THE OLD TESTAMENT PSEUDEPIGRAPHA

THE OLD TESTAMENT
P S E U D E P I G R A P HA
VOLUME 2
Expansions of
the "Old Testament" and Legends,
Wisdom and Philosophical Literature,
Prayers, Psalms, and Odes,
Fragments of
Lost Judeo-Hellenistic Works
EDITED BY
JAMES H. CHARLESWORTH
1985
DOUBLEDAY & COMPANY, INC.
GARDEN CITY, NEW YORK

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Main entry under tide:
Old Testament pseudepigrapha.
Includes indexes.
1. Apocryphal books (Old Testament)—Criticism,
interpretation, etc. I. Charlesworth, James H.
BS1830.A3 1985 229 80-2443
ISBN 0-385-09630-5 (v. 1)
ISBN 0-385-18813-7 (v. 2)
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 80-2443
ISBN: 0-385-18813-7
Copyright © 1985 by James H. Charlesworth
All Rights Reserved
Printed in the United States of America
First Edition
Designed by Joseph P. Ascherl

Dedicated to my family
—Jerrie, Michelle, Eve, and James—
to other families supporting our
common labors,
and to families who read these
documents.Dedicated to my family
—Jerrie, Michelle, Eve, and James—
to other families supporting our
common labors,
and to families who read these
documents.

CONTENTS
Foreword George W. MacRae, SJ. ix
Foreword for Christians James T. Cleland x
Foreword for Jews Samuel Sandmel xi
Editor's Preface James H. Charlesworth xv
Board of Advisors xviii
Contributors xviii
Introduction for the General Reader James H. Charlesworth xxi
Explanation of Typographical and Reference Systems xxxv
List of Abbreviations xxxvii
DOCUMENTS
EXPANSIONS OF THE "OLD TESTAMENT" AND LEGENDS
Introduction J. H. Charlesworth 5
Letter of Aristeas (Third Century B.c-First Century A.D.)
R. J. H. Shutt 7
Jubilees (Second Century B.C.) O. 5. Wintermute 35
Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah (Second Century B.C.-Fourth
Century A.D.) M. A. Knibb 143
Joseph and Aseneth (First Century B.c.-Second Century A.D.)
C. Burchard 177
Life of Adam and Eve (First Century A.D.) M. D. Johnson 249
Pseudo-Philo (First Century A.D.) D. J. Harrington 297
The Lives of the Prophets (First Century A.D.) D. R. A. Hare 379
Ladder of Jacob (c. First Century A.D.?) H. G. hunt 401
4 Baruch (First to Second Century A.D.) S. E. Robinson 413
Jannes and Jambres (First to Third Century A.D.)
A. Pietersma and T. R. Lutz 421
History of the Rechabites (First to Fourth Century A.D.)
J. H. Charlesworth 443
Eldad and Modad (prior to Second Century A.D.) E. G. Martin 463
History of Joseph (prior to Fourth Century A.D.) G. T. Zervos 467
WISDOM AND PHILOSOPHICAL LITERATURE
Introduction J. H. Charlesworth All
Ahiqar (Seventh to Sixth Century B.C.) J. M. Lindenberger 479VII CONTENTS
3 Maccabees (First Century B.C.) //. Anderson 509
4 Maccabees (First Century A.D.) H. Anderson 531
Pseudo-Phocylides (First Century B.c-First Century A.D.)
P. W. van der Horst 565
The Sentences of the Syriac Menander (Third Century A.D.)
T. Baarda 583
PRAYERS, PSALMS, AND ODES
Introduction J. H. Charlesworth 607
More Psalms of David (Second Century B.c-First Century A.D.)
7. H. Charlesworth with 7. A. Sanders 609
Prayer of Manasseh (Second Century B.c-First Century A.D.)
J. H. Charlesworth 625
Psalms of Solomon (First Century B.C.) R. B. Wright 639
Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers (Second to Third Century A.D.)
D. R. Darnell andD.A. Fiensy 671
Prayer of Joseph (First Century A.D.) J. Z. Smith 699
Prayer of Jacob (First to Fourth Century A.D.) J. H. Charlesworth 715
Odes of Solomon (Late First to Early Second Century A.D.)
J. H. Charlesworth 725
SUPPLEMENT
FRAGMENTS OF LOST JUDEO-HELLENISTIC WORKS
Editor's Introduction J. H. Charlesworth 775
General Introduction, with a Note on Alexander Polyhistor J. Strugnell 111
POETRY
Philo the Epic Poet (Third to Second Century B.C.) H. Attridge 781
Theodotus (Second to First Century B.C.) F. Fallon 785
ORACLE
Orphica (Second Century B.c-First Century A.D.) M. Lafargue 795
DRAMA
Ezekiel the Tragedian (Second Century B.C.) R. G. Robertson 803
OTHER
Fragments of Pseudo-Greek Poets (Third to Second Century B.C.)
H. Attridge 821
PHILOSOPHY
Aristobulus (Second Century B.C.) A. Yarbro Collins 831
CHRONOGRAPHY
Demetrius the Chronographer (Third Century B.C.) J. Hanson 843

HISTORY
Aristeas the Exegete (prior to First Century B.C.) R. Doran 855
Eupolemus (prior to First Century B.C.) F. Fallon 861
Pseudo-Eupolemus (prior to First Century B.C.) R. Doran 873
Cleodemus Malchus (prior to First Century B.C.) R. Doran 883
ROMANCE
Artapanus (Third to Second Century B.C.) J. J. Collins 889
APPENDIX
Pseudo-Hecataeus (Second Century B.c-First Century A.D.)
R. Doran 905
INDEX 921FOREWORD
GEORGE W. MACRAE, S.J.
The ancient Jewish and Jewish-Christian documents that are here called Pseud­
epigrapha have in their long history been both problematic and promising in both
Jewish and Christian communities. It is heartening to observe that the very
publication of this new collection testifies more to their promise than to their
problems. An ancient witness to both problem and promise can be found within
two late books of the New Testament itself. The Epistle of Jude, in its strong
antiheretical polemic, refers at least twice to the language of the book we call
1 Enoch and in a third instance quotes it in an authoritative manner as prophetic.
It also refers to a legend about the body of Moses known to us in the book called
the Assumption of Moses. The Second Epistle of Peter, generally regarded as the
latest of the New Testament books, incorporates much of Jude into its second
chapter, but it is very careful to excise all of the allusions to the Pseudepigrapha.
The problem to which this situation points is that of the canonical status of the
Pseudepigrapha in early Christianity—and the consequent propriety or impropriety
of citing them in public documents. Clearly the authors of Jude and 2 Peter reflect
different views. This problem persisted for centuries in the Church and can further
be seen in the reluctance of some churches to accept Jude into the New Testament
because of its controversial sources. In the synagogue the problem did not persist
so long, and the decision was clearly against the Pseudepigrapha.
The promise to which the episode of Jude and 2 Peter points is the value of
studying the Pseudepigrapha for a better understanding of prerabbinic Judaism and
of the religious matrix of Christianity. Whatever canonical decisions were taken
by the official leadership, it is clear that in popular religious circles, especially
Christian ones, this literature continued to be prominent and to influence thought
and piety.
The most recent decades have seen an astonishing rebirth of scholarly interest
in the Pseudepigrapha, and these volumes are an excellent guide to much of it.
The renewed interest has been and continues to be stimulated in part by new
manuscript discoveries. One thinks of the Dead Sea Scrolls among others. These
have provided access to much more extensive knowledge of Judaism in the period
immediately following the Old Testament. But perhaps even more important than
such a largely accidental factor as manuscript discoveries has been the ever
increasing acceptance of historical-critical method on the part of students of the
Bible at all levels. To study the Bible by this method involves knowing as much
as one can about the biblical world in all of its facets. And this of course includes
knowing the Jewish and Christian religious literature that ultimately did not becomeFOREWORD x
part of the Bible. What we find, as these volumes show, is a bewildering variety
of ideas, styles, and literary genres that is as diversified as the Bible itself yet
often quite different from it. One of the merits of this edition, especially when
compared to the few earlier ones in modern languages, is that it is inclusive rather
than exclusive. It includes much more of the surviving literature than others have.
Thus it affords a rich insight into the creative religious imagination from a singularly
important formative period in Western religious culture.
Readers of these volumes and those who consult them for reference should
include scholars and teachers, students, and any others who have an interest in the
biblical world. All will be grateful to the many scholars who have contributed to
the work. But more especially, they will have an enormous debt of gratitude to
Professor Charlesworth and his immediate associates who boldly undertook and so
competently executed the formidable task of editing this major work.
F O R E W O RD FOR CHRISTIANS
JAMES T. CLELAND
As one brought up in the home of a Church of Scotland minister, my father, and
as one prepared for the Christian ministry in the Divinity Hall of Glasgow
University, I have been trying to recall any unique impact made upon me by these
related experiences, apart from family worship; the daily reading of the Word of
God: Genesis to Revelation, one chapter per night, before falling asleep. The
unexpected outcome is that I still find it somewhat difficult to decide if a Scots
Presbyterian is an Old Testament Christian, with a stress on the Law and the
Psalms, or a New Testament Jew, who attends his synagogue—as Jesus' custom
was—on the sabbath day (Luke 4:16). There he hears a sermon which may be
based on the Old Testament, or on the New Testament, or on both, as equally
valid, equally authoritative. Why not? Is it not the same God in both testaments?
Many years later, in a Duke Divinity School morning chapel service, instead of
a meditation, I just read the Prayer of Manasseh, now recognized, in its own right,
as one of the Pseudepigrapha. After the service, a colleague asked me, 4'Where
did you find that?" I told him. His surprised, almost awed, comment was: 'That
is the gospel outside of the Gospels." Why such a reaction? Manasseh was
acknowledged to be the wickedest king of Judah, one who both majored and
minored in iniquity, and yet maintained his throne in Jerusalem for fifty-five years,
which was something of a record. Dr. James Moffatt sums up Manasseh, that
royal rake, in a few simple words: "He did ample evil in the sight of the eternal
to vex him" (2Chr 33:6). That is the emphasis of underemphasis. However,
Manasseh repented; he prayed; God forgave (2Chr 33:13). The God who forgave
is the same, yesterday, today, and forever, the God of Jew and Christian alike.
What I, a pulpiteer, hope from this volume, supervised by Professor Charlesworth,xi FOREWORD
aided and abetted by scholars throughout the world, is that, as never before,
Judaism and Christianity will be recognized as heirs of the same God, with what
Jew and Christian have in common uniting us, rather than continuing a separation
which may be emotionally understandable but is spiritually devitalizing. The very
text of parts of the Pseudepigrapha may have been edited by later Jews or Christians.
It would be good if one of the scholars discovered in his research that a section
was prepared by Jew and Christian working together, not always in agreement in
minor matters, but one in scholarship and editing because each had faith, academic
and spiritual, in the same Father, who is at the heart of both testaments, and to be
found in the Pseudepigrapha.
So, may it come to pass that what unites us as brethren will far surpass what
seems to separate us, too often, even too willingly. We need each other. We are
both children of the Kingdom, and the Pseudepigrapha may become a bridge
between the Old and New testaments, helping us cross to and fro, back and forth,
until we are equally at home in both, to our mental satisfaction, and our spiritual
growth in grace.
So read the Prayer of Manasseh in the Pseudepigrapha. It is a model for a
prayer, public or private: the invocation of God: "O Lord, God of our fathers,
. . . unending and immeasurable are your promised mercies*' (vss. 1-6); the
confession of sin, verses 9-10: "O Lord, I am justly afflicted . . . because I did
evil things before you"; the entreaty for forgiveness, verses 11-15, including the
wonderful metaphor of complete surrender to God: "And now behold I am bending
the knees of my heart" (v. 11); "Forgive me, O Lord, forgive me" (v. 13); "I
shall praise you continually all the days of my life" (v. 15). It is a bonny prayer;
my gratitude to the Jew who wrote it. I shall use it.
This prayer is to more than a few people the most famous instance of 4'the
infinite compassion of God." If a Manasseh can be absolved, there is hope for
anyone—including me. No wonder that I bend "the knees of my heart." It is the
gospel outside the Gospels.
FOREWORD FOR JEWS
SAMUEL SANDMEL
By the strangest quirk of fate respecting literature that I know of, large numbers
of writings by Jews were completely lost from the transmitted Jewish heritage.
These documents stem roughly from 200 B.C. to A.D. 200. Not only the so-called
Pseudepigrapha, but even such important and extensive writings as those by Philo
and Josephus have not been part of the Jewish inheritance from its past; these were
preserved and transmitted by Christians. It was rather only in the backwash of the
Renaissance that Jews began to encounter Philo and Josephus. A sixteenth-century
Italian rabbi, Azariah de Rossi, in a book called Me-or Enayim ("Light for theEyes"), inaugurated this Jewish rediscovery of the "lost" literature. He wrote
with great praise of Philo, but with only reserved admiration for Josephus, whose
Jewish loyalty he doubted. After de Rossi, Jews began slowly to deepen their
study of Josephus and Philo, and thereafter the other literature, as legitimate parts
of the Jewish heritage. The ancient literary legacy which Jews did preserve and transmit was primarily
the rabbinic literature. This huge body of writings might be divided into three
categories: one, the Midrashim; two, Mishna and Gemara; and three, the Targumim. The Midrashim are commentaries on Scripture arranged according to the sequence
of the biblical verses. The Mishna is a laconic statement of the secondary laws
(Halacha) derived from Scripture. The Targumim allude to the Aramaic translation
of Scripture; these translations have come down to us in differing styles and in
somewhat differing ages. While within the rabbinic literature, especially in passages
called haggadic ("narrative"), there are allusions to some of the documents found
in the Apocrypha and occasionally to those in the Pseudepigrapha, it is only
Ecclesiasticus (Jesus, the son of Sirach) who figures in any prominence at all in
the talmudic literature. The Pseudepigrapha as such might be said with very little
exaggeration to be without reflection in rabbinic literature. As is known, the Pseudepigrapha were first gathered by Johannes Fabricius in
the early part of the eighteenth century. Subsequent collectors of this material were
able to add certain books that were unknown to Fabricius and certain editors, such
as R. H. Charles, included in editions of the Pseudepigrapha materials the presence
of which might be questioned. Charles, for example, included the talmudic tractate
the Ethics of the Fathers. The point is that there is no such thing as a "canon" of
the Pseudepigrapha.xi FOREWORD
aided and abetted by scholars throughout the world, is that, as never before,
Judaism and Christianity will be recognized as heirs of the same God, with what
Jew and Christian have in common uniting us, rather than continuing a separation
which may be emotionally understandable but is spiritually devitalizing. The very
text of parts of the Pseudepigrapha may have been edited by later Jews or Christians.
It would be good if one of the scholars discovered in his research that a section
was prepared by Jew and Christian working together, not always in agreement in
minor matters, but one in scholarship and editing because each had faith, academic
and spiritual, in the same Father, who is at the heart of both testaments, and to be
found in the Pseudepigrapha.
So, may it come to pass that what unites us as brethren will far surpass what
seems to separate us, too often, even too willingly. We need each other. We are
both children of the Kingdom, and the Pseudepigrapha may become a bridge
between the Old and New testaments, helping us cross to and fro, back and forth,
until we are equally at home in both, to our mental satisfaction, and our spiritual
growth in grace.
So read the Prayer of Manasseh in the Pseudepigrapha. It is a model for a
prayer, public or private: the invocation of God: "O Lord, God of our fathers,
. . . unending and immeasurable are your promised mercies*' (vss. 1-6); the
confession of sin, verses 9-10: "O Lord, I am justly afflicted . . . because I did
evil things before you"; the entreaty for forgiveness, verses 11-15, including the
wonderful metaphor of complete surrender to God: "And now behold I am bending
the knees of my heart" (v. 11); "Forgive me, O Lord, forgive me" (v. 13); "I
shall praise you continually all the days of my life" (v. 15). It is a bonny prayer;
my gratitude to the Jew who wrote it. I shall use it.
This prayer is to more than a few people the most famous instance of 4'the
infinite compassion of God." If a Manasseh can be absolved, there is hope for
anyone—including me. No wonder that I bend "the knees of my heart." It is the
gospel outside the Gospels.
FOREWORD FOR JEWS
SAMUEL SANDMEL
By the strangest quirk of fate respecting literature that I know of, large numbers
of writings by Jews were completely lost from the transmitted Jewish heritage.
These documents stem roughly from 200 B.C. to A.D. 200. Not only the so-called
Pseudepigrapha, but even such important and extensive writings as those by Philo
and Josephus have not been part of the Jewish inheritance from its past; these were
preserved and transmitted by Christians. It was rather only in the backwash of the
Renaissance that Jews began to encounter Philo and Josephus. A sixteenth-century
Italian rabbi, Azariah de Rossi, in a book called Me-or Enayim ("Light for the

Charles, for example, included the talmudic tractate
the Ethics of the Fathers. The point is that there is no such thing as a "canon" of
the Pseudepigrapha. Rather, there is an abundance of this scattered literature, some
of it preserved in entirety and some preserved in part, usually in translation rather
than in the original Hebrew or Aramaic. It is in reality only in the eighteenth
century that the earnest and ever increasing study of the Pseudepigrapha began. Because most of the Pseudepigrapha were not preserved in Hebrew or Aramaic, it
has been only the rare Jewish scholar who has made this study a major concern. By and large it has been Christians who have done the painstaking work of
gathering this material, comparing the various manuscripts, producing critical
editions, and providing translations into modern languages. I do not think it is wrong to say that much of the Christian interest in the
Pseudepigrapha in the early nineteenth century was based on the light this literature
was deemed to throw on early Christianity. Since the documents in the Pseudepig­
rapha were not being studied for their own sake, often that roundedness which
one should expect from the best of scientific scholarship was absent. Even more
to be deplored was the circumstance that there were Christian scholars who seemed
to feel the need to choose, as it were, between the Pseudepigrapha on the one
hand and the rabbinic literature on the other hand, and who, on the basis of only
part of the total Jewish literary productivity, came to some occasionally quixotic
or reckless or even partisan conclusions about the nature of Judaism at the time of
the birth of Christianity. Such an allegation would not be unjust respecting R. H. Charles. A complete turnaround in the approach to the Pseudepigrapha in the last decades
has been most gratifying. These writings have become the object of study for their
own sake, part of the wish to illuminate the totality of the Jewish creativity of thatxiii FOREWORD
bygone age. The recent scholarship has not tried to make the literature fit into a
procrustean bed for some parochial purpose. It should be said that the relevancy
of the Pseudepigrapha to early Christianity is not in any way diminished by the
recent admirable mode of the study of Pseudepigrapha.
The result of the work of fine scholars, such as are represented herein, has been
a significant broadening and deepening of the appreciation of the Jewish literary
creativity. The cooperative study enlisting the gifted minds of Christians of various
denominations and Jews of varying backgrounds is surely as moving and exciting
a development as any cooperative academic venture could be. Perhaps it was the
abundance of this ancient literature which the author of Ecclesiastes had in mind
when he spoke rather cynically in these words: "of making many books there is
no end and most of them are a weariness of the flesh." Obviously the author of
Ecclesiastes did not admire every bit of writing that was in his ken. I do not think
that the modern student needs to admire every example of the Pseudepigrapha,
any more than we today need to regard every novel as a masterpiece. But he can
still be astonished, amazed, enlightened, and overwhelmed by the abundance and
variety and recurrent high quality of the Jewish literary activity of that period.
Old as this literature is for most modern people, it is also in a sense something
brand-new, for most American laypeople have never heard the word Pseudepigrapha,
or, if they have heard it, are not sure what it means. Now through the work of
Professor Charlesworth and his associates a door is being opened anew to treasures
that are very old. How gratifying it is that scholars devote themselves to the
recovery of that which was lost or strayed or hidden. How gratifying that cooperative
study is reviving this literature. How much such study contributes to understanding
the richness of the Jewish legacy, now the heritage of both Jews and Christians.EDITOR'S PREFACE
The present work is designed for the scholar and for the interested non-specialist.
The general introduction, the introductions to each subdivision and to each
document, and the translations with accompanying notes are shaped to help the
reader understand these ancient writings. At the outset it is wise to stress three
caveats for the general reader: 1) The following collection of writings, many of
which claim to preserve a message from God for his people, are not gathered here
in order to replace or add to those scriptures considered canonical by Jews or the
larger collections claimed to be canonical by various groups of Christians. 2) In
order to understand the Bible better the Pseudepigrapha should not be read in
isolation, but along with the writings collected in the Old and New testaments
(terms used for convenience and without confessional bias), and in ten other
collections of ancient Jewish or early Christian writings (see Introduction). 3) The
expanded definition of the Pseudepigrapha, now universally recognized as necessary
by scholars, represents a more extended historical period than Charles's selection
of writings; hence it must not be used prima facie as a group of writings
representative of Early Judaism. The late documents, and Christian expansions of
early Jewish writings, as the contributors themselves clarify, must not be read as
if they were composed by contemporaries of the early ones. Conversely, late
writings must not be ignored in a search for ideas possibly characteristic of Early
Judaism; these documents frequently preserve edited portions of early Jewish
writings.
In the fall of 1972, an editor at Doubleday, John J. Delaney, on the advice of
his consultants, invited me to prepare a new edition of the Pseudepigrapha. The
present work, completed ten years later, is the product of an international team of
collaborators. Because it is a widely used term today, we have decided to retain
the technical term "Pseudepigrapha"; it is explained in the following Introduction.
Each contributor was asked to discuss all issues requisite for a meaningful
reading of the document translated, and given some freedom in utilizing the
following format:
The contributor begins the presentation either with a synopsis of the narrative or
with a discussion of the key characteristics and central ideas in a non-narrative
writing.
Texts. The scholar discusses only the most important extant texts, and clarifies
the textual base or the critical edition behind the translation.
Original Language. The translator briefly discusses the original language of the
document, reviews published scholarly conclusions, and usually advocates one
possibility.
Date. The contributor assesses the debates (if any) over the date of the original
composition, explains, if appropriate, the dates of any subsequent expansions or
interpolations, and then presents his or her own scholarly opinion.EDITOR'S PREFACE xvi
Provenance. The expert briefly evaluates the hypotheses regarding the place or
places in which the work may have been composed, and subsequently voices his or
her own judgment. Historical Importance. The contributor discusses the importance of the document
for an appreciation of the historical period in which it was composed. Theological Importance. The specialist explains the motifs, symbols, and major
theological ideas contained in the pseudepigraphon. Relation to Canonical Books. The expert assesses the possible relationships
between the pseudepigraphon and writings now customarily judged canonical. Relation to Apocryphal Books. The scholar succinctly discusses the apocryphal
books to which the document is especially close. Cultural Importance. If appropriate, the contributor discusses the importance of
the pseudepigraphon for a better understanding of the origin of our culture. Briefly
mentioned are possible parallels between it and the great classics, such as Plato's
Dialogues, Dante's Divina Commedia, and Milton's Paradise Lost. At the end of each introduction to a document the contributor lists the most
important publications on the document. The organization of these documents follows considerable discussion with the
Board of Advisors and the contributors themselves. Any system for ordering these
documents has weaknesses. A listing of the documents in chronological order is
impractical at the present time. We are still uncertain about the date or dates of
composition for many of these writings; moreover, some are composite and
represent more than one century. Merely placing them in alphabetical order is
attractive in the sense that one knows where a particular document is in such a
recognized sequence; hence, an alphabetical listing on the endpapers of this
volume.We are still uncertain about the date or dates of
composition for many of these writings; moreover, some are composite and
represent more than one century. Merely placing them in alphabetical order is
attractive in the sense that one knows where a particular document is in such a
recognized sequence; hence, an alphabetical listing on the endpapers of this
volume. An alphabetical listing is confusing, however, because some of the
documents collected below are known by more than one title, some may be listed
alphabetically according to more than one word in the title, and—most importantly—
an alphabetical order is artificial and does not signal the relationships between
documents that are related. We have decided to organize the documents according
to broadly conceived literary types. Within these groups they are listed chronolog­
ically in terms of the earliest probable date with the exception that cycles of
traditions, like the Enoch and Ezra books, are grouped together. In the past scholars often felt free to emend a text and to aim at a loose idiomatic
translation (although Charles himself was a literalist). Modern scholarship has
demanded more rigorous devotion to extant readings, more thorough attempts to
understand the grammar and syntax of ancient languages, and, in general, more
loyalty to the manuscripts. While we have aimed whenever possible at an idiomatic
rendering, we have avoided the temptation to paraphrase the meaning of a
complicated passage or to conceal sometimes confusing readings behind elegant
English prose. Besides trustworthiness to the transmitted text, there are other
advantages in these literal renderings: The reader is introduced to the flavor of
ancient expressions, phrases, and images. We have also presented literal translations
of texts written in a language two or three times removed from that of the lost
original. For example, Pseudo-Philo is extant in Latin but the original was composed
in another language, probably Hebrew.EDITOR'S PREFACE
The present work is designed for the scholar and for the interested non-specialist.
The general introduction, the introductions to each subdivision and to each
document, and the translations with accompanying notes are shaped to help the
reader understand these ancient writings. At the outset it is wise to stress three
caveats for the general reader: 1) The following collection of writings, many of
which claim to preserve a message from God for his people, are not gathered here
in order to replace or add to those scriptures considered canonical by Jews or the
larger collections claimed to be canonical by various groups of Christians. 2) In
order to understand the Bible better the Pseudepigrapha should not be read in
isolation, but along with the writings collected in the Old and New testaments
(terms used for convenience and without confessional bias), and in ten other
collections of ancient Jewish or early Christian writings (see Introduction). 3) The
expanded definition of the Pseudepigrapha, now universally recognized as necessary
by scholars, represents a more extended historical period than Charles's selection
of writings; hence it must not be used prima facie as a group of writings
representative of Early Judaism. The late documents, and Christian expansions of
early Jewish writings, as the contributors themselves clarify, must not be read as
if they were composed by contemporaries of the early ones. Conversely, late
writings must not be ignored in a search for ideas possibly characteristic of Early
Judaism; these documents frequently preserve edited portions of early Jewish
writings.
In the fall of 1972, an editor at Doubleday, John J. Delaney, on the advice of
his consultants, invited me to prepare a new edition of the Pseudepigrapha. The
present work, completed ten years later, is the product of an international team of
collaborators. Because it is a widely used term today, we have decided to retain
the technical term "Pseudepigrapha"; it is explained in the following Introduction.
Each contributor was asked to discuss all issues requisite for a meaningful
reading of the document translated, and given some freedom in utilizing the
following format:
The contributor begins the presentation either with a synopsis of the narrative or
with a discussion of the key characteristics and central ideas in a non-narrative
writing.
Texts. The scholar discusses only the most important extant texts, and clarifies
the textual base or the critical edition behind the translation.
Original Language. The translator briefly discusses the original language of the
document, reviews published scholarly conclusions, and usually advocates one
possibility.
Date. The contributor assesses the debates (if any) over the date of the original
composition, explains, if appropriate, the dates of any subsequent expansions or
interpolations, and then presents his or her own scholarly opinion.

We have also presented literal translations
of texts written in a language two or three times removed from that of the lost
original. For example, Pseudo-Philo is extant in Latin but the original was composed
in another language, probably Hebrew. The same situation lies behind 1 Enoch
and Jubilees; both seem to derive ultimately from a Semitic language, which may
be immediately behind the Ethiopic or be separated from it by an intermediary
Greek version. The preparation of this volume has been financed by generous grants and giftsxvii EDITOR'S PREFACE
from the Phillips Investment Corporation, the Phillips family, the Mary Duke
Biddle Foundation, Brigham Young University's Religious Studies Center, Ray­
mond and Hazel Mueller, Frances DeMott, the Welch family, and the Duke
University Research Council. I am deeply grateful to each of them.
Finally after years of sacrificial work by so many it is difficult to articulate my
deep appreciation and indebtedness to all those who have helped in the completion
of the present edition of the Pseudepigrapha. I am indebted to the editors and staff
at Doubleday, to my Board of Advisors, to the external readers, notably H. D.
Betz, I. Gruenwald, J. Neusner, J. F. Oates, B. Schaller, J. L. Sharpe III, J. F.
Strange, N. Turner, J. C. VanderKam, and F. W. Young, who have labored over
many of these contributions, and to the contributors, who had to live for a long
time with a frequently stern and demanding editor. I am grateful to my colleagues
here at Duke, who had to live with unexpected responsibilities due to the tasks
that fell my way, to the administrators, especially President Sanford, Chairman
Bill Poteat, Chairman Bob Osborn, and Dean Langford, who provided space for
editing and preparing the work. W. D. Davies, Moody Smith, Ray Brown, and
John Strugnell helped me improve the Introduction. Many of my assistants worked
long and hard hours, often during the trying summer months in Durham, and 1
wish to express my appreciation to all of them, notably Gary Martin, Jim Dumke,
Dave Fiensy, Steve Robinson, George Zervos, and most especially to James
Mueller, who served the longest, saw the task through to completion, and has
proved to be a gifted and dedicated assistant. Marie Smith, my secretary, has
without complaint typed and retyped much of the manuscript, and all of the
voluminous correspondence. To all of these mentioned and many others I wish to
express my sincere appreciation and hope that the final product is worthy of their
sacrifices and support.
J. H. Charlesworth
Duke University
December 1982BOARD OF ADVISORS
Brown, R. E., Auburn Professor of Biblical Studies, Union Theological Seminary, New
York, New York
Davies, W. D., Bradford Distinguished University Professor of Religion Studies, Texas
Christian University, Fort Worth, Texas
Harrelson, W., Distinguished Professor of Old Testament, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee
Metzger, B. M., George L. Collord Professor of New Testament Language and Literature,
Emeritus, Princeton Theological Seminary, Princeton, New Jersey
Murphy, R. E., G. W. Ivey Professor of Old Testament, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina
Strugnell, J., Professor of Christian Origins, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME TWO
Anderson, H., Professor of New Testament Language, Literature, and Theology, Head of
the Department of New Testament, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland
3 Maccabees, 4 Maccabees
Attridge, H., Perkins School of Theology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas
Philo the Epic Poet, Fragments of Pseudo-Greek Poets
Baarda, T., Professor of the New Testament, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Holland
Syriac Menander
Burchard, C, Heidelberg-Ziegelhausen, West Germany
Joseph and Aseneth
Charlesworth, J. H., George L. Collord Professor of New Testament Language and
Literature, Princeton Theological Seminary, Princeton, New Jersey
Editor's Preface, Introduction for the General Reader, Introduction to Expansions of
the "Old Testament" and Legends, History of the Rechabites, Introduction to Wisdom
and Philosophical Literature, Introduction to Prayers, Psalms, and Odes, More Psalms
of David, Prayer of Manasseh, Prayer of Jacob, Odes of Solomon, Editor's Introduction
to Fragments of Lost Judeo-Hellenistic Works
Collins, A. Yarbro, Associate Professor of New Testament, McCormick Theological
Seminary, Chicago, Illinois
Aristobulus
Collins, J. J., Associate Professor of Religious Studies, De Paul University, Chicago,
Illinois
Artapanus
Darnell, D. R., Minister, First Christian Church (Disciples of Christ), Perryton, Texas
Hellenistic Synagogal Prayersxix CONTRIBUTORS
Doran, R., Department of Religion, Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts
Aristeas the Exegete, Pseudo-Eupolemus, Cleodemus Malchus, Pseudo-Hecataeus
Fallon, F., Visiting Assistant Professor, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts
Theodotus, Eupolemus
Fiensy, D. A., Assistant Professor of Religion, Kentucky Christian College, Grayson,
Kentucky
Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers
Hanson, J., Department of Religious Studies, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas
Demetrius the Chronographer
Hare, D. R. A., William F. Orr Professor of New Testament, Pittsburgh Theological
Seminary, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
The Lives of the Prophets
Harrington, D. J., S.J., Associate Professor of New Testament, Weston School of Theology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts
Pseudo-Philo
Johnson, M. D., Academic Editor, Augsburg Publishing House, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Life of Adam and Eve
Knibb, M. A., Lecturer in Old Testament Studies, University of London, King's College,
London, England
Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah
Lafargue, M., Lecturer, Religion Department, University of Massachusetts at Boston
Orphica
Lindenberger, J. M., Associate Professor of Old Testament, Director of Graduate Studies,
Vancouver School of Theology, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Ahiqar
Lunt, H. G., Samuel Hazzard Cross Professor of Slavic Languages and Literatures, Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Ladder of Jacob
Lutz, R. T., Department of Near Eastern Studies, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada
Jannes and Jambres
Martin, E. G., Perkins Library, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
Eldad and Modad
Pietersma, A., Department of Near Eastern Studies, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada
Jannes and Jambres
Robinson, S. E., Assistant Professor of Religion, Lycoming College, Williamsport,
Pennsylvania
4 Baruch
Robertson, R. G., Federated Church of Ashland, Ashland, Massachusetts
Ezekiel the Tragedian
Sanders, J. A., President, Ancient Manuscript Center for Preservation and Research, School
of Theology at Claremont and Claremont Graduate School, Claremont, California
More Psalms of David
Shutt, R. J. H., Professor Emeritus, Department of Religious Studies, Worcester College
of Education, Worcester, England
Letter of Aristeas
Smith, J. Z., William Benton Professor of Religion and Human Sciences, The Divinity
School, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Prayer of JosephCONTRIBUTORS xx
Strugnell, J., Professor of Christian Origins, Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Mas­
sachusetts
Introduction to Fragments of Lost Judeo-Hellenistic Works
Van der Horst, P. W., Lecturer of New Testament Exegesis and New Testament Background,
Faculty of Theology, University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Pseudo-Phocylides
Wintermute, O. S., Professor of Religion, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
Jubilees
Wright, R. B., Director of Graduate Religion Studies, Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania
Psalms of Solomon
Zervos, G. T., Research Assistant, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
History of JosephINTRODUCTION FOR THE GENERAL READER
BY J. H. CHARLESWORTH
Western culture has been largely shaped by a unique collection of ancient books:
the Bible. Not only our culture's language, but also its theology, philosophy, art,
and law have been affected profoundly by the ideas, symbols, morality, commit­
ments, perceptions, and dreams preserved in the biblical books. In the attempt to
understand these books, scholars, especially since the time of the European
Enlightenment, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, have coupled an
intensive study of them with a search for other ancient writings related to them.
The search for lost writings
Mere perusal of the biblical books discloses that their authors depended upon
sources that are no longer extant. We know so little about these sources that we
cannot be certain of the extent to which they were actual documents. A list of
these lost sources would be extensive; it would include at least the following: the
Book of the Wars of Yahweh (Num 21:14), the Book of the Just (Josh 10:13,
2Sam 1:18), the Book of the Acts of Solomon (IKgs 11:41), the Book of the
Annals of the Kings of Israel (IKgs 14:19, 2Chr 33:18; cf. 2Chr 20:34), the Book
of the Annals of the Kings of Judah (IKgs 14:29, 15:7), the Annals of Samuel the
seer (IChr 29:29), the History of Nathan the prophet (2Chr 9:29), the Annals of
Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer (2Chr 12:15), the Annals of Jehu son
of Hanani (2Chr 20:34), an unknown and untitled writing of Isaiah (2Chr 26:22),
the Annals of Hozai (2Chr 33:18), and an unknown lament for Josiah by Jeremiah
(2Chr 35:25). In the Apocrypha (defined below) lost books also are mentioned; in
particular, 1 Maccabees 16:24 refers to the Annals of John Hyrcanus. Within the
Pseudepigrapha themselves there are references to "documents" now lost (cf. e.g.
TJob 40:14, 41:6, 49:3, 50:3).
Christianity and rabbinic Judaism evolved within a milieu that was distinguished
by considerable and significant literary activity. Some of the documents composed
during the early centuries have been transmitted by copyists; many remain lost;
and others have been recovered during the last two centuries. The search for lost
writings is aided by ancient lists of "extracanonical" books. One of these lists is
a catalogue, perhaps from the sixth century, falsely attributed to Athanasius of
Alexandria (c. 296-373). The author includes among the disputed parts of the Old
Testament (ta antilegomena tes palaias diathekes), the four Books of the Maccabees
(1-4 Mac), the Psalms and Ode (sic) of Solomon. He defines the Apocrypha of
the Old Testament (ta de apokrupha palin tes palaias diathekes tauta9) as follows:Enoch Elijah the Prophet
Patriarchs Zephaniah the Prophet
Prayer of Joseph Zechariah the Father of John
Testament of Moses Baruch
Assumption of Moses Habakkuk
(And the) pseudepigrapha Ezekiel
(pseudepigrapha) of Abraham Daniel
Eldad and Modad
All of the documents judged to be disputed parts of the Old Testament or the
Apocrypha (if we understand their titles correctly) are included, if only fragmen-
tarily, in the present collection, except for 1 and 2 Maccabees (which belong in
the Apocrypha), and except for the lost pseudepigrapha attributed to Habakkuk
and Zechariah (which is to be placed among the New Testament Pseudepigrapha
because it is related to Zechariah the father of John the Baptist). Numerous writings not mentioned by Pseudo-Athanasius are included in this
volume. Many of these are named in other canonical lists, notably the List of Sixty
Books (c. sixth to seventh century?) and the list of Mechitar of Ayrivank4
(c. 1290). Others do not appear in any early list. Some pseudepigrapha mentioned
in medieval lists are not included; they are judged to be characteristically different
from and too late for the present collection (see below). The search continues for
documents not yet found but cited in the classical lists: an Apocryphon of Lamech
(Sixty Books), the Interdiction of Solomon (Gelasian Decree), and the Book of
the Daughters of Adam (Gelasian Decree; perhaps this document is another name
for Jubilees). Likewise scholars are seeking to understand the origin of ancient
quotations from or allusions to unnamed Jewish apocryphal documents. Many of
these citations or traditions are preserved by the Church Fathers, especially Clement
of Rome, Clement of Alexandria, Hippolytus, Tertullian, Origen, and the compiler
of the Apostolic Constitutions, as well as by the Byzantine chroniclers (especially
George Syncellus [c. 800] and George Cedrenus [c. 1057]). The present edition of the Pseudepigrapha reflects the search for lost writings.INTRODUCTION FOR THE GENERAL READER
BY J. H. CHARLESWORTH
Western culture has been largely shaped by a unique collection of ancient books:
the Bible. Not only our culture's language, but also its theology, philosophy, art,
and law have been affected profoundly by the ideas, symbols, morality, commit­
ments, perceptions, and dreams preserved in the biblical books. In the attempt to
understand these books, scholars, especially since the time of the European
Enlightenment, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, have coupled an
intensive study of them with a search for other ancient writings related to them.
The search for lost writings
Mere perusal of the biblical books discloses that their authors depended upon
sources that are no longer extant. We know so little about these sources that we
cannot be certain of the extent to which they were actual documents. A list of
these lost sources would be extensive; it would include at least the following: the
Book of the Wars of Yahweh (Num 21:14), the Book of the Just (Josh 10:13,
2Sam 1:18), the Book of the Acts of Solomon (IKgs 11:41), the Book of the
Annals of the Kings of Israel (IKgs 14:19, 2Chr 33:18; cf. 2Chr 20:34), the Book
of the Annals of the Kings of Judah (IKgs 14:29, 15:7), the Annals of Samuel the
seer (IChr 29:29), the History of Nathan the prophet (2Chr 9:29), the Annals of
Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer (2Chr 12:15), the Annals of Jehu son
of Hanani (2Chr 20:34), an unknown and untitled writing of Isaiah (2Chr 26:22),
the Annals of Hozai (2Chr 33:18), and an unknown lament for Josiah by Jeremiah
(2Chr 35:25). In the Apocrypha (defined below) lost books also are mentioned; in
particular, 1 Maccabees 16:24 refers to the Annals of John Hyrcanus. Within the
Pseudepigrapha themselves there are references to "documents" now lost (cf. e.g.
TJob 40:14, 41:6, 49:3, 50:3).
Christianity and rabbinic Judaism evolved within a milieu that was distinguished
by considerable and significant literary activity. Some of the documents composed
during the early centuries have been transmitted by copyists; many remain lost;
and others have been recovered during the last two centuries. The search for lost
writings is aided by ancient lists of "extracanonical" books. One of these lists is
a catalogue, perhaps from the sixth century, falsely attributed to Athanasius of
Alexandria (c. 296-373). The author includes among the disputed parts of the Old
Testament (ta antilegomena tes palaias diathekes), the four Books of the Maccabees
(1-4 Mac), the Psalms and Ode (sic) of Solomon. He defines the Apocrypha of
the Old Testament (ta de apokrupha palin tes palaias diathekes tauta9) as follows:

1057]). The present edition of the Pseudepigrapha reflects the search for lost writings. We have included many apocryphal documents, fragmentary or complete, which
may be related to those named in the canonical lists or cited by the Church Fathers;
note, for example, the following: Apocalypse of Adam, Apocalypse of Abraham,
Testament of Abraham, Prayer of Joseph, Eldad and Modad (still preserved in
only one brief quotation), Apocalypse of Elijah, Apocryphon of Ezekiel, Apocalypse
of Zephaniah, and Apocalypse of Ezra. Many documents, recently discovered in the Near East or recognized in
distinguished libraries, are translated here into English for the first time. Not
including the documents placed in the Supplement, the writings now available for
the first time in English are the Testament of Adam, the Testaments of Isaac and
Jacob (from the Arabic), the Apocalypse of Daniel, the Revelation of Ezra, the
Vision of Ezra, the History of Joseph, Syriac Menander, and the History of the
Rechabites (from the Syriac). Additional writings translated for the first time in a
full English translation are the Questions of Ezra, the Ladder of Jacob, Jannes and
Jambres, and the Apocalypse of Sedrach. In addition to these documents, four writings presented only in a truncated
version in Charles's edition are presented here in their full extant form. From theMartyrdom of Isaiah Charles himself included only chapters 1, 2, 3, and 5; the
present edition presents all of that document along with the other traditions now
preserved in the Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah. From 2 Enoch Forbes and
Charles omitted the conclusion to the document; the present edition includes
chapters 68 through 73, which contain the fascinating account of Melchisedek's
miraculous birth. From the Sibylline Oracles Lanchester collected only the fragments
and Books 3, 4, and 5; the present edition includes all of the Sibylline Oracles
now extant. Finally, from 4 Ezra Box selected chapters 3-14; the present edition
also includes the Christian additions (chapters 1 and 2, and 15 and 16). Canon
The preceding discussion brings forward the question of the origin of the closed
canons of the Old and New Testaments. Impressive research is presently focused
upon these issues, and it is possible to summarize only briefly my own opinions
regarding this complex issue. For a long time scholars postulated that two canons
of the Old Testament developed, one in Palestine and another in Egypt, and that
Alexandrian Jews added the Apocrypha (see below) to the Hebrew canon. It now
seems clear that there never was a rival Alexandrian canon. Philo and other Jews
in Alexandria did not cite the Apocrypha, and the Alexandrian Church Fathers
witness to the fact that Alexandrian Jews did not have an expanded canon. When R. H. Charles published his edition of the Pseudepigrapha there was
widespread agreement that the Hebrew canon, the Old Testament, was fixed finally
at Jamnia around A.D. 90. Today there is considerable debate regarding the
importance of the rabbinic school at Jamnia in the history of the codification of
the Hebrew canon.1057]). The present edition of the Pseudepigrapha reflects the search for lost writings. We have included many apocryphal documents, fragmentary or complete, which
may be related to those named in the canonical lists or cited by the Church Fathers;
note, for example, the following: Apocalypse of Adam, Apocalypse of Abraham,
Testament of Abraham, Prayer of Joseph, Eldad and Modad (still preserved in
only one brief quotation), Apocalypse of Elijah, Apocryphon of Ezekiel, Apocalypse
of Zephaniah, and Apocalypse of Ezra. Many documents, recently discovered in the Near East or recognized in
distinguished libraries, are translated here into English for the first time. Not
including the documents placed in the Supplement, the writings now available for
the first time in English are the Testament of Adam, the Testaments of Isaac and
Jacob (from the Arabic), the Apocalypse of Daniel, the Revelation of Ezra, the
Vision of Ezra, the History of Joseph, Syriac Menander, and the History of the
Rechabites (from the Syriac). Additional writings translated for the first time in a
full English translation are the Questions of Ezra, the Ladder of Jacob, Jannes and
Jambres, and the Apocalypse of Sedrach. In addition to these documents, four writings presented only in a truncated
version in Charles's edition are presented here in their full extant form. From the

90. Today there is considerable debate regarding the
importance of the rabbinic school at Jamnia in the history of the codification of
the Hebrew canon. On the one hand, it is becoming obvious that the process of
canonization began long before the first century A.D., and that perhaps the earliest
part of the Bible, the Law, had been closed and defined as authoritative well before
the second century B.C., and the Prophets surely by that time. On the other hand,
it is clear that after A.D. 90 there were still debates regarding the canonicity of
such writings as the Song of Songs, Ecclesiastes, and Esther, but it is not clear
what were the full ramifications of these debates. It seems to follow, therefore,
both that the early pseudepigrapha were composed during a period in which the
limits of the canon apparently remained fluid at least to some Jews, and that some
Jews and Christians inherited and passed on these documents as inspired. They
did not necessarily regard them as apocryphal, or outside a canon. The writings collected into the New Testament were written during the end of
this same period since they are dated from about A.D. 50 to 150. The New
Testament canon was not closed in the Latin Church until much later; certainly
not before the late fourth century and long after Constantine the Great established
Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire. All the twenty-seven
books of the New Testament, for example, are listed for the first time as the only
canonical New Testament scriptures by Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, in his
Easter letter of A.D. 367. If the Latin Church finally accepted twenty-seven books
as the canonical New Testament by the fifth century, the Greek Church apparently
was not thoroughly convinced about the canonicity of one book, Revelation, until
about the tenth century. The Syrian Church witnessed to an even more complicated
debate over the canon of the New Testament; for many east Syrians today thePeshitta is the canon and it contains only twenty-two documents, excluding 2
Peter, 2 and 3 John, Jude, and Revelation. Moreover, the assumption that all
Christians have the same canon is further shattered by the recognition that the
Copts and Ethiopians have added other documents to the canon. Even in America today there are different canons among the various Christian
communions: for example, Protestants exclude from the canon the Apocrypha, the
additional books in the Greek Old Testament; the Roman Catholics, following the
edicts of the Council of Trent in 1546, include them as deuterocanonical. The
Mormons, moreover, argue that more books belong in the canon, and that it should
remain open. Most Jews throughout the world acknowledge only the Old Testament as
canonical (cf. e.g. 4Ezra 14:37-48). The Falashas, Ethiopian Jews probably
dependent on Ethiopian Christianity, however, have an expanded canon, including
various apocrypha and pseudepigrapha, especially the Prayer of Manasseh, Jubilees,
1 Enoch, 3 and 4 Ezra. For our present purposes it is wise to add to the above insights the recognition
that many authors of pseudepigrapha believed they were recording God's infallible
words. Early communities, both Jewish and Christian, apparently took some
pseudepigrapha very seriously. The author of Jude, in verses 14 and 15, quoted
as prophecy a portion of 1 Enoch, and this passage, 1 Enoch 1:9, has now been
recovered in Aramaic from one of the caves that contained the Dead Sea Scrolls. Jude probably also was dependent, in verses 9 and 10, upon a lost Jewish
apocryphon about Moses. This brief overview of the historical development of the canons reveals that to
call the Pseudepigrapha "non-canonical," or the biblical books "canonical," can
be historically inaccurate prior to A.D. 100 and the period in which most of these
documents were written.90. Today there is considerable debate regarding the
importance of the rabbinic school at Jamnia in the history of the codification of
the Hebrew canon. On the one hand, it is becoming obvious that the process of
canonization began long before the first century A.D., and that perhaps the earliest
part of the Bible, the Law, had been closed and defined as authoritative well before
the second century B.C., and the Prophets surely by that time. On the other hand,
it is clear that after A.D. 90 there were still debates regarding the canonicity of
such writings as the Song of Songs, Ecclesiastes, and Esther, but it is not clear
what were the full ramifications of these debates. It seems to follow, therefore,
both that the early pseudepigrapha were composed during a period in which the
limits of the canon apparently remained fluid at least to some Jews, and that some
Jews and Christians inherited and passed on these documents as inspired. They
did not necessarily regard them as apocryphal, or outside a canon. The writings collected into the New Testament were written during the end of
this same period since they are dated from about A.D. 50 to 150. The New
Testament canon was not closed in the Latin Church until much later; certainly
not before the late fourth century and long after Constantine the Great established
Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire. All the twenty-seven
books of the New Testament, for example, are listed for the first time as the only
canonical New Testament scriptures by Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, in his
Easter letter of A.D. 367. If the Latin Church finally accepted twenty-seven books
as the canonical New Testament by the fifth century, the Greek Church apparently
was not thoroughly convinced about the canonicity of one book, Revelation, until
about the tenth century. The Syrian Church witnessed to an even more complicated
debate over the canon of the New Testament; for many east Syrians today the

This brief overview of the historical development of the canons reveals that to
call the Pseudepigrapha "non-canonical," or the biblical books "canonical," can
be historically inaccurate prior to A.D. 100 and the period in which most of these
documents were written. These terms should be used as an expression of some
later "orthodoxy" with regard to a collection that is well defined regarding what
belongs within and what is to be excluded from it. It is potentially misleading to
use the terms "non-canonical," "canonical," "heresy," and "orthodoxy" when
describing either Early Judaism or Early Christianity. Definition of pseudepigrapha
The technical term "pseudepigrapha" has a long and distinguished history. It
was used in the late second century by Serapion when he referred to the New
Testament Pseudepigrapha (ta pseudepigrapha, "with false superscription"; cf. Eusebius, HE 6.12). It was given prominence in the early years of the eighteenth
century by J. A. Fabricius, who called the first volume of his massive work Codex
pseudepigraphus veteris testamenti. The nineteenth-century collection of "pseud­
epigrapha" was by the Roman Catholic M. L'Abbe J.-P. Migne and titled
Dictionnaire des apocryphes, ou collection de tous les livres apocryphes relatifs d
Tancien et au nouveau testament; this work did not use the term "pseudepigrapha"
because Roman Catholics consider the Apocrypha to be deuterocanonical writings
and refer to the Pseudepigrapha as "the Apocrypha." In the year 1900, E. Kautzsch
edited the first German collection of the Pseudepigrapha, titled Die Apokryphen
und Pseudepigraphen des Alten Testaments. The first, and until the present the
only, English collection of the Pseudepigrapha was published in 1913 by the
Clarendon Press of Oxford, England, and edited by R. H. Charles; he included inhis large two-volume work both The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old
Testament. The importance of the Pseudepigrapha in the international community
at the present time is evidenced by the preparation of translations into Danish,
Italian, French, German, modern Greek, Japanese, Dutch, and Spanish. It is appropriate at this point to clarify the meaning of the term 4 'pseudepigrapha.''
Several definitions are current. Webster's Third New International Dictionary
(p. 1830) defines the term as denoting "spurious works purporting to emanate
from biblical characters." That definition is misleading; ancient writings are
dismissed subjectively as illegitimate. The Random House Dictionary of the English
Language (the Unabridged Edition, p. 1159) offers the following: "Certain writings
(other than the canonical books and the Apocrypha) professing to be Biblical in
character, but not considered canonical or inspired." Three reactions appear to
this definition: First, it would have been informative to clarify for whom the
writings are "not considered canonical or inspired." Second, it is good to see a
recognition of the claim to be "Biblical in character," which I believe is implied
by some pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament. Third, it is unfortunate that neither
of the two definitions presented by these authoritative volumes recognizes that this
term is also employed for documents not related to the Bible. Scholars have used
the term, for example, to denote some rabbinic writings, referring to the Othijoth
de Rabbi 'Akiba and the Pirhe de Rabbi Eliezer as rabbinic pseudepigrapha;
moreover, "pseudepigrapha" is a technical term for some writings by the post-
Platonic Pythagoreans.Third, it is unfortunate that neither
of the two definitions presented by these authoritative volumes recognizes that this
term is also employed for documents not related to the Bible. Scholars have used
the term, for example, to denote some rabbinic writings, referring to the Othijoth
de Rabbi 'Akiba and the Pirhe de Rabbi Eliezer as rabbinic pseudepigrapha;
moreover, "pseudepigrapha" is a technical term for some writings by the post-
Platonic Pythagoreans. Strictly speaking, the term "pseudepigrapha" has evolved from pseudepigrapha,
a transliteration of a Greek plural noun that denotes writings "with false super­
scription." The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, the title of this collection,
etymologically denotes writings falsely attributed to ideal figures featured in the
Old Testament. Contemporary scholars employ the term "pseudepigrapha" not
because it denotes something spurious about the documents collected under that
title, but because the term has been inherited and is now used internationally. In entitling the volume The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, I have had to take
a stance on the definition of "pseudepigrapha" as illustrated by the selection of
works other than those included by Charles. Only two works from Charles's volume
of seventeen documents are not included: Pirke Aboth and "The Fragments of a
Zadokite Work," the former because it is rabbinic and the latter because it is now
recognized to belong among the Dead Sea Scrolls. The following collection of
fifty-two writings together with a long Supplement has evolved from the consensus
that the Pseudepigrapha must be defined broadly so as to include all documents
that conceivably belong to the Old Testament Pseudepigrapha.This brief overview of the historical development of the canons reveals that to
call the Pseudepigrapha "non-canonical," or the biblical books "canonical," can
be historically inaccurate prior to A.D. 100 and the period in which most of these
documents were written. These terms should be used as an expression of some
later "orthodoxy" with regard to a collection that is well defined regarding what
belongs within and what is to be excluded from it. It is potentially misleading to
use the terms "non-canonical," "canonical," "heresy," and "orthodoxy" when
describing either Early Judaism or Early Christianity. Definition of pseudepigrapha
The technical term "pseudepigrapha" has a long and distinguished history. It
was used in the late second century by Serapion when he referred to the New
Testament Pseudepigrapha (ta pseudepigrapha, "with false superscription"; cf. Eusebius, HE 6.12). It was given prominence in the early years of the eighteenth
century by J. A. Fabricius, who called the first volume of his massive work Codex
pseudepigraphus veteris testamenti. The nineteenth-century collection of "pseud­
epigrapha" was by the Roman Catholic M. L'Abbe J.-P. Migne and titled
Dictionnaire des apocryphes, ou collection de tous les livres apocryphes relatifs d
Tancien et au nouveau testament; this work did not use the term "pseudepigrapha"
because Roman Catholics consider the Apocrypha to be deuterocanonical writings
and refer to the Pseudepigrapha as "the Apocrypha." In the year 1900, E. Kautzsch
edited the first German collection of the Pseudepigrapha, titled Die Apokryphen
und Pseudepigraphen des Alten Testaments. The first, and until the present the
only, English collection of the Pseudepigrapha was published in 1913 by the
Clarendon Press of Oxford, England, and edited by R. H. Charles; he included in

Only two works from Charles's volume
of seventeen documents are not included: Pirke Aboth and "The Fragments of a
Zadokite Work," the former because it is rabbinic and the latter because it is now
recognized to belong among the Dead Sea Scrolls. The following collection of
fifty-two writings together with a long Supplement has evolved from the consensus
that the Pseudepigrapha must be defined broadly so as to include all documents
that conceivably belong to the Old Testament Pseudepigrapha. The present
description of the Pseudepigrapha is as follows: Those writings 1) that, with the
exception of Ahiqar, are Jewish or Christian; 2) that are often attributed to ideal
figures in Israel's past; 3) that customarily claim to contain God's word or message;
4) that frequently build upon ideas and narratives present in the Old Testament; 5)
and that almost always were composed either during the period 200 B.C. to A.D. 200 or, though late, apparently preserve, albeit in an edited form, Jewish traditions
that date from that period. Obviously, the numerous qualifications (e.g. "with the
exception of," "often," "customarily," "frequently," "almost always") warn
that the above comments do not define the term "pseudepigrapha"; they merely
describe the features of this collection.Writings cognate to the Pseudepigrapha
Including fifty-two documents plus a Supplement in the present collection of the
Pseudepigrapha meant excluding other writings, although they may have some
characteristics of the Pseudepigrapha. These writings were usually omitted because
they were far removed from the Old Testament in date and character. Most notable
among them are the following: The Vision of Daniel, The Death of Abraham (both
ed. by A. Vassiliev in Anecdota Graeco-Byzantina, vol. 1. Moscow, 1893), the
Hebrew Apocalypse of Elijah (ed. and trans. M. Buttenwieser, Die hebrdische
Elias-Apokalypse. Leipzig, 1897), the Book of Jasher (ed. J. Hive, The Book of
Jasher. Bristol, 1829), the Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan (ed. A. Dillmann,
Das christliche Adambuch des Orients. Gottingen, 1853; ET: S. C. Malan, The
Book of Adam and Eve. London, 1882), the Cave of Treasures (ed. C. Bezold,
Die Schatzhdhle: Syrisch und Deutsch, 2 vols. Leipzig, 1883, 1888; ET: E. A. W. Budge, The Book of the Cave of Treasures. London, 1927), the Book of the
Rolls (cf. M. D. Gibson, Apocrypha Arabica. Studia Sinaitica 8. London, 1901),
the Sin of Solomon (unpublished, probably a homily, cf. Cod. Par. Gr. 1021,
fols. 184v-185v in the Bibliotheque Nationale), Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer (trans. G. Friedlander, Pirke de Rabbi Eliezer. New York, 19814), the Syriac Apocalypse of
Ezra (ed. and trans. J.-B. Chabot, 4'L'Apocalypse d'Esdras," Revue semitique 2
[1894] 242-50, 333-46), the Book of the Bee (ed. and trans. E. A. W. Budge,
The Book of the Bee. Anecdota Oxoniensia, Sem. Ser. 1.2. Oxford, 1886), and
the Questions Addressed by the Queen (of Sheba), and Answers Given by Solomon
(trans. J. Issaverdens, The Uncanonical Writings of the Old Testament. Venice,
1901). Later documents related to the Pseudepigrapha have been edited in important
collections; most important are those from Armenian by Jacques Issaverdens, from
Ethiopic by Wolf Leslau, and from rabbinic Hebrew by Adolph Jellinek (cf.Only two works from Charles's volume
of seventeen documents are not included: Pirke Aboth and "The Fragments of a
Zadokite Work," the former because it is rabbinic and the latter because it is now
recognized to belong among the Dead Sea Scrolls. The following collection of
fifty-two writings together with a long Supplement has evolved from the consensus
that the Pseudepigrapha must be defined broadly so as to include all documents
that conceivably belong to the Old Testament Pseudepigrapha. The present
description of the Pseudepigrapha is as follows: Those writings 1) that, with the
exception of Ahiqar, are Jewish or Christian; 2) that are often attributed to ideal
figures in Israel's past; 3) that customarily claim to contain God's word or message;
4) that frequently build upon ideas and narratives present in the Old Testament; 5)
and that almost always were composed either during the period 200 B.C. to A.D. 200 or, though late, apparently preserve, albeit in an edited form, Jewish traditions
that date from that period. Obviously, the numerous qualifications (e.g. "with the
exception of," "often," "customarily," "frequently," "almost always") warn
that the above comments do not define the term "pseudepigrapha"; they merely
describe the features of this collection.

Venice,
1901). Later documents related to the Pseudepigrapha have been edited in important
collections; most important are those from Armenian by Jacques Issaverdens, from
Ethiopic by Wolf Leslau, and from rabbinic Hebrew by Adolph Jellinek (cf. the
German translation by A. Wunsche). Recently Father Martin McNamara in The
Apocrypha in the Irish Church (Dublin, 1975) drew attention to "probably the
richest crop of apocrypha in any of the European vernaculars, possibly in any
vernacular language" (p. 2). While some of the documents mentioned above may prove to be ancient or
preserve portions of early Jewish pseudepigrapha, the following ten collections of
ancient Jewish or early Christian writings are recognized as important for under­
standing the period in which the Pseudepigrapha were composed. First and second
are the works of the Jewish philosopher and exegete Philo of Alexandria (c. 20
B.C.-A.D. 50) and the Jewish historian Josephus (c. A.D. 37-c. 100); these are
essential reading for an understanding of first-century Jewish life and thought. Third are the Dead Sea Scrolls, which are Jewish sectarian documents first found
in 1947 in caves to the west of the Dead Sea; these inform us of the apocalyptic
and eschatological ideas and of the surprising interpretations of the Old Testament
by one sect of Jews, which flourished from the second century B.C. (c. 150 B.C.)
to the first century A.D. (viz. A.D. 68). These scrolls are extremely important for
an understanding of many pseudepigrapha, especially Jubilees, the Testaments of
the Twelve Patriarchs, 1 Enoch, and the Odes of Solomon. Fourth are the rabbinic
writings, and there can be no doubt that some of the traditions recorded in thesedocuments predate the destruction of the Temple in A.D. 70; these early traditions
are helpful in understanding the daily life of the religious Jew before the destruction
of the nation and the Temple. Fifth are the targums, which are Aramaic translations
and expansive interpretations of the Hebrew scriptures; these sometimes seem to
preserve important evidence of an ancient understanding of the Old Testament. Since a Targum of Job, dating from the first half of the first century A.D., was
found at Qumran, it is now clear that the earliest traditions in the other, but much
later, targums must be included in an assessment of early Judaism. Sixth are the
"Jewish" magical papyri, especially those edited by K. L. Preisendanz; these
should not be ignored, as should become evident from a careful reading of some
pseudepigrapha, especially the Prayer of Jacob, the Prayer of Joseph, and the
History of Joseph. Seventh are the Hermetica, which are writings of the first few
centuries A.D. attributed to Hermes that describe the means to personal salvation;
these may contain (although I personally am not convinced) some early Jewish
traditions that are important for an understanding of Early Judaism and earliest
Christianity. Eighth are the Nag Hammadi codices; these Coptic codices were
composed from perhaps the first to the fourth centuries A.D., but were not found
until 1945 in Upper Egypt. These writings, most of which are gnostic, are
intermittently influenced by early Jewish traditions. Of special importance among
these codices is the Apocalypse of Adam included below. Ninth are the New
Testament Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, which contain many early Christian
writings that* are usually legendary expansions of the New Testament itself; these
only infrequently were shaped by early Jewish traditions.Of special importance among
these codices is the Apocalypse of Adam included below. Ninth are the New
Testament Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha, which contain many early Christian
writings that* are usually legendary expansions of the New Testament itself; these
only infrequently were shaped by early Jewish traditions. Tenth are the Apocrypha, which are writings that like many pseudepigrapha are
usually related to the Hebrew scriptures; as indicated earlier, the Apocrypha are
documents preserved in the Greek, but not in the Hebrew, Old Testament. These
documents are often designated by Roman Catholics as "deuterocanonical," but
most scholars have now accepted the Protestant terminology and call them
"Apocrypha."
Different collections of the Apocrypha are available today. In order to harmonize
with the contemporary, enlarged concept of Pseudepigrapha the Apocrypha should
include only the additional writings preserved in almost all Septuagint manuscripts,
and not the additional documents in the Vulgate (see PMR, p. 19). The Apocrypha,
therefore, includes thirteen documents: 2 Ezra ( = 1 Esdras),* Tobit, Judith,
Additions to Esther, Wisdom of Solomon, Sirach, 1 Baruch, Letter of Jeremiah,
Prayer of Azariah with the Song of the Three Young Men, Susanna, Bel and the
Dragon, 1 Maccabees, and 2 Maccabees. Often two pseudepigrapha, 4 Ezra (= 2
Esdras)* and the Prayer of Manasseh,* are considered part of the Apocrypha. The
thirteen documents in the Apocrypha, with the exception of Tobit, which may be
much earlier, date from the last two centuries before the common era. These
documents may be found in Protestant ecumenical Bibles that contain the Apocrypha
in a center section between the testaments, or at the end of the two testaments. All except the three marked with asterisks will be found in Roman Catholic Bibles
interspersed among the Old Testament writings or even as part of them (esp. Esth
and Dan).Venice,
1901). Later documents related to the Pseudepigrapha have been edited in important
collections; most important are those from Armenian by Jacques Issaverdens, from
Ethiopic by Wolf Leslau, and from rabbinic Hebrew by Adolph Jellinek (cf. the
German translation by A. Wunsche). Recently Father Martin McNamara in The
Apocrypha in the Irish Church (Dublin, 1975) drew attention to "probably the
richest crop of apocrypha in any of the European vernaculars, possibly in any
vernacular language" (p. 2). While some of the documents mentioned above may prove to be ancient or
preserve portions of early Jewish pseudepigrapha, the following ten collections of
ancient Jewish or early Christian writings are recognized as important for under­
standing the period in which the Pseudepigrapha were composed. First and second
are the works of the Jewish philosopher and exegete Philo of Alexandria (c. 20
B.C.-A.D. 50) and the Jewish historian Josephus (c. A.D. 37-c. 100); these are
essential reading for an understanding of first-century Jewish life and thought. Third are the Dead Sea Scrolls, which are Jewish sectarian documents first found
in 1947 in caves to the west of the Dead Sea; these inform us of the apocalyptic
and eschatological ideas and of the surprising interpretations of the Old Testament
by one sect of Jews, which flourished from the second century B.C. (c. 150 B.C.)
to the first century A.D. (viz. A.D. 68). These scrolls are extremely important for
an understanding of many pseudepigrapha, especially Jubilees, the Testaments of
the Twelve Patriarchs, 1 Enoch, and the Odes of Solomon. Fourth are the rabbinic
writings, and there can be no doubt that some of the traditions recorded in these

All except the three marked with asterisks will be found in Roman Catholic Bibles
interspersed among the Old Testament writings or even as part of them (esp. Esth
and Dan). It is important to draw attention to these other significant collections of early
Jewish and Christian documents. Along with them, the Pseudepigrapha preserve
ideas essential for an understanding of Early Judaism and Early Christianity.Importance of the Pseudepigrapha
We may now assess briefly the importance of the Pseudepigrapha for a better
understanding of the history and thought of Jews during the centuries that preceded
and followed the beginning of the common era. Four aspects of that period are
impressive. First, there is the very abundance of the literature, although we possess
only part of the writings produced by Jews during the period 200 B.C. to A.D. 200. We know many works are lost since early Christians quoted from and referred
to documents now lost, since some writings are available only in truncated
manuscripts or in fragments, since there are references to lost volumes produced,
for example, by Jason of Cyrene, Justus of Tiberias, and Nicolaus of Damascus,
and since each new discovery of a manuscript reminds us that there are still more
works to be recovered. It is obvious that post-exilic Judaism was distinguished by voluminous and
varied literature: from the production of epics or tragedies in hexameters or iambic
trimeters (viz. PhEPoet, EzekTrag) to philosophical tractates (viz. Aristob, Philo,
4Mac), from perhaps reliable histories (viz. IMac, some of Josephus" publications)
to imaginative recreations of the past (viz. the Chronicler, 3Mac, JosAsen), from
apocalyptic dreams and visions of another world (viz. IEn, 2Bar; cf. HistRech) to
humanistic wisdom (viz. Sir, Ps-Phoc), and even from charges against God in
seemingly Promethean arrogance (viz. Eccl; cf. ApSedr) to hymnic and introspective
submissions to God as the sole means of righteousness and salvation (viz. 1QH,
PrMan; cf. OdesSol). During the post-exilic period, the Jewish genius exploded
into creative new writings. Second, the Pseudepigrapha illustrate the pervasive influence of the Old Testament
books upon Early Judaism.All except the three marked with asterisks will be found in Roman Catholic Bibles
interspersed among the Old Testament writings or even as part of them (esp. Esth
and Dan). It is important to draw attention to these other significant collections of early
Jewish and Christian documents. Along with them, the Pseudepigrapha preserve
ideas essential for an understanding of Early Judaism and Early Christianity.

During the post-exilic period, the Jewish genius exploded
into creative new writings. Second, the Pseudepigrapha illustrate the pervasive influence of the Old Testament
books upon Early Judaism. That is seen not only in the following group of works
designated "Expansions of the Old Testament," but also in many similar ones,
especially in the selection of "apocalypses" and "testaments." Judaism became
for all time a religion of the Book, God's eternal message. Third, we learn from the Pseudepigrapha that the consecutive conquests of
Palestinian Jews by Persians, Greeks, and Romans, and the intermittent invasions
by Syrian, Egyptian, and Parthian armies did not dampen the enthusiasm of
religious Jews for their ancestral traditions. The ancient Davidic Psalter was
constantly expanded until some collections included 155 psalms. Other psalmbooks
appeared, especially the Psalms of Solomon, the Hodayoth, the Odes of Solomon,
and perhaps the Hellenistic Synagogal Hymns. Apocalypses that stressed the
grandeur and transcendence of God were customarily interspersed with hymns that
celebrated God's nearness, and by prayers that were perceived as heard and
answered. Post-exilic Judaism was a living and devout religion. New hymns,
psalms, and odes witness to the fact that persecution could not choke the blessings
by the faithful. Fourth, the Pseudepigrapha attest that pcJst-exilic Jews often were torn within
by divisions and sects, and intermittently conquered from without by foreign
nations who insulted, abused, and frequently employed fatal torture. Persecutions
inflamed the desire to revolt and some pseudepigrapha mirror the tensions among
the Jews. Especially noteworthy are the Psalms of Solomon and the Testament of
Moses, which record the idea that God alone is the source of power; it is he whowill initiate action against the gentiles and purge Jerusalem of the foreigners. The
apocalypses usually are pessimistic about the present: God had withdrawn from
the arena of history and from the earth; he would return only to consummate the
end and to inaugurate the new. Thereby the apocalyptists affirm the loyalty of God
to covenant, invite the reader to live in terms of, indeed within, another world,
and envisage an optimistic conclusion for Israel in God's completed story. The Pseudepigrapha, therefore, are an important source for understanding the
social dimensions of Early Judaism. The simplistic picture of Early Judaism should
be recast; it certainly was neither a religion which had fallen into arduous legalism
due to the crippling demands of the Law, nor was it characterized by four dominant
sects. A new picture has been emerging because of ideas preserved in the documents
collected below. Three examples suffice to demonstrate this insight: First, none of
the present translators strives to identify a document with a particular Jewish sect. We cannot identify with certainty any author of a pseudepigraphon as being a
Pharisee or an Essene or a member of another sect. Second, Palestinian Jews were
influenced by Egyptian, Persian, and Greek ideas. Hence, the old distinction
between "Palestinian Judaism" and "Hellenistic Judaism" must be either redefined
or discarded. Third, because of the variegated, even contradictory, nature of the
ideas popular in many sectors of post-exilic Judaism, it is obvious that Judaism
was not monolithically structured or shaped by a central and all-powerful "ortho­
doxy."
When Charles published his edition of the Pseudepigrapha, it was widely held
that Early Judaism was shaped and characterized by "normative Judaism" or a
ruling orthodoxy centered in Jerusalem. This idea is no longer defended by most
biblical scholars.Third, because of the variegated, even contradictory, nature of the
ideas popular in many sectors of post-exilic Judaism, it is obvious that Judaism
was not monolithically structured or shaped by a central and all-powerful "ortho­
doxy."
When Charles published his edition of the Pseudepigrapha, it was widely held
that Early Judaism was shaped and characterized by "normative Judaism" or a
ruling orthodoxy centered in Jerusalem. This idea is no longer defended by most
biblical scholars. Since 1947, when the first of the Dead Sea Scrolls were
discovered, there has even been a tendency to emphasize unduly the diversity in
Early Judaism. While it is now recognized that foreign ideas penetrated deep into
many aspects of Jewish thought, and that sometimes it is difficult to decide whether
an early document is essentially Jewish or Christian, it is, nevertheless, unwise to
exaggerate the diversity in Early Judaism. In the first century Judaism was neither
uniformly normative nor chaotically diverse. The above discussion leads to the following observations that should be
emphasized. The documents contained herein certainly demonstrate the rich vitality
and diversity of Judaism during the early centuries. This is not the place to attempt
to articulate further what, if anything, seems to unify them. Certainly confirmed
is Charles's own statement that was controversial in his time: Without the Apocrypha
and Pseudepigrapha (and we would add other documents recovered since his time,
notably the Dead Sea Scrolls) "it is absolutely impossible to explain the course of
religious development between 200 B.C. and A.D. 100" (APOT, vol. 1, p. x).During the post-exilic period, the Jewish genius exploded
into creative new writings. Second, the Pseudepigrapha illustrate the pervasive influence of the Old Testament
books upon Early Judaism. That is seen not only in the following group of works
designated "Expansions of the Old Testament," but also in many similar ones,
especially in the selection of "apocalypses" and "testaments." Judaism became
for all time a religion of the Book, God's eternal message. Third, we learn from the Pseudepigrapha that the consecutive conquests of
Palestinian Jews by Persians, Greeks, and Romans, and the intermittent invasions
by Syrian, Egyptian, and Parthian armies did not dampen the enthusiasm of
religious Jews for their ancestral traditions. The ancient Davidic Psalter was
constantly expanded until some collections included 155 psalms. Other psalmbooks
appeared, especially the Psalms of Solomon, the Hodayoth, the Odes of Solomon,
and perhaps the Hellenistic Synagogal Hymns. Apocalypses that stressed the
grandeur and transcendence of God were customarily interspersed with hymns that
celebrated God's nearness, and by prayers that were perceived as heard and
answered. Post-exilic Judaism was a living and devout religion. New hymns,
psalms, and odes witness to the fact that persecution could not choke the blessings
by the faithful. Fourth, the Pseudepigrapha attest that pcJst-exilic Jews often were torn within
by divisions and sects, and intermittently conquered from without by foreign
nations who insulted, abused, and frequently employed fatal torture. Persecutions
inflamed the desire to revolt and some pseudepigrapha mirror the tensions among
the Jews. Especially noteworthy are the Psalms of Solomon and the Testament of
Moses, which record the idea that God alone is the source of power; it is he who

1, p. x). Significant theological conceptions
The general reader will find it helpful, when reading the documents collected
below, to learn that at least four significant theological concerns are frequently
found in the Pseudepigrapha: preoccupations with the meaning of sin, the origins
of evil, and the problem of theodicy; stresses upon God's transcendence; concerns
with the coming of the Messiah; and beliefs in a resurrection that are often
accompanied with descriptions of Paradise. Each of these interests was developed—at least partly—from ideas and beliefs found in the Old Testament. At the beginning
it is prudent to emphasize that scholars9 understanding of early Jewish theology
has evolved from decades of research not only upon the Pseudepigrapha, but also
upon the Old Testament, the Apocrypha, early rabbinics, Philo, Josephus, and the
Dead Sea Scrolls. Sin, Evil, and the Problem of Theodicy. The Jews who returned to Palestine
following the sixth-century B.C. exile in Babylon attempted to be faithful to the
covenant; they rebuilt the Temple and emphasized the study of the Torah. Dedication
to purity involved not only heightened rules for worship and daily life but also
racial purity and separation from the heathen. Despite renewed dedication and
faithfulness, the righteous did not prosper and live in a holy land free from
domination. It was the sinners and the unfaithful who seemed to be rewarded, and
the land—indeed the land promised to Abraham as an inheritance—was ruled by
foreign oppressors. Sin and injustice were rewarded; evil appeared to be the ruling
power in a world created by God. Raised repeatedly was the question: "How could
the God of Israel be holy, just, and all-powerful, and at the same time permit evil
forces to oppress the righteous?" Many pseudepigrapha are shaped by this question
and the problem of theodicy (see especially 4Ezra, 2Bar, ApAbr, 3Bar). This problem evoked mutually exclusive reactions in Judaism. Qoheleth con­
cluded, "Vanity of vanities. All is vanity!" (Eccl 1:2). Authors of some
pseudepigrapha, basing their insight upon the story of Adam and Eve's first sin,
described in Genesis 3, took the position that evil was dominant in the world
because of Eve's sin. The author of the Life of Adam and Eve 18:1, as the author
of Sirach 25:24 (in the Apocrypha), put the blame squarely upon Eve. The source
of the guilt shifts completely from Eve to Adam in 4 Ezra.1, p. x). Significant theological conceptions
The general reader will find it helpful, when reading the documents collected
below, to learn that at least four significant theological concerns are frequently
found in the Pseudepigrapha: preoccupations with the meaning of sin, the origins
of evil, and the problem of theodicy; stresses upon God's transcendence; concerns
with the coming of the Messiah; and beliefs in a resurrection that are often
accompanied with descriptions of Paradise. Each of these interests was developed—

The author of the Life of Adam and Eve 18:1, as the author
of Sirach 25:24 (in the Apocrypha), put the blame squarely upon Eve. The source
of the guilt shifts completely from Eve to Adam in 4 Ezra. Evil reigns in the world
certainly not because of God's actions, but because of Adam, who "transgressed"
and was overcome, and not only he himself but all who descend from him (4Ezra
3:20f.; cf. 7:118). About the same time as 4 Ezra, the author of 2 Baruch argued
that sin is in the world and continues to be a power because each individual chooses
to sin (2Bar 54:15, 19; cf. IEn 98:4f.). An appreciably different explanation for the origin of sin is found emphasized
in numerous pseudepigrapha. Taking as their starting point the story in Genesis 6
about "the sons of God'* who married "the daughters of men," the authors of
some pseudepigrapha—especially the authors of 1 and 2 Enocli—claim that evil is
in the world and is a powerful force because of evil angels. Four possible
explanations for the fall of these angels may be discerned: 1) The angels had lusted
for earth's beautiful women (IEn 6:1-16:4, 40:7, 54:6; 2En 18). 2) The angels
perhaps had desired to reproduce themselves (IEn 6:2b, 7:1-3). 3) The Devil and
his followers refused to worship Adam (Vita 14:3). 4) An angel and his legions
desired to exalt themselves (2En 29:4f.). All these explanations, despite their
significant differences, reflect the seriousness with which evil was perceived by
post-exilic Jews, and all attempt to absolve God of the responsibility for evil. This
balanced perspective is upset in a much later document, the Apocalypse of Sedrach
(ch. 5). Evil is a dominant force in the world, despite God's will and actions. The
righteous suffer primarily because of the power evil has obtained on the earth. The
land of Israel has been engulfed by nations either sent by God to punish his sinful
people or by foreigners ruled by evil forces or angels; hence God can both sendevil and allow it to continue. God's people suffer, and he tends to remove himself
from a special portion of his creation. Transcendence of God. The emphasis in many pseudepigrapha that God is far
from Israel contrasts markedly with earlier traditions, especially two accounts:
According to Genesis 18 God encountered Abraham on the earth and by the oaks
of Mamre, just north of Hebron; according to Exodus 3 the Lord God calls Moses
from a burning bush on Mount Horeb, and the presence of God defines the place
as "holy ground." After the exile God is usually perceived as one who is above. The apocalyptists place him in the highest heaven, far removed from the earth
(IEn 1:4, 71:5-11; 2En 20:5), but the prayers interspersed through the apocalypses
reveal that he is not inaccessible. He has withdrawn from the world and no longer
acts in its history; he will, however, act again, probably through intermediaries
(PssSol 17, TLevi 18, TJud 24, 4Ezra 7, 2Bar 72f.). Most pseudepigrapha, in
contrast to earlier Jewish writings, are characterized by an increasing claim that
God is thoroughly majestic and transcendent (2Mac 3:39; 3Mac 2:15; SibOr 3.1,
11, 81, 807; 5.298, 352; Martls 1:6b; IEn 71:5-11; 2En 20:5). Knowledge of him
is obtained almost always only through the sacred books, the descent of angels
(TAb 2:15), the gift of vision (IEn 1:2), or the journey of a seer through the
various heavens (2En, Ascenls). The contrast of these ideas with earlier ones is
demonstrated by the way the author of the Testament of Abraham rewrites Genesis
18: God does not descend to visit Abraham; he sends his angel Michael to speak
with the patriarch (TAb 1; cf. 16). The contrast between ideas or tendencies in early documents, such as Genesis,
and those in the Pseudepigrapha should not be exaggerated; and the rewriting of
God's encounter with Abraham should not be interpreted to mean that religious
Jews came to believe that God was absolutely extramundane, remote, and exiled.16). The contrast between ideas or tendencies in early documents, such as Genesis,
and those in the Pseudepigrapha should not be exaggerated; and the rewriting of
God's encounter with Abraham should not be interpreted to mean that religious
Jews came to believe that God was absolutely extramundane, remote, and exiled. As the hymns, odes, and prayers in the apocalypses themselves demonstrate, the
Jew continued to affirm efficacious and personal communion with God. With these
caveats it is possible to point out that early Jews tended to emphasize God's
holiness, majesty, gloriousness, and sovereignty; he was transcendent. Messianism. The belief in a Messiah—a term which here means an ideal person,
probably a king or priest, who will bring in perfect peace—is not found in the Old
Testament, in the Apocrypha, or in Philo and Josephus (except for allusions). The
belief in a future messianic Davidic king, however, is recorded in the prophets
(viz. Isa 9:2-7, 11:1-9; Jer 33:14-22; Ezek 37:24-28); and the belief in a future
Messiah (or Anointed One) of Aaron and Israel (CD Text B 19.10f.; cf. 1QS 9.11)
is recorded in the Dead Sea Scrolls. The term "Messiah" also appears in the later
Targums (especially Pseudo-Jonathan [Jerusalem Targum] at Gen 49:1 and Num
24:17-24). Numerous titles were given to the expected messianic figure; but since
it is difficult to be certain in which passages these are indeed titles for the Messiah,
it is wise to limit this overview only to the places in the Pseudepigrapha which
mention the terms "the Messiah" (the Heb. noun) or "the Christ" (the Gk. translation) or "the Anointed One" (which is the meaning of both the Heb. and
the Gk.). Significantly, most pseudepigrapha do not contain a reference to the coming of
a Messiah; and it is impossible to derive a systematic description of the functions
of the Messiah from the extant references to him. Only five pseudepigrapha contain
clearly Jewish traditions about the Messiah.The author of the Life of Adam and Eve 18:1, as the author
of Sirach 25:24 (in the Apocrypha), put the blame squarely upon Eve. The source
of the guilt shifts completely from Eve to Adam in 4 Ezra. Evil reigns in the world
certainly not because of God's actions, but because of Adam, who "transgressed"
and was overcome, and not only he himself but all who descend from him (4Ezra
3:20f.; cf. 7:118). About the same time as 4 Ezra, the author of 2 Baruch argued
that sin is in the world and continues to be a power because each individual chooses
to sin (2Bar 54:15, 19; cf. IEn 98:4f.). An appreciably different explanation for the origin of sin is found emphasized
in numerous pseudepigrapha. Taking as their starting point the story in Genesis 6
about "the sons of God'* who married "the daughters of men," the authors of
some pseudepigrapha—especially the authors of 1 and 2 Enocli—claim that evil is
in the world and is a powerful force because of evil angels. Four possible
explanations for the fall of these angels may be discerned: 1) The angels had lusted
for earth's beautiful women (IEn 6:1-16:4, 40:7, 54:6; 2En 18). 2) The angels
perhaps had desired to reproduce themselves (IEn 6:2b, 7:1-3). 3) The Devil and
his followers refused to worship Adam (Vita 14:3). 4) An angel and his legions
desired to exalt themselves (2En 29:4f.). All these explanations, despite their
significant differences, reflect the seriousness with which evil was perceived by
post-exilic Jews, and all attempt to absolve God of the responsibility for evil. This
balanced perspective is upset in a much later document, the Apocalypse of Sedrach
(ch. 5). Evil is a dominant force in the world, despite God's will and actions. The
righteous suffer primarily because of the power evil has obtained on the earth. The
land of Israel has been engulfed by nations either sent by God to punish his sinful
people or by foreigners ruled by evil forces or angels; hence God can both send

Significantly, most pseudepigrapha do not contain a reference to the coming of
a Messiah; and it is impossible to derive a systematic description of the functions
of the Messiah from the extant references to him. Only five pseudepigrapha contain
clearly Jewish traditions about the Messiah. Late in the first century B.C. the authorof the Psalms of Solomon yearned for the coming of the Messiah, who will "purge
Jerusalem from gentiles." Notably he shall perform this task "with the word of
his mouth," and do this not from his own initiative, but because he is God's agent
and belongs to God (PssSol 17f.). Apparently late in the first century A.D.—when many of the New Testament
writings were being written, especially Matthew, Luke, and John—three authors
of pseudepigrapha elaborated on traditions concerning the Messiah. The author of
2 Baruch focused upon the role of the Messiah in three separate sections (chs. 29f., 39-42, 72-74). When "all is accomplished" the Messiah will be revealed
and the righteous resurrected (2Bar 29f.). In contrast to this apparently passive
role, the Messiah, according to the second section (2Bar 39-42), will act decisively,
convicting and putting to death the last evil leader, and protecting God's people. The Messiah is also active in the third section (2Bar 72-74): He shall summon all
the nations, sparing those who have not mistreated Israel, and slaying those who
have ruled over her. In both the second and third messianic sections the Messiah
appears to be described as a militant warrior who slays the gentiles by the sword
(72:6). At about the same time as the author of 2 Baruch the author of 4 Ezra, in three
passages (chs. 7, 11:37-12:34, 13:3-14:9), discusses the functions of the Messiah. According to the first of these (4Ezra 7), in the future age, the world to come
(7:50, 8:1), the Messiah shall be revealed, bringing rejoicing for four hundred
years, and eventually die (7:28f.). According to the second passage (4Ezra 11:37-
12:34), the Messiah, who is depicted as "the lion," will denounce, judge, and
destroy the ungodly; but he shall deliver the faithful and make them joyful. According to the third section (4Ezra 13:3-14:9), the Messiah, who is "my son"
(13:32, 37, 52; 14:9; cf.Significantly, most pseudepigrapha do not contain a reference to the coming of
a Messiah; and it is impossible to derive a systematic description of the functions
of the Messiah from the extant references to him. Only five pseudepigrapha contain
clearly Jewish traditions about the Messiah. Late in the first century B.C. the author

According to the second passage (4Ezra 11:37-
12:34), the Messiah, who is depicted as "the lion," will denounce, judge, and
destroy the ungodly; but he shall deliver the faithful and make them joyful. According to the third section (4Ezra 13:3-14:9), the Messiah, who is "my son"
(13:32, 37, 52; 14:9; cf. 7:28f.) and "a man" (13:26, 32), withstands a warring
multitude and consumes them with "a stream of fire" that proceeds from his
mouth. Perhaps roughly contemporaneously with 2 Baruch and 4 Ezra (see the intro­
duction to IEn), the author of 1 Enoch 37-71 recorded his ideas about the Messiah. In contrast to his vivid depictions of "the Son of Man," "the Righteous One,"
and "the Elect One," the author's two meager references to the Messiah (or "the
Anointed One") are surprisingly brief (48:10, 52:4). No functions are attributed
to the Messiah. The fifth document in the Pseudepigrapha that contains a clearly Jewish
perspective on the Messiah is the late document titled 3 Enoch. Noteworthy is the
portrayal of a Messiah who is son of Joseph, and a Messiah who is son of David
(45:5). It is possible that one Messiah is meant; but if two Messiahs are denoted,
then the Messiahs of Israel will wage war against Gog and Magog at the end of
time. This war appears to end in a draw; God himself eventually enters the war
and wins the last battle. Subsequently the author of 3 Enoch describes the celebration
of Israel's salvation (48:10A). The possibly early date of these traditions has been
raised by the discovery of similar ones in the Dead Sea Scrolls (especially 1QS,
CD, 1QM). Obviously different from the above are the references to "the Messiah" (and
derived terms) in the pseudepigrapha that appear to be Christian compositions. Observe especially the use of the term in the Odes of Solomon (9:3, 17:17, 24:1,
29:6, 39:11, 41:3, 41:15), the Apocalypse of Zephaniah (10:24-12:32), theApocalypse of Elijah (13:15-15:14, 25:8-19), and the Apocalypse of Sedrach (ch. 12). Lengthy Christian additions in the Vision of Isaiah (9:12-13, 30:7-15) and
the Testament of Adam (Rec. 2) also contain significant references to "the Anointed
One" or "the Christ."
Resurrection and Paradise. Scholars generally agree that the Old Testament
writings, with the possible exception of Isaiah 26 and Daniel 12, do not contain
explicit references to the resurrection of the dead. At death the individual simply
is gathered to his final (or father's) place, the tomb. Sheol and the netherworld
('ere$) is described as the abode of the dead, not of people who continue to live
after death (cf. Isa 38:18, Sir 17:28, 14:12-19). Only through his reputation or a
son does his life continue on the earth. In contrast to this perception are the ideas
developed in post-exilic Judaism. Some books in the Apocrypha contain numerous
explicit references to the resurrection of the dead (see especially 2Mac 7, 14), or
possibly even to the immortality of the soul (WisSol), and the Dead Sea Scrolls
preserve ambiguous sections possibly referring to an afterlife (see especially 1QH
5.34, 6.29f., 11.10-14). Some pseudepigrapha, even more than these other
documents, contain many passages that with pellucid clarity express the belief in
a resurrection after death (viz. TJob, PssSol, 4Mac, Ps-Phoc, 2En, HistRech). The
author of 2 Baruch, moreover, devotes a section, 49-52, to the description of the
resurrected body. Logically subsequent to the development of this idea is the attempt to describe
the future place of rest for the righteous. Hence, picturesque images of Paradise
appear in many pseudepigrapha. The various pictoral descriptions are characterized
by mutually exclusive ideas. Paradise is placed sometimes in the third heaven (2En
8A, ApMos 37:5, 40:1), and sometimes on the earth (IEn 32; 2En 8:1-6A, 30:1 A;
ApMos 38:5).According to the second passage (4Ezra 11:37-
12:34), the Messiah, who is depicted as "the lion," will denounce, judge, and
destroy the ungodly; but he shall deliver the faithful and make them joyful. According to the third section (4Ezra 13:3-14:9), the Messiah, who is "my son"
(13:32, 37, 52; 14:9; cf. 7:28f.) and "a man" (13:26, 32), withstands a warring
multitude and consumes them with "a stream of fire" that proceeds from his
mouth. Perhaps roughly contemporaneously with 2 Baruch and 4 Ezra (see the intro­
duction to IEn), the author of 1 Enoch 37-71 recorded his ideas about the Messiah. In contrast to his vivid depictions of "the Son of Man," "the Righteous One,"
and "the Elect One," the author's two meager references to the Messiah (or "the
Anointed One") are surprisingly brief (48:10, 52:4). No functions are attributed
to the Messiah. The fifth document in the Pseudepigrapha that contains a clearly Jewish
perspective on the Messiah is the late document titled 3 Enoch. Noteworthy is the
portrayal of a Messiah who is son of Joseph, and a Messiah who is son of David
(45:5). It is possible that one Messiah is meant; but if two Messiahs are denoted,
then the Messiahs of Israel will wage war against Gog and Magog at the end of
time. This war appears to end in a draw; God himself eventually enters the war
and wins the last battle. Subsequently the author of 3 Enoch describes the celebration
of Israel's salvation (48:10A). The possibly early date of these traditions has been
raised by the discovery of similar ones in the Dead Sea Scrolls (especially 1QS,
CD, 1QM). Obviously different from the above are the references to "the Messiah" (and
derived terms) in the pseudepigrapha that appear to be Christian compositions. Observe especially the use of the term in the Odes of Solomon (9:3, 17:17, 24:1,
29:6, 39:11, 41:3, 41:15), the Apocalypse of Zephaniah (10:24-12:32), the

The various pictoral descriptions are characterized
by mutually exclusive ideas. Paradise is placed sometimes in the third heaven (2En
8A, ApMos 37:5, 40:1), and sometimes on the earth (IEn 32; 2En 8:1-6A, 30:1 A;
ApMos 38:5). It is depicted as either without inhabitants (IEn 32, 2En 8f., 4Ezra
8:52) or with inhabitants (PssSol 14, 2En 42:3B, ApAb 21, OdesSol 11:16-24;
cf. HistRech). It is portrayed as both an eternal inheritance (PssSol 14:3f.; 2En
65:10A; OdesSol ll:16d, 16f.; 4Ezra 8:52) and a state preceding the end (ApMos
37:5, 40:1-41:3; Vita 48:6f.; Ascenls 9; cf. HistRech 13-15). There are some
common beliefs, notably that Paradise is full of fruitful trees (see 2En 8A, OdesSol
11:11-16, 23) and distinguished by a sweet-smelling odor (viz. see IEn 32:3, 2En
8A, OdesSol 11:15, 2En 23:18). The contradicting ideas should not be explained away or forced into an artificial
system. Such ideas in the Pseudepigrapha witness to the fact that Early Judaism
was not a speculative philosophical movement or theological system, even though
the Jews demonstrated impressive speculative fecundity. The Pseudepigrapha mirror
a living religion in which the attempt was made to come to terms with the dynamic
phenomena of history and experience. These are only four of the theological characteristics of the Pseudepigrapha,
namely the problems of sin and theodicy, emphasis upon God's transcendence,
speculations about the Messiah, and the ideas concerning the afterlife. Many other
theological features could also be highlighted. The choice between a lunar and a
solar calendar (see Jub and IEn) produced major upheavals in Judaism in the
second century B.C. Calendrical issues contained cosmic and profound theological
dimensions. How exasperating to discover you were not observing the Sabbath on
the correct day and with the angels and the rest of the universe. How astounding
to learn that Passover was celebrated at the wrong time. Similarly, the search forauthority and reliable insight into God's will is reflected in the search for the
quintessence of Torah and its text. The search for God himself and the tendency
toward belief in a transcendent and apparently aloof Creator spawned complex
angelologies. The impossibility of obtaining satisfactory meaning in present history
helped produce the theological perspectives behind apocalypticism.
Conclusion
These introductory comments are far too brief to constitute an introduction to
the Pseudepigrapha, and they should not be taken to indicate that scholars have
arrived at anything like a consensus on the major issues. These few comments
should, however, enable the general reader to understand better the documents
collected below; at least they reflect how the editor perceives them. Each of the
Pseudepigrapha is preceded by an introduction (see Editor's Preface) and organized
under categories which also have brief introductions/These collectively serve to
help the reader appreciate the documents themselves.EXPLANATION OF TYPOGRAPHICAL
AND REFERENCE SYSTEMS
Chapter and verse numbers
We have endeavored to present the documents below in a format similar to that
of the Jerusalem Bible. Hence, chapters and verses are supplied. A new chapter
is indicated by a large bold numeral. Verse numbers are placed in the margin in
ordinary roman type; in the text itself, the beginning of each verse is marked by
a • which precedes the first word of the verse except when the verse begins a new
line or a new chapter. Because of their linguistic nature, some documents—such
as the Sibylline Oracles, Letter of Aristeas, and Syriac Menander—are not divided
into chapters and verses. These are presented so that the beginning of each line or
section of text is noted in the margin with numbers in ordinary roman type as with
verse numbers.
Italics in the text
Italic type in the text denotes full or partial quotations of the Bible. The biblical
passage from which the quotation is derived is noted in the margin.
Brackets and other sigla in the translation
[ ] Square brackets denote restorations.
( ) Pointed brackets signify corrections to a text.
( ) Parentheses circumscribe words added by the translator. Ancient
languages are cryptic; verbs, nouns, and pronouns are often omitted.
These are, of course, necessary for idiomatic English and are presented
within parentheses.
| | This siglum indicates a letter incorrectly omitted by an ancient scribe.
{ } Braces denote unnecessary words or letters in an ancient text.
Footnotes
In each chapter, footnotes are lettered alphabetically. The footnotes are not
intended to be a mini-commentary, but to supply significant information, such as
important related thoughts contained in ancient writings not considered either
canonical or extracanonical. Only significant variants in the manuscripts are cited.
These notes assume that the reader has read the general introduction and the
introduction to each document being footnoted.EXPLANATION OF TYPOGRAPHICAL AND REFERENCE SYSTEMS xxrv/
Punctuation of biblical references
Chapter and verse are separated by a colon, e.g. Ex 20:7. A subsequent verse
in the same chapter is separated from the preceding by a comma. Subsequent
citations in other biblical or apocryphal writings are separated by semicolons: e.g.
Ex 20:17, 20; Lev 9:15. Citations which are not preceded by an abbreviation refer
to the respective passage in a document being footnoted.
Marginal references
Marginal references are kept to a minimum and except in rare occasions are
limited to significant parallels in biblical and apocryphal writings. These marginal
references should help the reader better understand the relevant passage by drawing
attention to the source of a biblical quotation, and to other uses of special terms,
phrases, or images. The references in the margin often occur in groups all relating
to one text line; in such cases, the position of the first reference indicates the line
to which the whole group applies. Marginal references not preceded by the
abbreviation of a book indicate a passage elsewhere in the document before the
reader.
Care has been taken to assure that each marginal reference begins on the line to
which it refers. However, in some cases this is not possible because of the length
of necessary marginal references. In these cases, the marginal reference is preceded
by a verse reference (i.e. the letter v plus the number of the verse) so the reader
can attach the marginal references to the correct verses.
Secondary divisions within the document
The manuscripts from which the translators have worked usually do not separate
the text so that each new thought or development in the narrative is indicated. The
translators have supplied the subdivisions to help the reader follow the flow of the
document.LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
I. MODERN PUBLICATIONS
AAR American Academy of Religion
AcOr Acta orientalia
AGAJU Arbeiten zur Geschichte des antiken Judentums und des
Urchristentums
Agrapha Resch, A., ed. Agrapha: Aussercanonische Schriftfragmente.
TU 30.3-4; Leipzig, 1906.
ALBO Analecta lovaniensia biblica et orientalia
ALGHJ Arbeiten zur Literatur und Geschichte des hellenistischen
Judentums
ALU OS Annual of the Leeds University Oriental Society
ANET Pritchard, J. B., ed. Ancient Near Eastern Texts. Princeton,
19693.
ANF Roberts, A., and J. Donaldson, eds. The Ante-Nicene
Fathers: Translations of the Writings of the Fathers down
to A.D. 325. 10 vols. Edinburgh, 1868-72; rev. and
repr. Grand Rapids, Mich., 1950-52.
ANRW Haase, W., and H. Temporini, eds. Aufstieg und Niedergang
der romischen Welt. Berlin, New York, 1979- .
ANT James, M. R. The Apocryphal New Testament. Oxford,
1924; corrected ed., 1955.
APAT Kautzsch, E., ed. Die Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen
des Alten Testaments. 2 vols. Tubingen, 1900.
Apoc. Lit. Torrey, C. C. The Apocryphal Literature: A Brief Introduction.
New Haven, Conn., 1945; repr. Hamden, Conn., 1963.
Apocrifi del NT Erbetta, M. Gli Apocrifi del Nuovo Testamento. 3 vols.
Turin, 1966-69.
APOT Charles, R. H., ed. The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha
of the Old Testament in English. 2 vols. Oxford, 1913.
ArOr Archiv orientdlni
ASOR American Schools of Oriental Research
AST! Annual of the Swedish Theological Institute
AT ANT Abhandlungen zur Theologie des Alten und Neuen Testaments
ATR Anglican Theological Review
AusBR Australian Biblical Review
BA The Biblical Archeologist
BASOR Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research
BDT Harrison, E. F., et al., eds. Baker's Dictionary of Theology.
Grand Rapids, Mich., 1960.
BEvT Beitrage zur evangelischen Theologie
BHH Reicke, B., and L. Rost, eds. Biblisch-historisches
Handworterbuch. 3 vols. Gottingen, 1962-66.BHM Jellinek, A. Bet ha-Midrasch. 2 vols. Jerusalem, 19673.
Bib Biblica
Biblia Sacra Weber, R., et al., eds. Biblia Sacra: luxta Vulgatam
Versionem. 2 vols. Stuttgart, 1969.
Bibliographie Delling, G. Bibliographie zur jiidisch-hellenistischen und
intertestamentarischen Literatur 1900-1970. TU 1062;
Berlin, 19752.
BibSt Biblische Studien
B1FAO Bulletin de Vinstitut frangais d'archiologie orientate
BiKi Bibel und Kirche
BIOSCS Bulletin of the International Organization for Septuagint
and Cognate Studies
BJRL, BJRULM Bulletin of the John Rylands Library, Bulletin of the John
Rylands University Library of Manchester
B-L2 Haag, H., ed. BibeULexikon. Zurich, 19682.
BLE Bulletin de literature ecclesiastique
BO Bibliotheca orientalis
BSOAS Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies
BZ Biblische Zeitschrift
BZAW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift fur die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft
BZNW Beihefte zur Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
und die Kunde der alteren Kirche
CB Cultura biblica
CBQ Catholic Biblical Quarterly
CCSL Corpus Christianorum. Series Latina.
CETEDOC Centre de traitement electronique des documents
CG Cairensis Gnosticus
Crucible Toynbee, A., ed. The Crucible of Christianity: Judaism,
Hellenism and the Historical Background to the Christian
Faith. New York, 1969.
CSCO Corpus scriptorum christianorum orientalium
CTM Concordia Theological Monthly
DB Vigouroux, F., ed. Dictionnaire de la Bible. 5 vols. Paris,
1895-1912.
DBSup Pirot, L., et al., eds. Dictionnaire de la Bible, Supplements.
Paris, 1928- .
DJD Discoveries in the Judaean Desert
Dogmengeschichte4 Harnack, A. Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte. 3 vols.
Tubingen, 1909-104.
D7T Dansk teologisk Tidsskrift
Enciclopedia de la Biblia Gutterrez-Larraya, J. A., ed. Enciclopedia de la Biblia. 6
vols. Barcelona, 1963.
Encyclopedia of Christianity Palmer, E. H., et al., eds. The Encyclopedia of Christianity.
Wilmington, Del., 1964- .
EncyJud Roth, C, et al., eds. Encyclopedia Judaica. 16 vols. New
York, 1971-72.
EOS Eos. Commentarii Societatis Philologae Polonorum
ETL Ephemerides theologicae lovanienses
EvT Evangelische Theologie
Exegese biblique et judaisme M6nard, J.-E., ed. Exegese biblique et judaisme. Strasbourg,
1973.
ExpT Expository TimesFalasha Anthology Leslau, W. Falasha Anthology. Yale Judaica Series 6; New
Haven, 1951.
FBBS Facet Books, Biblical Series
FGH Jacoby, F., ed. Fragmente der griechischen Historiker. 3
vols. Leiden, 1923-
FRLANT Forschungen zur Religion und Literatur des Alten und
Neuen Testaments
GamPseud Hammershaimb, E., et al., eds. De Gammeltestamentlige
Pseudepigrapher. 2 vols. Copenhagen, 1953-76.
GCS Die griechischen christlichen Schriftsteller der ersten drei
Jahrhunderte
GDBL Nielsen, E., and B. Noack, eds. Gads Danske Bibel
Leksikon. 2 vols. Copenhagen, 1965—66.
Geschichte [Baumstark] Baumstark, A. Geschichte der syrischen Literatur mit
Ausschluss der christlichpalastinensischen Texte. Bonn,
1922.
Geschichte (Graf] Graf, G. "Apokryphen und Pseudepigraphen," Geschichte
der christlichen arabischen Literatur. Studi e Testi 118;
Vatican, 1944; vol. 1, pp. 196-297.
GLAJJ Stem, M., ed. Greek and Latin Authors on Jews and
Judaism. Vol. 1: From Herodotus to Plutarch. Jerusalem,
1974.
GNT Grundrisse zum Neuen Testament
Goodenough Festschrift Neusner, J., ed. Religions in Antiquity: Essays in Memory
of Erwin Ramsdell Goodenough. Sup Numen 14; Leiden,
1968.
Gottesvolk Janssen, E. Das Gottesvolk und seine Geschichte:
Geschichtsbild und Selbstverstdndnis im paldstinensischen
Schrifttum von Jesus Sirach bis Jehuda ha-Nasi.
Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1971.
Gunkel Festschrift Schmidt, H., ed. Eucharisterion: Studien zur Religion des
Alten und Neuen Testaments. H. Gunkel Festschrift. Part
2: Zur Religion und Literatur des Neuen Testaments.
Gottingen, 1923.
Hastings' DB Hastings, J., ed. Dictionary of the Bible, rev. ed. by F. C.
Grant and H. H. Rowley. New York, 1963.
HAW Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft
HeyJ Heythrop Journal
History [Pfeiffer] Pfeiffer, R. H. History of the New Testament Times with
an Introduction to the Apocrypha. New York, 1949.
History [Schurer] Schurer, E. A History of the Jewish People in the Time of
Jesus Christ. 5 vols., plus index, trans. J. MacPherson
etal. Edinburgh, 1897-98.
History . . . The Time of the Hausrath, A. A History of New Testament Times: The Time
Apostles of the Apostles. 4 vols., trans. L. Huxley. London, 1895.
HNT Handbuch zum Neuen Testament
HSW Hennecke, E., W. Schneemelcher, and R. McL. Wilson,
eds. New Testament Apocrypha. 2 vols. London, 1963-
65.
HTKNT Herders theologischer Kommentar zum Neuen Testament
HTR Harvard Theological Review
HTS Harvard Theological StudiesHUCA Hebrew Union College Annual
IB Buttrick, G. A., et al., eds. The Interpreter's Bible. 12
vols. New York, 1952-57.
ICC International Critical Commentary
IDB Buttrick, G. A., et al., eds. The Interpreter's Dictionary
of the Bible. 4 vols. New York, 1962.
IDBS Crim, K., et al., eds. The Interpreter's Dictionary of the
Bible, Supplementary Volume. Nashville, Tenn., 1976.
IEJ Israel Exploration Journal
Int Interpretation
Intr. to the Apoc. Metzger, B. M. An Introduction to the Apocrypha. New
York, 1957.
Introduction Denis, A.-M. Introduction aux pseudipigraphes grecs
d'Ancien Testament. SVTP 1; Leiden, 1970.
IOCB Laymon, C. M., ed. The Interpreter's One-Volume
Commentary on the Bible. New York, 1971.
ITQ Irish Theological Quarterly
JA Journal asiatique
JAAR Journal of the American Academy of Religion
JAC Jahrbuch fur Antike und Christentum
JAL Jewish Apocryphal Literature
JAOS Journal of the American Oriental Society
JBC Brown, R. E., J. A. Fitzmyer, and R. E. Murphy, eds.
The Jerome Biblical Commentary. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J., 1968.
JBL Journal of Biblical Literature
JBLMS Journal of Biblical Literature Monograph Series
JE Singer, I., et al., eds. The Jewish Encyclopedia. 12 vols.
New York, London, 1901-6.
Jewish Symbols Goodenough, E. R. Jewish Symbols in the Greco-Roman
Period. 13 vols. New York, 1953-68.
JJS Journal of Jewish Studies
JNES Journal of Near Eastern Studies
JPOS Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society
JQR Jewish Quarterly Review
JRAS Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
JSHRZ Kummel, W. G., et al. Judische Schriften aus hellenistisch-
romischer Zeit. Gutersloh, 1973-
JSJ Journal for the Study of Judaism
JSS Journal of Semitic Studies
JThC Journal for Theology and the Church
JTS Journal of Theological Studies
Judaic Tradition Glatzer, N. N. The Judaic Tradition: Texts Edited and
Introduced. Boston, 1969.
Kommentar Strack, H. L., and P. Billerbeck. Kommentar zum Neuen
Testament aus Talmud und Midrasch. 5 vols. Munich,
1922-56.
KS Kirjath Sepher
Kuhn Festschrift Jeremias, G., H.-W. Kuhn, and H. Stegemann, eds.
Tradition und Glaube: Das fruhe Christentum in seiner
Umwelt. Festgabe fiir Karl Georg Kuhn zum 65.
Geburtstag. Gottingen, 1971.Lampe Lampe, G. W. H., ed. A Patristic Greek Lexicon. Oxford,
1961-68.
LAOT James, M. R. The Lost Apocrypha of the Old Testament.
TED; London, New York, 1920.
LCL Loeb Classical Library
Legends Ginzberg, L. The Legends of the Jews. 7 vols., trans. H.
Szold. Philadelphia, 1909-38; repr. 1937-66.
Literatur und Religion des Maier, J., and J. Schreiner, eds. Literatur und Religion
Fruhjudentums des Fruhjudentums. Gutersloh, 1973.
LSJM Liddell, H. G., and R. Scott. A Greek-English Lexicon,
rev. by H. S. Jones and R. McKenzie. Oxford, 1940.
LTK2 Buchberger, M., J. Hofer, and K. Rahner, eds. Lexikon
fiir Theologie und Kirche. 11 vols. Freiburg, 1957-672.
LUOS MS Leeds University Oriental Society Monograph Series
MBPAR Munchener Beitrage zur Papyrusforschung und Antiken
Rechtsgeschichte
McCQ McCormick Quarterly
MGWJ Monatsschrift fur Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums
Missionsliteratur Dalbert, P. Die Theologie der hellenistisch-judischen
Missionsliteratur unter Ausschluss von Philo und Josephus.
Hamburg-Volksdorf, 1954.
M. Smith Festschrift Neusner, J., ed. Christianity, Judaism and Other Greco-
Roman Cults: Studies for Morton Smith at Sixty. SJLA
12; Leiden, 1975.
NCCHS Fuller, R. C, et al., eds. A New Catholic Commentary on
Holy Scripture. London, 1969.
NCE McDonald, W. J., et al., eds. New Catholic Encyclopedia.
15 vols. New York, 1967-
NEB New English Bible
NHC Nag Hammadi Codex
NHL Nag Hammadi Library
NHS Nag Hammadi Studies
NovT Novum Testamentum
NovTSup Novum Testamentum, Supplements
NTS New Testament Studies
NTTS New Testament Tools and Studies
OCA Orientalia Christiana Analeta
Or Orientalia
OrChr Orientalia Christiana
OrSyr L' Orient syrien
OTS Oudtestamentische Studien
Pauly-Wissowa Wissowa, G., et al., eds. Paulys Real-Encyclopddie der
classischen Altertumswissenschaft, neue Bearbeitung.
Stuttgart, Munich, 1893-1972.
PCB Peake, A. S., M. Black, and H. H. Rowley, eds. Peakes
Commentary on the Bible. London, New York, 1962.
PEQ Palestine Exploration Quarterly
PETSE Papers of the Estonian Theological Society in Exile
Peshitta The Old Testament in Syriac According to the Peshitta
Version. Leiden, 1966-
PG Patrologiae graecae, ed. J. Migne
PIOL Publications de l'institut orientaliste de LouvainPL Patrologiae latinae, ed. J. Migne
PMR Charlesworth, J. H. The Pseudepigrapha and Modern
Research. SCS 7; Missoula, Mont., 1976.
Pseud I Fritz, K. von, ed. Pseudepigrapha I: Pseudopythagorica,
lettres de Platon, literature pseudepigraphe juive.
Entretiens sur rantiquity classique 18; Geneva, 1972.
Pseudipigraphes Philonenko, M., et al. Pseudepigraphes de VAncien Testament
et manuscrits de la mer morte. Cahiers de la RHPR 41;
Paris, 1967.
PVTG Pseudepigrapha Veteris Testamenti Graece
RAC Klauser, T., et al., eds. Reallexikon fur Antike und
Christentum: Sachwdrterbuch zur Auseinandersetzung
des Christentums mit der antiken Welt. Stuttgart,
1950- .
RB Revue biblique
RBen Revue binedictine
RechBib Recherches bibliques
REJ Revue des itudes juives
RESl Revue des etudes slaves
RevistB Revista biblica
RevSem Revue semitique
RGG* Galling, K., et al., eds. Die Religion in Geschichte und
Gegenwart. 6 vols, plus index. Tubingen, 1957-653.
RHPR Revue d'histoire et de philosophie religieuse
RHR Revue de I'histoire des religions
Riessler Riessler, P. Altjudisches Schrifttum ausserhalb der Bibel.
Heidelberg, 1927; repr. 1966.
RivB Rivista biblica
ROC Revue de V orient chritien
RQ Revue de Qumran
RSR Recherches de science religieuse
RSV Revised Standard Version
RTP Revue de thiologie et de philosophie
Sacramentum Mundi Rahner, K., et al., eds. Sacramentum Mundi: An Encyclopedia
of Theology. 6 vols. New York, 1968-70.
SBFLA Studii biblici franciscani liber annuus
SBLDS Society of Biblical Literature Dissertation Series
SBLMS Society of Biblical Literature Monograph Series
SBL 1971 Seminar Papers The Society of Biblical Literature One Hundred Seventh
Annual Meeting Seminar Papers—28-31 October 1971,
Regency Hyatt House—Atlanta, Ga. 2 vols. Missoula,
Mont., 1971.
SBL 1972 Seminar Papers McGaughy, L. C, ed. The Society of Biblical Literature
One Hundred Eighth Annual Meeting Book of Seminar
Papers: Friday-Tuesday, 1-5 September 1972, Century
Plaza Hotel—Los Angeles, Ca. 2 vols. Missoula, Mont.,
1972.
SBL 1974 Seminar Papers MacRae, G., ed. Society of Biblical Literature 1974 Seminar
Papers: One Hundred Tenth Annual Meeting, 24-27
October 1974, Washington Hilton, Washington, D.C. 2
vols. Cambridge, Mass., 1974.
S3T Studies in Biblical TheologySC Sources chr&iennes
ScEs Science et esprit
SCS Septuagint and Cognate Studies
SCS 2 Kraft, R. A., ed. 1972 Proceedings: International
Organization for Septuagint and Cognate Studies and
the Society of Biblical Literature Pseudepigrapha Seminar.
SCS 2; Missoula, Mont., 1972.
SCS 4 Nickelsburg, G. W. E. Jr., ed. Studies on the Testament
of Moses: Seminar Papers. SCS 4; Cambridge, Mass.,
1973.
SCS 5 Nickelsburg, G. W. E. Jr., ed. Studies on the Testament
of Joseph. SCS 5; Missoula, Mont., 1975.
SCS 6 Nickelsburg, G. W. E. Jr., ed. Studies on the Testament
of Abraham. SCS 6; Missoula, Mont., 1976.
SEA Svensk exegetisk Arsbok
Sem Semitica
Septuaginta Rahlfs, A., ed. Septuaginta: Id est Vetus Testamentum
graece iuxta LXX interpretes. 2 vols. Stuttgart, 1935;
repr. 1965.
SJLA Studies in Judaism in Late Antiquity
SJT Scottish Journal of Theology
SNTS MS Studiorum Novi Testamenti Societas Monograph Series
SPB Studia post biblica
ST Studia Theologica
StANT Studien zum Alten und Neuen Testament
Studien Eltester, W., ed. Studien zu den Testamenten der zwolf
Patriarchen. BZNW 36; Berlin, 1969.
Studies on T12P Jonge, M. de. Studies on the Testaments of the Twelve
Patriarchs: Text and Interpretation. SVTP 3; Leiden,
1975.
Sup Numen Supplements to Numen
SVTP Studia in Veteris Testamenti Pseudepigrapha
T&S Texts and Studies
T&T Texts and Translations
TBT The Bible Today
TDNT Kittel, G., ed. Theological Dictionary of the New Testament.
10 vols., trans. G. W. Bromiley. Grand Rapids, Mich.,
London, 1964-76.
TED Translations of Early Documents
ThEE Martinos, A., ed. Threskeutike kai Ethike Enkuklopaideia.
12 vols. Athens, 1962-68.
ThRu Theologische Rundschau
TLZ Theologische Literaturzeitung
TQ Theologische Quartalschrift
TU Texte und Untersuchungen
TWAT Botterweck, G. J., and H. Ringgren, eds. Theologisches
Worterbuch zum Alten Testament. Stuttgart, 1970-
TZ Theologische Zeitschrift
USQR Union Seminar Quarterly Review
VC Vigiliae christianae
VT Vetus TestamentumVTSup 22 Boer, P. A. H. de, ed. Congress Volume: Uppsala 1971.
Supplements to VT 22; Leiden, 1972.
Widengren Festschrift Bergman, J., et al. eds. Ex Orbe Religionum: Studia Geo
t
Widengren. 2 vols. Studies in the History of Religions
21, 22; Leiden, 1972.
WUNT Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament
WZHalle Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Martin-Luther-Universitat,
Halle-Wittenberg. Gesellschafts- und Sprachwissen-
schaftliche Reihe
WZJena Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Friedrich-Schiller-
Universitat, Jena. Gesellschafts- und Sprachwissen-
schaftliche Reihe
WZKM Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde des Morgenlandes
ZAW Zeitschrift fiir die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft
ZDMG Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft
ZKG Zeitschrift fiir Kirchengeschichte
ZNW Zeitschrift fiir die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft und die
Kunde der alteren Kirche
ZPEB Tenney, M. C, ed. The Zondervan Pictorial Encyclopedia
of the Bible. 5 vols. Grand Rapids, Mich., 1975.
ZRGG Zeitschrift fiir Religions- und Geistesgeschichte
ZTK Zeitschrift fiir Theologie und Kirche
ZWT Zeitschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Theologie
Additional Abbreviations
AT. Arabic lit. literally
Aram. Aramaic LXX Septuagint
Arm. Armenian MS(S) Manuscript(s)
BM British Museum MT Masoretic Text
c. circa n. nn. note(s)
cf. compare NAB New American Bible
ch(s). chapters) NEB New English Bible
col(s). column(s) NT New Testament
Cop. Coptic OT Old Testament
ET English translation pt(s). part(s)
Eth. Ethiopic rec(s). recension(s)
fol(s). folio(s) RSV Revised Standard Version
Gk. Greek Russ. Russian
GNMM Good News for Modern Man SBL Society of Biblical Literature
Heb. Hebrew Slav. Slavic
JB Jerusalem Bible SV Standard Version
Kar. Karshuni Syr. Syriac
KJV King James Version Vat. Vatican
1. 11. line(s) vs(s). verse(s)
Lat. Latinn. ANCIENT DOCUMENTS
Bible and Apocrypha
Gen Genesis Tob Tobit
Ex Exodus Jdt Judith
Lev Leviticus AddEsth Additions to Esther
Num Numbers WisSol Wisdom of Solomon
Deut Deuteronomy Sir Sirach
Josh Joshua IBar 1 Baruch
Judg Judges LeUer Letter of Jeremiah
Ruth Ruth PrAzar Prayer of Azariah
ISam 1 Samuel Sus Susanna
2Sam 2 Samuel Bel Bel and the Dragon
lKgs 1 Kings IMac 1 Maccabees
2Kgs 2 Kings 2Mac 2 Maccabees
IChr 1 Chronicles Mt Matthew
2Chr 2 Chronicles Mk Mark
Ezra Ezra Lk Luke
Neh Nehemiah Jn John
Esth Esther Acts Acts
Job Job Rom Romans
Ps(s) Psalms ICor 1 Corinthians
Prov Proverbs 2Cor 2 Corinthians
Eccl (Qoh) Ecclesiastes Gal Galatians
Song Song of Songs Eph Ephesians
Isa Isaiah Phil Philippians
Jer Jeremiah Col Colossians
Lam Lamentations IThes 1 Thessalonians
Ezek Ezekiel 2Thes 2 Thessalonians
Dan Daniel ITim 1 Timothy
Hos Hosea 2Tim 2 Timothy
Joel Joel Tit Titus
Amos Amos Phlm Philemon
Obad Obadiah Heb Hebrews
Jonah Jonah Jas James
Micah Micah IPet 1 Peter
Nan Nahum 2Pet 2 Peter
Hab Habakkuk Un 1 John
Zeph Zephaniah 2Jn 2 John
Hag Haggai 3Jn 3 John
Zech Zechariah Jude Jude
Mai Malachi Rev Revelation
2Ezra 2 Ezra
Pseudepigrapha
ApAb Apocalypse of Abraham
TAb Testament of Abraham
ApAdam Apocalypse of Adam
TAdam Testament of Adam
LAE Life of Adam and Eve
Ah Ahiqar
AnonSam An Anonymous Samaritan TextLetAris Letter of Aristeas
ArisEx Aristeas the Exegete
Aristob Aristobulus
Art Artapanus
2Bar 2 (Syriac Apocalypse of) Baruch
3Bar 3 (Greek Apocalypse of) Baruch
4Bar 4 Baruch
CavTr Cave of Treasures
CIMal Cleodemus Malchus
ApDan Apocalypse of Daniel
Dem Demetrius
ElMod Eldad and Modad
ApEl Apocalypse of Elijah
HebApEl Hebrew Apocalypse of Elijah
IEn 1 (Ethiopic Apocalypse of) Enoch
2En 2 (Slavonic Apocalypse of) Enoch
3En 3 (Hebrew Apocalypse of) Enoch
Eup Eupolemus
Ps-Eup Pseudo-Eupolemus
ApocEzek Apocryphon of Ezekiel
ApEzek Apocalypse of Ezekiel
EzekTrag Ezekiel the Tragedian
4Ezra 4 Ezra
GkApEzra Greek Apocalypse of Ezra
QuesEzra Questions of Ezra
RevEzra Revelation of Ezra
VisEzra Vision of Ezra
HecAb Hecataeus of Abdera
Ps-Hec Pseudo-Hecataeus
HelSynPr Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers
THez Testament of Hezekiah
FrgsHistWrks Fragments of Historical Works
Tisaac Testament of Isaac
Ascenls Ascension of Isaiah
Martls Martyrdom of Isaiah
Visls Vision of Isaiah
LadJac Ladder of Jacob
PrJac Prayer of Jacob
TJac Testament of Jacob
JanJam Jannes and Jambres
TJob Testament of Job
JosAsen Joseph and Aseneth
HisUos History of Joseph
PrJos Prayer of Joseph
Jub Jubilees
LAB Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum
LosTr The Lost Tribes
3Mac 3 Maccabees
4Mac 4 Maccabees
5Mac 5 Maccabees
PrMan Prayer of Manasseh
SyrMen Syriac MenanderApMos Apocalypse of Moses
AsMos Assumption of Moses
PrMos Prayer of Moses
TMos Testament of Moses
BkNoah Book of Noah
Ps-Orph Pseudo-Orpheus
PJ Paraleipomena Jeremiou
PhEPoet Philo the Epic Poet
Ps-Philo Pseudo-Philo
Ps-Phoc Pseudo-Phocylides
FrgsPoetWrks Fragments of Poetical Works
LivPro Lives of the Prophets
HistRech History of the Rechabites
ApSedr Apocalypse of Sedrach
TrShem Treatise of Shem
SibOr Sibylline Oracles
OdesSol Odes of Solomon
PssSol Psalms of Solomon
TSol Testament of Solomon
5ApocSyrPss Five Apocryphal Syriac Psalms
Thai Thallus
Theod Theodotus
T12P Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs
TReu Testament of Reuben
TSim Testament of Simeon
TLevi Testament of Levi
TJud Testament of Judah
TIss Testament of Issachar
TZeb Testament of Zebulun
TDan Testament of Dan
TNaph Testament of Naphtali
TGad Testament of Gad
TAsh Testament of Asher
TJos Testament of Joseph
TBenj Testament of Benjamin
Vita Vita Adae et Evae
ApZeph Apocalypse of Zephaniah
ApZos Apocalypse of ZosimusOther Writings
Dead Sea Scrolls
All abbreviations are according to J. A. Fitzmyer, S.J. The Dead Sea Scrolls: Major
Publications and Tools for Study. SBL Sources for Biblical Study 8; Missoula, Mont.,
1975; expanded ed., 1977.
Philo
All abbreviations are according to Studia Philonica with the exception that titles of Philonic
treatises are italicized.
Josephus
Ant Jewish Antiquities
Apion Against Apion
Life Life of Josephus
War Jewish Wars
New Testament Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha
EBar Epistle of Barnabas
GBart Gospel of Bartholomew
QuesBart Questions of Bartholomew
lClem 1 Clement
2Clem 2 Clement
PseudClemRec Pseudo-Clementine Recognitions
Did Didache
GEbion Gospel of the Ebionites
GEgyp Gospel of the Egyptians
GHeb Gospel of the Hebrews
ShepHerm Shepherd of Hermes
Aploan Apokalypsis tou hagiou loannou
Protlames Protoevangelium of James
ActsJn Acts of John
GMatthias Gospel of Matthias
GNic Gospel of Nicodemus
ActsPaul Acts of Paul
ApPaul Apocalypse of Paul
ApPet Apocalypse of Peter
GPet Gospel of Peter
PrPet Preaching of Peter
ActsPhil Acts of Philip
GPhil Gospel of Philip
RevSteph Revelation of Stephen
ActsThom Acts of Thomas
ApThom Apocalypse of Thomas
GThom Gospel of Thomas
GTr Gospel of Truth
ApVirg Apocalypse of the Virgin
Early Fathers
AdvHaer Epiphanius, Adversus haereses
AposCon Apostolic ConstitutionsCommGen Procopius of Gaza, Commentary on Genesis, part I
Commlsa Basil Caesar, Commentary on Isaiah
CommJn Origen, Commentary on the Gospel of St. John
DiatTrypho Justin, Dialogue with Trypho
Divlnst Lactantius, Divine Institutes
ExcerPss Origen, Excerpta in Psalmos
HE Eusebius, Historia ecclesiastica
HebQuaestinLibGen Jerome, Hebrew Questions on the Book of Genesis
Horn Macarius, Spiritual Homilies
Paid Clement of Alexandria, The Tutor (Paidagogos)
Philoc Origen, Philocalia
PrEv Eusebius, Praeparatio evangelica
Princ Origen, De principiis
Ref Hippolytus, Refutation of All Heresies
Strom Clement of Alexandria, Stromata
Rabbinics
Ab Abot
ARN Abot de-Rabbi Nathan
AZ 'Abodah Zarah
b. (before a rabbinic text) Babylonian Talmud
BB Baba Batra
Bek Bekorot
Ber Berakot
BHM Bet ha-Midrasch
Bikk Bikkurim
BM Batei Midrashot
BMes Baba Mesi'a (Talmudic tractate)
DeutR Debarim Rabbah
EcclR Qohelet Rabbah
4Eduy 'Eduyyot
4Erub 4Erubin
ExR Semot Rabbah
GedMos Gedulah Moshe
GenR Bere'Sit Rabbah
Gitt Gittin
Hag rjagigah
Hall Hallah
Hull Hullin
Ker Keritot
Ket Ketubot
Kid Kiddushin
LamR Ekah Rabbah
LevR Wayyiqra Rabbah
m. (before a rabbinic text) Mishnah
Makk Makkot
Meg Megillah
Men Menabot
Mik Mikwa'ot
MK Mo'ed Katan
Naz Nazir
Ned Nedarim

Nidd Niddah
NumR Bemidbar Rabbah
OM Ozar Midrashim
Pes Pesabim
PetMos Petiroth Moshe
PR Pesikta Rabbati
PRE Pirke de-Rabbi Eliezer
RH Rosh Hashanah
RuthR Ruth Rabbah
Sanh Sanhedrin
SER Seder Eliyahu Rabbah
Shab Shabbat
SifDeut Sifre Deuteronomy
SongR Sir HaSSirim Rabbah
Sot Sotah
Sukk Sukkah
t. (before a rabbinic text) Tosephta
Ta'an Ta'anit
TargOnk Targum Onkelos
TargYer Targum Yerushalmi
TarJon Targum Jonathan
Ter Terumot
y. (before a rabbinic text) Jerusalem Talmud
Yad Yadayim
Yeb Yebamot
Zeb Zebahim

THE OLD TESTAMENT PSEUDEPIGRAPHA

DOCUMENTS
EXPANSIONS OF THE "OLD
TESTAMENT" AND LEGENDSTHE OLD TESTAMENT PSEUDEPIGRAPHA

DOCUMENTS
EXPANSIONS OF THE "OLD
TESTAMENT" AND LEGENDS

INTRODUCTION
BY J. H. CHARLESWORTH
Early Judaism was a religion bound to and defined by the Book, the Torah. Because
God had chosen to reveal himself in history, a sacred aura surrounded the events
in Israel's past. These stories preserved in the books in the Old Testament were
told and retold not only in the synagogues but also around the evening fires or
wherever Jews would congregate. The biblical narratives were clarified, enriched,
expanded, and sometimes retold from a different perspective. Often circulating
first as oral legends, some stories eventually evolved into the documents collected
here. Distinguishable from the others is the Letter of Aristeas; it does not center
upon a biblical narrative, but glorifies the translation of the Hebrew scriptures into
Greek.
Frequently the expansions explain the superiority of Judaism over other religions
and may have an apologetic or missionary purpose; almost always they celebrate
God's covenant with and guidance of the faithful. The primary focus is upon God's
story in history, an ongoing drama in which the author claims to be a participant.
The early Jewish strata of the Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah belong to the
present category; in its final and present form, however, it is clearly an apocalyptic
work (especially chs. 6-11). Also related to the apocalyptic writings are Jubilees
and 4 Baruch.
The expansions to sacred stories in the Old Testament should be studied in light
of similar writings, such as some of the documents in the Apocrypha, the rabbinic
Targumim and Midrashim, the Qumran Pesharim, and other exegetical documents
(especially lQapGen), a few of Philo of Alexandria's writings, Josephus' histories,
and the Christian historians and chronographers. The Testament of Job, translated
above, is an expansion of the biblical narrative in a testament form.
CONTENTS
Letter of Aristeas Ladder of Jacob
Jubilees 4 Baruch
Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah Jannes and Jambres
Joseph and Aseneth History of the Rechabites
Life of Adam and Eve Eldad and Modad
Pseudo-Philo History of Joseph
The Lives of the ProphetsLETTER OF ARISTEAS
(Third Century B.c.-First Century A.D.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY R. J. H. SHUTT
The so-called Letter of Aristeas is a primary source for understanding the Septuagint, the
version of the Jewish Scriptures in Greek. It purports to describe how the Jewish Law was
translated from Hebrew into Greek by seventy-two Jews sent to Alexandria for this purpose. The author, Aristeas, writes to his brother Philocrates about this mission. Presumably,
Aristeas, who was a Jew from Alexandria, participated in the mission. The contents are briefly as follows: The Egyptian king Ptolemy II (285-247 B.C.) wants
Demetrius of Phalerum, his librarian, to collect all the books in the world for the library at
Alexandria. Demetrius thinks that such a collection should include a copy of the Jewish
Law in a Greek translation, and so he orders a letter to be written to the high priest at
Jerusalem. In a digression (vss. 12-27), Aristeas successfully petitions the king for the release of
those Jews forcibly deported to Egypt by his father, King Ptolemy, son of Lagos. The
relevant royal decree is quoted. Returning to the main theme, Aristeas quotes the letter which Demetrius, the librarian,
is instructed to send to the high priest (vss. 28-34). It suggests that the translation be made
by six suitable members from each of the twelve tribes (vss. 35-40). The suggestion is
accepted, and the names of the translators are given (vss. 47-50). Gifts are sent from the
king to the high priest (vss. 51-82). Aristeas himself is mentioned as one of the ambassadors
(vs. 43). A description of Palestine follows, including the Temple and the high priest's vestments
(vss. 83-120), but the account of the journey, though promised, is not given. The
qualifications and virtues of the translators are given and extolled (vss. 121-27). Then there is a further digression on the Law in Judaism (vss. 128-72).INTRODUCTION
BY J. H. CHARLESWORTH
Early Judaism was a religion bound to and defined by the Book, the Torah. Because
God had chosen to reveal himself in history, a sacred aura surrounded the events
in Israel's past. These stories preserved in the books in the Old Testament were
told and retold not only in the synagogues but also around the evening fires or
wherever Jews would congregate. The biblical narratives were clarified, enriched,
expanded, and sometimes retold from a different perspective. Often circulating
first as oral legends, some stories eventually evolved into the documents collected
here. Distinguishable from the others is the Letter of Aristeas; it does not center
upon a biblical narrative, but glorifies the translation of the Hebrew scriptures into
Greek.
Frequently the expansions explain the superiority of Judaism over other religions
and may have an apologetic or missionary purpose; almost always they celebrate
God's covenant with and guidance of the faithful. The primary focus is upon God's
story in history, an ongoing drama in which the author claims to be a participant.
The early Jewish strata of the Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah belong to the
present category; in its final and present form, however, it is clearly an apocalyptic
work (especially chs. 6-11). Also related to the apocalyptic writings are Jubilees
and 4 Baruch.
The expansions to sacred stories in the Old Testament should be studied in light
of similar writings, such as some of the documents in the Apocrypha, the rabbinic
Targumim and Midrashim, the Qumran Pesharim, and other exegetical documents
(especially lQapGen), a few of Philo of Alexandria's writings, Josephus' histories,
and the Christian historians and chronographers. The Testament of Job, translated
above, is an expansion of the biblical narrative in a testament form.
CONTENTS
Letter of Aristeas Ladder of Jacob
Jubilees 4 Baruch
Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah Jannes and Jambres
Joseph and Aseneth History of the Rechabites
Life of Adam and Eve Eldad and Modad
Pseudo-Philo History of Joseph
The Lives of the Prophets

Then there is a further digression on the Law in Judaism (vss. 128-72). The arrival of
the translators in Alexandria and their welcome are described; a royal banquet is prepared
(vss. 173-86). Even the author apologizes for the length of the next section, which is about a third of
Aristeas (vss. 187-294). He describes the questions put by the king during the seven days
of the banquet to each of the translators in turn, and their replies. Finally the translators are conducted to their well-furnished quarters by Demetrius, and
the work begins. Drafts of the translation are made, and the final version is completed in
exactly seventy-two days (vss. 301-7). The version is read to the Jewish community; Demetrius is asked to complete the project
by arranging for the translation of the rest of the Law, and steps are taken, by pronouncing
a curse on any who should change it in any way, to ensure that this is established as the
authorized and official Greek translation (vss. 308-11). The king shares in the rejoicing at the completion of the initial task, the sacred character
of the Law is emphasized, and Demetrius receives instructions to guard the books with
special care (vss. 312-17). Further compliments and gifts are given, and the translators depart for home with a guard
of honor, a letter, and further gifts to Eleazar (vss. 318-21).A brief epilogue addressed to Philocrates, recalling his interest in such projects, brings
Aristeas to a close. Texts1
44 There are more than twenty mss. containing the text or significant extracts from the
Letter of Aristeas."2 They range from the eleventh to the sixteenth centuries. Thackeray describes these manuscripts in detail; Pelletier gives them in chronological
groups according to the century to which they belong, adding six to Thackeray's list, and
paying special attention to two of them: U, Seragliensis 8 of Istanbul, belonging to the
twelfth or thirteenth centuries, and O, Monacensis 9 Munich of the eleventh century. Thackeray and Pelletier agree that what Thackeray calls group A manuscripts are of
special importance and antiquity. The group is subdivided as follows:
H Vaticanus 747. Rome (11th cent.)
K Vaticanus 383. Rome (12th-13th cent.)
A Regius 128. Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale (12th-13th cent.)
and (very similar to the above-mentioned):
G Venetus 534. Venice Marcianus (11th cent.)
I Palatinus 203. Rome, Bibl. Vatic. Pal. (11th cent.)
M Ottobonianus 32. Bibl. Vatic. Ottobon (15th cent.)
The earliest printed edition was a Latin translation by M. Palmerius of Pisa in 1471. A
Greek text, the work of S. Schard, was published by Oporinus in 1561 at Basel, based
mainly on O, Codex Monacensis 9 Munich. The genuineness of Aristeas as a contemporary account of the proceedings by an eyewitness
was seriously doubted by Hody (1659-1707). His position was rejected in 1870 by Schmidt,
who was followed by Mendelssohn in 1897 and Wendland in 1900. The first edition of
Thackeray's work also appeared in 1902 as an appendix to Swete's An Introduction to the
Old Testament in Greek. Thackeray's text has been adopted in the works of Meecham
(1935) and Hadas (1951). It is used as the basis of this translation; divergences from his
text are indicated in the notes. English translations have been published by H. St. J. Thackeray (1903), H. T. Andrews
(in R. H.Then there is a further digression on the Law in Judaism (vss. 128-72). The arrival of
the translators in Alexandria and their welcome are described; a royal banquet is prepared
(vss. 173-86). Even the author apologizes for the length of the next section, which is about a third of
Aristeas (vss. 187-294). He describes the questions put by the king during the seven days
of the banquet to each of the translators in turn, and their replies. Finally the translators are conducted to their well-furnished quarters by Demetrius, and
the work begins. Drafts of the translation are made, and the final version is completed in
exactly seventy-two days (vss. 301-7). The version is read to the Jewish community; Demetrius is asked to complete the project
by arranging for the translation of the rest of the Law, and steps are taken, by pronouncing
a curse on any who should change it in any way, to ensure that this is established as the
authorized and official Greek translation (vss. 308-11). The king shares in the rejoicing at the completion of the initial task, the sacred character
of the Law is emphasized, and Demetrius receives instructions to guard the books with
special care (vss. 312-17). Further compliments and gifts are given, and the translators depart for home with a guard
of honor, a letter, and further gifts to Eleazar (vss. 318-21).

Andrews
(in R. H. Charles, APOT, vol. 1, 1913), H. G. Meecham (1935), and M. Hadas (1951). Original language
The original language of Aristeas is Greek, but not a particularly distinguished or elegant
type of Greek. Some of its sentences are cumbersome, some of its words unusual, and
some of its phrases striking because of their awkwardness. It hardly reaches the heights
needed for a work to be classed as literature. Date
It is impossible to be certain about the date of this work. The king referred to is Ptolemy
II (Philadelphus, 285-247 B.C.). There is a reference in Aristeas to this king's father,
Ptolemy I (Lagos), who abdicated in 285 and died in 283. Josephus (A.D. 37-7110)
paraphrases the work in his Jewish Antiquities 12.12-118. From this we must conclude that
it was written between approximately 250 B.C. and A.D. 100. To venture further with the
dating demands some conjecture. Jellicoe3 summarizes the main categories of conjectured dates as follows:
1. early (i.e. 250-200 B.C.)
2. about 150-100 B.C. 3. first century A.D. The majority of the views is in favor of c. 150-100 B.C. In deciding which conjecture is
1 For further reference to the MSS see H. St. J. Thackeray, Introduction to the Old Testament in Greek (Cambridge,
1902) pp. 501-18, and A. Pelletier, Lettre d'Aristie d Philocrate, pp. 8-41. 2 Pelletier, Lettre d'Aristie, p. 8. 3 S. Jellicoe, The Septuagint and Modern Study, p. 48, n. 1.preferable, we first have to decide on the occasion (and purpose) of the work. It has a
decidedly Jewish background and provides an exposition and defense of the Law, seeking
to indicate its relation in thought and political philosophy to Hellenism. This would be
consistent with the view that the work emanated from Alexandria, a hellenistic center where
there was a significant Jewish element in the population. There was consequently a need to
promote integration and to avoid friction between Jew and non-Jew. There was presumably
an immediate occasion for the composition of the work: Such an occasion would probably
have been one during which an anti-Jewish policy was being carried out. A serious occasion
of this sort occurred when Antiochus Epiphanes sought to carry out his pro-hellenistic or
anti-Jewish policy, which caused such a strong reaction in Judea among, for example, the
Maccabees. There would have been repercussions and unease in Alexandria about that time,
i.e. about 170 B.C. Any attempt to consolidate the links between the two communities and
to prevent a deterioration of the situation would have been worthwhile. Such an attempt,
we may conjecture, underlies Aristeas. On these grounds we may with Jellicoe4 and Orlinsky
date the work about 170 B.C., thus putting it approximately in the second of the categories
mentioned above. Assuming some such occasion and date, what is the purpose of the work? It can hardly
be regarded as a document written at the same time as the translation of the Law into Greek,
known as the Septuagint. From this point of view, therefore, if that is the expectation, the
work may be a disappointment. What is more important, it concerns Judaism and is a
defense of Judaism in the light of its Law as available in a Greek version. The story of the
making of that version underlines the toleration and respect which the Jews of Alexandria
enjoyed and the integration of Jew and non-Jew in that city. Events in Jerusalem about 170
B.C.The story of the
making of that version underlines the toleration and respect which the Jews of Alexandria
enjoyed and the integration of Jew and non-Jew in that city. Events in Jerusalem about 170
B.C. threatened such a community. Aristeas is an attempt by the author, himself presumably
a Jew,5 to show the links between Jew and Greek and to underline them by narrating the
particular story of the translation of the Jewish Scriptures. Such we may conjecture is the
occasion, date, and purpose of this work. Provenance
A gentile, even a proselyte to Judaism, would hardly have attained such a knowledge of
Jewish practices, and of the Temple worship, as the Letter of Aristeas exhibits (e.g. vss. 83-120). It is highly probable therefore that the author was a Jew. His knowledge of
Alexandria needs also to be taken into account (e.g. vs. 301). The most attractive conjecture
is that he lived in Alexandria.6
Historical and theological importance
It is difficult, as shown above, to date this document, and therefore difficult also to assess
its importance for the time when it was composed. However, its importance goes further and deeper than its historical setting because it
raises a question implicit in Judaism that emerges in times of special crisis: If the Jews are
God's special people, a chosen race, how are they to regard non-Jews? Can they live with
them, or must they simply remove themselves and live exclusive lives? Is there any
temporary arrangement of mutual recognition and respect that can be evolved? The case for
the Jewish Law and attitude to life is set out in this work, and in confirmation of this, an
appeal is made to the history of the Jews in Egypt and Alexandria, with special reference
to the Law and its translation into Greek. It is also meant to show that there is some affinity
between Jew and Greek, but not necessarily an identity, so that it is possible for them to
live together.Andrews
(in R. H. Charles, APOT, vol. 1, 1913), H. G. Meecham (1935), and M. Hadas (1951). Original language
The original language of Aristeas is Greek, but not a particularly distinguished or elegant
type of Greek. Some of its sentences are cumbersome, some of its words unusual, and
some of its phrases striking because of their awkwardness. It hardly reaches the heights
needed for a work to be classed as literature. Date
It is impossible to be certain about the date of this work. The king referred to is Ptolemy
II (Philadelphus, 285-247 B.C.). There is a reference in Aristeas to this king's father,
Ptolemy I (Lagos), who abdicated in 285 and died in 283. Josephus (A.D. 37-7110)
paraphrases the work in his Jewish Antiquities 12.12-118. From this we must conclude that
it was written between approximately 250 B.C. and A.D. 100. To venture further with the
dating demands some conjecture. Jellicoe3 summarizes the main categories of conjectured dates as follows:
1. early (i.e. 250-200 B.C.)
2. about 150-100 B.C. 3. first century A.D. The majority of the views is in favor of c. 150-100 B.C. In deciding which conjecture is
1 For further reference to the MSS see H. St. J. Thackeray, Introduction to the Old Testament in Greek (Cambridge,
1902) pp. 501-18, and A. Pelletier, Lettre d'Aristie d Philocrate, pp. 8-41. 2 Pelletier, Lettre d'Aristie, p. 8. 3 S. Jellicoe, The Septuagint and Modern Study, p. 48, n. 1.

The case for
the Jewish Law and attitude to life is set out in this work, and in confirmation of this, an
appeal is made to the history of the Jews in Egypt and Alexandria, with special reference
to the Law and its translation into Greek. It is also meant to show that there is some affinity
between Jew and Greek, but not necessarily an identity, so that it is possible for them to
live together. The difficulties are recognized, however: It is the merit of Aristeas that the
author is alive to this recurring problem in the history of Judaism. For example, he describes
how special arrangements were made for the banquet when the king and the Jews ate
together (vs. 181). The implied warning is twofold: The danger with some of the Jews was
that they might become excessively exclusive in their attitude to others, and the danger with
4 Ibid., p. 49. 5 In spite of LetAris, vs. 16. 6 For details on the exact status of the Jews in Alexandria, see Josephus, Ant 19.279 (LCL ed., vol. 9, n. ad loc.,
and App. Q. 583-85).the Greeks, or the Hellenists, was that their attitude might be too syncretistic.7 The moral
was the need for mutual recognition of different customs and cultures. Relation to canonical books
There is no evidence in Aristeas either to indicate which books in the Old Testament
have exercised most influence upon it or to indicate which books in the New Testament it
has influenced. Aristeas holds the Law in the highest esteem and is concerned with narrating
the story of the translation of the Jewish Scriptures into Greek. Relation to apocryphal books
Similarly, there is no evidence that any of the apocryphal books directly influenced
Aristeas. There are no apocryphal books with which Aristeas is especially close; with some
there is only the general link shown by hellenistic influence. Cultural importance
Aristeas provides no specific detail either on the methods and aims of the translators or
on the text used. Indeed, a look at the contents shows that the space devoted to the translators
and their work is only a small proportion of the total, length of Aristeas. The project and
the names of the translators appear in verses 1-50; their actual work is described in Verses
301-21. A digression on the questions put to the translators during the seven-day banquet
occupies about a third of the whole work; other digressions include details of gifts from the
king (vss. 51-82) and a description of Palestine, the Temple, and the high priest's vestments
(vss. 83-120). Nevertheless, the work is important, for it is the only ancient document on the subject
that has survived. How is it then to be regarded? Opinions differ.8 It has been regarded as
a work of Jewish apologetics, aimed at the Greeks.How is it then to be regarded? Opinions differ.8 It has been regarded as
a work of Jewish apologetics, aimed at the Greeks. Tcherikover suggested that it was "not
written with the aim of self-defence or propaganda, and was addressed not to Greek, but to
Jewish readers."9 In either case, perhaps such a precise dichotomy obscures rather than
illuminates: It may well be that we are nearer to the truth if we say that its underlying
motive and purpose are mixed. The background of the work is Alexandria, where a Jewish community lived among a
predominantly gentile population. There were obvious differences in culture and religion,
but Judaism and Hellenism largely succeeded in living side by side there in comparative
harmony. Was any mutual assimilation possible? If so, would it take place? These questions
were bound to arise, and indeed had arisen ever since some of the Jews had been forced to
live in captivity in Babylon. To some extent, the result was the Judaism of the Dispersion,
which was liberal as compared with the Judaism of Palestine, with the Temple at Jerusalem
as the focus of its religion. This was inevitable and is associated with the rise and development
of the synagogues, but even so, the Judaism of the Diaspora maintained its identity. On the
other hand, the gentile population among whom the Dispersion lived was not always satisfied
with such a situation, although there was little general hostile expression of such dissatis­
faction. The ideals of Hellenism, however, aspired to a universalism in culture and religion,
which could be intolerant of what might be regarded as Jewish separatism and exclusiveness. The clash under Antiochus Epiphanes, which resulted in the persecution of the Jews in
Palestine and an attempt to eradicate them, may have taken place shortly before Aristeas
was written.10 There may well have been repercussions and anxiety among the Jews in
Alexandria and in the Dispersion.The case for
the Jewish Law and attitude to life is set out in this work, and in confirmation of this, an
appeal is made to the history of the Jews in Egypt and Alexandria, with special reference
to the Law and its translation into Greek. It is also meant to show that there is some affinity
between Jew and Greek, but not necessarily an identity, so that it is possible for them to
live together. The difficulties are recognized, however: It is the merit of Aristeas that the
author is alive to this recurring problem in the history of Judaism. For example, he describes
how special arrangements were made for the banquet when the king and the Jews ate
together (vs. 181). The implied warning is twofold: The danger with some of the Jews was
that they might become excessively exclusive in their attitude to others, and the danger with
4 Ibid., p. 49. 5 In spite of LetAris, vs. 16. 6 For details on the exact status of the Jews in Alexandria, see Josephus, Ant 19.279 (LCL ed., vol. 9, n. ad loc.,
and App. Q. 583-85).

The ideals of Hellenism, however, aspired to a universalism in culture and religion,
which could be intolerant of what might be regarded as Jewish separatism and exclusiveness. The clash under Antiochus Epiphanes, which resulted in the persecution of the Jews in
Palestine and an attempt to eradicate them, may have taken place shortly before Aristeas
was written.10 There may well have been repercussions and anxiety among the Jews in
Alexandria and in the Dispersion. In any case, the situation existed either actually or
potentially and was unavoidable as long as Jews lived among gentiles and, characteristically,
exercised a noticeable presence and influence to a greater or lesser extent at different times. 7 (Exclusiveness is found in Jub, syncretism in 4 Mac.—J.H.C.)
8 See article by V. Tcherikover in Studies in the Septuagint: Origins, Recensions, and Interpretations, ed. S. Jellicoe. 9 Ibid., p. 182. 10 175-64 B.C. See also "Date."The author of Aristeas was aware of this situation—and its danger, and he saw in the
translation of the Jewish Scriptures a phenomenal event important in itself for Judaism and
its understanding by Jews and non-Jews. He recognized that in process of time, through
lack of use in ordinary communication with gentiles, the native language of the Jews might
become less familiar. He also saw in the translation a sort of parable of the relationship
between the Judaism of the Dispersion and the Hellenism of the gentiles among whom these
Jews lived. Hence he acclaimed in this work the actual project and those responsible for its
execution, showing the attitudes of both groups to each other. Perhaps it is to be regarded
as an attempt at a compromise, which well may be criticized for its emphasis on and even
bias toward Judaism, but which, nevertheless, deserves credit for its basic concept and
vision. In this sense, Aristeas is not to be regarded as aimed only at Greeks or at Jews; it
was probably aimed at both. SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 78-80. Delling, Bibliographic pp. 97f. Denis, Introduction, pp. 105-10. Hadas, M. Aristeas to Philocrates. New York and London, 1951. (This translation follows
Thackeray's text.)
Jellicoe, S. The Septuagint and Modern Study. Oxford, 1968. (A most important work,
including chs. on Aristeas and its relation to LXX studies to date.)
Jellicoe, S., ed. Studies in the Septuagint: Origins, Recensions, and Interpretations. New
York, 1974. (This vol. contains articles on Aristeas by D. W. Gooding, V. Tcherikover,
and G. Zuntz which appeared in learned journals between 1958 and 1963, assembled
in convenient form for reference and prefaced with a masterly introduction by Jellicoe.)
Marcus* R. Josephus: Jewish Antiquities X1I-XIV. LCL edition, vol. VII; London and
Cambridge, Mass., 1943. (Josephus used Aristeas as a source in Ant 12.11-118.The ideals of Hellenism, however, aspired to a universalism in culture and religion,
which could be intolerant of what might be regarded as Jewish separatism and exclusiveness. The clash under Antiochus Epiphanes, which resulted in the persecution of the Jews in
Palestine and an attempt to eradicate them, may have taken place shortly before Aristeas
was written.10 There may well have been repercussions and anxiety among the Jews in
Alexandria and in the Dispersion. In any case, the situation existed either actually or
potentially and was unavoidable as long as Jews lived among gentiles and, characteristically,
exercised a noticeable presence and influence to a greater or lesser extent at different times. 7 (Exclusiveness is found in Jub, syncretism in 4 Mac.—J.H.C.)
8 See article by V. Tcherikover in Studies in the Septuagint: Origins, Recensions, and Interpretations, ed. S. Jellicoe. 9 Ibid., p. 182. 10 175-64 B.C. See also "Date."

VII; London and
Cambridge, Mass., 1943. (Josephus used Aristeas as a source in Ant 12.11-118. See
the appendix for a consideration of the method which Josephus adopted with this
source.)
Meecham, H. G. The Letter of Aristeas. Manchester, 1935. (The text of Thackeray is given
here, without translation. There are appendices in which philological studies are
paramount.)
Nestle, E. "Septuagint" in J. Hastings, Dictionary of the Bible. Edinburgh, 1902. (This
article contains much useful information, but now needs supplementing with the work
of S. Jellicoe.)
Pelletier, A. Lettre d'Aristee d Philocrate. SC 89; Paris, 1962. (This vol. contains an
introduction, text, and translation, with critical nn. and appendices. The introduction
includes important sections on MSS, author and date, the Library of Alexandria, and
the Jewish community there.)
Shutt, R. J. H. "Notes on the Letter of Aristeas." BIOSCS 10 (1977) 22-30. Swete, H. B. An Introduction to the Old Testament in Greek. Cambridge, 1902; text: 519-
74, introduction: 501-18. (The introduction is valuable for detailed descriptions of the
MSS of LetAris.)
Thackeray, H. St. J., ed. "The Letter of Aristeas," in An Introduction to the Old Testament
in Greek, by H. B. Swete. Cambridge, 1902. (This edition of LetAris is the basis for
the present translation.)ARISTEAS TO PfflLOCRATES
1 A trustworthy narrative has been compiled, Philocrates, of the meeting which we had
with Eleazar, high priest of the Jews, arising out of your attaching great importance to
hearing a personal account of our mission, its content and purpose. By detailing3 each
aspect I have tried to give you a clear exposition of it, realizing your scholarly disposition,
2 which is a supreme quality in any man who has tried continually to increase his learning
and understanding, whether from the accounts (of others) or by actual experience. This is
the way in which a pure disposition of mind is acquired, by the attainment of the noblest
ends, and which, turning to piety, the highest of all ends, lives by adopting a rule which
3 does not err. «We have a set purpose devoted to the special study of the things of God, and
offered ourselves as a deputation to the aforesaid gentleman, whose integrity and reputation
have won him preeminent honor in the eyes of citizens and others alike, and who has gained
a very great benefit for his own circle and for (fellow) citizens in other places. Our deputation
(waited upon him) with a view to the translation of the divine Law, due to its being written
4 by them on parchments in Hebrew characters. *We undertook this task with enthusiasm,
seizing an opportunity with the king in connection with those who were transported to Egypt
from Judea by the king his father, who was the original founder of the city and took over
5 the government of Egypt. It is worthwhile telling you this as well, *for I am convinced that
because you are more favorably inclined toward the piety and disposition of those who live
by the sacred Law, concerning whom we propose to write, you will gladly listen,b since
you have paid a special visit to us from your island, and wish to hear with us of matters
6 pertaining to the edification of the soul. •! had previously sent you the account of what I
regarded as the most memorable matters.•! had previously sent you the account of what I
regarded as the most memorable matters. We received this account of the people of the
7 Jews from the most renowned high priests in renowned Egypt. •You are studiously disposed
toward what can help the mind and it is my duty to share this with all like-minded persons,
and all the more so with you, for you have a kindred spirit, being not only a blood brother
8 in character but also in the pursuit of beauty the same as we are. •The value of gold or any
other treasure among those highly prized by the empty-headed does not possess the same
value, as compared with the pursuit of culture and caring for these things. But lest we
prolong the introduction and indulge in idle chatter, we will proceed to the main part of the
narrative. 9 On his appointment as keeper of the king's library, Demetrius of Phalerum undertook
many different negotiations aimed at collecting, if possible, all the books in the world. By
purchase and translation he brought to a successful conclusion, as far as lay in his power,
10 the king's plan. *We were present when the question was put to him, "How many thousand0
books are there (in the royal library)?" His reply was, "Over two hundred thousand, O
King. I shall take urgent steps to increase in a short time the total to five hundred thousand. Information has reached me that the lawbooks of the Jews are worth translation and inclusion
in your royal library."
n 44 What is there to prevent you from doing this?" he said. 4'Everything for your needs
has been put at your disposal."
Demetrius replied, 4'Translation is needed. They use letters characteristic of the language
of the Jews, just as Egyptians use the formation of their letters in accordance with then-
own language.VII; London and
Cambridge, Mass., 1943. (Josephus used Aristeas as a source in Ant 12.11-118. See
the appendix for a consideration of the method which Josephus adopted with this
source.)
Meecham, H. G. The Letter of Aristeas. Manchester, 1935. (The text of Thackeray is given
here, without translation. There are appendices in which philological studies are
paramount.)
Nestle, E. "Septuagint" in J. Hastings, Dictionary of the Bible. Edinburgh, 1902. (This
article contains much useful information, but now needs supplementing with the work
of S. Jellicoe.)
Pelletier, A. Lettre d'Aristee d Philocrate. SC 89; Paris, 1962. (This vol. contains an
introduction, text, and translation, with critical nn. and appendices. The introduction
includes important sections on MSS, author and date, the Library of Alexandria, and
the Jewish community there.)
Shutt, R. J. H. "Notes on the Letter of Aristeas." BIOSCS 10 (1977) 22-30. Swete, H. B. An Introduction to the Old Testament in Greek. Cambridge, 1902; text: 519-
74, introduction: 501-18. (The introduction is valuable for detailed descriptions of the
MSS of LetAris.)
Thackeray, H. St. J., ed. "The Letter of Aristeas," in An Introduction to the Old Testament
in Greek, by H. B. Swete. Cambridge, 1902. (This edition of LetAris is the basis for
the present translation.)

4'Everything for your needs
has been put at your disposal."
Demetrius replied, 4'Translation is needed. They use letters characteristic of the language
of the Jews, just as Egyptians use the formation of their letters in accordance with then-
own language. The Jews are supposed to use Syrian language, but this is not so, for it is
another form (of language)."
The king, in answer to each point, gave orders that a letter be written to the high priest
12 of the Jews that the aforementioned project might be carried out. #I considered that it was
an opportunity in connection with the matters on which I had often asked Sosibius of
a. The text is corrupt here, but the general sense is c. Lit. "How many ten thousands of books are there?''
clear. His reply was, "Over twenty, O King. I shall take urgent
b. Thackeray adopts the emendation of Schmidt. steps to increase in a short time the total to fifty."Tarentum and Andreas, the chief bodyguards, concerning the release of those deported from
Judaea by the father of the king. He invaded the whole of Coele-Syria and Phoenicia, and
by a combination of success and bravery deported some and took others prisoners, bringing
everything into subjection by fear. In the course of this he removed from the land of the
13 Jews into Egypt up to one hundred thousand people, •from whom he armed about thirty
thousand chosen men and settled them throughout the land in the forts. (Already in earlier
times as well a fair number had entered the country with the Persian, and before them other
confederate troops had been dispatched to fight with Psammitichus against the king of the
Ethiopians, but they were not so many in number as those brought over by Ptolemy the son
14 of Lagos.) *As we said previously, he selected the best, outstanding in youth and strength,
and armed them. The remaining number, old men, children, and women also, he let go
into slavery, not so much out of any personal predilection for such a course, but because
he was prevailed upon by his troops on account of the services which they had given in the
trials of war. When therefore we came upon some opportunity for their release, as we have
is shown before, we spoke the following words to the king. »"Let it never be unreasonable
to be refuted by events themselves, O King. The laws have been established for all the
Jews, and it is our plan not only to translate but also to interpret them, but what justification
shall we have for our mission, as long as large numbers are in subjection in your kingdom? But out of your unsullied and magnanimous soul release those who are subject to misery;
the (same) God who appointed them their Law prospers your kingdom, as I have been at
16 pains to show. •These people worship God the overseer and creator of all, whom all men
worship including ourselves, O King, except that we have a different name. Their name
for him is Zeus and Jove.•These people worship God the overseer and creator of all, whom all men
worship including ourselves, O King, except that we have a different name. Their name
for him is Zeus and Jove. The primitive men, consistently with this, demonstrated that the
one by whom all live and are created is the master and Lord of all. In your excelling all
n men by your nobility of soul, I beg you to release those held in slavery." »He wasted no
time, while we offered hearty prayer to God to dispose his mind to the release of them all. (Mankind is God's creation and is changed and converted by him. Wherefore with many
diverse prayers I besought the Lord with all my heart that he might be prevailed upon to
is accomplish my request. *For I had great hope, as I presented the case for the saving of
men, that God would execute the fulfillment of my requests, inasmuch as whatsoever men
think to do in piety in the way of righteousness and attention to good works, God the Lord
19 of all directs their acts and intentions.) •(The king) looked up and, looking on me with
gracious countenance, said, "How many thousand*1 do you consider there will be?" Andreas,
standing by, answered, "A little more than one hundred thousand." He said, "It is a small
request that Aristeas makes of us." Sosibius and some of those present thus said, "It is
worthy of your magnanimity to offer the release of these men as a thank offering to the
Most High God. You are highly honored by the Lord of all, and have been glorified beyond
20 your ancestors, so if you make even the greatest thank offerings, it befits you." #The king
was absolutely confounded, and ordered an increase in army pay, and the payment of twenty
drachmas for each slave, together with the publication of an edict on these matters, and the
compilation of a register accordingly.*For I had great hope, as I presented the case for the saving of
men, that God would execute the fulfillment of my requests, inasmuch as whatsoever men
think to do in piety in the way of righteousness and attention to good works, God the Lord
19 of all directs their acts and intentions.) •(The king) looked up and, looking on me with
gracious countenance, said, "How many thousand*1 do you consider there will be?" Andreas,
standing by, answered, "A little more than one hundred thousand." He said, "It is a small
request that Aristeas makes of us." Sosibius and some of those present thus said, "It is
worthy of your magnanimity to offer the release of these men as a thank offering to the
Most High God. You are highly honored by the Lord of all, and have been glorified beyond
20 your ancestors, so if you make even the greatest thank offerings, it befits you." #The king
was absolutely confounded, and ordered an increase in army pay, and the payment of twenty
drachmas for each slave, together with the publication of an edict on these matters, and the
compilation of a register accordingly. He exercised his zeal on a grand scale, God having
fulfilled all our purpose, and compelled him to release not only those who came into his
kingdom with his father's army but also any others who were there previously or were
subsequently taken there. They revealed that the gift amounted to more than four hundred
21 talents. «As regards the copy of the decree, I consider its recording to be of no small value,
because the generosity of the king will be more clearly manifested thereby, as God gives
22 him strength to bring salvation to large multitudes. *It was as follows.4'Everything for your needs
has been put at your disposal."
Demetrius replied, 4'Translation is needed. They use letters characteristic of the language
of the Jews, just as Egyptians use the formation of their letters in accordance with then-
own language. The Jews are supposed to use Syrian language, but this is not so, for it is
another form (of language)."
The king, in answer to each point, gave orders that a letter be written to the high priest
12 of the Jews that the aforementioned project might be carried out. #I considered that it was
an opportunity in connection with the matters on which I had often asked Sosibius of
a. The text is corrupt here, but the general sense is c. Lit. "How many ten thousands of books are there?''
clear. His reply was, "Over twenty, O King. I shall take urgent
b. Thackeray adopts the emendation of Schmidt. steps to increase in a short time the total to fifty."

«As regards the copy of the decree, I consider its recording to be of no small value,
because the generosity of the king will be more clearly manifested thereby, as God gives
22 him strength to bring salvation to large multitudes. *It was as follows. "By order of the
king—as many as joined our father's campaigns in the regions of Syria and Phoenicia and
in their advance into the territory of the Jews became masters of Jewish personnel which
they transported into the city or the country or sold to others, and likewise any such who
were there before the advance or were subsequently brought in—those who hold such
persons shall forthwith release them, receiving as the price for each individual twenty
drachmas, such money to be paid in the case of soldiers with the issue of their pay, and in
23 the case of the remainder from the royal treasury. *It is our opinion that these prisoners
were taken contrary to the wishes of our father in a manner quite improper, and that
d. Lit. "How many ten thousands do you consider
there will be?" Andreas, standing by, answered, 44A
little more than ten ten thousands."excessively drastic military action caused the destruction of their land and the transportation
of the Jews into Egypt. The assistance from the soldiers given along the plain was quite
24 enough, and the enslavement of these men is accordingly entirely inequitable. *We have a
reputation of dispensing justice to all men, and all the more to those who are enslaved
without good reason; our overall aim is that which promotes justice and piety in all things. We have accordingly decreed that all Jewish personnel in slavery (everywhere) in the
kingdom for whatever reason shall be released, their owners to receive the payment laid
down above, and that no one shall deal in a slow manner in these matters. Three days from
the day of publication of this decree, the owners shall furnish registers to those appointed
25 over these matters, giving immediate details of these persons. *We have concluded that it
is in the interest of ourselves and our royal affairs that this matter shall be accomplished. Anyone who so wishes may give information concerning those who have disobeyed (this
edict) on the understanding that he will assume the office of the accused if found guilty;
26 the possessions of such men shall be appropriated into the royal treasury." •This decree
was submitted to the king for his perusal. It was identical in all other respects except for
the clause 44 and likewise any such who were there before the advance or were subsequently
brought in," which the king added with his own hand, showing his magnificent magnanimity. He gave orders also that a generous gift of expenses should be divided among the servants
27 of the troops and the royal bankers. *Once so decided, it was implemented in seven days. The gift amounted to more than six hundred and sixty talents. A large number of children
at the breast were also set free, with their mothers.The gift amounted to more than six hundred and sixty talents. A large number of children
at the breast were also set free, with their mothers. There was an additional proposal to the
effect that twenty drachmas should be given for these, and the king commanded that this
also should be done, thus completely accomplishing every detail of his policy. 28 When this had been completed, he commanded Demetrius to report on the copying of
the Jewish books. All measures were taken by these kings by means of edicts and in
complete safety, with no trace of negligence or carelessness. For this reason I have set
down the copies of the report and of the letters, as well as the number of those returned
and the state of each, because each of them was outstanding in magnificence and skill. 29 The copy of the memorandum is as follows: 4To the great king from Demetrius. Your
command, O King, concerned the collection of missing volumes needed to complete the
library, and of items which accidentally fell short of the requisite condition. I gave highest
30 priority and attention to these matters, and now make the following further report: • Scrolls
of the Law of the Jews, together with a few others, are missing (from the library), for these
(works) are written in Hebrew characters and language. But they have been transcribed6
somewhat carelessly and not as they should be,f according to the report of the experts,
e. Lit. "have been indicated." The major problem in yet he admits the expressions in LetAris 30 "are not
understanding vs. 30 is this verb, sesemantai (perfect clear" and "not good Greek" (p. 213). He is wrong in
passive 3rd plural), which comes from semaind and can demanding that amelesteron, which he translated "rather
mean "to show by a sign, indicate, appear, be manifest, carelessly," "can only be taken as referring to earlier
give a signal, signify" (LSJM and similarly Preisigke); translations ..." (italics his).213). He is wrong in
passive 3rd plural), which comes from semaind and can demanding that amelesteron, which he translated "rather
mean "to show by a sign, indicate, appear, be manifest, carelessly," "can only be taken as referring to earlier
give a signal, signify" (LSJM and similarly Preisigke); translations ..." (italics his). "to indicate, signify, to mean (of words)" (Sophocles); The translation given above supports the position
or "to make known, report, communicate" (Bauer-Arndt- presented in 1863 by P. de Lagarde and defended more
Gingrich). As translated above the vs. refers to copies of recently by H. M. Orlinsky, D. Barthelemy, F. M. Cross,
Heb. scrolls (cf. the judicious comments by Shutt in H. H. Rowley, and S. Jellicoe (for details and biblio­
"Notes on the Letter of Aristeas," BIOSCS 10 [1977] graphical data see Jellicoe's The Septuagint and Modern
22-30. —J.H.C.)" Andrews (APOT, vol. 2, p. 98) took Study, pp. 59-63). LetAris 30 is not referring to other
sesimantai to mean "interpreted" and noted that the Gk. translations of the Law; it appears to refer to unreliable
"exact force" of this verb "is uncertain. If we translate Heb. MSS. There does appear to be an Urtext of the
'interpreted* it involves the supposition that an earlier, LXX; but the author of LetAris is, among other concerns,
though imperfect, translation of the law into Greek was apparently defending the LXX against one or more rival
in existence." Andrews translated the passage as follows: Gk. translations [perhaps emanating from Leontopolis,
"They are written in the Hebrew characters and language as Jellicoe, p. 50, suggested. —J.H.C.]. and have been carelessly interpreted, and do not represent f. Lit. "as is the case." Everyone recognizes the
the original text as I am informed by those who know phrase kai ouch hos huparchei as "difficult Greek"
. . ."Andrews' rendering supports P.«As regards the copy of the decree, I consider its recording to be of no small value,
because the generosity of the king will be more clearly manifested thereby, as God gives
22 him strength to bring salvation to large multitudes. *It was as follows. "By order of the
king—as many as joined our father's campaigns in the regions of Syria and Phoenicia and
in their advance into the territory of the Jews became masters of Jewish personnel which
they transported into the city or the country or sold to others, and likewise any such who
were there before the advance or were subsequently brought in—those who hold such
persons shall forthwith release them, receiving as the price for each individual twenty
drachmas, such money to be paid in the case of soldiers with the issue of their pay, and in
23 the case of the remainder from the royal treasury. *It is our opinion that these prisoners
were taken contrary to the wishes of our father in a manner quite improper, and that
d. Lit. "How many ten thousands do you consider
there will be?" Andreas, standing by, answered, 44A
little more than ten ten thousands."

. ."Andrews' rendering supports P. Kahle's hypothesis; (Hadas); it is translated variously: "and not acccording
Kahle claimed that the LetAris refers not to "the first to their true meaning" (Thackeray); "and not adequately"
Greek translation of the Law" but to "a revision of (Hadas). Since the author of LetAris has the Heb. text
already existing translations." (The Cairo Geniza [Ox­ of the Torah brought from Jerusalem, he may well have
ford, 19592] p. 212; italics his). Kahle demands that meant to indicate here that the copies available in Alex­
sesemantai be translated "interpreted" or "written" and andria were inadequate. [I am indebted here to conver­
claims it refers to earlier translations of the Law into Gk.; sations with H. Orlinsky. —J.H.C]31 because they have not received royal patronage. •These (books) also must be in your library*
in an accurate version, because this legislation, as could be expected from its divine nature,
is very philosophical and genuine. Writers therefore and poets and the whole army of
historians have been reluctant to refer to the aforementioned books, and to the men past
(and present) who featured largely in them, because the consideration of them is sacred and
32 hallowed, as Hecataeus of Abdera says. #If you approve, O King, a letter shall be written
to the high priest at Jerusalem, asking him to dispatch men of the most exemplary lives and
mature experience, skilled in matters pertaining to their Law, six in number from each tribe,
in order that after the examination of the text agreed by the majority, and the achievement
of accuracy in the translation, we may produce an outstanding version in a manner worthy
33 both of the contents and of your purpose. Farewell always." »On receiving this report, the
king ordered a letter to be written to Eleazar regarding these matters, announcing also the
actual release of the prisoners. He made them a gift also for the provision of cups and
goblets and a table and libation vessels weighing fifty talents of gold, seventy talents of
silver, and a goodly number of (precious) stones—he commanded the treasurers to allow
the craftsmen to select whatever they might prefer—and of currency for sacrifices and other
34 requirements one hundred talents. #We will show you details of the provisions after we
have given the copies of the letters. The letter of the king was of the following pattern. 35 "King Ptolemy to Eleazar the high priest, hearty greetings. It is a fact that a large number
of the Jews settled in our country after being uprooted from Jerusalem by the Persians
during the time of their ascendancy, and also came with our father into Egypt as prisoners.35 "King Ptolemy to Eleazar the high priest, hearty greetings. It is a fact that a large number
of the Jews settled in our country after being uprooted from Jerusalem by the Persians
during the time of their ascendancy, and also came with our father into Egypt as prisoners. 36 He put many of them into the military forces on generous pay, and in the same way,
having judged the veterans to be trustworthy, he set up establishments which he handed
over to them, to prevent the Egyptian people feeling any apprehension on their account. Having now inherited the throne, we adopt a more liberal attitude to all our subjects, and
37 more especially to your citizens. •We have freed more than a hundred thousand prisoners,h
paying to their captors the price in silver proportionate to their rank. We also make amends
for any damage caused by mob violence. We decided to do this as a religious obligation,
making of it a thank offering to the Most High God, who has preserved the kingdom for
us in peace and highest renown throughout the whole world. Those at the peak of their
youth we have appointed to the army, and those who are able to be at our court, being
38 worthy of confidence in our household, we have put in charge of (some) ministries. «It is
our wish to grant favors to them and to all the Jews throughout the world, including future
generations. We have accordingly decided that your Law shall be translated into Greek
letters from what you call the Hebrew letters, in order that they too should take their place
39 with us in our library with the other royal books. *You will therefore act well, and in a
manner worthy of our zeal, by selecting elders of exemplary lives, with experience of the
Law and ability to translate it, six from each tribe, so that an agreed version may be found
from the large majority, in view of the great importance of the matters under consideration. 40 We believe that the completion of this project will win (us) high reputation.. ."Andrews' rendering supports P. Kahle's hypothesis; (Hadas); it is translated variously: "and not acccording
Kahle claimed that the LetAris refers not to "the first to their true meaning" (Thackeray); "and not adequately"
Greek translation of the Law" but to "a revision of (Hadas). Since the author of LetAris has the Heb. text
already existing translations." (The Cairo Geniza [Ox­ of the Torah brought from Jerusalem, he may well have
ford, 19592] p. 212; italics his). Kahle demands that meant to indicate here that the copies available in Alex­
sesemantai be translated "interpreted" or "written" and andria were inadequate. [I am indebted here to conver­
claims it refers to earlier translations of the Law into Gk.; sations with H. Orlinsky. —J.H.C]

*You will therefore act well, and in a
manner worthy of our zeal, by selecting elders of exemplary lives, with experience of the
Law and ability to translate it, six from each tribe, so that an agreed version may be found
from the large majority, in view of the great importance of the matters under consideration. 40 We believe that the completion of this project will win (us) high reputation. *We have
dispatched on this business Andreas of the chief bodyguards and Aristeas, men held in high
esteem by you, to confer with you; they bring with them first fruits of offerings for the
Temple and one hundred talents of silver for sacrifices and the other requirements. Write
to us on any matters you wish, and your requests will be gratified; you will be performing
also an act worthy of friendship for what you choose will be carried out with all dispatch. 41 Farewell." »In reply to this letter Eleazar wrote in acceptance as follows: "Eleazar the high
priest to King Ptolemy, dear friend, greeting. Good health to you and to Queen Arsinoe,
your sister, and to your children; if that is so, it would be well, and as we wish. We too
42 are in good health. #On receipt of your letter we rejoiced greatly because of your purpose
and noble plan; we therefore collected together the whole multitude and read it to them,
that they might know your piety toward our God. We also showed them the vessels which
you sent, twenty of silver and thirty of gold, five cups, and a table for offering, and for the
performance of the sacrifices and the furnishing of the Temple requirements one hundred
43 talents of silver, •brought by two men highly esteemed by you, Andreas and Aristeas,
g. Lit. "with you," i.e. in your library, presumably,
though not all commentators would wish to be so specific. h. Lit. "ten ten thousands."gentlemen of integrity,1 outstanding in education, worthy in every respect of your conduct
and justice. They also communicated to us your messages, in reply to which they have
44 heard from us also sentiments consistent with what you wrote. •Everything which is to your
advantage, even if it is unnatural, we will carry out; this is a sign of friendship and love. 45 You have also bestowed great unexpected benefits upon our citizens in many ways. »We
therefore offered sacrifices without delay for you, your sister, your children, and your
friends. The whole multitude made supplication that it should come to pass for you entirely
as you desire, and that God the ruler of all should preserve your kingdom in peace and
glory, and that the translation of the sacred Law should come to pass in a manner expedient
46 to you and in safety. •In the presence of the whole assembly we selected elders, honorable
men and true, six from each tribe, whom we have sent with the Law in their possession. It
will be a noble deed, O righteous King, if you command that once the translation of the
47 books is complete these men be restored to us again in safety.•In the presence of the whole assembly we selected elders, honorable
men and true, six from each tribe, whom we have sent with the Law in their possession. It
will be a noble deed, O righteous King, if you command that once the translation of the
47 books is complete these men be restored to us again in safety. Farewell." #The names of
the men are as follows: First tribe:j Joseph, Ezekiah, Zachariah, John, Ezekiah, and Elissaeus;
second tribe: Judas, Simon, Somoel, Adaeus, Mattathias, and Esclemias; third tribe:
48 Neemiah, Joseph, Theodosius, Baseas, Ornias, and Dakis; •fourth tribe: Jonathan, Abraeus,
Elissaeus, Ananias, Chabrias;k fifth tribe: Isaac, Jacob, Jesus, Sabbataeus, Simon, Levi;
49 sixth tribe: Judas, Joseph, Simon, Zachariah, Somoel, and Selemiah; • seventh tribe:
Sabbataeus, Sedekiah, Jacob, Isaac, Jesias, Natthaeus; eighth tribe: Theodosius, Jason,
Jesus, Theodotus, John, and Jonathan; ninth tribe: Theophilus, Abram, Arsam, Jason,
50 Endemias, and Daniel; • tenth tribe: Jeremiah, Eleazar, Zachariah, Baneas, Elissaeus, and
Dathaeus; eleventh tribe: Samuel, Joseph, Judas, Jonathan, Chabeu,1 and Dositheus; twelfth
51 tribe: Isael, John, Theodosius, Arsamus, Abietes, and Ezekiel. Seventy-two in all. •The
matters relating to the king's letter received the aforementioned reply from Eleazar and his
advisers. Since I promised to give full details of the furnishings, I will now do so. The finished
objects were conspicuous for their variety of craftsmanship; the king made a generous
contribution and oversaw the craftsman in each case, so that they could not neglect anything
52 or finish it off thoughtlessly. First I will describe the details of the table. •The king's main
plan was to make the furnishing an object outstanding in its measurements, and commanded
inquiries to be made of the local people concerning the size of the previous one set up in
53 the Temple at Jerusalem.First I will describe the details of the table. •The king's main
plan was to make the furnishing an object outstanding in its measurements, and commanded
inquiries to be made of the local people concerning the size of the previous one set up in
53 the Temple at Jerusalem. *When they gave him the measurements he asked a further
question, whether he should make it larger. Some of the priests and the others said that
there was nothing to prevent this. The king replied that though he was quite willing to make
it even five times as large in size, he hesitated in case it proved to be useless for the services;
54 he not only chose, he said, that his gifts should be placed in that building, but would be
much more pleased if the appointed ministers duly performed the appropriate rites upon the
55 furnishings which he had provided. »Lack of money was not the reason he had made the
measurements of the previously completed offerings short, but it is plain, he said, for what
reason they were so constituted in their measurements. Had there been any (precise) order
(to that effect) there would be nothing lacking now. Accordingly, we must not transgress
56 nor overstep what is right and proper. «He commanded that the fiillest use should be made
of the variety of the arts, his intentions being pious in every respect, and having naturally
a good eye for appreciating how things will look. In cases of unspecified items he commanded
that they should make them with an eye to their beauty (not expense); in cases of specified
items, measurements should tally with them. 57 Their finished work was two cubits in length, one and a half" in height; they made it
solid all over with highly precious gold, by which I mean not just an outer covering of
58 gold, but the plate itself superimposed. 'They made the crown a palm's radius in size; the
moldings twined, with coiled work in low relief, the relief-work marvelously executed on
59 the three sides.*You will therefore act well, and in a
manner worthy of our zeal, by selecting elders of exemplary lives, with experience of the
Law and ability to translate it, six from each tribe, so that an agreed version may be found
from the large majority, in view of the great importance of the matters under consideration. 40 We believe that the completion of this project will win (us) high reputation. *We have
dispatched on this business Andreas of the chief bodyguards and Aristeas, men held in high
esteem by you, to confer with you; they bring with them first fruits of offerings for the
Temple and one hundred talents of silver for sacrifices and the other requirements. Write
to us on any matters you wish, and your requests will be gratified; you will be performing
also an act worthy of friendship for what you choose will be carried out with all dispatch. 41 Farewell." »In reply to this letter Eleazar wrote in acceptance as follows: "Eleazar the high
priest to King Ptolemy, dear friend, greeting. Good health to you and to Queen Arsinoe,
your sister, and to your children; if that is so, it would be well, and as we wish. We too
42 are in good health. #On receipt of your letter we rejoiced greatly because of your purpose
and noble plan; we therefore collected together the whole multitude and read it to them,
that they might know your piety toward our God. We also showed them the vessels which
you sent, twenty of silver and thirty of gold, five cups, and a table for offering, and for the
performance of the sacrifices and the furnishing of the Temple requirements one hundred
43 talents of silver, •brought by two men highly esteemed by you, Andreas and Aristeas,
g. Lit. "with you," i.e. in your library, presumably,
though not all commentators would wish to be so specific. h. Lit. "ten ten thousands."

57 Their finished work was two cubits in length, one and a half" in height; they made it
solid all over with highly precious gold, by which I mean not just an outer covering of
58 gold, but the plate itself superimposed. 'They made the crown a palm's radius in size; the
moldings twined, with coiled work in low relief, the relief-work marvelously executed on
59 the three sides. (It formed a triangle.) •On each side the shape of the workmanship was
identical in arrangement, so that whichever side it was turned, the appearance was identical,
i. See also vs. 46. This phrase, kaloi kai agathoi (lit. is missing. "Chelkias" has been suggested. "beautiful and good"), expresses the Gk. ideal of man­ 1. "Chabeu" seems wrong. "Caleb" has been sug­
hood and is almost untranslatable. gested. j. Lit. "There are of the first tribe." m. The addition "and a half comes from Josephus,
k. The name of the sixth member from the fourth tribe Ant 12.64.and when one side of the crown was placed downward the slope downward to the surface
of the table kept its beautiful shape, and the outer slope was facing the view of anyone
go approaching it. #So the prominence of the two sloping sides stood out sharply, being raised
high as we have said, and of triangular construction, whichever side it was turned. There
were arrangements of precious stones upon it between the patterns of lines: Each overlapped
61 the other, unsurpassed in craftsmanship. •They were all fastened through the holes with
62 golden pins for safety. At the corners the clasps closed to keep them together. »On the sides
on the crown all around as one looked at the top an ovate border had been fashioned set
with precious stones, [in prominent relief]" with uninterrupted striped reliefs, closely
63 connected with each other around the whole of the table. •Beneath the relief of the precious
stones which made the (aforesaid) ovate border the craftsmen made a crown adorned with
all sorts of fruit, preeminently conspicuous with grapes and ears of corn, also dates, apples,
olives, pomegranates, and the like. Thus they fashioned the stones in the shape of the
aforesaid fruits, in the color appropriate to each type, and then attached them with the
64 golden band around the whole design of the table in profile. 'After the disposition of the
crown a similar arrangement had been designed to match the scheme of the border, and
likewise the rest of the fluting and engraving, because the table had been made for use on
both sides whichever side they began, so that the position of the moldings and of the crown
65 matched the side where the feet were. 'They made a solid metal plate over the whole
breadth of the table, four fingers0 deep, so that into it the feet fitted which had fasteners
with holes for attaching under the crown to ensure its use whichever side they began. This
66 is seen plainly on the outside, the construction being visible on both sides.'They made a solid metal plate over the whole
breadth of the table, four fingers0 deep, so that into it the feet fitted which had fasteners
with holes for attaching under the crown to ensure its use whichever side they began. This
66 is seen plainly on the outside, the construction being visible on both sides. »On the actual
table they made an intricate pattern in relief with very costly stones in profusion in the
middle, consisting of rubies of many types and emeralds, onyx also, and the other kinds
67 conspicuous for their beauty. • After the arrangement of the (aforesaid) pattern there was
superimposed a web with interstices, marvelously contrived, which made the central view
rhomboid in shape; on it was put in relief a stone of crystal and what is called amber,
68 providing the viewers with a sight beyond compare. •They made the feet with the capitals
adorned with lilies, the lilies opening out underneath the table; the inside parts which could
69 be seen they made with a real covering of gold leaf. #The support of the foot on the ground
was adorned liberally with rubies, having an arrangement of a foot at the front, eight fingers
70 wide. On it was placed all the stress of the foot. •They made a sprouting ivy cluster of
stone entwined in acanthus, and surrounded all around the foot with a vine together with
the grape clusters, all fashioned out of stone, as far as the head. The same pattern was
applied to the four feet; everything was artistically contrived and introduced, uniformly
snowing preeminence of experience and art with an emphasis on realism, so that the
arrangement of the leaves seemed actually to receive a movement of breath in the air fanning
71 them. •Everything was modeled for realistic representation.The same pattern was
applied to the four feet; everything was artistically contrived and introduced, uniformly
snowing preeminence of experience and art with an emphasis on realism, so that the
arrangement of the leaves seemed actually to receive a movement of breath in the air fanning
71 them. •Everything was modeled for realistic representation. They made the mouth of the
table threefold, of three layers as it were, Qach layer fitted to each other with dovetailing
joints through the thickness of the piece (of furniture): they made the joints so closely fitting
as to be invisible and incapable of detection. The thickness of the whole table was not less
72 than half a cubit, so that the whole piece weighed many talents. •For since the king had
decided to add nothing to the measurements insofar as greater expenditure was required for
making them bigger, he increased the number of talents' weight, and so in accordance with
his purpose every detail was completed in an extraordinary and remarkable way, unparalleled
73 in craftsmanship and outstanding in beauty. *Two of the drinking bowls were made of solid
gold of overlapping design in relief from the base to the center, with very artistic joining
74 together of the stones in the middle of the layers. • There was superimposed an intricate
pattern a cubit high, incorporated into the design by intricate work in precious stones,
exhibiting meticulous art combined with beauty. On this was fluting intermingled with
75 circular patterns, giving a meshlike appearance as far as the mouth. *On the central part
small bosses of stones, one group close to another, and of varied types, not less than four
fingers in size, complemented the conspicuous beauty (of the whole). On the brim of the
n. The text here is corrupt. The general meaning is o.57 Their finished work was two cubits in length, one and a half" in height; they made it
solid all over with highly precious gold, by which I mean not just an outer covering of
58 gold, but the plate itself superimposed. 'They made the crown a palm's radius in size; the
moldings twined, with coiled work in low relief, the relief-work marvelously executed on
59 the three sides. (It formed a triangle.) •On each side the shape of the workmanship was
identical in arrangement, so that whichever side it was turned, the appearance was identical,
i. See also vs. 46. This phrase, kaloi kai agathoi (lit. is missing. "Chelkias" has been suggested. "beautiful and good"), expresses the Gk. ideal of man­ 1. "Chabeu" seems wrong. "Caleb" has been sug­
hood and is almost untranslatable. gested. j. Lit. "There are of the first tribe." m. The addition "and a half comes from Josephus,
k. The name of the sixth member from the fourth tribe Ant 12.64.

The text here is corrupt. The general meaning is o. A "finger" is reckoned as equivalent to seven tenths
given, following Schmidt's conjecture proochis, "a of an inch, so that four fingers would be approximately
prominent point," for prosoches, "attention." three inches.mouth shapes of lilies with flowers and interwoven clusters of grapes were fashioned all
76 around. #Such was the pattern of the golden (drinking bowls), holding above two? large
measures. The silver ones had a smooth appearance, being a reflector marvelously adapted
for this very effect, so that everything brought near it flashed more clearly than in mirrors. 77 It is not, however, possible to relate the additional details added to give the impression of
realism. When it was finished and the pieces put one upon another, that is to say a silver
drinking bowl first, then a gold, then one in silver and one in gold, the overall effect of the
sight was entirely beyond description, and even those who approached to view it were
78 unable to tear themselves away from the brilliance and delight in what they saw. 'The living
craftsmanship of the work now made visible was subtly diverse. As people looked at the
actual furnishing in gold, a certain fascination ensued, coupled with awed amazement, as
the attention concentrated on each artistic device in turn. And again, when anyone wanted
to gaze at the arrangement of the silver, everything reflected all around, however one stood,
and caused even greater amazement among the spectators. So that the manifold artistry of
79 the masterpieces was absolutely indescribable. 'They engraved the golden goblets with
crowns of grapes in the middle, and around the edges they plaited in relief a crown of ivy,
myrtle, and olive, into which they inserted precious stones; the remaining carvings the
craftsmen finished individually, competing with one another to do everything to the
so preeminent glory of the king. •There was absolutely no work of art comparable in
magnificence and craftsmanship, either in the royal treasuries or in any other. The king
81 took no small interest in the work, because of his dedication to works of art.•There was absolutely no work of art comparable in
magnificence and craftsmanship, either in the royal treasuries or in any other. The king
81 took no small interest in the work, because of his dedication to works of art. »Many a time
he laid aside public business and sat attentively among the craftsmen, in order that they
might complete the work in a manner consistent with the place for which the entire enterprise
was destined. So everything was done in solemnity and in a manner worthy of the king,
82 who sent (the gifts), and of the high priest, who presided over the place. •The number of
the stones was without limit, and they were great in size, not less than five thousand in
number. Everything was excellent in craftsmanship so that the gift of the stones and the
actual artistic work was worth five times more than the gold. 83 I assumed that the description of these details was indispensable, so I have narrated it to
you. What follows embraces the road to Eleazar that we took. First I will describe the
layout of the whole countryside. When we approached near the site, we saw the city built
in the midst of the whole land of the Jews, upon a hill which extended to a great height. 84 On the top of the hill the Temple had been constructed, towering above all. There were
three enclosing walls, over seventy cubits in size, the width being proportionate and the
length of the equipment of the house likewise; everything was built with a magnificence
85 and expense which excelled in every respect. #It was obvious that the expenditure of money
had been unrestricted upon the door, the fastenings upon it by the doorposts, and the
86 strength of the lintels. »The configuration of the veil was in respects very similar to the
door furnishing, and most of all in view of continuous movement caused to the material by
the undercurrent of the air.The text here is corrupt. The general meaning is o. A "finger" is reckoned as equivalent to seven tenths
given, following Schmidt's conjecture proochis, "a of an inch, so that four fingers would be approximately
prominent point," for prosoches, "attention." three inches.

#It was obvious that the expenditure of money
had been unrestricted upon the door, the fastenings upon it by the doorposts, and the
86 strength of the lintels. »The configuration of the veil was in respects very similar to the
door furnishing, and most of all in view of continuous movement caused to the material by
the undercurrent of the air. It was continuous because the undercurrent started from the
bottom and the billowing extendedq to the rippling at the top—the phenomenon making a
pleasant and unforgettable spectacle. 87 The furnishing of the altar was constructed in a manner commensurate with the place and
the sacrifices consumed in the fire, and that of the ascent to it likewise—the site had the
ladder designed in a manner consistent with seemliness for the ministering priests swathed
88 up to the loins in "leather garments." *The house faces east, and the rear of it faces west. The whole foundation was decked with (precious) stones and had slopes leading to the
appropriate places for carrying the water which is (needed) for the cleansing of the blood
from the sacrifices. (Many thousandsr of animals are brought there in the festival days.)
89 There is an uninterrupted supply not only of water, just as if there were a plentiful spring
rising naturally from within, but also of indescribably wonderful underground reservoirs,
which within a radius of five stades5 from the foundation of the Temple revealed innumerable
90 channels for each of them, the streams joining together on each side. • All these were
p. Perhaps about fifteen gallons. The Athenian measure r. Lit. "Many ten thousands."
held nine gallons; others five or six. s. A stade is one eighth of a Roman mile, i.e. one
q. Adopting Schmidt's conjecture katateinein, "ex- eighth of 1,618 yards or approximately 200 yards,
tend."covered with lead down to the foundation of the wall; on top of them a thick layer of pitch,
all done very effectively. There were many mouths at the base, which were completely
invisible except for those responsible for the ministry, so that the large amounts of blood
which collected from the sacrifices were all cleansed by the downward pressure and
91 momentum. • Being personally convinced, 1 will describe the building plan of the reservoirs
just as I understood it. They conducted me more than four stades outside the city, and told
me to bend down at a certain spot and listen to the noise at the meeting of the waters. The
result was that the size of the conduits became clear to me, as has been demonstrated. 92 The ministering of the priests was absolutely unsurpassable in its vigor and the arrangement
of its well-ordered silence: All work hard of their own accord, with much exertion, and
each one looks after his appointed task. Their service is unremitting, sharing the sacrifices,
some undertaking the carrying of wood, others oil, others wheaten flour, others the sweet
spices, others offering burnt offerings of the parts of the flesh—all of them exerting their
93 strength in different ways. •They divide the legs of the bullocks with both hands, though
they are more than two talents1 in weight in almost every case, and then with an upward
movement rip off with each hand in an amazing way a sufficiently large portion0 with
unerring accuracy/ The sheep and the goats are similarly treated in a remarkable way,
weight and fat notwithstanding. Those whose concern it is choose in every case spotless
94 specimens outstanding for fatness: Thus the aforesaid procedure is carried out. •They have
a rest room set aside, where those who are resting sit down. When this happens, some of
those who are rested stand up with alacrity, but no one orders the arrangements of their
95 ministry.•They have
a rest room set aside, where those who are resting sit down. When this happens, some of
those who are rested stand up with alacrity, but no one orders the arrangements of their
95 ministry. *A general silence reigns, so that one might think that there was not a single man
in the place although the number of ministers in attendance is more than seven hundred, in
addition to a large number of the assistants bringing forward the animals for sacrifice:
% Everything is carried out with reverence and in a manner befitting supreme divinity. *lt was
an occasion of great amazement to us when we saw Eleazar engaged on his ministry, and
all the glorious vestments, including the wearing of the "garment"* with precious stones
upon it in which he is vested; golden bells surround the hem (at his feet) and make a very
special sound. Alongside each of them are "tassels" adorned with "flowers," and of
97 marvelous colors. *He was clad in an outstandingly magnificent "girdle," woven in the
most beautiful colors. On his breast he wears what is called the "oracle," to which are
attached "twelve stones" of different kinds, set in gold, giving the names of the patriarchs
in what was the original order, each stone flashing its own natural distinctive color—quite
98 indescribable. •Upon his head he has what is called the "tiara," and upon this the inimitable
"mitre," the hallowed diadem having in relief on the front in the middle in holy letters on
a golden leaf the name of God, ineffable in glory. The wearer is considered worthy of such
99 vestments at the services. • Their appearance makes one awe-struck and dumbfounded: A
man would think he had come out of this world into another one. I emphatically assert that
every man who comes near the spectacle of what I have described will experience
astonishment and amazement beyond words, his very being transformed by the hallowed
100 arrangement on every single detail.#It was obvious that the expenditure of money
had been unrestricted upon the door, the fastenings upon it by the doorposts, and the
86 strength of the lintels. »The configuration of the veil was in respects very similar to the
door furnishing, and most of all in view of continuous movement caused to the material by
the undercurrent of the air. It was continuous because the undercurrent started from the
bottom and the billowing extendedq to the rippling at the top—the phenomenon making a
pleasant and unforgettable spectacle. 87 The furnishing of the altar was constructed in a manner commensurate with the place and
the sacrifices consumed in the fire, and that of the ascent to it likewise—the site had the
ladder designed in a manner consistent with seemliness for the ministering priests swathed
88 up to the loins in "leather garments." *The house faces east, and the rear of it faces west. The whole foundation was decked with (precious) stones and had slopes leading to the
appropriate places for carrying the water which is (needed) for the cleansing of the blood
from the sacrifices. (Many thousandsr of animals are brought there in the festival days.)
89 There is an uninterrupted supply not only of water, just as if there were a plentiful spring
rising naturally from within, but also of indescribably wonderful underground reservoirs,
which within a radius of five stades5 from the foundation of the Temple revealed innumerable
90 channels for each of them, the streams joining together on each side. • All these were
p. Perhaps about fifteen gallons. The Athenian measure r. Lit. "Many ten thousands."
held nine gallons; others five or six. s. A stade is one eighth of a Roman mile, i.e. one
q. Adopting Schmidt's conjecture katateinein, "ex- eighth of 1,618 yards or approximately 200 yards,
tend."

• Their appearance makes one awe-struck and dumbfounded: A
man would think he had come out of this world into another one. I emphatically assert that
every man who comes near the spectacle of what I have described will experience
astonishment and amazement beyond words, his very being transformed by the hallowed
100 arrangement on every single detail. *For the inspection of the entire scene we climbed the
neighboring citadel, and viewed it from there. It is situated on a lofty site, fortified with a
number of towers, which in their turn are built of sizable stones right up to the top, according
101 to our information, for the protection of the area around the Temple, #so that, in case of
any assault or revolt or enemy attack, no one could force his way into the precincts
surrounding the house. There were catapults in position upon the towers of the citadel and
102 a variety of engines; the place dominated the aforementioned precincts. »The towers were,
so to speak, guarded by most trustworthy sentries who had given distinguished service to
their country. They had no permit to leave the citadel, except at festivals, and then not as
103 a body: They did not allow a soul to enter. *ln the case of any order from their commander
to admit any visitors to watch, as for example in our case, they observed the order very
strictly, very reluctantly admitting us, though only two in number and unarmed, to observe
KM the proceedings at the sacrifices. •Such a procedure was, they said, confirmed by oath, for
every man had sworn that, in the necessary and solemn discharge of the matter according
t. The actual weight of a talent varied between fifty v. Lit. "and they do not fail in the attempt."
and eighty lbs. w. Cf. Ex 28:4, 27-31. u. Lit. "height."to the oath,* they would not admit more than five persons at the same time, although they
themselves were five hundred in number. The citadel, they said, provided the whole
protection for the Temple, and its founder had in this way secured the advanced protection
105 for the places which we have described. •The size of the city is well proportioned, about
forty stades in circumference, as far as one can estimate. The setting of its towers looks
like a theater, and that of thoroughfares, too, which stand out, some set lower down, some
higher up, all in the accustomed manner;* the same applies to the roads which cross them. 106 Since the city is built on a hill, the layout of the terrain is sloping. • There are steps leading
to the thoroughfares. Some people make their way above them, others go underneath them,
their principal aim being to keep away from the main road for the sake of those who are
107 involved in purification rites, so as not to touch any forbidden object. •There was good
reason for the building of the city by its pioneers in appropriate harmony, and their plan
was a wise one. The terrain was ample and beautiful; parts were flat, such as the area
around Samaria and the neighborhood of Idumaea; other parts were hilly, such as the
neighborhood of Judea.2 Continuous attention to husbandry and the care of the land is
necessary, to ensure good yield as a result for the inhabitants. When this attention is paid,
108 all farming is accompanied by abundant yield on all the aforesaid land. •In such of the
cities as achieve large size and its accompanying prosperity, the result is abundance of
population and neglect of the land, because everyone is bent on cultural delights, and the
109 whole population in its philosophy is inclined to pleasure. *This is what happened with
Alexandria, which excelled all cities in size and prosperity: Dwellers from the country
no migrated to that city and remained there, thus bringing agriculture into decline.•In such of the
cities as achieve large size and its accompanying prosperity, the result is abundance of
population and neglect of the land, because everyone is bent on cultural delights, and the
109 whole population in its philosophy is inclined to pleasure. *This is what happened with
Alexandria, which excelled all cities in size and prosperity: Dwellers from the country
no migrated to that city and remained there, thus bringing agriculture into decline. «So the
king, to prevent their settling, gave orders that their stay should not be longer than twenty
days. To those also in charge of business matters he gave written instructions that, should
it be necessary to summon anyone to attend, the matter should be dealt with in five days. in As an indication of the importance he attached to this, he appointed officials32 and their
staff by districts, to prevent the farmers and chief men of the city engaging in business,
ii2 thus diminishing the treasury, that is to say the profits of farming. *We have made this
digression because Eleazar has traced out the aforementioned facts for us so well. The zeal
of the farmers is indeed remarkable. In fact their land is thickly covered with large numbers
of olive trees and corn crops and pulse, and moreover with vines and abundant honey. As
for the fruit trees and date palms which they have, no number can be given. They have
M3 many flocks and herds of various kinds, with ample pasture for them. *So they perceived
clearly that the areas needed to be well populated, and designed the city and the villages
H4 accordingly. *A large quantity of spices and precious stones and gold is brought to the area
by means of the Arabs.*So they perceived
clearly that the areas needed to be well populated, and designed the city and the villages
H4 accordingly. *A large quantity of spices and precious stones and gold is brought to the area
by means of the Arabs. The land is agricultural and well fitted also for commerce; the city
lis is the home of many crafts, and there is no lack of goods imported from overseas, • because
of its convenient harbors which supply them, such as Ascelon, Joppa, and Gaza, and also
Ptolemais,b2 which the king founded in a central situation in regard to the aforementioned
places, not far away from them. The district is well watered everywhere, has everything in
ii6 abundance, and is very secure. •The river Jordan flows around it and never dries up. The
land originally measured not less than sixty million acres;02 subsequently, neighboring
peoples overran it. Six hundred thousandd2 settlers were established upon it, each having
one hundred acres. As the river rises, like the Nile, in the days approaching harvest, it
in waters much of the land, •discharging its waters into another river in the region of Ptolemais,
which in turn flows into the sea. Other torrents, as they are called, also flow down, covering
ii8 the parts toward Gaza and the district of Azotus. •The countryside is surrounded with natural
defenses, being difficult to invade and not negotiable for large numbers because of the
narrow approaches, with overhanging precipices and deep ravines, and the whole mountainous
x. Translating with Mendelssohn, horkismon, "oath"; these harbors were permanent Jewish possessions. The
the Gk. MSS read horismon, "a fixed course." abundance of water (116f.) is also exaggerated. y. The conjecture of Redpath, accepted by Thackeray. c2. Lit. "six thousand ten thousands aroura." The
z. The text is incomplete here. This is Thackeray's aroura was approximately the size of the Roman jugerum
emendation. (two thirds of an acre). Contrast Josephus, Apion 1.195
al.• Their appearance makes one awe-struck and dumbfounded: A
man would think he had come out of this world into another one. I emphatically assert that
every man who comes near the spectacle of what I have described will experience
astonishment and amazement beyond words, his very being transformed by the hallowed
100 arrangement on every single detail. *For the inspection of the entire scene we climbed the
neighboring citadel, and viewed it from there. It is situated on a lofty site, fortified with a
number of towers, which in their turn are built of sizable stones right up to the top, according
101 to our information, for the protection of the area around the Temple, #so that, in case of
any assault or revolt or enemy attack, no one could force his way into the precincts
surrounding the house. There were catapults in position upon the towers of the citadel and
102 a variety of engines; the place dominated the aforementioned precincts. »The towers were,
so to speak, guarded by most trustworthy sentries who had given distinguished service to
their country. They had no permit to leave the citadel, except at festivals, and then not as
103 a body: They did not allow a soul to enter. *ln the case of any order from their commander
to admit any visitors to watch, as for example in our case, they observed the order very
strictly, very reluctantly admitting us, though only two in number and unarmed, to observe
KM the proceedings at the sacrifices. •Such a procedure was, they said, confirmed by oath, for
every man had sworn that, in the necessary and solemn discharge of the matter according
t. The actual weight of a talent varied between fifty v. Lit. "and they do not fail in the attempt."
and eighty lbs. w. Cf. Ex 28:4, 27-31. u. Lit. "height."

(two thirds of an acre). Contrast Josephus, Apion 1.195
al. A technical term; these officials may be compared (quoting Hecataeus), according to which the area of
loosely with the judges of an assembly. Palestine is "about three million arourae"
b2. These are extravagant claims, if they imply that d2. Lit. "sixty ten thousands."119 surroundings of the entire area being very rugged. #It used to be said that copper and iron
mines were formerly sunk in the neighboring hills of Arabia, but in the time of the Persian
supremacy they were abandoned because of the false allegation by the responsible authorities
120 of the time that their working was unprofitable and very expensive. •The purpose of closure
was also to prevent the resulting ruination of the countryside by the working of the aforesaid
mines, and even perhaps its alienation through their tyranny, because they had seized the
pretext of moving into the mining areas on account of this allegation which had been made. I have explained to you in summary form, brother Philocrates, as much as was needful
121 concerning these matters, and we will next expound details of the translation. • Eleazar
selected men of the highest merit and of excellent education due to the distinction of their
parentage; they had not only mastered the Jewish literature, but had made a serious study
122 of that of the Greeks as well. •They were therefore well qualified for the embassy, and
brought it to fruition as occasion demanded; they had a tremendous natural facility for the
negotiations and questions arising from the Law, with the middle way as their commendable
ideal; they forsook any uncouth and uncultured attitude of mind; in the same way they rose
above conceit and contempt of other people, and instead engaged in discourse and listening
to and answering each and every one, as is meet and right. They all observed these aims,
and went further in wishing to excel each other in them; they were, one and all, worthy of
123 their leader and his outstanding qualities. 'It was possible to perceive how inseparable was
their attachment to Eleazar, and his to them. In addition to writing to the king concerning
their reestablishment, he urged Andreas to take manye2 active steps to this end, asking him
124 to collaborate to the utmost extent of our ability.'It was possible to perceive how inseparable was
their attachment to Eleazar, and his to them. In addition to writing to the king concerning
their reestablishment, he urged Andreas to take manye2 active steps to this end, asking him
124 to collaborate to the utmost extent of our ability. »We affirmed that we would pay good
heed to these matters, to which he replied that he was very apprehensive, because he knew
that the king, out of his love of culture, considered it of supreme importance to bring to
his court any man, wherever he might be found,n of outstanding culture and prudence
125 which excelled his contemporaries. *I understand too that he made the noble statement that
by having at his court men of integrity and wisdom he would provide the greatest protection
for his kingdom; this was the frank advice given him by his friends for his benefit. The
126 point is amply confirmed in the delegates whom he sent. •(Eleazar) also affirmed on oath
that he would not permit the men to leave if any other consideration militated against his
own personal advantage; he was only dispatching them for the common improvement of all
127 the citizens. *The good life, he said, consisted in observing the laws, and this aim was
achieved by hearing much more than by reading. By these pronouncements and others
similar to them he clearly showed his attitude toward them. 128 It is worthwhile mentioning briefly his intimations in reply to the questions raised through
us. It is my opinion that mankind as a whole shows a certain amount of concern for the
parts of their legislation concerning meats and drink and beasts considered to be unclean. 129 For example, we inquired why, since there is one creation only, some things are considered
unclean for eating, others for touching—legislation being scrupulous in most matters, but
130 in these especially so.(two thirds of an acre). Contrast Josephus, Apion 1.195
al. A technical term; these officials may be compared (quoting Hecataeus), according to which the area of
loosely with the judges of an assembly. Palestine is "about three million arourae"
b2. These are extravagant claims, if they imply that d2. Lit. "sixty ten thousands."

It is my opinion that mankind as a whole shows a certain amount of concern for the
parts of their legislation concerning meats and drink and beasts considered to be unclean. 129 For example, we inquired why, since there is one creation only, some things are considered
unclean for eating, others for touching—legislation being scrupulous in most matters, but
130 in these especially so. In reply, he began as follows: •"You observe," he said, "the
important matter raised by modes of life and relationships, inasmuch as through bad
relationships men become perverted, and are miserable their whole life long; if, however,
they mix with wise and prudent companions, they rise above ignorance and achieve progress
131 in life. • First, our lawgiver gave express commands relating to religious observance and
justice, and issued precise sets of instructions about them, not only negatively but positively,
together with the manifest damages and the visitations sent by God upon the guilty."
132 (Eleazar) began first of all by demonstrating that God is one, that his power is shown in
everything, every place being filled with his sovereignty, and that none of the things on
earth which men do secretly are hidden from him, but rather that all the deeds of any man
133 are manifest to him, as well as that which is to come to pass. *So by establishing these
matters accurately and setting them out plainly, he demonstrated that even if a man thinks
of doing evil he would not escape, let alone after the deed is done—thus indicating the
134 power of God through the entire legislation. •This was his introduction: He proceeded to
show that all the rest of mankind ("except ourselves," as he said) believe that there are
e2. Translating polla, "many things," with poiesai, "he made many representations to . . ."
"to do." Withparekakse. "Jie exhorted," it would read, f2. Lit. "named."many gods, because men themselves are much more powerful than the gods whom they
135 vainly worship; •they make images of stone and wood, and declare that they are likenesses
of those who have made some beneficial discovery for their living, and whom they worship,
136 even though the insensibility (of the images) is close at hand to appreciate. *For if the
existence of any godg2 depended on the criterion of invention, it would be absolutely foolish,
because in that case the inventors would have taken some of the created things and given
an added demonstration of their usefulness without themselves being their creators. Therefore
137 it is profitless and useless to deify equals. *And yet, even today, there are many of greater
inventiveness and learning than the men of old, who nevertheless would be the first to
worship them. Those who have invented these fabrications and myths are usually ranked to
138 be the wisest of the Greeks. •There is surely no need to mention the rest of the very foolish
people, Egyptians and those like them, who have put their confidence in beasts and most
of the serpents and monsters, worship them, and sacrifice to them both while alive and
139 dead. *In his wisdom the legislator, in a comprehensive survey of each particular part, and
being endowed by God for the knowledge of universal truths, surrounded us with unbrokenh2
palisades and iron walls to prevent our mixing with any of the other peoples in any matter,
being thus kept pure in body and soul, preserved from false beliefs, and worshiping the
140 only God omnipotent over all creation. •Hence the leading priests among the Egyptians,
conducting many close investigations and with practical experience of affairs, gave us the
title "men of God," which is ascribed exclusively to those who worship the true God, and
not to those who are concerned with meat and drink and clothes, their whole attitude (to
141 life) being concentrated on these concerns.*In his wisdom the legislator, in a comprehensive survey of each particular part, and
being endowed by God for the knowledge of universal truths, surrounded us with unbrokenh2
palisades and iron walls to prevent our mixing with any of the other peoples in any matter,
being thus kept pure in body and soul, preserved from false beliefs, and worshiping the
140 only God omnipotent over all creation. •Hence the leading priests among the Egyptians,
conducting many close investigations and with practical experience of affairs, gave us the
title "men of God," which is ascribed exclusively to those who worship the true God, and
not to those who are concerned with meat and drink and clothes, their whole attitude (to
141 life) being concentrated on these concerns. *Such concerns are of no account among the
people of our race, but throughout the whole of their lives their main objective is concerned
142 with the sovereignty of God. #So, to prevent our being perverted by contact with others or
by mixing with bad influences, he hedged us in on all sides with strict observances12
connected with meat and drink and touch and hearing and sight, after the manner of the
143 Law. »In general everything is similarly constituted in regard to natural reasoning, being
governed by one supreme power, and in each particular everything has a profound reason
for it, both the things from which we abstain in use and those of which we partake. For
144 illustration I will briefly give you one or two examples. 'Do not take the contemptible view
that Moses enacted this legislation because of an excessive preoccupation with mice and
weasels or suchlike creatures. The fact is that everything has been solemnly set in order for
us unblemished investigation and amendment of life for the sake of righteousness.'Do not take the contemptible view
that Moses enacted this legislation because of an excessive preoccupation with mice and
weasels or suchlike creatures. The fact is that everything has been solemnly set in order for
us unblemished investigation and amendment of life for the sake of righteousness. •The birds
which we use are all domesticated and of exceptional cleanliness, their food consisting of
wheat and pulse—such birds as pigeons, turtledoves, locusts, partridges, and, in addition,
146 geese and others of the same kind. *As to the birds which are forbidden, you will find wild
and carnivorous kinds, and the rest which dominate by their own strength, and who find
their food at the expense of the aforementioned domesticated birds—which is an injustice;
and not only that, they also seize lambs and kids and outrage human beings dead or alive. 147 By calling them impure, he has thereby indicated that it is the solemn binding duty of
those for whom the legislation has been established to practice righteousness and not to lord
it over anyone in reliance upon their own strength, nor to deprive him of anything, but to
govern their lives righteously, in the manner of the gentle creatures among the aforementioned
birds which feed on those plants which grow on the ground and do not exercise a domination
148 leading to the destruction of their fellow creatures. »By means of creatures like this the
legislator has handed down (the lesson) to be noted by men of wisdom, that they should be
righteous, and not achieve anything by brute force, nor lord it over others in reliance upon
149 their own strength. •In cases where it is not meet even to touch any of the aforesaid creatures
because of their natural habits with other creatures, surely all possible precautions must be
150 taken to prevent (human) morals degenerating to their level? •Everything pertaining to
conduct permitted us toward these creatures and toward beasts has been set out symbolically.It is my opinion that mankind as a whole shows a certain amount of concern for the
parts of their legislation concerning meats and drink and beasts considered to be unclean. 129 For example, we inquired why, since there is one creation only, some things are considered
unclean for eating, others for touching—legislation being scrupulous in most matters, but
130 in these especially so. In reply, he began as follows: •"You observe," he said, "the
important matter raised by modes of life and relationships, inasmuch as through bad
relationships men become perverted, and are miserable their whole life long; if, however,
they mix with wise and prudent companions, they rise above ignorance and achieve progress
131 in life. • First, our lawgiver gave express commands relating to religious observance and
justice, and issued precise sets of instructions about them, not only negatively but positively,
together with the manifest damages and the visitations sent by God upon the guilty."
132 (Eleazar) began first of all by demonstrating that God is one, that his power is shown in
everything, every place being filled with his sovereignty, and that none of the things on
earth which men do secretly are hidden from him, but rather that all the deeds of any man
133 are manifest to him, as well as that which is to come to pass. *So by establishing these
matters accurately and setting them out plainly, he demonstrated that even if a man thinks
of doing evil he would not escape, let alone after the deed is done—thus indicating the
134 power of God through the entire legislation. •This was his introduction: He proceeded to
show that all the rest of mankind ("except ourselves," as he said) believe that there are
e2. Translating polla, "many things," with poiesai, "he made many representations to . . ."
"to do." Withparekakse. "Jie exhorted," it would read, f2. Lit. "named."

•In cases where it is not meet even to touch any of the aforesaid creatures
because of their natural habits with other creatures, surely all possible precautions must be
150 taken to prevent (human) morals degenerating to their level? •Everything pertaining to
conduct permitted us toward these creatures and toward beasts has been set out symbolically. Thus the cloven hoof, that is the separation of the claws of the hoof, is a sign of setting
151 apart each of our actions for good, • because the strength of the whole body with its action
g2. Thackeray's emendation Theos eii, "a god may h2. Or "unbreakable."
be"; the Gk. MSS have theii. i2. Lit. "purities" or "purifications.'rests upon the shoulders and the legs.j2 The symbolism*2 conveyed by these things compels
us to make a distinction in the performance of all our acts, with righteousness as our aim. 152 This moreover explains why we are distinct from all other men. •The majority of other men
defile themselves in their relationships, thereby committing a serious offense, and lands and
whole cities take pride in it: they not only procure12 the males, they also defile mothers and
153 daughters. We are quite separated from these practices. »The man with whom the aforesaid
manner of disposition is concerned is the man on whom the legislator has also stamped that
of memory. For example, all cloven-footed creatures and ruminants quite clearly express,
154 to those who perceive it, the phenomenon of memory. • Rumination is nothing but the
recalling of (the creature's) life and constitution, life being usually constituted by nourishment. 155 So we are exhorted through scripture"12 also by the one who says thus, "Thou shalt
remember the Lord, who did great and wonderful deeds in thee." When they are (really)
understood they are manifestly "great and glorious"; first, there is the construction of the
156 body, the digestion of the food, and the specific function connected with each limb. •Much
more, the orderly arrangement of the senses, the operation and unseen activity of the mind,
and the speed of its reaction to each stimulus and its invention of arts and crafts involves
157 an infinite variety of methods. »So he exhorts us to remember how the aforesaid blessings
are maintained and preserved by divine power under his providence, for he has ordained
every time and place for a continual reminder of the supreme God and upholder (of all). 158 Accordingly in the matter of meats and drinks he commands men to offer first fruits and to
consume"2 them there and then straightaway.»So he exhorts us to remember how the aforesaid blessings
are maintained and preserved by divine power under his providence, for he has ordained
every time and place for a continual reminder of the supreme God and upholder (of all). 158 Accordingly in the matter of meats and drinks he commands men to offer first fruits and to
consume"2 them there and then straightaway. Furthermore in our clothes he has given us a
distinguishing mark as a reminder, and similarly on our gates and doors he has commanded
159 us to set up the "Words,"02 so as to be a reminder of God. #He also strictly commands
that the sign shall be worn on our hands,p2 clearly indicating that it is our duty to fulfill
every activity with justice, having in mind our own condition, and above all the fear of God. 160 He also commands that "on going to bed and rising" men should meditate on the ordinances
of God, observing not only in word but in understanding the movement and impression
which they have when they go to sleep, and waking too, what a divine change there is
161 between them—quite beyond understanding. •{ have already demonstrated to you the
extraordinary nature of the sound reason behind our distinctive characteristic of memory
when we expounded the cloven hoof and chewing the cud. It is no chance accident that it
has been ordained as part of our very soul; but it is bound up with truth and the expression
162 of the right reason. • After prescribing each set of regulations concerning meats and drinks
and matters relating to touch, he commands that no act be done nor word be heard to no
purpose and that no use should be made of the power of the (spoken) word to incline toward
163 injustice. *The same principle can be found in the case of beasts, because the character of
"weasels," and "mice," and all creatures like them which have been described is
164 mischievous.• After prescribing each set of regulations concerning meats and drinks
and matters relating to touch, he commands that no act be done nor word be heard to no
purpose and that no use should be made of the power of the (spoken) word to incline toward
163 injustice. *The same principle can be found in the case of beasts, because the character of
"weasels," and "mice," and all creatures like them which have been described is
164 mischievous. #Mice pollute and defile everything not only for their own nourishment, but
also to the extent of rendering absolutely useless for human beings everything which comes
165 their way to defile. #The species of weasel is unique: Apart from the aforementioned
characteristic, it has another polluting feature, that of conceiving through its ears and
166 producing its young through its mouth. *So for this reason any similar feature in men is
unclean; men who hear anything and give physical expression to it by word of mouth, thus
embroiling other people in evil, commit no ordinary act of uncleanliness, and are themselves
completely defiled with the taint of impiety. Your king's action in removing such people—
167 for so we are informed—is amply justified. *I said, "You refer to informers, I suppose, for
he systematically imposes upon them punishment and painful death." "Indeed I do refer
168 to them," he replied. "Being on the lookout to murder men is unholy. #Our Law forbids
harming anyone in thought or in deed. I have therefore given a brief resume* of these matters,
indicating farther to you that all the regulations have been made with righteousness in mind,
j2. The underlying thought here is that the cloven, m2. I.e. the OT. separate hoof is symbolic of the Jews and of their being n2. The text is corrupt, but the meaning is clear. separate and distinct from other people. o2. Namely "of the Law." This is perhaps the earliest
k2. The text is corrupt: Thackeray's suggestion ho use of "Words" in this manner. Cf.•In cases where it is not meet even to touch any of the aforesaid creatures
because of their natural habits with other creatures, surely all possible precautions must be
150 taken to prevent (human) morals degenerating to their level? •Everything pertaining to
conduct permitted us toward these creatures and toward beasts has been set out symbolically. Thus the cloven hoof, that is the separation of the claws of the hoof, is a sign of setting
151 apart each of our actions for good, • because the strength of the whole body with its action
g2. Thackeray's emendation Theos eii, "a god may h2. Or "unbreakable."
be"; the Gk. MSS have theii. i2. Lit. "purities" or "purifications.'

The text is corrupt: Thackeray's suggestion ho use of "Words" in this manner. Cf. Pelletier, Lettre
semeioutai, "he signifies by symbols," is adopted here. d'Aristie, ad loc. 12. Thackeray adopts Schmidt's emendation proa- p2. Perhaps a reference of "phylacteries."
gousi, "they procure."and that no ordinances have been made in scripture without purpose or fancifully, but to
the intent that through the whole of our lives we may also practice justice to all mankind
169 in our acts, remembering the all-sovereign God. -In the matter of meats, the unclean reptiles,
the beasts, the whole underlying rationale is directed toward righteousness and righteous
no human relationships.'* »In my view, he habitually made out a good case for each separate
category. For example, in the case of victims offered, calves, rams, and goats, he stated
that it was our duty to take them from our herds and flocks, thus sacrificing domestic
animals, but not a wild one, to prevent those who offer sacrifices being conscious in
themselves of any excess, seeing that they follow the symbol of their legislator. Thus the
ni man who offers the sacrifice makes an offering of every facet of his being.q2 •Indeed, I
consider that, on these matters, details of our way of life are worth narrating. Wherefore,
in view of your love of learning, I have been induced, Philocrates, to expound to you the
solemnity and characteristic outlook of the Law. 172 Eleazar offered sacrifice, selected the men, and made ready an abundance of gifts for the
173 king. He then sent us forth on our journey with a large escort. 'When we reached Alexandria,
news of our arrival was given to the king. Andreas and I were introducedr2 to the court,
174 we paid our warm respects to the king, and presented the letters from Eleazar. •The king
was anxious to meet the members of the deputation, so he gave orders to dismiss all the
i7s other court officials, and to summon these delegates. •The unprecedented nature of this step
was very clear to all, because it was an established procedure that important bona fide
visitors should be granted an audience with the king only four days after arrival,552 while
representatives of kings or important cities are rarely admitted to the court within thirty
days.•The king
was anxious to meet the members of the deputation, so he gave orders to dismiss all the
i7s other court officials, and to summon these delegates. •The unprecedented nature of this step
was very clear to all, because it was an established procedure that important bona fide
visitors should be granted an audience with the king only four days after arrival,552 while
representatives of kings or important cities are rarely admitted to the court within thirty
days. However, he deemed the present arrivals to be deserving of greater honor, having
regard to the preeminence of him who had sent them. So he dismissed all the officials
whom he considered superfluous and remained walking among the delegates until he had
176 greeted the whole delegation. »So they arrived with the gifts which had been sent at then-
hands and with the fine skins on which the Law had been written in letters of gold in Jewish
characters; the parchment had been excellently worked, and the joining together of the
letters was imperceptible. When the king saw the delegates, he proceeded to ask questions
177 about the books, *and when they had shown what had been covered and unrolled the
parchments, he paused for a long time, did obeisance about seven times, and said, "I offer
to you my thanks, gentlemen, and to him who sent you even more, and most of all to the
178 God whose oracles these are." »They all, visitors and the court present alike, said together
and with one voice, "It is well, O King." At this the king was moved to tears, so deeply
was he filled with joy. Intensity of feeling coupled with the greatness of the honor received
179 do force men to tears in the moment of success. #The king commanded the parcels to be
returned in order, and then immediately greeted the delegates with these words: "It is (meet
and) right, O men of God, first to render homage to the documents for the sake of which I
have sent for you, and after that to extend to you the right hand of greeting.The text is corrupt: Thackeray's suggestion ho use of "Words" in this manner. Cf. Pelletier, Lettre
semeioutai, "he signifies by symbols," is adopted here. d'Aristie, ad loc. 12. Thackeray adopts Schmidt's emendation proa- p2. Perhaps a reference of "phylacteries."
gousi, "they procure."

Intensity of feeling coupled with the greatness of the honor received
179 do force men to tears in the moment of success. #The king commanded the parcels to be
returned in order, and then immediately greeted the delegates with these words: "It is (meet
and) right, O men of God, first to render homage to the documents for the sake of which I
have sent for you, and after that to extend to you the right hand of greeting. This explains
180 my first action. #I regard this day of your arrival as of great importance, and it shall be
specially marked year by year throughout the time of our life, for by a happy chance it
coincides with our victory at sea against Antigonus.12 It will therefore be my wish to dine
181 with you this day. •Everything of which you partake," he said, "will be served in compliance
with your habits; it will be served to me as well as to you." They expressed their pleasure
and the king ordered the finest apartments to be given them near the citadel, and the
preparations for the banquet to be made. 182 The chief steward"2 Nicanor summoned Dorotheus, who was appointed in charge of these
matters/2 and bade him complete preparations for each guest. "These," he said, "are the
king's orders; some of them you still see now." The number of prominent delegates
q2. Lit. "soul." made, one c. 260 B.C. and one c. 245 B.C. However,
r2. Thackeray accepts Schmidt's conjecture pareimen- according to LetAris, vs. 41, Eleazar wrote to Queen
oi, "being introduced," for the corrupt pareimen, "we Arsinoe, who died in 269 B.C. may be present," or parimen, "we were present," of u2. A conjecture of Letronne adopted by Thackeray
the Gk. MSS. and Pelletier. s2. Lit. "on the fifth day." v2. Or "these men," but less probable in view of vs. t2. There are two battles to which reference may be 183 below.corresponds to the number of cities, all having the same customs in matters of drink and
food and bedding. All preparations were made in accordance with these customs, so that
when they came in the presence of the kings they would have a happy visit, with no cause
183 for complaint. •This was their experience. Dorotheus, who had the charge of such matters,
was a most punctilious man. He arranged all the furniture of which he had charge, all
reserved for this type of reception. He set out the couches in two lines, in accordance with
the royal command, because the king had ordered that half should sit at his right hand, and
the rest behind his royal couch, leaving no stone unturned in his desire to do these delegates
184 honor. »When they had taken their places, he ordered Dorotheus to carry everything out in
accordance with the customs practiced by all his visitors from Judea. So Dorotheus passed
over the sacred heralds, the sacrificial ministers and the rest, whose habitual role was to
offer the prayers. Instead, he invited Eleazar, "the oldest of the priests, our guests," to
185 offer a prayer. He stood and spoke these memorable words: »"May the almighty God fill
you, O King, with all the blessings which he has created—and may he grant you, your
wife, and children, and those of the same mind to enjoy all blessings without end all the
186 days of your life." #At these words from this man thunderous applause broke out with cries
and rapturous joy, lasting a long time. Then they straightway turned to the enjoyment
provided by the foods which had been made ready, all the service being carried out through
the organization of Dorotheus, including the royal pages and the king's honored guests.He stood and spoke these memorable words: »"May the almighty God fill
you, O King, with all the blessings which he has created—and may he grant you, your
wife, and children, and those of the same mind to enjoy all blessings without end all the
186 days of your life." #At these words from this man thunderous applause broke out with cries
and rapturous joy, lasting a long time. Then they straightway turned to the enjoyment
provided by the foods which had been made ready, all the service being carried out through
the organization of Dorotheus, including the royal pages and the king's honored guests. 187 When after an interval he found an opportunity, (the king) asked the occupant of the first
couch (they were seated according to age), "How can one keep his kingdom without offense
188 to the end?" • After a short pause he replied, "You would administer it best by imitating
the eternal goodness of God. By using longsuffering and treatment2 of those who meritx2
(punishment) more leniently than they deserve, you will convert them from evil and bring
189 them to repentance." •The king commended the answer and asked the next guest, "How
should one act in each case?" The reply was, "If he practiced just dealing toward all, he
will perform each task well for himself, believing that every thought is manifest to God. 190Take the fear of God as your guiding principle, and you will not fail in anything." •He
received him warmly and asked another guest, "How can one make his friends like
himself?" He replied, "If your friends saw that you showed intense concern for the people
whom you rule.By using longsuffering and treatment2 of those who meritx2
(punishment) more leniently than they deserve, you will convert them from evil and bring
189 them to repentance." •The king commended the answer and asked the next guest, "How
should one act in each case?" The reply was, "If he practiced just dealing toward all, he
will perform each task well for himself, believing that every thought is manifest to God. 190Take the fear of God as your guiding principle, and you will not fail in anything." •He
received him warmly and asked another guest, "How can one make his friends like
himself?" He replied, "If your friends saw that you showed intense concern for the people
whom you rule. This you will do by observing how God blesses the human race, giving
191 them health and food and all other gifts in their season." »He commended him, and asked
the next guest, "How in his dealings and judgments can one gain the approbation even of
those who lose their cases?" The reply was, "If you are fair to all in what you say, and if
192 you take no action arrogantly or in your own strength against wrongdoers. #This you will
achieve if you have regard to the method of God.This you will do by observing how God blesses the human race, giving
191 them health and food and all other gifts in their season." »He commended him, and asked
the next guest, "How in his dealings and judgments can one gain the approbation even of
those who lose their cases?" The reply was, "If you are fair to all in what you say, and if
192 you take no action arrogantly or in your own strength against wrongdoers. #This you will
achieve if you have regard to the method of God. For the prayers of the deserving are
fulfilled, but to those who fail, either through visions or acts, that which is harmful to them
is demonstrated, for God does not smite them in proportion to their offenses nor by the
193 greatness of his strength, but exercises clemency." •(The king) highly approved this guest
also, and asked the next guest, "How then can one be undefeated in the necessities of
war?" To which he replied, "If he did not place his confidence in his numbers and his
forces, but continually invoked God to direct his enterprises aright as he dealt justly in
194 everything." *He commended this guest also, and asked the next one, "How can one be
respected by his enemies?" The reply was, "If in spite of deploying his great array of arms
and forces, he knew that these things are useless in bringing anything to a lasting conclusion. For God by granting a truce and thus demonstrating the fear of his power implants it in
195 every breast." 'He commended this guest also, and said to the next, "What would be for
you (lit.Intensity of feeling coupled with the greatness of the honor received
179 do force men to tears in the moment of success. #The king commanded the parcels to be
returned in order, and then immediately greeted the delegates with these words: "It is (meet
and) right, O men of God, first to render homage to the documents for the sake of which I
have sent for you, and after that to extend to you the right hand of greeting. This explains
180 my first action. #I regard this day of your arrival as of great importance, and it shall be
specially marked year by year throughout the time of our life, for by a happy chance it
coincides with our victory at sea against Antigonus.12 It will therefore be my wish to dine
181 with you this day. •Everything of which you partake," he said, "will be served in compliance
with your habits; it will be served to me as well as to you." They expressed their pleasure
and the king ordered the finest apartments to be given them near the citadel, and the
preparations for the banquet to be made. 182 The chief steward"2 Nicanor summoned Dorotheus, who was appointed in charge of these
matters/2 and bade him complete preparations for each guest. "These," he said, "are the
king's orders; some of them you still see now." The number of prominent delegates
q2. Lit. "soul." made, one c. 260 B.C. and one c. 245 B.C. However,
r2. Thackeray accepts Schmidt's conjecture pareimen- according to LetAris, vs. 41, Eleazar wrote to Queen
oi, "being introduced," for the corrupt pareimen, "we Arsinoe, who died in 269 B.C. may be present," or parimen, "we were present," of u2. A conjecture of Letronne adopted by Thackeray
the Gk. MSS. and Pelletier. s2. Lit. "on the fifth day." v2. Or "these men," but less probable in view of vs. t2. There are two battles to which reference may be 183 below.

For the prayers of the deserving are
fulfilled, but to those who fail, either through visions or acts, that which is harmful to them
is demonstrated, for God does not smite them in proportion to their offenses nor by the
193 greatness of his strength, but exercises clemency." •(The king) highly approved this guest
also, and asked the next guest, "How then can one be undefeated in the necessities of
war?" To which he replied, "If he did not place his confidence in his numbers and his
forces, but continually invoked God to direct his enterprises aright as he dealt justly in
194 everything." *He commended this guest also, and asked the next one, "How can one be
respected by his enemies?" The reply was, "If in spite of deploying his great array of arms
and forces, he knew that these things are useless in bringing anything to a lasting conclusion. For God by granting a truce and thus demonstrating the fear of his power implants it in
195 every breast." 'He commended this guest also, and said to the next, "What would be for
you (lit. him) the supreme blessing for living?" The reply was, "To know that God is Lord
over all, and that we do not ourselves direct our plans in the finest of actions, but God
brings to completion the affairs of all men and guides (them) with (his) sovereign power."
196 He acknowledged to this guest also that he spoke well, and asked the next guest, "Supposing
one observed all (these principles) in their entirety, how can one transmit the same attitude
to his descendants in the end?" His reply was, "By continual prayer to God that he may
w2. A rare word, blimadzon, "inflicting punishment." x2. Lit. "worthy," i.e. of punishment. TheGk. MSS
Zuntz, followed by Pelletier. conjectured koladzon, "pun- are virtually unanimous here. Zuntz conjectures aitious,
ishing," but the Gk. MSS are unanimous. "guilty," which clarifies the text but is hardly necessary.receive good designs for what is to be done, and by exhorting his descendants not to be
dazzled by fame or riches—the bestower of these things is God himself, and men do not
197 have excess of anything through their own merits." •(The king) commended these sentiments
and inquired of the next guest, 4 4How can one endure with equanimity what happens?" His
reply was, "Only if you adopted as a basic principle that all men have been created by
God to share the greatest ills as well as the greatest blessings, and that it is impossible,
being a man, to be without some of both. But God, to whom we must pray, gives good
198 courage." «He was pleased with this guest too, and said that everyone gave good answers. 44I will question yet one more," (he said), "after which I will cease for the time being, so
that we can turn our attention to enjoying (the banquet) and pass the time pleasantly. In the
199 next six days following I will learn a little more from the others in turn." •Then he asked
the (next) man, 4 4What is the boundary of courage?" The reply was, "If the intent were
rightly accomplished as planned in acts involving risks. If your intentions are honorable, O
200 King, everything is brought to pass advantageously for you by God." #A11 the assembled
company acclaimed and applauded loudly, and the king said to the philosophers, of whom
there were many among them, "I think that these men excel in virtue and have a fuller
understanding, because when asked questions of this sort unexpectedly they give appropriate
201 answers, all making God the basis of their argument." •The philosopher Menedemus of
Eritrea said,44 Yes, indeed, O King, for since the whole universe is governed by providence,
and on the correct assumption that man is a creature of God, it follows that all power and
202 beauty of argument has its origin in God." •The king agreed, and this questioning ceased.In the
199 next six days following I will learn a little more from the others in turn." •Then he asked
the (next) man, 4 4What is the boundary of courage?" The reply was, "If the intent were
rightly accomplished as planned in acts involving risks. If your intentions are honorable, O
200 King, everything is brought to pass advantageously for you by God." #A11 the assembled
company acclaimed and applauded loudly, and the king said to the philosophers, of whom
there were many among them, "I think that these men excel in virtue and have a fuller
understanding, because when asked questions of this sort unexpectedly they give appropriate
201 answers, all making God the basis of their argument." •The philosopher Menedemus of
Eritrea said,44 Yes, indeed, O King, for since the whole universe is governed by providence,
and on the correct assumption that man is a creature of God, it follows that all power and
202 beauty of argument has its origin in God." •The king agreed, and this questioning ceased. They then turned to the enjoyment of the feast, and the banquet came to an end when the
evening had come. 203 On the day afterward the seating and banqueting arrangements were again carried out in
the same order. When the king considered it opportune to put some questions to the men,
204 he proceeded to ask the neighbors of those who had answered on the previous day. *He
began a dialogue with the eleventh. (On the previous day ten had been questioned.) When
205 silence reigned he inquired, 44 How can (one) remain rich?" • After a short pause the guest
who received the question said, "If he did nothing outrageous or unworthy of his sovereignty,
and did not by his spending contribute to vain and pointless objectives, while at the same
time by well-doing attracting the goodwill of his subjects toward him.*He
began a dialogue with the eleventh. (On the previous day ten had been questioned.) When
205 silence reigned he inquired, 44 How can (one) remain rich?" • After a short pause the guest
who received the question said, "If he did nothing outrageous or unworthy of his sovereignty,
and did not by his spending contribute to vain and pointless objectives, while at the same
time by well-doing attracting the goodwill of his subjects toward him. For the source of
206 blessings to everyone is God himself, who must be followed." •The king commended this
man and asked the next guest, "How can one maintain the truth?" The answer to this was,
"By realizing that the lie brings terrible disgrace upon every man, and much more so upon
kings. For if they have the power to do what they wish, what reason would they have for
telling lies? It is your duty, O King, to accept this further principle that God loves the
207 truth." *He warmly approved this man also, and looking closely at the next guest said,
44What does wisdom teach?" This next guest replied, 4'Insofar as you do not wish evils to
come upon you, but to partake of every blessing, (it would be wisdom) if you put this into
practice with your subjects, including the wrongdoers, and if you admonished the good and
208 upright also mercifully. For God guides all men in mercy." *The king commended him
(for his answer) and said to the guest after him, 'How might one be a friend of man?" He
replied, 44 By observing that the human race increases and is created over many years and
in painful suffering, so that it is your duty neither to inflict punishments easily nor to submit
men to torments, knowing that the life of mankind is constituted in pain and punishment.For the prayers of the deserving are
fulfilled, but to those who fail, either through visions or acts, that which is harmful to them
is demonstrated, for God does not smite them in proportion to their offenses nor by the
193 greatness of his strength, but exercises clemency." •(The king) highly approved this guest
also, and asked the next guest, "How then can one be undefeated in the necessities of
war?" To which he replied, "If he did not place his confidence in his numbers and his
forces, but continually invoked God to direct his enterprises aright as he dealt justly in
194 everything." *He commended this guest also, and asked the next one, "How can one be
respected by his enemies?" The reply was, "If in spite of deploying his great array of arms
and forces, he knew that these things are useless in bringing anything to a lasting conclusion. For God by granting a truce and thus demonstrating the fear of his power implants it in
195 every breast." 'He commended this guest also, and said to the next, "What would be for
you (lit. him) the supreme blessing for living?" The reply was, "To know that God is Lord
over all, and that we do not ourselves direct our plans in the finest of actions, but God
brings to completion the affairs of all men and guides (them) with (his) sovereign power."
196 He acknowledged to this guest also that he spoke well, and asked the next guest, "Supposing
one observed all (these principles) in their entirety, how can one transmit the same attitude
to his descendants in the end?" His reply was, "By continual prayer to God that he may
w2. A rare word, blimadzon, "inflicting punishment." x2. Lit. "worthy," i.e. of punishment. TheGk. MSS
Zuntz, followed by Pelletier. conjectured koladzon, "pun- are virtually unanimous here. Zuntz conjectures aitious,
ishing," but the Gk. MSS are unanimous. "guilty," which clarifies the text but is hardly necessary.

It is your duty, O King, to accept this further principle that God loves the
207 truth." *He warmly approved this man also, and looking closely at the next guest said,
44What does wisdom teach?" This next guest replied, 4'Insofar as you do not wish evils to
come upon you, but to partake of every blessing, (it would be wisdom) if you put this into
practice with your subjects, including the wrongdoers, and if you admonished the good and
208 upright also mercifully. For God guides all men in mercy." *The king commended him
(for his answer) and said to the guest after him, 'How might one be a friend of man?" He
replied, 44 By observing that the human race increases and is created over many years and
in painful suffering, so that it is your duty neither to inflict punishments easily nor to submit
men to torments, knowing that the life of mankind is constituted in pain and punishment. If you bear in mind each set of facts, you will be inclined to mercy, even as God is
209 merciful." •(The king) welcomed this man's answer and inquired of the next guest, "What
is the most needful characteristic of kingship?" The reply was, "That (the king) should
keep himself incorruptible, practice moderation throughout all his life, respect justice beyond
210 all else, and cultivate such men as friends, because God himself loves justice." *He
commended this guest also, and said to his neighbor, 44 What is the essence of godliness?"
He replied, "The realization that God is continually at work in everything and is omniscient,
and that man cannot hide from him an unjust deed or an evil action. For, as God does good
211 to the whole world, so you by imitating him would be without offense." •(The king) agreed
with him and said to the next guest, 4 4What is the definition of kingship?" The reply was,
"Real self-mastery, not being carried away by wealth and glamour, nor having, as a result,
overweening or unworthy ambitions—(that would be kingship) if you reasoned well. Youhave everything you needy2 at hand. God likewise does not want anything and yet is
merciful. You too must think in human terms, do not desire overmuch, but only what is
212 sufficient for reigning." *He complimented him, and asked the next guest, "How would
one think the finest thoughts?" He replied, "By setting justice before him continually in
everything, and thinking that injustice is negation of life. For God always provides for the
213 just the greatest blessings." »He commended this guest and said to the next, "How can
one sleep undisturbed?" He replied, "You have asked a question on a matter which is
difficult to answer, because self-consciousness is impossible in this realm of sleep, and we
214 are confined in this sphere to a sensation which goes beyond the rational. *Deep down in
us, our experience of the things that happen (in sleep) is just as if they were actually seen;
nevertheless we are irrational insofar as we imagine that we are on the sea and in boats, or
that we are carried aloft on wings and fly to other places, and other suchlike things, and
215 we think this is really happening.22 •! have stated this as clearly as I can. In every respect,
O King, I beg you to lift up your words and actions to reverence for God, so that your
conscience may be quite clear that you are following the path of virtue. Do not deliberately
216 show favors unreasonably, nor destroy justice in your exercise of power. #For the most
part, indeed, the matters which occupy each man in his waking hours are those on which
the mind dwells in sleep as well, and God*3 directs a man's every thought and action,
awake or asleep, when aimed at the highest (goals).Do not deliberately
216 show favors unreasonably, nor destroy justice in your exercise of power. #For the most
part, indeed, the matters which occupy each man in his waking hours are those on which
the mind dwells in sleep as well, and God*3 directs a man's every thought and action,
awake or asleep, when aimed at the highest (goals). Hence the stability which continually
217 surrounds you." •(The king) complimented this guest also, and said to the next one, "Since
you are the tenth one to answer we will turn our attention to dinner (after this question)."
218 So he asked him, "How can we avoid doing anything unworthy of ourselves?" »The reply
was, "Always have an eye to your glory and prominence, so that you may say and think
what is consistent with it, knowing that all your subjects have you in mind and speak of
219 you. #You must really be not the least among the actors! They observe the character which
they have to portray and do all their actions consistently with it. Yours however is no acting
role, you are really a king, God having granted you authority as your manner deserves."
220 The king responded with prolonged hearty and genial applause, after which they invited the
guests to sleep. When he had finished entertaining them, they turned (their) attention to the
next day's arrangements for the banquet. 221 On the next day, the same arrangement was made, and when the king deemed it an
appropriate time to ask the guests questions, he asked the first of those left over for
222 subsequent questioning, "What is the highest form of sovereignty?" »He replied, "Control
of oneself, and not being carried away by one's impulses." He said that it was quite natural
223 for all men to incline their thoughts in one direction (or another). •"The majority are likely
to incline toward things to eat and drink and pleasure, but kings toward territorial conquest,
depending on the greatness of their standing. And yet, in everyone moderation is a good
224 thing.It is your duty, O King, to accept this further principle that God loves the
207 truth." *He warmly approved this man also, and looking closely at the next guest said,
44What does wisdom teach?" This next guest replied, 4'Insofar as you do not wish evils to
come upon you, but to partake of every blessing, (it would be wisdom) if you put this into
practice with your subjects, including the wrongdoers, and if you admonished the good and
208 upright also mercifully. For God guides all men in mercy." *The king commended him
(for his answer) and said to the guest after him, 'How might one be a friend of man?" He
replied, 44 By observing that the human race increases and is created over many years and
in painful suffering, so that it is your duty neither to inflict punishments easily nor to submit
men to torments, knowing that the life of mankind is constituted in pain and punishment. If you bear in mind each set of facts, you will be inclined to mercy, even as God is
209 merciful." •(The king) welcomed this man's answer and inquired of the next guest, "What
is the most needful characteristic of kingship?" The reply was, "That (the king) should
keep himself incorruptible, practice moderation throughout all his life, respect justice beyond
210 all else, and cultivate such men as friends, because God himself loves justice." *He
commended this guest also, and said to his neighbor, 44 What is the essence of godliness?"
He replied, "The realization that God is continually at work in everything and is omniscient,
and that man cannot hide from him an unjust deed or an evil action. For, as God does good
211 to the whole world, so you by imitating him would be without offense." •(The king) agreed
with him and said to the next guest, 4 4What is the definition of kingship?" The reply was,
"Real self-mastery, not being carried away by wealth and glamour, nor having, as a result,
overweening or unworthy ambitions—(that would be kingship) if you reasoned well. You

•"The majority are likely
to incline toward things to eat and drink and pleasure, but kings toward territorial conquest,
depending on the greatness of their standing. And yet, in everyone moderation is a good
224 thing. What therefore God gives you, take and keep; do not covet the unattainable." •(The
king) was pleased with this reply and said to the next guest, "How could one be free from
envy?" After a pause he replied, "First of all, by realizing that God assigns glory and
greatness of wealth to kings, each and every one, and that no king is independent. All of
225 them wish to share this glory, but they cannot—it is a gift of God." •(The king) gave a
long commendation to this guest, and asked the next, "How can one despise his enemies?"
He replied, "By practicing goodwill to all men and by forming friendships, you would owe
no obligation to anyone. To practice goodwill to all men, and to receive a handsome gift
226 from God—this is the highest good." #He approved these words, and bade the next guest
answer, asking him, "How can one maintain the honor he received?" The reply was, "If
by earnestness and favors he showed munificence and liberality toward others, he would
never lack honor. Pray God continually that these qualities which I have mentioned may
227 abide with you." *He complimented him, and asked the next guest, "To whom must a
man be generous?" "It is a man's duty," he replied, "(to be generous) toward those who
are amicably disposed to us. That is the general opinion. My belief is that we must (also)
show liberal charity to our opponents so that in this manner we may convert them to what
y2. I adopt Wendland's conjecture hosa deon, "as a3. Thackeray's conjecture theos, "God," is here
much as is needed.". translated; so also "awake," i.e. egregorotos, for the
z2. The text is here manifestly corrupt. Thackeray's adverbial form, egregoros, in the Gk. MSS. conjecture is translated to provide the sense of the passage.is proper and fitting to them. You must pray God that these things be brought to pass, for
228 he rules the minds of all." •(The king) consented to these words, and asked the sixth guest
to answer. His question was, "To whom must one show favor?" The answer was, "To his
parents, always, for God's very great commandment concerns the honor due to parents. Next (and closely connected) he reckons the honor due to friends, calling the friend an
equal of one's own self. You do well if you bring all men into friendship with yourself."
229 (The king) commended this guest too, and inquired of the next one, "What deserves to be
regarded as beauty?" He replied, "Piety, for this is a preeminent form of beauty. Its
dynamic is love, a divine gift which you too have acquired, including in it all blessings."
230 (The king) applauded him very warmly and said to his neighbor, "How can one after a false
step recover once more the same glory?" The reply was, "For you, a fall is impossible,
because you have bestowed on everyone favors which produce goodwill, and this, because
231 it is stronger than the greatest of weapons, produces the greatest security. •If, however,
some do slip, they must avoid in future the course of action which caused their fall, win
friends, and act justly. It is a gift of God to be a doer of good works and not of the
232 opposite." »He was pleased with these words, and said to the next guest, "How can (one)
be free from sorrow?" The reply was, "By pursuing righteousness, doing no harm to
anyone, and helping everyone. The fruits of righteousness make for freedom from sorrow. 233 You must," he said, "pray God that harm may not come to you from occurrences
inconsistent with our conduct—I mean, death, disease, pain, and suchlike. As for you, God
234 fearing as you are, none of these evils would befall you." •(The king) praised him generously
and asked the tenth guest, "What is the highest form of glory?" The reply was, "Honoring
God.233 You must," he said, "pray God that harm may not come to you from occurrences
inconsistent with our conduct—I mean, death, disease, pain, and suchlike. As for you, God
234 fearing as you are, none of these evils would befall you." •(The king) praised him generously
and asked the tenth guest, "What is the highest form of glory?" The reply was, "Honoring
God. This is not done with gifts or sacrifices, but with purity of heart and of devout
disposition, as everything is ordained by God and ordered according to his will. This is
also your attitude, evidence of which can be seen by all from your past and present
235 accomplishments." 'With a loud voice the king complimented and encouraged them all;
the audience raised their voices in approval, and especially the philosophers, for these men
far surpassed them in attitudes and eloquence, their starting point being God himself. After
this the king led the way in showing goodwill to them in the toasts.This is
also your attitude, evidence of which can be seen by all from your past and present
235 accomplishments." 'With a loud voice the king complimented and encouraged them all;
the audience raised their voices in approval, and especially the philosophers, for these men
far surpassed them in attitudes and eloquence, their starting point being God himself. After
this the king led the way in showing goodwill to them in the toasts. 236 On the following day the arrangements for the banquet were the same as before, and
when it seemed suitable to the king he began to question the guests next to those who had
already replied, and said to the first, "Can (practical) wisdom be taught?" The reply was,
"It is a disposition of the soul, mediated by the power of God, to accept everything of
237 beauty, and to reject its opposite." »He concurred, and proceeded to ask the next guest,
"What makes the greatest contribution to health?" He replied, "Self-control, which it is
238 impossible to achieve unless God disposes the heart and mindb3 toward it." •(The king)
congratulated this guest, and said to the next, "How can one show toward his parents the
gratitude which they deserve?" The reply was, "By causing them no pain—which is
239 impossible unless God guides the mindc3 toward the noblest ends." *He nodded approval
of this man, and asked the next guest, "How can one be an attentive listener?" He replied,
"By perceiving that all knowledge is of value, so that in the face of events a man can select
one of the lessons he has heard, counteract the immediate situation and so remedy it43 with
the guidance of God—this means that the fulfillment of our deeds comes through him."
240 (The king) commended this man, and said to the next, "How can one avoid doing anything
contrary to the Law?" To this he replied, "By realizing that God has given to legislators
241 the purpose of saving men's lives, you would follow them." "(The king) approved this
guest, and said to the next, "What is the value of the family?" He replied, "If we think
that we are afflicted by adverse circumstances, and suffer as they do, the great strength of
242 the family bond is manifest, *and when that trouble is over, glory and success will be ours
in the eyes of such folk, for cooperation when given with goodwill is of itself indestructible
in the face of everything; with prosperity, there is no further need of their help, except that
243 you must pray God to bestow every blessing." •(The king) gave him the same welcome as
the others, and then asked another guest, "How does fearlessness come about?" He replied,
"When the mind is conscious that it has done no evil, for God directs men toward good
b3.After
this the king led the way in showing goodwill to them in the toasts. 236 On the following day the arrangements for the banquet were the same as before, and
when it seemed suitable to the king he began to question the guests next to those who had
already replied, and said to the first, "Can (practical) wisdom be taught?" The reply was,
"It is a disposition of the soul, mediated by the power of God, to accept everything of
237 beauty, and to reject its opposite." »He concurred, and proceeded to ask the next guest,
"What makes the greatest contribution to health?" He replied, "Self-control, which it is
238 impossible to achieve unless God disposes the heart and mindb3 toward it." •(The king)
congratulated this guest, and said to the next, "How can one show toward his parents the
gratitude which they deserve?" The reply was, "By causing them no pain—which is
239 impossible unless God guides the mindc3 toward the noblest ends." *He nodded approval
of this man, and asked the next guest, "How can one be an attentive listener?" He replied,
"By perceiving that all knowledge is of value, so that in the face of events a man can select
one of the lessons he has heard, counteract the immediate situation and so remedy it43 with
the guidance of God—this means that the fulfillment of our deeds comes through him."
240 (The king) commended this man, and said to the next, "How can one avoid doing anything
contrary to the Law?" To this he replied, "By realizing that God has given to legislators
241 the purpose of saving men's lives, you would follow them." "(The king) approved this
guest, and said to the next, "What is the value of the family?" He replied, "If we think
that we are afflicted by adverse circumstances, and suffer as they do, the great strength of
242 the family bond is manifest, *and when that trouble is over, glory and success will be ours
in the eyes of such folk, for cooperation when given with goodwill is of itself indestructible
in the face of everything; with prosperity, there is no further need of their help, except that
243 you must pray God to bestow every blessing." •(The king) gave him the same welcome as
the others, and then asked another guest, "How does fearlessness come about?" He replied,
"When the mind is conscious that it has done no evil, for God directs men toward good
b3. "Heart and mind" is an attempt to bring out the c3.236 On the following day the arrangements for the banquet were the same as before, and
when it seemed suitable to the king he began to question the guests next to those who had
already replied, and said to the first, "Can (practical) wisdom be taught?" The reply was,
"It is a disposition of the soul, mediated by the power of God, to accept everything of
237 beauty, and to reject its opposite." »He concurred, and proceeded to ask the next guest,
"What makes the greatest contribution to health?" He replied, "Self-control, which it is
238 impossible to achieve unless God disposes the heart and mindb3 toward it." •(The king)
congratulated this guest, and said to the next, "How can one show toward his parents the
gratitude which they deserve?" The reply was, "By causing them no pain—which is
239 impossible unless God guides the mindc3 toward the noblest ends." *He nodded approval
of this man, and asked the next guest, "How can one be an attentive listener?" He replied,
"By perceiving that all knowledge is of value, so that in the face of events a man can select
one of the lessons he has heard, counteract the immediate situation and so remedy it43 with
the guidance of God—this means that the fulfillment of our deeds comes through him."
240 (The king) commended this man, and said to the next, "How can one avoid doing anything
contrary to the Law?" To this he replied, "By realizing that God has given to legislators
241 the purpose of saving men's lives, you would follow them." "(The king) approved this
guest, and said to the next, "What is the value of the family?" He replied, "If we think
that we are afflicted by adverse circumstances, and suffer as they do, the great strength of
242 the family bond is manifest, *and when that trouble is over, glory and success will be ours
in the eyes of such folk, for cooperation when given with goodwill is of itself indestructible
in the face of everything; with prosperity, there is no further need of their help, except that
243 you must pray God to bestow every blessing." •(The king) gave him the same welcome as
the others, and then asked another guest, "How does fearlessness come about?" He replied,
"When the mind is conscious that it has done no evil, for God directs men toward good
b3. "Heart and mind" is an attempt to bring out the c3. See previous n.•"The majority are likely
to incline toward things to eat and drink and pleasure, but kings toward territorial conquest,
depending on the greatness of their standing. And yet, in everyone moderation is a good
224 thing. What therefore God gives you, take and keep; do not covet the unattainable." •(The
king) was pleased with this reply and said to the next guest, "How could one be free from
envy?" After a pause he replied, "First of all, by realizing that God assigns glory and
greatness of wealth to kings, each and every one, and that no king is independent. All of
225 them wish to share this glory, but they cannot—it is a gift of God." •(The king) gave a
long commendation to this guest, and asked the next, "How can one despise his enemies?"
He replied, "By practicing goodwill to all men and by forming friendships, you would owe
no obligation to anyone. To practice goodwill to all men, and to receive a handsome gift
226 from God—this is the highest good." #He approved these words, and bade the next guest
answer, asking him, "How can one maintain the honor he received?" The reply was, "If
by earnestness and favors he showed munificence and liberality toward others, he would
never lack honor. Pray God continually that these qualities which I have mentioned may
227 abide with you." *He complimented him, and asked the next guest, "To whom must a
man be generous?" "It is a man's duty," he replied, "(to be generous) toward those who
are amicably disposed to us. That is the general opinion. My belief is that we must (also)
show liberal charity to our opponents so that in this manner we may convert them to what
y2. I adopt Wendland's conjecture hosa deon, "as a3. Thackeray's conjecture theos, "God," is here
much as is needed.". translated; so also "awake," i.e. egregorotos, for the
z2. The text is here manifestly corrupt. Thackeray's adverbial form, egregoros, in the Gk. MSS. conjecture is translated to provide the sense of the passage.

"Heart and mind" is an attempt to bring out the c3. See previous n. meaning of one Gk. word, dianoian. d3. The text is uncertain but the meaning is clear.244 deliberations on everything." •(The king) approved this man and said to the next, "How
can one have the right reasoning at hand?" He replied, "By always having an eye to the
misfortunes of mankind, knowing that God takes away prosperity (from some) while
245 magnifying others and promoting them to receive honor." •(The king) warmly approved
this man also, and asked the next guest to answer, "How can one avoid having recourse to
idleness and pleasures?" "By having in the forefront of his mind," he said, "that he rules
a large kingdom and leads many people, and it is his duty not to have his mind centered
on anything else but thinking of their care. He should ask God that no part of his duties be
246 lacking." •(The king) commended this man also and asked the tenth guest, "How can one
recognize those who are acting falsely toward him?" The reply to this question was, "By
observing whether their conduct was generous, and whether their orderly behavior persisted
in the greetings and consultations and the rest of the social life of his companions; and
(seeing that) they do not go beyond the proper limit in their entertainments and the other
247 features of their conduct. »God will direct your mind, O King, to the noblest ends." He
applauded them all and congratulated them by name; the company present followed suit,
and so they turned to celebrations. 248 On the following day (the king) seized the opportunity and asked the next guest, "What
is the worst (type of) neglect?" To this he replied, "If a man were neglectful of children,
and did not use every endeavor to bring them up. For we continually pray to God for
ourselves as also for our children, that all blessings may rest upon them.248 On the following day (the king) seized the opportunity and asked the next guest, "What
is the worst (type of) neglect?" To this he replied, "If a man were neglectful of children,
and did not use every endeavor to bring them up. For we continually pray to God for
ourselves as also for our children, that all blessings may rest upon them. The petition that
children may have some discretion is something which comes to pass only by the power of
249 God." '(The king) said that he spoke well, and asked another guest, "How can one be a
patriot?" He replied, "By adopting the view that it is a noble thing to live and to die in
one's own country. A foreign country produces for the poor contempt, and for the rich
disgrace, as for men exiled for crimes. By doing good to all, while you continually carry
out this policy, you will undoubtedly be a patriot, God giving you favor in the sight of
250 all." *He heard this man, and then asked the next guest in order, "How can one reach
agreement with a woman?" "By recognizing," he replied, "that the female sex is bold,
positively active for something which it desires, easily liable to change its mind because of
poor reasoning powers, and of naturally weak constitution. It is necessary to have dealings
251 with them in a sound way, avoiding provocation which may lead to a quarrel. #Life prospers
when the helmsman knows the goal to which he must make the passage. Life is completely
252 steered by invocation of God." •(The king) gave assent to this man, and asked the next
guest, "How can one be without fault?" The reply was, "By doing everything with
considered judgment, not influenced by misrepresentations, but being your own judge of
what is said, and in your judgment directing aright matters concerned with petitions made
to you, and through your judgment bringing them to pass—that is how you would be without
fault, O King.#Life prospers
when the helmsman knows the goal to which he must make the passage. Life is completely
252 steered by invocation of God." •(The king) gave assent to this man, and asked the next
guest, "How can one be without fault?" The reply was, "By doing everything with
considered judgment, not influenced by misrepresentations, but being your own judge of
what is said, and in your judgment directing aright matters concerned with petitions made
to you, and through your judgment bringing them to pass—that is how you would be without
fault, O King. To have these intentions and to conduct oneself in the light of them is a task
253 involving God's power." »He was cheered by what was said, and asked the next guest,
"How can one avoid anger?" To this the reply was, "By realizing that he has absolute
power, and that any recourse to anger brings death, which is indeed a useless and painful
254 thing to do if many are deprived of life simply because he is lord. *But if all are obedient
and there is no opposition, what will be the point of getting angry? You must know that
God governs the whole universe with kindliness and without any anger, and you, O King,"
255 he said, "must follow him." *He said that he had given a good answer, and inquired of
the next guest, "What is sound judgment?" "Doing everything well," was the reply, "with
due consultation, in your deliberation taking into account as well the harmful features of
the opposite side of the argument, in order that after paying attention to each detail our
deliberations may be good and our object achieved."Heart and mind" is an attempt to bring out the c3. See previous n. meaning of one Gk. word, dianoian. d3. The text is uncertain but the meaning is clear.

*But if all are obedient
and there is no opposition, what will be the point of getting angry? You must know that
God governs the whole universe with kindliness and without any anger, and you, O King,"
255 he said, "must follow him." *He said that he had given a good answer, and inquired of
the next guest, "What is sound judgment?" "Doing everything well," was the reply, "with
due consultation, in your deliberation taking into account as well the harmful features of
the opposite side of the argument, in order that after paying attention to each detail our
deliberations may be good and our object achieved. What is most important, by the power
256 of God your every purpose will be accomplished if you practice piety." #(The king) said
that this man also had done well, and asked another guest, "What is philosophy?" "To
have a well-reasoned assessment of each occurrence," was the reply, "and not to be carried
away by impulses but to study carefully the harmful consequences of the passions, and by
exercising proper and necessary restraint in carrying out what the occasion demands. But
257 in order to have due care for these things, it is necessary to serve God." '(The king)
applauded this man, and asked another guest, "How can one find welcome abroad among
strangers?" "By equal treatment to everyone," he replied, "and by appearing inferiorrather than superior to those among whom he is a stranger. For, in general, God by his
very nature welcomes that which is humbled, and the human race deals kindly with those
258 in subjection." •(The king) bore witness to these sentiments and asked another, "How will
the structure which one builds survive in the future as well?" To this the reply was, "If
his accomplishments by his actions are great and glorious, so that those who see them show
forbearance because of their beauty; and if he does not neglect a single one of those who
carry out such works, and does not compel the rest to complete their part of the business
259 without any payment. *By considering how God cares for the human race in providing them
with health and discernment and suchlike, he will himself do something accordingly by
paying some compensation for sufferings endured. For the deeds which are of permanent
260 value are those performed out of righteousness." •(The king) said that this man had spoken
well, and asked the tenth guest, "What is the fruit of wisdom?" His reply was, "A clear
261 conscience of no evil done, and of living one's life in truth. •From these result for you the
greatest joy and steadfast self-possession, O mighty King, and good hopes in God as you
rule your realm with due reverence." When they heard this, all voiced their approval with
loud applause. After this the king, filled with joy, proceeded to drink their health. 262 On the next day the arrangement was the same as before for the details of the banquet,
and when an opportunity presented itself the king began to question the remainder (of the
263 guests). To the first he said, "How can a man avoid giving way to arrogance?" •The reply
was, "By maintaining impartiality, and by reminding himself in the case of each individual
that he is a ruler of men and still a man himself.262 On the next day the arrangement was the same as before for the details of the banquet,
and when an opportunity presented itself the king began to question the remainder (of the
263 guests). To the first he said, "How can a man avoid giving way to arrogance?" •The reply
was, "By maintaining impartiality, and by reminding himself in the case of each individual
that he is a ruler of men and still a man himself. Moreover, God destroys the proud, and
264 exalts the gentle and humble." *(The king) commended him, and asked the next guest,
"Of whom must one avail himself as counselors?" "Those who have won experience in
many affairs of state," he said, "and still maintain untarnished their loyalty to him and to
all who share his ways. God manifests himself to such qualities in those who deserve it."
265 He congratulated him and asked another guest, "What is the possession most essential for
a king?" "The love and affection of his subjects," he replied. "By these means the bond
of goodwill is unbreakable. As for the realization of these aims, God fulfills them according
266 to his will." •(The king) commended him and inquired of another guest, "What is the
purpose of speaking?" "To persuade your opponent in debate," was his reply, "by pointing
out his errors in an orderly list. In this way you will win over your listener, not being
antagonistic but using some commendation to persuade him. And persuasion succeeds
267 through the activity of God." •(The king) said that he spoke well, and asked the next guest,
"In view of the heterogeneous multitudes in the kingdom, how can one be in harmony with
them?" "By adopting the role appropriate to each one, with justice as your guiding
268 principle—as indeed is now your practice, God granting you sound reasoning." •(The king)
was pleased with this man, and said to the next guest, "At what things ought one to feel
pain?" To which he replied, "At the misfortunes of our friends, when we see them long-
drawn-out and incurable.In this way you will win over your listener, not being
antagonistic but using some commendation to persuade him. And persuasion succeeds
267 through the activity of God." •(The king) said that he spoke well, and asked the next guest,
"In view of the heterogeneous multitudes in the kingdom, how can one be in harmony with
them?" "By adopting the role appropriate to each one, with justice as your guiding
268 principle—as indeed is now your practice, God granting you sound reasoning." •(The king)
was pleased with this man, and said to the next guest, "At what things ought one to feel
pain?" To which he replied, "At the misfortunes of our friends, when we see them long-
drawn-out and incurable. When they are dead and released from evils, reason does not
indicate for them any pain. But when human beings attribute to themselves even what is to
their advantage, everyone suffers. The escape from every evil takes place only through the
269 power of God." •(The king) declared that this man replied as he ought to have done, and
said to the next guest, "How does unpopularity arise?" He replied, "When arrogance and
boundless self-confidence are predominant, dishonor ensues and destruction of good
270 reputation. God controls all reputation, directing it where he wishes." *He confirmed this
man's answer and asked the next guest, "To whom must one entrust himself?" "To those
who are drawn to you by loyalty," he replied, "and not through fear or flattery, with
(personal) gain as their only objective. The former is a sign of affection, the latter of
disaffection and expediency. The man whose aim is mere success is a natural traitor.*But if all are obedient
and there is no opposition, what will be the point of getting angry? You must know that
God governs the whole universe with kindliness and without any anger, and you, O King,"
255 he said, "must follow him." *He said that he had given a good answer, and inquired of
the next guest, "What is sound judgment?" "Doing everything well," was the reply, "with
due consultation, in your deliberation taking into account as well the harmful features of
the opposite side of the argument, in order that after paying attention to each detail our
deliberations may be good and our object achieved. What is most important, by the power
256 of God your every purpose will be accomplished if you practice piety." #(The king) said
that this man also had done well, and asked another guest, "What is philosophy?" "To
have a well-reasoned assessment of each occurrence," was the reply, "and not to be carried
away by impulses but to study carefully the harmful consequences of the passions, and by
exercising proper and necessary restraint in carrying out what the occasion demands. But
257 in order to have due care for these things, it is necessary to serve God." '(The king)
applauded this man, and asked another guest, "How can one find welcome abroad among
strangers?" "By equal treatment to everyone," he replied, "and by appearing inferior

The former is a sign of affection, the latter of
disaffection and expediency. The man whose aim is mere success is a natural traitor. As
271 for you, you have the goodwill of all, as God bestows upon you sound counsels." #He
declared that this man's answer was wise, and said to another guest, "What preserves a
kingdom?" To this the reply was, "Concern and care that no harm shall come upon the
multitudes through the officials appointed to serve their needs—which indeed is your policy,
272 God bestowing upon you such noble intent." •(The king) gave this man a word of
encouragement, and asked another guest, "What maintains favor and respect?" He said,
"Virtue, for it accomplishes good works and renounces evil; just as you keep your noble
273 integrity toward all, having this gift from God." •(The king) gave this man a favorablereception, and asked the eleventh guest (there being two over the seventy), "How can one
be peacefully disposed at heart even in war?" The answer was, "By the knowledge that
no evil has been committed upon any of your subjects, and that all are fighting for blessings
received, knowing that even if they give their lives, you will take care of their property. 274 You do not cease helping everyone, for God has given you the gift of kindliness." (The
king) applauded them all heartily and greeted them with acclamation, drank the health of
each one, and turned his attention to enjoying (the feast), mingling among the guests with
geniality and great delight. 275 On the seventh day, after much preparation, and amid the additional company of many
others from the cities—for there was a large number of delegates—the king, at a suitable
opportunity, asked the first of those who had not yet been questioned, "How can one avoid
276 being deceived?" •The reply was, "By investigating the speaker, his speech and the subject
of it, and by making the same inquiries over a longer period by other means. The possession
of an acute mind and the ability to discern everything, that is an excellent gift from God—
277 which indeed you possess, O King." »The king heartily applauded, and asked the next
guest, "Why do not the majority of human beings recognize virtue?" "Because all men,"
he said, "have become naturally intemperate, and inclined to pleasures, as a result of which
27g injustice came about and the mass of greed. •The virtuous disposition, on the other hand,
restrains those who are attracted to the rule of pleasure, and commands them to respect
279 self-control and justice more highly. God directs all these matters." *The king affirmed that
this man had given a good answer, and asked (the next guest),c3 "Whose guidance must
kings follow?" The answer was, "The laws, so that by practicing justice they may improve
the lives of men.•The virtuous disposition, on the other hand,
restrains those who are attracted to the rule of pleasure, and commands them to respect
279 self-control and justice more highly. God directs all these matters." *The king affirmed that
this man had given a good answer, and asked (the next guest),c3 "Whose guidance must
kings follow?" The answer was, "The laws, so that by practicing justice they may improve
the lives of men. In the same way that you by doing this have established an everlasting
280 memory of yourself, following the commandment of God." »He said that this man also
gave a good answer, and asked the next guest, "Whom ought one appoint as chief
ministers?" He replied, "Men who hate wickedness, and in imitation of his way of life do
justice, so as to earn themselves good repute continually—just as you, O mighty King,"
281 he said, "achieve this aim, God having granted you a crown of righteousness." •He loudly
approved him, looked toward the next guest, and said, "Whom must one appoint as
commanders of his forces?" He replied, "Men of outstanding bravery and justice, who
prefer saving men's lives to victory at the reckless risk0 of lives. As God showers blessings
282 upon all, you too in imitation of him are a benefactor to your subjects." »(The king) said
that he had given a good answer, and asked another guest, "What man deserves admiration?"
The reply was, "The man endowed with glory and wealth and power, who deep at heart is
the equal of everyone. Just as you by your conduct deserve admiration, God giving you the
283 gift of caring for these things." *(The king) commended this man also, and said to the next
guest, "On what matters ought kings to spend most of their time?" He said, "Time should
be spent on reading and on the accounts of travels, which have been written and dedicated
to thrones for the permanent betterment of mankind.As God showers blessings
282 upon all, you too in imitation of him are a benefactor to your subjects." »(The king) said
that he had given a good answer, and asked another guest, "What man deserves admiration?"
The reply was, "The man endowed with glory and wealth and power, who deep at heart is
the equal of everyone. Just as you by your conduct deserve admiration, God giving you the
283 gift of caring for these things." *(The king) commended this man also, and said to the next
guest, "On what matters ought kings to spend most of their time?" He said, "Time should
be spent on reading and on the accounts of travels, which have been written and dedicated
to thrones for the permanent betterment of mankind. This indeed you do, thereby winning
284 glory beyond the reach of others, with God fulfilling your plans." •(The king) warmly
commended this man also, and asked another guest, "What must be one's conduct in
relaxation and leisure?" The reply was, "Be a spectator of entertainments which exercise
restraint and keep before your eyes things in life done with decency and moderation—that
285 is suitable and appropriate to life. • There is indeed a therapeutic value in these things, for
often even from the smallest items something worthwhile stands out. You are well versed
in all restraint, and show love of wisdom in your activities, receiving your reward from
286 God because of your moral goodness." •(The king) was well pleased with what had just
been said, and addressed the ninth guest, "How ought one to conduct himself at banquets?"
The reply was, "By inviting men of learning, with the ability to remind him of matters
287 advantageous to the kingdom and to the lives of the subjects. •Better harmony or music
than these you would never find, because these men are beloved of God, having trained
their minds for the noblest ends.The former is a sign of affection, the latter of
disaffection and expediency. The man whose aim is mere success is a natural traitor. As
271 for you, you have the goodwill of all, as God bestows upon you sound counsels." #He
declared that this man's answer was wise, and said to another guest, "What preserves a
kingdom?" To this the reply was, "Concern and care that no harm shall come upon the
multitudes through the officials appointed to serve their needs—which indeed is your policy,
272 God bestowing upon you such noble intent." •(The king) gave this man a word of
encouragement, and asked another guest, "What maintains favor and respect?" He said,
"Virtue, for it accomplishes good works and renounces evil; just as you keep your noble
273 integrity toward all, having this gift from God." •(The king) gave this man a favorable

You are well versed
in all restraint, and show love of wisdom in your activities, receiving your reward from
286 God because of your moral goodness." •(The king) was well pleased with what had just
been said, and addressed the ninth guest, "How ought one to conduct himself at banquets?"
The reply was, "By inviting men of learning, with the ability to remind him of matters
287 advantageous to the kingdom and to the lives of the subjects. •Better harmony or music
than these you would never find, because these men are beloved of God, having trained
their minds for the noblest ends. This is your practice also, all your plans being directed
288 aright by God." *He was delighted at these words, and inquired of the next guest, "What
is thought finer by the multitude, to have a king set over them who was once a commoner,
e3. Not in the text but required by the sense. f3. Schmidt's emendation, adopted by Thackeray.289 or a king of royal blood?" He replied, "The alternative which is by nature best. •Some
kings of royal birth show themselves hard and cruel to their subjects; much worse—some
kings of common origin with their experience of misfortune and their share of poverty,
when given rule over people, have turned out to be more harsh than the foulest tyrants. 290 But, as I said before, a noble character which has had its share of (suitable) education is
capable of ruling. Just as you rule, O mighty King, and are distinguished not so much by
the outstanding glory and wealth of your kingdom but because you excel all men in your
291 moderation and humanity—God having endowed you with these gifts." •(The king)
congratulated this man also with long applause, and asked the last guest of all, "What is
the most important feature in a kingdom?" To this he replied, "To establish the subjects
292 continually at peace, and guarantee that they obtain justice quickly in verdicts. •The
sovereign brings about these aims when he hates evil and loves good and holds in high
esteem the saving of a human life. In the same way that you consider injustice the greatest
evil, and by your just government in all things have won glory for yourself which is
293 imperishable—God granting you to have a pure mind untainted by any evil." -When he
had finished speaking there was a long burst of applause accompanied by delighted cheers. When it subsided, the king took a cup and drank a toast to all the assembled company and
to the speeches which they had made. He addressed them all thus: "The greatest benefits
294 have fallen on me through your visit. *I have been assisted a great deal by your giving me
essential teaching on kingship." He commanded that three talents of silver should be given
to each one, together with the slave who would hand it over to him. All joined in the
acclamation, the guests were filled with rejoicing, and the king turned his attention to
festivities unreservedly.*I have been assisted a great deal by your giving me
essential teaching on kingship." He commanded that three talents of silver should be given
to each one, together with the slave who would hand it over to him. All joined in the
acclamation, the guests were filled with rejoicing, and the king turned his attention to
festivities unreservedly. 295 If I have dwelt at lengthg3 on these matters, Philocrates, I beg your pardon. I admired
these men tremendously, the way in which they gave immediate answers which needed a
2% long time (to ponder), *and while the questioner had thought out details in each case, those
answering gave their replies immediately one after another—they were manifestly deserving
of admiration to me and to the audience, but especially to the philosophers. All who will
297 inherit this narrative will, I think, find it incredible. *To tell lies concerning matters which
are being chronicled is inappropriate: If I were to make a single error, it would be impious
in these matters. On the contrary, we narrate things as they happened, eschewing any error. I therefore, heartily accepting the force of their argument, have tried to present from the
298 records the details of events at the audiences with the king and at the banquets. *It is, as
you know, the custom that, from the beginning of the king's audiences until he retires to
299 bed, a record be made of everything said and done. •This is an excellent and worthwhile
procedure, because on the next day, before the (day's) business begins, all that was done
300 and spoken is read out, and if any action needs it, it is corrected. *So this whole account
we have produced by accurate reference to the records, as I have said, knowing your keen
desire to learn what is of value. 301 Three days afterward, Demetrius took the men with him, traversed the mile-long jetty
into the sea toward the island, crossed the bridge, and went in the direction of the north.You are well versed
in all restraint, and show love of wisdom in your activities, receiving your reward from
286 God because of your moral goodness." •(The king) was well pleased with what had just
been said, and addressed the ninth guest, "How ought one to conduct himself at banquets?"
The reply was, "By inviting men of learning, with the ability to remind him of matters
287 advantageous to the kingdom and to the lives of the subjects. •Better harmony or music
than these you would never find, because these men are beloved of God, having trained
their minds for the noblest ends. This is your practice also, all your plans being directed
288 aright by God." *He was delighted at these words, and inquired of the next guest, "What
is thought finer by the multitude, to have a king set over them who was once a commoner,
e3. Not in the text but required by the sense. f3. Schmidt's emendation, adopted by Thackeray.

*So this whole account
we have produced by accurate reference to the records, as I have said, knowing your keen
desire to learn what is of value. 301 Three days afterward, Demetrius took the men with him, traversed the mile-long jetty
into the sea toward the island, crossed the bridge, and went in the direction of the north. There he assembled them in a house which had been duly furnished near the shore—a
magnificent building in a very quiet situation—and invited the men to carry out the work
302 of translation, all that they would require being handsomely provided. •They set to completing
their several tasks, reaching agreement among themselves on each by comparing versions.113
g3. Mendelssohn's emendation, adopted by Thack­ discussed in one single sentence (part of vs. 302), which
eray. identifies in three stages the whole process:
h3. This passage alone (vss. 302-7) deals with the 1. The elders . . . "completed their several tasks." If
process of translation and forms a very insignificant part we hoped for details concerning the method of assignment
of the whole of LetAris. This section includes the of these tasks, we are disappointed. If there was anything
description of the place where the work was done (vs. like a collation of MSS, we are not told, and it is not
302), the translators' manner of relaxing after each day's implied. (See Pelletier, Lettre dAristae, ad loc, and
work (vss. 303f.), their practice of washing hands (vs. Zuntz's article in Jellicoe, Studies in the Septuagint.)
305), with an exposition of the meaning of this symbolic 2. They reached harmony in their completed tasks by
rite of purification (vs. 303), and concludes with the comparing them. The word used, antibolais, "compari­
statement that the task of the seventy-two was completed son," sometimes has a technical connotation, but Aristeas
in seventy-two days. The actual work of translation is does not say or imply that such is the case here. Neither303 The result of their agreement thus was made into a fair copy by Demetrius. •The business
of their meeting occupied them until the ninth hour,'3 after which they were free for bodily
304 rest and relaxation, everything which they desired being furnished on a lavish scale. • Apart
from all this, Dorotheus also provided for them all that was prepared for the king—this was
the order which he had received from the king. At the first hour of the day they attended
the court daily, and after offering salutations to the king, retired to their own quarters. 3os Following the custom of all the Jews, they washed their hands in the sea in the course of
306 their prayers to God, and then proceeded to the reading and explication*3 of each point. *I
asked this question: "What is their purpose in washing their hands while saying their
prayers?" They explained that it is evidence that they have done no evil, for all activity
takes place by means of the hands. Thus they nobly and piously refer everything to
307 righteousness and truth. *In this way, as we said previously, each day they assembled in
their quarters, which were pleasantly situated for quiet and light, and proceeded to fulfill
their prescribed task. The outcome was such that in seventy-two days the business of
translation was completed, just as if such a result was achieved by some deliberate design. 308 When it was completed, Demetrius assembled the company of the Jews in the place where
the task of the translation had been finished, and read it to all, in the presence of the
translators, who received a great ovation from the crowded audience for being responsible
309 for great blessings. •Likewise also they gave an ovation to Demetrius and asked him, now
310 that he had transcribed*3 the whole Law, to give a copy to their leaders.308 When it was completed, Demetrius assembled the company of the Jews in the place where
the task of the translation had been finished, and read it to all, in the presence of the
translators, who received a great ovation from the crowded audience for being responsible
309 for great blessings. •Likewise also they gave an ovation to Demetrius and asked him, now
310 that he had transcribed*3 the whole Law, to give a copy to their leaders. »As the books
were read, the priests stood up, with the elders from among the translators and from the
representatives of the "Community,"13 and with the leaders of the people, and said, "Since
this version has been made rightly and reverently, and in every respect accurately, it is
311 good that this should remain exactly so, and that there should be no revision." •There was
general approval of what they said, and they commanded that a curse should be laid, as
was their custom, on anyone who should alter the version by any addition or change to any
part of the written text, or any deletion either. This was a good step taken, to ensure that
the words were preserved completely and permanently in perpetuity. 312 When the king received messages about these events, he rejoiced greatly, because it
seemed that the purpose which he shared had been safely accomplished.This was a good step taken, to ensure that
the words were preserved completely and permanently in perpetuity. 312 When the king received messages about these events, he rejoiced greatly, because it
seemed that the purpose which he shared had been safely accomplished. All of the version
was read by him, and he marveled profoundly at the genius of the lawgiver.m3 He said to
Demetrius, "How is it that after such great works were (originally) completed, none of the
313 historians or poets took it upon himself to refer to them?" #He said, "Because the legislation
was holy and had come from God, and indeed, some of those who made the attempt were
314 smitten by God, and refrained from their design." •Moreover, he said that he had heard
Theopompus declare that, just when he was about to quote in a misleading way some of
the previously translated passages from the Law, he had a mental upset for more than thirty
days; at its abatement, he besought God to make clear to him the cause of this occurrence. 315 It was revealed to him in a dream that it was due to his meddlesome desire to disclose the
316 things of God to common man, and then—he said—he ceased and so recovered. •! have
is there any reference to the criteria used for obtaining would have been solved. This section (vss. 308-11)
agreement or for resolving disagreement. describes the steps taken to secure the integrity of the
3. Demetrius made a fair copy of what was agreed. text as translated and to avoid any revision. The attitude
(There is no mention of any check or method of checking.) to the words themselves, not to mention the inspiration
The presentation of the completed work to the Jews is of the version, is noteworthy. described in vss. 308-11, and to the king in vss. 312- 13. See Pelletier. Lettre d'Aristie, ad loc. The term
16. translated "community" was applied to the Jews of
i3. I.e. 3 P.M.*So this whole account
we have produced by accurate reference to the records, as I have said, knowing your keen
desire to learn what is of value. 301 Three days afterward, Demetrius took the men with him, traversed the mile-long jetty
into the sea toward the island, crossed the bridge, and went in the direction of the north. There he assembled them in a house which had been duly furnished near the shore—a
magnificent building in a very quiet situation—and invited the men to carry out the work
302 of translation, all that they would require being handsomely provided. •They set to completing
their several tasks, reaching agreement among themselves on each by comparing versions.113
g3. Mendelssohn's emendation, adopted by Thack­ discussed in one single sentence (part of vs. 302), which
eray. identifies in three stages the whole process:
h3. This passage alone (vss. 302-7) deals with the 1. The elders . . . "completed their several tasks." If
process of translation and forms a very insignificant part we hoped for details concerning the method of assignment
of the whole of LetAris. This section includes the of these tasks, we are disappointed. If there was anything
description of the place where the work was done (vs. like a collation of MSS, we are not told, and it is not
302), the translators' manner of relaxing after each day's implied. (See Pelletier, Lettre dAristae, ad loc, and
work (vss. 303f.), their practice of washing hands (vs. Zuntz's article in Jellicoe, Studies in the Septuagint.)
305), with an exposition of the meaning of this symbolic 2. They reached harmony in their completed tasks by
rite of purification (vs. 303), and concludes with the comparing them. The word used, antibolais, "compari­
statement that the task of the seventy-two was completed son," sometimes has a technical connotation, but Aristeas
in seventy-two days. The actual work of translation is does not say or imply that such is the case here. Neither

I.e. 3 P.M. The Roman method of calculating is Alexandria, among others, and refers to the special status
used, beginning at 6 A.M. which they enjoyed. j3. The exact meaning of this word here is not clear; m3. This section describes the presentation of the work
an attempt has been made to reflect this ambiguity by the to the king. Concern for its preservation is underlined
rendering "explication." (See Zuntz in Jellicoe, Studies here by the cautionary talk of the experience of Theo­
in the Septuagint, pp. 21 Of.) The word used is diasa- pompus, with its warning against misquotation, or even
phesin, "explication." Its root meaning is that of clari­ quotation, of the Jewish Scriptures. See Zuntz's article
fying, or making clear, without indicating whether the in Jellicoe, Studies in the Septuagint, p. 223, and Pelletier,
clarification is a translation or a commentary or both. Lettre d'Ariste'e, ad loc. It is impossible to decide, witn
k3. "Transcribed the whole Law." This is a vague the evidence available to us, whether this warning was
statement; if it had been precise, giving more details of prompted by any particular experience of misquotation
the task undertaken and the exact books dealt with, many or misuse. of the chief critical problems connected with LetArisalso received from Theodectus the tragic poet (the report) that when he was about to include
in a play a passage from what is written in the Bible,"3 he was afflicted with cataract of the
eyes. He suspected that this was why the affliction had befallen him, so he besought God
317 for many days03 and recovered. •When the king had received, as I previously mentioned,
Demetrius' account on these matters, he bowed and gave orders for great care to be taken
318 of the books and for their hallowed preservation. *He invited the translators to visit him
often after their return to Judea. It was, he said, only fair for their departure to take place,
but when they returned he would, as was right, treat them as friends, and they would receive
319 the most liberal hospitalityp3 at his hands. *He ordered preparations to be made for their
departure, and treated the men magnificently, presenting to each one three robes of the
finest materials, two talents of gold, a cup worth a talent, and complete furnishing for a
320 dining room.q3 *He also sent to Eleazar, along with their luggage, ten silver-footed couches,
with all accessories to go with them, a cup worth thirty talents/3 ten robes, purple cloth, a
magnificent crown, one hundred lengths of finest linen, vessels, bowls, and two golden
321 goblets for a dedication. «He also wrote with an invitation that if any of the men desired to
return to him, there would be no impediment, because he attached great importance to the
company of men of culture, and invested his wealth liberally in such men, and not in useless
expenditure.
322 There you have, Philocrates, as I promised, my narrative. These matters I think delight
you more than the books of the mycologists, for your inclination lies in the direction of
concern for things that benefit the mind, and to them you devote the greater time. I will
also attempt to write down the remainder of what is worthwhile, in order that in going
through it you may achieve the very noble reward of your purpose.
n3. Apparently the first time the term "Bible" was q3. Cf. the Roman Triclinium, which seems to be
used to mean the OT. what Aristeas has in mind.
o3. Taken with "recovered," it could be translated r3. "Thirty talents" presumably refers to its value in
"recovered after many days." money, rather than to its weight. (Thirty talents is roughly
p3. Thackeray adopts Maturity's emendation polyor- equivalent to $1,200.) It would make more sense if we
ias, "hospitality," for polyddrias, "presents," in the read talantou, "talent," instead of talanton, "talents,"
Gk. MSS. Cf. vs. 270. i.e. "thirty cups [each] worth [or weighing] a talent."JUBILEES
(Second Century B.C.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY O. S. WINTERMUTE
The Book of Jubilees is an account of matters revealed to Moses during the forty days that
he spent on Mount Sinai (Ex 24:18). In the first chapter God describes to Moses the apostasy
and ultimate restoration of his people, which will take place in the future. The remaining
chapters (2-50) contain an extended revelation to Moses by an angel of the presence. The
angel recounts for Moses the primeval history of mankind and the subsequent history of
God's chosen people until the time of Moses. The author followed the outline of Israel's
history that is given in Genesis and the early chapters of Exodus. In retelling the biblical
narratives, the author has freely condensed (e.g. the story of plagues on Pharaoh, Ex 7-10
= Jub 48:4-11), omitted (e.g. the blessing of Ephraim and Manasseh, Gen 48:1-20),
expurgated (e.g. the notice of Abraham's presenting his wife to foreign rulers as his sister,
Gen 12:10-20; 20:2-7), explained (e.g. Reuben's apparent incest, Gen 35:22 = Jub 33:2-
20), supplemented (e.g. tales of Abraham's youth, Jub 12:1-9, 12f., 16-21, 25-27), and
sometimes radically recast the biblical episodes (e.g. Isaac's covenant with Abimelech, Gen
26:23-33 = Jub 24:21-33).
Jubilees may be outlined in the following manner:
Chapter
1 Introduction
2-4 Creation and Adam stories
5-10 Noah stories
11-23:8 Abraham stories
23:9-32 Digression on Abraham's death
24-45 Jacob and his family
46-50 Moses stories
The introduction and the digression at 23:9-32 are marked off in the preceding outline
because they are the two sections in which the author looks beyond the time of Moses to
describe what will happen in the distant future. The Abraham and Jacob stories are separated
in the outline at the death of Abraham; the author of Jubilees, however, causes them to
overlap by having Abraham express a special concern and blessing for Jacob.
The author's treatment of Adam in chapter 3:1-31 is characteristic of much of his writing.
In verses 1-7 he gives Jubilees' version of Genesis 2:18-24 with some rearrangement of
verses, slight expansion, and minor variations in the text. Verses 8-14 contain halakah for
the purification of women after childbirth, which the author relates to the example of Adam
and Eve in the garden of Eden. Verses 15-26 contain Jubilees' modified version of the Fall
(Gen 3). Verses 27-29 contain extrabiblical traditions about events on the day of Adam's
expulsion, i.e. a sacrifice was offered and the animals became mute. Verses 30f. interpret
the biblical account of God's clothing Adam (cf. Jub 3:26) as the basis for an eternal decree
prohibiting nudity, thereby distinguishing man from the animals.
In the Noah stories, the author has sharply abbreviated the account of the Flood. He has,moreover, inserted a considerable amount of extrabiblical material, including accounts and
discussions of the following: the judgment of the Watchers (5:6-16), the feast of weeks
(6:17-22), the calendar (6:23-28), the testament of Noah (7:20-39), the division of the
world (8:10-9:15), Noah's effective intercession against Mastema (10:1-14), and Canaan's
occupation of land belonging to Israel (10:28-34). The account of Abraham begins in chapters 1 lf. with a series of haggadic tales about the
youthful piety and wisdom of that hero. The end of his account is dominated by a series of
speeches, testaments, and blessings in chapters 19:10-22:30. Chapters 13-19 follow the
biblical account of the wanderings of Abraham, God's promises to him, and the birth of
Isaac. The biblical account is frequently abbreviated to eliminate details such as Sarah's
cruel treatment of Hagar in Genesis 16:4-14. The biblical account is also supplemented at
points. The author, for example, has inserted an account of the trials of Abraham (17:15-
18) and a theophany (16:15-19); his interest in ritual law leads him to report that Abraham
celebrated both the Feast of Firstfruits (15:lf.; cf. 22:1) and the Feast of Tabernacles (16:20-
31). He also supplies a lengthy discussion of circumcision (15:25-34). In Jubilees, Jacob is the central figure. He is frequently praised or blessed by Abraham
(19:17-25, 27-29; 22:10-24, 26-30), Rebecca (25:11-13, 14-23; 27:11; 35:6, 9-12), Isaac
(26:22-24; 27:14-17; 35:13-17; 36:15f.), and God (27:22-24; 44:5f.). In poetic passages
(e.g. 23:23; 31:15) Jacob is identified as Israel, the eponymous ancestor of all of the children
of Israel. The stories of Jacob and his sons therefore both represent and explain his nation's
justified hostility toward Philistines (24:25-33), Canaanites (25:1-10), Amorites (34:1-9),
and Edomites (chs. 37f.). Only four sons of Jacob are singled out for special attention. The
Joseph stories (chs.Only four sons of Jacob are singled out for special attention. The
Joseph stories (chs. 39f., 42-45) are simply a condensed version of the biblical account. Reuben's incest with Bilhah (ch. 33) is given elaborate treatment as a warning against
incest. In the case of Judah and Tamar, however, the story is retold in order to permit the
confession, forgiveness, and defense of Judah's righteous intent in the matter (41:23-28). Judah is singled out again in chapter 31, where he shares a blessing with Levi, who is
prominently treated in chapters 30-32. Judah and Levi, of course, were the two most
prominent tribes at the time of the writing of Jubilees. In chapters 24-29 the author of Jubilees supplements the biblical account of Jacob's early
life and sojourn in Mesopotamia. He takes every opportunity to justify Rebecca's favoritism
for Jacob over Esau. Jacob represents the highest degree of filial piety whereas Esau was
disloyal to his parents. Chapters 30-32 supplement biblical material with traditions about the priestly role of
Levi. In chapter 31 Judah shares a blessing with Levi, but elsewhere Levi tends to be
prominent. Chapter 33 is a Midrash on Reuben's sin in Genesis 35:22. Chapters 34-38 supplement the biblical account by describing in detail the wars of Jacob. Chapter 34 describes an Amorite war, while chapters 35-38 show how the relationship
between Jacob and Esau ended in hostility and the defeat of Edom. Chapters 39-45 are the writer's condensation of the Joseph stories. The Moses story begins with a mention of his father in chapter 46, a chapter which
explains the transition from an idyllic life under Joseph's rule, when there was no Satan in
the land (vss. If.), to a scene of harsh slavery at the end of the chapter (vss. 14-16). The
death of Joseph and war between the Canaanites and Egypt account for the deteriorating
conditions. The Moses story ends in chapters 49f.JUBILEES
(Second Century B.C.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY O. S. WINTERMUTE
The Book of Jubilees is an account of matters revealed to Moses during the forty days that
he spent on Mount Sinai (Ex 24:18). In the first chapter God describes to Moses the apostasy
and ultimate restoration of his people, which will take place in the future. The remaining
chapters (2-50) contain an extended revelation to Moses by an angel of the presence. The
angel recounts for Moses the primeval history of mankind and the subsequent history of
God's chosen people until the time of Moses. The author followed the outline of Israel's
history that is given in Genesis and the early chapters of Exodus. In retelling the biblical
narratives, the author has freely condensed (e.g. the story of plagues on Pharaoh, Ex 7-10
= Jub 48:4-11), omitted (e.g. the blessing of Ephraim and Manasseh, Gen 48:1-20),
expurgated (e.g. the notice of Abraham's presenting his wife to foreign rulers as his sister,
Gen 12:10-20; 20:2-7), explained (e.g. Reuben's apparent incest, Gen 35:22 = Jub 33:2-
20), supplemented (e.g. tales of Abraham's youth, Jub 12:1-9, 12f., 16-21, 25-27), and
sometimes radically recast the biblical episodes (e.g. Isaac's covenant with Abimelech, Gen
26:23-33 = Jub 24:21-33).
Jubilees may be outlined in the following manner:
Chapter
1 Introduction
2-4 Creation and Adam stories
5-10 Noah stories
11-23:8 Abraham stories
23:9-32 Digression on Abraham's death
24-45 Jacob and his family
46-50 Moses stories
The introduction and the digression at 23:9-32 are marked off in the preceding outline
because they are the two sections in which the author looks beyond the time of Moses to
describe what will happen in the distant future. The Abraham and Jacob stories are separated
in the outline at the death of Abraham; the author of Jubilees, however, causes them to
overlap by having Abraham express a special concern and blessing for Jacob.
The author's treatment of Adam in chapter 3:1-31 is characteristic of much of his writing.
In verses 1-7 he gives Jubilees' version of Genesis 2:18-24 with some rearrangement of
verses, slight expansion, and minor variations in the text. Verses 8-14 contain halakah for
the purification of women after childbirth, which the author relates to the example of Adam
and Eve in the garden of Eden. Verses 15-26 contain Jubilees' modified version of the Fall
(Gen 3). Verses 27-29 contain extrabiblical traditions about events on the day of Adam's
expulsion, i.e. a sacrifice was offered and the animals became mute. Verses 30f. interpret
the biblical account of God's clothing Adam (cf. Jub 3:26) as the basis for an eternal decree
prohibiting nudity, thereby distinguishing man from the animals.
In the Noah stories, the author has sharply abbreviated the account of the Flood. He has,

The
death of Joseph and war between the Canaanites and Egypt account for the deteriorating
conditions. The Moses story ends in chapters 49f. with a collection of laws concerning Passover
(49), Jubilees (50:1-5), and the sabbath (50:6-13). The events of Moses' own life are
quickly sketched in chapters 47f. Although the account is ultimately based on the Old
Testament, the Exodus story in chapter 48 has been rewritten to explain how Mastema
sought to help the Egyptians. It is easier to describe the literary character of Jubilees than it is to name its genre. M. Testuz sought to identify its genre in terms of its relationship to five different types of
literature: history, testament, apocalyptic, ritual law, and chronology. He concluded that
Jubilees was a work of composite genre sharing features of each of the types mentioned. Although "composite" is too vague a term to be entirely satisfying, Testuz's method of
describing the genres to which Jubilees is related enables one to provide a fair accountingof the distinctive combination which characterizes the genre of Jubilees.1
To the casual reader, Jubilees presents itself as a historical account of past events. R. H. Charles classified it as "Primitive History Rewritten from the Standpoint of Law."2 The
setting, the actors, and the episodes are all depicted in the past time. The most important
source which the author used in writing his account was the biblical text, but he supplemented
it with a considerable amount of traditional material which came to him in either written or
oral form. The final result was a relatively well-integrated account. Like most writers of history, the author of Jubilees was concerned to review critical
events of the past in order to expose their significance for understanding his own contemporary
political, social, or cultural situation. In Jubilees 10:29-34, for example, he has preserved
an account of how the Canaanites came to inhabit the promised land in order to prove that
any contemporary claim to it was illegitimate. His method of explaining contemporary
realities is generally in line with methods used in the Old Testament. In Genesis 48, the
Old Testament writers explain the division and priority of the Joseph tribes in later Israel
by reporting that their eponymous ancestors had been singled out for a blessing by Jacob. In a similar manner, Jubilees accounts for the new political reality of its own time by
preserving a report that Isaac had given a special blessing to Judah and Levi (Jub 31:1-22). In both content and method, the Book of Jubilees shares features of a historical genre. The Catena of Nicephorus (1.175) cites the "Testament" (diatheke) as the source of a
quotation which matches Jubilees 10:21. There is some reason to believe that either Jubilees
or some portion of that work circulated in antiquity as "The Testament of Moses." A
number of the speeches of the ancestors appear in Jubilees as testaments (e.g. Noah, 7:20-
39; Abraham, 20:2-11; Isaac, 36:1-17).There is some reason to believe that either Jubilees
or some portion of that work circulated in antiquity as "The Testament of Moses." A
number of the speeches of the ancestors appear in Jubilees as testaments (e.g. Noah, 7:20-
39; Abraham, 20:2-11; Isaac, 36:1-17). Since everything contained in Jubilees was to be
delivered to the children of Israel by Moses, one might possibly conceive of it as his
testament. In its present form, however, it appears as a revelation to Moses rather than a
testament from him. A book which presents itself as an account of matters revealed by God and his angel to
Moses might be identified as an apocalypse, but R. H. Charles did not list it among the
apocalypses in his edition of the Pseudepigrapha.3 Charles's position seems justified. Oespite
the fact that it shares many features of apocalyptic writings, Jubilees lacks certain
characteristics of that genre. In agreement with apocalyptic writings: (1) Jubilees is a
pseudonymous work which presents itself as (2) a book of revelations given privately (3)
to a heroic figure from Israel's past (4) by an angel (5) in the form of a world history
divided into balanced periods of time measured by weeks of years and jubilees (6) in an
attempt to instruct the author's contemporaries about matters of vital importance for their
own time. The characteristics of apocalyptic writings which Jubilees does not share are: (1) bizarre
imagery, (2) limited esoteric appeal, and (3) preoccupation with the type of eschatology
characteristic of apocalyptic writings. The beasts, the horns, the heavenly scenes, the
thrones, the rivers of fire, the otherworldly figures with brightly shining bodies, and the
many other terrifying objects that populate the visionary world of Daniel, Enoch, and other
apocalyptic writings are not found in Jubilees.The
death of Joseph and war between the Canaanites and Egypt account for the deteriorating
conditions. The Moses story ends in chapters 49f. with a collection of laws concerning Passover
(49), Jubilees (50:1-5), and the sabbath (50:6-13). The events of Moses' own life are
quickly sketched in chapters 47f. Although the account is ultimately based on the Old
Testament, the Exodus story in chapter 48 has been rewritten to explain how Mastema
sought to help the Egyptians. It is easier to describe the literary character of Jubilees than it is to name its genre. M. Testuz sought to identify its genre in terms of its relationship to five different types of
literature: history, testament, apocalyptic, ritual law, and chronology. He concluded that
Jubilees was a work of composite genre sharing features of each of the types mentioned. Although "composite" is too vague a term to be entirely satisfying, Testuz's method of
describing the genres to which Jubilees is related enables one to provide a fair accounting

The characteristics of apocalyptic writings which Jubilees does not share are: (1) bizarre
imagery, (2) limited esoteric appeal, and (3) preoccupation with the type of eschatology
characteristic of apocalyptic writings. The beasts, the horns, the heavenly scenes, the
thrones, the rivers of fire, the otherworldly figures with brightly shining bodies, and the
many other terrifying objects that populate the visionary world of Daniel, Enoch, and other
apocalyptic writings are not found in Jubilees. Granted the presence of angels, demons, and
an occasional prodigy (23:25), the world described in the revelation to Moses is very much
like the historical world in which the author of Jubilees lived. The bizarre visions contribute to the esoteric atmosphere of most apocalyptic writings. Behind such documents there is a small community of "the elect"; the writing is directed
to them and often contains hostile words for members of the larger religious community
from which they have separated. Apocalyptic writings are frequently described as being
hidden until a determined time when they will be understood only by those who are pure
(Dan 12:9f.). Jubilees is not written from that perspective. Although the revelation is given
privately to Moses, and there are suggestions that there was a body of secret lore passed
down in the family of Levi (Jub 32:22-26; 45:16), the content of Jubilees' revelation is
1 M. Testuz, Les Idies religieuses du livre des Jubilis, pp. I If. I am grateful to the editors and J. C. VanderKam
for helpful suggestions and improvements. 2 R. H. Charles, APOT, vol. 2, p. v. 3 Cf. his table of contents at the beginning of APOT, vol. 2.directed toward all of Israel and not to just a small group of embattled faithful. The author
of the book may have been a member of a relatively small band of Hasidim, but there is
no reason to believe that his group had yet broken sharply away from the larger Jewish
community. The matter of vital importance about which the author of Jubilees wishes to instruct his
contemporaries is the necessity of strictly obeying the Law in the critical age in which they
are living. The writer anticipates an age of increasing blessings in his own time which will
result from renewed loyalty to the Law. The author of Jubilees is only slightly concerned
with eschatological themes that preoccupy the writers of apocalyptic literature generally,
notably, the abrupt end of the age together with wars and natural disasters which accompany
it, the appearance of the Messiah, and the inauguration of the messianic age, or the revelation
of heavenly realms prepared for the punishment of the wicked and reward of the righteous. Davenport has examined The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees and sharply limited the
number of "Passages Intended to Teach Eschatology" (i.e. 1:4-29; 23:14-31). Although
there are other passages in which eschatological elements or terminology are present,
Davenport has argued that they are not "eschatological in function," i.e. the writer was
not primarily concerned to write eschatology.4
To the extent that the Torah could be designated a legal genre, one could argue that
Jubilees deserves a similar title. In supporting the validity of certain laws, the writer appealed
to the fact that they were given in "the book of the first law" (6:22), i.e. the biblical Torah. By doing that, he wished to present his own work as a second book of law given to Moses
on Mount Sinai. The author of Jubilees deals with law in a number of different ways.By doing that, he wished to present his own work as a second book of law given to Moses
on Mount Sinai. The author of Jubilees deals with law in a number of different ways. Sometimes he
gathers together a group of laws pertaining to a particular subject, for example, the list of
sabbath laws in chapter 50:6-13. Sometimes he is more concerned to elaborate the theological
rationale for supporting a particular observance. In chapter 2:17-33, for example, he
describes the sabbath as a sign of the election of Israel. The children of Israel are to keep
it as a sign of their unique relationship to God and his highest angels—angels of the presence
and angels of sanctification—who have kept the sabbath since the first week of creation. He further proves that the family of Jacob alone has been singled out for this honor because
God created twenty-two works before the first sabbath and there are twenty-two heads of
mankind from Adam to Jacob. The writer was concerned to demonstrate the authoritative status of his laws. One method
was to stress their antiquity. He is careful to note the first observance of particular rites. Thus the feast of Shevuoth was celebrated in heaven from the day of creation and subsequently
first celebrated on earth by Noah (6:17f.). Even the practices that were initiated by the
patriarchs have eternal validity because they were according to the testimony of the heavenly
tablets, and they are to be observed forever (16:21-30). In a more pragmatic manner, he
proves the validity of the Law by providing examples of the punishment of those who
disobeyed (7:20-25; 16:5-9) and the blessing of those who obeyed (17:17f.; 18:14-16;
39:6f.; 40:8-10). He urged his own generation to follow the laws of God by means of the
testimonies of the patriarchs, who regularly exhorted their offspring to avoid fornication,
uncleanness, idolatry, drinking or shedding of blood; and to observe justice, righteousness,
brotherly love, circumcision, and proper ritual practice (e.g.The characteristics of apocalyptic writings which Jubilees does not share are: (1) bizarre
imagery, (2) limited esoteric appeal, and (3) preoccupation with the type of eschatology
characteristic of apocalyptic writings. The beasts, the horns, the heavenly scenes, the
thrones, the rivers of fire, the otherworldly figures with brightly shining bodies, and the
many other terrifying objects that populate the visionary world of Daniel, Enoch, and other
apocalyptic writings are not found in Jubilees. Granted the presence of angels, demons, and
an occasional prodigy (23:25), the world described in the revelation to Moses is very much
like the historical world in which the author of Jubilees lived. The bizarre visions contribute to the esoteric atmosphere of most apocalyptic writings. Behind such documents there is a small community of "the elect"; the writing is directed
to them and often contains hostile words for members of the larger religious community
from which they have separated. Apocalyptic writings are frequently described as being
hidden until a determined time when they will be understood only by those who are pure
(Dan 12:9f.). Jubilees is not written from that perspective. Although the revelation is given
privately to Moses, and there are suggestions that there was a body of secret lore passed
down in the family of Levi (Jub 32:22-26; 45:16), the content of Jubilees' revelation is
1 M. Testuz, Les Idies religieuses du livre des Jubilis, pp. I If. I am grateful to the editors and J. C. VanderKam
for helpful suggestions and improvements. 2 R. H. Charles, APOT, vol. 2, p. v. 3 Cf. his table of contents at the beginning of APOT, vol. 2.

In a more pragmatic manner, he
proves the validity of the Law by providing examples of the punishment of those who
disobeyed (7:20-25; 16:5-9) and the blessing of those who obeyed (17:17f.; 18:14-16;
39:6f.; 40:8-10). He urged his own generation to follow the laws of God by means of the
testimonies of the patriarchs, who regularly exhorted their offspring to avoid fornication,
uncleanness, idolatry, drinking or shedding of blood; and to observe justice, righteousness,
brotherly love, circumcision, and proper ritual practice (e.g. 7:20-39; 20:2-11; 21:1-25;
36:1-17). The author's concern for chronological matters is illustrated by the earliest Hebrew
description of the book "The book of the divisions of the times according to their jubilees
and their weeks."5 If that title leads one to expect a work seriously concerned with
chronological matters, the reader will not be disappointed. The writer has a theological
concern for time which is reflected in the structure of the book. The author believed that there was a theological value inherent in certain special times. Unlike modern man, he did not limit himself to the quantitative measuring or counting of
days from an arbitrary starting point. For him, the days were also to be divided on a
4 G. L. Davenport, The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees, pp. 47-71, 81-87. 3 The Heb. description is found in CD, a sectarian document from Qumran. The most complete text was discovered
in 1896 in Cairo, but subsequent discoveries of portions of the work at Qumran have led to its identification with that
community. The mention of Jub is found at plate 16, 11. 2-4.qualitative scale with respect to their sanctity. Some days were sacred and others profane. In 6:33-37, the writer describes a situation in which confusion prevails and sacred feasts
are observed on unclean days. Although he does not explicitly say why he finds such a
situation to be scandalous, he undoubtedly believed that sacred rituals for forgiveness,
atonement, and communal well-being could not be valid unless observed at a sacred time. For the author of Jubilees, the sabbath, which fell regularly on the seventh day of every
week, was particularly sacred. A. Jaubert in her study of the calendar has demonstrated that
Sunday and Wednesday were also frequently designated as festival days by the author of
Jubilees.6 It was important for the author of Jubilees to be assured that the festivals of Israel
would fall on the same day of the week year after year. That was possible only if the
readers would make use of the special calendar of 364 days (divisible by seven) that was
adopted by the particular Jewish community to which the author belonged. Each year in
that calendar began on Wednesday and lasted precisely fifty-two weeks so that the following
year would also begin on Wednesday and all of the dates in that year would fall on the
same day of the week as they had in any previous year. The author of Jubilees is an outspoken opponent of the lunar month, which alternated in
length between months of twenty-nine and thirty days, because it resulted in a year of 354
days, ten days too few. Nevertheless, his calendar was constructed within a society where
the concept of "month" was too important in dating to be disregarded. Therefore the
calendar was divided into twelve non-lunar months of thirty days each for a total of 360
days. In order to bring the final yearly total to 364 days, the year was divided into four
seasons of three months each with an extra day inserted between each of the four seasons
but not counted within any month.Therefore the
calendar was divided into twelve non-lunar months of thirty days each for a total of 360
days. In order to bring the final yearly total to 364 days, the year was divided into four
seasons of three months each with an extra day inserted between each of the four seasons
but not counted within any month. Although months and seasons are accounted for in the calendar of Jubilees, it was the
recurring cycle of seven-day weeks that was used as the basic model for structuring larger
periods of time. Each period of seven years is referred to as a "week of years" or simply
as a "week." Each period of seven weeks of years, i.e. forty-nine years, is designated a
jubilee. And it is also possible that the period of forty-nine jubilees is significant for the
structure of the book. According to the Book of Jubilees, the Exodus took place 2,410
years after the creation of the world. Adam remained in Eden until the eighth year. Between
year eight and year 2410 there are 2,401 full years, i.e. forty-nine jubilees. Testuz has
suggested that the period of forty-nine jubilees represents a complete era in world history. If that is true, then the reference to the passing of that period of time at the end of Jubilees
(50:4) was written to call attention to the fact that a new era in world history had begun
with the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai.7
In addition to the literary genres listed by Testuz, it is helpful to see Jubilees in relation
to the genre Midrash. The compatibility of subject matter is obvious if simply because a
number of episodes in Jubilees are also preserved in later Midrashim. One striking example
is found in Midrash Wayyissau, which has preserved a detailed account of the war between
Jacob and Esau that is similar to Jubilees 37f.8
Unfortunately, the nature of Midrash and even its existence as a separate genre is still
being debated. R.In a more pragmatic manner, he
proves the validity of the Law by providing examples of the punishment of those who
disobeyed (7:20-25; 16:5-9) and the blessing of those who obeyed (17:17f.; 18:14-16;
39:6f.; 40:8-10). He urged his own generation to follow the laws of God by means of the
testimonies of the patriarchs, who regularly exhorted their offspring to avoid fornication,
uncleanness, idolatry, drinking or shedding of blood; and to observe justice, righteousness,
brotherly love, circumcision, and proper ritual practice (e.g. 7:20-39; 20:2-11; 21:1-25;
36:1-17). The author's concern for chronological matters is illustrated by the earliest Hebrew
description of the book "The book of the divisions of the times according to their jubilees
and their weeks."5 If that title leads one to expect a work seriously concerned with
chronological matters, the reader will not be disappointed. The writer has a theological
concern for time which is reflected in the structure of the book. The author believed that there was a theological value inherent in certain special times. Unlike modern man, he did not limit himself to the quantitative measuring or counting of
days from an arbitrary starting point. For him, the days were also to be divided on a
4 G. L. Davenport, The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees, pp. 47-71, 81-87. 3 The Heb. description is found in CD, a sectarian document from Qumran. The most complete text was discovered
in 1896 in Cairo, but subsequent discoveries of portions of the work at Qumran have led to its identification with that
community. The mention of Jub is found at plate 16, 11. 2-4.

One striking example
is found in Midrash Wayyissau, which has preserved a detailed account of the war between
Jacob and Esau that is similar to Jubilees 37f.8
Unfortunately, the nature of Midrash and even its existence as a separate genre is still
being debated. R. Bloch's description of its characteristics, however, may serve as a starting
point.9 The first characteristic is that Midrash has its point of departure in the Scripture. Midrash is the form taken by rabbinic interpretation of Scripture. Although not produced in
rabbinic circles, Jubilees shows evidence of a very similar type of scriptural interpretation. It may be regarded as a continuous interpretation of Genesis 1 through Exodus 12. It may
also be understood as a Midrashic reflection on Exodus 24:18. Pious curiosity wished to
know everything that Moses learned during his forty days on Mount Sinai. A second characteristic of Midrash is its "homiletical" character. In contrast to a precise
scholarly exegesis, it is a popular genre. The term "homiletical" reflects a presumed Sitz
im Leben of rabbinic Midrashim, i.e. the reading and explanation of Scripture within the
6 A. Jaubert, "The Calendar of Jubilees" The Date of the Last Supper, pp. 15-30. 7 Testuz, Les Idies religieuses, pp. 138-40. Cf. also E. Wiesenberg, "The Jubilee of Jubilees," RQ 3 (1961/
1962) 3-40. 8 The text of Midrash Wayyissau has been published by A. Jellinek in BHM, pt. 3, pp. 1-5. 9 R. Bloch, "Midrash," DBS, vol. 6, pp. 1263-81. ET by M. H. Callaway in Approaches to Ancient Judaism:
Theory and Practice, ed. W. S. Green (Brown Judaic Studies 1; Missoula, Mont., 1978) pp. 29-50.synagogue by means of a sermon designed to instruct the hearers. Jubilees was probably
produced by someone within priestly circles who drew freely upon analogous instructive
materials from an earlier generation. Notice how the reader is instructed by means of
explanation, illustrative stories, and morals drawn from the biblical text designed to warn
against nudity (3:26, 30f.) and incest (ch. 33) or to encourage the observance of the sabbath
(2:16-21), circumcision (15:24-34), laws of purification (3:8-14), and tithes (32:1-15). A third characteristic is careful attention to the text. Midrashic interpretation, which
sometimes wanders far from what we might consider the original meaning of the text, is
also capable of pausing to explain the significance of a single word or name. The author of
Jubilees is also fond of this method, as, for example, in his treatment of Jared (4:15) and
Rew (10:18). The author of Jubilees also has an extensive knowledge of Scripture which
enables him to bring to bear widely scattered biblical texts in his discussion of a problem. Compare, for example, his discussion of Passover and the sabbath in chapters 49f. The fourth characteristic is an adaptation to the present. The method of Midrashic
interpretation has two foci: the text of Scripture and the writer's contemporary situation. The writer seeks the word of God within the text for the practical purpose of instructing
the life of his contemporaries. That is clearly the intent of Jubilees. His contemporaries are
faced with arguments that Jewish ritual law and piety are no longer relevant, that it was a
law and piety freely adopted in the past and subject to arbitrary change in the present. Jubilees denies that. For Jubilees, the rites of Judaism are not recent. They were observed
by the patriarchs. They are ordained by God and written on heavenly tablets. Gentiles who
lived among the author's people did not observe the sabbath. They were uncircumcised.Gentiles who
lived among the author's people did not observe the sabbath. They were uncircumcised. They appeared nude in athletic exercise. Many Jews were undoubtedly tempted to intermarry
with them, adopt their customs, and abandon a pattern of Jewish piety. Jubilees preaches
against all those evils through the words and examples of angels and patriarchs. Obedience
to the Law is the central message of Jubilees. The fifth characteristic of Midrash is the presence of halakah and haggada. The halakah
consists of exegetical conclusions in the form of rules for a pious way of life such as we
find collected in Jubilees 50:6-13. The exegetical conclusions of haggada are non-legal. Thus Jubilees is able to answer the question of where Cain found a wife by mentioning the
birth of Adam's daughter Awan (4:1). The problem of a talking serpent is set in a new
perspective by assuming that all of the animals spoke (3:28) Hebrew (12:26) in the garden
of Eden. Haggadic commentary sometimes resolves minor problems, but at times it seems
to serve a broader creative impulse. In Genesis 15:11 we are told that Abram once had to
drive some birds away. Who sent the birds? Obviously, it was Mastema. In Jubilees 11:11-
24 his reputation for combating the birds sent by Mastema has developed into one of the
most charming tales in Jubilees. In Genesis 15:5, God orders Abram to look (Heb. habbei)
toward the sky and count the stars if he is able. Such a passage can easily account for his
reputation as a frustrated astrologer, which is reflected in Jubilees 12:16-20. With regard to the literary structure of Midrashim, A. G. Wright has written "there are
several rather diverse forms of literature that are designated as midrash. There are the
exegetical, homiletic, and narrative midrashim."10 The exegetical Midrash sets forth the
biblical text and discusses it phrase by phrase.One striking example
is found in Midrash Wayyissau, which has preserved a detailed account of the war between
Jacob and Esau that is similar to Jubilees 37f.8
Unfortunately, the nature of Midrash and even its existence as a separate genre is still
being debated. R. Bloch's description of its characteristics, however, may serve as a starting
point.9 The first characteristic is that Midrash has its point of departure in the Scripture. Midrash is the form taken by rabbinic interpretation of Scripture. Although not produced in
rabbinic circles, Jubilees shows evidence of a very similar type of scriptural interpretation. It may be regarded as a continuous interpretation of Genesis 1 through Exodus 12. It may
also be understood as a Midrashic reflection on Exodus 24:18. Pious curiosity wished to
know everything that Moses learned during his forty days on Mount Sinai. A second characteristic of Midrash is its "homiletical" character. In contrast to a precise
scholarly exegesis, it is a popular genre. The term "homiletical" reflects a presumed Sitz
im Leben of rabbinic Midrashim, i.e. the reading and explanation of Scripture within the
6 A. Jaubert, "The Calendar of Jubilees" The Date of the Last Supper, pp. 15-30. 7 Testuz, Les Idies religieuses, pp. 138-40. Cf. also E. Wiesenberg, "The Jubilee of Jubilees," RQ 3 (1961/
1962) 3-40. 8 The text of Midrash Wayyissau has been published by A. Jellinek in BHM, pt. 3, pp. 1-5. 9 R. Bloch, "Midrash," DBS, vol. 6, pp. 1263-81. ET by M. H. Callaway in Approaches to Ancient Judaism:
Theory and Practice, ed. W. S. Green (Brown Judaic Studies 1; Missoula, Mont., 1978) pp. 29-50.

Wright has written "there are
several rather diverse forms of literature that are designated as midrash. There are the
exegetical, homiletic, and narrative midrashim."10 The exegetical Midrash sets forth the
biblical text and discusses it phrase by phrase. Homiletical Midrashim, on the other hand,
begin with a portion of text which forms the basis for a thematic treatment of a specific
subject which the Scripture evokes. The theme is frequently repeated and supported by texts
drawn from various parts of the Old Testament. Finally, the narrative Midrash scarcely
distinguishes between text and comment, but interweaves them to form a continuous
narrative. In terms of overall structure, Jubilees is similar to the narrative Midrashim. Two of the texts most closely related to Jubilees in terms of literary characteristics are
Chronicles and the Genesis Apocryphon. Both of these works share certain characteristics
of Midrash. Chronicles is similar to Jubilees in its intent to interpret Scripture in light of
contemporary concerns. A central concern of the Chronicler was the Temple cultus. In his
restatement of traditions recorded in 1-2 Samuel-1 Kings, King David provided the prototype
for a proper attitude toward the cultus. Jubilees' dominant concern was for ritual law and
Jewish piety. Consequently the patriarchs became the embodiment of piety and of the proper
A. G. Wright, "The Literary Genre Midrash," CBQ 28 (1966) 133.concern for sacred festivals. The Genesis Apocryphon is too fragmentary to permit one to
discern its overall tendency, but P. Weimar has used it to illustrate the genre of narrative
Midrash. In doing so he compared a portion of the text with the text of Genesis and showed
how the author expanded upon it, occasionally making use of data found in Jubilees.11
Title
The earliest mention of Jubilees is found in the Qumran texts (CD 16.2-4), where the
writer reports that an accurate account of Israel's periods of blindness may be found in
"The book of the divisions of the times according to their jubilees and their weeks." The
Ethiopic version of the text was expanded on that title to describe the work in the following
manner: "This is the account of the division of days of the Law and the testimony for
annual observance according to their weeks (and) their jubilees throughout all the years of
the world."
In Greek, Syriac, Latin, and later Hebrew witnesses, however, the work was generally
designated more briefly as either "The (Book) of Jubilees" or "The Little Genesis." The
first of these titles probably represents a simple abbreviation of the longer description attested
at Qumran. The second title serves as an appropriate description of the content of the work. Just as the Chronicler recapitulated and supplemented, many of the episodes reported in the
books of Samuel and Kings with a special concern to emphasize the Davidic foundation of
many cultic details, the author of Jubilees likewise recapitulated and supplemented many
of the episodes found in Genesis with the intention of stressing the eternal validity of the
Law and explaining additional cultic details.The second title serves as an appropriate description of the content of the work. Just as the Chronicler recapitulated and supplemented, many of the episodes reported in the
books of Samuel and Kings with a special concern to emphasize the Davidic foundation of
many cultic details, the author of Jubilees likewise recapitulated and supplemented many
of the episodes found in Genesis with the intention of stressing the eternal validity of the
Law and explaining additional cultic details. Since the work is actually longer than the
biblical book of Genesis, Charles has suggested that the adjective "Little" (Gk., ta lepta)
was used to characterize the document's concern to provide fuller treatment of minor details
not available in the canonical work.12
The significance of other titles attested by ancient authorities is less clear. Syncellus
(Chronographia 1.5) reported that some people spoke of "The Little Genesis" as "an
apocalypse of Moses," but elsewhere (Chronographia 1.48) Syncellus uses the title "The
Apocalypse of Moses" to refer to a work which is quite distinct from "The Little Genesis."
In the Catena of Nicephorus 1.175 a quotation from Jubilees 10:21 is prefaced by the
phrase he diatheke, which H. Ronsch explained as referring to "The Testament of Moses,"
a work known from four of the ancient catalogs which were prepared to define canonical
boundaries. Although Ronsch may have been justified in interpreting the cryptic he diatheke
as representing "The Testament of Moses,"13 a simple identification of Jubilees with the
work listed by that name in the catalogs has been rejected because the number of stichoi
assigned in the catalog of Nicephorus (1,100) is scarcely one fourth the length of Jubilees.Wright has written "there are
several rather diverse forms of literature that are designated as midrash. There are the
exegetical, homiletic, and narrative midrashim."10 The exegetical Midrash sets forth the
biblical text and discusses it phrase by phrase. Homiletical Midrashim, on the other hand,
begin with a portion of text which forms the basis for a thematic treatment of a specific
subject which the Scripture evokes. The theme is frequently repeated and supported by texts
drawn from various parts of the Old Testament. Finally, the narrative Midrash scarcely
distinguishes between text and comment, but interweaves them to form a continuous
narrative. In terms of overall structure, Jubilees is similar to the narrative Midrashim. Two of the texts most closely related to Jubilees in terms of literary characteristics are
Chronicles and the Genesis Apocryphon. Both of these works share certain characteristics
of Midrash. Chronicles is similar to Jubilees in its intent to interpret Scripture in light of
contemporary concerns. A central concern of the Chronicler was the Temple cultus. In his
restatement of traditions recorded in 1-2 Samuel-1 Kings, King David provided the prototype
for a proper attitude toward the cultus. Jubilees' dominant concern was for ritual law and
Jewish piety. Consequently the patriarchs became the embodiment of piety and of the proper
A. G. Wright, "The Literary Genre Midrash," CBQ 28 (1966) 133.

Ronsch explained as referring to "The Testament of Moses,"
a work known from four of the ancient catalogs which were prepared to define canonical
boundaries. Although Ronsch may have been justified in interpreting the cryptic he diatheke
as representing "The Testament of Moses,"13 a simple identification of Jubilees with the
work listed by that name in the catalogs has been rejected because the number of stichoi
assigned in the catalog of Nicephorus (1,100) is scarcely one fourth the length of Jubilees. "The Book of Adam's Daughters" was identified with Jubilees in the Decree of Gelasius;
and Syncellus (1.7) reported that "The Little Genesis" was also called "The Life of
Adam." It is generally assumed that the titles which relate the book to Adam are justified
only when referring to certain limited portions of Jubilees. These titles may have originated
to designate earlier works incorporated in Jubilees or portions later excerpted from the work. Texts
In reviewing the textual history of Jubilees, it is difficult to be more succinct than J. C. VanderKam, who outlined its history thus:
1. Jubilees was written in Hebrew. 2. Jubilees was translated from Hebrew into Greek. 3. Jubilees was translated from Hebrew into Syriac. 4. Jubilees was translated from Greek into Latin. 5. Jubilees was translated from Greek into Ethiopic.14
11 P. Weimar, "Formen fruhjiidischer Literatur. Eine Skizze," Literatur und Religion des Friihjudentums, eds. J. Maier and J. Schreiner (WUrzburg, 1973) pp. 123-62. 12 R. H. Charles, The Book of Jubilees or the Little Genesis, p. xv. A similar opinion was expressed earlier by H. Ronsch in Das Buch der Jubilden oder die kleine Genesis, pp. 467f. 13 Ronsch, Das Buch der Jubilden, pp. 479-82. 14 J. C. VanderKam, Textual and Historical Studies in the Book of Jubilees, p. vi. The description of the texts is
actually quoted from the table of contents.Only fragments of the Greek text survive, in the form of quotations and summaries in
Greek sources. The Greek fragments have recently been collected by A.-M. Denis and
conveniently presented in his Fragmenta Pseudepigraphorum Graeca.15 It is unfortunate
that the Greek text has not survived in its entirety because both the Latin and Ethiopic
versions were translated from it. The primary basis for assuming that both of the later
versions are based upon a Greek text is the internal evidence of Greek loanwords, idioms,
and obvious mistranslations. H. Rdnsch presented data supporting a Greek base for the
Latin version,16 and R. H. Charles provided a smaller but no less convincing group of
examples to demonstrate that the Ethiopic version was translated from Greek.17
The existence of a Syriac version of Jubilees was still open to question when R. H. Charles wrote his introduction to Jubilees in volume 2 of The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha
of the Old Testament.18 The evidence available in 1913 was slight. It consisted of a list of
names of the wives of the patriarchs originally published by Ceriani19 and reprinted by
Charles as appendix III to his text of Jubilees. In 1921, however, E. Tisserant published
"Fragments syriaques du Livre des Jubilds."20 The fragments were discovered in an
anonymous Syriac chronicle. Since the author of the chronicle used only Syriac and Arabic
sources, these fragments bear witness to the existence of a Syriac text of Jubilees. Tisserant
found no internal evidence to suggest a Greek antecedent and concluded that the Syriac
Jubilees must have been translated directly from the Hebrew. Approximately one fourth of the Latin text has survived. It was first published by Ceriani
in 1861 and re-edited by both Ronsch and Charles.21 The Latin text, which Ronsch dated
in the mid-fifth century, is important because of its date, the length of the surviving
manuscript, and the relative care with which it was originally translated.Approximately one fourth of the Latin text has survived. It was first published by Ceriani
in 1861 and re-edited by both Ronsch and Charles.21 The Latin text, which Ronsch dated
in the mid-fifth century, is important because of its date, the length of the surviving
manuscript, and the relative care with which it was originally translated. Its editors have
noted lacunae and a number of corruptions. Charles, in particular, called attention to the
fact that its biblical quotations had been corrected to agree with the standard Septuagint or
Vulgate texts. Nevertheless, the Latin text is generally regarded as being almost as reliable
a witness as the Ethiopic text. Although Charles was cautious he occasionally relied upon
the Latin reading to emend his Ethiopic text. The Latin also provides help in interpreting
ambiguous Ethiopic phrases. The Ethiopic text is the only text that has survived in a form that is virtually complete. Therefore all complete translations of Jubilees are based on some form of the Ethiopic text. The present translation was made from the Ethiopic text edited by R. H. Charles in 1895.22
That text was based on four manuscripts which he designated A-D. The best manuscript
available to him was B, a sixteenth-century text preserved in the British Museum (B.M. Orient. 485), which he used as the basis of his edition. A number of shortcomings in Charles's edition, particularly his failure to list all of the
variant readings in his apparatus, have been noted by W. Baars and R. Zuurmond, who
were preparing a new critical edition.23 Nevertheless, Charles's text has several obvious
virtues. His decision to follow manuscript B seems wise. He skillfully treated the biblical
quotations in a systematic manner in an attempt to eliminate readings that contain scribal
corrections intended to make the text agree with that of the Ethiopic Old Testament.Ronsch explained as referring to "The Testament of Moses,"
a work known from four of the ancient catalogs which were prepared to define canonical
boundaries. Although Ronsch may have been justified in interpreting the cryptic he diatheke
as representing "The Testament of Moses,"13 a simple identification of Jubilees with the
work listed by that name in the catalogs has been rejected because the number of stichoi
assigned in the catalog of Nicephorus (1,100) is scarcely one fourth the length of Jubilees. "The Book of Adam's Daughters" was identified with Jubilees in the Decree of Gelasius;
and Syncellus (1.7) reported that "The Little Genesis" was also called "The Life of
Adam." It is generally assumed that the titles which relate the book to Adam are justified
only when referring to certain limited portions of Jubilees. These titles may have originated
to designate earlier works incorporated in Jubilees or portions later excerpted from the work. Texts
In reviewing the textual history of Jubilees, it is difficult to be more succinct than J. C. VanderKam, who outlined its history thus:
1. Jubilees was written in Hebrew. 2. Jubilees was translated from Hebrew into Greek. 3. Jubilees was translated from Hebrew into Syriac. 4. Jubilees was translated from Greek into Latin. 5. Jubilees was translated from Greek into Ethiopic.14
11 P. Weimar, "Formen fruhjiidischer Literatur. Eine Skizze," Literatur und Religion des Friihjudentums, eds. J. Maier and J. Schreiner (WUrzburg, 1973) pp. 123-62. 12 R. H. Charles, The Book of Jubilees or the Little Genesis, p. xv. A similar opinion was expressed earlier by H. Ronsch in Das Buch der Jubilden oder die kleine Genesis, pp. 467f. 13 Ronsch, Das Buch der Jubilden, pp. 479-82. 14 J. C. VanderKam, Textual and Historical Studies in the Book of Jubilees, p. vi. The description of the texts is
actually quoted from the table of contents.

His decision to follow manuscript B seems wise. He skillfully treated the biblical
quotations in a systematic manner in an attempt to eliminate readings that contain scribal
corrections intended to make the text agree with that of the Ethiopic Old Testament. Charles
also exercised good judgment in sorting out and evaluating the particular tendencies of the
Greek, Latin, and Ethiopic witnesses. Consequently his text is generally superior to any
single manuscript, and corrections to his text made without an intimate knowledge of all of
the witnesses are apt to be mistaken. The preparation of a new text will probably require years to complete, because the task
is very difficult. Nevertheless, the rationale and need for it are obvious. There is a group
13 A.-M. Denis, ed., Fragmenta pseudepigraphorum quae supersunt graeca, pp. 70-102. Cf. also J. T. Milik,
"Recherches sur la version grecque du livre des Jubills," RB 78 (1971) 545-57. 16 Rdnsch, Das Buch der Jubilden, pp. 439-60. 17 Charles, The Book of Jubilees, pp. xxxf. 18 Charles, APOT, vol. 2, p. 3. 19 A. M. Ceriani, Monumenta Sacra et Profana (Milan, 1861) vol. 2, pp. 9f. 20 E. Tisserant, RB 30 (1921) 55-86, 206-32. 21 Rdnsch, Das Buch der Jubilden; R. H. Charles, The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Jubilees. 22 Charles, Ethiopic Version. 23 W. Baars and R. Zuurmond, "The Project for a New Edition of the Ethiopic Book of Jubilees," JSS 9 (1964)
67-74. [Baars and Zuurmond have ceased work on this project. —J.H.C]of Ethiopic manuscripts now available which were unknown to Charles. Baars and Zuurmond
describe five manuscripts which they examined; all are from European collections. VanderKam has assigned them the letters Er-I.24 More recently, three additional manuscripts
have been copied by the Ethiopian Manuscript Microfilm Library Project. They are available
on microfilm at the Monastic Manuscript Microfilm Library, St. John's Abbey and University
in Collegeville, Minnesota. It is quite likely that additional Ethiopic manuscripts will be
discovered. A new critical text will have to include variant readings from the Syriac text published
by E. Tisserant, which were also unknown to Charles. It will have to include all of the
Qumran texts, some of which have not yet been published. In the present translation, both
the Syriac text and the group of Qumran texts studied by VanderKam have been carefully
examined and used to improve Charles's text. No other major change has been made. Original language
There is no longer any reason to doubt that Jubilees was originally written in Hebrew. That was a view most forcefully argued by R. H. Charles over seventy years ago vis-a-vis
the possibility of a Greek or Aramaic original. Nevertheless, there was still considerable
latitude for debate until the discovery of fragments of the Hebrew text at both Qumran and
Masada. The fragments from Qumran are especially significant. They include the earliest
known manuscript, datable on paleographic grounds to the late Hasmonaean period (c. 75-
50 B.C.), and their presence at Qumran called immediate attention to the many close parallels
between the views of the author of Jubilees and the teaching within that community. The
manuscripts from Qumran are near enough to the date of the text's composition and close
enough to its original social matrix virtually to exclude the possibility that they are translations
from some other language.75-
50 B.C.), and their presence at Qumran called immediate attention to the many close parallels
between the views of the author of Jubilees and the teaching within that community. The
manuscripts from Qumran are near enough to the date of the text's composition and close
enough to its original social matrix virtually to exclude the possibility that they are translations
from some other language. Consequently, it is generally maintained that the text was written
in Hebrew. Date
The discoveries at Qumran have also helped narrow the limits for dating Jubilees. They
provide new data for determining the latest possible date. Jubliees must have been written
before: (1) the date of the earliest fragment of the text discovered at Qumran; (2) the date
of Qumran documents which depend on Jubilees; (3) the date of the split between the
Maccabean establishment and the sect which settled at Qumran. The earliest published fragment of Jubilees from Qumran is dated in the late Hasmonaean
period (c. 75-50 B.C.), but VanderKam has reported that two unpublished fragments
(4Qml6Juba and 4Qml7Jubb) have been dated by F. M. Cross to 125-75 B.C, with circa
100 as the preferred date. VanderKam justly observes that it is unlikely that the two
unpublished fragments, which are written in a semicursive script, belong to the original
manuscript of Jubilees. Therefore, paleographic dating of the earliest fragments points to a
date prior to 100 B.C.25
There are two texts from Qumran which may have used Jubilees. In the case of the
Damascus Rule (CD), most scholars are convinced that there is an explicit reference to
Jubilees (CD 16.2-4). The earliest Hebrew fragment of the Damascus Document is dated
to 75-50 B.C., but its composition is certainly earlier than that; perhaps it was composed
at the end of the second or beginning of the first century B.C. That simply confirms a date
prior to 100 B.C. for Jubilees.His decision to follow manuscript B seems wise. He skillfully treated the biblical
quotations in a systematic manner in an attempt to eliminate readings that contain scribal
corrections intended to make the text agree with that of the Ethiopic Old Testament. Charles
also exercised good judgment in sorting out and evaluating the particular tendencies of the
Greek, Latin, and Ethiopic witnesses. Consequently his text is generally superior to any
single manuscript, and corrections to his text made without an intimate knowledge of all of
the witnesses are apt to be mistaken. The preparation of a new text will probably require years to complete, because the task
is very difficult. Nevertheless, the rationale and need for it are obvious. There is a group
13 A.-M. Denis, ed., Fragmenta pseudepigraphorum quae supersunt graeca, pp. 70-102. Cf. also J. T. Milik,
"Recherches sur la version grecque du livre des Jubills," RB 78 (1971) 545-57. 16 Rdnsch, Das Buch der Jubilden, pp. 439-60. 17 Charles, The Book of Jubilees, pp. xxxf. 18 Charles, APOT, vol. 2, p. 3. 19 A. M. Ceriani, Monumenta Sacra et Profana (Milan, 1861) vol. 2, pp. 9f. 20 E. Tisserant, RB 30 (1921) 55-86, 206-32. 21 Rdnsch, Das Buch der Jubilden; R. H. Charles, The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Jubilees. 22 Charles, Ethiopic Version. 23 W. Baars and R. Zuurmond, "The Project for a New Edition of the Ethiopic Book of Jubilees," JSS 9 (1964)
67-74. [Baars and Zuurmond have ceased work on this project. —J.H.C]

That simply confirms a date
prior to 100 B.C. for Jubilees. The Genesis Apocryphon (lQapGen) clearly shares common
traditions and a common biblical text with Jubilees. Scholars are still debating the precise
nature of the relationship between the two documents. It is unlikely that the Genesis
Apocryphon served as a source for Jubilees; J. Fitzmyer, for example, claims that the
Genesis Apocryphon "depends on . . . Jubilees."26 By assuming that priority, P. Weimar
24 VanderKam, Textual and Historical Studies, pp. 14f. 25 Ibid., pp. 215f. [My latest information is that there are now nineteen Eth. MSS of Jub. —J. C. VanderKam.]
26 J. A. Fitzmyer, The Genesis Apocryphon of Qumran Cave I: A Commentary. (Biblica et Orientalia 18A; Rome,
1966) p. 14.was able to provide an impressive illustration of the manner in which the writer of the
Genesis Aprocryphon made use of Jubilees.27 The date of the Genesis Aprocryphon is
uncertain, but it was probably composed in the first century B.C. By itself, the evidence
provided by the Genesis Apocryphon is less helpful for dating Jubilees than the witness of
the Damascus Document, but taken together, the fact that two separate first-century writers
treat Jubilees as an authoritative source indicates that Jubilees was already sufficiently
established to warrant that status. A still earlier date can be supported, but it depends on a different, somewhat less objective
type of evidence. The majority of scholars who have studied the relationship between
Jubilees and the doctrines of the sect at Qumran have noted a strong kinship. The parallels
are overwhelming. They include numerous similarities in theology, ritual, law, and piety,
as well as outright literary dependence and a common official calendar. Differences between
Jubilees and Qumran in matters of eschatology (viz. messiah), ritual practice (viz. baptism
and communal meals), details of theology, and attitudes toward the Temple and war were
pointed out by B. Noack in an attempt to correct the assumption that Jubilees was written
at Qumran.28 It is more accurate to think of Jubilees as a work that was produced within a
community of Hasidim or Essenes prior to the withdrawal of some of the members of the
sect to Qumran. The most significant difference between Jubilees and the writings from Qumran for the
purpose of dating is the fact that Jubilees does not reflect any significant break with the
larger national body whereas the Qumran sect has broken with the establishment and its
priesthood, which it judges apostate. Although the author of Jubilees was one of the spiritual
parents of the Qumran sect, he accepted the establishment and was filled with the joy of
Maccabean triumphs and hopes for the future. Years ago R. H.Years ago R. H. Charles noted the
proestablishment stance in Jubilees. He thought that Jubilees was written by a Pharisee, so
he concluded that "it was written before the public breach between Hyrcanus and the
Pharisees."29 In the light of Qumran, the author is no longer considered to be a Pharisee. He belongs within the Hasidic or Essene tradition. It is therefore necessary to conclude that
Jubilees was written before the breach between the Maccabeans and the Essenes. Unfortu­
nately, that breach was not public. Our evidence for it comes from cryptic references to the
"wicked priest" in the Qumran documents. The split probably occurred in the time of
Jonathan or Simon (160-134 B.C.). Since the issue was a dispute over the high priesthood,
two dates compete for attention: 152 B.C., the year that Jonathan was appointed high priest
by Balas, and 140 B.C., the year that Simon was recognized as high priest by the people
(IMac 14:34-49). Since Jubilees was written before the split, the latest possible date should
be set at either 140 B.C. or 152 B.C., depending on the identification of the "wicked priest."
A certain amount of subjective judgment is also involved in determining the earliest
possible date for the writing of Jubilees. The work can be no earlier than the latest historical
event to which it alludes. The majority of scholars assume that the writer composed his
account of Jacob's wars against the Amorites and Edomites (chs. 34, 38) under the influence
of certain Maccabean triumphs to which he alludes. In the war against the Amorites, for
example, Jubilees describes the participation of the king of Bethhoron and confederates
from the immediate area (34:4-7), recalling Judas Maccabeus' smashing victory over
Nicanor at Bethhoron (IMac 7:39-50). Both Judas and John Hyrcanus defeated the Edomites.That simply confirms a date
prior to 100 B.C. for Jubilees. The Genesis Apocryphon (lQapGen) clearly shares common
traditions and a common biblical text with Jubilees. Scholars are still debating the precise
nature of the relationship between the two documents. It is unlikely that the Genesis
Apocryphon served as a source for Jubilees; J. Fitzmyer, for example, claims that the
Genesis Apocryphon "depends on . . . Jubilees."26 By assuming that priority, P. Weimar
24 VanderKam, Textual and Historical Studies, pp. 14f. 25 Ibid., pp. 215f. [My latest information is that there are now nineteen Eth. MSS of Jub. —J. C. VanderKam.]
26 J. A. Fitzmyer, The Genesis Apocryphon of Qumran Cave I: A Commentary. (Biblica et Orientalia 18A; Rome,
1966) p. 14.

In the war against the Amorites, for
example, Jubilees describes the participation of the king of Bethhoron and confederates
from the immediate area (34:4-7), recalling Judas Maccabeus' smashing victory over
Nicanor at Bethhoron (IMac 7:39-50). Both Judas and John Hyrcanus defeated the Edomites. Charles, who would set the earliest possible date for Jubilees as late as the breach between
the Pharisees and Hyrcanus, assumed that Jubilees contained allusions to the subjugation of
Edom by that ruler.30 That was not a necessary conclusion, however, since the account in
Jubilees could equally have been influenced by historical campaigns of Judas, which are
noted in 1 Maccabees 5:3, 65. Recently, VanderKam carefully studied all the apparent
allusions to Maccabean history and concluded that "the latest events to which I can find
reference in Jubilees are Judas Maccabeus' wars in 161 B.C."31 If that is correct, the date
of Jubilees must be set between 161-140 B.C. 27 Weimar, Literdtur und Religion des Fruhjudentums, pp. 144-55. 28 B. Noack, "Qumran and the Book of Jubilees," SEA 22-23 (1957-58) 191-207. 29 Charles, APOT, vol. 2, p. 6. 30 Charles, The Book of Jubilees, p. lxii. 31 VanderKam, Textual and Historical Studies, p. 283.Provenance
The author of Jubilees was a Jew who lived in Palestine. That view may be supported
by a number of observations. The fact that he wrote in Hebrew would favor a Palestinian
background. His writing may reflect an awareness that not all of his contemporaries were
thoroughly familiar with the language because he reports that even father Abraham had to
learn Hebrew. Nevertheless, he understood that a knowledge of Hebrew was absolutely
necessary for the study of sacred books (12:25-27). He made use of a Palestinian biblical
text. The earliest external witness to his work is found in a writing from Qumran (CD). He
has special praise for the land of Lebanon from the Jordan to the sea (10:29). Jerusalem
was holy (1:28), and Zion was the navel of the earth (8:19). Although his knowledge of
world geography in chapters 8-10 is seriously deficient at many points, it is clear that he
is more familiar with the area assigned to Shem than that assigned to Ham or Japheth. Within the area assigned to Shem, his knowledge of Canaan from the Jordan to the sea
(10:29) is the greatest. Despite the fact that many place names have been corrupted in the
transmission of the Ethiopic text, scholars have been able to reconstruct most of them,
indicating that the author of Jubilees had a detailed knowledge of many cities and towns
within ancient Canaan. The author probably belonged to a priestly family. That may account for his special
interest in the origin of festivals, the determination of sacred times, and his incessant concern
for ritual details (21:7-18). In the supplemental material which he brings to the Genesis
account, Levi is given priority over the sons of Jacob (chs. 30-32), even being set before
Judah (31:12f.). Levi is also the one who is entrusted with a library of books (45:16)
containing heavenly lore revealed to Jacob (32:21-26) and sacred traditions passed down
from earlier patriarchs. One of the duties of Levi was to preserve and renew the books.Levi is also the one who is entrusted with a library of books (45:16)
containing heavenly lore revealed to Jacob (32:21-26) and sacred traditions passed down
from earlier patriarchs. One of the duties of Levi was to preserve and renew the books. If
our author defines his own vocation at any point, it must be here. He undoubtedly saw
himself as part of a continuous chain of priestly writers going back to Levi. The idea of
renewing ancestral books probably implied a license to do more than just make new copies. He was commissioned to bring ancient traditions up to date. The author's strict interpretation of the Law, his appeal to a distinct set of traditions
which reported the cultic life and piety of the patriarchs, his hostility to surrounding nations,
his abhorrence of gentile practices, his insistent demand for obedience to God's commands
in a time of apostasy, his belief that God was about to create a new spirit within his people
which would make possible a proper relationship between God and Israel, and his
preoccupation with adherence to a calendar of 364 days are some of the characteristics
which identify him as part of a zealous, conservative, pious segment of Judaism which was
bound together by its own set of traditions, expectations, and practices. It is well known
that such groups played a significant role in the struggles of the Maccabean age. First
Maccabees 2:29-42 reports about one group that withdrew to the wilderness in their search
for justice. When they were attacked on the sabbath by troops of the Seleucid king, they
refused to defend themselves because war on the sabbath was forbidden. A similar prohibition
is found in Jubilees 50:12. The group described in 1 Maccabees was slaughtered, but when
Mattathias, the leader of the Maccabean revolt, made a public display of mourning for
them, other pious groups of Hasidim joined forces with him.In the war against the Amorites, for
example, Jubilees describes the participation of the king of Bethhoron and confederates
from the immediate area (34:4-7), recalling Judas Maccabeus' smashing victory over
Nicanor at Bethhoron (IMac 7:39-50). Both Judas and John Hyrcanus defeated the Edomites. Charles, who would set the earliest possible date for Jubilees as late as the breach between
the Pharisees and Hyrcanus, assumed that Jubilees contained allusions to the subjugation of
Edom by that ruler.30 That was not a necessary conclusion, however, since the account in
Jubilees could equally have been influenced by historical campaigns of Judas, which are
noted in 1 Maccabees 5:3, 65. Recently, VanderKam carefully studied all the apparent
allusions to Maccabean history and concluded that "the latest events to which I can find
reference in Jubilees are Judas Maccabeus' wars in 161 B.C."31 If that is correct, the date
of Jubilees must be set between 161-140 B.C. 27 Weimar, Literdtur und Religion des Fruhjudentums, pp. 144-55. 28 B. Noack, "Qumran and the Book of Jubilees," SEA 22-23 (1957-58) 191-207. 29 Charles, APOT, vol. 2, p. 6. 30 Charles, The Book of Jubilees, p. lxii. 31 VanderKam, Textual and Historical Studies, p. 283.

A similar prohibition
is found in Jubilees 50:12. The group described in 1 Maccabees was slaughtered, but when
Mattathias, the leader of the Maccabean revolt, made a public display of mourning for
them, other pious groups of Hasidim joined forces with him. The spiritual genealogy of
both the Pharisees and Essenes should probably be traced back to those groups of pious
Hasidim. The author of Jubilees belonged to the Hasidic or Essene branch of Judaism. Historical importance
Although Jubilees presumes to give an account of the history of the world prior to the
time of Moses, it does not add any trustworthy information beyond that which may
incidentally be contained in the biblical writings. That does not mean that all of the
supplemental information presented in Jubilees was composed on the basis of the author's
imagination or his own contemporary history. It is obvious that he used a number of earlier
sources. Unfortunately, all of the traditions were transposed into a patriarchal setting whether
they belonged there or not. Thus accounts of wars against the Amorites and Edomites,
which the author reinterpreted in light of the Maccabean battles, undoubtedly had a longprehistory in extrabiblical traditions. In Jubilees, however, they were radically recast and
set within the patriarchal period, thus obscuring them and depriving them of their value as
a witness to any original historical event that they may have once had. As a witness to the author's own time, Jubilees is extremely important. Once the
approximate date of Jubilees has been determined, it provides an excellent original source
for the study of the social, political, and religious views of one group of Hasidim who lived
near the middle of the second century B.C. It can, for example, provide evidence of Jewish
reaction to some of the policies of Antiochus IV. According to 1 Maccabees, he was tolerant
of apostate Jews who joined his cause, permitting them to build a gymnasium where they
could imitate gentile ways, exercising in the nude, and disguising "their circumcision"
(IMac l:14f.). Both of those evils are sharply criticized in Jubilees (3:31; 15:33f.). Antiochus
is also credited with directing other actions that certainly must have outraged the community
to which the author of Jubilees belonged. The king's orders led to the shedding of innocent
blood (IMac 1:37; cf. Jub 7:23-29), the banning of sacrifices (IMac 1:45; cf. Jub 32:4-
22), the profaning of the sabbath and festival days (IMac 1:46; cf. Jub 23:19; 6:37), the
prohibiting of circumcision (IMac 1:47; cf. Jub 15:24-29), and a burning of books (IMac
1:56; cf. Jub 45:16). If Jubilees is dated between 161-140 B.C., it becomes an important primary source for
studying the evolution of the various religious parties which became prominent in Judea
just before the birth of Christ. Its kinship with the sect at Qumran and its relationship to
certain other writings has been described by F. M.Its kinship with the sect at Qumran and its relationship to
certain other writings has been described by F. M. Cross in the following terms:
The concrete contacts in theology, terminology, calendrical peculiarities, and
priestly interests, between the editions of Enoch, Jubilees, and the Testaments of
Levi and Naphtali found at Qumran on the one hand, and the demonstrably sectarian
works of Qumran on the other, are so systematic and detailed that we must place
the composition of these works within a single line of tradition.32
As an early witness to that "line of tradition," Jubilees may be understood to be a product
of one of the "proto-Essene (presumably Hasidic) communities" mentioned elsewhere by
Cross.33 There are also parallels between Jubilees and later rabbinic attitudes. We can no
longer agree with Charles's judgment that the author was "a pharisee of the straitest sect,"34
but his view was not absurd. Before the discovery of the library at Qumran, it was quite
reasonable to read Jubilees in light of the more abundant literature from Pharisaic circles. That a kinship exists between Jubilees and later works by the Pharisees is due to the fact
that the Pharisees also had roots in the Hasidic movement of the Maccabean age. To the
degree that Jubilees accurately reflects a proto-Essene position, it also provides evidence
that at the time of its writing the boundaries between Pharisees and Essenes were not as
sharply drawn as they were a hundred years later. Finally, if Milik is correct in tracing the
early Enoch books to Samaritan circles, the obvious relationships between Jubilees and
Enoch raise interesting questions about the openness of the Hasidim to Samaritan influences
during the Maccabean period.35
Theological Importance
There are a number of excellent discussions of the theology of Jubilees. One of the finest
is that of M.A similar prohibition
is found in Jubilees 50:12. The group described in 1 Maccabees was slaughtered, but when
Mattathias, the leader of the Maccabean revolt, made a public display of mourning for
them, other pious groups of Hasidim joined forces with him. The spiritual genealogy of
both the Pharisees and Essenes should probably be traced back to those groups of pious
Hasidim. The author of Jubilees belonged to the Hasidic or Essene branch of Judaism. Historical importance
Although Jubilees presumes to give an account of the history of the world prior to the
time of Moses, it does not add any trustworthy information beyond that which may
incidentally be contained in the biblical writings. That does not mean that all of the
supplemental information presented in Jubilees was composed on the basis of the author's
imagination or his own contemporary history. It is obvious that he used a number of earlier
sources. Unfortunately, all of the traditions were transposed into a patriarchal setting whether
they belonged there or not. Thus accounts of wars against the Amorites and Edomites,
which the author reinterpreted in light of the Maccabean battles, undoubtedly had a long

Finally, if Milik is correct in tracing the
early Enoch books to Samaritan circles, the obvious relationships between Jubilees and
Enoch raise interesting questions about the openness of the Hasidim to Samaritan influences
during the Maccabean period.35
Theological Importance
There are a number of excellent discussions of the theology of Jubilees. One of the finest
is that of M. Testuz.36 He was able to go beyond most earlier studies because he saw clearly
the nature of the theological parallels between Jubilees and Qumran. G. Davenport has also
made an important contribution to the study of Jubilees by carefully examining its
eschatology.37 As a result of his study it would appear that the writer of Jubilees was
scarcely interested in events which might occur beyond his own historical lifetime. He is
32 F. M. Cross, The Ancient Library of Qumran and Modern Biblical Studies (rev. ed.; Garden City, N.Y., 1961)
p. 199. 33 Ibid., p. 200. 34 Charles, The Book of Jubilees, p. lxxiii. 35 J. T. Milik, The Books of Enoch: Aramaic Fragments ofQumr&n Cave 4 (Oxford, 1976) pp. 9f., 13. 36 Testuz, Les Idies religieuses. 37 Davenport, The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees.not concerned to describe a future Messiah, to give a detailed account of a coming messianic
age, or to discuss at length an afterlife. The first concern of the eschatological passages in
Jubilees is to teach that God is now about to restore a proper relationship with his people
and to call the readers to obedience. If one is aware of the new information to be gleaned
from the Qumran texts and adopts a cautious view regarding the interpretation of the
eschatological passages, most of the earlier discussions of the theology of Jubilees may be
read with profit. Only the briefest outline is possible in the present work. In general, the writer of Jubilees expected his readers to share a common view of God
derived from the Old Testament, together with all which that implied about the power,
glory, majesty, wisdom, justice, creativity, compassion, or wrath of an ethical deity who
had called forth a unique people to serve him in righteousness. His view of God's intent
for Israel vis-a-vis the other nations, however, falls short of Second Isaiah's "light of the
nations" (Isa 42:6) or Jonah's mission to Nineveh, siding instead with the Chronicler in
calling for a rejection of all things gentile. In describing God's control of history, he has
introduced certain nuances which lead in the direction of a rather strict determinism. It is
clear that the author assumed that men were both free and culpable for their sins. Nevertheless,
when he makes God the speaker of the prophetic words in chapter 1, they are no longer
prophetic words. They become facts present in the foreknowledge of God. Prophetic words
are not necessarily inevitable; but there is no avoiding what God knows to be the future. The fact that certain predictions are inscribed on heavenly tablets (5:13) implies the same
fixed order of events. Even the evil forces of the world are fixed by God.The fact that certain predictions are inscribed on heavenly tablets (5:13) implies the same
fixed order of events. Even the evil forces of the world are fixed by God. Mastema, who
has been allotted exactly one tenth of the demons born in the days of Noah (10:9), may be
bound by God at will (48:15). Between God and man, Jubilees introduces us to a host of angels and demons. The author
stands at the beginning of a long history of speculation regarding that realm. In his account,
only the prince of evil spirits, Mastema (= Satan), is named (10:8). The angels are described
only by rank. There are two high ranks of angels: the angels of the presence and the angels
of sanctification. They are born circumcised (15:27) and are therefore able to participate
with Israel in all of her rites and feasts, including the sabbath rest (2:18). Lest the world
go uncared for on the seventh day, however, God also created lesser angelic powers such
as the spirits of wind, darkness, snow, and heat (2:2). There is also a class of angels known
as Watchers, who were sent to instruct men and to do righteousness (4:15), but they
corrupted themselves by having intercourse with the daughters of men who bore them giants
(7:2 If.). The Watchers also fathered a host of evil demons who plagued the sons of Noah
(10:1-6). Both angels and demons have their proper work to do within the world. Angelic spirits
control the forces of nature within the world (2:2f.). Good angels teach men skills (3:15;
12:26f.), inform them of God's will (12:22), test them (19:3), report their sins to God (4:6),
announce future events (16:1-4, 16), reveal secret cosmic lore (4:21), bind up evil spirits
(10:9f.), and actively assist those who are attacked by the forces of evil (48:4, 13). Good
angels may be assigned to guard men (35:17), but those assigned to direct the gentile nations
lead them astray (15:31).Finally, if Milik is correct in tracing the
early Enoch books to Samaritan circles, the obvious relationships between Jubilees and
Enoch raise interesting questions about the openness of the Hasidim to Samaritan influences
during the Maccabean period.35
Theological Importance
There are a number of excellent discussions of the theology of Jubilees. One of the finest
is that of M. Testuz.36 He was able to go beyond most earlier studies because he saw clearly
the nature of the theological parallels between Jubilees and Qumran. G. Davenport has also
made an important contribution to the study of Jubilees by carefully examining its
eschatology.37 As a result of his study it would appear that the writer of Jubilees was
scarcely interested in events which might occur beyond his own historical lifetime. He is
32 F. M. Cross, The Ancient Library of Qumran and Modern Biblical Studies (rev. ed.; Garden City, N.Y., 1961)
p. 199. 33 Ibid., p. 200. 34 Charles, The Book of Jubilees, p. lxxiii. 35 J. T. Milik, The Books of Enoch: Aramaic Fragments ofQumr&n Cave 4 (Oxford, 1976) pp. 9f., 13. 36 Testuz, Les Idies religieuses. 37 Davenport, The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees.

Good angels teach men skills (3:15;
12:26f.), inform them of God's will (12:22), test them (19:3), report their sins to God (4:6),
announce future events (16:1-4, 16), reveal secret cosmic lore (4:21), bind up evil spirits
(10:9f.), and actively assist those who are attacked by the forces of evil (48:4, 13). Good
angels may be assigned to guard men (35:17), but those assigned to direct the gentile nations
lead them astray (15:31). The Watchers were originally good angels (4:15) who fell into
sin with the daughters of men and were bound in the midst of the earth (5:6-11). Their
children, the giants, were destroyed, but the spirits of their children (IEn 15:8f.) wander
the earth as demons, causing diseases (10:1 If.), leading men astray (10: If.), seeking human
sacrifice, and encouraging idolatry (1:11). The author's interest in demonic powers provided a practical way of dealing with the
problem of evil: How can one affirm both the omnipotence and goodness of God in the
presence of manifest evil? In other words, where does evil come from? The author of
Jubilees would teach us three things about evil: (1) It is superhuman; (2) but it is not caused
by God; (3) therefore it comes from the angelic world, which has suffered a breach from
God's good order. The author of Jubilees does not blame Adam for the continuing diseases
and sins of mankind. The cause of evil is clearly superhuman, and Jubilees continually
stresses the helplessness of men (10: If., 8) and nations (15:31) before its power. Nevertheless
God cannot be held responsible. The author of Jubilees is so certain of that point that he
can recast the biblical traditions with confidence. It was Mastema and not God who tempted
Abraham to kill Isaac (17:15-18:13; cf. Gen 22:1-19), who provoked the Egyptians topursue Israel (48:12; cf. Ex 14:8f.), and who sought to kill Moses on the way to Egypt
(48:2f.; cf. Ex 4:24). The origin of Mastema is not separately discussed in Jubilees, but the
spirits which serve him are all traced to a cosmic breach which occurred when the Watchers
violated their natural order to mate with the daughters of men. The story of the fall of
Adam is repeated in Jubilees, but it is the fall in the superhuman or semidivine realm that
most readily explains the presence of evil in the world since the time of the Flood. The dualism of the angelic world was reflected in the world of men. The good kingdom
was identified with the children of Israel. God, their Father (1:28), selected them as a
special people above all peoples (2:21) to be marked by circumcision (15:11) and to
participate with him and his highest angels in the sabbath and all of the other festivals of
Israel. The other nations are separated from God because he has placed spirits in authority
over them to lead them astray. God alone rules Israel (15:32f.). Israel is qualitatively
different from all other nations. In the context of such an understanding, the hostility
between Israel and surrounding nations may be seen as a conflict between good and evil. The Lord destroyed the Rephaim because of their evil (29:11). The Egyptians were motivated
to pursue Israel by the prince of evil, Mastema (48:12). The Philistines were cursed by
Isaac (24:28-33), and the Canaanites were described as being more cursed than all the sons
of Noah for illegitimately seizing the land that Israel was to occupy (10:32). The Shechemites
(30:4-6), the Amorites (34:1-9), and the Edomites (38:1-10) were all destroyed by the
righteous sons of Israel. On a theological level, we are to understand that those who do not
belong to the children of the convenant belong to the children of destruction (15:26).The Shechemites
(30:4-6), the Amorites (34:1-9), and the Edomites (38:1-10) were all destroyed by the
righteous sons of Israel. On a theological level, we are to understand that those who do not
belong to the children of the convenant belong to the children of destruction (15:26). It is
possible, of course, for even the children of Israel to be subject to attack by the spiritual
powers of evil (48:2f.). In such a case, the good angels of God will save them (48:4), and
God himself will call to account both his angels and spirits in order to preserve and bless
the children of Israel (15:32). When the children of Israel sin, however, God provides a
day in which they may repent and be forgiven (5:17f.). The priestly author of Jubilees presents his theological work with the authority of
one who understands himself to be representing "the normative, orthodox" position. He
knows of periods of apostasy when the children of IsraePwHTgo astray (1:8-11). In some
cases sinners will act so outrageously that they will have to be cut off from the covenant
and left without pardon or forgiveness (15:34). Nevertheless, he is writing at a time
when he expects a general return to the "normative" position which he represents (23:26). Undoubtedly, his hope was frustrated. It would not be too long before his views would be
ignored or contested, particularly his view of the calendar. Chapter 6:34-38 bears witness
to the fact that there were many who did not observe it in his own time. He accuses them
of sharing the ignorance and errors of the gentiles (6:35), but there is no evidence that they
were in any position to threaten or prevent his own proper observance of festival times. He
does not give us any reason to believe that he belonged to a small sectarian minority.Good angels teach men skills (3:15;
12:26f.), inform them of God's will (12:22), test them (19:3), report their sins to God (4:6),
announce future events (16:1-4, 16), reveal secret cosmic lore (4:21), bind up evil spirits
(10:9f.), and actively assist those who are attacked by the forces of evil (48:4, 13). Good
angels may be assigned to guard men (35:17), but those assigned to direct the gentile nations
lead them astray (15:31). The Watchers were originally good angels (4:15) who fell into
sin with the daughters of men and were bound in the midst of the earth (5:6-11). Their
children, the giants, were destroyed, but the spirits of their children (IEn 15:8f.) wander
the earth as demons, causing diseases (10:1 If.), leading men astray (10: If.), seeking human
sacrifice, and encouraging idolatry (1:11). The author's interest in demonic powers provided a practical way of dealing with the
problem of evil: How can one affirm both the omnipotence and goodness of God in the
presence of manifest evil? In other words, where does evil come from? The author of
Jubilees would teach us three things about evil: (1) It is superhuman; (2) but it is not caused
by God; (3) therefore it comes from the angelic world, which has suffered a breach from
God's good order. The author of Jubilees does not blame Adam for the continuing diseases
and sins of mankind. The cause of evil is clearly superhuman, and Jubilees continually
stresses the helplessness of men (10: If., 8) and nations (15:31) before its power. Nevertheless
God cannot be held responsible. The author of Jubilees is so certain of that point that he
can recast the biblical traditions with confidence. It was Mastema and not God who tempted
Abraham to kill Isaac (17:15-18:13; cf. Gen 22:1-19), who provoked the Egyptians to

He accuses them
of sharing the ignorance and errors of the gentiles (6:35), but there is no evidence that they
were in any position to threaten or prevent his own proper observance of festival times. He
does not give us any reason to believe that he belonged to a small sectarian minority. It
was only at a later time when intense party strife broke out in the struggles for the office
of high priest and the rival lunar calendar was fixed in such a way as to exclude competition
that those who followed the calendar of Jubilees would have to acknowledge their minority
position. The theology of Jubilees has a uniqueness over against the views put forth by
other groups, but it was not directed toward a small embattled minority. It,was a theology
appeaJing to all of the pious sons of Israel to return to strict obedience to the law and a
proper observance of sacred times in accordance with God's covenant. Relation to canonical books
The author of Jubilees had before him most of the books of the Old Testament. His use
of the Pentateuch is extensive. Genesis 1 through Exodus 24:18 provided the major source
used by the author, but he also used legal and cultic data found elsewhere in the first five
books. In several passages the author refers or alludes to the book of the "first law" (6:22;
30:12, 21; 50:6). The most obvious identification for that book of law is the Pentateuch. The author was also familiar with the books contained in that portion of the Hebrew
Bible known as the Prophets. He makes use of expressions and data familiar from Kings,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and several of the twelve minor prophets. Examples are cited in
the margin of the translation of Jubilees which follows.The author's familiarity with books contained in the portion of the Hebrew Bible known
as the Writings is less clear. Granted the date of Jubilees and its provenance, he was
probably not familiar with the Book of Esther. The marginal citations indicate a familiarity
with Psalms and the work of the Chronicler (IChr, 2Chr, Ezra, Neh). The temptations of
Abraham in Jubilees 17f. clearly reflect the motif found in Job. Evidence for his familiarity
with other books in the collection of Writings is not clearly present. Evidence for the use of data appearing in Jubilees by writers of the New Testament is
conveniently summarized by Charles. On the basis of the evidence which he provided,38 it
is clear that Paul and the authors of Luke-Acts, James, Hebrews, and 2 Peter were familiar
with expressions and ideas that appear in Jubilees. Relation to apocryphal books
The relationship of Jubilees to other apocryphal writings remains an open and perplexing
question. The recovery of fragments of both previously known and newly discovered
apocryphal works from Qumran has led to a general reappraisal of many of the documents. In the case of Jubilees, the discoveries led to a new understanding of its proto-Essene
provenance and support for dating the work prior to the Essene split with the Maccabean
rulers. In the case of Enoch and the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, the finds at
Qumran have opened up a new discussion of the evolution of those documents. Inasmuch
as they are composite works, the question of dating the separate parts of each text has
generated considerable debate.39 In the case of the so-called Hymn to the Creator from the
Qumran Psalms Scroll and the better-known Genesis Apocryphon (lQapGen), we are
confronted with two entirely new texts which are very closely related to Jubilees. A clear
understanding of their relationship to Jubilees would require a firm dating for both texts.Inasmuch
as they are composite works, the question of dating the separate parts of each text has
generated considerable debate.39 In the case of the so-called Hymn to the Creator from the
Qumran Psalms Scroll and the better-known Genesis Apocryphon (lQapGen), we are
confronted with two entirely new texts which are very closely related to Jubilees. A clear
understanding of their relationship to Jubilees would require a firm dating for both texts. Inasmuch as Jubilees was part of a rather vast library of texts of uncertain date which
were either used or written by the sect at Qumran, it will require much more research before
the relative relationships between interdependent texts can be clearly demonstrated. In the
process of publishing additional fragments from Qumran many new parallels to Jubilees
will undoubtedly be uncovered. It will also require time to fix their relationship precisely. In the meantime, the best that can be done is to offer reasonable suggestions in the light of
our present knowledge. It is generally agreed that Jubilees is dependent on parts of the book of Enoch (IEn). At
the same time, it seems likely that the later portions of Enoch may be based on Jubilees. The question has been dealt with most recently by J. T. Milik, who argues that only four
books of the later Enochic Pentateuch were known at Qumran. The four were: (1) a larger
version of the Astronomical Book (IEn 72-82); (2) the Book of Watchers (IEn 1-36); (3)
the Book of Dreams (IEn 83-90); and (4) the Epistle of Enoch (IEn 91-108). From that
list, he dated the first three prior to Jubilees, following Charles in the assumption that
Jubilees made use of them. With regard to the epistle, Milik assumed that it depended on
Jubilees.40
The relationship which exists between the Aramaic apocryphal text of Levi, the Testament
of Levi, and the Book of Jubilees has been most recently studied by A. Hultgard. It is his
opinion that the apocryphal text and Jubilees depend on a common source.He accuses them
of sharing the ignorance and errors of the gentiles (6:35), but there is no evidence that they
were in any position to threaten or prevent his own proper observance of festival times. He
does not give us any reason to believe that he belonged to a small sectarian minority. It
was only at a later time when intense party strife broke out in the struggles for the office
of high priest and the rival lunar calendar was fixed in such a way as to exclude competition
that those who followed the calendar of Jubilees would have to acknowledge their minority
position. The theology of Jubilees has a uniqueness over against the views put forth by
other groups, but it was not directed toward a small embattled minority. It,was a theology
appeaJing to all of the pious sons of Israel to return to strict obedience to the law and a
proper observance of sacred times in accordance with God's covenant. Relation to canonical books
The author of Jubilees had before him most of the books of the Old Testament. His use
of the Pentateuch is extensive. Genesis 1 through Exodus 24:18 provided the major source
used by the author, but he also used legal and cultic data found elsewhere in the first five
books. In several passages the author refers or alludes to the book of the "first law" (6:22;
30:12, 21; 50:6). The most obvious identification for that book of law is the Pentateuch. The author was also familiar with the books contained in that portion of the Hebrew
Bible known as the Prophets. He makes use of expressions and data familiar from Kings,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and several of the twelve minor prophets. Examples are cited in
the margin of the translation of Jubilees which follows.

Hultgard. It is his
opinion that the apocryphal text and Jubilees depend on a common source. He claims,
however, that the author of the Testament of Levi made use of the Aramaic apocryphal text
of Levi in writing his testament. Thus the parallels which are noted between Jubilees and
the Testament of Levi are less immediate.41 That interpretation appears justified in light of
our present understanding of the texts. 38 Charles, The Book of Jubilees, pp. lxxxiii-lxxxv. 39 The problem of the evolution of Jub has also been raised anew. G. L. Davenport began the investigation in his
study of The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees. Davenport's analysis of the structure of those chs. of Jub with
which he dealt was very carefully done, but he treated only a limited amount of text. 40 Milik, The Books of Enoch. Milik mentioned the dependence of Jub on the Astronomical Book (p. 11), the
Watchers (p. 24), and the Book of Dreams (p. 45). On p. 255 he suggested that the epistle was dependent on Jubilees. More recently VanderKam has argued that the reverse is true ("Enoch Traditions in Jubilees and Other Second-
Century Sources," Seminar Papers of the Society of Biblical Literature [Missoula, Mont., 1978] vol. 1, pp. 229-
51). 41 A. Hultgard, L'Eschatologie des Testaments des Douze Patriarches (Uppsala, Sweden, 1977) vol. 1, pp. 24,
45.P. W. Skehan was the first to point out the close relationship between Jubilees and the
Hymn to the Creator from the Psalms Scroll. He accepted Milik's judgment that Jubilees
was to be dated from the end of the second century and assumed that it was dependent on
the hymn.42 When Avigad and Yadin published the Genesis Apocryphon in 1956, they
assumed that it was also earlier than the Book of Jubilees and served as a source for it.43
It is our opinion that in the case of both documents that judgment must now be reversed.
Jubilees was written earlier and served as a source for both the Hymn to the Creator and
the Genesis Apocryphon.
Other texts from Qumran that use expressions or ideas which are also found in Jubilees
include the Damascus Document, which cites Jubilees by name (CD 16.2-4), the Manual
of Discipline, the Hymns, and the Florilegium from Cave 4.
Note on the translation
The translation which follows is quite literal. The majority of students who make use of
the translation will probably not be familiar with Ge'ez, the ancient dialect of Ethiopic used
in writing the text. Therefore we have tried to remain as close to the simple wording of the
text as possible. Significant words or phrases inserted to aid in the translation are put in
parentheses. When square brackets are used, an accompanying footnote will explain their
significance.
In the notes which accompany the translation an attempt has been made to indicate those
passages for which there exists a parallel text in Hebrew, Latin, or Syriac.
The Ethiopic and Latin texts which have been used are those published by R. H. Charles
in The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Jubilees (Oxford, 1895). A number of
significant textual comments were subsequently made by Charles in The Book of Jubilees
or the Little Genesis (London, 1902). References in the notes to Charles's English translation
are citations of this work.
The Hebrew text which was used was taken from J. VanderKam's convenient summary
in Textual and Historical Studies in the Book of Jubilees. References to VanderKam's
discussion of the Hebrew text are to be found in that volume unless otherwise noted.
The Syriac text which was used was published by E. Tisserant in "Fragments syriaques
du Livre des JubileV' RB 30 (1921), 55-86; 206-32. References to Tisserant's.discussion
of the Syriac text are to be found in that volume.
No attempt was made to cite all parallels in Greek texts. A large group is contained in
A.-M. Denis's Fragmenta pseudepigraphorum quae supersunt graeca (Leiden, 1970; pp.
70-102). A number of them are also found in Charles's The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew
Book of Jubilees and his English translation, cited above.
42 P. W. Skehan, 'Jubilees and the Qumran Psalter," CBQ 37 (1975) 343-47.
43 N. Avigad and Y. Yadin, A Genesis Apocryphon: A Scroll from the Wilderness of Judea (Jerusalem, 1956) p.
38.BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 143-47.
Delling, Bibliographie, pp. 172-74.
Denis, Introduction, pp. 150-62.
Charles, R. H. The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Jubilees. Oxford, 1895. (This
edition contains an Eth. text edited from four MSS. In separate appendices Charles
has provided parallel portions from (1) the Heb. Book of Noah, (2) the Midrash
Wayyissau, and (3) a Syr. text naming the wives of the Patriarchs.)
. The Book of Jubilees or the Little Genesis. London, 1902. (This vol. contains an
ET, introduction, and commentary on the text. It includes an annotated bibliography
on previous editions, translations, and critical studies of the text.)
Davenport, G. L. The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees. SPB 20; Leiden, 1971. (An
attempt to deal with Jubilees in terms of redaction criticism.)
Denis, A.-M. 4tLiber Jubilaeorum," Fragmenta pseudepigraphorum quae supersunt graeca.
PVTG 3; Leiden, 1970; pp. 70-102. (A collection of Gk. parallels and citations.)
Holscher, G. "Die Karte des Jubilaenbuches," Drei Erdkarten. Heidelberg, 1949; pp. 57-
73.
Jaubert, A. "The Calendar of Jubilees/' The Date of the Last Supper, trans. I. Rafferty.
Staten Island, N.Y., 1965; pp. 15-30. (A good summation of Jaubert's important
discoveries regarding the calendar.)
Martin, F. "Le Livre des Jubil6s. But €t process de l'auteur. Ses doctrines," RB 8 (1911)
321-44; 502-33. ( A relatively brief, well-written introduction. Although written prior
to the Qumran discoveries, it reflects sensitive theological insight.)
Rdnsch, H. Das Buch der Jubilden oder die kleine Genesis, Leipzig, 1874; repr. Amsterdam,
1970. (This edition contains a Lat. text, which Charles sought to improve upon. It also
contains a mine of interesting material dealing with parallel literature, including handy
German translations of parallel texts that are sometimes hard to find.)
Testuz, M. Les Idees religieuses du livre desJubilis. Geneva, 1960. (Although Testuz ties
the author too closely to the Essenes of Qumran, he provides an outstanding introduction
to the religious issues in Jub.)
VanderKam, J. C. Textual and Historical Studies in the Book of Jubilees. Harvard Semitic
Museum, Harvard Semitic Monograph 14; Missoula, Mont., 1977. (Provides a summary
of the Heb. texts from Qumran which have been published thus far. Includes an
important discussion of the dating of Jub and a study of textual affinities of biblical
citations in Jub.)THE BOOK OF DIVISION
Title8
This is The Account of the Division of Days of the Law and the Testimony for
Annual Observance according to their Weeks (of years) and their Jubilees*
throughout all the Years of the World just as the LORD told it to Moses on Mount
Sinai when he went up to receive the tablets of the Law and the commandment0
by the word of the LORD, as he said to him, "Come up to the top of the Ex24:i2
mountain."
Moses is summoned to the mountain
1 1 In the first year of the Exodus of the children of Israel from Egypt, in the third
month on the sixteenth day of that month, the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,
"Come up to me on the mountain, and I shall give you two stone tablets of the Ex3i:i8
Law and the commandment, which I have written, so that you may teach them." eJ^is
2 And Moses went up to the mountain of the LORD. And the glory of the LORD
3 dwelt upon Mount Sinai, and a cloud overshadowed it for six days. *And he
called to Moses on the seventh day fromd the midst of the cloud. And the
appearance of the glory of the LORD was like fire burning on top of the mountain. 4 And Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights. Moses instructed to write a book
And the LORD revealed to him both what (was) in the beginning and what will
occur (in the future), the account of the division of all of the days of the Law and
5 the testimony. *And he said, "Set your mind on every thing which I shall tell
you on this mountain, and write it in a book so that their descendants might see EX 34:27
that I have not abandoned them on account of all of the evil which they have
done to instigate transgression6 of the convenant which I am establishing between
6 me and you today on Mount Sinai for their descendants. *And thus it will be,
when all of these things happen to them, that they will know that I have been Deut30:i
more righteous than they in all their judgments and deeds. And they will know
that I have truly been with them.BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 143-47.
Delling, Bibliographie, pp. 172-74.
Denis, Introduction, pp. 150-62.
Charles, R. H. The Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Jubilees. Oxford, 1895. (This
edition contains an Eth. text edited from four MSS. In separate appendices Charles
has provided parallel portions from (1) the Heb. Book of Noah, (2) the Midrash
Wayyissau, and (3) a Syr. text naming the wives of the Patriarchs.)
. The Book of Jubilees or the Little Genesis. London, 1902. (This vol. contains an
ET, introduction, and commentary on the text. It includes an annotated bibliography
on previous editions, translations, and critical studies of the text.)
Davenport, G. L. The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees. SPB 20; Leiden, 1971. (An
attempt to deal with Jubilees in terms of redaction criticism.)
Denis, A.-M. 4tLiber Jubilaeorum," Fragmenta pseudepigraphorum quae supersunt graeca.
PVTG 3; Leiden, 1970; pp. 70-102. (A collection of Gk. parallels and citations.)
Holscher, G. "Die Karte des Jubilaenbuches," Drei Erdkarten. Heidelberg, 1949; pp. 57-
73.
Jaubert, A. "The Calendar of Jubilees/' The Date of the Last Supper, trans. I. Rafferty.
Staten Island, N.Y., 1965; pp. 15-30. (A good summation of Jaubert's important
discoveries regarding the calendar.)
Martin, F. "Le Livre des Jubil6s. But €t process de l'auteur. Ses doctrines," RB 8 (1911)
321-44; 502-33. ( A relatively brief, well-written introduction. Although written prior
to the Qumran discoveries, it reflects sensitive theological insight.)
Rdnsch, H. Das Buch der Jubilden oder die kleine Genesis, Leipzig, 1874; repr. Amsterdam,
1970. (This edition contains a Lat. text, which Charles sought to improve upon. It also
contains a mine of interesting material dealing with parallel literature, including handy
German translations of parallel texts that are sometimes hard to find.)
Testuz, M. Les Idees religieuses du livre desJubilis. Geneva, 1960. (Although Testuz ties
the author too closely to the Essenes of Qumran, he provides an outstanding introduction
to the religious issues in Jub.)
VanderKam, J. C. Textual and Historical Studies in the Book of Jubilees. Harvard Semitic
Museum, Harvard Semitic Monograph 14; Missoula, Mont., 1977. (Provides a summary
of the Heb. texts from Qumran which have been published thus far. Includes an
important discussion of the dating of Jub and a study of textual affinities of biblical
citations in Jub.)

*And thus it will be,
when all of these things happen to them, that they will know that I have been Deut30:i
more righteous than they in all their judgments and deeds. And they will know
that I have truly been with them. Moses is told how the people will forsake the in the land of promise
LORD
7 "And you, write for yourself all of these words which I shall cause you to Dcut3i:27
know today, for I know their rebelliousness and their stubbornness before I cause Deut 3&20
them to enter the land which I swore to their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, DeutVi^o
8 saying, i will give to your seed a land flowing with milk and honey/ #And they
will eat and be satisfied, and they will turn to strange gods, to those who
1 a. MS B begins with a trinitarian formula and d. The preposition "from" is supplied from the
the blessing "May the LORD God of all spirit and reading in Ex 24:16. The Eth. text reads "in."
all flesh be blessed." The corruption may have occurred in reading the
b. In order to provide a chronological framework Heb. text in a scriptorium. The labial "m" in
for dealing with events covering a long period of mittok may have been heard as the labial "b" in
time, the author has used a system based on bitok. multiples of seven, the number of days in the week. e. The translation "to instigate transgression"
Seven years are treated as a week of years, and is an attempt to render the causative form of the
seven weeks of years equal a jubilee. verb which appears in the Eth. MSS. In his English
c. "The Law and the Commandment" are men­ translation, Charles emended the form to read as a
tioned in Ex 24:12. The Heb. is hattdrd and basic tense he rendered "in transgressing."
hammiswd.cannot save them from any of their affliction. And this testimony will be heard
9 as testimony against them, #for they will forget all of my commandments, 2K 17:15
gs
everything which I shall command them, and they will walk after the gentiles and Ezra9:iof. after their defilement and shame. And they will serve their gods, and they will 2Kgs
10 become a scandal for them and an affliction and a torment and a snare. • And Ex 23:33
many will be destroyed and seized and will fall into the hand of the enemy because Josh 23:13
they have forsaken my ordinances and my commandments and the feasts of my
covenant and my sabbaths and my sacred place, which I sanctified for myself
among them, and my tabernacle and my sanctuary, which I sanctified for myself
in the midst of the land so that I might set my name upon it and might dwell Ezek 20:28
11 (there). *And they will make for themselves high places and groves and carved
idols. And each of them will worship his own (idol) so as to go astray. And they 20*28.3
will sacrifice their children to the demons and to every work of the error of their j^jj^31
heart. The murder of prophets, the captivity, and the loss of the cult
12 "And I shall send to them witnesses so that I might witness to them, but they 20*2*19
will not hear. And they will even kill the witnesses. And they will persecute those Nd,2*^
who search out the Law, and they will neglect everything and beginf to do evil i» 1 is
13 in my sight. #And I shall hide my face from them, and I shall give them over to
the power of the nations to be captive, and for plunder, and to be devoured. And 2K 2i:i4
gs
I shall remove them from the midst of the land, and I shall scatter them among CD 128
14 the nations. *And they will forget all of my laws and all of my commandments Deut 4:28;
and all of my judgments, and they will err concerning new moons, sabbaths, CD3J3-15
festivals, jubilees, and ordinances.And 2K 2i:i4
gs
I shall remove them from the midst of the land, and I shall scatter them among CD 128
14 the nations. *And they will forget all of my laws and all of my commandments Deut 4:28;
and all of my judgments, and they will err concerning new moons, sabbaths, CD3J3-15
festivals, jubilees, and ordinances. Repentance and restoration
15 44 And afterward they will turn to me from among the nations with all their heart Deut 4:29f. and with all their soul and with all their might. And I shall gather them from the
midst of all the nations. And they will seek me so that I might be found by them. Jer 29:u
When they seek me with all their heart and with all their soul, I shall reveal to Jer 29:13
16 them an abundance of peace in righteousness. *And with all my heart and with Jer32:4i
all my soul I shall transplant8 them as a righteous plant. And they will be a Zech8:i3
17 blessing and not a curse. And they will be the head and not the tail. #And I shall CD 17
build my sanctuary in their midst, and I shall dwell with them. And I shall be Ex 25:8; 29:45
is their God and they will be my people truly and rightly. «And I shall not forsake ^ 2 ^ 12
them, and I shall not be alienated from them because I am the LORD their God." Deut 316
Moses' prayer of intercession
19 And Moses fell upon his face, and he prayed and said, "O Lord, my God, do
not abandon your people and your inheritance to walk in the error of their heart. 2K 21:14
gs
And do not deliver them into the hand of their enemy, the gentiles, lest they rule {J^,0^
over them and cause them to sin against you. 20 440 Lord, let your mercy be lifted up upon your people, and create for them p5i:io
S
an upright spirit. And do not let the spirit of Beliar* rule over them to accuse ,QS 1 24
them before you and ensnare them from every path of righteousness so that they
21 might be destroyed from before your face.*And thus it will be,
when all of these things happen to them, that they will know that I have been Deut30:i
more righteous than they in all their judgments and deeds. And they will know
that I have truly been with them. Moses is told how the people will forsake the in the land of promise
LORD
7 "And you, write for yourself all of these words which I shall cause you to Dcut3i:27
know today, for I know their rebelliousness and their stubbornness before I cause Deut 3&20
them to enter the land which I swore to their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, DeutVi^o
8 saying, i will give to your seed a land flowing with milk and honey/ #And they
will eat and be satisfied, and they will turn to strange gods, to those who
1 a. MS B begins with a trinitarian formula and d. The preposition "from" is supplied from the
the blessing "May the LORD God of all spirit and reading in Ex 24:16. The Eth. text reads "in."
all flesh be blessed." The corruption may have occurred in reading the
b. In order to provide a chronological framework Heb. text in a scriptorium. The labial "m" in
for dealing with events covering a long period of mittok may have been heard as the labial "b" in
time, the author has used a system based on bitok. multiples of seven, the number of days in the week. e. The translation "to instigate transgression"
Seven years are treated as a week of years, and is an attempt to render the causative form of the
seven weeks of years equal a jubilee. verb which appears in the Eth. MSS. In his English
c. "The Law and the Commandment" are men­ translation, Charles emended the form to read as a
tioned in Ex 24:12. The Heb. is hattdrd and basic tense he rendered "in transgressing."
hammiswd.

20 440 Lord, let your mercy be lifted up upon your people, and create for them p5i:io
S
an upright spirit. And do not let the spirit of Beliar* rule over them to accuse ,QS 1 24
them before you and ensnare them from every path of righteousness so that they
21 might be destroyed from before your face. *But they are your people and your Deut 9:26,29
inheritance, whom you saved by your great might from the hand of the Egyptians. f. The reading "begin" is found in MSS B C to be corrupt, and "transplant" is, at best, a weak
D. Charles preferred to follow MS A in his text, attempt to make sense of a difficult text. which reads "change." h. In ISam 2:12 the Heb. expression "sons of
g. The Eth. word means "remove." It has the Beliar" is translated "worthless men." Later the
sense of moving away from one's home and is term "Beliar" came to designate a demonic power;
hardly suitable in this context. The passage appears here it refers to Satan.Create a pure heart and a holy spirit for them. And do not let them be ensnared
by their sin henceforth and forever."
The predicts a restoration of the people
LORD
22 And the LORD said to Moses, "I know their contrariness and their thoughts Dcut3i:27
and their stubbornness. And they will not obey until they acknowledge their sin Lev 26:40
23 and the sins of their fathers. •But after this they will return to me in all Nch9:2
uprighteousness and with all of (their) heart and soul. And I shall cut off the 2Chr6:38
foreskin of their heart and the foreskin of the heart of their descendants. And I 06,11,0:16; 30:6
shall create for them a holy spirit, and I shall purify them so that they will not
24 turn away from following me from that day and forever. »And their souls will
cleave to me and to all my commandments. And they will do my commandments. Jer 3i:9
25 And I shall be a father to them, and they will be sons to me. »And they will all jfi7:4o
be called 'sons of the living God/ And every angel and spirit will know and
acknowledge that they are my sons and I am their father in uprightness and
righteousness. And I shall love them. Moses told again to write
26 "And you write down for yourself* all of the matters which I shall make known Ex 34:27
to you on this mountain: what (was) in the beginning and what (will be) at the
end, what will happen in all of the divisions of the days which are in the Law 4Ezra i4.-4f. and testimony and throughout their weeks (of years) according to the jubilees
forever,J until I shall descend and dwell with them in all the ages of eternity."
The Angel of the presence is instructed to write the history for Moses
27 And he said to the angel of the presence, "Write for Moses from the first 1QH6.13
28 creation until my sanctuary is built in their midst forever and ever. • And the ScSwlf
LORD will appear in the sight of all.and testimony and throughout their weeks (of years) according to the jubilees
forever,J until I shall descend and dwell with them in all the ages of eternity."
The Angel of the presence is instructed to write the history for Moses
27 And he said to the angel of the presence, "Write for Moses from the first 1QH6.13
28 creation until my sanctuary is built in their midst forever and ever. • And the ScSwlf
LORD will appear in the sight of all. And everyone will know that I am the God ^2a-io
of Israel and the father of all the children of Jacob and king upon Mount Zion isa 24-23
forever and ever. And Zion and Jerusalem will be holy."
The Angel of the presence receives the tablets containing the history
29 And the angel of the presence, who went before the camp of Israel, took the Ex 14.19
tablets of the division of years from the time of the creation of the law and jf^x
testimony according to their weeks (of years), according to the jubilees, year by
year throughout the full number of jubilees, fromk [the day of creation until]1 the 2Pw3:i3
day of the new creation when the heaven and earth and all of their creatures shall isa 65:17; 66:22
be renewed according to the powers of heaven and according to the whole nature iEn 9i:i6
of earth, until the sanctuary of the LORD is created in Jerusalem upon Mount
Zion. And all of the lights will be renewed for healing and peace and blessing for
i. The four MSS consulted by Charles differ on i.e. "year by year from." The repetition of "year
the text at this point. MSS A D read "And I shall by year" appears to be a gloss resulting from
write down for you." Charles used that reading in ductography. MS B does not repeat "year by year"
his Eth. text, but turned to the reading of B C in at this point. his English translation. We have also followed B 1. The portion of text between brackets has been
C. restored following a suggestion by M. Stone,
j.20 440 Lord, let your mercy be lifted up upon your people, and create for them p5i:io
S
an upright spirit. And do not let the spirit of Beliar* rule over them to accuse ,QS 1 24
them before you and ensnare them from every path of righteousness so that they
21 might be destroyed from before your face. *But they are your people and your Deut 9:26,29
inheritance, whom you saved by your great might from the hand of the Egyptians. f. The reading "begin" is found in MSS B C to be corrupt, and "transplant" is, at best, a weak
D. Charles preferred to follow MS A in his text, attempt to make sense of a difficult text. which reads "change." h. In ISam 2:12 the Heb. expression "sons of
g. The Eth. word means "remove." It has the Beliar" is translated "worthless men." Later the
sense of moving away from one's home and is term "Beliar" came to designate a demonic power;
hardly suitable in this context. The passage appears here it refers to Satan.

restored following a suggestion by M. Stone,
j. This sentence contains phrases similar to those "Apocryphal Notes and Readings," Israel Oriental
which appear in the title and in vs. 1:4. The book Studies 1 (1971) 125f. It is assumed that a scribe
that Moses is asked to write is a "second law." had to copy the phrase "from [the day of creation
The Pentateuch was apparently the book of the first until] the day of the new creation." By homoeo­
law, which was written by God himself, according teleuton, in which his eye skipped from the first
to Jub 6:22. In Ex 34:27 Moses was directed to "the day" to the second, he omitted the phrase
write certain laws, but in Ex 34:1 God wrote the between brackets. The suggestion by Stone makes
famous tablets of stone. sense of a passage that has long puzzled commen­
k. Charles's Eth. text contains a fuller reading. tators.all of the elect of Israel and in order that it might be thus from that day and unto
all the days of the earth. Description of six days of creation
1 2 And the angel of the presence spoke to Moses by the word of the LORD,
saying, "Write the whole account of creation, that in six days the LORD God
completed all his work and all that he created. And he observed a sabbath the
seventh day, and he sanctified it for all ages. And he set it (as) a sign for all his
works."
2 For8 on the first day he created the heavens, which are above, and the earth, Job 38:7
and the waters and all of the spirits which minister before him:
the angels of the presence,
Ps 104:4
and the angels of sanctification,
and the angels of the spirit of fire,b IEn 60:12-21
and the angels of the spirit of the winds, IEn 75
and the angels of the spirit of the clouds and darkness and snow0 and hail IEn 80
and frost, 2En 19:1-4
and the angels of resoundingsd and thunder and lightning, Ps 77:18; 104:7
and the angels of the spirits of cold and heat and winter and springtimeJ ob 37:4
and harvest and summer,
and all of the spirits of his creatures which are in heaven and on earth. And (he created) the abyssesc and darkness—both evening and nightf—and light—
both dawn and daylight8—which he prepared in the knowledge of his heart. 3 Then we saw his works and we blessed himh and offered praise before him on
account of all his works because he made seven1 great works on the first day. 2 a. There is a Gk. text contained in a work by first day. It is the abyss itself and not just its content
Epiphanius entitled De mensuris et ponderibus, that needed to be created the first day. which is parallel to Jub 2:2-21. Charles published f. The word "night" is restored from the Gk. the relevant portions of that text in parallel columns text of Epiphanius. It also seems justified to balance
opposite his Eth. text. Although the Gk. text is the structure of the sentence. frequently abbreviated, it is, however, quite close g.text is the structure of the sentence. frequently abbreviated, it is, however, quite close g. Only one Eth. MS (A) has the word "day­
to the Eth. in the passages which remain. light," but its presence in the Gk. text supports
A portion of the Syr. text published by E. the reading. The word order of the sentence from
Tisserant also begins at this point and continues "darkness" to "daylight" follows the order in the
through vs. 16. The Syr. parallel is not as precise Gk. text of Epiphanius. The word order in Eth. as the Gk., but it is helpful in confirming a few differs. readings. h. There is an interesting parallel in a text from
b. The "angels of the spirit of fire" are men­ a Qumran collection of Psalms (HQPsa). P. W. tioned in MSS BCD, but are lacking in MS A Skehan referred to it as the "Hymn to the Creator"
and the Gk. text of Epiphanius. Charles did not r Jubilees and the Qumran Psalter*' CBQ 37 (1975)
include the phrase in his Eth. text, but he had it 343-47). He demonstrated that vss. 4-6 of that
printed between brackets in his English translation. hymn, in which the author describes God's creative
The phrase is also lacking in Syr., but that text is acts and the hymnic response of the angels, are
drastically abbreviated. closely related to Jub 2:2f. The number of literal
c. The word "snow" is supplied from the Gk. parallels is striking. text of Epiphanius. Eth. MSS C D omit the word This theme of angelic praise to the Creator on
and MSS A B read "and everything," which is the day when the angels were created has more
difficult. recently appeared in the famous collection of Coptic
d. The Eth. word which appears in the MSS gnostic tractates from Nag Hammadi. In the Apoc­
means "depths," but Charles emended it to read ryphon of John, for example, as each pair of
"voices" in agreement with the reading in Epi­ invisible eons is created they glorify the Invisible
phanius. If translated literally, the Eth.restored following a suggestion by M. Stone,
j. This sentence contains phrases similar to those "Apocryphal Notes and Readings," Israel Oriental
which appear in the title and in vs. 1:4. The book Studies 1 (1971) 125f. It is assumed that a scribe
that Moses is asked to write is a "second law." had to copy the phrase "from [the day of creation
The Pentateuch was apparently the book of the first until] the day of the new creation." By homoeo­
law, which was written by God himself, according teleuton, in which his eye skipped from the first
to Jub 6:22. In Ex 34:27 Moses was directed to "the day" to the second, he omitted the phrase
write certain laws, but in Ex 34:1 God wrote the between brackets. The suggestion by Stone makes
famous tablets of stone. sense of a passage that has long puzzled commen­
k. Charles's Eth. text contains a fuller reading. tators.

In the Apoc­
means "depths," but Charles emended it to read ryphon of John, for example, as each pair of
"voices" in agreement with the reading in Epi­ invisible eons is created they glorify the Invisible
phanius. If translated literally, the Eth. word for One and his perfect power, Barbelo (5:18-9:25;
"voices" would not appear to be as suitable to cf. AWL, pp. 98-116). read beside "thunder and lightning" as "depths," This theme already appears in Job 38:7 where
but the Heb. word qdl, which was probably used "the morning stars sang together and all the sons
in this passage, means both "voice" and "thun­ of God shouted for joy," but both the Qumran and
der." It is in the latter sense that it is used here. later Nag Hammadi texts reflect an elaboration of
e. The Eth. MS reads "what is in the abysses," the motif suggested by Jub. but Charles emended his text to agree with the Gk. i. The seven created works were: heaven, earth,
The Syr. text also agrees with the Gk. The abyss waters, all the ministering spirits, the abyss, dark­
is one of the seven works created by God on the ness, and light.4 And on the second day he made the firmament in the midst of the water. And VJ
the waters were divided on that day. One half of them went up above, and one n
half of them went down beneath the firmament (which is) in the middle over the
surface of all of the earth. And he made only this (one) work on the second day. s On the third day he did as he saidj to the waters, "Let them pass from the 2En30:i
6 surface of the whole earth into one place, and let the dry land appear." •And the
waters did as he said. And they turned aside from upon the surface of the earth
7 into one place outside of this firmament.11A nd dry land appeared. • And on that
day he created for it all of the seas in each of their gathering places, and all of
the rivers, and the gathering places of the waters on the mountains and in all the
earth, and all of the ponds, and all of the dew of the earth, and the seed which is 4Ezra 3:6
sown, and everything which is eaten,1 and trees which bear fruit and (other) trees,
and the garden of Eden in Eden—in (the place of) luxury^—and everything."
These four great species the LORD made on the third day.°
8 And on the fourth day he made the sun and the moon and the stars. And he set Gen i: 14-19
them in the firmament of heaven so that they might give light upon the whole 26130:2-6
9 earth and rule over the day and the night and separate light and darkness. *And
the LORD set the sun? as a great sign upon the earth for days, sabbaths, months,
feast (days), years, sabbaths of years, jubilees, and for all of the (appointed) times
10 of the years—*and it separates the light from the darkness—and so that everything
which sprouts and grows upon the earth might surely prosper.*And
the LORD set the sun? as a great sign upon the earth for days, sabbaths, months,
feast (days), years, sabbaths of years, jubilees, and for all of the (appointed) times
10 of the years—*and it separates the light from the darkness—and so that everything
which sprouts and grows upon the earth might surely prosper. These three kinds
he made on the fourth day.q
11 And on the fifth day he created the great sea monsters in the midst of the depths Gen 1:20-23
of the waters—for these were made by his hands as the first corporeal beings— 26,130:7
and all the fish which move in the waters/ and all the birds which fly, and all of
12 their kind. *And the sun rose above them to make them prosper and above
j. In translating this vs. it was assumed that the 1. The Gk. text of Epiphanius reads "the sprouts."
phrase "as he said" was a citation formula of the Charles emended his Eth. text to read "everything
type which is now well known from Qumran. It is which sprouts," in agreement with the Gk. also assumed that the quotation is an attempt to m. Read batadla for latadla. The Gk. phrase
approximate Gen 1:9. The text of Jub, however, would have been en truphi, which is an attempt
differs from both Heb. and Gk. texts of Gen 1:9, to translate the Heb. phrase "in Eden" into Gk. directing the waters to "pass over from" rather That emendation was suggested by Charles in the
than being "gathered together into." This text notes to his English translation. It is now possible
may, however, provide the basis for an unusual to provide an additional support for this reading. statement which appears in the Nag Hammadi The Nag Hammadi tractate On the Origin of the
tractate On the Origin of the World (CG2, 100:10- World, which reflects a number of contacts with
14). In that text the unintentional creative force is the wording of Jub, has preserved a description of
Pistis Sophia, and the primordial, chaotic waters Paradise.statement which appears in the Nag Hammadi The Nag Hammadi tractate On the Origin of the
tractate On the Origin of the World (CG2, 100:10- World, which reflects a number of contacts with
14). In that text the unintentional creative force is the wording of Jub, has preserved a description of
Pistis Sophia, and the primordial, chaotic waters Paradise. According to that text, Paradise is located
of Gen 1 are the wellspring of evil within the "outside the circuit of the moon and the circuit of
world, which is controlled by Yaldabaoth. The text the sun in the luxuriant [truphS] earth" (CG2,
is filled with a number of verbal allusions to Gen 110:3-5). The reason for creating it outside the
1. The biblical background of CG2, 100:10-14 has circuit of the moon and the sun is probably related
not been explained, but it could quite easily be to the fact that neither sun nor moon had yet been
based on the wording of the present text of Jub. created. In the book of Jub, which is the most
The passage reads as follows: "Then when Pistis likely source of this detail, the sun and moon are
Sophia saw him moving in the depth of the waters, mentioned in the following vs., which describes
she said to him, 'O youth, pass over here/ which the creative acts of the fourth day. is interpreted Yaldabaoth." NHL, p. 163. n. The Gk. text of Epiphanius reads "and all
The phrase "from the surface of the whole the plants according to (their) kind."
earth" could also be translated "from the presence o. The four works are the creation of dry land,
of the whole earth." In vs. 6 the waters are actually bodies of water, flora, and Eden. removed to a place "outside this firmament." Both p. The writer mentions only the sun, and not
readings would have pleased the gnostics, who the moon, as the determinant for holy days.In the Apoc­
means "depths," but Charles emended it to read ryphon of John, for example, as each pair of
"voices" in agreement with the reading in Epi­ invisible eons is created they glorify the Invisible
phanius. If translated literally, the Eth. word for One and his perfect power, Barbelo (5:18-9:25;
"voices" would not appear to be as suitable to cf. AWL, pp. 98-116). read beside "thunder and lightning" as "depths," This theme already appears in Job 38:7 where
but the Heb. word qdl, which was probably used "the morning stars sang together and all the sons
in this passage, means both "voice" and "thun­ of God shouted for joy," but both the Qumran and
der." It is in the latter sense that it is used here. later Nag Hammadi texts reflect an elaboration of
e. The Eth. MS reads "what is in the abysses," the motif suggested by Jub. but Charles emended his text to agree with the Gk. i. The seven created works were: heaven, earth,
The Syr. text also agrees with the Gk. The abyss waters, all the ministering spirits, the abyss, dark­
is one of the seven works created by God on the ness, and light.

removed to a place "outside this firmament." Both p. The writer mentions only the sun, and not
readings would have pleased the gnostics, who the moon, as the determinant for holy days. This
understood what happened to Yaldabaoth in a is in keeping with his quasi-solar year of 364 days
similar manner, as he exalted himself and moved and his strident opposition to lunar calculations. above this firmament. q. The three are the sun, moon, and stars. k. The Syr. text describes the place to which r. The Gk. text of Epiphanius reads "the fish
the waters are removed as "the midst of the and the other crawling things in the water." Charles
firmament." In his commentary, Tisserant sug­ rearranged the Eth. word order to agree with the
gested that the variant texts were due to a confusion reading of the Gk. between the Heb. forms mittdk and bitok (cf. ch. s. The three are sea monsters, fish, and birds. 1, n. d).everything which was on the earth, everything which sprouts from the earth, and
every tree which bears fruit, and all flesh. These three kinds he made on the fifth
day.s
13 And on the sixth day he made all of the beasts of the earth and all of the cattle Gen 1:24-28
14 and everything which moves upon the earth. • And after all of this, he made man— 2En 30:8
male and female he made them—and he gave him dominion over everything
which was upon the earth and which was in the seas and over everything which
flies, and over beasts and cattle and everything which moves upon the earth or
above the whole earth. And over all this he gave him dominion. And these four
15,16 kinds he made on the sixth day.1 #And the total was twenty-two kinds. *And he
completed all of his work on the sixth day, everything which is in the heavens Ex 20:11
and the earth and the seas and the depths and in the light and in the darkness and
in every place. The significance of the sabbath
17 And he gave us a great sign, the sabbath day, so that we might work six days Ex 31:13
is and observe a sabbath from all work on the seventh day. #And he told us—all of
the angels of the presence and all of the angels of sanctification, these two great
19 kinds—that we might keep the sabbath with him in heaven and on earth. *And he
said to us, "Behold I shall separate for myself a people from among all the iK$8:53
g
nations. And they will also keep the sabbath. And I will sanctify them for myself," Ex 31:13.17
and I will bless them. Just as I have sanctified and shall sanctify the sabbath day Eaik 20:12
for myself thus shall I bless them. And they will be my people and I will be their
20 God. #And I have chosen the seed of Jacob from among all that I have seen. And
I have recorded him as my firstborn son, and have sanctified him for myself isa4i8:44:i
forever and ever.#And I have chosen the seed of Jacob from among all that I have seen. And
I have recorded him as my firstborn son, and have sanctified him for myself isa4i8:44:i
forever and ever. And I will make known to them the sabbath day so that they fx ^
er
might observe therein a sabbath from all work."
21 And thus he created therein a sign by which they might keep the sabbath with Ex 31:13,17
us on the seventh day, to eat and drink and bless the one who created all things Ezek 2012
just as he blessed and sanctified for himself a people who appearedv from all the
22 nations so that they might keep the sabbath together with us.w *And he caused
their desiresx to go up as pleasing fragrance, which is acceptable before him
always. 23 There were twenty-two chief men from Adam until Jacob,y and twenty-two
kinds of works were made before the seventh day. The former is blessed and
sanctified, and the latter is also blessed and sanctified. One was like the other
24 with respect to sanctification and blessing. *And it was granted to the former that
they2 should always be the blessed and sanctified ones of the testimony and the
first law just as he32 had sanctified and blessed sabbath day on the seventh day. t. The four are wild beasts, domestic animals, that there are twenty-two letters in the Heb. alphabet
reptiles, and man. and twenty-two sacred books. In his English trans­
u. A adds "(as) my (own) people." lation of 1902, Charles assembled an impressive
v. Charles emended his Eth. text to read "whom group of ancient witnesses which shared the ex­
he would possess" in agreement with Deut 7:6. panded tradition of Epiphanius. He was also per­
w. Charles has suggested that the phrase "so suaded that there was a lacuna at the beginning of
that they might keep the sabbath together with us" vs. 23 and proposed to restore it as follows: "As
might be a dittography from the second clause in there were two and twenty letters and two and
this vs.removed to a place "outside this firmament." Both p. The writer mentions only the sun, and not
readings would have pleased the gnostics, who the moon, as the determinant for holy days. This
understood what happened to Yaldabaoth in a is in keeping with his quasi-solar year of 364 days
similar manner, as he exalted himself and moved and his strident opposition to lunar calculations. above this firmament. q. The three are the sun, moon, and stars. k. The Syr. text describes the place to which r. The Gk. text of Epiphanius reads "the fish
the waters are removed as "the midst of the and the other crawling things in the water." Charles
firmament." In his commentary, Tisserant sug­ rearranged the Eth. word order to agree with the
gested that the variant texts were due to a confusion reading of the Gk. between the Heb. forms mittdk and bitok (cf. ch. s. The three are sea monsters, fish, and birds. 1, n. d).

Charles has suggested that the phrase "so suaded that there was a lacuna at the beginning of
that they might keep the sabbath together with us" vs. 23 and proposed to restore it as follows: "As
might be a dittography from the second clause in there were two and twenty letters and two and
this vs. twenty (sacred) books and two and twenty heads
x. The text reads "his desires," but the pronoun of mankind from Adam ..."
probably refers to "the people," which can be z. Apparently Jacob and his seed since Jacob is
regarded as masculine singular in Heb. "Their being likened to the sabbath. A reads "he" at this
desires" would then be the prayers of the people, point, but the other MSS have "they," agreeing
which are like good incense. with the plural forms used for "blessed" and
y. Eth. "from Adam until him." Charles was "sanctified."
able to restore "Jacob" on the basis of the parallel a2. A fragment of the Syr. text begins at this
which is found in Epiphanius' De mensuris et point and continues through vs. 2:25a. ponderibus, ch. 22. That text goes on to point outThe laws for keeping the sabbath
25 He created heaven and earth and everything which he created in six days. And
the LORD made the seventh day holy for all of his works. Therefore he commanded
concerning it, "Let everyone who will do any work therein die. And also whoever Ex 3i:i4f. 35=2
;
defiles it let him surely die.'' Num 15:3236
26 And you, command the children of Israel, and let them guard this day so that Ex 20:8; 31:13
they might sanctify it and not do any work therein, and not defile it because it is
27 more holy than any day. #And everyone who pollutes it let him surely die. And
anyone who will do any work therein, let him surely die forever so that the
children of Israel might guard this day throughout their generations and not be Deut 29:28
28 uprooted from the land because it is a holy day and a blessed day. *And every
man who guards it and keeps therein a sabbath from all his work will be holy and
blessed always like us. 29 Make known and recount to the children of Israel the judgment of the day that CD 10.22
they should keep the sabbath thereon and not forsake it in the error of their hearts. And (make known) that it is not permitted to do work thereon which is unlawful,
(it being) unseemly to do their pleasure thereon. And (make known) that they isa 58:13
should not prepare thereon anything which will be eaten or drunk, which they & 35:3
have not prepared for themselves on the sixth day.62 And (make known that it is
not lawful) to draw water or to bring in or to take out any work within their Jer 17:21
30 dwellings which is carried in their gates.02 *And they shall not bring in or take JSfn?^9
out from house to house on that day because it is more holy and it is more blessed
than any day of the jubilee of jubilees. On this day we kept the sabbath in heaven
before it was made known to any human to keep the sabbath thereon upon the
earth.And (make known) that they isa 58:13
should not prepare thereon anything which will be eaten or drunk, which they & 35:3
have not prepared for themselves on the sixth day.62 And (make known that it is
not lawful) to draw water or to bring in or to take out any work within their Jer 17:21
30 dwellings which is carried in their gates.02 *And they shall not bring in or take JSfn?^9
out from house to house on that day because it is more holy and it is more blessed
than any day of the jubilee of jubilees. On this day we kept the sabbath in heaven
before it was made known to any human to keep the sabbath thereon upon the
earth. 31 The Creator of all blessed it, but he did not sanctify any people or nations to
keep the sabbath thereon with the sole exception of Israel. He granted to them
alone that they might eat and drink and keep the sabbath thereon upon the earth. 32 And the Creator of all, who created this day for a blessing and sanctification and
33 glory, blessed it more than all days. •This law and testimony was given to the Ex 27:2]
children of Israel as an eternal law for their generations. Lev 7:36; 23:14
The naming of animals Gen i.m. 1 3 And in six days of the second week, by the word of the LORD, we brought to
Adam all of the beasts, and all of the cattle, and all of the birds, and everything
which moves on the earth, and everything which moves in the water, each one
according to its kind, and each one according to its likeness: the8 beasts on the
first day, and cattle on the second day, and the birds on the third day, and
everything which moves upon the earth on the fourth day, and whatever moves
2 in the water on the fifth day. *And Adam named all of them, each one according
3 to its name, and whatever he called them became their names.Charles has suggested that the phrase "so suaded that there was a lacuna at the beginning of
that they might keep the sabbath together with us" vs. 23 and proposed to restore it as follows: "As
might be a dittography from the second clause in there were two and twenty letters and two and
this vs. twenty (sacred) books and two and twenty heads
x. The text reads "his desires," but the pronoun of mankind from Adam ..."
probably refers to "the people," which can be z. Apparently Jacob and his seed since Jacob is
regarded as masculine singular in Heb. "Their being likened to the sabbath. A reads "he" at this
desires" would then be the prayers of the people, point, but the other MSS have "they," agreeing
which are like good incense. with the plural forms used for "blessed" and
y. Eth. "from Adam until him." Charles was "sanctified."
able to restore "Jacob" on the basis of the parallel a2. A fragment of the Syr. text begins at this
which is found in Epiphanius' De mensuris et point and continues through vs. 2:25a. ponderibus, ch. 22. That text goes on to point out

1 3 And in six days of the second week, by the word of the LORD, we brought to
Adam all of the beasts, and all of the cattle, and all of the birds, and everything
which moves on the earth, and everything which moves in the water, each one
according to its kind, and each one according to its likeness: the8 beasts on the
first day, and cattle on the second day, and the birds on the third day, and
everything which moves upon the earth on the fourth day, and whatever moves
2 in the water on the fifth day. *And Adam named all of them, each one according
3 to its name, and whatever he called them became their names. #And during these
five days Adam was observing all of these, male and female according to every
kind which was on the earth, but he was alone and there was none whom he
found for himself, who was like himself, who would help him. b2. In the Eth. text, the relative clause "which 3 a. There is a Gk. parallel from the Chronogra­
they have not prepared for themselves on the sixth phia of Georgius Syncellus, which is based on the
day" follows the phrase "to bring in or to take present ch. His description of the order in which
out." The obvious misplacement of the relative Adam named the animals is very close to the
was noted by Charles in his English translation. description which appears in Jub. Elsewhere in the
c2. The whole of vs. 29 is a single sentence in ch., the parallels are limited to a few phrases. The
Eth. Its length and complexity make it difficult to relevant portions of the Gk. text are available in
reproduce in English. Therefore it is necessary to A.-M. Denis' Fragmenta Pseudepigraphorum
restructure the clauses in translating. Graeca (PVTG 3; Leiden, 1970) pp. 76-78.The creation of Eve
4 And the LORD said to us, 4 * It is not good that the man should be alone. Let
s us make for him a helper who is like him." *And the LORD our God cast a deep
sleep upon him, and he slept. And he took one bone from the midst of his bones
for the woman. And that rib was the origin of the woman from the midst of his
bones. And he built up the flesh in place of it, and he constructed a woman. 6 And he awakened Adam from his sleep, and when he awoke, he stood up on
the sixth day. And he brought her to him and he knew her and said to her, 4'This
is now bone of my bone and flesh from my flesh. This one will be called my wife
because she was taken from her husband."
7 Therefore a man and woman shall be one. And therefore it shall be that a man
will leave his father and his mother and he will join with his wife and they will
become one flesh. The laws of purification after childbirth
8 In the first week Adam was created and also the rib, his wife. And in the
second week he showed her to him. And therefore the commandment was given Lev 12:2-5
to observe seven days for a male, but for a female twice seven days in their
impurity. 9 And after forty days were completed for Adam in the land where he was created,
we brought him into the garden of Eden so that he might work it and guard it. And on the eighth day his wife was also brought in. And after this she entered
10 the garden of Eden. »And therefore the command was written in the heavenly
tablets for one who bears, 4if she bears a male, she shall remain seven days in iEn 811
her impurity like the first seven days. And thirty-three days she shall remain in TLevl5
the blood of her purity. And she shall not touch anything holy. And she shall not
enter the sanctuary until she has completed these days which are in accord with
11 (the rule for) a male (child). *And that which is in accord with (the rule for) a
female is two weeks—like the two first weeks—in her impurity.1 3 And in six days of the second week, by the word of the LORD, we brought to
Adam all of the beasts, and all of the cattle, and all of the birds, and everything
which moves on the earth, and everything which moves in the water, each one
according to its kind, and each one according to its likeness: the8 beasts on the
first day, and cattle on the second day, and the birds on the third day, and
everything which moves upon the earth on the fourth day, and whatever moves
2 in the water on the fifth day. *And Adam named all of them, each one according
3 to its name, and whatever he called them became their names. #And during these
five days Adam was observing all of these, male and female according to every
kind which was on the earth, but he was alone and there was none whom he
found for himself, who was like himself, who would help him. b2. In the Eth. text, the relative clause "which 3 a. There is a Gk. parallel from the Chronogra­
they have not prepared for themselves on the sixth phia of Georgius Syncellus, which is based on the
day" follows the phrase "to bring in or to take present ch. His description of the order in which
out." The obvious misplacement of the relative Adam named the animals is very close to the
was noted by Charles in his English translation. description which appears in Jub. Elsewhere in the
c2. The whole of vs. 29 is a single sentence in ch., the parallels are limited to a few phrases. The
Eth. Its length and complexity make it difficult to relevant portions of the Gk. text are available in
reproduce in English. Therefore it is necessary to A.-M. Denis' Fragmenta Pseudepigraphorum
restructure the clauses in translating. Graeca (PVTG 3; Leiden, 1970) pp. 76-78.

And she shall not
enter the sanctuary until she has completed these days which are in accord with
11 (the rule for) a male (child). *And that which is in accord with (the rule for) a
female is two weeks—like the two first weeks—in her impurity. And sixty-six
days she shall remain in the blood of her purity. And their total will be eighty
days."
12 And when she finished those eighty days, we brought her into the garden of
Eden because it is more holy than any land. And every tree which is planted in
13 it is holy. •Therefore the ordinances of these days were ordained for anyone who
bears a male or female that she might not touch anything holy and she might not
14 enter the sanctuary until these days are completed for a male or female. *This is
the law and testimony which is written for Israel so that they might keep it always. The first seven years in Eden
15 And during the first week of the first jubilee Adam and his wife had been in
the garden of Eden for seven years tilling and guarding it. And we gave him
work and we were teaching him to do everything which was appropriate6 for
16 tilling. *And he was tilling. And he was naked, but he neither knew it nor was Gen 2:25
he ashamed. And he was guarding the garden from the birds and beasts and cattle
and gathering its fruit and eating. And he used to set aside the rest for himself
and his wife. And what was being guarded he set aside. The Fall Gen 3119
17 At the end of seven years which he completed there, seven years exactly, in
the second month on the seventeenth day, the serpent came and drew near to the
b. Lit. "which appeared," or "which was ob-woman. And the serpent said to the woman, "The LORD commanded you,
is saying, 'You shall not eat from any treec which is in the garden.'" *And she
said to him, "The LORD said, 4Eat from all of the fruit of the trees which are in
the garden/ But the LORD said to us, 4You shall not eat from the fruit of the tree
which is in the midst of the garden, and you shall not touch it lest you die.' "
19 And the serpent said to the woman, "It is not (true) that you shall surely die because
the LORD knows that on the day you eat of it your eyes will become opened and
you will become like gods, and you will know good and evil."
20 And the woman saw the tree that it was pleasant and it was pleasing to the eye
21 and its fruit was good to eat and she took some of it and she ate. *And she first
covered her shame with a fig leaf, and then she gave it to Adam and he ate and
22 his eyes were opened and he saw that he was naked. *And he took a fig leaf and
sewed it and made an apron for himself. And he covered his shame. 23 And the LORD cursed the serpent and he was angry with it forever.d And he
was angry with the woman also because she had listened to the voice of the
24 serpent and had eaten. And he said to her, '"I will surely multiply your grief and
your birth pangs. Bear children in grief. And to your husband is your return and
25 he will rule over you." #And to Adam he said, "Because you listened to the
voice of your wife and you ate from that tree from which I commanded you that
you should not eat, the land shall be cursed because of you. Thorns and thistles
shall sprout up for you. And eat your bread in the sweat of your face until you
return to the earth from which you were taken because you are earth and to the
earth you will return."
Expulsion-day sacrifice and the law of covering shame Gen 3.21,23
26 And he made for them garments of skin and he dressed them and sent them
27 from the garden of Eden.Thorns and thistles
shall sprout up for you. And eat your bread in the sweat of your face until you
return to the earth from which you were taken because you are earth and to the
earth you will return."
Expulsion-day sacrifice and the law of covering shame Gen 3.21,23
26 And he made for them garments of skin and he dressed them and sent them
27 from the garden of Eden. • And on that day when Adam went out from the garden
of Eden, he offered a sweet-smelling sacrifice—frankincense, galbanum, stacte, Ex 30:34
and spices—in the morning with the rising of the sun from the day he covered
28 his shame. #One that day the mouth of all the beasts and cattle and birds and Ex 20:26; 28:42
whatever walked or moved was stopped from speaking because all of them used
29 to speak with one another with one speech and one language/ *And he sent from
the garden of Eden all of the flesh which was in the garden of Eden and all of
the flesh was scattered, each one according to its kind and each one according to
30 its family, into the place which was created for them. #But from all the beasts
and all the cattle he granted to Adam alone that he might cover his shame. 31 Therefore it is commanded in the heavenly tablets to all who will know the
judgment of the Law that they should cover their shame and they should not be
uncovered as the gentiles are uncovered. The end of the first jubilee in 'Elda
32 And on the first8 of the fourth month Adam and his wife went out from the
garden of Eden and dwelt in the land of 'Elda, in the land of their creation.11 Gen 3:23
33,34 And Adam named his wife Eve. •They had no son until the first jubilee but after
c. B C read "from any fruit of the tree." made up of twelve months of thirty days plus four
d. At this point in his English translation Charles days added at the end of each of the seasons.And she shall not
enter the sanctuary until she has completed these days which are in accord with
11 (the rule for) a male (child). *And that which is in accord with (the rule for) a
female is two weeks—like the two first weeks—in her impurity. And sixty-six
days she shall remain in the blood of her purity. And their total will be eighty
days."
12 And when she finished those eighty days, we brought her into the garden of
Eden because it is more holy than any land. And every tree which is planted in
13 it is holy. •Therefore the ordinances of these days were ordained for anyone who
bears a male or female that she might not touch anything holy and she might not
14 enter the sanctuary until these days are completed for a male or female. *This is
the law and testimony which is written for Israel so that they might keep it always. The first seven years in Eden
15 And during the first week of the first jubilee Adam and his wife had been in
the garden of Eden for seven years tilling and guarding it. And we gave him
work and we were teaching him to do everything which was appropriate6 for
16 tilling. *And he was tilling. And he was naked, but he neither knew it nor was Gen 2:25
he ashamed. And he was guarding the garden from the birds and beasts and cattle
and gathering its fruit and eating. And he used to set aside the rest for himself
and his wife. And what was being guarded he set aside. The Fall Gen 3119
17 At the end of seven years which he completed there, seven years exactly, in
the second month on the seventeenth day, the serpent came and drew near to the
b. Lit. "which appeared," or "which was ob-

B C read "from any fruit of the tree." made up of twelve months of thirty days plus four
d. At this point in his English translation Charles days added at the end of each of the seasons. There
indicated a lacuna because an impressive number is no way that a new moon would be able to
of ancient witnesses who are dependent on Jub coincide on a regular basis with the first of every
claim that the serpent originally had four legs. It month in that system. Both the Lat. (28:24) and
therefore seemed appropriate that the text should the Syr. (6:1) texts use words for "first," which
contain some reference to cutting them off. cannot be translated "new moon."
e. There is a small portion of the Syr. text which h. Gen 3:23b says that Adam is to till the earth
is parallel to the first half of this vs. "from which he was taken." Apparently that phrase
f. On the basis of Jub 12:26, it is reasonable to led to speculation that Adam did not originate in
assume that all the animals spoke Heb. Eden but was taken from another place to which
g. Lit. "new moon," but the calendar used in the author of Jub would return him. Jub speaks against that usage. The calendar was35 this he knew her. *And he tilled the land as he had been taught in the garden of
Eden. The first murder and the law of manslaughter
Gen 4:i-i4
1 4 And in the third week in the second jubilee, she bore Cain. And in the fourth
2 she bore Abel. And in the fifth she bore 'Awan, his daughter. #And at the
beginning of the third jubilee, Cain killed Abel because the sacrifice of Abel was
3 accepted, but the offering of Cain was not accepted. *And he killed him in the
field, and his blood cried out from the earth to heaven, making accusation because
4 he killed him. #And the LORD rebuked Cain on account of Abel because he killed
him. And he made him a fugitive11 on the earth because of the blood of his brother. 5 And he cursed him upon the earth. •And therefore it is written in the heavenly
tablets, 4 'Cursed is one who strikes his fellow with malice. And all who have Deut 27:24
seen and heard shall say 'so be it.' And the man who saw and did not report (it)
6 shall be cursed like him." •Therefore when we come before the LORD our God
we will make known all of the sins which occur in heaven and earth and which
are in the light or in the darkness or in any (place). The descendants of Adam Gen 4:i7.25f. ;
5:6-15
7 And Adam and his wife were mourning four weeks of years on account of
Abel. And inb the fourth year of the fifth week they rejoiced. And Adam again
knew his wife and she bore a son for him. And he named him Seth because he
said, "The LORD has raised up another seed0 for us upon the earth in place of
8 Abel because Cain killed him." *And in the sixth week he begat 'Azura, his
daughter. 9 And Cain took his sister, 'Awan,d as a wife, and she bore for him Enoch at
the end of the fourth jubilee. And in the first year of the first week of the fifth
jubilee, buildings were constructed in the land. And Cain built a city and he
10 named it with the name of his son, Enoch. *And Adam knew Eve, his wife, and
she bore nine more children.And Cain built a city and he
10 named it with the name of his son, Enoch. *And Adam knew Eve, his wife, and
she bore nine more children. 11 And in the fifth week of the fifth jubilee, Seth took 'Azura, his sister, as a
12 wife. And in the fourth year of that week, she bore for him Enos. •He was first
to call the name of the LORD upon the earth. 13 And in the seventh jubilee in the third week, Enos took Noam, his sister, as a
wife. And she bore a sonc for him in the third year of the fifth week. And he
named him Kenan. 14 And at the end of the eighth jubilee, Kenan took for himself a wife, Mu'aleleth,
his sister, (as) a wife.f And she bore a son for him in the ninth jubilee in the first
week in the third year of that (week). And he called him Mahalalel. 15 And in the second week of the tenth jubilee, Mahalalel took for himself a wife, CD 2.IS
Dinah, the daughter of Baraki'el, the daughter of his father's brother,* as a wife. ,QapGcn 21
4 a. In his edition of the Eth. text, Charles sug­ f. B and D read "Kenan took for himself a
gested that the Ethiopic word nuha was a corrupt wife, Mu'aleleth, his sister (as) a wife." The
transliteration of the word ntf, "fugitive," which repetition of "wife" would appear to be redundant,
appears in Gen 4:14. but the Heb. text from Qumran clearly includes
b. A fragment of the Heb. text from Qumran the second mention of wife and apparently provides
(HQJub 1) begins at this point and continues to sufficient space in the lacuna for its first mention. the beginning of vs. 11. A C omit the final phrase "(as) a wife."
c. The Eth. word order is a bit unusual at this g. Eth. reads "father's sister." Where this read­
point. It reads lit. "raised up for us seed in the ing occurred, Charles systematically changed it to
earth, another one," but the same word order is read "father's brother." In his English translation
found in the Heb. fragment from Qumran. he assembled a number of ancient texts which bear
d.B C read "from any fruit of the tree." made up of twelve months of thirty days plus four
d. At this point in his English translation Charles days added at the end of each of the seasons. There
indicated a lacuna because an impressive number is no way that a new moon would be able to
of ancient witnesses who are dependent on Jub coincide on a regular basis with the first of every
claim that the serpent originally had four legs. It month in that system. Both the Lat. (28:24) and
therefore seemed appropriate that the text should the Syr. (6:1) texts use words for "first," which
contain some reference to cutting them off. cannot be translated "new moon."
e. There is a small portion of the Syr. text which h. Gen 3:23b says that Adam is to till the earth
is parallel to the first half of this vs. "from which he was taken." Apparently that phrase
f. On the basis of Jub 12:26, it is reasonable to led to speculation that Adam did not originate in
assume that all the animals spoke Heb. Eden but was taken from another place to which
g. Lit. "new moon," but the calendar used in the author of Jub would return him. Jub speaks against that usage. The calendar was

fragment from Qumran. he assembled a number of ancient texts which bear
d. The word order for "his sister, 'Awan" is witness to the marriage of the patriarchs to the
provided by the Heb. fragment from Qumran. The daughter of their "father's brother." The witnesses
Eth. text reads " 'Awan, his sister." include the Syr. "Names of the Wives of the
e. A fragment of the Heb. text from Qumran Patriarchs" which he published as Appendix III to
begins at this point and continues into vs. 14. his Eth. text. One might also note in support ofAnd she bore a son for him in the third week in the sixth year. And he called him
Jared because in his days the angels of the LORD, who were called Watchers, Dan4:i3
came down to the earth in order to teach the sons of man, and perform judgment ,En 1:5
and uprightness upon the earth. The birth and work of Enoch Gen 5:18-24
16 And in the eleventh jubilee Jared took for himself a wife and her name was
Baraka, the daughter of Rasuyal, the daughter of his father's brother, as a wife,
in the fourth week of that jubilee. And she bore a son for him in the fifthh week,
in the fourth year of the jubilee. And he called him Enoch. 17 This one1 was the first who learned writing and knowledge and wisdom, from iEn i2:3f. (among) the sons of men, from (among) those who were born upon earth. And
who wrote in a book the signs of the heaven according to the order of their
months, so that the sons of man might know the (appointed) times of the years iEn 72-82
is according to their order, with respect to each of their months. •This one was the
first (who) wrote a testimony and testified to the children of men throughout the
generations of the earth. And their weeks according to jubilees he recounted; and
the days of the years he made known. And the months he set in order, and the
19 sabbaths of the years he recounted, just as we made it known to him.J »And he
saw what was and what will be in a vision of his sleep as it will happen among
the children of men in their generations until the day of judgment. He saw and
knew everything and wrote his testimony and deposited the testimony upon the iEn 37.2-4
earth against all the children of men and their generations. 20 And in the twelfth jubilee in its seventh week, he took for himself a wife and iEn 85:3
her name was 'Edni, the daughter of Dan'el, his father's brother, as a wife, and
in the sixth year of this week she bore a son for him. And he called him
Methuselah. 21 And he was therefore with the angels of God six jubilees of years.And he called him
Methuselah. 21 And he was therefore with the angels of God six jubilees of years. And they iQapGen 2.21
showed him everything which is on earth and in the heavens, the dominion of the
22 sun. And he wrote everything, #and bore witness to the Watchers, the ones who
sinned with the daughters of men because they began to mingle themselves with
the daughters of men so that they might be polluted. And Enoch bore witness
23 against all of them. • And he was taken from among the children of men, and we iEn 70:1 -3
led him to the garden of Eden for greatness and honor. And behold, he is there
the change that the names Baraki'el (vs. 15) and parallelism in 11. 3f. of vs. 17 and 11. 4f. and 6f. Rasuyal (vs. 16) are masculine forms. Wintermute of vs. 18 is convincing. There may, however, be
attempts to follow the inconsistencies in the spelling some expansion in the Eth. version. The Syr. text
of the proper names in the Ethiopic text. —J.H.C. contains a much shorter reading which preserves
h. A fragment of the Heb. text from Qumran the same poetic pattern with its obvious parallelism. begins at this point and continues into vs. 17. Inasmuch as the Syr. text is generally abbreviated,
i. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point there is no reason to believe that it preserves the
and continues into vs. 21. original text at this point. Nevertheless, it provides
The fragment from Qumran has a blank space an interesting variant in support of the original
before the first word, which indicates that it marked poetic structure. It reads as follows:
a new section of narrative. The reading "This one"
17. This Enoch was the first (who) learned
is clearly found in the Qumran text, from which it
writing and knowledge and wisdom,
has been restored. Charles's Eth.fragment from Qumran. he assembled a number of ancient texts which bear
d. The word order for "his sister, 'Awan" is witness to the marriage of the patriarchs to the
provided by the Heb. fragment from Qumran. The daughter of their "father's brother." The witnesses
Eth. text reads " 'Awan, his sister." include the Syr. "Names of the Wives of the
e. A fragment of the Heb. text from Qumran Patriarchs" which he published as Appendix III to
begins at this point and continues into vs. 14. his Eth. text. One might also note in support of

This Enoch was the first (who) learned
is clearly found in the Qumran text, from which it
writing and knowledge and wisdom,
has been restored. Charles's Eth. text began "He
and (who) wrote the signs of heaven in a book,
was therefore the first." The "therefore" was
to teach to the sons of men,
attested only in MS A, however, so it should now
the changes of the times and the years,
be eliminated. according to their orders and their months. j. The suggestion that vss. 17f. were poetic
And he made known the days of the years
came from J. VanderKam, "Enoch Traditions in
and the number of the months he established. Jubilees and Other Second-Century Sources," SBL
1978 Seminar Papers (Missoula, Mont., 1978) vol. The discussion of Enoch in Jub is closely related
1, pp. 228-51. to the account which appears in the book of IEn. Although there are some phrases in vss. 17f. VanderKam's paper refers to the most important
which are a bit difficult to put in poetic lines, the current studies and introduces a number of signif­
case for an original poetic structure is strong. The icant new observations.writing condemnation and judgment of the world, and all of the evils of the
24 children of men. • And because of him none of the water of the Flood camek upon
the whole land of Eden, for he was put there for a sign and so that he might bear 2En 34.3
witness against all of the children of men so that he might relate all of the deeds
25 of the generations until the day of judgment. •And1 he offered the incense which
is acceptable before the LORD in the evening (at) the holy place"1 on Mount
26 Qater." •For the LORD has four (sacred) places upon the earth: the garden of
Eden and the mountain of the East and this mountain which you are upon today,
Mount Sinai, and Mount Zion, which will be sanctified in the new creation for
the sanctification of the earth. On account of this the earth will be sanctified from
all sin and from pollution throughout eternal generations. The generations from Enoch to Noah
Gen 5:25-29
27 And in the fourteenth jubilee Methuselah took as his wife 'Edna, daughter of
'Azri'al, his father's brother, as a wife, in the third week in the first year of that
week. And he begot a son. And he called him Lamech. 28 And in the fifteenth jubilee in the third week, Lamech took for himself a wife, lQapGcn 2.3
and her name was Betenos, the daughter of Baraki'il, the daughter of his father's
brother, (as) a wife. And in that week she bore a son for him and he called him
Noah, saying, "This one will console me from my grief and from all of my labor
and from the land which the LORD cursed."
The death of Adam
29 And° at the end of the nineteenth jubilee in the seventh week, in the sixth year,
Adam died. And all of his children buried him in the land of his creation. And
30 he was the first who was buriedp in the earth. • And he lacked seventy years from
one thousand years, for a thousand years are like one day in the testimony of 2Pet 3:8
k.And
30 he was the first who was buriedp in the earth. • And he lacked seventy years from
one thousand years, for a thousand years are like one day in the testimony of 2Pet 3:8
k. The reading is based on MS EMML3, the Mount Qater is undoubtedly to be identified with
oldest known MS of Jub and one that was not the mountain of the East in vs. 26. The Syr. text
known by Charles. The reading has already been uses the same word in both places, and its presence
noted by VanderKam, SBL 1978 Seminar Papers, in both places proves that some designation of the
vol. 1, pp. 228-51. mountain should be retained in vs. 25. The Syr. 1. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point name for the mountain could be read as "South"
and continues through the list of four mountains in or as "Taiman." If it is read as "South," then
vs. 26. one would assume a corruption or confusion of a
m. The reading "in the evening" is found in word for "East." If it is read as "Taiman," one
MSS C D. The reading was rejected by Charles, might guess that it had reference to Taima in
but has subsequently been confirmed by the pres­ Arabia, about halfway between Damascus and
ence of the word for "evening" in the Syr. text. Mecca, where Nabonidus spent about eight years
The reading of "holy place" which follows in the of his reign. As a center for caravans (Job 6:19),
Eth. text has no counterpart in the Syr. In com­ Taima was undoubtedly identified with the incense
menting on the Syr. text, E. Tisserant suggested trade, and might be an appropriate place to locate
that maqdas, "holy place," was a corruption of Enoch's mountain. Although Taima lies south of
qadami, "first," which agrees with the Syr. text. Jerusalem, it is also suitably eastward. In all
Thus one could read "and he offered incense which probability the Syr. Taiman is simply a later attempt
is acceptable to the LORD in the evening first on to identify the mountain with a known location. Mount Qater." The suggestion is attractive.This Enoch was the first (who) learned
is clearly found in the Qumran text, from which it
writing and knowledge and wisdom,
has been restored. Charles's Eth. text began "He
and (who) wrote the signs of heaven in a book,
was therefore the first." The "therefore" was
to teach to the sons of men,
attested only in MS A, however, so it should now
the changes of the times and the years,
be eliminated. according to their orders and their months. j. The suggestion that vss. 17f. were poetic
And he made known the days of the years
came from J. VanderKam, "Enoch Traditions in
and the number of the months he established. Jubilees and Other Second-Century Sources," SBL
1978 Seminar Papers (Missoula, Mont., 1978) vol. The discussion of Enoch in Jub is closely related
1, pp. 228-51. to the account which appears in the book of IEn. Although there are some phrases in vss. 17f. VanderKam's paper refers to the most important
which are a bit difficult to put in poetic lines, the current studies and introduces a number of signif­
case for an original poetic structure is strong. The icant new observations.

Taiman is simply a later attempt
is acceptable to the LORD in the evening first on to identify the mountain with a known location. Mount Qater." The suggestion is attractive. In any As it appeared in the earliest text it was simply an
case, Enoch is here being designated as the insti­ eastern mountain identified with incense; its actual
gator of the ritual of evening incense, which was location remains a subject of speculation. Compare
part of normal daily service in the Temple in Charles's discussion in his English translation and
Jerusalem. the discussion by Tisserant which accompanies his
n. "Qater" may be translated in Eth. as "noon." Syr. text for additional suggestions. It seems likely, however, that it was originally the o. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point. proper name of a mountain which was simply It contains the first part of vs. 1 and part of vs. 2. transcribed into Gk. and then Eth. just as Eden, The second part of vs. 1 is contained in a separate
Sinai, and Zion were. The Heb. root qtr is used fragment of the Syr. text noted below. to describe the burning of incense, and it is likely p. A fragment of the Heb. text from Qumran
that some formation from that root was used to (HQJub 2) begins at this point and continues
designate the place where Enoch burned incense. through most of vs. 30.heaven and therefore it was written concerning the tree of knowledge, 4 in the
day you eat from it you will die." Therefore he did not complete the years of this
day because he died in it. Abel avenged—law of retaliation
31 At the end of that jubilee Cain was killed one year after him. And his house
fell upon him, and he died in the midst of his house. And he was killed by its Ex 21:24
stones because he killed Abel with a stone, and with a stone he was killed by
32 righteous judgment. •Therefore it is ordained in the heavenly tablets:
4'With the weapons with which a man kills his fellow
he shall be killed
just as he wounded him,
thus shall they do to him."
The birth of Noah's sons Gen 5:32
33 And in the twenty-fifth jubilee Noah took a wife for himself and her name was
'Emzara, daughter of Rake'el, daughter of his father's brother, as a wife, in the
first year, in the fifth week. And in its third year she bore for him Shem. And in
its fifth year she bore for him Ham. And in the first year of the sixth week she
bore for him Japheth. Corruption of all flesh when angels mate with humans Gen 6:1-5
1 5 And when8 the children of men began to multiply on the surface of the earth iQapGen2.i
and daughters were born to them, that the angels of the LORD saw in a certain 1 En 6:if. year of that jubilee that they were good to look at. And they took wives for iEn 7:1,2
themselves from all of those whom they chose. And they bore children for them;
2 and they were the giants. *And injustice increased upon the earth, and all flesh
corrupted its way; man and cattle and beasts and birds and everything which walks
on the earth. And they all corrupted their way and their ordinances, and they 1 En 7:5
began to eat one another. And injustice grew upon the earth and every imagination
of the thoughts of all mankind was thus continually evil.Taiman is simply a later attempt
is acceptable to the LORD in the evening first on to identify the mountain with a known location. Mount Qater." The suggestion is attractive. In any As it appeared in the earliest text it was simply an
case, Enoch is here being designated as the insti­ eastern mountain identified with incense; its actual
gator of the ritual of evening incense, which was location remains a subject of speculation. Compare
part of normal daily service in the Temple in Charles's discussion in his English translation and
Jerusalem. the discussion by Tisserant which accompanies his
n. "Qater" may be translated in Eth. as "noon." Syr. text for additional suggestions. It seems likely, however, that it was originally the o. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point. proper name of a mountain which was simply It contains the first part of vs. 1 and part of vs. 2. transcribed into Gk. and then Eth. just as Eden, The second part of vs. 1 is contained in a separate
Sinai, and Zion were. The Heb. root qtr is used fragment of the Syr. text noted below. to describe the burning of incense, and it is likely p. A fragment of the Heb. text from Qumran
that some formation from that root was used to (HQJub 2) begins at this point and continues
designate the place where Enoch burned incense. through most of vs. 30.

And they all corrupted their way and their ordinances, and they 1 En 7:5
began to eat one another. And injustice grew upon the earth and every imagination
of the thoughts of all mankind was thus continually evil. The punishment of angels and annihilation of their offspring
Gen 6:7-13
3 And the LORD saw the earth, and behold it was corrupted and all flesh had
corrupted its order and all who were on the earth had done every sort of evil in
4 his sight. *And he said, 44I will wipe out man and all flesh which I have created
5 from upon the surface of the earth." *But Noah alone found favor in the sight of
the LORD. 6 And against his angels whom he had sent to the earth he was very angry. He IQH io.34f. commanded that they be uprooted from all their dominion. And he told us to bind
them in the depths of the earth, and behold, they are bound in the midst of them,
7 and they are isolated. *And against their children a word went forth from before
his presence so that he might smite them5 with the sword and remove them from
8 under heaven. #And he said, 44My spirit will not dwell upon man forever; for
9 they are flesh, and their days will be one hundred and ten years." »And he sent
his sword among them so that each one might kill his fellow and they began to
kill onec another until they all fell on the sword and they were wiped out from IQH io.34f. 10 the earth. 'And their parents also watched. And subsequently they were bound in
5 a. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point c. There is a portion of the Syr. text which
and continues to the end of the vs. begins at this point and contains the sense of the
b. The phrase could be impersonal, "(one) might present vs. although the wording is quite different,
smite them," i.e. "they might be smitten."65 JUBILEES
the depths of the earth forever, until the day of great judgment in order for
judgment to be executed upon all of those who corrupted their ways and their
11 deeds before the LORD. *And he wiped out every one from their places and not
one of them remained whom he did not judge according to all his wickedness. A new righteousness. The impartial judge will forgive
12 And he made for all his works a new and righteous nature so that they might
not sin in all their nature forever, and so that they might all be righteous, each in IQS 3.16
13 his kind, always. • And the judgment of all of them has been ordained and written
in the heavenly tablets without injustice. And (if)d any of them transgress from
their way with respect to what was ordained for them to walk in, or if they do
not walk in it, the judgment for every (sort of) nature and every kind has been
14 written. #And there is nothing excluded** which is in heaven or on earth or in the
light or in the darkness or in Sheol or in the depths or in the place of darkness. 15 And all their judgments are ordained, written, and engraved. •He will judge
concerning every one: the great one according to his greatness and the small one
16 according to his smallness, and each one according to his way. *And he is not IQH 15.24
one who accepts persons/ and he is not one who accepts' gifts when he says that
he will execute judgment upon each one. If one gave everything which is in the Deut 10:17
earth, he would not accept gifts or persons. And he would not accept (anything) 2Chr 19:7
from his hand because he is a righteous judge.If one gave everything which is in the Deut 10:17
earth, he would not accept gifts or persons. And he would not accept (anything) 2Chr 19:7
from his hand because he is a righteous judge. 17 And for the children of Israel it has been written and ordained, "If they return Jer 36:3
to him in righteousness, he will forgive all of their sins and he will pardon all of ,er 18:8
is their transgressions." *It is written and it is ordained, "He will have mercy on
19all who return from all their error, once each year." »But to any who corrupted
their way and their counsel before the Flood, he did not show partiality, except
Noah alone, for he showed partiality to him for the sake of his sons whom he
saved from the waters of the Flood (and) for his sake because his heart was
righteous in all of his ways just as it was commanded concerning him. And he
did not transgress anything which was ordained for him. The FlOOd Gen 6:14-8:]9
20 And the LORD said, "Let everything which is upon dry land be blotted out:
men and cattle and beasts and birds of the heaven and whatever moves on the
21 earth." #And he commanded Noah to make an ark for himself so that he might
22 save himself from the water of the Flood. *And Noah made an ark in all respects
just as he commanded him in the twenty-second jubilee of years in the fifth week
23 in the fifth year. *And he entered it in the sixth year in the second month on the
first of the second month until the sixteenth day. And he and everything which
we brought to him entered into the ark. And the LORD shut it up from outside
on the evening of the seventeenth. 24 And the LORD opened the seven floodgates of heaven,
and the mouths of the springs of the great deep were seven mouths in 1 En 89:2-7
number;
25 and these floodgates sent down water from heaven forty days and forty
nights,
and the springs of the deep sent up water until the whole world was full
of water. d. There is no external marker to indicate that judgment mentioned in vs. 13.And they all corrupted their way and their ordinances, and they 1 En 7:5
began to eat one another. And injustice grew upon the earth and every imagination
of the thoughts of all mankind was thus continually evil. The punishment of angels and annihilation of their offspring
Gen 6:7-13
3 And the LORD saw the earth, and behold it was corrupted and all flesh had
corrupted its order and all who were on the earth had done every sort of evil in
4 his sight. *And he said, 44I will wipe out man and all flesh which I have created
5 from upon the surface of the earth." *But Noah alone found favor in the sight of
the LORD. 6 And against his angels whom he had sent to the earth he was very angry. He IQH io.34f. commanded that they be uprooted from all their dominion. And he told us to bind
them in the depths of the earth, and behold, they are bound in the midst of them,
7 and they are isolated. *And against their children a word went forth from before
his presence so that he might smite them5 with the sword and remove them from
8 under heaven. #And he said, 44My spirit will not dwell upon man forever; for
9 they are flesh, and their days will be one hundred and ten years." »And he sent
his sword among them so that each one might kill his fellow and they began to
kill onec another until they all fell on the sword and they were wiped out from IQH io.34f. 10 the earth. 'And their parents also watched. And subsequently they were bound in
5 a. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point c. There is a portion of the Syr. text which
and continues to the end of the vs. begins at this point and contains the sense of the
b. The phrase could be impersonal, "(one) might present vs. although the wording is quite different,
smite them," i.e. "they might be smitten."

There is no external marker to indicate that judgment mentioned in vs. 13. this first clause is conditional, and Charles did not f. Lit. "accepts a face." What it means, of
translate it as such. The sentence is admittedly course, is that "he does not show partiality," but
difficult. Charles's Eth. text reads "all who," but the parallelism involved in describing one who
we have followed the reading of MS A, which accepts both persons and gifts (i.e. bribes) seemed
does not use a relative. worth preserving in this vs. e. Nothing is excluded from liability before the26 And the water increased upon the earth,
fifteen cubits the water rose over every tall mountain;
and the ark rose from upon the earth,
and it moved upon the surface of the water. 27 And all of the water stayed upon the surface of the earth five months, one
28 hundred and fifty days. »And the ark went and rested on the top of Lubar, one of
29 the mountains of Ararat. »And in the fourth month the springs of the great deep
were closed and the floodgates of heaven were held shut. And on the new moon
of the seventh month, all of the mouths of the deeps of the earth were opened. 30 And the water began to go down into the depths below. »And on the first of the
tenth month, the heads of the mountains appeared, and on the first of the first
31 month, the land appeared. «And the water dried up from upon the earth in the
fifth week, in its seventh year. And on the seventeenth day in the second month,
32 the land was dry. 'And on its twenty-seventh day, he opened the ark and he sent
out of it the beasts, and cattle and birds and whatever moved. Debarkation and sacrifice Gen 8:20
1 6 Anda on the first of the third month, he went out of the ark, and he built an iQapGen 10.13
2 altar on that mountain. *And he made atonement for the land. And he took the
kid of a goat, and he made atonement with its blood for all the sins of the land
Lev 18:26-28
because everything which was on it had been blotted out except those who were Num 35:33f. 3 in the ark with Noah. *And he offered up the fat upon the altar. And he took a iQapGen 10.15
calf,b a goat, a lamb, [kidsc], salt, a turtledove, and a young dove,d and he offered
up a burnt offering on the altar. And he placed upon them an offering kneaded
with oil. And he sprinkled wine, and placed frankincense upon everything. And
Ex 29:40
he offered up a sweet aroma which was pleasing before the LORD.And he sprinkled wine, and placed frankincense upon everything. And
Ex 29:40
he offered up a sweet aroma which was pleasing before the LORD. Lev 2:2-5
The covenant with Noah and laws prohibiting the eating of blood
Gen 8:21-9:17
4 And the LORD smelled the sweet aroma, and he made a covenant with him so
that there might not be floodwaters which would destroy the earth. All the days
of the earth, seed (time) and harvest will not cease. Cold and heat and summer
and winter and day and night will not change their ordinances or cease forever. 5 "But as for you, increase and be multiplied on the earth and become many upon
it, and become a blessing upon it. Fear and terror of you I will set upon everything
6 which is on the land or in the sea. #And behold, I have given you all of the beasts
and everything which flies and everything which moves upon the earth and in the
water, the fish and everything, for food like the green herbs. And I have given
7 you everything so that you might eat. #But flesh which is (filled) with life, (that
is) with blood, you shall not eat—because the life of all flesh is in the blood—
lest your blood be sought for your lives. From the hand of every man,
from the hand of every (creature),
I will seek the blood of a man. 8 Whoever pours out the blood of a man,
by man his blood shall be poured out,
because in the image of the LORD he made Adam. 6 a. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point was translated "goat" in vs. 2. The word is lacking
and continues through vs. 3. in the Syr. and is therefore best understood as an
b. The Eth. word which is translated "calf" is Eth. gloss. ambiguous. It could also mean "bull" or "cow," d. The words for "turtledove" and "young
but the Syr. text clearly reads "calf." dove" are plural in Syr. In editing the Syr. text,
c. The sudden appearance of "kids" in the Tisserant suggested that the plural forms were
plural is unusual.There is no external marker to indicate that judgment mentioned in vs. 13. this first clause is conditional, and Charles did not f. Lit. "accepts a face." What it means, of
translate it as such. The sentence is admittedly course, is that "he does not show partiality," but
difficult. Charles's Eth. text reads "all who," but the parallelism involved in describing one who
we have followed the reading of MS A, which accepts both persons and gifts (i.e. bribes) seemed
does not use a relative. worth preserving in this vs. e. Nothing is excluded from liability before the

text,
c. The sudden appearance of "kids" in the Tisserant suggested that the plural forms were
plural is unusual. It is not the same word for "kid" preferable because those birds were regularly of­
that was used in vs. 2, but it is the word which fered in pairs.9 And as for you, increase and become many in the land."
10 And Noah and his sons swore that they would not eat any blood which was in
any flesh. And he made a covenant before the LORD God forever in all of the
generations of the earth in that month. 11 Therefore, he spoke to you so that you also might make a covenant with the
children of Israel with an oath in this month upon the mountain. And you will Ex 1*1
sprinkle blood upon them on account of all of the words of the covenant which Lev 17:10,12
12 the LORD made with them for all time. •This testimony is written concerning
you so that you might keep it always lest you ever eat any blood of the beasts or Deut 12:23
birds or cattle throughout all of the days of the earth. And the man who eats the
blood of the beasts or cattle or birds throughout all of the days of the earth shall
13 be uprooted, he and his seed from the earth. #And you, command the children of iQapGen 11.17
Israel not to eat any blood so that their names and seed might be before the LORD
14 God always. #And there is no limit of days for this law because it is forever. They shall keep it for their generations so that they might make supplication on
your behalf with blood before the altar on every day. And at the hour of daybreak Lev 17:11
and evening they will seek atonement on their owne behalf continually before the
LORD SO that they might guard it and not be rooted out. Num 28:3-8
is And he gave a sign to Noah and his children that there should not again be a
16 flood upon the earth. •He set his bow in the clouds for a sign of the covenant
which is forever, that the water of the Flood should therefore not be upon the
earth to destroy it all of the days of the earth. The feast of Shebuot
17 Therefore, it is ordained and written in the heavenly tablets that they should
observe the feast of Shebuotf in this month, once per year, in order to renew the Ex 34:22
is covenant in all (respects), year by year.•He set his bow in the clouds for a sign of the covenant
which is forever, that the water of the Flood should therefore not be upon the
earth to destroy it all of the days of the earth. The feast of Shebuot
17 Therefore, it is ordained and written in the heavenly tablets that they should
observe the feast of Shebuotf in this month, once per year, in order to renew the Ex 34:22
is covenant in all (respects), year by year. *And all of this feast was celebrated in
heaven from the day of creation until the days of Noah, twenty-six jubilees and
five weeks of years. And Noah and his children kept it for seven jubilees and one
week of years until the day of the death of Noah. And from the day of the death
of Noah, his sons corrupted it until the days of Abraham, and they ate blood, CD 3.6
19 But Abraham alone kept it. And Isaac and Jacob and his sons kept it until your
days, but in your days the children of Israel forgot it until you renewed it for
them on this mountain. 20 And you, command the children of Israel so that they might keep this feast in
all of their generations as a commandment to them. One day per year in this
21 month they shall celebrate the feast, »for it is the feast of Shebuot and it is the Ex23:i6
feast of the first fruits. This feast is twofold and of two natures.8 Just as it is Num 28:2
e. The Eth. MSS provide three different readings particularly sensitive to chronology, does not iden­
here: "on behalf of them," "it," or "you" (mas­ tify this feast in relation to the passing of seven
culine plural). weeks, S. Zeitlin (The Book of Jubilees: Its Char­
f. Although the Eth. word means "weeks," acter and Its Significance [Philadelphia, 1939])
"Shebuot" was used in an attempt to maintain a made the following observation: "I venture to say
degree of openness to the double meaning of the that even the name Shabuot in the Book of Jubilees
Heb. word which undoubtedly appeared in the has not the connotation of 'weeks/ but means
original text of Jub.text,
c. The sudden appearance of "kids" in the Tisserant suggested that the plural forms were
plural is unusual. It is not the same word for "kid" preferable because those birds were regularly of­
that was used in vs. 2, but it is the word which fered in pairs.

word means "weeks," acter and Its Significance [Philadelphia, 1939])
"Shebuot" was used in an attempt to maintain a made the following observation: "I venture to say
degree of openness to the double meaning of the that even the name Shabuot in the Book of Jubilees
Heb. word which undoubtedly appeared in the has not the connotation of 'weeks/ but means
original text of Jub. In an unpointed Heb. text the 'oaths' " (p. 6). Zeitlin supported his statement by
consonants Sb'wt could be translated either "weeks" noting that the covenant between God and Noah
or "oaths." The MT vocalizes the absolute form provided the context for establishing the feast and
of the word for "weeks" as Sabu'ot and the word that the covenant with Abraham in ch. 15 also
for "oaths" as Sibudt, but "weeks" also appears occurred on this festival. The significance of this
as Sibu'dt in the construct. We have chosen the double meaning of weeks and oaths was probably
less precise spelling Shebuot to reflect the ambiguity not lost on the author of Jub. The spelling Shebuot
of an unpointed text, and do not intend to favor is an attempt to maintain that double meaning. one meaning over the other. g. The "double nature" may be due to the
The feast referred to by the Eth. word is, of double sense of Shebuot discussed in the preceding
course, better known by the name of Pentecost or n. Although not mentioned in Jub, the feast may
weeks, but both of these names are supposedly have marked the passing of "weeks" in the agri­
derived from the number of days (or weeks) which cultural year and also celebrated the "oaths" made
separate that feast from the offering of the Omer to Noah and Abraham. (Lev 23:9-17). Since the book of Jub, which is22 written and engraved concerning it, observe it. •This is because I have written it
in the book of the first law, which I wrote for you, so that you might observe it
in each of its appointed times, one day per year. And I have told you its sacrificial
offering so that the children of Israel might remember them and observe them in
their generations in this month one day each year. 23 And on the first of the first month and on the first of the fourth month and on IQS IO.S
the first of the seventh month and on the first of the tenth month are the days of Lev 23:24
remembrance and they are the days of appointed times in the four parts of the
24 year. They are written and inscribed for an eternal witness. *And Noah ordained
them for himself as feasts for eternal generations because they were a memorial
25 for him. •And on the first of the first month, he was told to make an ark. And on
26 it the land dried up, and he opened up and saw the land. • And on the first of the iEn 89:7f. fourth month, the mouths of the deeps of the abysses which were beneath were
shut. And on the first of the seventh month, all of the mouths of the depths of
27 the earth were opened, and the water began to go down into them. •On the first
28 of the tenth month the heads of the mountains appeared, and Noah rejoiced. *And
therefore he ordained them for himself as feasts of remembrance forever, and thus
29 they are ordained. #And they set them upon the heavenly tablets. Each one of
them is thirteen weeks from one to another of the remembrances, from the first
to the second, and from the second to the third, and from the third to the fourth. 30 And all of the days which will be commanded will be fifty-two weeks of days,
31 and all of them are a complete year. 'Thus it is engraved and ordained on the
heavenly tablets, and there is no transgressing in a single year, from year to year.30 And all of the days which will be commanded will be fifty-two weeks of days,
31 and all of them are a complete year. 'Thus it is engraved and ordained on the
heavenly tablets, and there is no transgressing in a single year, from year to year. The danger in failing to observe a 364-day calendar
32 And you, command the children of Israel so that they shall guard the years in IQS I.MT. this number, three hundred and sixty-four days, and it will be a complete year. ia?74:ioj2;
And no one shall corrupt its (appointed) time from its days or from its feasts T** ^
because all (of the appointed times) will arrive in them according to their testimony,
33 and they will not pass over a day, and they will not corrupt a feast. *But if they iEn 82:4-6
are transgressed, and they do not observe them according to his commandment,
then they will corrupt all of their (fixed) times, and the years will be moved from
34 within this (order), and they will transgress their ordinances. #And all of the sons CD314
of Israel will forget, and they will not find the way of the years. And they will
forget the new moons and (appointed) times and sabbaths. And they will set awry
35 all of the ordinances of the years. #For I know and henceforth I shall make you
know—but not from my own heart, because the book is written before me and is
ordained in the heavenly tablets of the division of days—lest they forget the feasts
of the covenant and walk in the feasts of the gentiles, after their errors and after
their ignorance. 36 And there will be those who will examine the moon diligently because it will
corrupt the (appointed) times and it will advance from year to year ten days. 37 Therefore, the years will come to them as they corrupt and make a day of testimony
a reproach and a profane day a festival, and they will mix up everything, a holy
day (as) profaned and a profane (one) for a holy day, because they will set awry
38 the months and sabbaths and feasts and jubilees.word means "weeks," acter and Its Significance [Philadelphia, 1939])
"Shebuot" was used in an attempt to maintain a made the following observation: "I venture to say
degree of openness to the double meaning of the that even the name Shabuot in the Book of Jubilees
Heb. word which undoubtedly appeared in the has not the connotation of 'weeks/ but means
original text of Jub. In an unpointed Heb. text the 'oaths' " (p. 6). Zeitlin supported his statement by
consonants Sb'wt could be translated either "weeks" noting that the covenant between God and Noah
or "oaths." The MT vocalizes the absolute form provided the context for establishing the feast and
of the word for "weeks" as Sabu'ot and the word that the covenant with Abraham in ch. 15 also
for "oaths" as Sibudt, but "weeks" also appears occurred on this festival. The significance of this
as Sibu'dt in the construct. We have chosen the double meaning of weeks and oaths was probably
less precise spelling Shebuot to reflect the ambiguity not lost on the author of Jub. The spelling Shebuot
of an unpointed text, and do not intend to favor is an attempt to maintain that double meaning. one meaning over the other. g. The "double nature" may be due to the
The feast referred to by the Eth. word is, of double sense of Shebuot discussed in the preceding
course, better known by the name of Pentecost or n. Although not mentioned in Jub, the feast may
weeks, but both of these names are supposedly have marked the passing of "weeks" in the agri­
derived from the number of days (or weeks) which cultural year and also celebrated the "oaths" made
separate that feast from the offering of the Omer to Noah and Abraham. (Lev 23:9-17). Since the book of Jub, which is

36 And there will be those who will examine the moon diligently because it will
corrupt the (appointed) times and it will advance from year to year ten days. 37 Therefore, the years will come to them as they corrupt and make a day of testimony
a reproach and a profane day a festival, and they will mix up everything, a holy
day (as) profaned and a profane (one) for a holy day, because they will set awry
38 the months and sabbaths and feasts and jubilees. • Therefore, I shall command you
and I shall bear witness to you so that you may bear witness to them because
after you have died your sons will be corrupted so that they will not make a year
only three hundred and sixty-four days. And therefore, they will set awry the
months and the (appointed) times and the sabbaths and the feasts, and they will
eat all of the blood with all flesh. Noah's sacrifice Gen 9:20
I 7 And in the seventh week in the first year in that jubilee, Noah planted a vine iQapGen 12.13
on the mountain on which the ark rested, whose name is Lubar, (one) of themountains of Ararat. And it produced fruit in the fourth year, and he guarded its
2 fruit; and he picked it in that year in the seventh month, •and he made wine from lQapGen 12.1s
it, and he put it in a vessel, and he guarded it until the fifth year, until the first
3 day on the first of the first month. • And on that day he made a feast with rejoicing. And he made a burnt offering to the LORD, one calf from the bulls, one ram, a Num 29:2-5
lamb of seven years, and one kid of the goats in order that he might thereby seek
4 atonement for himself and for his sons. »And he prepared the kid first. And he
placed some of its blood on the flesh which was on the altar which he had made. And all of the fat and the bull and the ram and the lamb he offered up upon the
altar, where he made the burnt offering. And he offered up all of their flesh upon
5 the altar. »And he placed all of their sacrifice upon it, kneaded with oil. And after
that, he sprinkled wine in the Are which he had placed upon the altar. And he
presented frankincense upon the altar, and offered up a sweet odor which is
6 pleasing before the LORD his God, *and rejoiced. And he drank some of that
wine, he and his sons, with rejoicing. The curse of Canaan and the blessing of Shem
Gen 9:21-27
7 And when evening came, he entered into his tent, and lay down drunk. And
8 he slept, and was uncovered in his tent as he was sleeping. •And Ham saw Noah,
9 his father, naked. And he went out, and told his two brothers outside. • And Shem
took his garment, and he stood up, he and Japheth, and they placed the garment
on their shoulders and, turning backward, they covered the shame of their father,
and their faces were backward. 10 And Noah woke up from his wine, and knew everything which his youngest
son had done to him. And he cursed his son and said, "Cursed is Canaan, let
11 him be an enslaved servant of his brothers." #And he blessed Shem, and said:
"May the LORD, the God of Shem, be blessed.36 And there will be those who will examine the moon diligently because it will
corrupt the (appointed) times and it will advance from year to year ten days. 37 Therefore, the years will come to them as they corrupt and make a day of testimony
a reproach and a profane day a festival, and they will mix up everything, a holy
day (as) profaned and a profane (one) for a holy day, because they will set awry
38 the months and sabbaths and feasts and jubilees. • Therefore, I shall command you
and I shall bear witness to you so that you may bear witness to them because
after you have died your sons will be corrupted so that they will not make a year
only three hundred and sixty-four days. And therefore, they will set awry the
months and the (appointed) times and the sabbaths and the feasts, and they will
eat all of the blood with all flesh. Noah's sacrifice Gen 9:20
I 7 And in the seventh week in the first year in that jubilee, Noah planted a vine iQapGen 12.13
on the mountain on which the ark rested, whose name is Lubar, (one) of the

10 And Noah woke up from his wine, and knew everything which his youngest
son had done to him. And he cursed his son and said, "Cursed is Canaan, let
11 him be an enslaved servant of his brothers." #And he blessed Shem, and said:
"May the LORD, the God of Shem, be blessed. And may Canaan be his servant. 12 May the LORD enlarge Japheth,
and may the LORD dwell in the dwelling place of Shem,
and may Canaan be his servant."
13 And Ham knew that his father cursed his youngest son, and it was disgusting to
him that he cursed his son. And he separated from his father, he and his sons
with him: Cush and Mizraim and Put and Canaan. The cities of Noah's three sons
14 And he (Ham) built a city for himself and he named it after his wife,
15 Na'eltama'uk. *And Japheth saw it and was jealous of his brother. And he also
16 built a city for himself and named it after his wife, 'Adataneses. • And Shem dwelt
with his father, Noah, and built a city near his father on the mountain. And he
17 also named it after his wife, Sedeqetelebab. #And behold, these three cities were
near Mount Lubar, Sedeqetelebab was in front of the mountain on its east, and
Na'eltama'uk was facing south, and 'Adataneses was toward the west. The sons of Shem and Japheth
18 And these are the sons of Shem: Elam and Ashur and Arpachshad, who was lQapGen 12.10
19 bom two years after the Flood, and Lud and Aram. •The sons of Japheth are:
Gomer and Magog and Madai and Javon, Tubal and Meshech and Tiras. These
are sons of Noah. The testament of Noah: avoid fornication, blood pollution, injustice
20 And in the twenty-eighth jubilee Noah; began to command his grandsons with
ordinances and commandments and all of the judgments which he knew. And he 2Pet 2:5bore witness to his sons so that they might do justice and cover the shame of their
flesh and bless the one who created them and honor father and mother, and each
one love his neighbor and preserve themselves from fornication and pollution and cD4.i4f. 21 from all injustice. »For on account of these three the Flood came upon the earth. For (it was) because of the fornication which the Watchers, apart from the mandate Lev n-.i
of their authority, fornicated with the daughters of men and took for themselves iEn7:i
22 wives from all whom they chose and made a beginning of impurity. #And they
begot sons, the Naphidim, and all of them were dissimilar. And each one ate his iEn 86:4; 88:2
fellow. The giants killed the Naphil, and the Naphil killed the Elyo, and the Elyo iEn i5:ii
23 mankind, and man his neighbor. #And everyone sold himself in order that he
might do injustice and pour out much blood, and the earth was full of injustice. iKgs 21:20
24 And afterward, they sinned against beasts, and birds and everything which moves ,En9:1»9
or walks upon the earth. And they poured out much blood upon the earth. And iEn 7:5
all the thoughts and desires of men were always contemplating vanity and evil. 25 And the LORD blotted out everything from the face of the earth on account of
the evil of their deeds. And on account of the blood which they poured out in the
midst of the land, he blotted out everything. 26 t4Anda we were left, I and you, my children, and everything which entered
with us into the ark. And behold, I see your deeds before me that you have not
been ones who walked in righteousness because you have begun to walk in the
paths of corruption. And each one of you will be separated from his neighbor. And this one will be jealous of that one, and (I see) that you will not be together,
27 O my sons, each one with his brother. »For I see, and behold, the demons have
begun to mislead you and your children.And this one will be jealous of that one, and (I see) that you will not be together,
27 O my sons, each one with his brother. »For I see, and behold, the demons have
begun to mislead you and your children. And now I fear for your sakes that after
I die, you will pour out the blood of men upon the earth. And you will be blotted
28 out from the surface of the earth. 'For all who eat the blood of man and all who
eat the blood of any flesh will be blotted out, all of them, from the earth. Lev 7:27
29 And no man who eats blood or sheds the blood of man will remain upon
the earth;
and neither seed nor posterity will remain alive for him under heaven. For they will go down into Sheol, IEn 103:7f. and into the place of judgment they will descend. And into the darkness of the depths they will all be removed with a cruel
death. 30 44 And let no blood from any of the blood which is in anything be seen upon Ezek 24:7
you on the day when you sacrifice any beast or cattle or what flies upon the earth. Lev 17:13
But do a good deed for yourselves by covering that which will be poured out
31 upon the surface of the earth. *And you shall not be like one who eats with blood, Lev 19:26
but beware lest they should eat blood before you. Cover the blood, because thus
I was commanded to testify to you and to your children together with all flesh. 32 And you shall not eat living flesh lest it be that your blood which is your life beL ev 17:10.11.14
33 sought by the hand of all flesh which eats upon the earth. *For the land will not
be cleansed of the blood which is poured out upon it, because by the blood of Num 35:33
one who poured it out will the land be cleansed in all of its generations. The testament of Noah and the law of reserving first fruits
34 44And now, my children, hear (and) do justice and righteousness so that you Jer ii:i7
might be planted in righteousness on the surface of the whole earth, and your iSTifril 93:5. 10
7 a.10 And Noah woke up from his wine, and knew everything which his youngest
son had done to him. And he cursed his son and said, "Cursed is Canaan, let
11 him be an enslaved servant of his brothers." #And he blessed Shem, and said:
"May the LORD, the God of Shem, be blessed. And may Canaan be his servant. 12 May the LORD enlarge Japheth,
and may the LORD dwell in the dwelling place of Shem,
and may Canaan be his servant."
13 And Ham knew that his father cursed his youngest son, and it was disgusting to
him that he cursed his son. And he separated from his father, he and his sons
with him: Cush and Mizraim and Put and Canaan. The cities of Noah's three sons
14 And he (Ham) built a city for himself and he named it after his wife,
15 Na'eltama'uk. *And Japheth saw it and was jealous of his brother. And he also
16 built a city for himself and named it after his wife, 'Adataneses. • And Shem dwelt
with his father, Noah, and built a city near his father on the mountain. And he
17 also named it after his wife, Sedeqetelebab. #And behold, these three cities were
near Mount Lubar, Sedeqetelebab was in front of the mountain on its east, and
Na'eltama'uk was facing south, and 'Adataneses was toward the west. The sons of Shem and Japheth
18 And these are the sons of Shem: Elam and Ashur and Arpachshad, who was lQapGen 12.10
19 bom two years after the Flood, and Lud and Aram. •The sons of Japheth are:
Gomer and Magog and Madai and Javon, Tubal and Meshech and Tiras. These
are sons of Noah. The testament of Noah: avoid fornication, blood pollution, injustice
20 And in the twenty-eighth jubilee Noah; began to command his grandsons with
ordinances and commandments and all of the judgments which he knew. And he 2Pet 2:5

The testament of Noah and the law of reserving first fruits
34 44And now, my children, hear (and) do justice and righteousness so that you Jer ii:i7
might be planted in righteousness on the surface of the whole earth, and your iSTifril 93:5. 10
7 a. The point at which direct discourse begins is Charles dealt with the problem by assuming a
not certain. It might have begun with vs. 21. lacuna. The missing section would have described
b. B C read "be consecrated." the events of the fifth year and then introduced the
c. Against the unanimous witness of all of the seventh year as the year of release. Compare Lev
Eth. MSS known to me, I have emended the "fifth 19:25 and the practice of Noah in Jub 7:2 in support
year" to read "seventh year." The year of release of a lacuna dealing with the fifth year. mentioned in Deut 15:1, 9 is the seventh year.honor may be lifted up before my God who saved me from the water of the Flood. 35 And behold, you will go and build for yourselves cities, and you will plant in iEn 84:6
them every plant which is upon the earth and every tree, moreover, which bears 2PM 2:5
36 fruit. »For three years its fruit will not be gathered from everything which may Lev i9.23f. be eaten, but in the fourth year its fruit will be gathered.b And let one offer up
the first fruits which are acceptable before the LORD Most High, who made
heaven and earth and everything, so that they might offer up in the juice the first
of the wine and the oil as first fruits upon the altar of the LORD, who will accept
it. And that which is left the servants of the house of the LORD will eat before
37 the altar which receives (it). #And in the seventh yearc make its release so that Deut 15:1,9
you might release it in righteousness and uprightness. And you will be righteous Uv 25:2-7
38 and all your plants will be upright, • because, thus, Enoch, the father of your
father, commanded Methuselah, his son, and Methuselah (commanded) Lamech,
his son. And Lamech commanded me everything which his fathers commanded
39 him. *And I am commanding you, my sons, just as Enoch commanded his son in
the first jubilees. While he was alive in his seventh generation, he commanded iEn 60:8; 93:3
and bore witness to his son and his grandsons until the day of his death." Jude 14
Cainan's discovery of astrological lore
1 8 And on the twenty-ninth jubilee in the first week, at its beginning Arpachshad
took a wife and her name was Rasu'eya, daughter of Susan, daughter of Elam,
as a wife. And she bore a son for him in the third year of that week, and he called
2 him Cainan,8 •and the child grew. And his father taught him writing. And he u 3:36
3 went forth in order that he might seek a place where he could buildb a city. *And
he found a writing which the ancestors engraved on stone. And he read what was
in it. And he transcribed it.And he read what was
in it. And he transcribed it. And he sinned because of what was in it, since there
was in it the teaching of the Watchers by which they used to observe the omens
4 of the sun and moon and stars within all the signs of heaven. *And he copied it
down, but he did not tell about it because he feared to tell Noah about it lest he
be angry with him because of it. The descendants of Cainan
Gen io:24f. 5 And in the thirtieth jubilee in the second week in its first year, he took a wife
and her name was Melka, daughter of Madai,c son of Japheth. And in its fourth
year he begot a son and he called him Shelah because, he said, "I have certainly
been sent out."d
6 And in the fourth year Shelah was born and he grew up. And he took a wife
and her name was Mu'ak, daughter of Kesed, his father's brother, as a wife in
the thirty-first5 jubilee in the fifth week in the first year. And she bore a son for
him in its fifth year, and he called him 'Eber. 7 And he took a wife, and her name was 'Azurad, daughter of Nebrod, in the
8 thirty-second jubilee in the seventh week in its third year. • And in its sixth year
she bore a son for him. And he called him Peleg because in the days when he
was born the sons of Noah began dividing up the earth for themselves. Therefore
9 he called him Peleg.f • And they divided it in an evil (manner) among themselves,
and they told it to Noah. 8 a. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point Basil, gr. I edited by de Lagarde. The relevant
and continues through vs. 4. The proper spelling portion of text has been reproduced by Denis,
of Cainan appears in the Syr. The Eth. text spells Fragmenta, p. 86. The Eth. reads *Abaday. it with a final "m." d. The Heb. root for the verb * 'to send"' contains
b. The reading "build" is supplied by the Syr. the same consonants (Slh) as the name Shelah. The Eth. reads "acquire" or "possess." As Tis­ e. The Eth.The testament of Noah and the law of reserving first fruits
34 44And now, my children, hear (and) do justice and righteousness so that you Jer ii:i7
might be planted in righteousness on the surface of the whole earth, and your iSTifril 93:5. 10
7 a. The point at which direct discourse begins is Charles dealt with the problem by assuming a
not certain. It might have begun with vs. 21. lacuna. The missing section would have described
b. B C read "be consecrated." the events of the fifth year and then introduced the
c. Against the unanimous witness of all of the seventh year as the year of release. Compare Lev
Eth. MSS known to me, I have emended the "fifth 19:25 and the practice of Noah in Jub 7:2 in support
year" to read "seventh year." The year of release of a lacuna dealing with the fifth year. mentioned in Deut 15:1, 9 is the seventh year.

reads "acquire" or "possess." As Tis­ e. The Eth. has the word for "year," but the
serant pointed out in his discussion of the Syr., the emendation to "first" is obvious. confusion is probably due to a misreading of Heb. f. The Heb. root for the verb "to divide"
bn* as qn\ contains the same consonants (pig) as the name
c. The spelling of the name has been altered to Peleg. agree with the reading which is given in codexThe division of the earth
10 And it came to pass at the beginning of the thirty-third jubilee, that they divided
the land (in) three parts, for Shem, Ham, and Japheth, according to the inheritance
of each, in the first year in the first week, while one of us who were sent was
u dwelling with them. 'And he called his children, and they came to him, they and
their children. And heg divided by lot the land which his three sons would possess. And they stretched out their hands and took the document from the bosom of
Noah, their father. Shem'S portion
Gen 10:26-31
12 And the lot of Shem was assigned in the document as the middle of the earth, ^^?{12
which he would take for his possession and for his sons for eternal generations
from the midst of the Rafa Mountains,11 from the mouth of the water of the river
Tina.' And his portion goes toward the west through the midst of this river, and
it goes on until it draws near to the water of the abysses from which this river
goes forth. And its waters pour forth into the Me'at* Sea. And this river goes on
into the Great Sea. And everything which is toward the north belongs to Japheth,
13 and everything which is toward the south belongs to Shem. 'And (his portion)
goes on until it draws near Karaso,k which is in the bosom of the tongue which
w looks toward the south. *And his portion goes on toward the Great Sea. And it
goes straight until it draws near to the west of the tongue which looks toward the
15 south because the name of this sea is the tongue of the Sea of Egypt. • And it is
turned from there toward the south, toward the mouth of the Great Sea1 on the
shore of the waters. And it goes on toward the west of 'Afra.m And it goes on
until it draws near the water of the river Gihon," and toward the south of the Gen 2:13
16 water of Gihon, toward the shore of that river.• And it is
turned from there toward the south, toward the mouth of the Great Sea1 on the
shore of the waters. And it goes on toward the west of 'Afra.m And it goes on
until it draws near the water of the river Gihon," and toward the south of the Gen 2:13
16 water of Gihon, toward the shore of that river. • And it goes on toward the east
until it draws near to the garden of Eden toward its south, to the south and east
of all the land of Eden, and to all of the east. And it turns in the east, and it
comes forth until it draws near toward the last of the mountain whose name is
n Rafa. And it goes down toward the shore of the mouth of the Tina River. •This
portion was assigned by lot to Shem and to his sons to possess it forever for his
generations forever. is And Noah rejoiced because this portion was assigned to Shem and for his sons. And he remembered everything which he spoke with his mouth concerning him
because he said:
g. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point into at least four regions. In the north there were
and summarizes the remainder of the ch. three "tongues," the Aegean, the Adriatic, and
h. Rafa is probably the vague Rhipaean Moun­ the Tyrrhenian seas. In the south there was a region
tains of early Gk. geographers whence the major known as the Sea of Egypt. From that perspective,
rivers flowed. the Aegean was the tongue which looked toward
i. The Tina is the river Don, which set the Egypt. Likewise from that perspective, Chersonese
boundary between the land of Shem and Japheth. lies in the bosom of the tongue which looks south. At this point the author of Jub is following hellen­ For further discussion consult G. Holscher, Drei
istic views of geography. Some geographers took Erdkarten (Heidelberg, 1949) pp. 57-73. the Don and the Nile (Gihon in Jub) as the 1. The Great Sea is the Mediterranean. boundaries of the three continents. It has been m.reads "acquire" or "possess." As Tis­ e. The Eth. has the word for "year," but the
serant pointed out in his discussion of the Syr., the emendation to "first" is obvious. confusion is probably due to a misreading of Heb. f. The Heb. root for the verb "to divide"
bn* as qn\ contains the same consonants (pig) as the name
c. The spelling of the name has been altered to Peleg. agree with the reading which is given in codex

boundaries of the three continents. It has been m. Africa, at least the portion through which
suggested that such a view may have been held by the Nile flows. See also nn. w and x. Hecataeus of Miletus (c. 500 B.C.) with whom n. The Nile. The early geographers were unin­
Herodotus disputed in his Histories 2.16 regarding formed about the sources of the Nile. For them, it
the use of the Nile to divide the continents. apparently flowed south beyond the borders of
j. Me'at is Lake Maeotis. Egypt and then flowed sharply eastward. Inasmuch
k. Karaso is probably Chersonese, an ancient as our writer identifies it with Gihon, one of the
name for the Gallipoli Peninsula, which extends four rivers flowing out of the garden of Eden, it
into the Aegean Sea west of the Hellespont. In was obvious to him that it must have flowed
order to make this identification, which Charles eastward so that one could reach Eden by following
rejected, it is necessary to assume that the author it. of Jub divided the Great Sea, i.e. the Mediterranean,May the LORD God of Shem be blessed,
and may the LORD dwell in the dwelling place of Shem. 19 And he knew that the garden of Eden was the holy of holies and the dwelling of lQapGen 19.8
the LORD. And Mount Sinai (was) in the midst of the desert and Mount Zion Ezek 38:12
(was) in the midst of the navel of the earth. The three of these were created as ,En26:l
20 holy places, one facing the other. *And he blessed the God of gods, who placed
21 in his mouth the word of the LORD, and also the Eternal God.° •And he knew lQapGen
that a blessed portion and blessing had reached Shem and his sons for eternal 2115f
generations: all the land of Eden, all of the land of the Red Sea, all of the land
of the East, India, along the Red Sea, and its mountains, all of the land of Basa,
all of the land of Lebanon, the islands of Caphtor, all of Mount Senir, Amanus, Jer 47:4
Mount Asshur, which is north, all of the land of Elam, Asshur, Babel, Susa, soIIJV*7
Media, all of the mountains of Ararat, and all of the region beyond the sea,p
which is beyond Mount Asshur, which is toward the north, the blessed and wide
land. And everything which is in it is very good. Ham's portion
Gen 10:6-20
22 And to Ham was assigned the second portion toward the other side of the lQapGen 19.13
Gihon, toward the south on the right of the garden. And it goes on toward the iEn 18:6-9;
south, and it goes along all of the mountains of fire.** And (his portion) goes on 24:13
toward the west, toward the Atelr Sea. And it goes on westward until it draws
23 near the Ma'uks Sea, to which nothing descends without perishing.1 #And it goes
forth in the north to the end of Gadir.u And it goes forth along the edge of the
water of the sea into the waters of the Great Sea until it approaches the river
Gihon. And it goes on along the Gihon River until it approaches the right side of
24 the garden of Eden.And it goes on westward until it draws
23 near the Ma'uks Sea, to which nothing descends without perishing.1 #And it goes
forth in the north to the end of Gadir.u And it goes forth along the edge of the
water of the sea into the waters of the Great Sea until it approaches the river
Gihon. And it goes on along the Gihon River until it approaches the right side of
24 the garden of Eden. *And this is the land that went forth to Ham as a portion
which he will possess forever for himself and for his children for their generations
forever. Japheth's portion
Gen 10:2-5
25 And for Japheth the third portion was assigned beyond the Tina River toward
the north of the mouth of its waters. And it goes on toward the northeast of all
26 of the region of Gog and everything east of it. •And it goes on toward the north
to the north. And it goes toward the mountains of Qeltv toward the north, toward
0. The Eth. text reads "the LORD forever," but the view that the Syr. text was translated directly
that is probably a slight corruption of the Heb. *il from the Heb. The final double consonant is
'oldm. Cf. Gen 21:33 and Isa 40:28. reflected by the reading of EMML 101, which
p. Probably the Caspian. preserves a form that could easily represent a Gk. q. Apparently a long range of mountains ringing transcription of the Heb. original. The Syr. form
the southern boundary of the world just as the Rafa may also reflect a final double consonant if we
Mountains marked a northern border. See G. assume a simple misreading of mhqq as mhwq. Hdlscher, Drei Erdkarten, p. 58, for a map. The confusion of " w" and4 4q'' is relatively simple,
r. The Atlantic. depending on the Syr. script that is used. s. The word Ma'uk is spelled ma'kaka in EMML t. The reading of the final phrase is based on an
101. In the Syr. text the spelling suggested by interpretation of the Syr. text. The Eth. text is
Tisserant was Mahouq. The Ma'uk Sea is the world seriously confused at this point.boundaries of the three continents. It has been m. Africa, at least the portion through which
suggested that such a view may have been held by the Nile flows. See also nn. w and x. Hecataeus of Miletus (c. 500 B.C.) with whom n. The Nile. The early geographers were unin­
Herodotus disputed in his Histories 2.16 regarding formed about the sources of the Nile. For them, it
the use of the Nile to divide the continents. apparently flowed south beyond the borders of
j. Me'at is Lake Maeotis. Egypt and then flowed sharply eastward. Inasmuch
k. Karaso is probably Chersonese, an ancient as our writer identifies it with Gihon, one of the
name for the Gallipoli Peninsula, which extends four rivers flowing out of the garden of Eden, it
into the Aegean Sea west of the Hellespont. In was obvious to him that it must have flowed
order to make this identification, which Charles eastward so that one could reach Eden by following
rejected, it is necessary to assume that the author it. of Jub divided the Great Sea, i.e. the Mediterranean,

text is
Tisserant was Mahouq. The Ma'uk Sea is the world seriously confused at this point. At best we can
ocean, known to the Greeks as dkeanos. Charles offer an awkward literal rendering of MS C and
sought to derive Ma'uk from that Gk. word, but EMML 101: 4 'Ma'uk, which is that one into which
that now seems impossible in light of the Syr. that which will be destroyed descends." All other
spelling. I would suggest that it is a mem prefor- MSS read "that which will not be destroyed."
mative noun from the Heb. root hqq with the u. Cadiz, located on the southern Atlantic coast
meaning "place of the boundary (of waters)." The of Spain. The name Gadir is Semitic, meaning a
same root is used in Prov 8:29: "when he assigned 44walled" or 4'fortified" place. It was founded as
the sea its limit." The consonantal spelling of the a distant colony of Tyre. name would be mhqq. The precise phonetic value v. This refers to the Celts who live in the far
of each of the consonants has been preserved in northwest toward the Ma'uk Sea. Syr., a fact which both depends on and reinforcesthe Ma'uk Sea, and it comes toward the east of Gadir up toward the edge of the
27 water of the sea. #And it goes on until it draws near toward the west of Feregw
and it returns toward 'Afreg*.* And it goes on toward the east, toward the water
28 of the Me'at Sea. *And it goes on toward the side of the Tina River, toward the
northeast until it approaches the end of its waters, toward Mount Rafa. And it
29 goes around to the north. •This is the land which came to Japheth and to his sons
as the portion of his inheritance which he will possess for himself and for his sons
for their generations forever: the five great islands and a great land in the north. 30 But it is cold, and the land of Ham is hot, but the land of Shem is not hot or cold
because it is mixed with cold and heat. The portions of the sons of Ham, Shem, and Japheth Gen io
1 9 And Ham divided (his land) among his sons. And the first portion was assigned
to Cusha toward the east, and west of him for Mizraim.b And west of him for
2 Put.c And west of him for Canaan. And toward his west was the sea. »And Shem
also divided among his sons. And the first portion was assigned to Elam and his
sons toward the east of the Tigris River until it approaches toward the east of all
of the land of India, along the Red Sead on its shore, the waters of Dedan,e and
all of the mountains of Mebrif and Elam* all of the land of Susa, and everything
3 which is beside Pharnakh as far as the Red Sea and up to the Tina River. *And
also to Asshur was assigned the second portion, all of the land of Asshur and
Nineveh and Shinar* and as far as the vicinity of India.And the first portion was assigned to Elam and his
sons toward the east of the Tigris River until it approaches toward the east of all
of the land of India, along the Red Sead on its shore, the waters of Dedan,e and
all of the mountains of Mebrif and Elam* all of the land of Susa, and everything
3 which is beside Pharnakh as far as the Red Sea and up to the Tina River. *And
also to Asshur was assigned the second portion, all of the land of Asshur and
Nineveh and Shinar* and as far as the vicinity of India. And then it goes up and
4 skirts the river J «And to Arpachshad was assigned the third portion, all of the
land of the region of Chaldeak toward the east of the Euphrates, which is near the
Red Sea, and all of the waters of the desert as far as the vicinity of the tongue of
the sea which faces toward Egypt, all of the land of Lebanon and Senir1 and
5 Amana as far as the vicinity of the Euphrates. »And to Aram the fourth portion
w. Fir eg is the reading found in MS A, and is used to distinguish Africa from Phrygia inasmuch
probably closest to the original text. The spelling as they were spelled alike. of this name, which apparently represents Africa,
differs from MS to MS and from place to place in 9 a. The Eth. text has kwes for Cush, but the
the text. The Syr. form which occurs at this point intent of the author is clear. In this vs. he is dealing
is 'afgerd, with an initial aleph and metathesis of with the four sons of Ham mentioned in Gen 10:6. the "g" and "r." The name also appears in vs. Cush is the land located directly south of Egypt. 15 and possibly a second time in the present vs. b. Egypt. The significance of drawing toward the west of c. Libya, or some part of it. Africa may simply indicate the southward move­ d. In the mind of the geographer, the Red Sea
ment around the boot of Italy or it may imply that was a huge eastern sea.Africa may simply indicate the southward move­ d. In the mind of the geographer, the Red Sea
ment around the boot of Italy or it may imply that was a huge eastern sea. Balancing the Mediterra­
the boundary between Japheth and Ham is in the nean in the west, it included the Indian Ocean,
southern Mediterranean in order to claim the islands thus reaching to India. for Japheth. e. The biblical Dedan is a prosperous caravan
x. Afreg is the spelling in MS B. It is closest to city in northeast Arabia somewhere near Taima
the Heb. and Aram, spelling for Africa Caphrjqi) (Isa 21:13; Ezek 25:13). of the forms given thus far. Holscher assumes f. Mebri is also spelled Mazbar. The site is
that it represents a second mention of Africa (Drei unknown. Erdkarten, p. 71). Charles, however, suggested in g. Only MS A reads "Elam. The other MSS read
his English translation that it referred to Phrygia. 'Eld. One might not ordinarily expect Elam to be
Phrygia could easily be a stopping point in the part of a list mentioning the holdings of Elam, but
direction of the Me'at Sea. According to Josephus in vs. 3 the land of Asshur is given to Asshur. (Ant 1.6.1), Phrygia belonged to Japheth. A further h. Holscher (Drei Erdkarten, p. 69f.) has iden­
bit of evidence may also be added to Charles's tified Pharnak with a site along the Farah River
argument; GenR refers to Phrygia (at the beginning near the border of Iran and Afghanistan, and has
of ch. 37) by the name yaphriqi, a homograph for cited a passage in which Assarhadon represented
Africa. Inasmuch as that fact shows that it was himself as subduer of the land of Parnaki. possible to use the same spelling when referring to i. Babylon. Africa or to Phrygia, we may not be able to j. The reading follows an emendation suggested
determine which one is intended here. Nevertheless, by Charles. it may be noted that in vs. 15 and in the first k. Chaldea is the homeland of the Neo-Baby-
mention of Africa in the present vs., the phrase lonian Empire.text is
Tisserant was Mahouq. The Ma'uk Sea is the world seriously confused at this point. At best we can
ocean, known to the Greeks as dkeanos. Charles offer an awkward literal rendering of MS C and
sought to derive Ma'uk from that Gk. word, but EMML 101: 4 'Ma'uk, which is that one into which
that now seems impossible in light of the Syr. that which will be destroyed descends." All other
spelling. I would suggest that it is a mem prefor- MSS read "that which will not be destroyed."
mative noun from the Heb. root hqq with the u. Cadiz, located on the southern Atlantic coast
meaning "place of the boundary (of waters)." The of Spain. The name Gadir is Semitic, meaning a
same root is used in Prov 8:29: "when he assigned 44walled" or 4'fortified" place. It was founded as
the sea its limit." The consonantal spelling of the a distant colony of Tyre. name would be mhqq. The precise phonetic value v. This refers to the Celts who live in the far
of each of the consonants has been preserved in northwest toward the Ma'uk Sea. Syr., a fact which both depends on and reinforces

15 and in the first k. Chaldea is the homeland of the Neo-Baby-
mention of Africa in the present vs., the phrase lonian Empire. "west of is used to define the location more 1. In the neighborhood of Mount Hermon (Song
specifically. It is possible that such a phrase was 4:8).was assigned, all of the land of Mesopotamia, between the Tigris and the Euphrates,
toward the north of the Chaldeans up to the vicinity of Mount Asshur and the
6 land of Arara.m #And to Ludn the fifth portion was assigned, Mount Asshur and
everything pertaining to it until it approaches the Great Sea. And it draws near
toward the east of Asshur, his brother. 7,8 And Japheth also divided the land of his inheritance between his sons. »And lQapGen 17.16
the first portion was assigned to Gomer° toward the east from the north side up
to the river Tina. And in the north to Magogp was assigned all of the inner parts
9 of the north until it approaches toward the Sea of Me'at. «And to Madaiq his
portion was assigned that he should take from the west of his two brothers as far
10 as the islands and up to the coasts of the islands. • And to Javanr the fourth portion Ezek 27:13
was assigned, every island and the islands which are toward the side of Lud. 11 And to TubaP the fifth portion was assigned in the midst of the tongue which
draws near toward the side of Lud's portion as far as the second tongue into the
12 region beyond the second tongue into the third tongue. • And to Meshech1 the sixth
portion was assigned, everything on the other side of the third tongue until it
13 approaches the east of Gadir. »And to Tirasu the seventh portion was assigned,
four great islands in the midst of the sea which approaches the portion of Ham. And the islands of Kamaturiv were assigned by lot to the sons of Arpachshad as
an inheritance for him. The curse against violating boundaries
14 And thus the sons of Noah divided for their children before Noah, their father. And he made them all swear an oath to curse each and every one who desired to
15 seize a portion which did not come in his lot.The curse against violating boundaries
14 And thus the sons of Noah divided for their children before Noah, their father. And he made them all swear an oath to curse each and every one who desired to
15 seize a portion which did not come in his lot. #And they all said, "So be it and
so let it be to them and to their sons forever in their generations until the day of
judgment in which the LORD God will judge them with a sword and with fire on
account of all the evil of the pollution of their errors which have filled the earth
with sin and pollution and fornication and transgression."
Noah's prayer against the demons
1 10 In the third week of that jubilee the polluted demons began to lead astray the iEn i5f. 2 children of Noah's sons and to lead them to folly and to destroy them. •And the
sons of Noah came to Noah, their father, and they told him about the demons
3 who were leading astray and blinding and killing his grandchildren. *And he
prayed before the LORD his God and he said, "God of the spirits which are in Num 16:22:
all flesh, who has acted mercifully with me and saved me and my sons from the 2716
water of the Flood and did not let me perish as you did the children of perdition, 2Thes 2:3
because
m. Ararat. lived by piracy on the coasts and islands of the
n. Ancient Lydia in Asia Minor. Aegean.*'
o. Associated with the Cimmerians, who in­ v. From Jub 8:29 we learn that there are five
vaded Asia Minor in the eighth century B.C. great islands that were assigned to Japheth. IEn
p. Associated with the Sythior hordes whom 77:8 mentions that there are five great islands in
Herodotus locates in this area (Histories, 4). The the Mediterranean. Enoch's islands would be Cor­
identification of Magog with the Scythians is found sica, Sardinia, Sicily, Cyprus, and Crete. In the
in Josephus, Ant 1.6.1. present vs. the writer may be modifying the view
q. The Medes. of 8:29 because he assigns only four to Japheth. r. Designates lonians living in Asia Minor.15 and in the first k. Chaldea is the homeland of the Neo-Baby-
mention of Africa in the present vs., the phrase lonian Empire. "west of is used to define the location more 1. In the neighborhood of Mount Hermon (Song
specifically. It is possible that such a phrase was 4:8).

r. Designates lonians living in Asia Minor. The fifth belongs to Arpachshad, a son of Shem. s. Identified with the Tabal, which is known If we are to select one of Enoch's five islands for
from Akkadian texts of the ninth century B.C. and Shem, it would obviously be Crete (Caphtor), in
later. It was located somewhere in Asia Minor near accord with 8:21. Therefore, it seems likely that
the area of Cappadocia. Kamaturi may be a corruption of Caphtor. It
t. Equated with the Muski mentioned in Akka­ involves the substitution of a labial 44m" for a
dian texts. It is located west of Tubal in Asia labial 44p." There could, of course, be five Med­
Minor. iterranean islands reserved for Japheth, as Jub 8:29
u. Identified by Charles in his English translation maintains, if we were to count Malta. as "the Tyrseni, a branch of the Pelasgians whoGreat was your grace upon me,
and great was your mercy upon my soul. Let your grace be lifted up upon my sons,
and do not let the evil spirits rule over them,
lest they destroy them from the earth. 4,s But bless me and my sons. And let us grow and increase and fill the earth. •And
you know that which your Watchers, the fathers of these spirits, did in my days
and also these spirits who are alive. Shut them up and take them to the place of
judgment. And do not let them cause corruption among the sons of your servant,
6 O my God, because they are cruel and were created to destroy. • And let them not
rule over the spirits of the living because you alone know their judgment, and do
not let them have power over the children of the righteous henceforth and forever. *'
The binding of nine tenths of the demons
7,8 And the LORD our God spoke to us so that we might bind all of them. *And i&i 104.12
the chief of the spirits, Mastema, came and he said, 440 Lord, Creator, leave Mk3:22
some of them before me, and let them obey my voice. And let them do everything ]|JJ
which I tell them, because if some of them are not left for me, I will not be able n
to exercise the authority of my will among the children of men because they are
(intended) to corrupt and lead astray before my judgment because the evil of the
9 sons of men is great." #And he said, "Let a tenth of them remain before him, IEI> io:ii-i3;
but let nine parts go down into the place of judgment." ,5f
10 And he told one of us to teach Noah all of their healing because he knew that
11 they would not walk uprightly and would not strive righteously. «And we acted
in accord with all of his words. All of the evil ones, who were cruel, we bound
in the place of judgment, but a tenth of them we let remain so that they might be
12 subject to Satan upon the earth. #And the healing of all their illnesses together
with their seductions we told Noah so that he might heal by means of herbs of
13 the earth.r. Designates lonians living in Asia Minor. The fifth belongs to Arpachshad, a son of Shem. s. Identified with the Tabal, which is known If we are to select one of Enoch's five islands for
from Akkadian texts of the ninth century B.C. and Shem, it would obviously be Crete (Caphtor), in
later. It was located somewhere in Asia Minor near accord with 8:21. Therefore, it seems likely that
the area of Cappadocia. Kamaturi may be a corruption of Caphtor. It
t. Equated with the Muski mentioned in Akka­ involves the substitution of a labial 44m" for a
dian texts. It is located west of Tubal in Asia labial 44p." There could, of course, be five Med­
Minor. iterranean islands reserved for Japheth, as Jub 8:29
u. Identified by Charles in his English translation maintains, if we were to count Malta. as "the Tyrseni, a branch of the Pelasgians who

All of the evil ones, who were cruel, we bound
in the place of judgment, but a tenth of them we let remain so that they might be
12 subject to Satan upon the earth. #And the healing of all their illnesses together
with their seductions we told Noah so that he might heal by means of herbs of
13 the earth. • And Noah wrote everything in a book just as we taught him according
to every kind of healing. And the evil spirits were restrained from following the
14 sons of Noah. #And he gave everything which he wrote to Shem, his oldest son,
because he loved him much more than all of his sons. The death of Noah
15 And Noah slept with his fathers and was buried on Mount Lubar in the land of Gen 9:28
16 Ararat. #Nine hundred and fifty years he completed in his life, nineteen jubilees
17 and two weeks and five years. *On account of his righteousness in which he was
perfected, his life on earth was more excellent than (any of) the sons of men
except Enoch, for the work of Enoch had been created as a witness to the
generations of the world so that he might report every deed of each generation in
the day of judgment. The Tower of Babel Gen 1118;
11:1-9
is And in the thirty-third jubilee, in the first year of this second week, Peleg took
a wife whose name was Lomna, daughter of Sina'ar. And she bore a son for him
in the fourth year of that week. And he called him Reu because, he said,4 'Behold,
the sons of man have become evil with perverse counsel so that they are building
19 a city and a tower for themselves in the land of Shinar." •For they departed from
the land of Ararat toward the east into Shinar, because in his days they built a
city and a tower, saying, 44Come let us go up in it into heaven."
20 And they began building. And in the fourth week they baked bricks in fire, and
bricks were for them like stones. And the mud with which they plastered was
bitumen, which came out of the sea, and the springs of water in the land of77 JUBILEES 10:35
21 Shinar. •And they built it; forty-three years they were building it. Its width was
two hundred and three bricks. And the height of a brick was one third its length. Five thousand, four hundred and thirty-three cubits and two palms its height rose
22 up. And thirteen stades (was its wall).3 #And the LORD our God said to us,
44Behold, the people are one and they have begun working. Now nothing will
escape them. Behold, let us go down and let us mix up their tongues so each one
will not hear another's word, and they will be scattered into cities and nations,
and, therefore, one counsel will not reside with them until the day of judgment."
23 And the LORD went down and we went down with him. And we saw the city
24 and the tower which the sons of men had built. *And he mixed up their tongues,
and, therefore, one did not hear another's word. And so they ceased to build the
25 city and the tower. •Therefore, all of the land of Shinar is called Babel because
there the LORD mixed up all the languages of the sons of men. And from there
they were scattered into their cities according to each of their languages and
26 nations. *And the LORD sent a great wind upon the tower and overthrew it on sibOr 3.98-103
the earth. And behold, it is between Asshur and Babylon in the land of Shinar
and he called it 44the Overthrow."
Canaan's seizure of land in Shem's portion
27 And in the fourth week in the first year in the beginning of it, in the thirty-
28 fourth jubilee, they were scattered from the land of Shinar. »And Ham and his
sons went into the land which was his possession, which he found in his portion
29 in the land of the south. *But Canaanb saw that the land of Lebanon as far as the
river of Egypt was very good. And he did not go into the land of his inheritance
toward the west, that is the sea, but he dwelt in the land of Lebanon, eastward
30 and westward, from the bank of the Jordan and from the shore of the sea.*But Canaanb saw that the land of Lebanon as far as the
river of Egypt was very good. And he did not go into the land of his inheritance
toward the west, that is the sea, but he dwelt in the land of Lebanon, eastward
30 and westward, from the bank of the Jordan and from the shore of the sea. »And
Ham, his father, and Cush and Mizraim, his brothers, said to him, 44You have
dwelt in a land which is not yours nor did it come forth for us by lot. Do not do
this, because if you do this, you and your children will fall in the land and be
cursed with sedition because by sedition you have dwelt and by sedition your
31 children will fall and you will be uprooted forever. #Do not dwell in the dwelling
32 of Shem because it came to Shem and his sons by lot. *You are cursed and you
will be cursed more than all of the sons of Noah by the curse which we swore
33 with an oath before the holy judge and before Noah, our father." -But he would 2Chr 7:8
not listen to them and he dwelt in the land of Lebanon from Hamath to the
34 entrance of Egypt, he and his sons, until this day. *And, therefore, that land is
called Canaan. The settlement of Japheth's sons
35 And Japheth and his sons went toward the sea, and they dwelt in the land of
their portion, but Madai saw the land of the sea and it did not please him. And
he begged it from Elam and Asshur and Arpachshad, from the brother of his wife. And he dwelt in the land of Media near his wife's brother until this day. And he
called his dwelling place and the dwelling place of his sons Media after their
father, Madai. 10 a. This sentence requires considerable adjust­ The third sentence is a free translation. The
ment in translating. There is a parallel Gk. text literal translation reads "And one third of one (was)
preserved in the Catena of Nicephorus. Charles its height."
published the relevant portion with his Eth. text. In the last sentence, which mentions "thirteen
The second sentence in this vs. is translated from stades," the Eth.All of the evil ones, who were cruel, we bound
in the place of judgment, but a tenth of them we let remain so that they might be
12 subject to Satan upon the earth. #And the healing of all their illnesses together
with their seductions we told Noah so that he might heal by means of herbs of
13 the earth. • And Noah wrote everything in a book just as we taught him according
to every kind of healing. And the evil spirits were restrained from following the
14 sons of Noah. #And he gave everything which he wrote to Shem, his oldest son,
because he loved him much more than all of his sons. The death of Noah
15 And Noah slept with his fathers and was buried on Mount Lubar in the land of Gen 9:28
16 Ararat. #Nine hundred and fifty years he completed in his life, nineteen jubilees
17 and two weeks and five years. *On account of his righteousness in which he was
perfected, his life on earth was more excellent than (any of) the sons of men
except Enoch, for the work of Enoch had been created as a witness to the
generations of the world so that he might report every deed of each generation in
the day of judgment. The Tower of Babel Gen 1118;
11:1-9
is And in the thirty-third jubilee, in the first year of this second week, Peleg took
a wife whose name was Lomna, daughter of Sina'ar. And she bore a son for him
in the fourth year of that week. And he called him Reu because, he said,4 'Behold,
the sons of man have become evil with perverse counsel so that they are building
19 a city and a tower for themselves in the land of Shinar." •For they departed from
the land of Ararat toward the east into Shinar, because in his days they built a
city and a tower, saying, 44Come let us go up in it into heaven."
20 And they began building. And in the fourth week they baked bricks in fire, and
bricks were for them like stones. And the mud with which they plastered was
bitumen, which came out of the sea, and the springs of water in the land of

In the last sentence, which mentions "thirteen
The second sentence in this vs. is translated from stades," the Eth. word translated "stades" is a
that Gk. text. The Eth. is more difficult to fit in measure of an unknown distance. the context. It reads "thirteen solid bricks (were) b. There is a portion of the Syr. text which is
in it." parallel to the first part of this vs.11 And in the thirty-fifth jubilee, in the third week, in the first year thereof, Reu
took a wife and her name was 'Ora,a daughter of 'Ur, son of Kesed.b And she
bore a son for him and he called him Seroh in the seventh year of that week in
that jubilee. • And the sons of Noah began fighting in order to take captive and to
kill each other, to pour the blood of man upon the earth, to eat blood, to build
fortified cities and walls and towers, so that (one) man will be raised up over the
people, to set up the first kingdoms to go to war, people against people and nation
against nation and city against city, and everyone (will act) to do evil and to
acquire weapons of battle and to teach their sons war. And they began to take
captive a city and to sell male and female slaves. *And 'Ur, the son of Kesed,
built the city of 'Ur of the Chaldeesc and he named it after his name and his
father's name. *And they made for themselves molten images, and everyone
worshiped the icon which they made for themselves as a molten image. And they
began making graven images and polluted likenesses. And cruel spirits assisted
them and led them astray so that they might commit sin and pollution. *And the
prince, Mastema, acted forcefully to do all of this. And he sent other spirits to iEn io*
those who were set under his hand to practice all error and sin and all transgression,
to destroy, to cause to perish and to pour out blood upon the earth. •Therefore he
called the name of Seroh, "Serug," because everyone had turned back to commit
all sin and transgression.41
The birth of Nahor Gen 11.22
And he grew up and dwelt in 'Ur of the Chaldees near the father of his wife's
mother. And he used to worship idols. And he took a wife in the thirty-sixth
jubilee, in the fifth week, in the first year thereof. And her name was Melka,e
daughter of Kaber, daughter of his father's brother. • And she bore for him Nahor
in the first year of that week.And her name was Melka,e
daughter of Kaber, daughter of his father's brother. • And she bore for him Nahor
in the first year of that week. And he grew up and he dwelt in 'Ur among the
Chaldeans, and his father taught him the researches of the Chaldeans in order to
practice divination and astrology according to the signs of heaven. The birth of Terah marks a devastation by crows Gen \u2A
And in the thirty-seventh jubilee, in the sixth week, in the first year thereof, he
took a wife. And her name was Tyaska/ daughter of Nestag of the Chaldees. And she bore for him Terah in the seventh year of that week. #And Prince
Mastema sent crows and birds so that they might eat the seed which was being
sown in the earth in order to spoil the earth so that they might rob mankind of
their labors. Before they plowed in the seed, the crows picked it off the surface
of the earth. 'And therefore he called him Terah because the crows and birds
were impoverishing them.8 And they ate their seed. 'And the years began being
11 a. A feminine name meaning "light." It is a ilant in Serug is a tin and the sibilants in the words
feminine form made with the same consonants as for "turn" and "sin" are sameks, the sounds were
'Ur, the name of her father. probably pronounced alike in the Heb. circles where
b. The Heb. phrase 'ur kasdim, "Ur of the this interpretation of Serug was proposed. Chaldeans," was apparently taken as a starting e. A feminine name which appears in Gen 11:29
point for this genealogical note. In the singular, as the name of Nahor's wife. Here she is the mother
'ur kesed could easily be read "Ur, son of Kesed." of a Nahor. The Nahor of Gen 11:29 is the son of
c. In this sentence the pun is complete; 'ur kesed Terah. The Nahor mentioned here is his grand­
built the city of 'ur kasdim. The Eth. text has father. corrupted the name of the city to 'ara, but the f. There is a Iascah in Gen 11:29, but there she
correction is obvious. is the daughter of Haran. d.In the last sentence, which mentions "thirteen
The second sentence in this vs. is translated from stades," the Eth. word translated "stades" is a
that Gk. text. The Eth. is more difficult to fit in measure of an unknown distance. the context. It reads "thirteen solid bricks (were) b. There is a portion of the Syr. text which is
in it." parallel to the first part of this vs.

is the daughter of Haran. d. The name Serug is provided with a rather g. There is an Ar. root trh, which means "to
feeble interpretation which is probably based on grieve, be sad." A Heb. or Aram, cognate may
alliteration between the first syllable of the name have existed to explain the meaning of Tenth's
(ser) and the Heb. roots sur, "turn," and sara, name. "turning away, apostasy, sin." Although the sib­barren because of the birds. And they ate all of the fruit of the trees from the
groves. If ever they were able to save a little from all of the fruit of the earth in
their days, it was with great effort. The birth of Abram and his piety
Gen ii:26
14 And in this thirty-ninth jubilee, in the second week, in the first year, Terah
took a wife and her name was 'Edna, daughter of 'Abram, daughter of his father's
15 sister. »And in the seventh year of that week, she bore a son for him, and he
called him Abram, after the name of his mother's father because he died before
16 his daughter conceived a son. #And the lad began understanding11 the straying of
the land, that everyone went astray after graven images and after pollution. And
his father taught him writing. And he was two weeks of years old. And he
17 separated from his father so that he might not worship the idols with him. *And
he began to pray to the Creator of all so that he might save him from the straying
of the sons of men, and so that his portion might not fall into straying after the
pollution and scorn. Abram's successful efforts against the crows'
is And the seed time arrived for sowing in the land. And they all went out together
so that they might guard their seed from before the crows. And Abram went out
19 with those who went out. And the lad was fourteen years old. #And a cloud of
crows came so that they might eat the seed, and Abram used to run up to them
before they settled upon the earth. And he would call out to them before they
settled upon the earth to eat seed, and he said, "Don't come down. Return to the
20 place whence you came." And they turned back. *And he caused the cloud of
crows to turn back* seventy times in that day. And none of the crows settled on
21 any of the fields where Abram was, not one. *And all who were with him in all
of the fields saw him as he was calling out. And all of the crows turned away. 22 And his reputation was great in all the land of Chaldea.And all of the crows turned away. 22 And his reputation was great in all the land of Chaldea. *And all who would sow
came to him during that year. And he used to go with them until the seed time
passed. And they sowed their land and harvested in that year enough food, and
they ate and were satisfied. 23 And in the first year of the fifth week, Abram taught those who were making
the implements for oxen, the skilled carpenters. And they made implements above
the ground facing the handle of the plow so that they might place seed upon it. And the seed would go down from within it onto the point of the plow, and it
would be hidden in the earth. And therefore they were not afraid of the crows. 24 And they did likewise upon all of the plow handles above the ground. And they
sowed and tilled all of the earth just as Abram commanded them. And therefore
they were not afraid of the birds. Abram's plea to avoid idolatry
1 12 And it came to pass in the sixth week, in its seventh year, that Abram spoke
to Terah, his father, saying, 440 father." And he said, 4'Behold, here I am, my
2 son." #And he said:
h. A portion of the Syr. text is parallel to this In that account it is God rather than Mastema who
vs. It excerpts portions of vss. from 11:16 to 12:29. sends the ravens. Abraham is unable to drive the
i. In his English translation, p. 88, Charles cited ravens away until he calls out to God for help
subsequent accounts of this episode by Jerome, St. ("Abraham and the Ravens: A Syriac Counterpart
Ephraem, and Bar. Hebraeus, but he concluded to Jubilees 11-12 and Its Implications," JSJ 9
that all of the later accounts were derived from 11979] 135-52). Jub. More recently, S. P. Brock has brought j. Various Eth. MSS read "he did." "they
together Syr.is the daughter of Haran. d. The name Serug is provided with a rather g. There is an Ar. root trh, which means "to
feeble interpretation which is probably based on grieve, be sad." A Heb. or Aram, cognate may
alliteration between the first syllable of the name have existed to explain the meaning of Tenth's
(ser) and the Heb. roots sur, "turn," and sara, name. "turning away, apostasy, sin." Although the sib­

Various Eth. MSS read "he did." "they
together Syr. evidence from the Catena Serevi on did," or "he returned." The emendation required
Gen and a letter written by Jacob of Edessa to John for the present reading is slight and it is now
of Litarba and has sought to demonstrate that it supported by the Syr. reflects an independent tradition about Abraham."What help or advantage do we have from these idols before which you
worship and bow down? 3 Because there is not any spirit in them, Ps 135:17
for they are mute,
and they are the misleading of the heart. Do not worship them.a
4 Worship the God of heaven,
who sends down rain and dew upon the earth,
and who makes everything upon the earth,
and created everything by his word,
and all life is in his presence. 5 Why do you worship those who have no spirit in them? Because they are works of the hands,
and you are carrying them upon your shoulders, Jer 10:3,9
and there is no help from them for you, k?46:7:26
except great shame for those who made them
and the misleading of the heart for those who worship them. Do not worship them."
6 And his father said to him, "I also know (that), my son, but what shall I do to
7 the people who have made me minister before them?b • And if I speak to them in
righteousness, they will kill me because their souls cleave to themc so that they
might worship them and praise them. Be silent, my son, lest they kill you."
8 And he told this matter to two of his brothers, and they were angry with him, and
he kept quiet. The marriages of Abram and his brothers
oenii:29
9 And in the fortieth jubilee, in the second week, in its seventh year, Abram took Gen 20:12
a wife and her name was Sarai,d daughter of his father, and she became a wife
for him. 10 And Haran, his brother, took a wife in the third year of the third week, and
she bore a son for him in the seventh year of that week. And he called him Lot. 11 And Nahor, his brother, took a wife. Abram burns the house of idols
12 In the sixtieth year of the life of Abram, i.e. the fourth week, in its fourth year,
Abram arose in the night and burned the house of idols. And he burned everything
13 in the house. And there was no man who knew. «And they rose up in the night,
14 and they wanted to save their gods from the midst of the Are. *And Haran rushed
to save them, and the fire flared up over him.Various Eth. MSS read "he did." "they
together Syr. evidence from the Catena Serevi on did," or "he returned." The emendation required
Gen and a letter written by Jacob of Edessa to John for the present reading is slight and it is now
of Litarba and has sought to demonstrate that it supported by the Syr. reflects an independent tradition about Abraham.

«And they rose up in the night,
14 and they wanted to save their gods from the midst of the Are. *And Haran rushed
to save them, and the fire flared up over him. And he was burned in the fire and
died in Ur of the Chaldees before Terah, his father. And they buried him in Ur
of the Chaldees. 12 a. The imperatives and the second person pro­ power of God. It seems reasonable to put vs. 2
nouns ("you") are all plural in vss. 3-5. The outside the poetic unit because the second person
author of the text has apparently made use of a pronoun (you) is singular and refers only to Abram's
liturgical unit written for a communal setting. father. The Syr. has drastically abbreviated and
Certain poetic features appear if the unit is divided rearranged the statements which appear in these
into three stanzas in the following manner: (1) vs. vss. 3; (2) vss. 4-5a; (3) the remainder of 5. Stanzas 1 b. The pronoun refers to the idols which were
and 3 begin with "because" and end with the described in vss. 3-5. refrain "Do not worship them"; they describe the c. See previous n. worthlessness of idols. Stanza 2 provides an internal d. The Eth. has "Sarah," but spellings have
contrast by describing the creative and providential been standardized to agree with the biblical text.81 JUBILEES 12:24
Departure to Haran Gen 1131
15 And Terah went out of Ur of the Chaldees, hee and his sons, so that they might
come into the land of Lebanon and into the land of Canaan. And he dwelt in
Haran.f And Abram dwelt with Terah, his father, in Haran two weeks of years.
Abram's night vigil
16 And in the sixth week, in its fifth year, Abram sat up during the night on the
first of the seventh month, so that he might observe the stars from evening until
daybreak so that he might see what the nature of the year would be with respect
17 to rain. And he was sitting alone and making observations; «and a word came into
his heart, saying, "All of the signs of the stars and the signs of the sun and the
moon are all in the hand of the LORD. Why am I seeking?
is If he desires, he will make it rain morning and evening,
and if he desires he will not send (it) down;
and everything is in his hand."
19 And he prayed on that night, saying:
"My God, the Most High God, you alone are God to me.
And you created everything,
and everything which is was the work of your hands,
and you and your kingdom I have chosen.
20 Save me from the hands of evil spirits
which rule over the thought of the heart of man,
and do not let them lead me astray from following you, O my God;
but establish me and my seed forever,
and let us not go astray henceforth and forever."
21 And he said, "Shall I return unto Ur of the Chaldees who seek my face so that I
should return to them? Or shall I dwell here in this place? Make the straight path
prosper before you in the hand of your servant that he might serve. And do not
let me walk in the elror of my heart, O my God."
Abram is called to the land of promise
Gen 12:1-3
22 And he finished talking and praying and behold, the word of the LORD was
sent to him by my hand, saying, "Come forth from your land and from your kin
and from your father's house into the land which 1 shall show you, and I shall
establish you as a great and numerous people.
23 And I shall bless you
and I shall make your name great,
and you will be blessed in the land
and all the nations of the earth will bless themselves by you.
And whoever blesses you I shall bless
and whoever curses you I shall curse.
24 And I shall be God for you and your son and for the son of your son and for all
of your seed. Do not fear henceforth and for all the generations of the earth. I am
your God."
e. There is a small fragment of a Heb. text from MS (D) omit the phrase "the land of." VanderKam
Qumran which is parallel to vss. 15-17. has argued that the Qumran fragment scarcely has
f. The printed Eth. text would give a reading room for it either.
"the land of Haran," but the Syr. and one Eth.The revival of Hebrew
25 And the LORD God said to me, "Open his mouth and his ears so that he might
hear and speak with his mouth in the language which is revealed because it ceased
26 from the mouth of all of the sons of men from the day of the Fall." •And I opened
his mouth and his ears and his lips and I began to speak with him in Hebrew, in
27 the tongue of creation. 'And he took his father's books—and they were written 19.25
lQapGen
in Hebrew—and he copied them. And he began studying them thereafter. And I
caused him to know everything which he was unable (to understand). And he
studied them (in) the six months of rain. The blessing of Terah
28 And it came to passg in the seventh year of the sixth week that he spoke with
his father and let him know that he was going from Haran to walk (in) the land
29 of Canaan so that he might see it and return to him. *And Terah, his father, said
to him:
"Go in peace. May God eternal make straight your path
and the LORD be with you
and protect you from all evil
[and grant favor upon you and mercy and grace before those who see
you.]h
May none of the sons of men rule over you to do evil to you. Go in peace. 30 And when you have seen a land pleasant to your eyes to dwell in, come and take
me to you. And take Lot, the son of Haran your brother with you (as) a son for
31 yourself. The LORD be with you. #But Nahor, your brother, leave with me until
you return in peace. And we will all go together with you."
Abram's sojourn at Bethel Gen 12:4-8
1 13 And Abram went from Haran. And he took Sarai, his wife, and Lot, his
brother Haran's son, into the land of Canaan. And he came to Asshur. And he
2 walked to Shechem. And he dwelt by a tall oak. *And he saw, and behold the
3 land was very pleasant from the entrance of Hamath to the tall oak. *And the
4 LORD said to him, "To you and to your seed I will give this land." »And he
built there an altar and he offered up upon it a burnt offering to the LORD, who
appeared to him.81 JUBILEES 12:24
Departure to Haran Gen 1131
15 And Terah went out of Ur of the Chaldees, hee and his sons, so that they might
come into the land of Lebanon and into the land of Canaan. And he dwelt in
Haran.f And Abram dwelt with Terah, his father, in Haran two weeks of years.
Abram's night vigil
16 And in the sixth week, in its fifth year, Abram sat up during the night on the
first of the seventh month, so that he might observe the stars from evening until
daybreak so that he might see what the nature of the year would be with respect
17 to rain. And he was sitting alone and making observations; «and a word came into
his heart, saying, "All of the signs of the stars and the signs of the sun and the
moon are all in the hand of the LORD. Why am I seeking?
is If he desires, he will make it rain morning and evening,
and if he desires he will not send (it) down;
and everything is in his hand."
19 And he prayed on that night, saying:
"My God, the Most High God, you alone are God to me.
And you created everything,
and everything which is was the work of your hands,
and you and your kingdom I have chosen.
20 Save me from the hands of evil spirits
which rule over the thought of the heart of man,
and do not let them lead me astray from following you, O my God;
but establish me and my seed forever,
and let us not go astray henceforth and forever."
21 And he said, "Shall I return unto Ur of the Chaldees who seek my face so that I
should return to them? Or shall I dwell here in this place? Make the straight path
prosper before you in the hand of your servant that he might serve. And do not
let me walk in the elror of my heart, O my God."
Abram is called to the land of promise
Gen 12:1-3
22 And he finished talking and praying and behold, the word of the LORD was
sent to him by my hand, saying, "Come forth from your land and from your kin
and from your father's house into the land which 1 shall show you, and I shall
establish you as a great and numerous people.
23 And I shall bless you
and I shall make your name great,
and you will be blessed in the land
and all the nations of the earth will bless themselves by you.
And whoever blesses you I shall bless
and whoever curses you I shall curse.
24 And I shall be God for you and your son and for the son of your son and for all
of your seed. Do not fear henceforth and for all the generations of the earth. I am
your God."
e. There is a small fragment of a Heb. text from MS (D) omit the phrase "the land of." VanderKam
Qumran which is parallel to vss. 15-17. has argued that the Qumran fragment scarcely has
f. The printed Eth. text would give a reading room for it either.
"the land of Haran," but the Syr. and one Eth.

*And he saw, and behold the
3 land was very pleasant from the entrance of Hamath to the tall oak. *And the
4 LORD said to him, "To you and to your seed I will give this land." »And he
built there an altar and he offered up upon it a burnt offering to the LORD, who
appeared to him. 5 And he removed from there into the mountain, with Bethel toward the west
6 and Ai toward the east, and he pitched his tent there. *And he saw and behold,
the land was wide and very good and everything was growing upon it: vines and
figs and pomegranate trees, oaks and ilexes and terebinths and olive trees and
cedars and cypresses and date trees8 and every tree of the held, and water was
g. A fragment of a Heb. MS from Qumran has Eth. names for some of the trees in this list. The
provided a parallel for vss. 28f. more familiar words for "vines," "figs," "pome­
h. The words within the brackets, which have granate," and "olive" are quite clear. The words
strong support in the Eth. MSS, are not attested in for cypress and cedar and terebinth are Eth. tran­
the fragment from Qumran. They are also missing scriptions of the Gk. terms. The word for oak
from the Syr. text, which omits the phrase "and represents a transcription of the Gk. balanos. The
the LORD be with you and protect you from all word which Charles rendered "ilex" is a transcrip­
evil." Since the Syr. text is frequently abbreviated, tion of the Gk. drus. Thus he used the Lat. name
its witness alone would scarcely be significant. The to distinguish it in translation from balanos. The
fact that there is not room for it in an early Heb. "date trees" are the result of Charles's emendation
text, however, raises serious questions about its of the Eth. text. Most of the Eth. MSS transcribed
authenticity. the Gk. libanos, "frankincense," but that would
be out of place in Canaan. 13 a. There is a degree of uncertainty about the83 JUBILEES 13:23
7 upon the mountains. •And he blessed the LORD who brought him out of Ur of
8 Chaldees and brought him into this land. •And it came to pass in the first year,
in the seventh week, on the first of the first month, (that) he built an altar on that
mountain and he called on the name of the LORD: "You (are) my God, the
9 eternal God." #And he offered up a burnt offering to the LORD upon the altar
so that he might be with him and not forsake him all the days of his life. Abram travels south to Hebron and Egypt
Gen 12:9-13.-2
IQapGen 19f. 10 And he arose from there and he went toward the South and he reached Hebron—
and Hebron was built then. Andb he dwelt there two years. And he went to the
11 land of the South as far as Bealoth. And there was a famine in the land. 'And
Abram went into Egypt in the third year of the week and he stayed in Egypt five
12 years before his wife was taken from him. #And Tanis of Egypt was built then, Num 13:22
seven years after Hebron. 13 And it came to pass when Pharaoh took Sarai, the wife of Abram, that the
LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues on account of Sarai, the
14 wife of Abram. *And Abram was honored with many possessions: sheep and oxen
and asses and horses and camels and male and female servants and silver and
15 much gold. And Lot, his brother's son, also had possessions. »And Pharaoh
returned Sarai, the wife of Abram. And he sent him out from the land of Egypt. Abram returns to Bethel and is promised the land
Gen i3:3-n
And he went to the place where he had pitched his tent first, to the place of
the altar. Ai was east and Bethel west. And he blessed the LORD his God who iQapGen 2i.2f. 16 brought him back in peace. *And it came to pass in that forty-first jubilee, in the
third year of the first week, (that) he returned to this place. And he offered up
upon it a burnt offering and he called upon the name of the LORD.*And he saw, and behold the
3 land was very pleasant from the entrance of Hamath to the tall oak. *And the
4 LORD said to him, "To you and to your seed I will give this land." »And he
built there an altar and he offered up upon it a burnt offering to the LORD, who
appeared to him. 5 And he removed from there into the mountain, with Bethel toward the west
6 and Ai toward the east, and he pitched his tent there. *And he saw and behold,
the land was wide and very good and everything was growing upon it: vines and
figs and pomegranate trees, oaks and ilexes and terebinths and olive trees and
cedars and cypresses and date trees8 and every tree of the held, and water was
g. A fragment of a Heb. MS from Qumran has Eth. names for some of the trees in this list. The
provided a parallel for vss. 28f. more familiar words for "vines," "figs," "pome­
h. The words within the brackets, which have granate," and "olive" are quite clear. The words
strong support in the Eth. MSS, are not attested in for cypress and cedar and terebinth are Eth. tran­
the fragment from Qumran. They are also missing scriptions of the Gk. terms. The word for oak
from the Syr. text, which omits the phrase "and represents a transcription of the Gk. balanos. The
the LORD be with you and protect you from all word which Charles rendered "ilex" is a transcrip­
evil." Since the Syr. text is frequently abbreviated, tion of the Gk. drus. Thus he used the Lat. name
its witness alone would scarcely be significant. The to distinguish it in translation from balanos. The
fact that there is not room for it in an early Heb. "date trees" are the result of Charles's emendation
text, however, raises serious questions about its of the Eth. text. Most of the Eth. MSS transcribed
authenticity. the Gk. libanos, "frankincense," but that would
be out of place in Canaan. 13 a. There is a degree of uncertainty about the

*And it came to pass in that forty-first jubilee, in the
third year of the first week, (that) he returned to this place. And he offered up
upon it a burnt offering and he called upon the name of the LORD. And he said:
"You, O God, Most High, (are) my God
forever and ever."
17 And in the fourth year of that week Lot separated from him. And Lotc dwelt in iQapGen 21.4f. is Sodom. And the men of Sodom were great sinners. • And his heart was sad because
his brother's son had separated from him because he had no sons. 19 (It was) in that year, when Lot was taken captive, that the LORD spoke to iQapGen2i.8-
Abram after Lot had separated from him, in the fourth year of that week: "Lift 10
up your eyes from the place where you are dwelling toward the North and South
20 and West and East •because all of the land which you see I will give to you and
your seed forever. And I will make your seed like the sands of the sea. (Even) if
a man were able to number the sands of the earth,d he would not (be able) to
21 number your seed. •Arise and walk in the land in its length and its breadth and iQapGen 21.11
see all (of it) because I will give it to your seed."
Abram at Hebron reacts to Lot's capture
Gen 14:1-14
22 And Abram went to Hebron and he dwelt there. • And in that year Chedorlaomer, iQapGen 21.23-
king of Elam; and Amraphel, king of Shinar; and Arioch, king of Sellasar; and 2217
Tergal,e king of the nations, came and killed the king of Gomorrah, but the king
of Sodom fled. And many fell with wounds in the valley of Siddim, by the sea
23 of salt. »And they took captive Sodom and Adam and Zeboim. And they took
b. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point the Lat. text. and continues through vs. 21. e. These names differ from the spelling in Gen
c. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point 14. The Eth. spelling reflects that of an intermediate
and continues through vs. 29. Gk. text. d. The first half of this sentence is omitted fromLot, the son of Abram's brother, captive and all of his possessions. And he went
24 to Dan. •And one who escaped came and told Abram that his brother's son had
25 been taken captive. *And he armed the servants of his house/
The law of the tithe Gen 14:20
. . . upon Abram and his seed a tenth of the firstfruits to the LORD. And the
LORD ordained it (as) an ordinance forever that they should give it to the priests,
26 to those who minister before him so that they might possess it forever. «And there
is no limit of days for this law because he ordained it for eternal generations so
that they might give one tenth of everything to the LORD: grain and wine and oil
27 and oxen and sheep. *And he gave (it) to his priests to eat and drink with rejoicing
before him. Abram restores booty to the king of Sodom Gen 14:21-24
28 And the king of Sodom approached him and bowed down before him. And he iQapGen 22.1s-
said, "Our lord Abram, give us the people whom you saved, but let the booty 26
29 belong to you." »And Abraham said to him, "I lift up my hand8 to the God Most
High (that) I will (not) take anything of yours, (even) a thread or shoelace lest
you say 41 have made Abram rich,' but only what the young men have eaten and
the portion of the men who went with me, 'Aner and 'Eschol and Mamre. Let
them take their portion."
Abram's dream and sacrifice at Mamre Gen is:i-n
1 14 And after these things, in the fourth year of this week, on the first of the iQapGen 22.26-
third month, the word of the LORD came to Abram in a dream, saying, "Don't 34
2 fear, Abram. I am your defender and your reward (will be) very great." *And he
said, "O Lord, O Lord what will you give me? I am going on without children. And the son of Maseq,a the son of my handmaid, is Eliezer of Damascus.I am going on without children. And the son of Maseq,a the son of my handmaid, is Eliezer of Damascus. He will
3 be my heir, but you have not given seed to me." #And he said to him, "This one
will not be your heir, but one who will come from your loins will be your heir."
4 And he took him outside and he said to him, "Look into heaven and count the
stars if you are able to count them."
5 And he looked at the heaven and he saw the stars. And he said to him, "Thus
shall your seed be."
6,7 And he believed the LORD and it was counted for him as righteousness. *And
he said to him, "I am the LORD who brought you from Ur of the Chaldees so
that I might give you the land of the Canaanites to possess forever and (so that I
8 might) be God for you and for your seed after you." *And he said, "O Lord, O
9 Lord, how shall I know that I shall inherit?" «And he said, "Take for me a young
animal of three years and a goat of three years and a sheep of three years and a
turtledove and a pigeon."
f. There is an obvious lacuna in the text at this The loss of the Melchizedek passage leads one
point. The biblical account of Abraham's pursuit to wonder how the author of Jub dealt with the
of the invading army, his recapture of Lot, and an fact that the Bible describes him as "priest of God
encounter with Melchizedek are all missing from Most High," a title used elsewhere of Levi (cf. the Eth. text. The Syr. text also omits the Melchiz­ 32:1). edek episode, but it contains a phrase not found in g. The lifting up of the hand signifies the swear­
our text, i.e. "and he pursued the kings and he ing of an oath. It is a Semitic idiom taken from
returned everything which they had taken captive Gen 14:22. from Sodom."
There is no way to determine whether the text 14 a. The Heb. text of Gen 15:2 is difficult. The
originally follows the biblical account of Abraham term ben-me$eq does not occur elsewhere in the
giving a tithe to Melchizedek or not.*And it came to pass in that forty-first jubilee, in the
third year of the first week, (that) he returned to this place. And he offered up
upon it a burnt offering and he called upon the name of the LORD. And he said:
"You, O God, Most High, (are) my God
forever and ever."
17 And in the fourth year of that week Lot separated from him. And Lotc dwelt in iQapGen 21.4f. is Sodom. And the men of Sodom were great sinners. • And his heart was sad because
his brother's son had separated from him because he had no sons. 19 (It was) in that year, when Lot was taken captive, that the LORD spoke to iQapGen2i.8-
Abram after Lot had separated from him, in the fourth year of that week: "Lift 10
up your eyes from the place where you are dwelling toward the North and South
20 and West and East •because all of the land which you see I will give to you and
your seed forever. And I will make your seed like the sands of the sea. (Even) if
a man were able to number the sands of the earth,d he would not (be able) to
21 number your seed. •Arise and walk in the land in its length and its breadth and iQapGen 21.11
see all (of it) because I will give it to your seed."
Abram at Hebron reacts to Lot's capture
Gen 14:1-14
22 And Abram went to Hebron and he dwelt there. • And in that year Chedorlaomer, iQapGen 21.23-
king of Elam; and Amraphel, king of Shinar; and Arioch, king of Sellasar; and 2217
Tergal,e king of the nations, came and killed the king of Gomorrah, but the king
of Sodom fled. And many fell with wounds in the valley of Siddim, by the sea
23 of salt. »And they took captive Sodom and Adam and Zeboim. And they took
b. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point the Lat. text. and continues through vs. 21. e. These names differ from the spelling in Gen
c. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point 14. The Eth. spelling reflects that of an intermediate
and continues through vs. 29. Gk. text. d. The first half of this sentence is omitted from

text of Gen 15:2 is difficult. The
originally follows the biblical account of Abraham term ben-me$eq does not occur elsewhere in the
giving a tithe to Melchizedek or not. Nevertheless, OT, and its translation remains uncertain. The
some incident involving a tithe must have been translators of the LXX were also confused by the
part of the text because vs. 24 continues the account phrase, which they mistook as a personal name. as though a precedent for the tithe had just been The Eth. reading "son of Maseq" follows that
described. tradition.10 And he took all of these in the middle of the month. And he was dwelling by
11 the oak of Mamre, which is near Hebron. «And he built an altar there. And he
slaughtered all of these, and he poured out their blood upon the altar. And he
divided them in the middle. And he placed them facing one another, but the birds
12 he did not cut up. *And the birds came down upon the piecesb and Abram kept
turning them away and he did not let the birds touch them. 13 And it came to pass when the sun set that a terror fell upon Abram. And behold
a great dark horror fell upon him. And it was said to Abram, "Surely know that
your seed will be strangers in an alien land. And they will serve them. And they
14 will make them suffer four hundred years. *But I will judge the people whom
they will serve. And afterward they will come forth from there with many
15 possessions. *And you will go to your fathers in peace and be buried in a good
16 old age. *And in the fourth generation they will return here because the sins of
the Amorites have not yet been completed."
The covenant with Abram
Gen 15:17-21
17 And he woke up from his sleep and stood up. And the sun had set and there
was a flame. And behold an oven was smoking and flames of Are passed between
is the pieces. •And on that day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying,
4 To your seed I will give this land from the river of Egypt to the great river, the
Euphrates River: the Kenites, the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites, the Perizzites, and
the Rephaim, the Phakorites, and the Hivites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites,
and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites."c
19 And that day passed and Abram offered up the pieces and the birds and their
20 (fruit) offering and their libation. And the fire consumed them. *And on that day
we made a covenant with Abram just as we had made a covenant in that month
with Noah. And Abram renewed the feast and the ordinance for himself forever.*And on that day
we made a covenant with Abram just as we had made a covenant in that month
with Noah. And Abram renewed the feast and the ordinance for himself forever. Sarai offers her handmaid, Hagar, to Abram
Gen 16:1-4,15
21 And Abram rejoiced and he told all of these things to Sarai, his wife. And he
22 believed that he would have seed, but she did not give birth. • And Sarai advised
Abram, her husband, and she said to him, 44Go into Hagar, my Egyptian maid. 23 It may be that I will build seed for you from her." #And Abram heard his wife
Sarai's word and he said, "Do (it)!" And Sarai took Hagar, her Egyptian maid,
24 and she gave her to Abram, her husband, so that she might be a wife. • And he
went into her. And she conceived and bore a son and he called him Ishmael, in
the fifth year of that week. And that year was the eighty-sixth year in the life of
Abram. The offering of firstfruitsa nd the covenant changing Abram's name
Gen 17.1-16
1 15 In the fifth year of the fourth week of that jubilee in the third month, in the
middle of the month, Abram made a feast of the firstfruits of the harvest of grain. 2 And he offered up a new sacrifice upon the altar, the firstfruits of the food for Lev 2315-20
the LORD, a bull and a goat and a sheep upon the altar (as) burnt offering to the
LORD. And their (fruit) offering and their libation he offered up upon the altar
3 with frankincense. #And the LORD appeared to Abram and he said to him, "I
4 am God Shaddai. Be pleasing before me and be perfect. *And I will make my
covenant between me and you and I will make you increase very much."
5.6 And Abram fell on his face and the LORD spoke to him, saying, •4'Behold, my
b. Charles corrected the Eth. text at this point c. This list differs from the list in Gen 15:19-
to agree with the biblical Heb. The Eth. MSS 21. The present list lacks Hittites, but includes
contain a word meaning "wide," probably having Phakorites and Hivites, who are not in the Heb.text of Gen 15:2 is difficult. The
originally follows the biblical account of Abraham term ben-me$eq does not occur elsewhere in the
giving a tithe to Melchizedek or not. Nevertheless, OT, and its translation remains uncertain. The
some incident involving a tithe must have been translators of the LXX were also confused by the
part of the text because vs. 24 continues the account phrase, which they mistook as a personal name. as though a precedent for the tithe had just been The Eth. reading "son of Maseq" follows that
described. tradition.

MSS 21. The present list lacks Hittites, but includes
contain a word meaning "wide," probably having Phakorites and Hivites, who are not in the Heb. in mind that which is spread out. text. The Hivites, however, appear in the LXX.7 ordinance is with you and you will be the father of many nations. »And your
name therefore will not be called Abram, but your name will henceforth and
forever be Abraham because*! have established you (as) the father of many nations. 8 And I shall make you very great and I shall make you into nations. And kings
9 will come from you. *And I shall establish my covenant between me and you and
your seed after you in their generations for an eternal ordinance so that I might
10 be God for you and your seed after you. *And I shall give to you and your seed
after you3 the land where you sojourn, the land of Canaan, which you will possess
forever. And I shall be God for them."
11 And the LORD said to Abraham, "And you also keep my covenant, you and
your seed after you. And youb will circumcise all of youi* males. And youb shall
circumcise your foreskins and it will be a sign of the eternal ordinance between
12 me and you.b »And a son on the eighth day you will circumcise, every male in
your generations, the servant of the house and whomever you purchase with
money from all of the sons of the foreigner, whom you have acquired, who was
13 not from your seed. #The (servant) bom in your house will certainly be circumcised
and the one whom you have purchased with money will be circumcised. And my
14 covenant will be in your flesh for an eternal ordinance. #And whatever male is
not circumcised, the flesh of whose foreskin was not circumcised on the eighth
day, that soul shall be uprooted from its family because he has broken my
15 covenant." #And the LORD said to Abraham, "Sarai, your wife, will therefore not
16 be called Sarai because Sarah is her name. *And I will bless her and I will give
you a son from her. And I will bless him. And he will become a people.And I will bless him. And he will become a people. And
kings of nations will come from him."
Abraham's concern for Ishmael
Gen 17:1722
17 And Abraham fell on his face and he rejoiced and pondered in his heart whether
a son would be born to one who was one hundred years old or (whether) Sarah,
is who was ninety years, would give birth. »And Abraham said to the LORD,
19 "Would that Ishmael might live before you." *And the LORD said, "Yes, but
Sarah will bear a son for you and you will call him Isaac. And I shall raise up
20 my covenant (as) an eternal covenant with him and with his seed after him. #And
concerning Ishmael I have heard you. And behold I shall bless him,c and make
him grow and increase him very much. And twelve princes he will beget. And I
21 shall make him into a great people. *But my covenant I shall establish with Isaac,
22 whom Sarah will bear for you in another year during these days."d *And he
finished talking with him and the LORD ascended from Abraham. The circumcision of Abraham's household
Gen 17:23-27
23 And Abraham did as the LORD said to him and he took Ishmael, his son, and
all of the male servants of his house and also whomever he bought with money,
every male who was in his house, and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskins. 24 And that very samee day Abraham was circumcised and every man of his house
and the servant of his house/ And all of those who were purchased for money
from the sons of aliens were also circumcised with him. 15 a. The first phrase in the sentence is missing days associated with the celebration of the feast of
in the MSS, but restored in the printed text on the the firstfruits of the grain harvest, i.e. the middle
basis of Gen 17:8. of the third month. Cf. the account of his birth in
b. The pronouns are in the second masculine 16:13. plural. The construction is dependent on the Heb. e. The Eth. phrase reads "in the time of that
text of the OT, which reflects a liturgical usage.MSS 21. The present list lacks Hittites, but includes
contain a word meaning "wide," probably having Phakorites and Hivites, who are not in the Heb. in mind that which is spread out. text. The Hivites, however, appear in the LXX.

The Eth. phrase reads "in the time of that
text of the OT, which reflects a liturgical usage. day," which is also found in the LXX as an attempt
The force of the statements in this sentence is to translate a somewhat unusual Heb. idiom which
imperative. means "that very same day."
c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point f. The phrase "and the servant of his house,"
and continues through vs. 31a. is found in the Lat. text, but is missing from the
d. Isaac is to be born during the period of sacred Eth. MSS used by Charles.The laws of circumcision
25 This law is for all the eternal generations and there is no circumcising8 of days
and there is no passing a single day beyond eight days because it is an eternal
26 ordinance ordained and written in the heavenly tablets. • And anyone who is born
whose own flesh is not circumcised on the eighth day is not from the sons of the
covenant which the LORD made for Abraham since (he is) from the children of
destruction. And there is therefore no sign upon him so that he might belong to
the LORD because (he is destined) to be destroyed and annihilated from the earth
and to be uprooted from the earth because he has broken the covenant of the
27 LORD our God. • Because the nature of all of the angels of the presence and all
of the angels of sanctification was thus from the day of their creation. And in the
presence of the angels of the presence and the angels of sanctification he sanctified
Israel so that they might be with him and with his holy angels. 28 And you command the sons of Israel and let them keep this sign of the covenant
for their generations for an eternal ordinance. And they will not be uprooted from
29 the land • because the commandment was ordained for the covenant so that they
30 might keep it forever for all of the children of Israel. #For the LORD did not
draw Ishmael and his sons and his brothers and Esau near to himself, and he did
not elect them because they are the sons of Abraham, for he knew them. But he
3t chose Israel that they might be a people for himself. • And he sanctified them and Deut 32-.8f. gathered them from all of the sons of man because (there are) many nations and Sir 17:17
many people, and they all belong to him, but over all of them he caused spirits
32 to rule so that they might lead them astrayh from following him.• And he sanctified them and Deut 32-.8f. gathered them from all of the sons of man because (there are) many nations and Sir 17:17
many people, and they all belong to him, but over all of them he caused spirits
32 to rule so that they might lead them astrayh from following him. *But over Israel Dan io:i3
he did not cause any angel or spirit to rule because he alone is their ruler and he J^SSu.f'
will protect them and he will seek for them at the hand of his angels and at the
hand of his spirits and at the hand of all of his authorities so that he might guard
them and bless them and they might be his and he might be theirs henceforth and
forever. A prediction of future faithlessness regarding circumcision
33 And now I shall announce to you that the sons of Israel will deny this ordinance
and they will not circumcise their sons according to all of this law because some
of the flesh of their circumcision they will leave in the circumcision of their sons. And all of the sons of Beliar will leave their sons without circumcising just as
TDan 5
34 they were bom. «And great wrath from the LORD will be upon the sons of Israel
because they have left his covenant and have turned aside from his words. And
they have provoked and blasphemed inasmuch as they have not done the ordinance
of this law because they have made themselves like the gentiles to be removed
and be uprooted from the land. And there is therefore for them no forgiveness or
pardon so that they might be pardoned and forgiven' from all of the sins of this
eternal error. Account of Sarah's laughter
Gen I&I-IS
1 16 And on the new moon of the fourth month, we appeared to Abraham at the
oak of Mamre and we talked with him and we also caused him to know that a
2 son would be given to him by Sarah, his wife. 'And Sarah laughed because she
heard that we discussed this matter with Abraham. And we reproached her. And
3 she was afraid and denied that she laughed about the matter. *And we told her
g.The Eth. phrase reads "in the time of that
text of the OT, which reflects a liturgical usage. day," which is also found in the LXX as an attempt
The force of the statements in this sentence is to translate a somewhat unusual Heb. idiom which
imperative. means "that very same day."
c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point f. The phrase "and the servant of his house,"
and continues through vs. 31a. is found in the Lat. text, but is missing from the
d. Isaac is to be born during the period of sacred Eth. MSS used by Charles.

And
3 she was afraid and denied that she laughed about the matter. *And we told her
g. This is the writer's way of suggesting that no ers discussed in ch. 10:2-9. day should be cut off to shorten the total number i. This phrase is found in MS B. Charles thought
of days. the phrase was a corruption due to dittography. h. The spirits are the descendants of the Watch­the name of her son Isaac—just as his name was ordained and written in the
4 heavenly tablets—*and (that) when we returned to her at a specific time she would
have conceived a son. The destruction of Sodom
Gen i8:i6-i9:2o
s And in that month the LORD executed the judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah
and Zeboim and all of the district of the Jordan. And he burned them with fire Gen 19.24
and sulphur and he annihilated them till this day just as (he said), "Behold, I
have made known to you all8 of their deeds that (they were) cruel and great sinners
and they were polluting themselves and they were fornicating in their flesh and
6 they were causing pollution upon the earth." *And thus the LORD will execute
judgment like the judgment of Sodom on places where they act according to the
pollution of Sodom. The sin of Lot's daughters
Gen 19:30-38
7 And we saved Lot because the LORD remembered Abraham and he brought
8 him out from the midst of the overthrow. • And he and his daughters also committed
sins upon the earth which were not (committed) on the earth from the days of
9 Adam until his time because the man lay with his daughters. #And behold it is
commanded and it is engraved concerning all of his seed in the heavenly tablets
so that he will remove them and uproot them and execute their judgment just like
the judgment of Sodom and so that he will not leave seed of man for him on the
earth in the day of judgment. Events surrounding the birth of Isaac at Beer-sheba
Gen 20:1-21:7
10 And in this month Abraham moved from Hebron and went and dwelt between
11 Qadesh and Shur in the mountains of Gerar. *And in the middle of the fifth month
12 he moved from there and he dwelt by the Well of the Oath. #And in the middle
13 of the sixth month the LORD visited Sarah and did for her as he had said. *And
she conceived and she bore a son in the third month, in the middle of the month,
in the time when the LORD told Abraham. Isaac was born on the feast of the
14 flrstfruits of the harvest.And
3 she was afraid and denied that she laughed about the matter. *And we told her
g. This is the writer's way of suggesting that no ers discussed in ch. 10:2-9. day should be cut off to shorten the total number i. This phrase is found in MS B. Charles thought
of days. the phrase was a corruption due to dittography. h. The spirits are the descendants of the Watch­

*And
she conceived and she bore a son in the third month, in the middle of the month,
in the time when the LORD told Abraham. Isaac was born on the feast of the
14 flrstfruits of the harvest. *And Abraham circumcised his son on the eighth day. He was the first one circumcised according to the covenant which was ordained
forever. is And in the sixth year of the fourth week we went forth to Abraham at the Well
of the Oath. And we appeared to him [just as we said to Sarah that we would
16 return to her. And she had conceived a son. »And we returned in the seventh
month and we found Sarah pregnant before us.]b And we blessed him and we
announced to him everything which was commanded for him that he would not
die until he begot six more sons and he would see (them) before he died. And Gen 25:2
17 through Isaac a name and seed would be named for him. • And all of the seed of Gen 21:12
his sons would become nations. And they would be counted with the nations. But
from the sons of Isaac one would become a holy seed and he would not be counted
is among the nations • because he would become the portion of the Most High and
all his seed would fall (by lot) into that which God will rule so that he might
become a people (belonging) to the LORD, a (special) possession from all people, Deut4:2o
19 and so that he might become a kingdom of priests and a holy people. *And we %^9%
2
went our way and we announced to Sarah everything which we had told him. Rev 5:io
And both of them rejoiced very greatly. 16 a. A portion of the Lat. text resumes at this in both Lat. and Eth. MSS, but it appears out of
point and continues through 17:6a. place here as a gloss which interrupts the text,
b. The section marked off by brackets is foundAbraham observes the feast of Booths at Beer-sheba Gen 21:8
Num 29:12-40
20 And he built an altar there to the LORD who delivered him and who made him
rejoice in the land of his sojourn. And he celebrated a feast of rejoicing in this
21 month, seven days, near the altar which he built by the Well of the Oath. *And
he built booths for himself and for his servants on that festival. And he first
22 observed the feast of the booths on the earth. «And in these seven days he was
making offering every day, day by day, on the altar a burnt offering to the LORD:
two bulls, and two rams, and seven lambs, one kid on behalf of sins so that he
23 might atone thereby on behalf of himself and his seed. •And for a thank offering:
seven rams and seven sheep and seven lambs and seven he-goats and their (fruit)
offerings and their libations and all their fat he offered upon the altar as chosen
burnt offering to the LORD for a sweet-smelling odor. 24 And in the morning and evening he offered the fragrance of frankincense, and Ex 30:34
galbanum, and stacte, and nard, and myrrh, and spices, and costum.c All seven StT 24:15
2s of these he offered, crushed, mixed in equal parts (and) pure. *And he observed
this feast seven days, rejoicing with all his heart and with all his soul, he and all
of those who were in his house. And there was no alien with him or any who
26 were not circumcised. *And he blessed his Creator who created him in his
generation because by his will he created him for he knew and he perceived that
from him there would be a righteous planting for eternal generations and a holy iEn io:i6;
27 seed from him so that he might be like the one who made everything. *And he 93:5,10
blessed and rejoiced and called the name of this festival "the festival of the
LORD," a joy acceptable to God Most High.*And he blessed his Creator who created him in his
generation because by his will he created him for he knew and he perceived that
from him there would be a righteous planting for eternal generations and a holy iEn io:i6;
27 seed from him so that he might be like the one who made everything. *And he 93:5,10
blessed and rejoiced and called the name of this festival "the festival of the
LORD," a joy acceptable to God Most High. 28 And we eternally blessed him and his seed who are after him in every generation
of the earth because he observed this feast in its (appointed) time according to the
29 testimony of the heavenly tablets. •Therefore it is ordained in the heavenly tablets Lev 23:4(M2
concerning Israel that they will be observers of the feast of booths seven days
with joy in the seventh month which is acceptable before the LORD (as) an eternal
30 law in their generations throughout all (time), year by year. • And there is no limit
of days for this because it is ordained forever concerning Israel so that they should
observe it and they should dwell in tents and that they should place crowns on
their heads and so that they should take branches of leaves and willow from the
31 stream. *And Abraham took branches'1 of palm trees and fruit of good trees and
each day of the days he used to go around the altar with branches. Seven times
per day, in the morning, he was praising and giving thanks to his God for all
things. The feast for the weaning of Isaac Gen 21:8
1 17 In the first of the fifth week in that jubilee Isaac was weaned. And Abraham
celebrated a great feast in the third month on the day that his son, Isaac, was
2 weaned. • And Ishmael, the son of Hagar, the Egyptian woman, was in the presence
of Abraham, his father, in his place. And Abraham rejoiced and he blessed the
3 LORD because he had seen his sons and had not died without sons. *And he
remembered the word which was told to him on the day that Lot separated from
him.*And
she conceived and she bore a son in the third month, in the middle of the month,
in the time when the LORD told Abraham. Isaac was born on the feast of the
14 flrstfruits of the harvest. *And Abraham circumcised his son on the eighth day. He was the first one circumcised according to the covenant which was ordained
forever. is And in the sixth year of the fourth week we went forth to Abraham at the Well
of the Oath. And we appeared to him [just as we said to Sarah that we would
16 return to her. And she had conceived a son. »And we returned in the seventh
month and we found Sarah pregnant before us.]b And we blessed him and we
announced to him everything which was commanded for him that he would not
die until he begot six more sons and he would see (them) before he died. And Gen 25:2
17 through Isaac a name and seed would be named for him. • And all of the seed of Gen 21:12
his sons would become nations. And they would be counted with the nations. But
from the sons of Isaac one would become a holy seed and he would not be counted
is among the nations • because he would become the portion of the Most High and
all his seed would fall (by lot) into that which God will rule so that he might
become a people (belonging) to the LORD, a (special) possession from all people, Deut4:2o
19 and so that he might become a kingdom of priests and a holy people. *And we %^9%
2
went our way and we announced to Sarah everything which we had told him. Rev 5:io
And both of them rejoiced very greatly. 16 a. A portion of the Lat. text resumes at this in both Lat. and Eth. MSS, but it appears out of
point and continues through 17:6a. place here as a gloss which interrupts the text,
b. The section marked off by brackets is found

And Abraham rejoiced and he blessed the
3 LORD because he had seen his sons and had not died without sons. *And he
remembered the word which was told to him on the day that Lot separated from
him. And he rejoiced because the LORD had given him seed upon the earth so
c. The list of incense contains some uncertain inspiration for the present text, the Eth. text uses
elements. The Eth. words for "frankincense," it to translate "galbanum." The word that is
"myrrh," and "spices" are fairly well known. translated "stacte" also appears in Ex 30:34 with
The Eth. word for "nard" is ndrdds, a simple that meaning. transcription of the Gk., and the word for4 'costum" d. The word which appears in both Lat. and
is kwast, which probably reflects the Gk. kostos. Eth. MSS translates into English as "heart" (of
The word that is translated "galbanum" is used in palm trees). That is apparently due to a confusion
Eth. to represent either the Gk. stakti or chalbani, between the Heb. words lulab, "branches," and
but at Ex 30:34, which probably provided the leb, "heart." The correction is obvious.that they might inherit the land. And he blessed the Creator of all with all his
eloquence.8
The banishment of Hagar
Gen 21:9-21
4 And Sarah saw Ishmael playing and dancing and Abraham rejoicing very
greatly. And she was jealous of Ishmael and she said to Abraham, "Drive out
this girl and her son because the son of this girl will not inherit with my son,
5 Isaac." *And the matter was grievous in the sight of Abraham because of his
maidservant and because of his son that he should drive them away from him. 6 And the LORD said to Abraham, "Let it not be grievous in your sight on account
of the lad and the girl. (As for) everything which Sarah said to you, obey her
words and do (it) because it is through Isaac that a name and seed will be named
7 for you. -But regarding the son of this girl, I will make him into a great people
because he is from your seed."
8 And Abraham rose at the crack of dawn and he took bread and a water skin
9 and set it on the shoulder of Hagar and the lad and he sent her away. «And she
went and wandered in the desert of Beer-sheba and the water was used up from
10 the skin and the lad thirsted and was unable to walk and he fell.9And his mother
took him and cast him under one of the olive trees and she went and sat opposite
him a distance of one (arrow) shot because, she said, "Let me not see the death
of my child." And sitting down, she wept. 11 And an angel of the LORD, one of the holy ones, said to her, "What are you
weeping for, Hagar? Having arisen, pick up the child and take him in your arms
12 because the LORD has heard your voice and he has seen the child." »And she
opened her eyes and she saw a well of water. And she went and filled the water
skin. And she gave the child a drink and arose and went toward the desert of
13 Paran. «And the child grew and was a hunter. And the LORD was with him. And
14 his mother took a wife for him from the maids of Egypt.And Abraham rejoiced and he blessed the
3 LORD because he had seen his sons and had not died without sons. *And he
remembered the word which was told to him on the day that Lot separated from
him. And he rejoiced because the LORD had given him seed upon the earth so
c. The list of incense contains some uncertain inspiration for the present text, the Eth. text uses
elements. The Eth. words for "frankincense," it to translate "galbanum." The word that is
"myrrh," and "spices" are fairly well known. translated "stacte" also appears in Ex 30:34 with
The Eth. word for "nard" is ndrdds, a simple that meaning. transcription of the Gk., and the word for4 'costum" d. The word which appears in both Lat. and
is kwast, which probably reflects the Gk. kostos. Eth. MSS translates into English as "heart" (of
The word that is translated "galbanum" is used in palm trees). That is apparently due to a confusion
Eth. to represent either the Gk. stakti or chalbani, between the Heb. words lulab, "branches," and
but at Ex 30:34, which probably provided the leb, "heart." The correction is obvious.

And the LORD was with him. And
14 his mother took a wife for him from the maids of Egypt. *And she bore a son for
him and he called him Nebaioth because, she said, "The LORD was near to me
when I called to him."
Mastema's plot to test Abraham Gen 22:1
15 And it came to pass in the seventh week, in its first year, in the first month, in
that jubilee, on the twelfth of that month, that words came in heaven concerning
Abraham that he was faithful in everything which was told him and he loved the
16 LORD and was faithful in all affliction. -And Prince Mastema came and he said
before God, "Behold, Abraham loves Isaac, his son. And he is more pleased
with him than everything. Tell him to offer him (as) a burnt offering upon the
altar. And you will see whether he will do this thing. And you will know whether
he is faithful in everything in which you test him."
17 And the LORD was aware that Abraham was faithful in all of his afflictions
because he tested him with his land, and with famine. And he tested him with the
wealth of kings. And he tested him again with his wife, when she was taken
(from him), and with circumcision. And he tested him with Ishmael and with
is Hagar, his maidservant, when he sent them away. #And in everything in which
he tested him, he was found faithful. And his soul was not impatient. And he was
not slow to act because he was faithful and a lover of the LORD. The sacrifice of Isaac
Gen 221-19
1 18 And the LORD said to him, "Abraham, Abraham." And he said, "Here I
2 am." *And he said, "Take your beloved son, whom you love, Isaac, and go into
17 a. Lit. "with all his mouth/the high land and offer him up on one of the mountains that I will make known
to you."
3 And he arose while it was still dark at daybreak and he loaded his ass and took
two of his young men servants with him and Isaac, his son. And he split the wood
of the sacrifice and he went to the place on the third day. And he saw the place
4 from afar. *And he arrived at a well of water and he said to the young men,
"Stay here with the ass and I and the child shall go. And when we have worshiped
we shall return to you."
s And he took the wood of the sacrifice and put it on the shoulder of Isaac, his
son, and he took the fire and the knife in his hand. And the two of them went
6 together to that place. • And Isaac said to his father, "Father." And he said,
"Here I am, my son." And he said to him, "Behold, the fire and the knife and
7 the wood, but where is the lamb for the burnt offering, father?" «And he said,
"The LORD will see about the lamb for the burnt offering, my son."
8 And they drew near to the (holy) place of the mountain of the LORD. *And he
built an altar and he placed the wood on the altar. And he bound Isaac, his son,
and he placed him on the wood which was on top of the altar, and he stretched
forth his hand, and took the knife in order to slaughter Isaac, his son. 9 And I stood before him and before Prince Mastema. And the LORD said,
"Speak to him. Do not let his hand descend upon the child. And do not let him
10 do anything to him because I know that he is one who fears the LORD." •And I
called out to him from heaven and I said to him, "Abraham, Abraham." And he
11 was terrified8 and said, "Here I am." *And I said to him, "Do not put forth your
hand against the child and do not do anything to him because now I know that
you are one who fears the LORD and you did not deny your firstborn son to me."
12 And Prince Mastema was shamed. And Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw a
ram was caught in the thicketb by his horns.And do not let him
10 do anything to him because I know that he is one who fears the LORD." •And I
called out to him from heaven and I said to him, "Abraham, Abraham." And he
11 was terrified8 and said, "Here I am." *And I said to him, "Do not put forth your
hand against the child and do not do anything to him because now I know that
you are one who fears the LORD and you did not deny your firstborn son to me."
12 And Prince Mastema was shamed. And Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw a
ram was caught in the thicketb by his horns. And Abraham went and took the ram
t3 and offered it up for a burnt offering instead of his son. #And Abraham called
that place "The LORD has seen," so that it is said "in the mountain0 the LORD
has seen." It is Mount Zion. 14 And the LORD called Abraham by his name again from heaven just as he
caused us to appear so that we might speak to him in the name of the LORD. 15 And he said, "I swear by myself, says the LORD, because you have done this
thing and you have not denied your firstbornd son, whom you love, to me that I
shall surely bless you and I shall surely multiply your seed like the stars of heaven
and like the sand of the seashore and your seed will inherit the cities of their
16 enemies. *And all of the nations of the earth will bless themselves by your seed
because you obeyed my word. And I have made known to all that you are faithful
to me in everything which I say to you. Go in peace." isam 1:17
17 And Abraham went to his young men and they got up and went (to) Beer-sheba
is together. And Abraham dwelt by the Well of the Oath. *And he observed this
festival every year (for) seven days with rejoicing. And he named it "the feast of
the LORD" according to the seven days during which he went and returned in
19 peace. #And thus it is ordained and written in the heavenly tablets concerning
Israel and his seed to observe this festival seven days with festal joy.And the LORD was with him. And
14 his mother took a wife for him from the maids of Egypt. *And she bore a son for
him and he called him Nebaioth because, she said, "The LORD was near to me
when I called to him."
Mastema's plot to test Abraham Gen 22:1
15 And it came to pass in the seventh week, in its first year, in the first month, in
that jubilee, on the twelfth of that month, that words came in heaven concerning
Abraham that he was faithful in everything which was told him and he loved the
16 LORD and was faithful in all affliction. -And Prince Mastema came and he said
before God, "Behold, Abraham loves Isaac, his son. And he is more pleased
with him than everything. Tell him to offer him (as) a burnt offering upon the
altar. And you will see whether he will do this thing. And you will know whether
he is faithful in everything in which you test him."
17 And the LORD was aware that Abraham was faithful in all of his afflictions
because he tested him with his land, and with famine. And he tested him with the
wealth of kings. And he tested him again with his wife, when she was taken
(from him), and with circumcision. And he tested him with Ishmael and with
is Hagar, his maidservant, when he sent them away. #And in everything in which
he tested him, he was found faithful. And his soul was not impatient. And he was
not slow to act because he was faithful and a lover of the LORD. The sacrifice of Isaac
Gen 221-19
1 18 And the LORD said to him, "Abraham, Abraham." And he said, "Here I
2 am." *And he said, "Take your beloved son, whom you love, Isaac, and go into
17 a. Lit. "with all his mouth/

And he named it "the feast of
the LORD" according to the seven days during which he went and returned in
19 peace. #And thus it is ordained and written in the heavenly tablets concerning
Israel and his seed to observe this festival seven days with festal joy. The death and burial of Sarah
Gen 23:1-20
1 19 In the first year of the first week in this forty-second jubilee Abraham returned
2 and dwelt two weeks of years opposite Hebron, i.e. Kiryath Arba. *And in the
18 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this phrase at this point. point and continues through 19:26a. c. The phrase "in the mountain" is found only
b. The Eth. words for "in the thicket" are based in the Lat. MS. on a reasonable emendation by Charles. The Eth. d. The reading is found in two of the Eth. MSS. MSS have a meaningless "and he came." The Lat. Lat.: "only begotten."
MS reads "caught by his horns," with no addedfirst year of the third week of this jubilee, the days of Sarah's life were completed
3 and she died in Hebron. *And Abraham went to weep for her and bury her. And we were testing him whether he would exercise self-control. And he was
not impatient with the words of his mouth and he was found self-controlled in
4 this also and he was not filled with anxiety • because with the self-control of his
spirit he spoke with the sons of Heth so that they might give him a place in which
5 to bury his dead. #And the LORD gave him favor in the presence of all who saw
him. And he begged politely from the sons of Heth and they sold him the land of
the cave of Machpelah,* which is opposite Mamre, i.e. Hebron, for four hundred6
6 silver (pieces). #And they begged him, saying, "Let us give (it) to you free."
But he did not take (it) from their control free because he gave the price for
the place (in) full silver. And he bowed down to them twice and afterward he
7 buried his dead in the cave of Machpelah. *And all the days of the life of Sarah
were one hundred and twenty-seven. These (are) two jubilees and four weeks and
8 one year. These (are) the days of the life of Sarah. •This (is) the tenth trial with
9 which Abraham was tried. And he was found faithful, controlled of spirit. • And CD 3.2
he did not say a word concerning the rumor which was in the land that the LORD
said he would give it to him and to his seed after him, but he begged a place Jas 2:23
there so that he might bury his dead because he was found faithful and he was jJJJi^g"
recorded as a friend of the LORD in the heavenly tablets. The marriage of Isaac and the birth of his children Gen 2*1-
25:3.24-28
10 And in the fourth year thereof he took a wife for his son, Isaac, and her name
was Rebecca, daughter of Bethuel, the son of Nahor, Abraham's brother, the
sister of Laban and daughter of Bethuel. And Bethuelc was the son of Melca, who
11 was the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother.The marriage of Isaac and the birth of his children Gen 2*1-
25:3.24-28
10 And in the fourth year thereof he took a wife for his son, Isaac, and her name
was Rebecca, daughter of Bethuel, the son of Nahor, Abraham's brother, the
sister of Laban and daughter of Bethuel. And Bethuelc was the son of Melca, who
11 was the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother. •And Abraham took a third wife and
her name was Keturah from the daughters of his household servants because Hagar
12 died before Sarah. *And she bore six sons for him: Zimram, and Jokshan, and
Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah,d in two weeks of years. 13 And in the sixth week in the second year Rebecca bore two children for Isaac,
Jacob and Esau. And Jacob was smooth and upright, but Esau was a fierce man
14 and rustic and hairy. And Jacob used to dwell in the tents. #And the youths grew
up and Jacob learned writing, but Esau did not learn because he was a rustic man
and a hunter. And he learned war, and all of his deeds were fierce. Abraham's blessings for Jacob Gen 25:28
15.16 And Abraham loved Jacob, but Isaac loved Esau. *And Abraham saw the deeds
of Esau and he knew that in Jacob a name and seed would be named for him. And he called Rebecca and he commanded concerning Jacob because he knew
17 that she loved Jacob more than Esau. *And he said to her, "My daughter, guard
my son Jacob because he will be in place of me upon the earth and for a blessing
is in the midst of the sons of men and a glory to all of the seed of Shem •because I
know that the LORD will choose him for himself as a people who will rise upc
19 a. The Eth. text has translated this phrase to a corrupt reading which does not fit the context. read "double cave." There was never any doubt The vs. as a whole has clearly suffered in trans­
that the familiar biblical phrase "cave of Mach­ mission. Both the Lat. and Eth. mention a daughter
pelah" was the ultimate source of the Eth. "double of Bethuel twice in vs. 10.And he named it "the feast of
the LORD" according to the seven days during which he went and returned in
19 peace. #And thus it is ordained and written in the heavenly tablets concerning
Israel and his seed to observe this festival seven days with festal joy. The death and burial of Sarah
Gen 23:1-20
1 19 In the first year of the first week in this forty-second jubilee Abraham returned
2 and dwelt two weeks of years opposite Hebron, i.e. Kiryath Arba. *And in the
18 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this phrase at this point. point and continues through 19:26a. c. The phrase "in the mountain" is found only
b. The Eth. words for "in the thicket" are based in the Lat. MS. on a reasonable emendation by Charles. The Eth. d. The reading is found in two of the Eth. MSS. MSS have a meaningless "and he came." The Lat. Lat.: "only begotten."
MS reads "caught by his horns," with no added

"double of Bethuel twice in vs. 10. That would suggest
cave," but now two fragments of the Heb. text that the dittography was also present in the earlier
from Qumran (3Q5, F.3 and 2Q19) contain the Gk. text. word mkplh. Therefore there is scarcely any reason d. The names of the six sons are spelled in
to avoid using it. agreement with Gen 25:2. The Eth. spellings are
b. Charles emended the Eth. text to read "four slightly different. The Lat. spellings are even more
hundred," which agrees with the Lat. The Eth. remote. MSS read "forty." e. The vs. is based on Deut 7:6, where the
c. The reading "daughter of Bethuel. And Be­ chosen people are described as God's "own pos­
thuel" follows the Lat. text. The Eth. MSS have session." The Lat. text describes them as a "holy19 from all the nations' which are upon the earth. •And behold, Isaac, my son, loves
20 Esau more than Jacob, but I see you as one who loves Jacob rightly. *Be even
better to him and let your eyes be lovingly upon him because he will be for us a
21 blessing upon the earth henceforth and for all generations of the earth. *Let your
hands be strong and let your heart rejoice in your son, Jacob. Because I love him
more than all of my sons. He will be blessed forever and his seed will be one
22 which fills all of the earth. *If a man is able to count the sand of the earth, then Gen i3:i6
23 his seed will be counted. *And all of the blessings with which the LORD blessed
24 me and my seed will be for Jacob and his seed always. #And in his seed my name
will be blessed and the names of my fathers Shem and Noah, and Enoch, and
2s Mahalalel, and Enos, and Seth, and Adam.8 *And they will serve to establish
heaven and to strengthen the earth and to renew all of the lights which are above
the firmament."
26 And he called to Jacob in the sight of Rebecca, his mother, and he kissed him
27 and blessed him, and said, • "Jacob, my beloved son, whom my soul loves, may
God from above the firmament bless and may he give you all of the blessings
with which he blessed Adam and Enoch and Noah and Shem. And everything
which he told me and everything which he said that he would give me may he
cause to cleave to you and your seed forever according to the days of heaven
28 above the earth. • And may the spirit of Mastema not rule over you or over your CD i2.2f. seed in order to remove you from following the LORD who is your God henceforth
29 and forever #and may the LORD God be for you and for the people a father
always and may you be af irstborn son. Go, my son, in peace."
3o,3i And the two of them went out together from Abraham. »And Rebecca loved
Jacob with all of her heart and all of her soul much more than Esau, but Isaac
loved Esau more than Jacob.Go, my son, in peace."
3o,3i And the two of them went out together from Abraham. »And Rebecca loved
Jacob with all of her heart and all of her soul much more than Esau, but Isaac
loved Esau more than Jacob. Abraham's farewell testimony for his children
Gen 25:5f. 1 20 And in the forty-second jubilee, in the first year on the seventh week, Abraham
called Ishmael and his twelve children and Isaac and his two children and Keturah's Gen 25:13-15
2 six children and their sons. *And he commanded them (a) that they should guard CD 6.20-7 4
the way of the LORD SO that they might do righteousness and each
one might love his neighbor, and (b) that it should be thus among all men so that
each one might proceed to act justly and rightly toward them upon the earth,
3 and (c) that they should circumcise their sons in the covenant which he made with
them, and (d) that they should not cross over either to the right or left from all of
the ways which the LORD commanded us and (e) that we should keep ourselves
from all fornication and pollution, and (f) that we should set aside from among
4 us all fornication and pollution.8 • And when any woman or girl fornicates among Deut 22:23
you you will burn her6 with fire, and let them not fornicate with her after their uvk2o6io°2i 9
Gen 38:24
people," and the Eth. describes them as "a people mention of renewing "all the lights which are
who will rise up." Charles assumed that it was above the firmament."
due to a misunderstanding of the Gk. word periou-
sios, which is also mistranslated in the Eth. version 20 a. Vss. 2f. are written with a rambling syntax. of the Bible. The designation of separate commands with letters
f. The word "nations" is restored from the Lat, (a) through (f) was introduced by the translator to
text. It is missing in the Eth. MSS. break up the long sentence. In his translation,
g."double of Bethuel twice in vs. 10. That would suggest
cave," but now two fragments of the Heb. text that the dittography was also present in the earlier
from Qumran (3Q5, F.3 and 2Q19) contain the Gk. text. word mkplh. Therefore there is scarcely any reason d. The names of the six sons are spelled in
to avoid using it. agreement with Gen 25:2. The Eth. spellings are
b. Charles emended the Eth. text to read "four slightly different. The Lat. spellings are even more
hundred," which agrees with the Lat. The Eth. remote. MSS read "forty." e. The vs. is based on Deut 7:6, where the
c. The reading "daughter of Bethuel. And Be­ chosen people are described as God's "own pos­
thuel" follows the Lat. text. The Eth. MSS have session." The Lat. text describes them as a "holy

break up the long sentence. In his translation,
g. In the genealogy of Enoch in Gen 5, the Charles bracketed the last injunction in this series
seven generations are listed as Adam, Seth, Enosh, as an example of dittography. Vs. 4, however,
Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared, and Enoch. Jared may describes in greater detail the manner in which
be left out of the present list because of the evil fornication is to be set aside. The shifting of
associations derived from the meaning of his name pronouns from "they" to "us" is similar to the
when the Watchers "descended" in his lifetime pattern found in the ancient liturgical fragment
(cf. Jub 4:15). The omission of Kenan may be due preserved in Deut 26:5-11. to the fact that it is similar to Cain. Within the b. Death by fire is the punishment which is
remaining group Mahalalel is the least famous, but appropriate for the daughter of a priest according
his name means4 'God shines forth,' * an appropriate to Lev 21:9; in other cases the OT required stoning,
name for a patriarch in this context where there is e.g. Deut 22:23f. Jub's order for burning, whicheyes and hearts and let them not take wives from the girls of Canaan because the
seed of Canaan will be rooted out of the land. And he told them the judgment of the giants and the judgments of the Sodomites
just asc they had been judged on account of their evil. And on account of their
fornication and impurity and the corruption among themselves with fornication
they died. And you guard yourself from all fornication and impurity,
and from all corruption of sin,
so that you might not make our name a curse, isa 65:15
and all your life a hissing, {in2?*8
and all your sons a destruction by the sword. And you will be cursed like Sodom,
and all your remnant like the sons of Gomorrah. I exhort you, my sons, love the God of heaven,
and be joined to all of his commands. And do not go after their idols and after their defilement. And do not make gods of molten or carved images for yourselves, Deut 27:15
because it is vain and they have no spirit. Because they are the work of hands,
and all those who trust in them trust in nothing. Do not worship them and do not bow down to them. Ex 20:5
But worship the Most High God,
and bow down to him continually,
and hope for his countenance always,
and do what is upright and righteous before him,
so that he might be pleased with you,d
and grant you his mercy,
and bring down rain for you morning and evening,
and bless all your works Deut 28:8
which you have made on the earth
and bless your food and your water,
and bless the fruit of your womb and the fruit of your land, Deut 7:i3
and the herds of your cattle and the flocks of your sheep. And you will become a blessing upon the earth, Gen 12:2
and all of the nations of the earth will desire you,
and they will bless your sons in my name,
so that they might be blessed just as I am. And he gave gifts to Ishmael and to his sons and to the sons of Keturah and he
sent them away from Isaac, his son, and he gave everything to Isaac, his son.break up the long sentence. In his translation,
g. In the genealogy of Enoch in Gen 5, the Charles bracketed the last injunction in this series
seven generations are listed as Adam, Seth, Enosh, as an example of dittography. Vs. 4, however,
Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared, and Enoch. Jared may describes in greater detail the manner in which
be left out of the present list because of the evil fornication is to be set aside. The shifting of
associations derived from the meaning of his name pronouns from "they" to "us" is similar to the
when the Watchers "descended" in his lifetime pattern found in the ancient liturgical fragment
(cf. Jub 4:15). The omission of Kenan may be due preserved in Deut 26:5-11. to the fact that it is similar to Cain. Within the b. Death by fire is the punishment which is
remaining group Mahalalel is the least famous, but appropriate for the daughter of a priest according
his name means4 'God shines forth,' * an appropriate to Lev 21:9; in other cases the OT required stoning,
name for a patriarch in this context where there is e.g. Deut 22:23f. Jub's order for burning, which

And you will become a blessing upon the earth, Gen 12:2
and all of the nations of the earth will desire you,
and they will bless your sons in my name,
so that they might be blessed just as I am. And he gave gifts to Ishmael and to his sons and to the sons of Keturah and he
sent them away from Isaac, his son, and he gave everything to Isaac, his son. And Ishmael and his sons and the sons of Keturah and their sons went together
and they dwelt from Paran to the entrance to Babylon in all of the land which
faces the east opposite the desert. *And these mixed with each other, and they
are callede Arabs or Ishmaelites. Abraham's farewell testimony for Isaac Gen 25:5,7
21 And in the sixth year of the seventh week of this jubilee Abraham called TLevi 9
Isaac, his son, and he commanded him, saying, "I am old and I do not know the Gen 27:2
appears to be a harsher form of death, may be text to agree with the Lat., which reads "direct
attributed to either the strictness of the community you aright," but in his subsequent translations he
to which the author belonged or to its priestly chose to follow the Eth. MSS. orientation. It might also be influenced by Judah's e. The reading "are called" is found in the Eth. example in Gen 38:24. MSS. Charles had emended the printed text to read
c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point "were joined" to agree with the Lat., but changed
and continues through 21:10a. his mind in subsequent translations and followed
d. The reading "be pleased with you" is found the Eth. MSS. in the Eth. MSS. Charles had emended the printed95 JUBILEES 21:12
2 day of my death and I am filled with my days. • Behold I am one hundred and
seventy-five years old, and throughout all of the days of my life I have been
remembering the LORD and sought with all my heart to do his will and walk
3 uprightly in all his ways. *I hated idols, and those who serve them I have rejected. And I have offered my heart and spirit8 so that I might be careful to do the will
4 of the one who created me • because he is the living God. And he is holy, and
faithful, and he is more righteous than all (others) and there is no accepting of Dem io:i7
persons with him or accepting of gifts because he is a righteous God and he is
the one who executes judgment with all who transgress his commandments and
5 despise his covenant. »And you, my son, keep his commandments and ordinances
and judgments, and do not follow pollutions or graven images or molten images. Lev 7:26
6 And do not eat any bloodb of beasts or cattle or any bird which flies in heaven. 7 And if you slaughter a sacrifice as an acceptable burnt offering of peace, slaughter Lev 3:7-io
it, but pour out its blood on the altar. And offer up all the fat of the burnt offering
on the altar with fine flour kneaded with oil, together with its libation. You will
offer it all together on the altar (as) a burnt offering, (as) a sweet aroma before
8 the LORD, »and the fat of the thanksgiving offering you will place upon the fire
which is on the altar. You shall remove the fat which is on the belly, all of the
fat of the internal organs and the two kidneys, all of the fat which is on them and
9 on the thighs and the liver together with the kidneys. *And you will offer all of
this up as a sweet aroma which is acceptable before the LORD together with its Lev 3.11
(fruit) offering and its libation for a sweet odor, the bread of a burnt offering to
10 the LORD. »And eat its flesh on that day and in the second (day), but do not let
the sun of the second (day) set upon it until it is consumed.*And you will offer all of
this up as a sweet aroma which is acceptable before the LORD together with its Lev 3.11
(fruit) offering and its libation for a sweet odor, the bread of a burnt offering to
10 the LORD. »And eat its flesh on that day and in the second (day), but do not let
the sun of the second (day) set upon it until it is consumed. And do not let it
remain until the third day because it will not be acceptable since it was not chosen. Therefore, it will not be eaten. And all of those who eat it will raise up sin against
themselves. Because thus I have found written in the books of my forefathers and
11 in the words of Enoch and in the words of Noah.c #And you shall put salt in all
TLevi
9
of your offerings, and you shall not omit the salt of the covenant from any of
12 your offerings before the LORD. »And take caution with the wood of the offering TLevi 2:13
that you do not bring wood for the offering except of such as these: cypress, bay,
almond, fir, pine, cedar, juniper, fig, olive, myrtle, laurel, and asphalathos.d
21 a. The statement "and those who serve . . . on Jub. A. Hultgard has worked on the relationship
heart and spirit" is not found in Eth., but appears of these three documents most recently in his
in the Lat. text. The additional text provides a LEschatologie des Testaments des Douze Patri-
smoother reading. arches (Uppsala, Sweden, 1977) vol. 1, pp. 15-
b. The instructions which follow through vs. 20 44. He is probably correct in his opinion that Jub
concern the proper regulations for offering bloody is related to the other two documents through a
sacrifices. This portion of the text shares a number common source (pp. 24, 45). of parallel passages with two other texts: TLevi 9 c. In both TLevi (9:12) and the apocryphal
and fragments of an apocryphal work about Levi fragments (vs. 22), Isaac describes Abraham as the
which has survived in Gk., Syr., and Aram, authority for the proper knowledge which he gives
fragments.In both TLevi (9:12) and the apocryphal
and fragments of an apocryphal work about Levi fragments (vs. 22), Isaac describes Abraham as the
which has survived in Gk., Syr., and Aram, authority for the proper knowledge which he gives
fragments. Charles has published the latter as to Levi. In the case of Jub, however, Abraham is
Appendix IU in his volume entitled The Greek speaking. He claims that the authority is to be
Versions of the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs found in the books of Enoch and Noah. Cf. 7:38. (Oxford, 1908). d. Charles read the names of fourteen different
In both TLevi and the apocryphal fragments, the trees in his printed Eth. text and called attention
instructions for performing sacrifice are given to to the fact that Enoch speaks of fourteen evergreen
Levi by Isaac. In Jub, the instructions are given to trees in ch. 3. He also noted that there are fourteen
Isaac by Abraham. Since Levi is the central priestly trees listed in Geoponica XI. Subsequently, how­
figure in Jub just as he is in the other two texts, ever, he discovered the list of twelve trees in the
there is no reason to suspect that liturgical instruc­ fragmentary apocryphal work about Levi which he
tions given to him at some earlier stage in the published as Appendix III in The Greek Versions
development of these interrelated traditions would of the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs. The
subsequently be applied to Isaac. The converse is list contained in the fragmentary apocryphal work
much more likely. In other words, these instructions has been preserved in both Aram, and Gk. Charles
were probably intended for Isaac, as Jub reports, compared the Aram, and Gk. lists with the Eth. but were subsequently reinterpreted to apply to list in Jub and concluded that Jub also contained
Levi. just twelve trees.And you will become a blessing upon the earth, Gen 12:2
and all of the nations of the earth will desire you,
and they will bless your sons in my name,
so that they might be blessed just as I am. And he gave gifts to Ishmael and to his sons and to the sons of Keturah and he
sent them away from Isaac, his son, and he gave everything to Isaac, his son. And Ishmael and his sons and the sons of Keturah and their sons went together
and they dwelt from Paran to the entrance to Babylon in all of the land which
faces the east opposite the desert. *And these mixed with each other, and they
are callede Arabs or Ishmaelites. Abraham's farewell testimony for Isaac Gen 25:5,7
21 And in the sixth year of the seventh week of this jubilee Abraham called TLevi 9
Isaac, his son, and he commanded him, saying, "I am old and I do not know the Gen 27:2
appears to be a harsher form of death, may be text to agree with the Lat., which reads "direct
attributed to either the strictness of the community you aright," but in his subsequent translations he
to which the author belonged or to its priestly chose to follow the Eth. MSS. orientation. It might also be influenced by Judah's e. The reading "are called" is found in the Eth. example in Gen 38:24. MSS. Charles had emended the printed text to read
c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point "were joined" to agree with the Lat., but changed
and continues through 21:10a. his mind in subsequent translations and followed
d. The reading "be pleased with you" is found the Eth. MSS. in the Eth. MSS. Charles had emended the printed

but were subsequently reinterpreted to apply to list in Jub and concluded that Jub also contained
Levi. just twelve trees. It goes without saying that there
The fact that Jub preserves an earlier order of is a considerable amount of uncertainty in the final
speakers does not necessarily prove that Jub is list. The word translated as "olive" is clear. It is
earlier or that the other two accounts are dependent written with the familiar Eth. word for "olive."13 But place some of these trees under the burnt offering on the altar (with) their
appearance tested. And you will not place any split or dark wood, (but) wood
strong and pure which has no spots, perfect, and new growth. And you will not
place old wood (there) because its aroma has gone out because there is not,
14 therefore, an aroma upon it as before. 'Except for these trees, there is none other
that you will put on (the altar) because its aroma has separated and the smell of
is its aroma will go up to heaven. *Keep this commandment and do it, my son, so
16 that you might act uprightly in all of your deeds. *And at all of the (appointed)
times be pure in your body and wash yourself with water before you go to make
an offering upon the altar. And wash your hands and your feet before you approach
the altar. And when you have completed making the offering, wash your hands
n and feet again. #And let there not be seen any blood upon you or your garments. is Be careful, my son, be extremely careful of blood. Cover it in the earth. *And, Lev n:i3f. therefore, do not eat blood because it is life, and you shall not eat any blood. IQSJ^^U. 19 And do not accept gifts for any human blood lest it be poured out in vain, without
judgment, because it is blood which is poured out to cause sin for the earth. And
the earth is not able to be purified of human blood except by blood of one who Num 35:33
20 shed it. • And you shall not accept gifts or tribute for human blood—blood through
bloods—so that you may be accepted before the LORD God Most High, and he
will be the protector of the good, and so that you might guard yourself from all
evil, and so that he might save you from all death,
21 I see, my son,
every deed of mankind, that (they are) sins and evils;
and all of their deeds are defilement and corruption and contamination;
and there is no righteousness with them.And
the earth is not able to be purified of human blood except by blood of one who Num 35:33
20 shed it. • And you shall not accept gifts or tribute for human blood—blood through
bloods—so that you may be accepted before the LORD God Most High, and he
will be the protector of the good, and so that you might guard yourself from all
evil, and so that he might save you from all death,
21 I see, my son,
every deed of mankind, that (they are) sins and evils;
and all of their deeds are defilement and corruption and contamination;
and there is no righteousness with them. 22 Be careful not to walk in their ways,
and to tread in their* path,
or to cornmit a mortal sin before God Most High u 5:i6
n
so that he will hide his face from you,
and deliver you into the power of your sin,
and uproot you from the earth,
and your seed from beneath the sky,
and your name and seedf will perish from all the earth. 23 Turn yourself aside from all their deeds and from all their defilement;
and keep the commands of God Most High,
and perform his will, and act uprightly in all things.8
24 And he will bless you in all your deeds,
All of the other Eth. words in the list are translit­ named" was probably inserted to explain the strange
erations of Gk. spellings, some of which are word 'arbdt, which survived in the text. themselves transliterations of Semitic names. The e. Fragments of the Heb. text found at Qumran
word for "fig" is ultimately derived from Aram. begin at this point and are parallel to phrases found
ttnd'. The word that is translated "juniper" rep­ in vss. 22-24. resents the same tree which appears in the OT as f. The Eth. clearly reads "seed" at this point. birdshlbirdth. It is frequently translated as "fir," There is less certainty about the reading of the
but our list also includes the Gk. strobilos and Heb. parallel from Qumran. In "Fragment d'une
pitus, which have been rendered "fir" and "pine" source du Psautier (4QPs 89) et fragments des
respectively.but were subsequently reinterpreted to apply to list in Jub and concluded that Jub also contained
Levi. just twelve trees. It goes without saying that there
The fact that Jub preserves an earlier order of is a considerable amount of uncertainty in the final
speakers does not necessarily prove that Jub is list. The word translated as "olive" is clear. It is
earlier or that the other two accounts are dependent written with the familiar Eth. word for "olive."

parallel from Qumran. In "Fragment d'une
pitus, which have been rendered "fir" and "pine" source du Psautier (4QPs 89) et fragments des
respectively. The word for "almond" is ultimately Jubites, du Document de Damas, d'un phylactere
related to the Heb. word shoqed. The most severe dans la grotte 4 de Qumran," RB 73 (1966) 104,
corruption is found at the end of the Eth. list, Milik reads the Heb. as zkrk, "your memory,"
which reads "cedar which is named 'arbdt and instead of a parallel zr'k, "your seed." The picture
balsam." The word asphalathos is clearly written which appears on plate 9 in that article is not clear
at the end of the list of twelve trees in the Gk. MS enough to confirm either reading. If Milik's reading
of the fragmentary apocryphal text. Since the list proves to be correct, then the text should be altered
is derived from a source which it shares with Jub to read "your memory."
and since the Eth. word 'arbit makes little sense, g. The parallel fragment from Qumran shows
it is possible that the phrase " 'arbdt and balsam" signs of a dittography at this point. The writer
reflects a corrupted spelling of asphalathos, which apparently began with the phrase "and from all
was not understood. Subsequently it was broken their defilements" and repeated the text to this
up and reinterpreted to yield at least one intelligible point. word, "balsam." The phrase "cedar which is97 JUBILEES 22:12
and he will raise up from you a righteous plant in allh the earth throughout
all the generations of the earth;
and my name and your name shall not cease from beneath heaven forever. 25 Go, my son, in peace. May God Most High, my God, and your God strengthen
you to do his will, and may he bless all of your seed and the remnant of your
seed for eternal generations with all righteous blessing so that you might be a
26 blessing in all of the earth." »And he went out from him rejoicing. Abraham's celebration of the feast of firstfruits
1 22 And it came to pass in the first week of this forty-fourth jubilee in the second
year, that year in which Abraham died, that Isaac and Ishmael came from the
Well of the Oath to Abraham, their father, to observe the feast of Shebuot,8 which
is the feast of the firstfruits of the harvest. And Abraham rejoiced because both
2 of his children came,b •for Isaac had many possessions in Beer-sheba. And Isaac
used to go and inspect his possessions and return to his father. 3 And in those days Ishmael came to see his father. And both of them came
together, and Isaac slaughtered a sacrifice as a burnt offering and offered (it) up
4 upon the altar of his father which he built in Hebron. *And he sacrificed a thank
offering and made a feast of joy before Ishmael, his brother. And Rebecca made
new round cakes of new grain. And she gave them to Jacob, her son, to take to
Abraham, his father, from the firstfruits of the land so that he might eat and bless
5 the Creator of all before he died. «And Isaac also sent by the hand of Jacob a sir 24:8
6 good thank offering to Abraham so that he might eat and drink. *And he ate and 2Mac 1:24
drank and blessed God Most High who created heaven and earth and who made
all the fat of the earth and gave it to the sons of man so that they might eat and
7 drink and bless their Creator: •"And now I thank you, my God, because you have
let me see this day.«And Isaac also sent by the hand of Jacob a sir 24:8
6 good thank offering to Abraham so that he might eat and drink. *And he ate and 2Mac 1:24
drank and blessed God Most High who created heaven and earth and who made
all the fat of the earth and gave it to the sons of man so that they might eat and
7 drink and bless their Creator: •"And now I thank you, my God, because you have
let me see this day. Behold, I am one hundred and seventy-five years old, and
8 fulfilled in days. And all of my days were peaceful for me. •The sword of the Jer6:25
enemy did not triumph over me in anything which you gave to me or my sons all
9 of the days of my life until this day. »0 my God, may your mercy and your peace
be upon your servant and upon the seed of his sons so that they might become an
elect people for you and an inheritance from all of the nations of the earth from Deut 4:20
henceforth and for all the days of the generations of the earth forever."
Abraham's blessing for Jacob
10 And he called Jacob and said, "My son, Jacob, may the God of all bless you
and strengthen you to do righteousness and his will before him. And may he elect
you and your seed so that you become a people for him who always belong to
his inheritance according to his will. And you, my son, Jacob, draw near and kiss
11 me." *And he drew near and kissed him. And he said:
"Blessed is my son, Jacob, and all his sons,
unto the LORD, Most High, forever. Gen 14:19
May the LORD give you righteous seed,
and may he sanctify some of your sons in the midst of all the earth
May the nations serve you, Gen 27:29
and all the nations bow down before your seed. 12 Be strong before men;
and rulec over all the seed of Seth, Num 24:17
h. The word "all" may be lacking in the Qumran b. A portion of the surviving Lat. text begins at
parallel. It is a matter of judgment regarding the this point and continues to the last word of 22:19. number of Heb. letters needed to fill up a lacuna. c. The Eth.parallel from Qumran. In "Fragment d'une
pitus, which have been rendered "fir" and "pine" source du Psautier (4QPs 89) et fragments des
respectively. The word for "almond" is ultimately Jubites, du Document de Damas, d'un phylactere
related to the Heb. word shoqed. The most severe dans la grotte 4 de Qumran," RB 73 (1966) 104,
corruption is found at the end of the Eth. list, Milik reads the Heb. as zkrk, "your memory,"
which reads "cedar which is named 'arbdt and instead of a parallel zr'k, "your seed." The picture
balsam." The word asphalathos is clearly written which appears on plate 9 in that article is not clear
at the end of the list of twelve trees in the Gk. MS enough to confirm either reading. If Milik's reading
of the fragmentary apocryphal text. Since the list proves to be correct, then the text should be altered
is derived from a source which it shares with Jub to read "your memory."
and since the Eth. word 'arbit makes little sense, g. The parallel fragment from Qumran shows
it is possible that the phrase " 'arbdt and balsam" signs of a dittography at this point. The writer
reflects a corrupted spelling of asphalathos, which apparently began with the phrase "and from all
was not understood. Subsequently it was broken their defilements" and repeated the text to this
up and reinterpreted to yield at least one intelligible point. word, "balsam." The phrase "cedar which is

c. The Eth. text reads "while you rule." The
Lat. text has potestatem exerce. An imperative
22 a. Shabuot for this feast; see ch. 6, n. f. form of the Eth. verb seems preferable.c. The Eth. text reads "while you rule." The
Lat. text has potestatem exerce. An imperative
22 a. Shabuot for this feast; see ch. 6, n. f. form of the Eth. verb seems preferable.

then may your ways be righteous, and the ways of your sons,
in order to be a holy people.
13 May the Most High God give you all the blessings
(with) which he blessed me,
and (with) which he blessed Noah and Adam;
may they rest upon the holy head of your seed throughout each generation
and forever.
M May he cleanse you from all sin and defilement,
so that he might forgive all your transgressions, and your erring through
ignorance.
May he strengthen you and bless you,
and may you inherit all of the earth,
is And may he renew his covenant with you,
so that you might be a people for him, belonging to his inheritance forever.
And he will be God for you and for your seed in truth and righteousness
throughout all the days of the earth.
16 And you also, my son, Jacob, remember my words,
and keep the commandments of Abraham, your father.
Separate yourself from the gentiles, isa 52:ii
and do not eat with them,d
and do not perform deeds like theirs.
And do not become associates of theirs.
Because their deeds are defiled,
and all of their ways are contaminated, and despicable, and abominable.
17 They slaughter their sacrifices to the dead, Deut 26:14
and to the demons they bow down. 106:28
And they eat in tombs.e
And all their deeds are worthless and vain,
is And they have no heart to perceive,
and they have no eyes to see what their deeds are,
and where they wander astray,
saying to the tree 4you are my god,'
and to a stone 'you are my lord, and you are my savior';
and they have no heart/
19 But (as for) you, my son, Jacob,
may God Most High help you,
and the God of heaven bless you.
And may he turn you from their defilement,
and from all their errors.
20 Be careful, my son, Jacob, that you do not take a wife from any of the Gen 28:i
seed of the daughters of Canaan,
because all of his seed is (destined) for uprooting from the earth;
21 because through the sin of Ham, Canaan sinned,
and all of his seed will be blotted out from the earth,
and all his remnant,
and there is none of his who will be saved.
22 And for all of those who worship idols and for the hated ones,
there is no hope in the land of the living;
because they will go down into Sheol. iEn io3:7f.
And in the place of judgment they will walk,
d. The implication is that the food prepared by be consumed in the tombs. For a wide-ranging
the gentiles would not be prepared in accord with recent discussion see M. Pope, Song of Songs
Jewish laws of purity. The issue became particularly (Garden City, N.Y., 1977) pp. 210-29.
acute in the writer's own time in light of the fact f. The phrase "and they have no heart" was
that servants of Antiochus IV tried to force Jews considered by Charles to be a dittography based
to eat impure food such as pork. Cf. IMac l:47f.; on the opening phrase in vs. 18, but it is found in
62f.;2Mac 6:18-21; 7:1. both Lat. and Eth. texts.
e. Sacrificial offerings to or for the dead wouldand they will have no memory upon the earth.*
Just as the sons of Sodom were taken from the earth,
so (too) all of those who worship idols shall be taken away. 23 Do not fear, my son, Jacob,
and do not be in terror, O son of Abraham. The Most High God shall protect you from destruction,
and from all the ways of error he will deliver you. 24 This house I have built for myself so that I might cause my name to dwell upon
it in the land. It has been given to you and to your seed forever.h And it will be
called the house of Abraham and will be given to you and to your seed forever
because you will build my house, and you will raise up my name before God
forever. Your seed and your name will remain in all the earth's generations."
A second blessing for Jacob
25.26 And he ceased commanding him and blessing him. *And both of them lay down
together on one bed. And Jacob slept on the bosom of Abraham, his father's
father. And he1 kissed him seven (times), and his compassionate heart1 rejoiced
27 over him, *and he blessed him with all his heart and he said, "God Most High Neh9:6f. (is) the God of all, and Creator of all who brought me out from Ur of the Chaldees Gen 15.7
so that he might give me this land to inherit it forever and to raise up a holy seed
28 so that the Most High may be blessed forever." »And he blessed Jacob, saying,
"My son (is) one in whom I rejoice with all my heart and all my emotion. And
29 may your favor and your mercy rest upon him and upon his seed always. #And
do not forsake him and neglect him henceforth and for the eternal days. And may iKgs 8:29,52
your eyes be open upon him and upon his seed so that you might protect him and Sll 9*8
30 bless him and sanctify him for a people who belong to your heritage. *And bless
him with all of your blessings henceforth and for all of the eternal days. And
renew your covenant and your mercy with him and with his seed with all your
will in all of the earth's generations."
The death and burial of Abraham Gen 2SM.*And bless
him with all of your blessings henceforth and for all of the eternal days. And
renew your covenant and your mercy with him and with his seed with all your
will in all of the earth's generations."
The death and burial of Abraham Gen 2SM. 1 23 And he placed the two fingers of Jacob on his eyes and he blessed the God Gen 46:4
of gods. And he covered his face, and stretched out his feet and slept the eternal Gen 49:33
2 sleep, and he was gathered to his fathers. • During all of this (time) Jacob was Judg 2:10
lying on his bosom and did not know that Abraham, his grandfather, was dead. 3 And Jacob awoke from his sleep and, behold, Abraham was cold as ice, and he
said, "O father, father!" And none spoke. And he knew that he was dead. 4 And he rose up from his bosom and ran and told Rebecca, his mother. And
Rebecca went to Isaac in the night and told him. And they went together and
Jacob was also with them, and a lamp was in his hand. And when they went,
5 they found Abraham lying dead. *And Isaac fell upon his father's face and wept
6 and kissed him. #And the sound was8 heard in Abraham's house and Ishmael, his
son, arose and went to Abraham, his father. And he wept for Abraham, his father,
7 he and allb of Abraham's house, and they wept greatly. »And his sons, Isaac and
g. In his English translation, Charles rearranged 23 a. One of the fragments of the Heb. text found
11. 2-5 of this vs. so that 1. 5 followed immediately at Qumran (3Q5 F.3) begins at this point and
after 1. 2, with which it forms an exact parallel. continues through vs. 7a. The present translation simply follows the order of b. It is possible that the Qumran fragment differs
the Eth. text. at this point, but the script is difficult to read. h. The phrase 4'It has been given . . . seed VanderKam has restored yn)sy. "(me)n," in the
forever" is repeated with a slight variation again Heb. text (Textual and Historical Studies, p. 62). in the same vs.then may your ways be righteous, and the ways of your sons,
in order to be a holy people.
13 May the Most High God give you all the blessings
(with) which he blessed me,
and (with) which he blessed Noah and Adam;
may they rest upon the holy head of your seed throughout each generation
and forever.
M May he cleanse you from all sin and defilement,
so that he might forgive all your transgressions, and your erring through
ignorance.
May he strengthen you and bless you,
and may you inherit all of the earth,
is And may he renew his covenant with you,
so that you might be a people for him, belonging to his inheritance forever.
And he will be God for you and for your seed in truth and righteousness
throughout all the days of the earth.
16 And you also, my son, Jacob, remember my words,
and keep the commandments of Abraham, your father.
Separate yourself from the gentiles, isa 52:ii
and do not eat with them,d
and do not perform deeds like theirs.
And do not become associates of theirs.
Because their deeds are defiled,
and all of their ways are contaminated, and despicable, and abominable.
17 They slaughter their sacrifices to the dead, Deut 26:14
and to the demons they bow down. 106:28
And they eat in tombs.e
And all their deeds are worthless and vain,
is And they have no heart to perceive,
and they have no eyes to see what their deeds are,
and where they wander astray,
saying to the tree 4you are my god,'
and to a stone 'you are my lord, and you are my savior';
and they have no heart/
19 But (as for) you, my son, Jacob,
may God Most High help you,
and the God of heaven bless you.
And may he turn you from their defilement,
and from all their errors.
20 Be careful, my son, Jacob, that you do not take a wife from any of the Gen 28:i
seed of the daughters of Canaan,
because all of his seed is (destined) for uprooting from the earth;
21 because through the sin of Ham, Canaan sinned,
and all of his seed will be blotted out from the earth,
and all his remnant,
and there is none of his who will be saved.
22 And for all of those who worship idols and for the hated ones,
there is no hope in the land of the living;
because they will go down into Sheol. iEn io3:7f.
And in the place of judgment they will walk,
d. The implication is that the food prepared by be consumed in the tombs. For a wide-ranging
the gentiles would not be prepared in accord with recent discussion see M. Pope, Song of Songs
Jewish laws of purity. The issue became particularly (Garden City, N.Y., 1977) pp. 210-29.
acute in the writer's own time in light of the fact f. The phrase "and they have no heart" was
that servants of Antiochus IV tried to force Jews considered by Charles to be a dittography based
to eat impure food such as pork. Cf. IMac l:47f.; on the opening phrase in vs. 18, but it is found in
62f.;2Mac 6:18-21; 7:1. both Lat. and Eth. texts.
e. Sacrificial offerings to or for the dead would

62). in the same vs. The repetition is cumbersome and That would mean that the earliest text read "all of
probably due to dittography. the men of Abraham's house." Since the text is
i. Abraham kissed Jacob. difficult to read at that point, VanderKam does not
j. Lit. "his mercy and his heart." seriously press the case for his reading.Ishmael, buried him in the cave of Macnpelahc near Sarah, his wife.d And all of
the men of his house and Isaac and Ishmael and all of their sons and all of the
sons of Keturah wept for him forty days in their places. And the daysc of
Abraham's weeping were completed. A discussion of the general decline in longevity Gen 25:8
8 And he lived three jubilees and four weeks of years/ one hundred and seventy-
9 five years. And he completed the days of his life, being old and full of days. •For8
the days of the lives of the ancients were nineteen jubilees. And after the Flood
they began to be less than nineteen jubilees and to grow old quickly and to shorten
the days of their lives due to much suffering and through the evil of their ways—
10 except Abraham. #For Abraham was perfect in all of his actions with the
LORD and was pleasing through righteousness all of the days of his life. And
behold, heh did not complete four jubilees in his life until he grew old in the
presence of evil (and) his days were full. 11 Arid all of the generations which will arise henceforth and until the day of the CD io.8f. great judgment will grow old quickly before they complete two jubilees, and their
knowledge will forsake them because of their old age/ And all of their knowledge
12 will be removedJ • And in those days if a man will live a jubilee and a half, theyk
will say about him, "He prolonged his life, but the majority of his days were
13 suffering and anxiety and affliction. And there was no peace, 'because plague Ps90:io
(came) upon plague, and wound upon wound, and affliction upon affliction, and
evil report upon evil report, and sickness upon sickness, and every evil judgment
of this sort one with another: sickness, and downfall, and sleet, and hail, and
frost, and fever, and chills, and stupor, and famine, and death, and sword, and
captivity, and all plagues, and suffering."
14 And all of this will come in the evil generation which sins in the land.great judgment will grow old quickly before they complete two jubilees, and their
knowledge will forsake them because of their old age/ And all of their knowledge
12 will be removedJ • And in those days if a man will live a jubilee and a half, theyk
will say about him, "He prolonged his life, but the majority of his days were
13 suffering and anxiety and affliction. And there was no peace, 'because plague Ps90:io
(came) upon plague, and wound upon wound, and affliction upon affliction, and
evil report upon evil report, and sickness upon sickness, and every evil judgment
of this sort one with another: sickness, and downfall, and sleet, and hail, and
frost, and fever, and chills, and stupor, and famine, and death, and sword, and
captivity, and all plagues, and suffering."
14 And all of this will come in the evil generation which sins in the land. Pollution
15 and fornication and contamination and abomination are their deeds. 'Then they
will say, 4The days of the ancients were as many as one thousand years and
good. But behold, (as for) the days of our lives, if a man should extend his life
seventy years or if he is strong (for) eighty years, then these are evil. And there Ps90:io
is not any peace in the days of this evil generation."
c. Another fragment of Heb. text (2Q19) begins the writer's view of his own age. G. L. Davenport
at this point. It overlaps the preceding fragment has made a careful study of this passage in his
(3Q5 F.3) on one word, i.e. mkplh, "Machpelah." volume The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees
The Eth. text contains a word meaning "double," (Leiden, 1971). See especially pp. 32-40 and the
which is simply a translation of "Machpelah," but extensive footnotes on pp. 32f., where he attempts
since the Heb. original clearly contained the form to discern the structure of the passage in relation
which is most familiar to readers of the Bible, we to surrounding material. have restored it. h. M. Baillet suggested that the Qumran frag­
The two Heb.62). in the same vs. The repetition is cumbersome and That would mean that the earliest text read "all of
probably due to dittography. the men of Abraham's house." Since the text is
i. Abraham kissed Jacob. difficult to read at that point, VanderKam does not
j. Lit. "his mercy and his heart." seriously press the case for his reading.

M. Baillet suggested that the Qumran frag­
The two Heb. fragments also provide evidence ment (3Q5 F.4) was to be identified with this
for changing the order of words in the Eth. text in portion of the text of Jub. In his "Remarques sur
this vs., but that change of word order in Eth. le manuscript du Livre des Jubiles de la grotte 3
would not be reflected in the English translation. de Qumran," RQ 5 (1964-66) 323-33, he recon­
d. VanderKam has argued rather convincingly structed a phrase which reads "(behol)d he did not
that the lacuna in the Heb. MS (2Q19) at this point complete." VanderKam has challenged the reading
indicates that the Heb. text had a fuller reading of the line and its appropriateness at this point in
than the one preserved in Eth. (Textual and His­ Jub (Textual and Historical Studies, pp. 100f.); his
torical Studies, p. 66). Nevertheless, what might judgment seems justified. have been in the additional text (approximately i. This is the reading of the Eth. MSS. Charles
twenty-two letters) is anyone's guess. followed the MSS in preparing his own translation,
e. Charles restored the word "days" on the but he had earlier emended the Eth. text to read
basis of Gen 50:4. His MSS B D read "the grief "because of their spirits" to agree with the Lat. of Abraham's weeping." text. f. The parallel Lat. text begins again at this j. The last sentence in vs. 11 does not appear
point and continues through 23:23a. in the Lat. text. Charles judged that the Eth. reading
g. An important digression from the continuing was due to ductography. account of the patriarchs begins here and runs to k. There is a Heb. fragment from Qumran (3Q5
the end of the ch. This is one of the main passages F. 1) which begins at this point. to be investigated by anyone wishing to discoverThe description of the future evil generation
16 And in this generation children will reproach their parents and their elders on iEn 9o-.6f. account of sin, and on account of injustice, and on account of the words of their
mouth, and on account of great evil which they will do, and on account of their
forsaking the covenant which the LORD made between them and himself so that Dan 11:30
they might be careful and observe all of his commandments and his ordinances Dew5:3if. 17 and all of his law without turning aside to the right or left. #For they all did evil
and every mouth speaks of sin and all of their deeds (are) polluted and abominable. iMac i:52f. And all of their ways (are) contamination and pollution and corruption,
is Behold, the land will be corrupted on account of all their deeds, and there will
be no seed of the vine, and there will be no oil because their works are entirely
faithless. And all of them will be destroyed together: beast, cattle, birds, and all Hos 4:3
19 of the fish of the sea on account of the sons of man. •Some of these will strive ieplnfj20
with others, youths with old men and old men with youths, the poor with the
rich, the lowly with the great, and the beggar with the judge concerning the Law
and the Covenant because they have forgotten the commandments and covenant
and festivals and months and sabbaths and jubilees and all of the judgments. 20 And they will stand up with bow and1 swords and war in order to return them to
"the way," but they will not be returned until much blood is shed upon the earth
21 by each (group). »And those who escape will not be turned back from their evils
to the way of righteousness because they will lift themselves up for deceit and
wealth so that one shall take everything of his neighbor; and they will pronounce
the great name but not in truth or righteousness. And they will pollute the holy
of holies with their pollution and with the corruption of their contamination.»And those who escape will not be turned back from their evils
to the way of righteousness because they will lift themselves up for deceit and
wealth so that one shall take everything of his neighbor; and they will pronounce
the great name but not in truth or righteousness. And they will pollute the holy
of holies with their pollution and with the corruption of their contamination. Punishment on that generation followed by repentance and God's blessings
22 And there will be a great plague upon the deeds of that generation from the
LORD and he will give them to the sword and to judgment and to captivity and
23 pillage and destruction. «And he will rouse up against them the sinners of the Ezek 9:6
nations who have no mercy"1 or grace for them and who have no regard for any
persons old or young or anyone. For (they will be) cruel and powerful so that
they will act more evilly than any of the sons of men. And they will cause turmoil in Israel and sin against Jacob;
and much blood will be shed upon the earth;"
and there will be no one who will gather and no one who will bury. Jer 8:2
24 In those days, they will cry out and call and pray
to be saved from the hand of the sinners, the gentiles, Gai 2:15
but there will be none who will be saved,
25 and the heads of children will be white with gray hairs,
and an infant three weeks old will look aged
like one whose years (are) one hundred,
and their stature will be destroyed by affliction and torment. 26 And in those days, children will begin to search the law,
and to search the commandments
and to return to the way of righteousness. 27 And the days will begin to increase and grow longer
1. The phrase "with bow and" is found only in did not match the text of Jub at this point. the Lat. MS. n. In his work on The Eschatology of the Book
m. There is a Heb. fragment from Qumran (3Q5 of Jubilees, Davenport gathered together a selected
F.3) which contains the Heb.M. Baillet suggested that the Qumran frag­
The two Heb. fragments also provide evidence ment (3Q5 F.4) was to be identified with this
for changing the order of words in the Eth. text in portion of the text of Jub. In his "Remarques sur
this vs., but that change of word order in Eth. le manuscript du Livre des Jubiles de la grotte 3
would not be reflected in the English translation. de Qumran," RQ 5 (1964-66) 323-33, he recon­
d. VanderKam has argued rather convincingly structed a phrase which reads "(behol)d he did not
that the lacuna in the Heb. MS (2Q19) at this point complete." VanderKam has challenged the reading
indicates that the Heb. text had a fuller reading of the line and its appropriateness at this point in
than the one preserved in Eth. (Textual and His­ Jub (Textual and Historical Studies, pp. 100f.); his
torical Studies, p. 66). Nevertheless, what might judgment seems justified. have been in the additional text (approximately i. This is the reading of the Eth. MSS. Charles
twenty-two letters) is anyone's guess. followed the MSS in preparing his own translation,
e. Charles restored the word "days" on the but he had earlier emended the Eth. text to read
basis of Gen 50:4. His MSS B D read "the grief "because of their spirits" to agree with the Lat. of Abraham's weeping." text. f. The parallel Lat. text begins again at this j. The last sentence in vs. 11 does not appear
point and continues through 23:23a. in the Lat. text. Charles judged that the Eth. reading
g. An important digression from the continuing was due to ductography. account of the patriarchs begins here and runs to k. There is a Heb. fragment from Qumran (3Q5
the end of the ch. This is one of the main passages F. 1) which begins at this point. to be investigated by anyone wishing to discover

There is a Heb. fragment from Qumran (3Q5 of Jubilees, Davenport gathered together a selected
F.3) which contains the Heb. word for "mercy." list of authors who describe the "messianic woes"
A. Rofe (Tarbiz, 34 [1965] 333-36) proposed that similar to those depicted in the following lines. He
the passage matched the text of Jub at this point. rightly objects to the adjective "messianic," but
VanderKam (Textual and Historical Studies, pp. the type of literature is widely known (cf. especially
60-65) has argued convincingly that the Heb. text p. 37).among those sons of men, generation by generation,
and year by year, until
their days approach a thousand years,
and to a greater number of years than days. And there (will be) no old men and none who is full of days.0 isa 6S:20
Because all of them will be infants and children. And all of their days they will be complete
and live in peace and rejoicing
and there will be no Satan and no evil (one) who will destroy, AsMos io-.i
because all of their days will be days of blessing and healing. And then the LORD will heal his servants,
and they will rise up and see great peace. And they will drive out their enemies,
and the righteous ones will see and give praise,
and rejoice forever and ever with joy;
and they will see all of their judgments and all of their curses among their
enemies. And their bones will rest in the earth, iEn 9i:io 92:3
;
and their spirits will increase joy,P
and they will know that the LORD is an executor of judgment;
but he will show mercy to hundreds and thousands,
to all who love him. And you, Moses, write these words because thus it is written and set upon the
heavenly tablets as a testimony for eternal generations. Jacob buys the right of firstborn from Esau
Gen 25:11,27-34
24 And it happened after the death of Abraham that the LORD blessed Isaac,
his son. And he arose from Hebron and went to the Well of the Vision8 in the Gen i6:u
first year of the third week of this jubilee, and he lived there seven years. And in the first year of the fourth week a famine began in the land other than Gen 26:1
the first famine which occurred in the days of Abraham. #And Jacob was cooking
lentil soup, and Esau came in from the field hungry, and he said to Jacob, his
brother, "Give me some of this reddish-coloredb soup." And Jacob said to him,
"Hand over your primogeniture (i.e.) this right of firstborn, and I will give you
bread and also some of this lentil soup." #And Esau thought, "I will die.There is a Heb. fragment from Qumran (3Q5 of Jubilees, Davenport gathered together a selected
F.3) which contains the Heb. word for "mercy." list of authors who describe the "messianic woes"
A. Rofe (Tarbiz, 34 [1965] 333-36) proposed that similar to those depicted in the following lines. He
the passage matched the text of Jub at this point. rightly objects to the adjective "messianic," but
VanderKam (Textual and Historical Studies, pp. the type of literature is widely known (cf. especially
60-65) has argued convincingly that the Heb. text p. 37).

And in the first year of the fourth week a famine began in the land other than Gen 26:1
the first famine which occurred in the days of Abraham. #And Jacob was cooking
lentil soup, and Esau came in from the field hungry, and he said to Jacob, his
brother, "Give me some of this reddish-coloredb soup." And Jacob said to him,
"Hand over your primogeniture (i.e.) this right of firstborn, and I will give you
bread and also some of this lentil soup." #And Esau thought, "I will die. Of what
use is this right of firstborn to me?" And he said to Jacob, "I give it (to) you."
And Jacob said, "Swear to me today." And he swore for him. *And Jacob gave
his brother, Esau, bread and soup. And he ate until he was satisfied. And Esau
despised his right of firstborn. Therefore, Esau's name was called Edom,c on
account of the reddish-colored soup which Jacob gave him for his right of firstborn. And Jacob became the older one but Esau was lowered from his seniority. o. Reading with the MSS, Charles inserted a contented with God's certain vindication of the
negative in his text to suggest there were none righteous. "whose days would not be full." As VanderKam
has pointed out, the negative is not needed (Textual 24 a. The Well of the Vision is the biblical Beer
and Historical Studies, p. 269). Lahai-roi. See Gen 16:13f. p. This vs. is subject to two quite different b. The Eth. text has "wheat soup," but Charles
interpretations. It could be understood as a descrip­ has pointed out that the word for wheat arose in
tion of spirits which remain conscious and aware the Gk. MS tradition where puros, "wheat,"
of postmortem events while their bones rest in resulted from a misspelling of purros, "red, red­
peace. It could also be understood as an example dish."
of poetic hyperbole, describing those who die with c. A name formed from the Heb. root meaning
assurance that justice has been done. They are red. portrayed as joyous dead who lie in the earthIsaac's sojourn at Gerar Gen 26:1-5
g And there was a famine upon the earth, and Isaac started to go down to Egypt
in the second year of this week and he went to the Philistine king at Gerar, to
9 Abimelek. *And the LORD appeared to him and he said to him, 44 Do not go
down to Egypt. Dwell in the land where I shall tell you. And sojourn in that land. 10 And I shall be with you and bless you • because I will give all of this land to you
and to your seed. And I will carry out my oath which I swore to Abraham, your
father. And I will multiply your seed as the stars of the sky. And I will give to
11 your seed all of this land. *And all of the nations of the earth will bless themselves
by your seed because your father obeyed me and observed my restrictions and my
commandments and my laws and my ordinances and my covenant. And now,
12 obey my voice, and dwell in this land." #And he dwelt at Gerar three weeks of
13 years.d »And Abimelek gave orders concerning him and everything which was
his, saying, 44 Any man who touches him or anything which is his let him surely Gen 26:11
die."
An account of the wells dug by Jacob from Gerar to Beer-sheba Gen 26:12-33
14 And Jacob grew prosperous among the Philistines and had many possessions:
is oxen, and sheep, and camels, and asses, and much property.e *And he sowed in
the land of the Philistines, and he raised grain one hundredfold. And Isaac became
16 very wealthy, and the Philistines became jealous of him. »And all of the wells
which the servants of Abraham dug during Abraham's lifetime the Philistines
17 stopped up and filled them with dirt after Abraham's death. »And Abimelek said
to Isaac, 44Go away from us because you are much greater than we."
And Isaac went away from there in the first year of the seventh week. And he
is sojourned in the valleys of Gerar, »and they dug again the wells of water which
the servants of Abraham, his father, had dug—and the Philistines stopped them
up after the death of Abraham, his father.»And Abimelek said
to Isaac, 44Go away from us because you are much greater than we."
And Isaac went away from there in the first year of the seventh week. And he
is sojourned in the valleys of Gerar, »and they dug again the wells of water which
the servants of Abraham, his father, had dug—and the Philistines stopped them
up after the death of Abraham, his father. And he named them just as his father,
19 Abraham, had named them. »And the servants of Isaac dug wells in the valley,
and they found running water. And the shepherds of Gerar became angry with
the shepherds of Jacob, saying, 44The water is ours." And Isaac named that well
4'Harshness," because they had been harsh with us. 20 And they dug another well and they also contended about it. And he named it
4'Hostility." And he rose from there, and they dug another well, but they were
not angered about that, and he called it 4'Breadth," and Isaac said, 44Now the
LORD has made wide (a place) for us. And we have increased in the land."
21 And he went up from there to the Well of the Oath in the first year of the first
22 week in the forty-fourth jubilee. »And the LORD appeared to him during that
night, on the new moon of the first month, and he said to him, 44I am the God of
Abraham, your father. Do not fear, because I am with you and I shall bless you
and I shall surely multiply your seed like the sand of the earth because of Abraham,
23 my servant." #And he built an altar there where Abraham, his father, had built
at first and called upon the name of the LORD and he offered a sacrifice to the
God of Abraham, his father. 24,25 And they dug a well and found running water. *But the servants of Isaac dug
another well and did not find water. And they went and told Isaac that they did
not find water. And Isaac said, 44I have sworn (an oath) on this day to the
26 Philistines.And in the first year of the fourth week a famine began in the land other than Gen 26:1
the first famine which occurred in the days of Abraham. #And Jacob was cooking
lentil soup, and Esau came in from the field hungry, and he said to Jacob, his
brother, "Give me some of this reddish-coloredb soup." And Jacob said to him,
"Hand over your primogeniture (i.e.) this right of firstborn, and I will give you
bread and also some of this lentil soup." #And Esau thought, "I will die. Of what
use is this right of firstborn to me?" And he said to Jacob, "I give it (to) you."
And Jacob said, "Swear to me today." And he swore for him. *And Jacob gave
his brother, Esau, bread and soup. And he ate until he was satisfied. And Esau
despised his right of firstborn. Therefore, Esau's name was called Edom,c on
account of the reddish-colored soup which Jacob gave him for his right of firstborn. And Jacob became the older one but Esau was lowered from his seniority. o. Reading with the MSS, Charles inserted a contented with God's certain vindication of the
negative in his text to suggest there were none righteous. "whose days would not be full." As VanderKam
has pointed out, the negative is not needed (Textual 24 a. The Well of the Vision is the biblical Beer
and Historical Studies, p. 269). Lahai-roi. See Gen 16:13f. p. This vs. is subject to two quite different b. The Eth. text has "wheat soup," but Charles
interpretations. It could be understood as a descrip­ has pointed out that the word for wheat arose in
tion of spirits which remain conscious and aware the Gk. MS tradition where puros, "wheat,"
of postmortem events while their bones rest in resulted from a misspelling of purros, "red, red­
peace. It could also be understood as an example dish."
of poetic hyperbole, describing those who die with c. A name formed from the Heb. root meaning
assurance that justice has been done. They are red. portrayed as joyous dead who lie in the earth

And they went and told Isaac that they did
not find water. And Isaac said, 44I have sworn (an oath) on this day to the
26 Philistines. And this thing has happened to us." #And he named that place 44the
Well of the Oath," because he swore an oath there to Abimelek and to 'Ahuzzat,
his friend, and to Phicol, the commander of his army. d. The Lat. text resumes at this point and great (household) staff," which agrees with the
continues through 25: la. Heb. of Gen 26:14. e. The Lat. text has ministerium magnum, "aIsaac curses the Philistines
27 And Isaac knew on that day that under pressure he swore an oath to them to
28 make peace with them. • And Isaac cursed the Philistines on that day, and he said,
4'Cursed be the Philistinesf for the day of wrath and anger from among all the
nations. May the LORD make them as scorn and a curse and (the object of) wrath
and anger at the hands of the sinners, the nations, and in the hands of the Kittim. 29 And whoever escapes from the sword of the enemy and from the Kittim, may Dan 11.30
the righteous people uproot them from beneath the sky with judgment, because MLM-I; 8:5
they will be enemies and foes to my sons in their generations upon the earth. 30 And no remnant will be left to them,
nor one who escapes on the day of the wrath of judgment;
because all of the Philistine seed is (destined) for destruction and uprooting
and removal from the earth. And, therefore, there will not be any name or seed which remains upon Amos 9:7
the earth for any of8 the Caphtorim. ^2:23
31 Because if they go up to heaven, from there they will fall;
and if they are set firm inh the earth, from there they will be torn out;
and if they are hidden among the nations, from there they will be uprooted; Amos 9:2-4
and if they go down to Sheol, even there their judgment will multiply, ft l39:8f
and also there will be no peace for them there. 32 And if they go into captivity by the hand of those who seek their life, they
will kill them along the way. And neither name nor seed will be left for them in all the earth,
because they shall walk in an eternal curse."
33 And thus it is written and engraved concerning him in the heavenly tablets to
be done to him in the day of judgment so that they might be uprooted from the
earth.32 And if they go into captivity by the hand of those who seek their life, they
will kill them along the way. And neither name nor seed will be left for them in all the earth,
because they shall walk in an eternal curse."
33 And thus it is written and engraved concerning him in the heavenly tablets to
be done to him in the day of judgment so that they might be uprooted from the
earth. Rebecca gives instruction to Jacob regarding marriage
1 25 In the second year of this week, in this jubilee, Rebecca called Jacob, her
son, and spoke to him, saying, "My son, do not take for yourself a wife from Gen28:i
the daughters of Canaan as (did) Esau your brother, who took for himself two
wives from the daughters of Canaan. And they have embittered my soul with all Gen 27:46
their impure deeds, because all of their deeds (are) fornication and lust. And there 00,126:35
2 is not any righteousness with them because (their deeds are) evil. • And I love you
very much, my son. And my heart and affection bless you at every hour of the
3 day and (every) watch of the night. -And now, my son, heed my voice, and do Gen 28:if. the will of your mother. And do not take for yourself a wife from the daughters
of this land, but from my father's house and my father's kin. You will take for
yourself a wife from my father's house. And the Most High God will bless you,
and your children will be a righteous generation and a holy seed."
f. This cursing of the Philistines is not part of h. The Lat. text reads "and where he flees."
the biblical tradition. It reflects the writer's attitude The text in vs. 31 is obviously dependent on Amos
with respect to the contemporary inhabitants of the 9:2-4. The writer may have been attracted to that
area regarded as Philistia. The Philistines are not passage because of the somewhat confusing refer­
to be defeated by the Jews in the first instance, but ence to the "way of Beer-sheba" in 8:14. In the
by the Kittim.And they went and told Isaac that they did
not find water. And Isaac said, 44I have sworn (an oath) on this day to the
26 Philistines. And this thing has happened to us." #And he named that place 44the
Well of the Oath," because he swore an oath there to Abimelek and to 'Ahuzzat,
his friend, and to Phicol, the commander of his army. d. The Lat. text resumes at this point and great (household) staff," which agrees with the
continues through 25: la. Heb. of Gen 26:14. e. The Lat. text has ministerium magnum, "a

The Philistines are not passage because of the somewhat confusing refer­
to be defeated by the Jews in the first instance, but ence to the "way of Beer-sheba" in 8:14. In the
by the Kittim. The identity of the Kittim is still a present text, Jacob is portrayed as cursing the
subject of debate. See J. C. Greenfield, "Kittim," Philistines in Beer-sheba after having made his way
in IDB. vol. 3, p. 40f., and Davenport's discussion there through Philistine territory. Although there is
in The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees (p. 56). no description of the patriarch Jacob cursing the
g. Charles emended the text to read "for these Philistines, Amos 8:14 does provide a biblical basis
Caphtorium" with the Lat. text, but the Eth. MSS of sorts for cursing those who live in that area. read "all Caphtorim."Jacob's response
4 And then Jacob spoke with Rebecca, his mother, and said to her, "Behold, O
mother, I am nine weeks of years old. And I have not known or touched or been
betrothed to any woman. Nor have I been thinking about taking for myself a wife
5 from the daughters of Canaan, •because I recall, 6 mother, the words of Abraham,
our father. For he commanded me that I should not take a wife from the daughters
of Canaan because I should take for myself a wife from the seed of my father's
6 house and from my (own) kin. *I heard some time ago that daughters had been
born to your brother, Laban. And I have set my heart upon them that I might take
7 a wife from among them. »And, therefore, I have guarded myself in my soul lest
I sin or be corrupted in any of my ways all the days of my life because my father,
8 Abraham, gave me many commands regarding lust and fornication. *In spite of
everything which he commanded me, for these twenty-two years my brother has
contended with me and he frequently spoke with me and said, 4My brother, take
as a wife one of the sisters of my two wives.' But I did not desire to do as he
9 had done. #I swear, O mother, before you all the days of my life, that I will not
take for myself a wife from the daughters of the seed of Canaan and I will not
10 act wickedly as my brother has done. #Do not fear, O mother. Trust that I will
do your will. And I will walk uprightly and will never corrupt my ways."
Rebecca's blessing for Jacob
11 And then she lifted her face toward heaven and spread out the fingers of her
hands8 and opened her mouth and blessed the Most High God who created heaven
12 and earth. And she gave to him glory and praise. #And she said, "May the LORD
God be blessed, and may his holy name be blessed forever and ever, he who gave
to me Jacob, a pure son and a holy seed; because he is yours and his seed will
13 (belong) to you for all times and in all generations forever.The Philistines are not passage because of the somewhat confusing refer­
to be defeated by the Jews in the first instance, but ence to the "way of Beer-sheba" in 8:14. In the
by the Kittim. The identity of the Kittim is still a present text, Jacob is portrayed as cursing the
subject of debate. See J. C. Greenfield, "Kittim," Philistines in Beer-sheba after having made his way
in IDB. vol. 3, p. 40f., and Davenport's discussion there through Philistine territory. Although there is
in The Eschatology of the Book of Jubilees (p. 56). no description of the patriarch Jacob cursing the
g. Charles emended the text to read "for these Philistines, Amos 8:14 does provide a biblical basis
Caphtorium" with the Lat. text, but the Eth. MSS of sorts for cursing those who live in that area. read "all Caphtorim."

And she gave to him glory and praise. #And she said, "May the LORD
God be blessed, and may his holy name be blessed forever and ever, he who gave
to me Jacob, a pure son and a holy seed; because he is yours and his seed will
13 (belong) to you for all times and in all generations forever. *0 LORD, bless him
14 and place in my mouth a righteous blessing so that I might bless him." «And at Jn i4:i7
that time, when a spirit of truthb descended upon her mouth, she placed her two
hands upon the head of Jacob and said:
15 "Blessed are you, O LORD of righteousness and God of Ages;
and may he bless you more than all the generations of man. May he grant to you the way of righteousness, my son;
and to your seed, may he reveal righteousness. 16 May he multiply your sons in your life(time);
may they rise up according to the number of the months of the year. And may their sons be more numerous and greater than the stars of heaven;
and more than the sand of the sea, may their number increase. 17 And may he give to them this pleasant land,
just as he said that he would give it to Abraham and his seed after him
always;
and may they hold it (as a) possession forever,
is And may I see, O my son, that you shall have blessed sons in my lifetime;
and a blessed and holy seed, may all your seed be. 19 And just as you have given rest to your mother's soul in her lifetime;
the womb of the one who bore you likewise blesses you. My affection and my breasts are blessing you;
and my mouth and tongue are praising you greatly. 20 Increase and overflow in the land,
and may your seed be perfected in every age in the joy of heaven and
earth. 25 a. She held her hands in a traditional attitude majority of MSS read "spirit of truth." Either
of prayer. reading would be appropriate in this context,
b. Eth. MS C reads "a holy spirit," but theAnd may your seed be glad;
and on the great day of peace, may it have peace. 21 May your name and your seed stand for all the ages;
and may God Most High be their God. And may the God of Righteousness dwell with them;
and with them may his sanctuary be built in all ages. 22 The one who blesses you will be blessed, Gen 27:29
and all flesh which curses you falsely will be cursed."
23 And she kissed him and said to him:
"May the LORD of the worldc love you;
just as the heart and affection of your mother rejoices in you and blesses
you."
And she stopped blessing him. The account of how Jacob received a blessing intended for Esau
Gen 27.1-40
1 26 And in the seventh year of this week Isaac called Esau, his elder son, and
said to him, "My son, I am old, and behold my eyes are too dim to see. And I
2 do not know the day of my death. *And now take your hunting gear, your quiver
and your bow. And go out to the field and hunt for me and catch something for
me, my son. And prepare for me food, such as my soul desires. And fetch it to
3 me so that I might eat and my soul might bless you before I die." *Now Rebecca
4 was listening as Isaac spoke to Esau. *And Esau went out early to the field so
5 that he might snare and take something and bring it to his father. *And Rebecca
called Jacob, her son, and said to him, "Behold, I heard Isaac, your father,
speaking with Esau, your brother, saying, 'Snare something for me and prepare
food for me. And bring it to me. And I will eat, and bless you before the LORD
6 before I die.' *And now listen, my son, to my words which I command you. Go
to your flock and take for me two good goat kids. And I will prepare them as
food for your father just as he desires. And you shall take it in to your father and
he will eat and bless you before the LORD before he dies.And I will prepare them as
food for your father just as he desires. And you shall take it in to your father and
he will eat and bless you before the LORD before he dies. And you shall be
7 blessed." •And Jacob said to Rebecca, his mother, "O mother, I will not refuse
anything which my father would eat and which would please him, but I am afraid,
8 my mother, lest he recognize my voice and wish to touch me. -And you know
that I am smooth and Esau, my brother, is hairy. And I shall become in his sight
like one who acts wickedly and I shall be doing a deed which he did not command8
me to do. And he will be angry with me and I shall bring upon myself a curse
9 and not a blessing." *And Rebecca, his mother, said to him, "Upon me let your
10 curse be, my son, but obey me." *And Jacob obeyed Rebecca, his mother. And
he went and took two good and fat goat kids. And he brought them to his mother. 11 And his mother prepared them just as he liked. *And Rebecca took the favorite
clothing of her elder son, Esau, which was with her in the house. And she put it
on Jacob, her youngest son, and hides of the goat kids she placed on his hands
12 and on the bare parts of his neck. *And she gave the stew and bread which she
13 had prepared into the hand of Jacob, her son. 'And Jacob entered to his father
and said, "I am your son. I have done as you said to me. Come, and sit down
and eat from what I have snared, O father, so that your soul might bless me."
14,15 And Isaac said to his son, "How have you found (it) so quickly, my son?" *And
16 Jacob said, "It is because your God directed me." »And Isaac said to him, "Draw
near, and let me touch you, my son, to know whether you are my son Esau or
17 not." *And Jacob drew near to Isaac, his father. And he touched him and said,
is "The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau."
c. The Eth. word which is translated "world" 26 a. A portion of the Lat.And she gave to him glory and praise. #And she said, "May the LORD
God be blessed, and may his holy name be blessed forever and ever, he who gave
to me Jacob, a pure son and a holy seed; because he is yours and his seed will
13 (belong) to you for all times and in all generations forever. *0 LORD, bless him
14 and place in my mouth a righteous blessing so that I might bless him." «And at Jn i4:i7
that time, when a spirit of truthb descended upon her mouth, she placed her two
hands upon the head of Jacob and said:
15 "Blessed are you, O LORD of righteousness and God of Ages;
and may he bless you more than all the generations of man. May he grant to you the way of righteousness, my son;
and to your seed, may he reveal righteousness. 16 May he multiply your sons in your life(time);
may they rise up according to the number of the months of the year. And may their sons be more numerous and greater than the stars of heaven;
and more than the sand of the sea, may their number increase. 17 And may he give to them this pleasant land,
just as he said that he would give it to Abraham and his seed after him
always;
and may they hold it (as a) possession forever,
is And may I see, O my son, that you shall have blessed sons in my lifetime;
and a blessed and holy seed, may all your seed be. 19 And just as you have given rest to your mother's soul in her lifetime;
the womb of the one who bore you likewise blesses you. My affection and my breasts are blessing you;
and my mouth and tongue are praising you greatly. 20 Increase and overflow in the land,
and may your seed be perfected in every age in the joy of heaven and
earth. 25 a. She held her hands in a traditional attitude majority of MSS read "spirit of truth." Either
of prayer. reading would be appropriate in this context,
b. Eth. MS C reads "a holy spirit," but the

word which is translated "world" 26 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this
is 'dlam; just as its Aram, counterpart, it may also point and continues through the first three words
refer to a period of time, a world age, or eon. of vs. 23.And he did not know him because the change was from heaven in order to iKgs 12:15
distract his mind, and Isaac was unaware because his hands were hairy like the
19 hands of Esaub so that he blessed him. #And he said, "Are you my son Esau?"
And he said, "I am your son." And he said, "Bring it near to me and I will eat
20 some of what you snared, my son, so that my soul might bless you." -And he
brought it near to him, and he ate. And he brought him wine, and he drank. 21 And Isaac, his father, said, "Come to me and kiss me, my son." And he drew
22 near and he kissed him. • And he smelled the fragrance of the odor of his garments,
and he blessed him and he said:
"Behold, the odor of my son is like the odor of a fieldc which the LORD
has blessed. 23 May the LORD give and multiply to you from the dew of heaven and from
the dew of earth,
and an abundance of wheat and oil may he multiply for you. May nations serve you,
and the people bow down to you. 24 Become a lord to your brothers,
and may your mother's sons bow down to you. And may all of the blessings with which the LORD blessed me and blessed
Abraham, my father,
belong to you and to your seed forever. May the one who curses you be cursed,
and the one who blesses you be blessed."
25 And it came to pass after Isaac ceased blessing his son Jacob, and after Jacob
went out from Isaac, his father, that he hid himself. And Esau, his brother, arrived
26 from his hunting. • And he also prepared food and brought (it) to his father and
said to his father, "Let my father arise and eat from what I have snared so that
27 your soul may bless me." #And Isaac, his father, said to him, "Who are you?"
And he said to him, "I am your firstborn, Esau, your son. I have done as you
28commanded me." *And Isaac was very greatly astonished, and he said, "Who is
this who hunted and snared (game) and brought (it) to me, and I ate from all (of
it) before you came, and I blessed him.• And he also prepared food and brought (it) to his father and
said to his father, "Let my father arise and eat from what I have snared so that
27 your soul may bless me." #And Isaac, his father, said to him, "Who are you?"
And he said to him, "I am your firstborn, Esau, your son. I have done as you
28commanded me." *And Isaac was very greatly astonished, and he said, "Who is
this who hunted and snared (game) and brought (it) to me, and I ate from all (of
it) before you came, and I blessed him. And he and all his seed will be blessed
29forever." •And it came to pass when Esau heard the words of his father, Isaac,
that he cried out with a very loud and bitter voice and said to his father, "Bless
30me also, O father!" #And he said to him, "Your brother came fraudulently and
took your blessings." And he said, "Now I know why his name was called Jacob. Behold he has defraudedd me twice. He has taken my right of firstborn and now
31 he has taken my blessing." #And he said, "Have you not retained a blessing for
me, father?" And Isaac answered and said to Esau, "Behold, I have set him up
as lord over you, and all his brothers I have given to him that they might be
servants to him. And with abundance of wheat, and wine, and oil I have
32 strengthened him. But for you, what shall I now establish, my son?" *And Esau
said to Isaac, his father, "Is there only one blessing of yours, father? Bless me
33also, father." And Esau raised his voice and wept. »And Isaac answered and said
to him:
"Behold, apart from the dew of the land shall be your dwelling,
and apart from the dew of heaven from above. 34 And by your sword you shall live,
and you will serve your brother. And it will happen when you become great,
and you will remove his yoke from your neck,
that then you will surely sin completely unto death,
and your seed will be rooted out from under heaven."
b. The Lat. text adds "his brother." d. In Heb.word which is translated "world" 26 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this
is 'dlam; just as its Aram, counterpart, it may also point and continues through the first three words
refer to a period of time, a world age, or eon. of vs. 23.

text adds "his brother." d. In Heb. the word meaning "defraud" con­
tains the same consonants as the name "Jacob."
c. The Lat. text reads "full field."Esau's resolve to kill Jacob Gen 27*1
35 And Esau kept threatening Jacob on account of the blessing with which his
father blessed him. And he said in his heart, "Now let the days of mourning for
my father draw near. And I will kill Jacob, my brother."
Rebecca and Isaac counsel Jacob to go to Haran Gen 27:42-28:5
1 27 And the words of Esau, her elder son, were told to Rebecca in a dream, and
2 Rebecca sent and called Jacob, her younger son, and she said to him, •"Behold,
3 Esau, your brother, will take vengeance in order to kill you. »So now, my son,
obey me and arise and flee to Laban, my brother, to Haran. And dwell with him
a few days until your brother's anger is turned away and he abandons his anger
with you and forgets the full extent of what you did to him. And I will send and
4 bring you from there." «And Jacob said, "I am not afraid. If he desires to kill
5 me, I shall kill him." »And she said to him, "(No),a lest I be bereaved of both
6 of my sons in one day." #And Jacob said to Rebecca, his mother, "Behold, you
know that my father is old. And he does not see because his eyes are dim. And
if I leave him it will be grievous in his sight because I am leaving and going from
you. And my father will be angry and curse me. I will not go. But when he sends
7 me, only then will I go." #And Rebecca said to Jacob, "I will go in and I will
8 speak to him. And he will send you." *And Rebecca entered and she said to
Isaac, "I despise my life because of the two daughters of Heth whom Esau took
as wives for himself. And if Jacob takes a wife from among the daughters of the
land who are like these, why then shall I live, because the daughters of Canaan
9 are evil." *And Isaac called Jacob and he blessed him and admonished him and
10 said to him, '"Do not take for yourself a wife from any of the daughters of
Canaan.And he will send you." *And Rebecca entered and she said to
Isaac, "I despise my life because of the two daughters of Heth whom Esau took
as wives for himself. And if Jacob takes a wife from among the daughters of the
land who are like these, why then shall I live, because the daughters of Canaan
9 are evil." *And Isaac called Jacob and he blessed him and admonished him and
10 said to him, '"Do not take for yourself a wife from any of the daughters of
Canaan. Arise and go into Mesopotamia to the house of Bethuel, your mother's
father, and take a wife for yourself from there, from the daughters of Laban, your
11 mother's brother. #And may God Almightyb bless and increase and multiply you. And become a company of nations. And may he grant the blessings of my father,
Abraham, to you andc to your seed after you so that you will inherit the land of
your sojournings and all of the land which the LORD gave to Abraham. Go, my
12 son, in peace." *And Isaac sent Jacob. And he went to Mesopotamia, to Laban,
the son of Bethuel, the Syrian, the brother of Rebecca, the mother of Jacob. Isaac consoles Rebecca regarding Jacob's future
13 And it came to pass after Jacob arose to travel to Mesopotamia that the spirit
14 of Rebecca grieved after her son. And she wept. • And Isaac said to Rebecca,
"My sister, do not weep on account of Jacob, my son, because in peace he will song 4:9,10.12
15 journey and in peace he will return. *God Most High will protect him from all
16 evil and he will be with him because he will not forsake him all of his days, *for
I know that he will make his ways prosper everywhere he goes until he returns to
17 us in peace and we see him in peace> *Do not fear on his account, my sister,
because he is upright in his way and he is a perfect man. And he is faithful. And
is he will not perish. Do not weep." »And Isaac comforted Rebecca on account of
Jacob, her son, and he blessed him.text adds "his brother." d. In Heb. the word meaning "defraud" con­
tains the same consonants as the name "Jacob."
c. The Lat. text reads "full field."

And
is he will not perish. Do not weep." »And Isaac comforted Rebecca on account of
Jacob, her son, and he blessed him. Jacob's dream and vow at Bethel Gen 28:10-22
19 And Jacob went forth from the Well of the Oath in order to traveld to Haran in
27 a. The word "no" is lacking in the Eth. text, c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point
but the syntax is awkward without it. and continues through the first two words of vs. b. "God Almighty" from Heb. El Shadday. 24. Two Eth. MSS have written Samdy, "heaven," d. Another fragment of the Heb. text from
instead of Saddy-Shadday. Qumran (1Q17) begins at this point.the first year of the second week of the forty-fourth jubilee. And he arrived at
Luz, which is in the mountains, i.e. Bethel, on the first of the first month of this
week. And he reached the place when it was evening. And he turned aside from
the way toward the west of the public road on that night. And he slept there
20 because the sun had set. #And he took one of the stones of that place and he
placed it at his headc beneath that tree and he was traveling alone, and he slept. 21 And he dreamed on that night and behold a staircase was set up upon the earth
and its head touched heaven. And behold, angels of the Lord were going up
22 and down upon it. And behold, the Lord was standing upon it. *And he spoke
with Jacob and he said, "I am the Lord, the God of Abraham, your father and
the God of Isaac. The land upon which you are sleeping I will give to you and to
23 your seed after you. • And your seed shall be like the sand of the earth. And you
shall increase in the West and the East and North and South. And all the peoples
24 of the nations will be blessed in you and in your seed. *And behold, I shall be
with you and I shall protect you everywhere you go. And I shall bring you back
into this land in peace because I shall not forsake you until I do everything which
251 have said to you." «And Jacob awoke from his sleep and he said, "Truly this
place is the house of the Lord, and I did not know it." And he was afraid and
said, "Dreadful is this place which is none other than the house of God.f And
this is the gate of heaven."
26 And rising early in the morning, Jacob took the stone which he had placed at
his head and he set it up as a pillar for a sign. And he poured out oil on top of it
and he named that place "Bethel." But formerly the name of that area was Luz.And I shall bring you back
into this land in peace because I shall not forsake you until I do everything which
251 have said to you." «And Jacob awoke from his sleep and he said, "Truly this
place is the house of the Lord, and I did not know it." And he was afraid and
said, "Dreadful is this place which is none other than the house of God.f And
this is the gate of heaven."
26 And rising early in the morning, Jacob took the stone which he had placed at
his head and he set it up as a pillar for a sign. And he poured out oil on top of it
and he named that place "Bethel." But formerly the name of that area was Luz. 27 And Jacob vowed a vow to the Lord, saying, "If the Lord will be with me
and protect me in this way in which I am traveling, and if he will give me bread
to eat and clothing to put on, and I return to the house of my father in peace,
then the Lord will be my God and this stone which I have set up as a pillar for
a sign in this place shall be the house of the Lord and everything which you have
given me I will tithe to you, my God."
Jacob is given Leah as a wife Gen 29:1-25
1 28 And he traveled8 to the land of the East, to Laban, Rebecca's brother. And
2 he was with him and served him for Rachel, his daughter, one week. • And in the
first year of the third week, he said to him, "Give me my wife for whom I have
served you seven years." And Laban said to Jacob, "I will give you your wife."
3 And Laban prepared a banquet and he took Leah, his elder daughter, and he
gave her to Jacob as a wife. And he gave to her Zilpah, his handmaid, as an
attendant. But Jacob did not know it because Jacob assumed that she was Rachel. 4 And he entered into her and behold, she was Leah. And Jacob was angry with
Laban and he said to him, "Why have you treated me thus? Was it not for Rachel
that I served you, and not for Leah? Why have you offended me?And
is he will not perish. Do not weep." »And Isaac comforted Rebecca on account of
Jacob, her son, and he blessed him. Jacob's dream and vow at Bethel Gen 28:10-22
19 And Jacob went forth from the Well of the Oath in order to traveld to Haran in
27 a. The word "no" is lacking in the Eth. text, c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point
but the syntax is awkward without it. and continues through the first two words of vs. b. "God Almighty" from Heb. El Shadday. 24. Two Eth. MSS have written Samdy, "heaven," d. Another fragment of the Heb. text from
instead of Saddy-Shadday. Qumran (1Q17) begins at this point.

Was it not for Rachel
that I served you, and not for Leah? Why have you offended me? Take your
s daughter, and I will go because you have done evil against me." *For Jacob loved
Rachel more than Leah because the eyes of Leah were weak, but her appearance
was very beautiful, and Rachel (had) good eyes and good appearance and she was
very beautiful. The rule regarding the marriage of the elder daughter first Gen 29:26f. 6 And Laban said to Jacob, "It does not happen thus in our land, to give the
younger woman before the elder." And it is not right to do this because thus it
e. The phrase "at his head" is lacking in the sponds to the Heb. name YHWH. In this passage,
Eth. text, but is present in the Lat. text and its however, the writer is presenting an explanation of
presence in the Heb. text may be implied by the the name "Bethel," "house of God."
length of the lacuna at the point where it should
appear. 28 a. The Eth. text reads lit. "he picked up his
f. The Eth. word for God which is used here is feet and traveled," thus preserving the quaint idiom
*egzl'abher. Elsewhere it has consistently been which appears in the Heb. of Gen 29:1. translated Lord because it most frequently corre­is ordained and written in the heavenly tablets that no one should give his younger Lev i&is
daughter before the elder because he should first give the elder and after her the
younger. And they will write it down as sin in heaven concerning the man who
acts thus. And no one who does this thing will be righteous because this deed is
7 evil before the LORD. *And you command the children of Israel so that they will
not do this thing: "Let not the younger woman be taken or given without the
8 elder one being first (given) because that is very evil." *And Laban said to Jacob,
"Let the seven days of banquet for this woman continue and then I will give you
Rachel so that you might serve me another seven years (and) pasture my sheep
just as you did in the previous week."
The marriage to Rachel and the birth of children
Gen 29:28-30:24
9 And on the day when the seven days of Leah's banquet passed, Laban gave
Rachel to Jacob so that he might serve him another seven years. And he gave to
10 Rachel, Bilhah, the sister of Zilpah, as an attendant. *And he served seven years
11 more on account of Rachel because Leah had been given to him gratis. *And the
LORD opened the womb of Leah and she conceived and she bore a son to Jacob,
and he called him Reuben, on the fourteenth of the ninth month, in the first year
12 of the third week. *But the womb of Rachel was closed because the LORD saw
13 that Leah was hated, but Rachel was loved. *And Jacob again went into Leah,
and she conceived and she bore another son to Jacob, and he called him Simeon,
14 on the twenty-first of the tenth month and in the third year of this week. *And
Jacob again went into Leah and she conceived and she bore the third son to him
and he called him Levi, on the first day of the first month, in the sixth year of
is this week. *And again Jacob went into her and she conceived and she bore the
fourth son to him and he called him Judah, on the fifteenth of the third month, in
16 the first year of the fourth week.*And
Jacob again went into Leah and she conceived and she bore the third son to him
and he called him Levi, on the first day of the first month, in the sixth year of
is this week. *And again Jacob went into her and she conceived and she bore the
fourth son to him and he called him Judah, on the fifteenth of the third month, in
16 the first year of the fourth week. • And in all of this Rachel was jealous of Leah
since she was not giving birth, and she said to Jacob, "Give me sons." And
Jacob said, "Have I withheld from you the fruit of your5 womb? Have I forsaken
you?"
17 And when Rachel saw that Leah had borne four sons to Jacob, Reuben and
Simeon and Levi and Judah, she said to him, "Go into Bilhah, my maid, and she
is will conceive and bear a son for me." #And she gave Bilhah, her maid, to him
so that she might be his wife.0 And he went into her and she conceived and she
bore a son to him, and he called him Dan, on the ninth day of the sixth month in
19 the sixth year of the third week. «And Jacob went into Bilhah again a second
time, and she conceived and bore another son to Jacob, and Rachel called him
Naphtali, on the fifth of the seventh month, in the second year of the fourth week. 20 And when Leah saw that she was steriled and was not bearing children, she took
and she also gave Zilpah, her attendant, to Jacob as a wife. And she conceived
and bore a son to him and Leah called him Gad, on the twelfth of the eighth
21 month in the third year of the fourth week. »And he went into her again and she
conceived and bore another son to him, and Leah called him Asher, on the second
22 of the eleventh month in the fifth year of the fourth week. #And Jacob went into
Leah and she conceived and she bore a son and she called him Issachar, on the
fourth day of the fifth month in the fourth year of the fourth week. And she gave
23 him to a nurse.Was it not for Rachel
that I served you, and not for Leah? Why have you offended me? Take your
s daughter, and I will go because you have done evil against me." *For Jacob loved
Rachel more than Leah because the eyes of Leah were weak, but her appearance
was very beautiful, and Rachel (had) good eyes and good appearance and she was
very beautiful. The rule regarding the marriage of the elder daughter first Gen 29:26f. 6 And Laban said to Jacob, "It does not happen thus in our land, to give the
younger woman before the elder." And it is not right to do this because thus it
e. The phrase "at his head" is lacking in the sponds to the Heb. name YHWH. In this passage,
Eth. text, but is present in the Lat. text and its however, the writer is presenting an explanation of
presence in the Heb. text may be implied by the the name "Bethel," "house of God."
length of the lacuna at the point where it should
appear. 28 a. The Eth. text reads lit. "he picked up his
f. The Eth. word for God which is used here is feet and traveled," thus preserving the quaint idiom
*egzl'abher. Elsewhere it has consistently been which appears in the Heb. of Gen 29:1. translated Lord because it most frequently corre­

#And Jacob went into
Leah and she conceived and she bore a son and she called him Issachar, on the
fourth day of the fifth month in the fourth year of the fourth week. And she gave
23 him to a nurse. *And Jacob went into her again and she conceived and she bore
twins, a boy and a girl, and she called the boy Zebulun and the girl's name was
Dinah, in the seventh day of the seventh month in the sixth year of the fourth
24 week. #And the LORD had mercy upon Rachel and opened her womb. And she
b. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point in his edition of the Eth. text emended the text to
and continues through vs. 27a. read "stopped*' (bearing children) to agree with
c. The first sentence in this vs. is lacking in the Lat. text and the Heb. of Gen 30:9, but
Eth., but it is found in Gen 30:4, and is also subsequently he followed the MS reading in his
attested in the Lat. text of Jub. English translation. d. This is the reading of the Eth. MSS. Charlesconceived and bore a son and called him Joseph, on the first of the fourth month
in the sixth year of that fourth week. Laban persuades Jacob to continue working for wages
Gen 30:25.31:1
25 And at the time when Joseph was born, Jacob said to Laban, "Give me my
wives and my children. And let me go to my father, Isaac. And let me make a
house for myself because I have completed the years which I served you for your
26 two daughters. And I will travel to my father's house." •And Laban said to Jacob,
"Remain with me for your wages and pasture my flock for me again and accept
27 your wages." #And they agreed with one another that he would give to him as
his wages each of the lambs and kids which were born (and) on which there were
28 black or spots or white. It would be his wages. #And all of the sheep bore spotted
(lambs) and ones which had variegated markings and ones which had various
shades of black. And the sheep bore again lambs which looked like themselves
and all which had markings belonged to Jacob and those which had no marking
29 belonged to Laban. #And the possessions of Jacob multiplied greatly. And he
acquired oxen and sheep and asses and camels and male and female servants. 30 And Laban and his sons were jealous of Jacob. And Laban collected his sheep
from him, and kept watch on him with evil intent. Jacob flees secretly to Gilead
Gen 31:2-21
1 29 And it came to pass after Rachel bore Joseph that Laban went to shear his
sheep because they were the distance of a three days' journey away from him. 2 And Jacob saw that Laban was going to shear his sheep and Jacob called Leah
and Rachel and spoke intimately with them so that they might go with him to the
3 land of Canaan. *For he told them everything, as he had seen it in the dream, and
everything which he* told him, that he would return to the house of his father.2 And Jacob saw that Laban was going to shear his sheep and Jacob called Leah
and Rachel and spoke intimately with them so that they might go with him to the
3 land of Canaan. *For he told them everything, as he had seen it in the dream, and
everything which he* told him, that he would return to the house of his father. 4 And they said, "We will go with you anywhere you go." *And Jacob blessed
the God of Isaac, his father, and the God of Abraham, his father's father. And
he arose and loaded up his wives and children and took all of his possessions and
crossed over the river and arrived at the land of Gilead. But Jacob concealed his
intention from Laban and did not tell him. The oath between Jacob and Laban and their separation
Gen 31:21-55
5 And in the seventh year of the fourth week, Jacob returned to Gilead, in the
first month on the twenty-first day of the month. And Laban pursued him. And
he found Jacob in the mountain of Gilead in the third month on the thirteenth
6 day. *But the LORD did not permit him to deal cruelly with Jacob because he
7 appeared to him in a dream at night. And Laban spoke to Jacob. -And on the
fifteenth of those days Jacob prepared a banquet for Laban and for all who came
with him. And Jacob swore to Laban on that day. And Laban also swore to Jacob
that one would not cross over on the mountain of Gilead against the other with
8 evil intent. *And they made there a heap for a witness. Therefore6 that place is
called "the Heap of Witness" after this heap.c
9 But formerly the land of Gilead was called "the land of Raphaim" because it
was the land of the Raphaim. And the Raphaim were born as giants whose height
10 was ten cubits, nine cubits, eight cubits, or down to seven cubits. *And their
dwelling was from the land of the Ammonites to Mount Hermon and their royal
11 palaces were in Qarnaim, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, and Misur, and Beon. *But
the LORD destroyed them because of the evil of their deeds since they were very
cruel.#And Jacob went into
Leah and she conceived and she bore a son and she called him Issachar, on the
fourth day of the fifth month in the fourth year of the fourth week. And she gave
23 him to a nurse. *And Jacob went into her again and she conceived and she bore
twins, a boy and a girl, and she called the boy Zebulun and the girl's name was
Dinah, in the seventh day of the seventh month in the sixth year of the fourth
24 week. #And the LORD had mercy upon Rachel and opened her womb. And she
b. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point in his edition of the Eth. text emended the text to
and continues through vs. 27a. read "stopped*' (bearing children) to agree with
c. The first sentence in this vs. is lacking in the Lat. text and the Heb. of Gen 30:9, but
Eth., but it is found in Gen 30:4, and is also subsequently he followed the MS reading in his
attested in the Lat. text of Jub. English translation. d. This is the reading of the Eth. MSS. Charles

*And their
dwelling was from the land of the Ammonites to Mount Hermon and their royal
11 palaces were in Qarnaim, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, and Misur, and Beon. *But
the LORD destroyed them because of the evil of their deeds since they were very
cruel. And the Amorites dwelt there instead of them, evil and sinful, and there is
29 a. The pronoun refers to God. c. 44 Heap of witnesses" was the presumed mean-
b. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point ing of Gilead. and continues through 31:1a.no people today who have fully equalled all of their sins. And therefore they had
no length of life in the land. 12 And Jacob dismissed Laban, and he traveled to Mesopotamia, the land of the
13 East. And Jacob returned to the land of Gilead. • And he crossed over the Jabbok Gen 32:22
in the ninth month on the eleventh day of the month. And on that day Esau, his
brother, came to him and was reconciled to him. And he went away from him to
the land of Seir; but Jacob dwelled in tents. Jacob's respect for his parents contrasted with Esau's disrespect
14 And in the first year of the fifth week in that jubilee, he crossed over the Jordan
and he dwelt on the other side of the Jordan. And he was pasturing his sheep
from the Sea of the Heap as far as Bethshan and Dothan and the forest of
is Akrabbim. • And he sent to his father, Isaac, some of all his possessions: clothing,
and food, and meat, and drink, and milk, and butter, and cheese, and some dates
16 of the valley. #And (he also sent) to his mother, Rebecca, four times per year—
between the appointed timesd of the months and between plowing and reaping,
and between fall and the rainy season and between winter and spring—to the
17 tower of Abraham. *For Isaac had returned from the Well of the Oath and had
gone up to the tower of his father, Abraham. And he dwelt there away from his
is son Esau • because in the days when Jacob journeyed to Mesopotamia, Esau took Gen 28:9
for himself as a wife Mahalath, daughter of Ishmael, and gathered together all of Gen 36:6,8
his father's flocks and his own wives and went up and dwelt in Mount Seir. And
19 he left his father, Isaac, alone at the Well of the Oath. #And Isaac went up from
the Well of the Oath and dwelt in the tower of Abraham, his father, in the
20 mountain of Hebron. • And Jacob sent there everything which he sent to his father
and mother from time to time, all of their needs. And they blessed Jacob with all
their heart and all their soul.• And Jacob sent there everything which he sent to his father
and mother from time to time, all of their needs. And they blessed Jacob with all
their heart and all their soul. Levi and Simeon avenge the shame of Dinah
Gen 33:17-3431
1 30 And in the first year of the sixth week he went up to Salem, which is east of
2 Shechem, in peace in the fourth month. *And there Dinah, the daughter of Jacob,
was snatched away to the house of Shechem, son of Hamor, the Hivite, the ruler
of the land. And he lay with her and defiled her, but she was little, only twelve
3 years old. «And he begged his father and her brothers that she be given to him as
a wife, but Jacob and his sons were angry at the men of Shechem because they
defiled Dinah, their sister. And so they spoke treacherously with them and
4 defrauded them and seduced them. #And Simeon and Levi entered Shechem TLevi 6
suddenly. And they executed judgment upon all of the men of Shechem and killed
every man they found therein and did not leave in it even one. They killed
s everyone painfully because they had polluted Dinah, their sister. *And therefore
let nothing like this be done henceforth to defile a daughter of Israel because the
judgment was ordered in heaven against them that they might annihilate with a
6 sword all of the men of Shechem because they caused a shame in Israel. *And
the LORD handed them over into the hand of the sons of Jacob so that they might
destroy them with the sword and execute judgment against them, and so that
nothing like this might therefore happen in Israel to defile an Israelite virgin. The law prohibiting marriage with foreigners
7 And if there is any man in Israel who wishes to give his daughter or his sister
to any man who is from the seed of the gentiles, let him surely die, and let him
be stoned because he has caused shame in Israel. And also the woman will be Gen 34:7
burned with fire because she has defiled the name of her father's house and so
d.*And their
dwelling was from the land of the Ammonites to Mount Hermon and their royal
11 palaces were in Qarnaim, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, and Misur, and Beon. *But
the LORD destroyed them because of the evil of their deeds since they were very
cruel. And the Amorites dwelt there instead of them, evil and sinful, and there is
29 a. The pronoun refers to God. c. 44 Heap of witnesses" was the presumed mean-
b. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point ing of Gilead. and continues through 31:1a.

The law prohibiting marriage with foreigners
7 And if there is any man in Israel who wishes to give his daughter or his sister
to any man who is from the seed of the gentiles, let him surely die, and let him
be stoned because he has caused shame in Israel. And also the woman will be Gen 34:7
burned with fire because she has defiled the name of her father's house and so
d. These are probably the four feast days estab- months of thirty days plus four intercalary days,
lished by Noah in Jub 6:23-32. There are twelve which provide a year of 364 days.8 she will be uprooted from Israel. •And do not let an adultress or defilement be
found in Israel all of the days of the generations of the earth because Israel is
holy to the LORD. And let any man who causes defilement surely die, let him be
9 stoned • because thus it is decreed and written in the heavenly tablets concerning
all of the seed of Israel: "Let anyone who causes defilement surely die. And let
him be stoned."
10 And there is no limit of days for this law. And there is no remission or
forgiveness except that the man who caused defilement of his daughter will be
rooted out from the midst of all Israel because he has given some of his seed to
11 Moloch and sinned so as to defile it. *And you, Moses, command the children of
Israel and exhort them not to give any of their daughters to the gentiles and not
to take for their sons any of the daughters of the gentiles because that is contemptible
12 before the LORD. •Therefore I have written for you in the words of the law all
of the deeds of the Shechemites which they did against Dinah and how the sons
of Jacob spoke, saying, "We will not give our daughter to a man who is Gcn34:i4
uncircumcised because that is a reproach td us."
13 And it is a reproach to Israel, to those who give and those who take any of the
daughters of the gentile nations because it is a defilement and it is contemptible
14 to Israel. • And Israel will not be cleansed from this defilement if there is in it a
woman from the daughters of gentiles or one who has given any of his daughters
15 to a man who is from any of the gentiles. *For there will be plague upon plague
and curse upon curse, and every judgment, and plague, and curse will come. And
if he does this thing, or if he blinds his eyes from those who cause defilement
and from those who defile the sanctuary of the LORD and from those who profane
his holy name, (then) all of the people will be judged together on account of all
16 of the defilement and the profaning of this one.*For there will be plague upon plague
and curse upon curse, and every judgment, and plague, and curse will come. And
if he does this thing, or if he blinds his eyes from those who cause defilement
and from those who defile the sanctuary of the LORD and from those who profane
his holy name, (then) all of the people will be judged together on account of all
16 of the defilement and the profaning of this one. *And there is no accepting of
person or regarding appearance8 or taking from his hand either fruit or sacrifice
or holocaust or fat or the aroma of sweet-smelling sacrifice so that heb might
accept it. And let any man or woman in Israel who defiled his sanctuary be (dealt
17 with likewise). •Therefore I command you, saying, "Proclaim this testimony to
Israel: 'See how it was for the Shechemites and their sons, how they were given
into the hand of the two children of Jacob and they killed them painfully. And it
was a righteousness for them and it was written down for them for righteousness.' ''
Levi is chosen for priesthood in recognition of his zeal
is And the seed of Levi was chosen for the priesthood and levitical (orders) to TLevi 4
minister before the LORD always just as wec do. And Levi and his sons will be
blessed forever because he was zealous to do righteousness and judgment and
19 vengeance against all who rose up against Israel. *And thus a blessing and
righteousness will be written (on high) as a testimony for him in the heavenly
20 tablets before the God of all. #And we will remember for a thousand generations
the righteousness which a man did during his life in all of the (appointed) times
of the year. And (it) will be written (on high) and it will come to him and his
descendants after him. And he will be written down as a friend and a righteous
one in the heavenly tablets.The law prohibiting marriage with foreigners
7 And if there is any man in Israel who wishes to give his daughter or his sister
to any man who is from the seed of the gentiles, let him surely die, and let him
be stoned because he has caused shame in Israel. And also the woman will be Gen 34:7
burned with fire because she has defiled the name of her father's house and so
d. These are probably the four feast days estab- months of thirty days plus four intercalary days,
lished by Noah in Jub 6:23-32. There are twelve which provide a year of 364 days.

And (it) will be written (on high) and it will come to him and his
descendants after him. And he will be written down as a friend and a righteous
one in the heavenly tablets. A warning against breach of covenant
21 All of these words I have written for you, and I have commanded you to speak
to the children of Israel that they might not commit sin or transgress the ordinances
or break the covenant which was ordained for them so that they might do it and
30 a. The expressions "accepting of person" (lit. appearance."
accepting of face) and "regarding appearance" (lit. b. The pronoun refers to God. regarding of face) are idioms which mean essen­ c. The "we" refers to the host of angels who
tially the same thing, i.e. "showing partiality." minister before the Lord continually. The Levites
The use of them together is somewhat redundant. are to minister on earth as the angels do in heaven. The Lat. text omits the phrase "or regarding22 be written down as friends. *But if they transgress and act in all the ways of
defilement, they will be recorded in the heavenly tablets as enemies. And they
will be blotted out of the book of life and written in the book of those who will
23 be destroyed and with those who will be rooted out from the land. »And on the
day that the children of Jacob killed Shechem he wrote (on high)d for them a book
in heaven that they did righteousness and uprightness and vengeance against the
sinners and it was written down for a blessing. The conclusion of the Shechem incident
Gen 34:26-31;
35:5
24 And they brought forth Dinah, their sister, from the house of Shechem and they
took captive everything which was in Shechem: their sheep and their oxen and
their asses and all their herds and all their goods. And they brought forth everything
25 to Jacob, their father. *And he spoke with them because they slaughtered the
citizens,e for he was afraid of those who inhabited the land: the Canaanites and
the Perizzites. But the terror of the LORD was in all of the cities which surrounded
Shechem and they did not rise up to pursue the sons of Jacob because a dread
had fallen upon them. The preparation for pilgrimage to Bethel
Gen 35:1-4
1 31 And on the first of the month, Jacob spoke to all of the men of his house,
saying, "Purify and change your clothes, and having arisen, let us go up to
Bethel, where on the day when I fled from the face of Esau, my brother, I made
a vow to him who has been with me and has returned me unto this land in peace. 2 Remove the strange gods that are among you." • And they handed over3 the strange
gods and what was on their ears and what was on their necks and the idols which
Rachel stole from Laban, her father,6 and she gave everything to Jacob, and he
burned it and crushed it and destroyed it and hid it under an oak which was in
the Land of Shechem.The preparation for pilgrimage to Bethel
Gen 35:1-4
1 31 And on the first of the month, Jacob spoke to all of the men of his house,
saying, "Purify and change your clothes, and having arisen, let us go up to
Bethel, where on the day when I fled from the face of Esau, my brother, I made
a vow to him who has been with me and has returned me unto this land in peace. 2 Remove the strange gods that are among you." • And they handed over3 the strange
gods and what was on their ears and what was on their necks and the idols which
Rachel stole from Laban, her father,6 and she gave everything to Jacob, and he
burned it and crushed it and destroyed it and hid it under an oak which was in
the Land of Shechem. Jacob invites his father to come to Bethel Gen 35:7
TLevi 9
3 And he went up on the first of the seventh month into Bethel. And he built an
altar in the place where he had slept and had erected a pillar. And he invited his
father, Isaac, and his mother, Rebecca, to come to him in the (time of) sacrifice. 4 And Isaac said, "Let my son Jacob come and let me see him before I die."
Jacob's visit to his father, Isaac
5 And Jacob went to his father, Isaac, and to his mother, Rebecca, at the house
of his father, Abraham, and he took with him two of his sons, Levi and Judah. 6 And he came to his father, Isaac, and his mother, Rebecca. «And Rebecca went
out from the tower at the gates of the tower to kiss Jacob and embrace him because
it revived her soul when she heard, "Behold, Jacob, your son, has arrived."
7 And she kissed him, and she saw his two sons and she recognized them and she
d. The use of the word arega in Jub needs passages. further study. Normally the word means "to as­ e. The text reads lit. "they killed the city," but
cend." In a few passages, the word involves writing the "city" is used by the writer to refer to all
on heavenly tablets. In the present translation such citizens. passages are rendered "to write (on high)," i.e.And (it) will be written (on high) and it will come to him and his
descendants after him. And he will be written down as a friend and a righteous
one in the heavenly tablets. A warning against breach of covenant
21 All of these words I have written for you, and I have commanded you to speak
to the children of Israel that they might not commit sin or transgress the ordinances
or break the covenant which was ordained for them so that they might do it and
30 a. The expressions "accepting of person" (lit. appearance."
accepting of face) and "regarding appearance" (lit. b. The pronoun refers to God. regarding of face) are idioms which mean essen­ c. The "we" refers to the host of angels who
tially the same thing, i.e. "showing partiality." minister before the Lord continually. The Levites
The use of them together is somewhat redundant. are to minister on earth as the angels do in heaven. The Lat. text omits the phrase "or regarding

In the present translation such citizens. passages are rendered "to write (on high)," i.e. "to go up (in writing).'' In the process of reviewing 31 a. The reading "handed over" is an emenda­
the work for publication, J. VanderKam has sug­ tion based on Gen 35:4. The Eth. MSS read either
gested the possibility of reading this vs. as "a "melt" or "seize" at this point. book/writing went up to heaven." He may be on b. Charles emended his Eth. text to read "her
the right track. The Lat. would appear to support brother," but he subsequently read "her father"
such a reading. I have retained an earlier translation, in English translation published in his APOT, vol. however, pending a study of all of the relevant 2.said to him, "Are these your sons, my son?" And she embraced them and kissed
them and blessed them, saying, "In you may he bless the seed of Abraham, and
may you become a blessing upon the earth."
8 And Jacob went in to Isaac, his father, in the chamber where he was lying
down, and his two children were with him. And he took the hand of his father,
and, bowing down, he kissed him. And Isaac hung on the neck of Jacob, his son,
9 and he wept on his neck. *And the darkness passed from the eyes of Isaac and he
saw Jacob's two sons, Levi and Judah, and he said, "Are these your sons, my
10 son, because0 they resemble you?" *And he told him that they were truly his
sons: "And certainly you have seen that they are truly my sons."
The blessing of Levi
n And they drew near to him and he turned and kissed them and embraced the
12 both of them together. #And a spirit of prophecy came down upon his mouth. 13 And he took Levi in his right hand and Judah in his left hand. • And he turned to iQapGen 2.4
Levi first and he began to bless him first, and he said to him, "May the God of TLevi 9
14 all, i.e. the LORD of all ages, bless you and your sons in all ages. *May the LORD
give you and your seed very great honor.d May he draw you and your seed near
to him from all flesh to serve in his sanctuary as the angels of the presence and
the holy ones. May your sons' seed be like them with respect to honor and
is greatness and sanctification. And may he make them great in every age. *And TLevi 8
they will become judges and rulers and leaderse for all of the seed of the sons of
Jacob. The word of the LORD they will speak righteously,
and all of his judgments they will execute righteously. And they will tell my ways to Jacob,
and my paths to Israel. The blessing of the LORD shall be placed in their mouth,
so that they might bless all of the seed of the beloved. 16 (As for) you, your mother has named you 4Levi,'
and truly she has named you.In the present translation such citizens. passages are rendered "to write (on high)," i.e. "to go up (in writing).'' In the process of reviewing 31 a. The reading "handed over" is an emenda­
the work for publication, J. VanderKam has sug­ tion based on Gen 35:4. The Eth. MSS read either
gested the possibility of reading this vs. as "a "melt" or "seize" at this point. book/writing went up to heaven." He may be on b. Charles emended his Eth. text to read "her
the right track. The Lat. would appear to support brother," but he subsequently read "her father"
such a reading. I have retained an earlier translation, in English translation published in his APOT, vol. however, pending a study of all of the relevant 2.

The blessing of the LORD shall be placed in their mouth,
so that they might bless all of the seed of the beloved. 16 (As for) you, your mother has named you 4Levi,'
and truly she has named you. You will be joinedf to the LORD
and be the companion of all the sons of Jacob. Lev 18:2.4
His table will belong to you, TLevi 8
and you and your sons will eat (from) it, TJud 21
and in all generations your table will be full,
and your food will not be lacking in any age. n And all who hate you will fall before you,
and all your enemies will be uprooted and perish,
and whoever blesses you will be blessed,
and any nation which curses you will be cursed."
The blessing of Judah
is And to Judah he said:
"May the LORD give you might and strength
to tread upon all who hate you. Be a prince, you and one of your sons for the sons of Jacob;
may your name and the name of your son be one which travels and goes
about in all the lands and cities. c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point returned to the Eth. MSS in preparing his own
and continues through 31:18. translation as "greatness and great glory."
d. The phrase "very great honor" is based on e. The Lat. text omits "leaders."
MS B, which reads "great greatness of honor"; f. In Heb. the name Levi and the verbal root
the Lat. reads "to understand his glory." Charles meaning "to cleave, be joined to" share similar
emended his Eth. text to agree with the Lat., but consonants and were presumed to be related.Then may the nations fear before your face,
and all of the nations tremble,
[and every nation trembles].8
19 And with you will be the help of Jacob
and with you will be found the salvation of Israel. 20 And on the day when you sit on your righteous throne of honor,
there will be great peace for all the seed of the beloved's sons. Whoever blesses you will be blessed,
and all who hate you and afflict you and curse you
will be uprooted and destroyed from the earth and they shall be cursed."
Jacob's visit with Isaac
21 And turning, he kissed him again and embraced him and rejoiced greatly because
22 he had seen the sons of Jacob, his own true son. *And he withdrew from his
embrace and fell down and bowed down to him. And he blessed them. And he
rested there near Isaac, his father, during that night. And they ate and drank
23 joyfully. #And he made the two sons of Jacob sleep, one on his right and one on
24 his left, and it was counted to him (as) righteousness. *And Jacob told his father
everything during the night, how the LORD had shown him great mercy, and how
25 he had made all of his affairs prosper and protected him from all evil. •And Isaac
blessed the God of his father, Abraham, who did not withhold his mercy and his
righteousness from the son of his servant Isaac. Isaac's farewell to Jacob
26 And in the morning, Jacob told his father, Isaac, (about) the vow which he had
made to the LORD and the vision which he had seen and that he had built an altar
and everything was prepared to make a sacrifice before the LORD just as he had
27 vowed and that he had come to set him upon an ass. *And Isaac said to Jacob,
his son, "I am not able to come with you because I have grown old and I am not
able to endure on the way. Go, my son, in peace, because I am one hundred and
sixty-five years old today. Therefore I am not able to travel. Set your mother (on
28 the ass) and let her go with you. *I know, my son, that you came for my sake.The blessing of the LORD shall be placed in their mouth,
so that they might bless all of the seed of the beloved. 16 (As for) you, your mother has named you 4Levi,'
and truly she has named you. You will be joinedf to the LORD
and be the companion of all the sons of Jacob. Lev 18:2.4
His table will belong to you, TLevi 8
and you and your sons will eat (from) it, TJud 21
and in all generations your table will be full,
and your food will not be lacking in any age. n And all who hate you will fall before you,
and all your enemies will be uprooted and perish,
and whoever blesses you will be blessed,
and any nation which curses you will be cursed."
The blessing of Judah
is And to Judah he said:
"May the LORD give you might and strength
to tread upon all who hate you. Be a prince, you and one of your sons for the sons of Jacob;
may your name and the name of your son be one which travels and goes
about in all the lands and cities. c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point returned to the Eth. MSS in preparing his own
and continues through 31:18. translation as "greatness and great glory."
d. The phrase "very great honor" is based on e. The Lat. text omits "leaders."
MS B, which reads "great greatness of honor"; f. In Heb. the name Levi and the verbal root
the Lat. reads "to understand his glory." Charles meaning "to cleave, be joined to" share similar
emended his Eth. text to agree with the Lat., but consonants and were presumed to be related.

Set your mother (on
28 the ass) and let her go with you. *I know, my son, that you came for my sake. And let this day be blessed on which you have seen me alive and I have also seen
29 you, my son. -Prosper and perform the vow which you made and do not delay
your vow because the vow will be sought. And now hasten to do it, and may the
30 one who created11 everything, to whom you vowed the vow, be pleased." #And
he said to Rebecca, "Go with Jacob, your son." And Rebecca went with Jacob,
her son. And Deborah (was) with her. And they reached Bethel. Jacob reflects on the blessing of his sons
31 And Jacob remembered the prayer (with) which his father blessed him and his
two sons, Levi and Judah, and he rejoiced and he blessed the God of his fathers,
32 Abraham and Isaac. 'And he said, "Now I know that I and my sons have an
eternal hope before the God of all." And thus it is ordained concerning the two
of them, and it has been written (on high) for them as an eternal testimony in the
heavenly tablets, just as Isaac blessed them. Jacob's tithe and sacrifice at Bethel
I 32 And he stayed that night in Bethel. And Levi dreamed that he had been TLevi 8
appointed and ordained priest of the Most High God, he and his sons forever. g. The phrase that is written between brackets h. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point
is a rather obvious dittography. and continues through the first three words of 32:8.2 And he woke from his sleep and blessed the LORD. • And Jacob rose early in the TLevi 9
morning on the fourteenth of that month and he gave a tenth of everything which
came with him: man, (and) beast, gold, (and) all (sorts of) vessels and clothes. And he gave a tenth of everything. 3 And in those days Rachel conceived Benjamin, her son. And Jacob counted his
sons from him and upward, and (the lot of) Levi fell with the portion of the
LORD. And his father put garments of the priesthood upon him and he filled his
4 hands. #And on the fifteenth of this month he brought to the altar fourteen bulls Num 29:12-40
from the herd and twenty-eight rams and forty-nine sheep and seven lambs and Lcv 23:34-44
twenty-one8 kids of the goats (as) a burnt offering upon the altar of sacrifices,
5 well pleasing for a sweet-smelling aroma before God. •This was his offering from oen 28:22
the vow which he made to tithe together with their (fruit) offerings and their
6 libations. *And when the fire consumed it he burned incense upon the fire above
it. And for a thank offering: two bulls and four rams and four sheep and four he-
goats and two lambs, each a year old, and two kids of the goats. Thus he did at
7 dawn for seven days. #And it happened as he and all his sons and his men ate
there joyfully for seven days that he blessed and praised the LORD, the one who
8 delivered him from all his affliction and who granted him his prayers. *And he
gave a tithe of every clean animal and he made a burnt offering, but the unclean
animals he did (not)b give to Levi, his son, but every human soul he gave to him. 9 And Levi served as priest in Bethel before Jacob, his father, (apart) from his ten
brothers. And he was a priest there. And Jacob gave his vow. Thus he tithed a
second tithe to the LORD and he sanctified it and it was sanctified to him.And Jacob gave his vow. Thus he tithed a
second tithe to the LORD and he sanctified it and it was sanctified to him. The law of the tithe
10 And therefore it is decreed in the heavenly tablets as a law to tithe the tithe Deut i4:22f
again in order to eat it before the LORD from year to year in the place where it is
determined that his name shall dwell. And there is no limit of days to this law
11 forever. *This ordinance is written to observe it year after year to eat the second
tithe before the LORD in the place where it is determined. And there is not to be
12 (anything) left over from it from this year to the year which is to come. •For in
its year the grain will be eaten until the days of the harvest of the grain of the
year, and the wine (will be drunk) until the days of the wine, and the olive (will
13 be used) until the day of its season. »And everything which is left over from it
and which grows old will be unclean. Let it be burned in the fire because it has
14 become impure. *And thus they shall eat it together in the sanctuary and they
is shall not let it become old. •And the whole tithe of oxen and sheep is holy to the Lev 27:32
LORD and it will belong to the priests who will eat it before him year after year 2Cnr3,:6
because it is so ordered and engraved on the heavenly tablets concerning the tithe. Jacob's vision which prevented him from sanctifying the court at Bethel
16 And in the second night, on the twenty-second day of this month, Jacob planned
to build up that place and to build a wall around the court and to sanctify it and
17 to make it eternally holy for himself and his sons after him. »And the LORD
appeared to him in the night and blessed him and said to him, "Your name will
18 not be called Jacob, but you will be named Israel." #And he said to him again,
"I am the LORD who created heaven and earth, and I shall increase you and
multiply you very much.Set your mother (on
28 the ass) and let her go with you. *I know, my son, that you came for my sake. And let this day be blessed on which you have seen me alive and I have also seen
29 you, my son. -Prosper and perform the vow which you made and do not delay
your vow because the vow will be sought. And now hasten to do it, and may the
30 one who created11 everything, to whom you vowed the vow, be pleased." #And
he said to Rebecca, "Go with Jacob, your son." And Rebecca went with Jacob,
her son. And Deborah (was) with her. And they reached Bethel. Jacob reflects on the blessing of his sons
31 And Jacob remembered the prayer (with) which his father blessed him and his
two sons, Levi and Judah, and he rejoiced and he blessed the God of his fathers,
32 Abraham and Isaac. 'And he said, "Now I know that I and my sons have an
eternal hope before the God of all." And thus it is ordained concerning the two
of them, and it has been written (on high) for them as an eternal testimony in the
heavenly tablets, just as Isaac blessed them. Jacob's tithe and sacrifice at Bethel
I 32 And he stayed that night in Bethel. And Levi dreamed that he had been TLevi 8
appointed and ordained priest of the Most High God, he and his sons forever. g. The phrase that is written between brackets h. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point
is a rather obvious dittography. and continues through the first three words of 32:8.

Jacob's vision which prevented him from sanctifying the court at Bethel
16 And in the second night, on the twenty-second day of this month, Jacob planned
to build up that place and to build a wall around the court and to sanctify it and
17 to make it eternally holy for himself and his sons after him. »And the LORD
appeared to him in the night and blessed him and said to him, "Your name will
18 not be called Jacob, but you will be named Israel." #And he said to him again,
"I am the LORD who created heaven and earth, and I shall increase you and
multiply you very much. And there will be kings from you; they will rule
19 everywherec that the tracks of mankind have been trod. #And I shall give to your CD i.7f. seed all of the land under heaven and they will rule in all nations as they have
32 a. The numbers "seven" and "twenty-one" b. The MSS lack the negative, but the sense
are found correctly in the Lat. text. The Eth. text requires it. has "sixty" and "twenty-nine" respectively, but c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point
the series of animals offered were most likely and continues through the first three words of 33:9. presented in multiples of seven.desired. And after this all of the earth will be gathered together*1 and they will
inherit it forever."
20 And he finished speaking with him, and he went up from him. And Jacob
21 watched until he went up into heaven. *And he saw in a vision of the night, and
behold an angel was descending from heaven, and there were seven tablets in his
hands. And he gave (them) to Jacob, and he read them, and he knew everything
which was written in them, which would happen to him and to his sons during
22 all the ages. #And he showed him everything which was written on the tablets. 23 And he said to him, "Do not build this place, and do not make an eternal
sanctuary, and do not dwell here because this is not the place. Go to the house
of Abraham, your father, and dwell with Isaac, your father, until the day of your
24 father's death • because you will die peacefully in Egypt and you will be buried
honorably in this land in the tomb of your fathers with Abraham and Isaac. Do
not fear, because just as you have seen and read, thus will everything come to
25 pass. But you write down everything just as you have seen and read (it)." »And
Jacob said, "O LORD, how will I remember everything that I read and saw?"
26 And he said to him, "I will cause you to remember everything." -And he went
up from him and he woke up from his sleep and he recalled everything that he
had read and seen and he wrote down all of the matters which he had read and
seen. The institution of the day of "Addition" to the feast
27 And he observed there yet one (more) day and he sacrificed in it according to 2Chr 7:9
everything which he had been sacrificing on the previous days. And he called it
"Addition" because that day was added, but the previous (days) he called "the
28 feast." *And thus it was revealed that it should be. And it is written in the
heavenly tablets. Therefore it was revealed to him so that he might observe it and
29 add it to the seven days of the feast.Jacob's vision which prevented him from sanctifying the court at Bethel
16 And in the second night, on the twenty-second day of this month, Jacob planned
to build up that place and to build a wall around the court and to sanctify it and
17 to make it eternally holy for himself and his sons after him. »And the LORD
appeared to him in the night and blessed him and said to him, "Your name will
18 not be called Jacob, but you will be named Israel." #And he said to him again,
"I am the LORD who created heaven and earth, and I shall increase you and
multiply you very much. And there will be kings from you; they will rule
19 everywherec that the tracks of mankind have been trod. #And I shall give to your CD i.7f. seed all of the land under heaven and they will rule in all nations as they have
32 a. The numbers "seven" and "twenty-one" b. The MSS lack the negative, but the sense
are found correctly in the Lat. text. The Eth. text requires it. has "sixty" and "twenty-nine" respectively, but c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point
the series of animals offered were most likely and continues through the first three words of 33:9. presented in multiples of seven.

And it is written in the
heavenly tablets. Therefore it was revealed to him so that he might observe it and
29 add it to the seven days of the feast. *And it was called "Addition" because it is
written (on high) in the attestatione of feast days according to the number of days
of the year. The death of Deborah Gen 35:8
30 And on the night of the twenty-third of that month Deborah, the nurse of
Rebecca, died. And she was buried south of the city under the oak at the river. And that place was called "Deborah's River" and the oak (was called) "the Oak
of Sorrow for Deborah."
Rebecca's departure
31 And Rebecca went and returned to her house, to his father, Isaac, and Jacob
sent in her hands rams and sheep and he-goats so that she might make for his
32 father a meal such as he desired. *And he traveled after his mother until he
approached the land of Kabratan. And he dwelt there. The birth of Benjamin and death of Rachel
Gen 35:16-20
33 And Rachel bore a son in the night and called him "son of my sorrow,"
because she suffered when she bore him, but his father called him Benjamin, on
the eleventh of the eighth month in the first year of the sixth week of that jubilee. 34 And Rachel died there and she was buried in the land of Ephrata, i.e. Bethlehem. And Jacob built a pillar on the tomb of Rachel, on the road above her tomb. d. This phrase could be translated lit. "they will e. This is the reading of the MSS. In his Eth. gather together all of the earth." The third person text and English translation, Charles followed the
plural may, however, be regarded as an impersonal Lat. text, which reads "among the days of the
subject and rendered equally well as a passive. feast days."The account of Reuben's sin with Bilhah Gen 35:2 if
1 33 And Jacob went and dwelt toward the south of Magdaladra'ef.* And he and
Leah, his wife, went to his father, Isaac, on the new moon of the tenth month. 2 And Reubenb saw Bilhah, the attendant of Rachel (and) his father's concubine, TReu 3
3 washing in the water privately, and he desired her. *And hiding at night, he
entered Bilhah's house at night0 and found her sleeping in her bed, alone in her
4 house. *And he lay with her. And she woke up and looked, and behold, Reuben
was lying with her on the bed. And she uncovered the hem of her (skirt) and
5 seized him and screamed and recognized that it was Reuben. *And she was
6 ashamed because of him and released her hand from upon him. And he fled. • And
she lamented greatly concerning this matter. And she did not tell anyone at all. 7 And when Jacob came and sought her, she said to him, "I am not clean for you
since I have become polluted for you because Reuben has defiled me and lay with
me at night, but I was sleeping and I was unaware until he had uncovered my Deut 22:30
8 skirt and lain with me." »And Jacob was very angry with Reuben because he had
9 lain with Bilhah, for he had uncovered his father's robe. *And therefore Jacob
did not draw near her since Reuben had defiled her. And the deed of any man
who uncovers his father's robe is very evil because he is despicable before the
LORD. The laws of incest
10 Therefore it is written and ordered in the heavenly tablets that a man should
not lie with his father's wife, and he should not uncover his father's robe because Lev 20:11
that is defilement. They shall certainly die together, the man who lies with his
father's wife and also the wife because they have made a defilement upon the
11 earth. *And there shall be no defilement before our God among the people whom
12 he has chosen for himself as a possession.They shall certainly die together, the man who lies with his
father's wife and also the wife because they have made a defilement upon the
11 earth. *And there shall be no defilement before our God among the people whom
12 he has chosen for himself as a possession. *And again it is written a second time:
"Let anyone who lies with his father's wife be cursed because he has uncovered Deut 22:30
his father's shame." And all the holy ones of the LORD said, "So be it, so be
it."
13 And you, Moses, command the children of Israel and let them keep this word
because it is a judgment worthy of death. And it is a defilement. And there is no
forgiveness in order to atone for a man who has done this, forever, but only to
execute him and kill him and stone him and to uproot him from the midst of the
14 people of our God. #For any man who does this in Israel should not have life for
a single day upon the earth because he is despicable and polluted. The example of Reuben does not permit exception to law of incest
is And let them not say, "Reuben had life and forgiveness after he lay with his
father's concubine and while she had a husband and while her husband, Jacob,
16 his father, was alive." *For the ordinance and judgment and law had not been Rom4:is
revealed till then (as) completed for everyone, but in your days (it is) like the law
of (appointed) times and days and an eternal law for everlasting generations. • And
17 this law has no consummation of days. And also there is no forgiveness for it but
only that both of them should be uprooted from the midst of the people. On the
day when they have done this they shall be killed. 33 a. In Gen 35:21 it is reported that Jacob dwelt b. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this point
near the "tower of Eder" (Heb., migdal-eder). and continues through vs. 16a. The Syr. text is
That tower was in the region of "Ephrath." The considerably abbreviated. Eth. spelling is therefore a corruption of the phrase c.And it is written in the
heavenly tablets. Therefore it was revealed to him so that he might observe it and
29 add it to the seven days of the feast. *And it was called "Addition" because it is
written (on high) in the attestatione of feast days according to the number of days
of the year. The death of Deborah Gen 35:8
30 And on the night of the twenty-third of that month Deborah, the nurse of
Rebecca, died. And she was buried south of the city under the oak at the river. And that place was called "Deborah's River" and the oak (was called) "the Oak
of Sorrow for Deborah."
Rebecca's departure
31 And Rebecca went and returned to her house, to his father, Isaac, and Jacob
sent in her hands rams and sheep and he-goats so that she might make for his
32 father a meal such as he desired. *And he traveled after his mother until he
approached the land of Kabratan. And he dwelt there. The birth of Benjamin and death of Rachel
Gen 35:16-20
33 And Rachel bore a son in the night and called him "son of my sorrow,"
because she suffered when she bore him, but his father called him Benjamin, on
the eleventh of the eighth month in the first year of the sixth week of that jubilee. 34 And Rachel died there and she was buried in the land of Ephrata, i.e. Bethlehem. And Jacob built a pillar on the tomb of Rachel, on the road above her tomb. d. This phrase could be translated lit. "they will e. This is the reading of the MSS. In his Eth. gather together all of the earth." The third person text and English translation, Charles followed the
plural may, however, be regarded as an impersonal Lat. text, which reads "among the days of the
subject and rendered equally well as a passive. feast days."

Eth. spelling is therefore a corruption of the phrase c. The repetition of "at night" seems unnec­
"the tower of Eder at Ephrath" or "the Ephrathite essary. The Lat. text mentions "night" only once
tower of Eder." in this vs.Moses is directed to warn people of laws of sexual defilement
is And you, Moses, write for Israel, and let them keep this. And let them do
according to these words. And let them not commit a sin worthy of death because
19 the LORD our God is a judge who does not acceptd persons or gifts. -And say to
them these words of the ordinance that they might hear and guard and watch
themselves concerning them and they will not be destroyed or uprooted from the
earth. For defiled, and an abomination, and blemished, and polluted are all who
20 do them upon the earth before our God. #And there is no sin greater than the
fornication which they commit upon the earth because Israel is a holy nation to
the LORD his God, and a nation of inheritance, and a nation of priests, and a royal
nation, and a (special) possession. And there is nothing which appears which is
as defiled as this among the holy people. The children of Jacob appear before Isaac
Gen 35:22-27
21 And in the third year of this sixth week it came to pass as Jacob and all his
sons were traveling that they dwelt (at) the house of Abraham near Isaac, his
22 father, and Rebecca, his mother. »And these are the names of the children of
Jacob: his firstborn, Reuben, and Simeon and Levi and Judah, and Issachar, and
Zebulun, the sons of Leah. And the sons of Rachel (are) Joseph and Benjamin. And the sons of Bilhah (are) Dan and Naphtali. And the sons of Zilpah (are) Gad
and Asher. And Dinah (is) the daughter of Leah, the only daughter of Jacob. 23 And when they came, they bowed down to Isaac and Rebecca. And when they
saw them, they blessed Jacob and all of his sons. And Isaac rejoiced greatly
because he saw the sons of Jacob, his younger son. And he blessed them. The sons of Jacob successfully defeat an Amorite coalition Gen 37:12
1 34 And in the sixth year of this week from this forty-fourth jubilee, Jacob sent
2 his sons with their servants to pasture their sheep in the field of Shechem.And he blessed them. The sons of Jacob successfully defeat an Amorite coalition Gen 37:12
1 34 And in the sixth year of this week from this forty-fourth jubilee, Jacob sent
2 his sons with their servants to pasture their sheep in the field of Shechem. *And
while hiding themselves under the trees, seven kings of the Amorites assembled
3 themselves to fight against them and to plunder their animals. *And Jacob and
Levi and Judah and Joseph were at home with Isaac, their father, because his soul
grieved him, and they were unable to leave him. And Benjamin was the youngest
and therefore he dwelt with his father. 4 And the kings of Tafu, and the kings of 'Aresa, and the kings of Seragan, and
the kings of Selo, and the kings of Ga'as, and the kings of Bethoron, and the
king of Ma'anisakir,* and all of those who dwelt in that mountain, who dwelt in
5 the woods of the land of Canaan, came. *And they reported it to Jacob, saying
that, "Behold, the kings of the Amorites have surrounded your sons and they
6 have plundered their herds." 'And he and his three sons and all of his father's
servants and his servants arose from his house and went against them with six
7 thousand men who carried swords. #And he killed them in the field of Shechem Gen 48.22
and he pursued those who fled and killed them with the edge of the sword. And TJud 4
he killed 'Aresa and Tafu and Seragan and Selo and Ma'anisakir and Ga'as, and
8 he collected his herds. *And he prevailed over them and decreed a tribute against TJIKM
d. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point Jub. See TJud 3-7 and Midrash Wayyissau in A. and continues through 35:5a. Jellinek's Bet ha-Midrasch (Jerusalem, 19382) part
3, pp. 1-5. In the Midrash Wayyissau it is explained
34 a. For a recent discussion of the place-names that the Amorites were provoked by the action of
mentioned in this vs. see VanderKam, Textual and two of Jacob's sons against Shechem, but waited
Historical Studies, pp. 220-29.Eth. spelling is therefore a corruption of the phrase c. The repetition of "at night" seems unnec­
"the tower of Eder at Ephrath" or "the Ephrathite essary. The Lat. text mentions "night" only once
tower of Eder." in this vs.

see VanderKam, Textual and two of Jacob's sons against Shechem, but waited
Historical Studies, pp. 220-29. seven years to mount an attack against the family
This account of the Amorite war against the sons of Jacob. In both the account of Wayyissau and
of Jacob is not biblical, but it is found in two TJud, Judah plays a leading role in the war against
Jewish texts in a form which provides witness to the Amorites. a version of the story which was independent ofthem so that they might give a tribute of five of the fruits of their land. And he
9 built Robel and Tamnatares. •And he returned peacefully and he made peace with
them and they became servants to him until the day he and his sons went down
into Egypt. The brothers sell Joseph and deceive their father
Gen 37:13-35
10 And in the seventh year of this week he sent Joseph from his house to the land
of Shechem in order that he might know about the welfare of his brothers, and
n he found them in the land of Dothan. *And they acted fraudulently and made a
plot against him to kill him, but they repented and sold him to a band of
Ishmaelites. And they took him down to Egypt and sold him to Potiphar, a eunuch
12 of Pharaoh, the chief guard,b the priest of the city of Heliopolis.c »And the sons
of Jacob slaughtered a kid and dipped Joseph's garment into the blood and sent
13 (it) to Jacob, their father, on the tenth of the seventh month. »And he lamented
all of that night, because they had brought it to him in the evening. And he
became feverish in lamenting his death, and said that, "A cruel beast has eaten
Joseph." And all of the men of his house lamented with him on that day. And it
14 happened as they were mourning and lamenting with him all that day •that his
sons and his daughter rose up to comfort him but he was not comforted concerning
his son. The death and burial of Bilhah and Dinah
is And on that day Bilhah heard that Joseph had perished and she died while
mourning for him. And she was dwelling in Qafratef. And Dinah, his daughter,
also died after Joseph perished. And these three lamentations came upon Israel in
16 a single month. #And they buried Bilhah opposite the tomb of Rachel, and they
17 also buried Dinah, his daughter, there.And these three lamentations came upon Israel in
16 a single month. #And they buried Bilhah opposite the tomb of Rachel, and they
17 also buried Dinah, his daughter, there. •And it happened, as they lamented for
Joseph one year, that he was not consoled, because he said, 44I will go down to
the grave lamenting for my son."
A day of memorial established for the crime against Joseph
is Therefore it is decreed for the children of Israel that they mourn on the tenth Lev 16:29,34
(day) of the seventh month—on the day when that which caused him to weep for
Joseph came to Jacob, his father—so that they might atone for them(selves) with
a young kid on the tenth (day) of the seventh month, once a year, on account of
their sin because they caused the affection of their father to grieve for Joseph, his
19 son. *And this day is decreed so that they might mourn on it on account of their
sins and on account of all their transgressions and on account of all their errors
in order to purify themselves on this day, once a year. The wives of the sons of Jacob Gen 38:2
20 And after Joseph perished, the sons of Jacob took wives for themselves. The
name of the wife of Reuben (was) 'Ada.d And the name of the wife of Simeon
(was) 'Adiba'a, a Canaanite. And the name of the wife of Levi (was) Melka, Gen 46:10
from the daughters of Aram, from the seed of the sons of Terah. And the name
b. The Eth. MSS read "chief cook," but that the Gk. 'eliou, "sun" (genitive). is due to a confusion about the meaning of the d. In his edition of the Eth. text, Charles included
Heb. word tabbah, which lit. means "one who a Syr. fragment as Appendix III. The Syr. fragment
slaughters." It was apparently applied to one who contained a list of the wives of the patriarchs which
slaughtered animals, i.e. a butcher, but in the generally agrees with the names found in Jub.see VanderKam, Textual and two of Jacob's sons against Shechem, but waited
Historical Studies, pp. 220-29. seven years to mount an attack against the family
This account of the Amorite war against the sons of Jacob. In both the account of Wayyissau and
of Jacob is not biblical, but it is found in two TJud, Judah plays a leading role in the war against
Jewish texts in a form which provides witness to the Amorites. a version of the story which was independent of

fragment
slaughters." It was apparently applied to one who contained a list of the wives of the patriarchs which
slaughtered animals, i.e. a butcher, but in the generally agrees with the names found in Jub. passing of time it became the title for a high official, Charles provided a detailed comparison of the forms
in this case the keeper of prison in Gen 39:1. in the notes to his 1902 English translation. c. The Eth. spelling 'Elew is a transcription ofof the wife of Judah (was) Betasu'el, a Canaanite. And the name of the wife of
Issachar (was) Hezaqa. And the name of the wife of Zebulun (was) Ni'iman. And
the name of the wife of Dan (was) 'Egla. And the name of the wife of Naphtali
(was) Rasu'u, who (was) Mesopotamian. And the name of the wife of Gad (was)
Maka. And the name of the wife of Asher (was) Tyona. And the name of the
wife of Joseph (was) Asenath, an Egyptian. And the name of the wife of Benjamin
(was) 'Iyasaka. *And Simeon repented and took another wife from Mesopotamia
as his brothers had. Rebecca's conversation with Jacob predicting her death
1 35 And in the first year of the first week in this forty-fifth jubilee, Rebecca called
to Jacob, her son. And she commanded him with regard to his father and brother
2 that he should honor them all the days of Jacob's life. *And Jacob said, "I will
do everything just as you have commanded me because this thing is an honor and
a greatness for me and a righteousness for me before the LORD, that I should
3 honor them. •And you, mother, know from the day I was born until8 this day all
of my deeds and everything which is in my heart, that I always think of good for
4 everyone. *And why would I not do this thing which you have commanded me,
5 that I should honor my father and my brother. •Tell me, mother, what perversity
you have seen against me and I will withdraw from it and mercyb will be upon
6 me." #And she said, "My son, all my days I have never seen against you anything
perverse but only uprightness. But I will rightly tell you, my son, (that) I shall
die within this year, and I shall not pass through this year alive because I have
seen in a dream the day of my death, that I shall not live more than one hundred
and fifty-five years. And behold, I have completed all of the days of my life which
I will live."
7 And Jacob laughed about his mother's words, because his mother said that she
would die, but she was sitting opposite him, and her strength was in her.But I will rightly tell you, my son, (that) I shall
die within this year, and I shall not pass through this year alive because I have
seen in a dream the day of my death, that I shall not live more than one hundred
and fifty-five years. And behold, I have completed all of the days of my life which
I will live."
7 And Jacob laughed about his mother's words, because his mother said that she
would die, but she was sitting opposite him, and her strength was in her. And
she was not suffering loss of strength, because she was coming and going and
seeing (clearly), and her teeth were sound, and no disease had touched her all the
8 days of her life. -And Jacob said, "I (would be) happy, mother, if my days
approached the days of your life and my powers were thus in me as your powers. And you will not die because you have spoken to mec (in) idle jest concerning
your death."
Rebecca's conversation with Isaac concerning Jacob and Esau
9 And she went in to Isaac and she said to him, "One request I beg of you. Make
Esau swear that he will not harm Jacob and will not pursue him hostilely because
you know Esau's inclination,*1 that it has been evil since his youth. [And there is
10 no goodness in him because he wants to kill him after your death.]e «And you
know everything that he has done from the day that Jacob, his brother, traveled
to Haran until this day, that he abandoned us with all his heart and did evil with
us. He gathered your flocks and robbed all of your possessions before your face. 11 And while we were begging and asking for what was ours he acted like a man
35 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this the sentence was probably in the original text. I
point and continues through 35:12a. am almost persuaded that he is right. I am, however,
b. The Lat. text reads "mercy of the Lord." struck by the fact that vs. 13 contains a phrase
c. A Heb. fragment from Qumran begins at this which is quite similar to the sentiment expressed
point and is parallel through vs. 10a.fragment
slaughters." It was apparently applied to one who contained a list of the wives of the patriarchs which
slaughtered animals, i.e. a butcher, but in the generally agrees with the names found in Jub. passing of time it became the title for a high official, Charles provided a detailed comparison of the forms
in this case the keeper of prison in Gen 39:1. in the notes to his 1902 English translation. c. The Eth. spelling 'Elew is a transcription of

fragment from Qumran begins at this which is quite similar to the sentiment expressed
point and is parallel through vs. 10a. here, but the phrase in vs. 13 was identified as an
d. The Heb. word in the Qumran text is yiser. addition to the text by Charles in his translation. The yiser of Esau is "evil." If the two sentences 9 and 13 are read together
e. The sentence enclosed in brackets is lacking with the bracketed phrases treated as glosses, one
from the Heb. text. There is, of course, no way of could imagine that some scribe was impressed with
knowing whether the Heb. text originally lacked the total depravity of Esau which was discussed in
the sentence, which appears in both Eth. and Lat., this ch. and wrote in two marginal comments,
or whether the sentence was simply lost from a perhaps to remind himself of a choice sermon
single Heb. manuscript. VanderKam, in his Textual illustration. and Historical Studies, pp. 85-87, concluded mat12 who was taking pity on us. *And he is bitter against you because you blessed
Jacob, your perfect and upright son, because he has no evil but only goodness. And since he came from Haran until this day he has not been depriving us of
anything, for he has always been bringing us everything in its season. And he
rejoices with his whole heart whenever we accept (anything) from his hand. And
he has been blessing us and has not separated from us since he came from Haran
until this day. But he has been dwelling with us continually at home honoring
13 us." *And Isaac said to her, "I know and see the deeds of Jacob, who is with
us, that with all his heart he is honoring us. And I first loved Esau more than
Jacob because he was born first, but now I love Jacob more than Esau because
he has increasingly made his deeds evil. And he has no righteousness because all
of his ways are injustice and violence. [And he has no righteousness around him.]f
14 And now my heart is vexed on account of all his deeds. And neither he nor his
seed is to be saved for they will be destroyed from the earth, and they will be
uprooted from under the heaven since he has forsaken the God of Abraham and
he has gone after his wives and after their defilement and after their errors, (both)
is he and his sons. *And you say to me that I should make him swear that he will
not kill his brother, Jacob. If he swears he will not abide by his oath, and he will
16 not do goodness, but only evil. •But if he wishes to kill Jacob, his brother, he
will be given into the hand of Jacob. And he will not escape from his hand
17 because he will fall into his hand. »And you should not fear on account of Jacob
because the protector of Jacob is greater and mightier and more honored and
praised than the protector of Esau."
Rebecca seeks assurances of fraternal love between Jacob and Esau
is And Rebecca sent and called Esau. And he came to her and she said to him,
"I have a request, my son, which I will ask of you.»And you should not fear on account of Jacob
because the protector of Jacob is greater and mightier and more honored and
praised than the protector of Esau."
Rebecca seeks assurances of fraternal love between Jacob and Esau
is And Rebecca sent and called Esau. And he came to her and she said to him,
"I have a request, my son, which I will ask of you. Say that you will do it, my
19 son." »And he said, "I will do everything which you say to me. And I will not
20 refuse your request." *And she said to him, 'i ask of you on the day when I die
that you bring me and bury me near Sarah, your father's mother, and that you
and Jacob love one another, and that one will not seek evil for his brother, but
only love him. And you will prosper, my sons, and be honored in the midst of
the earth and the enemy will not rejoice over you. And you will become a blessing
21 and a mercy in the sight of all who love you." *And he said, t4I shall do everything
which you have been saying to me. And I shall bury you on the day when you
die near Sarah, my father's mother, just as you have desired so that your bones
22 will be near her bones. #And Jacob, my brother, I shall love more than all flesh. And I have no brother in all the earth except him alone. And this is not a great
(thing) for me if I love him because he is my brother and together we were sown
in your belly and together we came forth from your womb. And if I do not love
23 my brother, whom shall I love? *But I beg of you only that you admonish Jacob
concerning my sons because I know that he will certainly rule over me and my
sons because on the day my father blessed him he set him above and me beneath. 24 And I swear to you that I will love him and that I will not seek evil for him all
the days of my life, but only good." And he swore to her concerning all of these
matters. 25 And she called Jacob in the sight of Esau, and she commanded him according
26 to what she had spoken with Esau. *And he said, "I will do your pleasure.fragment from Qumran begins at this which is quite similar to the sentiment expressed
point and is parallel through vs. 10a. here, but the phrase in vs. 13 was identified as an
d. The Heb. word in the Qumran text is yiser. addition to the text by Charles in his translation. The yiser of Esau is "evil." If the two sentences 9 and 13 are read together
e. The sentence enclosed in brackets is lacking with the bracketed phrases treated as glosses, one
from the Heb. text. There is, of course, no way of could imagine that some scribe was impressed with
knowing whether the Heb. text originally lacked the total depravity of Esau which was discussed in
the sentence, which appears in both Eth. and Lat., this ch. and wrote in two marginal comments,
or whether the sentence was simply lost from a perhaps to remind himself of a choice sermon
single Heb. manuscript. VanderKam, in his Textual illustration. and Historical Studies, pp. 85-87, concluded mat

25 And she called Jacob in the sight of Esau, and she commanded him according
26 to what she had spoken with Esau. *And he said, "I will do your pleasure. Trust
me, that evil will not proceed from me or my sons against Esau and I will not act
27 first in anything except to love (him) only." *And they ate and they drank, she
and her sons, that night. And she died (at the age of) three jubilees and one week
and one year on that night. And her two sons, Esau and Jacob, buried her in the
cave of Machpelah near Sarah, their father's mother. f. The sentence within the brackets was identi- it, a dittography," p. 209 in his 1902 English
lied by Charles as "either a corruption or, as I take translation.Isaac's farewell advice and blessings for Jacob and Esau
1 36 And in the sixth year of this week, Isaac called his two sons, Esau and Jacob. And they came to him and he said to them, "My sons, I am going in the way of Ecci 12:5
2 my fathers to the eternal home where my fathers are. •Bury me near Abraham,
my father, in the cave of Machpelah in the field of Ephron the Hittite which
Abraham acquired for a burial place there. In the tomb which I dug for myself
3 there, bury me. *And I am commanding this, my sons, that you might perform
righteousness and uprightness upon the earth so that the LORD will bring upon
you everything which the LORD said that he would do for Abraham and for his
4 seed. *And among yourselves, my sons, be loving of your brothers as a man loves
himself, with each man seeking for his brother what is good for him, and acting
s together on the earth, and loving each other as themselves. «And regarding the
matter of idols, I command you and admonish you to scorn them and hate them
and not to love them because they are full of error for those who worship and
6 bow down to them. •Remember, my sons, the LORD, the God of Abraham, your
father, and (that) I subsequently worshiped and served him in righteousness and
joy so that he might multiply you and increase your seed like the stars of heaven
with regard to number and (so that) he will plant you on the earth as a righteous
7 planting which will not be uprooted for all the eternal generations. *And now I
will make you swear by the great oath—because there is not an oath which is
greater than it, by the glorious and honored and great and splendid and amazing
and mighty name which created heaven and earth and everything together—that
8 you will fear him and worship him. #And (that) each one will love his brother
with compassion and righteousness and no one will desire evil for his brother
from now and forever all the days of your lives so that you will prosper in all
9 your deeds and not be destroyed.*And now I
will make you swear by the great oath—because there is not an oath which is
greater than it, by the glorious and honored and great and splendid and amazing
and mighty name which created heaven and earth and everything together—that
8 you will fear him and worship him. #And (that) each one will love his brother
with compassion and righteousness and no one will desire evil for his brother
from now and forever all the days of your lives so that you will prosper in all
9 your deeds and not be destroyed. *And if either of you seeks evil against his
brother, know that hereafter each one who seeks evil against his brother will fall
into his hands and be uprooted from the land of the living and his seed will be
10 destroyed from under heaven. *And on the day of turmoil and execration and
indignation and wrath, (then) with devouring burning fire just as he burned Sodom
so too he will bum up his land and his city and everything which will be his. And he will be wiped out from the book of the discipline of mankind, and he will
not be written (on high) in The Book of Life for (he is written) in the one which
will be destroyed and pass on to eternal execration so that their judgment will
always be renewed with eternal reproach and execration and wrath and torment
11 and indignation and plagues and sickness. *I have been speaking and exhorting
you, my sons, according to the judgment which will come upon the man who
desires to harm his brother."
12 And he divided8 all his possessions which he had with the two of them on that
day, and he gave a larger (portion) to the one whose birth was first: both the
tower and everything which surrounded it and everything which Abraham acquired
13 at the Well of the Oath.25 And she called Jacob in the sight of Esau, and she commanded him according
26 to what she had spoken with Esau. *And he said, "I will do your pleasure. Trust
me, that evil will not proceed from me or my sons against Esau and I will not act
27 first in anything except to love (him) only." *And they ate and they drank, she
and her sons, that night. And she died (at the age of) three jubilees and one week
and one year on that night. And her two sons, Esau and Jacob, buried her in the
cave of Machpelah near Sarah, their father's mother. f. The sentence within the brackets was identi- it, a dittography," p. 209 in his 1902 English
lied by Charles as "either a corruption or, as I take translation.

And he will be wiped out from the book of the discipline of mankind, and he will
not be written (on high) in The Book of Life for (he is written) in the one which
will be destroyed and pass on to eternal execration so that their judgment will
always be renewed with eternal reproach and execration and wrath and torment
11 and indignation and plagues and sickness. *I have been speaking and exhorting
you, my sons, according to the judgment which will come upon the man who
desires to harm his brother."
12 And he divided8 all his possessions which he had with the two of them on that
day, and he gave a larger (portion) to the one whose birth was first: both the
tower and everything which surrounded it and everything which Abraham acquired
13 at the Well of the Oath. •And he said, "I will surely increase this (portion) for
14 the one whose birth was first." -And Esau said, "I have sold to Jacob and I have
delivered my right of seniority to Jacob and so let it be given to him, and there
15 is not anything which I can say concerning it because it is his." *And Isaac said,
"May a blessing rest upon you and upon your seed on this day, my sons, because
you have given rest to me, and my heart has not been grieved concerning the
16 right of seniority lest you act perversely concerning it. »May the LORD Most High
bless the man who does righteousness, him and his seed forever."
n And he finished commanding them and blessing them. And they ate and drank
together before him. And he rejoiced because they were in mutual agreement. 36 a. There is a Heb. fragment from Qumran (1Q be placed at Jub 36:12, but a remnant of the
18) which contains the Heb. lettersp/g, "divide." preceding word in the Heb. text matches nothing
In the official publication of DJD (Oxford, 1955), in this vs. of Jub so the identification is unlikely. vol. 1, p. 84, Milik suggested that it might possiblyis And they went out from him and they rested that day and they slept. •And Isaac
slept on his bed on that day rejoicing. And he slept the eternal sleep. And he died Gen 35:29
at the age of one hundred and eighty years. He completed twenty-five weeks and
19 five years. And his two sons, Esau and Jacob, buried him. »And Esau traveled to
the land of Edom, to the mountain of Seir, and he dwelt there. 20 And Jacob dwelt in Mount Hebron in the tower of the land of the sojourning
of his father, Abraham. Andb he worshiped the LORD with all of his heart and
according to the commands which were revealed (and) according to the division
of the days of his generations. The death of Leah
21 And Leah, his wife, died in the fourth year of the second week of the forty-
fifth jubilee. And he buried her in the cave of Machpelah near Rebecca, his
22 mother, and northc of the tomb of Sarah, his father's mother. *And all of her
children and his children went out to weep with him for Leah, his wife, and to
23 comfort him concerning her because he was lamenting her. •For he loved her very
much after Rachel, her sister, died since she was perfect and upright in all of her
ways, and she honored Jacob. And in all of the days which she lived with him
he never heard a harsh word from her mouth because she possessed gentleness,
24 peace, uprightness, and honor. *And he remembered all of her deeds which she
had done in her life, and he lamented greatly for her because he loved her with
all his heart and all his soul. Esau's sons reprove him for yielding to Jacob
1 37 And on the day that Isaac,8 the father of Jacob and Esau, died, the sons of
Esau heard that Isaac had given the right of seniority to Jacob, his younger son,
2 and they were very angry.*And he remembered all of her deeds which she
had done in her life, and he lamented greatly for her because he loved her with
all his heart and all his soul. Esau's sons reprove him for yielding to Jacob
1 37 And on the day that Isaac,8 the father of Jacob and Esau, died, the sons of
Esau heard that Isaac had given the right of seniority to Jacob, his younger son,
2 and they were very angry. -And they argued with their father, saying,b "Why,
since you are the elder and Jacob the younger, did your father give the right of
3 seniority to Jacob and abandon you?" *And hec said to them, "Because I sold
my right of firstborn to Jacob for a little dish of lentils. And on the day that my
father sent me to hunt and snare [and bring to him]d so that he might eat and bless
me, he went with guile and brought food and drink to my father and my father
4 blessed him and placed me under his hand. *And now our father has made us
swear, (both) me and him, that we will not seek after evil, either one against his
brother, but that we will continue with an affection and a peace, each one with
5 his brother, so that we will not corrupt our ways."e *And they said, "We will
not listen to you in order to make peace with him because our might is stronger
than his might and we are stronger than he. We will go against him and we will
kill and destroy him and his sons. And if you do not go with us we will do harm
6 to you. *And now listen to us, and we will send to Aram and to Philistia and to
Moab and to Ammon and we will choose for ourselves chosen men who are ardent
in battle and we will go against him and we will fight with him and we will uproot
7 him from the land before he seizes power." «And their father said to them, "Do
8 not go and make war with him lest you fall before him." *And they said to him,
b. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point and your father has given him the larger portion
and continues through 37:5a. and made you lower?" The Syr. reads "why, since
c.And he will be wiped out from the book of the discipline of mankind, and he will
not be written (on high) in The Book of Life for (he is written) in the one which
will be destroyed and pass on to eternal execration so that their judgment will
always be renewed with eternal reproach and execration and wrath and torment
11 and indignation and plagues and sickness. *I have been speaking and exhorting
you, my sons, according to the judgment which will come upon the man who
desires to harm his brother."
12 And he divided8 all his possessions which he had with the two of them on that
day, and he gave a larger (portion) to the one whose birth was first: both the
tower and everything which surrounded it and everything which Abraham acquired
13 at the Well of the Oath. •And he said, "I will surely increase this (portion) for
14 the one whose birth was first." -And Esau said, "I have sold to Jacob and I have
delivered my right of seniority to Jacob and so let it be given to him, and there
15 is not anything which I can say concerning it because it is his." *And Isaac said,
"May a blessing rest upon you and upon your seed on this day, my sons, because
you have given rest to me, and my heart has not been grieved concerning the
16 right of seniority lest you act perversely concerning it. »May the LORD Most High
bless the man who does righteousness, him and his seed forever."
n And he finished commanding them and blessing them. And they ate and drank
together before him. And he rejoiced because they were in mutual agreement. 36 a. There is a Heb. fragment from Qumran (1Q be placed at Jub 36:12, but a remnant of the
18) which contains the Heb. lettersp/g, "divide." preceding word in the Heb. text matches nothing
In the official publication of DJD (Oxford, 1955), in this vs. of Jub so the identification is unlikely. vol. 1, p. 84, Milik suggested that it might possibly

and made you lower?" The Syr. reads "why, since
c. The word for "north" is literally "left." In you are older than Jacob your brother, did your
ancient Israel directions were given while facing father then give to him the right of first born and
the east so that "left" is "north" and "right" is the primacy, since he is younger than you."
"south." c. Both the Syr. and Lat. read "Esau."
d. The phrase in brackets is lacking in both Syr. 37 a. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this and Lat. point and continues through 38:9. e. The last phrase has a different Lat. text,
b. The Lat. and Syr. versions of this quotation which reads "so that we will not mutually engage
are worded differently. The Lat. reads "why is in malice." The Syr. text lacks this phrase. Jacob set before you inasmuch as he is younger,"This very (thing) is your (type of) act from your youth until this day, and you
put your neck under his yoke. But we will not listen to these words."
Esau's sons hire mercenaries for war against Jacob
9 And they sent to Aram and to Aduram, to their father's friend, and they hired
from them one thousand fighting men, chosen warriors. And they came to them:
10 from Moab and from the Ammonites, those who were hired, one thousand chosen
men, and from Philistia one thousand chosen fighting men, and from Edom and
from the Humans one thousand chosen fighting men, and from the Kittim strong
men, warriors. Esau's approach to battle against Jacob
11 And they said to their father, "Go forth with them and lead them. And if not,
12 we will kill you." #And he was filled with wrath and indignation when he saw
that his sons were forcing him to go before (them) in order to lead them to Jacob,
13 his brother. #But afterward he remembered all of the evil which was hidden in
his heart against Jacob, his brother, and he did not remember the oath which he
swore to his father and his mother that he would not seek any evil against Jacob,
his brother, all of his days. 14 And with all of this, Jacob did not know that they were coming against him
for battle. But he was lamenting Leah, his wife, until they drew very near the
is tower with four thousand men, warriors and chosen fighting men. *And the men
of Hebron sent to him, saying, "Behold, your brother has come up against you
in order to fight with you with four thousand men (who are) girded (with) swords
and bear shields and military weapons"; because they loved Jacob more than
Esau. And they spoke to him because Jacob was a more generous and merciful
man than Esau. 16,17 But Jacob did not believe (them) until they drew very close to the tower.and made you lower?" The Syr. reads "why, since
c. The word for "north" is literally "left." In you are older than Jacob your brother, did your
ancient Israel directions were given while facing father then give to him the right of first born and
the east so that "left" is "north" and "right" is the primacy, since he is younger than you."
"south." c. Both the Syr. and Lat. read "Esau."
d. The phrase in brackets is lacking in both Syr. 37 a. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this and Lat. point and continues through 38:9. e. The last phrase has a different Lat. text,
b. The Lat. and Syr. versions of this quotation which reads "so that we will not mutually engage
are worded differently. The Lat. reads "why is in malice." The Syr. text lacks this phrase. Jacob set before you inasmuch as he is younger,

And they spoke to him because Jacob was a more generous and merciful
man than Esau. 16,17 But Jacob did not believe (them) until they drew very close to the tower. *And
he closed the gates of the tower and he stood on the battlement and spoke with
his brother, Esau, and he said, "Is the consolation (with) which you have come
in order to console me concerning my wife who died good?f Is this the oath which
you swore to your father and again to your mother before they died? You have
sinned against the oath. And on the day when you swore to your father, you were
18 condemned."8 - And (at) that time, Esau answered and said to him:
"Mankind and beasts of the field have no righteous oath which they have
surely sworn forever. But daily they seek evil, one against the other, and each one (seeks) to
kill his enemy and adversary. 19 And you will hate me and my sons forever. And so there is no observing of fraternity with you. [And Jacob said, "Do not act (thus), my brother. As for me, there is no evil in
my heart against you. Do not plan evil against me. Know that there is a God and
he sees what is hidden and requites to everyone according to his deeds. Calm
down the heat of your anger and do not do anything rashly so that evil will come
upon you." Then Esau turned and said harshly:]h
20 Hear these words of mine which I will speak to you. If a boar changes his hide and his bristles (and) makes (them) soft as wool,
f. This question has no grammatical marker in vs. Charles's printed text, but MS C provides one, and h. The portion of text which is set between
the context is appropriate for a question. The Syr. brackets is lacking in Eth. It is found only in Syr. text inserts the interrogative word ma, "what?" or The sentiments expressed in the Syr. text are
"how?" at the beginning of this sentence. appropriate to the present context. g. The Syr. text lacks the last sentence of thisand if he brings forth horns upon his head like the horns of a stag or
sheep;'
then I will observe fraternity with you. [And if sucklings separate themselves from their mother, you would not
be a brother to me.] J
21 And if the wolves make peace with lambs so as not to eat them or assault
them,k
and if their hearts are (set) upon them to do good,
then peace will be in my heart for you. 22 And if the lion becomes a friend of the ox,
and if he is bound with him in a single yoke,
and he plows with him and makes peace with him,
then I will make peace with you. 23 And if the raven becomes white like the Raza1 bird,
then know that I will love you and I will make peace with you. You will be uprooted,
and your sons will be uprooted,
but you will have no peace."
24 And when Jacob saw that he had planned evil against him from his heart and
from his whole being so that he might kill him, and (that) he had come leaping
like a wandering boar who had come upon a spear which was piercing him and
killing him, and he would not withdraw from it, then he spoke to his own
(followers) and to his servants so that they might attack him and all his friends. The defeat of Esau and his forces
1 38 And afterward Judah spoke to Jacob, his father, and he said to him, 4tO
father, stretch your bow and shoot your arrows and strike down the enemy and
kill the adversary. And may you have might because we will not kill your brother
(inasmuch as) he is near to you and with us he is like you with respect to honor."3
2 And then when Jacob drew his bow and shot an arrow and struck Esau, his Uud9
3 brother, on his right breast,5 he killed him. *And again, he shot an arrow and
struck Adoran, the Aramean, in his left breast and drove him back and killed him. 4 And afterward, the sons of Jacob and their servants went forth to divide
5 themselves on the four (sides) of the tower. #And Judah went out in front and
Naphtali and Gad and fifty servants with him on the south side of the tower. And
i.#And Judah went out in front and
Naphtali and Gad and fifty servants with him on the south side of the tower. And
i. The phrase "or sheep" is lacking in the Syr. point and continues through 38:16, lacking only
The text reads more easily without it, but that could the last two words in that vs. also explain why someone would drop it. Charles had emended his Eth. text and translation
j. There is obviously something wrong with the to agree with the Lat. text and reads the end of vs. phrase between brackets. The word which is trans­ 1 as "let us give him (this) honor." We have
lated "sucklings" is lit. "breasts." The root from followed the MS reading instead. which the word is derived means "to suck milk." Charles's emendation is attractive, but the Syr. Charles emended his Eth. text to read "since the text also differs from the Eth. and it would appear
males have been separated from ..." but he that this vs. suffered in transmission. Nevertheless,
returned to follow a MS reading in his English the Syr. text does give some support for reading
translation. The Syr. text lacks this sentence. In with the Eth. MSS. The Syr. text reads as follows:
this case, however, the Syr. omission does not "Judah said to Jacob, his father, 'We are not able
provide clear evidence of the original text because to unsheath the sword before your brother because
the Syr. text has apparently shortened its reading he is like you in our sight. Bend your bow and
of all of vss. 20-23 quite drastically. destroy your enemy and kill your adversary because
k. Instead of "to eat them or assault them," the he is your brother, and leave to us the rest of the
Syr. reads "they will not harm them." warriors.' "
1. The Syr. has "pelican," which might be b. The phrase "his right breast" is lacking in
found in Palestine. Its white color is also appropriate Eth., but it is restored from the Lat. text. The Lat. for the present context.And they spoke to him because Jacob was a more generous and merciful
man than Esau. 16,17 But Jacob did not believe (them) until they drew very close to the tower. *And
he closed the gates of the tower and he stood on the battlement and spoke with
his brother, Esau, and he said, "Is the consolation (with) which you have come
in order to console me concerning my wife who died good?f Is this the oath which
you swore to your father and again to your mother before they died? You have
sinned against the oath. And on the day when you swore to your father, you were
18 condemned."8 - And (at) that time, Esau answered and said to him:
"Mankind and beasts of the field have no righteous oath which they have
surely sworn forever. But daily they seek evil, one against the other, and each one (seeks) to
kill his enemy and adversary. 19 And you will hate me and my sons forever. And so there is no observing of fraternity with you. [And Jacob said, "Do not act (thus), my brother. As for me, there is no evil in
my heart against you. Do not plan evil against me. Know that there is a God and
he sees what is hidden and requites to everyone according to his deeds. Calm
down the heat of your anger and do not do anything rashly so that evil will come
upon you." Then Esau turned and said harshly:]h
20 Hear these words of mine which I will speak to you. If a boar changes his hide and his bristles (and) makes (them) soft as wool,
f. This question has no grammatical marker in vs. Charles's printed text, but MS C provides one, and h. The portion of text which is set between
the context is appropriate for a question. The Syr. brackets is lacking in Eth. It is found only in Syr. text inserts the interrogative word ma, "what?" or The sentiments expressed in the Syr. text are
"how?" at the beginning of this sentence. appropriate to the present context. g. The Syr. text lacks the last sentence of this

The Lat. for the present context. The Raza bird has been version is supported by a parallel account of the
identified as ciconia ephippiorhynca, a type of war between Jacob and Esau which is reported in
stork. See Tisserant, RB 30 (1921) p. 223, for a Midrash Wayyissau. Charles printed the relevant
discussion of the word. portion of the text as Appendix II in his edition of
the Eth. text. There is a brief parallel to this battle
38 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this and the death of Esau in TJud 9.they killed everyone they found before them. And not a single one escaped from
6 them. *And Levi and Dan and Asher went forth on the east side of the tower and
fifty (men were) with them. And they killed the warriors of Moab and Ammon. 7 And Reuben and Issachar and Zebulun (went) forth on the north side of the tower
and fifty (men were) with them. And they killed the fighting men of the Philistines. 8 And Simeon and Benjamin and Enoch,0 the son of Reuben, went forth on the
west side of the tower, and fifty (men were) with them. And they killed four
hundred strong men, warriors, of the Edomites and Humans. And six hundred TJud 9
fled. And the four sons of Esau fled with them and they left their slain father just
9 as he had fallen on the hill which is in Aduram. *And the sons of Jacob pursued
them as far as the mountain of Seir. But Jacob buried his brother in the hill which
is in Aduram and he returned to his house. 10 And Jacob's sons besiegedd the children of Esau on the mountain of Seir. And
11 they bowed down their necks to become servants of the children of Jacob. »And
they sent to their father (to ask) whether they should make peace with them or
12 whether they should kill them. *And Jacob sent notice to his sons to make peace. And they made peace with them and placed a yoke of servitude upon them so
13 that they might pay tribute to Jacob and his sons always. *And they continued
14 paying tribute to Jacob until the day that he went down to Egypt. *And the
children of Edom have not ceased from the yoke of servitude which the twelve
sons of Jacob ordered upon them until today. The kings of Edom
Gen 36:31-39
is And these are the kings who ruled in Edom before a king ruled the children of
16 Israel until today in the land of Edom. • And Balaq, son of Be'or, ruled in Edom. 17 And the name of his city was Danaba. • And Balaq died, and Yobab, son of Zara,
is who was from Boser, ruled instead of him. *And Yobab died.• And Balaq died, and Yobab, son of Zara,
is who was from Boser, ruled instead of him. *And Yobab died. And Asam, who
19 was from the lande of Teman, ruled instead of him. • And Asam died. And ' Adath,
son of Barad, who killed Median in the field of Moab, ruled instead of him. And
20 the name of his city was 'Avith. #And 'Adath died. And Salman, who was from
21 'Amaseqa, ruled instead of him. *And Salman died. And Saul, who was from
22 Ra'aboth, (by the) river, ruled instead of him. *And Saul died. And Ba'elunan,
23 son of 'Achbor, ruled instead of him. • And Ba'elunan, son of'Achbor, died. And
'Adath ruled instead of him. And the name of his wife was Maitabith, daughter
24 of Matarat, daughter of Metabedza'ab. • These are the kings who ruled in the land
of Edom. Joseph in the house of Potiphar Gen 37:ir. ;
39:1-40:23
1 39 And Jacob dwelt in the land of his father's sojourning, (in) the land of Canaan. 2 These are the generations of Jacob. And Joseph was seventeen years old (when)
they brought him down into Egypt, and Potiphar, Pharaoh's eunuch, the chief of
3 the guard, bought him. • And he set Joseph over all of his house and the blessing
of the LORD was upon the house of the Egyptian because of Joseph and the LORD
4 caused everything which he did to prosper. »And the Egyptian left everything in
the hands ofa Joseph because he saw that the LORD was with him and the LORD
caused everything which he did to prosper. s And Joseph was good-looking and very handsome. And the wife of his master
lifted up her eyes and saw Joseph and desired him. And she begged him to lie
c. As if to explain why Enoch had to fight, the with Gen 36:34. The Eth. word which is being
Midrash Wayyissau notes that Joseph had already translated more frequently means "mountain" or
been sold at this time. "mountain region."
d. Charles emended his Eth. text to read "en­
circled" in agreement with the Lat., but then 39 a.The Lat. for the present context. The Raza bird has been version is supported by a parallel account of the
identified as ciconia ephippiorhynca, a type of war between Jacob and Esau which is reported in
stork. See Tisserant, RB 30 (1921) p. 223, for a Midrash Wayyissau. Charles printed the relevant
discussion of the word. portion of the text as Appendix II in his edition of
the Eth. text. There is a brief parallel to this battle
38 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this and the death of Esau in TJud 9.

Charles emended his Eth. text to read "en­
circled" in agreement with the Lat., but then 39 a. The phrase "in the hands of was suggested
returned to the MS reading in his English transla­ by Charles as an emendation. The Eth. MSS read
tion. "before."
e. The translation "land" is given in agreement6 with her. • And he did not surrender himself but he remembered the LORD and the
words which Jacob, his father, used to read, which were from the words of
Abraham, that there is no man who (may) fornicate with a woman who has a
husband (and) that there is a judgment of death which is decreed for him in heaven
before the LORD Most High. And the sin is written (on high) concerning him in
7 the eternal books always before the LORD. •And Joseph remembered these words
8 and he did not want to lie with her. -And she begged him (for) one year. And he
turned away and refused to listen to her. 9 Andb she embraced him and seized him in the house so that she might force
him to lie with her. And she shut the door of the house and seized him. And he
left his garment in her hand and he broke the door and fled outside (away) from
10 her presence. • And that woman saw that he would not lie with her and she falsely
accused him before his master, saying, "Your Hebrew servant, whom you love,
desired to seduce me so that he might lie with me. And it came to pass when I
raised my voice that he fled and he left his garment in my hand when I seized
him. And he broke the door."
Joseph in prison
11 And the Egyptian saw Joseph's garments and the broken door and he heard his
wife's story and he put Joseph in prison, in the place where the prisoners whom
12 the king imprisoned stayed. *And he was there in the prison and the LORD gave
Joseph favor and mercy before the chief guard of the prison because he saw that
the LORD was with him and the LORD caused everything which he did to prosper. 13 And he left everything in his hands,c and the chief guard of the prison knew
nothing which was with him • because Joseph did everything, and the LORD
14 perfected (it). *And he dwelt there two years. And in those days, Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, was angry with two of his
eunuchs, with the chief of the butlers and with the chief of the bakers.*And he dwelt there two years. And in those days, Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, was angry with two of his
eunuchs, with the chief of the butlers and with the chief of the bakers. And he
put them in prison, in the house of the chief of the guard, in the prison where
15 Joseph was held. #And the chief of the guard of the prison ordered Joseph to
16 serve them. And he served before them. *And both of them had a dream, the
17 chief of the butlers and the chief of the bakers, and they told it to Joseph. *And
just as he interpreted to them so it happened to them. And Pharaoh returned the
chief of the butlers to his task, but he killed the baker*1 just as Joseph interpreted
is for them. 'But the chief of the butlers forgot Joseph in the prison when he made
known to him what would happen to him, and he did not remember to tell the
Pharaoh what Joseph told him because he forgot. Joseph as an interpreter of Pharaoh's dreams Gen 41138
1 40 And in those days, Pharaoh dreamed two dreams in a single night concerning
the matter of the famine which would come upon all of the land. And he awoke
from his sleep and called all of the interpreters of dreams and magicians who
were in Egypt. And he told them of both of his dreams but they were unable to
2 explain (them). •Then the chief of the butlers remembered Joseph and he told the
king about him. And he brought him out of the prison and told both of the dreams
3 in his presence. »And he said in the presence of the Pharaoh that both of his
dreams were one. And he said to him, "Seven years will come. Abundance will
be in all the land of Egypt, but afterward seven years of famine, which (is) unlike
4 any (previous) famine, (will be) in all the land. #And now let Pharaoh appoint
overseers8 in all the land and let them store up food for a city within the city
b. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point d. The Lat. text reads "chief baker."
and continues through 40:8a. c. The phrase 44in his hands" was emended to 40 a.Charles emended his Eth. text to read "en­
circled" in agreement with the Lat., but then 39 a. The phrase "in the hands of was suggested
returned to the MS reading in his English transla­ by Charles as an emendation. The Eth. MSS read
tion. "before."
e. The translation "land" is given in agreement

c. The phrase 44in his hands" was emended to 40 a. The word 4 'overseers" is supplied from Lat. agree with the Lat. text and Gen 39:22. The Eth. The Eth. reading makes no sense at this point. MSS read "before him."during the days of the plentiful years. And there will be food for the seven years
of famine. And the land will not perish in the presence of the famine because it
5 will be very severe." #And the LORD gave Joseph favor and mercy in the sight
of the Pharaoh. And the Pharaoh said to his servants, 44 We will not find a man
wise and knowledgeable as this man because the spirit of the LORD is with him."
Joseph becomes a ruler in Egypt
Gen 41:39-49
6 And he set him second in all his kingdom and he made him rule in all of Egypt
7 and he made him ride upon the second chariot of the Pharaoh. *And he invested
him with a garment of byssus and hung a golden chain on his neck and they
proclaimed before him "£/, El wa Abirer" and he gave him the signet ring on Gen4i:43
his hand and he made him rule over all his house and he made him great and he
said to him, 44I will not be greater than you except (regarding) the throne alone."
8 And Joseph ruled in all the land of Egypt and all of the judges and all of the
servants of the Pharaoh and all of those who did the king's work loved him
because he walked uprightly and he had no pompousness or arrogance or partiality,
and there was no bribery because he ruled all the people of the land uprightly. 9 And the land of Egypt was at peace before the Pharaoh on account of Joseph
because the LORD was with him and gave him favor and mercy for all his family
before all who knew him and those who heard witness of him. And the kingdom
10 of the Pharaoh was upright. And there was no Satan and there was no evil. •And
the king called Joseph 44Sephantiphans." And he gave the daughter of Potiphar,
the daughter of the priest of Heliopolis, the chief of the guard, to Joseph (as) a
11 wife. *And on the day that Joseph stood with the Pharaoh he was thirty years old,
[when he stood with the Pharaoh.]b
12 And in that year Isaac died.•And
the king called Joseph 44Sephantiphans." And he gave the daughter of Potiphar,
the daughter of the priest of Heliopolis, the chief of the guard, to Joseph (as) a
11 wife. *And on the day that Joseph stood with the Pharaoh he was thirty years old,
[when he stood with the Pharaoh.]b
12 And in that year Isaac died. And it came (about) just as Joseph related concerning
the interpretation of the two dreams, and there were seven abundant years in all
of the land of Egypt. And the land of Egypt was very fruitful, one measure
13 (yielding) eighteen hundred measures. «And Joseph gathered the food of a city
into the city until it was full of grain, until they were unable to count or measure
it because of its magnitude. The story of Judah and Tamar
Gen 38:1-30
1 41 And in the forty-fifth jubilee, in the second week, in the second year, Judah Gen 38.6f. took a wife for Er, his firstborn, from the daughters of Aram, and her name was TJud 12
2 Tamar. *But he hated (her) and would not lie with her because his mother was
from the daughters of Canaan. And he wanted to take a wife from his mother's
3 people, but Judah, his father, did not permit him. • And Er, the firstborn of Judah,
4 was evil and the LORD killed him. #Anda Judah said to 'Onan, his brother, 44Go
to your brother's wife and act as levirate and raise up seed for your brother."
5 And 'Onan knew that the seed would not be his (but) only his brother's and he
entered the house of his brother's wife and poured out (his) seed on the ground
6 and he was evil in the sight of the LORD and he killed him. *And Judah said to
Tamar,b his daughter-in-law, 4"Remain at the house of your father as a widow
7 until Selah, my son, grows up. And I will give you to him (as) a wife." *And he
grew up, but Bedsuel, Judah's wife, did not permit Selah, her son, to marry. And
Bedsuel, Judah's wife, died in the fifth year of that week. 8 And in the sixth year, Judah went up in order to shear his sheep at Timnah.c. The phrase 44in his hands" was emended to 40 a. The word 4 'overseers" is supplied from Lat. agree with the Lat. text and Gen 39:22. The Eth. The Eth. reading makes no sense at this point. MSS read "before him."

And
Bedsuel, Judah's wife, died in the fifth year of that week. 8 And in the sixth year, Judah went up in order to shear his sheep at Timnah. And they told Tamar, 4'Behold, your father-in-law is going up to shear his sheep
9 at Timnah." *And she put off the clothes of her widowhood. And she put on a
veil. And she made herself beautiful and sat by the gates which are toward the
b. The words in brackets appear to be an obvious point and continues through 41:24. gloss caused by dittography. b. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point
and continues through the first word of 41:19. 41 a. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this10 Timnah road. •And when Judah walked along he found her and presumed that
she was a prostitute. And he said to her, "Let me enter into you." And she said
11 to him, "Come on." And he entered. »And she said to him, "Give me my fee."
And he said to her, "I have nothing in my hand except my signet ring of my
12 finger and my necklace and my staff which is in my hand." *And she said to
him, "Give them to me until you send my fee to me." And he said to her, "I
will send to you a young goat." And he gave them to her, and he was with her,c
and she became pregnant by him. i3,i4 And Judah went to his sheep and she went to her father's house. *And Judah
sent a young goat in the hand of his shepherd, an Adulamite, but he did not find
her. And he asked the men of the district, saying, "Where is the prostitute who
15 was here?" And they said to him, "There is no prostitute here with us." *And
he returned and told him that he did not find (her).d And he said, "I inquired of
the men of the district. And they said to me, There is no prostitute here.' " And
16 he said, "Let her take (it) lest we become an object of scorn." *And when she
completed three months it was obvious that she was pregnant. And they told
Judah, saying, "Behold, Tamar, your daughter-in-law is pregnant through pros-
17 titution." •And Judah went to her father's house and said to her father and her
brothers, "Bring her out and let them burn her because she has caused a defilement
in Israel."
is And it came to pass when they brought her out to bum her that she sent to her
father-in-law the signet ring and the necklace and the staff. And she said,
19 "Recognize whose these are because I am pregnant by him." *And Judah
recognized (them) and said, "Tamar was more righteous than I. And therefore let
20 them not burn her." #And on account of that she was not given to Selah. And
21 therefore he did not approach her again.And therefore let
20 them not burn her." #And on account of that she was not given to Selah. And
21 therefore he did not approach her again. #And after this she bore two children,
22 Perez and Zerah, in the seventh year of this second week. • And after this the Gen4i:53
seven years of full harvest which Joseph told Pharaoh (about) were completed. Judah's repentance
23 And Judah knew that the deed which he did was evil because he lay with his TJud 14
daughter-in-law. And he condemned himself in his own sight. And he knew that
he had sinned and gone astray because he uncovered the robe of his son. And he
began to mourn and make supplication before the LORD on account of his sin. 24 And we told him in a dream that it was forgiven him because he made great
supplication and because he mourned and did not do it again. Judah's forgiveness contrasted with subsequent
strict enforcement of the law
25 And there was forgiveness for him because he turned from his sin and from his TJud 19
ignorance because the sin was great before our God. And anyone who does
anything like this, who lies with his mother-in-law, they shall burn with fire so
that he might burn in it because defilement and impurity have come upon them. In the fire they shall burn them. 26 And you command the children of Israel and there will be no defilement in
their midst because everyone who lies with his daughter-in-law or with his mother- Lev 20:14
in-law causes defilement. In the fire they shall bum the man who has lain with J^* 20-12
her and also the woman. And the wrath and punishment he will cause to cease
from Israel. c. Both Syr. and Lat. MSS read "he was with able. her." Charles emended Lat. from fuit to coiit and d. This follows the reading of the MSS. Charles
then restored an Eth. phrase meaning "he entered emended the Eth. text to read "made known to
into her" to agree with his emended Lat. text. him. And he said, 1 did not find her. And I
Charles, of course, did not know the Syr.And
Bedsuel, Judah's wife, died in the fifth year of that week. 8 And in the sixth year, Judah went up in order to shear his sheep at Timnah. And they told Tamar, 4'Behold, your father-in-law is going up to shear his sheep
9 at Timnah." *And she put off the clothes of her widowhood. And she put on a
veil. And she made herself beautiful and sat by the gates which are toward the
b. The words in brackets appear to be an obvious point and continues through 41:24. gloss caused by dittography. b. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point
and continues through the first word of 41:19. 41 a. A portion of the Syr. text begins at this

And he said, 1 did not find her. And I
Charles, of course, did not know the Syr. text, and inquired/ " The altered word order agrees with
without its witness his reconstruction was reason­ the word order in the Lat. text.27 And we told Judah that his two sons had not lain with her and therefore his
28 seed stood for a second generation and it would not be uprooted • because in the
integrity of his eyes he went and sought judgment because by the judgment of
Abraham, which he commanded his sons, Judah wanted to bum her with fire. The arrival of the years of famine
Gen 41:53-56
1 42 In the first year of the third week of the forty-fifth jubilee the famine began
to come upon the land and rain refused to be given to the land because there was
2 nothing which would come down. *And the earth suffered famine but ina the land
of Egypt there was food because Joseph gathered the grain of the land during the
3 seven years of full harvest and he guarded it. •And Egypt came to Joseph so that
he might give them food. And he opened up the storehouses where the wheat of
the first year was and he sold it to the people of the land for gold. The sons of Jacob travel to Egypt for grain
Gen 42:i-28
4 [And the famine was very severe in the land of Canaan.]b And Jacob heard that
there was food in Egypt and he sent ten of his sons to get food for him in Egypt,
but he did not send Benjamin. [And the ten sons of Jacob]6 arrived [in Egypt]b
5 with those who were traveling (there). •And Joseph knew them, but they did not
know him. And he spoke with them and interrogated themc and said to them,
"Are you men not spies? And you have come to examine the paths of the land."
6 And he locked them up. #But afterward he released them again, and he made only
7 Simeon stay.d And he sent his nine brothers away. *And he filled their grain sacks
with grain and he also put their gold in their grain sacks, but they did not know
8 (it). *And he commanded them that they should bring their little brother because
they told him that their father was alive and also their little brother. The sons of Jacob recount their adventures in Egypt
9 And they went up from the land of Egypt.And he said, 1 did not find her. And I
Charles, of course, did not know the Syr. text, and inquired/ " The altered word order agrees with
without its witness his reconstruction was reason­ the word order in the Lat. text.

*And he commanded them that they should bring their little brother because
they told him that their father was alive and also their little brother. The sons of Jacob recount their adventures in Egypt
9 And they went up from the land of Egypt. And they arrived in the land of Gen 42:29-38
Canaan, and told their father everything just as they experienced (it) and how the
overseer of the district had spoken harshly with them and held Simeon until they
10 would bring Benjamin. *And Jacob said, "You have therefore bereaved me. Joseph is not (here) and Simeon is not (here) either and you will take Benjamin. n Your evil has therefore come upon me." »And he said, "My son will not go
down with you—perhaps he might become ill—because their mother bore two,
and one has perished, and you will take this one from me. If perhaps he became
feverish on the way then you would send down my old age to death in grief."
12 For he saw that the money of each one had been returned in his sack, and he
feared to send him on account of that. The famine causes the sons of Jacob to return to Egypt
Gen 43:1-44:2
13 But the famine increased and became severe in the land of Canaan and in all
the earth except in the land of Egypt. For many of the Egyptians stored up their
grain for food after they saw that Joseph was gathering grain and placing it in
14 storehouses and guarding it for the year of famine. *And the men of Egypt ate it
is in the first year of their famine. *And when Israel saw that the famine was very
severe in the land and there was no escaping, he said to his sons, "Go, return,
42 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this interrogated them." The Lat. agrees with Gen 43:7. point and continues through 42:14a. Cf. vs. 9 below. b. The portions of text found between brackets d. The Lat. text reads "and sending he sum­
was restored from the Lat. text. moned them. And taking Simeon alone, he bound
c. The Lat. text has "harshly" instead of "and him."16 and get food for us lest we die." #And they said, "We shall not go. If our little
17 brother does not come with us, we shall not go." •And Israel saw (that) if he did
is not send him with them they would all be destroyed due to the famine. *And
Reuben said, "Place him in my hands, and if I do not return him to you, kill
both of my sons for his life." And he said to him, "He will not go with you."
19 And Judah drew near and said, "Send him with me. And if I do not return him
to you, I will be guilty before you all the days of my life."
20 And he sent him with them in the second year of that week on the first of the
month and they arrived at the district of Egypt with all of those who were traveling
(there). And their presents (were) in their hands: stacte, almonds, terebinth nuts,
21 and pure honey. • And they arrived and stood before Joseph. And he saw Benjamin,
his brother, and he knew him. And he said to them, "Is this your little brother?"
And they said to him, "He is." And he said, "May the LORD be merciful to you,
22 my son." *And he sent him into his house. And he brought Simeon to them, and
made a banquet for them. And they presented him with his gift, which they
23 brought in their hands. • And they ate before him. And he gave a portion to all of
them. And he increased Benjamin's portion seven times more than any of their
24 portions. •And they ate and drank, and got up and stayed with their asses. 2s And Joseph thought of an idea by means of which he might learn their thoughts,
whether they had thoughts of peace for one another. And he said to the man who
was over his house, "Fill all of their bags with food for them. And also return
their money to them in the midst of their containers. And place my cup from
which I drink, the silver cup, in the bag of the youngest one and send them off."
Joseph's stratagem to test his brothers
Gen 44:2-34
1 43 And he did as Joseph told him. And he filled all their bags for them (with)
food.And place my cup from
which I drink, the silver cup, in the bag of the youngest one and send them off."
Joseph's stratagem to test his brothers
Gen 44:2-34
1 43 And he did as Joseph told him. And he filled all their bags for them (with)
food. And he also put their money in their bags. And the cup he put in Benjamin's
2 bag. *And (at) daybreak in the morning, they went. And it came to pass when
they departed from there, that Joseph said to the man of his house, "Pursue them. Run and reproach them,8 saying, 'You have repaid me evil in place of good. You
have robbed me of the silver cup from which my lord drinks.' And return to me
their little brother. And hurry, bring (him) before I go to my judgment seat."
3,4 And he ran after them and he spoke to them according to these words. »And
they said to him, "May God forbid that your servants would do this thing or steal
any vessel from your lord's house. But rather our money which we found at first
5 in our bags your servants have brought back from the land of Canaan. •Therefore,
why would we steal any vessel? Behold, search both us and our animals and
wherever you find the cup, in the bag of any one of our men, let him be killed,
6 and both we and our asses will become slaves to your lord." #And he said to
them, "It will not be so, (but) with the man with whom I find it, he alone, I will
take as a servant, but you will return in peace to your house."
7 And when he searched in their baggage, he started from the eldest and ended
8 with the youngest. And it was found in the bag of Benjamin. »And they tore their
clothes and loaded up their donkeys and returned to the city. And they reached
9 Joseph's house, and they all bowed to him with their face on the ground. *And
Joseph said to them, "You have done evil." And they said, "What can we say? (With) what can we defend ourselves? Our lord has found the guilt of his servants.*And he commanded them that they should bring their little brother because
they told him that their father was alive and also their little brother. The sons of Jacob recount their adventures in Egypt
9 And they went up from the land of Egypt. And they arrived in the land of Gen 42:29-38
Canaan, and told their father everything just as they experienced (it) and how the
overseer of the district had spoken harshly with them and held Simeon until they
10 would bring Benjamin. *And Jacob said, "You have therefore bereaved me. Joseph is not (here) and Simeon is not (here) either and you will take Benjamin. n Your evil has therefore come upon me." »And he said, "My son will not go
down with you—perhaps he might become ill—because their mother bore two,
and one has perished, and you will take this one from me. If perhaps he became
feverish on the way then you would send down my old age to death in grief."
12 For he saw that the money of each one had been returned in his sack, and he
feared to send him on account of that. The famine causes the sons of Jacob to return to Egypt
Gen 43:1-44:2
13 But the famine increased and became severe in the land of Canaan and in all
the earth except in the land of Egypt. For many of the Egyptians stored up their
grain for food after they saw that Joseph was gathering grain and placing it in
14 storehouses and guarding it for the year of famine. *And the men of Egypt ate it
is in the first year of their famine. *And when Israel saw that the famine was very
severe in the land and there was no escaping, he said to his sons, "Go, return,
42 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this interrogated them." The Lat. agrees with Gen 43:7. point and continues through 42:14a. Cf. vs. 9 below. b. The portions of text found between brackets d. The Lat. text reads "and sending he sum­
was restored from the Lat. text. moned them. And taking Simeon alone, he bound
c. The Lat. text has "harshly" instead of "and him."

(With) what can we defend ourselves? Our lord has found the guilt of his servants. 10 Behold, we (are) servants of our lord and also our donkeys." #And Joseph said
to them, "I fear the LORD. YOU, go to your houses, but let your brother alone be
my servant because you have done evil. Did you not know that a man would be
11 pleased withb his cup as I am with this cup? And you stole it from me." *And
Judah said, "I pray,c O lord, let me, your servant, speak a word in my lord's
43 a. The reading is based on the MSS. Charles in agreement with Gen 44:15, but returned to the
emended his Eth. text to read "seize them" in MS reading in his translation,
agreement with Gen 44:4. c. The Eth. text reads "upon me," which Charles
b. The phrase "be pleased with" is found in has identified as a simple mistranslation of Heb. the MSS. Charles emended his text to read4'divine'' bi, which is found in Gen 44:18.ear. His mother bore two brothers to our father, your servant. One went forth and
12 was lost, and was not found. #And he alone was left from his mother, and your
servant, our father, loves him. And his life is bound with the life of this (one). And it will come to pass that if we go to your servant, our father, and if the lad
is not with us, he will die. And we will bring down our father to death with
13 sorrow. *And let me, your servant, remain alone instead of the child as a servant
to my lord, and let the lad go with his brothers because I was put as a pledge for
him at the hand of your servant, our father. And if I should not return him your
servant will always be guilty to our father."
Joseph reveals himself to his brothers
Gen 45:1-13
14 And Joseph saw that the heart of all of them was in accord one with another
for good. And he was unable to control his emotion and he told them that he was
15 Joseph. #And he conversed with them in the Hebrew language and embraced their
16 necks and wept. But they did not recognize him. And they began to weep. *And
he said to them, "Do not weep for me, but hasten and bring my father to me. And I shall see him before I die even as the eyes of my brother Benjamin see.d
17 For behold this is the second year of famine, and there will still be five years,
is And there will be no harvest or fruit of the tree or plowing. 'Hasten, come down,
you and your households, lest you be destroyed in the famine. And you shall not
grieve for your possessions. For the LORD has sent me first to prepare before you
19 so that many people might live. *And tell my father that I am still alive and
behold, you were seeing that the LORD ordained me as a father to the Pharaoh
20 and so that I might rule in his house and over all the land of Egypt.For the LORD has sent me first to prepare before you
19 so that many people might live. *And tell my father that I am still alive and
behold, you were seeing that the LORD ordained me as a father to the Pharaoh
20 and so that I might rule in his house and over all the land of Egypt. *And tell my
father about all my honor and all the wealth and honor which the LORD has given
to me."
The brothers return to Canaan to get their father
Gen 45:17-28
21 And by the word of the mouth of the Pharaoh he gave them chariots and
provisions for the way. And he gave them all clothing of many colors and money. 22 And he also sent to their father clothing and money and ten asses which were
23 carrying wheat. And he sent them off. *And they went up and they told their
father that Joseph was alive and that he was distributing grain to all of the people
24 of the land. And he ruled over all the land of Egypt. -And their father did not
believe because there was a confusion in his mind. And after this he saw the
chariots which Joseph sent and the life of his soul was renewed. And he said, "It
is enough for me if Joseph is alive. I will go down and I will see him before I
die."
Jacob observes a feast of firstfruits at Beer-sheba Gen 46:1
1 44 And Israel rose up from Haran,3 from his house on the first of the third month
and he went by the way of the Well of the Oath. And he offered up a sacrifice to
2 the God of his father, Isaac, on the seventh day of that month. • And Jacob recalled
the dream which he dreamed in Bethel, and he was afraid to go down into Egypt. 3 And as he was planning to send to Joseph so that he might come to him, and he
would not go down, he remained there seven days (to learn) if he would see a
4 vision (concerning) whether he should remain or go down.(With) what can we defend ourselves? Our lord has found the guilt of his servants. 10 Behold, we (are) servants of our lord and also our donkeys." #And Joseph said
to them, "I fear the LORD. YOU, go to your houses, but let your brother alone be
my servant because you have done evil. Did you not know that a man would be
11 pleased withb his cup as I am with this cup? And you stole it from me." *And
Judah said, "I pray,c O lord, let me, your servant, speak a word in my lord's
43 a. The reading is based on the MSS. Charles in agreement with Gen 44:15, but returned to the
emended his Eth. text to read "seize them" in MS reading in his translation,
agreement with Gen 44:4. c. The Eth. text reads "upon me," which Charles
b. The phrase "be pleased with" is found in has identified as a simple mistranslation of Heb. the MSS. Charles emended his text to read4'divine'' bi, which is found in Gen 44:18.

• And Jacob recalled
the dream which he dreamed in Bethel, and he was afraid to go down into Egypt. 3 And as he was planning to send to Joseph so that he might come to him, and he
would not go down, he remained there seven days (to learn) if he would see a
4 vision (concerning) whether he should remain or go down. «And he observed the
feast of the harvest of the firstfruits from old wheat for there was not in the whole
land of Canaan a handful of any seed in the land because there was a famine for
all the wild animals and the cattle and the birds and also man. d. This sentence is translated in agreement with 44 a. According to the biblical account, the lo-
the Eth. MS. Charles emended the sentence to read cation of Jacob is near Hebron. Cf. Gen 37:14. "and you see that it is my mouth that speaks and Haran is apparently a corruption,
the eyes of my brother Benjamin see." The emen­
dation was based on Gen 45:12.Jacob's theophany at Beer-sheba
Gen 46:2-4
s And on the sixteenth day the LORD appeared to him and he said to him, "Jacob,
Jacob." And he said to him, "Here I am." And he again said to him, "I am the
God of your fathers, the God of Abraham and Isaac. Do not fear to go down to
6 Egypt because I will make you into a great people there. *I shall go down with
you and I shall bring you (back) and you will be buried in this land. And Joseph
will place his hand upon your eyes. Do not fear. Go down into Egypt."
The preparation for the journey to Egypt
Gen 46:5-7,28-
34
7 And his children and grandchildren rose up and they loaded their father and
8 their possessions on the chariots. *And Israel rose up from the Well of the Oath
9 on the sixteenth day of this third month and he went to the land of Egypt. #And
Israel sent Judah before him to Joseph, his son, so that he might examine the land
of Goshen, for Joseph told his brothers that they should come to dwell there so
10 they might be his neighbor. •And it was the best in the land of Egypt. And it was
near him for all (of them) and for the cattle. A list of the children of Jacob
Gen 46:8-27
ti And these are the names of the sons of Jacob who went into Egypt with their
12 father, Jacob. • Reuben was the firstborn of Israel. And these (are) the names of
his sons: Enoch, and Pallu, and Hezron, and Carmi—five. 13 Simeon and his sons; and these (are) the names of his sons: Jemuel, and Jamin,
and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul, the son of a Zephathite woman6—
seven. 14 Levi and his sons; and these (are) the names of his sons: Gershon, and Kohath,
and Merari—four. is Judah and his sons; and these are the names of his sons: Shela, and Perez, and
Zerah—four. 16 Issachar and his sons; and these are the names of his sons: Tola, and Phua, and
Jasub, and Shimron—five. 17 Zebulun and his sons; and these are the names of his sons: Sered, and Elon,
is and Jahleel—four.• And Jacob recalled
the dream which he dreamed in Bethel, and he was afraid to go down into Egypt. 3 And as he was planning to send to Joseph so that he might come to him, and he
would not go down, he remained there seven days (to learn) if he would see a
4 vision (concerning) whether he should remain or go down. «And he observed the
feast of the harvest of the firstfruits from old wheat for there was not in the whole
land of Canaan a handful of any seed in the land because there was a famine for
all the wild animals and the cattle and the birds and also man. d. This sentence is translated in agreement with 44 a. According to the biblical account, the lo-
the Eth. MS. Charles emended the sentence to read cation of Jacob is near Hebron. Cf. Gen 37:14. "and you see that it is my mouth that speaks and Haran is apparently a corruption,
the eyes of my brother Benjamin see." The emen­
dation was based on Gen 45:12.

16 Issachar and his sons; and these are the names of his sons: Tola, and Phua, and
Jasub, and Shimron—five. 17 Zebulun and his sons; and these are the names of his sons: Sered, and Elon,
is and Jahleel—four. *And these are the sons of Jacob and their sons whom Leah
bore to Jacob in Mesopotamia, six, plus one girl, Dinah, their sister. And all of
the persons who (were) sons of Leah and their sons, who entered Egypt with
Jacob, their father, were twenty-nine. And Jacob, their father, was with them. And they totaled thirty. 19 And the sons of Zilpah, the attendant of Leah, the wife of Jacob, which she
20 bore to Jacob, were Gad and Asher. *And these are the names of their sons who
entered into Egypt with him. The sons of Gad (are) Ziphion, and Gaggi, and Shuni, and Ezbon, and Eri,c
and Areli, and Arodi—eight. 21 And the sons of Asher (are) Imnah, and Ishvah, [and Ishvi],c and Beriah, and
22 Serah, their one sister—six. «And all of the persons (were) fourteen. And the total
of Leah was forty-four. 23 And the sons of Rachel, who (was) the wife of Jacob, (were) Joseph and
Benjamin. 24 And (sons) were born to Joseph in Egypt before his father entered Egypt whom
Asenath, the daughter of Potiphar, the priest of Heliopolis, bore to him, (namely)
Manasseh and Ephraim—three. 25 And the sons of Benjamin (are) Bela, and Becher, and Ashbel, and Gera, and
b. A woman from the Canaanite city of Zephath. Gen. They are lacking in the Eth. text. The spelling
Cf. Judg 1:17. The reading is found in MS B. of names has also been standardized to agree with
c. The names in brackets were restored from Gen.26 Naaman, and Ehi, and Rosh, and Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard—eleven. *And
all of the persons of Rachel were fourteen. 27 And the sons of Bilhah, the attendant of Rachel, the wife of Jacob, which she
bore to Jacob, (are) Dan and Naphthali, and these are the names of their sons
who entered Egypt with them. 28 And the sons of Dan (are) Hushim, and Samon, and Asudi, and 'Ijaka, and
29 Solomon—six. «And they died during the year they entered Egypt and there was
left to Dan only Hushim. 30 And these are the names of the sons of Naphthali: Jaziel, and Guni, and Jezer, ichr 7:i3
31 and Shallum, and 'Iv. *And Tv, who was born after the years of the famine, died
32 in Egypt. »And all of the persons of Rachel were twenty-six. 33 And all of the persons of Jacob who entered Egypt were seventy persons. Therefore all these sons and grandsons of his were seventy, but five died in Egypt
34 before Joseph, and they had no children. -And two sons of Judah, Er and Onan,
died in the land of Canaan. And they had no children. And the children of Israel
buried those who perished. And they were set among the seventy nations. The family of Jacob is settled in Goshen
Gen 46:29-47:12
1 45 And Israel entered into the land of Egypt into the land of Goshen on the first
of the fourth month in the second year of the third week of the forty-fifth jubilee. 2 And Joseph came to greet his father, Jacob, in the land of Goshen. And he
3 embraced the neck of his father and wept. #And Israel said to Joseph, "Let me
die now after I have seen you. And now let the LORD, the God of Israel, be
blessed, the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac, who did not withhold his
4 mercy and his kindness from his servant Jacob. *It is enough for me that I have
seen your face while I was alive, for the vision which I saw in Bethel was certainly
true. May the LORD my God be blessed forever and ever and blessed (be) his
name."
5 And Joseph and his brothers ate bread before their father, and they drank wine.*It is enough for me that I have
seen your face while I was alive, for the vision which I saw in Bethel was certainly
true. May the LORD my God be blessed forever and ever and blessed (be) his
name."
5 And Joseph and his brothers ate bread before their father, and they drank wine. And Jacob rejoiced very greatly because he saw Joseph eating and drinking with
his brothers before him. And he blessed the Creator of all who kept him and kept
6 for him his twelve sons. *And Joseph gave to his father and his brothers (as) a
gift that they might dwell in the land of Goshen and Ramses and all of the districts
(belonging) to them which he ruled over before the Pharaoh. And Israel and his
sons dwelt in the land of Goshen, the best of the land of Egypt. And Israel was
7 one hundred and thirty years old when he entered Egypt. »And Joseph provided
bread for his father and his brothers and their possessions, as much as was sufficient
for them for the seven years of famine. Joseph's skill as an administrator
Gen 47:13-26
8 Anda the land of Egypt suffered in view of the famine. And Joseph gathered
all of the land of Egypt for the Pharaoh by means of the food. And men and their
9 cattle and everything he acquired for Pharaoh. »And the years of the famine were
completed. And Joseph gave seed and food to the people who were in the land
so that they might sow the landb in the eighth year because the river was full in
10 all the land of Egypt. *For during the seven years of famine it was not0 full. And
it did not irrigate except a few places by the shore of the river. But now it was
full and the Egyptians sowed the land and it bored much wheat2 in that year. 11,12 And that was the first year of the fourth week of the forty-fifth jubilee. #And
45 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this of "it bore." Charles emended his text to follow
point and continues through 46:1a. the Lat. b. "The land" is restored from the Lat. text. e. The Lat. text reads "good fruit" for "much
c.16 Issachar and his sons; and these are the names of his sons: Tola, and Phua, and
Jasub, and Shimron—five. 17 Zebulun and his sons; and these are the names of his sons: Sered, and Elon,
is and Jahleel—four. *And these are the sons of Jacob and their sons whom Leah
bore to Jacob in Mesopotamia, six, plus one girl, Dinah, their sister. And all of
the persons who (were) sons of Leah and their sons, who entered Egypt with
Jacob, their father, were twenty-nine. And Jacob, their father, was with them. And they totaled thirty. 19 And the sons of Zilpah, the attendant of Leah, the wife of Jacob, which she
20 bore to Jacob, were Gad and Asher. *And these are the names of their sons who
entered into Egypt with him. The sons of Gad (are) Ziphion, and Gaggi, and Shuni, and Ezbon, and Eri,c
and Areli, and Arodi—eight. 21 And the sons of Asher (are) Imnah, and Ishvah, [and Ishvi],c and Beriah, and
22 Serah, their one sister—six. «And all of the persons (were) fourteen. And the total
of Leah was forty-four. 23 And the sons of Rachel, who (was) the wife of Jacob, (were) Joseph and
Benjamin. 24 And (sons) were born to Joseph in Egypt before his father entered Egypt whom
Asenath, the daughter of Potiphar, the priest of Heliopolis, bore to him, (namely)
Manasseh and Ephraim—three. 25 And the sons of Benjamin (are) Bela, and Becher, and Ashbel, and Gera, and
b. A woman from the Canaanite city of Zephath. Gen. They are lacking in the Eth. text. The spelling
Cf. Judg 1:17. The reading is found in MS B. of names has also been standardized to agree with
c. The names in brackets were restored from Gen.

The Lat. text reads "good fruit" for "much
c. The "not" is restored from the Lat. text. wheat."
d. The Lat. text reads "they harvested" insteadJoseph took for the king one fifth of everything which bore fruit/ and he left four
parts for them for food and seed. And Joseph set it up as an ordinance for the
land of Egypt until this day. The death of Jacob
Gen 47:28-31
;
49:1-50:41
And Israel lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years, and all of the days which
he lived were three jubilees, one hundred and forty-seven years. And he died in
the fourth year of the fifth week of the forty-fifth jubilee. •And Israel blessed his
sons before he died. And he told them everything which was going to happen to
them in the land of Egypt and in the latter days; he made them know how it would
come upon them. And he blessed them and he gave to Joseph a double portion
upon the land. *And he slept with his fathers. And he was buried in the cave of
Machpelah in the land of Canaan near Abraham, his father, in the tomb which he
excavated for himself in the cave of Machpelah in the land of Hebron. And he
gave all of his books and his fathers' books to Levi, his son, so that he might
preserve them and renew them for his sons until this day. The death of Joseph and his generation
46 And it came to pass after Jacob died that the children of Israel increased in
the land of Egypt. And they became a numerous people, and they were all in
accord in their hearts so that each one loved his brother and each man helped his
brother, and they increased exceedingly and increased very much for ten weeks8
of years, all the days of the life of Joseph.6 «And there was no Satan or anything
evil all the days of the life of Joseph which he lived after his father, Jacob,
because all of the Egyptians were honoring the children of Israel all the days of
the life of Joseph. #And Joseph died at one hundred and ten years of age. And
seventeen years he dwelt in the land of Canaan and ten years he remained as a
slave and three years in the prison and eighty years under the king ruling all of
the land of Egypt.#And Joseph died at one hundred and ten years of age. And
seventeen years he dwelt in the land of Canaan and ten years he remained as a
slave and three years in the prison and eighty years under the king ruling all of
the land of Egypt. • And he died and all of his brothers and all of that generation. The removal of Jacob's bones and a comment on Joseph's burial
And he commanded the children of Israel before he died to carry his bones at
the time when they would go out of the land of Egypt. • And he made them swear TSim 8
an oath concerning his bones because he knew that Egypt would not again bring TBenj 1
them forth and bury them in the land of Canaan because when Makamaron, the
king of Canaan, was dwelling in the land of Asshur, he fought in the valley with
the king of Egypt. And he killed him there. And he pursued after the Egyptians
as far as the gates of Ermon. *And he was unable to enter because another new
king ruled Egypt and he was stronger than he. And he returned to the land of
Canaan and the gates of Egypt were shut up and there was none who could leave
or enter Egypt. #And Joseph died in this forty-sixth jubilee in the sixth week in
the second year. And they buried him in the land of Egypt. And all of his brothers
died after him. f. The reading "everything which bore fruit" is the Eth. text edited by Charles. That was pointed
a correction based on the Lat. text. The Eth. MSS out by W. Baars and R. Zuurmond in their article
read "grain which they sowed," which is not "The Project for a New Edition of the Ethiopic
strictly logical. Book of Jubilees," JSS 9 (1964) 71. In that article
they recollated ch. 46 of Charles's Eth. text against
46 a. A fragment of Heb. text from Qumran (2Q MS B, calling attention to a number of interesting
20) begins at this point and continues through vs. variations. None of the variations which they noted,
3a. It confirms the Eth. text, however, require any change in the translation. b.The Lat. text reads "good fruit" for "much
c. The "not" is restored from the Lat. text. wheat."
d. The Lat. text reads "they harvested" instead

text, however, require any change in the translation. b. The spelling of this name was misprinted inThe removal of the bones of the children of Jacob
9 And the king of Egypt went forth to fight with the king of Canaan in this forty-
seventh jubilee in the second week in the second year. And the children of Israel
brought forth the bones of the children of Jacob, all except the bones of Joseph. And they buried them in the field in the cave of Machpelah in the mountain. 10 And many returned into Egypt but a few of them were left in Mount Hebron. Acts7:i5f. And Amram, your father, was left with them. The children of Israel are reduced to slavery
Ex i:i-i4
n And the king of Canaan was victorious over the king of Egypt and he closed
12 the gates of Egypt. »Andc he conceived an evil thought against the children of
Israel so that he might cause them to suffer. And he said to the men of Egypt,
13 "Behold, the people of the sons of Israel have grown and increased more than
we. Come let us act wisely concerning them before they increase. And let us
cause them to suffer in slavery before war comes to us, or before they battle with
us, or if not (that, then) they will mix with our*1 enemy. And they will depart
from our land because their hearts and their faces are upon the land of Canaan."
14 And they appointed over them taskmasters to make them suffer in slavery. And
they built strengthened cities for Pharaoh, Pithom, and Ramses.e And they built
all of the walls and all of the rampartsf which had fallen in the cities of Egypt. is And they made them slaves by force. And to the extent that they acted cruelly
16 against them, they likewise increased and multiplied. *And the men of Egypt
regarded the sons of Israel as defiled. The birth and early life of Moses Ex 2:i-is
1 47 And in the seventh week, in the seventh year in this forty-seventh jubilee,
your father came from the land of Canaan. And you were bom in the fourth week,
in the sixth year, in this forty-eighth jubilee, which were days of affliction upon
2 the children of Israel.The birth and early life of Moses Ex 2:i-is
1 47 And in the seventh week, in the seventh year in this forty-seventh jubilee,
your father came from the land of Canaan. And you were bom in the fourth week,
in the sixth year, in this forty-eighth jubilee, which were days of affliction upon
2 the children of Israel. • And the king of Egypt, Pharaoh, issued an order concerning Ex 1:22
them that they should throw all of their male children who were bom into the
3 river. #And they continued throwing (them into the river) seven months, until the
day when you were bom. And your mother hid you three months, and they
4 reported concerning her. »And she made an ark for you. And she covered it with
pitch and asphalt. And she placed it among the reeds by the shore of the river
and she placed you in it seven days. And your mother came in the night and
suckled you and (in) the day Miriam, your sister, guarded you from the birds. 5 And in those days Tharmuth, the daughter of Pharaoh, came in order to bathe
in the river and she heard your voice as you were crying and she told her maidsa
6 to fetch you. And they brought you to her. #And she took you from the ark and
7 had pity on you. •And your sister said to her, "Shall I go and call for you one
of the Hebrew women who will nurse and suckle the infant for you?" And she
g said to her, "Go!" #And she went and called your mother, Jochebed. And she Ex 6:20
gave a wage to her. And she nursed you. Num 26 5'
9 And after this when you had grown they brought you to the daughter6 of Pharaoh
and you became her son. And Amram, your father, taught you writing. And after
c. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this point but that is probably based on a mistranslation of
and continues through 48:5, except for the last six the Gk. dative plural abrais, "maids." The Lat. words. text is correct. The Eth. text may also have been
d. "Our" is supplied from the Lat. text. influenced by the appearance of "Hebrew women"
e. The Lat.text, however, require any change in the translation. b. The spelling of this name was misprinted in

influenced by the appearance of "Hebrew women"
e. The Lat. text also includes the city of On. in vs. 7. f. The phrase "and all of the ramparts" is b. The Eth. and Lat. MSS read "house" for
lacking in Lat. "daughter." Apparently the Gk. texts on which
the later versions were based misread the Heb. 47 a. The Eth. text has "her Hebrew women," consonants bt as "house" instead of "daughter."you completed three weeks (of years) they brought you into the royal court. #And
you were in the court three weeks of years until the day when you went out of
the royal court. And you saw an Egyptian beating your friend who was from the Acts 7:23
children of Israel. And you killed him and hid him in the sand. •And on the
second day you found two of the children of Israel striving together. And you
said to that one who was acting falsely, "Why are you striking your brother?"
And he was angry and indignant and said, "Who set you as a ruler and judge
over us? Do you also desire to kill me as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?"
And you were afraid and you fled because of those words. Moses' experience in Midian and encounter with Mastema
EX 2:15-4.26
48 And on the sixth year of the third week of the forty-ninth jubilee you went
and dwelt in the land of Midian8 five weeks and one year and you returned to
Egypt on the second week in the second year in the fiftieth jubilee. *And you Acts7:3o
know what was related to you on Mount Sinai, and what Prince Mastema desired
to do with you when you returned to Egypt, on the way when you met himb at
the shelter. »Did he not desire to kill you with all of his might and save the
Egyptians from your hand because he saw that you were sent to execute judgment
and vengeance upon the Egyptians? #And I delivered you from his hand and you
did the signs and wonders which you were sent to perform in Egypt against
Pharaoh, and all his house, and his servants, and his people. The plagues on Egypt
EX 7112:39
And the LORD executed great vengeance upon them on account of Israel.#And I delivered you from his hand and you
did the signs and wonders which you were sent to perform in Egypt against
Pharaoh, and all his house, and his servants, and his people. The plagues on Egypt
EX 7112:39
And the LORD executed great vengeance upon them on account of Israel. And
he smote them with blood, and frogs, and lice, and dog flies; and evil boils which
break out (as) blisters; and their cattle with death; and hailstones with which he
destroyed everything which sprouted up for them; and with locust who ate the
remainder which was left from the hail; and with darkness, and (with death of)
the firstborn of men, and cattle; and upon all of their gods the LORD took vengeance
and he burned themc with fire. • And everything was sent in your hand to announced
before it was done. And you related it to the king of Egypt before all of his
servants and before his people. • And everything happened according to your word,
ten great and cruel judgments came on the land of Egypt so that you might execute
vengeance upon it for Israel. #And the LORD did everything on account of Israel
and according to his covenant which he made with Abraham that he would take
vengeance upon them just as they had made them serve by force. Gen i5:i3f. The escape from Egypt and a discussion of Mastema's deeds Ex
And Prince Mastema stood up before you and desired to make you fall into the
hand of Pharaoh. And he aided the magicians of the Egyptians, and they stood
up and acted before you. •Thus we let them do evil, but we did not empower
them with healing so that it might be done by their hands. *And the LORD smote
them with evil wounds and they were unable to stand because we destroyed (their Ex 9:ii
ability) to do any single sign. «And despite all the signs and wonders, Prince Ex i4:8f. Mastema was nor6 shamed until he had become strong and called to the Egyptians
so that they might pursue after you with all the army of Egyptians, with their
48 a.influenced by the appearance of "Hebrew women"
e. The Lat. text also includes the city of On. in vs. 7. f. The phrase "and all of the ramparts" is b. The Eth. and Lat. MSS read "house" for
lacking in Lat. "daughter." Apparently the Gk. texts on which
the later versions were based misread the Heb. 47 a. The Eth. text has "her Hebrew women," consonants bt as "house" instead of "daughter."

«And despite all the signs and wonders, Prince Ex i4:8f. Mastema was nor6 shamed until he had become strong and called to the Egyptians
so that they might pursue after you with all the army of Egyptians, with their
48 a. The phrase "in the land of Midian" was dation. The Eth. MSS have "to do," which makes
restored from the Lat. text. The Eth. MSS simply a difficult reading. Perhaps one could retain the
read "there." Eth. text by assuming a command to work sym­
b. The reading "on the way where you met pathetic magic: "Everything was sent in your hand
him" is supplied by the Lat. text. The Eth. text is so that you might act (it out) before it was done."
corrupt at this point. e. The "not" appears in all MSS; Charles
c. The writer is thinking of the icons of the omitted "not" from his text because he thought
gods. that "it conflicts with the sense."
d. In his translation Charles suggested this emen­chariots, and with their horses, and with all the multitude of the peoples of Egypt. 13 And I stood between the Egyptians and Israel/ and we delivered Israel from
his hand and from the hand of his people. And the LORD brought them out through
14 the midst of the sea as through dry land. *And all of the people whom he brought
out to pursue after Israel the LORD our God threw into the middle of the sea into
the depths of the abyss beneath the children of Israel. Just as the men of Egypt
cast their sons into the river he avenged one million. And one thousand strong wisSoi is.s
and ardent men perished on account of one infant whom they threw into the midst
of the river from the sons of your people. is And on the fourteenth day, and on the fifteenth, and on the sixteenth, and on
the seventeenth, and on the eighteenth Prince Mastema was bound and shut up
16 from (coming) after the children of Israel so that he might not accuse them. • And
on the nineteenth day we released them so that they might help the Egyptians and
n pursue after the children of Israel. • And he hardened their hearts and strengthened Ex 14*
them. And it was conceived of by the LORD our God that he might smite the
is Egyptians and throw them into the midst of the sea. #And on the fourteenth^ day
we bound him so that he might not accuse the children of Israel on the day when
they were requesting vessels and clothing from the men of Egypt—vessels of
silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of bronze—so that they might plunder the
Egyptians in exchange for the servitude which they subjected them to by force. 19 And we did not bring the children of Israel from Egypt in their nakedness. The feast of Passover, its institution and observance EX i2f.19 And we did not bring the children of Israel from Egypt in their nakedness. The feast of Passover, its institution and observance EX i2f. 1 49 Remember the commandment which the LORD commanded you concerning
Passover, that you observe it in its time, on the fourteenth of the first month, so
that you might sacrifice it before it becomes evening and so that you might eat it
2 during the night on the evening of the fifteenth from the time of sunset. -For on
this night there was the beginning of the feast and there was the beginning of joy. You continued eating the Passover in Egypt and all of the powers of Mastema
were sent to kill all of the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of
Pharaoh to the firstborn of the captive maidservant who was at the millstone and
3 to the cattle. #And this is the sign which the LORD gave to them in every house
where they saw the blood of a year-old lamb upon its doors so that they would
not enter into the house to kill, they would pass over so that all who were in the
house might be saved because the sign of the blood was on its doors. 4 And the host of the LORD did everything which the LORD commanded them. And they passed over all the children of Israel. And the plague did not come upon
5 them to destroy any life from them whether cattle or men or dogs. »And there
was a very great plague in Egypt. And there was no house in Egypt in which
6 there was no corpse and weeping and lamenting. *And all of Israel remained
eating the flesh of the Passover and drinking wine and praising and blessing and
glorifying the LORD the God of their fathers. And they were prepared to depart
from the yoke of Egypt and from evil slavery. 7 And you, remember this day all of the daysa of your life and observe it from
year to year all the days of your life, once per year on its day according to all of
its law and you will not delay (one) day from (its) day or from (one) month to
8 (another) month.«And despite all the signs and wonders, Prince Ex i4:8f. Mastema was nor6 shamed until he had become strong and called to the Egyptians
so that they might pursue after you with all the army of Egyptians, with their
48 a. The phrase "in the land of Midian" was dation. The Eth. MSS have "to do," which makes
restored from the Lat. text. The Eth. MSS simply a difficult reading. Perhaps one could retain the
read "there." Eth. text by assuming a command to work sym­
b. The reading "on the way where you met pathetic magic: "Everything was sent in your hand
him" is supplied by the Lat. text. The Eth. text is so that you might act (it out) before it was done."
corrupt at this point. e. The "not" appears in all MSS; Charles
c. The writer is thinking of the icons of the omitted "not" from his text because he thought
gods. that "it conflicts with the sense."
d. In his translation Charles suggested this emen­

And they were prepared to depart
from the yoke of Egypt and from evil slavery. 7 And you, remember this day all of the daysa of your life and observe it from
year to year all the days of your life, once per year on its day according to all of
its law and you will not delay (one) day from (its) day or from (one) month to
8 (another) month. •For it is an eternal decree and engraved upon the heavenly
tablets for all of the children of Israel that they might observe it in each and every
year in its day once per year in all of their generations. And there is no limit of
days because it is ordained forever. f. The Eth. MSS also insert "between you" to used that reading in his translation, but his Eth. this series. The "you" refers to Moses. A B read text had "seventeenth" in agreement with MSS A
"I stood between you, the Egyptians, and Israel." D. MS C has "fifteenth."
C D read "I stood between the Egyptians, and
you, and Israel." 49 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this
g. * 'Fourteenth*' is the reading of MS B. Charles point and continues through 49:22a.9 And (as for) the man who is purified and does not come so that he might
observe it on its appointed day to bring a gift which is acceptable before the LORD
and to eat and to drink before the LORD on the day of his feast, that man who is Num 9:13
purified and nearby shall be uprooted because he did not bring a gift of the LORD
10 in its (appointed) time. That man shall lift up sin upon himself. •So that the
children of Israel will be ones who come and observe Passover on its appointed
day on the fourteenth of the first month between the evenings from the third (part)
of the day until the third (part) of the night because two parts of the day are given
11 for light and one third for evening. •This is what the LORD commanded you so
that you might observe it between the evenings. 12 And it is not fitting to sacrifice it during any time of light except during the
time of the border of evening. And they shall eat it during the time of evening
until a third of the night. And what is left of all its flesh from the third of the
13 night and beyond, they shall burn with fire. »And it is not fitting that they should
boil it in water. And they shall not eat it raw but roasted in the fire, cooked6 with
care, its head with its inner organs and with its feet. They shall roast it in fire
without breaking any of its bones within it because no bone of the children of
14 Israel will be broken. •Therefore the LORD commanded the children of Israel to
observe the Passover on its appointed day. And it is not fitting to break any bone
from it because it is the day of the feast and it is the day of the command. And
there is no passing over in it (one) day from (its) day or from month (to) month
because it shall be observed on the day of the feast. 15 And you command the children of Israel to observe the Passover in their days
in every year, once per year, on its appointed day. And it will come as an
acceptable memorial from before the LORD.15 And you command the children of Israel to observe the Passover in their days
in every year, once per year, on its appointed day. And it will come as an
acceptable memorial from before the LORD. And the plague will not come to kill
or to smite during that year when they have observed the Passover in its (appointed)
time in all (respects) according to his command. 16 And it is not fitting to eat it outside of the sanctuary of the LORD, but facing
the sanctuary of the LORD. And all the people of the congregation of Israel will
17 observe it in its (appointed) time. *And all the men who come on its day will eat
it in the sanctuary of your God before the LORD, whoever is twenty years or older, Ex 30:H
because thus it is written and decreed that they shall eat it in the sanctuary of the
LORD. IS And whenever the children of Israel enter into the land which they will possess,
into the land of Canaan, they will set up the tabernacle of the LORD in the midst
of the land, in one of their tribes, until the sanctuary of the LORD is built upon
the land. And it will come to pass whenc they come and observe the Passover in
the midst of the tabernacle of the LORD that they will sacrifice it before the LoRDd
19 from year to year. *And in the days when a house is built in the name of the
LORD in the land of their inheritance, they shall go there and they shall sacrifice
the Passover at evening when the sun is setting on the third (part) of the day. 20 And they shall offer up its blood on the threshold of the altar. And its fat they Deut 16:5-7
shall place on the fire which is above the altar. And they shall eat its flesh cooked
in fire within the court of the house which is sanctified in the name of the LORD. 21 And they shall not be able to observe the Passover in their cities or in any district
except before the tabernacle of the LORD or before his house in which his name
dwells. And let them not stray from after the LORD.And they were prepared to depart
from the yoke of Egypt and from evil slavery. 7 And you, remember this day all of the daysa of your life and observe it from
year to year all the days of your life, once per year on its day according to all of
its law and you will not delay (one) day from (its) day or from (one) month to
8 (another) month. •For it is an eternal decree and engraved upon the heavenly
tablets for all of the children of Israel that they might observe it in each and every
year in its day once per year in all of their generations. And there is no limit of
days because it is ordained forever. f. The Eth. MSS also insert "between you" to used that reading in his translation, but his Eth. this series. The "you" refers to Moses. A B read text had "seventeenth" in agreement with MSS A
"I stood between you, the Egyptians, and Israel." D. MS C has "fifteenth."
C D read "I stood between the Egyptians, and
you, and Israel." 49 a. A portion of the Lat. text begins at this
g. * 'Fourteenth*' is the reading of MS B. Charles point and continues through 49:22a.

21 And they shall not be able to observe the Passover in their cities or in any district
except before the tabernacle of the LORD or before his house in which his name
dwells. And let them not stray from after the LORD. 22 And you, Moses, command the children of Israel so that they shall keep the
ordinance of the Passover just as it was commanded to you so that you might
relate to them its annual (occurrence) each year, both its period of days and the
feast of unleavened bread so that they might eat unleavened bread for seven days
so that they might observe its feast, and so that they might bring its gift, day by
b. ' 'Cooked' * is the MS reading. Charles emended put the phrase in his text, but removed it from his
his text on the basis of the Lat. text to read "they translation. shall eat it." d. The Lat. text also omits the phrase "that they
c. The phrase "it will come to pass when" is will sacrifice it before the Lord."
not found in the Lat. text or in Eth. MS A. Charlesday, during those seven days to rejoice before the LORD upon the altar of your
23 God. #For this feast you observed with nervousness when you went out from
Egypt until you entered into the wilderness of Sur because you completed it on EX 1*22
the shore of the sea. The laws pertaining to the sabbath Ex 16:1
1 50 And after this law I made you know the days of the sabbaths in the wilderness CD 10.14-11.18
2 of Sina which is between Elim and Sinai. •And I also related to you the sabbaths
of the land on Mount Sinai. And the years of jubilee in the sabbaths of years I Lev 25:8
related to you. But its year I have not related to you until you enter into the land
3 which you will possess. • And the land will keep its sabbaths when they dwell Lev 26:34
upon it. And they will know the year of jubilee. 4 On account of this I ordained for you the weeks of years, and the years, and
the jubilees (as) forty-nine jubilees from the days of Adam until this day and one
week and two years. And they are still forty further years to learn the commands
of the LORD until they cross over the shore of the land of Canaan, crossing over
5 the Jordan to its western side. • And jubilees will pass until Israel is purified from
all the sin of fornication, and defilement, and uncleanness, and sin and error. And
they will dwell in confidence in all the land. And then it will not have any Satan
or any evil (one). And the land will be purified from that time and forever. 6 And behold the commandment of the sabbaths I have written for you and all
7 of the judgments of its law. •Six days you will work, but the seventh day is the Ex 20:9f. sabbath of the LORD your God. You shall not do any work in it, you, or your
children, or your manservant or your maidservant, or any of your cattle or the
8 stranger who is with you. #And let the man who does anything on it die. Every CD 11.if.#And let the man who does anything on it die. Every CD 11.if. man who will profane this day, who will lie with his wife, and whoever will CD 10 22f
discuss a matter that he will do on it so that he might make on it a journey for
any buying or selling, and whoever draws water on it, which was not prepared Neh io:3i
;
for him on the sixth day, and whoever lifts up anything that he will carry to take 13:,6f
9 out of his tent or from his house, let him die. *You shall not do any work upon
the day of the sabbath except what you prepared for yourself on the sixth day to
eat and to drink and to rest and to observe a sabbath from all work of that day
and to bless the LORD your God who gave to you the day of festival and the holy
day. And a day of the holy kingdom for all Israel is this day among their days
10 always. #For great is the honor which the LORD gave to Israel to eat and to drink
and to be satisfied on this day of festival and to rest in it from all work of the
occupations of the children of men except to offer incense and to bring gifts and
11 sacrifices before the LORD for the days and the sabbaths. •This work alone shall
be done on the day of the sabbath in the sanctuary of the LORD your God so that
they might atone for Israel (with) continual gift day by day for an acceptable
memorial before the LORD. And so that he might accept them forever, day by
day, just as he commanded you. 12 And (as for) any man who does work on it, or who goes on a journey, or who CD i2.5f.21 And they shall not be able to observe the Passover in their cities or in any district
except before the tabernacle of the LORD or before his house in which his name
dwells. And let them not stray from after the LORD. 22 And you, Moses, command the children of Israel so that they shall keep the
ordinance of the Passover just as it was commanded to you so that you might
relate to them its annual (occurrence) each year, both its period of days and the
feast of unleavened bread so that they might eat unleavened bread for seven days
so that they might observe its feast, and so that they might bring its gift, day by
b. ' 'Cooked' * is the MS reading. Charles emended put the phrase in his text, but removed it from his
his text on the basis of the Lat. text to read "they translation. shall eat it." d. The Lat. text also omits the phrase "that they
c. The phrase "it will come to pass when" is will sacrifice it before the Lord."
not found in the Lat. text or in Eth. MS A. Charles

And so that he might accept them forever, day by
day, just as he commanded you. 12 And (as for) any man who does work on it, or who goes on a journey, or who CD i2.5f. plows a field either at home or any (other) place, or who kindles a fire, or who
rides on any animal, or who travels the sea in a boat, and any man who slaughters iMac 2:31 -38
or kills anything, or who slashes the throat of cattle or bird, or who snares any 2Mac6n
13 beast or bird or fish, or who fasts or makes war on the day of the sabbath, •let
the man who does any of these on the day of the sabbath die so that the children
of Israel might keep the sabbath according to the commands of the sabbaths of
the land just as it was written in the tablets which he placed in my hands so that
I might write for you the law of each time and according to each division of its
days. The account of the division of days is finished here. 50 a. The Eth. text has written "sina" instead ofMARTYRDOM AND ASCENSION
OF ISAIAH
(Second Century B.c.-Fourth Century A.D.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY M. A. KNIBB
The Ascension of Isaiah is a composite work which falls very obviously into two parts,
chapters 1-5 and chapters 6-11; the first part is now known as the Martyrdom of Isaiah,
the second bears the title the Vision of Isaiah. However, the Martyrdom of Isaiah is itself
composite; included within these chapters is an independent section, 3:13-4:22, which is
sometimes called the Testament of Hezekiah. Apart from these three main sections there
are a number of additions and insertions which are to be attributed to the final editor of the
whole book. The Martyrdom of Isaiah (the basic material in 1:1-3:12 and 5:1-16) is the oldest element
in the Ascension. It is a Jewish work which tells, in legendary form, of the martyr's death
which Isaiah suffered at the hands of Manasseh. The narrative begins by describing how,
in the twenty-sixth year of his reign, Hezekiah summoned his son Manasseh in order to
instruct him, and how, on that occasion, Isaiah prophesied that Manasseh would ignore his
father's words and, inspired by Beliar, bring about the death of the prophet (ch. 1). The
remainder of the narrative describes the fulfillment of this prophecy. The wickedness of
Manasseh's reign (2:1-6) leads Isaiah, in company with other prophets and faithful men,
to flee from Jerusalem, first to Bethlehem, and then to a mountain in the desert (2:7-11). However, Isaiah's hiding place is discovered by a Samaritan who accuses Isaiah of treason
and blasphemy (2:12a; 3:1-10). Manasseh has Isaiah arrested (3:1 lf.) and put to death (5:1-
16). Included within this narrative is a digression (2:12b-16) which deals with the story of
Micaiah son of Imlah (cf. IKgs 22:5-28).And so that he might accept them forever, day by
day, just as he commanded you. 12 And (as for) any man who does work on it, or who goes on a journey, or who CD i2.5f. plows a field either at home or any (other) place, or who kindles a fire, or who
rides on any animal, or who travels the sea in a boat, and any man who slaughters iMac 2:31 -38
or kills anything, or who slashes the throat of cattle or bird, or who snares any 2Mac6n
13 beast or bird or fish, or who fasts or makes war on the day of the sabbath, •let
the man who does any of these on the day of the sabbath die so that the children
of Israel might keep the sabbath according to the commands of the sabbaths of
the land just as it was written in the tablets which he placed in my hands so that
I might write for you the law of each time and according to each division of its
days. The account of the division of days is finished here. 50 a. The Eth. text has written "sina" instead of

Included within this narrative is a digression (2:12b-16) which deals with the story of
Micaiah son of Imlah (cf. IKgs 22:5-28). A Christian addition to the Martyrdom of Isaiah, sometimes given the title the Testament
of Hezekiah (3:13-4:22), is in reality presented as the account of a vision which Isaiah
himself had experienced before his arrest by Manasseh. The account describes the life and
death of the Beloved (3:13-20), the corruption of the Church (3:21-31), the reign of Beliar
(4:1-13), and the second coming of the Lord (4:14-22). The Vision of Isaiah (chs. 6-11) is likewise a Christian work. The introduction to the
narrative tells how Isaiah, while present at the court of Hezekiah in the twentieth year of
Hezekiah's reign, was carried up in his mind into heaven and had a vision (ch. 6). In the
report of the vision itself (chs. 7-11) Isaiah describes his journey up through the seven
heavens (7:1-9:26); it is this ascension which gives the title to the whole book. In the
seventh heaven he sees the Lord and the Holy Spirit, and is given a glimpse of the glory
of God; he himself joins in the worship which is offered to them (9:27-10:6). He then hears
the Lord being commissioned by God to descend into the world (10:7-16); he sees the
descent of the Lord through the seven heavens (10:17-31), his miraculous birth (11:1-16),
his life, death, and resurrection (11:17-21), and his ascension once more into heaven
(11:22-33). Verses 34-43 of chapter 11 form the conclusion to the vision and the book.Texts1
The different elements within the Ascension of Isaiah were composed either in Greek or,
in the case of the Martyrdom, in Hebrew, and at an early stage translated into Greek. The
Greek text was translated into a number of different languages: Ethiopic, Latin, Slavonic,
Coptic. Of these translations the Ethiopic is the most important, because it is only in
Ethiopic that an entire version of the Ascension has survived. The translation into Ethiopic of the Ascension of Isaiah, which was regarded in Abyssinia
as a genuine work of the prophet, was probably undertaken as part of the translation into
Ethiopic of the books of the Bible and Apocrypha. As such it is to be dated at some time
after the introduction of Christianity into Abyssinia in the fourth century, but before the
end of the sixth century.2 A comparison of the Ethiopic translation with the fragment of the
Greek text that has survived (see below) shows that on the whole the Ethiopic has faithfully
rendered the original.3 Many of the corruptions in the Ethiopic are to be attributed to faults
in the underlying Greek, but there are also, of course, corruptions that are peculiar to the
Ethiopic version. The following manuscripts of the Ethiopic version were used. A Bodleian Library, MS Aeth.d.13 (Dillmann's Catalogue, No. 7), 15th century, fols. 95-115. B British Library, Or. 501 (Wright's Catalogue, No. 25), 15th century, fols. 62-69. C British Library, Or. 503 (Wright's Catalogue, No. 27), 18th century, fols. 57-62. D Vatican Library, Eth. 263, 14th-15th century, fols. 85-104. E A fragment of the Ascension in an Abba Garima codex (a microfilm of the codex is
deposited at the Hill Monastic Manuscript Library). The fragment covers 1:4-2:2, and
its text is closely similar to that of D. The Ethiopic text of the Ascension was first published in 1819 by R. Laurence; his edition
consisted of a transcript of A, the only manuscript known at the time. Subsequently, critical
editions of the text were published by A.Laurence; his edition
consisted of a transcript of A, the only manuscript known at the time. Subsequently, critical
editions of the text were published by A. Dillmann (1877) and by R. H. Charles (1900), in
both cases based on the three manuscripts A, B, and C. Dillmann and Charles regarded A
as the best manuscript and used it as their base text; Charles's edition contains a fair number
of somewhat uncertain conjectural emendations.4 D (unknown to Dillmann and Charles) is
as important as A; and it often agrees with A. However, D sometimes supports the readings
of B and C. The present translation of the Ascension is based on a fresh collation of these
five Ethiopic manuscripts; in practice the translation often, but by no means always, follows
Dillmann's edition of the text. As has already been indicated, only a fragment of the Greek text of the Ascension has
survived. The fragment, containing 2:4-4:4, was discovered in a papyrus of the Amherst
collection dating from the fifth or sixth century. As will be recognized, the fragment covers
both part of the original Martyrdom of Isaiah (the basic material in 1:1-3:12 and 5:1-16)
and part of the inserted Christian section (3:13-4:22). Despite its limited extent the fragment
is important because of the light it casts on the Ethiopic and Latin translations.3
Two quite different Latin translations of the Ascension are in existence. The first of these
(Latl) is represented by two fragments in a palimpsest belonging to the Vatican Library
(Vatic. Lat. 5750) which were published by A. Mai in 1828.6 The fragments, which cover
1 For a survey of the textual evidence see A.-M. Denis, Introduction, pp. 170-76. 2 On Ethiopic Bible translations see E. Ullendorff, Ethiopia and the Bible (The Schweich Lectures of the British
Academy, 1967; London, 1968) pp. 31-59, especially pp. 55-59. 3 Cf. B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hunt, The Amherst Papyri. . . Part 1. The Ascension of Isaiah and Other Theological
Fragments (London, 1900) p. 3. 4R.Included within this narrative is a digression (2:12b-16) which deals with the story of
Micaiah son of Imlah (cf. IKgs 22:5-28). A Christian addition to the Martyrdom of Isaiah, sometimes given the title the Testament
of Hezekiah (3:13-4:22), is in reality presented as the account of a vision which Isaiah
himself had experienced before his arrest by Manasseh. The account describes the life and
death of the Beloved (3:13-20), the corruption of the Church (3:21-31), the reign of Beliar
(4:1-13), and the second coming of the Lord (4:14-22). The Vision of Isaiah (chs. 6-11) is likewise a Christian work. The introduction to the
narrative tells how Isaiah, while present at the court of Hezekiah in the twentieth year of
Hezekiah's reign, was carried up in his mind into heaven and had a vision (ch. 6). In the
report of the vision itself (chs. 7-11) Isaiah describes his journey up through the seven
heavens (7:1-9:26); it is this ascension which gives the title to the whole book. In the
seventh heaven he sees the Lord and the Holy Spirit, and is given a glimpse of the glory
of God; he himself joins in the worship which is offered to them (9:27-10:6). He then hears
the Lord being commissioned by God to descend into the world (10:7-16); he sees the
descent of the Lord through the seven heavens (10:17-31), his miraculous birth (11:1-16),
his life, death, and resurrection (11:17-21), and his ascension once more into heaven
(11:22-33). Verses 34-43 of chapter 11 form the conclusion to the vision and the book.

3. 4R. Laurence, Ascensio Isaiae Vatis; A. Dillmann, Ascensio Isaiae. aethiopice et latine; R. H. Charles, The
Ascension of Isaiah. 5 For further details see the excellent edition by Grenfell and Hunt (see n. 3). The text is also given by Charles
(Ascension, pp. 84-95) and by A.-M. Denis (Fragmenta Pseudepigraphorum Graeca [PVTG 3; Leiden, 1970] pp. 108-13; Denis gives only the part which covers the Martyrdom, i.e. 2:4-3:12). 6 A. Mai, Scriptorum veterum nova collectio 3.2 (1828) 238f. (not seen). The fragments were identified by B. G. Niebuhr and republished by I. Nitzsch ("Nachweisung zweier Bruchstucke einer alten lateinischen Ubersetzung vom2:14-3:13 and 7:1-19, form part of the original writing in the manuscript and date from
the fifth or sixth century; the translation itself may have been made in the fifth century. The Ethiopic, Greek, and Latin texts which have been mentioned so far, despite many
differences of detail, all represent essentially the same textual tradition. This is not the case
with the second Latin translation and the Slavonic, which both belong to a quite different
textual tradition. These translations cover only chapters 6-11, the Vision of Isaiah, and thus
provide evidence for the independent existence of this part of the Ascension. The second Latin translation (Lat2) was first published by A. de Fantis in 1522 from a
manuscript whose whereabouts is now unknown.7 At the time when Laurence published the
Ethiopic text of the Ascension in 1819 the edition by De Fantis of the Latin version appeared
to have been lost, although Laurence knew of the edition because of a reference to it by
Sixtus of Siena, who, in the sixteenth century, had condemned the Vision of Isaiah as a
heretical work.8 However, copies of the edition of De Fantis were discovered by J. C. L. Gieseler, who republished the text in 1832.9
The Slavonic translation10 exists in two forms, of which the second is an abridgment of
the first. The complete version (with which we are here concerned) is represented by a
Russian manuscript of the twelfth century and by several later manuscripts of diverse origin. An edition of the Russian manuscript, with variants from a fourteenth-century Serbian
manuscript, was published by A. Popov in 1879, and it was from this edition that N.An edition of the Russian manuscript, with variants from a fourteenth-century Serbian
manuscript, was published by A. Popov in 1879, and it was from this edition that N. Bonwetsch made the Latin translation of the Slavonic version which is given in Charles's
edition of the Ascension.11 The variants of the Slavonic version which are given in the notes
in the present work have been taken from Bonwetsch, but it must be pointed out that his
translation is now seen to be insufficiently precise.12 An edition of the Russian manuscript,
with the principal variants of the other manuscripts, was published by A. A. Sachmatov
and P. A. Lavrov in 1899.13
The second Latin translation and the Slavonic clearly belong closely together and form a
distinct recension of the Vision of Isaiah, but the relationship of the two translations to one
another has been the subject of debate in recent years. Earlier this century it was argued
that the character of the mistakes in Lat2 showed that this Latin version had been translated
from a Slavonic text, and that the Slavonic version had been not merely adopted by the
Bogomils (S. J. Ivanov), but also subjected to Bogomil editing (such was the view of E. Turdeanu); it was held that the translation into Latin was made by the Cathari.14 In contrast,
it has been argued by A. Vaillant15 that those features in Lat2 which were held to show the
dependence of Lat2 on the Slavonic are better explained in terms of the independent use by
Lat2 and the Slavonic of a common Greek original, and that the differences between Lat2
and the Slavonic confirm this. Furthermore, the Vision of Isaiah, in the form known to us
Anabatikon Esaiou," Theologische Studien und Kritiken 3 (1830] 209-46). The text of the fragments is also given
by Dillmann (Ascensio, pp. 83-85); J.-P. Migne (PL 13, cols. 629-32); Charles (Ascension, pp. 87-92, 102-8), and
E. Tisserant (Ascension d'I sale, pp. 100-9, 142-54).3. 4R. Laurence, Ascensio Isaiae Vatis; A. Dillmann, Ascensio Isaiae. aethiopice et latine; R. H. Charles, The
Ascension of Isaiah. 5 For further details see the excellent edition by Grenfell and Hunt (see n. 3). The text is also given by Charles
(Ascension, pp. 84-95) and by A.-M. Denis (Fragmenta Pseudepigraphorum Graeca [PVTG 3; Leiden, 1970] pp. 108-13; Denis gives only the part which covers the Martyrdom, i.e. 2:4-3:12). 6 A. Mai, Scriptorum veterum nova collectio 3.2 (1828) 238f. (not seen). The fragments were identified by B. G. Niebuhr and republished by I. Nitzsch ("Nachweisung zweier Bruchstucke einer alten lateinischen Ubersetzung vom

Tisserant (Ascension d'I sale, pp. 100-9, 142-54). The text of the first fragment (2:14-3:13, but with the exception
of 3:13, since it is not part of the Martyrdom) is likewise reproduced in Denis (Fragmenta, pp. 111-13). 7 A. de Fantis, Opera nuper in lucem prodeuntia (Venice, 1522). The Vision is included among several other
religious writings. 8Cf. Laurence, Ascensio, p. 151. 9 Programme quo Academiae Georgiae Augustae prorector et senatus sacra pentecostalia anni MDCCCXXXJI pie
concelebranda indixerunt (not seen). The text was reproduced by Dillmann (Ascensio, pp. 76-83), Charles (Ascension,
pp. 98-139), and Tisserant (Ascension, pp. 133-214). 10The information given about the Slav, version is taken from the following sources: E. Kozak, "Bibliographische
Obersicht der biblisch-apokryphen Literatur bei den Slaven," Jahrbucher fur Protestantische Theologie 18 (1892)
138f.; N. Bonwetsch in A. Harnack, Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur (Leipzig, 1893) vol. 1.2, p. 916;
W. Ltidtke, "Beitrage zu slavischen Apokryphen," ZAW 31 (1911) 222f.; E. Turdeanu, "Apocryphes bogomiles et
apocryphes pseudo-bogomiles," RHR 138 (1950) 214; A. Vaillant, RESl 42 (1963) 110; Turdeanu, Apocryphes slaves
et roumains, pp. 70, 145-72. 11 Cf. Charles, Ascension, pp. 98-139, and the statement on pp. xxivf. 12 Cf. Vaillant, RESl 42 (1963) 110. 13 A. A. Sachmatov and P. A. Lavrov, Sbornik XII vika Moskovskago Uspenskago Sobora, 1 (Moscow, 1899) (not
seen). 14 Cf. Turdeanu, RHR 138 (1950) 214-18; information about the views of J. Ivanov (given in his book Bogomilski
knigi i legendi [Sofia, 1925]) has been taken from Turdeanu's article. The theory that Lat2 was translated from the
Slav., which was put forward by Ivanov and accepted by Turdeanu, had earlier been presented by Ludtke (ZAW
31 (1911) 223f.). See also Turdeanu, Apocryphes slaves et roumains, pp. 70-74, 150-72. u Cf. Vaillant, RESl 42 (1963) 109-21.from Lat2 and the Slavonic, contains no Bogomil doctrines, or even traces of Bogomil
editing, even though the Vision was taken over by the Bogomils because they found in it
similarities with their own doctrines. Rather, Lat2 and the Slavonic are independent
translations of a Greek version of the Vision of Isaiah which had been revised to make it
more orthodox (thus e.g. the account of the birth and life of the Lord in the Ethiopic version
of 11:2-22 has been replaced in Lat2 and the Slavonic by a short statement which lacks the
legendary features of the Ethiopic). The translation into Slavonic was made in the tenth or
eleventh century. In a more recent article Turdeanu, while reaffirming the idea of Bogomil
editing, apparently accepts the view that Lat2 is dependent on a Greek text. Fragments of the Ascension of Isaiah in two Coptic dialects (Sahidic and Akhmimic) are
also in existence. The fragments in Sahidic were published by L. T. Lefort;16 some of the
Akhmimic fragments were likewise published by Lefort, but a more complete version was
later issued by P. Lacau.17
Finally, reference should be made to the Legend about Isaiah which was discovered by
O. von Gebhardt in a twelfth-century Greek manuscript (Paris, Cod. Gr. 1534) and published
by him in 1878.18 The Legend is largely based on a Greek text of the Ascension of the type
which is represented by the Ethiopic version, the Greek fragment, and Lat 1, but the material
has been completely recast. One very obvious feature is that the various incidents in the
Ascension have been rearranged in a more coherent order, with the equivalent of the Vision
(Eth. chs. 6-11) coming before the account of the martyrdom. The importance of the Greek
Legend lies in the fact that it sometimes gives us the Greek wording underlying the Ethiopic
and Latl.6-11) coming before the account of the martyrdom. The importance of the Greek
Legend lies in the fact that it sometimes gives us the Greek wording underlying the Ethiopic
and Latl. A second manuscript of this Greek Legend is now known.19
Laurence, Dillmann, and Charles all included translations of the Ascension of Isaiah in
their editions of the Ethiopic text (see n. 4); other translations have also been published in
several languages.20
The translation given in the present volume has been made from the Ethiopic version on
the basis of a fresh collation of the five Ethiopic manuscripts mentioned above. In the notes
to the translation the more important variants of the Greek fragment and the first Latin
translation, on the one hand, and of the second Latin translation and the Slavonic, on the
other, have been given. Where appropriate, the evidence of the Greek Legend has also been
cited. Original language
In considering the question of the original language of the Ascension, it is necessary to
distinguish between the Martyrdom and the remaining sections of the book. So far as the
Martyrdom is concerned, there is good evidence for the view that is was composed in
Hebrew. First, the form of the sentences in 1:1, 2:1, and 3:2 is typically Hebraic and points
to the use of a construction with wayhf. Second, in 2:1 there is a play on words linking
the name Manasseh with the Hebrew verb "to forget" (ndsah, cf. Gen 41:31) which is
most naturally explained on the assumption that the Martyrdom was composed in Hebrew. Finally, in 5:1, 11 the Ethiopic states that Isaiah was sawed in half with "a wood saw"
(i.e. a saw to cut wood). But the Ethiopic expression is ambiguous and could be translated
"a wooden saw" (a saw made out of wood), and the corresponding passage in the Greek
Legend (3:16) actually has this. The context and sense obviously require the meaning "a
16L. T. Lefort, "Coptica Lovaniensia (suite)," Le Musion 51 (1938) 24-30, plate IVa. 17 L. T.Tisserant (Ascension d'I sale, pp. 100-9, 142-54). The text of the first fragment (2:14-3:13, but with the exception
of 3:13, since it is not part of the Martyrdom) is likewise reproduced in Denis (Fragmenta, pp. 111-13). 7 A. de Fantis, Opera nuper in lucem prodeuntia (Venice, 1522). The Vision is included among several other
religious writings. 8Cf. Laurence, Ascensio, p. 151. 9 Programme quo Academiae Georgiae Augustae prorector et senatus sacra pentecostalia anni MDCCCXXXJI pie
concelebranda indixerunt (not seen). The text was reproduced by Dillmann (Ascensio, pp. 76-83), Charles (Ascension,
pp. 98-139), and Tisserant (Ascension, pp. 133-214). 10The information given about the Slav, version is taken from the following sources: E. Kozak, "Bibliographische
Obersicht der biblisch-apokryphen Literatur bei den Slaven," Jahrbucher fur Protestantische Theologie 18 (1892)
138f.; N. Bonwetsch in A. Harnack, Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur (Leipzig, 1893) vol. 1.2, p. 916;
W. Ltidtke, "Beitrage zu slavischen Apokryphen," ZAW 31 (1911) 222f.; E. Turdeanu, "Apocryphes bogomiles et
apocryphes pseudo-bogomiles," RHR 138 (1950) 214; A. Vaillant, RESl 42 (1963) 110; Turdeanu, Apocryphes slaves
et roumains, pp. 70, 145-72. 11 Cf. Charles, Ascension, pp. 98-139, and the statement on pp. xxivf. 12 Cf. Vaillant, RESl 42 (1963) 110. 13 A. A. Sachmatov and P. A. Lavrov, Sbornik XII vika Moskovskago Uspenskago Sobora, 1 (Moscow, 1899) (not
seen). 14 Cf. Turdeanu, RHR 138 (1950) 214-18; information about the views of J. Ivanov (given in his book Bogomilski
knigi i legendi [Sofia, 1925]) has been taken from Turdeanu's article. The theory that Lat2 was translated from the
Slav., which was put forward by Ivanov and accepted by Turdeanu, had earlier been presented by Ludtke (ZAW
31 (1911) 223f.). See also Turdeanu, Apocryphes slaves et roumains, pp. 70-74, 150-72. u Cf. Vaillant, RESl 42 (1963) 109-21.

17 L. T. Lefort, "Fragments d'apocryphes en copte-akhmimique," Le Musion 52 (1939) 7-10, plate D; P. Lacau,
"Fragments de 1'Ascension d'Isaie en copte," Le Musion 59 (1946) 453-67. 18 O. von Gebhardt, "Die Ascensio Isaiae als Heiligenlegende," ZWT 21 (1878) 330-53. The text was subsequently
republished by Charles (Ascension, pp. 141-48); for a French translation see Tisserant (Ascension, pp. 217-26). 19 Vatic. Palat. 27 of the 11th cent. (cf. Denis, Introduction, p. 172). 20 English: Charles's translation was reproduced in APOT, vol. 2, pp. 155-62 (the Martyrdom only), and in TED;
London, 1917 (Introduction by G. H. Box). Danish: E. Hammershaimb in De Gammeltestamentlige Pseudepigrafer,
vol. 3 (1958) pp. 303-15 (not seen). French: R. Basset, Les apocryphes tthiopiens traduit en Francois. III. LAscension d'Isaie (Paris, 1894); Tisserant, Ascension (see n. 6). German: G. Beer, APAT, vol. 2, pp. 119-27
(Martyrdom only); P. Riessler, Altjudisches Schrifttum ausserhalb der Bibel (Augsburg, 1928) pp. 481-84, 1300f. (Martyrdom only); J. Flemming and H. Duensing in E. Hennecke and W. Schneemelcher, Neutestamentliche
Apokryphen (Tubingen, 19643) vol. 2, pp. 454-68 (ET, HSW, vol. 2, pp. 642-63); E. Hammershaimb, JSHRZ 2
(1973) 15-34 (Martyrdom only).wood saw," but the evidence of the Greek Legend suggests that in the original a Hebrew
construct-relationship was used, for which the translations 4'a wood saw" and "a wooden
saw" would both be possible, and that the Hebrew was incorrectly translated into Greek as
the latter. The Hebrew Martyrdom of Isaiah was translated into Greek, and, as we have seen, a
fragment of this Greek translation has survived. It is generally assumed that the remaining
sections of the Ascension were composed in Greek, and there seems no reason to doubt
this. Composite character of the Ascension
It was stated at the outset that the Ascension of Isaiah is a composite work, and this view
has been presupposed in the discussion so far. It is necessary here to say a little more about
the evidence on which this view is based.21
The first point to be noticed is that a clear distinction has to be drawn between chapters
1-5 and chapters 6-11. On even a superficial reading it is obvious that chapters 6—11 are
Christian in origin, and that chapters 1-5 at the very least include a good deal of Jewish
material. But beyond this the evidence of the second Latin translation and the Slavonic
translation shows that chapters 6-11 circulated independently of chapters 1-5 under the title
4'the Vision of Isaiah."22 The awkwardness inherent in the fact that the events described in
chapters 6-11 are set at an earlier stage in Isaiah's life than those described in chapters 1-5
suggests that chapters 6-11 not only circulated independently of chapters 1-5, but also had
a quite independent origin. The combination of chapters 1-5 and 6-11 is the result of
subsequent editorial activity. In modem times chapters 1-5 have been given the title 44the Martyrdom of Isaiah." So
far as these chapters are concerned, 3:13-4:22 stands out as being an addition to the text. The basic narrative of chapters 1-5 is Jewish, but 3:13-4:22 is manifestly Christian.In modem times chapters 1-5 have been given the title 44the Martyrdom of Isaiah." So
far as these chapters are concerned, 3:13-4:22 stands out as being an addition to the text. The basic narrative of chapters 1-5 is Jewish, but 3:13-4:22 is manifestly Christian. Apart
from this, 3:13-4:22 forms a very harsh break in the narrative between 3:12 and 5:1. So
much is clear; what is not clear is whether 3:13-4:22 originally formed part of an independent
work, or whether it was composed specifically for the context which it now occupies as an
addition to the narrative of the Martyrdom of Isaiah. R. H. Charles took the view that 3:13-4:22 did at one time have an independent existence,
and his view has been accepted by a number of scholars. Charles drew attention, on the
one hand, to the fact that l:2b-5a alludes, apparently with reference to 3:13-4:22, to a
vision which Hezekiah saw in the fifteenth year of his reign; and, on the other hand, to the
fact that the eleventh-century chronicler George Cedrenus quotes 4:12, but attributes the
passage to 44the Testament of Hezekiah." Charles concluded that 3:13-4:22 belonged
originally to an independent work called the Testament of Hezekiah, although he thought
the beginning and end of the work had been removed.23
There are, however, a number of difficulties with Charles's views about the Testament
of Hezekiah. In the first place, the revelation given in 3:13-4:22 is attributed to Isaiah, not
the king. This difficulty might be avoided by assuming that the revelation was transferred
from Hezekiah to Isaiah when 3:13-4:22 was inserted in the Ascension; against this it must
be pointed out that Cedrenus likewise places his quotation of 4:12 in the mouth of Isaiah
(4Tn the Testament of Hezekiah, king of Judah, Isaiah the prophet says . . .").17 L. T. Lefort, "Fragments d'apocryphes en copte-akhmimique," Le Musion 52 (1939) 7-10, plate D; P. Lacau,
"Fragments de 1'Ascension d'Isaie en copte," Le Musion 59 (1946) 453-67. 18 O. von Gebhardt, "Die Ascensio Isaiae als Heiligenlegende," ZWT 21 (1878) 330-53. The text was subsequently
republished by Charles (Ascension, pp. 141-48); for a French translation see Tisserant (Ascension, pp. 217-26). 19 Vatic. Palat. 27 of the 11th cent. (cf. Denis, Introduction, p. 172). 20 English: Charles's translation was reproduced in APOT, vol. 2, pp. 155-62 (the Martyrdom only), and in TED;
London, 1917 (Introduction by G. H. Box). Danish: E. Hammershaimb in De Gammeltestamentlige Pseudepigrafer,
vol. 3 (1958) pp. 303-15 (not seen). French: R. Basset, Les apocryphes tthiopiens traduit en Francois. III. LAscension d'Isaie (Paris, 1894); Tisserant, Ascension (see n. 6). German: G. Beer, APAT, vol. 2, pp. 119-27
(Martyrdom only); P. Riessler, Altjudisches Schrifttum ausserhalb der Bibel (Augsburg, 1928) pp. 481-84, 1300f. (Martyrdom only); J. Flemming and H. Duensing in E. Hennecke and W. Schneemelcher, Neutestamentliche
Apokryphen (Tubingen, 19643) vol. 2, pp. 454-68 (ET, HSW, vol. 2, pp. 642-63); E. Hammershaimb, JSHRZ 2
(1973) 15-34 (Martyrdom only).

. ."). Unless it
is to be assumed that Cedrenus made a mistake, it is difficult to take his quotation of 4:12
as providing evidence for the existence of an independent work attached to the name of
Hezekiah. It seems more likely that by 44the Testament of Hezekiah" Cedrenus was referring
to chapters 1-5 as a whole,24 the first chapter of which does have the character of a testament
21 For earlier discussions of this problem see Charles (Ascension, pp. xxxiv-xliii) and Tisserant (Ascension, pp. 42-
61). 22In full "The Vision which Isaiah the prophet (Slav "the holy Isaiah, the prophet"], the son of Amoz, saw." Eth
gives virtually the same heading at 6:1. 23 Cf. Charles, Ascension, pp. xiiif., xiii, 2, 29. For the text of Cedrenus (quoted by Charles, p. 29) see I. Becker,
Georgius Cedrenus, Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae (Bonn, 1838) vol. 1, pp. 120f. 24 Hammershaimb, JSHRZ 2 (1973) 17. Cf. also the critical comments of A. Caquot ("Bref commentaire du 'Martyre
d'lsaie,' " Semitica 23 [1973] 69) on the likelihood of the existence of an independent work called "the Testament
of Hezekiah."given by Hezekiah (see particularly n. g on 1:2). In the second place, it is not at all obvious
that l:2b-5a really does refer to 3:13-4:22; here the contrast with l:5b-6a, which clearly
was written with reference to chapters 6-11, is significant. Thus l:2b-6a comes from the
hand of the final editor of the Ascension and replaces an earlier narrative in which Hezekiah
summoned Manasseh in order to instruct him about the fear of God and about how he
should rule (see n. g on 1:2). In the present narrative we are told that Hezekiah summoned
Manasseh in order to give him an account of a vision which he had seen about the judgment
of the prince of this world and about faith in the Beloved (vss. 2b-5a), and an account of
a vision which Isaiah had seen (vss. 5b-6a, referring to chs. 6-11). The combination of
chapters 1-5 with chapters 6-11 gave the complete book predominantly the character of an
apocalypse, and it was because of this that the final editor was led to describe Hezekiah as
if he were an apocalyptic seer giving a revelation, rather than as a king giving practical
advice to his son. It is unnecessary, therefore, to assume that l:2b-5a refers to a particular
section of the Ascension. Even if the evidence for the view that 3:13-4:22 originally belonged to a work called the
Testament of Hezekiah is unconvincing, it is nonetheless possible that this section of the
Ascension has been taken from another, now unknown work. This question cannot be
answered with any degree of certainty. All that can be said is that in its present form 3:13-
4:22 presupposes the joining of chapters 1-5 (the Martyrdom) with chapters 6-11 (the
Vision); 3:13 clearly alludes to chapters 6-11, and there are also a number of other links
between 3:13-4:22 and the Vision. The material that is left to the Martyrdom after the removal of 3:13-4:22 consists of 1:1-
3:12 and 5:1-16 (minus a number of obvious editorial additions).All that can be said is that in its present form 3:13-
4:22 presupposes the joining of chapters 1-5 (the Martyrdom) with chapters 6-11 (the
Vision); 3:13 clearly alludes to chapters 6-11, and there are also a number of other links
between 3:13-4:22 and the Vision. The material that is left to the Martyrdom after the removal of 3:13-4:22 consists of 1:1-
3:12 and 5:1-16 (minus a number of obvious editorial additions). At an earlier stage some
scholars argued that chapter 1 did not form part of the original Martyrdom, but Charles25
has convincingly shown that this chapter is presupposed by 2:1, even though it now contains
a number of passages which stem from the final editor of the book (cf. vss. 2b-6a, 7, 13). The final editor was also responsible for a number of other passages in the Ascension (cf. 2:9; 4:19-5:la; 5:15f.; 11:41-43). The view that the Ascension is a composite work has been accepted by virtually every
scholar who has studied this book, and the debate has really been concerned with the
questions of the extent of the different elements within the Ascension, and the way in which
they were put together. Since the time of Laurence, only two scholars, F. C. Burkitt and
V. Burch, have maintained that the Ascension is a unity.26 Burkitt (whose discussion is the
more important) argued that it was impossible to remove the narrative portions of the
Ascension (i.e. the Martyrdom) from the remainder of the work; rather he regarded the
Martyrdom 44as an integral part of the Ascension, constructed from the writer's knowledge
of the early imperfect Greek translation of the Books of Kings, supplemented here and there
by stray fragments of Jewish lore."27 Burkitt believed that the unsatisfactory impression
which the Ascension gives is due to the fact that the writer tried to deal in an apocalypse
both with the last judgment and with the incarnation; the latter does not, in his view, really
belong in the literary genre of an apocalypse.Burch, have maintained that the Ascension is a unity.26 Burkitt (whose discussion is the
more important) argued that it was impossible to remove the narrative portions of the
Ascension (i.e. the Martyrdom) from the remainder of the work; rather he regarded the
Martyrdom 44as an integral part of the Ascension, constructed from the writer's knowledge
of the early imperfect Greek translation of the Books of Kings, supplemented here and there
by stray fragments of Jewish lore."27 Burkitt believed that the unsatisfactory impression
which the Ascension gives is due to the fact that the writer tried to deal in an apocalypse
both with the last judgment and with the incarnation; the latter does not, in his view, really
belong in the literary genre of an apocalypse. However, Burkitt's views do not really do
justice to the very different character of 1:1-3:12, plus 5:1-16, 3:13-4:22, and chapters 6-
11. Furthermore, even if it were to be accepted that it is not entirely possible to remove
the Martyrdom from the Ascension, it would still be necessary to assume for the narrative
portions of chapters 1-5 the use of a much more substantial Jewish substratum than Burkitt's
"stray fragments of Jewish lore"; but in this case we are effectively dealing once more
with sources. Burkitt's discussion does, nonetheless, have some importance inasmuch as it
serves as a warning of the difficulties of recovering the text of the original Martyrdom. It
cannot simply be assumed that what we are left with after the removal of the Christian
elements in the Ascension and the obvious editorial additions is the Jewish Martyrdom of
Isaiah; the possibility of Christian reworking of what appears to be Jewish material needs
to be kept in mind. 25 Ascension, pp. xl—xiii. 26 F. C. Burkitt, Jewish and Christian Apocalypses (The Schweich Lectures of the British Academy, 1913; London,
1914) pp. 45-48, 72-74. V. Burch, "The Literary Unity of the Ascension of Isaiah," 775 20 (1918-19) 17-23.. ."). Unless it
is to be assumed that Cedrenus made a mistake, it is difficult to take his quotation of 4:12
as providing evidence for the existence of an independent work attached to the name of
Hezekiah. It seems more likely that by 44the Testament of Hezekiah" Cedrenus was referring
to chapters 1-5 as a whole,24 the first chapter of which does have the character of a testament
21 For earlier discussions of this problem see Charles (Ascension, pp. xxxiv-xliii) and Tisserant (Ascension, pp. 42-
61). 22In full "The Vision which Isaiah the prophet (Slav "the holy Isaiah, the prophet"], the son of Amoz, saw." Eth
gives virtually the same heading at 6:1. 23 Cf. Charles, Ascension, pp. xiiif., xiii, 2, 29. For the text of Cedrenus (quoted by Charles, p. 29) see I. Becker,
Georgius Cedrenus, Corpus Scriptorum Historiae Byzantinae (Bonn, 1838) vol. 1, pp. 120f. 24 Hammershaimb, JSHRZ 2 (1973) 17. Cf. also the critical comments of A. Caquot ("Bref commentaire du 'Martyre
d'lsaie,' " Semitica 23 [1973] 69) on the likelihood of the existence of an independent work called "the Testament
of Hezekiah."

V. Burch, "The Literary Unity of the Ascension of Isaiah," 775 20 (1918-19) 17-23. 27 Jewish and Christian Apocalypses, pp. 45f.In the course of this discussion reference has been made to a number of titles which have
been given to different parts of the Ascension, namely the Martyrdom (a modern title given
to the basic material in 1:1-3:12 and 5:1-16), the Testament of Hezekiah (a title attached
by George Cedrenus to a quotation of 4:12; it was thought by Charles to refer to 3:13-
4:22, but has been taken here as a title of chs. 1-5), and the Vision of Isaiah (the title given
to chs. 6-11 in the Eth. translation, the second Lat. translation, and the Slav.). It is
convenient at this point to mention briefly the other titles that have been given to this book.28
The title conventionally given to the whole book—the Ascension of Isaiah—is the title
which is found in the Ethiopic version at the beginning of the book. The same title is found
twice in Epiphanius, on one occasion attached to a quotation of 9:35f. ,29 and, with reference
to 11:34, in Jerome.30 Since Jerome alludes elsewhere to the charges brought against Isaiah
in 3:6-10,31 it seems likely that he knew the Ascension in its complete form; but it is not
clear from Epiphanius' use of the title whether he meant by it the whole book or only
chapters 6-11. A similar uncertainty surrounds the use by Origen of the title4 4the Apocryphon
of Isaiah";32 Origen indicates that the story of the sawing of Isaiah in half was to be found
in this 4'Apocryphon," but it is not clear what else it contained. Date
It is difficult to date the different sections of the Ascension with any precision, but it is
possible to give a general indication of when they were composed.33
Both Justin Martyr and Tertullian34 refer to the tradition that Isaiah met his death by
being sawed in half, and this same tradition about Isaiah was probably in the mind of the
author of Hebrews 11:37. If this last point is correct, it suggests that the Martyrdom was
composed not later than the first century A.D.Date
It is difficult to date the different sections of the Ascension with any precision, but it is
possible to give a general indication of when they were composed.33
Both Justin Martyr and Tertullian34 refer to the tradition that Isaiah met his death by
being sawed in half, and this same tradition about Isaiah was probably in the mind of the
author of Hebrews 11:37. If this last point is correct, it suggests that the Martyrdom was
composed not later than the first century A.D. But the narrative, like the stories of the
martyrdom of Eleazar and the martyrdom of the seven brothers and their mother (2Mac
6:18-7:42), is probably much older than this and goes back ultimately to the period of the
persecution of the Jews by Antiochus Epiphanes in 167-164
B.C.35
There are a number of indications which point to the view that 3:13-4:22 was composed
at about the end of the first century A.D. This section of the Ascension is clearly later than
the death of Nero in A.D. 68 because it refers to the expectation that Nero would come
again as the 4'Antichrist" (see 4:2b-4a); presumably a little time would have been needed
for this belief to develop, and this suggests a date at the earliest toward the end of the first
century. On the other hand, the picture of the corruption of the Church which is given in
3:21-31 invites comparison with the descriptions of the Church given in 1 and 2 Timothy,
2 Peter, and 1 Clement 3; the similarities with these writings likewise suggest that 3:13-
4:22 dates from about the end of the first century. Two other pieces of evidence also point
toward this date. First, the author of 4 Baruch 9:18, 20, a work attributed to the early
second century, betrays a knowledge of chapters 1-5 of the Ascension in their Christian
form and may even have known the complete book; he gives in 9:18 what appears to be a
loose quotation of 3:17 of the Ascension.V. Burch, "The Literary Unity of the Ascension of Isaiah," 775 20 (1918-19) 17-23. 27 Jewish and Christian Apocalypses, pp. 45f.

Two other pieces of evidence also point
toward this date. First, the author of 4 Baruch 9:18, 20, a work attributed to the early
second century, betrays a knowledge of chapters 1-5 of the Ascension in their Christian
form and may even have known the complete book; he gives in 9:18 what appears to be a
loose quotation of 3:17 of the Ascension. Second, this same passage of the Ascension (3:17)
provides a description of the emergence of the Beloved (Jesus) from the tomb which is
similar to the description given in the Gospel of Peter 39f., a work which dates from the
middle of the second century. Taken together, these indications suggest a date for the
composition of 3:13-4:22 at about the end of the first century. The date of the Vision of Isaiah is rather more difficult to determine. The fact that Jerome
refers to 11:34, and that Epiphanius gives a quotation of 9:35f., suggests that this part of
28 Cf. Charles, Ascension, pp. xii-xiv; Denis, Introduction, pp. 170f. »The quotation of 9:35f. occurs in AdvHaer 67:3 (GCS 37 [19331 pp. 135f.); cf. AdvHaer 40:2 (GCS 31 [1922)
p. 82). ^Cf. Jerome, Commlsa 64:4 (PL, vol. 24, col. 622). 31 Jerome, Commlsa 1:10 (PL, vol. 24, col. 33). 32 Origen, CommMt 13:57 (GCS 40, p. 24); cf. EpAfr 9 (PL, vol. 11, col. 65). 33 For earlier discussions see Charles (Ascension, pp. xlivf); Tisserant (Ascension, pp. 59f). MDiatTrypho 120:5; Tertullian, De patientia 14 (Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum 47 [19061 P- 21);
Scorpicae 8 (Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum 20 [1890] p. 161). 35 Cf. O. Eissfeldt, The Old Testament. An Introduction, trans. P. R. Ackroyd (Oxford, 1966) p. 609.the Ascension was in existence, at the latest, by the end of the third century A.D. But it is
probably much older than the third century. The Acts of Peter 24, which dates from the
second half of the second century, appears to quote 11:14, while the narrative of the
miraculous birth of the Lord in 11:2-1636 shows some similarities with the Protoevangelium
of James, a work attributed to about A.D. 150. It thus seems likely that the Vision comes
from the second century A.D. The date of composition was carried back even earlier (to the
close of the first century) by Charles,37 because he believed that 11:16 was quoted in
Ignatius, Epistle to the Ephesians 19, "And hidden from the prince of this world were the
virginity of Mary and her child-bearing and likewise also the death of the Lord." But it is
not at all clear that Ignatius really is quoting from the Ascension. It is not known when exactly the three sections of the Ascension were combined. The
Greek fragment38 (from the 5th-6th cent.), the palimpsest giving the text of the fragments
of the first Latin translation (likewise from the 5th-6th cent.), and the Ethiopic translation
(which was made some time during the 4th-6th cent.) all presuppose the existence of the
complete work. But the character of the mistakes in the Greek fragment and the Latin
palimpsest suggests that the complete work had already been in existence for some time
when these manuscripts were copied. It thus seems likely that the three sections of the
Ascension were brought together in the third or fourth century A.D., and this is confirmed
by the fact that Jerome seems to have known the complete book.But the character of the mistakes in the Greek fragment and the Latin
palimpsest suggests that the complete work had already been in existence for some time
when these manuscripts were copied. It thus seems likely that the three sections of the
Ascension were brought together in the third or fourth century A.D., and this is confirmed
by the fact that Jerome seems to have known the complete book. It is possible that there
were two stages in this process, first the combination of 3:13-4:22 with the Martyrdom,
and second the combination of the enlarged Martyrdom with the Vision.39
Provenance
It is generally assumed that the Martyrdom was composed in Palestine, and this seems
to be correct given that the language of composition was almost certainly Hebrew, and
given the hostility that is shown toward the Samaritans (cf. 2:12, 14; 3:1, 3). The fact that
the legend is referred to in the rabbinic writings tends to support the view of Palestinian
composition. There is no evidence to suggest where either 3:13-4:22 or the Vision was
composed. It is also not known where the three parts of the Ascension were put together. Historical and theological importance
The Martyrdom of Isaiah belongs with the martyr stories of the Old Testament (cf. Dan
3 and 6) and the Apocrypha (cf. 2Mac 6:18-7:42), but it is the latter which provides the
closest parallel. The legend about the martyr's death which Isaiah suffered, like the stories
about Eleazar and about the mother and her seven sons, goes back ultimately to the time
of the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes. Stories such as this were written to encourage
the Jews to remain faithful to their religion, but unlike the somewhat older stories in Daniel
3 and 6 there is no happy ending; rather it is accepted that the cost of remaining faithful to
God will indeed be death.Two other pieces of evidence also point
toward this date. First, the author of 4 Baruch 9:18, 20, a work attributed to the early
second century, betrays a knowledge of chapters 1-5 of the Ascension in their Christian
form and may even have known the complete book; he gives in 9:18 what appears to be a
loose quotation of 3:17 of the Ascension. Second, this same passage of the Ascension (3:17)
provides a description of the emergence of the Beloved (Jesus) from the tomb which is
similar to the description given in the Gospel of Peter 39f., a work which dates from the
middle of the second century. Taken together, these indications suggest a date for the
composition of 3:13-4:22 at about the end of the first century. The date of the Vision of Isaiah is rather more difficult to determine. The fact that Jerome
refers to 11:34, and that Epiphanius gives a quotation of 9:35f., suggests that this part of
28 Cf. Charles, Ascension, pp. xii-xiv; Denis, Introduction, pp. 170f. »The quotation of 9:35f. occurs in AdvHaer 67:3 (GCS 37 [19331 pp. 135f.); cf. AdvHaer 40:2 (GCS 31 [1922)
p. 82). ^Cf. Jerome, Commlsa 64:4 (PL, vol. 24, col. 622). 31 Jerome, Commlsa 1:10 (PL, vol. 24, col. 33). 32 Origen, CommMt 13:57 (GCS 40, p. 24); cf. EpAfr 9 (PL, vol. 11, col. 65). 33 For earlier discussions see Charles (Ascension, pp. xlivf); Tisserant (Ascension, pp. 59f). MDiatTrypho 120:5; Tertullian, De patientia 14 (Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum 47 [19061 P- 21);
Scorpicae 8 (Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum 20 [1890] p. 161). 35 Cf. O. Eissfeldt, The Old Testament. An Introduction, trans. P. R. Ackroyd (Oxford, 1966) p. 609.

The legend about the martyr's death which Isaiah suffered, like the stories
about Eleazar and about the mother and her seven sons, goes back ultimately to the time
of the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes. Stories such as this were written to encourage
the Jews to remain faithful to their religion, but unlike the somewhat older stories in Daniel
3 and 6 there is no happy ending; rather it is accepted that the cost of remaining faithful to
God will indeed be death. The narrative of the Martyrdom, as will be apparent from the references and notes
appended to the translation, draws its inspiration to a very great extent from the Old
Testament, and particularly from 1 and 2 Kings. The author takes over the contrast that is
drawn in 2 Kings between the good Hezekiah and the wicked Manasseh, and there is no
trace of the more sympathetic picture of Manasseh which is given in 2 Chronicles 33 and
is presupposed in the Prayer of Manasseh. There is nothing in the Old Testament, of course,
about the death of Isaiah, but the impetus for the development of the story of the martyrdom
was perhaps provided by the note in 2 Kings 21:16 that "Manasseh shed innocent blood
. . . in such great quantity that he flooded Jerusalem from end to end."
36 The section 11:2-22 is attested only by the Eth. version and is omitted by the second Lat. translation and the
Slav. But the primitive character of the narrative of the birth of Jesus suggests very strongly that the Eth. has preserved
the original form of the text. 37 Ascension, p. xlv. 38 Although the Gk. fragment only covers 2:4-4:4, its text of 3:13 alludes to the content of chs. 6-11; the Gk. fragment
thus presupposes the combination of the three elements in the Ascension to form the complete book we know. 39 Cf. Eissfeldt, Introduction, p. 610.The particular detail that Isaiah met his death by being sawed in half is at first sight
somewhat surprising and has been the source of a good deal of speculation. But it is
probably to be explained by the fact that the author here presupposes a tradition which is
given in more complete form in the Talmuds. According to the tradition preserved in the
Babylonian Talmud (Yeb 49b) Isaiah was put on trial by Manasseh on a variety of charges;
included among these is the charge made in the Ascension (3:8f.) that Isaiah claimed to
have seen God, despite the fact that Moses said that no one can see God and live. Isaiah,
in order to escape, pronounced the name of God and, in consequence, was swallowed up
by a cedar. The cedar was brought and sawed in half, and this caused the death of Isaiah. In this tradition Isaiah's death is interpreted as a punishment for saying, "and I live among
a people of unclean lips" (Isa 6:5). Elsewhere the Babylonian Talmud only mentions the
fact that Manasseh slew Isaiah (cf. b.Sanh 103b), but the Jerusalem Talmud (y.Sanh 10.2
[ed. M. Schwab, vol. 11, p. 49]) preserves a variant of the tradition linking Isaiah with a
cedar. According to the Jerusalem Talmud Isaiah hid in a cedar to escape from Manasseh,
but the fringes of his garment stuck out and betrayed his presence. Manasseh ordered the
tree to be cut, and Isaiah was discovered.40 It would appear that the Martyrdom presupposes
a tradition, comparable to those in the Talmuds, according to which Isaiah took refuge in
a tree trunk, and that it was for this reason that he is said to have met his death by being
sawed in half. This view seems more likely than the view that the motif has been borrowed
from non-Israelite sources.Manasseh ordered the
tree to be cut, and Isaiah was discovered.40 It would appear that the Martyrdom presupposes
a tradition, comparable to those in the Talmuds, according to which Isaiah took refuge in
a tree trunk, and that it was for this reason that he is said to have met his death by being
sawed in half. This view seems more likely than the view that the motif has been borrowed
from non-Israelite sources. Thus a number of scholars believed that the motif of the sawing
in half was Iranian in origin,41 but it seems rather unlikely that the Iranian traditions which
were held to provide the evidence for this view are sufficiently old for them to have
influenced the author of the Martyrdom.42 K. Galling linked the traditions about Isaiah in
the Martyrdom with those about Isaiah and the cedar in the Talmuds and attempted to
explain them as a reinterpretation of the mythology connected with Adonis,43 but again this
seems improbable.44
The demonology of the Martyrdom of Isaiah is a matter of some interest. The leader of
the forces of evil, who has at his disposal a host of subordinate angels (2:2; cf. 5:9), is
called variously Sammael (1:8, 11; 2:1; 5:15f.), Beliar (l:8f.; 2:4; 3:11; 5:1, [4], 15), and
Satan (2:2, 7; 5:16). These three names, which are, of course, well known from other
sources, appear to be used synonymously, and there is no real evidence to support the view
of Charles that Sammael is subordinate to Beliar.45 Two other names are also applied to
this figure. The first, Malkira, is given in 1:8 as an additional name of Sammael and means
in Hebrew "king of evil." The second, Matanbukus (2:4; there is a corrupt variant in 5:3,
Mekembekus), apparently derives from a Hebrew expression meaning 44 gift of desolation."46
In different places both Beliar (1:9; 3:11; 5:1) and Sammael (2:1) are said to dwell in the
heart of Manasseh, and it is under the inspiration of Beliar (or Sammael) that Manasseh, at
the instigation of a Samaritan, has Isaiah put to death.These three names, which are, of course, well known from other
sources, appear to be used synonymously, and there is no real evidence to support the view
of Charles that Sammael is subordinate to Beliar.45 Two other names are also applied to
this figure. The first, Malkira, is given in 1:8 as an additional name of Sammael and means
in Hebrew "king of evil." The second, Matanbukus (2:4; there is a corrupt variant in 5:3,
Mekembekus), apparently derives from a Hebrew expression meaning 44 gift of desolation."46
In different places both Beliar (1:9; 3:11; 5:1) and Sammael (2:1) are said to dwell in the
heart of Manasseh, and it is under the inspiration of Beliar (or Sammael) that Manasseh, at
the instigation of a Samaritan, has Isaiah put to death. This Samaritan is presented in the
narrative as the agent of Beliar. The exact form of his name poses a particular problem. In
the Greek fragment the name occurs as Belicheiar, Becheira, Melcheira, and Belchira; in
the Latin palimpsest as Bechira; in the Ethiopic in a variety of forms, of which the most
important are Belkira or Balkira, and Melkira or Malkira; in the Coptic as Belch(ira); and
finally in the Greek Legend as Melchias or Becheiras47 (see the notes on 2:5, 12, 16; 3:1,
6, 11; 5:2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 12, 15, where the full evidence is given). Despite the wide range of
the evidence for this name, it seems clear that we have to do essentially with only two
40 For other Jewish traditions about Manasseh and Isaiah see L. Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews (Philadelphia,
1946) vol. 6, pp. 370-76. 41 The evidence for this view is summarized in Charles, Ascension, pp. xlviif. Cf. recently M. Philonenko, "Le
Martyre d'Esaie et 1'histoire de la secte de Qoumran," Pseudipigraphes, vol. 1, p. 10. 42 Cf. Caquot, Semitica 23 (1973) 87-89. V.The legend about the martyr's death which Isaiah suffered, like the stories
about Eleazar and about the mother and her seven sons, goes back ultimately to the time
of the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes. Stories such as this were written to encourage
the Jews to remain faithful to their religion, but unlike the somewhat older stories in Daniel
3 and 6 there is no happy ending; rather it is accepted that the cost of remaining faithful to
God will indeed be death. The narrative of the Martyrdom, as will be apparent from the references and notes
appended to the translation, draws its inspiration to a very great extent from the Old
Testament, and particularly from 1 and 2 Kings. The author takes over the contrast that is
drawn in 2 Kings between the good Hezekiah and the wicked Manasseh, and there is no
trace of the more sympathetic picture of Manasseh which is given in 2 Chronicles 33 and
is presupposed in the Prayer of Manasseh. There is nothing in the Old Testament, of course,
about the death of Isaiah, but the impetus for the development of the story of the martyrdom
was perhaps provided by the note in 2 Kings 21:16 that "Manasseh shed innocent blood
. . . in such great quantity that he flooded Jerusalem from end to end."
36 The section 11:2-22 is attested only by the Eth. version and is omitted by the second Lat. translation and the
Slav. But the primitive character of the narrative of the birth of Jesus suggests very strongly that the Eth. has preserved
the original form of the text. 37 Ascension, p. xlv. 38 Although the Gk. fragment only covers 2:4-4:4, its text of 3:13 alludes to the content of chs. 6-11; the Gk. fragment
thus presupposes the combination of the three elements in the Ascension to form the complete book we know. 39 Cf. Eissfeldt, Introduction, p. 610.

Caquot, Semitica 23 (1973) 87-89. V. Nikiprowetzky ("Pseudepigraphes de I'Ancien Testament et manuscrits
de la Mer Mort: Reflexions sur une publication recente," REJ 128 [1969] 12f.) thinks that although the traditions
about Isaiah in the Martyrdom were not based on Iranian sources, those in the Talmuds were. 43 K. Galling, "Jesaia-Adonis," Orientalistische Literaturzeitung 33 (1930) cols. 98-102. 44 Cf. Caquot, Semitica 23 (1973) 86f. 43 Ascension, p. 7. 46 Caquot (Semitica 23 [1973] 75) thinks the variant given in 5:3, Mekembekus, is preferable and argues that the
name derives from a Hebrew expression meaning "He who creates tears." But this seems less likely. 47 The story of the Martyrdom is given in ch. 3 of the Greek Legend, and "Melchias the false prophet" is mentioned
in vss. 5, 7, 17, 18. But in vs. 10 there is a reference to "Melchias and Becheiras the false prophets."alternatives, a name such as Belch(e)ira or Becheira, and a name such as Melcheira, and
that one is an ancient variant or corruption of the other. The task is to discern the original
form of the name and how the range of evidence for this name is to be explained. A number of scholars have argued that the name of the Samaritan is derived from the
Hebrew ifh(r-rac 4'the elect of evil,"48 and this would appear to be correct despite an
t
apparent difficulty. The Greek variant Becheira (2:16; 3:1; cf. Becheiras in Greek Legend
3:10) and the Latin Bechira can readily be explained in terms of such a Hebrew name, but
there is strong evidence in the Greek, Ethiopic, and Coptic versions, as well as in the Greek
Legend (Melchias), for the occurrence of an / at the end of the first syllable of the name,
and it is not so obvious that a form such as Belchira (Gk. 3:11) derives from the Hebrew
b*htr-rac. However, Caquot has pointed out that a superfluous / is also found in the name
Melchol, the Septuagint form of the Hebrew mtcdl,*9 and in any case it would be easy in
the Ascension for an / to be introduced in view of the occurrence in the same context of a
name with a similar beginning, i.e. Beliar. The greater part of the evidence from the various translations points to the view that the
name of the Samaritan was in Hebrew lfhir-rac, and that this passed into Greek as Becheira,
and then as Belch(e)ira, but there is some evidence for an alternative name (cf. Gk. 3:6,
Melcheira; similarly the Eth., MS D in 5:2, 3, 8, 12, 15 and MS A in 5:8, 12; Greek
Legend, Melchias) and it remains to be asked how this is to be explained. The variants of
this type point back to a Hebrew malkira', "the king of evil," and this name also occurs
as an additional name of Sammael in 1:8. There are two factors which could have contributed
to the appearance of Melcheira as an alternative to Belcheira.The variants of
this type point back to a Hebrew malkira', "the king of evil," and this name also occurs
as an additional name of Sammael in 1:8. There are two factors which could have contributed
to the appearance of Melcheira as an alternative to Belcheira. The first is that it would not
be difficult for the labials B and M to be confused; a comparable instance is found in 1
Enoch 6:7, where the Aramaic name mHafel occurs in one Greek version and in the Ethiopic
as Batriel. The second is that there is a tendency in the narrative for Beliar (or Sammael)
and his human agent to be confused; in 5:4-9 the Samaritan is actually presented as the
devil in human form; and in view of this it is perhaps hardly surprising that he should in
some instances be given a name {malkira6) which also occurs as an additional name of
Sammael. In the present translation the name has been consistently given as Belkira, a transliteration
of the Ethiopic form which appears to come closest to the original Hebrew, but all the
variant spellings which the different translations attest have been supplied in the notes. A study of the demonology of the Martyrdom led D. Flusser to the view that it reflected
the dualistic theology of the Dead Sea community. He further argued that the author projected
the religious disputes of his own day into the period of Isaiah, and that there are a number
of parallels between the persons and events mentioned in the Martyrdom and those mentioned
in the documents of the Qumran sect. In his view Isaiah represents the Teacher of
Righteousness, Manasseh the Wicked Priest, and Belkira (interpreted as Ifhir-ra', "the
elect of evil") the Teacher of the Lie.He further argued that the author projected
the religious disputes of his own day into the period of Isaiah, and that there are a number
of parallels between the persons and events mentioned in the Martyrdom and those mentioned
in the documents of the Qumran sect. In his view Isaiah represents the Teacher of
Righteousness, Manasseh the Wicked Priest, and Belkira (interpreted as Ifhir-ra', "the
elect of evil") the Teacher of the Lie. The withdrawal of Isaiah and his fellow prophets
from Jerusalem to a mountain in a desert place corresponds to the withdrawal of the
community to the wilderness; the arrest of Isaiah corresponds to the persecution of the
community; and the command to Isaiah's followers to go to the district of Tyre and Sidon
(5:13) corresponds to the flight of the community to the land of Damascus.50 Flusser's views
were accepted by J. van der Ploeg51 and by M. Philonenko; but the latter, although accepting
the main thrust of Flusser's arguments, offered a distinctive interpretation of his own. According to Philonenko, who accepts the views of A. Dupont-Sommer as to the origins
of the Qumran community, the story of the Teacher of Righteousness, at least in its final
stages, was a drama of three persons: the Teacher of Righteousness himself, and his
opponents, Aristobulus II and Hyrcanus Q. But the Martyrdom of Isaiah is also a drama of
48 Cf. G. H. Box in TED, p. xvii. This explanation is accepted by D. Flusser, IEJ 3 (1953) 35 (see n. 50);
Philonenko, Pseudipigraphes, vol. 1, p. 7; Caquot, Semitica 23 (1973) 75. The explanation suggested by W. Gesenius, Theologische Studien und Kritiken 3 [1830] 244; cf. Charles, Ascension, p. 14), that the name is derived
from belqirydh = b^al qiryah = 4'lord of the world," is impossible. "Semitica 23 (1973) 75. 50Flusser, IEJ 3 (1953) 34-47. See also H. Burgmann, "Gerichtsherr und Generalanklagen Jonathan und Simon,"
RB 9 (1977) 28-33, 70-72. 91 J.Caquot, Semitica 23 (1973) 87-89. V. Nikiprowetzky ("Pseudepigraphes de I'Ancien Testament et manuscrits
de la Mer Mort: Reflexions sur une publication recente," REJ 128 [1969] 12f.) thinks that although the traditions
about Isaiah in the Martyrdom were not based on Iranian sources, those in the Talmuds were. 43 K. Galling, "Jesaia-Adonis," Orientalistische Literaturzeitung 33 (1930) cols. 98-102. 44 Cf. Caquot, Semitica 23 (1973) 86f. 43 Ascension, p. 7. 46 Caquot (Semitica 23 [1973] 75) thinks the variant given in 5:3, Mekembekus, is preferable and argues that the
name derives from a Hebrew expression meaning "He who creates tears." But this seems less likely. 47 The story of the Martyrdom is given in ch. 3 of the Greek Legend, and "Melchias the false prophet" is mentioned
in vss. 5, 7, 17, 18. But in vs. 10 there is a reference to "Melchias and Becheiras the false prophets."

Burgmann, "Gerichtsherr und Generalanklagen Jonathan und Simon,"
RB 9 (1977) 28-33, 70-72. 91 J. van der Ploeg, "Les manuscrits du Desert de Juda: £tudes et decouvertes recentes," BO 11 (1954) 154f.three persons: Isaiah, Manasseh, and the false prophet Belkira. Philonenko identifies Isaiah
with the Teacher of Righteousness, Manasseh with Aristobulus II, and Belkira with Hyrcanus
II, the person he, following Dupont-Sommer, believes to be the Wicked Priest. Furthermore,
although Flusser specifically rejected the suggestion that we should conclude from the fact
that Isaiah was martyred that the Teacher of Righteousness was executed by his opponents,
Philonenko believes that the Martyrdom of Isaiah only makes sense if the Teacher of
Righteousness was himself martyred.52 Other scholars have accepted that there is a connection
between the Martyrdom of Isaiah and the Qumran community, but without going into
details.53
In comment on these views it must be said that although the idea that the Martyrdom of
Isaiah offers a veiled history of the Qumran community is not impossible, it does seem
rather unlikely. The Martyrdom is quite different in form from those Qumran writings, i.e. the biblical commentaries, which quite deliberately set out to reapply the Old Testament
text to the events of the time in which the Qumran community existed, and in itself the
Martyrdom offers no clue that it is to be interpreted in the way suggested by Flusser and
Philonenko. The particular theory offered by Philonenko is also open to question on the
grounds that an increasing number of scholars, if not the majority, are of the opinion that
the Wicked Priest is to be identified, not with Hyrcanus II, but with either Jonathan or
Simon. Even if the Martyrdom does not provide a veiled history of the Qumran community, it
might still be argued that this is a Qumran work. But although the dualistic theology of the
Martyrdom is not out of accord with that contained in the Qumran writings, the distinctive
language and theological emphasis of these writings are lacking.Even if the Martyrdom does not provide a veiled history of the Qumran community, it
might still be argued that this is a Qumran work. But although the dualistic theology of the
Martyrdom is not out of accord with that contained in the Qumran writings, the distinctive
language and theological emphasis of these writings are lacking. It thus seems unlikely that
the Martyrdom is a sectarian document, and the most that could be said is that it was a
writing used by the Qumran community. But, in fact, no traces of the Martyrdom have
been found among the Qumran writings.54
The Martyrdom has the style of a narrative, but 3:13-4:22 is cast in the form of a
prophecy given by Isaiah. The prophecy is linked rather awkwardly to the narrative (cf. 3:13) under the pretense that the giving of the prophecy was the reason for Beliar's anger
with Isaiah. However, although presented as a revelation of the future, half of this material
(3:13-31) is pseudo-prophecy and refers to events that at the time this passage was written
had either already taken place (the life and death of the Beloved, 3:13-20) or were still in
existence (the corruption of the Church, 3:21-31); it is only when the author refers to the
reign of Beliar (4:1-13) and the second coming of the Lord (4:13-18) that we have genuine
prophecy. The description of the corruption of the Church (3:21-31) casts an interesting light on
conditions in the area in which this section of the Ascension was written and provides a
clue as to the purpose of its composition. The author, like the authors of 1 and 2 Timothy
and 2 Peter, was concerned to warn his readers in no uncertain terms of the dangers which
faced the Christian community. At the same time he wished to encourage them by insisting
that the end of this age was near; the Church will be affected by false teaching and will
suffer at the hands of wicked elders who seek office for the sake of money, but this will
occur at the "approach" of the Beloved (3:2If.), i.e.Burgmann, "Gerichtsherr und Generalanklagen Jonathan und Simon,"
RB 9 (1977) 28-33, 70-72. 91 J. van der Ploeg, "Les manuscrits du Desert de Juda: £tudes et decouvertes recentes," BO 11 (1954) 154f.

The author, like the authors of 1 and 2 Timothy
and 2 Peter, was concerned to warn his readers in no uncertain terms of the dangers which
faced the Christian community. At the same time he wished to encourage them by insisting
that the end of this age was near; the Church will be affected by false teaching and will
suffer at the hands of wicked elders who seek office for the sake of money, but this will
occur at the "approach" of the Beloved (3:2If.), i.e. when his second coming is near, and
will be a sign of "the completion of the world" (4:1). The reign of Beliar, the length of
which has been predetermined (4:12), will shortly begin, and then the Lord will come again
both to punish Beliar and his hosts (4:14), and impious men (4:18), and to reward those
Christians who have remained faithful to him (4:15-17). It may be observed that what is
said here in a Christian context about Beliar provides a theological link with the surrounding
narrative of the Martyrdom, where, as we have seen, a good deal of attention is paid to the
role of this figure. The Vision of Isaiah belongs, from a literary point of view, among the apocalyptic
writings, and more precisely among those which take the form of an account of a heavenly
52 Philonenko, Pseudipigraphes, vol. 1, pp. 1—10 (see n. 41). 53Cf. R. Meyer, "Himmelfahrt und Martyrium des Jesaja," RGG3, vol. 3, col. 336; L. Rost, Judaism outside the
Hebrew Canon. An Introduction to the Documents, trans. D. E. Green (Nashville, 1976) p. 151. 54 Cf. the comments of Hammershaimb, JSHRZ 2 (1973) 19; Nikiprowetzky, REJ 128 (1969) 5-13.journey. Perhaps the best-known example of this type is to be found in the Similitudes of
Enoch (IEn 37-71), but the closest parallels to the Vision of Isaiah are the accounts of
journeys through several heavens in the Testament of Levi 2:6-3:10, 3 Baruch, and 2
Enoch. However, the Vision of Isaiah is unlike many earlier apocalypses: There is little
emphasis on the end of this age; and the author is more concerned to describe the heavens
and to give an account of past events, especially the life and death of the Lord. The author's purpose in writing the Vision seems to have been twofold. On the one hand
he wished to encourage and reassure his readers by describing the blessings which awaited
them in heaven. A good deal of attention is paid to the heavenly robes which the righteous
will put on (a symbol of the transformation they will undergo in heaven), and to the crowns
which they will wear and the thrones on which they will sit; the thrones are symbols of the
fact that the righteous dead in heaven will share in the reign of Jesus, and the crowns are
symbols of the reward which faithful Christians, particularly martyrs, will enjoy (see esp. 9:9-18, 24-26, and nn. i-k on 9:9f.). As further encouragement, the author hints that the
righteous dead will enjoy a higher status in heaven than the angels (cf. 9:28, 33, 38, 41,
and n. x2 on 9:38). On the other hand the author wished to present, as well as defend, certain views about
the Trinity and the incarnation. What he has to say about the Trinity is of particular interest. In 9:27-42 Isaiah describes how, in the seventh heaven, he saw "the Lord" (9:27-32) and
the Holy Spirit (9:33-36), and was given a glimpse of the glory of God (9:37-42). The
Holy Spirit is described as an angel (9:36), as he is, in fact, frequently throughout the
Ascension (see the list of references at n. s on 3:15).The
Holy Spirit is described as an angel (9:36), as he is, in fact, frequently throughout the
Ascension (see the list of references at n. s on 3:15). What is perhaps of greater interest is
that a superior status is attributed to the Father in that "the Lord" and the angel of the
Holy Spirit are presented as worshiping him (9:40). In the last part of the Vision the author describes how Isaiah saw the descent of "the
Lord" through the seven heavens, his birth, life, death, resurrection, and ascension (10:7-
11:33), and what is said here is of interest from the point of view of his beliefs about the
incarnation. Two emphases* stand out. The author is concerned to explain how it was that
the Lord's true nature remained concealed from the angels in the lower heavens (10:20-
27), from the prince of this world and his hosts (10:29-31), and from men (11:14, 19). It
is only when "the Lord" begins his ascent through the heavens that at last his true nature
is recognized (1 l:23f.). The author's explanation for the fact that the identity of "the Lord"
remained concealed (11:16) is that at the command of the Father (10:7-15) he progressively
transformed himself. The author is also concerned to defend the reality of the Virgin Birth
(11:2-16). This passage forms part of that section (11:2-22) which is attested only by the
Ethiopic version, and is lacking in the second Latin translation and the Slavonic. But the
primitive character of the narrative makes it difficult to believe that it did not form part of
the original text.The author, like the authors of 1 and 2 Timothy
and 2 Peter, was concerned to warn his readers in no uncertain terms of the dangers which
faced the Christian community. At the same time he wished to encourage them by insisting
that the end of this age was near; the Church will be affected by false teaching and will
suffer at the hands of wicked elders who seek office for the sake of money, but this will
occur at the "approach" of the Beloved (3:2If.), i.e. when his second coming is near, and
will be a sign of "the completion of the world" (4:1). The reign of Beliar, the length of
which has been predetermined (4:12), will shortly begin, and then the Lord will come again
both to punish Beliar and his hosts (4:14), and impious men (4:18), and to reward those
Christians who have remained faithful to him (4:15-17). It may be observed that what is
said here in a Christian context about Beliar provides a theological link with the surrounding
narrative of the Martyrdom, where, as we have seen, a good deal of attention is paid to the
role of this figure. The Vision of Isaiah belongs, from a literary point of view, among the apocalyptic
writings, and more precisely among those which take the form of an account of a heavenly
52 Philonenko, Pseudipigraphes, vol. 1, pp. 1—10 (see n. 41). 53Cf. R. Meyer, "Himmelfahrt und Martyrium des Jesaja," RGG3, vol. 3, col. 336; L. Rost, Judaism outside the
Hebrew Canon. An Introduction to the Documents, trans. D. E. Green (Nashville, 1976) p. 151. 54 Cf. the comments of Hammershaimb, JSHRZ 2 (1973) 19; Nikiprowetzky, REJ 128 (1969) 5-13.

This passage forms part of that section (11:2-22) which is attested only by the
Ethiopic version, and is lacking in the second Latin translation and the Slavonic. But the
primitive character of the narrative makes it difficult to believe that it did not form part of
the original text. The concern to defend the reality of the Virgin Birth suggests that in this
respect the Vision is to be compared with such writings as the Protoevangelium of James
(which has often been seen to possess similarities with the Vision) and, in general, with the
Infancy Gospels.55
It has been argued recently, on the basis of a number of parallels between the Vision of
Isaiah and certain gnostic sources, that the Vision comes from "semi-Christian circles" or
"Christian-gnostic circles."56 However, although parallels do exist, it is not clear how far
it is right to regard the Vision as a gnostic work. 55 Cf. the comments of O. Cullmann on the purposes of the Infancy Gospels in HSW, vol. 1, p. 367. (Also cf. OdesSol, introduced and translated in the present collection. —J.H.C.)
*Cf. A. K. Helmbold, NTS 18 (1972) 222-27.SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 125-30.
Delling, Bibliographie, p. 166.
Denis, Introduction, pp. 170-76.
Caquot, A. "Bref commentaire du 'Martyre d'Isaie,' " Sent 23 (1973) 65-93.
Charles, R. H. The Ascension of Isaiah. London, 1900.
Dillmann, A. Ascensio Isaiae, aethiopice et latine. Leipzig, 1877.
Flusser, D. "The Apocryphal Book of Ascensio Isaiae and the Dead Sea Sect," IEJ 3
(1953) 34-47.
Hammershaimb, E. "Das Martyrium Jesajas," JSHRZ 2 (1973) 15-34.
Helmbold, A. K. "Gnostic Elements in the 'Ascension of Isaiah,' " NTS 18 (1972) 222-
27.
Laurence, R. Ascensio Isaiae Vatis. Oxford, 1819.
Philonenko, M. "Le Martyre d'Esaie et 1 'histoire de la secte de Qoumran,'' Pseudipigraphes,
pp. 1-10.
Tisserant, E. Ascension d'Isaie. Documents pour l'6tude de la Bible; Paris, 1909. Pp. 100-
9, 142-54.
Vaillant, A. "Un Apocryphe pseudo-bogomile: La Vision d'Isaie," RESl 42 (1963) 109-
21.
(After the preparation of this contribution, the following volume of collected essays appeared:
Turdeanu, E. Apocryphes slaves et roumains de VAncien Testament [SVTP 5; Leiden,
1981]. In this book see the following: 44Apocryphes bogomiles et apocryphes pseudo-
bogomiles" [pp. 1-74], "La Vision d'Isaie: Tradition orthodoxe et tradition h6r£tique"
[pp. 145-72]; and the additional notes on pp. 436f., 438f. [with reference to an edition
and translation of the Slav, version of the Vision of Isaiah by A. Vaillant].)
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN FOOTNOTES ON PAGES 156-176:
The following abbreviations have been used; for more details see Texts.
Eth = the Eth. version of the Ascenls on which the following translation is based.
A, B, C, D, E = manuscripts of the Eth. version.
Cop = the Cop. version of the Ascenls.
Gk = the Gk. fragment.
Latl = a Lat. version of the Ascenls.
Lat2 = a second Lat. version of the Visls.
Slav = tthe Slav, version of the Visls.THE ASCENSION OF ISAIAH THE PROPHET
1. THE MARTYRDOM OF ISAIAH*
Hezekiah summons Manasseh
1 1 In the twenty-sixth year* of his reign Hezekiah king of Judah summoned1*
2 Manasseh his son,c for he was his only son.d #He summoned him in the presence
of Isaiah, the son of Amoz, the prophet/ and in the presence of Josabf the son of
Isaiah, in order to hand over to him the words of righteousness which the king
3 himself had seen,8 *and (the words concerning) the eternal judgments,11 and the
torments of Gehenna,' and the prince of this world,J and his angels, and his
4 authorities, and his powers, *and the words concerning faith in the Belovedk which iPet 3:22
5 he himself had seen in the fifteenth year of his reign during his sickness.1 «And
he handed to him the written words which Samnasm the secretary had written out," Jft1
and also those which Isaiah the son of Amoz had given to him, and to the prophets
a. The title "The Ascension of Isaiah the Prophet" incomplete work on Mt attributed to the sixth
is given in the Eth. MSS; the heading "1. The century. According to this work it was when
Martyrdom of Isaiah" has been supplied by the Hezekiah fell ill that he summoned Manasseh; his
editor. Contrast the heading at ch. 6. purpose was to give him commands (for which cf. vss. 6b, 7) about the fear of God, and about how
1 a. Greek Legend 1:1 "twenty-fifth"; Cop "six­ he should rule. The account in the Opus Imperfec­
teenth." "Sixteenth" would link more appropri­ tum has, to a greater extent than the account in the
ately with the date given for Hezekiah's vision in Ascension, the character of a testament scene, i.e. vs. 4, but does not fit with the mention of Hezekiah's a scene in which a great figure gives his last
twentieth year in vs. 6. commands to his children or followers on his
b. Lit. "of the reign of Hezekiah king of Judah deathbed. For the text (quoted in Charles, Ascen­
he summoned." sion, pp. 8f.) see PG, vol. 56, col. 626. c.626. c. Greek Legend 1:1 adds "who was eleven h. B C D "the judgments of this world."
years old," but this is inconsistent with its dating i. Gehenna is mentioned elsewhere in Ascenls
of the events in the twenty-fifth year of Hezekiah's only in 4:14. reign. According to 2Kgs 18:2 and 21:1 Hezekiah j. "and the prince of this world": translation
reigned for twenty-nine years, and Manasseh was based on a minor correction of the text, cf. 10:29;
twelve years old when he began to reign; this would B C D "and [D4 4 which is"] the place of punishment
mean that Manasseh was only eight in Hezekiah's of this world"; A "which is the eternal place of
twenty-fifth year. punishment."
d. Lit. "for he alone (was) to him." k. The tide "the Beloved" occurs frequently in
e. The translation assumes that "the prophet" Ascenls as a Christian designation of Jesus. Thus
refers to Isaiah, but it could refer to Amoz; this it is used in the section 3:13-4:22 (cf. 3:13, 17,
latter view would imply that Amoz, the father of 18; 4:3, 6, 9, 18, 21) and in chs. 6-11 (cf. 7:17,
Isaiah (Isa 1:1), was identified with the prophet 23; 8:18, 25; 9:12); the remaining occurrences (1:4,
Amos, an identification that is expliciUy made in 5, 7, 13; 5:15) are all to be attributed to the
4:22. B reads "Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz Christian editor of Ascenls. the prophet." In late Jewish tradition Amoz was 1. Cf. 2Kgs 20:1-11; Isa 38; 2Chr 32:24. The
regarded as a prophet, while in Christian tradition date "in the fifteenth year" has been deduced from
Amoz and Amos were frequently confused with the OT; Hezekiah reigned for twenty-nine years
one another; in the LXX and the Eth. OT the names (2Kgs 18:2), but at the time of his sickness was
Amoz and Amos are spelled the same way. promised a further fifteen years of life (2Kgs 20:6). f. I.e. Shear-jashub, cf. Isa 7:3. The Eth.SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 125-30.
Delling, Bibliographie, p. 166.
Denis, Introduction, pp. 170-76.
Caquot, A. "Bref commentaire du 'Martyre d'Isaie,' " Sent 23 (1973) 65-93.
Charles, R. H. The Ascension of Isaiah. London, 1900.
Dillmann, A. Ascensio Isaiae, aethiopice et latine. Leipzig, 1877.
Flusser, D. "The Apocryphal Book of Ascensio Isaiae and the Dead Sea Sect," IEJ 3
(1953) 34-47.
Hammershaimb, E. "Das Martyrium Jesajas," JSHRZ 2 (1973) 15-34.
Helmbold, A. K. "Gnostic Elements in the 'Ascension of Isaiah,' " NTS 18 (1972) 222-
27.
Laurence, R. Ascensio Isaiae Vatis. Oxford, 1819.
Philonenko, M. "Le Martyre d'Esaie et 1 'histoire de la secte de Qoumran,'' Pseudipigraphes,
pp. 1-10.
Tisserant, E. Ascension d'Isaie. Documents pour l'6tude de la Bible; Paris, 1909. Pp. 100-
9, 142-54.
Vaillant, A. "Un Apocryphe pseudo-bogomile: La Vision d'Isaie," RESl 42 (1963) 109-
21.
(After the preparation of this contribution, the following volume of collected essays appeared:
Turdeanu, E. Apocryphes slaves et roumains de VAncien Testament [SVTP 5; Leiden,
1981]. In this book see the following: 44Apocryphes bogomiles et apocryphes pseudo-
bogomiles" [pp. 1-74], "La Vision d'Isaie: Tradition orthodoxe et tradition h6r£tique"
[pp. 145-72]; and the additional notes on pp. 436f., 438f. [with reference to an edition
and translation of the Slav, version of the Vision of Isaiah by A. Vaillant].)
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN FOOTNOTES ON PAGES 156-176:
The following abbreviations have been used; for more details see Texts.
Eth = the Eth. version of the Ascenls on which the following translation is based.
A, B, C, D, E = manuscripts of the Eth. version.
Cop = the Cop. version of the Ascenls.
Gk = the Gk. fragment.
Latl = a Lat. version of the Ascenls.
Lat2 = a second Lat. version of the Visls.
Slav = tthe Slav, version of the Visls.

Isa 7:3. The Eth. Josab There is no OT tradition that Hezekiah saw a vision
(the variant Joseb occurs throughout) is the form when he was ill, but the author was perhaps building
used in the Eth. version of Isa 7:3. on the tradition that he was given a "sign" (cf. g. Vss. 2b-6a are a Christian interpolation in 2Kgs 20:8; 2Chr 32:24). the original Martyrdom whose purpose is in part m. I.e. Shebnah, cf. 6:17 and 2Kgs 18:18. The
to link together the different elements in the As­ Eth. Samnas (var. Samenas) reflects the spelling
cension; vss. 5b-6a, which describe a vision of of the name in the Eth. OT and the LXX. Isaiah, allude clearly to chs. 6-11; vss. 2b-5a, n. These words appear to imply that Hezekiah
which describe a vision seen by the king, have dictated the content of his vision to Samnas; they
sometimes been thought to allude to 3:13-4:22, are perhaps based on the tradition in Isa 38:9 that
but in fact 3:13-4:22 is presented as a revelation Hezekiah composed a "writing" (so the Heb.; JB
given through Isaiah, not the king. What appears "canticle") at the time of his sickness. The re­
to be a more original version of the scene described mainder of vs. 5 and vs. 6a refer to Visls, chs. in ch. 1 is preserved in the Opus Imperfectum, an 6-11.also, that they might write out and store up with him what he himself had seen
in the house of the king0 concerning the judgment of the angels, and concerning 10:12
the destruction of this world, and concerning the robes of the saints0 and their
going out,q and concerning their transformation and the persecution and ascension
6 of the Beloved. *In the twentieth year of the reign of Hezekiah Isaiah had seen ii:i9f., 22-32
the words of this prophecy and had handed them to Josab his son. Andr while ^J3'18
(Hezekiah) was giving his commands, with Josab the son of Isaiah standing by,
7 Isaiah said to Hezekiah the king, and not only in the presence of Manasseh did
he say (it) to him, "As the LORD lives8 whose name has not been transmitted to 7:37:8:7
this world, and as the Beloved of my LORD lives, and as the Spirit which speaks
in me lives/ all these commands and these words will have no effect on Manasseh 9:36; Mt 10.20
your son, and through the deeds of his hands, tormented in body I will depart. 1:6:2:1
8 And Sammael Malkira" will serve Manasseh and will do everything he wishes,
9 and he will be a follower of Beliar rather than of me.Andr while ^J3'18
(Hezekiah) was giving his commands, with Josab the son of Isaiah standing by,
7 Isaiah said to Hezekiah the king, and not only in the presence of Manasseh did
he say (it) to him, "As the LORD lives8 whose name has not been transmitted to 7:37:8:7
this world, and as the Beloved of my LORD lives, and as the Spirit which speaks
in me lives/ all these commands and these words will have no effect on Manasseh 9:36; Mt 10.20
your son, and through the deeds of his hands, tormented in body I will depart. 1:6:2:1
8 And Sammael Malkira" will serve Manasseh and will do everything he wishes,
9 and he will be a follower of Beliar rather than of me. «He will cause many in
Jerusalem and Judah to desert the true faith, and Beliarw will dwell in Manasseh, 2Kgs 21:9;
10 and by his hands I will be sawed in half." «And when Hezekiah heard these ??3??i?5:i
words, he wept very bitterly, and tore his robes, and threw earth on his head, and
11 fell on his face/ *And Isaiah said to him, "SammaelV plan against Manasseh is
12 complete; there will be no benefit to you from this day."2 #And Hezekiah thought
13 in his heart that he would kill Manasseh his son, •but Isaiah said to Hezekiah,
"The Beloved*2 has made your plan ineffective, and the thought of your heart
will not come about; for with this calling have I been called, and the inheritance
of the Beloved will I inherit."02
Manasseh's wicked reign
1 2 And it came about that after Hezekiah had died, and Manasseh had become
king, (Manasseh) did not remember the commands of Hezekiah his father, but i:6f. 2 forgot8 them; and Sammael dwelt in Manasseh and clung closely to him. *And i:9;3:ii;5:i
o. A D E "what the king alone had seen." Sammael, means in Heb. "king of evil"; elsewhere
p. D E "the righteous." The heavenly robes this name occurs as a variant of Belkira, the name
which the saints put on after death are a symbol of the Samaritan opponent of Isaiah (see 2:12); cf. of their transformed state; they are mentioned Intro.D E "the righteous." The heavenly robes this name occurs as a variant of Belkira, the name
which the saints put on after death are a symbol of the Samaritan opponent of Isaiah (see 2:12); cf. of their transformed state; they are mentioned Intro. frequently in the Christian portions of Ascenls; cf. v. Beliar: a variant form of Belial, a common
3:25; 4:16f.; 7:22; 8:14, 26; 9:2, 9-11, 17f., 24- name for the devil in the period, cf. 2Cor 6:15;
26; 11:40. Cf. also 2Cor 5:1-4; Rev 3:4f.; 6:11; Jub 1:20; 15:33; TLevi 3:3; 18:12; 19:1; TDan 5:1,
7:9, 13f.; 4Ezra 2:39, 44f. lOf. (and pass. inT12P); 1QS 1.17, 23f.;CD4.13,
q. I.e. their departure from this life. But Greek 15; 5.8. In Ascenls Beliar is mentioned elsewhere
Legend 1:2 more plausibly refers both the "going in 1:9; 2:4; 3:11, 13; 4:2, 4, 14, 16, 18; 5:1,(4),
out" and the "transformation" to the Beloved; 15. hence perhaps read "and concerning the going out, w. Greek Legend 1:9 "Satan."
and the transformation, and the persecution and x. Conventional signs of distress, cf. 2Sam
ascension of the Beloved." In this case the "going 13:19, 31; Job 2:12. out" will be the descent of the Beloved through y. Greek Legend 1:11 has "Satan" for "Sam­
the seven heavens, cf. 3:13; 10:7-31. mael."
r. The narrative of the Martyrdom is resumed z. "from this day": so B C; D E "from that
here from vs. 2a. day" (Greek Legend 1:1 lf. takes the phrase with
s. "As the LORD lives": the common OT oath the following vs., "And at that time Hezekiah
formula, cf. e.g. ISam 14:39, 45. I have rendered thought. . ."); A "from those words," an allusion
Eth. 3gzP*bdher by "LORD"; 3gz?a by "Lord"; to the commands mentioned in vss. 6b, 7. and Amlak by "God." The first of these commonly a2. "The Beloved": the use of the title betrays
translates Heb. "Yahweh" (LXX: kurios), the last Christian influence, see n. k on vs. 4. the Heb. "Elohim" (LXX: theos). b2. "and the inheritance . . . inherit": Christian
t. "and as the Beloved ...Isa 7:3. The Eth. Josab There is no OT tradition that Hezekiah saw a vision
(the variant Joseb occurs throughout) is the form when he was ill, but the author was perhaps building
used in the Eth. version of Isa 7:3. on the tradition that he was given a "sign" (cf. g. Vss. 2b-6a are a Christian interpolation in 2Kgs 20:8; 2Chr 32:24). the original Martyrdom whose purpose is in part m. I.e. Shebnah, cf. 6:17 and 2Kgs 18:18. The
to link together the different elements in the As­ Eth. Samnas (var. Samenas) reflects the spelling
cension; vss. 5b-6a, which describe a vision of of the name in the Eth. OT and the LXX. Isaiah, allude clearly to chs. 6-11; vss. 2b-5a, n. These words appear to imply that Hezekiah
which describe a vision seen by the king, have dictated the content of his vision to Samnas; they
sometimes been thought to allude to 3:13-4:22, are perhaps based on the tradition in Isa 38:9 that
but in fact 3:13-4:22 is presented as a revelation Hezekiah composed a "writing" (so the Heb.; JB
given through Isaiah, not the king. What appears "canticle") at the time of his sickness. The re­
to be a more original version of the scene described mainder of vs. 5 and vs. 6a refer to Visls, chs. in ch. 1 is preserved in the Opus Imperfectum, an 6-11.

inherit": Christian
t. "and as the Beloved ... in me lives": editorial addition, as the use of the title "the
Christian editorial addition, see n. k on vs. 4. Beloved" indicates; as an heir of Jesus, Isaiah's
u. According to Jewish tradition Sammael was fate is to be one of suffering, cf. 8:12; Rom 8:17. originally one of the chief archangels, but after
inciting the serpent to tempt Eve he became the 2 a. A play on words linking the name Manasseh
leader of the Satans. It is in such a role that he with the Heb. verb "to forget" {ndiah), cf. Gen
appears in Ascenls, where Sammael seems to be 41:31; the existence of this wordplay points to the
merely another name for Beliar (see n. v). Sammael fact that Martls was composed in Heb. The de­
is mentioned also in 1:11; 2:1; 3:13; 5:15f.; 7:9; scription of the reign of Manasseh (vss. 1-6) reflects
11:41 (in the last passage called Sammael Satan). that of 2Kgs 21:1-18; 2Chr 33:1-10. Malkira, used here as an additional name forManasseh abandoned the service of the LORD of his father, and he served Satan,b
3 and his angels, and his powers. *And he turned his father's house, which had
been in the presence of Hezekiah, away [from]c the words of wisdom and the
4 service of the LORD. • Manasseh turned them away so that they servedd Beliar; for 1&
the angel of iniquity who rules this world is Beliar, whose name is Matanbukus.e jffi2:3i-'i4^3o-
And he rejoiced over Jerusalem because of Manasseh, [and he strengthened him]f ;.2^or 4:4
2 2
in causing apostasy, and in the iniquity which was disseminated in Jerusalem. 2^s2i:9;
5 And sorcery and magic, augury and divination, fornication and adultery,* and the 2Kgs2i:6;
persecution of the righteous increased through Manasseh, and through Belkira,h
and through Tobiah the Canaanite, and through John of Anathoth, and through 8$
6 Zaliq Neway.' *And the rest of the acts, behold they are written in the book of 2Kp 2i:ij
the kings of Judah and Israel. Isaiah withdraws from Jerusalem
7 And when Isaiah the son of Amoz saw the greatj iniquity which was being
committed in Jerusalem, and the service of Satan, and his wantonness,k he withdrew
8 from Jerusalem and dwelt in Bethlehem of Judah. «And there also there was great
iniquity; and he withdrew from Bethlehem and dwelt on a mountain1 in a desert
9 place. *And Micah the prophet, and the aged Ananias, and Joel, and Habakkuk,
and Josab his son,m and many of the faithful who believed in the ascension into
10 heaven," withdrew and dwelt on the mountain. »A11 of them were clothed in
sackcloth, and all of them were prophets; they had nothing with them, but were 2Kgs 1:8
11 destitute, and they all lamented bitterly over the going astray of Israel. *And they Zech 13:4
Mt 3:4; Mk 1:6
had nothing to eat except wild herbs (which) they gathered from the mountains, 2Kgs 4:38f. and when they had cooked (them), they ate (them) with Isaiah the prophet.*And they Zech 13:4
Mt 3:4; Mk 1:6
had nothing to eat except wild herbs (which) they gathered from the mountains, 2Kgs 4:38f. and when they had cooked (them), they ate (them) with Isaiah the prophet. And 4Ezra 9:26;
12:51
they dwelt on the mountains and on the hills for two years of days. The story of Zedekiah and Micaiah
12 And after this, while they were in the desert, there was a certain man in Samaria
named Belkira,0 of the family of Zedekiah^ the son of Chenaanah, the false
prophet, whose dwelling (was) in Bethlehem.q And Zedekiahr the son of Chenaanah, ucgs 22:11
b. The very common name for the devil; in the contemporaries of Isaiah, but this was, in fact, true
Ascension used synonymously with Beliar and only of Micah. It is not known who is meant by
Sammael and mentioned elsewhere in 2:7; 5:16; "the aged Ananias." Micah, Ananias, Joel, and
7:9; 11:23,41,43. Josab are mentioned together in 6:7, and it is
c. Correction based on Greek Legend 3:3. possible that the names have been taken from there. d. So D; A B C "Manasseh turned his heart In Gk. and Eth. the names Micah (cf. 4:22) and
away to serve." Micaiah (cf. 2:12, 13, 16) are identical, and it
e. Another name for Beliar which possibly de­ could be the latter who is meant here (and in 6:7,
rives from a Heb. expression meaning "gift of 17; 7:1; 8:24). desolation" (contrast the OT name Mattaniah [cf. n. So Eth; Gk "who believed that (he) had
e.g. 2Kgs 24:17], which means "gift of Yahweh"); ascended into heaven." Gk refers to the ascension
see also 5:3. of Isaiah and makes no sense; Eth is much more
f. Correction (apparently supported by Gk); Eth vague, but apparently refers to the ascension of
"and he held him firmly." Jesus; neither version seems to preserve the original
g. "and adultery": so Eth; Gk omits. (Jewish) text of Martls. h. So D; A "Belakira"; B C "Balkira"; Gk o. So A; B C D "Balkira"; Gk "Belicheiar."
omits.inherit": Christian
t. "and as the Beloved ... in me lives": editorial addition, as the use of the title "the
Christian editorial addition, see n. k on vs. 4. Beloved" indicates; as an heir of Jesus, Isaiah's
u. According to Jewish tradition Sammael was fate is to be one of suffering, cf. 8:12; Rom 8:17. originally one of the chief archangels, but after
inciting the serpent to tempt Eve he became the 2 a. A play on words linking the name Manasseh
leader of the Satans. It is in such a role that he with the Heb. verb "to forget" {ndiah), cf. Gen
appears in Ascenls, where Sammael seems to be 41:31; the existence of this wordplay points to the
merely another name for Beliar (see n. v). Sammael fact that Martls was composed in Heb. The de­
is mentioned also in 1:11; 2:1; 3:13; 5:15f.; 7:9; scription of the reign of Manasseh (vss. 1-6) reflects
11:41 (in the last passage called Sammael Satan). that of 2Kgs 21:1-18; 2Chr 33:1-10. Malkira, used here as an additional name for

So D; A "Belakira"; B C "Balkira"; Gk o. So A; B C D "Balkira"; Gk "Belicheiar."
omits. Since Belkira is apparently introduced for It is this individual—in fact the agent of the devil
the first time in vs. 12, the name is probably an who in 5:4-9 is presented as the devil himself in
addition in Eth. here. The origin of the following human form—who brings about the death of Isaiah;
list of names is uncertain; they are not mentioned he is mentioned further in 3:1, 6, 11; 5:2, 3, 4, 5,
in 2Kgs 21 or 2Chr 33. 8, 12, 15; cf. 1:8; 2:5, 16. i. So A; B C D "Zaliqa"; Gk "Zadok, the p. D "Hezekiah", cf. n. r. overseer of the works." The Eth. names are q. Gk "Bethany."
probably corruptions of an expression meaning r. So Gk; Eth by mistake "Hezekiah," cf. n. "the overseer of the works." p. The account of the martyrdom is interrupted at
j. "great": so A; B C D omit, this point by a digression about Zedekiah and
k. Gk "and his triumph." Micaiah (vss. 12b-16). The narrative of the mar­
1. The narrative has possibly been influenced by tyrdom is resumed in 3:1. The text of vss. 12b-16
the story of Elijah, IKgs 19:1-8. is corrupt and difficult in a number of places. m. Micah, Joel, and Habakkuk are presented aswho was the brother of his father,8 was the teacher in the days of Ahab, king of
Israel, of the four hundred prophets of Baal.1 And he struck and abused Micaiah, iKgs 22:6
13 the son of Amida," the prophet. • And hev was abused by Ahab, and Micaiah* was ,Kgs 22:24
thrown into prison with Zedekiah the prophet;" they were with Ahaziah the son iKgs 22:24-28
14 of Alamerem Balalaaw.? #And Elijah the prophet from Tishbe in Gilead reproved 22;*2
Ahaziah and Samaria, and he prophesied concerning Ahaziah that he would die
on his bed of sickness, [and] Samaria2 would be given into the hand of 2K i:i-8
gs
is Shalmaneser,82 because he had killed the prophets of the LORD. *And when the 3:2; 2K \7.\-6
gs
false02 prophets who (were) with Ahaziah the son of Ahabc2 and their teacher
16 Jalerias02 from mount Joelc2 heard— »now he*2 was a brother of Zedekiah—when
they heard, they persuaded Ahaziah the king of Aguaron82 and [killed]"2 Micaiah. Isaiah is accused8
1 3 And Belkira0 discovered and saw the place of Isaiah and of the prophets who
were with him, for he himself dwelt0 in the district of Bethlehem, and he was a
follower of Manasseh. And he prophesied lies in Jerusalem, and there were many
2 from Jerusalem who joined with him, but he himself was from Samaria. *And it
came about, when Shalmaneser0 the king of Assyria came and captured Samaria, 2K« n:i-6;
and took the ninee tribes into captivity, and led them to the provincesf of the l^n1^:^
3 Medes and the rivers of Gozan,8 •this youth escaped and came to Jerusalem in ^"g62^:,
the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, but he did not walk in the ways of his
4 Samaritan father because he feared Hezekiah. *And he was found in the days of
s Hezekiah speaking words of iniquity in Jerusalem. *And the servants of Hezekiah
s. I.e. Zedekiah was the uncle of Belkira. for "Israel"; Latl "Efrem." "Mount Ephraim"
t. "of Baal": so A, Gk; B C D omit.for "Israel"; Latl "Efrem." "Mount Ephraim"
t. "of Baal": so A, Gk; B C D omit. The writer (JB: "the highlands of Ephraim") is mentioned
has confused the 400 prophets of Yahweh of IKgs frequently in the OT (e.g. Josh 17:15) and is
22:6 with the prophets of Baal mentioned in IKgs probably the reading to be preferred; it is possible
18:19, 22. that "Israel" was substituted for "Ephraim," and
u. Eth "Amida'' or "Amada''; Gk "Iemmada.'' that "Islal" and "Joel" are corruptions of this. All the forms are corrupt for an original "Imlah" f2. "now he": so Latl, the reference correctly
(IKgs 22:8). being to Jalerias. Eth and Gk add a gloss: Gk "now
v. The reference is apparently to Micaiah, al­ he, Becheir(a>"; Eth "now that Ibkira [so A; B
though this is not made clear in either Eth or Gk. "Abkira"; C "Ibakira"; D "Barakira"—the Eth. w. "Micaiah": so A C D, Gk; B omits (which forms are all corruptions of the Gk.]." But a
makes better sense). reference to this enemy of Isaiah, who in any case
x. "with Zedekiah the prophet": so Eth; Gk is said to be the nephew of Zedekiah (2:12), is out
"and he was with Zedekiah the false prophet." of place here. But in either case it is nonsense to say that Zedekiah g2. "Aguaron": so Eth; Gk, Latl "Gomorrah"
was "with" Micaiah in prison. Possibly the original (used here as a contemptuous name for Samaria,
Heb. text read "The people of Zedekiah the false cf. 3:10; Isa 1:10; Jer 23:14). Eth. "Aguaron" is
prophet were with Ahaziah . . ." but the word for either a corruption of "Gomorrah" or, more nat­
"people" (cam) was wrongly taken by the Gk. urally in Eth., of "Ekron." Ahaziah is king of
translator as the word for "with" (cim). Underlying Ekron because he consults the god of Ekron (2Kgs
vss. 13b-16 is an otherwise unknown tradition 1:1-16). about the fate of Micaiah in the reign of Ahaziah, h2. Supplied from Gk, Latl; Eth omits by
but many details are obscure. mistake. y.So D; A "Belakira"; B C "Balkira"; Gk o. So A; B C D "Balkira"; Gk "Belicheiar."
omits. Since Belkira is apparently introduced for It is this individual—in fact the agent of the devil
the first time in vs. 12, the name is probably an who in 5:4-9 is presented as the devil himself in
addition in Eth. here. The origin of the following human form—who brings about the death of Isaiah;
list of names is uncertain; they are not mentioned he is mentioned further in 3:1, 6, 11; 5:2, 3, 4, 5,
in 2Kgs 21 or 2Chr 33. 8, 12, 15; cf. 1:8; 2:5, 16. i. So A; B C D "Zaliqa"; Gk "Zadok, the p. D "Hezekiah", cf. n. r. overseer of the works." The Eth. names are q. Gk "Bethany."
probably corruptions of an expression meaning r. So Gk; Eth by mistake "Hezekiah," cf. n. "the overseer of the works." p. The account of the martyrdom is interrupted at
j. "great": so A; B C D omit, this point by a digression about Zedekiah and
k. Gk "and his triumph." Micaiah (vss. 12b-16). The narrative of the mar­
1. The narrative has possibly been influenced by tyrdom is resumed in 3:1. The text of vss. 12b-16
the story of Elijah, IKgs 19:1-8. is corrupt and difficult in a number of places. m. Micah, Joel, and Habakkuk are presented as

mistake. y. "Alamerem Balalaaw" (B "Balaaw"; D
"Balew"): so Eth; Gk "Ala[m] in Seminoma." 3 a. The narrative of the martyrdom is resumed
The text is obscure. "Alam" and "Alamerem" from 2:12a. are corruptions of "Ahab," cf. Gk in vs. 15; the b. A B C "Balkira"; D "Borakira"; Gk "Be­
remainder of the expression (in Gk and Eth) is cheira"; Latl "Bechira." See 2:12. Eth by mistake
perhaps a corruption of "in Samaria." links the name with the previous vs. ("[killed]
z. So Gk; Eth by mistake "in Samaria." There Micaiah and Belkira. And he discovered . . ."). is nothing in 2Kgs 1 to provide a basis for what is c. "dwelt": so D, Gk, Latl; ABC corrupt. said about Samaria in this verse. d. So Latl; Eth "Alagar Zagar" (or similar);
a2. Correction; Eth "Leba Naser" (or similar); Gk "Algasar"; for these corruptions of "Shalma­
Gk "Alnasar." neser" cf. 2:14. b2. "false": Gk omits. e. Gk, Latl "nine and a half."
c2. Gk "Alam," cf. n. y on vs. 13. f. "provinces": so Eth, cf. MT of 2Kgs 17:6;
d2. So B, C; Gk "Iallarias"; Latl "Gamarias." 18:11; Gk "mountains" (Latl "mountain") =
The OT contains no reference to a person with LXX of 2Kgs 17:6; 18:11. (Eth. OT follows former
such a name. A D omit' 'and their teacher Jalerias.' * in 18:11, latter in 17:6). e2. So Eth; Gk "Islal," assumed to be corrupt g. So Gk, Latl; Eth "Tazon."accused him, and he escaped to the district of Bethlehem and persuaded11 . . . 6 And Belkira' accused Isaiah and the prophets who (were) with him, saying, "Isaiah
and the prophets' who (are) with him prophesy against Jerusalem and against the
cities of Judah that they will be laid waste, and also (against) Benjamin that it
will go into captivity, and also against you, O lord king, that you will go (bound)
7 with hooks and chains of iron. »But they prophesy lies against Israel and Judah.k 2Cnr33:ii
8,9 And Isaiah himself has said, T see more than Moses the prophet.' • Moses said,
"There is no man who can see the LORD and live.' But Isaiah has said, T have Ex33:2o
10 seen the LORD, and behold I am alive.' 'Know, therefore, O king, that they (are) isa6:i
false prophets.1 And he has called Jerusalem Sodom, and the princes of Judah and
Jerusalem he has declared (to be) the people of Gomorrah." And he brought many isa i:io
11 accusations against Isaiah and the prophets before Manasseh. *But Beliar dwelt i:8
in the heart of Manasseh and in the heart of the princes of Judah and Benjamin, i:9; 2.1; 5A
and of the eunuchs, and of the king's counselors.»But they prophesy lies against Israel and Judah.k 2Cnr33:ii
8,9 And Isaiah himself has said, T see more than Moses the prophet.' • Moses said,
"There is no man who can see the LORD and live.' But Isaiah has said, T have Ex33:2o
10 seen the LORD, and behold I am alive.' 'Know, therefore, O king, that they (are) isa6:i
false prophets.1 And he has called Jerusalem Sodom, and the princes of Judah and
Jerusalem he has declared (to be) the people of Gomorrah." And he brought many isa i:io
11 accusations against Isaiah and the prophets before Manasseh. *But Beliar dwelt i:8
in the heart of Manasseh and in the heart of the princes of Judah and Benjamin, i:9; 2.1; 5A
and of the eunuchs, and of the king's counselors. And the words of Belkira"1
12 pleased him very much, #and he sent and seized Isaiah."
A prophecy about the Beloved and the Church0
13 For Beliar was very angry with Isaiah because of the vision, and because of the 5:15
exposure with which he had exposed Sammael, and that through him there had 1:8
been revealed the coming of the Beloved from the seventh heaven, and his 1*
transformation, and his descent, and the form into which he must be transformed, f,^4'16; 6:13;
(namely) the form of a man, and the persecution with which he would be
persecuted, and the torments with which the children of Israel must torment him,
and the coming of the twelve disciples, and the teaching,0 and that before the
sabbath he must be crucified on a tree, and be crucified with wicked men* and Jn 1*31
14 that he would be buried in a grave, »and the twelve who (were) with him would Mt 26:31
15 be offended at him; and the guards who would guard the grave;' #and the descent ^27:62-66;
of the angel of the church which is in the heavens, whom he will summon in the J*®* ^.^f•
16 last days; and that the angel of the Holy Spirit5 *and Michael, the chief of the Rev 3:12; 21:2
17 holy angels, will open his grave on the third day, #and that1 Beloved, sitting on Lk 24:4;
18 their shoulders,11 will come forth and send out his twelvev disciples, *and they will {"J^ ^
teach all nations and every tongue the resurrection of the Beloved, and those who Mt 28:19
believe in his cross will be saved, and inw his ascension* to the seventh heaven 9:26
19 from where he came; »and that many who believe in him will speak through the
20 Holy Spirit, #and there will be many signs and miracles in those days.*But Beliar dwelt i:8
in the heart of Manasseh and in the heart of the princes of Judah and Benjamin, i:9; 2.1; 5A
and of the eunuchs, and of the king's counselors. And the words of Belkira"1
12 pleased him very much, #and he sent and seized Isaiah."
A prophecy about the Beloved and the Church0
13 For Beliar was very angry with Isaiah because of the vision, and because of the 5:15
exposure with which he had exposed Sammael, and that through him there had 1:8
been revealed the coming of the Beloved from the seventh heaven, and his 1*
transformation, and his descent, and the form into which he must be transformed, f,^4'16; 6:13;
(namely) the form of a man, and the persecution with which he would be
persecuted, and the torments with which the children of Israel must torment him,
and the coming of the twelve disciples, and the teaching,0 and that before the
sabbath he must be crucified on a tree, and be crucified with wicked men* and Jn 1*31
14 that he would be buried in a grave, »and the twelve who (were) with him would Mt 26:31
15 be offended at him; and the guards who would guard the grave;' #and the descent ^27:62-66;
of the angel of the church which is in the heavens, whom he will summon in the J*®* ^.^f•
16 last days; and that the angel of the Holy Spirit5 *and Michael, the chief of the Rev 3:12; 21:2
17 holy angels, will open his grave on the third day, #and that1 Beloved, sitting on Lk 24:4;
18 their shoulders,11 will come forth and send out his twelvev disciples, *and they will {"J^ ^
teach all nations and every tongue the resurrection of the Beloved, and those who Mt 28:19
believe in his cross will be saved, and inw his ascension* to the seventh heaven 9:26
19 from where he came; »and that many who believe in him will speak through the
20 Holy Spirit, #and there will be many signs and miracles in those days. 11:is
h.And the words of Belkira"1
12 pleased him very much, #and he sent and seized Isaiah."
A prophecy about the Beloved and the Church0
13 For Beliar was very angry with Isaiah because of the vision, and because of the 5:15
exposure with which he had exposed Sammael, and that through him there had 1:8
been revealed the coming of the Beloved from the seventh heaven, and his 1*
transformation, and his descent, and the form into which he must be transformed, f,^4'16; 6:13;
(namely) the form of a man, and the persecution with which he would be
persecuted, and the torments with which the children of Israel must torment him,
and the coming of the twelve disciples, and the teaching,0 and that before the
sabbath he must be crucified on a tree, and be crucified with wicked men* and Jn 1*31
14 that he would be buried in a grave, »and the twelve who (were) with him would Mt 26:31
15 be offended at him; and the guards who would guard the grave;' #and the descent ^27:62-66;
of the angel of the church which is in the heavens, whom he will summon in the J*®* ^.^f•
16 last days; and that the angel of the Holy Spirit5 *and Michael, the chief of the Rev 3:12; 21:2
17 holy angels, will open his grave on the third day, #and that1 Beloved, sitting on Lk 24:4;
18 their shoulders,11 will come forth and send out his twelvev disciples, *and they will {"J^ ^
teach all nations and every tongue the resurrection of the Beloved, and those who Mt 28:19
believe in his cross will be saved, and inw his ascension* to the seventh heaven 9:26
19 from where he came; »and that many who believe in him will speak through the
20 Holy Spirit, #and there will be many signs and miracles in those days. 11:is
h. So Eth; Gk "and they persuaded"; Latl had experienced earlier in his life; the account of
omits; Cop "he persuaded Belch(ira)." The text is the vision describes the life and death of the
defective in Eth and Gk, but the fragmentary Beloved, the early history of the Church, the reign
evidence of Cop confirms the old suggestion that of Beliar, and the second coming of the Lord.11:is
h. So Eth; Gk "and they persuaded"; Latl had experienced earlier in his life; the account of
omits; Cop "he persuaded Belch(ira)." The text is the vision describes the life and death of the
defective in Eth and Gk, but the fragmentary Beloved, the early history of the Church, the reign
evidence of Cop confirms the old suggestion that of Beliar, and the second coming of the Lord. The
the missing object of the verb was Belkira; for the beginning of vs. 13 provides a summary of chs. construction cf. 2:16. The subject of the verb 6-11. remains uncertain; it has been thought to be either p. "and the coming . . . teaching": so Eth; Gk
the false prophets (cf. the plural verb in Gk) or "and the teaching of the twelve."
Beliar (cf. the singular verb in Eth and Cop); but q. "and that before . . . men": so Eth; Gk "and
we expect a human subject as in 2:16. that he must be crucified with wicked men."
i. A B C "Balkira"; D "Barakira"; Gk "Mel- r. Gk "and the guarding of the guards of the
cheira"; Latl "Bechira." Cf. 2:12. tomb."
j. "the prophets": so C D, Gk, Latl; A B s. "the angel of the Holy Spirit": for this
"those." expression (instead of "the Holy Spirit" or "the
k. "against Israel and Judah": so Eth, Latl Spirit") cf. 4:21; 7:23; 8:14; 9:36, 39, 40; 10:4;
(Latl adds "and Jerusalem"); Gk "and they hate 11:4, 33. In Gk there is a lacuna before "the angel
Israel and Judah and Benjamin, and their word (is) of the Holy Spirit," and it has been suggested that
evil against Judah and Israel." the name "Gabriel" stood there. 1. Gk, Latl "that he is a liar." t. Gk "the."
m. So A D; B C "Balkira"; Gk "Belchira"; u. Cf. GPet 39f., where Jesus emerges from the
Latl "Bechire." See 2:12. tomb supported by two angelic figures. n. The narrative of the martyrdom is resumed v. "twelve": Gk omits. in 5:1. w. "and in": so Gk; A omits "in"; BCD omit
o. Section 3:13-4:22 is a Christian interpolation "and."
within the Jewish Maitls; cf. Intro. This section is x.mistake. y. "Alamerem Balalaaw" (B "Balaaw"; D
"Balew"): so Eth; Gk "Ala[m] in Seminoma." 3 a. The narrative of the martyrdom is resumed
The text is obscure. "Alam" and "Alamerem" from 2:12a. are corruptions of "Ahab," cf. Gk in vs. 15; the b. A B C "Balkira"; D "Borakira"; Gk "Be­
remainder of the expression (in Gk and Eth) is cheira"; Latl "Bechira." See 2:12. Eth by mistake
perhaps a corruption of "in Samaria." links the name with the previous vs. ("[killed]
z. So Gk; Eth by mistake "in Samaria." There Micaiah and Belkira. And he discovered . . ."). is nothing in 2Kgs 1 to provide a basis for what is c. "dwelt": so D, Gk, Latl; ABC corrupt. said about Samaria in this verse. d. So Latl; Eth "Alagar Zagar" (or similar);
a2. Correction; Eth "Leba Naser" (or similar); Gk "Algasar"; for these corruptions of "Shalma­
Gk "Alnasar." neser" cf. 2:14. b2. "false": Gk omits. e. Gk, Latl "nine and a half."
c2. Gk "Alam," cf. n. y on vs. 13. f. "provinces": so Eth, cf. MT of 2Kgs 17:6;
d2. So B, C; Gk "Iallarias"; Latl "Gamarias." 18:11; Gk "mountains" (Latl "mountain") =
The OT contains no reference to a person with LXX of 2Kgs 17:6; 18:11. (Eth. OT follows former
such a name. A D omit' 'and their teacher Jalerias.' * in 18:11, latter in 17:6). e2. So Eth; Gk "Islal," assumed to be corrupt g. So Gk, Latl; Eth "Tazon."

Intro. This section is x. "ascension": so Gk; in Eth the word is
presented as an account of a vision which Isaiah normally translated "resurrection."The corruption of the Church
21 And afterwards/ at his approach, his disciples will abandon the teaching2 of the
22 twelve apostles, and their faith, and their love, and their purity. «And there will 1 Tim 4:12
23 be much contention*2 at his coming andb2 at his approach. *And in those days
24 (there will be) many who will love office, although lacking wisdom. *And there
will be many wicked elders and shepherds who wrong their sheep, [and they will
25 be rapacious because they do not have holy shepherds].02 *And many will exchange
the glory of the robes of the saints'12 for the robes of those who love money; and
there will be much respect of persons in those days, and lovers of the glory of
26 this world. »And there will be many slanderers'2 and [much]*2 vainglory at the
27 approach of the LORD, and the Holy Spirit will withdraw from many. *And in
those days there will not be many prophets, nor those who speak reliable words,
28 except one here and there in different places, • because of the spirit of error82 and
of fornication, and of vainglory, and of the love of money, which there will be
among those who are said to be servants of that One, and among those who 4:9
29 receive that One. «And among the shepherds and the elders there will be great
30 hatred towards one another. *For there will be great jealousy in the last days, for
31 everyone will speak whatever pleases him in his own eyes. *And they will make
ineffective"2 the prophecy of the prophets who were before me, and my visions
also12 . . . they will make ineffective, in order that they may speak what bursts
out of their heart. The reign of Beliar*
1 4 Now, therefore, Hezekiah and Josab my son, [these are the days of the
2 completion of the world].b *And after it has been brought to completion, Beliar i:8
will descend, the great angel,c the king of this world, which he has ruled ever i:3 2:4; 10:29
;
since it existed.they will make ineffective, in order that they may speak what bursts
out of their heart. The reign of Beliar*
1 4 Now, therefore, Hezekiah and Josab my son, [these are the days of the
2 completion of the world].b *And after it has been brought to completion, Beliar i:8
will descend, the great angel,c the king of this world, which he has ruled ever i:3 2:4; 10:29
;
since it existed. He will descend from his firmament in the form of a man, a king 7:12
3 of iniquity, a murderer of his mother4—this is the king of this world— *ande will w^nTi*
persecute the plant which the twelve apostles of the Beloved will have planted; ^n$:2'5,7:
4 some of the twelve will be given into his hand/ #This angel,8 Beliar, will come i:4
in the form of that king, and with him will come all the powers of this world, i:3
5 and they will obey him in every wish. *By his word he will cause the sun to rise"
6 by night, and the moon also he will make to appear at the sixth hour. «And he
will do everything he wishes in the world; he will act and speak like the Beloved,
7 and will say, "I am the LORD, and before me there was no one." *And all men 4:8; 10:13;
2Thes 2:4;
y. "afterwards": Gk omits. For the thought of SibOr 3:63-76. In vss. 2b-4a this belief is linked
vss. 21-31 cf. Acts20:29f.; ITim 1:3-7; 4:1; 2Tim with the expectation, which was current for some
3:1-9; 4:3f.; 2Pet 2:1. time after his death, that Nero would return, cf. z. Gk "prophecy." SibOr 4:119-39; 5:28-34, 99-110, 137-54, 361-
a2. Gk "many heresies." 85; Suetonius, Nero 57; Tacitus, Histories 2:8f. b2. "at his coming and": so Eth; Gk omits. b. "these . . . world": correction based on Gk;
c2. "and they . . . shepherds": correction of A Eth corrupt. C D based on Gk, which apparently read "[which c. Or "ruler," cf. vs. 4. will be ravagjed because they do not have pure d. Nero had his mother, Agrippina, murdered
shepherds"; B "and they will ravage the holy in A.D. 59; cf. SibOr 4:121; 5:29f., 142, 363. flock." e. "this is . . .Intro. This section is x. "ascension": so Gk; in Eth the word is
presented as an account of a vision which Isaiah normally translated "resurrection."

. . world—and": so Eth (B "who
d2. Perhaps an indication that Christians adopted is C omits "world"), a corruption of Gk
a special form of dress. "who himself, even this king."
e2. Gk "slanders"; Eth by mistake repeats the f. Gk is apparently more precise, "[one] of the
word for "slanderers," but in a different form. twelve"—an allusion to the martyrdom of Peter or
f2. Supplied from the Gk. Paul. In vs. 3 the author refers to events of history,
g2. "error": so B C, Gk; A D "lying." Nero's persecution of the Church ("the plant"),
h2. Gk "will neglect." rather than to the future activities of Beliar, the
i2. Eth adds "which," possibly a corruption of "Antichrist." The description reverts to the future
the word for "these"; Gk "and these visions of in vs. 4. mine." g. Or "ruler" (Gk actually has "ruler"), cf. 4 a. Vss. 1-13 describe the coming of Beliar as vs. 2. C D, Gk omit "Beliar."
the "Antichrist," the demonic ruler of the last h. "he will cause ... to rise": so D; A B C
days, cf. Un 2:18, 22; 4:3; 2Jn 7; 2Thes 2:3-10; "the sun will rise." Cf. SibOr 3:63-65; 4Ezra 5:4.8 in the world will believe in him. #They will sacrifice to him and will serve him, SibOr 5:34
9 saying, "This is the LORD, and besides him there is no other." #And the majority Rev 13:4, 8, 12
of those who have associated together to receive the Beloved he will turn aside 3:28
o.ii after him. #And the power of his miracles will be in every city and district, •and 2Thes 2:9; Rev
13:14; 19:20;
12 he will set up his image before him in every city.4 •And he will rule for three Mt 24:24; Mk
13:22
13 years and seven months and twenty-seven days.j •And many faithful and saints, Rev 13:14f.;
when they saw him for whom they were hoping, who was crucified, Jesus the 14:11
LORD Christ—after I, Isaiah, had seen him who was crucified and ascendedk—
and who believed in him, of these few will be left1 in those days as his servants,
fleeing from desert to desert1" as they await his coming." Cor 1:7; Phil
3:20; IThes
1:10; Heb 9:28
The second coming of the Lord
M And after [one thousand] three hundred and thirty-two days0 the LORD will come ITHCS 3:i3;
with his angels and with the hosts of the saints from the seventh heaven, with the JJ^. jJ^^J
glory of the seventh heaven, and will drag Beliar, and his hosts also, into Gehenna. *A6>6:1*
is And he will give rest to the pious whom he finds in the body in this world, but i!3; Rev 19:20
16 the sun will be ashamed,p *and (to) all who because of their faith in him have 2?5:237
cursed Beliar and his kings. But the saints will come with the LORD with their iThes 3:i3;4:i4
robes0- which are stored up in the seventh heaven above; with the LORD will come
those whose spirits are clothed, they will descend and be present in the world, Rev 20*
and the LORD will strengthen those who are found in the body, together with the
saints in the robes of the saints, and will serve those who have kept watch in this u n-.ii
n world. *And after this they will be turned in their robes upwards, and their body
is will be left in the world.But the saints will come with the LORD with their iThes 3:i3;4:i4
robes0- which are stored up in the seventh heaven above; with the LORD will come
those whose spirits are clothed, they will descend and be present in the world, Rev 20*
and the LORD will strengthen those who are found in the body, together with the
saints in the robes of the saints, and will serve those who have kept watch in this u n-.ii
n world. *And after this they will be turned in their robes upwards, and their body
is will be left in the world. •Then the voice of the Beloved will reprove in anger icor i5:5o-53;
this heaven, and this earth, and the mountains, and the hills, and the cities, and PSI^I"*
the desert, and the trees, and the angel of the sun/ and that of the moon, and
everywhere that Beliar has appeared and acted openly in this world. There will
be a resurrection and a judgment in their midst in those days, and the Beloved Rev 20:11-15
will cause fire to rise from him, and it will consume all the impious, and they 2Thes 1:8; 2:8;
19 will become as if they had not been created.* #And the rest of the words of the Isa 11:4
20 vision are written in the vision of Babylon.1 *And the rest of the vision about the
LORD, behold it is written in parables in the words of mine that are written in the
21 book which I prophesied openly. *And the descent of the Beloved into Sheol, 9:i6; 10:8
behold it is written in the section where the LORD says, "Behold, my son shall isa 52:13 LXX
i. An allusion to the cult of the Roman emperors see vs. 12. Translation follows A; B C "thirty
and the practice of erecting statues of them. hundred and thirty-two"; D "thirty hundred and
j. I.e. 1,335 days according to the Julian cal­ two."
endar; the author is drawing on Dan 12:12, itself p. "but the sun will be ashamed": a gloss which
an elaboration of the tradition in Dan 7:25; 12:7 interrupts the sequence of thought in vss. 15f.. . world—and": so Eth (B "who
d2. Perhaps an indication that Christians adopted is C omits "world"), a corruption of Gk
a special form of dress. "who himself, even this king."
e2. Gk "slanders"; Eth by mistake repeats the f. Gk is apparently more precise, "[one] of the
word for "slanderers," but in a different form. twelve"—an allusion to the martyrdom of Peter or
f2. Supplied from the Gk. Paul. In vs. 3 the author refers to events of history,
g2. "error": so B C, Gk; A D "lying." Nero's persecution of the Church ("the plant"),
h2. Gk "will neglect." rather than to the future activities of Beliar, the
i2. Eth adds "which," possibly a corruption of "Antichrist." The description reverts to the future
the word for "these"; Gk "and these visions of in vs. 4. mine." g. Or "ruler" (Gk actually has "ruler"), cf. 4 a. Vss. 1-13 describe the coming of Beliar as vs. 2. C D, Gk omit "Beliar."
the "Antichrist," the demonic ruler of the last h. "he will cause ... to rise": so D; A B C
days, cf. Un 2:18, 22; 4:3; 2Jn 7; 2Thes 2:3-10; "the sun will rise." Cf. SibOr 3:63-65; 4Ezra 5:4.

"but the sun will be ashamed": a gloss which
an elaboration of the tradition in Dan 7:25; 12:7 interrupts the sequence of thought in vss. 15f. and
that the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes would was probably occasioned by the reference to the
last three and a half years ("a time, two times, sun in vs. 18. The words are quoted from Isa
and half a time"; cf. Rev U:2f.; 12:6, 14; 13:5 24:23. and Lk 4:25; Jas 5:17). Ascenls 4:12, 14 are cited q. I.e. with the robes for the living righteous,
by the 1 lth-cent. chronicler George Cedrenus, who those who are found "in the body." Alternatively
attributes the passage to THez. According to Ced­ it could mean "with [i.e. "in"J their own robes."
renus the reign of the Antichrist would last 1,290 On the robes see n. p on 1:5. days; for this variant cf. Dan 12:11. r. Angels or spirits were thought to have been
k. "after I. . . ascended": an editorial insertion placed in charge of the various created elements;
linking 3:13-4:22 to its context. for the sun cf. Rev 7:2; 19:17; cf. also Rev 7:11;
1. "And many faithful . . . few will be left": 9:11; 14:18; IEn 60:12-21; Jub 2:2. the translation reflects the somewhat awkward Eth.; s. "and they will become . . . created": the
the sense seems to be that of the many faithful and language reflects the Eth. version of Job 10:19. saints who saw and believed in Jesus, few will be t. "the vision of Babylon": reflects the LXX
left. text of Isa 13:1. Vss. 19-22 are an editorial
m. The desert was the traditional place of safety conclusion to 3:13-4:22 which serves to link this
in times of persecution, cf. IKgs 17:2f.; 19:3f.; section of Ascenls with the canonical Book of
IMac 2:28-30; Rev 12:6, 14. Isaiah (vss. 19f.) and makes the claim that what is
n. B C D "the coming of the Beloved." said here was already (implicitly) contained in the
o. "one thousand" was omitted by mistake, and OT (vss. 21f.). similarly "two" written by mistake for "five,"understand."" And all these things, behold they are written in the Psalms,v in the
parables* of David the son of Jesse, and in the Proverbs of Solomon his son, and
in the words of Koran* and of Ethan the Israelite/ and in the words of Asaph,z
22 and in the rest of the psalms which the angel of the spirit has inspired, •(namely) 3:15
in those which have no name written, and in the words of Amos my father82 and
of Hosea the prophet, and of Micah, and of Joel, and of Nahum, and of Jonah,
and of Obadiah, and of Habakkuk, and of Haggai, and of Zephaniah, and of
Zechariah, and of Malachi,62 and in the words of the righteous Joseph,02 and in
the words of Daniel. The execution of Isaiah
1 5 Because of these visions, therefore, Beliar was angry with Isaiah, and he dwelt 1.8
2 in the heart of Manasseh, and he sawed Isaiah in half with a wood saw.8 •And 19; 2:i 311
;
while Isaiah was being sawed in half, his accuser, Belkira,b stood by, and all the
false prophets stood by, laughing and (maliciously) joyful because of Isaiah. 3 And Belkira,0 through Mekembekus,4 stood before Isaiah, laughing0 and deriding. 4 And Belkiraf said to Isaiah, "Say, i have lied in everything I have spoken; the
5 ways of Manasseh are good and right, *and also the ways of Belkira8 and those
6 who are with him are good.' " • And he said this to him when he began to be
7 sawed in half. *And Isaiah was in a vision of the LORD, but his eyes were open,
8 and he saw them.h -And Belkira1 spoke thus to Isaiah, "Say what I say to you,
u. "Behold, my son shall understand": a quo­ 5 a. "and he sawed . . . saw": the narrative of
tation of Isa 52:13, but reflecting the LXX form of the martyrdom is resumed here from 3:12. The first
the text. The quotation points to the messianic half of the vs. is a redactional link. For the
interpretation of Isa 52:13-53:12.is a redactional link. For the
interpretation of Isa 52:13-53:12. In referring to expression "a wood saw" see "Original Lan­
the descent of the Beloved into Sheol the author guage."
perhaps had in mind Isa 53:8 in its LXX form (so b. So A: B C "Balkira"; D "Malkira"; see
JB "struck down in death"). 2:12. v. "the Psalms": either a general heading for c. A B C "Balkira"; D "Malkira."
the various psalms and proverbs described in more d. "through Mekembekus": so A C D; B "and
detail in the remainder of the vs. and at the Mekembekus." The reading of B is grammatically
beginning of vs. 22, or a gloss on the word easier because the following verbs are in the plural
"parables," which is used here with a not very in all MSS with the exception that C has "stood"
common meaning. in the singular. But the plural forms could have
w. "the parables": the Eth. reflects Gk. para- been introduced under the influence of the plurals
bole and Heb. mdial, a word with a wide range of at the end of the previous vs., and it is easier to
meanings. It is used in Pss 49:4 (JB: "proverb") make sense of the reading "through." "Mekem­
and 78:2 with the sense "a didactic poem"; here bekus" is a corruption of "Matanbukus" (2:4),
the plural form has the rather general sense "poems" another name for Beliar; inspired by, and with the
or "psalms." help of Beliar, Belkira now mocks Isaiah. In Eth. x. "Koran": cf. e.g. the headings of Pss 42, MSS "and" (wa-) and "through" (ba-) are fre­
44. quently confused. y. "Ethan the Israelite": text follows the LXX e. "laughing": possibly a marginal variant of
form of the heading of Ps 89 (LXX 88), where the "deriding" which has now come into the text. The
MT reads "Ethan the Ezrahite" (= JB: "Ethan following "and" is omitted by A, but is present
the native-born"); cf. the LXX and MT of IKgs in BCD. 5:11. f. B "Balkira"; A C D "Beliar." Since Belkira
z. "Asaph": cf. the headings of Pss 50; 73-83. is presented in vss. 4-9 as the devil himself in
a2. Cf. n. e on 1:2."but the sun will be ashamed": a gloss which
an elaboration of the tradition in Dan 7:25; 12:7 interrupts the sequence of thought in vss. 15f. and
that the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes would was probably occasioned by the reference to the
last three and a half years ("a time, two times, sun in vs. 18. The words are quoted from Isa
and half a time"; cf. Rev U:2f.; 12:6, 14; 13:5 24:23. and Lk 4:25; Jas 5:17). Ascenls 4:12, 14 are cited q. I.e. with the robes for the living righteous,
by the 1 lth-cent. chronicler George Cedrenus, who those who are found "in the body." Alternatively
attributes the passage to THez. According to Ced­ it could mean "with [i.e. "in"J their own robes."
renus the reign of the Antichrist would last 1,290 On the robes see n. p on 1:5. days; for this variant cf. Dan 12:11. r. Angels or spirits were thought to have been
k. "after I. . . ascended": an editorial insertion placed in charge of the various created elements;
linking 3:13-4:22 to its context. for the sun cf. Rev 7:2; 19:17; cf. also Rev 7:11;
1. "And many faithful . . . few will be left": 9:11; 14:18; IEn 60:12-21; Jub 2:2. the translation reflects the somewhat awkward Eth.; s. "and they will become . . . created": the
the sense seems to be that of the many faithful and language reflects the Eth. version of Job 10:19. saints who saw and believed in Jesus, few will be t. "the vision of Babylon": reflects the LXX
left. text of Isa 13:1. Vss. 19-22 are an editorial
m. The desert was the traditional place of safety conclusion to 3:13-4:22 which serves to link this
in times of persecution, cf. IKgs 17:2f.; 19:3f.; section of Ascenls with the canonical Book of
IMac 2:28-30; Rev 12:6, 14. Isaiah (vss. 19f.) and makes the claim that what is
n. B C D "the coming of the Beloved." said here was already (implicitly) contained in the
o. "one thousand" was omitted by mistake, and OT (vss. 21f.). similarly "two" written by mistake for "five,"

n. e on 1:2. human form (cf. particularly vs. 9), it is perhaps
b2. The twelve minor prophets; the order in hardly surprising that there should be a confusion
which they are listed follows neither the MT, nor between Belkira and Beliar at this point. In vs. 8
the LXX, but is nearer to the latter than the former. it is Belkira, not Beliar, who addresses Isaiah, and
It might have been expected that there would be a correspondingly Greek Legend 3:17 (which sum­
reference to Jeremiah and Ezekiel, but cf. the marizes 5:4-8 of Ascenls) refers to "Melchias, the
similar list in 4Ezra l:39f., in which neither they false prophet." On the other hand 5:4 and 8 are
nor Isaiah himself is mentioned. cited by Ambrose (Expositio in psalmum 118
c2. Apparently a reference to PrJos; this work 12.32), and there it is the devil (Lat. diabolus)
is mentioned in lists of pseudepigraphic books, but who addresses Isaiah; for the text (quoted in
has been lost apart from some short excerpts in Charles, Ascension, p. 40) see Corpus scriptorum
early Christian writings. It is a little surprising that ecclesiasticorum latinorum vol. 62 (1913) p. 270. this pseudepigraphon should alone be mentioned g. So D; A B C "Balkira."
in the context of the books of the OT. [See the h. Possibly to be emended, "and (although) his
contribution on PrJos by J. Z. Smith elsewhere in eyes were open, he did [not] see them," cf. 6:10. the present collection. —J.H.C] i. BC"Balkira";A "Milkiras";D "Malkira."and I will turn their heart and make Manasseh, and the princes of Judah, and the
9 people, and all Jerusalem worship you."j #And Isaiah answered and said,k "If it
is within my power to say, Condemned and cursed be you,1 and all your hosts,
10 and all your house!'"1 •For there is nothing further that you can take except the
11 skin of my body." *And they seized Isaiah the son of Amoz and sawed him in
12 half with a wood saw. *And Manasseh, and Belkira," and the false prophets, and
13 the princes, and the people, and all stood by looking on. -And to the prophets
who (were) with him he said before he was sawed in half, "Go to the district of
14 Tyre and Sidon,° because for me alone the LORD has mixed the cup."p »And
while Isaiah was being sawed in half, he did not cry out, or weep, but his mouth
is spoke with the Holy Spirit until he was sawed in two. • Beliar did this to Isaiah
through Belkira** and through Manasseh, for Sammael was very angry with Isaiah i:8; 3:i3; 5:i
from the days of Hezekiah, king of Judah, because of the things which he had
16 seen concerning the Beloved, *and because of the destruction of Sammael which i:4
he had seen through the LORD, while Hezekiah his father was king. And her did
as Satan wished.3 2:2
2. THE VISION WHICH ISAIAH THE SON OF AMOZ SAW
Isaiah visits Hezekiah and has a vision8
1 6 In the twentieth year of the reign of Hezekiah, king of Judah, Isaiah the son
of Amoz and Josab the son of Isaiah came to Hezekiah in Jerusalem from Gilgal.b
2 And he sat on the couch of the king, and they brought a seat for him, but he
3 would not sit (on it). *And when Isaiah began to speak with Hezekiah the king
the words of faith and righteousness, all the princes of Israel were sitting (there),
and the eunuchs and the king's counselors.THE VISION WHICH ISAIAH THE SON OF AMOZ SAW
Isaiah visits Hezekiah and has a vision8
1 6 In the twentieth year of the reign of Hezekiah, king of Judah, Isaiah the son
of Amoz and Josab the son of Isaiah came to Hezekiah in Jerusalem from Gilgal.b
2 And he sat on the couch of the king, and they brought a seat for him, but he
3 would not sit (on it). *And when Isaiah began to speak with Hezekiah the king
the words of faith and righteousness, all the princes of Israel were sitting (there),
and the eunuchs and the king's counselors. And there were there forty* prophets
and sons of the prophets; they had come from the neighboring districts, and from
the mountains, and from the country, when they had heard that Isaiah was coming
4 from Gilgald to Hezekiah. •They came that they might greet him, and that they
s might hear his words, *and that he might lay his hand on them, and that they
might prophesy, and that he might hear their prophecy; and they were all in the
6 presence of Isaiah.e *And when Isaiahr spoke with Hezekiah the words of
righteousness and faith, they all heard a door being opened8 and the voice of the
7 Spirit.h •And the king summoned all the prophets and all the people who were to
j. There are some similarities with the temptation a. The heading (apart from "2") is given in
of Jesus, cf. Mt 4:8-10; Lk 4:5-8. Eth, Lat2, Slav, but Lat2 has "Isaiah the prophet,
k. C D add "to him." the son of Amoz" and Slav "the holy Isaiah, the
1. A C D "If (it is) within my power, 'Cursed, prophet, the son of Amoz."
that is to say, you.' "
m. In vs. 9 Belkira is presented as the devil in 6 a. The Visls (chs. 6-11) is a Christian work
human form, with his "hosts" of spirits at his which was originally quite independent of the
disposal (cf. 2:2). What is implicit in Ascenls is Jewish Martis (the basic narrative of chs. 1-5); cf. made explicit in the parallel passage in the Greek Intro. Legend (3:18), "Accursed be you, O Melchias the b. A B D "from Galilee," cf. vs.n. e on 1:2. human form (cf. particularly vs. 9), it is perhaps
b2. The twelve minor prophets; the order in hardly surprising that there should be a confusion
which they are listed follows neither the MT, nor between Belkira and Beliar at this point. In vs. 8
the LXX, but is nearer to the latter than the former. it is Belkira, not Beliar, who addresses Isaiah, and
It might have been expected that there would be a correspondingly Greek Legend 3:17 (which sum­
reference to Jeremiah and Ezekiel, but cf. the marizes 5:4-8 of Ascenls) refers to "Melchias, the
similar list in 4Ezra l:39f., in which neither they false prophet." On the other hand 5:4 and 8 are
nor Isaiah himself is mentioned. cited by Ambrose (Expositio in psalmum 118
c2. Apparently a reference to PrJos; this work 12.32), and there it is the devil (Lat. diabolus)
is mentioned in lists of pseudepigraphic books, but who addresses Isaiah; for the text (quoted in
has been lost apart from some short excerpts in Charles, Ascension, p. 40) see Corpus scriptorum
early Christian writings. It is a little surprising that ecclesiasticorum latinorum vol. 62 (1913) p. 270. this pseudepigraphon should alone be mentioned g. So D; A B C "Balkira."
in the context of the books of the OT. [See the h. Possibly to be emended, "and (although) his
contribution on PrJos by J. Z. Smith elsewhere in eyes were open, he did [not] see them," cf. 6:10. the present collection. —J.H.C] i. BC"Balkira";A "Milkiras";D "Malkira."

A B D "from Galilee," cf. vs. 3; Lat2, Slav
false prophet, O devil." omit. It is not clear why Gilgal should be mentioned. n. B C "Balkira"; A "Melakira"; D "Mel- c. It is not clear why there should be forty
kira." prophets; the figure is given in Eth and Greek
o. It is not clear why this particular region Legend 1:3, but is absent from Lat2, Slav. should be mentioned; it has been suggested that d. A "from Galilee," cf. vs. 1; Lat2 "from
the tradition of Elijah's association with Sidon Galgatha."
(IKgs 17:7-24) may have inspired the author at e. Lat2, Slav are much shorter than Eth in vss. this point. 3-5. p. "cup": a symbolic term for the vocation to f. CD, Lat2, Slav "he."
which Isaiah was called, cf. Mk 10:38f.; 14:36. g. Lit. "a door which (someone) opened."
q. A B C "Balkira"; D "Malkira." h. "they all. . . the Spirit [C "the Holy Spirit"]":
r. I.e. Manasseh. so Eth; Lat2, Slav "the Holy Spirit came upon
s. Vss. 15 and 16 are an editorial addition which him, and they all saw and heard the words of the
serves to link 3:13-4:22 with the narrative of the Holy Spirit." Eth seems to be dependent on the
martyrdom. corrupt Eth. text of vs. 9 and is probably secondary.be found there, and they came. And Micah, and the aged Ananias, and Joel, and
8 Josab were sitting on his right/ *And when they all heard the voice of the Holy 2:9
Spirit, they all worshiped on their knees, and they praised the God of righteousness,
the Most High, the One who (dwells) in the upper world and who sits on high,
9 the Holy One, the One who rests among the holy ones/ «and they ascribed glory
to the One who had thus graciously given a door in an alien world, had graciously
10 given it to a man/ • And while he was speaking with the Holy Spirit in the hearing
of them all, he became silent, and his mind was taken up from him,1 and he did
11 not see the men who were standing before him. *His eyes indeed were open, but
12 his mouth was silent, and the mind in his body was taken up from himT *But his
13 breath was (still) in him," for he was seeing a vision. *And the angel who was
sent to show him (the vision) was not of this firmament, nor was he from the 4:2; 7:9-12;
14 angels of glory of this world, but he came from the seventh heaven. «And y^ ^ St
the people who were standing by, apart from the circle of prophets, did (not]° 9:6
is think that the holy Isaiah had been taken up. *And the vision which he saw was
16 not from this world, but from the world which is hidden from the flesh.? »And
after Isaiah had seen this vision he recounted it to Hezekiah, and to Josab his
17 son,q and to the other prophets who had come. *But the officials, and the eunuchs,
and the people did not hear, apart from Samnas the secretary, and Jehoiakim/ i:s
and Asaph the recorder,8 for they (were) doers of righteousness, and the fragrance
of the Spirit was in them; but the people did not hear, for Micah and Josab his
son had sent them out when the wisdom of this world was taken from him as if
he were dead. Isaiah's journey through the seven heavens
1 7 The vision which Isaiah saw he told to Hezekiah, and to Josab his son, and to
2 Micah, and to the other prophets; *it was as follows.*But the officials, and the eunuchs,
and the people did not hear, apart from Samnas the secretary, and Jehoiakim/ i:s
and Asaph the recorder,8 for they (were) doers of righteousness, and the fragrance
of the Spirit was in them; but the people did not hear, for Micah and Josab his
son had sent them out when the wisdom of this world was taken from him as if
he were dead. Isaiah's journey through the seven heavens
1 7 The vision which Isaiah saw he told to Hezekiah, and to Josab his son, and to
2 Micah, and to the other prophets; *it was as follows. When I prophesied in
accordance with the message which you have heard, I saw a glorious angel; his
glory* was not like the glory of the angels which I always used to see, but he had
great glory, and an office/ such that I cannot describe the glory of this angel. 3 And I saw when he took hold of me by my hand/ and I said to him, "Who are
you? And what is your name? And where are you taking me up?" For strength
4 had been given to me that I might speak with him. *And he said to me, "When
I have taken you up through (all) the stages and have shown you the vision on
account of which I was sent, then you will understand who I am; but my name
5 you will not know, -for you have to return into this body. But whered I take you 8:11,23; 9:5
6 up, you will see, because for this purpose I was sent."* »And I rejoiced because
i. Lat2, Slav add "and on his left." r. No person with this name is mentioned in the
j. The description of God, and particularly the OT as living during the reign of Hezekiah. We
phrase "the One who rests among the holy ones," might have expected the name "Eliakim" (cf. reflects the LXX text of Isa 57:15, cf. n. h on 2Kgs 18:18; Isa 36:3), but it is also possible (cf. 10:6. Lat2, Slav have a shorter text in vs. 8. Charles, Ascension, p. 46) that the text is corrupt
k. "who ...A B D "from Galilee," cf. vs. 3; Lat2, Slav
false prophet, O devil." omit. It is not clear why Gilgal should be mentioned. n. B C "Balkira"; A "Melakira"; D "Mel- c. It is not clear why there should be forty
kira." prophets; the figure is given in Eth and Greek
o. It is not clear why this particular region Legend 1:3, but is absent from Lat2, Slav. should be mentioned; it has been suggested that d. A "from Galilee," cf. vs. 1; Lat2 "from
the tradition of Elijah's association with Sidon Galgatha."
(IKgs 17:7-24) may have inspired the author at e. Lat2, Slav are much shorter than Eth in vss. this point. 3-5. p. "cup": a symbolic term for the vocation to f. CD, Lat2, Slav "he."
which Isaiah was called, cf. Mk 10:38f.; 14:36. g. Lit. "a door which (someone) opened."
q. A B C "Balkira"; D "Malkira." h. "they all. . . the Spirit [C "the Holy Spirit"]":
r. I.e. Manasseh. so Eth; Lat2, Slav "the Holy Spirit came upon
s. Vss. 15 and 16 are an editorial addition which him, and they all saw and heard the words of the
serves to link 3:13-4:22 with the narrative of the Holy Spirit." Eth seems to be dependent on the
martyrdom. corrupt Eth. text of vs. 9 and is probably secondary.

46) that the text is corrupt
k. "who ... a man": so Eth, but probably for "and Joan son of Asaph, the recorder." In the
corrupt; Lat2 (and similarly Slav) "who had given OT Asaph is not the recorder himself, but the father
such a power of words in the world." of the person who is. 1. "and his mind . . . from him": so Eth, s. "the recorder": in Eth the same expression
supported by Greek Legend 2:1; Lat2, Slav omit. that is used in the Eth. version of Isa 36:3, 22; it
m. "and the mind. . . from him": so Eth; Lat2, corresponds to what JB translates as "the herald."
Slav omit. n. "But his breath . . . him": so Eth, supported 7 a. SoB; A CD "he."
by Greek Legend 2:2; Lat2, Slav "But the inspi­ b. "and an office": so Eth, cf. 3:23: Latl, Slav
ration of the Spirit [Lat2 "Holy Spirit"] was with "but he had a great and holy glory"; Lat2 corrupt. him." Lat2, Slav omit the rest of vs. 12 and vs. c. So Eth, but the text seems corrupt; Latl "And
13. he approached and held my hand"; Lat2, Slav
o. Restoration based on Lat2, Slav. "And he took me by (my) hand and led me on
p. So D; Lat2, Slav "from all flesh"; A C high."
"which was hidden from his flesh," and similarly d. Latl, Lat2, Slav "when."
B. e. "because for this . . . was sent": Lat2, Slav
q. Lat2, Slav omit the remainder of vs. 16, vs. omit. 17, and the beginning of 7:1 by homoeoteleuton.7 he spoke to me with kindness. #And he said to me, 44 Do you rejoice because I
have spoken kindly to you?" And he said, 44You will see one greater than me,
8 how he will speak kindly and gently with you; *and the Father of the one who is
greater you will also see, because for this purpose I was sent from the seventh
heaven, that I might make all this clear to you."
The firmament
10.29-31
9 And we went up into the firmament,81 and he, and there I saw Sammaelh and his 1:8
hosts; and there was a great struggle in it, and the words of Satan, and they were 2.2
10 envying one another.' *And as above, so also on earth, for the likeness of what
11 (is) in the firmament is here on earth. *And I said to the angel, 44 What is this
12 envying?"j #And he said to me, 44So it has been ever since this world existed 4:2
until now,k and this struggle (will last) until the one comes whom you are to see,
and he will destroy him." 10:12
The first heaven 10:27
13 And after this he took me up above the firmament; this is the [first]1 heaven. 14 There I saw a throne in the middle,m and on the right and on the left of it there
15 were angels. »And [the angels on the left]" were not like the angels who stood on
the right, but those who stood on the right had more glory, and they all sang
praises with one voice. And the throne was in the middle,0 and it they praised,
and those on the left after them;P but their voice was not like the voice of those
16 on the right, nor their praise like the praise of those (on the right). »And I asked
17 the angel who led me and said to him, 4 To whom is this praise directed?"* *And
he said to me, 44To the praise of [the One who sits in]r the seventh heaven, the
One who rests in the holy world,8 and to his Beloved, from where I was sent to
you. To there it is directed."
The second heaven
io:25f.»And I asked
17 the angel who led me and said to him, 4 To whom is this praise directed?"* *And
he said to me, 44To the praise of [the One who sits in]r the seventh heaven, the
One who rests in the holy world,8 and to his Beloved, from where I was sent to
you. To there it is directed."
The second heaven
io:25f. is And again, he took me up into the second heaven, and the height of that heaven 7:28
19 is like that from heaven to earth and to the firmament.'# AiM [I saw there, as]u in
the first heaven, angels on the right and on the left,v and a throne in the middle,
and the praise of the angels who (were) in the second heaven; and the one who
20 sat on the throne in the second heaven had more glory than all (the rest). *And
f. Latl "and One more eminent than the greater in Lat2, Slav), 33, 35, 37. In Col 1:16; TLevi 3:8
one himself; Lat2, Slav differ. the word "thrones" is used absolutely as the name
g. "the firmament": the vault of the sky (cf. of a class of angels, and a similar usage is to be
Gen 1:6-8), here thought of as separating the earth found in Ascenls in 7:21, and in the Eth. version
from the seven heavens. of 7:15, 27; 8:8; 11:25 (cf. Greek Legend 2:40). h. Lat2, Slav, and Greek Legend 2:9 "Satan." n. Supplied from Latl. i. So Eth, but corrupt; read with Latl "and the o. "And the throne was in the middle": so Eth,
angels of Satan were envying one another"; Lat2, Latl; Lat2, Slav omit, cf. n. m on vs. 14. Slav differ. p. "and it they praised, and those on the left
j. Latl "What is this war, and what is this after them": so Eth; Latl "and (those) on the left
envying?"; Lat2, Slav "What is this war and blessed afterwards"; Lat2 (partially corrupt), Slav
envying and struggle?" Cf. 10:29. "and those who were on the left sang praises after
k. "So . . . now": so Eth, Latl; Lat2, Slav them."
"That war is of the devil." q. Lit. "sent."
1. Supplied from Lat2, Slav. In Ascenls heaven r.46) that the text is corrupt
k. "who ... a man": so Eth, but probably for "and Joan son of Asaph, the recorder." In the
corrupt; Lat2 (and similarly Slav) "who had given OT Asaph is not the recorder himself, but the father
such a power of words in the world." of the person who is. 1. "and his mind . . . from him": so Eth, s. "the recorder": in Eth the same expression
supported by Greek Legend 2:1; Lat2, Slav omit. that is used in the Eth. version of Isa 36:3, 22; it
m. "and the mind. . . from him": so Eth; Lat2, corresponds to what JB translates as "the herald."
Slav omit. n. "But his breath . . . him": so Eth, supported 7 a. SoB; A CD "he."
by Greek Legend 2:2; Lat2, Slav "But the inspi­ b. "and an office": so Eth, cf. 3:23: Latl, Slav
ration of the Spirit [Lat2 "Holy Spirit"] was with "but he had a great and holy glory"; Lat2 corrupt. him." Lat2, Slav omit the rest of vs. 12 and vs. c. So Eth, but the text seems corrupt; Latl "And
13. he approached and held my hand"; Lat2, Slav
o. Restoration based on Lat2, Slav. "And he took me by (my) hand and led me on
p. So D; Lat2, Slav "from all flesh"; A C high."
"which was hidden from his flesh," and similarly d. Latl, Lat2, Slav "when."
B. e. "because for this . . . was sent": Lat2, Slav
q. Lat2, Slav omit the remainder of vs. 16, vs. omit. 17, and the beginning of 7:1 by homoeoteleuton.

Supplied from Lat2, Slav. In Ascenls heaven r. Supplied from Latl; Lat2, Slav "of God who
is thought of as being divided into seven layers, is above the seventh heaven."
each one more glorious than the one below. For s. "the One who rests in the holy world [B
the idea of gradations within heaven, and particu­ "among the holy ones of the world"]": so Eth
larly for the idea of seven heavens, cf. TLevi 2:7- (cf. 6:8), but the text appears corrupt; Latl "who
3:10; cf. also 3Bar; 2Cor 12:2; Eph 4:10; Heb belongs to the everlasting age"; Lat2, Slav omit. 4:14; 7:26. t. A "from earth to heaven and to the firma­
m. Lat2, Slav, add "and on it there sat an angel ment"; Lat2, Slav "from the first heaven to earth."
in great glory." A comparable statement occurs in u. Supplied from Latl, Lat2, Slav. the Eth. version of vss. 19, 24, 27, 29, 31 (also v. Lat2, Slav omit the rest of the vs.there was great glory in the second heaven, and their praise was not like the praise
21 of those who (were) in the first heaven. #And I fell on my face to worship him,w
and the angel who led me would not let me, but said to me, "Worship neither
throne,* nor angel from the six heavens/ from where2 I was sent to lead you, Rev i9:io;
22 before I tell you in the seventh heaven.*2 #For above all the heavens and their corns
angels is placed your throne, and also your robes and your crownb2 which you are 8:i4; 9:2;
23 to see." #And I rejoiced very much that those who love the Most High and his Rev4:4
Beloved will at their end go up there through the angel of the Holy Spirit. 3:is
The third heaven
io:23f. 24 And he took me up into the third heaven, and in the same way I saw those who
(were) on the right and on the left, and there also (there was) a throne in the
middle and one who sat (on it),c2 but no mention of this world was maded2 there. 25 And I said to the angel who (was) with me, for the glory of my facee2 was being
transformed as I went up from heaven to heaven, "Nothing of the vanity of that
26 world is named here." *And he answered me, saying, "Nothing is named because
27 of its weakness, but nothing is hidden which is done there."0 *And I wished to
find out how it is known; and he answered me, saying, "When I have taken you
up into the seventh heaven, from where I was sent, to the One which (is) above 9:19-23
these, then you will know that nothing is hidden from the thrones82 and those who
dwell in the heavens, nor from the angels." And the praises which they sang and
the glory of the one who sat on the throne were great, and the angels who (were)
on the right and on the left had more glory than (those in) the heaven which (was)
below them.1,2
The fourth heaven
io:2if.24 And he took me up into the third heaven, and in the same way I saw those who
(were) on the right and on the left, and there also (there was) a throne in the
middle and one who sat (on it),c2 but no mention of this world was maded2 there. 25 And I said to the angel who (was) with me, for the glory of my facee2 was being
transformed as I went up from heaven to heaven, "Nothing of the vanity of that
26 world is named here." *And he answered me, saying, "Nothing is named because
27 of its weakness, but nothing is hidden which is done there."0 *And I wished to
find out how it is known; and he answered me, saying, "When I have taken you
up into the seventh heaven, from where I was sent, to the One which (is) above 9:19-23
these, then you will know that nothing is hidden from the thrones82 and those who
dwell in the heavens, nor from the angels." And the praises which they sang and
the glory of the one who sat on the throne were great, and the angels who (were)
on the right and on the left had more glory than (those in) the heaven which (was)
below them.1,2
The fourth heaven
io:2if. 28 And again he took me up into the fourth heaven, and the height from the third to 7:is
29 the fourth heaven was greater than (from) earth to the firmament.42 »And there I
again saw those who (were) on the right and those who (were) on the left, and
the one who sat on the throne was in the middle,'2 and there also they were singing
30 praises. 'And the praise and glory of the angels on the right was greater than that
31 of those on the left. #And again the glory of the one who sat on the throne was
greater than that of the angels who (were) on the right, but their glory (was)
greater than that of those below. The fifth heaven 10:20
32,33 And he took me up into the fifth heaven. *And again I saw those who (were) on
the right and the left, and the one who sat on the throne had more glory than
34 those of the fourth heaven.Supplied from Lat2, Slav. In Ascenls heaven r. Supplied from Latl; Lat2, Slav "of God who
is thought of as being divided into seven layers, is above the seventh heaven."
each one more glorious than the one below. For s. "the One who rests in the holy world [B
the idea of gradations within heaven, and particu­ "among the holy ones of the world"]": so Eth
larly for the idea of seven heavens, cf. TLevi 2:7- (cf. 6:8), but the text appears corrupt; Latl "who
3:10; cf. also 3Bar; 2Cor 12:2; Eph 4:10; Heb belongs to the everlasting age"; Lat2, Slav omit. 4:14; 7:26. t. A "from earth to heaven and to the firma­
m. Lat2, Slav, add "and on it there sat an angel ment"; Lat2, Slav "from the first heaven to earth."
in great glory." A comparable statement occurs in u. Supplied from Latl, Lat2, Slav. the Eth. version of vss. 19, 24, 27, 29, 31 (also v. Lat2, Slav omit the rest of the vs.

The fifth heaven 10:20
32,33 And he took me up into the fifth heaven. *And again I saw those who (were) on
the right and the left, and the one who sat on the throne had more glory than
34 those of the fourth heaven. *And the glory of those who (were) on the right was
35 greater than that of those who (were) on the left . . .k2 •The glory of the one on
36 the throne was greater than that of the angels who (were) on the right, »but their
w. I.e. the one sitting on the throne, vs. 19. defective); Lat2, Slav omit. x. See n. m on vs. 14. d2. Lit. "named."
y. Lat2 * 'of that heaven"; Slav * 'from heaven.' * e2. Lat2, Slav "spirit."
z. "from where": so Eth, but elsewhere the f2. So (C) D and similarly Slav; B (and similarly
angel is specifically said to come from the seventh Lat2) "there which is done"; A "which is done
heaven (cf. 6:13; 7:8); Lat2 "for this purpose"; here."
Slav "because this purpose." Lat2, Slav do not g2. Cf. n. m on vs. 14. make any better sense, but may go back to the h2. Lat2, Slav have a much shorter text in vs. same Gk. original as Eth. Possibly the whole clause 27. was misplaced from the end of the vs. at an early i2. "than (from) earth . . . firmament": Lat2,
stage in the transmission of the text. Slav omit. a2. Lat2 (similarly Slav) "but only the one j2. "and the one . . . middle": Lat2, Slav omit. whom I shall tell you." Lat2 also omits the rest of vs. 29 and vs. 30. b2. Traditional Christian symbols of the glorious k2. All Eth. MSS add "from the third to the
and transformed state of the righteous in heaven, fourth." These words make no sense in their
see n. p on 1:5 and notes i-k on 9:9f. context, but are perhaps a fragment of a sentence
c2. "and one who sat (on it)": so Eth (B comparable to vs. 28.37 praise was more glorious than that of the fourth heaven.12 *And I praised the One
who is not named"12 and is unique, who dwells in the heavens, whose name is 8:7; u
unknown to all flesh, the One who has given such glory to the different heavens,"2
who makes the glory of the angels great and the glory of the one who sits on the
throne (even) greater.02
The air of the sixth heaven
1 8 And again, he took me up into the air of the sixth heaven, and I saw a splendor
2 such as I had not seen in the five heavens as I went up; •the angels possessed
3,4 great glory, -and the praise there was holy and wonderful.8 -And I said to the
s angel who led me, "What (is) this which I see, my lord?" *And he said to me,°
6 4T am not your lord, but your companion." #And again I asked him, and I said Rev i9:io;
7 to him, 44Why (are there) not corresponding groups of angels? "e #And he said to 22:8f
me,d "From the sixth heaven and upwards there are no longer those on the left,'
nor is there a throne placed in the middle, but [they are directed]f by the power of
the seventh heaven, where the One who is not named dwells, and his Chosen 7:37
8 One,« whose name is unknown, and no heaven can learn his name;h »for he is isa 42:i;
alone, (he) whose voice all the heavens and thrones answer.1 I, therefore, have ^Entixf^^'
9 been empowered and sent to bring you up here that you may see this glory, »and
10 (that) you may see the LORD of all these* heavens and of these thronesk •being
u transformed until he resembles your appearance and your likeness.1 #But I say to 10:8-10
you, Isaiah, that no man who has to return into a body of that world [has come 7:5; 8:23; 9:5
12 up, or seen],"1 or understood what you have seen" •and what you are to see, for ii:34
you are destined in the lot of the LORD, the lot of the tree,0 to come here, and
13 from there is the power of the sixth heaven and of the air."° #And I proclaimed
the greatness of my LORD with praise, that through his lot I should come here.37 praise was more glorious than that of the fourth heaven.12 *And I praised the One
who is not named"12 and is unique, who dwells in the heavens, whose name is 8:7; u
unknown to all flesh, the One who has given such glory to the different heavens,"2
who makes the glory of the angels great and the glory of the one who sits on the
throne (even) greater.02
The air of the sixth heaven
1 8 And again, he took me up into the air of the sixth heaven, and I saw a splendor
2 such as I had not seen in the five heavens as I went up; •the angels possessed
3,4 great glory, -and the praise there was holy and wonderful.8 -And I said to the
s angel who led me, "What (is) this which I see, my lord?" *And he said to me,°
6 4T am not your lord, but your companion." #And again I asked him, and I said Rev i9:io;
7 to him, 44Why (are there) not corresponding groups of angels? "e #And he said to 22:8f
me,d "From the sixth heaven and upwards there are no longer those on the left,'
nor is there a throne placed in the middle, but [they are directed]f by the power of
the seventh heaven, where the One who is not named dwells, and his Chosen 7:37
8 One,« whose name is unknown, and no heaven can learn his name;h »for he is isa 42:i;
alone, (he) whose voice all the heavens and thrones answer.1 I, therefore, have ^Entixf^^'
9 been empowered and sent to bring you up here that you may see this glory, »and
10 (that) you may see the LORD of all these* heavens and of these thronesk •being
u transformed until he resembles your appearance and your likeness.1 #But I say to 10:8-10
you, Isaiah, that no man who has to return into a body of that world [has come 7:5; 8:23; 9:5
12 up, or seen],"1 or understood what you have seen" •and what you are to see, for ii:34
you are destined in the lot of the LORD, the lot of the tree,0 to come here, and
13 from there is the power of the sixth heaven and of the air."° #And I proclaimed
the greatness of my LORD with praise, that through his lot I should come here. 14 And he said to me,q 44Hear then this also from your companion: [when from the
body by the will of God you have come up here]/ then you will receive the robe8 7.22; 9.2
which you will see, and also other numbered robes placed (there) you will see, 9:24f."e #And he said to 22:8f
me,d "From the sixth heaven and upwards there are no longer those on the left,'
nor is there a throne placed in the middle, but [they are directed]f by the power of
the seventh heaven, where the One who is not named dwells, and his Chosen 7:37
8 One,« whose name is unknown, and no heaven can learn his name;h »for he is isa 42:i;
alone, (he) whose voice all the heavens and thrones answer.1 I, therefore, have ^Entixf^^'
9 been empowered and sent to bring you up here that you may see this glory, »and
10 (that) you may see the LORD of all these* heavens and of these thronesk •being
u transformed until he resembles your appearance and your likeness.1 #But I say to 10:8-10
you, Isaiah, that no man who has to return into a body of that world [has come 7:5; 8:23; 9:5
12 up, or seen],"1 or understood what you have seen" •and what you are to see, for ii:34
you are destined in the lot of the LORD, the lot of the tree,0 to come here, and
13 from there is the power of the sixth heaven and of the air."° #And I proclaimed
the greatness of my LORD with praise, that through his lot I should come here. 14 And he said to me,q 44Hear then this also from your companion: [when from the
body by the will of God you have come up here]/ then you will receive the robe8 7.22; 9.2
which you will see, and also other numbered robes placed (there) you will see, 9:24f. 15 and then you will be equal to the angels who (are) in the seventh heaven."
12. Vss. 33-36 are considerably abbreviated in Rev 19:12. [Also see PrJac, introduced and trans­
Lat2, Slav. lated elsewhere in this collection. —J.H.C.]
m2. The thought is that the name of God is too i. Lat2, Slav "And all the heavens and his
sacred to be uttered by men. angels hear him."
n2. Lit. "from heaven to heaven." j. A "those"; B "the."
o2. Lat2, Slav differ considerably in vs. 37; in k.The fifth heaven 10:20
32,33 And he took me up into the fifth heaven. *And again I saw those who (were) on
the right and the left, and the one who sat on the throne had more glory than
34 those of the fourth heaven. *And the glory of those who (were) on the right was
35 greater than that of those who (were) on the left . . .k2 •The glory of the one on
36 the throne was greater than that of the angels who (were) on the right, »but their
w. I.e. the one sitting on the throne, vs. 19. defective); Lat2, Slav omit. x. See n. m on vs. 14. d2. Lit. "named."
y. Lat2 * 'of that heaven"; Slav * 'from heaven.' * e2. Lat2, Slav "spirit."
z. "from where": so Eth, but elsewhere the f2. So (C) D and similarly Slav; B (and similarly
angel is specifically said to come from the seventh Lat2) "there which is done"; A "which is done
heaven (cf. 6:13; 7:8); Lat2 "for this purpose"; here."
Slav "because this purpose." Lat2, Slav do not g2. Cf. n. m on vs. 14. make any better sense, but may go back to the h2. Lat2, Slav have a much shorter text in vs. same Gk. original as Eth. Possibly the whole clause 27. was misplaced from the end of the vs. at an early i2. "than (from) earth . . . firmament": Lat2,
stage in the transmission of the text. Slav omit. a2. Lat2 (similarly Slav) "but only the one j2. "and the one . . . middle": Lat2, Slav omit. whom I shall tell you." Lat2 also omits the rest of vs. 29 and vs. 30. b2. Traditional Christian symbols of the glorious k2. All Eth. MSS add "from the third to the
and transformed state of the righteous in heaven, fourth." These words make no sense in their
see n. p on 1:5 and notes i-k on 9:9f. context, but are perhaps a fragment of a sentence
c2. "and one who sat (on it)": so Eth (B comparable to vs. 28.

Lat2, Slav differ considerably in vs. 37; in k. Lat2, Slav "of all the heavens, and his [Slav
particular, Isaiah does not himself praise God, but "the"] angels and powers."
marvels at the sight of the angels praising him. 1. Lat2, Slav omit vs. 10. m. Correction based on Greek Legend 2:29; Eth
8 a. "wonderful": so D, Lat2, Slav; ABC "has seen this, or come up."
corrupt. n. B "see"; A "have understood."
b. "to me": so B D, Lat2, Slav; A C omit. 0. "the lot of the tree [i.e. the cross]": lacking
c. Lit. "companions of angels." The meaning in Lat2, Slav, and probably a gloss making explicit
of the question is clarified by the following vs.: the link between the martyrdom of Isaiah and the
why is there no longer one group of angels on the crucifixion of Jesus which is indicated in the phrase
left and one on the right? Lat2, Slav omit vs. 6. "the lot of the Lord," cf. 1:13. d. "to me": so C (corrected reading) D, Lat2, p. "and from there . . . the air": a gloss based
Slav; ABC (original reading) omit. on a misunderstanding of vs. 7, lacking in Lat2,
e. D adds "or right." Slav. f. Supplied from Lat2, Slav. q. "to me": so D, Lat2, Slav; ABC omit. g. "where the One ... and his [B C D "the"] r. "when . . . here": correction based on Lat2,
Chosen One": so Eth; Lat2, Slav corrupt; Lat2 Slav; A (and virtually C) "when from (your) alien
"where the bounteous [?] son of God is"; Slav body by the angel of the spirit you have come up
"where that famous one is and his only begotten here" (cf. 7:23); B "when in an alien body the
son." God of the spirit has brought you up here"; D
h. "whose name ... his name": Lat2, Slav "when from (your) alien body the God of the spirit
omit, cf. 7:37. If genuine, these clauses perhaps you have come up here."
refer to a secret name of the Chosen One, cf. 9:5; s. Lat2, Slav omit the rest of vs. 14.The sixth heaven
10:17-19
16 And he took me up into the sixth heaven, and there were none on the left,1 nor a
throne in the middle, but all (were) of one appearance, and their praise (was)
17 equal. »And (strength) was given to me, and I also sang praises with them, and
is that angel also, and our praise was like theirs. *And there they all named the
primalu Father and hisv Beloved, Christ, and the Holy Spirit,* all with one voice,
19,20 but it was not like the voice of the angels who (were) in the five heavens, #nor
(was it) like their speech, but there was a different voice there, and there was
21 much light there. *And then, when I was in the sixth heaven, I thought that light
22 which I had seen in the five heavens darkness. *And I rejoiced and praised the
23 One who has graciously given such light to those who await his promise.* #And A«S 1*
I entreated the angel who led me that from then on I should not return to the
24 world of flesh. •Indeed I say to you, Hezekiah and Josab, my son, and Micah/ 7:5; 8:ii;9:5
25 that there is much darkness here. • And the angel who led me knew what I thought
and said to me/ "If you rejoice over this light, how much more (will you rejoice)
in the seventh heaven when you see the light where the LORD is and his Beloved82—
26 from where I was sent—who is to be called in the world the Son! »He who is to
be in the corruptible world has not (yet) been revealed/2 nor the robes, nor the
thrones, nor the crowns which are placed (there) for the righteous, for those who 7=22; 9:9t
believe in that LORD who will descend in your form.• And the angel who led me knew what I thought
and said to me/ "If you rejoice over this light, how much more (will you rejoice)
in the seventh heaven when you see the light where the LORD is and his Beloved82—
26 from where I was sent—who is to be called in the world the Son! »He who is to
be in the corruptible world has not (yet) been revealed/2 nor the robes, nor the
thrones, nor the crowns which are placed (there) for the righteous, for those who 7=22; 9:9t
believe in that LORD who will descend in your form. For the light which (is) there
27 (is) great and wonderful/2 #But as regards your not returning into the body, your
28 days are not yet complete for coming here." *And when I heard (this), I was sad; 11:35
and he said to me,*12 "Do not be sad."
The air of the seventh heaven
1 9 And he led me into the air of the seventh heaven, and moreover I heard a voice
saying, "How far is he who dwells among aliens3 to go up?" And I was afraid
2 and was trembling. *And he said to me when I was trembling, "Behold! From
there another voice which was sent out has come, and it says/ 'The holy Isaiah
3 is permitted to come up here, for his robe is here/ " «And I asked the angel who 7:22; 8:i4
(was) with me and said, "Who is the one who prevented me, and who is this one
4 who turned to me that I might go up?"c »And he said to me, "The one who
prevented you, this is the one [who (is) in charge of]d the praise of the sixth
5 heaven. «And the one who turned to you/ this is your LORD, the LORD, the LORD
t. D adds "or the right"; Lat2, Slav "no angels Lat2, Slav do not have the clause, cf. n. w on vs. on the right or left." 18. u. "primal": C omits, c2. "forthose. . . wonderful": Lat2, Slav omit. v. BCD "the." d2. "to me": so C D, Slav; A B omit; Lat2
w. Lat2, Slav "they praised the Father of all defective. and his [Slav "the"] Beloved Son and the Holy
Spirit." Lat2, Slav do not mention the name 9 a. Lat2, Slav, and Greek Legend 2:23 "in the
"Christ" (cf.Lat2, Slav differ considerably in vs. 37; in k. Lat2, Slav "of all the heavens, and his [Slav
particular, Isaiah does not himself praise God, but "the"] angels and powers."
marvels at the sight of the angels praising him. 1. Lat2, Slav omit vs. 10. m. Correction based on Greek Legend 2:29; Eth
8 a. "wonderful": so D, Lat2, Slav; ABC "has seen this, or come up."
corrupt. n. B "see"; A "have understood."
b. "to me": so B D, Lat2, Slav; A C omit. 0. "the lot of the tree [i.e. the cross]": lacking
c. Lit. "companions of angels." The meaning in Lat2, Slav, and probably a gloss making explicit
of the question is clarified by the following vs.: the link between the martyrdom of Isaiah and the
why is there no longer one group of angels on the crucifixion of Jesus which is indicated in the phrase
left and one on the right? Lat2, Slav omit vs. 6. "the lot of the Lord," cf. 1:13. d. "to me": so C (corrected reading) D, Lat2, p. "and from there . . . the air": a gloss based
Slav; ABC (original reading) omit. on a misunderstanding of vs. 7, lacking in Lat2,
e. D adds "or right." Slav. f. Supplied from Lat2, Slav. q. "to me": so D, Lat2, Slav; ABC omit. g. "where the One ... and his [B C D "the"] r. "when . . . here": correction based on Lat2,
Chosen One": so Eth; Lat2, Slav corrupt; Lat2 Slav; A (and virtually C) "when from (your) alien
"where the bounteous [?] son of God is"; Slav body by the angel of the spirit you have come up
"where that famous one is and his only begotten here" (cf. 7:23); B "when in an alien body the
son." God of the spirit has brought you up here"; D
h. "whose name ... his name": Lat2, Slav "when from (your) alien body the God of the spirit
omit, cf. 7:37. If genuine, these clauses perhaps you have come up here."
refer to a secret name of the Chosen One, cf. 9:5; s. Lat2, Slav omit the rest of vs. 14.

and his [Slav "the"] Beloved Son and the Holy
Spirit." Lat2, Slav do not mention the name 9 a. Lat2, Slav, and Greek Legend 2:23 "in the
"Christ" (cf. 9:5, 13, 17; 10:7) or "Jesus" (cf. flesh."
9:5; 10:7). But Greek Legend 2:37 supports Eth in b. Lat2, Slav (and similarly Greek Legend 2:23)
10:7. "And again I heard another voice saying." In Eth
x. Lat2, Slav "such joy [Slav "such things"] "he said to me" is awkward and probably an
to those who receive his mercy." addition; this suggests that Eth originally read "And
y. "Hezekiah . . . Micah": Lat2, Slav omit. when I was trembling, behold from there another
z. "to me": so D, Lat2, Slav; ABC omit. voice . . . came, and it said." D adds "to me"
a2. Lat2, Slav "the heavenly Father sits and his after "has come/came," which points to such a
only begotten Son." text. b2. "from where I was sent. . . been revealed": c. So Eth, but a misunderstanding of the under­
Lat2, Slav omit, and the whole (or at least the lying Gk., which ought to have been rendered
beginning of vs. 26) is probably an interpolation; "who permitted me to go up" (cf. Greek Legend
if it has all been interpolated, the passage would 2:24). have originally read, "where the Lord is and his d. Correction based on Lat2, Slav, and Greek
Beloved, and also the robes and the thrones and Legend 2:25; Eth "on whom (is)."
the crowns which ..." For "who is to be called e. See n. c on vs. 3. ... the Son" cf. 9:5, 13; 10:7; in all these passagesChrist, who is to be called in the world Jesus/ but you cannot hear his name8
until you have come up from this body." 7:5; 8:ii, 23
The seventh heaven
6 And he took me up into the seventh heaven, and there I saw a wonderful light,
7 and also angels without number. #And there I saw all the righteous from the time
8,9 of Adam onwards. *And there I saw the holy Abel and all the righteous. *And
there I saw Enoch and all who (were) with him,h stripped of (their) robes of the
flesh; and I saw them in their robes of above,1 and they were like the angels who
10 stand there in great glory. •But they were not sitting on their thrones,j nor were
11 their crowns of gloryk on them. #And I asked the angel who (was) with me,1 7:22; 8:26; 9:18,
"How is it that they have received these robes, but are not on (their) thrones nor Wf; 11:40
12 in (their) crowns?" »And he said to me, "They do not receive the crowns and
thrones of glory—nevertheless, they do see and know whose (will be) the thrones
and whose the crowns—until the Beloved descends in the form in which you will
13 see him descend. •The LORD will indeed descend into the world"1 in the last days,
(he) who is to be called Christ after he has descended and become like you in
14 form," and they will think that he is flesh and a man.° *And the god of that world
will stretch out [his hand against the Son],? and they will lay their hands upon
is him and hang him upon a tree,* not knowing who he is. *And thus his descent,
as you will see, will be concealed even from the heavens so that it will not be
16 known who he is.r #And when he has plundered the angel8 of death, he will rise' 10:8,10, K;
on the third day" and will remain in that world for five hundred and forty-five !pet9i:i8-20;
17 days.v #And then many of the righteous will ascend with him, whose spirits do Mt27:52f.and they will lay their hands upon
is him and hang him upon a tree,* not knowing who he is. *And thus his descent,
as you will see, will be concealed even from the heavens so that it will not be
16 known who he is.r #And when he has plundered the angel8 of death, he will rise' 10:8,10, K;
on the third day" and will remain in that world for five hundred and forty-five !pet9i:i8-20;
17 days.v #And then many of the righteous will ascend with him, whose spirits do Mt27:52f. not receive (their) robes until the LORD Christ ascends and they ascend with him.w
18 Then indeed they will receive their robes andx their thrones and their crowns,
when he has ascended into the seventh heaven."
f. "this is your Lord . . . Jesus": Lat2, Slav 8:25f. "this is the Son of God," cf. n. w on 8:18 and n. p. Correction based on Lat2 (which adds "of
b2 on 8:25f. God"); Eth "by the hand of his son"; Slav corrupt. g. Apparently a reference to a secret name of q. "and they wUI lay ... a tree": Lat2, Slav
Jesus, cf. 8:7; Rev 19:12. If not, it is necessary to "and he will hang him upon a tree and kill him"
assume that all the references to "Jesus" and (Slav "and they will hang ... and he will kill
"Christ" in chs. 6-11 are secondary. him"). h. For vss. 7-9a Lat2, Slav have only "And I r. Lat2 (and similarly Slav) "And he will de­
saw certain righteous men," but Greek Legend scend into hell and make it and all the phantoms
2:27 supports Eth. of hell desolate." Lat2, Slav differ considerably
i. The heavenly robes of the righteous symbolize from Eth in vss. 15-17. their transformed state; they are mentioned else­ s. Or "prince."
where in 1:5; 3:25; 4:16f.; 7:22; 8:14, 26; 9:2, t. Lit. "ascend."
17f., 24-26; 11:40. Cf. Rev 3:4f.; 6:11; 7:9, 13f.; u. Lat2 (and similarly Slav) "And he wiU seize
4Ezra 2:39, 44f.; 2Cor 5:1-4. the prince of death, and will plunder him, and will
j.and his [Slav "the"] Beloved Son and the Holy
Spirit." Lat2, Slav do not mention the name 9 a. Lat2, Slav, and Greek Legend 2:23 "in the
"Christ" (cf. 9:5, 13, 17; 10:7) or "Jesus" (cf. flesh."
9:5; 10:7). But Greek Legend 2:37 supports Eth in b. Lat2, Slav (and similarly Greek Legend 2:23)
10:7. "And again I heard another voice saying." In Eth
x. Lat2, Slav "such joy [Slav "such things"] "he said to me" is awkward and probably an
to those who receive his mercy." addition; this suggests that Eth originally read "And
y. "Hezekiah . . . Micah": Lat2, Slav omit. when I was trembling, behold from there another
z. "to me": so D, Lat2, Slav; ABC omit. voice . . . came, and it said." D adds "to me"
a2. Lat2, Slav "the heavenly Father sits and his after "has come/came," which points to such a
only begotten Son." text. b2. "from where I was sent. . . been revealed": c. So Eth, but a misunderstanding of the under­
Lat2, Slav omit, and the whole (or at least the lying Gk., which ought to have been rendered
beginning of vs. 26) is probably an interpolation; "who permitted me to go up" (cf. Greek Legend
if it has all been interpolated, the passage would 2:24). have originally read, "where the Lord is and his d. Correction based on Lat2, Slav, and Greek
Beloved, and also the robes and the thrones and Legend 2:25; Eth "on whom (is)."
the crowns which ..." For "who is to be called e. See n. c on vs. 3. ... the Son" cf. 9:5, 13; 10:7; in all these passages

Lat2 (and similarly Slav) "And he wiU seize
4Ezra 2:39, 44f.; 2Cor 5:1-4. the prince of death, and will plunder him, and will
j. The thrones symbolize that the righteous dead crush all his powers, and will rise on the third
in heaven share in the reign of the Lord, cf. Rev day."
3:21; 4:4; Mt 19:28; Lk 22:30. v. "and wUI remain . . . days": Lat2, Slav omit
k. In the ancient world victorious athletes were and the words may be an addition to the text. The
crowned. In a Christian context crowns are symbols belief that Jesus remained on the earth after the
of the reward which Christians who are faithful are resurrection for 545 days is apparently taken from
to enjoy in heaven, cf. Rev 2:10; 3:11; 4:4; ICor gnostic sources; Irenaeus (Adversus haereses 1.3:2;
9:25; 2Tim 4:7f.; Jas 1:12; IPet 5:4; 4Ezra 2:43- 30:14 [PG, vol. 7, cols. 469f., 703]) states that
45; ShepHerm Similitudes 8:2, 1 and 3, 6. both the Valentinians and the Ophites believed that
1. "who (was) with me": so Eth, but D adds Jesus remained with the disciples after the resur­
"and I said to him"; Lat2, Slav "and I said." rection for eighteen months (i.e. approximately 545
m. "into the world": BCD omit. days). n. Lit. "like your form." w. Lat2 (and similarly Slav) "having certain
o. For vss. 12f. Slav (and similarly the corrupt righteous men with him, and will send his preachers
Lat2) reads "And he said to me, 'They do not into the whole world [cf. 3:17f.; 11:22], and will
receive these until this Son of God first descends; ascend into heaven." For the reference in Eth to
nevertheless, they know whose will be [lit. "are"] Christ cf. n. w on 8:18. the thrones and whose the crowns when he descends x. "their robes and": Lat2, Slav omit. Mention
and is like you in form [lit. "like your form"].' " of the robes is unexpected in what is intended as
For "who is to be called Christ" cf. n. b2 on an answer to the question of vs. 11; it was includedThe record of men's deeds
19,20 And I said to him what I had asked him in the third heaven, •["Show me how
21 everything]y which is done in that world is known here." *And while I was still
speaking to him, behold one of the angels who were standing by, more glorious
22 than that angel2 who had brought me up from the world, •showed me (some)
books,*2 but not like the books of this world/2 and he opened them, and the books
had writing in them, but not like the books of this world. And they were given
to me, and I read them, and behold the deeds of the children of Israel*2 were
23 written there, their deeds which you know, my son Josab.d2 #And I said, "Truly,
nothing which is done in this world is hidden in the seventh heaven. "e2
The robes and thrones and crowns
24,25 And I saw many robes placed there, and many thrones and many crowns, «and I 7:22; 9:9f. said to the angel who led me, "Whose (are) these robes and thrones and crowns?"
26 And he said to me, "As for these robes, there are many from that world who
will receive (them)*2 through believing in the words of that one who will be named
as I have told you/2 and they will keep them, and believe in them/2 and believe
in his cross; [for them (are) these]12 placed (here)." 3:i8
The worship of the Lord
27 And I saw one standing (there) whose glory surpassed that of all ,j2 and his glory
28 was great and wonderful. -And when theyk2 saw him, all the righteous whom 1
had seen and the angels12 came to him. And Adam and Abel and Seth and all the
righteous approached first and worshiped him, and they all praised him with one
voice, and I also was singing praises with them, and my praise was like theirs.1"2
29.30 And then all the angels approached, and"2 worshiped, and sang praises. *And he
31 was transformed and became like an angel.02 *And then the angel who led me
32 said to me, "Worship this one," and I worshiped and sang praises.And Adam and Abel and Seth and all the
righteous approached first and worshiped him, and they all praised him with one
voice, and I also was singing praises with them, and my praise was like theirs.1"2
29.30 And then all the angels approached, and"2 worshiped, and sang praises. *And he
31 was transformed and became like an angel.02 *And then the angel who led me
32 said to me, "Worship this one," and I worshiped and sang praises. #And the
angel said to me, "This is the LORD of all the praise which you have seen."
because both the righteous who are already in 6-11 to which this statement might refer, and vs. heaven (vss. 7-12) and the righteous who ascend 26 is no longer an answer to vs. 25. with Christ (vs. 17) are in mind in Eth. g2. "who will . . . told you": so Eth, cf. vs. y. Correction based on Lat2, Slav; Eth "and he 5; Lat2, Slav "about whom I told you." Lat2,
said to me, 'Everything.' " Slav omit the rest of vs. 26. z. Lit. "more glorious than the glory of that h2. BCD "him."
angel." i2. Correction; A C "but for them (they are)";
a2. Lat2, Slav "a book" (and consequently B D "for whom (they are)."
singular for plural in the rest of the vs). j2. "one standing . . . of all": Lat2, Slav "the
b2. "but not . . . this world": lacking in Lat2, Lord in great glory."
Slav, and probably a doublet. k2. A "I."
c2. "of the children of Israel": Lat2, Slav "of 12. A adds "whom I had seen"; D "all the
Jerusalem." righteous and the angels whom [I] had seen."
d2. "and their deeds . . . Josab": so Eth; Slav m2. Lat2, Slav are much shorter than Eth in
"and I saw the deeds of men whom I did not vss. 27f. and omit mention of Adam, Abel, and
know"; Lat2 corrupt, but refers to "the deeds of Seth; cf. n. h on vs. 9. all men." n2. Lat2, Slav "And then [Lat2 omits "then"]
e2. Lat2, Slav add "And I asked the angel, Michael approached and worshiped, and with him
'Who is that person who is pre-eminent over all all the angels"; cf. n. e2 on vs. 23.Lat2 (and similarly Slav) "And he wiU seize
4Ezra 2:39, 44f.; 2Cor 5:1-4. the prince of death, and will plunder him, and will
j. The thrones symbolize that the righteous dead crush all his powers, and will rise on the third
in heaven share in the reign of the Lord, cf. Rev day."
3:21; 4:4; Mt 19:28; Lk 22:30. v. "and wUI remain . . . days": Lat2, Slav omit
k. In the ancient world victorious athletes were and the words may be an addition to the text. The
crowned. In a Christian context crowns are symbols belief that Jesus remained on the earth after the
of the reward which Christians who are faithful are resurrection for 545 days is apparently taken from
to enjoy in heaven, cf. Rev 2:10; 3:11; 4:4; ICor gnostic sources; Irenaeus (Adversus haereses 1.3:2;
9:25; 2Tim 4:7f.; Jas 1:12; IPet 5:4; 4Ezra 2:43- 30:14 [PG, vol. 7, cols. 469f., 703]) states that
45; ShepHerm Similitudes 8:2, 1 and 3, 6. both the Valentinians and the Ophites believed that
1. "who (was) with me": so Eth, but D adds Jesus remained with the disciples after the resur­
"and I said to him"; Lat2, Slav "and I said." rection for eighteen months (i.e. approximately 545
m. "into the world": BCD omit. days). n. Lit. "like your form." w. Lat2 (and similarly Slav) "having certain
o. For vss. 12f. Slav (and similarly the corrupt righteous men with him, and will send his preachers
Lat2) reads "And he said to me, 'They do not into the whole world [cf. 3:17f.; 11:22], and will
receive these until this Son of God first descends; ascend into heaven." For the reference in Eth to
nevertheless, they know whose will be [lit. "are"] Christ cf. n. w on 8:18. the thrones and whose the crowns when he descends x. "their robes and": Lat2, Slav omit. Mention
and is like you in form [lit. "like your form"].' " of the robes is unexpected in what is intended as
For "who is to be called Christ" cf. n. b2 on an answer to the question of vs. 11; it was included

e2 on vs. 23. [Slav omits "all"] the angels in his glory?' And o2. The meaning seems to be that the appearance
he answered and said to me, "That [Slav "That of Jesus was transformed for the sake of Isaiah (cf. pre-eminent angel"] is the great angel [Slav "arch­ vss. 33, 37). Lat2, Slav (preferred by some com­
angel"] Michael, ever praying on behalf of mentators) read "And again I was transformed and
humanity.' " Cf. Lat2, Slav in vss. 29, 42. became like an angel [Lat2 "the angels"]." But
f2. Lat2 (and similarly Slav) "These robes many the transformation of Isaiah took place progres­
from that world will lose." On this text the one in sively as he ascended from heaven to heaven (7:25),
whose words they believe is presumably meant to and mention of it here comes too late; in any case,
be the Antichrist, but there is then nothing in chs. the easier reading "I" is unlikely to be original.The worship of the angel of the Holy Spirit
33 And while I was still speaking,p2 I saw another glorious (person) who was like
him, and the righteous approached him, and worshiped, and sang praises, and I
also sang praises with them; but his glory**2 was not transformed to accord with'2
34,35 their form. *And then the angels approached and worshiped him.82 *And I saw
36 the LORD and the second angel, and they were standing, «and the second one
whom I saw (was) on the left of my LORD. And I asked the angel who led me
and I said to him,12 "Who is this one?" And he said to me, "Worship him, for
this is the angel of the Holy Spirit who has spoken"2 in you and also in the other v.i
righteous. "v2
The worship of God
37 And I saw the Great Glory while the eyes of my spirit were open, but I could not
thereafter see,w2 nor the angel who (was) with me, nor any of the angels whom I
38 had seen worship my LORD. »But I saw the righteous as they beheld with great
39 power*2 the glory of that one. *And myy2 LORD approached me, and the angel of
the Spirit, and said,12 "See how it has been given to you to see the LORD,*3 and
(how) because of you power has been given to the angel who (is) with you."
40 And I saw how my LORD and the angel of the Holy Spirit worshiped and b3 both
41 together praised the LORD.c3 • And then all the righteous approached and worshiped,d3
42 and the angelse3 approached and worshiped, and all the angels sang praises. The worship of the Father by the six lower heavens
1 10 And then I heard the voices and the hymns of praise which I had heard in
2 each of the six heavens—which I had heard as I ascended8 there;b *and all (the
voices and hymns of praise) were directed to that Glorious Onec whose glory I 7:i6f. 3 could not see.d #And I also heard and saw the praise (which was directed to) him, 9:37
4 and the LORD and the angel of the Spirit heard everything and saw everything.6
5 And all the praise which was sent (up) from the six heavens was not only heard,
p2.The worship of the Father by the six lower heavens
1 10 And then I heard the voices and the hymns of praise which I had heard in
2 each of the six heavens—which I had heard as I ascended8 there;b *and all (the
voices and hymns of praise) were directed to that Glorious Onec whose glory I 7:i6f. 3 could not see.d #And I also heard and saw the praise (which was directed to) him, 9:37
4 and the LORD and the angel of the Spirit heard everything and saw everything.6
5 And all the praise which was sent (up) from the six heavens was not only heard,
p2. Slav "while he was still speaking"; Lat2 dead, but not the angels, can look at the glory of
omits. God, cf. Rev. 22:4; for the privileged position of
q2. "his glory": so Eth; Lat2, Slav "he." The the righteous cf. also vss. 28, 33, 41. glory of the Holy Spirit was not such that it needed y2. BCD "the."
transformation for the sake of Isaiah; contrast vs. z2. C D add "to me."
30. However, some commentators would emend a3. Apparently an allusion to the momentary
the text to read "my glory." vision of God which, according to Eth in vs. 37,
r2. Lit. "according to." Isaiah was granted. s2. "him": so B, Lat2, Slav; A C D omit. Slav b3. BCD "how he worshiped my Lord and
adds "And the angel said to me, 'Worship him the angel of the Spirit, and they."
and sing praises.' And I worshiped him and sang c3. For vss. 39f. Lat2 (similarly Slav) has only
praises." Lat2 adds the second sentence. "And first my Lord approached, and the spiritual
t2. "the angel ... to him": so D; A B omit; angel, and they worshiped him and [both] together
C "him." For vss. 35, 36a Lat2, Slav read "And sang praises."
again I saw the other one in great glory. And I d3. A C D add by mistake "and all the righ­
asked the angel who was walking [Lat2 "And teous" (C without "and"); B omits these words
walking, I asked the angel"]." by homoeoteleuton together with the preceding
u2. Lat2, Slav "speaks." "approached and worshiped."
v2. Vss. 35f.e2 on vs. 23. [Slav omits "all"] the angels in his glory?' And o2. The meaning seems to be that the appearance
he answered and said to me, "That [Slav "That of Jesus was transformed for the sake of Isaiah (cf. pre-eminent angel"] is the great angel [Slav "arch­ vss. 33, 37). Lat2, Slav (preferred by some com­
angel"] Michael, ever praying on behalf of mentators) read "And again I was transformed and
humanity.' " Cf. Lat2, Slav in vss. 29, 42. became like an angel [Lat2 "the angels"]." But
f2. Lat2 (and similarly Slav) "These robes many the transformation of Isaiah took place progres­
from that world will lose." On this text the one in sively as he ascended from heaven to heaven (7:25),
whose words they believe is presumably meant to and mention of it here comes too late; in any case,
be the Antichrist, but there is then nothing in chs. the easier reading "I" is unlikely to be original.

Vss. 35f. were used by the heretic Hieracas e3. Lat2, Slav include a reference to Michael,
according to Epiphanius {AdvHaer 67:3), who cf. n. e2 on vs. 23. quotes them. The text of Epiphanius is fuller than
that of Eth and of Lat2, Slav, and contains elements 10 a. "as I ascended": B "ascending."
which only occur separately in the two textual b. Lat2, Slav corrupt, but Lat2 points to a text
traditions. See "Composite Character of the As­ "which I had heard in the six heavens, ascending
cension," and n. 29. and being heard in the seventh heaven."
w2. Lat2, Slav "And after these things another c. Lat2, Slav "And all praised that One"; D
indescribable glory was revealed which, although "and all praised that Glorious One."
the eyes of my spirit were open, I could not see." d. D adds "to him (the praise) was directed."
x2. Lat2, Slav "in great glory." The righteous e. Lat2, Slav omit vss. 3f.6 but seen. 'And I heard the angel who led me, and he said to me/ "This is the
Most High of the high ones, who dwells in the holy world/ who rests among the
holy ones/ who will be called1 by the Holy Spirit in the mouth of the righteous
the Father of the LORD."
The Lord Christ is commissioned by the Father
7 And I heard the voice of the Most High, the Father of my LORD, as he said to
8 my LORD Christ, who will be called Jesus,j #"Go out and descend through all the
heavens. You shall descend through the firmament and through that world as far
9 as the angel who (is) in Sheol/ but you shall not go as far as Perdition.1 *And 9:i6; io:io, 14;
10 you shall make your likeness like that of all who (are) in the five heavens,"1 *and 11:19
you shall take care to make your form like that of the angels of the firmament
n and also (like that) of the angels who (are) in Sheol." »And none of the angels0
of that world shall know that you (are) LORD with me of the seven heavens and icor 2:8
12 of their angels. And they shall not know that you (are) with me •whenP with the
voice of the heavensq I summon you/ and their angels and their lights,5 and when Ps 50:4
I lift up (my voice)1 to the sixth heaven, that you may judge and destroy the 7:12
princes and the angels and the gods of that world, and the world which is ruled
13 by them/ *for they have denied me and said, 4We alone are, and there is no one
14 besides us.' #And afterwards you shall ascend from the gods of death to your 4:6
place/ and you shall not be transformed in each of the heavens, but in glory you 10:8
is shall ascend and sit at my right hand, *and then the princes and the powers of 1132
16 that world* will worship you." •This command I heard the Great Glory giving to ^372:10
my LORD. The descent of the Lord through the seven heavens
17 And thus* I saw when my LORD went out from the seventh heaven into the sixth
is heaven.And they shall not know that you (are) with me •whenP with the
voice of the heavensq I summon you/ and their angels and their lights,5 and when Ps 50:4
I lift up (my voice)1 to the sixth heaven, that you may judge and destroy the 7:12
princes and the angels and the gods of that world, and the world which is ruled
13 by them/ *for they have denied me and said, 4We alone are, and there is no one
14 besides us.' #And afterwards you shall ascend from the gods of death to your 4:6
place/ and you shall not be transformed in each of the heavens, but in glory you 10:8
is shall ascend and sit at my right hand, *and then the princes and the powers of 1132
16 that world* will worship you." •This command I heard the Great Glory giving to ^372:10
my LORD. The descent of the Lord through the seven heavens
17 And thus* I saw when my LORD went out from the seventh heaven into the sixth
is heaven. «And the angel who had led me from thisy world was with me, and he
said to me, "Understand, Isaiah, and look, that you may see the transformation
f. "to me": A B omit. commentators have thought the text unintelligible
g. Lat2, Slav "This is the one eternal (being), and have emended it to read "And they shall not
who dwells in the high world." know that you (are) with me until"; a simpler
h. The description of God is based on the LXX alternative would be to omit the negative: "But
text of Isa 57:15, cf. n. j on 6:8. Lat2, Slav add they shall know that you (are) with me when."
"whose name and appearance we cannot endure." For Lat2, Slav see n. u. C has "then" for "when"
i. Lat2, Slav "who is praised" and omit "the in both places in vs. 12. Father of the Lord." q. I.e. with thunder. j. Lat2, Slav "the voice of the Eternal One r. "you": A omits (hence "summon both their
saying to the Lord, the Son," but Greek Legend angels and ..."). 2:37 supports Eth; cf. n. w on 8:18 and n. b2 on s. The angels and lights of heaven are meant. 8:25f. t. "and when I lift up (my voice)": probable
k.Vss. 35f. were used by the heretic Hieracas e3. Lat2, Slav include a reference to Michael,
according to Epiphanius {AdvHaer 67:3), who cf. n. e2 on vs. 23. quotes them. The text of Epiphanius is fuller than
that of Eth and of Lat2, Slav, and contains elements 10 a. "as I ascended": B "ascending."
which only occur separately in the two textual b. Lat2, Slav corrupt, but Lat2 points to a text
traditions. See "Composite Character of the As­ "which I had heard in the six heavens, ascending
cension," and n. 29. and being heard in the seventh heaven."
w2. Lat2, Slav "And after these things another c. Lat2, Slav "And all praised that One"; D
indescribable glory was revealed which, although "and all praised that Glorious One."
the eyes of my spirit were open, I could not see." d. D adds "to him (the praise) was directed."
x2. Lat2, Slav "in great glory." The righteous e. Lat2, Slav omit vss. 3f.

t. "and when I lift up (my voice)": probable
k. B C D add "you shall descend." interpretation, text obscure. The sixth heaven is
1. The Eth. word haguel, which means "perdi­ singled out for mention because, in association
tion," "destruction" is probably intended here as with the seventh, it enjoys a special status; thus
the name of the final place of punishment for the e.g. the Lord does not change his appearance in
wicked; cf. Job 26:6; 28:22; Ps 88:11; Prov 15:11, the sixth heaven, cf. vs. 19. where the word rendered in JB as "Perdition" is u. For vss. 1 lf. Lat2, Slav have only "And
the Heb. Hbadd6n, i.e. "(place of) destruction." they will not recognize you, nor will the angels
"Abaddon" occurs as the name of the angel of the and the princes of that world; and you will judge
Abyss in Rev 9:11. "You shall descend . . . the prince of that world [Slav omits "of that world"]
Perdition": Lat2, Slav "You shall be in the world, and his angels, and the world ruled by them [Lat2
and go as far as the angel who is in hell." "and the rulers of the world"]."
m. I.e. in the five lower heavens; in the sixth v. B "And after you have died and risen, you
heaven he retains his divine form, cf. vs. 19. shall ascend to your place"; Lat2 omits; Slav "And
n. Lat2, Slav abbreviate vs. 9 and omit vs. 10. when you have been raised from the earth, after­
o. Or "rulers." wards."
p. "And they shall . . . when": so A B D. w. Lat2 (similarly Slav) "the princes and the
Jesus will only be recognized by the angels of this powers and all the angels and all the rulers of
world when he has actually ascended to heaven to heaven and earth and hell."
sit at the right hand of God, cf. vss. 14f. It is thus x. Lat2, Slav "then."
possible to make sense of the text. However, some y. B "that."19 and descent of the LORD." »And I looked, and when the angels who (were) in
the sixth heaven saw him, they praised him and glorified him, for he had not been
transformed into the form of the angels there; and they praised him, and I also
20 sang praises with them. *And I saw when he descended into the fifth heaven, that
in the fifth heaven he made his form like that of the angels there, and they did
21 not praise him, for his form was like theirs. *And then he descended into the
22 fourth heaven and made his form like that of the angels there; *and when they
saw him, they did not praise him or glorify him, for his form (was) like their form. 23 And again 1 saw when he descended into the third heaven, that he made his form
24 like that of the angels who (were) in the third heaven. *And those who kept the
gate of the (third) heaven demanded the password, and the LORD gave (it) to them
in order that he should not be recognized;2 and when they saw him, they did not
25 praise him or glorify him, for his form (was) like their form. -And again I saw
when he descended into the second heaven, that there again he gave the password,
26 for those who kept the gates demanded (it), and the LORD gave (it). *And 1 saw
when he made his form like that of the angels who (were) in the second heaven,
that they saw him, but did not praise him, for his form (was) like their form. 27 And again I saw when he descended into the first heaven, that there he gave the
password to those who kept the gates. And he made his form like that of the
angels who (were) on the left of that throne, and they did not praise him or glorify
28 him, for his form (was) like their form. #And as for me, no one questioned me
29 because of the angel who led me.And he made his form like that of the
angels who (were) on the left of that throne, and they did not praise him or glorify
28 him, for his form (was) like their form. #And as for me, no one questioned me
29 because of the angel who led me. *And again he descended into the firmament
where the prince of this world dwells, and he gave the password to those who i:3
(were) on the left, and his form (was) like theirs, and they did not praise him
there; but in envy they were fighting one another, for there is there a power of
30 evil*2 and envying about trifles.62 • And I saw when he descended and made himself
31 like the angels of the air, that he was like one of them. *And he did not give the
password, for they were plundering and doing violence to one another.02
The miraculous birth of the Lord
1 11 And after this I looked, and the angel who spoke to me and led me said to
me, "Understand, Isaiah son of Amoz, because for this purpose I was sent from
2 the LORD."- «And I saw a woman of the family of David the prophet whose name
(was) Mary, and she (was) a virgin and was betrothed to a man whose name (was)
Joseph, a carpenter, and he also (was) of the seed and family of the righteous
3 David of Bethlehem in Judah. #And he came into his lot.b And when she was
betrothed, she was found to be pregnant, and Joseph the carpenter wished to
4 divorce her. *But the angel of the Spirit appeared in this world,0 and after this
5 Joseph did not divorce Mary;d but he did not reveal this matter to anyone. »And
he did not approach Mary, but kept her as a holy virgin, although she was
6,7 pregnant. •And he did not live with her for two months. »And after two months
8 of days, while Joseph was in his house, and Marye his wife/ but both alone, »it
came about, when they were alone, that Mary then looked with her eyes and saw
9 a small infant, and she was astounded. *And after her astonishment had worn
z. "And those . . . recognized": B omits. b. The fate decreed him by God; it was God's
a2.t. "and when I lift up (my voice)": probable
k. B C D add "you shall descend." interpretation, text obscure. The sixth heaven is
1. The Eth. word haguel, which means "perdi­ singled out for mention because, in association
tion," "destruction" is probably intended here as with the seventh, it enjoys a special status; thus
the name of the final place of punishment for the e.g. the Lord does not change his appearance in
wicked; cf. Job 26:6; 28:22; Ps 88:11; Prov 15:11, the sixth heaven, cf. vs. 19. where the word rendered in JB as "Perdition" is u. For vss. 1 lf. Lat2, Slav have only "And
the Heb. Hbadd6n, i.e. "(place of) destruction." they will not recognize you, nor will the angels
"Abaddon" occurs as the name of the angel of the and the princes of that world; and you will judge
Abyss in Rev 9:11. "You shall descend . . . the prince of that world [Slav omits "of that world"]
Perdition": Lat2, Slav "You shall be in the world, and his angels, and the world ruled by them [Lat2
and go as far as the angel who is in hell." "and the rulers of the world"]."
m. I.e. in the five lower heavens; in the sixth v. B "And after you have died and risen, you
heaven he retains his divine form, cf. vs. 19. shall ascend to your place"; Lat2 omits; Slav "And
n. Lat2, Slav abbreviate vs. 9 and omit vs. 10. when you have been raised from the earth, after­
o. Or "rulers." wards."
p. "And they shall . . . when": so A B D. w. Lat2 (similarly Slav) "the princes and the
Jesus will only be recognized by the angels of this powers and all the angels and all the rulers of
world when he has actually ascended to heaven to heaven and earth and hell."
sit at the right hand of God, cf. vss. 14f. It is thus x. Lat2, Slav "then."
possible to make sense of the text. However, some y. B "that."

b. The fate decreed him by God; it was God's
a2. B C D "an evil power there." plan that Joseph should marry Mary; cf. vs. 10 and
b2. "but . . . trifles": Lat2, Slav omit. ProUames 9:1, "And the priest said to Joseph, it
c2. "for they . . . another": Lat2 "and they has fallen to your lot to receive the virgin of the
did not sing praises"; Slav "and they did not Lord.' " Cf. ProUames 19:1. question him." c. "in this world": B "to him."
d. B C "did not divorce her, but kept Mary";
11 a. Lat2, Slav add "to show you all things. For after "divorce" in A D a word has been erased. no one before you has seen, nor after you will be e. B C "in the house, and Mary"; D "in the
able to see, what you have seen and heard. And I house of Mary."
saw one like a son of man, and he dwelt with men f. "his wife": so C; B "his betrothed wife"; A
in the world, and they did not recognize him." D have an erasure. Lat2, Slav thereafter omit the whole of vss. 2-22.10 off,8 her womb was found as (it was) at first, before she had conceived. #And
when her husband/ Joseph, said to her, "What has made you astounded?" his
eyes were opened, and he saw the infant and praised the LORD, because the LORD
11 had come in his lot.1 #And a voice came to them, "Do not tell this vision to
12,13 anyone." »But the story about the infant was spread abroad in Bethlehem. #Some
said, "The virgin Mary has given birth before she has been married* two months."
14 But many said, "She did not give birth; the midwife did not go up (to her), and
we did not hear (any) cries of pain." And they were all blinded concerning him;
15 they all knew about him, butk they did not know from where he was. «And they
16 took him and went to Narazeth in Galilee. •And I saw, O Hezekiah and Josab my
son, and say to the other prophets also who are standing by, that it was hidden
from all the heavens and all the princes and every god of this world. Ignatius. Epistle
to the Ephesians
19
The infancy and life of the Lord
17 And I saw (that) in Nazareth he sucked the breast like an infant, as was customary,
is that he might not be recognized. »And when he had grown up, he performed great
signs and miracles in the land of Israel and (in) Jerusalem. 3:20
The crucifixion and resurrection of the Lord
19 And after this the adversary envied him and roused the children of Israel, who
did not know who he was, against him. And they handed him to the ruler,1 and
20 crucified him, and he descended"1 to the angel" who (is) in Sheol.0 #In Jerusalem, 9:16; 10:8, 10,
21 indeed, I saw how they crucified him on a tree, *and likewise (how) after the 14
third day he rose and remained (many) days.p
The ascension of the Lord through the seven heavens
22 And the angel who led me said to me, "Understand, Isaiah." And I saw when
23 heq sent out the twelve disciples and ascended. *And I saw him/ and he was in 3:i7f.,
the firmament,8 but was not transformed into their form.And they handed him to the ruler,1 and
20 crucified him, and he descended"1 to the angel" who (is) in Sheol.0 #In Jerusalem, 9:16; 10:8, 10,
21 indeed, I saw how they crucified him on a tree, *and likewise (how) after the 14
third day he rose and remained (many) days.p
The ascension of the Lord through the seven heavens
22 And the angel who led me said to me, "Understand, Isaiah." And I saw when
23 heq sent out the twelve disciples and ascended. *And I saw him/ and he was in 3:i7f.,
the firmament,8 but was not transformed into their form. And all the angels of the ^28,:. t
24 firmament, and Satan, saw him and worshiped. *And there was much sorrow there 2:2
as they said, "How did our* LORD descend upon us, and we did not notice the
glory which was upon him,u which we (now) see wasv upon him from the sixth
25 heaven?"w »And he ascended into the second heaven," and he was not transformed,
but all the angels who (were) on the right and on the left, and the throne in the
26 middle, • worshiped him, and praised him, and said, "How did oury LORD remain
27 hidden from us as he descended, and we did not notice?" »And in the same way
g. Lit. "after she had been astounded." r. "him": BCD omit. h. "her husband": so C; omitted by B, erased s. Lat2, Slav "And I saw him ascending into
in A and (apparently) D. the firmament."
i. "his lot": cf. n. b on vs. 3. t. B C "the."
j. "she has been married": so C; D (over an u. "which was upon him": possibly a doublet
erasure) "she has been betrothed"; in A B the of the following clause,
word has been erased. v. Lit. "was found."
k. C "they all believed in him, but"; B D "no w. As he descended Christ retained the glory
one believed in him, and." Vs. 14 is apparently which he possessed in the seventh and sixth heavens
quoted in the Acts of Peter 24. (cf. 10:19), but kept it concealed; as he ascended
1. "ruler": a word normally translated "king," Christ's proper glory (cf. vs. 29) was recognized
but it is presumably Pilate who is meant (cf.b. The fate decreed him by God; it was God's
a2. B C D "an evil power there." plan that Joseph should marry Mary; cf. vs. 10 and
b2. "but . . . trifles": Lat2, Slav omit. ProUames 9:1, "And the priest said to Joseph, it
c2. "for they . . . another": Lat2 "and they has fallen to your lot to receive the virgin of the
did not sing praises"; Slav "and they did not Lord.' " Cf. ProUames 19:1. question him." c. "in this world": B "to him."
d. B C "did not divorce her, but kept Mary";
11 a. Lat2, Slav add "to show you all things. For after "divorce" in A D a word has been erased. no one before you has seen, nor after you will be e. B C "in the house, and Mary"; D "in the
able to see, what you have seen and heard. And I house of Mary."
saw one like a son of man, and he dwelt with men f. "his wife": so C; B "his betrothed wife"; A
in the world, and they did not recognize him." D have an erasure. Lat2, Slav thereafter omit the whole of vss. 2-22.

vs. 29) was recognized
but it is presumably Pilate who is meant (cf. Mt by all. For vs. 24 Slav reads, "They said, 'How
27:2). was the Lord concealed from us in (our) midst,
m. B C D "and caused him to descend." and we did not recognize the king of glory?' "
n. B C "angels." Lat2 corrupt. The text appears to be defective at
o. "who (is) in Sheol": so D, cf. Greek Legend this point in Eth and Lat2, Slav, for we expect a
2:39 "the angel of Hades"; ABC omit. reference to the ascent of the Lord into the first
p. A B D have only "days," with the sense heaven. "many days"; C "forty days" (cf. Acts 1:3). It x. Lat2, Slav "And from the first heaven he
has been suggested that originally Eth read "five ascended more glorious."
hundred and forty-five days," as in 9:16. y. B C D "the."
q. B "the Lord."he ascended into the third (heaven), and in the same way they praised him and
28 spoke. *And in the fourth heaven and also in the fifth they spoke in exactly the
29,30 same way. •But there was one glory, and from it he was not transformed. »And
I saw when he ascended into the sixth heaven, that they worshiped him and praised
3i,32 him;2 »but in all the heavens the praise grew louder. -And I saw how he ascended
into the seventh heaven, and all the righteous and all the angels praised him. And
then I saw that he sat down at the right hand of that Great Glory, whose glory I io:u
33 told you I could not behold. •And also I saw that the angel of the Holy Spirit sat 9:37
on the left. 9:36
The conclusion of the vision
34 This angel said to me, "Isaiah, son of Amoz, [it is enough for you],82 for these
(are) great things, for you have observed what no one bom of flesh has observed.62 8:ii
35 And you shall return into your robe until your days are complete; then you shall 8:27
come here." These things I saw. Isaiah's instructions to Hezekiah
36 And Isaiah told (them)c2 to all those who were standing before him, and they sang
praises. And he spoke to Hezekiah the king and said, "These things I have spoken. 37,38 And the end of this world *and all this vision will be brought about in the last
39 generation." #And Isaiah made him*2 swear that he would not tell thise2 to the
people of Israel, and that he would not allow any man to copy these words.*2
40 And then*2 theyh2 shall read them.12 But as for you, be12 in the Holy Spirit that
you may receive your robes, and the thrones and crowns of glory, which are 7:22; 9:9f. 41 placed in the seventh heaven. • Because of these visions and prophecies Sammael 5:i; i5f. Satan sawed Isaiah the son of Amoz, the prophet, in half by the hand of Manasseh.• Because of these visions and prophecies Sammael 5:i; i5f. Satan sawed Isaiah the son of Amoz, the prophet, in half by the hand of Manasseh. i:8; 2.2
42 And Hezekiah gave all these things to Manasseh in the twenty-sixth year of his
43 reign.1"2 *But Manasseh did not remember these things, nor place them in his i:i
heart, but he became the servant of Satan and was destroyed.12 ?lg
Here ends (the book) of Isaiah the prophet with his ascension.1"2
z. For vss. 27-30 Lat2, Slav have a shorter text. reign of Hezekiah to the time of its actual com­
a2. Correction based on Lat2, Slav; Eth "I have position in the early Christian era. Cf. 6:17. saved you." g2. "then": apparently "in the last generation"
b2. Lat2, Slav add "what eye has not seen, nor (vs. 38), cf. Dan 12:4, 9. But the sequence of
ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man, thought is not very clear, and Eth may be defective;
how great things God has prepared for all [Slav see n. i2. omits "all"] those who love him [Lat2 "you"]"; h2. BCD "you."
cf. Isa 64:4; ICor 2:9. Jerome (Commentary on i2. "And then . . . read them": so Eth; Slav
Isaiah 64:4 [PL, vol. 24, col. 622]) states that "But as far as you understand what is said by the
Ascenls has this passage and thus indicates that king in the prophets, understand such things, all
here at least the text of Ascenls he knew is the one of you"; Lat2 corrupt. given in Lat2, Slav. For the title "the Ascension j2. Slav "watch."
of Isaiah" in Jerome, see "Composite Character k2. "of his reign": A C omit. of the Ascension." 12. Vss. 41-43 are an editorial conclusion which
c2. "These things ... told (them)": Lat2, Slav serves to link Visls (chs. 6-11) with Martls (chs. "These things Isaiah saw and told." 1-5). For these vss. Lat2, Slav have "And he
d2. D "Hezekiah." ceased speaking and went out from (the presence
e2. "this": A B D, Lat2, Slav omit. •of) Hezekiah the king."
f2. This statement is part of the apocalyptic m2.vs. 29) was recognized
but it is presumably Pilate who is meant (cf. Mt by all. For vs. 24 Slav reads, "They said, 'How
27:2). was the Lord concealed from us in (our) midst,
m. B C D "and caused him to descend." and we did not recognize the king of glory?' "
n. B C "angels." Lat2 corrupt. The text appears to be defective at
o. "who (is) in Sheol": so D, cf. Greek Legend this point in Eth and Lat2, Slav, for we expect a
2:39 "the angel of Hades"; ABC omit. reference to the ascent of the Lord into the first
p. A B D have only "days," with the sense heaven. "many days"; C "forty days" (cf. Acts 1:3). It x. Lat2, Slav "And from the first heaven he
has been suggested that originally Eth read "five ascended more glorious."
hundred and forty-five days," as in 9:16. y. B C D "the."
q. B "the Lord."

•of) Hezekiah the king."
f2. This statement is part of the apocalyptic m2. B, Slav omit; C "Here ends the vision of
fiction which was intended to explain how the Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, with his
account of Isaiah's vision had remained unknown ascension"; D "Here ends the ascension of Isaiah
from the time of its supposed composition in the the prophet''; Lat2 * 'The vision of Isaiah is ended.''JOSEPH AND ASENETH
(First Century B.c.-Second Century A.D.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY C. BURCHARD
The Old Testament records that Pharaoh gave to Joseph Aseneth, the daughter of Potiphera,
Priest of On, for his wife (Gen 41:45). How could Josepli—the model of chastity, piety,
and statesmanship—marry a foreign Hamitic girl, daughter of an idolatrous priest? Jewish
theology and lore found many answers to this intriguing question and expanded some into
narratives.1 Joseph and Aseneth, the longest of these stories, is a full-fledged romance by
an anonymous author; it is nearly twice as long as Esther, and a little longer than the Gospel
of Mark. Aseneth is a beautiful virgin of eighteen years and the daughter of Pentephres,2 priest of
Heliopolis and Pharaoh's chief counselor. Many princes, including Pharaoh's firstborn son,
ask for her hand in marriage. She despises them all and prefers to live in her ornate
penthouse above Pentephres' palace, where she worships countless idols. One day Joseph,
touring Egypt to collect corn, announces his visit to her father. Pentephres tells Aseneth he
is going to give her to Joseph in marriage. She refuses flatly, only to fall in love with
Joseph when she sees him entering her father's house in royal attire. Now it is her time to
be repudiated. A Jew who worships God and lives on the bread of life will not kiss a
heathen woman who eats food offered to idols. Still Joseph is charitable enough to say a
prayer for her conversion, then boards his chariot in order to gather more com, promising
to be back a week later. Utterly shaken, Aseneth destroys her idols, engages in a week of
fasting and crying, and repents for both her conceit and idolatry.•of) Hezekiah the king."
f2. This statement is part of the apocalyptic m2. B, Slav omit; C "Here ends the vision of
fiction which was intended to explain how the Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, with his
account of Isaiah's vision had remained unknown ascension"; D "Here ends the ascension of Isaiah
from the time of its supposed composition in the the prophet''; Lat2 * 'The vision of Isaiah is ended.''

Still Joseph is charitable enough to say a
prayer for her conversion, then boards his chariot in order to gather more com, promising
to be back a week later. Utterly shaken, Aseneth destroys her idols, engages in a week of
fasting and crying, and repents for both her conceit and idolatry. On the morning of the
eighth day, the chief of God's angels comes to see her, declares her reborn, tells her that
she is to be a mother city for all who would repent like her, feeds her a piece of honeycomb,
which he says is the bread of life, and promises her that Joseph will come to marry her. He does; and the wedding ensues, performed and presided over by Pharaoh himself. Eight years later, Pharaoh's firstborn son happens to see Aseneth by chance and his old
infatuation is revived. He fails to persuade Joseph's brothers, Simeon and Levi, to help him
kidnap Aseneth and assume power in Egypt by killing Pharaoh and Joseph. He then tries
Dan and Gad and achieves more success. He gives them troops; and the three set up an
ambush for Aseneth, who is driving to her vineyard. However, Benjamin, who is sitting
beside her in the carriage, wounds Pharaoh's son with a stone and kills his escorts. Levi,
being a prophet, divines what is going on and comes running with his brothers—Reuben,
Simeon, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulon—to slay Dan and Gad's men. These two attempt to
kill Aseneth, but miraculously their swords fall from their hands. Aseneth pardons them
and intercedes for them with her in-laws. Three days later Pharaoh's son dies, closely
followed by his grief-strickened father. Joseph then reigns over Egypt for forty-eight years. 1 V. Aptowitzer, "Asenath, the Wife of Joseph: A Haggadic Literary-Historical Study," HUCA 1 (1924) 239-306;
L. Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 2, pp. 170-78; also see esp. vol. 5, pp. 336-39, 374f. 2 As to the name form, see note on 1:3.Texts
Joseph and Aseneth is extant in sixteen Greek manuscripts, falling into at least four
groups, and eight versions translated from the Greek, running to a rough total of seventy
manuscripts.3 Abbreviations used herein are as follows:
Group a:
1. O = St. Catherine's Monastery, Mount Sinai, MS Greek 504, 10th cent., Joseph
and Aseneth is lost except for the title and the first words in the table of contents. 2. A = Vatican Library, Vatican City, MS Vaticanus Graecus 803, 11- 12th cent.;
printed by P. BatifTol, "Le Livre de la Priere d'Aseneth," Studia Patristica: Etudes
d'ancienne literature chritienne (Paris, 1889-90) pp. 1-87 (with apparatus from
BCD Syr.; = Bat); transl. P. Riessler, "Joseph und Asenath: Eine altjudische
Erzahlung," TQ 103 (1922) 1-22, 145-83, reprinted with little change by P. Riessler,
Altjudisches Schrifttum ausserhalb der Bibel (Augsburg, 1928; repr. Darmstadt,
1966) pp. 497-538, 1303f. (= Rie); and E. W. Brooks, Joseph and Asenath: The
Confession and Prayer of Asenath Daughter of Pentephres the Priest (TED 2.7;
London, New York, 1918). Brooks makes use of Batiffol's apparatus and Syr. Arm. LI Slav., and gives the non-a material contained in 11:15-18a, 12:8b, 15:12x,
16:17-17x, 20:5b, 6b, 21:10-21, and 23:6b in an appendix because he thinks it is
original (= Br). 3. P = Monastery of Konstamonitou, Mount Athos, MS 14, 15th cent. 4. Q = Vatican Library, Vatican City, MS Palatinus Graecus 364, 15th cent., many
omissions; used by V. M. Istrin, "Apokrif ob IosifS i AsenefS," Drevnosti (Trudy
Slavjanskoj kommissii Imperatorskago moskovskago archeologiceskago obScestva 2;
Moscow, 1898) pp. 146-99. 5. C = Bodleian Library, Oxford, MS Baroccio Greek 148, 15th cent., ends in 10:5;
used by Bat. 6. R = St. Catherine's Monastery, Mount Sinai, MS Greek 530, 15—16th cent., ends
in 5:1, maybe a copy of C. Group b:
7. E = Monastery of Vatopedi, Mount Athos, MS 600, 15th cent., many omissions. 8.Still Joseph is charitable enough to say a
prayer for her conversion, then boards his chariot in order to gather more com, promising
to be back a week later. Utterly shaken, Aseneth destroys her idols, engages in a week of
fasting and crying, and repents for both her conceit and idolatry. On the morning of the
eighth day, the chief of God's angels comes to see her, declares her reborn, tells her that
she is to be a mother city for all who would repent like her, feeds her a piece of honeycomb,
which he says is the bread of life, and promises her that Joseph will come to marry her. He does; and the wedding ensues, performed and presided over by Pharaoh himself. Eight years later, Pharaoh's firstborn son happens to see Aseneth by chance and his old
infatuation is revived. He fails to persuade Joseph's brothers, Simeon and Levi, to help him
kidnap Aseneth and assume power in Egypt by killing Pharaoh and Joseph. He then tries
Dan and Gad and achieves more success. He gives them troops; and the three set up an
ambush for Aseneth, who is driving to her vineyard. However, Benjamin, who is sitting
beside her in the carriage, wounds Pharaoh's son with a stone and kills his escorts. Levi,
being a prophet, divines what is going on and comes running with his brothers—Reuben,
Simeon, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulon—to slay Dan and Gad's men. These two attempt to
kill Aseneth, but miraculously their swords fall from their hands. Aseneth pardons them
and intercedes for them with her in-laws. Three days later Pharaoh's son dies, closely
followed by his grief-strickened father. Joseph then reigns over Egypt for forty-eight years. 1 V. Aptowitzer, "Asenath, the Wife of Joseph: A Haggadic Literary-Historical Study," HUCA 1 (1924) 239-306;
L. Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 2, pp. 170-78; also see esp. vol. 5, pp. 336-39, 374f. 2 As to the name form, see note on 1:3.

E = Monastery of Vatopedi, Mount Athos, MS 600, 15th cent., many omissions. 8. G = Greeley Collection, Virginia Beach, Va., MS McKell (formerly property of D. McK. McKell of Chillicothe, Ohio), c. 1580, written and illuminated by Luke the
Cypriot in Wallachia, omits 2:3b-10:la and other passages; miniatures published by
J. and O. Pacht, "An Unknown Cycle of Illustrations of the Life of Joseph," Cahiers
Archeologiques 1 (1954) 35-49, pi. XI1-XVI; G. Vikan, Illustrated Manuscripts of
Pseudo-Ephraem's Life of Joseph and the Romance of Joseph and Aseneth (Ph.D. diss., Princeton, N.J., 1976). 9. F = Library of the Academy of the People's Republic of Rumania, Bucharest, MS
Greek 966, 17th cent., four hortatory interpolations, some illegible spots. 10. W = St. Catherine's Monastery, Mount Sinai, MS Greek 1976, 17th cent., same
interpolations as F. Group c:
11. H = Greek Orthodox Patriarchate, Jerusalem, MS Panhagios Taphos 73, 17th cent.,
ends in 16:17y with a new ending down to chapter 21:9 added in modern Greek; this
ending is published by Chr. Burchard, "Joseph and Aseneth neugriechisch," NTS
24 (1978) 68-84, see 80-83. 12. J = Ibid., MS Saba 389, 17th cent., ends in 16:10. 13. K = Ibid., MS Saba 593, finished September 1, 1802, ends as H. Group d:
14. B = Vatican Library, MS Palatinus Graecus 17, 11th cent.; used by Bat, printed by
Istrin. 15. D = Bodleian Library, MS Baroccio Greek 147, 15th cent.; used by Bat. Critical edition of the d text by M. Philonenko, Joseph et Aseneth: Introduction,
3 For catalogs and other details see Chr. Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 2-17; A.-M. Denis, Introduction, pp. 40-
48. No papyri and no quotations in Gk. are on record.texte critique et notes (SPB 13; Leiden, 1968); full documentation of BD, many
readings from Slav. (cf. below on Slav.), occasional references to AEFGH, almost
none to the other versions (= Phil). Unexplored:
16. University Library, Wroclaw (formerly Breslau), Poland, MS Rehdiger 26, 11th
cent., lower script of a palimpsest. Versions:
1. Syr. = Syriac, first half of 6th cent. Syr. is preserved only as part of Pseudo-Zacharias
Rhetor, Church History, I 6 (finished soon after A.D. 569), in one MS and a copy of
it. Leaves containing 13:15-16:7 are lost. Careful edition by E. W. Brooks, Historia
ecclesiastica Zachariae Rhetori vulgo adscripta (CSCO 83; Paris, 1919, repr. 1953)
vol. 1, pp. 21-55; Latin translation by the same, Historia ecclesiastica Zachariae
Rhetori vulgo adscripta (CSCO 87; Louvain, 1924, repr. 1953) vol. 1, pp. 15-39. 2. Arm. = Armenian, 6-7th cent.(?). Forty-five manuscripts falling into six groups are
known to date, the most important being Matenadaran (Mashtotz Institute of Ancient
Manuscripts), Erevan, MS 1500 (A.D 1282-83) ( = 332). Poor edition by S. Yovsepceanc, T'angaran hin ew nor naxneac, I. Ankanon girkc hin ktakaranac (Venice,
1896) pp. 152-98 (= Yovs); used by Br; poorly translated by J. Issaverdens both
collectively, The Uncanonical Writings of the Old Testament (Venice, 1900) pp. 91-
160, and separately, The History of Assaneth (Venice, 1900); specimen of a better
edition by C. Burchard, "Joseph and Aseneth 25-29 armenisch," JSJ 10 (1979) 1-
10. 3. LI = Latin 1, circa A.D. 1200. Nine manuscripts are known, possibly all of them
written in England. The text is rather uniform. Tolerable edition by Batiffol, Studia
Patristica, pp. 89-115; used by Br. An unpublished epitome is preserved in three
manuscripts. 4. L2 = Latin 2, circa A.D. 1200. We have five manuscripts falling into two very
different groups. One group has only one member; it is University Library, Uppsala,
MS C 37, beginning of the 13th cent. (= 436).One group has only one member; it is University Library, Uppsala,
MS C 37, beginning of the 13th cent. (= 436). The other group is headed by
Monastery Library, Vorau (Austria), MS 136, 13th cent. (= 435). Unpublished. 5. Slav. = Serbian Slavonic, 15th cent.(?). Two manuscripts with minor variants are
known. 1) Belgrad, National Library, MS Slav. 29, early 15th cent, (now lost), was
printed by S. Novakovic\ "Srpsko-slovenski zbornik iz vremena despota Stefana
LazarevicV' Starine 9 (1877) 1-47, see 27-42 (= 551), and used by Br. 2)
Novakovid's text was reprinted with the variants from Bucharest, Library of the
Academy of the People's Republic of Rumania, MS Slav. 306, 15th cent. (= 552)
by Chr. Burchard, Joseph und Aseneth serbisch-kirchenslavisch: Text und Varianten
(Dielheimer Blatter zum Alten Testament. Beiheft 2; Dielheim, 1980); see pp. 43-45
for a list of corrections of Philonenko's presentation of BD). 6. Ngr. = Modern Greek, 16th cent. (?). We ha vet wo illuminated manuscripts: Monastery
of Koutloumousi, Mount Athos, MS 100, 16th cent. (= 661); Bodleian Library,
Oxford, MS Roe 5, 1614 ( = 671). Poor edition of 671 by Istrin, Drevnosti, pp. 146-
79; corrections and an edition of 661, which is a mere epitome, by Burchard, NTS 24
(1978) 68-79; miniatures of both published by Vikan, Illustrated Manuscripts;
miniatures of 661 published by S. M. Pelekanidis, P. C. Christou, C. Tsiounis, and
S. N. Kadas, The Treasures of Mount Athos: Illuminated Manuscripts, Miniatures-
Headpieces-Initial Letters (Athens, 1974) vol. 1, pp. 456, 458f.; figs. 339-41. 7. Rum. = Rumanian, 18th cent.(?). Four manuscripts are known. Rum. shares the
interpolations of FW. One manuscript was printed in modernized form by C. Bobulescu,
Istoria frumosului losif §i a prea frumoasei Asineta: Dupd un manuscris din 1753
(Biblioteca pentru popor 15; Bucharest, 1922). A critical edition by V.-I. Leb is in
preparation. 8. Eth. = Ethiopian. Lost save for a number of allusions.4 Eth.E = Monastery of Vatopedi, Mount Athos, MS 600, 15th cent., many omissions. 8. G = Greeley Collection, Virginia Beach, Va., MS McKell (formerly property of D. McK. McKell of Chillicothe, Ohio), c. 1580, written and illuminated by Luke the
Cypriot in Wallachia, omits 2:3b-10:la and other passages; miniatures published by
J. and O. Pacht, "An Unknown Cycle of Illustrations of the Life of Joseph," Cahiers
Archeologiques 1 (1954) 35-49, pi. XI1-XVI; G. Vikan, Illustrated Manuscripts of
Pseudo-Ephraem's Life of Joseph and the Romance of Joseph and Aseneth (Ph.D. diss., Princeton, N.J., 1976). 9. F = Library of the Academy of the People's Republic of Rumania, Bucharest, MS
Greek 966, 17th cent., four hortatory interpolations, some illegible spots. 10. W = St. Catherine's Monastery, Mount Sinai, MS Greek 1976, 17th cent., same
interpolations as F. Group c:
11. H = Greek Orthodox Patriarchate, Jerusalem, MS Panhagios Taphos 73, 17th cent.,
ends in 16:17y with a new ending down to chapter 21:9 added in modern Greek; this
ending is published by Chr. Burchard, "Joseph and Aseneth neugriechisch," NTS
24 (1978) 68-84, see 80-83. 12. J = Ibid., MS Saba 389, 17th cent., ends in 16:10. 13. K = Ibid., MS Saba 593, finished September 1, 1802, ends as H. Group d:
14. B = Vatican Library, MS Palatinus Graecus 17, 11th cent.; used by Bat, printed by
Istrin. 15. D = Bodleian Library, MS Baroccio Greek 147, 15th cent.; used by Bat. Critical edition of the d text by M. Philonenko, Joseph et Aseneth: Introduction,
3 For catalogs and other details see Chr. Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 2-17; A.-M. Denis, Introduction, pp. 40-
48. No papyri and no quotations in Gk. are on record.

= Ethiopian. Lost save for a number of allusions.4 Eth. may depend upon an
equally lost Arabic version. 4 See below, nn. 108-10.The textual history of Joseph and Aseneth is not yet fully understood.5
(1) The book is an author's work, not a folk tale which has no progenitor. There was an
original text. We may be reasonably certain that all textual witnesses known to date go
back to a common archetype, which must be older than c. A.D. 500.6
(2) We know that the Greek manuscripts fall into at least four groups, a, b, c, d, that
Slav, sides with d, and that the other versions align with b. For ancient translations, Arm. and L2 are full and reliable versions. However, for example, the relationship of 436 and
435& within L2 needs examination. Syr. would make a fair witness, too, were it not for a
tendency toward loose or double translation, some abbreviation from the middle of chapter
24 on, and the loss of nearly three chapters. LI, a mere epitome from chapter 25 onward,
is guilty of many omissions before that, even more so the Slav. When extant, Slav, is fairly
accurate, however. Ngr. is little more than a paraphrase with long stretches of text left out
altogether, while others are much inflated. Rum. is a severe condensation. All Greek groups
and the versions need closer inspection as to their Vorlage. The miniatures of G, 671, and
6617 may be of some help here because they reflect a state of textual development, all
within the b group, which is older than the manuscripts in which they occur. (3) We also know that a is a revision, no later than the tenth century, which meant to
improve the biblicized Greek of the text but did not impinge on its substance and order
save for a few omissions. Greek manuscript group c, as far as it goes, is an independent
and less thorough revision, probably late medieval or early modern, of a text which was
closer to b than to the ancestors of a or d. (4) Difficulties start with d. It is one third shorter than a.(4) Difficulties start with d. It is one third shorter than a. Philonenko feels that d represents
the oldest attainable text of Joseph and Aseneth; it was expanded into b, which was revised
into c, which in turn was finally revised into a. However, many gaps in d are obvious
omissions (see e.g. 19:4; 21:2; 27:10), and many readings are inferior to those in a, b, c. Manuscript group a is also generally closer to d than to b or c, which are supposed to stand
between them, and there is nothing to suggest that c, purported father of a, ever existed
beyond 16:17a. So d is more likely to be an epitome, no later than the eleventh century, of
a fiiller text, which was close to the unrevised archetype of a. Abridgment is a natural thing
to happen to a text transmitted in writing as any individual manuscript of Joseph and
Aseneth will readily demonstrate, and it tends to affect the last chapters, or the last verses
of a subsection, more than the first, which is exactly what occurs in d. (5) The main problem is b. This group includes four very recent Greek manuscripts and
seven versions, all very different in both wording and length, most of them marred by a
host of individual shortcomings. How does b, or its parts, relate to the other groups?8 At
any rate, the b group houses our oldest witnesses (Arm. Syr.)9 and is the largest and most
widely distributed group; readings offered, or supported, by it (versions included) are very
often superior to their competitors on internal grounds. This includes a number of passages
preserved by b alone such as 21:10-21. (6) It seems possible to reconstruct the archetype of the textual tradition with a fair degree
of certainty.10 Often the witnesses agree literally or to a degree that the general run of the
text is unmistakable even if the wording is not. Such passages occur over the whole length
of the book, forming a sort of grid which has kept the original outline from becoming
indiscernible. 5 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp.= Ethiopian. Lost save for a number of allusions.4 Eth. may depend upon an
equally lost Arabic version. 4 See below, nn. 108-10.

Such passages occur over the whole length
of the book, forming a sort of grid which has kept the original outline from becoming
indiscernible. 5 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 18-49; JSJ 1 (1970) 3-34; "Joseph und Aseneth neugriechisch," NTS 24 (1978)
68-84; see 69 (correcting Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 39); M. Philonenko, Joseph et Ase"neth, pp. 3-26; E. W. Smith, Jr., Joseph and Asenath, pp. 13-17. 6 That JosAsen is coupled with a Life of Joseph in all groups of text but c (see below) seems to corroborate the
basic unity of the tradition. 7 See Vikan, Illustrated Manuscripts, partly summarized in his "Illustrated Manuscripts of the Romance of Joseph
and Aseneth," SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, ed. G. MacRae (SBL Seminar Papers Series 10; Missoula, Mont., 1976)
pp. 193-208, 15 figs. Cf. further Pacht and Pacht, Cahiers Archiologiques 7 (1954) 35-49; Burchard, NTS 24 (1978)
75-77. 8 In some cases of split tradition b appears to have preserved one part of a clause and a, d, or c the other (see 2:3;
12:2; 16:14; 18:2, 11; 21:9; 22:9, 13; 24:3; 24:17; 25:4, 6). This would suggest that b is indeed a family of its own,
with an ancestor which stands at some distance from the original. 9 The Passion of St. Irene, which depends on JosAsen (see below) also seems to testify to the age of b. The text
which it presupposes certainly is neither a nor d (see 15:7). 10 Contrast the opinion of Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 22f. Nevertheless, for all practical purposes Philonenko
regards d as the original text.A new edition of the Greek text is needed; the existing editions of the Greek text, as
well as the modern translations, rely on either a or d and leave b, c, and most of the
versions practically unmined. A major edition will have to wait until all evidence has been
explored fully. A preliminary new text has been established for the present translation and
for the German version.11 The new text is based on fresh collations of all Greek and modem
Greek manuscripts (except the Breslau palimpsest) by D. Sanger, and of all Latin manuscripts
by H. Kriiger. It is also based on Syr. (as edited by Brooks), on Arm. chapters 1-24 (as
printed by Yovsepceanc, supplemented by a collation of 332), on Arm. chapters 25-29 (as
edited by Burchard), on Slav, (as printed by Novakovid), on Ngr. (671) (as printed by Istrin
and corrected by Burchard), and on Rum. (as printed by Bobulescu). The textual history of
Joseph and Aseneth as it is known to date would seem to suggest that an eclectic text with
a strong leaning toward b is in order. The preliminary text follows b unless a variant reading
definitely proves superior. This is generally assumed when a, c, or d have a fuller text than
b, unless there is evidence to the contrary. If there is a disagreement among the manuscripts
and versions of b, the variant that has more outside support is usually preferred. In a few
cases we must rely on conjecture (e.g. in 12:8). The text thus constituted may look more
b-like than a final one will. Still it has the advantage of presenting Joseph and Aseneth very
close to the form, or type of forms, in which the book was most widely read, and of being,
it is hoped, much closer to the original than any other text published so far. A minor edition
with a representative critical apparatus is in preparation.12
Original language
Most scholars have agreed that Joseph and Aseneth was composed in Greek. The only
one to argue at some length against this view was P.A minor edition
with a representative critical apparatus is in preparation.12
Original language
Most scholars have agreed that Joseph and Aseneth was composed in Greek. The only
one to argue at some length against this view was P. Riessler.13 To him a and d represented
two independent translations from the Hebrew. Textual history as reviewed above rules out
a double translation; the language all but precludes a single one. Riessler advanced some
evidence for mistranslation, but it is inconclusive (see 4:2; 15:7; 16:13). The balance of his
argument goes to show biblicized Greek; but it is better to assign this to the stylistic effort
of a Greek author (see below). Moreover, a translator would have had little occasion to use
words like "all-beautiful" (13:14), "child-loving" (12:8), "immortality," "incorruptibil­
ity" (e.g. 8:5), "(things) being and appearing" or "non-appearing and non-being" (12:2),
"incorruptible" (12:15), "sweet (father)" (of God, 12:14f.), "transient" (12:15), "unut­
terable" (14:2), turns like "it is not fitting" (e.g. 8:5), "in a tyrannical fashion" (23:6),
clusters of adjectival attributes (e.g. 10:10), or the passive with "by." If based on a Semitic
original, Joseph and Aseneth would be a reworking, not a translation. Yet no one has so
far produced a shred of evidence that Joseph and Aseneth was at all known in ancient
Hebrew or Aramaic literature. So the book belongs to what is commonly called "hellenistic
Jewish literature" as distinct from Palestinian and Babylonian,14 although the latter branches
are hardly less hellenistic, if often in a different way.15 Numerous contacts with the literature
of the Western diaspora and early Christianity readily bear this out. Literary character
Title
Ancient custom suggests that Joseph and Aseneth had a title, probably given in full at
the end and prefixed in a possibly shorter form at the opening,16 but none that have come
down to us seem to represent it (see before 1:1).Such passages occur over the whole length
of the book, forming a sort of grid which has kept the original outline from becoming
indiscernible. 5 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 18-49; JSJ 1 (1970) 3-34; "Joseph und Aseneth neugriechisch," NTS 24 (1978)
68-84; see 69 (correcting Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 39); M. Philonenko, Joseph et Ase"neth, pp. 3-26; E. W. Smith, Jr., Joseph and Asenath, pp. 13-17. 6 That JosAsen is coupled with a Life of Joseph in all groups of text but c (see below) seems to corroborate the
basic unity of the tradition. 7 See Vikan, Illustrated Manuscripts, partly summarized in his "Illustrated Manuscripts of the Romance of Joseph
and Aseneth," SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, ed. G. MacRae (SBL Seminar Papers Series 10; Missoula, Mont., 1976)
pp. 193-208, 15 figs. Cf. further Pacht and Pacht, Cahiers Archiologiques 7 (1954) 35-49; Burchard, NTS 24 (1978)
75-77. 8 In some cases of split tradition b appears to have preserved one part of a clause and a, d, or c the other (see 2:3;
12:2; 16:14; 18:2, 11; 21:9; 22:9, 13; 24:3; 24:17; 25:4, 6). This would suggest that b is indeed a family of its own,
with an ancestor which stands at some distance from the original. 9 The Passion of St. Irene, which depends on JosAsen (see below) also seems to testify to the age of b. The text
which it presupposes certainly is neither a nor d (see 15:7). 10 Contrast the opinion of Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 22f. Nevertheless, for all practical purposes Philonenko
regards d as the original text.

So the book belongs to what is commonly called "hellenistic
Jewish literature" as distinct from Palestinian and Babylonian,14 although the latter branches
are hardly less hellenistic, if often in a different way.15 Numerous contacts with the literature
of the Western diaspora and early Christianity readily bear this out. Literary character
Title
Ancient custom suggests that Joseph and Aseneth had a title, probably given in full at
the end and prefixed in a possibly shorter form at the opening,16 but none that have come
down to us seem to represent it (see before 1:1). It may have been something like "Aseneth,"
11 Burchard, Joseph und Aseneth (JSHRZ 2.4; Gutersloh, 1983). 12To be published in the PVTG series (Leiden). The text alone is available in mimeographed form in "Ein vorlaufiger
griechischer Text von Joseph und Aseneth," Dielheimer Blatter zum Alten Testament 14 (1979) 2-53. 13 "Joseph und Asenath: Eine altjudische Erzahlung," TQ 103 (1922) 1-22, 145-83; see esp. pp. 1-3. 14 R. Marcus, "Hellenistic Jewish Literature," The Jews: Their History, Culture, and Religion, ed. L. Finkelstein
(New York, 1949, I9603) vol. 2, pp. 1077-115; V. Tcherikover, "Jewish Apologetic Literature Reconsidered," Eos
48.3 (1957) 169-93; G. Del ling, "Perspektiven der Erforschung des hellenistischen Judentums," HUCA 45 (1974)
133-76. 15 M. Hengel, Judentum und Hellenismus (WUNT 10; Tubingen, 1969, 19732; ET by Fortress Press of Philadelphia
in 1974). 16On ancient book titles see lately, E. Schmalzriedt, Peri physeds: Zur Fruhgeschichte der Buchtitel (Munich,
1970).conceivably with a term denoting genre before and a word of identification after it, or
perhaps "Joseph and Aseneth" as we call the book today. The author's name may or may
not have gone with it, but~none is preserved. Structure
Joseph and Aseneth falls into two parts, which could almost stand by themselves. Part I
(chs. 1-21) is suspended between two allusions to the Story of Joseph (Gen 37-50). Chapter
1:1 echoes Genesis 41:46 to tell that Pharaoh sent Joseph around Egypt to gather up the
corn of the seven years of plenty, followed in 1:2 by a remark about Joseph's arrival in
Heliopolis. Chapter 21:9 notes the birth of Ephraim and Manasseh in accordance with
Genesis 41:50-52. The narrative proper opens with an exposition in 1:3-2:12; it corresponds
to the page announcing the cast of characters and the scene of action that we usually see
prefixed today to a play or detective story. Part I is rounded off by a hymn in 21:10-21 in
which Aseneth recounts what happened to her. This consists of a combination of two
different plots: the love story engaging Aseneth and Joseph, in chapters 3-9 and 19-21,
and the conversion story, which involves Aseneth and the heavenly man in chapters 10-
18, overlapping the love theme in 8f. and 19. Aseneth is the main figure, being almost
uninterruptedly on the scene. But she is not in control. Pentephres launches the action, then
he loses out gradually, first to the heavenly man and then to Pharaoh, the transitions being
operated by Joseph. Otherwise the latter is a passive figure who has his marriage more or
less wished upon him. During his bride's cumbersome conversion he is absent collecting
grain. Part II (chs. 22-29) opens in 22: If. with a summary of Genesis 41:53f. and 45:26-
46:7; 47:27: Jacob and his kin come to Egypt and settle in Goshen. Joseph and Aseneth go
to visit them (ch. 22 is an exposition). What follows is a tale of both abduction and
revolution, or attempts to that effect, not simply a case of kidnap.22 is an exposition). What follows is a tale of both abduction and
revolution, or attempts to that effect, not simply a case of kidnap. Not incongruously, it
ends with a reference to Joseph's rule over Egypt for forty-eight years. The scheme involves
Pharaoh's son aided and abetted by Dan and Gad on the one hand, and Levi, Simeon, and
Benjamin on the other. Aseneth has a part only in chapters 26-28. Joseph barely appears
in 26:1-4, his mind again set on corn. There is action in the story, but it is not fully developed. Potentially colorful narratives
such as the wedding feast in chapter 21 or the military entanglements in chapters 26f. are
merely stated. Considerable space is devoted to a sketch of Aseneth's tower and garden, to
descriptions of people's appearance and emotions and to scenes of Aseneth dressing, where
action is just an excuse for description. The rest consists mostly of dialogues, with some
monologues, especially in chapters 11-13. Stripped of the dialogues, the plot is simple enough. It unfolds with legendary
straightforwardness bordering on the naive (note the effects of a headache in 25:1-4). But
it is by and large well constructed. Most of the shortcomings may be explained away on
the assumption that Joseph and Aseneth is to be read as a companion to Genesis. Integrity
Some scholars have suspected that the hymn of 21:10-21 is a later insertion, and that
chapters 22-29 are an addition. The first half of this suspicion is invalidated by form
criticism (see 21:1 Of.), and Part II is so close to I in both style and thought content that it
is not likely to have come from a different hand. Lately T. Holtz argued for Christian
interpolations.17 Such interpolations, or other forms of editing, are not intrinsically
improbable, but the evidence is not overwhelming. Sources
If source means what the Gospel of Mark is to Matthew, or Pygmalion to My Fair Lady,
a source for Joseph and Aseneth, or part of it, direct or indirect, has not yet appeared.So the book belongs to what is commonly called "hellenistic
Jewish literature" as distinct from Palestinian and Babylonian,14 although the latter branches
are hardly less hellenistic, if often in a different way.15 Numerous contacts with the literature
of the Western diaspora and early Christianity readily bear this out. Literary character
Title
Ancient custom suggests that Joseph and Aseneth had a title, probably given in full at
the end and prefixed in a possibly shorter form at the opening,16 but none that have come
down to us seem to represent it (see before 1:1). It may have been something like "Aseneth,"
11 Burchard, Joseph und Aseneth (JSHRZ 2.4; Gutersloh, 1983). 12To be published in the PVTG series (Leiden). The text alone is available in mimeographed form in "Ein vorlaufiger
griechischer Text von Joseph und Aseneth," Dielheimer Blatter zum Alten Testament 14 (1979) 2-53. 13 "Joseph und Asenath: Eine altjudische Erzahlung," TQ 103 (1922) 1-22, 145-83; see esp. pp. 1-3. 14 R. Marcus, "Hellenistic Jewish Literature," The Jews: Their History, Culture, and Religion, ed. L. Finkelstein
(New York, 1949, I9603) vol. 2, pp. 1077-115; V. Tcherikover, "Jewish Apologetic Literature Reconsidered," Eos
48.3 (1957) 169-93; G. Del ling, "Perspektiven der Erforschung des hellenistischen Judentums," HUCA 45 (1974)
133-76. 15 M. Hengel, Judentum und Hellenismus (WUNT 10; Tubingen, 1969, 19732; ET by Fortress Press of Philadelphia
in 1974). 16On ancient book titles see lately, E. Schmalzriedt, Peri physeds: Zur Fruhgeschichte der Buchtitel (Munich,
1970).

Holtz argued for Christian
interpolations.17 Such interpolations, or other forms of editing, are not intrinsically
improbable, but the evidence is not overwhelming. Sources
If source means what the Gospel of Mark is to Matthew, or Pygmalion to My Fair Lady,
a source for Joseph and Aseneth, or part of it, direct or indirect, has not yet appeared. More is gained if we amend the question of sources to include subject matter or themes,
which the author may have picked up from tradition, oral or written, and worked into a
new story, much as West Side Story is based on Romeo and Juliet and both reflect the
17 "Christliche Interpolationen in 'Joseph und Aseneth,' " NTS 14 (1967-68) 482-97. On the problem outside
Joseph and Aseneth, see G. B. Coleman, The Phenomenon of Christian Interpolations into Jewish Apocalyptic Texts
(Ph.D. diss., Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tenn., 1974).eternal theme of young love thwarted by old convention, or individual happiness shattered
by group rivalry. However, much of what has been cited in this context at best furnishes
parallels to isolated motifs: the Egyptian Tale of the Doomed Prince, the Greek tradition
concerning beautiful Helen of Troy, the Prayer of Joseph,18 or Jewish legends making
Aseneth the daughter of Dinah (Gen 34).19 Batiffol, Aptowitzer, and Philonenko attach
great importance to a Syriac text of very late attestation narrating how an eagle carried
Dinah's daughter to Egypt and cradled her on Potiphar's altar.20 This text they think is a
later form of an old Jewish legend from which Joseph and Aseneth was developed, albeit
with some dissimulation, because a daughter of Dinah could hardly serve as a proto-
proselyte.21 The pertinent passage runs:
And the wife of this priest (Putiphar) took her (the baby) and brought her a nurse. And they rejoiced with great joy, for they had neither a boy nor a girl. And when
the little girl grew up, Putiphar had a splendid dwelling constructed where he allowed
her to live, and appointed virgins to serve her. And many chiefs' sons asked (for)
her (in marriage), for she was beautiful to look at; but they did not suit her. And
when Joseph came before Pharaoh he made him mount his carriage, and gave him
the seal of the kingdom. And the Egyptians escorted him in triumph across all of
Egypt, and his fame spread in all regions. And he (Pharaoh) gave him the daughter
of the priest, Putiphar, for his wife, and he (Joseph) did not repulse [lit. hate] the
daughter of Dina, (his) sister.And he (Pharaoh) gave him the daughter
of the priest, Putiphar, for his wife, and he (Joseph) did not repulse [lit. hate] the
daughter of Dina, (his) sister. There seems to be some contact with Joseph and Aseneth here, but as it is restricted to
chapters If., surely the dependence is on the legend's side.22
More helpful is hellenistic romance, especially the erotic variety as represented by the
Great Five: Chariton's Chaereas and Calirrhoe, Xenophon of Ephesus' Ephesiaca, Longus'
Daphnis and Chloe, Achilles Tatius' Clitophron and Leucippe, and Heliodorus' Aethiopica;
or by Apuleius' The Golden Ass and Cupid and Psyche.23 Much like these stories, Joseph
and Aseneth relates a love that is achieved with difficulty only to find itself exposed to
dangerous adventures to which a happy end is wrought by the hand of a benign Fate
(although adventure which makes up the bulk of the novels is represented by just one
episode in JosAsen). In particular, as an utterly conceited heroine who is swept off her feet
by a handsome male and then thrown into the blackest despair, from which she disentangles
herself by self-abasement and supernatural assistance, Aseneth is a worthy companion of
Xenophon's Habrocomes and Anthia or Apuleius' Psyche. The historian's touch which is
discernible in Joseph and Aseneth, although in the biblical vein rather than the Greek, does
not militate against this suggestion. This is characteristic of the hellenistic novel also,
especially of Chariton.24 As to conversion forming part of a romance, apart from the general
18 Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 32-43. See PrJos contained herein. 19 Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924) 243-56. 20 First published by G. Oppenheim, Fabula Josephi et Asenethae apocrypha e libro Syriaco Latine versa (Phil,
diss., Berlin; Berlin, 1886) pp. 4f., from the MS Staatsbibliothek, Berlin (DDR), MS Syr. 174, ff. 75*-76», after
A.D. 1827; repr. by Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924) 248, n. 22; French version by Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp.Holtz argued for Christian
interpolations.17 Such interpolations, or other forms of editing, are not intrinsically
improbable, but the evidence is not overwhelming. Sources
If source means what the Gospel of Mark is to Matthew, or Pygmalion to My Fair Lady,
a source for Joseph and Aseneth, or part of it, direct or indirect, has not yet appeared. More is gained if we amend the question of sources to include subject matter or themes,
which the author may have picked up from tradition, oral or written, and worked into a
new story, much as West Side Story is based on Romeo and Juliet and both reflect the
17 "Christliche Interpolationen in 'Joseph und Aseneth,' " NTS 14 (1967-68) 482-97. On the problem outside
Joseph and Aseneth, see G. B. Coleman, The Phenomenon of Christian Interpolations into Jewish Apocalyptic Texts
(Ph.D. diss., Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tenn., 1974).

by Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924) 248, n. 22; French version by Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 34f. A second MS was described by S. P. Brock ("Notes on Some Texts in the Mingana Collection," JSS 14 [1969]
205-26; see 206f.: Mingana MS Syr. 177, fols. 227«-28«, c. A.D. 1870). 21 They discern traces of the legend, e.g. in 1:5; 22:9; 23:14. 22 A legend of this type may, however, have influenced the much-debated miniature in the Vienna Genesis, fol. 16"
(6th cent, A.D), which would point to its age; cf. M. D. Levin, "Some Jewish Sources for the Vienna Genesis,"
Art Bulletin 54 (1972) 241-44. 23 First noted by Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, pp. 43-48 and passim) whose main interest, however, is to point
out parallels to individual motifs. See further Chr. Burchard, Zeuge, pp. 59-86; S. West, The Classical Quarterly,
N.S. 24 (1974) 70-81; R. I. Pervo, SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, pp. 171-81. On Gk. romance generally, see K. Kerenyi, Die Griechisch-Orientalische Romanliteratur in religionsgeschichtlicher Beleuchtung (Tubingen, 1927; repr. Darmstadt, 1962); Der antike Roman (Libelli 315; Darmstadt, 1962); M. Braun, History and Romance in Graeco-
Oriental Literature (Oxford, 1938); S. Trenkner, The Greek novella in the classical period (Cambridge, 1958); R. Merkelbach, Roman und Mysterium in der Antike (Munich, 1962); B. E. Perry, The Ancient Romances (Sather
Classical Lectures 37; Berkeley, Calif., 1967); T. Hagg, Narrative Technique in Ancient Greek Romances (Skrifter
utgivna av Svenska Institutet i A then, Series in 8°, 8; Stockholm, 1971). 24 He seems to give himself the air of a contemporary of the events which are way back. One wonders if the author
of JosAsen has the same thing in mind.presence of religion, sometimes with an outright propagandists drive (Heliodorus), there is
Apuleius, Book 1125 and (in a way) Cupid and Psyche again. This is not to postulate literary dependence on either side, but there may be independent
adaptation of common material. If the Kerenyi-Merkelbach school is right, a myth may be
at the bottom of this,26 but further investigation is needed. It should cover the whole range
of ancient romance in the wider sense of the term, which also includes such writings as
Ahiqar, Judith, 3 Maccabees, Daniel chapters 1-6, certain passages from Josephus, the Life
of Alexander, the Life of Aesop, the Pseudo-Clementines, or the apocryphal Acts of the
Apostles, and the Greek novella. Two more possible sources (dealt with later) are the Jewish
ritual and the allegorical patterns which, according to some, underlie Joseph and Aseneth
at certain points. Another question is whether models may have suggested or influenced, albeit by contrast,
the composition of Joseph and Aseneth without contributing much to its narrative content. A writer who had read Ruth, Judith, Tobit, or Esther would perhaps be more inclined to
tackle a figure from Israel's history, especially a woman, than one who had not. Then there
is the Story of Joseph, though not an independent book. Joseph and Aseneth may have been
inspired, among other things, by a desire to ensure that Joseph's wife become the heroine
of a story that would be similar to that of her husband.27 The romances are due for further
consideration under this heading as well.28 Most important, however, is a number of Jewish
and Christian texts relating to conversion, especially the ones containing "conversion
visions" (TJob 2-5; ApAb 1-11; Acts 9:1-19 par. 22:6-16; 26:12-18) and texts like Dan
4; Lk 7:36-50; Mt 16:16-18.Joseph and Aseneth may have been
inspired, among other things, by a desire to ensure that Joseph's wife become the heroine
of a story that would be similar to that of her husband.27 The romances are due for further
consideration under this heading as well.28 Most important, however, is a number of Jewish
and Christian texts relating to conversion, especially the ones containing "conversion
visions" (TJob 2-5; ApAb 1-11; Acts 9:1-19 par. 22:6-16; 26:12-18) and texts like Dan
4; Lk 7:36-50; Mt 16:16-18. They show, despite the differences they may have among
each other and with Joseph and Aseneth, that the conversion section, for all that it may
owe to the romantic genre, is constructed along the lines of a pattern, current in hellenistic
Judaism, as to how a conversion, particularly of a person who was to be a model, ought to
be presented.29
We are on safer ground when it comes to ascertaining the origin of details. Many of
these can be traced back to the Old Testament, to the early Jewish literature, to oral
traditions, and to Jewish traditions found in early Christian writings.30 The general framework,
the characters, and many a detail of the story are of course drawn from Genesis, especially
the Story of Joseph.31 The exception is Pharaoh's son,32 unless he is modeled upon Shechem,
the son of Hamor (Gen 34, but cf. Ex 11:5). The individual features of Jacob and his sons
(see e.g. 4:7; 6:4, 6; 22:7, 11) can be paralleled from other intertestamental writings. Pharaoh's philo-Semitism recalls the kindly views which Daniel or the Letter of Aristeas
have their respective sovereigns take to Judaism. The conversion section, particularly the
angel's visit, has some important points in common with Judges 13 (retold in LAB 42; cf. 23 For a commentary, see J. G. Griffiths, Apuleius of Madauros: The I sis-Book (Etudes Prlliminaires aux Religions
Orientales dans 1'Empire Romain 39; Leiden, 1975). 26 See nn. 23 and 81; Zeuge, pp. 81-86.23 and 81; Zeuge, pp. 81-86. 27 Some have detected its influence in Esther (A. Meinhold, "Die Gattung der Josephsgeschichte und des Estherbuches:
Diasporanovelle," ZAW 87 [1975] 306-24; 88 [1976] 72-93) and Tobit (L. Ruppert, "Das Buch Tobias—ein
Modellfall nachgestaltender Erzahlung," Wort, Lied und Gottesspruch: Beitrdge zur Septuaginta. Festschrift fur
Joseph Ziegler, ed. J. Schreiner [Forschung zur Bibel 1; Wurzburg, 1972] pp. 109-19). 28 Here the question of contrast comes up. Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, p. 44) thinks that as a "puritan novel"
JosAsen is a pigeon among the cats. But Chariton or Xenophon of Ephesus are not very different, and all novels,
although not exactly Victorian in their outlook on sexual matters, take a firm stand on female pudicity and conjugal
faithfulness. The triumph of chastity over all temptations that are waged against it is one of the main devices to keep
the action going. There is, however, a marked difference between the demure, if not in the least disinterested, attitude
in which Aseneth strives toward her happiness, and the ruses employed, e.g. by Dionysius, one of the good characters
in Chariton, to lure an unwilling Callirhoe into matrimony. 29 A wealth of material and interpretative suggestions is amassed by K. Berger (Auferstehung). Close structural
parallelism between Acts 9:1-19 and the conversional element in JosAsen, esp. chs. 4-19, was suggested by Burchard
(Zeuge, pp. 86-105). Cf. also U. Wilckens, Orientierung an Jesus, pp. 394-424. 30 See Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924); Berger, Auferstehung-, "Judisch-hellenistische Missionsliteratur und apokryphe
Apostelakten," Kairos N.S. 17 (1975) 232-48; E. W. Smith, Jr., "Joseph Material in Joseph and Asenath and
Josephus Relating to the Testament of Joseph," SCS 5, pp. 133-37. 31 Or some paraphrase such as Jub? Cf. the dates in 1:If.; 3:1; 22:1. On the Story of Joseph see D. B.by Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924) 248, n. 22; French version by Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 34f. A second MS was described by S. P. Brock ("Notes on Some Texts in the Mingana Collection," JSS 14 [1969]
205-26; see 206f.: Mingana MS Syr. 177, fols. 227«-28«, c. A.D. 1870). 21 They discern traces of the legend, e.g. in 1:5; 22:9; 23:14. 22 A legend of this type may, however, have influenced the much-debated miniature in the Vienna Genesis, fol. 16"
(6th cent, A.D), which would point to its age; cf. M. D. Levin, "Some Jewish Sources for the Vienna Genesis,"
Art Bulletin 54 (1972) 241-44. 23 First noted by Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, pp. 43-48 and passim) whose main interest, however, is to point
out parallels to individual motifs. See further Chr. Burchard, Zeuge, pp. 59-86; S. West, The Classical Quarterly,
N.S. 24 (1974) 70-81; R. I. Pervo, SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, pp. 171-81. On Gk. romance generally, see K. Kerenyi, Die Griechisch-Orientalische Romanliteratur in religionsgeschichtlicher Beleuchtung (Tubingen, 1927; repr. Darmstadt, 1962); Der antike Roman (Libelli 315; Darmstadt, 1962); M. Braun, History and Romance in Graeco-
Oriental Literature (Oxford, 1938); S. Trenkner, The Greek novella in the classical period (Cambridge, 1958); R. Merkelbach, Roman und Mysterium in der Antike (Munich, 1962); B. E. Perry, The Ancient Romances (Sather
Classical Lectures 37; Berkeley, Calif., 1967); T. Hagg, Narrative Technique in Ancient Greek Romances (Skrifter
utgivna av Svenska Institutet i A then, Series in 8°, 8; Stockholm, 1971). 24 He seems to give himself the air of a contemporary of the events which are way back. One wonders if the author
of JosAsen has the same thing in mind.

On the Story of Joseph see D. B. Redford, A
Study of the Biblical Story of Joseph (Genesis 37-50) (Supplements to VT 20; Leiden, 1970); E. I. Lowenthal, The
Joseph Narrative in Genesis: An Interpretation (New York, 1973); Meinhold, ZAW 87 (1975) 306-24 and 88 (1976)
72-93. 32 He remains anonymous, as do all persons (except Joakim of Moab, 1:9) and places in JosAsen which are nameless
or not referred to in the Bible. For a different handling cf. TJob and LAB.also Judg 6:11-24). Benjamin's bravery is a re-enactment of David slaying Goliath (ISam
17). The prayers (8:9; 12f.; 17:10; 21:11-21; 27:10), meditations (6:2-8; 11:3-14, 16-18;
17:9), and eulogies (3:3; 8:3; 15:12; 17:6; 19:8; 21:4, 6) could hardly have been composed
without knowledge of traditional forms of such devotional texts.33
Whether or not there is a common ancestry for the subject matter, many cliches which
are typical, if not exclusive, marks of the hellenistic romance can be found in Joseph and
Aseneth. A fine example is 1:3-6, which can be compared with Chariton 1.1. If.:
Hermocrates, the strategos (chief magistrate) of the Syracusans, the one who defeated
the Athenians, had a daughter by the name of Callirhoe, a wonderful specimen of a
virgin and the delight of all Sicily. For her beauty was not human but divine, not
that of a Nereid or a nymph of the mountains, but of the Virgin Aphrodite herself. The fame of the incredible spectacle penetrated everywhere, and suitors flocked into
Syracuse, princes and sons of tyrants, not only from Sicily, but also from Italy and
the mainland (or Epirus) and the (non-Greek) nations on the mainland. A second example, which can be compared to 18:9, is Achilles Tatius 1.4.3: Leucippe's
"mouth was a flower of roses, when the rose begins to open the leaves' lips."34
A problem which must yet be investigated is to what extent the realia—such as
architecture, landscape, seasons, products, clothing, and hygiene—reflect what the author
saw in his day, and how much the dealings of the characters mirror contemporary events. Obviously this also has some bearing on the questions of date and provenance (see below). The romances exhibit a good deal of anachronistic realism in these matters. As to Joseph
and Aseneth, one gathers that the author, whose interest in lively detail is limited anyway,
owes more to the biblical narrative and related literature than to an interested knowledge of
the world in which he lived.The romances exhibit a good deal of anachronistic realism in these matters. As to Joseph
and Aseneth, one gathers that the author, whose interest in lively detail is limited anyway,
owes more to the biblical narrative and related literature than to an interested knowledge of
the world in which he lived. Language and style
If Aseneth's looks are like Sarah's (1:5), so is her tongue. All of Joseph and Aseneth is
written in a simple Greek koine with a marked Hebrew and/or Aramaic flavor commonly
called "Semitic."35 It avoids subordinate clauses and conjunctive or absolute participles
(see 19:1 for an exception). Most sentences start with "and," with the verb immediately
following. Particles other than "and" are used very sparingly. Redundant possessive and
demonstrative pronouns abound. A noun in the genitive is often used as a substitute for an
adjectival attribute (e.g. "bride of God" 4:1; "prison of darkness" 4:10; "bread of life"
8:5; "bait of life" 21:21), and in the nominative for an adjectival complement ("fellowship
with her is destruction and corruption" 7:5). There is ample evidence of the cognate
accusative, usually carrying an attribute, in lieu of an adverb (lit. "to rejoice a great joy"
3:3; "to fear a great fear" 6:1; "to tremble a heavy trembling" 10:1; "to name the name
of God" 11:15; "to insult an insult" 23:14; "to pain a pain" 25:3), and of related uses of
the associative or instrumental dative (lit. "to weep with great and bitter weeping" 9:2;
"to sigh with great sighing" 10:3; "to die with death" 21:8; "to wound with a heavy
wound" 27:2). The Greek words prosopon, "face," and cheir, "hand," are employed to
form composite prepositions (e.g. 5:2; 27:7). Most of these phenomena, as well as the
author's vocabulary and phraseology generally, can be paralleled from the Septuagint. The
author, however, is not simply imitating the Old Testament or some other concrete model.36
Borrowing is at times quite obvious (e.g.On the Story of Joseph see D. B. Redford, A
Study of the Biblical Story of Joseph (Genesis 37-50) (Supplements to VT 20; Leiden, 1970); E. I. Lowenthal, The
Joseph Narrative in Genesis: An Interpretation (New York, 1973); Meinhold, ZAW 87 (1975) 306-24 and 88 (1976)
72-93. 32 He remains anonymous, as do all persons (except Joakim of Moab, 1:9) and places in JosAsen which are nameless
or not referred to in the Bible. For a different handling cf. TJob and LAB.

Most of these phenomena, as well as the
author's vocabulary and phraseology generally, can be paralleled from the Septuagint. The
author, however, is not simply imitating the Old Testament or some other concrete model.36
Borrowing is at times quite obvious (e.g. at 12:7; 15:7; 17:8; 20:5; 22:7; 27:1-5; 29:2),
although literal quotations are few (cf. TJob for contrast).37 However, basically the same
33N. B. Johnson, Prayer in the Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha (JBLMS 2; Philadelphia, Pa., 1948); G. Mayer,
"Die Funktion der Gebete in den alttestamentlichen Apokryphen," Theokratia 2 (1970-72) 16-25; J. Heinemann,
Prayer in the Talmud (Studia Judaica 9; Berlin, 1977). 34 A slight Persian touch is also characteristic. Cf. the satraps in e.g. 1:3, and Aseneth1 s garments in e.g. 3:6. 33 Philonenko, Joseph etAsineth, pp. 28-32; G. D. Kilpatrick, review of Burchard, Untersuchungen, and Philonenko,
Joseph et Asineth, in NovT 12 (1970) 233-36; G. Delling, JSJ 9 (1978) 29-56. Delling notes that the influence of
the Pss and Gen is most palpable. 36 He could have done so without discrediting himself. Imitation was a virtue rather than a vice in some areas of
ancient literature. Chariton is leaning heavily on the historical prose of Xenophon of Athens. 37 One would like to know to what extent deviation from our LXX text is because of a different form or forms of
text. There is no evidence so far for independent knowledge of MT or another Heb. text form.type of Greek, though with varying admixtures of Semitisms, is found for instance in the
Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, the Testament of Job, Luke-Acts, and Hermas. There
was a living tradition to write on sacred subjects in a biblicized language. On the other hand this recognition does not explain everything. Occasionally there is a
classical simile (8:5) or turn (21:21; 22:6), a quasi-philosophical touch (12:2 beginning), an
unexpected metonymy (20:1), a paronomasia (kakon anti kakou, "evil for evil," e.g. 23:9),
parechesis (pelos polys\ "plenty of mud," 10:16; 13:7, cf. 15:3), or chiasmus (e.g. 11:13). There are also words, with or without Septuagint support, that seem to be rare (apokrybe
6:6; barythymein 10:1; brimema 10:15; charopoios 22:7; delea[s]ma 21:21; eiddlomanes
12:9; hypolampas 14:9; katapetasma 10:2; prodromos or -mon 19:2, 4; sitistos 10:13). This
side of the author's vocabulary will have to be given further attention before we can reach
a definite conclusion regarding his language as a whole. The narrative evolves at a leisurely pace with plenty of repetition. It is full of recapitulation
("And there was ... a spring of abundant living water, and below the spring was a big
cistern receiving the water of that spring," 2:12), stereotyped auxiliary verbs and turns
("she hurried and," "he stretched out his hand and," "they prostrated themselves before
him, face down to the ground, and"), and mechanical epithets ("Pentephres priest of
Heliopolis," "Joseph the Powerful One of God"). The various and sundry scenes of
Aseneth getting dressed (3:6; 10:10; 14:14f.; 18:5f.) and emotional outbursts (e.g. 4:9; 6:1;
8:8; 9: If.; 10:1, 3, 15) show that variety of expression is not a concern of the author. Also
he has a leaning toward overemphasis. The overall result is a pompous rigidity of style
which is stiff to us, but presumably it was more attractive to the author and his readers.Also
he has a leaning toward overemphasis. The overall result is a pompous rigidity of style
which is stiff to us, but presumably it was more attractive to the author and his readers. Genre
We can only speculate whether the author intended to write a piece of fiction or a work
of history; but we can see the result: a romance in the wider sense of the word.38 Can it be
associated with any of the possible subdivisions of this heterogeneous ensemble which "is
probably the most formless of all ancient genres?"39 The books of Ruth, Esther, Tobit, and
Judith have been put forward as closest literary affinities, with some similarities to Jonah
acknowledged.40 These writings form an ill defined group, yet they resemble Joseph and
Aseneth in language and religion, and the eminent role both play in life. Female characters
dominate, there is marriage, and Jewish-gentile relations are at stake. There is also some
similarity in structure (see 12:1; 21:10, 11). But there is more interest in historical shading
(Joseph and Aseneth is closer to the Joseph story here), and none of these books makes
love's labors a constituent of the plot. This feature, as well as the adventures, is shared by
Joseph and Aseneth with the erotic novels.41 But is the element of eroticism and adventure
strong enough for Joseph and Aseneth to be considered a specimen of this variety? In Part
I love is almost superseded by the conversion theme; in Part II it is barely present. The
general background of high treason and fighting is romantic indeed, but the actors are mostly
busy discussing what they have in mind or why it must not be done. The naivete* and the
lack of historiographical detail, and the brevity of Joseph and Aseneth, distinguish it from
the erotic romances.Most of these phenomena, as well as the
author's vocabulary and phraseology generally, can be paralleled from the Septuagint. The
author, however, is not simply imitating the Old Testament or some other concrete model.36
Borrowing is at times quite obvious (e.g. at 12:7; 15:7; 17:8; 20:5; 22:7; 27:1-5; 29:2),
although literal quotations are few (cf. TJob for contrast).37 However, basically the same
33N. B. Johnson, Prayer in the Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha (JBLMS 2; Philadelphia, Pa., 1948); G. Mayer,
"Die Funktion der Gebete in den alttestamentlichen Apokryphen," Theokratia 2 (1970-72) 16-25; J. Heinemann,
Prayer in the Talmud (Studia Judaica 9; Berlin, 1977). 34 A slight Persian touch is also characteristic. Cf. the satraps in e.g. 1:3, and Aseneth1 s garments in e.g. 3:6. 33 Philonenko, Joseph etAsineth, pp. 28-32; G. D. Kilpatrick, review of Burchard, Untersuchungen, and Philonenko,
Joseph et Asineth, in NovT 12 (1970) 233-36; G. Delling, JSJ 9 (1978) 29-56. Delling notes that the influence of
the Pss and Gen is most palpable. 36 He could have done so without discrediting himself. Imitation was a virtue rather than a vice in some areas of
ancient literature. Chariton is leaning heavily on the historical prose of Xenophon of Athens. 37 One would like to know to what extent deviation from our LXX text is because of a different form or forms of
text. There is no evidence so far for independent knowledge of MT or another Heb. text form.

The
general background of high treason and fighting is romantic indeed, but the actors are mostly
busy discussing what they have in mind or why it must not be done. The naivete* and the
lack of historiographical detail, and the brevity of Joseph and Aseneth, distinguish it from
the erotic romances. Recently an attempt has been made to sever the Jewish book from
them and put it alongside the apocryphal acts, especially Paul and Thecla, as a "religious
proselyte romance."42 This attempt seems to emphasize unduly the conversion aspect to the
detriment of others; moreover, there is no figure in Joseph and Aseneth resembling an
apostle or missionary as portrayed in the Christian Acts. So while this approach has its
merits, it does not explain everything. R. I. Pervo43 assumes that, as a specimen of the
romantic genre, Joseph and Aseneth is best regarded as a piece of literary syncretism. Pervo
38 See e.g. P. Weimar, "Formen fruhjudischer Literatur," Literatur und Religion des Friihjudentums, eds. J. Maier
and J. Schreiner (Wurzburg, 1973) pp. 123-62; see pp. 130-35. Weimar strings Jdt, Esth, 3Mac, JosAsen, Tob,
LetAris, Art, and TJos chs. 2-9, together as novels. 39 Pervo, SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, p. 72. 40 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 106f.; Kilpatrick, NovT 12 (1970) 234. 41 Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 43-48; West, Classical Quarterly N.S. 24 (1974) 70-81. 42 T. Szepessy, "L'histoire de Joseph et d'Aseneth et le roman antique," Studia Clas ska Universitatis Scientiarum
Debreceniensis 10-11 (1974-75) 121-31. 43 SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, pp. 171-81.feels that the book updated the older form of the "Sapiental novel" (e.g. Ah, Tob, Dan 1-
6) by taking in structural elements and motifs of the erotic variety. He may underestimate
the affinities to the literature dealing with conversion,44 but generally he seems to be on the
right track. Date and provenance
Batiffol introduced Joseph and Aseneth to modern scholarship as a Christian work of the
fifth century A.D. from Asia Minor, based on a short Jewish legend of the fourth century.45
This infelicitous presentation did much to prevent students of the Bible and Judaism from
noticing the book. Kautzsch and Charles did not include it. Ironically enough, when a
reviewer concluded that Joseph and Aseneth must be a Jewish composition from Jesus' time
or even earlier, Batiffol all but agreed.46 Every competent scholar has since affirmed that
Joseph and Aseneth is Jewish, with perhaps some Christian interpolations; none has put the
book much after A.D. 200, and some have placed it as early as the second century B.C. As
to the place of origin, the majority of scholars look to Egypt. Those in favor of a Semitic
original suggest Palestine; and there is a plea for Syria.47 However, the date and provenance
have never been thoroughly examined.48
What we can say with certainty may be summarized in the following way. The book
itself is probably first attested toward the end of the fourth century A.D. Peter the Deacon
of Monte Cassino writes in his book On the Holy Places (shortly before A.D. 1137), in a
passage which he probably culled from the lost beginning of the Pilgrimage of Etheria (c. A.D. 382):49
Heliopolis is twelve miles from Babylonia (Cairo). In the center of this city is a
large piece of ground on which there is the Temple of the Sun, and there is Petefres'
house. Between Petefres' house and the Temple is Asennec's house.In the center of this city is a
large piece of ground on which there is the Temple of the Sun, and there is Petefres'
house. Between Petefres' house and the Temple is Asennec's house. The inner wall
within the city is rather old and made of stone (surrounding, or connecting?) only
the Temple with Asennec's house and Petefres' house. Aseneth's house is known exclusively from Joseph and Aseneth. People at Heliopolis, a
tourist center long before the first Christian pilgrim's progress (see 1:2), seem to have put
their finger on the localities described in Joseph and Aseneth, unless the author made use
of some local tradition already extant (in which case, however, one would like to find a
reference to the famous obelisk or obelisks in the text). But Joseph and Aseneth must be
even earlier than this testimony. A book glorifying the mother of the proselytes ought to
have been written before Greek-speaking Judaism ceased to make its impact on the ancient
world and gave way to Christianity.50 On the other hand, Joseph and Aseneth presupposes
at least some of the Septuagint, and probably all of it. It is hard to decode this into dates,
but we are probably safe to say that the book was written between 100 B.C. and Hadrian's
edict against circumcision, which has to do with the Second Jewish War of A.D. 132-135. If Joseph and Aseneth comes from Egypt, the Jewish revolt under Trajan (c. A.D. 115-117)
is the latest possible date.51 It does appear to have originated in Egypt, since Aseneth, and
44 Burchard, Zeuge; Berger, Auferstehung; Szepessy, Studio Classica Universitatis Scientiarum Debreceniensis 10-
11 (1974-75) 121-31. 45 Batiffol, Studia Patristica, pp. 30-37. 46 L. Duchesne, Bulletin critique 10 (1889) 461-66; see 466; Batiffol, review of M. R. James, Apocrypha Anecdota,
vol. 2 (T&S 5:1; Cambridge, 1897) in RB 7 (1898) 302-4; see 303. 47 Brooks, Joseph and Asenath, pp. xvii-xviii. 48 For a survey, see Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp.The
general background of high treason and fighting is romantic indeed, but the actors are mostly
busy discussing what they have in mind or why it must not be done. The naivete* and the
lack of historiographical detail, and the brevity of Joseph and Aseneth, distinguish it from
the erotic romances. Recently an attempt has been made to sever the Jewish book from
them and put it alongside the apocryphal acts, especially Paul and Thecla, as a "religious
proselyte romance."42 This attempt seems to emphasize unduly the conversion aspect to the
detriment of others; moreover, there is no figure in Joseph and Aseneth resembling an
apostle or missionary as portrayed in the Christian Acts. So while this approach has its
merits, it does not explain everything. R. I. Pervo43 assumes that, as a specimen of the
romantic genre, Joseph and Aseneth is best regarded as a piece of literary syncretism. Pervo
38 See e.g. P. Weimar, "Formen fruhjudischer Literatur," Literatur und Religion des Friihjudentums, eds. J. Maier
and J. Schreiner (Wurzburg, 1973) pp. 123-62; see pp. 130-35. Weimar strings Jdt, Esth, 3Mac, JosAsen, Tob,
LetAris, Art, and TJos chs. 2-9, together as novels. 39 Pervo, SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, p. 72. 40 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 106f.; Kilpatrick, NovT 12 (1970) 234. 41 Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 43-48; West, Classical Quarterly N.S. 24 (1974) 70-81. 42 T. Szepessy, "L'histoire de Joseph et d'Aseneth et le roman antique," Studia Clas ska Universitatis Scientiarum
Debreceniensis 10-11 (1974-75) 121-31. 43 SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, pp. 171-81.

xvii-xviii. 48 For a survey, see Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 133-51; Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 99-109. "Translated from the autograph as printed in Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 137; somewhat differently, J. Wilkinson,
Egeria's Travels (London, 1971) p. 204. 50Cf. generally, B. J. Bamberger, Proselytism in the Talmudic Period (Cincinnati, Ohio, 1939; repr. New York,
1968); W. G. Braude, Jewish Proselyting in the First Five Centuries of the Common Era, the Age of the Tannaim
and Amoraim (Brown University Studies 6; Providence, R.I., 1940); K. G. Kuhn and H. Stegemann, 44Proselyten,"
Pauly-Wissowa Suppl. 9 (1962) 1248-83; K. G. Kuhn, "proselytos," TDNT, vol. 6, 727-44; N. J. McEleney,
"Conversion, Circumcision and the Law," NTS 20 (1974) 319-41. 51 On the revolts generally, see E. M. Smallwood, The Jews under Roman Rule: From Pompey to Diocletian (SJLA
20; Leiden, 1976) esp. pp. 389-466. Perhaps we may even go back until the troubles in Alexandria under Caligula
(c. A.D. 38). Gentile-Jewish friction never ceased after that.not another woman such as Ruth or Rahab (Josh 2), is the heroine of the story. Other suggestions for dating and locating Joseph and Aseneth are mere speculation. Surely no individual incident such as the conversion of Queen Helena of Adiabene, an
elderly lady (died c. A.D. 65), was needed to trigger the composition of Joseph and Aseneth.52
That Egypt figures in the book as an independent country ruled by a philo-Semitic dynasty
does not prove that the novel was written under the later Ptolemies before the Romans took
over.53 The absence of a reference to proselyte baptism is of little avail since we do not
know when the custom began.54 Lexical chronology is also of little help. We may note that
words like anazdopoiein (8:9; 15:5), brimema (10:15), eiddlomanes (12:9), ekliparein (1:7;
15:7), hemithanes (27:3), male parthenos (4:7; 8:1), proskairos (12:15), sitistos (10:13),
sitodotes (25:5), sygkleronomos (24:14) are not attested with certainty until the first century
B.C. or even later.55 But Greek lexicography is not advanced enough to enable us to be
certain when a word first appeared. An Essene56 or Therapeutic57 origin of Joseph and Aseneth is maintained by some scholars;
but Aseneth's way of living, her marriage, and happiness thereafter are hardly in keeping
with the quasi-monastic rigorism of these groups. Philonenko suggests a rural milieu outside Alexandria because he thinks Joseph and
Aseneth is less intransigent toward paganism than an Alexandrian like Philo.58 Quite possibly
the book represents a more popular type of Jewish culture than does Philo, who among all
Jewish writers we know is closest to the hellenistic ideal of a well-bred, well-read, and
well-to-do gentleman spending his life in the service of both learning and politics. But this
does not necessarily imply the countryside.Philonenko suggests a rural milieu outside Alexandria because he thinks Joseph and
Aseneth is less intransigent toward paganism than an Alexandrian like Philo.58 Quite possibly
the book represents a more popular type of Jewish culture than does Philo, who among all
Jewish writers we know is closest to the hellenistic ideal of a well-bred, well-read, and
well-to-do gentleman spending his life in the service of both learning and politics. But this
does not necessarily imply the countryside. With villages usually adhering more closely to
their traditions than the city dwellers, would a rural community have attracted enough
proselytes and sympathizers to make writing about it worthwhile? Would it be interested in
the finer points of conversion? Would it provide enough of a reading public for Joseph and
Aseneth, supposing, as seems likely, that it was to be read privately and by Jews? (See
below.) Private reading in antiquity took both education and money. Jews were by and
large less illiterate than other populations, and perhaps more willing to buy books, theirs
being a book religion. Nevertheless, one must look for the prospective readers of Joseph
and Aseneth in the upper brackets of Jewish society, although perhaps not the top level;
would Philo have enjoyed it? We know too little about Judaism in and outside Alexandria59
and not yet enough about Joseph and Aseneth to answer these questions.60
Theological importance61
By design, the theological importance of a religious book is in its message. Beyond this
the modern historian will be interested generally in the theological ideas expressed in the
book, particularly in those that are less well documented outside it. Message
Barring heavy generalization, the message of Joseph and Aseneth cannot be rendered by
a single concept or phrase. A story of such length and complexity usually has several things
to say. But they will cohere if it is as well organized as Joseph and Aseneth. 52 Against Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924) 309.xvii-xviii. 48 For a survey, see Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 133-51; Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 99-109. "Translated from the autograph as printed in Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 137; somewhat differently, J. Wilkinson,
Egeria's Travels (London, 1971) p. 204. 50Cf. generally, B. J. Bamberger, Proselytism in the Talmudic Period (Cincinnati, Ohio, 1939; repr. New York,
1968); W. G. Braude, Jewish Proselyting in the First Five Centuries of the Common Era, the Age of the Tannaim
and Amoraim (Brown University Studies 6; Providence, R.I., 1940); K. G. Kuhn and H. Stegemann, 44Proselyten,"
Pauly-Wissowa Suppl. 9 (1962) 1248-83; K. G. Kuhn, "proselytos," TDNT, vol. 6, 727-44; N. J. McEleney,
"Conversion, Circumcision and the Law," NTS 20 (1974) 319-41. 51 On the revolts generally, see E. M. Smallwood, The Jews under Roman Rule: From Pompey to Diocletian (SJLA
20; Leiden, 1976) esp. pp. 389-466. Perhaps we may even go back until the troubles in Alexandria under Caligula
(c. A.D. 38). Gentile-Jewish friction never ceased after that.

But they will cohere if it is as well organized as Joseph and Aseneth. 52 Against Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924) 309. 33 Against G. D. Kilpatrick, "The Last Supper," ExpT 64 (1952-53) 4-8. 54 Cf. T. M. Taylor, "The Beginnings of Jewish Proselyte Baptism," NTS 2 (1955-56) 193-98. 55 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 148-51. 56 K. Kohler, "Asenath, Life and Confession or Prayer of," JE, vol. 2, pp. 172-76; Riessler, TQ 103 (1922) 4-
13; Altjiidisches Schrifttum, pp. 1303f. 57 K. G. Kuhn, "The Lord's Supper and the Communal Meal at Qumran," The Scrolls and the New Testament, ed. K. Stendahl (New York, 1957) pp. 65-93 , 259-65; see esp. 74-77, 261-62; M. Delcor, "Un roman d'amour
d'origine therapeute: Le Livre de Joseph et As6nath," Bulletin de Littirature Ecclisiastique 63 (1962) 3-27. 58 Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 106f. 59 Fbr a genera] survey see Small wood, Jews, pp. 220-55, 364-68. The complete lack of cultic interest in JosAsen
would seem to rule out Leontopolis with its "Temple in Exile" (c. 160 B.C.-A.D. 73), even though it is situated in
the county of Heliopolis, just eighteen kilometers north of the city (today Tell el-Yehudieh). 60 There is no compelling reason to assume that our author was an Egyptian proselyte; contrast Philonenko, Joseph
et Astneth, p. 106. 61 More information is available in the footnotes to the passages referred to in this section.In Part I attention is focused on what happens to Aseneth. She represents the virgin, who
is proud of her virginity, but, eventually chastised by violent passion, must endure hardships
before she is gratified. Yet, since the target of her emotions is Joseph, the son of God, her
story gradually assumes a religious complexion. Pride becomes a symbol for pagan enmity
against God, and passion the sudden desire to be accepted by him aroused by a meeting
with a true follower of God. Consequently love's labors are continued by a period of self-
humiliation leading to conversion. The message of Part I, therefore, is about conversion to
Judaism: It means fullness of life, whereas paganism brings death and eternal destruction. Some scholars have found allegory in the story. Philonenko, for example, detects several
allegorical patterns in the narrative. First, Aseneth is molded in the image of the Egyptian
goddess Neith, whose name she bears (see 1:5), thus insinuating that the deity is giving in
to the Most High God and wants her worshipers to follow her example. Second, there is
astrology in the book. Joseph and Aseneth impersonate the Sun and the Moon uniting in a
holy wedding, thus witnessing to the importance which Judaism, or parts of it, attached to
astrology. Third, there is a mythological pattern of gnostic extraction. Aseneth represents
the mythic figure of Wisdom fallen into error, and Joseph is the divine Logos, who is
coming to rescue her by uniting himself to her. This method of allegorizing the document is too complicated to warrant acceptance. As
to Neith, the appearance of the Lady of Sais seems to have been so variegated, and many
of her attributes so unspecific in the author's day, that very precise parallels would be
needed for Aseneth to be her symbol.62 Joseph and Aseneth, like Greek romance generally,
seems to make use of motifs that stem from mythical and astrological contexts.This method of allegorizing the document is too complicated to warrant acceptance. As
to Neith, the appearance of the Lady of Sais seems to have been so variegated, and many
of her attributes so unspecific in the author's day, that very precise parallels would be
needed for Aseneth to be her symbol.62 Joseph and Aseneth, like Greek romance generally,
seems to make use of motifs that stem from mythical and astrological contexts. But it
remains to be shown that the author did so consciously, and, if he did, that he intended
Joseph and Aseneth to be more than human figures entangled in the vicissitudes of human
love and conversion. Love is a heavenly thing, after all, and so is conversion, to religious
people. To be sure, the affair between Joseph and Aseneth has a deeper meaning. But it is stated
by the text; it is not coded in it. Aseneth, who found her way to God, is also an eternal
City of Refuge for all (not just women) who repent in like manner (15:7; 16:16; 19:5), with
her seven virgins as pillars to support her (17:6). The tradition of Sion, the City of God,
also described under the figure of a woman,63 lies behind this concept. Chapter 15:7a may
be a direct reference to the prophecy on Sion, Zech 2:15 LXX (cf. e.g. Isa 62:4-12; Jer
50:5; 4Ezra 9f.; Rev 21). Moreover, Aseneth as the City of Refuge parallels Abraham (Isa
51:lf.; LAB 23:4f.), Peter, the rock on whom the church is built (Mt 16:16-18), the "pillar
apostles" (Gal 2:9), perhaps also Sarah and Hagar as exegeted by Paul (Gal 4:21-31).M
This is metonymy, not allegory. For Aseneth, as a City of Refuge, does not mean merely
that all proselytes will be safeguarded by God like her. Full protection is offered to all who
seek shelter "in" her, by becoming naturalized descendants of her by rallying themselves
to the Jewish people of whom she is an ancestor. To be "in" Aseneth, however, is not
similar to being "in" Christ.Full protection is offered to all who
seek shelter "in" her, by becoming naturalized descendants of her by rallying themselves
to the Jewish people of whom she is an ancestor. To be "in" Aseneth, however, is not
similar to being "in" Christ. Both concepts are comparable in that salvation depends on
association with an historical person, but association means different things in each case. Aseneth did not continue to be present as a person. She does not continue to live "in" the
proselytes similar to the way "Christ lives in me" (Gal 2:20).65 Only the promises and
62 D. Sanger, Antikes Judentum und die Mysterien, pp. 58-67; idem, "Bekehrung und Exodus: Zum judischen
Traditionshintergrund von 'Joseph und Aseneth,' " JSJ 10 (1979) 11-36; see pp. 13-20. On Neith generally, see
C. J. Bleeker, "The Egyptian Goddess Neith," Studies in Mysticism and Religion presented to Gershom G. Scholem
on his seventieth Birthday by Pupils, Colleagues, and Friends, eds. E. E. Urbach, R. J. Zwi Werblowsky, and Ch. Wirszubski (Jerusalem, 1967) pp. 41-56; repr. in Bleeker, The Rainbow (SHR 30; Leiden, 1975) pp. 128-42. 63Cf. W. W. Reader, Die Stadt Gottes in der Johannesapokalypse (Theol. diss.; Gdttingen, 1972); G. Fohrer and
E. Lohse, "Si<5« etc.," TDNT, vol. 7, 292-338. 64Cf. also Jer 1:18; IQH 3.37; Mt 5:14; Eph 2:20; ITim 3:15. Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 118-21; C. Kahler,
"Zur Form- und Traditionsgeschichte von Matth. XVI. 17-19," NTS 23 (1977) 36-58. U. Fischer (Eschatologie und
Jenseitserwartung im hellenistischen Diasporajudentun [BZNW 44; Berlin, 1978] pp. 115-23) thinks that Aseneth
bears a touch of heavenly Jerusalem, considering that the heavenly rest of the saved is also described as a walled city
(see below). The point, however, is not elaborated. At any event, we should not regard the description of Aseneth
as a city as the outcome of a process of de-eschatologization. 65 H.But they will cohere if it is as well organized as Joseph and Aseneth. 52 Against Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924) 309. 33 Against G. D. Kilpatrick, "The Last Supper," ExpT 64 (1952-53) 4-8. 54 Cf. T. M. Taylor, "The Beginnings of Jewish Proselyte Baptism," NTS 2 (1955-56) 193-98. 55 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 148-51. 56 K. Kohler, "Asenath, Life and Confession or Prayer of," JE, vol. 2, pp. 172-76; Riessler, TQ 103 (1922) 4-
13; Altjiidisches Schrifttum, pp. 1303f. 57 K. G. Kuhn, "The Lord's Supper and the Communal Meal at Qumran," The Scrolls and the New Testament, ed. K. Stendahl (New York, 1957) pp. 65-93 , 259-65; see esp. 74-77, 261-62; M. Delcor, "Un roman d'amour
d'origine therapeute: Le Livre de Joseph et As6nath," Bulletin de Littirature Ecclisiastique 63 (1962) 3-27. 58 Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 106f. 59 Fbr a genera] survey see Small wood, Jews, pp. 220-55, 364-68. The complete lack of cultic interest in JosAsen
would seem to rule out Leontopolis with its "Temple in Exile" (c. 160 B.C.-A.D. 73), even though it is situated in
the county of Heliopolis, just eighteen kilometers north of the city (today Tell el-Yehudieh). 60 There is no compelling reason to assume that our author was an Egyptian proselyte; contrast Philonenko, Joseph
et Astneth, p. 106. 61 More information is available in the footnotes to the passages referred to in this section.

At any event, we should not regard the description of Aseneth
as a city as the outcome of a process of de-eschatologization. 65 H. Thyen (Studien zur Sundenvergebung im Neuen Testament und seinen alttestamentlichen und judischen
Voraussetzungen [FRLANT 96; Gdttingen, 1970] pp. 126f.) wrongly assumes that Aseneth is transformed into
Metanoia as her heavenly counterpart.qualities with which she was endowed remain available, like the physical and material
heritage that is inherited by a particular family. A woman portrayed in the role elsewhere occupied by men should not come as a surprise. The Sion tradition, at least when taken up directly, paved the way for this portrayal (cf. also Gal 4:21-31). This portrait may also reflect the fact that more women than men became
full proselytes, and that a relatively liberal status was accorded to women in some quarters
of Jewish Hellenism.66
In Part II Joseph's brothers are in the foreground, and Aseneth has become one of the
family. The message seems to be that true Jews will not allow themselves to be talked into
hate and subversion; if attacked, they will be protected by both divine assistance and their
own gallantry soothed by clemency. Let it be noted that it is not only moral and physical
integrity which is at stake here; it is also the leading position of Jews in society. Both
aspects are interrelated, as, for example, in the picture of the wise man in the Testament
of Levi 13, who is both prudent and influential, "enthroned with kings, as was Joseph my
brother'' (vs. 9).67 Much like the plot, the message of Part II is developed rather independently
from I, but there are some foreshadowings (perhaps 16:17-22). Between them the two parts
add up to a rather well-balanced whole. Part I defines Judaism in contrast to the world; Part
II describes Judaism in the world. Key Ideas
God6* has two main characteristics in Joseph and Aseneth. He created and sustains the
world by his word (8:9; 12: If.). He is also the loving father of man, assuring the welfare
of those who adhere to him and hating those who worship idols; but always he is prepared
to receive in mercy those who repent earnestly (11:7-14, 18; 12:8, 13-15). God is not
identified as the Lord of history, the author of the Law or morality, or the recipient of the
Temple cult.He is also the loving father of man, assuring the welfare
of those who adhere to him and hating those who worship idols; but always he is prepared
to receive in mercy those who repent earnestly (11:7-14, 18; 12:8, 13-15). God is not
identified as the Lord of history, the author of the Law or morality, or the recipient of the
Temple cult. Exodus, the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai, and the institution of the cult,
of course, postdate the setting of the narrative. But the author could have found a way to
mention these events if he was interested in them, e.g. by prophecy as the Testament of
the Twelve Patriarchs. The world which God created is a three-story structure animated by his "word which is
life for all your creatures" (12:If.) and holds all elements in obedience. Lowest is "the
abyss of the water," sealed by stones, floating on it like leaves, which carry the earth. On
top are the heavens founded on a firmament, which rests on the winds. The earth is man's
dwelling place, but (unlike Acts 17:26) the author is not interested in the subdivisions of
continents and seasons. The abyss underneath houses "the big sea monster" which Aseneth
is afraid may devour her (12:11). The devil is responsible for this (12:9-11), but it is not
specified where he resides. In heaven is God, of course, and the hosts of the angels. Two
of these are described individually: Aseneth's heavenly visitor who is their commander in
chief (elsewhere named Michael), and his beautiful sister, Repentance (14:8; 15:7f.). In
heaven is a "book of the living" that contains the names of the angels and the saved (15:4). In heaven is also God's Paradise, with many flowers from which bees make honey, the
food for the angels and God's elect; the honey is manna (16:14; cf. 16:7y-23). For the elect
a heavenly place of "rest" is prepared (8:9; 15:7; 22:13). More specifically, this place is
in the seventh heaven (if the reading is right); it is described as a walled city founded upon
rock (22:13).At any event, we should not regard the description of Aseneth
as a city as the outcome of a process of de-eschatologization. 65 H. Thyen (Studien zur Sundenvergebung im Neuen Testament und seinen alttestamentlichen und judischen
Voraussetzungen [FRLANT 96; Gdttingen, 1970] pp. 126f.) wrongly assumes that Aseneth is transformed into
Metanoia as her heavenly counterpart.

For the elect
a heavenly place of "rest" is prepared (8:9; 15:7; 22:13). More specifically, this place is
in the seventh heaven (if the reading is right); it is described as a walled city founded upon
rock (22:13). Man is dependent upon God for continuous sustenance. Yet of all creatures man has the
capacity of ignoring his maker by worshiping other gods. Idolatry rather than erroneous
philosophy, transgression of the Law, or plain moral depravity is the main earmark of the
godless. God will, of course, sustain only those who recognize him. The Jews alone do;
consequently they are endowed with light, truth, life, and immortality. The rest of mankind
thrives in darkness and error, and is practically dead. This dualistic view of mankind is not
66 K. Thraede, "Frau," RAC 8 (1972) 197-269; see especially 226f. 67 Here, however, wisdom is achieved by observance of the Law. 68 On his titles and predicates see Delling, JSJ 9 (1978) 45-47. Otherwise cf. R. Marcus, "Divine Names and
Attributes in Hellenistic Jewish Literature," Proceedings of the American Academy for Jewish Research (1931-32)
43-120.explained in terms of man's past, let alone primal developments as can be expressed only
in a myth. The pairs of opposites, darkness and light, error and truth, death and life—for
all that they may designate in other texts69—do not in Joseph and Aseneth denote a dualism
of spheres, eons, or opposite reigns of God and Satan; they denote two ways of life. Adherence is by birth, but it may be altered by choice. So there is no doctrine of the Fall
or of any redemptive activity of God in history. To know God has always been feasible;
unlike Romans 1:18-23, it is not a chance passed over. It is not naturally accomplished, of
course; it is a divine gift, which is available to each who would seek it. To be sure, Joseph
and Aseneth talks about sin (7:4; ll:10f., 18; 12:5, 15; 13:13; 21:11-21; 23:11) and election
(8:9; 16:14; 17:6; cf. 8:11; 21:4). But election is not predestination; it certainly does not
obliterate one's personal responsibility. Sin does not mean a supernatural agent holding
humanity in his or her grip, corrupting everyone in the very core of existence (as Paul sees
it); sin is the result of personal failure, often ushered in by "ignorance" (6:7; 12:5; 13:13). According to Joseph and Aseneth, sinful acts amount to non-allegiance to God and hostility
against his followers.70
Divine life is not mediated to man through the Law, through special revelation or mystical
experience, or through proclamations loaded with spirit and grounded in a "saving event"
(as with Paul); it is obtained through the right use of food, ointment, and by the avoidance
of the pagan way of partaking of them. This is the meaning of the much-debated so-called
meal formula (8:5; cf. 8:9; 15:5; 16:16; 19:5; 21:13f., 21). It is difficult to discern the
precise meaning of the "blessed bread, cup, and ointment" (see 8:5).8:9; 15:5; 16:16; 19:5; 21:13f., 21). It is difficult to discern the
precise meaning of the "blessed bread, cup, and ointment" (see 8:5). Perhaps the expression
refers merely to the ordinary Jewish diet; possibly it may refer to some ritual practice such
as a cultic meal; some even regard it as a Christian interpolation.71 At any event, "bread,
cup, and ointment," as enjoyed by Jews, provide life, immortality, and incorruption. That
is because the Jewish food is equivalent to the manna from heaven (see above), probably
by virtue of "blessing," i.e. grace said at meals. So Jews live in close relationship with God, and with angels whose food they share; but
they remain apart from non-Jews, with whom they may coexist but must not mingle: no
table-fellowship with pagans, no physical intimacy with a pagan woman (chs. 7f.). Relationship with God implies that Jews enjoy all the privileges that come with divine
childhood, leading some sort of angelic existence. Practically, as the example of Aseneth
shows, that means fullness of life, supernatural beauty, wisdom, comfortable living, and
divine protection. These things are embodied in an exemplary, if not exclusive, fashion, in
the Patriarchs generally, with particular emphasis, besides Aseneth, on Joseph (4:7; 6:4-6
and passim), Jacob (22:7), and Levi (22:13; 23:8-17; 26:6; 27:6; 28:15-17; 29:3-6). A
special mark is the gift of prophecy which Levi has (22:13; 23:8; 26:6). It assures supernatural
insight into things divine, such as a person's heavenly rest, and the ability to read others'
minds (cf. Lk 7:39) and recognize what is going on from a distance rather than to foretell
the future. A similar thing is the "inner light" which gives supernatural eyesight to Joseph
(6:6).72
Such qualities would seem to account for the epithet of "son of God" accorded to Joseph,
which is invariably in other people's mouths, never in the narrative (6:3, 5; 13:13; "his
firstborn son" 18:11; 21:4; "like the firstborn son" 23:10).For the elect
a heavenly place of "rest" is prepared (8:9; 15:7; 22:13). More specifically, this place is
in the seventh heaven (if the reading is right); it is described as a walled city founded upon
rock (22:13). Man is dependent upon God for continuous sustenance. Yet of all creatures man has the
capacity of ignoring his maker by worshiping other gods. Idolatry rather than erroneous
philosophy, transgression of the Law, or plain moral depravity is the main earmark of the
godless. God will, of course, sustain only those who recognize him. The Jews alone do;
consequently they are endowed with light, truth, life, and immortality. The rest of mankind
thrives in darkness and error, and is practically dead. This dualistic view of mankind is not
66 K. Thraede, "Frau," RAC 8 (1972) 197-269; see especially 226f. 67 Here, however, wisdom is achieved by observance of the Law. 68 On his titles and predicates see Delling, JSJ 9 (1978) 45-47. Otherwise cf. R. Marcus, "Divine Names and
Attributes in Hellenistic Jewish Literature," Proceedings of the American Academy for Jewish Research (1931-32)
43-120.

Lk 7:39) and recognize what is going on from a distance rather than to foretell
the future. A similar thing is the "inner light" which gives supernatural eyesight to Joseph
(6:6).72
Such qualities would seem to account for the epithet of "son of God" accorded to Joseph,
which is invariably in other people's mouths, never in the narrative (6:3, 5; 13:13; "his
firstborn son" 18:11; 21:4; "like the firstborn son" 23:10). This title has been taken as
evidence of Joseph being a figure of the Redeemer. But "sons of God" seems to be used
elsewhere as a designation of the saved in general (16:14; 19:8). Aseneth is called "a
daughter of the Most High" in a passage where her prototypical role is not at stake (21:4),
and Jacob (who does not cease to be Joseph's father) is designated "a friend of the Most
High God" (23:10). So "son of God" assigns to Joseph a peer's rank; he is superior even
to Pharaoh's firstborn, and that may be all it means.73 But if the Wisdom of Solomon 2-5,
wSee e.g. H. Conzelmann, "skotos etc./' TDNT. vol. 7, 423-45; "phds etc.," TDNT, vol. 9, 310-58. 70 This applies also when the sin of a Jew is envisaged (7:4; 23:11, only occurrence of the root hamart- in Part II). 71 This possibility is defended by Holtz, NTS 14 (1967-68) 482-97; cf. also R. D. Richardson, "Supplementary
Essay," in H. Lietzmann, Mass and Lord's Supper: A Study in the History of the Liturgy (Leiden, 1979) pp. 343-
47. 72 It is highly doubtful whether such features warrant the conclusion that "the highest religious value of the group
(sc. that is back of Joseph and Aseneth) seems to have been personal, revelatory experience" (H. C. Kee, "The
Socio-Religious Setting and Aims of 'Joseph and Asenath,' " SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, pp. 183-92; see p. 188). 73 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 115-17.especially 5, is analogical, "son of God" may also mean that Joseph is an example of the
just man in whom God can be recognized.74
Fullness of life does not include living together with other people in a community. The
services, festivals, and ordinances (unless 8:5 points to a communal meal) of the synagogue
play no role in the author's thought, although he must have been aware of their existence
and does not criticize them. It follows from the above discussion that salvation is a "necessity" appropriate only for
non-Jews. It did not have to be wrought by a redeemer (let alone a dying one like Christ);
and its conditions were not disclosed at some specific time in history by a special envoy of
God, such as the Teacher of Righteousness. That Aseneth is cast in the part of proto-
proselyte does not mean that salvation had then been instituted. The publication of Joseph
and Aseneth was not intended to announce salvation; it is not a gospel. The chance to be
saved has always been present, predicated on God's habitual mercy for penitent polytheists,
man's capacity to avail himself of it, and the presence of Judaism in the world. There is no hint in Joseph and Aseneth that Jewish missionaries or zealous individuals
spread the good news of salvation and called for conversion. Joseph does surprisingly little
for Aseneth.75 He prays for her conversion, and then leaves. This act is enough for the girl
to smash her idols and start castigating herself; but for positive guidance she depends upon
what she "heard" about the mercy of the God of the Hebrews (11:10),76 hardly from
missionary sermons. Finally she is accepted without further human interference, a fact
which is gladly welcomed by Joseph. Surely this is a pattern which conversion often
followed.77
Materially, conversion78 is described as the passage from darkness to light, from error to
truth, from death to life, in analogy to creation (8:9; 12:lf.; 15:12; 27:10); it is not from
sin to righteousness or forgiveness.Finally she is accepted without further human interference, a fact
which is gladly welcomed by Joseph. Surely this is a pattern which conversion often
followed.77
Materially, conversion78 is described as the passage from darkness to light, from error to
truth, from death to life, in analogy to creation (8:9; 12:lf.; 15:12; 27:10); it is not from
sin to righteousness or forgiveness. Forgiveness is hoped and asked for (11:18; 13:13), but
nobody tells Aseneth that her sins have been forgiven. Obviously, she has overcome them
by spuming her idols, giving away her valuables, and castigating herself for seven days. Conversion is also called re-creation (8:9; 15:5; cf. 16:16; 18:9)79 with no implication of a
fall from which one has to be lifted up again nor of dying and rising as professed, for
example, by Paul or perhaps, in a very different perspective, by Apuleius.80 Re-creation is
the promotion from the deficient, nothing-but-human state naturally possessed by the heathen
to the angelic status naturally possessed by the Jews. This has little, if any, moral implications
and consequences. There is no word about future obligations, not even religious ones such
as daily prayer, or of a new stimulus implanted in the re-created. Ethics are important to
the author (see below). But what Judaism offers over non-Jewish existence is privilege, not
74 Berger, Auferstehung, p. 606, nn. 506f. See further generally, P. Pokontf, Der Gottessohn: Literarische Obersicht
und Fragestellung (Theologische Studien 109; Zurich, 1971); M. Hengel, Der Sohn Gottes: Die Entstehung der
Christologie und die judisch-hellenistische Religionsgeschichte (Tubingen, 1975); P. Wttlfging von Martitz, G. Fohrer,
E. Schweizer, E. Lohse, and W. Schneemelcher, "hyios etc.," TDNT, vol. 8, 334-99; G. Del ling, "Die Bezeichnung
'Sdhne Gottes' in der judischen Literatur der hellenistisch-rdmischen Zeit," God's Christ and His People: Studies in
Honor of Nils Astrup Dahl, eds. J. Jervell and W. A.Lk 7:39) and recognize what is going on from a distance rather than to foretell
the future. A similar thing is the "inner light" which gives supernatural eyesight to Joseph
(6:6).72
Such qualities would seem to account for the epithet of "son of God" accorded to Joseph,
which is invariably in other people's mouths, never in the narrative (6:3, 5; 13:13; "his
firstborn son" 18:11; 21:4; "like the firstborn son" 23:10). This title has been taken as
evidence of Joseph being a figure of the Redeemer. But "sons of God" seems to be used
elsewhere as a designation of the saved in general (16:14; 19:8). Aseneth is called "a
daughter of the Most High" in a passage where her prototypical role is not at stake (21:4),
and Jacob (who does not cease to be Joseph's father) is designated "a friend of the Most
High God" (23:10). So "son of God" assigns to Joseph a peer's rank; he is superior even
to Pharaoh's firstborn, and that may be all it means.73 But if the Wisdom of Solomon 2-5,
wSee e.g. H. Conzelmann, "skotos etc./' TDNT. vol. 7, 423-45; "phds etc.," TDNT, vol. 9, 310-58. 70 This applies also when the sin of a Jew is envisaged (7:4; 23:11, only occurrence of the root hamart- in Part II). 71 This possibility is defended by Holtz, NTS 14 (1967-68) 482-97; cf. also R. D. Richardson, "Supplementary
Essay," in H. Lietzmann, Mass and Lord's Supper: A Study in the History of the Liturgy (Leiden, 1979) pp. 343-
47. 72 It is highly doubtful whether such features warrant the conclusion that "the highest religious value of the group
(sc. that is back of Joseph and Aseneth) seems to have been personal, revelatory experience" (H. C. Kee, "The
Socio-Religious Setting and Aims of 'Joseph and Asenath,' " SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, pp. 183-92; see p. 188). 73 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 115-17.

Jervell and W. A. Meeks (Oslo, 1977) pp. 18-28. 75 Apparently less than for Potiphar's wife according to TJos 4:4. 76T. Holtz, " 'Euer Glaube an Gott': Zu Form und Inhalt von 1 Thess l,9f.," Die Kirche des Anfangs. Festschrift
fur Heinz SchUrmann zum 65. Geburtstag, eds. R. Schnackenburg, J. Ernst, and J. Wanke (Erfurter Theologische
Studien 38; Leipzig, 1977) pp. 459-88; see esp. 472f. 77 On Jewish mission generally, see nn. 50, 87, 89, and D. Georgi, Die Gegner des Paulus im 2. Korintherbrief:
Studien zur religiosen Propaganda in der Spdtantike (Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum Alten und Neuen
Testaments 11; Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1964). On the Christian mission, F. Hahn, Mission in the New Testament (SBT
47; London, 1965); Chr. Burchard, "Formen der Vermittlung christlichen Glaubens im Neuen Testament," EvT 38
(1978) 313-40. 78 C. Bussmann, Themen der paulinischen Missionspredigt auf dem Hintergrund der spdtjUdisch~hellenistischen
Missionsliteratur (European University Papers, Series xviii, Theology 3; Bern, Frankfurt, 1971); S. Anandakumara,
The Gentile Reactions to the Christ-Kerygma—The Problems Involved in the Reception of the Christ-Kerygma in the
Young Gentile Christianity in the New Testament (Theol. diss.; Hamburg, 1975) pp. 29-91, 316-35; Berger, Kairos
17 (1975) 232-48; Sanger, Antikes Judentum und die Mysterien, pp. 148-90. Generally, see A. D. Nock, Conversion
(Oxford, 1933; repr. Oxford Paperbacks 30; 1961). 79 Some have sensed an element of "realized eschatology" at this point and others (cf. also n. 64). For this term to
be applied properly, the concept of re-creation would have to have been transposed from a context of future eschatology
into the present. Paul has done so (e.g. in 2Cor 5:17) but it may be doubted whether the author of JosAsen did the
same. 80 R. C. Tannehill, Dying and Rising with Christ (BZNW 32; Berlin, 1967); Griffiths, Isis-Book, pp. 296-301.obligation. Incidentally, Aseneth's motivation, which is plainly egotistical, at least in the
beginning, is not frowned upon. Philonenko81 suggested that the conversion section of Joseph and Aseneth, or part of it,
is shaped after some pertinent ritual or rituals, possibly an initiation liturgy designed to
present Judaism as a form of mystery religion. The parallels to Lucius' initiation and his
retransformation from donkey to human being (in Apuleius, Golden Ass, 11) might seem
to be prima facie evidence for this view. However, such a ritual would have to be
reconstructed from the very text which it is called upon to elucidate. The methodological
problem involved is how to translate literary developments back into liturgical procedure,
and that is a formidable problem. If there is mystery religion in Joseph and Aseneth,
moreover, we ought to be prepared for a measure of deliberate mystification (Apuleius,
Golden Ass, 11.23.6). Doubtless there were no angels visiting, no bees rising from
miraculous honeycombs, and no fiery chariots ascending into heaven. If these features
represent some ritual, what could it be? If they are fictional, why not the rest of chapters
14-18 as well? Ritual, however, or at least accepted custom, nevertheless, may be reflected in Joseph
and Aseneth. Entry into Judaism may well have been performed by a period of fasting,
praying, meditating, washing, a symbolical changing of clothes (and perhaps of name), and
celebrating a festive meal. But corroborative evidence is needed before we can be certain. It is significant that neither circumcision nor proselyte baptism (supposing that it existed
already in the author's day) is mentioned. Since religion in Joseph and Aseneth appears to
be private and personal, perhaps we should look more to the area of private custom than to
synagogue life for a better understanding of its conception of conversion.It is significant that neither circumcision nor proselyte baptism (supposing that it existed
already in the author's day) is mentioned. Since religion in Joseph and Aseneth appears to
be private and personal, perhaps we should look more to the area of private custom than to
synagogue life for a better understanding of its conception of conversion. Ethics is an important concern of the author, although it is not preparatory to, instrumental
in, or a consequence of salvation. He gives, or reports, a number of important rules,
beginning with the following:44It does not befit a man who worships God" (on this attribute,
see 4:7) to kiss a heathen woman (8:5), to sleep with his fiancee prior to the wedding (21:1),
to render evil for evil (23:9; 29:3; cf. 28:5, 14), to injure anyone of his own free will or
aid an injurer (23:12), or to crush a fallen enemy to death (29:3). The last three points are
the main lesson of Part II. Other standards are less formally stated, such as a general
warning against foreign women (7:5) attributed to Jacob, or expressed in the adjectives used
to characterize persons like Joseph, who is 44a man who worships God, and self-controlled,
and a virgin" (4:7) and 44meek and merciful and God-fearing" (8:8). More virtues are
exemplified by action. Joseph does not eat with non-Jews (7:1) and is concerned with social
welfare (4:7; 25:5; 26:3). There is a hint at charity in Aseneth's repentance (ch. 10) and a
display of magnanimity in her treatment of Dan and Gad (ch. 28). Individual bravery is
represented by Benjamin (27:1-5) and Joseph's good brothers (26:6; 27:6). Levi is the
incarnation of the man who does not render evil for evil (23:6-17; 28:15-17): His attempt
to save the life of Pharaoh's son (29:3-5) is reminiscent of the Good Samaritan (Lk 10:30-
35), even if it is far from disinterested. However, such meekness seems to be in order only
toward equals; hostile soldiers are dispatched in large quantities without further ado (27:4-
6).Jervell and W. A. Meeks (Oslo, 1977) pp. 18-28. 75 Apparently less than for Potiphar's wife according to TJos 4:4. 76T. Holtz, " 'Euer Glaube an Gott': Zu Form und Inhalt von 1 Thess l,9f.," Die Kirche des Anfangs. Festschrift
fur Heinz SchUrmann zum 65. Geburtstag, eds. R. Schnackenburg, J. Ernst, and J. Wanke (Erfurter Theologische
Studien 38; Leipzig, 1977) pp. 459-88; see esp. 472f. 77 On Jewish mission generally, see nn. 50, 87, 89, and D. Georgi, Die Gegner des Paulus im 2. Korintherbrief:
Studien zur religiosen Propaganda in der Spdtantike (Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum Alten und Neuen
Testaments 11; Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1964). On the Christian mission, F. Hahn, Mission in the New Testament (SBT
47; London, 1965); Chr. Burchard, "Formen der Vermittlung christlichen Glaubens im Neuen Testament," EvT 38
(1978) 313-40. 78 C. Bussmann, Themen der paulinischen Missionspredigt auf dem Hintergrund der spdtjUdisch~hellenistischen
Missionsliteratur (European University Papers, Series xviii, Theology 3; Bern, Frankfurt, 1971); S. Anandakumara,
The Gentile Reactions to the Christ-Kerygma—The Problems Involved in the Reception of the Christ-Kerygma in the
Young Gentile Christianity in the New Testament (Theol. diss.; Hamburg, 1975) pp. 29-91, 316-35; Berger, Kairos
17 (1975) 232-48; Sanger, Antikes Judentum und die Mysterien, pp. 148-90. Generally, see A. D. Nock, Conversion
(Oxford, 1933; repr. Oxford Paperbacks 30; 1961). 79 Some have sensed an element of "realized eschatology" at this point and others (cf. also n. 64). For this term to
be applied properly, the concept of re-creation would have to have been transposed from a context of future eschatology
into the present. Paul has done so (e.g. in 2Cor 5:17) but it may be doubted whether the author of JosAsen did the
same. 80 R. C. Tannehill, Dying and Rising with Christ (BZNW 32; Berlin, 1967); Griffiths, Isis-Book, pp. 296-301.

Levi is the
incarnation of the man who does not render evil for evil (23:6-17; 28:15-17): His attempt
to save the life of Pharaoh's son (29:3-5) is reminiscent of the Good Samaritan (Lk 10:30-
35), even if it is far from disinterested. However, such meekness seems to be in order only
toward equals; hostile soldiers are dispatched in large quantities without further ado (27:4-
6). We ought not be surprised, perhaps, that the more popular social virtues—such as
almsgiving, hospitality, visiting the sick, or burying the dead—are not evidenced in Joseph
and Aseneth, as they are, for example, in Tobit, the Testament of Job, and such sketches
of the ideal Jew as the 44good man" of TBenj 4. Doubtless they are not absent from the
author's moral code. If he does not mention them, it is because he lets himself be guided
by what his story requires, and the story is one of upper-class people (see 3:5) living
comfortable lives among their like in a divided society and experiencing upper-class
adventures. This observation, however, is noteworthy by itself. The criticism leveled against
the rich and mighty, the fundamental concern for the underprivileged, the hope for a just
81 Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 89—98. This approach parallels the interpretation of ancient romance as veiled
representations in narrative form of the cultic practice of mystery religions, especially Isis, by Merkelbach and his
pupils. It is liable to the criticism leveled at it generally. As to JosAsen, cf. Burchard (Zeuge, pp. 83f.) and Pervo
(SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, pp. 176f). A ritual background without the character of a mystery initiation is presupposed
by W. D. Berner (Imtiationsriten in Mysterienreligionen, im Gnostizismus und im antiken Judentum fTheol. diss.;
Gdttingen, 1972] pp. 156-72, 307-13); Anandakumara (Gentile Reactions, pp. 29-91, 316-35) even attempts to
reconstruct liturgical texts from JosAsen; Sanger, Antikes Judentum und die Mysterien, pp. 148-90.world in history or beyond, which characterizes other strands of Jewish tradition and much
of early Christianity,82 is entirely absent from Joseph and Aseneth. Social change is of no
concern to the author. Joseph and Aseneth has no qualms about the practicability of its moral standards. The
good characters naturally live up to them, although they may first have to calm their tempers
(23:7-9; 28:12-14). The evil characters do not, but experience and tolerance on the part
of the good ones teach them. High morals are not an exclusively Jewish mark. Doubtless, rules that befit one who
worships God are best kept by such men, but Joseph and Aseneth does not intimate that
Pentephres or Pharaoh fall short of them,83 whereas some Jews do, at least temporarily. And virginity, for all the symbolic overtones it may carry, had made Aseneth Joseph's
sister long before they first met (7:7-8:1). We learn little about the source of these ethics. The interdiction against foreign women
is traced back to Jacob (7:5), but he is hardly viewed as its author. Morals as befit God-
worshiping men seem to come with the worship of God without further notice. Eschatology^ is a matter of individual afterlife in heaven (8:9; 15:7f.; 22:13). Joseph and
Aseneth does not envisage an end of the world, let alone one of the type known as
"apocalyptic," with wars raging, stars falling from the sky, a general resurrection, and last
judgment,85 after which the godly live happily in heaven or on a new earth and the wicked
go to hell. In Joseph and Aseneth only individual lives come to their natural end followed
by heavenly "rest" seemingly without delay (ci*. Lk 23:43), if they are animated by the
supernatural vitality provided to Jews. They perhaps come to nothing if they are not (but
cf. 12:11). Little is said about how a person exists in heaven. The close association of the
Jews with the angels suggests some sort of angelic existence (cf. Lk 20:36).The close association of the
Jews with the angels suggests some sort of angelic existence (cf. Lk 20:36). This implies
that in heaven persons are not mere souls (27:10 notwithstanding) but have a body (cf. 16:16; 18:9). However, we are not told whether the new existence will be acquired by
transformation, resurrection, or new creation. If, by way of conclusion, we ask what Judaism as depicted in Joseph and Aseneth is
like, it is easier to say what it is not. It is not like Pharisaism, turning the Law into
guidelines for personal piety and minutely regulating the chores of daily life. It is not like
Sadduceeism, upholding the Law solely as the Magna Charta of the Temple of Jerusalem
and the community gathering around it. It is not like Essenism (or, its diasporic extension,
Therapeutism), withdrawing from the world to live in a priestly community by a new
interpretation of the Law, revealed in the last days by a teacher sent from God. It is not
like Zelotism, attempting to restore a Law-abiding theocracy in Israel by violence and
guerrilla tactics. Certainly, the author also was no Philo, trying to show that the Law is the
very essence of piety and philanthropy, a storehouse, if interpreted properly, of true
philosophical insight barely adumbrated in non-Jewish philosophy and a guide to the union
of the soul with God. Certainly the author had no apocalyptic leanings. He may have been
an addict of sapiental theology or mysticism or both, elements of which are also alive in
Philo in a "philosophized" form. On the whole, Joseph and Aseneth may be more
representative of Greek-speaking Judaism than we have previously imagined. Purpose
Joseph and Aseneth removes a rough spot in the Bible and satisfies pious curiosity as to
the circumstances of a noted patriarch's surprise wedding to a non-Jew. Yet the author's
main concern is his message. Joseph and Aseneth has often been called a missionary tract, a Missionsschrift, meaning
82 See generally, E.Levi is the
incarnation of the man who does not render evil for evil (23:6-17; 28:15-17): His attempt
to save the life of Pharaoh's son (29:3-5) is reminiscent of the Good Samaritan (Lk 10:30-
35), even if it is far from disinterested. However, such meekness seems to be in order only
toward equals; hostile soldiers are dispatched in large quantities without further ado (27:4-
6). We ought not be surprised, perhaps, that the more popular social virtues—such as
almsgiving, hospitality, visiting the sick, or burying the dead—are not evidenced in Joseph
and Aseneth, as they are, for example, in Tobit, the Testament of Job, and such sketches
of the ideal Jew as the 44good man" of TBenj 4. Doubtless they are not absent from the
author's moral code. If he does not mention them, it is because he lets himself be guided
by what his story requires, and the story is one of upper-class people (see 3:5) living
comfortable lives among their like in a divided society and experiencing upper-class
adventures. This observation, however, is noteworthy by itself. The criticism leveled against
the rich and mighty, the fundamental concern for the underprivileged, the hope for a just
81 Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 89—98. This approach parallels the interpretation of ancient romance as veiled
representations in narrative form of the cultic practice of mystery religions, especially Isis, by Merkelbach and his
pupils. It is liable to the criticism leveled at it generally. As to JosAsen, cf. Burchard (Zeuge, pp. 83f.) and Pervo
(SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, pp. 176f). A ritual background without the character of a mystery initiation is presupposed
by W. D. Berner (Imtiationsriten in Mysterienreligionen, im Gnostizismus und im antiken Judentum fTheol. diss.;
Gdttingen, 1972] pp. 156-72, 307-13); Anandakumara (Gentile Reactions, pp. 29-91, 316-35) even attempts to
reconstruct liturgical texts from JosAsen; Sanger, Antikes Judentum und die Mysterien, pp. 148-90.

Yet the author's
main concern is his message. Joseph and Aseneth has often been called a missionary tract, a Missionsschrift, meaning
82 See generally, E. Bammel, "ptbchos etc.," TDNT, vol. 6, 885-915; L. Schottroff and W. Stegemann, Jesus von
Nazareth—Hoffnung der Armen (Urban-Taschenbttcher, T-Reihe, 639; Stuttgart, 1978). 83 This hardly makes them God-fearers; against Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924) 303; Philonenko, Joseph et Astneth,
pp. 51f. 84 H. C. C. Cavallin, Life after Death: Paul's Argument for the Resurrection of the Dead (Coniectanea Biblica. NT
Series 7:1; Lund, 1974) pp. 155-60; G. Fischer, Die himmlischen Wohnungen: Untersuchungen zu Joh 14,2f
(European University Papers, Series 23.38; Bern, Frankfurt, 1975) pp. 186-89; U. Fischer, Eschatologie, pp. 106-
23. 83 But see 12:11; 28:7, 14.that it was written to promote Jewish mission among non-Jews, or Jews, or both.86 This is
mistaken.87 Judaism is not depicted as rmssion-minded in Joseph and Aseneth. Proselytes
are welcomed, not sought, and conversion certainly is not an easy affair. Moreover, Joseph
and Aseneth is not a beginner's book. The reader is supposed to know Genesis, at least the
Joseph story, and to understand allusions to other scriptural passages. Little effort is made
to explain Jewish life and customs; the sabbath,88 circumcision, the interdiction against
pork, and standards of levitical purity are not even mentioned. As a specimen of Introducing
Judaism, Joseph and Aseneth is remarkably ill-suited. It could, at best, be a book for the
advanced pagan reader entreating him to take the final step. But surely he would expect
something more tangible than a piece of fiction. It seems safe to assume that Joseph and Aseneth was composed for Jews, both bom and
naturalized, including perhaps those "God-fearing" sympathizers89 who thought and lived
Jewish but never crossed the line formally and were seldom pressed to do so. The document
reminds not only the Jews of the privileges they have always enjoyed but also the converts
of what they, or their forefathers, gained by crossing over to Judaism.90 Of course, just as
in the case of the message, there may be subordinate purposes incidental to the main object. Surely the ethics of the book belong here, especially the interdiction to repay evil by evil
and the injunction against non-Jewish women.91
Historical importance
Joseph and Aseneth greatly enhances our knowledge of Greek-speaking Judaism around
the beginning of the present era. Its main importance is in the field of theology, ethics
included; but, if handled with prudence, some historical information may also be derived
from it.Surely the ethics of the book belong here, especially the interdiction to repay evil by evil
and the injunction against non-Jewish women.91
Historical importance
Joseph and Aseneth greatly enhances our knowledge of Greek-speaking Judaism around
the beginning of the present era. Its main importance is in the field of theology, ethics
included; but, if handled with prudence, some historical information may also be derived
from it. From a literary point of view—like Ezekiel the Tragedian, Philo the Epic Poet,
Pseudo-Phocylides, and the Sibylline Oracles—it represents one of the attempts to adapt
forms of Greek belletristic literature. Perhaps the book will shed some modest light on the
history of the Septuagint text. It may also help us understand the growth of the romantic
genre. As a Greek Jewish writing, Joseph and Aseneth is part of the background of early
Christianity and its literature. A significant number of Christians were recruited from the
synagogue, and many elements of New Testament theology and ethics, church management
and administration of charity were taken over or adapted from Jewish sources. New Testament
parallels to Joseph and Aseneth are certainly not caused by literary influence on either side;
these similarities are due to a common Jewish heritage. Naturally Joseph and Aseneth has
been used for a fresh interpretation of New Testament passages (e.g. Mt 6:23; 16:16-18;
Lk 7:36-50; Jn 6:35, 48; Acts 9:1-19 par.; Rom 4:17; 7:24f.; 12:17; ICor 10:16f.; 11:24-
26 par.; Eph 1:4; IThes 5:15; Heb 3:7-4:13; IPet 3:9; and Rev 14:8f.)» Last but not least,
the language of Joseph and Aseneth invites comparison with New Testament Greek.93
Cultural importance
Joseph and Aseneth is one of the best attested and most widely distributed books included
in this collection. The number of copies and versions speaks for itself, especially when we
consider that most were made to be read aloud.94 But its influence extends far beyond this
86 E.g. Kohler, JE, vol. 2, pp.Yet the author's
main concern is his message. Joseph and Aseneth has often been called a missionary tract, a Missionsschrift, meaning
82 See generally, E. Bammel, "ptbchos etc.," TDNT, vol. 6, 885-915; L. Schottroff and W. Stegemann, Jesus von
Nazareth—Hoffnung der Armen (Urban-Taschenbttcher, T-Reihe, 639; Stuttgart, 1978). 83 This hardly makes them God-fearers; against Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924) 303; Philonenko, Joseph et Astneth,
pp. 51f. 84 H. C. C. Cavallin, Life after Death: Paul's Argument for the Resurrection of the Dead (Coniectanea Biblica. NT
Series 7:1; Lund, 1974) pp. 155-60; G. Fischer, Die himmlischen Wohnungen: Untersuchungen zu Joh 14,2f
(European University Papers, Series 23.38; Bern, Frankfurt, 1975) pp. 186-89; U. Fischer, Eschatologie, pp. 106-
23. 83 But see 12:11; 28:7, 14.

Kohler, JE, vol. 2, pp. 172-76. 87 Perhaps this is not only in the case of JosAsen. Some scholars think that no piece of hellenistic Jewish literature
was designed to be read predominantly by non-Jews (e.g. Tcherikover, Eos 48.3 [1957] 169-93). 88 It is presupposed in 9:5; 14:1; cf. 21:8. Both Joseph's and the angel's visits occur on Sundays. 89 See lately, F. Siegert, "Gottesfurchtige und Sympathisanten," JSJ 4 (1973) 109-64, and cf. above, n. 77. 90 A similar problem arises with regard to Acts, and an analogous answer should probably be given. 91 Mixed marriage is thought to be a major, or even the main, issue by Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, p. 106) and
Kee (SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, p. 187). 92 See above, nn. 29, 63, 64, 76, 79, and JosAsen at 4:7, 10; 6:1, 2, 6, 7, 8; 7:1, 4; 8:5, 9; 9:1, 2; 10:2, 11, 13,
16, 17; 11:5, 12; 12:5, 9, 15; 14:1, 6, 9; 15:4f., 7, 10; 16:14; 19:1, 11; 20:2, 7; 21:8, 16, 2.1; 23:8, 9; 24:14; 27:3;
29:4, 5. 93 Kilpatrick, NovT 12 (1970) 234-36; Chr. Burchard, "Fussnoten zum neutestamentlichen Griechisch I," ZNW 61
(1970) 157-71; Smith, Joseph and Asenath. Bauer-Amdt-Gingrich (Greek-English Lexicon [Chicago, 1957]) did not
use Joseph and Aseneth, but a future revision doubtless will. 94 MSS A, B, and O are menologies. See also note before 1:1.use, as shown by the following remarks, which are by no means exhaustive.95 As far as we
can see, exegesis and theology took little notice of our romance, unless inclusion in some
lists of canonical and apocryphal books is a sign of theological interest.96 Joseph and Aseneth
was read as a source of inspiration and moral strength, at times for historical information,
and indubitably often just for fun. About the fate of Joseph and Aseneth in Judaism we know nothing, unless the Heliopolis
tradition reported by Egeria, supposing that it reflects knowledge of the book, happens to
be Jewish. By Egeria's time, at the latest, Christianity must have appropriated Joseph and
Aseneth. The Passion of Irene (5th cent, A.D.?) drew on it, and other saints' lives show its
influence also, probably through Irene.97 At some early date Joseph and Aseneth was joined
(not merged except perhaps in G) with Pseudo-Ephrem's Life of Joseph.98 The Life of
Joseph is coupled with Joseph and Aseneth in CR (=a), GFW ( = fc), D (=<i), and MS
Breslau, crossing three of the four Greek groups, and in Arm. and Ngr.99 So it must antedate
Arm. (6th-7th cent.?). After this, we seem to lose track of Joseph and Aseneth in the
Greek church until the tenth century,100 the date of MS O. The eleventh century witnessed
the appearance of the following: B and perhaps A, the pictorial archetype of the miniature
cycles, covering the Life of Joseph and Joseph and Aseneth, in G, 671, and 661,101 and the
mention by Nikon of Rhoidiou near Antioch, Syria (died after 1088), of Joseph and Aseneth
in his Taktikon, chapter 13, which is a collection of monks' rules and letters pertaining to
matters of monastic discipline and liturgy.After this, we seem to lose track of Joseph and Aseneth in the
Greek church until the tenth century,100 the date of MS O. The eleventh century witnessed
the appearance of the following: B and perhaps A, the pictorial archetype of the miniature
cycles, covering the Life of Joseph and Joseph and Aseneth, in G, 671, and 661,101 and the
mention by Nikon of Rhoidiou near Antioch, Syria (died after 1088), of Joseph and Aseneth
in his Taktikon, chapter 13, which is a collection of monks' rules and letters pertaining to
matters of monastic discipline and liturgy. Chapter 13 in the Taktikon contains a list of
apocrypha based on the famous Canon of 60 Books; but it has an additional "Aseneth"
after the "Prayer of Joseph."102 By the intermediary of a Slavonic version, which became
something of a classic in the Slavonic churches, the Taktikon influenced some old Russian
canon lists.103 This apparent popularity of Joseph and Aseneth in the eleventh century may
have contributed to the translation of LI and L2 in the West (before A.D. 1200). A renewed interest makes itself felt beginning with the fourteenth or fifteenth century;
perhaps this is a Renaissance phenomenon. Manuscript group c, the interpolations of FW
Rum., the peculiar text of G, and Ngr. were probably produced early in this period, which
also saw the translation of Slav, and, somewhat later, Rum. Also, Ngr. 1:6 preserves a
quotation of uncertain origin and date which seems to reflect our book: "That is why some
poet said in praise of her [i.e. Aseneth], 'By beauty the sun surpasses the stars, but Aseneth
"The vast bulk of Jewish, Christian, and Islamic Joseph literature may hold traces of JosAsen that have gone
unheeded so far; for the time being cf. n. 1 and A. von Weilen, Der dgyptische Joseph im Drama des XVI. Jahrhundens (Wien, 1887); H. NaT, Syrische Josef-Gedichte: Mit Uebersetzung des Gedichts von Narsai und Proben
aus Balai und Jaqob von Sarug (Phil, diss., Zurich; Zurich, 1923); H.Jahrhundens (Wien, 1887); H. NaT, Syrische Josef-Gedichte: Mit Uebersetzung des Gedichts von Narsai und Proben
aus Balai und Jaqob von Sarug (Phil, diss., Zurich; Zurich, 1923); H. Priebatsch, Die Josephs geschichte in der
Weltliteratur (Breslau, 1937); H. A. Brongers, De Jozefsgeschiedenis bij Joden, Christenen en Mohammedanen
(Wageningen, 1962); M. Derpmann, Die Josephsgeschichte. Auffassung und Darstellung im Mittelalter (Beihefte zum
"Mittellateinischen Jahrbuch" 13; Ratingen—Kastellaun—Dusseldorf, 1974); and SCS 5. A matter calling for further
inquiry is the purported influence of Joseph and Aseneth on Yussuf and Zuleikha, an Islamic adaptation of Joseph's
adventure with Potiphar's wife treated repeatedly by authors in various languages, most notably by the famous Persian
poets, Firduzi (c. A.D. 940-1020) and Djami (A.D 1483); see Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 117-23. 96 Joseph and his wife figure in some Eastern versions of the Christian marriage ritual (R. P. A. Raes, Le mariage,
sa calibration et sa spirituality dans les Gglises dOrient [Collection Irenikon; Paris, 1959] pp. 34, 42, 51, 59, 62,
132, 189; cf. Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 39, n. 4). Influence of JosAsen is doubtful here, to say the least. "Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 134-37; Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. 110-17. Berger, Auferstehung, pp. 564-65, n. 403, has doubts. 98 Or is it genuine (cf. NSf, Josef-Gedichte, pp. 10f.)? 99 Chr. Burchard,* 'Zur armenischen Oberlieferung der Testamente der zwolf Patriarchen,'' Studien zu den Testamenten
der Zwdlf Patriarchen, ed. W. Eltester (BZNW 36; Berlin, 1969) pp. 1-29; cf. Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 29. 100 There are only a few possible exceptions. An anonymous chronicle of the late 9th cent, affirms that "Joseph
ruled over the Egyptian (land) for eighty years, beginning in the first year of plenty which was Joseph's thirty-second
year, in which he is reported [cf.Kohler, JE, vol. 2, pp. 172-76. 87 Perhaps this is not only in the case of JosAsen. Some scholars think that no piece of hellenistic Jewish literature
was designed to be read predominantly by non-Jews (e.g. Tcherikover, Eos 48.3 [1957] 169-93). 88 It is presupposed in 9:5; 14:1; cf. 21:8. Both Joseph's and the angel's visits occur on Sundays. 89 See lately, F. Siegert, "Gottesfurchtige und Sympathisanten," JSJ 4 (1973) 109-64, and cf. above, n. 77. 90 A similar problem arises with regard to Acts, and an analogous answer should probably be given. 91 Mixed marriage is thought to be a major, or even the main, issue by Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, p. 106) and
Kee (SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, p. 187). 92 See above, nn. 29, 63, 64, 76, 79, and JosAsen at 4:7, 10; 6:1, 2, 6, 7, 8; 7:1, 4; 8:5, 9; 9:1, 2; 10:2, 11, 13,
16, 17; 11:5, 12; 12:5, 9, 15; 14:1, 6, 9; 15:4f., 7, 10; 16:14; 19:1, 11; 20:2, 7; 21:8, 16, 2.1; 23:8, 9; 24:14; 27:3;
29:4, 5. 93 Kilpatrick, NovT 12 (1970) 234-36; Chr. Burchard, "Fussnoten zum neutestamentlichen Griechisch I," ZNW 61
(1970) 157-71; Smith, Joseph and Asenath. Bauer-Amdt-Gingrich (Greek-English Lexicon [Chicago, 1957]) did not
use Joseph and Aseneth, but a future revision doubtless will. 94 MSS A, B, and O are menologies. See also note before 1:1.

100 There are only a few possible exceptions. An anonymous chronicle of the late 9th cent, affirms that "Joseph
ruled over the Egyptian (land) for eighty years, beginning in the first year of plenty which was Joseph's thirty-second
year, in which he is reported [cf. JosAsen 1:2; 3:1 against Gen 41:50] to have married Aseneth, daughter of Pentephres,
priest of Heliopolis. This (man) was Osiris' priest. Osiris the Egyptians call the sun, just like the Greeks call him
[the sun] Apollon" (J. A. Cramer, Anecdota Graeca e codd. manuscriptis Bibliothecae Regiae Parisiensis [Oxford,
1839] vol. 2, p. 175). Then there is the date of a and d. Both seem, perhaps, to be older than c. A.D. 1000. 101 Thus Vikan (SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, pp. 196-98) against the earlier suggestion by Pacht and Pacht (Cahiers
Archiologiques 7 [1954] 35-49) argues that the archetype of the G miniatures originated in the 6th cent, in Syria in
the neighborhood of the Vienna Genesis. 102 See the only extant MS: St. Catherine, Mt. Sinai, MS Greek 441, f. 98b, unpublished (microfilm courtesy of the
Library of Congress). 103 Which may not therefore be cited as witnesses to the existence of JosAsen Slav.the girls under [or "the rays of?"] the sun.' "I04 Joseph and Aseneth was copied in Greek
so late as A.D. 1802. Turning to the oriental churches, we find traces of Joseph and Aseneth in Syriac,
Armenian, and Ethiopic. In Syriac, in addition to Pseudo-Zacharias and the legend quoted
above, there is an entry, "The Book of Asyath, wife of Joseph the Just, son of Jacob,"
between the works of Josephus and Tobit in a canon list by the noted theologian Ebed
Yeshu, which should be dated shortly before A.D. 1300.105
The area in which Joseph and Aseneth was most successful in the East is the Armenian
church. It first appears under the title of "Aseneth's Prayer" in an "Order of the Holy
Scriptures"—ascribed to John Sarkavag ("the Deacon") of Haghbat (A.D. 1045/55-
1129)106—a book list with indications of length, including the New Testament and Old
Testament, each with apocrypha, and a number of philosophical and theological books. It
was intended as a key to theological education, and possibly as a guide to a model theological
library. Since it says in the superscription that the books "were verified" (stugabanecan)
by John (which may denote text-critical and editorial activity, a thing for which he was
reputed), we may assume that John had a copy of the Armenian Joseph and Aseneth before
him. Anyway, it was after this "Order" that the monumental codex of Erevan 1500 (332),
one of the most important Armenian manuscripts ever written, was executed in A.D. 1282-
83. The "Order" may also have contributed to the fact that Armenian Bibles, which are
traditionally interspersed with apocrypha, though not with canonical honors, often feature
Joseph and Aseneth, the oldest specimen being the Erznka Bible of A.D. 1269.107 Of the
imprints Joseph and Aseneth left in Ethiopic,108 let us quote two that are not easily accessible.The "Order" may also have contributed to the fact that Armenian Bibles, which are
traditionally interspersed with apocrypha, though not with canonical honors, often feature
Joseph and Aseneth, the oldest specimen being the Erznka Bible of A.D. 1269.107 Of the
imprints Joseph and Aseneth left in Ethiopic,108 let us quote two that are not easily accessible. Among the hymns (salamdt) contained in the expanded version of the Ethiopian Synaxarion
(which dates from the late sixteenth or early seventeenth century) there are two drawn from
Joseph and Aseneth:109
Salutation to Joseph, who was called the similitude
Of the chief of the army of God [cf. 14:8; 21:21]. All my bones sing to this wise man, the bearer of a gem,
The storehouse of his riches, saying,
"O Mary, he is thyself."
Salutation to 5Asnet, whose splendor is like the sun,
And like the flower of the red rose, which cometh forth
from its leaves [cf. 18:9]. The bees who feed her ascend on the wings of the wind,
And those who wish to inflict a wound in her
Fall down upon the ground, and perish straightway
[cf. 16:20-22]. In a manuscript of the four gospels from A.D. 1720-45 there is a marginal note in Amharic
which reads:110
Asanet is the wife of Joseph. She is an idolater [cf. 2:3]. When she was yearning
for Joseph, she entered into seclusion [hermat] and prayed [cf. chs. 9-13], and an
104 Burchard, #73 24 (1977) 74. A second quotation inserted into 1:6 does not mention Aseneth. 105 Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 25. 106Ibid., pp. 32-34. The Order was investigated afresh by M. E. Stone ("Armenian Canon Lists IH—The Lists of
Mechitar of Ayrivank' (c. 1285 C.E.)," HTR 70 [1977] 289-300). He thinks that the ascription to Sarkavag is sound,
but we must not assume for sure that all books listed were extant in Armenian in his day. 107 Armenian Patriarchate, Jerusalem, MS 1925. JosAsen was occasionally illustrated by vignettes showing both
persons; for a specimen see M. E.100 There are only a few possible exceptions. An anonymous chronicle of the late 9th cent, affirms that "Joseph
ruled over the Egyptian (land) for eighty years, beginning in the first year of plenty which was Joseph's thirty-second
year, in which he is reported [cf. JosAsen 1:2; 3:1 against Gen 41:50] to have married Aseneth, daughter of Pentephres,
priest of Heliopolis. This (man) was Osiris' priest. Osiris the Egyptians call the sun, just like the Greeks call him
[the sun] Apollon" (J. A. Cramer, Anecdota Graeca e codd. manuscriptis Bibliothecae Regiae Parisiensis [Oxford,
1839] vol. 2, p. 175). Then there is the date of a and d. Both seem, perhaps, to be older than c. A.D. 1000. 101 Thus Vikan (SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, pp. 196-98) against the earlier suggestion by Pacht and Pacht (Cahiers
Archiologiques 7 [1954] 35-49) argues that the archetype of the G miniatures originated in the 6th cent, in Syria in
the neighborhood of the Vienna Genesis. 102 See the only extant MS: St. Catherine, Mt. Sinai, MS Greek 441, f. 98b, unpublished (microfilm courtesy of the
Library of Congress). 103 Which may not therefore be cited as witnesses to the existence of JosAsen Slav.

JosAsen was occasionally illustrated by vignettes showing both
persons; for a specimen see M. E. Stone, "Bible, Translations, Armenian," EncyJud, vol. 4, cols. 861f.; see col. 862. 108 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 39-41. Add the marginal note adduced presently. For a more recent discussion
see Select Bibliography. ,w Trans, by E. A. W. Budge, The Book of the Saints of the Ethiopian Church (Cambridge, 1928; vol. Mi repr. in
Hildesheim, New York, 1976) vol. 1, p. xxxvii. n° Patriarchate Library, Addis Abbaba, Ethiopian Manuscript Microfilm Library Project No. 650, f. 145' (W. F. Macomber, A Catalogue of Ethiopian Manuscripts Microfilmed for the Ethiopian Manuscript Microfilm Library, Addis
Abbaba and for the Hill Monastic Manuscript Library, Collegeville [Collegeville, Minn., 1976] vol. 2, p. 399). Trans, by G. Haile through the courtesy of Macomber. Both have informed the present translator that they have not
discovered a MS of the full text of JosAsen Eth.angel breathed on her mouth [cf. 16:8-11]. After that, a white bee [cf. 16:18] made
white honey in her mouth [cf. 16:19], and when she ate it [cf. 16:15], she was
purified of her idolatry. So he gave her Joseph [cf. 15:6], and she gave birth to
Ephraim and Manasseh [cf. 21:9]. In Europe, LI had an influence which surpasses even that of Arm. in the East.111 An
epitome is extant in three fifteenth-century manuscripts, probably from the continent.112 A
Middle English verse translation is preserved in a fifteenth-century manuscript also containing
some poetry of John Lydgate (c. 1370-c. 1451) and a Latin treatise by Hoccleve, both in
a different hand.113 After line 265, Joseph and Aseneth 8:7-9:4 are lacking. There is a
break in the verse pattern, not in the manuscript. So it is not the autograph. The author
seems to have lived "not far from Warwickshire, and not long after the death of Chaucer"
(A.D. 1400),1,4 hardly John Lydgate himself. But he is the only English writer of his time,
and perhaps the only one of some reputation at all, to remember Aseneth in his poem To
Mary the Queene of Heaven,115 fifth stanza (11. 33-40):
O bussh vnbrent, shewed to Moyses,
Iudith the secou/tde, \>ai saued al Israel,
Assenek of Egipt, of beute pereless,
Souereyn Sara of refut cheeff Rachel,
For our Sauacioun salued bi Gabriel,
Reclinatorye throne of kyng Salamoun,
Fro thy seruantes al mescheeff do repelle,
To thy .v. Ioies that haue deuocioun. Lydgate obviously knew Joseph and Aseneth (cf. 1:5), but in which form we cannot be
certain. The man who did most to promote the book was Vincent of Beauvais (c. 1190-c. 1264). He included a condensation of LI, independent of the epitome just mentioned, in his
Speculum historiale, 1, 118-24, a world history from creation down to A.D.1264). He included a condensation of LI, independent of the epitome just mentioned, in his
Speculum historiale, 1, 118-24, a world history from creation down to A.D. 1244-53.116
This condensation met with extraordinary success far beyond the wide distribution in Latin,
Dutch, French, and German of the Speculum itself.117 It was often separately copied and
found its way into numerous other compilations, both handwritten and printed, in Latin,
Czech, Dutch, English, French, German, Polish, Russian, and Scandinavian, including
Icelandic, down to the eighteenth century.118 In the sixteenth century, Joseph and Aseneth,
Part I, was made into a play for Corpus Christi Day.119
In 1670, Philipp von Zesen, the renowned German baroque writer, had his most important
novel, Assenat, probably the first one on this subject, printed in Amsterdam.120 He used a
111 Contrary to a suggestion by Batiffol (Studia Patristica, p. 3), LI cannot have been produced by the noted
Franciscan scholar Robert Grosseteste (before A.D. 1173-1253), who was the author, or rather commissioner, of the
Latin T12P (S. H. Thomson, The Writings of Robert Grosseteste: Bishop of Lincoln [Cambridge, 1940J pp. 242f.). 112 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 15, 36. 113 Now preserved in H. E. Huntington Library, San Marino, Calif, MS El 26. A. 13, printed by H. N. MacCracken,
"The Storie of Asneth: An Unknown Middle English Translation of a Lost Latin Version," The Journal of English
and Germanic Philology 9 (1910) 224-64; cf. G. L. Hamilton, "The Latin Historia Assenech," The Journal of
English and Germanic Philology 11 (1912) 143f.; MacCracken, "The Source of the Story of Asneth," The Journal
of English and Germanic Philology, 291f.; R. A. Dwyer, "Asenath of Egypt in Middle English," Medium Aevum
39(1970) 118-22. 1.4 MacCracken, Journal of English and Germanic Philology 9 (1910) 224. 1.5 H. N. MacCracken, The Minor Poems of John Lydgate (Early English Text Society. Extra Series 107; London,
1911) vol. 1, p. 286.JosAsen was occasionally illustrated by vignettes showing both
persons; for a specimen see M. E. Stone, "Bible, Translations, Armenian," EncyJud, vol. 4, cols. 861f.; see col. 862. 108 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 39-41. Add the marginal note adduced presently. For a more recent discussion
see Select Bibliography. ,w Trans, by E. A. W. Budge, The Book of the Saints of the Ethiopian Church (Cambridge, 1928; vol. Mi repr. in
Hildesheim, New York, 1976) vol. 1, p. xxxvii. n° Patriarchate Library, Addis Abbaba, Ethiopian Manuscript Microfilm Library Project No. 650, f. 145' (W. F. Macomber, A Catalogue of Ethiopian Manuscripts Microfilmed for the Ethiopian Manuscript Microfilm Library, Addis
Abbaba and for the Hill Monastic Manuscript Library, Collegeville [Collegeville, Minn., 1976] vol. 2, p. 399). Trans, by G. Haile through the courtesy of Macomber. Both have informed the present translator that they have not
discovered a MS of the full text of JosAsen Eth.

1, p. 286. 116 No modern printed edition and no English translation are available. MacCracken (Journal of English and Germanic
Philology 9 [1910] 228-64) prints the Lat. text of 1, 118-24 at the bottom of the pages. Illustrated copies in French
include pictures featuring Aseneth (L. Del isle, "Exemplaires royaux et princiers du Miroir historial (XTVe siecle),"
Gazette Archtologique 11 [1886] 87-101, and pis. 13-16, see 92, 98, pi. 14). 1,7 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 41-45. 118 For the influence of this condensation on English, see M. M. Banks, An Alphabet of Tales (Early English Text
Society. Original Series 126; London, 1904) vol. 1, pp. 61-64. II9L. Rouanet, Colleccidn de Autos, Farsas y Coloquios del siglo XVI, i—iv (Bibliotheca Hispanica 5-8; Madrid,
1901). However, the numerous Joseph plays of the 16th cent, take little or no notice of JosAsen. 120 Reprinted with an epilogue by V. Meid (Tubingen, 1967). A Danish version was printed in 1711 and reprinted
several times; another one is extant in MS form.Dutch version of Vincent's abridgment as one of his sources. Large portions have gone into
his text, others are quoted verbatim in the learned footnotes appended to the novel according
to a custom of the time. Of the thirty engravings which adorn the volume, several illustrate
scenes sterrirning from Joseph and Aseneth. Zesen apparently thought our romance historical. For this he was reprimanded by his even more famous contemporary J. J. C. Grimmelshausen
in his novel Das wunderbarliche Vogelnest, Part 1, first published at Montbeliard, France,
in 1672. He also insinuates plagiarism.121 Grimmelshausen had an ax to grind. He had
himself published a Histori vom Keuschen Joseph in Egypten, the first of its kind in
German,122 in which he had failed to use Joseph and Aseneth, a fact duly noted by Zesen. Anyway, Grimmelshausen is the first person on record to have voiced doubts as to the
historicity of Joseph and Aseneth.123
After this period the European reading public gradually lost interest in Joseph and Aseneth. Nineteenth-century scholarship rediscovered it and most of its versions; and owing to two
short notes by G. D. Kilpatrick and J. Jeremias in 1952,124 it has been viewed with growing
interest by students of early Judaism and Christianity. But all attempts to revive it as a work
of literature125 seem to be doomed to failure. By way of appendix, let us note two fields of influence of Joseph and Aseneth that require
the hand of the non-theological specialist. The first, and more important one, is iconography. Apart from the miniatures in the manuscripts referred to earlier, Aseneth naturally figures
in numerous illustrations of the biblical narrative proper, both in Genesis manuscripts and
outside. Influence of Joseph and Aseneth may of course be assumed with certainty only
when the pictorial content coincides with the novel against the biblical text.Apart from the miniatures in the manuscripts referred to earlier, Aseneth naturally figures
in numerous illustrations of the biblical narrative proper, both in Genesis manuscripts and
outside. Influence of Joseph and Aseneth may of course be assumed with certainty only
when the pictorial content coincides with the novel against the biblical text. It is less likely
when a picture deviates from the Bible without special support in Joseph and Aseneth, as
in the case of Jacob blessing the sons of Joseph, which is not narrated in our book. Aseneth
is not mentioned in Genesis 48 either, but she is present in many representations of the
scene from the fourth century down to Rembrandt's famous canvas of 1656 (now in
Kassel).126 It remains to be seen whether this, and other Aseneth pictures, have anything to
do with Joseph and Aseneth. Secondly, there is the use of Aseneth as a Christian name, which never seems to have
been a very popular one. The name occurs four times in a Greek tax list from after A.D. 716.127 Armenians have used it since the fifteenth century.128 Some English occurrences
from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries are also known.129 Since Joseph and Aseneth
was so widely distributed in Armenian, it may have furnished motivation to choose the
name, but we do not know how well seventeenth-century England was acquainted with the
book. The present translation
The following translation is based on the provisional text referred to above. A major
problem was the author's biblicized style. As it was employed by choice, being neither his
everyday mode of speech nor presumably the kind of language he would have used for a
noii-biblical subject, a translation must somehow preserve it. To this end it seemed advisable
121 Reprinted with an introduction by R. Tarot (Tubingen, 1970); see especially pp. 99-103. 122 Under the pseudonym of Samuel Greifnson (Nuremberg, 1666; 2nd ed., 1670, repr. Tubingen, 1968).1, p. 286. 116 No modern printed edition and no English translation are available. MacCracken (Journal of English and Germanic
Philology 9 [1910] 228-64) prints the Lat. text of 1, 118-24 at the bottom of the pages. Illustrated copies in French
include pictures featuring Aseneth (L. Del isle, "Exemplaires royaux et princiers du Miroir historial (XTVe siecle),"
Gazette Archtologique 11 [1886] 87-101, and pis. 13-16, see 92, 98, pi. 14). 1,7 Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 41-45. 118 For the influence of this condensation on English, see M. M. Banks, An Alphabet of Tales (Early English Text
Society. Original Series 126; London, 1904) vol. 1, pp. 61-64. II9L. Rouanet, Colleccidn de Autos, Farsas y Coloquios del siglo XVI, i—iv (Bibliotheca Hispanica 5-8; Madrid,
1901). However, the numerous Joseph plays of the 16th cent, take little or no notice of JosAsen. 120 Reprinted with an epilogue by V. Meid (Tubingen, 1967). A Danish version was printed in 1711 and reprinted
several times; another one is extant in MS form.

122 Under the pseudonym of Samuel Greifnson (Nuremberg, 1666; 2nd ed., 1670, repr. Tubingen, 1968). 123"Aseneth's story, although I did not see it, I consider a tale of some ancient rabbi who wanted to incite the
Jewish lads to virtue and chastity" (100f.). 124Seen, on 8:5. 123 E.g. C. Lucerna, Asseneth: Eine apokryphe Erzahlung aus den Werdezeiten des Christentums (Vienna, 1921;
also in Serbo-Croatian). 126 Generally, cf. W. S tec how, " Jacob Blessing the Sons of Joseph from Early Christian Times to Rembrandt,"
Gazette des Beaux-Arts, 6th series, 23 (1943) 193-208, 382; J. C. H. Lebram, "Jakob segnet Josephs Sonne:
Darstellungen von Genesis XLVIII in der Uberlieferung und bei Rembrandt," The Priestly Code and Seven Other
Studies, eds. J. C Vink et al. (OTS 15; Leiden, 1969) pp. 145-69. Cf. above, n. 116. 127 British Museum, London, Pap. 1419, Inv. No. 1442, ff. 4" (twice), 19», 24b (H. I. Bell, Greek Papyri in the
British Museum, [London, 1910] vol. 4, pp. 182, 201, 214). 128 rL Acaryan, Hayoc anjnanunneri bararan [Dictionary of Armenian Personal Names] (RSS d'Armenie. University
Molotov a Erivan. Travaux scientifiques 21; Erivan, 1942) vol. 1, p. 221. The evidence is mostly from MS colophons. 129 E. G. Withycombe, The Oxford Dictionary of English Christian Names (Oxford, 1945; 19532) p. 32: "It was
occasionally used, like most other Old Testament names, in the 17th C, and there was an Asenath Angel in Shropshire
in 1798. the gipsy name As(h)ena may be derived from it."to translate as literally, and consistently, as present-day English grammar will permit, even
to the extent of stretching a rule here and there, and to bring out the biblical affinities by
following an established translation of the Bible. The present translator was guided by The
Jerusalem Bible, unless otherwise required by the principle of literalness as laid down
before. If a non-literal rendering is unavoidable, the literal translation is given in a footnote,
except for some well-known turns that recur frequently such as 44to rejoice with great joy"
(lit. "to rejoice a great joy"), "to be filled with great fear" (lit. "to fear a great fear"),
and similar instances of the cognate accusative: "to tell you what I have to say" (lit. "to
speak to you my words"), "to speak words such as these" (lit. "to speak according to
these words"), "forever" (lit. "in the eternity" or "eternities"), "for ever (and) ever"
(lit. "in the eternity time," see 4:8), "for ever and ever" (lit. "in the eternities of the
eternities"). Personal names are spelled as in The Jerusalem Bible, because their original form has
not yet been critically established, except that Asenath is "Aseneth," and Potiphera,
"Pentephres" (see 1:3, 5). Chapters were installed by Batiffol and verses by Riessler, and later by Philonenko. Riessler obviously could not make up his mind between short verses, as in the Bible, and
longer paragraphs, as, for example, in Josephus. Working with a provisional text, the
present translator did not feel free to adopt a new division, which will, however, eventually
be necessary. He followed Riessler, continuing his numbering if new material is added at
the end of chapters (11:16-19 [or 15-18]; 21:10-21), using x, y numbers if in the middle
(ll:lx-y; 15:12x; 16:16x; 16:17x), and altering numbers only if textual criticism cogently
demands it (see 6:2; 13:10; 16:17; 16:17y). Philonenko's numbers are given in parentheses.He followed Riessler, continuing his numbering if new material is added at
the end of chapters (11:16-19 [or 15-18]; 21:10-21), using x, y numbers if in the middle
(ll:lx-y; 15:12x; 16:16x; 16:17x), and altering numbers only if textual criticism cogently
demands it (see 6:2; 13:10; 16:17; 16:17y). Philonenko's numbers are given in parentheses. A fresh division into sections and appropriate headlines have been supplied for this
translation. The text-critical footnotes include the major differences in length between a, b, c, and
d, a selection of variants illustrating the diversified nature as well as the basic unity of the
textual tradition in the positive text, and some variants bearing intrinsic interest. The
presentation is as follows: (a) If a textual problem is mentioned, as a rule, all pertinent
variants are cited except for minor deviations, especially such as will not normally show in
a translation at all, regarding, for example, the article, synonymous or nearly synonymous
prepositions and forms, or the word order, but not, for example, the exchange of synonyms,
(b) If more words than the one carrying the footnote letter are concerned, they are given at
the head of the note. The variants quoted after this until the first stop are in lieu of exactly
that heading. Longer readings are usually abbreviated by ellipsis points between the first
and last words (to find the exact length read back from the last word quoted to the first that
you come to reading backward). Insertions in parentheses refer only to the one word before
the parenthesis unless otherwise stated, (c) Variants are normally given full coverage from
ACPQR (=a), EFGW ( = *), HJK (=c), BD (=rf), Syr., Arm., LI, L2 (if 436 and 435&
do not agree they are quoted separately), Slav., Ngr. (671 only), Bat, Phil (both text and
translation), Br (including the appendixes), Rie, Eth., Rum., 661 (Ngr.), and Istrin are
noted by way of exception only.122 Under the pseudonym of Samuel Greifnson (Nuremberg, 1666; 2nd ed., 1670, repr. Tubingen, 1968). 123"Aseneth's story, although I did not see it, I consider a tale of some ancient rabbi who wanted to incite the
Jewish lads to virtue and chastity" (100f.). 124Seen, on 8:5. 123 E.g. C. Lucerna, Asseneth: Eine apokryphe Erzahlung aus den Werdezeiten des Christentums (Vienna, 1921;
also in Serbo-Croatian). 126 Generally, cf. W. S tec how, " Jacob Blessing the Sons of Joseph from Early Christian Times to Rembrandt,"
Gazette des Beaux-Arts, 6th series, 23 (1943) 193-208, 382; J. C. H. Lebram, "Jakob segnet Josephs Sonne:
Darstellungen von Genesis XLVIII in der Uberlieferung und bei Rembrandt," The Priestly Code and Seven Other
Studies, eds. J. C Vink et al. (OTS 15; Leiden, 1969) pp. 145-69. Cf. above, n. 116. 127 British Museum, London, Pap. 1419, Inv. No. 1442, ff. 4" (twice), 19», 24b (H. I. Bell, Greek Papyri in the
British Museum, [London, 1910] vol. 4, pp. 182, 201, 214). 128 rL Acaryan, Hayoc anjnanunneri bararan [Dictionary of Armenian Personal Names] (RSS d'Armenie. University
Molotov a Erivan. Travaux scientifiques 21; Erivan, 1942) vol. 1, p. 221. The evidence is mostly from MS colophons. 129 E. G. Withycombe, The Oxford Dictionary of English Christian Names (Oxford, 1945; 19532) p. 32: "It was
occasionally used, like most other Old Testament names, in the 17th C, and there was an Asenath Angel in Shropshire
in 1798. the gipsy name As(h)ena may be derived from it."

Insertions in parentheses refer only to the one word before
the parenthesis unless otherwise stated, (c) Variants are normally given full coverage from
ACPQR (=a), EFGW ( = *), HJK (=c), BD (=rf), Syr., Arm., LI, L2 (if 436 and 435&
do not agree they are quoted separately), Slav., Ngr. (671 only), Bat, Phil (both text and
translation), Br (including the appendixes), Rie, Eth., Rum., 661 (Ngr.), and Istrin are
noted by way of exception only. For the sake of brevity, A or A include Bat, Rie, and Br,
d includes Slav, and Phil, unless otherwise stated, and "rest" includes all witnesses normally
used for coverage except those quoted individually, (d) The witness or witnesses supporting
a reading, if only with minor deviations, are set right after it. If a version or versions are
adduced after Greek evidence this implies only that they show no sign of being based on a
different Greek text. If a witness deviates in a more than minor fashion, but still supports
the reading in a general way, it is set in parentheses. If this should happen to all witnesses
supporting a variant, they vary considerably from one another, which usually means that
the text generally can be reconstructed but details remain doubtful. The abbreviation "add."
means that a reading is found in addition to the text in the witnesses quoted, "om." that it
is lacking, "gap(s)" that the reading and words before or after it or both are lacking, not
necessarily to the same extent in all witnesses adduced. The present translator is greatly indebted to Dieter Sanger and Tuviah Kwassman for
their unfailing help in preparing the translation, and especially to J. H. Charlesworth for
correcting it. Claudius Fehlandt and Michael Hoffmann helped to see the work through the
press.SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 137-40. Delling, Bibliographic pp. 95f. Denis, Introduction, pp. 40-48. Berger, K. Die Auferstehung des Propheten und die Erhdhung des Menschensohnes:
Traditionsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen zur Deutung des Geschickes Jesu in fruh~
christlichen Texten. Studien zur Umwelt des Neuen Testaments 13; Gottingen, 1976,
Burchard, Chr. Der dreizehnte Zeuge. FRLANT 103; Gottingen, 1970; pp. 59-105. . Untersuchungen zu Joseph und Aseneth. WUNT 8; Tubingen, 1965. . "Zum Text von Joseph und Aseneth,' " JSJ 1 (1970) 3-34. Delling, G. "Einwirkungen der Sprache der Septuaginta in 4Joseph und Aseneth,' " JSJ 9
(1978) 29-56. Kahler, C. "Zur Form- und Traditionsgeschichte von Matth. XVI. 17-19," NTS 23 (1976)
36-58. Nickelsburg, G. W. E. Jr. "Narrative Writings, §B 7: Joseph and Aseneth," Oral and
Literary Tradition in Judaism and Early Christianity. Compendia Rerum Iudaicarum
ad Novum Testamentum 2, 2; Leiden, in press. Pervo, R. I. 4'Joseph and Asenath and the Greek Novel," SBL 1976 Seminar Papers, ed. G. MacRae. SBL Seminar Papers Series 10; Missoula, Mont., 1976; pp. 171-81. Philonenko, M. Joseph et Aseneth: Introduction, texte critique, traduction et notes. SPB
13; Leiden, 1968. Sanger, D. Antikes Judentum und die Mysterien. Religionsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen
zu Joseph und Aseneth. WUNT 2.5; Tubingen, 1980 (with history of research and full
bibliography). Smith, E. W. Jr. Joseph and Asenath and Early Christian Literature: A Contribution to the
CorpusHellenisticumNovi Testamenti (Ph.D. dissertation, Claremont Graduate School),
Claremont, Calif., 1974. West, S. 4'Joseph and Asenath: A Neglected Greek Romance," The Classical Quarterly
N.S. 24 (1974) 70-81. Wilckens, U. "Vergebung fiir die Sunderin (Lk 7, 36-50)," Orientierung an Jesus: Zur
Theologie der Synoptiker. J. Schmid zum 80. Geburtstag am 26. Januar 1973 von
Freunden, Kollegen undSchiilern, eds. P. Hoffmann, N. Brox, and W. Pesch. Freiburg,
1973; pp. 394-424.Insertions in parentheses refer only to the one word before
the parenthesis unless otherwise stated, (c) Variants are normally given full coverage from
ACPQR (=a), EFGW ( = *), HJK (=c), BD (=rf), Syr., Arm., LI, L2 (if 436 and 435&
do not agree they are quoted separately), Slav., Ngr. (671 only), Bat, Phil (both text and
translation), Br (including the appendixes), Rie, Eth., Rum., 661 (Ngr.), and Istrin are
noted by way of exception only. For the sake of brevity, A or A include Bat, Rie, and Br,
d includes Slav, and Phil, unless otherwise stated, and "rest" includes all witnesses normally
used for coverage except those quoted individually, (d) The witness or witnesses supporting
a reading, if only with minor deviations, are set right after it. If a version or versions are
adduced after Greek evidence this implies only that they show no sign of being based on a
different Greek text. If a witness deviates in a more than minor fashion, but still supports
the reading in a general way, it is set in parentheses. If this should happen to all witnesses
supporting a variant, they vary considerably from one another, which usually means that
the text generally can be reconstructed but details remain doubtful. The abbreviation "add."
means that a reading is found in addition to the text in the witnesses quoted, "om." that it
is lacking, "gap(s)" that the reading and words before or after it or both are lacking, not
necessarily to the same extent in all witnesses adduced. The present translator is greatly indebted to Dieter Sanger and Tuviah Kwassman for
their unfailing help in preparing the translation, and especially to J. H. Charlesworth for
correcting it. Claudius Fehlandt and Michael Hoffmann helped to see the work through the
press.

Freiburg,
1973; pp. 394-424. SUPPLEMENT
Burchard, Chr. *4Joseph und Aseneth," JSHRZ 2.4 (1983). (German translation with
Introduction and Bibliography.)
— . "Zur armenischen Ubersetzung von Joseph und Aseneth," Revue des Etudes
arminiennes 17 (1983) 207-40. .4 4 Der jiidische Asenethroman und seine Nachwirkung: Von Egeria zu Anna Katharina
Emmerick oder von Moses aus Aggel zu Karl Ker^nye," ANRW, vol. 2, 20 (in press). (A full account of the cultural importance of JosAsen with new information about Eth. by G. Haile.)
. "The Importance of Joseph and Aseneth for the Study of the New Testament,"
NTS 32 (1986). (General survey with Bibliography, and a fresh study of the importance
of JosAsen for the Lord's Supper). Delling, G. "Die Kunst des Gestaltens in 4Joseph und Aseneth,' " NovTest 26 (1984) 1-40. Denis, A.-M., and Schumacher, J. Concordance des Pseudipigraphes grecs d'Ancien
Testament. Leiden, 1984. van Goeij, M. Jozef en Aseneth. Apokalyps van Baruch. De Pseudepigrafen 2; Kampen,
1981. (Dutch translation.)
Kee, H. "The Socio-Cultural Setting of Joseph and Aseneth," NTS 29 (1983) 394-413. Martinez Fernandez, R., and Piiiero, A. "Jose" y Asenet," Apocrifos del Antiguo Testamento,
ed. A. Dfez Macho; Madrid, 1983. (Spanish translation of Philonenko's text.)
Suski, A. "J6zef i Asenet," Studia Theologica Varsaviensia 16 (1978) 199-240. (Polish
translation of Philonenko's text.)i:i 202
JOSEPH AND ASENETH8
FIRST PART: ASENETH'S CONVERSION AND MARRIAGE
I. CAST OF CHARACTERS. SCENE OF ACTION
The characters are introduced
1 (i) 1 And it happened1* in the first year of the seven years of plenty, in the second month, on
the fifth of the month:c Pharaoh sent out Joseph to drive around the whole land of Egypt. 2 (2) And Joseph came in the fourth month of the first year, on the eighteenth of the month,d
O) into the territory of Heliopolis,6 and was gathering the grain of that region like the sand of
the sea.f
3 (4) And8 there was a man in that city,h a satrap of Pharaoh, and this (man) was a chief of
(S) all the satraps and the noblemen of Pharaoh. And this man was exceedingly rich and prudent
and gentle, and he was a counselor of Pharaoh, because he was understanding beyond all
the noblemen of Pharaoh. And the name of that man (was) Pentephres, priest of Heliopolis.1
1 a. Modern (Rie, see Intro.). Survey of the titles d. See 1:1 (5th day, 2d month, year 1), 3:1 (as
in Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 50-54. "Life in 1:2), and 22:2 (21st day, 2d month, year 2 of
and Confession of Aseneth daughter of Pentephres famine), cf. the dates in Jub. According to the
priest of Heliopolis, and how the all-beautiful calendar of Jub, also attested at Qumran, 5th day,
Joseph took her for (his) wife" (a d LI Ngr. Br, 2d month and 8th day, 4th month would be sabbaths
Phil, not Bat Rie); "Discourse (logos) about Ase­ (J. van Goudoever, Biblical Calendars [Leiden,
neth daughter of Pentephres." c; "Discourse (lo­ 1959; 19612] p. 63). But 18th day, 4th month is a
gos) chosen from the old book about Aseneth Sunday in 9:5, and would Joseph travel on sabbaths? having become (h.b. omit W) the wife of Joseph Or is 18th day, 4th month "an indication of the
the all-beautiful and self-controlled (a.s. omit W)" summer solstice" (Goudoever, Biblical Calendars,
FW (Arm. c, 435, Ebed Yeshu, see Intro.); "Story p. 120, referring to 5:5; 6:2; 9:5 etc.)?c, 435, Ebed Yeshu, see Intro.); "Story p. 120, referring to 5:5; 6:2; 9:5 etc.)? Anyway, it
(historia) of A." E 332 (somewhat longer Arm. is harvest time in chs. 1-21 (see also 2:11; 4:2;
a, d) 2-456 (436); "Book of Asyath" Anonymous 5:5) as also in 22:29, though years later (24:15;
letter in Ps-Zacharias Rhetor, Church History, 1.4; 25:2; 26:1). Does the season of Aseneth's conver­
'4 Aseneth's Prayer" Sarkavag (see Intro.); "Prayer sion have a symbolical meaning (cf. Mt 9:37)? The
of Aseneth" Bat, "Aseneth" Nikon and other day certainly has one (see on 9:5; 11:1; 14:1). canon lists (see Intro.); "Deed(s?) of the all- e. "Sun City," Heb. 3on, Gen 41:45,50; 46:20,
beautiful Joseph and his wife Aseneth" MS Breslau; cf. Jer 43:13; today Matarieh, a few miles northeast
"Tale of Joseph the Just and of Asyath his wife" of Cairo (E. P. Uphill, "Pithom and Raamses:
Syr. (Syr. subscription, Arm. b, e, cf. also L2 Their Location and Significance", JNES 27 [1968]
445, 455); "Story of Joseph and Aseneth" or 291-316; 28 [1969] 15-39, see especially pp. similar, Rum. The first mentioned title is old 296-99 [with plans] and pp. 37-39). It is an
because it crosses a, b, and d, and the next two important center of the Sun god Re, almost in ruins
may be derived from it, but it sounds hagiograph- in the author's day, but a tourist attraction haunted
ical. The title is followed in CPQR FW HJK BD by the memories of Plato and Eudoxus (Strabo,
by "Bless, Lord (or Father)," a stock formula Geography 17.1.29). Jews thought that Abraham
opening the delivery of the text when read aloud. had visited there and taught the Egyptian clergy
[Biblical and apocryphal references are not placed astrology (Ps-Eup F. 1), that they had fortified the
in the margins to JosAsen because there are no city (Ex 1:11 LXX), and built the local temple (Art
formal quotations from them in this document; F. 2; 3). Apion, History of Egypt, is said by
affinities are discussed in the following notes.Freiburg,
1973; pp. 394-424. SUPPLEMENT
Burchard, Chr. *4Joseph und Aseneth," JSHRZ 2.4 (1983). (German translation with
Introduction and Bibliography.)
— . "Zur armenischen Ubersetzung von Joseph und Aseneth," Revue des Etudes
arminiennes 17 (1983) 207-40. .4 4 Der jiidische Asenethroman und seine Nachwirkung: Von Egeria zu Anna Katharina
Emmerick oder von Moses aus Aggel zu Karl Ker^nye," ANRW, vol. 2, 20 (in press). (A full account of the cultural importance of JosAsen with new information about Eth. by G. Haile.)
. "The Importance of Joseph and Aseneth for the Study of the New Testament,"
NTS 32 (1986). (General survey with Bibliography, and a fresh study of the importance
of JosAsen for the Lord's Supper). Delling, G. "Die Kunst des Gestaltens in 4Joseph und Aseneth,' " NovTest 26 (1984) 1-40. Denis, A.-M., and Schumacher, J. Concordance des Pseudipigraphes grecs d'Ancien
Testament. Leiden, 1984. van Goeij, M. Jozef en Aseneth. Apokalyps van Baruch. De Pseudepigrafen 2; Kampen,
1981. (Dutch translation.)
Kee, H. "The Socio-Cultural Setting of Joseph and Aseneth," NTS 29 (1983) 394-413. Martinez Fernandez, R., and Piiiero, A. "Jose" y Asenet," Apocrifos del Antiguo Testamento,
ed. A. Dfez Macho; Madrid, 1983. (Spanish translation of Philonenko's text.)
Suski, A. "J6zef i Asenet," Studia Theologica Varsaviensia 16 (1978) 199-240. (Polish
translation of Philonenko's text.)

2; 3). Apion, History of Egypt, is said by
affinities are discussed in the following notes. Two Josephus to have reported that Moses was bom in
verse systems are provided (see Introduction, "The Heliopolis and erected prayer-houses and pillars
present translation"). Bullets denote the primary with statues on them for sun-clocks there (Apion
system of verses; marginal parentheses specify 2.2 §10-11, cf. 12-14). On Leontopolis see Intro,
Philonenko's system. The beginning of a verse n. 59. according to the secondary system is not indicated f. Frequent traditional simile, e.g. Gen 41:49. if the punctuation points to it unequivocally; when g. On the following introduction of a man cf. it is not obvious, the sign ' has been inserted in e.g. Job 1:1-3; Acts 10: If.; Xenophon of Ephesus
the text.—J.H.C] 1.1.1. On 1:3-6 cf. e.g. Chariton 1.1.If.; Xeno­
b. "And it happened" G c Syr. Arm. LI; "it phon of Ephesus 1.1.1-3; Apuleius 4.28.1-29.4. h." CR E d 435&; omit AOPQ Ngr.; l:lf. omit h. See next note. FW; 1:1-7 "for (his) wife" omit 436. Frequent i. "And . . . Heliopolis" (all) except a, which
traditional turn (not in Aram.) to introduce circum­ has "by name (of) P. being priest of H. and" after
stantial data, also 3:1; 21:9; 22:1; followed by an "city." Pentephres (Heb. Pdti Pera\ LXX Pe-
independent clause without "and," e.g. 2Chr 12:11; tephres; etymology in Redford, Study, pp. 228f.,
Dan 8:15; Lk 1:59. As the opening of an entire cf. Philo, Somn, 1.78, "worshipper of the mind")
book in Josh, Judg, Ruth, 2Sam, IMac, Jub (1:1, occurs in the Bible only at Gen 41:45, 50; 46:20. also with a precise date); "it h." TAb B 1:1, cf. Like, e.g., Josephus, Ant 2.6.1 §91, and Philo,
Lk 1:5. Jos, 121, JosAsen does not identify Pentephres
c. See 1:2. with Potiphar Gen 37:36, 39:1, whose name is4 (6) And he had a daughter, a virgin of eighteen years ,j (she was) very tall and handsome and
s (7) beautiful to look at beyond all virgins on the earth. • And this (girl) had nothing similar to
the virgins of the Egyptians, but she was in every respect similar to the daughters of the
(8) Hebrews; and she was tall as Sarah and handsome as Rebecca and beautiful as Rachel.k
6 (9) And the name of that virgin was Aseneth.1 • And the fame of her beauty spread all over that
land and to the ends of the inhabited (world).m And all the sons of the noblemen and the
sons of the satraps and the sons of all kings, all of them young and powerful,n asked for
do) her hand in marriage,0 and there was much wrangling among them over Aseneth, 'and they
made attempts to fight against each other because of her.p
7(ii) And* Pharaoh's firstborn son heard about her and he kept entreating' his father to give
02) her to him for (his) wife. And his firstborn son said to Pharaoh, "Father, give me Aseneth,
the daughter of Pentephres, the priest of Heliopolis, for (my) wife."8 «And Pharaoh, his
8 (13) father, said to him, "Why do you seek a wife (that is) beneath you, and you are king* of
the whole land of Egypt? •Behold, is not the daughter of the king of Moab, Joakim,"
9(i4) betrothed to you,v and she is a queen and exceedingly beautiful? This (one) take for (your)
wife."
Aseneth's tower and the court surrounding Pentephres' house are described
1 (i) 2 And Aseneth was despising and scorning every man, and she was boastful and arrogant
with everyone.* And no man had ever seen her, because Pentephres had a tower adjoining
almost identical in MT and completely in LXX, "desired (epethymouri) her to be married" ACPR
but many ancient authors, both Jewish and Chris­ (Q Arm. 435& Ngr.); "praised (hymnoun) her" b
tian, did (e.g. Jub 40:10; TJos 18:3; rabbinical Syr. LI Rum.; gap 436. Seems to be one instance
literature is divided (cf.LI Rum.; gap 436. Seems to be one instance
literature is divided (cf. Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 where b (but not all versions) is at fault, although
[1924], 262). It is not clear whether "priest" has its reading is not entirely incongruent (cf. Xenophon
the article. Perhaps it should be omitted when of Ephesus 1.1.3; 1.2.7; Apuleius 4.28. If.). Note
followed by "of Heliopolis" (4;3, 7; 21:2, 11) in the graphic similarity of the two verbs. accordance with LXX, but retained when not (3:2; p. Another novelistic feature. For an illustration
12:5). Despite his tide, P. is never shown offici­ see e.g. Chariton 1.2.2L
ating, whereas Aseneth is (2:3). q. 1:7-9 lays the foundation for 4:11 and chs. j. Aseneth' s virginity, not mentioned in the Bible 22-29. (but, e.g. by Josephus, Ant 2.6.1 §91), plays a r. The verb ekliparein (also 15:7) is found first
great role in JosAsen (e.g. chs. 7f., 11-13), as in Strabo and Dionysius of Halicamassus. virginity generally does in the romances. The age s. Cf. Gen 34:4. of eighteen means that she has been fighting off t. The titles of "king" and "queen" (1:9; 28:2;
suitors for several years. cf. 10:13; 13:8) in JosAsen are also applied to the
k. A novel's hero or heroine has to be beautiful crown prince, to viceroys like Joseph (4:7), and
(e.g. Xenophon of Ephesus 1.1.3; 1.2.5,7; Achilles related folk. Tatius 1.4.2; Apuleius 4:28), and her looks may u. "Moab, Joakim" a, "Moab" E FW (gap
be compared to a classical figure or a goddess (e.g. following) c Syr. (gap following) Arm. LI L2,
Chariton 1.1.1; 1.6.2; 2.6.1 etc.). To a Jew, Jewish "Joakim" d, paraphrase G, gap Ngr. Is Moab a
women, above all the patriarchs' wives, whose biblicised reference to the Nabatean kingdom, c. beauty was legendary (e.g. Sarah, Ginzberg, Leg­ 100 B.C.-A.D. 105/6 (Burchard, Untersuchungen,
ends, vol. 5, p. 261, no. 90; vol. 6 (1928, repr. pp. 144-46)? The name was used down to Christian
1946) p. 273, n. 132; IQapGen 20.2-8), would times.2; 3). Apion, History of Egypt, is said by
affinities are discussed in the following notes. Two Josephus to have reported that Moses was bom in
verse systems are provided (see Introduction, "The Heliopolis and erected prayer-houses and pillars
present translation"). Bullets denote the primary with statues on them for sun-clocks there (Apion
system of verses; marginal parentheses specify 2.2 §10-11, cf. 12-14). On Leontopolis see Intro,
Philonenko's system. The beginning of a verse n. 59. according to the secondary system is not indicated f. Frequent traditional simile, e.g. Gen 41:49. if the punctuation points to it unequivocally; when g. On the following introduction of a man cf. it is not obvious, the sign ' has been inserted in e.g. Job 1:1-3; Acts 10: If.; Xenophon of Ephesus
the text.—J.H.C] 1.1.1. On 1:3-6 cf. e.g. Chariton 1.1.If.; Xeno­
b. "And it happened" G c Syr. Arm. LI; "it phon of Ephesus 1.1.1-3; Apuleius 4.28.1-29.4. h." CR E d 435&; omit AOPQ Ngr.; l:lf. omit h. See next note. FW; 1:1-7 "for (his) wife" omit 436. Frequent i. "And . . . Heliopolis" (all) except a, which
traditional turn (not in Aram.) to introduce circum­ has "by name (of) P. being priest of H. and" after
stantial data, also 3:1; 21:9; 22:1; followed by an "city." Pentephres (Heb. Pdti Pera\ LXX Pe-
independent clause without "and," e.g. 2Chr 12:11; tephres; etymology in Redford, Study, pp. 228f.,
Dan 8:15; Lk 1:59. As the opening of an entire cf. Philo, Somn, 1.78, "worshipper of the mind")
book in Josh, Judg, Ruth, 2Sam, IMac, Jub (1:1, occurs in the Bible only at Gen 41:45, 50; 46:20. also with a precise date); "it h." TAb B 1:1, cf. Like, e.g., Josephus, Ant 2.6.1 §91, and Philo,
Lk 1:5. Jos, 121, JosAsen does not identify Pentephres
c. See 1:2. with Potiphar Gen 37:36, 39:1, whose name is

273, n. 132; IQapGen 20.2-8), would times. Why does this Moabite (or his daughter?)
set the standard. "Hebrews" instead of "Jews" have a Heb. name? (as in 11:10) has a distinguished ring. v. In Jewish law of the time, as in Greek,
1. "And . . . Aseneth" (G d Syr. Arm. 435&); betrothal (also 21:3, 23:3) was the legally binding
"by name (of) A." before or after 1:4 "virgin" a step in bringing about a marital union, constituting
EW c LI Ngr. Rum. illegible F; gap 436. Aseneth by and large the formal beginning of a marriage;
(Heb. 'As^nat, LXX Asen(n)eth, Egyptian possibly consummation by the wedding could be, and often
ns-nt: "the One belonging to Neith"; on this was, deferred at the parties1 convenience. See
etymology see Redford, Study, pp. 229f.) is men­ generally R. Taubenschlag, The Law of Greco-
tioned in the Bible only at Gen 41:45, 50; 46:20. Roman Egypt in the Light of the Papyri 332 B.C-
The author and the readers of JosAsen may have 640 A.D. (Warsaw, 19552) p. 114; A. Calderini,
been aware of the reference to Neith, but more "La eggyisis matrimoniale nei romanzieri greci e
would be needed to make Aseneth a representation nei papiri," Aegyptus 39 (1959) 29-39; B. Cohen,
of the goddess (cf. Intro.). Jewish and Roman Law. A Comparative Study
m. Ps 19:4. A person's reputation spreads the (New York, 1966), vol. 1, pp. 279-347. same way, e.g. in Chariton 1.5.1; 3.2.7; 4.7.5;
5.2.6; Achilles Tatius 6.10.3; Apuleius 4.29.1; 2 a. In spite of the general ring, Aseneth's boast-
11.18.1. fulness, which is a main motif in chs. 1-21 (4:12;
n. Maybe these are to be understood as two 6:2-8; 7:7f.; 11:6; 12:5; 13:13; 21:12, 16-21), is
more classes of suitors, in fact limited to possible suitors (cf. 8:1). As she
o. The reading "asked . . . marriage": c d; lives in seclusion (see vs. 2), it would express(2) his house, very big and high, and ,on top of this tower was an upper floor including ten
2 (3) chambers.b *And the first chamber was big and splendid, paved with purple stones, and its
(4) walls were faced with colored and precious stones ,c and the ceiling of that chamber was of
3 gold. #And within that chamber gods of the Egyptians'1 who were without number were
(3) fixed to the walls,e (even gods) of gold and silver/ And Aseneth worshiped them all and
4 (6) feared them and performed sacrifices to them every day.8 • And the second chamber contained
(7) Aseneth's ornaments and chests, and there was much gold in it (the chamber) and silver
and clothes interwoven with gold and chosen and cosdy stones and distinguished c!othsh
5 (8X9) and all the ornaments of her virginity. *And the third chamber was Aseneth's storeroom,
6(io) and in it were all the good (things) of the earth.1 #And seven virgins' occupied the remaining
do seven chambers, each having one chamber, 'and these were waiting on Aseneth, and they
were all of the same age, bom in one night with Aseneth, and she loved them very much.k
And they were very beautiful, like the stars of heaven, and no man ever conversed with
them, not (even) a male child. 7 (12) And there were three windows to Aseneth *s big chamber where her virginity was being
d3) fostered.*And the third chamber was Aseneth's storeroom,
6(io) and in it were all the good (things) of the earth.1 #And seven virgins' occupied the remaining
do seven chambers, each having one chamber, 'and these were waiting on Aseneth, and they
were all of the same age, bom in one night with Aseneth, and she loved them very much.k
And they were very beautiful, like the stars of heaven, and no man ever conversed with
them, not (even) a male child. 7 (12) And there were three windows to Aseneth *s big chamber where her virginity was being
d3) fostered. And the one window, the first, was exceedingly big, looking east toward the court,
and the second one was looking south, and the third one was looking north toward the street
8 (14) where people passed by.1 *And there was a golden bed standing in the chamber, (a bed)
d5) that looked toward the window (looking) east, and the bed was laid with gold-woven purple
9 (16) stuff, interwoven with violet, purple, and white.1" #And in this bed Aseneth slept, alone;
and a man or another woman never sat on it, only Aseneth alone."
10 (17) And there was a large court surrounding the house,0 and a wall was around the court,
n (18) very high, built from big square stones.p *And the court had four iron-plated gates, and
(19) eighteen powerful armed young men guarded each of these.0 And handsome trees of all
itself in the manner shown in ch. 4. She behaves f. Conventional, cf. e.g. Ex 20:23; Ps 115:4
lovingly toward her parents, servants (2:6; 10:4; (113:12 LXX); WisSol 13:10; LeUer 3, 10, 29;
17:4), and her dead brother (10:8). She is actuated Acts 17:29; Rev 9:20; 17:4. by virginal fastidiousness rather than misanthropy, g. Cf. 10:12; ll:8f., 16; 12:5; 13:11; 19:5;
feminism, or sex-hatred. She wants the best man 21:13f. Xenophon of Ephesus' Antheia and Helio-
(a fairy-tale motif), and she will get him, if only dorus' Charicleia were also priestesses. Cf. TJob
against herself (cf. on 4:11). 2:2f.; ApAb 1:3. b.2:2f.; ApAb 1:3. b. The "tower" need be no more than the two- h. Gold, silver, jewels, and fine clothes is a
story part of an otherwise flat mansion. On the common formula for mobile wealth (cf. Acts 20:33;
description of the premises cf. Cupid's palace and Jas 5:2f.). In antiquity clothes were folded away
park (Apuleius 5.1.1-2.1); a garden (Achilles in chests (also 10:8; 14:14; 18:5), never hung up
Tatius 1.15). That women, especially unmarried in wardrobes or closets. daughters, had better stay home is a common ideal i. Or "land"; i.e. food stuff as in 4:2. Cf. Isa
of the time, often no more than that (Thraede, 1:19; Hos 10:1. "Frau," pp. 199-201, 215f.), but upheld rigor­ j. Cf. Esth 2:9, seven valets Esth 1:10, seven
ously in Jewish quarters (e.g. 2Mac 3:19; 3Mac counsellors Ezra 7:14. The wording of the first half
1:18; Sir 42:9-14; Ps-Phoc 215-17; Philo, Leg of vs. 6 is doubtful. Cf. 17:4. All, 3.169; Flacc, 89). This does not mean that k. The reading "and . . . much": ACP; de­
Aseneth is held a prisoner. In other texts the tower stroyed R; gaps Q EG Ngr.; omit rest. Cf. 10:4. (another fairy-tale motif) may mean just that; in 1. Lit. "of the (people) passing by" FW c (Syr.)
JosAsen it goes to underline Pentephres' affluence Arm. LI (L2); omit a d; gaps EG Ngr. and his care for his daughter. Obviously she is in m. Both text and meaning of the description of
charge of the house during her parents' absence the textiles are uncertain (as in 3:6; 5:5; 13:3;
(chs. 18-20), just as she will look after Joseph's 16:18); cf. Ex 26:1, 31, 36; 28:5f., 8, 15; Jdt
estate later on (24:15; 26:1-4; see 3:5). She is also 10:21; TJob 25:7; Josephus, War 5.5.4 §212. For
Pentephres' heiress (12:15), apparently being his similar luxury beds, see Esth 1:6; TJob 25:8; 32:4;
only child after her brother's death (10:8; according Philo, Somn, 2.57; Chariton 8.1.14; 8.6.7; Xeno­
to Nu 27:1-11; BB 9:1, Jewish daughters inherit phon of Ephesus 1.8.2; Apuleius 2.19.1.273, n. 132; IQapGen 20.2-8), would times. Why does this Moabite (or his daughter?)
set the standard. "Hebrews" instead of "Jews" have a Heb. name? (as in 11:10) has a distinguished ring. v. In Jewish law of the time, as in Greek,
1. "And . . . Aseneth" (G d Syr. Arm. 435&); betrothal (also 21:3, 23:3) was the legally binding
"by name (of) A." before or after 1:4 "virgin" a step in bringing about a marital union, constituting
EW c LI Ngr. Rum. illegible F; gap 436. Aseneth by and large the formal beginning of a marriage;
(Heb. 'As^nat, LXX Asen(n)eth, Egyptian possibly consummation by the wedding could be, and often
ns-nt: "the One belonging to Neith"; on this was, deferred at the parties1 convenience. See
etymology see Redford, Study, pp. 229f.) is men­ generally R. Taubenschlag, The Law of Greco-
tioned in the Bible only at Gen 41:45, 50; 46:20. Roman Egypt in the Light of the Papyri 332 B.C-
The author and the readers of JosAsen may have 640 A.D. (Warsaw, 19552) p. 114; A. Calderini,
been aware of the reference to Neith, but more "La eggyisis matrimoniale nei romanzieri greci e
would be needed to make Aseneth a representation nei papiri," Aegyptus 39 (1959) 29-39; B. Cohen,
of the goddess (cf. Intro.). Jewish and Roman Law. A Comparative Study
m. Ps 19:4. A person's reputation spreads the (New York, 1966), vol. 1, pp. 279-347. same way, e.g. in Chariton 1.5.1; 3.2.7; 4.7.5;
5.2.6; Achilles Tatius 6.10.3; Apuleius 4.29.1; 2 a. In spite of the general ring, Aseneth's boast-
11.18.1. fulness, which is a main motif in chs. 1-21 (4:12;
n. Maybe these are to be understood as two 6:2-8; 7:7f.; 11:6; 12:5; 13:13; 21:12, 16-21), is
more classes of suitors, in fact limited to possible suitors (cf. 8:1). As she
o. The reading "asked . . . marriage": c d; lives in seclusion (see vs. 2), it would express

She is also 10:21; TJob 25:7; Josephus, War 5.5.4 §212. For
Pentephres' heiress (12:15), apparently being his similar luxury beds, see Esth 1:6; TJob 25:8; 32:4;
only child after her brother's death (10:8; according Philo, Somn, 2.57; Chariton 8.1.14; 8.6.7; Xeno­
to Nu 27:1-11; BB 9:1, Jewish daughters inherit phon of Ephesus 1.8.2; Apuleius 2.19.1. East: to
only if their father had no male children living). facilitate prayer in that direction (on which see
c. Cf. IChr 29:2 LXX; Esth 1:6. 11: iy). d. These would be animal statues, but unlike n. The reading "except . . . alone": ACPR d\
e.g. WisSol 15:18f. JosAsen makes nothing of it. gaps b Ngr.; omit rest. Cf. 15:14. The gods have names (3:6), but as in Jewish o. Not on the northern side, unless Aseneth's
polemic generally they are not identified individ­ tower is a distance from the house, cf. 2:7; 10:11—
ually. See further esp. 12:9-11. 13; 13:11. e. Both chamber and walls are mentioned in G p. Indicating careful and costly construction. Arm. LI L2 Rum. (and perhaps F in between Cf. ShepHerm Vis 3.2.5. illegible spots), the chamber alone in APQ d Slav. q. The number hardly symbolizes the eighteen
Ngr., the walls in c Syr. (and perhaps F in between stars of Aries (Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. illegible spots); gaps CR EW. 74f.) or the Eighteen Benedictions (Riessler, Altju-sorts and all bearing fruit were planted within the court along the wall. And their fruit was
12 (20) ripe, for it was the time of harvest. •And there was in the court, on the right hand, a spring
of abundant living' water, and below the spring was a big cistern receiving the water of that
spring. From there a river ran right through the court and watered all the trees of that court. N. PENTEPHRES' A T T E M PT TO GIVE ASENETH TO JOSEPH IN MARRIAGE
Joseph's visit to Pentephres is announced
1 d)3 And it happened in the first year of the seven years of plenty, in the fourth month, on
the eighteenth* of the month; Joseph came into the territory of Heliopolis and was gathering
2 (2) the surplus grain of that region.6 • And when he had come close to that city, Joseph sent
O) twelve menc ahead of him to Pentephres the priest, saying, 4tI will lodge with you because
it is the hour of noon and the time of lunch,d and the heat of the sun is great, and (I desire)
3 (4) that I may refresh myself under the shadow of your house."e #And Pentephres heard this,
and rejoiced exceedingly with great joy and said, 44 Blessed (be) the Lord, the God of
4 (5) Joseph, because my lord Joseph thought me worthy to come to us."f • And Pentephres called
(6) the (steward) of his house8 and said to him, "Hurry and make my house ready and prepare
a great dinner, because Joseph, the Powerful One of God,h is coming to us today."
Aseneth dresses up to meet her parents
5 (7) And Aseneth heard that her father and mother had come from the field, which was their
(8) inheritance/ and rejoiced and said, 4T will go and see my father and my mother because
they have come from the field which is our inheritance. "s For it was (the) time of harvest. 6 (9) And Aseneth hurried into the chamber, where her robes lay,k and dressed1 in a (white) linen
disches Schrifttum, p. 1303).6 (9) And Aseneth hurried into the chamber, where her robes lay,k and dressed1 in a (white) linen
disches Schrifttum, p. 1303). If it is at all symbol­ expression sounds Semitic, but no equivalent is on
ical, the total of seventy-two might refer to the record; could this be an artificial Semitism? Perhaps
seventy-two nations of the world (Gen 10 LXX; the expression is not so much due to an intention
cf. LetAris 50, 307; Lk 10:1). Cf. 3:2. to present Pentephres in a biblicized manner, as to
r. I.e. fresh as opposed to cistern water; also a peculiarity of Egyptian law. Arable land was
14:12, 15. Traditional, e.g. Gen 26:19; Jer 2:13. considered property of the crown and either ad­
ministrated directly or allotted to others. In Ptole­
3 a. Witnesses c FW Syr. Arm. LI Slav. Phil; maic times the latter seems to have gradually
"seventeenth" 436; "twenty-eighth" ACPR d i, acquired the character of private property (see
"eighth" Q; gaps EG 435& Ngr. Taubenschlag, Law, pp. 232-39). That Pentephres
b. The reading "of surplus (lit. "plenty") . . . is a landowner may come from Gen 47:22, 26, but
region": the evidence is variegated, (a) B Slav, Pharaoh's firstborn (25:2) and Joseph (24:15; 26:1)
have only "the region"; FW LI only "the plenty"; also are (cf. further 23:3). With men of their
similarly Syr. ("of the seven years of plenty," cf. description, the "fields" would be estates as hel­
Gen 41:34, 47) Arm. ("of plenty of the times"), lenistic patricians used to have rather than mere
only 436 and perhaps c have both; omit Ngr., gaps strips of land; perhaps we ought to translate agros
EG D 435& Phil. The text is restored on the accordingly. Pentephres' estate is near (16:4). Such
assumption of split tradition. estates were run by managers (cf. Lk 16:1) who
c. A reference to Israel? Cf. 2:11. Of course a might be slaves, with the help of other slaves (cf. man in Joseph's position would not travel alone, Chariton 4.2) or hired labor (cf. Lk 15:15f.).She is also 10:21; TJob 25:7; Josephus, War 5.5.4 §212. For
Pentephres' heiress (12:15), apparently being his similar luxury beds, see Esth 1:6; TJob 25:8; 32:4;
only child after her brother's death (10:8; according Philo, Somn, 2.57; Chariton 8.1.14; 8.6.7; Xeno­
to Nu 27:1-11; BB 9:1, Jewish daughters inherit phon of Ephesus 1.8.2; Apuleius 2.19.1. East: to
only if their father had no male children living). facilitate prayer in that direction (on which see
c. Cf. IChr 29:2 LXX; Esth 1:6. 11: iy). d. These would be animal statues, but unlike n. The reading "except . . . alone": ACPR d\
e.g. WisSol 15:18f. JosAsen makes nothing of it. gaps b Ngr.; omit rest. Cf. 15:14. The gods have names (3:6), but as in Jewish o. Not on the northern side, unless Aseneth's
polemic generally they are not identified individ­ tower is a distance from the house, cf. 2:7; 10:11—
ually. See further esp. 12:9-11. 13; 13:11. e. Both chamber and walls are mentioned in G p. Indicating careful and costly construction. Arm. LI L2 Rum. (and perhaps F in between Cf. ShepHerm Vis 3.2.5. illegible spots), the chamber alone in APQ d Slav. q. The number hardly symbolizes the eighteen
Ngr., the walls in c Syr. (and perhaps F in between stars of Aries (Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, pp. illegible spots); gaps CR EW. 74f.) or the Eighteen Benedictions (Riessler, Altju-

man in Joseph's position would not travel alone, Chariton 4.2) or hired labor (cf. Lk 15:15f.). The
but have a large staff with him (9:3; 18:1). owners lived in the city, keeping an occasional eye
d. Cf. Mk 11:1 par; Lk 9:52; 19:5. See also 3:5 on things (as described e.g. in Chariton 2.3.1),
end. particularly at harvest time. So statements like
e. The reading "the shadow (skian, "shelter" those in 24:15; 25:2; 26:1 should be taken in the
[skepen] D) of your house (hand 435&)": E D sense of supervision rather than personal hard work,
Arm. LI L2; "the roof (stegen) of y.h." a Slav.; although a landlord was not above lending a helpful
"your shadow" c; "your house (oikian)" FW hand when on his estate (Syracuse's second-best
(Syr.); "your roof" B Phil; gaps G Ngr. man fell from a ladder there and almost killed
f. Traditional form of eulogy, e.g. Gen 14:19- himself, Chariton 1.3.1). The estates in JosAsen
20; ISam 25:32; IKgs 1:48; 8:15; Tob 3:11; 2Mac produce different kind of fruit (4:2), honey (16:4),
1:17; see H. W. Beyer, "eutoged etc.," TDNT 2, wine (24:15; 25:2; 26:1), and doubtless also corn. 754-65. Also in a gentile's mouth as in 8:2; 21:4, j. This might have been mentioned as early as
e.g. IKgs 5:21; 10:9. The translation "to come to 3:2. Ngr. has an addition there to this effect as
us" is a guess from the variegated evidence. well as further remarks on Pentephres' hospitality. g. Cf. Gen 43:16; 44:1, 4. An analogous person k. The reading "into . . . lay": APCR B; gaps
in ch. 18. They would be slaves. Cf. on 5:1. EG; omit rest Phil. The MS evidence is poor, but
h. Also 4:7; 18:If.; 21:21. Not LXX, but cf. some such remark seems appropriate, cf. 10:8;
Isa 9:5; Jub 40:7. 14:14; 18:5. i. Lit. "field of their inheritance," also 3:5b; 1. More dressing scenes, cf. 10:10; 14:l4f.;
4:2; 16:4; 20:6; 24:15; 26:1; cf. 10:1; 23:3. The 18:5f. Cf. Jdt 10:3f.robe interwoven with violet and gold,"1 and girded herself (with) a golden girdle and put
bracelets on her hands and feet, and put golden buskins" about her feet, and around her
do) neck she put valuable ornaments and costly stones which hung around from all sides, and
the names of the gods of the Egyptians0 were engraved everywhere on the bracelets and the
do stones, and the faces of all the idols were carved on them. And she put a tiara on her head
and fastened a diadem around her temples, and covered her head with a veil. Pentephres proposes to give Aseneth to Joseph in marriage, but she refuses
1 d)4 And she hurried and went down the stairs from the upper floor, and came to her father
(2) and mother and greeted them and kissed them. And Pentephres and his wife rejoiced over
her daughter Aseneth (with) great joy, because they saw her adorned like a bride of God.*
2 (3) And they brought out all the good (things) which they had brought from the field which
(4) was their inheritance, and gave (them) to their daughter. And Aseneth rejoiced over all the
good (things), the fruit,b and the grapes, and the dates, and the doves,c and the pomegranates,
and the figs, because they were all handsome and good to taste.d
3(5) And Pentephres said to his daughter Aseneth, "My child." And she said, "Behold,
4 (here) I (am), my lord."e »And he said to her, "Sit down between us/ and I will tell you
what I have to say."8
5 (6X7) And Aseneth sat between her father and mother. And Pentephres, her father, with his
right hand grasped the right hand of his daughter and kissed ith and said to her, "My child
6 Aseneth." #And she said, "Behold, (here) I (am), lord. Let my lord and my father speak
7 (8) up."j «And Pentephres, her father, said to her, "Joseph the Powerful One of God is coming
to us today.And Pentephres, her father, with his
right hand grasped the right hand of his daughter and kissed ith and said to her, "My child
6 Aseneth." #And she said, "Behold, (here) I (am), lord. Let my lord and my father speak
7 (8) up."j «And Pentephres, her father, said to her, "Joseph the Powerful One of God is coming
to us today. And he is chief of the whole land of Egypt,j and the king Pharaoh appointed
(9) him king of the whole land/ and he is giving grain to the whole land, and saving it from
the oncoming famine.1 And Joseph is a man who worships God,m and self-controlled, and
a virgin" like you today,0 and Joseph is (also) a man powerful in wisdom and experience,
m. See 2:8. f. Sus 50 Theod. n. Thus Br for anaxyrides, an ill-defined piece g. Lit. "my words" as often. Cf. 4:9. of oriental clothing; "Binden" Rie, "pantalons" h. Or "her"; cf. 20:6. Phil; also 18:6. Liddell-Scott only admit "trou­ i. Wording of vs. 6 is uncertain,
sers," but those do not go well with "feet" and j. Cf. Gen 45:26. would leave Aseneth barefooted. The sequence of k. Cf. Gen 41:41, 44. The wording of the clause
objects also demands something more in the nature is uncertain. Gen does not say that Joseph is "king"
of an accessory. (on the meaning see 1:8), but postbiblical tradition
o. See 2:3. did, or almost did, e.g. TLev 13:9; Philo, Jos,
120. See further on 29:8f. [In the Histlos, Joseph
4 a. Does this expression mean that a god will is called "King"; see the contribution in this
unite himself to her in the guise of the future king volume on HisUos by G. T. Zervos.—J.H.C]
of Egypt (Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, p. 141)? 1. Also 25:6; 26:3; cf. Gen 47:13-26. A genitive of quality or origin seems to fit the m. Gk. theosebes, also 8:5f.; 21:1; 23:9f., 12;
context better, cf. IThes 4:16; Rev 15:2. For the 28:5; 29:3, cf. 8:8; 27:1. JosAsen never uses
vision of a bride clad in white cf. ShepHerm Vision eusebis. The word theosebes is something like a
4.2.1.man in Joseph's position would not travel alone, Chariton 4.2) or hired labor (cf. Lk 15:15f.). The
but have a large staff with him (9:3; 18:1). owners lived in the city, keeping an occasional eye
d. Cf. Mk 11:1 par; Lk 9:52; 19:5. See also 3:5 on things (as described e.g. in Chariton 2.3.1),
end. particularly at harvest time. So statements like
e. The reading "the shadow (skian, "shelter" those in 24:15; 25:2; 26:1 should be taken in the
[skepen] D) of your house (hand 435&)": E D sense of supervision rather than personal hard work,
Arm. LI L2; "the roof (stegen) of y.h." a Slav.; although a landlord was not above lending a helpful
"your shadow" c; "your house (oikian)" FW hand when on his estate (Syracuse's second-best
(Syr.); "your roof" B Phil; gaps G Ngr. man fell from a ladder there and almost killed
f. Traditional form of eulogy, e.g. Gen 14:19- himself, Chariton 1.3.1). The estates in JosAsen
20; ISam 25:32; IKgs 1:48; 8:15; Tob 3:11; 2Mac produce different kind of fruit (4:2), honey (16:4),
1:17; see H. W. Beyer, "eutoged etc.," TDNT 2, wine (24:15; 25:2; 26:1), and doubtless also corn. 754-65. Also in a gentile's mouth as in 8:2; 21:4, j. This might have been mentioned as early as
e.g. IKgs 5:21; 10:9. The translation "to come to 3:2. Ngr. has an addition there to this effect as
us" is a guess from the variegated evidence. well as further remarks on Pentephres' hospitality. g. Cf. Gen 43:16; 44:1, 4. An analogous person k. The reading "into . . . lay": APCR B; gaps
in ch. 18. They would be slaves. Cf. on 5:1. EG; omit rest Phil. The MS evidence is poor, but
h. Also 4:7; 18:If.; 21:21. Not LXX, but cf. some such remark seems appropriate, cf. 10:8;
Isa 9:5; Jub 40:7. 14:14; 18:5. i. Lit. "field of their inheritance," also 3:5b; 1. More dressing scenes, cf. 10:10; 14:l4f.;
4:2; 16:4; 20:6; 24:15; 26:1; cf. 10:1; 23:3. The 18:5f. Cf. Jdt 10:3f.

ShepHerm Vision eusebis. The word theosebes is something like a
4.2.1. technical term in JosAsen; it is used to designate
b. "Fruit" seems to serve as a heading, cf. the Jews who revere the one and only God and
10:13. observe appropriate ethical standards (see Intro.). c. No positive variants. Riessler (TQ 103 [1922] So theosebes has a distinguishing ring (cf. e.g. Jdt
2) suggests that Heb. gozdlim ("pigeons") is a 11:17; 4Mac 15:28; 16:12); that is why "religious"
mistake for 'gdztm ("walnuts"); this is a rather will not do for a translation (* * god-fearing' * suggests
remote possibility in view of the context. If tais phoboumenos ton theon as a Gk. original and
peristerais ("the doves") cannot be explained provokes false association with the "god-fearers"). somehow (cf. Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, p. Parallels to this usage are not numerous (NT only
141), perhaps we might envisage corruption from in Jn 9:31). See further G. Bertram, "theosebes,
tais persikais ("the peaches") or tois pistakiois theosebeia,'' TDNT vol. 3, 123-28; McEleney,
("the pistachios"). NTS 20 (1974) 326f. d. Cf. Gen 2:9. n. This seems to be the first instance of masculine
e. Traditional opening of a dialogue; cf. e.g. parthenos before (or beside?) Rev 14:4 (cf. ICor
Tob 2:3 S; 6:11 S; Jub 18:6; more in Berger, 7:25); Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 110, n. 1. Auferstehung, pp. 43If., n. 19, and on 14:6. It is Perhaps this is a Jewish and Christian speciality;
repeated in vss. 5f.; as the angel in ch. 14, Achilles Tatius 5.20.5 wonders if it is admissible. Pentephres addresses Aseneth twice before he See further 2:1; 7:7; 15:1,7. launches his speech; cf. ISam 3:1-14; Jn 21:15- o. I.e. "to date" as in 8:1; 23:2; cf. Acts 22:3. 18.g do) and the spirit of God is upon him, and the grace of the Lord (is) with him.p •Come, my
child, and I will hand you over* to him for (his) wife, and you will be a bride to him, and
he will be your bridegroom for ever (and) ever."r
9(ii) And when Aseneth heard these words from her father, plenty of red sweat9 poured over
her face, and she became furious with great anger, and looked askance at her father with
d2) her eyes, and said, "Why does my lord and my father speak words such as these, to hand
me over,1 like a captive, to a man (who is) an alien, and a fugitive, and (was) sold (as a
io (13) slave)?" •Is he not the shepherd's son from the land of Canaan/ and he himself was caughr
04) in the act (when he was) sleeping with his mistress, and his master threw him into the
prison of darkness;1 and Pharaoh brought him out of prison, because he interpreted his
n (15) dream just like the older women of the Egyptians interpret (dreams)?* »No,z but I will be
married to the king's firstborn son, because he is king of the whole land of Egypt."*2
12 (16) Hearing this,62 Pentephres was ashamed to speak further to his daughter Aseneth02 about
Joseph, because she had answered him*2 daringly and with boastfulness and anger. Joseph arrives at Pentephres' house
Ki)5 And a young man of Pentephres' servants" rushed in and says, "Behold, Joseph is
2 (2) standing before the doors of our court." 'And Aseneth fled from her father's and mother's
p. This is a mosaic of traditional attributes this); "from there was brought hither" Slav.; gaps
occurring, either alone or in combination, in de­ CR Q G Ngr. Cf. Jn 8:4. scriptions of godly men, and most of them also of x. Cf. Gen 39:20. For the darkness see TJos
Joseph: "who worships God" (e.g. Ex 18:21; Job 8:5, cf. 2:4; 9:If. Ancient prisons used to be dark,
1:1, 8; 2:3; TNaph 1:10; TAb A 4); "self-con­ e.g. Isa 42:7; 49:9; Xenophon of Ephesus 2.6.5;
trolled" especially in sexual matters (of Joseph, Apuleius 9.21.4; cf. also WisSol 17:2.Isa 42:7; 49:9; Xenophon of Ephesus 2.6.5;
trolled" especially in sexual matters (of Joseph, Apuleius 9.21.4; cf. also WisSol 17:2. cf. Gen 39; 4Mac 2:2; TJos 4:lf.; 6; 7; Philo, Jos, y. Whence? The meaning must be deprecatory. 40; Josephus, Ant 2.4.3 §48); "wisdom and ex­ If a neutral or favorable comparison were intended,
perience" (e.g. Jdt 11:8; of Joseph, cf. Gen 41:39); Aseneth could have referred, e.g., to the dream
"spirit" (e.g. Dan 6:4; Lk 2:25; Acts 6:5; of interpreters (among them women) who belonged
Joseph, cf. Gen 41:38; TSim 4:4; Philo, Jos, 116); to the staff of many pagan temples of the time (cf. "grace" (e.g. Lk 2:40; Acts 6:8; of Joseph, cf. F. Cumont, L'Egypte des Astrologues [Brussels,
TJos 12:3). Such attributes are also used to char­ 1937] pp. 127-29). The whole vs. is a distortion
acterize messianic figures (e.g. PssSol 17:37f.; Lk of elements from Gen 39-41; according to 13:13
2:52), but there is nothing intrinsically messianic (cf. 6:2) people told Aseneth so. about them. z. Witnesses ACR EF c d LI: "No, my lord
q. Gk. paradidonai, lit. "to give over," often father and my sweetest mother, no" P (Q); "I will
has a negative ring when used of people (it is what not do this" W; "No, my father, not to this (one)
Judas Iscariot does to Jesus), which is more to the will I be joined" Syr.; "it will not be so" Arm. point in vs. 9 than here; but cf. Tob 7:13; 10:10 (436); "Not so" 435&; "Anyway, oh my precious
S. father, be silent and do not speak to me such
r. Gk. eh ton aidna chronon, lit. "into the words" Ngr. 671 (a little shorter 661); gap G. eternity time," a septuagintism (no Semitism), e.g. Something like "No, my father (cf. PQ Syr. Ngr),
Ex 14:13; Jdt 15:10; PssSol 8:33; 15:13; also IEn it will not be so (cf. Arm. L2)" may be original;
103:4, cf. 3Mac 5:11, never NT. JosAsen is fond cf. 23:1 and the variant at 20:9. of it: also 6:8; 8:9; 12:11; 13:15; 15:6, 7, 9, 12x; a2. This outburst of class feeling may be ex­
16:14; 17:6; 19:5;21:3f.ShepHerm Vision eusebis. The word theosebes is something like a
4.2.1. technical term in JosAsen; it is used to designate
b. "Fruit" seems to serve as a heading, cf. the Jews who revere the one and only God and
10:13. observe appropriate ethical standards (see Intro.). c. No positive variants. Riessler (TQ 103 [1922] So theosebes has a distinguishing ring (cf. e.g. Jdt
2) suggests that Heb. gozdlim ("pigeons") is a 11:17; 4Mac 15:28; 16:12); that is why "religious"
mistake for 'gdztm ("walnuts"); this is a rather will not do for a translation (* * god-fearing' * suggests
remote possibility in view of the context. If tais phoboumenos ton theon as a Gk. original and
peristerais ("the doves") cannot be explained provokes false association with the "god-fearers"). somehow (cf. Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, p. Parallels to this usage are not numerous (NT only
141), perhaps we might envisage corruption from in Jn 9:31). See further G. Bertram, "theosebes,
tais persikais ("the peaches") or tois pistakiois theosebeia,'' TDNT vol. 3, 123-28; McEleney,
("the pistachios"). NTS 20 (1974) 326f. d. Cf. Gen 2:9. n. This seems to be the first instance of masculine
e. Traditional opening of a dialogue; cf. e.g. parthenos before (or beside?) Rev 14:4 (cf. ICor
Tob 2:3 S; 6:11 S; Jub 18:6; more in Berger, 7:25); Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 110, n. 1. Auferstehung, pp. 43If., n. 19, and on 14:6. It is Perhaps this is a Jewish and Christian speciality;
repeated in vss. 5f.; as the angel in ch. 14, Achilles Tatius 5.20.5 wonders if it is admissible. Pentephres addresses Aseneth twice before he See further 2:1; 7:7; 15:1,7. launches his speech; cf. ISam 3:1-14; Jn 21:15- o. I.e. "to date" as in 8:1; 23:2; cf. Acts 22:3. 18.

of it: also 6:8; 8:9; 12:11; 13:15; 15:6, 7, 9, 12x; a2. This outburst of class feeling may be ex­
16:14; 17:6; 19:5;21:3f. For the concept of marriage aggerated, but it is not reprehended as such. "The
forever, see Tob 7:12 S. king's (not Pharaoh's) firstborn son" may be de­
s. Cf. Lk 22:44; Chariton 4.2.13. liberately ambiguous, cf. 18:11; 21:4, 20; 23:10. t. The reading "why . . . over": many variants. To be forced down the social ladder is a constant
The major problem is whether "want(s)" is to be threat in ancient romance, e.g. Chariton, and a
inserted before "to give" and whether the verb (or person owes it to himself or herself to defend his
verbs) is (or are) in the third or second person. or her status. Structurally, Aseneth's pride resem­
Phil adds "so" after "speak" on the sole strength bles Habrocomes' boastfulness toward Eros (Xeno­
of Slav., maybe because he omitted "words such phon of Ephesus 1.1.4-6) and Psyche's attempted
as these" on the authority of d Slav. murder of her unknown husband (Apuleius 5.5.1-
u. Cf. Apuleius 4.31.2 Prisoners of war were 22.1). often sold as slaves, and slaves' masters could b2. "Hearing this" ACPR d (Q Ngr.); "And
effect a marriage to them. Pentephres had a right in longness of spirit [i.e. longanimity] P. was and"
to marry his daughter away, but not without sheer Syr.; "and" rest; gap G. The participial form is
injustice to give her to a man thrice dishonored. suspicious. "Fugitive" may also be rendered "driven into c2. Witnesses ACR Syr. (omit "his daughter")
exile"; meaning that he had it coming to him. Slav.; gaps EG Ngr.; omit rest. v. A sneer; see Gen 46:34. Cf. Mk 6:3 par. d2. Witnesses a c d Syr. Arm. 436; "her father"
w. The reading "was caught": EFW c Syr. FWLl;gapsEG435& Ngr. Arm. LI (L2); "was abandoned by him (his
father)" (A)P d Rie Br (Philonenko, Joseph et 5 a. It is taken for granted that Pentephres has a
Asineth, p. 145, comments on the strangeness of staff of servants to look after his house. Cf. 3:4.presence, when she heard (them) speak these words about Joseph, and went up into the
upper floor and entered her chamber and stood by the large window, the one looking east,
3(3) in order to see Joseph entering her father's house.6 *And Pentephres and his wife and hisc
4 (4) whole family went out to meet Joseph.0 *And the gates of the court looking east were
(5) opened, and Joseph entered, standing* on Pharaoh's second chariot/ 'and four horses, white
as snow* and with golden bridles, were harnessed (to it), and the entire chariot was
5 (6) manufactured from pureh gold. *And Joseph was dressed in an exquisite white tunic, and
the robe which he had thrown around him1 was purple, made of linen interwoven with gold,j
and a golden crown (was) on his head, and around the crown were twelve chosen stones,
and on top of the twelve stones were twelve golden rays/ And a royal staff was in his left
(7) hand, and in his right hand"1 he held outstretched an olive branch," 'and there was plenty
6 (8) of fruit on it, and in the fruits was a great wealth of oil.° #And Joseph entered the court,
(9) and the gates of the court were closed, and every man and woman, (if) strange, remained
outside the court, because the guards of the gates drew tight and" closed the doors, and all
7 (io the strangers were closed out.q »And Pentephres and his wife and hisr whole family, except
their daughter Aseneth, went and prostrated themselves face down to the ground before
di) Joseph. And Joseph descended from his chariot and greeted them with his right (hand). Aseneth is shattered at the sight of Joseph
Ki)6 And Aseneth saw Joseph on his chariot and was strongly cut (to the heart), and her soul
was crushed/ and her knees were paralyzed, and her entire body trembled/ and she was
filled with great fear.0 And she sighed and said in her heart:
b. See 6:1; 7:2. reference to the zodiac, may have suggested the
c. Some witnesses have "their," as also in 5:7; twelve tribes or patriarchs to the author.reference to the zodiac, may have suggested the
c. Some witnesses have "their," as also in 5:7; twelve tribes or patriarchs to the author. See further
20:6. Some mention the servant staff in addition 6:2. to, or in lieu of, the family. I. An ensign of office as becomes a viceroy, not
d. Also 5:7; 19:2-4; 22:5. This is the proper mentioned in Gen 41:42. Cf. WisSol 10:14. thing to do when receiving an honored guest; cf. m. The reading "in his left . . . right hand":
Acts 10:24f. (Syr.) Arm. L2; gaps Q G. The other MSS mention
e. Witnesses EFW c LI L2 (cf. 17:8); "sitting" only the right (or just one) hand, implying either
ACP d Arm. (Ngr., also miniatures); "carried that Joseph held both scepter and olive branch in
upon" Syr.; gap Q G. Joseph would of course sit one hand (cf. Rie Br) or that the scepter was in
while en route (cf. Acts 8:28), but he may have the form of a branch. stood up for the entry. Nevertheless, "sitting" n. A sign of peace, carried e.g. by ambassadors. could be right. Perhaps there is also an overtone of fertility. A
f. Cf. Gen 41:43. See also at 24:19. priestly note (TLev 8:8) is less likely. g. Also 16:8, 18; 22:7. This is a traditional o. The reading "and ... a great wealth of oil
simile; cf. e.g. Dan 7:9 Theod.; IEn 106:2; Mt (lit. "a fatness of much oil")": (F Syr. Arm. LI
28:3; Rev 1:14. L2 Slav. Ngr.?); omit ACP Wcrf; gaps Q EG. h. APC (Syr), gaps Q G 435& Ngr., omit rest. p. The reading "drew tight and": ACP c (LI
i. Lit. "the rope of his wrapping" {periboli, 436); omit FW d Syr? Arm.; gaps Q EG 435&
also "dress"). Ngr. j. See 2:8. q. The reading "and . . . out": D(FSyr. Arm.)
k. Joseph is dressed in royal attire. The fact is LI L2 (Slav); omit ACP WcB Phil; gaps Q G
suggested by Gen 41:42, but the description is Ngr. See also 19:3; cf. Apuleius 11.23.5. more like Esth 8:15. The details of the crown (itself r. See 5:3. probably in the form of a palm wreath) go beyond
this. The twelve stones and rays are characteristic 6 a.of it: also 6:8; 8:9; 12:11; 13:15; 15:6, 7, 9, 12x; a2. This outburst of class feeling may be ex­
16:14; 17:6; 19:5;21:3f. For the concept of marriage aggerated, but it is not reprehended as such. "The
forever, see Tob 7:12 S. king's (not Pharaoh's) firstborn son" may be de­
s. Cf. Lk 22:44; Chariton 4.2.13. liberately ambiguous, cf. 18:11; 21:4, 20; 23:10. t. The reading "why . . . over": many variants. To be forced down the social ladder is a constant
The major problem is whether "want(s)" is to be threat in ancient romance, e.g. Chariton, and a
inserted before "to give" and whether the verb (or person owes it to himself or herself to defend his
verbs) is (or are) in the third or second person. or her status. Structurally, Aseneth's pride resem­
Phil adds "so" after "speak" on the sole strength bles Habrocomes' boastfulness toward Eros (Xeno­
of Slav., maybe because he omitted "words such phon of Ephesus 1.1.4-6) and Psyche's attempted
as these" on the authority of d Slav. murder of her unknown husband (Apuleius 5.5.1-
u. Cf. Apuleius 4.31.2 Prisoners of war were 22.1). often sold as slaves, and slaves' masters could b2. "Hearing this" ACPR d (Q Ngr.); "And
effect a marriage to them. Pentephres had a right in longness of spirit [i.e. longanimity] P. was and"
to marry his daughter away, but not without sheer Syr.; "and" rest; gap G. The participial form is
injustice to give her to a man thrice dishonored. suspicious. "Fugitive" may also be rendered "driven into c2. Witnesses ACR Syr. (omit "his daughter")
exile"; meaning that he had it coming to him. Slav.; gaps EG Ngr.; omit rest. v. A sneer; see Gen 46:34. Cf. Mk 6:3 par. d2. Witnesses a c d Syr. Arm. 436; "her father"
w. The reading "was caught": EFW c Syr. FWLl;gapsEG435& Ngr. Arm. LI (L2); "was abandoned by him (his
father)" (A)P d Rie Br (Philonenko, Joseph et 5 a. It is taken for granted that Pentephres has a
Asineth, p. 145, comments on the strangeness of staff of servants to look after his house. Cf. 3:4.

probably in the form of a palm wreath) go beyond
this. The twelve stones and rays are characteristic 6 a. The reading "cut . . . crushed": E (FW c
of the crown of the sun god Helios (F. J. Dolger, Syr. Arm.) LI L2; "cut (and suffered add. PQ1 in
"Die 12 Apostel als Corona duodecim radiorum the soul, and her bowels were crushed" a d (Slav.);
und die Zwdlfstrahlenkrone des Sonnengottes," gap G; doubtful Ngr. Antike und Christentum [Munster, 1940] vol. 6, b. Syr. Yovs (not 332) L2 add another clause
pp. 36-51; for similar crowns worn by other expressing distress, but the wording differs widely. heavenly figures cf. e.g. Rev 12:1 and the com­ c. Lit. "she feared (a) great fear." See Intro. mentaries thereon; Lucianus, De Syria dea, 32). This is Jos A sen's way to describe a "stroke of
The author may remember some statue of Helios lightning" that has hit, e.g. Habrocomes (Xeno­
or generalize his memory of such statues. This phon of Ephesus 1.3.1) or Psyche (Apuleius 5.22.3)
does not mean that Joseph is regarded as a god or in similar situations (cf. also TJos 14:1; Josephus,
that Helios is explained as a deification of Joseph, Ant 2.10.2 §252). Other kinds of unexpected con­
the way Sarapis was (b. AZ 43a; Firmicus Mater­ frontations may be depicted in a similar vein (e.g. nus, De errore profanarum reiigionum, 13:1-3 Chariton 4.1.9 and frequently). From ch. 6 (or
etc.). Joseph is not wearing all this of his own even ch. 5) on down to ch. 13 cf. Xenophon of
right. He is a representative, outwardly of Pharaoh, Ephesus 1.3.1-4.7; Apuleius 5.22-6.5; Acts 9:3-
but really of God, of whom the sun can be a symbol 9 par. (Zeuge, 86f., 88-98; Berger, Auferstehung,
(see 6:6; 11:ly). The number twelve, originally a pp. 196-98, 210; 556f., n. 378; 557-62, nn. 382-2 (5) What1 shall I now do,e wretched (that I am)? Did I not speak' saying8 that Joseph is coming,
the shepherd's son from the land of Canaan? And now, behold, the sun from heavenh has come to
us on its chariot
and entered our house today,
and shines in it like a light upon the earth.'
3(6) But I, foolish and daring,j have despised him
and spoken wicked words about him,
and did not know that Joseph is (a) son of God.k
4 (7) For who among men on earth will generate such beauty,1
and what womb of a woman will give birth to such light?"1
What a wretched and foolish (girl) I (am),
because I have spoken wicked words about him to my father,
s (2) And now, where shall I go" and hide from his face0
in order that Joseph the son of God does not see me
because I have spoken wicked (things) about him? 6 0) And where shall I fleep and hide,
because every hiding place,q he sees
and nothing hidden escapes him,
because of the great light that is inside him?"
7 (4) And now be gracious on me, Lord, God of Joseph,
93; 597, n. 492). as the representative of God (see 5:5) as every true
d. Present order of vss. 2-7 in EFW c Syr. Jew is, or at least the famous ones. Arm. LI L2 Ngr., vss. 5-7 before 2-4 in a d, gap j. Cf. Prov 9:13. G. Riessler's verse numbers, virtually identical k. See Intro. with Philonenko's as given in parentheses, had to I. Joseph's beauty was proverbial since Gen
be altered here. Aseneth's lament vss. 2-8 antici­ 39:7, e.g. TSim 5:1. See Intro. pates many motifs laid out in greater detail in chs. m. The wording is biblical, but the idea is not
11-13. On the background, see E. W. Smith, Jr., unfamiliar to the Gk. mind, cf. e.g. Chariton 2.1.5. "The Form and Religious Background of Romans n. See 11:3. VD 24-25a," NovT 13 (1971) 127-35; P. Tachau, o. Cf. Ps 138:7, particularly as quoted by lClem
"Einst" und "Jetzt" im Neuen Testament: Beo~ 28:3; also Achilles Tatius 8.2.1; Historia Regis
bachtungen zu einem urchristlichen Predigtschema Tyri, 27:1; Apuleius 6.26.6.Cf. Ps 138:7, particularly as quoted by lClem
"Einst" und "Jetzt" im Neuen Testament: Beo~ 28:3; also Achilles Tatius 8.2.1; Historia Regis
bachtungen zu einem urchristlichen Predigtschema Tyri, 27:1; Apuleius 6.26.6. in der neutestamentlichen Briefliteratur und zu p. Witnesses FWcrf Syr. (Ngr.?), "go away"
seiner Vorgeschichte (FRLANT 105; Gdttingen, ACP (436); omit Arm. (incl. following "and");
1972) pp. 52-58 (see also 12:5); Berger, "Mis­ gaps Q EG LI 435&. sionsliteratur," 240-45 (especially ActsPhil 61). q. Gk. apokrybe is very rare and unattested
e. The reading "do" (poiesd): E Syr. Arm. Rie; before Origen except in OT translations. "see" (opsomai) CPQ FW c D (LI) L2 (Slav.) r. The closest parallel known is Mt 6:23 (Jn
Phil; "follow" (hepsomai) A B Bat Br ("This can 11:10?). Ancient ophthalmology, both popular (as
hardly be correct," p. 29, n. 1); gaps G Ngr. implied e.g. in Sir 23:19; TGad 5:7; LAB 25:12;
f. "Did . . . speak" ACP EFW c d LI 435&; Philo, QuodDeus, 58; Eph 1:18; cf. below 14:9)
"Because my strange counsellors deceived me who and scientific (e.g. Plato, Timaeus. 45B-46C;
said to me" Syr.; "Did not now my father and Galenus, De placitis Hippocratis et Platonis, 7.5;
mother with despising speak to me and said" Arm.; Epictetus, Diss., 2.23.3; Philo, see below; not
"Did not some say" 436; "And did not my father Aristotle!), believed that eyesight depends on rays
say to me that the Powerful (One) of God comes, of light or spirit emitted from, not received by, the
Joseph, who is powerful according to God's truth eye. Sharp-sightedness requires a large portion of
because with God's power he reigns as King [cf. inner light, supernatural vision a supernatural one. 4:7]? I said" Ngr.; gaps Q G. Cf. 13:13. See the The whole verse may be an allusion to Zaphenath-
next note. paneah (Gen 41:45), interpreted as "finder of
g. EFW d LI (436); cf. Syr. Arm. in previous hidden (things)" in Josephus, Ant 2.6.1 §91 (cf. note; omit ACP c 435& Ngr.; gaps Q G.probably in the form of a palm wreath) go beyond
this. The twelve stones and rays are characteristic 6 a. The reading "cut . . . crushed": E (FW c
of the crown of the sun god Helios (F. J. Dolger, Syr. Arm.) LI L2; "cut (and suffered add. PQ1 in
"Die 12 Apostel als Corona duodecim radiorum the soul, and her bowels were crushed" a d (Slav.);
und die Zwdlfstrahlenkrone des Sonnengottes," gap G; doubtful Ngr. Antike und Christentum [Munster, 1940] vol. 6, b. Syr. Yovs (not 332) L2 add another clause
pp. 36-51; for similar crowns worn by other expressing distress, but the wording differs widely. heavenly figures cf. e.g. Rev 12:1 and the com­ c. Lit. "she feared (a) great fear." See Intro. mentaries thereon; Lucianus, De Syria dea, 32). This is Jos A sen's way to describe a "stroke of
The author may remember some statue of Helios lightning" that has hit, e.g. Habrocomes (Xeno­
or generalize his memory of such statues. This phon of Ephesus 1.3.1) or Psyche (Apuleius 5.22.3)
does not mean that Joseph is regarded as a god or in similar situations (cf. also TJos 14:1; Josephus,
that Helios is explained as a deification of Joseph, Ant 2.10.2 §252). Other kinds of unexpected con­
the way Sarapis was (b. AZ 43a; Firmicus Mater­ frontations may be depicted in a similar vein (e.g. nus, De errore profanarum reiigionum, 13:1-3 Chariton 4.1.9 and frequently). From ch. 6 (or
etc.). Joseph is not wearing all this of his own even ch. 5) on down to ch. 13 cf. Xenophon of
right. He is a representative, outwardly of Pharaoh, Ephesus 1.3.1-4.7; Apuleius 5.22-6.5; Acts 9:3-
but really of God, of whom the sun can be a symbol 9 par. (Zeuge, 86f., 88-98; Berger, Auferstehung,
(see 6:6; 11:ly). The number twelve, originally a pp. 196-98, 210; 556f., n. 378; 557-62, nn. 382-

in previous hidden (things)" in Josephus, Ant 2.6.1 §91 (cf. note; omit ACP c 435& Ngr.; gaps Q G. Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 [1924] 286). It is also rem­
h. The reading "the sun from heaven": (FW c) iniscent of traditional references to God (e.g. Job
D LI 436 (435&) Slav. Phil; "like the s.f.h. (he, 28:24; 34:21f.; Sir 42:18-20), the sun (e.g. Ps
namely Joseph)" a B Arm. (Ngr.?); "I see (that) 19:6; Sir 42:16; cf. vss. 2 and 5:5 above), and
the s. of h." E (Syr.), gapG. Wisdom (e.g. WisSol 7:22-8:1), but this does not
i. Aseneth verbalizes 5:5 with a pun: the sun is make Joseph a heavenly being, an incarnation of
coming to Sun City at last. Cf. e.g. Sir 50:7; IEn Wisdom, or a figure of the Messiah. Rather, he is
106:2, 10; 4Ezra 7:97; TJob 31:5; Chariton 5.3.9. credited with prophetical insights: "To a prophet
The Messiah is not often compared to the sun, but nothing is unknown, because he has intelligible
see TZeb 9:8 (Mai 3:20); TLevi 18:3f. Joseph is light in him and shadowless rays" (Philo, Spec
not coming as the Messiah will be; he is coming Leg, 4:192).because I have spoken wicked words against him in ignorance9
8 (8) And now, let my father give me to Joseph for a maidservant and slave,1
and I will serve him for ever (and) ever. Joseph is convinced that Aseneth will not molest him and agrees to meet her
i (i) 7 And Joseph entered the house of Pentephres and sat upon the throne.a And they washed0
his feet and set0 a table before him by itself, because Joseph never ate with the Egyptians,
2 for this was an abomination to him.0 *And looking up with his eyes, Joseph saw Aseneth
(2) leaning through (the window).e And Joseph said to Pentephres and his whole family, saying,
O) "Who is this woman who is standing in the upper floor by the window? Let her leave this
3 house," 'because Joseph was afraid, saying, "This one must not molest me, too." *For all
the wives and the daughters of the noblemen and the satraps of the whole land of Egypt
(4) used to molest him (wanting) to sleep with him, and all the wives and the daughters of the
4 (5) Egyptians, when they saw Joseph, suffered badly because of his beauty. »But Joseph
despised them/ and the messengers whom the women sent to him with gold and silver and
valuable presents Joseph sent back with threats and insults/ because Joseph said/ "I will
s. Ignorance (agnoia) separates Aseneth's e. "And .. . (the window)" a c "with his eyes"
wickedness from outright sin; it does not absolve omit AC, "leaning through" omit Q); "And Joseph
her of responsibility but lets her hope for forgiveness looked at the tower" Syr. (mentioning the leaning
(also 17:10; cf. e.g. TJud 19:3). The word is also through in the next sentence, where PQ also have
used in an analogous sense for her general status it); "Gazing, however, Joseph (with) his eyes saw
prior to conversion, where the object of ignorance in the chamber above Aseneth standing" Ngr.; gap
is above all God (12:5; 13:11-13). This is Jewish G; omit rest. On "leaning through {parakypteinY"
and Christian usage (e.g.This is Jewish G; omit rest. On "leaning through {parakypteinY"
and Christian usage (e.g. WisSol 14:22; Acts 3:17; cf. IChr 15:29; Prov 7:6; Song 2:9; Sir 14:23;
13:27; 17:30; ITim 1:13; Aristides, Apology, 17:4). 21:23. The word may have sexual or mythical
t. Also 13:15. Aseneth desires almost as little overtones or both (W. Fauth, Aphrodite Parakyp-
as the prodigal son (Lk 15:19), and like him she tusa: Untersuchungen zum Erscheinungsbild der
will get more. An application of the traditional vorderasiatischen Dea prospiciens [Akademie der
principle inherent in e.g. Ps 147:6; Prov 3:34 Wissenschaften in Mainz. Abhandlungen der Gei-
(quoted Jas 4:6; IPet 5:5); Mt 23:12; Lk 1:52. stes- und sozialwissenschaftlichen Klasse, 1966,
Voluntary enslavement of course is also a motif of no. 6; Wiesbaden, 1967]), but it looks harmless
erotic language. enough here. Joseph's misgivings are actuated by
the behavior of the Egyptian women generally
7 a. Pentephres' throne as in 20:2? As a satrap he (vs. 3), rather than by Aseneth's posture in partic­
would have one ex officio (cf. TJob 20:4f.). Any­ ular. His attitude in chs. 7f. rather resembles
way, the article is there. Aseneth's in chs. 2-4, a stroke of poetic justice. b. The reading "they washed": a W c Syr. The scene in vss. 2-6 is developed from Gen 39:7-
(Brooks' emendation) Arm. LI L2 Ngr.661; "he 10, but not by the author of JosAsen. Jewish and
washed" F</Syr. (ms.) Ngr.671; "washing (sing.)" Christian lore has it that all Egyptian women felt
E; gap G; cf. next note. Foot washing is a traditional like Potiphar's wife when they saw Joseph on his
gesture of hospitality, e.g. Gen 18:4; ISam 25:41; tour around Egypt, offering him their valuables,
TAb 3; b. Ket 61a; Lk 7:44; Jn 13:1-17; Vita and that his resistance was strengthened by the
Aesopi G, 61. It is a service which dependants like memory or an appearance of his father (Naf, Josef-
wives, children, pupils owed to their respective Gedichte, pp.Ket 61a; Lk 7:44; Jn 13:1-17; Vita and that his resistance was strengthened by the
Aesopi G, 61. It is a service which dependants like memory or an appearance of his father (Naf, Josef-
wives, children, pupils owed to their respective Gedichte, pp. 73f.; Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 [1924]
masters (13:15; 20:2-5). 269f.; e.g. PRE 39). The latter point is already in
c. Witnesses ACP (c) D Syr. (Brooks' emen­ Jub 39:6; TJos 3:3. For the hero of a romance
dation) LI L2 Ngr.; "set (sing.)" Q E B Syr. being the idol of all women see Xenophon 1.5.4. (ms.) Slav. Phil; gaps FGW. Tables like this one f. "But . . . them" (F)W (c Syr.) Arm. (LI)
would be low affairs, more like trays on legs, often L2; omit a d; gaps EG Ngr. Instead of "but" (W
with a disconnecting board, to be set when needed Arm. L2) we may have to read "and" (F Syr. and put away after use; see 15:14; 17:7f. "To set LI). (paratithenai) a table before someone"; also e.g. g. "Threats" (apeili, sing.) has a tendency to
IEn 89:50; Acts 16:34. come in a pair with words denoting physical
d. Reversal of Gen 43:32. Abstention from violence (Plato, Protagoras 325D; 4Mac 4:24; Pap. heathen food and avoidance of table fellowship Rylands I 28.117; Chariton 2.8.1; Acts 9:1; ZNW
between Jews and pagans was one of the main 61 [1970] 163-65). So perhaps "insults" (hybris,
issues of Jewish life in the hellenistic, especially also singular) had better be rendered "outrage,
post-Maccabean, period (cf. e.g. Esth 4:17x; Jub injuries." As in the romances (and elsewhere)
22:16; 3Mac 3:4, 7; SibOr 4:24-30; Acts 10-11; righteous indignation has a right to violent expres­
Gal 2:11-14). The reason, as given in JosAsen, is sion (see also chs. 23-29). Chaereas barely fails
that pagan food has come into contact with idols.in previous hidden (things)" in Josephus, Ant 2.6.1 §91 (cf. note; omit ACP c 435& Ngr.; gaps Q G. Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 [1924] 286). It is also rem­
h. The reading "the sun from heaven": (FW c) iniscent of traditional references to God (e.g. Job
D LI 436 (435&) Slav. Phil; "like the s.f.h. (he, 28:24; 34:21f.; Sir 42:18-20), the sun (e.g. Ps
namely Joseph)" a B Arm. (Ngr.?); "I see (that) 19:6; Sir 42:16; cf. vss. 2 and 5:5 above), and
the s. of h." E (Syr.), gapG. Wisdom (e.g. WisSol 7:22-8:1), but this does not
i. Aseneth verbalizes 5:5 with a pun: the sun is make Joseph a heavenly being, an incarnation of
coming to Sun City at last. Cf. e.g. Sir 50:7; IEn Wisdom, or a figure of the Messiah. Rather, he is
106:2, 10; 4Ezra 7:97; TJob 31:5; Chariton 5.3.9. credited with prophetical insights: "To a prophet
The Messiah is not often compared to the sun, but nothing is unknown, because he has intelligible
see TZeb 9:8 (Mai 3:20); TLevi 18:3f. Joseph is light in him and shadowless rays" (Philo, Spec
not coming as the Messiah will be; he is coming Leg, 4:192).

23-29). Chaereas barely fails
that pagan food has come into contact with idols. to kick to death his beloved Callirhoe, who is
Remarkably enough, while it is implied later on reported to be unfaithful (Chariton 1.4.12); he is
that it is polluting (11:9, 16; 12:5), it is never said acquitted because he acted in good faith. Besides,
that Jewish food is pure. So the Levitical law of the messengers would probably be slaves. purity plays no role here, at least not directly. See h. The reading "because Joseph said": E Syr. further 8:5; 20:7. (Arm. LI L2); "saying" a FW c d; gaps G Ngr.not sin before (the) Lord God of my father Israel nor in the face of my father Jacob."4
s (6) And the face of his father Jacob, Joseph always had before his eyes, and he remembered
his father's commandments. For Jacob would say to his son Joseph and all his sons,j "My
children, guard strongly against associating with a strange woman, for association (with)
6 (7) her is destruction and corruption. "k •Therefore Joseph said, "Let this woman leave this
house."
7 (8) And Pentephres said to him, "Lord, this one whom you have seen standing in the upper
floor is not a strange woman, but she is our daughter, a virgin1 hating every man, and there
(9) is not any other man who has ever seen her except you alone today. And if you will, she
8(io) will come and address you, because our daughter is like a sister to you."m *And Joseph
rejoiced exceedingly with great joy because Pentephres had said, "She is a virgin hating
every man." And Joseph said by himself, "If she is a virgin hating every man, this (girl)
di) will certainly not molest me."n And Joseph said to Pentephres and his whole family,0 "If
she is your daughter and a virgin, let her come, because she is a sister to me, and I love
her from today as my sister."
Joseph will not be kissed by Aseneth, but prays for her conversion
1 (i) 8 And Aseneth's mother went up to the upper floor and brought her and stood her before*
Joseph."k •Therefore Joseph said, "Let this woman leave this
house."
7 (8) And Pentephres said to him, "Lord, this one whom you have seen standing in the upper
floor is not a strange woman, but she is our daughter, a virgin1 hating every man, and there
(9) is not any other man who has ever seen her except you alone today. And if you will, she
8(io) will come and address you, because our daughter is like a sister to you."m *And Joseph
rejoiced exceedingly with great joy because Pentephres had said, "She is a virgin hating
every man." And Joseph said by himself, "If she is a virgin hating every man, this (girl)
di) will certainly not molest me."n And Joseph said to Pentephres and his whole family,0 "If
she is your daughter and a virgin, let her come, because she is a sister to me, and I love
her from today as my sister."
Joseph will not be kissed by Aseneth, but prays for her conversion
1 (i) 8 And Aseneth's mother went up to the upper floor and brought her and stood her before*
Joseph. And Pentephres said to his daughter Aseneth,6 "Greer1 your brother, because he,
too, is a virgin like you today and hates every strange woman, as you, too,d every strange
2(2)man." •And Aseneth said to Joseph, "Be of good cheer,e my lord, blessed by the Most
3Highf Lord." • And Joseph said to Aseneth, "May the Lord God* who gives life to all
4 (3) (things) bless you." •And Pentephres said to his daughter Aseneth, "Go up and kiss your
5 (4) brother." *And as Aseneth went up to kiss Joseph, Joseph stretched out his right hand and
put it on her chest between her two breasts, and her breasts were already standing upright
(5) like handsome apples.6 And Joseph said, "It is not fitting for a man who worships God,1
i. Sin against God and the father also in 23:11. Arm. LI L2; "to" a (FW) d; "before" Ngr.; gap
See TRub 1:8; Lk 15:18. 21; ShepHerm Vision G. 1.3.1; cf. Ex 10:16; Josephus, War 1.32.3 §365; b. The reading "his daughter Aseneth (before
Ant 19.6.4 §315.Ex 10:16; Josephus, War 1.32.3 §365; b. The reading "his daughter Aseneth (before
Ant 19.6.4 §315. The reason for this combination "his": Syr. Arm., punctuated so as to belong to
may be gleaned from Ps-Phoc 8; SibOr 3.593f. the following sentence as an address E, omit W
j. Text uncertain since vs. 4 "I will not." L2 Slav.)": EFW d Syr. Arm. L2 Slav.; "her"
k. A common warning since OT times (e.g. Gen ACP c LI Ngr.; omit Q; gap G. 24:3; 28:1, 6; Deut 7:3f.; Neh 13:13-29), as a c. Gk. aspasai, which may also mean "kiss":
word of Jacob (Jub 39:6; TJos 3:3). Cf. further Br; cf. 19:10. But vs. 4 is against this. e.g. Tob 4:12; PJ 8:2, 4f.; TJud 14:6; TLevi 9:10; d. The reading "hate today": add. c LI (after
14:6; TJob 44:3; LAB 9:5; Philo, Spec Leg, 3.29; "man") 436; "hate" add. Ngr.; gaps EGW; omit
Josephus, Ant 8.7.5 §191f.; b. AZ 36b. This is not rest. tantamount to a general interdiction of exogamy. e. Gk. chairois (also Ngr.). Never in LXX and
But a foreign woman will have to turn Jewish, like NT, but TAb B 13:6. Aseneth, before a Jew may marry her. Pentephres f. A frequent attribute of God in JosAsen, as in
seems to understand Joseph's attitude, but many LXX (e.g. Gen 14:19) and other hellenistic Jewish
did not. Cf. Tacitus, His tor iae, 5.2.2; b.Meg 13b. literature, but rare in the NT (e.g. Acts 16:17). In
I. All read thus except omit A; gap G. a polytheistic environment it sounded both inviting
m. Cf. Tob 7:12; ShepHerm Vision 1.1.7. Pen­ and exclusive (e.g. against Zeus Hypsistos); cf. G. tephres suggests that virginity makes people of Bertram, "hypsos etc.," TDNT 8, 602-20. different faith brothers and sisters. Joseph accepts g. The reading "the Lord God": a L2 (add. this only with the restriction stated in 8:5f. See "of Israel"); "God" d; "the Lord" EFW c Syr. also 15:1, 7. On the idea that certain virtues are a Arm. LI; gaps G Ngr. natural preparation for conversion, cf. also Acts h. The reading "between . . . apples": (APQ
10:34f. E Syr.23-29). Chaereas barely fails
that pagan food has come into contact with idols. to kick to death his beloved Callirhoe, who is
Remarkably enough, while it is implied later on reported to be unfaithful (Chariton 1.4.12); he is
that it is polluting (11:9, 16; 12:5), it is never said acquitted because he acted in good faith. Besides,
that Jewish food is pure. So the Levitical law of the messengers would probably be slaves. purity plays no role here, at least not directly. See h. The reading "because Joseph said": E Syr. further 8:5; 20:7. (Arm. LI L2); "saying" a FW c d; gaps G Ngr.

apples": (APQ
10:34f. E Syr. LI 436); "and pushed her away" Slav.;
n. "And . . . molest me" (EF Syr. Arm. LI omit c d Arm. 435&; gaps C FGW Ngr. "Like
L2 Ngr.); omit a c d; gaps G W. handsome apples" is in APQ (adds "two" after
o. The reading "and . . . family": F c Arm. "like") only, a classical metaphor for a girl's
(Syr.) LI L2; "and his wife" a d; omit E Ngr.; breasts; cf. Aristophanes, Lysistrata, 155; Eccle-
gaps GW. Perhaps we should adopt both wife and siazusae, 903; (Ps-?) Theocritus, Idylls, 27.50. family, cf. 5:7 (but see also 7:2). Another simile is in 18:9. i. On this opening see Intro.; cf. Acts 10:28. 8 a. The reading "and . . . before": (E) c Syr. The following triad of statements about the bread.who will bless* with his mouth the living God and eat blessed bread of lifek and drink a
blessed cup of immortality1 and anoint himself with blessed ointment of incorruptibility to
kiss a strange woman who will bless with her mouth dead and dumb1" idols and eat from
their table bread of strangulation" and drink from their libation a cup of insidiousness0 and
6 (6) anoint herself with ointment of destruction. *But a man who worships God will kiss his
mother and the sister (who is born) of his mother" and the sister (who is born) of his clan
and family and the wife who shares his bed, (all of) who(m) bless with their mouths the
7 (7) living God. • Likewise, for a woman who worships God it is not fitting to kiss a strange
man, because this is an abomination before the Lord God/'
the cup, and the ointment is often called a "meal which were always in contact with food offered to
formula" (also 8:9; 15:5; 16:16; 19:5; 21:13f., 21), idols one Way or the other. Be that as it may, a
perhaps unwisely so. If we go by 8:5, which seems change of diet is indispensable if a person wants
to be its original setting in JosAsen, it is couched to become Jewish and gain life (see further 7:1). in relative clauses, the subject of which is "the Aseneth is promised bread, cup, and ointment
man who worships God" (see at 4:7), and the (15:5; cf. 8:9), and receives them, she says (19:5;
point of the passage is not to institute or justify 21:13f., 21). But she is actually fed a piece of
any meal, but to explain why such a man does not supernatural honeycomb, i.e. manna (see Intro.),
kiss a heathen woman. Also it is not at all clear which means—the angel explains—that she has
whether the unction is envisaged as an integral part eaten the bread, drunk the cup, and been anointed
of a meal. Anyway, it is the right kind of "bread," with the ointment (16:16).Also it is not at all clear which means—the angel explains—that she has
whether the unction is envisaged as an integral part eaten the bread, drunk the cup, and been anointed
of a meal. Anyway, it is the right kind of "bread," with the ointment (16:16). This poses a new
"cup" and "ointment" that characterizes a Jew, problem; is the honey a symbol, for example, for
and distinguishes him from the gentile, who uses the Law or the word of God (cf. e.g. Pss 19:10f.;
the opposite kind. The problem is whether this is 119:103; Philo, Fuga, 137-39), implying that when
to be understood in terms of a cultic meal, albeit it is received this is equivalent to the reception of
a daily one as in communities such as the Essenes bread, cup and ointment, whatever they mean
or the Therapeutae, or in terms of ordinary Jewish (Anandakumara, Gentile Reactions, 66f.; Delling,
self-maintenance. If a sacramental interpretation is JSJ 9 (1978) 54)? Does the honey refer to something
preferred we will have to identify JosAsen*s meal real, a "honey communion" connected with, or
either with one that we know (Essene: 1QS 6.4- representing, the cultic meal described by the
6; IQSa 2.17-21; Josephus, War 2.8.5 §129-33, "formula" (Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, p. 98)? or, rather. Therapeutic: Philo, Vita Cont, 37ff., Is this scene a way of depicting metaphorically
69ff.; e.g. Kuhn, "Lord's Supper," The Scrolls what bread, cup, and ointment really are? The
and the New Testament, ed. K. Stendahl, 74-77, latter interpretation, which is preferred here, is
261-62) or with one that we seem to know applicable whether the meal is a cultic one or not;
(synagogue meals in mystery style, e.g. Thy en, if it is not cultic we may point to Did 9:3f.,
Studien, 127f., cf. Georgi, Gegner, 135f.); or else doubtless based on a Jewish prayer, as proof for
we should stipulate a hitherto unknown meal (e.g. the idea that hellenistic Jews thought of their daily
Kilpatrick, ExpT 64 [1952-53] 4-8; W.Georgi, Gegner, 135f.); or else doubtless based on a Jewish prayer, as proof for
we should stipulate a hitherto unknown meal (e.g. the idea that hellenistic Jews thought of their daily
Kilpatrick, ExpT 64 [1952-53] 4-8; W. Nauck, bread as a gift from heaven which provided life
Die Tradition und der Charakter des ersten Johan- and wisdom. The "meal formula" may be of some
nesbriefes [WUNT 3; Tubingen, 1957] pp. 169- help in interpreting Jn 6, especially vss. 35, 48,
71, referring to Christian initiation by unction, and ICor 10 (Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 130-
baptism, and first eucharist, both orthodox and 33; corrected and enlarged in NTS 32 [1986] in
gnostic, e.g. ActsThom 120-21; GPhil 68,76,98; press). Philonenko, Joseph et Asineih, pp. 91-93). The j. I.e. probably say grace before and after meals. heathen counterpart would probably be meals in a This was regarded as one of the distinguishing
temple "at a god's table" (in Aseneth's case marks of Judaism (e.g. SibOr 4.25L; Christian,
equivalent to daily meals, see 10:13); such meals but with a possible Jewish origin, Aristides, Apol­
are known to us among other things from the papyri ogy, 15:10). This "blessing" will account for
(see the commentaries on ICor 10:14-22; cf. also "blessed" below. the idea later developed at length by Firmicus k. The only real extant parallel to Jn 6:35, 48. Maternus, De errore profanarum religionum, esp. I. Grace after meals was said over a cup which
ch. 18, that the pagan mysteries ape the Christian would hence be called "cup of blessing" (cf. ICor
sacraments). If the "formula" is taken to refer to 10:16 and commentaries thereon). ordinary Jewish eating and anointing (J. Jeremias, m. Also 11:8; 12:5; 13:11. Some witnesses attest
"The Last Supper," ExpT 64 [1952-53] 91f.; the reverse order except in 13:11, where the words
Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 121-33), we should occur only in AP c Arm.apples": (APQ
10:34f. E Syr. LI 436); "and pushed her away" Slav.;
n. "And . . . molest me" (EF Syr. Arm. LI omit c d Arm. 435&; gaps C FGW Ngr. "Like
L2 Ngr.); omit a c d; gaps G W. handsome apples" is in APQ (adds "two" after
o. The reading "and . . . family": F c Arm. "like") only, a classical metaphor for a girl's
(Syr.) LI L2; "and his wife" a d; omit E Ngr.; breasts; cf. Aristophanes, Lysistrata, 155; Eccle-
gaps GW. Perhaps we should adopt both wife and siazusae, 903; (Ps-?) Theocritus, Idylls, 27.50. family, cf. 5:7 (but see also 7:2). Another simile is in 18:9. i. On this opening see Intro.; cf. Acts 10:28. 8 a. The reading "and . . . before": (E) c Syr. The following triad of statements about the bread.

Some witnesses attest
"The Last Supper," ExpT 64 [1952-53] 91f.; the reverse order except in 13:11, where the words
Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 121-33), we should occur only in AP c Arm. L2, the latter two having
compare the passages in which human maintenance "dumb and deaf." Never LXX or NT, but cf. is summarized by the triad "bread (or other food), 3Mac4:16. wine (or other beverage), oil" (e.g. Ezra 3:7; Ps n. For similar turns, see Ps 80:5; Prov 31:27;
23:5; Jdt 10:5; Dan 10:3; 1QH 10.24; ApAb 9:7; Isa 30:20; Hos 9:4. Terumoth 6:1; Maasseroth 2:1; b. Pes 32a; Epic- o. Lit. "ambush" as in chs. 24-27. The choice
tetus. Diss., 2.23.5; Ps-Heraclite, Letters, 7.5.1). of words in this and the previous instance may be
This triad is doubtless related to the similar one influenced by the obvious fact that pagan food does
"grain, wine, oil" that describes the produce of not cause people to drop dead. the land (e.g. Ps 104:14f.; Josephus, War 1.15.6 p. The reading "and the sister . . . mother":
§299 [plus cattle]; Rev 6:6; TJud 9:8; SibOr AC (Syr. Arm. 435&) Slav.; omit PQ EFW c (gap
3.243,745; Eup. 2.25f.; Apuleius 9.33.2). The following in HK) d LI 436; gaps G Ngr. heathen counterpart would then be ordinary meals8 (8) And when Aseneth heard these words of Joseph, she was cut (to the heart) strongly andq
was distressed exceedingly and sighed, and she kept gazing at Joseph with her eyes open
(9) and her eyes were filled with tears. And Joseph saw her, and had mercy on her exceedingly,
and was himself cut (to the heart)/ because Joseph was meek and merciful and fearing
9 God.9 #And he lifted up his right hand and put it1 upon her head and said:"
do Lord God of my father Israel/
the Most High, the Powerful One of Jacob,*
who gave life* to all (things)
and called (them) from the darkness to the light/
and from the error to the truth/
and from the death to the life;32
you, Lord, bless this virgin,
do and renew her by your spirit,62
and form her anew by your hidden hand,
and make her alive again02 by your life,02
and let her eat your bread of life,
and drink your cup of blessing,
and number her among your people
that you have chosene2 before all (things) came into being,
and let her enter your rest
which you have prepared for your chosen ones,"
and live in your eternal*2 life for ever (and) ever. q. The reading "she . . . and": E (FW c Syr. b2. Witnesses F c B Syr. Arm. LI (partly) L2
Arm.) LI (L2 Ngr.); omit a d; gap G. Phil;"hoIys."<iEWDLl (partly)Slav. (^Bucharest
r. The reading "and . . . heart)": (EF) W (c MSonly)Ngr.;gapG. "Spirit"(4:7; 16:14; 19:11)
Syr. Arm.) LI (L2); uncertain Ngr.; omit a B Slav. in JosAsen is supernatural vitality and insight,
Phil; gaps G D. rather than a miraculous power by which exorcisms,
s. Similarly 27:1. See at 4:7. glossolalia, or prophetic inspirations are caused
t. The reading "and put it": PQ Syr. Arm. L2 (26:6 probably notwithstanding). On renewal by
(Ngr.?); gap G; omit rest. Similarly 16:13. A spirit cf. Rom 7:6; 2Cor 3:6; Tit 3:5; AposCon,
gesture of blessing rather than exorcism (against 8.6. Philonenko, Joseph et Aseneth, p. 157). c2. Also 15:5. Gk. anazdopoiein was known
u. On Joseph's prayer cf.anazdopoiein was known
u. On Joseph's prayer cf. Smith, Joseph and hitherto only as a Christian word, except perhaps
Asenath, pp. 107-16; Berger, Kairos 17 (1975) in TAb A 18. 232-40 (quotes especially ActsPhil 117). The d2. The reading "and form ... life": (FW Syr. address refers to the creator, which is common Arm. LI 436 435&) Phil; "and make (her) alive
enough (12:If.; 2Kgs 19:15 parallel Isa 37:16; Neh again by your hand" c; omit a ("and make alive"
9:6; Esth 4:17c; 3Mac 2:2-3; PrMan 2f.; 2Bar added after "bless") Ngr.; gaps EG d ("make
21:4f.; IEn 84:2f.; Jub 12:19; Acts 4:24). But the alive and" add. before "bless"). FW have "hand
four clauses apply equally well to God's activity at the top (koryphaia, never LXX or NT)" instead
in conversion (see Intro.). of "hidden [probably kryphaia] hand" (cf. Ex
v. Cf. Jdt 9:2. 17:16 LXX). w. The reading "of Jacob": Syr. Arm. 436 e2. Cf.Ps33:12;Ephl:4;O.Hofius," 'Erwahlt
Ngr.; "God" ACP c; omit Q EW d LI 435&; vor Grundlegung der Welt' (Eph 1,4)," ZNW 62
illegible F; gaps G Rum. Cf. MT Gen 49:24 (also (1971) 123-28. LXX); Isa 49:26; 60:16; Ps 132:2, 5. See also f2. Cf. Ps 95:11 (LXX rather than MT). The
11:9, but the text is uncertain. "rest" (katapausis) is not a state of body or mind,
x. Gk. zoopoiisas AC FW d Arm. (Ngr.); but a place in heaven prepared for the saved (15:7;
"gives life to" (zoopoidn) E LI L2; "made" 22:13). JosAsen seems to be the oldest witness to
(poiesas) PQ c; uncertain Syr.; gap G. Cf. Neh this idea, which is of some importance for under­
9:6; lTim6:13. standing Heb 3:7-4:13 (O. Hofius, Katapausis. y. Cf. Philo, Virt, 179f.; SibOr Fr. 1.25-34; Die Vorstellung vom endzeitlichen Ruheort im
Passover Haggadah, section Lefi-Khakh; Acts 26:18; Hebraerbrief[W\jm 11; Tubingen, 1970]). [Cf. IPet 2:9; lClem 59:2; Meliton of Sardes, Passover D. R. Darnell's Rebellion, Rest, and the Word of
Homily, 489-93; Poimandres, 19f. See S.Some witnesses attest
"The Last Supper," ExpT 64 [1952-53] 91f.; the reverse order except in 13:11, where the words
Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 121-33), we should occur only in AP c Arm. L2, the latter two having
compare the passages in which human maintenance "dumb and deaf." Never LXX or NT, but cf. is summarized by the triad "bread (or other food), 3Mac4:16. wine (or other beverage), oil" (e.g. Ezra 3:7; Ps n. For similar turns, see Ps 80:5; Prov 31:27;
23:5; Jdt 10:5; Dan 10:3; 1QH 10.24; ApAb 9:7; Isa 30:20; Hos 9:4. Terumoth 6:1; Maasseroth 2:1; b. Pes 32a; Epic- o. Lit. "ambush" as in chs. 24-27. The choice
tetus. Diss., 2.23.5; Ps-Heraclite, Letters, 7.5.1). of words in this and the previous instance may be
This triad is doubtless related to the similar one influenced by the obvious fact that pagan food does
"grain, wine, oil" that describes the produce of not cause people to drop dead. the land (e.g. Ps 104:14f.; Josephus, War 1.15.6 p. The reading "and the sister . . . mother":
§299 [plus cattle]; Rev 6:6; TJud 9:8; SibOr AC (Syr. Arm. 435&) Slav.; omit PQ EFW c (gap
3.243,745; Eup. 2.25f.; Apuleius 9.33.2). The following in HK) d LI 436; gaps G Ngr. heathen counterpart would then be ordinary meals

Darnell's Rebellion, Rest, and the Word of
Homily, 489-93; Poimandres, 19f. See S. Pines, God: An Exegetical Study of Hebrews 3:1-4:13,
"From Darkness into Great Light," Immanuel 4 (unpublished dissertation) Duke University, 1973. (1974) 47-51; R. Stehly, "Une citation des Upan- J.H.C.]
ishads dans Joseph et Aseneth," RTP 55 (1975) g2. The reading of a: "heavenly": Ngr.; gaps
209-13; Anandakumara, Gentile Reactions, p. 45, G d Syr.; omit rest. Eternal life is frequently
n. 1. mentioned in ancient Jewish and Christian texts
z. Cf. lClem 59:2; AposCon, 7.39.3. (e.g. 2Mac 7:9; Dan 12:2; PssSol 3:12; IEn 40:9;
a2. Cf. Lk 15:24,32; Jn 5:24; 1 Jn 3:14; AposCon, Mt 25:46; Jn 3:5; Rom 5:21). 7.39.3. See also 20:7 and n. y above.Aseneth retires in confusion
9 And Aseneth rejoiced exceedingly with great joy over Joseph's blessing, and hurried and
went into the upper floor by herself, and fell on her bed exhausted, because in her there
was joy and distress and much fear and trembling8 and continuous sweating0 as she heard
all these words of Joseph, which he had spoken to her in the name of the Most High God. And she wept with great and bitter weeping and repented of" her (infatuation with the) gods
whom she used to worship, and spurned0 all the idols, and waited for the evening to come. Joseph departs after promising to return a week later
And Joseph ate and drank and told his servants, "Harness the horses to the chariots"';
for, he said, "I will go awayf and drive around the whole land." »And Pentephres said to
Joseph, "Let my lord lodge here today, and tomorrow you will go out (on) your way."
And Joseph said, "No, but I will go out today, because this is the day on which God began
to make all his creatures,* and on the eighth" day, when this day returns,* I too will return
to you and lodge here."
10 And Joseph went away (on) his way 'and Pentephres and his whole family went away
to their estate.3
9 a. The reading "and trembling": FW c Syr. is probably to be found in the passages which make
Arm. LI L2; omit a d; gaps EG Ngr. "Fear and repentance the prerequisite for God's forgiveness
trembling" is a biblicism (e.g. Gen 9:2; Ps 55:6; (e.g. PrMan 7, 13f.; PssSol 3:8; Sir 17:29; IEn
Jdt 2.28; 4Mac 4:10; IEn 13:3; 2En 22:10; ICIem 50:2-4; Jub 41:23-25; TAb B 12:13). 12:5, and below) denoting physical terror, rather d. The verb prosochthizein is not attested prior
than awe or reverence. The reading "in great fear to the LXX. and trembling" of 14:10 (cf. Isa 19:16; ICor 2:3) e. Only the twelve men of 3:2 and one chariot
and "with much fear and trembling" of 16:13 have been mentioned before. (which would be the only ancient exact parallel to f. The reading "for . . .. . away": (E?) FW (d)
2Cor 7:15; Eph 6:5; Phil 2:12 known to date) are Syr. Arm. LI (L2) Slav.; omit a c; gaps G Ngr. secondary (against Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, g. Sunday. Its definition as representing the first
p. 178, on 14:10, and Burchard, ZNW 61 (1970) day of creation was taken over into Christianity
169, on 16:13). Mingled emotions: Mt 28:8; (first in Justin, Apology, 1,67). "Creatures" (ktis-
ShepHerm Vision 5.4; Chariton 1.9.3; 3.4.15; matd) is neuter, but 12:2 suggests that they are
5.8.2; Xenophon of Ephesus 5.13.4; Achilles Tatius alive, meaning either that they are the live beings
1.4.5; 5.19.1; Apuleius 11.7.1. such as angels (TJob 47:11; created on the first day
b. The reading "was poured around her" (peri- according to e.g. Jub 2:2) and men (but they were
echythi auten): added D Bat (in broken parentheses) made on the sixth day), or that all of creation is
Br Rie Phil (cf. 4:9); gaps EG Ngr.; omit rest. A considered animated. See further n. i. new verb for "sweat" is in order after "in her," h. Witnesses a c d (Syr.) LI L2; "seventh"
but this could be the very reason why it was EFW Arm. (but cf. 11:1); "the restful day, or
inserted. Anyway, the accusative form autin (prob­ sabbath" Ngr. (see E below); gap G. ably a purely graphic variant) cannot be right. Cf. i. The reading "when . . . returns": FW c Arm. Apuleius 11.7.1. LI 436; "when he rested" E; omit a d Syr. 435&
c. Metanoein apo as e.g. Jer 8:6; Acts 8:22; Ngr. (but see n. h); gap G. Aseneth repents on a
ICIem 8:3; same verb in 15:7, substantive metanoia Sunday (see vs. 2), but she must wait a week until
n 16:14, as the name of an angel in 15:7. Re­ God accepts her. This goes to underscore, among
pentance does not denote conversion as a whole, other things (see 10:17), the huge distance between
?ut, rather, mankind's part in it, which is a human her old and new existence. On the symbolism of
lccomplishment, not a stroke of grace bestowed the eighth day cf. R.Darnell's Rebellion, Rest, and the Word of
Homily, 489-93; Poimandres, 19f. See S. Pines, God: An Exegetical Study of Hebrews 3:1-4:13,
"From Darkness into Great Light," Immanuel 4 (unpublished dissertation) Duke University, 1973. (1974) 47-51; R. Stehly, "Une citation des Upan- J.H.C.]
ishads dans Joseph et Aseneth," RTP 55 (1975) g2. The reading of a: "heavenly": Ngr.; gaps
209-13; Anandakumara, Gentile Reactions, p. 45, G d Syr.; omit rest. Eternal life is frequently
n. 1. mentioned in ancient Jewish and Christian texts
z. Cf. lClem 59:2; AposCon, 7.39.3. (e.g. 2Mac 7:9; Dan 12:2; PssSol 3:12; IEn 40:9;
a2. Cf. Lk 15:24,32; Jn 5:24; 1 Jn 3:14; AposCon, Mt 25:46; Jn 3:5; Rom 5:21). 7.39.3. See also 20:7 and n. y above.

On the symbolism of
lccomplishment, not a stroke of grace bestowed the eighth day cf. R. Staats, "Ogdoas als ein
ipon man (in the NT cf. Luke-Acts, esp. Lk 15). Symbol fur die Auferstehung," VC 26 (1972) 29-
n this instance repentance means no more than 52; see 45f. breaking away from the idols (cf. Rev 9:20f. and
perhaps Heb 6:1); turning to God comes later, in 10 a. Lit. "lot," i.e. a share of land as e.g. in
:hs. 10-13. For repentance to ripen to conversion Num 16:14, often in the papyri; see at 3:5. Pen­
t takes the intercession of Repentance and God's tephres and his family seem to stay there until the
icceptance (15:7). The background of this concept episode in 20:6.in. ASENETH'S CONVERSION
A. ASENETH'S REPENTANCE
Aseneth prepares for her repentance in sackcloth and ashes
(2) And Aseneth0 was left alone with the seven virgins, and she continued to be weighed
down and weep until the sun set. And she ate no bread and drank no water.c And the night
fell,d and all (people) in the house slept, and she alone was awake and continued to brood
and* to weep; and she often struck her breast with (her) hand and kept being filled with
great fear and trembled (with) heavy trembling. 2 (3) And Aseneth rose from her bed and quietly went down the stairs from the upper floor
(4) and went to the gateway/ and the woman gatekeeper8 was asleep with her children. And
Aseneth hurried and took down from the window the skin (which hung there for a) curtain/
and filled it with ashes from the fireplace,1 and carried it up into the upper floor, and put it
3 (5) on the floor. *And she closed the door firmly and slipped the iron bolt across and sighed
with great sighing and bitter weeping. Aseneth's virgins try to look after her
4(6) And the virgin (who was) her foster sister,j whom Aseneth loved beyond all the virgins,
heard her sighing and hurried and woke up the other six virgins. And they wentk to Aseneth's
5 (7) door and found the door closed. »And they heard Aseneth's sighing and weeping and said
to her,1 "What have you, mistress, and why do you feelm so sad, and what is it that is
6(8)bothering" you? Open (the door to) us, and we will see what you have."0 »And Aseneth
did not open the door, but said to them from within, "My head is (stricken with) heavy
pain,0 and I am resting in my bed, and I do not have the strength0 to rise and open (the
7 door to) you, because I have grown weak inr all my limbs. #But go each of you in your
8 chamber and rest and let me be quiet." »And the virgins went away, each into her chamber.Open (the door to) us, and we will see what you have."0 »And Aseneth
did not open the door, but said to them from within, "My head is (stricken with) heavy
pain,0 and I am resting in my bed, and I do not have the strength0 to rise and open (the
7 door to) you, because I have grown weak inr all my limbs. #But go each of you in your
8 chamber and rest and let me be quiet." »And the virgins went away, each into her chamber. Aseneth throws her valuables away, idols included, and repents in sackcloth and ashes
for seven days
(9) And Aseneth rose and opened the door quietly and went into her second chamber where
the chests (containing) her ornaments were, and opened her coffer and took out a black and
b. On the following reactions cf. esp. Dan katapetasmatos); cf. 10:14. Gk. katapetasma is
4:33a-34 LXX; Xenophon of Ephesus 1.3.3- extremely rare outside Jewish and Christian liter-
4.1.6; Chariton 2.4.3-5; 3.10.3-4.1.1; Apuleius ature, where it designates one of the veils hanging
7.27.2; more at I l:lx,15. in the Temple, either directly or figuratively (as in
c. Also 10:17 (see there); 13:9; cf. Ex 34:28; Heb). ISam 30:12; Ezra 10:6. i. The reading "from the fireplace": (FW) Arm. d. "And . . . fell" (all) except a d; gap Ngr. 436; gaps G Ngr.; omit rest. e. The reading "to brood and": F(G)W (c) Syr. j. The reading "her foster sister": b c (Syr. (Arm.) LI (436); omit a E; gaps d 435& Ngr. Arm.) LI 436 (435&); omit a d; gap Ngr. Aseneth
f. The reading "the gateway" (ton pylona): a has a favorite slave just as Callirhoe (Chariton
EFW c d LI; "the millhouse" (ton mylona) Syr. 1.4.1 etc.) and other ancient ladies. The Beloved
Arm. 436 (435&); gaps G Ngr. Disciple (Jn 13:23, etc.) is barely comparable. g. The reading "the woman gatekeeper" (he k. Witnesses a G d have this verb and the three
pyloros): EFW LI, "the woman gatekeeper" (ac- following ones in the singular, the rest, if present,
cusative, tinpyloron) c, "the woman doorkeeper" have it in the plural.On the symbolism of
lccomplishment, not a stroke of grace bestowed the eighth day cf. R. Staats, "Ogdoas als ein
ipon man (in the NT cf. Luke-Acts, esp. Lk 15). Symbol fur die Auferstehung," VC 26 (1972) 29-
n this instance repentance means no more than 52; see 45f. breaking away from the idols (cf. Rev 9:20f. and
perhaps Heb 6:1); turning to God comes later, in 10 a. Lit. "lot," i.e. a share of land as e.g. in
:hs. 10-13. For repentance to ripen to conversion Num 16:14, often in the papyri; see at 3:5. Pen­
t takes the intercession of Repentance and God's tephres and his family seem to stay there until the
icceptance (15:7). The background of this concept episode in 20:6.

The reading "the woman gatekeeper" (he k. Witnesses a G d have this verb and the three
pyloros): EFW LI, "the woman gatekeeper" (ac- following ones in the singular, the rest, if present,
cusative, tinpyloron) c, "the woman doorkeeper" have it in the plural. (accusative ten thyrdron) a d (a c d have "she I. The reading "outside standing (singular)":
found . . . sleeping" for "was asleep"), "the added a; gaps d Syr. Ngr.; omit rest; a may be
woman miller" Syr. (plural) Arm. 436; gaps G correct, as it corresponds to "from within" of vs. 435& Ngr. Women as gatekeepers, in the author's 6. day, were most likely slaves who lived in a room m. Lit. "look."
near the gate or door; cf. e.g. 2Sam 4:6 LXX n. Same word as "molest" in 7:2-8. (followed by Josephus, Ant 7.2.1 §48); TJob 6:5; o. Two questions followed by an imperative: Ps
Jn 18:16f.; Acts 12:3-5; Plautus, Curcidio. 1.1.76). 43:2f., 5; Lk 24:38f. Why the children should be mentioned is not clear, p. Similarly 18:4; 25:3. So headache as an
unless to indicate that the woman had retired for excuse (or is it?) was known in antiquity; cf. the night (Lk 11:7) and was not likely to notice Apuleius 3.13.1. Aseneth's doings. q. Cf. Lk 11:7. h. Lit. "the skin of the curtain" (tin derrin tou r. Lit. "of."(io) somber tunic.8 'And this was her tunic of mourning when her younger* brother died. In this
9 Aseneth had dressed and mourned for her brother. • And she took her black tunic and carried
it into her chamber and closed the door again firmly and slipped the bolt across. lO(ii) And Aseneth hurried and put off her linen and gold woven royal robe and dressed in the
black tunic of mourning, and loosened her golden girdle and girded a rope around (her),
and put off the tiara from her head, and the diadem and the bracelets from her hands and
11 (i2) feet, and put everything on the floor. »And she took her chosen robe and the golden girdle
and the headgear and the diadem, and threw everything through the window looking north
12 (13) to the poor." *And Aseneth hurried and took all her gods that were in her chamber, the
ones of gold and silver who were without number, and ground them to pieces/ and threw
all the idols of the Egyptians through the window looking north from her upper floor to
13 (14) beggars and needy (persons). • And Aseneth took her royal dinnerw and the fatlingsx and the
fish and the flesh of the heifer and all the sacrifices of her gods and the vessels of their
wine of libation and threw everything through the window looking north, and gave everything
to the strange dogs. For Aseneth said to herself, "By no means must my dogs eat from my
dinner and from the sacrifice of the idols, but let the strange dogs eat those. "y
14(15)06) And after that Aseneth took the skin (full) of ashes and poured it on the floor. 'And she
took a piece of sackcloth2 and girded it around her waist. And she loosened the clasp of
15 the hair of her head82 and sprinkled ashes upon her head." *And she scattered the ashes on
d7) the floor 'and struck her breast02 often with both hands, and wept bitterly, and fell upon the
ashes and wept with great and bitter weeping all night with sighing and screaming112 until
daybreak. s. Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, p. 163) draws w.Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, p. 163) draws w. "Royal dinner" (also 13:8) seems to serve
attention to Isis' black cloak (e.g. Apuleius 11.3.7; as a heading for what follows, like "fruit" in 4:2. Griffiths, Isis-Book, 128f.). But Aseneth's tunic is "Royal" is an attribute of quality (cf. Apuleius
more like the garments worn for repentance or 5.2.4), rather than origin (Dan 1:15). Aseneth is a
mourning often mentioned in Jewish texts (e.g. Jdt queen after all (see on 1:8). Her regular dinner is
4:10; IMac 2:14; 2Mac 3:19; PssSol 2:21; LAB a sacrificial meal "at the god's table" and vice
30:5; SibOr 5:190), which would of needs be black versa (11:9; 12:5; 21:13f.; see 8:5). (Josephus, Life 28 §138). Black was also the color x. So Br for ta sitista, cf. Mt 22:4. This rare
of mourning in the Greek and Roman tradition Gk. word is not attested before Mt and Josephus,
(e.g. Chariton 3.4.4), but not in the Egyptian Ant 8.2.4 §40. Gk. ta (the) omit Phil. tradition. y. The reading "and gave . . . those": (FbW c
t. Witnesses b Syr. Arm. LI ("major" 2 MSS) Syr. Arm. LI L2); "and gave everything (panta
436 435&; "second" c; "firstborn" a d; gap Ngr. omit in apparatus Phil) to the dogs as food (or to
The brother who is not otherwise known comes up the north)" B; "to the dogs (as) food" A (D Slav. unexpectedly. Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, p. Phil); "to the dogs" Ngr.; "to the poor" P; gap
163) refers to Isis' mourning for Osiris, but he is Q; also cf. 13:8. Aseneth's dogs might be watch
her eider brother. "Repenting, the younger brother dogs (e.g. TJob 9:3: eight hundred for the cattle,
of not sinning" (Philo, Somn, 1.91) does not help, two hundred for the palace) or pets (b. Ket 61b;
either. cf. Mk 7:27 parallel) or both. The "strange dogs"
u. The reading "to the poor" (tois penesin): AP would be stray street roamers—a common plague
d; gaps Q EW Ngr.; omit rest. The crushed idols in the ancient Near East (e.g.The reading "to the poor" (tois penesin): AP would be stray street roamers—a common plague
d; gaps Q EW Ngr.; omit rest. The crushed idols in the ancient Near East (e.g. IKgs 14:11; Lk
are given "to the beggars and needy persons" 16:21)—which are often cited proverbially. Both
(ptochois kai deomenois, vs. 12). The translation "strange" and "dogs" probably bear antiheathen
assumes that penes (a man without means who has overtones (cf. Mk 7:27 parallel; Mt 7:6; Did 9:5). to work for a living) and ptochos (beggar) are not See generally O. Michel, "kyon, kynarion," TDNT
synonymous as in other Jewish texts; the idols' 3, 1101-04. remnants are reserved for the lowest social class. z. Lit. "the skin (derris as in 10:2) of the
This would be a point in favor of the author's sackcloth." Sackcloth is made of animal hair, not
mastery of Gk. (Bammel, "ptochos etc.," TDNT skin. Does derris mean "sheet"? 6, 885-915). On almsgiving as a prerequisite to a2. A gesture of mourning, cf. e.g. Esth 4:17k. conversion (cf. Mk 10:21 parallels; Lk 7:5; 19:8; b2. TO besprinkle one's own head with ashes,
Acts 10:2) see K. Berger, "Almosen fur Israel: dust, or dirt is a common gesture of mourning,
Zum historischen Kontext der paulinischen Kol- e.g. 2Sam 1:2; Jdt 9:1; 2Mac 10:25; PJ 2:1; TJob
lekte,"/VTS23(1976-77) 187-204;cf. also 12:15. 28:2; Josephus, Ant 20.6.1 §123; Rev 18:19; Ho­
v. The reading "and . . . pieces": APrf(Ngr., mer, Iliad, 18.23L; Chariton 3.10.4; Apuleius
in 9:2); gaps Q GW Syr.; omit rest. Also 13:11. 7.27.2. Cf. Acts 22:23. Cf. Jdg 6:25-32; 2Chr 34:7; Isa 2:20; 30:22; 31:7; c2. Cf. Philo. Flacc, 19 §157; Lk 18:13; Char­
ApAb 1-6; Jub 12:1-14; TJob 5:2; 17:4. A Jew iton 1.14.9; Apuleius 9.31.1. must neither deride others' gods (Ex 22:27 LXX; d2. The reading "and screaming": FW Arm. Philo, Spec Leg 1.53; VU Mos, 2.205; Josephus, LI 436; omit a c d: gaps EG Syr. 435& Ngr. Gk.The reading "the woman gatekeeper" (he k. Witnesses a G d have this verb and the three
pyloros): EFW LI, "the woman gatekeeper" (ac- following ones in the singular, the rest, if present,
cusative, tinpyloron) c, "the woman doorkeeper" have it in the plural. (accusative ten thyrdron) a d (a c d have "she I. The reading "outside standing (singular)":
found . . . sleeping" for "was asleep"), "the added a; gaps d Syr. Ngr.; omit rest; a may be
woman miller" Syr. (plural) Arm. 436; gaps G correct, as it corresponds to "from within" of vs. 435& Ngr. Women as gatekeepers, in the author's 6. day, were most likely slaves who lived in a room m. Lit. "look."
near the gate or door; cf. e.g. 2Sam 4:6 LXX n. Same word as "molest" in 7:2-8. (followed by Josephus, Ant 7.2.1 §48); TJob 6:5; o. Two questions followed by an imperative: Ps
Jn 18:16f.; Acts 12:3-5; Plautus, Curcidio. 1.1.76). 43:2f., 5; Lk 24:38f. Why the children should be mentioned is not clear, p. Similarly 18:4; 25:3. So headache as an
unless to indicate that the woman had retired for excuse (or is it?) was known in antiquity; cf. the night (Lk 11:7) and was not likely to notice Apuleius 3.13.1. Aseneth's doings. q. Cf. Lk 11:7. h. Lit. "the skin of the curtain" (tin derrin tou r. Lit. "of."

435& Ngr. Gk. Apion 2.33 §237) nor rob their temples (Rom 2:22); brimema is very rare; it is found neither in LXX
but a would-be convert could not leave his personal nor in NT. idolatrous gear undisturbed (cf. Acts 19:18f.).16 (18) And Aseneth rose at daybreak and looked, and behold/2 there was much mud from her
(19) tears" and from the ashes. 'And Aseneth fell again upon her face on the ashes till evening
and until the setting (of) the sun.82
n (20) And this way Aseneth did for seven days/2 and she ate no bread and drank no water in
those seven days of her humiliation.'2
Aseneth's first soliloquy on how to take courage to address God
i (i) 11 Anda on the eighth day, behold, it was dawn and the birds were already singing and
the dogs barking at (people who were) passing through, and Aseneth lifted her head (just)
a little from the floor and the ashes on which she was lying, because she was exceedingly
tired and could not control her limbs because of the want (of food) for the seven days. u Andb she rose on her knees and put her hand on the floor and lifted (herself) up a little
from the floor, and (she was) still bowing her head, and the hairs of her head were stretched
out (in strands) from the load of ashes. And Aseneth clasped her hands, finger against
finger, and shook her head to and fro/ and struck her breast continuously with her hands,
and laid her head into her lap/ and her face was flooded with her tears, and she sighed
with great sighing/ and pulled her hairs from her head/ and sprinkled ashes on her head. iy And Aseneth was tired and had become discouraged and her strength had gone.8 And she
2 turned upward to the wallh and sat below the window looking east.1 #And she laid her head
into her lap, clasping her fingers round her right knee, and her mouth was closed, and she
3 (had) not opened it in the seven days and in the seven nights of her humiliation. *And she
said in her heart without opening her mouth:j
What shall I do, miserable (that I am)/
or where shall I go;
e2. "And looked, and behold" is traditional, of Lucius' reformatio (Apuleius 11.7). Daily life
e.g. Dan 4:13 LXX Theod.;Rev 4:1; see also 14:9. in ancient times began at daybreak (21:2; 26:1) or
f2.Dan 4:13 LXX Theod.;Rev 4:1; see also 14:9. in ancient times began at daybreak (21:2; 26:1) or
f2. Poetic exaggeration, rather than a prodigy even before (Burchard, "Fussnoten zum neutesta-
recalling Isis* tears which cause the Nile to rise mentlichen Griechisch II," ZNW 69 [1978) 143-
(Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, p. 165). 57, see especially p. 152, n. 52). Jews would then
g2. The reading "till evening (deiles). . . sun": say their moming prayer (compulsory for males
(FW) c Arm. (omit "and") (LI) 436; "until the only). sun set" a d; "till the set of the sun" 435&; "till b. Vss. lx-18 all; except omit d. Vs. lx (GFW
the oncoming of the evening" Syr.; "until evening c Syr. Arm. LI 435&); omit a; gaps E d 436 Ngr.;
(hesperas)" G; gaps E Ngr.; "setting" is an details very uncertain. The verse contains a com­
infinitive in FW c Arm. The "and" is the weakest petent assortment of conventional mourning ges­
point of the restored text. Is this an example of tures; see also 10:1, 8, 14f.; 11:15. double chronology as in Mk 1:32; Poimandres, 29? c. Lit. "thence and thence." Cf. e.g. Apuleius
h2. 4Ezra (e.g. 5:13) and 2Bar (e.g. 9:2) men­ 9.31.1. tion several seven-day periods of fasting and mourn­ d. Cf. e.g. Chariton 1.8.3. For a different pur­
ing preparatory to prayer or revelation; also cf. pose cf. 2Kgs 18:42. LAB 30:4f. These may go back to the seven days e. The text of the last two clauses is very
of mourning for the dead (Gen 50:10; ISam 31:13 uncertain. parallel IChr 10:12; Sir 22:12). Closer parallels f. Cf. e.g. Chariton 3.10.4; Apuleius 7.27.2. are similar periods connected with conversion (seven g. Lit. "she was out of her power."
years Dan 4:33a-b LXX; cf. 4QPrNab 1.3; three h. Alsocf. vs. 15. Cf. 2Kgs20:2. days Acts 9:9; ten days' abstention from wine and i. For the practice of praying at a window cf. meat Apuleius 11.23.3; 11.28.4; 11.30.1, which Tob 3:11; Dan 6:11. Jewish prayer ought to be
may reflect the Egyptian ten-day week; cf.435& Ngr. Gk. Apion 2.33 §237) nor rob their temples (Rom 2:22); brimema is very rare; it is found neither in LXX
but a would-be convert could not leave his personal nor in NT. idolatrous gear undisturbed (cf. Acts 19:18f.).

meat Apuleius 11.23.3; 11.28.4; 11.30.1, which Tob 3:11; Dan 6:11. Jewish prayer ought to be
may reflect the Egyptian ten-day week; cf. Griffiths, directed toward Jerusalem (Dan 6:11). "East" may
Isis-Book, pp. 290, 355f). The figures all bear a denote either that tradition or the direction of the
note of completeness. See also 9:5. rising sun as a symbol of God or new life (Philo,
i2. The reading "and she . . . humiliation": (b Vita Cont, 11 §89; Josephus, War 2.8.5 §128), or
c Syr. Arm. LI L2); "not tasting anything at all" both. AP (Q) d; gap Ngr. "Humiliation" (tapeinosis) j. Ch. 11:3-14 has a good parallel in Apuleius
probably does not have the ordinary Gk. meaning 6.5; cf. also Xenophon of Ephesus 1.4.1-4.6f. of a dilapidated state of body or mind or the Jewish From the structural angle the parallel is weakened
nuance of humility, but of self-castigation, partic­ by the presence of the second soliloquy, almost
ularly fasting, as e.g. Ezra 9:5; Ps 25:18; Sir 18:21; unnoticed hitherto, which gives chs. 11-13 a
lClem 53:2; 55:6. See W. Grundmann, "tapeinos tripartite rather than bipartite structure (see also
etc.." TDNT&, 1-26. 4:3; 14:4). From this point down to ch. 20 Apuleius'
book 11 has a number of structural parallels to
11 a. The reading "it happened": added d 332, offer (Burchard, Zeuge, pp. 72-80). omit rest, gaps 436 Ngr. The eighth day (cf. 4Ezra k. The reading "humble (that I am)": a; gaps
6:36; Lk 9:28; see 9:5) begins much like the day d 436 Ngr.; omit rest.with whom shall I take refuge,1
or what1" shall I speak,"
I the virgin and an orphan and desolate and abandoned and hated?0
4 All people have come to hate me,
and on top of thosep my father and my mother,
because I, too, have come to hate their gods and have destroyed them,
and caused them to be trampled underfoot by men.q
5 And therefore my father and my mother and my whole family
have come to hate me and said, "Aseneth is not our daughter
because she destroyed our* gods."
6 And all people hate me,'
because I, too, have (come to) hate every man,
and all who asked for my hand in marriage. And now, in this humiliation of mine, all have (come to) hate me,
and gloat over this affliction of mine."
7 And the Lord the God of the powerful Joseph, the Most High,
hates all those who worship idols,
because he is a jealous and terrible godv
toward all those who worship strange gods,
g Therefore he has come to hate me, too,
because I worshiped dead and dumbw idols,
and blessed them,
9 and atex from their sacrifice(s),
and my mouth is defiled* from their table,
and I do not have the boldness to call on the Lord God of Heaven,
the Most High, the Mighty One of the powerful Joseph,2
because my mouth is defiled from the sacrifices of the idols. 0 But I have heard82 many saying
that the God of the Hebrewsb2 is a true God,
and a living God,c2 and a merciful God,
and compassionate and long-suffering and pitiful and gentle,62
and does not count the sine2 of a humble person,n
nor expose the lawless deeds of an afflicted person at the time of his affliction. 1 Therefore I will take courage too and turn to him,
and take refuge with him,g2
and confess all my sins to him,
I. One of the big words in chs. 11-13 and 15:7; Arm. LI; "she sold our" 435&; "I gave to
19:5; it is biblical, e.g. Ps 142:6, but cf. also destruction their" a c; gaps EG d 436 Ngr. Xenophon of Ephesus 1.4.5. t. Order of clauses varies widely since beginning
m. Syr. LI 435&; "with whom" a c; gaps rest. of vs. 5. n.meat Apuleius 11.23.3; 11.28.4; 11.30.1, which Tob 3:11; Dan 6:11. Jewish prayer ought to be
may reflect the Egyptian ten-day week; cf. Griffiths, directed toward Jerusalem (Dan 6:11). "East" may
Isis-Book, pp. 290, 355f). The figures all bear a denote either that tradition or the direction of the
note of completeness. See also 9:5. rising sun as a symbol of God or new life (Philo,
i2. The reading "and she . . . humiliation": (b Vita Cont, 11 §89; Josephus, War 2.8.5 §128), or
c Syr. Arm. LI L2); "not tasting anything at all" both. AP (Q) d; gap Ngr. "Humiliation" (tapeinosis) j. Ch. 11:3-14 has a good parallel in Apuleius
probably does not have the ordinary Gk. meaning 6.5; cf. also Xenophon of Ephesus 1.4.1-4.6f. of a dilapidated state of body or mind or the Jewish From the structural angle the parallel is weakened
nuance of humility, but of self-castigation, partic­ by the presence of the second soliloquy, almost
ularly fasting, as e.g. Ezra 9:5; Ps 25:18; Sir 18:21; unnoticed hitherto, which gives chs. 11-13 a
lClem 53:2; 55:6. See W. Grundmann, "tapeinos tripartite rather than bipartite structure (see also
etc.." TDNT&, 1-26. 4:3; 14:4). From this point down to ch. 20 Apuleius'
book 11 has a number of structural parallels to
11 a. The reading "it happened": added d 332, offer (Burchard, Zeuge, pp. 72-80). omit rest, gaps 436 Ngr. The eighth day (cf. 4Ezra k. The reading "humble (that I am)": a; gaps
6:36; Lk 9:28; see 9:5) begins much like the day d 436 Ngr.; omit rest.

5. n. Similarly 6:5f.; cf. Xenophon of Ephesus u. Cf. Jn 16:20; Rev 11:10. 1.4.7. v. FW c Syr. Arm. LI; "as I heard" added AP;
o. These are recurring motifs in chs. 11-13. gaps Q EG d 436 435& Ngr. Cf. Ex 20:5f.; Deut
Actually nothing of the sort has happened or will 5:9f. happen. A theme going back to the "complaint," w. See 8:5. or "lament," psalm genre (e.g. Ps 27:10) and put x. Gk. ephagon FGW Syr. Arm. LI 435&;
to appropriate use in texts relating to conversion "fled" (ephygon) AP {-ga Q) c; gaps E d 436 Ngr. (cf. also 1QH 9.34f.; Philo, Spec Leg. 4.179; Mk y. (G)FW Arm. LI 435&; "estranged" a c;
13:12 parallel) has dictated the expressions in this gaps E d Syr. 436 Ngr. lament. Doubtless life often was like that when a z. See 8:9 beginning. person decided to become a Jew. The counterpoint a2. Unlike Esther (Additions to Esther 14:5),
is that it is expected that God will be a new and who "heard" the traditions from her early youth. better father (see especially 12:8); cf. generally G. b2. TJos 12:3; Josephus, Ant 9.2.1 §20. On
Schrenk and G. Quell, "pater etc.," TDNT 5, "Hebrews" see 1:5. 945-1022; J. Jeremias, The Prayers of Jesus (SBT c2. Cf. e.g. TJob 37:2; IThes 1:9. 2.6; London, 1967). d2. Cf. e.g. Ex 34:6; Ps 86:15. p. The reading "on top of those (people or e2. Cf. e.g. Ps 32:2; TZeb 9:7; 2Cor 5:19. things)": AP c; omit EG Syr.(?) Arm. LI 435&; f2. The reading "and especially of one who sins
gaps Q FW d 436 Ngr. in ignorance": added a; gaps G d 436 Ngr; omit
q. Also 13:11, but not quite in accord with rest. 10:12; cf. Mt 5:13. g2. The reading "and . . . him": AP Syr. Arm. r. Cf. Lk 15.19, 21 and 15:24, 32. LI 435&; omit Q EFW c; gaps rest. s. The reading "she destroyed our": FW (Syr.)and pour out my supplication before him.1,2
12 Who knows,12 (maybe) he will see my humiliation*2
and have mercy on me. Perhaps he will see this desolation of mine
and have compassion on me,
13 or see my orphanage"
and protect me,
because12 he is the father of the orphans,
and a protector of the persecuted,
and of the afflicted a helper."12
14 I will take courage and cry to him. Aseneth's second soliloquy on how to take courage to pronounce God's name
15 And"2 Aseneth rose from the wall where she was sitting and turned to the window looking
east and straightened up on her knees and spread her hands out toward heaven. And she
was afraid to open her mouth and to name the name of God.°2 And she turned again away
to the wall and sat and struck her head?2 and her breast with (her) hand often, and said in
her heart without opening her mouth:
16 (What) a wretched (woman) I (am), and an orphan and desolate,
my mouth is defiled from the sacrifices of the idols
and from the blessings*2 of the gods of the Egyptians. 17 And now, in these tears of mine and the ashes strewn around'2 and the filth of my
humiliation,
how shall I open my mouth to the Most High,
and how name his terrible holy name,
(and be sure) that the Lord will not be angry with me,
because in (the midst of) my lawless deeds I have called on his holy name? is What shall I now do, wretched (that) I (am)? I will rather take courage and open my mouth to him
and invoke his name. And if in fury the Lord strikes me
he himself will again heal me;
and if he chastises me with his whips,82
he himself will look again on me in his mercy;
and if he is furious at me in my sins,
he will again be reconciled with me and forgive me every sin. So I will take courage to open my mouth to him. Aseneth's confession of sin and prayer for acceptance
19 And Aseneth rose again from the wall where she sat and straightened up on her knees12
hi. The reading "and he will have mercy upon n2. Vss. 15-18 (G c Syr. Arm.5. n. Similarly 6:5f.; cf. Xenophon of Ephesus u. Cf. Jn 16:20; Rev 11:10. 1.4.7. v. FW c Syr. Arm. LI; "as I heard" added AP;
o. These are recurring motifs in chs. 11-13. gaps Q EG d 436 435& Ngr. Cf. Ex 20:5f.; Deut
Actually nothing of the sort has happened or will 5:9f. happen. A theme going back to the "complaint," w. See 8:5. or "lament," psalm genre (e.g. Ps 27:10) and put x. Gk. ephagon FGW Syr. Arm. LI 435&;
to appropriate use in texts relating to conversion "fled" (ephygon) AP {-ga Q) c; gaps E d 436 Ngr. (cf. also 1QH 9.34f.; Philo, Spec Leg. 4.179; Mk y. (G)FW Arm. LI 435&; "estranged" a c;
13:12 parallel) has dictated the expressions in this gaps E d Syr. 436 Ngr. lament. Doubtless life often was like that when a z. See 8:9 beginning. person decided to become a Jew. The counterpoint a2. Unlike Esther (Additions to Esther 14:5),
is that it is expected that God will be a new and who "heard" the traditions from her early youth. better father (see especially 12:8); cf. generally G. b2. TJos 12:3; Josephus, Ant 9.2.1 §20. On
Schrenk and G. Quell, "pater etc.," TDNT 5, "Hebrews" see 1:5. 945-1022; J. Jeremias, The Prayers of Jesus (SBT c2. Cf. e.g. TJob 37:2; IThes 1:9. 2.6; London, 1967). d2. Cf. e.g. Ex 34:6; Ps 86:15. p. The reading "on top of those (people or e2. Cf. e.g. Ps 32:2; TZeb 9:7; 2Cor 5:19. things)": AP c; omit EG Syr.(?) Arm. LI 435&; f2. The reading "and especially of one who sins
gaps Q FW d 436 Ngr. in ignorance": added a; gaps G d 436 Ngr; omit
q. Also 13:11, but not quite in accord with rest. 10:12; cf. Mt 5:13. g2. The reading "and . . . him": AP Syr. Arm. r. Cf. Lk 15.19, 21 and 15:24, 32. LI 435&; omit Q EFW c; gaps rest. s. The reading "she destroyed our": FW (Syr.)

15-18 (G c Syr. Arm. 436 Br; all of
my miserableness": added a; omit FW c Syr. these except 436 have the first soliloquy); omit a
(Arm.) LI 435&; gaps rest; also cf. 12:3; cf. Pss EFW LI 435& (in some of these the omission may
102:1; 142:3. actually be 15b-19, because 15a and 19 are very
i2. Lit. "who knows if (tis oiden ei) (Br). But similar; in 435& elements of the second soliloquy
this would express doubts rather than timid confi­ seem to be combined with the first); gaps d Ngr. dence which is what the Gk. means (Rie); cf. e.g. See further 11:3. 2Sam 12:22; Esth 4:14; Tob 13:8 BA; LAB 9:6; o2. Cf. Lev 24:16; Sir 23:9. Epictetus, Diss., 2.20.30; Achilles Tatius 7.6.2; p2. Cf. e.g. Chariton 3.10.3; Apuleius 4.25.1. Apuleius 1.15.4; 6.1.2; 6.5.4; 10.26.2. If this q2. Gk. eulogiai means "blessed gifts," rather
applies to ICor 7:16 as well, it is an exhortation than "words of blessing."
to carry on in a mixed marriage; Burchard, ZNW r2. Or "besprinkled with ashes."
61 (1970) 170f.; if not, it gives permission to let s2. Cf. IKgs 12:11, 14 parallel 2Chr 10:11, 14. go (S. Kubo, "I Corinthians vii.16: Optimistic or t2. As a rule a Jew would pray standing up (e.g. Pessimistic?" NTS 24 [1978] 539-44). TJob 40:1 f.; Lk 18:11, 13); kneeling or prostration
j2. Cf. ISam 1:11; Lk 1:48. See 10:17. indicates intensity (e.g. Dan 6:11; TJob 40:4; Mk
k2. Gk. orphania also 13:1. LXX only Isa 47:8. 14:35 parallel; Acts 9:40). In either case, he (or
12. FWG c Syr. Arm. LI; "as I hear" added a; she) would look up (e.g. TLevi 2:3; Lk 6:41. 18:13
gaps rest. is by way of exception). m2. Also 12:13; cf. Jdt 9:11.(i2:i) 'and spread her hand eastward and looked with her eyes up toward heaven, and opened her
mouth to God, and said:
i (2) 12 Lord* God of the ages,b
who created all (things) and gave life (to them),
who gave breath of life to your whole creation,0
who brought the invisible (things) out into the light,d
2 who made the (things that) are and the (ones that) have an appearance from the non-
appearing and non-being,e
O) who lifted upf the heaven
and founded it on* a firmamenth upon the back of the winds,*
who founded the earth upon the waters ,j
who put big stones on the abyss of the water,k
and the stones will not be submerged,1
but they are like oak leaves (floating) on top of the water,
and they are living stones
and hear your voice, Lord,
and keep your commandments"1 which you have commanded to them,
and never transgress your ordinances,"
but are doing your will to the end.°
For you, Lord, spoke and they were brought to life,p
because your word, Lord, is life for all your creatures.q
3 With you I take refuge, Lord,
(4) and to you I will shout, Lord,
to you I will pour out my supplication,
to you I will confess my sins,
and to you 1 will reveal my lawless deeds. 4 Spare me, Lord,
(5) because I have sinned much before you,
I have committed lawlessness and irreverence/
and have said wicked and unspeakable (things) before you. 12 a. Witnesses AP Bat Br prefix "Prayer and vol. 1 [Leipzig-Berlin, 19281 p. 112). Confession of Aseneth," B before "and spread" g. Or "as."
11:19 (different script). This heading may have h. Cf. Gen 1:6 LXX; IEn 18:2; TSol 20:12;
originated as a marginal note slipped into the text Ascenls 7:9; 10:23. See generally G. Bertram,
at various places. Perhaps an ancestor of B was "stereos etc.," TDNT 7, 609-14. corrected after a MS of the AP type. Content and i. The reading "and . . . winds": (FGW c Syr. form of the confession require analysis; cf. Tob Arm. LI. L2); omit a E d; gap Ngr. 3:2-6, 11-15; Esth 4:17b-h, l-z; PrMan; Dan j. Cf. e.g.Cf. e.g. Pss 24:2; 136:6; 2En 28:lf.; 2Pet
3:24-45; LXX 4:34, also Ezra 9:5-15; Neh 9; Dan 3:5; ShepHerm Vision 1.3.4. 9:4-19; IBar 1:15-3:8. On the function of prayer k. Cf. e.g. 2En 28:If.; ShepHerm Similitudes
as denoting the turn of a predicament, see the 9.3.3; ShepHerm Vision 3.2.4f.; Aptowitzer, HUCA
above examples and Jdt 9:2-14; in the romances, 1 (1924) 27lf. cf. Xenophon of Ephesus 1.4.4L; Apuleius 11.2. I. The Gk. verb bythizesthai appears in LXX
b. The reading "the ages": EG d Syr. Arm. only in 2Mac 12:4. 436 (cf. 16:16; 21:21; Tob 13:7; 13:11 BA; Sir m. Cf. e.g. Jdt 16:14; Sir I6:27f.; 1QS 3.16f. 36:17; ICIem 35:3; 55:6; 61:2); "the just (plural)" n. The reading "but they . . . ordinances": (FW
A FW c LI (cf. PrMan 8); "the powers" PQ; "the Syr. Arm. LI L2); omit a d; gaps EG c Ngr. See
heavens" 435&; omit Slav., gap Ngr. On some of next note. the following clauses see further 8:9. o. The reading "but are . . . end": a d; gaps c
c. Cf. e.g. Gen 2:7; Prov 24:12; Acts 17:25. EG Ngr. 435&; omit rest. Perhaps this is the a d
d. Cf. Gen 1:2 LXX. variant of the text cited in previous note, rather
e. One of the essentials of Jewish and Christian than part of the original text. Cf. Rev 2:26;
cosmology, e.g. Gen 1:2 LXX; WisSol 11:25; 2Bar ShepHerm Similitudes 9.27.3. 21:4; 48:8; 2En 24:2; 24:5-26:1; Philo, Spec Leg, p. Creation by God's word is another basic
4§I87;S<WI/I 1 §76; Rom4:17; Heb 11:3; ShepHerm principle of Jewish and Christian theology, e.g. cf. Vision 1.1.6; ShepHerm Mandates 1; AposCon Jdt 16:14; Pss 33:9; 148:5; WisSol 9:1; Isa 48:13;
8.12.7. Jn 1:3, 10; Heb 11:3; 2Pet 3:5; ShepHerm Visions
f. Gk. hypsdsas, according to Philonenko (Jo­ 1.3.4; 3.3.5; IgnatiusEph 15:1. Cf. 16:11. seph et Asineth, pp. 59f), is typical of Egyptian q. Cf. e.g. Jn 1:4; 12:50; Un l:lf.; cf. 9:5. cosmology and not evidenced in Jewish literature; r. Cf. e.g. IKgs 8:47; Ps 106:6; IBar 2:12; Dan
but cf.15-18 (G c Syr. Arm. 436 Br; all of
my miserableness": added a; omit FW c Syr. these except 436 have the first soliloquy); omit a
(Arm.) LI 435&; gaps rest; also cf. 12:3; cf. Pss EFW LI 435& (in some of these the omission may
102:1; 142:3. actually be 15b-19, because 15a and 19 are very
i2. Lit. "who knows if (tis oiden ei) (Br). But similar; in 435& elements of the second soliloquy
this would express doubts rather than timid confi­ seem to be combined with the first); gaps d Ngr. dence which is what the Gk. means (Rie); cf. e.g. See further 11:3. 2Sam 12:22; Esth 4:14; Tob 13:8 BA; LAB 9:6; o2. Cf. Lev 24:16; Sir 23:9. Epictetus, Diss., 2.20.30; Achilles Tatius 7.6.2; p2. Cf. e.g. Chariton 3.10.3; Apuleius 4.25.1. Apuleius 1.15.4; 6.1.2; 6.5.4; 10.26.2. If this q2. Gk. eulogiai means "blessed gifts," rather
applies to ICor 7:16 as well, it is an exhortation than "words of blessing."
to carry on in a mixed marriage; Burchard, ZNW r2. Or "besprinkled with ashes."
61 (1970) 170f.; if not, it gives permission to let s2. Cf. IKgs 12:11, 14 parallel 2Chr 10:11, 14. go (S. Kubo, "I Corinthians vii.16: Optimistic or t2. As a rule a Jew would pray standing up (e.g. Pessimistic?" NTS 24 [1978] 539-44). TJob 40:1 f.; Lk 18:11, 13); kneeling or prostration
j2. Cf. ISam 1:11; Lk 1:48. See 10:17. indicates intensity (e.g. Dan 6:11; TJob 40:4; Mk
k2. Gk. orphania also 13:1. LXX only Isa 47:8. 14:35 parallel; Acts 9:40). In either case, he (or
12. FWG c Syr. Arm. LI; "as I hear" added a; she) would look up (e.g. TLevi 2:3; Lk 6:41. 18:13
gaps rest. is by way of exception). m2. Also 12:13; cf. Jdt 9:11.

e.g. IKgs 8:47; Ps 106:6; IBar 2:12; Dan
but cf. Jer 38 (31 ):35 LXX; Paris Magical Papyrus 3:29; 9:5 (Theodotion); ApMos 32; 1QS 1.24f. 1204f. (K. Preisendanz, Papyri Graecae Magicae,5 My mouth is defiled from the sacrifices of the idols
and from the tables of the gods of the Egyptians. (6) I have sinned, Lord,
before you I have sinned much in ignorance,
and have worshiped dead and dumb5 idols. And now I am not worthy* to open my mouth to you, Lord. (7) And I, Aseneth, daughter of Pentephres the priest,
the virgin and queen,
who (was) once proud and arrogant,
and prospering in my riches beyond all people,
am now an orphan, and desolate, and abandoned by all people."
6 With you I take refuge, Lord,
and to you I bring my supplication,
and to you I will shout. Rescue me before I am caught by my persecutors/
7
8 For (just) as a little child who is afraid flees to his father,
and the father, stretching out his hands, snatches him off the ground/
and puts his arms around him by his breast,
and the child clasps his hands around his father's neck,
and regains his breath after his fear,
and rests at his father's breast,
the father, however, smiles aty the confusion of his childish mind,'
likewise you too, Lord, stretch out your hands upon me as a child-loving father,
and snatch me off the earth.*2
9(9) For behold, the wild old62 lionc2 persecutes me,
because he is (the) father of the gods of the Egyptians/2
and his children are the gods of the idol maniacs.62
And I have come to hate them,
because they are the lion's children,
and have thrown all of them from me and destroyed them. And the lion their father" furiously persecutes me,g2
s. See 8:5. AP G; gaps rest. t. Cf. e.g. LAB 42:5; Lk 15:19, 21; Jn 1:27; a2. The reading "off the earth (same word as
Acts 13:25. "ground" above)": c Syr. Arm. L2; "off the lion"
u. Cf. 12:13; 13:6, 11; Xenophon of Ephesus G (from vs. 9); "out of the hand of the ("super­
5.11.4, also 1.4.1. Tachau ("Ernst" und ' Jetzt," natural" added a) enemy" a d; omit LI; gaps
pp. 55f.) suggests the "now" clause should be EFW Ngr. If this means that Aseneth would rather
understood as signaling a positive condition, in die, cf. e.g.If this means that Aseneth would rather
understood as signaling a positive condition, in die, cf. e.g. Tob 3:6; Apuleius 11.2.7 and many
analogy to e.g. Rom 7:5f.; 11:30; ICor 6:9-11; other passages in the novels. Col 1:21; IPet 2:25. However, whatever the con­ b2. Cf. e.g. Rev 12:9; 20:2, also Jn 8:44; Un
nection between the two sets of passages in terms 3:8. of tradition history may be, JosAsen contrasts past c2. In the OT "lion" is a metaphor for a
glory and present misery, the NT past godlessness persecutor; in later times it also signifies the devil
and present salvation. Only 13:11 comes close to (cf. e.g. Pss 7:3; 22:14; Esth 4:17s; ApEl 19:5;
that. IPet 5:8). That the devil will attempt to avenge
v. Cf. Pss7:2f.;31:15f.; 142:6f. himself upon those who escaped his dominion
w. The reading "off the ground": Syr. Arm. makes the plot of TJob, and apparently there was
L2; small gaps a G c; large gaps rest. a paraenetic tradition warning new converts against
x. The reading "regains . . . after": Syr. (Br); his machinations (cf. also Mk 4:15 parallel). "reassures himself from" Arm.; "gasps (anhelat) d2. Cf. Firmicus Matemus, De errore prof an-
from" 435&; "is weak from (asthenei apo)" c arum religionum, 13:4; etc. (cf. Ps 88:10 LXX); gaps rest. For the Gk. text we e2. The reading "of the idol maniacs": AP; "of
may conjecture anapnei apo, although anapnein is the Egyptians" d; "of the heathen" Arm.; "whom
attested in LXX only at Job 9:18 and never in the I worshipped" G; "and the judges (?, i sudcii,
NT. corrupt for "Egyptians"?)" Slav.; gaps rest. "Idol
y. The reading "smiles at": L2; "is glad about" maniac (eiddlomanis)" is first attested in Athenag-
Syr. (Br); "is weary because of (akedia epi)" c; oras. Leg., 21:1 (A.D 177), which makes it a bit
gaps rest. Gk. akedian (in LXX Pss 61:3; 102:1; doubtful here. Unlike Jn 8:44, men are not identified
143:4; Sir 22:13; 1 Bar 3:1; Dan 7:15) has a negative as devil's children.e.g. IKgs 8:47; Ps 106:6; IBar 2:12; Dan
but cf. Jer 38 (31 ):35 LXX; Paris Magical Papyrus 3:29; 9:5 (Theodotion); ApMos 32; 1QS 1.24f. 1204f. (K. Preisendanz, Papyri Graecae Magicae,

akedian (in LXX Pss 61:3; 102:1; doubtful here. Unlike Jn 8:44, men are not identified
143:4; Sir 22:13; 1 Bar 3:1; Dan 7:15) has a negative as devil's children. ring, and it is doubtful whether it can be constructed f2. FG c Arm. 436; "the devil" added a d;
with epi. Gk. meidia has been conjectured for the gaps rest. Gk. text. g2. The reading "persecutes me": FG c Syr. z. The reading "and the child . . . childish mind Arm. 436; "tries to swallow me" AP (Q) d; gaps
(lit. "childhood")": (c Syr. Arm. L2 Br); omit EW LI 435& Ngr.n do) but you, Lord, rescue me from his hands,
and from his mouth deliver me,h2
lest he carry me off like a lion,'2
and tear me up
and throw me into the flame of the fire,
and the fire will throw me into the hurricane ,j2
and the hurricane (will) wrap me up in darkness
and throw me out into the deep of the sea,
and the big sea monster who (exists) since eternity will swallow me,"
and I will be destroyed for ever (and) ever.12
i2(ii) Rescue me, Lord,
before all this comes upon me. Rescue me, Lord,
the desolate and solitary,1"2
because my father and my mother disowned me and said,
*4Aseneth is not our daughter,"
because I have destroyed and ground (to pieces) their gods,
and have come to hate them. 13 And I am now an orphan and desolate,
and I have no other hope save in you, Lord,
and no other refuge except"2 your mercy, Lord,
because you are the father of the orphans,
and a protector of the persecuted
and a helper of the afflicted. 14 Have mercy upon me, Lord,
and guard me, a virgin (who is) abandoned and an orphan,
because you, Lord, are a sweet and good and gentle father. 15 What father is as sweet as you, Lord,
and who (is) as quick in mercy as you, Lord,
and who (is as) long-suffering toward our sins as you, Lord? d2) For behold, all the gifts02 of my father Pentephres,
which he gave me as an inheritance,02 are transient*"2 and obscure;
but the gifts'2 of your inheritance, Lord, are incorruptible and eternal.82
1 13 Be mindful, Lord, of my humiliation
and have mercy upon me. (i) Look at my orphanage
and have compassion on the afflicted. For behold, I fled from everything
and took refuge in you, Lord, the only friend to men. 2 Behold, I left behind all the good (things) of the earth
and took refuge in you, Lord,
h2. Cf. Ps 22:22; 2Tim 4:17. p2. See at 2:1; 3:5. i2. The reading "like a lion": F L2; "like a q2. Gk. proskairos is first attested in Dionysius
wolf d; omit Syr. Arm. LI; gaps rest. Also cf. of Halicarnassus. Cf. 2Cor 4:18, also Mt 6:19-21
vs. 9.akedian (in LXX Pss 61:3; 102:1; doubtful here. Unlike Jn 8:44, men are not identified
143:4; Sir 22:13; 1 Bar 3:1; Dan 7:15) has a negative as devil's children. ring, and it is doubtful whether it can be constructed f2. FG c Arm. 436; "the devil" added a d;
with epi. Gk. meidia has been conjectured for the gaps rest. Gk. text. g2. The reading "persecutes me": FG c Syr. z. The reading "and the child . . . childish mind Arm. 436; "tries to swallow me" AP (Q) d; gaps
(lit. "childhood")": (c Syr. Arm. L2 Br); omit EW LI 435& Ngr.

2Cor 4:18, also Mt 6:19-21
vs. 9. parallel; IPet 1:4; Jas 1:17. j2. Cf. Ps 11:6. Or "gush, big wave"; cf. Ps r2. The reading "gifts": (G Syr. Arm. 436
69:16?. Slav.) Rie; "houses" AP d Bat Br; illegible F;
k2. Is Aseneth afraid to be tossed across the omit Q c: gaps EW LI 435& Ngr. See above, n. four elements? Anyway, unlike e.g. Rev 19:20, o2. fire is not the end. s2. Cf. e.g. 4Ezra 13:54-56;TJob4:4-l 1; 18:5-
12. Cf. Jn 10:28. 8; Mk 10:17-31 parallel; Heb 10:34. Conversion
m2. The reading "defenceless": Br and Rie, often meant leaving one's property or occupation
which is possible for aperistatos. behind, either as a prerequisite or as a practical
n2. Cf. e.g. Ps 91:9; Jdt 9:14; Add. to Esth consequence, and the values to be gained by the
4:17 1, t. new existence were held out in comfort. Cf. K. o2. The reading "gifts (domata conjectured)": Berger, Die Gesetzesauslegung Jesu: Ihr histo-
(G) Syr. 436 Rie; "funds (c/ireroa/a)" B Phil; rischer H inter grand im Judentum und im Alten
"houses (domata)" a F c D Bat (followed by G. Testament (Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum
Fischer, Wohnungen, p. 188) Br; "bands (uzy, Gk. Alten und Neuen Testament 40; Neukirchen-Vluyn,
demata or desmata?)" Slav.; omit Arm. 435&; 1972) vol. 1, pp. 422-32; see also 10:11. eaos EW LI Ngr. See below, n. r2.in this sackcloth and ashes,8
naked and an orphan and left all alone.b
3 (2) Behold, I put off my linen royal robe, interwoven with violet and gold/
and dressed in a black mourning tunic. 4 (3) Behold, I loosened my golden girdle and threw it off me
and girded a rope and sackcloth around myself. 5 (4) Behold, my tiara and my diadem I threw off my head,
and have sprinkled ashes (upon it). 6 (5) Behold, the floor of my chamber, paved with colored and purple stones,
which once used to be besprinkled with perfumes
and wiped with bright linen cloths,
is now besprinkled with my tears
and was profaned having been powdered with ashes. 7 <6) Behold, my Lord, from my tears and the ashes
much mud has been formed in my chamber,
as on a broad street.d
8 (7) Behold, Lord, my royal dinner and the cereals
I gave to the strangef dogs. 9 (8) And behold, seven days and seven nights I was fasting
and ate no bread and drank no water,
and my mouth has become dry as a drum,
and my tongue as a horn,
and my lips as a potsherd/
and my face has fallen,11
and my eyes are burning in shame* from my many tears,
and my entire strength has left (me).J
11 Behold now, all the gods whom I once used to worship in ignorance:
I have now recognized11 that they were dumb and dead1 idols,
and I have caused them to be trampled underfoot by men,
and the thieves snatched"1 those that were of silver and gold."
12 And with you I have taken refuge, O Lord my God. Yet you, rescue me from my many deeds of ignorance0
13 and pardon me,
(9) because I have sinned against you in ignorance,
being a virgin,
and have fallen in error unwittingly/
and spoken blasphemous (words) against my lord Joseph,
do) because I did not know, the miserable (one that I am),
that he is your son,
as people told me
that Joseph is the shepherd's son from the land of Canaan. 13 a. A Jewish pair not attested in profane Gk. L2); omit a c; gaps rest. Vs.2Cor 4:18, also Mt 6:19-21
vs. 9. parallel; IPet 1:4; Jas 1:17. j2. Cf. Ps 11:6. Or "gush, big wave"; cf. Ps r2. The reading "gifts": (G Syr. Arm. 436
69:16?. Slav.) Rie; "houses" AP d Bat Br; illegible F;
k2. Is Aseneth afraid to be tossed across the omit Q c: gaps EW LI 435& Ngr. See above, n. four elements? Anyway, unlike e.g. Rev 19:20, o2. fire is not the end. s2. Cf. e.g. 4Ezra 13:54-56;TJob4:4-l 1; 18:5-
12. Cf. Jn 10:28. 8; Mk 10:17-31 parallel; Heb 10:34. Conversion
m2. The reading "defenceless": Br and Rie, often meant leaving one's property or occupation
which is possible for aperistatos. behind, either as a prerequisite or as a practical
n2. Cf. e.g. Ps 91:9; Jdt 9:14; Add. to Esth consequence, and the values to be gained by the
4:17 1, t. new existence were held out in comfort. Cf. K. o2. The reading "gifts (domata conjectured)": Berger, Die Gesetzesauslegung Jesu: Ihr histo-
(G) Syr. 436 Rie; "funds (c/ireroa/a)" B Phil; rischer H inter grand im Judentum und im Alten
"houses (domata)" a F c D Bat (followed by G. Testament (Wissenschaftliche Monographien zum
Fischer, Wohnungen, p. 188) Br; "bands (uzy, Gk. Alten und Neuen Testament 40; Neukirchen-Vluyn,
demata or desmata?)" Slav.; omit Arm. 435&; 1972) vol. 1, pp. 422-32; see also 10:11. eaos EW LI Ngr. See below, n. r2.

L2); omit a c; gaps rest. Vs. 10 is as follows: "But
"In sackcloth and ashes" is on record only at TJos you, my Lord (God added A), rescue me from the
15:2; Mt 11:21 parallel Lk 10:13. many deeds of ignorance of mine, and pardon me
b. Cf. lTim5:5;4Mac 16:10. because I, being a virgin and unwitting, have fallen
c. See 2:8. into error" (transposed here from vss. 12b and
d. Cf. Micah 7:10; Zech 9:3. "Broad street" 13a) AP (Q); omit c Syr. Arm. L2; vss. lOf. omit
means highway (also 24:20). "Mud of the street" G; 10-12 omit d; 10-12a omit F; gaps EW LI
is a common phrase, often employed proverbially, Slav. Ngr. e.g. Ps 18:43 = 2Sam 22:43; lQSb 5.27. k. Cf. TJob 40:4; Jn 16:30; 17:7; Acts 12:11;
e. See 10:13. 20:25. f. F c D Syr. Arm. 436 Slav.; omit a B Phil; 1. See 8:5. gaps rest. m. Not consonant with 10:12; 11:4, but with a
g. Cf. Ps 22:16. point made in polemics against idols (e.g. Letter
h. Also 18:3, 4, 7. Cf. Gen 4:5f.; ISam 1:18; 56f.; Aristides, Apology. 3:2). Jdt 6:9; TJos 7:2. n. This clause is in AP c Syr. Arm. LI 436;
i. Lit. "became (or, were) in shame of inflam­ "and have removed them from my face" added
mation." This clause is very uncertain, but words Syr. (Arm.); also L2 after "men" ("and . . . to this effect were there. "In shame (en aischyne)" gold" omit 435&); gaps rest. It could be part of
is strange in this context; a word expressing phys­ the text, but the position is awkward. ical, rather than mental, discomfort would be more o. Cf. Ps 39:9. to the point. p. See 13:9. i. The reading "and . . . (me)": (F Syr. Arm.And I, the miserable one, have come to believe them
and fall into error. And I have despised him
and spoken wicked (words) about him,
and did not know that he is your son. 14 (in For who among men will give birth to such beauty
and such great wisdom and virtue and power,
as (owned by) the all-beautiful Joseph? is Lord, I commit him to you,q
because I love him beyond my (own) soul/
(12) Preserve him in the wisdom of your grace. And you, Lord, commit me to him for a maidservant and slave. And I will make his bed
and wash his feet
and wait on him
and be a slave for him and serve him for ever (and) ever.*
B. ASENETH'S ACCEPTANCE
A man descends from heaven, introduces himself as chief of the angels, and orders
Aseneth to dress again
1 (i) 14 And* when Aseneth had ceased making confession to the Lord, behold, the morning
(2) star rose out of heaven in the east. And Aseneth saw it and rejoiced and said, '"So the
Lord God listened to my prayer, because this star rose as a messenger4 and herald of the
20) light of the great day."c "And Aseneth kept looking,d and behold, close to the morning
3(4) star, the heaven was torn apart* and great and unutterable light appeared/ *And Aseneth
saw (it) and fell on (her) face on the ashes.8 And a manh came to her from heaven and
4,5(5) stood by Aseneth's head. *And he called her and said, 44Aseneth, Aseneth."' #And she
said, 44 Who is he that calls me, because the door of my chamber is closed, and the tower
6(6) is high, and how then did he come into my chamber?" *And the man called her a second
q. Cf. e.g. Acts 14:23; 20:32; IPet 4:19. tische und gattungsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen
r. Cf. Apuleius 5.6.6. (Frankfurter Theologische Studien 4; Frankfurt am
s. Cf. 6:8. Main, 1970) pp. 99-127. f. 44Light" is a must for heavenly appearances. 14 a. 44 And. . . saw": Gk. text with full apparatus It emanates from them (as e.g. vs. 9) or directly
in C. Burchard, "Zum Text von 'Joseph und from heaven (as here).9) or directly
in C. Burchard, "Zum Text von 'Joseph und from heaven (as here). The sky is torn apart and
Aseneth,' " JSJ 1 (1970) 3-34, see 30-34. On the supernatural light which fills the upper world
the form of 14:1-9 cf. Acts 9:1-8 and below vs. leaks out (cf. also Acts 9:3 parallel). So the Gk. 6. In function the heavenly man's visit (chs. 14- should not be translated "a light" (Rie, Phil). 17) is not parallel to Jesus' appearance according g. Also vs. 10. The proper reaction; cf. e.g. to Acts 9:3-8 (see above 6:1), but to Saul's vision Dan 8:17f.; ApAb 10:2; TJob 3:4; Acts 9:4 parallel. referred to in Acts 9:12 and the angel's visit to h. The reading "a man" (anthropos): a FG LI
Cornelius in Acts 10:3-7; cf. also Apuleius 11.5.1- 436 Phil; "(one) similar to a man" c (Arm.); "a
6.6. man of light" B; "the man of God" D; "an angel"
b. Gk. aggelos, which may also mean "angel," W; "the angel of the Lord" (435& Ngr); "a bright
but4 'messenger'' seems to go better with4"herald.'' angel" Slav.; "a voice" E; destroyed Syr. Similar
Besides, the star is not identical with the man (vs. variants occur at each mention of the man below,
3). On the morning star as a symbol of new light, with "angel" or the like dominating in a E LI
life, and renovation, cf. 2Pet 1:11; Rev 2:28; R. 435& Ngr. (Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 21). Staats, "Die Sonntagnachtgottesdienste der christ- Doubtless the "man" was promoted to "angel,"
lichen Fruhzeit," ZNW 66 (1975) 242-63, see esp. rather than vice versa, as 19:5, 9 confirm, where
pp. 255f. 44man" is attested by virtually all witnesses. c. The first day of creation which will be the i. Also vs. 6. Double address is frequent in
day of reformation (cf. 2Cor 4:6) or just the day Jewish and early Christian literature, e.g. Gen 46:2;
of salvation (OdesSol 41:4; cf. dies salutaris Apu­ TJob 3:1; 24:1; 25:9; Lk 10:41; Acts 9:4; Berger,
leius 11.5.4). The Day of Atonement can also be Auferstehung, p. 436, n. 31.L2); omit a c; gaps rest. Vs. 10 is as follows: "But
"In sackcloth and ashes" is on record only at TJos you, my Lord (God added A), rescue me from the
15:2; Mt 11:21 parallel Lk 10:13. many deeds of ignorance of mine, and pardon me
b. Cf. lTim5:5;4Mac 16:10. because I, being a virgin and unwitting, have fallen
c. See 2:8. into error" (transposed here from vss. 12b and
d. Cf. Micah 7:10; Zech 9:3. "Broad street" 13a) AP (Q); omit c Syr. Arm. L2; vss. lOf. omit
means highway (also 24:20). "Mud of the street" G; 10-12 omit d; 10-12a omit F; gaps EW LI
is a common phrase, often employed proverbially, Slav. Ngr. e.g. Ps 18:43 = 2Sam 22:43; lQSb 5.27. k. Cf. TJob 40:4; Jn 16:30; 17:7; Acts 12:11;
e. See 10:13. 20:25. f. F c D Syr. Arm. 436 Slav.; omit a B Phil; 1. See 8:5. gaps rest. m. Not consonant with 10:12; 11:4, but with a
g. Cf. Ps 22:16. point made in polemics against idols (e.g. Letter
h. Also 18:3, 4, 7. Cf. Gen 4:5f.; ISam 1:18; 56f.; Aristides, Apology. 3:2). Jdt 6:9; TJos 7:2. n. This clause is in AP c Syr. Arm. LI 436;
i. Lit. "became (or, were) in shame of inflam­ "and have removed them from my face" added
mation." This clause is very uncertain, but words Syr. (Arm.); also L2 after "men" ("and . . . to this effect were there. "In shame (en aischyne)" gold" omit 435&); gaps rest. It could be part of
is strange in this context; a word expressing phys­ the text, but the position is awkward. ical, rather than mental, discomfort would be more o. Cf. Ps 39:9. to the point. p. See 13:9. i. The reading "and . . . (me)": (F Syr. Arm.

436, n. 31. The angel addresses
called "The Great Day" (Isa 1:13 LXX; Aristides, Aseneth twice before beginning to deliver his
Apology, 14:4), but it is on vii-10, not iv-25. message. The idea that a heavenly being has to
I d. 4 4 And . . . looking" (b c Arm. LI L2 Ngr); call three times before it can be believed may be
omit a d; destroyed Syr.; gap Slav. back of this (cf. e.g. LAB 53:4; Jn 21:15-18; Acts
e. Cf. e.g. Mk 1:10; ShepHerm Vision 1.1.4. 10:10-16; Berger, Auferstehung, pp. 158f.; 451-
On the motif generally, see F. Lentzen-Deis, Die 54, nn. 85-93). See also 4:3; 11:3; Mk 14:32-42
Taufe Jesu nach den Synoptikern: Literarkri- parallel.7 time and said, "Aseneth, Aseneth."j »And she said, "Behold, (here) 1 (am), Lord. Who
8(7) are you, tell me." #And the man said, "I am the chief of the house of the Lord and
commander of the whole host of the Most High.k Rise and stand on your feet,1 and 1 will
tell you what I have to say."m
9(8) And Aseneth raised her head" and saw, and behold,0 (there was) a man in every respect
(9) similar to Joseph,0 by the robe and the crown and the royal staff, 'except0- that his face was
like lightning, and his eyes like sunshine, and the hairs of his head like a flame of fire of
a burning torch/ and hands and feet like iron shining forth from a fire, and sparks shot
iO(io) forth from his hands and feet. *And Aseneth saw (it) and fell on her face at his feet on the
n do ground. And Aseneth was filled with great fear, and all of her limbs trembled. «And the
man said to her, "Courage, and do not be afraid,5 but rise and stand on your feet, and 1
12(12) will tell you what I have to say." *And Aseneth rose and stood on her feet. And the man
said to her, "Proceed unhindered into your second chamber and put off your black tunic of
mourning, and the sackcloth put off your waist, and shake off those ashes from your head,
d3) and wash your face and your hands with living water, 'and dress in a new linen robe (as
yet) untouched' and distinguished and gird your waist (with) the new twin girdle of your
13 (14) virginity.«And the
man said to her, "Courage, and do not be afraid,5 but rise and stand on your feet, and 1
12(12) will tell you what I have to say." *And Aseneth rose and stood on her feet. And the man
said to her, "Proceed unhindered into your second chamber and put off your black tunic of
mourning, and the sackcloth put off your waist, and shake off those ashes from your head,
d3) and wash your face and your hands with living water, 'and dress in a new linen robe (as
yet) untouched' and distinguished and gird your waist (with) the new twin girdle of your
13 (14) virginity. »And come (back) to me, and 1 will tell you what 1 have to say."
And Aseneth hurried and went into her second chamber where the chests (containing)
14(15)
her ornaments were, and opened her coffer, and took a new linen robe, distinguished (and
d6) as yet) untouched, and undressed the black tunic of mourning and put off the sackcloth
from her waist, and dressed in her distinguished (and as yet) untouched linen robe, and
girded herself with the twin girdle of her virginity, one girdle around her waist, and another
15 (17) girdle upon her breast." • And she shook off the ashes from her head, and washed her hands
and her face with living water. And she took an (as yet) untouched and distinguished linen
veil and covered her head. The heavenly man announces Aseneth's acceptance with God and her marriage to
Joseph
i (i) 15 And she went to the man into her first chamber and stood before him. And the man
said to her, "Remove the veil from your head, and for what purpose did you do this?8 For
j. Vss. 6-8 represent a traditional form to start have been interpreted as being angels appearing in
a dialogue, cf. e.g. Gen 27:18f.; 31:11-13; 46:2f.; the form of such persons (Aptowitzer, HUCA 1
Jub 44:5; ApAb 8:2-5; 9:1-5; Poimandres, If.; [1924] 278f.; cf. also Acts 9:12) are no parallels
Acts 9:4f.; also in shorter form, e.g. TJob 3:If.; to the thought here. Acts 9:10f.; 10:3-5; cf. above 4:3-6. See G. q.See G. q. The details of the angel's description are
Lohfink, Paulus vor Damaskus (Stuttgarter Bibel- traditional, cf. e.g. Dan 10:6; ApAb 17:12; ApZeph
studien 4; Stuttgart, 1965); Burchard, Zeuge, pp. 9:3f.;Mt 28:3; Rev 1:13-16; 10:1. 88f.; Berger, Auferstehung, pp. 154-59; 436-54, r. Gk. hypolampados kaiomenes A; "from a
nn. 33-93. burning torch {hypo Lk.)" P c; omit G d Arm. LI
k. Also 21:21. There are many variants; cf. also L2; destroyed Syr.; gaps Q EFW Ngr. Gk. hypo-
Eth. (see Intro.). Witnesses a D Slav. Ngr. Phil lampas is rare, and the meaning "torch" is uncer­
(gap B) have "commander-in-chief {archistrate- tain; but it is apparently required in Acts 20:8 D. gos)" someplace in this verse and later on (cf. The report in Bauer-Arndt-Gingrich {Greek-English
Josh 5:14). This is the conventional title of Michael Lexicon [Chicago, 1957]) is garbled. (Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, p. 178); and he is s. Also 23:16; 28:7. This is a traditional exhor­
meant certainly. The angels' hosts (cf. e.g. Lk tation, e.g. 4Ezra 6:33, LAB 6:9; 20:5; Mk 6:50
2:13) are traditionally thought of as being organized parallel. like a monarch's court (in the NT "house of God" t. Or "not to be touched, pure," as in vss. 14,
has become an epithet of the Church, e.g. ITim 15. 3:15) or an army (see 25:6) with Michael at its u. Unusual. The two girdles seem to be a special
head. mark of virginity; according to 3:6 and 18:6 Aseneth
I. Also vs. 11. Cf. e.g. Josh 5:14; Acts 26:16. wears only one, presumably around her waist. m. Also vs. 11. Cf. e.g. Ezek 2:1; 4Ezra 7:2; Girdles around (or above?) the breast are mentioned
Acts 9:6; 22:10. in ApZeph 9:4; Rev 1:13; 15:6 {BJ has "waist"
n. Aseneth starts to obey the angel's order but in both instances), but they seem to be in lieu of
finds at once that she cannot do it. the ordinary ones. Job's daughters are given mul­
o. "Raise, see, and behold" e.g. Gen 37:25; ticolored girdles to gird their breasts (TJob 46:9),
2Sam 13:34; cf. further 10:16.436, n. 31. The angel addresses
called "The Great Day" (Isa 1:13 LXX; Aristides, Aseneth twice before beginning to deliver his
Apology, 14:4), but it is on vii-10, not iv-25. message. The idea that a heavenly being has to
I d. 4 4 And . . . looking" (b c Arm. LI L2 Ngr); call three times before it can be believed may be
omit a d; destroyed Syr.; gap Slav. back of this (cf. e.g. LAB 53:4; Jn 21:15-18; Acts
e. Cf. e.g. Mk 1:10; ShepHerm Vision 1.1.4. 10:10-16; Berger, Auferstehung, pp. 158f.; 451-
On the motif generally, see F. Lentzen-Deis, Die 54, nn. 85-93). See also 4:3; 11:3; Mk 14:32-42
Taufe Jesu nach den Synoptikern: Literarkri- parallel.

Gen 37:25; ticolored girdles to gird their breasts (TJob 46:9),
2Sam 13:34; cf. further 10:16. and these seem to be additional, but they convey
p. Michael holds the post in heaven which protection against the devil, eternal life, and mi­
Joseph holds in Egypt: second only to the supreme raculous creativity in poetry and music (TJob 46-
ruler. But he is not Joseph, nor does he appear in 50), and have nothing to do with virginity. his guise. Visionary appearances of historical per­
sons (such as Josephus, Ant 11.8.5 §334) which 15 a. The reading "and . . . this": FW c (Arm.)2(2) you are a chaste virgin today, and your head is like that of a young man."b »And Aseneth
removed the veil from her head. Andc the man said to her, "Courage, Aseneth, chaste virgin. Behold, I have heardd all
3 the words of your confession and your prayer. •Behold, I have also seen* the humiliation
and the affliction of the seven days of your want (of food). Behold, from your tears and
4(3) these ashes, plenty of mud has formed before your face. •Courage, Aseneth, chaste virgin. For behold, your name was writtenf in the book of the living8 in heaven; in the beginning
of the book, as the very first of all, your name was written by my finger,h and it will not
5(4) be erased forever. • Behold, from today, you will be renewed and formed anew and made
alive again,1 and you will eat blessed bread of life, and drink a blessed cup of immortality,
6(5) and anoint yourself with blessed ointment of incorruptibility. •Courage, Aseneth, chaste
virgin. Behold, I have given* you today to Joseph for a bride, and he himself will be your
bridegroom for ever (and) ever. 7(6) t4Andk your name shall no longer be called Aseneth, but your name shall be City of
Refuge,1 because in you many nations will take refuge with the Lord God, the Most High,
and under your wings many peoples trusting in the Lord Godm will be sheltered," and behind
your walls0 will be guarded those who attach themselves to the Most High Godp in the name
Ll L2; omit a E d; destroyed Syr.; gaps G Ngr. "renewed and made alive again (omit D W? Ngr.)"
b. Aseneth is not declared androgynous (against FW d Arm. (Ll) Ngr.; "renewed" EG; destroyed
Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, p. 181); her head Syr.; gaps Q 435&. Cf. Gen 2:7. The two last
is compared to, not identified with, a young man's. verbs of the triad may be interpreting the first as
This may signify that virginity gives a certain in ICor 2:3; 4:9; Eph 2:5; 3:6 (Burchard, ZNW 61
equality to the sexes (see 7:7), or that in Judaism [1970], 169).The two last
is compared to, not identified with, a young man's. verbs of the triad may be interpreting the first as
This may signify that virginity gives a certain in ICor 2:3; 4:9; Eph 2:5; 3:6 (Burchard, ZNW 61
equality to the sexes (see 7:7), or that in Judaism [1970], 169). both sexes are alike before God. It probably does j. See 15:2. not mean that JosAsen suggests Jewish virgins k. Vss. 7-8: Gk. with full apparatus in Bur­
should go unveiled (as perhaps some Corinthians chard, Untersuchungen, pp. 55-67. This is one of
did, cf. ICor 11:2-16 and the commentaries thereon), the most badly damaged passages of the book,
because in 18:6 Aseneth puts on a veil again, albeit especially in the second half of vs. 7. Vs. 7a is
"like a bride." taken up in the Passion of St. Irene (Burchard,
c. On vss. 2-10 cf. Apuleius 11.5.1-6.6. There Untersuchungen, p. 135) in a form apparently close
is no analogy to Aseneth's role as City of Refuge, to b. but Lucius will become a model to the "unreli- 1. Proselytes often took new names, but there is
gious" (11.15.4). more to the phenomenon here. Aseneth does not
d. First person: GFW c Arm. L2; third ("the choose a name, she is given one from above like
Lord" or the like): a d Ll; destroyed Syr.; gaps E others in biblical tradition, in particular those who
Ngr. Similarly, vs. 3 "I have seen" (GFW c Arm. have a significance for God's people as a whole
L2 versus AP Ll E; destroyed Syr.; gaps Q d (e.g. Gen 17:5, 15; 32:29; 41:45; Isa 62:4f.; IBar
Ngr); vs. 4 "was written," first instance (a G d 5:4; Zech 8:3; Mk 3:16 parallel; Mt 16:18; Berger,
Arm. Ll Ngr. versus W c L2, perhaps E, illegible Auferstehung, pp. 198; 562-65, nn. 394-405). F; destroyed Syr.); "was written," second instance That she is called a "City" is necessitated by the
(W[?J c Arm. versus L2, illegible F; destroyed concept underlying 15:7 (see Intro.). "City of
Syr.; gaps rest); vs. 6 "I have given" (b c Arm."City of
Syr.; gaps rest); vs. 6 "I have given" (b c Arm. Refuge ipolis kataphyges)" may have been sug­
Ll L2 versus a d Ngr.; destroyed Syr.). In the gested by Zech 2:15 LXX (cf. Isa 54:15; Jer 27
retrospective 19:5 "I have given" has no variant [50]:5) as taken up in the following clause. Perhaps
in the positive text (illegible F; gap d). On the a pun was intended; poiis sounds much WV&pollois,
strength of this the first person was adopted into the dative plural of polloi "many" (the Vortage of
the text (against Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 47) Ll actually may have read pollois kataphyges). except in 15:4, where there is little support for it. Possibly there is also a reminiscence of Num 35:27f. e. See 15:2. (the only parallels in LXX and the other Gk. f. See 15:2. versions of the OT). Attempts to explain "City of
g. The reading "of the living (plu.)": EGW c Refuge" on the basis of a pun in Heb. or Aram,
Arm. Ll 436; "of life" a d 435& Ngr.; illegible have failed because there is no word resembling
F; destroyed Syr. This book (also vs. 12x; usually *As*nat which could mean "refuge"; but the author
"of life") is a sort of heavenly citizens' register, may have been familiar with an etymology of the
a common, Jewish and Christian idea with roots name as meaning "ruin" (cf. Heb. "ason "calam­
way back in the ancient Near East; cf. e.g. Ex ity") which was known to Jerome and others
32:32f.; Ps 87:6; Jub 30:22; 1QM 12. If.; Lk 10:20; (Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 92-95). Rev 20:12, 15. See L. Koep, Das himmlische Buch m. The reading "trusting . . . God": (E) Arm. in Antike und Christentum (Theophaneia 8; Bonn, (Ll 436); omit a G d 435&; destroyed Syr.; gaps
1952). FW c Slav. Ngr. h. "For . . . finger": Gk. with full apparatus n. Cf. e.g. Ps 17:8; 61:5; 63:8. in Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. 54f.; "in the o. Lit. "in your wall." Gk. teichos may also
beginning . . . finger" (FW c Arm. L2); omit E mean "fortress."
Ngr.; destroyed Syr.; gaps a G d Ll. p. Gk.Gen 37:25; ticolored girdles to gird their breasts (TJob 46:9),
2Sam 13:34; cf. further 10:16. and these seem to be additional, but they convey
p. Michael holds the post in heaven which protection against the devil, eternal life, and mi­
Joseph holds in Egypt: second only to the supreme raculous creativity in poetry and music (TJob 46-
ruler. But he is not Joseph, nor does he appear in 50), and have nothing to do with virginity. his guise. Visionary appearances of historical per­
sons (such as Josephus, Ant 11.8.5 §334) which 15 a. The reading "and . . . this": FW c (Arm.)

p. Gk. hoi proskeimenoi to Theo is a standing
i. The reading "renewed (see 8:9) . . . again" epithet of the proselytes; cf. e.g. Isa 56:6. AP (436) Phil; "renewed and formed anew" c;(7) of Repentance. For Repentance0- is in the heavens, an exceedingly beautiful and good
daughter of the Most High. And she herself entreats' the Most High God for you at all
times8 and for all who repent in the name of the Most High God, because he is (the) father
of Repentance. And she herself is guardian of all virgins,1 and loves you very much, and
is beseeching the Most High for you at all times5 and for all who repent she prepared a
place of rest in the heavens." And she will renew all who repent, and wait on them herself
8(8) for ever (and) ever. #And Repentance is exceedingly beautiful, a virgin pure and laughingv
always, and she is gentle and meek. And, therefore, the Most High Father loves her,w and
all the angels stand in awe of her. And I, too, love her exceedingly, because she is also
my sister." And because she loves you virgins, I love you, too. 9(9) "And behold, I am going away to Joseph and will tell him about you everything I have
to say. And Joseph will come to you today, and see you, and rejoice over you, and love
you, and he will be your bridegroom, and you will be a bride for him for ever (and) ever. iO(io) And now listen to me, Aseneth, chaste virgin, and dress in your wedding robe, the ancient
and firsty robe which is laid up in your chamber since eternity, and put around you all your
di) wedding ornaments, and adorn yourself as a good bride, and go meet Joseph.And Joseph will come to you today, and see you, and rejoice over you, and love
you, and he will be your bridegroom, and you will be a bride for him for ever (and) ever. iO(io) And now listen to me, Aseneth, chaste virgin, and dress in your wedding robe, the ancient
and firsty robe which is laid up in your chamber since eternity, and put around you all your
di) wedding ornaments, and adorn yourself as a good bride, and go meet Joseph. For behold,
he himself is coming to you today, and he will see you and rejoice."
Aseneth tries to ascertain the heavenly man's name
iid2) And when the man had finished speaking these words/ Aseneth rejoiced exceedingly
with great joy about all these words and fell down at his feet and prostrated himself face
12 (13) down to the ground before him, and said to him, •"Blessed be the Lord your God the Most
High who sent you out to rescue me from the darkness and to bring me up from the
i2x foundations of the abyss/2 and blessed be your name forever.02 •Whatc2 is your name, Lord;
tell me in order that I may praise and glorify you for ever (and) ever."0"2 And the man said
to her, "Why do you seek this, my name, Aseneth? My name is in the heavens in the book
of the Most High, written by the finger of God in the beginning of the book before all (the
others), because I am chief of the house of the Most High. And all names written in the
book of the Most High are unspeakable, and man is not allowed to pronounce nor hear
them in this world, because those names are exceedingly great and wonderful and laudable."
Aseneth invites the heavenly man to take food. The mysterious honeycomb which is
bread of life
13 And Aseneth said, "If 1 have found favor in your sight/2 Lord, and will know that you
will do all your words that you have spoken to me, let your maidservant speak before you."
q. Angels representing, or presiding over, hu­ She is his assistant in charge of everything prepa­
man virtues are well known in Judaism.The mysterious honeycomb which is
bread of life
13 And Aseneth said, "If 1 have found favor in your sight/2 Lord, and will know that you
will do all your words that you have spoken to me, let your maidservant speak before you."
q. Angels representing, or presiding over, hu­ She is his assistant in charge of everything prepa­
man virtues are well known in Judaism. IEn 40:9 ratory to a proselyte's acceptance, which is then
calls the angel of repentance Phanuel; he is anon­ ratified by him. ymous in ShepHerm Vision 5.8; Clement of Al­ y. The reading "and first": AP c (d) L2; omit
exandria, Quis dives salv., 42:18; metanoia (see EFW; destroyed Syr.; gaps Q G Arm. LI Slav. 9:2) is personified also in TGad 5:7f. In the Ngr. Also cf. 18:5; Lk 15:22; Burchard, ZNW 61
romances, cf. Achilles Tatius 6.10.4; Apuleius (1970) 160. 6.8.3; 6.9.2; 6.24.4. z. Cf. e.g. Mt 7:28. r. Angels (Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 [1924] 292) a2. The reading "into the light": added AP d;
and the patriarchs (e.g. Philo, Praem, 166) were omit FGW c Arm. LI L2 Ngr.; destroyed Syr.;
regarded as intercessors. In Heb, Christ, the heav­ gaps Q E Slav. Perhaps this should be adopted into
enly highpriest, fulfills this office. the text. On vs. 12 cf. further Melito of Sardis,
s. Lit. "every hour." Or does this mean "at Passover Homily, 68; VitaAesopiG, 5. On "dark­
every regular hour (of prayer)"? ness" cf. Ps 107:14; Isa 42:7; Col 1:13, on "abyss"
t. I.e. all nations (Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 [1924] cf. above 12:11. 293f.), or all individuals who are prepared for b2. Also 19:8; cf. Ps 72:19. conversion through virginity (see 7:7). c2. "What . . . said" {b c Arm. LI L2 Ngr. u. Cf. Jn 14:2f.; G. Fischer, Wohnungen. On Br); omit a d; destroyed Syr.; gap Slav. Gk. with
"rest" see 8:9 and Intro. Witness d (gap Slav.) full apparatus in Burchard, Untersuchungen, pp. has a "heavenly bridal chamber" instead, which 68-73. On Aseneth's demand cf. e.g. Gen 32:30;
may be gnostic (GPhil; cf.p. Gk. hoi proskeimenoi to Theo is a standing
i. The reading "renewed (see 8:9) . . . again" epithet of the proselytes; cf. e.g. Isa 56:6. AP (436) Phil; "renewed and formed anew" c;

e.g. Gen 32:30;
may be gnostic (GPhil; cf. Philonenko, Joseph et Judg 13:6, 16f.; LAB 42:10; TLevi 5:5f.; Berger,
Ase'neth, p. 184). Auferstehung, pp. 156, 443f., nn. 56-60. v. Cf. Lk 15:7, 10. d2. Same motivation in Judg 13:17; TLevi 5:5;
w. As he loves Wisdom (WisSol 8:3). Cf. Jn Berger, Auferstehung, p. 444, n. 59. 10:17. e2. Traditional phrase, e.g. Gen 47:29; Esth 5:8;
x. Repentance and Michael seem to form a team. 7:3; 8:5.14 And the man said to her, "Speak (up)." And Aseneth stretched out her right hand and put
d4) it on his knees" and said to him, "I beg you, Lord, sit down a little on this bed, because
this bed is pure and undefiled, and a man or woman never sat on it. And I will set a table
before you, and bring you bread and you will eat, and bring you from my storeroom old
and good wine, the exhalation of which82 will go up till heaven, and you will drink from
15 it. And after this you will go out (on) your way." »And the man said to her, "Hurry and
bring (it) quickly."
I (i) 16 And Aseneth hurried and set a new8 table before him and went to provide bread for
2(2) him. And the man said to her, "Bring me also a honeycomb. "b «And Aseneth stood still
3(3) and was distressed,0 because she did not have a honeycomb in her storeroom. #And the
4 man said to her, "Why do you stand still?" «And Aseneth said, "I will send a boy to the
suburb, because the field which is our inheritance is close,d and he will quickly bring you
5 a honeycomb from there, and I will set (it) before you, Lord." »And the man said to her,
"Proceed and enter your storeroom, and you will find a honeycomb lying upon the table. 6 Pick it up and bring (it) here." *And Aseneth said, "Lord, a honeycomb is not in my
7 storeroom." #And the man said, "Proceed and you will find (one)."
8(4) And Aseneth entered her storeroom and found a honeycomb lying on the table. And the
comb was big and white as snow and full of honey. And that honey was like dew frome
9 heaven and its exhalation like breath of life/ #And Aseneth wondered and said in herself,
Did then this comb come out of the man's mouth, because its exhalation is like the breath
io(5) of this man's mouth?8 *And Aseneth took that comb and brought it to the man, and put it
on the table which she had prepared before him.h
And the man said to her, "How is it that you said that a honeycomb is not in my
II (6) storeroom?And the
comb was big and white as snow and full of honey. And that honey was like dew frome
9 heaven and its exhalation like breath of life/ #And Aseneth wondered and said in herself,
Did then this comb come out of the man's mouth, because its exhalation is like the breath
io(5) of this man's mouth?8 *And Aseneth took that comb and brought it to the man, and put it
on the table which she had prepared before him.h
And the man said to her, "How is it that you said that a honeycomb is not in my
II (6) storeroom? And behold, you have brought a wonderful honeycomb." «And Aseneth was
afraid and said, "Lord, I did not have a honeycomb in my storeroom at any time, but you
spoke and it came into being.4 Surely this came out of your mouth, because its exhalation
is like breath of your mouth."
12.13 (7) And the man smiled at Aseneth's understanding,' *and called her to himself, and stretched
out his right hand, and grasped her head and shook her head with his right hand. And
Aseneth was afraid of the man's hand, because sparks shot forth from his hand as from
bubbling (melted)k iron. And Aseneth looked, gazing with her eyes at the man's hand. 14 And the man saw (it) and smiled and said, "Happy are you,1 Aseneth, because the ineffable
f2. 44And Aseneth . . . knees" (c Arm. Ll 436); 14); gaps G d Ll Ngr.; omit rest. omit a G 435&; destroyed Syr.; gaps rest. Gk. text f. Both "exhalation" and "breath" represent
with full apparatus in Burchard, Untersuchungen, Gk. pnoe. A pun; see also vss. 9,11. The description
pp. 74-76. On the invitation cf. Gen 18:1-5; Judg shows that the comb represents manna (cf. e.g. Ex
13:15f.; ISam 28:22f.; Vita Aesopi G, 4. This 16:14, 31; WisSol 19:21; SibOr 3.746); see further
narrative does not represent a magic rite to entice vs. 14. Generally see R. Meyer, "manna," TDNT,
a daimon parhedros (against Philonenko, Joseph vol. 4, 462-66; B. J. Malina, The Palestinian
et Asineth, p. 97). Manna Tradition (AGAJU 7; Leiden, 1968). g2. Lit.e.g. Gen 32:30;
may be gnostic (GPhil; cf. Philonenko, Joseph et Judg 13:6, 16f.; LAB 42:10; TLevi 5:5f.; Berger,
Ase'neth, p. 184). Auferstehung, pp. 156, 443f., nn. 56-60. v. Cf. Lk 15:7, 10. d2. Same motivation in Judg 13:17; TLevi 5:5;
w. As he loves Wisdom (WisSol 8:3). Cf. Jn Berger, Auferstehung, p. 444, n. 59. 10:17. e2. Traditional phrase, e.g. Gen 47:29; Esth 5:8;
x. Repentance and Michael seem to form a team. 7:3; 8:5.

g2. Lit. "of which its exhalation"; cf. ICIem g. The reading "because . . . mouth": (FW
21:9 (so it is probably not a Semitism). Syr. Arm. Ll L2); omit a c Ngr.; gaps EG d. This
could be a statement, rather than a question. 16 a. Gk. kainen FG c Ll L2; "most handsome" h. The reading "which . . . him": (Arm. Syr. Ngr.; 4'empty (kenen, pronounced like kainen)" 436); omit a c Ngr.; gaps b d Ll 435&. AP Arm. W; omit Q; destroyed Syr.; gaps E d i. The reading "you . . . being": FW Arm. Rum. Syr. (Ll) 436 (Ngr.); 44as you said, so (AP only)
b. Lit. "comb of honey (Jkerion melitos)" or it came into being" a d; "you however spoke" c;
"of bee (melissis)"; also in vss. 2-11. Witnesses gaps EG 435&. "Came into being (gegone)" might
a d Ll generally support the former variant, b c also be rendered 4'happened."
Arm. L2 (Ngr.) the latter; but there are exceptions. j. Also see vs. 14. A smiling angel; cf. e.g. The rendering 4'honeycomb" may do justice to ShepHerm Vision 3.8.2. both variants, as "bee" perhaps is used in meton­ k. Gk. kochlazontos (or ka-). Erroneously och-
ymy for 4'honey." lazontos, "crowding," Bat ("redhot" Br, on the
c. 44And Aseneth . . . distressed": many vari­ strength of Syr. Arm.). Batiffol's error induced
ants. Ngr. (435&) prefix 44And as Aseneth heard Riessler (TQ 103 [1922] 2) to suggest a confusion
(this)," which is in JosAsen's style. of Heb. suq I, "to pour" with sdq II, "to be
d. Cf. Chariton 1.13.5. narrow"; hence his translation "geschmolznem."
e. The reading "third": added Syr. 436 (see vs. 1. Cf. e.g. Mt 16:17.mysteries'" of the Most High have been revealed to you, and happy (are) all who attach
themselves to the Lord God in repentance, because they will eat from this comb. For this
(8) comb is (full of the) spirit of life. And the bees of the paradise of delight" have made this
from the dew of the roses of life that are in the paradise of God. And all the angels of God
eat of it and all the chosen of God and all the sons of the Most High,0 because this is a
comb of life, and everyone who eats of it will not die for ever (and) ever."
is (9) And the man stretched out his right hand and broke a small portion off the comb, and he
himself ate and what was left he put with his hand into Aseneth's mouth, andp said to her,
16 "Eat." And she ate. «And the man said to Aseneth, "Behold, you have eaten bread of
life, and drunk a cup of immortality, and been anointed with ointment of incorruptibility. Behold, from today your flesh0- (will) flourish' like flowers of life from the ground5 of the
Most High, and your bones will grow strong1 like the cedars of the paradise of delight of
God, and untiring powers will embrace you, and your youth will not see old age, and your
beauty will not fail for ever.u And you shall be like a walled mother-city of" all who take
i6x refuge with the name of the Lord God, the king of the ages." #And the man stretched out
his right hand and touched the comb where* he had broken off (a portion), and it was
restored and filled up, and at once it became whole as it was in the beginning. The heavenly man marks the comb with a cross and makes bees, which encircle
Aseneth, rise from it
n (io) Andx again the man stretched out his right hand and put his (fore)flnger on the edge of
the comb looking east and drew it over the edge looking west, and the wayy of his finger
di) became like blood.Behold, from today your flesh0- (will) flourish' like flowers of life from the ground5 of the
Most High, and your bones will grow strong1 like the cedars of the paradise of delight of
God, and untiring powers will embrace you, and your youth will not see old age, and your
beauty will not fail for ever.u And you shall be like a walled mother-city of" all who take
i6x refuge with the name of the Lord God, the king of the ages." #And the man stretched out
his right hand and touched the comb where* he had broken off (a portion), and it was
restored and filled up, and at once it became whole as it was in the beginning. The heavenly man marks the comb with a cross and makes bees, which encircle
Aseneth, rise from it
n (io) Andx again the man stretched out his right hand and put his (fore)flnger on the edge of
the comb looking east and drew it over the edge looking west, and the wayy of his finger
di) became like blood. And he stretched out his hand the second time and put his finger on the
edge of the comb looking north and drew it over to the edge looking south, and the way of
i?x(i2) his finger became like blood. • And Aseneth stood at his left (hand) and watched everything
that the man was doing. i?y(i3) And the man said to the comb, "Come."2 *And bees rose from the cells of that comb,
and the cells were innumerable, ten thousand (times) ten thousand and thousands upon
m. The reading "the ineffable mysteries": AP; to flourishing plants is traditional, e.g. Pss 1:3;
"the mysteries" Q F435&; "the hidden (things)" 92:13-15; Jer 17:8; below 18:9. Flourishing may
G Syr. Arm.; "the ineffable (things)" E c d 436; also symbolize prolific posterity (cf. TSim 6:2;
gaps W (LI) Ngr. Split tradition except in AP, or Targum Isa 53:2). is that reading conflate? Anyway, "mysteries" s. Gk. [apo tes] ges G Syr. Arm. 436; "garden"
should be retained. The revelation concerns the 435&; "spring (peges)" APc; gaps rest. "Ground"
origin of the honeycomb as recognized in vs. II (cf."Ground"
origin of the honeycomb as recognized in vs. II (cf. 18:9) makes a good parallelism with "para­
and its nature as described presently, rather than dise," but "spring" makes sense too. God's mysteries in general. t. Lit. "fat."Cf. Isa 58:11; 66:14. n. LXX translation of "Garden of Eden," e.g. u. Cf. Apuleius 11 6.5f. The fulfillment of this
Gen 3:23. It is in the third heaven, according to begins in 18:9. ApMos 37:5; 3Bar 4:8; 3En 8:1; there are also the v. FG are the only Gk. witnesses from here
manna mills (b. Hag 12b). Manna is "bread of (or down to vs. 16x end. from) heaven," e.g. Neh 9:15; Ps 105:40. w. Or "of which."
o. "The chosen of God" (cf. e.g. Tob 8:15 BA; x. Vs. 17 (G d Syr. Arm. LI 435& Br, also
IEn 39:1; 61:10; ITim 5:21) and "the sons of the Rie, who put vss. 17-17x first half after vs. 23 as
Most High" (e.g. Ps 89:7; see Intro.) might be vss. 24f. on the strength of BD1); omit F; gaps EW
angels or the dead just in paradise, both of which 436 Ngr.; a c have "But the angel whetted the
are credited with eating manna (Ps 75:25; WisSol comb" for vss. 17—I7x. Br gives an idea how
16:20; LAB 19:5; Meyer, TDNT 4, 462-66), or divergent the evidence is. Vs. 17 is the introduction
God's children on earth (17:6; 19:8). Maybe JosAsen to the following verses, rather than an episode by
does not draw a sharp line between angels and itself. So the cruciform mark is preparatory to, and
men, God's elect residing on earth and in heaven. perhaps causal of, the appearance of the bees in
p. The reading from "and" to the end of vs. vs. 17y. See further vs. 23. 16x (all); except omit d; gap W. y. Gk. he hodos D (Syr.) LI (435&) (Br Rie
q. Lit. plural. Phil); "the appearance (to eidosV B Arm. Slav.;
r. Gk. bryousi (present tense): APG c Syr. Br omit G ("the hand" for "of his finger"); gaps
Rie; future Arm. (LI) L2; gaps rest. Gk. bryein rest. Same situation at the second occurrence of
(never LXX, NT only Jas 3:11) does not seem to "the way" (G gap too).g2. Lit. "of which its exhalation"; cf. ICIem g. The reading "because . . . mouth": (FW
21:9 (so it is probably not a Semitism). Syr. Arm. Ll L2); omit a c Ngr.; gaps EG d. This
could be a statement, rather than a question. 16 a. Gk. kainen FG c Ll L2; "most handsome" h. The reading "which . . . him": (Arm. Syr. Ngr.; 4'empty (kenen, pronounced like kainen)" 436); omit a c Ngr.; gaps b d Ll 435&. AP Arm. W; omit Q; destroyed Syr.; gaps E d i. The reading "you . . . being": FW Arm. Rum. Syr. (Ll) 436 (Ngr.); 44as you said, so (AP only)
b. Lit. "comb of honey (Jkerion melitos)" or it came into being" a d; "you however spoke" c;
"of bee (melissis)"; also in vss. 2-11. Witnesses gaps EG 435&. "Came into being (gegone)" might
a d Ll generally support the former variant, b c also be rendered 4'happened."
Arm. L2 (Ngr.) the latter; but there are exceptions. j. Also see vs. 14. A smiling angel; cf. e.g. The rendering 4'honeycomb" may do justice to ShepHerm Vision 3.8.2. both variants, as "bee" perhaps is used in meton­ k. Gk. kochlazontos (or ka-). Erroneously och-
ymy for 4'honey." lazontos, "crowding," Bat ("redhot" Br, on the
c. 44And Aseneth . . . distressed": many vari­ strength of Syr. Arm.). Batiffol's error induced
ants. Ngr. (435&) prefix 44And as Aseneth heard Riessler (TQ 103 [1922] 2) to suggest a confusion
(this)," which is in JosAsen's style. of Heb. suq I, "to pour" with sdq II, "to be
d. Cf. Chariton 1.13.5. narrow"; hence his translation "geschmolznem."
e. The reading "third": added Syr. 436 (see vs. 1. Cf. e.g. Mt 16:17.

bryein rest. Same situation at the second occurrence of
(never LXX, NT only Jas 3:11) does not seem to "the way" (G gap too). occur in the future tense. It can be either transitive z. "And . . . come" (FG Syr. Arm. LI Ngr.);
(Br Rie) or intransitive (cf. parallel clause about omit d Br; gaps rest. In G and LI the man's
the bones). Comparison of the well-being of persons command is addressed to Aseneth.is thousands.82 *And the bees were white as snow, and their wings like purple and like violet
and like scarlet (stuff) and like gold-woven linen cloaks,52 and golden diadems (were) on
19(14) their heads, and they had sharp stings, and they would not injure anyone/2 *And all those
bees encircled Aseneth from feet to head. And other bees were great and chosen like their queens,42 and they rose from the damaged
part of the comb*2 and encircled Aseneth's mouth, and made upon her mouth and her lips
20 a comb similar to the comb which was lying before the man.12 »And all those*2 bees ate of
(is) the comb which was on Aseneth's mouth. And the man said to the bees, "Go off to your
2i.22(i6) place." #And all the bees rose and flew and went away into heaven. *And those who wanted
d7) to injure Aseneth fell to the ground and died. And the man stretched out his staff over the
23 dead bees and said to them, "Rise you, too, and go away to your place." *And the bees
who had died rose and went into the court adjoining Aseneth's house and sought shelter on
the fruit-bearing trees.112
KD 17 And the man said to Aseneth, "Have you seen this thing?"a And she said, "Yes,
2(2) Lord, I have seen all these (things)." #And the man said to her, "So will be all my words
3 (3) which I have spoken to you today." *And the man for the third time stretched out his right
hand, and touched the damaged part* of the comb, and at once fire went up from the table
4 and consumed0 the comb, but the table it did not injure. *And much fragrance came forth
from the burning of the comb, and filled the chamber.*1
The heavenly man blesses Aseneth's seven virgins
(4) And Aseneth said to the man, "Lord, with me are seven virgins ministering to me,
fostered with me from my childhood, born with me in one night, and I love them as my
a2. Cf. Dan 7:10; ApZeph 4:4; 13:1; IEn 40:1; for the ritual. See further vs. 23. 60:1; 71:8; Rev 5:11; lClem 34:6. Is there a g2. Witnesses AP; omit F (Syr.Is there a g2. Witnesses AP; omit F (Syr. 435&); gaps
connection with Deut 33:17? The translations rest. It is not clear whether all bees or just the big
"(times)" and "upon" are lit. "of." Groupc ends ones eat. On vss. 20-22 cf. Eth. (see Intro.). with the first "ten thousand." Vs. 17y is 17 in Rie h2. Cf. Mk 4:32 parallel. The bees episode (vss. (for the beginning see our vs. 17). 17-23 [see especially vs. 17]) is a confirmation
b2. See 2:8. miracle as e.g. 2Kgs 20:8-11; it offers proof that
c2. For a contrast, cf. Rev 9:7-10. all promises of the angel will be fulfilled (17: If.). d2. Beehives were regarded as being governed But the episode has not yet been interpreted satis­
by kings in antiquity, not queens. The author may factorily. Since the bees of paradise have been
have had in mind something like "as befits queens," mentioned as producers of the comb in vs. 14, the
but there is a "queen of the bees" in Epictetus, bees in vss. 17y—23 are perhaps best explained as
Diss., 3.22.99. their like, rather than an allegorical representation
e2. The reading "from . . . comb": (a FG Syr. of some sort. Thus vss. 19-21 could prove that
Arm.); gaps rest. The translation "damaged part" honey such as Aseneth has eaten is made by the
is dubious; it is not in a, and the other witnesses bees of paradise and remains available through her
are not clear; besides, the comb is not broken at (note the correspondence of vs. 19b with vss. 9
this moment (vs. 16). However, 17:3 seems to and lib). Admittedly it is not easy to pursue this
suppose that it is damaged somehow; this would line in vss. 22f., unless we are to understand that
seem to refer back to the angel's manipulations in some of the paradisiac honey-makers will remain
vs. 17. If not, we may have to translate "tablet" with Aseneth for good (cf. Ngr. in 17:2; but why
or "cells" in vs. 19. the vicious ones?) or that natural bees are a4 'fallen"
f2. Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, p. 189) has variety of the heavenly ones.bryein rest. Same situation at the second occurrence of
(never LXX, NT only Jas 3:11) does not seem to "the way" (G gap too). occur in the future tense. It can be either transitive z. "And . . . come" (FG Syr. Arm. LI Ngr.);
(Br Rie) or intransitive (cf. parallel clause about omit d Br; gaps rest. In G and LI the man's
the bones). Comparison of the well-being of persons command is addressed to Aseneth.

Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, p. 189) has variety of the heavenly ones. If allegory was
drawn attention to the vagrant legend that a swarm intended (cf. also vs. 9) we should perhaps equate
of bees descended on Pindar, Plato, Ambrose and the bees to the Israelites, Aseneth's new compa­
others, while in their cradles, symbolizing their triots, rather than to the virgins, the nations or the
future inspiration and eloquence (more on this in like (on bee symbolism generally, cf. W. Telfer,
I. Opelt, "Das Bienenwunder in der Ambrosius- " 'Bees' in Clement of Alexandria," JTS 28 [1926-
biographie des Paulinus von Mai land," VC 22 27] 167-78). The aggressive ones would then
[1968J 38-44). Whatever can be made of this anticipate Dan and Gad as portrayed in chs. 22-
tradition, the meaning of vs. 19 surely is not to 29. But why should they end up in Aseneth's park? credit Aseneth with poetic or theological inspira­ Is it because they will eventually be forgiven? tion, since she is nowhere cast in the role of a
speaker. H. M. I. Gevaryahu, in a conversation, 17 a. Lit. "word (rema)"; a biblicism. Cf. e.g. suggested some connection with the Old Egyptian Lk 2:15. See also 23:11. mouth-opening ritual, believed to infuse the breath b. Lit. "blow, injury (pligi)" AP (Syr. Arm.);
of life into the statues of the gods. But it is not omit Q G d LI 435&; gaps rest. See 16:19. said at this point that Aseneth ate from the comb, c. Cf. Judg 6:21. and besides honey along with butter was also needed d. Cf. Jn 12:3.5(5) sisters. I will call them, and you will bless them as you have blessed me, too." •And the
6 man said, "Call them." •And Aseneth called the seven virgins and stood them before the
man. And the man blessed them and said, "May the Lord God the Most High bless you. And you shall be seven pillars of the City of Refuge,6 and all the fellow inhabitants' of the
chosen of that city will rest upon you for ever (and) ever."
The heavenly man departs
7(6), 8 And the man said to Aseneth, "Put this table away." *And Aseneth turned to put the
table away, and at once the man went away8 out of her sight.1. And Aseneth saw (something)
like a chariot of four horses traveling into heaven toward (the) east. And* the chariot was
like a flame of fire, and the horses like lightning. And the man was standing on that chariot.j
9 And Aseneth said, "(What a) foolish and bold (woman) I (am), because I have spoken
with frankness and said that a man came into my chamber from heaven; and I did not know
that (a) godk came to me. And behold, now he is traveling (back) into heaven to his place."
io(7) And she said in herself, Be gracious, Lord, to your slave, and spare your maidservant,
because I have spoken boldly before you all my words in ignorance. IV. JOSEPH'S AND ASENETH'S MARRIAGE
Joseph's second visit is announced. Aseneth's foster-father notices her fallen face
1 (i) 18 And as Aseneth was still saying these things to herself, behold, a young man from
Pentephres'a servant staff rushed in and said, "Behold, Joseph the Powerful One of God is
coming to us today.JOSEPH'S AND ASENETH'S MARRIAGE
Joseph's second visit is announced. Aseneth's foster-father notices her fallen face
1 (i) 18 And as Aseneth was still saying these things to herself, behold, a young man from
Pentephres'a servant staff rushed in and said, "Behold, Joseph the Powerful One of God is
coming to us today. For a forerunner of his is standing at the gates of our court."6
2 (2) And Aseneth hurried and called her foster-father, the (steward) of her house,c and said to
him, "Hurry and make the house ready and prepare a good dinner, because Joseph the
3 Powerful One of God is coming to us today." »Andd her foster-father saw her, and behold,
her face had fallen from the affliction and the weeping and the fasting of the seven days,
and he was distressed and wept, and he took her right hand and kissed it and said, "What
4 have you, my child,e because your face has fallen so (much)?" *And Aseneth said to him,
"My head is stricken with heavy pain, and the sleep kept away from my eyes/ and therefore
5 my face has fallen."8 #And her foster-father went away and prepared the house and the
dinner. e. The reading "seven . . . Refuge": (E Syr. 18 a. Witnesses EFW Syr. Arm. Ll 436 (Ngr.)
Arm.) Ll (prefixes "like"; Batiffol's edition omits Br (in footnote); "P. her father's" G; "her fa­
"seven") 435&; "pillars (seven pillars Rie) of ther's" 435&; "Joseph's" a d. refuge of seven cities" a (Bat marks "pillars of b. "For . . . court" (b Syr. Arm. Ll L2); omit
refuge" off as illegible in A); gaps rest. Cf. Prov a d Ngr.(?). 9:1; Philo, Quaes Ex, 1.21 on 12:17; Gal 2:9; Rev c. The reading "her foster father . . . house":
3:12; ICIem 5:2; ShepHerm Vision 3.8.2. See FW (Syr. Arm.) 436; "her foster father" G Ngr. further Intro. (adding "or, her grandfather"); "the (steward) of
f. Gk. kai synoikoi (fern.), i.e. "women im­ her house" a E d 435&; gap Ll. The man who is
migrants." probably not identical with Pentephres' steward
g. The reading "went away": (AP EFW d Syr.Philonenko (Joseph et Asineth, p. 189) has variety of the heavenly ones. If allegory was
drawn attention to the vagrant legend that a swarm intended (cf. also vs. 9) we should perhaps equate
of bees descended on Pindar, Plato, Ambrose and the bees to the Israelites, Aseneth's new compa­
others, while in their cradles, symbolizing their triots, rather than to the virgins, the nations or the
future inspiration and eloquence (more on this in like (on bee symbolism generally, cf. W. Telfer,
I. Opelt, "Das Bienenwunder in der Ambrosius- " 'Bees' in Clement of Alexandria," JTS 28 [1926-
biographie des Paulinus von Mai land," VC 22 27] 167-78). The aggressive ones would then
[1968J 38-44). Whatever can be made of this anticipate Dan and Gad as portrayed in chs. 22-
tradition, the meaning of vs. 19 surely is not to 29. But why should they end up in Aseneth's park? credit Aseneth with poetic or theological inspira­ Is it because they will eventually be forgiven? tion, since she is nowhere cast in the role of a
speaker. H. M. I. Gevaryahu, in a conversation, 17 a. Lit. "word (rema)"; a biblicism. Cf. e.g. suggested some connection with the Old Egyptian Lk 2:15. See also 23:11. mouth-opening ritual, believed to infuse the breath b. Lit. "blow, injury (pligi)" AP (Syr. Arm.);
of life into the statues of the gods. But it is not omit Q G d LI 435&; gaps rest. See 16:19. said at this point that Aseneth ate from the comb, c. Cf. Judg 6:21. and besides honey along with butter was also needed d. Cf. Jn 12:3.

The man who is
migrants." probably not identical with Pentephres' steward
g. The reading "went away": (AP EFW d Syr. (3:4) reappears in vss. 3, 5, 7, 11 as "her foster-
Ll 436); "became invisible" Q G Arm. 435&? father" (FGW Syr. Arm. 436 Ngr., if present) or
Slav.? Ngr. (also 661), also the secondary finale "the (steward) of her house" (a, if present; 435&);
of c (Burchard, NTS 24 [1977] 81). never again in d; gap Ll. E is lacking in vss. 3,
h. Lit. "eyes." Cf. Judg 6:21. 5, 7, but has both titles in vs. 11. Maybe both
i. "And" to end of vs. 9 (all); except omit d; titles were there each time. "Foster-father (tro-
gapE. pheus)" might also be rendered "personal atten­
j. Cf. Elijah's ascension 2Kgs 2:11; Berger, dant," but he seems to be more than that (vs. 3). Auferstehung, pp. 569f., n. 416. Vss. 8-10 also d. "And" ... to "hurried and" in vs. 5 (all);
stand in the tradition of Judg 6:2If.; 13:20-22; except "And Aseneth" d; gap Ll. Berger, Auferstehung, pp. 156f., 444-47, nn. 61- e. The reading "my child": G Ngr. (Syr.);
69. On angels' disappearances generally, cf. Ber­ "child" FW Arm.; "my mistress" a; "mistress"
ger, Auferstehung, pp. 170-72,471-78, nn. 147- 436; "dearest" 435&; gaps E d Ll. 58. f. Cf. e.g. Gen 31:40; IMac 6:10. k. The reading "(a) god": AP; with article, i.e. g. The reading "and . . . fallen": (FGW Arm. "God" Q; "an angel of the Lord" Arm. (Ll L2 Ngr.); omit a Syr.; gaps E d Ll. 435&); ambiguous Syr. ("God from heaven"
Brooks' edition) 436; gaps rest. See also at 22:3.Aseneth dresses as a bride and is transformed to heavenly beauty
0) And Aseneth remembered the man (from heaven) and his commandment, 'and she hurried
and entered her second chamber where the chests (containing) her ornaments were, and
opened her big coffer and brought out her first robe, (the one) of wedding, like lightning
6 (4) in appearance, and dressed in it. • And she girded a golden and royal girdle around (herself)
(5) which was (made) of precious stones. And she put golden bracelets on her fingers and on
her feet golden buskins,h and precious ornaments she put around her neck in which
innumerable costly (and) precious stones were fastened/ and a golden crown she put on her
head, and on that crown, in front on her brow, was a big sapphire1 stone, and around the
(6) big stone were six costly stones. And with a veil she covered her head like a bride, and
she took a scepter in her hand/
7 And Aseneth remembered the words of her foster-father, because he had said to her,
"Your face has fallen." And she sighed and was much distressed and said, "Woe is me,
8(7) the humble, because my face has fallen.And she put golden bracelets on her fingers and on
her feet golden buskins,h and precious ornaments she put around her neck in which
innumerable costly (and) precious stones were fastened/ and a golden crown she put on her
head, and on that crown, in front on her brow, was a big sapphire1 stone, and around the
(6) big stone were six costly stones. And with a veil she covered her head like a bride, and
she took a scepter in her hand/
7 And Aseneth remembered the words of her foster-father, because he had said to her,
"Your face has fallen." And she sighed and was much distressed and said, "Woe is me,
8(7) the humble, because my face has fallen. Joseph will see me and despise me." *And she
said to her foster-sister,1 "Bring me pure water from the spring,"1 and I will wash my face."
9 And she brought her pure water from the spring and poured it into the basin." And Aseneth
leaned (over) to wash her face and saw her face in the water.0 And it was like the sun° and
her eyes (were) like a rising morning star, and* her cheeks like fields of the Most High/
and on her cheeks (there was) red (color) like a son of man's blood/ and her lips (were)
like a rose of life' coming out of its foliage, and her teeth like fighting men lined up for a
fight/ and the hair of her head (was) like a vine in the paradise of God prospering in its
fruits/ and her neck like an all-variegated cypress,w and her breasts (were) like the mountains
of the Most High God.x
10 And when Aseneth saw herself in the water, she was amazed at the sight and rejoiced
with great joy, and did not wash her face, for she said, "Perhaps I (will) wash off this
n great beauty." #And her foster-father came to say to her, "Everything is prepared as you
have commanded." And when he saw her he was alarmed and stood speechless for a long
(time)/ and was filled with great fear* and fell at her feet and said, "What is this, my
h. See 3:6. r. The reading "fields of the Most High": FW
i. The reading "in . . . fastened": (FW Syr.. fastened": (FW Syr. Syr. (cf. Song 5:13); "furrows even and beautiful"
Arm. L2 Ngr.); omit AP d; gaps Q EG LI Slav. Arm.; "a star of heaven" A; "the stars of the
j. Same word as "violet"; see 2:8. Cf. Rev heaven" P; gaps rest. 21:20. s. The reading "and . . . blood": (F Syr. Arm. k. The reading "like . . . hand": (GFW Syr. 436); omit AP W; gaps rest. "Son of man" is a
Arm. L2); omit AP; gaps Q E d LI Ngr. ("bride" Semitism meaning no more (in this instance) than
is there). "a man" (cf. e.g. Jdt 8:16; Ps 8:5; Sir 17:30; TJos
1. The reading "her foster-sister": FW Arm. 2:5). It is in F Syr. 436 only; "parts of a pome­
L2; "her maidservant" AP B Phil (D); "one of granate" Arm. (cf. Song 4:3?). the virgins her companions" Syr.; "the virgins" t. The reading "of life": FW Syr. L2; "flow­
G; gaps rest. See 10:4. ering" Arm.; "being red" AP Eth. (see Intro.);
m. See 2:12. In a more hellenized environment gaps rest. she would doubtless have ordered a bath. u. The reading "coming . . . fight": (Syr. Arm. n. The reading "and . . . basin": details uncer­ L2); "which comes forth from its leaves" Eth. tain. Some witnesses also mention a bowl (kogche) (see Intro.); omit AP FW; gaps rest. Cf. Achilles
such as was used for drawing water. It may belong Tatius 1.4.3 (see Intro.). in the text. v. The paradise tree Gen 2:17; 3:3, cf. ApAb
o. Does this scene reflect magical practice in­ 23:5f. volving the mirror effect of water in a basin w. The reading "all-variegated cypress": A (cf. (Philonenko, Joseph et Asineth, p. 193)? Probably Ps 92:12f.; Ezek 31:8f.); "much-variegated vine"
not, because the text neither says that Aseneth had P (cf. preceding clause); "beautiful tower" Arm. anything but washing in mind, nor that she was (cf. Song 4:4; 7:5); "isles of rest of angels that
transformed because she looked into the water. (are) in heaven" Syr.; "hill of (the) heavens" 436;
Aseneth's sudden beauty is in partial fulfillment of gaps rest. The original text is obscure. 16:16.The man who is
migrants." probably not identical with Pentephres' steward
g. The reading "went away": (AP EFW d Syr. (3:4) reappears in vss. 3, 5, 7, 11 as "her foster-
Ll 436); "became invisible" Q G Arm. 435&? father" (FGW Syr. Arm. 436 Ngr., if present) or
Slav.? Ngr. (also 661), also the secondary finale "the (steward) of her house" (a, if present; 435&);
of c (Burchard, NTS 24 [1977] 81). never again in d; gap Ll. E is lacking in vss. 3,
h. Lit. "eyes." Cf. Judg 6:21. 5, 7, but has both titles in vs. 11. Maybe both
i. "And" to end of vs. 9 (all); except omit d; titles were there each time. "Foster-father (tro-
gapE. pheus)" might also be rendered "personal atten­
j. Cf. Elijah's ascension 2Kgs 2:11; Berger, dant," but he seems to be more than that (vs. 3). Auferstehung, pp. 569f., n. 416. Vss. 8-10 also d. "And" ... to "hurried and" in vs. 5 (all);
stand in the tradition of Judg 6:2If.; 13:20-22; except "And Aseneth" d; gap Ll. Berger, Auferstehung, pp. 156f., 444-47, nn. 61- e. The reading "my child": G Ngr. (Syr.);
69. On angels' disappearances generally, cf. Ber­ "child" FW Arm.; "my mistress" a; "mistress"
ger, Auferstehung, pp. 170-72,471-78, nn. 147- 436; "dearest" 435&; gaps E d Ll. 58. f. Cf. e.g. Gen 31:40; IMac 6:10. k. The reading "(a) god": AP; with article, i.e. g. The reading "and . . . fallen": (FGW Arm. "God" Q; "an angel of the Lord" Arm. (Ll L2 Ngr.); omit a Syr.; gaps E d Ll. 435&); ambiguous Syr. ("God from heaven"
Brooks' edition) 436; gaps rest. See also at 22:3.

The original text is obscure. 16:16. She comes close to being an angelic creature x. The reading "and . . . God": (Syr. Arm. (see 20:6; cf. Acts 6:15; 2Cor 3:18). The description 436); omit AP; gaps rest. On Arm. cf. Song 2:17;
offers many variants. It is reminiscent of the Song 8:14. of Songs, the influence of which seems to have y. A common reaction; cf. e.g. Chariton 3.9.2;
grown stronger in the MS tradition. 4.1.9; 5.3.9; Apuleius 11.14.1. p. Cf. e.g. Mt 17:2; Rev 1:16; 10:1. z. The reading "he was . . . fear": (FW Syr. q. The reading "and" to the end of vs. 11: (all); Arm. L2); "he was much filled with fear and was
except omit d; gaps LI Slav. trembling for a long time" AP; "he was alarmed"mistress, and what is this great and wonderful beauty?82 At last the Lord God of heaven
has chosen you as a bride for his firstborn son, Joseph?"62
Joseph arrives and acknowledges Aseneth
(1) 19 And while they were still speaking this (way)8 a boy came and said to Aseneth,
2 "Behold, Joseph is standing at the doors of our court." »And Aseneth hurried and went
down the stairs from the upper floor with the seven virgins to meet Joseph and stood in the
3 entrance of the house. #And Joseph entered the court and the gates were closed, and all
strangers remained outside. (2) And Aseneth went out of the entrance to meet Joseph, and Joseph saw her and was
5 amazed at her beauty, and said to her, "Whob are you? Quickly tell me." *And she said
to him, "I am your maidservant Aseneth, and all the idols I have thrown away from me
and they were destroyed. And a man came to me from heaven today, and gave me bread
of life and I ate, and a cup of blessing and I drank. And he said to me, i have given0 you
for a bride to Joseph today, and he himself will be your bridegroom for ever (and) ever.'
And he said to me, 'Your name will no longer be called Aseneth, but your name will be
called City of Refuge and the Lord God will reign as king over many nations for ever,d
6 because in you many nations will take refuge with the Lord God, the Most High.' -And
the man said to me, 'I will also go to Joseph and speak into his ears6 concerning you what
7 I have to say.' *And now, you know, my Lord, whether that man has come to you and
spoken to you concerning me."
8 And Joseph said to Aseneth, "Blessed are you by the Most High God, and blessed (is)f
your name for ever, because the Lord God founded your walls in the highest, and your
walls (are) adamantine walls of life,8 because the sons of the living Godh will dwell in your
9 City of Refuge, and the Lord God will reign as king over them for ever and ever. 'For this
man came to me today and spoke to me words such as these concerning you.And he said to me, i have given0 you
for a bride to Joseph today, and he himself will be your bridegroom for ever (and) ever.'
And he said to me, 'Your name will no longer be called Aseneth, but your name will be
called City of Refuge and the Lord God will reign as king over many nations for ever,d
6 because in you many nations will take refuge with the Lord God, the Most High.' -And
the man said to me, 'I will also go to Joseph and speak into his ears6 concerning you what
7 I have to say.' *And now, you know, my Lord, whether that man has come to you and
spoken to you concerning me."
8 And Joseph said to Aseneth, "Blessed are you by the Most High God, and blessed (is)f
your name for ever, because the Lord God founded your walls in the highest, and your
walls (are) adamantine walls of life,8 because the sons of the living Godh will dwell in your
9 City of Refuge, and the Lord God will reign as king over them for ever and ever. 'For this
man came to me today and spoke to me words such as these concerning you. And now,
come to me, chaste virgin, and why do you stand far away from me?"1
(3) And Joseph stretched out his hands and called Aseneth by a wink of his eyes.J And
Aseneth also stretched out her hands and ran up to Joseph and fell on his breast.k And
Joseph put his arms around her, and Aseneth (put hers) around Joseph, and they kissed
n each other for a long time and both came to life in their spirit.1 *And Joseph kissed Aseneth
and gave her spirit of life, and he kissed her the second time and gave her spirit of wisdom,
and he kissed her the third time and gave her spirit of truth.m
G; "he was filled with fear" Q; paraphrastic E; e. Cf. also 24:2. The image is traditional, e.g. gaps d Ll Ngr. Perhaps the trembling should go Gen 20:8; Deut 31:28; ShepHerm Vision 3.8.11;
into the text on the assumption of split tradition. 4.3.6. The phrase expresses audibility, rather than
a2. Witnesses a G Arm. Ngr.; "virtue" FW furtiveness. Syr. L2; "grace" E; gaps d Ll. f.L2; "grace" E; gaps d Ll. f. Or "blessed (it will be)," i.e. "it will be
b2. The reading "his firstborn son, Joseph" is praised" (Berger, Auferstehung, p. 563, n. 401;
a reconstruction from "his firstborn son" F Syr. cf. Mk 14:9 parallel)? Also 15:12. L2; "his son Joseph" A; "Joseph" PQ Arm.; "the g. The reading "in . . . life": (G Syr. Arm. most beautiful Joseph" G; gaps rest. Doubtful. L2); omit AP; gaps rest. h. Cf. Hos2:l. 19 a. Traditional formula of transition, e.g. ISam i. On vss. 8f. cf. Apuleius 11.22.4-6. 17:23; Job 1:16-18; Mt 9:18; Mk 5:35. On ch. 19 j. The reading "by . . . eyes": Syr. Arm. L2
cf. Acts 9:10-17; Apuleius 11.22.4-6; 11.23.1,6; (Ngr.); gaps rest. See next note. 11.27.7-9. Joseph's role is similar to that of k. The reading "and called . . . breast": (b Syr. Ananias in Acts 9:10-17 and of the head priest Arm. L2 Ngr.); omit a D Ll Phil; gaps B Slav. of Isis to whom Lucius rushes after having been 1. I.e. "they cheered up"; cf. e.g. Gen 45:27;
told in a dream that the day of his initiation had Jub 31:6; 43:24. This verse seems to contain the
approached, only to find him informed in the same first indubitable occurrence of anazan besides Lk
manner. On the motif of double dreams or visions 15:24 and Rom 7:9. cf. Acts 9:10-12 and the commentaries thereon. m. That life, soul, spirit, or the like can be
b. "Who" to end of vs. 9 (all); except "Come transferred or exchanged (or taken away, for that
to me, chaste virgin, because I was given good matter) by a kiss is a very old idea underlying
news about you from heaven who (masc!) said to many kinds of human behavior and ritual, and
me all the (things) about you" d ("from . . . you" expressed in a host of texts, both religious and
omit D); gap Slav. This is a manifest case of profane (e.g. Gen 2:7; Jn 20:22; OdesSol 28:6f.;
condensation in d with a patent seam before' 'who.'' Xenophon of Ephesus 1.9.6); in the way of ritual,
c. See 15:2. cf. e.g. the "holy kiss" of the early Church ICor
d. Cf. e.g.The original text is obscure. 16:16. She comes close to being an angelic creature x. The reading "and . . . God": (Syr. Arm. (see 20:6; cf. Acts 6:15; 2Cor 3:18). The description 436); omit AP; gaps rest. On Arm. cf. Song 2:17;
offers many variants. It is reminiscent of the Song 8:14. of Songs, the influence of which seems to have y. A common reaction; cf. e.g. Chariton 3.9.2;
grown stronger in the MS tradition. 4.1.9; 5.3.9; Apuleius 11.14.1. p. Cf. e.g. Mt 17:2; Rev 1:16; 10:1. z. The reading "he was . . . fear": (FW Syr. q. The reading "and" to the end of vs. 11: (all); Arm. L2); "he was much filled with fear and was
except omit d; gaps LI Slav. trembling for a long time" AP; "he was alarmed"

Cf. e.g. Pss 10:16 (9:37 LXX); 146:10; 16:20, etc., and the Valentinian "Sacrament of the
WisSol 3:8; Rev 11:15. Cf. also vs. 8. Bridal Chamber" in GPhil; see generally, I. Low,1 20 And they embraced each other for a long time and interlocked their hands like bonds.3
Aseneth leads Joseph into the house and washes his feet
(1) And Aseneth said to Joseph, "Come, my Lord, and enter our5 house, because I have
2 prepared our0 house and made a great dinner." *And she grasped his right hand and led
(2) him into her*1 house and 'seated him on Pentephrese her father's throne. And she brought
3 water to wash his feet/ *And Joseph said, "Let one of the virgins come and wash my
4(3) feet." #And Aseneth said to him, "No, my Lord, because you are my lord from now on,
and I (am) your maidservant. And why do you say this (that) another virgin (is) to wash
your feet? For your feet are my feet, and your hands are my hands, and your soul my soul/
5 and your feet another (woman) will never wash."h »And she urged him and washed his
feet. And Joseph looked at her hands, and they were like hands of life, and her fingers fine
(4) like (the) fingers of a fast-writing scribe/ And after this Joseph grasped her right hand and
kissed it/ and Aseneth kissed his head and sat at his right (hand). Pentephres proposes to give a wedding feast, but Joseph prefers Pharaoh
6 (5) And her father and mother and hisk whole family came from the field which was their
inheritance.1 And they saw Aseneth like (the) appearance of light, and her beauty was like
heavenly beauty.m And they saw her sitting with Joseph and dressed in a wedding garment.n
7 And they were amazed at her beauty and rejoiced0 and gave glory to God who gives life to
8 the dead.p *And after this they ate and drank and celebrated.0
"Der Kuss," MGWJ 65 (1921) 253-76, 323-49; "like yourself" (cf. Ruth l:16f.; TJos 17:7), rather
K. Thraede, "Urspriinge und Formen des 'Heiligen than an illustration of the lovers' "mystical union"
Kusses' in fruhen Christentum/ * JAC 11-12 (1968- (thus Philonenko, Joseph et Astneth, p. 195). 69) 124-80; G. Stahlin, "phileo etc.," TDNT 9, h. The reading "and . . .. . wash": (a d); omit F
113-71. Joseph's kiss may go back to an erotic Syr. Arm. LI 436; gaps EGW 435& Ngr. Cf. Jn
motif, if only in a spiritualized form (cf. Xenophon 13:8. 1.9.6). He imparts to Aseneth the spirit which he i. "And Joseph . . . scribe" (F Syr. Arm. LI
himself possesses; it is not sent down from above L2 Ngr. Br); gap E; omit rest. Many variants
for the occasion. "Spirit of life," "of wisdom," especially in the last clause (omit F LI). The
and "of truth" (not all too frequent in ancient reading "like the fingers (daktyloi)" (Syr. Br, cf. Judaism: e.g. Jub 25:14; TJud 20:5; IQS 3.18f.; Arm.) might also be "like the reed pens (kalamoi)"
4.21,23; 1QM 13.10; of course Jn 15:26; ShepHerm (436, cf. 435&; Ps 45:2). The first variant is
Mandates 3.4) denotes three aspects or effects of retained on the assumption that copyists are more
the spirit, rather than three spirits (so "spirit" likely to clarify a biblical allusion than to obscure
should remain anarthrous as in the Gk. text, against it. Rie Br). How this relates to the blessed bread, cup, j. Or "her"; cf. 4:5. and ointment which also provide life (see 8:5) is k. See 5:3. not clear. Maybe we are to understand that life is 1. They seem to have been there since 10:1. first mediated by intimate contact with a Jew and m. "And they . . . heavenly beauty" (FGW
then sustained by other things. But perhaps the Syr. Arm. LI 436 Br); omit a E d 435& (Ngr.?). author in 19:11 just makes use of a different tradition n. Cf. Mt 22:11. to express the same general idea that adherence to o. The reading "and rejoiced": a d (Ngr.); gap
Judaism means life. G; omit rest. Cf. Apuleius 11.13.4. p. Cf. e.g. 2Mac 7:28f.; Eighteen Benedictions
20 a. Lit. "and tightened the bonds of their hands." 2 (see C. W. Dugmore, The Influence of the
In a handshake or around each other's neck? Synagogue upon the Divine Office [Westminster,
b. Witnesses a FW Syr. Arm. LI L2; "my" G 1964] pp.Cf. e.g. Pss 10:16 (9:37 LXX); 146:10; 16:20, etc., and the Valentinian "Sacrament of the
WisSol 3:8; Rev 11:15. Cf. also vs. 8. Bridal Chamber" in GPhil; see generally, I. Low,

Arm. LI L2; "my" G 1964] pp. 114-27); Jn 5:21; Rom 4:17; Apuleius
d; omit Ngr.; gaps E Slav. See n. d below. 11.16.2; O. Hofius, "Eine altjOdische Parallele zu
c. Witnesses AP (Syr.) Arm.; "my" Ngr.; omit Rom. IV. Mbr NTS 18 (1971-72) 93f. Around
L2; gaps Q b d LI Slav. the beginning of our era "He who gives life to the
d. Witnesses AQ G d Syr. Ngr.661; "their" P; dead" had become all but a definition of God in
omit EFW Arm. LI L2 Ngr.671; gap Slav. The Judaism. Does this mean that Pentephres and his
"her house" does not go well with "our house" family embraced Judaism too? The next verse seems
of vs. 1. to confirm this interpretation. Cf. also "to give
e. Witnesses a d; gaps LI Ngr.; omit rest. glory to God" in Mt 5:16; IPet 2:12. f. On foot washing see 7:1 and note. For foot- q. The reading "and celebrated": Q Arm. (Ngr.);
washing scenes with a deeper meaning see Lk "and celebrating all (of them)" AP; Br connects
7:36-50 (see Wilckens, Orientierung an Jesus); it with the following sentence; gap 435&; omit
Jn 13:1-17. rest. "To eat, drink, and celebrate" is a traditional
g. This is a poetic expression of loving someone threesome, e.g. IKgs 4:20; Tob 7:10; Eccl 8:15;(6) And Pentephres said to Joseph, "Tomorrow I will call all the noblemen and the satraps
of the whole land of Egypt and give a marriage feast for you/ and you will take my daughter
9(7) Aseneth for (your) wife." #And Joseph said,8 "I will go tomorrow to Pharaoh the king,
because he is like a father to me and appointed me chief of the whole land of Egypt,' and
I will speak about Aseneth into his ears, and he himself will give her to me for (my) wife."
io And Pentephres said to him, "Go in peace. "u
21 And Joseph stayed that day with Pentephres, and he did not sleep wittY Aseneth,
I (20:8)
because Joseph said, "It does not befit a man who worships God to sleep with his wife6
before the wedding."
Pharaoh solemnizes the marriage and gives a wedding feast
2(2i:i) Andc Joseph rose at daybreak and went away to Pharaoh andd said to him, "Give me
3 Aseneth, daughter of Pentephres, priest of Heliopolis, for (my) wife." #And Pharaoh
rejoiced with great joy andc said to Joseph, "Behold, is not this one betrothed to you since
eternityT And she shall be your wife from now on and for ever (and) ever."
4 (2) And Pharaoh sent and called Pentephres, and he came and brought Aseneth, and stood
(3) her before Pharaoh.8 And Pharaoh saw her and was amazed at her beauty and said, "May
the Lord, the God of Joseph bless you, child, and let this beauty of yours remain for ever
(and) ever, because justly the Lord, the God of Joseph, has chosen you as a bride for
Joseph, because he is the firstborn son of God. And you shall be called a daughter of the
5(4) Most High andh a bride of Joseph from now on and for ever." •And Pharaoh took Joseph
and Aseneth and put golden crowns1 on their heads which had been in his house from the
6 beginning and of old."u
21 And Joseph stayed that day with Pentephres, and he did not sleep wittY Aseneth,
I (20:8)
because Joseph said, "It does not befit a man who worships God to sleep with his wife6
before the wedding."
Pharaoh solemnizes the marriage and gives a wedding feast
2(2i:i) Andc Joseph rose at daybreak and went away to Pharaoh andd said to him, "Give me
3 Aseneth, daughter of Pentephres, priest of Heliopolis, for (my) wife." #And Pharaoh
rejoiced with great joy andc said to Joseph, "Behold, is not this one betrothed to you since
eternityT And she shall be your wife from now on and for ever (and) ever."
4 (2) And Pharaoh sent and called Pentephres, and he came and brought Aseneth, and stood
(3) her before Pharaoh.8 And Pharaoh saw her and was amazed at her beauty and said, "May
the Lord, the God of Joseph bless you, child, and let this beauty of yours remain for ever
(and) ever, because justly the Lord, the God of Joseph, has chosen you as a bride for
Joseph, because he is the firstborn son of God. And you shall be called a daughter of the
5(4) Most High andh a bride of Joseph from now on and for ever." •And Pharaoh took Joseph
and Aseneth and put golden crowns1 on their heads which had been in his house from the
6 beginning and of old. And Pharaoh set Aseneth at Joseph's right side, #and put his hands
on their heads, and his right hand was on Aseneth's head.j And Pharaoh said, "May the
Lord God the Most High bless you and multiply you and magnifyk and glorify you forever."
7 (5) And Pharaoh turned them around toward each other face to face and brought them mouth
to mouth and joined them by their lips/ and they kissed each other. TAb B, 5:1; Lk 12:19. Toexpress joy by appropriate ness, is born. meals is an all but universal custom. Here it may d. The reading "and said . . . saying": (all),
reflect a ceremonial meal held on the occasion of except omit B(D). D omits "and said . . . sent,"
a conversion.. sent,"
a conversion. If eating separates the Jews from the then adds "and Aseneth" after "Pentephres," then
non-Jews, the first meal with Jews must acquire a omits from "and he" to "natives" in vs. 8. Slav,
special character. Cf. Mk 2:15; Lk 15:23; Acts is shortened, omitting vs. 3 altogether. A rather
16:34; Apuleius 11.24.5. Anyway, there is no poor Gk. retroversion of Slav., corrected by two
further mention of the interdiction stated in 7:1. readings from A and F Syr., is adopted and
r. Lit. "make you weddings." Cf. Mt 22:2. translated by Phil. s. "Not so, but" added Arm. 435& (cf. 4:11; e. The reading "rejoiced . . . and": a, P(Q)
23:1); gap d; omit rest. prefixing "having heard this word from Joseph";
t. Cf. Gen 45:8. gaps E d Ngr.; omit rest. Stylistically PQ is
u. Traditional valediction, e.g. Judg 18:6; Jdt acceptable except for the participial form. 8:35; Acts 16:36. f. Similarly 23:3. Cf. Tob 6:18. This expression
means no more than that the match is providential. 21 a. The reading "sleep with": FGW Arm. Ll Closer scrutiny of the wedding rites in vss. 4-8
436 Ngr.; "recognize" Syr. (cf. e.g. Gen 4:1; Mt might help to determine the date and place of origin
1:25); "go in to" a d (cf. vs. 9); gaps E 435&. of JosAsen. b. Aseneth is Joseph's "wife" by virtue of her g. Cf. Gen 47:7. engagement (20:4, 8; cf. 23:3; see on 1:9), but we h. The reading "a daughter . . . and": (FW
may have to understand "his (future) wife." In Syr. Arm. Ll 436 Slav. Phil); omit AP; gaps rest. either case the statement seems to imply that a man i. I.e. wreaths. They were an all but universal
"who does not worship God" might have acted custom in ancient weddings. otherwise. A Jew might not (Cohen, Jewish and j. The reading "and . . . head": (FGW Arm. Roman Law, vol. 1, p. 322), but there may have Ll 436); omit a Syr. 435&; gaps E d Ngr. (except
been local differences (see m. Ket 1:5 and com­ perhaps for a trace in Ngr. 661). Cf. Gen 48:13. mentaries on Mt l:18f.). k.Arm. LI L2; "my" G 1964] pp. 114-27); Jn 5:21; Rom 4:17; Apuleius
d; omit Ngr.; gaps E Slav. See n. d below. 11.16.2; O. Hofius, "Eine altjOdische Parallele zu
c. Witnesses AP (Syr.) Arm.; "my" Ngr.; omit Rom. IV. Mbr NTS 18 (1971-72) 93f. Around
L2; gaps Q b d LI Slav. the beginning of our era "He who gives life to the
d. Witnesses AQ G d Syr. Ngr.661; "their" P; dead" had become all but a definition of God in
omit EFW Arm. LI L2 Ngr.671; gap Slav. The Judaism. Does this mean that Pentephres and his
"her house" does not go well with "our house" family embraced Judaism too? The next verse seems
of vs. 1. to confirm this interpretation. Cf. also "to give
e. Witnesses a d; gaps LI Ngr.; omit rest. glory to God" in Mt 5:16; IPet 2:12. f. On foot washing see 7:1 and note. For foot- q. The reading "and celebrated": Q Arm. (Ngr.);
washing scenes with a deeper meaning see Lk "and celebrating all (of them)" AP; Br connects
7:36-50 (see Wilckens, Orientierung an Jesus); it with the following sentence; gap 435&; omit
Jn 13:1-17. rest. "To eat, drink, and celebrate" is a traditional
g. This is a poetic expression of loving someone threesome, e.g. IKgs 4:20; Tob 7:10; Eccl 8:15;

mentaries on Mt l:18f.). k. The reading "and magnify": a; gaps E d 436
c. On vss. 2-9 cf. Apuleius 6.21.1-24.4: Cupid Slav. Ngr.; omit rest. Cf. WisSol 19:22. Is this a
flies to Jupiter to ask for Psyche's hand in marriage. current wedding formula? Cf. Gen 1:28. Jupiter convokes all the gods and declares Psyche I. The reading "and . . . lips": FW 436; "on
immortal and her union with Cupid perpetual. A their lips" Ll; omit A; gaps rest. Lit. "on their
feast ensues, and soon their daughter, Voluptuous­ mouths" and "on their lips."8 (6) And after this Pharaoh gave a marriage feast and a great dinner and a big banquet"1 for
(7) seven days." And he called together all the chiefs of the land of Egypt and all the kings of
the nations0 and proclaimed to the whole land of Egypt, saying, "Every man who does
(any) work during the seven days of Joseph's and Aseneth's wedding shall surelyp die."
9(8) And it happened after this,q Joseph went in to Aseneth, and Aseneth conceived from
Joseph, and gave birth to Manasseh and Ephraim, his brother, in Joseph's house/
V. ASENETH'S PSALM
10 And8 then Aseneth began to confess to the Lord God and gave thanks, praying, for all
the good (things) of which she was deemed worthy by the Lord:1
11 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned,
before you I have sinned much,"
I Aseneth, daughter of Pentephres, priest of Heliopolis,
who is an overseer of every thing/
m. Lit.''drinking bout*'; in LXX this expression insoluble, especially at the end of vs. 11 and in
is often used for banquets (e.g. Job 1:4). After vss. 19f. On the function of the text, cf. Ex 15;
"dinner" (Ps-Lucianus, Onos, 24.3; never LXX) Tob 13; Jdt 16:1-17; 4Mac 18:6b-19; on the
it denotes the drinking rounds following the meal anaphoric form of the stanzas, cf. TJob 25; 32; on
proper. the first person singular Ps 151; 4Mac 18:6b-19;
n. The conventional length in Judaism, as al­ on the general structure (ten stanzas of parallel
ready e.g. Judg 14:12, 17. form, followed by a longer prose section), cf. Mt
o. Cf. e.g. Lk 22:25. 5:1-12; D. Daube, The New Testament and Rab­
p. Lit. "by death." Cf. Ex 35:2, "by death" binic Judaism (London, 1956) pp. 196-201. being an addition from a legal formula such as Ex t. An introduction to vss. 11-21 would seem to
21:16. be needed; cf. Tob 13:1; Jdt 15:14. E has been
q. "And . . . this" F(G)W Syr. Arm. Ll 436; adopted for want of a better text (see previous
"And when the marriage feast had happened and note); "gave thanks (eucharistdsa)" is dubious.Arm. Ll 436; adopted for want of a better text (see previous
"And when the marriage feast had happened and note); "gave thanks (eucharistdsa)" is dubious. the dinner was completed" AP(Q) d Slav, (adding The psalm is entitled "Hymn of Confession of
"and"); omit 435&; gaps E Ngr. Split tradition? Aseneth to the Most High" (FW Syr. Arm. Ll
r. Cf. Gen 41:50-52. The author gives us no 436 Br); gaps rest. The heading may have originated
idea as to where Joseph's house stood. "To go in" as a marginal title; it is hardly original as part of
is a traditional euphemism to denote consummation the running text (see also 12:1). of marriage. It is followed by "conceive and give u. "I have sinned, Lord . . . much" (FW Syr. birth" e.g. Gen 30:4f., 10; 2Sam 12:24. 435& Arm. Ll 436 Br); gaps rest. The two lines recur
break off at this point. On the 436 version of vs. in vss. 12-21 in Ll Br, in vss. 12-20 in Arm., in
9 see at vs. 10. vs. 21 only in 436. FW have them again before
s. Vss. 10-21 (EFW Syr. Arm. Ll 436 Br); vss. 12, 16, and 18, Syr. before vss. 12, 13, and
omit a G d Rum.; gap Ngr. Vs. 10 is in E only 19, all in shorter forms than above, varying a little
(omit vss. 11-21), but there seem to be traces of each time. It is assumed here that all verses down
it elsewhere. In F(W) vss. 11-21 are imbedded to vs. 21 began this way, although in vs. 20 this
into a lengthy exhortation beginning after vs. 9, beginning seems to break a sentence. and introduced thus: "But hear (singular) also the v. The clause is a reconstruction from "who
confession, or thanksgiving, of Aseneth. For after sees everything" Syr.; "of (the) god who is an
she recognized (the) living God, and was released overseer of everything" Arm. 332; "who was the
from the pollutions of the idols (cf.mentaries on Mt l:18f.). k. The reading "and magnify": a; gaps E d 436
c. On vss. 2-9 cf. Apuleius 6.21.1-24.4: Cupid Slav. Ngr.; omit rest. Cf. WisSol 19:22. Is this a
flies to Jupiter to ask for Psyche's hand in marriage. current wedding formula? Cf. Gen 1:28. Jupiter convokes all the gods and declares Psyche I. The reading "and . . . lips": FW 436; "on
immortal and her union with Cupid perpetual. A their lips" Ll; omit A; gaps rest. Lit. "on their
feast ensues, and soon their daughter, Voluptuous­ mouths" and "on their lips."

For after sees everything" Syr.; "of (the) god who is an
she recognized (the) living God, and was released overseer of everything" Arm. 332; "who was the
from the pollutions of the idols (cf. Acts 15:20), overseer of the gods all (singular)" Yovs; "like of
and had renounced the dead and dumb images of an (or the) overseer (episcopi) of all (plural)" Ll
the Egyptian gods, and had obtained what she MSS 424 433 441; omit rest of Ll including
wanted, giving thanks, she said to the Most High." Batiffol's edition; gaps rest. The structure of the
The Ll MS 421 has "Afterwards (she) said" in stanza would require a further clause. If the above
the margin of the heading, adopted with an added variants represent it, nevertheless the wording (epis-
"Aseneth" by Batiffol's edition of Ll and accepted kopos may have been in it) and to whom it refers
by Br. In 436 vs. 9 reads: "And it happened after remain obscure. In Syr. and 332 the reference is
this that Joseph entered to the song of confession unequivocally to the sun. This makes good sense,
which Aseneth sang to the Lord the Most High because the idea that the sun (or God, for that
after she gave birth to Effraim and Manasse." Vss. matter) sees everything is commonplace (see 6:6). 11-21 Gk. with full apparatus in Burchard, Unter­ But whereas in Syr. and 332 the clause goes well
suchungen, pp. 76-90; cf. also Br. W was not with "Heliopolis," rendered "City of the Sun,"
known at the time; it offers some helpful variants. is it not easy to see how this would have run in
Nevertheless the text of the psalm is marred by Gk. numerous difficulties, some of them well-nigh12 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
I was prospering in my father's house,
and was a boastful and arrogant virgin.
13 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
And I have worshiped strange gods who were without number,
and eaten bread from their sacrifices.
K I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
Bread of strangulation I have eaten,
and a cup of insidiousness I have drunk from the table of death.
is I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
And I did not know the Lord the God of Heaven,
and I did not trust in the Most High God of life.
16 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
For I trusted in the richness of my gloryw and in my beauty,
andx I was boastful and arrogant.
n I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
And I despised every man on earth,
and there was no one who achieved something* before me.
18 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
And I had come to hate all who had asked my hand in marriage,
and despised them and scorned them.
19 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
And I spoke bold (words) in vanity and said,
"There is no prince on earth who may loosen the girdle of my virginity."2
20 Ia2 have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
But will be the bride of the great king's firstborns on.
21 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much,
until Joseph the Powerful One of God came.b2
He pulled me down from my dominating position
and made me humble after my arrogance,
and by his beauty he caught me,
and by his wisdom he grasped me like a fish on a hook,
and by his spirit, as by bait of life, he ensnared me,c2
w. This phrase is the only extant ancient parallel a2. The verse is doubtful. Maybe it is not a
to Rom 9:23; Eph 1:18; 3:16; Col 1:27; cf. Phil separate stanza at all.
4:19; but the sense is different. b2. Cf. Dan 4:8.
x. W Syr. Arm.; omit F LI 436 Br, also c2. Hunting metaphors play a role in missionary
Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 80; gaps rest. language, e.g. Mk 1:17 parallel; see generally,
y. The reading "achieved something" is a guess W. H. Wuellner, The Meaning of "Fishers of
from the variegated evidence; cf. Burchard, Un­ Men" (NT Library; Philadelphia, Pa., 1967). Gk.
tersuchungen, p. 81. W has "as someone does not delea(s)ma. "bait," is not a frequent word; cf.
do." Josephus, War 2.8.11 §158; 2Pet 2:14, 18. In a
z. Classical metonymy in Jewish language. burlesque throng of masqueraded people precedingand by his power he confirmed me,
and brought me to the God of the ages
and to the chief of the house of the Most High,
and gave me to eat bread of life,
and to drink a cup of wisdom,
and I became his bride for ever and ever. SECOND PART: PHARAOH'S SON ATTEMPTS TO KIDNAP ASENETH
AND RISE TO POWER IN EGYPT
I. JOSEPH'S AND ASENETH'S VISIT TO JACOB
Aseneth meets Jacob
KD 22 And it happened after this: The seven years of plenty passed and the seven years of
2(2) famine began to come. *And Jacob heard about Joseph his son, and Israel went to Egypt
with his whole family, in the second year of the famine, in the second month, on the
twenty-first of the month,3 and dwelt in the land of Goshen.b
3 0) And Aseneth said to Joseph/ 4 41 will go and see your father, because your father Israel
4 is like a father to me and (a) god."d *And Joseph said to her, "You shall go with me and
5(4) see my father." -And Joseph and Aseneth went to the land of Goshen to Jacob. And
Joseph's brothers met them and prostrated themselves face down to the ground before them. 6 (5) And they went in to Jacob. Andc Israel was sitting on his bed, and he was an old man in
comfortable old age/
7 And Aseneth saw him and was amazed at his beauty,8 because Jacob was exceedingly
beautiful to look at, and his old age (was) like the youth of a handsome (young) man, and
his head was all white as snow, and the hairs of his head were all exceedingly close and
thick like (those) of an Ethiopian/ and his beard (was) white reaching down to his breast,
and his eyes (were) flashing1 and darting (flashes of) lightning, and his sinews and his
shoulders and his arms were like (those) of an angel, and his thighs and his calves and his
8 feet like (those) of a giant. And Jacob was like a man who had wrestled with God.j *And
Aseneth saw him and was amazed, and prostrated herself before him face down to the
ground. And Jacob said to Joseph, is this my daughter-in-law, your wife?And Jacob was like a man who had wrestled with God.j *And
Aseneth saw him and was amazed, and prostrated herself before him face down to the
ground. And Jacob said to Joseph, is this my daughter-in-law, your wife? Blessed she
9 will be by the Most High God." »And Jacob called her to himself and blessed her and
kissed her. And Aseneth stretched out her hands and grasped Jacob's neck and hung herself
the Isis procession Apuleius noticed hunters, fowl­ father" d; "like (a) god to me" FW (Syr. Arm.)
ers with lime-sticks, and fishermen with fishing LI 436; gaps EG Ngr. "God" (which must be
rods and hooks (11.8. If.), but it is unlikely that original even if "father" is not) either means a
they are symbolic figures (Griffiths, his-Book, p. person of utmost authority (cf. Ex 4:16; Philo, Vit
177). The Devil is compared to a fisherman catching Mos, 1.158; Jn 20:28 is only a formal parallel) or
different fish with different sorts of bait in the an angelic, godlike being as described in vs. 7; cf. gnostic Authentikos Logos, pp. 29f. 17:9. e. The reading "And" to "himself " in vs. 9:
22 a. Jub 45:1 says it was on the 1st day of the (all) except omit d; gap Ngr. 4th month, a Wednesday according to its calendar. f. Lit. "in fat old age." Classical, not LXX. See 1:2. g. He has gotten what Aseneth was promised in
b. Gen 41:53f.; 45:26-46:7; 47:27. The histor­ 16:16 and accorded in 18:9. ical Goshen may have been in the northern part of h. The reading "like (those) of an Ethiopian":
the county of Heliopolis and adjoining regions Syr.; "like (those) of an Indian man" Arm. (Attn-
farther north (Uphill, JNES 27 [19681 291-316 and hps may also mean one of the dark aborigines of
28 [1969] 15-39. See also n. e to 1:2), but we do India); "his teeth however like (those) of an
not know where the author thought it was. Ethiopian (Gen 49:12?)" 436; omit a; gaps rest. c. Note the naive way in which the action starts In our terms "Ethiopian" should be Nubian or
again.12 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
I was prospering in my father's house,
and was a boastful and arrogant virgin.
13 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
And I have worshiped strange gods who were without number,
and eaten bread from their sacrifices.
K I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
Bread of strangulation I have eaten,
and a cup of insidiousness I have drunk from the table of death.
is I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
And I did not know the Lord the God of Heaven,
and I did not trust in the Most High God of life.
16 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
For I trusted in the richness of my gloryw and in my beauty,
andx I was boastful and arrogant.
n I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
And I despised every man on earth,
and there was no one who achieved something* before me.
18 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
And I had come to hate all who had asked my hand in marriage,
and despised them and scorned them.
19 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
And I spoke bold (words) in vanity and said,
"There is no prince on earth who may loosen the girdle of my virginity."2
20 Ia2 have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much.
But will be the bride of the great king's firstborns on.
21 I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned;
before you I have sinned much,
until Joseph the Powerful One of God came.b2
He pulled me down from my dominating position
and made me humble after my arrogance,
and by his beauty he caught me,
and by his wisdom he grasped me like a fish on a hook,
and by his spirit, as by bait of life, he ensnared me,c2
w. This phrase is the only extant ancient parallel a2. The verse is doubtful. Maybe it is not a
to Rom 9:23; Eph 1:18; 3:16; Col 1:27; cf. Phil separate stanza at all.
4:19; but the sense is different. b2. Cf. Dan 4:8.
x. W Syr. Arm.; omit F LI 436 Br, also c2. Hunting metaphors play a role in missionary
Burchard, Untersuchungen, p. 80; gaps rest. language, e.g. Mk 1:17 parallel; see generally,
y. The reading "achieved something" is a guess W. H. Wuellner, The Meaning of "Fishers of
from the variegated evidence; cf. Burchard, Un­ Men" (NT Library; Philadelphia, Pa., 1967). Gk.
tersuchungen, p. 81. W has "as someone does not delea(s)ma. "bait," is not a frequent word; cf.
do." Josephus, War 2.8.11 §158; 2Pet 2:14, 18. In a
z. Classical metonymy in Jewish language. burlesque throng of masqueraded people preceding

c. Note the naive way in which the action starts In our terms "Ethiopian" should be Nubian or
again. Some words about the whereabouts and Sudanese. situation of the characters known from the first part i. Gk. charopoioi is very rare; cf. Gen 42:19
of the book, which closed some eight years earlier, BA. would certainly be welcome. j. "And . . . God" (Syr. Arm. 436); omit AP;
d. The reading "like . . . god": AP(Q); "my gaps rest. Cf. Gen 32:25-33.on her father's neckk just like someone hangs on to his father's neck when he returns from
10(6), (7) fighting into his house, and she kissed him.1 *And after this they ate and drank. And Joseph
and Aseneth went (back) to their house. Simeon and Levi see Joseph and Aseneth home
11 And Simeon and Levi, Joseph's brethren, the sons of Leah, alone escorted them; but the
sons of Zilpah and Bilhah, Leah's and Rachel's maidservants, did not escort them, because
12 they envied (them) and were hostile against them.111 »And Levi was on Aseneth's right (side)
13(8) and Joseph on (her) left. •And" Aseneth grasped Levi's hand. And Aseneth loved Levi
exceedingly beyond all of Joseph's brethren, because he was one who attached himself to
the Lord, and he was a prudent man and a prophet of the Most High and sharp-sighted with
(9) his eyes, and he used to see letters0 written in heaven by the finger of Godp and he knew
the unspeakable (mysteries) of the Most High God0- and revealed them to Aseneth in secret,
because he himself, Levi, would love Aseneth very much, and see her place of rest/ in the
highest, and her walls like adamantine eternal walls, and her foundations founded upon a
rock of the seventh heaven.8
H. THE PLOT OF PHARAOH'S SON AGAINST ASENETH AND JOSEPH
Pharaoh's son fails to persuade Simeon and Levi to help him
1 (i) 23 And it happened while Joseph and Aseneth were passing by,8 Pharaoh's firstborn son
(2) saw them from the wall.0 And he saw Aseneth and was cut (to the heart), and (for some
time) he was heavily indignant and felt sick* because of her beauty. And he said, "Thus it
shall not be."d
2(3) And Pharaoh's son sent messengers and called to him Simeon and Levi. And the men
came to him and stood before him.And he said, "Thus it
shall not be."d
2(3) And Pharaoh's son sent messengers and called to him Simeon and Levi. And the men
came to him and stood before him. And Pharaoh's firstborn son said to them, "I know
today* that you are powerful men beyond all men on the earth, and by these right (hands)
of yours the city of the Shechemites has been overthrown, and by these two swords of
3(4) yours thirty thousand fighting men were cut down/ »And behold, today I will take you as
companions for myself,8 and give you plenty of gold and silver, and servants and maids
k. Gk. trachilos is distinct from previous auchin, p. The reading "by the finger of God": Syr. which is the hind part of the neck. Traditional 436 (cf. 15:4, 12x); omit a d; gaps rest. phrase, e.g. Gen 45:15; 46:29; 50:1; 3Mac 5:49; q. The reading "and . . . God": G (Syr.) Arm. TAb B 6:2. (436 "read" instead of "know"); "and read
1. The reading "just . . . him" has been recon­ them" a d; gaps rest. Perhaps a case of split
structed on the assumption of split tradition from tradition which ought to be reconstructed as "and
"just. . . house" (Syr. Arm. 436) and "and . . . read . . . and he knew . . ."
him" a (E) d; omit both phrases FW; gaps G Ll r. Cf. Isa 66:1 LXX(?). On the "rest" see Intro. Ngr. s. The reading "and her walls . . . heaven":
m. Tradition, none directly from the Joseph (Syr. Arm. [332 "third," Yovs "second" heaven]
story, is reflected in this verse. The relationship 436); omit a d; gaps b Ll Ngr. between Simeon and Levi may go back to Gen
34:25-31; 49:5-7, although they are severely cen­ 23 a. The reading "when they were going away
sured there, whereas Levi is a thoroughly positive to Jacob (absolute genitive)": added A(PQ); gap
figure in JosAsen (see Intro.) as in ancient Jewish Ngr.; omit rest. lore generally, and Simeon could be, were it not b. Does the author intend the city wall? Cf. Gen
for his temper (see 23:7). Hostility of Dan, Gad, 12:14; 2Sam 11:2.c. Note the naive way in which the action starts In our terms "Ethiopian" should be Nubian or
again. Some words about the whereabouts and Sudanese. situation of the characters known from the first part i. Gk. charopoioi is very rare; cf. Gen 42:19
of the book, which closed some eight years earlier, BA. would certainly be welcome. j. "And . . . God" (Syr. Arm. 436); omit AP;
d. The reading "like . . . god": AP(Q); "my gaps rest. Cf. Gen 32:25-33.

Gen
for his temper (see 23:7). Hostility of Dan, Gad, 12:14; 2Sam 11:2. Naphtali, and Asser, the sons of Zilpah and Bilhah c. The reading "and was . . . sick": (all); except
(Gen 30:1-13), against their brothers, especially "he became mad about her" AP(Q) d. Cf. 6:1;
Joseph, probably was developed on the basis of 7:3. certain features of Gen 37 and is likewise evidenced d. "And ... be" (all); except omit a G d; gap
in contemporary literature (e.g. TGad 1; Aptowitzer, Ngr. See also 4:11. HUCA 1 [1924J 284f.). e. See 4:7. n. Perhaps we should shift the beginning of vs. f. Also vs. 14. Cf. Gen 34; Jub 30; TLevi 1-7. 13 to the next clause. g. "And . . . myself (a b Syr. Arm. 436);
o. Those grammata would be writings such as "And behold I will take you for my assistance
the Book of the Living (15:4, 12x) or the heavenly today" B; "But I ask you for my assistance; hurry"
tablets read by Jacob (Jub 32:21; PrJos Fragment D (Ll); gaps Slav. Ngr. Phil adopts both D and
B), Asser (TAss 5:4), or Enoch (IEn 103:2; 106:19; the majority reading (following F). "Companions"
cf. further TLevi 5:4; TAss 2:10), rather than letters denotes members of Pharaoh's son's retinue (see
inscribed in the sky. also vs. 4), not just "pals."and houses and big (estates as) inheritance.h Only do this thing and show mercy on me,1
for I have been insulted very much by your brother Joseph, for he himself took Aseneth
4(5) my (envisaged) wife who was betrothed to me from the beginning) »And now, come assist
me, and we will make war on Joseph your brother, and I will kill him with my sword,k
and have Aseneth for (my) wife, and you will be to me brothers and faithful friends.1
5(6) However, do this thing. But if you are too cowardly to do this thing, and despise my
6 purpose, behold, my sword is prepared against you."m »And while he was saying this, he
exposed his sword and showed it to them. But when the men, Simeon and Levi, heard these words, they were exceedingly cut (to
7 (7) the heart), because Pharaoh's son had spoken to them in a tyrannical fashion." • And Simeon
was a daring and bold man,° and he intended to lay his hand on the handle of his sword
and draw it from its sheath and strike Pharaoh's son, because he had spoken defiant things
8(8) to them.p #And Levi saw the intention of his heart, because Levi was a prophet, and he
was sharp-sighted with (both) his mind and his eyes, and he used to read what is written in
the heart of men.q And Levi trod with his foot (on) Simeon's right foot and pressed it and
9(9) (thus) signaled him to cease from his wrath. #And Levi said to Simeon quietly, "Why are
you furious with anger with this man? And we are men who worship God, and it does not
befit us to repay evil for evil."8
io(io) And Levi said to Pharaoh's son with frankness, his face cheerful,' and there was not the
least (bit of) anger in him, but in meekness of heart he said to him, "Why does our lord"
speak words such as these? And we are men who worship God, and our father is a friendv
n di) of the Most High God, and Joseph our brother is like the firstborn son of God.And we are men who worship God, and it does not
befit us to repay evil for evil."8
io(io) And Levi said to Pharaoh's son with frankness, his face cheerful,' and there was not the
least (bit of) anger in him, but in meekness of heart he said to him, "Why does our lord"
speak words such as these? And we are men who worship God, and our father is a friendv
n di) of the Most High God, and Joseph our brother is like the firstborn son of God. »And how
could we do this wicked thing,w and sin before our God and before our father Israel* and
12 before our brother Joseph?y #And now, listen to my words. It does not befit a man who
worships God to injure anyone in any way. And if anyone wants to injure a man who
worships God, that (first-mentioned) man who worships God does not succor him (the
13 injurer),2 because a sword is not in his hands.82 •And you at least guard against speaking
d2) any longer about our brother Joseph words such as these. But if you insist on this wicked
purpose of yours, behold, our swords are drawn in our right hands before you."
14 (13) And Simeon and Levi drew their swords from their sheaths and said, "Behold, have you
h. Lit. plural. See 3:5. important ethical principles held up in JosAsen. i. Lit. "make mercy with me." Biblical, e.g. The only exact parallels are Rom 12:17; IThes
ISam 20:14; Lk 10:37. 5:15; IPet 3:9 and later on ApSedr 7:7; Letter of
j. Pharaoh thought otherwise, 1:7-9; but cf. Polycarpus, 2:2. See further Intro. 4:11. Undoubtedly he means: "by Fortune, un­ t. Esther keeps up a cheerful face in spite of a
known to man," as 21:3. On "wife" see 21:1. fearful heart (Esth 5:1b). k. "I will make war" and "we will kill" are u. The reading "does our Lord": AP EFW Syr. also well attested. The textual situation calls for Arm. LI 436; "do you, my lord" (Q) G d; gap
further scrutiny. Ngr. Cf. Gen 44:7 LXX. 1. The words denote rank, rather than personal v. Witnesses a FW 436; "near and beloved"
intimacy; cf. IMac 14:40 (see also vs. 3).Gen
for his temper (see 23:7). Hostility of Dan, Gad, 12:14; 2Sam 11:2. Naphtali, and Asser, the sons of Zilpah and Bilhah c. The reading "and was . . . sick": (all); except
(Gen 30:1-13), against their brothers, especially "he became mad about her" AP(Q) d. Cf. 6:1;
Joseph, probably was developed on the basis of 7:3. certain features of Gen 37 and is likewise evidenced d. "And ... be" (all); except omit a G d; gap
in contemporary literature (e.g. TGad 1; Aptowitzer, Ngr. See also 4:11. HUCA 1 [1924J 284f.). e. See 4:7. n. Perhaps we should shift the beginning of vs. f. Also vs. 14. Cf. Gen 34; Jub 30; TLevi 1-7. 13 to the next clause. g. "And . . . myself (a b Syr. Arm. 436);
o. Those grammata would be writings such as "And behold I will take you for my assistance
the Book of the Living (15:4, 12x) or the heavenly today" B; "But I ask you for my assistance; hurry"
tablets read by Jacob (Jub 32:21; PrJos Fragment D (Ll); gaps Slav. Ngr. Phil adopts both D and
B), Asser (TAss 5:4), or Enoch (IEn 103:2; 106:19; the majority reading (following F). "Companions"
cf. further TLevi 5:4; TAss 2:10), rather than letters denotes members of Pharaoh's son's retinue (see
inscribed in the sky. also vs. 4), not just "pals."

IMac 14:40 (see also vs. 3). Syr.; "beloved" Arm. (as in following clause,
m. "However . . . thing ("H.—thing" omit where d also has it instead of "son"); "slave" d;
EFW Syr. LI). But . . . you" (b Syr. Arm. LI *'puer'' ("child" or "servant") L1; "guest" Slav.;
436); "But if you do not hear my words I will kill gaps EG Ngr. The tide "friend of God" is here
you with my sword" AP(Q) d; gaps Slav. Ngr. drawn from Jewish tradition, which applied it above
On "thing" see vs. 11. all to Abraham, but Egyptian and Greek tradition
n. "But . . . fashion" (EFGW Syr. Arm. 436 (e.g. Epictetus, Diss., 2.17.29: the Stoic) have it
Br); omit a d; gaps LI Slav. Ngr. too(G. Stahlin, "philos etc.," TDNT9, 146-71). o. Cf. 28:12f. Simeon's character goes back to w. Lit. "word (rema)" also vs. 5 and 24:14. Gen 34:25-31; 49:5-7; cf. on 22:11. A biblicism; cf. e.g. Gen 18:25. See also 17:1. p. Cf. Gen 42:7, 30; Jude 15. x. Witnesses AP Syr. LI 436; "Jacob" GW
q. The reading "and he was . . . men": (G Syr. Arm.; omit F; gaps rest. Arm. 436); "and he saw in advance all the (things) y. Cf. Gen 39:9. See also on 7:4. to come" (B) D Phil; omit AP EF; gaps rest. For z. Other translations: "that (injured) man who
this description of a prophet see e.g. Lk 7:39, also worshipped] God avengeth not himself upon him
Mk 2:8 parallel; Jn 2:25. (the injurer)" Br; 11 so schutzt sich jener Gottes-
r. The reading "with anger": E Syr.? Arm. furchtige dock nicht vor ihm (the injurer)" Rie. (436); omit a G d; gaps rest. "To be furious with But, for this, "him" would here have to be in the
anger {thymousthai orgi)" is prevalent in LXX, accusative, as in 24:7, not in the dative. e.g. Gen 39:19. a2. But cf. vs. 14. Are we to understand: "not
s. Also 29:3, cf. 28:5, 14, one of the most wantonly"?seen these swords? With these two swords the Lord God punished the insult of the
Shechemites (by) which they insulted the sons of Israel, because of our sister Dinah whom
15 (14) Shechem the son of Hamor had defiled." »And the son of Pharaoh saw their swords drawn
and was exceedingly afraid and trembled over his whole body, because their swords were
flashing forth (something) like a flame of fire, and the eyes of Pharaoh's son darkened, and
16 (15) he fell on his face on the ground beneath their feet. • And Levi stretched out his right hand
and grasped02 him and said to him, "Rise and do not be afraid. Only guard against speaking
17(16) any longer a wicked word about our brother Joseph." »And Simeon and Levi went away
from the presence of Pharaoh's son. Pharaoh's son enlists the help of Dan and Gad, Naphtali and Asher. They set up an
ambush for Aseneth
KD 24 And the son of Pharaoh was full of fear and distress, because he was afraid of Joseph's
brothers, Simeon and Levi, and he was still weighed down by Aseneth's beauty and
2(2) distressed with great overwhelming" distress. *And his servants said to him into the ear,
saying, "Behold, the sons of Bilhah and the sons of Zilpah, Leah's and Rachel's maidservants,
Jacob's wives, are hostile to Joseph and Aseneth and envy them. And these will be in your
3(3) power0 according to your will." »And Pharaoh's son sent messengers and called them to
himself. And they came to him at the first hour of the night and stood before him. And
Pharaoh's son said to them, "I have a word (to say) to you, because0 you are powerful
4(4) men." »And Dan and Gad, the elder brothers, said to him, "Let our lord say to his servants
what he wants (to say), and your servants will listen,d and we will do according to your
5(5) will."e »And Pharaoh's son rejoiced exceedingly with great joy and said to his servants,
"Withdraw from me a little, because I have a confidential word (to say) to these men."
6 And they all withdrew.And they came to him at the first hour of the night and stood before him. And
Pharaoh's son said to them, "I have a word (to say) to you, because0 you are powerful
4(4) men." »And Dan and Gad, the elder brothers, said to him, "Let our lord say to his servants
what he wants (to say), and your servants will listen,d and we will do according to your
5(5) will."e »And Pharaoh's son rejoiced exceedingly with great joy and said to his servants,
"Withdraw from me a little, because I have a confidential word (to say) to these men."
6 And they all withdrew. 7(6) And Pharaoh's son lied to them andf said, "Behold, blessing8 and death (are set) before
(7) your face. Take now rather the blessing8 and not the death, 'because you are powerful men
8(8) and will not die like women,h but be brave and avenge yourself on your enemies. #For I
heard Joseph your brother saying to Pharaoh my father concerning you, 'Children of my
father's maidservants are Dan and Gad and Naphtali and Asher, and they are not my
(9) brothers. And I will wait for my father's death* and (then) I will blot them out from the
earth1 and all their offspring lest they share the inheritance with us, because they are children
9(io) of maidservants.k •And these (men) have sold me to the Ishmaelites,1 'and I will repay them
according to the whole insult of theirs which they committed against me wickedly. Only
io(ii) let my father die (first).' *And Pharaoh, my father, commended him and said to him, 4Well
you have spoken, child. Then, take from me men (who are) powerful in fighting and go
out to meet themm in accordance with what they did to you. And I will be a helper to
you.' "
11 d2) And when the men heard the words of Pharaoh's son, they were exceedingly troubled
b2. Gk. ekratesen AP G Arm. 436; "erected (all); except "life" G Syr.; gaps E Ngr. Cf. Deut
(igeiren)" Q FW Syr.; "raised (anestesen)" E d; 30:19; Jer 21:8. A similar alternative in weaker
gaps Ll Ngr.IMac 14:40 (see also vs. 3). Syr.; "beloved" Arm. (as in following clause,
m. "However . . . thing ("H.—thing" omit where d also has it instead of "son"); "slave" d;
EFW Syr. LI). But . . . you" (b Syr. Arm. LI *'puer'' ("child" or "servant") L1; "guest" Slav.;
436); "But if you do not hear my words I will kill gaps EG Ngr. The tide "friend of God" is here
you with my sword" AP(Q) d; gaps Slav. Ngr. drawn from Jewish tradition, which applied it above
On "thing" see vs. 11. all to Abraham, but Egyptian and Greek tradition
n. "But . . . fashion" (EFGW Syr. Arm. 436 (e.g. Epictetus, Diss., 2.17.29: the Stoic) have it
Br); omit a d; gaps LI Slav. Ngr. too(G. Stahlin, "philos etc.," TDNT9, 146-71). o. Cf. 28:12f. Simeon's character goes back to w. Lit. "word (rema)" also vs. 5 and 24:14. Gen 34:25-31; 49:5-7; cf. on 22:11. A biblicism; cf. e.g. Gen 18:25. See also 17:1. p. Cf. Gen 42:7, 30; Jude 15. x. Witnesses AP Syr. LI 436; "Jacob" GW
q. The reading "and he was . . . men": (G Syr. Arm.; omit F; gaps rest. Arm. 436); "and he saw in advance all the (things) y. Cf. Gen 39:9. See also on 7:4. to come" (B) D Phil; omit AP EF; gaps rest. For z. Other translations: "that (injured) man who
this description of a prophet see e.g. Lk 7:39, also worshipped] God avengeth not himself upon him
Mk 2:8 parallel; Jn 2:25. (the injurer)" Br; 11 so schutzt sich jener Gottes-
r. The reading "with anger": E Syr.? Arm. furchtige dock nicht vor ihm (the injurer)" Rie. (436); omit a G d; gaps rest. "To be furious with But, for this, "him" would here have to be in the
anger {thymousthai orgi)" is prevalent in LXX, accusative, as in 24:7, not in the dative. e.g. Gen 39:19. a2. But cf. vs. 14. Are we to understand: "not
s. Also 29:3, cf. 28:5, 14, one of the most wantonly"?

Deut
(igeiren)" Q FW Syr.; "raised (anestesen)" E d; 30:19; Jer 21:8. A similar alternative in weaker
gaps Ll Ngr. terms is proposed to Joseph by Potiphar's wife in
Josephus, Ant 2.4.3 §48f. 24 a. Lit. "super-great." h. Also 25.7; cf. LAB 31:7. b. Gk. hypocheirioi, lit. "under-the-hand-(peo- i. Cf. Gen 47:28. ple)." LXX often use this for subjugated groups. j. The reading "from the earth": a G (after
c. "I ... because" (FGW Arm. 436); "I "offspring") Syr.; gaps E Ngr.; omit rest. learned from many that" a; "I know that" d; omit "k. Cf. Gen 21:10; Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924)
Syr.; gaps E Ll Ngr. Is this a case of split tradition? 285
d. The reading "and . . . listen": (AP Syr.) 1. Cf. Gen 37:25-28. 436; "and we . . . listen" G Arm.; omit Q d; gaps m. The reading "and . . . them (kai hypexelthe
rest. Cf. ISam 3:9f. autous or autois)": A d; "and give them back(?)"
e. Witnesses AQ(P) G d Syr. Arm. 436; "word" Slav.; omit P; paraphrastic Syr.; gaps rest. The
EFW; gaps Ll Ngr. translation is difficult; "and proceed against them"
f. The reading "lied . . . and": (AP E? d)\ omit Br; "und belange sie" Rie; "et sors secritement
FGW Syr. Arm. 436; gaps Q Ll Ngr. Pharaoh's pour traiter tes frires" Phil. The rendering "and
son tries a new approach in the following verses. keep out of their way" would suit the verb better,
g. The reading "blessing," both occurrences: but not in this context.12(13) and distressed and said to Pharaoh's son, "We beg you, lord, help us."n #And Pharaoh's
13 son said to them, "I will be a helper to you if you hear my words." *And the men said,
"Behold, we are your servants before you.0 Give us orders, and we will do according to
14 your will." -And Pharaoh's son said to them, "I will kill my father Pharaoh this night,
because Pharaoh my father is like a father to Joseph and said to him (that he would) help
him against you. And you kill Joseph. And I will take Aseneth for a wife for myself, and
you will be brothers to me and fellow heirsP of all my (things). However, do this thing."
15(14) And Dan and Gad said to him, "We are your servants*" today and will do everything
which you have ordered us. And we have heard Joseph saying to Aseneth today, 4Go
tomorrow to the field (which is) our inheritance, because it is the hour of the vintage.' And
he gave (as an escort to be) with her six hundred men powerful in fighting and fifty
16,17 forerunners. #And now, listen to us, and we will speak to our lord." #And they spoke to
i8(i5) him all their secret words (and said), "Give us men for war."r «And Pharaoh's son gave
to the four brothers five hundred men each, and them he appointed their chiefs and
commanders. 19 (16) And Dan and Gad said to him, "We are your servants today, and will do everything that
you have ordered us. We will go by night and set up an ambush in the wadi,8 and hide in
d7) the thicket of the reeds. And you, take with you fifty bowmen on horses,1 and go far ahead
(18) of us.u And Aseneth will come and fall into our hands.v And we will cut down the men
who are with her. And Aseneth will flee ahead with her carriage* and fall into your hands,
d9) and you will do to her as your soul desires/ And after that we will kill Joseph as he is
(20) distressed over Aseneth, and his children we will kill before his eyes."y And Pharaoh's son
rejoiced when he heard these words.And you, take with you fifty bowmen on horses,1 and go far ahead
(18) of us.u And Aseneth will come and fall into our hands.v And we will cut down the men
who are with her. And Aseneth will flee ahead with her carriage* and fall into your hands,
d9) and you will do to her as your soul desires/ And after that we will kill Joseph as he is
(20) distressed over Aseneth, and his children we will kill before his eyes."y And Pharaoh's son
rejoiced when he heard these words. And he sent them out and two thousand fighting men
with them. 20 (2i) And they came to the wadi and hid in the thicket of the reeds. (And) they split into four
detachments.2 And there were sitting across the wadi, on the forward section as it were, on
this side of the road and the other five hundred men each; likewise on this side of the wadi
the rest were waiting, and they, too, were sitting in the thicket of the reeds, on this side of
the road and the other five hundred men each.82 And between them the road (was) wide
and spacious. n. "For from now on we are your household but it seems to be needed as a foundation for vs. servants and slaves and will die with you" added 18. There is no evidence whatsoever for a syn­
(a); omit G Syr. Arm. 436; gaps rest. It is assumed tactical link such as "(and said)."
here that the a reading is an anticipation from vs. s. Cf. ISam 15:5. 13 (or 15:19?), but perhaps the case merits recon­ t. LXX has mounted bowmen only in Jdt 2:15. sideration; cf. Mk 14:31 parallel. u. The reading "of us": Syr. LI Br Rie; "of
0. "Behold ... you" 0 Syr. Arm. 436); omit her" or "it" (autes) a B; "it" (auto) G; omit EFW
a (including "the men"); gaps d LI Ngr. See also D Arm. 436 Slav. Phil; gap Ngr. vs. 11. v. Witnesses a GW d Arm.; "ambush (plural)"
p. Gk. sygkleronomos is not otherwise attested EF LI 436; gaps Syr. Ngr. before Philo and Rom 8:17; Eph 3:6 (cf. Burchard, w. Gk. ochema (also 26:5; 27:If., never LXX
ZNW 61 [1970] 169); Heb 11:9; IPet 3:7. Gk.Deut
(igeiren)" Q FW Syr.; "raised (anestesen)" E d; 30:19; Jer 21:8. A similar alternative in weaker
gaps Ll Ngr. terms is proposed to Joseph by Potiphar's wife in
Josephus, Ant 2.4.3 §48f. 24 a. Lit. "super-great." h. Also 25.7; cf. LAB 31:7. b. Gk. hypocheirioi, lit. "under-the-hand-(peo- i. Cf. Gen 47:28. ple)." LXX often use this for subjugated groups. j. The reading "from the earth": a G (after
c. "I ... because" (FGW Arm. 436); "I "offspring") Syr.; gaps E Ngr.; omit rest. learned from many that" a; "I know that" d; omit "k. Cf. Gen 21:10; Aptowitzer, HUCA 1 (1924)
Syr.; gaps E Ll Ngr. Is this a case of split tradition? 285
d. The reading "and . . . listen": (AP Syr.) 1. Cf. Gen 37:25-28. 436; "and we . . . listen" G Arm.; omit Q d; gaps m. The reading "and . . . them (kai hypexelthe
rest. Cf. ISam 3:9f. autous or autois)": A d; "and give them back(?)"
e. Witnesses AQ(P) G d Syr. Arm. 436; "word" Slav.; omit P; paraphrastic Syr.; gaps rest. The
EFW; gaps Ll Ngr. translation is difficult; "and proceed against them"
f. The reading "lied . . . and": (AP E? d)\ omit Br; "und belange sie" Rie; "et sors secritement
FGW Syr. Arm. 436; gaps Q Ll Ngr. Pharaoh's pour traiter tes frires" Phil. The rendering "and
son tries a new approach in the following verses. keep out of their way" would suit the verb better,
g. The reading "blessing," both occurrences: but not in this context.

ochema (also 26:5; 27:If., never LXX
ZNW 61 [1970] 169); Heb 11:9; IPet 3:7. Gk. syn or NT), whereas Joseph's chariot is harma (e.g. refers to joint possession. The testator in this case 5:4). We should perhaps visualize a household
is Pharaoh, rather than his son. vehicle designed to transport several people (cf. q. Cf. Josh 9:8, 11;LAJ9 57:4. 27:1-5) with their luggage (cf. Chariton 2.3.3f.). r. Vs. 17: "And . . . words" (a FWG Arm. x. Traditional phrase, e.g. ISam 2:16; Isa 58:11
436); "and may he give us men for war" Syr.; LXX. "let therefore my lord command to come with us y. Cf. 2Kgs 25:7. war-men more than those" LI (lacks vss. 16 and z. "And... detachments" a (no "and" because
18-19a); "and give us men of war, and (men) preceding clause begins "And as"); gaps E Ngr.;
powerful for war" Slav, (lacks vs. 16 "and . . . omit rest. "Split" is lit. "became"; cf. Gen 2:10. lord"); cf. "and give us 500 men each" added in Gk. arche in the sense of "military body" (as e.g. vs. 19 after "reeds" E (lacks vs. 16 "and we in Judg 7:16; ISam 13:17) seems to be a Septu-
will," vs. 19 "ordered us"); gaps d (vs. 15 "and agintism; cf. Josephus, Ant 1.9 §172. fifty" to 17; but B Phil begin vs. 18 "And as a2. "And there were . . . each" (A); much
Pharaoh's son heard these words, he") Ngr. (E, shorter rest; gaps E 436 Ngr.: A alone gives a clear
see above). The verse is reconstructed on the picture of the ambush. Words from the other
assumption of split tradition, but it is utterly witnesses may, however, be used to improve it. doubtful. The first half is well attested, but why The road is crossing the wadi. the secrecy? The second half is poorly evidenced,Pharaoh's son fails to kill his father and takes up his position in the ambush
i (i) 25 And Pharaoh's son rose in that night and went to the chamber8 of his father in order to
kill his father with a sword. And his father's guards prevented him from going in to his
2(2) father and said to him, "What are your orders, lord?" «And Pharaoh's son said to them,
"I want to see my father, because I am going out to harvest (the vintage of) my new-
3(3) planted vineyard."0 »And the guards said to him, "Your father suffers from a headache0
and lay awake all night, and now he is resting a little.d And he said to us, 'Let no one
4(4) come close to me, not even my firstborn son." »And when he heard this/ Pharaoh's son
went away hurriedlyf and took with him fifty mounted bowmen and went away at their
head,8 just as Dan and Gad had spoken to him. Naphtali and Asher, bitten by remorse, fail to refrain Dan and Gad
5 (5) And the younger brothers, Naphtali and Asher, spoke to their older brothers, Dan and
Gad, saying,h "Why do you once again act wickedly against our father Israel and against
(6) our brother Joseph? And him the Lord is guarding like an apple of the eye.' 'Behold, have
you not sold him once, and now he is king of the whole land of Egypt and savior and grain
6(7) giver?* #And now again, if you should attempt to act wickedly against him, he will cry to
the Most High,k and he will send fire from heaven, and it will consume you,1 and the angels
7(8) of God will fight for him against you."m #And their older brothers, Dan and Gad, were
8 angry at them and said, "But shall we die like women?" That would be absurd." #And
they went out to meet Joseph and Aseneth.0
ID. ASENETH FALLS INTO THE AMBUSH AND IS RESCUED
BY JOSEPH'S BROTHERS
Aseneth is caught in the ambush and Levi alarms his brothers
I (D 26 And Aseneth rose at daybreak and said to Joseph, "I will go, just like you have said,"
to the field (which is) our inheritance. And my soul is anxious, because you are parting
25 a.ASENETH FALLS INTO THE AMBUSH AND IS RESCUED
BY JOSEPH'S BROTHERS
Aseneth is caught in the ambush and Levi alarms his brothers
I (D 26 And Aseneth rose at daybreak and said to Joseph, "I will go, just like you have said,"
to the field (which is) our inheritance. And my soul is anxious, because you are parting
25 a. Gk. epi ton thalamon: E (d) 436; "for the Gk. anaboesetai "he will cry up" (or "out") may
death (epi ton thanatori)" FW; "in the reed (en td be behind both boesei and anabesetai. But perhaps
kalamdY' G; "into the bedchamber (eis ton koi- this is just another case of split tradition. A possible
tdna)" AP; "into the house (eis ton oikon)" Q reconstruction, assuming loss by homoiarcton, is
Arm.; omit Syr.; gaps Ll Ngr. "he will cry to the Most High, and (his cry) will
b. Gk. ampelos, "grapevine,' * is used for "vine­ go up into the heaven" (cf. Acts 10:4). yard" on papyri since the third century B.C., but 1. Cf. 2Kgs 1:10, 12, 14; Sir 48:3; TAb B 12;
this and possibly Rev 14:18f. are the first known Lk 9:54. occurrences in literary texts. m. Cf. e.g. 2Kgs 6:16f.; 2Mac 3:25f.; 3Mac
c. Witnesses b Syr. Arm. Ll; "ache" a d; 6:18f.; 1QM 12.8; Mt 26:53; Berger, Auferstehung,
illegible 436; gap Ngr. pp. 270-73, n. 106. See also 28:1. d. The reading "a little": FGW Arm. Ll 436; n. See 24:6. omit aEd Syr.; gap Ngr. o. "That. . . Aseneth" a ("in" for "out" AP)
e. The reading "when . . . this": AP Ll; gap d; gaps Ll Ngr.; omit Slav, and rest. The end of
Ngr.; omit rest. vs. 7 is not intrinsically improbable (me genoito,
f. WitnessesbArm. 436; "inanger"ad(Syr.?); the well-known emphatic negation stemming from
omit Ll; gap Ngr. Is this a split tradition? popular philosophical parlance, never LXX, but
g. Lit. "ahead of them," a traditional phrase e.g. TJob 38:1; Rom 3:4); but vs. 8 is difficult,
implying leadership; cf. e.g. Tob 5:18; LAB 39:1; because the bad brothers have already gone out
IQSa 1.17,23. (24:19f.), and not against Joseph at that. Is vs. 8
h.ochema (also 26:5; 27:If., never LXX
ZNW 61 [1970] 169); Heb 11:9; IPet 3:7. Gk. syn or NT), whereas Joseph's chariot is harma (e.g. refers to joint possession. The testator in this case 5:4). We should perhaps visualize a household
is Pharaoh, rather than his son. vehicle designed to transport several people (cf. q. Cf. Josh 9:8, 11;LAJ9 57:4. 27:1-5) with their luggage (cf. Chariton 2.3.3f.). r. Vs. 17: "And . . . words" (a FWG Arm. x. Traditional phrase, e.g. ISam 2:16; Isa 58:11
436); "and may he give us men for war" Syr.; LXX. "let therefore my lord command to come with us y. Cf. 2Kgs 25:7. war-men more than those" LI (lacks vss. 16 and z. "And... detachments" a (no "and" because
18-19a); "and give us men of war, and (men) preceding clause begins "And as"); gaps E Ngr.;
powerful for war" Slav, (lacks vs. 16 "and . . . omit rest. "Split" is lit. "became"; cf. Gen 2:10. lord"); cf. "and give us 500 men each" added in Gk. arche in the sense of "military body" (as e.g. vs. 19 after "reeds" E (lacks vs. 16 "and we in Judg 7:16; ISam 13:17) seems to be a Septu-
will," vs. 19 "ordered us"); gaps d (vs. 15 "and agintism; cf. Josephus, Ant 1.9 §172. fifty" to 17; but B Phil begin vs. 18 "And as a2. "And there were . . . each" (A); much
Pharaoh's son heard these words, he") Ngr. (E, shorter rest; gaps E 436 Ngr.: A alone gives a clear
see above). The verse is reconstructed on the picture of the ambush. Words from the other
assumption of split tradition, but it is utterly witnesses may, however, be used to improve it. doubtful. The first half is well attested, but why The road is crossing the wadi. the secrecy? The second half is poorly evidenced,

Is vs. 8
h. On this intervention cf. TZeb 1:7. an addition? But the style of JosAsen requires some
i. Also 26:2. Traditional, e.g. Deut 32:10; Ps conclusion of the scene. Is this an early example
17:8; IEn 100:5. of flashback technique, perhaps somewhat unex­
j. This noun is not otherwise attested before pectedly and rather clumsily done? Or shall we
imperial times. assume that vss. 5-8 have been misplaced at some
k. The reading "he will cry (boesei). .. High": early date? They would fit better between 24:19
a; "he will go up (anabesetai) into the heaven" and 24:20. EGW (Syr.) 436 Slav.; "God will pull him into
heaven" Arm.; "he will call upon the God of Israel 26 a. Reported in 24:15. saying (omit D Phil)" d; illegible F; gaps Ll Ngr.2(2) from me." •And Joseph said to her, "Courage, and do not be afraid, but go,b because the
Lord is with you,c and he himself will guard you like an apple of the eye from every wicked
3 (3) deed!d *For I, too, will go to my grain giving* and will give breadf to all men, and the
4(4) whole land will surely not perish (away) from the face of the Lord."8 'And Aseneth went
away on her way, and Joseph went away to his grain giving. 5(5) And Aseneth and the six hundred men with her came to the place of the wadi. And
suddenly those who lay in ambushh rushed out of their ambushes and joined battle with
Aseneth's men, and cut them down with the edge of the sword/ and they killed all her
(6) forerunners, but Aseneth fled ahead with her carriage. 6 (7) And Levi, the son of Leah, perceived all these (things) in (his) spiritj as a prophet, and
hek declared the danger1 (in which) Aseneth (was) to his brothers the sons of Leah.m And
each of them took his sword and put it on his thigh, and they took their shields and put
them on their arms, and they took their spears in their right hands, and pursued after Aseneth
in rapid course. 7 (8) And Aseneth was fleeing ahead, and behold, Pharaoh's son and fifty horsemen with him
8 met" her. »And Aseneth saw him and was afraid and troubled very much, and her whole
body trembled. And she called on the name of the Lord her God. Benjamin wounds Pharaoh's son and kills his troups with stones
i (i), (2) 27 And Benjamin8 sat at Aseneth's left (hand) in her carriage.6 And Benjamin was a boy
of eighteen years, big and strong and powerful, and there was unspeakable beauty on him,
2 (3) and strength like (that of) a lion cub,c and he feared the Lord exceedingly. • And Benjamin
leapt down from the carriage and took a round stone from the wadi and filled his handd and
hurled (the stone) at Pharaoh's son and struck his left temple and wounded him with a
3 heavy* wound.Benjamin wounds Pharaoh's son and kills his troups with stones
i (i), (2) 27 And Benjamin8 sat at Aseneth's left (hand) in her carriage.6 And Benjamin was a boy
of eighteen years, big and strong and powerful, and there was unspeakable beauty on him,
2 (3) and strength like (that of) a lion cub,c and he feared the Lord exceedingly. • And Benjamin
leapt down from the carriage and took a round stone from the wadi and filled his handd and
hurled (the stone) at Pharaoh's son and struck his left temple and wounded him with a
3 heavy* wound. *And Pharaoh's son fell down from his horse on the ground, being half
4(4) dead.f «And Benjamin leapt and went up upon the rock, and said to Aseneth's charioteer,
5(5) "Give me stones8 from the wadi." #And he gave him fifty stones. And Benjamin hurled
b. A adds "rejoicing (masculine) completely, n. Lit. "meets (apanta)."
(by) nothing (or "no one") being frightened (ptoou-
meni)"\ PQ add "rejoicing (feminine) no word 27 a. He appears unexpectedly. ISam 17, espe­
doing (poioumene)"; gaps EG LI Slav. Ngr.; omit cially vss. 48-51, have inspired the following
rest. verses and 29:2. This explains why Benjamin is a
c. Traditional; see W. C. van Unnik, "Dominus "boy" despite his eighteen years (on those cf. 1:4
vobiscum," New Testament Essays: Studies in and also TLevi 12:5). Memory of Thomas Walter Manson, ed. A. J. B. b. "And . . . carriage" (E)F(G)W ("right" for
Higgins (Manchester, 1959) pp. 270-305. "left" E G) Arm. (436); "And Benjamin was
d. Cf. e.g. Ps 120:7; Jub 12:29; 31:24; IQS sitting with her (w. h. omit Slav.) on the carriage
2.3. at (the) right (side) ("at . . . side" omit d only)"
e. Gk. sitodosia, in LXX only Gen 42:19, 33, (a d)\ "Benjamin however with her was in the
no equivalent in MT. Also cf. vs. 4. carriage" Syr.; "Benjamin however (just) as he
f. Witnesses FW Arm. LI (436); "grain" AP was on Aseneth's carriage with her" LI; "Sat
d Syr.?; omit E Slav.; gaps Q G Ngr. however also near her in her right part Benjamin
g. Cf.Is vs. 8
h. On this intervention cf. TZeb 1:7. an addition? But the style of JosAsen requires some
i. Also 26:2. Traditional, e.g. Deut 32:10; Ps conclusion of the scene. Is this an early example
17:8; IEn 100:5. of flashback technique, perhaps somewhat unex­
j. This noun is not otherwise attested before pectedly and rather clumsily done? Or shall we
imperial times. assume that vss. 5-8 have been misplaced at some
k. The reading "he will cry (boesei). .. High": early date? They would fit better between 24:19
a; "he will go up (anabesetai) into the heaven" and 24:20. EGW (Syr.) 436 Slav.; "God will pull him into
heaven" Arm.; "he will call upon the God of Israel 26 a. Reported in 24:15. saying (omit D Phil)" d; illegible F; gaps Ll Ngr.

however also near her in her right part Benjamin
g. Cf. Gen 6:11. If this vs. in Gen is alluded to the son of Jacob or rather the brother of Joseph"
we should perhaps translate, "... surely not grow Ngr. corrupt in the Lord's sight." Cf. further Gen 41:36; c. Cf. Gen 49:9 (Judah). Benjamin's description
47:13. varies considerably. Maybe more can be made of
h. The reading "those . . . ambush": b ("for the evidence. them" added G) Arm. 436 (LI) Slav, (added "for d. The expression appears to mean that he
her"); "the men" Syr.; "those around Pharaoh's "gripped the stone firmly." Cf. 2Kgs 9:24, lit. son" AP(Q) d (against 24:19); gap Ngr. "And Jehu filled his hand with the bow."
i. Lit. "in mouth of sword," the well-known e. Witnesses a EFW Syr. Arm. (436); "great
biblica] phrase, e.g. Gen 34:26; Jdt 2:27; Sir 28:18; and heavy" G Slav. Phil; "great" Ngr.; gaps d
Lk 21:24. LI. j. Cf. Mk 2:8; see Intro. f. The reading "being half dead": (a) d (LI)
k. The reading "the son . . . he": (o d)\ cf. Ngr. (661 only, see Burchard, NTS 24 (1978] 73f.);
"And as Levi and Benjamin saw (singular)" Ngr. probably Arm. (Burchard, "Joseph und Aseneth
(but context is garbled); omit rest including Slav. 25-29 armenisch," JSJ 10 [1979] 1-10); omit EG
1. As often, kindynos means "predicament," Syr. 436 Slav.; gap FW. Gk. hemithanes is first
rather than "risk." attested by Dionysius of Halicarnassus and Dio-
m. The reading "the sons of Leah": E Syr. dorus of Sicily. Cf. Lk 10:30; Burchard, ZNW 61
Arm. 436 Ngr.; "the sons of Israel" (FGW); omit (1970) 158. rest. g. See vs. 5. Perhaps we should prefix "fifty."the fifty stones and killed the fifty men who were with the son of Pharaoh." And all the
stones penetrated their temples. Levi and his brothers kill the troops of Dan and Gad
6 (6) And the sons of Leah, Ruben and Simeon, Levi and Judah, Issachar and Zebulun, pursued
after the men who had been lying in ambush for Aseneth and fell upon them unawares1 and
cut them all down; and the six men killed two thousand J
Dan and Gad, Naphtali and Asher try to kill Aseneth, but their swords turn to ashes
7 (7) And their brothers, the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, fled from their presence and said,
44We have been destroyed by our brothers, and Pharaoh's son has died by the hand of
Benjamin the boy, and all (who were) with him have been destroyed by the one hand of
8 the boy Benjamin. *And now,k come, let us kill Aseneth and Benjamin and flee into this
9(8) thicket of reeds." *And they came toward Aseneth holding their swords drawn, full of
blood. 10 And Aseneth saw them and was exceedingly afraid and said:
Lord my God, who made me alive again
and rescued me1 from the idols and the corruption of death,1"
who said to me, 44Your soul will live for ever,""
rescue me from the hands of these wicked men. 11 And the Lord God heard Aseneth's voice, and at once their swords fell from their hands
on the ground and were reduced to ashes. The wicked brothers give up and ask Aseneth to intercede for them with Levi and his
brothers
KD 28 And the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah saw this great thing and were exceedingly afraid and
2(2) said, 44The Lord fights against us for Aseneth."8 «And they fell on the face to the ground
and prostrated themselves before Aseneth and said, 44Have mercy on us, your slaves,
3 because you are our mistress and queen.11 And the Lord God heard Aseneth's voice, and at once their swords fell from their hands
on the ground and were reduced to ashes. The wicked brothers give up and ask Aseneth to intercede for them with Levi and his
brothers
KD 28 And the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah saw this great thing and were exceedingly afraid and
2(2) said, 44The Lord fights against us for Aseneth."8 «And they fell on the face to the ground
and prostrated themselves before Aseneth and said, 44Have mercy on us, your slaves,
3 because you are our mistress and queen. *And we have wickedly committed evil (things)
(3) against you and against our brother Joseph;0 and the Lord repaid us according to our works.c
4 »And now we, your slaves, beg you, have mercy on us and rescue us from the hands of
our brothers, because they arrived as avengers of the insult (done to) you, and their swords
5 are against us. *Andd we know that our brothers are men who worship God and do not
6 repay anyone evil for evil. 'Anyway, be gracious to your slaves, mistress, before them."
7(4) And Aseneth said to them, 44Courage, and do not be afraid of your brothers, because
h. In a G d the number of stones and men, if does not by itself prove that JosAsen believes in
present, is fifty (G d have it also in vs. 4); in EFW its immortality (against Philonenko, Joseph et As£-
Syr. Arm. Ngr. it is forty-eight; in 436 forty-nine; neth, p. 215). It is compatible with other ideas of
Slav, has fifty in vs. 4, forty-eight in vs. 5; gap man's future life (cf. Fischer, Eschatologie und
Ll. Fifty is consonant with 24; 19; 25:4; 26:7. Jenseitserwartung, pp. 97-105). See further Intro. Maybe Dan and Gad have been deducted erro­
neously to make forty-eight. 28 a. Alsocf. vs. 10. Cf. e.g. Ex 14:14, 25; 2Chr
i. Cf. Josh 10:9. 20:29. G. Delling ("Einwirkungen der Sprache der
j. The variants are too numerous to list here. Septuaginta in 'Joseph und Aseneth,' " JSJ 9
k. "And now" b d Syr. (436 Slav.); "and now [1978] 29-56, see p.however also near her in her right part Benjamin
g. Cf. Gen 6:11. If this vs. in Gen is alluded to the son of Jacob or rather the brother of Joseph"
we should perhaps translate, "... surely not grow Ngr. corrupt in the Lord's sight." Cf. further Gen 41:36; c. Cf. Gen 49:9 (Judah). Benjamin's description
47:13. varies considerably. Maybe more can be made of
h. The reading "those . . . ambush": b ("for the evidence. them" added G) Arm. 436 (LI) Slav, (added "for d. The expression appears to mean that he
her"); "the men" Syr.; "those around Pharaoh's "gripped the stone firmly." Cf. 2Kgs 9:24, lit. son" AP(Q) d (against 24:19); gap Ngr. "And Jehu filled his hand with the bow."
i. Lit. "in mouth of sword," the well-known e. Witnesses a EFW Syr. Arm. (436); "great
biblica] phrase, e.g. Gen 34:26; Jdt 2:27; Sir 28:18; and heavy" G Slav. Phil; "great" Ngr.; gaps d
Lk 21:24. LI. j. Cf. Mk 2:8; see Intro. f. The reading "being half dead": (a) d (LI)
k. The reading "the son . . . he": (o d)\ cf. Ngr. (661 only, see Burchard, NTS 24 (1978] 73f.);
"And as Levi and Benjamin saw (singular)" Ngr. probably Arm. (Burchard, "Joseph und Aseneth
(but context is garbled); omit rest including Slav. 25-29 armenisch," JSJ 10 [1979] 1-10); omit EG
1. As often, kindynos means "predicament," Syr. 436 Slav.; gap FW. Gk. hemithanes is first
rather than "risk." attested by Dionysius of Halicarnassus and Dio-
m. The reading "the sons of Leah": E Syr. dorus of Sicily. Cf. Lk 10:30; Burchard, ZNW 61
Arm. 436 Ngr.; "the sons of Israel" (FGW); omit (1970) 158. rest. g. See vs. 5. Perhaps we should prefix "fifty."

"And now" b d Syr. (436 Slav.); "and now [1978] 29-56, see p. 45) suggests a deliberate
they say" (or "said") Arm.; "Anyway therefore allusion to the miraculous deliverance at the Red
(omit Q) the (omit A) left behind (plural) said" a Sea. See further 25:6. Bat ("the" omit "left... said" in square brackets; b. The reading "and . . . Joseph": a B (D)
omit Br Rie); gaps Ll Ngr. Phil; gaps Ll Ngr.; omit rest. 1. Cf. Isa 49:7, 26; 54:5, 8. c. Cf. e.g. Ps 62:12; Prov 24:12; Sir 35:24;
m. The reading "and rescued . . . death": Rom 2:6; 2Cor 11:15. AP(Q); "out of death" b Syr. Arm. 436 Slav. d. Vss. 5f. (a B; vs. 5 in square brackets Bat,
Phil; gaps d Ll Ngr. The a reading has been omit Br); omit b D (but in vs. 7 D Phil have "not
adopted on the principle of lectio longior (see repaying evil for evil" for "fearing . . . man," a
Intro.) and because "rescued" makes a good vestige of the a B reading?) Syr. Arm. 436 Slav. parallelism with "rescue," but the evidence is Br Phil; gaps Ll Ngr. Vs. 5 will have to be taken
poor. Cf. Rom 7:24. as a self-correction ("And yet we know . . .") to
n. The mention of an afterlife of the "soul" make sense after vs. 4.(5) they are men who worship God and fearing God and respecting every man.e But go into
this thicket of reeds, until I appease them concerning youf and make their anger cease,
(6) because you acted in great boldness against them. Courage now, and do not be afraid. 8 (7) Besides, the Lord* will judge between me and you."h •And Dan and Gad and their brothers
fled into the thicket of reeds. Aseneth appeases Simeon and his brothers
(8> 9 And behold, the sons of Leah came running like three-year-old1 stags against them. • And
Aseneth descended from the carriage (that gave) her shelter and gave them her right hand
(9) with tears, 'and they, falling (down), prostrated themselves on the ground before her, and
wept in a loud voice; and they were seeking their brothers, the sons of their father's
io(io) maidservants, in order to do away with them. «And Aseneth said to them, "I beg you,
spare your brothers and do not do* them evil for evil, because the Lord protected me against
them, and shattered their swords, and they melted on the ground like wax from the presence
di) n of fire.k 'And this is enough for them that the Lord fights against them for us.1 *And you,
spare them because they are your brothers and your father Israel's blood. "m
12(12) And Simeon said to her, "Why does our mistress speak good (things) on behalf of her
13 (13) enemies? *No, but let us cut them down" with our swords, because they (were) first (to)
plan evil (things) against us and against our father Israel and against our brother Joseph,0
14 (14) this already twice,p and against you, our mistress and queen, today." • And Aseneth stretched
out her right hand and touched Simeon's beard and kissed him and said, "By no means,
brother, will you do evil for evil to your neighbor.* To the Lord will you give (the right)
to punish the insult (done) by them/ And they are your brothers and your fathers, Israel's
line, and they fled far from your presence."m
12(12) And Simeon said to her, "Why does our mistress speak good (things) on behalf of her
13 (13) enemies? *No, but let us cut them down" with our swords, because they (were) first (to)
plan evil (things) against us and against our father Israel and against our brother Joseph,0
14 (14) this already twice,p and against you, our mistress and queen, today." • And Aseneth stretched
out her right hand and touched Simeon's beard and kissed him and said, "By no means,
brother, will you do evil for evil to your neighbor.* To the Lord will you give (the right)
to punish the insult (done) by them/ And they are your brothers and your fathers, Israel's
line, and they fled far from your presence. Anyway, grant them pardon."5
15 (15), (16) And Levi went up to her and kissed her right hand and perceived that 'she wanted to
16 save the men from their brother's anger so that they would not kill them. #And' they were
n nearby in the thicket of reeds. *And Levi their brother perceived it and did not declare it to
his brothers. For he was afraid that in their anger they might cut them down. Levi tries to save the life of Pharaoh's son
1 (i) 29 And Pharaoh's son rose from the ground and sat up and spat blood from his mouth,
2 (2) because the blood from his temple ran down over his mouth. • And Benjamin ran up to him
and took his sword and drew it from its sheath, because Benjamin did not have a sword on
3 (3) his thigh, and set about to strike the breast of Pharaoh's son." • And Levi ran up to him and
grasped his hand and said, "By no means, brother, will you do this deed, because we are
men who worship God, and it does not befit a man who worships God to repay evil for
4 evil nor to trample underfoot a fallen (man) nor to oppress his enemy till death. *And now,
(4) put your sword back into its place,b and come, help me, and we will heal him of his wound;
and if he lives, he will be our friend after this, and his father Pharaoh will be like our
father."
e. The reading "and . . ."And now" b d Syr. (436 Slav.); "and now [1978] 29-56, see p. 45) suggests a deliberate
they say" (or "said") Arm.; "Anyway therefore allusion to the miraculous deliverance at the Red
(omit Q) the (omit A) left behind (plural) said" a Sea. See further 25:6. Bat ("the" omit "left... said" in square brackets; b. The reading "and . . . Joseph": a B (D)
omit Br Rie); gaps Ll Ngr. Phil; gaps Ll Ngr.; omit rest. 1. Cf. Isa 49:7, 26; 54:5, 8. c. Cf. e.g. Ps 62:12; Prov 24:12; Sir 35:24;
m. The reading "and rescued . . . death": Rom 2:6; 2Cor 11:15. AP(Q); "out of death" b Syr. Arm. 436 Slav. d. Vss. 5f. (a B; vs. 5 in square brackets Bat,
Phil; gaps d Ll Ngr. The a reading has been omit Br); omit b D (but in vs. 7 D Phil have "not
adopted on the principle of lectio longior (see repaying evil for evil" for "fearing . . . man," a
Intro.) and because "rescued" makes a good vestige of the a B reading?) Syr. Arm. 436 Slav. parallelism with "rescue," but the evidence is Br Phil; gaps Ll Ngr. Vs. 5 will have to be taken
poor. Cf. Rom 7:24. as a self-correction ("And yet we know . . .") to
n. The mention of an afterlife of the "soul" make sense after vs. 4.

. . man": G (Syr.) Arm. "relative" (not biblical). See the evidence in J. 436; omit AP b Slav.; gaps rest (D Phil see at vs. Behm, "haima etc.," TDNT 1, 172-77; SibOr
5). Cf. Lk 18:2. 3.827; Josephus, War 1.18.4 §359; Apuleius 4.23.4. f. Cf. Ex 32:30. n. The reading "limb from limb": added a D;
g. The reading "may see A, idou "behold" gaps E LI Slav. Ngr.; omit rest. PQ) and": added a (cf. Ex 5:21; ISam 24:16; 2Chr o. Cf. Gen 50:20. 24:22); gaps LI Ngr.; illegible F; omit rest. p. The reading "this . . . twice": FGW D Syr. h. The whole phrase is traditional; cf. previous (Arm.) Phil; omit a B 436; gaps E LI Slav. Ngr. note and Gen 16:5; Jdt 7:24. q. The reading "to your neighbor": a d; gaps
i. The reading "three-year-old": FGW; "young" E LI Slav. Ngr.; omit rest. Syr.; "many" Arm.; "in much hurry" AP(Q); r. Or4 'give the insult (done) by them to punish.''
omit d 436; gaps E LI Ngr. Stags or hinds are a Cf. e.g. TBenj 4:3; IQS 10.17f.; Rom 12:19. model of velocity in the OT, e.g. cf. Ps 18:34. s. "Anyway . . . pardon" AP; omit G Syr. j. Witnesses FGW d Arm. 436; "repay" a Syr.; Arm. 436; gaps rest. Doubtful. gaps rest including Slav, t. Vss. 16f. (a FGW Syr. Arm. 436); omit d;
k. Traditional, e.g. Ps 68:2; Micah 1:4. gaps E LI Slav. Ngr. 1. See vs. 1. m. "Blood" was believed to have a part in 29 a. Cf. ISam 17:50f. See also 27:1. procreation (e.g. WisSol 7:2; IEn 15:4; Jn 1:13) b. Cf. Mt 26:52; Jn 18:11. and hence used in metonymy for "line," "family,"5 (5) And Levi raised Pharaoh's son from the ground and washed the blood off his face and
tied a bandage to his wound, and put him upon his horse, and conducted him to his father
6(6), (7) Pharaoh,6 and described"1 to him all these things. *And Pharaoh rose from his throne and
prostrated himself before Levi on the ground and blessed him.e
IV. THE END
7 (8) And on the third day Pharaoh's son died from the wound (caused by the impact) of the
8(9) stone of Benjamin, the boy. *And Pharaoh mourned exceedingly for his firstborn son, and
do from the mourning he fell ill; and Pharaoh diedf at a hundred and nine* years, and left his
9(ii) diadem to Joseph. »And Joseph reigned as king in Egypt for forty-eight years,h and after
this he gave the diadem to Pharaoh's younger offspring, who was at the breast when Pharaoh
died. And Joseph was like a father to Pharaoh's younger son in the land of Egypt all the
days of his life.'
c. Cf. Lk 10:30-35. Levi's attitude borders on number 109 is correct; Pharaoh died one year
the love of one's enemy as implied in the Good before the ideal age of 110 years, which Joseph
Samaritan and prescribed by Mt 5:43-48; yet it is reached (Gen 50:26). not the same thing. Levi exhibits clemency toward h. Similar figures in Jewish lore; cf. Apto­
a defeated enemy, as becomes a man in power, a witzer, HUCA 1 (1924) 286. deed both noble and sensible which serves the i. The reading "all . . . life": Syr.; "until his
interests of both parties (cf. e.g. LetAris 227). death glorifying and lauding God" a (B); omit EG
Jesus exacts love of one's persecutors from a D Ll 436 Phil; W stopped after vs. 9 "years," F
subdued minority predicated upon God's boundless at some point after4'offspring in Egypt" (illegible);
mercy. Cf. L. Schottroff, 44Non-Violence and the Arm. after vs. 7 "died," Slav, after vs. 9 "son,"
Love of One's Enemies," Essays on the Love Ngr. after vs. 9 4'years";4'celebrating with the all
Commandment, ed. R. H.. . man": G (Syr.) Arm. "relative" (not biblical). See the evidence in J. 436; omit AP b Slav.; gaps rest (D Phil see at vs. Behm, "haima etc.," TDNT 1, 172-77; SibOr
5). Cf. Lk 18:2. 3.827; Josephus, War 1.18.4 §359; Apuleius 4.23.4. f. Cf. Ex 32:30. n. The reading "limb from limb": added a D;
g. The reading "may see A, idou "behold" gaps E LI Slav. Ngr.; omit rest. PQ) and": added a (cf. Ex 5:21; ISam 24:16; 2Chr o. Cf. Gen 50:20. 24:22); gaps LI Ngr.; illegible F; omit rest. p. The reading "this . . . twice": FGW D Syr. h. The whole phrase is traditional; cf. previous (Arm.) Phil; omit a B 436; gaps E LI Slav. Ngr. note and Gen 16:5; Jdt 7:24. q. The reading "to your neighbor": a d; gaps
i. The reading "three-year-old": FGW; "young" E LI Slav. Ngr.; omit rest. Syr.; "many" Arm.; "in much hurry" AP(Q); r. Or4 'give the insult (done) by them to punish.''
omit d 436; gaps E LI Ngr. Stags or hinds are a Cf. e.g. TBenj 4:3; IQS 10.17f.; Rom 12:19. model of velocity in the OT, e.g. cf. Ps 18:34. s. "Anyway . . . pardon" AP; omit G Syr. j. Witnesses FGW d Arm. 436; "repay" a Syr.; Arm. 436; gaps rest. Doubtful. gaps rest including Slav, t. Vss. 16f. (a FGW Syr. Arm. 436); omit d;
k. Traditional, e.g. Ps 68:2; Micah 1:4. gaps E LI Slav. Ngr. 1. See vs. 1. m. "Blood" was believed to have a part in 29 a. Cf. ISam 17:50f. See also 27:1. procreation (e.g. WisSol 7:2; IEn 15:4; Jn 1:13) b. Cf. Mt 26:52; Jn 18:11. and hence used in metonymy for "line," "family,"

R. H. Fuller (Philadelphia, beautiful Aseneth, this all beautiful Joseph" added
1978) pp. 9-39. 671; 4'Joseph however made with Aseneth two
d. (All), except "they d." G Ll Ngr. Phil (no sons, Manasse and Ephraim [cf. 21:9], and saw
footnote); gaps E Slav. children of his children" added 661. The text is
e. The reading "and blessed him": a B Arm.?; doubtful; a might be given preference on the
"and he lifted up his son from the ground" 436; strength of Tob 14:15f.; TAb B 14:7, but perhaps
44 Pharaoh however was grateful to them that they we should break off after "of Egypt." Most
had not killed him" vs. 6 Ll; omit FG D Syr. witnesses add some historical remarks from Gen
Phil; gaps EW Slav. Ngr. or Ex, an admonition, a note of completion, giving
f. Arm. ends here. the title of the book, a doxology, a colophon, or a
g. The reading "a hundred and nine": A E d; combination of such items; a adds Gen 50:22b-26
"99" GW Ll; "199" F; "190" Ngr.; "170" PQ; LXX, which is a remark about Aseneth's death
"177" Syr.; 44 1 60" 436; uncertain Slav. If the and burial, and a doxology.LIFE OF ADAM AND EVE
(First Century A.D.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY M. D. JOHNSON
The Greek and Latin texts of the Life of Adam and Eve both purport to narrate in Midrashic
form some episodes in the life of the "first-made" after their expulsion from Paradise,
especially their deathbed recollections and instructions. The Greek text (ApMos), after relating the murder of Abel by Cain and the birth of Seth,
moves rapidly to Adam's deathbed, from which he tells how illness resulted from the first
sin. He asks Seth and Eve to return to Paradise for oil from a tree with which he might be
anointed and find rest from his pains. On the way to Paradise Seth is attacked by a wild
beast and learns that the revolt of the animal world is another result of the Fall. At Paradise
the archangel Michael informs Seth that the oil of mercy will not be given men until the
day of resurrection. Seth and Eve return to Adam, who asks Eve to tell all their children
the story of the Fall from Paradise. This she does at length (ApMos 15-30), describing the
devil's plot with the serpent, his entry into Paradise, the temptation and Fall, God's
appearance in Paradise to announce the punishments, and the expulsion from Paradise. Eve
then repents in great sorrow. Adam dies, and Eve witnesses the awesome return of God to
the earthly Paradise. Adam's soul is washed in Lake Acheron and taken up into the heavenly
Paradise, while his body and that of Abel are prepared for burial in the spot where Adam's
body had been formed at creation. Six days later Eve also dies and her body is buried in
the same place. The Latin text (Vita) begins differently;1 after a description of their repentance (1-17),
Eve is shown standing in the Tigris River and Adam in the Jordan. When Eve's time of
penitence is half accomplished, Satan appears as an angel and deceives her a second time,
inducing her to interrupt her penance. Adam approaches her and the devil.R. H. Fuller (Philadelphia, beautiful Aseneth, this all beautiful Joseph" added
1978) pp. 9-39. 671; 4'Joseph however made with Aseneth two
d. (All), except "they d." G Ll Ngr. Phil (no sons, Manasse and Ephraim [cf. 21:9], and saw
footnote); gaps E Slav. children of his children" added 661. The text is
e. The reading "and blessed him": a B Arm.?; doubtful; a might be given preference on the
"and he lifted up his son from the ground" 436; strength of Tob 14:15f.; TAb B 14:7, but perhaps
44 Pharaoh however was grateful to them that they we should break off after "of Egypt." Most
had not killed him" vs. 6 Ll; omit FG D Syr. witnesses add some historical remarks from Gen
Phil; gaps EW Slav. Ngr. or Ex, an admonition, a note of completion, giving
f. Arm. ends here. the title of the book, a doxology, a colophon, or a
g. The reading "a hundred and nine": A E d; combination of such items; a adds Gen 50:22b-26
"99" GW Ll; "199" F; "190" Ngr.; "170" PQ; LXX, which is a remark about Aseneth's death
"177" Syr.; 44 1 60" 436; uncertain Slav. If the and burial, and a doxology.

When Eve's time of
penitence is half accomplished, Satan appears as an angel and deceives her a second time,
inducing her to interrupt her penance. Adam approaches her and the devil. Satan then tells
them that his fall from heaven resulted from his refusal to worship Adam, the image of
God. When Adam completes his period of penance, Eve separates herself from him until
the birth of Cain. The Latin here adds the story of Adam's ascension into the heavenly
Paradise (25-29) but omits Eve's story of the Fall (ApMos 15-30). It continues with the
account of the death and burial of Adam, and concludes with Eve's command to her children
to record the story of Adam and Eve for posterity on tablets of stone and clay. Texts
Tischendorf published an edition of the Greek text in 1866 which was based on four
manuscripts (Al BCD) and which, together with two others (El E2), was used as the
basis for the English translation of Wells and the German of Fuchs.2 Seventeen additional
manuscripts have been located, ten of which, along with the previous six, have been collated
by J. L. Sharpe as variants to the Tischendorf text.3 These sixteen manuscripts, with sigla
as used by Tischendorf, Fuchs, Wells, and Sharpe, along with an estimation of date, present
location, and degree of completeness, are:
1 In the following pages I have designated the Lat. text as Vita and the Gk. text as ApMos. Two MSS (F and H)
of ApMos have a version of the repentance and are translated below as a parallel to Vita Iff. 2 See Bibliography. 3 J. L. Sharpe, Prolegomena, pt. 2.Al. 13th-14th cent.; Venice; ends at 36:3. A2. 15th—17th cent.; Athos; complete, except 13:2-16:4 is missing. B. 13th~16th cent.; Vienna; omits 21:3-25:2 and 33:2-43:4. C. 11th—13th cent.; Vienna; this is the most complete manuscript. DI. 11th cent.; Milan; 18:1-36:1 is missing.4
D2. 12th—14th cent.; Strassburg; complete. D3. 1518 A.D.; Athens; complete. D4. 13th cent.; Athos; complete. D5. 16th-17th cent.; Andros; 16:3-29:3 is missing. El. 16th cent.; Paris; essentially complete. E2. 15th—16th cent.; Montpellier; essentially complete. F. 15th—17th cent.; Vatican; incomplete in 43; has the "repentance*'following 29:6. G. 16th cent.; Brescia; complete. H. 16th—17th cent.; Patmos; complete; has the "repentance" following 29:6. Ml. 15th—16th cent.; Ankara; complete. M2. 16th cent.; Patmos; complete. Sharpe suggests a classification of these manuscripts into four translations.5 A (Al A2);
D (DI D2 D3 D4 D5 Ml M2); C (C El E2 G); F (F H); manuscript B is unclassified. Since progress in the critical analysis of the text does not yet allow a firm conclusion about
the classification and relative priority among these manuscripts,6 it has seemed best to
present a translation which takes into account the major variants of all available manuscripts. The translation of the Vita is based on the text of Meyer, taking into account the variants
indicated in his apparatus as well as some of those given by Mozley.7 Meyer classified the
manuscripts, all of which are located in Munich except for the last mentioned, which is in
Paris, as follows:
i. Three manuscripts: S, ninth century; T, tenth century; M, twelfth century. These do
not have 29:4-15 or 51:3-9 and are Meyer's main authority, with preference for manuscript
S. n. Four manuscripts, one from the thirteenth to fourteenth centuries, the others from the
fifteenth century. These contain the lengthy additions to chapters 29 and 51; eight of
Mozley's manuscripts, as well as some medieval translations, conform to this textual type.Four manuscripts, one from the thirteenth to fourteenth centuries, the others from the
fifteenth century. These contain the lengthy additions to chapters 29 and 51; eight of
Mozley's manuscripts, as well as some medieval translations, conform to this textual type. m. Four manuscripts from the fifteenth century, which include 29:4-15 as well as material
on the history of the wood of the cross (similar to one manuscript of Mozley). rv. The Paris manuscript, produced in the ninth century or later, related to Q; contains
29:4-15 and 51:3-9. Significant versions of the Greek text are the Armenian8 and, with more Christian
interpolations, the Slavonic.9 The Greek and Latin original texts are both certainly prior to
these and perhaps also to the other Adam literature, sometimes of Christian production,
such as The Cave of Treasures, extant in Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic; The Combat of
Adam and Eve, a Christian work of the eleventh century translated from Arabic into Ethiopic;
the Testament of Adam, extant primarily in Greek and Syriac, and an Apocalypse of Adam
among the gnostic works discovered at Nag Hammadi.10 These documents reveal the
4 MS DI was published by A. M. Ceriani in Monumenta Sacra et Profana (Milan, 1868) vol. 5, pt. 1, pp. 19-
24. 5 Sharpe, Prolegomena, pt. 1, pp. 185-203. 6Sharpe,s contention (pt. 1, p. 201) that MSS El and E2 preserve "the earliest type of text and the most
conservative in style" goes against some apparently secondary features of those MSS, e.g. the omission of koimomenon
de autdn, "and while they were lying down in order to sleep" (2:1); the addition of "my brother" in 2:2b; esthenese
mikron, "he fell sick a little," in 5:2; the addition of "branch of grace" in 9:3b and 10:1; "how were your eyes
opened?" in 10:3; cf. also 11:1b and 19:2. 7 See bibliography. 8 F. C. Conybeare, "On the Apocalypse of Moses," JQR 7 (1895) 216-35. See also the references in Denis,
Introduction, p. 7, n. 23, and M.When Eve's time of
penitence is half accomplished, Satan appears as an angel and deceives her a second time,
inducing her to interrupt her penance. Adam approaches her and the devil. Satan then tells
them that his fall from heaven resulted from his refusal to worship Adam, the image of
God. When Adam completes his period of penance, Eve separates herself from him until
the birth of Cain. The Latin here adds the story of Adam's ascension into the heavenly
Paradise (25-29) but omits Eve's story of the Fall (ApMos 15-30). It continues with the
account of the death and burial of Adam, and concludes with Eve's command to her children
to record the story of Adam and Eve for posterity on tablets of stone and clay. Texts
Tischendorf published an edition of the Greek text in 1866 which was based on four
manuscripts (Al BCD) and which, together with two others (El E2), was used as the
basis for the English translation of Wells and the German of Fuchs.2 Seventeen additional
manuscripts have been located, ten of which, along with the previous six, have been collated
by J. L. Sharpe as variants to the Tischendorf text.3 These sixteen manuscripts, with sigla
as used by Tischendorf, Fuchs, Wells, and Sharpe, along with an estimation of date, present
location, and degree of completeness, are:
1 In the following pages I have designated the Lat. text as Vita and the Gk. text as ApMos. Two MSS (F and H)
of ApMos have a version of the repentance and are translated below as a parallel to Vita Iff. 2 See Bibliography. 3 J. L. Sharpe, Prolegomena, pt. 2.

7, n. 23, and M. Stone, "The Death of Adam—An Armenian Adam Book," HTR 59 (1966) 283-
91. 'Text edited by V. Jagic\ Slavische Beitrdge zu den biblischen Apocryphen (Vienna, 1893), vol. 1, pp. 17-99. The Slav, version of the repentance is translated by L. S. A. Wells, APOT, vol. 2, pp. 134-36. 10 For bibliography on these and other Adam materials see Denis, Introduction, pp. 7-14; Wells, APOT, vol. 2,
pp. 125f.; James, LAOT, pp. 1-8.continued interest among Christian writers in speculating upon the life of the protoplasts,
Adam and Eve, and upon Seth as a recipient of revelation. To a large extent, however,
these documents are later alterations of the material here presented, and are of limited use
in establishing the Greek and Latin texts. Original language
Although no Hebrew text is extant,11 it is most probable that there did exist an original
Hebrew document or documents from which the Apocalypse and Vita were translated, the
Greek directly from the Hebrew and the Latin directly either from the Hebrew or from the
Greek.12 Sharpe has summarized much of the evidence which leads to this conclusion with
regard to the Greek text:13 the consistent parataxis; the verb preceding the subject; traces of
Semitic parallelism (ApMos 34-36; 39:1-3); the use of the infinite absolute, a rarity in
Aramaic (17:5; 41:3); the adjectival genitive (3:2; 21:2; 38:2; 43:5); Hebraic relative
constructions ("the tree in which the oil flows out of it" in 9:3 and 44my command which
I delivered to you to keep it" in 22:3); and the redundant use of the participle, as in the
frequently used expression 44he answered and said" or 44he wept, saying." More striking
are the evidences of transliterations and apparent mistranslations from the Hebrew: idou,
lit., 44behold," in 41:1 (Heb. hirfni); Jael (see 29:4; 33:5); repeated prepositions (Gk. of
26:4); en mataiois, lit., 44in follies," an apparent mistranslation in 25:1 (see n.). In addition
to this evidence offered by Sharpe, see the notes to Apocalypse 1:3 and 19:5, both of which
suggest a Hebrew original. In spite of this convincing evidence it should be noted that the author was familiar with
the Septuagint of Genesis 1-5 and that the Lake Acheron of Apocalypse 37:3 is derived
from Greek tradition, although it was familiar to early Christians and could have been
known also to a Jewish author (see n.).In addition
to this evidence offered by Sharpe, see the notes to Apocalypse 1:3 and 19:5, both of which
suggest a Hebrew original. In spite of this convincing evidence it should be noted that the author was familiar with
the Septuagint of Genesis 1-5 and that the Lake Acheron of Apocalypse 37:3 is derived
from Greek tradition, although it was familiar to early Christians and could have been
known also to a Jewish author (see n.). Whether the Latin is derived solely from a Greek version, partly from a Greek and partly
from a Hebrew, or entirely from a Hebrew text cannot be determined conclusively. The
problem is complicated by the fact that three episodes in the Latin have no direct counterpart
in most manuscripts of the Greek: the repentance of Adam and Eve (1-11); Satan's fall
from heaven (12-16) and Adam's ascension into the heavenly Paradise (25-29). Similarly,
Eve's story of the Fall in Apocalypse 15-30 has no complete parallel in Vita, although
several details from it are reproduced.14 The Greek text, moreover, shows clear signs of
composite sources: God appears in the earthly Paradise twice to announce punishments for
sin (8; 22) and twice to attend to matters following the death of Adam (33; 38). Without
doubt, a diverse oral and literary history lies behind the Greek and Latin texts alike; it
would therefore be pointless to attempt recovery of 44the original Hebrew text."
The linguistic evidence in Vita is likewise mixed. On the one hand Greek expressions
are retained in the Latin, e.g. plagas, 4'plagues," in 34:1; plasmatics, 4"created," in 13:2;
plasmasti, 44you formed," in 27:2; plasma, 4'creature," in 46:3; sindones bissinas, 44linen
cloths," in 48:1. On the other hand Semitisms can be seen in 10:1 (Heb. yardqah,
44sponge," read as ydrdq, 44herb"); 18:2 (ad occasum solis, 44to the sunset," see n.); 21:1
(virtutes, 4'excellences," see n.); 21:3 (herbam, 44reed," see n.), as well as in the style.7, n. 23, and M. Stone, "The Death of Adam—An Armenian Adam Book," HTR 59 (1966) 283-
91. 'Text edited by V. Jagic\ Slavische Beitrdge zu den biblischen Apocryphen (Vienna, 1893), vol. 1, pp. 17-99. The Slav, version of the repentance is translated by L. S. A. Wells, APOT, vol. 2, pp. 134-36. 10 For bibliography on these and other Adam materials see Denis, Introduction, pp. 7-14; Wells, APOT, vol. 2,
pp. 125f.; James, LAOT, pp. 1-8.

On the other hand Semitisms can be seen in 10:1 (Heb. yardqah,
44sponge," read as ydrdq, 44herb"); 18:2 (ad occasum solis, 44to the sunset," see n.); 21:1
(virtutes, 4'excellences," see n.); 21:3 (herbam, 44reed," see n.), as well as in the style. Several possibilities remain: The Latin author was ignorant of the Greek; he chose not to
reproduce the story of Eve; or he had before him a form of the Greek text that is earlier
than what is reflected in the extant manuscripts. The latter possibility seems most adequate.15
12 Rabbinic traditions interpret Gen 5:1 as referring to God's foreknowledge of human history rather than to a
document, as in bAZ 5a: "Did not Resh Lakish say, 4What is the meaning of the verse. This is the book of the
generations of Adam? Did Adam have a book? What it implies is that the Holy One, blessed be He, showed to Adam
every generation with its exposition . . .' " (so also ARN 31 [Goldin's ed., p. 126); bBM 85b-86a; GenR 24:2; ExR
40). 12 Gk. from Heb. original: Meyer, p. 217; Wells, APOT, vol. 2, pp. 129f.; C. Fuchs, APAT, vol. 2, p. 511;
Sharpe, Prolegomena pt. 1, pp. 114-39; O. Eissfeldt, The Old Testament: An Introduction (New York, 1965) p. 636. That the Lat. is directly translated from the Heb. is less widely held; see the evidence adduced by Wells, APOT,
vol. 2, pp. 128f., to suggest that the author of the Vita had the ApMos before him. 13 Sharpe, Prolegomena, pt. 1, pp. 116-39. 14 Cf. the following passages from Eve's story with parallels in Vita (ApMos reference is given first): 15:2 with
32:2; 16:2 with 14:3; 16:3 with 12-16; 17:1 with 9:1 and 33:2; 21:6 with 44:2; 22 with 25; 29:6 with 22:2 and 43:5. 15 But see Meyer's reasons for presupposing translation from the Heb. (Abhandlungen, pp. 198-207).Date
Meyer suggested the possibility that the Paris manuscript of the Vita was made in the
ninth century or later from a manuscript dated between 730 and 740.16 He notes also that
the story of the fall of Satan (12-16), not found in the Greek, seems to have been known
to Mohammed (see 12:1, n.) and that the original document (Hebrew?) must be prior to the
Adam material extant in Syriac, Arabic, Ethiopic, and Slavic. Parts, at least, of the Greek
document were known to the author of the Gospel of Nicodemus (ch. 19 = Descent into
Hell 3); and the Armenian and Slavic are translations of the Greek. The external evidence
therefore would indicate a latest possible date of about A.D. 500, or better 400, for the first
Greek and Latin translations of the original document(s), which must be considerably earlier. The absence of apparent Christian allusions, except for the easily identifiable variants in
Vita 29 and 51, does not necessarily argue for a date early in the Christian period since
Christian allusions are rare in most Jewish writings of that time. Yet, given the fact that
the document enjoyed wide circulation among Christians, the paucity of Christian interpo­
lations is indeed striking. The many parallels with early rabbinic traditions (some are
identified in the notes), 2 Enoch (see below), and Josephus (cf. Ant 1.2.3 with Vita 50)
reveal that the substance of both recensions, Greek and Latin, fits into the time near the
beginning of Christianity. On the other hand, the frequently adduced passage in Vita 29:8
which refers to a second temple without mentioning its destruction is not an indication of
date since it is missing in the best Latin manuscripts. There are, unfortunately, no clear
historical allusions in any part of either text. Given the relationship with the Pseudepigrapha, Josephus, rabbinic traditions, and perhaps
Paul, the most natural span for the original composition would be between 100 B.C. and
A.D.Given the relationship with the Pseudepigrapha, Josephus, rabbinic traditions, and perhaps
Paul, the most natural span for the original composition would be between 100 B.C. and
A.D. 200, more probably toward the end of the first Christian century. The Greek and Latin
texts were produced between that time and A.D. 400.17
Provenance
On the basis of supposed hellenistic touches, especially the mention of the Lake of
Acheron in Apocalypse 37:3, it has often been suggested that the author of the original
document was a Jew of Alexandria.18 This view is difficult to maintain if it is admitted that
both the Greek and Latin texts show signs of mistranslation of a source or sources written
in Hebrew. Moreover, our documents have a consistently non-Philonian approach to biblical
interpretation, with no trace of allegorization or symbolic treatment of biblical figures. The
work stands much closer to the Midrash or Haggadah so typical of Qumran and the Rabbis. Preferable, therefore, is the view of Sharpe, who concludes from an examination of the
Greek text that 4'the original document was written in Hebrew, the form is that of the
Midrash, and the theology is that of Pharisaic Judaism" and that it probably originated in
Palestine.19 While the question of authorship can be discussed only on the basis of the
contents and must therefore remain problematical, it is highly probable that the author of
the main traditions was a Jew who had not absorbed much of Greek piety or the Philonian
exegetic method.20
Theological importance
The contents of both the Greek and Latin recensions appear to be quite compatible with
the beliefs reflected in the Pseudepigrapha as a whole, as well as the theology of rabbinic
16 Meyer, Abhandlungen, pp. 218f. 17 See also Sharpe, Prolegomena, pt. 1, pp. 146-51. 18 E.g. Wells, APOT, vol. 2, p. 130. 19 Sharpe, Prolegomena, pt. 1, p. 226; also pp. 8f. and 151. 20 E. Scharer, Geschichte des Judischen Volkes4 (Leipzig, 1909) vol. 3, pp.On the other hand Semitisms can be seen in 10:1 (Heb. yardqah,
44sponge," read as ydrdq, 44herb"); 18:2 (ad occasum solis, 44to the sunset," see n.); 21:1
(virtutes, 4'excellences," see n.); 21:3 (herbam, 44reed," see n.), as well as in the style. Several possibilities remain: The Latin author was ignorant of the Greek; he chose not to
reproduce the story of Eve; or he had before him a form of the Greek text that is earlier
than what is reflected in the extant manuscripts. The latter possibility seems most adequate.15
12 Rabbinic traditions interpret Gen 5:1 as referring to God's foreknowledge of human history rather than to a
document, as in bAZ 5a: "Did not Resh Lakish say, 4What is the meaning of the verse. This is the book of the
generations of Adam? Did Adam have a book? What it implies is that the Holy One, blessed be He, showed to Adam
every generation with its exposition . . .' " (so also ARN 31 [Goldin's ed., p. 126); bBM 85b-86a; GenR 24:2; ExR
40). 12 Gk. from Heb. original: Meyer, p. 217; Wells, APOT, vol. 2, pp. 129f.; C. Fuchs, APAT, vol. 2, p. 511;
Sharpe, Prolegomena pt. 1, pp. 114-39; O. Eissfeldt, The Old Testament: An Introduction (New York, 1965) p. 636. That the Lat. is directly translated from the Heb. is less widely held; see the evidence adduced by Wells, APOT,
vol. 2, pp. 128f., to suggest that the author of the Vita had the ApMos before him. 13 Sharpe, Prolegomena, pt. 1, pp. 116-39. 14 Cf. the following passages from Eve's story with parallels in Vita (ApMos reference is given first): 15:2 with
32:2; 16:2 with 14:3; 16:3 with 12-16; 17:1 with 9:1 and 33:2; 21:6 with 44:2; 22 with 25; 29:6 with 22:2 and 43:5. 15 But see Meyer's reasons for presupposing translation from the Heb. (Abhandlungen, pp. 198-207).

Scharer, Geschichte des Judischen Volkes4 (Leipzig, 1909) vol. 3, pp. 398-99, is one of the few who has
expressed doubts on this point.Judaism,21 the Dead Sea Scrolls, and early Christianity.22 The absence of polemic and
sectarian tendencies is remarkable and refreshing, and yet it frustrates the attempt to identify
the milieu out of which the material has sprung. God is pictured with a curious mixture of transcendent majesty and quaint anthropo­
morphism. The four theophanies of the Greek text (ApMos 8; 22; 33; 38) describe God's
arrival on a "chariot of Cherubim" (22) or a "chariot of light . . . [drawn] by four radiant
eagles" (33), accompanied by ranks of angels, and with such glory that the sun and moon
seem to be darkened (ApMos 35-36). With this, the account in Vita 25-28 of Adam's
ascension into the "paradise of righteousness" is fully consistent. This divine transcendence
is suggested also by the mediation of the angels who carry out God's will. Especially
touching are the blossoming of the plants of the earthly Paradise on God's arrival (ApMos
22:3; 38:4), the cultic preparations made for the theophany in Apocalypse 33, and the piety
of Vita 28 and Apocalypse 32; 42. Yet both recensions record God stretching out his hand
to receive Adam's soul (ApMos 37:4; Vita 47:2), holding a conversation first with Adam's
soul (ApMos 39) and then his body (ApMos 41), and rebuking the angels for being more
merciful than he (ApMos 27:4).23 God is both to be feared and also to be looked to for
grace. The exaltation of God is also to be seen in the numerous references to angelic beings. There are ranks of angels (ApMos 36:1) over which are the cherubim (ApMos 22; 36:3)
and the seraphim (ApMos 33:3; 37:3). These accompany God in his appearances on earth
and offer worship to him at regular intervals (ApMos 7:2; 17:1).There are ranks of angels (ApMos 36:1) over which are the cherubim (ApMos 22; 36:3)
and the seraphim (ApMos 33:3; 37:3). These accompany God in his appearances on earth
and offer worship to him at regular intervals (ApMos 7:2; 17:1). Four angels are mentioned
by name (ApMos 40:2) and of these Michael is of greatest interest in our texts: He teaches
Adam agriculture (Vita 22:2); as the "angel of mankind" (ApMos 32; Vita 41:1) he comforts
Eve (Vita 21:2); he conducts Adam to the paradise of righteousness (Vita 22:2), takes charge
of the soul and body of Adam after his death (ApMos 37:5-6; Vita 46:3), and in general
serves as God's messenger to men (ApMos 2:1; 3:2; 49:2 and par. in Vita). The Angelic
Liturgy of the Dead Sea Scrolls offers an interesting parallel to several of these details (see
nn.). Certain angels, called virtutes, "excellences," in the Vita, are placed to guard the
earthly Paradise before and after the Fall. Satan is a pre-existent fallen angel, and the Vita constitutes a classic source for this legend
(12-16), which recurs in the Koran and various early and medieval Christian writings. He
seeks to destroy men's souls (Vita 17:1) by disguising himself as an angel of light (Vita
9:1, 3; 12:1; ApMos 17:1) to put into men "his evil poison, which is his covetousness"
(epithymia, ApMos 19:3; cf. Vita 15:3). This leads to transgression of God's commands,
to strife or enmity (ApMos 25:4; 28:3; Vita 12:1), to seventy varieties of illness and pain
(ApMos 8; Vita 34), to disruptions in the natural and animal world (ApMos 10ff.; Vita
37ff.; ApMos 20:3), and, above all else, to death (ApMos 14:2; 2:4). But in the end, those
whom he has seduced by his wiles will sit on the glorious throne which he has usurped
(ApMos 39:2; Vita 47:3). Man is formed from clay and the divine breath (Vita 27:2) and so has the image of God,
which is not totally obliterated by the Fall (ApMos 10:3; 12:1; 35:2; Vita 13:3; 14:1-3;
15:2; 37:3; 39:2).Scharer, Geschichte des Judischen Volkes4 (Leipzig, 1909) vol. 3, pp. 398-99, is one of the few who has
expressed doubts on this point.

But in the end, those
whom he has seduced by his wiles will sit on the glorious throne which he has usurped
(ApMos 39:2; Vita 47:3). Man is formed from clay and the divine breath (Vita 27:2) and so has the image of God,
which is not totally obliterated by the Fall (ApMos 10:3; 12:1; 35:2; Vita 13:3; 14:1-3;
15:2; 37:3; 39:2). He was originally clothed in righteousness and glory (ApMos 20-21) and
received the worship of angels (Vita 13-14) but now has an "evil heart" (ApMos 13:5)
and is subject to toil, pain, strife, sickness, and death. Yet his love of knowledge remains
(Vita 27:3). Of special interest is the conception of soul and body, seen most clearly in the
Greek text, in which at the death of Adam the soul is taken into the third heaven (ApMos
37) while the body is buried in the ground (ApMos 40). Restoration of full life awaits the
resurrection, when the soul and body will be reunited. That there is some Greek influence
on this conception can be seen by the mention of the Lake Acheron in Apocalypse 37:3. Sin, according to our texts, stems from grasping equality with God (Vita 15:3) or from
Satan's epithymia ("covetousness" or "grasping desire"; ApMos 19:3), which takes
concrete form in the breaking of God's commands. Both texts repeatedly assert that sin has
21 Except that the MSS in group I at Vita 14:2 have the divine name in Gk. uncials: 1HU. 22 Christian motifs are not evident even in the interpolations in Vita 29:4-15, except at vs. 14, and 51:3-9, except
vs. 9. The same is true of ApMos 13:3-6, but not, of course. Vita 42:2-5, which is completely Christian in origin. 23 Wells, APOT. vol. 2, p. 132.come to the human race through a woman (ApMos 9:2; 11; 14:2; 21:2, 6; 24:1; 29:3; 32:2;
Vita 18:1; 26:2; 35:2; 38; 44:2). Repentance and sincere sorrow are the appropriate attitudes
of the sinner, as is seen most movingly in Eve's repentance in Apocalypse 32 (cf. ApMos
27:3; Vita 4). The Vita also emphasizes ritual acts (fasting, 6:1; submersion in water, 6;
placing dung or dust on one's head, 40:2; 36:1; cf. ApMos 6:2), but it is noteworthy that
in neither text is sacrifice explicitly set forth as expiatory.24 Ascetic ideals are much less in
evidence than one would expect in an early Jewish or Christian document.25
Of special interest in both texts are the two paradises. The earthly Paradise is surrounded
by water (Vita 29:2-3) and a wall with gates (ApMos 17:1; 19:1); it was divided between
Adam and Eve to be tended by them (ApMos 15; Vita 32:2). Greatest emphasis falls on
the tree of life, the "illegal tree," and the tree from which the healing oil flows (in Vita
36:2 but not ApMos this is identified with the tree of life). The earthly Paradise is also the
place of burial of Adam, Abel, and Eve (ApMos 40:6). The heavenly Paradise is located
in the third heaven26 (ApMos 37:5; 40:1; cf. 2En 8) and is the "Paradise of visitation" or
"Paradise of righteousness" of Vita 25:3 and 29:1. This is the abode of the soul after death
(ApMos 37). The resurrection of the dead at the last day is repeatedly taught. While not denying the
resurrection of the wicked, the emphasis clearly is placed on the restoration to man of what
had been lost in the Fall: The tree of life will be given (ApMos 28:4), the healing oil which
Adam requested in vain (ApMos 13; Vita 42), a godly heart (ApMos 13), and the throne
usurped by Satan (ApMos 39; Vita 47). The absence of any and all messianism is most
striking and completely unexplainable on the assumption of a Christian origin of the material.While not denying the
resurrection of the wicked, the emphasis clearly is placed on the restoration to man of what
had been lost in the Fall: The tree of life will be given (ApMos 28:4), the healing oil which
Adam requested in vain (ApMos 13; Vita 42), a godly heart (ApMos 13), and the throne
usurped by Satan (ApMos 39; Vita 47). The absence of any and all messianism is most
striking and completely unexplainable on the assumption of a Christian origin of the material. There is also the motif of the place where Adam was created (ApMos 40:6), where he
had his house of prayer (ApMos 5:3; Vita 30:2), and where he was buried (ApMos 40; Vita
45:2). In Vita 45:2 this is "against the East in the great dwelling place of God," and in
Apocalypse 33:4 there is an altar at that spot. There can be little doubt that the same site
is intended in all such references and that the location is to be understood as the place of
the Jerusalem Temple, where rabbinic sources fix the location of Adam's oratory (see n. to
Vita 30:2). Since no trace is here found of the Christian legend that Adam was buried on
the site of the crucifixion and burial place of Jesus,27 we have all the more reason to think
of a specifically Jewish origin of this material. Relation to canonical and apocryphal books
Parts of this work develop themes which are at best tangential to Old Testament material:
the repentance of Adam and Eve and the fall of Satan (Vita 1-17); Adam's rapture to the
heavenly Paradise (Vita 25-29); Seth's quest for the healing oil (ApMos 5:3-6:3; 9-14 and
par.); the death and burial of Adam and Eve (ApMos 31-43 and par.); and Eve's command
to her children to make the tablets (Vita 49; 51:3ff.).Since no trace is here found of the Christian legend that Adam was buried on
the site of the crucifixion and burial place of Jesus,27 we have all the more reason to think
of a specifically Jewish origin of this material. Relation to canonical and apocryphal books
Parts of this work develop themes which are at best tangential to Old Testament material:
the repentance of Adam and Eve and the fall of Satan (Vita 1-17); Adam's rapture to the
heavenly Paradise (Vita 25-29); Seth's quest for the healing oil (ApMos 5:3-6:3; 9-14 and
par.); the death and burial of Adam and Eve (ApMos 31-43 and par.); and Eve's command
to her children to make the tablets (Vita 49; 51:3ff.). The remainder of the narrative,
including the birth of the children of Adam and Eve (ApMos 1-5 and par.), Adam's story
of the Fall (ApMos 7-8 and par.), and Eve's story of the Fall (ApMos 15-30), is a typical
haggadic Midrash on various details of Genesis 1-5.28 Numerous allusions and quotations
from the Septuagint are to be found in Apocalypse 15-30 and from the Vulgate throughout
the Vita. Specific allusions to other Old Testament material are rare. Vita 4:2 and even the
description of the divine chariot may derive directly from other Pseudepigrapha (but cf. Vita 15f. with Isa 14:13). Interesting parallels to several New Testament passages can be found: Hebrews 1:16 (Vita
13-14); James 1:17 (Vita 29:2; ApMos 36:3); the tree of life (Rev 22:2). However, it is
24 Sacrifice is not mentioned in Vita; in ApMos it seems to be a form of worship (4:2; 29:3). 25 Fasting only in Vita 6:1; sexual intercourse as the "sin of the flesh" in ApMos 25:3 has rabbinic parallels (see
n); separation of animals in Paradise according to sex (ApMos 15:3; not in Vita 32) may not be an ascetic touch. By
contrast, suffering is not to be desired (ApMos 24-25) and there is nothing wrong in enjoying the delights of Paradise
(Vita 16:2). 26 Only in ApMos 35:2 are seven heavens mentioned; see note to Vita 25:3.But in the end, those
whom he has seduced by his wiles will sit on the glorious throne which he has usurped
(ApMos 39:2; Vita 47:3). Man is formed from clay and the divine breath (Vita 27:2) and so has the image of God,
which is not totally obliterated by the Fall (ApMos 10:3; 12:1; 35:2; Vita 13:3; 14:1-3;
15:2; 37:3; 39:2). He was originally clothed in righteousness and glory (ApMos 20-21) and
received the worship of angels (Vita 13-14) but now has an "evil heart" (ApMos 13:5)
and is subject to toil, pain, strife, sickness, and death. Yet his love of knowledge remains
(Vita 27:3). Of special interest is the conception of soul and body, seen most clearly in the
Greek text, in which at the death of Adam the soul is taken into the third heaven (ApMos
37) while the body is buried in the ground (ApMos 40). Restoration of full life awaits the
resurrection, when the soul and body will be reunited. That there is some Greek influence
on this conception can be seen by the mention of the Lake Acheron in Apocalypse 37:3. Sin, according to our texts, stems from grasping equality with God (Vita 15:3) or from
Satan's epithymia ("covetousness" or "grasping desire"; ApMos 19:3), which takes
concrete form in the breaking of God's commands. Both texts repeatedly assert that sin has
21 Except that the MSS in group I at Vita 14:2 have the divine name in Gk. uncials: 1HU. 22 Christian motifs are not evident even in the interpolations in Vita 29:4-15, except at vs. 14, and 51:3-9, except
vs. 9. The same is true of ApMos 13:3-6, but not, of course. Vita 42:2-5, which is completely Christian in origin. 23 Wells, APOT. vol. 2, p. 132.

By
contrast, suffering is not to be desired (ApMos 24-25) and there is nothing wrong in enjoying the delights of Paradise
(Vita 16:2). 26 Only in ApMos 35:2 are seven heavens mentioned; see note to Vita 25:3. 27 Held already by African us, Origen, Athanasius, Basil, Chrysostom, and Epiphanius; see E. C. Quinn, The Quest
of Seth for the Oil of Life (Chicago, 1962) p. 77, and M. Stone, HTR 59 (1966) 291, for references. 28 Sharpe, Prolegomena, pt. 1, pp. 94-113, would limit the midrashic base to Gen 3:1-5:5.the writings of Paul with which the documents have the closest affinity,29 as can be seen in
the idea that Eve was the source of sin and death (cf. 2Cor 11:3; ITim 2:4; in Rom 5:12—
21 death follows the sin of Adam). Death as the separation of soul and body may have
some affinity with 2 Corinthians 5:1-5, while the most striking parallels are the appearance
of Satan in the brightness of an angel {Vita 9:1; ApMos 17:1; cf. 2Cor 11:14); the location
of Paradise in the third heaven (ApMos 37:5; 2Cor 12:2); and epithymia as the root of all
sin (ApMos 19:3; Rom 7:7). In spite of these parallels it is impossible to determine whether
there is a relationship between the New Testament and our texts. Among the other Jewish writings of the time various parallels can be found in the Dead
Sea Scrolls, 4 Ezra, Jubilees, and 1 and 2 Enoch (see nn.). The Latin text has an especially
close relationship with 2 Enoch (the fall of Satan, 2En 29:4-5; heavenly Paradise, 8:1-5;
42:2; 65:1; waters of Paradise, 8:5; 22:9; the tablets, 33:8-12). Wells's judgment appears
fully justified when he suggests that "Paul and the author of the 2 Enoch were near
contemporaries of the original author of Apoc. Mos. and moved in the same circle of
ideas."30
Cultural importance
The biblical story of the Fall of the first humans and its effect has grasped and stimulated
the minds of Jews, Christians, and Muslims from antiquity to the present day. In the long
history of this speculation the two documents here translated constitute one of the earliest,
if not the first, separate treatments of the various legends linked to the first chapters of
Genesis. Yet in assessing the cultural influence of these documents one must face the knotty
problem of determining whether these documents themselves, or their Hebrew precursor,
were the impetus for the many subsequent treatments or whether they are but one result of
this interest itself.In the long
history of this speculation the two documents here translated constitute one of the earliest,
if not the first, separate treatments of the various legends linked to the first chapters of
Genesis. Yet in assessing the cultural influence of these documents one must face the knotty
problem of determining whether these documents themselves, or their Hebrew precursor,
were the impetus for the many subsequent treatments or whether they are but one result of
this interest itself. The popularity of these two documents can be seen both by the fact that various versions
of the Greek were made, notably the Armenian and the Slavic,31 and also by their apparent
use in several of the series of Eastern works which take the death of Adam as a starting
point for a series of prophecies and events leading to the crucifixion. Among the latter, the
Syriac Cave of Treasures32 has inspired the Ethiopic Conflict of Adam and Eve,33 while
both works have occasional parallels of detail with the Vita and the Apocalypse.34 The
Syriac and Arabic Testament of Adam shows less influence from the Vita and the Apocalypse
than the Cave and Conflict.35
Literary evidence suggests that during the fifth century, coincidental with the height of
the Pelagian controversy, there was great interest, especially among Frankish churchmen,
in harmonizing the biblical story of the origins of man with classical pagan heroic motifs,
as is seen in poems of Hilary of Aries, Victor Rhetor of Marseilles, Avitus of Vienne,
Cyprian of Gaul, and in the popular Carmen de Deo of Dracontius.36 Direct influence of
the Vita or the Apocalypse, however, is not found in these. Similarly, the earliest extant
Anglo-Saxon Christian poetry, of the eighth and ninth centuries, reveals the influence of
pagan Germanic saga.Among the latter, the
Syriac Cave of Treasures32 has inspired the Ethiopic Conflict of Adam and Eve,33 while
both works have occasional parallels of detail with the Vita and the Apocalypse.34 The
Syriac and Arabic Testament of Adam shows less influence from the Vita and the Apocalypse
than the Cave and Conflict.35
Literary evidence suggests that during the fifth century, coincidental with the height of
the Pelagian controversy, there was great interest, especially among Frankish churchmen,
in harmonizing the biblical story of the origins of man with classical pagan heroic motifs,
as is seen in poems of Hilary of Aries, Victor Rhetor of Marseilles, Avitus of Vienne,
Cyprian of Gaul, and in the popular Carmen de Deo of Dracontius.36 Direct influence of
the Vita or the Apocalypse, however, is not found in these. Similarly, the earliest extant
Anglo-Saxon Christian poetry, of the eighth and ninth centuries, reveals the influence of
pagan Germanic saga. It is especially the English poem Christ and Satan31 that betrays
influence of the Vita in its Christianized form of the legend of the fall of Satan, as is also
the case with the continental poem known as Genesis £.38 The Koran also reflects knowledge
of a form of the fall of Satan legend which is close to that of the Vita (Vita 12, n. a). Toward the close of the twelfth century we have evidence that the legends of the history
of the wood of the cross, developed at an earlier time, were combined with the motif of
29 Wells, APOT. vol. 2, p. 130; Sharpe, CBQ 35 (1973) 35-46. 30 Wells, APOT. vol. 2, p. 130. 31 On these see Sharpe, Prolegomena, pt. 1, pp. 204-15. 32 English translation by E. A. Wallis Budge, The Book of the Cave of Treasures (London, 1927). 33 English translation by S. C. Mai an, The Book of Adam and Eve, Also Called the Conflict of Adam and Eve with
Satan (London, 1882). 34 See Wells, APOT. vol. 2, pp. 125-27, 131f. 35 M. R. James, LAOT. pp. 5-8; Wells, APOT. vol. 2, pp. 125f. 36 On these see J. M.By
contrast, suffering is not to be desired (ApMos 24-25) and there is nothing wrong in enjoying the delights of Paradise
(Vita 16:2). 26 Only in ApMos 35:2 are seven heavens mentioned; see note to Vita 25:3. 27 Held already by African us, Origen, Athanasius, Basil, Chrysostom, and Epiphanius; see E. C. Quinn, The Quest
of Seth for the Oil of Life (Chicago, 1962) p. 77, and M. Stone, HTR 59 (1966) 291, for references. 28 Sharpe, Prolegomena, pt. 1, pp. 94-113, would limit the midrashic base to Gen 3:1-5:5.

36 On these see J. M. Evans, Paradise Lost, ch. 4. 37 Ed. G. P. Krapp, The Junius Manuscript (New York, 1936). 38 Evans, Paradise Lost, ch. 5, especially p. 146.Seth's journey to Paradise, a combination found in Meyer's four fifteenth-century manuscripts
(Group HI) but found already in the Rationale divinorum officiorum, circa 1170.39 According
to this tradition, Seth returned from Paradise with a twig or seeds from which grew the tree
that eventually supplied the wood for the cross of Jesus. In this modified form the Vita had
a significant impact on the medieval European imagination.40
Apart from its conflation with the holy-wood motif, the Vita undoubtedly influenced the
twelfth-century Historia Scholastica of Peter Comestor, especially in its treatment of the
ascension of Adam and the Fall itself.41 Less direct influence can be traced in the Townely
and Chester medieval English miracle plays and in such narrative poems as The Stanzaic
Life of Christ, Robert Grosseteste's Chasteau d'Amour, Ludus Coventriae, De Lyff of Adam
and Eve in the Vernon manuscript, as well as in De Deuelis Perlament and the Canticum
de Creatione.42 The Vim's description of Adam's repentance finds a close parallel in the
similar account in Mirk's Festival, while William of Shoreham's poem On the Trinity,
Creation, the Existence of Evil, Devils, and Adam and Eve reads like a theological reflection
on the themes of the Vita. English miracle plays typically included the serpent disguised as
an angel of light, Adam's prophetic dream at the creation of Eve, the serpent extracting the
promise from Eve that she would give the fruit to Adam, and Eve's suggestion after the
Fall that Adam kill her—all features betraying the probable influence of the Vita. Seth's
journey to Paradise, however, is prominent only in the Ordinale de Origine Mundi.43
Adam is relatively insignificant in the Divine Comedy, being prominent only in paragraph
26, where Dante questions him about the duration of time from the creation to Dante's life
(4,302 years) and the language Adam spoke in Eden (a tongue already extinct before the
Flood).English miracle plays typically included the serpent disguised as
an angel of light, Adam's prophetic dream at the creation of Eve, the serpent extracting the
promise from Eve that she would give the fruit to Adam, and Eve's suggestion after the
Fall that Adam kill her—all features betraying the probable influence of the Vita. Seth's
journey to Paradise, however, is prominent only in the Ordinale de Origine Mundi.43
Adam is relatively insignificant in the Divine Comedy, being prominent only in paragraph
26, where Dante questions him about the duration of time from the creation to Dante's life
(4,302 years) and the language Adam spoke in Eden (a tongue already extinct before the
Flood). The greatest classic on this theme, Milton's Paradise Lost, shows in its various drafts
the influence of several of the prior treatments but especially, at least with regard to form,
that of the Latin drama Adamus Exul, written by Hugo Grotius in 1601. Yet a good many
details in Milton's work raise the probability of at least indirect influence by the Vita:
Satan's charge that he was self-created and the equal of the Son of God, yet treated as
inferior (Paradise Lost 5.66Iff.; Vita 14); the corresponding functions of Milton's Abdiel
and the Vita's Michael; the division of labor between Adam and Eve {Paradise Lost 9.205-
12; Vita 32); the dropping of Eve's garland at the first sin (Paradise Lost 9.892L; cf. ApMos 20); the Fall as the loss of righteousness and glory (Paradise Lost 9.1054ff.; ApMos
21); and the vision of future generations given by Michael at the close of Milton's poem
(book 11), which forms a parallel to Vita 29, 41, and the Apocalypse 13. While J. M. Evans (see bibliography) has brilliantly traced the treatment of the Fall theme
in literature up to Milton, there is no comparable study for the history of art or for literary
and artistic productions subsequent to Milton. 39 E. C. Quinn, The Quest of Seth. especially pp. 88ff. 40 Quinn, Quest of Seth.36 On these see J. M. Evans, Paradise Lost, ch. 4. 37 Ed. G. P. Krapp, The Junius Manuscript (New York, 1936). 38 Evans, Paradise Lost, ch. 5, especially p. 146.

88ff. 40 Quinn, Quest of Seth. traces the history of this tradition. 41 Evans, Paradise Lost, pp. 168-72. 42 Ibid., pp. 176-85. 43 The Ordinale de Origine Mundi is a 15th-cent. Cornish miracle play (see Evans, Paradise Lost, pp. 195-207). Evans was not aware of the motif of the serpent as an angel of light in Vita and ApMos; he thought it was "the
accidental result of the exigencies of medieval stage craft" (Evans, Paradise Lost, p. 195).BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 74f.
Delling, Bibliographie, p. 172.
Denis, Introduction, pp. 3-7.
Evans, J. M. Paradise Lost and the Genesis Traditions. Oxford, 1968. (Comprehensive
analysis of the interpretations of the Adam and Eve traditions in Jewish, gnostic,
patristic, medieval, and Renaissance literature as well as in Milton's Paradise Lost.)
Fuchs, C. "Adambuch," APAT, vol. 2, pp. 514-28. (German translation with introduction.)
Ginzberg, L. The Legends of the Jews. 7 vols.; Philadelphia, 1909-38. (Adam legends are
narrated in vol. 5, nn. 22-53.)
James, M. R. The Lost Apocrypha of the Old Testament. London, 1920. (General introduction
to the Adam literature subsequent to Vita and ApAdam is on pp. 1-9.)
Meyer, W. 44Vita Adae et Evae," Abhandlungen der koniglich bayerischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Philosophische-philologische Klasse, vol. 14 (Munich, 1878). (The
Lat. text with convenient apparatus is on pp. 221-50 and an excellent introduction on
pp. 187-220.)
Mozley, J. H. 44The Vitae Adae," JTS 30 (1929) 121-49. (The Lat. text based on several
medieval British MSS with nn.)
Sharpe, J. L. Prolegomena to the Establishment of the Critical Text of the Greek Apocalypse
of Moses. Unpublished dissertation, Duke University, 1969. Ann Arbor, Mich., 1969.
(Pt. 1 provides treatment of the provenance, theology, versions, and MSS of the Gk.
text, with bibliography. Pt. 2 contains the Gk. text with the most complete apparatus
currently available.)
. 44The Second Adam in the Apocalypse of Moses," CBQ 35 (1973) 35-46. (Shows
similarities of thought between ApMos and Paul.)
Tischendorf, C. von. Apocalypses Apocryphae. Hildesheim, 1966. (This reprint of the 1866
edition has the Gk. text on pp. 1-23 with a brief introduction on pp. X-XII.)
Wells, L. S. A. 44The Books of Adam and Eve," The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of
the Old Testament, ed. R. H. Charles. Oxford, 1913. (An English translation of the
Gk. and Lat. texts with a fine introduction is in vol. 2, pp. 123-54.)THE LIFE OF ADAM AND EVE
[Vita]
1. THE REPENTANCE OF ADAM AND EVE
The motive and manner of their repentance
i 1 When they were driven out of Paradise they made for themselves a tent and oen 3:22-24
mourned for seven days, weeping in great sorrow. But after seven days they began
to hunger and sought food to eat, but found none.
1 2 Then Eve said to Adam, "My lord, I am hungry. Go and seek for us that we
may eat. Perhaps the LORD God will consider us and pity us and call us back to
2 the place we were before." *And Adam rose and walked seven days over all that
land and found no food such as they had had in Paradise.
1 3 And Eve said to Adam, "My lord, would you kill me? O that I would die!
Then perhaps the LORD God will bring you again into Paradise, for it is because
2 of me that the LORD God is angry with you."" •Adam answered, "Do not wish
to speak such words lest the LORD God bring on us some further curse. How is
it possible that I should let loose my hand against my flesh? But rather let us rise Gen 2:23
and search for ourselves, how we might live, and not weaken."
1 4 And they walked searching for nine days and found nothing such as they had
2 had in Paradise, but only such as animals eat.a #And Adam said to Eve, "The
LORD apportioned this for animals and beasts to eat, but for us there used to be
3 the food of angels.b »But it is just and fitting for us to lament in the sight of God
Ps 78:25
who made us. Let us repent with a great penitence; perhaps the LORD God will
be forbearing and pity us and provide for us that we might live."c
1 5 And Eve said to Adam, "My lord, tell me, what is repentance and what kind
of penitence should I do, lest by chance we impose on ourselves an effort which
we cannot sustain, and the LORD not hear our prayers and turn his face from us
2 because we did not keep our promise. *My lord, how much did you intend to
repent, since I have brought toil and tribulation on you."
1 6 And Adam said to Eve, "You are not able to do so much as I; but do as much
as you have strength for. I will spend forty days fasting, but you rise and go to
3 a. The MSS have a doublet of Eve's request which ends, "For it is because of me that you have been
driven from there."
4 a. That Adam ate animals' food is considered in some rabbinic writings one of his punishments for
the Fall (GenR ad rem; PRE 20); in ARN1 (Goldin 14) Adam complains about eating animals' food.
b. Cf. Sanh 59b.
c. In PR 50:5 Adam learns the value of repentance from Cain, while in 7:2 we read that Adam refused
to repent before being driven out of Paradise; see also the n. to 6:3.THE LIFE OF ADAM AND EVE
[Apocalypse]
PREFACE
The narrative and life of Adam and Eve the first-made, revealed by God to Moses
his servant when he received the tablets of the law of the covenant from the hand
of the LORD, after he had been taught by the archangel Michael.8
7 29" And it happened that we mourned for seven days. After seven days we were
hungry and I said to Adam, "Gather and bring us food that we might eat and
live, lest we die. Let us get up and weep on the ground so that God might hear
8,9 us." »And we rose and went through the whole land and did not find (food). #And
answering, I said to Adam, "Rise, my lord, and do away with me that I might
depart from you and from the presence of God and from the angels so that they
10 will cease to be angry with you on my account." #Then Adam answered and said
to Eve, "Why have you been thinking of this evil, that I should commit murder
and bring death to my rib, so that I should stretch out my hand against the image Gen 2.21
11 which God made?b #But rather let us
repent and offer prayersc for forty days. But
you fast thirty-four days because you were not formed (until) the sixth day in
P a. This preface, certainly a later addition to the Gk. text, is the sole cause of the traditional, but
erroneous, title "Apocalypse of Moses"; the Gk. text has nothing to do with Moses, nor is it in the
technical sense an apocalypse.
29 a. The "repentance" in the Gk. tradition is found only in MSS F and H, and is located there after
29:6 as the concluding part of Eve's story of the Fall; the text translated here is that of H with variants
of F noted.
b. Gk. epoiesei, "[he] made"; MS H has apoiisei, "[he] will not make."
c. MS PH adds "and with me."[Vila]
the Tigris River and take a stone and stand on it in the water as far as (your) Gen 2:i4
2 neck* in the depths of the river. »And let no speech come out of your mouth,
because we are unworthy to entreat the LORD since our lips are unclean from the isa 6:5
illegal and forbidden tree. And stand in the water of the river for thirty-seven
3 days. *But I will spend forty days in the water of the Jordan.6 Perhaps the LORD H^"*"
God will pity us." Mt4:2
i 7 And Eve walked to the Tigris River and did just as Adam told her. Similarly,
Adam walked to the Jordan River and stood on a stone up to his neck in water. 1 8 And Adam said, (T tell you, water of the Jordan, mourn with me and gather
to me all swimming creatures which are in you and let them surround me and so
2 lament together with me. • Let them not mourn for themselves, but rather for me,
3 because it is not they who have sinned, but I." *At once all the living beings
came and surrounded him and the water of the Jordan stood, its current not ,osh 3:131
moving, from that hour. Satan again deceives Eve
1 9 Eighteen days went by. Then Satan was angry and transformed himself into 2Cor ii:i4
the brightness of angels" and went away to the Tigris River to Eve and found her
2 weeping. *And the devil himself, as if to grieve with her, began to weep and said
to her, "Step out of the river and cry no more. Cease now from sadness and
3 sighs. Why are you and your husband Adam disturbed? *The LORD God has heard
your sighs and accepted your repentance; and all we angels have entreated for you
4 and interceded with the LORD, «and he sent me to bring you up from the water
and give you food which you had in Paradise, and for which you have been
5 lamenting. *Now therefore come out of the water and I will lead you to the place
where your food has been prepared."
1 10 Now when Eve heard this she believed and came out of the water of the
2 river, and her flesh was as grass" from the cold of the water.*The LORD God has heard
your sighs and accepted your repentance; and all we angels have entreated for you
4 and interceded with the LORD, «and he sent me to bring you up from the water
and give you food which you had in Paradise, and for which you have been
5 lamenting. *Now therefore come out of the water and I will lead you to the place
where your food has been prepared."
1 10 Now when Eve heard this she believed and came out of the water of the
2 river, and her flesh was as grass" from the cold of the water. • And when she came isa 40:6;
3 out, she fell on the ground and the devil raised her and led her to Adam. »But 51:12
when Adam saw her and the devil with her, he cried out with tears and said, "O
4 Eve, Eve, where is the work of your penitence? »How have you again been
seduced by our enemy by whom we have been deprived of our dwelling in Paradise
and of spiritual joy?"
1 11 When Eve heard this, she knew that the devil had persuaded (her) to come
out of the river and fell on her face to the ground, and her sorrow and sighing
2 and lamenting were doubled. •She cried out, saying, "Woe to you, O devil. Why
6 a. That a woman's ritual bath can purify only when it reaches one's neck is asserted in b.Yoma 87a. b. In PRE 20 Adam's repentance is put on the first Sunday after his expulsion from Paradise and it
takes place in the Gihon, one of the rivers of Paradise (Gen 2:13); Adam stayed there for seven weeks,
until his body became like a sponge; he prayed for forgiveness and God accepted his repentance. 9 a. Cf. ApMos 17:2. In the Dead Sea Scrolls the archangel Michael is referred to as the "Prince of
Lights" (1QM 13:9-10; 17:6-8; IQS 3:20); the Vita and Paul in 2Cor 11:14 may imply that Satan
disguised himself as Michael. 10 a. Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 5, p. 115, suggests that this odd expression is due to a mistranslation of
the rare Heb.THE LIFE OF ADAM AND EVE
[Apocalypse]
PREFACE
The narrative and life of Adam and Eve the first-made, revealed by God to Moses
his servant when he received the tablets of the law of the covenant from the hand
of the LORD, after he had been taught by the archangel Michael.8
7 29" And it happened that we mourned for seven days. After seven days we were
hungry and I said to Adam, "Gather and bring us food that we might eat and
live, lest we die. Let us get up and weep on the ground so that God might hear
8,9 us." »And we rose and went through the whole land and did not find (food). #And
answering, I said to Adam, "Rise, my lord, and do away with me that I might
depart from you and from the presence of God and from the angels so that they
10 will cease to be angry with you on my account." #Then Adam answered and said
to Eve, "Why have you been thinking of this evil, that I should commit murder
and bring death to my rib, so that I should stretch out my hand against the image Gen 2.21
11 which God made?b #But rather let us
repent and offer prayersc for forty days. But
you fast thirty-four days because you were not formed (until) the sixth day in
P a. This preface, certainly a later addition to the Gk. text, is the sole cause of the traditional, but
erroneous, title "Apocalypse of Moses"; the Gk. text has nothing to do with Moses, nor is it in the
technical sense an apocalypse.
29 a. The "repentance" in the Gk. tradition is found only in MSS F and H, and is located there after
29:6 as the concluding part of Eve's story of the Fall; the text translated here is that of H with variants
of F noted.
b. Gk. epoiesei, "[he] made"; MS H has apoiisei, "[he] will not make."
c. MS PH adds "and with me."

5, p. 115, suggests that this odd expression is due to a mistranslation of
the rare Heb. word yardqah, "sponge," as though it were related to ydraq, "herb"; PRE 20 says that
Adam's body became like a sponge from his penitence in the water. This may be an indication of a Heb. source for Vita.[Apocalypse]
12 which God made his creation.d •But you rise and go to the Tigris River, and take
a stone and set (it) under your feet, and go in and stand in the water up to the
neck, and do not let three words come out of your mouth, for we are unworthy
and our lips are not clean. But cry silently to God (saying), 40 God, be gracious
to me.' "e
13 #But Adam went into the Jordan River and cried with a loud voice,
saying, "I say to you, water of the Jordan, stand still; and all birds and all animals
14 and all reptiles both on land and in the sea gather together." *And all the angels
and all the creatures of God surrounded Adam as a wall around him, weeping and
praying to God on behalf of Adam, so that God gave ear to them.
15 But the devil, not having found an opportunity with Adam, came to the Tigris
River to Eve. Taking the form of an angel, he stood before her weeping, and his
16 tears fell on the ground and on his robe. *And he said to me, "Come up out of
the water and be done with weeping, for the LORD has heard your request and the
angels and all his creatures have beseeched God about your prayer.
17 Thus he deceived me, and I stepped out of the water."
d. Sharpe has ktisin, "creation." The Slav, reads, "forty-four."
e. MS F; H reads, "But pray to God, and keep the lips silent that we might be baptized in the water
with all your heart"; this has a Christian touch not found in F.[Vita]
do you assault us for nothing? What have you to do with us? What have we done
to you, that you should pursue us with deceit? Why does your malice fall on us? 3 Have we stolen your glory and made you to be without honor? Why do you
treacherously and enviously pursue us, O enemy, all the way to death?"
Satan's account of his expulsion from heaven
1 12 And the devil8 sighed and said, "0 Adam, all my enmity and envy and isa I* 12-15
sorrow concern you, since because of you I am expelled and deprived of my glory ^^.5.7
which I had in the heavens in the midst of angels, and because of you I was cast K^8
2 out onto the earth." 'Adam answered, "What have I done to you, and what is 2&129:4-5
my blame with you? Since you are neither harmed nor hurt by us, why do you *9
2
pursue us?"
1 13 The devil replied, "Adam, what are you telling me? It is because of you that
2 I have been thrown out of there. •When you were created, I was cast out from
3 the presence of God and was sent out from the fellowship of the angels. *When
God blew into you the breath of life and your countenance and likeness were
made in the image of God, Michael8 brought you and made (us) worship you in
the sight of God, and the LORD God said, 'Behold Adam! I have made you in
our image and likeness.'
1 14 And Michael went out and called all the angels, saying, 'Worship the image Gen i:26
2 of the LORD God, as the LORD God has instructed.'8 •And Michael himself Rcv 12:712
worshiped first, and called me and said, 'Worship the image of God, Yahweh.'b
3 And I answered, *I do not worship Adam.'c And when Michael kept forcing me
to worship, I said to him, 'Why do you compel me? I will not worship one inferior
and subsequent to me. I am prior to him in creation; before he was made, I was
already made. He ought to worship me.'
1 15 When they heard this, other angels who were under me refused to worship
2 him. #And Michael asserted, 'Worship the image of God.[Apocalypse]
12 which God made his creation.d •But you rise and go to the Tigris River, and take
a stone and set (it) under your feet, and go in and stand in the water up to the
neck, and do not let three words come out of your mouth, for we are unworthy
and our lips are not clean. But cry silently to God (saying), 40 God, be gracious
to me.' "e
13 #But Adam went into the Jordan River and cried with a loud voice,
saying, "I say to you, water of the Jordan, stand still; and all birds and all animals
14 and all reptiles both on land and in the sea gather together." *And all the angels
and all the creatures of God surrounded Adam as a wall around him, weeping and
praying to God on behalf of Adam, so that God gave ear to them.
15 But the devil, not having found an opportunity with Adam, came to the Tigris
River to Eve. Taking the form of an angel, he stood before her weeping, and his
16 tears fell on the ground and on his robe. *And he said to me, "Come up out of
the water and be done with weeping, for the LORD has heard your request and the
angels and all his creatures have beseeched God about your prayer.
17 Thus he deceived me, and I stepped out of the water."
d. Sharpe has ktisin, "creation." The Slav, reads, "forty-four."
e. MS F; H reads, "But pray to God, and keep the lips silent that we might be baptized in the water
with all your heart"; this has a Christian touch not found in F.

He ought to worship me.'
1 15 When they heard this, other angels who were under me refused to worship
2 him. #And Michael asserted, 'Worship the image of God. But if now you will
3 not worship, the LORD God will be wrathful with you.' *And I said, 'If he be
wrathful with me, I will set my throne above the stars of heaven and will be like ba 14:13
the Most High.' Dan 8:10
0bad4
Job 22:12
16 And the LORD God was angry with me and sent me with my angels out from Jude 9
our glory; and because of you, we were expelled into this world from our dwellings
and have been cast onto the earth. *And immediately we were made to grieve,
since we had been deprived of so great glory. And we were pained to see you in
such bliss of delights.8 «So with deceit I assailed your wife and made you to be Gen 3:1-7
expelled through her from the joys of your bliss, as I have been expelled from
my glory."
12 a. Satan's fall is a widely known legend (see marginal references here and at 15:3) which may have
arisen as a Midrash on Isa 14:12-15. It is reflected in 2En 29:4f.; 31:3; GBart 4.51-55, vol. 1, p. 500;
numerous rabbinic writings; the NT (marginal references above); Tertullian, de Patientia 5; Irenaeus,
Against Heresies, IV.40.3; Augustine, de Genesi ad Literam XI. 18; and the Koran, suras 2, 7, 15, 17,
18, 20, and 38. The account in the Vita could well be among the earliest witnesses to this legend. 13 a. Michael is the chief angel in Vita and ApMos, as also in the Dead Sea Scrolls (see Vita 9, n. a);
cf. M. Hengel, Judaism and Hellenism (Philadelphia, 1974) vol. 1, pp. 188, 231. 14 a. Heb 1:6 may be an allusion to an early form of this legend; cf. Heb 1:14. b. MSS in group I; IHU, "Yahweh"; those in groups II and III omit this name. c. Lat. Non habeo ego odor are, "I do not have to worship."
16 a. Lat. laetitia delitiarum, "bliss of delights.'1LIFE OF ADAM AND EVE
[Apocalypse][Vita]
1 17 Hearing this from the devil, Adam cried out with great weeping and said,
"O LORD, my God, my life is in your hands. Remove far from me this my
opponent, who seeks to destroy my soul, and give me his glory which he himself
2.3 has forfeited." »And immediately the devil disappeared from him. *But Adam U4:i3
persisted forty days standing in repentance in the water of the Jordan. 0. THE CHILDREN OF ADAM AND EVE
The birth of Cain
1 18 And Eve said to Adam, "You live on, my lord. Life is granted to you, since
you have done neither the first nor the second error, but I have been cheated and
2 deceived, for I have not kept the command of God. *And now separate me from
3 the light of such life, and I will go to the sunset8 and stay there until I die." • And
she began to walk toward the West and to mourn and to weep bitterly with loud
4 sighing. *And she made there a shelter while she was three months pregnant. I 19 And when the time of her giving birth drew near, she began to be distressed
with pains and cried out to the LORD, saying, "Have mercy on me, LORD, help
2.3 me." -But neither was she heard, nor was the mercy of God around her. -And
she said to herself, "Who will give the news to my lord Adam? I beg you, O
lights of heaven, when you return to the East,8 tell my lord Adam."
1 20 However, at that very moment, Adam said, "Eve's complaint has come to
2 me; perhaps again the serpent8 has contended with her." »And he went forth and
came upon her in great distress. And Eve said, "The moment I saw you, my lord,
my pained soul was refreshed.b And now implore the LORD God for me to hear
3 you and to have regard for me and free me from my most awful pains." »And
Adam prayed to the LORD for Eve. 1 21 And behold, twelve angels and two excellencies8 came and stood to the right
2 and to the left of Eve. #And Michael stood to the right and touched her from her
face to the breast and said to Eve, "Blessed are you, Eve, because of Adam.LIFE OF ADAM AND EVE
[Apocalypse]

1 21 And behold, twelve angels and two excellencies8 came and stood to the right
2 and to the left of Eve. #And Michael stood to the right and touched her from her
face to the breast and said to Eve, "Blessed are you, Eve, because of Adam. Since his prayers and utterances are many, I am sent to you that you might receive
3 our help. Now rise and make ready to give birth." *And she bore a son, and he
was lustrous.b And at once the infant rose, ran, and brought in his hands a reedc
and gave it to his mother.-And his name was called Cain. Gen *i
18 a. A Hebraism. 19 a. The East is the location of Paradise in Gen 2:8 and IEn 32:2. 20 a. Cf. Vita 37:1 and the role of the serpent in ApMos 15-30. b. Lat. refrigeravit, "he was refreshed"; lit. "cooled"; other MSS read infrigeravit, "he was cooled,"
or inrefrigeravit, "he was cooled."
21 a. "Excellencies" (virtutes) may be a translation of the Heb. for "partakers of the divine Kabod
('glory')" in b.Ber 60b; see b.Hag 16a and cf. the "principalities and powers" of Rom 8:38; Eph 6:12,
etc. b. Lat. lucidus, "lustrous," "full of light," probably related to ApMos 1:3 (see n.). c. Lat. herbam, "reed"; probably from the similarity of the Heb. words Qdyin, "Cain," and qaneh,
"reed." According to GenR 22:8, Cain killed Abel with a reed.

[Apocalypse][Apocalypse]

[Vita]
22
And Adam brought Eve and the child and led them to the East. *And the ApMos 29
LORD God sent various seeds by the angel Michael and gave them to Adam and Sl3,:i?
showed him (how) to work and till the ground so as to have produce by which
they and all their generations might live.
The murder of Abel and the birth of Adam's other children
23 For Eve later conceived and bore a son, whose name was Abel. And Cain
and Abel used to stay together. •And Eve said to Adam, 4'My lord, while I was
sleeping I saw a vision—as if the blood of our son Abel was in the hand of Cain
(who was) gulping it down in his mouth. That is why I am sad." *And Adam
said, "God forbid that Cain would kill Abel! But let us separate them from each
other and make separate places for them." #And they made Cain a farmer and Gen4:2
Abel a shepherd, that in this way they might be separated from each other. • After Gen 4:9
this Cain murdered Abel, at which time Adam was 130 years old, while Abel Gen 5:3
when he was murdered was 122.8
24 After this Adam knew his wife and she bore a son and called his name Seth.
And Adam said to Eve, "See, I have sired a son in place of Abel, whom Cain
struck down." *And after Adam had become the father of Seth, he lived eight
hundred years and fathered thirty sons and thirty daughters, sixty-three altogether."
And they were multiplied over the earth in their nations. Gen 10:32
ffl. ADAM IS TAKEN UP TO THE HEAVENLY PARADISE*
25 Adam said to Seth, "Listen, Seth my son, and I will pass on to you what I
heard and saw. • After your mother and I had been driven out of Paradise, while isa 66:15
we were praying, Michael the archangel and messenger of God came to me. H^fto
And I saw a chariot like the wind and its wheels were fiery. I was carried off 104:3
into the Paradise of righteousness,8 and I saw the LORD sitting and his appearance ApSos'33
lEn 13-17
23 a. George Syncellus, Chronicle 1:14, asserts that Abel was twenty-two when he sacrificed, and he
puts the date at 99 Anno Mundi.
24 a. Including Cain, Abel, and Seth.
T a. This section seems to have had some original relationship with ApMos 37.
25 a. See also ApMos 37-40; Vita 29; 2Cor 12:4; Lk 23:43; Rev 2:7; IEn 32:3; 77:3; 60:8; 2En 8:1-5;
42:2; 65:10; 4Ezra 7:53; 8:52. In the Vita and ApMos there are both an earthly Paradise, Eden, and a
heavenly, which is located in the third heaven. The latter is referred to here and in Vita 29:1 ("Paradise
of visitation and of God's command"); ApMos 37:5; 40:1; the remaining references in Vita and ApMos
to Paradise are to the earthly. In some popular Jewish and Christian writings there are said to be seven
heavens, as in ApMos 35:2 and 2En 1-20 (classic description in b.Hag 12b); an older view, perhaps, is[Apocalypse]
1,2 1 This is the account of8 Adam and Eve. •After they had come out of Paradise,
Adam took his wife, and they went down into the East. And they stayed there
3 eighteen years and two months,b #and Eve conceived and bore two sons, Diaphotos
called Cain, and Amilabes called Abel.c
1 2 After these things Adam and Eve were together and when they were lying
2 down to sleep, Eve said to her lord Adam, '"My lord, I saw in a dream this night
the blood of my son Amilabes, called Abel, being thrust into the mouth of Cain
3 his brother, and he drank it mercilessly. »He begged him to allow him a little of
it, but he did not listen to him but swallowed all of it. And it did not stay in his
4 stomach but came out of his mouth." »And Adam said to Eve, "Let us rise and
go to see what has happened to them.8 Perhaps the enemy is warring against
them."
1 3 And when they both8 had gone out they found Abel killed by the hand of Cain,
2 his brother. #And God said to Michael the archangel, "Say to Adam, 'The mystery
which you knowb do not report to your son Cain, for he is a son of wrath. But Gen 4:5
do not mourn, for I will give you another son in his place; this one shall reveal 4.25
3 to youc all that you shall do;d but you tell him nothing!' "e "These things God
said to his angel, and Adam kept the word in his heart, with him and Eve, grieving u 2:19,51
over Abel their son.
1 4 After these things Adam knew his wife and she conceived and bore Seth.8
2 And Adam said to Eve, "See, we have begotten a son in place of Abel, whom
Cain killed; let us give glory and sacrifice to God."
1 5 And Adam fathered thirty sons and thirty daughters. Gen 5:4
1 a. MSS El and E2 add "the first-made."
b. El and E2 add "Adam knew his wife and she."
c. Several explanations of the enigmatic names for Cain and Abel have been proposed: (a) That the
original read Diaphytor or Diaphyteutis, "a planter," and Melatas or Melobotes, "a keeper of sheep";
(b) Adiaphdtos, "unshining," as found in MSS DI D2 D3 Ml M2 El (Aphaton, "nameless," in E2)
as well as the Arm. text; (c) that "Amilabes" is a rude transcription of the Heb. hanfhubdl, "the
destroyed one"; (d) that the similarity of Qayin, "Cain," with kiyun (Kaiwan = the planet Saturn) gave
rise to the legend about the shining face of Cain which is found in PRE 21 and TargYer on Gen 4:1.
The description of Cain as "lustrous" in Vita 21:3 supports this view of the name Diaphotos. The later
two explanations would imply that a Semitic, probably Heb., original text lay behind both the Gk. and
Lat.
2 a. El and E2 omit the last five words.
3 a. El and E2 omit "both."
b. MS B omits these five words.
c. "To you" is omitted in Al A2 DI D2 D3 D4.
d. Some MSS add "to him."
e. The last phrase is omitted in DI D4 El E2 G H and the Arm.
4 a. MS H adds the last half of Gen 4:25.[Vita]
was unbearable flaming fire. And many thousands of angels were at the right and Ezek 1.21
at the left of the chariot.6
1 26 "I was disturbed when I saw this; fear laid hold of me and I worshiped in
2 the presence of God on the face of the earth. •And God said to me, 'Behold, you
shall die, because you have disregarded the command of God, since you have .,
A Mos24
listened rather to the voice of your wife, whom I gave into your power, that you Gen 3-6
might keep her in your will. But you listened to her and disregarded my words/
1 27 "And when I heard these words of God, I fell down on the ground, worshiped
the LORD, and said, 4My lord, almighty and merciful God, holy and upright, let
not the name that reminds of your majesty8 be blotted out, but convert my soul,
2 for I am dying, and my spirit will pass from my mouth. *Cast me not from your Ps si: 11
presence, whom you formed from the clay of the earth; and do not withhold your
3 grace from him whom you nurtured/ •And behold, your wordb came to me and
the LORD said to me, 'Because your days are numbered,0 you have been made to
cherish knowledge; therefore, there shall not be abolished from your seed forever
(those who would) serve me.'
1 28 "Hearing these words, I prostrated myself to the ground and worshiped the
LORD God, saying, 'You are the eternal and most high God and all creatures give
2 you honor and praise. •You are the true light shining above all lights, living life,
incomprehensibly great excellence. To you the spiritual powers" give honor and Rom 8:38
praise. You perform among all humanity the miracles of your mercy.' Eph 6:12
1 29 "After I had worshiped the LORD, Michael the archangel of God immediately
took hold of my hand and ejected me from the Paradise of visitation and of God's vua 2*3
2 command. *And Michael held in his hand a rod and touched the waters which
3 were around Paradise" and they froze. •!*And Michael held in his hand a rod and touched the waters which
3 were around Paradise" and they froze. •! crossed over and Michael with me, and
he took me to the place from where he had seized me."b
that there were three heavens, as is implied in 2Cor 12:2-3 (the third heaven is designated "Paradise")
and TLevi 3; see also TDNT, vol. 5, pp. 511-12 (Traub). The Samaritans also held to an earthly and a
heavenly Paradise, both called the "Garden of Eden" (J. Macdonald, Theology of the Samaritans
[Philadelphia, 1964] ch. 21). b. Cf. the "chariot-like Throne above the firmament of the cherubim" in the Qumran "Liturgy of the
Angels" (T. Gaster, The Dead Sea Scriptures [Garden City, 1964], pp. 373f.). The chariot here seems
to be both the means of Adam's rapture (vs. 3a) and also the throne of God (vs. 3b), a possible indication
of a reworking of the sources. 27 a. In 2En 30:13, SibOr 3:24-26, and other sources, the name Adam is taken to be an acrostic for
the names of the four directions; the reference here, however, may be to Adam as the image of God. See W. D. Davies, Paul and Rabbinic Judaism (New York, 1967) p. 55. b. Lat. verbum mum, a reference to the promise of progeny for Adam through Seth. c. Lat. Quoniam figurantur dies tui. Other MSS read figura (figuratio) cordis tui, "form of your
heart"; figura corporis tui, "form of your body"; figura corporis mei, "form of my body"; foetus est,
"it is done." The meaning is obscure, although it may be linked with Ps 90:12. 28 a. Lat. virtutes, lit. "excellencies"; see Vita 21, n. a. 29 a. TLevi 3:2 refers to fire, snow, and ice at the first (lowest) heaven; 2En 3:3 describes a "very great
Sea, greater than the earthly sea at the first heaven"; Rev 4:6 and 15:2 refer to a "sea of glass" in
heaven. Here, however, the waters seem to be around the earthly Paradise. b.[Apocalypse]
1,2 1 This is the account of8 Adam and Eve. •After they had come out of Paradise,
Adam took his wife, and they went down into the East. And they stayed there
3 eighteen years and two months,b #and Eve conceived and bore two sons, Diaphotos
called Cain, and Amilabes called Abel.c
1 2 After these things Adam and Eve were together and when they were lying
2 down to sleep, Eve said to her lord Adam, '"My lord, I saw in a dream this night
the blood of my son Amilabes, called Abel, being thrust into the mouth of Cain
3 his brother, and he drank it mercilessly. »He begged him to allow him a little of
it, but he did not listen to him but swallowed all of it. And it did not stay in his
4 stomach but came out of his mouth." »And Adam said to Eve, "Let us rise and
go to see what has happened to them.8 Perhaps the enemy is warring against
them."
1 3 And when they both8 had gone out they found Abel killed by the hand of Cain,
2 his brother. #And God said to Michael the archangel, "Say to Adam, 'The mystery
which you knowb do not report to your son Cain, for he is a son of wrath. But Gen 4:5
do not mourn, for I will give you another son in his place; this one shall reveal 4.25
3 to youc all that you shall do;d but you tell him nothing!' "e "These things God
said to his angel, and Adam kept the word in his heart, with him and Eve, grieving u 2:19,51
over Abel their son.
1 4 After these things Adam knew his wife and she conceived and bore Seth.8
2 And Adam said to Eve, "See, we have begotten a son in place of Abel, whom
Cain killed; let us give glory and sacrifice to God."
1 5 And Adam fathered thirty sons and thirty daughters. Gen 5:4
1 a. MSS El and E2 add "the first-made."
b. El and E2 add "Adam knew his wife and she."
c. Several explanations of the enigmatic names for Cain and Abel have been proposed: (a) That the
original read Diaphytor or Diaphyteutis, "a planter," and Melatas or Melobotes, "a keeper of sheep";
(b) Adiaphdtos, "unshining," as found in MSS DI D2 D3 Ml M2 El (Aphaton, "nameless," in E2)
as well as the Arm. text; (c) that "Amilabes" is a rude transcription of the Heb. hanfhubdl, "the
destroyed one"; (d) that the similarity of Qayin, "Cain," with kiyun (Kaiwan = the planet Saturn) gave
rise to the legend about the shining face of Cain which is found in PRE 21 and TargYer on Gen 4:1.
The description of Cain as "lustrous" in Vita 21:3 supports this view of the name Diaphotos. The later
two explanations would imply that a Semitic, probably Heb., original text lay behind both the Gk. and
Lat.
2 a. El and E2 omit the last five words.
3 a. El and E2 omit "both."
b. MS B omits these five words.
c. "To you" is omitted in Al A2 DI D2 D3 D4.
d. Some MSS add "to him."
e. The last phrase is omitted in DI D4 El E2 G H and the Arm.
4 a. MS H adds the last half of Gen 4:25.

Here, however, the waters seem to be around the earthly Paradise. b. The MSS in groups II, III, and IV include here the following interpolation, an apocalyptic piece
which refers both to the temples of Solomon and of Herod:
29:4 "Listen, Seth my son, to the other future sacramental mysteries which were revealed to me, which
by eating of the tree of knowledge I knew and understood, which shall be in this temporary age, which
God is about to perform with his creation, the human race. 5 The LORD will appear in a blaze of fire. From the mouth of his majesty he will give commands and precepts, and they will hallow him in the[Apocalypse][Vita]
IV. ADAM'S FINAL ILLNESS
1 30 After Adam had lived 930 years, he knew his days were at an end and Gen 5:5
therefore said, 44Let all my sons be gathered to me, that I may bless them before
2 I die, and speak with them." •And they assembled in three parts in his sight at
3 the oratory* where they used to worship the LORD God. *And they asked him,
"What is it with you, Father, that you should gather us together? And why are
4 you lying on your bed?" #And Adam answered and said, "My sons, I am sick
with pains." And all his sons said to him, 44What is it, Father, to be sick with
pains?"
i 31 Then his son Seth said, "Lord, perhaps you have longed for the fruit of
Paradise of which you used to eat, and that is why you are lying in sadness. 2,3 Tell me and I will go to the vicinity of the entrances to Paradise #and will put
dust on my head and throw myself to the ground before the gates of Paradise and
mourn with great lamentation, entreating the LORD. Perhaps he will hear me and
4 send his angel to bring me the fruit which you desire." •Adam answered and
said, 4 4No, my son, I do not long for (that); but I have weakness and great pain
5 in my body." »Seth responded, "What is pain, O lord Father? I do not know; do
not hide it from us, but tell us."
Adam's story of the Fall
1 32 And Adam answered and said, 4'Listen to me, my sons. When God made
us, me and your mother, and placed us in Paradise and gave us every tree bearing
fruit to eat, he forbade us (saying), 'Regarding the tree of the knowledge of good
2 and evil, which is in the midst of Paradise, do not eat of it.' •Moreover, God
gave a part of Paradise to me and (a part) to your mother. The trees of the eastern
part and over against the north he gave to me, and to your mother he gave the
southern and western parts. ApMos is
house of the habitation of his majesty.The trees of the eastern
part and over against the north he gave to me, and to your mother he gave the
southern and western parts. ApMos is
house of the habitation of his majesty. 6 And he will show them the wonderful place of his majesty, and
then they will build a house for the LORD their God on the earth where he will dread them (ms. 3 has
"which he will prepare for them"), 7 and there they will pass by his precepts and their sanctuary will
be set on fire and their land deserted and they themselves will be dispersed because they provoked God. 8 And once again he will deliver them from their dispersion, and again they will build a house of God,
and the latest house of God shall be exalted more highly than before. And once again iniquity will surpass
equity. 9 After this God will dwell with men, being seen on the earth, and then justice will begin to
shine, and the house of God will be honored in this world and no longer will the enemies be able to
harm men who believe in God. 10 And God will raise up for himself a faithful people whom he will
save forever. 11 But the wicked who refused to love his law will be punished by God their king. 12 Heaven and earth, nights and days, and all creatures will obey him and not ignore his commandment
nor change its works, but rather men who forsake the law of the LORD will be changed. 13 Therefore,
the LORD will banish from himself the impious while the righteous will shine like the sun in the presence
of God. 14 And in that time men will be purified from sins by water, but those who refuse purification
by water will be condemned. 15 Happy will be the man who has reformed his soul when the judgments
and wonders of God shall come among men, their deeds being investigated by God, the just Judge."
The Babylonian destruction of Judah is referred to in vs. 7 and the second temple in vs. 8; vs. 14 is
certainly, and vs. 9 possibly, from a Christian hand. 30 a.[Apocalypse]

9 possibly, from a Christian hand. 30 a. In rabbinic sources Adam's oratory is located on Mount Mori ah, on the spot on which the holy
of holies of the temple later stood (Midrash on Ps 92:6; PR 43:2; PRE 23; 31, etc.). The assertion of
ApMos 40:5 that Adam was buried on the same spot from which the dust was taken for his body is
assumed in several Jewish sources to refer to the same place; cf. Vita 45:2.[Apocalypse]
2 5 And (Adam) became ill and cried with a loud voice saying, "Let all my sons
3 come to me that I may see them before I die." »And all came together, for the
earth was settled" in three parts.b And they all came to the door of the house in
4 which he used to enter to pray to God.c »And his son Seth said, "Father Adam,
what is your illness?" And he said, "My children, much pain afflicts me."d
5 And they said, "What is pain and illness?"'
t 6 And Seth answered and said, "Father, have you been thinking of the things
2 from which you used to eat and grieving to desire them?" #If such is the case tell vim M
me, and I will go and bring you fruit from Paradise. For I will place dung on my
head and weep and pray, and the LORD will hear me and will send his angel, and Mai 2:3
3 I will bring (it) to you so that the pain will leave you."b »Adam said to him,
"No, Seth my son; but I have sickness and pain." Seth said to him, "And how
did this happen to you?"
1 7 Adam said to him, "When God made us, me and your mother, through whom
I am dying," he gave us every plant in Paradise, but concerning one he commanded
us not to eat of it, (for) we would die by it.b Gen 2:16-17
5 a. MSS El and E2 read "divided."
b. Arm. reads "For they were living apart each by himself in his own place."
c. This sentence occurs only in Al A2 (variant) C (variant) D3 F.
d. El and E2 omit this sentence and otherwise condense the conversation.
e. The purpose of this section in both Vita and ApMos is to show that sickness is not part of the
created order, but rather one of the punishments brought by the Fall.
6 a. Several MSS omit the last three words.
b. MS B reads, "And he will bring to me from the tree in which the oil flows, and the pain will leave
you."
7 a. This phrase is not found in El and E2.
b. MS G reads differently, but without significant change of meaning, in vss. 1-3.[Vita]
1,2 33 The LORD God appointed two angels to guard us.a »The hour came when the
3 angels ascended to worship in the presence of God. •Immediately the adversary,
the devil, found opportunity while the angels were away and deceived your mother
so that she ate of the illicit and forbidden tree. And she ate and gave to me. 1 34 And immediately the LORD God was angry with us and the LORD said to me,
'Because you have forsaken my commandment and have not kept my word which
2 I set for you, behold, I will bring upon your body seventy plagues; »you shall be
racked with various pains, from the top of the head and the eyes and ears down
3 to the nails of the feet, and in each separate limb.' •These he considered to be
the scourge of pain from one of the trees." Moreover, the LORD sent all these to
me and to all our generations."
1 35 Adam said this to all his sons while he was seized with great pains, and he
cried out with a loud voice, saying, "Why should I suffer misery and endure such
2 agony?" #And when she saw him weeping, Eve herself began to weep, saying,
3 "O LORD, my God, transfer his pain to me, since it is I who sinned." #And Eve
said to Adam, "My lord, give me a portion of your pain, for this guilt has come
to you from me.'* vua ua
1 36 And Adam said to Eve, "Rise and go with my son Seth to the regions of
Paradise and put dust on your heads and prostrate yourselves to the ground and
2 mourn in the sight of God. • Perhaps he will have mercy and send his angel to the
tree of his mercy, from which flows the oil of life," and will give you a little of
it with which to anoint me, that I might have rest from these pains by which I
am wasting away."
The rule of the beasts
1 37 And Seth and his mother went toward the gates of Paradise; and while they
were walking, behold suddenly there came a serpent, a beast, and attacked and
2 bit Seth. *And when Eve saw it, she cried out and said, "Woe is me for I am
3 cursed, since I have not kept the command of the LORD.[Apocalypse]
2 5 And (Adam) became ill and cried with a loud voice saying, "Let all my sons
3 come to me that I may see them before I die." »And all came together, for the
earth was settled" in three parts.b And they all came to the door of the house in
4 which he used to enter to pray to God.c »And his son Seth said, "Father Adam,
what is your illness?" And he said, "My children, much pain afflicts me."d
5 And they said, "What is pain and illness?"'
t 6 And Seth answered and said, "Father, have you been thinking of the things
2 from which you used to eat and grieving to desire them?" #If such is the case tell vim M
me, and I will go and bring you fruit from Paradise. For I will place dung on my
head and weep and pray, and the LORD will hear me and will send his angel, and Mai 2:3
3 I will bring (it) to you so that the pain will leave you."b »Adam said to him,
"No, Seth my son; but I have sickness and pain." Seth said to him, "And how
did this happen to you?"
1 7 Adam said to him, "When God made us, me and your mother, through whom
I am dying," he gave us every plant in Paradise, but concerning one he commanded
us not to eat of it, (for) we would die by it.b Gen 2:16-17
5 a. MSS El and E2 read "divided."
b. Arm. reads "For they were living apart each by himself in his own place."
c. This sentence occurs only in Al A2 (variant) C (variant) D3 F.
d. El and E2 omit this sentence and otherwise condense the conversation.
e. The purpose of this section in both Vita and ApMos is to show that sickness is not part of the
created order, but rather one of the punishments brought by the Fall.
6 a. Several MSS omit the last three words.
b. MS B reads, "And he will bring to me from the tree in which the oil flows, and the pain will leave
you."
7 a. This phrase is not found in El and E2.
b. MS G reads differently, but without significant change of meaning, in vss. 1-3.

• Perhaps he will have mercy and send his angel to the
tree of his mercy, from which flows the oil of life," and will give you a little of
it with which to anoint me, that I might have rest from these pains by which I
am wasting away."
The rule of the beasts
1 37 And Seth and his mother went toward the gates of Paradise; and while they
were walking, behold suddenly there came a serpent, a beast, and attacked and
2 bit Seth. *And when Eve saw it, she cried out and said, "Woe is me for I am
3 cursed, since I have not kept the command of the LORD. *And Eve said to the
serpent in a loud voice, "Cursed beast! How is it that you were not afraid to
throw yourself at the image of God, but have dared to attack it? And how were
your teeth made strong?""
33 a. Ginzberg, JE, vol. 1, p. 179, takes these to be among the virtutes, "excellencies," mentioned in
21:1; 28:2; 48:2; see also 2En 8:8. 34 a. Lat. Haec deputavit in flagellationem dolori uno cum arboribus; the MSS differ greatly on this
expression. 36 a. This tree is identified as the "tree of life" only in ApMos 28; contrast Vita 40:3 and see Vita
40:2-3; ApMos 13:1. In ApMos 28:2-4 Adam is told that he will not eat from the tree of life until the
resurrection, an inconsistency with this passage if the tree here is the tree of life. Both texts, however,
are composed of originally separate traditions. Rabbinic literature knows nothing of the "oil of life" but
speaks of the "dew of light" (Isa 26:19) as the means of resurrection; on the oil see GNic 19 (= Descent
3); PseudClemRec 1.45; Origen, Contra Celsus 6:27; Mk 6:13; Jas 5:14. 37 a. The oldest MSS of Vita omit this sentence.[Apocalypse]
2 •And the hour drew near for the
angels who were guarding0 your mother to ascend and worship the LORD. And
the enemy gave to her and she ate from the tree, since he knew that neither I nor Gen 3:1-7
3 the holy angels were near her. •Then shed gave also to me to eat.
1 8 When we both had eaten,8 God was angry with us. And the LORD came into Gen 3:8-12
Paradiseb and called with a frightful voice, saying, 'Adam, where are you? And
2 why do you hide from my face? Can the house hide from its builder?' »And he
said, 'Since you have forsaken my covenant, I have submitted your body to
seventy plagues.c The pain of the first plague is affliction of the eyes; the pain of
the second plague is of the hearing; and so one after the other all the plagues shall
pursued you.* "
1 9 While he was saying these things to his sons, he sighed deeply and said, "What
2 shall I do? I am in great distress." #And Eve also wept and said, "My lord Adam,
rise, give me half of your illness and let me bear it, because this has happened to
you through me; because of me you suffer troubles and pains."8
3 *But Adam said ApMos 1*2
to Eve,b "Rise and go with our son, Seth, near to Paradise, and place earth on Rev 22:2
your heads and weep, beseeching God so that he might have mercy on me, and iiU 8?33^
send his angel into Paradise and give mec from the tree out of which the oil flows, J^jJ8^1
and bring it to me, and I will anoint myself and rest."d
1 10 And Seth and Eve went into the regions of Paradise. As they were going,
2 Eve saw her son and a wild beast attacking him. »And Eve wept, saying, "Woe
is me! For when I come to the day of resurrection, all who have sinned will curse
3 me, saying8 that Eve did not keep the command of God." #And Eve cried out to
the beast and said, "O you evil beast, do you not fear to attack the image of
God? How was your mouth opened? How did your teeth grow strong? How did
you not remember your subjection, for you were once subjected to the image of Gen i:26,28
God?"
c. Several MSS read diaterountas, "watching closely,*' rather than phylassonton, "guarding,"
translated here.
d. Some MSS read "he" or "that one."
8 a. Six MSS omit this phrase (C DI D2 D4 Ml M2).
b. Several MSS add "placed his throne."
c. Three MSS read "seventy-two." This confusion is similar to the rabbinic question whether there
are seventy or seventy-two nations in the world; m.Nega'im 1:4 deals with the signs of leprosy and is
not relevant to this passage.
d. Gk. parakolouthesousin, "pursue."
9 a. This clause is not found in El and E2; several other MSS omit "and pains."
b. In Vita 31 (= ApMos 6) Adam rejects Seth's offer to go to Paradise.
c. MSS El and E2 add "a branch."
d. MS C reads, "I will anoint myself and be freed from the pain"; several others add, "And I will
show you the way in which we were formerly deceived," an addition which disrupts the narrative.
10 a. Some MSS read, "cursed be Eve, for she did not keep the command of God."[Vita]
1 38 The beast answered in a human voice, "O Eve, is not our malice against
2 you! Is not our fury against you! •Tell me, Eve, how was your mouth opened
3 that you ate of the fruit which the LORD God commanded you not to eat? *Now,
however, are you not able to bear it if I begin to reproach you?"8
1 39 Then Seth said to the beast, "May the LORD God rebuke you. Stop; be quiet;
2 close your mouth, cursed enemy of truth, chaotic destroyer.8 • Stand back from
the image of God until the day when the LORD God shall order you to be brought
3 to judgment." »And the beast said to Seth, "See, I stand back from the presence
of the image of God, as you have said." Immediately he left Seth, who was
wounded by (his) teeth.b
Seth and Eve at the earthly Paradise
1 40 But Seth and his mother walked toward the regions of Paradise for the oil of
2 mercy, to anoint the sick Adam. #And they arrived at the gates of Paradise, took 3i:3
dust from the earth, and put it on their heads, prostrated themselves to the ground ApMos 6:3
3 on their faces and began to mourn with loud sighs, 'begging the LORD God to
pity Adam in his pains and to send his angel to give them the oil from the tree of
mercy. 1 41 But when they had prayed and entreated for many hours, behold, the angel
Michael appeared to them, saying, "I have been sent to you from the LORD; I
2 have been set by the LORD over the bodies of men. #I say to you, Seth, man of
God, do not weep, praying and begging for the oil of the tree of mercy to anoint
your father Adam for the pains of his body. i 42 Truly I say to you that you are by no means able to take from it, except in
the last days.8
1 43 But you, Seth, go to your father Adam, for the span of his life is completed. 2 Six days from now his soul shall leave the body; and as it leaves, you shall see
great wonders in heaven and on the earth and in the lights of heaven." • Having
3 ApMos 35-36
4 said this, Michael immediately withdrew from Seth.[Apocalypse]
2 •And the hour drew near for the
angels who were guarding0 your mother to ascend and worship the LORD. And
the enemy gave to her and she ate from the tree, since he knew that neither I nor Gen 3:1-7
3 the holy angels were near her. •Then shed gave also to me to eat.
1 8 When we both had eaten,8 God was angry with us. And the LORD came into Gen 3:8-12
Paradiseb and called with a frightful voice, saying, 'Adam, where are you? And
2 why do you hide from my face? Can the house hide from its builder?' »And he
said, 'Since you have forsaken my covenant, I have submitted your body to
seventy plagues.c The pain of the first plague is affliction of the eyes; the pain of
the second plague is of the hearing; and so one after the other all the plagues shall
pursued you.* "
1 9 While he was saying these things to his sons, he sighed deeply and said, "What
2 shall I do? I am in great distress." #And Eve also wept and said, "My lord Adam,
rise, give me half of your illness and let me bear it, because this has happened to
you through me; because of me you suffer troubles and pains."8
3 *But Adam said ApMos 1*2
to Eve,b "Rise and go with our son, Seth, near to Paradise, and place earth on Rev 22:2
your heads and weep, beseeching God so that he might have mercy on me, and iiU 8?33^
send his angel into Paradise and give mec from the tree out of which the oil flows, J^jJ8^1
and bring it to me, and I will anoint myself and rest."d
1 10 And Seth and Eve went into the regions of Paradise. As they were going,
2 Eve saw her son and a wild beast attacking him. »And Eve wept, saying, "Woe
is me! For when I come to the day of resurrection, all who have sinned will curse
3 me, saying8 that Eve did not keep the command of God." #And Eve cried out to
the beast and said, "O you evil beast, do you not fear to attack the image of
God? How was your mouth opened? How did your teeth grow strong? How did
you not remember your subjection, for you were once subjected to the image of Gen i:26,28
God?"
c. Several MSS read diaterountas, "watching closely,*' rather than phylassonton, "guarding,"
translated here.
d. Some MSS read "he" or "that one."
8 a. Six MSS omit this phrase (C DI D2 D4 Ml M2).
b. Several MSS add "placed his throne."
c. Three MSS read "seventy-two." This confusion is similar to the rabbinic question whether there
are seventy or seventy-two nations in the world; m.Nega'im 1:4 deals with the signs of leprosy and is
not relevant to this passage.
d. Gk. parakolouthesousin, "pursue."
9 a. This clause is not found in El and E2; several other MSS omit "and pains."
b. In Vita 31 (= ApMos 6) Adam rejects Seth's offer to go to Paradise.
c. MSS El and E2 add "a branch."
d. MS C reads, "I will anoint myself and be freed from the pain"; several others add, "And I will
show you the way in which we were formerly deceived," an addition which disrupts the narrative.
10 a. Some MSS read, "cursed be Eve, for she did not keep the command of God."

i 42 Truly I say to you that you are by no means able to take from it, except in
the last days.8
1 43 But you, Seth, go to your father Adam, for the span of his life is completed. 2 Six days from now his soul shall leave the body; and as it leaves, you shall see
great wonders in heaven and on the earth and in the lights of heaven." • Having
3 ApMos 35-36
4 said this, Michael immediately withdrew from Seth. »And Eve and Seth turned
back and brought with them aromatics, namely, nard, crocus, calamine, and AM 29
P OS
cinnamon. 38 a. Some MSS omit the words "if I begin to reproach you."
39 a. These words, as well as the identification of the beast as a serpent in 37:1, reveal that the Lat. text thinks of the beast as Satan; this is not the case in ApMos. b. Lat. plaga de dentibus a Seth, "Seth who was wounded by his teeth"; there are a variety of variants
for this phrase. 42 a. Meyer includes here the following extract, found in a few MSS as well as the Lat. text of GNic
19 (= Descent 3): "... When five thousand five hundred years [variants: 6,500, 5,050, 5,200, 5,199,
5,228] shall have been completed. Then the most beloved Christ, Son of God, shall come upon the earth
to revive the body of Adam and with him the bodies of the dead. *And when he, the Son of God, comes,
he himself will be baptized in the river Jordan, and when he has come out of the water of the Jor­
dan, then he will anoint from the oil of mercy all who believe in him. *And the oil of mercy shall be
from generation to generation for those who are bom again of water and the Holy Spirit into eternal
life. •Then the most beloved Son of God, Christ, shall descend to the earth, and lead your father Adam
to Paradise to the tree of mercy." Meyer takes this passage as evidence that the Vita, or its sources, was
known to the author of GNic.[Apocalypse]
11 Then the beast cried out, saying, "0 Eve, neither your greed nor your weeping
are due to us, but to you, since the rule of the beasts has happened because of
you.a *How is it that your mouth was opened to eat from the tree concerning
which God commanded you not to eat from it? Through this also our nature was
changed. •Therefore now you would not bear it if I begin to reprove you."
12 Seth said to the beast, "Shut your mouth and be silent, and keep away from
the image of God until the day of judgment." #Then the beast said to Seth, "See,
I stand off, Seth,a from the image of God." Then the beast fled and left him
wounded and went to its dwelling.6
13 And Seth went with his mother Eve near to Paradise. And they wept there,8
praying God that he would send his angel to give them the oil of mercy.b
And God sent Michael the archangel,0 and he said to them, "Seth, man of God,
do not labor, praying with this supplication about the tree from which the oil
flows, to anoint your father Adam; it shall not come to be yours now (but*1 at the
end of times. #Then all flesh from Adam up to that great day* shall be raised,
such as shall be the holy people; *then to them shall be given every joy of Paradise
and God shall be in their midst, #and there shall not be any more sinners before
him, for the evil heart shall be removed from them, and they shall be given a Jer3i.3
heart that understands the good and worships God alone.) 'But you go again to f^V8
your father, since the measure of his life is fulfilled, that is/ in three days. And
as his soul departs, you are sure to witness its fearful upward journey."
ApMos
11 a. That the hostilities of the animal world toward man will be removed in the future age is found in
Isa 11:6-9; see also Mk 1:13.
12 a. Several MSS omit the name Seth here. The widespread speculation that Seth possessed the image
of God in a special way is based on Gen 5:3.
b. Lit. "tent"; MS C reads, "den" (koiten).
13 a. This word is not found in several MSS.
b. A play on words (elaion/eleou, "oil''/"mercy") not capable of Lat. translation.
c. See ApMos 17:2, n. a.
d. The words from here through 13:5 are found in a minority of the Gk. MSS and are thus included
here in parentheses. Yet, in striking contrast to the interpolation in Vita 42:2-5, this passage has no
exclusively Christian features.
e. MS B reads, "the day of consummation."
f. Gk. ison, "that is"; lit. "equal to"; some MSS emend this to eison, "within," or eis treis emeras,
"to three days."[Vita]
1 44 And when Seth and his mother reached Adam, they told him how the beast,
2 the serpent, bit Seth. -And Adam said to Eve, "What have you done? You have
3 brought upon us a great wound, transgression and sin in all our generations. *And
you shall relate8 what you have done to your children5 after my death, for those
who rise up from us shall labor, not being adequate, but failing,0 and they shall
4 curse us, saying, •'Our parents who were from the beginning have brought upon
5 us all evils.' " #When Eve heard this she began to weep and groan.
44 a. Lit. refert, "she relates"; other MSS read refer, "you relate," referes, "you are relating," or
referent, "they are relating." This statement suggests that the author of the Vita was aware of Eve's
story (ApMos 15-30).
b. The MSS read tuos, "your," tuis, "your," me us, "my," tuus, "your," or nostri, "of us"; and
filios, acc. pi. "children," filius, nom. sing, "son," or filii, nom. pi. "children."
c. This suggests an acquaintance with ApMos 24.[Apocalypse]
14 Having said these things, the angel departed from them. Seth and Eve came
into the tent where Adam was lying. »Adam said to Eve, "Why have you wrought 2Cor n*
destruction among us and brought upon us great wrath, which is death gaining Rom 52:i24-2i
rule over all our race?"8 »Andb he said to her, "Call all our children and our
children's children, and tell them how we transgressed."
V. EVE'S STORY OF THE FALL AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
15 Then Eve said to them, "Listen, all my children and my children's children,
and I will tell you how our enemy deceived us.a #It happened while we were
guarding Paradise, each his portion allotted from God. Now I was watching in
my share, the South and West, «and the devil came into Adam's portion, where vua 32
the male animals were, since God divided the animals among us, and all the
males he gave to your father, and all the females to me, and each of us kept his
own.b
16 "And the devil spoke to the serpent," saying, 'Rise and come to me, and I
will tell you something to your advantage.' 'Then the serpent came to him, and
the devil said to him, 'I hear that you are wiser than all the beasts; so I came to
observe you.b I found you greater than all the beasts, and they associate with you;
but yet you are prostrate to the very least.0 •Why do you eat of the weeds of
Adamd and not of the fruit* of Paradise? Rise and come and let us make him to
be cast out of Paradise through his wife/ just as we were cast out through him.'
The serpent said to him, 41 fear lest the LORD be wrathful to me.' •The devil said
to him, 'Do not fear; only become my vessel,8 and I will speak a word through
your mouth by which you will be able to deceive him.'h
The temptation
17 "And immediately he suspended himself from the walls of Paradise about AMOS7:2
P
the time when the angels of God went up to worship. Then Satan came in the
vita9.\
form of an angel and sang hymns to God as the angels. -And I saw him bending 2Cor 11:14
14 a. 2En 30:18 and Sir 25:24 also hold that death came through Eve (cf. 2Cor 11:3; ITim 2:14), while
the blame is put on Adam in Rom 5:17; 4Ezra 3:21; 7:118. MS C does not have the words following
"death."
b. MSS El E2 G have a significantly different text for 14:3-16:5 and Ml and M2 for 14:3-17:2; MS
D5 begins at this point.
15 a. MS C omits the words "Listen . . . deceived us."
b. The last phrase of this sentence is not found in four MSS.
16 a. On the serpent of Paradise see TDNT, vol. 5, pp. 577f. (Foerster).
b. Gk. katanoesai, "to observe"; MS C: "And therefore I consult you . . ."
c. This clause is not found in MS C; two others omit the last phrase.
d. Some MSS add "and his wife."
e. Most MSS do not have "of the fruit."
f. Several MSS omit "through his wife."
g. A Hebraism (see TDNT, vol. 7, pp. 359-60); several MSS omit "only."
h. Some MSS correct this to read "her" or "them."[Vita][Apocalypse]
over the wall, like an angel. And he said to me, 4Are you Eve?' And I said to
3 him, 4I am.' And he said to me, 4What are you doing in Paradise?' •{ replied,
4 4God placed us to guard it and eat from it.' •The devil answered me through the
5 mouth of the serpent, 4You do well, but you do not eat of every plant.' *And I
said to him, 4Yes, we eat from every plant except one only, which is in the midst Gen 3:3
of Paradise, concerning which God commanded us not to eat of it, else you shall Gen 2:17
most surely die.'
1 18 44Then the serpent said to me, 4May God live! For I am grieved8 over you,
that you are like animals.b For I do not want you to be ignorant; but rise, come
2 and eat, and observe the glory of the tree.' #And I said to him, i fear lest God
3 be angry with me, just as he told us.' •He said to me, 4Fear not; for at the very
time you eat, your eyes will be opened and you will be like gods, knowing good Gen 3:5
4 and evil. •But since God knew this, that you would be like him,c he begrudged
5 you and said, 44Do not eat of it." *But come to the plant, and see its great glory.'
6 And I turned to the plant and saw its great glory. And I said to him, 4It is pleasing Gen 3:6
to consider with the eyes';d yet I was afraid to take of the fruit. And he said to
me, 4Come, I will give it to you. Follow me.'
The Fall
1 19 44And I opened (the gate) for him,8 and he entered into Paradise, passing
through in front of me.[Vita]

And he said to
me, 4Come, I will give it to you. Follow me.'
The Fall
1 19 44And I opened (the gate) for him,8 and he entered into Paradise, passing
through in front of me. After he had walked a little, he turned and said to me, i
have changed my mind and will not allow you to eat.' He said these things,
wishing in the end to entice and ruin me.b And he said to me, 'Swear to me that
2 you are giving (it) also to your husband.' *And I said to him, 41 do not know by
what sort of oath I should swear to you;c however, that which I do know I tell
you: By the throne of the LORD and the cherubim and the tree of life, I shall give
3 (it) also to my husband to eat.' •When he had received the oath from me, he
went, climbed the tree, and sprinkled his evil poison on the fruit which he gave
me to eat which is his covetousness.d For coveteousness is the origin* of every jas \.is,
sin. And I bent the branch toward the earth/ took of the fruit, and ate. Rom 7:7
18 a. MS DI has a hiatus from here to 36:1. b. Most MSS do not have this phrase. c. This phrase is not in MSS C and E2. d. Several MSS omit vs. 6 up to this point. 19 a. This implies that Satan and not Eve was outside of Paradise; on Satan's attempt to enter Paradise,
cf. ARN 1. b. This sentence is not found in several MSS. c. One MS has this as a question: "What sort of oath shall I swear to you?"
d. Gk. epithymias; see ApMos 25:3, n. d. The poison (ios) of snakes is mentioned in the LXX of Ps
139:4 (ET 140:3); 57:5 (ET 58:4) [thymos . . . tou opseos = wrath ... of serpents]; see also Rev 3:3;
Hennas, Sim. 9.26.7. e. Gk. kepnale corresponds to the Heb. rd'S, "head" or "first"; since the Heb. word also denotes a
poisonous plant, the original could have been a pun. MS C reads "root and beginning."
f. Several MSS and the Arm. read, "he bent," corresponding to ARN 1, where the serpent "touched
the tree with his hands and feet, and shook it until its fruits fell to the ground."

[Vita][Apocalypse]
20 "And at that very moment my eyes were opened and I knew that I was naked Gen 3:7
of the righteousness with which I had been clothed.8 #And I wept saying, 'Why isa6i:io
have you done this to me, that I have been estranged from my glory with which EPh6:1°*
I was clothed?'b »And I wept also about the oath. But that one came down from
the tree and vanished. *I looked for leaves in my region so that I might cover my Gen 3:7
shame, but I did not find (any) from the trees of Paradise, since while I ate, the
leaves of all the trees of my portion fell,c except (those) of the fig tree only. »And
I took its leaves and made for myself skirts; they were from the same plants of Gen 3:7
which I ate.d
21 "And I cried out with a loud voice, saying, 'Adam, Adam, where are you? Rise, come to me and I will show you a great mystery/ «And when your father
came, I spoke to him unlawful words of trangression such as brought us down
from great glory.8 #For when he came, 1 opened my mouth and the devil was
speaking, and I began to admonish him, saying, 'Come, my lord Adam, listen to
me and eat of the fruit of the tree of which God told us not to eat from it, and
you shall be as God/ *Your father answered and said, i fear lest God be angry
with me/ And I said to him, 'Do not fear; for as soon as you eat, you shall know
good and evil.' •Then I quickly persuaded him. He ate, and his eyes were opened,
and he also realized his nakedness. *And he said to me, 'O evil woman! Why vnau
have you wrought destruction among us?*And he said to me, 'O evil woman! Why vnau
have you wrought destruction among us? You have estranged me from the glory ApMos
of God/
The appearance of God in Paradise
22 "And in the same hour we heard the archangel Michael sounding his trumpet, isa 58.1
calling the angels, saying, •'Thus says the LORD, "Come with me into Paradise Hoskfc?:l-6
and hear the sentence8 which 1 pronounce on Adam/" #And as we heard the {J^4*^
archangel sounding the trumpet, we said, 'Behold, God is coming into Paradise iThes 416
to judge us/ We were afraid and hid.b And God returned to Paradise, seated on Rev 8:2
a chariot of cherubim, and the angels were praising him. When God came into
Paradise, all the plants, both of the portion of Adam and also of my portion,
bloomed forth and were established.c #And the throne of God was made ready ApMos20:i;
where the tree of life was.d 4
23 "And God called Adam, saying, 'Adam, where did you hide, thinking that Gen 3:9
I would not find you? Can a house hide from its builder?' #Then your father
answered and said, *0 LORD, we are not hiding thinking that we would not be
discovered by you, but rather I8 am afraid because I am naked, and I stood in Gen 310
20 a. Ginzberg (Legends, vol. 5, pp. 121f. and n. 120) notes that the haggadic interpretation of "naked"
in Gen 3:7, 10 is that the first pair became aware that they were bare of good deeds; cf. Shab 14a; Meg
32a; GenR 19:6; PRE 14. Other Jewish and Christian writers assert that Adam and Eve had garments of
light before the Fall. b. This sentence is not found in several MSS. c. See ApMos 22:3; 38:4 and cf. b.Yoma 39b. d. Cf. PR 42:1: The tree of knowledge was "wheat, according to R. Meir. A fig tree according to R. Jose. Grapes, according to R. Judah the son of R. Mai. According to R. Abba of Akko, it was the
ethrog. Whatever it was, God has not revealed its identity." GenR 15:7 agrees with later Adam literature
that it was the fig tree. Several MSS do not have the last clause of vs. 5. 21 a.[Vita]

5. 21 a. Some MSS omit the words "such as . . . glory."
22 a. Gk. hrematos, "sentence," or krimatos, "judgment," "sentence."
b. Several MSS omit vs. 3 up to this point. c. Some MSS apply this verb to the following sentence: "And the throne of God was established
d. According to 2En 8:3 when God comes into Paradise he locates himself at the tree of life. 23 a. Some MSS correct this to "we.1

[Vita][Apocalypse]
3 awe of your might, 0 LORD.' #God said to him, 4Who showed you that you are Gen 3:11
naked, unless you have forsaken my commandment which I delivered to you to
4 keep?' *Then Adam remembered the word which 1 spoke to him, when I wanted
s to deceive him, 41 will make you safe from God/ *And he turned and said to me,
4Why have you done this?' And I also remembered the word of the serpent, and Gen 3:13
I said, 4The serpent deceived me.'
The punishments
1 24 44Godsaidto Adam,'Because you transgressed my commandment and listened Gen 3:17-19
2 to your wife, cursed is the ground in your labors. »For when you work it, it will
not give its strength; it shall yield you brambles and thistles and with sweat on Gen3:i8
your brow shall you eat your bread. You will suffer many a hardship: Gen 3:19
You will grow weary and not rest;
be afflicted with bitterness and not taste
sweetness;
3 be oppressed by heat and burdened by cold;
you will toil much and not gain wealth;
you will grow fat and Anally not be.a
4 And the animals over which you ruled will rise up against you in disorder, because ApMos 11
you did not keep my commandment.'
1 25 4'Turning to me, the LORD said to me, 'Since you have listened to the serpent Gen 3:i6
and ignored my commandment, you shall suffer birth pangs8 and unspeakable
2 pains; •with much trembling you shall bear children and on that occasion you
3 shall come near to lose your lifeb from your great anguish and pains, *and you
shall confess and say, 44LORD, LORD, save me and I will never again turn to the
4 sin of the flesh.»For when you work it, it will
not give its strength; it shall yield you brambles and thistles and with sweat on Gen3:i8
your brow shall you eat your bread. You will suffer many a hardship: Gen 3:19
You will grow weary and not rest;
be afflicted with bitterness and not taste
sweetness;
3 be oppressed by heat and burdened by cold;
you will toil much and not gain wealth;
you will grow fat and Anally not be.a
4 And the animals over which you ruled will rise up against you in disorder, because ApMos 11
you did not keep my commandment.'
1 25 4'Turning to me, the LORD said to me, 'Since you have listened to the serpent Gen 3:i6
and ignored my commandment, you shall suffer birth pangs8 and unspeakable
2 pains; •with much trembling you shall bear children and on that occasion you
3 shall come near to lose your lifeb from your great anguish and pains, *and you
shall confess and say, 44LORD, LORD, save me and I will never again turn to the
4 sin of the flesh. "c #And by this, according to your word I will judge you, because
of the enmity which the enemy has placed in you.d And yet you shall turn again
to your husband, and he shall rule over you.'
1 26 44 And after he had told me these things,8 he spoke to the serpent in great Gen 3:14-15
wrath, saying to him, 4Since you have done this and become an ungrateful vessel,b
so far as to lead astray the careless of heart, accursed are you beyond all wild Gen3:i4
2 beasts. •You shall be deprived of the food which you used to eat,c and shall eat
dust every day of your life. You shall crawl on your belly and you shall be deprived Gen 3:14
3 of your hands as well as your feet. •There shall be left for you neither ear nor
24 a. Gk. eis telos me hyparkseis may also be translated "not reach (your) goal."
25 a. Fuchs rightly suggests that the Gk. mataiois, "follies," resulted from reading the Heb. original
ffbdltm, "birth pangs," as h°bdttm, "vanities." The translator in ANF, vol. 3, p. 568 suggests that the
Gk.[Vita]

3, p. 568 suggests that the
Gk. originally read kamatoi, "labors," (as in D3) or mochthois, "hardships."
b. Gk. en mia hora elthis kai apoleseis tin zdin sou, lit. "in one hour you may come and you will
lose your life."
c. Eve's promise has close parallels in b.Nidd 31b and GenR 20:7. d. A pun (echthran, "enmity," echthros, "enemy"); Ginzberg (Legends, vol. 5, p. 124, n. 131)
suggests that in the Heb. original this sentence read "according to your actions," that it was addressed
to the serpent, and that it was located at the end of 26. In the Gk. the "word" refers to Eve's promise
in vs. 2. The idea that Satan awakened Eve's sexual desire is found in ApAb 23; PRE 21; Philo, Op 56. 26 a. The first clause of 26:1 is not found in several MSS. b. Gk. skeuos achariston may be a translation of the Heb. /Wiy b<liyya*al, "tool of Belial"; so Fuchs,
Ginzberg, and Maurer (TDNT, vol. 7, p. 360, n. 15); but see Hos 8:8 in LXX. The expression is not
found in MSS C and D4. c. MS B has a lengthy addition here.

[Vita][Apocalypse]
wing nor one limb of all that with which you enticed (them) in your depravity
and caused them to be cast out of Paradise.d *And I will put enmity between you Gen 3: is
and his seed; he shall beware of your head and you his heel until the day of
judgment. 'e
The expulsion and the repentance
27 "Having said these things, he ordered his angels to cast us out of Paradise. While we were being expelled and lamenting, your father Adam begged the
angels, (Let me be a little while so that I may beseech God that he might have
compassion and pity me, for I alone have sinned/ *And they ceased driving him
out. And Adam cried out with weeping and said, 'Forgive8 me, LORD, what I
have done/ •Then the LORD said to his angels, 'Why have you stopped driving
Adam out of Paradise? Is the guilt mine, or did I judge badly?' •Then the angels
fell on the ground and worshiped the LORD, saying, 'You are righteous, LORD,
and you judge uprightly/
28 "And the LORD turned and said to Adam, 'From now on I will not allow you
to be in Paradise/ «And Adam answered and said, 'LORD, give me from the tree
of life that I might eat before I am cast out.' 'Then the LORD spoke to Adam,
'You shall not now take8 from it; for it was appointed to the cherubim6 and the
flaming sword which turns to guard it because of you, that you might not taste of Gen 3:24
it and be immortal forever,0 but that you might have the strife which the enemy ApMos 25:3
has placed in you. *But when you come out of Paradise, if you guard yourself
from all evil, preferring death to it,d at the time of the resurrection I will raise
you again, and then there shall be given to you from the tree of life, and you
shall be immortal forever/0
29 "When the LORD had said these things, he ordered us cast out of Paradise.Is the guilt mine, or did I judge badly?' •Then the angels
fell on the ground and worshiped the LORD, saying, 'You are righteous, LORD,
and you judge uprightly/
28 "And the LORD turned and said to Adam, 'From now on I will not allow you
to be in Paradise/ «And Adam answered and said, 'LORD, give me from the tree
of life that I might eat before I am cast out.' 'Then the LORD spoke to Adam,
'You shall not now take8 from it; for it was appointed to the cherubim6 and the
flaming sword which turns to guard it because of you, that you might not taste of Gen 3:24
it and be immortal forever,0 but that you might have the strife which the enemy ApMos 25:3
has placed in you. *But when you come out of Paradise, if you guard yourself
from all evil, preferring death to it,d at the time of the resurrection I will raise
you again, and then there shall be given to you from the tree of life, and you
shall be immortal forever/0
29 "When the LORD had said these things, he ordered us cast out of Paradise. And your father wept before the angels opposite Paradise, and the angels said to
him, 'What do you want us to do for you, Adam?' #Your father answered and
said to the angels, 'See, you are casting me out; I beg you, let me take fragrances Jub 3:27
from Paradise, so that after I have gone out, I might bring an offering to God so
that God8 will hear me.' *And they came to God and said, 'Jael,b eternal king,
command that fragrant incenses from Paradise be given to Adam.' *And God
ordered Adam to come that he might take aromatic fragrances out of Paradise0 for 4^522'2,
his sustenance. »When the angels allowed him, he gathered bothd kinds: crocus, 1:29
nard, reed, cinnamon; and other seeds for his food. And he took these and went
out of Paradise. And (so) we came to be on the earth.e
d. Several sources suggest the belief that the serpent had limbs before the Fall; see Josephus, Ant
1.1.4; GenR 19:1; 20:5. e. The verb tiresei is from Gen 3:15, LXX; the Heb.[Vita]

e. The verb tiresei is from Gen 3:15, LXX; the Heb. verb Suwp may have the same meaning. 27 a. Gk. sygchdreson, "forgive"; lit. "yield," as in 33:5; 35:2; and 37:6. 28 a. MS C reads "taste."
b. In the Dead Sea Scrolls the cherubim are the highest rank of angels; cf. IEn 61:10; 2En 19:6. c. MS Ml has a hiatus from here to 34:1. d. Gk. hos boulomenos apothanein, "preferring death to it"; lit. "as one who wishes to die"; one
MS reads "as one about to die."
e. MSS El and E2 do not have this vs.; MSS C and G omit the last clause. 29 a. Some MSS have "he."
b. "Jael," a compound from the first syllable of each of the two most common Heb. biblical terms
for God (Yahweh, Elohim); see Wells, p. 148. C omits the word; D5 has aule, D2 eael, and E2 ydil. c. Several MSS add "and seeds."
d. For cultic purposes and also for food; several MSS read "four kinds."
e. MSS F and H add here the account of the repentance of Adam and Eve, translated above as a
parallel to Vita 1-10.

[Vita]
1 45 And just as Michael the archangel had predicted, the death of Adam came
2 after six days. 'When Adam realized that the hour of his death had come, he said
to all his sons, "Behold, I am 930 years old, and if I should die, bury me against
3 the East in the great dwelling place of God."a *And it happened that when he
finished his whole speech, he gave up the spirit.
45 a. Lat. contra ortum dei magnum habitationibus, "against the East in the great dwelling place of
God"; some MSS read in agrum. "toward open country," or in agro, "on land"; see Vita 30:2, n. a.[Apocalypse]
1 30 "Now then, my children, I have shown you the way in which we were
deceived. But you watch yourselves so that you do not forsake the good."8
VI. THE DEATH AND BURIAL OF ADAM AND EVE
1 31 When she had said these things in the midst of her sons and while Adam was
lying ill, having one more day before going out of the body, Eve said to Adam,
2Cor5:i-5
2 "Why are you dying and I live? And how long have I to live after you die? Tell
3 me." 'Then Adam said to Eve, "Do not be concerned about this, for you shall
not be long after me, but we shall both alike die, and you yourself8 shall be laid
in my place. But when I die, leave me alone6 and let no one touch me until the
4 angel of the LORD shall say something about me; •for God will not forget me,
but will seek his own vessel* which he has formed. But rather rise to pray to God
until I shall give back my spirit into the hands of the one who has given it. For
we know not how we shall meet our maker, whether he shall be angry with us or
turn to have mercy on us."
Eve's repentance and Adam's death
1,2 32 Then Eve rose and went out and fell on the ground and said, *"I have sinned,
O God; I have sinned, O Father of all; I have sinned against you, I have sinned
against your chosen angels, I have sinned against the cherubim, I have sinned
against your steadfast throne; I have sinned, LORD, I have sinned much; I have
3 sinned before ypu, and all sin in creation has come about through me."8 • While AMOS 1*2
P
Eve was still on her knees praying, behold, the angel of mankind6 came to her
4 and lifted her up, saying, #"Rise, Eve, from your repentance, for behold, Adam
your husband has gone out of his body. Rise and see his spirit borne up to meet
its maker."
The return of God with his angels
1 33 And Eve rose and put her hand on her face,8 and the angel said to her, "Lift Acts 7:55;
2 yourself from earthly things." •And Eve gazed into heaven, and saw a chariot of 1:10
light coming, (drawn) by four radiant eagles of which it is not possible for anyone
born from the womb to tell their glory or to see their faces," and angels went
30 a. In lieu of this paragraph El and E2 have a description of Eve's lament.
31 a. So the Arm.; most Gk. MSS have "she herself," although A2 and M2 put the verb in the second
person singular.
b. Gk. kataleipsete, "leave (me) alone"; Al and A2 read kalypsete, "cover (me)."
c. Gk. skeuos, "vessel"; other MSS read plasma, "image."
32 a. The E MSS here refer to death as resulting from Eve's sin.
b. Michael is intended; see Vita 41:1.
33 a. The Gk. MSS have several variants here; Arm. (cf. MS G) reads "with her hands wiped her many
tears from her face."
b. MSS Ml G El read, "The beauty and glory of which it is impossible for tongues of men to
describe."[Vita]
1,2 46 And for seven days were the sun, moon, and stars darkened. »And while Seth
was mourning, embracing the body of his father from above and Eve was looking
3 at the ground, her hands folded over her head, with her head on her knees, and
all her children were weeping most bitterly, • behold, the angel Michael appeared
standing at the head of Adam and he said to Seth, "Rise from the body of your
father and come to me and see what the LORD God is arranging concerning him.
He is his creature and he has had mercy on him."[Apocalypse]
3 before the chariot. •When they came to the place where yourc father Adam was
lying, the chariot stood, and the seraphim (were) between (your) father and the
4 chariot. *I myself saw golden censers and three bowls, and behold, all the angels
with frankincense and the censers and the bowls came to the altar and breathed
5 on them, and the fumes of the incense hid the sky.d »And the angels fell down
and worshiped God, crying out and saying, "Holy Jael, forgive, for he is your
image, and the work of your (holy) hands."
1 34 And then I, Eve, saw two great and fearful mysteries standing before God. 2 And I wept from fear and cried out to my son Seth, saying, #"Rise, Seth, from
the body of your father, Adam," and come to me, that you may see things which
no eye has ever seen."b
1 35 Then Seth got up and came to his mother. And he said to her, "What is the
2 matter? Why are you weeping?" #She said to him, "Look up with your eyes and
see the seven heavens3 opened, and see with your eyes how the body of your
father lies on its face, and all the holy angels are with him, praying for him and
3 saying, 'Forgive him, O Father of all, for he is your image. *b #Soc then, my child
Seth, what shall this be? When will he be given over into the hands of our unseen
4 Father and God?[Vita]
1,2 46 And for seven days were the sun, moon, and stars darkened. »And while Seth
was mourning, embracing the body of his father from above and Eve was looking
3 at the ground, her hands folded over her head, with her head on her knees, and
all her children were weeping most bitterly, • behold, the angel Michael appeared
standing at the head of Adam and he said to Seth, "Rise from the body of your
father and come to me and see what the LORD God is arranging concerning him.
He is his creature and he has had mercy on him."

*b #Soc then, my child
Seth, what shall this be? When will he be given over into the hands of our unseen
4 Father and God? *And who are the two dark-skinned personsd assisting at the
prayer for your father?"
1 36 Seth said to his mother, "These are the sun and the moon, and they themselves
2 fall down and pray for my father Adam." »And Eve said to him, "And where is joci 210; 3:is
3 their light, and why have they become dark?" •Seth said to her, "They are not i°b2*5
v8 2
able to shine before the light" of all, and this is why the light is hid from them." vua 28:2
Adam's soul is taken up to the heavenly Paradise8
1 37 While Seth was speaking to his mother, an angel sounded the trumpet and
the angels who were lying on their faces stood upb and cried out with a fearful
2 voice, saying, •"Blessed be the glory of the LORD over his works; he has had
3 mercy on Adam, the work of his hands." #When the angels had shouted out these
things, one of the six-winged seraphim came and carried Adam off to the Lake
c. Most of ApMos 33-34 are written as though Eve is speaking; this may have been part of a separate
section from which 15-30 were also derived. d. Or "firmaments" (steredmata); F and H read "heaven."
34 a. Several MSS do not include the name Adam here. b. Several MSS add, "And they are praying for your father Adam."
35 a. See Vita 25, n. a. b. Some MSS read, "son," "house," "tent," or "product."
c. The E MSS do not contain 35:3-36:3 and have a much shorter form of the text from there to the
end. d. Gk. Aithiopes, lit. "Ethiopians"; MS G reads theoprosopoi, "god-faced ones."
36 a. Several MSS read "Father of lights," as in Jas 1:17. 37 a. Chs. 37f. presuppose a distinction, not so clear in Vita, between body and spirit (or "soul");
death is the separation of the two. See TDNT, vol. 7, p. 1050 (E. Schweizer); on Paradise see Vita 25,
n. a. b. So D F and Arm.; Tischendorf s text reads "The angels lying on their faces blew the trumpet..."[Vita]
1 47 And all the angels sounded the trumpets and said, "Blessed are you, LORD,
2 who has pitied your creature." •Then Seth saw the extended hand of the LORD ApMos37:4
3 holding Adam, and he handed him over to Michael, saying, •"Let him be in your
custody until the day of dispensing punishment8 at the last years, when I will turn
his sorrow into joy. Then he shall sit on the throne of him who overthrew him."
1 48 And again the LORD said to the angels Michael and Uriel, "Bring me three
linen cloths and spread them out over Adam, and other cloths over his son Abel,
2 and bury Adam and his son." *And all the ranks of angels processed before
3 Adam, and the sleep8 of the dead was hallowed. *And Michael and Uriel said, AMOS43:2
P
"Bury your dead in the same way as you have seen."
47 a. Lat. usque in diem dispensationis in suppliciis, "until the day of dispensing punishment"; other
MSS tead disposition, "order," or defensionis, "defense."
48 a. Lat. dormitatio, "sleep" (medieval); other MSS have dormitio, "sleep.'[Apocalypse]
of Acheron0 and washed him three timesd in the presence of God. •He lay three
hours/ and so the LORD of all, sitting on his holy throne, stretched out his hands vita 47:2
and took Adam and handed him over to the archangel Michael, saying to him,
"Take him up into Paradise, to the third heaven/ and leave (him) there until that 2Cor 12:2
great and fearful day which I am about to establish for the world." »And the
archangel Michael took Adam and brought him away and left him, just as God
told him at the pardoning of Adam. The burial of Adam's body
38* Now after all these things the archangel asked about attending to the remains. And God gave orders that all the angels should gather before him, each according
to his rank. #And all the angels came together, some with censers and others
trumpets. And the LORD of hosts mounted up, the winds drawing him, and the
cherubim being above the winds; and the angels of heaven were leading him. And
when they came to the place where the body of Adam was, they took it. »And
they came into Paradise and all the plants of Paradise were stirred, so that all
those born of Adam became drowsy from the fragrance except Seth, because he
was born according to the appointment of God.b
39 Now the body of Adam was lying on the ground in Paradise, and Seth was
mourning greatly over him. And the LORD God said, "Adam, why did you do
this? If you had kept my commandment, those who brought you down into this
place would not have rejoiced. *Yet now I tell you that their joy shall be turned
into sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy; and when that happens, I
will establish you in your dominion on the throne of your seducer. #But that one
shall be cast into this place, so that you might sit above him.[Vita]
1 47 And all the angels sounded the trumpets and said, "Blessed are you, LORD,
2 who has pitied your creature." •Then Seth saw the extended hand of the LORD ApMos37:4
3 holding Adam, and he handed him over to Michael, saying, •"Let him be in your
custody until the day of dispensing punishment8 at the last years, when I will turn
his sorrow into joy. Then he shall sit on the throne of him who overthrew him."
1 48 And again the LORD said to the angels Michael and Uriel, "Bring me three
linen cloths and spread them out over Adam, and other cloths over his son Abel,
2 and bury Adam and his son." *And all the ranks of angels processed before
3 Adam, and the sleep8 of the dead was hallowed. *And Michael and Uriel said, AMOS43:2
P
"Bury your dead in the same way as you have seen."
47 a. Lat. usque in diem dispensationis in suppliciis, "until the day of dispensing punishment"; other
MSS tead disposition, "order," or defensionis, "defense."
48 a. Lat. dormitatio, "sleep" (medieval); other MSS have dormitio, "sleep.'

*Yet now I tell you that their joy shall be turned
into sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy; and when that happens, I
will establish you in your dominion on the throne of your seducer. #But that one
shall be cast into this place, so that you might sit above him. Then he himself
and those who listen to him shall be condemned, and they shall greatly mourn
and weep when they see you sitting on his glorious throne."
40 Then he spoke to the archangel Michael, 44Go into Paradise in the third
heaven* and bring me three cloths of linen and silk."b - And God said to Michael,
Gabriel, Uriel, and Raphael/ "Cover Adam's body with the cloths and bring oil
from the oil of fragrance and pour it on him." And thus they did and prepared
his body. #And the LORD spoke, "Let also Abel's body be brought." And they
brought other linens and prepared him also, •since he was unattended from the
c. In Gk. tradition part of the stream over which the souls of the dead were conveyed to the underworld. That Michael washes repentant sinners in Acheron is found in ApPaul 22 (end); Bartholomew literature
(M. R. James, ANT, p. 185); SibOr 2.330-39 (HSW, vol. 2, p. 718); see also SibOr 5.485; 3Bar 10:2;
IEn 17:6. d. "Three times" is omitted in some MSS. e. Most Gk. MSS originally read "days"; "hours" is written by another hand. Cf. TJob 20. f. See Vita 25, n. a. The E MSS do not have the words following "Paradise" in 37:5 or 38:1-3, 5. 38 a. MSS F and H do not have chs. 38-39. b. Gk. kath horon tou theou, "according to the appointment of God," may be a reference to Gen
4:25 or could be read kathoran tou theou, "to behold God" (so Charles); or may be read, as in MS G,
katharos endpion tou theou, "pure before God."
40 a. See Vita 25, n. a. b. Gk. syrikas, "pipes," is mistakenly written for sirikas, "silken"; some MSS omit "and silk."
c. These four angels also are named in the Dead Sea Scrolls and IEn 9:1 as the greatest of the angels. Several MSS mention Michael alone here.[Vita]
Eve's instructions about the tablets and her death
1 49 Indeed, six days after Adam died, Eve, aware that she would die, gathered
all her sons and daughters, Seth with thirty brothers and thirty sisters, and Eve
2 said to (them) all, •"Listen to me, my children, and I will tell you that I and your
3 father transgressed the command of God, *and the archangel Michael said to us,
'Because of your collusion, our LORD will bring over your race the wrath of his
judgment, first by water and then by fire; by these two the LORD will judge the
whole human race.'
1 50 "But listen to me, my children! Make now tablets of stone and other tablets 2En 33:8-12
of clay and write in them all my life and your father's which you have heard and {°iefhus'An
2
2 seen from us. *If he should judge our race by water, the tablets of earth will
dissolve and the tablets of stone will remain; but if he should judge our race by
fire, the tablets of stone will break up and those of clay will be thoroughly
baked."8
50 a. This tradition is already found in different form in Josephus, Ant 1.2.3; the tradition is known in
"Pseudo-Manetho," cf. George Syncellus, Chronicle 40; see also Jub 8:1-3; 2En 33:8-12 (B); Philo,
Vita Mos 2:36; GenR 26; ARN 31. The fact that the contents of these tablets according to the Vita is the
story of Adam and Eve, while in Josephus it is astronomical knowledge, may indicate lack of dependence
between these two. Cf. M. Hengel, Judaism and Hellenism, vol. 1, pp. 241-43.[Apocalypse]
day when his brother Cain murdered him.d For the evil Cain took much care to
hide (Abel's body), but could not,c for the earth did not receive the body, saying, Gen 4:10-11
5 4i shall not receive anotherf body until the mound of earth which was taken from
me and formed shall come to me." Then the angels took up the body and set it Gen 2:7
6 on the rock, until the time his father died, #and both were buried according to the
command of God in the regions of Paradise in the place from which God had
7 found the dust.8 #And God sent seven angels into Paradise and they brought many
fragrances and set them in the earth, and so they took the two bodies and buried
them in the place which they dug and built.h
1 41 And God called Adam and said, "Adam, Adam." And the body answered
2 from the ground and said, "Here I am, LORD." #And the LORD said to him, "I Gen319
3 told you that you are dust and to dust you shall return. *Now I promise to you
the resurrection; I shall raise you on the last day in the resurrection with every
man of your seed."
1 42 After these words God made a triangular seal and sealed the tomb in order
that no one might do anything to him for six days, when his rib would return to
2,3 him. •Then the LORD and the angels went to their place,8 #and after six days Eve
also died.b
d. Several sources, including Josephus, Ant 1.2.1, assert that Cain hid Abel's body in the ground;
rabbinic sources hold that Adam buried Abel (cf. b.Ta'an 69a, 56; DeutR on 4:41). We have here a
separate tradition.
e. MS D adds "for the body sprang up from the earth and there was a voice from the earth saying
f. Most MSS have hetairon, "companion"; the original probably had, as with D, heteron, translated
here. Abel could not be buried before Adam.
g. See Vita 30, n. a; the temple mount is suggested. The Samaritans held a similar view but identified
the place of Adam's creation, Eden, and burial place as Mount Gerizim; cf. J. Macdonald, The Theology
of the Samaritans (The New Testament Library; London, 1964) p. 375.
h. MSS F and H have an abbreviated form of vss. 5-7.
42 a. So MS D; others read, "And when the benevolent God and the holy angels had committed (him)
to his place, after six days ..."
b. This may be linked with the rabbinic interpretation of Gen 1-2 that Adam was created on the first
day of creation and Eve on Friday; cf. Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 5, p. 127, n. 138.[Vita]
3 When Eve had said all this to her children, she stretched out her hands
to heaven, praying, and bent her knees to the ground and worshiped the LORD,
giving thanks, and gave up the spirit.
1,2 51 After this, all her children buried her with great weeping. •Then, when they
had mourned for four days, the archangel Michael appeared to them and said to
Seth, "Man of God, do not prolong mourning your dead more than six days,
because the seventh day is a sign of the resurrection, the rest of the coming age,
3 and on the seventh day the LORD rested from all his works." •Then Seth made Gen 2:2
the tablets.
VI. APPENDIX: THE DISCOVERY OF THE TABLETS8
Then Seth made tablets of stone and clay, and wrote in them the life of his father
Adam and his mother Eve, what he had heard from them and his eyes had seen,
and he put the tablets in the middle of the house of his father in the oratory6 where
4 he used to pray to the LORD. »And after the Flood, those written tablets were seen
5 by many persons but were read by no one. •The wise Solomon, however, saw
the writings and was entreating the LORD, and an angel of the LORD appeared to
6 him, saying, *"I am he who held the hand of Seth, so that he wrote with his
finger onto stone, and you shall be wise in writing0 so that you might know and
understand all that is contained on the stones, and where the place of prayer was
7 where Adam and Eve used to worship the LORD God. *And it is fitting for you
8 to build the temple of the LORD, the house of prayer, at that place. •Then Solomon
completed the temple of the LORD God and called forth those Achilleand documents
(that is to say, written without the knowledge of words by the finger of Seth, his
9 hand being held by the angel of the LORD). *And on the stones themselves was
found what Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied before the Flood, speaking Gen 5:21-24
of the coming of Christ, "Behold, the LORD will come in his holiness to pronounce Judc ,4"16
judgment on all and to convict the impious of all their works which they spoke iEn i:9
of him, sinners and impious, murmurers and irreligious, who walked according
to their lust and whose mouth has spoken pride."e
51 a. This appendix, certainly a late and separate tradition, is found in the MSS of Meyer's group D,
with many variants in some MSS used by Mozley (pp. 145-49), and in several medieval English and
German versions. It is often connected with the legend of the wood of the cross.
b. See Vita 30, n. a.
c. Lat. scripturam, "writing."
d. Lat. achiliacas; other MSS have achilicas or archilaykas. Meyer suggests a translation from the
Gk. (acheiropoietous, "not made with hands"). There are numerous textual variants in vss. 8-9.
e. That vs. 9 describes different contents of the tablets from what is indicated in 50:1 and 51:3
demonstrates the composite nature of this appendix.[Apocalypse]
While living, she herself wept about her death,c because she did not
know where her body was to be placed. For while the LORD was in Paradise when
they buried Adam, both she and her children slept, except for Seth, as I said.d
4 And Eve in the hour of her death implored that she might be buried where Adam,
5 her husband, was, saying, #"My Master, LORD and God of all excellence, do not
6 separate mee from the body of Adam; for you made me from his members; •but
rather consider me worthy, even me, unworthy and sinful, to be buried near his
7 body. And just as I was with him in Paradise, *and not separated even after the
8 transgression, so also let no one separate us (now)." •Therefore after she prayed,
she looked up to heaven, rose, beat her breast, and said, "God of all, receive my u 23:46
spirit." And immediately she gave up her spirit to God.f
1 43 When she had died, the archangel Michael stood by, and three angels came
2 and took her body and buried it where the body of Abel was. »And the archangel
Michael said to Seth, "Thus you shall prepare for burial each man who dies until WM48:3
3 the day of resurrection.8 »And do not mourn more than six days; on the seventh
day rest and be glad in it, for on that day both God and we angels rejoice in the
4 migration from the earth of a righteous soul."b *And when he had said these
things, the angel went up into heaven, glorifying (God) and saying, "Alleluia, to
whom be glory and power forever and ever."c
c. MS D reads "about the death of Adam."
d. The reference is to ApMos 38:4.
e. Some MSS add "your servant."
f. The E MSS end here with a statement that Eve's sons buried her with the body of Adam and there
is a brief doxology.
43 a. The D group, F H G, add, with variants, "Upon giving him (this) law, the archangel departed
from Seth, saying to him ..."
b. MS G ends, "... in which God rested from all his works; to him be glory and power forever and
ever. Amen." Other MSS read, "Do not mourn for seven days, for in it God and we angels rejoice
c. So MS DI. All MSS, in addition to Arm. and Slav., have variant endings; Tischendorf printed that
of MS C: "He went up into heaven, glorifying and saying the hallelujah, 'Holy, holy, holy. LORD, to
the glory of God the Father, for to him is due glory, honor, and worship with his eternal and life-giving
Spirit both now and eternally, forever and ever. Amen.' " The trisagion is found also in D2 D3 D5 Ml
M2 H. The ending of MS G is given in n. b.PSEUDO-PHILO
(First Century A.D.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY D. J. HARRINGTON
Pseudo-Philo's Biblical Antiquities (often referred to by the Latin title Liber Antiquitatum
Biblicarum), a history of Israel from Adam to David, is an imaginative retelling of parts of
the Old Testament story. It interweaves biblical incidents and legendary expansions of these
accounts. From the material corresponding to that of the book of Genesis there are genealogies
from Adam to Noah (ch. 1) and from Cain to Lamech (ch. 2), the story of the Flood (ch. 3), genealogies of the sons of Noah down to Abraham (ch. 4), the census of Noah's
descendants (ch. 5), the story of the tower of Babel and Abraham's rescue from the fiery
furnace (ch. 6), the account of the dispersion of the peoples and the choice of Canaan as
the land of Abraham (ch. 7), and the history of Israel from Abraham's settlement in Canaan
to the descent of Jacob's sons into Egypt (ch. 8). From Exodus there are the stories of
Moses' birth (ch. 9), the departure from Egypt and the crossing of the sea (ch. 10), the
giving of the Law (ch. 11), and the golden calf (ch. 12). Various statutes regarding festivals
and the purification of lepers are taken from Leviticus (ch. 13). From Numbers there is the
census of the people (ch. 14) as well as the accounts of the twelve spies (ch. 15), the
rebellion of Koran (ch. 16), the rod of Aaron (ch. 17), and Balaam (ch. 18). The narrative
of Moses' farewell, prayer, and death (ch. 19) uses material from Deuteronomy. From
Joshua there are stories of Joshua's commissioning as Moses' successor and his division of
the land (ch. 20), Joshua's prayer and the cult at Gilgal (ch. 21), the altar across the Jordan
and those at Gilgal and Shiloh (ch. 22), the covenant of Joshua (ch. 23), and the farewell
and death of Joshua (ch. 24). Then from Judges there is a lengthy section about Kenaz,
who is mentioned only in Judges 3:9-11 as the father of Othniel.[Apocalypse]
While living, she herself wept about her death,c because she did not
know where her body was to be placed. For while the LORD was in Paradise when
they buried Adam, both she and her children slept, except for Seth, as I said.d
4 And Eve in the hour of her death implored that she might be buried where Adam,
5 her husband, was, saying, #"My Master, LORD and God of all excellence, do not
6 separate mee from the body of Adam; for you made me from his members; •but
rather consider me worthy, even me, unworthy and sinful, to be buried near his
7 body. And just as I was with him in Paradise, *and not separated even after the
8 transgression, so also let no one separate us (now)." •Therefore after she prayed,
she looked up to heaven, rose, beat her breast, and said, "God of all, receive my u 23:46
spirit." And immediately she gave up her spirit to God.f
1 43 When she had died, the archangel Michael stood by, and three angels came
2 and took her body and buried it where the body of Abel was. »And the archangel
Michael said to Seth, "Thus you shall prepare for burial each man who dies until WM48:3
3 the day of resurrection.8 »And do not mourn more than six days; on the seventh
day rest and be glad in it, for on that day both God and we angels rejoice in the
4 migration from the earth of a righteous soul."b *And when he had said these
things, the angel went up into heaven, glorifying (God) and saying, "Alleluia, to
whom be glory and power forever and ever."c
c. MS D reads "about the death of Adam."
d. The reference is to ApMos 38:4.
e. Some MSS add "your servant."
f. The E MSS end here with a statement that Eve's sons buried her with the body of Adam and there
is a brief doxology.
43 a. The D group, F H G, add, with variants, "Upon giving him (this) law, the archangel departed
from Seth, saying to him ..."
b. MS G ends, "... in which God rested from all his works; to him be glory and power forever and
ever. Amen." Other MSS read, "Do not mourn for seven days, for in it God and we angels rejoice
c. So MS DI. All MSS, in addition to Arm. and Slav., have variant endings; Tischendorf printed that
of MS C: "He went up into heaven, glorifying and saying the hallelujah, 'Holy, holy, holy. LORD, to
the glory of God the Father, for to him is due glory, honor, and worship with his eternal and life-giving
Spirit both now and eternally, forever and ever. Amen.' " The trisagion is found also in D2 D3 D5 Ml
M2 H. The ending of MS G is given in n. b.

24). Then from Judges there is a lengthy section about Kenaz,
who is mentioned only in Judges 3:9-11 as the father of Othniel. His election and the
sinners' confession (ch. 25), the punishment of the sinners and the twelve precious stones
(ch. 26), his victory in battle (ch. 27), and his covenant, vision, and death (ch. 28) are
described. After a brief section on Zebul (ch. 29) there are accounts of Deborah's call (ch. 30), the defeat of Sisera (ch. 31), the "hymn" of Deborah (ch. 32), and her farewell and
death (ch. 33). Then sections about Aod the magician (ch. 34), the call (ch. 35) and victory
(ch. 36) of Gideon, Abimelech (ch. 37), Jair (ch. 38), Jephthah (ch. 39) and his daughter
Seila's lament (ch. 40), Abdon and Elon (ch. 41), and the birth (ch. 42) and exploits (ch. 43) of Samson are included. The narratives about the idols of Micah (ch. 44), the crisis at
Nob (ch. 45), Israel's defeat (ch. 46), and the activities (ch. 47) and ascension (ch. 48) of
Phinehas the priest follow. Finally, corresponding to 1 Samuel and the beginning of 2
Samuel there are long sections devoted mainly to Samuel and David. Connected with Samuel
are the stories of Israel's search for a leader (ch. 49), the prayer of Hannah (ch. 50), the
birth of Samuel (ch. 51), the sons of Eli (ch. 52), the call of Samuel (ch. 53), the capture
of the ark and Eli's death (ch. 54), the return of the ark (ch. 55), the people's demand for
a king (ch. 56), the presentation of Saul to the people (ch. 57), and the sin of Saul (ch. 58). Connected with David are the parts about his anointing and his psalm (ch. 59), his
function as Saul's exorcist (ch. 60), David and Goliath (ch. 61), David and Jonathan,
David's song (ch. 62), the death of Abimelech (ch. 63), the witch of Endor (ch. 64), and
the death of Saul (ch. 65).Texts
Pseudo-Philo exists in eighteen complete and three fragmentary Latin manuscripts, all
apparently of German or Austrian origin.1 The oldest are dated to the eleventh century,
while the most recent are from the fifteenth century. All the complete manuscripts have
what seem to be gaps of uncertain length between 36:4 and 37:2 and between 37:5 and
38:1. All end abruptly in the midst of Saul's final speech; the original ending seems to have
been lost. There are Latin errors common to all the manuscripts. For our purposes the most
important complete manuscripts are Fulda-Cassel Theol. 4°,3 (11th cent.) and Phillipps 461
(12th cent.; part of the Bodmer Collection). Also important is the editio princeps published
by John Sichardus at Basel in 1527 in which he used the Fulda-Cassel manuscript along
with a now lost manuscript from the Lorsch monastery. Detailed analysis indicates that this
Lorsch manuscript reflected an earlier stage of tradition than any extant manuscript does. The close relationships between it and the Fulda-Cassel manuscript and between the latter
and the Phillipps 461 lead us to rely on these primarily as the basis for arriving at the
earliest possible text of Pseudo-Philo. The remaining complete manuscripts form a second
major group. The most significant of these are Munich Latin 18481 (formerly Tegernsee
481; 11th cent.) and Admont 359 (11th cent.; now in the library of H. L. Goodhart). The
relationships among all the extant manuscripts is such, however, that this second major
group can preserve some readings that are likely to correspond to the earliest stage of the
Latin tradition of Pseudo-Philo. Our translation is based mainly on the text of the Fulda-
Cassel and Phillipps manuscripts, but where the second group offers manifestly superior
readings we have adopted them. Finally, there are medieval retroversions of parts of Pseudo-
Philo to be found in the Hebrew Chronicles of Jerahmeel (Bodleian MS Heb. d.Finally, there are medieval retroversions of parts of Pseudo-
Philo to be found in the Hebrew Chronicles of Jerahmeel (Bodleian MS Heb. d. 11; 14th
cent.).2 Several features in these Hebrew texts are best explained as translations from the
Latin; there is also a tendency to assimilate Old Testament texts to the Masoretic Text. It
is difficult to know, however, which Latin text (or texts) the retroverter had at his disposal. The title Biblical Antiquities comes from the first Latin editions. In the 1527 edition,
Sichardus followed the lead of the fourteenth-century label of the Fulda-Cassel manuscript
(liber Philonis antiquitatum) and called it Liber Antiquitatum. The title Liber Antiquitatum
Biblicarum first appears in the edition of Sichardus' text printed in 1552 at Lyon by S. Gryphe. Original language
In an 1898 article3 that reintroduced Pseudo-Philo to the scholarly world, Leopold Cohn
argued that the Latin text is a translation from the Greek and that underlying the Greek
there must have been a Hebrew original. Cohn's view has won general acceptance. Pseudo-
Philo now exists in a Latin version whose idiom and style represent that vulgar Latin in
which the Old Latin versions of the Bible were written. There are, however, several texts
that are best explained if we presume a Greek stage in the transmission.4 For example, in
Pseudo-Philo 9:3 ("from the time when the word of God that he spoke to Abraham was
spoken, there are 350 years") the Latin has was found. Here we probably have confusion
between the Greek errethe, "was spoken," and heurethe, "was found." Also, several
Greek words have been left practically untranslated: paratecem, "deposit," in 3:10,
ometoceam, "miscarriage," in 9:2, zaticon, "covenant," in 9:15, and anteciminus,
"adversary," in 45:6. There are examples of mistranslation implying a Hebrew original.24). Then from Judges there is a lengthy section about Kenaz,
who is mentioned only in Judges 3:9-11 as the father of Othniel. His election and the
sinners' confession (ch. 25), the punishment of the sinners and the twelve precious stones
(ch. 26), his victory in battle (ch. 27), and his covenant, vision, and death (ch. 28) are
described. After a brief section on Zebul (ch. 29) there are accounts of Deborah's call (ch. 30), the defeat of Sisera (ch. 31), the "hymn" of Deborah (ch. 32), and her farewell and
death (ch. 33). Then sections about Aod the magician (ch. 34), the call (ch. 35) and victory
(ch. 36) of Gideon, Abimelech (ch. 37), Jair (ch. 38), Jephthah (ch. 39) and his daughter
Seila's lament (ch. 40), Abdon and Elon (ch. 41), and the birth (ch. 42) and exploits (ch. 43) of Samson are included. The narratives about the idols of Micah (ch. 44), the crisis at
Nob (ch. 45), Israel's defeat (ch. 46), and the activities (ch. 47) and ascension (ch. 48) of
Phinehas the priest follow. Finally, corresponding to 1 Samuel and the beginning of 2
Samuel there are long sections devoted mainly to Samuel and David. Connected with Samuel
are the stories of Israel's search for a leader (ch. 49), the prayer of Hannah (ch. 50), the
birth of Samuel (ch. 51), the sons of Eli (ch. 52), the call of Samuel (ch. 53), the capture
of the ark and Eli's death (ch. 54), the return of the ark (ch. 55), the people's demand for
a king (ch. 56), the presentation of Saul to the people (ch. 57), and the sin of Saul (ch. 58). Connected with David are the parts about his anointing and his psalm (ch. 59), his
function as Saul's exorcist (ch. 60), David and Goliath (ch. 61), David and Jonathan,
David's song (ch. 62), the death of Abimelech (ch. 63), the witch of Endor (ch. 64), and
the death of Saul (ch. 65).

Here we probably have confusion
between the Greek errethe, "was spoken," and heurethe, "was found." Also, several
Greek words have been left practically untranslated: paratecem, "deposit," in 3:10,
ometoceam, "miscarriage," in 9:2, zaticon, "covenant," in 9:15, and anteciminus,
"adversary," in 45:6. There are examples of mistranslation implying a Hebrew original. For example, in 15:6 ("to kindle a lamp for my people and to establish laws for creation")
the Latin word terminus, "boundaries," can be traced back to the Hebrew htiqqim, which
can mean both "boundaries" and "laws." Also, in 53:6 ("With your right ear pay attention,
1 D. J. Harrington, "The Text-Critical Situation of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum," RBen 83
(1973) 383-88. 2 D. J. Harrington, The Hebrew Fragments of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum Preserved in the
Chronicles of Jerahmeel. 3 L. Cohn, "An Aprocryphal Work Ascribed to Philo of Alexandria," JQR 10 (1898) 277-332. 4 D. J. Harrington, "The Original Language of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum" HTR 63 (1970)
303-14. Most of the key passages are mentioned in the notes accompanying our translation.with your left be deaf) the Latin taceat, "be silent," reflects the Hebrew haras, which
means both "be silent" and "be deaf." Lastly, some biblical texts are best explained as
translations from Hebrew into Greek and then into Latin. In 3:4 ("Noah, who was a
righteous man and blameless"), a version of Genesis 6:9, the word inmaculatus,' 'blameless,''
renders the Hebrew tammim. Unlike the Septuagint translators, who rendered tammim as
teleios,4 'perfect,'' the Greek translator of Pseudo-Philo must have used amdmos, 4 'spotless,''
4'blameless," which in Latin became inmaculatus. In other words, here and elsewhere we
are dealing with a translation of the Hebrew Bible independent of the Greek Old Testament. These indications that Hebrew was the original language of Pseudo-Philo enable us to
recognize more clearly the many Semitisms behind the Latin text. Could Pseudo-Philo have
been composed in Aramaic? Distinguishing between a work written in the Hebrew of the
second Temple period and a work composed in Aramaic when we have only a Latin version
made from a Greek translation is not easy. But some of the probable errors noted are
possible only in Hebrew. For example, the phrase in victoria (9:3) or ad victoriam (12:6)
can be traced to the Hebrew idiom lenesah, "forever, everlasting," but the root nsh in
Aramaic is not used in this sense. Furthermore, there is no solid positive evidence on which
to argue that the book was composed in Aramaic. Therefore we are led to conclude that
Hebrew, rather than Aramaic, is the original language of Pseudo-Philo. Date
Attempts to date the composition of the original Hebrew version have focused on Pseudo-
Philo 19:7, which mentions "the place where they will serve me 740 years" as having been
destroyed on the same day as that on which Moses broke the tablets of the Law, the
seventeenth of Tammuz. This has been understood as a reference to Titus' capture of
Jerusalem, A.D. 70.This has been understood as a reference to Titus' capture of
Jerusalem, A.D. 70. But close inspection of this text and the complexities involved in it
indicates that the reference could also be to the capture of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar,
Antiochus Epiphanes, or Pompey.5 The parallels between Pseudo-Philo and 4 Ezra and 2
Baruch, the latter two most probably composed after the destruction of the second Temple,
could also suggest a date after A.D. 70. But, again, this point is not decisive, since the
theological emphases of these two books (mourning over the destroyed Temple, heightened
eschatological consciousness, the four-empire scheme of history, the Messiah, etc.) are not
the same as those of Pseudo-Philo. The presence of what may be called a "Palestinian" biblical text6 (rather than "Baby­
lonian" or 4'Egyptian" according to the categories of F. M. Cross, Jr.7) makes the latest
possible date around A.D. 100 (when such texts were probably suppressed). Some other
considerations lead us to suspect that Pseudo-Philo was composed before A.D. 70: the
attitude toward the Temple and sacrifice (e.g. 32:3) is what we would expect before 70; the
expression "unto this day" in 22:8 suggests that the Temple still stands; the negative
attitude toward Jewish rulers not chosen by God (possibly an anti-Herodian polemic) would
have been a dead issue after 70; the silence about the destruction of the Temple would be
strange if indeed the Temple had been destroyed; the free attitude toward the biblical text
fits the period before 70 better than after it. If Getal, the king of the Ammonites in 39:8,
can be identified with Zenon surnamed Cotylas, who was ruler of Philadelphia (Ammon),
then we can establish 135 B.C. as the earliest possible date for the composition of the work. A date around the time of Jesus seems most likely. Provenance
If Pseudo-Philo had really been composed by Philo the Jew, Alexandria would be its
obvious place of origin.Here we probably have confusion
between the Greek errethe, "was spoken," and heurethe, "was found." Also, several
Greek words have been left practically untranslated: paratecem, "deposit," in 3:10,
ometoceam, "miscarriage," in 9:2, zaticon, "covenant," in 9:15, and anteciminus,
"adversary," in 45:6. There are examples of mistranslation implying a Hebrew original. For example, in 15:6 ("to kindle a lamp for my people and to establish laws for creation")
the Latin word terminus, "boundaries," can be traced back to the Hebrew htiqqim, which
can mean both "boundaries" and "laws." Also, in 53:6 ("With your right ear pay attention,
1 D. J. Harrington, "The Text-Critical Situation of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum," RBen 83
(1973) 383-88. 2 D. J. Harrington, The Hebrew Fragments of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum Preserved in the
Chronicles of Jerahmeel. 3 L. Cohn, "An Aprocryphal Work Ascribed to Philo of Alexandria," JQR 10 (1898) 277-332. 4 D. J. Harrington, "The Original Language of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum" HTR 63 (1970)
303-14. Most of the key passages are mentioned in the notes accompanying our translation.

A date around the time of Jesus seems most likely. Provenance
If Pseudo-Philo had really been composed by Philo the Jew, Alexandria would be its
obvious place of origin. The Latin text of Pseudo-Philo was transmitted along with the
Latin translations of Philo's works, but the attribution of Pseudo-Philo to him cannot be
5 P.-M. Bogaert, Apocalypse syriaque de Baruch (SC 144; Paris, 1969) 252-58. 6 D. J. Harrington, "The Biblical Text of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquiiatum Biblicarumr CBQ 33 (1971) 1-17. 7 F. M. Cross, Jr., The Ancient Library of Qumran and Modern Biblical Studies (Garden City, N.Y., 1961) pp. 163-94; "The History of the Biblical Text in the Light of the Discoveries in the Judaean Desert,'' HTR 57 (1964)
281-99.sustained. The manner of dealing with the biblical text is very different from Philo's
allegorizing. Moreover, Philo wrote in Greek (how much Hebrew he knew is debatable),
but our author apparently wrote in Hebrew. Finally, there are several points at which Pseudo-
Philo explicitly contradicts the views of Philo: 1,652 years from Adam to the Flood (3:6)
against Philo's 2,242; the favorable or at least neutral portrayal of Balaam (18) against
Philo's negative description; Moses' burial by God (19:16), not by the angels.8
Many factors point to Palestine as the place in which Pseudo-Philo originated: it was
apparently composed in Hebrew; the biblical text that the author had at his disposal was a
Palestinian one; there are many literary parallels with 4 Ezra and 2 Baruch,9 both of
Palestinian origin; some of the author's theological interests (the Temple, the rules of
sacrifice, the covenant and the Law, eschatology, and angelology) point toward a Palestinian
provenance; where we can understand the geographical aspects of the work, the author
seems to know the geography of Palestine (e.g. 55:7). Historical importance
Efforts to connect Pseudo-Philo with specific groups or sects in Palestine (Pharisees,
Essenes, Qumran Covenanters, Samaritans, anti-Samaritans, Hellenists, Gnostics, etc.) have
not won general acceptance. Rather, Pseudo-Philo seems to reflect the milieu of the
Palestinian synagogues at the turn of the common era.Historical importance
Efforts to connect Pseudo-Philo with specific groups or sects in Palestine (Pharisees,
Essenes, Qumran Covenanters, Samaritans, anti-Samaritans, Hellenists, Gnostics, etc.) have
not won general acceptance. Rather, Pseudo-Philo seems to reflect the milieu of the
Palestinian synagogues at the turn of the common era. It is the earliest witness for motifs
frequently repeated in the Jewish tradition: Abraham's escape from Ur (6), Israel's being
spared from the water of the Flood (7:4), Dinah's husband as Job (8:8), Moses' being born
circumcised (9:13), the writing on the tablets of the Law fleeing away (12:5), Balaam as
an interpreter of dreams (18:2), the sacrifice of Isaac (18:5; 32:2-4; 40:2), Isaac's birth in
the seventh month (23:8), the concealment of the precious stones until the last day (26:13),
the equation of Phinehas and Elijah (48:1), the identification of Saul with the fleeing
Benjaminite of 1 Samuel 4:12 (54:4), and Saul's death as an atonement for his sins (64:9). The work also transmits legends and motifs not found elsewhere. Among the more
significant examples are the connection of the building of the tower of Babel with casting
Abraham into the fire (6:3-18), Tamar's aim in having intercourse with Judah as to avoid
intercourse with gentiles (9:5), the connection between Moses' being cast into the water
and his later drying up of the Red Sea (9:10), Moses' being prevented from entering the
holy land lest he see idols (19:7), the long sections on Kenaz (chs. 25-28), the idols of
Micah (44:5), and Saul's motive in expelling the sorcerers as winning personal renown
(64:1). Two other features might tell us more about the historical setting of the work if we
were able to offer satisfactory explanations for them. There are some interesting plays on
Old Testament cliches from what would now be described as a feminist perspective: "woman
of God" in 33:1 and "the bosom of her mothers" in 40:4.A date around the time of Jesus seems most likely. Provenance
If Pseudo-Philo had really been composed by Philo the Jew, Alexandria would be its
obvious place of origin. The Latin text of Pseudo-Philo was transmitted along with the
Latin translations of Philo's works, but the attribution of Pseudo-Philo to him cannot be
5 P.-M. Bogaert, Apocalypse syriaque de Baruch (SC 144; Paris, 1969) 252-58. 6 D. J. Harrington, "The Biblical Text of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquiiatum Biblicarumr CBQ 33 (1971) 1-17. 7 F. M. Cross, Jr., The Ancient Library of Qumran and Modern Biblical Studies (Garden City, N.Y., 1961) pp. 163-94; "The History of the Biblical Text in the Light of the Discoveries in the Judaean Desert,'' HTR 57 (1964)
281-99.

Two other features might tell us more about the historical setting of the work if we
were able to offer satisfactory explanations for them. There are some interesting plays on
Old Testament cliches from what would now be described as a feminist perspective: "woman
of God" in 33:1 and "the bosom of her mothers" in 40:4. Also, there seems to be a
deliberate attempt to relocate certain biblical events: Shiloh in 45:5 rather than Mizpah of
Judges 20:1 or Bethel of Judges 20:18; Shiloh in 55:9 rather than Beth-shemesh of 1 Samuel
6:12; Ramathaim in 58:2 rather than Gilgal of 1 Samuel 15:12, 21, 33; and Bethel in 59:2
rather than Bethlehem of 1 Samuel 16:4. Theological importance
God is light (12:9; cf. 22:3) and life (30:6). He knows what is to happen beforehand
(18:4; 21:2; 28:4). He is frequently described with the epithet "the Most Powerful"
(Fortissimus). He punishes sin and holds people responsible for transgressions but has mercy
on Israel on account of those who have fallen asleep (35:3). God spoke about Israel even
before it existed (9:4). The habitable places of the world were made for Israel (39:7). The
holy land was not touched by the Flood (7:4). The heavenly bodies minister to Israel and
intercede for it with God (32:9, 14). Israel can be defeated only if it sins (18:13). It cannot
be destroyed so long as the world exists (9:3). In fact, if God destroyed Israel, there would
be no one left to glorify him (12:9). 8 L. H. Feldman, in his Prolegomenon to the reissue of M. R. James's The Biblical Antiquities of Philo (New
York, 1971), pp. xxiii-xxiv. 9 James, The Biblical Antiquities of Philo, pp. 46-58.The Law is an eternal light (9:8), a light to the world but a punishment to the ungodly
(11:1). By the Law, God will judge the whole world (11:2). It is an eternal commandment
that will not pass away (11:5); it was prepared from the creation of the world (32:7). Idolatry
and mixed marriage are the most reprehensible sins against the Law. Abraham would rather
have died than take part in idolatrous rites (6). Idolatry is at the root of the sinful behavior
of the tribes (25:9-13). Aod (34), Gideon (36:3), Jair (38), and Micah (44:1-5) lead the
people astray by idolatry. It is the root of all evils (44:6f.). Pseudo-Philo is vigorously
opposed to marriage with gentiles. Tamar had relations with her father-in-law rather than
have relations with gentiles (9:5). Balaam plots to have the Midianite women lead Israel
astray (18:13f.). The list of evils in 44:7 culminates in lusting after foreign women. The
Levite's concubine was abused because she had had intercourse with the Amalekites (45:3). See also 9:1; 21:1; 30:1; and 43:5 for other criticisms of sexual relations with gentiles. While an individual's punishment for sin may be deferred for a while, it is finally exacted
(6:11; 27:7, 15; 45:3; 49:5). The Deuteronomic concept of history (sin-punishment-salvation)
is found in 3:9f.; 12:4; 13:10; and 19:2-5. At the basis of Pseudo-Philo's views on God
and humanity is the biblical notion of covenant. Angels appear frequently in Pseudo-Philo. The angels were jealous of Abraham (32: If.). Jacob wrestled with the angel who was in charge of hymns (18:6). The angels lamented
Moses' death (19:16). Two angels assisted Samuel when he was raised up by the witch of
Endor (64:6). The angels are guardians (11:12; 59:4), but they will not intercede for people
if they sin (15:5). Four angels are mentioned by name: Ingethel (27:10), Zeruel (27:10;
Zervihel in 61:5), Nathaniel (38:3), and Fadahel (42:10).The angels are guardians (11:12; 59:4), but they will not intercede for people
if they sin (15:5). Four angels are mentioned by name: Ingethel (27:10), Zeruel (27:10;
Zervihel in 61:5), Nathaniel (38:3), and Fadahel (42:10). Evil spirits are assumed to exist
(53:3f.; 60:1); they were created on the second day of creation (60:3). Certain angels who
were condemned still assist men in the practice of sorcery (34:3). Holy spirits are mentioned
in connection with Balaam's prophecy (18:3, 11). A holy spirit came upon Kenaz (28:6). Deborah speaks of the grace of the holy spirit (32:14). The focus of Pseudo-Philo's eschatological interest is the future state, i.e. what happens
after death and what happens during and after God's eschatological visitation. He does not
cast his eschatology in political terms, nor does he show interest in the future Messiah. There are two ages: the present and the world to come (3:10; 16:3; 19:7, 13; 32:17; 62:9). After death, when the soul is separated from the body, all will be judged according to their
deeds (44:10). There is no chance to repent after death, and the fathers of Israel cannot
intercede for sinful Israel (33:2-5). The souls of the just will be at peace until the
eschatological visitation (23:13; 28:10; 51:5), but the wicked undergo punishment for their
sins (16:3; 23:6; 31:7; 36:4; 38:4; 44:10; 51:5; 63:4). When the appointed time is fulfilled,
God will visit the world (3:9; 16:3; 19:12f., 15; 23:13; 26:12; 48:1). Then all will be raised
up and judged according to their deeds (3:9f.; 19:12f.; 25:7). The just will dwell in happiness
with God (19:12f.) and with their fathers (23:13), but the wicked like Korah and his band
will be annihilated (16:3). Relation to canonical books
A glance at the summary of contents placed at the beginning of the Introduction shows
how important the books of the Bible from Genesis to 1 and 2 Samuel are for Pseudo-
Philo. There are also occasional references to Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Psalms.Two other features might tell us more about the historical setting of the work if we
were able to offer satisfactory explanations for them. There are some interesting plays on
Old Testament cliches from what would now be described as a feminist perspective: "woman
of God" in 33:1 and "the bosom of her mothers" in 40:4. Also, there seems to be a
deliberate attempt to relocate certain biblical events: Shiloh in 45:5 rather than Mizpah of
Judges 20:1 or Bethel of Judges 20:18; Shiloh in 55:9 rather than Beth-shemesh of 1 Samuel
6:12; Ramathaim in 58:2 rather than Gilgal of 1 Samuel 15:12, 21, 33; and Bethel in 59:2
rather than Bethlehem of 1 Samuel 16:4. Theological importance
God is light (12:9; cf. 22:3) and life (30:6). He knows what is to happen beforehand
(18:4; 21:2; 28:4). He is frequently described with the epithet "the Most Powerful"
(Fortissimus). He punishes sin and holds people responsible for transgressions but has mercy
on Israel on account of those who have fallen asleep (35:3). God spoke about Israel even
before it existed (9:4). The habitable places of the world were made for Israel (39:7). The
holy land was not touched by the Flood (7:4). The heavenly bodies minister to Israel and
intercede for it with God (32:9, 14). Israel can be defeated only if it sins (18:13). It cannot
be destroyed so long as the world exists (9:3). In fact, if God destroyed Israel, there would
be no one left to glorify him (12:9). 8 L. H. Feldman, in his Prolegomenon to the reissue of M. R. James's The Biblical Antiquities of Philo (New
York, 1971), pp. xxiii-xxiv. 9 James, The Biblical Antiquities of Philo, pp. 46-58.

Relation to canonical books
A glance at the summary of contents placed at the beginning of the Introduction shows
how important the books of the Bible from Genesis to 1 and 2 Samuel are for Pseudo-
Philo. There are also occasional references to Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Psalms. Pseudo-Philo
does not treat Scripture in the same way as the compilers of the later Jewish Midrashim do. Rather than making a clear distinction between the biblical text and its interpretation,
Pseudo-Philo interweaves the two. As far as we can tell from the Latin text, he seems to
have used a version of the Old Testament other than the Masoretic Text. For his combination
of genealogies, short narratives, speeches and prayers, supplements to existing biblical
narratives, and interest in numbers, Pseudo-Philo may have taken as his formal model the
books of Chronicles. There are some important verbal parallels with the New Testament:10 "May your blood
10 For more extensive lists, see James, Biblical Antiquities, pp. 59-60, and Feldman, Prolegomenon, pp. Ivi-lviii. See also R. Bauckham, "The Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum of Pseudo-Philo and the Gospels as 'Midrash/ " in
Gospel Perspectives. Volume III (Sheffield, England. 1983) pp. 33-76.be upon your own head" (6:11 and Mt 23:34f.; 27:25; cf. Acts 5:28; 18:6; 20:26); "on the
third day" to mean "after three days" (11:2 and Mt 27:63; Mk 8:31; 9:31; 10:34; Lk 24:7;
Acts 10:40; ICor 15:4); "he who restrains" (51:5 and 2Thes 2:6f.). There are also common
traditions: "a well of water to follow them" (10:7; 11:15 and ICor 10:4); divorce initiated
by the wife (42:1 and Mk 10:12). There are parallels between the stories of the births of
Moses (9:9-16) and of Samson (42:1-10) and the infancy narratives in Matthew If. and
Luke If. respectively.11 Another important connection is to be found in Pseudo-Philo's
treatment of the sacrifice of Isaac (Gen 22). According to 32:2-4 Isaac offered his life
freely (cf. 40:2); his sacrifice is related to other sacrifices made to God for the sins of men
(cf. 18:5); and his self-offering has a beneficent effect upon future generations. This complex
of ideas12 is similar to the Christian theology of Jesus' death, but it is not certain that the
New Testament writers actually knew the theology connected with Abraham's sacrifice of
Isaac. Relation to apocryphal books
As an example of an imaginative retelling of the biblical story that joins the Old Testament
text and legendary material, Pseudo-Philo stands closest in form to Jubilees, the Qumran
Genesis Apocryphon, and Josephus' Antiquities. In matters of apocalyptic language it stands
closest to 4 Ezra and 2 Baruch. Among the apocalyptic motifs common to the three works
are these: the dead sleep in the earth (3:10; 19:12; 35:3; 53:5; 4Ezra 7:32; 2Bar 11:4), the
souls of the righteous are in their chambers (32:13; 4Ezra 4:35; 2Bar 21:23; 42:7f.), Sheol
restores its debt (3:10; 4Ezra 4:41-43; 2Bar 21:23), death is sealed up (3:10; 33:3; 4Ezra
8:53; 2Bar 21:23; 42:7f.), the nations are like spittle (7:3; 12:4; 4Ezra 6:56; 2Bar 82:5).In matters of apocalyptic language it stands
closest to 4 Ezra and 2 Baruch. Among the apocalyptic motifs common to the three works
are these: the dead sleep in the earth (3:10; 19:12; 35:3; 53:5; 4Ezra 7:32; 2Bar 11:4), the
souls of the righteous are in their chambers (32:13; 4Ezra 4:35; 2Bar 21:23; 42:7f.), Sheol
restores its debt (3:10; 4Ezra 4:41-43; 2Bar 21:23), death is sealed up (3:10; 33:3; 4Ezra
8:53; 2Bar 21:23; 42:7f.), the nations are like spittle (7:3; 12:4; 4Ezra 6:56; 2Bar 82:5). Such parallels have led scholars in the past to speak of Pseudo-Philo as emanating from the
same school or circle in which 4 Ezra and 2 Baruch were composed. Yet there exists a
complex of ideas common to 4 Ezra and 2 Baruch that is absent from Pseudo-Philo: the
four-empire scheme of history, the last wicked empire being overthrown by the Messiah,
the formulation of messianic activity in forensic terms, and the concept of a temporary
messianic kingdom.13 In Pseudo-Philo there are no clear statements about the Messiah's
role in the eschatological visitation, no dwelling on the fall of Jerusalem (unless it be in
19:7), and no mention of revenge on Rome or the ruling empire. The authors of 4 Ezra and
2 Baruch may have known Pseudo-Philo, but to speak of all three originating in the same
circle or school stretches those vague terms too far. Cultural importance
As a witness to the understanding of the Bible in the Palestinian synagogues prior to A.D. 70 and as a link to the material later gathered in the traditional midrashic compilations,
Pseudo-Philo has great significance for the history of Judaism. As a Jewish writing composed
about the time when most of the New Testament writings were taking shape, it is important
also for the history of early Christianity. Yet Pseudo-Philo's impact on both Jewish and
Christian history has been slight. The earliest Christian references to it come from the
medieval writers Rhabanus Maurus, Rupert of Deutz, and Peter Comestor.Relation to canonical books
A glance at the summary of contents placed at the beginning of the Introduction shows
how important the books of the Bible from Genesis to 1 and 2 Samuel are for Pseudo-
Philo. There are also occasional references to Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Psalms. Pseudo-Philo
does not treat Scripture in the same way as the compilers of the later Jewish Midrashim do. Rather than making a clear distinction between the biblical text and its interpretation,
Pseudo-Philo interweaves the two. As far as we can tell from the Latin text, he seems to
have used a version of the Old Testament other than the Masoretic Text. For his combination
of genealogies, short narratives, speeches and prayers, supplements to existing biblical
narratives, and interest in numbers, Pseudo-Philo may have taken as his formal model the
books of Chronicles. There are some important verbal parallels with the New Testament:10 "May your blood
10 For more extensive lists, see James, Biblical Antiquities, pp. 59-60, and Feldman, Prolegomenon, pp. Ivi-lviii. See also R. Bauckham, "The Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum of Pseudo-Philo and the Gospels as 'Midrash/ " in
Gospel Perspectives. Volume III (Sheffield, England. 1983) pp. 33-76.

Yet Pseudo-Philo's impact on both Jewish and
Christian history has been slight. The earliest Christian references to it come from the
medieval writers Rhabanus Maurus, Rupert of Deutz, and Peter Comestor. Several proper
names near the end of John Donne's Metempsychosis indicate that the English divine knew
it. The only reference to it by a Jewish scholar before the nineteenth century comes from
Azariah dei Rossi in the sixteenth century. Even after Cohn's 1898 article made the work
known again, it was overlooked in the collections edited by R. H. Charles and E. Kautzsch
and in the rabbinic commentary on the New Testament by P. Billerbeck. Louis Ginzberg,
however, made ample use of it in his Legends of the Jews.14
11 C. Perrot, "Les Recits d'enfance dans la Haggada ant£rieure au II* siecle de notre ere," RSR 55 (1967) 481-
518. 12 S. Spiegel, The Last Trial (New York, 1967); G. Vermes, Scripture and Tradition in Judaism. Haggadic Studies
(SPB 4; Leiden, 1961), pp. 193-227; R. Le D6aut, La Nuit Pascale (AnBib; Rome, 1963), pp. 188-94. R. J. Daly,
"The Soteriological Significance of the Sacrifice of Isaac," CBQ 39 (1977) 45-75; P. R. Davies and B. D. Chilton,
"The Aqedah: A Revised Tradition History," CBQ 40 (1978) 514-46. 13 M. E. Stone, "The Concept of the Messiah in IV Ezra," in Religions in Antiquity: Essays in Memory of E. R. Goodenough (Leiden, 1968), p. 302. 14 Feldman, Prolegomenon, pp. ix-xv.This translation
Pseudo-Philo has been translated into English by M. R. James (1917), German by
P. Riessler (1928) and C. Dietzfelbinger (1975), Modern Hebrew by A. S. Hartom (1967),
and French by J. Cazeaux with C. Perrot and P.-M. Bogaert (1976). The present English
version of Pseudo-Philo is based on the edition of the Latin text prepared by the translator
for Sources chnStiennes. Both there and here we have followed the combination of Fulda-
Cassel Theol. 4°,3 and Phillipps 461 unless these manuscripts were obviously wrong. The
present translation aims at a literal rendering of the Latin text. This decision has been made
partly out of the feeling that a literal translation would best communicate the "biblical"
flavor of the book. But even more persuasive has been the recognition that in many places
the Latin text is corrupt and cannot be restored with certainty. The translation mirrors the
awkwardness of the text in these places. Where a proper name has a recognizable biblical
equivalent, we have written it according to its usual biblical form. Where the text agrees
with a recognizable ancient biblical text (the MT, LXX, Samaritan Pentateuch, etc.), we
have signaled these agreements by placing the relevant words in italics and noting the text
in question in the margin. Where there is merely an allusion to the biblical text, we have
noted this in the margin. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 170-73. Delling, Bibliographie, pp. 174f. Denis, Introduction, p. 162. Cohn, L. "An Apocryphal Work Ascribed to Philo of Alexandria," JQR 10 (1898) 277-
332. (An extensive summary of the content and a survey of the major issues.)
Ginzberg, L. The Legends of the Jews /-V7/. Philadelphia, 1909-46. (Ps-Philo is studied
along with many other Jewish writings; references are cited in the index of vol. 7,
537-39.)
Harrington, D. J. "The Original Language of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblica-
rum," HTR 63 (1970) 503-14. (Argues for a Heb. original translated into Gk.Yet Pseudo-Philo's impact on both Jewish and
Christian history has been slight. The earliest Christian references to it come from the
medieval writers Rhabanus Maurus, Rupert of Deutz, and Peter Comestor. Several proper
names near the end of John Donne's Metempsychosis indicate that the English divine knew
it. The only reference to it by a Jewish scholar before the nineteenth century comes from
Azariah dei Rossi in the sixteenth century. Even after Cohn's 1898 article made the work
known again, it was overlooked in the collections edited by R. H. Charles and E. Kautzsch
and in the rabbinic commentary on the New Testament by P. Billerbeck. Louis Ginzberg,
however, made ample use of it in his Legends of the Jews.14
11 C. Perrot, "Les Recits d'enfance dans la Haggada ant£rieure au II* siecle de notre ere," RSR 55 (1967) 481-
518. 12 S. Spiegel, The Last Trial (New York, 1967); G. Vermes, Scripture and Tradition in Judaism. Haggadic Studies
(SPB 4; Leiden, 1961), pp. 193-227; R. Le D6aut, La Nuit Pascale (AnBib; Rome, 1963), pp. 188-94. R. J. Daly,
"The Soteriological Significance of the Sacrifice of Isaac," CBQ 39 (1977) 45-75; P. R. Davies and B. D. Chilton,
"The Aqedah: A Revised Tradition History," CBQ 40 (1978) 514-46. 13 M. E. Stone, "The Concept of the Messiah in IV Ezra," in Religions in Antiquity: Essays in Memory of E. R. Goodenough (Leiden, 1968), p. 302. 14 Feldman, Prolegomenon, pp. ix-xv.

(Argues for a Heb. original translated into Gk. and
then into Lat.)
. "The Biblical Text of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum," CBQ 33
(1971) 1-17. (Detailed study of OT quotations and allusions in the text.)
. The Hebrew Fragments of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum Preserved
in the Chronicles of Jerahmeel. Texts and Translations 3, Pseudepigrapha Series 3;
Cambridge, Mass., 1974. (Text and translation of the Heb. retroversions of Ps-Philo
found in the Chronicles of Jerahmeel.)
, Cazeaux, J., Perrot, C, and Bogaert, P.-M. Pseudo-Philon, Les Antiquites
Bibliques. SC 229-30; Paris, 1976. (Introduction to the text, critical text, French
translation, literary introduction, and commentary.)
James, M. R. The Biblical Antiquities of Philo. Translations of Early Documents 1:
Palestinian Jewish Texts; London, 1917. (A lengthy introduction along with an ET
based on the editio princeps. The volume was reprinted in 1971 by Ktav Publishing
House of New York with a 169-page prolegomenon by Louis H. Feldman. Feldman's
work is a very valuable compilation of information and a major contribution in its own
right.)
Kisch, G. Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum. Publications in Mediaeval Studies
10; Notre Dame, Ind., 1949. (A Lat. text based primarily on MS Admont 359.)
Perrot, C. "Les Remits d'enfance dans la Haggada anteneure au IIe siecle de notre ere,"
RSR 55 (1967) 481-518. (Connects the stories of the births of Moses, Samson, and
Samuel in Ps-Philo with other Jewish accounts and the NT infancy narratives.)
Strugnell, J. "More Psalms of David," CBQ 27 (1965) 207-16. (Retroversion of 59:4 into
Gk. and Heb. with detailed philological commentary.)PSEUDO-PHILO
Genealogies from Adam to Noah
1 1 In the beginning of the world* Adam became the father of three sons and one
daughter: Cain, Noaba,b Abel, and Seth. 2 And after he became the father of Seth, Adam lived 700c years; and he became Gen 5:4
3 the father of twelve sons and eight daughters. *And these are the names of the
males: Eliseel, Suris, Elamiel, Brabal, Naat, Zarama, Zasam, Maathal, and Anath.d
4 And these are his daughters: Fua, Iectas, Arebica, Sifa, Tetia, Saba, Asin.c
5 And Seth lived 105f years and became the father of Enosh. And after he became Gen 5:6f
the father of Enosh, Seth lived 707* years and became the father of three sons
6 and twoh daughters. •And these are the names of his sons: Elidia, Forma, and
Matha; and of his daughters: Malida and Thila. 7 And Enosh lived 180' years and became the father of Kenan. And after he Gen5:9f
became the father of Kenan, Enosh lived 715* years and became the father of two
8 sons and a daughter. *And these are the names of his sons: Foe and Thaal; and
of his daughter: Catennath. 9 And Kenan lived 170k years and became the father of Mahalalel.1 And after he Gen 5:i2f. became the father of Mahalalel, Kenan lived 730™ years and became the father
10 of three sons and two daughters. #And these are the names of the males: Athac,
Socer, Lofa; and the names of the daughters: Ana and Leva. n And Mahalalel lived 165n years and fathered Jared. And after he fathered Gen5:i5f. Jared, Mahalalel lived 730° years and became the father of seven sons and five
12 daughters. *And these are the names of the males: Leta, Mata, Cechar, Melie,
Suriel, Lodo, Otim.p And these are the names of his daughters: Ada and Noa,
Iebal, Mada, Sella. 13 And Jared lived 162* years and became the father of Enoch. And after he Gen 5:i8f. became the father of Enoch, Jared lived 800 years and became the father of four
14 sons and two daughters.And after he Gen 5:i8f. became the father of Enoch, Jared lived 800 years and became the father of four
14 sons and two daughters. *And these are the names of the males: Lead, Anac,
Soboac, and Ietar; and of the daughters: Tetzeco, Lesse. 15 And Enoch lived 165x years and became the father of Methuselah. And after he Gen 5:2if. became the father of Methuselah, Enoch lived 200s years and became the father
16 of five sons and three daughters. *Now Enoch pleased God in that time and he Gen 5:24
n was not to be found, for God took him away.1 #Now the names of his sons: Anaz,
Zeum, Achaun, Feledi, Elith; and of his daughters: Theiz, Lefith, Leath. is And Methuselah lived 187" years and became the father of Lamech. And after Gen 5:25f. 1 a. Some MSS have "The beginning of the k. All MSS have 520, while the LXX of Gen
world" or omit the expression altogether. 5:12 has 170 and the MT 70. We have emended
b. According to Jub 4:1 her name is A wan, but DXX (520)toCLXX(170). in a Syriac patristic text she is called Leboda or 1. Here and in 1:11 the MSS have Malalech,
Lobda. but see Gen 5:12-17. This and other recognizable
c. The LXX of Gen 5:4 has 700, while the MT biblical names have been spelled according to their
has 800. The chronological scheme underlying the usual English forms. whole ch. is closest to that of the LXX. m. The LXX of Gen 5:13 has 740, the MT 840. d. Only nine of Adam's twelve sons are named. n. The LXX of Gen 5:15 has 165, the MT 65. Jub 4:10 says that Adam had nine sons. o. The LXX of Gen 5:16 has 730, the MT 830. e. Only seven of the eight daughters are named. p. Lodo and Otim appear as one name (Lodo-
f. The MT of Gen 5:6 has 105, while the LXX otim) in the MSS. has 205. q. We have emended 172 (CLXXII) to 162
g. The LXX of Gen 5:7 has 707, the MT 807. (CLXII) in the light of the LXX and MT of Gen
h. Most MSS read "three." Either we should 5:18. read "two" with other MSS, or we must assume r. The LXX of Gen 5:21 has 165, the MT 65.(Argues for a Heb. original translated into Gk. and
then into Lat.)
. "The Biblical Text of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum," CBQ 33
(1971) 1-17. (Detailed study of OT quotations and allusions in the text.)
. The Hebrew Fragments of Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum Preserved
in the Chronicles of Jerahmeel. Texts and Translations 3, Pseudepigrapha Series 3;
Cambridge, Mass., 1974. (Text and translation of the Heb. retroversions of Ps-Philo
found in the Chronicles of Jerahmeel.)
, Cazeaux, J., Perrot, C, and Bogaert, P.-M. Pseudo-Philon, Les Antiquites
Bibliques. SC 229-30; Paris, 1976. (Introduction to the text, critical text, French
translation, literary introduction, and commentary.)
James, M. R. The Biblical Antiquities of Philo. Translations of Early Documents 1:
Palestinian Jewish Texts; London, 1917. (A lengthy introduction along with an ET
based on the editio princeps. The volume was reprinted in 1971 by Ktav Publishing
House of New York with a 169-page prolegomenon by Louis H. Feldman. Feldman's
work is a very valuable compilation of information and a major contribution in its own
right.)
Kisch, G. Pseudo-Philo's Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum. Publications in Mediaeval Studies
10; Notre Dame, Ind., 1949. (A Lat. text based primarily on MS Admont 359.)
Perrot, C. "Les Remits d'enfance dans la Haggada anteneure au IIe siecle de notre ere,"
RSR 55 (1967) 481-518. (Connects the stories of the births of Moses, Samson, and
Samuel in Ps-Philo with other Jewish accounts and the NT infancy narratives.)
Strugnell, J. "More Psalms of David," CBQ 27 (1965) 207-16. (Retroversion of 59:4 into
Gk. and Heb. with detailed philological commentary.)

read "two" with other MSS, or we must assume r. The LXX of Gen 5:21 has 165, the MT 65. that the name of one daughter has been omitted. s. The LXX of Gen 5:22 has 200, the MT 300. i. The LXX of Gen 5:9 has 190, the MT 90. t. That is, to heaven. j. The LXX of Gen 5.10 has 715, the MT 815. u. The LXX of Gen 5:25 has 187, the MT 87.he became the father of Lamech, Methuselah lived 782 years and became the
19 father of two sons and two daughters. •And these are the names of the males:
Inab and Rafo; and of the daughters: Aluma and Amuga. 20 And Lamech lived 182* years and became the father of a son and called him Gen 5:28f. after his birth "Noah," saying, "This one will give rest™ to us and to the earth
from those who dwell on it—on account of the wickedness of whose evil deeds
21 the earth will be visited." *And after he fathered Noah, Lamech lived 585x years. Gen 5.30
22 And Noah lived 300* years and became the father of three sons: Shem, Ham, Gen 5:32
Japheth.1
Genealogies from Cain to Lamech
1 2 Now Cain dwelt in the land trembling,* as God had appointed for him after he Gen 4:16
2 had killed Abel his brother. And the name of his wife was Themech.b *And Cain (4:,214)
3 knew Themech his wife, and she conceived and bore Enoch. »Now Cain was Gen 4:17
fifteen years old when he did these things, and from that time he began to build Gen 4:17
cities until he had founded seven cities. And these are the names of the cities: the
name of the first city, corresponding to the name of his son, Enoch; and the name
of the second city Mauli, and of the third Leed, and the name of the fourth Teze,
and the name of the fifth Iesca, and the name of the sixth Celeth, and the name
4 of the seventh Iebbat. •And after he became the father of Enoch, Cain lived 715
years and became the father of three sons and two daughters. And these are the
names of his sons: Olad, Lizaf, Fosal; and of his daughters: Citha and Maac. And
all the days of Cain were 730 years, and he died. 5 Then Enoch took a wife from the daughters of Seth, and she bore him Ciramc
andCuut and Madab. NowCiram became the father ofMethushael,d and Methushael Gen 4:i8
6 became the father of Lamech. *Now Lamech took for himself two wives. The name Gen 4:19
7 of the one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah. *And Adah bore Jobab; Gen 4:20f.The name Gen 4:19
7 of the one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah. *And Adah bore Jobab; Gen 4:20f. he was the father of all those dwelling in tents and feeding cattle. And again, she
8 bore him Jobal, who was the first to teach all kinds of musical instruments. *ln Gen 4:21
that time, when those inhabiting the earth began to do evil deeds (each one with
his neighbor's wife) and they defiled them, God was angry. And hee began to
play the lyre and the lute and every instrument of sweet song and to corrupt the
9 earth. *Now Zillah bore TubaU and Miza and Theffa. And this is the Tubal who Gen 4:22
showed men techniques in using lead and tin and iron and bronze and silver and
gold. And then those inhabiting the earth began to make statues and to adore
10 them. *Now Lamech said to both his wives, Adah and Zillah, "Hear my voice, Gen4:23f
wives of Lamech, and pay attention to my remark, for I have destroyed men on
my own account and snatched sucklings from the breasts, in order to show my
sons and those inhabiting the earth how to do evil deeds. And now Cain will be
avenged seven times, but Lamech seventy-seven times."
v. The MT of Gen 5:28 has 182, the LXX 188. 4:16. See also Gen 4:12, 14. w. This interpretation of the name Noah traces b. According to Jub 4:8 the name of Cain's wife
the name back to the Heb. root nwh, "rest," but was Awan, who according to Jub 4:1 was also his
the MT of Gen 5:29 relies on nhm, "console." sister. The name Themech is also given to the
The LXX is similar to Ps-Philo here. mother of Sisera in Ps-Philo 31:8. x. The MT of Gen 5:30 has 595, the LXX 565. c. According to Gen 4:18 the name should be
y. Both the MT and the LXX of Gen 5:30 have Irad. 500. d. The generation of Mehujael (see Gen 4:18)
z. With the phrase "three sons" and the omis­ has been omitted. sion of "and" between the proper names Ps-Philo e. That is, Jobal. A connection is being drawn
stands in agreement with the LXX of Gen 5:32.read "two" with other MSS, or we must assume r. The LXX of Gen 5:21 has 165, the MT 65. that the name of one daughter has been omitted. s. The LXX of Gen 5:22 has 200, the MT 300. i. The LXX of Gen 5:9 has 190, the MT 90. t. That is, to heaven. j. The LXX of Gen 5.10 has 715, the MT 815. u. The LXX of Gen 5:25 has 187, the MT 87.

That is, Jobal. A connection is being drawn
stands in agreement with the LXX of Gen 5:32. between musical instruments and immoral
behavior. 2 a. The word "trembling" is due to the ambiguity f. The MT of Gen 4:22 has Tubalcain. Ps-Philo
of the Heb. nwd in "the land of Nod" in Gen here agrees with the LXX and the Vetus Latina.The Flood
1 3 And it happened that, when men began to multiply upon the earth, beautiful Gen 6:if. daughters were born to them. And the sons'1 of God saw that the daughters of
2 men were very fair and took for themselves wives from all whom they chose. •And
God said, "My spirit shall not judge"0 those menc forever, because they are flesh, Gen 6:3
but their years shall be 120." For them he set the limits of life, but the crimes
3 done by their hands did not cease. *And God saw that among all those inhabiting Gen 6:5,7
the earth wicked deeds had reached full measure; and because they were plotting
evil all their days, he said, ' 7 will blot out man and all the things that grow on
earth, for 1 am sorry that I have made him."
4 Yet Noah found favor and mercy before the Lord, and these are his generations. Gen 6:8f. Noah, who was a righteous man and blameless in his generation, pleased the
Lord. To him God said, "The time set for all men dwelling upon the earth has Gen 6:13-15
arrived, for their deeds are wicked. And now make for yourself an ark from cedar*1
wood. And this is how you will make it: Its length will be 300 cubits, and its
width 50 cubits, and its height 30 cubits. And you will enter the ark, you and Gen6:i8
your wife and your sons and the wives of your sons with you. And 1 will establish
my covenant with you, to destroy all those inhabiting the earth. Now of the clean Gen 7:2-4
animals and of the clean birds of the heaven you will take seven males and seven
females so that their seed can live upon the earth. But of the unclean animals and Gen 6:19-21
birds you will take for yourself two males and two females. Also, you will take
5 food for yourself and for them." *And Noah did what God commanded him. And Gen 7:5,7
he entered the ark, he and all his sons with him. And it happened after seven Gen 7:10-12
days that the water of the flood began to fall upon the earth.And Gen 7:5,7
he entered the ark, he and all his sons with him. And it happened after seven Gen 7:10-12
days that the water of the flood began to fall upon the earth. And on that day
were opened all the deeps and the great spring and the floodgates of the heaven;
6 and there was rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights. »Now it was then
the sixteen hundred and fifty-secondf year from the time when God made heaven
and earth, in which the earth along with those inhabiting it was destroyed on
7 account of the wickedness of their deeds. mAnd the deluge continued on the earth Gen 7:23-8:1
for one hundred and fifty days. Only Noah and those who were with him in the
ark survived. And when God remembered Noah, he made the water subside. 8 And it happened on the ninetieth* day that God dried up the earth and said to Gen 8:14-21
Noah, "Go forth from the ark, you and all who are with you, and increase and
multiply upon the earth." And Noah went forth from the ark, heh and his sons
and the wives of his sons, and brought out all the beasts and reptiles and birds
and cattle with him, as God commanded him. Then Noah built an altar to the
Lord, and took some of the clean cattle and clean birds, and offered burnt offerings
upon the altar, and it was accepted by the Lord like a restfub scent. 9 And God said, "I will never again curse the earth on man's account, for the Gen 8:21
tendency of man's heart is foolish* from his youth; and so I will never destroy all
living creatures at one time as I have done. But when those inhabiting the earth
sin, I will judge them by famine or by the sword or by fire or by death; and there
3 a. Most LXX MSS as well as Philo and Josephus from the MT's chronology, 1,656 years. This total,
have "angels" rather than "sons" in Gen 6:2. however, cannot be reconciled with the chronology
b. The LXX of Gen 6:3 has "remain." Ps-Philo of Ps-Philo 1, and the section may well be a scribal
is reading the Heb. ydwn as in the MT and gloss.That is, Jobal. A connection is being drawn
stands in agreement with the LXX of Gen 5:32. between musical instruments and immoral
behavior. 2 a. The word "trembling" is due to the ambiguity f. The MT of Gen 4:22 has Tubalcain. Ps-Philo
of the Heb. nwd in "the land of Nod" in Gen here agrees with the LXX and the Vetus Latina.

The LXX of Gen 6:3 has "remain." Ps-Philo of Ps-Philo 1, and the section may well be a scribal
is reading the Heb. ydwn as in the MT and gloss. understanding it to mean "judge." g. Apparently Ps-Philo understood Gen 8:14 as
c. Lit. "all" (omnibus), which we have emended meaning after two months and twenty-seven days. to "men" (hominibus) in the light of Gen 6:3. h. The wife of Noah is not mentioned; see Gen
d. This interpretation of the Heb. goper as cedar 8:18. in Gen 6:14 is also found in the Palestinian Targums i. The LXX translator with his osmen euddias
and GenR. has taken the Heb. hnyhh of Gen 8:21 to mean
e. Perhaps we should emend omnes abyssi et "tranquilizing" or "soothing" because of its good
fons magnus to omnes fontes abyssi magni, "all odor. Ps-Philo has taken it in the sense of "restful."
the springs of the great abyss," on the basis of j. We are reading desipit, "is foolish," rather
Gen 7:11. than desiit, "has left off," of all the MSS; see
f. The figure is close to what can be deduced Gen 8:21.will be earthquakes, and they will be scattered to uninhabited places. But no more
will I destroy the earth by the water of the flood. And in all the days of the earth, Gen 8:22
seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, spring and fall will not cease day and night
until I remember those who inhabit the earth, until the appointed times are fulfilled. "But when the years appointed for the world have been fulfilled, then the light
will cease and the darkness will fade away. And I will bring the dead to life and
raise up those who are sleepingk from the earth. And hell will pay back its debt,
and the place of perdition will return its deposit1 so that I may render to each
according to his works and according to the fruits of his own devices, until 1
judge between soul and flesh.m And the world will cease, and death will be
abolished, and hell will shut its mouth. And the earth will not be without progeny
or sterile for those inhabiting it; and no one who has been pardoned by me will
be tainted. And there will be another earth and another heaven, an everlasting
dwelling place."
And the Lord spoke again to Noah and to his sons, saying, "Behold I will Gen9:8f. establish my covenant with you and with your seed after you, and no more will I Gen 9:11
destroy the earth by the water of a flood. And everything that moves and lives Gen 9:3f
will be food for you. But meat with its lifeblood you may not eat. For whoever Gen9:6f
will shed the blood of a man, his own blood will be shed, because man was made
after the image of God. But you, increase and multiply and fill the earth, like a Gen9:i
school of fish multiplying in the waves." *And God said, "This is the covenant1 Gen 9:12
that I have established between me and you.For whoever Gen9:6f
will shed the blood of a man, his own blood will be shed, because man was made
after the image of God. But you, increase and multiply and fill the earth, like a Gen9:i
school of fish multiplying in the waves." *And God said, "This is the covenant1 Gen 9:12
that I have established between me and you. And it will happen that when I cover Gen 9:14
the heaven with clouds, my° bow will appear in the cloud; and it will be a
memorial of the covenant between me and you and all those inhabiting the earth." Gen 9:16
Genealogies of the sons of Noah
4
And the sons of Noah who went forth from the ark were Shem, Ham, and Gen9i8
Japheth. The sons of Japheth: Gomer,* Magog and Madai, Javan,b Tubal, Meshech, Gen 10:2-4
Tiras,c Ashkenaz,6 Riphath and Togarmah, Elishah, Tarshish,e Kittim,* DodanimJ
And the sons of Gomer: Thelez, Lud, Deberleth. And the sons of Magog: Cesse
and Thifa, Faruta, Ammiel, Fimei, Goloza, Samanac. And the sons of Javanh:
Sallus, Felucta, Fallita. And the sons of Tubal: Fanata, Nova, and Eva. And the
sons of Meshech4: Amboradat, Urac, Bosara. And the sons of Tiras: Maac, Tabel,
Ballana, Samplameac, Elaz. And the sons of AshkenazJ: Jubal, Zaraddana, Anac. And the sons of Riphathk: Doad, Defad, Zead, Enoc. And the sons of Togarmah:
Abiuth, Safath, Asapli, Zepthir. And the sons of Elishah: Zaac, Zenez, Mastisa,
Rira. And the sons of Tarshish1: Meccul, Loon, Zelatabac. And the sons of
Kittim1": Macziel, Temna, Aela, Finon. And the sons of Dodanim: Itheb, Beath,
k. For the dead sleeping in the earth see 19:12; obviously biblical name can be recognized we have
35:3; 53:5; 4Ezra 7:32; 2Bar 11:4; 21:24. placed that name in the text and given the MSS
1. For the idea of restoring the deposit see 33:3 reading at the bottom of the page. as well as 2Bar 21:23; IEn 51:1; and 4Ezra 4:41- b. MSS Nidiazec. 43; 7:32. c. MSS combine Meshech and Tiras into Moc-
m. The phrase "between soul and flesh" may teras.The LXX of Gen 6:3 has "remain." Ps-Philo of Ps-Philo 1, and the section may well be a scribal
is reading the Heb. ydwn as in the MT and gloss. understanding it to mean "judge." g. Apparently Ps-Philo understood Gen 8:14 as
c. Lit. "all" (omnibus), which we have emended meaning after two months and twenty-seven days. to "men" (hominibus) in the light of Gen 6:3. h. The wife of Noah is not mentioned; see Gen
d. This interpretation of the Heb. goper as cedar 8:18. in Gen 6:14 is also found in the Palestinian Targums i. The LXX translator with his osmen euddias
and GenR. has taken the Heb. hnyhh of Gen 8:21 to mean
e. Perhaps we should emend omnes abyssi et "tranquilizing" or "soothing" because of its good
fons magnus to omnes fontes abyssi magni, "all odor. Ps-Philo has taken it in the sense of "restful."
the springs of the great abyss," on the basis of j. We are reading desipit, "is foolish," rather
Gen 7:11. than desiit, "has left off," of all the MSS; see
f. The figure is close to what can be deduced Gen 8:21.

MSS combine Meshech and Tiras into Moc-
m. The phrase "between soul and flesh" may teras. simply refer to the higher and lower aspects of the d. MSSCenez. whole person. e. MSS Dessin. n. Gen 9:12 has "this is the sign of the cove­ f. MSS Cethin. nant." The Heb. for "sign" (Vf) was probably g. MSSTudant. omitted due to its proximity to "this" (r'f or even h. MSS Tudan. The sons of Madai have been
z*wt). omitted. 0. For "my" in Gen 9:14 see the LXX, Vetus i. MSS Mel lech. The MSS place the sons of
Latina, and Vulgate. Tiras before the sons of Meshech. j. MSSCenez. 4 a. Gomer is not in the MSS of Ps-Philo, but see k. MSS Heri, Fuddet. Gen 10:2 and Ps-Philo 4:2, 4. The proper names 1. MSS Tessis. The MSS place the sons of
in this ch. and the following one are usually given Kittim before the sons of Tarshish. as they appear in the MS tradition, but where an m. MSS Zepti.3 Feneth. •And these were the ones who were scattered abroad and dwelt on the Gen io:5
earth among the Persians and Medes and" in the islands that are in the sea. And
Feneth0 the son of DodanimP went up and ordered that seafaring ships be built. 4 And then a third part of the earth* was divided up. •Gomerr and his sons received
Ladech. Magog and his sons received Degal. Madai and his sons received Besto. Javan and his sons received Ceel. Tubal and his sons received Feed. Meshech
and his sons received Nepthi. Tiras5 and his sons received Duodenin. Ashkenaz1
and his sons received Goda. Riphath and his sons received Bosorra. Togarmah
and his sons received Futh. Elishah and his sons received Thabola. Tarshish" and
his sons received Marecham. Kittimv and his sons received Thaan. Dodanim and
5 his sons received Caruba. #And then they began to work the land and to sow upon
it. And when the land was dry, its inhabitants cried out to the LORD; and he heard
them and gave rain in abundance. And it happened that, when the rain descended
upon the earth, the bow appeared in the cloud. And those inhabiting the earth saw
this memorial of the covenant and fell upon their faces and made sacrifices and
offered burnt offerings to the LORD. 6 Now the sons of Ham: Cush and Egypt" and Put* and Canaan. And these are Gen io:6f. the sons of Cush: Seba and Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah and Sabteca. And the sons
of Raamah: Shebay and Dedan.1 And the sons of Put82: Zeleu, Telup, Geluc,
Lefuc. And the sons of Canaan: Sidon, Aendain, Racin, Simmin, Uruin, Nemigin, Gen io:is-i8
7 Amathin,b2 Nefin, Telaz, Elat, Cusin. *Now Cush became the father of Nimrod. Gen io:8f. He began to be arrogant before the Lord. Now Egypt became the father ofLudim Gen iu:i3f
and Anamimc2 and Lehabim and Latuind2 and Pathrusim and Casluhim (whence
8 came the Philistines) and the Cappadocians. •And then they also began to build
cities.Now Egypt became the father ofLudim Gen iu:i3f
and Anamimc2 and Lehabim and Latuind2 and Pathrusim and Casluhim (whence
8 came the Philistines) and the Cappadocians. •And then they also began to build
cities. And these are the cities that they built: Sidon and its surroundings, that is,
Resun, Beosomaza, Gerar, Ashkelon,e2 Dabircamo, Tellun, Lachish, Sodom and Gen io:i9
Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim. 9 And the sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, and Aram. And the Gen 10:22-25
sons of Aram: Uz, Hul,n Gether, and Mash. Now Arpachshad became the father
of Shelah; Shelah became the father of Eber. And to Eber were born two sons;
the name of one was Peleg,82 for in his days the earth was divided, and the name
10 of his brother was Joktan.h2 •Joktan became the father of Almodad and Sheleph, Gen 10:26-29
Hazarmaveth, Jerah, Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, Obal, Abimael, Sheba, Ophir,
Havilah, and Jobab:2 And the sons of Pelegj2: Reu,*2 Refuth, Zefaram, Aculon, Gen 11:17-20
Sachar, Sifaz, Nabi, Suri, Seciur, Falacus, Rafo, Faltia, Zaldefal, Zavis and
Arteman, Helifaz. These are the sons of Peleg, and these are their names. And
they took wives for themselves from the daughters of Joktan and became fathers
11 of sons and daughters and filled the earth. #Now Reu took as his wife Melcha12
the daughter of Ruth, and she bore to him Serug. And when the day of his delivery
came, she said, "From him there will be born in the fourth generation one who
n. The word "and" is not in the MSS. b2. Gen 10:15-18 may be of some help in
0. MSS Fenath; see 5:1. restoring the text here: Racin—the Arkites; Sim­
p. MSS Dudeni. min—the Sinites; Uruin—the Arvadites; Nemi­
q. Apparently a third part of the earth destroyed gin—Zemarites; Amathin—Hamathites. by the Flood is now being resettled. See Rev 8:7- c2. MSS Niemigin. 12; 9:15, 18. d2. According to Gen 10:13 this should be
r. MSS Domereth. Naphtuhim. s. MSS Iras. e2. For Gerar, Ashkelon, the MSS have Gerras,
t. MSS Iesca.MSS combine Meshech and Tiras into Moc-
m. The phrase "between soul and flesh" may teras. simply refer to the higher and lower aspects of the d. MSSCenez. whole person. e. MSS Dessin. n. Gen 9:12 has "this is the sign of the cove­ f. MSS Cethin. nant." The Heb. for "sign" (Vf) was probably g. MSSTudant. omitted due to its proximity to "this" (r'f or even h. MSS Tudan. The sons of Madai have been
z*wt). omitted. 0. For "my" in Gen 9:14 see the LXX, Vetus i. MSS Mel lech. The MSS place the sons of
Latina, and Vulgate. Tiras before the sons of Meshech. j. MSSCenez. 4 a. Gomer is not in the MSS of Ps-Philo, but see k. MSS Heri, Fuddet. Gen 10:2 and Ps-Philo 4:2, 4. The proper names 1. MSS Tessis. The MSS place the sons of
in this ch. and the following one are usually given Kittim before the sons of Tarshish. as they appear in the MS tradition, but where an m. MSS Zepti.

For Gerar, Ashkelon, the MSS have Gerras,
t. MSS Iesca. The MSS place Duodenin and Calon. Ashkenaz in the wrong positions; we have reversed f2. For Uz, Hul, the MSS have Assum or Asum. them. g2. MSS Falech. u. MSSTessis. h2. MSS Iepta. v. MSSCethim. i2. We have restored the text in the light of Gen
w. MSS Mestra. 10:26-29. MSS have "Elimodan et Salastra et
x. MSS Funi. Mazaam, Rea, Dura, Uzia, Deglabal, Mimoel,
y. MSS omit "and Havilah . . . Sheba," but Sabthfin, Evilach, Iubab."
see Gen 10:7. j2. MSS Falech. z. MSSTudan. k2. MSS Ragau. a2. MSS Funi. 12. According to Jub 11:7 her name is Ora.will set his dwelling on high1"2 and will be called perfect and blameless; and he
will be the father of nations, and his covenant will not be broken, and his seed
12 will be multiplied forever." •And after he became the father of Serug, Reu lived Gen 11:21
119n2 years and became the father of seven sons and five daughters. And these
are the names of his sons: Abiel, Obthi, Salma, Dedasal, Zeneza, Accur, Nefes. And these are the names of his daughters: Cedema, Derisa, Seifa, Ferita, Theila. 13 And Serug lived 29°2 years and became the father of Nahor. And after he became Gen ii:22f
the father of Nahor, Serug lived 67p2 years and became the father of four sons
and three daughters. And these are the names of the sons: Zela, Zoba, Dica, and
14 Fodde. And these are his daughters: Tefila, Oda, Selifa. *And Nahor lived 34*»2 Gen ii:24f
years and became the father of Terah. And after he became the father of Terah,
Nahor lived 200r2 years and became the father of eight sons and five daughters. And these are the names of the males: Recap, Dediap, Berechap, losac, Sithal,
15 Nisab, Nadab, Camoel; and his daughters: Esca, Thifa, Bruna, Cene, Etha. •And Gen ii:26f
Terah lived 70 years and became the father of Abram and Nahor and Haran. Now Haran became the father of Lot. 16 Then those who inhabited the earth began to observe the stars82 and started to
reckon by them and to make predictions and to have their sons and daughters pass
17 through the fire. But Serug and his sons did not act as these did.12 *And these are Gen io:3if .5
the generations of Noah according to their tribes and languages, from which the
nations were portioned oui on the earth after the Flood. The census of Noah's descendants
1 5 Then the sons of Ham came and made Nimrod their leader; and the sons of
Japheth appointed Fenech their chief; and the sons of Shem came together and
2 made Joktan their leader.But Serug and his sons did not act as these did.12 *And these are Gen io:3if .5
the generations of Noah according to their tribes and languages, from which the
nations were portioned oui on the earth after the Flood. The census of Noah's descendants
1 5 Then the sons of Ham came and made Nimrod their leader; and the sons of
Japheth appointed Fenech their chief; and the sons of Shem came together and
2 made Joktan their leader. #And when these three came together, they decided to
have the people related8 to them pass in review and to number them. And while
Noah was still alive, all gathered together in one place and lived in accord, and
3 the earth was at peace. *Now in the three hundred and fortieth year after Noah's
exit from the ark, after God dried up the flood, the leaders numbered their people. 4 And Fenech had the sons of Japheth pass in review. The sons of Gomer, all Gen 10:2-4
passing by under their captains' staffs,b were 5,800 in number. Now of the sons
of Magog, of all passing under their captains' staffs, the number was 6,200. Now
the sons of Madai, all passing by under their captains' staffs, were 5,700 in
number/ Now the sons of Tubal, all passing by under their captains' staffs, were
9,400 in number. And the sons of Meshech,d all passing by under their captains'
staffs, were 5,600 in number. But the sons of Tiras, all passing by under their
captains' staffs, were 12,300 in number.6 And the sons of Riphath/ those passing
by under their captains' staffs, were 11,500 in number. But the sons of Togarmah,
passing by under their captains' staffs, were 14,400 in number. Now the sons of
Elishah, passing by under their captains' staffs, were 14,900 in number. Now the
sons of Tarshish, all passing by under their captains' staffs, were 12,100 in
number. Now the sons of Kittim, all passing by under their captains' staffs, were
m2. That is, in heaven or perhaps even on 5 a. Lit. those drawing near. Since the leaders are
Mount Moriah.For Gerar, Ashkelon, the MSS have Gerras,
t. MSS Iesca. The MSS place Duodenin and Calon. Ashkenaz in the wrong positions; we have reversed f2. For Uz, Hul, the MSS have Assum or Asum. them. g2. MSS Falech. u. MSSTessis. h2. MSS Iepta. v. MSSCethim. i2. We have restored the text in the light of Gen
w. MSS Mestra. 10:26-29. MSS have "Elimodan et Salastra et
x. MSS Funi. Mazaam, Rea, Dura, Uzia, Deglabal, Mimoel,
y. MSS omit "and Havilah . . . Sheba," but Sabthfin, Evilach, Iubab."
see Gen 10:7. j2. MSS Falech. z. MSSTudan. k2. MSS Ragau. a2. MSS Funi. 12. According to Jub 11:7 her name is Ora.

those drawing near. Since the leaders are
Mount Moriah. numbering their own families, the Heb. underlying
n2. The MT and LXX of Gen 11:21 have 207. the expression is probably qrwbym, "relatives."
o2. The MT of Gen 11:22 has 30, the LXX b. Lit. here and throughout the ch., "according
130. to the scepters of their captaincies." The expression
p2. The MT and LXX of Gen 11:23 have 200. may come from Lev 27:32 ("all that pass under
q2. The MT of Gen 11:24 has 29, the LXX 79. the herdsman's staff"). Again as in ch. 4 we have
r2. The MT of Gen 11:25 has 119, the LXX given the proper names according to their recog­
129. nizable biblical forms. s2. There may be some connection between c. The sons of Javan have been omitted. ending the genealogy with Terah, who lived in Ur d. MSS Mesca. (a place noted for astrology), and these remarks e. The sons of Ashkenaz have been omitted. about the beginning of astrology. f. MSS Rifa. t2. According to Jub 11, Serug and his family
did worship idols.17,300 in number. But the sons of Dodanim,* passing by under their captains'
staffs, were 17,700 in number. And the total of the camps of the sops of Japheth,
all men of might and all equipped with arms for battle before their leaders, was
142,200, apart from women and children. In the review of Japheth the total
number was 142,000.h
5 And Nimrod, himself a son of Ham, had all the sons of Ham pass in review. Gen io:6f
The sons of Egypt, all passing by under their captains' staffs, were found to be
24,800 in number. The sons of Put,' all passing by under their captains' staffs,
were 27,700 in number. And the sons of Canaan, all passing by under their
captains' staffs, were found to be 32,800 in number. But the sons of Seba,J all
passing by under their captains' staffs, were found to be 4,300 in number. And
the sons of Havilah,k all passing by under their captains' staffs, were found to be
24,300 in number. But the sons of Sabtah,1 all passing by under their captains'
staffs, were found to be 25,300 in number. And the sons of Raamah, all passing
by under their captains' staffs, were found to be 30,600 in number. But the sons
of Sabteca,m all passing by under their captains' staffs, were found to be 46,400
in number. And the total of the camps of the sons of Ham, all men of might and
equipped with battle gear before their leaders, were 244,900, apart from women
and children. 6 And Joktan the son of Shem had the sons of Shem pass in review. And the Gen 10:22
sons of Elam, all passing by under their captains' staffs, were 37,000 in number. Now the sons of Asshur, all passing by under their captains' staffs, were found
to be 78,000 in number. And the sons of Aram," all passing by under their
captains' staffs, were found to be 87,400 in number. But the sons of Lud, all
passing by under their captains' staffs, were found to be 30,600 in number.0 Now
the sons of Arpachshad, all passing by under their captains' staffs, were 114,600
7 in number.And the sons of Aram," all passing by under their
captains' staffs, were found to be 87,400 in number. But the sons of Lud, all
passing by under their captains' staffs, were found to be 30,600 in number.0 Now
the sons of Arpachshad, all passing by under their captains' staffs, were 114,600
7 in number. The total number of all of them was 347,600. •This was the total of
the camps of the sons of Shem. All were distinguished in courage and military
8 discipline before their captains, . . .D besides women and children. »And these are
the generations of Noah taken separately, whose total number altogether was
914,100. And all these were examined while Noah was still alive. And Noah lived
Gen 9:28f. 350 years after the flood. And all the days of Noah were 950 years, and he died. The tower of Babel and Abraham in the furnace
1 6 Then all those who had been separated and were inhabiting the earth gathered Gen W.I-A
and dwelt together. And migrating from the east, they found a plain in the land
of Babylon; and settling there, each one said to his neighbor, "Behold it will
happen that we will be scattered every man from his brother and in the last days
we will be fighting one another. Now come, let us build for ourselves a tower
whose top will reach the heavens, and we will make a name for ourselves and a
2 glory upon the earth." *And they said, each to his neighbor, "Let us take bricks" Gen 113
and let each of us write our names on the bricks and burn them with fire; and
whatever will be burned through and through will be used for mortar and brick."0
3 And they took their bricks, all of them except twelve men who would not take
them. And these are their names: Abram, Nahor, Lot, Ruge, Tenute, Zaba,
4 Armodat, Jobab, Esar, Abimahel, Saba, Aufin.c #And the people of that land laid
g. MSS Doin. of the sons of Ham was ..."
h. The sentence is probably a scribal gloss. p. The total is lacking in the MSS. i. MSS Fua. j. MSS Soba. The number here is dispropor­
tionately small, 6 a.those drawing near. Since the leaders are
Mount Moriah. numbering their own families, the Heb. underlying
n2. The MT and LXX of Gen 11:21 have 207. the expression is probably qrwbym, "relatives."
o2. The MT of Gen 11:22 has 30, the LXX b. Lit. here and throughout the ch., "according
130. to the scepters of their captaincies." The expression
p2. The MT and LXX of Gen 11:23 have 200. may come from Lev 27:32 ("all that pass under
q2. The MT of Gen 11:24 has 29, the LXX 79. the herdsman's staff"). Again as in ch. 4 we have
r2. The MT of Gen 11:25 has 119, the LXX given the proper names according to their recog­
129. nizable biblical forms. s2. There may be some connection between c. The sons of Javan have been omitted. ending the genealogy with Terah, who lived in Ur d. MSS Mesca. (a place noted for astrology), and these remarks e. The sons of Ashkenaz have been omitted. about the beginning of astrology. f. MSS Rifa. t2. According to Jub 11, Serug and his family
did worship idols.

MSS Soba. The number here is dispropor­
tionately small, 6 a. Lit. "stones"; but the context demands the
k. MSS Lebilla. translation "bricks."
1. MSS Sata. b. For building the tower. m. MSS Sabaca. c. Abimahel, Saba, and Aufin can be traced to
n. The sons of Aram and the sons of Arpachshad Gen 10:28f. Ruge may be Reu of Gen 11:18-21. are in reverse order in the MSS, but see Gen 10:22. Armodat may be Almodad of Gen 10:26. Jobab is
o. In the MSS there is an intrusion: "the number found in Gen 10:29.hold of them and brought them to their chiefs and said, "These are the men who
have gone against our plans and would not walk in our ways." And the leaders
said to them, "Why were each of you not willing to cast in bricks along with the
people of the land?" And those men answered saying, "We are not casting in
bricks, nor are we joining in your scheme. We know the one LORD, and him we
worship. Even if you throw us into the fire with your bricks, we will not join
5 you." #And the leaders were angered and said, "As they have spoken, so do to
them. And unless they take part with us in throwing in the bricks, you will have
the fire devour them along with your bricks. "d
6 And Joktan,e who was chief of the leaders, answered, "No, but let them be
given a period of seven days, and if they repent of their evil plans and are willing
to cast in bricks with you, they may live. If not, let it be done and let them be
burned then in accord with your judgment." He, however, sought how he might
save them from the hands of the people, because he was of their tribe and served
7 God. 'When this was said, he took them and locked them in the royal household. And when it was evening, the leader commanded that fifty men of might be
summoned to him, and he said to them, "Go forth and tonight take those men
who are locked in my house, and put supplies for them from my household on
ten beasts of burden. And bring those men to me, and bring their supplies along
with the beasts of burden to the mountains and take care of them there. And know
8 that, if anyone learns what I have said to you, I will burn you in the fire." #And
the men went forth and did everything that their chief commanded them. And
they brought the men to his housef by night, and they took their supplies and put
them on the beasts of burden and led them into the mountains as he had commanded
9 them. »And the chief summoned to himself those twelve men and said to them,
"Be confident and do not fear, for you will not die.And
they brought the men to his housef by night, and they took their supplies and put
them on the beasts of burden and led them into the mountains as he had commanded
9 them. »And the chief summoned to himself those twelve men and said to them,
"Be confident and do not fear, for you will not die. For the God in whom you
trust is powerful, and therefore be steadfast in him because he will free you and
save you. And behold now I have commanded the fifty men who have brought8
you out here; supplies have already been taken from my household. And they
have gone forthh into the mountains and are waiting' for you in the valley, and I
will give you another fifty men who will escort you there. And go, hide yourselves
there in the valley; you will have drinking water that flows from the rocks. And
stay there for thirty days, until the hatred of the people of this land subsides and
until God sends his wrath upon them and destroys them. For I know that the evil
plan that they have agreed to carry out will not stand, because their plot is foolish. And when seven days have passed and they seek you out, I will say to them,
4The door of the jail in which they were locked up was broken down. They went
out and escaped by night. And I have sent a hundred men to search after them.'
10 And I will distract them from the anger that is upon them." »And eleven of the
men answered him and said, "Your servants have found favor in your eyes,
11 because we are rescued from the hands of these arrogant men." #But Abram alone
was silent. And the leader said to him, "Why do you not answer me, Abram
servant of God?" Abram answered and said, "Behold, today I flee to the
mountains. And if I escape the fire, wild beasts will come out of the mountains
and devour us; or we will lack food and die of famine; and we will be found
fleeing from the people of this land but falling in our sins. And now as he in
whom I trust lives, I will not be moved from my place where they have put me.MSS Soba. The number here is dispropor­
tionately small, 6 a. Lit. "stones"; but the context demands the
k. MSS Lebilla. translation "bricks."
1. MSS Sata. b. For building the tower. m. MSS Sabaca. c. Abimahel, Saba, and Aufin can be traced to
n. The sons of Aram and the sons of Arpachshad Gen 10:28f. Ruge may be Reu of Gen 11:18-21. are in reverse order in the MSS, but see Gen 10:22. Armodat may be Almodad of Gen 10:26. Jobab is
o. In the MSS there is an intrusion: "the number found in Gen 10:29.

And if I escape the fire, wild beasts will come out of the mountains
and devour us; or we will lack food and die of famine; and we will be found
fleeing from the people of this land but falling in our sins. And now as he in
whom I trust lives, I will not be moved from my place where they have put me. If there be any sin of mine so flagrant that I should be burned up, let the will of
God be done." And the leader said to him, "May your blood be upon your own
d. The connection of Abraham's escape from f. Var. "from his house"; but the context seems
Ur (in Heb., 'tfr means "fire") and the building to require "to his house." See 6:7. of the tower of Babel is unique to Ps-Philo. The g. The MSS put the verb in the future. tradition of Abraham in the fiery furnace is similar h-i. In the MSS the two verbs are imperatives,
to those of Dan 3 and 2Mac 7. but the story demands that they be perfect and
e. The MSS call him Iectan, but presumably he imperfect respectively. Heb. yfwtwhhv was prob­
is to be connected with the sons of Shem in 5:1, ably misread as wfw/whkw.head* if you are not willing to go forth with these men. Now if you are willing to
do so, you will be freed; but if you wish to stay, stay as you wish." And Abram
12 said, "I will not go forth, but I will stay here." #And the leader took those eleven
men and sent another fifty with them and commanded them, saying, "You also,
wait in the mountains for fifteen days with those fifty who were sent on ahead;
and afterward come back and say, 4We have not found them,' as I told the former
group. And know that if anyone disregards any of these words that 1 have spoken
to you, he will be burned in the fire." And the men went forth. And he took
B Abram by himself and locked him up again where he had been confined. *And
after seven days had passed, the people gathered together and said to their leader,
"Give us back the men who were unwilling to join in our plan, and we will burn
them in the fire." And they sent the leaders to bring them out, and they found no
one but Abram. And they gathered together with their leaders and said, "The
men whom you locked up have fled; they have evaded our scheme." #And Fenech
14 and Nimrodk said to Joktan, "Where are the men whom you locked up?" But
that man said, "They have broken out by night. But I have sent a hundred men
to search for them and commanded them that, if they find them, not only should
they burn them in the fire but also give their corpses to the birds of the heavens,
and so let them destroy them."
15 And then those men said, "This fellow who alone has been found, we will
burn him." And they took Abram and brought him to their leaders. And they said
to him, "Where are those who were with you?" And he said, "I was sleeping
16 during the night; when I awoke, I did not find them." •And they took him and Dan3
built a furnace and lit it. And they threw bricks burned with fire into the furnace. And then the leader Joktan with great emotion* took Abram and threw him along
n with the bricks into the fiery furnace.And they threw bricks burned with fire into the furnace. And then the leader Joktan with great emotion* took Abram and threw him along
n with the bricks into the fiery furnace. #But God caused a great earthquake, and
the fire gushing out of the furnace leaped forth in flames and sparks of flame. And it burned all those standing around in sight of the furnace. And all those who
were burned in that day were 83,500. But there was not the least injury to Abram
is from the burning of the fire. *And Abram came up out of the furnace, and the
fiery furnace collapsed. And Abram was saved and went away to the eleven men
who were hidden in the mountains, and he reported to them everything that had
happened to him. And they came down with him from the mountains, rejoicing
in the name of the LORD. And no one who met them frightened them that day. And they named that place by the name of Abram and in the language of the
Chaldeans "Deli,"m which means "God."
The dispersion of the people and the choice of Canaan
1 7 And it happened after these events that the people of the land were not turned
from their malicious plottings, and they came together again to their leaders and Gen ii:4
said, "The people will not be defeated forever. And now we will come together
and build ourselves a city and a tower that will never be taken away."
2 And when they had begun to build, God saw the city and the tower that the Gen nsf. sons of men were building, and he said, "Behold they are one people and have
one language for all; but what they have begun to make, neither the earth will
put up with it nor will the heavens bear to behold it. And if they are not stopped
3 now, they will be daring in all the things they propose to do. •And behold now I Gen it.7
will divide up their languages and scatter them in all regions so that a man will
not understand his own brother and no one will hear the language of his neighbor.And if I escape the fire, wild beasts will come out of the mountains
and devour us; or we will lack food and die of famine; and we will be found
fleeing from the people of this land but falling in our sins. And now as he in
whom I trust lives, I will not be moved from my place where they have put me. If there be any sin of mine so flagrant that I should be burned up, let the will of
God be done." And the leader said to him, "May your blood be upon your own
d. The connection of Abraham's escape from f. Var. "from his house"; but the context seems
Ur (in Heb., 'tfr means "fire") and the building to require "to his house." See 6:7. of the tower of Babel is unique to Ps-Philo. The g. The MSS put the verb in the future. tradition of Abraham in the fiery furnace is similar h-i. In the MSS the two verbs are imperatives,
to those of Dan 3 and 2Mac 7. but the story demands that they be perfect and
e. The MSS call him Iectan, but presumably he imperfect respectively. Heb. yfwtwhhv was prob­
is to be connected with the sons of Shem in 5:1, ably misread as wfw/whkw.

And if they are not stopped
3 now, they will be daring in all the things they propose to do. •And behold now I Gen it.7
will divide up their languages and scatter them in all regions so that a man will
not understand his own brother and no one will hear the language of his neighbor. And I will banish them to the cliffs, and they will build for themselves huts with
stalks of straw and will dig caves for themselves and live there like the beasts of
j. See Mt 23:35-36; 27:25; Acts 5:28; 18:6; m. Perhaps read Beli as in PrEv 9.18.2. Ac­
20:26. cording to Josephus' Ant 1.7.2 §160, a village in
k. For Nimrod as the planner of the tower of the region of Damascus was called "Abram's
Babel see Josephus' Ant 1.4.2 §§113f. abode."
1. Lit. "dissolved with feeling."the held. And thus they will remain before me all the time so that they will never
make such plots again, and I will consider them like a drop of water and liken isa40:is
them to spittle.3 And to some the end will come by water, but others will be dried
4 up with thirst. #And before all these I will choose my servant6 Abram, and I will
bring him out from their land and will bring him into the land upon which my
eye has looked from of old, when all those inhabiting the earth sinned in my sight
and I brought the water of the flood and I did not destroy it but preserved that
land. For neither did the springs of my wrath burst forth in it, nor did my water
of destruction descend on it.c For there I will have my servant Abram dwell and
will establish my covenant with him and will bless his seed and be lord for him
as God forever."
5 Now when the people inhabiting the land had begun to construct the tower,
God divided up their languages and changed their appearances, and a man did not
recognize his own brother and no one heard the language of his neighbor. And Gen 117
so it happened that when the builders would order their assistants to bring bricks,
those would bring water; and if they demanded water, those would bring straw. And so their plan was frustrated, and they stopped building the city. And the Lord Gen 1 i:sr
scattered them from there over the face of all the earth. And therefore the name
of that place was called * 'Confusion,''d because there God confused their languages
and from there he scattered them over the face of all the earth. From Canaan to Egypt
1 8 Now Abram went forth from there and dwelt in the land of Canaan and took Gen i2:4f
with him Lot his nephew and Sarai his wife. And since Sarai was sterile and had §2 Ifr!2
not conceived, then Abram took Hagar his maid and she bore him Ishmael. Now Q^JJ 25-12
2 Ishmael became the father of twelve sons. *Then Lot separated from Abram and Gen i3:i 1—13
dwelt in Sodom.Now Q^JJ 25-12
2 Ishmael became the father of twelve sons. *Then Lot separated from Abram and Gen i3:i 1—13
dwelt in Sodom. But Abram lived in the land of Canaan.* And the men of Sodom
3 were very wicked men and great sinners. *And God appeared to Abram, saying,
Gcn
"To your seed 1 will give this land, and your name will be called Abraham, and Gen 13-15
Sarai, your wife, will be called Sarah. And I will give to you from her an 0611,7:5'15-8'7
everlasting seed, and 1 will establish my covenant with you." And Abraham knew
Sarah, his wife, and she conceived and bore Isaac. Gen 2i:2f
4 Now Isaac took for himself a wife from Mesopotamia, the daughter of Bethuel, Gen 25:20-26
5 who conceived and bore to him Esau and Jacob. #Now Esau took for himself as ^n l%%4
wives6 Judith the daughter of Beeri and Basemath the daughter of Elon and ^gtffij*1
Oholibamah the daughter of Anah and Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael.c And Gen 36:11
Adah bore him Eliphaz,6 and the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, %en 36:4(,0K
Gatam, Kenaz, Amalek. And Judith bore Tenacis, Ieruebemas. Basemath bore Gen 36:5. w,i8
Reuel.' And the sons ofReuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, Mizzah. And Oholibamah
6 bore Auz, loolam,f Korah. Mahalath bore Tenetde, Thenatela. «Now Jacob took Gen 29:31-
for himself as wives the daughters of Laban the Syrian, Leah and Rachel, and 23^2635:18'
two concubines, Billah and Zilphah. And Leah bore to him Reuben, Simeon,
Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, and Dinah their sister. Now Rachel brought
forth Joseph and Benjamin. Billah bore Dan and Naphtali. And Zilphah bore Gad
7 and Asher. These are the twelve sons of Jacob and one daughter. *And Jacob 34:2
7 a. We are reading "spittle" (sputo), rather than 8 a. All MSS have the error Cham. "shield" (scuto) found in all MSS, on the basis of b. In view of what follows we would expect
the LXX of Isa 40:15 and Ps-Philo 12:4; see also "Adah the daughter of Elon" here. 4Ezra 6:56 and 2Bar 82:5. c.And if they are not stopped
3 now, they will be daring in all the things they propose to do. •And behold now I Gen it.7
will divide up their languages and scatter them in all regions so that a man will
not understand his own brother and no one will hear the language of his neighbor. And I will banish them to the cliffs, and they will build for themselves huts with
stalks of straw and will dig caves for themselves and live there like the beasts of
j. See Mt 23:35-36; 27:25; Acts 5:28; 18:6; m. Perhaps read Beli as in PrEv 9.18.2. Ac­
20:26. cording to Josephus' Ant 1.7.2 §160, a village in
k. For Nimrod as the planner of the tower of the region of Damascus was called "Abram's
Babel see Josephus' Ant 1.4.2 §§113f. abode."
1. Lit. "dissolved with feeling."

4Ezra 6:56 and 2Bar 82:5. c. MSS have '4 Manem the daughter of Samael.''
b. Lit. "child," which reflects the Gk. pais as As in chs. 5f. we are presenting the proper names
a rendering for the Heb. cbd. according to their recognizable biblical equivalents. c. That it did not rain on the land of Israel in d. MSS conflate the names to Adelifan. the Flood is also stated in b.Zeb 113a and SongR e. MSS Rugil. 1:15. f. From Gen 36:5, 14, 18, we would expect
d. Based on the biblical etymology for Babel; "Jeush, Jalam."
see Gen 11:9.dwelt in the land of Canaan, and Shechem the son of Hamor the Hurrite* raped
Dinah his daughter and humiliated her. And the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Gen 34:25f. went in and killed the whole city of them by the sword; and they took their sister
8 Dinah and went away from there. »And afterward Job took her as a wifeh and Job42:i3f. fathered from her fourteen sons and six daughters; that is, seven sons and three
daughters before he was struck down with suffering, and afterward seven sons
and three daughters when he was healed. And these are their names: Elifac,
Ermoe, Diasat, Filias, Diffar, Zellud, Thelon; and his daughters: Meru, Litaz,
Zeli.j And such as had been the names of the former, so were those of the latter. 9 Now Jacob and his twelve sons lived in the land of Canaan. And these hated Gen 37:i,A
their brother Joseph, whom they delivered into Egypt to Potiphar, the chief of Gen 37:36; 39:i
10 Pharaoh's cooks,* and he spent fourteen years with him. *And afterward the king Gen4ii
of Egypt had a dream. And they told him about Joseph, and he explained to him
the dreams. And after he explained to him the dreams, Pharaoh made him chief Gen4i:43
over all the land of Egypt. At that time there was a famine over all the land, as Gen4i:54
Joseph had discerned, and his brothers went down to buy food in Egypt because Gen 42:3
only in Egypt was there food. And Joseph recognized his brothers, but was not Gen 42. i
known by them. And he did not deal vengefully with them, and he sent and 0,51142:8
summoned his father from the land of Canaan; and he went down to him. I i And these are the names of the sons of Israel who went down to Egypt with Gen 46:8,27;
Jacob, each with his own household. The sons of Reuben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, Gen 46:9-I 5
and Carmi. Now the sons of Simeon: NamueP and Jamin and Ohad and Jachinm
and Shaul the son of the Canaanite woman. Now the sons of Levi: Gershon,n
Kohath, and Merari. The sons of Judah: Er and Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah.Now the sons of Levi: Gershon,n
Kohath, and Merari. The sons of Judah: Er and Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah. Now the sons of Issachar: Tola and Puvah, Job and Shimron.0 Now the sons of
Zebulun: Sered, Elon,p and Jahleel. And Dinah their sister bore fourteen sons and
six daughters. And these are the generations of the sons that Leah* bore to Jacob,
12 all the sons and daughters' being 72.5 *Now the sons of Dan: Hushim.1 The sons Gen 46:23-25
of Naphtali: Betaal, Neemmu, Surem, Opti, Sariel.u And these are the generations
13 of Billah that she bore to Jacob; the total was eight.v *But the sons of Gad": Gen46:i6-i8
Sariel, Sua, Visui, Mofar, and Sar their sister the daughter of Seriebel, Melchiel. These are the generations of Zilphah the woman of Jacob that she bore to him,
14 and all the sons and daughters were tenx in number. «And the sons of Joseph: Gen 46:20-22
Ephraim and Manasseh. But Benjamin fathered Bela, Ashbel,y Nanubal, Aboc-
mefec, Utendeus. And these are the persons whom Rachel bore to Jacob, fourteen. And they went down into Egypt and dwelt there 210 years. g. Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX of Gen 34:2 m. Zohar of Gen 46:10 has been omitted,
in making Shechem a Hurrite; other texts call him n. MSSGetson. a Hivvite. o. MSS Sombran. h. Apparently Job is identified with Jobab of p. The MSS conflate the two names into Sarelon. Gen 36:33. That Dinah married Job is stated in q. The MSS omit Leah, but see Gen 46:15. TJob 1:6 and several rabbinic texts. r. Lit. "all the souls of the sons and daughters."
i. Perhaps we are to connect the names with s. According to Gen 46:15 the number should
Job's comforters: Elifac—Elifaz; Filias—Baldas; be 33; perhaps Ps-Philo had 32 (XXXII), the actual
Diffar—Soffar. Meru may be related to Job's first number of sons here (25 names and 7 from Dinah),
daughter, Jemimah (Job 42:14). which was then misread as 72 (LXXU). j. In calling Potiphar the chief of Pharaoh's t. MSS Usinam. cooks, Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX of Gen 37:36; u.4Ezra 6:56 and 2Bar 82:5. c. MSS have '4 Manem the daughter of Samael.''
b. Lit. "child," which reflects the Gk. pais as As in chs. 5f. we are presenting the proper names
a rendering for the Heb. cbd. according to their recognizable biblical equivalents. c. That it did not rain on the land of Israel in d. MSS conflate the names to Adelifan. the Flood is also stated in b.Zeb 113a and SongR e. MSS Rugil. 1:15. f. From Gen 36:5, 14, 18, we would expect
d. Based on the biblical etymology for Babel; "Jeush, Jalam."
see Gen 11:9.

MSS Usinam. cooks, Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX of Gen 37:36; u. Gen 46:24 has Jahzeel, Guni, Jezer and
39:1; Jub 34:1; Josephus' Ant 2.4.1 §39 and 2.5.4 Shillem. §78, and Philo's Jos 27 and LegAll 3.236. v. Gen 46:25 has seven. There are only six
k. For Namuel rather than Jemuel see IChr 4:24. names given here and only five in the OT. 1. The MSS have Doth. In Gen 46:10 the MT w. Most of the list of Gad's sons and the
has yhd and the LXX Add. The Lat. translator of beginning of Asher's sons have dropped out. Ps-Philo or an earlier Gk. copyist probably confused x. Gen 46:18 has sixteen. initial alpha and delta. y. MSS have Gela, Esbel.Amram and the birth of Moses
1 9 And after Joseph's passing away, the sons of Israel multiplied and increased Ex 1:6-10
greatly. And another0 king who did not know Joseph arose in Egypt, and he said
to his people, "Behold that people has multiplied more than we have. Come, let
us make a plan against them so they will not multiply more." And the king of Ex 1:22
Egypt ordered all his people, saying, "Every son that is born to the Hebrews,b
throw into the river; but let their females live.'' And the Egyptians answered their
king, saying, "Let us kill their males, and we will keep their females so that we
may give them to our slaves as wives. And whoever is born from them will be a
slave and will serve us." And this is what seemed wicked before the LORD. 2 Then the elders of the people gathered the people together in mourning, and
they mourned and groaned saying, "The wombs of our wives have suffered
miscarriage; our fruit is delivered to our enemies. And now we are lost, and let
us set up rules for ourselves that a man should not approach his wife lest the fruit
of their wombs be defiled and our offspring serve idols. For it is better to die
without sons until we know what God may do."
3 And Amram answered and said, "It will sooner happen that this age will be Ex6:2o
ended forever* or the world will sink into the immeasurable deep or the heart of
the abyss will touch the stars than that the race of the sons of Israel will be ended. And there will be fulfilled the covenant that God established with Abraham when
he said, 'Indeed your sons will dwell in a land not their own and will be brought Gen 15:13
into bondage and afflicted 400 years.' And behold from the time when the word
of God that he spoke to Abraham was spoken,d there are 350 years; from the time Ex i2:4o
4 when we became slaves in Egypt, there are 130* years.For it is better to die
without sons until we know what God may do."
3 And Amram answered and said, "It will sooner happen that this age will be Ex6:2o
ended forever* or the world will sink into the immeasurable deep or the heart of
the abyss will touch the stars than that the race of the sons of Israel will be ended. And there will be fulfilled the covenant that God established with Abraham when
he said, 'Indeed your sons will dwell in a land not their own and will be brought Gen 15:13
into bondage and afflicted 400 years.' And behold from the time when the word
of God that he spoke to Abraham was spoken,d there are 350 years; from the time Ex i2:4o
4 when we became slaves in Egypt, there are 130* years. #Now therefore I will not
abide by what you decree, but I will go in and take my wife and produce sons so
that we may be made many on the earth.f For God will not abide in his anger,
nor will he forget his people forever, nor will he cast forth the race of Israel in
vain upon the earth; nor did he establish a covenant with our fathers in vain; and
5 even when we did not yet exist, God spoke about these matters. -Now therefore
I will go and take my wife, and I will not consent to the command of the king;
and if it is right in your eyes, let us all act in this way. For when our wives
conceive, they will not be recognized as pregnant until three months have passed,
as also our mother Tamar did.* For her intent was not fornication, but being
unwilling to separate from the sons of Israel she reflected and said, 4It is better
for me to die for having intercourse with my father-in-law than to have intercourse
with gentiles.'11 And she hid the fruit of her womb until the third month. For then
she was recognized. And on her way to be put to death, she made a declaration
saying, 'He who owns this staff and this signet ring and the sheepskin,* from him Gen 38:24f. 6 / have conceived.' And her intent saved her from all danger. »Now therefore let
us also do the same.MSS Usinam. cooks, Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX of Gen 37:36; u. Gen 46:24 has Jahzeel, Guni, Jezer and
39:1; Jub 34:1; Josephus' Ant 2.4.1 §39 and 2.5.4 Shillem. §78, and Philo's Jos 27 and LegAll 3.236. v. Gen 46:25 has seven. There are only six
k. For Namuel rather than Jemuel see IChr 4:24. names given here and only five in the OT. 1. The MSS have Doth. In Gen 46:10 the MT w. Most of the list of Gad's sons and the
has yhd and the LXX Add. The Lat. translator of beginning of Asher's sons have dropped out. Ps-Philo or an earlier Gk. copyist probably confused x. Gen 46:18 has sixteen. initial alpha and delta. y. MSS have Gela, Esbel.

6 / have conceived.' And her intent saved her from all danger. »Now therefore let
us also do the same. And when the time of giving birth has been completed, we
9 a. The MT for Ex 1:8 has "new," but the LXX Egypt as Ps-Philo does. has "another." f. In several rabbinic texts Amram advises the
b. The specification "to the Hebrews" is absent husbands and wives not to live together. In Jo­
from the MT of Ex 1:22 but present in the LXX sephus' Ant 2.9.3 §210 Amram's wife is already
and Samaritan Pentateuch. pregnant. c. The Lat. in victoria reflects the Gk. eis nikos g. This is the first instance of a common tech­
and Heb. Insh and means "forever." In Aram, the nique in Ps-Philo: referring back to past events or
root has only the meaning of "splendor" or "vic­ forward to future events in Israelite history to
tory" and so the phrase is an argument against illustrate an event now under discussion. Aram, as the original language of Ps-Philo. h. This apology for Tamar's actions is found
d. Lit. "was found," which probably arose from only in Ps-Philo. For other polemics against mar­
confusion between Gk. heurethe, "was found," riage with gentiles, see 18:13f.; 21:1; 30:1; 44:7;
and errethi, "was spoken." 45:3. e. See Ex 12:40, where the MT says that the i. In Gen 38:18, 25, the MT has "cords," the
people of Israel dwelt in Egypt for 430 years but LXX "small necklace," and the Vulgate "brace­
the LXX divides the time between Canaan and let."will not cast forth the fruit of our womb (if we are able). And who knows if God
will be provoked on account of this so as to free us from our humiliation?"
7 And the strategy that Amram thought out was pleasing before God. And God
said, "Because Amram's plan is pleasing to me, and he has not put aside the
covenant established between me and his fathers, so behold now he who will be
born from him will serve me forever, and I will do marvelous things in the house
of Jacob through him and I will work through him signs and wonders for my
people that I have not done for anyone else; and I will act gloriously among them
8 and proclaim to them my ways. *And 1, God, will kindle for him my lamp that
will abide in him, and I will show him my covenant that no one has seen. And I
will reveal to him my Law* and statutes and judgments, and I will burn an eternal
light for him, because I thought of him in the days of old, saying, "My spirit will Gen 6:3
not be a mediator among these men forever, because they are flesh and their days
will be 120 years.' "
9 And Amram of the tribe of Levi went out and took a wife from his own tribe.k Ex 2:i 6:20
;
When he had taken her, others followed him and took their own wives. And this
10 man had one son and one daughter; their names were Aaron and Miriam. *And
the spirit of God came upon Miriam one night, and she saw a dream and told it
to her parents in the morning, saying, "I have seen this night, and behold a man
in a linen garment stood and said to me, 4Go and say to your parents, "Behold
he who will be born from you will be cast forth into the water; likewise through
him the water will be dried up.1 And I will work signs through him and save my
people, and he will exercise leadership always." ' " And when Miriam told of
her dream, her parents did not believe her. 11 The strategy of the king of Egypt, however, prevailed against the sons of Israel,
12 and they were humiliated and worn down in making bricks.*And
the spirit of God came upon Miriam one night, and she saw a dream and told it
to her parents in the morning, saying, "I have seen this night, and behold a man
in a linen garment stood and said to me, 4Go and say to your parents, "Behold
he who will be born from you will be cast forth into the water; likewise through
him the water will be dried up.1 And I will work signs through him and save my
people, and he will exercise leadership always." ' " And when Miriam told of
her dream, her parents did not believe her. 11 The strategy of the king of Egypt, however, prevailed against the sons of Israel,
12 and they were humiliated and worn down in making bricks. *Now Jochebed Ex 2:2-3; 6:20
conceived from Amram and hid him in her womb for three months.m For she
could not conceal him any longer, because the king of Egypt appointed local
chiefs who, when the Hebrew women gave birth, would immediately throw their Ex 1:22
male children into the river. And she took her child and made for him an ark from Ex 2:3
13 the bark of a pine tree and placed the ark at the bank of the river. *Now that
14 child was born in the covenant of God and the covenant of the flesh."# And when
they had cast him forth, all the elders gathered and quarreled with Amram, saying,
"Are not these our words that we spoke, 4It is better for us to die without having
sons than that the fruit of our womb be cast into the waters'?" And Amram did
15 not listen to those who were saying these words. *Now Pharaoh's daughter came Ex 2:5f. down to bathe in the river, as she had seen in dreams, and her maids saw the
ark. And she sent one, and she fetched and opened it. And when she saw the boy
and while she was looking upon the covenant (that is, the covenant of the flesh),0
16 she said, "It is one of the Hebrew children." «And she took him and nursed him. Ex 2:9f
And he became her own son, and she called him by the name Moses.6 / have conceived.' And her intent saved her from all danger. »Now therefore let
us also do the same. And when the time of giving birth has been completed, we
9 a. The MT for Ex 1:8 has "new," but the LXX Egypt as Ps-Philo does. has "another." f. In several rabbinic texts Amram advises the
b. The specification "to the Hebrews" is absent husbands and wives not to live together. In Jo­
from the MT of Ex 1:22 but present in the LXX sephus' Ant 2.9.3 §210 Amram's wife is already
and Samaritan Pentateuch. pregnant. c. The Lat. in victoria reflects the Gk. eis nikos g. This is the first instance of a common tech­
and Heb. Insh and means "forever." In Aram, the nique in Ps-Philo: referring back to past events or
root has only the meaning of "splendor" or "vic­ forward to future events in Israelite history to
tory" and so the phrase is an argument against illustrate an event now under discussion. Aram, as the original language of Ps-Philo. h. This apology for Tamar's actions is found
d. Lit. "was found," which probably arose from only in Ps-Philo. For other polemics against mar­
confusion between Gk. heurethe, "was found," riage with gentiles, see 18:13f.; 21:1; 30:1; 44:7;
and errethi, "was spoken." 45:3. e. See Ex 12:40, where the MT says that the i. In Gen 38:18, 25, the MT has "cords," the
people of Israel dwelt in Egypt for 430 years but LXX "small necklace," and the Vulgate "brace­
the LXX divides the time between Canaan and let."

And when she saw the boy
and while she was looking upon the covenant (that is, the covenant of the flesh),0
16 she said, "It is one of the Hebrew children." «And she took him and nursed him. Ex 2:9f
And he became her own son, and she called him by the name Moses. But his
mother called him Melchiel.p And the child was nursed and became glorious above
all other men, and through him God freed the sons of Israel as he had said. j. Lit. "superexcellence." This expression (or I. The connection between Moses' being cast
one like it) must mean "law" or "statute" as in into the water as an infant and his later drying up
11:1; 12:2; 19:4; 30:2; and 44:6, but its origin is of the Red Sea is unique to Ps-Philo. not now recognizable. m. There may be some material missing here,
k. There are striking parallels between Moses' since there is a sudden transition from Jochebed's
birth as narrated here and that of Jesus in Mt If.: pregnancy to her precautions to save Moses. communication by dreams, the spirit of God, n. That is, Moses was born circumcised as in
interest in name and mission, concealment, and b.Sot 12a and ExR 1:24. the slaughter of the male children. Literary de­ 0. That is, the sign of his circumcision. In post-
pendence is doubtful; the points in common show biblical Heb., "covenant" had become a technical
a lively interest in the birth of heroes in the NT term for circumcision. period. The "new Moses" motif in Mt 2 is well p. For Melchi as a name for Moses, see Clement
known. See also Ps-Philo 42. of Alexandria's Strom 1.23.1.The departure from Egypt and the crossing over the sea
1 10 Now when the king of the Egyptians died, another king rose up and afflicted Ex 2:23f.. i*
all the people of Israel. But they cried out to the LORD, and he heard them. And
he sent Moses and freed them from the land of the Egyptians. God also sent upon
them ten plagues and struck them down. Now these were the plagues; that is, Ex7:i4-i2:36
blood and frogs and all manner of beasts and hail and the death of cattle and
locusts and gnats and darkness that could be felt and the death of the firstborn.2
2 And while they were going forth from there and setting out, the heart of the Ex 1*8-11
Egyptians was hardened once more, and they continued to pursue them and found
them by the Red Sea. And the sons of Israel cried out to their Lord and said to
Moses, saying, "Behold now the time of our destruction has come. For the sea
is ahead of us, and the throng of enemies is behind us, and we are in the middle. Num 1*3
Is it for this that God has brought us forth, or are these the covenants that he
established with our fathers, saying, 'To your seed will I give the land in which Gen 12:7
you dwell' that now he might do with us whatever is pleasing in his sight?"
3 Then in considering the fearful situation of the moment, the sons of Israel were
split in their opinions according to three strategies.6 For the tribe of Reuben and
the tribe of Issachar and the tribe of Zebulun and the tribe of Simeon said,
"Come, let us cast ourselves into the sea.For the sea
is ahead of us, and the throng of enemies is behind us, and we are in the middle. Num 1*3
Is it for this that God has brought us forth, or are these the covenants that he
established with our fathers, saying, 'To your seed will I give the land in which Gen 12:7
you dwell' that now he might do with us whatever is pleasing in his sight?"
3 Then in considering the fearful situation of the moment, the sons of Israel were
split in their opinions according to three strategies.6 For the tribe of Reuben and
the tribe of Issachar and the tribe of Zebulun and the tribe of Simeon said,
"Come, let us cast ourselves into the sea. For it is better for us to die in the water
than to be killed by our enemies." But the tribe of Gad and the tribe of Asher
and the tribe of Dan and that of Naphtali said, "No, but let us go back with them; Ex \AM
and if they are willing to spare our lives, we will serve them." But the tribe of
Levi and the tribe of Judah and that of Joseph and the tribe of Benjamin said,
"Not so, but let us take up our weapons and fight with them, and God will be
4 with us." #And Moses cried out to the Lord and said, "Lord God of our fathers, Ex 3:i3f. did you not say to me, 4 Go and tell the sons of Israel,' "God has sent me to
you" '? And now behold you have brought your people to the edge of the sea, Ex i4:i5,9
5 and the enemy has pursued them; but you, LORD, remember your name." *And Ex i4i5f. God said, "Why have you cried out to me? Lift up your rod and strike the sea,
and it will be dried up." And when Moses did all this, God rebuked the sea and
the sea was dried up. And the seas of water piled up and the depths of the earth Ex 1*8
were visible, and the foundations of the worldd were laid bare by the fearful din
6 of God and by the breath of the anger of the LoRD.e *And Israel passed through Ex 14:22(29)
the middle of the sea on dry ground. And the Egyptians saw this and continued
following them.And when she saw the boy
and while she was looking upon the covenant (that is, the covenant of the flesh),0
16 she said, "It is one of the Hebrew children." «And she took him and nursed him. Ex 2:9f
And he became her own son, and she called him by the name Moses. But his
mother called him Melchiel.p And the child was nursed and became glorious above
all other men, and through him God freed the sons of Israel as he had said. j. Lit. "superexcellence." This expression (or I. The connection between Moses' being cast
one like it) must mean "law" or "statute" as in into the water as an infant and his later drying up
11:1; 12:2; 19:4; 30:2; and 44:6, but its origin is of the Red Sea is unique to Ps-Philo. not now recognizable. m. There may be some material missing here,
k. There are striking parallels between Moses' since there is a sudden transition from Jochebed's
birth as narrated here and that of Jesus in Mt If.: pregnancy to her precautions to save Moses. communication by dreams, the spirit of God, n. That is, Moses was born circumcised as in
interest in name and mission, concealment, and b.Sot 12a and ExR 1:24. the slaughter of the male children. Literary de­ 0. That is, the sign of his circumcision. In post-
pendence is doubtful; the points in common show biblical Heb., "covenant" had become a technical
a lively interest in the birth of heroes in the NT term for circumcision. period. The "new Moses" motif in Mt 2 is well p. For Melchi as a name for Moses, see Clement
known. See also Ps-Philo 42. of Alexandria's Strom 1.23.1.

And the seas of water piled up and the depths of the earth Ex 1*8
were visible, and the foundations of the worldd were laid bare by the fearful din
6 of God and by the breath of the anger of the LoRD.e *And Israel passed through Ex 14:22(29)
the middle of the sea on dry ground. And the Egyptians saw this and continued
following them. And God hardened their perception, and they did not know that
they were entering the sea. And while the Egyptians were in the sea, God again
commanded the sea and said to Moses, "Strike the sea yet once more." And he
did so. And the LORD commanded the sea, and it started flowing again and covered
the Egyptians and their chariots and horsemen. 7 Now he led his people out into the wilderness; for forty years he rained down Ex 1613-17:6
for them bread from heaven and brought quail to them from the sea and brought Num^ieUo
forth a well of water to follow them.f Now with a pillar of cloud he led them by ^J,3:2*: Nch
2
day, and with a pillar of fire he gave them light by night. 10 a. The plague of boils is absent from the list. d. Lit. "habitation," which in Gk. probably
When the order is compared with mat of the biblical was oikoumeni. text, the order in Ps-Philo is 1,2, 4, 7, 5, 8, 3, e. Lit. "my LORD." The use of the first person
9, 10. singular possessive adjective is unexpected. The
b. The division of opinion here may be related Gk. translator may have mistranslated the Heb. to that in Judg 5:15-16. A fourfold rather than *dwny ("the LORD") as "my LORD."
threefold division is common in rabbinic texts. f. The idea of a well of water to follow them
c. All MSS but one have "the sons of Leah," arises from Num 21:16-20 and is found in Ps-Philo
but the conjecture of that one MS ("the sons of 11:15; ICor 10:4, and many targumic and rabbinic
Israel") is probably correct. See Ex 3:14. texts.The gift of the Law. The Decalogue
1 11 And in the third month after the sons of Israel had gone forth from the land Ex 1*1
of Egypt, they came into the wilderness of Sinai, and God remembered his words
and said, "I will give a light to the world and illumine their dwelling places and
establish my covenant with the sons of men and glorify my people above all
nations. For them I will bring out the eternal statutes* that are for those in the
2 light but for the ungodly a punishment." *And he said to Moses, "Behold I will Ex i9:i5
call you tomorrow; be prepared and tell my people, "For three days let no man
approach his wife,' and on the third dayc I will speak to you and to them. And
afterward you will come up to me, and I will put my words in your mouth, and
you will enlighten my people, for I have given an everlasting Law into your hands
and by this I will judge the whole world. For this will be a testimony. For even
if men say, 'We have not known you, and so we have not served you,' therefore
3 I will make a claim upon them because they have not learned my Law."d - And
Moses did what God commanded him, and he consecrated the people and said Ex i9:i4f. to them, "Be prepared on the third day, because after three days God will establish
his covenant with you." And the people were consecrated. 4 And on the third day there were claps of thunder and the brightness of lightning, Ex i9:i6f. and the sound of trumpets sounded aloud. Terror came upon all the people who
5 were in the camp. And Moses brought the people out before God.Terror came upon all the people who
5 were in the camp. And Moses brought the people out before God. »And behold
the mountains burned with Are, and the earth quaked, and the hills were disturbed,
and the mountains were rolled about, and the abysses boiled, and every habitable
place was shaken, and the heavens were folded up, and the clouds drew up water,
and flames of fire burned, and thunderings and lightnings were many, and winds
and storms roared, the stars gathered together, and angels ran on ahead, until God
should establish the Law of his eternal covenant with the sons of Israel and give
his eternal commandments that will not pass away.e
6 And then the Lord spoke to his people all these words, saying, "/ am the Lord Ex 20:if.,4-6
your God who led you forth from the land of Egypt, from the house of slavery. You shall not make for yourselves graven gods; neither shall you make any
abominable image of the sun and moon or of any of the ornaments of heaven;
nor shall you make a likeness of any of the things that are upon the earth or of
those things that crawl in the water or upon the earth. I am the Lord your God,
a jealous God and visiting until the third and fourth generation the sins of them
that sleep on the living sons of the ungodly if they will walk in the ways of their
parents, but acting mercifully for a thousand generations to those who love me
7 and keep my commandments. *You shall not take the name of the Lord your God Ex 20:7
in vain, lest my ways be made empty.f For God detests him who takes his name
8 in vain. *Take care* to sanctify the sabbath day. Work for six days, but the seventh Ex 20:8-1 I
day is the sabbath of the Lord. You shall not do any work on it, you and all your
help, except to praise the LORD in the assembly of the elders and to glorify the Ps 107:32
Mighty One in the council of the older men. For in six days the Lord made the
heaven and the earth and the sea and all things that are in them and all the world
11 a. Lit.And the seas of water piled up and the depths of the earth Ex 1*8
were visible, and the foundations of the worldd were laid bare by the fearful din
6 of God and by the breath of the anger of the LoRD.e *And Israel passed through Ex 14:22(29)
the middle of the sea on dry ground. And the Egyptians saw this and continued
following them. And God hardened their perception, and they did not know that
they were entering the sea. And while the Egyptians were in the sea, God again
commanded the sea and said to Moses, "Strike the sea yet once more." And he
did so. And the LORD commanded the sea, and it started flowing again and covered
the Egyptians and their chariots and horsemen. 7 Now he led his people out into the wilderness; for forty years he rained down Ex 1613-17:6
for them bread from heaven and brought quail to them from the sea and brought Num^ieUo
forth a well of water to follow them.f Now with a pillar of cloud he led them by ^J,3:2*: Nch
2
day, and with a pillar of fire he gave them light by night. 10 a. The plague of boils is absent from the list. d. Lit. "habitation," which in Gk. probably
When the order is compared with mat of the biblical was oikoumeni. text, the order in Ps-Philo is 1,2, 4, 7, 5, 8, 3, e. Lit. "my LORD." The use of the first person
9, 10. singular possessive adjective is unexpected. The
b. The division of opinion here may be related Gk. translator may have mistranslated the Heb. to that in Judg 5:15-16. A fourfold rather than *dwny ("the LORD") as "my LORD."
threefold division is common in rabbinic texts. f. The idea of a well of water to follow them
c. All MSS but one have "the sons of Leah," arises from Num 21:16-20 and is found in Ps-Philo
but the conjecture of that one MS ("the sons of 11:15; ICor 10:4, and many targumic and rabbinic
Israel") is probably correct. See Ex 3:14. texts.

For in six days the Lord made the
heaven and the earth and the sea and all things that are in them and all the world
11 a. Lit. "heights," but the context demands the e. Similar lists of wonders accompanying the
meaning "statutes." See 9:8. gift of the Law are in 15:5f.; 23:10; and 32:7f. See
b. The MSS have "ascend" (ascendat), but in also 4Ezra 3:18f. For commandments that do not
view of Ex 19:15 we have emended to "approach" pass away, see Mt 5:18. (accedat). f. The "ways" here may be purely metaphorical
c. Here "on the third day" is the equivalent of (i.e. God's ways or directions), or they may be
"after three days" as in Mt 27:63; Mk 8:31; 9:31; connected with b.Shab 33a: "For the crime of vain
10:34; Lk 24:7; Acts 10:40; and ICor 15:4. oaths ... the roads became desolate."
d. According to b.AZ 2b, since God offered the g. The Samaritan Pentateuch of Ex 20:8 and the
Law to all the nations, they have no excuse for not various texts of Deut 5:12 also have "take care"
obeying it. But perhaps only the case of unfaithful rather than * * remember.''
Israelites is being considered here.and the uninhabitable wilderness and all things that labor and all the order of
heaven. And God rested on the seventh day. Therefore, God sanctified the seventh^
9 day because he rested on it. »Love your father and your mother, and you shall Ex 20:12
honor them, and then your light will rise. And I will command the heaven, and
it will give forth its rain, and the earth will give back fruit more quickly. And
you will live many days and dwell in your land, and you will not be without sons,
10 for your seed will not be lacking in people to dwell in it. *You shall not commit Ex 20:14
adultery,' because your enemies did not commit adultery against you, but you Ex i4:8
11 came forth with a high hand.* *You shall not kill, because your enemies had power Ex 20:15
12 over you so as to kill you, but you saw their death. *You shall not be a false Ex20:i6
witness against your neighbor, speaking false testimony, lest your guardiansk
13 speak false testimony against you. *You shall not covet your neighbor's house or Ex 20:17
what he has, lest others should covet your land."
14 And when the LORD ceased speaking, the people were very much afraid, because Ex 20:i8; Dem
they saw the mountain burning with torches of fire. And they said to Moses, "You I^OM™ 128
speak to us, but do not let God speak to us lest perhaps we die. For behold today
we know that God speaks to a man face to face and that man may live. And now
we have recognized that the earth has borne the voice of God with quaking." And
Moses said to them, "Do not fear. For God has come to test you that you
yourselves should come to fear him so that you will not sin."
15 And all1 the people stood far off, but Moses drew near the cloud, knowing that Ex 20:21
God was there. And then God told him his statutes and his judgments, and he
detained him forty days and forty nights.For God has come to test you that you
yourselves should come to fear him so that you will not sin."
15 And all1 the people stood far off, but Moses drew near the cloud, knowing that Ex 20:21
God was there. And then God told him his statutes and his judgments, and he
detained him forty days and forty nights. And there he commanded him many Ex24:i8
things and showed him the tree of life, from which he cut off and took and threw Ex 1525
into Marah, and the water of Marahm became sweet. And it" followed them in
the wilderness forty years and went up to the mountain with them and went down
into the plains. And he commanded him about the tabernacle and the ark of the Ex 25-31
LORD and about the sacrifice of burnt offerings and incense and about setting up
the table and the candlestick and about the laver and its basin0 and about the
ephod and the breastplate and about the precious stones, so that the sons of Israel
might make these things. And he showed him their likeness in order that he might Ex 25:9,8
make them according to the pattern that he had seen. And he said to him, "Make
me a sanctuary, and the tent of my glory will be among you."p
The golden calf
12
1 And Moses came down. And when he had been bathed with invisible light, Ex 34:29-35
he went down to the place where the light of the sun and the moon are; and the
light of his face surpassed the splendor of the sun and the moon, and he did not
even know this. And when he came down to the sons of Israel, they saw him but
did not recognize him.a But when he spoke, then they recognized him. And this
was like what happened in Egypt when Joseph recognized his brothers but they Gen 42:8
did not recognize him. And afterward, when Moses realized that his face had
become glorious, he made a veil for himself with which to cover his face. 2 And while he was on the mountain, the heart of the people was corrupted, and Ex 32:if
h.For in six days the Lord made the
heaven and the earth and the sea and all things that are in them and all the world
11 a. Lit. "heights," but the context demands the e. Similar lists of wonders accompanying the
meaning "statutes." See 9:8. gift of the Law are in 15:5f.; 23:10; and 32:7f. See
b. The MSS have "ascend" (ascendat), but in also 4Ezra 3:18f. For commandments that do not
view of Ex 19:15 we have emended to "approach" pass away, see Mt 5:18. (accedat). f. The "ways" here may be purely metaphorical
c. Here "on the third day" is the equivalent of (i.e. God's ways or directions), or they may be
"after three days" as in Mt 27:63; Mk 8:31; 9:31; connected with b.Shab 33a: "For the crime of vain
10:34; Lk 24:7; Acts 10:40; and ICor 15:4. oaths ... the roads became desolate."
d. According to b.AZ 2b, since God offered the g. The Samaritan Pentateuch of Ex 20:8 and the
Law to all the nations, they have no excuse for not various texts of Deut 5:12 also have "take care"
obeying it. But perhaps only the case of unfaithful rather than * * remember.''
Israelites is being considered here.

And afterward, when Moses realized that his face had
become glorious, he made a veil for himself with which to cover his face. 2 And while he was on the mountain, the heart of the people was corrupted, and Ex 32:if
h. The LXX and Peshitta of Ex 20:11 also have the Vetus Latina of Ex 20:21 in reading "all."
"seventh," while the other texts have "sabbath." m. Marah in Heb. means "bitter."
i. The prohibition of adultery precedes that of n. The water, not the LORD (as some MSS
murder as in the LXX, Nash Papyrus, Philo, and have); see 10:7. some NT texts (Rom 13:9; Lk 18:20; Jas 2:11). o. The MSS have "vase" (vase), but "basin"
The prohibition of stealing is omitted. (base) must be correct; see 13:1 and Ex 30:18. j. The point seems to be that Israel's enemies p. With "tent" and "among you" Ps-Philo
did not get the chance to commit adultery. stands closest to the Samaritan Pentateuch of Ex
k. See also 15:5 and 59:4 for guardian angels. 25:8. The passage is a formulation of the golden rule
("Do to others as you would have them do to 12 a. That the people of Israel saw Moses but did
you";cf. Mt7:12). not recognize him is unique to Ps-Philo. 1. Ps-Philo agrees with the Lucianic MSS andthey gathered together to Aaron, saying, * 'Make gods for us whom we may serve,
as the other nations have, because that Moses through whom wonders were done
before our eyes has been taken away from us." And Aaron said to them, "Be
patient. For Moses will come, and he will bring judgment near to us and will
illumine the Law for us and will explain from his own mouth the Lawb of God
3 and set up rules for our race." *And while he was speaking, they did not heed
him, so that the word spoken in the time when the people sinned by building the
tower might be fulfilled, when God said, "And now unless I stop them, everything Gen u*
that they will propose to do they will dare, and even worse." But Aaron, fearful
because the people were very strong, said to them, "Bring us the earrings of your Ex 32:2-4
wives." And each man asked his wife, and they gave them immediately. And
they cast them into the fire, and they were fashioned into shape, and out came a
molten calf. 4 And the Lord said to Moses, "Hurry* away from here, because the people have Ex 32:7f
been corrupted and have turned aside from my ways that I commanded them. Are the promises that I promised to your fathers when I said to them, 'To your Gen 12:7
seed I will give the land in which you dwell*—are they at an end? For behold the
people have not even entered the land yet and now even have the Law with them,
and they have forsaken me. And indeed I know that if they had entered that land,
even greater iniquities would have been done. And now I too will forsake them,
and I will turn again and make peace with them so that a house may be built for
me among them, a house that will be destroyed because they will sin against me. And the race of men will be to me like a drop from a pitcher and will be reckoned isa40:i5
like spittle."
s And Moses hurried down and saw the calf And he looked at the tablets and Ex 32:15,19
saw that the writing was gone,d and he hurried to break them.And now I too will forsake them,
and I will turn again and make peace with them so that a house may be built for
me among them, a house that will be destroyed because they will sin against me. And the race of men will be to me like a drop from a pitcher and will be reckoned isa40:i5
like spittle."
s And Moses hurried down and saw the calf And he looked at the tablets and Ex 32:15,19
saw that the writing was gone,d and he hurried to break them. And his hands
were opened, and he became like a woman bearing her firstborn who, when she
is in labor, her hands are upon her chest and she has no strength to help herself
6 bring forth.e •And after one hour he said to himself, "Will bitterness win the day
always, or will evil prevail forever? And now I will rise up and gird my loins,
because even if they have sinned, what was declared to me above will not be in
7 vain." *And he arose and broke the calf and cast it into the water and made the Ex 32:20
people drink of it.f And if anyone had it in his will and mind that the calf be
made, his tongue was cut off; but if he had been forced by fear to consent, his
face shone. 8 And then Moses went up to the mountain and prayed to the LORD, saying,
"Behold now, you O God, who have planted this vine and set its roots into the
abyss and stretched out its shoots to your most high seat,* look upon it in this
time, because that vine has lost its fruit and has not recognized its cultivator. And
now, if you are angry at your vine and you uproot it from the abyss and dry up
its shoots from your most high and eternal seat, the abyss will come no more to
nourish it, nor will your throne come to cool that vine of yours that you have
9 burned up. #For you are he who is all light; and you have adorned your househ
with precious stones and gold; and you have sprinkled your house with perfumes
and spices1 and balsam wood and cinnamon and roots of myrrh and costumj; and
you have filled it with various foods and the sweetness of various drinks.And afterward, when Moses realized that his face had
become glorious, he made a veil for himself with which to cover his face. 2 And while he was on the mountain, the heart of the people was corrupted, and Ex 32:if
h. The LXX and Peshitta of Ex 20:11 also have the Vetus Latina of Ex 20:21 in reading "all."
"seventh," while the other texts have "sabbath." m. Marah in Heb. means "bitter."
i. The prohibition of adultery precedes that of n. The water, not the LORD (as some MSS
murder as in the LXX, Nash Papyrus, Philo, and have); see 10:7. some NT texts (Rom 13:9; Lk 18:20; Jas 2:11). o. The MSS have "vase" (vase), but "basin"
The prohibition of stealing is omitted. (base) must be correct; see 13:1 and Ex 30:18. j. The point seems to be that Israel's enemies p. With "tent" and "among you" Ps-Philo
did not get the chance to commit adultery. stands closest to the Samaritan Pentateuch of Ex
k. See also 15:5 and 59:4 for guardian angels. 25:8. The passage is a formulation of the golden rule
("Do to others as you would have them do to 12 a. That the people of Israel saw Moses but did
you";cf. Mt7:12). not recognize him is unique to Ps-Philo. 1. Ps-Philo agrees with the Lucianic MSS and

And
now, if you are angry at your vine and you uproot it from the abyss and dry up
its shoots from your most high and eternal seat, the abyss will come no more to
nourish it, nor will your throne come to cool that vine of yours that you have
9 burned up. #For you are he who is all light; and you have adorned your househ
with precious stones and gold; and you have sprinkled your house with perfumes
and spices1 and balsam wood and cinnamon and roots of myrrh and costumj; and
you have filled it with various foods and the sweetness of various drinks. Therefore,
if you do not have mercy on your vine, all things, LORD, have been done in vain,
and you will not have anyone to glorify you. For even if you plant another vine,
this one will not trust you, because you have destroyed the former one. For if
b. Lit. "superexcellence"; see 9:8. g. For a similar description, see IQH 6.14-17. c. See the LXX of Ex 32:7 badize to tachos. h. Perhaps paradise, but more likely the uni­
d. The legend that the writing fled away from verse. the tablets of the Law is found in rabbinic writings. i. Var. "jasper.'*
e. See Jer 4:31 and IQH 3.7-10 for the image j. ["Costum" is from Lat. costum (Gk. kostos). of giving birth. which denotes an eastern plant with aromatic qual­
f. Drinking the waters to determine the identity ities; there is no English name for the plant; see
of sinners is found in Num 5:11-31 in the case of Jub 16:24 (and n. c), in which "costum" is
a woman suspected of adultery. mentioned among other fragrant plants. —J.H.C.]you indeed forsake the world, then who will do for you what you say as God? And now let your anger be restrained from your vine; rather let what was said
previously by you and what still must be said be done, and do not let your labor
be in vain, and do not let your inheritance be pulled apart in humiliation."
10 And God said to him, "Behold I have been made merciful according to your Ex 34:1
words. Therefore cut two stone tablets for yourself from the same place where
you cut the former ones, and rewrite^ on them the commandments that were on
the first ones."
The tent of meeting and the festivals
13 And Moses hastened and did everything that God commanded him. And he Ex 35-40
went down and made the tent of meeting8 and its vessels and the ark and the lamp
and the table and the altar of holocausts and the altar of incenseb and the ephod
and the breastplate and the precious stones and the laver and the basins and
everything that was shown to him. And he arranged all the vestments of the
priests, the belt and the robec and the headdress and the golden plate and the holy
crown. And the oil for anointing priests and the priests themselves he consecrated. And when all this was done, the cloud covered them all. *Then Moses called to Ex 40:33I
the LORD, and God spoke to him from the tent of meeting, saying, "This is the Uv 1:1
law of the altar,d according to which you will sacrifice to me and pray for your
own souls. Now regarding what you will offer to me, from the cattle offer the Lev 1:10,14
calf and the sheep and the goat, but from the birds the turtledove and the dove. "And if there be leprosy in your land and the leper be cleansed, they will take Lev 14:2-6
for the LORD two live chicks and cedarwood and hyssop and scarlet, and he will
approach the priest, and he will kill one chick but keep the other alive. And he
will give orders to the leper in all the matters that I have commanded in my Law."And if there be leprosy in your land and the leper be cleansed, they will take Lev 14:2-6
for the LORD two live chicks and cedarwood and hyssop and scarlet, and he will
approach the priest, and he will kill one chick but keep the other alive. And he
will give orders to the leper in all the matters that I have commanded in my Law. "And when the times appointed for you come around, you will acknowledge Lev 234-8
me as holy on the festival day and rejoice before me on the festival of the
unleavened bread and set before me the bread, celebrating the festival as a
memorial, because on that day you went forth from the land of Egypt. *And on Lev 23:15-21
the festival of weeks you will set before me bread and make me an offering for
your fruits. «Now the feast of trumpets will be an offering for your watchers.6 In Lev 23.24-32
as much as I watched over creation/ may you also be mindful of all the earth. At the beginning of those days, when you present yourselves, I will declare the
number of those who are to die and who are to be born. A fast of mercy you will
fast* for me for your own souls, so that the promises made to your fathers may
be fulfilled. •And celebrate for me the festival of the booth, and you will take for Lev 23:40
me the beautiful branch of the tree and the palm branch and the willow and the
cedar and branches of myrtle. And 1 will remember the whole earth with rain,
and the measure of the seasons will be established, and I will fix the stars and
command the clouds, and the winds will resound, and lightning bolts will rush
about, and there will be a thunderstorm. And this will be an everlasting sign; and
the nights will yield dew, as I said after the flooding of the earth."
Then he gave him the command regarding the year of the lifetime of Noah,
and he said to him, "These are the years that 1 ordained after the weeks in which
I visited the city of men, at which time I showed them the place of creation and
> k Moses is to write the commandments.And
now, if you are angry at your vine and you uproot it from the abyss and dry up
its shoots from your most high and eternal seat, the abyss will come no more to
nourish it, nor will your throne come to cool that vine of yours that you have
9 burned up. #For you are he who is all light; and you have adorned your househ
with precious stones and gold; and you have sprinkled your house with perfumes
and spices1 and balsam wood and cinnamon and roots of myrrh and costumj; and
you have filled it with various foods and the sweetness of various drinks. Therefore,
if you do not have mercy on your vine, all things, LORD, have been done in vain,
and you will not have anyone to glorify you. For even if you plant another vine,
this one will not trust you, because you have destroyed the former one. For if
b. Lit. "superexcellence"; see 9:8. g. For a similar description, see IQH 6.14-17. c. See the LXX of Ex 32:7 badize to tachos. h. Perhaps paradise, but more likely the uni­
d. The legend that the writing fled away from verse. the tablets of the Law is found in rabbinic writings. i. Var. "jasper.'*
e. See Jer 4:31 and IQH 3.7-10 for the image j. ["Costum" is from Lat. costum (Gk. kostos). of giving birth. which denotes an eastern plant with aromatic qual­
f. Drinking the waters to determine the identity ities; there is no English name for the plant; see
of sinners is found in Num 5:11-31 in the case of Jub 16:24 (and n. c), in which "costum" is
a woman suspected of adultery. mentioned among other fragrant plants. —J.H.C.]

And 1 will remember the whole earth with rain,
and the measure of the seasons will be established, and I will fix the stars and
command the clouds, and the winds will resound, and lightning bolts will rush
about, and there will be a thunderstorm. And this will be an everlasting sign; and
the nights will yield dew, as I said after the flooding of the earth."
Then he gave him the command regarding the year of the lifetime of Noah,
and he said to him, "These are the years that 1 ordained after the weeks in which
I visited the city of men, at which time I showed them the place of creation and
> k Moses is to write the commandments. Most rible," was misread for thysiaterion, "altar."
/ witnesses sav that God wrote them, but some LXX c. We are reading citona. "robe," instead of
/ MSS do make Moses the writer S~ee~Ex 34:27f. cetera, "the rest," the reading of all the MSS. >v See also Ps-Fhilo 15:\5 tor doubt aboutjLhe au- d. Again the MSS have "thurible."
Nthbrshipj)Mhe^Law. e. Angelic guardians are probably meant, but in
34:2 sacrifice to angels is attacked. Perhaps the
13 a. Lit. "the tables" (tabulas), but the context point is that at the New Year, Israel is brought to
demands "tent of meeting" (tabernaculum). judgment by God's angels. b. Lit. "the thurible of holocausts and the thu­ f. For the New Year as the anniversary of
rible of incense," but according to Ex 35:15f. these creation see b.RH 11a. should be altars. Perhaps Gk. thymiaterion, "thu­ g. The Day of Atonement.the serpent. "h And he said, "This is the place concerning which I taught the first
man,* saying, Tf you do not transgress what I have commanded you, all things
will be subject to you.' But that man transgressed my ways and was persuaded
by his wife; and she was deceived by the serpent. And then death was ordained
9 for the generations of men." *And the LORD continued to show him the ways of
paradise and said to him,j "These are the ways that men have lost by not walking
in them, because they have sinned against me."
10 And the LORD commanded him regarding the salvation of the souls of the
people and said, "If they will walk in my ways, I will not abandon them but will
have mercy on them always and bless their seed; and the earth will quickly yield Lev 26:2-5
its fruit, and there will be rains for their advantage, and it will not be barren. But
I know for sure that they will make their ways corrupt and I will abandon them,
and they will forget the covenants that I have established with their fathers; but
nevertheless I will not forget them forever. For they will know in the last days
that on account of their own sins their seed has been abandoned, because I am
faithful in my ways."
The census of the people
1 14 Then God said to him, "Make pass in review my people from twenty years Num i: 1—3
and up to forty years so that I may show your tribes what I declared to your
fathers in a foreign land, because from the fiftieth8 part I raised them up from the Ex ms
2 land of Egypt, but forty-nine parts died in the land of Egypt.But
I know for sure that they will make their ways corrupt and I will abandon them,
and they will forget the covenants that I have established with their fathers; but
nevertheless I will not forget them forever. For they will know in the last days
that on account of their own sins their seed has been abandoned, because I am
faithful in my ways."
The census of the people
1 14 Then God said to him, "Make pass in review my people from twenty years Num i: 1—3
and up to forty years so that I may show your tribes what I declared to your
fathers in a foreign land, because from the fiftieth8 part I raised them up from the Ex ms
2 land of Egypt, but forty-nine parts died in the land of Egypt. •When you make
them stand and pass in review, write down their number until I fulfill all that I
have spoken to their fathers and until I set them firmly in their own land; for not
a single word from what I have spoken to their fathers will I renege on, from
those that I said to them: 'Your seed will be like the stars of heaven in multitude.' Gen 22:17; Deut
By number they will enter the land, and in a short time they will become without 28:62
number.''
3 And then Moses came down and numbered them, and the number of the people
was 604,550.b But he did not number the tribe of Levi with them, because so it Num i:46-49;
was commanded him. But he did number those who were above fifty* years, whose 2:33
number was 47,300. Moreover, he numbered those who were below twenty years,
and their number was 850,850. And he looked over the tribe of Levi, and the
whole number of them was 100,200. And the whole number of the sons of Israel
4 was l,620,900.d »And Moses declared their number to God, and God said to him,
"These are the words that I spoke to their fathers in the land of Egypt, and I
established the number of 210 years for all who saw my wonders; and the number
of all of them was 9,295,000 men apart from women. And I put to death the
whole crowd of them because they did not believe in me.And 1 will remember the whole earth with rain,
and the measure of the seasons will be established, and I will fix the stars and
command the clouds, and the winds will resound, and lightning bolts will rush
about, and there will be a thunderstorm. And this will be an everlasting sign; and
the nights will yield dew, as I said after the flooding of the earth."
Then he gave him the command regarding the year of the lifetime of Noah,
and he said to him, "These are the years that 1 ordained after the weeks in which
I visited the city of men, at which time I showed them the place of creation and
> k Moses is to write the commandments. Most rible," was misread for thysiaterion, "altar."
/ witnesses sav that God wrote them, but some LXX c. We are reading citona. "robe," instead of
/ MSS do make Moses the writer S~ee~Ex 34:27f. cetera, "the rest," the reading of all the MSS. >v See also Ps-Fhilo 15:\5 tor doubt aboutjLhe au- d. Again the MSS have "thurible."
Nthbrshipj)Mhe^Law. e. Angelic guardians are probably meant, but in
34:2 sacrifice to angels is attacked. Perhaps the
13 a. Lit. "the tables" (tabulas), but the context point is that at the New Year, Israel is brought to
demands "tent of meeting" (tabernaculum). judgment by God's angels. b. Lit. "the thurible of holocausts and the thu­ f. For the New Year as the anniversary of
rible of incense," but according to Ex 35:15f. these creation see b.RH 11a. should be altars. Perhaps Gk. thymiaterion, "thu­ g. The Day of Atonement.

And the whole number of the sons of Israel
4 was l,620,900.d »And Moses declared their number to God, and God said to him,
"These are the words that I spoke to their fathers in the land of Egypt, and I
established the number of 210 years for all who saw my wonders; and the number
of all of them was 9,295,000 men apart from women. And I put to death the
whole crowd of them because they did not believe in me. And the fiftieth part of
them was left, and I consecrated them to myself. Therefore I command each
generation of my people that they should give to me tithes from their fruits, to be
before me as a memorial of how many hardships I have removed from them."
5 And when Moses descended and declared these matters to the people, they
mourned and lamented; and they dwelt in the wilderness for two years. Num 9:i
The twelve spies
1 15 And Moses sent twelve men as spies to spy out the land, for so it was Num i3:i-3. 20-29,32f. h. We are reading colubrum, "serpent" (see Heb. hmsym in Ex 13:8, which can mean "equipped
13:8 below) instead of colorem, "color," found for battle" or "fifties."
in all MSS. b. Num 1:46 has 603,550. i. Adam, who is called protoplasms here. For c. In view of 14:1 we would expect "forty."
the same term see WisSol 7:1 and 10:1. d. The figures for the Levites and all the sons
j. Probably Moses, but possibly Noah. of Israel are emendations based on a very corrupt
text. Num 3:39 puts the number of Levites at
14 a. Based on a midrashic explanation of the 22,000.commanded him.3 When they went up and spied out the land, they returned to
him and brought back fruits from the fruits of the land. And they troubled the Josh 1*8
heart of the people, saying, "You cannot inherit the land, because it has been
locked up with iron bars by its mighty men." *Yet two men of the twelve did not Num 1330
speak in this way, but said, "Just as hard iron can overcome the stars, or as
weapons conquer lightning, or thunder is shut off by the arrows of men, so can
these men fight against the LORD."0 For they saw as they went up that the
lightnings from the stars shone forth and claps of thunders resounding with them
followed. #And these are their names: Caleb the son of Jephunneh, son of Beri, Num 32:12
son of Batuel, son of Galifa, son of Cenen, son of Selumin, son of Selon, son of
Judah. The second was Joshua son of Nun, son of Eliphat, son of Gal, son of ichr 7:21-27
Nefelien, son of Emon, son of Saul, son of Dabra, son of Ephraim, son of Joseph. But the people did not listen to the voice of these two. Rather, they were very
disturbed and said, "Are these the words that God spoke to us, saying, 'I will
bring you into a land flowing with milk and honey' ? And how does he now bring Ex 3:8
us up so that we should fall upon the sword and our wives be taken into captivity?" Num 14:3
And when they said these words, suddenly the glory of God appeared, and he Num i4:io
said to Moses, "So, do the people continue not to listen to me at all? Behold
now the plan of action that has issued from me will not be in vain. I will send
the angel of my wrath upon them to afflict their bodies with fire in the wilderness.Behold
now the plan of action that has issued from me will not be in vain. I will send
the angel of my wrath upon them to afflict their bodies with fire in the wilderness. But I will command my angels who watch over themc not to intercede for them;
for their souls I will shut up in the chambers of darkness, and I will tell my
servants, their fathers, 4Behold this is the seed to which 1 have spoken, saying,
"Your seed will stay a while in a land not its own, and I will judge the nation Gen I5i3f
whom it will serve " ' And I fulfilled my words and made their enemies melt
away and set the angels beneath their feet and placed the cloud as the covering
for their head. And I commanded the sea, and when the abyss was divided before Ex 14:22
them, walls of water stood forth. #And there was never anything like this event
since the day I said, 'Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together into Gen 19
one place," until this day. And I brought them forth, but I killed their enemies. And I brought them before me to Mount Sinai, and I bent the heavens and came isa 64:1
down to kindle a lamp for my people and to establish lawsd for creation. And I
taught them to make sanctuaries for me that I might dwell in them, but they
abandoned me and did not believe my words, and their mind grew weak. And
now behold the days will come, and I will do to them as they wished, and I will
cast forth their bodies in the wilderness." Num 14:32
And Moses said, "Before you took the seed from which you would make man Num 14:13-19
upon the earth, was it I who did establish their ways? Therefore let your mercy
sustain us until the end, and your fidelity for length of days; for unless you had
mercy, who would ever be born?"
The rebellion of Korah
16
In that time he commanded that man3 about the tassels. And then Korah and Num is:37-i6:.And the whole number of the sons of Israel
4 was l,620,900.d »And Moses declared their number to God, and God said to him,
"These are the words that I spoke to their fathers in the land of Egypt, and I
established the number of 210 years for all who saw my wonders; and the number
of all of them was 9,295,000 men apart from women. And I put to death the
whole crowd of them because they did not believe in me. And the fiftieth part of
them was left, and I consecrated them to myself. Therefore I command each
generation of my people that they should give to me tithes from their fruits, to be
before me as a memorial of how many hardships I have removed from them."
5 And when Moses descended and declared these matters to the people, they
mourned and lamented; and they dwelt in the wilderness for two years. Num 9:i
The twelve spies
1 15 And Moses sent twelve men as spies to spy out the land, for so it was Num i3:i-3. 20-29,32f. h. We are reading colubrum, "serpent" (see Heb. hmsym in Ex 13:8, which can mean "equipped
13:8 below) instead of colorem, "color," found for battle" or "fifties."
in all MSS. b. Num 1:46 has 603,550. i. Adam, who is called protoplasms here. For c. In view of 14:1 we would expect "forty."
the same term see WisSol 7:1 and 10:1. d. The figures for the Levites and all the sons
j. Probably Moses, but possibly Noah. of Israel are emendations based on a very corrupt
text. Num 3:39 puts the number of Levites at
14 a. Based on a midrashic explanation of the 22,000.

Therefore let your mercy
sustain us until the end, and your fidelity for length of days; for unless you had
mercy, who would ever be born?"
The rebellion of Korah
16
In that time he commanded that man3 about the tassels. And then Korah and Num is:37-i6:. two hundred0 men with him rebelled and said, "Why is an unbearable law imposed
upon us?"c
And God was angry and said, "I commanded the earth, and it gave me man;
15 a. Ps-Philo follows Num 13:If. in attributing "limits, boundaries" or "laws, statutes, enact­
the sending of the spies to God's initiative, but in ments." See 51:3. Deut 1:22f. it is a suggestion of men approved by
Moses. 16 a. Moses. b. That is, it is impossible for these men to fight b. Num 16:2 has 250. against the LORD. c. In Josephus' Ant 4.2.2 §14 Korah's rebellion
c. For the angels as guardians see also Ps-Philo is traced to his jealousy of Moses. The connection
11:12 and 59:4 as well as Jub 35:17. in Ps-Philo between the law of the tassels (Num
d. The expression "laws" (terminos) can be 15:37-41) and the rebellion (Num 16:1-3) is due
traced back to the Heb. hwqym, which can mean to the proximity of the two passages.and to him two sons were born first of all, and the older rose up and killed the
Gen4:i-i6
younger, and the earth quickly swallowed up his blood. But I drove Cain out and
cursed the earth and spoke to the parched land,d saying, 4You will swallow up
blood no more/' #And now the thoughts of men are very corrupt; behold 1
command the earth, and it will swallow up body and soul together. And their Num 16:30
dwelling place will be in darkness and the place of destruction; and they will not
die but melt away until I remember the world and renew the earth. And then they
will die and not live, and their life will be taken away from the number of all
men.f And hell will no longer spit them back, and their destruction will not be
remembered, and their passing will be like that of those tribes of nations of whom
I said, 'I will not remember them,' that is, the camp of the Egyptians and the
race that I destroyed with the water of the flood. And the earth will swallow them
up, and I will do no more."
And though Moses was speaking all these words to the people, Korah and his
men were still defiant. And Korah sent for his seven sons, who had not joined
with him in the plot, to be summoned. *But they answered him, saying, "Just as
Num 26:ii
a painter does not produce a work of art unless he has been instructed beforehand,
so we have received the Law of the Most Powerful that teaches us his ways; and
we will not enter them except to walk in them. Our father has not begotten us,
but the Most Powerful has formed us. And now if we walk in his ways, we will
be his sons. But if you are unbelieving, go your own way." And they did not
come up to him. And after this the earth was opened before them. And his sons sent to him,
saying, "If your madness is still upon you, who will help you in the day of your
destruction?" And he did not heed them. And the earth opened its mouth and Num 16:32
swallowed up them and their households.And his sons sent to him,
saying, "If your madness is still upon you, who will help you in the day of your
destruction?" And he did not heed them. And the earth opened its mouth and Num 16:32
swallowed up them and their households. And four times the foundation of the
earth was shaken so as to swallow up the men as it had been commanded. And
after this, Korah and his group cried out until the earth became solid again. -Now
the assembly of the people said to Moses, "We cannot stay around8 this place
where Korah and his men were swallowed up." And he said to them, "Take up
Num i6:26f. your tents from round about them; do not be joined in their sins" And so they
did. The rod of Aaron
17 And then the identity of the priestly family was revealed by the selection of
one tribe. And it was told to Moses, "Take for the twelve tribes one rod apiece
Num i7:2.4f
and put them in the tent of meeting. And then to whomever my glory shall have
spoken, the rod of that one will flower and I will take away the murmuring from
my people." #And Moses did so, and he deposited the twelve rods. And the rod
Num i7:7f
of Aaron sprouted and flowered and yielded seed of almonds. »Now that which
happened8 then was like what Israel did while he was in Mesopotamia with Laban Gen 30.37-39
the Syrian when he took almond rods and put them at the cisterns of water; and
the flocks came to drink and were divided among the peeled rods, and they brought
forth white and speckled and many-colored kids. »So the assembly of the people
was like the flock of sheep. And as the flocks brought forth according to the
almond rods, so the priesthood was established through almond rods. Balaam
18 In that time, Moses killed Sihon and Og, the kings of the Amorites, and he Num 21
handed over all their land to his own people, and they dwelled in it. »Now Balak Nufn 22
d. Lit. "Zion"; this is based on a misunder­ f. Korah and his group will be annihilated. standing of the Heb. sywn, "parched earth." See g. Lit.Therefore let your mercy
sustain us until the end, and your fidelity for length of days; for unless you had
mercy, who would ever be born?"
The rebellion of Korah
16
In that time he commanded that man3 about the tassels. And then Korah and Num is:37-i6:. two hundred0 men with him rebelled and said, "Why is an unbearable law imposed
upon us?"c
And God was angry and said, "I commanded the earth, and it gave me man;
15 a. Ps-Philo follows Num 13:If. in attributing "limits, boundaries" or "laws, statutes, enact­
the sending of the spies to God's initiative, but in ments." See 51:3. Deut 1:22f. it is a suggestion of men approved by
Moses. 16 a. Moses. b. That is, it is impossible for these men to fight b. Num 16:2 has 250. against the LORD. c. In Josephus' Ant 4.2.2 §14 Korah's rebellion
c. For the angels as guardians see also Ps-Philo is traced to his jealousy of Moses. The connection
11:12 and 59:4 as well as Jub 35:17. in Ps-Philo between the law of the tassels (Num
d. The expression "laws" (terminos) can be 15:37-41) and the rebellion (Num 16:1-3) is due
traced back to the Heb. hwqym, which can mean to the proximity of the two passages.

sywn, "parched earth." See g. Lit. "Sinai" (Syna oxSina), which we emend
Isa 25:5 and 32:2. to sinu, lit. "in the bosom of this place."
e. b.Sanh 37b says that the earth did not open
its mouth from when it swallowed Abel's blood 17 a. Lit. "was born" (Gk. egennethi), probably
until it swallowed up Korah. a mistake for egenithi; see also 30:5; 51:6.was king of Moab and was living opposite them, and he was very much afraid. And he sent to Balaam the son of Beor, the interpreter" of dreams, who lived in
Mesopotamia, and commanded him, saying, "Behold I know that in the reign of
my father Zippor, when the Amorites fought him, you cursed them and they were
handed over before him. And now come and curse this people, because they are Num 22:6,17
too many for us,b and 1 will do you great honor." #And Balaam said, "Behold
this has given pleasure to Balak, but he does not know that the plan of God is
not like the plan of man. Now he does not realize that the spirit that is given to Num 22:18
us is given for a time. But our ways are not straight unless God wishes it. And Num 22:8
now wait here, and I will see what the Lord may say to me this night."
And God said to himc by night, "Who are the men who have come to you?" Num 22:9
And Balaam said, "Why, LORD, do you try the human race? They cannot endure
it, because you know well what is to happen in the world, even before you
founded it. And now enlighten your servant if it be right to go forth with them."d
And he said to him, "Is it not regarding this people that I spoke to Abraham in
a vision, saying, 'Your seed will be like the stars of the heaven,' when I lifted Gen 22:17
him above the firmament and showed him the arrangements of all the stars?6 And
I demanded his son as a holocaust. And he brought him to be placed on the altar,
but I gave him back to his father and, because he did not refuse, his offering was
acceptable before me,f and on account of his blood8 I chose them.And now enlighten your servant if it be right to go forth with them."d
And he said to him, "Is it not regarding this people that I spoke to Abraham in
a vision, saying, 'Your seed will be like the stars of the heaven,' when I lifted Gen 22:17
him above the firmament and showed him the arrangements of all the stars?6 And
I demanded his son as a holocaust. And he brought him to be placed on the altar,
but I gave him back to his father and, because he did not refuse, his offering was
acceptable before me,f and on account of his blood8 I chose them. And then I
said to the angels who work secretly, 'Did I not say regarding 'his, "/ will reveal Gen i8:n
everything I am doing to Abraham »and to Jacob his son, the third one whom I
called11 firstborn, who, when he was wrestling in the dust with the angel who was Gen 32:24-27
in charge of hymns, would not let him go until he blessed him." ' And do you
propose to go forth with them to curse whom I have chosen? But if you curse Num 22:12
them, who will be there to bless you?"
And Balaam arose in the morning and said, "Be on your way, because God1 Num 22:13-15
does not wish me to come with you." And they set out and told Balak what was
said by Balaam. And Balak again sent other men to Balaam, saying, "Behold I
know that when you offer holocausts to God, God will be reconciled with men. And now ask even still more from your LORD and beg with as many holocausts
as he wishes. But if he should be propitiated regarding my evil deeds, you will
have your reward and God will receive his offerings." •And Balaam said to them,
"Behold the son of Zippor is looking aroundj and does not recognize that he
dwells among the dead.k And now wait here this night, and I will see what God Num 22:19-21. may say to me." And God said to him, "Go with them, and your way will be a 8
stumbling block, and that Balak will go to ruin." He rose in the morning and set
out with them. *And his she-ass came by way of the wilderness and saw an angel Num 22.27.sywn, "parched earth." See g. Lit. "Sinai" (Syna oxSina), which we emend
Isa 25:5 and 32:2. to sinu, lit. "in the bosom of this place."
e. b.Sanh 37b says that the earth did not open
its mouth from when it swallowed Abel's blood 17 a. Lit. "was born" (Gk. egennethi), probably
until it swallowed up Korah. a mistake for egenithi; see also 30:5; 51:6.

may say to me." And God said to him, "Go with them, and your way will be a 8
stumbling block, and that Balak will go to ruin." He rose in the morning and set
out with them. *And his she-ass came by way of the wilderness and saw an angel Num 22.27. and lay down beneath him.1 And hem opened Balaam's eyes, and he saw the angel 3,f 35
and adored him on the ground. And the angel said to him, "Hurry and be gone,
because whatever you say will come to pass for him."
And he" came into the land of Moab and built an altar and offered sacrifices. Num 23:2
18 a. The name of the river Pernor in Num 22:5 also b.Yoma 5a and Mekilta d'R. Shimon 4. has been rendered as "interpreter" because of the h. Lit. "he called" (vocavit); but in this context
root ptrlpSr. See also Josephus' Ant 4.6.2 §104. and in the light of Jub 19:29, where Jacob is called
b. Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX and the Lu- God's firstborn son, we have emended to "I called"
cianic MSS of Num 22:8 in reading "for us" (Heb. (vocavi). mmnw) rather than the MT's "for me" (mmny). i. See the LXX of Num 22:13. c. The phrase "to him" agrees with the LXX j. Var. "foolish" (insipiens) rather than inspi-
of Num 22:9 rather than the MT. ciens. d. Balaam's reply to God here puts him in a k. Korah does not recognize that the idols are
more favorable light than he receives in the OT. dead. e. In TAb 10, Abraham is given a world tour 1. Balaam. in a heavenly chariot. m. The angel, or God as in Num 22:31. f. See 32:2-4; 40:2; Josephus' Ant 1.13.2-4 n. Presumably Balaam. See Num 23:2, where
§§225-36, and TarJon of Gen 22:1 for similar the MT says that Balaam and Balak sacrificed
presentations of the sacrifice of Isaac. together while the LXX and Philo have Balak
g. Even though Isaac's blood was not really sacrifice alone. Josephus {Ant 4.6.4 §113) and Ps-
shed, it is still seen as having atoning value; see Philo have Balaam sacrifice alone.And when he saw part of the people, the spirit of God did not abide in him. ° And Num 22:41
;
he took up his discourse and said, "Behold Balak brought me to the mountain, 23:6f
saying, Come, run into the firep of those men.' What fire the waters will not
extinguish, I cannot resist; but the fire that consumes water, who will resist that?"
And he said to him, "It is easier to take away the foundations and the topmost
part of the earthq and to extinguish the light of the sun and to darken the light of
the moon than for anyone to uproot the planting of the Most Powerful or to destroy
his vine." And her did not know that his consciousness was expanded so as to
hasten his own destruction. '"For behold I see the heritage that the Most Powerful Num 24:2
has shown me by night. And behold the days will come, and Moab will be amazed
at what is happening to it because Balak wished to persuade the Most Powerful
with gifts and to buy a decision with money. Should you not have asked about
what he sent upon Pharaoh and his land because he wished to reduce them to
slavery? Behold an overshadowing5 and highly desirable vine, and who will be
jealous because it does not wither? But if anyone says to himself that the Most
Powerful has labored in vain or has chosen them to no purpose, behold now I see
the salvation and liberation that will come upon them. I am restrained in my
speech and cannot say what I see with my eyes, because there is little left of the
holy spirit that abides in me. For I know that, because I have been persuaded by
Balak, I have lessened the time of my life. *And behold my remaining hour. Behold again I see the heritage and the dwelling place1 of this people. And its
light will shine more brilliantly than the splendor of lightning, and its course will
be swifter than that of an arrow. And the time will come and Moab will groan,
and those serving Chemosh" who have plotted these things against them will be
made weak.And its
light will shine more brilliantly than the splendor of lightning, and its course will
be swifter than that of an arrow. And the time will come and Moab will groan,
and those serving Chemosh" who have plotted these things against them will be
made weak. But I will gnash my teeth, because I have been led astray and have
transgressed what was said to me by night. And my prophecy will remain public,
and my words will live on. And the wise and understanding will remember my
words that, when I cursed, I perished, but though I blessed, I was not blessed."
On saying these words he grew silent. And Balak said, "Your God has cheated Num24iof
you of many gifts from me."
And then Balaam said to him, "Come and let us plan what you should do to Num3ii6
them. Pick out the beautiful women who are among us and in Midian, and station Num 25
them naked and adorned with gold and precious stones before them.v And when
they see them and lie with them, they will sin against their LORD and fall into
your hands; for otherwise you cannot fight against them." »And on saying this, Nam 24:25; 251
Balaam turned away and returned to his place. And afterward the people were
seduced after the daughters of Moab. For Balak did everything that Balaam had
showed him. Moses' farewell, prayer, and death
19 And in that time Moses killed the nations and gave half their spoils to the Num 31:27
people. And he began declaring to them the words of the Law that God had Deut3ii6-i8
spoken to them on Horeb. *And he spoke to them, saying,3 "Behold I am to
sleep with my fathers and will go to my people. But I know that you will rise up
and forsake the words established for you through me, and God will be angry at
0. For the view that Balaam prophesied by the u. The MSS have Cham, which must be emended
spirit of God, see the LXX of Num 23:6 (also Num to Chamos in the light of Num 21:29. 24:2). v. Josephus (Ant 4.6.6 §129) says, "Take of
p. There may be a play on the Heb.may say to me." And God said to him, "Go with them, and your way will be a 8
stumbling block, and that Balak will go to ruin." He rose in the morning and set
out with them. *And his she-ass came by way of the wilderness and saw an angel Num 22.27. and lay down beneath him.1 And hem opened Balaam's eyes, and he saw the angel 3,f 35
and adored him on the ground. And the angel said to him, "Hurry and be gone,
because whatever you say will come to pass for him."
And he" came into the land of Moab and built an altar and offered sacrifices. Num 23:2
18 a. The name of the river Pernor in Num 22:5 also b.Yoma 5a and Mekilta d'R. Shimon 4. has been rendered as "interpreter" because of the h. Lit. "he called" (vocavit); but in this context
root ptrlpSr. See also Josephus' Ant 4.6.2 §104. and in the light of Jub 19:29, where Jacob is called
b. Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX and the Lu- God's firstborn son, we have emended to "I called"
cianic MSS of Num 22:8 in reading "for us" (Heb. (vocavi). mmnw) rather than the MT's "for me" (mmny). i. See the LXX of Num 22:13. c. The phrase "to him" agrees with the LXX j. Var. "foolish" (insipiens) rather than inspi-
of Num 22:9 rather than the MT. ciens. d. Balaam's reply to God here puts him in a k. Korah does not recognize that the idols are
more favorable light than he receives in the OT. dead. e. In TAb 10, Abraham is given a world tour 1. Balaam. in a heavenly chariot. m. The angel, or God as in Num 22:31. f. See 32:2-4; 40:2; Josephus' Ant 1.13.2-4 n. Presumably Balaam. See Num 23:2, where
§§225-36, and TarJon of Gen 22:1 for similar the MT says that Balaam and Balak sacrificed
presentations of the sacrifice of Isaac. together while the LXX and Philo have Balak
g. Even though Isaac's blood was not really sacrifice alone. Josephus {Ant 4.6.4 §113) and Ps-
shed, it is still seen as having atoning value; see Philo have Balaam sacrifice alone.

Josephus (Ant 4.6.6 §129) says, "Take of
p. There may be a play on the Heb. words ywr, your daughters those who are comeliest and most
"fire," and *rh. "curse." capable of constraining and conquering the chastity
q. Lit. "their" (eorum), for which we read of their beholders by reason of their beauty, deck
terre. out their charms to add to their comeliness ..."
r. Balaam. s. Or "overshadowed," i.e. protected. 19 a. For other testaments of Moses, see Deut
t. Lit. "of the dissolution," which probably 31-34, Jub 1, AsMos, and Josephus' Ant 4.7.44-
reflects a confusion between the meanings of Gk. 48 §§302-26. katalysis.you and abandon you and depart from your land. And he will bring upon you
those who hate you, and they will rule over you, but not forever, because he will
remember the covenant that he established with your fathers. *But then you and
your sons and all your generations will rise up after you and lament the day of
my death and say in their heart, 'Who will give us another5 shepherd like Moses
or such a judge for the sons of Israel to pray always for our sins and to be heard
for our iniquities?'c -Now / call to witness against you today heaven and earth Deui4:26; 32:1
(for heaven will hear this, and earth will know it with its ears) that God has
revealed the end of the world so that he might establish his statutesd with you and
kindle among you an eternal light.c And you will remember, you wicked ones;
for when I spoke to you, you answered saying, "All that God has said to us, we Deut 5:27
will do and hear. But if we transgress or grow corrupt in our ways, you will
recall this as a witness against us, and he will cut us off.' • But know that you Ps 10* 78:25;
have eaten the bread of angels for forty years. And now behold I bless your tribes Deut 33
before my end comes. But you, acknowledge my toil that I have toiled for you
from the time you went up from the land of Egypt."
On his saying these words, God spoke to him a third time, saying, "Behold Deut3ii6
you are going forth to sleep with your fathers. But this people will rise up and
not seekf me, and they will forget my Law, by which I have enlightened them,
and I will abandon their seed for a time. -Now I will show you the land before Deut 32:52; 34:4
you die, but you will not enter it in this age lest you see the graven images with
which this people will start to be deceived and led off the path.81 will show you
the place" where they will serve me for 740 years. And after this it will be turned
over into the hands of their enemies, and they will destroy it, and foreigners will
encircle it.-Now I will show you the land before Deut 32:52; 34:4
you die, but you will not enter it in this age lest you see the graven images with
which this people will start to be deceived and led off the path.81 will show you
the place" where they will serve me for 740 years. And after this it will be turned
over into the hands of their enemies, and they will destroy it, and foreigners will
encircle it. And it will be on that day as it was on the day I smashed the tablets Ex 32:19; zech
of the covenant that I drew up for you on Horeb; and when they sinned, what 8:19
was written on them flew away. Now that day was the seventeenth day of the
fourth month."'
And Moses ascended Mount Abarim* as God had commanded him, and he Deut 32:49;
prayed saying, "Behold I have completed my lifetime; 1 have completed 120 Num 27:12
years. And now I ask, May your mercy with your people and your pity with your
heritage, LORD, be established; and may your long-suffering in your placek be
upon the chosen race because you have loved them before all others. #And you Ex3i-6
know that / was a shepherd. And when I fed the flock in the wilderness, I brought
them to your mountain Horeb and then / first saw your angel on fire from the
bush. But you called me from the bush, and / was afraid and turned my face. And you sent me to them and you freed them from Egypt, but their enemies you
drowned in the water. And you gave them the Law and statutes in which they
might live and enter as sons of men. For who is the man who has not sinned !Kgs8:46
against you? And unless your patience abides, how would your heritage be
established, if you were not merciful to them? Or who will yet be bom without
sin? Now you will correct them for a time, but not in anger."
Then the Lord showed him the land and all that is in it and said, "This is the Deut 34:1,4
land that I will give to my people." And he showed him the place from which
the clouds draw up water to water the whole earth, and the place from which the
b. Lit.Josephus (Ant 4.6.6 §129) says, "Take of
p. There may be a play on the Heb. words ywr, your daughters those who are comeliest and most
"fire," and *rh. "curse." capable of constraining and conquering the chastity
q. Lit. "their" (eorum), for which we read of their beholders by reason of their beauty, deck
terre. out their charms to add to their comeliness ..."
r. Balaam. s. Or "overshadowed," i.e. protected. 19 a. For other testaments of Moses, see Deut
t. Lit. "of the dissolution," which probably 31-34, Jub 1, AsMos, and Josephus' Ant 4.7.44-
reflects a confusion between the meanings of Gk. 48 §§302-26. katalysis.

Now you will correct them for a time, but not in anger."
Then the Lord showed him the land and all that is in it and said, "This is the Deut 34:1,4
land that I will give to my people." And he showed him the place from which
the clouds draw up water to water the whole earth, and the place from which the
b. Lit. "one." There may have been an error which the Israelites would be led astray. at the level of Heb., where yhd (one) was read as h. Presumably, the Temple in Jerusalem. *hr (another). i. m.Ta'an 4:6 has been taken as evidence that
c. See AsMos 11:11, 17; 12:3, for a similar the second Temple was destroyed on the 17th of
description of Moses. For a similar description of Tammuz, A.D. 70, but this is contrary to the witness
Jeremiah see 2Mac 15:14 and 2Bar 2:2. of Josephus and involves many problems. It cannot
d. Lit. "heights" (superexcelsa) as in 9:8. be taken as proof that Ps-Philo was composed after
e. For the Law as lamp see 2Bar 17:4 and 59:2. A.D. 70. f. Var. "and seek"; but the sense demands a j. The variant "Horeb" is certainly wrong in
negative. the light of Deut 32:49. Perhaps "Nebo" is to be
g. Ps-Philo is unique in stating that the reason read. why Moses was not allowed to enter the promised k. Heaven, or possibly the Temple or Israel. land was to keep him from seeing the idols byriver takes its water, and the land of Egypt,1 and the place in the firmament from
which only the holy land"1 drinks. And he showed him the place from which the
manna rained upon the people, even unto the paths of paradise. And he showed
him the measurements of the sanctuary and the number of sacrifices and the signs
by which they are to interpret the heaven. And he said, "These are what are
n prohibited for the human race because they have sinned against me.n »And now
your staff with which these signs were performed will be a witness between me
and my people. And when they sin, I will be angry with them but I will recall
your staff and spare them in accord with my mercy. And your staff will be before
me as a reminder all the days, and it will be like the bow with which I established
my covenant with Noah when he went forth from the ark, saying, 1 will place Gen 9:13,15
my bow in the cloud, and it will be for a sign between me and men that never
12 again will the flood water cover all the earth.' «Now I will take you from here
and glorify you with your fathers, and I will give you rest in your slumber and
bury you in peace. And all the angels will mourn over you, and the heavenly
hosts will be saddened. But neither angel0 nor man will know your tomb in which Dem 34:6
you are to be buried until I visit the world. And I will raise up you and your
fathers from the land of Egyptp in which you sleep and you will come together
13 and dwell in the immortal dwelling place that is not subject to time. *But this
heavenq will be before me like a fleeting cloud and passing like yesterday.And I will raise up you and your
fathers from the land of Egyptp in which you sleep and you will come together
13 and dwell in the immortal dwelling place that is not subject to time. *But this
heavenq will be before me like a fleeting cloud and passing like yesterday. And
when the time draws near to visit the world, I will command the years and order
the times and they will be shortened/ and the stars will hasten and the light of
the sun will hurry to fall and the light of the moon will not remain; for I will
hurry to raise up you who are sleeping in order that all who can live may dwell
in the place of sanctification I showed you."
14 And Moses said, "If I can make another request of you, LORD; according to
your great mercy be not angry with me, but show me what amount of time has
15 passed and how much remains." *And he said to him, "There is honey, the
topmost peak,5 the fullness of a moment, and the drop of a cup; and time has
fulfilled all things. For four and a half have passed, and two and a half remain."
16 And when Moses heard this, he was filled with understanding and his appearance Deut 34:5f. became glorious; and he died in glory according to the word of the Lord, and he
buried him as he had promised him. And the angels mourned at his death, and
the lightnings and the torches and the arrows went all together before him. And
in that day the hymn of the heavenly hosts was not sung because of the passing
of Moses, nor was there such a day from the one on which the LORD made man
upon the earth, nor shall there be such forever, that the hymn of the angels should
stop on account of men; because he loved him very much. And he buried him
with his own hands on a high place and in the light of all the world."
Joshua and the division of the land
1 20 And in that time God established his covenant with Joshua the son of Nun, Dem 31:23
who was left from the men who had spied out the land; for the lot went forth
I. The Samaritan Pentateuch of Deut 34:1 also r.Now you will correct them for a time, but not in anger."
Then the Lord showed him the land and all that is in it and said, "This is the Deut 34:1,4
land that I will give to my people." And he showed him the place from which
the clouds draw up water to water the whole earth, and the place from which the
b. Lit. "one." There may have been an error which the Israelites would be led astray. at the level of Heb., where yhd (one) was read as h. Presumably, the Temple in Jerusalem. *hr (another). i. m.Ta'an 4:6 has been taken as evidence that
c. See AsMos 11:11, 17; 12:3, for a similar the second Temple was destroyed on the 17th of
description of Moses. For a similar description of Tammuz, A.D. 70, but this is contrary to the witness
Jeremiah see 2Mac 15:14 and 2Bar 2:2. of Josephus and involves many problems. It cannot
d. Lit. "heights" (superexcelsa) as in 9:8. be taken as proof that Ps-Philo was composed after
e. For the Law as lamp see 2Bar 17:4 and 59:2. A.D. 70. f. Var. "and seek"; but the sense demands a j. The variant "Horeb" is certainly wrong in
negative. the light of Deut 32:49. Perhaps "Nebo" is to be
g. Ps-Philo is unique in stating that the reason read. why Moses was not allowed to enter the promised k. Heaven, or possibly the Temple or Israel. land was to keep him from seeing the idols by

And he buried him
with his own hands on a high place and in the light of all the world."
Joshua and the division of the land
1 20 And in that time God established his covenant with Joshua the son of Nun, Dem 31:23
who was left from the men who had spied out the land; for the lot went forth
I. The Samaritan Pentateuch of Deut 34:1 also r. For God's shortening of the days on account
mentions the land of Egypt. of the elect, see 2Bar 20:1; 54:1; 83:1 as well as
m. For the expression "the holy land" see Zech Mk 13:20 (Mt 24:22). 2:12; 2Bar 63:10; 4Ezra 13:48; 2Mac 1:7. s. The Lat. Is tic met, apex magnus might be
n. Lit. "themselves" (sibi)', but since God is emended to Stigma et apex manus ("An instant,
the speaker, "me" seems better. Confusion be­ the topmost part of a hand") on the basis of 4Ezra
tween Heb. ly (against me) and /vv (against them, 4:48-50 and 6:9f. in a collective sense) is likely. t. What units are meant or what system of
o. According to Philo's Vita Mosis 2:291, Moses calculation is implied is not clear. See 28:8. was buried by immortal powers (i.e. angels). u. That Moses' death took place in public and
p. The reference is to those Israelites who died that God buried him is also found in Josephus' Ant
in the land of Egypt, outside the boundaries of the 4.8.48 §326 and AsMos 1:15. There may be
holy land. conscious opposition to the view that Moses did
^ q. Perhaps read "age" (seculum) rather than not really die. "heaven" (celum).upon them that they should not see the land because they had spoken badly about
it, and on account of this that generation died. •Then God said to Joshua the son Josh 11-3
of Nun, "Why do you mourn and why do you hope in vain that Moses yet lives? And now you wait to no purpose, because Moses is dead. Take his garments of
wisdom and clothe yourself, and with his belt of knowledge gird your loins, and
you will be changed and become another man. Did I not speak on your behalf to isam 10:6
Moses my servant, saying, This one will lead my people after you, and into his Deut 3:28
hand I will deliver the kings of the Amorites'?"
And Joshua took the garments of wisdom and clothed himself and girded his
loins with the belt of understanding. And when he clothed himself with it, his
mind was afire and his spirit was moved, and he said to the people, "Behold the Num 1*35
first generation has died in the wilderness because they have spoken against their
God. And behold now, all you leaders, know today that if you proceed in the
ways of your God, your paths will be made straight. »But if you do not heed his
voice and you become like your fathers, your affairs will be spoiled and you
yourselves will be crushed and your name will perish from the earth. And where
will the words be that God spoke to your fathers? For even if the gentiles say,
'Perhaps God has failed, because he has not freed his people'—nevertheless they
will recognize that he has not chosen for himself other peoples and done great
wonders with them, then they will understand that the Most Powerful does not
respect persons; but because you sin through pride, so he took away his power
from you and subdued you.And where
will the words be that God spoke to your fathers? For even if the gentiles say,
'Perhaps God has failed, because he has not freed his people'—nevertheless they
will recognize that he has not chosen for himself other peoples and done great
wonders with them, then they will understand that the Most Powerful does not
respect persons; but because you sin through pride, so he took away his power
from you and subdued you. And now rise up and set your heart to walk in the
ways of your LORD, and he will guide you." #And the people said to him, Num 1126
"Behold we know today what Eldad and Modad prophesied in the days of Moses,
saying, 'After Moses goes to rest, the leadership of Moses will be given over to
Joshua the son of Nun.' And Moses was not jealous but rejoiced when he heard
them. And from then on all the people believed that you would exercise leadership
over them and divide up the land among them in peace. And now even if there Josh 1:6.9
is conflict,8 be strong and act manfully, because you alone are ruler in Israel."
On hearing these words Joshua decided to send spies into Jericho. And he Josh 2:1
summoned Kenaz and Seeniamias,b his brother, the two sons of Caleb, and he
said to them, "I and your father were sent by Moses in the wilderness, and we Josh 1*6-8
went up with ten other men. And they came back and spoke badly about the land
and discouraged the heart of the people, and they and the heart of the people
with them were discouraged. But I and your father alone fulfilled the word of the
Lord, and behold we are alive today. And now I will send you to spy out the
land of Jericho. Imitate your father, and you also will live." *And they went up
and spied out the city. And when they brought back word, the people went up Josh 6:24
and attacked the city and burned it with fire. And after Moses died, the manna stopped descending upon the sons of Israel, Josh 5:12
and then they began to eat from the fruits of the land.And he buried him
with his own hands on a high place and in the light of all the world."
Joshua and the division of the land
1 20 And in that time God established his covenant with Joshua the son of Nun, Dem 31:23
who was left from the men who had spied out the land; for the lot went forth
I. The Samaritan Pentateuch of Deut 34:1 also r. For God's shortening of the days on account
mentions the land of Egypt. of the elect, see 2Bar 20:1; 54:1; 83:1 as well as
m. For the expression "the holy land" see Zech Mk 13:20 (Mt 24:22). 2:12; 2Bar 63:10; 4Ezra 13:48; 2Mac 1:7. s. The Lat. Is tic met, apex magnus might be
n. Lit. "themselves" (sibi)', but since God is emended to Stigma et apex manus ("An instant,
the speaker, "me" seems better. Confusion be­ the topmost part of a hand") on the basis of 4Ezra
tween Heb. ly (against me) and /vv (against them, 4:48-50 and 6:9f. in a collective sense) is likely. t. What units are meant or what system of
o. According to Philo's Vita Mosis 2:291, Moses calculation is implied is not clear. See 28:8. was buried by immortal powers (i.e. angels). u. That Moses' death took place in public and
p. The reference is to those Israelites who died that God buried him is also found in Josephus' Ant
in the land of Egypt, outside the boundaries of the 4.8.48 §326 and AsMos 1:15. There may be
holy land. conscious opposition to the view that Moses did
^ q. Perhaps read "age" (seculum) rather than not really die. "heaven" (celum).

And when they brought back word, the people went up Josh 6:24
and attacked the city and burned it with fire. And after Moses died, the manna stopped descending upon the sons of Israel, Josh 5:12
and then they began to eat from the fruits of the land. And these are the three
things that God gave to his people on account of three persons; that is, the well
of the water of Marah for Miriam and the pillar of cloud for Aaron and the manna
for Moses. And when these came to their end, these three things were taken away
from them. Now the people and Joshua fought against the Amorites. And they prevailed in
battle against their enemies all the days of Joshua, and thirty-ninec kings who Josh 12:7-24
dwelt in the land were destroyed. And Joshua gave the land to the people by lot, Josh 13-23
to each tribe according to the lots, as it had been commanded him. •Then Caleb Josh i4:6.8f ,13
approached him and said, "You know that the two of us were sent by lot from
Moses to go with the spies, and because we fulfilled the word of the LORD, behold
we are alive today. And now, if it is acceptable in your eyes, let there be given
20 a. Var. "even if you will waver." On Joshua's IChr 2:42f. wavering see AsMos 11:9-19; 12:3. c. Var. "thirty-eight." The MT of Josh 12:24
b. Perhaps taken over from Mesha the son of has thirty-one, while the LXX has twenty-nine. Caleb or Shema the great-grandson of Caleb; seeby lot to Kenaz my son the territory of the three towers. "d And Joshua blessed
him, and so he did. The prayer of Joshua and the cult at Gilgal
21 And when Joshua had grown old and was advanced in days, God said to Josh i3:i(23:i)
him, ' 'Behold you are old and advanced in days; and there is very much land,
and there is no one to divide it up by lot. And after your departure this people
will be intermingled with those inhabiting the land, and they will be seduced after Dem 3116
strange gods, and I will abandon them as I testified in my speech to Moses. But
you bear witness to them before you die."
And Joshua said, "You above all know, LORD, what moves the heart of the
sea before it rages, and you have searched out the constellations and numbered
the stars and regulated the rain; you know the number8 of all generations before
they are born. And now, LORD, give to your people a wise heart and a prudent iKgs 3:9
mind; and when you will give those orders to your heritage, they will not sin
against you and you will not be angry at them. #Are not these the words that I
spoke before you, LORD, when Achan stole from the things under the ban and the Josh 7.1
people were delivered up before you, and I prayed before you and said, 4Would
it not have been better for us, LORD, if we had died in the Red Sea, where you
drowned our enemies, or if we had died in the wilderness like our fathers, than
to be delivered into the hands of the Amorites so as to be destroyed forever?' Josh 7.7
And the word concerns us: 4No evil will befall us.' For even if our goal be taken
away in death, you who are before all ages and after all ages still live, even if
man, who cannot place one generation before another, says, 4God has destroyed
the people whom he has chosen for himself.' And behold we will be in Sheol but
you will make your word alive. And now let the fullness of your mercy sustain
your people and choose for your heritage a man so that he and his offspring will
rule your people.#Are not these the words that I
spoke before you, LORD, when Achan stole from the things under the ban and the Josh 7.1
people were delivered up before you, and I prayed before you and said, 4Would
it not have been better for us, LORD, if we had died in the Red Sea, where you
drowned our enemies, or if we had died in the wilderness like our fathers, than
to be delivered into the hands of the Amorites so as to be destroyed forever?' Josh 7.7
And the word concerns us: 4No evil will befall us.' For even if our goal be taken
away in death, you who are before all ages and after all ages still live, even if
man, who cannot place one generation before another, says, 4God has destroyed
the people whom he has chosen for himself.' And behold we will be in Sheol but
you will make your word alive. And now let the fullness of your mercy sustain
your people and choose for your heritage a man so that he and his offspring will
rule your people. *Did not our father Jacob speak about him, saying, 'A ruler will Gen 49:10
not be lacking from Judah, nor a leader from his loins'? And now confirm those
words spoken beforehand so that the nations of the earth and the tribes of the
world may learn that you are eternal." «And he added, saying, 44LORD, behold
the days will come when the house of Israel will be like a brooding dove who on
placing her young in a nest does not leave or forget her place. So also these,
having repented of their deeds, will hopeb for the salvation that is to be born from
them."c
And Joshua went down to Gilgal and built an altar with very large stones and Josh 8:30-35
did not lift an iron tool to them as Moses had commanded. And he set up large
stones on Mount Ebald and whitened them and wrote on them very plainly the
words of the Law. And he gathered all the people together and read out loud
before them all the words of the Law. • And he came down with them and offered Josh 8:31
peace offerings on the altar; and all sang many praises.And when they brought back word, the people went up Josh 6:24
and attacked the city and burned it with fire. And after Moses died, the manna stopped descending upon the sons of Israel, Josh 5:12
and then they began to eat from the fruits of the land. And these are the three
things that God gave to his people on account of three persons; that is, the well
of the water of Marah for Miriam and the pillar of cloud for Aaron and the manna
for Moses. And when these came to their end, these three things were taken away
from them. Now the people and Joshua fought against the Amorites. And they prevailed in
battle against their enemies all the days of Joshua, and thirty-ninec kings who Josh 12:7-24
dwelt in the land were destroyed. And Joshua gave the land to the people by lot, Josh 13-23
to each tribe according to the lots, as it had been commanded him. •Then Caleb Josh i4:6.8f ,13
approached him and said, "You know that the two of us were sent by lot from
Moses to go with the spies, and because we fulfilled the word of the LORD, behold
we are alive today. And now, if it is acceptable in your eyes, let there be given
20 a. Var. "even if you will waver." On Joshua's IChr 2:42f. wavering see AsMos 11:9-19; 12:3. c. Var. "thirty-eight." The MT of Josh 12:24
b. Perhaps taken over from Mesha the son of has thirty-one, while the LXX has twenty-nine. Caleb or Shema the great-grandson of Caleb; see

And he gathered all the people together and read out loud
before them all the words of the Law. • And he came down with them and offered Josh 8:31
peace offerings on the altar; and all sang many praises. And they took the ark of
the covenant of the LORD out of the tent of meeting with timbrels and dances and Ps 150:3-5
harps and lyres and lutes and every good-sounding instrument. *And the priests
and Levites were going before the ark and rejoicing in song, and they put the ark
in front of the altar. And they offered very many peace offerings upon it, and all Josh 8:3i
the house of Israel sang together in a loud voice saying, 4'Behold our LORD has
fulfilled what he said to our fathers: 'To your seed I will give the land in which Dem ii:9
you may dwell, a land flowing with milk and honey.' And behold he led us into
the land of our enemies and delivered them broken in spirit before us, and he is
d. Var. "of the tribe of towers," which is also as censum. obscure. There may be some allusion to Hebron b. Lit. "capture by attack" (expugnabunt), which
and the three sons of Anak (Judg 1:20), where the we have emended to expectabunt. Heb. gdl (great one) and mgdl (tower) have been c. The point seems to be that Israel opposes the
confused. leaders given to it by God. d. Josh 8:33 mentions both Mount Gerizim and
21 a. Lit. "mind" (sensum), which we have read Mount Ebal, but Ps-Philo mentions only the latter.the God who sent word to our fathers in the secret dwelling places of souls,
saying, 'Behold the LORD has done everything that he has said to us/ And truly
now we know that God has established every word of his Law that he spoke to
us on Horeb. And if our heart keeps to his ways, it will be good for us and for
10 our sons after us." *And Joshua blessed them and said, "The LORD grant that
your heart may abide in him all the days and you do not depart from his name. May the covenant of the LORD remain with you and not be broken, but may there
be built among you a dwelling place for God, as he said when he sent you into
his inheritance with joy and gladness."
The altar across the Jordan. Gilgal and Shiloh
1 22 And after these events when Joshua and all Israel heard that the sons of Josh 22:10-12
Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh who dwelt around
the Jordan had built an altar there* and were offering sacrificesb on it and had
made priests for the sanctuary, all the people were very much disturbed* and came
2 to them to Shiloh.* »And Joshua and all the elders said to them, "What are these Josh 22:15-20
deeds that are done among you, when we have not even yet settled in our land? Are not these the words that Moses spoke to you in the wilderness, saying,
'Beware that on entering your land you grow corrupt in your own deeds and
destroy all this people'? And now why have our enemies abounded unless it is
because you have corrupted your ways and made all this trouble? And so those
gathered against us will crush us."
3 And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh Josh 22:2i,24f
said to Joshua and to all the people of Israel, "Behold now God has counted our
the fruit of the womb of men and set up a light that they may see what is in
darkness, because he himself knows what are in the hidden places of the abyss
and the light abides with him.And now why have our enemies abounded unless it is
because you have corrupted your ways and made all this trouble? And so those
gathered against us will crush us."
3 And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh Josh 22:2i,24f
said to Joshua and to all the people of Israel, "Behold now God has counted our
the fruit of the womb of men and set up a light that they may see what is in
darkness, because he himself knows what are in the hidden places of the abyss
and the light abides with him. Now the LORD God of our fathers knows that none Dan 2:22
of us nor we ourselves have done this act out of wickedness but rather for our
posterity's sake so that their heart may not be separated from the LORD our God
and that they may not say to us, 'Behold our brothers who are across the Jordan
have an altar and offer sacrifice on it, but we in this place do not have an altar
and are far from the LORD our God; for our God is so far from our ways that we
4 may not serve him.' #And on saying these words, we said among ourselves, 'Let
us make an altar for ourselves so that there may be zeal among us for seeking the
LORD.' For some of us who stand here did this. And knowing that we are your
brothers and that we stand guiltless before you, do therefore whatever is pleasing
in the eyes of the LORD."
5 And Joshua said, "Is not the LORD the King more powerful than a thousand
sacrifices? And why have you not taught your sons the words of the LORD that
you heard from us? For if your sons had been meditating upon the Law of the
LORD, their mind would not have been led astray after an altar made by hand. Or
do you not know thatf when the people were left alone for a while in the wilderness,
when Moses went up to receive the tablets, their mind was led astray and they
made idols for themselves.And he gathered all the people together and read out loud
before them all the words of the Law. • And he came down with them and offered Josh 8:31
peace offerings on the altar; and all sang many praises. And they took the ark of
the covenant of the LORD out of the tent of meeting with timbrels and dances and Ps 150:3-5
harps and lyres and lutes and every good-sounding instrument. *And the priests
and Levites were going before the ark and rejoicing in song, and they put the ark
in front of the altar. And they offered very many peace offerings upon it, and all Josh 8:3i
the house of Israel sang together in a loud voice saying, 4'Behold our LORD has
fulfilled what he said to our fathers: 'To your seed I will give the land in which Dem ii:9
you may dwell, a land flowing with milk and honey.' And behold he led us into
the land of our enemies and delivered them broken in spirit before us, and he is
d. Var. "of the tribe of towers," which is also as censum. obscure. There may be some allusion to Hebron b. Lit. "capture by attack" (expugnabunt), which
and the three sons of Anak (Judg 1:20), where the we have emended to expectabunt. Heb. gdl (great one) and mgdl (tower) have been c. The point seems to be that Israel opposes the
confused. leaders given to it by God. d. Josh 8:33 mentions both Mount Gerizim and
21 a. Lit. "mind" (sensum), which we have read Mount Ebal, but Ps-Philo mentions only the latter.

For if your sons had been meditating upon the Law of the
LORD, their mind would not have been led astray after an altar made by hand. Or
do you not know thatf when the people were left alone for a while in the wilderness,
when Moses went up to receive the tablets, their mind was led astray and they
made idols for themselves. And if the mercy of the God of our fathers had not
been their guardian, all their assemblies would have been derided and all the sins
6 of the people made public because of your foolishness. #And so now, go and dig
up the altars that you have built for yourselves, and teach your sons the Law and
have them meditate on it day and night, so that through all the days of their life josh 1*
22 a. Lit. "for themselves"; but Josh 22:10 to d. According to Josh 22:13, 15, the meeting
(there) suggests that ibi (there) should be read for takes place in the land of Gilead. sibi here. e. Lit. "cut off" (amputavit), which we have
b. The statement that they did offer sacrifices emended to computavit. contradicts Josh 22:23, 26, 28, 29. f. Lit. "when" (quando); but "that" (quoniam)
c. The Lat. conturbati sunt might also be derived seems necessary. Perhaps Gk. bote, "when," was
from turbo and translated "were gathered to­ misread for hoti, "because."
gether."the LORD may be for them a witness and a judge. And God will be a witness and
a judge between me and you and between my heart and your heart. For if you
have done this act out of cunning because you wished to destroy your brothers,
it will be avenged upon you; but if you have done it out of ignorance as you say
because of your sons, God will be merciful to you." And all the people answered,
44Amen, amen."
7 And Joshua and all the people of Israel offered a thousand rams on their behalf
for their pardon, and they prayed for them, and he sent them away in peace. They
went and destroyed the altar, and they fasted and lamented, they and their sons,
and they prayed saying, "God of our fathers and you who know beforehand the
heart of all men, you know that our ways were not undertaken out of wickedness
before you; we have not strayed from your ways but all of us serve you, for we
are the works of your hands. Now have mercy on your covenant with the sons of
your servants."
8 And after this Joshua went up to Gilgal and took up the tent of meeting of the
LORD and the ark of the covenant and all its vessels, and he took them8 up to
Shiloh and set up the Urim and Thummim there. And then Eleazar the priest was Ex 28:30
ministering at the altar. All who came from the people came together and sought
the LORD; he taught them with the Urim, for with this it was revealed to them. Now at the new altar that was in Gilgal Joshua had decreed even unto this dayh
9 what holocausts would be offered every year by the sons of Israel. -For until the
house of the LORD was built in Jerusalem1 and sacrifice offered on the new altar,
the people were not prohibited from offering sacrifice there, because the Thummim
and Urim revealed all things in Shiloh. And until the ark was placed in the
sanctuary of the LORD by Solomon, they were offering sacrifice there until that
day. Now Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest was serving in Shiloh.And until the ark was placed in the
sanctuary of the LORD by Solomon, they were offering sacrifice there until that
day. Now Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest was serving in Shiloh. The covenant of Joshua
1 23 Now Joshua the son of Nun, being a mighty man, organized the people and Josh i9:si
divided up the land among them. And while there were still enemies of Israel
upon the land, the days of Joshua drew near for him to die. And he sent and
summoned all Israel in all their land, along with women and children, and he said Josh 23:2
to them, 4'Gather before the ark of the covenant8 of the LORD in Shiloh,b and I
2 will establish a covenant with you before I die." #And on the sixteenth day of
the third monthc all the people along with women and children gathered together josh 24:if. before the Lord in Shiloh, and Joshua said to them, "Hear, O Israel. Behold I Deut 6:4
am establishing with you a covenant of this Law that the LORD established for
your fathers on Horeb. And so wait here this night and see what God will say to Num 22:19
3 me on your behalf." #And while the people were waiting that night, the LORD
appeared to Joshua in a dream vision and said to him, 44 According to these words
I will speak to this people."
4 And Joshua rose up in the morning and gathered all the people and said to josh 24:2
them, 44The LORD says this: 'There was one rock from which I quarried out your isa 5i:if. father. And the cutting of that rock bore two men whose names are Abraham and
Nahor, and out of the chiseling of that place were born two women whose names
are Sarah and Melcha, and they lived together across the river. And Abraham josh 24:2
5 took Sarah as a wife, and Nahor took Melcha. »And when all those inhabiting the 001111:29
land were being led astray after their own devices, Abraham believed in me and
g. Lit. "it" (earn); but the sense requires a 23 a. Lit. "the ark and the covenant" (arce et
plural (ea). testamenti)', originally "the ark of the covenant"
h.For if your sons had been meditating upon the Law of the
LORD, their mind would not have been led astray after an altar made by hand. Or
do you not know thatf when the people were left alone for a while in the wilderness,
when Moses went up to receive the tablets, their mind was led astray and they
made idols for themselves. And if the mercy of the God of our fathers had not
been their guardian, all their assemblies would have been derided and all the sins
6 of the people made public because of your foolishness. #And so now, go and dig
up the altars that you have built for yourselves, and teach your sons the Law and
have them meditate on it day and night, so that through all the days of their life josh 1*
22 a. Lit. "for themselves"; but Josh 22:10 to d. According to Josh 22:13, 15, the meeting
(there) suggests that ibi (there) should be read for takes place in the land of Gilead. sibi here. e. Lit. "cut off" (amputavit), which we have
b. The statement that they did offer sacrifices emended to computavit. contradicts Josh 22:23, 26, 28, 29. f. Lit. "when" (quando); but "that" (quoniam)
c. The Lat. conturbati sunt might also be derived seems necessary. Perhaps Gk. bote, "when," was
from turbo and translated "were gathered to­ misread for hoti, "because."
gether."

"the ark and the covenant" (arce et
plural (ea). testamenti)', originally "the ark of the covenant"
h. The phrase "even unto this day" implies that (arce testamenti). when the author wrote, sacrifices were still being b. Ps-Philo along with the LXX of Josh 24:1
offered in the Temple (i.e. before A.D. 70). place the covenant renewal ceremony at Shiloh,
i. This is the only explicit mention of Jerusalem while the MT has it at Shechem. in all of Ps-Philo. c. Jub 1:1; 15:1; 44:1-4 say that Pentecost must
be observed on the fifteenth day of the third month.was not led astray with them. And I rescued him from the flame and look him Josh 24:3
and brought him over all the land of Canaan and said to him in a vision, "To Gen nn
your seed I will give this land" And that man said to me, "Behold now you Gen 15:2-5
have given me a wife, and she is sterile. And how will I have offspring from that
6 rock of mine that is closed up?" *And I said to him, "Bring me a three-year-old Gen i5:9i
calf and a three-year-old she-goat and a three-year-old ram, a turtledove, and a
dove." And he brought them as I commanded him. Now I sent upon him a deep Gen 15:12
sleep and encompassed him with fear and set before him the place of fire where
the deeds of those doing wickedness against me will be expiated, and 1 showed
him the torches of fire by which the just who have belie'ved in me will be Gen 15:17
7 enlightened.d #And I said to him, "These will be a witness between me and you,
that I will give you offspring from one who is closed up. And I will make you
like the dove, because you have taken for me a city that your sons will begin to
build before me. Now the turtledove I liken to the prophets who will be bom from
you; and the ram I liken to the wise men who will be bom from you, who will
enlighten your sons; but I will liken the calf to the multitude of peoples, which
are made many through you; the she-goat I liken to the women whose wombs 1
will open and they will give birth. And these prophecies and this night will be a
8 witness between us, that I will not go against my words." *And I gave him Isaac Josh 24:3
and formed him in the womb of her who gave birth to him and commanded her
to restore him quickly and to give him back to me in the seventh month. And
therefore every woman who gives birth in the seventh month,e her son will live,
9 because upon him I have brought my glory and revealed the new age. *And I gave Josh 24:4f
to Isaac Jacob and Esau.And
therefore every woman who gives birth in the seventh month,e her son will live,
9 because upon him I have brought my glory and revealed the new age. *And I gave Josh 24:4f
to Isaac Jacob and Esau. And I gave to Esau the land of Seir as an inheritance,
but Jacob and his sons went down into Egypt. And the Egyptians humbled( your
fathers, as you know; but I remembered your fathers and sent Moses my friend
10 and freed them from there, but their enemies I struck down. #And I brought them Ex 14:8
out with a high hand and led them through the Red Sea and set a cloud beneath
their feet and brought them through the deep. And I brought them to the foot of
Mount Sinai, and I bowed the heaven and came down and congealed the flame of Ps i8:9
fire and stopped up the channels of the abyss and impeded the course of the stars
and muffled the sounds of thunder and quenched the fullness of the wind and
rebuked the many clouds and stayed their movements and interrupted the storm
of the heavenly hosts so as not to break my covenant. For all things were set in
motion when I came down, and everything was brought to life when I arrived. And I did not let my people be scattered, but I gave them my Law and enlightened
them in order that by doing these things they would live and have many years
11 and not die. *And I brought you into this land and gave you vineyards. Cities that Josh 24:13
you did not build you inhabit. And I fulfilled my covenant that I promised your
12 fathers. *And now, if you listen to your fathers, I will set my heart among you
forever and overshadow you, and your enemies will fight against you no more. And your land will be renowned over all the earth, and your seed special among
all the peoples, who will say, "Behold a faithful people!"the ark and the covenant" (arce et
plural (ea). testamenti)', originally "the ark of the covenant"
h. The phrase "even unto this day" implies that (arce testamenti). when the author wrote, sacrifices were still being b. Ps-Philo along with the LXX of Josh 24:1
offered in the Temple (i.e. before A.D. 70). place the covenant renewal ceremony at Shiloh,
i. This is the only explicit mention of Jerusalem while the MT has it at Shechem. in all of Ps-Philo. c. Jub 1:1; 15:1; 44:1-4 say that Pentecost must
be observed on the fifteenth day of the third month.

*And now, if you listen to your fathers, I will set my heart among you
forever and overshadow you, and your enemies will fight against you no more. And your land will be renowned over all the earth, and your seed special among
all the peoples, who will say, "Behold a faithful people! Because they believed
in the LORD, therefore the LORD freed them and planted them." And so I will
plant you like a desirable vine and tend you like a lovable flock; and I will
command the rain and the dew, and they will be abundant for you during your
13 lifetime. »But also at the end the lot of each one of you will be life eternal,
for you and your seed, and I will take your souls and store them in peace until
the time allotted the world be complete. And I will restore you to your fathers Mai 3:24(4:6)
and your fathers to you, and they will know through you that I have not chosen
14 you in vain.' These are the words that the LORD spoke to me this night." *And
all the people answered and said, "The Lord is our God, and him alone we will Josh 24:24.nr
d. Cf. Abraham's vision of the judgment process beginning of Josh 24:24; with the LXX and Lucian
in TAb 11-14. in "and the Egyptians humbled"; and with the
e. According to b.RH 11a, Isaac was born in MT, Lucian, Vulgate, and Peshitta in mentioning
the seventh month. Moses. The only texts having all three features are
f. Ps-Philo agrees with the MT, Lucian, Vulgate, Ps-Philo and Lucian. and Peshitta in having "And I gave" at theserve.'' And all the people had a great feast that day and a renewal ceremony for
twenty-eight days. The farewell and death of Joshua
24 And after those days Joshua the son of Nun again gathered all the people and
said to them, "Behold now the LORD has testified among you. Today I have called Deut 4:26
to witness against you heaven and earth, for if you continue to serve the LORD,
you will be a special people to him; but if you are not willing to serve him and Josh 24:15
you wish to obey the gods of the Amorites in whose land you dwell, say this today
before the LORD and go forth. But I and my household will serve the Lord."
And all the people raised their voice and wept and said, "Perhaps God has
accounted us worthy; it is better for us to die in fear of him than to be blotted out
from the earth." *And Joshua the son of Nun blessed the people and kissed them
and said to them, "May your words win mercy before our LORD, and may he
send his angel and guard you. Be mindful of me after my death and of Moses the
friend of the LORD, and let not the words of the covenant that he established with
you depart from you all the days." And he dismissed them, and they went away,8 Josh 24:28
each man to his own inheritance. #Now Joshua laid himself on his bed and sent
and summoned the son of Eleazar the priest and said to him, "Behold now I see
with my own eyes the transgression of this people in which they are to stray; but
you strengthen yourself while you are still with them." And he kissed him and
his father and his sons, and he blessed him and said, "May the LORD God of
your fathers guide your ways and those of this people." #And when he ceased
speaking to them, he drew up his feet into the bed and slept with his fathers; and Gen 49:33
his sons placed their hands over his eyes. *And then all Israel gathered together Gen 46:4
to bury him.#Now Joshua laid himself on his bed and sent
and summoned the son of Eleazar the priest and said to him, "Behold now I see
with my own eyes the transgression of this people in which they are to stray; but
you strengthen yourself while you are still with them." And he kissed him and
his father and his sons, and he blessed him and said, "May the LORD God of
your fathers guide your ways and those of this people." #And when he ceased
speaking to them, he drew up his feet into the bed and slept with his fathers; and Gen 49:33
his sons placed their hands over his eyes. *And then all Israel gathered together Gen 46:4
to bury him. And they made a great lamentation for him, and they said this in
their lamentation:
"Lament over the wing of this swift eagle
because he has flown away from us,
and lament over the might of the lion's cub
because he has been hidden from us. And who will go and tell the just Moses that we have had a leader like him for
forty years?" And they ended their lamentation and buried him with their own Josh 24:30,28
hands at Mount Ephraim, and they returned each to his own tent. The election of Kenaz and the sinners' confession
25
And after the death of Joshua the land of Israel was peaceful. But the Judg i:i
Philistines were seeking to fight with the sons of Israel.*And now, if you listen to your fathers, I will set my heart among you
forever and overshadow you, and your enemies will fight against you no more. And your land will be renowned over all the earth, and your seed special among
all the peoples, who will say, "Behold a faithful people! Because they believed
in the LORD, therefore the LORD freed them and planted them." And so I will
plant you like a desirable vine and tend you like a lovable flock; and I will
command the rain and the dew, and they will be abundant for you during your
13 lifetime. »But also at the end the lot of each one of you will be life eternal,
for you and your seed, and I will take your souls and store them in peace until
the time allotted the world be complete. And I will restore you to your fathers Mai 3:24(4:6)
and your fathers to you, and they will know through you that I have not chosen
14 you in vain.' These are the words that the LORD spoke to me this night." *And
all the people answered and said, "The Lord is our God, and him alone we will Josh 24:24.nr
d. Cf. Abraham's vision of the judgment process beginning of Josh 24:24; with the LXX and Lucian
in TAb 11-14. in "and the Egyptians humbled"; and with the
e. According to b.RH 11a, Isaac was born in MT, Lucian, Vulgate, and Peshitta in mentioning
the seventh month. Moses. The only texts having all three features are
f. Ps-Philo agrees with the MT, Lucian, Vulgate, Ps-Philo and Lucian. and Peshitta in having "And I gave" at the

The election of Kenaz and the sinners' confession
25
And after the death of Joshua the land of Israel was peaceful. But the Judg i:i
Philistines were seeking to fight with the sons of Israel. And they inquired of the
Lord and said, "Should we go up and fight against the Philistines?"8 And God
said to them, "If you go up with a pure heart, fight; but if your heart is defiled,
you should not go up." And they inquired again, "How will we know if the heart
of all the people is the same?" And God said to them, "Cast lotsb among your
tribes, and every tribe that comes out in the lot will be set aside for another lot,
and then you will know whose heart is pure and whose may be defiled." *And
the people said, "First let us appoint a leader among us, and then we will cast
the lot." And the angel of the LORD said to them, "Appoint one." And the people
said, "Whom will we appoint who is worthy, LORD?" And the angel of the LORD
said to them, "Cast the lot upon the tribe of Caleb; and whoever will be revealed
24 a. The expression "and they went away" is b. The lot is a device to ascertain knowledge by
found in the LXX of Josh 24:28 but not in the MT. occult means. In the OT most of the words used
with "lot" suggest that it was thrown or cast. See
25 a. According to Judg 1:1, the Canaanites. also 49:1. fin that lot, he will rule over you." And they cast the lot upon the tribe of Caleb,
and the lot came out upon Kenaz,c and they made him ruler in Israel. Josh i9:i
3 And Kenaz said to the people, "Bring to me your tribes and hear the word of
the LORD." And the people were gathered, and Kenaz said to them, "You know
what Moses the friend of the LORD commanded you, not to transgress the Law josh 17; Deut
to the right or to the left. And also Joshua, who was ruler after him, commanded 28:14
you the same. And now behold we have heard from the mouth of the LORD that
your heart is defiled, and the LORD has ordered us to cast lots upon your tribes in
order that we may know whose heart has turned away from the LORD our God. Will not the fury of his wrath be brought upon the people? Now I promise you
today that, even if someone from my own household comes out in the lot of sin,
he will not be saved but will be burned in the fire." And the people said, "You
4 have proposed a good plan to carry out." •And he brought the tribes before him,
and there were found from the tribe of Judah 345 men, but from the tribe of
Reuben 560, and from the tribe of Simeon 775, and from the tribe of Levi 150,
and from the tribe of Issachar 665, from the tribe of Zebulun 545,d and from the
tribe of Gad 380, and from the tribe of Asher 665, and from the tribe of Manasseh
480, and from the tribe of Ephraim 448, and from the tribe of Benjamin 267. And the total number of those who were found in the lot of sin was 6,110. And
Kenaz led them all away and shut them up in prison until it should be known
s what should be done about them. *And Kenaz said, "Did not Moses the friend
of the LORD speak about these people, saying, 'Lest* there be among you a root
bearing poison and bitterness'? Now blessed be the LORD, who has revealed all Deut29:i7<i8)
the schemes of these men and did not let them corrupt the people with their
wicked deeds.*And Kenaz said, "Did not Moses the friend
of the LORD speak about these people, saying, 'Lest* there be among you a root
bearing poison and bitterness'? Now blessed be the LORD, who has revealed all Deut29:i7<i8)
the schemes of these men and did not let them corrupt the people with their
wicked deeds. Therefore bring the Urim and Thummim here, and summon Eleazar
6 the priest, and let us inquire of the LORD through him." *And then Kenaz and
Eleazar and all the elders and all the assembly prayed together saying, "LORD
God of our fathers, reveal to your servants the truth, for we have found those
who do not believe the wonders that you did for our fathers from the time you
brought them out of the land of Egypt until this day." And the LORD answered
and said, "First question those who have been found such, and let them confess
their deeds that they have done with cunning, and afterward they will be burned
in the fire."
7 And Kenaz brought them out and said to them, "Behold now you know how
Achanf confessed when he came out in the lot and how he declared everything
he had done. And now declare to us your wicked deeds and schemes. And who
knows that if you tell the truth to us, even if you die now, nevertheless God will
8 have mercy on you when he will resurrect the dead?" »And one of them, Elas by
name, said, "Will not death now come upon us so that we might die in the fire? But I tell you, sir, the schemes that we have done so wickedly are not all alike.The election of Kenaz and the sinners' confession
25
And after the death of Joshua the land of Israel was peaceful. But the Judg i:i
Philistines were seeking to fight with the sons of Israel. And they inquired of the
Lord and said, "Should we go up and fight against the Philistines?"8 And God
said to them, "If you go up with a pure heart, fight; but if your heart is defiled,
you should not go up." And they inquired again, "How will we know if the heart
of all the people is the same?" And God said to them, "Cast lotsb among your
tribes, and every tribe that comes out in the lot will be set aside for another lot,
and then you will know whose heart is pure and whose may be defiled." *And
the people said, "First let us appoint a leader among us, and then we will cast
the lot." And the angel of the LORD said to them, "Appoint one." And the people
said, "Whom will we appoint who is worthy, LORD?" And the angel of the LORD
said to them, "Cast the lot upon the tribe of Caleb; and whoever will be revealed
24 a. The expression "and they went away" is b. The lot is a device to ascertain knowledge by
found in the LXX of Josh 24:28 but not in the MT. occult means. In the OT most of the words used
with "lot" suggest that it was thrown or cast. See
25 a. According to Judg 1:1, the Canaanites. also 49:1. f

And who
knows that if you tell the truth to us, even if you die now, nevertheless God will
8 have mercy on you when he will resurrect the dead?" »And one of them, Elas by
name, said, "Will not death now come upon us so that we might die in the fire? But I tell you, sir, the schemes that we have done so wickedly are not all alike. Now if you wish to seek out the plain truth, examine the men of each tribe
individually; and so every bystander will know the differences among their sins."
9 And Kenaz examined those who were from his own tribe, and they said to him,
"We desired to copy and make the calf that they made in the wilderness." And
after this he examined the men of the tribe of Reuben, and they said, "We desired
to sacrifice to the gods of those who inhabit the land."8 And he examined the
men from the tribe of Levi, and they said, "We desired to test the tent of meeting,
whether or not it is holy." And he asked the group from the tribe of Issachar,
and they said, "We desired to make inquiry through the demons of the idols,
whether or not they would reveal things plainly." And he examined the men of
the tribe of Zebulun, and they said, "We desired to eat the flesh of our own
c. Kenaz is mentioned in Judg 3:9, 11, as e. Lit. "There is a strong ..." (Fortis est);
Othniel's father. There as elsewhere in the Jewish but "Lest there be" (Ne forte sit) corresponds
tradition (except in Josephus' Ant 5.3.3 §§182-84) better to Deut 29:17(18). he is merely a name. f. Most MSS have Achiar or the like; see 21:3. d. The tribes of Dan and Naphtali have been g. The tribe of Simeon has been omitted. omitted in this list; cf. 10:3; 25:9.children and to know whether or not God has care for these." And he examined
the group from the tribe of Dan, and they said, "The Amorites have taught us
what they make, so we might teach our children, and behold these things are
hidden beneath Abraham's mountainh and stored beneath a heap of earth. Therefore
send, and you will find them.'' And Kenaz sent and found them. And he examined
the group from the tribe of Naphtali, and they said, "We desired to make what
the Amorites make,1 and behold they are hidden beneath the tent of Elas, who
told you to examine us. Therefore send, and you will find them." And Kenaz
io sent and found them. 'And afterward he examined those who were left over from
the tribe of Gad, and they said, "We have committed adultery with each other's
wives." And then he examined the men of the tribe of Asher, who said, "We
have found the seven golden idols whom the Amoritesj call the sacred nymphs,
and we took them along with the precious stones set upon them and hid them. And behold now they are stored beneath the summit of Mount Shechem.k Therefore
send, and you will find them." And Kenaz sent men, and they removed them
n from there. •These are the nymphs that, when called upon, showed the Amorites
what to do every hour. For these are what seven sinful men devised after the
flood; their names are these: Canaan, Futh, Selath, Nimrod, Elath, Desuath.1 Nor
will there ever be anything like this in the world graven by the hand of a craftsman
or adorned with painting. Now they were set up with spikes and fixed for the
worship of idols. Those precious stones, among which were crystal and prase,m
were brought from the land of Havilah; and they had a pierced style. And one of Gen 2:iif. them was cut on the top, and another like spotted chrysoprase shone in its cutting
12 as if it revealed the water of the deep lying beneath it.And one of Gen 2:iif. them was cut on the top, and another like spotted chrysoprase shone in its cutting
12 as if it revealed the water of the deep lying beneath it. • And these are the precious
stones that the Amorites had in their sanctuaries, the value of which cannot be
estimated; because for those entering by night the light of a lamp was not necessary,
so brightly did the natural light of the stones shine forth. But among these that
one cut in the pierced style and cleansed with bristles gave off more light. For
even if one of the Amorites was blind, he would go and put his eyes on it and
recover sight. These Kenaz found, and he stored them in hiding until he might
13 know what to do about them. *And after this he examined the group from the
tribe of Manasseh, and they said, "We merely profaned the sabbaths of the
LORD." And he examined the group from the tribe of Ephraim, who said, "We
desired to make our sons and daughters pass through the fire, to know if what
had been said would be proved by direct evidence." And he asked the group from
the tribe of Benjamin, and they said, "We desired in this time to investigate the
book of the Law, whether God had really written what was in it or Moses had
taught these things by himself."
The punishment of the sinners. The twelve stones
1 26 And when Kenaz had taken in all these words and written them in a book
and had read them before the LORD, God said to him, "Take the men and what
was found with them and all their possessions, and put them in the bed of the
river Fison* and burn them with fire, so that my anger may cease from them."
2 And Kenaz said, "Should we burn those precious stones in the fire or consecrate
them to you, because we do not have any like those?" And God said to him, "If
h. Abraham's mountain would be Mount Moriah Am 18.4.1 §85. (in Jerusalem), or perhaps we should emend to 1. There are only six names. Desuath may be a
monte Abarim. corruption of Dedan, Suah (cf. Gen 10:7), or
i. Since in Heb.And who
knows that if you tell the truth to us, even if you die now, nevertheless God will
8 have mercy on you when he will resurrect the dead?" »And one of them, Elas by
name, said, "Will not death now come upon us so that we might die in the fire? But I tell you, sir, the schemes that we have done so wickedly are not all alike. Now if you wish to seek out the plain truth, examine the men of each tribe
individually; and so every bystander will know the differences among their sins."
9 And Kenaz examined those who were from his own tribe, and they said to him,
"We desired to copy and make the calf that they made in the wilderness." And
after this he examined the men of the tribe of Reuben, and they said, "We desired
to sacrifice to the gods of those who inhabit the land."8 And he examined the
men from the tribe of Levi, and they said, "We desired to test the tent of meeting,
whether or not it is holy." And he asked the group from the tribe of Issachar,
and they said, "We desired to make inquiry through the demons of the idols,
whether or not they would reveal things plainly." And he examined the men of
the tribe of Zebulun, and they said, "We desired to eat the flesh of our own
c. Kenaz is mentioned in Judg 3:9, 11, as e. Lit. "There is a strong ..." (Fortis est);
Othniel's father. There as elsewhere in the Jewish but "Lest there be" (Ne forte sit) corresponds
tradition (except in Josephus' Ant 5.3.3 §§182-84) better to Deut 29:17(18). he is merely a name. f. Most MSS have Achiar or the like; see 21:3. d. The tribes of Dan and Naphtali have been g. The tribe of Simeon has been omitted. omitted in this list; cf. 10:3; 25:9.

Gen 10:7), or
i. Since in Heb. fbd can mean both "make" perhaps Ham should be inserted before Canaan. and "worship," Ps-Philo may have meant "to m. A leek-green gem. worship what the Amorites worship."
j. For the Amorites as wicked idolators, see 26 a. This may be the river Pishon, which goes
2Bar 60:1. around the land of Havilah (Gen 2:11) and is
k. For the burial of images under an oak at connected with precious stones. Or perhaps the
Shechem, see Gen 35:4. For the hiding of sacred Kishon. See also 27:15. vessels, see 2Bar 6:7; 2Mac 2:4-8; and Josephus*God in his own name takes anything from the things under the ban, what will
man do? And so now you will take those precious stones and everything that has
been found in the book; and when you have arranged for the men, you will place
the stones apart with the books, because the fire cannot bum them up, and
afterward I will show you how to destroy them. But the men and everything else
that has been found, you will burn in the fire. And when all the people have been
gathered together, you will say to them, 'So it will be done to every man whose
3 heart has turned from his God/ *And after the fire has burned up those men, then
you will place on the top of the mountainb beside the new altar the books and the
precious stones that cannot be burned by fire or cut up by iron or blotted out by
water. And I will command a cloud, and it will go and take dew and send it down
upon the books and blot out what is written in them, because they will not be
blotted out by any other water than that which has never served men. And afterward
4 I will send forth my lightning, and it will burn up those books. »But regarding
the precious stones, I will command my angel, and he will take them and go and
put them in the deep of the sea. And I will order the deep, and it will swallow
them up, for they cannot remain in the world, because they have been defiled by
the idols of the Amorites. And I will command another angel, and he will take
for me twelve stones from the same place from which these seven were taken. When you find them on the top of the mountain where you are to place these
others, you will take them and set them on the ephod over against the twelve
stones that Moses in the wilderness set on the breastplate; you will consecrate
them according to the twelve tribes.And I will command another angel, and he will take
for me twelve stones from the same place from which these seven were taken. When you find them on the top of the mountain where you are to place these
others, you will take them and set them on the ephod over against the twelve
stones that Moses in the wilderness set on the breastplate; you will consecrate
them according to the twelve tribes. And do not say, 'How will I know what
stone to set for what tribe?' Behold I will tell you the name of the tribe along
with the name of the stone, and you will find them engraved one over the other."
5 And Kenaz went and took everything that had been found and the men along
with these things, and he gathered all the people to himself again and said to
them, "Behold you have seen all the wonders that God has revealed to us until
this day. And behold, when we were seeking out all those who planned evil deeds
craftily against the LORD and against Israel, God revealed them to us according
to their works. And now cursed be the man who would plot to do such things
among you, brothers." And all the people answered, "Amen, amen." And when
this had been said, he burned all those men in the fire and everything that had
been found with them except the precious stones.c
6 And after this Kenaz wished to determine whether or not the stones would be
burned by fire, and he cast them into the fire. And as soon as they fell into the
fire, the fire was extinguished. And Kenaz took the iron sword so that they might
be broken up; and when the sword touched them, its iron melted. And after this,
he wished at least to blot out the books with water, but as soon as the water fell
upon them it was congealed.Gen 10:7), or
i. Since in Heb. fbd can mean both "make" perhaps Ham should be inserted before Canaan. and "worship," Ps-Philo may have meant "to m. A leek-green gem. worship what the Amorites worship."
j. For the Amorites as wicked idolators, see 26 a. This may be the river Pishon, which goes
2Bar 60:1. around the land of Havilah (Gen 2:11) and is
k. For the burial of images under an oak at connected with precious stones. Or perhaps the
Shechem, see Gen 35:4. For the hiding of sacred Kishon. See also 27:15. vessels, see 2Bar 6:7; 2Mac 2:4-8; and Josephus*

And Kenaz took the iron sword so that they might
be broken up; and when the sword touched them, its iron melted. And after this,
he wished at least to blot out the books with water, but as soon as the water fell
upon them it was congealed. And on seeing these happenings Kenaz said, "Blessed
be God, who has done so many mighty deeds for the sons of men, and he made
Adam as the first created one and showed him everything so that when Adam
sinned thereby, then he might refuse him all these things (for if he showed them
7 to the whole human race, they might have mastery over them)." #And when this
was said, he took the books and the stones, and he placed them on top of the
mountain beside the new altar as God had commanded him. And he took the
peace offering and offered the holocausts on the new altar by placing on it 2,000
holocausts in all as a whole-burnt offering on that day; and he and all his people
together celebrated a great feast. 8 And that same night God did as he had told Kenaz. He commanded a cloud,
and it went and took dew from the ice of paradise and poured it on the books and
blotted them out. And after this an angel came and burned them. But another
angel took the precious stones and cast them into the heart of the sea, and he
b. According to 25:10 the stones were hidden c. Mention of the books has been omitted; see
under the top of Mount Shechem, but 22:8 speaks 26:3. of the new altar at Shiloh.commanded the deep of the sea and it swallowed them up. And another angel
came and took the twelve stones and put them beside that place from which he
had taken the previous seven and engraved on them the names of the tribes. 9 And Kenaz arose the next morning and found those twelve stones on the top
of the mountain where he himself had placed the previous seven. And the engraving
10 on them was such that the forms of eyes were portrayed on them. •And the first Ex 28:17-20
stone/ on which was written the name of the tribe Reuben, was like sardius. But
the second stone was cut from ivory, and there the name of the tribe of Simeon
was engraved, and it seemed like topaz. And on the third stone, which was like
emerald, was engraved the name of the tribe of Levi. Now the fourth stone, on
which the name of the tribe of Judah was engraved, was called crystal, and it was
like carbuncle. But the fifth stone was prase, and upon it was engraved "tribe of
Issachar," and it had the color of sapphire in it. And the engraving of the sixth
stone (like chrysoprase) was speckled with diverse markings, and there was written
11 "tribe of Zebulun," and it was like jasper. »Now the engraving of the seventh
stone shone and showed itself as if it held the water of the deep, and there was
written the name of the tribe of Dan, and it was like figure. The eighth stone was
cut out from diamond, and there was written the name of the tribe of Naphtali,
and it was like amethyst. And the engraving of the ninth stone was pierced-work
from Mount Ophir, and there was written "tribe of Gad," and it was like agate. And the engraving of the tenth stone was hollowed out, and it had the appearance
of stone from Teman, and there was written "tribe of Asher," and it was like
chrysolite. And the eleventh stone was taken from Lebanon, and there was written
the name of the tribe of Joseph, and it was like beryl.And the engraving of the tenth stone was hollowed out, and it had the appearance
of stone from Teman, and there was written "tribe of Asher," and it was like
chrysolite. And the eleventh stone was taken from Lebanon, and there was written
the name of the tribe of Joseph, and it was like beryl. And the twelfth stone was
cut out from the height of Zion, and on it was written "tribe of Benjamin," and
it was like onyx. 12 And God said to Kenaz, "Take those stones and put them in the ark of the
covenant of the LORD along with the tablets of the covenant that I gave to Moses
on Horeb; and they will stay there until Jahel,e who will build a house in my
name, will arise, and then he will set them before me upon the two cherubim,
13 and they will be before me as a memorial for the house of Israel. *And when the
sins of my people have reached full measure and enemies begin to have power
over myf house, I will take those stones and the former stones8 along with the
tablets, and I will store them in the place from which they were taken in the
beginning.h And they will be there until I remember the world and visit those
inhabiting the earth. And then I will take those and many others better than they
are from where eye has not seen nor has ear heard and it has not entered into the isa 64:4
heart of man, until the like should come to pass in the world. And the just will
not lack the brilliance of the sun or the moon, for the light of those most precious
14 stones will be their light." *And Kenaz arose and said, "Behold how much good
God has made for men, but because of their sins they have been deprived of all
these things. And now today I know that the race of men is weak and their life
is should be accounted as nothing." *And on saying this, he took the stones from
the place they were laid. And when he took them, it was as if the light of the sun
was poured over them and the earth glowed from their light.And Kenaz took the iron sword so that they might
be broken up; and when the sword touched them, its iron melted. And after this,
he wished at least to blot out the books with water, but as soon as the water fell
upon them it was congealed. And on seeing these happenings Kenaz said, "Blessed
be God, who has done so many mighty deeds for the sons of men, and he made
Adam as the first created one and showed him everything so that when Adam
sinned thereby, then he might refuse him all these things (for if he showed them
7 to the whole human race, they might have mastery over them)." #And when this
was said, he took the books and the stones, and he placed them on top of the
mountain beside the new altar as God had commanded him. And he took the
peace offering and offered the holocausts on the new altar by placing on it 2,000
holocausts in all as a whole-burnt offering on that day; and he and all his people
together celebrated a great feast. 8 And that same night God did as he had told Kenaz. He commanded a cloud,
and it went and took dew from the ice of paradise and poured it on the books and
blotted them out. And after this an angel came and burned them. But another
angel took the precious stones and cast them into the heart of the sea, and he
b. According to 25:10 the stones were hidden c. Mention of the books has been omitted; see
under the top of Mount Shechem, but 22:8 speaks 26:3. of the new altar at Shiloh.

And now today I know that the race of men is weak and their life
is should be accounted as nothing." *And on saying this, he took the stones from
the place they were laid. And when he took them, it was as if the light of the sun
was poured over them and the earth glowed from their light. And Kenaz put them
in the ark of the covenant of the LORD with the tablets as it had been commanded
him, and they are there to this day. d. Compare the other lists of gems in the MT Perhaps Heb. byty (my house) was misread as bytw
and LXX of Ex 28:17-20; Philo's LegAll 1:81; (his (the people's] house). Josephus' Ant 3.7.5 §168 and War 5.5.7 §234; g. Those already on the breastplate. Rev 21:19; and ExR 38:8. h. For the concealment of the precious stones
e. Jahel should be Solomon. Ithiei is one of until the last day, see 2Bar 6:4-10; 4Bar 3:7-14;
Solomon's ten names in rabbinic literature. But AsMos 1:17; Josephus' Ant 18.4.1 §85; 2Mac
Jahel may be the angel Jaoel as in ApAb 10:4, 9. 2:4-8. f. Lit. "their," but the Temple is God's house.The victory of Kenaz
1 27 And after this he armed three hundred thousand men from the people, and he
went up to fight the Amorites. And he struck down on the first day eight hundred
2 thousand men, and on the second day he killed five hundred thousand. »And on
the third day certain men of the people grumbled against Kenaz, saying, "Behold
now Kenaz alone is busy at his home with his wife and his concubines, and he
3 sei\ds us into battle so that we may be destroyed before our enemies." #And on
hearing these words, the servants of Kenaz reported them to him. And he
commanded the captain of fifty, and he brought thirty-seven3 men from them who
4 had been his detractors, and he locked them up in prison. • These are their names:
Leetuz, Betul, Efal, Dealma, Anaf, Desac, Besac, Getel, Anael, Anazim, Noac,
Cehec, Boac, Obal, Iabat, Enath, Beath, Zelut, Effor, Ecent, Deffaf, Abidan,
Esar, Moab, Duzal, Azat, Felac, Igat, Zefal, Eliesor, Ecar, Zebat, Sebet, Nesach,
Cere. And when the captain of fifty had locked them up according to the command
of Kenaz, Kenaz said, "When God will have worked salvation for his people by
my hands, then I will punish those men."
5 And on saying this, Kenaz commanded the captain of fifty, saying, "Go and jud7:8
g
choose from my servants three hundred men and horses of the same number, and
let no one of the people know the hour in which I am to go out for battle; only
in whatever hour I tell you, prepare the men, so that they might be prepared even
6 at night." #And Kenaz sent emissaries as spies to see where the main part of the
Amorite camp was. And the emissaries went and in their spying saw that the main
part of the Amorite camp was arrayed on the cliffs and that they were planning
to come and fight against Israel. And the emissaries returned and reported this to Judg 7:9-18
him. And Kenaz and the three hundred horsemen with him arose by night, and
he took trumpets in his hand and began to go down with the three hundred men.And the emissaries returned and reported this to Judg 7:9-18
him. And Kenaz and the three hundred horsemen with him arose by night, and
he took trumpets in his hand and began to go down with the three hundred men. And when he drew near to the Amorite camp, he said to his servants, "Stay here. I will go down alone to have a look at the Amorite camp. And if 1 blow the
trumpet, you may come down; but if not, you are not to look for me there."
7 And Kenaz went down alone. And before he went down he prayed and said,
"LORD God of our fathers, you have shown your servant the wonders that you
are ready to do by reason of your covenant in the last days. And now send one
of your wonders to your servant, and I will fight your enemies in order that they
and all the nations and your people may know that the LORD saves not by means
of a huge army or by the power of horsemen. If they but knew the sign of
deliverance that you will work with me today! Behold I will draw my sword out
of its scabbard, and it will shine in the Amorite camp. And if the Amorites
recognize that I am Kenaz, I know that you have delivered them into my hands. But if they do not recognize me and think I am someone else, I know that you
have not heard me but have delivered me to my enemies. For even if 1 be handed
over to death, I know that the LORD has not heard me because of my faults and
has handed me over to my enemies. But he will not destroy his inheritance by
my death."
8 And he went forth after he prayed, and he heard many of the Amorites saying,
"Rise up, and let us fight against Israel. For we know that our sacred nymphs are
9 there with them, and they will deliver them into our hands." *And Kenaz arose,
and the spirit of the LORD clothed him, and he drew his sword.And now today I know that the race of men is weak and their life
is should be accounted as nothing." *And on saying this, he took the stones from
the place they were laid. And when he took them, it was as if the light of the sun
was poured over them and the earth glowed from their light. And Kenaz put them
in the ark of the covenant of the LORD with the tablets as it had been commanded
him, and they are there to this day. d. Compare the other lists of gems in the MT Perhaps Heb. byty (my house) was misread as bytw
and LXX of Ex 28:17-20; Philo's LegAll 1:81; (his (the people's] house). Josephus' Ant 3.7.5 §168 and War 5.5.7 §234; g. Those already on the breastplate. Rev 21:19; and ExR 38:8. h. For the concealment of the precious stones
e. Jahel should be Solomon. Ithiei is one of until the last day, see 2Bar 6:4-10; 4Bar 3:7-14;
Solomon's ten names in rabbinic literature. But AsMos 1:17; Josephus' Ant 18.4.1 §85; 2Mac
Jahel may be the angel Jaoel as in ApAb 10:4, 9. 2:4-8. f. Lit. "their," but the Temple is God's house.

But he will not destroy his inheritance by
my death."
8 And he went forth after he prayed, and he heard many of the Amorites saying,
"Rise up, and let us fight against Israel. For we know that our sacred nymphs are
9 there with them, and they will deliver them into our hands." *And Kenaz arose,
and the spirit of the LORD clothed him, and he drew his sword. And when its
light shone on the Amorites like a lightning bolt, they saw it and said, "Is not
this the sword of Kenaz that has wounded so many of us, and the word that we
were saying is correct because the sacred nymphs have delivered them into our
hands? And behold now this day will be a feast day for the Amorites, since our
enemy has been handed over to us. Now therefore rise up, and let each one gird
10 himself with his sword and begin to fight." »And when Kenaz heard their words,
27 a. There are only thirty-five names.he was clothed with the spirit of power and was changed into another man, and
he went down to the Amorite camp and began to strike them down. But the LORD
sent before him the angel Ingethel," who is in charge of hidden things and works
invisibly, and another powerful angel was helping him. And Ingethel struck the
Amorites with blindness so that, when each saw his neighbor, they thought they
were their adversaries and they killed one another. And Zeruel,c the angel who is
pre-eminent in military might, bore up the arms of Kenaz lest they should sink
down.d And Kenaz killed forty-five thousand men of the Amorites. Now they
11 killed one another, and forty-five thousand men fell. -And when Kenaz had killed
such a great number, he wished to release his hand from the sword, because it
was stuck to the handle of the sword and could not be released, and his right hand 2Sam 23:10
took in the power of the sword. And then some of the Amorite survivors fled into
the mountains. Now Kenaz sought how he might release his hand, and looking
about, he saw with his own eyes an Amorite man in flight; and he took hold of
him and said to him, "I know that the Amorites have been wiped out, and now
show me how to release my hand from this sword, and I will let you go." And
the Amorite said, "Go and get a man from the Hebrews, and kill him; and while
his blood is still hot, put your hand beneath it; on receiving his blood, your hand
will be released." And Kenaz said, "As the LORD lives, for if you had said, 'Get
a man from the Amorites,' I would have gotten one of these and saved you. But
because you have said 'from the Hebrews' and so reveal your hatred, your own
word will be against you and, as you have said, so I will do to you." And on
saying these words, Kenaz killed him; and while his blood was still hot, he put
12 his hand beneath; and on receiving it, it was released.Now Kenaz sought how he might release his hand, and looking
about, he saw with his own eyes an Amorite man in flight; and he took hold of
him and said to him, "I know that the Amorites have been wiped out, and now
show me how to release my hand from this sword, and I will let you go." And
the Amorite said, "Go and get a man from the Hebrews, and kill him; and while
his blood is still hot, put your hand beneath it; on receiving his blood, your hand
will be released." And Kenaz said, "As the LORD lives, for if you had said, 'Get
a man from the Amorites,' I would have gotten one of these and saved you. But
because you have said 'from the Hebrews' and so reveal your hatred, your own
word will be against you and, as you have said, so I will do to you." And on
saying these words, Kenaz killed him; and while his blood was still hot, he put
12 his hand beneath; and on receiving it, it was released. -And Kenaz left there and
took off his clothes and threw himself into the river and washed himself.e And
he came up again, changed his clothes, and returned to his servants. But the LORD
had sent upon them a deep sleep at night, and they slept and did not know all the
deeds that Kenaz had done. And Kenaz came and woke them up from sleep, and
they looked at him and saw with their own eyes, and behold the field was full of
bodies; and they were astonished and looked at each other. And Kenaz said to
them, "Why are you amazed? Is the way of men like the ways of God? For
among men a great number prevails, but with God whatever he has decided. And
so if God wished to save this people by my hands, why are you amazed?But he will not destroy his inheritance by
my death."
8 And he went forth after he prayed, and he heard many of the Amorites saying,
"Rise up, and let us fight against Israel. For we know that our sacred nymphs are
9 there with them, and they will deliver them into our hands." *And Kenaz arose,
and the spirit of the LORD clothed him, and he drew his sword. And when its
light shone on the Amorites like a lightning bolt, they saw it and said, "Is not
this the sword of Kenaz that has wounded so many of us, and the word that we
were saying is correct because the sacred nymphs have delivered them into our
hands? And behold now this day will be a feast day for the Amorites, since our
enemy has been handed over to us. Now therefore rise up, and let each one gird
10 himself with his sword and begin to fight." »And when Kenaz heard their words,
27 a. There are only thirty-five names.

For
among men a great number prevails, but with God whatever he has decided. And
so if God wished to save this people by my hands, why are you amazed? Arise,
and each of you gird on your swords, and we will go home to our brothers."
13 And when all Israel heard that deliverance had been accomplished by the hands
of Kenaz, all the people went out together to meet him and they said, "Blessed
be the LORD who has made you leader among his people and has shown that what
he had said to you was worthy of belief; and what we have heard by word, now
14 we have seen, and the work of God's word is manifest." -And Kenaz said to
them, "Ask your brothers, and have them tell you how much they have toiled
with me in battle." And those men who were with him said, "As the LORD lives,
we did not fight nor did we even know anything except that, when we were
awakened, we saw the field full of bodies." And the people answered, "Now we
know that the LORD has decided to save his people; he does not need a great
number but only holiness."
is And Kenaz said to the captain of fifty who had locked up those men in prison,
"Bring those men here, and we will hear their words." And when he had brought
them, Kenaz said to them, "Tell me what you have seen so as to grumble about
me among the people." These said, "Why do you ask us? Now therefore command
us to be burned in the fire, because we will not die for this sin that we are talking
about now but for that previous one in which we were implicated. Those men
b. The name may be related to the Heb. root this is meaningless in the context and involves a
<th (hide). wrong sequence of tenses. See Ex 17:8-13 for the
c. The name is probably related to the Heb. rrw* motif as applied to Moses. (arm, strength). See also 61:5 for what seems to e. Var. "and he was washed"; this may have
be reference to the same angel. the notion of ritual purification connected with it. d. Var. '4lest they should perceive him"; butmade a confession and were burned for their sins. For then we had joined in their
sins, saying, 'Perhaps the people will not find us out/ and then we escaped the
people. But rightly have we been made a public example in our sins, in that we
have fallen into slandering you." And Kenaz said, "If therefore you testify against
yourselves, how will I have mercy on you?" Kenaz ordered them to be burned
in the fire and threw their ashes into the bed of the river Fison,f where he had
16 thrown those of the great number of sinners. »And Kenaz ruled the people fifty- Judg3:8-n
seven * years, and there was fear among all his enemies all his days. The covenant of Kenaz. His vision and death
1 28 And when the days of Kenaz drew near for him to die, he sent and summoned
all of them and Jabis and Phinehas the two prophets and Phinehas the son of
Eleazar the priest,3 and he said to them, "Behold now the LORD has shown to
2 me all his wonders that he is ready to do for his people in the last days. *And
now I will establish my covenant with you today so that you do not abandon the
LORD your God after my departure. For you have seen all the wonders that came
upon those who sinned and what they declared in confessing their sins voluntarily,
or how the LORD our God destroyed them because they transgressed against his
covenant. Now therefore spare those of your household and your children, and
stay in the paths of the LORD your God lest the LORD destroy his own inheritance."
3 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said, "If Kenaz the leader and the
prophets and the elders command it, I will speak the word that I heard from my
father when he was dying, and I will not be silent about the command that he
commanded me while his soul was being taken away." And Kenaz the leader and
the prophets said, "Speak, Phinehas.For you have seen all the wonders that came
upon those who sinned and what they declared in confessing their sins voluntarily,
or how the LORD our God destroyed them because they transgressed against his
covenant. Now therefore spare those of your household and your children, and
stay in the paths of the LORD your God lest the LORD destroy his own inheritance."
3 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said, "If Kenaz the leader and the
prophets and the elders command it, I will speak the word that I heard from my
father when he was dying, and I will not be silent about the command that he
commanded me while his soul was being taken away." And Kenaz the leader and
the prophets said, "Speak, Phinehas. Should anyone speak before the priest who
guards the commandments of the LORD our God, especially since truth goes forth
4 from his mouth and a shining light from his heart?" 'And then Phinehas said,
"While my father was dying, he commanded me, saying, 'These words you will
say to the sons of Israel, "When you were gathered together in the assembly, the
LORD appeared to me three days ago in a dream by night and said to me, 'Behold
you have seen and also your father before you how much I have toiled among my
people. But after your death this people will rise up and corrupt its ways and turn
from my commands, and I will be very angry with them. But I will recall that
time that was before the creation of the world, the time when man did not exist
and there was no wickedness in it, when I said that the world would be created
and those who would come into it would praise me. And I would plant a great
vineyard, and from it I would choose a plant; and I would care for it and call it
by my name, and it would be mine forever.For
among men a great number prevails, but with God whatever he has decided. And
so if God wished to save this people by my hands, why are you amazed? Arise,
and each of you gird on your swords, and we will go home to our brothers."
13 And when all Israel heard that deliverance had been accomplished by the hands
of Kenaz, all the people went out together to meet him and they said, "Blessed
be the LORD who has made you leader among his people and has shown that what
he had said to you was worthy of belief; and what we have heard by word, now
14 we have seen, and the work of God's word is manifest." -And Kenaz said to
them, "Ask your brothers, and have them tell you how much they have toiled
with me in battle." And those men who were with him said, "As the LORD lives,
we did not fight nor did we even know anything except that, when we were
awakened, we saw the field full of bodies." And the people answered, "Now we
know that the LORD has decided to save his people; he does not need a great
number but only holiness."
is And Kenaz said to the captain of fifty who had locked up those men in prison,
"Bring those men here, and we will hear their words." And when he had brought
them, Kenaz said to them, "Tell me what you have seen so as to grumble about
me among the people." These said, "Why do you ask us? Now therefore command
us to be burned in the fire, because we will not die for this sin that we are talking
about now but for that previous one in which we were implicated. Those men
b. The name may be related to the Heb. root this is meaningless in the context and involves a
<th (hide). wrong sequence of tenses. See Ex 17:8-13 for the
c. The name is probably related to the Heb. rrw* motif as applied to Moses. (arm, strength). See also 61:5 for what seems to e. Var. "and he was washed"; this may have
be reference to the same angel. the notion of ritual purification connected with it. d. Var. '4lest they should perceive him"; but

But I will recall that
time that was before the creation of the world, the time when man did not exist
and there was no wickedness in it, when I said that the world would be created
and those who would come into it would praise me. And I would plant a great
vineyard, and from it I would choose a plant; and I would care for it and call it
by my name, and it would be mine forever. When 1 did all the things that I said,
nevertheless my plant that was called by my name did not recognize me as its
planter, but it destroyed its own fruit and did not yield up its fruit to me.' " * And
5 this is what my father commanded me to say to this people." *And Kenaz and
the elders and all the people lifted up their voices and wept with great lamentation
until evening and said, "Will the Shepherd destroy his flock for any reason except
that it has sinned against him? And now he is the one who will spare us according
to the abundance of his mercy, because he has toiled so much among us."
6 And when they had sat down, a holy spirit came upon Kenaz and dwelled6 in Num 24:17;
him and put him in ecstasy, and he began to prophesy, saying, "Behold now I Ezck8:,(20:
see what I had not hoped for, and I perceive that I did not understand. Hear now,
you who dwell on the earth, just as those staying a while on it prophesied before
me and saw this hour even before the earth was corrupted, so all of you who
7 dwell in it may know the prophecies that have been fixed in advance. •Behold
f. See 26:1. 28 a. Originally there may have been only one
g. Josephus (Ant 5.3.3 §184) says that Kenaz prophet and one prophet-priest. See 48:1-3, where
ruled forty years. According to Judg 3:8-11, Cushan- Phinehas is described in terms reminiscent of Elijah,
rishataim ruled Israel eight years and Othniel forty b. Lit. "dwelling."
years (fifty, according to Lucian).now I see flames that do not burn, and I hear springs raised up out of a sleep for
which there is no foundation, and I perceive neither the tops of the mountains nor
the roof of the firmament, but everything has no appearance and is invisible and
has no place whatsoever. And although my eye does not know what it sees, my
8 heart will find what to say. *Now from the flame that I saw not burning, I saw
and behold a spark came up and, as it were, laid for itself a platform. And the
floor was like what a spider spins, in the pattern of a shield. And when this
foundation had been set, beholdc there was stirred up from that spring, as it were,
boiling foam; and behold it changed itself into another foundation, as it were. Now between the upper foundation and the lower there came forth from the light
of that invisible place, as it were, the images of men; and they were walking
around. And behold a voice was saying, 'These will be a foundation for men,
9 and they will dwelld in between them for 7,000* years.' *And the lower foundation
was solid material, but the upper was of foam. And those who went forth from
the light of the invisible place, they will be those who will have the name 'man.'f
And when he will sin against me and the time will be fulfilled, the spark will be
put out and the spring will stop, and so they will be transformed."
10 And when Kenaz had spoken these words, he was awakened, and his senses
came back to him. But he did not know what he had said or what he had seen. But this alone he said to the people: "If the repose of the just after they have Num23:io
died is like this, we must die to the corruptible world so as not to see sins." And
when he had said these words, Kenaz died and slept with his fathers. And the
people mourned for him thirty days.But this alone he said to the people: "If the repose of the just after they have Num23:io
died is like this, we must die to the corruptible world so as not to see sins." And
when he had said these words, Kenaz died and slept with his fathers. And the
people mourned for him thirty days. Zebul
1 29 And afterward the people appointed over themselves as leader Zebul.a In that judg 9:28-4i
time he gathered the people together and said to them, "Behold now we know
all the toil that Kenaz toiled for us in the days of his life. And now if he had
sons, they should rule the people. And since he left only daughters, let them
receive a greater inheritance among the people, because their father during his Num 36
lifetime refused to give anything to them lest he be called avaricious and greedy."
2 And the people said, "Do everything that is pleasing in your sight." »Now Kenaz
had three daughters, whose names were these: the firstborn Ethema, the second
Feila, the third Zelfa. And Zebul gave to the firstborn all that was around the land
of the Phoenicians, and to the second he gave the olive grove of Ekron, but to Josh i5:46f. the third he gave the tilled lands that were around Ashdod. And he gave them
husbands, that is, to the firstborn Elisefan, to the second Odihel, but to the third
3 Doel. *Now in those days Zebul established a treasury for the LORD and said to 20*2*8;
the people, "Behold if anyone wishes to consecrate gold and silver to the LORD, 2KGS 12:9~16
let him bring it to the treasury of the LORD in Shiloh; only do not let anyone who
has anything belonging to idols wish to consecrate it to the treasuries of the LORD,
because the LORD does not want the abominations of the things under the ban lest
you disturb the assembly of the LORD. For the wrath that has passed is sufficient."
And all the people, from men to women, brought whatever gold and silver their
heart prompted.But I will recall that
time that was before the creation of the world, the time when man did not exist
and there was no wickedness in it, when I said that the world would be created
and those who would come into it would praise me. And I would plant a great
vineyard, and from it I would choose a plant; and I would care for it and call it
by my name, and it would be mine forever. When 1 did all the things that I said,
nevertheless my plant that was called by my name did not recognize me as its
planter, but it destroyed its own fruit and did not yield up its fruit to me.' " * And
5 this is what my father commanded me to say to this people." *And Kenaz and
the elders and all the people lifted up their voices and wept with great lamentation
until evening and said, "Will the Shepherd destroy his flock for any reason except
that it has sinned against him? And now he is the one who will spare us according
to the abundance of his mercy, because he has toiled so much among us."
6 And when they had sat down, a holy spirit came upon Kenaz and dwelled6 in Num 24:17;
him and put him in ecstasy, and he began to prophesy, saying, "Behold now I Ezck8:,(20:
see what I had not hoped for, and I perceive that I did not understand. Hear now,
you who dwell on the earth, just as those staying a while on it prophesied before
me and saw this hour even before the earth was corrupted, so all of you who
7 dwell in it may know the prophecies that have been fixed in advance. •Behold
f. See 26:1. 28 a. Originally there may have been only one
g. Josephus (Ant 5.3.3 §184) says that Kenaz prophet and one prophet-priest. See 48:1-3, where
ruled forty years. According to Judg 3:8-11, Cushan- Phinehas is described in terms reminiscent of Elijah,
rishataim ruled Israel eight years and Othniel forty b. Lit. "dwelling."
years (fifty, according to Lucian).

*Now in those days Zebul established a treasury for the LORD and said to 20*2*8;
the people, "Behold if anyone wishes to consecrate gold and silver to the LORD, 2KGS 12:9~16
let him bring it to the treasury of the LORD in Shiloh; only do not let anyone who
has anything belonging to idols wish to consecrate it to the treasuries of the LORD,
because the LORD does not want the abominations of the things under the ban lest
you disturb the assembly of the LORD. For the wrath that has passed is sufficient."
And all the people, from men to women, brought whatever gold and silver their
heart prompted. And everything that was brought was weighed out: twenty talents
4 of gold and two hundred and fifty of silver. • And Zebul judged the people twenty-
five years. And when he had completed his time, he sent and called together all
the people and said, "Behold now I am going forth to die; look to the testimonies
that our predecessors have left as witnesses, and do not let your heart be like the
waves of the sea. But just as a wave of the sea understands nothing except what
c. Lit. "I saw." f. Var. "they will be those who dwell, and the
d. Lit. "for those dwelling." The Gk. third name of that man . . ."
person plural present indicative may have been
read as a masculine plural participle. 29 a. The name should correspond to Ehud of
e. Var. "4,000." See 19:15, whose four and a Judg 3:15. half and two and a half suggest that 7,000 is correct.is in the sea, so let your heart ponder nothing else except what belongs to the
Law." And Zebul slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the tomb of his
father. Deborah
30 Then the sons of Israel did not have anyone to appoint for themselves as
judge; and their heart fell away, and they forgot the promise and transgressed the Judg 2:17
ways that Moses and Joshua the servants of the LORD had commanded them, and
they were led astray after the daughtersa of the Amorites and served their gods. Num 25:if
And the LORD was angry at them and sent his angel and said, "Behold I have Judg 2:1-3.17
chosen one people from every tribe of the earth, and I said that my glory would
reside in this world with it; and I sent to them Moses my servant, who would
declare my laws and statutes; and they transgressed my ways. And behold now I
will arouse their enemies,b and they will rule over them. And then all the people Judg 2:3
will say, 'Because we have transgressed the ways of God and of our fathers, on
account of this these things have come upon us.V And a woman will rule over
them and enlighten them for forty years." «And after this the LORD aroused
against them Jabin the king of Razor, and he began to attack them. And he had Judg 4:2f
Sisera as the commander of his army, who had eight thousand0 iron chariots, and
he came to Mount Ephraim and attacked the people. And Israel feared him very
much, and the people could not resist all the days of Sisera. *And when Israel
had been badly humiliated, all the sons of Israel gathered together to the mountain
of Judahd and said, "We say that we are more blessed than other nations, and
behold now we have been humiliated more than all peoples so that we cannot
dwell in our own land and our enemies have power over us. And now who has
done all these things to us? Is it not our own wicked deeds, because we have
forsaken the LORD of our fathers and have walked in these ways that have not Jer 2:8
profited us?And now who has
done all these things to us? Is it not our own wicked deeds, because we have
forsaken the LORD of our fathers and have walked in these ways that have not Jer 2:8
profited us? And now come, let us fast for seven days, from man to woman and isam 15:3;
from the least to the suckling child. And who knows, perhaps God will be 22:19
reconciled with his inheritance so as not to destroy the plant of his vineyard?"
And when the people had fasted seven days and sat in sackcloth, the LORD sent
to them on the seventh day Deborah, who said to them, "Can the sheep to be isa537
slaughtered give answer to its slaughterer? But both the slaughterer and the
slaughtered are silent even though he is sorrowful over it. And now you were6
like a flock before our LORD, and he led you into the height of the clouds and set
the angels beneath your feet and established for you the Law and commanded you
through the prophets and corrected you through the leaders and showed you not
a few wonders; and on your account he commanded the luminaries, and they stood Josh 10:11-13
still in their assigned places; and when your enemies came against you, he rained
down hailstones^ on them and destroyed them. And Moses and Joshua and Kenaz
and Zebul commanded you, and you did not obey them. *For while these were
alive, you showed yourselves as if you were serving your God; but when these
died, your heart also died. And you became like iron cast into the fire, which
when made molten by the flame becomes like water, but when it comes out of
the fire it reverts to its original hardness. So you also, while those who warned
you burned you, you were taught* the matter; but after they have died you forget
30 a. See also 9:5; 21:1; 44:7; 45:3; cf. 18:13f. e. Lit. "were born." We may have confusion
for polemics against intermarriage. here between Gk. "were born" and "were"; see
b. The MT of Judg 2:3 has "sides" (sdym) also 17:3; 51:6. while the LXX's "narrow places" (synochai) im­ f.*Now in those days Zebul established a treasury for the LORD and said to 20*2*8;
the people, "Behold if anyone wishes to consecrate gold and silver to the LORD, 2KGS 12:9~16
let him bring it to the treasury of the LORD in Shiloh; only do not let anyone who
has anything belonging to idols wish to consecrate it to the treasuries of the LORD,
because the LORD does not want the abominations of the things under the ban lest
you disturb the assembly of the LORD. For the wrath that has passed is sufficient."
And all the people, from men to women, brought whatever gold and silver their
heart prompted. And everything that was brought was weighed out: twenty talents
4 of gold and two hundred and fifty of silver. • And Zebul judged the people twenty-
five years. And when he had completed his time, he sent and called together all
the people and said, "Behold now I am going forth to die; look to the testimonies
that our predecessors have left as witnesses, and do not let your heart be like the
waves of the sea. But just as a wave of the sea understands nothing except what
c. Lit. "I saw." f. Var. "they will be those who dwell, and the
d. Lit. "for those dwelling." The Gk. third name of that man . . ."
person plural present indicative may have been
read as a masculine plural participle. 29 a. The name should correspond to Ehud of
e. Var. "4,000." See 19:15, whose four and a Judg 3:15. half and two and a half suggest that 7,000 is correct.

The MT of Judg 2:3 has "sides" (sdym) also 17:3; 51:6. while the LXX's "narrow places" (synochai) im­ f. The LXX of Josh 10:11 also has "hailstones";
plies srym. Ps-Philo has interpreted srym as "ene­ the MT has "great stones."
mies." g. Lit. "you demonstrated," which probably
c. Judg 4:3 has 900. Some Ps-Philo MSS have depends on the Gk. translator's having mistaken
9,000. the Heb. hophal ("were taught") for the hiphil
d. In Judg 4:5 it is the hill country of Ephraim. ("demonstrated").7 everything. •And behold now the LORD will take pity onh you today, not because
of you but because of his covenant that he established with your fathers and the
oath that he has sworn not to abandon you forever. (Know, however, that after
my departure you will start sinning again until the end of your days.) On account
of this the LORD will work wonders among you and hand over your enemies into
your hands. For our fathers are dead, but the God who established the covenant
with them is life."
The defeat and death of Sisera
1 31 And Deborah sent and summoned Barak, and she said to him, "Rise and Judg4:6
gird your loins like a man, and go down and attack Sisera, because I see the stars Job 38:3<40:7)
moved from their course and ready for battle on your side. Also I see the lightning Judg 5:20
that cannot be moved from its course going forth to hinder the works of the Ex 1*25
chariots of those who glory in the might of Sisera, who is saying, i am going
down to attack Israel with my mighty arm, and / will divide their spoils among Judg 5:30; Ex
my servants, and I will take for myself beautiful women as concubines.' And on 15
account of this the LORD said about him that the arm of a weak woman would
attack him and maidens would take his spoils and even he would fall into the
2 hands of a woman." *And when Deborah and the people and Barak went down Judg4:9
to meet the enemies, immediately the LORD disturbed the movement of his stars. And he said to them,8 "Hurry and go, for your enemies fall upon you; and
Judg5:20
confound their arms and crush the power of their heart, because I have come that
my people may prevail. For even if my people have sinned, nevertheless I will
have mercy on them." And when these words had been said, the stars went forth
as had been commanded them and burned up their enemies. And the number of
those gathered together in one hour and slain was 90 times 97,000 men; but they
did not destroy Sisera, because so it had been commanded them.For even if my people have sinned, nevertheless I will
have mercy on them." And when these words had been said, the stars went forth
as had been commanded them and burned up their enemies. And the number of
those gathered together in one hour and slain was 90 times 97,000 men; but they
did not destroy Sisera, because so it had been commanded them. 3 And when Sisera, sitting on a horse,b had fled to save his life, Jael the wife of Judg 4:15, nr. Heberc the Kenite adorned herself and went out to meet him; now the woman
was very beautiful in appearance. And she saw him and said to him, "Go inside
and take some food and sleep until evening; I will send my servants with you. For I know that you will remember me and return the favor to me." And Sisera
went in, and when he saw roses scattered on the bed, he said, "If I am saved, I
Judg5:28
4 will go to my mother, and Jael will be my wife." »And after this Sisera was
thirsty and said to Jael, "Get me a little water, because I am faint and my soul Judg4:i9; 5:25
burns with the flame that I saw in the stars." And Jael said to him, "Rest a little
5 while, and then you will drink." *And when Sisera was sleeping, Jael went out
to the flock and got milk from it. And when she was milking, she said, "And
now be mindful, LORD, of when you assigned every tribe or race to the earth. Did you not choose Israel alone and liken it to no animal except to the ram that
goes before and leads the flock? And so look and see that Sisera has made a plan
and said, *I will go and punish the flock of the Most Powerful One.' And I will
take from the milk of these animals to which you have likened your people/and
I will go and give him to drink. And when he will have drunk, he will be off
guard, and afterward I will kill him.The MT of Judg 2:3 has "sides" (sdym) also 17:3; 51:6. while the LXX's "narrow places" (synochai) im­ f. The LXX of Josh 10:11 also has "hailstones";
plies srym. Ps-Philo has interpreted srym as "ene­ the MT has "great stones."
mies." g. Lit. "you demonstrated," which probably
c. Judg 4:3 has 900. Some Ps-Philo MSS have depends on the Gk. translator's having mistaken
9,000. the Heb. hophal ("were taught") for the hiphil
d. In Judg 4:5 it is the hill country of Ephraim. ("demonstrated").

And so look and see that Sisera has made a plan
and said, *I will go and punish the flock of the Most Powerful One.' And I will
take from the milk of these animals to which you have likened your people/and
I will go and give him to drink. And when he will have drunk, he will be off
guard, and afterward I will kill him. But this will be the sign that you act along
with me, LORD, that, when I enter while Sisera is asleep, he will rise up and ask
me again and again, saying, 'Give me water to drink,' then I know that my prayer Judg 4:19
6 has been heard." *And when Jael returned and came in, Sisera was awakened
and said to her, "Give me a drink, because I am burning up terribly and my soul
is inflamed." And Jael took wine and mixed it with milk and gave it to him to
7 drink. And he drank it and went to sleep. *Now Jael took a stake in her left hand
h. Var. "be reconciled with." c. The name Heber is absent from all the MSS
but one, yet it is present in Judg 4:17. Its omission
31 a. Here God speaks to the stars. in the Lat. is easily explained by the proximity of
b. In Judg 4:17 Sisera flees on foot. uxor and Aber.and approached him, saying, "If God will work this sign with me, 1 know that Judg4:2i. 5:26
Sisera will fall into my hands. Behold I will throw him down on the ground from Jdt 13:7
the bed on which he sleeps; and if he does not feel it, 1 know that he has been
handed over." And Jael took Sisera and pushed him onto the ground from the jdt 13:9
bed. But he did not feel it, because he was very groggy. And Jael said, "Strengthen Jdt 13:7
in me today, Lord, my arm on account of you and your people and those who judg 4:21.5:26
hope in you." And Jael took the stake and put it on his temple and struck it with
a hammer. And while he was dying, Sisera said to Jael, "Behold pain has taken
hold of me, Jael, and I die like a woman." And Jael said to him, "Go, boast
before your father in hell and tell him that you have fallen into the hands of a Judg 4:9
woman." And by doing this she killed him and left his body there until Barak judg528-30
8 should return. #Now Sisera's mother was named Themech,d and she sent word to
her ladies, saying, "Come and let us go out together to meet my son, and you
will see the daughters of the Hebrews whom my son will bring here for himself
9 as concubines." »Now Barak returned from pursuing Sisera and was very Judg4:22
disappointed because he had not found him.And while he was dying, Sisera said to Jael, "Behold pain has taken
hold of me, Jael, and I die like a woman." And Jael said to him, "Go, boast
before your father in hell and tell him that you have fallen into the hands of a Judg 4:9
woman." And by doing this she killed him and left his body there until Barak judg528-30
8 should return. #Now Sisera's mother was named Themech,d and she sent word to
her ladies, saying, "Come and let us go out together to meet my son, and you
will see the daughters of the Hebrews whom my son will bring here for himself
9 as concubines." »Now Barak returned from pursuing Sisera and was very Judg4:22
disappointed because he had not found him. Jael went out to meet him and said,
"Come, enter in, you blessed by God, and I will hand over to you your enemy
whom you pursued but did not find." And Barak entered and found Sisera dead
and said, "Blessed be the LORD, who sent his spirit and said, 'Into the hand of a
woman Sisera will be handed over.'" And on saying these words he cut off
Sisera's head and sent it over to his mother and gave a message to her, saying,
"Receive your son, whom you hoped to see coming back with spoils."
The hymn of Deborah
1 32 Then Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoa and'all the people together sang Judg 5:i
a hymnb to the LORD on that day, saying, "Behold the LORD has shown us his
glory from on high, as he did in the height of the heavenly places when he sent
forth his voice to confuse the languages of men. And he chose our nation and Gen 117
took Abraham our father out of the fire and chose him over all his brothers and
kept him from the firec and freed him from the bricks destined for building the
tower. And he gave him a son at the end of his old age and took him out of a
sterile womb.And he chose our nation and Gen 117
took Abraham our father out of the fire and chose him over all his brothers and
kept him from the firec and freed him from the bricks destined for building the
tower. And he gave him a son at the end of his old age and took him out of a
sterile womb. And all the angels were jealous of him, and the worshiping hosts
2 envied him.d #And since they were jealous of him, God said to him, 'Kill the Gen 22:1-10
fruit of your body for me, and offer for me as a sacrifice what has been given to
you by me.'e And Abraham did not argue, but set out immediately. And as he
was setting out, he said to his son, 'Behold now, my son, I am offering you as a
3 holocaust and am delivering you into the hands that gave you to me.' *But the
son said to the father, 'Hear me, father. If a lamb of the flock is accepted as
sacrifice to the LORD with an odor of sweetness and if for the wicked deeds of
men animals are appointed to be killed, but man is designed to inherit the world,
how then do you now say to me, "Come and inherit life without limitf and time
without measure"? Yet have I not been born into the world to be offered as a
sacrifice to him who made me? Now my blessedness will be above that of all
men, because there will be nothing like this; and about me future generations will
be instructed and through me the peoples will understand that the LORD has made
4 the soul of a man worthy to be a sacrifice.' #And when he had offered the son Gen 22:9-18
d. This was also the name of Cain's wife in 2:2. c. See 6:3-18 for Abraham's escape from the
Was it originally Tanaach, or was it derived from fire. tybb or tbt in Judg 5:28? d. On the angels' jealousy of Abraham, see
GenR 55:4, where they accuse Abraham before
32 a. Judg 5:1 has "Abinoam" and omits "and God. all the people." The Gk. translator may have e. For Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac, see 18:5
divided the Heb. 'fryw'm into ybynw and *m (Abino and 40:2. and the people). f. Lit.And so look and see that Sisera has made a plan
and said, *I will go and punish the flock of the Most Powerful One.' And I will
take from the milk of these animals to which you have likened your people/and
I will go and give him to drink. And when he will have drunk, he will be off
guard, and afterward I will kill him. But this will be the sign that you act along
with me, LORD, that, when I enter while Sisera is asleep, he will rise up and ask
me again and again, saying, 'Give me water to drink,' then I know that my prayer Judg 4:19
6 has been heard." *And when Jael returned and came in, Sisera was awakened
and said to her, "Give me a drink, because I am burning up terribly and my soul
is inflamed." And Jael took wine and mixed it with milk and gave it to him to
7 drink. And he drank it and went to sleep. *Now Jael took a stake in her left hand
h. Var. "be reconciled with." c. The name Heber is absent from all the MSS
but one, yet it is present in Judg 4:17. Its omission
31 a. Here God speaks to the stars. in the Lat. is easily explained by the proximity of
b. In Judg 4:17 Sisera flees on foot. uxor and Aber.

f. Lit. "life secure." There may be confusion
b. Even though what follows is called a hymn, between the Gk. apeiratos, "untroubled," and
we cannot now detect a hymnic structure. aperantos, * * limitless.''upon the altar and had bound his feet so as to kill him, the Most Powerful hastened
and sent forth his voice from on high saying, 4 You shall not slay your son, nor
shall you destroy the fruit of your body. For now I have appeared so as to reveal
you to those who do not know youg and have shut the mouths of those who are
always speaking evil against you. Now your memory will be before me always,
and your name and his will remain from one generation to another/
5 "And he gave Isaac two sons, both also from a womb that was closed up. And Gen 25:2I
their mother was then in the third year of her marriageh; and it will not happen
in this way to any woman, nor will any female so boast. But when her husband
approached her in the third year, to him there were bom two sons, Jacob and
6 Esau. And God loved Jacob, but he hated Esau because of his deeds. »And in Mai i:2f
their father's old age Isaac blessed Jacob and sent him into Mesopotamia, and
there* he became the father of twelve sons. And they went down into Egypt and
dwelt there. 7 "And when their enemies had dealt with them wickedly, the people cried out
to the LORD, and their prayer was heard, and he brought them out of there and Ex 19
brought them to Mount Sinai and brought forth for them the foundation of
understanding that he had prepared from the creation of the world.j And then
when the world's foundation was moved, the heavenly hosts speeded the lightnings
on their courses, and the winds brought forth noise from their chambers,k and the
earth was shaken from its firmament, and the mountains and cliffs trembled in
their joints, and the clouds lifted up their floods against the flame of Are so that
8 it would not bum up the world. •Then the abyss was aroused from its very springs,
and all the waves of the sea gathered together.7 "And when their enemies had dealt with them wickedly, the people cried out
to the LORD, and their prayer was heard, and he brought them out of there and Ex 19
brought them to Mount Sinai and brought forth for them the foundation of
understanding that he had prepared from the creation of the world.j And then
when the world's foundation was moved, the heavenly hosts speeded the lightnings
on their courses, and the winds brought forth noise from their chambers,k and the
earth was shaken from its firmament, and the mountains and cliffs trembled in
their joints, and the clouds lifted up their floods against the flame of Are so that
8 it would not bum up the world. •Then the abyss was aroused from its very springs,
and all the waves of the sea gathered together. Then Paradise gave off the scent
of its fruit, and the cedars of Lebanon were shaken from their roots, and the beasts
of the held were moved in their dwelling places in the forest; and all his creatures
came together to see the LORD establishing a covenant with the sons of Israel. And everything that the Most Powerful said, this he observed, having Moses his
beloved as a witness. 9 "And when he was dying, God established for him a platform1 and showed
him then what we now have as witnesses, saying, 'Let there be as a witness
between me and you and my people the heaven that you are to enter and the earth
on which you walk until now. For the sun and the moon and the stars are servants
10 to you.' »And when Joshua arose to rule the people, on the day when he was
fighting the enemies, the evening approached while the battle was still going on. Joshua said to the sun and moon, 4You who have been made servants between
the Most Powerful and his sons, behold now the battje is still going on, and do
you abandon your duties? Therefore stand still today and give light to his sons Josh 10:12
and darkness to his enemies.' And they did so. 11 44And now in these days Sisera arose to enslave us.f. Lit. "life secure." There may be confusion
b. Even though what follows is called a hymn, between the Gk. apeiratos, "untroubled," and
we cannot now detect a hymnic structure. aperantos, * * limitless.''

Therefore stand still today and give light to his sons Josh 10:12
and darkness to his enemies.' And they did so. 11 44And now in these days Sisera arose to enslave us. And we cried out to our
LORD, and he commanded the stars and said, 'Depart from your positions and
burn up my enemies so that they may know my power.' And the stars came down
12 and attacked their camp and guarded us without any strain. •So we will not cease
singing praise, nor will our mouth be silent in telling his wonders, because he has
remembered both his recent and ancient promises and shown his saving power to
us. And so Jael is glorified among women, because she alone has made straight Judg 5:24
the way to success by killing Sisera with her own hands. 13 "Go, earth; go, heavens and lightnings; go, angels of the heavenly host; go
and tell the fathers in their chambers of soulsm and say, 4The Most Powerful has
not forgotten the least of the promises that he established with us, saying, 44Many
wonders will I do for your sons."' And now from this day on let it be known
g. Var. "to reveal myself to those who do not j. The Law, or divine wisdom in general. know me." k. For the treasuries of the winds, see 1 En 18:1. h. But according to Gen 25:20 Isaac was forty 1. Moses is given a platform or balcony from
when he married, and according to Gen 25:26 he which he can see all. was sixty when Jacob and Esau were bom. m. For Sheol as the resting place of souls, see
i. But Benjamin was bom in the land of Israel. IPet 3:19; 4:6; 4Ezra 4:35; 2Bar 21:23; 42:7f.that, whatever God has said to me, he will do; these things he will do, even if
14 man delays in praising God. »But you, Deborah, sing praises, and let the grace
of the holy spirit awaken in you, and begin to praise the works of the LORD,
because there will not again arise such a day on which the stars will band together"
and attack the enemies of Israel as was commanded them. And from this hour, if
Israel falls into distress, it will call upon those witnesses along with these servants,
and they will form a delegation to the Most High, and he will remember that day
15 and send the saving power of his covenant. »And you, Deborah, begin to tell
what you saw in the field, how the people were walking about and going forth in
safety and the stars fought for them. Rejoice, earth, over those dwelling in you,
because the knowledge0 of the LORD that builds a towerp among you is present. Not unjustly did God take from you the rib of the first-formed,q knowing that Gen 2:2if
from his rib Israel would be born. Your forming will be a testimony of what the
16 LORD has done for his people. #Wait, you hours of the day, and do not wish to
hurry, in order that we may declare what our mind can bring forward, for night
will be upon us. It will be like the night when God killed the firstborn of the Ex 12:29
17 Egyptians on account of his own firstborn. *And then I will cease my hymn, for
the time is readied for his just judgments. For 1 will sing a hymn to him in the
renewal of creation. And the people will remember his saving power, and this
will be a testimony for it. And let the sea with its abyss be a witness, because
not only has God dried it up before our fathers, but also he has diverted the stars' Ex i4f
from their positions and attacked our enemies." Judg 5:20
is And when Deborah made an end to her words, she along with the people went
up to Shiloh, and they offered sacrifices and holocausts, and they sang to the
accompaniment of the trumpets.And the people will remember his saving power, and this
will be a testimony for it. And let the sea with its abyss be a witness, because
not only has God dried it up before our fathers, but also he has diverted the stars' Ex i4f
from their positions and attacked our enemies." Judg 5:20
is And when Deborah made an end to her words, she along with the people went
up to Shiloh, and they offered sacrifices and holocausts, and they sang to the
accompaniment of the trumpets. And when they were singing and the sacrifices
had been offered, Deborah said, "And this will be as a testimony of trumpets
between the stars and their LORD." And Deborah came down from there and
judged8 Israel forty years. Judg 5:31
The farewell and death of Deborah
1 33 And when the days of her death drew near, she sent and gathered all the
people and said to them, "Listen now, my people. Behold 1 am warning you as
a woman of Goda and am enlightening you as one from the female race; and obey
2 me like your mother and heed my words as people who will also die. *Behold I Josh 23.14
am going todayb on the way of all flesh, on which you also will come. Only direct
your heart to the LORD your God during the time of your life, because after your
3 death you cannot repent of those things in which you live. *For then death is
sealed up and brought to an end, and the measure and the time and the years have
returned their deposit. For even if you seek to do evil in hell after your death,
you cannot, because the desire for sinning will cease and the evil impulse will
lose its power,c because even hell will not restore what has been received and
deposited to it unless it be demanded by him who has made the deposit to it.Therefore stand still today and give light to his sons Josh 10:12
and darkness to his enemies.' And they did so. 11 44And now in these days Sisera arose to enslave us. And we cried out to our
LORD, and he commanded the stars and said, 'Depart from your positions and
burn up my enemies so that they may know my power.' And the stars came down
12 and attacked their camp and guarded us without any strain. •So we will not cease
singing praise, nor will our mouth be silent in telling his wonders, because he has
remembered both his recent and ancient promises and shown his saving power to
us. And so Jael is glorified among women, because she alone has made straight Judg 5:24
the way to success by killing Sisera with her own hands. 13 "Go, earth; go, heavens and lightnings; go, angels of the heavenly host; go
and tell the fathers in their chambers of soulsm and say, 4The Most Powerful has
not forgotten the least of the promises that he established with us, saying, 44Many
wonders will I do for your sons."' And now from this day on let it be known
g. Var. "to reveal myself to those who do not j. The Law, or divine wisdom in general. know me." k. For the treasuries of the winds, see 1 En 18:1. h. But according to Gen 25:20 Isaac was forty 1. Moses is given a platform or balcony from
when he married, and according to Gen 25:26 he which he can see all. was sixty when Jacob and Esau were bom. m. For Sheol as the resting place of souls, see
i. But Benjamin was bom in the land of Israel. IPet 3:19; 4:6; 4Ezra 4:35; 2Bar 21:23; 42:7f.

*For then death is
sealed up and brought to an end, and the measure and the time and the years have
returned their deposit. For even if you seek to do evil in hell after your death,
you cannot, because the desire for sinning will cease and the evil impulse will
lose its power,c because even hell will not restore what has been received and
deposited to it unless it be demanded by him who has made the deposit to it. Now
therefore, my sons, obey my voice; while you have the time of life and the light
4 of the Law, make straight your ways." *And while Deborah was saying these
words, all the people raised up their voice together and wept and said, "Behold
now, Mother, you will die, and to whom do you commend your sons whom you
n. Lit. "announce," which in Heb. would be judged" (wtSpt) and "it was quiet" (wtSqt)\ see
ygydw; but better sense is had by assuming an Ps-Philo 33:6.'
original ygwdw, "will band together," as in Ps
94:21. 33 a. The expression "woman of God" seems to
0. Var. "assembly." be the feminist counterpart of the common expres­
p. Lit. "burns incense" (thurificat); but "builds sion "man of God"; see also "the bosom of her
a tower" (turrificat) may be better in view of 32:1. mothers" in 40:4. q. Adam. b. Reading "today" (hodie) rather than "to
r. Most MSS have the incorrect castra, "camps," die" {mori) on the basis of Josh 23:14. instead of astra. c. The idea that the evil impulse ceases after
s. Comparison with the Heb. of Judg 5:31 death is unique to Ps-Philo. suggests a possible confusion between "and sheare leaving? Pray therefore for us, and after your departure your soul will be
5 mindful of us forever." #And Deborah answered and said to the people, "While
a man is still alive he can pray for himself and for his sons, but after his end he
cannot pray or be mindful of anyone. Therefore do not hope in your fathers.d For
they will not profit you at all unless you be found like them. But then you will
be like the stars of the heaven,c which now have been revealed among you."
6 And Deborah died and slept with her fathers and was buried in the city of her
fathers. And the people mourned for her seventy days, and while they were
mourning for her, they said these words as a lamentation:
"Behold there has perished a mother from Israel, Judg 5:7
and the holy one who exercised leadership in the house of Jacob. She firmed up the fence about her generation,
and her generation will grieve over her."
And after her death the land had rest for sevenf years. Judg 5:3i
Aod the magician
1 34 And in that time there arose a certain Aoda from the sanctuaries of Midian, Judg &i-6
and this man was a magician, and he said to Israel, "Why do you pay attention
to your Law? Come, I will show you something other than your Law." And the
people said, "What will you show us that our Law does not have?" And he said
to the people, "Have you ever seen the sun by night?" And they said, "No."
And he said, "Whenever you wish, I will show it to you in order that you may
know that our gods have power and do not deceive those who serve them." And
2 they said, "Show it." *And he went away and worked with his magic tricks and
gave orders to the angels who were in charge of magicians, for he had been
3 sacrificing to them for a long time.Judg 5:3i
Aod the magician
1 34 And in that time there arose a certain Aoda from the sanctuaries of Midian, Judg &i-6
and this man was a magician, and he said to Israel, "Why do you pay attention
to your Law? Come, I will show you something other than your Law." And the
people said, "What will you show us that our Law does not have?" And he said
to the people, "Have you ever seen the sun by night?" And they said, "No."
And he said, "Whenever you wish, I will show it to you in order that you may
know that our gods have power and do not deceive those who serve them." And
2 they said, "Show it." *And he went away and worked with his magic tricks and
gave orders to the angels who were in charge of magicians, for he had been
3 sacrificing to them for a long time. • Because in that time before they were
condemned, magic was revealed by angels and they would have destroyed the age
without measure;b and because they had transgressed, it happened that the angels
did not have the power; and when they were judged, then the power was not
given over to others. And they do these things by means of those men, the
4 magicians who minister to men, until the age without measure comes. -And then Judg 6:7-io
by the art of magic he showed to the people the sun by night. And the people
were amazed and said, "Behold how much the gods of the Midianites can do,
5 and we did not know it." »And God wished to test if Israel would remain in its
wicked deeds, and he let them0 be, and their work was successful. And the people
of Israel were deceived and began to serve the gods of the Midianites. And God
said, "I will deliver them into the hands of the Midianites, because they have
been deceived by them." And he delivered them into their hands, and the Jud6:i
g
Midianites began to reduce Israel to slavery. The call of Gideon
1 35 Now Gideon was the son of Joash; he was the most powerful man among all
his brothers.*For then death is
sealed up and brought to an end, and the measure and the time and the years have
returned their deposit. For even if you seek to do evil in hell after your death,
you cannot, because the desire for sinning will cease and the evil impulse will
lose its power,c because even hell will not restore what has been received and
deposited to it unless it be demanded by him who has made the deposit to it. Now
therefore, my sons, obey my voice; while you have the time of life and the light
4 of the Law, make straight your ways." *And while Deborah was saying these
words, all the people raised up their voice together and wept and said, "Behold
now, Mother, you will die, and to whom do you commend your sons whom you
n. Lit. "announce," which in Heb. would be judged" (wtSpt) and "it was quiet" (wtSqt)\ see
ygydw; but better sense is had by assuming an Ps-Philo 33:6.'
original ygwdw, "will band together," as in Ps
94:21. 33 a. The expression "woman of God" seems to
0. Var. "assembly." be the feminist counterpart of the common expres­
p. Lit. "burns incense" (thurificat); but "builds sion "man of God"; see also "the bosom of her
a tower" (turrificat) may be better in view of 32:1. mothers" in 40:4. q. Adam. b. Reading "today" (hodie) rather than "to
r. Most MSS have the incorrect castra, "camps," die" {mori) on the basis of Josh 23:14. instead of astra. c. The idea that the evil impulse ceases after
s. Comparison with the Heb. of Judg 5:31 death is unique to Ps-Philo. suggests a possible confusion between "and she

And God
said, "I will deliver them into the hands of the Midianites, because they have
been deceived by them." And he delivered them into their hands, and the Jud6:i
g
Midianites began to reduce Israel to slavery. The call of Gideon
1 35 Now Gideon was the son of Joash; he was the most powerful man among all
his brothers. And when it was summertime, he came to beat out the sheaves he Jud6:iif.,i5
g
had and to escape the attacking Midianites by hiding himself in the mountain. And behold the angel of the Lord met8 him and said to him, "From where have Judg i9:n
2 you come, and where is your destination?" #He said to him, "Why do you ask
me from where do I come, for distress has encompassed me? Israel has fallen into
d. What is being disputed is the power of the 34 a. The episode of Aod is unique to Ps-Philo. dead to intercede for the living. See also 2Bar b. The age to come, the eschatological age. 85:12. Elsewhere in Ps-Philo (e.g. 35:3) the merits c. The wicked angels. of Israel's fathers have power. e. On the life of the just after death as astral 35 a. Judg 6:12 has4 'appeared.'' Heb. wyqr* (met)
immortality, see Dan 12:2f.; IEn 104:2, 6; AsMos may have been confused with wyr3 (appeared). 10:9. f. Judg 5:31 has "forty" years.distress; they have been delivered into the hands of the Midianites. And where Judg6:i3
are the wonders that our fathers described to us, saying, 'The LORD has chosen
Israel alone before all the peoples of the earth'? And behold now he has delivered
us up and forgotten the promises that he told our fathers. For we would prefer to
be handed over to death once and for all than for his people to be punished thus
3 over a period of time." *And the angelb of the Lord said to him, "You have not Judg 6; 14
been delivered up without reason, but your own schemes have done these things
to you; because, as you have abandoned the promises that you have received from
the LORD, these evilsc have found you out; and you have not been mindful of the Judg 6:13
commandments of God that those who were before you commanded you, so that
you have come into the displeasure of your God. But he will have mercy, as no
one else has mercy, on the race of Israel, though not on account of you but on
4 account of those who have fallen asleep.d #And now come; I will send you, and Judg6:i4
you will free Israel from the hand of the Midianites; for the LORD says these
words: 'Even if Israel is not just, nevertheless because the Midianites are sinners,
though I recognize the wickedness of my people, I will forgive them and afterward
I will rebuke them because they have acted wickedly. But for the present I will
5 take my vengeance upon the Midianites.'" »And Gideon said, "Who am I and Judges
what is the house of my father that I should go up against the Midianites for
battle?" And the angel said to him, "Perhaps you think that as the way of men
is, so the way of God is. For men look for the glory of the world and riches, but
God for the straight and good and for meekness. Now therefore go and gird your
loins, and the Lord will be with you.For men look for the glory of the world and riches, but
God for the straight and good and for meekness. Now therefore go and gird your
loins, and the Lord will be with you. For he has chosen you to take vengeance Judg&i6
6 upon his enemies as he commanded you." *And Gideon said to him, "May my mg&.n
Lord not be angry that I should say a word. Behold Moses the first of all the 061118:30
prophets asked the LORD for a sign, and it was given to him. But who am I,
unless perhaps the LORD has chosen me? May he give me a sign so that I may Judg6.n
know that I am being guided." And the angel of the Lord said to him, "Run and Judg 6:20
get for me water from that lake and pour it on that rock, and I will give you a
7 sign." And he went away and got it as he commanded him. »And the angel said Judg6:20f
to him, "Before you pour water on the rock, ask what you wish to be made from
it, either blood or fire, or that it not appear at all." And Gideon said, "Let it
become half blood and half fire." And Gideon poured water on the rock. And
when he had poured it out, it became half flame and half blood, and they were
both mixed together, that is, the fire and the blood; and the blood did not extinguish
the fire nor did the fire consume6 the blood. And Gideon saw these happenings
and sought other signs, and they were given to him. Are they not written in the
Book of Judges? The victory of Gideon. His sin and death
1 36 And Gideon took three hundred8 men and went out and came to the outskirts judg 7:19
of the camp of Midian and heard each man speaking to his neighbor, saying,
"You will see confusion beyond reckoning caused by the sword of Gideon coming
upon us because God has delivered into his hands the camp of the Midianites and Judg 7:i4
he is about to destroy us utterly, that is, even mother along with children, because
our sins have reached full measure as even our own gods have shown us and we
did not believe them.And God
said, "I will deliver them into the hands of the Midianites, because they have
been deceived by them." And he delivered them into their hands, and the Jud6:i
g
Midianites began to reduce Israel to slavery. The call of Gideon
1 35 Now Gideon was the son of Joash; he was the most powerful man among all
his brothers. And when it was summertime, he came to beat out the sheaves he Jud6:iif.,i5
g
had and to escape the attacking Midianites by hiding himself in the mountain. And behold the angel of the Lord met8 him and said to him, "From where have Judg i9:n
2 you come, and where is your destination?" #He said to him, "Why do you ask
me from where do I come, for distress has encompassed me? Israel has fallen into
d. What is being disputed is the power of the 34 a. The episode of Aod is unique to Ps-Philo. dead to intercede for the living. See also 2Bar b. The age to come, the eschatological age. 85:12. Elsewhere in Ps-Philo (e.g. 35:3) the merits c. The wicked angels. of Israel's fathers have power. e. On the life of the just after death as astral 35 a. Judg 6:12 has4 'appeared.'' Heb. wyqr* (met)
immortality, see Dan 12:2f.; IEn 104:2, 6; AsMos may have been confused with wyr3 (appeared). 10:9. f. Judg 5:31 has "forty" years.

The victory of Gideon. His sin and death
1 36 And Gideon took three hundred8 men and went out and came to the outskirts judg 7:19
of the camp of Midian and heard each man speaking to his neighbor, saying,
"You will see confusion beyond reckoning caused by the sword of Gideon coming
upon us because God has delivered into his hands the camp of the Midianites and Judg 7:i4
he is about to destroy us utterly, that is, even mother along with children, because
our sins have reached full measure as even our own gods have shown us and we
did not believe them. And now let us rise up and take care for our own lives and
2 flee." •And as soon as Gideon heard these words, he put on the spirit of the Judg7:i5;6:34
Lord6 and was strengthened and said to the three hundred men, "Rise up, let
each one of you gird on his sword, because the Midianites have been delivered
b. In the LXX ot Judg 6:14 as in Ps-Philo an e. Most MSS have "shook off" (excussit), but
angel speaks; in the MT God speaks. "consume" (exussit) must be correct. c. The expression "these evils** agrees with the
LXX, Lucian, and Vetus Latina of Judg 6:13. 36 a. Judg 7:19 has "one hundred."
d. The idea that God will have mercy on Israel b. Or perhaps read "the spirit of the LORD
because of those who have died is also found in clothed him" by emending induit spiritum to induit
2Mac8:15. spirit us; see Judg 6:34.into our hands." And the men went down with them. And he drew near and
began to fight, and they blew the trumpets and cried out together and said, "The Judg i.m
sword of the Lord* is upon us." And they killed about 120,000 men of the Judg 8: io
3 Midianites, and the rest of the Midianites fled. *And after these events Gideon
came and gathered the people of Israel and said to them, "Behold the LORD has
sent me to fight your battle, and I have gone out as he commanded me. And now
/ make one request of you; do not turn your face away. Let each of you give me Judg 8:24-27
the golden bracelets'1 that you have on your hands." And Gideon spread out a
garment, and each of them threw in his bracelets. And all were weighed, and
their weight was found to be twelve talents.e And Gideon took them and made
4 idols from them and worshiped them. »And God said, "One course is fixed, that
I should not rebuke Gideon during his lifetime, because, when he destroyed the
sanctuary of Baal, then they all said, 'Baal will avenge himself.' Now if I should Judg 6:25-32
chastise him because he has acted wickedly against me, you may say, 4Not God,
but Baal has chastised him, because he sinned against him first.' And so now
Gideon will die at a good old age so that they may have nothingf to say. But
afterward, when Gideon will have died, I will chastise him once and for all,
because he has offended me." And Gideon died at a good old age and was buried Judg 8:32
in his own city.*
Abimelech
1 37 And he had a son by a concubine. Abimelech8 killed allb his brothers, for he judg 9:i
2 wished to be leader of the people. *Then all the trees of the field came together }JjJ| jj:^8
to the fig tree* and said, "Come, reign over us." And the fig tree said, "Was I
born for kingship or rulership over the trees? Or was I planted so as to reign
among you? And so as I cannot reign over you, so Abimelech will not get a long
tenure in his rule." And afterward the trees came together to the vine and said, Judg9.i2f.Or was I planted so as to reign
among you? And so as I cannot reign over you, so Abimelech will not get a long
tenure in his rule." And afterward the trees came together to the vine and said, Judg9.i2f. "Come, reign over us." And the vine said, "I was planted to give sweetness to
men. Come and preserve the fruit of my vineyard. But as I cannot reign over you, Ezek 3:i8
so is the blood of Abimelech demanded from you." And then the trees came to
the apple treed and said, "Come, reign over us." And it said, "It has been
commanded to me to provide sweet-smelling fruit for men. So I cannot reign over
3 you; and Abimelech will die by stoning." *And then the trees came to the Jud9:i4
g
bramblebush and said, "Come, reign over us." And the bramblebush said,
"When the thorn was born, truth shone forth in the form of a thorn.6 And when
the first-formedf was condemned to death, the earth was condemned to bring forth
thorns and thistles. And when the truth enlightened Moses, it enlightened him by Gen 3:18
means of a thicket of thorns. And now it will be that the truth may be heard by Ex 3:2
you from me. And if you have spoken truthfully to the bramblebush that it really Judg9i5
should reign over you, sit in its shadow. But if hypocritically, let the fire go forth
and devour8 and eat up the trees of the field, for the apple tree signifiesh the
chastisers, and the fig tree signifies the people, and the vine signifies those who
4 were before us. »And now the bramblebush will be for you in this hour like
Abimelech, who killed his brothers unjustly and wishes to rule among you. If
c. The var.4 4the sword of the LORD and Gideon' * b. Only Ps-Philo and the Lucianic MSS of Judg
is probably due to an assimilation to Judg 7:20. 9:5 have "all."
d. In Judg 8:24-27 it is "earrings." c. The olive tree mentioned in Judg 9:8f. is
e. In Judg 8:26 it is 1,700 shekels of gold. omitted. f. The phrase "they may have nothing" is d. Var.The victory of Gideon. His sin and death
1 36 And Gideon took three hundred8 men and went out and came to the outskirts judg 7:19
of the camp of Midian and heard each man speaking to his neighbor, saying,
"You will see confusion beyond reckoning caused by the sword of Gideon coming
upon us because God has delivered into his hands the camp of the Midianites and Judg 7:i4
he is about to destroy us utterly, that is, even mother along with children, because
our sins have reached full measure as even our own gods have shown us and we
did not believe them. And now let us rise up and take care for our own lives and
2 flee." •And as soon as Gideon heard these words, he put on the spirit of the Judg7:i5;6:34
Lord6 and was strengthened and said to the three hundred men, "Rise up, let
each one of you gird on his sword, because the Midianites have been delivered
b. In the LXX ot Judg 6:14 as in Ps-Philo an e. Most MSS have "shook off" (excussit), but
angel speaks; in the MT God speaks. "consume" (exussit) must be correct. c. The expression "these evils** agrees with the
LXX, Lucian, and Vetus Latina of Judg 6:13. 36 a. Judg 7:19 has "one hundred."
d. The idea that God will have mercy on Israel b. Or perhaps read "the spirit of the LORD
because of those who have died is also found in clothed him" by emending induit spiritum to induit
2Mac8:15. spirit us; see Judg 6:34.

The phrase "they may have nothing" is d. Var. "myrtle tree." Neither an apple tree nor
inserted in only one MS, but some such phrase is a myrtle tree is mentioned in Judg 9:8-15. necessary for sense. e. To what Ps-Philo is alluding is not clear. g. The phrase "in his own city" is found in the f. Adam. LXX and Lucianic MSS of Judg 8:32 but not in g. Perhaps the Lat. at one point had "let the
the MT. fire go forth from the bramblebush," but then de
rubo (from the bramblebush) was corrupted into
37 a. The proper name is missing in all but one devoret. See Judg 9:15 and Ps-Philo 37:4. MS. Some other material seems to be missing here h. Lit. "was made for."
also.Abimelech be worthy of them whom he wishes to rule for himself, let him be
like the bramblebush that was made to rebuke the foolish among the people."
And the fire went forth from the bramblebush and ate up the trees that were in
Judg9:i5
the fields/ • After this Abimelech ruled the people one year and six months/ and judf 9.-53
he died when a woman threw down upon him half a millstone.k
Jair
38 Jaira built a sanctuary to Baal, and he deceived the people, saying, "Everyone Judg 10:3-6
who will not sacrifice to Baal will die." And when all the people were sacrificing,
only seven men were not willing to sacrifice. Their names are these: Defal,
Abiesdrel, Getalibal, Selumi, Assur, Ionadali, Memihel.b •They answered and
said to Jair, "Behold we are mindful of the commandments that those who were
before us and Deborah our mother commanded us, saying, 'See that you do not
Deut 5:32; Josh
turn your heart to the right or to the left, but pay attention to the Law of the LORD ,:7F
day and night.' And now why do you corrupt the people of the LORD and deceive
them, saying, 'Baal is God; let us adore him'? And now if he is God as you say,
let him speak as God and then we will sacrifice to him." #And Jair said, "Burn
iKgs 18:24
them in the fire, because they have blasphemed against Baal." And his servants
took them to bum them in the fire. And when they had put them in the fire,
Nathaniel,0 the angel who was in charge of fire, came forth and extinguished the
fire and burned the servants of Jair. But he let the seven men escape in such a
way that none of the people saw them, because he had struck the people with
blindness. #And when Jair came to the place, he was burned with the fire; and
before he burned him up, the angel of the LORD said to him, "Hear the word of
the LORD before you die.But he let the seven men escape in such a
way that none of the people saw them, because he had struck the people with
blindness. #And when Jair came to the place, he was burned with the fire; and
before he burned him up, the angel of the LORD said to him, "Hear the word of
the LORD before you die. And these words the LORD says: 'I have raised you up
from the landd and appointed you leader over my people, but you rose up and
corrupted my covenant and deceived them and sought to burn up my servants
with the flame because they chastised you. Those who were burned with corruptible
fire, now are made alive with a living fire and are freed; but you will die, says
the LORD, and in the fire in which you will die there you will have a dwelling
place/ "e And afterward hef burned him up, and he came to the pillar* of Baal
and demolished it and burned Baal along with the people who stood by,h that is,
a thousand men. Jephthah
39 And after these events the sons of Ammon came and began to attack Israel, Judg 10:9
and they took many of their cities. And the people were in distress, and they
Judg io:i7f. gathered together in Mizpah and were saying, each one to his neighbors, "Behold
now we look at the distress that encompasses us, and the LORD has departed from
us and now is not with us, and our enemies have captured our cities, and there is
no leader who may go in and go out before us. Now therefore let us see whom
we may appoint over us to fight our battle."
Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty warrior. His brothers who thrust him Judg 11:1-3
i. Perhaps the sentence should be in the future charge of fire. or jussive and included within the quotation as in d. The var. "land of Egypt" may be merely the
Judg 9:15. mechanical repetition of a biblical cliche* or may
j. Judg 9:22 has "three years." be making some point about the origin of idolatrous
k. There seems to be a gap of some sort between worship outside the land of Israel. the end of ch. 37 and the beginning of ch. 38. e.The phrase "they may have nothing" is d. Var. "myrtle tree." Neither an apple tree nor
inserted in only one MS, but some such phrase is a myrtle tree is mentioned in Judg 9:8-15. necessary for sense. e. To what Ps-Philo is alluding is not clear. g. The phrase "in his own city" is found in the f. Adam. LXX and Lucianic MSS of Judg 8:32 but not in g. Perhaps the Lat. at one point had "let the
the MT. fire go forth from the bramblebush," but then de
rubo (from the bramblebush) was corrupted into
37 a. The proper name is missing in all but one devoret. See Judg 9:15 and Ps-Philo 37:4. MS. Some other material seems to be missing here h. Lit. "was made for."
also.

38. e. For the fire as the dwelling place of the
wicked, see 2Bar 44:15; 48:39, 43; 59:2; 64:7; and
38 a. Most MSS omit the proper name, but the 85:13. rest of the story makes clear who is meant. f. The angel of the LORD. b. For a similar story, see 6:3-18 as well as g. The reference to the pillar is sudden. Perhaps
Dan 3 and 2Mac 7. the Heb. msbt (pillar) has been misread for mzbh
c. An angel named "Nathaniel" does appear in (altar). rabbinic traditions but is not described as being in h. Perhaps his devotees.out from his own land envied him,a and he went and dwelt in the land of Tob. 3 And worthless* men gathered around him and spent their time with him. •And Judg nst
when Israel was being attacked, they came to the land of Tob to Jephthah and
said to him, "Come, rule over the people. For who knows if you have been kept Esth 4:i4
safe to these days or freed from the hands of your brothers in order that you may
4 rule your people in this time?" *And Jephthah said to them, "Does love so return Judg ii:7
after hatred, or does time conquer all things, for you have driven me out of my
land and from the house of my father and now you have come to me when you
are in distress?" And they said to him, "If the God of our fathers, when we had
sinned against him and he had delivered us up before our enemies and we were
hard pressed by them, was not mindful of our sins but freed us, why do you,
mortal man, want to remember the iniquities that happened to us in the time of
5 our distress? And therefore let it not be so before you, sir." «And Jephthah said,
"God can be not mindful of our sins, for he has the time and place where he as
God may restrain himself out of his long-suffering; but I, a mortal man and made
from the ground into which I will return, where will I expel my wrath and the
injury that you have done me?" And the people said to him, "Let the dovec to
which Israel has been compared teach you, because when her young are taken
from her, still she does not depart from her place, but she puts away the injury
6 done her and forgets it as if it were in the depth of the abyss." *And Jephthah Judg ii:ii
arose and came with them and gathered all the people and said to them, "You
know that, while our leaders were still alive, they warned us to follow our Law. And Ammon and his sons turned the people from their way in which they walked, Judg io:i3
and they served foreign gods who would destroy them.And therefore let it not be so before you, sir." «And Jephthah said,
"God can be not mindful of our sins, for he has the time and place where he as
God may restrain himself out of his long-suffering; but I, a mortal man and made
from the ground into which I will return, where will I expel my wrath and the
injury that you have done me?" And the people said to him, "Let the dovec to
which Israel has been compared teach you, because when her young are taken
from her, still she does not depart from her place, but she puts away the injury
6 done her and forgets it as if it were in the depth of the abyss." *And Jephthah Judg ii:ii
arose and came with them and gathered all the people and said to them, "You
know that, while our leaders were still alive, they warned us to follow our Law. And Ammon and his sons turned the people from their way in which they walked, Judg io:i3
and they served foreign gods who would destroy them. Now therefore set your
hearts on the Law of the LORD your God, and let us beg him together, and so we
will fight against our enemies, trusting and hoping in the LORD that he will not
deliver us up forever. Even if our sins be overabundant, still his mercy will fill
7 the earth. "d *And all the people prayed together, men and women and children. And when they prayed, they said, "Look, LORD, upon the people that you have
chosen, and may you not destroy the vine that your right hand has planted, in
order that this nation, which you have had from the beginning and always preferred
and for which you made dwelling places and brought into the land you promised,
may be for you as an inheritance; and may you not hand us over before those
who hate you, LORD."
8 And God repented of his wrath and strengthened the spirit of Jephthah. And he Judg w.29
sent a messenger to Getal* the king of the sons of Ammon and said, "Why are Judg ii: 12
you troubling our land and taking my cities?And when they prayed, they said, "Look, LORD, upon the people that you have
chosen, and may you not destroy the vine that your right hand has planted, in
order that this nation, which you have had from the beginning and always preferred
and for which you made dwelling places and brought into the land you promised,
may be for you as an inheritance; and may you not hand us over before those
who hate you, LORD."
8 And God repented of his wrath and strengthened the spirit of Jephthah. And he Judg w.29
sent a messenger to Getal* the king of the sons of Ammon and said, "Why are Judg ii: 12
you troubling our land and taking my cities? Or are you sad that Israel did not
take you first so that you might scatter those inhabiting the land? And now return
to me my cities, and my anger will cease from you. But if not, know that I will
come up to you and return to you past offenses and repay your wickednesses on
your own head. Or am I not mindful that you were deceitful to the people of
Israel in the wilderness?" And the ambassadors of Jephthah gave these messages
9 to the king of the sons of Ammon. #And Getal said, "Does Israel think highly of
itself in so far as it has taken possession of the land of the Amorites? And therefore
you say, 4Know that now I will take other cities from you and return your
wickedness to you and avenge the Amorites whom you have harmed/" And Judgiiu
Jephthah sent another message to the king of the sons of Ammon, saying, 4'Truly
I have learned that God has brought you forward that I may destroy you unless
you cease from the iniquity by which you wish to harm Israel. And so I will come
39 a. Lit. "when he envied his brothers"; but 5:26, and several rabbinic texts. according to Judg 11:2 Jephthah's brothers envied d. See Rom 5:20. him. Perhaps in the original Heb. bqn't *hyw (in e.38. e. For the fire as the dwelling place of the
wicked, see 2Bar 44:15; 48:39, 43; 59:2; 64:7; and
38 a. Most MSS omit the proper name, but the 85:13. rest of the story makes clear who is meant. f. The angel of the LORD. b. For a similar story, see 6:3-18 as well as g. The reference to the pillar is sudden. Perhaps
Dan 3 and 2Mac 7. the Heb. msbt (pillar) has been misread for mzbh
c. An angel named "Nathaniel" does appear in (altar). rabbinic traditions but is not described as being in h. Perhaps his devotees.

Perhaps in the original Heb. bqn't *hyw (in e. Perhaps this is "Zenon, sumamed Cotylas,
the envy of his brothers) the word *hyw was taken who was ruler of the city of Philadelphia" (Ammon)
as an objective rather than subjective genitive. in Josephus' Ant 13.8.1 §235 (also War 1.2.4 §60). b. Lit. "vagrant" (vagi). We have emended to If this identification of Getal with Cotylas is correct,
"worthless" (vani) on the basis of Judg 11:3. then we could establish 135 B.C. as the earliest
c. Israel is compared to the dove in 23:7; 4Ezra possible date of composition for Ps-Philo.to you and show myself to you. For they are not gods, as you say they are, who judg 11:24
have given you the inheritance that you possess; but because you have been
deceived by following after stones, fire will come after you for vengeance."
And because the king of the sons of Ammon would not listen to the voice of Judg ii:28
Jephthah, Jephthah rose up and armed all the people to go out and fight in battle
array, saying, "When the sons of Ammon have been delivered into my hands and Judg ii:30f
/ have returned, whoever meets me first on the way will be a holocaust to the
Lord." #And God was very angry and said, "Behold Jephthah has vowed that he
will offer to me whatever meets him first on the way; and now if a dog should Judg 11:31
meet Jephthah first, will the dog be offered to me?f And now let the vow of
Jephthah be accomplished against his own firstborn, that is, against the fruit of
his own body, and his request against his only-begotten. But 1 will surely free my
people in this time, not because of him but because of the prayer that Israel
prayed."
The daughter of Jephthah
40 And Jephthah came and attacked the sons of Ammon, and the Lord delivered Judg 11:32-35
them into his hands, and he struck down sixty8 of their cities. And Jephthah
returned in peace, and women came out to meet him in song and dance. And it
was his only daughter who came out of the house first in the dance to meet her
father. And when Jephthah saw her, he grew faint and said, "Rightly was your
name called Seila,b that you might be offered in sacrifice. And now who will put
my heart in the balance and my soul on the scale? And I will stand by and see
which will win out, whether it is the rejoicing that has occurred or the sadness
that befalls me.And now who will put
my heart in the balance and my soul on the scale? And I will stand by and see
which will win out, whether it is the rejoicing that has occurred or the sadness
that befalls me. And because / opened my mouth to my Lord in song with vows,c
/ cannot call that back again." *And Seila his daughter said to him, "And who Judg ii:36
is there who would be sad in death, seeing the people freed?d Or do you not
remember what happened in the days of our fathers when the father placed the Gen 22
son as a holocaust,6 and he did not refuse him but gladly gave consent to him,
and the one being offered was ready and the one who was offering was rejoicing? And now do not annul everything you have vowed, but carry it out.f Yet one Judg ii:36-38
request I ask of you before I die, a small demand I seek before I give back my
soul: that / may go into the mountains and stay in the hills and walk among the
rocks, / and my virgin companions, and I will pour out my tears there and tell of
the sadness of my youth. And the trees of the field will weep for me, and the
beasts of the field will lament over me. For I am not sad because 1 am to die nor
does it pain me to give back my soul, but because my father was caught up in
the snare of his vow; and if 1 did not offer myself willingly for sacrifice, I fear
that my death would not be acceptable or I would lose my life in vain. These
things I will tell the mountains, and afterward I wjll return." And her father said,
"Go." »And Seila the daughter of Jephthah, she and her virgin companions, went judg ii:38
out and came and told it to the wise men of the people, and no one could respond
to her word.8 And afterward she came to Mount Stelae,h and the LORD thought
of her by night and said, "Behold now I have shut up the tongue of the wise men
of my people for this generation so that they cannot respond to the daughter of
Jephthah, to her word, in order that my word be fulfilled and my plan that 1
f.Perhaps in the original Heb. bqn't *hyw (in e. Perhaps this is "Zenon, sumamed Cotylas,
the envy of his brothers) the word *hyw was taken who was ruler of the city of Philadelphia" (Ammon)
as an objective rather than subjective genitive. in Josephus' Ant 13.8.1 §235 (also War 1.2.4 §60). b. Lit. "vagrant" (vagi). We have emended to If this identification of Getal with Cotylas is correct,
"worthless" (vani) on the basis of Judg 11:3. then we could establish 135 B.C. as the earliest
c. Israel is compared to the dove in 23:7; 4Ezra possible date of composition for Ps-Philo.

For I am not sad because 1 am to die nor
does it pain me to give back my soul, but because my father was caught up in
the snare of his vow; and if 1 did not offer myself willingly for sacrifice, I fear
that my death would not be acceptable or I would lose my life in vain. These
things I will tell the mountains, and afterward I wjll return." And her father said,
"Go." »And Seila the daughter of Jephthah, she and her virgin companions, went judg ii:38
out and came and told it to the wise men of the people, and no one could respond
to her word.8 And afterward she came to Mount Stelae,h and the LORD thought
of her by night and said, "Behold now I have shut up the tongue of the wise men
of my people for this generation so that they cannot respond to the daughter of
Jephthah, to her word, in order that my word be fulfilled and my plan that 1
f. In b .Ta'an 4a there is speculation that Jephthah e. See 18:5 and 32:2-4 for a similar description
might have met an unclean thing. of the sacrifice of Isaac. f. According to the rabbis Jephthah's vow was
40 a. Judg 11:33 has twenty cities. invalid. b. The name of Jephthah's daughter is given as g. A rabbinic tradition says that Jephthah's
Seila only in Ps-Philo. In Heb. the root fl means daughter was sacrificed because the scholars forgot
"ask," and so Seila is the one "asked for," or that his vow was invalid. "requested." h. Perhaps connected with the Heb. Slg (snow)
c. Lit. "in the song of vows." or the Aram, tig (snow). TargOnk of Deut 3:9
d. The same motif is found in Josephus' Ant describes Mount Hermon as the "mountain of
5.7.10 §265. snow."thought out not be foiled. And I have seen that the virgin is wise in contrast to
her father and perceptive in contrast to all the wise men who are here. And now
let her life be given at his request, and her death will be precious before me p H6:i5
s
always, and she will go away and fall into the bosom of her mothers."*
s And when the daughter of Jephthah came to Mount Stelae, she began to weep,
and this is her lamentation that she lamented and wept over herself before she
departed. And she said,
"Hear, you mountains, my lamentation;
and pay attention, you hills, to the tears of my eyes;
and be witnesses, you rocks, of the weeping of my soul. Behold how I am put to the test! But not in vain will my life be taken away. May my words go forth in the heavens,
and my tears be written in the firmament! That a father did not refuse the daughter whom he had sworn to sacrifice,
that a ruler granted that his only daughter be promised for sacrifice. 6 But I have not made good on my marriage chamber,
and I have not retrieved my wedding garlands. For I have not been clothed in splendor while sitting in my woman's
chamber,j
And I have not used the sweet-smelling ointment/
And my soul has not rejoiced in the oil of anointing that has been prepared
for me. O Mother, in vain have you borne your only daughter,
because Sheol has become my bridal chamber,
and on earth there is only my woman's chamber. And may all the blend of oil that you have prepared for me be poured out,
and the white robe that my mother has woven, the moth will eat it. And the crown of flowers that my nurse plaited for me for the festival,
may it wither up;
and the coverlet that she wove of hyacinth and purple in my woman's
chamber, may the worm devour it. And may my virgin companions tell of me in sorrow and weep for me
through the days.For I am not sad because 1 am to die nor
does it pain me to give back my soul, but because my father was caught up in
the snare of his vow; and if 1 did not offer myself willingly for sacrifice, I fear
that my death would not be acceptable or I would lose my life in vain. These
things I will tell the mountains, and afterward I wjll return." And her father said,
"Go." »And Seila the daughter of Jephthah, she and her virgin companions, went judg ii:38
out and came and told it to the wise men of the people, and no one could respond
to her word.8 And afterward she came to Mount Stelae,h and the LORD thought
of her by night and said, "Behold now I have shut up the tongue of the wise men
of my people for this generation so that they cannot respond to the daughter of
Jephthah, to her word, in order that my word be fulfilled and my plan that 1
f. In b .Ta'an 4a there is speculation that Jephthah e. See 18:5 and 32:2-4 for a similar description
might have met an unclean thing. of the sacrifice of Isaac. f. According to the rabbis Jephthah's vow was
40 a. Judg 11:33 has twenty cities. invalid. b. The name of Jephthah's daughter is given as g. A rabbinic tradition says that Jephthah's
Seila only in Ps-Philo. In Heb. the root fl means daughter was sacrificed because the scholars forgot
"ask," and so Seila is the one "asked for," or that his vow was invalid. "requested." h. Perhaps connected with the Heb. Slg (snow)
c. Lit. "in the song of vows." or the Aram, tig (snow). TargOnk of Deut 3:9
d. The same motif is found in Josephus' Ant describes Mount Hermon as the "mountain of
5.7.10 §265. snow."

And the crown of flowers that my nurse plaited for me for the festival,
may it wither up;
and the coverlet that she wove of hyacinth and purple in my woman's
chamber, may the worm devour it. And may my virgin companions tell of me in sorrow and weep for me
through the days. 7 You trees, bow down your branches and weep over my youth,
You beasts of the forests, come and bewail1 my virginity,
for my years have been cut off
and the time of my life grown old in darkness."
g And on saying these things Seila returned to her father, and he did everything Judg ii:39f. that he had vowed and offered the holocausts. Then all the virgins of Israel
gathered together and buried the daughter of Jephthah and wept for her. And the
children of Israel made a great lamentation and established that in that month on
the fourteenth day of the month they should come together every year and weep
for Jephthah's daughter for four days. And they named her tomb in keeping with
9 her name: Seila. *And Jephthah judged the sons of Israel tenm years, and he died Judg 12:7
and was buried with his fathers. i. The phrase "bosom of her mothers" seems "bridal chamber." The other two uses of the term
like a feminist counterpart to the more usual in this section are also emendations. "bosom of his fathers"; see also "woman of God" k. Lit. "Moses." In Lat. there may have been
in 33:1. confusion between Moysi (Moses) and moscho;
j. The MSS have "sitting on my knees" {sedens confusion at the Heb. level is also possible. in genua mea) or "sitting in my virginity" (sedens 1. Lit. "trample" (conculcate), which we have
in virginitate mea). We emend to sedens in genicio emended to "bewail" (conululate). meo (sitting in my woman's chamber) where gen- m. The MT has six, the LXX sixty. icium is a form of gynaecium, the opposite of theAbdon and Elon
41
1 And after him Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite* arose as judge in Judg 12:13-15
Israel, and he also judged the sons of Israel eight years. And in his days the king
of Moab sent messengers to him, saying, "Behold now you know that Israel has
taken my cities, and now return them as a repayment." And Abdon said, "Have
you not learned from what happened to the sons of Ammon, unless perhaps it is
so that the sins of Moab have reached full measure?" And Abdon sent and took
from the people twenty thousand men and came out against Moab and attacked
them and killed forty thousand men of them, but the rest fled before him. And
Abdon returned in peace, and he offered holocausts and sacrifices to his LORD. 2 And he died and was buried in Effrata,b his own city. #And in that time the people
chose Elon and appointed him as judge for them. And he judged Israel twenty0 Judg i2:iif. years. And in those days they attacked the Philistines and took from them twelve
3 cities. And Elon died and was buried in his own city. *But the sons of Israel
forgot the LORD their God and served the gods of those inhabiting the land; and
on account of this they were handed over to the Philistines and served them forty judg i3:i
years. The announcement of Samson's birth
42
1 Now there was a man from the tribe of Dan whose name was Manoah, son Judg 13:2
of Edoc, son of Odon, son of Eriden, son of Fadesur, son of Dema, son of Susi,
son of Dan. And he had a wife whose name was Eluma8 the daughter of Remac,
and she was sterile and did not bear children to him.The announcement of Samson's birth
42
1 Now there was a man from the tribe of Dan whose name was Manoah, son Judg 13:2
of Edoc, son of Odon, son of Eriden, son of Fadesur, son of Dema, son of Susi,
son of Dan. And he had a wife whose name was Eluma8 the daughter of Remac,
and she was sterile and did not bear children to him. And, every day, Manoah
her husband was saying to her, "Behold the LORD has shut up your womb so that
you may not bear children, and now let me gob that I may take another wife lest
I die without fruit." And she said, "Not me has the LORD shut up that I may not
bear children, but you that I may not bear fruit." And he said to her, "Would
2 that this could be tested and proved!"0 #And they were quarreling daily and both
were very sad, because they were without fruit.d One night the wife went up to
the upper chamber and prayed saying, "Behold you, LORD God of all flesh,
reveal to me whether it has not been granted to my husband or to me to produce
children, or to whom it may be forbidden or to whom it may be allowed to bear
fruit in order that whoever is forbidden may weep over his sins because he remains
without fruit. Or if both of us have been deprived, then reveal this to us also so
that we might bear our sins and be silent before you."
3 And the LORD heard her voice and sent his angel to her in the morning, and Judg 13:3
he said to her, "You are the sterile one who does not bring forth, and you are
the womb that is forbidden so as not to bear fruit. But now the LORD has heard
your voice and paid attention to your tears and opened your womb. And behold Judg 13:3.24,5
41 a. The MSS have "Addo son of Elech from ance, the name announced. See also ch. 9. Praton." The description of Abdon contradicts that b. According to Jewish law the husband rather
of Josephus (Ant 5.7.15 §273): "Thanks to the than the wife must take the initiative in a divorce
prevailing peace and security of the state, he too proceeding; but see Mk 10:12.And the crown of flowers that my nurse plaited for me for the festival,
may it wither up;
and the coverlet that she wove of hyacinth and purple in my woman's
chamber, may the worm devour it. And may my virgin companions tell of me in sorrow and weep for me
through the days. 7 You trees, bow down your branches and weep over my youth,
You beasts of the forests, come and bewail1 my virginity,
for my years have been cut off
and the time of my life grown old in darkness."
g And on saying these things Seila returned to her father, and he did everything Judg ii:39f. that he had vowed and offered the holocausts. Then all the virgins of Israel
gathered together and buried the daughter of Jephthah and wept for her. And the
children of Israel made a great lamentation and established that in that month on
the fourteenth day of the month they should come together every year and weep
for Jephthah's daughter for four days. And they named her tomb in keeping with
9 her name: Seila. *And Jephthah judged the sons of Israel tenm years, and he died Judg 12:7
and was buried with his fathers. i. The phrase "bosom of her mothers" seems "bridal chamber." The other two uses of the term
like a feminist counterpart to the more usual in this section are also emendations. "bosom of his fathers"; see also "woman of God" k. Lit. "Moses." In Lat. there may have been
in 33:1. confusion between Moysi (Moses) and moscho;
j. The MSS have "sitting on my knees" {sedens confusion at the Heb. level is also possible. in genua mea) or "sitting in my virginity" (sedens 1. Lit. "trample" (conculcate), which we have
in virginitate mea). We emend to sedens in genicio emended to "bewail" (conululate). meo (sitting in my woman's chamber) where gen- m. The MT has six, the LXX sixty. icium is a form of gynaecium, the opposite of the

Praton." The description of Abdon contradicts that b. According to Jewish law the husband rather
of Josephus (Ant 5.7.15 §273): "Thanks to the than the wife must take the initiative in a divorce
prevailing peace and security of the state, he too proceeding; but see Mk 10:12. did no brilliant deed.'* c. Lit. "the Law makes evident our experi­
b. Judg 12:15 says that he was buried at Pirathon; ment." We may have had a Heb. infinitive-absolute
Effrata may be a corruption of this name. construction mstnw hwrh twrh; then twrh was
c. According to Judg 12:11 Elon was judge for translated as a noun meaning "Law." Our trans­
ten years. lation is based on this supposition. An idiomatic
rendering would be "Our experiment will indeed
42 a. This name for Samson's mother is found prove it out!"
nowhere else in Jewish literature. There are many d. Josephus (Ant 5.8.2 §277) speaks of the great
parallels between Samson's birth as narrated here beauty of Samson's mother and her husband's
and those of John the Baptist and Jesus in Luke's jealousy. Gospel: a genealogy not derived from the OT, e. A terrace or balcony, the part of the house
sterility, prayer in seclusion, the angel's appear­ exposed to the sun.you will conceive and bear a son, and you will call his name Samson. For this
one will be dedicated to your LORD/ But see that he8 does not taste from any Judg i3:4,i4,s
fruit of the vine and eat any unclean thing, because (as heh himself has said) he
will free Israel from the hand of the Philistines.'' And when the angel of the
4 LORD had spoken these words, he departed from her. *And she came into the Judg i3:6
house to her husband and said to him, 'i am placing my hand upon my mouth,
and I will be silent before you all the days because I have boasted in vain and
have not believed your words. For the angel of the LORD came to me today and Judg I3:6,3
revealed to me, saying, 'Eluma, you are sterile, but you will conceive and bear
5 a son.'" #And Manoah did not believe his wife, and being perplexed and sad, he
himself also went to the upper chamber and prayed and said, "Behold I am not Judg 13:8
worthy to hear the signs and wonders that God has done among us or to see the
6 face of his messenger." »And while he was speaking these words, the angel of Judg i3:9f. the Lord came again to his wife. But she was in the field, and Manoah was in his
house. And the angel said to her, "Run and announce to your husband that God
7 has accounted him worthy to hear my voice." *And the wife ran and called to Judg 13:10-12
her husband, and he hurried to come to the angel in the field.* The angel said to
him, "Go into your wife and do all these things." But he said, "I am going,j
but see to it, sir, that your wordk be accomplished regarding your servant." And
8 he said, "It will be accomplished." *And Manoah said to him, "If I can, let me Judg i3:i5f
persuade you to enter my house and eat bread with me; and know that, when you
go, I will give you gifts that you may take along with you to offer as a sacrifice
to the LORD your God." And the angel said to him, "I will not enter your house
with you, nor eat your bread nor take your gifts.But she was in the field, and Manoah was in his
house. And the angel said to her, "Run and announce to your husband that God
7 has accounted him worthy to hear my voice." *And the wife ran and called to Judg 13:10-12
her husband, and he hurried to come to the angel in the field.* The angel said to
him, "Go into your wife and do all these things." But he said, "I am going,j
but see to it, sir, that your wordk be accomplished regarding your servant." And
8 he said, "It will be accomplished." *And Manoah said to him, "If I can, let me Judg i3:i5f
persuade you to enter my house and eat bread with me; and know that, when you
go, I will give you gifts that you may take along with you to offer as a sacrifice
to the LORD your God." And the angel said to him, "I will not enter your house
with you, nor eat your bread nor take your gifts. For if you offer sacrifice from
9 what is not yours,1 I cannot show favor to you." »And Manoah built an altar Judg 13:19,23
upon the rock and offered sacrifices and holocausts. And when he had cut up the
meats and placed them on the altar, the angel reached out and touched them with Judg 6:2I
the tip of his staff. And fire came forth from the rock, and it devoured the
holocausts and sacrifices. And the angel of the Lord went up from there with the Judg i3:2u
10 flame of fire.m *But Manoah and his wife saw these events and fell on their faces Judg 13:20
and said, "Surely we will die because we have seen the Lord face to face." And Judg 13:22
Manoah said," "It is not enough that I have seen him but I even asked his name, Judg I3:i6-i8
not knowing that he was the minister of God.'' Now the angel who came was
named Fadahel.0
The exploits of Samson
1 43 And in those days Eluma conceived and bore a son and called his name Judg I 3:24;
Samson, and the Lord was with him. And when he had begun to grow up and Isa
sought to attack the Philistines, he took for himself a wife from the Philistines. Judg i4f.Praton." The description of Abdon contradicts that b. According to Jewish law the husband rather
of Josephus (Ant 5.7.15 §273): "Thanks to the than the wife must take the initiative in a divorce
prevailing peace and security of the state, he too proceeding; but see Mk 10:12. did no brilliant deed.'* c. Lit. "the Law makes evident our experi­
b. Judg 12:15 says that he was buried at Pirathon; ment." We may have had a Heb. infinitive-absolute
Effrata may be a corruption of this name. construction mstnw hwrh twrh; then twrh was
c. According to Judg 12:11 Elon was judge for translated as a noun meaning "Law." Our trans­
ten years. lation is based on this supposition. An idiomatic
rendering would be "Our experiment will indeed
42 a. This name for Samson's mother is found prove it out!"
nowhere else in Jewish literature. There are many d. Josephus (Ant 5.8.2 §277) speaks of the great
parallels between Samson's birth as narrated here beauty of Samson's mother and her husband's
and those of John the Baptist and Jesus in Luke's jealousy. Gospel: a genealogy not derived from the OT, e. A terrace or balcony, the part of the house
sterility, prayer in seclusion, the angel's appear­ exposed to the sun.

And when he had begun to grow up and Isa
sought to attack the Philistines, he took for himself a wife from the Philistines. Judg i4f. The Philistines burned her in the fire, because they had been badly humiliated by Judg 15:6
2 Samson. *And afterward Samson was angry at Ashdod," and they locked him up Judg 16:1-3
and surrounded the city and said, "Behold now our enemy has been delivered
into our hands, and now let us gather together and let us save our own lives."
And when Samson arose at night and saw the city locked up, he said, "Behold
f. Ps-Philo may have had in mind a derivation m. The MT of Judg 13:20 has "in the flameo f
from the Heb. Imi (minister, serve) in the light of the altar." Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX here. Samson's Nazirite status. n. "And Manoah said" is absent from some
g. In Judg 13:4, 14, it is Samson's mother who MSS but is necessary for the sense of the passage. is not to drink wine or eat anything unclean. o. According to Judg 13:18 the angel's name is
h. Presumably this is God. pPy. Ps-Philo probably had an original pPy*l. which
i. Some MSS add "in spirit" (in animo) or "in in Gk. would have been Phalael, which in turn
Ammo." was deformed into Fadahel. j. Var. "to him" (ei) rather than "I am going"
(Eo). 43 a. Var. "Gaza," which is the reading of Judg
k. The MT of Judg 13:12 has "words." 16:1. The Heb. czth (to Gaza) could have been
1. If the angel accepted Manoah's gifts, then mistranslated into Gk. as Azoton. But Ps-Philo
Manoah would not have his own things to offer. frequently changes the places of biblical events.now those fleas have locked me up in their own city, and now the LORD will be
3 with me, and I will go out through their gates and attack them." «And he came Judg i6:3
and put his left hand beneath the bar of the gate, and he took down the gate from
the wall by shaking it. One part of it he kept in his right handb for a shield; the
other he put on his shoulders. And he carried it because he had no sword, and he
pursued the Philistines with it and killed 25,000 men with it. And he took up
4 everything that made up the gate and brought them up to the mountain. »Now judg i4:5f. concerning the lion that he killed and concerning the jawbone of the ass by which Judg i5:i5f
he killed the Philistines and concerning the bonds that were broken offc from his Judg 1*14
arms as it were spontaneously and the foxes that he caught, are not these written Judg is:4f
in the Book of Judges? 5 Then Samson went down to Gerar, a city of the Philistines, and he saw there Judg i6:i,4
a harlot whose name was Delilah, and he was led astray after her and took her
to himself for a wife. And God said, "Behold now Samson has been led astray
through his eyes, and he has not remembered the mighty works that I did with
him; and he has mingled with the daughters of the Philistines and has not paid Gen 39
attention to Joseph my servant who was in a foreign land and became a crown
for his brothers because he was not willing to afflict his own seed. And now
Samson's lust will be a stumbling block for him, and his mingling a ruin. And I
will hand him over to his enemies, and they will blind him. But in the hour of
his death I will remember him, and I will avenge him upon the Philistines once Judg 16:28
6 more." #And after this his wife was pressuring him and kept saying to him, Judg 16.16
' 'Show me your power and in what your strength lies, and so I will know that
you love me." And when Samson had tricked her three times and she was still Judg i6:i6f.And I
will hand him over to his enemies, and they will blind him. But in the hour of
his death I will remember him, and I will avenge him upon the Philistines once Judg 16:28
6 more." #And after this his wife was pressuring him and kept saying to him, Judg 16.16
' 'Show me your power and in what your strength lies, and so I will know that
you love me." And when Samson had tricked her three times and she was still Judg i6:i6f. pressuring him daily, the fourth time he revealed to her his heart. And she got Judg 16:19
him drunk, and while he slept, she called in a barber and he cut the seven locks
of his head, and his strength left him, because he had made such a revelation. And she called the Philistines, and they beat Samson and blinded him and put Judg 1621
7 him in prison. *And on the day of their drinking bout they summoned Samson to Judg 16:25
make sport of him. And he, bound between two pillars, prayed saying, "Lord Judg 16:28,30
God of my fathers, hear me once more and strengthen me in order that I may die
with these Philistines, because the sight that they took from me was given freely
to me by you." And Samson added, saying, "Go forth, my soul, and do not be
8 sad; die, my body, and do not weep about yourself." *And he grasped the two Judg 16:29-31
columns of the house* and shook them. And the house and all that was around it
fell down, and it killed all who were around it. And their number was 40,000c
men and women. And Samson's brothers and all the house of his father went
down and took him and buried him in the tomb of his father. Now he had judged
Israel twenty years. The idols of Micah and the sin of Israel
1 44 And in those days there was no leader in Israel, but each one did what was Judg 17:6
2 pleasing in his own eyes. •And in that time there arose Micah the son of Dedila Judg n.i-4
the mother of Heliu, and he had one thousand pieces of gold and four wedges of
melted gold and forty double pieces of silver.And when he had begun to grow up and Isa
sought to attack the Philistines, he took for himself a wife from the Philistines. Judg i4f. The Philistines burned her in the fire, because they had been badly humiliated by Judg 15:6
2 Samson. *And afterward Samson was angry at Ashdod," and they locked him up Judg 16:1-3
and surrounded the city and said, "Behold now our enemy has been delivered
into our hands, and now let us gather together and let us save our own lives."
And when Samson arose at night and saw the city locked up, he said, "Behold
f. Ps-Philo may have had in mind a derivation m. The MT of Judg 13:20 has "in the flameo f
from the Heb. Imi (minister, serve) in the light of the altar." Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX here. Samson's Nazirite status. n. "And Manoah said" is absent from some
g. In Judg 13:4, 14, it is Samson's mother who MSS but is necessary for the sense of the passage. is not to drink wine or eat anything unclean. o. According to Judg 13:18 the angel's name is
h. Presumably this is God. pPy. Ps-Philo probably had an original pPy*l. which
i. Some MSS add "in spirit" (in animo) or "in in Gk. would have been Phalael, which in turn
Ammo." was deformed into Fadahel. j. Var. "to him" (ei) rather than "I am going"
(Eo). 43 a. Var. "Gaza," which is the reading of Judg
k. The MT of Judg 13:12 has "words." 16:1. The Heb. czth (to Gaza) could have been
1. If the angel accepted Manoah's gifts, then mistranslated into Gk. as Azoton. But Ps-Philo
Manoah would not have his own things to offer. frequently changes the places of biblical events.

The idols of Micah and the sin of Israel
1 44 And in those days there was no leader in Israel, but each one did what was Judg 17:6
2 pleasing in his own eyes. •And in that time there arose Micah the son of Dedila Judg n.i-4
the mother of Heliu, and he had one thousand pieces of gold and four wedges of
melted gold and forty double pieces of silver. And Dedila his mother said to him,
"My son, hear my voice, and you will make a name for yourself before death. Take that gold and melt it down and make for yourself idols, and they will be as
3 gods for you, and you will become a priest for them. *And whoever wishes to
ask anything through them will come to you, and you will respond to him. And
there will be an altar in your house and a column made out of that gold you have;
b. For the reference to the two hands of Samson, d. Ps-Philo agrees with the LXXB of Judg 16:29
see Judg 16:29. in reading "the house" (hbyi) rather than "the
c. The verb "broken off" suggests that the Heb. middle" (htwk). behind Ps-Philo and the Lucianic MSS of Judg e. In Judg 16:27 the MT has three thousand and
15:14 may have been wytkw (from the root ntk) the LXX seven hundred on the roof. rather than the MTs wymsw.you will prepare frankincense for burning and sheep for sacrifice. And whoever
wishes to offer a sacrifice will give seven double pieces for the sheep; and for the
incense, if he wishes to burn it, he will give one double piece of silver of full
weight. And your title will be 4priest,' and you will be called 4worshiper of the
4 gods."' #And Micah said to her, 44You have advised me well, Mother, on how
to live. And now your name will be even greater than mine, and in the last days
s all kinds of things will be requested of you." *And Micah set out and did Judg I7:5
everything that his mother had commanded him. And he shaped and made for
himself three images of boys and calves, the lion, the eagle, and the dragon, and
the dove. And all who were led astray would come to him. And if some wished
to ask for a wife, they would ask him by means of the dove. But if anyone asked
for sons, it was by the images of the boys. But whoever asked for riches did it
through the likeness of the eagle. Whoever asked for courage, he advised him
through the image of the lion. If for servants and maids, he asked through the
images of the calves. But if for length of days, he asked by the image of the
dragon.8 And his wickedness took many forms, and his impiety was full of
trickery. 6 And then, when the sons of Israel were departing from the LORD, the LORD
said, 4'Behold I will root up the earth and destroy the whole human race, because,
when I established laws on Mount Sinai, I showed myself to the sons of Israel in
the storm. And I said that they should not make idols, and they agreed not to
Ex 2Q-.I-\I-
carve out the images of gods. And I ordered them not to take my name in vain, 061115:6~21
and they agreed that they themselves would not take my name in vain. And I
commanded them to keep the sabbath, and they agreed to keep it holy.b And I
told them to honor father and mother, and they promised they would do it. And
I ordered them not to steal,6 and they agreed.And I
commanded them to keep the sabbath, and they agreed to keep it holy.b And I
told them to honor father and mother, and they promised they would do it. And
I ordered them not to steal,6 and they agreed. And I told them not to commit
murder, and they held it as acceptable not to do this. And I commanded them not
to commit adultery, and they did not oppose this. And I ordered them not to speak
false testimony and not to covet each one his neighbor's wife or his house or all
7 his possessions, and they agreed. •And I told them not to make idols nor the
works of those gods that have been born from corruption under the name of
'graven image' and those things through which all these corruptions have been
brought about.d For mortal men have made them, and the fire has served to melt
them down. The skill of a man has produced them, and hands have manufactured
them, and imagination has invented them.6 By accepting these they took my name
in vain, and they have given my name to graven images. And the day of the
sabbath that they agreed to keep, they have done abominable things on it. Whereas
I have told them to love father and mother, they have dishonored me, their Creator. And whereas I told them not to steal, they have dealt like thieves in their schemesf
with graven images. And whereas I told them not to kill, they kill those whom
they seduce. And though I commanded them not to commit adultery, they have
committed adultery with their zeal. And whereas they chose not to speak false
testimony, they accepted false testimony from those whom they destroyed. And
they lusted for foreign women. 8 4'Therefore, behold I abhor the race of men, and I will cut away the root of
my creation; and those dying will outnumber those being born, because the house
of Jacob has been infected in its wickedness and the impiety of Israel has been
44 a. The various images may have something to c.The idols of Micah and the sin of Israel
1 44 And in those days there was no leader in Israel, but each one did what was Judg 17:6
2 pleasing in his own eyes. •And in that time there arose Micah the son of Dedila Judg n.i-4
the mother of Heliu, and he had one thousand pieces of gold and four wedges of
melted gold and forty double pieces of silver. And Dedila his mother said to him,
"My son, hear my voice, and you will make a name for yourself before death. Take that gold and melt it down and make for yourself idols, and they will be as
3 gods for you, and you will become a priest for them. *And whoever wishes to
ask anything through them will come to you, and you will respond to him. And
there will be an altar in your house and a column made out of that gold you have;
b. For the reference to the two hands of Samson, d. Ps-Philo agrees with the LXXB of Judg 16:29
see Judg 16:29. in reading "the house" (hbyi) rather than "the
c. The verb "broken off" suggests that the Heb. middle" (htwk). behind Ps-Philo and the Lucianic MSS of Judg e. In Judg 16:27 the MT has three thousand and
15:14 may have been wytkw (from the root ntk) the LXX seven hundred on the roof. rather than the MTs wymsw.

8 4'Therefore, behold I abhor the race of men, and I will cut away the root of
my creation; and those dying will outnumber those being born, because the house
of Jacob has been infected in its wickedness and the impiety of Israel has been
44 a. The various images may have something to c. This order of commandments—stealing, mur­
do with the sanctuary of Mithras, where two torch- der, adultery—is also found in Jer 7:9. bearing youths, a bull, a lion, a serpent, and a bird d. The text is corrupt here. We have added
customarily appear. But here there is no mention "And I told them" to make better sense; "of
of the bull or the sun, both important features of 'graven image'" is based on emending sculptili
the Mithraic cult. sed to scuptilis et. The point of the whole passage
b. Lit. "to sanctify themselves." But the ob­ is to show that idolatry is the root of all sins. servance of the sabbath is clearly at issue; there e. For similar expressions, see WisSol 13:10-
may have been confusion at the level of Heb. or 19. Gk. f. Lit. "sense."multiplied. And can I not totally destroy the tribe of Benjamin, because they first
of all were led astray after Micah? And the people of Israel will not go unpunished. 9 But this will be an everlasting scandal remembered for generations. *Now I will
deliver Micah to the fire, and his mother will be rotting away in his sight while
she is alive upon the earth, and worms8 will come forth from her body. And then,
while they are speaking to one another, she will sayh as a mother chastising her
son, 'Behold what a sin you have committed!' And he will answer as a son
heeding his mother and acting cleverly, 'And you have done even greater
wickedness.' And the image of the dove that he made will be used for putting out
his eyes, and the image of the eagle will be used for bringing fire upon them out
of its wings, and the images of the boys that he made will be used for scraping
his sides, and the image of the lion that he made will be like mighty ones
10 tormenting him.1 • And I will not do this to Micah alone, but to all who sin against
me.j And the race of men will know that they will not make me jealous by their
inventions that they make, but to every man there will be such a punishment that
in whatever sin he shall have sinned, in this he will be judged. And if they have
lied before me, I will command the heaven and it will deny them rain. And if
anyone wished to covet the wifek of his neighbor, I will command death and it
will deny them the fruit of their womb. And if they will make a false declaration
in my name, I will not hear their prayers. And when the soul is separated from
the body, then they will say, 'Let us not mourn over these things that we suffer;
but because whatever we ourselves have devised, these will we receive.'"
The crisis at Nob
45 And in that time a certain man from the tribe of Levi came to Gibeah, and Judg i9:i
he wanted to stay there when the sun set. And he wanted to enter there, but those Judg i9:i4
who dwelt there did not let him.And when the soul is separated from
the body, then they will say, 'Let us not mourn over these things that we suffer;
but because whatever we ourselves have devised, these will we receive.'"
The crisis at Nob
45 And in that time a certain man from the tribe of Levi came to Gibeah, and Judg i9:i
he wanted to stay there when the sun set. And he wanted to enter there, but those Judg i9:i4
who dwelt there did not let him. And he said to his servant, "Walk on and lead Judg 19:13
the mule, and we will go to the city of Nob;a perhaps they will let us enter it."
And he came there and sat down in the open square of the city, and no one said Judg 1*15
to him, "Enter my house."
Now there was a certain Levite whose name was Bethac. When this man had Judg 1916-20
seen him, he said to him, "Are you Beelb from my tribe?" And he said, "I am."
And he said to him, "You do not know the wickedness of those who dwell in
this city. And who persuaded you to enter here? Get out of here in a hurry and
enter my house where I dwell, and stay there today; and the LORD will shut up
their heart0 before us as he shut up the Sodomites before Lot." And he entered Gen i9:iof
the city and remained there that night. *And all those inhabiting the city came Judg 1922-25;
together and said to Bethac, "Bring out those who have come to you today. If 061119:5,9
not, we will bum in the fire both you and them." And he came out to them and
said to them, ' 'Are not these our brothers? Let us not do evil with them lest our
sins be multiplied against us." And they answered, "It has never happened that
the strangers gave orders to the natives." And they entered by force and dragged
him and his concubine out, and they cast him off. And when the man had been
let go, they abused his concubine until she died, because she had transgressed"1
against her man once when she committed sin with the Amalekites, and on account Judg 192
g. For great sinners being eaten alive by worms, novam), but see 46:3.8 4'Therefore, behold I abhor the race of men, and I will cut away the root of
my creation; and those dying will outnumber those being born, because the house
of Jacob has been infected in its wickedness and the impiety of Israel has been
44 a. The various images may have something to c. This order of commandments—stealing, mur­
do with the sanctuary of Mithras, where two torch- der, adultery—is also found in Jer 7:9. bearing youths, a bull, a lion, a serpent, and a bird d. The text is corrupt here. We have added
customarily appear. But here there is no mention "And I told them" to make better sense; "of
of the bull or the sun, both important features of 'graven image'" is based on emending sculptili
the Mithraic cult. sed to scuptilis et. The point of the whole passage
b. Lit. "to sanctify themselves." But the ob­ is to show that idolatry is the root of all sins. servance of the sabbath is clearly at issue; there e. For similar expressions, see WisSol 13:10-
may have been confusion at the level of Heb. or 19. Gk. f. Lit. "sense."

And when the man had been
let go, they abused his concubine until she died, because she had transgressed"1
against her man once when she committed sin with the Amalekites, and on account Judg 192
g. For great sinners being eaten alive by worms, novam), but see 46:3. see 63:4; 2Mac 9:9; Acts 12:23, and b.Sot 35a. b. Ps-Philo is unique in giving the names Bethac
h. Lit. "said"; but the sense demands a future and Beel. or present. c. Our concept of "mind" as the organ of
i. The calves and the dragon are omitted. thought and perception is presupposed by "heart."
j. That is, the punishment is to fit the crime. In Gen 19:1 Of. the Sodomites are struck blind. k. The MSS have "property" (rem), but in view d. The fate of the concubine in the Bible is not
of the principle of the punishment fitting the crime connected to her personal sins as it is here, but Ps-
("deny them the fruit of their womb") we have Philo's interpretation may take its rise from Judg
emended to "wife" (uxorem). 19:2 as well as from his own theological outlook. For his horror at intermarriage with gentiles, see
45 a. The best MSS have "new city" (clvitatem 9:5; I8:13f.; 21:1; 30:1; 44:7.4 of this the LORD God delivered her into the hands of sinners. #And when it was
morning, Beel went out and found his concubine dead and put her on the mule Judg 19:27-29
and hurried away and came into Cades.e And he took her body and cut it up into
parts and sent her around to the twelve tribes, saying, "These things have been
done to me in the city of Nob, and those dwelling there rose up against me to Judg 20*
kill me, and they took my concubine while I was locked up and they killed her. And if being silent pleases you, nevertheless the LORD judges. But if you wish to
5 take revenge, the LORD will help you." #And all the men of the twelve tribes Judg2u:i
were disturbed, and they gathered together in Shiloh/ and each one said to his
neighbor, "If such wickedness is done in Israel, Israel will cease to be." Judg 20:6
6 And the LORD said to the adversary8, "Did you see this foolish people disturbed
in the hourh in which they ought to have died, when Micah acted craftily so as
to lead the people astray with the dove and the eagle and with the image of the
men and the calves and the lion and the dragon? And so because they were not
provoked to anger then, therefore let their plan be in vain1; and their heart will be
so disturbed that the sinners as well as those allowing the evil deeds will be
destroyed."
The defeat of Israel
1 46 And when it was morning, the people of Israel were disturbed and said, "Let Judg 20:11
us go up and search out the sin that has been committed in order that wickedness Judg 20:13
be taken away from us." And then they said, "Let us ask the LORD first and Jud20:27f. g
learn if he will deliver our brothers into our hands; if not, let us desist." And
Phinehas said to them, "Let us bring out the Urim and Thummim."8 And the
LORD answered them, saying, "Go up, because I will deliver them into your
2 hands." But he led them astray so that he might fulfill his words. • And they went Judg 20:i2f.g
learn if he will deliver our brothers into our hands; if not, let us desist." And
Phinehas said to them, "Let us bring out the Urim and Thummim."8 And the
LORD answered them, saying, "Go up, because I will deliver them into your
2 hands." But he led them astray so that he might fulfill his words. • And they went Judg 20:i2f. up for battle and came into the city of Benjamin and sent messengers saying,
"Send us the men who have done this wicked deed, and we will spare you but
return to each his own evil." And the people of Benjamin hardened their heart,
and they said to the people of Israel, "Why should we deliver our brothers to
you? And if you do spare them, will we not fight against you?" And the people
of Benjamin went out to meet the sons of Israel and pursued them. And the sons
of Israel fell before theni, and they struck down among them forty-five thousand6 Judg 20:21
3 men. »And the heart of the people was very much disturbed, and they came Jud20:26
g
mourning and weeping to Shiloh. And they said, "Behold the LORD has delivered
us before those dwelling in Nob, and now let us ask the LORD who among us has Judg 20:23
sinned." And they asked the Lord, and he said to them, "If you wish, go up and Judg 20:28
fight, and they will be delivered into your hands, and then it will be told to you
why you have fallen before them." And they went up the next day to attack them, Judg 20:24f. and the sons of Benjamin went out and pursued Israel and killed among them
4 forty-six thousand6 men. • And the heart of the people grew very faint, and they Judg 20:26-28
said, "Has God wished to lead his people astray? Or has he so established it on
account of the evil that was done, that the innocent as well as those who do
wicked deeds should fall together?" And on saying these words they fell before
the ark of the covenant of the Lord and tore their garments and put ashes on their
heads, they and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, who prayed and said,
e. Var.And when the man had been
let go, they abused his concubine until she died, because she had transgressed"1
against her man once when she committed sin with the Amalekites, and on account Judg 192
g. For great sinners being eaten alive by worms, novam), but see 46:3. see 63:4; 2Mac 9:9; Acts 12:23, and b.Sot 35a. b. Ps-Philo is unique in giving the names Bethac
h. Lit. "said"; but the sense demands a future and Beel. or present. c. Our concept of "mind" as the organ of
i. The calves and the dragon are omitted. thought and perception is presupposed by "heart."
j. That is, the punishment is to fit the crime. In Gen 19:1 Of. the Sodomites are struck blind. k. The MSS have "property" (rem), but in view d. The fate of the concubine in the Bible is not
of the principle of the punishment fitting the crime connected to her personal sins as it is here, but Ps-
("deny them the fruit of their womb") we have Philo's interpretation may take its rise from Judg
emended to "wife" (uxorem). 19:2 as well as from his own theological outlook. For his horror at intermarriage with gentiles, see
45 a. The best MSS have "new city" (clvitatem 9:5; I8:13f.; 21:1; 30:1; 44:7.

Or has he so established it on
account of the evil that was done, that the innocent as well as those who do
wicked deeds should fall together?" And on saying these words they fell before
the ark of the covenant of the Lord and tore their garments and put ashes on their
heads, they and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, who prayed and said,
e. Var. "Gades." Perhaps this is the Levitical i. Reading vanum instead of the MSS mamt
city of Kedesh(lChr 6:57). (hand) or malum (evil). f. According to Judg 20:1 the assembly took
place at Mizpah; according to Judg 20:18 there was 46 a. Lit. "the demonstration and truth," which
an assembly at Bethel. renders the Gk. deldsis kai alitheia and the Heb. g. The Lat. anteciminus has been taken over Vrym wtmym. This refers to an oracular device
from the Gk. antikeimenos (adversary), which is carried in the priest's breastplate. See 47:2. most likely the equivalent of the Heb. im; see Job b. In Judg 20:21 the number is twenty-two
1:6-12. thousand. h. The MSS have "land" (terra), but the emen­ c. In Judg 20:25 the number is eighteen thou­
dation to "hour" (hora) seems likely in view of sand. "they were not provoked to anger then.""What is this deceit by which you have led us astray, LORD? If what the sons of
Benjamin have done is right in your sight, why have you not told us so we might
consider it? But if it did not please you, why have you allowed us to fall before
them?"
The fable of the lion
1 47 And Phinehas added, saying, "God of our fathers, hear my voice and tell
your servant today whether this has been done correctly in your sight, or perhaps
the people have sinned and you were not willing to root out their evil deeds so as
to correct those among us who have sinned against you. For I remember in my Num 25:6-18
youth when Jambres sinned in the days of Moses your servant, and I went and
entered in and was possessed with jealousy in my soul, and I hoisted both of
them' up on my sword. And the rest wished to rise up against me and kill me,
and you sent your angel and you killed from them twenty-four thousand men, and
2 you freed me from their hands. *And now you have sent the eleven tribes up,
saying to them, 'Go and kill them'; and they went and were delivered up. And
now they say that your Urim and Thummimb are telling lies in your sight. And
now, LORD God of our fathers, do not hide from your servant but tell us why you
have brought this wickedness against us."
3 And the LORD saw that Phinehas had prayed earnestly before him, and he said
to him, "I myself have sworn, says the LORD; if I had not sworn, I would not
have remembered you in what you have said, nor would I have answered you
4 today. And now say to the people, 'Stand and hear the word of the LORD.' •These
words the LORD says: There was a certain mighty lionc in the midst of the forest
to whose power all the beasts entrusted the forest that he might guard it lest
perhaps other wild animals should come and destroy it. And while the lion was
guarding these, some wild animalsd arrived from another forest and devoured all
the young of the animals and destroyed the fruit of their wombs. And the lion
looked on and was silent.And while the lion was
guarding these, some wild animalsd arrived from another forest and devoured all
the young of the animals and destroyed the fruit of their wombs. And the lion
looked on and was silent. And the animals were at peace, because they had
entrusted the forest to the lion and did not realize that their own offspring had
5 been destroyed. »And after a time there arose from those who had entrusted the
forest to the lion a very small animal, and he ate up the small cub of another
wicked animal. And behold the lion roared and disturbed all the animals of the
6 forest, and they fought among themselves, and each attacked his neighbor. *And
when many animals were destroyed, another cub from another great forest saw
the lion and said, "Have you destroyed so many animals? What is this wickedness
that when so many animals and their offspring were unjustly destroyed previously
by other wicked animals, and when all the animals should have been moved to
avenge themselves when their fruit was being destroyed in vain, then you were
silent and did not speak? But now one cub of a wicked animal has perished, and
you have so aroused the whole forest that all the animals should eat one another
up unjustly, so that the forest is depleted. And now you ought to be destroyed
first, and so you will make the rest secure." And the cubs of the animals heard
this and killed the lion first, and they appointed the cub in his place, and so all
the other animals were subject to one authority/
7 "Micahe arose and made you rich by these things that he and his mother made. And they were wicked and evil things that no one before them had discovered,
but by his own craftiness he made them—graven images that had not been made
until this day. And no one was provoked but all were led astray, and you saw the
47 a. They are not named in Ex 7:11 but are called story. Jannes and Jambres in the Jewish tradition and d. Lit. "animals of the field" {fere agri)\ but
2Tim 3:8.Or has he so established it on
account of the evil that was done, that the innocent as well as those who do
wicked deeds should fall together?" And on saying these words they fell before
the ark of the covenant of the Lord and tore their garments and put ashes on their
heads, they and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, who prayed and said,
e. Var. "Gades." Perhaps this is the Levitical i. Reading vanum instead of the MSS mamt
city of Kedesh(lChr 6:57). (hand) or malum (evil). f. According to Judg 20:1 the assembly took
place at Mizpah; according to Judg 20:18 there was 46 a. Lit. "the demonstration and truth," which
an assembly at Bethel. renders the Gk. deldsis kai alitheia and the Heb. g. The Lat. anteciminus has been taken over Vrym wtmym. This refers to an oracular device
from the Gk. antikeimenos (adversary), which is carried in the priest's breastplate. See 47:2. most likely the equivalent of the Heb. im; see Job b. In Judg 20:21 the number is twenty-two
1:6-12. thousand. h. The MSS have "land" (terra), but the emen­ c. In Judg 20:25 the number is eighteen thou­
dation to "hour" (hora) seems likely in view of sand. "they were not provoked to anger then."

Lit. "animals of the field" {fere agri)\ but
2Tim 3:8. agri may be a mistake for the Gk. agroi (wild,
b. See 46:1. We have emended manifestationes savage). tue veritates to manifestationes tue et veritates. e. Seder Olam 12 and Est Rabbah 37:7 also
c. The species of the animal is lacking in all but connect the sin of Micah and the crime of the
one MS but can be supplied from the rest of the Benjaminites.8 fruit of your womb destroyed and you were silent like that wicked lion. *And
now on seeing how this man's concubine, who had done wicked deeds, died, you
were all disturbed and came to me, saying, 'Will you deliver the sons of Benjamin
into our hands?' Therefore I have deceived you and said, T will deliver them to
you.' And now I have destroyed you, who were silent then. And so I will take
my revenge on all who have acted wickedly."
9 And all the people rose up together and went away. And the sons of Benjamin Judg 20:31-37
came out to meet them, thinking that they would conquer them as before, and
they did not know that evil had reached full measure against them. And when
they had come out as at first and pursued them, the people fled from before them
so as to give ground. And then they rose up from their hiding places, and the Judg 20:42
10 sons of Benjamin were in their midst. • And when those who were fleeing turned Judg 20*1-43
back, eighty-five thousandf people of the city of Nob, men and women, were
killed. And the sons of Israel burned the city, and they destroyed all their spoils Judg 20:37
that had been snatched away by the edge of the sword. And none of the sons of
Benjamin survived except six hundred men who fled and were not found in the Judg 20:46-48
battle. And all the people returned to Shiloh, and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the
11 priest was with them. • These are they who were left from the race of Benjamin,
the rulers of the tribe, of ten families, whose names are these.«Of the first family: ichr 8
Ezbaile, Zieb, Balac, Rein, Oebac, Belloch. And of the second family: Netach,
Zenip, Fenoch, Demech, Geresaraz. And from the third family: Ierimuth, Veloth,
Amibel, Genuth, Nefuth, Fienna. And from the fourth city: Gemuf and Eliel,
Gemet, Soleph, Rafaf, and Doffo. And from the fifth family: Anuel, Code, Fretan,
Remmon, Peccan, Nabath. From the sixth family: Refaz, Sefet, Arafaz, Metach,
Adhoc, Balinoc.And from the fifth family: Anuel, Code, Fretan,
Remmon, Peccan, Nabath. From the sixth family: Refaz, Sefet, Arafaz, Metach,
Adhoc, Balinoc. And from the seventh family: Benin, Mefiz, Araf, Ruimel,
Belon, Iaal, Abac. From the tenth11 family: Enoflasa, Melee, Meturia, Meac. And
12 the rest of the rulers of the tribe who survived were sixty in number. • And in that
time the LORD repaid to Micah and his mother all he had said. And Micah was
destroyed in the fire and his mother was rotting away, just as the LORD had said
concerning them. The ascension of Phinehas
1 48 And in that time Phinehas laid himself down to die, and the LORD said to
him, "Behold you have passed the 120 years that have been established for every oen &3
man. And now rise up and go from here and dwell in Danaben on the mountain
and dwell there many years. And / will command my eagle, and he will nourish iKgs 174
you there, and you will not come down to mankind until the time arrives and you
be tested in that time; and you will shut up the heaven then, and by your mouth iK n:i
gs
it will be opened up.8 And afterward you will be lifted up into the place where
those who were before you were lifted up, and you will be there until I remember
the world. Then I will make you all come, and you will taste what is death."
2 And Phinehas went up and did all that the LORD commanded him. Now in those
3 days when he appointed EIib as priest, he anointed him in Shiloh. «Now in that
time when he went up, then the sons of Israel were celebrating Passover,c and
they commanded the sons of Benjamin, saying, "Go up and get wives for Judg 21:17-19
yourselves, because we cannot give you our daughters. For we made a vow in
the time of our anger, but let it not happen that one tribe be blotted out from
Israel." And the sons of Benjamin went up and seized for themselves wives and Judg 21:23
4 built for themselves Gabaon and began to dwell there. *And while the sons of Judg 21:25
f.Lit. "animals of the field" {fere agri)\ but
2Tim 3:8. agri may be a mistake for the Gk. agroi (wild,
b. See 46:1. We have emended manifestationes savage). tue veritates to manifestationes tue et veritates. e. Seder Olam 12 and Est Rabbah 37:7 also
c. The species of the animal is lacking in all but connect the sin of Micah and the crime of the
one MS but can be supplied from the rest of the Benjaminites.

For we made a vow in
the time of our anger, but let it not happen that one tribe be blotted out from
Israel." And the sons of Benjamin went up and seized for themselves wives and Judg 21:23
4 built for themselves Gabaon and began to dwell there. *And while the sons of Judg 21:25
f. In Judg 20:46 there are twenty-five thousand 48 a. Phinehas is described in terms reminiscent
men. of Elijah. g. Some of the names may come from IChr 8: b. The MSS have "him" (eum\ but in the light
Geresaraz (cf. Gera 8:7), Ierimuth (cf. Jeremoth of 50:3 and 52:2 Eli seems to be meant. 8:14), Eliel (8:20), and Melee (cf. Melech 8:35). c. Judg 21:19 merely describes it as a yearly
h. The eighth and ninth families are missing. feast.Israel were at rest in the meantime, they had no leader in those days, and each
5 one did what was pleasing in his own eyes. • These are the commandments and
judgments and testimonies and manifestations that were in the days of the judges
of Israel, before a king ruled over them. The search for a new leader
1 49 And in that time the sons of Israel began to make a request from the LORD,
and they said, 44Let all of us cast lots8 to see who it is who can rule us as Kenaz
did. For perhaps we will find a man who may free us from our distress, because
2 it is not appropriate for the people to be without a ruler." •And they cast the lot. And when no one was found, the people were very sad and said, "The people
were not worthy to be heard by the LORD. Therefore6 he did not answer us. And
now let us cast lots by tribes, if God may be reconciled by a large group. For we
know that God will be reconciled with those worthy of him." And they cast the
lot by tribes, and upon no tribe did the lot come forth. And Israel said, 4'Let us
choose from among ourselves, for we are put in a position of need. For we know
3 that God has hated his people and his soul has detested us." *And a certain man
by the name of Nethezc answered and said to the people, "He does not hate us,
but we have made ourselves so hateful that God should abandon us. And so, even
if we die, let us not abandon him, but let us flee to him. We who have walked
in our evil ways have not known him who created us, and so our plan will be in
vain. For I know that God will not reject us forever, nor will he hate his people
for all generations. And so strengthen yourselves, and let us pray again, and let
us cast lots by cities. For even if our sins are many, nevertheless his long-suffering
4 will not fail." »And they cast lots by cities, and Ramathaimd came out in the lot.And so strengthen yourselves, and let us pray again, and let
us cast lots by cities. For even if our sins are many, nevertheless his long-suffering
4 will not fail." »And they cast lots by cities, and Ramathaimd came out in the lot. And the people said, "So Ramathaim is accounted more just than all the cities of
Israel, because he has chosen it above all the cities." And each one said to his
neighbor, "In that city that came out in the lot let us cast a lot by men, and let
5 us see whom the LORD has chosen from it." *And they cast the lot by men, and
it fell upon no one except Elkanah. Because the lot fell out upon him, the people
took him and said, "Come, and be a leader for us." And Elkanah said to the
people, "I cannot be a leader over this people, nor can I be considered* one who
could be a leader for you. But if my sins have caught up with me, I will kill
myself so that you may not defile me. For it is just that I should die only for my
own sins rather than to bear the burden of this people."
6 And the people saw that Elkanah was not willing to exercise leadership over
them, and they prayed again to the LORD, saying, "LORD God of Israel, why
have you abandoned your people in the victory of their enemies, and in the time
of distress why have you neglected your inheritance? Behold even he who has
been chosen in the lot has not fulfilled your commandments. But this happened
only because the lot fell out on him and we thought we had a leader. And behold
it has happened that even he is contendingf against the lot. Whom will we ask
for once more, or to whom will we flee, or where is the place of our relaxation
and rest?For we made a vow in
the time of our anger, but let it not happen that one tribe be blotted out from
Israel." And the sons of Benjamin went up and seized for themselves wives and Judg 21:23
4 built for themselves Gabaon and began to dwell there. *And while the sons of Judg 21:25
f. In Judg 20:46 there are twenty-five thousand 48 a. Phinehas is described in terms reminiscent
men. of Elijah. g. Some of the names may come from IChr 8: b. The MSS have "him" (eum\ but in the light
Geresaraz (cf. Gera 8:7), Ierimuth (cf. Jeremoth of 50:3 and 52:2 Eli seems to be meant. 8:14), Eliel (8:20), and Melee (cf. Melech 8:35). c. Judg 21:19 merely describes it as a yearly
h. The eighth and ninth families are missing. feast.

And behold
it has happened that even he is contendingf against the lot. Whom will we ask
for once more, or to whom will we flee, or where is the place of our relaxation
and rest? For if the ordinances that you have established with our fathers are true,
saying, 7 will multiply your seed/ and they will experience this, then it would Gen 16:10
have been better to say to us, i am cutting off your seed,' than to neglect our
7 root." *And God said to them, "If I were to pay you back according to your evil
deeds, it would be necessary to pay no attention at all to your race. And what
will I do that my name will come to be invoked upon you? And now know that
49 a. See ch. 25. d. The MSS have Armathem or Arimathes; see
b. Lit. "because." The Heb. probably had ISam 1:1. "therefore" ('/ kn), but at the level of Gk., dio, e. In all the MSS the verb existimare is active,
"therefore," was confused with dioti. "because," but Elkanah has not been asked to think of a
which was taken over into the Lat. as quia. substitute. We have emended to existimari. c. The name may have some relation to the Heb. f. Var. "even if he were not contending."
and Aram, term for "lot."Elkanah, upon whom the lot has fallen, cannot rule among you; but rather his son
who will be born from him, he will rule among you and prophesy. And from this Gen 49:10
8 time on, a ruler will not be lacking from you for many years." #And the people isam i:8
said, "Behold, LORD, Elkanah has ten sons, and who of them will rule or
prophesy?" And God said, "None of the sons of Peninnah can rule the people,
but the one who is born from the sterile woman whom I have given to him as a
wife will be a prophet before me. And I will love him as I have loved Isaac, and
his name will be before me always." And the people said, "Behold perhaps now
God has remembered us so as to free us from the hand of those who hate us*."
And on that day they made peace offerings and feasted according to their customs.h
The prayer of Hannah in her distress
50 And Elkanah had two wives. The name of one was Hannah, and the name of isam \a
the other was Peninnah. And because Peninnah had sons and Hannah did not, isam i*
Peninnah taunted* her, saying, "What does it profit you that Elkanah your husband
loves you, for you are a dry tree? And I know that my husband will love me, isa 56:3
because he delights in the sight of my sons standing around him like a plantation Ps 128:3
» of olive trees." 'And so it was when she was taunting her daily, and Hannah was
saddened very much. And she had been fearing God from her youth. It happened
that on the holy dayb of Passover, when her husband went up to sacrifice, Peninnah isam i:3
was insulting Hannah, saying, "A wife is not really loved even if her husband isam i:7
loves her or her beauty.c Let Hannah not boast in her appearance; but she who isam 2:7,io
boasts, let her boast6 when she sees her offspring before her. And when among
women the fruit of her womb is not so, love will be in vain. For what did it profit
Rachel that Jacob loved her?And when among
women the fruit of her womb is not so, love will be in vain. For what did it profit
Rachel that Jacob loved her? And unless the fruit of her womb had been given to
him, his love would have been in vain." And when Hannah heard these words, isam i:io
her soul grew faint and poured out tears. mAnd her husband saw her and said, isam i:8f. ' 'Why are you sad? And why do you not eat? And why does your heart fall within
you? Are not your ways of behaving* better than the ten sons of Peninnah?" And
Hannah listened to him, and she rose up after she ate and came to Shiloh to the
house of the LORD, where Eli the priest dwelt, whom Phinehas the son of Eleazar
• the priestf had appointed, as had been commanded him. • And Hannah prayed and
said, "Did you not, LORD, search out the heart of all generations before you
formed the world? Now what womb is born opened or dies closed unless you wish
it? And now let my prayer ascend before you today lest I go down from here
empty, because you know my heart, how I have walked before you from the day
i of my youth." *And Hannah did not want to pray out loud as all people do. For isam 113
then she thought, saying, "Perhaps I am not worthy to be heard, and Peninnah
will then be even more eager to taunt me as she does daily when she says, 'Where Ps 42:3
is your God in whom you trust?' And I know that neither she who has many sons isam 2:5
is rich nor she who has few is poor, but whoever abounds in the will of God is
rich. For who may know what I have prayed for? If they know that I am not
heard in my prayer, they will blaspheme. And I will not have any witness except
in my own soul, because my tears are the servant of my prayers."
And while she was praying, Eli8 the priest saw that she was disturbed and isam i:i4f. acted like a drunken woman, and he said to her, "Go and put your wine away
g. The MSS lack "us." Perhaps the Heb. Sn'ynw husband's loving her or her beauty."
(our enemies) was misread as $n*ym (enemies). d.And behold
it has happened that even he is contendingf against the lot. Whom will we ask
for once more, or to whom will we flee, or where is the place of our relaxation
and rest? For if the ordinances that you have established with our fathers are true,
saying, 7 will multiply your seed/ and they will experience this, then it would Gen 16:10
have been better to say to us, i am cutting off your seed,' than to neglect our
7 root." *And God said to them, "If I were to pay you back according to your evil
deeds, it would be necessary to pay no attention at all to your race. And what
will I do that my name will come to be invoked upon you? And now know that
49 a. See ch. 25. d. The MSS have Armathem or Arimathes; see
b. Lit. "because." The Heb. probably had ISam 1:1. "therefore" ('/ kn), but at the level of Gk., dio, e. In all the MSS the verb existimare is active,
"therefore," was confused with dioti. "because," but Elkanah has not been asked to think of a
which was taken over into the Lat. as quia. substitute. We have emended to existimari. c. The name may have some relation to the Heb. f. Var. "even if he were not contending."
and Aram, term for "lot."

Sn'ynw husband's loving her or her beauty."
(our enemies) was misread as $n*ym (enemies). d. In the LXX of ISam 2:10 there is a long
h. Lit. "dispositions," which may refer to or­ expansion on the theme of boasting. ders in the sense of groups arranged according to e. For "ways of behaving" (mores), perhaps
some hierarchical scheme (see IQSa). read "loves" (amores). f. For Eli as appointed by Phinehas, see 48:2
50 a. While "taunted" is absent from the LXX and 52:2. of ISam 1:6, it is found in the Lucianic MSS, the g. In the LXX of ISam 1:14 the servant (pai-
MT, and other texts. darion) of Eli speaks; Ps-Philo here agrees with
b. Lit. "the good day." the MT. c. Or "the love of wife does not depend on herfrom you."h And she said, 44Is my prayer so heard that I am called a drunken
woman? Now I am drunk with sorrow, and I have drunk the cup of my weeping."
7 And Eli the priest said to her, 4Tell me why you are being taunted." And she
said to him, 4i am the wife of Elkanah; and because God has shut up my womb, isam \.\s
I have prayed before him that I do not go forth from this world without fruit and
that I do not die without having my own image." And Eli the priest said to her, isam i.n
"Go, because I know' for what you have prayed; your prayer has been heard."
8 But Eli the priest did not want to tell her that a prophet had been foreordained
to be born from her. For he had heard that when the LORD spoke concerning him. And Hannah came into her house,* and she was consoled of her sorrow, but she isam i is
told no one what she had prayed. The birth of Samuel
1 SI In those days she conceived and bore a son and called his name Samuel, isam \ao
which is interpreted 4'mighty one,"a as God had named him when he prophesied
about him. And Hannah6 remained there and nursed the infant until he was two isam i:23f. years old. And when she had weaned him, she went up with himc and brought
gifts in her hands. And the child was very handsome, and the LORD was with him. 2 And Hannah placed the boy before Eli and said to him,6 "This is the desire I isam i:25f. desired, and this is the request I have asked." And Eli said to her, "You have
not asked alone, but the people have prayed for this. This is not your request
alone, but it was promised previously to the tribes.desired, and this is the request I have asked." And Eli said to her, "You have
not asked alone, but the people have prayed for this. This is not your request
alone, but it was promised previously to the tribes. And through this boy your
womb has been justified so that you might provide advantage for the peoplese and
3 set up the milk of your breasts as a fountain for the twelve tribes." «And on isam2:i
hearing this Hannah prayed and said,
4'Come to my voice, all you nations,
and pay attention to my speech, all you kingdoms,
because my mouth has been opened that 1 should speak
and my lips have been commanded to sing a hymn to the LORD. Drip, my breasts, and tell your testimonies,
because you have been commanded to give milk. For he who is milked from you will be raised up,
and the people will be enlightened by his words,
and he will show to the nations the statutes/
and his horn will be exalted very high. isam 2:io
4 And so I will speak my words openly,
because from me will arise the ordinance of the LORD, isa5i:4
and all men will find the truth. Do not hurry to say great things isam 2:3
or to bring forth from your mouth lofty words,
but delight in glorifying (God). For when the light8 from which wisdom is to be bom will go forth, IMSM
not those who possess many things will be said to be rich,
nor those who have borne in abundance will be called mothers. For the sterile one has been satisfied* in childbearing, isam 2:5
h. Only the Lucianic MSS of ISam 1:14 have c. The expression "with him" is found in the
both "go" and "from you." LXX, the Lucianic MSS, and Ps-Philo but not in
i. Var. "you know"; but in this context "I the MT of ISam 1:24. know" seems preferable. d. Only Ps-Philo and the Lucianic MSS have
j. The phrase "into her house" is found in the "to him" in ISam 1:26. LXX and the Lucianic MSS of ISam 1:18 but not e. This may refer to the gentiles, but the par-
in the MT; but see ISam 1:19.Sn'ynw husband's loving her or her beauty."
(our enemies) was misread as $n*ym (enemies). d. In the LXX of ISam 2:10 there is a long
h. Lit. "dispositions," which may refer to or­ expansion on the theme of boasting. ders in the sense of groups arranged according to e. For "ways of behaving" (mores), perhaps
some hierarchical scheme (see IQSa). read "loves" (amores). f. For Eli as appointed by Phinehas, see 48:2
50 a. While "taunted" is absent from the LXX and 52:2. of ISam 1:6, it is found in the Lucianic MSS, the g. In the LXX of ISam 1:14 the servant (pai-
MT, and other texts. darion) of Eli speaks; Ps-Philo here agrees with
b. Lit. "the good day." the MT. c. Or "the love of wife does not depend on her

LXX and the Lucianic MSS of ISam 1:18 but not e. This may refer to the gentiles, but the par-
in the MT; but see ISam 1:19. allelism of the next line suggests that the peoples
of Israel are being discussed. 51 a. Based on the possible division of "Samuel" f. Lit. "boundaries"; see 15:6. in Heb. as Imw >/ meaning "his name is El (the g. The light is the anticipated prophet Samuel. Mighty One)." h. The phrase depends on the Hebrew SbPh of
b. Only Ps-Philo and one Lucianic MS mention ISam 2:5, which is usually interpreted with the
Hannah by name in ISam 1:23. number "seven" in mind.but she who had many children has been emptied. Because the Lord kills in judgment,
s isam 2:6
and brings to life in mercy. For them who are wicked in this world he kills,'
isam 2:9
and he brings the just to life when he wishes. Now the wicked he will shut up in darkness,
but he will save his light for the just. And when the wicked have died, then they will perish. And when the just go to sleep, then they will be freed. Now so will every judgment endure,
until he who restrains' will be revealed. 6 Speak, speak, Hannah, and do not be silent. Sing a hymn, daughter of Batuel,k
about the miracles that God has performed with you. Who is Hannah that a prophet is born1 from her? Or who is the daughter of Batuel that she should bear the light to the isa 51*
peoples? Rise up, you also, Elkanah, and gird your loins. Jer VAT,
Sing a hymn about the wonders of the LORD. ,OB 38:3
Because Asaph prophesied in the wilderness about your son, saying,
'Moses and Aaron were among his priests, Ps 99:6
and Samuel was there among them.'
Behold the word has been fulfilled,
and the prophecy has come to pass. And these words will endure
until they give the horn to his anointed one
isam 2:iof. and power be present at the throne of his king. And let my son stay here and serve
until he be made a light for this nation."
And they departed™ and set out with gladness, rejoicing and exulting in heart
7 isam2:ii
over all the glory that God had worked with them. But the people came down to
Shiloh together with timbrels and dances, lutes and harps, and they came to Eli
the priest and brought to him Samuel. And they stood Samuel before the LORD,
anointed him, and said, "Let the prophet live among the people, and may he be
a light to this nation for a long time!"
The sons of Eli
1 52 Now Samuel was very young and knew nothing of these things.LXX and the Lucianic MSS of ISam 1:18 but not e. This may refer to the gentiles, but the par-
in the MT; but see ISam 1:19. allelism of the next line suggests that the peoples
of Israel are being discussed. 51 a. Based on the possible division of "Samuel" f. Lit. "boundaries"; see 15:6. in Heb. as Imw >/ meaning "his name is El (the g. The light is the anticipated prophet Samuel. Mighty One)." h. The phrase depends on the Hebrew SbPh of
b. Only Ps-Philo and one Lucianic MS mention ISam 2:5, which is usually interpreted with the
Hannah by name in ISam 1:23. number "seven" in mind.

But the people came down to
Shiloh together with timbrels and dances, lutes and harps, and they came to Eli
the priest and brought to him Samuel. And they stood Samuel before the LORD,
anointed him, and said, "Let the prophet live among the people, and may he be
a light to this nation for a long time!"
The sons of Eli
1 52 Now Samuel was very young and knew nothing of these things. And while isam2:ii-i6
he was serving before the Lord, the two sons of Eli were not walking in the ways
of their fathers and began to do wicked things to the people and multiplied their
own wickednesses. And they were lingering near the house of Bethac, and when
the people came together to sacrifice, Hophni and Phinehas came and provoked isam 2:34
the people to anger by taking their sacrificial offerings before they were offered
2 as holy to the LORD. «And this was pleasing neither to the LORD nor to the people
nor to their father. And so their father said to them, "What is this report that I isam2:23f. hear about you? Or do you not know that I have received this place that Phinehas
committed to me?a And if we destroy what we have received, what will we say
if he who committed it asks for it again and he for whom he committed it should
harm us? And now straighten out your ways and walk in good ways, and your
i. Lit. "For they are wicked in this world*'; we "she should bear" we would expect "is born."
have added "he kills" to make a parallel with This may reflect confusion between egenethi (was)
"brings the just to life." and egennethi (was bom); see 17:3; 30:5. j. Most likely God himself; see 2Thes 2:6f. m. Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX and Lucianic
k. Only Ps-Philo mentions the name of Hannah's MSS of ISam 2:11 in having a plural verb. father as Batuel. 1. Lit. "is." In view of the parallel expression 52 a. See 48:2 and 50:3.positions will remain the same. But if you refuse and do not restrain your wicked
schemes, you will destroy yourselves, and the priesthood will be in vain and what
has been sanctified will be considered as nothing. And then they will say, 'Did
the staff of Aaron spring up in vain or has the flower born of it come down to
nothing?' »And so while you still can, my sons, correct what you have done
sinfully, and the men against whom you have sinned will pray for you. But if
you are not willing and you remain in your wickedness, I will be guiltless and isam 2.25
will only be sorry if perhaps I will hear of the day of your death before I die. But
even if this should happen, I will be free of guilt; and though 1 will be saddened,
nevertheless you will perish." •And his sons did not listen, because the Lord had isam 2:25
made a decision about them that they should die, for they had sinned. For when
he said to them, "Repent of your wicked way," they were saying, "When we
grow old, then we will repent. "b And they who were warned by their father were
not permitted to repent, because they were always rebelling and acting very
unjustly in despoiling Israel. The LORD was angry at Eli.c
The call of Samuel
53 And Samuel was serving before the Lord, still not knowing what the oracles isam 3:i; 2:ii;
of the Lord were. He had not yet heard the oracles of the LORD. He was eight 3:7
years old.8 #And when God remembered Israel, he wished to reveal to Samuel isam3:7.3
his words. And Samuel was sleeping in the temple of the Lord, And when God
called to him, he gave it consideration first, saying, "Behold now Samuel is
young so as to be beloved before me. In spite of the fact that he has not heard
the voice of the LORD or has been confirmed with the word of the Most High,
nevertheless he is like my servant Moses. To an eighty-year-old I spoke, but
Samuel is eight years old. And Moses saw the fire first, and his heart was very
much afraid.To an eighty-year-old I spoke, but
Samuel is eight years old. And Moses saw the fire first, and his heart was very
much afraid. And if Samuel should see fire now, how will he survive? And so
now my voice to him will be like that of a man, and not like that of God. And
when he has understood, then I will speak to him like God." *And in the middle isam 34f
of the night a voice from heaven called him. And Samuel was awakened, and he
recognized it as the voice of Eli the priest, and he ran to him and said, "Why
have you awakened me, Father? For I was frightened, because you never called
me at night." And Eli said, "Woe is me! Has an unclean spirit led my son Samuel
astray?" And he said to him, MGo, sleep. For / have not called you. Nevertheless,
tell me this, if you remember: How often did he who summoned you call?" And
he said, "Twice. "b And Eli said to him, "Tell me, whose voice did you recognize,
my son?" He said, "Yours. Therefore I ran to you." «And Eli said, "In you I
see this sign that men will have from today unto eternity, that if one should call
to another twice by night or in midday, they will know that it is an evil spirit. But if he should call again a third time, I will know that it is an angel." And isam3:5
Samuel went away and slept. • And a second time he heard a voice from heaven, isam 3:6,8f. and he rose up and ran to Eli and said to him, "Why has he called me? For I
have heard the voice of my father Elkanah." And then Eli understood that God
had begun to summon him. For Eli said, "With the two voices by which God
has already called to you, he has become like a father and a master; now with the
third he will be like God." #And he said to him, "With your right ear pay isam3:ii
attention, with your left be deaf.c For Phinehas the priest has commanded us,
saying, 'The right ear hears the LORD by night, but the left an angel.* And so if
b.But the people came down to
Shiloh together with timbrels and dances, lutes and harps, and they came to Eli
the priest and brought to him Samuel. And they stood Samuel before the LORD,
anointed him, and said, "Let the prophet live among the people, and may he be
a light to this nation for a long time!"
The sons of Eli
1 52 Now Samuel was very young and knew nothing of these things. And while isam2:ii-i6
he was serving before the Lord, the two sons of Eli were not walking in the ways
of their fathers and began to do wicked things to the people and multiplied their
own wickednesses. And they were lingering near the house of Bethac, and when
the people came together to sacrifice, Hophni and Phinehas came and provoked isam 2:34
the people to anger by taking their sacrificial offerings before they were offered
2 as holy to the LORD. «And this was pleasing neither to the LORD nor to the people
nor to their father. And so their father said to them, "What is this report that I isam2:23f. hear about you? Or do you not know that I have received this place that Phinehas
committed to me?a And if we destroy what we have received, what will we say
if he who committed it asks for it again and he for whom he committed it should
harm us? And now straighten out your ways and walk in good ways, and your
i. Lit. "For they are wicked in this world*'; we "she should bear" we would expect "is born."
have added "he kills" to make a parallel with This may reflect confusion between egenethi (was)
"brings the just to life." and egennethi (was bom); see 17:3; 30:5. j. Most likely God himself; see 2Thes 2:6f. m. Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX and Lucianic
k. Only Ps-Philo mentions the name of Hannah's MSS of ISam 2:11 in having a plural verb. father as Batuel. 1. Lit. "is." In view of the parallel expression 52 a. See 48:2 and 50:3.

For I
have heard the voice of my father Elkanah." And then Eli understood that God
had begun to summon him. For Eli said, "With the two voices by which God
has already called to you, he has become like a father and a master; now with the
third he will be like God." #And he said to him, "With your right ear pay isam3:ii
attention, with your left be deaf.c For Phinehas the priest has commanded us,
saying, 'The right ear hears the LORD by night, but the left an angel.* And so if
b. See b.Yoma 85b: "If one says, 'I shall had completed his twelfth year when he began to
continue to sin and later repent,1 the opportunity act as a prophet. to repent is not granted to him." b. "Twice" implies a text similar to that of the
c. In 52:2f. Eli has made it clear that he has not LXX for ISam 3:4. been involved in the sin of his sons, yet in 54:5 c. Lit. "be silent," which probably reflects a
he dies along with them. confusion between the meanings of the Heb. root
hri (be silent, be deaf). 53 a. Josephus (Ant 5.10.4 §348) says that Samuelyou hear in your right ear, say 'Say whatever you wish, because I am listening, isam 3:9
for you have created me/ But if you hear with your left ear, come and tell me."
7 And Samuel went away and slept as Eli had commanded him. *And the Lord isam 3:8
spoke again a third time, and the right ear of Samuel was filled. And when he
knew that the word of his father had come down, Samuel turned on his other side
and said, "If I am capable, speak; for you know more about me (than I do)."
8 And God said to him, "I have indeed enlightened the house of Israel in Egypt
and have chosen for myself then as a prophet Moses my servant and have done
wonders through him for my people and have taken revenge on my enemies as I
wished. And I brought my people into the wilderness and enlightened them as
9 they looked on. •And when one tribe rose up against another, saying, 'Why are Num 16
the priests alone holy?' I did not wish to destroy them and I said to them, 'Have
each one present his staff, and he whose staff will flower—him I have chosen for
the priesthood/ And when all had handed in the staffs as I had commanded, then
I commanded the ground where the tent of meeting was that the staff of Aaron
should flower in order that fiis family be made manifest all the days. And now
10 those who have flowered haVe defiled my holy things. •Therefore behold the days
will come, and I will trample on the flower that was born then and will stop them
who transgress the word that I have commanded Moses my servant, saying, 7/ Deut 22:6
you come upon a bird's nest, you shall not take the mother with young.'6 So it
will happen to them that mothers will die with daughters*5 and fathers will perish
11 with sons." *And when Samuel heard these words, his heart grew faint, and he
said, "Has it thus fallen to my youth that I should prophesy the destruction of
him who nourished me? And now how is it that I have been given according to
my mother's prayer? And who has brought me up?And now how is it that I have been given according to
my mother's prayer? And who has brought me up? How has he commanded me
12 to announce evil as if it were good?" *And Samuel arose in the morning,1 and isam3:i5
he did not wish to tell Eli. And Eli said to him, "Listen now, my son. Behold
before you were born, God promised Israel that he would send you to them and
that you would prophesy. And then when your mother came here and prayed,
because she did not know what had happened, I said to her, 'Go forth, for what
will be born from you will be a son for me.' And so I spoke to your mother and
so has the LORD guided your life. Even if you should chastise the one who has
brought you up, as the LORD lives, do not hide from me whatever you have heard." isam 3:n
13 Then Samuel was afraid and told him all the words that he had heard. And he isam3:i5.i8
said, "Will the object formed answer back him who formed it? So I cannot answer isa 29:16
back when he wishes to take away what he has delivered as a faithful giver. Holy
is he who has prophesied, for I am under his power."
The capture of the ark and Eli's death
1 54 And in those days the Philistines assembled their camp to attack Israel.a And isam 4:1-3
the sons of Israel went out to fight with them. And when the people of Israel
were put to flight in the first encounter, they said, ' 'Let us bring up the ark of the
covenant of the Lord, and perhaps he may fight along with us, because in it are
2 the tablets6 of the LORD that he established with our fathers on Horeb." »And isam4:5
when the ark went up with them and arrived at the camp, the LORD thundered
and said, "This hour will be like that which occurred in the wilderness when they
took the ark without my command, and destruction befell them.For I
have heard the voice of my father Elkanah." And then Eli understood that God
had begun to summon him. For Eli said, "With the two voices by which God
has already called to you, he has become like a father and a master; now with the
third he will be like God." #And he said to him, "With your right ear pay isam3:ii
attention, with your left be deaf.c For Phinehas the priest has commanded us,
saying, 'The right ear hears the LORD by night, but the left an angel.* And so if
b. See b.Yoma 85b: "If one says, 'I shall had completed his twelfth year when he began to
continue to sin and later repent,1 the opportunity act as a prophet. to repent is not granted to him." b. "Twice" implies a text similar to that of the
c. In 52:2f. Eli has made it clear that he has not LXX for ISam 3:4. been involved in the sin of his sons, yet in 54:5 c. Lit. "be silent," which probably reflects a
he dies along with them. confusion between the meanings of the Heb. root
hri (be silent, be deaf). 53 a. Josephus (Ant 5.10.4 §348) says that Samuel

Holy
is he who has prophesied, for I am under his power."
The capture of the ark and Eli's death
1 54 And in those days the Philistines assembled their camp to attack Israel.a And isam 4:1-3
the sons of Israel went out to fight with them. And when the people of Israel
were put to flight in the first encounter, they said, ' 'Let us bring up the ark of the
covenant of the Lord, and perhaps he may fight along with us, because in it are
2 the tablets6 of the LORD that he established with our fathers on Horeb." »And isam4:5
when the ark went up with them and arrived at the camp, the LORD thundered
and said, "This hour will be like that which occurred in the wilderness when they
took the ark without my command, and destruction befell them. So also in this
hour the people will fall and the ark will be captured in order that I may destroy
the enemies of my people on account of the ark and correct my people because
3 they have sinned/' #And when the ark had come into the battle, the Philistines isam4:iof. d. The connection of the sins of Eli's sons with does not. Deut 22:6 is unique to Ps-Philo. e. Var. "sons"; but the parallelism suggests 54 a. The sentence "And . . . Israel" is absent
that ''daughters'* is preferable. from the MT of ISam 4:1 but is present in the
f. The LXX, the Lucianic MSS, 4Q160, and LXX and Lucianic MSS. Ps-Philo have this phrase; the MT of ISam 3:15 b. The tablets of the Decalogue.went out to meet the sons of Israel and killed them. And Goliath the Philistine
was there, and he came up to the ark. And Hophni and Phinehas the sons of Eli
and Saul the son of Kish were holding onto the ark. And Goliath took hold of it
4 with his left hand and killed Hophni and Phinehas. *But Saul, because he was isam4:i2
swift on his feet, fled from him.c And he tore his garments and put ashes on his
head. And he came to Eli the priest, and Eli said to him, "Tell me what happened isam 4:i4-n
in the camp." And Saul said to him, "Why do you ask me these things? For the
people are defeated, and God has rejected Israel, and even the priests have been
5 killed by the sword, and the ark has been delivered to the Philistines." #But when
Eli had heard of the capture of the ark, he said, "Behold Samuel prophesied about
my sons and about me that we should die together, but he did not mention the
ark to me then. And now the tablets of the Law have been delivered to enemies. What more can I say? Behold Israel departs from the truth,d because the statutes
have been taken away from it." And while Eli was in deep despair, he fell down isam4:i8
from his seat. And there died on one day Eli and Hophni and Phinehas his sons. 6 And the wife of Phinehas sat down to give birth. When she heard these things, isam 4:19-21
all her insides were loosened. And the midwife said to her, "Regain your strength,
and let not your soul grow faint, because a son is born to you." And the woman
said to her, "Behold now this one person is born and four of us die, that is, the
father and the two sons and his daughter-in-law." And she called his name "where
is glory,"e saying, ' 'Glory has departed from Israel,f because 4he ark of the Lord
has been captured." And when she had said these words, she gave up her spirit. The return of the ark
1 55 Now Samuel knew nothing of all these matters, because three days before
the battle God had sent him forth, saying to him, "Go and look around Ramathaim isam r.And the midwife said to her, "Regain your strength,
and let not your soul grow faint, because a son is born to you." And the woman
said to her, "Behold now this one person is born and four of us die, that is, the
father and the two sons and his daughter-in-law." And she called his name "where
is glory,"e saying, ' 'Glory has departed from Israel,f because 4he ark of the Lord
has been captured." And when she had said these words, she gave up her spirit. The return of the ark
1 55 Now Samuel knew nothing of all these matters, because three days before
the battle God had sent him forth, saying to him, "Go and look around Ramathaim isam r. n
where your dwelling will be." And when Samuel had heard what had happened
to Israel, he came and prayed to the LORD, saying, "Behold now in vain has
understanding been denied me, that 1 should see the destruction8 of my people. And now I fear lest perhaps my days grow old in evil and my years reach an end
in sorrow. Since the ark of the LORD is not with me, why should I go on living?"
2 And the LORD said to him, "Do not be sad, Samuel, because the ark has been
taken away. I will bring it back, and I will overturn those who have taken it
away, and I will avenge my people from my enemies." And Samuel said, "Behold
even if you do take vengeance according to your long-suffering, nevertheless what
will we who die now do?" And God said to him, "Before you die, you will see
the end that I am bringing upon my enemies, in which the Philistines will be isam6:4
destroyed by scorpionsb and all evil creeping things and will perish."
3 And when the Philistines had set up the captured ark of the Lord in the temple isam 5:2-6
of Dagon, their god, and when they had come to inquire of Dagon concerning
the outcome,0 they found that he had fallen on his face and his hands and feet
were lying before the ark. And on the first morning they went out and crucified
his priests.Holy
is he who has prophesied, for I am under his power."
The capture of the ark and Eli's death
1 54 And in those days the Philistines assembled their camp to attack Israel.a And isam 4:1-3
the sons of Israel went out to fight with them. And when the people of Israel
were put to flight in the first encounter, they said, ' 'Let us bring up the ark of the
covenant of the Lord, and perhaps he may fight along with us, because in it are
2 the tablets6 of the LORD that he established with our fathers on Horeb." »And isam4:5
when the ark went up with them and arrived at the camp, the LORD thundered
and said, "This hour will be like that which occurred in the wilderness when they
took the ark without my command, and destruction befell them. So also in this
hour the people will fall and the ark will be captured in order that I may destroy
the enemies of my people on account of the ark and correct my people because
3 they have sinned/' #And when the ark had come into the battle, the Philistines isam4:iof. d. The connection of the sins of Eli's sons with does not. Deut 22:6 is unique to Ps-Philo. e. Var. "sons"; but the parallelism suggests 54 a. The sentence "And . . . Israel" is absent
that ''daughters'* is preferable. from the MT of ISam 4:1 but is present in the
f. The LXX, the Lucianic MSS, 4Q160, and LXX and Lucianic MSS. Ps-Philo have this phrase; the MT of ISam 3:15 b. The tablets of the Decalogue.

I will bring it back, and I will overturn those who have taken it
away, and I will avenge my people from my enemies." And Samuel said, "Behold
even if you do take vengeance according to your long-suffering, nevertheless what
will we who die now do?" And God said to him, "Before you die, you will see
the end that I am bringing upon my enemies, in which the Philistines will be isam6:4
destroyed by scorpionsb and all evil creeping things and will perish."
3 And when the Philistines had set up the captured ark of the Lord in the temple isam 5:2-6
of Dagon, their god, and when they had come to inquire of Dagon concerning
the outcome,0 they found that he had fallen on his face and his hands and feet
were lying before the ark. And on the first morning they went out and crucified
his priests. And the next day they came and found it as the day before, and there
4 was a great massacre among them. »And the Philistines gathered in Ekron and isam5:iof
said, each to his neighbor, "Behold now we see that destruction is great among
us, and the fruit of our womb will perish because the creeping things that have
c. In identifying Saul with the unnamed man of 4:21. Benjamin in ISam 4:12, Ps-Philo agrees with
several rabbinic writings. The word "fled" agrees 55 a. All the MSS have "army" (exercitium); we
with the Lucianic MSS. are reading "destruction" (exitium) as being more
d. Var. "perishes utterly." consistent with the content of the passage. e. That is, Ichabod, which lit. in Heb. is "no b. According to ISam 6:4 the Philistines are
glory." The translator may have read 'yh kbwd, destroyed by mice rather than scorpions. A con­
"where is glory?" for *y kbwd, "no glory." fusion at the level of Heb. ('kbrym meaning "mice"
f. Some MSS have' 'The glory of God in Israel,'' with cqrbym meaning "scorpions") is likely. while others have "The glory of the house of c. Or "their going forth."
Israel." Our reading of the text is based on ISambeen sent upon us will destroy those who are with child or sucklings and those
who are nursing." And they said, "Let us see why the hand of the LORD has isams:7
been heavy upon us. Is it not because of the ark, for our god is found daily falling isam 5:3f. on his face before the ark? And we have destroyed the priests more than once in
5 vain." »And the wise men of the Philistinesd said, "Behold now we can learn isam6:2
about this, if the LORD has sent destruction upon us on account of the ark or an
6 evil power has come upon us by chance. *And now because all who are pregnant isam 6:7-io
and who are nursing are dead, and those who nurse are made childless and those
who are nursed perish, let us take cows that give milk and yoke them to a new
cart and put the ark on it and shut up their calves. And if the cows in going forth
should go forth so as not to turn back to their calves, we will know that we have
suffered these things on account of the ark. But if they do not want to go forth
out of longing for their calves, we will know that the time of destruction has come
7 upon us." •And some of the wise men and diviners answered, "Not only will we isam 6:2
try this, but also we will set the cows at the juncture of the three roads that are isam 6:9
around Ekron. For the middle road goes straight to Ekron and the right-hand one
to Judah and the left-hand one to Samaria. And if they set out on the right-hand
road and go straight to Judah, we will know indeed that the God of the Jews has
destroyed us. But if they go forth by the other roads, we will know that this very isam 6:9
violent time has come upon us because now we have denied our own gods."
8 And the Philistines took the cows that gave milk and yoked them to the new cart isam 6:10-12
and put the ark on it and set them at the juncture of the roads and shut up their
calves at home.And if they set out on the right-hand
road and go straight to Judah, we will know indeed that the God of the Jews has
destroyed us. But if they go forth by the other roads, we will know that this very isam 6:9
violent time has come upon us because now we have denied our own gods."
8 And the Philistines took the cows that gave milk and yoked them to the new cart isam 6:10-12
and put the ark on it and set them at the juncture of the roads and shut up their
calves at home. Now the cows, even though they lowed and yearned for their
calves, nevertheless were going forth on the right-hand road, which leads to Judah. 9 And then they knew they were being destroyed because of the ark. *And all the isam6:2i
Philistines gathered together and returned the ark to Shilohc with timbrels and
pipes and dances. And in place of the evil creeping things that destroyed them
10 they made golden tumors, and they consecrated the ark. *And on that day the isam6:i7
destruction of the Philistines took place. The number of those who were with ,Sam6:19
child and died was seventy-five thousand, and the sucklings sixty-five thousand
and those who were giving suck fifty-five thousand, and the men twenty-five
thousand. And the land was at peace for seven years. The people demand a king
1 56 And in that time the sons of Israel desired and sought for a king, and they isam 8:4f. gathered to Samuel and said, ' 'Behold now you are old, and your sons do not
walk in your ways. And now appoint over us* a king to govern us, because the
word has been fulfilled that Moses said to our fathers in the wilderness, saying,
2 'Appoint from your brothers a ruler over you.'" *And when Samuel heard talk of Dem n:i5
a kingdom, he was very sad in his heart and said, "Behold now I see that it is 1Sam86
not yet the time for us to have an everlasting kingdom and to build the house of
the LORD our God, for these people are seeking a king before the proper time.I will bring it back, and I will overturn those who have taken it
away, and I will avenge my people from my enemies." And Samuel said, "Behold
even if you do take vengeance according to your long-suffering, nevertheless what
will we who die now do?" And God said to him, "Before you die, you will see
the end that I am bringing upon my enemies, in which the Philistines will be isam6:4
destroyed by scorpionsb and all evil creeping things and will perish."
3 And when the Philistines had set up the captured ark of the Lord in the temple isam 5:2-6
of Dagon, their god, and when they had come to inquire of Dagon concerning
the outcome,0 they found that he had fallen on his face and his hands and feet
were lying before the ark. And on the first morning they went out and crucified
his priests. And the next day they came and found it as the day before, and there
4 was a great massacre among them. »And the Philistines gathered in Ekron and isam5:iof
said, each to his neighbor, "Behold now we see that destruction is great among
us, and the fruit of our womb will perish because the creeping things that have
c. In identifying Saul with the unnamed man of 4:21. Benjamin in ISam 4:12, Ps-Philo agrees with
several rabbinic writings. The word "fled" agrees 55 a. All the MSS have "army" (exercitium); we
with the Lucianic MSS. are reading "destruction" (exitium) as being more
d. Var. "perishes utterly." consistent with the content of the passage. e. That is, Ichabod, which lit. in Heb. is "no b. According to ISam 6:4 the Philistines are
glory." The translator may have read 'yh kbwd, destroyed by mice rather than scorpions. A con­
"where is glory?" for *y kbwd, "no glory." fusion at the level of Heb. ('kbrym meaning "mice"
f. Some MSS have' 'The glory of God in Israel,'' with cqrbym meaning "scorpions") is likely. while others have "The glory of the house of c. Or "their going forth."
Israel." Our reading of the text is based on ISam

gathered to Samuel and said, ' 'Behold now you are old, and your sons do not
walk in your ways. And now appoint over us* a king to govern us, because the
word has been fulfilled that Moses said to our fathers in the wilderness, saying,
2 'Appoint from your brothers a ruler over you.'" *And when Samuel heard talk of Dem n:i5
a kingdom, he was very sad in his heart and said, "Behold now I see that it is 1Sam86
not yet the time for us to have an everlasting kingdom and to build the house of
the LORD our God, for these people are seeking a king before the proper time. But even if the LORD SO wished it, it seems to me that a king could not be
3 appointed." *And the LORD said to him by night, "Do not be sad. For I will send isam 8:9
them a king who will destroy them, and he himself will be destroyed afterward. Now he who will come to you tomorrow at the sixth hour; he is the one who will isam 9:i6
rule over them."
4 And on the next day Saul the son of Kish came from the hill country of Ephraim isam 9:1-4
in search of his father's asses. And when he came to Ramathaim, he went in to isam9:i2f. inquire from Samuel about the asses. Now he was walking around Bama.b And
d. Josephus (Ant 6.1.2 §§8-10) also describes in agreement with the LXX and Lucianic MSS of
a dispute among the Philistine leaders based on ISam 8:5. ISam 6:2. b. The MSS have Boom. The emendation to
e. According to ISam 6:12 the Philistines brought Bama is based on the assumption that the Heb. the ark to Beth-shemesh. word for "high place" (bdmd) in ISam 9:12-14
has been misunderstood, or deliberately misinter­
56 a. Ps-Philo reads "And now" and "over us" preted, as a proper name.Saul said to him, 4 'Where is he who sees?'' Now in that time a prophet was called isam 9:is
"one who sees." And Samuel said to him, "I am the one who sees." And he 9:?9
:
said, "Can you tell me about my father's asses, because they are lost?" And isam9:i9
Samuel said to him, "Rest yourself with me today, and I will tell you tomorrow
that for which you have come to inquire." *And Samuel said to the LORD, "Direct
your people, LORD, and tell me what you have planned for them." And Saul isam9:24-26
rested himself with Samuel on that day. And he rose up in the morning, and
Samuel said to him, "Behold may you know that the Lord has chosen you as isam 10:1
ruler for his people in this time and has directed your ways, and your future will
also be directed." #And Saul said to Samuel, "Who am I and what is the house isam9:2i
of my father that my lord should say to me this word? For I do not understand Jer 1*
what you are saying, because I am young." And Samuel said to Saul, "Who will
grant that your word be accomplished of itself to the end that you should have a
long life? Nevertheless, consider this, that your words will be compared to the
words of the prophet whose name will be Jeremiah." •And Saul went away, and
on that day the people came to Samuel, saying, "Give us a king as you have isam8:6
promised us." And he said to them, "Behold your king will come to you after
threec days." And behold Saul came, and all the signs that Samuel had told him isam 10:9
happened to him. Are these not written in the Book of Kings?d
Saul is presented to the people
57 And Samuel sent and gathered all the people and said to them, "Behold you isam 12:1-3
and your king. But I am in your midst as God has commanded me.Are these not written in the Book of Kings?d
Saul is presented to the people
57 And Samuel sent and gathered all the people and said to them, "Behold you isam 12:1-3
and your king. But I am in your midst as God has commanded me. *And so
before your king I say to you as my lord Moses the servant of God said to your
fathers in the wilderness when the company of Korah8 rose up against him, 'You
know that / have not taken anything from you, nor have I harmed anyone of you.' Num 16:15
And because they lied then and said, 'You have taken,' the earth swallowed them Num 16:32
up. *And now you, who have not been punished by the LORD, answer before the isam 12:3
Lord and before his anointed, if you have sought a king because I have treated
you badly; and the Lord will be the witness for you. But if now the word of the isam 12:5
LORD has been fulfilled, I and the house of my father are free from blame."
And the people answered, "We are your servants; but we have a king, because
we are not worthy to be governed by a prophet. Now appoint over us a king who isam 8:5
will govern us." And all the people and the king wept with a great lamentation
and said, "Long live Samuel the prophet!" And when the king was being
appointed, they brought sacrifices to the LORD. #And afterward Saul fought with isam 13:9
the Philistines in a year of very successful combat. The sin of Saul
58 And in that time the LORD said to Samuel, "Go and say to Saul, 'You have
been sent to destroy Amalek in order that the words that Moses my servant spoke isam 15:3
may be fulfilled: "I will destroy the name of Amalek from the earth." 1 have Deut25:i9;Ex
spoken in my anger. And do not forget to destroy everyone of them as has been 17:14
commanded to you.'" *And Saul went off and attacked Amalek. And he let Agag, isam 15:7-9.gathered to Samuel and said, ' 'Behold now you are old, and your sons do not
walk in your ways. And now appoint over us* a king to govern us, because the
word has been fulfilled that Moses said to our fathers in the wilderness, saying,
2 'Appoint from your brothers a ruler over you.'" *And when Samuel heard talk of Dem n:i5
a kingdom, he was very sad in his heart and said, "Behold now I see that it is 1Sam86
not yet the time for us to have an everlasting kingdom and to build the house of
the LORD our God, for these people are seeking a king before the proper time. But even if the LORD SO wished it, it seems to me that a king could not be
3 appointed." *And the LORD said to him by night, "Do not be sad. For I will send isam 8:9
them a king who will destroy them, and he himself will be destroyed afterward. Now he who will come to you tomorrow at the sixth hour; he is the one who will isam 9:i6
rule over them."
4 And on the next day Saul the son of Kish came from the hill country of Ephraim isam 9:1-4
in search of his father's asses. And when he came to Ramathaim, he went in to isam9:i2f. inquire from Samuel about the asses. Now he was walking around Bama.b And
d. Josephus (Ant 6.1.2 §§8-10) also describes in agreement with the LXX and Lucianic MSS of
a dispute among the Philistine leaders based on ISam 8:5. ISam 6:2. b. The MSS have Boom. The emendation to
e. According to ISam 6:12 the Philistines brought Bama is based on the assumption that the Heb. the ark to Beth-shemesh. word for "high place" (bdmd) in ISam 9:12-14
has been misunderstood, or deliberately misinter­
56 a. Ps-Philo reads "And now" and "over us" preted, as a proper name.

And do not forget to destroy everyone of them as has been 17:14
commanded to you.'" *And Saul went off and attacked Amalek. And he let Agag, isam 15:7-9. the king of Amalek, live, because he said to him, "I will show you hidden 20
treasures." And on account of this he spared3 him and let him live and brought isam 15:16,20
him to Ramathaim.b #And God said to Samuel, "You have seen how in a short
time the king has been corrupted with silver, and he has let the king of Amalek
and his wife live. And now let them be, so that Agag may come together with
c. Seven, according to ISam 10:8. 58 a. Josephus (Ant 6.7.2 §137) says that Saul
d. ISam is also referred to in this manner in the spared Agag "out of admiration for his beauty and
his stature."
LXX tradition. b. According to ISam 15:12, 21, 33, Agag is
57 a. According to Seder 01am 20 and other brought to Gilgal. rabbinic sources Samuel was a descendant of Korah.his wife tonight; and you will kill him tomorrow. But his wife they will keep safe
until she bears a male child, and then she also will die. And he who will be born
from her will become a stumbling block for Saul.c Now may you rise up tomorrow
and kill Agag, because Saul's sin is written before me all the days." *And when
ISam 15:12f
Samuel rose up early in the morning, Saul went out to meet him and said to him,
"The LORD has delivered our enemies into our hands just as you have said." And
Samuel said to Saul, "How much harm Israel has done because they demanded
you for themselves as a king before the time came that a king should rule over
them! And you, who were sent to do the will of the LORD, have transgressed it. And so he who was let live by you will die now, and those hidden treasures that
he talked about he will not show you, and one who will be born from him will
be for you a stumbling block." And Samuel came to Agag, and he had a sword,
and Samuel killed Agag* and returned to his house. ISam 15:33f. The anointing and the psalm of David
59 And the Lord said to him, "Go, anoint him whom I will tell you, because
ISam 16:1,3
the time in which his kingdom will come to pass has been fulfilled." And Samuel
said, "Behold are you blotting out the kingdom of Saul?" And he said, "I am
blotting it out." •And Samuel went forth to Bethel8 and consecrated elders and
ISam 16:4-7
Jesse and his sons. And Eliab, the firstborn son of Jesse, came. And Samuel said,
"Behold now is this the holy one, the anointed of the Lord?" And the Lord said
to him, "Where is your vision that your heart sees? Are you not the one who said
ISam 9:19
to Saul, 7 am the one who sees'? And why do you not know whom you should
anoint?And do not forget to destroy everyone of them as has been 17:14
commanded to you.'" *And Saul went off and attacked Amalek. And he let Agag, isam 15:7-9. the king of Amalek, live, because he said to him, "I will show you hidden 20
treasures." And on account of this he spared3 him and let him live and brought isam 15:16,20
him to Ramathaim.b #And God said to Samuel, "You have seen how in a short
time the king has been corrupted with silver, and he has let the king of Amalek
and his wife live. And now let them be, so that Agag may come together with
c. Seven, according to ISam 10:8. 58 a. Josephus (Ant 6.7.2 §137) says that Saul
d. ISam is also referred to in this manner in the spared Agag "out of admiration for his beauty and
his stature."
LXX tradition. b. According to ISam 15:12, 21, 33, Agag is
57 a. According to Seder 01am 20 and other brought to Gilgal. rabbinic sources Samuel was a descendant of Korah.

Are you not the one who said
ISam 9:19
to Saul, 7 am the one who sees'? And why do you not know whom you should
anoint? And now this reproach is sufficient for you; seek out the least shepherd
of all and anoint this one." *And Samuel said to Jesse,b "Send and bring your
ISam 16:11-13
son from the flock, because God has chosen him." And Jesse* sent and brought
David, and Samuel anointed him in the midst of his brothers. And the LORD was
with him from that day. #Then David began to sing this song, and he said,
"From the ends of the earth I will begin my song of glory,
Ps61:2
and from the days long ago I will take upd a hymn. When Abel first shepherded flocks,
his sacrifice was more acceptable than that of his brother,
and his brother was jealous of him and killed him. But for me it is not the same,
because God has protected me
and because he has delivered me to his angels
and to his guardianse that they should guard me. For my brothers were jealous of me,
and my father and my mother neglected me. Ps 27:10
And when the prophet came,
they did not call to me. And when the anointed of the LORD was to be designated,
they forgot me. But God with his right hand
and his mercy drew near to me. Therefore I will not cease singing praises
all the days of my life."
And while David was still speaking, behold a fierce lion from the forest and a
c. See 65:4. That Agag's son was responsible b. Var. * * Hear, O Jesse "; but our reading reflects
for Saul's death is not found in the biblical account. ISam 16:11. In Josephus' Ant 11.6.5 §211 Haman (cf. Esth 3:1) c. Only the Lucianic MSS and Ps-Philo specify
is a descendant of Agag. Jesse as the subject here in ISam 16:12. d. Josephus (Ant 6.7.5 §155) has Samuel give d. Lit. "say"; confusion between the Gk. airo
an order for someone else to put Agag to death. (take up) and ero (say) is possible. e. For the angels as guardians, see 11:12 and
59 a. According to ISam 16:4 the place should 15:5. be Bethlehem.bear from the mountain seized the sheep1 of David. And David said, "Behold
this will be a sign for me as a most striking beginning of my victory in battle. And / am going out after them and will rescue what has been snatched away and
kill them." And David went out after them and took stones from the forest and
killed them. And God said to him, "Behold with stones I have delivered up these
beasts for you. Now this will be a sign for you, because with stones you will kill
the enemy8 of my people later on."
David as exorcist
1 60 And in that time the spirit of the Lord was taken away from Saul, and an isam i6:i4
evil spirit was choking him. And Saul sent and brought David, and he played a isam 16:19,23
song on his lyre by night. And this was the song he played for Saul in order that
the evil spirit might depart from him. 2 "Darkness and silencea were before the world was made,
and silence spoke a wordb and the darkness became light. Then your namec was pronounced in the drawing together of what had
been spread out,
the upper of which was called heaven and the lower was called earth. Gen uir
And the upper part was commanded to bring down rain according to its
season,
and the lower part was commanded to produce food for all things that had
been made. And after these was the tribe of your spirits made. 3 And now do not be troublesome as one created on the second day.d
But if not, remember Tartarus where you walk. Or is it not enough for you to hear that, through what resounds before
you, I sing to many? Or do you not remember that you were created from a resounding echo in
the chaos? But let the new womb from which I was born rebuke you,
from which after a time one bom from my loinse will rule over you."
And as long as David sang, the spirit spared Saul. isam 16:23
David and Goliath
1 61 And after this the Philistines came to fight Israel, and David returned to the isam 17:15
wilderness to feed the sheep. And the Midianites happened upon him and wanted
to take his sheep.Are you not the one who said
ISam 9:19
to Saul, 7 am the one who sees'? And why do you not know whom you should
anoint? And now this reproach is sufficient for you; seek out the least shepherd
of all and anoint this one." *And Samuel said to Jesse,b "Send and bring your
ISam 16:11-13
son from the flock, because God has chosen him." And Jesse* sent and brought
David, and Samuel anointed him in the midst of his brothers. And the LORD was
with him from that day. #Then David began to sing this song, and he said,
"From the ends of the earth I will begin my song of glory,
Ps61:2
and from the days long ago I will take upd a hymn. When Abel first shepherded flocks,
his sacrifice was more acceptable than that of his brother,
and his brother was jealous of him and killed him. But for me it is not the same,
because God has protected me
and because he has delivered me to his angels
and to his guardianse that they should guard me. For my brothers were jealous of me,
and my father and my mother neglected me. Ps 27:10
And when the prophet came,
they did not call to me. And when the anointed of the LORD was to be designated,
they forgot me. But God with his right hand
and his mercy drew near to me. Therefore I will not cease singing praises
all the days of my life."
And while David was still speaking, behold a fierce lion from the forest and a
c. See 65:4. That Agag's son was responsible b. Var. * * Hear, O Jesse "; but our reading reflects
for Saul's death is not found in the biblical account. ISam 16:11. In Josephus' Ant 11.6.5 §211 Haman (cf. Esth 3:1) c. Only the Lucianic MSS and Ps-Philo specify
is a descendant of Agag. Jesse as the subject here in ISam 16:12. d. Josephus (Ant 6.7.5 §155) has Samuel give d. Lit. "say"; confusion between the Gk. airo
an order for someone else to put Agag to death. (take up) and ero (say) is possible. e. For the angels as guardians, see 11:12 and
59 a. According to ISam 16:4 the place should 15:5. be Bethlehem.

isam 16:23
David and Goliath
1 61 And after this the Philistines came to fight Israel, and David returned to the isam 17:15
wilderness to feed the sheep. And the Midianites happened upon him and wanted
to take his sheep. And he went down to them and attacked them, and he killed
fifteen thousand of their men.a This is the first battle that David fought while he
2 was in the wilderness. *And a man by the name of Goliath went forth from the isam 17:4
camp of the Philistines, and he looked at Saul and at Israel and said, "Are you
not the Israelb that fled before me when I took the ark from you and killed your
priests? And now that you are king, come down like a man and a king, and fight isam 17:9
us. If not, I will come to you and take you captive and make your people serve
f. Lit. "bulls"; but see ISam 17:34, where the created on the second day, but according to Jub
lion and the bear took a lamb from the flock. The 2:2 on the first day. tauros of Ps-Philo can be explained as resulting e. It is unlikely that this is a reference to the
from confusion between ih (lamb) and iwr (bull). future Messiah (or Jesus), given the lack of interest
g. Goliath. See 61:3. in such a figure throughout Ps-Philo. Probably this
is an allusion to Solomon as exorcist; see WisSol
60 a. The primordial silence is also mentioned in 7:17-22 and especially Josephus' Ant 8.2.5 §§45-
2Bar 3:7. 49. b. For speech coming from silence, see IgnMagn
8:2 and GTr 27:10-12. 61 a. This incident with the Midianites is unique
c. The name of the evil spirit. to Ps-Philo. d. According to 2En 29:1 the evil spirits were b. Perhaps Saul or Israelite.our gods."c And when Saul and Israel heard these words, they were very much ISam 17:11
afraid. And the Philistine said, "According to the number of days in which Israel
feasted when it received the Law in the wilderness, that is, forty days, so I will
3 ridicule them and afterward I will fight with them." #And when the forty days ISam 17:16,28,
had been completed and David came to view his brothers' battle, he heard the 22
words that the Philistine had spoken and said, "Is this the time about which God
said to me, T will deliver into your hands by stones the enemy of my people'?"
4 And Saul heard these words and sent and received him and said, "What is this ISam 17:31
word that you have spoken to the people?" And David said, "Do not fear, King, ISam 17:32
because I will go and fight the Philistine, and God will take away hatred and ISam 17:36
5 reproaches from Israel."6 #And David set out, and he took seven* stones and ISam 17:40
wrote on them the names of his fathers (those of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
Moses and Aaron) and his own and the Most Powerful. And God sent Zervihel/
6 the angel in charge of might in warfare. *And David went out to Goliath and said 2Sam 21:15-22
to him, "Hear this word before you die. Were not the two women, from whom Ruth 1:14
you and I were born, sisters? And your mother* was Orpah, and my mother Ruth. And Orpah chose for herself the gods of the Philistines and went after them, but
Ruth chose for herself the ways of the Most Powerful and walked in them. And
now there were born from Orpah you and your brothers. And because you have
risen up today and have come to destroy Israel, behold I who am born from your
own blood have come to avenge my people. For after your death your three
brothers, too, will fall into my hands. Then you will say to your mother, 'He
7 who was born from your sister has not spared us.'" #And David put a stone in ISam 17:49-51
the sling and struck the Philistine on his forehead.For after your death your three
brothers, too, will fall into my hands. Then you will say to your mother, 'He
7 who was born from your sister has not spared us.'" #And David put a stone in ISam 17:49-51
the sling and struck the Philistine on his forehead. And he ran up to him and
drew his sword. And Goliath, while he still had life in him, said to him, "Hurry
8 and kill me, and then rejoice." *And David said to him, "Before you die, open
your eyes and see your slayer, the one who has killed you." And the Philistine
looked and saw an angel and said, "Not you alone have killed me, but also the
one who is present with you, he whose appearance is not like the appearance of
9 a man." And then David cut off his head. *Now the angel of the LORD had ISam 17:55-58
changed11 David's appearance, and no one recognized him. And Saul saw David
and asked him who he was, and there was no one who recognized him. David and Jonathan
1 62 And after this Saul was jealous of David, and he sought to kill him. Now isam 18:3
David and Jonathan the son of Saul had made a covenant together. And when
David saw that Saula was seeking to kill him, he fled to Ramathaim; and Saul isam 19:18-22
2 went out after him. •And a spirit abided in Saul, and he prophesied, saying, isam 19:23
"Why are you led astray, Saul, and whom are you pursuing in vain? The time
allotted to your kingdom has been completed. Go to your place. For you will die,
and David will reign. Will not you and your sonb die together? And then the tsam3i:6
kingdom of David will appear." And Saul went away and did not know what he
had prophesied. 3 Now David came to Jonathan and said to him, "Come, and let us make a isam 18:3
covenant before we are separated from one another. For Saul, your father, seeks
to kill me unjustly, and because he knows that you love me he does not tell you isam 20.3
4 what he is planning about me. *But on account of this he hates me, because you
c.isam 16:23
David and Goliath
1 61 And after this the Philistines came to fight Israel, and David returned to the isam 17:15
wilderness to feed the sheep. And the Midianites happened upon him and wanted
to take his sheep. And he went down to them and attacked them, and he killed
fifteen thousand of their men.a This is the first battle that David fought while he
2 was in the wilderness. *And a man by the name of Goliath went forth from the isam 17:4
camp of the Philistines, and he looked at Saul and at Israel and said, "Are you
not the Israelb that fled before me when I took the ark from you and killed your
priests? And now that you are king, come down like a man and a king, and fight isam 17:9
us. If not, I will come to you and take you captive and make your people serve
f. Lit. "bulls"; but see ISam 17:34, where the created on the second day, but according to Jub
lion and the bear took a lamb from the flock. The 2:2 on the first day. tauros of Ps-Philo can be explained as resulting e. It is unlikely that this is a reference to the
from confusion between ih (lamb) and iwr (bull). future Messiah (or Jesus), given the lack of interest
g. Goliath. See 61:3. in such a figure throughout Ps-Philo. Probably this
is an allusion to Solomon as exorcist; see WisSol
60 a. The primordial silence is also mentioned in 7:17-22 and especially Josephus' Ant 8.2.5 §§45-
2Bar 3:7. 49. b. For speech coming from silence, see IgnMagn
8:2 and GTr 27:10-12. 61 a. This incident with the Midianites is unique
c. The name of the evil spirit. to Ps-Philo. d. According to 2En 29:1 the evil spirits were b. Perhaps Saul or Israelite.

For Saul, your father, seeks
to kill me unjustly, and because he knows that you love me he does not tell you isam 20.3
4 what he is planning about me. *But on account of this he hates me, because you
c. In ISam 17:9 Goliath threatens to make Israel reflects an error in reading ni3 or ns"h (raised) for
serve the Philistines, not the gods of the Philistines inh (changed). For the idiom of "changing the
as here. face" to avoid recognition, see 7:5 and 64:4. d. For taking away reproaches from Israel, see
the LXX and Lucianic MSS of ISam 17:36. 62 a. All the MSS merely have "he," but ac­
e. ISam 17:40 speaks of five stones only. cording to ISam 19:18-22 and the rest of the story
f. See 27:10 for what seems to be the same here it must be Saul. angel. b. But according to ISam 31:6 Saul dies with
g. Here "mother" must mean ancestress. his three sons. h. All the MSS have "raised," which probablylove me and in order that I may not reign in his place. And when I gave him
good things, he paid me back with bad things. And when I killed Goliath according
to the word of the Most Powerful, see the end that he planned for me, for he
determined to destroy my father's house. And would that the judgment of truth
might be placed in the balance so that the many prudent people might hear the
s decision. *And now I fear that he will kill me, that he will lose his own life on
my account. For I never have shed innocent blood, and why does my soul suffer
persecution? For I, the least among my brothers, was tending sheep, and why Ps ISKLXXJ
should I be in danger of death? For I am just and have no wickedness, and why
does your father hate me? But the righteousness of my father0 helps me so that I
should not fall into the hands of your father. And since I am young and tender of
6 days, in vain does Saul envy me. *If I had harmed him, I would ask that he
forgive me these sins; because if God forgives wicked deeds, how much more
should your father, who is flesh and blood. I have walked in his household with
a perfect heart, and like a swift eagle I was brought before him. I put my hands
to the lance, and I blessed him with songs. But he made plans to kill me, and
7 like a sparrow who flees before the hawk, so I fled from him. #To whom did I
say these words, or to whom have I told what I have suffered, except to you and
8 Michal, your sister? As for the two of us, let us go forth together in truth. *And
it would have been better, brother, if I had been slain in battle than that I should
fall into the hands of your father. For in the battle my eyes were looking everywhere
that I might protect him from his enemies. Jonathan my brother, hear my words. And if there is wickedness in me, correct me." isam 20.8
9 And Jonathan answered and said to David, "Come to me, my brother David,
and I will tell you of your righteousness.Jonathan my brother, hear my words. And if there is wickedness in me, correct me." isam 20.8
9 And Jonathan answered and said to David, "Come to me, my brother David,
and I will tell you of your righteousness. My soul whTpine away in sadness over
you, because we are now separated from each other. And our sins have caused
this, that we should be separated from each other; but let us be mindful of one
another night and day while we live. Even if death separates us, I know that our
souls will know each other.d For yours is a kingdom in this world, and from you
10 is the beginning of a kingdom which will come in its own time. *And now like
an infant who is taken away from the milk of its mother, so will our separation
be. Be a witness, heaven, and be a witness, earth, for those words that we have isam 20:23
exchanged; and let us weep each one over the other, and let us collect our tears
into one vessel and consign that vessel to the earth, and it will be a testimony for
11 us." *And they wept, one over the other, and they kissed one another. But isam20:4if. Jonathan was afraid, and he said to David, "Let us remember, my brother, the
covenant begun between us and the oath set in our heart. And if I die before you
and you are king as the LORD has said, do not remember the anger of my father
but your covenant that has been established between me and you. Do not remember
the hatred with which my father hates you in vain but my love with which I have
loved you. Do not remember that my father was ungrateful toward you, but
remember the table at which we ate together. Do not hold on to the jealousy with
which he was jealous of you so evilly but the truth that you and I have. Do not
care about the lie that Saul has lied but the oaths that we have sworn to one
another." And they kissed each other. And after this David* went off into the
wilderness, and Jonathan entered the city.For Saul, your father, seeks
to kill me unjustly, and because he knows that you love me he does not tell you isam 20.3
4 what he is planning about me. *But on account of this he hates me, because you
c. In ISam 17:9 Goliath threatens to make Israel reflects an error in reading ni3 or ns"h (raised) for
serve the Philistines, not the gods of the Philistines inh (changed). For the idiom of "changing the
as here. face" to avoid recognition, see 7:5 and 64:4. d. For taking away reproaches from Israel, see
the LXX and Lucianic MSS of ISam 17:36. 62 a. All the MSS merely have "he," but ac­
e. ISam 17:40 speaks of five stones only. cording to ISam 19:18-22 and the rest of the story
f. See 27:10 for what seems to be the same here it must be Saul. angel. b. But according to ISam 31:6 Saul dies with
g. Here "mother" must mean ancestress. his three sons. h. All the MSS have "raised," which probably

Do not
care about the lie that Saul has lied but the oaths that we have sworn to one
another." And they kissed each other. And after this David* went off into the
wilderness, and Jonathan entered the city. The death of Abimelech
1 63 In that time the priests who dwelt in Nob were profaning the holy things of isam 22:1 sr. the LORD and desecrating8 the first fruits of the people. And God was angry and
c. In the rabbinic tradition Jesse, David's father, resurrection, see 2Bar 50:3f. is one of the four righteous men who did not die e. All texts except the MT specify David as the
because of their own sins but because the serpent subject in ISam 20:42 (21:1 in the MT). caused Adam and Eve to sin. The present sentence
contrasts Jesse's righteousness with Saul's unrigh­ 63 a. We are reading expropriantes for expro-
teousness. bantes, which is found in all the MSS. d. For the dead recognizing one another at thesaid, "Behold I will blot out those dwelling in Nob, because they walk in the
2 ways of the sons of Eli." b • And in that time Doeg the Syrian,c who was in charge isam 22:9-13,
of Saul's mules, came and said to him, "Do you not know that Abimelech the 16-21
priest is making plans with David, and he has given him a sword and has let him
go in peace?" And Saul sent and called Abimelech and said to him, "You will
surely die, because you have made a plot with my enemy." And Sauld killed
Abimelech and the house of his father, and not one of his tribe was saved except
Abiathar his son. And he went off to David and told him all that had happened
3 to him. »And he said to him, "Behold in the year when Saul began to reign, isam 1*45
when Jonathan had sinned and hee wanted to kill him, this people rose up and
did not let him. And now when 385f priests are killed, they are silent and say isam22:i8
nothing. And so behold the days will come soon, and I will deliver them into the isam 31
4 hands of their enemies, and they will fall wounded with their king." *And the
LORD said these things about* Doeg the Syrian: "Behold the days will come soon,
and a fiery wormh will go up into his tongue and make him rot away, and his
5 dwelling place will be with Jair in the inextinguishable fire forever." »A11 the
things that Saul did, and the rest of his words, and how he pursued David, are
they not written in the Book of the Kings of Israel? The witch of Endor
1 64 And after this Samuel died, and all Israel gathered together and wept over isam 28:3; 25:1
him and buried him. Then Saul thought and said, "Because I am to expel the
wizards from the land of Israel, they8 will be mindful of me after my departure."
And Saul scattered all the wizards from the land.The witch of Endor
1 64 And after this Samuel died, and all Israel gathered together and wept over isam 28:3; 25:1
him and buried him. Then Saul thought and said, "Because I am to expel the
wizards from the land of Israel, they8 will be mindful of me after my departure."
And Saul scattered all the wizards from the land. And God said, "Behold Saul isam28:3
has not driven the wizards out of the land for fear of me, but to make a name for
himself.b Behold he will go to those whom he has scattered, to obtain divination
2 from them, because he has no prophets." *And then the Philistines said, each to
his neighbor, "Behold Samuel the prophet is dead, and who prays for Israel? And
David, who fought on their behalf, is Saul's enemy, and he is not with them. And now let us rise up and go and fight and attack them and avenge the blood of
3 our fathers." And the Philistines gathered together and came for battle. *And isam28:4
when Saul saw that Samuel was dead and David was not with him, his hands ,Sam 28:5-7
grew faint, and he inquired of the Lord, but he did not listen to him. And he
sought out prophets, and none appeared to him. And Saul said to the people, "Let
us seek out some medium and inquire of him what I should plan out." And the
people answered him, "Behold now there is a woman, Sedeclac by name, and
this is the daughter of the Midianite divinerd who led the people of Israel astray
4 with sorceries, and behold she dwells in Endor. *And Saul put on his worst clothes isam 28:8-11
and went off to her, he and two men with him, by night and said to her, ' 'Raise
up Samuel for me." She said, "I fear King Saul." And Saul said to her, "You
will not be harmed by Saul in this matter." And Saul said to himself, "When I
was king in Israel, even if the gentiles did not see me, they knew nevertheless
that I was Saul." And Saul asked the woman, saying, "Have you ever seen
Saul?" She said, "I have seen him often." Saul went outside and wept and said,
b.Do not
care about the lie that Saul has lied but the oaths that we have sworn to one
another." And they kissed each other. And after this David* went off into the
wilderness, and Jonathan entered the city. The death of Abimelech
1 63 In that time the priests who dwelt in Nob were profaning the holy things of isam 22:1 sr. the LORD and desecrating8 the first fruits of the people. And God was angry and
c. In the rabbinic tradition Jesse, David's father, resurrection, see 2Bar 50:3f. is one of the four righteous men who did not die e. All texts except the MT specify David as the
because of their own sins but because the serpent subject in ISam 20:42 (21:1 in the MT). caused Adam and Eve to sin. The present sentence
contrasts Jesse's righteousness with Saul's unrigh­ 63 a. We are reading expropriantes for expro-
teousness. bantes, which is found in all the MSS. d. For the dead recognizing one another at the

And Saul said to the people, "Let
us seek out some medium and inquire of him what I should plan out." And the
people answered him, "Behold now there is a woman, Sedeclac by name, and
this is the daughter of the Midianite divinerd who led the people of Israel astray
4 with sorceries, and behold she dwells in Endor. *And Saul put on his worst clothes isam 28:8-11
and went off to her, he and two men with him, by night and said to her, ' 'Raise
up Samuel for me." She said, "I fear King Saul." And Saul said to her, "You
will not be harmed by Saul in this matter." And Saul said to himself, "When I
was king in Israel, even if the gentiles did not see me, they knew nevertheless
that I was Saul." And Saul asked the woman, saying, "Have you ever seen
Saul?" She said, "I have seen him often." Saul went outside and wept and said,
b. Josephus (Ant 6.12.6 §260) also connects the g. Lit. "to"; but the statement is cast in the
death of the priests with the iniquities of Eli's sons, third person, and so there may have been confusion
but he does not say that they themselves did wrong between the Heb. '/ (to) and 7 (about). as Ps-Philo does. h. On being eaten by worms, see 44:9. c. Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX and Josephus
in making Doeg an Aramean (or Syrian) rather 64 a. Var. "he will be mindful."
than an Edomite as in the MT of ISam 22:9. b. Ps-Philo is unique in attributing the expulsion
d. According to ISam 22:18 Doeg, not Saul, of the sorcerers to Saul's selfishness. does the killing. c. Ps-Philo alone gives this name, Sedecla, to
e. Saul, according to ISam 14:45. the witch of Endor. f. According to ISam 22:18 the number of d. An emendation. Most MSS have "Adod the
priests killed was 385 (Josephus), 85 (MT), 305 Midianite," who may be Aod of ch. 34. (LXX), 350 (Lucianic MSS)."Behold now I know that my appearance has been changed, and the glory of my
5 kingdom has passed from me." •And when the woman saw Samuel rising up and isam 28:i2f. she saw Saule with him, she shouted out and said, "Behold you are Saul, and
why have you deceived me?" And he said to her, "Do not be afraid, but telV
what you have seen" She said, "Behold forty years have passed since I began
raising up the dead for the Philistines, but such a sight as this has never been seen
6 before nor will it be seen afterward." *And Saul* said to her, "What is his isam28:i3f
appearance?" She said, "You are asking me about divine beings. For behold his
appearance is not the appearance of a man. For he is clothed in a white robeh
with a mantle placed over it, and two angels' are leading him." And Saul
remembered the mantle that Samuel tore when he was alive, and he struck his isam 15:27
7 hand on the ground and pounded it. *And Samuel said to him, "Why have you iiSXiS-is
disturbed me by raising me up? I thought that the time for being rendered the
rewards of my deeds had arrived.j And so do not boast, King, nor you, woman;
for you have not brought me forth, but that order that God spoke to me while I
was still alive, that I should come and tell you that you have sinned now a second
time in neglecting God. Therefore after rendering up my soul my bones have been
disturbed so that I who am dead should tell you what I heard while I was alive. 8 Now therefore tomorrow you and your sons will be with mek when the people isam28:i9
have been delivered into the hands of the Philistines; and because your insides
9 were eaten up with jealousy, what is yours will be taken from you." *And Saul
heard the words of Samuel and grew faint and said, "Behold I am going to die
with my sons; perhaps my destruction will be an atonement1 for my wickedness."
And Saul rose up and went away from there.Therefore after rendering up my soul my bones have been
disturbed so that I who am dead should tell you what I heard while I was alive. 8 Now therefore tomorrow you and your sons will be with mek when the people isam28:i9
have been delivered into the hands of the Philistines; and because your insides
9 were eaten up with jealousy, what is yours will be taken from you." *And Saul
heard the words of Samuel and grew faint and said, "Behold I am going to die
with my sons; perhaps my destruction will be an atonement1 for my wickedness."
And Saul rose up and went away from there. isam 28:25
The death of Saul
1 65 And the Philistines attacked Israel, and Saul went out for battle, and Israel isam 311.3
fled before the Philistines. And Saul seeing that the battle was very fierce said in
his heart, "Why are you strengthening yourself for life when Samuel has announced
2 death for you along with your sons?" •And Saul said to his armor-bearer, "Take isam 3i:4
your sword and kill me before the Philistines come and abuse me." And the
3 armor-bearer was not willing to lay his hands upon him. #But he fell upon his isam 3i:4
own sword, without being able to die. And he looked behind him. He saw a man 2Sam \.i
running, and he called him and said, "Take your sword and kill me; there is still 2Sam i:9
4 life in me." •And he came to kill him. And Saul said to him, "Before you kill 2Sam uo
me, tell me who you are." And he said to him, "I am Edabus, son of Agag, 2Sam 1.8,13
king of the Amalekites." And Saul said, "Behold now the words of Samuel have
come to pass upon me, because he said, 4He who is born of Agag will be a
5 stumbling block for you.'8 #Now go and tell David, i have killed your enemy.' 2Sam 110
And you will say to him, 4Be not mindful of my hatred or my injustice.'"
e. Some LXX MSS of ISam 28:12 report that i. Cf. GPet 10 (39f.), where two angels lead
the woman saw Saul, but the other texts say that Christ out of the tomb,
she saw Samuel. Ps-Philo appears to combine the j.And Saul said to the people, "Let
us seek out some medium and inquire of him what I should plan out." And the
people answered him, "Behold now there is a woman, Sedeclac by name, and
this is the daughter of the Midianite divinerd who led the people of Israel astray
4 with sorceries, and behold she dwells in Endor. *And Saul put on his worst clothes isam 28:8-11
and went off to her, he and two men with him, by night and said to her, ' 'Raise
up Samuel for me." She said, "I fear King Saul." And Saul said to her, "You
will not be harmed by Saul in this matter." And Saul said to himself, "When I
was king in Israel, even if the gentiles did not see me, they knew nevertheless
that I was Saul." And Saul asked the woman, saying, "Have you ever seen
Saul?" She said, "I have seen him often." Saul went outside and wept and said,
b. Josephus (Ant 6.12.6 §260) also connects the g. Lit. "to"; but the statement is cast in the
death of the priests with the iniquities of Eli's sons, third person, and so there may have been confusion
but he does not say that they themselves did wrong between the Heb. '/ (to) and 7 (about). as Ps-Philo does. h. On being eaten by worms, see 44:9. c. Ps-Philo agrees with the LXX and Josephus
in making Doeg an Aramean (or Syrian) rather 64 a. Var. "he will be mindful."
than an Edomite as in the MT of ISam 22:9. b. Ps-Philo is unique in attributing the expulsion
d. According to ISam 22:18 Doeg, not Saul, of the sorcerers to Saul's selfishness. does the killing. c. Ps-Philo alone gives this name, Sedecla, to
e. Saul, according to ISam 14:45. the witch of Endor. f. According to ISam 22:18 the number of d. An emendation. Most MSS have "Adod the
priests killed was 385 (Josephus), 85 (MT), 305 Midianite," who may be Aod of ch. 34. (LXX), 350 (Lucianic MSS).

GPet 10 (39f.), where two angels lead
the woman saw Saul, but the other texts say that Christ out of the tomb,
she saw Samuel. Ps-Philo appears to combine the j. The day of judgment,
two. k. In death. f. By including "tell" Ps-Philo stands with the 1. In rabbinic literature Saul's death is an atone­
LXX and the Lucianic MSS of ISam 28:13. ment for his sins, but Josephus (Ant 6.14.4 §349)
g. The inclusion of "Saul" is found only in the attributes his death to desire for fame after death. Lucianic MSS of ISam 28:14. h. The white shroud in which he was buried. 65 a. See 58:4.THE LIVES OF THE PROPHETS
(First Century A.D.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY D. R. A. HARE
"The names of the prophets, and where they are from, and where they died and how, and
where they lie"—with these phrases the major manuscript, Codex Marchalianus, summarizes
the content of the brief document now known as The Lives of the Prophets. In some sections
all the information given fits this summary. In others the scheme is expanded to include
legendary information not contained in the Scriptures (Jonah was the son of the widow of
Zarephath visited by Elijah, IKgs 17!—10:4-6) and prophecies or "signs" attributed to
the prophet that are not found in the canon. Non-canonical miracles are also reported. In a
few instances canonical narratives are included. The collection treats the three major and
twelve minor prophets and Daniel, and seven non-literary prophets whose activities are
reported in the Bible. Texts
The Lives of the Prophets is extant in a number of versions, including Syriac, Ethiopic,
Latin, and Armenian, but all are dependent upon Greek originals. There are an abundance
of Greek manuscripts, the most important of these are the following:
Codex Marchalianus, Cod. Vaticanus Gk. 2125, sixth century, in the Vatican library; it
is referred to as Q. It is the most important member of the group of manuscripts
constituting the "anonymous recension."1
Codex Paris. Gk. 1115, copied in 1276, now in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris; because
it is the chief witness for the longer of the two recensions attributed to Epiphanius
of Salamis, it will be referred to as E1. Codex Coisl. 120, tenth century, Bibliotheque Nationale (Fonds Coislin), Paris; since it
is the leading representative of the short recension attributed to Epiphanius, it will
be referred to as E2. Codex Vindob. Theol. Gk. 40 (formerly 77), thirteenth century, Vienna; because it is
the best example of the recension attributed to Dorotheus, it will be cited as D. Codex Coisl.GPet 10 (39f.), where two angels lead
the woman saw Saul, but the other texts say that Christ out of the tomb,
she saw Samuel. Ps-Philo appears to combine the j. The day of judgment,
two. k. In death. f. By including "tell" Ps-Philo stands with the 1. In rabbinic literature Saul's death is an atone­
LXX and the Lucianic MSS of ISam 28:13. ment for his sins, but Josephus (Ant 6.14.4 §349)
g. The inclusion of "Saul" is found only in the attributes his death to desire for fame after death. Lucianic MSS of ISam 28:14. h. The white shroud in which he was buried. 65 a. See 58:4.

40 (formerly 77), thirteenth century, Vienna; because it is
the best example of the recension attributed to Dorotheus, it will be cited as D. Codex Coisl. 224, tenth century, Bibliotheque Nationale (Fonds Coislin), Paris; a member
of the "anonymous recension," it generally agrees with Q. No siglum is used for
this manuscript, because it is used infrequently. The text is well preserved in these manuscripts (Coisl. 224 is defective in the section on
Daniel), but they differ widely regarding the order in which the prophets are treated and in
respect to which non-literary prophets are included. The translation here presented is based almost entirely upon Q, which is generally regarded
as best representing the earliest Greek version of this work.2
1 This term distinguishes Q and its dependents from the many MSS that attribute the work to Epiphanius or
Dorotheus. 2 A critical text of Q is presented by T. Schermann, Prophetarum vitaefabulosae indices apostolorum discipulorumque
Domini Dorotheo, Epipnanio, Hippotyto aliisque vindicate, pp. 68-98. With this was compared the text of Q as
printed by E. Nestle, Marginalien und Materialmen. Discussions of the major recensions and their chief witnessesOriginal language
It is believed by many that The Lives of the Prophets was originally written in one of
the Semitic languages. A few scholars have proposed that the original language was Syriac,
but this position has won few supporters.3 More widespread is the view, vigorously defended
by C. C. Tomey, that the book was composed in Hebrew.4 The Israeli scholar S. Klein
suggests that either Aramaic or Hebrew may have been the original language.5 T. Schermann
posits a Hebrew ancestor but opposes the view that the earliest Greek version was simply
a translation from Hebrew.6
Two arguments count against the hypothesis of a Semitic original. First, the evidence of
mistranslation is not substantial.7 Secondly, there are several instances in which the text is
closer to the Greek version of the Jewish Scriptures than to the Hebrew.8 In the absence of
compelling evidence to the contrary, it is best to assume that the Palestinian traditions
included in this document first attained literary form in Greek.9
Date
It is very difficult to date a document of this kind, not only because it contains very few
allusions to contemporary events, but also because it was an open-ended collection that
invited additions. The document is extant in Christian manuscripts only. Not a scrap of it has been identified
at Qumran, and there is no reference to it in other Jewish literature. Nevertheless, the basic
material has been so little influenced by Christian beliefs that scholars are generally agreed
that the original writing was created by a Jew. Because it was transmitted by Christians,
however, it is not surprising that the manuscripts contain a good deal of Christian material. In D, for example, each section is prefaced with prophecies concerning the Messiah
attributed to the prophet in question, to which are appended in some instances references
to the use of these prophecies in the New Testament.Because it was transmitted by Christians,
however, it is not surprising that the manuscripts contain a good deal of Christian material. In D, for example, each section is prefaced with prophecies concerning the Messiah
attributed to the prophet in question, to which are appended in some instances references
to the use of these prophecies in the New Testament. E1 adds sections dealing with Zechariah
the father of John the Baptist, Simeon of Luke 2:25-35, and John the Baptist. A few
manuscripts dependent upon Q, including Coisl. 224, contain an account of the martyrdom
of "Simon, son of Clopus, the cousin of the LORD." Q contains no Christian additions of
either of these two types, but Christian interpolations of a more subtle kind are suspected
at various points, some of which will be referred to in the notes.10
On the assumption that the basic work was created by a non-Christian Jew, it is still
difficult to establish limits for his activity, but the evidence suggests a date within the first
century A.D. Some of the traditions are undoubtedly ancient, but it seems unlikely that the
basic collection originated as early as the Maccabean period. Nor is there any certain
evidence that the document dates from after the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple in
may be found in T. Schermann, Propheten- und Apostellegenden nebst Jungerkatalogen der Dorotheas und verwandter
Texte, pp. 1-133; A.-M. Denis, Introduction, pp. 85-88; C. C. Torrey, The Lives of the Prophets, pp. 4-6. 3 The leading proponent was I. H. Hall, "The Lives of the Prophets," JBL 7 (1887) 38f. 4 Lives, p. 7; Torrey also cites earlier advocates of this view. 5 4,tfl/ ha-seper Vitae Prophetarum," Sefer Klozner, ed. H. Torczyner, 209. 6 Propheten- und Apostellegenden, pp. 131f. 7 Cf. n. c on 1:1. Torrey's brilliant conjecture concerning the argolai of 2:7 (Lives, p. 49; see below, n. k on 2:7)
does not provide evidence of translation from a Heb.40 (formerly 77), thirteenth century, Vienna; because it is
the best example of the recension attributed to Dorotheus, it will be cited as D. Codex Coisl. 224, tenth century, Bibliotheque Nationale (Fonds Coislin), Paris; a member
of the "anonymous recension," it generally agrees with Q. No siglum is used for
this manuscript, because it is used infrequently. The text is well preserved in these manuscripts (Coisl. 224 is defective in the section on
Daniel), but they differ widely regarding the order in which the prophets are treated and in
respect to which non-literary prophets are included. The translation here presented is based almost entirely upon Q, which is generally regarded
as best representing the earliest Greek version of this work.2
1 This term distinguishes Q and its dependents from the many MSS that attribute the work to Epiphanius or
Dorotheus. 2 A critical text of Q is presented by T. Schermann, Prophetarum vitaefabulosae indices apostolorum discipulorumque
Domini Dorotheo, Epipnanio, Hippotyto aliisque vindicate, pp. 68-98. With this was compared the text of Q as
printed by E. Nestle, Marginalien und Materialmen. Discussions of the major recensions and their chief witnesses

49; see below, n. k on 2:7)
does not provide evidence of translation from a Heb. original; if the passage is not a gloss, the author may simply
be transmitting a tradition popular among Gk.-speaking Jews of Egypt. The evidence of mistranslation in 4:10 is
impressive (see n. f) but is not in itself sufficient to justify the hypothesis. 8 Cf. n. j on 4:15, n. f on 12:12, and nn. k and 1 on 21:13-14. The use of "Sybatha" in 20:1 seems to reflect a
tradition based on the Heb. text (see n. c), but awareness of such a tradition on the part of a Palestinian author would
not justify the inference that he wrote in Heb. (or Aram.). 9 Concerning the use of Gk. by Palestinian Jews, cf. J. N. Sevenster, Do You Know Greek? (Leiden, 1968);
A. R. C. Leaney, "Greek Manuscripts from the Judean Desert," Studies in New Testament Language and Text, ed. J. K. Elliott (Leiden, 1976) pp. 283-300. 10 M. de Jonge, "Christelijke Elementen in de Vitae Prophetarum," Nederlands Theologisch Tijdschrift 16 (1961-
62) 164, raises the possibility that Melito or Hegesippus assembled the material while traveling in the Near East, and,
in conjunction with Christian editing, first presented it to the world as a literary document.A.D.70.11 A date after the emergence of gentile Christianity may be required if the prophecy
in 2:13 concerning gentiles worshiping a piece of wood is an expression of Jewish disgust
at the idolatrous veneration of the cross by gentile Christians, but it seems more probable
that this is a Christian interpolation. Of greater relevance to the question of the date are two passages that seem to imply
specific historical situations. If the passage concerning Isaiah's grave indicates that in the
author's perspective the so-called spring of Siloam is outside the wall of Jerusalem, a date
prior to the erection of the new south wall by Herod Agrippa (A.D. 41-44) is required.12
On the other hand, the author may simply be reflecting an awareness of the fact that the
Herodian wall is of very recent date, and therefore this passage cannot be pressed as certain
evidence for a date prior to A.D. 41. More convincing evidence of a first-century date is provided by a phrase in 21:1, "Elijah,
a Thesbite from the land of the Arabs." That is, from the author's perspective, Elijah's
Transjordanian birthplace lay within the area under Nabatean political control. Since
Nabatean hegemony was terminated in A.D. 106 by Trajan, it is probable that our author
wrote at an earlier date. Although demonstration is impossible, it would appear that the most probable date is the
first quarter of the first century A.D., when interest in the erection of monuments for prophets
and other national heroes, encouraged in part by Herod's construction of an expensive
memorial of white marble at the entrance to David's tomb (Josephus, Ant 16.7.1 §182)
began to gain momentum. One may hazard the guess that this little document preceded,
and perhaps even contributed toward, the peaking of this movement. The saying of Jesus
in Luke 11:47, "Alas for you who build the tombs of the prophets, the men your ancestors
killed!" (cf. Mt 23:29), implies that memorials had been erected recently for certain martyred
prophets.The saying of Jesus
in Luke 11:47, "Alas for you who build the tombs of the prophets, the men your ancestors
killed!" (cf. Mt 23:29), implies that memorials had been erected recently for certain martyred
prophets. Jeremias argues that Jesus was alluding most probably to monuments in honor of
Isaiah and Zechariah son of Jehoiada, the only prophets to whom tradition had attributed a
Jerusalem martyrdom and burial.13 While The Lives of the Prophets 1:8 suggests that a
monument had been erected for Isaiah (cf. n. 1 on 1:8), there is no suggestion that this was
of recent date. Respecting the burial of Zechariah son of Jehoiada, on the other hand, our
text betrays no awareness of a monument (cf. 23:1 and n. d). If Jesus' saying does in fact
point to such a construction, it can be inferred that our author wrote prior to the time of
Jesus' public ministry. Provenance
It is most probable that the writing originated in Palestine. Not only does the author
apparently have accurate geographical information, but also his perspective seems to be that
of a resident in Judea. Torrey argues that the author is an inhabitant of Jerusalem, because
of the naturalness with which he speaks of "the city" when referring to Jerusalem.14 Since
it is possible, however, that Jews resident elsewhere in Palestine sometimes spoke in this
way, it it necessary to be cautious. In any case, the author seems to be particularly well
informed regarding Jerusalem. The details he gives concerning the site of Isaiah's grave in
relation to other local landmarks suggest great familiarity with, if not actual residence in,
the Holy City. Did the work originate among hellenistic Jews of Palestine?49; see below, n. k on 2:7)
does not provide evidence of translation from a Heb. original; if the passage is not a gloss, the author may simply
be transmitting a tradition popular among Gk.-speaking Jews of Egypt. The evidence of mistranslation in 4:10 is
impressive (see n. f) but is not in itself sufficient to justify the hypothesis. 8 Cf. n. j on 4:15, n. f on 12:12, and nn. k and 1 on 21:13-14. The use of "Sybatha" in 20:1 seems to reflect a
tradition based on the Heb. text (see n. c), but awareness of such a tradition on the part of a Palestinian author would
not justify the inference that he wrote in Heb. (or Aram.). 9 Concerning the use of Gk. by Palestinian Jews, cf. J. N. Sevenster, Do You Know Greek? (Leiden, 1968);
A. R. C. Leaney, "Greek Manuscripts from the Judean Desert," Studies in New Testament Language and Text, ed. J. K. Elliott (Leiden, 1976) pp. 283-300. 10 M. de Jonge, "Christelijke Elementen in de Vitae Prophetarum," Nederlands Theologisch Tijdschrift 16 (1961-
62) 164, raises the possibility that Melito or Hegesippus assembled the material while traveling in the Near East, and,
in conjunction with Christian editing, first presented it to the world as a literary document.

The details he gives concerning the site of Isaiah's grave in
relation to other local landmarks suggest great familiarity with, if not actual residence in,
the Holy City. Did the work originate among hellenistic Jews of Palestine? Sometimes the document
reflects dependence upon the Hebrew text of the Bible, at other points it clearly evidences
familiarity with a Greek translation.15 It is important in this connection to remember that in
11 The prediction of 12:11 that the Temple will be destroyed by a Western nation was probably understood as
referring to the Romans, but nothing requires that it be taken as a prophecy after the fact; the accompanying statements
have the ring of unfulfilled predictions. Similarly, the prophecy of 10:11 is best taken as reflecting an earlier situation,
not the bitter experience of A.D. 70 (see n. on 10:11). 12 See 1:1-8 and n. i. 13 J. Jeremias, Heiligengrdber in Jesu Umwelt, pp. 66, 68. Jeremias seems to infer that since there were no graves
of martyr-prophets in Galilee, Transjordan, or Samaria, and because the graves of Micah and Amos were honored in
southern Judea beyond the area of Jesus' travels, it can be assumed that Jesus' saying alludes to the Jerusalem martyrs. 14 Lives, p. 11. 15 Sybatha in 20:1 and Spharphotim in 16:3 suggest acquaintance with the Scriptures in Heb. (see nn. on these
passages). On the other hand, the use of Baltasar as a name both for Nebuchadnezzar's crown prince and for Daniel
depends on LXX (see 4:4, 15 and n.).the first century A.D. a large number of Palestinian Jews were bilingual or trilingual, and
well able to use Greek as a literary medium. In the absence of clear proof to the contrary,
it may be supposed that The Lives of the Prophets reflects bilingual Palestinian Judaism. Theological importance
Perhaps the main reason why this early writing has so seldom been translated into English
and has not heretofore been included in English collections of Jewish apocryphal and
pseudepigraphical writings is that it contains so little of interest to biblical theologians. Religious edification is not its prime purpose, and consequently theological themes are for
the most part dealt with only indirectly. The document is "orthodox" in the sense that it assumes the biblical view that there is
but one God, who is LORD of history and Savior of his people, and that the rulership of
God is manifested in natural disasters and in miracles (1:2-8; 2:3-4). Abnormal natural
occurrences are taken as signs, provided by God and announced through his prophets, of
forthcoming historical events (3:5; 4:19-20). Angels, though seldom mentioned, are obviously taken for granted as an important means
of communication between God and his people (12:12; 16:2-3; 23:2; the men "of shining
white appearance" of 21:2 are presumably angels). Demons are never referred to, but Satan
appears three times in the text under the name "Beliar" (4:6, 20; 17:2), a designation often
used in the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs and in the Qumran literature, and occurring
once in the New Testament (2Cor 6:15).16 Another designation for the prince of evil is "the
serpent" (12:13); the closest parallel to this is provided by Revelation 12:9, 17 (ApMos
16:5 prefers to render the snake of Gen 3 as Satan's "vessel"). Satan is also alluded to as
"the enemy" (2:15), as in the Testament of Daniel 6:3f. and Luke 10:19 (cf. Mt 13:39).and Luke 10:19 (cf. Mt 13:39). Thus it can be affirmed that dualism is present in the document, but it is by no means
emphasized. Ethics and the related theological topics of guilt, punishment, and expiation are not a
major concern in this writing. It is assumed that it is proper to live in accordance with the
law (2:18; 3:16; 17:1), but there is no attempt to preach this by reference to God's acts in
history. Although the historical narratives of the canonical books of Kings and of Chronicles
are the source of anecdotal material, the central theological theme of these books, namely
that God punishes those who fail to keep his law and rewards those who observe it, has not
greatly influenced this document. It is particularly striking that in a book that purports to
relate the martyrdoms of six prophets there is no allusion to the popular theme that Israel
has always persecuted God's prophets (cf. 2Chr 24:19; 36:14-16; Neh 9:26; Jub 1:12).17
Only in the case of Jeremiah is the martyrdom attributed in generalized terms to his
"people," i.e. Israel (see 2:1 and n.), and even here there is no theological reflection on
the corporate guilt thus incurred. Also significant is the fact that the "moral thunder" of
the prophetic writings, so much appreciated by modern readers, has left almost no trace
(cf. 6:2). It is very evident that the author's interest in the prophets relates not to their
importance as ethical teachers but, rather, to their numinous quality as workers of miracles,
intercessors, and foretellers of future events. The doctrine of the resurrection is assumed without argument or polemic (2:15; 3:12). It
is further assumed that important symbols of Israel's worship will reappear in the age to
come.The details he gives concerning the site of Isaiah's grave in
relation to other local landmarks suggest great familiarity with, if not actual residence in,
the Holy City. Did the work originate among hellenistic Jews of Palestine? Sometimes the document
reflects dependence upon the Hebrew text of the Bible, at other points it clearly evidences
familiarity with a Greek translation.15 It is important in this connection to remember that in
11 The prediction of 12:11 that the Temple will be destroyed by a Western nation was probably understood as
referring to the Romans, but nothing requires that it be taken as a prophecy after the fact; the accompanying statements
have the ring of unfulfilled predictions. Similarly, the prophecy of 10:11 is best taken as reflecting an earlier situation,
not the bitter experience of A.D. 70 (see n. on 10:11). 12 See 1:1-8 and n. i. 13 J. Jeremias, Heiligengrdber in Jesu Umwelt, pp. 66, 68. Jeremias seems to infer that since there were no graves
of martyr-prophets in Galilee, Transjordan, or Samaria, and because the graves of Micah and Amos were honored in
southern Judea beyond the area of Jesus' travels, it can be assumed that Jesus' saying alludes to the Jerusalem martyrs. 14 Lives, p. 11. 15 Sybatha in 20:1 and Spharphotim in 16:3 suggest acquaintance with the Scriptures in Heb. (see nn. on these
passages). On the other hand, the use of Baltasar as a name both for Nebuchadnezzar's crown prince and for Daniel
depends on LXX (see 4:4, 15 and n.).

The doctrine of the resurrection is assumed without argument or polemic (2:15; 3:12). It
is further assumed that important symbols of Israel's worship will reappear in the age to
come. In connection with his concealment of the ark of the covenant and its contents prior
to the destruction of the first Temple, Jeremiah is said to have declared:
This ark no one is going to bring out except Aaron, and none of the priests or
prophets will any longer open the tablets in it except Moses, God's chosen one. And in the resurrection the ark will be the first to be resurrected and will come out
of the rock and be placed on Mount Sinai, and all the saints will be gathered to it
there . . . (2:14f.)
16 For a helpful discussion of the significance of Belial (Beliar) in the Dead Sea Scrolls, cf. H. Ringgren, The
Faith of Qumran, trans. E. T. Sander (Philadelphia, 1963) pp. 74f., 91 f. 17 L. Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, vol. 4, p. 295, cites a haggadah in which the young Jeremiah declares,
"O LORD, I cannot go as a prophet to Israel, for when lived there a prophet whom Israel did not desire to kill?"Similarly, Habakkuk prophesies that the capitals of the pillars of the second Temple will
be restored at the commencement of the age to come as sources of illumination for those
being pursued by the serpent (12:12f.). Of special interest to students of Jewish eschatology is the designation of Moses as
"God's chosen one" (2:14), in view of the fact that the same words are employed as a
designation of the Messiah by Jesus' enemies in Luke's passion narrative (Lk 23:35). Since
the Messiah is nowhere mentioned in the oldest version of The Lives of the Prophets, it
can be argued that its author adhered to that segment of Jewish eschatology which expected
not a Davidic but a Mosaic deliverer. Also fascinating is the assertion that Elijah "will
judge Israel" (21:3, to which most MSS apart from Q add "with sword and fire"). This
provides valuable evidence of the belief that God will execute his judgment by means of
one or more human deputies, and makes more understandable the parallel assertions of the
New Testament (e.g. Mt 19:28; Acts 17:31; ICor 6:2f.). The idea that Elijah will function
as eschatological judge may underlie the prediction attributed to John the Baptist concerning
the one who will baptize with fire (Mt 3:1 If.; Lk 3:16f.). Despite a strong belief in a future resurrection it is perhaps even more strongly believed
that the righteous dead are still alive in a very real sense. In 1:8 it is asserted that the
martyred Isaiah is the patron saint of Siloam, through whose prayers the water continues to
flow, and it is apparently the numinous presence of Jeremiah at his grave that makes the
soil effective for the healing of asps' bites (2:4). With this must be compared the early
Christian belief that the righteous dead are transported to a place of blessedness before the
final resurrection (Lk 16:22-24; 23:43; Phil 1:23; Rev 6:9f.; cf. Mk 12:26f.) and thus are
to be conceived of as already alive and not merely "sleeping" in the earth.With this must be compared the early
Christian belief that the righteous dead are transported to a place of blessedness before the
final resurrection (Lk 16:22-24; 23:43; Phil 1:23; Rev 6:9f.; cf. Mk 12:26f.) and thus are
to be conceived of as already alive and not merely "sleeping" in the earth. No consistency
is attempted in our text relative to the location of this post-mortem existence. On the one
hand it is assumed that the dead prophet's lively existence is to be experienced at his grave;
on the other, a heavenly residence is suggested by the statement that Jeremiah and Moses
"are together to this day" (2:19), despite the fact that their supposed graves are widely
separated. Relation to canonical books
Although the author is thoroughly familiar with the biblical narratives concerning the
prophets given in Kings and Chronicles and the prophetic books, it is evident that he wishes
to provide supplementary information rather than simply to repeat canonical material. For
this reason, the long summaries of the "signs" performed by Elijah and Elisha (21:4-14;
22:4-17) must be suspected of being later additions.18
There is no indication that the book was known to any of the New Testament writers,
but the author of the Letter to the Hebrews seems to have been aware of some of the
traditions here recorded. The statement of Hebrews 11:37, "They were stoned, or sawn in
half, or beheaded," appears to refer to the popular legends concerning the martyrdoms of
the three major prophets Jeremiah, Isaiah, and Ezekiel respectively.19 Our document
explicitly states that Jeremiah was stoned (2:1) and that Isaiah "died under Manasseh by
being sawn in two" (1:1) but is less explicit regarding Ezekiel. We are told only that "The
ruler of the people Israel killed him ..." (3:2).The doctrine of the resurrection is assumed without argument or polemic (2:15; 3:12). It
is further assumed that important symbols of Israel's worship will reappear in the age to
come. In connection with his concealment of the ark of the covenant and its contents prior
to the destruction of the first Temple, Jeremiah is said to have declared:
This ark no one is going to bring out except Aaron, and none of the priests or
prophets will any longer open the tablets in it except Moses, God's chosen one. And in the resurrection the ark will be the first to be resurrected and will come out
of the rock and be placed on Mount Sinai, and all the saints will be gathered to it
there . . . (2:14f.)
16 For a helpful discussion of the significance of Belial (Beliar) in the Dead Sea Scrolls, cf. H. Ringgren, The
Faith of Qumran, trans. E. T. Sander (Philadelphia, 1963) pp. 74f., 91 f. 17 L. Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, vol. 4, p. 295, cites a haggadah in which the young Jeremiah declares,
"O LORD, I cannot go as a prophet to Israel, for when lived there a prophet whom Israel did not desire to kill?"

The statement of Hebrews 11:37, "They were stoned, or sawn in
half, or beheaded," appears to refer to the popular legends concerning the martyrdoms of
the three major prophets Jeremiah, Isaiah, and Ezekiel respectively.19 Our document
explicitly states that Jeremiah was stoned (2:1) and that Isaiah "died under Manasseh by
being sawn in two" (1:1) but is less explicit regarding Ezekiel. We are told only that "The
ruler of the people Israel killed him ..." (3:2). The saying of Jesus regarding the erection of monuments in honor of martyred prophets
(Mt 23:29; Lk 11:47) has no direct point of contact with The Lives of the Prophets, which
mentions no recent monuments, but it supports our text by providing evidence of the
#
contemporary interest in the graves of the prophets. The belief that the holy martyrs are able to present petitions to God, evidenced in
Revelation 6:9-11, is probably to be seen as related to the conception of the prophets as
intercessors, as witnessed by L8.20
Relation to apocryphal books
A much fuller account of Isaiah's murder is provided by the Martyrdom of Isaiah, but
the latter makes no mention of the burial or its location. There is no evidence of dependency
18 Cf. Torrey, Lives, pp. 3f. and n. on 21:4. 19 See n. on 3:2. 20 Cf. Jeremias, Heiligengraber, pp. 133-38.in either direction. The functions of the two narratives are very different. Whereas the point
of the much longer version is to edify, the intention of the brief account given here is simply
to note that Isaiah is a martyr, because this fact is significant for the cult connected with
his grave. The legend concerning the concealment of the ark and its contents in a cliff by Jeremiah
(2:11-19) has parallels in 2 Maccabees 2:4-8 and 4 Baruch 3:8 without any indication of
borrowing. It must be assumed that the tradition circulated in variant forms in the folklore
of Palestine. Many of the legends here recorded have parallels in the haggadah of rabbinic Judaism,
as will be indicated in the notes. Cultural importance
The Lives of the Prophets has had little influence upon Western culture, but it throws
indirect light on the Christian practice of the veneration of the saints, which is frequently
reflected in the art and literature of the Western world. No attempt can be made here to
pursue the question of the origin of the practice, but it is clear that we have in this document
evidence that one of the roots lies in the Jewish veneration of the holy dead. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 175-77. Delling, Bibliographie, p. 172. Denis, Introduction, pp. 85-90. Ginzberg, L. The Legends of the Jews. Translated by H. Szold. 7 vols.; Philadelphia, 1909-
38. (This invaluable collection provides ample evidence that many if not most of the
legends transmitted in LivPro have parallels in rabbinic and other Jewish sources.)
Jeremias, J. Heiligengraber in Jesu Umwelt. Gottingen, 1958. (This is the fullest study
available of holy graves in Jewish Palestine. Jeremias carefully compares the literary
data provided by LivPro and early pilgrims with the available archaeological evidence.)
Jonge, M. de. "Christelijke Elementen in de Vitae Prophetarum," Nederlands Theologisch
Tijdschrift 16 (1961-62) 161-78.The statement of Hebrews 11:37, "They were stoned, or sawn in
half, or beheaded," appears to refer to the popular legends concerning the martyrdoms of
the three major prophets Jeremiah, Isaiah, and Ezekiel respectively.19 Our document
explicitly states that Jeremiah was stoned (2:1) and that Isaiah "died under Manasseh by
being sawn in two" (1:1) but is less explicit regarding Ezekiel. We are told only that "The
ruler of the people Israel killed him ..." (3:2). The saying of Jesus regarding the erection of monuments in honor of martyred prophets
(Mt 23:29; Lk 11:47) has no direct point of contact with The Lives of the Prophets, which
mentions no recent monuments, but it supports our text by providing evidence of the
#
contemporary interest in the graves of the prophets. The belief that the holy martyrs are able to present petitions to God, evidenced in
Revelation 6:9-11, is probably to be seen as related to the conception of the prophets as
intercessors, as witnessed by L8.20
Relation to apocryphal books
A much fuller account of Isaiah's murder is provided by the Martyrdom of Isaiah, but
the latter makes no mention of the burial or its location. There is no evidence of dependency
18 Cf. Torrey, Lives, pp. 3f. and n. on 21:4. 19 See n. on 3:2. 20 Cf. Jeremias, Heiligengraber, pp. 133-38.

de. "Christelijke Elementen in de Vitae Prophetarum," Nederlands Theologisch
Tijdschrift 16 (1961-62) 161-78. (De Jonge argues that the Christian elements are far
more pervasive than many have believed, and that this collection of Jewish traditions
may have first attained literary form in a Christian context.)
Klein, S. "cal ha-seper Vitae Prophetarum," Sefer Klozner, edited by H. Torczyner. Tel
Aviv, 1937; 189-208. (A critical analysis of LivPro in Heb., with special attention to
matters of geography.)
Nestle, E. Marginalien undMaterialien. Tubingen, 1893. (On opposite pages Nestle presents
the Gk. text of Q and E1, with a list of the variant readings of three Syr. MSS.)
Schermann, T. Prophetarum vitae fabulosae indices apostolorum discipulorumque Domini
Dorotheo, Epiphanio, Hippolyto aliisque vindicate. Leipzig, 1907. (A critical text of
each of the major Gk. recensions, with an extensive apparatus giving the more important
variants.)
. Propheten- und Apostellegenden nebst Jungerkatalogen des Dorotheus und ver-
wandter Texte. TU 31.3. Leipzig, 1907. (An indispensable study of the texts and
versions of LivPro.)
Simon, M. "Les Saints d'Israel dans la devotion de TEglise ancienne," RHPR 34 (1954)
98-127. (A study of the influence of Jewish veneration of the graves of heroes and
prophets upon the early Church.)
Torrey, C. C. The Lives of the Prophets. Greek Text and Translation. Philadelphia, 1946. (The most important English study. The translation assumes that the Gk. text contains
a number of difficulties which are due to mistranslation from an underlying Heb. text.)THE LIVES OF THE PROPHETS
The names of the prophets, and where they are from, and where they died and
how, and where they lie. Isaiah
1 1 Isaiah, from Jerusalem, died under Manasseh by being sawn in two,8 and was Manis5is
buriedb underneath the Oak of Rogel,c near the place where the path crosses the
2 aqueduct whose water Hezekiah shut off by blocking its source.d • And God worked
the miraclee of Siloam for the prophet's sake, for, being faintf before he died, he
prayed for water to drink, and immediately it was sent to him from it; therefore
3 it is called Siloam, which means "sent."8 •And in the time of Hezekiah, before
he made the cisterns and the pools, in response to the prayer of Isaiah a little
water came out, for the nation was besieged by foreigners and (this happened) in
4 order that the city might not perish for lack of water.h *For the enemies were
5 asking, "From where are they drinking?" #And having the city under siege they
6 were encamped at Siloam.1 «If, then, the Jews were coming, water would come
7 out, but if foreigners (approached), (it would) not. •Wherefore to this day it comes
1 a. Cf. b.Yeb 49b, y.Sanh 10:28c, 37. Heb 11:37 of the Gk. text and ignores the fact that our author
witnesses to the pre-Christian origin of this legend. was ignorant of Hezekiah's tunnel; see n. h below. b. Lit. "placed." e. Lit. "sign" as in Jn 2:11; 20:30. c. Possibly' 'Fuller's Oak.'' A common practice f. "Being faint" seems to be required by the
associated holy graves with trees, with oaks given context, but there is no lexical evidence that
special preference (Jeremias, Heiligengraber, p. oligdred ever carried this meaning. 120). Torrey, Lives, pp. 10f., supports the conjec­ g. Because of the parallel at Jn 9:7, de Jonge,
ture that an error occurred in translating the un­ Nederlands Theologisch Tijdschrifi 16 (1961-62)
derlying Heb. into Gk. and that the original referred 166, argues that we have here evidence of Christian
to 'in rdgil, i.e.into Gk. and that the original referred 166, argues that we have here evidence of Christian
to 'in rdgil, i.e. the Fountain of Rogel. Since a influence upon LivPro. Since the etymology is very
major point of the following narrative is to present differently employed in the two writings, however,
Isaiah as the patron spirit of the Spring of Siloam, there is little basis for de Jonge's conjecture. it is hardly likely that he was buried at 'en rdgil, h. This statement provides clear evidence that
now known as Jacob's Well, which is situated the transmitters of this tradition, like Josephus (War
about 400 meters south of Siloam. If the Fuller's 5.4.1 §140), regarded Siloam as a spring rather
Field (Isa 7:3) was situated in this area (cf. Jeremias, than as the effluence of Hezekiah's underground
Heiligengriiber, p. 64), it is not at all unlikely that aqueduct which diverted the water from the Gihon
a tree along the path descending the hill above spring. An excellent description of Hezekiah's
Siloam should be known as "Fuller's Oak." engineering feat is provided by J. Simons, Jeru­
d. Lit. "near the crossing of the waters that salem in the Old Testament (Leiden, 1952) pp. Hezekiah destroyed by blocking them." Torrey, 173-92. Apparently all recollection of the connec­
Lives, p. 34, translates diabaseos as "conduit," tion with Gihon had disappeared by the Roman
apparently taking it as an allusion to the ancient period. aqueduct that descended Ophel above the Kidron i. It is generally held that Hezekiah's intention
valley from Gihon to the Lower Pool. Since this was to divert water from Gihon, which lay outside
water system was entirely outside the city wall, the fortifications, to a reservoir within the walls
Hezekiah blocked the source so as to deprive (cf. 2Kgs 20:20; Sir 48:17). On the basis of careful
invading enemies of a convenient source of water archaeological investigation, K. Kenyon, Digging
(2Chr 32:3, 4, 30; cf. Isa 8:6). F.-M. Abel (H.de. "Christelijke Elementen in de Vitae Prophetarum," Nederlands Theologisch
Tijdschrift 16 (1961-62) 161-78. (De Jonge argues that the Christian elements are far
more pervasive than many have believed, and that this collection of Jewish traditions
may have first attained literary form in a Christian context.)
Klein, S. "cal ha-seper Vitae Prophetarum," Sefer Klozner, edited by H. Torczyner. Tel
Aviv, 1937; 189-208. (A critical analysis of LivPro in Heb., with special attention to
matters of geography.)
Nestle, E. Marginalien undMaterialien. Tubingen, 1893. (On opposite pages Nestle presents
the Gk. text of Q and E1, with a list of the variant readings of three Syr. MSS.)
Schermann, T. Prophetarum vitae fabulosae indices apostolorum discipulorumque Domini
Dorotheo, Epiphanio, Hippolyto aliisque vindicate. Leipzig, 1907. (A critical text of
each of the major Gk. recensions, with an extensive apparatus giving the more important
variants.)
. Propheten- und Apostellegenden nebst Jungerkatalogen des Dorotheus und ver-
wandter Texte. TU 31.3. Leipzig, 1907. (An indispensable study of the texts and
versions of LivPro.)
Simon, M. "Les Saints d'Israel dans la devotion de TEglise ancienne," RHPR 34 (1954)
98-127. (A study of the influence of Jewish veneration of the graves of heroes and
prophets upon the early Church.)
Torrey, C. C. The Lives of the Prophets. Greek Text and Translation. Philadelphia, 1946. (The most important English study. The translation assumes that the Gk. text contains
a number of difficulties which are due to mistranslation from an underlying Heb. text.)

F.-M. Abel (H. Up Jerusalem (New York and Washington, 1974)
Vincent and F.-M. Abel, Jerusalem [2 vols.; Paris, pp. 158, 246f., maintains that Siloam was not
1912-26] vol. 2, p. 857) insists that diabasis enclosed within the walls of the city until Herod
denotes not an aqueduct but the place where one Agrippa built the new south wall, A.D. 41-44. crosses a watercourse, i.e. either a bridge or a Puzzling though such a conclusion is relative to
ford. Jeremias, Heiligengraber, p. 64, concurs but Hezekiah's defense strategy, it is confirmed by our
argues that Abel is mistaken in associating the text, which assumes that the besieging army camped
diabasis with the old aqueduct; it must refer, rather, by the spring in order to use its water. Further
to the place where the path crosses Hezekiah's confirmation is provided by Josephus, who reports
tunnel, just above its lower end at Siloam. Although that the most ancient wall traversed the hill "above
Jeremias' interpretation fits well with Isaiah's func­ the fountain of Siloam" (War 5.4.2 §145). tion as patron spirit of Siloam, it makes nonsense8 out intermittently,* in order that the mystery may be manifested.11 «And since this
happened through Isaiah, as a memorial of it the nation also buried him nearby
with care and in great honor,1 so that through his prayers even after his death they
might enjoy the benefit of the water, for an oracle was also given to them
concerning him. 9 His tomb is near the tomb of the kings,m west of the tomb of the priests" in the
10 southern part of the city.0 #For Solomon made the tombs, in accordance with
David's design, east of Zion,? which4 has an entrance from Gabaon, twenty stadiar
11 distant from the city. 'And he made a secret construction with winding passages;
12 and it is to this day unknown to most.8 •There the king kept the gold from Ethiopia
13 and the spices. *And because Hezekiah showed the gentiles the secrets of David 2Ks20:i2-i8
g
and Solomon and defiled the bones of the place of his fathers, God swore that his
offspring should be enslaved to his enemies, and God made him sterile from that
day. Jeremiah
1 2 Jeremiah was from Anathoth, and he died in Taphnai of Egypt,8 having been Jer u
2 stonedb by his people.0 •He was buriedd in the environs of Pharaoh's palace, Jer 43:8
because the Egyptians held him in high esteem, having been benefitted through j^%31
3
3 him. "For he prayed, and the asps left them, and the monsters of the waters,
j. The intermittent character of the Gihon spring "Zion," it is clear that he erroneously regarded
(known today as the Virgin's Spring or the Spring David's city as situated on the western hill of
of the Steps) is due to a subterranean siphon caused Jerusalem (War 5.4.1 §137); cf. Simons, Jerusa­
by the geological formation; cf. Simons, Jerusalem, lem, pp. 35-59. The phrase "east of Zion" need
pp. 163f. not imply the same error. It may mean simply "on
k. Torrey's translation "to keep the miracle in the eastern (Kidron) slope of David's city."
mind" (Lives, p. 34) is very attractive, but there q. The Gk.34) is very attractive, but there q. The Gk. text here becomes hopelessly con­
is no lexical evidence that mysterion ever carried fused. Jeremias, Heiligengraber, p. 58, proposes
this connotation. Cf. its use in 2:10, 19. that the original purpose of this clause was to bring
1. This language suggests the erection of a the royal tomb' into relation with the Siloam tunnel;
monument (Jeremias, Heiligengr&ber, p. 64). Since since the tunnel's point of origin at the Gihon
memorial constructions were not always contiguous spring was no longer known, it was possible to
with the actual graves (Jeremias, Heiligengraber, present the fanciful idea that it was almost 4
p. 122), Isaiah's monument may not have been kilometers long and had its beginning north of the
situated beside the Oak of Rogel. "Nearby" (ple- city in the direction of Gibeon. This proposal
sion) suggests that the monument was "in the ignores the fact that the author believed that Siloam
neighborhood," rather than directly adjacent to was a spring (see n. h above). It is better to take
Si loam, however, and therefore a site near the tree the clause as a haggadic description of the famous
is entirely possible. tomb. m. The site of the royal necropolis is still r. About 3.8 kilometers (2.3 miles). uncertain. The constructions on the Kidron side of s. Q and its dependents add the ungrammatical
the hill about 110 meters (c. 361 ft.) northeast of and awkward gloss "and of the whole people,"
Si loam, identified by R. Weill as the royal tombs which is absent from E1 and E2. D attempts an
(La Citi de David [Paris, 1920] pp. 35-44, 157- improvement: "unknown to most of the priests and
73), are regarded by Kenyon, Digging, pp. 3If., to the whole people." Since E1 concludes its
as cisterns.F.-M. Abel (H. Up Jerusalem (New York and Washington, 1974)
Vincent and F.-M. Abel, Jerusalem [2 vols.; Paris, pp. 158, 246f., maintains that Siloam was not
1912-26] vol. 2, p. 857) insists that diabasis enclosed within the walls of the city until Herod
denotes not an aqueduct but the place where one Agrippa built the new south wall, A.D. 41-44. crosses a watercourse, i.e. either a bridge or a Puzzling though such a conclusion is relative to
ford. Jeremias, Heiligengraber, p. 64, concurs but Hezekiah's defense strategy, it is confirmed by our
argues that Abel is mistaken in associating the text, which assumes that the besieging army camped
diabasis with the old aqueduct; it must refer, rather, by the spring in order to use its water. Further
to the place where the path crosses Hezekiah's confirmation is provided by Josephus, who reports
tunnel, just above its lower end at Siloam. Although that the most ancient wall traversed the hill "above
Jeremias' interpretation fits well with Isaiah's func­ the fountain of Siloam" (War 5.4.2 §145). tion as patron spirit of Siloam, it makes nonsense

35-44, 157- improvement: "unknown to most of the priests and
73), are regarded by Kenyon, Digging, pp. 3If., to the whole people." Since E1 concludes its
as cisterns. Nevertheless the literary evidence, both treatment of Isaiah at this point, it is possible that
biblical (Neh 3:16) and rabbinic (t.BB 1:11), points the subsequent irrelevant statements concerning
to a site within the walls at the southern extremity Solomon's storehouse and Hezekiah's indiscretion
of the southeast hill, i.e. not far distant from the did not belong in the earliest version. site proposed in n. c above for Isaiah's grave. Cf. Simons, Jerusalem, p. 210. 2 a. Taphnai is an unusual Gk. transliteration of
n. "The tomb of the priests" may refer to one the Heb. name tahpanhis (Jer 43:7). This was
or more of the impressive constructions still stand­ probably the town known in hellenistic times as
ing on the eastern slope of the Kidron about 800 Daphnai, modern Tell Defenneh, in northeastern
meters (2,600 ft.) from Si loam. Photographs and Egypt, less than 20 kilometers (12.5 miles) west
descriptions are provided by B. Mazar, The Moun­ of the point where the Suez Canal enters Lake
tain of the Lord (Garden City, N.Y., 1975) pp. Menzaleh. 71. 225. The Gk. opisthen probably reflects the b. Lit. * 'having been thrown (down) by stones.''
Heb. 'ahar, which normally means "behind" but c. Lit. "by the people." Laos, "people," nor­
can connote "West" (cf. MT and LXX of Judg mally designates Israel in this document as in
18:12). hellenistic Jewish literature generally; cf. 3:2, 11,
o. Lit. "at the southern part." 13. p. Although Josephus did not employ the term d. Lit. "he lies."4 which the Egyptians call Nephoth and the Greeks crocodiles.e »And those who are
God's faithful pray at the place to this very day, and taking the dust of the place
s they heal asps' bites.f #And we have heard from the children of Antigonus and
Ptolemy, old men, that Alexander the Macedonian, after standing at the prophet's
grave8 and witnessing his mysteries,h transferred his remains to Alexandria and
6 placed them in a circle around (the city) with due honor;' *and the whole race
7 of asps was kept from the land, and from the river likewise the crocodiles) *And
to the same end hek introduced the snakes which are called Argolai, which means
"snake-fighters," which he brought from Argos of the Peloponnesus, whence
they are also called Argolai, that is, "fortunate ones from Argos"; for everything
fortunate they call laia.1
8 This Jeremiah gave a sign to the priests of Egypt, that it was decreed"1 that their
idols would be shaken and collapse [through a savior, a child born of a virgin, in
9 a manger]." •Wherefore even to this day they revere a virgin giving birth and,
10 placing an infant in a manger, they worship. #And when Ptolemy the king inquired
about the cause, they said, "It is an ancestral mystery delivered to our fathers by
e. Torrey, Lives, pp. 49-52, accepting the read­ the lack is supplied by an awkward gloss in its
ing ephdth found in E2 and D, conjectures that the dependents. Included here in brackets is the reading
original text contained no reference to crocodiles of Coisl. 224, which appears to be related to the
since ephdth is simply the transliterated plural of parallel in D: "through a savior, a child born of a
the Heb. word 'ep'eh, "viper," the term by which virgin, and lying in a manger" (cf. Lk 2:12). It is
Egyptian Jews referred to the asps. virtually impossible to reconstruct the earliest form
f.It is
Egyptian Jews referred to the asps. virtually impossible to reconstruct the earliest form
f. At this point the textual tradition becomes of this paragraph, which is differently represented
very confused, with various glosses, inversions, in each of the four major recensions. The second
and conflations. The following tradition, although and third sentences, which are absent from E1, are
given verisimilitude by association with specific probably secondary, whatever the origin of the
names, is missing from E1 and for that reason may first. The opening statement predicts divine pun­
be suspected of being a gloss. ishment of Egyptian idolatry; it is not likely that a
g. Lit. "place." Jewish author who included this "sign" would
h. See 1:7 and n. have been so foolish as to suggest that the pagan
i. Jeremias, Heiligengraber, pp. 108-10, pro­ Egyptians regularly celebrated the anticipated over­
poses that this strange statement alludes to the throw of their popular religion in a cultic ceremony
founding of Alexandria and asserts that Alexander that was itself a manifestation of pagan polytheism! deposited the bones of the prophet at specific For this reason the suggestion of Torrey, Lives,
locations on the perimeter, both to establish the pp. 9f., that the Palestinian author derived this
bounds of the city and to protect it. M. Simon, tradition from a Christian Jew from Egypt, is hardly
RHPR 34 (1954) 124, argues that this tradition acceptable. M. de Jonge, Nederlands Theologisch
regarding the transfer of Jeremiah's remains to Tijdschrift 16 (1961-62) 168, is probably correct
Alexandria represents a Christian attempt to woo in insisting that the entire paragraph must be
Christians away from the ancient site where they regarded as a Christian product. It can be argued,
were too easily attracted to Jewish popular religion. however, that more than one Christian hand is
j. D omits "the crocodiles." evident here. The first glossator asserted that Jer­
k. I.e. Alexander.I.e. Alexander. Torrey, Lives, p. 49, proposes emiah had foreseen the success of Christianity in
that an earlier version of this gloss attributed the Egypt, which was to be initiated by the visit of the
introduction of the Argolai to Jeremiah. He con­ Virgin Mother and Holy Child (Mt 2:13-15, with
jectures that the unknown Gk. word argolai is the which is conflated the narrative concerning the
transliteration of the Heb. hargdl, which occurs at manger of Lk 2:7-16). A later scribe noted how
Lev 11:22 as the designation of one of four kinds this visit had been prefigured in a pagan festival
of grasshoppers that may be eaten. In LXX it is honoring a virgin and divine child, and added the
rendered ophiomachen, "snake-fighter," as here! legendary anecdote concerning Ptolemy's question
Since grasshoppers cannot kill snakes, Torrey sug­ in order to bring his addition into connection with
gests that the mistranslation in LXX indicates that Jeremiah. It is remotely possible, however, that
Egyptian Jews had used hargdl, "grasshopper," the first sentence (without the awkward reference
as a nickname for the ichneumon (the Egyptian to the manger) comes from a Jewish author who
mongoose famous for its ability to kill snakes) produced the "sign" by combining three prophetic
because of its abrupt leaping. Because the original texts as translated in LXX: Isa 19:1, Jer 46:15
meaning of argolai had been lost, it was possible (LXX 26:15), and Isa 7:14. In this case the
for later glossators to conceive them as snakes, and statement would express a Jewish hope that the
derive them from Argos. The tradition about the pagan culture of Egypt would be overturned by the
Argolai is absent from E1 and E2. Messiah, whose miraculous birth would signal that
1. That this strained etymology was difficult to God had invested him with the supernatural power
understand even in ancient times is indicated by necessary for the task. D. Daube, The New Tes­
the plethora of textual variants.35-44, 157- improvement: "unknown to most of the priests and
73), are regarded by Kenyon, Digging, pp. 3If., to the whole people." Since E1 concludes its
as cisterns. Nevertheless the literary evidence, both treatment of Isaiah at this point, it is possible that
biblical (Neh 3:16) and rabbinic (t.BB 1:11), points the subsequent irrelevant statements concerning
to a site within the walls at the southern extremity Solomon's storehouse and Hezekiah's indiscretion
of the southeast hill, i.e. not far distant from the did not belong in the earliest version. site proposed in n. c above for Isaiah's grave. Cf. Simons, Jerusalem, p. 210. 2 a. Taphnai is an unusual Gk. transliteration of
n. "The tomb of the priests" may refer to one the Heb. name tahpanhis (Jer 43:7). This was
or more of the impressive constructions still stand­ probably the town known in hellenistic times as
ing on the eastern slope of the Kidron about 800 Daphnai, modern Tell Defenneh, in northeastern
meters (2,600 ft.) from Si loam. Photographs and Egypt, less than 20 kilometers (12.5 miles) west
descriptions are provided by B. Mazar, The Moun­ of the point where the Suez Canal enters Lake
tain of the Lord (Garden City, N.Y., 1975) pp. Menzaleh. 71. 225. The Gk. opisthen probably reflects the b. Lit. * 'having been thrown (down) by stones.''
Heb. 'ahar, which normally means "behind" but c. Lit. "by the people." Laos, "people," nor­
can connote "West" (cf. MT and LXX of Judg mally designates Israel in this document as in
18:12). hellenistic Jewish literature generally; cf. 3:2, 11,
o. Lit. "at the southern part." 13. p. Although Josephus did not employ the term d. Lit. "he lies."

D. Daube, The New Tes­
the plethora of textual variants. tament and Rabbinic Judaism (London, 1956) pp. m. Lit. "it is necessary," but divine necessity 6f., finds evidence of an early rabbinic tradition
is implied; cf. Dan 2:28LXX and Mt 24:6. concerning the miraculous birth of Moses. n. Something has dropped out of Q at this point;a holy prophet, and we are to await, he says, the consummation of his mystery.*'0
u This prophet, before the capture of the Temple, seized the ark of the Law and 2M«c 2:4-8
12 the things in it, and made them to be swallowed up in a rock.D »And to those 4Bar3:820
standing by he said, 4'The LORD has gone away from Zion into heaven and will
13 come again in power. *And this will be for you a sign of his coming, when all
H the gentiles worship a piece of wood."0- *And he said, 4'This ark no one is going
to bring out except Aaron, and none of the priests or prophets will any longer
15 open' the tablets in it except Moses, God's chosen one. #And in the resurrection
the ark will be the first to be resurrected and will come out of the rock and be
placed on Mount Sinai, and all the saints will be gathered to if there as they await
16 the LORD and flee from the enemy who wishes to destroy them." »In the rock 12:13
with his finger he set as a seal the name of God, and the impression was like a
carving made with iron, and a cloud covered the name, and no one knows the
n place nor is able to read the name1 to this day and to the consummation. *And the
rock is in the wilderness, where the ark was at first, between the two mountains
is on which" Moses and Aaron lie.v *And at night there is a cloud like fire, just like
19 the ancient one, for the glory of God will never cease from his Law.w *And God
bestowed this favor upon Jeremiah, that he might himself perform the completion
of his mystery/ so that he might become a partner of Moses/ and they are
together to this day.1
Ezekiel
1 3 Ezekiel. This man was from the land of Arira," of the priests, and he died in Ezek i:3
the land of the Chaldeans during the captivity, after having prophesied many
2 things to those in Judea.*And the
rock is in the wilderness, where the ark was at first, between the two mountains
is on which" Moses and Aaron lie.v *And at night there is a cloud like fire, just like
19 the ancient one, for the glory of God will never cease from his Law.w *And God
bestowed this favor upon Jeremiah, that he might himself perform the completion
of his mystery/ so that he might become a partner of Moses/ and they are
together to this day.1
Ezekiel
1 3 Ezekiel. This man was from the land of Arira," of the priests, and he died in Ezek i:3
the land of the Chaldeans during the captivity, after having prophesied many
2 things to those in Judea. •The ruler of the people Israel killed him there as he
3 was being reproved by him concerning the worship of idols.b *And they buried Gen 10:22;
him in the field of Maourc in the grave of Shem and Arpachshad, ancestors of !a!r°i:i7,26
o. Cf. 1:7; 2:5, 19. a mysterious land of Sir in the Far East; cf. p. In 2Bar 6 it is an angel who takes the sacred Josephus, Ant 1.2.3 §71, and G. J. Reinink, "Das
vessels from the Temple; the earth opens its mouth Land 'Seiris' (Sir) und das Volk der Sirer in
and swallows them. judischen und christlichen Traditionen," JSJ 6
q. This is probably an allusion to gentile ven­ (1975) 72-85, who concludes that the land of Sir
eration of the cross. It need not be regarded as a is China. Christian interpolation if it is seen as a negative b. E. R. Goodenough, Jewish Symbols in the
comment upon gentile Christianity, but it more Greco-Roman Period (13 vols.; New York, 1953-
probably is an expression of the Christian hope 68) vol. 10, pp. 188-90, argues that the pictures
that Jesus will return when the full number of the in the Ezekiel cycle on the north wall of the Dura
gentiles have been converted. synagogue portray the arresting of Ezekiel by a
r. Lit. "unfold" (as a scroll) but probably used person of great dignity and his subsequent behead­
metaphorically in the sense of "disclose." ing.Lit. "unfold" (as a scroll) but probably used person of great dignity and his subsequent behead­
metaphorically in the sense of "disclose." ing. Since the Jewish leader in Babylonia claimed
s. Following E1 and E2. Q's reading "to him" royal status, and in A.D. 200 received the title
is probably simply a grammatical error. Exilarch (Resh Galuta) from the Parthians, Good-
t. Following E1. Q has "him," perhaps with enough proposes that the Jewish tradition under­
reference to "impression" (a masculine noun). lying both the Dura painting and the statement here
u. Lit. "in which" or "in the midst of which." in LivPro attributed Ezekiel's death to the political
v. The two mountains on which Aaron and leader of Babylonian Jewry. He suggests that Heb
Moses died, Hor and Nebo respectively, were 11:37, "They were stoned, or sawn in half, or
sometimes considered "twins" in Jewish legend; beheaded," alludes to traditions concerning the
cf. Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 3, p. 316. manner of execution of the three major prophets
w. E1 ends its narrative concerning Jeremiah at Jeremiah, Isaiah, and Ezekiel respectively. ApPaul
this point. 49, however, witnesses to a different tradition
x. Cf. 1:7; 2:5, 10. regarding the manner of Ezekiel's death: "I am
y. E2 concludes at this point, and may well Ezekiel whom the children of Israel dragged by
represent the earliest version. the feet over the rocks on the mountain until they
z. Although their physical remains rest in widely dashed out my brains" (HSW, vol. 2, p. 792). separated locations! Cf. 2Mac 15:13 and Mt 16:14 The same report is given in the Syriac Acts of
for similar views concerning the continued vitality Philip; cf. W. Wright, Apocryphal Acts of the
of Jeremiah. Apostles (London and Edinburgh, 1871) vol. 2, p. 83. 3 a. The place in question remains unknown. c. Torrey, Lives, p. 23, n. 18, conjectures that
Variants include Sarira, Sarira, Saira, Saiira, and Maour is a corruption of Naour, i.e. Nahor (Gen
Serida.D. Daube, The New Tes­
the plethora of textual variants. tament and Rabbinic Judaism (London, 1956) pp. m. Lit. "it is necessary," but divine necessity 6f., finds evidence of an early rabbinic tradition
is implied; cf. Dan 2:28LXX and Mt 24:6. concerning the miraculous birth of Moses. n. Something has dropped out of Q at this point;

18, conjectures that
Variants include Sarira, Sarira, Saira, Saiira, and Maour is a corruption of Naour, i.e. Nahor (Gen
Serida. The variants may reflect the tradition about 11:22, 26). Jeremias, Heiligengraber, p. 112,Abraham, and the tomb is a double cave, for Abraham also made Sarah's tomb
4 in Hebron like it.d #It is called "double" because there is a twisting passage and Gen 23:9
an upper room which is hidden from the ground floor, and it is hung over the
ground level in the cliff.'
5 This prophet gave a portent to the people, so that they should pay attention to
the river Chebar: When it failed they should set their hope in the scythe which Ezek ii
desolates to the end of the earth, and when it flooded, in the return to Jerusalem, zech 5.I-3LXX
6,7 For the saint also lived there, and many used to congregate to him. *And once
when there was a multitude with himf the Chaldeans were afraid that they would
8 rebel, and came up against them to destroy them. *And he made the water stop
9 so that they might escape by getting to the other side. «And those of the enemies
who dared to pursue were drowned. 10 Through prayer he furnished them of his own accord with an abundant supply
of fish, and for many who were at the point of dying he entreated that life should
come from God.8
n When the people was being destroyed by its enemies, he went to the (enemy)
12 leaders and, terrified by the prodigies, they ceased. #He used to say this to them:
"Are we lost? Has our hope perished?"h and in the wonder of the dead bones he Ezek 37:i-i4
persuaded them that there is hope for Israel both here and in the coming (age). 13 While he was there he used to show the people Israel what was happening in
14 Jerusalem and in the Temple. *He was snatched up from there and he went to Ezek 8:3
is Jerusalem to rebuke those who were faithless. «Like Moses, this man saw the Ex2S:9
pattern of the Temple,' with its wall and broad outer wall, just as Daniel also said Ezek 40-42
16 that it would be built. *He pronounced judgment in Babylon on the tribe of Dan
and that of Gad, because they were committing sacrilege against the LORD by
17 persecuting those who were keeping the Law.«Like Moses, this man saw the Ex2S:9
pattern of the Temple,' with its wall and broad outer wall, just as Daniel also said Ezek 40-42
16 that it would be built. *He pronounced judgment in Babylon on the tribe of Dan
and that of Gad, because they were committing sacrilege against the LORD by
17 persecuting those who were keeping the Law. •And respecting them he worked
this great wonder, that snakes would devour their infants and all their flocks, and
he foretold that on their account the people would not return to its land but would
is be in Media until the consummation of their error. *And the one who killed him
19 was one of them. «For they opposed him all the days of his life. Daniel
1 4 Daniel. This man was of the tribe of Judah, of the family of those prominent Dan 13
in the royal service,8 but while yet a child he was taken from Judea to the land
argues that it is very unlikely that the burial place the main room. of such famous figures would be designated with f. Jeremias, Heiligengraber, p. 112, prefers E1,
the name of a descendant; moreover, Nahor is according to which the miracle was effected post­
regularly represented in LXX and the NT as Nachdr. humously for the benefit of pilgrims who had
Jeremias therefore prefers the possibility that Maour gathered at Ezekiel's grave "for prayer and sup­
is a corrupton of Our, i.e. Ur of the Chaldees. He plication."
reports that veneration is still paid to the grave of g. The reference seems to be to a restoration to
Ezekiel in Kifil, south of ancient Babylon; this site, earthly life, not to the preaching of life after death,
however, is over 200 kilometers (125 miles) north­ as suggested by Torrey, Lives, p. 37. For haggadah
east of Ur. Rabbinic legend places Ezekiel's tomb concerning Ezekiel's success in restoring various
in Babylonia near that of Baruch; cf. Ginzberg, dead persons to life, see Ginzberg, Legends, vol. Legends, vol. 4, pp. 324f., 333. 4, pp. 332f. d. Gen 23 gives no hint of any special construc­ h.18, conjectures that
Variants include Sarira, Sarira, Saira, Saiira, and Maour is a corruption of Naour, i.e. Nahor (Gen
Serida. The variants may reflect the tradition about 11:22, 26). Jeremias, Heiligengraber, p. 112,

d. Gen 23 gives no hint of any special construc­ h. Following Torrey, Lives, p. 37, who takes
tion by Abraham, but the Heb. name makpilah the statements as questions. Since it is the people
(Machpelah) means "double." In LXX the name who say this in Ezek 37:11, however, it is possible
is not transliterated but translated "the double that D correctly represents the original: "... when
cave," to spelaion to diploun (Gen 23:9), as in Israel was saying, 'We are lost, our hope has
our text. The duality of the tomb is dealt with by perished/ "
Philo, Quaes Gen 4.80, and by the Talmud (b.'Erub i. "Of the temple" is missing from Q but found
59a: While Rab held that the cave consisted of two in E1, E2, D, Coisl. 224, and most other MSS. chambers, one within the other, R. Samuel held
that it had a lower and an upper chamber). 4 a. By combining Dan 1:3, 6 with Isa 39:7,
e. A common practice was to expand a cave Jewish tradition maintained that Daniel was a
tomb by carving out a lower chamber below the member of the royal family; cf. Josephus, Ant
entry level. As our text suggests, it was very 10.10.1 §186 and Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 6, p. uncommon to construct a second chamber above 414.2 of the Chaldeans. #He was born in Upper Beth-Horon, and he was a chaste man,
so that the Judeans thought that he was a eunuch. 3 He mourned greatly over the city, and in fasts he abstained from all desirable
food, and he was a man gaunt in appearance but beautiful in the favor of the Most
High. 4 He prayed much for Nebuchadnezzar, at the entreaty of his son Baltasar,b when
5 he became a wild animal and beast of the held, so that he might not perish. *His Dan4:30(33)
fore parts with the head were like an ox, and the feet with the hind parts like a
6 lion. •Concerning this mystery it was revealed to the holy man that (Nebuchad­
nezzar) had become a beast of the field because he was fond of pleasure and stiff-
necked, and because those who belong to Beliarc become like an ox under yoke. 4:20; w.i
i Tyrants have these (vices) in their youth, and in the end they become monsters,
8 seizing, destroying, killing, and smiting. •Through divine revelation the saint
9 knew that he was eating grass like an ox and that it became human food. *It was
also for this reason that Nebuchadnezzar, recovering a human heart after digestion,0
used to weep and honor the LORD, praying forty times each day and night.e
10 Behemoth' used to come upon him, and he would forget that he had been a man;
his tongue was taken from him so that he might not speak, and perceiving (this)
n he immediately wept; his eyes were like raw flesh from crying. #For many were
12 going out of the city and gazing at him. • Daniel alone did not wish to see him,
because he was in prayer for him the whole time of his changed condition; and
he kept saying, 4'He will become a man again," and they did not believe him. 13 Daniel made the seven years, which he called seven seasons, become seven Dan 4:29(32)
months/ the mystery of the seven seasons was accomplished in his case, for he
was restored in seven months; during the six years and sixh months (remaining) Dan 4:3if.• Daniel alone did not wish to see him,
because he was in prayer for him the whole time of his changed condition; and
he kept saying, 4'He will become a man again," and they did not believe him. 13 Daniel made the seven years, which he called seven seasons, become seven Dan 4:29(32)
months/ the mystery of the seven seasons was accomplished in his case, for he
was restored in seven months; during the six years and sixh months (remaining) Dan 4:3if. he prostrated himself to the LORD and confessed his impiety, and after the (34f,)
14 forgiveness of his wickedness he restored to him the kingdom. •Ht neither ate
bread or meat nor drank wine as he made his confession, for Daniel had ordered
is him to appease the LORD with (a diet of) soaked pulse and greens. *Nebu- Dan i:7; 5:12
chadnezzar' called him Baltasar* because he wanted to make him joint heir
16 with his children. *But the holy man said,4 4Far be it from me to leave the heritage
n of my fathers and cleave to the inheritances of the uncircumcised."k *And for
other kings of the Persians he wrought many prodigies, which they did not write
is down. •There1 he died, and was buried by himself and with great honor in the
royal grotto. b. "Belshazzar," according to the MT; see n. §216), translates the "seven times" of Dan 4:32
j below. as "seven years" while Theodotion renders more
c. In many texts "Beliar" (or "Belial") des- literally as "seven seasons," hepta kairoi. The
ignates the chief of evil spirits, Satan; it is used tradition that Daniel's prayer reduced the sentence
below in 4:20 and 17:2. Cf. Martls 2:2-4, where from seven years to seven months is also found in
it appears as the synonym of "Satan." In the NT Yerahmeel 46 (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 4, p. 334;
it occurs only at 2Cor 6:15. vol. 6, p. 423). d. Since Hebrew thought conceived the heart as h. D, Coisl. 224, and some dependents read
the seat of mental activity, Torrey, Lives, p.d. Gen 23 gives no hint of any special construc­ h. Following Torrey, Lives, p. 37, who takes
tion by Abraham, but the Heb. name makpilah the statements as questions. Since it is the people
(Machpelah) means "double." In LXX the name who say this in Ezek 37:11, however, it is possible
is not transliterated but translated "the double that D correctly represents the original: "... when
cave," to spelaion to diploun (Gen 23:9), as in Israel was saying, 'We are lost, our hope has
our text. The duality of the tomb is dealt with by perished/ "
Philo, Quaes Gen 4.80, and by the Talmud (b.'Erub i. "Of the temple" is missing from Q but found
59a: While Rab held that the cave consisted of two in E1, E2, D, Coisl. 224, and most other MSS. chambers, one within the other, R. Samuel held
that it had a lower and an upper chamber). 4 a. By combining Dan 1:3, 6 with Isa 39:7,
e. A common practice was to expand a cave Jewish tradition maintained that Daniel was a
tomb by carving out a lower chamber below the member of the royal family; cf. Josephus, Ant
entry level. As our text suggests, it was very 10.10.1 §186 and Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 6, p. uncommon to construct a second chamber above 414.

D, Coisl. 224, and some dependents read
the seat of mental activity, Torrey, Lives, p. 39, "five," correcting the arithmetical error,
paraphrases: "recovering human reason when i. Lit. "he."
digestion was completed." j. Cf. 4:4. Although the Heb. and Aram, portions
e. Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 4, p. 334, reports of Daniel carefully distinguish between "Beltesh-
that in Yerahmeel 46.205f. the king's reason is azzar," the Baby Ionian name given to Daniel (1:7),
restored after forty days; he spends the next forty and "Belshazzar," the name of Nebuchadnezzar's
days weeping over his sins, and for the remainder crown prince (5:1), for some inexplicable reason
of the seven months he again lives the life of a the LXX translators rendered both names as Bal-
beast. Our text may represent a confused recollec- tasar. E1 notes the coincidence with an explanatory
tion of these two sets of forty days. gloss added at this point: "For this reason also
f. The text is clearly in error, since in Jewish Nebuchadnezzar called Daniel Baltasar' after the
tradition Behemoth is a primeval monster, not a name of his only-begotten son." Not only the gloss
demon (cf. 2Bar 29:4). Torrey, Lives, pp. 24f., but the underlying statements in Q seem to reflect
conjectures that the underlying Heb. read lib be- an environment in which LXX, not MT, is domi-
himot, i.e. "heart of dumb beasts," and that lib nam. was accidentally omitted in the Heb. text used by k. The same statement is attributed to Daniel in
the Gk. translator. He translates (Lives, p. 39): Yerahmeel 66.206 (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 4, p. "Then the mind of a dumb animal would (again) 339; vol. 6, p. 427). take possession of him ..." I. "There" is ambiguous. According to most
g. LXX, followed by Josephus (Ant 10.10.6 Jewish sources Daniel's mausoleum was to be seen19 And he gave a portent with respect to the mountains which are above Babylon:
"When the mountain on the north smokes, the end of Babylon is coming; and
20 when it lies as in fire,m the end of all the earth. #And if the mountain in the south
pours forth water the people will return to its land, and if it pours forth blood, 4:6;i7:2
21 Beliar's slaughter will take place in all the earth." *And the holy man fell asleep
in peace. Hosea
1 5 Hosea. This man was from Belemoth3 of the tribe of Issachar, and he was
2 buried in his own districtb in peace. #And he gave a portent, that the LORD would
arrive upon the earth if ever the oak which is in Shilohc were divided from itself,
and twelve oaks came to be. Micah
1.2 6 Micah the Morathite* was of the tribe of Ephraim.b 'Having done many things MI i:i
c
to Ahab, he was killed by Joram his sonc at a cliff,d because he rebuked him for
3 the impieties of his fathers. #And he was buried in his own district by himself,'
near the burial ground of the Anakim.f Josh 11:22
Amos
1,2 7 Amos was from Tekoa. «And when Amaziah had tortured him sorely, at last
3 his son also killed him with a club by striking him on the temple.8 *And while he
was still breathing he went to his own district, and after some days he died and
was buried there. in Shushan (Susa), but others convey the impression Klozner, p. 197 (cf. Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, p. that he died in Palestine (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 82). 4, p. 350; vol. 6, p. 437). E1 explicitly states that c. Despite the unambiguous chronological note
Daniel died in Babylon, "and his grave is known of Mic 1:1, Micah is here placed in the time of
to all in Babylon to this very day." Ahab, apparently by confusion with Micaiah son
m. Coisl. 224 emends to "burns with fire." of Imlah (IKgs 22:8). This could be explained as
due to the fact that LXX employs the same trans­
literation for both Heb. names, if it were not for
5 a. Torrey, Lives, pp.names, if it were not for
5 a. Torrey, Lives, pp. 26, 40, considers the the fact that the same confusion is found in rabbinic
otherwise unknown Belemoth a variant of Balamon sources; in one haggadah Micah is named one of
of Jdt 8:3, which he identifies with Ibleam in the four disciples of Elijah (Ginzberg, Legends,
northern Samaria. According to Josh 17:11 Ibleam vol. 6, p. 343; cf. p. 355). belonged to the tribe of Manasseh but was situated, d. For the difficult krimnd E1 substitutes krem-
within the territory of Issachar. Cf. Jeremias, notheis, i.e. "hanged" or possibly "crucified"
Heiligengraber, p. 29. (LSJM, p. 994, cites a 2nd-cent, instance of the
b. Shalshelet ha-Kabbalah 19a reports that Ho­ verb with this meaning). sea died in Babylon and was buried in the Jewish e. E1 adds: "And his grave is well known to
cemetery at Safed (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 4, p. this day." Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, p. 85, infers
261; vol. 6, p. 356). that the narrator (or interpolator) knew of a mon­
c. Silom, the form of the name given here, ument marking Micah's supposed grave, and finds
corresponds neither to the transliteration used by this confirmed by the report of the 5th-cent, church
LXX nor to any of the various renderings of Shiloh historian Sozomenos that the bishop of Eleuthero­
found in Josephus, but the identity is not in question, polis had discovered Micah*s remains near this
since the same form occurs in 18:1,5 in connection town in 385 (Ecclesiastica Historia 7.29.2). with Ahijah of Shiloh (IKgs 11:29). That the oak f. "Anakim" designates the three giants of
of Shiloh was a well-known landmark is indicated Hebron in Num 13:22, but Josh ll:21f. refers to
by its appearance here and at 18:5. an entire people by this name, and reports that the
remnants of the Anakim were located at Gaza,
Gath, and Ashdod. Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, pp. 6 a.D, Coisl. 224, and some dependents read
the seat of mental activity, Torrey, Lives, p. 39, "five," correcting the arithmetical error,
paraphrases: "recovering human reason when i. Lit. "he."
digestion was completed." j. Cf. 4:4. Although the Heb. and Aram, portions
e. Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 4, p. 334, reports of Daniel carefully distinguish between "Beltesh-
that in Yerahmeel 46.205f. the king's reason is azzar," the Baby Ionian name given to Daniel (1:7),
restored after forty days; he spends the next forty and "Belshazzar," the name of Nebuchadnezzar's
days weeping over his sins, and for the remainder crown prince (5:1), for some inexplicable reason
of the seven months he again lives the life of a the LXX translators rendered both names as Bal-
beast. Our text may represent a confused recollec- tasar. E1 notes the coincidence with an explanatory
tion of these two sets of forty days. gloss added at this point: "For this reason also
f. The text is clearly in error, since in Jewish Nebuchadnezzar called Daniel Baltasar' after the
tradition Behemoth is a primeval monster, not a name of his only-begotten son." Not only the gloss
demon (cf. 2Bar 29:4). Torrey, Lives, pp. 24f., but the underlying statements in Q seem to reflect
conjectures that the underlying Heb. read lib be- an environment in which LXX, not MT, is domi-
himot, i.e. "heart of dumb beasts," and that lib nam. was accidentally omitted in the Heb. text used by k. The same statement is attributed to Daniel in
the Gk. translator. He translates (Lives, p. 39): Yerahmeel 66.206 (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 4, p. "Then the mind of a dumb animal would (again) 339; vol. 6, p. 427). take possession of him ..." I. "There" is ambiguous. According to most
g. LXX, followed by Josephus (Ant 10.10.6 Jewish sources Daniel's mausoleum was to be seen

Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, pp. 6 a. In reading Morathi instead of Morasthi (so 82-86, points out that Jewish legend associated the
D, and most MSS of LXX, at Mic 1:1), Q is giants with Eleutheropolis. He claims to have
consistent with its own reading at Mic 1:1; cf. also discovered the "cemetery of the giants" in an
LXX of Jer 33:18. Eusebius, Onomastikon (ed. E. impressive Seleucid necropolis that he and A. Alt
Klostermann [Hildesheim, 1966] p. 134) has Mor- visited in 1932, situated about 2 kilometers (1.25
athei, and asserts that the place was just east of miles) north of Beit Jibrin. Eleutheropolis (modern Beit Jibrin, northeast of
Hebron). 7 a. According to Shalshelet ha-Kabbalah 97, King
b. The erroneous identification with Ephraim Uzziah killed Amos by striking him on the forehead
may have resulted from confusion with Micah of with a red-hot iron (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 4, p. Ephraim of Judg 17, as proposed by Klein, Sefer 262; vol. 6, p. 357).Joel
1 8 Joel was from the territory of Reuben,* in the countryside of Bethomoron.b
2 He died in peace6 and was buried there. Obadiah
1 9 Obadiah was from the district of Shechem, of the countryside of Bethacharam.*
2 This man was a disciple of Elijah,6 and endured much because of him, and iKgs \%a
3 escaped with his life. •This was the third captain of fifty whom Elijah spared and 2Kgs 113-15
4 (with whom) he went down to Ahaziah.0 •After these events he left the service of
5 the king and prophesied. •And he died and was buried with his fathers. Jonah
1 10 Jonah was from the district of Kariathmos" near the Greek city of Azotus by
2 the sea. *And when he had been cast forth by the sea monster and had gone away Jonah 2:IKK»;
to Nineveh and had returned, he did not remain in his district, but taking his 3,5
mother along he sojourned in Sour,b a territory (inhabited by) foreign nations;
3 for he said, "So shall I remove my reproach, for I spoke falsely in prophesying Jonah 3:4.10
4 against the great city of Nineveh."0 »At that time Elijah was rebuking the house ucgs 17:1-7
5 of Ahab, and when he had invoked famine upon the land he fled. *And he went iKgs 17:8-16
and found the widow with her son, for he could not stay with uncircumcised
6 people; and he blessed her. *And when her sond died, God raised him again from IKRS I7:17-24;
the dead through Elijah, for he wanted to show him that it is not possible to run j^nah 1.3
7 away from God. • And after the famine he arose and went into the land of Judah. 8 And when his mother died along the way, he buried her near Deborah's Oak.e Gen 33:8
9 And after sojourning in the land of Saraa^ he died and was buried in the cave of
8 a. The tribal connection of the prophet is not graber, p. 31). given in the book that bears his name. In IChr 5:4, b. Cf. Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 6, p. 343. 8, however, there is mention of a Reubenite of the c. Jewish tradition also associated the prophet
same name.8, however, there is mention of a Reubenite of the c. Jewish tradition also associated the prophet
same name. with the pious Obadiah of IKgs 18:3-16, who was
b. Klein, Sefer Klozner. p. 198, and Torrey, a high official in Ahab's court (Ginzberg, Legends,
Lives, pp. 26, 41, propose that this should be vol. 4, pp. 240f.). emended to Bithmadn, i.e. Beth-meon of Jer 48:23,
a modified form of Beth-baal-meon (Josh 13:17), 10 a. Identity unknown. a town in Transjordan south of Nebo. IChr 5:8 b. Cf. Jdt 2:28, where Sour seems to refer to a
locates the Reubenite Joel in this vicinity. Jeremias, coastland city. Torrey, Lives, p. 41, conjectures
Heiligengraber, p. 104, can report no other evi­ that this is simply an unusual transliteration of sor,
dence of the veneration of Joel's grave during the and therefore translates it as "Tyre."
early centuries of the Christian era, and proposes c. Cf. Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 4, p. 247. that the tradition reported by LivPro may be a d. The narrative assumes familiarity with the
purely literary product that had no local precipitate widespread tradition that Jonah was the son of the
in the form of a cult. widow of Zarephath (cf. Ginzberg, Legends, vol. c. H. J. Schoeps, Aus friihchristlicher Zeit (Tu­ 4, p. 197; vol. 6, p. 318). E2, D, and Coisl. 224
bingen, 1950) p. 132, notes that, according to The make the connection explicit by adding "Jonah."
Book of the Bee of Solomon of Basra, Joel was e. Jeremias, Heiligengraber, p. 119, prefers D's
clubbed to death like Amos. reading, "the oak of Lebanon."
f. E', E2, D, and Coisl. 224 read Soar. Torrey,
9 a. Torrey, Lives, p. 41, derives the name from Lives, p. 42, translates "Seir," i.e. Edom. From
the Heb. bit ha-kerem, "House of the Vineyard," the perspective of the writer, Seir, which in his
which was probably a common name for small, time was better known as Idumea, included much
rural settlements. If Obadiah s grave was indeed of southern Judea (cf. Josephus, Apion 2.116).Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, pp. 6 a. In reading Morathi instead of Morasthi (so 82-86, points out that Jewish legend associated the
D, and most MSS of LXX, at Mic 1:1), Q is giants with Eleutheropolis. He claims to have
consistent with its own reading at Mic 1:1; cf. also discovered the "cemetery of the giants" in an
LXX of Jer 33:18. Eusebius, Onomastikon (ed. E. impressive Seleucid necropolis that he and A. Alt
Klostermann [Hildesheim, 1966] p. 134) has Mor- visited in 1932, situated about 2 kilometers (1.25
athei, and asserts that the place was just east of miles) north of Beit Jibrin. Eleutheropolis (modern Beit Jibrin, northeast of
Hebron). 7 a. According to Shalshelet ha-Kabbalah 97, King
b. The erroneous identification with Ephraim Uzziah killed Amos by striking him on the forehead
may have resulted from confusion with Micah of with a red-hot iron (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 4, p. Ephraim of Judg 17, as proposed by Klein, Sefer 262; vol. 6, p. 357).

If Obadiah s grave was indeed of southern Judea (cf. Josephus, Apion 2.116). the object of veneration near Shechem when LivPro Jeremias, Heiligengraber, pp. 88f., suggests that
was written, the tradition must have disappeared the Mohammedan mosque of Jonah at Halhul, 6
by the 4th cent., when Christians looked for the kilometers (3.75 miles) north of Hebron, marks
grave elsewhere in Samaria (Jeremias, Heiligen­ the site to which reference is here made.10 Kenaz,* who became judge of one tribeh in the days of the anarchy. • And he gave Gen 36:15,42;
a portent concerning Jerusalem and the whole land, that whenever they should Judg 3:9
11 see a stone crying out piteously the end was at hand. *And whenever they should Hab2:ii
see all the gentiles in Jerusalem,4 the entire city would be razed to the ground. 4Bar 9:30
Nahum
1 11 Nahum was from Elkesi on the other side of Isbegabarin of the tribe of
2 Simeon.8 •After Jonah this man gave to Nineveh a portent, that it would be
3 destroyed by fresh water and an underground fire, which also happened. *For the
lake which surrounds it inundated it during an earthquake, and fire coming from
4 the wilderness burned its higher section. #He died in peace and was buried in his
own district. Habakkuk
1 12 Habakkuk was of the tribe of Simeon, from the countryside of Bethzouchar.8
2 Before the captivity he had a vision6 concerning the conquest of Jerusalem, and
3 he mourned greatly. #And when Nebuchadnezzar entered Jerusalem he fled to
4 Ostrakine,c and (later) sojourned in the land of Ishmael.d »When the Chaldeans
turned back, and the remnant that was in Jerusalem (went) to Egypt, he was living
5 in his own district and ministering to those who were harvesting his field. #When
he took the food, he prophesied to his own family, saying, "lam going to a far
6 country, and I will come quickly. »But if I delay, take (food) to the harvesters." Bei 33-39
7 And when he had gone to Babylon and given the meal to Daniel,6 he approached
the harvesters as they were eating and told no one what had happened; he
8 understood that the people would soon return from Babylon. *And he died two
9 years before the return. »And he was buried alone in his own field. 10 He gave a portent to those in Judea, that they would see a light in the Temple
11 and so perceive the glory of the Temple.»And he was buried alone in his own field. 10 He gave a portent to those in Judea, that they would see a light in the Temple
11 and so perceive the glory of the Temple. »And concerning the end of the Temple
12 he predicted, "By a western nation it will happen." #"At that time," he said,
"the curtain of the Dabeir* will be torn into small pieces, and the capitals of the
two pillars will be taken away, and no one will know where they are; and they
will be carried away by angels into the wilderness, where the tent of witness was
g. Ps-Philo 25:3 and Josephus Ant 5.3.3 §182, eropolis. If Elkesi was an existing village, and not
as well as later rabbinic sources (Ginzberg, Leg­ merely a postulate based upon the Heb. text of
ends, vol. 6, p. 181), identify the first judge as Nan 1:1, it must have been situated in southwestern
Kenaz, not Othniel the son of Kenaz, despite the Judah, where tradition located the tribe of Simeon. unequivocal testimony of Judg 3:9 that the son held E2 takes the name in Nan 1:1 as personal, and
this honor. Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, p. 90, con­ substitutes "Nahum, son of Elkesaios, was from
jectures that this reflects local Idumean tradition, Iesbe ..."
which glorified Kenaz as the ancestor of an im­
portant Edomite tribe. The cave of Kenaz thus 12 a. Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, p. 81, identifies
constituted the Idumean response to the cave of Bethzouchar as Khirbet Beit Skaria (Beth-Zacha-
Machpelah, the grave of the patriarchs near Hebron. rias), situated 9 kilometers (5.6 miles) southeast of
h. Torrey, Lives, pp. 27f., conjectures that the Bethlehem. underlying Heb. text was corrupt. His emendation b. Lit. "saw."
yields the translation: "the first who became judge." c. On the Mediterranean coast in eastern Egypt. This is unnecessary if the reference is to Idumean d. I.e. Arabia or Nabatea. tradition (see preceding n). e. The same story is found in Bel 33-39 (JB
i. This prediction makes little sense if the pres­ Dan 14:33-39).If Obadiah s grave was indeed of southern Judea (cf. Josephus, Apion 2.116). the object of veneration near Shechem when LivPro Jeremias, Heiligengraber, pp. 88f., suggests that
was written, the tradition must have disappeared the Mohammedan mosque of Jonah at Halhul, 6
by the 4th cent., when Christians looked for the kilometers (3.75 miles) north of Hebron, marks
grave elsewhere in Samaria (Jeremias, Heiligen­ the site to which reference is here made.

The same story is found in Bel 33-39 (JB
i. This prediction makes little sense if the pres­ Dan 14:33-39). ence of "all the gentiles in Jerusalem" is taken as f. Hapldma seldom designates a curtain, but this
referring to the successful penetration of the city's curious usage is attested by TBenj 9:4, where it
defenses by the Roman armies in A.D 70. It seems, also denotes the Temple veil. Dabeir (or Dabir) is
rather, to reflect uneasiness regarding the increasing a transliteration of the Heb. d'bir, which denotes
number of gentile visitors and/or residents, which the inner sanctuary of the Temple (the holy of
threatened to change the character of Israel's holy holies). The LXX translators elected to use this
city. transliteration rather than a translation at IKgs 6:5
and elsewhere where the Heb. word occurs, treating
11 a. Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, pp. 83f., 100, it as if it were a place-name. identifies Isbegabarin as Beit Jibrin, i.e. Eleuth­13 set up in the beginning. •And by means of them the LORD will be recognized at
the end, for they will illuminate those who are being pursued by the serpent in Rev i2:9,i7;
darkness as from the beginning." 2:15
Zephaniah
i,2 13 Zephaniah was of the tribe of Simeon, of the countryside of Sabaratha.8 *He zeph j:4,i2
prophesied concerning the city and about the end of the gentiles and the shaming zeph 21-15
3 of the impious. • And he died and was buried in his held. Haggai
1 14 Haggai, who is also 44the Messenger,"8 came from Babylon6 to Jerusalem, Hag 113
probably as a youth, and he openly prophesied concerning the return of the people,
2 and witnessed in part the building of the Temple. *And when he died he was Hag i:i4
buried near the tomb of the priests,0 in great honor as were they. Zechariah
1 15 Zechariah came from Chaldea when he was already well advanced in years,
and there he prophesied many things to the people, and gave portents as proof. Ezra 3:2
2 This man told Jozadak that he would beget a son and that he would serve as priest
3 in Jerusalem. *He also pronounced a blessing upon Shealtiel8 at the birth of his
4 son, and named him Zerubbabel. »And concerning Cyrus he gave a portent of his
victory, and prophesied regarding the service which he was to perform for
s Jerusalem, and he blessed him greatly.b •His prophesying in Jerusalem was based
on his visions about the end of the gentiles, Israel, the Temple, the laziness of
6 prophets and priests, and he set forth the twofold judgment. *And he died when Zech9:i2
he had attained a great age, and when he expired he was buried near Haggai.0
Malachi
1 16 Malachi. This man was born in Sopha after the return,8 and while still a very
2 young man he led a virtuous6 life. «And since the whole people honored him as
holy and gentle, it called him Malachi, which means *4angel"; for he was indeed Mai I:KLXX)
3 beautiful to behold.This man was born in Sopha after the return,8 and while still a very
2 young man he led a virtuous6 life. «And since the whole people honored him as
holy and gentle, it called him Malachi, which means *4angel"; for he was indeed Mai I:KLXX)
3 beautiful to behold. •Moreover, whatever he himself said in prophecy, on the
same day an angel of God appeared and repeated (it), as happened also in the
13 a. Klein, Sefer Klozner, p. 202, conjectures 15 a. The Gk. is Salathiel, as in LXX of Ezra
that Sabaratha derives from Satiabaratha, which 3:2. in turn represents an inverted form of Berathsatia, b. Q puts * 'greatly'' with the following sentence,
i.e. Birath Satia, which lay about 3.5 kilometers but the text is badly disturbed, and later recensions
(2.1 miles) north of Beit Jibrin (Eleutheropolis). make various emendations. What follows in this
Jeremias, Heiligengraber, p. 87, finds this conjec­ translation is a rough paraphrase. ture problematical but concurs that the connection c. Zechariah the prophet, "son of Berechiah son
with Simeon points to the area of Beit Jibrin. of Iddo" (Zech 1:1), was frequently confused with
the martyred priest Zechariah son of Jehoiada (2Chr
14 a. Aggelos, here translated "messenger," else­ 24:20-22; cf. Mt 23:35), whose violent death is
where denotes "angel." The clause is absent from reported below, ch. 23. In E2 the two Zechariahs
E1, E2, and D and is probably a gloss based on become one in a conflation of chs. 15 and 23. For
Hag 1:13. Torrey, Lives, pp. 29, 44, omits. an excellent discussion of this widespread confu­
b. Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi were asso­ sion, see S. A. Blank, "The Death of Zechariah
ciated with Daniel in rabbinic tradition (Ginzberg, in Rabbinic Literature," HUCA 12/13 (1937-38)
Legends, vol. 6, p. 613). 327-46. c. Cf. above 1:9 and n. Jeremias, Heiligengra­
ber, p. 72, can cite no corroborating evidence but 16 a. Sopha is unknown.The same story is found in Bel 33-39 (JB
i. This prediction makes little sense if the pres­ Dan 14:33-39). ence of "all the gentiles in Jerusalem" is taken as f. Hapldma seldom designates a curtain, but this
referring to the successful penetration of the city's curious usage is attested by TBenj 9:4, where it
defenses by the Roman armies in A.D 70. It seems, also denotes the Temple veil. Dabeir (or Dabir) is
rather, to reflect uneasiness regarding the increasing a transliteration of the Heb. d'bir, which denotes
number of gentile visitors and/or residents, which the inner sanctuary of the Temple (the holy of
threatened to change the character of Israel's holy holies). The LXX translators elected to use this
city. transliteration rather than a translation at IKgs 6:5
and elsewhere where the Heb. word occurs, treating
11 a. Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, pp. 83f., 100, it as if it were a place-name. identifies Isbegabarin as Beit Jibrin, i.e. Eleuth­

72, can cite no corroborating evidence but 16 a. Sopha is unknown. Other traditions regard
accepts it as probable that Haggai's tomb lay in Malachi as one of the returning exiles (Ginzberg,
the Kidron valley. Legends, vol. 4, p. 354; vol. 6, p. 413). b. Lit. "beautiful."days of the anarchy as written in Spharphotim,c that is, in the Book of Judges. 4 And while he was still a young man he was added to his fathers in his own field.d
Nathan
17
1 Nathan, David's prophet, was from Gaba,a and it was he who taught him the 2Sam 7:2
2 law of the LORD.6 #And he saw that David would transgress in the Bathsheba 2Sam ii:2-4
(affair); and while he was hastening to go to tell him, Beliar hindered him, for 4:6,20
by the road he found a dead man who had been murdered lying naked; and he
3 remained there, and that night he knew that (David) had committed the sin. *And
he returned weeping, and when (David) killed her husband, the LORD sent (him) 2Sam ii:i4-i7
4 to rebuke him. »And when he had grown very old he died and was buried in his
own district. Ahijah
1 18 Ahijah was from Shiloh,3 where the tabernacle was in ancient times, of Eli's JJj* \!£9
f
2 city. •This man said concerning Solomon that he would give offense to the LORD. iKgT ii.3133
3 And he rebuked Jeroboam, because he was going to walk deceitfully with the iKgs i4:7-i4
LORD: He saw a yoke of oxen trampling the people and running against the priests. 4 He also foretold to Solomon that his wives would change him and all his iKgs 12:28
5 posterity.1* #And he diedc and was buried near the Oak of Shiloh. 5:2
Joad
19
1 Joad3 was from Samareim.6 This is the one whom the lion attacked and he iKgs 13.1-32
2 died, when he rebuked Jeroboam over the calves. #And he was buried in Bethel
near the false prophet who deceived him.c 2Kgs 23:i7f. c. A confused recollection of the Heb. title of b. Lit. "race."
the Book of Judges, seper Sdpttm. Torrey, Lives, c. According to the medieval Midrash Aggadah
p. 30, conjectures that the original transliteration (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 6, p. 3%), Ahijah died
was Spharsophtim. Probably an allusion to Judg a martyr's death at the hands of Abijah, king of
13:8f. Judah. d. Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, reports nothing
concerning Malachi's grave. 19 a.Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, reports nothing
concerning Malachi's grave. 19 a. Variants include loab, loam, and loath. No
name is given to the prophet in the biblical narrative
17 a. On the strength of D and the Syriac version, (IKgs 13:1-32), but this deficiency was remedied
Torrey, Lives, p. 30, reads Gaboon, i.e. Gibeon. by later tradition. Josephus (Ant 8.8.5 §231) gives
Klein, Sefer Klozner, p. 190, conjectures that his name as Jadon (laddn). Rabbinic tradition
Gibeon was assumed to be Nathan's home because identified him with Iddo, the seer of 2Chr 9:29
the ark of the covenant was in that place at the (b.Sanh 89b, 104a). This identification is perhaps
time of Nathan's conversation with David in 2Sam responsible in part for the inclusion of the prophet
7:17 (cf. IChr 16:39). On the other hand, the at this point in the series, for 2Chr 9:29 brings
textual evidence in favor of Gaba and Gabath is together Nathan, Ahijah, and Iddo as prophets
stronger. Since Josephus uses this Gk. name to whose writings constituted sources for the history
refer to Gibeah (Ant 6.8.1 §156, referring to ISam of Solomon. Jerome is a later witness to this
15:34), it can be argued that Gibeah, not Gibeon, tradition in Quaestiones Hebraicae on 2Chr 12:15
is intended. The Bible, however, designates four (PL, vol. 23, col. 1391) and, further, supplies the
places with the name ''Gibeah.'' On the basis of name Jaddo, which is reminiscent of the form of
reports concerning Nathan's grave given by me­ the name used by Josephus. dieval Jewish pilgrims, Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, b. The common variant "Samaria" is under­
p. 80, concludes that the Gibeah in question is standable, but improbable in view of the explicit
modern Jeba, which lies about 19 kilometers (11.9 reference to Judea in the biblical narrative (IKgs
miles) southwest of Jerusalem. Torrey, Lives, pp. 13:1).72, can cite no corroborating evidence but 16 a. Sopha is unknown. Other traditions regard
accepts it as probable that Haggai's tomb lay in Malachi as one of the returning exiles (Ginzberg,
the Kidron valley. Legends, vol. 4, p. 354; vol. 6, p. 413). b. Lit. "beautiful."

Torrey, Lives, pp. 13:1). Torrey, Lives, p, 46, proposes that the place
30, 45, accepts the addition "from the tribe of in question is Zemaraim of Josh 18:22, 2Chr 13:4,
Thok," found in E1, and emends it to read "from which has been identified as Khirbet es Sumrah. the tribe of the Hivites" and concludes that Nathan situated 8 kilometers (5 miles) northeast of Jericho. was a foreigner. This is improbable. c. 2Kgs 23:17f. reports that a gravestone or
b. The Zohar 2.108 contains the tradition that monument marked the common grave of the man
Nathan was Solomon's teacher (Ginzberg, Legends, of God from Judah and the prophet of Bethel who
vol. 6, p. 279). deceived him. Local tradition concerning this grave
persisted until at least the 5th cent, A.D (Jeremias,
18 a. See above 5:2 and n. Heiligengrdber. p. 51).Azariah
20
1 Azariah was from the district of Sybatha;8 (it was he) who turned from Israel 2Cnr is:i-is
2 the captivity of Judah.b • And he died and was buried in his own field. 2Cnr 28:8-15
Elijah
1 21 Elijah, a Thesbite* from the land of the Arabs,b of Aaron's tribe,0 was living uc n.i
gs
2 in Gilead, for Thesbe8 was given to the priests.d 'When he was to be born, his
father Sobacha saw that men of shining white appearance were greeting him and
3 wrapping him in fire, and they gave him flames of fire to eat. •And he went and
reported (this) in Jerusalem, and the oracle told him, 44Do not be afraid, for his
dwelling will be light and his word judgment/ and he will judge Israel. "f
4,s The signs8 which he did are these. •Elijah prayed, and it did not rain for three iKgs i7:i
6 years, and after three years he prayed again and abundant rain came. *In Zarephath ucs n:8-i6
g
of Sidon through the word of the LORD he made the jar of the widow not to fail
7 and the flask of oil not to diminish. #Her son who had died God raised from the iKgs i7:n-24
8 dead after (Elijah) prayed.*1 • When the question was posed by him and the prophets 10:6
of Baal concerning who is the true and real God, he proposed' that a sacrifice be
offered both by him and by them, and that fire not be placed under (it), but that
20 a. Sybatha, like Josephus' Saphatha (variants Jeremias, Heiligengraber, p. 106, who accepts the
Sabatha and Saphtha, Ant 8.12.1 §293), seems to identification with Listib, proposes that Egeria did
derive from the textually difficult allusion in 2Chr not actually see Thesbe, but that the direction in
14:10. J. Jeremias, "Sarabatha und Sybatha," which the town lay was pointed out to her by her
Zeitschrift des deutschen Palastina-Vereins 56 (1933) guides.J. Jeremias, "Sarabatha und Sybatha," which the town lay was pointed out to her by her
Zeitschrift des deutschen Palastina-Vereins 56 (1933) guides. This is hardly an adequate interpretation of
253-55, argues that here LXX reflects a better text; the text: ad subito vidimus civitatem sancti pro-
the corrupt reading of MT has given rise to the phetae Heliae, id est Thesbe ("suddenly we saw
spurious place-name Zephathah. the city of the holy prophet Elijah, that is, Thesbe"). b. It appears that tradition has confused Azariah It remains possible, of course, that Egeria was
son of Oded of 2Chr 15:1 with the later prophet misinformed by her guides. Oded of 2Chr 28:9; it is the latter, not the former, b. In the 1st cent, the Nabateans (Araboi) con­
who reverses Israel's enslavement of Judah in the trolled the area east of Perea and the Decapolis. war between Pekah and Ahaz. The reconstruction Perhaps their influence at times extended to those
of the text proposed by Torrey, Lives, p. 46, "who villages in Transjordan that were not in close
turned away from Judah the captivity that befell proximity to the major hellenistic and Jewish towns. Israel," is unnecessary if allusion is here made to In any event, our author or his source believed that
the prophecy of Oded in 2Chr 28:9-15. Thesbe lay in Nabatean territory. c. Elijah was often regarded as a priest in Jewish
21 a. The name of Elijah's home is spelled Thesbei tradition (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 6, p. 316). in Q; variants include Thesbi, Thesbis, and Thes- d. According to Josh 21:19, thirteen cities were
bdn. The location of the town is still unknown; cf. assigned to the descendants of Aaron, but Tishbeh
J. Simons, The Geographical and Topographical (Thesbe) is not mentioned in any of the lists of
Texts of the Old Testament (Leiden, 1959) pp. priestly cities. 359f. According to the LXX translators, Elijah e. Or "verdict."
came from Thesbon, which is perhaps to be taken f.Torrey, Lives, pp. 13:1). Torrey, Lives, p, 46, proposes that the place
30, 45, accepts the addition "from the tribe of in question is Zemaraim of Josh 18:22, 2Chr 13:4,
Thok," found in E1, and emends it to read "from which has been identified as Khirbet es Sumrah. the tribe of the Hivites" and concludes that Nathan situated 8 kilometers (5 miles) northeast of Jericho. was a foreigner. This is improbable. c. 2Kgs 23:17f. reports that a gravestone or
b. The Zohar 2.108 contains the tradition that monument marked the common grave of the man
Nathan was Solomon's teacher (Ginzberg, Legends, of God from Judah and the prophet of Bethel who
vol. 6, p. 279). deceived him. Local tradition concerning this grave
persisted until at least the 5th cent, A.D (Jeremias,
18 a. See above 5:2 and n. Heiligengrdber. p. 51).

According to the LXX translators, Elijah e. Or "verdict."
came from Thesbon, which is perhaps to be taken f. Most MSS, including E1, E2, and D, add
as the genitive plural of a neuter plural Thesba "with sword and fire." Elijah was frequently
(IKgs 17:1). Josephus {Ant 8.13.2 §319) has Thes- assigned a role in the judgment of the deceased
bdnis (variant Thessebdnes), but Thesba is given (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 6, p. 324). by Eusebius, Onomastikon (Klostermann, ed.; p. g. Following D, Torrey, Lives, pp. 8, 32, 47f.,
102). The existence of such a place in the Roman- omits the "signs" included by Q in the sections
Byzantine period and its association with Elijah on Elijah and Elisha (21:4-15; 22:4-17), which
are confirmed by the 5th-cent. testimony of Egeria are taken from l-2Kgs. It is instructive that E1 and
that she saw (probably without actually visiting) E2 have short additions at this point, but contain
the town of Thesbe, which possessed a grotto in none of the biblical material found in Q. Torrey is
which Elijah was said to repose (the Lat. text and probably correct, therefore, in regarding this ma­
French translation are given on adjoining pages in terial as secondary. It is even possible that the
the edition by H. P6tre\ "Athene," Journal de entire section devoted to Elijah is a later addition,
voyage {SC 21; Paris, 1948] pp. 154f.). Egeria's since it does not conform to the document's general
report suggests that the town of Thesbe was visible purpose of encouraging veneration of the prophets'
from the Jordan valley; therefore, it cannot be graves. identical with Listib, the site proposed by F.-M. h. See above 10:6 and n. No attempt is made
Abel, Giographie de la Palestine (Paris, 19673) in this passage to identify the dead son as Jonah. vol. 2, p. 486, which is about 17 kilometers (10.6 i. "Proposed" fits the context but cannot be
miles) east of the Jordan between Osara and Ajlun. defended lexically. The first aorist active of haired9 each should pray, and the one answering him would be God. •Accordingly, the
(prophets) of Baal prayed and cut themselves until the ninth hour, and no one
answered them; and Elijah, when he had filled the place where the sacrifice was
with much water, also prayed, and immediately fire came down and consumed
10 the sacrifice, and the water was gone.J *And all blessed God, and killed the four
11 hundred and fifty (prophets) of Baal. •When King Ahaziah sent to obtain an oracle 2K
gs
12 from idols, (Elijah) prophesied death, and he died. "When two captains of fifty 2K 1:9-12
gs
were sent to him from Ahaziah, the king of Israel, he invoked the LORD and fire 9:3
came down from heaven, and the fire consumed them at the LORD'S command. 13,14 Ravens brought him bread in the morning and meat in the afternoon.k •With a iKgs w.s
sheepskin1 he struck the Jordan and it was divided, and they crossed over with 2Ks 2:8
g
15 dry feet, both he and Elisha. •Finally he was taken up in a chariot of fire. 2Ks 2:11
g
Elisha
1.2 22 Elisha was from Abel Meholah in the land of Reuben.8 • And a marvel occurred iKgs 19.16
concerning this man, for when he was born in Gilgal,b the golden calf bellowed
shrilly, so that it was heard in Jerusalem, and the priest declared through the
Urimc that a prophet had been born to Israel who would destroy their carved
3 images and molten idols. #And when he died, he was buried in Samaria.d
4,5 The signs which he did are these. »He too struck the Jordan with Elijah's 2K 2i3f
gS
6 sheepskin, and the water was divided, and he too passed over with dry feet. *The 2Kgs 2:19-22
water in Jericho was foul and sterile; and hearing (this) from the city's residents,
he invoked God, and he said, 4i am healing this water, and no longer will death
7 and sterility issue from it," and the water has remained healed to this day. •When 2K 2:23f. gs
children treated him disrespectfully, he cursed them,e and two bears came out and
8 tore to piecesf forty-two of them.•When 2K 2:23f. gs
children treated him disrespectfully, he cursed them,e and two bears came out and
8 tore to piecesf forty-two of them. •The wife of a prophet who had died was being 2Kgs 4:1-7
pestered by creditors,* and was unable to pay; she came to Elisha, and he
commanded her to gather new vessels, as many as she could, and to pour the
(jar) containing very little oil into them until the vessels were full; and she did
this and filled the vessels and repaid her creditors, and she had the surplus for the
9 sustenance of her children. *He went to Shunemh and stayed with a certain woman;
is not witnessed until the 4th cent., according to phrase "in Gilgal" is awkwardly placed, it is
LSJM, p. 41, and nowhere does the active verb apparently to be taken with the following clause. bear a meaning suitable to this context. Perhaps Torrey, Lives, p. 48, remarks, "This passage in
hirise should be emended to itise, "asked," but the Lives is the oldest witness to the belief, found
the latter would fit poorly with the fourth infinitival in the writings of certain Church fathers, that one
phrase. of Jeroboam's two golden calves was set up in
j. Lit. "ceased." Possibly a scribal error sub­ Gilgal instead of Dan."
stituted exeleipen for an original exelixen as found c. Cf. Num 27:21; Urim is often combined with
in the LXX version of the narrative, IKgs 18:38, Thummim (Ex 28:30). Possibly a form of dice by
"and it licked up the water." means of which a priest could secure a divine
k. Following LXX; MT has "bread and meat answer to a human inquiry. Cf. I. Mendelsohn,
in the morning, and bread and meat in the after­ "Urim and Thummim," IDB 4.739-40. noon." d. Jeremias, Heiligengrdber, p. 30, notes that
I. Again following LXX; MT has "mantle." the narrative concerning Elisha's grave in 2Kgs
13:20f. presupposes a site much closer to the
22 a.According to the LXX translators, Elijah e. Or "verdict."
came from Thesbon, which is perhaps to be taken f. Most MSS, including E1, E2, and D, add
as the genitive plural of a neuter plural Thesba "with sword and fire." Elijah was frequently
(IKgs 17:1). Josephus {Ant 8.13.2 §319) has Thes- assigned a role in the judgment of the deceased
bdnis (variant Thessebdnes), but Thesba is given (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 6, p. 324). by Eusebius, Onomastikon (Klostermann, ed.; p. g. Following D, Torrey, Lives, pp. 8, 32, 47f.,
102). The existence of such a place in the Roman- omits the "signs" included by Q in the sections
Byzantine period and its association with Elijah on Elijah and Elisha (21:4-15; 22:4-17), which
are confirmed by the 5th-cent. testimony of Egeria are taken from l-2Kgs. It is instructive that E1 and
that she saw (probably without actually visiting) E2 have short additions at this point, but contain
the town of Thesbe, which possessed a grotto in none of the biblical material found in Q. Torrey is
which Elijah was said to repose (the Lat. text and probably correct, therefore, in regarding this ma­
French translation are given on adjoining pages in terial as secondary. It is even possible that the
the edition by H. P6tre\ "Athene," Journal de entire section devoted to Elijah is a later addition,
voyage {SC 21; Paris, 1948] pp. 154f.). Egeria's since it does not conform to the document's general
report suggests that the town of Thesbe was visible purpose of encouraging veneration of the prophets'
from the Jordan valley; therefore, it cannot be graves. identical with Listib, the site proposed by F.-M. h. See above 10:6 and n. No attempt is made
Abel, Giographie de la Palestine (Paris, 19673) in this passage to identify the dead son as Jonah. vol. 2, p. 486, which is about 17 kilometers (10.6 i. "Proposed" fits the context but cannot be
miles) east of the Jordan between Osara and Ajlun. defended lexically. The first aorist active of haired

Again following LXX; MT has "mantle." the narrative concerning Elisha's grave in 2Kgs
13:20f. presupposes a site much closer to the
22 a. Abel Meholah is frequently located west of Jordan, where an incursion of Moabite raiders
the Jordan, about 16 kilometers (10 miles) south would be more likely, but adds that later tradition
of Beisan (Beth-shan, Scythopolis); cf. Simons, consistently points to Samaria. Jerome, Comm. in
Geographical and Topographical Texts, pp. 293f. Abdiam 1 (PL, vol. 25, col. 1099B), mentions a
N. Glueck, Explorations in Eastern Palestine, IV, mausoleum of Elisha in Sebaste (Samaria). part I: Text, Annual of the American Schools of e. Lit. "among them."
Oriental Research 25-28 (1945-49; New Haven. f. Emending the text from enerrixan, "broke
1951) pp. 211-23, argues for a site in Gilead near into," to anerrixan, as found in LXX of 2Kgs
the Wadi el-Yabis. Our text supports a Transjor- 2:24. danian site but places it much farther south in g. 2Kgs 4:1 mentions only one creditor. Reubenite territory. h. Q, following LXX, has Souman. Eusebius,
b. The Gilgal here referred to is not the sanctuary Onomastikon (Klostermann, ed.; p. 158) identifies
near Jericho but a site near Bethel. Awareness of Shunem (which he spells Sounim) with an existing
this second Gilgal persisted through the Roman village called Soulem, five Roman miles (c. 4.6
period, as evidenced by the Onomastikon of Eu­ miles) south of Mount Tabor. sebius (Klostermann, ed.; p. 66). Although theshe was not able to bear a child, but earnestly desired to have one; he prayed and
made her able to conceive and give birth; then, when the child died, he prayed
io again and raised it from the dead. •He went to Gilgal and was brought before the 2K 4:38-4i
gs
sons of the prophets; and when the food was boiled, and a deadly herb was boiled
with the food, and they were all on the brink of danger, he made the food harmless
n and sweet. •When the sons of the prophets were felling trees by the Jordan, the 2K 6.1-7
gs
axehead fell off and sank; and Elisha, praying, made the axehead float to the
12,13 surface. •Through him Naaman the Syrian was cleansed of leprosy. #When his 2K 5:1-27
gs
servant, named Gehazi, went to Naaman secretly, against his wishes, and asked
for silver, and later upon returning denied it, Elisha rebuked and cursed him, and
14 he became a leper. 'When the king of Syria was making war against Israel, he 2Kgs 6:8-23
15 protected the king of Israel by announcing to him the plans of the enemy. »When
the king of Syria learned this he sent a force to bring the prophet, but he prayed
and made them to be struck1 with blindness, and he led them to Samaria, to their
16 enemies, but keeping them unharmed he preserved and fed them. 'When the king
17 of Syria learned this he stopped making war. • After Elisha's death a man died, 2Ks i3:20f. g
and as he was being buried he was thrown onto his bones, and just as he touched
Elisha's bones the dead man revived immediately.• After Elisha's death a man died, 2Ks i3:20f. g
and as he was being buried he was thrown onto his bones, and just as he touched
Elisha's bones the dead man revived immediately. Zechariah son of Jehoiada
1 23 Zechariah was from Jerusalem, son of Jehoiada the priest, and Joash the king 2Chr 24:20-22
of Judah killed him near the altar,8 and the house of Davidb poured out his blood Mt 23:35
in front of the Ailam;c and the priests took him and buried him with his father.d
2 From that time visible portents occurred in the Temple,e and the priests were not
able to see a vision of angels of God or to give oracles from the Dabeir,* or to
inquire by the Ephod,8 or to answer the people through Urim as formerly. i. Reading patachthinai, following Nestle's (and Isaiah, according to the variant tradition
transcription of Q, Marginalien, p. 34; the same repotted by ARN 39 [B]) were buried within the
verb is used by the LXX narrative, 2Kgs 6:18. city walls (e.g. t.BB 1:11). In the light of Mt
Schermann, Prophetarum vitae fabulosae, p. 96, 23:29f. and Lk 11:47, Jeremias continues, we must
has katachthinai as Q's reading. assume that the supposed grave of Zechariah had
recently been marked with a new monument, for
23 a. The Midrash on Lamentations, Midrash Zechariah and Isaiah are the only prophets whose
Rabbah, ed. H. Freedman and M. Simon (10 vols.; martyrdoms and subsequent burials in Jerusalem
London, 1939) vol. 7, p. 226, stresses that the could have prompted this saying of Jesus. Because
murder occurred in the Court of the Priests, not of the widespread confusion that identified this
the Court of Israel or the Court of Women. Ac­ Zechariah with the prophet of the same name (see
cording to Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 6, p. 396, the n. c on 15:6), it is probable that the monument
medieval Midrash Aggada declares that the blood was erected in the Kidron valley near the tombs of
of Zechariah bespattered the walls of the sanctuary. the priests (see n. n on 1:9).Again following LXX; MT has "mantle." the narrative concerning Elisha's grave in 2Kgs
13:20f. presupposes a site much closer to the
22 a. Abel Meholah is frequently located west of Jordan, where an incursion of Moabite raiders
the Jordan, about 16 kilometers (10 miles) south would be more likely, but adds that later tradition
of Beisan (Beth-shan, Scythopolis); cf. Simons, consistently points to Samaria. Jerome, Comm. in
Geographical and Topographical Texts, pp. 293f. Abdiam 1 (PL, vol. 25, col. 1099B), mentions a
N. Glueck, Explorations in Eastern Palestine, IV, mausoleum of Elisha in Sebaste (Samaria). part I: Text, Annual of the American Schools of e. Lit. "among them."
Oriental Research 25-28 (1945-49; New Haven. f. Emending the text from enerrixan, "broke
1951) pp. 211-23, argues for a site in Gilead near into," to anerrixan, as found in LXX of 2Kgs
the Wadi el-Yabis. Our text supports a Transjor- 2:24. danian site but places it much farther south in g. 2Kgs 4:1 mentions only one creditor. Reubenite territory. h. Q, following LXX, has Souman. Eusebius,
b. The Gilgal here referred to is not the sanctuary Onomastikon (Klostermann, ed.; p. 158) identifies
near Jericho but a site near Bethel. Awareness of Shunem (which he spells Sounim) with an existing
this second Gilgal persisted through the Roman village called Soulem, five Roman miles (c. 4.6
period, as evidenced by the Onomastikon of Eu­ miles) south of Mount Tabor. sebius (Klostermann, ed.; p. 66). Although the

the priests (see n. n on 1:9). Jeremias, Heiligen­
The assertion of Jesus that Zechariah died * 'between graber, pp. 68-72, rules out the possibility that
the sanctuary and the altar" (Mt 23:35; Lk 11:51) Zechariah's monument can be identified with any
shows contact with the tradition transmitted by of the existing structures in that area. LivPro. An interesting variant provided by Codex e. None of the punishments listed in this sentence
Bezae at Lk 11:51 shows even closer contact: are mentioned in the rabbinic haggadah, but a great
anameson, "in the midst of or "between." deal of attention is given there to one portent that
b. In Zech 12:8 the term "the House of David" is not explicitly alluded to in LivPro: The blood of
seems to be a circumlocution for "the king." Zechariah seethed and bubbled on the stones in the
Poetic parallelism employs the same circumlocution Temple court for 252 years until it was finally
here. atoned by the slaughter effected by Nebuzaradan
c. Ailam is the transliteration employed in LXX (b.Gitt 57b; b.Sanh 89b; Midrash on Ecclesiastes
to render the Heb. Warn and 'u/dm, which designate 3.16 §1; 10.4 §1 [Midrash Rabbah, vol. 8, pp. the porch of the Temple (IKgs 6:3 et al.). 101f., 263f.J). d. According to 2Chr 24:16, Jehoiada was buried f. See n. f on 12:12. The practice here alluded
"with the kings in the Citadel of David." Jeremias, to of giving oracles from the holy of holies is
Heiligengraber, p. 68, correctly points out that, nowhere attested. regardless of the accuracy of this statement, it is g. According to this passage, both the Ephod
very unlikely that lst-cent. Jews believed that and the Urim were employed in oracular practice. Zechariah and his father were buried within Jeru­ Rabbinic haggadah contains a similar opinion
salem, in view of the frequent testimony in the (Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 3, p. 172). Cf. also
rabbinic literature that only the kings and Huldah LetAris 97.Conclusion
i 24 And other prophets became hidden," whose names are contained in their
genealogies in the books of the names of Israel; for the whole race of Israel are
enrolled by name.
24 a. The difficulty of this phrase is probably simply that, while there are other prophets, the
responsible for the variant reading of E1, "which collection here assembled exhausts the list of proph-
we have not mentioned." E2 and D do not have ets whose graves are known,
this concluding sentence. "Hidden" may meanLADDER OF JACOB
(c. First Century A.D.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY H. G. LUNT
The Ladder of Jacob has not survived as an integral text, even in a form as unsatisfactory
as that of the Apocalypse of Abraham, but is known only from what was utilized in the
Slavonic Tolkovaja paleja, or Explanatory Palaia. In retelling the tales of the Old Testament,
the Slavic editors of the Palaia made many changes in the texts they used; they excised,
they rearranged the order of sentences, paragraphs, or sections, and—most important—they
modified wording in order to fit the texts into the anti-Jewish commentary interspersed in
the canonical and non-canonical episodes they were explaining. Moreover, they freely united
heterogeneous materials, often with little consideration for narrative flow or logical
connections. Therefore we must treat the Ladder of Jacob with the utmost caution; at best
our reconstitution of the text must be controversial in many details. For the moment,
however, given the lack of careful study of the manuscript witnesses and the inaccessibility
of many of them, we can give only a preliminary approximation that will serve as an
introduction to the problems. The original Slavonic version of the Ladder was modified in slightly different ways by
two traditions in the history of the Palaia text. Recension A is the more conservative but is
marred by the omission of the continuous text after 7:9; recension B was severely edited in
a part of the narrative, while other passages appear to show harmonization with the
commentary. Both have before 1:8 an obvious insertion whose purpose is to elucidate the
Septuagint version of Genesis 28:13 (see n. to 1:7). In recension B, the major portion of
Jacob's account—2:3-5:1—is reduced to a banal prayer and the matter-of-fact appearance
of a nameless angel who starts to explain the vision. Otherwise, recension B continues
through the end of chapter 7.In recension B, the major portion of
Jacob's account—2:3-5:1—is reduced to a banal prayer and the matter-of-fact appearance
of a nameless angel who starts to explain the vision. Otherwise, recension B continues
through the end of chapter 7. A, on the other hand, abruptly moves from the middle of 6:9
to the commentary that in B follows 7:35. There is nothing to indicate that this omission
was a real editorial decision; it is possible that our three copies go back to a model based
on a defective manuscript.' In any case, the commentary jumps back to offer brief and
haphazard interpretations of 5:12-17, then 6:5-12, 1-4, 13-15, and then a much more
detailed and discernibly organized exegesis in chapter 7. Chapter 7 is probably to be regarded as a separate work (cf. n. a to ch. 7). It is connected
1 In A, the commentary begins: "Understand, Jew, how the Lord explained to your forefather Jacob . . ." In B,
the introduction is longer: "Have you heard this well, you who have not recognized the truth, 0 Jew, how the Lord
explained ..." Very likely the common ancestor of our three MSS of rec. A was the work of a copyist who was
faced with a lacuna, presumably bounded by "your tribe" of 6:9 and the vocative "Jew" of the commentary. He
simply bridged it by means of the imperative "understand," which is common enough in the Palaia commentaries. Note that A (like the longer version of the ApAb) is found in what is agreed to be the second redaction of the Palaia
as a whole. This indicates that copies of the independent text were still available in 15th-cent. Russia, when an editor
restored some of the passages that had been modified or deleted by earlier compilers of the Palaia. It is quite possible
that the episode we call the LadJac was a part of a larger work, but there is no evidence to affirm P. E. Scegolev's
conjecture that it is an excerpt from TJac ("Ocerki istorii otrecennoj literatury: Skazanie Afroditiana," Izvestija
Otdelenija russkogo jazyka i slovesnosti, vol.Conclusion
i 24 And other prophets became hidden," whose names are contained in their
genealogies in the books of the names of Israel; for the whole race of Israel are
enrolled by name.
24 a. The difficulty of this phrase is probably simply that, while there are other prophets, the
responsible for the variant reading of E1, "which collection here assembled exhausts the list of proph-
we have not mentioned." E2 and D do not have ets whose graves are known,
this concluding sentence. "Hidden" may mean

E. Scegolev's
conjecture that it is an excerpt from TJac ("Ocerki istorii otrecennoj literatury: Skazanie Afroditiana," Izvestija
Otdelenija russkogo jazyka i slovesnosti, vol. 4 [1899] 1332f.). [Frequently authors' first names are given in full
herein, because Slav, publications are unusually difficult to locate. We are grateful to R. Rubinkiewicz for sharing
with us his photographs of MSS of LadJac that he has found; and we look forward to his publications on this
interesting document. —J.H.C.]to the Ladder only by means of a grammatically incongruent sentence referring to the angels
descending and ascending, and otherwise contains no identifiable reference to Jacob. Modern
scholars have regarded it as a part of the Ladder because the Palaia has it, with its long
commentary, between the materials clearly connected with Jacob's vision at Bethel and his
continued journey to Laban. Synopsis
The Ladder of Jacob is an elaboration of Jacob's dream at Bethel, Genesis 28:11-22. Resting during his flight from Esau, Jacob sees in a dream a ladder or staircase reaching
from the earth to heaven. At the top is a fiery image, and at the right and left of each of
the twelve steps is a statue or bust of a man. Angels are ascending and descending on the
staircase. From above the highest statue, God calls to Jacob, promising that the land on
which he is sleeping will be his and that his descendants are to flourish and be blessed. Jacob awakens, consecrates the place, and utters a long prayer (unfortunately somewhat
garbled and possibly shortened in the transmission of the text) asking God to interpret the
dream. God orders the archangel Sariel to bless Jacob and explain the dream. Sariel appears
to Jacob and changes his name to Israel. (An obscure passage may have offered an
interpretation of Sariel's name; there may well be substantial omissions here.) Sariel says
the ladder or staircase is this age and the twelve steps are the periods of the age; the faces
or busts are the kings of the godless gentiles who will try Jacob's descendants. The iniquity
of these descendants will bring retribution; unfortunately the text is too corrupt to allow any
clear definition of precisely what is being prophesied. Possibly there is a reference to the
destruction of the Temple. Some descendants of Esau will become kings and will help the
Israelites (but again the corrupt text fails to give a clear picture).Possibly there is a reference to the
destruction of the Temple. Some descendants of Esau will become kings and will help the
Israelites (but again the corrupt text fails to give a clear picture). Eventually a king will
arise for final vengeance, and the angels and archangels will hurl their bolts of lightning to
aid the salvation of Jacob's tribe. The wicked (clearly the Egyptians) will be punished,
Leviathan and "the lawless Falkon" will be defeated, and Jacob's justice will prevail. The
kingdom of Edom and the peoples of Moab will perish. The text now designated chapter 7 is a mosaic of oracular prophesies concerning the birth
of Christ and also the crucifixion. It is to be regarded as an independent work, juxtaposed
to the Ladder of Jacob by a Slavic editor of the Palaia. Texts
The following survey of manuscripts is based on materials kindly furnished by Ryszard
Rubinkiewicz. RECENSION A, three manuscripts. S. Explanatory Palaia of 1477. Sin. 210, State Historical Museum, Moscow, fols. 100v-106v. The manuscript was reproduced in facsimile: Tolkovaja paleja 1477
goda, vol. 93, Obsdestvo ljubitelejdrevnerusskojpis''mennosti (St. Petersburg, 1893). R. Rumiantsev Palaia of 1494. Rum. 455, Lenin Library, Moscow, fols. 76-83. Published by A. N. Pypin in Grigorij Kuselev-Bezborodko, Pamjatniki starinnoj
russkoj literatury (St. Petersburg, 1862) vol. 3, pp. 27-32. U. Undolsky Palaia of 1517. Und. 719, State Historical Museum, Moscow. (Unpublished; a few variants available from penciled notes in my copy of Kuselev-
Bezborodko.)
RECENSION B, thirteen manuscripts. K. Kolomna Palaia of 1406. Tr.-Serg. 38, Lenin Library, Moscow, fols. 77-79. The Ladder was first published by N. S. Tikhonravov, Pamjatniki starinnoj russkoj
literatury (St. Petersburg, 1863) vol. 1, pp. 92-95. Later the whole manuscript was
printed: Paleja tolkovaja po spisku sdelannomu v g. Kolomne v 1406 g., Trud
udenikovN. S. Tikhonravova, Moscow, 1892.E. Scegolev's
conjecture that it is an excerpt from TJac ("Ocerki istorii otrecennoj literatury: Skazanie Afroditiana," Izvestija
Otdelenija russkogo jazyka i slovesnosti, vol. 4 [1899] 1332f.). [Frequently authors' first names are given in full
herein, because Slav, publications are unusually difficult to locate. We are grateful to R. Rubinkiewicz for sharing
with us his photographs of MSS of LadJac that he has found; and we look forward to his publications on this
interesting document. —J.H.C.]

S. Tikhonravova, Moscow, 1892. This edition adduces selected variants
from eight other manuscripts (one from the 14th, one from the 15th cent., the restlater; including MS Slav. 9 of the Vienna State Library, erroneously identified as
no. 12). V1. MS 83, Public Library, Vilnius, fols. 139-43, sixteenth century. V2. MS 84, Public Library, Vilnius, fols. 84-86, sixteenth century. M. Melee Monastery collection, Ukrainian Academy Library, Kiev, No. 114 (Aa
1292), fols. 74v-77r, seventeenth century. P. Solovki Monastery collection, Saltykov-Shchedrin Public Library, Leningrad,
Sol. 653. The Ladder was published by I. Ja. Porfir'ev, in "Apokrificeskie skazanija
o vetkhozavetnykh licakh i sobytijakh po rukopisjam soloveckoj biblioteki"
(= Sbornikotd. r. jaz. i slov. 17.1), St. Petersburg, 1877, pp. 138-49. RECENSION C is a brief extract of little interest on fol. 30r of the Palaia of 1414,
Library of the Academy of Sciences, Leningrad, no. 25.5.8. A German translation was made by N. Bonwetsch ("Die Apokryphe 'Leiter
Jakobs,' " Gottinger Nachrichten, philol.-histor. Klasse [1900] 76-87) on the basis
of the published material from R, K, and P, but it remained for N. M. Vtorykh
(Drevnosti, Trudy Slavjanskoj komissii Moskovskoj arkheologideskogo obSdestva, 2,
1902, protokoly, 1) to point out that recs. A and B go back to a single Slavonic
translation. The present translation is based on an eclectic text relying chiefly on MS S. It must be
emphasized that many of the witnesses are unavailable or known only from variants selected
by diverse scholars with differing methodologies and prejudices. One hopes that in the
future it will be possible to examine carefully all the evidence. Since the relative value of
many manuscripts is unknown, and the extant provenance of some variants has not been
noted, the commentary does not attempt to identify the source of every variant mentioned. Original language
The Explanatory Palaia is a compilation from many sources, but nearly all of the
component parts of variant redactions go back to the Old Church Slavonic translations made
in the Cyrillo-Methodian period, A.D.Since the relative value of
many manuscripts is unknown, and the extant provenance of some variants has not been
noted, the commentary does not attempt to identify the source of every variant mentioned. Original language
The Explanatory Palaia is a compilation from many sources, but nearly all of the
component parts of variant redactions go back to the Old Church Slavonic translations made
in the Cyrillo-Methodian period, A.D. 863-87, and in the subsequent flowering of Byzantino-
Slavic culture among the Slavs of Macedonia and Bulgaria for several generations after
890. A few hints in the Ladder, such as uslaidaemyx, 4'beguiled," (katathelchthentes) in
3:2, the distorted moguty for unfamiliar moguti "nobles'1 in 5:8, the agreement with the
Apocalypse of Abraham (whose language demonstrably places its translation in the tenth
century at the latest), and the peculiar use of vusxody or suxody (cf. nn. to 5:7, 9), allow
us to assume that the Slavonic Ladder existed before the final Byzantine destruction of the
Bulgarian state in 1018. Greek may have been the original language of the Ladder (excluding ch. 7, whose origin
will be treated below). No other Slavonic text has lice, 44face," used to mean 44statue" or
4'bust" (1:5 etc.), and there is no Semitic parallel. It is easily explained as a caique of
prosopon. (The use of 44face" as a quasi-pronoun in 3:1 etc. is common in Slavonic as a
reflection of biblical Gk. and tells us nothing of a text's origin.)
A non-Hebrew base text may be inferred from the citation of several Hebrew words in
the prayer in 2:18b—19. (The reproduction of the untranslatable names of Divinity as in
2:18a and ApAb 17:16 tells us nothing about the original language.) Perhaps Sariel's
explanation of his name in 4:6 was based on transposing letters. The Slavonic jako tu biaSe
(S) may be modified from jakovu biaSe, reflecting Greek iakob en.S. Tikhonravova, Moscow, 1892. This edition adduces selected variants
from eight other manuscripts (one from the 14th, one from the 15th cent., the rest

(The reproduction of the untranslatable names of Divinity as in
2:18a and ApAb 17:16 tells us nothing about the original language.) Perhaps Sariel's
explanation of his name in 4:6 was based on transposing letters. The Slavonic jako tu biaSe
(S) may be modified from jakovu biaSe, reflecting Greek iakob en. We may speculate
further that much earlier the text spelled out the name, Iakob (iod, ain, koph, waw, beth)
and went on to explain some sort of modification and its significance. Such a text would
have little meaning for a later, non-Jewish audience, and successive copyists would surely
distort it. In short, it is possible that the truncation of this passage preceded its translation
into Slavonic. If all this is so, we can posit an originally Jewish text written down in Greek
but intended for readers with at least some knowledge of Hebrew.Date and provenance
The date and provenance of the Ladder are unknown.2 The following observations should
help in discerning the history of transmission of the possibly original Jewish document.3
The enigmatic (k)falkonagargailyu(ya) of 5:15 must somehow be connected with the
"lawless Falkon"; cf. 6:13. Perhaps the association with Leviathan provides a clue. In
Isaiah 27:1, Leviathan is described as "the crooked (or twisted) serpent," Hebrew nhi
'qltwn. The unusual epithet may have been taken as a proper name, and spelled in Greek—
with loss of the initial ain—kalthdn. A mechanical transposition of letters would produce
Thalkon, and the East Slavic confusion of the letters theta and phi would yield "Falkon"
In the apocryphal Life of St. Pancratius of Taormina, a pagan god named Falkon was cast
into the sea by demons at the command of the saint; perhaps this legend influenced the
form of the name in the Ladder. We may surmise that the second element is connected with
the Greek stem gargalizein, "tempt, seduce," and conjecture that the original text was
alluding to the crooked or lawless tempter, Satan. The relationship of chapter 7 to the Ladder is only one of many questions still facing the
student of the origin and development of the Explanatory Palaia. The time, place, and shape
of the original compilation are controversial, and the order of various additions and
emendations still needs intensive study. We can discern, however, two general aims of the
original compilers and subsequent editors: to give an outline of Old Testament history, with
some interpretation of significant but obscure events, and to elucidate the specifically
Christian import of all Scripture and expose "the wicked falsity" of Jewish exegesis. For
the first purpose, the whole texts of the Apocalypse of Abraham and the Ladder were
suitable, although they might require some modification.We can discern, however, two general aims of the
original compilers and subsequent editors: to give an outline of Old Testament history, with
some interpretation of significant but obscure events, and to elucidate the specifically
Christian import of all Scripture and expose "the wicked falsity" of Jewish exegesis. For
the first purpose, the whole texts of the Apocalypse of Abraham and the Ladder were
suitable, although they might require some modification. For anti-Jewish polemical purposes,
no particular system was required, for a word here and a sentence there can point to the
proper sense. Such expansions could be made either to the original biblical text (e.g. the
n. on Gen 28:13 inserted after LadJac 1:7) or to passages of an interpolated unit (such as
the comments on 5:12-17 and ch. 6). Yet some persistent Jewish arguments called for more
detailed refutation, and therefore longer pieces were added at a place the editors deemed
appropriate. This is surely the case with chapter 7, which is generally devoted to the divinity
of Christ, and more specifically to the Nativity: The cryptic text has been constructed as a
framework and excuse for the exegesis. Its incorporation into the Palaia may have preceded,
followed, or been simultaneous with the addition of the Ladder. The principal source is a well-known Christian work entitled Explanation of the Events
in Persia (Exegesis ton prachthenton en Persidi), more specifically the section found
independently in some manuscripts under the name Tale of Aphroditianus.4 Russian and
Serbian Slavonic copies (13th- 18th cent.) surely stem from an Old Church Slavonic
translation made in the tenth century.3 It is a mediocre translation with a series of peculiarities
2 Epiphanius (Adv. Haer. 30.16.7) mentions a "Ladder [anabathmoi, "steps," not klimax as we would expect] of
Jacob"; but, as Rubinkiewicz has stated to me, K.Haer. 30.16.7) mentions a "Ladder [anabathmoi, "steps," not klimax as we would expect] of
Jacob"; but, as Rubinkiewicz has stated to me, K. Holl correctly showed that Epiphanius is referring to a "Ladder
of Jacob (the Apostle)." See Holl's Epiphanius (Ancorants and Panarion) (Leipzig, 1915) vol. 1, p. 354. In contrast
to LadJac, Epiphanius' "Ladder of Jacob" concerns the Temple, sacrifices, and fire on the altar. —J.H.C. 3 We can speculate reliably only on the final steps in the transmission of LadJac. I suggest, however, that this is the
last of a series of stages, approximately as follows: (1) a Jewish story composed in Jewish-Gk. for a Palestinian
audience; (2) transmission of this text in Byzantine circles, with inevitable distortions, ending up with a Gk. copy
available by about A.D. 900 to a Slav; (3) translation into OCS; (4) utilization of copies of this old translation by
Russ. editors as they elaborated various redactions of the Palaia in the 13th-15th cent. 4 Published, with an extensive study, by E. Bratke, Das sogenanme Religionsgesprdch am Hof der Sasaniden pp. 101-6. The Tale of Aphroditianus is 11.3-19.9 of his text. At the same time, P. E. Scegolev published a study of
Aphroditianus, chiefly in Slav, literature (Izvestija Otdelenija, vol. 4 (1899) 148-99, 1304-44). It is a pity that he
and Bratke were unaware of each other's work. 5 The 13th-cent. Russ. Slavonic copy titled Skazanie Afrodit'jana o byvSim v perstii zemli tudesi was published by
N. S. Tikhonravov, Pamjatniki starinnoj russkoj literatury (St. Petersburg, 1863) vol. 2, pp. 1-4; it corresponds to
Bratke's 11.3-19.6. A 16th-cent. Russ. Slavonic copy (cf. I. Ja. Porfir'ev, "Apokrificeskie skazanija o novozavetnykh
licakh i sobytijakh po rukopisjam Soloveckoj biblioteki," Sbornik Otdelenija russkogo jazyka i slovesnosti 52 [1891]
149-54) adds a final paragraph from another source. A 13th-cent. Serbian Slavonic fragment published by V.(The reproduction of the untranslatable names of Divinity as in
2:18a and ApAb 17:16 tells us nothing about the original language.) Perhaps Sariel's
explanation of his name in 4:6 was based on transposing letters. The Slavonic jako tu biaSe
(S) may be modified from jakovu biaSe, reflecting Greek iakob en. We may speculate
further that much earlier the text spelled out the name, Iakob (iod, ain, koph, waw, beth)
and went on to explain some sort of modification and its significance. Such a text would
have little meaning for a later, non-Jewish audience, and successive copyists would surely
distort it. In short, it is possible that the truncation of this passage preceded its translation
into Slavonic. If all this is so, we can posit an originally Jewish text written down in Greek
but intended for readers with at least some knowledge of Hebrew.

A 13th-cent. Serbian Slavonic fragment published by V. Makusev
(Russkij fiiotogideskij vestnik 7 [1882] 9-12) breaks off at 15.1. The full text, with a long interpolation not mentioned
by Bratke, was published from a 1740 Serbian Slavonic MS by Stojan Novakovic" (Starine 10 [1878] 72-80).that make it possible to demonstrate beyond question that verses 11-25 of chapter 7 of the
Ladder were put together from elements found in the Slavonic Aphroditianus.6 The whole
chapter and its commentary is most probably the work of the Slavic editors of the Palaia,
very likely Russians of the thirteenth to fourteenth centuries. Verse 7:2b anticipates 16,
which is part of the mosaic from Aphroditianus. Verses 3-9, 21, and 26-35 are taken from
other sources; this last group is not well integrated with what goes before. The Tale of Aphroditianus starts with the uproar among the idols in Persian temples that
caused the Magi to seek out Mary and Jesus in Bethlehem, and continues through the events
of the Nativity and the slaughter of the innocents. The commentary to the Ladder 7:20
quotes Balaam's prophecy, "a star shall rise out of Jacob, a man shall spring out of Israel"
(Numbers 24:17LXX). These words, and the final phrase of the verse, "and shall crush the
princes of Moab," would be familiar to pious Orthodox Christians, for the passage occurs
in one of the Old Testament lessons for the Christmas service. Moreover, that same service
explicitly connects the star of Jacob and the star of Bethlehem.7 Therefore the Slavic editors
of the Palaia had good reason for associating this chapter with the Ladder 6:15 as the
suitable spot to introduce extensive arguments about the miraculous and divine nature of
the Nativity.8 The problems of this chapter deserve further study, but in any case it is clear
that these verses were added not to the Greek but to the Slavonic Ladder. Theological importance9
Belief in one God is emphasized in the Ladder of Jacob. God is Lord of the world. He
is the one who is "carrying the whole world under" his arm, "yet not being borne by
anyone" (2:9). He made the skies, set the order of movements for the sun, moon, and stars
(2:10-12), and fills the "heaven and earth, the sea and abysses and all the ages" with his
glory (2:20).He
is the one who is "carrying the whole world under" his arm, "yet not being borne by
anyone" (2:9). He made the skies, set the order of movements for the sun, moon, and stars
(2:10-12), and fills the "heaven and earth, the sea and abysses and all the ages" with his
glory (2:20). Yet, it is not clear that Jewish monotheism is emphasized in the Ladder; the
existence of other gods is not denied and often it seems that the God of Adam, Abraham,
Isaac (2:6), and Jacob (passim) is the God of gods; note 2:22, "you are a god who is
mighty, powerful and glorious, a god who is holy; my Lord and Lord of my fathers."
Likewise, thoroughgoing monotheism seems to be foreign to the Ladder, since Falkon raises
"the wrath of the God of gods by his pride" (6:13). Angels, of course, play a prominent role in the Ladder. They ascend and descend, which
is a characteristic of traditions related to Jacob (cf. Gen 28:12b; Jn 1:51); elsewhere the
emphasis is upon angels descending and then ascending. The archangel Sariel, who is also
mentioned in the Qumran Scrolls, Aramaic Enoch, and the Neofiti Targum,10 is said to be
the one who is in charge of dreams (3:2); hence, he is the one who is dispatched to Jacob
in order to explain to him the meaning of his dream. 'Specifically, vss. lOf. = Aphr 15.9f.; 12b+13a = 14.2; 14 = 15.16+19; 15f. = 18.8-10; vs. 17 expresses
ideas of Aphr 13.4-7; 18f. is a general summary with reference to Aphr 15.10; 20 = 14.11-16; 21 is from another
source; vs. 22 has the idea of 15.1 plus words of 13.19, while vss. 23-25 = 15.1-3. Some further details are
mentioned in the nn. to the translation. 7 Since the Christmas liturgy associates Balaam's prophecy with the Magi and the Nativity, these same themes were
sometimes interwoven in Christmas sermons, as early as Basil the Great. A particularly striking parallel for our ch. 7 is a sermon of John of Damascus (inc.A 13th-cent. Serbian Slavonic fragment published by V. Makusev
(Russkij fiiotogideskij vestnik 7 [1882] 9-12) breaks off at 15.1. The full text, with a long interpolation not mentioned
by Bratke, was published from a 1740 Serbian Slavonic MS by Stojan Novakovic" (Starine 10 [1878] 72-80).

A particularly striking parallel for our ch. 7 is a sermon of John of Damascus (inc. Hopotan to ear eiselthe), where Balaam's prophecy is cited just before a
long passage taken literally from Aphr (cf. Bratke, Das sogenannte Religionsgesprdch, p. 92, and Stegolev, Izvestija
Otdelenija, vol. 4 [1899] 195f.; both attribute the sermon to John of Euboea). We lack evidence that this work was
translated into Slavonic in the early period, however, but surely the Slavs knew some of the earlier sermons of this
type. 8 The Slavs may well have known another traditional connection which is echoed in Theodore of Studios' apostrophe
of the Theotokos as the 'Madder, fixed on the earth, to heaven" by which the Lord descended "to the great patriarch
Jacob." ('in dormitionem Deiparae," in Migne, PG, vol. 99, col. 725B.)
9The remainder of the introduction and nn. is by J. H. Charlesworth, in consultation with Lunt and Rubinkiewicz. 10 Cf. 1QM 9.12-15, 4QEnb (cf. 4QEna), and Noef. Gen 32:25-32 (viz. "And Jacob was left alone; and the angel
Sariel wrestled with him in the likeness of a man . . ."). G. Vermes argues that Sariel appears as one of the four
chief angels (along with Michael, Raphael, and Gabriel) through reflections upon the Jacob saga; cf. his "The
Archangel Sariel: A Targumic Parallel to the Dead Sea Scrolls," in Christianity, Judaism and Other Greco-Roman
Cults, ed. J. Neusner (SJLA 12; Leiden, 1975) part 3, pp. 159-66. Also cf. J. T. Milik, ed., with M. Black, The
Books of Enoch: Aramaic Fragments of Qumrdn Cave 4 (Oxford, 1976) pp. 170-74. It is significant for the dating
of the traditions in LadJac to observe that Sariel, who is later replaced by Ouriel (cf. IEn 9:1) as one of the four
archangels, is linked with traditions that are clearly pre-A.D. 70 and Palestinian.As in some of the other pseudepigrapha, the voice has ceased to be something heard and
has become a hypostatic creature. In 2:2, we have the familiar concept of a voice; but in
3:1, we hear that4 *a voice came before my face" and, although he appears to be speaking
to Jacob, he actually addresses words to Sariel. A hypostatic voice also appears in the
Apocalypse of Abraham, chapter 9, and tells Abraham to sacrifice. In the History of the
Rechabites, a voice comes to an individual (2:7) and even speaks to the traveler (3:1). The concept of a hypostatic voice appears also in the Apocalypse of Sedrach and some of
the apocalypses preserved in the Mani Codex.11
In contrast to the Treatise of Shem (contained herein), there appear to be anti-astrological
overtones in at least two passages. In 2:12, it is stated that the sun is controlled by God
"so that it might not seem a god" and similarly in 2:14 it is said that the stars are controlled
by God "to pass on so that they too might not seem gods."
Running throughout the six chapters in an unorganized fashion—reflecting the fragmentary
nature of the text—12 appears to be an apocalyptic vision of the future. First, the descendants
of Jacob will suffer desolation and exile (5:7; 6:2). Because of the sins of Jacob's descendants
(5:7), they "shall be exiled in a strange land" and be afflicted with slavery and wounds
every day (5:16). Second, his descendants will be freed by God (6:2), because angels (6:6)
and finally God (6:9) will fight for Jacob's tribe (cf. 1QM). Finally, at the end of time,
Jacob's descendants will inherit the land promised to him (1:9) and become as many "as
the stars of heaven and the sand of the sea" (1:10). The future will indeed be glorious
according to God's own words to Jacob: "And through your seed all the earth and those
living on it in the last times of the years of completion shall be blessed" (1:11). SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 130f. Denis, Introduction, pp. 34f. Bonwetsch, N.A particularly striking parallel for our ch. 7 is a sermon of John of Damascus (inc. Hopotan to ear eiselthe), where Balaam's prophecy is cited just before a
long passage taken literally from Aphr (cf. Bratke, Das sogenannte Religionsgesprdch, p. 92, and Stegolev, Izvestija
Otdelenija, vol. 4 [1899] 195f.; both attribute the sermon to John of Euboea). We lack evidence that this work was
translated into Slavonic in the early period, however, but surely the Slavs knew some of the earlier sermons of this
type. 8 The Slavs may well have known another traditional connection which is echoed in Theodore of Studios' apostrophe
of the Theotokos as the 'Madder, fixed on the earth, to heaven" by which the Lord descended "to the great patriarch
Jacob." ('in dormitionem Deiparae," in Migne, PG, vol. 99, col. 725B.)
9The remainder of the introduction and nn. is by J. H. Charlesworth, in consultation with Lunt and Rubinkiewicz. 10 Cf. 1QM 9.12-15, 4QEnb (cf. 4QEna), and Noef. Gen 32:25-32 (viz. "And Jacob was left alone; and the angel
Sariel wrestled with him in the likeness of a man . . ."). G. Vermes argues that Sariel appears as one of the four
chief angels (along with Michael, Raphael, and Gabriel) through reflections upon the Jacob saga; cf. his "The
Archangel Sariel: A Targumic Parallel to the Dead Sea Scrolls," in Christianity, Judaism and Other Greco-Roman
Cults, ed. J. Neusner (SJLA 12; Leiden, 1975) part 3, pp. 159-66. Also cf. J. T. Milik, ed., with M. Black, The
Books of Enoch: Aramaic Fragments of Qumrdn Cave 4 (Oxford, 1976) pp. 170-74. It is significant for the dating
of the traditions in LadJac to observe that Sariel, who is later replaced by Ouriel (cf. IEn 9:1) as one of the four
archangels, is linked with traditions that are clearly pre-A.D. 70 and Palestinian.

34f. Bonwetsch, N. "Die Apokryphe 'Leiter Jakobs,'" Gottinger Nachrichten, philol.-histor. Klasse (1900) 76-87. (German translation of the LadJac.)
Bratke, E. Das sogenannte Religionsgesprdch am H of der Sasaniden. TU N.F. 4.3a (1899)
pp. 101-6. (A study of ch. 7 of LadJac.)
James, M. R. "Ladder of Jacob," The Lost Apocrypha of the Old Testament. TED; London,
New York, 1920; pp. 96-103. (A brief summary and comments on LadJac.)
Scegolev, P. E. "Ocerki istorii otrecennoj literatury: Skazanie Afroditiana," Izvestija
Otdelenija russkogo jazyka i slovesnosti, Imp. Akademija Nauk, vol. 4 (1899) 148-
99, 1304-44. Vassiliev, Athanasius. Anecdota Graeco-Byzantina. Moscow, 1893; vol. 1, pp. xxix-xxxii. (Summary, Lat. version of LadJac 7, and the Palaia's commentary.)
11 See the discussions in the contributions herein on ApAb 9, HistRech 3:1, ApSedr 2:1-4; also cf. TJob 3:1, "a
loud voice came to me in a very bright light saying, Jobab, Jobab"; and 3Bar 11:5, "And behold a voice came: 'Let
the gate be opened' " (Gk., cf. Slav.). 12 Perhaps the Slavs deleted portions of an earlier longer document; certainly there were ideas in Early Judaism that
would have been offensive or confusing to the medieval Slavs.THE LADDER OF JACOB
1
1,2 Jacob then went to Laban his uncle. *He found a place and, laying his head Gen 28:11-12a
3 on a stone, he slept there, for the sun had gone down. •He had a dream.8 And
4 behold, a ladder was fixed on the earth, whose top reached to heaven. *And the
5 top of the ladder was the faceb as of a man, carved out of fire. •There were twelve
steps leading to the top of the ladder, and on each step to the top there were two
human faces, on the right and on the left, twenty-four faces (or busts) including
6 their chests. •And the face in the middle was higher than all that I saw, the one
of fire, including the shoulders and arms, exceedingly terrifying, more than those
7 twenty-four faces. • And while I was still looking at it, behold, angels of God Gen 28:12b
8 ascended and descended on it.c #And God was standing above its highest face,
and he called to me from there, saying, "Jacob, Jacob!" And I said, "Here I
9 am, LORD!" #And he said to me, "The land on which you are sleeping, to you Gen28:i3f. 10 will I give it, and to your seed after you. »And I will multiply your seed as the
11 stars of heaven and the sand of the sea. *And through your seed all the earth and
those living on it in the last times of the years of completion shall be blessed. 12 My blessing with which I have blessed you shall flow from you unto the last
generation; the East and the West all shall be full of your tribe."
1,2 2 And when I heard (this) from on high, awe and trembling fell upon me. *And
3 I rose up from my dream and, the voice still being in my ears, I said,8 *"How Gen 28:17-19
fearful is this place! This is none other than the house of God and this is the gate
4 of heaven." »And I set up the stone which had been my pillow as a pillar, and I
poured olive oil on the top of it, and I called the name of that place the House of
5 God.*And
3 I rose up from my dream and, the voice still being in my ears, I said,8 *"How Gen 28:17-19
fearful is this place! This is none other than the house of God and this is the gate
4 of heaven." »And I set up the stone which had been my pillow as a pillar, and I
poured olive oil on the top of it, and I called the name of that place the House of
5 God. *And I stood and began to sing, and I said,
6 "LORD God of Adam your creature and
LORD God of Abraham and Isaac my fathers
and of all who have walked before you in justice! 1 a. We follow Tikhonravov in beginning LadJac with the beginning of Gen 28:13 in explicitly LXX
here, a decision supported, as far as we know, by form: "And the LORD was established on it." A
only one MS, V1. The preceding material in the short commentary on this phrase follows, then
Palaia tells of Esau's murderous anger and Rebec­ reference to the angels ascending (identified as the
ca's advice that Jacob flee to Laban. The wording gentiles) and descending (the Jews). This is the
is essentially Gen 27:41b-45, slightly altered in only interruption of the text up to 6:8. sequence; nothing remains of Gen 27:45-28:9. In
the oldest MSS of rec. B there is no hint of a 2 a. From here through 5:1 the text is preserved
subdivision here or nearby. Rec. A, however (with only in A. B has a poorly constructed condensation
two MSS of B), makes a break after "dream" in as follows:
vs. 3 and provides a heading: "Concerning the "LORD, Creator of all creation, and again LORD
Ladder." MS S has a miniature showing the God of Abraham and of Isaac my father, and God
sleeping Jacob and God appearing behind a craggy of all who have walked in justice before you. mountain but, oddly enough, no ladder. It is (Behold, I saw a terrible vision; trembling fell upon
probable, in view of the first-person narrative from me.) But remember, LORD, my forefather Abra­
vs.34f. Bonwetsch, N. "Die Apokryphe 'Leiter Jakobs,'" Gottinger Nachrichten, philol.-histor. Klasse (1900) 76-87. (German translation of the LadJac.)
Bratke, E. Das sogenannte Religionsgesprdch am H of der Sasaniden. TU N.F. 4.3a (1899)
pp. 101-6. (A study of ch. 7 of LadJac.)
James, M. R. "Ladder of Jacob," The Lost Apocrypha of the Old Testament. TED; London,
New York, 1920; pp. 96-103. (A brief summary and comments on LadJac.)
Scegolev, P. E. "Ocerki istorii otrecennoj literatury: Skazanie Afroditiana," Izvestija
Otdelenija russkogo jazyka i slovesnosti, Imp. Akademija Nauk, vol. 4 (1899) 148-
99, 1304-44. Vassiliev, Athanasius. Anecdota Graeco-Byzantina. Moscow, 1893; vol. 1, pp. xxix-xxxii. (Summary, Lat. version of LadJac 7, and the Palaia's commentary.)
11 See the discussions in the contributions herein on ApAb 9, HistRech 3:1, ApSedr 2:1-4; also cf. TJob 3:1, "a
loud voice came to me in a very bright light saying, Jobab, Jobab"; and 3Bar 11:5, "And behold a voice came: 'Let
the gate be opened' " (Gk., cf. Slav.). 12 Perhaps the Slavs deleted portions of an earlier longer document; certainly there were ideas in Early Judaism that
would have been offensive or confusing to the medieval Slavs.

mountain but, oddly enough, no ladder. It is (Behold, I saw a terrible vision; trembling fell upon
probable, in view of the first-person narrative from me.) But remember, LORD, my forefather Abra­
vs. 6 on, that LadJac originally began with Jacob's ham, how he walked before you in innocence, and
own account of events that brought him to this in all ways fulfilled your commandments. And also
place. my father, your servant Isaac, did not disobey your
b. Here and below surely prosdpon in the sense commandments. Therefore, LORD, look on me
of "bust" or "portrait." We retain the traditional mercifully, on your servant, and explain to me this
"ladder," although surely this is rather a solid vision, this terrible one I have seen." And while
staircase, lined with statues, as on a ziggurat. (Cf. the word and prayer were still in Jacob's mouth,
E. A. Speiser's comment on Gen 28:12 in his behold an angel of God stood before him, saying,
Genesis (The Anchor Bible; Garden City, N.Y., "Jacob, I have been sent to you by the Creator of
1964] p. 218.) all things to tell you of your dream. Put this
c. At this point there is an insertion, starting announcement of your dream in your heart."7 You who sit firmlyb on the cherubim and the fieryc throne of glory
. . . and the many-eyed (ones) just as I saw in my dream,
8 holding the four-faced cherubim,
bearing also the many-eyed seraphim,
9 carrying the whole worldd under your arm,
yet not being borne by anyone;
10 you who have made the skies firm for the glory of your name,
n stretching out on two heavenly clouds the heaven which gleams under you,
12 that beneath it you may cause the sun to course and conceal it during the cf. ApAb 7:8
night so that it might not seem a god;
13 (you) who made on themc a way for the moon and the stars;
14 and you make the moon wax and wane, and destine the stars to pass on
so that they too might not seem gods,
is Before the face of your glory the six-winged seraphim are afraid, and they isa 6:2
cover their feet and faces with their wings, while flying with their
other (wings), and they sing unceasingly a hymn:
16 4. . .f whom I now in sanctifying a new (song) ... n Twelve-topped,8 twelve-faced, many-named, fiery one! Lightning-eyed holy one! is Holy, Holy, Holy, Yao, Yaova, Yaoil, Yao, Prjac
Kados,h Chavod,' Savaoth,
19 OmlemlechJ il avirk amismi1 varich,m
eternal king, mighty, powerful, most great,
patient, blessed one!'
20 You who fill heaven and earth, the sea and abysses
and all the ages with your glory,
21 hear my song with which I have sung you and grant me the request I ask
of you,
22 and tell me the interpretation of my dream,
for you are a god who is mighty, powerful and glorious,
a god who is holy; my LORD and LORD of my fathers."
1 3 And while I was still saying this prayer, behold, a voice came before my face
2 saying, •"Sariel, leader of the beguiled,3 you who are in charge of dreams, go
and make Jacob understand the meaning of the dream he has had and explain to
3 him everything he saw; but first bless him." #And Sariel the archangel came to
4 me and I saw (him), and his appearance was very beautiful and awesome.Lightning-eyed holy one! is Holy, Holy, Holy, Yao, Yaova, Yaoil, Yao, Prjac
Kados,h Chavod,' Savaoth,
19 OmlemlechJ il avirk amismi1 varich,m
eternal king, mighty, powerful, most great,
patient, blessed one!'
20 You who fill heaven and earth, the sea and abysses
and all the ages with your glory,
21 hear my song with which I have sung you and grant me the request I ask
of you,
22 and tell me the interpretation of my dream,
for you are a god who is mighty, powerful and glorious,
a god who is holy; my LORD and LORD of my fathers."
1 3 And while I was still saying this prayer, behold, a voice came before my face
2 saying, •"Sariel, leader of the beguiled,3 you who are in charge of dreams, go
and make Jacob understand the meaning of the dream he has had and explain to
3 him everything he saw; but first bless him." #And Sariel the archangel came to
4 me and I saw (him), and his appearance was very beautiful and awesome. »But I
was not astonished by his appearance, for the vision which I had seen in my
5 dream was more terrible than he. *And I did not fear the vision of the angel. 1.2,3 4 And the angel said to me, "What is your name?" #And 1 said, "Jacob." »(He
announced), "Your name shall no longer be called Jacob, but your name shall be
b. Slav, kripci; perhaps better read kripde, 440 h. Heb. qdddS, "holy."
Mighty One, sitting (who sittest)." i. All copies written with an abbreviation mark
c. The text is corrupt at this point. In the phrase obviously understood by scribes as xrista vod,
na pristoli slavy ogneni, the last word may be "Christ of the waters." Surely Heb. kdvod, "Glory"
locative and an epithet of "throne," as translated, in the sense of a "theophanic cloud."
but it could be a banal error for ognlne, a vocative j. Probably distorted Heb. melek, "king," per­
("0 fiery one!") which introduces a new invoca­ haps plus cdldm. tion, cf. vs. 17 below and ApAb 17:19. At least a k. For Heb. '£/ 'abir, "LORD-BUII; mighty
few words must have been omitted at this point.mountain but, oddly enough, no ladder. It is (Behold, I saw a terrible vision; trembling fell upon
probable, in view of the first-person narrative from me.) But remember, LORD, my forefather Abra­
vs. 6 on, that LadJac originally began with Jacob's ham, how he walked before you in innocence, and
own account of events that brought him to this in all ways fulfilled your commandments. And also
place. my father, your servant Isaac, did not disobey your
b. Here and below surely prosdpon in the sense commandments. Therefore, LORD, look on me
of "bust" or "portrait." We retain the traditional mercifully, on your servant, and explain to me this
"ladder," although surely this is rather a solid vision, this terrible one I have seen." And while
staircase, lined with statues, as on a ziggurat. (Cf. the word and prayer were still in Jacob's mouth,
E. A. Speiser's comment on Gen 28:12 in his behold an angel of God stood before him, saying,
Genesis (The Anchor Bible; Garden City, N.Y., "Jacob, I have been sent to you by the Creator of
1964] p. 218.) all things to tell you of your dream. Put this
c. At this point there is an insertion, starting announcement of your dream in your heart."

For Heb. '£/ 'abir, "LORD-BUII; mighty
few words must have been omitted at this point. LORD."
d. Or "age"; Gk. aidn, Heb. cdldm. Grammar 1. Var. amimis. Probably contains Heb. 'amis,
obscure; possibly "the age of everything" or, "strong, firm, courageous."
assuming a lacuna, "the age of the whole . . ." m. Heb. bdr&k, "blessed."
e. Presumably the clouds. 3 a. Slav, uslaidaemyx, lit. "sweetened," but
f. Text corrupt. here surely forGk. katathelgo, "enchant, charm,"
g. Or "twelve-crested." or with negative sense 4'delude, deceive."4 similar to my name, IsraeLa,, #And when I was going from Phandana of Syria6
to meet Esau my brother, he came to me and blessed me and called me Israel. s.6 And he would not tell me his name until I adjured him. •And then he said to me,
"As you were kep zulc ..."
1 5 Thus he said to me: "You have seen a ladder with twelve steps, each step
2 having two human faces which kept changing their appearance. *The ladder is
3,4 this age, *and the twelve steps are the periods8 of this age. *But the twenty-four
5 faces are the kings of the ungodly nations of this age. •Under these kings the
children of your children and the generations of your sons will be interrogated. 6.7 These will rise up against the iniquity of your grandsons. *And this place will be
madeb desolate0 by the four ascentsd . . . through the sinsc of your grandsons. 8 And around the property of your forefathers a palace will be built, a temple in
9 the name of your God and of (the God) of your fathers, »and in the provocations
10 of your children it will become desertedf by the four ascents8 of this age. •For
11 you saw the first four bustsh which were striking against the steps . . . • angels*
12 ascending and descending, and the busts amid the steps. *The Most High will
raise up kings from the grandsons of your brother Esau, and they will receive all
13 the nobles of the tribes of the earth who will have maltreated your seed. *And
14 they will be delivered into his hands and he will be vexedj by them. • And he will
hold them by force and rule over them, and they will not be able to oppose him
until the day when his thought will go out against them to serve idols and (to
15 offer) sacrifices of the dead.k •. . . (He will) do violence to all those in his
kingdom who will be revealed in such guilt, both to the highest (man)1 from your
16 tribe and kfalkonagargailyuya.™ •Know, Jacob, that your descendants shall be
exiles in a strange" land, and they will afflict them with slavery and inflict wounds cf.. (He will) do violence to all those in his
kingdom who will be revealed in such guilt, both to the highest (man)1 from your
16 tribe and kfalkonagargailyuya.™ •Know, Jacob, that your descendants shall be
exiles in a strange" land, and they will afflict them with slavery and inflict wounds cf. Gen i5:i3f. 17 on them every day. »But the LORD will judge the people for whom they slave. 1.2 6 "aAnd when the king arises, judgment too will come upon that place. •Then
your seed, Israel, will go out of slavery8 to the nations who hold them by force,
4 a. Heb. sry-'l, "Sariel," with transposition of "before the fourth ascent"; cf. ApAb 28:5, in
one letter is ysr-'l, "Israel." which this term seems to denote a period. b. This same form, clearly representing Padan h. The text is corrupt; possibly "you saw the
Aram (Aram = "of Syria"), is found in ApAb four faces first when they were striking" (or
2:3. "hitting"). The sense of the latter verb is obscure. c. R U kop zul. Presumably more detailed dis­ i. B omits the vs. In A, "angels" is nominative,
cussion of the angel's name has been deleted here. but the accompanying participles are accusative. The "busts" or "faces" are either nominative or
accusative. 5 a. Slav, vrimena, probably Gk. kairoi. j. Slav, negodujem, a passive participle, though
b. Vs. corrupt. A has singular transitive "he the verb is always intransitive elsewhere. will make," B plural "they will make"; neither k. A has no verb, but the genitive "of the dead"
subject is clear. with no clear context. B has "that they may sacrifice
c. Or "empty." to the dead" with appropriate dative. Neither rec. d. Positing instrumental plural vusxody; the ma­ has a clear connection to the following "do vio­
jority reading is sxody, "descents." The word lence"; there must be something missing. means "going up" in various senses, including 1. A (with U) vySunemu; S R an incongruous
"stairway," and its exact meaning here, in vs. 9 vySlnem. below, and in ApAb 27:3 and 28:4f.For Heb. '£/ 'abir, "LORD-BUII; mighty
few words must have been omitted at this point. LORD."
d. Or "age"; Gk. aidn, Heb. cdldm. Grammar 1. Var. amimis. Probably contains Heb. 'amis,
obscure; possibly "the age of everything" or, "strong, firm, courageous."
assuming a lacuna, "the age of the whole . . ." m. Heb. bdr&k, "blessed."
e. Presumably the clouds. 3 a. Slav, uslaidaemyx, lit. "sweetened," but
f. Text corrupt. here surely forGk. katathelgo, "enchant, charm,"
g. Or "twelve-crested." or with negative sense 4'delude, deceive."

9 vySlnem. below, and in ApAb 27:3 and 28:4f. is obscure. It m. S R; U, with rec. A, omits final -ya but
is used in an early version of Ezek 9:3 to render starts next vs. with the conjunction a, "and, but."
the Gk. aithrion, referring to the threshold of the A omits initial k, probably equating it with the
Temple. If this is the sense, F. M. Cross, Jr., preposition "to," deemed inappropriate in the
suggests it may be taken as a boundary: To enter context. Meaning possibly "crooked tempter," i.e. the Holy of Holies one must cross four thresholds Satan. or make four "ascents," while in leaving it would n. Note that the wording of this vs. is not quite
be four "descents." Cf. Ezek 10:4,18f. and 1 l:22f. that of Gen, either in Heb. or Gk. for the descent or abandonment and chs. 42-48 for
the ascent or return. 6 a. This is the text of A, where it follows 5:17. e. Instrumental plural in S, nominative or ac­ In B and in the repetition found embedded in the
cusative singular or else genitive plural elsewhere. commentary, 5:17 is followed by 6:5, and the text
f. Slav, zapustiet, intransitive. of lf. is slightly different: "Then the Most High
g. Reading vusxody and interpreting it as instru­ will give judgment to that place, and he will lead
mental. Yet do sxod is possible, and might mean your seed out of slavery."3 and they will be free from any rebuke of your enemies. #For this king is the head
of all revenge and retaliation1" against those who have done evil to you, Israel,
4 and the end of the age. •For bitter ones will rise;c they will cry out, and the LORD
s will hear them and accept their plea. *And the Mighty One will repent because
6 of their sufferings. *For the angels and archangels will hurl their bolts of lightning
7 before them for the sake of the salvation of your tribe. *And you will gain the
8.9 mercy of the Most High. •Then their wives will bear many children. »And
afterward the LORD will fight for your tribed through great and terrible signs
10 against those who made them slaves. *He filled their storehouses, and they will
11 be found empty. •Their land swarmed with reptiles and all sorts of deadly things. i2,i3 There will be earthquakes and much destruction. »And the LORD will pour out his
wrath against Leviathan the sea-dragon; he will kill the lawless Falkon with the
14 sword, because he will raise the wrath of the God of gods by his pride. *And
then your justice will be revealed, Jacob, and that of your children6 who are to
15 be after you (and) who will walk in your justice. »And then your seed will sound
the horn and all the kingdom of Edom will perish together with all the peoples of
Moab. * * *
i,2 7 "And as for the angels you saw descending and ascending the ladder,8 •in the
last years there will be a man from the Most High, and he will desire to join the
3 upper (things) with the lower. «And before his coming your sons and daughters
4 will tell about him and your young men will have visions about him. •Such will
5,6 be the signs at the time of his coming: »A tree cut with an ax will bleed; •three-
7 month-old babes will speak understanding; *a baby in the womb of his mother
8,9 will speak of his way; *a youth will be like an old man.«And before his coming your sons and daughters
4 will tell about him and your young men will have visions about him. •Such will
5,6 be the signs at the time of his coming: »A tree cut with an ax will bleed; •three-
7 month-old babes will speak understanding; *a baby in the womb of his mother
8,9 will speak of his way; *a youth will be like an old man. *And then the expected
one will come, whose pathb will not be noticed by anyone,
lo.ii "Then the earth will be glorified, receiving heavenly glory. »What was above
12,13 will be below also.c #And from your seed will bloom a root of kings; #it will
14 emerge*1 and overthrow the power of evil. »And he himself will be the Savior for
every land and rest for those who toil, and a cloud shading the whole world from
i5,i6 the burning heat. «For otherwise the uncontrolled6 will not be controlled. »If he
17 does not come/ the lower (things) cannot be joined with the upper. *At his coming
the idols of brass, stone, and any sort of carving will give voice for three days.8
is They will give wise men news of him and let them know what will be on earth. 19 By a star, those who wish to see on earth him whom the angels do not see above
20 will find the way to him. -Then the Almighty will be on earth in body, and,
b. Not congruous with "vengeance," though repeated in the commentary. Note that, unlike Gen
the error is minor. Perhaps, however, the sense is 28:12, descending comes first. This surely sym­
"and yours is the vengeance of those who have bolizes Christ's descent to earth, introducing the
done evil to Israel." idea of incarnation, which clearly is the theme of
c. Slav, gorci bo vstanutl, A; B gorci vstaneti the ch. na nja, "bitterly will (he) rise against them." In b. B "whose path you are: he."
the commentary the subject "Pharaoh" is added. c. Aphr 15.10 negates the first clause: "What
d. From this point through the end of the ch. was not above was below." Note that the past
the text in both recs.9 vySlnem. below, and in ApAb 27:3 and 28:4f. is obscure. It m. S R; U, with rec. A, omits final -ya but
is used in an early version of Ezek 9:3 to render starts next vs. with the conjunction a, "and, but."
the Gk. aithrion, referring to the threshold of the A omits initial k, probably equating it with the
Temple. If this is the sense, F. M. Cross, Jr., preposition "to," deemed inappropriate in the
suggests it may be taken as a boundary: To enter context. Meaning possibly "crooked tempter," i.e. the Holy of Holies one must cross four thresholds Satan. or make four "ascents," while in leaving it would n. Note that the wording of this vs. is not quite
be four "descents." Cf. Ezek 10:4,18f. and 1 l:22f. that of Gen, either in Heb. or Gk. for the descent or abandonment and chs. 42-48 for
the ascent or return. 6 a. This is the text of A, where it follows 5:17. e. Instrumental plural in S, nominative or ac­ In B and in the repetition found embedded in the
cusative singular or else genitive plural elsewhere. commentary, 5:17 is followed by 6:5, and the text
f. Slav, zapustiet, intransitive. of lf. is slightly different: "Then the Most High
g. Reading vusxody and interpreting it as instru­ will give judgment to that place, and he will lead
mental. Yet do sxod is possible, and might mean your seed out of slavery."

From this point through the end of the ch. was not above was below." Note that the past
the text in both recs. is embedded in commentary; statements of Aphr are converted to the prophetic
it may have undergone special editing. future here. e. A ditei; B has did, "grandfathers," and d. Or "raise its head"; Aphr 14.2 riza entheos
modifies the following phrase slightly. kai basilike anekypsen. e. In A the text is garbled, and in B the majority
7 a. Ch. 7, which comprises about one third of have positive ustrojenaja instead of neustrojenaja
LadJac, was compiled by a Slav as part of the anti- (= Aphr ta adioiketa, "the [things which are] not
Jewish commentary of the Palaia; apparently his administered, managed"). The Slav, could mean
principal source was the Slavonic version of the "the unordered (things)."
Tale of Aphroditianus. Presently it is not clear f. Reading pridet, against majority priSel, "if
whether ch. 7 was intended as an addition to LadJac he had not come," which fits the commentary (and
or was written originally as a separate polemical Aphr) but not the appropriate reference to future
exercise. Syntactically this vs. is not properly events. connected with either the preceding or the follow­ g. Aphr has the talking idols, but no three-day
ing. Cf. 5:11. In A the text is embedded in period is mentioned. commentary, but in B it is separate and then21 embraced by corporeal arms, he will restore human matter.h *And he will revive
22 Eve, who died by the fruit of the tree. •Then the deceit of the impious will be
23 exposed and all the idols will fall face down. *For they will be put to shame by
24 a dignitary. 1 #For because (they were) lying by means of hallucinations, henceforth
25 they will not be able to rule or to prophesy. • Honor will be taken from them and
they will remain without glory J
26 "For he who comes will take power and might and will givek Abraham the
27 truth which he previously told him. •Everything sharp he will make dull, and the
28 rough will be smooth. *And he will cast all the iniquitous into the depths of the cf. Micah r.\
29,30 sea. *He will work wonders in heaven and on earth. *And he will be wounded in cf. zech
31 the midst of his beloved house.1 »And when he is wounded, then salvation will ,3:6LXX
32 be ready, and the end to all perdition. #For those who have wounded him will
33 themselves receive a woundm which will not be cured in them forever. #And all
34 creation will bow to him who was wounded, and many will trust in him. *And
he will become known everywhere in all lands, and those who acknowledge his
35 name will not be ashamed. #His own dominion and years will be unending ps 102:27
forever."
V
h. Slav, ponovit veStl clov&tlsku; cf. Aphr pon- "by an office-holding [or "active"] person."
avljajetl cloviCliu veSft, an extremely free render­ j. This is the end of the material from Aphr.
ing of Gk. tina gennousa anthrdpon, "who bore a k. Or "give back to."
man," which refers to Mary. VeSft has a broad I. Or "the house of his beloved," which cor­
range of meaning, from "thing, matter" (Gk. responds to the Alexandrine text of LXX.
pragma, stoicheion) to "nature" (Gk.physis). The m. Two MSS have paguba, either "ruin, per­
author of LadJac 7 combines phrases from his dition" (Gk. apdleia, (kata)phthora) as in 30, or
sources with little regard to their original usage. else "pestilence" (Gk. loimos); this may have
i. Slav, ot sanovita lica, lit. "by a dignity- established a connection between the two vss. in
endowed face"; Aphr hyper empraktou prosdpou, the original Slav, compilation.4 BARUCH
(First to Second Centuries A.D.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY S. E. ROBINSON
This pseudepigraphon, attributed to Baruch the scribe in the Ethiopic version but to Jeremiah
the prophet in the Greek, deals with certain events between the destruction of Jerusalem by
the Babylonians and the stoning of Jeremiah. On the eve of Jerusalem's destruction, the
LORD warns Jeremiah of the impending disaster and instructs him to leave the city and to
take Baruch with him. The LORD further instructs Jeremiah to take the vessels of the Temple
service and "deliver them to the earth," by which they will be guarded. Jeremiah asks
what favor he can do at this critical time for Abimelech in return for the latter's faithful
service, and the LORD instructs him to send Abimelech out of the city on a pretext and
promises that he will be preserved. The LORD further directs Jeremiah to go with the people
into captivity, but Baruch is to remain behind in Jerusalem. In the morning, before the Babylonians arrive, Jeremiah sends Abimelech out of the city,
ostensibly to gather figs for the sick at the farm of Agrippa. In Abimelech's absence, the
Babylonians conquer the city and lead the people off. Jeremiah commits the keys of the
Temple to the care of the sun and is carried off with the people. In Baruch's lament for the
city, he insists that Jerusalem could not have been taken were it not for the wickedness of
its inhabitants, which led the LORD to abandon them. Baruch also affirms that God will
eventually bring his people back, and then he retires to live in a tomb, where the angels of
God come often to converse with him. In the meantime, Abimelech, who has collected his basket of figs, stops in the heat of
the day to rest under a tree and sleeps for sixty-six years. Both he and his figs are
miraculously preserved by the LORD; when he wakes up, he even complains about the
brevity of his nap.21 embraced by corporeal arms, he will restore human matter.h *And he will revive
22 Eve, who died by the fruit of the tree. •Then the deceit of the impious will be
23 exposed and all the idols will fall face down. *For they will be put to shame by
24 a dignitary. 1 #For because (they were) lying by means of hallucinations, henceforth
25 they will not be able to rule or to prophesy. • Honor will be taken from them and
they will remain without glory J
26 "For he who comes will take power and might and will givek Abraham the
27 truth which he previously told him. •Everything sharp he will make dull, and the
28 rough will be smooth. *And he will cast all the iniquitous into the depths of the cf. Micah r.\
29,30 sea. *He will work wonders in heaven and on earth. *And he will be wounded in cf. zech
31 the midst of his beloved house.1 »And when he is wounded, then salvation will ,3:6LXX
32 be ready, and the end to all perdition. #For those who have wounded him will
33 themselves receive a woundm which will not be cured in them forever. #And all
34 creation will bow to him who was wounded, and many will trust in him. *And
he will become known everywhere in all lands, and those who acknowledge his
35 name will not be ashamed. #His own dominion and years will be unending ps 102:27
forever."
V
h. Slav, ponovit veStl clov&tlsku; cf. Aphr pon- "by an office-holding [or "active"] person."
avljajetl cloviCliu veSft, an extremely free render­ j. This is the end of the material from Aphr.
ing of Gk. tina gennousa anthrdpon, "who bore a k. Or "give back to."
man," which refers to Mary. VeSft has a broad I. Or "the house of his beloved," which cor­
range of meaning, from "thing, matter" (Gk. responds to the Alexandrine text of LXX.
pragma, stoicheion) to "nature" (Gk.physis). The m. Two MSS have paguba, either "ruin, per­
author of LadJac 7 combines phrases from his dition" (Gk. apdleia, (kata)phthora) as in 30, or
sources with little regard to their original usage. else "pestilence" (Gk. loimos); this may have
i. Slav, ot sanovita lica, lit. "by a dignity- established a connection between the two vss. in
endowed face"; Aphr hyper empraktou prosdpou, the original Slav, compilation.

In the meantime, Abimelech, who has collected his basket of figs, stops in the heat of
the day to rest under a tree and sleeps for sixty-six years. Both he and his figs are
miraculously preserved by the LORD; when he wakes up, he even complains about the
brevity of his nap. Returning to Jerusalem, he is totally disoriented until an old man solves
the riddle and is able to convince Abimelech of what has happened. An angel then leads
him to Baruch. Baruch interprets the awakening of Abimelech as proof of the resurrection of the dead
individually and also as an indication that God is about to restore his people collectively. He informs Jeremiah of what has happened in a letter, which is delivered by an eagle
miraculously provided for that purpose, and instructs Jeremiah to prepare the people for
their return by excluding gentiles from their company and by repudiating their Babylonian
spouses and children. At last the LORD brings his people back to Jerusalem, excluding those
who would not cast off their Babylonian relations. The latter eventually found Samaria. While celebrating the return in Jerusalem, Jeremiah has a vision and prophesies the coming
of Jesus Christ, for which he is stoned to death by the people. Text
Both long and short forms of 4 Baruch are preserved in a relatively large number of
manuscripts. So far, Greek witnesses for the long form total twenty-three manuscripts, and
4 Baruch is found in Ethiopic, Armenian, Old Church Slavonic, and Romanian versions,
besides the Greek. The translation below is taken from the provisional, eclectic text of thelong form of 4 Baruch edited by R. A. Kraft and A.-E. Purintun,1 which improves upon
the text published by J. R. Harris in 18892 by consulting more Greek manuscripts and by
adding the evidence of the Armenian and Slavonic versions to that of the Ethiopic employed
by Harris. The major Greek texts of 4 Baruch are A: Milan Brera AFIX 31 (15th cent.); B: Jerusalem
Taphos 34 (11th cent.); C: Jerusalem Taphos 6 (10th cent.); and P: Paris Greek Manuscript
1534 (11th cent.). Kraft and Purintun have an excellent summary of the textual witnesses,
to which the reader is referred.3
Original language
Several early scholars, particularly R. H. Charles and those influenced by him, maintained
that the original language of 4 Baruch was Greek.4 Since the time of Charles, however,
scholars have generally come to favor the hypothesis of a Semitic original for the work.5
The Greek text contains several elements that may be traces of such a Semitic original, and
a list of several such elements has been compiled by A.-E. Purintun.6 Among others, these
include the possible transliteration of Hebrew words (e.g. "God Zar" for "foreign God,"
7:29), intensive verbs (e.g. "to pray a prayer," 9:3, and "stone with stones," 9:22), the
possible use of the Greek ek for the Hebrew min (5:35 and 7:29), and the redundant use of
personal pronouns following a relative pronoun (e.g. "in whom all judgment was hidden
in him," 9:6).7
Date
The strongest bit of evidence for dating 4 Baruch is the mention of the vineyard or farm
of Agrippa (3:14, 21; 5:22), since it places the final Jewish redaction of the work after
Agrippa I gained control of Judea and Samaria, A.D. 41.8 It is probable that we should
understand the destruction of the city and Temple in chapters 1 through 4 to reflect the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, A.D. 70. It is unlikely that this can refer to the
second revolt (A.D.70. It is unlikely that this can refer to the
second revolt (A.D. 132-35), because the actual destruction of the Temple and the cessation
of the Temple service figure so prominently in the story. Consequently, the upper limit of
composition for the Jewish portion of the work may be found by adding the sixty-six years
of Abimelech's sleep (i.e. the maximum duration of exile expected by the author) to the
date of the destruction of the Temple, A.D. 70. This gives an upper limit of A.D. 136. Further, since the final Jewish redaction of 4 Baruch appears to have been harmonized with
2 Baruch, which was composed shortly before the end of the first century, we may conclude
that the Jewish portion of 4 Baruch was finished sometime roughly during the first third of
the second century A.D. and may have contributed to, or even been produced by, the
resurgent hope for a restoration of Jewish institutions that led ultimately to the second
revolt. Sometime thereafter, perhaps by the middle of the second century, the work was
redacted by a Christian who made at least one interpolation (6:25) and Christianized the
ending (8:12-9:32). 1 R. A. Kraft and A.-E. Purintun, Paraleipomena Jeremiou, pp. 12-48. [The present contribution had to be
reassigned; I am grateful to S. E. Robinson, who agreed to contribute this work on 4Bar even though only two
months could be allowed to complete the task. —J.H.C]
2 J. R. Harris, The Rest of the Words of Baruch, pp. 47-64. 3 Kraft and Purintun, Paraleipomena, pp. 3-5. See also P. Bogaert, Apocalypse de Baruch, pp. 179f. 4 R. H. Charles, APOT, vol. 2, pp. 133f. See also J.-B. Frey, "Apocryphes de Tancien testament," DBSup, vol. 1, p. 454. 5 E.g. A.-M. Denis, Introduction, p. 75; G. Delling, Jiidische Lehre und Frdmmigkeit in den Paralipomena
Jeremiae. p. 72. 6 A.-E. Purintun, Paraleipomena Jeremiou (Philadelphia, 1971) unnumbered. 7 Purintun, Paraleipomena, unnumbered. 8 See the discussion in Harris, The Rest, pp. 33f.In the meantime, Abimelech, who has collected his basket of figs, stops in the heat of
the day to rest under a tree and sleeps for sixty-six years. Both he and his figs are
miraculously preserved by the LORD; when he wakes up, he even complains about the
brevity of his nap. Returning to Jerusalem, he is totally disoriented until an old man solves
the riddle and is able to convince Abimelech of what has happened. An angel then leads
him to Baruch. Baruch interprets the awakening of Abimelech as proof of the resurrection of the dead
individually and also as an indication that God is about to restore his people collectively. He informs Jeremiah of what has happened in a letter, which is delivered by an eagle
miraculously provided for that purpose, and instructs Jeremiah to prepare the people for
their return by excluding gentiles from their company and by repudiating their Babylonian
spouses and children. At last the LORD brings his people back to Jerusalem, excluding those
who would not cast off their Babylonian relations. The latter eventually found Samaria. While celebrating the return in Jerusalem, Jeremiah has a vision and prophesies the coming
of Jesus Christ, for which he is stoned to death by the people. Text
Both long and short forms of 4 Baruch are preserved in a relatively large number of
manuscripts. So far, Greek witnesses for the long form total twenty-three manuscripts, and
4 Baruch is found in Ethiopic, Armenian, Old Church Slavonic, and Romanian versions,
besides the Greek. The translation below is taken from the provisional, eclectic text of the

8 See the discussion in Harris, The Rest, pp. 33f. Contrary to Harris, the mention of Agrippa cannot be used to
establish an upper limit for the date of 4Bar, since place-names can be extremely long-lived.Provenance
The references to the vineyard or farm of Agrippa (3:14, 21; 5:22) and the marketplace
of the gentiles (6:19) may indicate a Palestinian provenance for 4 Baruch. It may even have
been written in Jerusalem, as J. R. Harris suggested, since both allusions would seem to
betray a thorough familiarity with the environs of the holy city.9 However, it is not necessary
to press an identification of the vineyard of Agrippa or the marketplace of the gentiles with
any sites known from other sources.10 Moreover, one must bear in mind that a skillful
author could invent geographical details to give his fiction the ring of authenticity and that
even valid allusions to Jerusalem landmarks prove only that the author was familiar with
the city and not that his work was necessarily produced there. Nevertheless, in the absence
of any evidence for a different provenance, we are certainly justified in associating the place
of composition with the only geographical clues we have in the text, and tentatively suggest
that 4 Baruch was indeed written in Palestine, perhaps even in Jerusalem as Harris
maintained. An originally Jewish composition, 4 Baruch has been interpolated by a Christian and
provided with a Christian ending (8:12-9:32, esp. 9:14-32). The Jewish portion of the
document has more than one redactional level." Characteristic of the earlier level of Jewish
redaction is an emphasis on the figure of Jeremiah the prophet as the "chosen one" of the
LORD and as the LORD'S agent in dealing with Israel. If Baruch figures in the story at this
level, it is only as an auxiliary of Jeremiah. This is in harmony with the picture of these
events in canonical Jeremiah, 2 Maccabees 2:1-7, and The Lives of the Prophets. The later
level of redaction in the Jewish portion of the text is characterized by an emphasis on the
importance of Baruch the scribe. This complicated redactional history is responsible for the
fact that the work is known by two titles.The later
level of redaction in the Jewish portion of the text is characterized by an emphasis on the
importance of Baruch the scribe. This complicated redactional history is responsible for the
fact that the work is known by two titles. The Greek manuscripts title it "The Things
Omitted from Jeremiah the Prophet"; in the Ethiopic version it is titled "The Rest of the
Words of Baruch." In the final form of 4 Baruch, what begins as a revelation to the prophet
continues as a pronouncement of the scribe and ends with a prophecy about the Christ. This
sequence adequately reflects the redactional history of the work. Jeremiah, who completely
overshadows Baruch in chapters 1 through 4, is almost totally eclipsed by Baruch in chapters
7 and 8, in which the prophet must accept the mediation of the scribe between himself and
God. Moreover, we are told in 7:25-28 that God loved Baruch too much to let him suffer
the same fate as Jeremiah. G. Delling has already noted the strong Pharisaic flavor of 4
Baruch, and the shifting of importance from prophet to scribe is certainly in keeping with
the Pharisaic point of view.12
The final redaction of 4 Baruch was by a Christian, as the reference to Jesus Christ in
the last chapter (9:14) makes perfectly clear. Also, the description of the waters of the
Jordan as a test for the people (6:25) is an obvious Christian interpolation referring to
baptism, especially since there is no mention of a test by water when the people actually
do cross the Jordan (8:4-6).13 The Christian redactor employs some terms and phrases that
are similar to but not necessarily influenced by gnostic ideas, especially in chapters 6 and
9.8 See the discussion in Harris, The Rest, pp. 33f. Contrary to Harris, the mention of Agrippa cannot be used to
establish an upper limit for the date of 4Bar, since place-names can be extremely long-lived.

Delling has already noted the strong Pharisaic flavor of 4
Baruch, and the shifting of importance from prophet to scribe is certainly in keeping with
the Pharisaic point of view.12
The final redaction of 4 Baruch was by a Christian, as the reference to Jesus Christ in
the last chapter (9:14) makes perfectly clear. Also, the description of the waters of the
Jordan as a test for the people (6:25) is an obvious Christian interpolation referring to
baptism, especially since there is no mention of a test by water when the people actually
do cross the Jordan (8:4-6).13 The Christian redactor employs some terms and phrases that
are similar to but not necessarily influenced by gnostic ideas, especially in chapters 6 and
9. Some examples are "virgin faith" (6:7), "O great name which no one can know" (6:13),
"let knowledge come into our heart" (6:13), "the sign of the great seal" (6:25), and "Jesus
Christ the light of all the aeons" (9:14, 26).14 Also the passage at 9:16f., which describes
the rejection of the trees that "had sprouted" (the Jews) and the acceptance of those that
were previously "uncultivated," seems to reflect a Christianity that was already non-Jewish
in its own self-understanding. Historical importance
In 4 Baruch there is very little direct information about the period between A.D. 70 and
9 Harris, The Rest, pp. 12f. 10 A doubtful project pursued by Harris in The Rest, pp. 121., 32-35. 11 See O. Wintermute's review of G. Delling, Jiidische Lehre, in CBQ 30 (1968) 44f. 12 Delling, Jiidische Lehre, pp. 71f. 13 See Harris, The Rest, pp. 14f. 14 Wintermute, CBQ 30 (1968) 44f.136, yet the Jewish portions of the work offer an insight into the psychological response to
the destruction of the Temple in 70 and the eventual revival of hopes for a restoration of
Jewish institutions prior to 136. The document may, with its shift in emphasis from prophet
to scribe, reflect the increasing influence of the Pharisees after A.D. 70 (see "Provenance"). After the disastrous results of the second revolt (A.D. 132-35), a disillusioned Judaism
abandoned 4 Baruch altogether (along with most of its other apocalyptic literature) to be
preserved by Christians, who found it (for a while at least and with appropriate revisions)
a serviceable vehicle for validating Christian claims. It has been preserved to the present in
both Greek Orthodox and Ethiopian Christianity. Theological importance
The author of 4 Baruch insists that the holy vessels of the Temple cultus were miraculously
preserved from destruction by the Babylonians (Romans) and can therefore be restored when
God brings his people back from exile (3:8-11, 18f.; 4:4f.). Also, Jerusalem, according to
our author, could never have been destroyed if God had not abandoned it for its sins (4:7-
8). The conclusion to be drawn by the original audience was perhaps that if the Jews would
conform sufficiently to the will of God, as interpreted by the scribe,15 they could bring
about a restoration of the Temple cultus in an invincible Jewish state. We see here lingering
hope for and real anticipation of the restoration of the Temple and of the nation, which
continued until all hope was quenched in the second revolt. Also, the miraculous preservation of Abimelech and the figs is seen by the author as a
proof of the doctrine of the resurrection (6:6-10), and the ideas of personal and corporate
resurrection are closely linked.We see here lingering
hope for and real anticipation of the restoration of the Temple and of the nation, which
continued until all hope was quenched in the second revolt. Also, the miraculous preservation of Abimelech and the figs is seen by the author as a
proof of the doctrine of the resurrection (6:6-10), and the ideas of personal and corporate
resurrection are closely linked. A further connection between the doctrine of personal
resurrection and the restoration of Israel is found at 7:18, where the eagle raises a dead
man so that the people may believe God is about to restore the nation. The insistence on a
personal resurrection probably accounts for some of 4 Baruch's appeal to Christians, and
this doctrine is given further attention at 9:12-14, where Jeremiah's ecstatic faint is described
in terms reminiscent of the resurrection of Christ. Relation to canonical books
In 4 Baruch are described events found in the canonical books of Jeremiah, 2 Kings, 2
Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah. The book is intended by its Greek title to be understood
as an addition to the canonical Jeremiah. It agrees with its canonical antecedents concerning
the general facts of destruction and deportation but disagrees with them on the details. For
example, 4 Baruch represents Jeremiah and Baruch as leading the people back from Babylon,
but Jeremiah 43:6f. makes it clear that neither went to Babylon, but that they went instead
to Egypt.16 Neither Jeremiah nor Baruch is mentioned in the account of the return in Ezra-
Nehemiah, although a priest named Jeremiah may have been confused by the author of 4
Baruch with Jeremiah the prophet (Neh 10:2; 12:1, 12, 34). The description of the Samaritans
as Jews who intermarried with Babylonians during the exile is sharply contradicted by Ezra-
Nehemiah, according to which the Samaritans existed before the return, and by 2 Kings
17:24-41, which connects the origin of the Samaritans with the Assyrian conquest of the
Northern Kingdom.Delling has already noted the strong Pharisaic flavor of 4
Baruch, and the shifting of importance from prophet to scribe is certainly in keeping with
the Pharisaic point of view.12
The final redaction of 4 Baruch was by a Christian, as the reference to Jesus Christ in
the last chapter (9:14) makes perfectly clear. Also, the description of the waters of the
Jordan as a test for the people (6:25) is an obvious Christian interpolation referring to
baptism, especially since there is no mention of a test by water when the people actually
do cross the Jordan (8:4-6).13 The Christian redactor employs some terms and phrases that
are similar to but not necessarily influenced by gnostic ideas, especially in chapters 6 and
9. Some examples are "virgin faith" (6:7), "O great name which no one can know" (6:13),
"let knowledge come into our heart" (6:13), "the sign of the great seal" (6:25), and "Jesus
Christ the light of all the aeons" (9:14, 26).14 Also the passage at 9:16f., which describes
the rejection of the trees that "had sprouted" (the Jews) and the acceptance of those that
were previously "uncultivated," seems to reflect a Christianity that was already non-Jewish
in its own self-understanding. Historical importance
In 4 Baruch there is very little direct information about the period between A.D. 70 and
9 Harris, The Rest, pp. 12f. 10 A doubtful project pursued by Harris in The Rest, pp. 121., 32-35. 11 See O. Wintermute's review of G. Delling, Jiidische Lehre, in CBQ 30 (1968) 44f. 12 Delling, Jiidische Lehre, pp. 71f. 13 See Harris, The Rest, pp. 14f. 14 Wintermute, CBQ 30 (1968) 44f.

makes it clear that neither went to Babylon, but that they went instead
to Egypt.16 Neither Jeremiah nor Baruch is mentioned in the account of the return in Ezra-
Nehemiah, although a priest named Jeremiah may have been confused by the author of 4
Baruch with Jeremiah the prophet (Neh 10:2; 12:1, 12, 34). The description of the Samaritans
as Jews who intermarried with Babylonians during the exile is sharply contradicted by Ezra-
Nehemiah, according to which the Samaritans existed before the return, and by 2 Kings
17:24-41, which connects the origin of the Samaritans with the Assyrian conquest of the
Northern Kingdom. Relation to apocryphal books
It has often been claimed that 4 Baruch is dependent upon 2 Baruch, and in fact the two
works have many striking similarities.17 P. Bogaert has offered several reasons why 4 Baruch
should be considered to be dependent on 2 Baruch.18 Nevertheless, while it is probable that
the final form of 4 Baruch is later than and to a certain extent dependent upon 2 Baruch,
15 Jeremiah instructs the people to follow the directions of Baruch in these words: "Everything that you have heard
from the letter observe, and the LORD will lead us into our city" (7:23). 16 This is also stated in LivPro on Jeremiah. 17 These are listed by Bogaert, Apocalypse, pp. 186-92. 18 Bogaert, Apocalypse, pp. 192-221.the possibility should be allowed that the earlier level of redaction in 4 Baruch preserves a
more original form of the tradition and is not copied from 2 Baruch. This is seen most
clearly in chapter 1 of 4 Baruch, where Jeremiah the prophet receives the initial warning
of destruction. In 2 Baruch 2, the warning is very similar, but it is Baruch the scribe who
receives it. 4 Baruch tends to agree with canonical Jeremiah, 2 Maccabees 2:1-7, and The
Lives of the Prophets 2 that the prophet and not the scribe is the central character. Moreover,
in The Lives of the Prophets 2:11-19 and in 2 Maccabees 2:1-7, which must certainly be
dated long before 2 Baruch, it is Jeremiah who buries the Temple vessels (in agreement
with 4Bar 3) and not the anonymous angel of 2 Baruch 6:6-10.19 Concerning the traditions
of the fall of Jerusalem, 4 Baruch agrees with the earlier 2 Maccabees against 2 Baruch. Since the author of 2 Maccabees reports that this material was already found "in the
archives" (2:1, 4) in his day, it is likely that all four accounts (2Mac 2:1-7; 2Bar 1-10;
LivPro 2:11-19; 4Bar 1-4) are taken from a prior source, to which the earlier level of
redaction in 4 Baruch is more faithful, at least in some respects, than is 2 Baruch. Sometime
after the publication of 2 Baruch, a Anal Jewish redactor of 4 Baruch edited the latter to
bring it into harmony with the former. It was at this time that emphasis within the work
was shifted from Jeremiah to Baruch. In conclusion, it seems appropriate to offer a few speculative suggestions. A close
examination of the opening chapters of 4 Baruch reveals that the figure of Baruch is an
intrusion here, inserted perhaps by the later Jewish redactor to bring 4 Baruch into harmony
with 2 Baruch. For example, 1:10 ("So rise up and go to Baruch and tell him these words")
breaks up the sequence of the LORD'S instruction to Jeremiah in 1:9 and 11.A close
examination of the opening chapters of 4 Baruch reveals that the figure of Baruch is an
intrusion here, inserted perhaps by the later Jewish redactor to bring 4 Baruch into harmony
with 2 Baruch. For example, 1:10 ("So rise up and go to Baruch and tell him these words")
breaks up the sequence of the LORD'S instruction to Jeremiah in 1:9 and 11. The redactor
obviously intends 1:10 to complement 2:1a ("And Jeremiah ran and told these things to
Baruch"), but 2:1a is obviously an intrusion, since in 2:2-6, Baruch does not yet know
what has happened. The other two references to Baruch in chapter 1 are appositional (1:1,
8), and represent the simplest kind of editorial additions. Moreover, it is possible that the
subservient character in chapter 2 was originally not Baruch at all but Abimelech, since he,
and not Baruch, is in the habit of calling Jeremiah "father" (5:5, 22), since 2:5 suggests
that the unidentified character does menial labor ("let us not draw water for the troughs"),
and since the motif of Abimelech's being spared the sight of Jerusalem's destruction, which
is mentioned twice (3:13; 5:28), is later transferred to Baruch (7:25-27). Another possibility is that chapters 1 to 4, rather than reflecting an earlier redactional
level, constitute a separate Jeremiah source which was used by the author of 4 Baruch and
altered by him to harmonize with 2 Baruch. On this view, some of the tension within the
composition would be due not to separate redactional levels but to the use of incompatible
sources. Either way, the Jeremiah material of chapters 1 to 4 seems to be prior to the form
of the traditions in 2 Baruch and not dependent upon them except as it has been harmonized
with that document by the author or redactor. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 88-91. Delling, Bibliographie, p. 171. Denis, Introduction, pp. 70-78. Bogaert, P. Apocalypse de Baruch. Paris, 1969; pp. 177-221. Delling, G. Jiidische Lehre und Frommigkeit in den Paralipomena Jeremiae.makes it clear that neither went to Babylon, but that they went instead
to Egypt.16 Neither Jeremiah nor Baruch is mentioned in the account of the return in Ezra-
Nehemiah, although a priest named Jeremiah may have been confused by the author of 4
Baruch with Jeremiah the prophet (Neh 10:2; 12:1, 12, 34). The description of the Samaritans
as Jews who intermarried with Babylonians during the exile is sharply contradicted by Ezra-
Nehemiah, according to which the Samaritans existed before the return, and by 2 Kings
17:24-41, which connects the origin of the Samaritans with the Assyrian conquest of the
Northern Kingdom. Relation to apocryphal books
It has often been claimed that 4 Baruch is dependent upon 2 Baruch, and in fact the two
works have many striking similarities.17 P. Bogaert has offered several reasons why 4 Baruch
should be considered to be dependent on 2 Baruch.18 Nevertheless, while it is probable that
the final form of 4 Baruch is later than and to a certain extent dependent upon 2 Baruch,
15 Jeremiah instructs the people to follow the directions of Baruch in these words: "Everything that you have heard
from the letter observe, and the LORD will lead us into our city" (7:23). 16 This is also stated in LivPro on Jeremiah. 17 These are listed by Bogaert, Apocalypse, pp. 186-92. 18 Bogaert, Apocalypse, pp. 192-221.

Delling, G. Jiidische Lehre und Frommigkeit in den Paralipomena Jeremiae. Berlin, 1967. Harris, J. R. The Rest of the Words of Baruch. Cambridge, England, 1889. Kilpatrick, G. D. "Acts VII.52 ELEUSIS," JTS 46 (1945) 140-45. Kohler, K. "The Pre-Talmudic Haggada. B. The Second Baruch or Rather the Jeremiah
Apocalypse," JQR 5 (1893) 407-19. Kraft, R. A., and Purintun, A.-E. Paraleipomena Jeremiou. T&T 1, Pseudepigrapha Series
1; Missoula, Mont., 1972. 19 This is also true in the rabbinic literature; see for example b.Yoma 54.THE THINGS OMITTED FROM JEREMIAH THE
PROPHET8
1 1 It happened, when the children of Israel were taken captive by the king of the
Chaldeans, that God spoke to Jeremiah, saying, "Jeremiah, my chosen one, rise
up and get out of this city, you and Baruch, because I am going to destroy it for
2 the multitude of the sins of those who inhabit it. »For your prayers are like a firm
3 pillar in the middle of it, and like an unbreachable wall encircling it. #So now
4 rise up and get out before the host of the Chaldeans surrounds it." #And Jeremiah
answered, saying, "I implore you, LORD, allow me, your servant, to speak before
5,6 you." #And the LORD said to him, "Speak, my chosen one, Jeremiah." #And
Jeremiah spoke, saying, "LORD Almighty, are you delivering the chosen city into
the hands of the Chaldeans, so that the king may boast with the multitude of his
7 people and say, i prevailed over the holy city of God'? • (Surely) not, my LORD;
8 but if it is your will, let it be destroyed by your (own) hands." »And the LORD
said to Jeremiah, "Since you are my chosen one, rise up and get out of this city,
you and Baruch, because I am going to destroy it for the multitude of the sins of
9 those who inhabit it.b #For neither the king nor his host can come into it unless I
io.li first open its gates. »So rise up and go to Baruch and tell him these words. #And
rising up at the sixth hour of the night, get up on the wall of the city, and I will
12 show you that unless I first destroy the city, they cannot come into it." • After
saying these things, the LORD departed from Jeremiah. 1 2 And Jeremiah ran and told these things to Baruch, and as they came into the
Temple of God,a Jeremiah tore his garments and put dust on his head and went
2 into the sanctuary of God.#And
rising up at the sixth hour of the night, get up on the wall of the city, and I will
12 show you that unless I first destroy the city, they cannot come into it." • After
saying these things, the LORD departed from Jeremiah. 1 2 And Jeremiah ran and told these things to Baruch, and as they came into the
Temple of God,a Jeremiah tore his garments and put dust on his head and went
2 into the sanctuary of God. #And Baruch, seeing him (with) dust sprinkled on his
head and his garments torn, cried out in a loud voice, saying, "Father Jeremiah,
what is the matter with you, or what sort of sin have the people committed?"b
3 (He said this) because whenever the people sinned, Jeremiah sprinkled dust on
4 his head and would pray for the people until the sin was forgiven them. *And
(this is why) Baruch asked him, saying, "Father, what is the matter with you?"c
s And Jeremiah said to him, "Avoid the rending of your garments, but rather let
us rend our hearts; and let us not draw water for the troughs, but let us weep and
6 fill them with tears. For the LORD will not have mercy on this people." *And
7 Baruch said, "Father Jeremiah, what has happened?" •And Jeremiah said, "God
is delivering the city into the hands of the king of the Chaldeans, to take the
8 people captive into Babylon." #And when Baruch heard these things, he tore his
9 garments also and said, "Father Jeremiah, who revealed this to you?" *And
Jeremiah said to him, "Wait with me a little, until the sixth hour of the night,
10 that you may know that this word is true." »And so they both remained at the
altar weeping, and their garments were torn. 1 3 But when the hour of the night arrived, as the LORD had said to Jeremiah, they
2 went up together onto the walls of the city, Jeremiah and Baruch. #And behold,
there was a sound of trumpets, and angels came out of heaven holding torches in 2Bar6:i-4
1 a. This is the title given in the Gk. MSS; the by a redactor interested in enhancing the importance
Eth.Delling, G. Jiidische Lehre und Frommigkeit in den Paralipomena Jeremiae. Berlin, 1967. Harris, J. R. The Rest of the Words of Baruch. Cambridge, England, 1889. Kilpatrick, G. D. "Acts VII.52 ELEUSIS," JTS 46 (1945) 140-45. Kohler, K. "The Pre-Talmudic Haggada. B. The Second Baruch or Rather the Jeremiah
Apocalypse," JQR 5 (1893) 407-19. Kraft, R. A., and Purintun, A.-E. Paraleipomena Jeremiou. T&T 1, Pseudepigrapha Series
1; Missoula, Mont., 1972. 19 This is also true in the rabbinic literature; see for example b.Yoma 54.

This is the title given in the Gk. MSS; the by a redactor interested in enhancing the importance
Eth. version is entitled "The Rest of the Words of of Baruch. Baruch." b. Note Baruch's subservient status in the open­
b. Note that this is a doublet of 1:1b. ing chs., where Jeremiah is always addressed as
"Father."
2 a. MS C and the Eth. version omit "Jeremiah c. The majority of Gk. MSS read, "What is
ran . . . God." In light of 2:2-7 the omission is this?" The translation here follows the text of J. probably correct. The line may have been added R. Harris, The Rest of the Words of Baruch.3 their hands, and they stood on the walls of the city. *And when Jeremiah and
Baruch saw them, they wept, saying, "Now we know that the word is true."
4 And Jeremiah pleaded with the angels, saying, "I implore you not to destroy the 2Bar6:5f. s city just yet, until I have a word with the LORD." *And the LORD spoke to the
angels, saying, "Don't destroy the city until I speak to my chosen one, Jeremiah."
6j Then Jeremiah spoke, saying, "Please, LORD, let me speak before you." »And
8 the LORD said, "Speak, my chosen one, Jeremiah." »And Jeremiah said, "Behold,
LORD, we know now that you are delivering the city into the hands of its enemies,
9 and they will carry the people off into Babylon. •What do you want me to do 2Bar6:7-io
10 with the holy vessels of the (Temple) service?" #And the LORD said to him,
"Take them and deliver them to the earth, saying, 'Hear, earth, the voice of him
who created you, who formed you in the abundance of the waters, who sealed Rev 5:i
you with seven seals in seven periods (of time), and after these things you will
n receive your fruitful season.8 • Guard the vessels of the (Temple) service until the
12 comingb of the beloved one.' " »And Jeremiah spoke, saying, "I implore you,
LORD, show me what I should do for Abimelech the Ethiopian, for he did many
13 good deeds for your servant Jeremiah. «For he pulled me out of the muddy cistern, Jer 38:4-13
and I do not want him to see the destruction of this city and (its) desolation, but
14 that you may show him mercy and that he might not be grieved." #And the LORD
said to Jeremiah, "Send him to the vineyard of Agrippac and in the shadow of 3Bar i:3
15 the mountain I will shelter him until I return the people to the city. «But you,
Jeremiah, go with your people into Babylon and stay with them, preaching to 2Bar 10:1-3
16 them until I return them to the city.«For he pulled me out of the muddy cistern, Jer 38:4-13
and I do not want him to see the destruction of this city and (its) desolation, but
14 that you may show him mercy and that he might not be grieved." #And the LORD
said to Jeremiah, "Send him to the vineyard of Agrippac and in the shadow of 3Bar i:3
15 the mountain I will shelter him until I return the people to the city. «But you,
Jeremiah, go with your people into Babylon and stay with them, preaching to 2Bar 10:1-3
16 them until I return them to the city. #But leave Baruch here until 1 speak to him." Jer43:6f
17.18 After the LORD said these things, he went up from Jeremiah into heaven.d #But
Jeremiah and Baruch went into the sanctuary and, gathering up the vessels of the Jer 52:17-19
(Temple) service, they delivered them to the earth, just as the LORD had instructed IML6TA-%
19,20 them. #And immediately the earth swallowed them up. »And the two sat down LivPro
21 and wept. #And when it was morning, Jeremiah sent Abimelech away, saying,
"Take the basket and go out to the farm of Agrippa by the mountain road and
get a few figs to give to the sick among the people, for the delight of the LORD
22 (rests) upon you, and (his) glory upon your head." *And saying these things,
Jeremiah sent him away, and Abimelech went as he had been instructed. 1 4 And when it was morning, behold the host of the Chaldeans surrounded the
2 city. #And the great angel trumpeted, saying, "Come into the city, host of the 2Bar8:2
3 Chaldeans; for behold, the gate has been opened for you.1 4 And when it was morning, behold the host of the Chaldeans surrounded the
2 city. #And the great angel trumpeted, saying, "Come into the city, host of the 2Bar8:2
3 Chaldeans; for behold, the gate has been opened for you. •Therefore, let the king
4 come in with his multitude and take all the people captive." «But Jeremiah, taking
the keys of the Temple, went outside of the city and, facing the sun, he tossed
them, saying, "I say to you, sun, take the keys of the Temple of God and keep 2Bar 10:18
5 them until the day in which the LORD will question you about them.8 • Because
6 we were not found worthy of keeping them, for we were false stewards." • While jer 52:27-30;
Jeremiah was still weeping for the people, they carried him (off) with the people, ^ j7:
7 dragging (them) into Babylon. »And Baruch put dust on his head and sat and
wept this lamentation, saying, "Why was Jerusalem made desolate? For the
sins of the beloved people she was delivered into the hands of enemies, for our
8 sins and (those) of the people. #But do not let the outlaws boast and say, 4We
were strong enough to take the city of God by our power'; but because of our
9 sins it was delivered to you. *And our God will pity us and return us to our city, 2Bar i0:6f. 10 but you will not have life. •Blessed are our fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, 2Bar 1,4
3 a. Lit. "your ripeness of fruit." supported by the Arm. version. b. Following the suggestion of G. D. Kilpatrick, c. Harris, The Rest, p. 12, identifies this vine­
"Acts VII.52 ELEUSISr JTS 46 (1945) 140f., yard with an area south of Jerusalem known as
although this rendering is elsewhere unattested. Solomon's Gardens. See also Josephus, Ant 8.7.3. Literally the word is "coming together," or "union," d. Note the anthropomorphic representation of
or perhaps even "marriage." The variant "con­ God. summation, completion" (MSS A B P) should be
noted. According to R. A. Kraft and A.-E. Purintun 4 a.This is the title given in the Gk. MSS; the by a redactor interested in enhancing the importance
Eth. version is entitled "The Rest of the Words of of Baruch. Baruch." b. Note Baruch's subservient status in the open­
b. Note that this is a doublet of 1:1b. ing chs., where Jeremiah is always addressed as
"Father."
2 a. MS C and the Eth. version omit "Jeremiah c. The majority of Gk. MSS read, "What is
ran . . . God." In light of 2:2-7 the omission is this?" The translation here follows the text of J. probably correct. The line may have been added R. Harris, The Rest of the Words of Baruch.

Kraft and A.-E. Purintun 4 a. See also b.Ta*an 29a; LevR 19:6; and ARN
(Paraleipomena Jeremiou, p. 17), "coming" is 7.for they departed from this world and did not see the destruction of this city."
11 After saying these things, Baruch went outside the city, weeping and saying,
12 "Grieving over you, Jerusalem, I have left you." #And he remained sitting in a Jer43:6f. tomb while the angels came to him and elaborated to him all the things that the
LORD would reveal to him through them. 1 5 But Abimelech carried the figs in the heat (of the day), and coming upon a
2 tree, he sat under its shade to rest a little. *And leaning his head on the basket of
figs (and) falling asleep, he slept for sixty-six years, and he did not wake from
3 his sleep. «And afterward, when he arose from his sleep, he said, "I slept
pleasantly a little, but my head is weighed down because I didn't get enough
4,5 sleep." #Then, uncovering the basket of figs, he found them dripping milk. *And
he said, "I would like to nap a little longer, because my head is weighed down,
but I'm afraid I might fall fast asleep and be late waking up, and my father
Jeremiah might think less (of me). For if he were not in a hurry, he would not
6 have sent me (so) early this morning. *So I will get up and proceed in the heat,
7 for isn't there heat, isn't there work, every day?" 'So, getting up, he took the
basket of figs and put (it) on his shoulders and went into Jerusalem, and he did
not recognize it, neither the house nor his neighborhood; neither did he find his
8 family, nor any of the neighbors. *And he said, "Blessed (be) the LORD, for a
9 great stupor has befallen me today. •This is not the city Jerusalem! I got losta
because I came by the mountain road after getting up from my sleep; and since
10 my head was heavy from my not getting enough sleep, I got lost.•This is not the city Jerusalem! I got losta
because I came by the mountain road after getting up from my sleep; and since
10 my head was heavy from my not getting enough sleep, I got lost. •Imagine telling
n Jeremiah that I got lost!"b #And he went out of the city, and looking (carefully)
he saw the landmarks of the city and said, "This, then, is the city; I got lost."
12 And he returned again to the city and searched and found none of his own (people),
13 and he said, "Blessed (be) the LORD, for a great stupor has befallen me!" *And
he went outside the city again and stayed (there) grieving, not knowing where he
14 should go. *And he put the basket down, saying, "I'm sitting right here until the
15 LORD takes this stupor away from me." *And as he sat, he saw an elderly man
coming from the field, and Abimelech said to him, "I say to you, old man, what
16.17 city is this?" *And he said to him, "It is Jerusalem." #And Abimelech said to
him, "(Then) where is Jeremiah the priest and Baruch the reader and all the
is people of this city, because I didn't find them." 'And the old man said to him,
"Are you not from this city, that you remember Jeremiah today, and ask about
19 him after so long a time? •For Jeremiah is in Babylon with the people. For they
were taken captive by Nebuchadnezzar the king and Jeremiah is with them to
20 preach to them and to teach them the word.'' *But as soon as Abimelech heard (this)
from the old gentleman, he said, "If you weren't an old man, and if it
weren't improper for a man to insult his elder(s), I would laugh at you and say
you are crazy because you said, 'The people were taken captive into Babylon.'
21 If the cataracts of heaven had come down upon them, there still isn't time to have
22 gone into Babylon! •For how long can it be since my father Jeremiah sent me to
the farm of Agrippa to get a few figs so we could give (them) to the sick among
23 the people?Kraft and A.-E. Purintun 4 a. See also b.Ta*an 29a; LevR 19:6; and ARN
(Paraleipomena Jeremiou, p. 17), "coming" is 7.

For they
were taken captive by Nebuchadnezzar the king and Jeremiah is with them to
20 preach to them and to teach them the word.'' *But as soon as Abimelech heard (this)
from the old gentleman, he said, "If you weren't an old man, and if it
weren't improper for a man to insult his elder(s), I would laugh at you and say
you are crazy because you said, 'The people were taken captive into Babylon.'
21 If the cataracts of heaven had come down upon them, there still isn't time to have
22 gone into Babylon! •For how long can it be since my father Jeremiah sent me to
the farm of Agrippa to get a few figs so we could give (them) to the sick among
23 the people? •And I went out and got them, and coming upon a certain tree in the
heat (of the day), I sat down to rest a little, and I leaned my head on the basket
24 and fell asleep. *And when I woke up, I uncovered the basket of figs, thinking I
25 was late, and found the figs dripping milk, just as (when) I picked them. *And
26 you say that the people were taken captive into Babylon! *But (just) so you'll
27 know, take the figs (and) see!" «And he uncovered the basket of figs for the old
28 man, and he saw them dripping milk. *And when he saw them, the old gentleman
said, "O my son, you are a righteous man, and God did not want you to see the
29 desolation of the city, so he brought this stupor upon you. »For behold, it is today
5 a. Lit. "I wandered the road."
b. Lit. "Marvelous to say this to Jeremiah that30 sixty-six years since the people were taken captive into Babylon. *And so that
you may learn, son, that what I am telling you is true, look out into the field and
31 see that the growth of the crops is not (yet) apparent. #See also the figs, that it is
32 not (yet) time for them, and understand." •Then Abimelech cried in a loud voice,
saying, "I will bless you, O God of heaven and of the earth, the rest of the souls
33 of the righteous in every place." •Then he said to the elderly gentleman, "What
34,35 month is this?" *And he said, "Nisan, the twelfth (day)."c »And picking up Ezra8:3i
(some) of the figs, he gave them to the old gentleman and said to him, "May Gai4:26
God guide you with (his) light to the city above, Jerusalem!" 8ar4:2?7
1 6 After these things Abimelech went outside the city and prayed to the LORD. 2 And behold, an angel of the LORD came and, taking hold of his right hand,
brought him back to the place where Baruch was sitting, and he found him in a
3 tomb. »And when they saw each other, both (of them) wept, and they kissed each
4 other. *And looking up, Baruch saw with his (own) eyes the figs sheltered in
5,6 Abimelech's basket. #And raising his eyes to heaven, he prayed, saying, »"You
are the God who bestows a reward (on) those who love you. Prepare yourself,
my heart; rejoice and be glad in your tabernacle, saying to your fleshly dwelling,
4Your sorrow has been turned to joy.1 For the Mighty One is coming and will
7 raise you in your tabernacle, for sin has not taken root" in you.#And raising his eyes to heaven, he prayed, saying, »"You
are the God who bestows a reward (on) those who love you. Prepare yourself,
my heart; rejoice and be glad in your tabernacle, saying to your fleshly dwelling,
4Your sorrow has been turned to joy.1 For the Mighty One is coming and will
7 raise you in your tabernacle, for sin has not taken root" in you. #Be refreshed
8 within your tabernacle, in your virgin faith, and believe that you will live.b »Look
at this basket of figs; for behold, they are sixty-six years old and they have not
9 withered nor do they stink, but they are dripping with milk.c •Thus will it be for
you, my flesh, if you do the things commanded you by the angel of righteousness.d
10 He who preserved the basket of figs, the same one again will preserve you by
11 his power." • After saying these things, Baruch said to Abimelech, "Get up and
let us pray that the LORD might reveal to us how we can send word to Jeremiah
12 in Babylon about the protection which was yours on the way." »And Baruch
prayed, saying, 4'Our power, LORD God, (thou) chosen light, (is) that which
13 proceeds from your mouth.e *We implore and beg of your goodness, O great name
which no one can know. Hear the voice of your servants and let knowledge come
14 into our heart. • What should we do, and how should we send this news to Jeremiah
15 in Babylon?" *And while Baruch was still praying, behold an angel of the LORD
came and said to Baruch all these words: "Councilor of the light, don't worry
about how you should send to Jeremiah. For tomorrow an eagle is coming to you
16 (at the) hour of light, and you must direct (it) to Jeremiah. •Therefore, write in
the letter/ 4Speak to the children of Israel, "Let him among you who has become Ezra 10:11
a foreigner be expelled," and let them spend fifteen days, and after these things
171 will lead you into your city, says the LORD.For they
were taken captive by Nebuchadnezzar the king and Jeremiah is with them to
20 preach to them and to teach them the word.'' *But as soon as Abimelech heard (this)
from the old gentleman, he said, "If you weren't an old man, and if it
weren't improper for a man to insult his elder(s), I would laugh at you and say
you are crazy because you said, 'The people were taken captive into Babylon.'
21 If the cataracts of heaven had come down upon them, there still isn't time to have
22 gone into Babylon! •For how long can it be since my father Jeremiah sent me to
the farm of Agrippa to get a few figs so we could give (them) to the sick among
23 the people? •And I went out and got them, and coming upon a certain tree in the
heat (of the day), I sat down to rest a little, and I leaned my head on the basket
24 and fell asleep. *And when I woke up, I uncovered the basket of figs, thinking I
25 was late, and found the figs dripping milk, just as (when) I picked them. *And
26 you say that the people were taken captive into Babylon! *But (just) so you'll
27 know, take the figs (and) see!" «And he uncovered the basket of figs for the old
28 man, and he saw them dripping milk. *And when he saw them, the old gentleman
said, "O my son, you are a righteous man, and God did not want you to see the
29 desolation of the city, so he brought this stupor upon you. »For behold, it is today
5 a. Lit. "I wandered the road."
b. Lit. "Marvelous to say this to Jeremiah that

For tomorrow an eagle is coming to you
16 (at the) hour of light, and you must direct (it) to Jeremiah. •Therefore, write in
the letter/ 4Speak to the children of Israel, "Let him among you who has become Ezra 10:11
a foreigner be expelled," and let them spend fifteen days, and after these things
171 will lead you into your city, says the LORD. •Whoever is not separated from
Babylon, let him not come into the city, and I will punish them with not being
is taken back again by the Babylonians, says the LORD.' " »And after these things,
19 the angel departed from Baruch. *And Baruch sent to the marketplace of the
gentiles and got papyrus and ink, and he wrote the following letter: 44Baruch, the 2Bar78:i
20 servant of God, writes to Jeremiah in the captivity of Babylon. #Hail and rejoice! For God has not left us to pass out of this body grieving over the city which was
21 desolated and outraged. *For this reason the LORD has taken pity on our tears and
has remembered the covenant that he established with our fathers Abraham, Isaac,
c. Kraft and Purintun (Paraleipomena Jeremiou, identified in Jewish literature as the forbidden fruit
p. 27), give "Nisan (which is Abib)." The text is of Eden. difficult here (see Harris, The Rest, p. 54), but d. See 8:12 and 9:15. Ezra 8:31 supports the translation above. e. Or "Our power, LORD God, (is) the chosen
light which proceeds from your mouth."
6 a. From ginesthai, lit. "has not become." f. What follows are instructions for Jeremiah
b. Baruch interprets the experience of Abime­ the prophet from Baruch the scribe, in a reversal
lech as a proof of the resurrection of the flesh. of their canonical roles and of their respective roles
c. The fig is an apt symbol for life, since it is in chs. 1-4, 9. full of seeds and "drips milk." The fig is often22 and Jacob. *And he sent his angel to me and told me these words which I have
23 sent to you. »Now, these are the words that the LORD God of Israel, who led us
from the land of Egypt, out of the great furnace, spoke: 'Because you didn't keep
my commandments, but your heart was lifted up and you stiffened your neck
before me, in wrath and anger I delivered you to the furnace in Babylon. 24 However, if you will listen to my voice,' says the LORD, 'from the mouth of
Jeremiah my servant, whoever listens I will bring him back from Babylon, and
whoever does not listen will become a stranger to Jerusalem and to Babylon. 25 And you will prove them with the water of the Jordan; whoever does not listen
will become known; this is the sign of the great seal.' "*
1 7 And Baruch stood up and went out of the tomb and found the eagle sitting 2Bar77:i7-26
2 outside the tomb. *And conversing in a human voice, the eagle said to him, "Hail,
3 Baruch, the steward of the faith!"8 »And Baruch said to him, "You who speak
are chosen from all the birds of heaven, for this is clear from the gleam in your
4 eyes; so show me, what are you doing here?" *And the eagle said to him, "I was
s sent here so that you may send every word you desire through me." *And Baruch
6 said to him, "Can you take this message up to Jeremiah in Babylon?" #And the
7 eagle said to him, "Certainly; this is why I was sent." *And picking up the letter
and fifteen figs from the basket of Abimelech, Baruch tied them to the neck of
the eagle and said to him, "I say to you, king of birds, depart in peace and health
8 and carry the message for me. •Don't be like the raven that Noah sent out and Gen 8:7-12
that never again returned to him in the ark, but be like the dove that on the third
9 (attempt) brought word to the righteous one. »So also, you take this precious word
up to Jeremiah and to those prisoners with him that it might be well with you. 10 Take this papyrus to the people and to the chosen one of God.»So also, you take this precious word
up to Jeremiah and to those prisoners with him that it might be well with you. 10 Take this papyrus to the people and to the chosen one of God. *If all the birds of
heaven should surround you and desire to fight with you, resist (them); the LORD
11 will give you power. *And don't veer off to the right or to the left, but like an
arrow shot straight, go forth in the power of God, and may the glory of the LORD
12 be with you on the entire journey which you will travel." •Then the eagle took
flight, having the letter around his neck, and departed for Babylon. And when he
arrived (there), he rested in a certain tree outside the city in a deserted place. 13 And he was silent until Jeremiah came by, for he and certain other people were
14 coming out to bury a dead man outside the city. *For Jeremiah had made a request
of King Nebuchadnezzar, saying, "Give me a place where I may bury the dead
15 of my people." And the king had given (it) to him. *And as they were going out
16 with the dead man and weeping, they passed by the eagle. »And the eagle cried
in a loud voice, saying, "I say to you, Jeremiah, chosen one of God, go! Gather
the people and come here that they may hear a letter which I have brought you
17 from Baruch and Abimelech." »And when Jeremiah heard, he glorified God, and
he went out and gathered the people with (their) wives and children, and he came
18 to where the eagle was. •And the eagle descended upon the one who had died,
19,20 and he came back to life. *This happened that they might believe. #And all the
people marveled at what had happened, saying, "Is this the God who appeared
to our fathers in the wilderness through Moses (who) has now also appeared to
21 us through this eagle?" «And the eagle said, "I say to you, Jeremiah, come untie
this letter and read it to the people." So, untying the letter, he read it to the
22 people.For tomorrow an eagle is coming to you
16 (at the) hour of light, and you must direct (it) to Jeremiah. •Therefore, write in
the letter/ 4Speak to the children of Israel, "Let him among you who has become Ezra 10:11
a foreigner be expelled," and let them spend fifteen days, and after these things
171 will lead you into your city, says the LORD. •Whoever is not separated from
Babylon, let him not come into the city, and I will punish them with not being
is taken back again by the Babylonians, says the LORD.' " »And after these things,
19 the angel departed from Baruch. *And Baruch sent to the marketplace of the
gentiles and got papyrus and ink, and he wrote the following letter: 44Baruch, the 2Bar78:i
20 servant of God, writes to Jeremiah in the captivity of Babylon. #Hail and rejoice! For God has not left us to pass out of this body grieving over the city which was
21 desolated and outraged. *For this reason the LORD has taken pity on our tears and
has remembered the covenant that he established with our fathers Abraham, Isaac,
c. Kraft and Purintun (Paraleipomena Jeremiou, identified in Jewish literature as the forbidden fruit
p. 27), give "Nisan (which is Abib)." The text is of Eden. difficult here (see Harris, The Rest, p. 54), but d. See 8:12 and 9:15. Ezra 8:31 supports the translation above. e. Or "Our power, LORD God, (is) the chosen
light which proceeds from your mouth."
6 a. From ginesthai, lit. "has not become." f. What follows are instructions for Jeremiah
b. Baruch interprets the experience of Abime­ the prophet from Baruch the scribe, in a reversal
lech as a proof of the resurrection of the flesh. of their canonical roles and of their respective roles
c. The fig is an apt symbol for life, since it is in chs. 1-4, 9. full of seeds and "drips milk." The fig is often

*This happened that they might believe. #And all the
people marveled at what had happened, saying, "Is this the God who appeared
to our fathers in the wilderness through Moses (who) has now also appeared to
21 us through this eagle?" «And the eagle said, "I say to you, Jeremiah, come untie
this letter and read it to the people." So, untying the letter, he read it to the
22 people. *And when the people heard (it), they wept and put dust on their heads,
and they said to Jeremiah, "Save us, and tell us what we should do, that we may
23 enter our city (once) again.'' • And Jeremiah answered and said to them, "Everything
that you have heard from the letter observe, and the LORD will lead us into our
24 city." *And Jeremiah also wrote a letter to Baruch, saying thus, "My beloved
son, do not be negligent in your prayers pleading with God in our behalf, that he
g. This is probably a reference to Christian 7 a. This use of "the faith" to mean correct
baptism. Note that the language of this ch. (6:7, doctrine is similar to the use of the term in the
12f., 25) is reminiscent of Gnosticism. Pastoral Epistles. See e.g. ITim 3:9; 4:1.25 might speed our journey until we leave the jurisdiction of this lawless king. •For
you were found righteous before God, and he didn't allow you to come here, so Jer 45:2-5
you wouldn't see the oppression which has befallen the people at the hands of the
26 Babylonians. #For (it is) just as (when) a father has an only son and he is handed
over for punishment; those who see his father and (are) consoling him cover his
face so he won't see how his son is being punished and be racked by grief (even)
27 more. #For God similarly had mercy on you and didn't allow you to come into
28 Babylon so you wouldn't see the oppression of the people. «For since we came
29 here, grief has not left us (even) today (after) sixty-six years! *For I would often
go out and find (some) of the people hung up by King Nebuchadnezzar weeping
30 and saying, 4 Have mercy on us, God Zar!'b •Hearing these things, I would grieve
and would weep a double lamentation, not only because they were hung up, but
31 because they were calling upon a foreign god, saying, 4Have mercy on us.' #And
I would remember the feast days that we used to celebrate in Jerusalem before
we were taken captive, and remembering, I would groan and return to my house
32 distressed and weeping. »So pray now in the place where you are, you and
33 Abimelech, for this people, so that we may depart from here. #For I say to you
that the whole time we have been here, they have oppressed us, saying, 4Singc us
34 a song from the songs of Zion, the song of your God.' #And we say to them, p$ i37:3f. 35 4How can we sing to you, being in a foreign land?' " #And after these things,
Jeremiah tied the letter to the neck of the eagle, saying, 44Go in peace, and may
36 the LORD watch over us both!" •And the eagle took flight and came to Jerusalem
and gave the letter to Baruch, and after he had untied (it), he read (it) and kissed
it, and he wept when he heard about the griefs and the oppressions of the people.#For I say to you
that the whole time we have been here, they have oppressed us, saying, 4Singc us
34 a song from the songs of Zion, the song of your God.' #And we say to them, p$ i37:3f. 35 4How can we sing to you, being in a foreign land?' " #And after these things,
Jeremiah tied the letter to the neck of the eagle, saying, 44Go in peace, and may
36 the LORD watch over us both!" •And the eagle took flight and came to Jerusalem
and gave the letter to Baruch, and after he had untied (it), he read (it) and kissed
it, and he wept when he heard about the griefs and the oppressions of the people. 37 But Jeremiah took the figs and distributed (them) to the sick among the people,
and he continued teaching them to keep away from the pollutions of the gentiles
of Babylon. 1,2 8 But the day came in which the LORD led the people out of Babylon. *And the
LORD said to Jeremiah, 44Get up, you and the people, and come to the Jordan;
and you will say to the people, 4Let him who desires the LORD leave the works
3 of Babylon behind.' #And (of) the men who took wives from them, and the Ezra io:i8f. women who took husbands from them, let those who hear you cross over, and
take them up to Jerusalem; but (as for) those who do not hear you, you must not
4 lead them there." #And Jeremiah spoke these words to the people, and they got
5 up and came to the Jordan to cross over. *And when he told them the words
which the LORD had spoken to him, half of those who had (inter)married with
them did not want to hear Jeremiah, but said to him, 4 4We will not leave our
6 wives behind forever, but we will bring them with us back to our city." •So they
7 crossed over the Jordan and came to Jerusalem. *And Jeremiah stood (firm) with Ezra 9:12
Baruch and Abimelech, saying, 44No man who cohabits with Babylonians will Neh 1327
8 enter this city!" #And they said among themselves, 4'Let's get up and return to
9 Babylon, to our place." And they departed.*This happened that they might believe. #And all the
people marveled at what had happened, saying, "Is this the God who appeared
to our fathers in the wilderness through Moses (who) has now also appeared to
21 us through this eagle?" «And the eagle said, "I say to you, Jeremiah, come untie
this letter and read it to the people." So, untying the letter, he read it to the
22 people. *And when the people heard (it), they wept and put dust on their heads,
and they said to Jeremiah, "Save us, and tell us what we should do, that we may
23 enter our city (once) again.'' • And Jeremiah answered and said to them, "Everything
that you have heard from the letter observe, and the LORD will lead us into our
24 city." *And Jeremiah also wrote a letter to Baruch, saying thus, "My beloved
son, do not be negligent in your prayers pleading with God in our behalf, that he
g. This is probably a reference to Christian 7 a. This use of "the faith" to mean correct
baptism. Note that the language of this ch. (6:7, doctrine is similar to the use of the term in the
12f., 25) is reminiscent of Gnosticism. Pastoral Epistles. See e.g. ITim 3:9; 4:1.

*And when he told them the words
which the LORD had spoken to him, half of those who had (inter)married with
them did not want to hear Jeremiah, but said to him, 4 4We will not leave our
6 wives behind forever, but we will bring them with us back to our city." •So they
7 crossed over the Jordan and came to Jerusalem. *And Jeremiah stood (firm) with Ezra 9:12
Baruch and Abimelech, saying, 44No man who cohabits with Babylonians will Neh 1327
8 enter this city!" #And they said among themselves, 4'Let's get up and return to
9 Babylon, to our place." And they departed. #But when they came to Babylon,
the Babylonians came out to meet them, saying, 44You will not come into our
city, because you hated us and went out from us in secret; for this you will not
10 come in with us. »For we made one another swear an oath in the name of our
god to receive neither you nor your children, since you went out from us in
11 secret." #And when they learned this, they turned back and came to a desert place 2K 17:24-41
gs
some distance from Jerusalem, and they built themselves a city and named it
12 Samaria.8 »And Jeremiah sent to them, saying, 4'Repent, for an angel of
righteousness is coming, and he will lead you to your exalted place.""
b. This is probably a transliteration of the Heb. 8 a. This conflicts with the account of Samaritan
zar ("foreign"). See G. D. Kilpatrick, JTS 46 origins found at 2Kgs 17:24-41. (1945) 141. b. The Christian redactor has changed the orig­
c. The Gk. is eipate, "say." inal Jewish polemic against the Samaritans into a
promise of exaltation by adding this vs.1 9 And those who were with Jeremiah continued for nine days rejoicing and £0*8*5
2 offering up sacrifices for the people. *But on the tenth (day) Jeremiah alone offered
3 up a sacrifice. #And he prayed a prayer, saying, "Holy, holy, holy, incense of ISA 6:3
4 the living trees, true light that enlightens me until I am taken up to you; »for your Jn 1*
mercy I plead, for the sweet voice of the two seraphim I plead, for another fragrant
5 odor of incense. *And may Michael, the archangel of righteousness who opens
the gates for the righteous, be (the object of) my attention until he leads the
6 righteous in. *I implore you, Almighty LORD of all creation, unbegotten and
incomprehensible, in whom all judgment was hidden8 before these things existed."
7 And as Jeremiah said these things, while standing at the altar with Baruch and
8 Abimelech, he became as one of those who have given up their soul. • And Baruch
and Abimelech remained weeping and crying in a loud voice, "Woe to us, because
9 our father Jeremiah has left us; the priest of God has departed." »And all the
people heard their weeping, and they all ran to them and saw Jeremiah lying on
10 the ground as though dead. 'And they tore their garments and put dust on their
11 heads and wept bitterly.6 *And after these things, they prepared themselves to
12 bury him. #And behold, there came a voice saying, "Do not bury one still living,
13 for his soul is coming into his body again." #And because they heard the voice,
they did not bury him but remained in a circle around his tabernacle for three
14 days, saying, "At what hour is he going to rise?" #And after three days, his soul
came into his body and he lifted up his voice in the midst of (them) all and said, Rom 15:6
"Glorify God with one voice! All (of you) glorify God, and the Son of God who
awakens us, Jesus Christ the light of all the aeons, the inextinguishable lamp, the
15 life of faith!#And behold, there came a voice saying, "Do not bury one still living,
13 for his soul is coming into his body again." #And because they heard the voice,
they did not bury him but remained in a circle around his tabernacle for three
14 days, saying, "At what hour is he going to rise?" #And after three days, his soul
came into his body and he lifted up his voice in the midst of (them) all and said, Rom 15:6
"Glorify God with one voice! All (of you) glorify God, and the Son of God who
awakens us, Jesus Christ the light of all the aeons, the inextinguishable lamp, the
15 life of faith! • And after these times there will be another four hundred and seventy-
16 seven years, and (then) he is coming to the earth. *And the tree of life which is
planted in the middle of Paradise will cause all the uncultivated trees0 to bear
17 fruit, and they will grow and sprout. *And the trees that had (already) sprouted
and boasted and said, 'We raised our top to the air,'d he will cause them to wither Eph 2:2
together with the loftiness of their branches. And the firmly rooted tree will cause 8
is them to be judged! #And what is scarlet will become as white as wool; the snow
will be made black; the sweet waters will become salty, and the salty sweet in Ezek 47:8-11
19 the great light of the joy of God. »And he will bless the islands that they may 4Ezra5:9
20 bear fruit at the word of the mouth of his anointed one.e #For he will come! And
he will go out and choose for himself twelve apostles, that they may preach among jn i:9
the nations, he whom I have seen adorned by his father and coming into the world Acls ,nf
21 on the Mount of Olives; and he will fill the hungry souls." #And as Jeremiah was Mt 5:6; i4:i9f.»And he will bless the islands that they may 4Ezra5:9
20 bear fruit at the word of the mouth of his anointed one.e #For he will come! And
he will go out and choose for himself twelve apostles, that they may preach among jn i:9
the nations, he whom I have seen adorned by his father and coming into the world Acls ,nf
21 on the Mount of Olives; and he will fill the hungry souls." #And as Jeremiah was Mt 5:6; i4:i9f. saying these things about the Son of God, that he is coming into the world, the
people became angry and said, "These (once) again are the words spoken by
22 Isaiah the son of Amos, saying, i saw God and the son of God.' •Come, therefore, Ascenls 3:9
and let us not kill him by that (same) death, but let's stone him with stones." ^nksln
23 Now, Baruch and Abimelech were extremely grieved because they wanted to hear
24 in full the mysteries that he had seen. *But Jeremiah said to them, "Be quiet and
do not weep, for they will not kill me until I have described to you everything
25,26 that I saw." -And he said to them, "Bring a stone here to me." *And he set it
(up) and said, "Light of the aeons, make this stone look just like me until I have
27 described everything I saw to Baruch and Abimelech." «Then the stone, by the
28 command of God, took on the likeness of Jeremiah. *And they were stoning the
29 stone, thinking that it was Jeremiah. *But Jeremiah delivered all the mysteries
that he had seen to Baruch and Abimelech, and then he simply stood in the midst
30 of the people, desiring to bring his stewardship to an end. •Then the stone cried
9 a. The MSS add "in him,'' a redundancy that cryptic line. Kraft and Purintun render it: "We
may indicate a Semitic original. have supplied our power (?) to the air." The Gk. b. Lit. "wept a bitter weeping," possibly an­ air, "air," may here be used in a demonological
other Semitism carried over to the Gk. text. sense; cf. Eph 2:2. c. I.e. gentiles. e. Or "of his Christ" (used as a proper noun). d. Lit.*And when he told them the words
which the LORD had spoken to him, half of those who had (inter)married with
them did not want to hear Jeremiah, but said to him, 4 4We will not leave our
6 wives behind forever, but we will bring them with us back to our city." •So they
7 crossed over the Jordan and came to Jerusalem. *And Jeremiah stood (firm) with Ezra 9:12
Baruch and Abimelech, saying, 44No man who cohabits with Babylonians will Neh 1327
8 enter this city!" #And they said among themselves, 4'Let's get up and return to
9 Babylon, to our place." And they departed. #But when they came to Babylon,
the Babylonians came out to meet them, saying, 44You will not come into our
city, because you hated us and went out from us in secret; for this you will not
10 come in with us. »For we made one another swear an oath in the name of our
god to receive neither you nor your children, since you went out from us in
11 secret." #And when they learned this, they turned back and came to a desert place 2K 17:24-41
gs
some distance from Jerusalem, and they built themselves a city and named it
12 Samaria.8 »And Jeremiah sent to them, saying, 4'Repent, for an angel of
righteousness is coming, and he will lead you to your exalted place.""
b. This is probably a transliteration of the Heb. 8 a. This conflicts with the account of Samaritan
zar ("foreign"). See G. D. Kilpatrick, JTS 46 origins found at 2Kgs 17:24-41. (1945) 141. b. The Christian redactor has changed the orig­
c. The Gk. is eipate, "say." inal Jewish polemic against the Samaritans into a
promise of exaltation by adding this vs.

d. Lit. "We gave our end to the air," a veryd. Lit. "We gave our end to the air," a very

out, saying, "0 stupid children of Israel, why do you stone me, thinking that I
31 am Jeremiah? Behold, Jeremiah stands in your midst!" #And when they saw him,
they immediately ran at him with many stones, and his stewardship was fulfilled. LivPro
32 And Baruch and Abimelech came and buried him, and they took the stone and
put (it) on his tomb after inscribing (it) thus: "This is the stone (that was) the ally
of Jeremiah."JANNES AND JAMBRES
(First to Third Centuries A.D.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY A. PIETERSMA AND R. T. LUTZ
The names of Jannes and Jambres appear with considerable frequency in ancient and
medieval sources, and traditions about their activity and fate are extant in Hebrew, Aramaic,
Syriac, Arabic, Greek, and Latin. Christian, Jewish, and pagan writers found occasion to
refer to these two magicians at the Pharaonic court who plied the art of magic in opposition
to Moses.1 Our oldest Semitic reference speaks of "Johana," while the earliest text of the
book of Jannes and Jambres gives the names as "Joannes" (Johannes) and, by analogical
formation, "Joambres," but the most common appellations of the two brothers are "Jannes"
and "Jambres." In Latin and rabbinic sources, however, "Jambres," with some textual
variation, becomes "Mambres."
It is now beyond doubt that in antiquity there existed, on the one hand, traditions about
Jannes and Jambres, and on the other, a book that detailed some of their exploits. Not yet
entirely clear, however, is the precise relationship between the loose traditions and the
written composition. The tradition
The earliest reference to our magicians occurs in the Damascus Document, fragments of
which have been discovered in the Cairo Geniza and more recently at Qumran. The date of
this work has been given as c. 100 B.C.2 Apparently referring to the exodus, it states,
". . . in ancient times, Moses and Aaron arose by the hand of the Prince of Lights and
Satan [Belial] in his cunning raised up Jannes [Johana] and his brother when Israel was first
delivered."3 Our earliest reference in Greek, the language in which most of our ancient
sources were written, is 2 Timothy 3:8f., which is thought to date from the early second
century A.D. Here our magicians are cited as opponents of the truth: "Men like this defy
the truth just as Jannes and Jambres defied Moses: their minds are corrupt and their faith
spurious.out, saying, "0 stupid children of Israel, why do you stone me, thinking that I
31 am Jeremiah? Behold, Jeremiah stands in your midst!" #And when they saw him,
they immediately ran at him with many stones, and his stewardship was fulfilled. LivPro
32 And Baruch and Abimelech came and buried him, and they took the stone and
put (it) on his tomb after inscribing (it) thus: "This is the stone (that was) the ally
of Jeremiah."

in ancient times, Moses and Aaron arose by the hand of the Prince of Lights and
Satan [Belial] in his cunning raised up Jannes [Johana] and his brother when Israel was first
delivered."3 Our earliest reference in Greek, the language in which most of our ancient
sources were written, is 2 Timothy 3:8f., which is thought to date from the early second
century A.D. Here our magicians are cited as opponents of the truth: "Men like this defy
the truth just as Jannes and Jambres defied Moses: their minds are corrupt and their faith
spurious. But they will not be able to go on any longer: their foolishness, like that of the
other two, must become obvious to everybody."
From relative obscurity and doubtlessly due to the increasing prominence of Moses,
Jannes and, to a lesser extent, Jambres achieved some prominence as magicians in the
Greco-Roman world.4
The origin of the Jannes and Jambres tale was clearly pre-Christian, more particularly
Jewish, and its base is the biblical account of the exodus, in which Pharaoh's magicians
are anonymous. But though the tale is of Jewish origin—some scholars have attempted to
1 Aaron, if referred to at all, is virtually never mentioned by name. For the general rise of Moses in the hellenistic
and early Greco-Roman periods, which in the Jannes and Jambres tradition caused the eclipse of Aaron, see G. Vermes, "La Figure de Moise au tournant des deux testaments," in Moise I'homme de I'alliance (Paris, 1955), and
Gager, Moses in Greco-Roman Paganism. 2 For an English translation see G. Vermes, The Dead Sea Scrolls in English (Penguin Books, 1968) pp. 95-117. 3 Vermes, The Dead Sea Scrolls in English, p. 102. 4 As early as the 1st cent, A.D., Pliny (Natural History 30.2.11) speaks of Moses, Jannes, and Lotapes (= Jambres?)
as magicians among the Jews. See further Apuleius, Apology 90, QuesBart 4:50 (Lat. 2), and Acts of St. Catherine
(J. Viteau, Text A.4 and passim in Text B; cf. n. 11).hold Artapanus (c. 100 B.C.) responsible for it3—the pair play an insignificant role in
rabbinic literature before the ninth century A.D. Of the earlier literature, only the Talmud
(Men. 85a) and Targum Pseudo-Jonathan (Ex 1:15; 7:11; Num 22:22) mention them.6 In
the Targum (Ex 1:15), they interpret a dream of Pharaoh, predict the birth of Moses, and
subsequently appear as the helpers of Balaam (Num 22:22). In later Jewish tradition they
become Balaam's sons. In the Talmud, Moses is derided for coming with magic to the
home of magic. Most early development of the Jannes and Jambres tale took place in a Greek (and Latin)
Christian milieu. We touch here briefly on additions to the biblical Exodus, apart from the
mere identification of the magicians.7 The order that follows is basically chronological. Of much interest is the problematic statement by the pagan writer Numenius (2nd cent. A.D.), who, in a brief passage cited in Eusebius' Praeparatio evangelica (9.8), says that
Jannes and Jambres were able to undo, publicly, even the greatest of the disasters that
Moses brought against Egypt. This assertion is the more noteworthy since Origen mentions
in his Contra Celsum (4.51) that the same Numenius had recounted "the story concerning
Moses and Jannes and Jambres," which must mean that Numenius composed more on the
subject than what has been preserved in Eusebius; presumably he had based his account on
extensive traditions and perhaps was acquainted with a book on Jannes and Jambres. Whatever the case, Numenius' statement clearly contradicts the biblical account according
to which the magicians, hence Jannes and Jambres, were able to follow Moses' act only to
the second plague inclusive (cf. Ex 8:18). Furthermore, no known ancient author shows
any agreement with Numenius' aberrant claim. Consequently, it seems necessary to discount
an author who, one would assume, knew well the Jannes and Jambres tale. New relevant
evidence, however, has recently come to light in Pap.Consequently, it seems necessary to discount
an author who, one would assume, knew well the Jannes and Jambres tale. New relevant
evidence, however, has recently come to light in Pap. Chester Beatty XVI (see below,
"Texts"), one fragment of which (26ar) contains a passage (". . . Jannes opposed Moses
and ... by doing everything they had [done]") which appears to suggest that in the Book
of Jannes and Jambres the conflict between Moses (and Aaron) and Jannes, at least insofar
as this involved feats of magic, was telescoped into what in the biblical account is merely
the introduction to the plagues episode. There is no evidence in our available texts that the
book gave a blow-by-blow account of the story of the plagues, though, admittedly,
conclusions drawn from silence must be treated with due caution. To return to Numenius, if in the book the confrontation was indeed telescoped, and since
one of the Chester Beatty fragments (see also Pap. Vindob. G 29 456 verso B) clearly states
that Jannes equaled Moses' achievement, Numenius may have been acquainted with Jannes
and Jambres. To be sure, Numenius speaks of both Jannes and Jambres, while the fragment
mentions only Jannes as directly opposing Moses, but this need not be a contradiction,
since Jambres may have played a supporting role. Naturally, no author, Christian or Jewish, who was intimately familiar with the biblical
account would readily repeat the claim of Numenius, who may not have been guilty of
distortion but nevertheless created the wrong impression by quoting out of context. Philostorgius (4th/5th cent.), in addition to repeating that the magicians Jannes and
Jambres were afflicted with ulcers (cf. Ex 9:11), relates that Moses sent the mother "of
one of them" to her death. No mother of either, of course, appears in the biblical account,
but the Vienna text as well as the Chester Beatty fragments8 mention "the mother," not of
one but of both magicians.in ancient times, Moses and Aaron arose by the hand of the Prince of Lights and
Satan [Belial] in his cunning raised up Jannes [Johana] and his brother when Israel was first
delivered."3 Our earliest reference in Greek, the language in which most of our ancient
sources were written, is 2 Timothy 3:8f., which is thought to date from the early second
century A.D. Here our magicians are cited as opponents of the truth: "Men like this defy
the truth just as Jannes and Jambres defied Moses: their minds are corrupt and their faith
spurious. But they will not be able to go on any longer: their foolishness, like that of the
other two, must become obvious to everybody."
From relative obscurity and doubtlessly due to the increasing prominence of Moses,
Jannes and, to a lesser extent, Jambres achieved some prominence as magicians in the
Greco-Roman world.4
The origin of the Jannes and Jambres tale was clearly pre-Christian, more particularly
Jewish, and its base is the biblical account of the exodus, in which Pharaoh's magicians
are anonymous. But though the tale is of Jewish origin—some scholars have attempted to
1 Aaron, if referred to at all, is virtually never mentioned by name. For the general rise of Moses in the hellenistic
and early Greco-Roman periods, which in the Jannes and Jambres tradition caused the eclipse of Aaron, see G. Vermes, "La Figure de Moise au tournant des deux testaments," in Moise I'homme de I'alliance (Paris, 1955), and
Gager, Moses in Greco-Roman Paganism. 2 For an English translation see G. Vermes, The Dead Sea Scrolls in English (Penguin Books, 1968) pp. 95-117. 3 Vermes, The Dead Sea Scrolls in English, p. 102. 4 As early as the 1st cent, A.D., Pliny (Natural History 30.2.11) speaks of Moses, Jannes, and Lotapes (= Jambres?)
as magicians among the Jews. See further Apuleius, Apology 90, QuesBart 4:50 (Lat. 2), and Acts of St. Catherine
(J. Viteau, Text A.4 and passim in Text B; cf. n. 11).

Ex 9:11), relates that Moses sent the mother "of
one of them" to her death. No mother of either, of course, appears in the biblical account,
but the Vienna text as well as the Chester Beatty fragments8 mention "the mother," not of
one but of both magicians. Though Philostorgius may be suggesting that Jannes and Jambres
were paternal half brothers, there is no extant tradition that contradicts their being full
'This was first proposed by J. Freudenthal, Alexander Polyhistor (Breslau, 1875) p. 173. See also L. E. Iselin,
"Zwei Bemerkungen zu Schurer's 'Geschichte des jtidischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi,' " Zeitschrift fur
wissenschaftliche Theologie 37 (1894) 321-26. •See M. McNamara, The New Testament and the Palestinian Targum to the Pentateuch, pp. 90-93, and in greater
detail H. L. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament aus Talmud und Midrasch, vol. 3, pp. 660-64. 7 "Addition" has been taken fairly strictly. When, for example, the Ambrosiaster (4th cent.) states that Jannes and
Jambres confessed in pain that God was active in Moses (confessi sunt cum dolore vulnerum Deum in Moyse
operatum), this is not regarded as an addition. Though the biblical story does not speak of "confession," the
magicians' acknowledgment of the "finger of God" (Ex 8:19) was naturally understood as meaning just that (cf. also
Cosmas Indikopleustes, Christian Topography 3.164 B). For the boils, see Ex 9:11. Similarly, 2Tim 3:8f. can hardly
be said to go beyond the biblical account, apart from the naming of the magicians. 8See the discussion under "Texts."brothers. Of further interest is that, as Philostorgius intimates, "the mother" died a violent
death. This is now apparently confirmed by the Chester Beatty papyrus. Twice in the tradition we are told that Jannes and Jambres themselves perished as a result
of their confrontation with Moses. According to the Acts of Pilate (4th cent.), Jannes and
Jambres were regarded as gods by the Egyptians but perished "together with those that
believed in them" (5:1), since the signs they did were not of God. That the two had
adherents is specifically stated in the Vienna (3rd cent.) and Chester Beatty (4th cent.)
fragments, where they appear as "the friends." That Jannes and Jambres themselves
perished is subsequently also mentioned by Abdias (6th cent.) and apparently in part is
confirmed by the Chester Beatty fragments, in which Jannes seems to have died an untimely
death. But though their mother seemingly perished likewise, there is no evidence that
Jambres did. Further confirmation of Jannes' death comes from the British Library text
(11th cent.; cf. "Texts," below), though we remain in the dark about the circumstances. From the earliest mention of "Jannes and his brother" in the Damascus Document we
encounter explicit references to the fact that our magicians were in league with the devil. In the Testament of Solomon (3rd/4th cent.?) a demon who, interestingly, has some
connection with "the Red Sea"9 replies to the king: "I am he who was called upon by
Jannes and Jambres who fought against Moses in Egypt" (25:4). Similarly, in the later text
of the Questions of St. Bartholomew (6th/7th cent.) Satan says, "Simon Magus, Zaroes,
Arfaxir, and Jannes and Mambres are my brothers" (Lat. 2, 4:50). Of further significance
here may be a statement in the Penitence of Cyprian (5th cent.?) in which the great magician
of Antioch relates how the devil called him "a clever lad, a new Jambres, trained for
service, and worthy of fellowship with himself" (§6).2, 4:50). Of further significance
here may be a statement in the Penitence of Cyprian (5th cent.?) in which the great magician
of Antioch relates how the devil called him "a clever lad, a new Jambres, trained for
service, and worthy of fellowship with himself" (§6). The implication seems to be that
Jambres had enjoyed such fellowship. It is possible that Palladius (5th cent.) also meant to
imply that Jannes and Jambres had been assisted by demons. In his Lausiac History (ch. 17) he relates that Macarius of Alexandria (4th cent.) once visited the garden-tomb
(kepotaphion) of Jannes and Jambres, and upon arrival was met by seventy demons who
resided there. Presumably in the tomb, he found a small brass jar suspended, and outside
were some empty pomegranates that had been dried up by the sun. A rusty chain lay by
the well beside the tomb. The connection, however, between Jannes and Jambres and the
demons is indirect at best and may in fact be non-existent.10 Of interest is the reference to
the garden-tomb, since one of the Chester Beatty fragments mentions Jannes' tomb (mneion
for mnemeion), near which, as it seems, his mother was buried. In our extant texts there is no explicit reference to the devil's role in the opposition of
Jannes and Jambres, but the last lines of a Chester Beatty fragment (26ar) are suggestive. After Jannes has been struck with a fatal illness in consequence of his contest with Moses,
the text continues that he "sent word to the king [saying, This] active [power] is of God.'
Therefore I deliberately (thelori) op[posed Moses]." Obviously, here we have moved well
beyond the biblical account, which simply states, "So the magicians said to Pharaoh, This
is the finger of God' " (Ex 8:19). Though in the majority of references Jannes and Jambres are simply described as
magicians—sometimes, as we saw, in explicit league with the devil—one source indicates
specifically that they practiced necromancy. In the Acts of St.Ex 9:11), relates that Moses sent the mother "of
one of them" to her death. No mother of either, of course, appears in the biblical account,
but the Vienna text as well as the Chester Beatty fragments8 mention "the mother," not of
one but of both magicians. Though Philostorgius may be suggesting that Jannes and Jambres
were paternal half brothers, there is no extant tradition that contradicts their being full
'This was first proposed by J. Freudenthal, Alexander Polyhistor (Breslau, 1875) p. 173. See also L. E. Iselin,
"Zwei Bemerkungen zu Schurer's 'Geschichte des jtidischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi,' " Zeitschrift fur
wissenschaftliche Theologie 37 (1894) 321-26. •See M. McNamara, The New Testament and the Palestinian Targum to the Pentateuch, pp. 90-93, and in greater
detail H. L. Strack and P. Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament aus Talmud und Midrasch, vol. 3, pp. 660-64. 7 "Addition" has been taken fairly strictly. When, for example, the Ambrosiaster (4th cent.) states that Jannes and
Jambres confessed in pain that God was active in Moses (confessi sunt cum dolore vulnerum Deum in Moyse
operatum), this is not regarded as an addition. Though the biblical story does not speak of "confession," the
magicians' acknowledgment of the "finger of God" (Ex 8:19) was naturally understood as meaning just that (cf. also
Cosmas Indikopleustes, Christian Topography 3.164 B). For the boils, see Ex 9:11. Similarly, 2Tim 3:8f. can hardly
be said to go beyond the biblical account, apart from the naming of the magicians. 8See the discussion under "Texts."

Though in the majority of references Jannes and Jambres are simply described as
magicians—sometimes, as we saw, in explicit league with the devil—one source indicates
specifically that they practiced necromancy. In the Acts of St. Catherine (Text B.ll),11 a
work which in its present form does not antedate the tenth century but perhaps contains
earlier material, we are told that Jannes and Jambres "show to those who seek to behold
the persons (faces) who from of old have slept in the earth."12
Once, in an Arabic work of Bar Hebraeus (13th cent.), we are told that Moses was
entrusted by Pharaoh's daughter to Jannes and Jambres for instruction in wisdom. In conclusion, we briefly summarize (post-9th-cent.) rabbinic additions to the biblical
account.13 As already mentioned, from helpers of Balaam in Targum Pseudo-Jonathan,
9 For Jannes and Jambres and the Red Sea episode in rabbinic literature, see Strack and Billerbeck, Kommentar zum
Neuen Testament, vol. 3, p. 663k. 10 For a similar story extant in Syr. but probably deriving indirectly from Palladius, see Iselin, Zeitschrift fur
wissenschaftliche Theologie 37 (1894) 321 f. 11 See J. Viteau, Passions des Saints Ecaterine et Pierre d'Alexandrie (Paris, 1897). 12The term "necromancy" is employed in an untranslatable line that precedes this passage (see M. R. James, The
Lost Apocrypha of the Old Testament, pp. 33f.). 13 See Strack and Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, vol. 3, pp. 660-64.Jannes and Jambres achieve the status of sons, and together with their father are counselors
of Pharaoh. It is they who are responsible for the order to destroy all newborn males of
Israel, in an effort to forestall predicted ruin. When Moses nevertheless grows to manhood,
they leave for Ethiopia; but, after some years, they reappear on the scene as Pharaoh's
magicians, who with their craft oppose the exodus of Israel. When bested by Moses, they,
against God's explicit advice, are accepted by him as proselytes. This allows them to
accompany Israel out of Egypt and places them in a position to continue their animosity on
the desert wanderings. Not unexpectedly, they are in the forefront of the golden-calf revolt,
and as a result are put to death (cf. Ex 32:28). Alternatively, they remained with Pharaoh,
went with him to the Red Sea, flew above the waters on wings they had made themselves,
but perished at the hands of the archangel Michael. In the manifestly earlier traditions about Jannes and Jambres there is little if any
corroboration of these rabbinic elaborations. There is no evidence of their filial relationship
to Balaam, and no connection with the Red Sea episode or desert wandering is evident.14
The book
That at some point in the evolution of the Jannes and Jambres tale a book was composed
about them is first mentioned by Origen (3rd cent.). In reference to 2 Timothy 3:8f., he
states that the information contained there is not found in "public books" (= canonical)
but in an apocryphal composition entitled The Book of Jannes and Jambres.15
In the next century, the writer known to modem scholarship as the Ambrosiaster (4th
cent.) comments directly on 2 Timothy 3:8f.There is no evidence of their filial relationship
to Balaam, and no connection with the Red Sea episode or desert wandering is evident.14
The book
That at some point in the evolution of the Jannes and Jambres tale a book was composed
about them is first mentioned by Origen (3rd cent.). In reference to 2 Timothy 3:8f., he
states that the information contained there is not found in "public books" (= canonical)
but in an apocryphal composition entitled The Book of Jannes and Jambres.15
In the next century, the writer known to modem scholarship as the Ambrosiaster (4th
cent.) comments directly on 2 Timothy 3:8f. and labels it4 'an example from the apocrypha.''16
The so-called Gelasian Decree (6th cent.), which, among other things, contains a list of
biblical books, includes, as an apocryphal book, the title Penitence of Jannes and Jambres.11
What the precise meaning is of a reference in the Chronicle of John of Nikiu (7th cent.),
preserved only in Ethiopic, is not clear.18 In chapter 30 of that work he writes, "Pharaoh
Petissonius, who is Amosis, King of Egypt, reigned with the help of the book of the
magicians Jannes and Jambres." At first glance the book appears to be by them (or belonging
to them) rather than about them, but whatever the intent some book is clearly alluded to.19
It is now certain that a book on Jannes and Jambres not only existed in antiquity but has
been preserved in fragments. Unfortunately, due to its very fragmentary state much remains
disconcertingly unclear, but on the positive side it must be said that we now know much
more than we did a mere decade ago. When we integrate the manuscripts, the story runs
somewhat as follows:20
1. The king of Egypt, one assumes, has summoned his wise men to observe the growth
of some miraculous tree or other plant, the branches of which have quickly formed a shelter
from the sun's heat.When we integrate the manuscripts, the story runs
somewhat as follows:20
1. The king of Egypt, one assumes, has summoned his wise men to observe the growth
of some miraculous tree or other plant, the branches of which have quickly formed a shelter
from the sun's heat. While Jannes (?) at the behest of the king is seated under "a certain
apple tree," "a great earthquake" strikes, accompanied by thunder and lightning, and the
violence of the elements breaks off some of the branches of the shelter. Thereupon Jannes
(as chief magician?) runs into the library in order to consult his magical books and tools. 2. Perhaps while he is engaged in his magical proceedings in the library heavenly
emissaries appear to him and bring him a message from "the LORD of the earth and the
14 Jannes* warning to Jambres not to accompany Pharaoh in his campaign against the "Hebrews" (see Vienna
papyrus A) need not foreshadow the pursuit but perhaps ought to be so interpreted in the light of one of the Chester
Beatty fragments (26gf). Though once again our text is too fragmentary for complete reconstruction, enough is clear
to determine that at least the question of the pursuit is raised. But we do not know whether Jambres, in defiance of
his brother's warning, accompanied the king. An indirect connection between our magicians and the sea episode is
found in TSol, in which the demon upon whom the brothers are said to have called hails from "the Red Sea."
19 Commentary on Matthew 27:9. The work is extant only in Lat. translation, hence the reference reads "Mambres"
for "Jambres." See further on Mt 23:37. 16 Commentary on 2 Timothy. 17Since it is in Lat. the names appear as "Jamnes" and "Mambres."
18 See Iselin, Zeitschrift fur wissenschaftiiche Theoiogie 37 (1894) 324. 19 We may have further indication of the existence of a book in the Acts of St.Though in the majority of references Jannes and Jambres are simply described as
magicians—sometimes, as we saw, in explicit league with the devil—one source indicates
specifically that they practiced necromancy. In the Acts of St. Catherine (Text B.ll),11 a
work which in its present form does not antedate the tenth century but perhaps contains
earlier material, we are told that Jannes and Jambres "show to those who seek to behold
the persons (faces) who from of old have slept in the earth."12
Once, in an Arabic work of Bar Hebraeus (13th cent.), we are told that Moses was
entrusted by Pharaoh's daughter to Jannes and Jambres for instruction in wisdom. In conclusion, we briefly summarize (post-9th-cent.) rabbinic additions to the biblical
account.13 As already mentioned, from helpers of Balaam in Targum Pseudo-Jonathan,
9 For Jannes and Jambres and the Red Sea episode in rabbinic literature, see Strack and Billerbeck, Kommentar zum
Neuen Testament, vol. 3, p. 663k. 10 For a similar story extant in Syr. but probably deriving indirectly from Palladius, see Iselin, Zeitschrift fur
wissenschaftliche Theologie 37 (1894) 321 f. 11 See J. Viteau, Passions des Saints Ecaterine et Pierre d'Alexandrie (Paris, 1897). 12The term "necromancy" is employed in an untranslatable line that precedes this passage (see M. R. James, The
Lost Apocrypha of the Old Testament, pp. 33f.). 13 See Strack and Billerbeck, Kommentar zum Neuen Testament, vol. 3, pp. 660-64.

the names appear as "Jamnes" and "Mambres."
18 See Iselin, Zeitschrift fur wissenschaftiiche Theoiogie 37 (1894) 324. 19 We may have further indication of the existence of a book in the Acts of St. Catherine Text B.l 1, in which the
singular verb with Jannes and Jambres perhaps suggests that the reference is to a composition known as Jannes and
Jambres rather than to the magicians as individuals. 20 The outline is of necessity only tentative. As a result of more study it may well turn out that the order of some
of the Chester Beatty fragments will have to be changed. See the authors' forthcoming monograph.Overseer of the universe." They have come to remove him to Hades, where he will share
the lot of the dead. However, "two clad in white" appear to grant him a respite of fourteen
days (?). 3. Having comforted his mother, who apparently has fallen ill, and having committed
her to the care of his friends, Jannes takes Jambres with him (from an unknown place) to
Memphis, where he entrusts his brother with a book (of magic?), enjoins him to keep it
secret, and warns him against participation in the king's campaign against and in pursuit of
the Hebrews. He perhaps also relates to Jambres what had transpired with his mother. 4. While Jannes is delivering to his adherents an address that mentions a wedding he has
attended and possibly also his previous altercations with Moses, emissaries from the palace
arrive, urging him to oppose "Moses the Hebrew," who in the presence of the king has
succeeded in astounding everyone with his feats. Though Jannes is able to duplicate whatever
"Moses and his brother" have done, he is afflicted with "a painful ulcer" and retreats to
the hedra, presumably his official residence, from which he presently sends word to the
king explaining that the "active power of God" was operative in Moses and that he, in full
knowledge of this fact, launched his opposition. 5. Jambres (and perhaps the mother of the two brothers) subsequently appears to visit
Jannes, who gives him instructions for the next move. That night, however, a portent of a
falling star is observed; the next morning, it is apparently interpreted (by whom our
fragmentary text does not tell us) as indicating the downfall of Jannes and his adherents
and as foreboding his own death. 6. Jannes presumably meets his end as a result of his "painful ulcer." He is survived
by his brother and his mother, who addresses his corpse with a moving lament.6. Jannes presumably meets his end as a result of his "painful ulcer." He is survived
by his brother and his mother, who addresses his corpse with a moving lament. Though we
remain in the dark as to the manner and circumstances, it is clear that his mother follows
Jannes in death; she is buried with complete ritual by her second son, Jambres, apparently
next to Jannes' tomb. 7. It seems reasonable to assume that at this point in the story Jambres comes into his
own as a magician. We are told that he opened the book(s) (probably the one that had
earlier been entrusted to him by Jannes) near (?) the apple tree (which likewise has appeared
earlier in the story), and "performed necromancy." The penitent shade of Jannes promptly
makes its appearance and launches into an apparently lengthy and wide-ranging discourse
admitting the justness of his punishment, warning his brother against a life that will lead to
Hades, describing his abode below, relating God's displeasure with idols and idol worshipers
alike, and evidently warning at length about the life that leads to hell. Perhaps Jannes, for
the benefit of the reader, recaps the debacle of the opposition with appropriate paraenetic
commentary along the way. What became of Jambres we do not know. Texts
Jannes and Jambres is extant only in fragmentary form. Scholars have long been acquainted
with British Library, Cotton, Tiberius B.V., fol. 87. First edited in 1861, this text in Latin
(plus Anglo-Saxon translation) and accompanied by two illustrations was brought to renewed
scholarly attention in 1901 by M. R. James.21 The date of the British Library fragment is
eleventh century A.D. In Greek we possess Pap. Vindob. G 29 456 verso of the Nationalbibliothek in Vienna,
which comprises four fragments (A-D) and has been dated to the third century A.D. AS a
basis for translation, we have used P. Maraval's edition22 as well as photographs kindly
supplied by H. Loebenstein of the Nationalbibliothek in Vienna.the names appear as "Jamnes" and "Mambres."
18 See Iselin, Zeitschrift fur wissenschaftiiche Theoiogie 37 (1894) 324. 19 We may have further indication of the existence of a book in the Acts of St. Catherine Text B.l 1, in which the
singular verb with Jannes and Jambres perhaps suggests that the reference is to a composition known as Jannes and
Jambres rather than to the magicians as individuals. 20 The outline is of necessity only tentative. As a result of more study it may well turn out that the order of some
of the Chester Beatty fragments will have to be changed. See the authors' forthcoming monograph.

Maraval's edition22 as well as photographs kindly
supplied by H. Loebenstein of the Nationalbibliothek in Vienna. Further fragments in Greek are in the possession of the Chester Beatty Library and Gallery
of Oriental Art, Dublin.23 Seven frames include a total of ninety-three fragments, the vast
21 M. R. James, "A Fragment of the 'Penitence of Jannes and Jambres,' "JTS 2 (1901) 572-77. A year later, an
improved text was published by M. Fdrster in "Das lateinisch-altenglische Fragment der Apokryphe von Jamnes und
Mambres," Archiv fur das Studium der neueren Sprachen und Literaturen 108 (1902) 15-28. 22 P. Maraval, "Fragments grecs du Livre de Jannes et Jambn* (Pap. Vindob. 29456 et 29828 Verso)," Zeitschrift
fur Papyrologie und Epigraphik 25 (1977) 199-207. 23 Cf. A. Pietersma, "Greek and Coptic Inedita of the Chester Beatty Library," Bulletin of the International
Organization for Septuagint and Cognate Studies 7 (1974) 10-18.majority of which are too small either for reconstruction of the papyrus or for translation. The date of the Chester Beatty fragments is fourth century A.D. or perhaps somewhat earlier. Though the official designation is now Pap. Chester Beatty XVI, the numbers of the
individual frames that appear with the present translation have no official status and hence
are subject to change. The argument of K. Koch that a passage in Targum Pseudo-Jonathan on Exodus 1:15
constitutes an insertion from Jannes and Jambres has been convincingly refuted by C. Burchard.24 We have therefore not included the passage in our edition of Jannes and Jambres. A.-M. Denis cites a passage from Philostorgius that in his judgment is a quotation from
our book.25 This seems unlikely not only because the wording of the passage suggests a
reference rather than a quotation but also because the statement that Moses sent the mother
"of one of them" to her death contradicts our extant fragments, which make it clear that
Jannes and Jambres were sons of the same mother. This passage, therefore, like that of
Pseudo-Jonathan, has been ignored for our edition of Jannes and Jambres. In addition to an enumeration of extant texts, mention should be made here of the
possibility that more than one version of the book existed. When one compares the Latin
fragment in the British Library with the parallel Chester Beatty text (24afpr), it becomes
readily apparent that the two are not identical. The differences, however, are not so great
that they cannot be explained by the fact that the former was lifted out of its original context
and modified accordingly. Yet there is some evidence to suggest that more than one version
of our book was in circulation. By a remarkable coincidence, Pap. Vindob. G 29 456 verso,
fragment B, parallels Pap. Chester Beatty XVI 26a (part of recto and continued on verso). Initially, the Vienna papyrus merely shows some expansion: "wonder" (or "signs," but
not both) of Pap.Chester Beatty XVI 26a (part of recto and continued on verso). Initially, the Vienna papyrus merely shows some expansion: "wonder" (or "signs," but
not both) of Pap. Chester Beatty is "signs and wonders" in Pap. Vindob., and "Moses
and his brother" of the former becomes "Moses and his brother Aaron" in the latter. However, from approximately that point onward the two texts, though similar and even
identical at times, go their own separate ways. Naturally, much is uncertain because of the
state of the papyri, but that the two texts diverge quite markedly is not subject to debate. Original language
In consequence of his argument that a fragment in Pseudo-Jonathan belongs to Jannes
and Jambres, Koch has attempted to uncover Semitisms in the Latin fragment at the British
Library—the only text known to scholars at the time of Koch's writing—but his arguments
in support of an Aramaic original are not convincing. Particularly when one remembers the
influence of the Septuagint, one is hesitant to posit a Semitic original in order to explain
the phenomenon of clauses linked simply by "and . . . and" and the occurrence of "saying"
after the finite verb respondit ("he answered"). Similar Septuagintalisms exist in our newly
discovered Greek texts, but these are insufficient to prove that the original language of the
book is Semitic. Certain other features point in a different direction, e.g. the use of the
particle te as a connective not simply of word pairs but of coordinate clauses as well, and
the appearance of the so-called historical present. Our oldest texts of Jannes and Jambres are in Greek and there is as yet no good reason
to believe that the original language of the composition was other than Greek. Date
The usual difficulty in dating literature of the kind we are concerned with is compounded
by the extremely fragmentary nature of the text. The Vienna fragments are third century
A.D., and Pap. Chester Beatty XVI was written at most a century later.Maraval's edition22 as well as photographs kindly
supplied by H. Loebenstein of the Nationalbibliothek in Vienna. Further fragments in Greek are in the possession of the Chester Beatty Library and Gallery
of Oriental Art, Dublin.23 Seven frames include a total of ninety-three fragments, the vast
21 M. R. James, "A Fragment of the 'Penitence of Jannes and Jambres,' "JTS 2 (1901) 572-77. A year later, an
improved text was published by M. Fdrster in "Das lateinisch-altenglische Fragment der Apokryphe von Jamnes und
Mambres," Archiv fur das Studium der neueren Sprachen und Literaturen 108 (1902) 15-28. 22 P. Maraval, "Fragments grecs du Livre de Jannes et Jambn* (Pap. Vindob. 29456 et 29828 Verso)," Zeitschrift
fur Papyrologie und Epigraphik 25 (1977) 199-207. 23 Cf. A. Pietersma, "Greek and Coptic Inedita of the Chester Beatty Library," Bulletin of the International
Organization for Septuagint and Cognate Studies 7 (1974) 10-18.

The Vienna fragments are third century
A.D., and Pap. Chester Beatty XVI was written at most a century later. When we add to
this evidence the fact that Origen (c. 185-c. 254) specifically mentions the existence of an
apocryphal book on Jannes and Jambres, whence, according to him, the information in 2
Timothy 3:8 derives, it becomes clear that the latest possible date of our book is the middle
of the third century A.D. The earliest possible date, however, is more difficult to determine. 24 K. Koch, "Das Lamm, das Agypten vernichtet. Ein Fragment aus Jannes und Jambres und sein geschichtlicher
Hintergrund," ZNW 57 (1966) 79-93. C. Burchard, "Das Lamm in der Waagschale," ZNW 57 (1966) 219-28. 25 A.-M. Denis, Fragmenta Pseudepigraphorum quae supersunt graeca, p. 69.Several scholars have thought that the book is pre-Christian. J. Bidez and F. Cumont,26 for
example, date it back to hellenistic times, and E. Schiirer argued that,
... as it is probable that those anonymous personages owed their name and
individuality first of all to the apocryphal book itself, we may perhaps venture to
refer the date of the composition of this work to pre-Christian times.27
These scholars may well be correct, but proof still eludes us. Even if in its present form
the book is Christian, that in no way precludes an originally (pre-Christian) Jewish
composition.28
Possible evidence for Jannes and Jambres as a Christian book is as follows: (1) In
fragment B of the Vienna papyrus (1. 8), the word chiazein occurs, the basic meaning of
which is "to form (the Greek letter) chi." It need mean no more than "to cross out" or
"to mark with an X" but could possibly be a reference to the cross.29 Unfortunately the
context is no aid to interpretation, hence the evidential value of the word is slight.30
Furthermore, only the Vienna text but not the basically parallel text of Chester Beatty has
the reading in question. (2) Chester Beatty 23e recto, line 2, reads apparently "this one
having descended to Ha[des . . .]," which may be a reference to the descent of Christ. The
remainder of the sentence might run "[did not] die," but again we cannot go beyond the
realm of the possible. Other interpretations can be adduced. (3) Perhaps the best argument
for Jannes and Jambres, in its present form, as a Christian book lies in its apparent literary
form.Other interpretations can be adduced. (3) Perhaps the best argument
for Jannes and Jambres, in its present form, as a Christian book lies in its apparent literary
form. If our ordering of the material is even approximately correct and if the Gelasian
Decree has reference to our book, Jannes and Jambres is essentially a confession (poenitentia),
a genre of literature that was manifestly Christian but not Jewish.31
Provenance
As has already been mentioned,32 Freudenthal sought to connect the Jannes and Jambres
tale with the Jewish historian Artapanus, basing his argument on the fact that Numenius,
who is said by Origen to have composed "the story of Moses and Jannes and Jambres,"
called Moses by his hellenized name, Musaeus, as did Artapanus. His argument, however,
was judged inconclusive by Schiirer, who stated that "the names of the magicians, which
in all probability are Semitic, seem rather to point to a Palestinian origin."33 Subsequently
Iselin34 attempted to strengthen Freudenthal1 s argument by claiming that "Aristomenes,"
in Bar Hebraeus, is a corruption of "Artapanus." Hence Bar Hebraeus is made to yield
that Paul in 2 Timothy 3:8 is dependent on Artapanus. By extension, if Artapanus was the originator of the Jannes and Jambres tradition, perhaps
he in fact wrote the book, or at any rate the book might be presumed to have been written
26 J. Bidez and F. Cumont, Les Mages hellinisis (Paris, 1938) vol. 2, p. 22. 27 E. Schiirer, History, vol. 3, p. 149. 28 Of some interest and possible significance is the fact that both our Gk. fragments and 2Tim 3:8 use the verb
anthistanai, "to withstand," in describing the magicians1 opposition to Moses. This verb, admittedly a logical but
scarcely the sole choice (it does not appear in the biblical account), is found only in authors who can be presumed to
have been familiar with 2Tim. Numenius, for example, used paristanai and TSol machesthai.The Vienna fragments are third century
A.D., and Pap. Chester Beatty XVI was written at most a century later. When we add to
this evidence the fact that Origen (c. 185-c. 254) specifically mentions the existence of an
apocryphal book on Jannes and Jambres, whence, according to him, the information in 2
Timothy 3:8 derives, it becomes clear that the latest possible date of our book is the middle
of the third century A.D. The earliest possible date, however, is more difficult to determine. 24 K. Koch, "Das Lamm, das Agypten vernichtet. Ein Fragment aus Jannes und Jambres und sein geschichtlicher
Hintergrund," ZNW 57 (1966) 79-93. C. Burchard, "Das Lamm in der Waagschale," ZNW 57 (1966) 219-28. 25 A.-M. Denis, Fragmenta Pseudepigraphorum quae supersunt graeca, p. 69.

This verb, admittedly a logical but
scarcely the sole choice (it does not appear in the biblical account), is found only in authors who can be presumed to
have been familiar with 2Tim. Numenius, for example, used paristanai and TSol machesthai. However, even if there
be a question of literary dependence, we have no way of knowing who influenced whom. 29 Cf. G. W. H. Lampe, p. 1525, and LSJM, p. 1991. 30 The verb chiazein in Plato's Timaeus was thought by Justin Martyr to refer to the cross; a similar interpretation
would be possible for Jannes and Jambres even if no reference to the cross was intended. One is invariably reminded
here of a passage in James (Lost Apocrypha, p. 34) in which he comments on references to Jannes and Jambres in
the Gk. Acts of St. Catherine:
The other [of two passages] is better [i.e. more intelligible]: "But concerning the mountains (sic— ?mules)
Jannes and Jambres spake, signifying the sign of the manger of the Lord; and concerning the stone whereby
the stone of the tomb (a verb is wanted) . . ." If this is a genuine quotation at all (and one from the Sibyl
which precedes it is correct) it implies Messianic, even Christian, predictions in the book. (For the Gk. text of James's reference, see Viteau, Passions de Saints tcaterine, p. 33 [ = Text B §11]). Though
James incautiously fails to distinguish between what Jannes and Jambres may have contained and how the book was
interpreted, it appears to have been at least open to Christian interpretation. 31 See further below. 32Seen. 5. 33 Schiirer, History, p. 150. 34Seen. 5.in Egypt. But thus far no convincing argument has been made for Artapanus as the originator
of the tradition. Though it is a priori not unlikely that Artapanus would have created the
tale, in view of his obvious interest in Moses, what seems to contradict this possibility is
the fact that we do possess, in Eusebius, Artapanus' connected narrative of the confrontation,
but Jannes and Jambres are not mentioned.35 Of course Artapanus may have written a
separate work on the two magicians, but in that instance is it credible that in his survey he
did not even mention their names? Of some possible significance is the fact that, in our texts, the centef of action seems to
be Memphis,36 the Old Kingdom capital, whereas in the biblical account no city is mentioned
by name. Memphis also plays the central role in Artapanus and Philo,37 but this city of
ancient fame and lasting prestige would admittedly be the logical choice for any author with
historical sense who tried to place Moses historically. Since our earliest texts of Jannes and Jambres were found in Egypt and since our book
is first mentioned by an Alexandrian author, the burden of proof may be assumed to lie
with those who wish to advocate a Palestinian origin for the composition. The place of
origin of the tradition, in distinction from our book, is another question. Theological importance
The fragmentary nature of our text makes it hazardous, if not impossible, to arrive at
definitive theological conclusions. Some tentative observations, however, may be made. That Jannes and Jambres may have relevance for the question of forgiveness will be noted
below. Jannes and Jambres clearly evidences continued Jewish (if the work was Jewish in origin)
and Christian interest in necromancy, though in our book as well as in the Old Testament
it is condemned, if only by association with the opponents of Moses.That Jannes and Jambres may have relevance for the question of forgiveness will be noted
below. Jannes and Jambres clearly evidences continued Jewish (if the work was Jewish in origin)
and Christian interest in necromancy, though in our book as well as in the Old Testament
it is condemned, if only by association with the opponents of Moses. It may well be,
however, that when the Chester Beatty text comments on idolatry (22av), its primary and
perhaps only referent is necromancy. But for this there is no absolute proof. We may have
no more than a general condemnation of idolatry, necromancy included, which is well
attested in early literature of both religions. Further noteworthy items are mentioned here only in passing. Astrological interest appears
in a passage that seemingly links the impending death of Jannes to a falling star (26av). God is spoken of as episkopos (25av), a term which, though well enough attested in early
literature, is relatively rare as a divine epithet.38 Hades appears to be described as the great
equalizer which obliterates all distinction between king and pauper (22jv).39 Heavenly
emissaries are sent to remove Jannes to Hades (25av),40 but "two clad in white" win him
a reprieve, and the mother apparently addresses the corpse of Jannes (24br). Relation to canonical books
As indicated at least as early as the Pseudo-Jonathan tradition, the Jannes and Jambres
tale takes its point of departure from the biblical account of the contest between Moses and
Pharaoh's court magicians in the plague narrative of Exodus 7 and 8. Later elaboration,
though not present in our fragmentary text, links these two magicians to the birth of Moses
(Ex 1-2), the crossing of the Red Sea (Ex 14), the golden calf incident (Ex 32), and the
oracles of Balaam (Num 22-24). Jannes and Jambres are not named in the biblical story,
nor are they ever referred to anywhere else in the Old Testament.This verb, admittedly a logical but
scarcely the sole choice (it does not appear in the biblical account), is found only in authors who can be presumed to
have been familiar with 2Tim. Numenius, for example, used paristanai and TSol machesthai. However, even if there
be a question of literary dependence, we have no way of knowing who influenced whom. 29 Cf. G. W. H. Lampe, p. 1525, and LSJM, p. 1991. 30 The verb chiazein in Plato's Timaeus was thought by Justin Martyr to refer to the cross; a similar interpretation
would be possible for Jannes and Jambres even if no reference to the cross was intended. One is invariably reminded
here of a passage in James (Lost Apocrypha, p. 34) in which he comments on references to Jannes and Jambres in
the Gk. Acts of St. Catherine:
The other [of two passages] is better [i.e. more intelligible]: "But concerning the mountains (sic— ?mules)
Jannes and Jambres spake, signifying the sign of the manger of the Lord; and concerning the stone whereby
the stone of the tomb (a verb is wanted) . . ." If this is a genuine quotation at all (and one from the Sibyl
which precedes it is correct) it implies Messianic, even Christian, predictions in the book. (For the Gk. text of James's reference, see Viteau, Passions de Saints tcaterine, p. 33 [ = Text B §11]). Though
James incautiously fails to distinguish between what Jannes and Jambres may have contained and how the book was
interpreted, it appears to have been at least open to Christian interpretation. 31 See further below. 32Seen. 5. 33 Schiirer, History, p. 150. 34Seen. 5.

Later elaboration,
though not present in our fragmentary text, links these two magicians to the birth of Moses
(Ex 1-2), the crossing of the Red Sea (Ex 14), the golden calf incident (Ex 32), and the
oracles of Balaam (Num 22-24). Jannes and Jambres are not named in the biblical story,
nor are they ever referred to anywhere else in the Old Testament. Not until the New Testament do we again meet any reference to these two antagonists of
33 See Denis, Fragmenta, pp. 189-95. [Also see J. J. Collins' contribution on Artapanus in the Supplement. —
J.H.C]
36 See Vienna papyrus fragment A. 37 Its precise role in Josephus is unclear (Ant 2.240). 38 See, e.g., IClement 59:3 and SibOr "Fragments" 1. 3 (J. GetTcken, Die Oracula Sibyllina [GCS; Leipzig, 1902;
reprint Amsterdam, 1970] p. 227.), Olympiodorus' fragmentary commentary on Job (PG 93.221A), and in earlier
classical literature Iliad 22.255 and Sophocles, Antigone 217. 39 Cf. Job 3:11-19 and Isa 14:9-11. 40 Cf. the angel who announces death in TAb.Moses. In the often quoted verses 2 Timothy 3:8f., the author of the epistle compares false
Christian teachers to Jannes and Jambres. As the latter defied truth when they opposed
Moses, so the former defy truth when they champion a pattern of behavior contrary to
accepted Christian standards. The end result for them will be the same as that of Jannes
and Jambres. Knowledge of the tradition is assumed, but no information apart from their
names is provided. Relation to apocryphal books
It has been suggested above that Jannes and Jambres in its present form is a confession
or penitence (poenitentia), as it is labeled in the Gelasian Decree in distinction from Origen,
who calls it simply "Book of Jannes and Jambres" (Mambres). This decree lists immediately
preceding our book the Penitence of Origen and the Penitence of (Saint) Cyprian, and
earlier on the Penitence of Adam. Of these only the Penitence of Cyprian has survived;
James, more than seventy-five years ago, suggested a connection between the two books:
In one of the writings classed with it [i.e. the Penitence of Jannes and Jambres] in
the Gelasian Decree, the Penitence of Cyprian, we see a document calculated to
give us a fair idea of the nature of what is gone [i.e. lost of Jannes and Jambres]. Cyprian, the hero of the Penitence, is the wizard of Antioch . . . and in his work
he tells—with a quantity of interesting detail—the story of his initiation into the
black art, and his practice of it, and its failure when confronted with the power of
the true God.. and in his work
he tells—with a quantity of interesting detail—the story of his initiation into the
black art, and his practice of it, and its failure when confronted with the power of
the true God. Very much the same would the contents of the Penitence of the two
Egyptian magicians have been, only it is doubtful whether they or at least both of
them, made so fine an end as Cyprian.41
James's surmise seems to have been correct in general terms; it is now confirmed by new
evidence, though obvious differences between the two works exist, not the least of which
is the fact that whereas Cyprian's is a totally retrospective account, by the protagonist
himself in the first person, of his initiation into and the practice of magic, in Jannes and
Jambres the confession, apparently put in the mouth of Jannes, who speaks from the realm
of the dead, is preceded by a third-person narrative that details the conflict between the two
brothers and Moses. From the point of view of literary form, Cyprian's would seem to be
the more developed penitence. In the course of his lament over past misdeeds, Cyprian repeatedly expresses his belief
and fear that God will not forgive him, and in one of his despairing utterances he exclaims
as follows:
I do not believe that He forgives me. For I am not convinced that a man worse than
I has been born, seeing that I surpassed the well-known Jannes and Jambres. They
when they practised magic acknowledged the finger of God, but I was convinced
that God did not exist. If God did not forgive them, when they recognized him in
part, how can He forgive me since I totally ignored him.42
James has placed what may be termed a Faustian interpretation on this passage by
suggesting that the two brothers did not obtain pardon.43 There is, however, no completely
compelling reason for drawing this inference.Later elaboration,
though not present in our fragmentary text, links these two magicians to the birth of Moses
(Ex 1-2), the crossing of the Red Sea (Ex 14), the golden calf incident (Ex 32), and the
oracles of Balaam (Num 22-24). Jannes and Jambres are not named in the biblical story,
nor are they ever referred to anywhere else in the Old Testament. Not until the New Testament do we again meet any reference to these two antagonists of
33 See Denis, Fragmenta, pp. 189-95. [Also see J. J. Collins' contribution on Artapanus in the Supplement. —
J.H.C]
36 See Vienna papyrus fragment A. 37 Its precise role in Josephus is unclear (Ant 2.240). 38 See, e.g., IClement 59:3 and SibOr "Fragments" 1. 3 (J. GetTcken, Die Oracula Sibyllina [GCS; Leipzig, 1902;
reprint Amsterdam, 1970] p. 227.), Olympiodorus' fragmentary commentary on Job (PG 93.221A), and in earlier
classical literature Iliad 22.255 and Sophocles, Antigone 217. 39 Cf. Job 3:11-19 and Isa 14:9-11. 40 Cf. the angel who announces death in TAb.

They
when they practised magic acknowledged the finger of God, but I was convinced
that God did not exist. If God did not forgive them, when they recognized him in
part, how can He forgive me since I totally ignored him.42
James has placed what may be termed a Faustian interpretation on this passage by
suggesting that the two brothers did not obtain pardon.43 There is, however, no completely
compelling reason for drawing this inference. The passage may simply mean that, as a
result of their opposition to Moses (God), Jannes and Jambres perished; but this punishment
does not exclude ultimate forgiveness. Alternatively, Cyprian may simply be drawing an
inference, either from the Exodus account or from the Book of Jannes and Jambres. Yet
there is possibly some support for the idea that the book explicitly dealt with the question
of forgiveness. In a passage of Pap. Chester Beatty XVI (23fv), which appears to be part
of Jannes' confession and touches on his present plight in Hades, we read: "and now there
is for us no forgiveness." But be it noted once again that our text is very fragmentary! 41 James, JTS 2 (1901) 575. 42 Penitence of Cyprian, para. 17. 43James, 773 2(1901) 576.Cultural importance
Whether we have in Jannes and Jambres another tale, in addition to those of Simon
Magus, Cyprian of Antioch, and Theophilus of Adana,44 that was a forerunner of the Faust
legend is still relatively obscure.45 Very interesting in this connection is a passage in the
Chester Beatty papyrus to which we have already referred twice, namely 26ar. Here it is
stated that precisely because Jannes knew that Moses' power was from God, he launched
his opposition. We have already noted that this comment goes well beyond the biblical
account; but perhaps we are justified in going one step further. Implicitly, though perhaps
not explicitly, we may be dealing here with a "pact with the devil," which is an integral
part of the Faust tradition; but in the pre-Faust legends it is not attested earlier than the
story of Theophilus of Adana (7th-9th cent.). Similarly, like the end of Faust, the fate of
Jannes (and Jambres?) may have been intended as a warning to the believers. SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 133f. Delling, Bibliographie, p. 165. Denis, Introduction, pp. 146-49. TEXTS AND ALLEGED TEXTS
Denis, A.-M. Fragmenta Pseudepigraphorum quae super sunt graeca. PVTG 3; Leiden,
1970; p. 69. Forster, M. "Das lateinisch-altenglische Fragment der Apokryphe von Jamnes und Mambres,"
Archiv fur das Studium der neueren Sprachen und Literaturen 108 (1902) 15-28. James, M. R. "A Fragment of the 4Penitence of Jannes and Jambres,' " JTS 2 (1901)
572-77. . The Lost Apocrypha of the Old Testament. London and New York, 1920; pp. 31-38. Koch, K. "Das Lamm, das Agypten vernichtet. Ein Fragment aus Jannes und Jambres und
sein geschichtlicher Hintergrund," ZNW 57 (1966) 79-93. Maraval, P. 4'Fragments grecs du Livre de Jannes et Jambr6 (Pap. Vindob. 29456 et 29828
Verso)," Zeitschrift fur Papyrologie und Epigraphik 25 (1977) 199-207. GENERAL
Gager, J. G. Moses in Greco-Roman Paganism. Nashville, 1972. McNamara, M.They
when they practised magic acknowledged the finger of God, but I was convinced
that God did not exist. If God did not forgive them, when they recognized him in
part, how can He forgive me since I totally ignored him.42
James has placed what may be termed a Faustian interpretation on this passage by
suggesting that the two brothers did not obtain pardon.43 There is, however, no completely
compelling reason for drawing this inference. The passage may simply mean that, as a
result of their opposition to Moses (God), Jannes and Jambres perished; but this punishment
does not exclude ultimate forgiveness. Alternatively, Cyprian may simply be drawing an
inference, either from the Exodus account or from the Book of Jannes and Jambres. Yet
there is possibly some support for the idea that the book explicitly dealt with the question
of forgiveness. In a passage of Pap. Chester Beatty XVI (23fv), which appears to be part
of Jannes' confession and touches on his present plight in Hades, we read: "and now there
is for us no forgiveness." But be it noted once again that our text is very fragmentary! 41 James, JTS 2 (1901) 575. 42 Penitence of Cyprian, para. 17. 43James, 773 2(1901) 576.

Nashville, 1972. McNamara, M. The New Testament and the Palestinian Targum to the Pentateuch. Analecta
Biblica 27; Rome, 1966; pp. 82-96. Pietersma, A. "Greek and Coptic Inedita of the Chester Beatty Library," Bulletin of the
International Organization for Septuagint and Cognate Studies 1 (1974) 10-18. Schurer, E. A History of the Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ, Eng. rev. ed. Edinburgh, 1885-91; §32.3. Strack, H. L. and Billerbeck, P. Kommentar zum Neuen Testament aus Talmud und
Midrasch. Munich, 1926; vol. 3, pp. 660-64. 44 Cf. P. M. Palmer and R. P. More, The Sources of the Faust Tradition (New York, 1936), and with Gk. texts L. Radermacher, Griechische Quellen zur Faust sage (Sitzungsberichte der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien; phil -
histor. Klasse, Bd. 206, Abhandlung 4, Vienna, Leipzig, 1927). 49 See the very suggestive title of a paper delivered by H. Chadwick at the 14th International Congress of Papyrologists,
"The Penitence of Jannes and Jambres: The Origins of the Faust Legend," Proceedings of the XIV International
Congress of Papyrologists, Oxford, 24-31 July 1974 (London, 1975) x.FRAGMENTS FROM
THE BOOK OF JANNES AND JAMBRES
Pap. Chester Beatty XVI
] all [
] having summoned [
his servants], both [the] wise men an[d the
magicians, and after] seven [day]s when he was w[alking] about
i]n [his] ho[use] and saw [
the plant flourish [and] that the
bra]nches were already providing shade [
And when he had become [ ] he ordered [
to sit(?) under a certain apple tree (melea)
And [when he was seated] there, a great earthquake occurred
and from heaven (came) [the sound] of thunder and
lightning], so that some branches of the
shelter [broke off]. When he saw what had happened
Jannes ran into the library
where [his] magical tools were
(bottom of page)
] they(?) came [
cjlothed [
t]he two having [
(remnants of two lines)
] to him and sa[y
ing, the LORD of the earth and (the) Overseer [of the
universe] has sent us to lead you away [to Hades
Henceforth [you will be] a companion of the dead.
Forever [you will be] pitied.
Then] the two clad in white said,
Let there be granted to him] still fourteen days(?)
in his house and after that [
(bottom of page)
Pap. Vindob. G 29 456v (fragment A)
(top of page)
(remnants of two lines)
And when Jambres knew [
(remnants of six lines)
les]t bi[tter ] lest bitter [
] each day [ ] I shall send t[o
(remnants of two lines) ] and you [
and also to Joambres my brother to
] to heed you attend to you (and) to heed you
faithfully. [Then he approached faithfully. Then he approached
and kissed he]r, flighting back and kissed her, fighting back
his tears]. [ his] tears. When she had left he
] let [his tears] flow. ] let his tears flow. And [he took
leave of?] his friends having
urged them all [to ca]re for
his mother. (Then) he took his
brother with him to Memphisand ha[nded him the] book.
(top of page) He said, Brother, I am [passing
] Keep it on to you] a document. Keep it
secret, a[nd take heed so as not secret, and ta[ke heed so as not
to go forth] on the day when to go [forth] on the day when
the king] marches out with the the king] marches out [with] the
grandees of [Egypt against] the grandees of Egypt [against the
peop[le of the Hebrews, and do peo]ple of the Hebrews, and do
not accompany t]hem [ not acco[mpany them]. And [
] and [the] soul to be ill and the [soul
(remnants of two lines) from death and from(?) [
God] heav[en(?) ] God heaven [
(remnants of one line) (bottom of column)
our mother [
(remnants of one line)
I (they?) said to her [
k]ing [
When [our] mother had left [
] from death [
(top of page)
to/at a wedding and the [
for seven [da]ys [we] en|joyed ourselves.
Men and brothers, afteit?) [
I took up position(?) against a [certain] Hebrew
And when he had [not yet] finished [speaking
emissaries came [from the palace
saying, Come quickly [and Pap. Vindob. G 29 456v (fragment B)
oppose] Moses the Hebrew who is op]pose Moses the Hebr[ew who is
per[forming wonders] to the rjerforming si]gns and wonders to the
amazement of all. [And in the amazement] of all. And in the
presence] of the king, Jannes presence [of the ki]ng, he
opposed Moses and [his brother opposed Moses and his brother Aaron
by doing everything they had by doing everything t[hey had
done. Then the] fatal disease done]. Then the fatal disease
struck him] on the spot, struck [him on the spot,
[and with a painful ulcer he] and] with a painful ulcer [he
w[ent] to the hedra and a[fter a went] to the [hedra
while] sent word ] to mark with a chi [
to the king to] the king,
[saying, This] active [power] is saying, This [is
of God. Therefore I deliberately the finger of God]. Indeed
opposed [Moses I am unable [
] except unto death [
(top of page) Joannes [called his] brother [
[not and] urged him [ ] not
to gjrieve [him.] And [ to grie[ve] him [
because/that because/that
he [hazjarded in the daytime(?) he hazarded [
(remnants of one line)
] therefore regarding money/ ] money/possessions and [
possessions [
] against us. Make ready ] us. Make ready [
(remnants of three lines) ] for the spirit [
] that/because si[gns] through (a) spi[rit
] for the morning and [ ] ] his brother [
al]l the things being observed [ (remnants of one line)
] he made inquiry at what hour (bottom of column)
he saw the] setting of the star [
] he said, Such is a
generation [of lying li]ps and deceitful hearts
] of the hour of [his] death
] Come and see how long [
j and he said to him nothing
(remnants of one line)
] after this [
] to pursue the p[eople of the Hebrews
(remnants of two lines)
] Egypt [
] and of the people [
] weeping [
] Jambres [
(remnants of two lines)
(remnants of one line)
] the oaths which [ ] swore [
] your[
] and when Jannes [
] he said to [his] brother [
(remnants of one line)
] hundred thou [sand
] hundred fo[als
] hundred [ca]mels [
(remnants of three lines)
(top of page)
] and a noise
] and he said
] h[is] b[roth]er
(remnants of one line)
(top of page)
my/of me is perishing and [
my whole body has been agit[ated
his brother Jambre[s
] and [Jannjes op[posed
(top of page)
When Joannes heard [
of the king he encouraged/advised [all the
other friends. [And his mother] cri[ed out say
ing [ ] and my son J[
(remnants of two lines)
] and when [his] mot[her
] (s)he was amazed a[nd
] if to him and [
] he had preferred [
(remnants of one line)24afpv
(remnants of one line)
] when [his] mother [ca]me [she
approached hi]m to kiss him [
] from her and [
he said to he]r, Stay back, mother, [
] on account of the fire (= fever?) I am unable [
I am in] much [pain], mother. Then [his mother
] said [
] he replied [
] you took the trouble, mother, [to come] to me [
(remnants of two lines)
to hi]m, I will go to [
(remnants of five lines)
24br
(top of page)
I saw [the] dead and no one
resembled] you, child. Lie(?) here
] your appearance [ ] has been utterly changed
j child, you are a corpse, for
your tongue] and your lips are not moving
and] your [knucjkles are not [
24c'
Jambres [
and weeping(?) ]
I(?) have been deprived [
(remnants of one line)
] and money [
(remnants of one line)
24afjpr
(remnants of one line)
] the spirit [
] his mother(?) [
] the tomb of his brother a[nd
her] abandoned(?) corpse and [having per­
formed the] complete funeral rites he buried h[er
his] mother Jamb[res Brit. Lib., Cotton, Tiberius B.V., fol. 87
having op]ened the b[ook near(?) Mambres opened the magical books
the apple tree performed] of his brother Jannes; he performed
necromancy necromancy
and] brought up from Ha[des and brought up from the netherworld
his brother's shade, and [the soul his brother's shade. The soul
of Jannes said to [his] of Jannes said in response,
brother Jambres I your brother did not die
(remnants of seven lines) unjustly, but indeed justly,
(bottom of page) and the judgment will go
against me, since I was more
clever than all clever magicians,
and opposed the two brothers,
Moses and Aaron, who performed
great signs and wonders.
As a result I died and was
brought from among (the living)
to the netherworld where there is
great burning and the pit of
perdition, whence no ascent is
possible. Now then, brother Mambres,make sure you do good in
your life to your children and
friends; for in the netherworld
no good exists, only gloom and
darkness. After you will have
died and have come to the
netherworld, among the dead,
your abode your abode will be two cubits wide
cubits and four cubits long
(remnants of nine lines)
(remnants of one line)
] cubits [
(remnants of three lines)
thojse who do not do evil [
(remnants of six lines)
(remnants of one line)
] where are (the) sons [
] Egypt and on account of the [
(remnants of two lines)
(remnants of four lines)
] and we are descending [
j but now(?) there is no
forgiveness for us(?) [
(remnants of two lines)
] and friends [
] for the gates of [
the] dumb and [
(bottom of page)
(remnants of six lines)
] of us/our [
(remnants of two lines)
] the oikoum[ene
] unab[le
] corruption
] fo[r] he knew [
This one having descended to Ha I des . . . d
ied. These [
(remnants of two lines)
(remnants of four lines)
our limbs [
full of darkness [
we are burning(?) [
nothing [
we [
to give it(?) [
(bottom of page)
(remnants of one line)
We who worshiped idofls and
carved images until we came [to de
struction together with [our] idols, [for neitherthe idols nor their worship[ers does
God the King [of the earth love(?)
and in Hades no one, not even [
(remnants of one line)
22bv
] the wretched one(?) [
(remnants of three lines)
] practiced sorcery [
] commit perjury [
22cv
(remnants of six lines)
] money lenfder
] my [br]other [
22j»
in] Hades not even a kin[g
] excels [
] equality/fair dealing, just ones [
(remnants of one line)
] having opposed [
] of the earth [
] the mighty one [
tjorture [
22abr
(remnants of three lines)
] of [th]e children nor of the [
j the soul [
] fornication. Nothing [
] very gladly he sins and [
(remnants of one line)
] brothe[r
22C
(remnants of one line)
] she [
b]ut grief [
] the wom[an
] evil [
(remnants of two lines)
forjnication [
(remnants of one line)
22kr
(remnants of one line)
Phajraoh kin[g
(remnants of one line)
22mr
(remnants of one line)
1 of God [HISTORY OF THE RECHABITES
(First to Fourth Centuries A.D.)
A NEW TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION
BY J. H. CHARLESWORTH
The History of the Rechabites in its present form recounts the visit of a virtuous man,
named Zosimus in some passages, to the island of the Blessed Ones. For forty years this
man has entreated God to show him the abode of the Blessed Ones. God answers his prayer,
and with the guidance of an angel and supernatural assistance from an animal and two trees
he is able to journey over the great ocean and a dense cloud to an island that resembles
paradise (chs. 1-3). The man meets the Blessed Ones, who become so oppressively
inquisitive about him that he asks his attendant to inform visitors: 44He is not here." This
request causes a mild sensation, and an assembly asks this liar, a 44man of sin," to go
away. After pleas for forgiveness the man receives mercy. He then asks the Blessed Ones
concerning their history (chs. 4-7). The Blessed Ones inform him that they are the Rechabites who, by the help of the angels
of God, departed Jerusalem for the present island in the time of Jeremiah (chs. 8-10). They
describe themselves, their occupation, and their blessed state, and report that angels dwell
with them (chs. 11-12:9). The account also mentions the virginal birth of the Word and
Lent (chs. 12:9a-13:5c), describes the paradisaic state they enjoy, and with considerable
detail defines the death of the body and ascent of the soul (chs. 14:1 a—16:8g). The traveler
then returns to the shore of the sea, and with the help of the two trees passes over the cloud
and the sea, and finally the (apparently same) animal carries him back to his cave (chs. 17:1-18:4). Texts
The History of the Rechabites was once very popular and is now extant in many ancient
languages, of which the most important are the Ethiopic, the Greek, and the Syriac.the idols nor their worship[ers does
God the King [of the earth love(?)
and in Hades no one, not even [
(remnants of one line)
22bv
] the wretched one(?) [
(remnants of three lines)
] practiced sorcery [
] commit perjury [
22cv
(remnants of six lines)
] money lenfder
] my [br]other [
22j»
in] Hades not even a kin[g
] excels [
] equality/fair dealing, just ones [
(remnants of one line)
] having opposed [
] of the earth [
] the mighty one [
tjorture [
22abr
(remnants of three lines)
] of [th]e children nor of the [
j the soul [
] fornication. Nothing [
] very gladly he sins and [
(remnants of one line)
] brothe[r
22C
(remnants of one line)
] she [
b]ut grief [
] the wom[an
] evil [
(remnants of two lines)
forjnication [
(remnants of one line)
22kr
(remnants of one line)
Phajraoh kin[g
(remnants of one line)
22mr
(remnants of one line)
1 of God [

17:1-18:4). Texts
The History of the Rechabites was once very popular and is now extant in many ancient
languages, of which the most important are the Ethiopic, the Greek, and the Syriac. The
present translation, the first English rendering of the latter,1 aims at being idiomatic without
sacrificing the flavor of the Syriac. The base of the translation is manuscript A,2 Syriac 236
(olim Supplement 28, Saint-Germain 125.), of the Bibliotheque Nationale.3 This manuscript
was copied near the end of the twelfth century.4 Significant variants in B (Syr. 235 [olim
1 An English translation of the Eth. was published by E. A. W. Budge (The Life and Exploits of Alexander the
Great, London, 1896; vol. 2, pp. 555-84), and of the Gk. by W. A. Craigie ("The Narrative of Zosimus Concerning
the Life of the Blessed," ANF 10, pp. 220-24). A French translation of the Syr. was published by F. Nau ("La
Legende in6dite des his de Jonadab, his de Rechab, et les iles fortunees," Revue simitique 7 (1899] 136-46). For
further bibliographical information see Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 223-28. An edition and literal translation of the Gk.,
Syr., and Eth. will be published by Charlesworth, Martin, and Wintermute in the SBL T&T Pseudepigrapha Series. 2 Nau also based his translation upon MS A; but he placed in his text and translation variants from other MSS. Frequently he did not note the source of the reading. 3 HistRech appears on fols. 328a-37b; these are well preserved and of paper. A description is published in H. Zotenberg, Catalogues des manuscrits syriaques et sateens (mandaites) de la Bibliotheque Nationale (Paris, 1874)
pp. 187f. 4 Fol. 364a, 1. 8 down: '"These histories (or biographies) are completed by the help (lit. helps) of our Lord"', I
11 down: "in the year 1505 of the Greeks."Ancien fonds 144.] of the Bibliotheque Nationale, of the 13th cent, and of paper),5 in C
(Syr. 234 [olim Ancien fonds 143, Colbert 5137.], also of the Bibliotheque Nationale, of
the 13th cent, and of paper),6 and in D (BM Add. 12174 of the British Museum, of the
12th cent, and of vellum)7 are placed in the notes.8
Original language, date, and provenance
It is unwise to state the probable original language, date, or provenance of this document
until critical editions of the Greek, Syriac, and Ethiopic texts are available.9 A few
observations and speculations, however, are warranted. The Syriac version, as the notes to
the translation below indicate, may well have been translated from a Greek text; but some
of it may go back to an earlier, Semitic source. Work on the Greek version suggests a
complex picture: Some sections appear to have been composed in Greek, others indicate
possible translation from a Semitic text, which could be the original language of the earliest
portions. This opinion, obtained from years of work on the two major versions, the Syriac
and the Greek, receives stunning endorsement from the rubrical preface to this section of
manuscript D (fols. 209r-210v): "The History of the Blessed Ones, the Sons of the Rechabites
. . . It Was Translated from Hebrew into Greek and from Greek into Syriac by the Hands
of the Reverend Mar Jacob of Edessa.''10
The date of the History of the Rechabites is the crucial issue, and it is related to the
Jewish or Christian character of the various sections. In its present form the work may date
from the sixth century A.D., as M. R. James contended.11 Comparison of the Syriac
manuscripts reveals that the document, like many pseudepigrapha (viz. 4Ezra), has received
interpolations by Christians; the same observation results from a mere cursory examination
and comparison of the Greek manuscripts, and by the recognition that the Greek is expanded
by chapters 19 through 23, which are certainly Christian.James contended.11 Comparison of the Syriac
manuscripts reveals that the document, like many pseudepigrapha (viz. 4Ezra), has received
interpolations by Christians; the same observation results from a mere cursory examination
and comparison of the Greek manuscripts, and by the recognition that the Greek is expanded
by chapters 19 through 23, which are certainly Christian. The Ethiopic, moreover, has been
extensively expanded by scribes who were obviously Christian.12 Some of the present
document is Christian, but the Christian interpolations—sometimes found in only one
manuscript—raise the possibility that 12:9a- 13:5c and 16:lb-8 are not original but a
Christian insertion into an earlier document. This hypothetical earlier writing could be a
Christian revision of inherited Jewish traditions, or it could be a Christian expansion of an
original (partly preserved) Jewish document. James,13 A. Zanolli,14 Nau,15 G. Graf,16 L. 5 HistRech begins on fol. 84b (left col.); it ends on fol. 91b (right col.): "The history of the sons of Rechab ends."
Cf. Zotenberg, Catalogues, pp. 185-87. Fol. 341b, right col., 1. 7 down: "It ends by the help of our Lord
1. 16 down: "of the year 1603 of the Greeks."
6 HistRech appears on fols. 61a (right col.) to 62a (left col.); as Zotenberg said, it is a "n£sum6 de la vision de
Zosime, relative aux Rechabites." Cf. Zotenberg, Catalogues, pp. 182-85. In the middle margin of 344b is found
"In the year 1505 this book is completed, the living words, in the year 1603 of the Greeks." MS C differs considerably
from MS A, most notably, besides being an epitome, in the placing of the history of the Rechabites in Jerusalem
before mentioning Zosimus, who is described as a monk who lives in a monastery in Jerusalem. 7 HistRech appears on fols. 209b (or recto) to 214a (or verso). Cf. W. Wright, Catalogue of the Syriac Manuscripts
in the British Museum (London, 1872) pt. DI, pp. 1123-39, especially p. 1128.17:1-18:4). Texts
The History of the Rechabites was once very popular and is now extant in many ancient
languages, of which the most important are the Ethiopic, the Greek, and the Syriac. The
present translation, the first English rendering of the latter,1 aims at being idiomatic without
sacrificing the flavor of the Syriac. The base of the translation is manuscript A,2 Syriac 236
(olim Supplement 28, Saint-Germain 125.), of the Bibliotheque Nationale.3 This manuscript
was copied near the end of the twelfth century.4 Significant variants in B (Syr. 235 [olim
1 An English translation of the Eth. was published by E. A. W. Budge (The Life and Exploits of Alexander the
Great, London, 1896; vol. 2, pp. 555-84), and of the Gk. by W. A. Craigie ("The Narrative of Zosimus Concerning
the Life of the Blessed," ANF 10, pp. 220-24). A French translation of the Syr. was published by F. Nau ("La
Legende in6dite des his de Jonadab, his de Rechab, et les iles fortunees," Revue simitique 7 (1899] 136-46). For
further bibliographical information see Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 223-28. An edition and literal translation of the Gk.,
Syr., and Eth. will be published by Charlesworth, Martin, and Wintermute in the SBL T&T Pseudepigrapha Series. 2 Nau also based his translation upon MS A; but he placed in his text and translation variants from other MSS. Frequently he did not note the source of the reading. 3 HistRech appears on fols. 328a-37b; these are well preserved and of paper. A description is published in H. Zotenberg, Catalogues des manuscrits syriaques et sateens (mandaites) de la Bibliotheque Nationale (Paris, 1874)
pp. 187f. 4 Fol. 364a, 1. 8 down: '"These histories (or biographies) are completed by the help (lit. helps) of our Lord"', I
11 down: "in the year 1505 of the Greeks."

1123-39, especially p. 1128. 8 Variants to these MSS are noted only when the different word (or form) supplies a significantly different meaning. I am most grateful to the trustees of the Bibliotheque Nationale and of the BM for permission to study these MSS
personally and to obtain photographs of them. 9 Comments herein will be conservative in line with the rest of this collection of documents. As with 2En, ApAb,
LadJac, and some other pseudepigrapha, so with HistRech we are in the early stages of understanding the document
and its complex traditions. 10 For the tides to the MSS see n. b to ch. 1. 11 M. R. James, Apocrypha Anecdota (T&S 2.3; Cambridge, England, 1893) p. 95. Nau claimed the present form
does not predate the 5th cent. ("La Lggende in6dite des ftls de Jonadab, fils de Rechab, et les ties fortunees," Revue
simitique 6 [1898] 264). K. Kunze thinks that the document was composed in Gk. in the 6th cent. See his "Zosimo,
monaco della Scizia, beato (?)," Bibliotheca Sanctorum (Rome, 1969) vol. 12, col. 1502. 12 See the provisional translation of the Eth. and a comparison of it with the Syr. and Gk. versions, and especially
Appendix D in E. G. Martin, The Account of the Blessed Ones: A Study of the Development of an Apocryphon on
the Rechabites and Zosimus (The Abode of the Rechabites). Duke Ph.D., 1979. 13 James, Apocrypha Anecdota, p. 95. 14 A. Zanolli, "La leggenda di Zosimo secondo la redazione armena," Giornale della Societd Asiatica Italiana. N.S. 1 (1924) 146-62. 19 Nau, Revue simitique 6 (1898) 265. 16 G. Graf, Geschichte der christlichen arabischen Literatur (Studi e Testi 118; Rome, 1944) vol. 1, p. 214.Ginzberg,17 J.-C. Picard,18 and B. McNeil19 have perceived evidence of a Jewish original
behind the present Christian document. Nau even used such terms as "the Christian
translator," "the r/rirnitive text," "the Hebrew text," and "the Hebrew author." Working
with only the Greek document generates the impression that the beginning and end are
Christian and that the central chapters, 3-15, are originally Jewish. Focusing upon the
Syriac document leaves the impression that only 12:9a-13:5c and 16: lb—8 are clearly
Christian and appear to be interpolated, because they interrupt the flow of thought and
contain intrusive ideas. The mention of the name "Zosimus" in the latter section (16:8)
suggests that perhaps all passages connected with this name may be from a later stratum,20
hence chapters 7:12-16:la, which do not identify the traveler as "Zosimus," would be
earlier and possibly Jewish. It is only in these chapters, and specifically in 8-10, that
mention is made of the Rechabites and their history in Jerusalem during the days of
Jeremiah.21 At this stage in our work it is best to suggest only that sections of this document
are Jewish or heavily influenced by Jewish traditions, and that they may antedate the second
century A.D. It is practically impossible to discern the provenance of this document. According to the
Armenian version, "Yovsimios" lived on Schiza, an island in the Ionian Sea.22 This
identification appears late, speculative, and unreliable. Syriac manuscript C states that
Zosimus lived in a monastery in Palestine (see n. b to ch. 18). This comment should not
be taken seriously in itself, although Palestine is a likely origin for the early Jewish stratum,
which has a strong Semitic flavor, centers upon the Rechabites, and locates their history in
Jerusalem. The repeated mention of Jerusalem in chapters 8-10, however, could be caused,
of course, by the midrashic nature of these chapters and the dependence upon Jeremiah 35,
which is centered in Jerusalem.This comment should not
be taken seriously in itself, although Palestine is a likely origin for the early Jewish stratum,
which has a strong Semitic flavor, centers upon the Rechabites, and locates their history in
Jerusalem. The repeated mention of Jerusalem in chapters 8-10, however, could be caused,
of course, by the midrashic nature of these chapters and the dependence upon Jeremiah 35,
which is centered in Jerusalem. Historical and theological importance
The historical and theological importance of this document is first related to the growing
perception of early medieval Christian interest in the land of the Blessed Ones, further
reflections on a distant, not future, earthly paradise, and continued dependence on Jewish
apocryphal literature or traditions. Such importance is, second, related to the increasing
clarity with which we can now perceive and understand the theology of Jews near the
beginning of the present era. Of central importance is the rich imagery and interesting
descriptions of the daily life of the Blessed Ones, especially their freedom from sickness,
pain, misfortune, temptation, discomfort—but not death—and their unique sexual customs. The eschatological concerns of Jewish apocalyptic are reflected not only in the ideas
previously mentioned but also in the concern for the time of the end of the world (6:5-6a;
cf. 2Bar and 4Ezra). Angelology is impressively developed, but not in ways similar to the
multiplicity of names typical of 2 Enoch, 3 Enoch, and the Prayer of Jacob. The angels
descend to the Blessed Ones, visit them (15:4b), and even dwell with them (12:8). They
announce the time of death of a Blessed One, bury his (or her) body (14:2-15:10), and take
the soul to heaven. The angels also transmit the prayers and praises "before" the throne
(16:8c-8d). 17 L. Ginzberg, The Legends of the Jews, 7 vols., trans. H. Szold (Philadelphia, 1909-38, reprinted 1937-66) vol. 6, p. 409. 18 J.-C.1123-39, especially p. 1128. 8 Variants to these MSS are noted only when the different word (or form) supplies a significantly different meaning. I am most grateful to the trustees of the Bibliotheque Nationale and of the BM for permission to study these MSS
personally and to obtain photographs of them. 9 Comments herein will be conservative in line with the rest of this collection of documents. As with 2En, ApAb,
LadJac, and some other pseudepigrapha, so with HistRech we are in the early stages of understanding the document
and its complex traditions. 10 For the tides to the MSS see n. b to ch. 1. 11 M. R. James, Apocrypha Anecdota (T&S 2.3; Cambridge, England, 1893) p. 95. Nau claimed the present form
does not predate the 5th cent. ("La Lggende in6dite des ftls de Jonadab, fils de Rechab, et les ties fortunees," Revue
simitique 6 [1898] 264). K. Kunze thinks that the document was composed in Gk. in the 6th cent. See his "Zosimo,
monaco della Scizia, beato (?)," Bibliotheca Sanctorum (Rome, 1969) vol. 12, col. 1502. 12 See the provisional translation of the Eth. and a comparison of it with the Syr. and Gk. versions, and especially
Appendix D in E. G. Martin, The Account of the Blessed Ones: A Study of the Development of an Apocryphon on
the Rechabites and Zosimus (The Abode of the Rechabites). Duke Ph.D., 1979. 13 James, Apocrypha Anecdota, p. 95. 14 A. Zanolli, "La leggenda di Zosimo secondo la redazione armena," Giornale della Societd Asiatica Italiana. N.S. 1 (1924) 146-62. 19 Nau, Revue simitique 6 (1898) 265. 16 G. Graf, Geschichte der christlichen arabischen Literatur (Studi e Testi 118; Rome, 1944) vol. 1, p. 214.

409. 18 J.-C. Picard, "L'Histoire des bienheureux du temps de JSremie et la narration de Zosime: Arriere-plan historique
et mythique," Pseudipigraphes de VAncien Testament et manuscrits de la Mer Morte, ed. M. Philonenko et al. (Cahiers de la RHPR 41; Paris, 1967) pp. 27-43. Also see V. Nikiprowetzky, "Pseudipigraphes de I'Ancien
Testament et manuscrits de la Mer Morte: Reflexions sur une publication recente," REJ 128 (1968) 5-40. 19 B. McNeil rightly observes the lack of Christology, soteriology, and ecclesiology in the main body of HistRech
and concludes that "it is a light Christian reworking of a Jewish text." See his "The Narrative of Zosimus," JSJ 9
(1978) 68-82. 20 The name "Zosimus" appears in the Syr. version only in 1:2 (bis), 3; 2:9; 7:11; 16:8f.; and 17:1a. The omission
of the name is frequently conspicuous; and sometimes it appears the Blessed Ones are not speaking to one person but
to many, e.g. n. 14:1a: "And again we announce to you (plural), O brothers ..." The opening <A. also tends to
supply the impression that the "certain" man mentioned later is to be identified with a particular individual: "His
name was Zosimus . . ." (1:2). 21 Jeremiah is also mentioned in 1:2; but this verse is obviously part of the introduction to the document. 22 Zanolli, Giornale della Societd Asiatica Italiana. N.S. I (1924) 153.The island of the Blessed Ones is an intermediary state between the corruptible world
and the heavenly realm. There is no resurrection, but rather a separation of soul from body,
and ascent of the former with the aid of angels. When in heaven, the soul resides in a
mansion, awaiting the resurrection of the rest of the Blessed Ones (16:7a). This thought is
rather unique in biblical and quasi-biblical literature. Relation to other books
Since the traditions preserved in the History of the Rechabites are exceedingly complex
and rich, and since some of these are preserved in only one recension of one of the main
versions (Syriac, Greek, or Ethiopic), it is necessary to limit discussion on literary relationships
until critical texts and translations are available. The History of the Rechabites is obviously dependent upon Jeremiah; the middle chapters
(apparently the earliest section) of this document (especially chs. 8-10) resemble a midrashic
expansion of Jeremiah 35. Many other passages are ultimately dependent upon traditions
preserved in the Old Testament; for example, chapters 7:2a-10a and 12:3a are derived,
perhaps only through secondary sources or oral traditions, from Genesis 1-3. Unlike the
Greek and Ethiopic versions, which are intermittently dependent on New Testament ideas
and traditions, the Syriac version is almost totally free of influences from the New Testament. Even the apparent Christian interpolations in the Syriac version are more influenced by
ecclesiastical and liturgical traditions than by the New Testament documents; chapters 12:9a-
13:5c, which mention the incarnation of the Word, and the virgin, are more influenced by
ecclesiastical liturgy than John, on the one hand, or Matthew and Luke, on the other. Chapter 16:1 b—8 shows virtually no influence from the New Testament.23
The History of the Rechabites shows no literary dependence upon any of the other
pseudepigrapha, but striking parallels exist between it and 1 Enoch (cf. ch.Chapter 16:1 b—8 shows virtually no influence from the New Testament.23
The History of the Rechabites shows no literary dependence upon any of the other
pseudepigrapha, but striking parallels exist between it and 1 Enoch (cf. ch. 39), Jubilees
(cf. 23:29), the Ascension of Isaiah (cf. e.g. HistRech 12:9a and 16:8a-8d), and especially
2 Baruch. As with the holy man in the History of the Rechabites, so Baruch fasts for seven
days, eats no bread and drinks no water (not wine as in HistRech; cf. 2Bar 20:5-21:2). The
abundance of food on the island of the Rechabites is reminiscent of the pictorial description
of nourishment prepared for "the consummation of time" according to 2 Baruch 29.24 The
elaborate descriptions of the death of the body and the description of the soul and its ascent
in the History of the Rechabites recalls the explanation of the resurrected body in 2 Baruch
50 and 51. Other shared traditions are the concept of the corruptible and incorruptible worlds
(cf. 2Bar 74:2) and the description of the blessed island or the future day as one in which
there is no disease, anxiety, or anguish, but only rest and joy, and the idea that plants will
produce food by themselves (cf. 2Bar 73, 74). The relationship between the History of the
Rechabites and 2 Baruch, however, is apparently not the result of literary dependence in
either direction; it can be explained by a shared milieu or body of traditions, perhaps by a
shared tradition, and possibly by independent influence from a lost apocryphon on the abode
of the nine and a half tribes.25
23 There can be little doubt that the HistRech influenced many early Christian writers. Merely two examples must
suffice. The Contendings of the Apostles has been influenced by this document (or its traditions).409. 18 J.-C. Picard, "L'Histoire des bienheureux du temps de JSremie et la narration de Zosime: Arriere-plan historique
et mythique," Pseudipigraphes de VAncien Testament et manuscrits de la Mer Morte, ed. M. Philonenko et al. (Cahiers de la RHPR 41; Paris, 1967) pp. 27-43. Also see V. Nikiprowetzky, "Pseudipigraphes de I'Ancien
Testament et manuscrits de la Mer Morte: Reflexions sur une publication recente," REJ 128 (1968) 5-40. 19 B. McNeil rightly observes the lack of Christology, soteriology, and ecclesiology in the main body of HistRech
and concludes that "it is a light Christian reworking of a Jewish text." See his "The Narrative of Zosimus," JSJ 9
(1978) 68-82. 20 The name "Zosimus" appears in the Syr. version only in 1:2 (bis), 3; 2:9; 7:11; 16:8f.; and 17:1a. The omission
of the name is frequently conspicuous; and sometimes it appears the Blessed Ones are not speaking to one person but
to many, e.g. n. 14:1a: "And again we announce to you (plural), O brothers ..." The opening <A. also tends to
supply the impression that the "certain" man mentioned later is to be identified with a particular individual: "His
name was Zosimus . . ." (1:2). 21 Jeremiah is also mentioned in 1:2; but this verse is obviously part of the introduction to the document. 22 Zanolli, Giornale della Societd Asiatica Italiana. N.S. I (1924) 153.

Merely two examples must
suffice. The Contendings of the Apostles has been influenced by this document (or its traditions). According to this
account, Matthew tells Peter and Andrew that he has just returned from the country of Prokumenos, whose inhabitants
tell him that they are the nine and a half tribes "whom God Almighty brought into the land of inheritance ... we
eat not flesh and we drink not wine in our country, for our food is honey and our drink is the dew . . . and our
firstborn children do we offer as a gift unto God that they may minister in the church . . . The water which we drink
[floweth] not from cisterns which have been hewn by the hand of man, but [we drink] of the water which floweth
from Paradise ... No word of lying hear we in our land, and no man knoweth another who speaketh that which is
false." Other interesting parallels to the HistRech could be listed, most notably the report that "in our country there
is neither spring, nor cold, nor ice; but there are winds and they are [always] pleasant." (ET from E. A. W. Budge,
The Contendings of the Apostles, London, New York, 1901; vol. 2, pp. 111-13.) The same apparent dependence on
HistRech—or the lost apocryphon on the lost tribes—is found in the hymns of Commodius (cf. especially XLII in J. Martin, Commodiani Carmina, CCSL 128, Turin, 1960). 24 The manna preserved for the future day is mentioned explicitly in 2Bar 29:8; it is also one of the traditional
images inherited by the Christian redactor of the HistRech (cf. 13:2). For a discussion of this imagery in early Jewish
writings, including the pseudepigrapha, see B. J. Malina, The Palestinian Manna Tradition (AGAJU 7; Leiden,
1968). 23 HistRech contains traditions that are elsewhere identified with the lost tribes (cf. n. 22). 2Bar (cf. especially
77:17-26) is clearly built upon traditions related to the nine and a half tribes. It is possible that there once was an
apocryphon on the lost tribes; cf. Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 147-49.Ginzberg has drawn attention to concepts shared by the History of the Rechabites and 2
Alphabet of Ben Sira 28. The latter Jewish work records that the descendants of Jonadab,
that is the Rechabites, entered alive into Paradise. In contrast to the History of the Rechabites,
2 Alphabet of Ben Sira 28 states that the Rechabites do not "taste death."26
The History of the Rechabites has also been influenced by ideas, concepts, and traditions
developed in non-Jewish and non-Christian writings. The description of the abode of the
Rechabites is in places impressively similar to Iranian myths, notably the Var de Yima,
which depict paradise.27 At least six early Greek or Roman authors preserved ideas that
appear eventually to have influenced the author(s) of the History of the Rechabites. Hesiod
(fl. 800 B.C.) describes the region in which heroes live after death; it is the "island of the
Blessed Ones," which is beyond the shore of the ocean at the ends of the world (Works
and Days 159-74; cf. also Homer, Odyssey IV.560). Pindar (522-448 B.C.) records the
idea that souls that are pure "pass by the highway of Zeus unto the Tower of Cronus,
where the ocean-breezes blow around the Islands of the Blest (lit. "Island of the Blessed
Ones": makaron nasos)."2* Herodotus (c. 485-425 B.C.) places "the Island of the Blessed
Ones" (Makaron nesos) "seven days' march from Thebes across sandy desert."29 Plato
(427-347 B.C.) envisions a celestial earth in which the inhabitants have no sickness, live
long lives, and are vastly superior to earthly men and women; and the gods "really dwell"
in their "sacred groves and temples" (cf. Phaedo 111b). Virgil (70-19 B.C.), like the
author of 2 Baruch, describes the future golden age as one in which the earth shall pour
forth gifts without having to be tilled and goats with swollen udders will come home without
having to be tended or called (Eclogue IV. 18-25, 39f.). Lucian (A.D.18-25, 39f.). Lucian (A.D. 125-200) describes
an "island of the Blessed Ones" (he men nesos eie ton Makaron) on which the inhabitants
are heroes who have become incorporeal (autoi de somata men ouk echousin . . . kai
asomatoi ontes) and who enjoy sweet breezes, an eternal spring (aiei gar par autois ear
esti), and a land abounding in flowers, grapevines, and instead of "wheat-ears, loaves of
bread all baked grow on the tops of the halms . . ."30 The History of the Rechabites
apparently has inherited images and ideas commonly shared in antiquity in the countries of
the Fertile Crescent and in the lands of the Mediterranean.31
Cultural importance
The History of the Rechabites must have considerably influenced Western and Middle
Eastern culture during the middle ages, since it is extant in numerous medieval Greek,
Syriac, Ethiopic, Arabic, Karshuni, Slavonic, and Armenian manuscripts.32 Moreover, a
very popular story in medieval Europe is the Navigatio Sancti Brendani, which is extant in
two versions and recounts how Brendan of Clonfert (c. 484-577), an Irish monk, twice
visited the island of the Blessed Ones. Brendan sails west from Ireland and visits one island
after another until he arrives at an island, encircled by a thick cloud, on which he meets a
holy man who is unclothed except for feathers. The island is the island of the Blessed Ones. Because of similar ideas in Greek and Roman sources, we cannot conclude that the traditions
in the History of the Rechabites influenced this Irish legend; and there is no reason to
26 Ginzberg, Legends, vol. 6, p. 409. 27 See Picard (Pseudipigraphes, pp. 27-43), who sees influence on the HistRech from the Var de Yima through
the Dead Sea Scrolls. Although direct influence from the Dead Sea Scrolls is unlikely, HistRech shares with them
the concept that a full member has transcended mere anthropology and has approached angelology (cf. HistRech 7:11
with 1QH 3:21f.) and that angels dwell within the community (cf.Merely two examples must
suffice. The Contendings of the Apostles has been influenced by this document (or its traditions). According to this
account, Matthew tells Peter and Andrew that he has just returned from the country of Prokumenos, whose inhabitants
tell him that they are the nine and a half tribes "whom God Almighty brought into the land of inheritance ... we
eat not flesh and we drink not wine in our country, for our food is honey and our drink is the dew . . . and our
firstborn children do we offer as a gift unto God that they may minister in the church . . . The water which we drink
[floweth] not from cisterns which have been hewn by the hand of man, but [we drink] of the water which floweth
from Paradise ... No word of lying hear we in our land, and no man knoweth another who speaketh that which is
false." Other interesting parallels to the HistRech could be listed, most notably the report that "in our country there
is neither spring, nor cold, nor ice; but there are winds and they are [always] pleasant." (ET from E. A. W. Budge,
The Contendings of the Apostles, London, New York, 1901; vol. 2, pp. 111-13.) The same apparent dependence on
HistRech—or the lost apocryphon on the lost tribes—is found in the hymns of Commodius (cf. especially XLII in J. Martin, Commodiani Carmina, CCSL 128, Turin, 1960). 24 The manna preserved for the future day is mentioned explicitly in 2Bar 29:8; it is also one of the traditional
images inherited by the Christian redactor of the HistRech (cf. 13:2). For a discussion of this imagery in early Jewish
writings, including the pseudepigrapha, see B. J. Malina, The Palestinian Manna Tradition (AGAJU 7; Leiden,
1968). 23 HistRech contains traditions that are elsewhere identified with the lost tribes (cf. n. 22). 2Bar (cf. especially
77:17-26) is clearly built upon traditions related to the nine and a half tribes. It is possible that there once was an
apocryphon on the lost tribes; cf. Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 147-49.

Although direct influence from the Dead Sea Scrolls is unlikely, HistRech shares with them
the concept that a full member has transcended mere anthropology and has approached angelology (cf. HistRech 7:11
with 1QH 3:21f.) and that angels dwell within the community (cf. HistRech 11:5, 12:6-9 with e.g. IQSa 2.3-11 and
1QH 3.21f., 4.24f.). Also see n. 30. 28 Olympian Odes 2.69-71; Gk. and ET from J. Sandys, The Odes of Pindar (LCL; Cambridge, Mass., London,
1937) pp. 24f. 29 History Bk. 111.26; Gk. and ET from A. D. Godley, Herodotus (LCL; New York, London, 1921) pp. 34f. 30 A True Story 2.6-13; Gk. and ET from A. M. Harmon, Lucian (LCL; New York, London, 1913) pp. 310-17. 31 Nikiprowetzky (REJ 128 (1969] 22-38) claims that Christians employed classical and Jewish sources to produce
the HistRech, which is a Christian work that praises monasticism. McNeil (JSJ 9 (1978] 80f.) similarly argues that
"the most important aspect" of this document is that it "sets out, in a pictorial form, a way of life for a community."
He suggests that the community should be identified with the Therapeutae. 32 See the discussion of these versions in Martin, The Account of the Blessed Ones, pp. 68-108.imagine with Alexander von Humboldt that Saint Brendan is reporting that he succeeded in
reaching the American continent.33
A world map of approximately 1275 seems to identify the islands Saint Brendan visited
with the Canary Islands (Fortunate Insulate Sex Sunt Insulae Set Brandani)* This amazing
confusion seems to be caused by Pliny's, Strabo's, and Ptolemy's identification of the
Canary Islands as the islands of the Blessed Ones;35 the identification in antiquity is logical,
since the legends place them in the ocean, near the end of the earth, precisely the geographical
location of the Canary Islands in early antiquity. Introduction to the translation
The following English translation attempts to be as idiomatic as possible, although the
main focus has been upon the Syriac manuscripts with their subtleties and inelegancies. Hence, while particles and connectives in Syriac that are intrusive or unnecessary in English
are not represented, nouns and verbs are translated as consistently as English will allow;
note the following: npP = "soul," sP = "he prayed," slwf = "prayer," s°l = "he
requested," Pit3 = "request," pys = "he asked," = "he petitioned," Y = "he
came," yzP = "he journeyed," hlk = "he walked," rd3 - "he traveled," knS = "he
assembled," knP = "the assembly," Srbf = "family," V° = "land,"36 swr* =
"bulwark." Chapters noted herein have been adapted from W. A. Craigie's translation of
the Greek version; verses are supplied for the first time. Verse numbers in parentheses
denote that the passage is unique (or nearly so) in the Greek recension; verse numbers
followed by an alphabetical number signify that the Syriac has another (or longer) version. Hence, 16:(7)7a means verse 7 in Greek is missing in Syriac, and that the Syriac has another
reading. Verses to the Greek version will be found in the forthcoming edition. Placed within
parentheses are additions necessary for idiomatic English. Italics denote rubrification. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp.Although direct influence from the Dead Sea Scrolls is unlikely, HistRech shares with them
the concept that a full member has transcended mere anthropology and has approached angelology (cf. HistRech 7:11
with 1QH 3:21f.) and that angels dwell within the community (cf. HistRech 11:5, 12:6-9 with e.g. IQSa 2.3-11 and
1QH 3.21f., 4.24f.). Also see n. 30. 28 Olympian Odes 2.69-71; Gk. and ET from J. Sandys, The Odes of Pindar (LCL; Cambridge, Mass., London,
1937) pp. 24f. 29 History Bk. 111.26; Gk. and ET from A. D. Godley, Herodotus (LCL; New York, London, 1921) pp. 34f. 30 A True Story 2.6-13; Gk. and ET from A. M. Harmon, Lucian (LCL; New York, London, 1913) pp. 310-17. 31 Nikiprowetzky (REJ 128 (1969] 22-38) claims that Christians employed classical and Jewish sources to produce
the HistRech, which is a Christian work that praises monasticism. McNeil (JSJ 9 (1978] 80f.) similarly argues that
"the most important aspect" of this document is that it "sets out, in a pictorial form, a way of life for a community."
He suggests that the community should be identified with the Therapeutae. 32 See the discussion of these versions in Martin, The Account of the Blessed Ones, pp. 68-108.

Italics denote rubrification. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Charlesworth, PMR, pp. 223-28. Denis, Introduction, p. 144. Budge, E. A. W. The Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great. London, 1896; vol. 2, pp. 555-84. (ETof the Eth.)
Charlesworth, J. H. The History of the Rechabites, vol. I: The Greek Recension. T&T 17;
Pseudepigrapha Series 10; Chico, Calif., 1982. Craigie, W. A. "The Narrative of Zosimus Concerning the Life of the Blessed," ANF 10,
pp. 220-24. (ET of the Gk.)
James, M. R. "On the Story of Zosimus," Apocrypha Anecdota. T&S 2.3; Cambridge,
England, 1893; pp. 86-108. (Contains Gk. text plus significant introduction.)
33 See the discussion of the Navigatio Sancti Brendani and opinions regarding it in R. H. Ramsay's No Longer on
the Map: Discovering Places That Never Were (New York, 1973) pp. 60-74, 210-12. C. R. Beazley correctly states
that the Brendan story "shows in many places signs of being concocted from other narratives" (p. 235). He suggests,
furthermore, that the voyages of the Moslem Wanderers of Lisbon and of Sinbad the Sailor "are clearly related in
some way to the Brendan narrative" (p. 235). See his The Dawn of Modern Geography (London, 1897). For a
defense of the claim that the traditions in the legend of St. Brendan are to be connected "with an Atlantic quest,"
see G. Ashe, Land to the West: St. Brendan's Voyage to America (New York, 1962). As far as I know, no publication
draws attention to the parallels between the HistRech and the Navigatio Sancti Brendani. 34 Ramsay, No Longer on the Map, pp. 64f. 35 See Ashe, Land to the West. pp. 132f. 36 Sometimes "land" seems ill suited in the context; the reader may substitute "ground" or "earth."Martin, E. G. The Account of the Blessed Ones: A Study of the Development of an
Apocryphon on the Rechabites and Zosimus (The Abode of the Rechabites). Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Duke University, 1979. (A good review of research and assessment
of the versions.)
McNeil, B. "The Narrative of Zosimus." JSJ 9 (1978) 68-82.
Nau, F. "La L6gende in£dite des Mis de Jonadab, his de Rdchab, et les lies fortunecs,"
RevSem 6 (1899) 263-66 (introduction); 7 (1899) 54-75 (Syr. text); 7 (1889) 136-46
(French translation).
Picard, J.-C. "L'Histoire des bienheureux du temps de J6r6mie et la narration de Zosime:
Arriere-plan historique et mythique," Pseudepigraphes de VAncien Testament et
manuscrits de la Mer Morte, ed. M. Philonenko et al. Cahiers de la RHPR 41; Paris,
1967; pp. 27-43.
Zanolli, A. "La leggenda di Zosimo secondo la redazione armena," Giornale della Societd
Asiatica I ta liana. N.S. 1 (1924) 146-62.