The Mythology of the Aryan Nations, Vol. II — George William Cox (1870)
=======================================================================
Volume II of George William Cox's The Mythology of the Aryan Nations (London, 1870) — the great Victorian comparative-mythology synthesis reading Greek, Norse and Vedic myth as solar and nature allegory, public domain. Completes Cox's two-volume system in the library. Scan via Internet Archive.

AEIAN MYTHOLOGT. 


TQSi 30:. 



IPOTItSWOODB A2n> QQ., »BW-8T&gBT ftQnAirti 
i.in> PA.XLXAUSKT 8XBSSZ 




THE MITHOLOftT 


OF 


THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BT 

GEOEGE W. COX, M.A. 

UTS aCBOUS OS TKDUTT ooiLsas, 
oxFOim. 


IN TWO VOLUMES. 

VOL. n. 



LONDON; 

LONGMANS, GEEEN, AND CO. 

1870. 


All riahif rettmed* 



CONTENTS 


OF 

THE SECOND VOLUME. 


BOOK 11. 

CHAPTER II.— continued. 

TEE LIGHT 

Suction VII —APERODITK 

Birth of Aphrodite ... ... 1 

The Ministers of Aphrodit6 . . . . . 3 

The Arrows of Aphroditd . . . . 3 

Her Children . . • . . 4 

Her Share in the Trojan V’ar ... . . 4 

Aphrodite and Adonis . . • *7 

The armed Aphrodite ...... H 

The Latin Venus . ...... 8 

Adonis and Dionysos 

Section VIII.—HERE. 

Myths relating to the Birth of H6r6 , . , . . 

Relations of Zeus and H6re .... .11 

H6r6 and Ixi6n .... . 1*-^ 

Hfir^Akraia . . • . . 12 

H6r4 the Matron • • - i'-^ 

The Latin Juno . ...... 13 

Section IX.—THE ERINYES 

Doctrine of Necessity . . . • • • .13 

The Conflict between Light and DarkiiO's . . . .14 

Erinyes and Eumenides . - ... 15 

The Fatal Sisters . ..... 16 

The Teutonic Noms .... . . 18 

Nemesis and Adrasteia . . . • 19 

Tych6 Akraia ..... ... 21 










C0NTEM5 OP 


Section X.—HELLENIC SUN-GODS anb HEROES. 


The Ionian Legend of the Birth of PhoiUos . 

The Delphian Story .... 

The infant Phoibos .... 
PhoiboB Delphinios .... 

The Pish-sun ..... 
Phoibos and Hermes .... 
Phoibos and Helios .... 
Phoibos and Daphn6 .... 
Alpheios and Arethousa 
Endymidn ..... 

The Story of Narkissos 
lamos and Askl4pioB . 

Ld6n and Atlas 

The Gardens of the Hesperidcs 

Hyperibn ..... 

EeHos and Phaethbn .... 

Patroklos and Telemachos 

The Bondage of Phoibos and Herakle.s 

Character of Herakles 

Herakles and Eurystheus 

The Lions of Kithairfin and Nemea . 

Herakles and Kerberos 

The Madness of Herakles 

Orthros and Hydra .... 

The Marathonian and Cretan Bulls . 

The Girdle of Hippolyt^ 

Myths interspersed among the Legends of the twelve 
Herakles and Eurytos 

Herakles and Aug& .... 

Herakles and D^ianeira 

The Death of Herakles 

The Latin Hercules .... 

Egyptian Myths . . . , 

Repetitions of the Myth of Herakh-.s 

The Story of Perseus 

Birth and Youth of Theseus . 

The six Exploits of his first Journey 
Theseus at Atheni^ . 

Theseus and the Minotauros ... 
Theseus and the Amazons 
Theseus in the Underworld . 

Hipponods Bellerophontes 
The Birth of Oidipous 
The Career of Oidipous 
The blinded Oidipous 
Oidipous and Antigon^ 

The Story of T^lephos 

Twofold Aspect of the Trojan Paris 

The Birth and Infancy of Paris 


Labours 












THE SECOND VOLUME. 


THE SECOND VOLUME. 

The Judgment of Paris .... 



Vll 

PAGE 

. 78 

Paris and Helen ..... 



. 79 

lamos . . . . . . , 



. 81 

Pelias and Neleus ..... 



. 82 

Eomulus and Bexnus . ... 



. 82 

Cyrus and Astyages .... 



. 83 

Chandragupta .... 



. 84 

Kadmos and Eur6pS ..... 



. 86 

Minos and the Minotaur .... 



. 88 

Bhadamanthys and Aiakos . . • . 



. 88 

Nestor and Sarp^6n ..... 



. 89 

Memn6n the Ethiopian .... 



. 90 

Kephalos and E6s ..... 



. 91 

Shomon sc.—TETTTONIC SUN-GODS AND HEROES. 


Baldur and Brond ..... 



. 93 

The Dream of Baldur .... 



. 94 

The Death of Baldur ..... 



. 94 

The Avenging of Baldur 



. 95 

The Story of Tell and Gesler 



. 96 

The Myth wholly without Historical Foundation 



. 98 

Utter Impossibility of the Swiss Story 



. 98 

Other Versions of the Myth of Tell . 



. 99 

Tell the far-shooting ApoUdn 



. 102 

Section XU.—THE VIYIFYING 

Flexible Character of Vishnu 

SUN. 


. 102 

Vishnu the striding God .... 



. 103 

Dwarf Incarnation ..... 



. 104 

The Palace of Vishnu .... 



. 106 

Avatars of Vishnu ..... 



. 106 

Emblems associated with the Worship of Vishiju 



. 107 

Sensuous Stage of Language .... 



. 108 

Aryan and Semitic Monotheism 



. 109 

Ideas and Symbols of the vivifying Power in Nature 



. 112 

Bods and Pillars ..... 



. 113 

Tree and Serpent Worship .... 



. 116 

Sacrifices connected with this Worship 



. 117 

Symbols of Wealth ..... 



. 118 

The Lotos .... 



. 120 

Goblets and Homs . . ... 



. 120 

Gradual Befinement of the Myth 



. 124 

Aryan and Semitic Mysteries 



. 125 

Beal meaning of Tree and Serpent Worship . 



. 127 


Section Xni.—THE SUN-GODS OE LATEE HINDU MYTHOLOGy. 

Vislinu and Krislma ........ 130 

Parwtage of Krishna ....... 130 


















VIU 


CONTENTS OF 


PAGB 

Krislina and Btidra ........ 131 

Vishigii and Bama ........ 131 

The Story of Krislma ....... 132 

Section XIV.—THE MOON AND THE STABS. 

Sel4n4 and Pan ....... 138 

16 the Heifer ......... 138 

Argos Panopt6s . . . . . . . .139 

16 and Proni4thens ........ 140 

Hekat6 ......... 141 

Artemis ......... 142 

The Ankadian and Dehan Artemis . . • . . .143 

Artemis Orthia and Tauropola . . . . . .143 

Iphigeneia and Britomartis . . . . . . .145 


OHAPTBB m. 

TEE LOST TREASURE, 

Section I—THE GOLDEN FLEECE. 

The Myth of Stolen Treasure found among all the Aryan Nations 

Bepetition of this Myth under different forms 

The Golden Fleece ^ 

The Argonautic Voyage • . . . , 

Ias6n and Medeia .... 


Section II.—^HELEN. 

The Wealth of Helen • • . . 

The Stealing of Helen and her Treasures 
The Story of Conall Gulban . 

The Voyage of the Achaians to Hion , 

Meleagros and Kleopatra . - . . ' 

Thetis and Achilleus . . . . ^ 

The womanly Achilleus . . ’ 

The Career of Achilleus 
The Nostoi . * . 

Odysseus and Autolyk6s ... * 

Odysseus and Penelop6 ... * 

The womanly Odysseus 

Odysseus the Wanderer ... * 

Odysseus and Aiolos . . . , * 

The Laistrygonians . 

The Lotos-Eaters 
Kirk6 and Kalypso 


147 

149 

160 

162 

164 


166 

166 

167 

169 

160 

162 

163 

163 

171 

171 

173 

174 

176 

177 

177 

178 

179 

















THE SECOND VOLUME. 


IX 


Section III.—THE CHILDREN OP THE SUN 

The Expxilsion of the Herakleids .... 

The Betum of the Herakleids .... 


Section IV.—THE THEBAN WABS. 

Adrastos and Amphiar&os . . . • • 

The Sons of Oidipous ..... 

Tydeus .....* 

The War of the Epigonoi . . . . ■ 

Antigon6 and Haimon ..... 

Alkmaidn and EriphJ^lfe ..... 

Orestes and IOytaiinn6stra .... 


. 184 
. 185 
186 
. 187 
. 188 
. 189 
, 189 


CHAPTER IV. 

THE FIRE. 


Section I.—^AG-NI. 

Light and Heat ... . • 

Physical Attributes of Agni . ... 

The Infant Agni ...••• 
Agni the Psychopompos . . . . • 

The Tongues of Agni . ... 

Agni and Hephaistos ..... 

Section IL—PHORONEUS AND HESTIA 

The Wind and the Eire .... 

The Argive Phorfineus . . . - 

Hestia ...•••* 
The Sacred Eire ....«• 


Section III.— HEPHAISTOS AND LOKI 

The maimed Hephaistos . . • • 

The Eorge of Hephaistos . . . • • 

Hephaistos and Ath5n5 . . - 

The Latin Vulcan ..•••• 
The Eire-god Loki ...••• 

Loki the Thief ...*•• 

Section IV — PKOMETIIEUS. 

The Hesiodic Ages . . ... 

The Heroic Age ....*• 

The Prometheus of JEschylos .... 

The Punishment of Prometheus . . • - 

The Cheating of Zeus . . * • • 


190 

191 

192 
192 
198 
194 


. 194 

. 195 

196 
. 196 


197 

198 

199 
199 

199 

200 


. 201 
. 203 
. 205 
. 206 
. 207 

















X 


CONTEOTS OF 


Prometheus and Pandora 
Prometheus and Peukalion . 

Prometheus and 16 . 

Section V.—THE 

The Titans .... 

The Kyklopes 
Schamir and Sassafiras 
Ahmed and Tanhaiiser 
The Greedy Alcalde . 

Medieval Spells 


PAQI 
. 208 
. 210 
. 211 


LiaHTNIHO. 

.212 

.214 

.216 

.217 

.218 

.210 


CHAPTER V. 

THE WINES, 


Section L—VAYU AND THE MARUTS. 

Vayu and Pavonius ...... 

Boreas and the Maruts . ... 

The Crushers or Grinders 

Eudra ....... 


. 221 

. 221 

. 222 

. 228 


Section II.—HERMES 

Hindu and Greek Myths of the Wind 

The Infancy of Hermes 

The Theft of the Cattle 

The Covenant of Hermes and Phoibos 

The Meaning of this Covenant 

The Rivalry between Hermes and Phoibos . 

Hermes the God of the Moving Air . 

Transparent Clearness of the Myth . 

Humour of the Myth ... 

The Craft of Hermes .... 
Hermes and the Chaxites 
Hermes the Herald e. 


. 224 
. 224 
. 225 
. 225 
. 227 
. 229 
. 230 
. 233 
. 235 
. 287 
. 238 
. 238 


Section III.—ORPHEUS. 


Points of Difference between Orpheus and Hermes .... 239 

The Seirens ..... .... 242 

The Piper of Hameln ....... 242 

The Jew among the Thorns ....... 244 

Inehanted Harps and Horns ....... 245 

The Harp of Wainamdinen ....... 245 

Galdner the Singer ........ 246 

The Sibyl 247 


















THE SECOND VOLUME. xi 

Section IV. — PAN. 

PAGE 

The Song of the Breeze in the Eeeda ..... 247 

Pan, the Purifying Breeze ....... 248 

Pan and Syrinx ... ... 249 

Section V.— AMPH16N AND ZETHOS. 

The Theban Orpheus........ 249 

Zethos and Prokn6 ........ 250 

Linos and Zephyxos . . . . . . . .251 

Section VI.—AIOLOS AND ABES. 

The Guardian of the Winds ....... 252 

The Storms .... .... 253 

Ar6s and Ath5n5 ........ 254 


CHAPTER VI. 

THE WATEBS. 

Section I.—THE DWELLEES IN THE SEA. 


Proteus and Nereus ........ 256 

Glaukos . . ...... 257 

Naiads and Nereids . ...... 257 

Swan-maidens and Apsaras . . . . . .258 

Triton and Amphitrit6 . . . . .259 

The Seirens ... ..... 260 

Skylla and Oharybdis . . , . . .260 

The Megarian Skylla ....... 261 

Section II.—THE LOED OP THE WATERS. 

Zeus Poseid6n ........ 262 

Poseiddn and Ath5n6. . . . . . . .263 

PoseidOn and the TelcMnes 264 

PoseidOn the Bondman ....... 264 

Helikertes . . ...... 265 

The Ocean Stream ........ 266 

Section IH—THE EIVEES AND POXJNTAINS. 

Danaos and Aigyptos ........ 266 

Their Sons and Daughters ....... 267 

Hypermnestra and Lynkeus ....... 269 

Origin of the Myth ........ 269 

The Lyrkeios ......... 270 

















Xll 


CONTESSTTS OF 


CHAPTER VII. 

THE CLOUDS. 

Section I.—THE CHILDREN OF THE MIST. 

Phrixos and HellS . 

Athamaa and In6 . . . • • • • . J7' 

Section II.—^THE CLOUELAND. 

T^jb Phaiakians . . ► • . . 27 

^he Palace of Alkmods . . • * 

Tile Fleets of Alkinods . • . 27t 

The Phaiaki,ans and Odysseus . . . • • .271 

Niob4 and L4t6 . ... . 27f 

The Cattle of Helios . . ... . . . 2B( 

Section III.-THE NYMPHS AND SWAN-MATDRNS. 

The Swan-shaped Phorkides . . . . . . .281 

The Muses and the Valkynen ...... 28ti 

The Swan-shaped Zeus . . .... 283 

Inchanted Maidens . ... 284 

The Hyades and Pleiades ... ' . . 286 

TheOraiai . , . . ... 286 

The G-orgons ... . ... 287 

Aktaidn ......... 288 

Medousa and Chrys46r ...... 288 

Pegasos ......... 289 

Section IV.—THE HUNTERS AND DANCERS OP THE HEAVENS. 

Ori6n.280 

Seirios ...... . . 290 

The Telchines and Kour6tes . . '. . . . .291 


CHAPTER YIII. 

TJSE EAETII 

Section I —DIUNA bOS, 

The Captivity of Dionysos ... ... 293 

Dionysos and Zagreos ... . . 293 

Dionysos the Wanderer . . . 294 

The Womanly Dionysos . . . 295 

The Mothers of Dion} sos ...... . 296 








THE kSECOND volume. 


xiii 


Sectiojt II.--DEMETEE 

The Story of Persephonfi .... 

Iduna ...... 

The Stupifying Narcissus 

The Sleep of Winter . . . . . 

The Story of Kapunzel .... 
The Lengthening Days 

The Ill-tempered Princess .... 
The Story of S{try4 Bai .... 
The nourishing Earth .... 

Holda ..... 

The Eleusinian Myth..... 

and Iasi6n ..... 
Cores and Saturn ... 


Section m.—THE CHILBEEN OE THE EARTH. 

Erichthonios ......... 308 

Erechtheus ......... 309 

Kekrops ......... 309 

Pelops.. 

Section IV.—THE PRIESTS OP THE GREAT MOTHER 

Gaia and Ouranos . . . . . , .311 

.Rhea .......... 312 

The Kour^tes and Idaioi Bahtyloi . . . . . .313 

The Kabeiroi and Horybantes . . . . . ,314 

Section V.~THE PEOPLE OP THE WOODS AND WATERS. 

The Satyrs ......... 315 

The Seil^noi ......... 31$ 

The Latin Silanus . . . . . . . .318 

Priapos ...... . . 318 


CHAPTER IX. 

THE UNDEE WOULD, 

Section 1—HADES. 


The buried Treasure ...... 

. 319 

Ilad^s or AidOneus ...... 

. 319 

The Rivers of the Unseen Land .... 

. 320 

Section H.—ELYSION. 

The Judges of the Dead ..... 

. 821 

The Asphodel Meadows ..... 

. 322 


PAGE 

29G 

298 

299 

300 

301 

302 

303 
303 
306 
306 

306 

307 








XIV 


CONTENTS OP 


CHAPTER X. 

THE DAEKNES8. 

Section L—VRITBA AND AHI. 

The Story of Saram4 and Helen 

India and Achillens ..... 

The Struggle between Light and Darkness . 

The Oreat Enemy ..... 

Pani and Paris ..... 

Snakes and Worms ..... 

The Stolen Cattle ..... 

The Blocking-up of Fountains 

The Stolen Nymphs ..... 

Bayana and Sita ..... 

The Trojan Paris ..... 

Helen and PenelopS ..... 

Herakles and Echidna .... 

Orthros ...... 

Typhon ...... 


Section II.—THE LATIN KYTE. 


Hercules and Oacus . 

Cacus another Form of Vritra 
Sancus or Becaranus . 


Section HI.—BELLEBOPHCN. 

The Monster Belleros .... 

Leophontes ...... 


Section IV.—THE THEBAN MYTH. 

The Sphinx ........ 

The Biddle solyed ....... 

The Voice of the Thunder ...... 

m 

Section V.—THE DELPHIAN AND CBETAN MYTHS. 

The Pythian Dragon ...... 

The Minotauros 

Section VI.—THE GLOAMING AND THE NIGHT. 

The Phorkides, Graiai, and Gorgons .... 

The Night and the Winter .... 

Modification of the Myth .... 


PAQE 

324 

326 

326 
320 

327 

327 
828 

328 

329 

329 

330 

332 

333 
336 
336 


. 337 
. 338 
. 339 


. 341 
. 343 


. 344 
. 346 
. 347 


. 347 
. 348 


, 350 
. 351 
. 352 










THE SECOND VOLUME. 


XV 


Sbctiok Vn.-~THE PHYSICAL STRUGGLE SPIRITUALISED. 


Contrast between Hindu and Iranian Mythology .... 353 

Identity of Names in Vedic and Persian Mythology .... 353 

Azidabilca and Zohak ....... 354 

Iranian Dualism ........ 356 

Its Influence on the Jews . . . . . . .356 

The Epic of Pirdusi ........ 357. 

Section Vin.—THE SEMITIC AND ARYAN DEVIL. 

The Semitic Satan ........ 368 

Effect of Christian Teaching ....... 359 

The Teutonic Devil ........ 361 

Wayland the Smith . . . . . . . .362 

The Blinded Devil ........ 365 


APPENDICES. 

I. Laios and Dasyu ....... 367 

n. The Siege of Troy ....... 368 

ni. The Stauros or Cross ....... 369 













THE MYTHOLOGY 

OF 

THE AKYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 11. 


CHAPTEE IL— coniiwaed. 

THE LIGHT. 

Sbotion VIL—aphrodite. 

The story told in the Hesiodic Theogony is manifestly a 
comparatively late form of the legend of Aphrodite. Yet it 
resolves itself almost at the first touch into the early myth¬ 
ical phrases. Prom the blood of the mutilated Ouranos 
which fell upon the sea sprang the beautifal goddess who 
made Kythira and Kypros her home, as Phoibos dwelt in 
Lykia and in Delos. This is but saying in other words 
that the morning, the child of the heaven, springs up fimt 
from the sea,' as AtMnS also is bom by the water-side. But 
as Ath^n6 became the special embodiment of the keen wis¬ 
dom which Phoibos alone shared vdth her, so on*Aphrodite, 
the child of the firoth or foam of the sea, was lavished all 
the wealth of words denoting the loveliness of the morn- 

1 We have already seen, vol. i. p. 368, of the dawns. So too, as the dawn and 
that Kronos is a-mere creation from the the morning are bom from the heaven, 
older and mistinderstood epithet Kro- the mutilation of Ouranos or Kronos 
nides or Kronifin, the ancient of days, but would inevitably be suggested.^ The 
that when these days, or time, had come idea is seen in another form in the 
to be regarded as a person, the myth splitting of the head of Zeus before the 
would certainly follow that he devoured birth of Ath4n4. 

^ his own children, as time is the devourer 

VOIi II. 


CHAP. 

It 


Birth of 
Aphrodite. 


B 



2 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BO(^ t&g; and thus the Hesiodic poet goes on at once to any that 
. the grass sprung up under her feet as she moved, tliat ErAs, 
Love, walked by her side, and Himeros, Longing, followed 
after her*' At her birth she is not only the beautiful 
Anadyomene of Apelles, as the sun whom Seleutl comes to 
greet is Endymi6n,* but she is also Enalia and Poiitiu, the 
deity of the deep sea.® In our Eiad and Odyssey the myth 
is scarcely yet crystallised. In the former j)oem Aplirotlitfi 
is the daughter of Zeus and Dion4, in whom was seen the 
mother of Dionysos after her resurrection. Li the Odyssey 
she is the wife of Hephaistos, whose love for ArCs forms the 
subject of the lay of Demodokos. Here she is attended by 
the Charites who wash her and anoint her with oil at 
Paphos. In the Iliad, however, the wife of Hephaistos is 
Charis, and thus we are brought back to the old myth in 
which both Charis and Aphrodite are mere names for the 
glistening dawn. In Charis we have simply the brilliance 
produced by fat or ointment,* which is seen again in 
Liparai Athenai, the gleaming city of the morning. In the 
Vedic hymns this epithet has already i^assed from the dawn 
or the sun to the shining steeds which draw their chariot, and 
the Haris and Harits are the horses of Indra, the sun, and 
the dawn, as the Eohits are the horses of Agni, the fire.® 
Thus also the single Charis of the Hiad is converted into the 


.» Theog. 194-201. 

* The words tell each its own story, 
the one denoting uprising from water, 
as the other denotes the down-plunging 
into it, the root being found also in the 
English djive, and the Gherman taufen, 

* This notion is seen in the strange 
myth of transformations in which to 
escape from Typhon in the war between 
Zeus and the Jitans, Aphroditi, like 
Phoibos and Onnes, Thetis or Proteus, 
assumes the form of a fish. Ov. Met, 
V. 331 With this idea there is pro¬ 
bably mmgled m this instance that 
notion of the vesica piseis as the emblem 
of generation, and denoting the special 
function of Apbrodit4. The same em¬ 
blematical form is seen in the kestos or 
cestus of Aphrodite, which answers to 
the necklace of Harmoma or EriphyU. 
This cestus has the magic power of in¬ 
spiring love, and w used by KM, when 
she wishes to prevent 2^us from marring 


her dc^signs. 

* Max Miiller, Zeoiures on Language, 
second senes, 369, 875. The Latin 
Gratia belongs to the same root, which 
yields —as has been already noticed—our 
‘grease.’ Objoctious founded on any 
supposed degrading association of ideas 
in this connection are themselves un¬ 
worthy and trivial. Professor Muller 
remarks that * as fat and greasy infants 
grow into airy toy lllians, so do 
words and ideas,’ and that * <^e Psalmist 
does not shrink from even bolder meta»- 
phors,’ as in Psalm cxxxiii. That the root 
which thus supplied a name for AphiO- 
dit5 should aJso be employed 
'gracefulness or charm in is 

strictly natural. Thus the ^aSScrit 
arka is a name not only for sun, 
but also for a hymn of praise, while the 
cognate arkshas denoted the shining 
stars, 

® Max Muller, ib, 370. 



THE CHARITBS OR GRACES. 


3 


Charites of the Odyssey, tlie gracefal beings whose form gHap. 
Hellenic mythology is always hnman.^ ‘ .. 1^:. ^ 

With this origin of the name Charis all the myths which Tlie mini- 
have gathered round the Charites are in the closest agree- Aphrodite 
ment; and they do but resolve themselves, somewhat mo¬ 
notonously, into expressions denoting the birth of the morn¬ 
ing from the heavens or the sky, and the sea or the waters. 

In the Hesiodic Theogony, the Charis who is the wife of 
Hephaistos is called Aglaia (the shining), whose name is also 
that of Aigle, Glaukos, and Athdn§ of the bright face 
(Glaukdpis). In other versions their mother is herself Aigle, 
who here becomes a wife of Phoibos ; in others again she is 
Eurydomene, or Eurynome, names denoting with many others 
the broad flush of the morning light; or she is LSth6, as 
Phoibos is also a son of L^t6, and the bright Dioskouroi 
spring from the colourless Leda. So too the two Spartan 
Charites are, like Phaethousa and Lampetid, K14t^ and 
Phaenna (the clear and glistening). But beautiful though 
they aU might be, there would yet be room for rivalry or 
comparison, and thus the story of the judgment of Paris is 
repeated in the sentence by which Teiresias adjudged the 
prize of beauty to Kal^, the fair. The seer in this case 
brings on himself a punishment which answers to the ruin 
caused by the verdict of Paris.* 

As the goddess of the dawn. Aphrodite is endowed with The 
arrows irresistible as those of Phoibos or Achilleus, the rays 
which stream like spears from the flaming sun and are as 
fatal to the darkness as the arrows of Aphrodite to the giant 
Polyphemos. Nay, like Ixion himself, she guides the four- 
spoked wheel, the golden orb at its first rising: but she does 
not share his punishment, for Aphrodite is not. •seen in the 
blazing noontide.® In her brilliant beauty she is Arjuni, a 

* Professor 372. remarks poets, for in one hymn the Harits are 

that m Greek the name Chans never called the Sisters, and in another are 
means a horse, and that ‘ it never passed represented with beantifiil wings, 
through that phase in the mind of the - Sostratos ap. Eustath, ad Horn. 

Greek poets ^ich is so familiar in the p. 1665. Smith, Biotionary of Greek and 
poetry of the Indian bards ’ But the Rom, Biography, s. v Charis. 

Greek notion, he observes, had at the • Find. Pyth iv, 380. 
least dawned on the mind of the Vedic 



4 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAX xVATIOXS. 


LOOK 

II. 


Her 

children. 


Sl^are of 
Aphrodite 
in the 
Trojan 
war. 


name whicli appears again in that of Aijuna, the companion 
^ of Krishna, and the Hellenic Argynnis. 

But the conception of the morning in the form of Aphro- 
ditl exhibits none of the severity which marks the character 
of Athdn^. She is the dawn in all her loveliness and si>lon- 
dour, but the dawn not as nnsullied by any breath of passi<in, 
but as waking all things into life, as the great mother who 
preserves and fosters all creatures in whom is the breath of 
life. She would thus be associated most closely with those 
forms under which the phenomena of reproduction wei’o uni¬ 
versally set forth. She would thus be a goddess lavish of 
her smiles and of her love, rcost benignant to her closest 
imitators ; and as the vestals of Athens showed forth the 
purity of the Zeus-born goddess, so the Hierodouloi of 
Corinth would exhibit the opposite sentiment, and answer 
to the women who assembled in the temples of the Syrian 
Mylitta. The former is really Aphrodite Ourania; the latter 
the Aphrodite known by the epithet Pandfimos. Aphroditt^ 
is thus the mother of countless children, not all of them 
lovely and beautiful like herself, for the dawn may be re¬ 
garded as sprung from the darkness, and the evening (Eds) as 
the mother of the darkness again. Hence like Echidna and 
Typhon, Phobos and Deimos (fear and dread) are among the 
offspring whom the bright Paphian goddess bore to Ares, 
whUe Priapos and Bacchos are her children by Dionysos. 
Kor is her love confined to undying gods. The so-called 
Homeric hymn teUs the story how in the guise of a simple 
maiden she came to the folds where the Trojan Anchises was 
tending his flocks, and how Aineias was bom, whom the 
nymphs loved by the Seilenoi and Hermes the Areos-Slaver 
tended and cdierislied.^ 

In the Iliad, Aphroditd, as the mother of 
on the side of Dion, not so much because she has any keen 
wish for the victory of the one side rather than the other, as 
because she desires to preserve her child and make him a 
father of many nations. Nowhere in fact do we more clearly 
see the disintegration of the earliest myths than in the part 
which the several deities play in the long struggle before the 

^ Bymn to Ajp^roditS, 268 . 



APIIRODITfi AXD AIXEIAS. 


5 


walls of Ilion. That struggle is strictly the desperate strife CHAP 
which is to avenge the wrongs and woes of Helen and to end . 
in her return to her ancient home in the west,—the return 
of the beautiful dawnlight, whom the powers of darkness 
had borne away from the western heavens in tlie evening. 

It is unnecessary to do more here than to refer to the evid¬ 
ence by which this conclusion may be regarded as proved; 
but it follows hence that not only is the faithless Helen the 
Saramd whom the dark beings vainly try to seduce in the 
hymns of the Veda, but Paris is Pani, the cheat and the 
tliief, who steals away and shuts up the light in his secret 
lurking-place. Thus in the early and strict form of the 
myth, Helen is all light and Paris is all blackness; and his 
kinsfolk are the robbers which are associated with the great 
seducer. Hence we should expect that on the side of the 
Trojans there would be only the dark and forbidding gods, 
on the side of the Achaians only those who dwell in the 
ineffable light of Olympos. The latter is indeed the case; 
but although H^r^, the queen of the pure ether, is the zeal¬ 
ous guardian of the Argive hosts, and Ath§nd gives strength 
to the weapons and wisdom to the hearts of AchiHeus and 
Odysseus, yet Apolldn and Aphrodite are not partakers in 
their counsels. Throughout, the latter is anxious only for the 
safety of her child, and Apollon encourages and comforts the 
noble and self-devoted Hektor. There was in truth nothinsr 
in the old mythical phrases which could render this result 
either impossible or unlikely. The victory of the Achaians 
might be the victory of the children of the sun over the dark 
beings who have deprived them of their brilliant treasure, 
but there was no reason why on each hero, on either side, 
there should not rest something of the lustre* which sur¬ 
rounds the forms of Phoibos, Herakles, Perseus, and Bellero- 
ph6n. There might be a hundred myths inwoven into the 
history of either side, so long as this was done without vio¬ 
lating the laws of mythical credibility. Grlankos must not 
himself take part in the theft of Helen: but if local tradition 
made him a Lykian chief not only in a mythical but also in 
a geographical sense, there was no reason why he should not 
leave his home to repel the enemies of Priam. Phoibos must • 



MYTHOLOGY OF THE AHYAX NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


not SO far turn tlie course of events as to secure the triumph 
of Paris: but he might fairly be regarded as the supporter 
and guide of the generous and self-sacrificing Hektor. Hence 
when the death day of Hektor has come, Apoll6n leaves him, 
reluctantly it may be, but still he abandons him while 
Athens draws near to Achilleus to nerve him for the final 
conflict.^ So again, AphroditS may wrap Aineias in mist 
and thus withdraw him from the fight which was going 
against him; but she must not herself smite his enemy 
Diom^d^s, and the Achaian must be victor even at the cost 
of the blood which flows within her own veins. But when 
the vengeance of Achilleus is accomplished, she may again 
perform her own special work for the fallen Hektor. The 
dawn is the great preserver, purifier, and restorer; and hence 
though the body of Hektor had been tied by the feet to 
Achilleus’ chariot wheels and trailed in the defiling dust,^ 
still all that is unseemly is cleansed away and the beauty of 
death brought back by Aphrodite, who keeps off all dogs and 
anoints him with the ambrosial oil which makes all decay 
impossible, while Phoibos shrouds the body in a purple mist, 
to temper the fierce heat of the midday sun.^ It is true that 
this kindly office, by which the bodies of Chundun Rajah and 
Sodewa Bai are preserved in the Hindu fairy tales, is per¬ 
formed for the body of Patroklos by Thetis: but Thetis, like 
Ath§n^ and Aphrodite, is herself the child of the waters, and 
the mother of a child whose bright career and early doom is, 


' The importance of the subject war¬ 
rants my repeating that too great a 
stress cannot be laid on this passage of 
the Iliad (xxii. 213) With an unfairness 
which would be astounding if we failed 
to remember that Colonel Mure had an 
hypothesis to maintain which must be 
maintained at all costs, the author of 
the Ontical History of Greek Jjiterature 
thought fit to glorify Achilleus and 
vilify Hektor, on the ground that the 
latter overcame Patroklos only because 
he was aided by Phoibos, while the 
former smote down Hektor only in fair 
combat and by his own unaided force. 
But in point of fact Achilleus cannot 
slay his antagonist until Phoibos has 
deserted him, and no room whatever is 


left for any comparison which may turn 
the balance in favour of either warrior. 
In neither case are the conditions with 
which we are dealing the conditions of 
human life, nor can the heroes be 
judged by the scales in which mankind 
must be weighed. Nay, not only does 
Phoibos leave Hektor to his own devices, 
but Ath^n^ cheats him into resisting 
Achilleus, when perhaps his own sober 
sense would have led him to retreat 
'within the walls 11. xxii. 231. 

U xxii 396. Yet it has been 
gravely asserted that ‘Homer knows 
nothing of any deliberate insults to the 
body of Hektor, or of any barbarous in¬ 
dignities practised upon it/ 

^ 11. xxiii. 186-191. 



ADONIS. 


7 


like that of Meleagros, boiand up with the hrilliant but short- CHAP, 
lived day. ^ ^ 

But the dawn as bringing back the sun and thus recalling Apliroditfe 
to life the slumbering powers of nature is .especially the lover 
of the bright fruits and flowers which gladden her brilliant 
pathway. In other words. Aphrodite loves Adonis, and 
would have him for ever with her. The word Adonis is 
manifestly Semitic, and the influence of Asiatic thought 
may be readily admitted in the later developements of this 
myth; but the myth itself is one which must be suggested 
to the inhabitants of every country where there is any visible 
alternation or succession of seasons. There is nothing in 
the cultus of Tammuz which may not be found in that of 
D^mSt^r or Baldur, if we except its uncontrolled licentious¬ 
ness. It is scarcely necessary to go through all the details 
of the later mythographers,—^not one of which, however, 
presents any real discordance with the oldest forms of the 
legend. Adonis, as denoting the jQruitfiilness and the fruits 
of the earth, must spring from its plants, and so the story 
ran that he was bom from the cloven body of his mother 
who had been changed into a tree, as AthSn^ sprang from 
the cloven head of Zeus. The beautiful babe, anointed by 
the Naiads with his mother’s tears (the dews of spring-time) 
as the tears of E6s fall for her dead son Memn6n, was 
placed in a chest and put into the hands of Persephon^, the 
queen of the underworld, who, marking his wonderful loveli¬ 
ness, refused to yield up her charge to Aphrodite. ^ It is 
the seeming refusal of the wintry powers to loosen their 
clutch and let go their hold of the babe which cannot thrive 
until it is released from their grasp. But the Dawn is not 
thus to be foiled, and she carries her complaint to Zeus, who 
decides that the child shall remain during four months of 
each year with Persephon^^ and for four he should remain 
with his mother, while the remaining four were to be at 
his own disposal. In a climate like that of Greece the 
myth would as inevitably relate that these four months he 
spent with Aphrodite, as on the fells of Norway it would run 

' In short PersephonS refuses to give jealously guards on the Glistening 
up the treasure which the dragon so Heath, 



8 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK that he was compelled to spend them in Mflheim. Still the 
n_,j:—. doom is upon him. He must beware of all noxious and 
biting beasts. The fair summer cannot longer survive the 
deadly bite of winter than Little Surya Bai the piercing of 
the Eaksha’s claw, or Baldur withstand the mistletoe of 
Loki. Like Atys the fair and brave, he is to meet his death 
in a boar-hunt; and the bite, which only leaves a life-long 
mark on the body of Odysseus, brings to an end the dream of 
Aphrodite. In vain she hastens to stanch the wound. The 
flowers (the last lingering flowers of autumn) spring up 
from the nectar which she pours into it, but Adonis the 
beautiful must die. Once again she carries the tale of her 
sorrow to Zeus, who grants her some portion of her prayer. 
Adonis may not, like Memndn or like Sarp^don (for in some 
versions he also is raised again), dwell always in the halls 
of Olympos, but for six months in the year he may return 
to cheer Aphrodite as, in the Eleusinian legend, Per¬ 
sephone is restored to the arms of Demeter. Of the love 
of Aphrodite for Boutes it is enough to say that Boutes, the 
shepherd, is a priest of the dawn-goddess Athene, who, as the 
Argonauts approach within hearing of the Seirens, throws 
himself into the sea, but is saved by Aphrodite and carried 
away to Lilybaion.^ 

The armed. Lastly, Aphrodite may assume a form as stem and awfol 
AphroditA Athene herself. As Duhita Divah, the daughter 

of the sky, is invincible, so Aphrodite, as the child of Ouranos 
and Hemera, the heaven and the day, has a power which 
nothing can resist, and the Spartan worshipped her as a 
conquering goddess clad in armour and possessing the 
strength which the Athenian poet ascribes to Er6s the in¬ 
vincible in battle. 2 

Venus^^^^ Latin Venus is, in strictness of speech, a mere name, 

to which any epithet might be attached according to the 
conveniences or the needs of the worshipper. The legends 
which the later poets applied to her are mere importations 
from Greek mythology, and seem to be wholly unnoticed in 
earlier Eoman tradition. When the Eoman began to trace 
his genealogy to the grandson of Priam, the introduction of 
1 ApoUod. I 9, 25. 2 Soph. Ant, 781. 



VENUS. 


9 


name. 


the story of Anchises was followed naturallv hrr 
irom the same source; but they found no eono-en' 1 'i • li¬ 
the genuine belief of the people, for whom ^ ^ ' 

epithets supplied the place of mythical history. With them 
it was enough to have a Venus Myrtea (a name of doubifS 
origin), or Cloacina the purifier, barbata, the bearded 
militaris, equestris, and a host of others, •wTino^, ’ 

too.yag«e to caU for anjr oareM diafikcS 

Tto 0^0 Mhaa wodd rriag„„a reason, 

connected with the Sanskrit root van, to desire love or 
favour. _ Thus, in the Eig Veda, girvanas mealis loving “ 
invocations, and yajnavanas loving sacrifices while the 
common Sanskrit preserves vanita in the sense of a beloved 
woman. To the same root belong the Anglo-Saxon 
pleasure, the German wonne, and the EnolicV • 

The word Venus, therefore, denotes either love or favour 
To the former signification belongs the Latin venustas • To 
the latter the verb veneror, to venerate, in other words’ to 
seek the favour of any one, venia being strictly favoui&fr 
permission.* Venus was probably not the oldest and c^^ 
tainly not the only name for the goddess of love’ in Ital 
as the Oscan deity was named Herentas. 

The myth of Adonis links the legends of Aphrodite with 

those of Dionysos. Like the Theban wine-god Adonis is 

born only on the death of his mother: and the’two mThs 

are in one version so far the same that Dionvcno vi a / • 

. , ,. vxv-vv- X-. '^^ysos iike Adonis 

IS placed in a chest which being cast mto tbp oo„ • • i 

X -D • • V XV V ;i A- ,, sea IS earned 
to Brasiai, where the body of his mother is buried But 

like lilemndn and the Syrian Tammuz or Adonis SemM^ 

raised from the underworld and on her assumption 

the name of Dion^. , 


Adonis 
and Dio¬ 
nysos. 


IS 

receives 


Section YIII.—HERlfe. 

In the Hellenic mythology H^r6, in spite 


majesty with which she is sometimes invested and^^^e^^ 

* From cluere >= Ifto wosli or 


Myths re^ 
lating to 
the hirth 


cleanse. Most of these epithets lie be¬ 
yond the region of mythology. They 
are mere official names, like Venus 
Calva^, which seemingly has reference to 


power 

the practice of devotino T i ^ of HIrA 

the We’s hair on tL I ^ 

^ I am indebted 

to Professor Anfreeht- ^I^anatiOBi 
ness of Dr. MtS! “ the hnd- 



10 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


whicli is sometimes exercised by ber, is little more than a 
being of tbe same class with Kronos. The same necessity 
which produced the one evoked the other. Zens mnst have a 
father, and the name of this father was suggested by the epi¬ 
thet Kionides or Kronion. In like manner he mnst have a 
wife, and her name mnst denote her abode in the pure and 
brilliant ether. Accordingly the name HSr^ points to the 
Sanskrit svar, the gleaming heaven, and the Zend hvar, the 
snn, which in Sanskrit appears in the kindred form Shrya, 
and in Latin as Sol.^ She is thus strictly the consort of 
Zens, with rather the semblance than the reality of any inde¬ 
pendent powers. In the Hiad she speaks of herself as the 
eldest daughter of Kronos, by whom, like the rest of his 
progeny, she was swallowed, and as having been given by 
Eheia into the charge of Okeanos and Tethys, who nursed 
and tended her after Kronos had been dethroned and im¬ 
prisoned by Zens beneath the earth and sea.^ This myth 
passed naturally into many forms, and according t6 some 
she was brought up by the daughters of the river Asterion 
(a phrase which points to the bright blue of heaven coming 
into sight in the morning over the yet starlit waters), while 
others gave her as her nurses the beautiful Horai,® to whose 
charge are committed the gates of heaven, the clouds which 
they scatter from the summits of Olympos and then bring 
to it again.^ In other words, the revolving seasons all 
sustain the beauty and the splendour of the bright ether. 
When she became the bride of Zeus, she presented Lim with 
the golden apples, the glistening clouds of the morning,® 
guarded first by the hundred-headed offspring of Typhon 


^ Welefcer, GriecJiische Gbtterlehre, i, 
363, regards thef^ame as a cognate form 
of ipa, earth, and traces it through a 
large number of words which he sup¬ 
poses to be akin to it. Of this and 
other explanations, Preller, who refers 
the name to the Sanskrit svar, says 
briefly ‘ Die gewohnlichen Erklarungen 
von ipa^ die Erde, oder von die Luft, 
oder'^H/ja, d i Hera, die Erau, die Herrin 
schlechthin, lassen sich weder etymolo- 
gisch noch dem Sinne nach rechtferti- 
gen.’— Gnechische Mythologie, i. 124. 

* 11. xiv. 201 

* Fans, li. 13, 3. 


^ In this case we have the authority 
of the Iliad itself for an interpretation 
which would otherwise be probably 
censured as a violent straining of the 
text. but the office of the gatekeeper of 
Olympos is expressly stated to be 

avaKKiyai irvKipbv y€<pos rjS* hriOeiyou'’ 
V. 761. 

Preller, Gr. Myth. 374. 

* This myth, which arose from the 
confusion of the word an apple, 

with fi^Koy^ a sheep, is ready only ano¬ 
ther form of the legend which gave the 
story of Phaethoiisa and LampetiS. 



HfiB® AND ZEUS. 


and EcHdna, and afterwards by Aigle, Erytbeia, Hestia 
and Aretbousa, tbe glistening children of Hesperos, whether 
in Libya or in the Hyperborean gardens of Atlas.^ 

Throughout the Hiad, which makes no mention of this 
incident, the will of H^re, though compelled to submit, is by 
no means always in harmony with the will of Zeus. The 
Argives, the children of the bright evening land, are exclu¬ 
sively the objects of her love 5 and the story of the judgment 
of Paris was designed to furnish a reason for this exclusive 
favour. So the tale went that when the gods were assem¬ 
bled at the marriage board of Thetis and Peleus, Eris flung 
on the table a golden apple to be given to the fairest 
of the fair. The trial which follows before the shepherd of 
Ida (the sun still resting on the slopes of the earth which he 
loves) is strictly in accordance with the mythical characters 
of H^rS and Athen^, as well as of Aphrodite, to whom, as 
the embodiment of the mere physical loveliness of the dawn 
(apart from the ideas of wisdom or power underlying the 
conceptions of HSrS and Ath^n^), the golden prize is 
awarded. Henceforth Aphrodite threw in her weight on 
the side of the Trojans, while Athene and Her6 gave their 
aid to the kinsfolk or the avengers of Helen. But the 
way was not so clear to Zeus as it seemed to be to HSr^. 
Hektor himself was the darling of Apoll6n, and here alone 
was a reason why Zeus should not be eager to bring about 
the victory of the Achaians; but among the allies of Priam 
there were others in whose veins his own blood was running, 
the Aithiopian Memn6n, the child of the morning, Glaukos, 
the brave chieftain from the land of light, and, dearest of aU, 
Sarpfed6n. Here at once there were causes of strife between 
Zeus and his queen, and in these quarrels H^e wins her 
ends partly by appealing to his policy or his fears, or by 
obtaining from Aphrodite her girdle of irresistible power. 
Ohly once do we hear of any attempt at force, and this 
instance is famished by the conspiracy in which she plots 
with Poseid6n and Ath^nS to make Zeus a prisoner. This 
scheme is defeated by Thetis and Briareos, and perhaps with 
this may be connected the story that Zeus once hung up 

^ Apollod. ii. 5, 11. 


-'VJ 

CHAP. 

II. 


Eelations 
of Zeus 
and H4re. 



12 


BOOK 

II. 


H^r4 and 
Ixi6n. 


Akraia. 


the 

Matron. 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

in the heaven with golden handcuflfe on her wrists and 
two heavy anvils suspended from her feet. In the same way 
she is at enmity with Herakles, and is wounded by his 
barbed arrows. But where the will of Zeus is not directly 
thwarted, is endowed with the attributes even of 

Phoibos himself. Thus she imparts to the horse Xanthos the 
gifts at once of human speech and of prophecy, and sends 
the unwilling Helios to his ocean bed when Patroklos falls 
beneath the spear of Hektor. 

But while Zeus asserts and enforces his own power over 
her, none other may venture to treat her with insult 5 and 
the proud Ixidn himself is fastened to the four-spoked wheel 
of noon-day, for his presumption in seeking the love of the 
wife of Zeus. The sun as climbing the heights of heaven, 
and wooing the bright ether, is an arrogant being who must 
be bound to the fiery cross, or whose flaming orb must be 
made to descend to the west, like the stone of Sisyphos, just 
when it has reached the zenith, or summit of the hill. 

Among the many names under which she was known 
appears the epithet Akraia, which was supposed to describe 
her as the protectress of cities, but which was applied also 
to Ath^n 4 as denoting the bright sky of morning.^ Thus 
viewed she is the mother of H6b6, the embodiment of ever¬ 
lasting youth, the cupbearer of Zeus himself. H^rS, how^ 
ever, like Ath^nS, has her dark and terrible aspects. From 
Ouranos, the heaven, spring the gigantic monsters. Thunder 
and Lightning; and as the source of like convulsions, H^r6 
is the mother of Ar^s (Mars), the crusher, and Hephaistos, 
the forger of the thunderbolts. 

But her relations to marriage are those which were most 
prominently brought out in her worship throughout Hellas. 
She is the wife of Zeus in a sense which could not be applied 
to any other of the Olympian deities; and, apart from the 
offspring which she produces by her own unaided powers, 
she has no children of which Zeus is not the father. Hence 
she was regarded both as instituting marriage, and punish¬ 
ing those who violate its duties. It is she who sends the 
Eileithyiai to aid women, when their hour is corner and 
* See Preller, Or, Myth, i. 125. 



IDEA OF KECESSITY. 

thus she has that power of hastening or retarding a hirth 
which is nsed to give Eurystheus priority over Herakles. 

In these functions she is practically identical with the 
Latin Juno (a name closely akin to that of Zeus).^ But 
Juno not only presides over marriage. She is the special 
protectress of women from the cradle to the grave, and as 
such, is Matrona and Virginalis. As Moneta, the guardian 
of the mint, she hears a name which connects her functions 
with those of Minerva. 


Section IX.—^THB ERZJSnTBS. 

In the whole cycle of Greek mythology no idea perhaps is 
more prominent than that of the inevitable doom.of toil, 
sorrow, and suffering which is laid without exception on 
every one of the heroes, and on all the gods, unless it be 
Zeus himself. For none is there any permanent rest or 
repose. Phoibos may not tarry in his brilliant birthplace, 
and his glance must be fatal to the maiden whom he loves. 
Nay, more, he must fight with, and destroy the Kykldpes, 
the loathsome giants or storm-clouds ; but these are the chil¬ 
dren of Zeus, and Phoibos must therefore atone for his deed 
by a long servitude in the house of Admetos. But on this 
house there rests the same awful fate. In the midst of all her 
happiness and wealth Alk^stis must die if her husband is to 
live, and the poet who teUs the tale declares in the anguish 
of his heart that he has searched the heaven above and the 
earth beneath, and found nothing so mighty,'so invincible, as 
this iron force, which makes gods and men bow beneath her 
sway. The history of Phoibos is the history of all who are 
of 1 ^ to him. Herakles, with all his strength and spirit, 
must still be a slave, and the slave of one infinitely weaker 
and meaner than himself. Perseus must be tom away from 
his mother Dana$, to go and face strange perils and fight 
with fearful monsters. He must even unwittingly do harm 
to others, and his mischief must end in the disorder of his 
own mind, and the loss of power over his own wOl. He must 


13 


CHAP. 

IL 


Tlie Latin 
Juno. 


Doctrine 
of Neces¬ 
sity. 


Vol.i.p 364. 



14 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOH show certain dispositions, and do certain acts. The sun 
'—' must rise in the heavens, must seem to woo the queen of the 
deep blue ether, must rouse the anger of her lord, must be 
hurled down from his lofty place. Hence, Ixi6n must writhe 
on his fiery cross, and Sisyphos must roll the huge stone to 
the hilltop only to see it dash down again to the plain 
beneath. There would not be wanting more terrible crimes 
and more mysterious complications. The Sun must be united 
again in the evening to the mother from whom he was 
parted in the morning; and hence that awful marriage of 
Oidipous with lokast^, which filled his house with woe and 
brought his lineage to an end in blood. Iphigeneia must die 
that Helen may be brought back, as the evening twilight must 
vanish away if the light of dawn is to come again. But 
Iphigeneia has done no wroug. She is the darling of her 
father’s heart, and the memories linked with her image are 
those only of tenderness and love. Must there not then be 
vengeance taken for the outpouring of her innocent blood ? 
And can AtS rest till she has visited on Agamemnon himself 
the death of his guiltless child ? 

The con- Without going further, we have here the germs, and more 
tween ' germs, of doctrines which, from the time that these 

dSimess awakened in the human mind, have moulded the 

theology of the world—^the doctrines of irresistible force, of 
the doom which demands blood for blood, of the destiny 
which shapes a man’s life even before he is born. These 
doctrines necessarily assume at an early age a moral or a 
spiritual character; but the ideas which underlie them were 
evoked by the physical phenomena of nature. The moral 
conflict and antagonism between Ormuzd and Ahriman 
points to the earlier struggle in which Indra fights with and 
slays the biting snake, the thief, the seducer, who hides 
away his prey in his dismal cave 5 and the battle between 
spiritual good and evil takes form from the war between 
the light of the Sun and the darkness of the night. But 
while these ideas were passing more and more into the 
region of things spiritual, and were becoming crystallized in 
theological systems, the growth of a physical mythology was 
not wholly arrested. The vengeance for iniquity may belong 



THE FATAL SISTERS. 

to tie feaxful Erinyes 5 but tie Erinys is still a being wbo 
wanders in tie air. The wratb of At6 may never slumber, 
so long as the murderer remains unpunished; but she is still 
the tangible being whom Zeus seizes by her long-flowing 
locks, and hurls from the portals of Olympos. But the 
impulse to a moral mythology once given could not but call 
into existence other beings answering to At^ or the Erinyes 
in their purely spiritual aspects. From the idea of a being 
who can see all that is done by the children of men would 
come the notion of three beings, each having as its province 
severally the past, the present, and the future; while the 
lot which is each man^s portion, and the doom which he 
cannot avoid would be apportioned to him by beings whose 
names would denote their functions or the gentler qualities 
which men ascribed to them in order ^ to deprecate their 
wrath. 

Of these beings the Erinyes are in the Hellenic mythology 
among the most fearful—so fearful, indeed, that their wor¬ 
shippers, or those who had need to speak of them, called them 
rather the Eumenides, or merciful beings, to win from them 
the pity which they were but little supposed to feel. Yet 
these awful goddesses ^ are but representatives of the Yedic 
Saranyu, the beautiful morning whose soft light steals across 
the heaven, and of whom it was said that she would And out 
the evil deeds committed during the night, and punish the 
wrongdoer. Still, unconscious though the Athenian may 
have been of the nature of the beings whom he thus dreaded 
or venerated, they retained some of their ancient character¬ 
istics. Terrible as they might be to others, they had only a 
genial welcome for the toilworn and suffering Oidipous, the 
being who all his life long had struggled against the doom 
which had pressed heavily on the Argive HeraMes. Close 
to Athens, the city of the dawn goddess, is their sacred 
grove 5 and under the shadow of its clustering trees the 
blinded Oidipous will tranquilly wait until it is his time to 
die. Where else can the weary journey come to an end 
than amidst the sacred groves in which the Erinyes are seen 
in the evening, weaving, like PenelopS, the magic web which 

^ trffxj/al deal. 


15 

CHAP. 

II. 


Erinyes 
and Eii-< 
menides^ 



16 


BOOK 

II. 


The Fatal 
Sisters. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN" NATIONS. 

is to be ■andone again during the night ? The threads of this 
web become in their hands, and in those of the kindred 
Moirai, the lines of human destiny. Having said thus much 
of these dreaded beings we have practically said all. Mytho- 
graphers could not fail to speak of them as children of Gaia, 
sprung from the blood of the mutilated Ouranos, or as the 
daughters of the night, or of the earth and darkness—a 
parentage which will apply with equal truth to Phoibos or 
the Dioskouroi. When we are told that, in cases where 
their own power seems inadequate they call in the aid of 
Dik^ or Justice, we are manifestly on the confines of allegory, 
which we are not bound to cross. In the conceptions of later 
poets, they appear, like the Gorgons, with writhing snakes 
in place of hair, and with blood dripping from their eyes; 
and as naturally, when their number was limited to three, 
they received names which, like All^kt6, Megaira, and Tisi- 
phon^, imply relentless hatred, jealousy, and revenge. Their 
domain is thus far wider and more terrible than that of the 
Moirai, who weave, deal out, and cut short the thread of 
human life. 

Prom this point the mythology, which has grown up, such 
as it is, round the fatal sisters, may be regarded as thoroughly 
artificial. The division of time into the past, the present, 
and the future once made, it only remained to assign these 
divisions severally to one personal being, ‘and to invest this 
being with attributes suited to the office which it has to 
perform. It may be instructive to trace the process by 
which the single Moira of the Iliad and Odyssey suggests the 
notion of many Moirai, and is represented by the Hesiodic 
sisters, K 16 th 6 , Lachesis, and Atropos; but the process is 
altogether different from that which, starting with phrases 
denoting simply the action of wind or air in motion, gives 
us first the myths of Hermes, Orpheus, Pan, and AmpHon, 
and ends with the folk-lore of the Master Thief and the 
Shifty Lad. In the latter case, the mythmaker knew little, 
probably nothing, of the source and the meaning of the 
story, and worked in unconscious fidelity to traditions which 
had taken too strong a root to be lightly dislodged or 
materially changed. In the former we have the work rather 



THE FATES. 

of the moralist or the theologian. The course of human 
existence and of all earthly things is regarded as a long coil 
of thread, and the gods are the spinners of it. Thus this 
work is specially set apart to Aisa, the spoken word of Zeus, 
the Fatum of the Latins, or to Moira, the apportioner; for 
to both alike is this task of weaving or spinning assigned,^ 
and Aisa and Moira are alike the ministers of Zeus to do his 
will, not the despotic and irresponsible powers before whom, 
as before the Anank^ of Euripides, Zeus himself must bow. 
Nay, even a mortal may have a certain power over them, 
and Achilleus may choose either a brief career and a brilliant 
one, or a time of repose after his return home which shall 
stand him in the stead of glory.^ The dualism of the ideas 
of birth and death would lead us to look for two Moirai in 
some traditions, and accordingly we find the two at Delphoi, 
of whom Zeus and Apolldn are the leaders and guides.® 
The three Hesiodic Moirai, who are sisters of the Erinyes, 
are also called the K^res, or masters of the destinies of 
men.** Of these three one alone is, by her name K16th6, 
charged with the task of spinning; but in some later versions 
this task is performed by all three; nor is the same account 
always given of their functions with regard to the past, the 
present, and the future. Commonly E[16th& spins the threads, 
while Lachesis deals them out, and Atropos severs them at 
the moment of death; but sometimes K16th& rules over the 
present, Afcropos over the past, and Lachesis over the future.^ 
If, again, they are sometimes represented in comparative 
youth, they sometimes appear with all the marks of old age; 


1 Jl. XX. 128 ; xxiv. 209. 

2 11. IX. 411. 

* Pau3. X. 24, 4. 

* These are the lajpes rav7j\€y4os 
Oai/tiroio — the name belonging to the 
same root which has yielded the words 
K^pLoSy Kolpovos, and the Latin creare, 
(cf. G-r. Kpel(o), creator. The name Moira 
answers to that of the Latin Mors, the 
grinding, crushing power, the fjLo7pa 
Kparai^ of the lhad. Yet the etymo¬ 
logy was not wholly without reason, 
which connected the word with fiSpos^ a 
share or portion, the idea of pieces or 
fragments being naturally expressed by 
the root used to denote the working of 

VOL. n. 0 


the hammer or the millstone. 

*,Clotho praesentis temporis habet 
curam, quia quod torque^ur in digitis, 
momenti praesentis indicat spatia; Atro¬ 
pos praeteriti' fatum est, quia quod in 
fuso perfectum est, prseteriti temporis 
habet speciem, Lachesis ;futuri, quod 
etiam illis, quse future sunt, finem suum 
Deus dederit—^Apuleius, de Mundo, p 
280; Grimm, Deutsche Myth. 386. The 
Hesiodic poet, in his usual didactic vein, 
makes the Moirai strictly moral beings 
who punish the wrong doing, or trans¬ 
gressions, whether of gods or men.— 
Theog. 220. 


17 

CHAP. 

II. 



18 

BOOK 

11 . 


The Teu¬ 
tonic 
Noms. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


and tlins we come to tlie Teutonic Norns. The Hellenic 
Moirai, as knowing what was to befall each man, had neces¬ 
sarily the power of prediction, a characteristic which is the 
most prominent attribute of the fatal sisters of the North. 
These in the German myths are Yurdh, Verdhandi, and 
Skuld, names purely arbitrary and artificial, denoting simply 
that which has been, that which is in process of becoming or 
is in being, and that which shall be hereafter.^ Of these 
names the two last have dropped out of English usage, while 
Yurdh has supplied the name by which the sisters were 
known to Shakespeare; and thus we have the weird sisters 
whom Macbeth encounters on the desolate heath, the weird 
elves of Warner’s Albion, the Weird Lady of the Woods of 
the Percy Ballads,^ the Fatal Sustrin of Chaucer. 

These Noins, gifted with the wisdom of the Thriai,^ lead 
us through all the bounds of space. They are the guardians 
of the great ash-tree Tggdrasil, whose branches embrace the 
whole world. Under each of its three roots is a marvellous 
fountain, the one in heaven, the abode of the Ajsas, being 
the fountain of Yurdh, that of Jotunheim being called by the 
name of the wise Mimir, while the third in Niflheim, or 
Hades, is the Hvergelmir, or boiling cauldron. At the first 
the Asas and Norns hold their court; at the second Mimir 
keeps his ceaseless watch, a being whose name has apparently 
a meaning closely akin to that of the Latin Minerva,^ and 


' Vurdh represents the past tense of 
the word werden Verdhandi is the 
present participle, werdend, while Skuld 
is the older form of Schuld, the obliga¬ 
tion to atone for the shedding of blood. 
Skuld thus represents really the past tense 
s/cal, which means ' I have killed, and 
therefore am bbund to make compensa¬ 
tion for it ’ The difference between our 
‘ shall * and ‘ will ’ is thus at once ex¬ 
plained. Max Muller, Chi^s, u. 62; 
Gnmra, D. M^th 377. 

2 G-rimm, D. M. 378. Max Muller, 
Lectures on Language, second series, 
663. The Norns are the Three Spin¬ 
sters of the German story in Grimm’s 
collection, who perform the tasks which 
are too hard for the delicate hands of 
the Dawn-maiden. In the Norse Tales 
(Dasent) they reappear as the Three 
Aunts, or the three one-eyed hags, who 


help Shortshanks, as the three sisters in 
the tale of Farmer "Weathersky, and the 
three loathly heads in the story of 
Bushy Bride 

* Their wisdom is inherited by the 
bards whoso name, Skalds, has been 
traced by Professor Kuhn to the same 
root with the Sanslmt TOiandas, metre; 
and Khandas Professor Max Muller re¬ 
gards as identical with the term Zend. 
For the evidence of this see Chips, 

1 . 84, note. 

^ Grimm, who traces the word through 
its many changes, notos also the relation 
of the Latin memor with the Greek 
jutjueojuat—the mimic being the man who 
remembers what is done by another; 
and thus ‘mummery’ is but another 
form of ‘memory.’— D. Myth. 353. 
Mimir is thus the Kentaur Mimas, and 
the wisdom of the Kentaur, it may be 



TGGDRASIL AND IRMINSUL. 

who leaves to Waotan (Odin) only one eye, having de¬ 
manded the other as a pledge before he will grant to him a 
draught from the water which imparts wisdom. Such is the 
sanctity of this water, which the UTorns every morning pour 
over the branches of the ash-tree, that everything touched 
by it becomes snow-white, and the dew which falls from the 
tree is always sweet as honey. On the crown of the tree 
sits an eagle; under its roots lurks the serpent or dragon 
Mdhogr; and between these the squirrel, ever running up 
and down, seeks to sow dissension. This mighty ash-tree in 
Grimm’s belief is only another form of the colossal Irmin- 
sul,^ the pillar which sustains the whole Kosmos, as Atlas 
bears up the heaven, the three roads which branch from the 
one representing the three roots of the other. The tree and 
the pillar are thus alike seen in the columns, whether of 
Herakles or of Eoland; while the cosmogonic character of 
the myth is manifest in the legend of the primeval man Askr, 
the offspring of the ash-tree, of which Virgil, from the 
characteristic which probably led to its selection, speaks as 
stretching its roots as far down into earth as its branches 
soar towards heaven.^ 

The process which multiplied the ISTorns and defined their 
functions exalted also the character of Ate, who, as we have 
seen, appears in the Iliad simply as the sphit of mischievous 
folly, hurled out of Olympos for bringing about the birth of 
Eurystheus before that of Herakles, but who in the hands of 
-®schylos becomes the righteous but unrelenting avenger of 
blood. The statement that the Litai are beings who follow 
closely when a crime is done, and seek to make amends for 
it, is a mere allegory on the office of prayer; and what is 
told us of Nemesis, if less allegorical, is still inerely the 
result of moral reflection. In the world good and evil seem 

noted, became a proverb. In one story Irmin cannot be identified ^ntb the 
Mimir is sent by the Asas to the Vanir, Greek Hermes (Grimm, D. Myth. 328), 
•who cut off his head and sent it back to yet we may compare the Greek cp/xidiov 
them. Wuotan utters a charm over it, with the German Irminsul, the pillar oi: 
and the head, which never wastes away, column of Irmin, answering to the busts 
becomes his counsellor—a legend which of Hermes fixed on the Hermai at Athens 
can scarcely fail to remind us of the and elsewhere. Cf. the note of M. 
myth of Memnon’s head with its pro- Br6al in Professor Max Muller’s 
phetic powers, localised in Eg 3 Tpt second senes, 474. 

* Although the name of the German * See also Max Muller, Chips, ii. 207. 


19 


CHAP. 

II. 


Nemesis 
and Adras- 
teia. 



20 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II 


Tycli4 

Airaia. 


to be capriciously distributed, so that on the one side we 
- baye tbe squalid beggar, on the other the man whose pros¬ 
perity is so unyarying that his friend, foreseeing the issue, 
sends to renounce all further alliance with him. This in¬ 
equality it is the business of NTemesis to remedy; and thus 
she becomes practically an^ embodiment of righteous indig¬ 
nation at successful wrong, although she is also regarded as 
the minister of the gods who are jealous when the well-being 
of man passes beyond a certain limit. ^ In either aspect she 
is Adrasteia, the being from whom there is no escape. 

In the meaning commonly attached to the word, TychS 
denoted the idea of mere blind chance, scattering her gifts 
without any regard to the deserts of those on whom they 
might fall. But this was not the conception which led some 
to represent her with a rudder as guiding the affairs of the 
world, and not only to place her among the Moirai, but to 
endow her with a power beyond that of the others.® In her 
more fickle aspect she carries the ball in her hand, while her 
wealth and the nature of her gifts are denoted by the horn of 
Amaltheia at her side, and the boy Eros who accompanies 
her, or the Good Demons who sometimes surround her. As 
Akraia, Tych^ becomes simply a name of Athene, the wealth- 
bringer; with the epithet AgathS, good, she becomes prac¬ 
tically identical with the Agathos Daim6n, the nameless 
benignant deity inyoked by cities and indiyidual men. The 
names Theos and Daimon are often giyen to those unnamed 
forces in nature which, in Preller’s words, are more felt in 
their general influences than in particular acts.® NTor is the 
assertion without warrant that the genuine utterances of the 
heart were addressed to this incomprehensible power, of whose 
goodness generally they felt assured, and not to any mythical 
deities on whose capricious feelings no trust could be placed. 
When the swineherd Eumaios talks with Odysseus, we hear 
nothing of Zeus or Phoibos, but we are told simply that the 
unnamed God giyes and takes away as may seem to him best. 

\ 4>eopfphy rh Uifi6piop~tbi6 doctrine Rhamnusian egg of Nemesis belong to 
which lies at the root of the philosophy the story of Leda and Helen, 
attributed by Herodotos to Solon, and * Pans. vii. 26, 3. 

of the policy of Amasis in his dealings ® Gr. Mytk i. 42*1. 

with Polykrates. The myth of the ’ * ' 



THE WANDERINGS OF L£t6. 


21 


Nor can we doubt that even the mass of the people were im- CHAP. 

pressed with the belief in a deity or power dijfferent in land >—_ 

from the mythical deities brought before them by their epic 
or tragic poets. This deity was simply the good God, or the 
unknown Being, worshipped ignorantly, whom St. Paul said 
that he came only to declare to them. Doubtless even this 
conception underwent many modifications; and in the end 
not only each state or city, but each man and woman, from the 
moment of birth, had a guardian demon or angel who sought 
to lead them always in the right way.^ This guardian was in¬ 
voked on all occasions, in such forms as our ^Luck be with you,’ 
or the ^ Quod bonum, felix, faustumque sit ’ of the Latins.^ 


Section X.—HELLENIC STJNTGODS AND HEROES. 

The Ionian legend, embpdied in the so-called Homeric The Ionian 
Hymn, tells the simple tale that L§t6, the mother of the th?biri^ 
unborn Phoibos, could find no place to receive her in her ofPhoibos., 
hour of travail until she came to Delos. To wealthier and 
more fertile lands she made her prayer in vain; and when 
she addressed herself to the little stony island with its rugged 
cliffs and hills, Delos trembled with joy not unmingled with 
fear. The unborn child, she knew, would be a being of 
mighty power, ruling among the undying gods and mortal 
men; and she dreaded lest he should despise his sterile 
birthplace and spurn it with his foot into the sea. It re¬ 
mained only for L^t& to make a solemn covenant with Delos, 
that here should be the sanctuary of her child for ever, and 
that here his worshippers, coming from all lands to his high 
festival, should lavish on her inexhaustible wealth of gold 
and treasures. So the troth was plighted; but although 
Dionfe and Ajnphitnt^ with other goddesses were by her side, 

H^rS remained far away in the palace of Zeus, and the child 
of L4t6 could not be born unless she should suffer Eileithyia 
to hasten to her relief. Then, as she drew near, L6t& cast 
her arms around a tall palm-tree as she reclined on the bank 

* fiirovTt dalfiav avdpl fTviJLnapi(rrarai Al. 5, p. 260. Preller, Gr, Myth, 
evBtfS y€(rofii4vip fivcrayotyhs rov fiiov i. 422. 
ieyMs. —^Menander, quoted by Clem. * Preller, ib. i, 423. 



22 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The 

Delphian 

story. 


of Kynthos, and tlie babe leaped to life and light as the 
earth smiled around her. The goddesses bathed him in pure 
water, and wrapping him in a glistening robe, fine and 
newly wrought, placed a golden band round the body of 
Chrys 46 r, while Thetis touched his lips with the drink and 
food of the gods. But no sooner had the child received this 
nourishment, than he was endowed with an irresistible 
strength, and his swaddling bands fell off him like flax, as he 
declared his mission of teaching to men the counsels of Zeus. 
Then began the journey of the far shooting god, whose golden 
hair no razor should ever touch. From land to land he went, 
delighting his eyes with the beautiful sights of grove-clad 
hi l ls and waters running to the sea. 

This hymn has, indeed, a historical interest, as being 
manifestly the work of a time when the great Ionian festival 
at Delos was celebrated with a magnificence which the 
Lydian and Persian conquests grievously impaired. To the 
hymn writer Delos is the abode dear above all others to the 
lord of light; and thither come worshippers whose beauty 
and vigour would seem beyond the touch of sickness, pain, or 
death. The rest of the hymn is manifestly a diflerent poem,; 
composed by a Delphian when the oracle of that place had 
reached its highest reputation; but the blind old bard of 
the rocky islet of Chios is well aware that, apart from any 
rivalry of other temples and other festivals, it is impossible 
for Phoibos always to abide in Delos. For him there is no 
tranquil sojourn anywhere; and all that the poet can say on 
behalf of his beloved Delos is, that the God never fails to 
return to it with ever-increasing delight, as in the old Vedic 
hymns the Dawn is said to come back with heightened beauty 
every morning. In truth, almost every phrase of the hymn 
is transparent in its meaning. The name L6t6 is close akin 
to that of Leda, the dusky mother of the glorious Dioskouroi, 
and is in fact another form of the L6th6, in which men forget 
alike their joys and sorrows, the Latmos in which Endymifln 
sinks into his dreamless sleep, and the Ladon, or lurking- 
dragon, who guards the golden apples of the Hesperides. 
But for many a weary hour the night travails with the birth 
of the coming day, and her child cannot be bom save in the 



DELOS AND OKTTGIA. 


28 


brigM laad (Delos) of the Dawn. A toilsome jonmey lies CHAP. 

before ber; and tbe meaning of the old myth is singularly —- 

seen in the unconscious impulse which led the hymn-writer 
to speak of her as going only to lofty crags and high moun¬ 
tain summits.^ Plains and valleys it would obviously be 
useless to seek; the light of the sun must rest on the hill 
tops long before it reaches the dells beneath. In another 
version, she is said to have been brought in twelve days from 
the land of the Hyperboreans to Delos in the form of a she- 
wolf,^ Lukos, a phrase which carries us to the story of LykS.6n, 
and to the interpretation given to the name of the Lykeian 
Apollon. So again in the Phoinix or palm, round which 
Let6 casts her arms, we have that purple hue of dawn which 
marks the early home of the children of Ag^n6r and T^le- 
phassa.* But there were other traditions about his birth. 

An y word expressing the ideas of light and splendour might 
be the name of his birthplace; and ^o the tale ran that 
Apolldn and Artemis were both bom in Ortygia, the land of 
the quaU, the earliest bird of spring, and thus of t|ie early 
morning. Ho mythical incidents were attached to his epi¬ 
thet Lyk^gen^s; but this name speaks of him simply as 
bom in that land of light, through which flows the Xanthian 
or golden stream, and where dwell Sarp^d6n, the creeping 
flush of morning, and Glaukos the brilliant, his friend. He 
is the Phanaian^ or glistening king, who gave his name to 
the Chian promontory on which his worshippers assembled 
to greet him. 

In the Delian hymns ApoUdn soon attains his full might The infant 
and majesty. Still for a time he lies still and helpless, with 
a golden band around his body which is clad in white 
swaddling clothes. These white mists which seem to cling 
to the rising sun are wrapped more tightly round the Theban 
Oidipous, and the golden band gives place to the nails which 
pierce his feet when he is exposed on the heights of Kithairdn. 

' Hymn. A'poll. 30-45. sends her light from afar; and the con- 

2 The myth was regarded as account- nection of the purple hue with the hirth 
ing for a supposed fact connected with and early life of the sun is seen not 
the breeding of wolves.—Grrote, History only in the myth of the bird known as 
of Greece, i 62. the Phenix, but in Phoimx, the teacher 

* Eur6p^, the broad spreading dawn, and guide of Achilleus in his childhood, 
is necessanly the child of the being who * Virg. Georg, ii. 98. 



24 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AHYAjY NATIOJSTS. 


book 

II. 


But in both alike the time of weakness is short. Oidipous 
returns to Thebes, mighty in strength of arm and irresistible 
in wisdom, to slay the terrible Sphinx. In one version 
Phoibos is only four days old when, hurrying to Parnassos, 
he slays the dragon which had chased his mother Let6 in 
her -wanderings to Delos. The more elaborate legend of the 
Hymn places the slajdng of the Python later in his career; 
bnt lite the Sphinx, Python ^ is not only the darkness of 
night, but the black storm-cloud which shuts up the waters, 
and thus it guards or blockades the fountain which is to 
yield water for the Delphian temple.^ In other respects the 
later of the two poems woven together in the Homeric hymn 
is as transparent in meaning as the earlier. In both Phoibos 
journeys gradually westward; in both riches and glory are 
promised to those who will receive him. But the bribe is 
held out in vain to the beautiful fountain Telphoussa, near 
whose waters Phoibos had begun to lay the foundations of a 
shrine. By warnings of the din of horses and of cattle 
brought thither to watering she drove him away, and Phoibos 
following her counsel betook himself to Parnassos, where 
Trophonios and Agamed^s raised his world-renowned home. 
It is at this point that the author of the hymn introduces 
the slaughter of the worm or dragon to account for the 
name Pytho, as given to the sanctuary from the rotting of 
its carcase in the sun;« and thence he takes ApoUdn back 


^ Pytlion is here called the nurse of 
Typhoon, the dragon-child or monster, 
to 'v^hieh Here gives birth by her own 
unaided power, as Athene is the 
daughter of Zeus alone. Typhoon, one 
of the many forms of Vritra, Ahi, and 
Cacus, stands to HerA the bright goddess 
of the upper aif, in the relation of the 
Mmotauros to the brilliant Pasiphae, 
wife of Minos 

2 ‘ In a Slovakian legend the dragon 
sleeps in a mountain cave through the 
"winter months, but at the equinox 
bursts forth. “ In a moment the heaven 
was darkened, and became black as 
pitch, only illumined by the fire which 
flashed from the dragon’s jaws and eyes. 
The earth shuddered, the stones rattled 
down the mountain sides into the glens • 
right and lef^ left and right, did the 
dragon lash his tail, overthrowing pines 


and bushes, and snapping them as reeds. 
He evacuated such floods of water that the 
mountain torrents were full. But, after 
a while, his power was exhausted; he 
lashod no more with his tail, ejected no 
more water, and spat no more fire ” I 
think it impossible not to see m this 
description a spring-tide thunderstorm.’ 
—Gould, Wereu'o/f, p. 172 
* The word is connected by Sophokl4s 
not with the rotting of the snake but 
with the questions put to the oracle. 
The latter is the more plausible coineo- 
ture; but the origin of the word is un¬ 
certain, as is also that of Apollfin, of 
which ■Welcker(Oi<?cte^ Gotterlehre, 
i. 460) regards Apell6n as the genuine 
form, connecting it in meaning with the 
epithets iAeft/ca/co?, i.Trorp6iraioSf &K4<rtos, 
and others. This, however, is probably 
as doubtful as the derivation v hich con- 



THE FISH SUH. 


25 


to Telplioussa, to wreak kis vengeance on tke beautiful 
fountain wliicb bad cheated him of a bright home beside her 
glanciug waters. The stream was choked by a large crag, 
the crag beetling over Tantalos, which he toppled down 
upon it, and the glory departed from Telphoussa for ever. 

It now remained to find a body of priests and servants for 
his Delphian sanctuary, and these were furnished by the 
crew of a Cretan ship sailing with merchandise to Pylos. 
In the guise of a dolphin Phoibos urged the vessel through 
the waters, while the mariners sat still on the deck in terror 
as the ship moved on without either sail or oar along the 
whole coast of the island of Pelops. As they entered the 
Krisaian gulf a strong zephyr carried them eastward, till the 
ship was Lifted on the sands of Zrisa. Then Apollon leaped 
from the vessel like a star, while from him fiew sparks of 
light till their radiance reached the heaven, and 
to his sanctuary he showed forth his weapons in the flames 
which he kindled. This done, he hastened with the swiftness 
of thought back to the ship, now on the form of a beautiful 
youth, with his golden locks flowing over his shoulders, and 
asked the seamen who they were and whence they came. 
In their answer, which says that they had been brought to 
Krisa against their will, they address him at once as a god, 
and Phoibos tells them that they can hope to see their home, 
their wives, and their children again no more. But a higher 
lot awaits them. Their name shall be known throughout 
the earth as the guardians of ApoUdn’s shrine, and the in¬ 
terpreters of his will. So they follow him to Pytho, while 
the god leads the way fiUing the air with heavenly melodies. 
But once more they are dismayed as they look on the naked 
crags and sterile rocks around them, and ask how they are 
to live in a land thus dry and barren. The answer is that 
they should have all their hearts’ desire, if only they would 
avoid falsehood in words and violence in deed. 

Such was the legend devised to account for the iia.Tna and 
the founding of the Delphian temple. It is obviously a myth 


nects Phoibos with light. By Pro- belonging to the same family with the 
fessor Max Muller the latter name is Greek<^>v«, the Latm/ia, and the English 
identified with the Sanskrit Bhava, a word be, Phoibos is thus the living Q-od. 


CHAP. 

II. 


Phoibos 

Delphi- 

nios. 


The Pish- 
sun. 



26 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Phoibos 

and 

Hermes, 


■wMch cannot be taken by itself. Pboibos bere ti’averses the 
. sea in the form of a fish, and imparts lessons of wisdom and 
goodness when he has come forth from the greeli depths. 
He can assume many forms, and appear or vanish as he 
pleases. AH these powers or quahties are shared by Proteus 
in Hellenic story, as well as by the fish-god, Dagon or Onnes, 
of Syria; and the wisdom which these beings possess is that 
hidden wisdom of Zeus which, in the Homeric hymn, Phoibos 
cannot impart even to Hermes. So in the Vishnu Purana 
the demon Sambara casts Pradyumna, the son of Vishnu, 
into the sea, where he is swallowed by a fish, but he dies not 
and is born anew from its belly.* The story must be taken 
along with those of the Prog prince, of Bheki, and of the 
Pish-rajah in Hindu fairy tales.^ Doubtless it is tlie same 
dolphin which appears in the stoi'y of Arion, but the fish not 
less than the harp has lost something of its ancient power.® 
In this myth Phoibos acts from his own proper force. 
Here, as in the hymn to Hermes, he is emphatically the 
wise and the deep or far-seeing god. The lowest abyss of 
the sea is not hidden from his eye, but the wind can never 
stir their stormless depths, ffis gift of music was not, how¬ 
ever, his own from the first. His weapons are irresistible, 
and nothing can -withstand the splendour of his unveiled 
form; but^ he must live in a world of absolute stillness, 
without mist and -without clouds, until the breath of the 
wind stirs the stagnant air. Hermes then is the maker of 
the harp and the true lord of song; and the object of the 
hymn is to account for the harmony existing between himself 
and Phoibos, from whom he receives charge over the bright 
and radiant clouds which float across the blue seas of heaven. 
It is impossible to lay too much stress on this difference of 


' Translation of H. H. -Wilson, 
p. 675 

^ SeevoLi pp 165,400. Tlie story of 
the Frog-prmce agrees closely with the 
Gaelic tale of the Sick Queen (Campbell, 
li. 131), for whom none but the Frog can 
supply the water of life. 

^ ® The power of Phoibos and Proteius 
IS shared by Thetis, and again m Grimm’s 
story of Roland, by the maiden, who 
changes her lover into a lake, and 


herself into a duck; or who becomes a 
lily in a hedge, while Roland plays on 
his flute a tune which makes the witch, 
like the Jew on the thorns, dance till 
she drops down dead. The same trans- 
lormations occur in the stories of Fir- 
Apple ^d the Two Kings’ Children, in 
Grimms collection, and in the Norse 
tales of Dapplegrim and Farmer 



SISTPHOS AND IXiON. 27 

inherent attributes. Hermes may yield up bis barp to CHAP. 
Pboibos, as tbe soft breezes of summer may murmur and . 

whisper while leaves and waters tremble in the dazzling 
sunlight; but willing though Phoibos may be to grant the 
prayer of Hermes to the utmost of his power, it is impossible 
for him to give to the god of the moving air a share in the 
secret counsels of Zexis.* 

Essentially, then, there is no distinction between Phoibos PMbos 
and Helios. Both ai-e beings of unimaginable brightness; 
both have invulnerable weapons and the power of watening 
and destroying life; both can delight and torment, bring 
happiness or send scorching plagues and sicknesses; both 
have wealth and treasures which can never be exhausted; 
both can mar the work which they have made. That each 
of these qualities might and would furnish groundwork for 
separate fables, the whole course of Aryan mythology fully 
shows. Their wisdom would be shown by such words as 
Sisyphos, Metis, Medeia; their healing powers by the names 
Akesios, S 6 t 4 r, Akestdr; and both these faculties might be 
conceived as exercised in opposition to the will of Zeus. 

The alternations of beneficence and malignity would mark 
them as capricious beings, whose wisdom might degenerate 
into cunning, and whose riches might make them arrogant 
and overbearing. But for these things there must be punish¬ 
ments ; and thus are furnished the materials for a host of 
myths, every one of which will be found in strict accordance 
with the physical phenomena denoted by the phrases of the 
old mythical or myth-generating speech. The words which 
spoke of the sun as scorching up the fruits and waters which 
he loves would give rise to the stories of Tantalos and 
LykS/6n; the pride of the sun which soars into the highest 
heaven would be set forth in the legend of Ixi6n; the 
wisdom which is mere wisdom would be seen in the myths 
of Sisyphos or Medeia. The phrases which described the 
sun as revolving daily on his four-spoked cross, or as doomed 
to sink in the sky when his orb had reached the zenith, 

* There is nothing surprising in the ing the walls of Troy, as Amphifin 
fact, ^ that later versions, as those of built those of Thebes, by playing on his 
Kallimachos and Ovid, describe Apolldn harp, 
as himself inventing the lyre and build' 



28 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ABYAN NATIO^^S. 


BOOK 

II. 


Ptoibos 

and 

Dapbn6. 


would give rise to the stories of Iridn on his flaming wheel 
and of Sisyphos with his recoiling stone. If again the sun 
exhibits an irresistible power, he may also be regarded as a 
being compelled to do his work, though it be against his 
own will. He must perform his daily journey; he must 
slay the darkness which is his mother 5 he must be parted 
from the Dawn which cheered him at his birth; and after a 
few hours he must sink into the darkness from which he had 
sprung in the morning. His work again may be benignant; 
the earth may laugh beneath his gaze in the wealth of fruits 
and flowers which he has given her. But these gifts are not 
fdr himself; they are lavished on the weak and vile beings 
called men. These are really his masters, and he must serve 
them as a bondman until his brief career comes to an end. 
These ideas lie at the bottom of half the Aryan mythology. 
They meet us, sometimes again and again, in every legend; 
and it is scarcely possible to arrange in strict method either 
the numberless forms in which these ideas are clothed, or the 
stories in which we find them. The order of the daily phe¬ 
nomena of day and night may furnish the best clue for 
threading the mazes of the seemingly endless labyrinth. 

In the myth of Daphne we see the sun as the lover of 
the Dawn, to whom his embrace is, as it must be, fatal. 
Whether as the daughter of the Arkadian Ladon Or of the 
Thessalian Peneios, Daphne,^ or the Dawn, is the child of 
the earth springing from the waters when the first flush of 
light trembles across the sky. But as the beautiful tints 
fade before the deepening splendour of the sun, so Daphn^ 
flies from Apoll6n, as he seeks to win her. The more eager 
his chase, the more rapid is her flight, until in her despair 

^ From tbo roots dh and dah (to each other, for how—the people would 
hum), which stand to each other in the say—could they have the same name?^ 
relation of as and das (to hite), as m And hence the story of the transforma^ 
the Sanskrit asru and the Greek Safcpv, tion of DaphnA Max Muller, Lectures 
a tear, are produced the names AlianA, on Language, second senes, 602; Chips, 
the Vedic dawn-goddess, and Ath^n6, as ^c. ii. 93. The idea of fury or madness 
well as the Sanskrit I)ahan4 and the was closely connected with that of fire; 
Hellenic Haphn^. These names denote hence the laurel which grew on the 
simply the brightness of morning; hut tomb of Amykos had the quality of 
the laurel, as wood that hums easily, making the crew of a ship quarrel till 
received the same name. ‘Afterwards they threw it overboard. Piin. JY. N 
the two, as usual, were supposed to he xvi 89. 
one, or to have some connection with 



daphnSi and bolina. 

slie prays that the earth or the waters may deliver her from 
her persecutor; and so the story went that the laurel tree 
grew up on the spot where she disappeared, or that Daphn^ 
herself was changed into the laurel tree, from which Apoll6n 
took his incorruptible and glorious wreath.^ 

The same fatal pursuit is the burden of the legend of the 
huntsman Alpheios. Like Daphn 4 and Aphrodite Ana- 
dyomen^, he is the child of the waters, whether he be de¬ 
scribed as a son of Okeanos and Thetis, or of Helios himself. 
He is in short the Elf, or water-sprite, whose birthplace is 
the Elbe or flowing stream. But Arethousa must fly from 
him as Daphne flies from Phoibos ; and Pausanias takes her 
to the Syracusan Ortygia, where she sinks into a well with 
which the waters of Alpheios become united. This is but 
saying, in other words, that she fled to the Dawnland, where 
E6s closes as she begins the day, and where the sun again 
greets the love whom he has lost,— 

Like spirits that lie 

In the azure sky, 

Where they live hut love no more.® 

In another version she is aided by Artemis, who, herself 
also loved by Alpheios, covers her own face and the faces of 
her companions with mud, and the huntsman departs bafled; 
or, to recur to old phrases, the sun cannot recognise the 
dawn on whom he gazes, because her beauty is faded and 
gone. With these legends are closely connected the stories 
of Hippodameia, Atalant^, and -^e Italian Camilla, who 
become the prize only of those who can overtake them in 
fair fleld 5 a myth which reappears in tbe German story, 
^ How Six travelled through the World.^ It is repeated of 
Phoibos himself in the myth of Bolina, who, to escape from 
his pursuit, threw herself into the sea near the mouth of the 

* The story of the Sicilian Daphnis is unfaithful to her. This “blindness is the 
simply a weak version of that of Daphnfe, blindness of Oidipous. The sequel is 
with some features derived from other that of the legends of Prokris or 
myths. Like T6Iephos, Oidipous, and Kordnis, and the blinded Daphnis falls 
others, Daphnis is exposed in his infancy; from a rock (the Leukadian cliff* of 
and, like Apolldn, whose favourite he is, Kephalos) and is slain. If the sun 
he is tended by nymphs, one of whom would but remain with the dawn, the 
(named in one version Lykd, the shin- blindness of night would not follow, 
ing) loves him, and tells him that * Shelley, Jjrethicsa, 
blindness will be his punishment if he is 


29 

CHAP. 

n. 


Alpheios 
and Are¬ 
thousa. 



30 


BOOK 

n. 


Endy]ni6D. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

river Argyros (the silver stream). The name Bolina looks 
much like a feminine form of ApoU&n.' 

The reverse of these stories is obviously presented in the 
transparent myth of Endymion and the scarcely less trans¬ 
parent story of Narkissos. The former belongs, indeed^ to 
that class of stories which furnish us with an absolutely 
sure starting-point for the interpretation of myths. When 
we jSbad a being, described as a son of Zeus and Kalyk^ (the 
heaven and the covering night), or of Aethlios (the man of 
many struggles), or of Protogeneia (the early dawn), married 
to Selene (the moon), or to Asterodia (the being whose path is 
among the stars), we at once see the nature of the problem 
with which we have to deal, and feel a just confidence that 
other equally transparent names in other Greek myths meant 
originally that which they appear to mean. Thus, when we 
find that Prokris is a daughter of Hers^, we know that 
whatever Prokris may be, she is the child of the dew, and 
hence we have solid grounds for connecting her name with 
the Sanskrit ^rish^ to sprinkle, although it cannot be ex¬ 
plained directly from any Greek word. The myth of En- 
dyniion was localised in Elis (where his tomb was shown in 
the days of Pausanias), doubtless because it was the western¬ 
most region of the Peloponnesos, just as the Leukadian 
rocks, the most westerly point of northern Hellas, were asso¬ 
ciated with the name of Kephalos; , and when it was once 
localised, fresh names and incidents, mostly of little value or 
significance, were readily imported into the tale. Thus one 
version gave him fifty daughters by Sel^n^, to match the 
fifty sons and daughters of Danaos and Aigyptos; others gave 
him Heis, Iphianassa, and others as his wives, or made 
him, under the unconscious infiuence of the old mythical 
phrases, the father of Eurydik^, the broad flashing dawn, 
who is the bride of Orpheus. In fact, the myth of Endymi6n 
has produced rather an idea than a tale. It has little in¬ 
cident, and scarcely anything which might entitle it to be 
regarded as epical history, for the few adventures ascribed to 
liTTn by Pausanias^ have manifestly no connection with the 
original legend. The visit of Sel§n^, followed by an endless 
. ^ Pausanias vii. 23, 3. ^ yiii, 1. 



etstdymiOn- xnd tithSnos. 


31 


sleep, is in substance all that poets or antiquarians tell us CHAP, 
of; and even this is related by Pausanias with so many ^ 
variations as to show that the myth, from its obvious solar 
character, was too stubborn to be more than thinly disguised. 

If Endymi6n heads an army, or dethrones a king, this is the 
mere arbitrary and pointless fiction of a later age. The real 
scene of the myth is the land of Latmos, not the Earian hill 
or cave to which Pausanias made him migrate from Elis, 
but that western region of the heavens where the wearied 
sun finds a resting-place.^ The word itself belongs to the 
root which has produced the word Lethe, forgetfulness, as 
weU as the names of Let6 and Leda, the mothers of Phoibos 
and the Dioskouroi. The simplest form of the story is per¬ 
haps that of ApoUodoros, who merely says that Sel^n6 loved 
him and that Zeus left him free to choose anything that he 
might desire. His choice was an everlasting sleep, in which 
he might remain youthful for ever.^ His choice was wiser 
than that of E6s (the morning or evening light), who ob¬ 
tained for the beautiful Tith&nos the gift of immortality 
without asking for eternal youth; a myth as transparent as 
that of Endymi6n, for E6s, like lokast^, is not only the wife 
but also the mother of Tith6nos, who in one version is a son 
of Laomedon the Ilian king, in another of Kephalos, who 
WOOS and slays Prokris. The hidden chamber in which E6s 
placed her decrepit husband is the Latmian hiU, where . 
the more fortunate Endymidn lies in his charmed sleep. 
Endymi6n is in short, as his name denotes, simply the sun 
setting"^ opposite to the rising moon. Looking at the tale 
by the light which philology and comparative mythology 
have thus thrown upon it, we may think it incredible that 
any have held it to be an esoteric method of describing early 

^ An address of ^ Ossian ’ to the Set- Timidly raising their heads 
ting Sun, -vrluch Mr. Camphell (iv 150) To gaze on thee beauteous asleep, 
pronounces to be a close translation of They witless have fled from thy side, 

G-aelic, assumed to be older than 1730, Take thy sleep ’within thy cave, 
vividly expresses the idea of this myth: 0 Sun, and come back from sleep re- 

Hast left the blue distance of heaven ? joining* 

Sorrowless son of the gold-yellow hair I Here we have not only the Latmian 
Night’s doorways are rea»dy for thee, cave, but the idea which grew into the 
Thy pavilion of peace in the West myths of IMCemndn, Adonis, and Baldur. 

The billows came slowly around, ^ i. 7, 5. 

To behold him of brightest hair, 



32 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAIT NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


The story 
of Nar- 
kissos. 


astronomical researclies. It is scarcely less difficult to see' 
in it, as some have discerned, simply a personification of 
sleep.^ In his father Aethlios, we see one who, like Odysseus, 
has suffered much, the struggling and toiling sun,^ and his 
own name expresses simply the downward plunge of the sun 
into the western waters.^ The whole idea of Endymi6n, who 
is inseparable from the material sun, is altogether distinct 
from that of the separate divinity of Phoibos Apoll6n, to 
whom he stands in the relation of Gaia to D^mSt^r, or of 
Nereus to Poseidon. 

Of the story of Narkissos Pausanias^ gives two versions. 
The former which describes him as wasting away and dying 
through love of his own face and form reflected in a fountain 
he rejects on account of the utter absurdity of supposing 
that ifarkissos could not distinguish between a man and his 
shadow. Hence he prefers the other, but less known, legend, 
that Narkissos loved his own twin sister, and that on her 
death he found a melancholy comfort in noting the likeness 
of his own form and countenance to that of his ^ lost love. 
But the more common tale that Narkissos was deaf to the 
entreaties of the nymph Echo is nearer to the spirit of the 
old phrase, which spoke of the sleep of the tired sun.® His 


' Dr. Schmitz {JDiotionary of Greek 
and Boynan Biography and Mythology, 
s V. ‘ Endymion ’) holds that his name 
and all his attributes confirm this 
opinion. ‘Endymion signifies a being 
that gently comes over one; he is called 
a king because he has power over all 
living creatures ; a shepherd, because 
he slumbers m the cool caves of Mount 
Latmos, that is, the mount of oblivion.’ 
If it be meant that the sleep here 
personified is the sleep of man, the 
assertion rests on a very questionable, 
if not a Tery forced, etymology; and 
the title of king or shepherd no more 
belongs to the mythical conception, 
than does his tomb in Elis. But Endy- 
mi6n is not spoken of as a being who 
comes over any one else, or as having 
power over all living creatures, but as 
one who cannot shake off his own sleep, 
a sleep so profound that they who are 
vexed in heart may well envy it. 

ZoXurhs iju.lv S rhy Hrpoiroj^ liiryov 
iaiicov 

*Ey^v/ilc 0 v —^Theokr. Eidyll. hi. 49. 


* There is no difference of meaning 
between Aethlios and TroKirTKas, the 
stock epithet of Odysseus. 

* It can hardly be questioned that 
iydtffia 7}\lov was once the equivalent of 
n\lov dvcrjuai, and that originally the 
sun iyddv TrSvToy, where in the lhad and 
Odyssey we have only the simple verb. 
Had Endymi6n remained a recognised 
name for the sunset, the myth of Endy¬ 
mion, as Professor Max Muller remarks 
{Chtps^ <^c. li. 80), could not have arisen; 
but as its meaning was forgotten, the 
name Endymion was formed in a 
manner analogous to Hyperidn, a name 
of the high-soaring sun. 

^ ix. 31, 6. He rejects also the 
notion that the flower was so named 
after Narkissos, the former having 
certainly existed before his time, inas¬ 
much as Persephon4, who belongs to an 
earlier period, was caught while pluck¬ 
ing a narcissus from its stem. 

* The myth of Echo merely repro¬ 
duces that of Salmakis, vol. i p. 393. 



THE HEALERS. 33 

very name denotes the deadly lethargy [vdpKrj) which makes CHAP, 
the pleadings of Sel^n^ fall unheeded on the ear of En- 
dymidn; and hence it is that when Persephon^ is to he 
taken at the close of summer to the land of darkness, 
the narcissus is made the instrument of her capture. It is 
the narcotic which plunges Brynhild into her profound 
slumber on the Glistening Heath, and drowns Briar Eose 
and her fellows in a sleep as still as death. 

From the lot of Endymi6n, Harkissos, and Tith6nos, lamosand 
Apollon is freed only because he is regarded not as the 
visible sun who dies when his day^s journey is done, but as 
the living power who kindles his light afresh every morning. 

The one conception is as natural as the other, and we still 
speak of the tired or the unwearied sun, of his brief career 
and his everlasting light, without any consciousness of in¬ 
consistency. Phoibos is then the ever-bright sun, who can 
never be touched by age. He is emphatically the Aker- 
sekom^s, the glory of whose golden locks no razor is ever to 
mar. He is at once the comforter and healer, the saviour 
and destroyer, who can slay and make alive at wiU, and from 
whose piercing glance no secret can be kept hid. But 
although these powers are inseparable from the notion of 
Phoibos Apolldn, they are also attributed separately to 
beings whose united qualities make up his full divinity. 

Thus his knowledge of things to come is given to lamos; 
his healing and life-giving powers to AsHSpios. The story 
of the latter brings before us another of the countless in¬ 
stances in which the sun is faithless to his love or his love 
is faithless to him. In every case there must be the sepa¬ 
ration ; and the doom of Koronis only reflects the fate which 
cuts short the life of Daphn^ and Arethousa, Prokris and 
lokast^.^ The myth is transparent throughout. The 

1 The story of the hirth of Askl^pios Eilhart, the Russian hero Dobruna 
agrees substantially with that of Diony- Nikitisch, of the Scottish Macduff, of 
SOS ,* and the legends of other Aryan Volsung who yet kissed his mother 
tribes tell the same tale of some of their before she died, of Sigurd, and of Sceaf 
mythical heroes. Of children so born, the son of Scild, the child brought in 
G-nmm says generally, * XJngeborne, the mysterious skiff, which needs neither 
d. h aus dem Mutterleib geschnittne sail, rudder, nor oarsmen. Whence 
Kinder pflegen Helden zu werden,’ and came the popular belief attested by such 
adds that this incident marks the stories a phrase as that which Grimm quotes 
of the Persian Rustem, the Tristram of from the Chronicle of JPeterhou(>et ‘de 

VOL. II. D 



S4 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE A'RYM 2sUTIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


motlier of Askl^pios is a daughter of Phlegyas (the flaming), 
and Apollon woos her on shores of the lake Boib^is; ^ or, if 
we take another version given by Apollodoros, she is Ar- 
sino^, a daughter of Leukippos (a name in which we see the 
flashing steeds which draw the car of Indra or Achilleus), 
and a sister of Hilaeira and Phoib^, the radiant maidens 
whom the Dioskouroi bore away.^ When the myth goes on 
to say that when Apollon had left her Kordnis yielded her¬ 
self to the Arkadian Ischys, we have a story which simply 
repeats that of Prokris, for as Kephalos returns disguised 
and wins the love of the child of HersS (the dew), so is 
Ischys simply the strength or power of the lord of light 
(Arkas). In each case, the penalty of faithlessness is death; 
and the mode in which it is exacted in the myth of Kor6nis 
precisely corresponds with the legend of Semel^. Like 
Dionysos, Askl^pios is born amidst and rescued from the 
flames; in other words, the light and heat of the sun which 
ripen the fruits of the earth, scorch and consume the clouds 
and the dew, or banish away the lovely tints of early morn¬ 
ing.^ Throughout the myth we have to deal with different 
versions which, however they may differ from each other, 
still point to the same fountain-head of mythical speech. 
In one form the story ran that Kor^nis herself exposed her 
child on the slopes of mount Myrtion, as Oidipous was 
left to die on Kifhairon. There he is nourished by a goat 
and a dog, incidents which are reproduced in the myths of 


talibus excisis literae testantur quod, si 
vita comes fuerit, felices in mundo 
habeantur ? ’—Deutsche Mythologie, 362. 
The Teutonic myths must clearly be 
compared with that of Hlodr (Lodur), 
who is born with helmet and sword, and 
this again with the story of Ath4n^, 
who springs fully armed from the fore¬ 
head of Zeus, a story as transparent 
as that of Phoibos Chrys46r. These, 
therefore, are all dawn-children or sons 
of the bright heaven. In the latter 
case the forehead of Zeus, the sky, is 
cloven; in the former, the body of the 
dawn. In other words, the dawn dies 
almost before the sun has had time 
to bid her farewell. It is impossible 
not to see in the kiss which Volsung 
gives to his dying mother the embrace 


which Orpheus vainly yearns to give to 
Eurydik4 as she vanishes from his sight. 

^ Pind. Dyth in 14 

2 Apollod. ill. 10, 3. 

® The Dawn cannot long survive the 
birth of the sun. Hence the mother of 
Volsung dies as soon as her child has 
kissed her So in Grimm’s story of the 
Almond Tree, the mother of the sun- 
child, who is as white as snow and as red 
as blood, IS so delighted at seeing her 
babe that she dies. The same lot is the 
portion of the mother in the story of 
Little Snow-white, the Dawn-maiden—a 
story which suggests a comparison with 
the mjrths of the glass of Agrippa and 
of the well of Apolldn Thyrxis as 
related by Pau&anias. 



ASKLfiPIOS. 


35 


Cyrus and Eomulus. When at length the shepherd Ari- CHAP, 
sthanas traced the dog and goat to the spot where the infant ^ 
lay, he was terrified by the splendour which surrounded the 
child, like the fiame round the head of the infant Servius in the 
Eoman tale. The wonder, Pausanias adds, was soon noised 
abroad, and throughout land and sea the tidings were carried 
that Askl^pios healed the sick and raised the dead.^ The 
wisdom by which he obtained this power he received from 
the teaching of the wise centaur Cheiron; but we have to 
mark that Cheiron is the teacher not only of Asklepios but 
of lason and Achilleus, who also represent the wisdom and 
brightness or power of Phoibos, and the descent of Cheiron 
himself connects him with the phenomena of daylight. 

When Ision in his boundless pride sought to seize H6r6 the 
bright queen of the air herself, Zeus placed in his way the 
mist-maiden Nephel^ from whom was born the Kentaur,® as 
the sun in the heights of heaven calls forth the bright clouds 
which move like horses across the sky. It is difficult not to 
see in these forms of Hellenic mythology a reflection of the 
Vedic Gandharvas, who are manifestly the bright sunlit 
clouds.^ Not only has Indra the Harits (the Greek Charites) 
as his steeds, but the morning herself as the bride of the sun 
is spoken of as a horse,^ and a hymn addressed to the sun- 
horse says, ^ Tama brought the horse, Trita harnessed him, 


* ii. 26, 4. To this marvel of the 
flame was referred his title Aigla4r, the 
gleaming, which simply reproduces the 
Lykian epithet of his father Phoibos, 
The healing powers of AskUpios are 
seen in the German stories of Grand¬ 
father Death and Brother Lustig. 

2 Pind Pi/tk. 11 . 80. 

* M. Br4al, in his masterly analysis 
of the myth of Oidipous, has no doubt 
of their identity ^ M. Adalbert Kuhn,* 
he says, ‘ dans un de ses plus ing^nieux 
travaux, amontr4 Tideutne des Centaures 
et des Gandharvas, ces ^tres fantastiques, 
qui jouent dans la mythologie indienne 
le mSme r61e que les Centaures chez les 
Grecs Ils portent le m4me nom: c’est ce 
que prouve Tanalyse grammaticale des 
deux mots. Comme les Centaures, les 
Gandharvas ne forment qu’une seule 
famille. Ilssontle fruit de I’union du 
Gandharva avec les Nu6es. En exami¬ 
nant les passages v^diques oh il est 


question de ces divinit^s, M. Kuhn a 
d4montr6 que Gandharva est le nom du 
soleil, consid^r^ an moment oh il repose 
parmi les nu^es et semble c^Ubrer son 
union avec elles, et que les Gandharvas 
sontles nuages qui paraissent chevaucher 
dans le ciel Ixion chez les Grecs est 
le Centaure par excellence, puisqu’il est 
le p^re de cette famille de monstres: 
il correspond au Gandharva vMique.’ 

* Professor Max Mpller cites the ex¬ 
planation of Yaska: ‘ Saranyu, the 
daughter of Tvashtar, had twins from 
Vivasvat, the sun. She placed another 
like her in her place, changed her form 
into that of a horse, and ran off. 
Vivasvat the sun likewise assumed the 
form of a horse, followed her, and 
embraced her. Hence the two Asvins 
were born, and the substitute (Savama) 
bore Manu.* Lectures on Language^ 
second senes, 482. Those Asvins are 
the Dioskouroi. See vol i. p. 390, &c. 



36 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ABYAIST JS-ATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


The stories 
of Ixion 
and Atlas. 


Indra first sat on him, tlie Gandliarva took hold of his 
rein.^^ It was inevitable that, when the word ceased to be 
understood in its original sense, the brightness of the clouds 
which seem to stretch in endless ranks to the furthermost 
abyss of heaven should suggest the notion of a wisdom 
which Phoibos receives from Zeus but cannot impart in 
its fulness to Hermes. What part of the heaven is there 
to which the cloud may not wander 9 what secret is there in 
nature which Cheiron cannot lay bare 9 There were, how¬ 
ever, other traditions, one of which asserted that Asklepios 
wrought his wonderful cures through the blood of Gorgo, 
while another related of him the story which is assigned 
elsewhere to Polyidos the son of Eoiranos.^ But like almost 
all the other beings to whose kindred he belonged, Asklepios 
must soon die. The doom of Patroklos and Achilleus, 
Sarpeddn and Memndn, was upon him also. Either Zeus 
feared that men, once possessed of the secret of Asklepios, 
might conquer death altogether, or Plouton complained that 
his kingdom would be left desolate; and the thunderbolt 
which crushed Phaeth6n smote down the benignant son of 
Phoibos, and the sun-god in his vengeance slew the Kyklopes, 
the fashioners of the fiery lightnings for the lord of heaven.® 
But throughout Hellas Asklepios remained the healer and 
the restorer of life, and accordingly the serpent is every¬ 
where his special emblem, as the mythology of the Linga 
would lead us to expect.'* 

The myth of Ixidn exliibits the sun as bound to the four- 
spoked wheel which is whirled round everlastingly in the 
sky.® In that of Sisyphos we see the same being condemned 


^ Max Miiller, LectureSj second series, 
616. 

* Apollod. lii. 10, 3, and in. 3, 1. 
This story, as we haye already seen, is 
that of the Snake Leaves, and reappears 
in Hindu as well as in Teutonic fairy 
tales. See vol. i. p. 160. 

* Apollod. 111 . 10, 4. Diod. iv 71. 
In the Iliad, A&kllpios is simply the 
blameless healer, who is the father of 
Mach&6n and Podaleirios, the wise 
physicians, who accompany the Achaians 
to Hion. These are descendants of 
Pai46n. 

* See section xii. of. this chapter. 


* T^rpdxvafiop Setr/iiJi/. Pind. Pyth. 
ii. 80. This wheel reappears lu the 
Gaelic story of the Widow and her 
Daughters, Campbell, h 266, and in 
Gnmm’s German tale of the Iron Stove. 
The treasure-house of Ixion, which none 
may enter without being either destroyed 
hke Hesioneus or betrayed by marks of 
gold or blood, reappears in a vast 
number of popular stories, and is the 
foundation of the story of Bluebeard. 
Compare the Woodcutter’s Child in 
Grimm’s collection. The sequel of the 
Gaelic tale already mentioned represents 
Grimm’s legend of the Feather Bird. 



THE WISDOM OP ATLAS. 

to the daily toil of heaving a stone to the summit of a hill 
from which it immediately rolls down. This idea of tasks 
unwillingly done, or of natural operations as accomplished 
by means of punishment, is found also in the myth of Atlas, 
a name which like that of Tantalos denotes endurance and 
suffering, and so passes into the notion of arrogance or 
presumption. But the idea of a being who supported the 
heaven above the earth, as of a being who guides the horses 
of the sun, was awakened in the human mind long before 
the task was regarded as a penalty. Indeed, it can scarcely 
be said that this idea is clearly expressed in the Odyssey, 
which says of Atlas that he knows all the depths of the sea 
and that he holds or guards the lofty pillars which keep the 
heaven from falling to crush the earth.^ It is scarcely pro¬ 
minent even when the Hesiodic poet speaks of him as doing 
his work under a strong necessity, for this is no more than 
the force which compels Phoibos to leave Delos for Pyth&, 
and carries Kephalos, Belleroph&n, and Odysseus to their 
doom in the far west. Nor in either of thefee poems is there 
anything to warrant the inference that the poet regarded 
Atlas as a mountain. This idea comes up in the myth of 
Perseus, who sees the old man bowing beneath his fearful 
load, and holding the Gorgon^s face before his eyes, turns him 
• into stone; and the stone which is to bear up the brazen heaven 
must needs be a great mountain, whether in Libya or in 
other regions, for the African Atlas was not the only moun¬ 
tain which bore the name. But the phrase in the Odyssey 
which speaks of him as knowing all the depths of the sea 
points to a still earlier stage of the myth, in which Atlas 
was possessed of the wisdom of Phoibos and was probably 
Phoibos himself. Eegarded thus, the myths which make 
the Okeanid PlMonS his wife and the Pleiades his children, 
or which give him Aithra for his bride and make her the 

' It can scarcely be doubted that the surrounding either a square or a circular 
words afKpls fExova-iVj Od. i. 54, do not earth. It is at the least certain that 
mean that these columns surround the this is not the meaning of the Hesiodxc 
efurth, for in this case they must be not poet, who gives to Atlas a local habita- 
only many in number, but it would be tion at the utmost bounds of the earth 
obvious to the men of a mythmaHug near the abode of the Hesperides, and 
and mythspeaking age, that a being makes him bear the heavens on his 
stationed in one spot could not keep up, heads and hands. The Hellenic Atla.s is 
or hold, or guard, a number of pillars simply the VedicSkambha, vol. i. p. 38S, 


37 

CHAP. 

n. 



38 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK mother of the Hyades and the Hesperides, are at once ex- 

>-. plained. He is thus naturally the father of Hesperos, the 

most beautiful star of the heavens, who appears as the herald 
of Eos in the morning and is again seen by her side in the 
evening. The Hellenic He6sphoros, the Latin Lucifer, the 
Lightbringer, who is Ph6sphoros, is also called a son of 
Astraios and E6s, the starlit skies of dawn.^ 

The Far away in the west by the stream of the placid Ocean is 

Hebpe- dwelling of the Hesperides, the children or sisters of 

Tides. Hesperos, the evening star, or, as they might also be termed, 
of Atlas or of Phorkys. This beautiful island which no bark 
ever approaches, and where the ambrosial streams flow per¬ 
petually by the couch of Zeus, is nevertheless hard by the 
land of the Gorgons and near the bounds of that everlasting 
darkness which is the abode of Ahi and Pani, of Geryon, 
Cacus, and Echidna. Hence the dragon Ladon guards with 
them the golden apples which Gaia gave to H4r^ when she 
became the bride of Zeus, these apples being the golden 
tinted clouds or herds of Helios, the same word being used 
to denote both.^ It remained only to give them names easily 
supplied by the countless epithets of the morning or evening 
twilight, and "^lo assign to them a local habitation, which was 
found close to the pillars or the mountain of Atlas which 
bears up the brazen heaven above the earth. 

Atlas and Atlas is thus brought into close connection with Helios, 

Hyperion, bright god, the Latin Sol and our sun. In the Eiad and 
Odyssey he is himself Hyperion, the climber: in the Hesiodic 
Theogony, Hyperion becomes his father by the same process 
which made Zeus the son of Elronos,—his mother being 
Theia, the brilliant, or Euryphaessa, the shedder of the 
broad light. In the former poems he rises every morning 
jfrom a beautiful lake by the deep-flowing stream of Ocean, 
and having accomplished his journey across the heaven 
plunges again into the western waters. Elsewhere this 
lake becomes a magnificent palace, on which poets lavished 
all their wealth of fancy; but this splendid abode is none 

* So transparent are all these names, been altogether ima-ware of the sources 
and so many the combinations in which of the materials with which they haa to 
they are presented to us, that even the deal, 
later mythographers can scarcely have ^ See note 5, p. 10. 



HYPERidN. 


39 


other than the house of Tantalos, the treasury of Ixi6n, the 
palace of AUah-ud-deen in the Arabian tale. Through the 
heaven his chariot was borne by gleaming steeds, the Eohits 
and Harits of the Veda; but his nightly journey from the 
west to the east is accomplished in a golden cup wrought by 
Hephaistos, or, as others had it, on a golden bed. But greater 
than his wealth is his wisdom. He sees and knows all things; 
and thus when Hekate cannot answer her question, Helios 
tells D^mSter to what place Kor^ has been taken, and again 
informs Hephaistos of the faithlessness of Aphrodite. It is 
therefore an inconsistency when the poet of the Odyssey 
represents him as not aware of the slaughter of his oxen by 
Eurylochos, until the daughters of Neaira bring him the 
tidings 3 but the poet returns at once to the true myth, when 
he makes Helios utter the threat that unless he is avenged, 
he will straightway go and shine among the dead. These 
cattle, which in the Yedic hymns and in most other Greek 
myths are the beautiful clouds of the Phaiakian land, are 
here (like the gods of the Arabian Kaaba), the days of the 
lunar year, seven herds of fifty each, the number of which 
is never increased or lessened; and their death is the 
waiting of time or the killing of the days by the comrades of 
Odysseus. 

The same process which made Helios a son of Hyperidn 
made him also the father of Phaeth6n, In the Iliad he is 
Helios Phaeth6n not less than Helios Hyperion; but when 
the name had come to denote a distinct personality, it served 
a convenient purpose in accounting for some of the pheno¬ 
mena of the year. The hypothesis of madness was called in 
to explain the slaughter of the boy Eunomos by Herakles; 
but it was at the least as reasonable to say that if the sun 
destroyed the fruits and flowers which his genial warmth 
had called into life, it must be because some one who had 
not the skill and the strength of Helios was holding the 
reins of his chariot.^ Hence in times of excessive heat or 
drought the phrase ran that Phaeth6n, the mortal son of an 
undying father, was unable to guide the horses of Helios, 

^ This is the Irish story of CuchuUin. and Eerdiah. Pergusson, Irish before 
the Conquest. ^ 


CHAP. 

IL 


Helios and 
Phaeth6n. 



MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


40 

HOOK 

11 . 


Patroklos 
i' 0(1 Tele- 
iiiachos. 


while the thunderstorm, which ended the drought and disk 
comfited Yritra and the Sphinx, dealt also the deathblow to 
Phaethon and plunged him into the sea. The tears of the 
Heliades, his sisters, like the drops which fell from the eyes 
of Zeus on the death of his son Sarp6d6n, answer to the 
down-pouring rain which follows the discharge of the 
lightning. 

Phaethon, then, is strictly a reflection of his father with 
all his beauty and all his splendour, but without his dis¬ 
cretion or his strength; and the charge given to him that he 
is not to whip the fiery steeds is of the very essence of the 
story. If he would but abstain from this, they would bring 
him safely to his journey^s end; but he fails to obey, and is 
smitten. The parallel between this legend and that of 
Patroklos is singularly exact. Mr. Grote has remarked the 
neutral characters and vaguely defined personality both of 
Patroklos and of Telemachos, and we are justified in laying 
special stress on the fact that just as Phaeth6n is allowed to 
drive the horses of Helios under a strict charge that he shall 
not touch them with his whip, so Achilleus suffers Patroklos 
to put on his armour and ascend his chariot under the in¬ 
junction that so soon as he has driven the Trojans from the 
ships he is not to attempt to pursue them to the city. Pa¬ 
troklos disobeys the command and is slain by Hektor 5 but 
the sorrow of the Heliades is altogether surpassed by the 
fiery agony of Achilleus. It is in truth impossible not to see 
the same weakened reflection of a stronger personality in the 
Latin Eemus the brother of Eomulus, in Arjuna the com¬ 
panion of Kiishna, in Peirithoos the associate of Theseus, 
and in all the other mythical instances cited by Cicero as 
examples of genuine friendship. In the folk-lore of the East 
these secondaries, represented by faithful John in the Teu¬ 
tonic story, reappear as Luxman in the legend of Eamah, and 
as Butti in the tale of Vicram Maharajah. Nor can we fail to 
discern the same idea in the strange story of Absyrtos, the 
younger and weaker brother of the wise and unscrupulous 
Medeia, who scatters his limbs in the sea to stay the pursuit 
of Ai^t^s,—-a vivid image of the young sun as tom into pieces 
among the vapours that surround him, while the light falling 



ALKEISTIS. 


41 


in isolated patches on the sea seems to set hounds to the CHAP, 
encroaching darkness which gives way before the conqueror ^ 
of the clouds. 

The slaughter of the Kykl6pes brought on Phoibos the Thei^ond- 
sentence of a year’s servitude; and thus we have in the myth ph^oitos 
of Apolldn himself the germs of the hard bondage which andHera- 
weighs down Herakles through his whole career, and is only 
less prominent in the mythical histories of Perseus, Theseus, 
and other heroes, who, like Achilleus, fight in a quarrel which 
is not of their own choosing or making.^ The master whom 
Phoibos serves is one between whom and himself there is 
no such contrariety of will as marks the relations of Herakles 
with Eurystheus. He is no hard exacter of tasks set in mere 
caprice to tax his servant's strength to the utmost; but he is 
well content to have under his roof one who, like the Brownie 
of modern superstition, has brought with him health and 
wealth and all good things. One thing alone is wanting, 
and this even Phoibos cannot grant him. It is the life of 
Alk^stis, the pure, the devoted, the self-sacrificing, for it had 
been told to Adm^tos that he might escape death, if only his 
parents or his wife would die in his stead, and Alkestis has 
taken the doom upon herseK.^ Thus in the very prime of her 
beauty she is summoned by Thanatos, death, to leave her 
home and children, and to cross with him the gloomy stream 
which separates the land of the living from the regions of the 
dead; and although Phoibos intercedes fo;r a short respite, 
the gloomy being whose debtor she is lays his icy hands 
upon her and will not let her go untU the mighty Herakles 
grapples with him, and having by main force rescued her 
from his grasp, brings her back to Adm^tos. Such is the 
story told by Euripides, a story in which the character of 
Herakles is exhibited in a light of broad burlesque alto¬ 
gether beyond that of the Hymn to Hermes. We see in it 
at once the main features of the cognate legends. It is 

1 ‘ The thoiight of the sxm as a hond- Inca, like a tied beast who goes ever 
man led the Peruvian Inca to deny his round and round in the same track.’— 
pretension to be the doer of all things; Max Muller, ii. 113. 

for, if he were free, he would go and * Hence the connection of the name 
visit other parts of the heavens where with that of Alkminfe or of (Ath4u6) 
he had never been. He is, said the Alalkomen^. 



42 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

11 . 


Character 
of Hera- 
Hes. 


essentially the myth of Orpheus who like Adm^tos must be 
parted from his lovely bride, and who differs from Adm^tos 
only in this, that he must go and seek for her himself. In 
the one story the serpent stings and causes the death of 
Eurydik^: in the other, when Admetos enters his bridal 
chamber on the day of his marriage, he sees on the bed a 
knot of twisted snakes, the omen of the grief that is coming. 
But although Alk^stis may die, death cannot retain dominion 
over her; and thus we have again the story of the simple 
phrases that the beautiful dawn or twilight, who is the bride 
‘Of the sun, must die after sunset, if the sun himself is to live 
on and gladden the world with his light,—must die, if she 
herself is to live again and stand before her husband in all 
her ancient beauty. At this point the myth of Admetos stops 
short, just as the Odyssey leaves the chief, after his toil is 
ended, with the faithful Penelop^, although it hints at a 
coming separation which is to end in death. The legend of 
Admetos carries on the tale a step further, and the vanishing 
of Eurydik^ just as she reaches the earth is the vanishing 
of Daphn^ from Apoll6n, of Arethousa from Alpheios, or it 
is the death of Prokris slain by the unwitting Kephalos. 

But this idea of servitude which is thus kept in the back¬ 
ground in the myths of Apollon serves as the links which 
connect together all the phases and scenes of the life of 
Herakles. He is throughout the toiling, suffering hero, who 
is never to reap any fruit of his labour, and who can be 
cheered even by the presence and the love of lolS, only when 
the fiery garment is eating deep into his flesh. When this 
idea once became prominent, a series of tasks and of suc¬ 
cessful achievements of these tasks was the inevitable sequel. 
What is there which the sun-god in his majesty and power 
cannot accomplish? What part of the wide universe is 
there which his light cannot penetrate? It mattered not 
whither or against what foes Eurystheus might send him; 
he must assuredly return triumphant over every adversary. 
On this fruitful stem would grow up a wealth of stories which 
mythographers might arrange according to any system sug¬ 
gested by their fancy, or which might be modified to suit 
any passing whim or local tradition and association 5 and so 



THE BIRTH OF HERAKLE?, 


43 


long as we remember that such, systematic arrangements are CHAP, 
results of recent ages, we may adopt any such plan as the . 
most convenient way of dealing with the endless series of 
legends, all of them more or less transparent, and all pointing 
out with unmistakeable clearness the character of the hero 
who is the greatest representation of Indra on Hellenic 
soil. From first to last, his action is as beneficent to the 
children of men as it is fatal to the enemies of light, and the 
child who strangles in his cradle the deadly snakes of dark¬ 
ness grows up into the irresistible hero whom no danger can 
daunt and no difficulties can baffle. 

The immense number of exploits attributed to him, the Hemkle.s 
arrangement of which seems to have 'afforded a special 
delight to more recent my thographers, would lead us to expect 
a large variety of traditions modified by local associations. 

To go through them all would be an endless and an unpro¬ 
fitable task; and we may safely accept the notices of the 
Homeric and lyric poets as the more genuine forms of the 
myth. Like Phoibos, Hermes, Dionysos, and others, he is 
a son of Zeus, born, as some said, in brilliant Argos, or as 
others related, in the Boiotian Thebes. With him is born 
his twin brother IphiklSs, the son—so the tale went—of 
Amphitryon 5 and thus the child of the mortal father stands 
to the so'n of the undying king of Olympos in the relation 
of Phaeth^n to Helios, of Patroklos to Achilleus, or of Tele¬ 
machos to the chieftain of Ithaka. The subjection of the 
hero to his kinsman was brought about by the folly of Zeus, 
who, on the day of his birth, boasted himself as the father of 
one who was to rule over all the house of Perseus. HSr^ 
thereupon, urged on by At^, the spirit of mischief, made him 
swear that the child that day to be bom of his lineage should 
be this ruler, and summoning the Eileithyiai bade them see 
that Eurystheus came into the world before Herakles. So 
wroth was Zeus when H^r 4 told him that the.good man Eury¬ 
stheus must, according to his oath, be king of Argos, that he 
seized Ate by the hair of her head, and swearing that she 
should never again darken the courts of heaven, hurled her 
from Olympos. Thus the weaker came to be tyrant over the 
stronger 5 but when the mythographers had systematized his 



44 


MYTHOLOGT OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II 


labours, tbey related that Zeus made a compact by wbicb 
Herakles should become immortal when be bad brought bis 
twelve tasks to a successful issue. Tbe story of bis birtb 
tells us not only of tbe child in his cradle strangling the 
horrid snakes of darkness which seek to destroy their enemy, 
but of an infancy as troubled as that of Telephos or Oidipous. 
Like them, Alkm^n^, favouring the jealousy of H^rS, exposed 
the babe on the plain which thence received the name of 
Herakles ; and it is picked up, of course, by the dawn-goddess 
Athens, who beseeches H^r^, the queen of the blue heaven, to 
nourish it. The child bites bard, and Her^ flings it back to 
Athen^, who carries it to her mother.^ Tbe boy grows up 
tbe model of human strength and power; and his teachers 
point to tbe cloudland to wbicb he himself belongs. Auto- 
lykos and Eurytos, by whom he is taught to wrestle and to 
shoot with the bow, denote the light and splendour of 
morning; Elastor, who shows him how to fight in heavy 
armour, is the twin brother of Polydeukes, these twins an¬ 
swering to the Vedic Asvins or horsemen; and Linos, who 
teaches him music, is akin to Hermes, Pan, Orpheus, and 
Amphion. The harper is slain by bis pupil, and Amphitryon, 
fearing that bis son might use his strength in a like way 
again, sends him to tend cattle, and in this task, which 
in other myths is performed by Saram^ or the daughters of 
IsTeiara, he lives until be has reached the fall strength of 
youth. Thus far we have a time answering to the bright 
period in wbicb Pboibos is tended by the nymphs in bis 
infancy, when his face is unsoiled, and his raiment all white, 
and bis terrible sword is not yet belted to bis side. It is the 
picture of the unclouded sun rising in pure splendour, seeing 
the heavens wbicb be must climb, and ready for the conflicts 
which may await him—gloomy mists and angry stormclouds. 
The moral aspect which this myth may be made to assume 
must be that of self-denial. The smooth road of indulgence 
is tbe easiest on which to travel; he who takes the rugged 
path of duty must do so from deliberate choice; and thus 
the brave Herakles, going forth to bis long series of labours, 
suggests to tbe sophist Prodikos the beautiful apologue in 

* Biod. iv. 9. 



THE TOILS OF HEEAKLES. 


45 


whicli Aret^ and Eakia, virtue and vice, eacli claim tis obe¬ 
dience, as Aphrodite and AtliSn^ each, claim the golden 
prize which Paris must adjudge. The one promises endless 
pleasures here and hereafter; the other holds out the pro¬ 
spect of hard days followed by healthful slumbers, and warns 
hiTYi that nothing good was ever won without labour, nothing 
great ever done without toil. The mind of Herakles is made 
up at once ; and the greatest of all mythical heroes is thus 
made to inforce the highest lessons of human duty, and to 
present the highest standard of human action. The apologue 
is full of beauty and truth, and there is manifestly no harm 
in such applications of myths when the myths themselves 
are not strained or distorted in the process. The images of 
self-restraint, of power used for the good of others, are pro¬ 
minent in the lives of all or almost all the Zeus-bom heroes ; 
but these are not their only aspects, and it is as necessary to 
remember that other myths told of Herakles can no more be 
reconciled with this standard of generous self-devotion than 
the conduct of Odysseus as he approaches the Seirens’ island 
with the Christian duty of resisting temptation. 

With this high heroic temper Herakles sets forth for his 
first great fight with the lion of Kithairon, and whether from 
its carcase or from that of the Nemean beast, he obtains the 
lion’s skin with which he is seen so commonly represented, 
and which reappears in the jackal’s skin in the story of the 
enchanted Hindoo rajah.' The myth of the fifty daughters 
of Thestios or Thespios, which in some versions is con¬ 
nected with his first great exploit, is akin to that of the fifty 
daughters of Danaos and the fifty children whom Asterodia 
bare to Endymi6n.^ It is but one instance out of many in 


' "Witli this lion’s skin must "be com¬ 
pared the fish-skin with which the sun- 
god is represented in the characters of 
Proteus and Onnes or Dagon, and 
which might be worn hy Phoibos Del- 
phimos. With the later, it is simply a 
sign of the sun as rising hke Aphrodite 
from the sea, the lion’s skin may denote 
perhaps the raiment of tawny cloud 
which the sun seems to trail behind him 
as he fights his way through the vapours 
whom he is said to overcome. Seevol i. 
p 135. In his chapters on Ancient 


Faiths and l^gends^ M. Maury enters 
at length into the physiological questions 
which on the Euemeristic hypothesis 
must be connected with the myth of the 
Hemean Lion. However conclusive his 
arguments may be, the inquiry is almost 
superfluous It cannot be necessary 
to disprove the existence of lions in 
the Peloponnese, unless we must also 
disprove that of the Sphinx or ^e 
Chimaira 
2 See p. 30. 


CHAP. 

II. 


The lions 
ofKith- 
airOn and 
Nemea. 



46 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE AEYAH NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


Herakles 
and Ker¬ 
beros. 


whicli we i,aTe the sun under an aspect altogether incon¬ 
sistent with the ideal of Prodikos. Herakles is no longer 
the hero who imposes on himself a hard discipline, but the 
voluptuous wanderer who has many loves in many lands. In 
his attack on the envoys of Er^nos he is armed with a coat 
of mail brought to him by the dawn-goddess Ath^n^, as 
AchiUeus and Sigurd wear the armour brought to them by 
Thetis and Hjordis.' The same thought suggested the gift 
of the bow and arrows from Phoibos, the lord of the spear¬ 
like sunbeams, of the sword from Hermes, whose stroke can 
split the forest trees, of the peplos from Ath^n^, the clear¬ 
faced morning. The arrows bestowed on bim by ApoUdn it 
must specially be noted are poisoned; and these poisoned 
barbs are used by Philokt^tgs, who receives them from 
Heoptolemos, the child of Achilleus, the brilliant but short¬ 
lived sun, and by Odysseus, whom Athgn4 restores to youth¬ 
ful beauty as his life’s labour draws towards its end. But we 
have no historical evidence that poisoned arrows were used 
by any Hellenic tribes, or that they would not have regarded 
the employment of such weapons with the utmost horror. 
How then comes it to pass that the poets of the Hiad and 
Odyssey can attribute to the Achaian heroes practices from 
which their kinsmen would have shrunk with disgust P The 
mystery is easily solved. The equivocation which turned 
the violet-tinted rays of morning into spears was inevitable; 
the change of the spears or arrows into poisoned barbs was, 
at the least, as natural and necessary.* 

As the conquest of the lion of Eithairon is the first great 
exploit, so according to the systematising mythographers 
the bringing up of the dog Kerberos ^ from Hades is the 
last. This story is mentioned by the poet of the Odyssey, 

• Er^nos is the father of Trophonios thus far the equivocation differs from 
Md Agamedes, the builders of the that which turned Lyk46n into a wolf 
Delphian shnne —the myth of the and Arkas into a hear, these names 
children of darkness raising the sanetu- being in fact of the same signification 
ary of the lord of light answering to the although the men who uttered them had 
legend which makes ApoUdn himself ceased to be conscious of it. 
the Aild of (:Ut6) the sombre night. > The name Kerberos is the Sanskrit 
The word i<!r, foi/, which furnished Sarvara, or Sambara, one of the enemies 
a name for the violet hue, for a spear, slam by Indra.—Max Miiller, Chips li 
and for poison, is really a homonym 182, 188. ■ 

traceable to two or three roots; and 



HEBAKLES AND LAOMEDON. 


47 


wIlo makes Herakles tell Odysseus tkat kis sufferings are 
knt a reflection of tke toils wkick ke kad kimself undergone 
by tke tyranny of tke mean Eurystkeus, and tkat tkis task 
of bringing up tke kound kad been achieved by tke aid of 
Athene and Hermes, tke dawn and tke breeze of morning.^ 
On tkis framework was built an elaborate superstructure, 
wkick we need not examine closely, but of wkick some at 
least of tke details are signifleant. Tke slaughter of tke 
Kentaurs by Herakles, for wkick ke needed puriflcation 
before descending to Hades, is tke conquest and dispersion 
of tke vapours by tke sun as ke rises in tke heaven; and tke 
crime of Herakles is only another form of tkat of Ixi6n. As 
ke returns to tke upper world ke rescues Theseus, kimself 
one of tke great solar heroes, and tke child of Aitkra, tke 
pure air; but Peiritkoos must remain behind, as Patroklos 
must die even though ke be tke friend of Ackilleus. Tke 
dog of Tama thus brought back is, of course, caiTied down 
again by Herakles to tke nether world. 

But tke sun as ke rises in the heaven acquires a fiercer 
power; and thus Apoll6n becomes Okrys 46 r, and Herakles 
becomes mad. It is tke raging of tke heat wkick burns up 
tke fruits of tke earth wkick it has fostered, and so Herakles 
slays kis own children by Megara, and two also of tke sons 
of Ipkikl^s. At tkis point ke is represented by some as 
asking tke Pythian priestess where ke should make kis 
abode, and as receiving from her, instead of kis former title, 
Alkaios or Al k ides, tke sturdy, tke name of Herakles, tke 
heavenly.^ As suck, ke is tke avenger of tke fraud of Lao- 
med6n, who kad refused to pay tke promised recompense to 
Poseidon and Pkoibos for building kis walls and tending kis 
flocks. As in tke case of Kepkeus or of Oineus, tke offended 
deities send a monster to ravage tke fields of Hion, and Lao- 
med6n promises to bestow kis immortal horses on any one 
who will slay it. But again ke breaks kis oath, by giving 
mortal steeds to Herakles when tke beast has been killed. 

' Od. xi 626; U. viii. 369. The here spealcs of Zeus as mad, hard of 
latter passage is especially noteworthy heart, a blunderer, and an obstacle in 
as indicating that clashing of wills her path. 

between Ath^n^ and Zeus which Mr, The name Herakles is the same as 
Gladstone is anxious to keep as much HlrS, with the termination denoting 
as possible in the background. Ath4u4 glory or renown. 


CHAP. 

U. 


The mad¬ 
ness of 
Herakles. 



48 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK The result is the first Trojan war mentioned in the Iliad, 

>-—. which relates how Herakles, coming with six ships and few 

men, shattered its towers and left its streets desolate.^ In 
other words, Herakles is mightier than Agamemnon; he 
is the snn-god demanding his own recompense: the Achaians 
among whom Aehilleus fights are the sun-children seeking 
to recover the beautiful light of evening and the treasures 
which have been stolen with her from the west. 

Orthros Of the other exploits of Herakles, the greater number 
H^ra explain themselves. The Nemean lion is the offspring of 

Tjphon, Orthros, or Echidna; in other words, it is sprung 
from Vritra, the dark thief, and Ahi, the throttling snake of 
darkness, and it is as surely slain by Herakles as the snakes 
which had assaulted him in the cradle. Another child of 
the same horrid parents is the Lernaian Hydra, its very 
name denoting a monster who, like the Sphinx or the Panis, 
shuts up the waters and causes drought. It has many heads, 
one being immortal, as the storm must constantly supply new 
clouds while the vapours are driven off by the sun into space. 
Hence the story went that although Herakles could burn 
away its mortal heads, as the sun burns up the clouds, still 
he can but hide away the mist or vapour itself, which at its 
appointed time must again darken the sky. In this fight 
he is aided by lolaos, the son of Iphikles, a name recalling, 
like that of lole, the violet-tinted clouds which can be seen 
only when the face of the heaven is clear of the murky 
vapours. Hence it is that Eurystheus is slain when lolaos 
rises from the under world to punish him for demanding 
from the children of the dawn-goddess Ath^nS the surrender 
of the Herakleids, who had found among them a congenial 
home. The stag of Keryneia is, according to some versions, 
slain, in others only seized by Herakles, who bears it with 
its golden antlers and brazen feet to Artemis and Phoibos. 


^ U. V 640. This story is put into 
the mouth of the Herahleid Tl^polemos 
■when he is about to slay SarpMon. 
Grote, IRst. Gr. i. 388 The other 
incidents simply repeat the story of 
Kepheus The oracle says that a 
maiden must he given up to the sea- 
monster, and the lot falls on Hesion^, 


the daughter of Laomedon, as in the 
Libyan tale it falls on Andromeda, the 
daughter of Kepheus. Herakles, of 
course, plays the part of Perseus, and is 
aided by Ath^n^ and the Trojans, who 
build him a tower to help him m the 
fight. 



THE MARATHONIAH AND CRETAN BULLS. 

The light god is angry because he had thus laid hands on 
an animal sacred to his sister, and thus the stag becomes a 
cloud crowned with golden tints, and dispersed as the sun 
pursues it. The story of the Erymanthian boar is in some 
accounts transferred from Argos to Thessaly or Phrygia, the 
monster itself, which Herakles chases through deep snow, 
being closely akin to the Chimaira slain by Belleroph6n. 
In the myth of the Augeian stables Herakles plays the part 
of Indra, when he lets loose the waters imprisoned by the 
Pani.^ In this case the plague of drought is regarded not 
so much in its effects on the health of man as in its 
influence on nature generally, in the disorder, decay, un¬ 
seemliness, and filth which must follow from it. The clouds, 
here the cattle of Augeias, may move across the sky, but 
they drop down no water on the earth, and do nothing 
towards lessening the evil. Of these clouds Augeias pro¬ 
mises that Herakles shall become in part the lord, if he can 
but cleanse their stables. The task is done, but Augeias, 
like Laomeddn, refuses to abide by his bargain, and even 
defeats Herakles and his companions in a narrow Eleian 
gorge. But the victory of Augeias is fatal to himself, and 
with Kteatos and Eurytos he is slain by Herakles. 

The myth of the Cretan bull seems to involve a confusion 
similar to that which has led some to identify the serpent 
who is regarded as an object of love and affection in the 
Phallic worship, with the serpent who is always an object of 
mere aversion and disgust.^ The bull which bears Eur6p6 
from the Phoinikian land is obviously the bull Indra, which, 
like the sun, traverses the heaven, bearing the dawn from the 
east to the west. But the Cretan bull, like his feUow in the 
Gnossian labyrinth, who devours the tribute children from the 
city of the dawn-goddess, is a dark and malignant monster 

‘ This exploit^ in the Norse story of Oaelic story of the Battle of the Birds, 
the Mastermaid, is performed by the of which Mr. Campbell {Tales of the 
prince, who finds that, unless he guides West Highlands^ i. 61) says that * it 
the pitchfork anght, ten pitchforks full might have been taken from classical 
of filth come in for every one that he mythology if it stood alone, but Norwe- 
tosses out, an incident which recalls the gian peasants and West Highlanders 
growth of the heads of the Lernaian could not so twist the story of Hercules 
Hydra. This myth is repeated in the into the same shape.’ 
tale of the Two Stepsisters, and in the * See section xii. of this chapter. 

VOL. II. B 


49 


CHAP. 

n. 


The Mara- 

thonian 

bull. 



50 


MTTHOLOOT OF THE ARTAIST NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Tbe girdle 
of Hippo- 
lyt6. 


to the throttling snake, who represents the powers of 
night and darkness. This bull Poseid6n, it is said, makes 
mad; but although Herakles carries it home on his back, he 
is compelled to let it go again, and it reappears as the bull 
who rayages the fields of Marathon, till it is slain by the 
hands of Theseus, who is the slayer also of the Minotauros. 
The clouds and vapours pursued and conquered by the hero 
are seen again in the mares of DiomM^s, which consume their 
master and are thus rendered tame, perhaps as the isolated 
clouds are unable to resist the sun when the moisture which 
has produced them has been subdued. They appear also as 
the Stymphalian birds, with claws, wings, and beaks resem¬ 
bling those of the Sphinx, and like her being eaters of 
human flesh or destroyers of men and beasts. These birds, 
it is said, had taken refuge in the Stymphalian lake, because 
they were afraid of the wolves—a phrase which exhibits the 
dark storm-clouds as dreading the rays (Lykoi) of the sun, 
which can only appear when themselves have been defeated. 
These clouds reappear yet again as the cattle stolen by Ge- 
ryon, and recovered by Herakles—a myth of which the 
legend of Cacus exhibits the most striking and probably 
the most genuine form. Nor is the legend of the golden 
apples guarded by the Hesperides anything more than a 
repetition of the same idea, being itself, as we have seen, 
a result of the same kind of equivocation which produced 
the myths of Lykdon, Arktouros, and Kallisto. 

In the girdle of HippolytS we have one of those mysterious 
emblems which are associated with the Linga in the worship 
of Vishnu. It is the magic kestos of Aphrodite and the 
wreath of the Kadmeian Harmonia. Into the myth which re¬ 
lated how Herakles became its possessor, the mythographers 
have introduced a series of incidents, some of which do not 
belong to it, while others merely repeat each other. Thus, 
before he reaches the land of the Amazons, Herakles aids 
Lykos against the Bebrykes, in other words, fights the battle 
of the bright being against the roaring monsters who are his 
enemies; and thus, after he has slain Hippolyt^ and seized 
the girdle, he visits Echidna, a being akin to the beautiful 
but mysterious Melusina, who throws her spell over Bay- 



ARfiS Am> KYKNOS. 

mond of Toulonsey and then takes vengeance on the Trojan 
Laomed6ny slaying the bright Sarp^d6n, who in the Hiad 
falls by the spear of his descendant Tlepolemos. 

The narratives of these great e:?:ploits, which are commonly 
known as the twelve labours of Herakles, are interspersed 
with numberless incidents of greater or less significance, 
some of them plainly interpreting themselves. Thus, in his 
journey to the land of the Hesperides he is tormented by 
the heat of the sun, and shoots his arrows at Helios, who, 
admiring his bravery, gives him his golden cup in which to 
cross the sea. In Kyknos, the son of Ar^s the grinder or 
crusher, he encounters an antagonist akin to Cacus, or even 
more formidable. With his father Kyknos invades the 
sacred precincts of Apoll6n, where he sits on his fiery 
chariot while the earth trembles beneath the hoofs of his 
horses, and the altar and grove of Phoibos are filled with 
the horrid glare. It is the thimderstorm which blackens 
the heavens at midday, usurping the place of the lord of 
light, and lighting up his sanctuary, the blue heaven, with 
streams of deadly fire. Well may the poet say that against 
such a foe none but Herakles and his faithful lolaos would 
dare to make a stand. But the son of Alkmene is journeying 
to Trachis, and Kyknos, whose chariot blocks up the road, 
must yield up the path or die. On the challenge of Herakles 
a furious confiict ensues, in which we see the spears of Indra 
hurled against his hateful enemy. The crash of the thunder 
rolls through the heaven, and the big thunderdrops fall from 
the sky.^ At last Kyknos is slain, but Herakles is now con¬ 
fronted by Ar^s himself, whom he conquers although he 
cannot slay him. Ar^s is indeed not the passing storm, but 
the power from whom these storms come: he is that head of 
the Lemaian hydra which cannot die, and thus he escapes 
with a thigh wound, while the body of Kyknos, stripped of 
its glittering armour, is buried by Keyx. In Antaios^ Hera- 

* As^. Herdkl, S84. more clearly jn the Teutonic devil. 

2 Antaios, the uncouth awkward giant, Whether in Greek, Hindu, or other my- 
may he fairly taken as a type of the thology, these monsters are generally 
Teutonic Troll, in whom is combined outwitted, and hence nothing is gained 
the unsightliness of Polyph^mos with by hypotheses which see in these Trolls 
the stupidity which, tolerably character- the aboriginal inhabitants who had not 
istic of the Kykl6ps, is brought out still wit enough to hold their ground against 


51 

CHAP. 

H. 


Myths in¬ 
terspersed 
among the 
legends of 
the twelve 
labours ot 
Herakles. 



52 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Herakles 
and Enry- 
tos. 


Mes encounters the giant who, under the name of Polyph^- 
mos, seets to crush Odysseus. Like the latter, the Libyan 
monster is a son of the sea-god—the black storm-vapour 
which draws to itself new strength from the earth on which 
it reposes. Hence Herakles cannot overcome bin until he 
lifts him off the earth and strangles him in the expanse of 
heaven, as the sun cannot bum up and disperse the vapours 
until his heat has lifted them up above the surface of the land. 
The fiercer heats of summer may, as we have seen, suggest 
the idea not only that another hand less firm than that of 
Helios is suffering his fiery horses to draw too near the earth, 
but that Helios himself has been smitten with madness, and 
cares not whether in his fury he slays those whom he has 
most loved and cherished. The latter idea runs through the 
myths of the raging Herakles, and thus, when he has won 
lol^ the daughter of Burytos as the prize for success in 
archery, her father refuses to fulfil the compact because a 
beiug who has killed one bride and her oflspring may repeat 
the crime: and thus he is parted from lolS at the very 
moment of winning her. It is the old story of Daphnfi, 
Prokris, or Arethousa, with this difference only that the 
legend of loM belongs to the middle heats of summer. But 
Herakles may not be injured with impunity. The beautiful 
cattle of Eurytos are feeding like those of Helios in the pas¬ 
tures where the children of Heaira tend them, and.Heraldes 
is suspected of driving them away, as the tinted clouds of 
morning tide vanish before the sun. His friend Iphitos 
pleads his cause, but when he asks the aid of TT ato VIoq in 
recovering the lost cattle, the angry hero turns on his friend 
and slays him. The friendship of Herakles is as fatal to 

the new invaders of the land, and who we need say is that they become more 
therefore betook themselves to the stupid as we go further north. The 
mountains It is of the very essence of Kykl6ps of the Odyssey is not quite 
the myths of Indra, Herakles, Bellero- such a fool as the Troll who slits his * 
phontes, Perseus, or any other light- stomach that he may eat the more, be- 
bom heroes, that they should be victo- cause ‘ Boots who ate a match with the 
rious over the enemies opposed to them, Troll* and has made a slit in the scrip 
and that these enemies should appear in which he carries under his chin assures 
horrible shapes which yet are not so for- him that the pain is nothing to speak of. 
midable as they seem; in other words, The giant in the story of the Valiant 
they cannot stand against the hero Tailor (Grimm) is cheated much in the 
whose insignificant stature and mean same fashion, 
appearance they had despised. All that 



HERAKLES THE BOITOMAH 53 

Iphitos as that of Achilleus to PatroMos. Incident is now CHAP, 
crowded on incident, all exhibiting the working of the same - - 

idea. It is the time of the wild simoom. Herakles ap¬ 
proaches the sanctuary of Phoibos, but the Pythia will yield 
no answer to his questions, and a contest follows between 
Herakles and Phoibos himself, which is ended only when 
Zeus sunders them by a flash of lightning. When thus for 
the time discomfited, he is told that he can be loosed from 
his madness and again become sound in mind only by con¬ 
senting to serve for a time as a bondman; and thus the myth 
which makes ApoUdn serve in the house of Adm^tos, and 
which made Herakles all his life long the slave of a mean 
tyrant, is again brought into the story. He is now sold to 
Omphal^ (the correlative of Omphalos), and assumes some¬ 
thing like the guise of the half-feminine Dionysos. But even 
with this story of subjection a vast number of exploits are 
interwoven, among these being the slaying of a serpent on 
the river Sygaris and the hunting of the Kalydonian boar. 

The tale of his return from the conquest of Dion presents HeraHes 
the same scenes under slightly different colours. In his 
fight with the Meropes he is assailed by a shower of stones, 
and is even wounded by Chalk6d&n,— another thunder¬ 
storm recalling the fight with Ares and Kyknos: and the 
same battle of the elements comes before us in the next task 
which AthSnS sets him, of fighting with the giants in the 
burning fields of Phlegrai. These giants, it had been fore¬ 
told, were to be conquered by a mortal man, a notion which 
takes another form in the surprise of Polyph^mos when he 
finds himself outwitted by so small and insignificant a being 
as Odysseus. At this point, after his return to Argos, some 
mythographers place his marriage with Aug^, the mother 
of Telephos, whose story reproduces that of Oidipous or 
Perseus. 

H!is union with D^ianeira, the daughter of the Kalydonian Herakles 
chief, brings us to the closing scenes of his troubled and 
tumultuous career. The name points, as we have seen, to 
the darkness which was to be his portion at the ending of 
his journey, and here also his evil fate pursues him. His 
spear is fatal to the boy Eunomos, as it had been to the 



54 


ALTTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


The death 
of Hera- 
l.les. 


children of Megara 5 but although in this instance the crime 
had been done unwittingly, Herakles would not accept the 
pardon tendered to him, and he departed into exile with 
Dfeianeira. At the ford of a river Herakles entrusts her to 
the charge of the Kentaur Nessos, who acted as ferryman, and 
who attempting to lay hands on D^ianeira is fatally wounded 
by the hero. In his last moments Nessos bids her preserve his 
blood, as the sure means of recovering her husband’s love if 
it should be transferred to another. The catastrophe brought 
about by these words of Hessos is related by Sophokles; but 
before this end came, Herakles had aided many friends and 
vanquished many foes. Among these was Augeias, whom 
he attacked at the head of an Arkadian host, the men of the 
bright land. Against him were arrayed, among other allies 
of the Eleian king, Eurytos and Kteatos, the sons of the 
grinders or crushers MolionS and Aktor. But here the 
strength of Herakles for a time fails him, and the enemy 
hesitates not to attack him during his sickness 5 but the 
hero lies in ambush, like the sun lurking behind the clouds 
while his rays are ready to burst forth like spears, and having 
slain some of his enemies, advances and takes the city of 
Elis, making Phyleus king in place of Augeias, whom he 
slays together with his children. 

When at length the evening of his life was come, D^ianeira 
received the tidings that her husband was returning in triumph 
from the Euboian Oichalia, not alone, but bringing with him 
the beautiful lol^ whom he had loved since the hour when he 
first put the shaft to his bow in the contest for that splendid 
prize. Now he had slain her father, as Perseus slew Akrisios 
and as Oidipous smote down Laios, and the maiden herself 
was coming to grace his home. Then the words of Nessos 
come back to the memory of the forsaken wife, who steeps in 
his blood the white garment which at the bidding of Hera- 
kies Lichas comes to fetch from Trachis. The hero is about 
to offer his sacrifice to the Kenaian Zeus, and he wishes to 
offer it up in peace, clad in a seemly robe of pure white. With 
the fair and gentle lolS standing by his side. But so it is 
not to be. Scarcely has he put on the robe which Lichas 
brings than the poison begins to course through his veins 



HERAKLES AND BELLEBOPHCN. 


65 


and rack every limb with agony unspeakable, as the garment 
given by HeUos to Medeia consumed the flash of Glauk^ • 
and of Kre6n, Once more the suffering hero is lashed into 
madness, and seizing the luckless Lichas he hurls him into 
the sea. Thus, borne at last to the heights of Oita, he gathers 
wood, and charges those who are around him to set the 
pile on Are, when he shall have laid himself down upon it. 
Only the shepherd Poias ventures to do the hero’s will: but 
when the flame is kindled, the thunder crashes through the 
heaven, and a cloud comes down which bears him away to 
Olympos, there to dwell in everlasting youth with the radiant 
H 4 b 6 as his bride.‘ It is a myth in which ‘ looms a mag¬ 
nificent sunset,’® the forked flames as they leap from the 
smoke of the kindled wood being the blood-red vapours which 
stream from the body of the dying sun. It is the reverse of 
the picture which leaves Odysseus with Penelop^ in all the 
brightness of early youth, knowing indeed that the night 
must come, yet blessed in the profound calm which has fol¬ 
lowed the storms and troubles of the past. It is the picture 
of a sunset in wild confusion, the multitude of clouds hurry¬ 
ing hither and thither, now hiding, now revealing the man¬ 
gled body of the sun,—of a sunset more awful yet not more 
sad ^^ba.Tl that which is seen in the last hours of Belleroph6n, 
as he wanders through the Aleian plain in utter solitude, 
the loneliness of the sun who has scattered the hostile va¬ 
pours and then sinks slowly down the vast expanse of pale 
light with the ghastly hues of death upon his face, whUe 
none is nigh to cheer him, like lol^ by the funeral pile of 
Herakles.® * 


^ There was no reason why the myth 
should stop short here; and the cycle 
already so many times repeated is 
carried on by making Herakles and 
the parents ot Alexiar4s and 
Anikfetos, names which again denote the 
irresistible strength and the benignant 
nature of the parent whose blood flows 
in their veins. The name i^lexiar^ 
belongs to the same class with Alexi- 
kakos, an epithet which Herakles sharts 
with Zens and ApoU6n, along with 
Daphn^p'ioros, Olympios, Pangenetdr, 
and others —Max Muller, Chiijs, li. 89. 

* Max Muller, ih n 88. 

* It was easy to think of Herakles as 


never wearied and never dying, but as 
journeying by the Ocean stream after 
sun-down to the spot whence he comes 
again into sight in the morning Hence 
in the Orphic h)mns he is self-born, 
the wanderer along the path of light 
(Lykabas) in which he performs his 
mighty exploits between the rising and 
the setting of the sun He is of many 
shapes, he devours all things and pro¬ 
duces all things, he slays and he heals. 
Eound his head he bears the Morning 
and the Night (xii.), and as living 
through the hours of darkness he wears 
a robe of stars {dffTpoxiroA. 


CHAP. 

IL 



56 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


Of tie Latin Hercules we need say bnt little bere. Tbe 

--' most prominent myth connected with the name in compara- 

Herc^es'^ tively recent times is that of the punishment of Cacns for 
stealing the oxen of the hero; and this story must be taken 
along with the other legends which reproduce the great con¬ 
test between the powers of light and darkness set forth in 
the primitive myth of Indra and Ahi. The god or hero of 
whom the Latins told this story is certainly the same in 
character with the Hellenic son of Alkm AnA; but, as Mebuhr 
insisted, it is not less certain that the story must have been 
told from the first not of the genuine Latin Hercules or 
Herculus, a deity who was the guardian of boundaries, like 
the Zeus Herkeios of the Greeks, but of some god in whose 
' place Hercules has been intruded, from the phonetic resem¬ 

blance between his name and that of Herakles. Apart from 
this story the Latin Hercules, or rather Recaranus, has no 
genuine mythology, the story of the Potitii and Pinarii being, 
like a thousand others, a mere institutional legend, to account 
for ceremonies in the later ritual. 

Egyptian Still less is it necessary to give at length the points of 
likeness or difference between the Hellenic Herakles and 
the deities of whom Herodotos or other writers speak as the 
Herakles of Egypt or other countries. By their own admis¬ 
sion their names at least had nothing in common; and the 
affinity between the Greek hero and the Egyptian Som, Chon, 
or Makeris, must be one of attributes only. It is, indeed, 
obvious that go where we will, we must find the outlines, at 
least, of the picture into which the Greek mind crowded such 
an astonishing variety of life and action. The sun, as toiling 
for others, not for himself, as serving beings who are as no¬ 
thing in comparison with his own strength and splendour, as 
cherishing or destroying the fruits of the earth which is his 
bride, as faithful or fickle in his loves, as gentle or furious in 
his course, could not fail to be the subject of phrases which, as 
their original meaning grew fainter, must suggest the images 
wrought up with lavish but somewhat undisceming zeal into 
the stories of the Hellenic Herakles. Not less certainly 
would these stories exhibit him under forms varying in¬ 
definitely from the most exalted majesty to the coarsest bur- 



THE BAHISHMEKT OF THE HEEAKLEIDS. 


57 


lesque. He might be the devoted yonth, going forth like 
Sintram to fight against all mean pleasures, or the kindly 
giant who almost plays the part of a buffoon in the house of 
the sorrowing AdmStos. Between the HeraJdes of Prodikos 
and that of Euripides there was room for a vast variety of 
colouring, and thus it was easy to number the heroes bearing 
this name by tens or by hundreds. The obvious resemblances 
between these deities would lead the Greeks to identify their 
own god with the Egyptian deity, and suggest to the Egyp¬ 
tians the thought of upholding their own mythology as the 
sole source or fountain of that of Hellas. 

But the mythical history of HeraHes is bound up with 
that of his progenitors and his descendants, and furnishes 
many a link in the twisted chain presented to us in the pre¬ 
historic annals of Greece. The myth might have stopped 
short with the death of the hero; but a new cycle is, as we 
have seen, begun when Heb^ becomes the mother of his chil¬ 
dren in Olympos, and Herakles, it is said, had in his last 
moments charged his son Hyllus on earth to marry the 
beautiful lol^. The ever-moving wheels, in short, may not 
tarry. The children of the sun may return as conquerors in 
the morning, bringing with them the radiant woman who 
with her treasures had been stolen away in the evening. 
After long toils and weary conflicts they may succeed in bear¬ 
ing her back to her ancient home, as Perseus bears Dana^ 
to Argos; but not less certainly must the triumph of the 
powers of darkness come round again, and the sun-children 
be driven from their rightful heritage. Thus was framed 
that woful tale of expulsion and dreary banishment, of efforts 
to return many times defeated but at last successful, which 
make up the mythical history of the descendants of Herakles. 
But the phenomena which rendered their expulsion necessary 
determined also the direction in which they must move, and 
the land in which they should find a refuge. The children 
of the sun can rest only in the land of the morning, and ac¬ 
cordingly it is at Athens alone and from the children of the 
dawn-goddess that the Herakleids can be sheltered from 
their enemies, who press them on every side. Thus we find 
ourselves in a cycle of myths which might be repeated at will, 


CHAP. 

IL 


Eepe- 
titions 
of the 
myth of 
HeraMes. 



58 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

BOOK ’which in fact were repeated many times in tlie so-called pre- 
. ^ historic annals of Greece, and which doubtless would have 

been repeated again and again, had not the magic series 
been cut short by the dawn of the historical sense and the 
rise of a real historical literature. 

The story In the Argive tradition the myth of Perseus is made to 
of Perseus. whole legend of Herakles, the mightiest and the 

most widely known of all the mythical heroes of the Greeks. 
It is as belonging to the race of Perseus, and as being by the 
arts of TTArA brought into the world before his cousin, that 
Eurystheus becomes the tyrant of Herakles. Yet the story 
of Perseus is essentially the same as the story of his more 
illustrious descendant; and the profound unconsciousness of 
the Argives that the two narratives are in their groundwork 
identical is a singular illustration of the extent to which 
men can have all their critical faculties lulled to sleep by 
mere difference of names or of local colouring in legends 
which are only modifications of a single myth. In either case 
we have a hero whose life, beginning in disasters, is a long 
aeries of labours undertaken at the behest of one who is in 
every way his inferior, and who comes triumphantly out of 
these fearful ordeals, because he is armed with the invincible 
weapons of the dawn, the sun, and the winds. Nor is there 
perhaps a single feature or incident in the whole myth to 
which a parallel is not furnished by other Hellenic, or even 
other Argive, legends. Before his birth, Akrisios, his motherfe 
father, learns at Delphoi, like the Theban Laios, that if his 
daughter has a child, that child will be his destroyer. At 
once then he orders that DanaA shall be shut up in a brazen 
tower, an imprisonment answering to that of PersephonA in 
the land of Hades, or of Brynhild in Hiflheim. But here, as 
with them, a deliverer is wanted; and this deliverer is Zeus, 
the lord of the life-giving ether, who had wooed Leda in 
the form of the white swan, the spotless cloud, and who now 
enters the dungeon of DanaA in a golden shower, the glitter¬ 
ing rays which herald the approach of spring with its new 
life for the trees and flowers. Thus in his mother’s dreary 
prison-house the golden child ^ is born; and Akrisios in his 

* XpvaSiraTpos, the Gold Child, in Grimm’s collection of Teutonic stories. 



DAKAS ato diktys. 


59 


wrath decrees that his daughter and her babe shall share 
the doom of Oidipous and Dionysos. Like Semel^, she is 
placed with the infant in a chest or ark, which is thrust out 
into the sea, and carried by the waves and tide to the island 
of Seriphos, where the vessel is seen by Diktys, who of 
course is fishing, and by him Danae and her child are taken 
to the house of his brother Polydektes, the chief of the 
island, a myth which we have to compare with those of 
Artemis Diktynna and Persephon^. Throughout the story, 
Diktys is the kindly being whose heart is filled with pity for 
the sorrowing mother, while Polydektes, a name identical 
with that of Hades Polydegmon, is her unrelenting perse¬ 
cutor. He is thus a champion of the lord of light, which is 
reflected in his name as in that of Diktynna and the Diktaian 
cave in Crete; and the equivocation in the one case is pre¬ 
cisely the same as in the other. Polydektes now tries all his 
arts to win Dana^, and his efforts at once recall the tempta¬ 
tion of Saram 4 by Paul; but Dana^ is true to her child and 
to his father, and Polydektes resolves to be rid of the youth 
who stands thus in his way. So, like Eurystheus, he sends 
him away with a strict charge that he is not to return unless 
he brings with him the Gorgon’s head, the sight of which 
can freeze every living being into stone. Thus the dawn 
is parted from her son, for Phoibos himself must leave his 
mother L^to and begin his westward journey.^ He starts 
alone, and as he thinks unbefriended, but with the high and 
generous spirit which marks the youthful Herakles in the 
apologue of Prodikos, and heavenly beings come to his aid 
as Aret^ promises to strengthen the son of AlkmSn^. From 
the dawn-goddess, AthSn^, he receives the mirror into which 
he is to gaze when he draws his sword to smite the mortal 
Gorgon, the fiend of darkness; from Hermes he obtains the 
sword which never falls in vain; and the Nymphs bring him 
the bag in which he is to carry away the head of Medousa, 
the tarn-kappe or invisible helmet of Hades, and the golden 
sandals which will bear him along as swiftly as a dream,—in 
other words, the golden chariot of Helios, or the armour of 

^ If Niebuhr is right in connecting name OanaS is only another form of 
together the names Da«.nos, Danaos, Ahan& and Ath4n6, of DahanA and 
Lavinus, Lalunus, Latinus, &c., the Bapnn4 Bee vol. i. p. 242. 


CHA?. 

n. 



60 MTTHOLOGT OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

BOOK Acliilletis, wMcli bears bim up as a bird upon tbe wing. He 
^ ^ is now tbe Cbrys 46 r, armed for tbe battle and ready for bis 

journey; and like tbe sun, be may yeil bimself in clouds 
wben be wishes not to be seen. But be cannot reach tbe 
Gorgon^s den until be has first passed tbe borne of tbe 
Graiai, tbe land of tbe gloaming, whose solitary eye and 
tooth be refuses to restore until they have pointed out tbe 
road which shall bring him to bis journey’s end. In other 
words, tbe sun must go through tbe twilight-land before be 
can pierce tbe regions of utter darkness and reappear in tbe 
beautiful gardens of tbe Hyperboreans, tbe asphodel mea¬ 
dows of tbe tinted beayens of morning. Wben at length 
bis task is done, and be turns to go to tbe upper world, tbe 
Gorgon sisters (tbe clouds of darkness) start up in fury, and 
their brazen talons almost seize bim as be reaches the clear 
blue beayen, which is called tbe land of tbe brilliant Ethi¬ 
opians. Here, again, tbe same war is going on in which be 
has already been tbe conqueror. Tbe stormcloud is seeking 
to deyour tbe dawn and to blot out its tender light; in other 
words, tbe Libyan dragon seeks to make Andromeda bis 
prey, as tbe maiden stands motionless on tbe rock to which 
she has been fastened. Tbe monster is soon destroyed, as tbe 
Sphinx is soon discomfited by Oidipous; and tbe awful 
power of tbe Gorgon’s glance is seen in tbe death of Pbineus, 
and in tbe merciful ending of tbe long labours of Atlas. 
But tbe great work remains yet to be done, tbe ayenging of 
tbe wrongs of Dana^, as tbe Acbaians fought to ayenge tbe 
griefs and woes of Helen. Tbe yengeance of Perseus must 
be as terrible as that of Acbilleus or tbe stem chieftain of 
Itbaka. But wben Polydektes and bis abettors baye been 
turned into stone and Diktys made king of tbe land, Perseus 
yields up bis magic weapons to tbe gods who gaye them, and 
departs with bis mother to tbe old home in Argos. Once 
more Dana 4 treads her natiye soil, as Helen graces tbe balls 
of Menelaos wben Paris tbe thief has been slain. But tbe 
doom pronounced by tbe Delphian priestess was stiU un¬ 
fulfilled; and Akrisios no sooner bears that Perseus is 
coming than be flies to Larissa. Thither Perseus follows 
bim, not as a foe, but as a friend, and takes part in tbe 



BANAfi AlH) AITHRA. 

games wlicli Teutamidas tlie cHef tolds in Ids honour. 
Presently a quoit hurled by Perseus lights on the feet of 
Akrisios, and the prophecy is accomplished which makes 
Oidipous, Eomulus, and Cyrus slay their parents or their 
grandsires. The sequel is given in two versions, correspond¬ 
ing to the choice given to AchiUeu§.^ In the one Perseus 
returns to Argos, and there dies in peace; in the other grief 
and shame for the death of Akrisios drive him to abandon 
his Argive sovereignty for that of Tiryns, where his kinsman 
Megapenthes is king. In the latter, he may be compared 
with BeUerophon wandering in gloom and loneliness through 
the Aleian plain; in the former we have the tranquil time 
which follows the great vengeance of Achilleus and Odysseus. 
Thus as the unwilling destroyer even of those whom he loves, 
as the conqueror of monstrous beasts and serpents, as toijling 
for a mean and cruel master, yet as coming forth in the end 
victorious over aU his enemies, Perseus is at once the fore¬ 
father and the counterpart of Herakles. He is himself bom 
in Argos the bright land, as Phoibos springs to life in Delos 
or Artemis in Ortygia ; but his mother DanaS is almost as 
neutral and colourless as L6t6 or lokastS or Hekab^ or 
Semel6. The Argive tradition runs in a circle, and the 
Athenian myth, jealously prized as a wholly independent 
history, is made up of the same materials. The practical 
identity of the Athenian legend of Theseus and the Argive 
legend of the son of AlkmSn^ suggested the proverb ^Another 
Herakles ; ^ nor, if attention had been specially fixed on the 
task of tracing out such resemblances, would very keen po^yers 
of criticism have been needed to show that the same process 
might be applied to the legends of all the Hellenic tribes. 

The myth of Theseus is indeed more transparent than that 
of his two great kinsmen. As Perseus is the son of the 
golden shower, so is Theseus the child of Aithra, the pure air; 
and if in one version he is said to be a son of Aigeus, king 
of Athens, in another he is called a son of Poseiddn, as Ath^n^ 
is Tritogeneia, and Aphrodite comes up from the sea; but 
Aigeus himself is only Poseiddn under a name denoting the 
dash of the waves on the shore, and when ApoUodoros speaks 
I iZ. ix. 411 ; xvi. 685 . 


61 


CHAP 

n. 


Birth and 
youth of 
Theseus. 



62 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

BOOK of Aigeus as a son not of Pandion but of Skyrios, we are still 
^ in tbe same magic circle, for tbe island of Skyros seems tohave ' 
been noted especially for tbe worship of the Ionian Poseiddn,^ 

^ In some of its earlier incidents the myth carries us to the story 
of Sigurd and Brynhild. As he grows up his mother tells him 
that a great work lay before him so soon as he could lift the 
great stone beneath which lay his father’s sword and sandals, 
the sword and sandals which Perseus had worn when he 
went to the Gorgons’ land. Thus gaining these prizes as 
Sigmund obtained the good sword Gram, Theseus started on 
that career of adventure and conquest which, with differences 
of local colouring and detail, is the career of Oidipous, Melea- 
gros, Belleroph6n, Odysseus, Sigurd, Grettir, and other my¬ 
thical heroes, as well as of Herakles and Perseus. Like 
these, he fights with and overcomes robbers, murderers, 
dragons, and other monsters. Like some of them, also, he 
is capricious and faithless. Like them, he is the terror not 
only of evil men but of the gods of the underworld. 

The six At his birth Poseiddn gave to his son the three wishes 
his first appear again and again in Teutonic folk-lore, and 

journey. sometimes in a ludicrous form.^ The favour of the sea- 
deities is also shown in the anecdote told by Pausanias ^ that 
when Minos cast, doubts on his being a son of Poseiddn, and 
bade him, if he were such, to bring up a ring thrown into the 
sea, Theseus dived and reappeared not only with the ring 
but with a golden crown, which Aphrodite herself had placed 
upon his head. His journey from Troizen to Athens is sigr- 
nalised by exploits which later mythographers regarded as 
six in number, as twelve were assigned to Herakles. They 
are all, as we might expect, merely different forms of the 
great fight waged by Indra and Oidipous against Yritra, 
Ahi, or the Sphinx. Thus the robber Periphet^s is the club¬ 
bearing son of Hephaistos, who, being weak in the feet, uses 
his weapon to smite down the passers by—an image of the 
stormcloud which in a mountain pass seems to rest on the 
hUl-side, and to discharge its fiery bolts on defenceless 

* Preller, Ghr. Myth. ii. 287. The ■ Eui: Mpp. 46. Preller, Gr. Myth. 
name Pandi6n is manifestly a mascn- ii. 288. 
line form of Pandia, an epithet of Sel4n6, ® i. 16, 3; Preller, ib. 

the moon, 'when, at its fiill. 



SINIS, THE PINE-BENDER. 


63 


travellers below. But Sinis tbe robber, or plunderer, is bis CHAP.* 
kinsman, being like bimself a son of Poseidon, and from bis ^^—- 
name Pityokamptes is tbe stormwind wbicb bends tbe pine 
trees. Hence tbe mytb went tbat be slew bis victims by 
compelling them to bend a fir tree wbicb be allowed to fly * 
back upon tbem, and tbat Tbeseus wbo caugbt bim in bis 
own trap nevertheless felt tbat be needed to purify bimself 
for tbe death of one wbo was also a son of tbe sea. Tbe 
same idea gave rise to tbe mytb of Pbaia, tbe dark or asben- 
coloured sow of Krommyon, wbo shares tbe fate of all such 
monsters, and again to tbat of Skeiron, wbo burls from tbe 
cliffs tbe travellers whom be has constrained to kneel and 
wash bis feet,^ and wbo in bis turn is in like manner destroyed 
by Tbeseus. In Kerkyon, whose name apparently connects 
bim with tbe Kerkdpes, we have a reflection of Laios, Akn- 
sios, Amulius, and other beings wbo seek from fear for them¬ 
selves to destroy their children or their children's children. 

Tbe story of bis daughter Alop^ is simply tbe story of Aug^,. 

Semel6, Dana6, and many others; but Kerkyon bimself is 
tbe Eleusinian wrestler, wbo is defeated by Theseus in bis 
own and slain. Tbe robber Prokroustes is a being of 
tbe same kind; but tbe mytb attached to bis name does not 
explain itself like the rest, and may perhaps have been sug¬ 
gested by tbe meaning of tbe word wbicb may denote either 
tbe process of beating or hammering out, or simply a down¬ 
right blow. In the latter case Prokroustes would simply be 
Sinis or Peripb^tes under another name ; in tbe former, the 
story of a bed to wbicb be fitted tbe limbs of bis victims by 
stretching tbem or cutting tbem ofiP might not unnaturally 
spring up. 

Tbeseus now enters tbe dawn city with a long flowing Theseus at 
robe, and with bis golden hair tied gracefully behind bis 
bead; and bis soft beauty excites tbe mockery of some 
workmen, wbo pause in their work of building to jest upon 
tbe maiden wbo is unseemly enough to walk about alone. 

It is tbe story of tbe young Dionysos or Acbilleus in woman’s 

1 Preller has no donbt on this head, ischen Pelsen, so hiess dieser Pass, 

‘ Es scheint wohl dass dieser Skeiron . . leicht in die See hinunterstiessen, wo die 
ein Bild fur die heftigen Sturme ist, Klippen seine Glieder zerschellten/ 
welche den Wanderer von den Skeiron- Or, Myth, ii. 290. 



64 

BOOK 

II. 


Theseus 
and the 
Mino- 
taiiros. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

garb; but Theseus is mightier than they, and, without saying 
a word, he unspans the oxen of the builders^ wagon, and 
hurls the vehicle as high above the temple pillars as these 
rose above the ground.' In the house of his fathers he was 
still surrounded by enemies. Aigeus was now wedded to 
the wise woman Medeia, who in her instinctive jealousy of 
the beautiful youth makes Aigeus an accomplice in her 
scheme for poisoning him. The deadly draught is placed 
on the banquet-table, but Aigeus recognises the sword which 
Theseus bears, and, embracing him as his, bids Medeia 
depart with her children to her own land. He encounters 
foes more formidable in the fifty gigantic sons of PaUas, who 
have thrust themselves into the place of Aigeus, as the 
suitors in Ithaka usurp the authority of Odysseus; but by 
the aid of the herald Leos, who betrays them, Theseus is 
again the conqueror.^ He is, however, scarcely more than at 
the beginning of his toils. The fields of Marathon are 
being ravaged by a bull,^ in whom we see a being akin to the 
terrible Cretan Minotauros, the malignant power of darkness 
hidden away in its labyrinth of stars. In his struggle with 
this monster he is aided by the prayers and offerings of the 
benign and aged Hekal^, whose eyes are not permitted to 
look again on the youth whom she has so tenderly loved—a 
myth which brings before us the gentle TSlephassa sinking 
down in utter weariness, before her heart can be gladdened 
once more by the sight of her child Eur6p6.^ 

He has now before him a still harder task. The bull 
which now fills Athenian hearts with grief and fear has his 
abode not at Marathon, but at Knossos. In the war waged 
by Minos in revenge for the death of his son Androgeos, 
who had been slain on Attic soil, the Cretan king was the 
conqueror.® With the war had come famine and pestilence; 

1 Pans. i. 19, 1; Preller, Ghr, Myth. ■ In the story of Krishna this hull is 
ii. 291. animated hy the demon Arishta. V%Bhm 

* These fifty sons of Pallas must JPurma, H. H. Wilson, 636. 
he compared with the fifty sons and * The name Hekal4 is the same as 
daughters of .ffigyptos, Danaos, Aster- Hekat6 and Hekatos, and thus, like 
odia and Sel4n6. But these are clearly T^lephassa, has simply the meaning of 
images of the starry heavens; and thus rays shot from a distant orb. 
the myth of the Pallantides is simply a ® The myth of Androge6s has many 

story of the night vieing with, or usurp- versions. The most important exhibits 
ing the prerogatives of, the day. him as a youth of great beauty and 



THE TRIBUTE CHILDREl}'. 65 

and thus the men of Athens were driven to accept terms CHAP, 
which bound them for nine years to send yearly a tribute of - - 

seven youths and seven maidens, as victims to feed the 
Minotauros. The period named is the nine years’ cycle, 
while the tribute children may represent the months of the 
lunar year. Twice had the black-sailed ship departed from 
the haven with its doomed freight when Theseus offered 
himself as one of the tribute children, to do battle with the 
monster. In this task he succeeds only through the aid of 
Ariadn^, as Ias6n does the bidding of Aiet^s only because he 
has the help of Medeia. The thread which the maiden 
places in his hand leads him through all the mazes of the 
murky labyrinth,^ and when the beast is slain, she leaves 
her home with the man to whom she has given her love. 

But she herself must share the woes of all who love the 
bright sun. Beautiful as she is, she must be abandoned in 
Naxos, while Theseus, like Sigurd, goes upon his way; and 
in his place must come the vine-crowned Dionysos, who 
shall place on her head a glittering diadem to shine among 
the everlasting stars. Theseus himself fulfils the doom which 
places him among the fatal children. He forgets to hoist 
the white sails in token of victory, and Aigeus, seeing the 
black hue of the ship, throws himself into the sea which 
bears his name. 

In another adventure he is the enemy of the Amazons, Theseus 
mysterious beings of whom it is enough to say that they are g 
opposed or slaughtered not only by Theseus, but by HeraMes, 
Achilleus, and BeUeroph&n, and that thus they must be 
classed with the other beings in whom are seen reflected the 
features of the cloud enemy of Indra. Their beauty, their fero¬ 
city, their seclusion, all harmonise with the phenomena of the 
clouds in their varying aspects of storm and sunshine; ® and 

promise, tmable to achieve the tasks of Achilleus for the death of his 
■which may be done only by the greatest comrade. 

heroes. On this account, he is tom by ^ This is the work of Daidalos, the 
the Marathonian bull whom Aigeus has cunning smith; and in Icelandic Volun- 
charged him to slay: in other -words, durshus, the house of Wayland, means a 
he IS Patroklos striving to slay an labyrinth. 

enemy -who can be conquered only by * If the name be Q-reek at all, it 
Achilleus; and the wax -which Minos seems to suggest a comparison -with 
■wages answers to the bloody vengeance UdeKpos ; and the stoiy of the cutting 

VOL. II. P 



66 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

11 . 


Theseus 
in the 
under- 
T7orld. 


tlms their fight with Theseus in the streets of Athens would 
be the struggle of dark vapours to throw a veil over the city 
of the dawn, and their defeat the victory of the sun which 
drives away the clouds. They are thus at once the natural 
allies of the king of Hion, the stronghold of the robber Paris, 
and the friends of his enemies; for Antiop^, who is stolen 
away by Herakles, becomes the bride of Theseus and the 
mother of Hippolytos,^ whose story exhibits the action of a 
moral sentiment which has impressed itself even more deeply 
on the traditions of Thebes. Hippolytos is to Theseus what 
Patroklos is to Achilleus, or Phaethon to Helios, the re- 
fiection of the sun in all its beauty, but without its strength 
and power; and the love of Phaidra (the gleaming) for the 
glorious youth is simply the love of Aphrodite for Adonis, 
and, like that of Aphrodite, it is repulsed. But Phaidra is 
the wife of Theseus, and thus her love for Hippolytos becomes 
doubly a crime, while the recoil of her feelings tempts her to 
follow the example of Anteia in the myth of Belleroph6n. 
Her trick is successful; and Hippolytos, going forth under 
his father’s curse, is slain by a bull which Poseidon sends 
up from the sea, the storm-cloud which Theseus had fought 
with on the plains of Marathon. But Hippolytos, like Adonis, 
is a being whom death cannot hold in his power, and Askl6- 
pios raises him to life; as in the Italian tradition Virbius, 
the darling of the goddess of the groves, is brought back 
from the dead and entrusted to the care of the nymph Egeria. 

Theseus, indeed, like Herakles, is seen almost everywhere. 
He is one of the chiefs who sail in the divine Argo to recover 
the golden fleece; he joins the princes of Aitolia in the hunt 


off the breasts would thus be the result 
of a mistaken etymology. It should 
he added that some see in the name an 
intensive force which makes it the 
equivalent of the German *■ vielhe- 
biustete,’ and thus identify it with the 
Ephesian Artemis whose images answer 
to this description, and who was 
worshipped as Amaz6. The Amazon 
would thus be further identified with 
Isis, the horned moon, and her wander¬ 
ings would follow as a matter of course, 
as in the myth of 16. "With this must 
be compart the Eortuna Hammosa of 


the Latins, and seemingly the Teutonic 
Ciza, Zizi, who was worshipped under 
the same form as the Ephesian Artemis, 
Some have supposed that Tacitus meant 
this deity, when he spoke of German 
tribes as worshipping Isis: others iden¬ 
tify the name with the Greek 
Nork. s. V. 

* Others make Hippolytos a, son 6f 
Hippolyt6, the Amazonian queen, whose 
girdle Herakles brings to Eurystheus, 
and who is thus not the enemy of The¬ 
seus, as in some versions, but his hride. 



THE CHILDREN OF THESEUS AND HERAKLES. 


67 , 


of the Kalydonian boar, and takes part in the war of the CHAP. 
Epigonoi before Thebes. But a more noteworthy myth is . . 

that which takes him, like Orpheus, into the nether world to 
bring back another Eurydike in the form of the maiden Perse¬ 
phone. This legend exhibits another reflection of Theseus 
in Peirithoos, a son of Zeus or Ixion, the heaven or the 
proud sun, and Dia, the clear-shining dawn.^ Peirithoos 
had already aided Theseus when he took Helen from Sparta 
and placed her in the hands of his mother Aithra, an act 
requited in the myth which carries Aithra to Ilion and 
makes her the handmaid of Helen. The attempt of Peiri¬ 
thoos ends as disastrously as the last exploits of Patroklos, 
and Theseus himself is shut up in Hades until Herakles 
comes to his rescue, as he does also to that of Prometheus. 

The presence of the Dioskouroi, the bright Asvins or horse¬ 
men, complicates the story. These carry away Helen and 
Aithra, and when Theseus comes back from the unseen land, 
he finds that his stronghold of Aphidnai has been destroyed, 
and that Menestheus is king in Athens. He therefore 
sends his sons to Euboia, and hastens to Skyros, where the 
chief Lykomedes hurls him from a cliff into the sea, a death 
which Kephalos inflicted upon himself at the Leukadian or 
White Cape. But though his own life closes in gloom, his 
children return at length with Aithra from Ilion, and are 
restored, like the Herakleids, to their ancient inheritance. 

This is the Theseus who, in the pages of Thucydides, con- The The- 
solidates the independent Attic Bemoi into one Athenian ^hucy^ 
state, over which he rules as a constitutional sovereign, con- dides. 
fining himself strictly to his definite functions. There is 
nothing more to be said against the method by which this 
satisfactory result is obtained than that it may be applied 
with equal profit, if not with equal pleasure, to the stories of 
Boots and Jack the Giant-Killer. 

In the Corinthian tradition, Hipponoos, the son of Glaukos Hipponooi 
or of Poseiddn, is known especially as the slayer of BeUeros, p^lntes 
whom the same tradition converted" into a near kinsman, 

' The carrying off of Hippodamoia, is a myth of the \mid-driven and stag- 
the bride of Peirithoos, at her wedding- ^ering cloud bearing away the golden 
feast, by the drunken Kentaur Eurytidn, light into the distant heavens. 



68 

BOOK 

11 . 


The birth 
of Oidi- 
pous. 


MYTHOIiOOT OF THE AKYAN NATIO]S'’S. 

but in ’wbom we are now able to discern a being whose 
features much resemble those of the gloomy Vritra. Like 
Perseus, Theseus, Phoibos, he is a son of the heaven or the 
sea; ^ and his career is throughout that of the sun journeying 
through thunderstorms and clouds. In his youth he attracts 
the love of Anteia, the wife of Proitos, who on his refusal 
deals with him as Phaidra deals with Hippolytos; and 
Proitos, believing her lies, sends him as the bearer of woeful 
signs which are to bid lobates, the Lykian king, to put the 
messenger to death. The fight with the monster Chimaira 
which ensues must come before us among the many forms 
assumed by the struggle between the darkness and the light; 
and in the winged steed P^gasos, on which Bellerophdn is 
mounted, we see the light-crowned cloud soaring with 
or above the sun into the highest heavens. But although 
he returns thus a conqueror, lobates has other toils still in 
store for him. He must fight with the Amazons and the 
Solymoi, and last of all must be assailed by the bravest of 
the Lykians, who, by the king’s orders, lurk in ambush for 
him. These are all slain by his unerring spear; and Hippo- 
noos is welcomed once more to the house of Proitos. But 
the doom is not yet accomplished. The hatred of the gods 
lies heavy upon him. Although we are not told the reason, 
we have not far to seek it. The slaughter of the Kykl6pes 
roused the anger of Zeus against Phoibos: the blinding of 
Polyph^mos excited the rage of Poseiddn against Odysseus: 
and these victims of the sun-god are all murky vapours 
which arise from the sea. The wrath of Ath6n6 and Poseiddn 
added sorely to the length and weariness of the wanderings 
of Odysseus; nor could it leave Bellerophdn at rest. Like 
Odysseus, he too must roam through many lands, and thus 
we find him wandering sadly along the Aleian plain, avoiding 
the paths of men, treading, in other words, that sea of pale 
light in which, after a day of storms, the sun sometimes goes 
down without a cloud to break its monotonous surface. 

When at the close of his disastrous life Oidipous dra'Wte 
near to die in the sacred grove of the Erinyes, it is Theseus 


^ * Als Sonnenheld gilt Bellerophon Poseidon, veil die Sonne ans dem Meero 
fill einen Sohn des Q-latikos, oder des aufsteigt.’—PreUer, Gfr* Myihy li. 78, 



LAIOS AND ASTYAGES. 

wlio stands by ids side to guide Mm, where no other 
mortal man might dare to tread 5 and thus the Theban 
king is at once seen as a being of the same race with the 
son of Aigeus and Aithra. Nor does the connexion cease 
here. If Aigeus deserts his wife and leaves the infant 
Theseus to her sole care, Oidipous also suffers from the 
hatred of his father, who, like Akrisios and Astyages, has 
learnt from the Delphic oracle that if he has a son that son 
will be his destroyer. Hence no sooner is Oidipous born 
than the decree goes forth that the child must be slain; but 
the servant to whom he is intrusted contents himself with 
exposing the babe on the slopes of Kithairon, where a 
shepherd finds him, and carries him, like Cyrus or Eomulus, 
to his wife, who cherishes the child with a mother’s care. 
After a while, Oidipous is taken to Corinth and brought up 
as the son of Polybos and Merop4; and all things go 
smoothly until some one at a feast throws out a hint that he 
is not the son of his supposed parents. To the questions 
which he is thus driven to put to Merop^ the answers 
returned satisfy Mm for a time, but for a time only. The 
anxious doubts return; and in his utter perplexity he 
hastens to Delphoi and there learns, as Laios had learnt 
already, that his doom would make him the destroyer of 
Ms father and the husband of his mother. Gloomy and 
sick at heart, he takes the way towards Thebes, being re¬ 
solved not to run the risk of killing Polybos (whom he 
supposed to be his father), if he returned to Corinth, and as 
he journeys, he falls in with a chariot in which rides an old 
man- The servant insolently bids Oidipous to stand aside, 
and on his refusal the old man strikes at him with his staff. 
Oidipous thorougMy angered slays both, and goes on his 
way, unconscious that he has fulfilled the prediction of 
Phoibos, the murdered man being Laios the king of Thebes. 

Laios is thus a being whose nature closely resembles that 
of L^t 6 or of Leda, the night which is the parent of the sun, 
and which may be regarded with equal justice as hating its 
offspring or loving it. Apart from his fear of the son of 
lokast^, his character is as neutral as that of the mother of 
Phoibos; indeed, we can scarcely be said to know anything 


69 

CHAP. 

n. 


The career 
of Oidi¬ 
pous. 



MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


of him beyond the tale that he stole away the beautiful 
Chrysippos with his golden steeds, as the eagle of Zeus 
carried Ganymedes up to Olympos, the latter being an 
image of the tinted clouds of morning bearing the dawn to 
the high heaven, the former a picture of the night robbing 
the sliy of its splendour. The story of his cruel treatment 
of his son was regarded as accounting for the name Oidipous, 
or Swellfoot, from the tight bandages which hurt his limbs 
as he lay exposed on Kithairon. The explanation has about 
the same value as that by which the nurse Eurykleia pro¬ 
fessed to account to Odysseus for the name which he bore.* 
The sequel of the myth furnished another explanation, to 
which probably less exception may be taken. When Oidipous 
drew near to Thebes, he found the city full of misery and 
mourning. The Sphinx had taken up her abode on a rock 
which overhung the town, and there sat watching the people 
as they died of famine and wasting sickness. Only when 
the man came who could expound her mysterious riddle 
would she free them of her hateful presence; and so in 
their perplexity the chiefs of the city had decreed that he 
who discomfited the monster should be made king and have 
lokast^ as his bride. Meanwhile the Sphinx sat motionless 
on the cliff, uttering from time to time the mysterious 
sounds which conveyed no sense to the ears of mortal men. 
This dreadful being who shut up the waters is, it may be 
enough to say here, only another Yritra, and her name has 
•the exact meaning of Ahi, the choking or throttling snake; 
and the hero who answers her riddle may thus not unnatu¬ 
rally receive his name from his wisdom. Thus much is 
certain, that the son of Laios speaks of himself as knowing 
nothing when he first drew near to encounter the Sphinx, 
while afterwards he admits that his name is a familiar word 

1 M. Br^al thinks that if the name ha compared with those of Achiljlet;is in 
really belongs to this root, it must be the Hellenic mythology, of Baldur and 
taken as denoting the sun when it Signrd in the Teutonic legends, and of 
touches the horizon, ‘ lorsque, pax TefP^t Isfendiyar and Rustem in the Persian 
de vapours qui flottent dans les couches story. It might, however, be said with 
inf^rieures de I’atmosph^re, il semble de not less truth that the swelling of the 
moment an moment augmenter le sun has reference to his rising, and to 
volume.’ He thinks also that the its apparent enlargement at the base 
wounds thus mflicted on Oidipous must until half its disk becomes visible. 



THE BIDDLE OE THE SPHIHX. 


71 


in all mouths,1 and thus Oidipous becomes the counterpart 
of the wise Medeia. With the death of the Sphinx ends the v 
terrible drought. Oidipous has understood and interpreted 
the divine voices of Typhon, or the thunder, which the gods 
alone can comprehend.® The sun appears once more in the 
blue heaven, in which he sprang into life in the morning; 
in other words, Oidipous is wedded to his mother lokast^, 
and the long train of woes which had their root in this awful 
union now began to fill the land with a misery as great as 
that from which Oidipous had just delivered it. As told by 
^schylos and Sophokles, it is a fearful tale j and yet if the 
poets had but taken any other of the many versions in which 
the myth has come down to us, it could never have come 
into existence. They might, had they pleased, have made 
Euryganeia, the broad shining dawn, the mother of Antigone 
and Ism^nS, of Eteokles and Polyneikes, instead of lokastS, 
the violet light, which reappears in the names Iol4, lamos, 
lolaos, lasion, and lobates. Undoubtedly the mother of 
Oidipous might be either Euryganeia, lokastfi or Asty- 
medousa, who are all assigned to him as his wives; but only 
by giving the same name to his mother and his wife could 
the moral horrors of the story be developed, and the idea 
once awakened took too strong a hold on their imagination 
to be lightly dislodged. 

Thus far the story resolves itself into a few simple phrases, 
which spoke of the thundercloud as looming over the city 
from day to day, while the waters remained imprisoned in 
its gloomy dimgeons, like the rock which seemed ever going 
to fall on Tantalos,—of the sun as alone being able to 
understand her mysterious mutterings and so to defeat her 
scheme, of his union with the mother from whom he 
had been parted in his infancy. The sequel is not less 
transparent. lokastS, on learning the sin of which she has 
unwittingly been guilty, brings her life to an end, and 
Oidipous tears out the eyes which he declares to be un¬ 
worthy to look any longer on the things which had thus far 

' 6 fiTjSiy OtBiirovs. — SopK. Old, Tyr, 397* 

b vaffi KXet^s Otdtvovs RoiKo()fi€yos, — lb, 8 . 

* Br6al, Le mytkc d^EdiyCt 17. 


CHAP. 

II. 


Tho 

blinded 

Oidipous. 



72 


MTTHOLOQT OP THE AHTAH NATION’S. 


BOOK 

II. 


Oidipons 

and 

Antigon^. 


filled Mm witli delight. In other words, the sun has blinded 
himself. Clouds and darkness have closed in about him, 
and the clear light is blotted out of the heaven.^ Nor is 
this blinding of the sun recorded only in this Thebaii story. 
BeIleroph6n, when thrown from Ms winged steed Pegasos. 
is said to have been both lamed and blinded, and the story 
may be compared with the blinding of Samson before he 
bends the pillars of the temple and brings death and dark¬ 
ness on all who are around him.^ The feuds and crimes 
wMch disgrace Ms family when he has yielded up his s\ieptre 
to Ms sons are the results of a moral process, and not of the 
strictly mythical developement which makes him the slayer 
of Laios, a name which, denoting simply the enmity of the 
darkness to the light, is found again in Leophontes as an 
epithet of Hipponods, who is also called Bellerophdn.® 

But if lokast^, the tender mother who had watched over 
him at his birth, is gone, the evening of Ms life is not with¬ 
out its consolation. His sons may fill the city with strife 
and bloodshed; Ms daughter Ism§nS may waver in her filial 
allegiance; but there yet remains one who will never for¬ 
sake him, and whose voice shall cheer Mm in his last hour. 


' So in the Grerman story of Eapnn- 
zpI, the prince, •when his bride is torn 
from him, loses his senses mth grief, 
and springing from the tower (like 
Kephalos Som the Lenkadian cliff) falls 
into thorns which put out his eyes. 
Thus he wanders blind in the forest (of 
winter), but the tears of Bapunzel (the 
tears which Eds sheds on the death of 
Memnon) fall on the sightless eyeballs, 
and his sight is given to him again. In 
the story of the Two Wanderers (the 
Uioskouroi or Asvins, the Babes in the 
Wood) one of the brothers, who is a 
tailor, and who is thrust out to starve, 
falls into the hands of a shoemaker who 
gives him some bread only on condition 
that he will consent to lose his eyes; 
his sight is, of course, restored as m the 
other story. In the story of the ‘ Prince 
who was afraid of Nothing ’ (the Sigurd 
of Brynhild), the hero is blinded by a 
giant, but the lion sprinkling some 
water on his eyes restores the sight m 
part, and bathing himself in the stream 
which he finds near him, the prince ne- 
cessanly comes out of the water able to 
see as well as ever. In the Norse Tales 


(Dasent) Oidipous appears as the blinded 
brother in the story of True and Untrue, 
and as the blinded prince in that of the 
Blue Belt. 

* In the code of the Lokrian (Epize- 
phyrian) law-giver Zaleukos, the punish¬ 
ment of adulterers is said to have been 
loss of the eyes. It is unnecessary to 
say that the evidence for the historical 
existence of Zaleukos is worth as much 
and as little as that which is adduced 
for the historical character of Minos, 
Mauu, Lykourgos and Numa. The 
story told of Zaleukos himself that he 
agreed to have one of his own eyes put 
out rather than allow his son, who had 
been convicted of adultery, to lose both 
his eyes, is a mingling of the myths of 
the blinded Oidipous and the one-eyed 
Kyklops or Wuotan. The law hy 
which the punishment is inflicted simply 
reflects the story of Oidipous, who m 
strictly punished for incest by the loss 
of his eyes; and the name Zaleukos, 
the glistening or gleamiiM, carries us to 
Apoll6n Lykios, the Tjatin Lucius, 
Lucna, Luna, &c. 

® See Appendix A, 



THE DEATH OP OIDIPOUS. 7^ 

In tliis beautiful being, over vrbom SopboHes bas tbrowai a CHAP, 
singular cbarin, M. Br 4 al sees tbe bgbt wbicb sometimes . - 

flushes tbe eastern sky as tbe sun sinks to sleep in tbe west.^ 

Tbe word must certainly be compared with sucb names as ^ 

Anteia, Antiope, Antikleia; while tbe love of AntigonS for 
Oidipous seems to carry us to tbe love of Sel^n§ for En- 
dymidn or of Echo for tbe dying Narkissos. With tbe death 
of Oidipous, her own life draws towards its close. It is 
brought about indeed by the despotic cruelty of Ere6n; but 
tbe poet could scarcely withstand tbe force of tbe feeling, 
wbicb in accordance with tbe common phenomena of tbe 
heavens bound up tbe existence of Oinbn^, Kleopatra, Bryn- 
bild, Altbaia, with tbe life of tbe being whom they bad 
loved and lost. Here again Antigen^, betrothed to tbe 
youthful Haimon, dies in the dark cave, like tbe bright 
clouds wbicb Vritra shuts up in bis horrid dungeons. But 
before this last catastrophe is brought about, there is a time 
of brief respite in wbicb Oidipous reposes after all tbe griefs 
and sorrows which have come upon him, some at tbe rising of 
tbe sun or its setting, some at noonday or when tbe stars 
twinkled out in tbe sky. All these bad burst as in a deluge 
on bis devoted bead;* but now be draws nigh to tbe haven 
of rest. His feet tread tbe grass-grown pathway; over bis 
bead tbe branches sigh in tbe evening breeze; and when an 
Athenian in holy horror bids him b^one from tbe sacred 
grove of the Eumenides, Oidipous replies that their sanc¬ 
tuary can never be violated by him. He is not merely their 
suppliant, but their friend; and they it is who will guide 
him peacefully through tbe dark valley of tbe shadow of 
death. One prayer only be bas to make, and this is that 
some one will bring Theseus, tbe Athenian king, to bis side 
before be dies. Tbe wish is realised; and we see before us 
perhaps tbe most striking of aU mythical groups,—tbe 
blinded Oidipous sinking peacefully into bis last sleep, as be 
listens to the voice of tbe man who rules in tbe city of tbe 
dawn-goddess Atbfind, and feels tbe gentle touch of bis 
daughter’s band, while over him wave tbe branches in the 
grove of the Eumenides, benignant always to him, and now 
' Brial, Mytht SBivga. 21. * Soph. Oii. Col, 1218. 



74 


BOOK 

n. 


The story 
of me- 
phos. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN NATIONS. 

reflecting more than ever the loveliness of the Eastern 
Saranyu. Then comes the signal of departure, that voice 
of the divine thunder which now, as before, when he en¬ 
countered the Sphinx, Oidipous alone can understand. With¬ 
out a murmur he prepares to obey the summons, and with 
Theseus alone, the son of the sea and air, by his side, 
calmly awaits the end. With wonderful fidelity to the old 
mythical phrases, the poet brings before us a sunset which 
dazzles the eyes even of the Athenian king, and tells us 
of the hero who has passed away, by no touch of disease, 
for sickness could not fasten on his glorious form, by no 
thunderstroke or sea-roused whirlwind, but guided by some 
heaven-sent messenger, or descending into the kindly earth 
where pain and grief may never afiBlict him more. Well 
may the poet speak as though he were scarcely telling the 
story of the death of mortal man.^ 

The tomb of Endymidn was shown in Elis, and the Cre¬ 
tans pointed to the grave of Zeus; but no man could say in 
what precise spot the bones of Oidipous reposed. It was 
enough to know that a special blessing would rest on the 
land which contained his sepulchre; and what place could 
be more meet for this his last abode than the dearest in¬ 
heritance of Athene ? 

The Theban myth of Oidipous is repeated substantially in 
the Arkadian tradition. As Oidipous is the son of Laios 
and lokast^, the darkness and the violet-tinted sky, so 
is T^lephos (who has the same name with T^lephassa, the 
far-shining), the child of Aleos the blind, and Aug6 the 
brilliant: and as Oidipous is left to die on the slopes of 
Kithairon, so Telephos is exposed on mount Parthenion. 
There the babe is suckled by a doe, which represents the 
wolf in the myth of Eomulus and the dog of the Persian 
story of Cyrus, and is afterwards brought up by the Arka¬ 
dian king Korythos. Like Oidipous, he goes to Delphoi to 
learn who is his mother, and is there bidden to go to 
Teuthras, king of Mysia. But thither Aug6 had gone 
before him, and thus in one version Teuthras promised her 
to Telephos as his wife, if he would help him against his 
^ Soph. Old. Colon. 1665. 



TfiliEPHOS AND PARIS. 75 

enemy Idas. This service he performs, and Ang 4 differs CHAP, 
from lokastS only in the steadiness with which she refuses 
to wed T^lephos, although she knows not who he is. T§le- 
phos now determines to slay her, hut Herakles reveals the 
mother to the child, and like Perseus, T^lephos leads his 
mother back to her own laird. In another version he be¬ 
comes the husband not of Aug6, but of a daughter of Teu- 
thras, whose name Argiopd shows that she is but AugS under 
another form. In this tradition he is king of Mysia when 
the Achaians come to Ilion to avenge the wrongs of Helen, 
and he resists them with all his jiower. In the ensuing 
strife he is smitten by Achilleus, and all efforts to heal the 
wound are vain. In his miserj' he betakes himself again to 
the oracle, and learns that only the man who has inflicted 
the wound can heal it. In the end, Agamemnon prevails on 
Achilleus to undo his own work, and to falsify in the case 
of Tfilephos the proverb which made use of his name to 
describe an incurable wound. The means employed is the 
rust of the spear which had pierced him,—an explanation 
which turns on the equivocal meaning of the words ios, ion, 
as denoting rust, poison, an arrow, and the violet colour. 

As we read the story of Telephos we can scarcely fail to Twofold 
think of the story of the Trojan Paris, for like Tdlephos Paris 
is exposed as a babe on the mountain side, and like him he Pan**- 
receives at the hands of Achilleus a wound which is either 
incurable or which Oinone either will not or cannot heal. It 
is true that the only portion of the myth of Paris introduced 
into our Iliad is that which relates to the stealing away of 
Helen, and to the time which she spent with him in Hion: 
but it is really unnecessary to adduce again the evidence 
which proves that the poets of the Iliad used only those 
myths or portions of myths which served their immediate 
purpose. Even in what they do tell us about him we discern 
that twofold aspect which the process of mythical disintegra¬ 
tion would lead us to look for. There is on the one side not the 
slightest doubt that he is the great malefactor who by taking 
Helen from Sparta brings the Achaian chiefs to the assault 
of Troy ; and as Helen is manifestly the Yedic SaramU, the 
beautiful light of the morning or the evening, Paris as con- 



76 


MTTHOLOaT OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


veying lier to liis stronghold is the robber who drives off the 
shining cattle of Indra to his dungeon. The fight at Troy is 
thus the struggle of the children of the Sun to recover from 
the dreary caves of night the treasure of which the darkness 
deprived them in the evening; in other words, Ilion is the 
fortress of Vritra or Ahi, and Paris the successful seducer of 
Helen represents the unsuccessful seducer of SaramA On 
the other hand it is not less clear that the character of Paris 
in his capriciousness, his moody sullenness, his self-imposed 
inaction, singularly resembles that of Meleagros, and so like¬ 
wise that of Achilleus. The cause also is the same. Achilleus 
is angry because Brisks is taken away: Paris is indignant 
because he is desired to give up Helen: we have therefore 
simply to distinguish the incidents which exhibit Paris as 
the dark cheat and plunderer, from the details which ascribe 
to him a character more or less resembling that of the great 
solar heroes. This twofold aspect should cause us no per¬ 
plexity. If the Trojans as a whole represent the enemies of 
Indra, we cannot shut our eyes to the fact that many of 
those chiefs who take his part are heroes whose solar origin 
is beyond all question. On his side may be seen the Ethio¬ 
pian Memn6n, over whose body the morning weeps tears of 
dew, and who, rising fi:om the dead, is exalted for ever to the 
bright halls of Olympos. With them are ranged the chief¬ 
tains of the bright LyMan land; and assuredly in Glaukos 
and Sarp 4 d 6 n we discern not a single point of likeness with 
the dark troops of the Panis. There is nothing in the his¬ 
tory of mythology which should make this result a matter of 
surprise. The materials for the great epic poems of the 
Aryan world are the aggregations of single phrases which 
have been gradually welded into a coherent narrative; and 
the sayings which spoke of the light as stolen away in the 
evening from the western sky and carried away to the 
robber’s stronghold far away towards the east, of the children 
of the light as banding together to go and search out the 
thief, of their struggle with the seducer and his kinsfolk, of 
the return of the light from the eastern sky back again to 
its borne in the west, were represented by the mythical 
statements that Paris stole Helen from the Western Sparta 



THE ACHAIA^T AND TROJAN CHIEFS. 77 

and took ker away to Hion, that the kinsfolk of Helen roused CHAP, 
the Achaian chiefs to seek out the robber and do battle with 
him and his people, and that after a hard fight Helen 
was rescued from their grasp and brought back to the house 
of Menelaos. But there was a constant and an irresistible 
tendency to invest every local hero with the attributes which 
are reflected upon Herakles, Theseus, and Perseus from 
Phoibos and Helios the lords of light; and the several 
chiefs whose homes were localised in Western Asia would as 
naturally be gathered to the help of Hektor as the Achaian 
princes to the rescue and avenging of Helen. Over every 
one of these the poet might throw the rich colours of the 
heroic ideal, while a free play might also be given to 
purely human instincts and sympathies in the portraits of 
the actors on either side. If Paris was guilty of great 
crimes, his guilt was not shared by those who would have 
made him yield up his prey if they could. He might be a 
thief, but they were “fighting for their homes, their wives, 
and their children: and thus in Hektor we have the embodi¬ 
ment of the highest patriotism and the most disinterested 
self-devotion,—a character, in fact, infinitely higher than 
that of the sensitive, sullen, selfish and savage Achilleus, 
because it is drawn from human life, and not, like the other, 
from traditions which rendered such a portrait in his case 
impossible. Hence between Paris the Ilian hero and the 
subject of local eastern myths, and Paris in his relations 
with the Western Achaians, there is a sharp and clear dis¬ 
tinction ; and if in the latter aspect he is simply the Vritra 
of Hindu mythology, in the former he exhibits all the 
features prominent in the legends of Herakles, Dionysos, 

Theseus and Achilleus.^ 

* * WIc Aphrodite und Helena, so er* nnd gross im Harem, die gerade Gegen- 
schien auch^aris in den Kyprien, Tcr- satz zu den Griechischen Helden, na- 
muthlicli nacli Anleitung orthcher Tra- mentlich zu Jlenelaos und zum Acliill.’ 
ditionen, in einexn andem Lichte und —Preller, (rr. Myth. ii. 413. It must 
als Mittelspunkt eines grosseren Sagon- not, however, be forgotten that one of 
complexes, welcher gleichfalls bei den the characteristics {yvvaifua/^s) by which 
spatoren Dichtern nnd Knnstlem einen Paris is s^ially distinguished, is also 
lebhafteu Anklang gefunden hat, Er seen in Indra and Krishna. See section 
ist ganz der Orientalische Held, zu- xiii. of this chapter. Nor are Herakles 

f leich mannhaft und weichlich wie or Sigurd less treacherous or inconstant 
)ionyso8, wie Sardanapal, wie der Ly- than Pans, 
dische Heroes, gross in der Schlacht 



78 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The birth 
and in¬ 
fancy of 
Paris. 


Thejndg 
ment of 
Paris. 


The eastern myth then begins with incidents precisely 
parallel to those which mark the birth and childhood of 
Dionysos, TMephos, Oidipons, Eomnlus, Perseus, and many 
others. Before he is born, there are portents of the ruin 
which, like Oidipous, he is to bring upon his house and 
people. His mother Hekab^ dreams that her child will be a 
torch to set Dion in flames; and Priam, like Laios, decrees 
that the child shall be left to die on the hill side. But the 
babe lies on the slopes of Ida (the Vedic name for the earth 
as the bride of Dyaus the sky), and is nourished by a she- 
bear.^ The child grows up, like Cyrus, among the shepherds 
and their flocks, and for his boldness and skill in defending 
them against the attacks of thieves and enemies he is said to 
have been called Alexandros, the helper of men. In this his 
early life he has the love of Oin6n^, the child of the river-god 
EebrSn,^ and thus a being akin to the bright maidens who, 
like Athen^ and Aphrodite, are born from the waters. Mean¬ 
while, he had not been forgotten in Dion. His mother^s 
heart was still full of grief, and Priam at length ordered that 
a solemn sacrifice should be offered to enable his dead son 
to cross the dark stream of Hades. The victim chosen is a 
favourite bull of Paris, who follows it in indignation, as the 
men lead it away. In the games now held he puts fprth his 
strength, and is the victor in every contest, even over Hektor.. 
His brothers seek to slay the intruder, but the voice of 
Kasandra his sister is heard, telling them that this is the 
very Paris for whose repose they were now about to slay the 
victim,—and the long-lost son is welcomed to his home. 

At this point the legend carries us to the Thessalian 
myth. When Thetis rose from the sea to become the bride 
of Peleus, Eris, who alone was not invited with the other 
deities to the marriage-feast, threw on the banquet-table a 
golden apple,^ with the simple inscription that it was a gift 
for the fairest. Her task of sowing the seeds of strife was 

' The equivocal meaning of the name the Greek a wolf, denote the 

Arktos, the bear, has already come be- glossiness of their coats, 
fore ns in the myths of the seven ark- * That this name Kebr^n is probably 
shas and the seven rishis; and pro- the same as Severn, the intermediate 
bably all the animals selected to perform forms leave little room for doubting, 
this office of nourishing exposed children ^ See Campbell’s Tales of the West 
will be found to have names which, like Highlands^ i. b;xxii. &c. 



THE JUDGMENT OP PARIS. 


79 


done. The golden apple is the golden ball which the Trog- 
prince brings np from the water, the golden egg which the 
red hen lays in the Teutonic story, the gleaming sun which 
is bom of the morning; and the prize is claimed, as it must 
be claimed, by HSr^, Ath^n^, and Aphrodite, the queens of 
heaven and the goddesses of the dawn. I’or the time the 
dispute is settled by the words of Zeus, who bids them carry 
their quarrel before the Idaian Paris, who shall decide between 
them. As the three bright beings draw near, the shepherd 
youth, whose beauty is far beyond that of all the children of 
men, is abashed and scared, and it is only after long en¬ 
couragement that he summons spirit to listen to the rival 
claims. H6r6, as reigning over the blue ether, promises 
him the lordship of Asia, if he will adjudge the prize to her; 
Athens, the morning in its character as the awakener of 
men’s minds and souls, assures him of renown in war and 
fame in peace; but Paris is unable to resist the laughter- 
loving goddess, who teUs him that if his verdict is for her he 
shall have the fairest bride that ever the world has seen. 
Henceforth Paris becomes the darling of Aphrodite, but the 
wrath of H6r^ and Ath^nS lies heavy on the doomed city of 
Ilion. Fresh fuel was soon to be supplied for the fire. A 
famine was slaying the people of Sparta, and Menelaos the 
king learnt at Delphoi that the plague could not cease until 
an offering should be made to appease the sons of Prome¬ 
theus, who were buried in Trojan sod. Thus Menelaos came 
to Ilion, whence Paris went with him first to Delphoi, then to 
Sparta. The second stage in the work of Eris was reached. 
The shepherd of Ida was brought face to face with the 
fairest of all the daughters of men. He came armed with 
the magic powers of Aphrodite, whose anger had been 
kindled against Tyndare6s, because he had forgotten to make 
her an offering; and so, when Menelaos had departed to 
Crete and the Dioskouroi were busied in their struggle with 
the sons of Aphareus, Paris poured his honied words into 
the ears of Helen, who yielded herself to him with all her 
treasures, and sailed with him to Hion in a bark which 
Aphrodite wafted over a peaceful sea. 

There is scarcely a point in this legend which fails of 


CHAP. 

II. 


Paris stod 
Helen. 



80 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE AEYAN NATION’S. 


BOOK finiling a parallel in other Aryan myths. The beautiful 
^ stranger, who beguiles the young wife when her husband is 
gone away, is seen again in the Arkadian Ischys who takes 
the place of Phoibos in the story of Koronis, in the disguised 
Eephalos who returns to win the love of Prokris. The de¬ 
parture of Menelaos for Crete is the voyage of the sun in 
his golden cup from west to east when he has reached the 
waters of Okeanos; ‘ and the treasures which Paris takes 
away are the treasures of the 'Volsung tale and the Nibelung 
song in all their many versions, the treasures of light and 
life which are bound up with the glory of morning and 
evening, the fatal temptation to the marauding chiefs, who 
' in the end are always overcome by the men whom they have 
wronged. There is absolutely no difference between the 
quarrel of Paris and IMEenelaos, and those of Sigurd and 
Hogni, of Hagene and Walthar of Aquitaine. In each case 
the representative of the dark power comes in seeming 
alliance with the husband or the lover of the woman who is 
to be stolen away; in other words, the first shades of night 
thrown across the heaven add only to its beauty and its 
charm, like Satan clothed as an angel of light. In each 
case the wealth to be obtaiued is scarcely less the incite¬ 
ment than the loveliness of Helen, Brynhild, or Eriemhild. 
Nor must we forget the stress laid in the Hiad on these 
stolen treasures. All are taken: Paris leaves none behind 
himand the proposals of Antenor and Hektor embrace tbe 
surrender of these riches not less than that of Helen. The 
' narrative of the war which avenges this crime belongs 
rather to the legend of AchiUeus; and the eastern story 
of Paris is resumed only when, at the sack of Troy, he is 
wounded by Philokt^t^s in the Skaian or western gates, and 
with his blood on fire from the poisoned wound, hastens to 
Ida and his early love. Long ago, before Aphrodite helped 
him to build the fatal ship which was to take him to Sparta, 
OinonS had warned him not to approach the house of Mene¬ 
laos, and when he refused to listen to her counsels she had 
told him to come to her if hereafter he should be wounded. 
But now when he appears before her, resentment for the 
great wrong done to her by Paris for the moment over- 
‘ Helios leaves £6s behind him. ’ E. iii. 70, 91. 



lAMOS. 

masters tier love^, and she refuses to heal him. Her anger 
lives but for a moment; still when she comes with the 
healing medicine it is too late, and with him she lies down 
to die.* Eds- cannot save Memndn from death, though she 
is happier than Oindne, in that she prevails on Zeus to bring 
her son back from the land of the dead. 

So ends the legend of the Trojan Alexandros, with an 
incident which precisely recalls the stories of Meleagros and 
Sigurd, and the doom of Kleopatra and Brynhild; and such 
are the materials from which Thucydides has extracted a 
military history quite as plausible as that of the siege of 
Sebastopol. 

A happier fate than that of Telephos or Paris attends the 
Arkadian lamos, the child of Evadnd and Phoibos. Like 
his father and like Hermes, he is weak and puny at his birth, 
and Evadnd in her misery and shame leaves the child to die. 
But he is destined for great things, and the ofBce of the dog 
and wolf in the legends of Cyrus and Eomulus is here per¬ 
formed by two dragons, not the horrid snakes which seek to 
strangle the infant Herakles, but the glistening creatures 
who bear a name of like meaning with that of AthSnS, and 
who feed the child with honey. But Aipytos, the chieftain of 
Phaisana, and the father of Evadne, had learnt at Delphoi 
that a child of Phoibos had been born who should become 
the greatest of all the seers and prophets of the earth, and 
he asked all his people where the babe was: but none had 
heard or seen him, for he lay far away amid the thick bushes, 
with bis soft body bathed in the golden and purple rays of 
the violets.* So when he was found,, they called him lamos, 
the violet child; and as he grew in years and strength, he 
went down into the Alpheian stream, and prayed to his 
father that he would glorify his son^ Then the voice of Zeus 

* ApoUod. iu.l2, 6. attached to the same word. Hence the 

* In this myth Pindar uses the word poisoned awovs of Achilleus and Phi- 

ws, twice, a,s denoting in the one case lokt^t^s. The word as applied to colour 
honey, in the other the violet flower, is traced by Prof. Max Muller to the 
But the phrase which he uses, root«, as denoting a crying hue, i.e. a 

fjiivos &icTi(nv *C<av {^01, vi. 92), leads us loud colour. The stoiy of lamos is the 
to another meaning of tea, which, as a institutional legend of the lamidai, on 
spear, represents the far-darting rays of whom Pindar bestows the highest praise 
the 6un; and a further equivocation was alike for their wisdom and their truth- 
the result of the other meaning of poison fhlness. 

VOIi. II. O 


81 


CHAP. 

n. 


The deatii 
of Oin^n^. 


lamos the 

violet 

child. 



82 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE AEYAN DfATIONS. 


BOOK 

U. 


Pelias and 
Helens. 


Bomulub 

and 

Bemub 


Poseidon was heard, bidding him come to the heights of 
Olympos, where he should receive the gift of prophecy and 
the power to understand the voices of the birds. The local 
legend made him, of course, the soothsayer of the Eleian 
Olympia, where Her aides had founded the great games. 

The myth of Pelias and Helens has the same beginning 
with the stories of Oidipous, T^lephos, and Paris. Their 
mother Tyro loves the Enipean stream, and thus she becomes 
the wife of Poseid6n; in other words, her twin sons Pelias 
and Helens are, like Aphrodite and AthSn^, the children of 
the waters. These Dioskonroi, or sons of Zens Poseid6n, are 
left to die, but a mare suckles the one, a dog the other; and 
in due course they avenge the wi’ongs of Tyro by putting to 
death the iron-hearted Sid6r6, whom her father Salm6neus 
had married. The sequel of the tale, which makes Pelias 
drive his brother from the throne of lolkos, belongs rather 
to the history of Ias6n. 

This myth which has now come before us so often is the 
groundwork of the great Eoman traditions. Here also we 
have the Dioskonroi, Eomulus and Eemus, the children of 
Mars and the priestess Ehea Hia or Silvia. Like Perseus 
and Dionysos, the babes are exposed on the waters; but a 
wolf is drawn to them by their cries, and suckles them until 
they are found by Acca Larentia, and taken to the house of 
her husband the shepherd of king Eaustulus. There they 
grow up renowned for their prowess in all manly exercises, 
and, like Cyrus, the acknowledged leaders of all their youth¬ 
ful neighbours; and when at length Eemus falls into the 
hands of king AmuHus, Eomulus hastens to his rescue, and 
the tyrant undergoes the doom of Laios and Akrisios. These 
two brothers bear the same name, for Eemus and Eomus are 
only another and an older form of Eomulus; ^ and thus a 
foundation might be furnished for the story of their rivalry, 
even if this feature were not prominent in the myths of 
Pelias and Helens and the Dioskonroi who are the sons of 
Zeus and Leda, as well as in the rivalry of E&s and Pro- 
kris, of Hiob6 and L^t6, of AthSnfe and Medousa. Hor does 
Eomulus resemble Oidipous less in the close of his life than 

' TTonco they are mere eponymoi, like Boi6tos, Orchomenos, &c. 



ROMULUS AKD CYRUS. 83 

at his birth. He is taken away in a thunderstorm, wrapped CHAP, 
in the clouds which are to bear him in a fiery chariot to the . 

palace of Jupiter. 

The myth of Cyrus differs from the Eomulean legend only Cyrus and 
in the fact that here it has gathered round an unquestion- 
ably historical person. But it cannot be too often repeated 
that from the myth we learn nothing of his history, and his 
history confers no sort of credibility on the myth. So far as 
the latter is concerned, in other words, in all that relates to 
his earlier years, he remains' wholly unknown to us, while 
the story resolves itself into the stock materials of all such 
narratives- As Laios in the Theban myth is the enemy, 

Dasyu, of the devas or bright gods, so is Astyages only a 
Grecised form of Asdahag, the Azidahaka or biting snake of 
Hindu legend and the Zohak of the epic of Birdusi. Like 
Laios also he is told that if his daughter Mandan^ has a son, 
that child will live to be king in his stead. In this case the 
emblem seen before the birth of the infant is not a torch but 
a vine which overspreads the whole of Asia, and the babe 
who is exposed is not the child whom Harpagos delivers to 
the herdsman clad in a magnificent golden robe, but the 
dead child which happens to be born in the herdsman’s 
house just as he enters it with the doomed son of MandanS. 

Under this man’s roof Cyrus grows up with the true spirit 
of kingship, and when he is chosen despot by the village 
boys in their sport, he plays his part so well that Artembares, 
the father of a boy who has been scourged by his orders, 
complains to Astyages of the insult. The bearing of the 
youth and his apparent age make Astyages think of the 
babe whose death he had decreed, and an examination of 
the herdsman justifies his worst fears. On Harpagos, to 
whom he had in the first instance intrusted the child, he 
takes an awful vengeance; but the magi satisfy him that the 
election of Cyrus to be king of the village boys fulfils the 
terms of the prophecy, and that therefore he need have no 
further fears on his account. Thus Cyrus is suffered to 
grow up in the palace, and is afterwards sent to his father, 
the Persian Kambyses. Harpagos thinks that the time is now 
come for requiting Astyages for his detestable cruelty, and 



84 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK counsels Cyrus to raise the standard of revolt. The sequel is 

. ^ an institutional legend, of much the same value with the 

story of the setting up of the Median monarchy by Deiokes, 
a name in which we also recognise the Dahak or biter of 
Hindu mythology. 

Chandra- • Jn its earlier scenes the legend of Chandragupta presents 
some points of difference with that of Cyrus. The child is 
exposed to great danger in his infancy; but it is at the 
hands, not of his kinsman, but of a tributary chief who has 
defeated and slain his suzerain, and it is his mother who, 
^ relinquishing him to the protection of the devas, places him 
in a vase, and deposits him at the door of a cattle-pen/ 
Here a bull named Chando comes to him and guards him, 
and a herdsman, noting this wonder, takes the child and 
rears him as his own. The mode by which he is subse¬ 
quently discovered differs from the Persian story only by the 
substitution of the chopping off of hands and feet instead of 
scourging. This is done by axes made of the horns of goats 
for blades,' with sticks for handles; and the lopped limbs are 
restored whole at Chandragupta’s word when the play is 
done.^ Slightly altered, this story becomes the legend of 
Semiramis, whom her mother the fish-goddess Derketo ex¬ 
poses in her infancy; but she was saved by doves, and 
like Cyrus, Eomulus, and Chandragupta, brought up by a 
shepherd until her beauty attracts Onnes, one of the king^s 
generals, and afterwards makes her the wife of king Ninus 
himself, whom in some versions she presently puts to death, 
in order that she may reign alone, like E6s surviving 
Eephalos.^ 


^ Max Muller, SansJcr. Lit. 290. 

* Unlike Cyrus and Chandragupta, 
Ninus and Semiramis are, like Romu¬ 
lus, purely mythical or fabulous beings. 
‘The name of Ninus is derived from 
the city he is the eponymous king and 
founder of Nineveh, and stands to it in 
the same relation as Tros to Troy, Medus 
to Media, Maeon to Maeonia, Romulus to 
Rome His conquests and those of Se- 
miramis are as unreal as those of 
Sesostns. It is the characteristic of 
these fahuldus conquerors, that, although 
they are reported to have overrun and 
subdued many countries, the history of 


those countries is silent on the subject. 
Sesostris is related to have conquered 
Assyria, and the king of Assyria was 
doubtless one of those whom he har¬ 
nessed to his chariot But the history 
of Assyria makes no mention of Sesos¬ 
tris. Semiramis is related to have con¬ 
quered Egypt, but the history of Egypt 
makes no mention of Semiramis.’ ^ 
G C. Lewis, Astronomy of the Ancients, 
408. Romulus is one of seven kings 
whose chronology is given with great 
precision; but this chronology is 
throughout, in Niebuhr’s trenchant 
words, ‘ a forgery and a fiction.’— 



THE CHILDREN OP TELEPHASSA. 

The story of Eur6p§, like that of DaphnS or Arethousa, 
Psyche or TJrvasl, is but one of the many forms assumed by 
the myth that the sun and the dawn are soon parted. The 
scene is here laid in the Phoinikian or purple land, a 
region belonging to the same aerial geography with Lykia, 
Delos, Oi-tygia, the Ai-kadia of Eallistd or the Athens of 
Theseus and Peirithobs. But when Phenicia became to 
the Greeks the name of an earthly country, versions were 
not long wanting, which asserted that Agenor was bom in 
Tyre or Sidon, or some other spot in the territories of Ca- 
naanite tribes. Of these we need take no account, while in 
its names and incidents generally the myth explains itself. 
Agenor is the husband of Telephassa, the feminine form of the 
name TMephos, a word conveying precisely the same mean¬ 
ing with Hekatos, Hekate, Hekatebolos, well known epithets 
of the sun and moon. His children are Eadmos, Phoinix, 
Eilix and EurdpS, although in some accounts Eurdpd is 
herself a daughter of Phoinix. On this maiden, the broad¬ 
flushing light of dawn, Zeus, the heaven, looks down with 
love; and the white bull, the spotless cloud, comes to bear 
her away to a new home, in Crete, the western land. She 
becomes the mother of Minos, Rhadamanthys, and Sarpddon. 
But in the house from which she is thus torn all is grief 
and sorrow. There can be no more rest until the lost one is 
found again; the sun must journey westwards until he sees 
again the beautiful tints which greeted his eyes in the morn¬ 
ing. Eadmos therefore is bidden to go in search of his 
sister, with strict charge never to return unless he finds her. 
With him goes his mother, and a long and weary pilgrim¬ 
age brings them at length to the plains of Thessaly, where 
Tdlephassa worn out with grief and anguish lies down to die. 
But Eadmos must journey yet further westward; and at 
Delphoi he leams that he must follow a cow which he would 
be able to distinguish by certain signs, and where she lay 
down from weariness, there he must build his city. The 
cow, doubtless on6 of the herd to which belong the bull of 
Eur6p§ and the cattle of Helios, lies down on the site of 

Borne, Tol. i.; Edinburgh Eeview, Jan. Literature and Art, s. v. ‘ Tabulation of 
1867, p. 130; Luitwryary of Sotence, Chronology, 


85 

CHAP. 

II. 


Kadmos 

and 

Europe. 



S6 MYTHOLOGT OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

BOOK Thebes. But before be can offer tbe cow in sacrifice to tbe 
^ ^ dawn-goddess AtbSn^, be bas to figbt witb tbe cloud in a 

form akin to tbat of tbe Pytbian monster, or of tbe Spbinx 
which at a later period of its mythical history was to vex 
bis own people. A great dragon, tbe child of ArSs, tbe 
grinder or crusher, guards tbe well from which be seeks to 
obtain water, and slays tbe men whom be sends to fetch it. 
Kadmos alone, like Oidipous, can master it; but bis victory 
is followed by another struggle or storm. He sows in tbe 
earth tbe dragon^s teeth, which, as in tbe story of Ias6n in 
Kolcbis, produce a harvest of armed men who slay each 
other, leaving five only to become the ancestors of the 
Thebans. It is the conflict of the clouds which spring up 
from the earth after the waters have been let loose from the 
prison-house, and mingle in wild confusion until a few only 
remain upon the battle-field of the heaven. But if Phoibos 
himself paid the penalty for slaying the Kykl6pes, Kadmos 
must not the less undergo, like him, a time of bondage, at the 
end of which Ath^n^ makes him king of Thebes, and Zeus 
gives him Harmonia as his bride. These incidents interpret 
themselves 5 while the gifts which Kadmos bestowed on 
Harmonia suggest a comparison with the peplos of Athenfi 
and the hangings woven for the Ashera by the Syrian women, 
as well as with the necklace of EriphylS, and thus with the 
circular emblems which reproduce the sign of the Toni. 
There is but little more worth telling in this Theban legend. 
The wars in which Kadmos fights are the wars of Kepha- 
los or Theseus, with fewer incidents to mark them; and the 
spirit of the old myth is better seen in the legend, that 
when their work here was done, Kadmos and his wife were 
changed into dragons (like the keen-sighted creatures which 
draw the chariot of Medeia), and so taken up to Elysion.^ 

Minos and The children of Europ^ are more prominent in Hellenic 
jjiythology than Kadmos himself. Minos who appears first 

1 The question of the colonisation of This word, together with the occurrence 
Boiotia by Phenicians must be settled, of Banna as the Boiotian word for 
if settled at all, by evidence which it is daughter, seemed to satisfy Niebuhr as 
vain to seek in the incidents of the myth, to the fact of this Phenician settlement. 
One item may perhaps be furnished by We must add to the list of such words 
the name Kadmos, if this be the Grecised the epithet of PalaimOn, Melikertes, the 
form of the Semitic Kedem, the east. Syrian Melkarth or Moloch. 



THE MINOTAUROS. 


in the lists of Apollodoros, is in some accounts split up into 
two beings of the same name; but the reason which would 
justify this distinction might be urged in the case of almost 
all the gods and heroes of Aryan tradition. It is enough 
to say that as the son of Zeus and EuropS he is the son of 
the heaven and the morning; as the offspring of Lykastos 
and Ida, he has the same brilliant sire, but his mother is the 
earth. In his name he is simply many the measurer or 
thinker, the Indian Manu: and if in the Hindu legend Manu 
enters the ark with the seven rishis at the time of the great 
deluge, so Minos is the father of Deukalion, in whose days 
the floods are let loose in the western land. Thus as the 
representative of the great human family, he becomes not 
merely like Manu the giver of earthly codes or institutes, but 
a judge of the dead in the nether world, with Ehadamanthys 
and Aiakos, who were admitted to share this ofiice. The con¬ 
ception which made Manu the builder of the ark is seen 
apparently in the maritime power and supremacy attributed 
to the Cretan Minos, a supremacy which to Thucydides 
seemed as much a fact of history as the Peloponnesian war. 
This power, according to Apollodoros, Minos the grim ^ 
obtained by overcoming his brothers, who quarrelled after 
Asterion the king of Crete had married their mother 
Europe,—in other words, after the evening stars began to 
twinkle in the light-flushed skies. But although Minos had 
boasted that whatever he desired the gods would do, he 
was none the more shielded against disaster. At his wish 
Poseidon sent up a bull from the sea, on the pledge of Minos 
that he would offer the beast in sacrifice. Minos offered one 
of his own cattle in his stead; and Poseidon not only made 
the bull mad, but tilled Pasipha^ with a strange love for the 
monster. From the union of the bright heaven with this 
sombre progeny of the sea sprang the Minotauros, who in 
his den far away within his labyrinth of stars devoured the 
tribute children sent from the city of Ath&i^, and who, by the 
help of Ariadn^, fells under the sword of Theseus as lason by 
the aid of Medeia conquers the fire-breathing bulls of Eolchis. 
So transparent is the legend of the ‘ solar hero and solar king 



88 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE AEYAlf HATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Ehada- 

manthys 

and 

Aiakos, 


of Crete/' who rules over the island in the nine years’ cycle 
which reappears in the myth of the tribute children. Like 
Indra and Krishna, like Phoibos and Alpheios and Paris, 
he is the lover of the maidens, the hot and fiery sun greeting 
the moon and the dew.'^ Hence, in the words of one who 
professes to distrust the conclusions of Comparative My¬ 
thology, ^ the great king of Crete met his end in the distant 
evening-land where the sun goes down.’^ He is slain in 
Sicily by king Kokalos, a name which reminds us o£ Hora- 
tius Cocles,^ and which seems to denote simply the eyeless 
gloom of night. 

Of Ehadamanthys, who in the ordinary version is like 
Minos, a son of Zeus and Eur6p6, little more is told us, apart 
from the seemingly later story of ApoUodoros, than that 
for the righteousness of his life he was made the judge of 
Elysion, and that Minos was afterwards joined with him 
in this office. Pausanias, who gives this priority to Rhada- 
manthys, adds that some spoke of him as a son of Hephaistos, 
who in this myth was a son of Tal6s, a son of the eponymos 
Kr^s.® 

The same reputation for impartial justice added to their 
number Aiakos, who in one version is a brother of Minos 
and Ehadamanthys, in another a son of Zeus and Aigina, 
the nymph whose names denotes the beating of the surf on 
the island which was called after her.® In this island 
Aiakos, ruling over a race of Myrmidons, or ant-bom men,^ 
plays the part of Oidipous at Thebes or Phoibos at Delphoi. 


* Preller, Gr. Myth ii 118 
^ In this aspect of his character Minos 
IS the lover of Diktynna and of Prokns, 
according to the strange story told by 
ApoUodoros, 111 15, 1 Prokris avoids 
the doom which befalls all other victims 
of his love by making Minos take the 
antidote of Kirke. Of these myths 
Preller says, ‘In noch andern Sagen 
von Kreta erschemt Minos als grosser 
Ji^er, der in den Bergen iind Waldern 
seiner Insel das Wild nnd die Nymphen 
Jagt, wie wir namenthch von seiner 
Liebe zur Diktynna und znr Prokns 
wissen, die wieder den Mond bedeuten, 
wie Minos in solchen Fabeln die heiss© 
nnd fenrige Sonne zu bedeuten scheint.’ 
— Ghr. Myth. li. 122. 


® Preller, Gt. Myth, ihid. 

* This word seems to be akin to the 
Latin adjective emeus, and poKsibly with 
Kaikias, the word which seems to have 
suggested the myth of Oacus. It is 
made up of the particle denoting sepa¬ 
ration, ha^ and the root oc, which we find 
in the Latin oculus, tho German auge, 
the English eye. The same formation 
has given us the words halt, half, Ac.— 
Bop|^ CoTwp. Gt. § 308. 

* Paus viii 53, 2 

Its former name is said to have been 
Oin6n6 or Oinopia. Aigina belongs to 
the same root with Aigai, Aigaidn, and 
Aigeus, the eponymos of the Aigaiau 
(Egean) sea. 

' See vol. 1 . p. 405, et seq. 



THE OLD AGE OF JS'ESTOE. 


89 


For tlie Vritra or dragon wliiehi shuts up the waters is sent 
hy Herl, who is jealous of the love of Zeus for Aigina, to 
desolate the island; and when they send to learn the will of 
the god at Pytho, the answer is that the plag-ue can he 
removed only by the prayers of the righteous Aiakos. At 
their entreaty he offers up a solemn sacrifice, and the rain 
falls once more upon Hellas.* With Poseiddn and Phoibos 
he takes part in the work of building the Ilian walls; and 
here also the dragons are seen again. Three of them rush 
against the walls, and one makes its way through the portion 
built by Aiakos, while the other two fall dead beneath the 
structure oi the gods,—a myth which was interpreted to 
mean the future overthrow of Ilion by the descendants of 
Aiakos. 


In the Cretan myth Sarpeddn also is a brother of Minos, 
and thorofoi’e a son of Zeus and Eui‘6p6. Other versions 
told of a Sarpeddn who was the child of Laodameia, the 
daughter of Bellerophdntos. As in the case of Minos, my- 
thograplxers made two beings out of one, as they might 
indefinitely have extended the number. Of the one Sarpdddn 
it is said that Zeus granted to him, as to Nestor,® a life 
stretching over three generations of men; of the other the 
beautiful story is told which we find in the Iliad. The 
legend is transparent throughout. If his grandsire Hip- 
ponods received the name by which he was commonly known 
from liis slaying of a monster answering to the Pythian 


* PauH. ii. 6. 

* If tho in\th <»f 0»l}bHoiis, a8 cun- 

tiHstf'd with tinit of points to 

the slow sinking ot‘ the unclouded sun 
in perfect re^iobii after the wcurj' battle 
ana wandenngn of a stormy day, and 
thus suggests the idea of the tranquil 
evening of life for the chief who hii« 
grown old in fighting, tho notion of age 
thus given is brought out more promi¬ 
nently in other legends, whether of the 
Greek or the Teutonic nations The 
decrepitude proctHling tho death of the 
sun, a notion as familiar as that of his 
undying vigour and everlasting youth, 
18 exhibited in the stoty of Tith6nos, 
which differs from that of Nestor only 
in the weakness which paral^es the 
being once so powerful. With the 
wisdom of Phoibos Nestor retains the 


vigour of Herakles, whose friend he had 
been, and whose skill m the manage- 
nii‘nt of chariots and horses he has in¬ 
herited in double portion. Like Phoi¬ 
bos, again, he has the gift of honeyed 
elofiuence, the gift of Hermes to the 
sun-god; and more particularly as bo 
gmw’s in wisdom, he becomes more 
keen-sighted, more prudent, more saga- 
eiouB ^ Nestor then and Odysbeus stand 
as p id(‘a altogether distinct from that 
which is embodied in the conceptions of 
Achilleus and Siegfncd, and the two 
types may be traced through the Aryan 
m^lbology generally, in the Godmund 
who lives five hundred years, as m the 
Sigurd who falls in the full glory of his 
youth. Grimm, D. M. 365; Max 
Muller, CAijps, &c. ii. 84. 


CHAP. 

II. 


Nostnr 
and Sar¬ 
peddn. 



90 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

BOOK dragon or the Thehan Sphinx, his daughter Laodameia is as 
'—. clearly the beautiful evening weaving together her tinted 
clouds, and slain by Artemis, the cold moon, before her web 
is finished. To her son, the chief of Lykia, the land of light, 
as to AchiUeus, a brief but a brilliant career is allotted. 
With his friend Glaukos (a name denoting the bright day 
as Sarp^don is the creeping light of early morning) he leaves 
the banks of the golden stream of Xanthos, and throws in 
his lot with the brave and fierce-minded Hektor; but the 
designs of H^r^ require that he must die, and the tears of 
Zeus fall in big raindrops from the sky because it is not 
possible for him to avert the doom. So SarpM6n falls 
beneath the spear of Patroklos; but no decay may be suf¬ 
fered to mar his beauty. Phoibos himself is charged to 
bathe the body in Simoeis, and wrap it in ambrosial robes, 
while Thanatos and Hypnos, death and sleep, are bidden to 
bear it away to his Lykian home, which they reach just as 
E6s is spreading her rosy light through the sky,—an ex¬ 
quisite variation on the myth of Endymidn plunged beneath 
the waters, or IsTarkissos in his profound lethargy, or Helios 
moving in his golden cup from the western to the eastern 
ocean. 

Kpmii6n From the story of Sarpeddn the legend of Memn6n, it is 
piL. scarcely necessary to say, differs only in the greater clearness 
with which it represents the old phrases, Sarped6n, though 
a being akin to Phoibos and Helios, is yet regarded as the 
ruler of mortal Lykians, and his cairn is raised high to keep 
alive his name amongst his people. With Memnon the myth 
has not gone so far. He is so transparently the son of Eos 
that he must rise again. Like Zeus, Eds weeps tears of dew 
at the death of her child, but her prayers avail to bring him 
back, like Adonis or Tammuz, from the shadowy region, to 
dwell always in Olympos. If again Sarpedon is king of the 
land of light (Lykia), Memnon rules over the glistening 
country of Aithiopia (Ethiopia), the ever youthful child of 
Tithdnos, the sun whose couch Eos leaves daily to bring 
back morning to the earth. Nay, so clear is the meaning of 
the story, that he is by some called the child of Hdmera, the 
day; and his gleaming armour, like that of AchiUeus, is 



memn6n and mimir. 91 

■wroTiglit by tbe fire-god Hepbaistos, When Memn6n falls CHAP, 
in atonement for the slaughter of Antilocbos, the son of . . 

Nestor, his comrades ai'e so plunged in grief that they are 
changed into birds, 'vrhich yearly visit his tomb to water the 
ground with their tears. Not less obvious is the meaning of 
another story, which brings before us the battle of the clouds 
over the body of the dead sun—a fight which we see in a 
darker form in the desperate struggle of the Achaians and 
Trojans over the body of Achilleus. To comfort Eos, Zeus 
makes two flocks of birds (the swan maidens or winged 
clouds of Teutonic folk-lore) meet in the air and fight over 
Momnon’s funeral sacrifice, mitil some of them fall as victims 
on the altar. Of Memnon’s head the tale was told that it 
retained the prophetic power of the living Helios, a story 
which is found in the myth of the Teutonic Mimir, and 
which might also have been related of Kephalos, the head of 
the sun. 

Like Minos and SarpMon, Eephalos is assigned in dif- Kephaios 
ferent versions of the myth to different parents, whose 
names denote, however, the same idea; but there is no 
other reason for dividing him into two persons. In the one 
account he is a son of Hermes and Hers^, the morning 
breeze and the dew, and by him E6s becomes the mother of 
Tithonos or, as others said, of Phaeth6n. In the other he is 
the son of the Phokian Deion, and HersS appears as the wife 
of Erechtheus, and the mother of his wife Prokris or Prokn^, 
who is only the dew under another name.^ Nor is the whole 
story anything more than a series of pictures which exhibit 
the dew as lovingly reflecting the rays of the sun, who is also 
loved by the morning, until at last his fiery rays dry up the 

’ Proller, Gr, Myth. ii. 145, is content the moon. B^t the incidents in the life 
to regard the name as an abbreviated of Prokns do not point to the course of 
form of ^ -jrpoK«Kpifx4v7}, alleging the use the moon and its phenomena, and Pro¬ 
of xp6Kptv for irpdKptcrtv by liesiod, a kris is not preferred or honoured, but 
fact which, if proved, is but a slender throughout slighted and neglected, 
warrant for the other. But IIors5, the Hence there is absolutely no reason for 
mother of Prokris, is confessedly the refusing to take into account the appa- 
dew, and Prokn6, the other form of rently obvious connection of Prokns 
l^kris, cannot be referred to rj vpoK€~ and rroknfi with the Greek rrpd^j a dew- 
Kpip-ivTi. Preller adduces the expression drop^ and the cognate words which with 
applied to Hekatfi, wepl it are referred to the root pnsh. See 

Kpoyi^ns rlfiiq<r€y in illustration of his ety- vol. i. p. 430. 
mology and of his belief tliat Prokris is 



92 MYTHOLOGY OF THE AHYAH NATIONS. 

BOOK last drops wMcb. still lurk in tlie desp thicket. Hence we 
^ - ^ have at once the groundwork of the jealousy of Eos for 

Prokris, as of H^r^ for 16 or Eur6p6. But the dew reflects 
many images of the same sun; and thus the phrase ran that 
Kephalos came hack in disguise to Prokris, who, though 
faithless to her troth, yet gave her love to her old lover, as 
Kor6ms welcomed in Ischys the reflection of Phoibos Apollon, 
AH that was needed now was to represent E6s as tempting 
Kephalos to test the fidelity of Prokris, and to introduce into 
the legend some portion of the machinery of every solar tale. 
The presents which E6s bestows on Kephalos to lure Prokris 
to her ruin are the riches of Isdon, on which his wife Dia 
cannot look and live; and when Prokris awakes to a sense 
of her shame, her flight to Crete and her refuge in the arms 
of Artemis denote the departure of the dew from the sun- 
scorched hills to the cool regions on which the moon looks 
down. But Artemis Hekate, like her brother Hekatos, is a 
being whose rays have a magic power, and she bestows on 
Prolvris a hound which never fails to bring down its prey, 
and the spear which never misses its mark. Prokris now 
appears disguised before the faithless Kephalos, who has 
given himself to E6s, but no entreaty can prevail on her to 
yield up the gifts of Artemis except in return for his love. 
The compact is made, and Prokris stands revealed in all her 
ancient loveliness. E6s for the time is baffled; but Prokris 
still feels some fear of her rival’s power, and as from a thicket 
she watches Kephalos hunting, in other words, chasing the 
clouds along the blue fields of heaven, she is smitten by the 
unerring spear and dies, like the last drop of dew lingering 
in the nook where it had hoped to outlive the day. The 
same mythical necessity which made Delos, Oi-tygia, or 
Lykia, the birth-place and home of Phoibos and Artemis, 
localised the story of Prokris in the land of the dawn-goddess 
Ath6n6, and then carried him away on his westward journey, 
toiling and suffering, like Herakles, or Apolldn, or Kadmos. 
He must aid Amphitryon in hunting the dog which, sent by 
Poseid6n or Dionysos, like the Marathonian bull, ravaged 
the plain of Thebes; he must go against the Teleboans, the 
sea-robbers of the Akamanian coast; and finally, wearied 



BALDUR AND h6dE. 


93 


out witli his toil, he must fall from the Leukadian or glisten- CHAP, 
ing cape into the sea, as the sun, greeting the rosy 
sinks beneath the waters.' 


Sbction XL—teutonic SUN-GODS AND HEROES. 

In Cajdmon and the epic of Beowulf the word baldor, Baidnr 
bealdor, is found in the sense of prince or chief, as mag'Sa 
bealdor, virginum princeps. Hence the name Baldr or Baldur 
might be referred to the Gothic balSs, our hold, and stress 
might be laid on the origin of the name of Baldur’s wife 
Hanna from a verb nenna, to dare. But Grimm remarks 
that the Anglo-Saxon genealogies speak of the son of Odin 
not as Baldur but as Baldag, Beldeg, a form which would 
lead us to look for an Old High German Paltac. Although 
this is not found, we have Paltar. Either then Baldag 
and Bealdor are only forms of the same word, as Regintae 
and Reginari, Sigitac and Sighar, or they are compounds in 
which bal must be separated from dag; and thus the word 
might be connected with the Sclavonic Bjelbog, Belbog, the 
white shining god, the bringer of the day, the benignant 
Phoibos. Such an inference seems to be strengthened by 
the fact that the Anglo-Saxon theogony gives him a son 
Brond, who is also the torch or light of day. Baldur, how¬ 
ever, was also known as Phol, a fact which Grimm establishes 
with abundant evidence of local names; and thus the identity 
of Baldr and Bjelbog seems forced upon us. Forseti, or 
Fosite, is reckoned among the Asas as a son of Baldur and 
Hanna, a name which Grimm compares with the Old High 
German forasizo, prmses, princeps.* The being by whom 
Baldur is slain is Hddr, a blind god of enormous strength, 
whose name may be traced in the forms Hadupracht, Hadu- 
fians, &c., to the Chatumerus of Tacitus. He is simply the 
power of darkness triumphing over the lord of light; and 

’ Another acconnt made the dog of to Kephalos. Prokris is also a bride of 
Prokris a work of Hephaistos, like the Minos, whom she delivers from the * 
golden statues of Alkinoos, and spoke of speUs of a magician who acts by the 
it as a gift from Zeus to who counsels of Pasiphae, who is also called 

g .ve it to Minos, and as bestowed by a wife of Minos, 
mos on Prokris, who at last gives it * Deutsche Myth. 212. 



94 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ABYAH NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


The dretiiDL 
of Baldur. 


hence there were, as we might expect, two forms of the 
myth, one of which left Baldur dead, like Sarp^ddn, another 
which brought him back from the unseen world, like Mem- 
n6n and Adonis. 

But the essence of the* myth lies in his death, the cause of 
which is set forth in a poem of the elder Edda, entitled 
Baldur’s dream, a poem so beautiful and so true to the old 
myth that I may be forgiven for citing it in fuU. 

The gods have hastened all to the assembly, 

The goddesses gathered all to the council, 

The heavenly rulers take counsel together, 

Why dreams of ill omen thus terrify Baldur. 

Then uprose Odin the all-creator 
And flung the saddle on Sleipnir’s back, 

And downwards rode he to Nebelheim, 

Where a dog met him from the house of HeL 

Spotted with blood on his front and chest, 

Loudly he bayed at the father of song; 

But on rode Odin, the earth made moaning, 

When he reached the lofty mansion of Hel. 

But Odinjrode on to its eastern portal, 

Where well he knew was the vela’s mound; 

The seer’s song of the wine-cup singing. 

Till he forced her to rise, a foreboder of lU. 

* What man among men, one whom I know not, 

Causes me trouble and breaks my rest ? 

The snow hath enwrapped me, the rain heat upon me, 

The dews have drenched me, for I was long dead.’ 

* Wegtam my name is, Waltam’s son am T, 

Speak thou of the under world, I of the upper; 

For whom are these seats thus decked with rings, 

These shining chains all covered with gold?’ 

‘ The mead is prepared for Baldur here, 

The gleaming draught covered o’er with the shield, 

There is no hope for the gods above ; 

Compelled I have spoken, but now am I mute.’ 

‘ Close not thy lips yet, I must ask further, 

Till I know all things. And this will I know. 

What man among men is the murderer of Baldur, 

And bringeth their end upon Odin’s heirs ? ’ 

‘Hodur will strike down the Mighty, the Famed one, 

He will become the murderer of Baldur, 

And bring down their end on the heirs of Odin * 

CompolleJ I have spoken, but now am I mute.’ 

* Close not thy lips yet, I must ask further, 

Till I know all tilings. And this will I know; 

Who will accomplish vengeance on Hddur, 

And bring to the scaffold the murderer of Baldur ? ’ 

* Bindur in the west hath won the prize 

Who shall slay in one night all Odin’s heirs. 

His hands he shall wash not: his locks he doth comb not, 

Till he brings to the scaffold the murderer of Baldur.’ 



THE DYIHG TEAE. 


95 


* Close not thy lips yet I will ask fui’ther, 

Till I know all things And this will I know: 

The name of the woman who refuses to weep, 

And cast to the heavens the veil from her head.’ 

* Thou art not Wegtam as erst I deemed thee, 

But thou art Odin the all-creator.’ 

‘And thou art not Vola, no wise woman thou, 

Nay, thou art the mother of giants in Hel.’ 

‘Eide home, 0 Odin, and make thy boast, 

That never again shall a man visit me, 

Till Loki hath broken his fetters and chains, 

And the twilight of gods brings the end of all things.’ 

Some features in this legend obviously reproduce incidents 
in Greek mythology. The hound of hell who confronts the 
Father of Song is the dog of Yamen, the ETerberos who bars 
the way to Orpheus until he is lulled to sleep by his harp¬ 
ing ; while the errand of Odin which has for its object the 
saving of Baldur answers to the mission of Orpheus to re¬ 
cover Eurydik^. Odin, again, coming as Wegtam the wan¬ 
derer reminds us at once of Odysseus the far-joumeying 
and long-enduring. The ride of Odin is as ineffectual as 
the pilgrimage of Orpheus. All created things have been 
made to take an oath that they will not hurt the beautiful 
Baldur: but the mistletoe has been forgotten, and of this 
plant Loki puts a twig into the hand of Baldur’s blind 
brother Hodr, who uses it as an arrow and unwittingly slays 
Baldur while the gods are practising archery with his body 
as a mark. Soon, however, Ali (or Wali) is born, a brother 
to Baldur, who avenges his death, but who can do so only by 
slaying the unlucky Hddr. 

The mode in which this catastrophe is brought about can¬ 
not fail to suggest a comparison with the myth which offers 
Sarp^ddn as a mark for the arrows of his uncles, and with 
the stories of golden apples shot from the heads of blooming 
youths, whether by William Tell, or William of Cloudeslee, or 
any others. In short, the gods are here in conclave, aiming 
their weapons at the sun, who is drawing near to his doom, 
as the summer approaches its end- They have no wish to 
slay him 5 rather, it is the wish of all that he should not 
die 5 but he must be killed by his blind brother, the autumn 
sun, when the nights begin to be longer than the day. The 
younger brother horn to avenge him is the new sun-child. 


CHAP. 

n. 


The death 
of Baldur. 


The 

avenging 
of Baldur. 



96 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

BOOK whose birth marks the gradual rising again of the sun in 

^^ the heayen. The myth now becomes transparent. Baldur, 
who dwells in Breidablick or Ganzblick (names answering 
precisely to Europ^ and Pasipha^, the broad-spreading light 
of morning, or the dazzling heavens), is slain by the wintry 
snn, and avenged by Ali or Wali, the son of Odin and Rind, 
immediately after his birth. Ali is further called Bui, the 
tiller of the earth, over which the plough may again pass on 
the breaking of the frost. These incidents at once show 
that this myth cannot have been developed in the countries 
of northern Europe. Bunsen rightly lays stress, and too 
great stress can scarcely be laid, on the thorough want of 
correspondence between these myths and the climatic con¬ 
ditions of northern Germany, still more of those of Scandi¬ 
navia and of Iceland. It may be rash to assign them dog¬ 
matically to Central Asia, but indubitably they sprung up in a 
country where the winter is of very short duration. BaJdur 
then is ^ the god who is slain,^ like Dionysos who is killed 
by his brothers and then comes to life again: but of these 
myths the Vedic hymns take no notice. ^ In the region 
, where they arose there is no question of any marked decline 
of temperature,’ and therefore these poems ^stoi) short at 
the collision between the two hostile forces of sunshine and 
storm.’ ^ 

The story The myth of TeU, with which the story of Baldur and 

of Tell and 

Gesler. i * The tragedy of the sokr year, of Sigurd of the Kdda with the Sivgfrifd 

the murdered and risen god, is familiar of the Nibelung JSoiig haa so inijH»rtA!it 
to us from the days of ancient Eg\’pt a bearing on the results of (\»mpHniti\e 
must it not be of equally primeval Mythology, that I mail myself all the 
origin here?’ [in Teutonic tradition]— more readily of the evith-nee by which 
Bunsen, God iti JTistor^, n, io8 this fact has been established* by one 

The evidence which has established who believes that Atli and one or two 
the substantial identity of tho story of other names of the NiUdung Lay htt 
the with that of the Or7//6i.c?y has ‘undoubtHlly histoneal/ On tins point, 
also shown that the Nibelung Lay prae- indeed, Bunsen has left no work to b« 
tieally reproduces the myth of the Vol- done. If hu has left in the Lay of the 
sungs, and that the same myth is pre- Nibolungs two orthrts* hist»irical names, 
sent^ under slightly different colours in he has left nothing more. The narra- 
. the legends of Walthar of Aquitaine and tive or legend itself carries to tho 
other Teutonic romances, vol. i. ch. xii. Breidablick (EuryphaeBsa) or Gant- 
The materials of these narratives are, blick (Pa.sipha^) which is the dnaBling 
in short, identical with the legends of abode of Baldur, the typo of the several 
the Teutonic Baldur and the Greek Helgis, of Higurd and Siegfried, as he ie 
Helen, and the whole narrative thus be- also of AchiUeus and Odysseus, of Rus- 
comes in each case transparent in tern, Perseus, or Heraklee. 
almost every part. The identity of the 



THE LEGEND OP TELL. 


97 


SarpM6n suggests a comparison, has received its deathblow 
as much from the hands of historians as from those of com¬ 
parative mythologists. But there are probably few legends 
which more thoroughly show that from myths which have 
worked themselves into the narrative of an historical age 
there is absolutely nothing to be learnt in the way of history. 
Even if the legend of Tell be given up as a myth, it might 
be contended that at the least it indicates some fact, and 
this fact must be the oppression of the Swiss by Austrian 
tyrants; and yet this supposed fact, without which the story 
loses all point and meaning, has been swept away as effectually 
as the mcidents which have been supposed to illustrate it. 
The political history of the Forest Cantons begins at a time 
Tong preceding the legendary date of Tell and Gesler; and 
the election of Rudolf of Hapsburg as king of the Romans 
in 1273 was important to the Swiss only from their previous 
connexion with his house.* In short, we have proof of the 
existence of a confederation of the Three Cantons in 1291, 
while the popular account dates its origin from the year 1314, 
and ascribes it to the events which are assigned to that time. 
Nay, inore, ‘there exist in contemporary records no in¬ 
stances of wanton outrage and insolence on the Hapsburg 
side. It was the object of that power to obtain political 
ascendency, not to indulge its representatives in lust or 
wanton insult. That it was so becomes all the more distinct, 
since there are plentiful records of disputes in which the 
interests of the two were mixed up with those of particular 
persons.’ In these quarrels, the Edinburgh Reviewer goes 
on to say, ‘the symptoms of violence, as is natural enough, 
appear rather on the side of the Swiss Communities tha.n on 
that of the aggrandising imperial house; ’ and the attack on 
the abbey of Einsiedeln was treated ‘ not as a crime of 
which the men of Schwitz were guilty, but as an act of war 
for which the three Cantons were responsible as a separate 
state.’ The war of Swiss independence which followed this 
event was brought to an issue in the battle of Morgarten; 

> The evidence of this connexion has Confkdhation Suisse in the Edinburgh 
been ably summarised by the writer of Review for January 1869, p. 134 et se^. 
the article on Rilliefs Ongines de la 

VOL. II. H 


CHAP. 

n 



98 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK but tke documents ■wbicb have preserved the terms of peace 

_. simply define the hounds of the imperial authority, without 

questioning that authority itself. In all this there is no 
real need of the exploits of Tell or rather there is no room 
for them, even if the existence of the Confederation were 
not traced hack to a time which according to the legend 
would probably precede his birth. 

This legend, which makes Tell not less skilful as a boatman 
•without than as an archer, is not noticed by chroniclers who would 
founda-^ gladly have retailed the incidents of the setting up of the 
tion. ducal cap by Gesler in the market place, of Tell’s refusal to 
do obeisance to it, of his capture, and of the cruelty which 
compelled him to shoot an apple placed on his son’s head, of 
his release during the storm on the lake that he might steer 
the skiff, and finally of the death of Gesler by Tell’s unerring 
shaft. When examined more closely, all the antiquities of 
the myth were found to be of modern manufacture. The 
two chapels which were supposed to have been raised by 
eye-witnesses of the events were ‘ trumpery works of a much 
more recent date,’—and if the tales of the showmen were 
true, the place had ‘ remained unchanged by the growth and 
decay of trees and otherwise for six centuries and a half.’ 
Further, ■the hat set on a pole that all who passed by might 
do obeisance is only another form of the golden image set -up 
that all might worship it on the plains of Dura, and here, as 
in the story of the Three Children, the men who crown the 
work of Swiss independence are three in number. 

™sTbmt important is this story as showing how utterly 

ofthV ^ destitute of any residuum of fact is the mythology intro- 
s^! troduced into the history even of a well-known age, that I 
feel myself justified in quoting the passage in which M. 
Eimet sums up the argument proving the absolute impossi- 
' bility of the tale from beginning to end. 

‘The internal history of the three valleys offers to the 
existence of a popular insurrection which freed them from 
the tyranny of King Albert of Austria a denial which the 
consequent conduct of this prince and that of his sons fully 
confirms. A revolt which would have resulted not only 
in defying his authority, but outraging it hy the expul- 



WILLIAM OP CLOUDESLEE. 

sion and murder of his officers, would not haye been for 
one instant tolerated by a monarch not less jealous of his 
power than resolute to make it respected. So when we see 
him in the month of April 1308, when he went to recruit in 
Upper Germany for his Bohemian wars, sojourning on the 
banks of the Limmat and the Eeuss, and approaching the 
theatre assigned to the rebellion, without making the slightest 
preparation or revealing any intention to chastise its authors; 
when we find him at the same time entirely occupied in 
celebrating the festival of the Carnival with a brilliant train 
of nobles and prelates; when we find him soon afterwards, 
on April 25, confirming to the abbey of Zurich the posses¬ 
sion of domains comprehending the places which were the 
very centre of the revolt; when we find him, six days latei-, 
regardless of revelations about the plot which was to cost 
him his life, banqueting with the sons and the nephew whose 
hands were already raised against him, and thence proceed, 
full of eagerness, to meet the queen who was on her way to 
join him,—it seems impossible to admit that he was swallow¬ 
ing in silence an affront inflicted on him by insolent peasants, 
and which an inexplicable impunity could only render all 
the more mortifying to his self-love and comj)romising to his 
authority.’ 

The myth is thus driven off the soil of the Helvetian 
republic. We find it growing as congenially in almost 
every Aryan land, and in some regions which are not Aryan 
at all. It is the story of the ballad of Clym of the Clough, 
in which Oloudeslee performs not only the exploits assigned 
to Locksley in Sir Walter Scott’s ^ Ivanhoe,’ but this very 
deed of Tell. Here the archer is made to say: 

I have a sonne seven years old: 

Hee is to me fall deere: 

I will tye him to a stake— 

All shall see him that bee here — 

And lay an apple upon his head, 

And goe six paces him froo, 

And I myself with a broad arrow© 

Shall cleave the apple in towe/ 

Hanging is to be the penalty in case of failure. The result 
is of course as in the myth of TeU; but the sequel which 
involves the actual death of the Vogt in that legend is repre- 


99 


CHAP. 

II. 


Other ver¬ 
sions of 
the th 
of Tell, 



100 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK sented in the English ballad by the hope which the king ex- 
. presses that he may never serve as a mark for Cloudeslee’s 
arrows. Here also Cloudeslee is one of a trio (along with 
Adam Bell and Clym of the Clough), which answers to the 
Swiss triumvirate; and Grimm is fully justified in remarking 
that Cloudeslee's Christian name and Bell’s surname exhibit 
the two names of the great Swiss hero.^ By Saxo Gramma¬ 
ticus, a writer of the twelfth century, the story is told of Pal- 
natoki, who performs the same exploit at the bidding of King 
Harold Gormson, and who when asked by the king why he 
had taken three arrows from his quiver when he was to have 
only one shot, replies, ^ That I might avenge on thee the 
swerving of the first by the points of the rest.’ In the 
Vilkina Saga the tale is related, and almost in the same 
terms, of Egill, ^ the fairest of men,’ the brother of Vdlundr, 
our Wayland Smith, while in the MaUeus Maleficarum it is 
told of Puncher, a magician on the Upper Rhine.® Another 
version is seen in the Saga of Saint Olaf, who challenges 
Eindridi, a heathen whom he wishes to convert, to the same 
task, only leading the way himself. Olaf’s arrow grazes the 
child’s head, and the pleading of Eindridi’s wife then induces 
the king to put an end to the contest. With some differences 
of detail the legend reappears in the story of another Harold 
(Sigurdarson), in the eleventh century. Here the rival or 
opponent of the king is Homing, whose arrows, as Harold 
remarks, are all inlaid with gold, like the arrows of Phoibos. 
Enraged at many defeats, the king at last dares Heming 
to shoot a nut on the head not of his son but of his brother. 
Not less significant in some of its touches is the Paroese 
tradition, which attributes Tell’’s achievement to Geyti, 
Aslak’s son, the king being the same who is confronted by 
Heming. Learning that Geyti is his match in strength, 
Harqld rides to the house of Aslak, and asking where his 

1 ‘ Aiiaser den angefubrten deutschen dem Konig, seinem siebenjahngon Sohn 
nnd nordischcn Erzahlungen las&t sich einen Apfei auss haupt zulegen und 120 

noch eine altenglische in dem nortlmm- Schritte weit herab zn schiessen.’_ 

brischenLiedeyonden dreiWildschntzen Grimiri, 2). Myth. 356. 

Adam Bell, Clym, nnd William of * The passages from these three 
Clondesle anfweisen; der letzte, dessen works are quoted at length by I)r. 
Vomame, wie der Zuname des ersten, Dasent, iVbm introduction irv.- 
Bell, an Tell gemahnt, erbietet sich vor xxxix 



OTHER VERSIONS OP THE MYTH OF TELL. 


101 


youngest son is, receives for answer that he is dead and 
buried in the churchyard of Kohin. The king insists on 
seeing the body, and the father replies that where so many 
lie dead it would not be easy to find the corpse of his son. 
But as Harold rides back over the heath, he meets a hunts¬ 
man armed with a bow, and asking who he is, learns that it 
is the dead Geyti, who has returned to the land of the living, 
like Memndn, or Euridyke, or Adonis. The story otherwise 
differs little, if at all, from that of Heming, Mr. Gould, 
who like Dr. Dasent has thoroughly examined this subject, 
cites from Castren a Finnish story, in which, as in the Tell 
myth, the apple is shot off a nmn’s head; but the archer (and 
this feature seems specially noteworthy) is a boy of twelve 
years old, who appears armed with bow and arrows among 
the reeds on the banks of a lake, and threatens to^ shoot some 
robbers who had carried off his father as a captive from 
the village of Alaj^rvi. The marauders agree to yield up 
the old man if the boy will do by him as Tell and Cloudeslee 
do by their sons. The legend at the least suggests a com¬ 
parison with the myth of the youthful Chrys^r, who also is 
seen on the shore of the Delian sea; while the twelve years 
look much like the ten years of the Trojan contest, the hours 
of the night during which the sun lies hid from the sight of 
men until he comes forth ready for the work in which his 
triumph is assured. The myth might be traced yet further, 
if it were necessary to do so. In Dr. Dasent’s words, ^ it is 
common to the Turks and Mongolians; and a legend of the 
wild Samoyeds, who never heard of Tell or saw a book in 
their lives, relates it, chapter and verse, of one of their 
marksmen. What shall we say, then, but that the story of 
this bold master-shot was primaeval amongst many tribes and 
races, and that it only crystallised itself round the great 
name of Tell by that process of attraction which invariably 
leads a grateful people to throw such mythic wreaths, such 
garlands of bold deeds of precious memory, round the brow 
of its darling champion.’ ^ Further still, it seems impossible 
not to discern the same myth in the legend which tells us of 
the Lykian Sarp^ddn, that when Isandros and Hippolochos 

* Norse Tales, introd. aacxv. 


CHAP. 

II. 



102 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK disputed with each other for the throne, his mother Lao- 
—,.1—- dameia olfered him for the venture, when it was settled that 
the kingdom should belong to the man who could shoot a 
ring frotn the breast of a child without hurtiUg him. The 
tale is here inverted, and the shot is to be aimed at the child 
who lies exposed like Oidipous on Kithairon, or Romulus 
among the reeds of the Tiber, but who is as sure to escape 
the danger as Tell and the others are to avoid the trap in 
which their enemies think to catch them. 

To say more is but to slay the slain. ^ William Tell, the 
good archer, whose mythological character Dr. Dasent has 
established beyond contradiction, is the last reflection of the 
sun-god, whether we call him Indra, or Apollo, or Ulysses/ ^ 

Section XIL-THE YIYIFYING SUJSf. 

In strictness of speech the Vedic Vishnu is nothing but a 
ofVi&hnxj, name. The writers of the Aitareya-brahmana could still 
say, ^ Agni is all the deities, Vishnu is all the deities.’* Hence 
he rises sometimes to a dignity greater even than that of 
Dyaus and Indra, while at others he is spoken of as subor¬ 
dinate to them, or is regarded as simply another form of the 
three deities Agni, Yayu, and Surya. In some hymns he is 
associated with Indra as Varuna is linked with Mitra, and 
Dyaus with Prithivi. 

^ Ail divine power, like that of the sky, was completely 
communicated to thee, Indra, by the gods (or worshippers), 
when thou, 0 impetuous deity, associated with Vishnu, didst 
slay Vritra Ahi, stopping up the waters.’ ® 

In truth, it may almost without exaggeration be said that 
the whole Vedic theology may be resolved into a series of 
equations, the result being one quite consistent with a real 
monotheism. Thus Vishnu is himself Agni and Indra. 

Thou, Agni, art Indra, bountifiil to the excellent ^ thou 
art Vishnu, the wide-stepping, the adorable.’^ 

These are again identified with other gods : 

^ Max Muller, Chips^ &c. ii 233, 

See Appendix B. 

* Max Muller, Sanskrit Lit 391, 


The far- 
shooting 
god. 


Flexible 


® i?. r. vii. 20, 2; Mmr, Sanskrit 
Textsj part ir ch ii sect. 1. 

^ i?. r. ii, 1, 3’; Muir, id. 



THE STRIDES OF VISHNU. 


103 


^ Thou, Agni, art Varuna, wlien thou art honi; thou art 
Mitra, wheu thou art kindled; son of strength, in thee 
reside all the gods: thou art Indra to the man who sacri¬ 
fices.^ 

^ Thou art Aryaman, when thou, self-controlled, possessest 
the secret name of the maidens.^' 

Agni, again, although along with Indra, Soma, and Para- 
meshthin he is a son of PrajApati,^ is according to the same 
writers Prajapati himself, 

^ The man who became Prajapati is the same as this Agni 
who is kindled on the altar/ 

This name brings us at once to other equations, for Pra¬ 
japati is Daksha: he is also Time and Death. 

‘ The gods were afraid of this ender, death, the year which 
is Prajapati, lest he should by days and nights bring on the 
end of our life/ ® 

Elsewhere Prajapati is Brahma. 

^ Those men who know Brahma know him who occupies 
the highest place (Parameshthin): he who knows Paramesh- 
thin and who knows PrajS,pati, they who know the ancient 
Brahinana (deity ?), they know Skambha.’ ^ 

It is scarcely necessary, then, to say that in all the phrases 
which describe the attributes of Vishnu, the origin of each 
conception is plainly discernible. He is especially the god 
who traverses the heaven in three strides, these strides being 
taken by some commentators to denote his manifestations as 
fire on the earth, as lightning in the atmosphere, and as the 
sun in heaven, or in other words, his identity with Agni, 
Vayu, and Surya. By others they are regarded as setting 
forth the rising, culmination, and setting of the sun; and 
there can be little doubt that the latter idea was at the first 
most closely associated with the thought of Vishnu.® It 
would seem indeed that these gods are distinguished only 

^ E. V. V. 3, 1; Muir, Samk. Texts, porter or propper, vol i. p. 37. This 
pt. iv. eh. ii. sect. 1. tunciion, Dr. Muir remarks, is frequently 

^ Sutaj}atha Brahmana, xi. 1, 6; ascribed to Indra, Varuna, Vishnu, and 
Muir, ib. Savitri. 

* The idea is obviously that of the ‘Vishnu, thou didst prop asunder 

Greek Kronus, who devours all his off- these two worlds; tbou didst envelope 
spring. the earth on every side with beams of 

* Ath. V. X. 7, 7 ; Muir, Sanskrit Texts, light.'— R. V, vii. 99, 3. 

part iv. p. 17. Skambha is the sup- * Muir, Sanskrit Texts^ part iv. p. 57. 


CHAP. 

IT. 


Vishnu the 

striding 

god. 



104 


MYTHOLOCJY OF THE AEYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK wli6ii tlie worsliipper wishes to add to the titles of the beings 
—^—- whom he invokes in his litanies. 

^ Agni, Varuna, Mitra, ye gods, give us strength, and ye 
hosts of Maruts, and Yishnu. May both the Asvins, Eudra, 
and the wives of the deities, with Pushan, Bhaga, and Saras- 
vati, be pleased with us. 

^ I invoke for our protection Indra and Agni, Mitra and 
Yaruna, Adiia, heaven, earth and sky, the Maruts, the moun¬ 
tains, the waters, Yishnu, Pushan, Brahmanaspati, Bhaga, 
Samsa and Savitri. 

^ And may Yishnu and the wind, uninjuring, and Soma, 
the bestower of riches, give us happiness. And may the 
Eibhus, Asvins, Tvashtri and Yibhvan be favourable to us, so 
as to grant us wealth.’ ^ 

Dwarf In- Much of the later mythology respecting Yishnu turns on 
carnation. Dwarf Incarnation, which may be compared with the 
myth of the maimed Hephaistos. In both cases the defect 
is simply a veil putting out of view the irresistible power of 
the god. The fire at its birth is weak, and its flame puny; 
the sun sheds but little warmth as he rests on the horizon at 
his rising; and it might well be said that none could tell 
how vast a power lay in these seemingly weak and helpless 
beings. So Yishnu, manifesting himself as the Dwarf, ob¬ 
tains from the Asuras as much as he can lie upon, or as 
much as he can cover in three strides. It is thus that Bali, 
the great enemy of the gods, is overcome. Havmg con¬ 
quered the three worlds, Bali terrifies Indra, who, with other 
deities, beseeches Yishnu to take the shape of a dwarf and 
deceive their conqueror. Having in this shape approached 
the son of Yirochana and obtained the boon of the three 
paces, ^the thrice-stepping Yishnu assumed a miraculous 
form, and with three paces took possession of the worlds. 
For with one step he occupied the whole earth, with a 
second the eternal atmosphere, and with a third the sky. 
Having then assigned to the Asura Bali an abode in Patala 
(the infernal region), he gave the empire of the three worlds 
to Indra.’^ In the Mah^bharata this fact is ascribed to 


* i?. V. V. 46; Muir, Sansk. Y.pt. iy, p 69. * Hamayam, i, 322; Muir, t//. 117. 



DWARF GODS. 


10 £ 


Krishna, who, having become the son of Aditi, was called 
Vishnu.* In the Bhagavata Pui'ana the story assumes pro¬ 
portions almost as vast as those of the god whom it seeks to 
glorify. No sooner has Bali granted the seemingly moderate 
request of Hari or Vishnu, than the body of the dwarf begins 
to expand and fills the whole universe, and Bali is bound 
with the chains of Varuna.® This dwarf appears elsewhere 
in the person of the child Kum4ra, the son of Aushasi, the 
daughter of the dawn.® Thus throughout we are dealing 
with phrases which the Hindu commentators knew to be 
mere phrases; and thus without a thought of injustice done 
to the deities whom he seemed to disparage, the worshipper 
could say that Varuna himself and the Asvins do the bidding 
of Vishnu, and that Vishnu is more beneficent than his chosen 
companion Indra. 

‘ King Varuna and the Asvins wait on the decree of this 
ruler, attended by the Maruts: Vishnu possesses excellent 
wisdom, which knows the proper day, and with his friend 
opens up the cloud. 

‘ The divine Vishnu who has chosen companionship with 
the beneficent Indra, himself more beneficent, the wise god 
has gratified the Arya.’ * 

And again, 

‘ Thou, Agni, art Indra, bountiful to the good; thou art 
Vishnu, the wide-stepping, the adorable.’ ® 

So when Indra. is about to smite Vritra, he is at once 
represented as bidding his friend Vishpu to stride vastly. 

‘ Friend Vishnu, stride vastly: sky, give room for the 
thunderbolt to strike j let us slay Vritra and let loose the 
waters.’ ® 

Yet although in some passages Vishnu is described as 
having established tlie heavens and the earth, and as sus- 

* Muir, Sanskrit Texts^ pt. iv. p. 118. contempt. The idea of mere diminu- 

^ Id lb. p. 125, &c. tiveness issues at length in the stones 

• Id, ib. p. 284. The diminutive size of Tom Thumb: but Tom Thumb is m 
of many of the heroes of popular tradi- reality as little to be despised as any 
lion must be traced to this ulea. Odys- other hero of Aiyan legends. 

sens is small, when he stands, as com- * It V. i. 166, Muir, Sanskrit TexiSj 
pared with Menelaos ■ in other words part iv. p. 66. 
ne is Shortshanks (Grimm). Boots is * Muir, ib. 

despised for his insignificant stature, • B. V. viii. 89, 12; Muir, ib. p. 68, 
and the Master Thief incurs the same 


CHAP. 

II 


Majesty o 
Vishi^iu. 



106 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK taining the world hy his own inherent force, still he is said 
'—' in others to make his .three strides through the power of 
Indra. 

When, Indra, the gods placed thee in their front in the 
. battle, then thy dear steeds grew. 

^ When, thnnderer, thon didst by thy might slay Vritra 
who stopped up the streams, then thy dear steeds grew. 

^ When by thy force Vishnu strode three steps, then thy 
dear steeds grew.^ ^ 

Elsewhere we are told that mortal man cannot comprehend 
his majesty. 

^ No one who is being born, or has been born, has attained, 
0 divine Vishnu, to the furthest limit of thy greatness.’ ® 

The palace The personality of the mythical Vishnu is, in short, as 
of Vishpu. transparent as that of Helios or Sel^nS. He dwells in the 
aerial mountains, in a gleaming palace where the many 
horned and swiftly moving cows abide. ^ Here that supreme 
abode of the wide-stepping vigorous god shines intensely 
forth.’ These cows are in some places the clouds, in others, 
the rays which stream from the body of the sun. But on 
the whole it must be admitted that the place of Vishnu in 
the Rig Veda, as compared with the other great deities, is in 
the background; and the institutional legends of later 
Brahmanic literature throw but little light on the mythical^ 
idea of this deity, and perhaps none on the mythology of 
any other people. 

Avatars of As the Supreme spirit, whose ten Avatars or Incarnations 
are among the later developements of Hindu theology, 
Vishnu is associated or identified not only with Siva or 
Mahadeva, but with Rama in the Ramayana, and with 
Eiishna in the Mah^bh^rata.® But the Mahadeva, with 
whom he is thus identified, is himself only Varuna or Dyaus, 
under another name. ^ He is Rudra, he is Siva, he is Agni, 
he is Saiva, the all-conquering; he is Indra, he is Vayu, ha 
is the Asvins, he is the lightning, he is the moon, he is 
Iswara, he is Surya, he is Varuna, he is time, he is death 
the ender; he is darkness, and night, and the days; he is 

* B V Till 12, Muir, SansJcrit Texts, pt. iv. p. 77. » Muir, ib. p. 63 

» Id ib. ch. ii. sect. 5. » F ■ 



VISHNU AND Krishna/ 

the months and the half-months of the seasons, the morning 
and evening twilight, and the year.’' Krishna, again, is - 
said to he sometimes a partial, sometimes a perfect mani¬ 
festation of that god; but the phrases in which Krishna is 
spoken of are as indefinite and elastic as those which speak 
of Agni, Indra or Vishnu. In some passages Krishna is 
simply a son of Devaki. But as Vishnu is also Brahma, 
so is Krishna also the supreme deityElsewhere it is said 
that Brahma and Mahadeva themselves proceed from Krish¬ 
na, who again identifies himself with Kudra, although in 
other passages Rudra is described as mightier;^ and in 
each case commentators, as we might expect, are ready 
with the reasons which reconcile the seeming inconsistency. 
Like Vishnu, Krishna rises to greater importance in later 
times, and in far more abundant measure. The popular 
affections were more and more fixed on the bright god who 
was born in a cave, at whose birth the exulting devas sang 
in the heavens, whose life was sought by a cruel tyrant, and 
who, like Zeus or Herakles, had many loves in many lands. 

In this later theology the idea which regarded the sun as 
the generator of all life left the attributes of Vishnu by 
comparison in the shade; and the emblem thus especially 
associated with this deity marks a singular stage in the 
history of religion. If the subject is one which must be 
approached with the utmost caution, it is also one in which 
we are especially *bound not to evade or misrepresent the 
facts. If the form of faith, or rather it should be said, of 
worship, with which we have now to deal, has prevailed in 
all lands and still prevails amongst a large majority of man¬ 
kind, it becomes our duty to trace fairly, to the best of our 
power, its origin and growth, and to measure accurately the 
influence which it has exercised on the human intellect and 
on human morality. If in our search we find that phrases 
and emblems, to which we now attach a purely spiritual 
signification, have acquired this meaning gradually as the 
ruder ideas which marked the infancy of the human race 

> Muir, Sanskrit Texts, pt. iv. ch. ii. hate come down to lighten its load?’-— 
5 , Vishnu Parana, H. H. Wilson, 510. 

s Id. ib. p. 152. ‘ Do you not know/ » Muir, Sanskrit Texts, part iv. pp. 
says Krishna to Balarama, * that you and 214, 216, 239, 

I are alike the origin of the world, who 


107 

CHAP. 

IT. 


Emblems 
associated 
with the 
worship of 
Vifehpu. 



108 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

IJ 


Sensuous 
stage of 
language 


faded from the mind, we shall not allow old associations and 
prejudices to stand in the place of evidence, or suffer the 
discovery to interfere with or weaken moral or religious 
convictions with which these phrases or emblems have no 
inseparable connexion. The student of the history of re¬ 
ligion can have no fear that his faith will receive a shock 
from which it cannot recover, if his faith is placed in Him 
with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning, 
and whose work human passion can neither mar nor hinder. 
He can walk in confidence by the side of the student of 
language and mythology, and be content to share his labour, 
if he hopes that such efforts may one day ^lay bare the 
world-wide foundations of the eternal kingdom of God.’ ^ 

In truth, the evidence which must guide us at the outset 
of the inquiry can be furnished by the science of language 
alone. The very earliest records to which we can assign 
any historical character refer to states of society which are 
comparatively late developements. The history of words 
carries us back to an age in which not a single abstract 
term existed, in which human speech expressed mere bodily 
wants and mere sensual notions, while it conveyed no idea 
either of morality or of religion. If every name which 
throughout the whole world is or has been employed as a 
name of the One Eternal God, the Maker and Sustainer of 
all things, was originally a name only for some sensible 
object or phenomenon, it follows that there was an age, the 
duration of which we cannot measure, but during which 
man had not yet risen to any consciousness of his relation 
to the great Cause of all that he saw or felt around him. 
If all the words which now denote the most sacred relations 
of kindred and affinity were at the fii’st names conveying 
no such special meaning, if the words father, brother, sister, 
daughter, were words denoting merely the power or occu¬ 
pation of the persons spoken of, then there was a time 
during which the ideas now attached to the words had not 
yet been developed.^ But the sensuousness which in one of 
its results produced mythology could not fail to influence in 
whatever degree the religious growth of mankind. This 
^ Max Muller, ‘ Semitic Monotheism,» Chips, &c., i. 378. » See vol. i. ch. il 



THE VITAL TOWERS OF ^"ATURE. 


109 


sensuousness, inevitable in tlie infancy of the human race, 
consisted in ascribing to all physical objects the same life 
of -which men were conscious tlieniselves. They had every 
thing to learn and no experience to fall back upon, while 
the very impressions made upon them by the sights and 
sounds of the outward world were to be made the means of 
leading them gradually to correct these impressions and 
to rise beyond them to facts which they seemed to contra¬ 
dict. Thus side by side were growing up a vast mass of 
names which attributed a conscious life to the hosts of 
heaven, to the clouds, trees, streams and flowers, and a 
multitude of crude and undefined feelings, hopes, and long¬ 
ings which were leading them gradually to the conscious 
acknowledgment of One Life as the source of all the life 
which they saw around them.^ The earliest utterances of 
huxnan thought which have come down to us belong to a 
period comparatively modern; but even some of these, far 
from exhibiting this conviction clearly, express the fears and 
hopes of men who have not yet grasped the notion of any 
natural order whatever. The return of daylight might 
depend on the caprice of the arbitrary being whom they had 
wa-tched through his brilliant but brief journey across the 
heaven. The sun whose death they had so often witnessed 
might sink down into the sea to rise again from it no more. 
The question eagerly asked during the hours of night betray 
a real anguish, and the exultation which greeted the dawn, 
if it appear extravagant to us, comes manifestly from men 
for whom nature afforded but a very slender basis for argu¬ 
ments from analogy.^ But although the feeling of confi¬ 
dence in a permanent order of nature was of long or slow 
growth, the phenomena of nature suggested other thoughts 
which produced their fruit more quickly. The dawns as they 
came round made men old, but the Dawn herself never lost 
her freshness, and sprang from the sea-foam as fair as when 
she first gladdened the eyes of man. Men might sicken and 
die, but the years which brought death to them could not 
dim the light of the sun 5 and this very contrast supplied, in 

* Max Muller, ‘ Semitic Monotlieism,’ Chips, &e., i. 355. 

* See Yol. i. p. 41. 


CHAP. 

11 . 



110 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK Professor Max Miiller’s words, ^ the first intimation of beings 
>—' wbicb. do not wither and decay—of immortals, of immor¬ 
tality/^ When from this thought of the immortality of 
other beings they awoke at length to the consciousness that 
man himself might be among the number of immortal crea¬ 
tures, the feeling at once linked itself with another which 
had thus far remained almost dormant. To adopt once 
more the words of Professor Max Muller, ^ by the very act 
of the creation God had revealed himself;’^ but although 
many words might be used to denote ‘ that idea which the 
first breath of life, the first sight of the world, the first 
consciousness of existence, had for ever impressed and im¬ 
planted in the human mind,’^ the idea of a real relation with 
this Unchangeable Being could be awakened in men only 
when they began to feel that their existence was not bounded 
to the span of a few score years. 

Aryan and A twofold influence, however, was at work, and it pro- 
Mono- duced substantially the same results with the Semitic as 
theism. Aryan races. Neither could be satisfied with effects 

while seeking for a Cause; and the many thoughts a^s to the 
nature of this Creative Power would express themselves in 
many names. The Vedic gods especially resolve themselves 
into a mere collection of terms, all denoting at first different 
aspects of the same idea; and the consciousness of this fact 
is strikingly manifested by the long line of later interpreters. 
A monstrous overgrowth of unwieldy mythology has sprung 
up round these names, and done it^ deadly work on the 
minds of the common people; but to the more thoughtful 
and the more truthful, Indra and Varuna, Dyaus and Vishnu, 
remained 'mere terms to denote, however inadequately, some 
qizality of the Divine Nature. But the Vedic Indra and 
Dyaus might have a hundred epithets, and alike in the East 
and West, as the meaning of these epithets was either in 
part or wholly forgotten, each name came to denote a sepa¬ 
rate being, and suggested for him a separate mythical history. 
Thus the Hindu sun-god Surya was represented among the 
Hellenic tribes not only by Helios and Phoibos, but by 

* Max Muller, 'Comparative M\t-holopy,’ Chips, ii. 97. 

® Id. ‘ Semitic Monotheism,’ Onpa, ii 352 » Id. ib. 363. 



POLYTHEISM AND MONOTHEISM. 


Ill 


Herakles and Perseus, Tlieseus and Belleropli6n, Keplialos, CHAP. 
Endymi6n, Narkissos, Kadinos, Oidipous, Meleagros, Achil- . 
lens, Tantalos, Ixiou, Sisj'plios, and many more. The Yedic 
Dalunia reappeared not only as Dai)hn4 and Ath^n4, but 
as Eui'ydike, Eurypliassa, Tol6, lokaste, Dana4, Briseis, Aph¬ 
rodite, Europe, Eurygaiioia, with other beings, for most of 
whom life had leas to offer of joy than of grief. But although 
the fortunes of those beings varied indefinitely, although 
some wei-e e.xalted to the highcvst heaven and others tlu'ust 
down to the nethermost hell and doomed to a fruitless toil 
for ever and ever, yet they wore all superhuman, all beings 
to be thought of with fear and hatred if not with love, and 
some of them were among the gods who did the bidding of 
Zeus himself, or were even mighty enough to thwart his 
will. Thus those names remained no longer mere appel¬ 
lations denoting different aspects of the character of the 
same being; and from the Dyaus, Theos, and Deus, of 
Hindus, Greeks, and Latins, sprung the Deva, Theoi, Dii, 
and the plural form stereotyped the polytheism of the Aryan 
world.* The history of the Semitic tribes was essentially 
the same. The names which they had used at first simply 
as titles of God, underwent no process of phonetic decay like 
that which converted the name of the glistening ether into 
the Vedic Dyaus and the Greek Zeus. The Semitic epithets 
for the Divine Being had never been simple names for natural ’ 
phenomena; they were mostly general terms, expressing the 
greatness, the power, and the glory of God. But though El 
and Baal, Moloch and Milcom, never lost their meaning, the 
idea which their teachers may have intended to convey by 
these terms was none the less overlaid and put out of sight. 

Each epithet now became a special name for a definite deity, 
and the people generally sank into a worship of many gods 
as effectually as any of the Aryan tribes, and clung to it 
more obstinately. Of the general monotheistic conviction, 
which M. Ei4nan regards as inherent in all 'the Semitic 
tribes, there is not the faintest trace. The gods of Laban 
are stolen by Bachel, and Jacob bargains with God in lan¬ 
guage which not only betrays ‘ a temporary want of faith,’ 

* Max M^er, * Semitic Monotheism/ ChipSy u. 360. 



112 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK but shows ^ that the conception of God bad not yet acquired 

>_^ that complete uniyersality wbicb alone deserves to be called 

monotbeism, or belief in tbe One God.^' 

Ideas and Tbe recognition of beings powerful enough to injure, and 

S^vivify-^ perhaps placable enough to benefit, the children of men, 

ing power inyolved the necessity of a worship or cultus. They were all 
in nature. *' . 

of them gods of life and death, of reproduction and decay, of 
the great mystery which forced itself upon the thoughts of 
men from infancy to old age. If the language of poets in 
general describes the phenomena of nature under metaphors 
suggested by the processes of reproduction and multiplication 
in the animal and vegetable world, the form which the idea 
would take among rude tribes with a merely sensuous speech 
is sufficiently obvious. The words in which ^aEschylos and 
Shelley speak of the marriage of the heaven and the earth 
do but throw a veil of poetry over an idea which might easily 
become coarse and repulsive, while they point unmistakeably 
to the crude sensuousness which adored the principle of life 
under the signs of the organs of reproduction in the world 
of animals and vegetables. The male and female powers of 
nature were denoted respectively by an upright and an oval 
emblem, and the conjunction of the two furnished at once 
the altar and the ashera, or grove, against which the He¬ 
brew prophets lifted up their voice in earnest protest. It is 
clear that such a cultus as this would carry with it a con¬ 
stantly increasing danger, until the original character of the 
emblem should be as thoroughly disguised as the names of 
some of the Vedic deities when transferred to Hellenic soil. 
But they have never been so disguised in India as amongst 
the ancient Semitic tribes; ^ and in the kingdoms both of 

^ Max Muller, ‘ Semitic Monotheism/ vanes greatly, and the coarser dcvelopc- 
Chij^s, ii 368 ments of the cultus are confined to a 

2 ‘Wie wcnig das Alterthum den comparatively small number. Professor 
Begnif der XJnzncht mit diesem Bilde Wilson says that ‘ it is unattended in 
verband, beweist, dass in den Elensi- Upper I^ypt by any indecent or indeli- 
nien nur die Jungfrauen die dyr6p^7}ra cate ceremonies,' (‘ On Hindu Sects/ 
tragen durften (Thucyd vi 56, Suid. Asiatic Beview, vol. xvii.); and Sir 
s V *A^i5r](/>opfo) und des Phallus Ver- William Jones remarks that ‘it seems 
ehrung selbst von den Vestalischen never to have entered into the heads of 
Jungfrauen (Plin. xxviii. 4, 7) ’ Nork, the Hindu legislators and people that 
Beal-Worterbztch s v. Phalluscult, 62 anything natural could be offensively 
Even when the emblems still retain obscene—a singularity which pervades 
more or less manifestly their original all their writings, hut is no proof of the 
character, the moral effect on the people depravity of their morals; hence the 



THE QUICKEHIHG SUN. 


Judah and of Israel the rites connected with these emblems 
assumed their most corrupting form. Even in the Temple 
itself stood the Ashera, or the upright emblem,^ on the 
circular altar of Baal-Peor, the Priapos of th# Jews, thus re¬ 
producing the Linga and Toni of the Hindu. Por this symbol 
the women wove hangings, as the Athenian maidens em¬ 
broidered the sacred peplos for the ship presented to Athene 
at the great Dionysiac festival. Here, at the winter solstice, 
they wept and mourned for Tammuz, the fair Adonis, done 
to death by the boar, as Sury^ Bai is poisoned by the 
Eakshas’ claw, and Rustem slain by the thorn of winter. 
Here also, on the third day, they rejoiced at the resurrection 
of the lord of light.^ Hence, as most intimately connected 
with the reproduction of life on earth, it became the symbol 
under which the sun, invoked with a thousand names, has 
been worshipped throughout the world as the restorer of the 
powers of nature after the long sleep or death of winter. 

As such the symbol was from the first venerated as a 
protecting power, and the Palladion thus acquired its magic 


worship of the Linga by the followers of 
and of the Xoni by the followers 
of Vishnu/— Works^ vol. ii. p, 311. In 
other words, the origin of the Phallos- 
worship * nicht aus der morahschen Ver- 
dorbenheit dor Vdlkor .... souderu 
aus ihror noch kindhch naiven Denk- 
wcise orklurt worden muss, wo man un- 
bekximmeit urn die Decenz des Aus- 
drueks odor de» Bildes stets dasjonige 
wahlto, welches eino Idee am pasbend- 
fitcn bezeichnete. Welches Glied konnte 
aber bozcichncndor an den Schdpfer 
mahnen als ebendns schaffcnde Organ?’ 
—Nork, lieal-Wbrterbuchj s, v. Phallus- 
cult, 49. 

' This Ashera, which in the author¬ 
ised English version of the Old Testa¬ 
ment is translated ‘grove,’ was in fact a 
pole or stem of a tree; and hence it is 
that the reforming kings are said to 
hew it down, while the stone altar, or 
Yoni, on which it rests is broken up. 

* That Adonis was known also by 
the name Ia6 cannot be doubted The 
epithet specially applied to this darling 
of Aphrodit6 is a^p6s, tender; and in 
the oracle of the Klarian Apoll6n the 
god of the autumn is called a^phs *Icw5. 
That Adonis was known to the Cyprians 

VOL. II. ] 


by this name is stated by Tzetzes and 
Lykophron, 831. <5 ''Abcans Tadov irap^ 
Kvirplots Ka\etrai — Faday hero being 
merely a transcriber’s error for *Iouas. 
Adonis again stands to Lionysos in th(‘ 
relation of Helios to Phoibos, or of 
Zeus to Ouranos. Aiyerai (xkv 6 ''ASupis 
{nrh Tov ffvhs Bia(l>9apijvat • rbv 5* *^Abcayiv 
ovx erepov dXAck AiSwcoy ^ivat yofit^ovcri. 
Plut. iSymjJos, iv. quest, v. 3; Movers, 
Phonisic, ch. xiv; Colenso, On the 
Pentateuch^ part r. appendix iii. Thus 
we come round again to the oracle of 
the Klarian Apollbn, which teaches that 
the supreme god is called, according to 
the seasons of the year, Hades, Zeus, 
Helios, and Ia6. 

ippa^eo Toy irdyray tvaroy 6e6v *la^, 
fi4y r’ *A/5j?y, A/a t* otapos 
apxofiiyoio^ 

dipovSy fJL€rov^pov 5 * afiphy 

Hades is thus supreme lord while Per- 
sephonS abides in the unseen land, and 
the name of Zeus here retains something 
of its original meaning. He is the god 
of the bright sky from which the rain 
falls, the Indra or sap-god of the 
Hellenes. 


113 


CHAP. 

II. 


Pods and 
pillars. 



114 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAJST NATIONS. 


BOOK virtue.^ So guarded, Jacob is content to lie down to sleep' 
. in bis weary journey to tbe bouse of Laban; and according 
to later Jewish tradition tbe stone so set up was carried to 
Jerusalem, and there reverenced. But tbe erection of these 
stone columns or pilft>rs,^ tbe forms of which in most cases 
tell their own story,^^re common throughout the Ea-st, some 
of the most elaborate being found near Ghizni.® The 
wooden emblem carries us, however, more directly to the 
natural mythology of the subject. The rod acquired an in¬ 
herent vitality, and put forth leaves and branches in the 
Thyrsoi of the Dionysiac worshippers and the Seistron ^ of 
Egyptian priests. It became the tree of life, and reappeared 
as the rod of wealth and happiness given by ApoUdn to 
Hermes,® the mystic spear which Abaris received from the 
Hyperborean Sun-god, and which came daily to Phoibos in 
his exile laden with all good things. It was seen as the 
htuus of the augur, the crooked staff of the shepherd, the 
sceptre of the king, and the divining rod which pointed out 
hidden springs or treasure to modern conjurors.® In a form 

^ The word denotes simply a figure and they might he combined in many 
of Pallas, and Pallas is but another -ways ‘ Das Zeichcn Schiba’s ein Tri¬ 
form of Phallos. To the same class angel, mit der Spitze nach oben ([A), 
belong tbe names of Paks, the Latin das aufwarts strobende, Feuer versinn- 
god of flocks and shepherds, and of the lichend, TPie umgekehrt, des fouchten 
Sicilian Palikoi The former is con- Wischnn Symbol das (v)» das abwarts 
neeted with the Eoman Palatium, the fliessende Wasser versinnlichend. Da- 
spot doubtless where the emblem was mit die Welt geschafien werde, musste 
supposed to have been first set up. The Wischnu einst dem Schiba die Dienste 
latter are Dioskouroi, twin sons of Zeus des Weibes leisten, Der monotheist- 
and Thaleia, although they have rather ische Israelit gab beide Zeichen dem 
the character of demons Jehovah, wie der Judische Talisman 

- They are the columns of Herakles, /\^ 

Dionysos, Osiris and Sesostris The ^ V X ) Scutum Davidis genannt, be- 
statements of Herodotos about the v 

pillars set up by this last-named god weist.’—^Nork, s. v. Schiba. We cannot 
are singularly significant. They are hesitate to connect with these columns 
distinctly connected with virile strength, the pillared Saints whether of the East 
although he supposes that they were or the West. The Stylite did not choose 
erected to receive inscriptions. The names thus to exalt himself without any rea- 
of those nations, who had won a'^eputa- son. He found 'the column or pillar, 
tion for bravery, were carved on them Phallos, an objectof idolatrous reverence, 
without further marks* dr^eav de dfxaxnTl and he wished doubtless to connect the 
/cod €vTr€T4oo$vap4\a^e rds TrJxty, To4noi(n emblem with more spiritual associations. 

ip4ypcifl\/€ 4v rfa’i <rTfi\ri<ri Kara raurd See Appendix C. 
leal roTa'i dvSpjjlota'i ruy i9y4eoy 'yew- ® Pergusson, Hist, of Atoh. ii. 642. 
fieyoKfi, /cod 5b ai5o7a yvyaiichs tt/joct- * This instrument exhibits both the 
eydypaxf/e^ SijAa Trot4€iv &5 symbols in combination. 

^n<Tay dvdXKi^es, ii. 102. In short * ffyi7in to Hermes, 629. 

they exhibited, like the representations ’ In a picture of St. Zeno of Verona 

of Vishnu, the two emblems combined; tbe two emblems are combined, the fish* 



THE STAUROS AND THE RING-. 


115 


which adhered still more strictly to the first idea the emblem 
became the stauros or cross of Osiris^ and a new source of 
mythology was thus laid open. To the Egyptian the cross 
thus became the symbol of immortality, and the god himself 
was crucified to the tree which dApted his fructifying 
power. ^ Eising from a crescent, the ^modified form of the 
Yoni, the cross set forth the marriage of Ouranos and Gaia, 
of Vishnu and Sacti, of heaven and earth. But this cross 
was itself a new symbol of the sun, and in the so-called 
Assyrian representations of the moon-goddess the sun is ex¬ 
hibited in human form standing on the crescent. More com¬ 
monly the plain stauros was joined with an oval ring, was 
worn as an amulet, and was reproduced by the Christians 
of Egypt as a sacred mark inserted in their inscriptions. 
In this form, or in that of a ring inclosing a cross of four 
spokes, this emblem is found everywhere. It is peculiar 
neither to Egyptians nor Assyrians, neither to Greeks, 
Latins’ Gauls, Germans, or Hindus; and no attempt to ex¬ 
plain its original employment by any one of these nations is 
admissible, unless it explains or seeks to explain them for 
aJL We recognise the male symbol in the trident of Posei- 
d6n or Proteus, and in the fylfot or hammer of Thor, which 
assumes the form of a cross pattee in the various legends 
which turn on the rings of Freya, Holda, Venus, or Aphro¬ 
dite. In each of these stories the ring is distinctly con¬ 
nected with the goddess who represents the female power 
in nature, or tells its own tale of sensuous passion. In one 
of the latest of these stories a newly married youth at Eome 
places his wedding ring on a statue of Venus, and finds to 
his dismay not only that he cannot dislodge it from her 
stony finger, but that the goddess herself claims to stand to 
him in the refation of Aphrodite to Adonis.® As we might 

(vesica piscis) being seen pendant from magic ring to be on their guard against 
the pastoral or shepnerd^s staff.—Jamie- tho allurements of the beings whom ho 
son, 8acred and Legendary Arty p. 417. was about to raise by his incantations. 

1 See Appendix 0. These beings are beautiful damsels, one 

* This story is given by Fordun, of whom, singling out a youth, holds 
Miatthew of Westminster, Roger of out to him a ring of gold, which tho 
Wendover, and Vincent of Beauvais, youth touches, thus placing himself in 
Mr. G-ould cites from Csesarius Heister- her power. Curious Myths, i. 225. 
bachensis a tale, in which a necromancer See also Scott, Border Mxnsirksy, nitro- 
warns some youths placed within a duction to ballad of Tamlane. 

I 2 


CHAP. 

II. 



IIG 


MYTHOLOG-Y OP THE AKYAN NATION'S. 


BOOK 

II. 


Tree and 

serpent 

worship. 


expect, this myth was transferred to the Virgin Mary, and 
the knight whose ring she refuses to surrender looks upon 
himself as betrothed to the mother of God, and dedicates 
himself to her by taking the monastic vows. In the older 
Saga of the Paroese this ring appears as that of Thorgerda, 
who allows Earl Hakon to draw it from her statue after he 
had besought her for it with many tears. This ring Hakon 
gives to Sigmund Brestesson, bidding him never to part with 
it. When Sigmund afterwards refused to yield it to Olaf, 
the Norwegian warned him that it should be his bane, and 
the prediction was fulfilled when, for the sake of this ring, 
Sigmund was murdered in his sleep. ^ EinaUy, the symbol 
of the Phallos in its physical characteristics suggested the 
form of the serpent, which thus became the emblem of life 
and healing, and as such appears by the side of the Hellenic 
Askl^pios, and in the brazen crucified serpent venerated by 
the Jewish people until it was destroyed by Hezekiah.^ 

Here then we have the key to that tree and serpent wor¬ 
ship which has given rise to much ingenious and not alto- 


^ This ring is the ‘ tetcrrima causa ’ of 
the war of Troy (Horace, Sat i. 3, 107), 
and carries with it the sarao doom 
which the marriage of Biynhild brought 
to Sigurd the Volsung. With these 
legends may he compared the story of 
the crown of the hero Astrabakos (Hero- 
dotos, vi. 69), the counterpart of the 
Scottish myth of Tamlane Sir^W. 
Scott (Border Minshehy, li. 266) cites 
from dervase of Tilbury an account of 
the Dracae, a sort of water spirits, who 
inveigled women and children into the 
recesses which they inhabit, beneath 
lakes and rivers, by floating past them 
on the surface of the water, in the shape 
of gold rings or cups, and remarks that 
‘ this story in almost all its parts is 
current in both the Highlands and Low¬ 
lands of Scotland, with no other varia¬ 
tion than the substitution of Fairies for 
Lracse, and the cavern of a hill [the 
Horselberg] for that of a river ’ 

® This symbol of the serpent re¬ 
appears in the narrative of the tempta¬ 
tion and fall of Eve, the only difference 
being that the writer, far from sharing 
the feelings of the devotees of Baal- 
peor, regarded their notions and their 
practices with the utmost horror; and 


thus his narrative exhibits the animal 
irdiligence inseparable from those 
idolatrous rites, as destructive alike to 
the body and the mind of man. The 
serpent is therefore doomed to perpetual 
contempt, and invested with some of the 
characteristics of Vritra, the snake- 
enemy of Indra. But V'ritra is strictly 
the biting snake of darkness; and it 
is scarcely necessary to say, that the 
Egyptian serpent is the result of tho same 
kind of metaphor which has given to the 
elephant the epithet of anguimanus. 
The phallic tree is also introduced into 
the narrative of the book of Grcnesis: 
but it is here called a tree not of life 
but of the knowledge of good and evil, 
that knowledge which dawns in the 
mmd with the first consciousness of 
difference between man and woman. 
In contrast with this tree of carnal 
indulgence tending to death is the tree 
of life, denoting the higher existence 
for which man was designed, and whidi 
would bring with it the happiness and 
the freedom of tho children of God. In 
the brazen serpent of the Pentateuch 
the two emblems of the cross and 
serpent, the quiescent and energising 
Phallos, are united. 



THE SiaiPENT AND THE CROSS. 


517 


gether profitable speculation. The analysis of language and 
aU that we know of the historical growth of ideas would 
prepare us for the developement of such a cultus. The con¬ 
dition of thought which led men to use the names applied 
first to the visible heaven or the sun as names for the 
Supreme G-od could not possibly make choice of any other 
emblems to denote the power which maintains and multiplies 
life. The cruder realism which suggested the image of the 
serpent* was in some degree refined in the symbol of the 
(stauros) tree, and the stake or cross of Osiris gradually 
assumed a form in which it became capable of denoting the 
nobler idea of generous self-denial. 

But the cultus with visible emblems would, whether with 
Semitic or with Aryan tribes, be but imperfectly developed 
without sacrifice; and although the blood of algiu victims 
might be poured out to appease the power which could 
restore as well as destroy life, still there remained obviously 
another sacrifice more in accordance with the origin of the 
symbols employed to denote that power. It was possible to 
invest with a religious character either the sensuality to 
which the Jewish or Phenician idolatry appealed, or the im¬ 
pulse which finds its complete developement in a rigorous 
asceticism. In the former shape the idea was realised in 
the rites of the Babylonian Mylitta, and in the vocation of 
the Hierodouloi of Greek and Hindu temples.** In the latter 
the sacrifice was consummated by a vow of virginity,® 
the Gerairai and Vestal Virgins of the Athenians and the 
Eomans became the type of the Catholic and Orthodox nun. 


' ‘ The learned and still living Mgr. 
Granme {TraiU du Saint Esprit) joins 
Cameranns in the belief that serpents 
bite women rather than men.' Burton, 
Tales of Indmn DevUry^ preface, p, xix. 
The facts already cited account for the 
superstition. 

* Herod, i. 199. The passage is 
translated by Mr, Bawlinson, Ancient 
Eastern Monarchies^ iii. 465. 

* In this case, they were devoted to 
the service of Sacti, the female power: 
ia the former they were the ministers 
of Aphrodite. That the 'institution of 
the virgin priestesses of Vesta and of 
the female devotees of Mylitta or Sacti 


had this origin, will probably be 
conceded by all. But the idea of 
virginity for men which has been de¬ 
veloped into Buddhist or Hebrew or 
Christian monachism must be traced to 
another source, and in my belief carries 
us back to that conviction of the utter 
corruption of matter which lies at the 
root of all the countless forms of the 
Manichean philosophy. Latin and 
Tentonic Christendom^ ch. iii. In the 
theory of monachism for Christian 
women this conviction is blended with 
the older sensuous ideas which are 
sometimes painfully prominent in 
language addressed to the spouses or 


CHAP. 

II. 


Sacrifices 
connected 
with this 
worship. 



118 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


Symbols 

•wealth. 


But the true mythology of the subject is connected rather 
- with the Toni than with the Linga. If the latter serves as 
f a sign of power, the former becomes the image of unbounded 
wealth and fertility. If the Linga is the sun-god in his 
majesty, the Toni is the earth who yields her fruit under his 
fertilising warmth; and it thus represents the sum of all 
potential existence. It is the ark which contains all the 
living creatures of the earth, while the sun is hidden behind 
the impenetrable rain clouds; it is the Argo, which shelters 
all the Achaian chieftains through the weary darkness of 
their search for the Golden Meece. In this form the emblem 
at once exhibits mysterious properties akin to those of the 
Linga, and passes into a legion of shapes, aU closely resem¬ 
bling the original form, all possessing in greater or less 
degree a talismanic power, but all manifesting the presence 
of the essential idea of boundless fertility which the symbol 
was specially adopted to denote. The Argo itself is divine. 
It was the work of a being akin to, if not identical with, 
Argos Panoptes, the all-seeing, who guards the heifer 16. In 
its prow Ath6n6, the dawn-goddess, herself places a piece 
of wood^ from'the speaking oaks of Dodona, and the ship is 
thus endowed with the power of warning and guiding the 
chieftains who form its crew. This mystic vessel reappears 
in the shell of Aphrodite, and in the ship borne in solemn 
procession to the Parthenon on the great Panathenaic 
festival,’^ as the phallos was carried before the god in the 
great feasts of Dionysos. Over this ship floated the saffron- 
coloured robe woven for it by the hands of Athenian maidens, 
as the women in the temple at Jerusalem wove hangings for 
the Ashera of Baal. This ship again is the bark or boat- 

Lrides of the Lamh. The idea of nence in the Phrygian or Eastern my- 
monachism or asceticism for woman thology. < Nun erzahlt Arnobius, Oy- 
probahly never entered the head of bele habe mit ihrem Kleide den abge- 
Hindu or Buddhists theologians and schnittenen Phallus des Attes bed^t, 
philosophers ein Gebrauch, weleher in den Mysterien 

^ Seemingly the Phallos, which gave der Isis gleichfalls vorkam, denn zu 
her title of Pallas. In the issue this Byblos wurde im Tempel der Baaltis 
piece of wood, or pole, is as fatal to lason (Gottermutter) das heilige Holz 
as the Stauros to Osins, or the Mistletoe palus) von der Isis mit Leinwand be- 
to Baldur, deckt.— Plut. de Is. c. 16. Nun wirdauch 

2 The connexion of the rohe or veil die Bibelstelle {Ezech. xvi. 17) klar,’— 
with the Phallic emblem is brought out, Nork, s. v. ‘ Attes.’ 
as we might expect, with great promi- 



THE SHIP OF ISIS. 


119 


-shaped vessel of which Tacitas speaks as the symbol em¬ 
ployed by the Suevi in the worship of Isis. Whether this 
goddess is to be identified with the Teutonic Ziza worshipped 
in the country about Augsburg is an indifferent matter. It 
is more likely that the name is given from a resemblance of 
attributes, as he calls Wuotan Mercury and Thor Mars. 
But it is strange that Tacitus should have satisfied himself 
with the remark, that the sign pointed simply to a foreign 
cultus brought across the sea, when not only was the same 
symbol used in the Athenian processions of his own day, but 
the voyage of Isis was mai’ked in the Eoman rustic calendar 
on the 5 th of March. ^ This ship of Isis was, however, 
nothing more nor less than the vehicle of the earth-goddess 
Herth or Aerth, whose sacred island Tacitus mentions in the 
same treatise.^ Here too, as with the Ashera at Jerusalem 
and the ship of Ath^n4, the vehicle was carefully covered 
with a robe which no profane hand might touch, and carried 
in procession drawn by cows.® 


J The parallelism of these myths was 
pointed out with singular accuracy by 
Mr. Richard Price in his introduction 
to Warton’s History of English Eoeiry 
It IS impossible for any student of 
comparative mythology to read this 
remarkable treatise, written some forty 
years ago, without feeling that, hero as 
clsowhoro, other men have laboured, and 
we enter into their labours. It deserves 
in every way to be republished sepa¬ 
rately, as being the work of a critic far 
too keen-sighted and judicious to pro¬ 
duce a book of which tho interost and 
the value may soon pass away. 

* Mr. G-ould having quoted the 
passage from Appuleius in which the 
goddess says, that yearly her priests 
•dedicate to her a new ship laden with 
the firstfruits of spring, adds that the 
carrying in procession of ships, m 
which the Virgin Mary takes the place 
of Aphrodit4 or Astart4, has not yet 
wholly gone out of use, and notices the 
prohibitions issued at different times 
against the canying about of ploughs 
and ships on Shrove Tuesday or other 
•days. Curious Myths^ ii. 68, 69. The 
plough IS only one of the many forms 
■of the Phallos, and carries us at once 
•to the metaphor of .^chylos, Sepi&m c. 


Th. 754, and of Sophokles, 0, T, 1267, 
and to the gardens of Ad6nis. The 
mode in which the advent of this ship 
was greeted may be seen in a passage 
quoted at length by Grimm (D M 237) 
from the chronicle of Rudolph of St 
Trudo, given in the Spicilegium of 
B’Achory. Tho rites wore Bacchic 
throughout, and at the end the writer 
adds ‘ quse tune videres agere, nostrum 
est taccre et deflere, quibiis modo 
contingit graviter luere/ Not less 
significant as to the meaning of the 
plough carried about after a like sort, is 
the statement of another chronicler, 

* Mos erat antiquitus Lipsise ut Libera- 
libus (um Bacchusfest, d. i. Fassnachtsl 
personati juvenes per vicos oppidi 
aratrum circumducerent, puellas obvias 
per lasciviam ad illius jugum aecedere 
etiam repugnantes cogerent, hoc veluti 
ludicro pcenam expetentes ab iis quae in- 
nuptae ad eum usque diem mansissent.’ 
—Grimm, %b, 243. 

* These ships, chests, or boats are 
the Kl<rroii putFriKal of the Mysteries, and 
we see them in the chest or coffin of 
Osiris, * das Grab des verstorbenen 
Jabrgotts, der aber in der Idee nur 
stirbt, well er vom Todo wieder aufer- 
steht,’ in the Korykian cave in which 


CHAP, 

n. 



J20 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK Scarcely altered, this vessel reappears in tlie Lotos of 
Hindu and Egyptian mytliology, tlie symbol of tbe earth.* 

The Lotos, and its fecundation. In this form it is the seat of the child 
Harpichruti (Harpokrates) and of Bhay^ana or Mahakali^ 
the sanguinary deity of later Hindu worship and the patron 
goddess of the Thugs. The eating of the lotos is thus the 
eating of the forbidden fruit, and the Lotophagoi of the 
Odyssey are an example of unrestrained sensuality, and a 
warning to all who care for higher things not to imitate 
their selfish pleasures, and so forget their children and their 
home.^ 

Gohiets In the folk-lore of the Dcccan the vessel is represented by 

and lioms. milkwoman, the kindly Dem^t^r, into which 

the beautiful Sury4 Bai falls in the form of a mango when 
the fruit is ripe. As a cup, this sign reappears in a vast 
number of myths. It is the golden cup into which Helios 
sinks when his journey is done. It is the crater or mixing 
bowl in which the Platonists spoke of the Demiourgos as 
mingling the materials of the future Eosmos. It is the 
horn of Amaltheia, the nurse of Zeus, who gave to it the 
power of supplying to its possessor all that he could desire 
to have. This horn reappears in the myths of Bran, and 
Ceridwen, and Huon of Bordeaux, to whom Oberon gives a 
horn which yields the costliest wine in the hands of a good 
man only.^ The talismanic power of this horn is still further 
shown in the ^Drose romance of Tristram, when the liquor is 
dashed over the lips of any guilty person who ventures to 
lift it to his mouth, and in the goblet of Tegan Euroron, the 
wife of Caradoc of the strong arm.® It is seen again in the 


Zeus is bound till Hermes (the breath 
of life) comes to rescue him, and in the 
boats in which the bodies of Elaine and 
Arthur are laid in the more modern 
romance. Nork, s. v. ‘Arche.’ 

' This prohibition to eat the lotus, 
suggests a comparison with the so-called 
Pythagorean precept to abstain from 
beans. Whether the word K-6afios belong 
to the same root which has yielded K^ca, 
kv4(u, K<)T}{xa, Kv/ia, or not, the word 
<l>d(m\os shows clearly enough how 
readily the shape of the bean brought 
up the idea of a boat, or a boat-shaped 
vessel. Nor can we well omit to note 


the prohibition, also attributed to Py¬ 
thagoras, to abstain from fish, in con¬ 
nexion with the purpose especially as¬ 
cribed to him, and the ascetic discipline 
which he is said to have established. 
It will scarcely be maintained that thesfr 
precepts, in a peculiarly esoteric system, 
are to be interpreted literally. The* 
technical meanings acquired by tihe 
words Kiafxos and seem to point 

in the same direction. 

* Price, Introd. to WarMs SkC 
Eng. I^oetry, 66. 

* lb. 59. This goblet reappears in 
the Scottish ballad of the Luck or 



CUPS AND MIRBOES. 


inexianstible table of tlie EtMopians, in the dish, of Ehyd- 
dercL. tbe Scholar;, in the basket of Gwyddno^ in which food 
designed for one becomes an ample supply for a hundred; 
in the table round which Arthur and his peers hold high 
revelry; in the wishing-quem of Frodi;^ in the lamp of 
AUah-ud-deen, which does the bidding of its owner through 
the Jin who is its servant; in the purse of Bedreddin Hassan, 
which the fairy always keeps filled in spite of his wasteful¬ 
ness ; in the wonderful well of Apoll6n Thyrxis in Lykia,^ 
which reveals all secrets to those who look into it. This 
mysterious mirror is the glass vessel of Agrippa, and of the 
cruel stepmother in the German tale of Little Snow-white, 
who, like Brynhild, lies in a death-like sleep, guarded under 
a case of ice by dwarfs until the piece of poisoned apple 
falls from between her lips; and we see it again in the cups 
of Ehea and D^mSt^r, the milkwoman or the gardener’s wife 
of Hindu folk-lore, and in the modios of Serapis. It becomes 
tjie receptacle of occult knowledge. Before the last desperate 
struggle with the Spartans, Aristomenes buried in the most 
secret nook of moxmt Ithom^ a treasure which, if guarded 
carefully, would insure the restoration of Mess^n^. When 
the battle of Leuktra justified the hopes of Aristomenes, the 
Argive Epiteles saw a vision which bade him recover the old 
woman who was well nigh at her last gasp beneath the sods 
of Ithomfi. His search was rewarded by the discovery of a 
water-jar, in which was contained a plate of the finest tin. 
On this plate were inscribed the mystic rites for the worship 


liidenliall. When it was seized by ono 
of tbe family of Musmve, the faiiy 
train vanished, crying ^oud, 

* If this glass do break or fall, 
Farewell the luck of EdenhaD.’ 

The goblet, it is said, narrowly escaped 
being broken, when it fell from the 
hands of the Duke of Wharton. Of 
course it was caught in its fall by his 
butler, and the old idea of its inherent 
fertility remained in the fancy that * the 
lees of wine are still apparent at the 
bottom/—Scott, Border Minstrdsy, ii. 
277. 

^ * When Fr6di, the Norse king, pro¬ 
claimed his peace, he set two women 
slaves to grind gold, peace, and pros- 


peri^ from the wonderful quern, allow¬ 
ing them no sleep longer than while the 
cuckoo was silent. At length they 
ground a great army against Fr6di, and 
a sea king slew him, carrying off great 
booty, and with it the quern and the 
two slaves. These were now made to 
grind white salt in the ships, till they 
sank in Pentland Firth. There is ever 
since a whirlpool where the sea falls 
into the quern’s eye. As the quern 
roars, so does the sea roar, and thus it 
was that the sea first became salt.’— 
Thorpe, Translation of Smnunds Edda, 
ii. 150. See also the story ‘Why the 
Sea is SalV in Dasent’s Norse Tales. 

® Pans. vii. 21, 6. 


12t 

CHAP. 

n. 



122 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAIST NATIOITS. 


BOOK 
- IL 


of tlie great gods.^ The same wonderful ewer or goblet of 
the sun was bestowed in the Persian legend on Jemshid, and 
explained the glories of his magnificent reign. The same 
vessel is the divining cup of Joseph; ^ and in late traditions it 
reappears in the tale which relates how Eehoboam inclosed 
the book containing his father’s supernatural knowledge in 
an ivory ewer and placed it in his tomb. The fortunes of 
this vessel are related by Flegetanis, who is said to have traced 
up his genealogy on the mother’s side to Solomon 5 and Mr. 
Price ^ has remarked that it will be ^no matter of surprise to 
those who remember the talismanic effect of a name in the 
general history of fiction, that a descendant of this distin¬ 
guished sovereign should be found to write its history, or 
that another Joseph should be made the instrument of con¬ 
veying it to the kingdoms of Western Europe/ This mystic 
vessel, the Sangreal of Arthurian legend, is at once a store¬ 
house of food as inexhaustible as the table of the Ethiopians, 
and a talismanic test as effectual as the goblets of Oberon 
and Tristram. The good Joseph of Arimathsca, who had 
gathered up in it the drops of blood which fell from the side 
of Jesus when pierced by the centurion’s spear, was nourished 
by it alone through his weary imprisonment of two and forty 
years 5 and when at length, having either been brought by 
him to Britain, or preserved in heaven, it was carried by 
angels to the pure Titurel and shrined in a magnificent 
temple, it supplied to its worshippers the most delicious food, 


' Pans IV 20, 26. With this may 
he compared the legend of the great 
wizard Michael Scott. In this case the 
Mighty Booh is found not in an ewer, 
but in the hand of the magician. Still 
the boat-shaped vessel is not wanting. 
The magic lamp (it is a lamp in the 
story of Allah-ud-deen) is at his Imee, 
and as the sepulchre is opened, the 
light bursting forth, 

Streamed upward to the chancel roof, 
And through the galleries far aloof 
No earthly flame blazed e’er so bright, 
It shone like heaven’s own blessed light. 

Scott, Lay of the Last Minstrel, li. 18. 

® The same vessel in Taliesin imparts 
to its possessor the wisdom of lamos. 
It healed all the evils to which flesh is 


heir, and even raised the dead It was 
m fact the counterpart of the Sangreal, 
The cruder form of the myth is seen in 
the legend of the Caldron of Ceridwen, 
the Keltic D4m4t4r. This atoiy is given 
by Mr. Gould {Curwus MythSy ii. 335), 
who adds that ‘ this vessel of the liquor 
of wisdom had a prominent place in 
British mythology.’ Sir Walter Scott 
remarks, that in many Scottish legends 
a drinking horn will prove a cornu¬ 
copia of good fortune to any one who 
can snatch it from the fairies and beat 
it across a running stream As an 
emblem this cup is combined with the 
serpent in the representations of St. 
John 

* Introd. to Warton's Exst. of Ena, 
Loetfy. 



THE SANGHEAL. 


123 


•and preserved item in perpetual youtli. As sucla, it differs CHAP, 
in no way from the horn of Amaltheia, or any other of the . 
oval vessels which can be traced back to the emblem of the 
Hindu Sacti. We should be prepared, therefore, to find in 
the many forms assumed by the Arthurian myth some traces 
of its connexion with the symbol of the fecundating power in 
nature; nor is this expectation disappointed. The symbol 
of the sun has already appeai'ed as a lance, spear, or trident 
in the myths of Abaris and Poseidon; and in this form it 
is seen again in the story of the Holy Grail, when Sir Galahad 
is to depart with it from the Logrian land. As with his com- 
' rades he sups in the palace of King Pelles, he sees a great 
light, in which he beheld four angels supporting an aged 
man clad in pontifical garb, whom they placed before a table 
on which lay the Sangreal. ‘ This aged prelate was Joseph 
of Arimathaea, the first bishop of Christendom.’^ Then the 
other angels appeared bearing candles and a spear, from 
which fell drops of blood, and these drops were collected by 
angels in a box. Then the angels set the candles upon the 
table, and “ the fourth set the holy speare even upright upon 
the vessel,” as represented on an ancient churchyard crucifix, 
in rude sculpture, at Sancreed in Cornwall.’' This mysterious 
spear is constantly seen throughout the legend. When Sir 
Bors had seen the Sangreal in the house of Pelles, he was 
led into a fair chamber, where he laid himself in full armour 
on the bed. ^ And right as he saw come in a light that he 
might wel see a speare groat and long which come straight 
upon him point-long.’^ Indeed the whole myth exhibits 
that unconscious repetition and reproduction of the same 
forms and incidents which is the special characteristic of the 
Greek dynastic legends. Perceval, in the episode of Pecheur, 
the Pisher-king, answers to Sir Galahad in the quest of the 
Sangreal. In both cases the work can be done only by a 
pure-minded knight, and Perceval as well as Galahad goes in 
search of a goblet, which has been stolen from the king’s 
table. The sick king, whom he finds lying on his couch, 
has been wounded while trying to mend a sword broken 

' Mr. Gould, from whom these words emblem .—Curious Myths, ii 348. 
are quoted, gives a drawing of this * Morte d^Arihurc. Gould, ih. 340. 



124 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Gradual] 
refinement 
of the 
mytL 


[ 

by bis enemy Pertinax, and Perceval alone can make it 
sound, as Theseus only can recover the sword and sandals 
of his father Aigeus. The title of the Pisher-king suggests 
a comparison with that of BheM in the Hindu legend and 
the Prog-prince of the German story. The latter denotes the 
sun as it rests upon the water; and as BheM cannot reappear 
in her former beauty until the night is spent, so the Pisher- 
king cannot regain his health until Pertinax has been slain. 
He is avenged by Perceval, who bears away the holy vessel 
and the bleeding lance as the reward of his prowess; An 
earlier heathen version of this story is found in the legend 
of Pheredur, in which the boat-shaped vessel appears with 
the head of a man swimming in blood—a form which carries 
us to the repulsive Maha Kali of later Hindu mythology. 

In the myth of Erichthonios we have a crucial instance 
of a coarse and unseemly story produced by translating into 
the language of human life phrases which described most 
innocently and most vividly some phenomena of nature. In 
the myth of the Saiigreal we see in the fullest degree the 
working of the opposite principle. Por those who first 
sought to frame for themselves some idea of the great 
mystery of their existence, and who thought that they had 
found it in the visible media of reproduction, there was 
doubtless far less of a degrading influence in the cultus of 
the signs of the male and female powers and the exhibition 
of their symbols than we might be disposed to imagine. But 
that the developement of the idea might lead to the most 
wretched results, there could be no question. No degrada¬ 
tion could well be greater than that of the throngs who 
hurried to the temples of the Babylonian Mylitta. But we 
have seen the myth, starting from its ci'ude and undisguised 
forms, assume the more harmless shape of goblets or horns 
of plenty and fertility, of rings and crosses, of rods and 
spears, of mirrors and lamps. It has brought before us the 
mysterious ships endowed with the powers of thought and 
speech, beautiful cups in which the wearied sun sinks to 
rest, the staff of wealth and plenty with which Hermes 
guides the cattle of Helios across the blue pastures of heaven, 
the cup of DemSt^r into which the ripe fruit casts itself by 



MYSTERIES. 


125 


im irresistible impulse. We have seen the symbols assume 
the character of talismanic tests, by which the refreshing 
draught is dashed from the lips of the guilty; and, finally, in 
the exquisite legend of the Sangreal the symbols have be¬ 
come a sacred thing, which only the pure in heart may see 
and touch. To Lancelot who tempts Guenevere to be faith¬ 
less to Arthur, as Helen was unfaithful to Menelaos, it 
either remains invisible, or is seen only to leave him stretched 
senseless on the earth for his presumption. The myth which 
corrupted the worshippers of Tainmuz in the Jewish temple 
has supplied the beautiful picture of unselfish devotion 
which sheds a marvellous glory on the career of the pure 
Sir Galahad.^ 

IsTo idea is, however, more prominent in most of the shapes 
which the myths connected with the Linga and Toni have 
assumed than that of a mysterious knowledge; nor has any 
feature in the ancient world attracted more attention than 
the great Mysteries in which a knowledge hidden from the 
profane was supposed to be imparted to the initiated. Is 
the knowledge to which the myths refer the sum and sub¬ 
stance of the knowledge conveyed in the mysteries ? That 
it has been and is so throughout India, no one probably 
will deny or dispute. The wailing of the Hebrew women at 
the death of Tammuz, the crucifixion and resurrection of 
Osiris, the adoration of the Babylonian Mylitta, the Sacti 
ministers of Hindu temples, the cross and crescent of Isis, 
the rites of the Jewish altar of Baal-Peor, wholly preclude 
all doubt of the real nature of the great festivals and mys¬ 
teries of Phenicians, Jews, Assyrians, Egyptians, and Hindus. 
Have we any reason for supposing that the case was essentially 
different in more western countries, and that the mysteries of 

* In the Arabian story the part of Boots or Cinderella. The treasure is 
Sir Galahad is played by Allah-ud-dcen, a lamp in which burns a liquid which 
who is told by the magician that no one is not oil; with the possession of it 
in the whole world bnt ho can be per- are hound up wealth, happiness, and 
mittcd to touch or lift up the stone and splendour- it is, in short, the Sangreal. 
go beneath it. The Eastern story- I'he ring which the magician places on 
tellers were not reiy careful about the his finger is the ring of Gyges. Plato, 
consistency of their legends. The PoliL 359. If it does not make himself 
magician, it is true, singles out the boy invisible, the visibility of the minister 
for his * simplicity and artlessness; * of the ring depends upon the way in 
but the portrait drawn of the child at which it is handled, this being in both 
the outset of the talo is rather that of stories the same. 


CHAP. 

II. 


Aryan and 

Semitic 

mysteries. 



126 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYA5 NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


tte Hellenic tribes were not substantially identical with 
. those of other Aryan and Semitic tribes ? Bishop Thirlwall 
is contented to express a doubt whether the Greek mysteries- 
were ever used ^ for the exposition of theological doctrines 
differing from the popular creed/ Mr. Grote’s conclusion 
is more definite. In his judgment it is to the last degree 
improbable that ^ any recondite doctrine, religious or philo¬ 
sophical, was attached to the mysteries, or contained in the 
holy stories ’ of any priesthood of the ancient world. If by 
this recondite teaching be meant doctrines relating to the 
nature of God and the Divine government of the world, their 
judgments may perhaps be in accordance with fact; but it 
can scarcely be denied that the thoughts aroused by the 
recognition of the difference between man and woman are 
among the most mysterious stirrings of the human heart, 
and that a philosophy which professed to reconcile the natu¬ 
ral impulses of the worshippers with the sense of right and 
duty would carry with it a strange and almost irresistible fas¬ 
cination. The Corinthian Aphrodite had her Hierodouloi, 
the pure Gerairai ministered to the goddess of the Parthenon, 
and the altar of the Latin Yesta was tended by her chosen 
virgins. A system which could justify these inconsistencies 
in the eyes of the initiated, and lead them to discern different 
forms of the same sacrifice in the purity of the one and the 
abandonment of the other, might well be said to be based on 
a recondite, though not a wholesome, doctrine. IsTor, indeed, 
is it supposed that the character of the Hellenic mysteriee 
was less dramatic than those of Egypt or Hindustan. Every 
act of the great Eleusinian festival reproduced the incidents 
of the myth of D^met^r, and the processions of Athen^ and 
Dionysos exhibited precisely the same symbols which marked 
the worship of Vishnu and Sacti, of the Egyptian Isis and 
the Teutonic Hertha. The substantial identity of the rites 
justifies the inference of a substantial identity of doctrines.^. 

^ * In ^ den Elensinischen Mysterien Dies lasst voraussetzen, dass desgleichen 
wurde ein Phallus entblosst nnd den in den Eleusinien wiriiioli geschali, was 
Eingeweihten gezeigt (Tert. ad Valent, mann also rcb lepck Z^iKvvffBai nannte. 
p 289): nnd Demeter wird .dadurch, Vgl. Lobek. Aglaoph. p. 49.’—>Nork, 
dass Banbo ihre ktgXs entblosst, zur iv. 53. The form of dismissal at the 
Heiterkeit gestimmt. Clem. Al. Protr. Eleusinian mysteries, Khy^ has 

p. 16; Arnob. adv. Gent, v. p 218. been identified by some with the 



THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES. 


12T 


It is no accident wliich has given to Iswara Arghanantha, 
the Hindu Dionysos, an epithet which makes him the lord 
of that divine ship which bore the Achaian warriors from 
the land of darkness to the land of the morning. The testi¬ 
mony of Theodoret, Arnobios, and Clement of Alexandria, 
that an emblem similar to the Yoni was worshipped in the 
mysteries of Eleusis needs no confirmation, when we re¬ 
member that the same emblem was openly carried in pro¬ 
cession at Athens. The vases in the Hamiltonian collection 
at the British Museum leave us as little in doubt that the 
purification of women in the Hellenic mysteries agreed closely 
with that of the Sacti in the mysteries of the Hindus. That 
ornaments in the shape of a vesica have been popular in all 
countries as preservatives against dangers, and especially 
from evil spirits, can as little be questioned as the fact that 
they still retain some measure of their ancient popularity in 
England, where horse-shoes are nailed to walls as a safe¬ 
guard against unknown perils, where a shoe is thrown by 
way of good-luck after newly married couples, and where 
the villagers have not yet ceased to dance round the Maypole 
on the green. 

It may be confidently said that the facts now stated 
furnish a clue which will explain all the phenomena of tree 
and serpent worship. The whole question is indeed one of 
fact, and it is useless to build on hypothesis. If there is 
any one point more certain than another, it is that, wherever 
tree and serpent worship has been found, the cultus of the 
PhaUos and the Ship, of the Linga and the Toni, in con¬ 
nection with the worship of the sun, has been found also. It 
is impossible to dispute the fact; and no explanation can be 
accepted for one part of the cultus which fails to explain the 
other. It is unnecessary, therefore, to analyse theories which 
profess to see in it the worship of the creeping brute or the 
wide-branched tree. A religion based on the worship of the 
venomous reptile must have been a religion of terror; in the 
earliest glimpses which we have of it, the serpent is a symbol 
of life and of love. Nor is the Phallic cultus in any respect a 


CHAP. 

n. 


Real 

meaning of 
tree and 
serpent 
■worship. 


* Cansha Om Pacsha,’ with which the Brahmans close their religious services.— 
Nork, i. vii. 



128 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


cultiis of the fall-grown and branching tree. In its earliest 
form the symbol is everywhere a mere stanros, or pole; and 
although this stock or rod budded in the shape of the thyrsos 
and the shepherd’s staff, yet even in its latest developements 
the worship is confined to small bushes and shrubs and 
diminutive plants of a particular kind. Nor is it possible 
again to dispute the fact, that every nation at some stage or 
other of its history has attached to this cultus precisely that 
meaning which the Brahman now attaches to the Linga and 
the Yoni. That the Jews clung to it in this special sense 
with vehement tenacity is the bitter complaint of the pro¬ 
phets ; and the crucified serpent, adored for its healing 
powers, stood untouched in the temple until it was removed 
and destroyed by Hezekiah. This worship of serpents ^ void 
of reason,’ condemned in the Wisdom of Solomon, probably 
survived even the Babylonish captivity. Certainly it was 
adopted by the Christians who were known as Ophites, 
Gnostics, and Nicolaitans. In Athenian mythology the 
serpent and the tree are singularly prominent. Kekrops, 
Erechtheus, and Erichthonios, are each and all serpentine 
in the lower portion of their bodies. The sacred snake of 
AtMn^ had its abode in the AkropoJis, and her olive-tree 
secured for her the victory in her rivalry with Poseidon. 
The health-giving serpent lay at the feet of AsM^pios, and 
snakes were fed in his temple at Epidauros and elsewhere.^ 
That the ideas of mere terror and death, suggested by the 
venomous or the crushing reptile, could never have given 


^ It is, in fact, the healer, under the 
many names, lason, lasion, &c., which 
bear the equivocal meaning of saving or 
destroying life, as they are referred to 
poison, or Idofiai, to heal. It is the 
means by which the waste caused by 
death is repaired. ‘ Daher die Phallus- 
sehlange, auch die Heilsclilange *Ayado- 
daifiCDv. daher der mit Schlangen um- 
gurtete Phallusstab in der Hand des 
Hermes ldv(pa\\iK6sf und des Aesculap, 
dessen weibliche Hiilfte, Hygiea ihm 
die Schale entgegen tragt, welche ein 
Symbol des Mntterbeckens ist.’—Nork, 
s. V. ‘ Arzt.* This shell is the shell of 
Aphrodite 

It is scarcely necessary to add that 


serpents played a prominent part in the 
rites of Zeus Sabazios, whose worship 
was practically identical with that of 
the Syrian Tammuz or Adonis. The 
epithet Sabazios, which, like the words 
Adonai and Melkarth, was imported 
into Greek mythology, is applied not 
less to Bionysos than to Zeus, but the 
stories told of this deity remained vague 
and shadowy. Sometimes he is a son 
of Zeus and Persephon^, and is nursed 
by the nymph Nyssa, whose name re¬ 
appears in Dionysos sometimes Dio¬ 
nysos is Jiimself the father of Sabazios, 
who is, again, a child also of Kabeiros 
or of Kronos. 



THE BULL AND THE SERPENT. 


129 


way tlius completely before those of life, healing, and safety, 
is obvious enough ; and the latter ideas alone are associated 
with the serpent as the object of adoration. The deadly 
beast always was, and has always remained, the object of 
the horror and loathing which is expressed for Ahi, the 
choking and throttling snake, the Vritra whom Indra smites 
with his unerring lance, the dreadful Azidahaka of the 
Avesta, the Zohak or biter of modern Persian mythology, 
the serpents whom Herakles strangles in liis cradle, the 
Python, or Pafnir, or Grendel, or Sphinx, whom Phoibos, or 
Sigurd, or Beowulf, or Oidipous, smite and slay. That the 
worship of the serpent has nothing to do with these evil 
beasts is abundantly clear from all the Phallic monuments 
of the East or West. In the topes of Sanchi and Amravati 
the disks which represent the Toni predominate in every 
part of the design ; the emblem is worn with unmistakeable 
distinctness by every female figure carved within these disks, 
while above the multitude are seen, on many of the disks, a 
group of women with their hands resting on the Linga, 
which they uphold. It may, indeed, be possible to trace out 
the association which connects the Linga with the buU in 
Sivaism, as denoting more particularly the male power, 
while the serpent in Jainaism and Vishnavism is found with 
the female emblem the Toni. So again in Egypt, some may 
discern in the bull Apis or Mnevis the predominance of the 
male idea in that country, while in Assyria or Palestine the 
serpent or Agathos Daimon is connected with the altar of 
Baal. These are really questions of no moment. The his¬ 
torical inquiry is ended when the origin of the emblems has 
been determined. 

Por the student who is willing to be taught by the facts 
which he regards as ascertained, this chapter in the history 
of human thought will involve no more perplexity than the 
fact that there was a time when human speech had none but 
sensuous words, and mankind, apparently, none but sensuous 
ideas. If from these sensuous words have been evolved terms 
capable of expressing the highest conceptions to which the 
human mind has yet risen, he may be well content to accept 
the condition of thought which fastened on the processes of 

VOL. II. K 


CHAP, 

n. 


The edu¬ 
cation of 
man. 



130 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE AEYAH NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


Visli^Ti as 
Krishna. 


Parentage 

ofEiishna. 


natural reproduction as a necessary stage in the education of 
man. If our limbs are still sbacHed and our inoTements 
hindered by ideas wbicli have their root in the sensuousness 
of the ancient language, we shall do well to remember that 
a real progress for mankind might in no other way have 
been possible. If the images of outward and earthly objects 
have been made the means of filliug human hearts and 
■miTirlg with the keenest yearnings for Divine truth, beauty, 
and love, the work done has been the work of God. 

Section XIIL—THE STHST-GODS OF LATEE HINDU 
MYTHOLOGY. 

If it be urged that the attribution to Krishna of qualities 
or powers belonging to other deities is a mere device by 
which his devotees sought to supersede the more ancient 
gods, the answer must be that nothing is done in his case 
which has not been done in the case of almost every other 
member of the great company of the gods, and that the sys¬ 
tematic adoption of this method is itself conclusive proof of 
the looseness and flexibility of the materials of which the 
cumbrous mythology of the Hindu epic poems is composed. 
As being Yishnu, Krishna performs aU the feats of that god. 

' And thou, Krishna, of the T&dava race, having become 
the son of Aditi and being called Vishnu, the younger 
brother of Ihdra, the all-pervading, becoming a child, and 
vexer of thy foes, hast by thy energy traversed the sky, the 
atmosphere, and the earth in three strides.’* 

He is thus also identifled with Hari or the dwarf Yishnu, 
a myth which carries us to that of the child Hermes as well 
as to the story of the limping Hephaistos. As the son of 
Nanda, the bull, he is Govinda, a name which gave rise in 
times later than those of the Mah^bh^ata to the stories of 
his life with the cowherds and his dalliance with their wives; 
but in the MahS,bh^ata he is already the protector of cUttll, 
and like HeraJdes sla]rs the bull which ravaged the herds.® 
His name Krishna, again, is Connected with another parent¬ 
age, which makes him the progeny of the black bn.ir of Hari, 

^ Muir, Texts, part ir. p. 118. * iJ. 206. 



KRISHNA, EUDRA, AND VISHNU. 

the dwarf Vishnu.* But he is also Hari and Hari 

is Narayana, ‘the god who transcends all, the minutest of 
the minute, the vastest of the vast, the greatest of the great.’ 
In short, the interchange or contradiction is undisguised, for 
he is the soul of all, the omniscient, the aU, the all-know¬ 
ing, the producer of all, the god whom the goddess Devaki 
hore to Vishnu.* Elsewhere Krishna speaks of himself as 
the maher of the Eudras and the Vasus, as both the priest 
and the victim, and adds, 

‘ Know that Dharma (righteousness) is my beloved first¬ 
born mental son, whose nature is to have compassion on all 
creatures. In his character I exist among men, both pre¬ 
sent and past, passing through many varieties of mundane 
existence. I am Vishnu, Brahma, Indra, and the source as 
well as the destruction of things, the creator and the anni- 
hilator of the whole aggregate of existences. While all 
men live in unrighteousness, I, the unfailing, build up the 
bulwark of righteousness, as the ages pass away.’® As such 
he is not generated by a father. He is the unborn. 

The character of Eudra, thus said to be sprung from 
Krishna, is not more definite. As so produced, he is Time, 
and is declared by his father to be the offspring of his 
anger.'* But in the character of MahMeva, Eudra is wor¬ 
shipped by Bjrishna, and the necessary explanation is that 
in so adoring him Krishna was only worshipping himself.® 
Eudra, however, is also Karayana, and Siva the destroyer. 
There is no difference between Siva who exists in the form 
of Vishnu, and Vishnu who exists in the form of Siva, just 
as in the form of Hari and Hara Vishnu and MahSdeva are 
combined. ‘ He who is Vishnu is Eudra; he who is Eudra 
is PitAmaha (Brahma, the great father) j the substance is 
one, the gods are three, Eudra, Vishnu and PiMmaha. . , 
Just as water thrown into water can be nothing else than 
water, so Vishnu entering into Eudra must possess the 
nature of Eudra. And just as fire entering into fire can be 
nothing else but fire, so Eudra entering into Vishnu must 
possess the nature of Vishnu. Eudra should be understood to 

1 Muir, Sanshni Texts^ pt» iv* p. 221. 

* Ib, 235. ih. 205. 

K 2 


131 

CHAP. 

n. 


Krishna 

andRndxa. 


= Ib. 224. 
“ a. 225. 



132 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

BOON possess the nature of fire : Vishnu is declared to possess the 
■ . nature of Soma (the Moon); and the world, moveable and 

immoveable, possesses the nature of Agni and Soma.^ ^ 

Vjsbnii It is the same with Eama, who is sometimes produced 
and Rama. Yishnu^s virile power, and sometimes 

addressed by Brahma as ^the source' of being and cause of 
destruction, Upendra and Mahendra, the younger and the 
elder Indra.^ ^ He is Skambha, the supporter, and Trivik- 
rama, the god of three strides.® But the story of his wife* 
Sita who is stolen away and recovered by Eama after the 
slaughter of Savana runs parallel with that of SaramSi and 
Pani, of Paris and Helen. 

Hindu This cumbrous mysticism leads us further and further 
mysticism, simpler conceptions of the oldest mythology, in‘ 

which Eudra is scarcely more than an epithet, applied some¬ 
times to Agni, sometimes to Mitra, Varuna, the Asvins, or 
the Maruts. 

‘ Thou, Agni, art Eudra, the deity of the great sky. Thou 
art the host of the Maruts. Thou art lord of the sacrificial 
food. Thou, who hast a pleasant abode, movest onwards 
with the ruddy winds.^^ 

It was in accordance with the general course of Hindu my¬ 
thology that the greatness of Eudra, who is sometimes regarded 
as self-existent, should be obscured by that of his children. 
Sk opposite conceptions, which exhibit Herakles in 

one aspect as a self-sacrificing and unselfish hero, in another 
as the sensual voluptuary, are brought before us with sin¬ 
gular prominence in the two aspects of Krishna’s character. 
The being who in the one is filled with divine wisdom and 
love, who offers up a sacrifice which he alone can make, who 
bids his friend Arjuna look upon him as sustaining all 
worlds by his inherent life, is in the other a being not much 
more lofty or pure than Aphrodite or Adonis. If, like the 
legends of the Egyptian Isis and Osiris, the myth seems to 
lend itself with singular exactness to an astronomical inter¬ 
pretation, it also links itself with many stories of other 
Aryan gods or heroes, and thus throws on them a light all 

> Muir, 8anshnt Texts, pt. iv p. 237. * Ib, 146, 250. 

* V. ii. 1, 6; Muir, Sanskrit Texts, pt. ir. p 257. 


* 3. 151. 



THE BIRTH OF KRISHNA. 




ifclie more valuable from the independent developements of 
these several myths from a common germ. Thus if Pausa- 
nias speaks of Dionysos Antheus, Krishna also is Vanamali, 
the flower-crowned. If Herakles smites Antaios, Krishna 
overthrows the giant Madhu, and the cruel tyrant of 
Madura. Like Oidipous^ Eomulus, Perseus, Cyrus and others, 
he is one of the fatal children, born to be the ruin of their 
sires; and the king of Madura, like Laios, is terrified by the 
prediction that his sister’s son shall deprive him of his 
throne and his life. It is but the myth of Kronos and Zeus 
in another form. The desire of Kamsa is to slay his sister, 
but her husband promises to deliver all her children into the 
hands of the tyrant. But although six infants were thus 
placed in his power and slain, he shut up the beautiful 
Devaki and her husband in a dungeon; and when the 
seventh child was about to be born, Devaki prays, like Ehea, 
that this one at least may be spared. In answer to her 
entreaty, Bhavani, who shields the newly-born children, 
comes to comfort her, and taking the babe brings it to the 
house of Nanda, to whom a son, Balarama, had been born. 
When Devaki was to become for the eighth time a mother, 
Kamsa was again eager to destroy the child. As the hour 
drew near, the mother became more beautiful, her form 
more brilliant, while the dungeon was filled with a heavenly 
light as when Zeus came to Dana^ in a golden shower, and 
the air was filled with a heavenly harmony as the chorus of 
the gods, with Brahma and Siva at their head, poured forth 
their gladness in song.' All these marvels (which the Bha- 
gavata Purana assigns to the birth of the child) are reported 
to Kamsa by the warders, and his jealousy and fear are 

cities, villages, hamlets, and towns; all 
the fires, waters, and -winds; the stars, 
astensms, and planets , the sky crowded 
with the variegated chariots of the gods, 
and ether that provides space for all 
substance; the several spheres of earth, 
sky, and heaven, of saints, sages, 
ascetics, and of Brahma; the whole egg 
of Brahma with all its population of 
gods, demons, spirits, snake-gods, fiends, 
ghosts and imps, men and brutes, and 
whatever creatures have life, comprised 
in him who is their eternal lord and 


^ This song would of itself suffice to 
prove how thoroughly Krishna, like Dyu, 
Indra, Varuna, Agni, or any other 
names, denotes the mere conception of 
the One True God, who is but feebly 
shadowed forth under these titles and 
by the symbolism of these myths. ‘ As 
Aditi,’ say the gods to Devaki the 
mother of the unborn Krishna, ‘thou 
art tho parent of the gods; as Diti, 
thou art the mother of the Daityas, 
their foes. . . . The whole earth, deco¬ 
rated with oceans, rivers, continents, 


CHAR. 

II. 



134 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAH HATIONS. 


BOOK still more vehemently excited. But the fatal hour draws 
— nigh, and in a cave, like Zeus and Mithras, Erishna, as the 
incarnation of Vishnu, is horn with four arms and all the 
attributes of that god. ^ On the day of his birth the quarters 
of the horizon were irradiate with joy, as if more light were 
diffused over the whole earth. The virtuous experienced 
new delight; the strong winds were .hushed, and the rivers, 
glided tranquilly when Janarddana was about to be born. 
The seas with their melodious murmurings made the music, 
while the spirits and the nymphs of heaven danced and 
sang.’ ^ Bor a moment he takes away from the eyes of his. 
earthly parents the veil which prevents them from seeing 
things as they are, and they behold the deity in all his 
majesty. But the mists are again suffered to fall upon them, 
and they see only the helpless babe in his cradle. Then the- 
voice of an angel sounds in the father’s ears, bidding him take 
the child and go into Gokala, the land of cows, to the house 
of Nanda, where he should jSLud a new-born maiden. This 
child he must bring back, leaving Krishna in her place. 
This he is at once enabled to do, for the fetters fall from his. 
hands and the prison doors open of their own accord; and 
gmded by a dragon or snake, who here plays the part of the 
dragons or snakes in the myths of lamos or Medeia, he 
reaches the house of ITanda. Nanda himself is in pro- 
< found sleep, and his wife prostrate from pain when Krishna 
was left under their roof. As the husband of Devaki re¬ 
enters the prison, the doors close again and the chains, 
fasten themselves on his wrists, while the cry of the infaixt 
rouses the warders, who in their turn carry the tidings to 


tte object of all apprebonsion; whose 
real form, nature, names, and dimen¬ 
sions are not within human appre¬ 
hension,— are now with that Vishnu 
in thee Thou art Swaha; thou art 
Swadh&: thou art wisdom, ambrosia, 
light, and heaven. Thou hast de¬ 
scended upon earth for the preserva¬ 
tion of the world.’— Vi^hmc I^urana, 
H. H. Wilson, p. $01. The same idea 
animates much of the devotion ad¬ 
dressed to the Virgin Mary, as in the 
Litany of Loretto and in many among 
the authorised hymns of the Breviary. 

* Vishnu I^ranuy H. H. Wilson, 503. 


Milton was led into tho same strain of 
thought as he wrote his Christmas 
Hymn *— 

‘Peaceful was the night 
Wherein the Prince of Light 
His reign of peace upon the earthi 
began• 

The winds with wonder whist 
Smoothly the waters kissed, 

Whispering new joys to the mild 
Ocean, 

Who now hath quite forgot to rave, 
While birds of calm sit brooding on the- 
charmed wave.’ 



KRISHNA AND THE GOPIAS. 


135 


the king. At midnight Kamsa enters the dungeon, and 
Devaki entreats his mercy for the babe. She prays in vain; 
but before Kamsa can accomplish his will, the child slips 
from his grasp, and he hears the voice of Bhavani, telling 
him that his destroyer is born and has been placed beyond 
his reach. Mad with rage, the tyrant summons his council 
and asks what should be done. The answer is that, as they 
know not where the child is, he should order all the newly- 
bom infants or all children under two years to he slain. 
More assured than ever that his great enemy was his sister’s 
child, he sets everything in motion to insure his destruction. 
But the demon Putana, who assaults the child in his cradle, 
is dealt with as summarily as the dragons who seek to 
strangle the infant Herakles. This demon, finding Krishna 
asleep, took him up and gave him her breast to suck, the 
doom of all who do so suck being instant death; but Krishna 
strains it with such violence as to drain Putana of all life, 
—^a touch which recalls the myth of Herakles and H6r6 in 
connexion with the Milky Way.^ As Krishna grew up, he 
became the darling of the milk-maidens, in whom some have 
seen the stars of the morning sky,—an inference which 
seems to be here warranted by the myth that Krishna stole 
their milk, seemingly as the sun puts out the light of the 
stars; and this inference is strengthened by the story which 
connected the formation of the milky way with the nursing 
of Herakles by H^rS., When the maidens complained of the 
wrong, Krishna opened his mouth, and therein they saw 
revealed his full splendour. They now beheld him seated 
in the midst of all created things, receiving adoration from 
all. But from this glimpse of his real glory the legend 
returns to the myths told of swan-maidens and their lovers* 
In the nine days’ harvest feast of Bhavani (the nine days’ 
festival of D^mSt^r) the Gopias, each and all, pray to the 
goddess that they may become the brides of Krishna.^ 

^ See page 44. of the girls.* Thus, like Agni, Indra,. 

* This myth is in strict accordance and Yama, he is the husband of the 
with the old Vedic phrase addressed to wives, an expression which, in Professor 
the Sun as the horse: ‘ After thee is Max Muller’s opinion, was ^ probably 
the chariot; after thee, Arvan, the man; ‘ meant originally for the evening sun as. 

after thee the cows ; after thee, the host surrounded by the splendours of the 


CHAP. 

n. 



136. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARTAH I^ATIONS. 


HOOK 

n. 


As they bathe in a stream^ Erishna takes their clothes and 
refuses to surrender them unless each comes separately for 
her raiment. Thus the prayer is fulfilled, and Krishna, 
playing on his flute among the Gopias, becomes the Hellenic 
Apolldn Homios,^ whose harp is the harp of Orpheus, rous¬ 
ing all things into life and energy. With these maidens he 
dances, like Apollon with the Muses, each maiden fancying 
that she alone is his partner (an idea which we find again in 
the story of the Athenian Prokris). Only Eadha, who loved 
Krishna with an absorbing affection, saw things as they 
really were, and withdrew herself from the company. In 
vain Krishna sent maidens to soothe her and bring her 
back. To none would she listen, until the god came to her 
himself. His words soon healed the wrong, and so greac 
was his joy with her that he lengthened the night which 
followed to the length of six months, an incident which has 
but half preserved its meaning in the myth of Zeus and 
Alkm^ne, but which here points clearly to the six months 
which Persephone spends with her mother Demcter. The 
same purely solar character is impressed on the myth in the 
Bhagavata Purana, which relates how Brahma, wishing to 
prove whether Krishna was or was not an incarnation of 
Vishnu, came upon him as he and Balarama were sleeping 
among the shepherd youths and maidens. AJl these Brahma 
took away and shut up in a distant prison,—and Krishna and 
his brother on awaking found themselves alone. Balarama 
proposed to go in search of them. Krishna at once created 
the same number of youths and maidens so precisely like 
those which had been taken away that when Brahma re¬ 
turned at the end of a year, he beheld to his astonishment 
the troop which he fancied that he had broken up. Hurry¬ 
ing to the prison he found that none had escaped from it, 
and thus convinced of the power of Krishna, he led all his 


gloaming, as it "were by a more serene 
repetition of the da\7n. The Dawn her¬ 
self is likewise called the wife; hut the 
expression “ husband of the wives is in 
another passage clearly applied to the 
sinking sun, B. V, ix. 86, 32: “The 
husband of the wives approaches the 
Lecturesf second series, 613, 


/.The parallel is exact. Phoibos 
giving to Hermes charge over his cattle 
is represented by Indra, who sa^ to 
Krishna, ‘I have now come by demre of 
the cattle to install you as Upendra, and 
as the Indra of the cows thou shalt be 
railed Govinda /—Vishnu BuranOy* H, 
H. Wilson, 528, 



THE DEATH OP KEISHls^A. 


137 


prisoners back to kirn, wlio tben suffered tbe pbantasms 
wkiclL he had evoked to vanish away. Here we have the 
sleep of the sun-god which in other myths becomes the sleep 
of Persephon^ and Brynhild, of Endymion or Adonis,—^the 
slumber of autumn when the bright clouds are imprisoned 
in the cave of Cacus or the Panis, while the new created 
youths and maidens represent merely the days and months 
which come round again as in the years that had passed 
away. In his solar character Krishna must again be the 
slayer of the Dragon or Black Snake, Kalinak, the old 
serpent with the thousand heads, who, like Vritra or the 
Sphinx, poisons or shuts up the waters.' In the fight which 
follows, and which Hindu art has especially delighted in 
symbolising, Krishna freed himself from the coils of the 
snake, and stamped upon his heads until he had crushed 
them ah. The sequel of the myth in its more recent form 
goes on to relate his death,—^how Balarama lay down to 
sleep beneath the Banyan tree,—how from his throat issued 
a monstrous snake, like the cobra of Vikram in the modern 
Hindu story,—how Krishna himself became sorely depressed, 
—how, as he lay among the bushes with his foot so placed 
that his heel, in which alone he, like so many others, was 
vulnerable, was exposed, a huntsman, thinking that he was 
aiming at a gazelle, shot him with an arrow, and the ground 
was bathed with his blood,—^incidents which are at once 
explained by a reference to the myths of Baldur, Adonis, or 
Osiris.^ 


' Tho Vishnu Purana (Wilson, 514) 
tells us bow, stirred up by tbe incite¬ 
ments of Nanda, Krishna lays bold of 
tbe middle hood of the chief of the 
snakes with both hands, and, bonding it 
down, dances upon it in triumph 
Whenever the snake attempted to raise 
his head, it was again trodden down, and 
many bruises were inflicted on the hood 
by the pressure of the toes of Elrishna. 

Among the many foes conquered by 
Krishna is Kiraka, from whom he 
rescues elephants, horses, women, &c. 
*At an auspicious season he espoused 
all the maidens whom Naraka had 
carried oif from their friends. At one 
land the same moment he received the 
hands of all of them, according to the 


ritual, in separate mansions. Sixteen 
thousand and one hundred was the 
number of the maidens, and into so 
many forms did the son of Madhu mul¬ 
tiply himself, so that every one of the 
damsels thought that he had wedded 
her in her single person ’—Vishnu Pu- 
ranUj ih. 589. This myth is beyond all 
doubt simply that of Prokris in another 
form. The dew becomes visible only 
when tbe blackness of the night is dis¬ 
pelled, and tbe same sun is reflected in 
the thousands of sparkling drops: but 
the language of the Purana is in sin¬ 
gular accordance with the phraseology 
in which Roman Catholic writers delight 
to speak of nuns as the hrides of Christ. 

* It is, of course, true that these 


CHAP. 

H. 



138 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAH NATIONS. 


Section XIY.—THE MOON. 


I 


BOOK 

II. 


Sel4ne and 
Peb. 


16 the 
heifer. 


As Eudymion sinks into his dreamless sleep beneath, the 
Latmian kill, the beantifal Selto^ comes to gaze upon the 
being whom she loves only to lose. The phrase was too 
transparent to allow of the growth of a highly developed 
myth. In the one name we have the sun sinking doTO into 
the unseen land where all things are forgotten—in the other 
the full moon comes forth from the east to greet the sun, 
before he dies in the western sky. Hence there is little 
told of Sel^n^ which fails to carry with it an obvious mean¬ 
ing. She is the beautiful eye of night, the daughter of 
Hyperi 6 n, of Pallas, or of Helios; the sister of Phoibos 
ApoUdn. Like the sun, she moves across the heaven in a 
chariot drawn by white horses from which her soft light 
streams down to the earth; or she is the huntress, roving 
like Alpheios, over hill and dale. She is the bride of Zeus, 
and the mother of Pandia, the full orb which gleams in the 
nightly sky 5 ^ or as loving, like him, the crags, the streams, 
and the hills, she is beloved by Pan, who entices her into the 
dark woods under the guise of a snow-white ram.^ In other 
words, the soft; whispering wind, driving before it the shining 
fleecy clouds, draws the moon onwards into the sombre 
groves. In another version, she is Asterodia, the wanderer 
among the stars, the mother of the fifty daughters of 
Endymi 6 n, the Ursula of modern legend with her many 
virgins.^ 

In the story of 16, the moon appears in connexion with 


in 3 rths have "been crystallised round the 
name of Krishna in ages subsequent to 
the period dunng which the earliest 
Vedic literature came into existence; 
but the myths themselves are found in 
this older literature associated with 
other gods, and not always only in 
germ. Krishna as slaying'the dragon 
IS simply Indra smiting Vritra or Ahi, 
or Phoibos destroying the Python. 
There is no more room for inferring 
foreign influence in the growth of any 
of these myths than, as Bunsen rightly 
insists, there is room for tracing Chris¬ 
tian influence in the earlier epical lite¬ 


rature of the Teutonic tribes. Practi¬ 
cally the myths of Krishna seem to 
have been fully developed in the days of 
Megasthenes, who identifies him with 
the Greek Herakles. Nork, s. v. 
Krishna, 398. 

^ ‘ Pandia, d. h. die ganz leuchtende,' 
—Preller, Grr. Myth, i. 347. 

* Virg. G-eorg. lii 391. 

® Preller regards the number 60 here 
as denoting the fifty moons of the Olym¬ 
pian Festal Cycle. Gr, Myth, i. 348. 
hut the myth must be taken along with 
the legends of the fifty sons or daughters 
of Aigyptos, Banaos, or Priam. 



THE WANDERINGS OF l6. 


139 


the myths of Hermes, Prometheus, and other tales. 16 is 
pre-eminently the horned being, whose existence is one of —,— 

brief joy, much suffering, and many changes and wanderings; 
in other words, her life is the life of the moon in its several 
phases, from full to new, and thence back to the full again. 

She is the pure priestess of the great queen of heaven, on 
whom Zeus, the lord of the untroubled ether, looks down 
with unfailing love.^ But H6r6 is the wife of Zeus, and thus 
at once she is jealous of 16, whom she changes into a heifer ^ 

(the well-known symbol of the young or homed morn), and 
places in the charge of Argos Panopt6s, the being with a 
thousand eyes, some of which he opens when the stars arise, 
while others he closes when their orbs go down. Whether 
these eyes are, as in some versions, placed on his brow and 
on the back of his head, or, as in others, scattered all over 
his body, Argos is the star-illumined sky watching over the 
moon as she wanders 

Pale for very lyearmess 
Of climbing heaven and gazing on the earth, 

Wandering companionless 
Among the stars that have a different birth.® 

In this aspect Argos appears in the Cretan myth as 
Asteri6n, or the Minotauros, the guardian of the Daidalean 
labyrinth, the mazes of the star-clothed heavens. 

From this terrible bondage she is rescued at the bidding of Aigos 
Zeus by Hermes, -who appears here as a god of the morning- 
tide. By the power of his magic rod, and by the music of 
his flute, the soft whisper of the morning breeze, he lulls even 
Argos himself into slumber, and then his sword falls, and 
the thousand eyes are closed in death, as the stars go out 
when the morning comes, and leave the moon alone.'* This 
rescue of 16 by Hermes is, in the opinion of Preller, the tern- 

^ 16 becomes a mother iiriTTvoias of the Old Man and the Hmd, where the 
JEsch. 18; a myth which transformation is precisely owing to the 

may be compart with the story of the jealonsy of H6r6 for 16 and her off- 
mares of Diom6d^s. spring. 

In the Norse story of Tatterhood, * It is not likely that Shelley was 
the younger of the two sisters who thinking of the myth of Argos Panoptos 
answer to the Dioskouroi is changed when he wrote these lines; hut he has 
into a calf, and the tale immediately singularly reproduced this idea of the 
connects the transformation with the antagonism between the moon and the 
voyage of Isis. The same incidents are stars. 

found in the Arabian Nights in the story * The myth is thus explained which 



140 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAIS' HATIOKS. 


BOOK 

n. 


16 and 
Prome¬ 
theus. 


porary disappearance of the moon, during her wanderings in 
unknown regions until she appears as Pandia, the full moon, 
in the eastern heaven.^ This time was naturally conceived 
as one of trouble and toil, and so the myth went that 16 was 
driven from one place to another by a gadfly sent by Her6, 
who suffers her neither to rest by day nor to sleep by night. 

These wanderings have been related by -ffischylos in his 
immortal drama of the bound Prometheus. They carry her 
over regions, some of whose names belong to our earthly 
geography; but any attempts to fix her course in accordance 
with the actual position of these regions is mere labour lost. 
That for such accuracy iEschylos cared nothing is plain from 
the fact that the course which 16 takes in his play of the 
Suppliants cannot be reconciled with the account given in 
the Prometheus. It is enough to note that the poet takes 
his moon from the West towards the North, gradually 
approaching the East and the South, until in the beau¬ 
tiful Aigyptos she is suffered to resume her proper form, 
or in other words, appear as the full moon, the shape 
in which she was seen before H6r6 changed her into the 
homed heifer or new moon. This mention of Egypt, or the 
land of the Nile, as the cradle of her child Epaphos, naturally 
led the G-reeks to identify 16 vdth the Egyptian Isis, and 
her son with the bull Apis—an identification to which no 
objection can be raised, so long as it is not maintained that 
the Hellenic names and conceptions of the gods were bor¬ 
rowed from those of Egypt. The great Athenian poet would 
naturally introduce among the places visited by 16 places 
and peoples which excited his curiosity, his wonder, or his 
veneration. She from whom was to spring the deliverer 
of Prometheus must herself learn from the tortured Titan 
what must be the course of her own sufferings and their 
issue. She must cross the heifer^s passage, or Bosporos, 
which bears her name: she must journey through the country 

makes Hermes tTie father of Autolykos, as transparent as that of Argos Pa- 
whointhe Odyssey is the grandfather noptes. The eyes of the dead Argos are 
of Odysseus and the craftiest of men—a placed by H^r6 in the peacock^ tail- 
character which, as Preller remarks, is but this was only another symbol for 
simply reflected from Hermes. Qr, the starry heavens. Preller, ii 41 
Myth, 1 . 306. The name Autolykos is ^ Gr, Myth. li. 39 



HEKATfi AND PHOIBOS. 

of tlie Chalybes, beings akin to tbe Kyklbpes wbo forge tbe 
thunderbolts of Zeus; she must trust lierself to tbe guidance 
of tbe Amazons wbo will lead ber to tbe rocks of Salmydessos, 
rocks not unlike tbe Symplegades in tbe Argonautic story: 
sbe must encounter tbe GrAiai and tbe Gorgons in tbe land 
of tbe gloaming and tbe nigbt, and finally sbe is to see tbe 
end of ber sorrows when sbe reaches tbe well or fountains of 
tbe sun. There ber child will be born, and tbe series of 
generations will roll on, which are to end m tbe glorious 
victories of ber descendant, Herakles.^ 

To Pboibos, as Hekatos, tbe far-sbooting lord of bgbt, 
Hekate stands in tbe relation which Diana bolds towards 
Dianus or Janus. Sbe falls, in short, into tbe ranks of cor¬ 
relative deities with tbe Asvins and tbe Dioskouroi, Surya, 
and Savitri, and many others already named. Her keenness 
of bearing and sight is second only to that of Helios, for 
when D§m4t^r is searching in agony for ber lost child, it is 
HekatS alone wbo says that she has beard ber cries, while 
Helios is further able to tell ber whither Hades has departed 
vritb tbe maiden. Sbe is then tbe queen of tbe night, the 
moon, and as such sbe may be described as sprung either 
fi-om Zeus and H4r^, or like Pboibos himself, from Leto, or 
even from Tartaros, or again, from Asteria, the starlit nigbt.^ 
In a comparison of offices and honours it is bard to see 
whether Pboibos or HekatS stands higher; and all that 
can be said is that tbe Hesiodic poet could hardly have 
spoken of ber in a strain so bigbflown if tbe thought of 
ApoUdn and bis wisdom, incommunicable even to Hermes, 
bad at tbe moment crossed bis mind, just as tbe worshipper 
of Brahma or Vishnu must have modified bis language, bad 
be wished to bring it into apparent consistency with what be 
may have said elsewhere in bis devotions to Varuna, Dyaus, or 
Soma. Sbe is the benignant being, ever ready to bear those 
wbo offer to ber a holy sacrifice. Hor has she fallen from 

^ It is, of course, quite possible that or a horned maiden. Both alike lose 
'vvitli this particular myth of 16 some their children and search for them as 
features borrowed from Semitic mytlio- Bemeter searched for Persephone, 
logy may have been designedly blended. Preller, Gr, Myth. ii. 44. 

The Phenician Astarte, Ashtaroth, was * Hes. Tfieog. 411. 
also represented as a wandering heifer, 


141 


CHAI>. 

II. 


Hekate. 



142 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


HOOK tLe liigli estate ■wMcli was liers before Zeus vanquished the 

^ . Titans ; but she remains mighty as ever, in the heavens, on 

the earth, and in the sea. She is the giver of victory in war, 
the helper of Mngs in the ministration of justice, the guar¬ 
dian of the flocks and of the vineyards; and thus she is named 
pre-eminently Kourotrophos, the nurse and the cherisher of 
men. But these great powers could scarcely fail to throw 
over her an air of mystery and awe. She would be some¬ 
times the solitary inhabitant of a dismal region, caring 
nothing for the sympathy or the love of others; and the very 
help which with her flaming torch she gives to D^m^t^r 
would make her a goddess of the dark nether world to which 
she leads the sorrowing mother. Her ministers therefore 
must be as mysterious as herself, and thus the Kour^tes and 
Eabeiroi become the chosen servants of her sacrifices. Like 
Artemis, she is accompanied by hounds, not flashing-footed 
like that which Prokris received from the twin-sister of 
Phoibos, but Stygian dogs akin to Kerberos and the awful 
hounds of Tama. Only one step more was needed to reach 
that ideal of witchcraft which is exhibited in its most exalted 
form in the wise woman Medeia. It is from a cave, like 
that in which Kirke and Ealypso dwell, that she marks the 
stealing away of Persephone, and her form is but dimly seen 
as she moves among murky mists. She thus becomes the 
spectral queen who sends from her gloomy realm vain dreams 
and visions, horrible demons and phantoms, and who imparts 
to others the evil knowledge of which she has become pos¬ 
sessed herself. Her own form becomes more and more 
fearful. Like Kerberos, she assumes three heads or faces, 
which denote the monthly phases of the moon—^the horse 
with its streaming mane pointing to the moon at its full, 
and the snake and the dog representing its waxing and 
waning, until it disappears from the sight of men. 

Aitemis In somo traditions Artemis is the twin sister of Phoibos, 
with whom she takes her place in the ranks of correlative 
deities. In others she is born so long before him that she can 
aid L§t6 her mother at the birth of Phoibos—a myth which 
speaks of the dawn and the sun as alike sprung from the 
night. Thus her birthplace is either Delos or Ortygia, in 



ARTEMIS. 


143 


•either case the bright morning land, and her purity is that 
of Athens and Hestia. Over these three deities alone 
Aphrodite has no power. Love cannot touch the maiden 
whose delight is in the violet tints of dawn or in the 
narrows which she sends forth with never failing precision,^ 
^d which seal the doom, while they are given to avenge the 
wrongs of Prokris. Like Phoibos, she has the power of life 
^nd death; she can lessen or take away the miseries and 
plagues which she brings upon men, and those who honour 
her are rich in flocks and herds and reach a happy old age. 
Prom those who neglect her she exacts a fearful penalty; 
and the Kalydonian boar ravages the fields of Oineus only 
because he had forgotten to include her among the deities to 
whom he offered sacrifice.^ In a word the colours may be 
paler, but her features and form generally are those of her 
glorious brother. With him she takes delight in song,® and 
as Phoibos overcomes the Pyth6n, so is she the slayer of 
Tityos.^ 

It seems unnecessary to draw any sharp distinction be¬ 
tween the Arkadian and the Delian Artemis. If she is no 
longer the mere reflection of Phoibos, she still calls herself a 
child of L^t6,® and appears as the glorious morning roving 
through the heaven before the birth of the sun. This broad¬ 
spreading light is represented by her wanderings among the 
glens and along the mountain summits of Arkadia. Like 
Ath^n^ and Aphrodite, she belongs to or springs from the 
running waters, and she demands from Zeus an attendant 
troop of fifty Okeanid and twenty Amnisiad, or river, 
nymphs.® With these she chases her prey on the heights 


^ vapd4vos iox^cLipa. 

* Mr. Groto remarks that m the hunt 
■which follows for the destruction of the 
hoar, Artemis, who is sometimes con¬ 
founded even with her attendant 
nymphs, reappears in the form of Ata- 
lante. Hist. Gr. i. 76. The name of 
Camilla, the counterpart of Atalant^ in 
the Mndcl^ is, according to M. Maury, 
that of a Gallic divinity, being the 
feminine form of Camulus (Camillus) 
Croyanocs ct Lkgendes de VAntiquiU, 
229, et seq. 

* Bmnn to Aphrodite, 19. Preller, 
Ghr. Myth i, 228, adopts the explanation 
which connects her name with the word 


d.pre/x'fis, and regards the epithet as de¬ 
noting her unsullied purity as well as 
her physical vigour Her kindly and 
indignant aspects are -with him the 
varying, yet constantly recurring, effects 
produced by the moon on the pheno¬ 
mena of the seasons, and, as was sup¬ 
posed, of human life. Por the Ephesian 
Artemis, see p. 66. 

* Kallim. Hymn to Artemis, 110. 

* Ib. Kol yap iyb) ATirtaias dfjii. She 
desires to be worshipped under many 
names, that she may not need to fear 
the rivalry of Apollon, 7. 

» Ib. 20, &c. 


CHAP. 

n. 


The Ar¬ 
kadian and 
Delian 
Artemis. 



144 


MITHOLOGT OP THE ARTAIT NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Artemis 
Orthia 
and Tanro- 
pola. 


of Erymanthos, Mainalos, and Taygetos. Her chariot is 
fashioned by the fiery Hephaistos, and Pan, the breeze 
whispering among the reeds, provides her with dogs, the 
clouds which speed across the sky driven by the summer 
winds. Here, like Arethousa, she is loved and pursued by 
Alpheios, who fails to seize her. 

But the cultus of the Spartan Artemis, whose epithet 
Orthia would seem to denote a phaUic deity, is marked by 
features so repulsive, and so little involved in the myth of 
the Delian sister of Phoibos, that the inference of an earlier 
religion, into which Aryan mythical names were imported, 
becomes not unwarrantable. Whether or not this Artemis- 
be the same as the Artemis known by the epithets Taurica 
or Tauropola, she is a mere demon, glutted with the human 
sacrifices which seem to have formed a stage in the religious 
developement of every nation on the earth. We have here 
manifestly the belief that the gods are all malignant powers, 
hungering for the blood of human victims, and soothed by 
the smoke of the fat as it curls up heavenwards.^ But the 
prevalence of this earlier form of faith or practice would tend 
to prove only that the mythology of the Greeks was not 
necessarily their religion, and was certainly not common- 


* The extent to which these horrible 
superstitions prevailed among the histo¬ 
rical Grreeks as well as among other races 
and tribes has been excellently traced 
bj Mr. Paley in a paper on * Chthonian 
Worship’ (Journal No. I. 

June, 1868) His conclusion is that, as 
‘the propitiation of malignant powers 
rather than the adoration of a supreme 
good seems to have formed the basis of 
the early religions of the world,’ so a 
large part of the early religious systems 
of the Grreeks exhibits this character 
of devil-worship, in which streams of 
human blood were the only effectual 
offerings. The unsatisfied shades or 
ghosts of heroes became hateful demons, 
going about with wide-stretched mouths 
for anything which might serve as a 
prey These are the Latin Manduci 
and Lemures, the Greek Lamyroi, and 
Chardn, the gaper, words * all pointing 
to swallowing and devouring, as our 
gohlm is supposed to do,’ p. 7. The 
general proposition is indisputable, but 


the English goblin. seems to represent 
etymologicaUy the Teutonic Kobold and 
the Greek Kob41os, beings doubtless of 
closely kindred character. If this be so, 
the idea of sacrifice is traced back to an 
utterly revolting source in the thoughts 
of the still savage man. To the question 
which asks how this conclusion ‘ can be 
reconciled with the Jewish doctrine of 
sacrifice and all its momentous conse¬ 
quences,’ he answers, ‘ I think we may 
fairly pply, we are not called upon to 
reconcile them. We are not building up 
questionable theories, but expounding 
unquestionable matters of fact, and it 
is a perfectly open subject of discussion 
whether the pagan idea of sacrifice is a 
corruption of a revealed obligation of 
man to his Creator, or whether it was 
(as many will thmk more probable) in¬ 
dependently denved and developed from 
the materialistic and sensuous notions 
of the untutored races of antiquity about 
the nature, condition, and wants of 
beings, infernal and supernal,’ p. 13. 



ARTEMIS AND IPHIGENEIA. 

'Surate witli it. Still, altliOTigli there is not much in the 
phenomena of morning, or in the myth of the Delian Ar¬ 
temis, to suggest the practice of slaying youths and maidens, 
or scourging them until the blood ran in streams to glut the 
angry demon, there are not wanting mythical phrases which, 
if translated into the conditions of human life, would point 
to such revolting systems. Adonis cannot rise to the life of 
the blessed gods until he has been slain. The morning 
cannot come until the E6s who closed the previous day has 
faded away and died in the black abyss of night. So it is 
also with Memnoii and Sarp^don, with Endymi6n and Nai*- 
kissos. But all these are the children of Zeus or Phoibos, 
or some other deity of the heaven or the sun; and thus the 
j)arents may be said to sacrifice their children, as Tantalos 
placed the mangled Pelops on the banquet-table of Zeus. 
It is thus seemingly that Iphigeneia must die before Helen 
can be brought again from Hion: but Helen is herself Iphi¬ 
geneia, and thus the return of Helen is the resurrection of 
the victim doomed by the words of Kalchas and the consent 
of Agamemnon, and Iphigeneia becomes the priestess of 
Artemis, whose wrath she had been slain to expiate. With 
an unconscious fidelity to the old mythical phrases, which is 
stiU more remarkable, Iphigeneia is herself Artemis, and thus 
the story resolves itself into the saying that the evening and 
the morning are the same, but that she must die at night 
before she can spring into life again at dawn. Nor must it 
be forgotten that Helen stolen away from the Argive or 
gleaming land of the West is the golden light stolen away 
in the evening. The weary voyage from the Achaian shores 
is the long journey of the sun-children for the stolen trea¬ 
sure, beginning-just when the twilight is deepening into 
night, and when the lagging hours seem likely never to pass 
away. Iphigeneia is slain at the beginning of this dismal 
journey—^in other words, she dies in the evening that 
Helen may come back in the morning, when, after ten long 
hours of mortal strife, the walls of Ilion have fallen. 
But when Artemis, Helen, and Iphigeneia, had received 
each her own distinct personality, it was easy to say that 
the anger of Artemis, offended for some supposed neglect 
VOL. n. L 


lU 

CH.IP. 

II. 



146 


MTTHOLOaY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK or affront of Agamemnon, was tlie cause of the death of 

. ^ Iphigeneia.^ 

Iphigeneia The distinction between Artemis and Britomartis is as- 
ffight as that which separates her from Iphigeneia. What¬ 
ever be the origin of the name, Britomartis is spoken of as a 
daughter of L6t6, or of Zeus and Karm^, and as flying from 
the pursuit of Minos as Artemis flies from that of Alpheios.^ 
IVom this pursuit she escapes, like Arethousa and Daphne^ 
only by throwing herself into the sea—as some said, because 
she leaped from the heights of Diktynnaion, or, as others 
would have it, because she fell into the nets {BiKTua) of the- 
fishermen. Eescued from the water she goes to Aigina, and 
is reverenced there under the name of Aphaia. The wan¬ 
derings of Britomartis are simply the journey of the day 
across the heaven, and the story of the nets must clearly 
be compared with that of Dana^ and the kindly treatment 
of Diktys of Seriphos, who is contrasted with his gloomy 
brother Polydekt^s—a mere reflection of Hades Poly- 
degmon. When the name of Diktys is further compared 
with the myth of the Diktaian cave, we can no longer doubt 
that Artemis Diktynna is simply Artemis the light-giving, 
and that the nets were brought into the myths by an equi¬ 
vocation similar to that which converted Arkas and Kallistd 
into bears and Lyk46n into a wolf.® 


^ For the Ephesian or Asiatic Ar¬ 
temis, see p. 66 

® Kallim. Hymn. Art. 192, &c. 

* As the dawn springs fully armed 
from the forehead of the cloven sky, so 
the eye first discerns the blue of heaven 


as the first faint arch of light is seen in 
the East. This arch is the Diktaian 
cave in which the infant Zeus is nour¬ 
ished until he reaches his full strength 
—^in other words, until the day is fully 
come. 



CHAPTER III. 


THE LOST TREASURE. 

Section I.—THE GOLDEH FLEECE. 

The idea of wealth is one of the most prominent cha¬ 
racteristics in the legends of Helios, Ixi6n, Sisyphos and 
Tantalos. The golden palace of Helios, Hazing with in¬ 
tolerable splendour, is reflected in the magnificent home of 
the Phrygian and Corinthian kings. So dazzling indeed is 
the brilliaipLce of this treasure-house that none may look 
closely upon it and live. Hence Dia the beautiful wife of 
Ixi6n has never seen her husband’s wealth, as the Dawn 
may never see the sun when high in the heavens: and her 
father Hesioneus who insists on being put into possession of 
all the glorious things which Ixion said should follow his 
union with Dia, the radiant morning, finds himself plunged 
into a gulf of fire. These treasures, in the myth of Prokris, 
E6s herself bestows on Kephalos that he may beguile the 
gentle daughter of the dew. They are the beautiful flowers 
which bloom in the Hyperborean gardens, the wonderful 
web wrought and unwrought by Penelope, the riches which 
the suitors waste in the absence of Odysseus, the herds of 
cattle which are fed by the glistening nymphs who rise from 
Ihe ocean stream. They are the light of day in all its varied 
aspects and with all its wonderful powers. With them is 
bound up the idea of life, health, and joy: and hence when 
these treasures are taken away, the very blackness of desola¬ 
tion must follow. What can the sons of men do, when the 
bright being who has gladdened their eyes is taken from their 
sight? Must they not either sit still in utter despair or 
wait with feverish impatience until they see his kindly face 
again ? What again must be the drama of those dark and 


CHAP. 

m. 


The myt 
of stolon 
treasuro 
found 
am 

the Aryan 
nations. 



148 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAIf NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


dreary tours wtich pass between the setting of the sun and 
its rising? What must be the history of the silent time 
ending in the battle which precedes the defeat of the powers 
of darkness? That mighty conflict they might see every 
morning in the eastern heavens, as the first light flickers 
faintly across the sky, only to be driven back, as it would 
seem, until it returns with fresh strength and aided by new 
Mends: but the incidents which went before this strife they 
could not see. All that was before their eyes reminded them 
of the hosts of vapours, some bright, some murky, which 
had been marshalled round the dying sun; and the same 
forms are now seen, the dark clouds being gradually driven 
away or being even changed from foes into Mends as the sun¬ 
light turns their blackness into gold. But the bright clouds, 
sailing along in unsullied purity are especially the children 
of Helios, the offspring ,of the union of Ixion and the lovely 
Nephel^. These then have sought him through the long 
hours of the night, and at length have rescued him from the 
gloomy prison house. There is thus the daily taking away 
; in the West of all that gives life its value, of all on which 
life itself depends; and it must be taken away by robbers 
utterly malignant and hateful. Thus there is also the 
nightly search for these thieves,—a search which must be 
carried on in darkness amidst many dangers and against 
almost insurmountable obstacles; and this search must end 
in a terrible battle, for how should the demons yield up their 
prey until their strength is utterly broken ? But even when 
the victory is won, the task is but half achieved. The 
beautiful light must be brought back to the Western home 
from which the plunderers had stolen it; and there will bc‘ 
new foes to be encountered on the way, storm clouds and 
tempests, black vapours glaring down with their single eye, 
fierce winds, savage whirlpools. But at length all is done, 
and the radiant maiden, freed from all real or fancied stains 
of guilt, gladdens her husband’s house once more, before the 
magic drama of plunder, rescue, and return is acted over 
again; and it is precisely this magic round which furnishes 
all the materials for what maybe called the mythical history 
not only of Greece but of all the Aryan nations. If the 



KECUERING CYCLES. 


149 


features are the same in all, if there is absolutely no political 
motive or interest in any one which may not be found more 
or less prominent in all the rest, if it is every where the 
same tale of treasure stolen, treasure searched for and 
fought for, treasure recovered and brought back, why are we 
to suppose that we are dealing in each case with a different 
story ? Why are we to conjure up a hundred local conflicts 
each from precisely the same causes, each with precisely the 
same incidents and the same results ? Why are we to think 
that the treasures of Eos are not the treasures of Helen, 
that Helenas wealth is not the wealth of Brynhild, and that 
Brynhild's riches are not the dower of the wife of Walthar 
of Aquitaine ? Why, when myth after myth of the Hellenic 
tribes exhibits the one ceaseless series of precious things 
taken away and after fearful toils recovered, and after not 
less terrible labours brought back, are we to believe that the 
errand on which the Achaian chieftains depart from Hellas 
is in every case different ? If it be urged that such move¬ 
ments are those of a squirrel in its cage, and that such 
movements, though they may be graceful, yet must be mono¬ 
tonous, the answer is that not only is the daily alternation of 
light and darkness proved to be monotonous, but all the inci¬ 
dents and the whole course of human life may be invested 
with the same dull colouring. Men are married, love and hate, 
get wealth or struggle in poverty, and die; and the mono¬ 
tony is broken only when we have distinguished the toils 
and acts of one man from those of another and learnt to see 
the points of interest which meet us every where on the bound¬ 
less field of human life, as they meet us also in all the countless 
aspects of the changing heavens. There is in short no dul- 
ness except in those who bring the charge; and the story of 
Daphn^ and Echo does not lose its charm because it is all 
told over again in the legends of Arethousa and SelSne. 

The taking away of precious things, and the united search 
of armed hosts for their recovery come before us first in the 
great myth of the Argonautic Voyage. The tale is repeated 
in the stealing of Helen and her treasures, and is once more 
told in the banishment of the Herakleidai and their efforts, 
at last successfol, to recover their lost inheritance. These 


CHAP. 

III. 


Eepetitiou 
of this 
myth 
Tindep dif¬ 
ferent 
forms. 



150 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The 

Golden 

Pleece. 


myths fall into a regular series, and are repeated until we 
find ourselyes on the confines of genuine history, which cuts 
the threads of the mythical drama just where it happens to 
meet them; and we leave the subject in the full confidence 
that the radiant maiden would have been stolen and the chil¬ 
dren of the sun banished jfrom the west yet many times 
more under different names and circumstances sufficiently 
varied, had not men been awakened to the need of providing 
in contemporary writing a sure means for the preservation 
of historical facts. 

Into the Argonautic story, as into the mythical histories 
or sagas which follow it, a number of subordinate legends 
have been interwoven, many of which have been already 
noticed as belonging to the myths of the heavens and the 
light, clouds, waters, winds, and darkness; and we have now 
only to follow the main thread of the narrative from the 
moment when Phrixos,^ the child of the mist, has reached 
the Kolchian land and the home of king Ai^t^s, a name in 
which we recognise one of the many words denoting the 
breath or motion of the air. Hell^, the warm and brilliant- 
tinted maiden, has died by the way, and the cold light only 
remains when the golden-fleeced ram, the offspring of Posei- 
d6n and Theophan^, the lord of the air and the waters, and 
the bright gleaming sky, reaches its journey’s end. The 
treasures of the day, brought to the east, are now in the 
words of Mimnermos represented by ^ a large flieece in the 
town of AiStes, where the rays of Helios rest in a golden 
chamber.’ These treasures must be sought out so soon as 
the man destined to achieve the task is forthcoming. He is 
found by the same tokens which foretold the future greatness 
of Oidipous, Perseus, T^lephos, Eomulus, or Cyrus. Pelias, 
the chief of lolkos, who had driven away his brother Neleus, 
had been told that one of the children of Aiolos would be his 
destroyer, and decreed therefore that all should be slain, 
lason only (a name which must be classed with the many 
others, lasion, lamos, lolaos, laso, belonging to the same 


* The naina belongs apparently to the 
same root with Pro&is, voi. i, p 430, 
and IS thus connected with (ppicnrco, oiir 


freeze, the story of the spoiling of the 
corn being the result of a false etymo¬ 
logy- 



ORPHEUS AND THE ABGONAUTAI. 


151 


root), is preserved, and brought up like Achilleus by the 
wise Eentaur Cheiron, the son or descendant of Ixi6n and 
Nephel^, the sun and the cloud. The child grows up; PeUas 
receives another warning to be on his guard against the one- 
sandaUed man; and he discerns his enemy when Ias6n 
appears with one foot only shod, having dropped the other 
slipper into the stream Ananros. There is nothing, however, 
that he can do beyond putting him to the perfermance of 
impossible tasks; and thus as Eurystheus sent HeraMes on 
hopeless errands, so Pelias thinks to be rid of Ias6n by bid¬ 
ding him bring the golden fleece back to lolkos.^ The journey 
is too long and across seas too stormy, and the toil is too great 
for any one man, be he ever so mighty; and as all the kins¬ 
folk of Helld are equally sufferers by the robbery, so all must 
unite to avenge her wrongs and regain her wealth. Prom 
all parts they come together, fifty in number, like the 
•children of Danaos and Aigyptos, of Thestios and Asterodia, 
to the building of the great ship Argo, which Ath 4 n§ endows 
■with the gift of speech and the power, possessed also by the 
Phaiakian barks, of understanding the thoughts of Tnan , But 
ibefore they could leave their own land there was need of yet 
farther help to enable them to tame the fury of savage beasts, 
birds, and creeping things ; and thus Ias6n betakes himself 
to the harper Orpheus, whose sweet tones no living thing 
•can withstand. He alone can find his way to the utmost 
bounds of darkness and return in safety; and the tidings 
that Orpheus would accompany them scattered the gloom 
which was gathering thickly on the hearts of the Argo- 
nautai. His power is soon shown. In spite of aU efforts to 
•dislodge her, the Argo remains fast fixed to the spot on 
which she was built; but at tlie sound of the harp of 
•Orpheus it went down quickly and smoothly into the sea. 
Before she sets out on her perilous voyage, Cheiron gives 
them a feast, and a contest in music follows between the 
Eentaur, who sings of the wars with the Lapithai, and 

' It is scarcely necessary to notice the assumed the form of an old -woman, that 
■many versions of this myth. In some so she may he home in his arms, 
■we have the Enipeus or the Ev&nos m- Others make Pelias declare himself 
stead of the Ananros; in others Ias6n ready to yield up his place and power 
loses his sandal while carrying across to Ias6n, only he must first bring back 
•the stream H4rfi. who loves him and has the lost treasure. 


CHAP. 

HL 



152 


MYTHOLOGT OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The Argo- 

iiautic 

Voyage. 


Orpheus, who, like Hermes, discourses of all things j&'om 
Chaos downwards, of Eros and Eionos and the giants, like 
the song of the winds which seem to speak of things incom¬ 
prehensible by man. 

Setting out from lolkos, the confederate chiefs reach 
Lemnos, while the island is seemingly suffering from the 
plagues which produced the myths of the Danaides in Argos. 
Like them, the Lemnian women all kiU their husbands,. 
one.only, Thoas, being saved, like Lynkeus, by his daughters 
and his wife Hypsipyl^. These women yield themselves to 
the Argonautai, as the Danaides take other husbands when 
they have slain the sons of Aigyptos.^ In the country of the 
Doliones they are welcomed by the chief Kyzikos, who, how¬ 
ever, is subsequently slain by them unwittingly and to their 
regret. In Amykos, the king of the Bebrykes, or roaring 
winds, they encounter Namuki, one of the Vedic adevas 
or enemies of the bright gods,^ who slays Polydeukes, the 
twin brother of Kastor. In the Thrakian Salmydessos 
they receive further counsel from Phineus the seer, who 
suffers from the attacks of the Harpyiai, a foe akin to the 
Bebrykes. In gratitude for his deliverance from these 
monsters, Phineus tells them that if they would avoid beirg 
crushed by the Sympl%ades, or floating rocks, which part 
asunder and close with a crash like thunder, they must mark 
the flight of a dove, and shape their course accordingly. The 
dove loses only the feathers of its tad; and the Argo, urged 
on by the power of Her^, loses only some of its stern orna¬ 
ments, and henceforth the rocks remain fixed for ever.^ The 


^ That this incident is precisely the 
same as the story of the sojourn of 
Odysseus in the land of tho Lotophagoi, 
is manifest from tho phrase used m the 
Argonantics. They all, -we are told, 
forgot the duty set heforo them, nor 
would they have left the island, but for 
the strains of Orpheus winch recalled 
them to their sense of right and law, 
490. Thus this incident throws light 
on the nature of the enj'oymonts signi¬ 
fied by the eating of the lotos. See 

p. 120. 

2 MaxMiiller, ChipSy &c. ii. 188. 

* It has been supposed that the 
Synipl^gades represent icebergs which 


in the ages during which the myth was 
developed were seen in tho Black Sea, 
and which melted away at the mouth of 
the Bosporos. In support of the posi¬ 
tion that the myth thus points to phy¬ 
sical phenomena now no longer known 
in that sea, Mr. Paley remarks that 
their name Kyaneai is very significant, 
and that ‘ they aro described as rolling 
and plunging precisely as icebe^s are 
often seen to do.’ ‘When tho Pontus 
was a closed lake, as even human tradi¬ 
tion distinctly states that it once was 
(Diod. S V. 47), it was very likely in¬ 
deed, especially towards the close of a 
glacial penod, that a great accumulation. 



MEDEIA AND ABSYRTOS. 


15S 


incidents which, follow their arrival in Kolchis repeat in part CHAP, 
the myth of Eadmos at Thebes; and indeed the teeth of the 
dragon which Ai^tes bids him sow are the very teeth which 
Kadmos had not needed to nse. The men who spring from 
them fight with and slay each other as in the Theban 
legend, and by the aid of Medeia lasoii also tames the fire¬ 
breathing bulls, beings which answer to the Minotauros of 
Crete and the brazen bull in which Phalaris is said to 
have burnt his victims.^ Dangers thicken round them. 

While lason is thus doing the bidding of the chieftain, 

Ai^tes is forming a plan to burn the Achaian ships, and is 
anticipated only by Medeia, who has lavished her love on 
lason with all the devotion of E6s for Orion. She hastens 
with her lover on board the Argo, and hurriedly leaves 
Kolchis, taking with her her brother Absyrtos. But Ai^tSs 
is not yet prepared to yield. The Gorgon sisters cannot rest 
without at the least making an effort to avenge Medousa on 
her destroyer Perseus. Ai^t^s is fast overtaking the Argo 
when Medeia tears her brother’s body limb from limb, and 
casts the bleeding and mangled members into the sea—an 
image of the torn and blood-red clouds reflected in the blue 
waters, as the blood which streams from the body of Hera- 
kles represents the fiery clouds stretched along the flaming 
sky.^ But Absyrtos is as dear to Aietos as Polyph&mos 
to Poseidon; and as he stops to gather up the limbs, the 
Argo makes her way onward, and the Kolchian chief has 


of ice should have been formed in so 
vast a basin, borne down from the 
Northern rivers. When the lake burst 
its barriers, they would be earned by 
the current towards the entrance of the 
straits, and there become stranded, as 
the story says that in fact they did/— 
Pindar^ introd. xxiv. Among other 
myths pointing to physical facts of a 
past age Mr. Paley cites the story of the 
rising of Rhodos from the sea, compar¬ 
ing with it the fact of the recent up¬ 
heaval of part of Santorin, the ancient 
Thera, and the old legend of the up¬ 
heaving of Delos, as all showing th.* 
those islands lie ‘within an area of 
known volcanic disturbance/ 

^ Of any historical Phalaris wo know 
absolutely nothing; and the tradition 
simply assigns to him the character of 


the Phenician Moloch. The iniquities 
attributed to him are the horrid holo¬ 
causts which defiled the temples of 
Carthago and the valley of Hinnom. 
His name is probably connected with 
Pales, Palikoi, Pallas, Palatium, and 
Phallos, and would thus point to the 
cruel forms which the worship of Aph¬ 
rodite, Artemis, and the Light deities 
generally, often assumed. 

* The same fate is allotted to Myrtilos, 
whom Pelops throws into that portion of 
the Egean sea which was supposedto bear 
his name. It is, in fact, half the myth of 
Pelops himself, the difference being that 
while all are thrown into the water, 
Pelops is brought to life again —the dif¬ 
ference, in other words, between Sarpe- 
d6n in the common version and Memn6n, 
between Askl^pios and Osins and Baldur. 



154 , 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAH NATIONS. 


BOOK to return home discomfited. The Achaians are now pos- 
—.J— sessed of the golden fleece, but Zeus also is wroth at the 
death of Absyrtos, and raises a storm, of which the results 
are similar to those of the tempest raised by Poseiddn to 
avenge the mutilation of Polyph^mos. In fact, the chief 
incidents in the return of Odysseus we find here also, in 
the magic songs of the Seirens, and the wisdom of KirkS, 
in Skylla and Charybdis and the Phaiakian people. From 
the Seirens they are saved by the strains of Orpheus, strains 
even sweeter than theirs, which make the stuffing of the 
sailors’ ears with waz a work of supererogation. It is use¬ 
less to go into further detail. The accounts given of the 
course of the voyage vary indefinitely in the different mytho- 
graphers, each of whom sought to describe a journey through 
countries and by tracks least known to himself, and there¬ 
fore the most mysterious. The geography, in short, of the 
Argonautic voyage is as much and as little worth iuvesti- 
gating as the geography of the travels of 16 and the sons 
and daughters of her descendants Danaos and Aigyptos. 
and The prophecy uttered long ago to Pelias remained yet 
unfulfilled; and when Ias6n returned to lolkos, he found, NVo 
Odysseus on his return to Ithaka, according to some versions, 
that his father Aison was still living, although worn out with 
age. The wise woman Medeia is endowed with the powers of 
Askl6pios by virtue of the magic robe bestowed on her by 
Helios himself, and these powers are exercised in 
Aison young again. Pelias too, she says, shall recover all his 
ancient strength and vigour, if his daughters will cut up his 
limbs and boil them in a caldron; but when they do her 
bidding, Medeia suffers the limbs to waste away without 
pronouncing the words which would have brought him to life 
again. Thus is lason, like Oidipous and Perseus, Cyrus and 
Eomulus, one of the fatal children whose doom it is to slay 
their sires. The sequel of the myth of Ias6n has few, if any, 
features peculiar to itself. Ias6n can no more be constant to 
Medeia than Theseus to Ariadn6 or Phoibos to Zordnis. At 
Corinth he sees the beautiful Glauk6, another of the bright 
beings whose dwelling is in the morning or evening sky; but 
the nuptials must be as fatal as those of Iol6 and Herakles. 



THE CHILDBEN OF MEBEIA. 


155 


The robe of Helios, whicli lias been tbns far only the golden CHAP, 
fleece under another name, now assumes the deadly powers . 
of the arrows of HeraHes, Acbillcus, or Pbilokt^t^s, and eats 
into the flesh of GlaukS and her father Kreon, as the robe 
bathed in the blood of the Eentaur Nessos consumed the 
body of Herakles. In the murder of the children of lason 
by their mother Medeia we have only another version of the 
slaughter of Pelops by Tantalos, while the winged dragons 
which bear away her chariot are not the dragons of the 
night, like the snakes which seek to strangle the infant 
Herakles, but the keener-eyed serpents of the morning, which 
feed the babe lamos with honey in the violet beds. But 
this portion of the story may be told, and is told, in a 
hundred different ways. In one version she goes to Thebes, 
and there cures Herakles of his j)oisoned wound; in another 
she is reconciled to lason; in another she becomes the wife 
of Aigeus, king of Athens, and the enemy of his son Theseus. 

Others again carry lason back with Medeia to Kolchis, or 
make him die, crushed beneath the timber-head of the Argo. 


Section II— 

There was, however, no need to carry las&n and Medeia The 
with her golden robe back again to the eastern land. The Jelen^ 
treasure brought back from that distant shore could not 
remain long in the west; and in the stealing away of Helen 
and her wealth we have an incident which, from the magni¬ 
ficent series of myths to which it has given birth or with 
which it is interwoven, seems to dwarf almost every other , 
feature in the mythical history of the Aryan nations. The 
story has been complicated with countless local traditions; 
it has received a plausible colouring from the introduction 
of accurate geographical details, of portraits which may be 
true to national character, of accounts of laws, customs, and 
usages, which doubtless prevailed at the time when the poet 
wrote. Tet in spite of epithets which may still be applied 
to the ruins of Tirjns and Mykenai, in spite of the cairns which 
still bear the names of Achilleus or of Aias on the shores of 
the strong-flowing Hellespontos, Helen is simply the radiant 



156 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


The steal¬ 
ing of 
Helen and 
her 

treasures. 


liglit, wL.ether of the morning or the evening.^ As SarainS.^ 
the dawn which peers about in search of the bright cows 
which the Panis have stolen from Indra, we have seen her 
already listening, though but for a moment, to the evil words 
of the robbers. These evil words are reproduced in the 
sophistry of the Trojan Paris, who is only a little more 
successful than the thief of the Vedic hymns, and the mo¬ 
mentary unfaithfulness of the one becomes the long-continued? 
faithlessness of the other. But it is a faithlessness more in 
seeming than in fact. Helen is soon awakened from her* 
evil dream, and her heart remains always in beautiful Argos, 
in the house of her husband who never showed her anything 
but kindness and love. Though Paris is beautiful, yet she 
feels that she has nothing in common with him, and thus 
she returns with a chastened joy to the home from which 
she had been taken away. 

But to be stolen or persecuted for her beauty w^as the lot 
of Helen almost from her cradle. Li the myth of Theseus 
she is brought into Attica, and guarded in early youth by 
Aithra in the stronghold of Aphidnai until she is delivered 
by her brothers, the Dioskouroij and when she had been 
stolen by Paris, and spent ten weary years in Troy, she is 
said in some versions to have become the wife of Deiphobos, 
another son of Priam, and another representative of the 
dark beings who own kinship with the Yedic Vritra. When 
Paris is slain, the brother of the seducer will not suffer 
Helen to be given up to ihe Achaians 5 and thus, on the fall 
of nion, his house is the first to be set on fire. Even after 
her death the fate of Helen is not changed. In Leuk^, the 
white island of the dawn, she is wedded to Achilleus, and 
becomes the mother of Euphorion, the winged child who is 
first loved and then smitten by the thunderbolts of Zeus in 
Melos.^ Throughout she is a being not belonging to the 
land of mortal men. Slie is sprung from the egg of Leda^ 
the being to whom Zeus comes in the form of a swan, and 

^ Tlus is fully recognised by Preller, Medeia also as liis brides in this bright 
■who compares her, as such, ^nth the island: and these are Simply other 
Mater Matuta of the Latins. Gr.Myth. names for the dawn or the evening 
ii. 108. light. 

® But Achilleus has Iphigeneia and 



HELENS HENDRITIS. 


157 


lier Ibrotliers are the Dioskoiiroi, or Asvins. When the time 
for her marriage draws nigh, suitors come thronging from all 
parts of Hellas, their numbers being one for each day of the 
lunar month—a myth which simply tells us that every day 
the sun woos the dawn. In the Hiad she is never spoken of 
uBxcept as the daughter of Zeus; and Isokrates notices the 
^sacrifices offered in Thera.pnai to her and to Menelaos, not 
.as heroes but as gods.' She is worshipped by the women of 
Sparta as the source of all fruitfulness, and in 4.rgos as the 
mother of Iphigeneia, the child of Theseus, and as having 
dedicated a temple to Eileithyia.^ In Rhodes she is Helene 
Dendritis, and a wild legend was invented to account for 
the name.^ Lastly, the myth of her journey to Hion and her 
return is in its framework simply the myth of Auge, the 
mother of T^lephos, like her, taken away to the same land, 
and, like her, brought back again when all enemies have 
been overcome."' 

This is, practically, the Gaelic story of Conall Gulban, 
which may be fairly regarded as embodying a whole cycle of 
mythical tradition. The materials of which it is made up 
-carry us to a vast number of legends in Aryan mythology, 
but the main story is that of Herakles, Achilleus, and Helen. 
Conall himself is the solar hero, despised at first for his 
homely appearance and seeming weakness, but triumphant 
in the end over all his enemies. Hay, as he becomes an 
idiot in the Lay of the Great Fool, so here he is emphatically 
Analkis, the coward. But he is resolved nevertheless to 


’ Preller, Gr Myth. ii. 109-110; 27. 
tdii. 426, Od. iv. 184, &c.: Ibokr. Helen. 
EnJcom. 63. 

Paus. ii. 22, 7. 

* Id. 11 . 19, 10. This story rotates 
lliat Helen, being persecuted hy Mega- 
penthes and Nikostratos after the death 
of Menelaos, took refuge at Rhodes in 
the house of PolyxO, who, being angry 
with Helen as the cause of the Trojan 
war and thus of the death of her 
liusband Tlepoleraos whom Sarp4don 
hIcw, sent some maidens, disguised as 
Krinyes, who surprised Helen while 
ibathmg, and hung her up to a tree 
This myth is simply a picture of the 
nlawn rising like Aphrodite from the 
bca; and it preserves the recollection of 


the Erinyes as dawn-goddesses, while it 
mingles with it tho later notion which 
represented them as Furies. The tree 
points probably to her connexion with 
the sun, and thus carries us back to th<* 
special form of worship paid to her 
at Sparta, as well as to the myth of 
Wuotan. See vol. i p. 371, 430. 

^ This myth is to Preller * eine 
Vorstellung welche ursprunglich hochst 
wahrschemlich auch mit ihrer Bedeutung 
im Naturleben zusammenhmg,’— Gr. 
Myth. ii. 110: and he draws between 
the stories of Helen and Auge a parallel 
which may be exhibited in the following 
equation:— 

Aug4 : Teutliras ;: Helen4 : Paris, 

Tegea : Mysia :: Sparta ; Ilion. 


CHAP. 

m. 


The story 
of Conall 
Gulban. 



158 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AKYAIST NATIONS. 


BOOK 

IL 


make the daughter of the King of Laidheatin his wife^ 
although, like Brynhild and Briar Eose and Surya Bai, she 
is guarded within harriers which the knight who would win 
her must pass at the cost of his life if he fails. The fortress- 
had a great wall, with iron spikes within a foot of each 
other, and a man’s head hpon every spike but the one spike 
which had been left for his own, although it was never to be 
graced by it. It is the hedge of spears of the modern Hindu 
legends, the fiery circle which Sigurd must enter to waken 
the maiden who sleeps within it. As he draws nigh to the 
barrier, one of the soldiers says, ^ I perceive that thou art a 
beggar who was in the land of Eirinn; what wrath would 
the king of Laidheann have if he should come and find hia 
daughter shamed by any one coward of Eirinn?’ At a 
window in this fastness stands the Breast of Light, the 
Helen of the tale. ^ Conall stood a little while gazing at her, 
but at last he put his palm on the point of his spear, he gave 
his rounded spring, and he was in at the window beside the 
Breast of Light,’ a name which recalls the Eur 6 p 6 , Eury- 
ganeia, and Euryphassa of Hellenic myths. The maiden 
bids him not make an attempt which must end in his death, 
but he leaps over the heads of the guards. ^ Was not that 
the hero and the worthy wooer, that his like is not to be 
found to-day ? ’ Yet she is not altogether pleased that it is 
^ the coward of the great world ’ that has taken her away 5 
but Conall is preparing to take a vengeance like that of 
Odysseus, and all the guards and warriors are slain. The 
insult is wiped out in blood, but with marvellous fidelity to 
the old mythical phrases, Conall is made to tell the Breast of 
Light ^that he had a failing, every time that he did any 
deed of valour he must sleep before he could do brave deeds 
again.’ The sun must sleep through the night before he can 
again do battle with his foes. The sequel is as in the Lay of 
the Great Eool. Paris comes while Menelaos slumbers, or 
heeds him not, or is absent. He has a mirror in his ship 
which will rise up for none but the daughter of the king of 
Laidheann, and as it rises for her, he knows that he has 
foimd the fated sister of the Dioskouroi, and with her he 
sails straightway to his home across the wine-faced sea. 



THE STORT OP CONALIi QULBAH. 


159 


But the seducer has sworu to leave her free for a year and CHAP. 

• • TTT 

a day, if Conall has so much courage as to come in pursuit v—,, 1 ^ 
of her. Like Helen, she is shut up in the robber’s strong¬ 
hold, ^ sorrowful that so much blood was being spilt for her 5 ’ 
but Conall conquers in the struggle and rescues her ^ out of 
the dark place in which she was,^ the gloomy cave of the 
Panis. Then follow more wanderings answering to the Nostoi, 
and, like Odysseus, Conall appears in worn-out clothes in 
order to make his way into the king’s fortress, and again a 
scene of blood ensues, as in the hall of slaughter in the 
courts of the Ithakan and Burgundian chieftains. The story 
now repeats itself. The king of the Green Isle has a daugh¬ 
ter who, like Danae, is shut up in a tower, and the other 
warriors try in vain to set her free, till Conall ^ struck a kick 
on one of the posts that was keeping the turret aloft, and 
the post broke and the turret fell, but Conall caught it be¬ 
tween his hands before it reached the ground. A door opened 
and Sunbeam came out, the daughter of the king of the Green 
Isle, and she clasped her two arms about the neck of Conall, 
and Conall put his two arms about Sunbeam, and he bore 
her into the great house, and he said to the king of the Green 
Isle, Thy daughter is won.’ The myth is transparent. Sun¬ 
beam would marry Conall, but he tells her that he is already 
wedded to Breast of Light, and she becomes the wife of Mac- 
a-Moir, the Great Hero, the son of the king of Light. 

The stealing away of Helen and all her treasures is the The voy- 
cause of another expedition which, like the mission of the ^chafans^ 
Argonautai, brings together all the Achaian chieftains; and to Ilion. 
the mythical history of these princes, interwoven with the 
old tale of the death or the taking away of the day, has 
grown up into the magnificent poems which make up the 
storehouse of Greek epical literature. But the main thread 
of the story remains clear amd simple enough. If the search 
and the struggle which end it represent the course of the 
night, they must last for something like ten hours, and thus 
we get the ten years of the war. The journey is accomplished 
during the dark hours: but it cannot begin until the evening 
is ended, or in other words, until the twilight has completely 
faded away. Hence the calm which stays the Achaian fleet 



160 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYA^s^ HATIOHS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Meleagros 
and Kleo¬ 
patra. 


in Aulis cannot end until IpMgeneia has been oJBEered as a 
victim to the offended Artemis, the goddess of the moon or 
the night. It is vain to resist. The sin of Agamemnon is 
brought back to his mind, as he remembers how he promised 
before the birth of his child that he would offer up the most 
beautiful thing which that year might produce, and how he 
had failed to fulfil his vow. But now the evening must die 
if the light of morning is to be seen again: and Iphigeneia is 
slain that Helen may come back to Sparta. But although 
her blood flows to the grief and agony of her father and her 
kinsfolk, the war must still last for ten years, for so it had 
been decreed by Zeus, who sent the snake to eat up the 
sparrow and her young; ^ and thus room was given for the 
introduction of any number of episodes, to account for, or to 
explain the lengthening out of the struggle; and the machi¬ 
nery of a thousand myths was obviously available for the 
purpose. Like Hippodameia or Atalant^, Helen was beau¬ 
tiful, but many must fail while one alone could win her. 
Sigurd only can waken Brynhild; and the dead bodies of 
the unsuccessful knights lie before the hedge or wall of 
spears in^the Hindu folk-lore. Thus with the introduction 
of Achilleus, as the great hero without whom the war can 
never be brought to an end, the whole framework of the epic 
poem was complete. It only remained to show what the 
others vainly attempted, and what Achilleus alone succeeded 
in doing. That the life of Achilleus should run in the same 
magic groove with the lives of other heroes, mattered nothing. 
The story which most resembled that of Achilleus is indeed 
chosen by the poet to point to him the moral which he 
needed most of all to take to heart. 

This story is the life of Meleagros, and it is recited to 
Achilleus by Phoinix, the teacher of his childhood, the 
dweller in that purple land of the east from which Eur6p6 
was taken to her western home. It is the picture of the 
short-lived sun, whose existence is bound up with the light 
or the torch of day, who is cursed by his mother for killing 

' This incident, II. ii. 300, is related and not at all as the cause of the length 
simply as a sign of the number of years of the struggle, 
which must precede the fall of Ilion, 



MBLBAGROS AND THE KOUKETES. 


161 


her brothers, the clouds which are scattered by his spear chap, 
rays, who moves on his way moodily and sullenly, as the 
clouds pass across his face, and appears at intervals to the 
terror of all his enemies. He is a son of Oineus or Ar^s, 
and Althaia the nourishing D^mdtdr; and he proves his skill 
in the use of the javelin by bringing down the monstrous 
boar which the chieftains assembled at Halydon had failed 
to kill. But the interest of his life lies in the burning torch 
and the prophecy of the Moirai, that with its extinction his 
own life must come to an end. His mother therefore 
snatches it from the fire, and carefully guards it from harm. 

But the doom must be accomplished. Artemis stirs up strife 
between the men of Kalydon and the Kouretes for the spoils 
of the boar, and a war foUows in which the former are 
always conquerors whenever Meleagros is among them. 

But the^ Kouretes are, like the Eorybantes and the Idaian 
Daktyloi, the mystic dancers who can change their forms at 
will, and thus their defeat is the victory of the sun who 
scatters the clouds as they wheel in their airy movements 
round him. These clouds reappear in the brothers of 
Althaia, and when they are slain her wrath is roused, like 
the anger of Poseiddn when Polyphdmos is blinded, or the 
rage of Zeus when the Kykldpes are slain. The curse now 
lies heavy on Meleagros. His voice is no more heard in the 
council; his spear is seen no more in the fight. He lies idle 
in his golden chambers with the beautiful Kleopatra; 
Kephalos is taking his rest with Eds behind the clouds 
which hide his face from mortal men, and he will not come 
forth. Wearied out at last, his mother brings forth the 
fatal brand and throws it into the fire, and as its last spark 
flickers out,^ Meleagros dies. With him die his wife and his 
mother; Hdianeira and Oindne cannot live when Herables 
and Paris are gone.i^ So passes away the hero who can only 
thus be slain, and his sisters who are changed into guinea- 
hens weep for his death, as the sisters of Phaethdn, the 

bright fleecy clouds, shed tears of amber over their brotlier’s 
grave. 


^ * In the Uiad. Meleagros does not 

return home from the fight with the 
Kouretes, for the Erinyes who have 
VOL. II. 


Althaia overtake 
another form of the 
myth of Helene Bendritis. 



' 162 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK In this story Phoinix tells Achilleus that he may see a 
^ reflection of himself; and the parallel is closer than perhaps 
Thetis and the poet imagined. Like Meleagros^ he is a being in whose 
■^®his flows the blood of the gods. His mother is the sea- 
nymph Thetis^ for, like Kephalos and Aphrodite, like Athene 
and lamos, the sun-god must rise from the waters; and in 
the life of his father Peleus the threads of a large number 
of myths are strangely ravelled together. The tale of his 
sojourn in lolkos repeats the story of Belleroph6n and 
Anteia; and as Proitos sends Belleroph6n that he may be 
put to death by other hands than his own, so Akastos, the 
husband who thinks himself injured, leaves Peleus without 
arms on the heights of Pelion, that the wild beasts may 
devour him. He is here attacked by Hentaurs, but saved by 
Cheiron, who gives him back his sword. Here also he becomes 
the husband of Thetis, at whose wedding-feast the seeds of 
the strife are sown which produce their baleful fruits in the 
stealing away of Helen and all its wretched consequences. 
But the feast itself is made the occasion for the investiture 
of Peleus with all the insignia of Helios or Phoibos. His 
lance is the gift of Cheiron: from Poseid6n, the god of the 
air and the waters, come the immortal horses Xanthos and 
Balios, the golden and speckled steeds which draw the chariot 
of the sun through the sky, or the car of Achilleus on the 
plains of Hion. Por her child Thetis desires, as she her¬ 
self possesses, the gift of immortality, and the legend, as 
given by ApoUodoros, here introduces almost unchanged 
the story of D^m^ter and Triptolemos. Like the Eleu- 
sinian goddess, Thetis bathes her babe by night in Are, 
to destroy the mortality inherited from his father. Peleus, 
chancing one day to see the act, cries out in terror, and 
Thetis leaves his house for ever.^ Of the many stories told 
of his later years, the myth of the siege of lolkos and the 
' death of Astydameia repeats that of Absyrtos and has 
probably the same meaning. The involuntary slaughtei- of 
Eurytion finds a parallel in the death of Eunomos, who is 
unwittingly killed by Herakles; and the flocks which he 
offers in atonement to Iros the father, are the flocks which 
* ApoUod lii. 13, 6. 



ACHILLEUS IN WOMAN’S GAEB. 


163 


appear in all tlie legends of Phoibos and Helios. Iros re- CHAP, 
fuses to receive tliem, and Peleus suffers them to wander . ^ 

untended untiil they are devoured by a wolf,—a phrase which 
betrays the nature both of the herds and their destroyer, 
and carries us to the death of the gentle Prokris. 

When Thetis had vanished away, Peleus carried the child The wo- 
to the wise Kentaur Oheiron, who taught him how to ride AcbUeus. 
and shoot,—a myth which at once explains itself when we 
remember that the Kentaurs are the offspring of Ixlon and 
Nephele. In his earlier years Achilleus resembles the youth¬ 
ful Dionysos, Theseus, and Phoibos, in the womanly appear¬ 
ance of his form,—the gentler aspect of the new risen sun 
when the nymphs wash him in pure water and wrap him in 
robes of spotless white. But while his limbs yet showed 
only the rounded outlines of youth, Kalchas the prophet 
could still foresee that only with his help could the strong¬ 
hold of the seducer of Helen be taken, and that none but 
Achilleus could conquer Hektor. Only the death of his 
enemy must soon be followed by his own. The night must 
follow the blazing sunset in which the clouds pour out their 
streaips of blood-red colour, like the Trojan youths slain on 
the great altar of sacrifice. To avert this doom, if it be 
possible to do so, Thetis clothed the child, now nine years 
old, in girlish raiment and placed him in Skyros among the 
daughters of Lykomedes, where from his golden locks he 
received the name of Pyrrha. But he could not long be 
hid: and the young boy who had in his infancy been called 
Ligyron, the whining, was recognised by Odysseus the 
chieftain of Ithaka as the great champion of the Achaian 
armies. 

Thus was Achilleus engaged in a quarrel which was not The career 
his own; and on this fact we can scarcely lay a greater 
stress than he does himself. The task is laid upon him, as 
it was on Herakles or on Perseus; and the sons of Atreus 
are to him what Polydektes and Eurystheus had been to the 
sons of Dana^ and Alkm^ne. The men of Hion had never 
ravaged his fields or hurt his cattle; and not only were his 
exploits made to shed lustre on the greedy chiefs who used him 
for a tool, but in every battle the brunt of the fight fell upon 



164 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 
II. ' 


him, while almost all the booty went to them. It is the 
servitude of Phoibos: but the despot is here a harsher 
master than Adm^tos, and the grief which Achilleua is 
made to suffer is deeper than that of Apoll6n when Daphn^ 
vanishes from his sight, or of Herakles when Eurytos refuses 
to perform the compact which pledged him to make Iol6 the 
bride of the hero. The Achaian camp is visited with a 
terrible plague. Pirst the beasts die, then the men, and the 
smoke of funeral pyres ascends up everywhere to heaven. At 
length they learn from Kalchas that the wrath of Phoibos 
has been roused by the wrong done to the priest Chryses 
who had in vain offered to Agamemnon a splendid ransom 
for his daughter, and that not until the maiden is given up 
will the hand of the god cease to lie heavy on the people. 
At length the king is brought to submit to the will of the 
deity, but he declares that in place of the daughter of 
Chryses, Bris^is, the child of the Vedic Brisaya, shall be torn 
away from the tents of Achilleus, and thus the maiden on 
whom Achilleus had lavished all his love passes away into the 
hands of the man whom he utterly despises for his cowardice 
and his greed. For him the light is blotted out of the sky 
as thoroughly as the first beauty of the day is gone when the 
fair hues of morning give way before the more monotonous 
tints which take their place. Henceforth his journey must 
be solitary, but he can take that vengeance on his persecutor 
which the sun may exact of those who have deprived him of 
his treasure. He may hide himself in his tent, or sullenly 
sit on the sea-shore, as the sun may veil his face behind the 
clouds, while the battle of the winds goes on beneath them. 
Then, in the sudden outburst of his grief, he makes a solemn 
vow that when the Achaians are smitten down by their enemies 
his sword shall not be unsheathed in their behalf; and when 
his mother comes from her coral caves to comfort him, he 
beseeches her to go to Zeus and pray him to turn the scale 
of victory on the Trojan side, that the Argives may see what 
sort of a king they have, and Agamemnon may rue the folly 
which dishonoured the best and bravest of all the Achaian 
chieftains. So Thetis hastens to Olympos, and Zeus swears 
to her that Hion shall not fall until the insult done to her 



THE WRATH OP ACHILLEUS. 


165 


son has been fully atoned. But to this Agamemnon will 
not yet stoop. His chieftains stand around him in unim¬ 
paired strength, and the men ■whom they lead are eager for 
the conflict. It was obviously the point at which the poet 
might pass from the story of Achilleus to the exploits of 
other chieftains, and accordingly many books of the Tligrl 
are taken up with naixatives showing what those chiefs 
could and could not do without Achilleus. Whether these 
narratives formed part of the Iliad in its earliest form, is a 
point which has been examined elsewhere; but they are so 
arranged as to lead to the humiliating confession of Aga¬ 
memnon that he has lost too many men to be able to con¬ 
tinue -the struggle with any hope of success—a confession 
which only admits in other words that the conqueror of 
Ilion is not now in their assembly. The answer is obvious. 
Briseis must be restored, and Agamemnon must express his 
sorrow for all his evil words and evil deeds. If then any 
attempts were made to appease the wrath of Achilleus before 
the Anal reparation which he accepted, it follows that those 
attempts did not fulfll the conditions on which he insisted, 
and hence that the ninth of the books of the Iliad, as it now 
stands, could not possibly have formed part of the original 
Achillfeis or Ilias. The apology which is here rejected is 
word for word the same as that which is afterwards held to 
suffice, and the reparation offered after the death of Patro- 
klos is in no way larger than that which had been offered 
before. The rejection of a less complete submission is, how¬ 
ever, in thorough accordance with the spirit of the old myth, 
and the mediation of Phoinix serves weU to exhibit Achilleus 
to himself in the mirror of the character of Meleagros. But 
taking the story as it now stands, we may weU stand amaxed 
at the unbounded savagery of the picture. There is not 
only no pausing on the part of Achilleus to reflect that 
Agamemnon has a heart to feel as well as himself, and that 
the loss of Chrysffis might at least weigh something against 
that of the daughter of Brisks, but there is not the slightest 
heed to the sufferings of his countrymen and the hopeless 
misery of the protracted struggle. The one redeeming fea- 
trae is his truthfulness, if this can be held to redeem a cha- 


CHAP 

lu. 



166 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


racter whicli Patroklos describes^ as fit only for one wbo is 
the child of the rugged rocks and the bairen sea. If the 
tears of Patroklos are of any avail, it is not because he tells 
him of the wretched plight of the Achaian hosts, but because 
he is his friend, and his friendship is part of himself, his 
own selfish and personal concern; and thus when that friend 
prays him, if he will not go forth himself, to let him have 
his horses, his armour, and his Myrmidons, Achilleus tells 
him that all his rage is because Agamemnon had taken from 
him the prize of his bow and spear, and that even now he 
would not have yielded a jot of his vow, if the war had not 
at length touched his own ships.^ When, further, his friend 
has fallen by the hand of Hektor, and Achilleus makes his 
deadly oath that the funeral rites shall not be performed over 
his body until the head and the arms of Hektor can be 
placed by its side, the submission of the Argive chiefs is 
accepted not from any notion that his inaction has sprung 
from an exorbitant selfishness, but because his own grief and 
unbounded fury for the loss of his friend drive him to do the 
things to which the chiefs would urge him by the less exci¬ 
ting arguments of a cooler patriotism. How that his wrath 
is thus kindled, the strife shall indeed be ended in the blood 
of his enemies. Hektor shall die, though the death of 
Achilleus may follow ever so closely upon it, and the blood 
of twelve human victims, deliberately reserved for the fright¬ 
ful sacrifice, shall stream on the pyre of Patroklos. As the 
portrait of a human being, the picture is from first to last 
inexpressibly revolting; and it is only when we take the 
story to pieces and trace the origin of its several portions, 
that we begin to see how there lay on the poet a necessity 
not less constraining than that which forced Achilleus to his 
fitful fury and his early doom, a necessity which compelled 
him to describe under the guise of human warriors the 
actions of the hosts which meet for their great battle every 
morning in the heavens. Regarded thus, there is scarcely 
a single feature, utterly perplexing though it may be on the 
supposition that we are dealing with a human portrait, 
which is not seen to be full of life and meaning. We are no 

’ > 'll. xvi 34. 2 xvj. 63. 



PATROKLOS AND SARPEDON. 


167 


longer perplexed to know wky Patroklos, who can move in CHAP, 
the armonr of Achilleus, yet cannot wield his spear, why the . 

horses which Zeus gave to Peleus are the offspring of the 
west-wind and the harpy Podarge, and why their mother 
feeds in a meadow by the side of the ocean stream.^ All is 
now plain. The Myrmidons must be compared with the 
wolves which appear almost everywhere in the myths of 
Phoibos Apolldn; their tongues and their cheeks must be 
red as with blood. We see at once why Patroklos can re¬ 
turn safe from the fight only if he does strictly the bidding 
of Achilleus, for Patroklos is but the son of Edymene, who 
must not dare to whip the horses of Helios. When at 
length Patroklos goes forth and encounters Sarped6n5 it is 
curious to trace the inconsistencies which are forced upon 
the poet as he interweaves several solar myths together. On 
the one side is the Zeus who has sworn to Thetis that he 
will avenge the wrongs done to Aehilleus,—a promise which 
cannot be fulfilled by allowing his friend to be slaughtered, 
on the other the Zeus whose heart is grieved for the death 
of his own child Sarp^d6n. His vow to Thetis binds him to 
shield Patroklos from harm; his relation to the brave 
Lykian chieftain makes him look upon the son of Menoitios 
as he looked on Phaethon while doing deadly mischief in 
the chariot of Helios. So here Zeus takes counsel whether 
he shall smite him at once or suffer him to go on a little 
longer in his headlong course. But each story remains 
perfectly clear. SarpM6n falls by the same doom which 
presses not only on the man who slays him, but on Achilleus, 
on Bellerophdn, on Kephalos and a hundred others. The 
Lykian chief dies, like his enemy, in the prime of golden 
youth and in the far west, for his Lykia lay far away to the 
east of Ilion, where the sun comes up, and the Dawn is 
greeting the earth when the powers of sleep and death bear 
their beautiful burden to the doors of his golden home. By 
the same inconsistency the eastern tradition made Apollon 
the enemy of Patroklos, as it afterwards associates him with 
Paris in the death of Achilleus; yet the power by which he 
preserves the body of Hektor from decay is employed by 

' iZ xvi. 160 . 



168 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II 


Thetis to preserve that of PatroHos. But the terrible fight 
over the dead ?atroklos is fought over again when Achilleus 
is smitten, as^ it is fought out by the clouds which do battle 
together over the dying Herakles. Prom this point all is 
transparent. The grief of Achilleus when he learns that 
his friend is dead is the darkening of the sky when the sun 
which had been shining through the cloud-rifts withdraws 
his light; -and in the tearing of his hair, in the defilement 
of his beautiful robe and the tossing of the sand over his 
head and face, we see the torn vapours hurrying hither and 
thither in a thousand shapeless forms. Henceforth the one 
thought which fills his heart is that of vengeance, nor is his 
burning desire weakened when Thetis tells him that the 
death of Hektor must soon be followed by his own, as the 
sunset is not far off when the sun wins his final victory over 
the clouds which have assailed him throughout his journey. 
Herakles himself met boldly the doom brought upon him by 
the wrath of Her^; and Achilleus is content to die, if only 
he may first give his enemies sufficient cause for weeping. 
Then follows the incident in which Thetis and Hephaistos 
play precisely the part of Hjordis and Begin in the Volsung 
tale. The arms of Achilleus are in the hands of Hektor; but 
when the morning comes, Thetis will return from the east 
bringing a goodly panoply from the lord of fire. At what 
other time could the sun receive the new armour which is 
to replace that of which he had been robbed by the powers 
of darkness P We can scarcely lay too much stress on these 
points of detail in which the poet manifestly follows a tra¬ 
dition too strong to be resisted. This story of the evening 
which precedes the return of Achilleus to the battle-field is a 
vivid picture of tho sun going down angrily and betokening 
his appearance in fiercer strength on the morrow. When to 
the bidding of Iris, that he should go forth to avenge his 
friend, he replies that he has no arms, the goddess bids him 
show himself in the trenches without them. Like the 
sudden flash of the sun, when as he approaches the horizon 
his light breaks from behind the dense veil of vapours, 
is the shout of Achilleus ringing through the air. It is 
absurd to think of any human warrior, or to suppose that 
any hyperbole could suggest or justify the poet's words, as 



THE ARMING OF ACHILLEUS. 


169 


he tells us how the dazzling light thrown from his face 
reached up to the high ether of Zens, and how the horses 
of the Trojans felt the woes that were coming, and their 
drivers were astonished, as they beheld the awful fire kindled 
on the head of the great-hearted son of Peleus by the dawn- 
goddess Pallas Athene. But for the present there is the 
blaze of light, and nothing more. At the bidding of Here 
the sun goes down, and the strife is sta3’-ed. But as the 
hours of the night wear on, the fire-god toils on the task 
which Thetis prays him to undertake 5 and when the mighty 
disk of the shield and the breast-plate more dazzling than 
the fiercest fire are ready, Thetis flies with them to her son 
nice a hawk winging its way from the snow-clad Olympos. 
The hour of vengeance is now indeed come. As his mother 
lays before him the gifts of Hephaistos, his eyes flash like 
the lightning, and his only fear is that while he is fighting, 
the body of Patroklos may decay. But Thetis bids him be 
of good cheer. Ho unseemly thing shall come near to mar 
that beautiful form, though it should lie unheeded the whole 
year round. There can be now no delay, and no pause 
in the conflict. The black clouds have hidden the face of 
Achilleus long enough; but now he will not eat before his 
deadly task is done. He is braced for the final struggle by 
a sight which he had scarcely hoped to see again. The 
Achaia.n chiefs appear to make the submission of Agamem¬ 
non, and like lol^ coming to HeraHes, or Antigon^ to the 
dying Oidipous, Briseis is restored to him unscathed as 
when she was torn away from his tent. In her grief for 
Patroklos, whom she had left full of life, we have the grief 
of the dawn for the death of the sun in his gentler aspect. 
In him there had been no fierceness, and if his gentler 
temper went along with a lack of strength, like that of 
Phaethdn in the chariot of Helios, he wa^ none the less 
deserving of her love. In the arming which follows we have, 
as plainly as words can paint it, the conflagration of the 
heavens: and the phrases used by the poet, if regarded as a 
description of any earthly hero and any earthly army, might 
be pronounced a series of monstrous hyperboles with far 
greater justice than the hundred-headed narcissus to which 
Colonel Mure applies the term when speaking of the myth 


CHAP. 

in. 



170 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


of Persephon^. The shield flashing like a beacon-fire far 
away on the deep sea, the helmet crest gleaming like a star, 
the armour which bears up the hero as on the pinions of a 
bird, the spear which Cheiron cut on the heights of Pelion, 
the undying horses gifted with the mind and the speech of 
man, all belong to no earthly warfare. Of the mighty con¬ 
flict which follows we have already spoken; but it is scarcely 
possible to lay too much stress on the singular parallelism 
between the several stages in this fatal contest, as compared 
with the battle between Odysseus and the suitors. The 
hero with the irresistible weapons which no other arm 
can wield, filled with the strength of Athene herself, fight¬ 
ing with enemies who almost overpower him just when 
he seems to be on the point of winning the victory,—the 
struggle in which the powers of heaven and hell take part, 
—the utter discomfiture of a host by the might of one in¬ 
vincible warrior,—the time of placid repose which follows 
the awful turmoil,—the doom which in spite of the present 
glory still awaits the conqueror, all form a picture, the lines 
of which are in each case the same, and in which we see 
reflected the fortunes of Perseus, Oidipous, BeUeroph6n, 
and all the crowd of heroes who have each their Hektor to 
vanquish and their Ilion to overthrow, whether in the den 
of Chimaira, the labyrinth of the Minotaur, the cave df 
Cacus, the frowning rook of the Sphinx, or the stronghold of 
the Panis. Nor is the meaning of the tale materially altered 
whether we take the mj'-th that he fell in the western gates 
by the sword of Paris aided by the might of Phoibos, or the 
version of Diktys of Crete, that in his love for Polyxena the 
daughter of Priam he promised to join the Trojans, and 
going unarmed into the temple of Apollon at Thymbra, was 
there slain by the seducer of Helen. As the sun is the child 
of the night, so, as the evening draws on, he may be said to 
aUy himself with the kindred of the night again; and his 
doom is equally certain whether the being whom he is said 
to love represent the dawn or the sister of the night that is 
coming. With all the ferocity which he shows on the loss of 
BrisMs, Achilleus none the less resembles Herakles ; but the 
pity which he feels for the amazon Penthesileia, when 



THE RETURN OF THE ACHAIANS. 


171 


he discovers her beauty, explains the^ myths which make CHAP, 
him the lover of DiomedS and Polyxena, and the hus- - > 

band of Medeia, or Iphigeneia, or of Helen herself on the 
dazzling isle of Lenk^. We are dealing with the loves 
of the snn for the dawn, the twilight, and the violet-tinted 
clouds. 

But if the myth of Achilleus is, as Phoinix himself is made The 
to say, only another form of the tale of Meleagros, the story of 
the sun doomed to go down in the full brightness of his splen¬ 
dour after a career as brief as it is brilliant—if for him the 
slaughter of Hektor marks the approaching end of his own 
life, the myth of Helen carries us back to another aspect of 
the great drama. She is the treasure stolen from the gleam¬ 
ing west, and with her wealth she is again the prize of the 
Achaians when Paris falls by the poisoned arrows of Philo- 
ktStes. This rescue of the Spartan queen from the se¬ 
ducer whom she utterly despises is the deliverance of Sa- 
ram^ from the loathsome Panis; but the long hours of the 
day must pass before her eyes can be gladdened by the sight 
of her home. Thus the ten hours’ cycle is once more re¬ 
peated in the Hostoi, or return of the heroes, for in the 
Mediterranean latitudes, where the night and day may be 
roughly taken as dividing the twenty-four hours into two 
equal portions, two periods of ten hours each would repre¬ 
sent the time not taken up with the phenomena of daybreak 
and sunrise, sunset and twilight. Thus although the whole 
night is a hidden struggle with the powers of darkness, the 
decisive exploits of Achilleus, and indeed the active opera¬ 
tions of the war are reserved for the tenth year and furnish 
the materials for the Iliad, while in the Odyssey the ten 
years’ wanderings are followed by the few hours in which 
the beggar throws off his rags and takes dire vengeance on 
his enemies. Hence it is that Odysseus ^returns, a man of 
many griefs and much bowed with toil, in the twentieth year 
from the time when the Achaian fleet set sail from Aulis. 

The interest of the homeward voyage of the treasure-seek- odys^seus 
ers is centered in the fortunes of Odysseus, the brave and 

lykos 

wise ctieftain wiiose one yearning it is to see Ms wife and 
Ms cliild once more before be dies. He has fought the battle 



172 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


of the children of the sun against the dark thieves of night, 
and now his history must he that of the lord of day as he 
goes on his journey through the sky in storm and calm, in 
peace or in strife. This transparence of meaning marks 
not only the myth of Odysseus; it is seen in all that is 
related of his kinsfolk. The character of his parents merely 
reflects his own. His grandfather is Autolykos, the true or 
the absolute light which kindles the heavens at dawn. But 
Autolykos, who is endowed with a wisdom which coming 
from Helios passes into a craft like that of Medeia, is a child 
of Hermes, the morning breeze, and Telaug^ the far-shining. 
His bride is Neaira, the early dawn, whose daughters feed 
the cattle of Helios in Thrinakia. His child is Antikleia, a 
name which suggests a comparison with Antigon^ and 
Antiop^ ; and Antikleia is the wife of Laertes, a being akin 
to the Laios of Theban tradition, or of Sisyphos, whose story 
is that of the sun toiling to the uppermost heights of the 
heaven with his huge orb, only to see it roll down again to 
the sea. From these springs Odysseus, whose name, in the 
belief of the poet,^ indicated the wrath or hatred of his 
grandsire Autolykos, but which through the form Olyseus, the 
Latin TJlyxes or TJlysses, may perhaps rather represent the 
Sanskrit ulukshaya, the Eurykreion or widely ruling king 
of the Greeks. With the abode of Autolykos on Pamassos is 
connected the story of the boar’s bite, by whose mark Eury- 
kleia the old nurse recognises Odysseus on his return from 
Ilion; nor can we doubt that this boar is the beast whose 
tusk wrought the death of Adonis. It is true indeed that 
in Autolykos the idea suggested by the penetrating powers 
of sunlight has produced a character far lower than that of 
Odysseus : but it must not be forgotten that the latter can 
lie, or steal, or stab secretly when it suits his purpose to do 
so. If the splendour of the sun is in one sense an image of 
absolute openness and sincerity, the rays which peer into 
dark crannies or into the depths of the sea may as naturally 
indicate a craft or cunning which must suggest the forms 
assumed by the myth in the stories of Medeia, Autolykos, 

* He is also called the husband of Amphithea, the light which gleams all round 
the heaven, ' Od, xix. 410. 



PBNELOPfi. 


173 


and Sisyphos. The process is the same as that which con- CHAP, 
verted the flashing weapon of Chrys 46 r into the poisoned ^ 

arrows of Herakles, Odysseus, and Philokt^tes. 

But Odysseus, the suitor of Helen, is known especially as Odysaeus 
the husband of Penelop^, who weaves by day the beautiful 
web of cirri clouds which is undone again ’during the night; 
and it is as the weaver that she defeats the schemes of the 
suitors in that long contest which runs parallel to the great 
conflict at Ilion. Por the departure of the Achaian chief¬ 
tains at Troy is the departure of the light after sundown; 
and the powers of darkness as necessarily assail Penelop^ as 
they fight to retain Helen in the city of Priam and Paris. 

How then could she withstand their importunities except by 
devising some such condition as that of the finishing of a web 
which cannot be seen completed except by the light of the 
sun,—in other words, until Odysseus should have come back ? 
Eegarded thus, Penelop^ is the faithful bride of the sun, 
pure and unsullied in her truthfulness as Ath^n^ herself, and 
cherishing the memory of Odysseus through weary years of 
sorrow and suffering. As such, the poet of the Odyssey has 
chosen to exhibit her; but there were legends which spoke 
of Pan as the offspring of Penelop^ and Hermes, or of Pe- 
nelop^ and all the suitors together. Of this myth, which 
simply exhibits the evening twilight and the darkness as the 
parents of the breeze which murmurs softly in the night, it 
is enough to say that we have no right to put it down as 
necessarily of later growth than the myth which forms the 
subject of the Odyssey. There is nothing to be urged 
against, there is much to be urged for, the priority of such 
myths as Kephalos and Prokris, D^m^ter and Persephon^, over 
by far the larger number of legends noticed or narrated in 
our Homeric poems; and if one story is to be pronounced of 
later growth than another, the verdict must be based on 
other and more conclusive evidence than the mere fact that 
it happens not to be mentioned in our Iliad or Odyssey. 
Penelope indeed is only the dawn or the evening light: and 
Aphrodite is but another aspect of Ath^n^. As such, Pe¬ 
nelope is thrown by her parents into the sea at her birth, 
and she becomes AnadyomenS when the sea-birds, from 



174 ' 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAH NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II 


The -wo¬ 
manly 
Odysseus. 


which she was also said to have her name, raise her np on 
their cloud-like wings. As such also, when Odysseus has 
been slain by Telegonos,^ she becomes the wife of his mur¬ 
derer, either in Aiaia or in Leuke where Helen is also 
wedded to Achilleus. 

To the success of the Trojan expedition Odysseus is only 
less necessary than the great chieftain of Phthia; and hence 
we have the same story of his unwillingness to engage in it 
which we find in the story of Achilleus. In this case as in 
the other it is a work to be done for the profit of others, not 
his own. It is in short a task undertaken against his will; 
and'it answers strictly to the servitude of Phoibos in the 
house of Adm^tos, or the subjection of Herakles to the 
bidding of Eurystheus. With the idea of the yoke thus laid 
upon them is closely connected that notion of weakness to 
which the Homeric hymn points when it speaks of the 
nymphs as wrapping Phoibos in the white swaddling-clothes 
before he became Chrys46r. This raiment becomes a dis¬ 
guise, and thus the workmen jeer at Theseus for his girlish 
appearance, and Achilleus is found in woman’s garb by those 
who come to take him to Ilion. The idea of disguise, how¬ 
ever, readily suggests that of feigned madness, and as such 
it comes before us in the story of Odysseus, who is described 
as sowing salt behind a plough drawn by an ox and an ass. 
The trick is found out by Palamedes, who, placing the infant 
Telemachos in his way, makes Odysseus turn the plough 
aside and avoid him. He is now bound to attempt the 
rescue of Helen, as he and all her suitors had sworn to do 
when they sought her hand. At Troy, however, he is but 
one of many Achaian chieftains, although he is second only 
to Achilleus ; and thus he goes with Menelaos to Ilion to 
demand the surrender of Helen, before the strife is formally 
begun. In the long contest which follows he is renowned 
chiefly for his wisdom and his eloquence. In the council 

' TMs name, like Telemachos, Tele- the sun, it follows that all who die are 
phos aud T^lephassa, denotes the far- slain by these gods. Hence Odysseus 
reaching spears (rays) of the sun and not less than his enemies must be slai n 
as Helios and Phoibos became the lords by Phoibos or somebody who represents 
of life and death, of the light and him. 
darkness which depends on the orb of 



ODYSSEUS AND HIS COMRADES. 


175 


none lias greater power; and his coolnnimpassioned sotriety 
stands out in singular contrast with, the fierce impetuosity of 
Achilleus. He can also serve, if need be, as a spy, and in 
ambush none are more formidable. With, him, according to 
one tradition, originated that device of the wooden horse 
which simply reproduces the Argo on dry land. As the ship 
bears the confederated Achaians who contrive to win a 
welcome from the Kolchian king, so the wooden horse 
carries all the bravest of the Argives on their errand of 
death to the Trojans and of rescue to Helen, whose wealth 
is the Golden Fleece. 

With the fall of Ilion Odysseus at once appears in another 
aspect. He is now the man who longs to see his wife, who 
cannot tarry where he is, and who must go on his way 
homewards in spite of all that may oppose him or seek to 
weaken the memory of her beauty and her love. On this 
thread the poet of the Odyssey has strung together the series 
of adventures, most of which we have already sufiSciently 
examined in the myths under which each naturally falls. 
These adventures are interwoven with wonderful skill; but 
they may each be traced to some simple phrase denoting 
originally the phenomena of the sun’s daily or yearly course 
through the heaven. Among the most remarkable features 
of the story are the changes in the companions of Odysseus. 
He sets out from Hion with a gallant fleet and a goodly com¬ 
pany : he lands in Ithaka from a beautiful bark with a noble 
crew: but of those who had left Troy with him not one re¬ 
mained—a vivid image of the sun setting among clouds, but 
the clouds are not the same as those which surrounded him 
at his birth. These must vanish away and die continually, 
and a stock of stories to account for each disaster was the 
inevitable result. The means by which the misfortunes were 
brought about would also be readily suggested by the daily 
appearances of the sky. Of all the clouds which are seen in 
the heavens the delicate vapours which float like islets 
through the blue seas of air would be the friends of the sun; 
the black clouds which rudely thrust these aside, or blot 
them out of sight, would be the enemies who devour his 
men. The same phenomena would suggest their features 


CHAP. 

III. 


Odysseus 
the Wan¬ 
derer. 



176 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


and their raiment, the rough shaggy locks and nnconth 
faces of the beings who represent the dark yaponrs, the pure 
white robes and heavenly countenances of the maidens who 
dwell in the fair Phaiakian land. Thus the enemies and 
friends of the sun attend him throughout his journey, and 
the times of peace may at any moment be followed by a time 
of war. But these gloomy storm-clouds, which move like 
giants with clubs as high as a ship^s mast, all rise from the 
sea. In other words they are sons of Poseidon, and thus is 
explained that enmity of Poseid&n for Odysseus which is 
partially counteracted by the dawn-goddess Ath^nS. Hence 
also many of the beings whom he encounters are only old 
friends or enemies in a new form or dress. There is really 
no difference in kind between the Kikones, the Laistry- 
gonians, and the Kyklopes, between the Lotos-eaters, KirkS, 
and the Seirens. It is but a question of the degree of risk 
and extent of loss in each case. Thus the Kikones gather 
together, like the leaves of the trees in number, and they gain 
their victory as the sun goes down in the west. These 
beings reappear in more formidable shape on the island 
where the Kykl6pes feed their shaggy flocks, the vapours 
which lie low and seem to browse upon the hills. Necessarily 
they can but pasture their herds, for vines or cornfields they 
can have none. It is hard to say how far the details of the 
story may not be strictly mythical in their origin. Certain 
it seems that when Odysseus, having left eleven ships in the 
goat island, approaches the home of the Kykl6pes with only 
one, we see the sun drawing near to the huge storm-cloud 
with but a single Phaiakian bark by his side. As his orb 
passes behind the mass of vapour the giant becomes the 
one-eyed or round-faced Kyklops, who devours one by one 
the comrades of Odysseus, as the beautiful clouds vanish one 
after the other behind this sombre veil. As the vapours 
thicken still more, the face of the sun can no longer be seen ; 
in other words, PolyphSmos has been blinded, and his rage 
is seen in the convulsive movements of the vapours, from 
beneath which, as from beneath the shaggy-fleeced rams, 
the white clouds which belong to the Phaiakian regions are 
seen stealing away, until at last from under the hugest beast 



THE BAG OF WINDS. 


177 


of the flock the sim himself emerges, only to draw down on 
himself another savage attack from the madly rushing storm- 
cloud. PolyphSmos has been smitten, and as on the dis¬ 
comfiture of Vritra, or the Sphinx, or the Pythian dragon, 
the mighty waters burst forth, and the ship of Odysseus is 
well-nigh overwhelmed in the sea. 

The incidents which follow the departure of' Odysseus 
from the island of Aiolos are a picture of a violent gale 
followed by profound calm. Aiolos himself gives to Odysseus 
a bag containing all the winds, from which he might let out 
the Zephyr to waft him on his way. As he sleeps, his com¬ 
rades bewail the evil fate which sends them home empty- 
handed while Odysseus has received from the king of the 
winds vast treasures which would enrich them all. This 
notion impels them to open the bag, and all the winds of 
heaven burst forth in wild fury, and carry them back to 
Aiolia, whence the king drives them away as being under 
the curse of the gods, and says that henceforth he will not 
help them more. At once Odysseus is made to relate how 
his men were now tired out with rowing day and night, 
because there was not a breath of air to speed them on their 
voyage. 

In the city of the Laistrygonians, Lamos, a name con¬ 
nected with the Greek Lamuroi and the Latin Lemures, we 
see simply the awful caves in which the Vritra hides away 
the stolen cattle of Indra. It is hard by the confines of Day 
and Mght, and round it rise the rocks sheer and smooth 
fi:om the sea, while two promontories leave a narrow entrance 
for ships. Within it there is neither wave nor wind, but an 
awful stillness broken only by the dull sound when 

Shepherd calls to shepherd, entering through 
The portals, and the other makes answer due,^ 

like tliimder-cloTids greeting each other with their mysterious 
voices. No cheering sight, however, meets th^ eye; an/i 
when the men of Odysseus are led by the daughter of 
Antiphates the chief into his palace, they gaze with horror 
at his wife, who stands before them huge as a rock. By 


CHAP. 

m. 


Odysseus 

and 

Aiolos. 


The 

Laistrygo- 

nians. 


‘ Worsley, Odyssey, X 234. 



178 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AKYAN I^^ATIONS. 


Antiphates Limaelf ttey are necessarily treated like their 

--—' comrades in the Kykl6ps^ island, and Odysseus escapes after 

losing many of his men only by cutting the mooring-ropes 
of his ship and hastening out to sea. 

The Lotos- In the land of the Lotos-eaters Odysseus encounters dan- 

&D(1 ^ 

Kn-irA’ gers of another kind. The myth carries ns to the many 
emblems of the reprodnctive powers of nature, of which the 
Lotos is one of the most prominent. It here becomes the 
forbidden fruit, and the eating of it so poisons the blood as 
to take away all memory and care for home and kinsfolk, for 
law, right, and duty. The sensual inducements held out by 
the Lotophagoi are, in short, those by which Venus tempts 
Tanhaiiser into her home in the Horselberg; and the de¬ 
gradation of the bard answers to the dreamy indolence of 
the groups who make life one long holiday in the Lotos 
land. The Venus of the medieval story is but another form 
of Kirk^, the queen of Aiaia j but the sloth and sensuality of 
the Lotos-eaters here turns its victims into actual swine, 
while the spell is a tangible poison poured by Kirk^ into 
their cups. The rod which she uses as the instrument of 
transformation gives a further significance to the story. 
IVom these swinish pleasures they are awakened only through 
the interference of Odysseus, who has received from Sermes 
an antidote which deprives the charms of Kirk^ of all power 
to hurt him. The HeraMes of Prodikos is after all the 
Herakles whom we see in the myths of Echidna or of the 
daughters of Thestios, and thus Odysseus dallies with Kirk^ 
as he listens also to the song of the Seirens. True, he has 
not forgotten his home or his wife, but he is ready to avail 
himself of all enjoyments which will not hinder him from 
reaching home at last. So he tarries with Kirke and with 
the fairer Kalypso, whose beautiful abode is the palace of 
Tara Bai in the Hindu legend, while she herself is Ursula, 
the moon, wanderiug, like Asterodia, among the myriad 
stars,—the lovely being who throws a veil over the Stm 
while he sojourns in her peaceful home. 

Erom the abode of Kirk4 Odysseus betakes himself to the 
regions of Hades, where from Teiresias he learns that he 
may yet escape from the anger of Poseidon, if he and his 



ODYSSEUS m ITHAKA. 


179 


•comrades will but abstain from hurting the cattle of Helios 
in the island of Thrinakia—or in other words, as we have . 
«een, if they will not waste time by the way. Coming back 
fo Hirke he is further warned against other foes in the air 
and^ the waters in the Seirens and Skylla and Charybdis. 
Worse than all, however, is the fate which awaits him in 
Thrinakia. The storm which is sent after the death of the 
oxen of Helios destroys all his ships and all his comrades, 
and Odysseus alone reaches the island of Kalypso, who, like 
E6s, promises him immortality if he will but tarry with her 
for ever. But it may not be. The yearning for his home 
and his wife may be repressed for a time, but it cannot be 
extinguished; and Ath^nS has exacted from Zeus an oath 
that Odysseus shall assuredly be avenged of all who have 
wronged him. So at the bidding of Hermes Halypso helps 
Odysseus to build a raft, which bears him towards Scheria, 
until Poseid6n again hurls him from it. But Ino Leukothea 
is at hand to save him, and he is at last thrown up almost 
dead on the shore of the Phaiakian land, where Ath^n^ brings 
Nausikaa to his rescue. He is now in the true cloudland of 
his friends, where everything is beautiful and radiant; and 
in one of the magic ships of Alkinoos he is wafted to Ithaka, 
and landed on his native soil, buried in a profound slumber. 
Here the wanderer of twenty years, who finds himself an 
outcast from his own home, where the suitors have been 
wasting his substance with riotous living, prepares for his 
last great work of vengeance, and for a battle which answers 
to the fatal conflict between Achilleus and Hektor. He is 
himself but just returned from the search and the recovery 
of a stolen treasure; but before he can rest in peace, there 
remains yet another woman whom he must rescue, and 
another treasure on which he must lay his hands. Of the 
incidents of this struggle it is unnecessary here to say more 
than that they exhibit the victory of the poor despised out¬ 
cast, whether it be Boots, or Cinderella, or Jack the Giant 
Bailer, over those who pride themselves on their grandeur 
and their strength. He stands a beggar in his own hall. 
Athene^ herself has taken all beauty from his face, all colour 
from his golden hair; but there remains yet the bow which 

N 2 


CHAP. 

m. 



180 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


HOOK 

II. 


Tlioex- 
puLion of 
tho Iferu- 
kU ills. 


lie alone can bend, tbe gleaming slipper wbicli Cinderella 
alone can put on. The whole picture is wonderfully true to 
the phenomena of the earth and the heavens, but as a 
portrait of human character, it is not more happy than that 
of Achilleus. There is the same complete disproportion 
between the offence committed and the vengeance taken, the 
same frightful delight in blood and torture—the mutilation 
of Melanthios and the deliberate slaughter of the hand¬ 
maidens answering to the insults offered by Achilleus to the 
body of Hektor, and the cold-blooded murder of the twelve 
Trojan youths on the funeral pyre of Patroklos. How com¬ 
pletely the incidents of the decisive conflict answer to those 
of the battle of Achilleus, we have seen already. All that we 
need now say is that Odysseus is united with his wife, to 
whom Ath^n^ imparts all the radiant beauty of youth in 
which she shone when Odysseus had left her twenty years 
ago. The splendid scene with which the narrative ends 
answers to the benignant aspect in which Achilleus appears 
when Hektor is dead and his great toil against Ilion is over. 

Section III.—THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN. 

We have thus far traced the second return of the treasure- 
seekers. In each case the work to which they had devoted 
themselves is accomplished. The golden fleece and Helen 
are each brought back to the land from which they had been 
taken; and though Odysseus may have suffered many and 
grievous disasters on the way, still even with him the de¬ 
struction of the suitors is followed by a season of serene 
repose. But the poet who here leaves him with the bride of 
his youth restored to all her ancient beauty, tells us never¬ 
theless that the chieftain and his wife must again be parted; 
and myths might be framed from this point of view as readily 
as from the other. It was as natural to speak of the sun as 
conquered in the evening by the powers of darkness as it 
was to speak of him as victorious over these same foes in the 
morning—as natural to describe the approach of night under 
the guise of an expulsion of the children of Helios or Hera- 
kles, as to represent the reappearance of the sunset hues in 



HYLLOS AM) EURYSTHEUS. 


181 


tlie west by a mytli relating their triumphant return. Such 
myths are in fact the germs of those recurring expulsions, and 
those attempted or successful restorations which form what is 
•commonly called the history of the Herakleidai. The extent 
to which an element of actual history may be traced in these 
mythical narratives is a question on which something has 
been said abeady, and probably it will not be disputed that 
even if many of the names may be those of real local chief¬ 
tains (and some of the incidents may possibly be traditions 
of real local events), yet the narratives in their main features 
closely resemble the other epical myths with which they are 
connected. These stories were altered at will by later poets 
and mythographers in accordance with local or tribal preju¬ 
dices or fancies, and forced into arrangements which were 
regarded as chronological. Thus, some speak of the Trojan 
war as taking place in the interval between the death of 
Hyllos and the return of his son Eleodaios ; but the his¬ 
torical character of all these events has been swept away, 
and we are left free to reduce the narratives to the simple 
elements of which they are composed. Thus the story ran 
that when Herakles died, his tyrant and tormentor Eurys- 
theus insisted on the surrender of his sons, and that Hyllos, 
the son of DSianeira, with his brothers, hastily fled, and after 
wandering to many other places at last found a refuge in 
Athens. This was only saying in other words that on the 
death of the sun the golden hues of evening were soon 
banished from the western sky, but that after many weary 
hours they are seen again in the country of the Dawn, as 
indeed they could be seen nowhere else. Athens is the only 
possible refuge for the children of Herakles; but theb ene¬ 
mies will not allow them to slip from theb l^ands without a 
struggle. The;Gorgon sisters almost seize Perseus as he 
hurries away after the slaughter of Medousa; and thus 
Eurystheus marches with his hosts against Athens. But 
the dawn must discomfit the dark beings. The Athenians 
are led on by Theseus, the great solar hero of the land, by 
lolaos, the son of Iphikles, the twin brother of Herakles, and 
hy the banished Hyllos. Eurystheus is slain, and Hyllos car¬ 
ries his head to Alkm^nS. 


CHAP. 

lu. 



182 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ABYAN HATIOHS. 


BOOK If we choose now to follow the ordinary arrangement of 
.—^^ these stories, we shall see in them a series which might be 
The re- indefinitely extended, but of whose mythical origin we can 
^Hera- scarcely feel a doubt. If after the defeat of Eurystheus the 
kleids. Herahleids return to the Peloponnesos, we find that they 

' cannot maintain their footing there for more than a year, 

and that then by an irresistible necessity they find their 
way back to Athens; and these alternations, which represent 
simply the succession of day and night, might and would 
have been repeated any number of times, if the myths had 
not at length become mixed up with traditions of the local 
settlement of the country—in other words, if certain names 
found in the myths had not become associated with particular* 
spots or districts in the Peloponnesos. To follow all the 
versions and variations of these legends is a task perhaps 
not much more profitable than threading the mazes of a 
labyrinth; but we may trace in some, probably in most of 
them, the working of the same ideas. Thus the ^version 
which after the death of Eurystheus takes Hyllos to Thebes 
makes him dwell by the Elelctrian or amber-gates. The 
next stage in the history is another return of the children of 
Herakles, which ends in the slaughter of Hyllos in single 
combat with Echemos—a name connected perhaps with that 
of Echidna, Ahi, the throttling snake. The night is once, 
more victorious, and the Herakleidai are bound by a compact 
to forego all attempts at return for fifty or a hundred years, 
periods which are mere multiples of the ten years of the 
Trojan war, and of the Hostoi or homeward wanderings of 
the Achaian chiefs. Once more the children of the dawn 
goddess give them shelter in Trikorythos, a region answering 
to the Hypereia or upper land, in which the Phaiakians 
dwelt before they were driven from it by the Kyklopes. The 
subsequent fortunes of Kleodaios and Aristomachos the son 
and grandson of Herakles simply repeat those of Hyllos; 
but at length in the next generation the myth pauses, as in 
the case of Odysseus and Achilleus in the Iliad and the 
Odyssey, at the moment of victory, and the repetition of the 
old drama is prevented by the gradual awakening of the 
historical sense in the Hellenic tribes. For this last return. 



EARNOS AND CHRYSES. 


183 


the preparations are on a scale which may remind ns in some 
degree of the brilliant gathering of the Achaian chieffcams 
with their hosts in Anlis. A fleet is built at the entrance of 
the Corinthian gulf, at a spot which hence bore the name of 
Naupaktos, and the three sons of Aristomachos, Aristodemos, 
Temenos and Kresphontes, make ready for the last great 
enterprise. But Aristodemos is smitten by lightning before 
he can pass over into the heritage of his fathers, and his 
place is taken by his twin sons Eurysthenes and Prokles, in 
whose fortunes we see that rivalry and animosity which, 
appearing in its germ in the myth of the Dioskouroi, is 
brought to a head in the story of Bteokles and Polyneikes, 
the sons of Oidipous. The sequel exhibits yet other points 
of resemblance to the stpry of the Trojan war. The sooth¬ 
sayer Chrys^s reappears as the prophet Kamos, whose death 
by the hand of Hippot^s answers to the insults offered to 
Chrys^s by Agamemnon. In either case the wrath of 
Apolldn is roused, and a plague is the consequence. The 
people die of famine, nor is the hand of the god hfbed' from 
off them, until, as for OhrysSs, a full atonement and recom¬ 
pense is made. Hippot^s is banished, and the chiefs are 
then told to take as their guide the three-eyed man, who is 
found in the Aitolian Oxylos who rides on a one-eyed horse. 
But as the local myth exhibited Tisamenos the son of 
Orestes as at this time the ruler of Peloponnesos, that 
prince must be brought forwai'd as the antagonist of the 
returning Herakleids; and a great battle follows in which 
he is slain, while, according to one version, Pamphylos and 
Dymas, the sons of the Dorian Aigimios, faU on the side of 
the invaders. With the partition of the Peloponnesos among 
the conquerors the myth comes to an end. Argos falls to 
the lot of Temenos, while Sparta becomes the portion of the 
sons of Aristodemos, and Mess^ne that of Kresphontes. A 
sacrifice is offered by way of thanksgiving by these chiefs on 
their respective altars; and as they drew near to complete 
the rite, on the altar of Sparta was seen a serpent, on that 
of Argos a toad, on that of MessSn^ a fox. The soothsayers 
were, of course, ready with their interpretations. The slow 
and sluggish toad denoted the dull and unenterprising dis- 


CHAP. 

m 



184 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AHY.\N NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n, 


Adiastos 
and Am- 
phiaraos. 


position of the future Argive people 5 the serpent betokened 
the terrible energy of the Spartans; the fox, the wiliness and 
cunning of the Messenians. As indications of national 
character, more appropriate emblems might perhaps have 
been found; but it may be noted that the toad or frog 
reappears in the Hindu legend of BheM, the frog-sun, and 
in the Grerman story of the frog-prince ; that the serpent in 
this legend belongs to the class of dragons which appear in 
the myths of Helios, Medeia and lamos; and that the Mes- 
senian fox is an animal closely akin to the wolf which we 
meet in the myths of the Lykian Apollon and the Arkadian 
Lyk^n.^ 


Section IV.—THE THEBANT WAES. 

In spite of all differences of detail between the legends of 
the Trojan and the Theban wars, the points of resemblance 
are at the least as worthy of remark. In each case there 
are two wars and two sieges; and if the Argive chiefs under 
Adrastos are not so successful as HeraMes with his six ships 
at Ilion, still the Trojan power was no more destroyed by the 
latter than that of Eteokles was crushed by Polyneikes a,nd 
his allies. In either case also there is a hero whose presence 
is indispensable to the success of the enterprise. In the 
Theban story this hero is Amphiaraos, the Achilleus of the 
Trojan legend in this its most important feature: and as 
Troy cannot fall unless Achilleus fights against it, so the 
Argives cannot hope to take ^Thebes unless Amphiaraos goes 
with themo But as neither Achilleus nor Odysseus wished 
to fight in a quarrel which was not their own, so Amphi¬ 
araos shrinks from any concern in a contest in which the 
prophetic mind inherited by him jffom his ancestor Melam- 
pous teUs him that aU the chiefs engaged in it must die 

* The three sons, Aristodemos, point to Yng, Askr, and Irmin. To 
Temenos and Elresphontes, who in this Yng, probably, we may trace iSie 
stage of the myth represent the line of English name : in Askr we see the ash- 
Herakles, are seen again in the three born man, the race of which the Ghreek 
sons of the German Mann, the Mannus spoke as sprung iK fi€\iay: Irmm is the 
of Tacitns: but the names in the old Saxon god, whose name is familiar 
Teutonic story are more significant, to us under its later form Herman, the 
The names of the three great tribes, Arminius of Tacitus. Muller, 

Ingsevones, Iscsevones, Herminones. Lectures, second series, 458. 



AMPHIARAOS AND ERIPHYLE. 


185 


with the one exception of Adrastos. But he had promised 
the Argive ting that in any differences which might 
arise between them he would abide by the decision of his 
wife Eriphyle, and Eriphyl^ had been bribed by Polyneites 
with the gift of the necklace and peplos of Harmonia to de¬ 
cide in favour of the expedition. Thus Amphiaraos departs 
for Thebes with a presentiment of his own coming doom 
as strong as the consciousness of Achillens that his career 
must be brief; but before he sets out, he charges his 
sons Amphilochos and Alkmaion to slay their mother, so 
soon as they hear of his death, and to march against the 
hated city of Thebes; and thus the starting point was 
famished not only for the Theban war, but for a new series 
of woes to be wrought by the Erinyes of Eriphyl^. 

The germs of the rivalry, which in the case of the sons of 
Oidipous grew into a deadly hatred, are seen in the points 
of contrast afforded by almost all the correlative deities of 
Greek and Vedic mythology, and the twin heroes whether 
of the east or the west.^ Thus there is a close parallel 
between the Dioskouroi and the sons of Oidipous. The 
former may not be seen together; the latter agree to reign 
over Thebes in turn; and it was a ready device to account 
for the subsequent feud by saying that the brother whose 
time was over refused to abide by his compact. Hence 
Polyneikes became an exile; but it is not easy to determine 
precisely to what degree a purely moral element has forced 
^ its way into this series of legends from the horror which a 
\ union like that of lokast^ and Oidipous, when regarded as a 
\ fact in the lives of two human beings, could not fail to in¬ 
spire. Here also the Erinys might exercise her fatal office, 
for the blood of lokastS must cry for vengeance as loudly as 
Vhat of Iphigeneia or Amphiaraos; and the same feeling 
yhich suggested the curse of Amphiaraos on Eriphyl^ would 
^so suggest the curse of Oidipous on his children. In the 

\ They are, in short, the rival brothers True and Untrue, by Big Peter and 
no^ only of the royal houses of Sparta, Little Peter in Dasent’s Norse Tales 
bulin a vast number of stories in Aryan In the story of the Widow’s Son (Dasent) 
foU-lore, and are represented by Ferdi- we have a closer adherence to the type 
nai the Faithful and Ferdinand the of the Dioskouroi in the two princes, one 
Uniithful m Grimm’s collection, by of whom is turned into a horse. 

\ 

I 


CHAP. 

ni. 


The son 
of Oidi¬ 
pous. 



18G 


BOOK 

II. 


Tydeus. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

older poems on the subject this curse was pronounced for 
ojffences not very grave, if regarded merely from an ethical 
point of view. His sons had been accustomed to bring him 
the shoulders of victims offered in sacrifice, and they once 
brought him a thigh. At another time they put before him 
the table and the wine-cup of Kadmos, although he had 
charged them never to do so. But the former of these two 
acts implied a slight like that which Prometheus put upon 
Zeus when giving him the choice of the portion for the 
gods; and the latter made him think of the golden days 
when he sat down with lokaste to banquets as brilliant as 
those of the long-lived Aithiopians and drank purple wine 
from the inexhaustible horn of Amaltheia. But to Sopho- 
kl^s, who looked at the matter simply as a moralist, these 
causes were so inadequate that he at once charged the sons 
with cruel treatment of their father, whom they drove away 
from his Lome to fight with poverty as well as blindness. 

Polyneikes, when in his turn an exile, betook himself to 
Argos where he fell in with Tydeus,' with whom he quarrels. 
But it had been shown long ago to Adrastos that he should 
wed his two daughters to a lion and a boar; and when he 
found these two men fighting, with shields which had sever¬ 
ally the sign of the boar and the lion, he came to the con¬ 
clusion that these were the destined husbands of Argeia and 
Deipyle. Hence also he readily agreed to avenge the alleged 
wrongs of Polyneikes, and the league was soon formed, 
which in the later Attic legend carried the Seven Argive 
Chiefs to the walls of Thebes, but which for the poets of 
the Thebais involved as large a gathering as that of the 
chieftains who assembled to hunt the Kalydonian boar or to 
recover the Golden Fleece. How far these poets may have 
succeeded in imparting to their subject the charm of oiu 
Iliad or Odyssey, the scanty fragments of the poem whicl 
alone we possess make it impossible to say; but there wjs 
more than one incident in the struggle which might be^o 
treated as fairly to win for the poem a title to the 

* Tills name, like that of Tyndareos, conveyed by the vrord is thus precMy 
means apparently the hammerer. The that of Thor Miolnir, of the Moli^^ 
two forms may be compared with the and the Aloadai. 

, Latin tundo, tutudi, to beat. The idea , 



THE DEATH OF AMPHIAKAoS. 


187 


praise bestowed upon it by Pansaixias.^ Thus the story told 
by DiomSd^s of bis father Tydeus when sent to Thebes to 
demand the restoration of Polyneikes reproduces in part the 
story of Belleroph6n.^ Yictorious in the strife of boxing or 
wrestling to which he had challenged the Kadmeians, he is 
assailed on his way back to the Argive host by an ambus¬ 
cade of fifty Thebans, all of whom he slays except Maion, 
who is saved by the special intervention of the gods. So 
too the prophecy of Teiresias that the Thebans should be 
conquerors in the war if Ar^s received the youthful Menoi- 
keus as a victim, must be compared with those utterances 
of Kalchas which sealed the doom of Iphigeneia and Poly- 
xena; and finally when the Argives are routed and Penkly- 
menos is about to slay Amphiaraos, we see in his rescue by 
the earth which receives him with his chariot and horses 
another form of the plunge of Endymidn into the sea or of 
the leap of Kephalos from the Leukadian cape. It is the 
vanishing from mortal sight of the sun which can never die, 
and so the story went that Zeus thus took away Amphiaraos 
that he might make him immortal. 

This first assault of the Argives against Thebes answers 
to the ineffectual attempts of the Herakleidai to recover 
their paternal inheritance. It was therefore followed b}" a 
second attack in the struggle known as the war of the 
Epigonoi, or the children of the discomfited chiefs of the 
former expedition. But it must be noted that as the BTera- 
Heids find a refuge in Athens after the slaughter of Hyllos 
by Echemos, so Adrastos, who alone had been saved from the 
carnage by the speed of his horse Areion, betakes himself to 
the Attic Eleusis, whence Theseus marches against the 
Thebans to insist on the surrender and the burial of the 
dead,—an incident in which the historical Athenians took 
pride as an actual event in their annals. The doom of 
Thebes was now come, and the Epigonoi approach like the 
H^akleidai when their period of inforced idleness is at an 
end. The Thebans are utterly routed by the Argives under 
AJ^maion, the son of Amphiaraos; and Teiresias declares 

* ix 9, 3. Gr rote, History of Greece, i. 364. 

“ 2L IV. 384, et seq. 


CHAP. 

Ill 


The -war of 
the Epi- 
gonoi. 



KS8 


MYTHOLOaY OF THE ARYA2T NATIOKS. 


BOOK 

IL 


AntigonS 
and Hai- 
mon. 


Alkmai6n 
and Eri- 
phyl^. 


that there is no longer any hope, as the gods have abandoned 
them. The city is therefore surrendered, and Thersandros, 
the son of Polyneikes, is seated on the throne of Kadmos. 

Of the remaining incidents connected with these two 
great struggles the most remarkable is the doom of Anti¬ 
gone, who is condemned by Eie6n to be buried alive because 
she had performed the funeral rites over the body of Poly¬ 
neikes, which had been cast forth to the birds and dogs. Of 
the sentiments which Sophokles puts into her mouth as 
exjplaining her motives and justifying her actions aU that we 
need to say here is that they belong seemingly rather to 
the Eastern than the Western world, and may be a genuine 
portion of the Persian myth which Herodotos has clothed in 
a Greek garb in the story of the Seven Conspirators. But 
the dismal cave in which she is left to die seems but the 
horrid den into which the Panis sought to entice Sarama, 
and in which they shut up the beautiful cattle of the dawn. 
It is the cave of night into which the evening must sink and 
where she must die before the day can again dawn in the 
east. hTor can we well fail to notice the many instances in 
which those who mourn for mythical heroes taken away put 
an end to their own lives by hanging. It is thus that Hai- 
mon ends his misery when he finds himself too late to save 
Antigon^; it is thus that lokast^ hides her shame from the 
sight of the world; it is thus that Althaia and Kleopatra 
hasten away from life which without Meleagros is not worth 
the living for. The death of these beings is the victory of 
Echidna and Ahi, the throttling or strangling snake; and 
the tradition unconsciously preserved may have determined 
the mode in which these luckless beings must die. 

Kor may we forget that after the death of Amphiaraos 
the fortunes of his house run parallel with those of the 
house of Agamemnon after his return from Ilion. In 
obedience to his father’s command Alkmaion slays his 
mother Eriphyl^, and the awful Erinys, the avenger of 
blood, pursues him with the unrelenting pertinacity of the 
gadfly sent by HerS to torment the heifer 16. Go where he 
will, she is there to torture him by day and scare him by 
night; and not until he has surrendered to Phoibos the 



OEESTES AND PYLADES. 


189 


precious necklace of Harmonia or Kadmos, and found out a CELiP 
spot to dwell in on whicli tke sun kad never looked at tke . 

time wken EripkylS met ker doom, can Alkmaion kave 
any rest. Suck a refuge was fornisked by tke Oiniadai, 
wkick kad grown up at tke moutk of tke river 
Ackeldos from tke deposits brougkt down by tke stream to 
tke sea. Here ke marries Kallirkoe tke daugkter of tke 
river god, wko causes kis deatk at tke kands of tke sons of 
Pkegeus by insistin g on kis fetcking ker tke necklace of 
EuripkylS. But Kallirkoe is, like Leda and L^t6, tke motker 
of twin sons, and ske prays tkat tkey may at once grow into 
mature mankood and become tke avengers of tkeir fatker, as 
Hyllos is avenged by tke Herakleids of a later generation. 

Tkis is substantially tke story of Orestes, wko slays Orestcs 
Klytaimnestra for murdering ker kusband Agamemnon as 
Euripkyl4 kad brougkt about tke deatk of Ampkiaraos, and tra, 
wko is tkerefore ckased, like Alkmaion, from land to land by 
tke Erinyes of kis motker, until at last ke comes to Atkens, 
tke dawn city, and is tkere by tke casting vote of Atk^nl 
kerself acquitted in tke court of Areiopagos. Of tkis mytk 
tkere were, as we migkt expect, many variations: and 
among tkese we may notice tke story wkick speaks of kim 
and kis friend Pylades as slaying Helen wken Menelaos 
refused to rescue tkem from tke angry Argives, and las%, 
tke legend tkat Orestes kimself, like EurydikS, died from tke 
bite of a snake, doubtless tke AM or tkrottling serpent of 
Vedic mytkology. 



190 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ABYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


Light and 
heat. 


The ma¬ 
jesty of 
Agni. 


CHAPTEE IV. 

THE FIRE. 


Sectiojt I.—^AGrNI. 


When the old Vedie faith had been long overlaid by an 
elaborate sacerdotal ceremonialism, Agni still remained, as 
it had been from the first, a name for light or heat as per¬ 
vading all things or as concentrated in the flame of fire. 
In the Satapatha-Br^hmana, Svetaketu teUs king Janaka 
that he sacrifices to two heats in one another which are ever 
shining and filling the world with their sj)lendotu*. When 
the king asks how this may be, the answer is ^ Aditya (the 
sun) is heat: to him do I sacrifice in the evening in the fire 
(Agni). Agni is heat: to him do I sacrifice in the morning 
in the snn (Aditya). When to Somasnshma, who says 
that he sacrifices to light in light, the king puts the same 
question, the Brahman replies, ^Aditya is light; to him 
do I sacrifice in the evening in Agni. Agni is light; to him 
do I sacrifice in the morning in Aditya.’^ 

Thus Agni, like Indra, is sometimes addressed as the one 
great god who makes all things, sometimes as the light which 
fills the heavens, sometimes as the blazing lightning, or as 
the clear flame of earthly fire. The poets pass from one appli¬ 
cation of the word to another with perfect ease, as conscious 
that in each case they are using a mere name which , may 
denote similar qualities in many objects. There is no rivahy 
or antagonism between these deities.^ Agni is greatest, 
Taruna is greatest, and Indra is greatest; but when the 


* Max Miiller, Sanskrit Lit. 421. 

* Professor Max Muller, making this 
remark, adds, ‘ This is a most important 
feature m the religion of the Veda, and 


has never been taken into consideration 
hy those who have written on the history 
of ancient polytheism.’— Sanskr, Lit. 
546. 



THE PAEENTAGE OP A6NI. 


19] 


one is so described, tbe otters are for tbe timf^ unnoticed, or 
else are placed in a subordinate position. Thus Agni is said 
to comprehend all other gods -within himself, as the circum¬ 
ference of a wheel embraces its spokes;' and not unfre- 
quently Indra is said to be Agni, and Agni is said to be 
Indra, while both alike are Skambha, the supporter of 
■the universe. 

Hence the character of the god, as we might expect, is 
almost wholly physical. The blessings which his worship¬ 
pers pray for are commonly temporal, and very rarely is he 
asked, like Varuna, to forgive sin. In the earlier hymns, 
he is generally addressed as the fire which to mortal men 
is an indispensable boon: in -the more developed cere¬ 
monialism of later times he is chiefly concerned with the 
ordering of the sacrifice. As bearing up the offerings on the 
flames which mount to the sky, he stands in the place of 
Hermes as the messenger between gods and men. Like 
Phoibos and Indra, he is full of a secret -wisdom. He is the 
tongue (of fire) through which gods and men receive each 
their share of the victims offered on the altar. Nay, so 
•clearly is his mythical character stiU understood, that, 
•although he is sometimes the originator of all things, at 
•others he is said to have been kindled by Manu (man), and 
the expression at once carries us to the legends of Prome¬ 
theus, Hermes, and Phordneus, who is himself the Vedic god 
•of fire Bhuranyu. The very sticks which Manu rubbed 
together are called the parents of Agni, who is said to have 
destroyed them, as Oidipous and Perseus, Cyrus and Eomu- 
lus are said to have destroyed their fathers. The hymns 
•describe simply the phenomena of fire. 

‘ 0 Agni, thou firom whom, as a new-born male, undying 
flames proceed, the brilliant smoke-god goes towards the 
sky, for as messenger thou art sent to -the gods. 

‘ Thou, whose power spreads over the earth in a moment 
when thou hast grasped food with thy jaws—like a dashing 
army thy blast goes forth; with thy lambent flame thou 
seemest to tear up the grass. 

‘ BKm alone, the ever youthful Agni, men groom, like a 
* Muir, JPnncijoal D&ities of V. 570. 


CHAP. 

IV. 


Pl\>siCcil 
attributes 
of Agui. 



192 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE AKYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK horse in the evening and at dawn; they bed him as a stran- 
.—rJ—- ger in his conch; the light of Agni, the worshipped male, is 
lighted. 

‘ Thy appearance is fair to behold, thou bright-faced Agni, 
when like gold thou shinest at hand; thy brightness comes 
like the lightning of heaven; thou showest splendour like 
the bright sun.’* 

‘ Adorable and excellent Agni, emit the moving and grace¬ 
ful smoke. 

‘ The flames of Agni are luminous, powerful, fearful, and 
not to be trusted® 

phrases which bring before us at once the capriciousness 
and suUenness of Meleagros and AchUleus. T.iirft Indra, 
Agni is also Yritrahan. 

‘ I extol the greatness of that showerer of rain whom men 
celebrate as the slayer of Vritra: the Agni, VaiSwanara, slew 
the stealer of the waters.’® 

Like Indra, again, and the later Erishna, he is ‘ the lover 
of the maidens, the husband of the wives.’^ He is ‘ black- 
backed ’ and ‘many-limbedj ’ ‘ his hair is flame,’ and ‘he it 
is whom the two sticks have engendered, like a new-born 
babe.’ 

‘ Thou art laid hold of with difficulty,’ the poet truly says, 

‘ like the young of tortuously twining snakes, thou who art a 
consumer of many forests as a beast is of fodder.’® 
font A ni infant Hermes soon reaches his full strength, so 

an gni. flames of Agni, who, puny at his birth, is kept alive by. 
clarified butter, roar after a little while like the waves of the 
sea. But Agni consumes that which Hermes is constrained 
to leave untasted, and scathes the forest with his tongue, 
shearing off the hair of the earth as with a razor. - 
the As the special guardian and regulator of sacrifices, A gni 
assumes the character of the Hellenic Hestia, and almost 
attains the majesty of the Latin Vesta. He is the lord and 
protector of every house, and the father, mother, brother, 
and son of every one of the worshippers.® He is the keeper 

* S. r. vii. 3; Mai Muller, Samh-. * H. H. Wilson, Sia Veda S. ii. 168. 
I/it, 667. * Ib. ii. 180. 

2 H. H. Wilson, Big Veda S. vol. i. * Jb. iii. 253. 
pp. 102-104. « Mxiir, Brincijp, B. of B, V 569. 



EALI AND KARAIil. 


193 


of hidden treasures, and all blessings proceed from him as CHAP, 
the giver. He is Vasn, the lord of light. ‘ During life he —■ 

sliields men from harm, and at death he becomes the Psy- 
chopompos, as conveying the ^ unborn part ’ of the dead to 
the unseen world. 

But in every phase of his character the appellative force of The 
his name remains discernible; nor are there wanting plain 
assertions that Agni is but one of many titles for the One 
Great Cause of all things. 

^ They call (him) Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni; then he is 
the well-winged heavenly Garutmat: that which is One, the 
wise call it many ways: they call it Agni, Yama, M^tari^van/^ 

In India, however, as in the western world, there was a 
constant tendency to convert names into persons, and then 
to frame for them a mythical history in accordance with 
their meaning. Thus two of the ever-flickering tongues of 
the black-pathed Agni were called Kali, the black, and 
Karali, the terrific ; and these became names of Durga, the 
wife of Siva, who was developed out of Agni ; and a bloody 
sacrificial worship was the result.^ 


1 Of the existence of the root vas, to 
shine, there can he, of course, no douht. 
It IS sufficiently shown by its derivatives 
(pdoSf (pcdvuf for, fatum, &c. 

Hence Professor Max Muller naturally 
refers to this root the Sanskrit vasar, 
Lat. ver (for vesr), the Greek 
lap, ^p, the spring-time, and other 
words denoting the year^ which seem to 
be akin to it. It is thus the shining 
gleaming time when nature displays 
herself in her beauty: but in Mr 
Peile’s judgment the meaning is never¬ 
theless very uncertain. ‘ There are 
three distinct roots,’ he remarks, ‘ of the 
same form VAS. . . but none gives a 
satisfactory meaning; the best perhaps 
is that which means to clothe, so that 
spring should be the reclothing of 
nature; but this may be thought 
fanciful.’— Introd. to Gr. and Lat. 
Etymology^ 89. Meanwhile we have 
the facts that other names for one season 
of the year have been used to denote 
the year itself. ‘ Man erinnere ^ sich 
nur an surad, herbst, Pers. s41, jalm: 
varshAh, regenzeit, oder pr4vnsh im 
Veda, dann varsha, jahr ; hima,^^nter, 
im bimus, zwei wintrig, i.e. zweijahrig.* 
Thus also. Professor Muller adds, we 


have the modified form vat in Skr. 
samvat, as well as in vatsa, vatsara, 
and samvatsara, and in the Greek, 
iros, feroj, the year, thus too the 
Sanskrit parat for para-vat, in the 
previous year, explains the Greek Wp- 
vff-i for wip-vr-i This form vat or %it he 
traces back to a time preceding the dis¬ 
persion of the Aryan tribes ,* the term 
4viaxnhs answering to samvat, may, he 
thinks, be later. In all this the^ idea 
certainly seems to be that of brilliance, 
and so of freshness, passing into that of 
youth. and thus. Professor Muller adds, 
we have the Greek Fira\6f, the Latin 
vitulus, meaning literally a yearling, 
as bimus and trimus would denote 
creatures two or three years old. Hence 
vitulus would answer ^ precisely to 
xt/u.aipaQ>8 a winterling, i.e. one winter 
old. Lastly, he remarks, ‘ der Samvat¬ 
sara, das Jahr oder die Juhres-sonne, aus 
dem Schoosse der Wasser geboren wird,’ 
a myth which only repeats the story of 
the birth of Aphrodite and every other 
dawn-goddess. 

^ JR. K i 164, 46; Max Muller, 
Sanskr. Lit. 567. 

• Muir, Skr. Texts, part iv. p. 365,425. 


VOL. II. 


0 



194 


MYTHOLOOT OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK Lite TTslias and E6s, Agni never grows old. He is em- 

__. pLatically tlie youngest of all tlie gods, not as being the 

Agni and latest born, but as never losing his strength and might; and 
Hephais- name Tavishtha^ which is never given to any other 

Yedic god, we may recognise the Hellenic Hephaistos.^ 
Eut the name Agni is nowhere found in the west as the 
name of any deity. In the Greet dialects the word itself 
seems to have been lost, while the Latin ignis, with which 
it is identical, is merely a name for fire ; nor are any myths 
associated with the Lithuanian Agni. 


Section II.—PHORONEUS AOT) HESTIA. 


The Wind The myth of Hermes brings before us one of the many 
and^thft modes in which men were supposed to have become first 
possessed of the boon of fire. But although Hermes is there 
said to have been the first to bestow this gift upon mankind, 
it is simply as supplying or kindling the materials, not as 
being himself the fire. The hymn-writer is careful to dis¬ 
tinguish between the two. He is the fire-giver because he 
rubs the branches of the forest trees together till they burst 
into a flame: but the wood thus kindled and the meat 
which is roasted are devoured not by himself but by the 
flames. Hermes remains hungry, although he^ is repre¬ 
sented as longing for the food whose savour fills his nostrils. 
Nothing can show more clearly that we are dealing simply 
with the wind or with air in motion, in other words, with 
the bellows not with the fire. Hence with a keen sense of 
the meaning of the myth, Shelley, in his translation of the 


^ Professor Max Muller thinks that 
this identification must he regarded as 
scarcely open to douht The name 
Hephaistos, he says, became the subject 
of myths in the West, precisely because 
it IS not in strict analogy with the 
Sanskrit yavishtha, the superlative of 
yuvah, Lat juvenis, young. The kindred 
form yavan, found also in Zend, yields 
yAvyd, the name of the Greek H4b4. 
The only difficulty is presented by the 
change of the Sanskrit v into the 
Greek $; but this change is seen in the 
Greek^ (r<j»bs for the Sanskrit svas. To 
the objection that the Sanskrit yavishtha 


ought to be represented by the Greek 
Hephistos, he replies that the Zend 
form st4vaesta represents the Sanskrit 
sthavistha, and thus from the analogous 
yilvaesta we should reach Hephaistos. 
Thus, with the’ exception of Agni, all 
the names of the fire and the fire- 
god were carried away by the Western 
Aryans: and we have Prometheus 
answering to Pramantha, Phor6neus to 
Bhuranyu, and the Latin Vulcanus to 
the Skr. ulkah, a firebrand, a 'word used 
in connection with the fiames or sparks' 
of Agni. 



PHOROI^'EUS and NIOBfi. 


195 


line, speaks of Hermes as supplying to men ^ matches^ tin- CHAP, 
derbox and steel ’ for the kindling of the flame. ^ 

Another discoverer or bestower of fire is the Argive Pho- The Ar- 
rdneus, who represents the Vedic fire-god Bhuranyu, and 
whose name is thus seen to be another form of the Greek 
Pur, the Teutonic feuer and fire. Phoroneus is thus the 
fire itself, and as such he dwelt on the Astu Phor6nikon of 
Argos,—in other words he is the Argive Hestia with its holy 
flame of everlasting fire.^ In this aspect he was naturally 
represented as the first of men and the father of all who are 
subject to death; and as such, he is also described, in ac¬ 
cordance with the myth of the Askingas, as springing from 
an ash-tree.^ To Phoroneus himself more than one wife is 
assigned. In one version he is the husband of Xerdo, the 
clever or winsome, a name pointing to the influence of fire 
on the comfort and the arts of life; in another of Telodik^, 
a word which indicates the judicial powers of the Greek 
Hestia and the Latin Vesta. For the same reason, he is 
also wedded to Peitho, persuasion. Among his children are 
Pelasgos, lasos and Agenor, of whom a later tradition said 
that after their father’s death they divided the kingdom of 
Argos among themselves. He is thus described as the 
father of the Pelasgic race, in contrast with Deukalion, who 
is the progenitor of the Hellenic tribes. But it is unneces¬ 
sary to enter the ethnological labyrinth from which it seems 
as impossible to gather fruit as from the barren sea. It 
is enough to say that Agenor, in this Argive myth, is a 
brother of EuropS, while in that of the Phoinikian land he is 
her father, and that Argos and Phoinikia are alike the 
glistening regions of the purple dawn. The phrase that 
Eur6pS, the broad-spreading morning light, is the daughter 
of Phoroneus, corresponds precisely with the myth which 
makes Hephaistos cleave the head of Zeus to allow the dawn 
to leap forth in its full splendour. But from fire comes 
smoke and vapour, and Phor6neus is thus the father of 
Niob^, the rain-cloud, who weeps herself to death on Mount 
Sipylos. 

* Preller, Gr. Myth, ii. 37. chos, who thus becomes the father of 

* Ih, Melia, of course, becomes a Phoroneus. 
nymph, and is said to be wedded to Ina- 

o 2 



196 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAX NATIONS. 


BOOK As gathering to one centre the Argives, who had thus far 
V——- dwelt scattered without a notion of social order and law, 
Hestia. Phoronens discharges the functions of Hestia. Nay, his 
Astu is Hestia, the inviolable fire on the sacred hearth 
which may not be moved but stands fast for ever.^ But no 
great accretion of myths was possible in the case either of 
Phordneus or of Hestia. The legend, such as it is, belongs 
to that class of transparent stories among which the myths • 
of Endymi6n, Narkissos, Daphn^, SarpM6n, and Memn6n 
are among the most conspicuous; and the beneficial in¬ 
fluence of her cultus is perhaps most strongly marked by the 
almost complete absence of folk-lore in connexion with her 
name. She is so clearly the fire on the hearth, the symbol 
and the pledge of kindliness and good faith, of law and 
order, of wealth and fair dealing, that it was impossible to 
lose sight of her attributes or to forget their origin; and 
except under these conditions there can be no full develope- 
ment of mythology. Of no other deity perhaps was the 
worship so nearly an unmixed blessing. Falsehood and 
treachery, fickleness and insincerity, were to her things 
utterly hateful. Her purity could brook no uncleanness; 
her youth could know no decay, and thus her sacred dwell¬ 
ing became the centre of influences which breathed some life 
into a society prone to become more and more heartless and 
selfish. From the horrible devil-worship of Artemis Orthia, 
or Tauropola, we may turn to the redeeming cultus of Hestia 
and Askl^pios,—the shrines of the one being the strong¬ 
hold of generosity and sympathy, the temples of the other 
being devoted to those works of mercy, which we are dis¬ 
posed to regard as the exclusive products of Christianity.^ 

The sacred Hestia in the common legend is the eldest daughter of 

£r6. 


^ The names Astu and Hestia are 
hoth referred by Preller to the Sanskrit 
■vas, to dwell, the cognate Greek forms 
being efw and 7^0), thus connecting to¬ 
gether the Latin Vesta and sedes, a 
permanent habitation But on the 
other hand it is urged that the name 
Hestia may more reasonably be referred 
to the root vas, to shine, which has 
yielded Vasu as a name for Agni, as 
well as many names for the year. (See 
note ^ p. 193). Hestia and Vesta would 


thus denote the glistening flame, and 
would^ be akin to the names for the 
hot wind, Euros and Auster, aia'r7)p6s. 
Peile, Introduction to Greek and Jjatin 
Etymology^ 77. 

^ ^ The temples of AskUpios were prac¬ 
tically large hospitals, where something 
like the aid of Christian chanty was 
extended to the sick and afflicted by 
physicians whose knowledge raised them 
far above the empincs and spell-mut- 
terers of the Middle Ages. 



HESTIA AND PHOIBOS. 


197 


Eronos and Eheia, and is wooed both by Pboibos and CHAP. 
Poseiddn; but their suit is vain. Hestia makes a solemn . 
vow that she will never be a bride, and as her reward she 
receives honour and glory both among gods and among men. 

As the pure maiden, she is to have her home in the inmost 
part of every dwelling, and at every sacrifice offered to Zeus 
and the other deities she is to preside and to receive the first 
invocation and the first share. As apart from her there can 
be no security for truth, peace, and justice, each town, city, 
and state must have its own Prytaneion, with its central 
hearth, uniting the citizens in a common faith and in 
common interests. Here the suppliant should obtain at the 
least the boon of a fair trial, here should all compacts, 
whether between states or private men, receive their most 
solemn sanction; and when it became necessary to lighten 
the pressure of population at home by sending forth some of 
the citizens into new countries, from this hearth should the 
sacred fire be taken as the link which was to bind together 
the new home with the old. This fire should never be ex¬ 
tinguished; but if by chance such calamity shoidd befall, 
it was to be lit again, not from common flame but as Hermes 
kindled Are, by fiuction, or drawn by burning-glasses from 
the sun itself. Hands impure might not touch her altar, 

.and the guardians of her sacred fire should be pure and 
chaste as herself. All this is so transparent that we cannot 
be said to have entered here on the domain of mythology; 
and even the great hearth of the Universe is but an exten¬ 
sion to the whole Kosmos of the idea which regarded Hestia 
as the very foundation of human society. 

Section III.—HEPHAISTOS AED LOKI. 

In Hephaistos, the ever-young,* we see an image of fire, 
not as the symbol and pledge of faith and honour, of law 
and equity, but like Agni, dark and stunted in its first 
beginnings but able to do wonders in its power over earths 
and metals. He is the mighty workman who, at the prayer 
of Thetis, forges for Achilleus the irresistible armour in 

' See note p. 194. 



198 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK whicli he is to avenge the death of Patr6Hos, as Begin the 

--- smith of Hialprek the king of Denmark fashions a new 

sword for Sigurd at the intercession of his mother Hjordis. 
But in spite of all his power he himself is subject to great 
weakness, the result, according to one version, of his mother’s 
harshness, in another, of the cruelty of Zeus. The former 
relates that was so horrified by his deformity and limp¬ 
ing gait that she cast him forth from Olympos, and left him 
to find a refuge with the Ocean nymphs Thetis and Eurynom^. 
The other tells how when once he was taldng his mother’s 
part in one of her quarrels with her husband, Zeus, in¬ 
dignant at Lis interference, seized him by the leg and 
hurled him out of heaven. Throughout the livelong day he 
continued to fall, and as the sun went down he lay stunned 
on the soil of Lemnos, where the Sintians took him up and 
tended him in his weakness.^ The myth also ran that he 
had no father, as Athene has no mother, and that he was 
the child of H4r^ alone, who in like manner is called the 
solitary parent of Typhon. The mystery of his birth per¬ 
plexed Hephaistos: and the stratagem in which he dis¬ 
covered it reappears in the Norse story of the Master Smith, 
who, like Hephaistos, possesses a chair from which none can 
rise against the owner’s will. In the one case it is H^r^, in 
the other it is the devil who is thus entrapped, but in both 
the device is successful. 

The forge The Olympian dwelling of Hephaistos is a palace gleam- 

phaistos. with the splendour of a thousand stars. At his huge 
anvils mighty bellows keep up a stream of air of their own 
accord; and giant forms, Brontes, Sterop^s, Pyrakmon 
(the thunders, lightnings and flames) aid him in his labours. 
With him dwells his wife, who in the Iliad, as we have seen, 
is Charis, in the Odyssey Aphrodite. In its reference to 
Hephaistos the lay of Demodokos which relates the faith- 

^ The tradition -which assigns this in- halting and so furnishing the gods with 
cident as the cause of his lameness refers a source of inextinguishable laughter, 
probably to the weakened powers of fire as they see him puffing and panting in 
when either materials or draught fail It his ministrations as the cup-bearer. 
The Vedic hymn speaks of Agni as The golden supports which hold him up 
clothed or hindered by smoke only at as he walks are tlie glittering flames 
his birth, but with a feeliug not less which curl upward beneath the yolumes 
true to the phenomena of fire, the poets of smoke which rise above them, 
of the Iliad represent him as always 



HEPHAISTOS AND LOKI. 


199 


lessness of Aplirodite is wort.liy'’of note ehiefly as it attributes CHAP, 
to him the powers of Daidalos. The thin chains which, catch- . . 

ing the eye scarcely more than spiders" webs, entrap Ar^s 
and Aphrodite in a network from which there is no escape, 
at once suggest a comparison with the tortuous labyrinth 
made for Pasiphae in the land of Minos. 

In our Homeric poems no children of Hephaistos are Heplmis- 
mentioned. In Apollodoros we have the strange story which 
makes him and Athene the parents of Erichthonios, and the 
legend which represents him as the father of the robber 
Periphet^s, who is slain by Theseus—myths transparent 
enough to render any detailed explanation superfluous. The 
Christian missionaries converted Hephaistos into a demon, 
and thus he became the limping devil known in Warwick¬ 
shire tradition as Wayland the Smith. 

Of the Latin Vulcan little more needs to be said than that The Latin 
he too is a god of fire, whose name also denotes his office, 
for it points to the Sanskrit ulka, a firebrand, and to the 
kindred words fulgur and fulmen, names for the flashing 
lightning.^ Like most other Latin gods, he has in strictness 
of speech no mythology 3 but ifc pleased the later Eoman 
taste to attribute to him all that Greek legends related of 
Hephaistos. 

The name Loki, like that of the Latin Yulcanus, denotes The fire- 
the light or blaze of fire, and in such phrases as Locke dricker 
vand, Loki drinks water, described the phenomena of the sun 
drinking when its light streams in shafts from the cloud rifcs 
to the earth or the waters beneath. The word thus carries 
us to the old verb liuhan^ the Latin lucere, to shine, and to 
Logi as its earlier form, the modern German lohe, glow; 
but as the Greek tradition referred the name Oidipous to 
the two words olha and olSsoo^ to know and to swell, so a 
supposed connexion with the verb lukan, to shut or lock, 
substituted the name Loki for Logi, and modified his cha¬ 
racter accordingly.^ He thus becomes the being who holds 

* In the Gaelic Lay of Magnus, the rudely daughters of the King of Light 
smith or forging god appears under the marry the twelve foster-brothers of 
name Balcan, his son being the sailor. Manus the hero—the months of the 
This looks as if the Latin name had year —Campbell, lii 347. 
been borrowed. In this story the twelve * Grimm. D Af., 221. 



200 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Lokithe 
thief. 


the keys of the prison-house, like the malignant Grendel in 
Beowulf, or the English fire-demon Grant mentioned by Ger- 
vase of Tilbury, a name connected with the Old Norse grind, 
a grating, and the modern German grenz, a boundary. At 
no time, however, did Loki exhibit the features of the Semitic 
devil or the Iranian Ahriman. Like Hephaistos, a god of 
the fire, he resembles him also in his halting gait and in the 
uncouth figure which provokes the laughter of the gods; 
and if we are not told that like him Loki was hurled out of 
heaven, yet we see him bound for his evil deeds, and, like 
Prometheus, he shall be set fi:ee, we are told, at the end of 
the world, and shall hurry in the form of a wolf to swallow 
the moon, as the deliverance of Prometheus is to be followed 
by the overthrow of his tormentor. Hence the Norse phrase, 
^ Loki er or bdndum,^ answering to the expression, ^ Der 
Teufel ist frei gelassen,^ the devil is loose. ^ 

The last day of the week bore, in Grimm^s opinion, the 
name of this deity.^ In place of our Saturday we have the 
Old Norse laugardagr, the Swedish logerdag, the Danish 
loverdag, a word which at a later period was held to mean 
the day appointed for bathing or washing, but which was 
more probably used at first in the original sense of bright¬ 
ness attached to Loki^s name. When, however, this mean¬ 
ing gave way before the darker sense extracted jfrom the 
verb Inkan, to shut or imprison, Loki became known as 
Ssetere, the thief who sits in ambush. The Christian mis¬ 
sionaries were not slow to point out the resemblance of this 
word to the Semitic Satan and the Latin Saturnus, who were 
equally described as malignant demons 5 and thus the notions 
grew up that the name of the last day of the week was im¬ 
ported from the old mythology of Italy, or that the Teutonic 
god was also the agricultural deity of the Latin tribes. 

’ The root, of the two myths of Loki family of the gods. The vulture of 
aud Prometheus is thus precisely the Prometheus is in the case of Loki re¬ 
same ^ In each case the benefactor of placed by a serpent whose venom 
_man is a being as subtle as he is wise, trickles down upon his face. 

'and as such he is expelled from the * <3-nnim, L. M.^ ii. 227. 



201 


Section IV.—PEOMBTHETJS. 

Anotlier and in some versions a very different account of CHAP, 
fire is given in the myths of Prometheus. In the Hesiodic . 
Theogony Prometheus is a son of the Titan lapetos, his hro- The 
thers being Epimetheus, Atlas, and Menoitios. But even of 
these the Hesiodic account cannot easily be reconciled with 
that of the Odyssey. In the latter, Atlas (Skambha) is the 
guardian and keeper of the pillars which hold up the heaven 
above the earth, and he knows all the depths of the sea.^ In 
the former he is condemned by Zeus to support the heaven 
on his head and hands,^ while Menoitios undergoes a punish¬ 
ment corresponding to that of Sisyphos or Ld&n, and with 
his father lapetos is consigned to the abyss of Tartaros. In 
short, if we put aside the assertion that in some way or 
other Prometheus was a giver of the boon of fire to men, the 
story is told with a singular variety of inconsistent details. 
Nothing can be more clear and emphatic than the narrative 
in which ^schylos asserts the utter and hopeless savagery of 
mankind before Prometheus came to their aid. They had no 
settled homes, no notion of marriage or of the duties which 
bind the members of a family together 5 they burrowed in 
the ground like the digger Indians, and contented themselves 
■with food not much better than that of the insect-eating 
Bushmen, because they knew nothing about fire, and how 
far it might raise them above the beasts of the field. This 
wretched state was their original condition, not one to 
which they had fallen from a higher and a better one, and 
it was from mere compassion to their utter helplessness that 
Prometheus stole fire from the house of Zeus, and hiding it in 
a ferule, imparted it to men, teaching them at the same time 
how to cook their food and build houses. With this notion 
the narrative of the Hesiodic Theogony is in complete an¬ 
tagonism. In this legend the existence of man upon earth 
began with a golden age, during which the earth yielded 
her fruits of her own accord, and in which plagues and sick¬ 
nesses were unknown. They were subject indeed to the 


Od^ss, i. 52. Grote, Bzst Gr i, 101. 


* Hesiod, T^o^. 616. 



202 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


doom of death ; but they died as though they were merely 
going to sleep^ and became the righteous demons who, wan¬ 
dering like the Erinyes everywhere through the air, watch 
the ways and works of men, to uphold the righteous and 
overturn the wicked. The second is the silver age, the men 
of which incurred the wrath of Zeus, and were hidden by 
him beneath the earth for impiously witholding the honours 
due to the immortal gods. Still when they die they are 
reckoned among the blessed, and are not without honours 
themselves.^ The brazen age which followed exhibits a 
race of men who ate no corn and had hearts of adamant, 
and whose hands sprung from their vast shoulders. These 
were the workers in brass (for men had not yet needed or 
come to know the use of iron), and their weapons were used 
to their own destruction. Like the men sprung from the 
dragon^s teeth in the Theban and Argonautic myths, they 
fought with and slaughtered each other, and went down 
without a name to the gloomy underworld of Hades. But 
it must not be forgotten that the Hesiodic poet knows of no 
transitional periods. The old age does not fade away insen¬ 
sibly into the new. It is completely swept off, and the new 
takes its place as virtually a new creation. Thus the earth 
becomes the possession of a series of degenerating inhabitants, 
the race of the poet’s own day being the worst of all. These 


^ The portions thus allotted to the 
departed of the golden and silver races 
tended to foster and develops that idea 
of a moral conflict between good and 
evil which first took distinct shape on 
Iranian soil. The evil spirits are there 
the malignant powers of darkness who 
represent both in name and in attributes 
the gloomy antagonist of the sun-god 
Indra. The Hesiodic myth coincides 
completely with this sentiment, while it 
extends it. Here the spirits of the men 
belonging to the golden age are the 
good demons, these demons being gene- 
rically different from the blessed gods 
of Ol^mpos: but it was easy to assign 
to the departed souls of the silver age a 
lower, or oven a positively malignant, 
character. They are not called Dai- 
mones by the Hesiodic poet, but they 
have a recognised position and dignity 
in the realm of the air There was no 


reason, therefore, why they should not 
be represented by others as evil demons; 
and this step which, as Mr Grote re¬ 
marks, was taken by Empedokles and 
Xenokratps, led to that systematic dis¬ 
tinction of which the Christian teachers 
availed themselves for the overthrow 
or rather the transformation of the 
system itself It only remained for 
them to insist on the reality of the evil 
demons thus brought into existence, and 
then, as the gods themselves are in the 
Jhad and Odyssey and elsewhere called 
demons, to include all together in the 
one class of malignant devils and at 
once the victory of the new creed was 
insured The old mythology was not 
killed, but it took a different shape, and, 
losing all its ancient beauty, acquired 
new powers of mischief and corruption. 
—Grote, H%st. Greece^ i, 96, &c. 



THE HESIODIC AGES. 


203 


are tlie men of the iron age, who know no peace by day and CHAP. ’ 
by night, and for whom, although some good may yet be - ^7’ . 
mingled with the evil, the poet anticipates nothing but an 
increasing misery which at the last will become unbearable. 

Good faith and kindly dealing will in the end vanish from 
the face of the earth, until Aid6s and Nemesis (reverence 
and righteousness) will wrap their shining garments around 
their radiant forms, and soar away into the heights never 
pierced by the eye of man. 

Such is the purely ethical legend by which the Hesiodic The 
poet accounts for the present condition of mankind—a state 
not only opposed to the legends of Hermes, Prometheus, and 
Phoroneus, but also to all the associations which had taken 
the strongest hold on the popular mind. The stories recited 
by bards or rhapsodists told them of a time when men 
walked the earth who were the children of immortal mothers, 
whose joys and sorrows were alike beyond those of men now 
living, who had done great deeds and committed great 
crimes, but who nevertheless held open converse with the 
flashing-eyed goddess of the dawn, and for whom the fire- 
god forged irresistible weapons and impenetrable armour. In 
the conviction of the Hesiodic as of our Homeric poets, the 
heroes of this magnificent but chequered age were utterly 
different from the miserable race which had followed them, 
nor could they be identified with the beings of the three 
races wjio had gone before them. It was, however, impos¬ 
sible even for a poet, who probably preferred his ethical 
maxims to the story of the wrath of AehilleuS or the aveng¬ 
ing of Helen, to pass them by in contemptuous silence. 

They must therefore be placed by themselves in a position 
which breaks the ethical order of the primeval ages ; ^ and 
thus the poet contents himself with saying that many of 
them slew each other at Thebes fighting for the apples or 
the cows of Oidipous, while others met their doom at Troy. 

AIT these were placed by Zeus in a region far away from the 
undying gods and beyond the bounds of the earth, where 
Kronos is their king, and where the teeming soil produces 

* It is note^vorthy that the genera- Vuh are interrupted after the third 
tions given in the Tkeogonyot the Popol creation. Max Muller, Chiys, i. 336. 



204 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The Pro¬ 
metheus of 
JEschylos. 


yearly its triple harvests in the islands of the blessed by the 
deep eddj’ing ocean. 

In contrast -with this gloomier belief, the Promethean 
myth exhibits mankind in a scale ascending from the savage 
state in which they knew the use neither of fire nor of metals 
to that high civilisation in which Zens fears that men may 
become like the gods in wisdom and thus share their power. 
Por this myth, as related by JEschylos, knows nothing of a 
previous knowledge of fire, which, according to the Hesiodic 
version, Zeus took away from men in revenge for the cheat 
which left only the fat and bones of victims as the por¬ 
tion of the gods. This explanation, which is not altogether 
consistent with other passages in the Hesiodic Theogony, 
completely excludes the idea which lies at the very root of 
the ^schylean tradition, for Prometheus expressly speaks 
of men not as having lost high powers and the fruits of 
great results achieved by those powers, but as never having 
been awakened to the consciousness of the senses with 
which they were endowed. Prom the first, until he came to 
their aid, they were beings to whom sight and hearing were 
wholly useless, and for whom life presented only the confused 
shapes of a dream. The sunless caves, in which they lived 
like ants, were not wrought into shape by their hands. Por 
them there were no distinctions of seasons, no knowledge of 
the rising and setting of the stars. Por this state of un¬ 
speakable misery there was no remedy until men Qpuld be 
roused to a knowledge of their own powers and be placed in 
the conditions indispensable for tjieir exercise—a result to 
be achieved only by bestowing on them the boon of fire. 
But this very idea involves the fact that till then fire was a 
thing unknown to men upon the earth. They might see it 
in the cloven thunderclouds, or tremble at the fiery streams 
hurled into the air from the heaving volcano, but to them 
fire was at the least a thing which they dared not approach 
with the thought of mastering and turning it to use. Some 
wiser being than they must therefore bring it to them in a 
form which shall deprive it of its terrors and make it the 
servant, not the destroyer of man. That being is Prometheus, 
who, ascending to the palace of Zeus, fills a ferule with fire. 



THE GIFT OF FIKE. 


205 

s"'' A' 

and thus brings down the precious boon to the woe-begone chap 
children of men. Henceforth the task of raising them was ^ ^ 

practically stripped of its difficulty, and Prometheus was 
enabled to teach men how to cook and build, and where to 
find the riches stored up within the earth. Prom him came 
the knowledge of the movements of the heavens, and the 
changes of the seasons; by him men were taught to plough 
and reap, and to launch themselves in ships on the waters 
and spread their white wings to the breeze. Prom him 
they received skill in the discernment of herbs and roots 
for the healing of diseases under which they had groaned in 
hopeless suffering ; and from him they learnt to understand 
the signs of the calm and the troubled heavens, and the 
meanings of the muscular movements of victims slain in 
sacrifice. 

It was impossible for the poet to show more clearly that The 
Prometheus was the friend who bestowed on man, originally 
a creature more feeble and helpless than any of the brute 
beasts, aU that can make life valuable. Of any earlier con¬ 
dition in which men lived, as in the golden or silver ages, or 
of any state better in any respect than the one in which he 
found them, the Prometheus of the great tragic poet knows 
nothing. Nor can we well lay too great a stress on this 
fact, because the version given by iEschylos not only makes 
the whole myth self-consistent, but it is clearly the earlier 
form of the legend into which the Hesiodic poet introduced 
the vengeance taken by Zeus for the cheat put upon him. 

This story is really .a mere patchwork; for according to it 
men, deprived of fire as a punishment, lose a thing on which 
much of their comfort may depend, but they are not deprived 
of the crafty wisdom in which Prometheus had been their 
teacher. In short, they are as far as ever from that state of 
unawakened powers which is of the very essence of the story 
in the tragedy of -Sschylos. But there were two things which 
^schylos felt it needful to explain. The very mode in which 
Prometheus became possessed of the priceless treasure implied 
that he was acting in opposition to the will of Zeus, or at 
the least without his knowledge, while it showed that he 
had access to the gleaming palace of the father of the gods. 



206 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


How then came it about that Prometheus should be able 
thus to enter Olympos^ and why should he seek to conceal 
the deed which he had resolved to do ? These questions the 
poet answered by a reference to other myths with which 
Prometheus was connected. This friend of man was himself 
either a Titan or the son of the Titan lapetos; and when his 
gigantic kinsfolk rose in rebellion against Zeus, Prometheus 
played the part of Michael in the great war waged within 
the courts of heaven. Finding that all good counsels were 
cast away on the brutal partisans of Kronos, Prometheus 
throws in the weight of his wisdom on the side of Zeus, and 
the result is that Kronos with his adherents is hurled, like 
Satan with the revolted angels, into the abyss of Tartaros or 
hell. Thus far Prometheus was a benefactor to Zeus without 
awakening either his jealousy or his wrath. Henceforth he 
might have remained for ever in the bright homes of Olympos 
had it not been for the injustice of which Zeus became guilty 
as soon as he found himself securely seated on the throne of 
heaven. To each of the deathless gods he assigned a place 
and function ; of men alone he took no count, his heart’s 
desire being to sweep the whole race from the earth and to 
create another. But it is clear that this resolution was 
formed not because men were already becoming too wise and 
too powerful, as the Hesiodic version would represent it, but 
because man was too mean and wretched a thing to be 
suffered to cumber the earth. Here Zeus expresses no fear, 
and Prometheus is opposed to him not because he is too 
severe upon enemies whom he dreads, but because he feels 
no pity for creatures whose wretchedness calls only for com¬ 
passion. The mercy refused by Zeus is extended to them by 
Prometheus, who determines to raise them from their abject 
misery and by stealing the fire converts the opposition of 
Zeus into a fierce longing for vengeance against the mighty 
being who had dared to thwart his will. The great heart 
whose pulses had beaten in sympathy with the griefs and 
wants of men shall itself be torn with an agony far sur¬ 
passing their puny woes. In the sentence thus passed upon 
him it seems difficult not to discern a phrase or a sentiment in 
close analogy with those which are seen in the myths of Erinys 



THE TOETURING OF PROMETHEUS. 


207 


or At^. The awful being, who with sleepless eye wanders 
through the air to watch the deeds of men and exact a 
righteous penalty for the shedding of innocent blood, had 
been, or was, in the land of the Five Streams only the beau¬ 
tiful Saranyu or morning. But the natural phrase, ^the 
dawn will find out the evil doer,’ changes Saranyu in Hellas 
into the dread minister of divine vengeance; and it was 
necessary only to give a physical meaning to the phrase that 
the hearts of the enemies of Zeus shall be racked with pain, 
to furnish a starting-point for the myth which told how the 
vulture gnawed the heart of Prometheus as he lay bound to 
the frozen crags of Caucasus. But the visible vulture gnawing 
a bleeding heart would soon have finished its horrid task; 
the heart, therefore, must constantly grow, and thus the 
story ran that the portion consumed during the day was 
restored in the night, and the region of everlasting ice and 
storm was chosen as the place of torture presenting the most 
awful contrast with the sunlit halls of Olympos. 

The zeal of Prometheus on behalf of mankind is brought 
to a climax in the institutional legend which professed to 
account for the portion assigned to the gods in the distri¬ 
bution of victims slain in sacrifices. They have only the 
bones and the fat, while the meat and the entrails belong to 
men. This practice is ascribed strictly to the craft of Pro¬ 
metheus, who, in the great contest between gods and men 
in Mekone, divided an ox, and placing the meat under the 
stomach and the bones under the more inviting and auspicious 
fat, called on Zeus to make his choice. The god with great 
eagerness placed both hands on the fat, and was enraged on 
finding that it concealed only a heap of bones. ^ This 


^ The Hesiodic poet in relating this 
story malces use of one or ‘two expres¬ 
sions which imply or assert that Zeus 
saw through the tnok from the first, 
and that thus it was m fact no trick at 
all. When Zeus saw the two heaps 
laid out for his choice, he is made to 
say that the division is not fair. The 
poet adds that this was a sarcasm from 
a god whose wisdom was boundless; 
and m the same way, when he is sum¬ 
moned to choose, the poet says that he 
did so with his eyes open, yvm p 
Tjyuoirjcre d6hov. The words are intro¬ 


duced simply to save the majesty of 
Zeus at the cost of complete inconsis¬ 
tency with the story Had he thus seen 
through the trick, he would have de¬ 
feated it, and would certainly have 
shown no feverish eagerness to lay his 
hands on the tempting heap of fat. 
Rut Prometheus succeeds in his scheme; 
in other words, Zeus is really outwitted. 
Mr. Grote sees clearly that the poet’s 
reservation cannot be admitted. Hist 
Greece^ i. 86. In one point, however, 
the JEschyleau version is as singularly 
at variance with itself as in all others it 


CHAP. 

IV. 


The cheat¬ 
ing of 
Zeus. 



208 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II 


Prome¬ 
theus and 
Pandora. 


insult, according to tlie Hesiodic Tlieogony, Zeus avenged by- 
depriving men of fire—a sequel hopelessly at variance with 
the more genuine form of the myth as related by -ffischylos. 

But the name Prometheus^ suggested •'to the Greeks a 
connexion with words springing from, the same root with 
Metis and Medeia. It came, in short, to mean Forethought 
or Providence, and thus they were led to its antithesis Epi- 
metheus, Afterthought, and to exalt the one by framing a 
story to illustrate the vanity of the other. This is as mani¬ 
festly implied by the story of Pandora as the overreaching 
of Zeus is patent in the institutional myth of the sacrifices. 
Prometheus is the wise and cautious counsellor, whose 
advice, if followed, will assuredly mitigate an evil or pre¬ 
vent a catastrophe. As such, he had bidden men, and more 
especially his brother Epimetheus, to be on their guard 
against any gifts which might be offered to them by Zeus, 
as their acceptance would be followed only by pain and 
misery. But it was impossible thus to defeat the schemes 
of Zeus or avert the doom of man. ISTo sooner had Zeus 
been tricked in the matter of the sacrificial victims than he 
bade the fire-god Hephaistos mould of clay the figure of a 
maiden,^ into which Ath^n^ the dawn-goddess breathed the 
breath of life, clothing her with silver raiment, while 


is -with, the Hesiodic myth. These chil¬ 
dren of men, ^ho are described as being 
unable either to see or hear, and as 
clustering together like ants in their 
sunless cares until they receive the 
boon of fire and the blessings -which 
follow that gift, yet possess a knowledge 
of things to come, and see most clearly 
what is to be the course and the close of 
their lives, ‘TrpodepK^o’dai fiSpoy^ before 
Prometheus brings down for them the 
heavenly fire. This power he takes 
away from them, substituting blind 
hopes or dreams in its place, and when 
he has added to this benefit the gift of 
the fire, he then instructs them in divi¬ 
nation, thus supplying in a measure the 
very knowledge which he had wished to 
take away, and of which he had in fact 
deprived them. The contradiction 
could not be more complete 

* It has been connected by Dr. Kuhn 
•with the Sanskrit Pramantha or chum 
used for kindlmg fire with dried pieces 
of wood. The wood thus has reference 


not to his wisdom but to his giving of 
the fire ,* and it was in this case a mere 
resemblance of soxmd which led the 
Greeks to explain the name as denoting 
forethought. Hence Epimetheus is 
strictly the result of a false etymology; 
and the process which brought him into 
existence is illustrated by the language 
of Pindar, Pyth. v. 25, who assigns to 
Epimetheus a daughter Prophasis, Ex¬ 
cuse, the offspring of after-thought. 
Grote, Qr i 102. 

* In the Finnish epic of Wainamoinen, 
the smith is Ilmarinen, who makes, not 
for others, but for himself, a wife of gold 
and silver whom he brings to life after 
vast trouble, He finds however, that 
that side of his body which has touched 
the golden Bride is very cold in the 
morning. Hence he is -willing to turn 
her over to Wainamoinen, who, not 
much relishing the gift, advises him 
to take it to some place where gold is 
in more request. 



THE MYTH OF PANDORA. 


209 


Hermes gave her the mind of a dog, to cozen, deceive, and 
ruin those with whom she, might come in contact. The 
maiden, thus arrayed, is brought to Epimetheus, and pre¬ 
sented to him under the name Pandora, the gift of all the 
gods.^ Thus was woman brought to man; and the poet of 
the Theogony only adds that through woman man was 
speedily plunged into woe irremediable. The author of the 
Works and Days gives the reasons in detail. In the keep¬ 
ing of Epimetheus was a fatal jar, whose cover could 
not be lifted without grievous consequences to mankind. 
Pandora of course raises the lid, and a thousand evils are 
let loose. Thus far men had been plagued by no diseases : 
now the air was filled with the seeds of sickness which every 
where produced their baneful fruit; and the only possible 
alleviation of their woe was rendered impossible .by the 
shutting up of Hope, which alone remained a prisoner within 
the cask when Pandora in her terror hastily replaced the 
cover.2 Here manifestly we have an account of the origin 
of evil which is altogether at variance with the true Pro¬ 
methean legend. The disaster thus caused by Pandora 
occurs long after the theft of the fire from Olympos, and 
at a time when Prometheus was paying the penalty for his 
offence. But in the version given by ^schylos Prometheus 
mentions, as one of his reasons for wishing to bestow on 
men the boon of fire, the crowd of diseases and plagues 
which they were unable either to mitigate or to cure. 
The reconciliation of these two myths, thus sprung from 
two different lines of thought, is an impossibility. But the 
Hesiodic legend is indeed inconsistent throughout. The 

1 In another and a more probable Pandora, he says, does not in Hesiod 
tradition Pandora is an epithet of Graia, ‘ bring with her the cask .... The 
the bountiful earth, lavish of her gifts case is analogous to that of the closed 
to all her childreff: it would thus bag of unfavourable winds wliich JEolus 
answer to the phrase dcSreap idooy. gives into the hands of Odysseus, and 

* The opinion that Hope was left a* which the guilty companions of the 
prisoner out of mercy to men seems un- latter force open, to the entire rum of 
tenable. The genuineness of the line his hopes .... The diseases and 
in which Zeus bids Pandora replace the evils are inoperative so long as they 
lid IS very doubtful, while the whole remain shut up in the cask: the same 
legend assuredly represents Zeus as in- mischief-making which lets them out to 
exorably hostile to men, and hence as their calamitous work takes care that 
most unlikely to interfere in their be- Hope shall still continue a powerless 
half. In Mr. G-rote’s opinion the point prisoner in the inside.’—Gr. i. 
is one which does not admit of question. 104. 

VOL. II. P 


CHAP. 

IV. 



210 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK, mere comparison instituted between Prometheus and Epime- 
. theus^ the fore-thinker and the after-thinker, implies that 
there must be some advantage in the one, some loss in the 
other, if the contrast is to have any force. But in the 
Theogony and the Works and Days there is no more to be 
said in behalf of one than of the other. The provident and 
the improvident are alike outwitted and punished; and the 
gain, if any there be, is decidedly to the man who does 
not see the coming evils as they cast their shadows before 
them. 


Prome- Putting aside these myths as the result of a mistaken 

thetis and it • . 

Benkalion. ^tj^ology, we see in Prometheus simply another Phoroneus, 
the giver of fire, and, by consequence, of the blessings which 
spring from the knowledge of fire. As wakening the senses 
of men, as providing them with the appliances and comforts 
of life, as teaching them how to plough and build, to cross 
the seas and search the mines, he is practically the creator 
as well as the preserver of men; and the creative function 
thus assigned to him is brought out still more in the story 
of his son Deukalion, in whose days the great flood of 
waters overwhelms the whole of Hellas. By his father’s 
advice Deukalion builds an ark, in which with his wife 
Pyrrha he floats for nine days and nights until the vessel 
rested on the summits of Pamassos.^ When descending 
from the ark with Pyrrha (a name denoting redness, 
whether of the soil, or, as other names in the myth render 
far more probable, of the early morning), he offers his first 
sacrifice. Hermes is sent to grant them any one thing which 
they may choose. The prayer of Deukalion reflects the 
spirit of Prometheus; and he beseeches Zeus to restore 
mankind, now that the race has been swept away, as 
his father had entreated him to stay his hand when first he 
resolved to destroy them. The answer, whether given by 


^ For otter versions of this Flood see 
page87,andvol. 1 page 414. In all these 
deluges only the righteous, or those -who 
have a consecrated character, are saved. 
The men of Delphoi are the ministers of 
the light"god Phoibos: hence ■wolves, by 
the same equivocation which led to the 
confounding of the tail of light, Lykos- 
oura (Lykabas), with that of the wolf, 


led them to the heights of Parnassos, 
where, of course, the city of Lykoreia, 
or Mountain of Light, is founded. Me¬ 
tros, again, who is saved by foUo'wing 
the high-soaring cranes, is a son of Zeus 
and a Sithnian nymph, or, in other words, 
a child of the waters, akin to the morning 
deities Athln4, Artemis, and Aphrodite. 
—Paus. i. 40, 1. 



THE TWILIGHT OP THE GODS. 


211 


Zens or by Tbesens, is that they must cast the bones of 
their mother behind them as they go upon their way; and 
the wisdom of Prometheus, which had warned them of the 
coming deluge, now teaches them that their common parent 
must be the Earth, and that her bones were to be seen in the 
rocks and stones strewn around them. These, accordingly, 
they cast backwards over their heads; and from those which 
Deukalion hurls spring up men, from those cast by Pyrrha 
women. ^ 

But Prometheus is one of those beings over whom tortures 
and death have no lasting hold. Memn6n, Sarp^d6n, and 
Ad6nis may all die, but they must rise again to more than their 
ancient splendour; and thus Prometheus must be delivered 
from his long torments by one of those bright heroes whose 
nature he shares. The Promethean legend thus becomes 
intermingled with that .of 16 as a parent of Herakles, for 
only beings like Herakles, Phoibos, or Asklepios may achieve 
such deliverances. Since, again, the sufferings of Prome¬ 
theus have been caused by his resisting the will of Zeus, it 
follows that his rescue must involve the humiliation of Zeus; 
and thus the indomitable son of lapetos is represented as 
using language which seems to point distinctly to the Norse 
belief in the Twilight of the gods, when the long day of the 
deities of Asgard shall be quenched in endless night.^ Nor 
are 16 and Herakles the only names denoting the brilliance 
of the morning or the sun, which are associated with the 
name of Prometheus. The whole legend teems with a trans¬ 
parent mythical history in its very names, if we confine 
ourselves to these alone. Deukalion and Pyrrha are the 
parents of Protogeneia, who, being wedded to Zeus, becomes 

^ This myth, in Professor Max fruit of a certain palm, and out of the 
Muller’s opinion, ‘owes its origin to a kernels sprang men and women, 
mere pun on Aobr and Xaay.’— Chips, ^e. * It may be doubted whether this 

ii 12. The temptation so to assign it idea is anything more than an inference 
is great; but it seems unlikely that the conceived by me mind of .®schylos ; 
same equivocation should run through for no other mention of the downfall of 
the language of other tribes, among the Olympian hierarchy seems to be 
whom the story is found, as among found in any other Greek writer The 
the Macusi Indians of South America, notion, which agrees well with the 
who believe that the stones were gloomy climate of the North, was not 
changed into men, and the Tamanaks likely to fasten on the imagination of 
of Onnoko, who hold that a pair of Hellenic tribes in their sunnier home, 
human beings cast behind them the 


CHAP. 

IV. 


Prome¬ 
theus and 
16 . 



212 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN JS’ATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The 

Titans. 


the mother of Aethlios, whose wife, Ealyke, is the mother 
.. of Endymi6n, the husband of Asterodia, who bears him 
fifty children. Translating these words into English, we 
have simply the assertions that the clear purple tints usher 
in the early dawn, the mother of the struggling sun, from 
whose union with the earth springs the wearied sun of even¬ 
ing, who, plunging into the western waters, is wedded to 
the tranquil night moving among the stars who are her 
children. 


Section Y.—THE LIGHTNIMa. 

With the gift of fire Prometheus imparted to man the 
power of interpreting the fiery lightnings which flash across 
the sky and seem to pierce the very bowels of the earth. 
These lightnings are the mighty fires in which the invincible 
weapons and arms are welded for beings like Phoibos, 
Herakles, or Achilleus; or they are themselves the awful 
thunderbolts forged by Hephaistos, the fire-god, and his 
ministers for Zeus himself. These ministers are the gigantic 
Titans, some of whom are thus compelled to do service to 
the god against whom they had rebelled; while others, like 
Typhoeus and Enkelados, are bound on fiery couches beneath 
huge mountains, through which they vomit forth ^streams of 
molten fire. Thus, among the myths related of these beings, 
we find some which refer to the manifestations of fire in the 
heaven, while others exhibit the working of the same forces 
upon the earth or under it. When we reach the Hesiodic 
or Orphic theogonies, these myths have been modified and 
woven together in a highly elaborate system. It is true that 
even here we find the poets, or mythographers, working more 
or less in unconscious fidelity to the old m 3 rfchical phrases, 
which had mainly furnished them with their materials. 
Thus when the Orphic poet desired to go further back than 
the point to which the Hesiodic theogony traces the gene¬ 
ration of the Eosmos, he traced the universe to the great 
mundane egg produced by Cbronos, time, out of Chaos and 
Aith^r,—a symbol answering to the mighty mixing-bowl of 
the Platonic demiourgos, and akin to all the circular, oval. 



POLYPHfiMOS. 


213 


or boat-shaped emblems of fertility wbicb have been asso¬ 
ciated with the signs of the male-powers in nature. But 
the artificial character of these theogonies can neither be 
ignored nor explained away 5 nor can it be denied, that the 
deliberate process of manufacture which they have under¬ 
gone deprives them in great part of any mythological value, 
while it frees us from the necessity of going through their 
tedious details, or of adhering invariably to their order. 
Thus, if we take the story, whether of the gigantic PolyphS- 
mos or of the Kyld6pes among whom he is reckoned, we are 
not bound to go through the cumbrous genealogy of Oura- 
niones. Titans, and Gigantes with which the theogonies are 
overloaded. It is enough to say that when Arg^s, SteropSs, 
and Brontes are spoken of as Kykldpes, these are manifestly 
the dazzling and scorching flashes which plough up the 
storm-clad heavens. But although it is possible to trace 
the affinity between these Kykl6pes and the beings to whom 
the poets of the Iliad and the Odyssey give the same name, 
the latter exhibit nevertheless features very different from 
the former. The Kykl6ps of the Odyssey has nothing to do 
with fire; he is the son of Poseid6n and the nymph Tho6sa; 
in other words, he is emphatically the child of the waters, 
and of the waters only—the huge mists which wrap the 
earth in a dark shroud. Instead of forging armour, he 
feeds his flock of sheep and goats on the rough hill-side. 
These herds answer to the cattle of Helios in every respect 
except their brilliance. The flocks of the Kykldps are the 
rough and misshapen vapours on which no sunshine sheds 
its glory, while the Kykldps himself is the oppressive and 
blackening mist, through which glares the ghastly eye of 
the shrouded sun. This terrible being may be seen drawn 
with wonderful fidelity to the spirit of the old myth in 
Turner’s picture of the overthrow of the troops sent by 
Cambyses to the shrine of the Libyan Ammon; and they who 
see the one-eyed monster glaring down on the devoted army, 
where the painter was probably utterly unconscious that he 
was doing more than representing the simoom of the desert, 
will recognise at once the unconscious accuracy with which 
the modern painter conveys the old Homeric conception of 


CHAP. 

IV. 



214 


MYTEOLOGY OF THE AEYAN EAT^OJN’S 


BOOK 

II/ 


The Ky- 
kl6pes. 


Poljrpli^mos. In this picture, as in the storms of the desert, 
the sun becomes the one great eye of an enohnous monster, 
who devours every living thing that crosses his path, as 
Polyphemos devoured the comrades of Odysseus.^ The 
blinding of this monster is the natural sequel when his mere 
brute force is pitted against the craft of his adversary/ In 
his seeming insignificance and his despised estate, in his 
wayworn mien and his many sorrows, Odysseus takes the 
place of the Boots or Cinderella of Teutonic folk-lore; and as 
the giant is manifestly the enemy of the bright being whose 
splendours are for the time hidden beneath a veil, so it is 
the representative of the sun himself who pierces out his 
eye; and thus Odysseus, Boots, and Jack the Giant Killer 
alike overcome and escape from the enemy, although they 
may each be said to escape with the skin of their teeth. 

Polyphemos then is the Kyklops, in his aspect as a 
shepherd feeding his vast flocks on the mountain sides; but 
from the mighty vapours through which his great eye glares 
may dart at any moment the forked streams of lightning; 
and thus the Kykldpes are connected with the fire-convulsed 
heaven, and with Hephaistos the lord of the awful flames. 
These, with the Hekatoncheires, or hundred-handed monsters, 
are the true Gigantes, the earth-borii children of Ouranos, 
whom he thrusts down into the nether abyss, like the pent- 
up fires of a volcano. But the Titans stiH remained free. 
Whatever may be the names of these beings, they are clearly 
the mighty forces which carry on the stupendous changes 


^ The sun, thus glaring through the 
storm cloud, may be regarded not 
merely as the eye but as the whole face 
of some horrible monster, and the name 
Kyklops agrees etymologically with the 
latter meaningbetter than with the other. 
The word no more means of necessity a 
being with one eye in the middle of his 
forehead, than Q-laukopis, as an epithet 
of Athene, implies that she had only a 
grey eye. This name really denotes the 
blmding splendour of her countenance; 
and thus the Kykl6ps became a being 
not with an eye in the middle of his 
head, but with a round face In this 
case, as it so happens, either description 


is equally true to the phenomena of 
nature. Even if the notion of the 
round face was suggested before the 
Greek myth-makers reached the idea of 
the one eye in the centre of the forehead, 
we can see at once how readily the 
latter notion may be derived from the 
sight of the black storm-cloud, as it 
suffers the sun to glare dimly through 
its mysterious shadows. 

2 The story and attributes of Poly- 
ph^mos with a thousand others were 
transferred to the devil, when the 
Christian missionaries had converted all 
the ancient gods into demons. See 
ch. X. of this book, section 8. 



THE WABS OF THE TITAIS’S. 


215 


wroiiglit from time to time in tlie physical world. Of the CH^. 

titles given to them by m3rfchographers5 many doubtless, like --,J— 

the abstract conceptions of Themis and MnemosynS, are 
artificial additions, and may be the manufacture of the 
mythographers themselves. Others, as Ejcios and Hyperion, 
denote simply might or supremacy, and as such might 
become the names of Helios, Phoibos, or other kindred 
beings. Others, as Kronos, have their origin in epithets 
wrongly understood. Between these beings and their father 
a second war is waged, in which Gaia enables her children to 
mutilate Ouranos, from whose blood spring the Erinyes, so 
fearful on Hellenic soil, so beautiful in the land of the five 
streams, and Aphrodite, the dawn goddess, who may be 
terrible as well as lovely. The Kykl&pes are now delivered 
from their prison-house,,and Eionos becomes the supreme 
king 5 but time can only swallow the things which he has 
made, and vomit them forth again. The thing which hath 
been, shall be, and there is nothing new under the sun. 

But it was as impossible that the Kykl6pes could continue 
the allies of any monarch of heaven, as that the same foun¬ 
tain should send forth sweet water and bitter; and again 
they are thrust down into the depths from which they had 
been rescued, once more to be avenged when the Titans, led 
on by Zeus, waged a third war of elements, in which Kronos 
is hurled from his throne, and the child born in the Diktaian 
(or Light) cave reigns in his stead. But when the Kykl6pes 
are once more set free, Zeus avails himself of their might to 
crush the Titans; and finally the Kykl6pes themselves are 
slain by Phoibos in vengeance for the death of AsklSpios the 
Healer and the Saviour. These several contests are not dis¬ 
tinguished from each by any peculiar features; and the 
theogonies simply heap together mountains of words almost 
as vast as the rocks hurled by the hands of the giants, as if 
conscious of the barrenness of their theme, and of its lack 
of interest as compared with myths springing from phrases 
which, though they may denote the phenomena of nature, 
strike a responsive chord in the human heart. It is, in fact, 
the old story of the struggle between Indra and Yritra, 



216 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AJRYAN I^’ATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


Schamir 

and 

Sassafras. 


regarded from a point of view wLicli removes it altogether 
from the region of human sympathies.^ 

Thus, then, the myth of the KyM6ps brings before us in 
close connexion the two images of the cloud and the light- ^ 
ning. This connexion may be traced through a vast num¬ 
ber of stories, in many cases but slightly resembling each 
other, yet all adhering to the original ideas of mist and fire. 

In these the lightning becomes an arrow capable of piercing 
the mountain side or the huge storm-cloud, and displaying 
for a moment marvellous treasures of jewels and gold. The 
effects produced by this arrow or spear are sometimes good, 
sometimes disastrous. It may scorch and paralyse, or in 
times of drought, when the waters are pent up in the cloud, 
it may cleave the vapours and call the dead earth to life 
again with the streams let loose upon her parched surface. 
But the cloud might assume the form not only of sheep and 
cattle, as in the Vedic hymns and in the Thrinakian legend, 
but of birds, as of swans or eagles; and as the clouds carry 
the lightning with them until the time comes for using the 
mighty weapons, so the bird carries a stone capable of split¬ 
ting the hardest substance. Finally the stone becomes a 
worm, and thus we have the framework of a large family of 
stories which, if they have their origin among Aryan tribes, 
have been extended far beyond the limits of that race. 
These myths have been so fully traced by Mr. Baring G-ould,^ 
that nothing is left for us but to follow his steps. In the 
many versions devised by BLebrew tradition for a legend 
gained through their contact with Iranian tribes, the cloud 
is in each case a bird, the lightning being either a stone or 
a worm. Thus Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, discovers the 
wonder-working pebble Schamir, by watching a moor-hen, 
which, finding a piece of glass laid over her nest, flies away, 
and fetching a worm, splits the cover; or Solomon obtains 
it in the form of a stone from the raven, of whom he has 
been informed by the demon Sackar, In similar stories told 

* In short, these theogonies are the myths, which might be carried out in 
result, in part, of a backward process, any way most congenial to the worker, 
which led the mythographer back to the * Cunom Myths^ second senes, 
mundane egg, and, in part, of that * Schamir.’ 
systematic rearraugement of current 



ROCK-SPLITTING PLANTS. 


21T 


by iElian and Pliny of tbe woodpecker or the boopoe, tbe in- chap 
strument by wbicb tbe bird gets at ber young is a grass; and . 
thus we reach tbe family of plants whose power of splitting 
rocks has won for them tbe name of Saxifrage, or Sassafras. 

This grass or plant will either reveal treasures, as in tbe 
blinding glare of tbe electric fluid, or will restore life, as in 
tbe effects of bgbtning in setting free tbe waters on a 
parcbed-up soil. Thus tbe story of Glaukos and Polyidos,of 
tbe Three Snake Leaves, and of Eama and Luxman, is re¬ 
peated in Fouqu 4 ’s Sir Elidoc, where tbe young Amyot is 
watching tbe corpse of a woman as Glaukos watches that of 
Polyidos. This mysterious herb becomes tbe German Luck- 
flower, tbe possessor of wbicb is enabled to go down into tbe 
rocks wbicb gape to receive him, and to fill bis pockets with 
tbe glittering treasures of wbicb tbe beautifol queen of this 
bidden palace bids him take bis fill, warning bini only not 
to forget tbe best. This warning is, of course, understood 
by tbe peasant as a charge to select tbe most precious 
stones, and leaving tbe flower behind him, be finds, as tbe 
rocks close with a crash, that tbe mountain is closed to Li-m 
for ever. This flower is sometimes inclosed in a staff, which 
is obviously only another form of tbe ligbning-spear, as in 
tbe tale of tbe luckless shepherd of Ilsenstein, who, for¬ 
getting to take tbe staff as be leaves tbe cave, is himself 
cloven by tbe closing rocks. In aU these cases tbe flower or 
plant, as tbe talismanic spell, is more precious than tbe bid 
treasures; and unless tbe treasure-seeker keeps it by Lim he 
is lost. It is, in short, tbe flower, sometimes blue, some¬ 
times yellow or red (as tbe hues vary of the lightning 
flashes), wbicb, in Mr. Gould’s words, exclaims in feeble 
piteous tone, ‘ Forget me not,’ but its bttle cry is unheeded. 

In tbe story of Ali Baba and the Forly Thieves tbe flower Ahmed 
itself has disappeared, but tbe spell stUl bes in its name; 
for^ as Mr. Gould remarks, ‘ sesame is tbe name of a well 
known Eastern plant {Sescurmm onmtale); so that probably, 
in tbe original form of the Persian tale absorbed into tbe 
Arabian Nights, a flower was employed to give admission to 
tbe mountain.’ In tbe story of AUab-ud-deen, tbe same 
verbal talisman is employed by tbe African magician, when 



218 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK lie lias Mndled a fire from wMcli rises a dense smoke and 

--^. vaponr, and the instantaneous effect, as of the lightning, is 

the discovery of a way into the depths of the earth. In the 
tale of Ahmed and the Peri Banou, the Schamir or Sassa¬ 
fras is again an arrow which, when shot by the hand of the 
prince, travels so far as to become invisible, as the light¬ 
nings shine from the east and give hght to the nttermost 
west. Following its coui’se, he comes to a great mountain, 
and finds the arrow just where an opening in the rocks shows 
him a door by which he descends into a palace of unim¬ 
aginable splendour. Here he is greetefd by the queen of this 
magnificent domain, who calls him by his name, and having 
convinced him of her knowledge of all his actions by recount¬ 
ing incidents of his past life, offers herself to him as his bride. 
With her he dwells in happiness and luxury, until, driven 
by a yearning to see his home and his father once more, he 
beseeches the benignant being to suffer him to go, and at 
length obtains his wish after promising, like true Thomas 
in the myth of Ercildoune, that he will soon return. This 
beautiful Peri with her vast treasures and her marvellous 
wisdom is but a reflection of the wise Eark^ and Medeia, or 
of the more tender Kalypso, who woos the brave Odysseus 
in her glistening cave, until she is compelled to let the man 
of many sorrows go on his way to his wife PenelopS. She is, 
in short, the Venus of the Horselberg or Ercildoune (the hill 
of Ursula and her eleven thousand Virgins), for the names 
are the same, and the prince Ahmed is Tanhaiiser, or Thomas 
the Ehymer, wooed and won by the Elfland queen. 

The greedy It is obvious that for the name of the flower which is to 

open the cave or the treasure-house might be substituted 
any magical formula, while the lightning flash might be 
represented by the hghting of a miraculous taper, the ex¬ 
tinguishing of which is followed by a loud crashing noise. 
With these modifications, the myth at once assumes the 
form of the Spanish legend of the Moor’s Legacy, as related 
by Washington Irving. In this dehghtful tale we have all 
the usual incidents or features—^the buried treasures—^the 
incantation which has ^ such virtue that the strongest bolts 
and bars, nay, the adamantine rock itself, will yield before 



THE LIGHTNING. 


219 


it^—^the wonderM taper "by whose light alone the in- CHAP, 
cantation can be read—the opening of the secret places of 
the earth while the taper continues to burn—^the crash with 
which the gates close when the light is gone. All these 
features are so skilfully fitted into the modern Alhambra 
legend, as fairly to hide the origin of the story, until we 
apply the right key to the lock. JSTo sooner is this done 
than the myth is as clearly revealed as the treasure of the 
robbers’ cave on pronouncing the word ^ Sesame.’ Of the 
real meaning of the tale, Irving doubtless knew nothing; 
but he has preserved it as faithfully as the hymn-writer 
adhered to the spirit of the myth of Hermes. ‘ The scroll 
was produced’ (the sassafras or sesame), ^the yellow waxen 
taper lighted’ (the fiash of the yellow lightning), ^the earth 
trembled and the pavement opened with a thundering sound.’ 

While the taper burns, the Moor and the water-carrier load 
the panniers of their ass with costly treasures; but when 
they have satisfied themselves, the costliest still remain 
untouched, and the greedy Alcalde, having in vain prayed 
them to bring up these also, descends with his griping 
retainers still lower into the vault. ^No sooner did the 
Moor behold them fairly earthed, than he extinguished the 
yellow taper ’ (the darkness closes in after the flash of light¬ 
ning), Hhe pavement closed with the usual crash, and fche 
three worthies remained buried in its womb.’ Doubtless, 
when reduced to their primitive elements, these tales may 
seem poor and monotonous enough; but the marvellous 
powers of growth which these germs possess have seldom 
been more clearly exhibited than in the folklore which has 
yielded the legends of the Forty Thieves, the Peri Banou, 
AUah-ud-deen, and the Legacy of the Moor, with the German 
stories of Simeli Mountain and the Glass Cof&n.^ 

Once more, the light flashing from the dim and dusky Mediaeval 
storm-cloud becomes the Hand of Glory, which, formed of a 
dead man’s limbs, aids the mediseval treasure-seeker in his 

' In this story the office of Schamir lightning, it splits the rocks open and 
is discharged by a goat, suggesting a the Tailor descends through the opening 
comparison with the Aigis of Ath4n4 into the hidden chamber, where the 
(see 11 . 347-8). The beast thrusts his maiden sleeps in the Glass Coffin, 
horns with such force that, like the 



220 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


forbidden search, whether in the depths of the earth or after 
his neighbour’s goods; nor have we far to seek in much 
older writings for the very same image without its repulsive 
transformation- The hand of glory is the red light of 
Jupiter, with which he smites the sacred citadels ; ^ and 
with this we may compare the myth of the golden hand of 
Indra SavitS^r. 

’ Horace, Od. i. 2. 



221 


CHAPTEE V. 

THE WINDS. 


Section I.—VAYU AND THE MARTJTS. 


The god of the bright heaven, who is known as Dyu, Indra, CHAP, 
and Agni, is also called Yayn, a name denoting, it would 
seem, simply the gentler movements of the air, which are Vayu ani 
expressed by the sweet pipings of the Greek Pan and the 
soft breathings of the Eatin Favonius. As such, he comes 
early in the morning to chase away the demons, and the 
Dawns weave for him golden raiment.' He is drawn by the 
Niijuts, and has Indra for his charioteer.* With some he 
was, along with Agni and Surya, supreme among the deities. 

‘ There are only three deities, according to the Hairuktas 
(etymologists): Agni whose place is on earth; Vayu or Indra 
whose place is in the atmosphere, and Surya whose place is 
in the sky.’ * 

The blustering rage of the Greek Boreas and the more Boreas 
violent moods of Hermes are represented by the crowd of 
Maruts, or storm-winds, who attend on Indra and aid biTn 
in his struggle with his great enemy Vritra. Of these 
beings it is enough to say, that the language used in de¬ 
scribing their functions is, if possible, more transparent than 
that of the poem known as the Homeric Hymn to Hermes. 

They overturn trees and destroy forests, they roar like lions 
and are as swift as thought, they shake the mountains and 
are clothed with rain. They are borne on tawny-coloured 
horses; they are brothers, ‘ of whom no one is the elder, no 
one the younger.’ They are bom self-luminous with the 


^ Muir, Sanskrit Texts^ part iv. 
p. 337 

® H. H Wilson, 5. V. S, lii. 209; 


Muir, Scmskr. Texts, iv. 3, 7. 

* Muir, Skr. Texts, part iv. p. 57. 



222 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK spotted deer, tlie spears, the daggers, the glittering orna- 
^ ments.^ These spears and daggers are the lightnings, and 
the spotted deer are seen in the spotted lynxes who play 
round Phoihos as he pipes to the flocks of Adm^tos.^ The 
worshipper hears the cracking of their whips in their hands 
as they go upon their way. After their mightiest exploits 
they assume again, ^ according to their wont, the form of 
new-born babes,’^ a phrase which exhibits the germ, and 
more than the germ, of the myth of Hermes returning like a 
child to his cradle after tearing up the forests. Theix voice 
is louder than that of Stentor. 

^Whither now?’ asks the poet. 'On what errand of 
yours are you going, in heaven not on earth? Where are 
your cows sporting ? Prom the shout of the Maruts over 
the whole space of the earth men reeled forward.’ ^ 

' They make the rocks to tremble; they tear asunder the 
kings of the forest,’ like Hermes in his rage. 

' Lances gleam, Maruts, upon your shoulders, anklets on 
your feet, golden cuirasses on your breasts, and pure (waters 
shine) on your chariots: lightnings blazing with fire glow in 
your hands, and golden tiaras are towering on your heads.’ ® 
In the traditions of Horthem Europe these furious Maruts 
become the fearful Ogres, who come tearing along in their 
ships (the clouds), while the wind roars and growls after 
them, and who, after desperate conflicts, are vanquished by 
Shortshanks in the Norse tale. The ogre of this story 
carries with him ' a great thick iron club,’ which sends the 
earth and stones flying five yards in the air at each stroke. 
The Crush- But pre-eminently, as the name denotes, the Maruts are 
Grinders. crushers or grinders; and thus, as made to share in the 
deadly strife between Indra and Vritra, they assume an ex¬ 
clusively warlike character. The history of the root which 
furnishes this name has been abeady traced,® and has linked 
together the Greek war-god ArSs, the gigantic Aloadai and 
Moliones, the Latin Mars and Mors, and the Teutonic Thor 
Miolnir. They are the children of Eudra, worshipped as the 

' MH.Tr Miiller, Bio Veda Sanhttaf i. * Bb. 65. 

59 . « H. H. ■Wilson, B. V. 8. vol. li. 

* Eurip. Aik 579. p. 333 

> Max Muller, B. V 8. i. 3. • Vol i. p. 34. 



EUDRA. 


223 


destroyer and reproducer, for these functions were blended CHAP, 
by the same association of ideas which gave birth to the ^ 
long series of correlative deities in Aryan mythology. 

^Adorned with armlets, the Maruts have shone like the 
skies with their stars; they have glittered like showers from 
the clouds, at the time when the prolific Eudra generated 
you, Maruts, with jewels on your breasts, from the shining 
udder of Prisni.^ ^ 

The several phases which the character of this god as- Eudra. 
sumes in the later Hindu literature are minutely traced by 
Dr. Muir; ^ but among the monstrous overgrowths of wild 
fancies we find some of -ftie more prominent attributes of the 
cognate Greek deity ascribed to Eudra in his character as 
Father of the Winds. Like the Asvins and Agni, like 
Proteus, Phoibos, and the other fish-gods, Eudra can change 
his form at will. 

^ Father of the Maruts, may thy felicity extend to us: 
exclude us not from the light of the sun. 

^ Thou, Eudra, art the chiefest of beings in glory. Thou, 
wielder of the thunderbolt, art the mightiest of the mighty. 

^ Where, Eudra, is thy joy-dispensing hand ? Firm with 
strong limbs, assuming many forms, he shines with golden 
ornaments.^ ® 

Like Hermes, Eudra is worshipped as the robber, the 
cheat, the deceiver, the Master Thief.^ The mocking laugh¬ 
ter of the wind as it passes on after wreaking its fury could 
not fail to suggest the same ideas in the most distant lands. 

As we might expect, Eudra, like Siva, whose gracious name 
was a mere euphemism to deprecate his deadly wrath, at 
length eclipses Indra, as Indra had put Dyaus and Varuna 
into the background, and he becomes associated most closely 
with that phallic worship which seemingly found but little 
favour in the true Vedic age.® 

* R. V. ii 34, 2; Muir, Slur. Texts, See also toI. i. 

part IV. p 260. ^ ® Dr. Muir fully aduuts the scantiness 

* Muir, ^5. part iv. ch. iv. sect. 3. of the evidence on which the negative 

* H H. Wilson, i?. V. 8. ii 289. conclusion rests. 8kr, Texts, iv. p 348. 

* Muir, 8kr. Texts, part iv. p. 341. 



224 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


Hindu and 
Greek 
myths of 
the wind. 


The story 
of Hermes. 


Section II. — HEHMES. 

The character of the more gentle Vayu, who comes with 
the blush of early morning, carries ns to the strange legend 
of Hermes; and we have to see how the phrases which 
yielded bnt a slight harvest of myth in the East grew np in 
the West into stories enriched by an exquisite fancy, while 
they remained free from the cumbrous and repulsive extra¬ 
vagances of later Hindu mythology, and how true to the 
spirit of the old mythical speech and thought is the legend 
of that son of Zeus, who was born early in the morning in a 
cave of the Kyllenian hill, who at noon played softly and 
sweetly on his harp, and who at eventide stole away the 
cattle of Phoibos.^ 

Eising from his cradle (so the story runs), the babe stepped 
forth from the cave, and found a tortoise feeding on the 
grass- Joyously seizing his prize, he pierced oat its life 
with a borer, and drilling holes in the shell, framed a lyre 
with reed canes, a buU’s hide, and seven sheep-gut cords. 
Then striking the strings he called forth sounds of wonder¬ 
ful sweetness, as he sang of the loves of Zeus in the beauti¬ 
ful home of his mother Maia, the daughter of Atlas. But 
soon he laid down his harp in his cradle, for the craving 
of hunger was upon him, and as the sun went down with 
his chariot and horses to the stream of Ocean,^ the child has¬ 
tened to the shadowy mountains of Pieria, where the cattle 
of the gods feed in their large pastures. Taking fifty of the 
herd, he drove them away, sending them hither and thither, 
so that none could tell by what path they had really gone, 
and on his own feet he bound branches of tamarisk and 
myrtle. Passing along the plains of Onchestos, he charged 

^ Hymn to Hermes, 17, 18. The after striding like a giant over heaths 
sudden growth of Hermes, followed hy and hills, as well as the cave of Aiolos 
an equally rapid return to his infantile and the bag of winds which he places 
shape and strength, explains the story in the hands of Odysseus, 
of the Fisherman and the Jin in the ® Hymn to Hermes, 67. I have 
Arabian Nights. This tale is substan- striven to adhere with scrupulous care 
tially the same as Grimm’s story of the to the imagery of the hymn, avoiding 
Spirit in the Bottle The bottle in the the introduction of any notions not 
one case, the jar in the other, represents warranted by actual expressions in the 
the cradle to which Hermes comes back poem. 



THE CEJUDLE OF HEEMES. 


225i 


an old man who was at work in his vineyard to forget the CHAP, 
things which it might not be convenient to remember. ^ . 

Hastening onwards with the cattle, he reached the banks The theft 
of Alpheios, as the moon rose np in the sky. There he 
brought together a heap of wood, and, kindling the first 
flame that shone upon the earth, he slew two of the cows, 
and stretching their hides on the rock, cut up the flesh into 
twelve portions.^ But sorely though his hunger pressed 
him, he touched not the savoury food, and hurling his san¬ 
dals into the river, he broke up the blazing pile, and scattered 
the ashes all night long beneath the bright light of the 
moon. Early in the morning he reached Kyll^n^, neither 
god nor man having spied him on the road; and passing 
through the bolt-hole of the cave like a mist or a soft 
autumn breeze,^ he lay down in his cradle, playing among 
the clothes with one hand, while he held his lyre in the 
other. To the warning of his mother, who told him that 
Phoibos would take a fearful vengeance, and bade him begone 
as bom to be the plague of gods and men,^ Hermes simply 
answered that he meant to be the equal of Phoibos, and that 
if this right were refused to him, he would go and sack his 
wealthy house at Pytho. 

Meanwhile, Phoibos, hastening to Onchestos in search of The cove- 
his cattle, had asked the old vinedresser to say who had Hemes 
taken them. But the words of Hermes still rang in the old Phoi- 
man’s ears, and he could remember only that he had seen 
cows and a babe following them with a staff in his hand. 
Elnowing now who had stolen them,^ Phoibos hastened on to 


' Hemes is thus especially connected 
with the ordering of burnt sacrifices. 
But this we have seen to be the especial 
attribute or function of Agni. 

* In other words the great giant has 
reduced himself almost to nothing. 
This is the story of the Fisherman and 
the Jin in the Arabian Nights, of the 
Spirit in the Bottle in Grimm’s German 
stories, of the devil in the purse of the 
Master Smith, and again in the story of 
the Lad and the Devil (Dasent), and 
the Gaelic tale of The Soldier. Campbell, 
ii. 279 . 

* With this we may compare the 
prognostications of the mother of the 

VOL. II. < 


Shifty Lad, in the Scottish version of 
the myth. 

* B^mn to Hermes, 214-5. Nothing 
could show more clearly than these 
words tliat the myth pointed to a 
physical phenomenon with which 
Phoibos was already familiar. Had 
the story been told by one who meant 
to speak of any human child, he would 
never have represented Apoll5n as 
knowing who the thief was before his 
name was mentioned or the clue to his 
hiding-place furni shed. The po et mi ght 
indeed have said that the child had 
stolen the cows many times already: 
but the statement would not have agreed 



226 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN NATIONS. 


BOOH 

II. 


Pylos, and ttere stood amazed at tlie confused tracks whicli 
tlie beasts had left behind them. Hurrying onwards to 
KyllSn^, Apoll6n caught the child in his cradle, and taxed 
him with the theft. ^ How can it be that I have stolen the 
cows ? ^ said the babe, ‘ I who can but sleep and suck and 
play with the clothes of my cradle. I was born but yester¬ 
day, and my feet are tender, and the ground is hard. I have 
not taken your cattle, and I know nothing of cows but their 
name.^ But as he spoke he winked slily with his eyes, and 
a long low whistle came from his lips. Smiling in spite of 
his anger, Phoibos saw that the craft of Hermes would set 
many a herdsman grieving, and that he had won the right 
to be called the prince of robbers and the Master Thief for 
ever. Then seizing the child he was bearing him away when 
a loud noise made him let go his hold; but at length both 
appeared before the judgment-seat of Zeus, and the babe, 
who spoke of himself as a most truthful person, said that he 
must be guiltless, as he knew not even what sort of things 
cows were. The plea was not admitted, and the nod of Zeus 
warned Hermes that his command to restore the oxen was 
not to be disobeyed. So on the banks of Alpheios he showed 
the lost cattle to Phoibos, who, dismayed at the signs of 
recent slaughter, again seized the babe in his anger. In 
great fear Hermes bethought him of his lyre, and striking 
its chords wakened sounds most soft and soothing as he sang 
of the old time when the gods were born and the world was 
young. As he listfened to the beautiful harmony, Phoibos, 
angry no more, longed only to learn whence the child had 
this wondrous power, and to gain for himself this marvellous 
gift of song. At once Hermes granted his prayer," Take my 
lyre,’ he said, ^ which to those who can use it deftly will dis¬ 
course of all sweet things, but will babble nonsense and 
moan strangely to all who know not how to draw forth its 
speech.’ So the strife between them was ended, and Phoibos 
placed in the hand of Hermes his three-leafed rod of wealth 
and happiness, and gave him charge over all his cattle.^ 

'Vrell with his special object in relating German story the Little Farmer who 
themyth—viz to account for the alliance cheats the greedy townsmen with the 
between Phoibos and Hermes. sight of his flocks in the water. ‘ There 

» Thus Hermes becomes in the happened to be a fine blue sky with 



227 


THE COMPACT BETWEEN HEEMES AND PHOIBOS. 


Then tonching the tortoise-lyre, Apoll6n called forth its 
sweet music, and Hermes, taking courage, prayed that to 
him also might be granted the secret wisdom of Phoibos: 
but Apolldn said, ‘ This alone may not be- Hone but myself 
may know the hidden counsels of Zeus; but other things 
there are which mortal men may never learn, and these 
fhings the Thriai shall teach thee, who dwell far down in the 
clifts of Parnassos. Other honours too are in store for thee. 
Thou shalt be the guardian of all flocks and herds, the mes¬ 
senger of the gods, and the guide of the dead to the dark 
land of Hades.’ Thus was the compact between iBem made 
and Phoibos became the lord of the sweet-voiced lyre, and 
Hermes for his part sware that no harm should come to the 
holy home of Apoll6n at Delphoi. But tp men Hermes 
brings no great help, for he has a way of cheating them 
through the dusky hours of night. 

It is obvious that the legend, as thus related in the hymn, 
cannot be understood until we have traced to their source 
the mythical facts that Hermes was bom in the morning, 
that from him come the gifts of music and song, that he 
reached his full strength at midday, that although he could 
kindle flame he could not eat the food nhich the fire de¬ 
voured, and that he could at will lie like a in his 

cradle or terrify gods and men with his sudden blasts." The 
mystery is certainly not solved if with Mr. Grote* we hold 
that ‘the general types of Hermes and Apolldn, coupled 
with the present fact that no thief ever approached the rich 
and seemingly accessible treasures of Delphi, engender a 
string of expository incidents, oast into a quasi-Mstorical 
form, and detailing how it happened that Hermes had 
bound himself by especial convention to respect the Del¬ 
phian temple.’ Mr. Grote cannot mean that the immunity 
of the Pythian shrine from theft and plunder originated 
the general types of the two gods, and it is precisely with 


plenty of fleecy clouds over it, whicli 
were mirrored in the water and looked 
like little lambs. The farmers called 
one to another, “ Look there, we can see 
the sheep abeady on the ground below 
the water.” * 

* Ifymn to Hermes, 296. This line 


contains, perhaps, the only really coarse 
expression in the whole poem; and the 
reference to the action of wind in its 
pdden outbursts at once makes it both 
innocent and graphic. 

* History of Greece, part i. ch. i 


a 2 


CHAP. 

V. 


The mean¬ 
ing of the 
covenant. 



228 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


these types that we are now concerned. If a conven¬ 
tion should be made at aU, why should it be with Hermes 
rather than with any other god? If it be answered that 
Hermes was the prince and patron of thieves, we have then 
to ask why this should be his character and whence the 
notion came. The mere pointing out of a contrast does not 
explain the origin of that contrast; and Mr. Gladstone lays 
down a principle of universal application when he says that 
^ invention cannot absolutely create; it can only work on 
what it finds already provided to hand.^^ The criticisms 
of Colonel Mure^ might have some force if we could suppose 
that the poet created his own materials; but it is manifestly 
useless to explain as a jest the relations between Hermes 
and Apoll6n5 until we have shown why these particular 
relations should be invested with a ludicrous character. It 
is strange that Colonel Mure should suppose that he had 
touched the real point at issue by asserting that in order to 


* Homer and the Homeric Age, ii. 9. 

^ History of Greek Literature, ii 340. 
No wish, to disparage the ^eat learning 
of Colonel Mure or to depreciate his 
services in the important subject to 
which he devoted lumself must be in¬ 
ferred from the expression of a conviction 
that he was incapable of analysing fairly 
any mythical narrative, the truth being 
that he knew nothing of the nature of 
myths in general Thus in the present 
case he seems to have a fixed idea that 
his work is done when he says that the 
whole Hymn to Hermes is designed as a 
burlesque, that the absurdity is intended 
to lie in the contrast ‘between the 
Herculean exploits of the divine urchin 
and his baby form and habits,’ and that 
the supernatural element of the story 
‘alone gives point and seasoning to 
an otherwise palpable extravagance.’ 
There is not an expression throughout 
the whole hymn which implies any 
consciousness of extravagance or bur¬ 
lesque or absurdity on the part of the 
poet, who evidently writes in all possible 
seriousness. But with Colonel Mure 
almost all mythical incidents resolve 
themselves into the mere extravagances 
of a disordered or ill-regulated fancy 
The hundred-headed narcissus, whose 
fragrance made earth and heaven smile, 
and which tempted Persephonl to leave 
her companions in the fields of Enna, 


he is content to put aside as ‘ a 
monstrous hyperbole ’ In point of fact, 
the poet chose the narcissus because its 
name denotes the deadly languor and 
lethargy which comes over the earth in 
autumn, and which is expressed more 
fully in the myth of Narkissos, the 
counterpart of Endymi6n. (See page 33.) 
It is not, however, accurate to speak of 
the ‘ baby habits ’ of Hermes. His child¬ 
ish ways are confined to the time which 
he spends in his cradle. As soon as he 
leaves it, he begins to move with giant 
stndes, and nothing of the child remains 
about him. Colonel Mure adds that ‘ as 
the patron deity of cunning and intrigue, 
he IS at once qualified to compete with 
and to surpass even Apollo, hitherto 
considered as unrivalled in these arts.’ 
There is not the slightest ground for 
thinking that Apoll6n was at any time 
connected with the notion of cunning 
and intrigue, and still less for supposing 
that he was regarded as the embodiment 
or ideal of those qualities until the 
questionable honour was transferred to 
Hermes It is, in fact, impossible to 
determine whether the myth of Plioibos 
has the priority of time over that of 
Hermes, and therefore we cannot say 
how the former was regarded before the 
latter furnished the notion of the Master 
Thief. 



INFANCY OF THE GODS. 


^29 


accommodate tlie dispute ^on terms honourable to each CHAP. 

party ’ ^ an elegant expedient suggested itself ’ in the in- s —^ _ 

vention of the lyre by Hermes, and the transference of 
this instrument,’ which could not fail to lay Apoll6n under 
a heavy debt of gratitude to the donor. ^ This leaves alto¬ 
gether out of sight the fact that Phoibos imparted to 
Hermes such secrets as it was lawful for him to disclose, 
and in no way explains why Hermes should invent the lyre 
and Phoibos be possessed of a hidden wisdom. To say that 
^Hermes in his capacity of god is gifted from the first 
moment of his existence with divine power and Energy,’ and 
that ^ as a member of the Hellenic pantheon he is subjected 
to the natural drawbacks of humanity, and hence at his 
birth to those of infancy,’ is partly to misrepresent the myth 
and partly to say of him that which may be said just as 
well of Apollon, or Dionysos, or Aphrodite. Hermes, it is 
true, is represented as a babe at his birth in the morning: 
but it is ludicrous to speak of natural human drawbacks for 
a child who can leave his cradle when a few hours old, and 
exert the strength of a giant at his will. If, again, Apoll6n 
at his birth was bathed by the nymphs in pure water and 
wrapped in a soft and spotless robe, he yet became very soon 
'the ChrysS)6r whose invincible sword must win him the 
victory over all his enemies. 

We are thus beating the air until we discover the ground- The 
work or source of the ideas which led to the notion of con- ^^tweL 
trast and rivalry between the two gods. Far from concern- Hermes 
ing ourselves in the first place with the mode devised for phoihos. 
their reconciliation, it is this very rivalry and antagonism 
for which we have to account. If the legend in its Greek 
form fails to carry us to the source of the idea, we must 
necessarily look elsewhere: and we shall not search the 
hymns of the Yeda in vain. ^The divine greyhound 
SaramS,,’ says Dr. Mommsen,^ ‘ who guards for the lord of 
heaven the golden herd of stars and sunbeams, and for him 
collects the nourishing rainclouds of heaven for the milking, 
and who moreover faithfully conducts the pious dead into 
the world of the blessed, becomes in the hands of the Greeks 

^ Cnt. Hist. Gr. Lit. ii. 344. ^ History of Borne, i. 18. 



230 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE AEYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

11 . 


Hermes 
the god of 
the moving 
air. 


the son of Saramd, Sara/meyas, or Hermeias/ In the Vedic 
Saram^ Dr. TTnTm finds a name identical with the Teutonic 
storm and the Greek HormS. Although neither of these 
statements accords strictly with the Yedic passages which 
speak of Saram^ and Sarameya, the controversy which has 
turned upon these names may perhaps be compared to the 
battle of the knights for the sides of the silvered and 
brazened shield in the old tale. 

Confining our view strictly to the Yeda, we find no divine 
greyhound Saram 4 . The beautiful being known by this 
name is the Greek Helene^ the words ^ being phonetically 
identical^ not only in every consonant and vowel, but even in 
their accent; ^ ^ and both are traced to the root Sar, to go or 
to creep. When the cows of Indra are stolen by the Panis, 
Sarama is the first to spy out the clift in which they were 
hidden, and the first to hear their lowings. The cows which 
she thus recovers Indra reconquers from the Panis, who 
have striven with all their powers to corrupt the fidelity of 
Saram^. 

^ What kind of man is Indra ? ^ they ask, ^ he as whose 
messenger thou comest from afar ? Let us make thee our 
sister, do not go away again: we will give thee part of the 
cows, 0 darling.’ 

Saram^, then, as going, like TTshas, before Indra, is the 
Dawn, and Sarameya or Hermeias is the Dawn-child. Into 
the conception of the former. Professor Max Muller rightly 
asserts that the idea of storm never entered 5 and the pas¬ 
sages in which mention is made of Sarameya lead him also 
to exclude this notion from the character of Hermes. With 
him, then, Hermes is ^the god of twilight, who betrays his 
equivocal nature by stealing, though only in fan, the herds 
of ApoU6n, bat restoring them without the violent combat 
that is waged for the same herds in India between^Indra the 
bright god and Yala the robber. In India the dawn brings 
the light, in Greece the twilight is itself supposed to have 
stolen it, or to hold back the light, and Hermes the twilight 
surrenders the booty when challenged by the sun-god Apollo.’ ® 
This view explains at most only two or three of the traits 
^ Max Muller, Lectures on Language^ second senes, 471. * Ib. 475. 



HERMES AND SARAMEYA, 


231 


wliicL. make up tke character of the Helleuic Hermes; it 
does not show us how the functions of the twilight could he 
carried on through the live-long night; ^ still less does it 
account for the radical idea of sound connected with Hermes 
as contrasted with the light which is the chief characteristic 
of Apolldn. Yet Professor Max Miiller himself supplies the 
clue which may lead us through the labyrinth when he tells 
us that Hermes is born in the morning, ^ as Sarameya would 
be the son of the twilight, or, it may be, the fir>st breeze of 
the dawn/ ^ The idea which lies at the root of the Vedic 
Saramd and Sarameya is that of brightness ; the idea which 
furnishes the groundwork for the myth of Hermes is essen¬ 
tially that of sound. There is nothing to bewilder us in this 
fact. Both ideas are equally involved in the root Bar, which 
expressed only motion; and the degree of difference discern¬ 
ible between the Vedic Saram 4 and the Greek Hermes is at 
the worst precisely that which we should expect from the 
disintegrating process brought about by a partial or complete 
forgetfulness of the original meaning of words. That the 
tales of one nation are not borrowed directly from the legends 
of another, the whole course of philological science tends, as 
we have seen, more and more to prove. Names which are 
mere attributes in one mythology are attached to distinct 
persons in another. The title Arjuni, which in the Veda is 
a transparent epithet of the dawn, becomes in the West 
Argennos, known only as a favourite of Agamemnon; and 
the mysterious Varuna of the Hindu is very inadequately 
represented by the Hellenic Ouranos. The Greek Oharites 
and the Latin Gratise are in name identical with the Sanskrit 
Harits : Erinys is Saranyu, and Helen is SaramSi. But the 
Greek did not get his Charis from the Harit of the Brah¬ 
man ; the western poets ,did not receive their Helen from 
Vedic bards: the Hellenic Hermes does not owe his parent¬ 
age to Sarameya. Carrying with them an earlier form of 
those names from the common home of the race, the Greek 
developed his own myths as the Vedic rishis developed 
theirs. The common element insured resemblance, while it 
rendered absolute agreement impossible, and an indefinite 

^ Hj/mn to Hermesf 141. * Leot, on Lang, second series, 473. 


CHAP. 

V. 



232 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


divergence in detail inevitable. If the myth so developed is 
found to contradict the essential idea of a less developed 
Sanstrit phrase, there would be good cause for perplexity; 
but here there is no such contrariety. The idea of the dawn 
is associated with that of the breeze almost as much as with 
that of light; and although the idea of Saram4 excludes the 
bare notion of storm, it does not exclude the thought of the 
whispering airs of morning tide. The action of Hermes in 
the Homeric hymn cannot be consistently explained by a 
mere reference to storms; and the Saram^, whose child he 
is, is unmistakably the Dawn who peers about after the 
bright cows which have been stolen by the night and hidden 
in its secret caves. With this being the Hellenic Hermes 
retains all the affinity which from the general results of 
Comparative Mythology we should expect him to exhibit. 
We may with Professor Max Muller lay stress on the facts 
that ^he loves HersS, the dew, and Aglauros, her sister; 
among his sons is Eephalos, the head of the day. He is 
the herald of the gods; so is the twilight: so was Saramd 
the messenger of India. He is the spy of the night, vvkto 9 
67rco7r7)TT]p ; he sends sleep and dreams; the bird of the 
morning, the cock, stands by his side. Lastly, he is the 
guide of travellers, and particularly of the souls who travel 
on their last journey: he is the Psychopompos.^' And yet 
the single idea of light fails utterly to explain or to account 
for the origin of the series of incidents narrated in the 
Homeric hymn. Throughout this singularly beautiful poem 
the leading idea is that of air in motion, or wind, varying in 
degree from the soft breath of a summer breeze to the rage 
of the groaning hurricane. His silence in the morning, his 
soft harping at midday, the huge strides with which in the 
evening he hurries after the cattle of Phoibos, the crashing 
of the forest branches until they burst into flame, the sacrifice 
which Hermes prepares, but of which he cannot taste though 
grievously pressed by hunger, the wearied steps with which 
he returns to sleep in his cradle, the long low whistle with 
which he slily closes his reply to the charge of theft, the 
loud blast which makes Apollon let go his hold, the soft 

^ Lect. on Lang, second seriesj 476. 



THE GOD OF THE MOVING AIK, 


233 


music by wliicli the babe assuages his wrath, the longing of CHAP. 
Hermes to learn the secret wisdom of the sun-god, are all 
traits exquisitely beautiful if told of the wind, but with 
absolutely no meaning if applied to the light or the dawn. 

Analysed with reference to the idea of air in motion, the Transpa- 
whole story becomes self-luminous. Like the fire which at 
its first kindling steps out with the strength of a horse from myth, 
its prison, the wind may freshen to a gale before it be an 
hour old, and sweep before it the mighty clouds big with 
the rain that is to refresh the earth. Where it cannot 
throw down it can penetrate. It pries unseen into holes 
and crannies, it sweeps round dark corners, it plunges into 
glens and caves; and when the folk come out to see the 
mischief that it has done, they hear its mocking laughter as 
it hastens on its way. These few phrases lay Bare the whole 
framework of the Homeric legend, and account for the not 
ill-natured slyness and love of practical jokes which enter 
into the character of Hermes.^ The babe leaves the cradle 
before he is an hour old. The breath of the breeze is at 
first soft and harmonious as the sounds which he summons 
from his tortoise-lyre. But his strength grows rapidly, and 
he lays aside his harp to set out on a plundering expedition. 

With mighty strides he hastens from the heights of EyllSnd 
until he drives from their pastures the cattle of Apoll6n, 
obliterating the foot-tracks after the fashion of the autumn- 
winds, which cover the roads with leaves and mire.^ In his 
course he sees an old man working in his vineyard, and, like 
a catspaw on the surface of the sea, he whispers in his ear a 
warning of which but half the sound is Caught before the 
breeze has passed away. AH the night long the wind roared, 
or, as the poet says, Hermes toiled till the branches of the 
trees, rubbing against each other, burst into a flame; and 
so men praise Hermes, like Prometheus, Phoroneus, and 
Bhuranyu, as the giver of the kindliest boon—fire.® The 
flames, fanned by the wind, consume the sacrifice; but the 
wind, though hungiy, cannot eat of it,^ and when the 
morning has come he returns to his mother^s cave, passing 


* Hor. Od. i. 10 

* Hymn to Htrnm^ 75. 


* Hymn to Hermes, 110. 

* lb. 131. 



234 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE AKYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


througli tlie opening of the bolt like the sigh of a summer 
breeze or mist on a hiU side.^ The wind is tired of blowing, 
or, in other words, the feet of Hermes patter almost noise¬ 
lessly over the floor,^ till he lies down to sleep in his cradle 
which he had left but a few hours ago. The sun rises and 
finds to his discomfiture that the herds are gone. He too 
sees the hedg’er of Onchestos, who thinks, but is not sure,® 
that he had seen a babe driving cows before him. The sun 
hastens on his way, sorely perplexed at the confused foot- 
tracks covered with mud and strewn with leaves, just as if 
the oaks had taken to walking on their heads But when 
he charges the child with the theft, the defence is grounded 
on his tender age. Can the breeze of a day old, breathing 
as softly as a babe new born, be guilty of so much mischief? 
Its proper home is the summer land; ® why should it stride 
wantonly over bleak hills and bare heaths ? But, with an 
instinct singularly true, Hermes is represented as closing his 
defence with a long whistle,® which sounds very much like 
mockery and tends perhaps to heighten the scepticism of 
Apoll6n. The latter seizes the child, who with a loud blast 
makes him suddenly let go, and then appeals against his 
unkin d treatment to his father (the sky).^ Zeus refuses to 
accept his plea of infancy; but when Hermes brings back 
the cows, the suspicions of Apoll6n are again roused, and, 
dreading his angry looks, the child strikes his tortoise-lyre 
and wakens sounds so soft and tender® that the hardest- 
hearted man cannot choose but listen. Never on the heights 
of Olympos, where winds perhaps blow strong as they com¬ 
monly do on mountain summits, had Phoibos heard a strain 
so soothing.® Like the pleasant murmur of a breeze in the 
palm-groves of the south, it filled his heart with a strange 
yearning,^® carrying him back to the days when the world 
was young and all the bright gods kept holiday, and he 
longed for the glorious gift of musicwhich made the life of 
Hermes a joy on the earth. His prayer is at once granted, 
the wind grudges not his music to the sun; he seeks only to 

* Hymn to Hermes, 147. ’ Hymn to Hermes, 312. 

« Jb. 149. • n 208. < J5. 349. » /i 419. • ii. 446, 450. 

* Id. 267-8. * li. 280. >« li. 422. li. 457. 



THE mYINO HER^fES. 


235 


know tke secrets whicli his own eyes cannot penetrate,^ for 
Phoibos sits in the high heaven by the side of Zens, knowing 
the inmost mind of his father, and his keen glance can pierce 
the depths of the green sea. This wisdom the sun may not 
impart. The wind may not vex the pure ether or break in 
upon the eternal repose of the ocean depths. Still there are 
other honours in store for him, many and great. He shall 
be the guardian of the bright clouds; his song shall cheer 
the sons of men and lessen the sum of human suffering; his 
breath shall waft the dead to the world unseen, and when he 
wills he may get wisdom by holding converse with the hoary 
sisters far down in the clifts of Parnassos, as the wind may 
be heard mysteriously whispering in hidden glens and un¬ 
fathomable caves. The compact is ratified by the oath that 
the wind shall do no hurt to the home of the sun, who 
declares in his turn that he loves nothing so well as the 
fresh breeze of heaven.^ True to the last to the spirit of 
the myth, the poet adds that his friendship for man is not 
equal to his love for the sun. The wind has a way of doing 
men mischief while they sleep. 

The idea which has explained every incident of the hymn 
accounts also for the humour which runs through it. It is 
a humour depending not upon the contrast between the puny 
form and the mighty exploits of Hermes or on the super¬ 
natural element which in Colonel Mure’s belief alone gives 
point to what would otherwise be mere extravagance. It 
is the result of an exquisitely faithful noting of outward 
phenomena, and, as such, it was not the invention of the 
Homeric or post-Homeric poets, but a part of the rich in¬ 
heritance which gave them likewise the chief features in 
the characters of AchiUeus, Meleagros, Odysseus, and other 
mythical heroes. For those who have eyes to see it, nature 
has her comedy not less than her sad and mournful tragedy. 
If some have seen in the death of the ambitious or grasping 
man, cut off in the midst of his schemes, an irony which 
would excite a smile if the subject were less awful, we may 
enter into the laughter of Hermes, as he pries into nooks 
and crannies, or uproots forests, or tears down, as the pas- 
* Hymn to RirTnes, 472, 532. = jb, 625. 


CHAP. 

V. 


Humour 
of the 
myth. 



236 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AHYAIST NATIONS. 


HOOK time of an hour, fabrics raised with the toil of many years. 

■_' The idea of the sun as bringing forth rich harvests from 

the earth in many lands, and passing from one to the other 
with an imperturbable indifference, may suggest the notion 
of a selfish sensuality which may run into broad burlesque.^ 

' On these grounds we should expect to find a ludicrous side 
to the stories told of Zeus, Heratles and Hermes as re¬ 
presenting the sky, the sun, and the wind; but in each 
case the humour, whether coarse or refined, was involved 
in the very truthfulness of the conception, although this 
conception was worked out with an unconscious fidelity 
which is indeed astonishing. The burlesque with which the 
adventures of Herakles may easily be invested, arose from 
no intention of disparaging the hero’s greatness; and we 
are scarcely justified in saying with Mr. Grote that ^ the 
hymnographer concludes the song to Hermes with frankness 
unusual in speaking of a god.’^ The Greek spoke as the 
needs of his subject required him to speak; and the sly 
humour which marks the theft of Hermes in Pieria no more 
detracts from the dignity of Hermes, than the ^ frolicsome 
and irregular’^ exploits of Samson degraded the Jewish hero 
in the estimation of his countrymen. Even if the hymn- 
writer had failed to identify Hermes with the winds of 
heaven as confidently as, when he spoke of SeMnS watching 
over Endymion, he must have felt that he was speaking 
really of the moon and the sun, this would prove only that 
the original conception of the myth led him unconsciously to 
handle all his materials in strict accordance with the lead¬ 
ing idea. That the meaning of the myth of Hermes had 
not been so far forgotten, will perhaps be generally con¬ 
ceded. 

Hemes, The idea of sound, which underlies all the incidents of the 
the mes- Homeric hymn, explains most of the attributes and inven- 
the thief, tions ascribed to Hermes. The soft music of the breeze 
would at once make him the author of the harp or lyre. 

* Hence, while Herakles is a good- boasting, 
humoured glutton in the Alke&tis of '** H^st. Grreece, i. 82. 

Eunpides, he becomes the Valiant Little ® Stanley, Lectures on the Jewish 
Tailor of the German story, who succeeds Church. 
in all his exploits by sheer force of 



LATER ATTRIBUTES OF HERMES. 


237 


As driving the clouds across the blue fields of heaven, he 
would be the messenger of Apolldn, and this ofB.ce would 
soon be merged in that of the herald of Zeus and all the 
gods. As such again, he would be skilled in the use of 
words, and he would be employed in tasks where eloquence 
was needed. Thus he appears before Priam in the time of 
his anguish, not in his divine character, but as one of the 
servants of Achilleus, and, by the force of his words alone, 
persuades the old man to go and beg the body of Hektor.* 
So too he wins the assent of Hades to the return of Perse¬ 
phone from the underworld.* Hermes thus became asso¬ 
ciated with all that calls for wisdom, tact, and skill in the 
intercourse between man and m^m, and thus he is exhibited 
at once as a cunning thief, and as the presiding god of 
wealth.® It is possible, however, or likely, that in later 
times, the functions of Hermes were largely multiplied by a 
confusion between words, the fruitful source of secondary 
myths. If such words as spfirjveCa and epfi7)vsveiv, to interpret, 
are to be traced to the name Hermes, there are others, as 
sppa, a prop, sppaKss, heaps of stones, eppari^eiv, to ballast a 
ship, which clearly can have nothing to do with it. Yet on 
the strength of these words Hermes becomes a god of 
boundaries, the guardian of gymnasia, and lastly the patron 
of gymnastic games j and his statues were thus placed at 
the entrance of the Agora.^ The cause of this confusion 
M. Br4al finds in the word kpp,iZu>v or ip/idBiov, commonly 


' II xxiv. 400. 

2 Hymn to 335. 

* TkovrohSrTiS' 'irakiyKonrikos. Orph. 
xxyiii. The so called Orphic hymns, as 
we have seen, string together all the 
epithets which the conceptions or in¬ 
ferences of poets and mythographers 
had accumulated dunng a long senes of 
ages. Among these the epithet Tris- 
megistos, the ‘ ter maximus Hermes ’ of 
Ausonius, has degenerated into the 
supposed Saracenic idol Termagant. 
Grimm, H. M. 137. ^ 

* Hermes Agoraios "We are thus 
brought to the later developements which 
connected him in some de^ee with 
traffic and merchandise Of this notion 
not a trace can be found in the so-called 
Homeric Hymn to Hermes, which must 
be regarded as of the first importance 


for all who wish to determine the 
character of the god: and it is, to say 
the least, extremely difficult to discern 
even the germ of this idea in the Ibad 
or Odyssey. The Latin god Mercurius 
is, it IS true, simply a god of traffickers, 
(merx, mercari). but he possessed not 
a single attnbute in common with the 
Hellenic Hermes; and the Tetiales 
persistently refused to admit th*>ir 
identity, in spite of the fashion which 
attached the Greek myths to Latin 
deities with which they had nothing to 
do. The Hellenic Hermes is a harper, 
a thief, a guide, or a messenger—but 
not a merchant. Whatever honours he 
may have apart from his inherent 
powers of song and mischief are 
bestowed on him by Phoibos. 


CHAP. 

V. 



238 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AETAH NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


Hermes 
and tlie 
Charites. 


Hermes 
the herald. 


taken to signify a small statue of Hermes, but wbicb might 
also mean a small prop or stay. This word spfia M. Breal 
connects with the Greek stpyco and ^pKos, and the Latin 
arcere, erctum, may in the same way have led to the identifi¬ 
cation of the Labin Ercules or Herculus, the god of boun¬ 
daries, with the Greek Herakles. The word epfiatov^ as 
denoting a god-send or treasure-trove, may belong to either 
the one root or the other.^ 

The office of Hermes connects him necessarily with many 
legends, and especially with those of Prometheus, 16, Paris, 
and Deukalion; but it is more noteworthy that ^ as the 
Dawn in the Veda is brought by the bright Harits, so 
Hermes is called the leader of the Charites.’ ^ His worship, 
we are told, was instituted first in Arkadia, and thence 
transferred to Athens.^ That it may have been so is possible, 
but in the absence of all historical evidence, we cannot affirm 
it as fact: and no argument can be based on traditions con¬ 
cerned with such names as Athens, Arkadia, Ortygia or 
Eleusis. If Hermes be the son of the twilight, or the first 
breeze of the morning, his worship would as certainly begin 
in Arkadia (the glistening land), or at Athens (the home of 
the Dawn), and his first temple be built by Lyk^n (the 
gleaming), as the worship of Phoibos would spring up in the 
brilliant DSlos, or by the banks of the golden Xanthos in the 
far-off Lykia or land of light, whence Sarped6n came to the 
help of Hektor. The reasons have been already given,^ 
which seem to warrant the conclusion that historical infer¬ 
ences based on names which, although applied afterwards to 
real cities or countries, come from the mythical cloudland, 
can be likened only to castles built in the air. 

The staff or rod which Hermes received from Phoibos, and 
which connects this myth with the special emblem of Vishnu,® 
was regarded as denoting his heraldic office. It was, how¬ 
ever, always endowed with magic properties, and had the 
power even of raising the dead.® The fillets of this staff 

' See M.Br^al’s letter on this subject, * Hygin, Fab. 225. 

inserted in Prof Max Muller’s Lect. on * See book i. ch. x. 

Lang, second series, 474. ® See page 113. 

* Tiyeixav Xaplruv, Max Muller, ib. ® Vu*g. 3Sn. iv. 242. 

473. 



ORPHEUS AND EURYDIRE. 


239 


sometimes gave place to serpents; and the golden sandals, 
which in the Iliad and Odyssey bear him through the air 
more swiftly than the wind, were at length, probably from 
the needs of the sculptor and the painter, fitted with wings, 
and the Orphic hymn-writer salutes him accordingly as the 
god of the winged sandals.^ In the legend of Medonsa these 
sandals bear Perseus away from the pursuit of the angry 
Gorgons into the Hyperborean gardens and thence to the 
shores of Libya. 



Section in.~ORPHEUS. 

Of the myth of Orpheus it may also be said that it brings Points of 
before us a being, in whom some attributes which belong to between 
the light or the sun are blended with others which point as 
clearly to the wind. The charm of the harping of Hermes is Hermes, 
folly admitted in the Homeric hymn, but its effect is simply 
the effect of exquisite music on those who have ears to hear 
and hearts to feel it. In the story of Orpheus the action 
becomes almost wholly mechanical. If his lyre has power 
over living beings, it has power also over stones, roclcs, and 
trees. What then is Orpheus ? Is he, like Hermes, the 
child of the dawn, or is he the sun-god himself joined for 
a little while with a beautiful bride whom he is to recover 
only to lose her again? There can be no doubt that this 
solar myth has been bodily imported into the legend of 
Orpheus, even if it does not constitute its essence. The 
name of his wife, Eurydik^, is one of the many names which 
denote the wide-spreading flush of the dawn; and this fair 
being is stung by the serpent of night as she wanders close 
by the water which is fatal alike to Melusina and TTndine, 
to the Lady of Geierstein and to the more ancient BheM or 
frog-sun. But if his Helen is thus stolen away by the dark 
power, Orpheus must seek her as pertinaciously as the 
Achaians strive for the recovery of Helen or the Argonauts 
for that of the Golden Fleece. All night long he will wander 
through the regions of night, fearing no danger and daunted 
by no obstacles, if only his eyes may rest once more on her 

» Eymn XXVIU, 



240 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


wlio was tlie delight of his lifs. At last he comes to the 
grim abode of the king of the dead, and at length obtains 
the boon that his wife may follow him to the land of the 
living, on the one condition that he is not to look back until 
she has fairly reached the earth. The promise is not kept; 
and when Orpheus, overcome by an irresistible yearning, 
turns round to gaze on the beautiful face of his bride, he 
sees her form vanish away like mist at the rising of the sun. 
This, it is obvious, is but another form of the myth which 
is seen in the stories of Phoibos and Daphne, of Indra and 
Dahan^, of Arethousa and Alpheios; and as such, it would 
be purely solar. Put the legend as thus related is shorn of 
other features not less essential than these solar attributes. 
Orpheus is never without his harp. It is with this that he 
charms all things conscious or unconscious. With this he 
gathers together the bright herds of Helios and all the beasts 
of the field. As he draws forth its sweet sounds, the trees, 
the rocks, the streams, all hasten to hear him, or to follow 
him as he moves onwards on his journey. Only when Eury- 
dik4 is dead, are its delicious sounds silenced; but when at 
the gates of the palace of Hades the three-headed hound 
Kerberos growls savagely at him, its soft tones charm away 
his fury, and the same spell subdues the heart of the 
rugged king himself. It is thus only that he wins the 
desire of his heart, and when Eurydik^ is torn from 
her the second time, the heavenly music is heard ag&,in 
no more. It is impossible to regard this part of the 
story as a solar myth, except on the supposition that 
Orpheus is but another form of Phoibos after he has becolne 
possessed of the lyre of Hermes. But the truth is that the 
myth of the Hellenic Hermes is not more essentially con¬ 
nected with the idea of sound than is that of Orpheus toge¬ 
ther with the long series of myths based on the same notion 
which are found scattered over almost all the world. In the 
opinion of Professor Max Muller " Orpheus is the same word 
as the Sanskrit Eibhu or Arbhu, which though it is best 
known as the name of the three Eibhus, was used in the 
Veda as an epithet of Indra, and a name for the Sun.^ ^ 
' ChijpSt ii. 127. 



THE HAEP OF OEPHEUS. 


241 


Mr. Kelly, following Dr. Knlin, sees in the Eibhus the 
storm-winds which sweep trees and rocks in wild dance 
before them by the force of their magic song.^ Bnt even if 
the Sanskrit name can be applied only to the snn, this 
would only show that the name of Orpheus underwent in its 
journey to the west a modification similar to that of the 
name Hermes. It must, however, be noted that Orpheus 
acts only by means of his harp, which always rouses to mo¬ 
tion. The action of Hermes is twofold, and when he is 
going forth on his plundering expedition he lays aside his 
lyre, which he resumes only when he comes back to lie down 
like a child in his cradle. Hence the lyre of Hermes only 
charms and soothes. Its sweet tones conquer the angry 
sun-god, and lull to sleep the aU-seeing Argos of the hun¬ 
dred eyes, when Hermes seeks to deliver 16 from his cease¬ 
less scrutiny. But among the Greek poets the idea which 
would connect Orpheus with the sun was wholly lost. In 
Pindar he is sent indeed by Apollbn to the gathering of the 
Argonauts, but this would point simply to a phrase which 
spoke of the sun as sending or bringing the morning breeze: 
and with the poet he is simply the harper and the father of 
songs.^ In ^schylos he leads everything after him by the 
gladness with which his strain inspires them.^ In Euripides 
he is the harper who compels the rocks to follow him,^ while 
in speaking of him as the originator of sacred mysteries the 
poet transfers to him the idea which represents Hermes as 
obtaining mysterious wisdom in the hidden caves ‘of the 
Thriai,^ In the so-called Orphic Argonautika the harper is 
the son of Oiagros and Kalliop 6 , the latter name denoting 
simply the beauty of sound, even if the former be not a 
result of the onomatopoeia which has produced such Greek 
words as svxni 700 ^, and olfjucoyq. Ho sooner does he call on 
the divine ship which the heroes had vainly tried to move, 
than the Argo, charmed by the tones, glides gently into the 
sea.® The same tones wake the voyagers in Lemnos from 
the sensuous spell which makes Odysseus dread the land of 

* Curiosities of Indo-Euroj^ean Folk- * Iphig, in Aul. 1213. 

lore, 17 . * Bhes, 943, Hymn to Hermes, 562, 

* Pyth, iv 315. ® Argonaut, 262. 

* Agam, 1630. 

VOL. IT. B 


CHAP, 

V 



242 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK the Lotos-eaters.^ At the magic sound the Kyanean rocts 
s—. parted asunder to make room for the speaking ship, and the 
Symplegades which had been dashed together in the fury of 
ages remained steadfast for evermore.^ But it is singular 
that when it becomes needful to stupify the dragon which 
guards the golden fleece, the work is done not by the harp 
of Orpheus, but by the sleep-god Hypnos himself, whom 
Orpheus summons to lull the Vritra to slumber.^ 

The Sei- The Same irresistible spell belongs to the music of the 
Seirens, who are represented as meeting their doom, in one 
legend, by means of Orpheus, in another, through Odysseus. 
Whether these beings represent the Seirai, or belts of calms, 
which are so treacherous and fatal to mariners, or whether 
the name itself is found again in the Syrinx or pipe of the 
god Pan, and in the Latin susurrus,^ the whisper of the 
breeze, is a point of no great importance, so long as we note 
the fact that none who listened to their song could be with¬ 
held from rushing under its influence to their own destruc¬ 
tion. In the story of the Odyssey, Odysseus breaks the spell 
by filling his sailors’ ears with wax, while he has himself 
stoutly tied to the mast of his ship. In the Orphic myth 
the divine harper counteracts their witchery by his own strain, 
and the Seirens throw themselves into the sea and are 
changed into rocks according to the doom which granted 
them life only until some one should sing more sweetly and 
powerfully than they. 

The Piper This mysterious spell is the burden of a vast number of 
of Hameln. many of which have been gathered together by Mr. 

Baring Gould in his chapter on the Piper of Hameln, who, 
wroth at being cheated of his promised recompense for 
piping away into the Weser the rats which had plagued the 
city,® returns to take an unlooked-for vengeance. No sooner 

' Argonaut. 480. sun-god in the temples where he was wor- 

* Ih 740 shipped under this name. But the story 

* Jh 1008. accounted for this by saying that the 

* The name is more probably con- mouse was endowed with the gift of 
nected with the Latin Silanus,see p. 318. prophecy, and was therefore put by the 

* This tale at once carries us to the side of the deity who was possessed of 
Sminthian worship of Apollon. Smmthos, the profound wisdom of Zeus himself, 
it IS said, was a Cretan word for a This in the opinion of Welcker is a mere 
mouse, and certain it is that a mouse was inversion, which assigned to the mouse 
placed at the foot of the statues of the an attribute which had belonged ex- 



THE PIPER OP BEARDERBURG. 


243 


is a note of Ms music heard than there is throughout the 
town a sound of pattering feet. 

All the little boys and girls 

With rosy cheeks and flixen curls 

And sparkling eyes and teeth like pearls 

Tripping, skipping, ran merrily after 

The wonderful music with shouting and laughter. 

Tte musician goes before them to a bill rising above tbe 
Weser, and as they follow bim into a cavern, tbe door in tbe 
mountain-side shuts fast, and tbeir bappy voices are beard 
no more. According to one version none were saved but a 
lame boy, wbo remained sad and cheerless because be could 
not see tbe beautiful land to which tbe piper bad said that 
be was leading them—a land 

Where waters gushed and fruit trees grew. 

And flowers put forth a fairer hue, 

And everything was strange and new, 

And sparrows were brighter than peacocks here* 

And their dogs outran our fallow deer. 

And honey bees had lost their stings. 

And horses were born with eagles’ wings. ‘ 

The temptation to follow Mr. Gould through bis series of 
tales is almost as powerful as tbe spell of tbe piper himself. 
We may yield to it only so far as we must do so to prove the 
wide range of these stories in tbe North, tbe East, and the 
West. At Brandenburg tbe plague from which tbe piper 
delivers tbe people is a host of ants, whom be charms into 
tbe water. Tbe promised payment is not made, and when 
be came again, all tbe pigs followed bim into tbe lake—a 
touch borrowed probably from tbe narrative of tbe miracle at 
Gadara. In this myth there is a triple series of incidents. 
Failing to receive bis recompense tbe second year for sweep¬ 
ing away a cloud of crickets, tbe piper takes away all tbeir 
ships. In tbe third year all tbe children vanish as from 
Hamelri, tbe unpaid toil of tbe piper having been this time 
expended in driving away a legion of rats. 

clusively t6 the god near whom it was churches to fall on their knees and pray 

placed; accordingly he refers the myth God to destroy the mice. GriLchisthe 

without hesitation to Apoll6n as the Gotterlekre^ i. 482. 

deliverer from those plagues of mice ‘ These lines are quoted from Mr. 

which have been dreaded or hated as a Browning by Mr. Gould, who does not 

terrible scourge, and which even now mention the poet’s name. 

draw German peasants in crowds to the 

n 2 


CHAP. 

V. 



244 


BOOK 

II. 


The Erl- 
king. 


The Jew 
among the 
thorns. 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

Tlie idea of music as charming away souls from earth is 
common to all these legends, and this notion is brought out 
more fully not only in Gothe’s ballad of the Erlking, who 
charms the child to death in his father’s arms, but also, in 
Mr. Gould’s opinion, in superstitions still prevalent among 
certain classes of people in this country, who believe that 
the dying hear the sound of sweet music discoursing to them 
of the happy land far away.^ 

The idea of the shrubs and trees as moved by the harping 
of Orpheus has run out into strange forms. In some myths, 
the musician who compels all to dance at his wiH is endowed 
with the thievish ways of Hermes, although these again are 
attributed to an honest servant who at the end of three 
years receives three farthings as his recompense. ,In the 
German story of the Jew among the Thorns the servant gives 
these farthings to a dwarf who grants him three wishes in 
return. The first two wishes are, of course, for a weapon 
that shall strike down all it aims at, and a fiddle that shall 
make every one dance, while by the third he obtains the 
power of forcing every one to comply with any request that 
he may make. Erom this point the story turns more on 
the Homeric than on the Orphic myth. Strangely enough, 
Phoibos is here metamorphosed into the Jew, who is robbed 
not of cows but of a bird, and made to dance until his clothes 
are aU torn to shreds. The appeal to a judge and the trial, 
with the shifty excuses, the dismissal of the plea, and the 
sentence, follow in their due order. But just as Hermes 
delivers himself by waking the sweet music of his lyre when 
Phoibos on discovering the skins of the slaughtered cattle is 
about to slay him, so the servant at the gallows makes his 
request to be allowed to play one more tune, when judge, 
hangman, accuser, and spectators, all join in the magic 
dance. Another modem turn is given to the legend when 
the Jew is made to confess that he had stolen the money 
which he gave the honest servant, and is himself hanged in 
the servant’s stead.* 

* CuTiom Myths, second series, 160. -witch dance against her will to a 

* This marvellous piper reappears in bewitched tune, and of the Valiant 
Gnmm’s stones of the Wonderful Tailor who thus conquers the Bear as 
Musician, of Roland who makes the Orpheus masters Kerberos, 



THE HORN OF OBERON. 


245 


In a less developed form tfiiis story is the same as the 
legend of Arion, who, though supposed to be a friend of the 
Corinthian tyrant Periandros, is still represented as a son of 
Poseid6n, In this case the musician’s harp fails to win his 
life at the hands of the men who grudge him his wealth, but 
his wish seems to carry with it a power which they are not 
able to resist, while his playing brings to the side of the 
ship a dolphin who bears Arion on his back to Corinth. In 
the trial which follows, the tables are turned on the sailors 
much as they are on the Jew in the German story, and 
Arion recovers his harp which was to play an important 
part in many another Aryan myth. 

The German form of the myth Mr. Gould has traced into 
Iceland, where Sigurd’s harp in the hands of Bosi makes 
chairs and tables, king and courtiers, leap and reel, until all 
fall down from sheer weariness and Bosi makes off with his 
bride who was about to be given to some one else. The 
horn of Oberon in the romance of Huon of Bordeaux has 
the same powers, while it further becomes, like the Sangreal, 
a test of good and evil, for only those of blameless character 
dance when its strains are heard. Still more marvellous 
are the properties of the lyre of Glenkundie: 

He’d harpit a fish out o’ saut water. 

Or water out o’ a stane, 

Or milk out o’ a maiden’s breast 
That bairn had never nane.^ 

The instrument reappears in the pipe of the Irish Maurice 
Connor, which could waken the dead as well as stir the 
living; but Maurice is himself enticed by a mermaid, and 
vanishes with her beneath the waters. It is seen again 
in the magic lyre which the ghost of Zorayhayda gives to 
the Eose of the Alhambra in the charming legend related by 
Washington Irving, and which rouses the mad Philip V. 
from his would-be coffin to a sudden outburst of martial 
vehemence. In Sclavonic stories the harp exhibits only the 
lulling qualities of the lyre of Hermes, and in this Mr. Gould 
perceives the deadening influence of the autumn winds 


CHAP. 

V 


The story 
or Arion. 


Inchanted 
harps and 
horns. 


The hariD 
of Waina- 
mdmen. 


’ Jamieson’s Scottish Ballads^ i, 98; Price, Inirod. to WartorCs Hist, Eng. 
Boetry, Ixiv. 



246 


BOOK 

II. 


Galdner 
the Siuger. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

wliicli chill all vegetation into the sleep of winter, until the 
sun comes back to rouse it from slumber in the spring. It 
comes before us again in the story of Jack the Giant-killer, 
in which the Giant, who in the unchristianised myth was 
Wuotan himself, possessed an inchanting harp, bags of gold 
and diamonds, and a hen which daily laid a golden egg. 
^ The harp,’ says Mr. Gould, ^ is the wind, the bags are the 
clouds dropping the sparkling rain, and the golden egg, laid 
every morning by the red hen, is the dawn-produced Sun.’ * 
This magic lyre is further found where perhaps we should 
little look for it, in the grotesque myths of the Quiches of 
Guatemala. It is seen in its full might in the song of the 
Tinnish Wainamoinen, and in the wonderful effects pro¬ 
duced by the chanting of the sons of Kalew on the woods, 
which burst instantly into flowers and fruit, before the song 
is ended. The close parallelism between the myth of 
Wainamoinen and the legends of Hermes and Orpheus can¬ 
not be better given than in the words of Mr. Gould. 

^Wainamoinen went to a waterfall and killed a pike 
which swam below it. Of the boiies of this fish he con¬ 
structed a harp, just as Hermes made his lyre of the tor¬ 
toiseshell. But he dropped this instrument into the sea, 
and thus it fell into the power of the sea-gods, which 
accounts for the music of the ocean on the beach. The 
hero then made another from the forest wood, and with it 
descended to Pohjola, the realm of darkness, in quest of the 
mystic Sampo, just as in the classic myth Orpheus went 
down to Hades to bring thence Eurydice. When in the 
realm of gloom perpetual, the Einn demigod struck his 
kantele and sent aU the inhabitants of Pohjola to sleep, as 
Hermes when about to steal 16 made the eyes of Argus close 
at the sound of his lyre. Then he ran off with the Sampo, 
and had nearly got it to the land of light when the dwellers 
in Pohjola awoke, and pursued and fought him for the 
ravished treasure which, in the struggle, fell into the sea 
and was lost; again reminding us of the classic tale of 
Orpheus.’^ 

Wuotan again in the Teutonic mythology is Galdner the 
^ Curiam Myths^ ii. 160, 2 



THE Eastern and wESTteRN sibyls. 


247 


singer: and in the Gudmnlied the time "which it wonld CHAP, 
take one to ride a thousand miles passed in a moment "while ^ 

any one listened to the singing of Hjarrandi. The christian¬ 
ised form of this myth, as the Legend of the Monk and the 
Bird, is well known to the readers of Longfellow and Arch¬ 
bishop Trench, and is noteworthy chiefly as inverting the 
parts, and making the bird charm the wearied and doubting 
man. 

Still more remarkable is the connexion of this mystic The sfbyl. 
harp in the legend of Guntdhya "with a myth which repro¬ 
duces that of the Sibylline books offered in diminished 
quantities, but always at the same price, to the Eoman king 
Tarquin. In the Eastern tale the part of Tarquin is played 
by King SS,tavMiana to whom Gun^dhya sends a poem of 
seven himdred thousand slokas written in his o-wn blood. 

This poem the king rejects as being -written in the PisS.cha 
dialect. Gunidhya then bums a portion of the poem on the 
top of a mountain, but while it is being consumed, his song 
brings together all the beasts of the forest who weep for joy 
at the beauty of his tale. The king falls ill, and is told that 
he must eat game: but none is to be had, for all the beasts 
are listening to Gun4dhya. On hearing this news, the king 
hastens to the spot and buys the poem, or rather the 
seventh portion which now alone remained of the whole.* 

It is scarcely necessary to add that in this tale, as in that of 
Wainamoinen, we have two stories which must be traced to 
a common source with the myths of Hermes, Orpheus, and 
the Sibyl,—in other words, to a story, the framework of 
which had been’put together before "the separation of the 
Aryan tribes.* 

A 

Section IV.—^PAET. 

The lyre of Orpheus and the harp of Hermes are but The song 
other forms of the reed pipe of Pan. Of the real meaning 
of this name the Western poets were utterly unconscious, the reeds. 
In the Homeric Hymn he is said to be so called because aU 
the gods were cheered by his music.* StiU through all the 

‘ Katha Sant Sagara, i. 8, Govild, * See toI. i p. 121, etseij. 

Curious Myths, ii. 172. ’ Bymn to Pan, 47. 



248 

BOOK 

II. 


Pan, the 
purifying 
breeze. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

grotesque and uncouth details of the myth, which tell us of 
his goat^s feet and horns, his noisy laughter and capricious 
action, the idea of wind is pre-eminent. It is the notion not 
so much of the soft and lulling strains of Hermes in his 
gentler mood, or of the irresistible power of the harp of 
Orpheus, as of the purifying breezes which blow gently or 
strong, for a long or a little while, waking the echoes now 
here now there, in defiance of all plan or system, and with a 
wantonness which baj 0 a.es all human powers of calculation. 
To this idea the Homeric hymn adheres with a singular 
fidelity, as it tells us how he wanders sometimes on the 
mountain summits, sometimes plunging into the thickets of 
the glen, sometimes by the stream side or up the towering 
crags, or singing among the reeds at eventide. So swift is 
his pace that the birds of the air cannot pass him by. With^ 
him play the water-maidens, and the patter of the nymphs’ 
feet is heard as they join in his song by the side of the dark 
fountain.^ Like Hermes again and Sarameya, he is the 
child of the dawn and the morning, and it is his wont to lie 
down at noontide in a slumber from which he takes it ill if 
he be rudely roused.^ Of his parentage we have many stories, 
but the same notion underlies them all. Sometimes, as in 
the Homeric Hymn, he is the son of Hermes and of the 
nymph Dryops, sometimes of Hermes and Penelop^, some¬ 
times of Penelop^ and Odysseus; but Penelop^ is the bride 
of the toiling sun, who is parted from her whether at morning 
or eventide, and to be her son is to be the child of Saram4. 
Nor is the idea changed if he be spoken of as the son of 
heaven and earth (Ouranos and Gaia), or of air and water 
(Aith^r and a Nereid). 

Pan then is strictly the purifying breeze, the Sanskrit 
pavana,^ a name which reappears in the Latin Favonius, 
and perhaps also in Faunus 5 and his real character, as the 
god of the gentler winds, is brought out most prominently 
in the story of his love for Pitys, and of the jealousy of the 
blustering Boreas, who hurled the maiden from a rock and 
changed her into a pine-tree. The myth explains itself. 
In Professor Max Muller’s words, ^ We need but walk with 

^ Hymn to Fan^ 7-20. * Theok. vii. 107. * Max Muller, Chijps^ 11 . 159. 



PAN AND PITYS. 


249 


our eyes open along the cliffs of Bournemouth to see the 
meaning of that legend/—the tale of Pitys, ^ the pine-tree 
wooed by Pan, the gentle wind, and struck down by jealous 
Boreas, the north wind/ Of Boreas himself we need say 
but little. His true character was as little forgotten as that 
of Sel^n^, and thus the name remained comparatively barren. 
The Athenian was scarcely speaking in mythical language 
when he said that Boreas had aided the Athenians by scat¬ 
tering the fleets of Xerxes. The phrases were almost as 
transparent which spoke of him as a son of Astraios and 
E6s, the star-god and the dawn, or as carrying off Oreithyia, 
the daughter of Erechtheus, the king of the dawn-city. 

Another myth made Pan the lover of the nymph Syrinx; 
but this is but a slight veil thrown over the phrase which 
spoke of the wind playing on its pipe of reeds by the river’s 
bank; and the tale which related how Syrinx, fljdng from 
Pan, like Daphn4 from Phoibos, was changed into a reed, is 
but another form of the story which made Pan the lover of 
the nymph Echo, just as the unrequited love of Echo for 
Narkissos is but the complement of the unrequited love of 
Sel^n^ for Endymidn. 


Section V.—AMPHIOX AND ZETHOS. 

The same power of the wind which is signified by the 
harp of Orpheus is seen in the story of Amphion, a being 
localised in the traditions of Thebes. But Amphion is a 
twin-brother of Zethos, and the two are, in the words of 
Euripides, simply the Dioskouroi, riding on white horses, 
and thus fall into the ranks of the correlative deities of 
Hindu and Greek mythology. But the myth runs into 
many other legends, the fortunes of their mother Antiopd 
differing but little from those of Augd, Tyr6, Evadnd, or 
Koronis. The tale is told in many versions. One of these 
calls her a daughter of NTykteus, the brother of Lykos, 
another speaks of Lykos as her husband; but this is only 
saying that Artemis Hekatd may be regarded as either the 
child of the darkness or the bride of the light. A third 
version makes her a daughter of the river Asdpos, a parent- 


CHAP. 

V 


Pan and' 
Syrinx. 


The 

Theban 

Orpheus. 



250 


BOOK 

II. 


Zethos 

and 

Prokne. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

age whicli stows ter affinity witt Attend, Aptrodite, and 
all otter deities of tte ligtt and tte dawn. Her ctildren, 
like Oidipous, T^leptos and many otters, are exposed on 
tteir birtt, and like ttem found and brougtt up by step- 
herds, among whom Antiop^ herself is said to have long 
remained a captive, like Dana^ in tte house of Polydektes. 
We have now tte same distinction of office or employment 
which marks tte otter twin brothers of Greek myths- Zethos 
tends tte flocks, while Amption receives from Hermes 
a harp which makes the stones not merely move but fix 
themselves in their proper places as he builds the walls of 
Thebes. The sequel of the history of Antiop^ exhibits, 
like the myths of Tyr 6 , In 6 , and other legends, the jealous 
second wife or step-mother, who is slain by Amption and 
Zethos, as Siderd is killed by Pelias and Helens. Amption 
himself becomes the husband of Mobd, the mother who pre¬ 
sumes to compare her children with the offspring of Zeus 
and Ldt 6 . 

In one tradition Zethos, the brother Amption, is the hus¬ 
band of Proknd, the daughter of the Athenian Pandion 5 and 
in this version the story ran that she killed her own child 
by mistake, when through envy of her fertility she proposed 
to slay the eldest son of her sister-in-law Niobd.^ But in its 
more complete form the myth makes her a wife of Tereus, 
who is king either of the hiU-country (Thrace) or of the 
Megarian Pegai. When her son Itys was bom, Tereus cut 
out his wife’s tongue and hid her away with her babe, and 
then married her sister Philomela, whom he deceived by 
saying that Prokne was dead. When the sisters discovered 
his guilt, Prokne killed her own child Itys, and served up 
his flesh as a meal for Tereus. Tereus in his turn, learning 
what had been done, pursues the sisters as they fly from him, 
and he has almost seized them when they pray that they 
may be changed into birds. Tereus thus became a hoopoe, 
Prokne a swallow, and Philomdla a nightingale.^ Hence it 
is that as the spring comes round, the bride mourns for her 
lost child with an inconsolable sorrow, as in the Megarian 


' Preller, Gr. Myth. ii. 141. of the sisters, and made Prokn^ the 

* Another version reversed the doom nightingale and Philomela the swallow. 



PHILOMELA AM PROKNS. 


251 


legend tlie living Prokn^ wept Herself to deatli, like MoHS 
mourning for her sons and daughters. The story is easily 
taken to pieces. The transformation is the resnlt of the 
same process which turned Lykadn into a wolf, and Kallisto 
into a bear; and as Philomela was a name for the nightin¬ 
gale, so the daughter of Pandion is said to have been 
changed into that bird. With the nightingale as a bird 
of spring the swallow is closely associated, and this fitting 
transformation was at once suggested for Prokne. But it 
becomes at the least possible that in its earlier shape the 
•myth may have known only one wife of Tereus, who might 
be called either Prokn^ or Philomela. Of these two names 
Prokne is apparently only another form of Prokris, who is 
also the daughter of an Athenian king; and thus the legend 
seems to explain itself, for as in Tantalos and Lyk46n we 
have the sun scorching up and destroying his children, so 
here the dew is represented as offering the limbs of her 
murdered child to her husband, the sun, as he dries up the 
dewdrops. The myth is thus only another version of the 
tale of Kephalos or Prokris. The name Philomela, again, 
may denote one who loves the flocks, or one who loves 
apples; but we have already seen how the sheep or flocks 
of Helios becomes the apples of the Hesperides, and thus 
Philomela is really the lover of the golden-tinted clouds, 
which greet the rising sun, and the name might well be 
given to either the dawn or the dew. 

The mournful or dirge-like sound of the wind is signi¬ 
fied by another Boiotian tradition, which related how the 
matrons and maidens mourned for Linos at the feast which 
was called Amis because Linos had grown up among the 
lambs,—in other words, the dirge-like breeze had sprung up 
while the heaven was flecked with the fleecy clouds which, 
in the German popular stories, lured the rivals of Dummling 
to their destruction in the waters. The myth that Linos 
was torn to pieces by dogs points to the raging storm which 
may follow the morning breeze. Between these two in force 
would come Zephyros, the strong wind from the evening- 
land, the son of Astraios the starry heaven, and of E6s who 
closes, as she had begun, the day. The wife of Zephyros is 


CHAP. 

V. 


Linos and 
Zephyros. 



252 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK the Harpyia Podarg^, the white-footed wind, Notos Arges- 
tes, who drives before her the snowy vapours, and who is 
the mother of Xanthos and Balios, the immortal horses of 
Achillens. But as the clouds seem to fly before Podarge or 
Zephyros, so the phenomenon of clouds commg up seeming¬ 
ly against the wind is indicated in the myth of the wind 
Kaikias, a name which seems to throw light on the story of 
Hercules and Cacus. 

Section VI. — ^AIOLOS AND ARES. 

The In the Odyssey ^ all the winds are placed by Zeus under 

thfthe charge of Aiolos, who has the power of rousing or stilling 

Winds. them at his will. But beyond this fact the poem has no¬ 
thing more to say of him than that he was the father of six 
sons and six daughters, and that he dwelt in an island which 
bore his name. With the mythology which grew up around 
the persons of his supposed descendants we are not here con¬ 
cerned. As a local or a tribal name, it has as much and as 
little value as that of Hellen, Ion, or Achaios. In itself 
the word is connected apparently with the names Ala and 
Aietes, and may denote the changeful and restless sky from 
which the winds are born. But the ingenuity of later my- 
thographers was exercised in arranging or reconciling the 
pedigrees of the several children assigned to Aiolos, and 
their efforts were rewarded by complications which were 
relieved of intolerable weariness only by the mythical in¬ 
terest attaching to some of the many names thus grouped in 
a more or less arbitrary connexion. With them this asso¬ 
ciation was valuable, chiefly as accounting for the historical 
distribution of certain Hellenic clans; and this supposed 
fact has been imported into the controversy respecting the 
date and composition of our Homeric poems, by some critics 
who hold that Homer was essentially an Aiolic poet, who 
wished to glorify his tribesmen over all the other members 
of the Hellenic race. It may be enough to say that there 
is no trace of such a feeling in either our Iliad or our 
Odyssey, which simply speak of Aiolos as a son of Hippotes 
and the steward of the winds of heaven. 



THE MOLlONES AND AKTORIDAI, 


253 


But Hermes, Orpheus, Amphion, and Pan, are not the 
only conceptions of the effects of air in motion to be found 
in Greek mythology- The Vedic Maxuts are the winds, not 
as alternately soothing and furious, like the capricious action 
of Hermes, not as constraining everything to do their magic 
bidding, like the harping of Orpheus and Amphion, nor yet 
as discoursing their plaintive music among the reeds, like 
the pipe of Pan; but simply in their force as the grinders or 
crushers of everything that comes in their way. These 
crushers are found in more than one set of mythical beings 
in Greek legends. They are the Moliones, or mill-men, or 
the Aktoridai, the pounders of grain, who have one body but 
two heads, four hands, and four feet,—who first undertake to 
aid Herakles in his struggle with Augeias, and then turning 
against the hero are slain by him near Kle6nai. These 
representatives of Thor Miolnir we see also in the Aloadai,' 
the sons of Iphimedousa, whose love for Poseid6n led her to 
roam along the sea-shore, pouring the salt water over her 
body. The myth is transparent enough. They are as 
mighty in their infancy as Hermes. When they are nine 
years old, their bodies are nine cubits in breadth and twenty- 
seven in height—a rude yet not inapt image of the stormy 
wind heaping up in a few hours its vast masses of angry 
vapour. It was inevitable that the phenomena of storm 
should suggest their warfare with the gods, and that one 
version should represent them as successful, the other as 
vanquished. The storm-clouds scattered by the sun in his 
might are the Aloadai when defeated by Phoibos before 
their beards begin to be seen, in other words, before the 


^ The identity of the names Aloadai, 
and Moliones must be determined by 
the answer to be given to the question, 
whether a threshing-floor, can be 

traced back to the root maL which indu¬ 
bitably yields Molion^, juuA77, the Latin 
molcL^ our mill and meal. There is no 
proof that certain words may in Grreek 
assume an initial /u which is merely 
euphonic: but there is abundant evi¬ 
dence that Greek words, which origin¬ 
ally began with ju. occasionally drop it. 
This, Professor Max Muller admits, is 
a violent change, and it would seem phy¬ 
sically unnecessary, but he adduces the 


analogies of fi6(rxos and a tender 
shoot or branch, fa for fjila m Homer, the 
Latin mola, and the Greek ovXal, meal, 
adding that * instead of our very word 
&\€upo*/, wheaten flour, another form, 
fidXevpop, is mentioned by Helladius.’ — 
Lect Lang, second senes, 323. The 
same change is seen in as correspond¬ 
ing to the numeral cV 
The idea of the storm as crushing and 
pounding is seen in molniia, a name for 
lightning arnong the Slavonic tribes, 
and in Munja, the sister of Grom, the 
thunderer, in Serbian songs. Max 
Muller, lb. 322. 


CHAP. 

V. 


The 

Storms. 



254 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AHTAH NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II 


Ar^s and 
Athens. 


expanding vaponrs have time to spread themselves over the 
sky. The same clouds in their triumph are the Aloadai 
when they hind Ar^s and keep him for months in chains^ as 
the gigantic ranges of vapours may be seen sometimes keep¬ 
ing an almost motionless guard around the heaven^ while 
the wind seems to chafe beneath, as in a prison from which 
it cannot get forth. The piling of the cumuli clouds in the 
skies is the heaping up of Ossa on Olympos and of Pelion on 
Ossa to scale the heavens, while their threat to make the sea 
dry land and the dry land sea is the savage fury of the storm 
when the earth and the air seem mingled in inextricable 
confusion. The daring of the giants goes even further. 
Ephialtes, like Iridn, seeks to win HSr^ while Otos follows 
Artemis, who, in the form of a stag, so runs between the 
brothers that they, aiming at her at the same, time, kill 
each other, as the thunderclouds perish from their own 
discharges.^ 

Ar^s, the god imprisoned by the Aloadai, whose name he 
shares, represents like them the storm-wind raging through 
the sky. As the idea of calm yet keen intellect is inse¬ 
parable from Athen^, so the character of ArSs exhibits simply 
a blind force without foresight or judgment, and not un- 
frequently illustrates the poet’s phrase that strength without 
counsel insures only its own destruction. Hence Ar^s and 
Ath^n^ are open enemies. The pure dawn can have nothing 
in common with the cloud-laden and wind-oppressed atmo¬ 
sphere.^ He is then in no sense a god of war, unless war is 
taken as mere quarrelling and slaughtering for its own sake. 
Of the merits of contending parties he has neither knowledge 
nor care. Where the carcases are likely to lie thickest, 
thither like a vulture will he go; and thus he becomes pre¬ 
eminently fickle and treacherous,^ the object of hatred and 
disgust to all the gods, except when, as in the lay of Demo- 
dokos, he is loved by Aphrodite. But this legend implies that 

* 1 ‘ Otos and Ephialtes, the wind Ares and the Maruts discovered the 
and the hurricane,’ i. e. the leaper. personification of the sky as excited by 
Max Muller, Lect on Lcing. second storm.’ Ath^n^ then, according to 
series. Proller, ‘ als Gottin der reinen Luft und' 

* Professor Max Muller remarks, des JEthers die natiirliche Pemdin des 
325, that ‘In Are^, Preller, without any Ares ist.’— Gr. Mi/tK 202. 
thought of the relationship between “ aK\orrp6(ra?0^o5. 



ARfiS AND ADONIS. 


255 


the god has laid aside his fury, and so is entrapped in the CHAP, 
coils cast round him by Hephaistos, an episode which merely ^ 
repeats his imprisonment by the Aloadai. Like these, his 
body is of enormous size, and his roar, like the roar of a hur¬ 
ricane, is louder than the shouting of ten thousand men. But 
in spite of his strength, his life is little more than a series of 
disasters, for the storm-wind must soon be conquered by the 
powers of the bright heaven. Hence he is defeated by 
Herakles when he seeks to defend his son Kyknos against 
that hero, and wounded by DiomedSs, who fights under the 
protection of Athene. In the myth of Adonis he is the boar 
who smites the darling of Aphrodite, of whom he is jealous, 
as the storm-winds of autumn grudge to the dawn the light 
of the beautiful summer.^ 

* When Herodotos says that Ar^s was this Hellenic name, no one will now 
worshipped by Scythian tribes under maintain, and the judgment of Hero- 
the form of a sword, to which even dotos on a comparison of attributes 
human sacrifices were offered, we have would not be altogether trustworthy, 
to I'eceive his statement with as much The so-called Egyptian Arfis has much 
caution as the account given by him of more of the features of Dionysos. The 
the Ar4s worshipped by the Egyptians. Scythian sword belongs to another set 
That the deities were worshipped under of ideas. See ch. ii. sect. xii. 



256 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


CHAPTEE VL 

THE ‘WATBES. 

Section I—THE DWELLERS IN THE SEA. 

BOOK Between Proteus, tLe cLild of Poseid6n, and Nereus, the 

>_^ son of Pontos, there is little distinction beyond that of name. 

Proteus Both dwell in the waters, and although the name of the 
SereuS. l^-tter points more especially to the sea as his abode, yet the 
power which, according to Apollpdoros, he possesses of 
changing his form at will indicates his affinity to the cloud 
deities, unless it be taken as referring to the changing face 
of the ocean with its tossed and twisting waves. It must, 
however, be noted that, far from giving him this power, the 
Hesiodic Theogony seems to exclude it by denying to him 
the capricious fickleness of Proteus. He is called the old 
man, we are here told, because he is truthful and cannot lie, 
because he is trustworthy and kindly, because he forgets not 
law but knows all good counsels and just words—a singular 
contrast to the being who will yield only to the argument of 
force. Like Proteus, he is gifted with mysterious wisdom, 
and his advice guides Herakles in the search for the apples 
(or flocks) of the Hesperides. His wife Doris is naturally 
the mother of a goodly offspring, fifty in number, like the 
children of Danaos, Aigyptos, Thestios, and Asterodia; but 
the ingenuity of later mythographers was scarcely equal to 
the task of inventing for all of them names of decent 
mjH^hical semblance. Some few, as Amphitrite and Galateia, 
are genuine names for dwellers in the waters; but most of 
them, as Dynamen^, Pherousa, Proto, Kymodoke, Nesaia, 
Aktaia, are mere epithets denoting their power and strength, 
their office or their abode. Of Pontos himself, the father 
of Nereus, there is even less to be said. In the Hesiodic 



THE NYMPHS. 


257 


Theogony lie is a son of G-aia alone, as Typhoens springs 
only from and AtMn^ has no mother. In the Iliad 

and Odyssey, Pontos is a mere name for the sea 5 and the 
phrases ttovtos 6 X 0 $ ttoXltjs and OdXaaaa ttovtov show that 
the poets were not altogether unconscious of its meaning 
and of its affinity with their word a path. It is 

therefore a name applied to the sea by a people who, till 
they had seen the great water, had used it only of roadways 
on land. In the myth of Thaumas, the son of Pontos and 
the father of Iris and the Harpyiai, we are again carried 
back to the phenomena of the heavens; the latter being the 
greedy storm-clouds stretching out their crooked claws for 
their prey, the former the rainbow joining the heavens and 
the earth with its path of light. 

Another son of Poseiddn, whose home is also in the waters, 
is the Boiotian Glaukos, the builder of the divine ship Arg6 
and its helmsman. After the fight of Ias6n with the 
Tyrrhenians, Glaukos sinks into the sea, and thenceforth 
is endowed with many of the attributes of Nereus. Like 
him, he is continually roaming, and yearly he visits all the 
coasts and islands of Hellas; like him, he is full of wisdom, 
and his words may be implicitly trusted. 

The domain in which these deities dwell is thickly peopled. 
Their subjects and companions are the nymphs, whose name, 
as denoting simply water, belongs of right to no beings who 
live on dry land, or in caves or trees,^ The classification of 
the nymphs as Oreads, Dryads, or others, is therefore in 
strictness an impossible one; and the word Naiad, usually 
confined to the nymphs of the fresh waters, is as general a 
term as the name Nymph itself. Nor is there any reason 
beyond that of mere usage why the Nereides should not be 
called Naiads as well as Nymphs. But the tendency was to 
multiply classes: and seldom perhaps has the imagination 
of man been exercised on a more beautiful or harmless 
subject than the nature and tasks of these beautiful beings 
who comfort Prometheus in his awful agony and with Thetis 
cheer Achilleus when his heart is riven with grief for his 

* v{ffji 4 >Tj answers precisely to the l^’mphaticus corresponds to the Greek 
Latin lympha, and thus the Latin vvpt.<p6\iiiirT05, 

VOL. II. S 


CHAP. 

VI. 


Glaukos. 


Naiads 

and 

Nereids. 



258 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN HATIOJiTS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Swan- 

Maidens 

and 

Apsaras. 


friend PatroHos. For the most part^ indeed, they remain 
mere names; hut their radiailt forms are needed to fill up 
the background of those magnificent scenes in which the 
career of the short-lived and suffering sun is brought to a 
close. And beyond this, they answered a good purpose by 
filling the whole earth with a joyous and unfailing life. If 
it be said that to the Greek this earth was his mother^ and 
that he cared not to rise above it, yet it was better that his 
thoughts should be where they were, than that he should 
make vain profession of a higher faith at the cost of 
peopling whole worlds with beings malignant as they were 
powerful. The effect of Christian teaching would necessarily 
invest the Hellenic nymphs with some portion of this malig¬ 
nity, and as they would stiU be objects of worship to the 
unconverted, that worship would become constantly more 
and more superstitious; and superstition, although its nature 
remains unchanged, is stripped of half its horrors when its 
objects are beings whose nature is wholly genial. This 
comparatively wholesome influence the idea of nymphs 
inhabiting every portion of the world exercised on the 
Hellenic mind. Each fountain and lake, each river and 
marsh, each well, tree, hHl, and vale had its guardian, 
whose presence was a blessing, not a curse. As dwelling in 
the deep running waters, the nymphs who in name answer 
precisely to the Yedic Apsaras, or movers in the waters, 
have in some measure the wisdom of Nereus, Glaukos, and 
of Proteus ; hence the soothsayer, as he uttered the oracles 
of the god, was sometimes said to be filled with their spirit. 
They guarded the flocks and fostered the sacredness of 
home, while on the sick they exercised the beneficent art 
and skill of AsklSpios. 

These kmdly beings must, however, be distinguished from 
the Swan-maidens and other creatures of Aryan mythology, 
whose nature is more akin to the clouds and vapours. The 
lakes on which these maidens are seen to swim are the blue 
seas of heaven, in which may be seen beautiful or repulsive 
forms, the daughters of Phorkys, Gorgons, Harpies, Eentaurs, 
Titans, Graiai, Phaiakians. Nor can it be said that Thetis, 
though called a ITereid, is in all points like the companions 



THETIS. 


259 


among wliom she dwells. She lives^ indeed^ in the sea; 
but she has been brought up by H^re the queen of the high 
heaven, and like the Telchines and Kouretes, like Proteus 
and Glaukos, she can change her form at will, and Peleus 
obtains her as his bride only when he has treated her as 
Aristaios treats the guardian of the ocean herds. She 
belongs thus partly to the sea, and in part to the upper air, 
and thus the story of her life runs through not a little of the 
mythical history of the Greeks. When Dionysos flies from 
Lykourgos, and Hephaistos is hurled down from Olympos, it 
is Thetis who gives them a refuge; and if she is married to 
a mortal man, it is only because at the suggestion, it is said, 
of Here, she refuses to become the bride of Zeus, or as others 
would have it, because it was fated that her child should be 
mightier than his father—a myth which can be only solar in 
its character. In yet another version she plays the part of 
Aphrodite to Anchises in the Homeric Hymn, and wins 
Peleus as her husband by promising that his son shall be 
the most renowned of all the heroes. The story of her 
wedding carries us far away from her native element, and 
when, as in the Iliad, she preserves the body of Patroklos 
from decay, she appears rather in the character of the dawn- 
goddess who keeps off all unseemly things from the slain 
Hektor. Nor is she seen in her true character as a Nereid, 
before the last sad scene, when, rising from the sea with her 
attendant nymphs, she bathes the body of her dead son, and 
wraps it in that robe of spotless white, in which the same 
nymphs folded the infant Chrys^r. 

But as the sea-goddess thus puts on some of the qualities 
and is invested with some of the functions which might seem 
to belong exclusively to the powers of the heavens and the 
light, so the latter are all connected more or less closely with 
the waters, and the nymphs might not unnaturally see their 
kinsfolk in Athfen^ Tritogeneia; in DaphnS, the child of the 
Peneian stream ; in Phoibos ApoI 16 n her lover, and in Aph¬ 
rodite Anadyomene herself All these, indeed, whatever may 
be their destiny, are at their rising the offspring of Tritos 
(Triton), the lord of the waters. The Triton of Hellenic my¬ 
thology, who dwells in his golden palace in the lowest depths 

s 2 


CHAP. 

VI 


Tritons 
and An - 
phitrite. 



260 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AKYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK of the sea, rides on the billows which are his snow-crested 
. horses. This god of the waters is reflected in Amphitrit^, 
the wife of Poseid6n in some versions, who is present at the 
birth of Phoibos in Delos. In the Odyssey she is simply the 
sea., purple-faced and loud-sounding. 

The Another aspect of the great deep is presented in the Sei- 

Seirens. beautiful singing lure mariners to their 

ruin. As basking among the rocks in the sunlit waters, they 
may represent, as some have supposed, the belts (Seirai) of 
deceitful calms against which the sailor must be ever on his 
guard, lest he suffer them to draw his ship to sandbanks or 
quicksands. But apart from the beautiful passage in the 
Odyssey, which tells us how their song rose with a strange 
power through the still air when the god had lulled the 
waves to sleep, the mythology of these beings is almost 
wholly artificial. They are children of Acheron and Sterop^, 
of Phorkos, Melpomen§, and others, and names were de¬ 
vised for them in accordance with their parentage. In 
form they were half women, half fishes, and thus are akin 
to Echidna and Melusina; and their doom was that they 
should live only until some one should escape their toils. 
Hence by some mythographers they are said to have flung 
themselves into the sea and to have been changed into 
rocks, when Odysseus had effected his escape, while others 
ascribe their defeat to Orpheus.^ Other versions gave them 
wings, and again deprived them of them, for aiding or re¬ 
fusing to aid Dimeter in her search for Persephon^. 

Skylla and If or are there wanting mythical beings who work their 
Charybdis. ^mong storm-beaten rocks and awful whirlpools. 

Among the former dwells Skylla, and in the latter the more 
terrible Charybdis. These creatures the Odyssey places on 
two rocks, distant about an arrow^s flight from each other, 
and between these the ship of Odysseus must pass. If he 
goes near the one whose smooth scarped sides run up into a 
covering of everlasting cloud, he will lose six of his men as a 
prey to the six mouths which Skylla will open to engulf 
them. But better thus to sacrifice a few to this monster 
with six outstretching necks and twelve shapeless fefet, as she 

* See page 242. 



SKYLLA. 


261 


slioots out her hungry hands from her dismal dens, than 
to have the ships knocked to pieces in the whirlpool where 
Charybdis thrice in the day drinks in the waters of the sea, 
and thrice spouts them forth again. The peril may seem to 
be less. The sides of the rock beneath which she dwells are 
not so rugged, and on it blooms a large wild fig-tree,^ with 
dense foliage; but no ship that ever came within reach of 
the whirling eddies ever saw the light again. In other 
words, Skylla is the one who tears her prey, while Charybdis 
swallows them ; the one is the boiling surf beating against a 
precipitous and iron-bound coast, the other the treacherous 
back-currents of a gulf full of hidden rocks. The name Kra- 
taiis also given to her in the Odyssey denotes simply her 
irresistible power. This horrid being is put to death in 
many ways. In one version she is slain by Herakles, and 
brought to life again by her father Phorkys as he burns her 
body. In another she is a beautiful princess, who is loved 
by Zeus, and who, being robbed of her children by the jealous 
Her^, hides herself in a dismal cavern, and is there changed 
into a terrific goblin which preys upon little children. This 
Skylla, who is called a daughter* of Lamia the devourer, is in 
fact the hobgoblin of modern tales’, and was manifestly used 
by nurses in the days of Euripides much as nurses may use 
such names now to quiet or frighten their charges.^ In 
another version she refuses her love to the sea-god Glaukos, 
who betakes himself to Kirk^; but Kirk^ instead of aiding 
him to win her, threw some herbs into the weU where Skylla 
bathed and changed her into the form of Echidna. It is need¬ 
less to cite other legends which are much to the same effect. 

The Megarian tradition brings before us another Skylla, 
who is probably only another form of the being beloved by 
Glaukos or Triton. Here the beautiful maiden gives her 
love to the Cretan Minos, who is besieging Megara to 
revenge the death of Androgeds, and in order to become his 
wife she steals the purple lock on the head of her father 
Nisos, on which depended her own life and the safety of the 

* Preller here suspects a play between ohic oTSe Aojuias rrjs Ai^vctik^s y4vos , 

the wprdfa ipiv^hs and ipipvs. quoted from Euripides by Diodoros 

* rlsT oijyoj^a rb i7rop€lBi<rroy fiporois xx, 41. Preller, Qt, Myth 1 . 484 . 


CHAP. 

VI. 


The 

Megarian 

Skylla 



262 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAiY lYATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Zens Po- 
S6id6n. 


city. But ste reaps no good from her treachery. In one 
story she is tied to the stem of the ship of Minos and 
drowned in the Saronic gulf; in another she throws herself 
into the water, as Minos sails away, and is turned into a 
bird, while her father, who has been changed into an eagle, 
swoops down after her into the sea. 


Section II.—THE LOUD OF THE WATERS. 

Over all these beings of the world of waters Poseid6n is in 
the later mythology exalted as the supreme king. His 
name, like that of Indra, exhibits him apparently as the god 
of moisture, the rain-bringer, who makes the thirsty earth 
drink and yield her fruits.^ Hence in some myths he is the 
friend and guardian of Dionysos, and the lover of Dem^t^r, 
who becomes the mother of Despoina and the horse Orion; 
and although he can descend to the depths of the sea and 
there dwell, yet he can appear at will on Olympos, and his 
power is exercised scarcely less in the heavens than in the 
depths beneath. Like Zens, he is the gatherer of the clouds, 
and he can let loose the winds from their prison-house. But 
his empire was not well defined, and thus the myths relat¬ 
ing to him turn chiefly on his contests with other deities, 
even with some towards whom he is generally friendly. It 
was not unnatural that the god of the waters which come 
from the heaven as well as of those which feed and form the 
sea, should wish to give his name to the lands and cities 
which are refreshed by his showers or washed by his waves. 
It was as natural that the dawn-goddess should wish the 
rocky heights on which her first beams rest to bear her 
name 3 and thus a contest between the two became inevit¬ 
able. In the dispute with Zeus for Aigina, the water-god 
had been successful, and the island retained one of the many 
names denoting spots where break the waves of Poseid6n. 
His power and his dwelling were in like manner seen at Aigai 

* ‘Sem Name druckt die flussige hin dor. lloTi^dy^ 

Natur im weitesten Umfange aus. Die Uoreiddyy seol. liorlSav, UoTeldow, gewor- 
alteren Formen smd das donsche den 1 st. Die Wurzel 1 st dieselbe wie m 
Tloa-iBTjs nnd UoffeidTis (dalier das Fest den Wortern -nSros, Tror^fw, TroTOjucis.’ 
noo-e^Seia imd rioa-tS^ioj/), 'woraus weiter- Preller, Gr. Myth, i 443. 



poseidOn the horse-tamer. 

and at Helike, spots where the billows curl and dash upon 
the shore.' But in the city on the banks of Kephisos he en¬ 
counters a mightier rival; and here he fails to give his name 
to it, although in one version he shows his power and his 
beneficence by striking his trident into the rock of the 
Akropolis and causing the waters to leap forth. In her 
turn Ath^nS produces the olive, and this is adjudged to be 
the better gift for men. Poseid6n here acts in strict ac¬ 
cordance with the meaning of his name; but it is not easy 
to see on what grounds the claims of Athen^ are allowed 
precedence, and hence we may suppose that the more 
genuine form of this myth is to be found in the other 
version which makes Poseid6n call forth from the earth not 
a well but a horse. 

That Poseid6n should become the lord and tamer of the 
horse was a necessary result as soon as his empire was 
definitely limited to the sea. As the rays of the sun be¬ 
came the Harits and Eohits, his gleaming steeds, so the 
curling waves with their white crests would be the flowing¬ 
maned horses of the sea-king. Thus he ascends his chariot 
at Aigai, and his steeds with golden hair streaming from 
their shoulders speed across the waters. Round him play 
the monsters of the deep, and the sea in her gladness makes 
a path for her lord.^ In the myth which traces the name of 
the [^gean] Aigaian sea, to the goat,^ which is said to have 
sprung from its surface, we have a story which might have 
made Poseidon the goatherd, whose goats leap from rock to 
rock as the waves toss to and fro in the sea. But it failed 
to take root, probably because such names as Aigialos, 
the shore where the sea breaks, retained their meaning too 
clearly. There was nothing to prevent the other associ¬ 
ation, and thus Poseidon became especially the god who 
bestowed on man the horse, and by teaching them how to 
tame and use it fostered the art of war and the love of 

> ‘ -SEgse und Helik4 bedeuten eigent- * U, xiii. 23-30. 
lich. das Meer oder die M<^ere8ku&te, * rb nkv Aiyatov weXayos oi fjXv oTib 
wo sich die Wogen brechen ’ Preller, Gr rris Kiyas aiyhs eirdowixov yeyoveuai 
Myth. 1 . 443. Thus the name Helikou tpaclv, ol Sk dvb ttjs Kopuarios r^s 
denotes the upward curling or spouting Alyairjs dyofiaCojueyrjs • Sch. Apollon, i. 
of the water when the soil is dinted by 11. 65.* Preller 6^. Myth, i. 445. 
the hoof of P^gasos. 


263 


CHAP. 

YI 


PoseidOn 

and 

AthOnA 



264 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II 


Poseidon 
and the 
Telchines. 


-Poseidon 
the Bond- 
man. 


strife. Thus the verdict of the gods in his contest with 
Ath^n^ receives its full justification. His defeat is followed, 
as we might expect, by a plague of waters which burst over 
the land when he is worsted by Ath^n^, or by the drying up 
of the rivers when refuses to let him be king in Argos. 
In Corinth there is a compromise. Helios remains master 
of the Akropolis which greets him on his rising, while 
Poseiddn is lord of the Isthmus watered by his waves. All 
these disputes, together with his claim on Naxos against 
Dionysos, and on Delos against Apoll6n, mark simply the 
process which gradually converted Poseiddn the lord of the 
rain-giving atmosphere into the local king of the sea. 
It is the degradation of Zeus Ombrios to the lordship of 
a small portion of his ancient realm. ^ But he still remains 
the shaker of the earth, and his trident exercises always its 
mysterious powers.^ 

Of the process which assigned to him a definite place in 
the later theogonies it is scarcely necessary to speak. Like 
Zeus, Poseiddn had been KronidSs, and when this name had 
been made to yield a mythical personality, he became also a 
son of Kronos, and was swallowed by him, like the other 
children of Ehea. A truer feeling is seen in the myth 
which makes the Telchines, the mystic dancers of the sky, 
guardians of his infancy.^ Like Zeus, again, he must fight 
against the Titans, and when after their defeat the triple 
division is made between the Hronid brothers, Poseiddn 
must be made to own allegiance to Zeus,—an admission 
which is followed by no great harmony. He can retort the 
angry words of Zeus, and he* plots with H^rS and Athene to 
bind him. 

The myth which makes Poseidon and Phoibos together 
build the walls of Ilion for Laomeddn belongs to the earlier 
stage in the growth of the myth, during which he is still 
the king of the upper air, and therefore may be represented, 
like the Delian god and the heroes who share his nature, as 
toiling for the benefit of mean and ungrateful man. For at 
the hands of Laomedon he receives no better recompense 

* This earlier identity of Poseidon ^ eppoffiyaios, Preller, ib. 

with Ins brother is attested by the name i. 446. 

Zenoposeidon. Preller, (rr. iWyM. i. 452. ^ Diod. v. 56, 



MELIKERTES AND KADMOS. 


265 


than that which Bnrystheus accords to Heraldes; and CHAP, 
hence the wrath of Poseiddn against Ilion and its people 
burns as fiercely as that of HSre. The monster which he 
brings up from the sea to punish Laomed&n is the huge 
storm-cloud, which appears in the Cretan legend as the bull 
sent by Poseidbn to be sacrificed by Minos, who instead of 
so dealing with it hides it among his own cattle, the fitting 
punishment for thus allowing the dark vapours to mingle 
with the bright clouds being that the love of Pasipha^ is 
given to the monster, and thus is born the dreadful Mino- 
tauros. Lastly, when by Amphitrite he becomes the father 
of Triton, the myth goes back to the early significance of the 
name Poseid6n. 

Among other mythical inhabitants of the sea are In6, the Meii- 
daughter of Kadmos and Harmonia, and her child Mali- 
kertes. Their earthly history belongs to the myth of the 
Golden Fleece; but when on failing to bring about the 
death of Phrixos she plunges, like Fndymi6n, into the sea, 
she is the antithesis of Aphrodite Anadyomfen^. With her 
change of abode her nature seemingly becomes more genial. 

She is the pitying nymph who hastens to the help of 
Odysseus as he is tossed on the stormy waters after the 
breaking up of his raft; and thus she is especially the 
white goddess whose light tints the sky or crests the waves. 

In his hew home her son Melikertes, we ara told, becomes 
Palaimon, the wrestler, or, as some would have it, Glaukos. 

The few stories related of him have no importance; but his 
name is more significant. It is clearly that of the Semitic 
Melkarth, and thus the sacrifices of children in his honour, 
and the horrid nature of his cultus generally, are at once 
explained. It becomes, therefore, the more probable that 
Kadmos is but a Greek form of the Semitic Eedem, the 
east; and thus the Boiotian mythology presents us with at 
least two undoubted Phenician or Semitic names, whatever 
be the conclusion to which they point. 

In his later and more definite functions as the god of the The ocean 
waters, Poseidon is still the lord only of the troubled sea: 
and there remains a being far more ancient and more ma¬ 
jestic, the tranquil Okeanos, whose slow and deep-rolling 



266 


M1TH0L0GY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Banaos 

and 

Aigyptos. 


stream no storm can ever ruffle. He dwells in tlie far west, 
where are the sources of all things. From him flow all 
rivers and all the tossing floods, all fountains and all wells. ^ 
[NTay, he is himself the spring of all existence,^ whether to 
the gods or to m*en.^ He is therefore with Tethys his wife 
the guardian of H^rS, while Zeus is busy warring with the 
Titans. His children are recounted in numbers w^hich 
denote infinity; and the Hesiodic Theogony which calls him 
a son of Ouranos and Gaia gives him three thousand 
daughters who dwell in the lakes and fountains of the 
earth, and three thousand sons who inhabit the murmuring 
streams,^ and seems also to point dimly to the source of the 
Ocean itself.^ 

Section III.—THE RIVERS AND FOUNTAINS. 

If in the legend of Danaos and Aigyptos with their fifty 
sons and fifty daughters we put aside the name Belos and 
possibly that of Aigyptos as not less distinctly foreign than 
the Semitic Melikertes, Kadmos, and AgSnor in the Boiotian 
mythology, there remains in the whole list of names on either 
side not a single name which is not purely Greek or Aryan. 
Doubtless when at a comparatively late time the myths were 
systematically arranged, this singular story was dovetailed 
into the cycle of stories which began with the love of Zeus 
for the Inachian 16; and when 16 was further identified 
with Isis, a wide door was opened for the introduction of 
purely foreign elements into myths of strictly Aryan origin. 
Nor would it be prudent to deny that for such identifications 
there may not, in some cases, have been at the least a 
plausible ground. 16 was the horned maiden, and her calf- 
child was Epaphos; but the Egyptian worshipped Apis, and 
had Isis as his homed maiden. There was nothing here 
which might not have grown up independently in Egypt 
and in Greece: nor is any hypothesis of borrowing needed 

* Jl. xxi 195, the short syllable being represented by 

* E XIV. 246. Acheron and Acheloos, the long by Axios, 

* 11 XIV 301. Axe, Exe, E&k, Usk, and other forms, 

^ Hes. Theog. 365, &c. The name See also vol. i p 383. 

Okeanos is referred by some to the same ® Hes. Theog. 282. 

root with the Latin aqua (cf. acer, w/ctJi), 



FOREIGiS" NAMES IN GREEK MYTHOLOGY. 


267 


to account for the similarity of myths suggested by the 
horns of the new moon. The mischief began with the 
notion that the whole Greek mythology not merely ex¬ 
hibited certain points of likeness or contact with that of 
Semitic or other alien tribes, but was dhectly borrowed 
from it; and when for this portentous fact no evidence 
was demanded or furnished beyond the impudent assertions 
of Egyptian priests, there was obviously no limit and no 
difficulty in making any one Greek god the counterpart of a 
deity in the mythology of Egypt. Hence, speaking gene¬ 
rally, we are fully justified in sweeping away all such state¬ 
ments as groundless fabrications. Nay more, when Hero- 
dotos tells us that Danaos and Lynkeus were natives of 
Chemmis, and that the Egjp)tians trace from them the 
genealogy of Perseus, the periodical appearance of whose 
gigantic slipper caused infinite joy in Egypt, we can not 
be sure that his informers even knew the names which the 
historian puts into their mouths. In all probability, the 
points of likeness were supplied by Herodotos himself, 
although doubtless the Egyptians said all that they could 
to strengthen his fixed idea that Egypt was the source of 
the mythology and religion, the art and science of Greece; 
nor does the appearance of a solitary sandal lead us neces¬ 
sarily to suppose that the being who wore it was in any way 
akin to the Argive hero who receives two sandals from the 
Ocean nymphs. 

Hence it is possible or likely that the names Belos and 
Aigyptos may have been late importations into a purely 
native myth, while the wanderings of Danaos and Aigyptos 
with their sons and daughters have just as much and as little 
value as the pilgrimage of 16 . In the form thus assigned to 
it, the legend runs that Libya, the daughter of Epaphos the 
calf-child of 16 , became the bride of Poseid6n and the 
mother of Agenor and Belos. Of these the former is placed 
in Phoinikia, and takes his place in the purely solar myth 
of T 61 ephassa, Kadmos, and Eur6pe: the latter remains in 
Libya, and marrying Anchirrho6 (the mighty stream), a 
daughter of the Nile, becomes the father of the twins 
Danaos and Aigyptos, whose lives exhibit not much more 


CHAP. 

VI. 


Their 
sons and 
daughters. 



268 

BOOK 

II. 


Hyper- 
mnestra 
and L 3 m.- 
keus. 


, MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAK NATIONS. 

harmony and concord than those of many other pairs of twins 
in Aryan story. These sons of Belos marry many wives, 
and while Aigj^ptos has fifty sons, Danaos has fifty daughters, 
numbers which must be compared with the fifty daughters 
of Nereus or the fifty children of Endymibn and Asterodia. 
The action of the story begins with the tyranny of Aigyptos 
and his sons over Danaos and his daughters. By the aid of 
Ath^n^, Danaos builds a fifty-oared vessel, and departing 
with his children, comes first to the Rhodian Lindos, then 
to Argos, where they disembark near Lernai during a time 
of terrible drought caused by the wrath of Poseiddn. He at 
once sends his daughters to seek for water ; and Amymon^ 
(the blameless), chancing to hit a Satyr while aiming at 
a stag, is rescued from his hot pursuit by Poseidon whose 
bride she becomes and who calls up for her the never-failing 
fountain of Lerna. But Aigyptos and his sons waste little 
time in following them. At first they exhibit all their old 
vehemence and ferocity, but presently changing their tone, 
they make proposals to marry, each, one of the fifty Dana- 
ides.^ The proffer is accepted in apparent friendship; but 
on the day of the wedding Danaos places a dagger in the 
hands of each maiden, and charges her to smite her husband 
before the day again breaks upon the earth. His bidding is 
obeyed by all except Hypermnestra (the overloving or gentle) 
who prefers to be thought weak and wavering rather than 
to be a murderess. All the others cut off the heads of the 
sons of Aigyptos, and bury them in the marshland of Lerna, 
while they placed their bodies at the gates of the city: from 
this crime they were purified by Athene and Hermes at the 
bidding of Zeus, who thus showed his approval of their deed. 
Nevertheless, the story grew up that in the world of the 
dead the guilty daughters of Danaos were condemned to 
pour water everlastingly into sieves. 

Danaos had now to find husbands for his eight and forty 
daughters, Hypermnestra being still married to Lynkeus 
and Amymone to Poseiddn. This he found no easy task, 
but at length he succeeded through the device afterwards 


^ With this number we may compare the fifty daughters of Daksha m Hindu 
mythology, and of Thestios, and the fifty sons of Pallas and Priam. 



BANAOS AND GELANOR. 


269 


adopted, we are told, by Kleisthenes. There were, however, chap. 
versions which spoke of them as all slain by Lynkens, who . . 

also put Danaos himself to death. There is little that is 
noteworthy in the rest of the legend, unless it be the way in 
which he became chief in the land where the people were 
after him called Danaoi. The dispute for supremacy between 
himself and Gelanor is referred to the people, and the decision 
is to be given on the following day, when, before the appointed 
hour, a wolf rushed in upon the herd feeding before the gates 
and pulled down the leader. The wolf was, of course, the 
minister of the Lykian Apollon; the stricken herd were the 
subjects of the native king, and the smitten ox was the king 
himself. The interpretation was obvious, and Gelanor had 
to give way to Danaos. 

What is the meaning and origin cf this strange tale? Origin of 
With an ingenuity which must go far towards producing 
conviction, Preller answers this question by a reference to 
the physical geography of Argolis. Not much, he thinks, 
can be done by referring the name Danaos to the root da, to 
burn, which we find in Ahan4, Dahan^, and Daphn^,^ as 
denoting the dry and waterless nature of the Argive soil. 

This dryness, he remarks, is only superficial, the whole 
territory being rich in wells or fountains which, it must be 
specially noted, are in the myth assigned as the works of 
Danaos, who causes them to be dug. These springs were 
the object of a special veneration, and the fifty daughters of 
Danaos are thus the representatives of the many Argive wells 
or springs, and belong strictly to the ranks of water nymphs.^ 

In the summer these springs may fail. Still later even 
the beds of the larger streams, as of the Inachos or the 
Eephisos, may be left dry, while in the rainy portion of the 
year these Charadrai or Cheimarroi, winter fiowing streams, 
come down with great force and overflow their banks. Thus 
the myth resolves itself into phrases which described ori- 

* The objection on the score of the - If the name Danaos itself denotes 
quantity of the fir^^t syllable, which in water, it must be identified with Tanais, 

Danaos is short, while in Daphn^ and Don, Donau, Tyne, Teign, Tone, and 
5avi wood easily infiamiiiable, it other forms of the Celtic and Slavonic 
is long, IS perhaps one on which too words for a running stream, 
much stress should not be laid. 



270 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


The Lyr- 
keios. 


ginally these alternations of flood and drought. The down¬ 
ward rush of the winter torrents is the wild pursuit of the 
sons of AigyptoSj who threaten to overwhelm the Danaides, 
or nymphs of the fountains; but as their strength begins to 
fail, they offer themselves as their husbands, and are taken 
at their word. But the time for vengeance has come; the 
waters of the torrents fail more and more, until their stream 
is even more scanty than that of the springs. In other 
words, they are slain by their wives, who draw or cut off the 
waters from their sources. These sources are the heads of 
the rivers, and thus it is said that the Danaides cut off their 
husbands’ heads. A precise parallel to this myth is fur¬ 
nished by the Arkadian tale, which speaks of Skephros (the 
droughty) as slandering or reviling Leimon (the moist or 
watery being), and as presently slain by Leimon, who in 
his turn is killed by Artemis. If in place of the latter we 
substitute the Danaides, and for the former the sons of 
Aigyptos, we have at once the Argive tradition. The mean¬ 
ing becomes still more obvious when we mark the fact that 
the Danaides threw the heads into the marsh-grounds of 
Lernai (in other words, that there the sources of the waters 
were preserved according to the promise of Poseiddn that 
that fountain should never fail), while the bodies of the sons 
of Aigyptos, the dry beds of the rivers, were exposed in the 
sight of all the people. It may therefore well be doubted 
whether the name Aigyptos itself be not a word which may 
in its earlier form have shown its affinity with Aigai,Aigaion, 
Aigialos, Aigaia, and other names denoting simj)ly the break¬ 
ing or dashing of water against the shores of the sea or the 
banks of a river. ^ 

But one of the Danaides refused or failed to slay her 
husband. The name of this son of Aigyptos is Lynkeus, a 
myth to which Pausanias furnishes a clue by giving its other 
form Lyrkeios. But Lyrkeios was the name given to the 
river Inachos in the earlier portion of its course, and thus 
this story would simply mean that although the other streams 

* Preller thinks that when the idea ings presented an obnous point of com- 
of a foreign origin for Aigyptos and parison with the Cheimarroi or winter- 
Banaos was once suggested, the Nile torrents of the Peloponnesos. Gr, 
with Its yearly inundations and shrink- Myth. li. 47. 



LYNKEUS. 


271 


were quite dried up, tlie waters of tlie Lyrkeios did not CHAP, 
wholly faih^ ^ 


' The head of Lynkeus (Lyrkeois), the 
one stream which is not dried np, 
answers to the neck of the Lernaiau 
Hydra. So long as streams were sup¬ 
plied from the mam source, Herakles 
had still to struggle with the Hydra. 
His victory was not achieved until he 
had severed this neck which Hyper- 


mnestra refused to touch. The heads of 
the slam sons of Aigyptos are the heads 
which Herakles hewed ojff from the 
Hydra’s neck • and thus this labour of 
Herakles resolves itself into the struggle 
of the sun with the streams of the earth, 
the conquest of which is of course the 
setting in of thorough drought. 



272 


MYTHOLOGY OF TEE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II 


Phrixos 
and Hell6. 


CHAPTER VII. 

THE CLOUDS. 

Section I.—THE CHILDREN OE THE MIST. 

The name NepLel^ stands almost at the beginning of that 
series of mythical narratives which stretch down to a time 
even later than the alleged period of the return of the 
Herakleids. She is the mother of the children whose dis¬ 
appearance led to the long searching of the Argonautai for 
the Golden Eleece, to be followed by the disappearance of 
Helen and then of the children of Heraldes; each with its 
astonishing train of marvellous incidents which, when closely 
viewed, are found more or less to repeat each other under 
a different colouring, and with names sometimes only slightly 
disguised, sometimes even unchanged. But Hephel^ herself 
is strictly the representative of the mist or the cloud, and as 
such she becomes the wife of Athamas, a being on whose 
nature some light is thrown by the fact that he is the brother 
of Sisyphos, the sun condemned, like Ixion, to an endless and 
a fruitless toil. In this aspect, the myth resolves itself into 
a series of transparent phrases. The statement that Athamas 
married Nephel^ at the bidding of H§r^ is merely the as¬ 
sertion that the wedding of the sun with the clouds, of 
Herakles with lole, is brought to pass in the sight of the 
blue heaven. From this union spring two children, Phrixos 
and Hell^, whose names and attributes are purely atmo¬ 
spheric. It is true that a mistaken etymology led some of 
the old mythographers to connect the name of Phrixos with’ 
the roasting of corn in order to kiU the seed, as an explan¬ 
ation of the anger of Athamas and his crime; but we have 
to mark the sequel of the tale, in which it is of the very 



mO AND NEPHEL®. 


273 


essence of the story that Phrixos reaches Kolchis safely on chap. 
the hack of the ram, while Hell^ falls off and is drowned. . 

That the name of this ill-fated maiden is the same as that of 
the Helloi, or Selloi, or Hellenes, and that the latter are the 
children of Helios, will probably he disputed by none. HeU^ 
then is the bright clear air as Uluminated by the rays of the 
sun; and she is carried away from the western Thessaly to 
the far eastern land. But before the dawn can come the 
evening light must die out utterly, and hence it was inevit¬ 
able that Hell^ should meet her doom in the broad-flowing 
Hellespontos, the path which bears her name. What then 
is her brother but the air or ether in itself, and not merely 
as lit up by the splendour of the sun? It was impossible, 
then, that the frigid Phrizos could feel the weariness which 
conquered his sister. Her force might fail, but his arms 
would cling only the more closely round the neck of the ram, 
rmtil at last, as the first blush of light was wakened in the 
eastern sky, he reaches the home of the Kolchian king. 

Hot less clear are the other incidents of the legend. Atliamas 
Athamas has been wedded to Hephel^; but he is no more at 
ease than is Ias6n with Medeia, and the Kadmeian In6 plays 
in this tale the part of the Corinthian G-lauk^. Finding that 
her husband’s love has been given to another, Nephel^ van¬ 
ishes away. The morning mist retreats to Hiflheim, its 
cloud-home, leaving her children in the hands of In6 Leu- 
kothea, the open and glaring day, in which there is nothing 
to keep down the heat of the sun. Hence between her and 
the children of the mist there is an enmity as natural as that 
which exists between Ar§s and Ath^nA and this enmity is as 
naturally signified in the drought or famine which she brings 
upon the land. It is, in fact, the same plague with which 
the Sphinx tormented the men of Thebes and AM scourged 
the worshippers of Indra. When consulted as to the cause 
of all this misery, the Delphian priestess answers that the 
children of Athamas must be sacrificed, or in other words 
that the crime of Tantalos and Lykadn must be committed 
again. In6 seeks to bring the doom on the children of 
NephelA who now sends the golden-fleeced ram to bear them 
away to KolcMs. But the curse works on stni; and the 

VOL. n. T 



274 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The 

akians. 


madness of Herakles falls on Atliamas, who carries out the 
sentence of the Pythia loj slaying his son Learchos. The 
drought has reached its height; and Ino, with her other 
child, Melikertes, casts herself into the sea. Left alone, 
Athamas now asks whither he must go and where he may 
find a home: and the answer is that he must make his 
abode where wild beasts receive him hospitably. This wel¬ 
come he finds in a spot where wolves, having torn some 
sheep, leave for him the untasted banquet. The beasts must 
needs be wolves, and the country of which he thus becomes 
the lord is the Aleian plain, through which the lonely Belle- 
rophon wandered in the closing days of his life. 


Section H.—THE CLOUD-LAND. 

Nephele then is the mist of morning tide, which vanishes, 
like Daphn^ and Arethousa, when the sun becomes Chrys^r. 
The myths of the earth under its many names bring the 
clouds before us in other forms, as the Kour^t^s, who weave 
their mystic dances round the infant Zous; the Idaian Dak- 
tyls, who impart to the harp of Orpheus its irresistible power ; 
and the marvellous Telchines, who can change their forms 
at will.^ But the cloud-land in all its magnificence and 
imperial array is displayed not so much in these isolated 
stories as in the great Phaiakian legend of the Odyssey. It 
may be safely said that there is scarcely a single detail in 
this marvellous narrative which fails to show the nature and 
the origin of the subjects of Alkinoos. We may, if we 
please, regard them as a people settled historically in the 
island known to us as Korkyra or Corfu; and withPreller or 
other writers we may lay stress on the fact that they are 
altogether a people of ships and of the sea, living far away 
from mortal men near the western Okeanos; but no one who 
wishes really to get at the truth of facts can thus convince 
himself that he has solved the problem. Whether Scheria 
be or be not the Mediterranean Korkyra, the meaning of 
most of the names occurring in the myth is beyond all 
doubt; and we have simply to follow the poet as he tells the 

* Sco p. 26 L 



THE PHAIAKIAN LAISTD. 


275 


tale, how long ago they had dwelt in the broad Hypereia, 
near to the rude and gigantic Kykl6pes, who were mightier 
than they and did them sore harm, until ISTausithoos led 
them away to Scheria, and there built them a city and 
planted them vineyards and raised temples to the gods.^ 
Here we have no sooner recalled to mind the nature of the 
Eyklops as the storm-cloud which clings to, or keeps its 
flocks, on the rough mountain-side, than the whole story 
becomes transparent. The broad Hypereia is the upper 
region, where dwell also the Hyperboreans in their beautiful 
gardens. Hay, we may safely say that the Phaiakians are 
the Hyperboreans who have been driven from their early 
home by the black vapours between whom and themselves 
there can be no friendship. Prom these malignant foes they 
can but fly to Scheria, their fibsed abode,^ where these rugged 
shepherds ^ cannot trouble them. 

This new home then is that ideal land far away in the 
west, over which is spread the soft beauty of an everlasting 
twilight, unsullied by unseemly mists and murky vapours, 
where the radiant processions which gladden the eyes of 
mortal men only when the heavens are clear are ^ ever passing 
through the streets and along the flower-clad hiUs. On this 
beautiful conception the imagination of the poet might feed, 
and find there an inexhaustible banquet; and we need only 
mark the several images which he has chosen to see how 
faithfully he adheres (and it may be unconsciously) to the 
phenomena of cloud-land. He who has seen in the easterner 
western sky as lit up by the rising or setting sun the cloud- 
capped towers and gorgeous temples catching the light on 
their burnished faces, can well feel whence came the sur¬ 
passing and everlasting glory of the palace and the gardens 
of Alkinoos. In those marvellous scenes which more than 
all other painters Turner delighted to transfer to paper or 
canvas, we may see the walls and chambers of that splendid 
dwelling gleaming with the lustre of the sun or the moon, 
the brazen Walls with their purple bands and stringcourses, 

‘ Od, vi. 1, &e. akin to 

* Of tlie word Scheria Preller says ® The ^Lif^pes dX^rjcral here spoken 
that it denotes simply the firm land, of are clearly the Kyklopee and non^ 
(rr, 1, 492. It would thus he others, 

(t 2 


CHAP. 

vn. 


The palace 
of Alki* 
noos. 



276 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The fleets 
of Alti- 
noos. 


the golden doors, and steps of sUver. Nay, who has not 
watched the varying forms and haK convinced himself that 
the unsubstantial figures before him are the shapes of men 
and beasts who people that shadowy kingdom ? Who has 
not seen there the dogs of gold and silver who guard the 
house of AlMnoos and on whom old age and death can 
never lay a finger—^the golden youths standing aroxmd the 
inmost shrine with torches in their hands, whose light never 
dies out—^the busy maidens plying their golden distaffs as 
their fingers run along the filmy threads spread on the bare 
ground of the unfading ether ? Who does not understand 
the poet at once when he says that their marvellous skill 
came ffom Ath^nS, the goddess of the dawn? And who does 
not see that in the gardens of this beautiful palace must 
bloom trees laden always -with golden firuits, that here the 
soft west wind brings new blossoms before the old havfi 
ripened, that here fountains send their crystal streams to 
freshen the meadows which laugh beneath the radiant heaven? 
It is certainly possible that in this description the poet may 
have introduced some features in the art or civilization of 
his own day; but the magnificent imagination even of a 
Spanish beggar has never dreamed of a home so splendid as 
that of the Scherian chieftain, and assuredly golden statues 
and doors, silver stairs and brazen walls formed no part of 
the possessions of any king of the east or the west from the 
days of the Homeric poets to ora own. In truth, there is 
nothing of the earth in this exquisite picture. In the Phaia- 
Tng.Ti land sorrow and trouble are things unknown. The 
house of Alkinobs is the house of feasting, where the dancers 
are never weary, and the harp is never silent. 

But the poet carries us to the true Phaiakian domain, 
when he makes Alkinoos say that though his people are not 
good boxers or wrestlers, none can outrun them on land or 
rival their akill on shipboard; and we may well suppose that 
some consciousness of the meaning of his tale must have 
been present to the mind of the bard as he recounted the 
wonders of the Phaiakian ships. These mysterious vessels 
have neither helmsmen nor rudders, rigging nor tackling; 
but they know the thoughts and the minds of men. There 



THE ?HAIAKIAN FLEET. 


277 


is not a city nor a cornfield thronghont the wide earth which 
they fail to visit, as they traverse the sea veiled in mist anil 
cloud j and in this their ceaseless voyaging they dread no 
disaster.' No bark of that goodly fieet has ever been stranded 
or wrecked, for so the gods have ordained for the blameless 
leaders and guides of all across the sounding seas. Far in 
the distance only looms a danger of which the vdse Nausi- 
thoos has dimly warned the king; and whence can the 
peril come but from Poseidbn, whose huge and ungentle 
offspring drove them from their ancient heritage? But 
whether the sea-god will really be able to fulfil his threat 
and sink the gallant Phaiakian bark, is a matter which 
Alkinoos is content to leave to the dis;Posal of God. So 
in the light of a sun which has not yet gone down dwell 
the happy Phaiakian people; but their beautiful ships are 
seen not only by Achaian eyes. The old Teutonic poet also 
beheld SMdhladnir, the magic bark ofPreya; the Icelander 
saw the good ship ELLide, as the wish-breeze bore the m 
along to their destination. Nor were these the only vessels 
endowed with the power and wisdom of the Phaiakian ships. 
The divine Argo can speak the language of men, and guide 
its crew to the land which they seek; but at this point the 
story of the speaking vessel becomes mingled with images 
which belong to another set of myths. The Argo contains 
within itself aU the warriors of the Achaian land, and Skid- 
bladnir, which can carry all the Asas, may yet be folded up 
like a mist and carried in the hand like a garment; and 
thus the imagery of the cloud is interwoven with that of 
tlie earth and its teeming womb. One question only remains. 
If the ships of A lkin oos have neither helm, nor rudder, nor 
rigging, what can these ships be but the Phaiakians them¬ 
selves, as they sad at will through the blue seas of heaven, not 

^ In the Norse stoiy of Big Bird Dan the look at you/ In short, each time that 
ship has become an iron boat; but still the club (of the Maruts) is raised, the 
it * sails of itself, if you only say, Boat, fiercer will be the storm. The old 
boat, go on. In that boat there is an myth is still further apparent in the 
iron club, and that club you must lift a concluding direction. * When you’ve 
little when you see the ship [which is got to land, you’ve no need to bother 
bearing away the dawn-maiden] straight yourself at all about the boat; first 
ahead of you, and then they’ll get such turn it about and shove it ofi* and say 
a rattling fair breeze, they’ll forget to Boat, boat, go back home/ ^ 


CHAP. 

vn. 



278 


MYTHOLOaY OF THE NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


The Phai* 
akians and 
Odysseiis, 


Niob6 and 
Utb, 


on the watery deep which, conches beneath 9 ^ Their very 
name points to the twilight land, and when the ship brings 
Odysseus back to his own island, it comes like the gleaming 
star^ushering E6s, the early bom.^ 

As the Kykl6pes are the natural enemies of the Phaiakians, 
so the latter have a natural friendship and love for the bright 
beings who gladden them with their light. When the hea¬ 
vens are veiled with the murky storm vapours, the lovely 
Phaiakians may stiU be thought of as comforting the bright 
hero in his sorrow 2 and hence the sympathy which by the 
agency of the dawn-goddess Ath^n^ is kindled in the heart 
of the pure Nausikaa for the stranger whom she finds on the 
sea-shore wearied almost unto death. This man of many 
griefs is not indeed what he seems; and the real nature of 
the being whom they thus befriend K'eaks out from time to 
time beneath the poor disguise which for the present he is 
content to wear. No sooner has Odysseus cleansed his face, ' 
than the soft locks fiow down over his shoulders with 
the hue of the hyacinth flower, and his form gleams like a 
golden statue; ® and the same air of regal majesty is thrown 
over him when he stands in the assembly of the Phaiakians, 
who must love him when they see his glory 

Prom the sorrows of the forsaken NephelS we passed to 
the happiness of the cloudland itself. Prom this peaceful 
region we must pass again to deeper griefs than those of the 
wife of Athamas. Of the many tales related of the luckless, 
Niob^, there is perhaps not one of which the meaning is not 
easily seen. Her name itself shows her af&nity to the mother 
of Phrixos and Helle ; and if in one version she is called a 


^ The poet, as wq might expect, con¬ 
tradicts himself when ho relates the 
voyage of the Phaiakians as they carry 
Odysseus from Phaiakia to Ithaka. 
Sere the ship has oarsmen and oars, 
and these imply the furniture of other 
ships, which he has expressly denied to 
them before. 

* Od. xiii. 93; Preller, Gr. Myth, i, 
495. Not less mysterious than the Phai- 
akian ships is the vessel without sail or 
rudder, which brings Scild, the son of 
Sceaf, the skiff, to the coast of Scandia 
Scildbecomes the king of the land, and in 
the lay of Beowulf, when he feels himself 


about to die, he bids his men lay him 
armed m the boat and put him out to 
sea. ^ This is the bark Elhde of Ice¬ 
landic legend, the wonderful ship of the 
Norse tale of Shortshanks, which be¬ 
comes bigger and bigger as soon as the 
hero steps into it, which goes without 
rudder or sail, and when he comes out 
becomes as small as it was before. 
This is, manifestly, nothing more than 
the swelling and shrinking of vapour: 
and so the ship which can carry aU th^ 
Asas may be folded up like a napkin. 

" Od.-vi.225. 

^ Od, vni, 21, 



THE KOUBETES and TELCHINES. 


279 


daughter of Phoroueus, from -whom, as a bride of Zeus, are 
born Argos and Pelasgos, this only tells us that the mist is 
the child of fire or heat, and that from its union with the 
heaven springs the light-crowned cloud. But the commoner 
version which represents her as a daughter of Tantalos is 
stm more significant. Here Mob^, the bride of the Theban 
AmpMon, a being akin to Orpheus, Pan, and Hermes, be¬ 
comes the mother of beautiful children, whose number varies 
as much as that of the sons and daughters of Endymidn, or 
of the mystic Kour^tes and Telchines. Then follows the 
rivalry of the proud mother with the mightier parent of 
Artemis and Phoibos—^the presumption of the mist or the ice 
which dares to match the golden-tinted clouds with the sun 
and moon in their splendour. The children of L^t6 are but 
two in number; her own cluster round her, a blooming 
troop of sons and daughters.* But Llt6 had only to carry the 
story of her troubles to her children, and the unerring arrows 
soon smote the unconscious causes of her anger. ISTiobS 
herself sat down overcome with woe on the summits of 
Sipylos, and there her grief turned her into stone, as the 
water turns into ice on the cold hiU-side.* Local tradition 
BO preserved the story that the people fancied that they saw 
on the heights of Sipylos the actual figure of Mob^ mourning 
for her children; but in fact, there were many NiobSs in 
many lands, and the same luckless portion was the lot of all.® 


* The number of these children is 
variously given in almost every account. 
The clouds are never the same. 

® Sophokles, Antig. 830, speaks 
expressly of the snow which never leaves 
her, and thus shows that he is dealing 
with the phenomena of congelation. 

* With many,other names, that of 
Niob^ may be traced back to a root snu, 
to flow, which yields the Sanskrit Nyav^, 
snow, as from Dyu we have DydvA, i. e. 

Hence Professor Max Muller 
sees in Niob4 the goddess of winter, 
whose children are smitten by the 
arrows of Phoibos and Artemis, as the 
winter gives place to summer. Thus 
the myth that there were none to bury 
them because all who might have 
done so had been turned into stone, is 
explained as indicating the power of 
frost which congeals everything: and 
thus also the tears of Niob^, as she sits 


on her stony seat, point to the melting 
or weeping of the petrified or frozen 
winter earth. Professor Max Mullor 
compares this myth with that of Chion6 
hiems, winter), who for presump¬ 
tion much hke that of Niob4 is slam by 
Artemis. Preller, Gr. Myth li. 383, 
takes a diiferent view. * Niobe ist selbst 
die Ehea dieser Bergen und dieser 
Thaler’ [of Sipylos], ‘die fruchtbaro 
Mutter und doch so traurig, im Pruhlmge 
prangend in dem Schmueke bliihender 
Kinder, im Sommer, wenn die heissen 
Pfeile der G-otter des Lichtes treffen, 
verwaist, und wie Eachel, die uber den 
Leichen ihrer Kinder sitzt und “will 
sich nicht trosten lassen, deim es ist aus 
mit ihnen.”’ He adds that the petrifac¬ 
tion of Kiob4 seems to indicate tlie 
tradition of some catastrophe. The 
catastrophe is simply lhat of every 
northern winter. 


CHAP. 

VII. 



280 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAIT NATION'S. 


BOOK 

n. 


The cattle 
of Helios. 


In the Vedic hymns, the cloud myths are inextricably 
intermingled with those of the dawn and the light. The 
very enemy of Indra hiding the stolen herds in his horrid 
den is but the storm-cloud which shuts up the rain-clouds 
ready to refresh the parched earth. He is Cacus who drags 
the cattle of Geryon into his cave, and the Sphinx which 
plagues the Hadmeians with drought. Of the beautiful 
cattle of Indra thus stolen by the Panis Saram^ is the 
guardian; each morning she comes forth to lead them to 
their pastures,^ each evening she reappears to drive them 
home. The same scenes are repeated daily in the Homeric 
Thrinakia, when the cattle of the sun are tended by the 
nymphs Phaethousa and Lampeti^, the fair-haired chhdren 
whom Neaira, the early morning, bare to Helios Hype 2 i 6 n. 
But although the companions of Odysseus are made actually 
to slay some of these cows, and although strange signs 
follow their crime, yet the story itself points to another 
origin for these particular herds. The Thrmakian cattle are 
not the clouds, but the days of the year. The herds are 
seven in number, and in each herd are fifty cows, never less, 
and representing in all the three hundred and fifty days of 
the lunar year.^ Thus in the story that the comrades of 
Odysseus did not return home with him because they slew 
the cattle of the sun, we may ^recognize an old proverbial 
or mythological expression, too literally interpreted even by 
Homer, and therefore turned into mythology.^ If, then, as 
Professor Muller adds, the original phrase ran that Odysseus 
reached his home because he persevered in his task, while 
his companions ^wasted their time, killed the days, i.e., the 
cattle of Helios, and were therefore punished, nothing would 
be more natural than that after a time their punishment 
should have been ascribed to their actually devouring the 
oxen in the island of Thrinalda.’ ^ 

^ In many popular^ tales these blue in Basent’s Norse Tales ; the Gaelic 
pastures with the white flocks feeding story of the Three Widows, Campbell, 
on them are reflected m the water, and ii 224, 228, 237; and the German tale 
the sheep feeding far down in the depths of the Little Farmer, Grimm. 

^e made the means by which Boots or ^ Sir G. 0. Lewis, Astronomy of the 

Dummling (the beggar Odysseus) lures Anoi&nts, 21. 

his stupid brothers to their death. See ® Chim, ii. 166.' 

the story of ‘ Big Peter and Little Peter,* 



281 


Section HI.—THE NYMPHS AND SWAN-MAIDENS. 

On tlie clond-origin of the Vedic Gandharvas, the Hellenic 
Kentanrs, and the Kyklopes whether of onr Homeric or 
Hesiodic poems, enough has perhaps been said in the 
analysis of the myths of IJrvasi, Psyche, Ixi6n, and Asld^- 
pios. These myths may each run into others which relate 
more exclusively to the earth or the sun; but the close 
connexion of earth, light and vapour, is so constantly 
present to the minds of all the Aryan tribes that it becomes 
almost impossible to set down any one myth, as a whole, as 
a specimen of one definite class; and thus the language 
used of the powers of darkness themselves is applied to the 
gloomy storm-vapours, whether they appear as the mon¬ 
strous Polyph^mos, or as the three daughters of Phorkos, 
who have but one tooth each and possess a single eye in 
common. These beings -fflschylos especially calls swan- 
shaped, and here we have the germ of a large family of 
legends common to all the Aryan tribes and extending, it 
would seem, far beyond them. We have already seen the 
clouds, whether as lit up by the sun or as refreshing the 
earth with rain, spoken of as cows tended by nymphs, 
while the stormy vapours, their relentless enemies, are 
snakes, worms, or dragons, which throttle or strangle their 
prey. But the Sphinx, one of the most prominent of this 
repulsive tribe, is called particularly the winged hound,^ and 
the swan-shaped Phorkides answer to the black ravens who, 
as messengers of Wuotan, roam across the sky. These two 
classes of vapours are kept tolerably distinct. The one 
brings only famine and sickness; the other recalls the dead 
earth to life, like the serpents with their snake-leaves in the 
stories of Glaukos, of Faithful John, and of Panch Phul 
Eanee. Sometimes, however, the vapours play an inter¬ 
mediate part, being neither wholly malignant, nor kindly. 
Thus in the Arabian Nights the rushing vapour is the roc, 
^ which broods over its great luminous egg, the sun, and 
which haunts the sparkling valley of diamonds, the starry 

^ vrrivhs k6^v. JEsch. P/. 1024; Agam, 136. 


CHAP. 

vn. 


The swan¬ 
shaped 
Phorkides. 



282 


MTTHOLOaY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


The Muses 
and the 
Valkyrien. 


sky.’ ^ Here the single eye in the forehead of Polyphemos 
becomes the golden egg which reappears in the story of Jack 
the Giant Killer as the egg which the red hen lays every 
morning. This monstrous bird appears as the kindly minis¬ 
ter of the light-born prince in the Norse story of Parmer 
Weather sky. 

In the Hymn to Apoll6n the clouds appear as the nymphs 
or goddesses who bathe the new-born Phoibos, and the 
white robe which they wrap around him is the garment of 
morning mist, through which his orb may be seen ascend¬ 
ing amidst zones of gold. Among these nymphs are the 
Charites, who attend on Aphrodite, the lovely clouds which 
dance in the morning sky, while in the hymn of Kallima- 
chos the clouds are plainly spoken of as the singing swans 
who hasten from Paktdlos and fly seven times round Delos 
at the birth of Phoibos, who therefore in after years fixes on 
seven notes as the complement of the musical scale. These 
beautiful beings in their thousand forms all spring from 
the water, whether it be AthSn^ or Aphrodite, Melusina, or 
ITrvasi. All therefore are the Apsaras or water-maidens, of 
whom the germs may be seen in Vedic hymns, while in 
later Hindu epics they appear with all the features of the 
Teutonic Valkyrien; and the consolation addressed to the 
warriors of the Mah^bh^ata is that by which Mahomet 
cheers the hearts of the faithful. ^ A hero slain is not to be 
lamented, for he is exalted in heaven. Thousands of beauti¬ 
ful nymphs (apsaras) run quickly up to the hero who has 
been slain in battle, saying to him. Be my husband.’ ^ Here 
then we have the groundwork of all those tales which speak 
of men as wedded to fairies, nymphs, nixies, mermaids, 
swan-maidens, or other supernatural beings. The details 
may vary indefinitely ; but the Aryan and Turanian myths 
alike point to the same phenomena. Prom the thought 
which regarded the cloud as an eagle or a swan, it was easy 
to pass to the idea that these birds were beautiful maidens, 
and hence that they could at will, or on the ending of the 
inchantment, assume their human form. This would, in 

* Gould, Curious MythSj second series, 146. 

^ Muir, Bkr, Texis, part iv. p. 235. ' 



SWAN-MAIDENS. 


283 


fact, be nothing more than the power exercised by Herakles, CHAP, 
who, whenever he desired it^ could lay'aside his robe of lion’s - - 

skin. Then would follow the myth, that the only way to 
capture these beings was to seize their garment of swan’s or 
eagle’s feathers, without which they were powerless; and 
this myth has been reflected in a thousand tales which re¬ 
late how men, searching for something lost, have reached 
some peaceful lake (the blue heaven) on which were floating 
the silver swans, birds only in outward seeming, and so long 
as they were suffered to wear their feathery robes.^ Some 
specimens of Turanian myths belonging to this class, cited by 
Mr. Gould, are noteworthy as containing not only this idea but 
all the chief incidents belonging to the Teutonic story of the 
Giant who had no Heart in his Body, and the Hindu tale of 
Punchkin. Among the Minussinian Tartars, Mr. Gould 
adds, these maidens appear, like the Hellenic Harpyiai, as 
beings which scourge themselves into action with a sword, 
and fly gorged with blood through the heavens, forty in 
number, yet running into one, like the many clouds absorbed 
into a single mass. The vapour in this, its less inviting 
aspect, is seen in the myth of Kyknos, the swan son of Ar§s, 
or Sthenelos, or^ Poseid6n (for all these versions are found), 
who after a hard fight is slain by Herakles. 

In the legend of Helen and the Dioskouroi Zeus himself The swan- 
comes to Leda in the guise of a swan, as to Danad he 
appears in the form of a golden shower; and hence from 
the two eggs sprung severally, according to one of many 
versions, Kastor and Helen, Polydeukes and Klytaimnestra, 
while others say that the brothers were the sons of Zeus, 
and Helen the child of the mortal Tyndare&s. When the 
notion which regarded Helen as doomed to bring ruin on 
her kinsfolk and friends had been more fully developed, 
the story ran that the egg came not from Leda but from 
Nemesis, the power which, like the Norns, gives to each 
man his portion. 

The ideas of inchantment and transformation once 

' These robes in other tales become Fairy Mythology, 21. With these legends 
fairy garments, ’without which the Persian t^e may also compare the stories of mer- 
Peri cannot leave the human husband maids who unite themselves with human 
to whom she is wedded. Keightley, lovers. 



284 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Inchanted 

maidens. 


awakened ran riot in a crowd of stories wMch. resemble 
in some of tbeir features the myths of which the tale of 
PsychS and Eros is a type; in others, the legends in which 
the youngest brother or sister. Boots or Cinderella, is in the 
end exalted over those who had thought little of him in 
times past, and, in others again, the narratives of jealous 
wives or stepmothers, found in the mythology of all the 
Aryan tribes. Thus the ship and the swan are both 
prominent in the mediaeval romance of the Knight of the 
Swan, in which the son of queen Matabrune, having 
married the beautiful Beatrice, leaves her in his mother’s 
charge. After his departure, Beatrice gives birth to six 
sons and a daughter, each with a silver collar round its 
neck. These children the stepmother seeks to destroy, but 
she is cheated by the usual device which substitutes some 
beast for the human victim. At length Matabrune is 
informed that seven children may be seen each with a 
silver collar, and again she decrees their death. They are, 
however, only deprived of their collars, and the loss changes 
them into swans, all but the youngest, Helias, whom a 
hermit had taken away as his companion.^ Helias, of 
course, avenges his mother’s innocence, when she is about 
to be put to death, and then makes a vow that he will never 
rest until he has delivered his brothers and sister from the 
evil inchantment. Having recovered five of the collars, he 
succeeds at length in restoring five to their human shape; 
but one remains spellbound, his collar having been melted 
to make a drinking-cup for Matabrune. This swan- 
brother now appears drawing a boat, in which Helias em¬ 
barks, and arriving at Heumagen fights on behalf of the lady 
who claimed the duchy of Bouillon. His victory makes 
him duke of Bouillon, but he warns the duchess that if she 
asks his name he must leave her. In due time the ques¬ 
tion is of course asked, and instantly, the swan and boat 
reappearing, Helias vanishes like Eros when seen by 
PsychS. This romance Mr. Gould, who gives some of other 

1 In Grimm’s story of * The White but at the same moment a snow-white 
and the Black Bnde/ the mother and swan is seen swimming down the 
sister push the true bride into the water, stream. 



THE STORY OF GUZRA BAL 


285 


versions of the story, regards as a local myth of Brabantine 
origin, the name Helias being a corruption of the Keltic 
ala, eala, ealadh, a swan. This is but saying, in other 
words, that an old myth has been worked into the traditions 
of European towns, and attached, like the story of the early 
life of Cyrus, to names undoubtedly historical. The tale 
itself agrees in all its essential features not only with many 
Teutonic legends but with the Hindu story of Guzra Bai, 
the Beatrice of the tale of Truth’s Triumph. This beautiful 
maiden is the Elower Girl, or the Gardener’s daughter, in 
other words, the child of D^m^t^r playing on the flowery 
plain of Hysa or Enna,—^the teeming source of life as dis¬ 
tinguished from the dead or inert matter on which it works. 
She thus becomes at once, like Beatrice, the mother of 
many children 3 here the number is a hundred and one, 
this one being as with Beatrice a daughter. These beauti¬ 
ful children awaken the jealousy and hatred of the twelve 
childless wives to whom the husband of Guzra Bai was 
already married, and in whom we may see an image of the 
months of the year or the hours of the night, in themselves 
producing nothing, until the spring reawakens the slumber¬ 
ing earth or the dawn flushes the eastern sky. In either 
case, it is but one hour or one day doing the work which 
otherwise many hours and many days would be unable to 
accomplish. Then follows a series of transformations which 
have the effect of counteracting the arts of the twelve 
queens as those of Matabrune are frustrated in the western 
story, and which end in the change of all the brothers not 
into swans but into crows, the only one of Guzra Bai’s 
children who is saved being the daughter, as Helias alone, is 
not transformed in the myth of Matabrune. The subse¬ 
quent marriage of Guzra Bai’s daughter xmder the name of 
Draupadi to a king who sees her feeding the crows is the 
return of Persephon^ from the lower world in more than her 
former beauty. Draupadi now becomes the mother of a 
child who avenges her wrongs as Perseus requites the perse¬ 
cutors of DanaS, and punishes the demon who, with the 
wand of Kirk^, had changed his mother’s brothers into crows. 
The flnal incident is the deliverance of Guzra Bai from the 


CHAP. 

vn. 



286 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


The 

Hyades 

and 

Pleiades. 


The 

Graiai. 


prison to wticli the twelve princesses had committed her, 
and the discomfiture of the latter, answering to the humilia¬ 
tion of Matabmne. 

As the storm-cloud brooding* over the earth without yield¬ 
ing rain became in Greek mythology the Theban Sphinx or 
the Pythian Dragon, so the clouds as rain-givers were the 
Hyades or the rainy sisters. These, it is obvious, might be 
described in a hundred ways, and accordingly almost every 
mythographer has a different account to give of them. 
They are the daughters of Atlas and Aithra, the heaven 
and the pure air, or of Okeanos, the water, or of Erechtheus 
(the earth); and thus the myths do but repeat the genera¬ 
tion of the cloud, 

I am tlie daughter of earth and water, 

And the nursling of the sky, 

giving it names which all denote their cherishing, fructify¬ 
ing, and reviving powers.^ They are the nymphs of Hysa 
or Dodona, who guard the infant Dionysos, or are the 
nurses of Zeus himself; and this kindness the wine-god 
requites by causing Medeia, the wise dawn-goddess, to 
restore them to youth when they had grown old, a sight 
witnessed every morning. These nymphs are seen again 
in their sisters the Pleiades, whose name, pointing only to 
their watery nature, became confused with that of the ring 
dove, Peleias, and so the story ran that they were changed 
into doves and placed among the stars. Generally these 
Pleiades are seven in number, six being visible and one 
invisible. Without taking into accoimt any supposed 
astronomical explanations, it is enough to note that the 
same difference marks the stories already cited of Mata- 
brune, Guzra Bai, and others, in which of a troop of chil¬ 
dren some remain visible while the rest vanish through 
iuchantment. 

These sisters are either always youthful and radiant, or 
they are from time to time restored to their former beauty. 
But we may think also of clouds as dwelling for ever far 
away the doubtful gloammg, not wholly dark, but faintly 


^ Eudora, AlthaiU) Phyto, Amtrosia, 



THE GLOAMING. 


287 


visible in a weird and dismal twiligbt. These clouds, which 
are never kindled into beauty by the rays of the sun, are the 
Graiai, the daughter of Phorkys, whose hair was grey from 
their birth, like the white streamers which move in ghastly 
lines across the sky, as evening dies away into night. The 
swan form of these sisters points clearly, as we have seen, to 
their cloud origin; and the story of the single tooth and the 
common eye would follow from the notion of their ever¬ 
lasting old age, even if these features were not suggested by 
myths like those of Polyphemos and the Kykl6pes.* 

Some of the features which characterise these gloomy 
sisters wore transferred to the Gorgons, if the idea of one 
Gorgon, as in our Hiad and Odyssey, be older than the 
Hesiodic myth of the three Gorgon daughters of Phorkys 
and K6t6, Stheino or Stheno, Euiyal^ and Medousa. The 
Gorge of the Odyssey is the hideous head of a monster 
belonging to the nether world; in the Odyssey she is a 
being with an awful face and a terrific glance. In the 
Hesiodic Theogony the two undying and barren sisters are 
sharply distinguished from Medousa, the woman of pitiable 
woes.* It is, of course, possible or even likely, that the 
writhing snakes which, by the doom passed on her, take the 
place of her beautiful locks may represent the hideous storm 
vapours streaming across the heaven at night, and still more 
likely that the wings and claws given to her fearful sisters 
attest their cloud nature. But this explanation does not 
account for the myth of the mortal maiden who onco 

Walked in beauty like tbo night 
Of cloudless climes and starry skies, 

whom Poselddn loved in the soft green meadow among the 
flowers of spring, and who became the mother of the mighty 
Chiysilflr and the winged horse Pegasos who rose from 
heaven to the house of Zeus, where he is the bearer of 
thunders and lightnings to the king of gods and men. Here 
plainly Medousa is none other than L4td, the mother of 

* Among tho many monitors which sons. Tho storm-cloud hero assumes 
are either children of Poaoiddn or aro the snake form which in the,Hindu 
sent up by him from tho soa are the two mythology belongs to Vritra and Ahi. 
serpents who destroy Laoko6u and his * \vypi TraOovira, lies. T/ieo^. 276* 


CHAP. 

YU. 


The Gor- 
gons. 



288 


MYTHOLOGY OS’ THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK CJuys^r, the lord of the golden sword: in other words, the 
^ night in its benignant aspect as the parent of the sun, and 
therefore as mortal, for must not the birth of the sun be 
fatal to the darkness from which it springs ? Hence Perseus, 
the filiild of the golden shower, must bring her weary woe to 
an end. The remaining feature of the story is the early 
loveliness of Medousa, which tempts her into rivalry with the 
dawn goddess Ath^nS herself, a rivalry which they who know 
the moonlit nights of the Mediterranean can weU understand. 
But let the storm-clouds pass across the sky, and the maiden’s 
beauiy is at once marred. She is no longer the darling of 
Poseid6n, sporting on the grassy shore. The unseemly 
vapours stream like serpents across her once beautiful face, 
hissing with the breath of the night-breeze, and a look of 
agony unutterable comes over her countenance, chilling and 
freezing the hearts’ blood of those who gaze on the brow 
of the storm-tormented night. This agony can pass away 
only with her lifej in other words, when the sword of 
Phoibos smites and scatters the murky mists. But although 
Medousa may die, the source from which the storm-clouds 
come cannot be choked, and thus the Gorgons who seek 
to avenge on Perseus their sister’s death are themselves 
immortal. 

Aktaiin. In the Theban myth of Aktaidn, the son of the 

Autono^, the cloud appears as a huntsman who has been 
taught by the Kentaur Cheiron, but who is tom to pieces by 
his own dogs, just as the large masses of vapour are rent 
and scattered by the wind, which bear them across the sky. 
As this rending is most easily seen in a heaven tolerably free 
from clouds, so the story ran that Aktaion was thus punished 
because he had rashly looked on Artemis while she was 
bathing in the fountain of Gargaphia. 

Not less significant is the myth of Pegasos, the off- 

Ssr. spring of Medousa with Chrysler, the magnificent piles of 
sunlit cloud, which seem to rise as if on eagle’s wings to 
the highest heaven, and in whose bosom may lurk the light¬ 
nings and thunders of Zeus. Like AthSnS and Aphrodite, 
like Baphn4 and Arethousa, this horse of the morning (E6s) 
must be bom from the waters; hence he is Pegasos, sprung 



ATnSNB CHALINiTIS. 


289 


from tlie fountains of Poseiddn, the sea.' On this horse 
Belleroph6n is mounted in his contest with the Chimaira: . 
hut he becomes possessed of this steed only by the aid of 
Ath6nd Chaliidtis, who, giving him a bridle, enables him to 
catch the horse as he drinks from the well Peir^n^, or, as 
others said, brings him Pegasos ahmdy tamed and bridled. 

When the Chimaira was slain, Bellerophdn, the story ran, 
sought to rise to heaven on the back of his steed, but was 
either thrown oif or fell off from giddiness, while the horse 
continued to soar upwards, like the cumuli clouds which far 
outstrip the sun as they rise with him into the sky. 

Pegasos, however, is not only tlie thundering horse of Pegasos 
Zeus; he is also connected with the Muses, who in their 
swan forms * are the beautiful clouds s^ing along the sky 
to the soft music of the morning breezes. The same blending 
of the myths of vapour and wind is seen in the rivalry 
between the Pierides and the Helikonian Muses. "When the 
former sang, everything, it is said, became dark and gloomy, 
as when the wind sighs through the pinewoods at night, 
while with the song of the Muses the light of gladness 
returned, and Helikon itself leaped up in its joy and rose 
heavenwards, until a blow from the hoof of Pegasos smote it 
down, as a sudden thunderstorm may check the soaring cirri 
in their heavenward way. But Pegasos is stiU in this myth 
the moisture-laden cloud. Prom the spot dinted by his 
hoof sprang the fountain Hippokr^n^, whether in Boiotia or 
in Argos. 


SBOnoK rsr.—THE HUNTERS AND DANCERS OP THE 
HEAVENS. 

The vapour in more than one of its aspects receives Orion, 
another embodiment in the myth of (Mon, which in almost 
all its many versions remains transparent. Bike other 


> With Pewos we ma,y commra the ‘ at the saillf moment a fearful noiae 
horse in Grimm’s story of the Two was heard, and a piece out of tho ground 
Wanderers (Dioskonroi), which conrses of the court rose up into tho air like a 
thrice round tho castio yard as swiftly ball/ and a stream of water leaps 
as lightning, and then falls. This is forth, as on the discomfittire of the 
the moment of tho lightning flash, and Sphinx, 
the story of course goes on to say that * Kallim. Ifymn to Iklos, 255. 

veil* II- V 



290 


MYTH0L06T OF THE AEYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


Seiiios. 


beings of -the same Mnd, be is sprung from ibe oartb or 
the waters, as a son whether of Poseidfin and Euryal6, or 
of Oinopion. He grows up a mighty hunter, tho cloud 
ranging in wild freedom over hills and valleys. At Chios he 
sees the beautiful Aer6, but when he seeks to make her his 
bride, he is blinded by her fether, who, on the advice of 
Dionysos, comes upon him in his sleep. Orion is now told 
that he may yet recover his sight if he would go to the east 
and look toward the rising sun. Thither he is led by the 
help of Hephaistos, who sends Kedalion as his guide. 
On his return he vainly tries to seize and punish the man 
who had blinded him, and then wandering onward meets 
and is loved by Artemis. It is but the story of the beautiful 
cloud left in darkness when the sun goes down, but re¬ 
covering its brilliance when he rises again in the east. Of 
his death many stories were told. In the Odyssey he is 
slain in Ortygia, the dawn land, by Artemis, who is jealous 
of her rival Eds. In another version Artemis slays him 
unwittingly, having aimed at a mark on the sea which 
Phoibos had declared that she could not hit. This mark 
was the head of Orion, who had been swimming in the 
waters; in other words, of the vapour as it begins to rise 
from the surface of the sea. But so nearly is he alrin to tho 
powers of light, that Askldpios seeks to raise him from the 
dead, and thus brings on his own doom from the thunderbolts 
of Zeus—a myth which points to the blotting out of the sun 
from the sky by the thundercloud, just as he was rekindling 
the faded vapours which lie motionless on the horizon. 

Like Andromeda, Ariadnd, and other mythical beings, 
Orion was after his death placed among the constellations, 
and his hound became the dog-star Seirios, who marks the 
time of yearly drought. He is thus the deadly star ^ who 
bums up the fields of Aristaios and destroys his bees, and is 
stayed from his ravages only by the moistening heaven.® 
This, however, is but one of the countless myths springing 
from old phrases which spoke of the madness of the sun, 
who destroys his own children, the fruits of his bride the 
earth. The word Seirios itself springs from the same root 

» «e!Moj dffTiip. * Ztbs (V«7oy. Prdler, (rr. AfyM, i. 3S8, 



THE D.U'CEKS OF THE SKY. 


with the Sanskrit Surya and the Greek Helios, Herd, and 
Herakles; and with Archilochos and Suidas it was still a 
mere name for the sun.* 

The characteristics of the Phaiakians and their ships 
carry us to other myths of tho clouds and the light. As 
roaming over hill and dale, as visiting every corn-field and 
seeing all the works of men, and as endowed with powers of 
thought, these mysterious vessels are possessed in some 
measure of tho wisdom of Phoibos himself. The kindred 
Telchines and Kouretes, tho unwearied dancers who move 
across the skies, have the power also of changing their forms 
at will.® If we put these attributes together, we at once 
have the wise yet treacherous, and the capricious yet trutli- 
fnl Proteus, the Parmer Wcathersky of Teutonic tales. This 
strange being is the old man of the sea, who reappears in 
the voyages of Sindbad. He is necessarily a subject, some 
said a son, of Poseidfln; and he lives not far from the river 
Aigyptos, a phrase akin to the myth of the Aithiopian 
Memndn. Huge flocks of seals sport around him in tho 
waters, like_ clouds gambolling in the heavens; and when 
the heat is greatest ho raises himself from tho deeps and 
takes his rest on the sea-shore—^the repose of the cloud 
armies which hang round the heaven in tho hot noon-tide. 
It is at this time that Virgil represents Aristaios as fettering 
the old man by the advice of his mother Arethousa. The 
attempt is followed by many changes of form; and Proteus ® 
becomes first a fire, then a snake, and pa^es through other 
changes before he is compelled to return to his proper form. 
In Proteus, the king of Egypt, we have one of those persons 


' In support of bis assertion that 
Boirios ir&s a name for any glittering 
orb or star, Preller quotes Hosychios: 

Kuybs ZIktjv rhtr dtrrp^ou 

fcijra, 6 ^Ktov, ^'l^vKos 

Si rd ierrpa, and adds * Suidas 

kennt die Form Seir fur Sonne. iVnit. 
l^hoin, 331: pa yj&Kitrra *0^4a (Tctpidet, 
Kai fitv KoKfovff* Mpeovot Sefpioy.' Gr, 
Myth. i. 363. 

* So with the fairy in tho Ballad of 
Taxnlane: 

* I quit my body when I please, 

Or unto it repair; 


Wo can inhabit at our case 
In either earth or air. 

Our shapes and size we can convert 
To uitlior large or small: 

An old nutshell’s the same to ua 
As is tho lofty hall.’ 

The. sequel of the ballad speelfies all tho 
changes of Thetis when Peleus seeks to 
win her. 

* Like the Rakshiis in Iho story of 
Ouzra Bai (Truth’s Triumph). Frere, 
Deccan Tales. 

% 


291 

CHAP. 

VII. 


Tlio Tcl- 
cliinos and 
Kouretes. 



292 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


of whom the Euemerists availed themselves to escape from 
the necessiiy of believing the incredible tale of Troy. Ac¬ 
cording to one version of the story, Paris came to Egypt 
with Helen in the course of his homeward wanderings from 
Sparta. It was easy to say that the real Helen went no 
further, and that the Helen seen in Ilion was only a phantom 
with which Proteus cheated the senses of Paris and his 
countrymen. It is enough to remark that of such a tale the 
poets of our Hiad and Odyssey know nothing; and that the 
Egyptian Proteus is none other than the son of Poseiddn, 
gifted with more than the wisdom of Hermes. 



293 


CHAPTER Yin. 


THE EAETH. 


Sectiox I.—DIONYSOS. 

The Homeric liymn tells the simple tale how Dionysos in Tho cap- 
tho first bloom of youth was sitting on a jutting rock by the 
sea-shore, a purple robe thrown over his shoulders and his 
golden locks streaming from his head, when he was seized 
by some Tyrrhenian mariners who had seen him as they 
were sailing by. These men placed him on board their 
vessel and strongly bound him, but the chains snapped like 
twigs and fell from his hands and feet, while he sat smiling 
on them with his deep blue eyes. The helmsman at once 
saw the folly of his comrades, and bade them let him go lest 
the god, for such he must be, should do them some harm. 

His words fell on unheeding ears, and they declared that 
they would take him away to Kypros, Egypt, or the Hyper¬ 
borean land. But no sooner had they taken to their oars than 
a purple stream flowed along the decks, and the’ air was 
filled with its fragrance. Then the vine-plant shot up the 
masts, and its branches laden with rosy fruit hung from the 
yardarms', mingled with clustering ivy, while the oar pegs 
were all wreathed in glistening garlands. The sailors now 
beseech Medeides, the steersman, to bring the ship to shore 5 
but it is too late. For Dionysos now took the forms of a 
lion and a bear, and thus rushing upon them drove the cruel 
mariners into the sea, where they became dolphins, while 
the good steersman was crowned vrith honour and glory. 

In this story we have clearly the manifestation of that Dionysos 
power which ripens the fruits of the earth, and more espe- 
cially the vine, in the several stages from its germ to its 



294 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS!. 


HOOK 

II. 


Dionysos 
the Wan¬ 
derer. 


maturity. The fearful power displayed by the god is tho 
influence which the grape exercises on man. Its juice may 
flow as a quiet stream, Ailing the air with sweet odours, but 
as men drink of it its aspect is changed, and it becomes like 
a wild beast urging them to their destruction. But the 
penalty thus inflicted upon the Tyrrhenian mariners is strictly 
for their evil treatment of the god, whose character is merely 
jovial, and by no means designedly malignant. Nor is tho 
god MmseK invested with the majesty of the supreme Zeus, 
or of Phoibos or Poseid6n, although the helmsman says that 
either of these gods may possibly have taken the form of the 
youthful Dionysos. But before we find ourselves in his¬ 
torical Hellas a complete change has taken place. Dionysos 
is now the horned Zagreos after his death and resurrection, 
and the myth of the son of Semel 4 is anticipated or repeated 
by the legend of this child of Persephone, whom his father 
Zeus places beside him on his throne. In this, as in other 
cases, the jealousy of Hdre is roused, and at her instigation 
the Titans slay Zagreos, and cutting up his limbs, leave only 
liis heart, which Athend carries to Zeus. This heart is given 
to Semeld, who thus becomes the mother of Dionysos. This 
slaughter and cutting up of Zagreos is only another form of 
the rape of Persephon^ herself. It is the stripping off of 
leaves and fruits in the gloomy autumn which leaves ordy 
the heart or trunk of the tree to give birth to the foliage of 
the coming year, and the resurrection of Zagreos is the 
return of Persephond to' her mother DdmSt^r. Henceforth 
with D^m^t^r, who really is his mother also, Dionysos be¬ 
comes a deity of the first rank; * and into his mythology are 
introduced a number of foreign elements, pointing to tho 
comparatively recent influence exercised by Egypt and Syria 
on the popular Hellenic religion. The opposition of the 
Thrakian Lykourgos and the Theban Pentheus to the frenzied 
rites thus foisted on the cultus of Dionysos is among the few 
indications of historical facts exhibited in Hellenic mythology. 

In the Homeric hymn the^Tyrrhenian mariners avow their 
intention of taking Dionysos to Egypt, or Ethiopia, or the 
Hyperborean land 5 and this idea of change of abode '^comes 
^ ^ Gfote, msif Greece^ i. 31< 



DIONYSOS THE WANDERER. 


295 


tlie prominent feature in the later developements of the wan- CHAP, 
dering wine-god. It is unnecessary to trace these journeys - 
in detail, for when the notion was once suggested, every 
country and even every town would naturally frame its own 
story of the wonderful things done by Dionysos as he abode 
in each. Thus he flays Damaskos alive for refusing to aJlow 
the introduction of the vine which Dionysos had discovered, 
and a false etymology suggested the myth that a tiger bore 
him across the river Tigris. But wherever he goes there is 
the same monotonous exhibition of fury and frenzy by which 
mothers become strange unto their own flesh and maidens 
abandon themselves to frantic excitement. All this is merely 
translating into action phrases which might tell of the 
manifest powers of the wine-god; and the epithets applied 
to him show that these phrases were not limited merely to 
his exciting or maddening influences. In his gentler aspects 
he is the giver of joy, the healer of sicknesses, the guardian 
agfainst plagues. As such he is even a lawgiver, and a pro¬ 
moter of peace and concord. As kindling new or sti-ange 
thoughts in the mind, he is a giver of wisdom and the re- 
vealer of hidden secrets of the future. In this, as his more 
genuine and earlier character, he is attended by the beautiful 
Charites, the maidens and ministers of the dawn-goddess 
Aphroditfi, who give place in the later mythology to fearful 
troops of raging Mainades or Bassarides, bearing in tiLeir 
hands the budding thyrsus, which marks the connection of 
this cultus with that of the great restoring or revivifying 
forces of the world. 

The changes which come over the person of Dionysos are The wo¬ 
rn accordance with the natural facts indicated by his attri- p^^ygos, 
butes. Weak and seemingly helpless in his iiifancy, like 
Hermes or Phoibos himself, he is to attain in the end to 
boundless power j but the intervening stages exhibit in him 
the languid and voluptuous character which marks the early 
foliage and vegetation of summer. Hence the story that 
PersephonS placed her child Dionysos in the hands of In6 
and Athamas to be brought up as a girl; and from this 
character of feminine gracefulness he passes to the vehement 
licence of his heated worshippers. 



296 


BOOK 

n. 


The mo¬ 
thers of 
Dionysos 


The story 
of Perse* 
phonS. 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

Persepiion^, as we have seen, is not Ms only mother; nor 
is the myth wMeh makes him bom of his mother SemeM 
amidst the blaze of the thunderbolts the only legend of his 
birth. He is spoken of sometimes as a son of 16 , or of Axg6, 
of Di6n6, or Amaltheia, the nurse of Zeus; and there was a 
tale which related how, when Kadmos heard that Zeus had 
made his cMld Semel6 a mother, he placed her and her babe 
in a chest, and launched them, as Akrisios larmched Dana6 
and her infant, upon the sea. The chest, according to local 
tradition, was carried to Brasiai, where the babe was rescued 
by In6; Semel6, who was found dead, being solemnly buried 
on the shore.^ 


Section IT.—DEMlSlTBE.. 

The m3rth wMch gives most fully and most clearly the 
history of the earth through the changing year is to be 
found not so much in the legend of Adonis as in the legend 
of Persephon6 herself. TMs story as related in the Hymn to 
D6m6t6r tells us how the beautiful maiden (and in her rela¬ 
tions with the upper world she is pre-eminently the maiden, 
Kor6), was playing with her companions on the floweiy 
Nysian plain, when far away across the meadow her eye 
caught the gleam of a narcissus flower. As she ran towards 
it alone, a fragrance, wMch reached to the heaven and made 
the earth and sea laugh for gladness, filled her with delight} 
but when she stretched out her arms to seize the stalk with 
its hundred flowers, the earth gaped, and before her stood 
the immortal horses bearing the car of the king Polydegmdn, 
who placed her by Ms side. In vain the maiden cried aloud, 
and made her prayer to the son of Eronos; for Zeus was far 
away, receiving the prayers and offerings of men in his 
holy place, and there was none to hear save Hekat6, who in 
her secret cave heard the wail of her agony, and Helios, the 
bright son of Hyperidn, and one other—the loving mother, 

> l'relle^_ Gr. Myth. i. 623, regards jenes Leibethron am 
the name Dionysos p simply an epithet Olymp, vo Dionysos nnd Orphens seit 
of Zens as the Nysaian or nponing god: alter Zeit in der Umgebnng der Mnsen 
Der xsani 0 scheint einen feuclitpii, vcrelirt ■wurden,* 
saftig fruchtbaren Ort zu bedeiiten, wie 



THE SEAHCII foe THE LOST lIAIDEH. 


m 


whose heart was pierced as with a sword, as the cry of her 
child reached her ears, a cry which echoed mournfully over 
hills, and vales, and waters. Then D^m^t^r threw the dark 
veil over her shoulders, and hastened like a bird over land and 
sea, searching for her child. But neither god nor Tnfl.rr could 
give her tidings untU, with torch in hand, she reached the 
cave of Hekatfi, who knew only of the theft of the mfl.irieTi, 
but could not tell whither she had gone. From Helios, 
whom she addresses as the all-seeing, Dem4t^r receives 
clearer tidings and a deeper sympathy, and now she learns 
that her child is the bride of Aidoneus, who reigns in the 
unseen land beneath the earth. The grief of the mourning 
motlier is almost swallowed up in rage, as she leaves the 
home of the gods and wanders along the fields and by the 
cities of men, so changed in form, and so closely veiled that 
none could know the beautiful queen who had till then shed 
a charm of loveliness over all the wide world. At last she 
sat down by the wayside, near Eleusis, where the maidens of 
the city come to draw water from the fountain. Here, when 
questioned by the daughters of Helcos the king, the mourner 
tells them that her name is D^6, and that, having escaped 
from Cretan kidnappers, she seeks a refuge and a home, 
where she may nurse young children. Such a home she 
finds in the house of Keleos, which the poet makes her enter 
veiled from head to foot.* Hot a word does she utter in 
answer to the kindly greetings of Metaneira, and the deep 
gloom is lessened only by the jests and sarcasms of lamb^. 
When Metaneira offers her wine, she says that now she may 
not taste it, but asks for a draught of water mingled with 
flour and mint, and then takes charge of the new-born son of 
Keleos, whom she names Demophodn. Under her care the 
babe thnves marvellously, though he has no nourishment 
either of bread or of milk. The kindly nurse designs, in¬ 
deed, to make him immortal; and thus by day she anoints 
him with ambrosia, and in the night she plunges him, like 
a torch, into a bath of fire. But her purpose is frustrated 
by the folly of Metaneira, who, seeing the child thus basking 

• The hymn writer foigets for a tonched the roof, whUo a blaze of light 
momentthe vi^ilod Mater Bolorosa, when streamed through tho doors and flll^ 
ftt her entrance ho says that her head the dwelling. 


CHAP. 

VIII. 



298 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK in the flames, screams with fear, and is told by D^metfir that, 
—though her child shall ever receive honour because he has 
slumbered in her arms, still, like all the sons of men, and like 
Achilleus himself, he must die. Nevertheless, though she cast 
the child away from her, she abode yet in the house of Keleos, 
mourning and grieving for the maiden, so that all things in 
the heaven above and the earth beneath felt the weight of 
her sorrow. In vain the ploughs turned up the soil, in vain 
was the barley seed scattered along the farrows. In Olympos 
itself t Are was only gloom and sadness, so that Zeus charged 
Iris to go and summon DSm^ter to the palace of the gods. 
But neither her words nor those of the deities who follow her 


Iduna. 


ayail to lessen her grief or to bend her will. The mourning 
mother will not leave the place of her exile till her eyes have 
looked upon her child once more. Then Hermes, at the 
bidding of Zeus, enters the dismal underworld, and Poly- 
degmfin consents to the return of PersephonI, who leaps 
with delight for the joy that is coming. Still he cannot 
altogether give up his bride, and PersephonS finds that she 
has unwittingly eaten the pomegranate seed,^ and must come 
back to Aiddneus again. But even with this condition the 
joy of the meeting is scarcely lessened. A third part only 
of the year she must be queen in Hades; through all the 
other months she is to be once more the beautiful maiden 
who sported on the plains of Hysa. The wrath of Hdmdtdr 
has departed with her grief, the air is filled with fragrance, 
and the corn-fields wave with the ripening grain. 

In Teutonic tradition Persephond is represented by Iduna, 
the beautiful, whom Loki brings back in the shape of a quail 
(Wachtel), a myth which caimot fail to remind us of Ar¬ 
temis Ortygia. LoH here distinctly plays the part of Per¬ 
seus, for the giants of cold hasten after him as he bears 
away Iduna, as the Grorgon sisters chase Perseus on his way 


^ ‘Am liaufigsten ward dcr Granat- 
apfel als Symbol des Zeugung iind 
Empfangniss verwendet, was wohl dayon 
herruhrt dass er, well seme Kerne 
zugleich Samcnkerne sind, Samen- 
behaltniss ist, nnd insofem diese Kerne 
in zahlreicher Menge in ihm enthalten 
sind, diente er sehr pass end zuin S^mabol 

des GegcJilechtsyeylialtnisses, , . , Tn 


den Mythen erscheint dor Granatbanm 
als entsprosson aus dom auf die Erdo 
gellossenen Blute oines des Zengegliedee 
beraubten Gottea: nnd Nana, die 
Tochter des Flussgotts Sangarue, wurde 
schon dadnrch schwanger, weil sie einen 
Granatapfel in ibren Schooss gel^ 
hatt-o (Arnob, adx\ Gent 5): Nork, s.v. 



THE MAIDESr AND THE MOTIIEE. 


299 


to tlie Hyperborean gardens. Tbis myth in Bunsen’s belief 
‘is an exact counterpart of tlic cnadiest myth of HeraMes, 
who falls into tlio sleep of winter and lies tbero stiff and 
stark till lolaus wakes bim by bolding a quail to bis nose.’ 
Tbis idea of tbe palsied or feeble sun is reproduced in tbe 
Egyptian Harp-i-ebruti (tbe Grccised Hax'poki'ates), tbe sun 
regarded as an infant, tbe lame child of Isis, tbe eartb,—a 
pbrase wbieb carries iis to that wide class of legends, wbicb 
speak of tbe sun, or tbe wind, or tbe light, as weali, if not 
impotent, in their fii'st manifestations. Osiris can be avenged 
only by Horos, the full-grown sun, after the vorual equinox. 

Altbougb with tbe mythical history of Persephone are 
mingled some institutional legends explaining the ritual of 
the Eleusinian mysteries, tbe myth itself is so transparent 
as to need but little interpretation. Tbe stupifying narcis¬ 
sus with its hundred flowers springing from a single stem is 
in tbe opinion of Colonel Mure a monstrous hyperbole; yet 
it must be a narcotic wbieb lulls to sleep the vegetation of 
nature in tbe bright yet sad autumn days when heaven and 
earth smile with the beauty of the dying year, and the myth 
necessarily chose the flower whose name denoted tbis dreamy 
lethargy. Even in her gloomy nether abode tbe charac¬ 
ter of tbe maiden is iiot wholly changed. She is still not 
tbe fierce queen who delights in death, but the daughter 
yearning to be clasped once more in her mother’s arms. 
That mother is carefully nursing the child of Eeleos, the 
seed which grows without food or drink, except the nourish¬ 
ment of the dew and the heat which still lurks in the bosom 
of the winter-smitten earth. But while she is engaged in 
this task, she is mourning still for the daughter who has 
been taken away from her, and the dreary time which passes 
before they meet again is the reign of the gloomy winter, 
which keeps tho leaves off the trees and condemns the tillers 
of the soil to unwilling idleness. The sequel of the hymn 
simply depicts the joy of returning spring and summer, 
when the mourning mother is exalted in glory to the ever¬ 
lasting halls of Olympos. Hence, so far as the meaning of 
tho myth is concerned, it matters little whether Demfiter be 
herself the earth grieving for the lost treasures of summer, 


CHAP. 

VIU. 


The sta- 

pifying 

Narcissiifi, 



300 


Mythology op ths ahyan nations. 


BOOK or tire dawa-mother mouminff for the desolation of the 
II * ° 

—,1—. earth which she lores.* 

This story is naturally found in all lands where the dif¬ 
ference between summer and winter is sufiSeiently marked 
to leave on the mind the impression of death and resur¬ 
rection. Its forms of course vary indefinitely, but it is in 
fact repeated virtually in every solar legend. The beautiful 
earth laughing amidst the summer flowers is as truly the 
bride of the sun as is the blushing dawn with its violet tints. 
The grief of D^mSt^r for Korl is the sorrow of ApoUfin when 
bereft of Daphn 4 , as its converse is the mourning of Psychd 
for Eros or Sel 4 nS for Endymidn. But there is hope for all. 
Sarpeddn, Adonis, Memndn, Arethousa shall all rise again,— 
but only when the time is come to join the being who has 
loved them, or who has the power to rouse them from their 
sleep. The utter baiTenness of the earth, so long as the wrath 
of DSmStdr lasts, answers to the locking up of the treasures in 
Teutonic folk-lore; but the awakening of spring may be said 
to be the result of the return, not only of the maiden from 
the underworld, but of the sun from the far-off regions to 
which he had departed. In the former case the divine 
messenger comes to summon the daughter from the unseen 
land; in the other the sleeper rests unawakened until she 
feels the magic touch of the only being who can rouse her. 
With either of these ideas it was possible and easy to work 
out the myth into an infinite variety of detail; and thus in 
the northern story PersephonI becomes the maiden Biyn- 
hild who sleeps within the flaming walls, as the heroine of 
the Hindu tales lies in a palace of glass surrounded by seven 
hedges of spears. But she must sleep until the knight 
arrives who is to slay the dragon, and the successful exploit 
of Sigurd would suggest the failure of weaker men who had 
made the same attempt before him. Thus we have the germ 
of those countless tales in which the father promises to be- 

* Professor Max Muller prefers the PoseidOn or Kolios to Apollon. Gain 
lattCT emlanation and refers tho name is thus the actual soil from which tho 
to the oansknt dy&Tdmatar. Lectures, deadly narcissus springs, and therefore 
second senes, 617. If Demet6r, or 1)66, tho accomplice of Polydegm6n, while 
as she also styles hersolf, he only a D6ni6t6r is tho mystorious power which 
. V Q-aia stands to causes all living things to grow and 

D6m6t6r, m the relation of ITcreus to ripen, ^ 



TUB witch’s garden. 


301 


stow his daughter on the man who can either leap over the chap. 
wall of spears or work his way through the hedge of thorns, . 
or slay the monster who guards her dwelling, deatli being 
the penalty for all who try and fail. The victorious knight 
is the sun when it has gained sufficient strength to bi-eak the 
chains of winter and set the maiden free; the hrckless beings 
who precede him ai'e the suns which rise and set, making 
vain efforts in the fii’st bleak days of spring to rouse nature 
from her deathlike slumbers. This is the simple tale of 
Dornrosehen or Briar Eose, who pricks her finger with a 
spindle and falls into a sleep of a hundred years, the spindle 
answering hero to the stupifying narcissus in the myth of 
Persephonfi. This sudden touch of winter, arresting all the 
life and activity of nature, followed in some climates by a 
return of spring scarcely less sudden, would naturally sug¬ 
gest the idea of human sleepers resuming their tasks at the 
precise point at which they were interrupted; and thus when, 
after many princes who had died while trying to force their 
way through the hedge of briars, the king’s son arrives at 
the end of the fated time and finds the way open, an air of 
burlesque is given to the tale (scarcely more extravagant, 
however, than that which Euripides has imparted to the 
deliverer of AlkSstis), and the cook on his waking gives the 
scullion boy a blow which he had raised his hand to strike a 
hundred years ago. 

This myth of the stealing away of the summer-child is Tha 
told in Grimm’s story of Eapunzel, where the witch’s garden 
is the earth with its fertilising powers pent up within high 
walls. Eapunzel herself is KorS, the maiden, the Eose of 
the Alhambra, while the witch is the icy Predegonda, whose 
story Washington Irving has told with marvellous but un- 
oonscious fidelity. The maiden is shut up, like DanaS, in a 
high tower, but the sequel reverses the Argive legend. It 
is noT; Zeus who comes in the form of a golden shower, but 
the prince who ascends on the long golden locks which 
stream to the earth from the head of Eapunzel. In the 
story of the Dwarfs PersephonS is the maiden who eats a 
golden apple (the narkissos), and thereupon sinks a hundred 
fathoms deep in the earth, where the prince (Herakles) finds 



302 


BOOK 

II. 


The 

lengthen¬ 
ing days. 


MYTHOLOGY OF TUB ARYAN NATIONS. 

her with the nine-headed dragon resting on her lap. The 
return of Persephon^ is strangely set fortli in the story of 
the House in the Wood, which in other stories is the houso 
or case of ice in which the seemingly dead princess is laid. 
This house breaks up, like the ice, at the return of spring. 
The sides crack, ‘ the doors were slammed back against the 
walls; the beams groaned as if they were being riven away 
from their fastenings; the stairs fell down, and at last it 
seemed as if the whole roof fell in.^ On waking from her 
sleep the maiden finds herself in a splendid palace, sur¬ 
rounded by regal luxuries. The maiden has returned from 
the dreary abode of Hades to the green couch of the life- 
giving mother. 

The gradual lengthening of the days after the winter 
solstice is singularly seen in Grimm^s story of the Nix of the 
Mill Pond. In this tale, the dawn-bride, severed from her 
husband, betakes herself to an old woman, who comforts her 
and bids her comb her long hair by the water-side and see 
what would happen. As she plies her golden comb, a wave 
rolling to the bank carries it away. Presently the waters 
began to bubble and the head of the huntsman (Alpheios) 
appears. ^ He did not speak, but looked at his wife sorrow¬ 
fully, and at the same moment another wave rolled on and 
covered his head.’ A second time she goes to the old 
woman, who gives her a flute, and this time there ^ appeared 
not only the head, bnt half the body of the man, who 
stretched out his arms towards his wife; but at the same mo-' 
ment a wave came and covering his head drew him down 
again.’ The third time she comes with a spinning-wheel of 
gold (the wheel of Ixi6n), and the huntsman leaping out of 
the waters hurries away with his wife from the demons 
who seek to seize them. In the story of Jungfrau Maloeii 
(Kore), the princess and her maid are shut up in a dark 
tower, and are constrained to scrape a hole through the wall 
in order to let in the light. When they are able to peep out 
they see a blue sky, but everything on the earth is desolate 
as at the close of a northeim winter, and like Cinderella, the 
maiden is obliged to take the cook’s place in the king’s 
palace, where at length, as in other stories, she becomes the 



THE WINTEE PRISOir. 


303 


bride of the prince. The Forse tale of the Old Dame and chap. 
her Hen repeats the same myth. Here the maiden who . . 

falls down into the cave within the hill is disconsolate be- . 
cause she cannot get back to her mother, ‘who is hard 
pinched, she knows, for meat and drink, and has no one 
with her,’ a true picture of the lonely DomStfir on the Eleu- 
sinian plain. The Einkrank (Hades) of the Gei’man story 
is hero a Troll, who is cheated in the same way, the sisters 
whom the Maiden sends back to the iipper woidd before her¬ 
self being the less genial spring-days which precede the 
return of the true summer. 

In the Spanish stoiy Jungfrau Maleen assumes a loss Tho ill- 
attractive form. She is here the ill-tempered princess, who 
is shut up in a castle which has no door. To this strong¬ 
hold comes a poor young knight in search of adventures, the 
Odysseus, Sigurd, Boots, or Beggar, of Greek and Teutonic 
legends; and he and his three companions for a long time 
strive in vain to make a breach in the wall. The grip of 
winter is too strong to be overcome, and the hill of ice 
cannot yet be scaled. At last they hear a cry which seems 
to come from an old well overgrown with creeping plants; 
but on opening tho cover of the well, they find that the hole 
seems to go down to tlie very depths of tho earth,—in short, 
to Hades. They then set to work to twist a rope by which 
to descend for the rescue of the maiden who is imprisoned 
in this dismal dungeon; but when it is ready, his com¬ 
panions draw off from fuitiher share in the enterprise. 

Sigurd alone can ride through the flames to awaken Bryn- 
hild, and the young knight alone has the courage to go 
down into the black abyss. The maiden who has been 
carried off by a horned demon becomes, of course, the 
knight’s wife. For awhile she behaves fairly, but at length 
her ill temper so far gets tho better of her that the knight 
^ is heartily glad when the demon takes her away once more. 

In other words, the worn-out summer puts on the sorry garb 
of autumn, and is again carried away into the winter-land. 

But far more noteworthy is the Hindu story of Little story of 
Sfiryd, Bai, or the sun-child, as exhibiting a developemont of 
* Patrniiap, or Spam'oh Stoiias, logondary and traditional, 



304 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN’ NATIONS. 

BOOK the myth far more elaborate than that of either Hellenic or 
. . Teutonic legends. This beautiful child, the daughter of a 

poor milkwoman, is stolen by two eagles, who bear her to a 
nest made of wood hooped with iron, and having seven 
doors. Here, having lavished upon her all the costliest 
treasures of the earth, they leave her, to go and fetch a 
diamond ring for her little finger. While they arc still 
away, the fire in the nest, without which the maiden could 
not cook her food, is put out; and in her perplexity, Suryd, 
peering over the walls of the nest, sees smoke curling up 
afar off, and going towards it, finds herself at the house of 
a Eakshas, or evil demon, whose mother tries to keep her 
that she may serve as a feast for her son. Sury^ Bai, how¬ 
ever, will not stay; and when the Eakshas, learning from 
his mother what a prize he had missed, comes to the nest, he 
finds the little maiden asleep, and in his frantic efforts to 
break open the walls, leaves a piece of his claw sticking in 
the crack' of the door. This nail is, of course, the spindle 
which wounds Briar Eose and the narcissus which stupifies 
PersephonS; and thus Sury^, placing her hand unwittingly 
upon it, loses all consciousness. In this state she is found 
by a Eajah, who, after gazing long upon her, feels sure that 
her slumber is not the sleep of death, and spies the claw 
sticking in her hand. As soon as it is taken out, Sfiryft 
revives, and becomes the bride of the Eajah, thus rousing 
the jealousy of his other wife, as 16 rouses the jealousy of 
H6r^; and like 16, Sury4 is made to disappear, not by the 
stinging of a gadfly, but by the fate which H6r6 had designed 
for Semel6 and her child Dionysos. Sfiry4 is enticed to the 
edge of a tank and thrown in; but on the spot where she 
fell there sprang up a golden sunflower, which the Eajah 
sees as he wanders about in his inconsolable agony. The 
flower bends lovingly towards him, and he lavishes on it the 
wealth of affection which he had bestowed on Sfiryd, 
the jealous wife has the flower carried into a forest and 
burnt. Prom its ashes a mango tree rises, with one fair 
blossom on its topmost bough, which swells into a firuit so 
beautiful that it is to be kept only for the Eajah. This 
mango, when ripe, falls into the can of the poor rnilkwoman. 



EARTH, THE MOTHER. 


305 


■\vlio carries it lioine, and is astonislied to see tliat the can 
contains not a mango, hnt a tiny lady richly dressed in red 
and gold and no bigger than the fruit. But she grows with 
wonderful quickness, and when she reaches her full stature, 
she is again seen by the Raj air, who claims his bride, but is 
repulsed by the milkwoman. The truth, however, cannot 
be hid: and the Rajah and the milkwoman each recognise 
the lost maiden, when Suryl, tells her own tale and confesses 
that an irresistible impulse made her throw herself into the 
milk can, while her form was yet that of the mango. 

The milkwoman of this myth is simply Demeter in the 
aspect with which the Vedie hymn-writers were most familiar. 
To them the earth was pre-eminently the being who nour¬ 
ishes all living things with heavenly milk, who satisfies all 
desires without being herself exhausted.’ The eagles which 
carry the child are the clouds of sunrise and sunset—the As- 
vins or the Dioskouroi, who carry away Aithra from Athens, 
the swan-maidens of Teutonic folk-lore, the Erinyes and Har- 
pyiai of Hellenic legend. The nest is the secret place where 
Persephon^ is hidden, whether Hades, or the lonely heath 
where Brynhild sleeps, or the gloomy Niflheim where Pafnir 
guards the stolen treasures. But dreary though it may be, 
it is not without fire to keep up the maiden’s life, as that of 
Deuiophodn is strengthened by the fiery bath of DSm^t^r. 
The journey of SuryS, to the Rakshas’ country denotes the 
blight and frost which may nip and chill the first vegetation 
of spring. Prom this slumber she is roused by the Rajah, 
who, like Sigurd, is the sun. The jealousy of the elder 
queen is matched, not only by that of HerS, but more 
precisely by that of Eos, the rival of Prokris. Thus Sury4, 
exposed to countless dangers, is yet imperishable. If thrown 
into the water, she rises like Aphrodite in renewed beauty: 
if consumed by fire, the fruit-tree rises from her ashes, 

* I can but follow here the writer of in the Mg Veda. We see, however, a 
a very able review of Miss Frore’s conception as early as that of the G& 
Drecan Tales^ which appeared in the Pamm^tor of iEschylos in the invocation 
Sj*rctofor for April 25, 1868. The ‘May the Earth which the As vi ns moted 
paKsngeH quotinl are from the Athar\a out, on which Vishnu hath stepped, 
Veda, but these are perhaps more vain- which the mighty Indra has rid of all 
able for the purpose of illustrating the his enemies, may Earth pour out her 
current folk-lore than if they occurred milk—^mother Earth to me her son ^ 

VOL. II. X 


CHAP. 
VI CL 


The 

noiu’ishing 

Earth 



306 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Holda. 


The Elei.- 

Mnian 

myth. 


■antil at last the mango falls into the millcwoman’s can 
as the ripe fruit must fall into the lap of the earth, its 
mother.* 

The idea of D^mlt^r finds an expression in the Teutonic 
Holda, the benignant goddess or lady, who reappears as 
Frau Berchta, the bright maiden, the Phaethousa or Lam- 
peti4 of the Odyssey. The few details which we have of 
these beings agree strictly with the meaning of their names. 
Thus BTolda gently wraps the earth in a mantle of snow, and 
when the snow falls Holda is said to he making her bed, of 
which the feathers fly about, reminding us of the Scythian 
statement made by Herodotos that the air in the northernmost 
part of Europe is always full of feathers. This Frau Holda 
(verelde) is transformed into Pharaildis, a name said to have 
been given to Herodias, who in the medieval myth was con¬ 
founded with her daughter, and of whom the story was told 
that she loved the Baptist, and determined never to wed any 
man if she could not be his wife; that Herod, discovering 
this, ordered John to be put to death, and that the bringing 
of the head on a charger was not for any purposes of insult, 
but that she might bathe it with her tears.* The head flies 
from her kisses, and she is left mourning like Aphrodite for 
Adonis. A third part of the human race is made subject to 
her by way of atonement for her sufferings. The same myth 
is told of dame Habonde in the Eoman de la Eose.® 

It is in this kindly and attractive guise that PersephonS 
appears in the myth of Eleusis. Here the story took root 
most firmly; and the fountain where the daughters of Keleos 
accosted the mom-ning mother, and the spot where lamb^ 
assailed her with friendly jests, were pointed out to the 
veneration of the faithful who came to celebrate her solemn 
mysteries. To the Eleusinians, beyond a doubt, the whole 
narrative was genuine and sacred history.* But this belief 
would, of course, explain to them as little as it would to us 

■ The modern Hindu storyteller is, of the nature of thoir materials—a con- 
doubtless, not more conscious of the ception-which must almost have reached 
meaning and origin of this Ule than the tho stage of knowledge in the author of 
authors of the Homeric hymns were of the Hymn to Hermes. 
the myths of Aphrodite, or Dionysos. * Grimm, D. M. 262. 

Now and then we can scarcely suppose ® Ih. 265. 

that they fail to have some conception < Grote, History of Greece, i. 56. 



DSMfiTeR AND lASIO^T. 


307 


tlie origin and nature of tlie story. Botk are alike laid bare CITAP. 
by a comparison wliicli has shown that every incident may . . 

be matched with incidents in other legends so far resembling 
each other as to leave no room for questioning their real 
identity, yet so far unlike as to preclude the idea that the 
one was borrowed fi'om or directly suggested by the other. 

But the Eleusinian could adduce in evidence of his belief not 
only the mysteries which were there enacted, but the geo¬ 
graphical names which the story conseci'ated; and here he 
found himself in the magic circle from which the inhabitants 
of Athens or Argos, Arkadia or Lykia, Delos or Ortygia, 
could never escai)e. Eleusis itself was a town or village in 
the land of the dawn-goddoss Athene, and the name denoted 
simply the approach of Demeter to greet her returning child. 

If, again, it pleased the Athenians to think that Persephon^ 
was stolen away from Koldnos, or even from the spot where 
she met her mother, there were other versions which local¬ 
ised this incident on some Nysaian plain, as in the Homeric 
hymn, in the Sicilian Enna, or near the well of Arethonsa. 

As we might expect, the myth of Demeter is intertwined p^mcter 
with the legends of many other heings, both human and 
divine. Like Hcrakles and Zeus, she has, in many lands, 
many loves and many children. As the wife of Poseidon 
she is the mother of Despoina and Orion.^ The earth must 
love the beautifully tinted skies of morning; and thus D^m6- 
ter loves lasion, the son of Zeus and Heinera, the heaven 
and the day, or of Minos and the nymph Pyronea,^ and 
becomes the mother of Plouton or Plontos, the god who 
guards the treasures of the earth, and whom the Latins 
identified with Hades. She must hate those who spoil her 
trees and waste her fruits j hence she punishes with fearful 


* Max Muller, Lectures^ second series, a like kind. There are but few which 

617, Apollod. ill. 6, 8. would be found to withstand the test of 

* The name Minos, it has been already philological analysis; but even wheretliis 
paid, is, like Menu, the same word as is the case, we are fully justified in 

the moapurer or thinker. But selecting those versions which explain 
Minos himself is the husband of Pasi- themselves. The mere fact that in one 
phafi the light-givor, and the father of of them Ia8i6n is called a son of Zeus 
Ariadne who guides Theseus to the den and Hemera, is sufficient evidence that 
of tile Miiiotauros. It is scarcely net*es- this was one way of accounting for his 
sary to give all the names which occur exist-eace; and this phrase is trans- 
in the story of lasion or other myths of parent. 

X 2 



308 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK hunger the earth-tearer Erysichthon. As possossiiig and 
——- guarding the wealth of the earth, she takes her place among 
the Chthonian deities, whose work is carried on unseen by 
mortal eyes. As teaching men how to plough, to sow, and 
to reap, she is DSm4t4r Thesmophoros, the lover of law, 
order, peace and justice. 

Of the Latin Ceres it is enough to say that although, like 
other Latin deities, she has no special mythology, her name 
at least is significant. She is strictly the ripener of the 
fruits of the. earth; and since, as such, she could have no 
attribute wholly inconsistent with the chai'acter of the Greek 
D^m^t^r, it became easy to attach to Ceres all the stories 
told of the Hellenic goddess.' With the name of Ceres we 
ought to connect that of Saturn, a god who has no feature 
in common with the Greek Kronos with whom the later 
Eomans identified him, as they identified his wife Ops, a 
name corresponding in meaning with that of Plontos, with 
Ehea. Saturn, as the sower of the seed,* answers far more 
nearly to the Greek Triptolemos, who is taught byDdmdtdr. 
At the end of his work Saturn is said to have vanished from 
the earth, as Persephond disappears when the summer has 
come to an end; and the local tradition went that Latium 
was his lurking-place.* 


Section HI.—THE CHILDREN OE THE EARTH. 


EnAtho- As the Eleusinian myth tells the story of the earth and 
her treasures under the name of Ddmdtdr, so the Athenian 
legend teUs the same story under the name of Erechtheus or 
Erichthonios, a son of Hephaistos, according to one version, 
by Atthis, a daughter of Eranaos, according to another, by 
Athdnd herself.^ In the latter version Athdnd becomes’his 


^ The name has by some been identi¬ 
fied mth the Greek Kor^, by others with 
the Latin G-aranus or Eecaranns. By 
Professor Max Muller it is referred to 
the root which yields the Sanskrit Sarad, 
autumn, viz. sri or sri, to cook or ripen, 
Sri, or Lakshmi, is in the Eamayana the 
wife of Vishnu Like Aphrodite, she 
rises from the sea, but with four arms, 
and her dwelling is in the Lotos. 


2 Bridal, Hereine et Cacm^ 38 
® The name must necessarily be traced 
through its cognate forms; and thus, 
before we ca;n judge positively, we must 
compare it with Latmi, Lakini, Lavini, 
&e. See vol. i p. 23f5. 

A KranaA is a title of AthInA, 
Atthis the child of Kranaos is probably 
only Ath6n6 under a slight disguise. 



ERECHTHBUS AND KEKROPS. 


309 


mother when she goes to HexAaistos to ask for a suit of chap. 
armour, the fire-fashioned raiment of the morning. When the 
child is born she nourishes it, as Dimeter nursed Demophofin, 
with the design of rendering it immortal; and, placing it 
in a chest, she gave the child to Pandrosos, Herse, and 
Agraulos, charging them not to raise the lid.^ They disobey, 
and finding that the coils of a snake are folded round the 
body of the child, are either slain by Athene or throw them¬ 
selves down the precipice of the Akropolis. Henceforth the 
dragon-bodied or snake-bound Erichthonios dwells in the 
shrine of Athene, and under her special protection. 

There were other stories of Erichthonios or Erechtheus^ Erpch- 
which some luythogra.phers assign to a grandson of the 
supposed child of Hephaistos and AthSn^. Of this latter 
Erectheus, the son of Pandion, it is said that he was killed 
by the thunderbolts of Zeus, after his daughters had been 
sacrificed to atone for the slaughter of Eumolpos by the 
Athenians—a tale manifestly akin to the punishment of 
Tantalos after the crime committed on his son Pelops. 

But the legend of Erichthonios is merely a repetition of Kokiops. 
the myth of the dragon-bodied Kekrops, who gave his name 
to the land which had till then been called Akte, and who 
became the father not only of Erysichthon but of the three 
sisters who px’oved faithless in the charge of Erichthonios. 

To the time of Kekrops is assigned one version of the story 
which relates the rivahy of Poseidon and Ath^n^; but here 
Poseidon produces not a horse, but a well on pie Akropolis, 
a work for which he is careless enough to produce no wit¬ 
ness, while Athene makes her olive tree grow up beneath 


* The names Pandrosos and Ilmfi 
translate each other: the addition of 
Agraulos meroly states that the dew 
covers the fields. 

* Of the name Erichthonios, Proller, 

Gt, Myth. i. 169, says, ‘Der Name . . . 
reoht cigentlich emen Genius der frucht- 
baren Erilbodons bedeutet/ and com¬ 
pares it with ^ptoipTjSf and 

other words. If Erechtheus and Erich- 
thonios are names for one and the same 
person, the explanation which regards 
the name as a compound of 

earth, seems to become at least doubtful. 
There is, however, no ground for up¬ 


holding a double jKTSonality. ‘The 
Homeric Scholiast treated Erichtheus 
and Erichtlionios as the same person 
under two names; and since in regard 
to such mythical persons there exists no 
other test of identity of the subject 
except perfect similarity of attributes, 
tills seems the reasonable conclusion.’ 
Grote, History of Greece, i. 264. The 
case is, however, altered when we find 
the names in the mj-thology of other 
nations, in which the origin of the w'ord 
no longer remains open to doubt. 
Preller, Gr. Myth. li. 136. 



310 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYA:^ NATIOXS. 


BOOK the eye of Ketrops, who gives judgment that the city shall 
bear the name of the dawn-goddess.^ 

Pelops A more transparent myth of the earth is found iu the 
history of Pelops, the son of Tantalos and Dione, or as some 
have it, Elytia or Euryanassa. His father in his magnificent 
palace and with his inexhaustible wealth is manifestly only 
another form of Ixi6n and Helios; and the child whom he 
slays represents not less clearly the fruits of the earth first 
sustained by his warmth and then scorched by his raging 
heat. This horrible banquet of his flesh he sets before Zeus, 
for the ravages of drought are accomplished in the face of 
the blue heaven; but none of the gods will eat of it, except 
D^mSt^r, who, plung-ed in grief for the loss of her child, eats 
the shoulder: and thus the story ran that when at the 
bidding of Zeus Hermes boiled the limbs and restored them 
to life, an ivory shoulder supplied the place of the part 
devoured by DSm^t^r.^ In the story of Hippodameia, a 
name which occurs as an epithet of Aphrodite,^ Pelops 
plays the part of the successful hero in the myths of Bryn- 
hild, or Briar Eose. The heads of those who have failed to 
conquer Oinomaos in the chariot race stare down upon him 
from the doorposts; but nothing daunted, he makes a com¬ 
pact with Myrtilos the charioteer to loosen the wheels of 
Oinamaos. Pelops is thus the victor; but as even the 
summer which succeeds in ripening the grape must die, so 
Pelops is made to fall under the curse of Myrtilos, whom he 
ungratefully drowns in the sea. This curse was wrought 
out in the fortunes of all his children, whose life and death 
do but exhibit one of the many aspects of the great tragedy 
of nature. 

^ The meaning of the myth of Kekrops - Hence the notion that hie de¬ 
ls sufficiently clear, whether we adopt or scendants likewise had ono shoulder 
reject Preller’s explanation of the word • white as ivory. Pmdar rejects the story, 
‘Per Name schoint mit Kapwhs nnd preferring the version that he was 
Kp(t)irioy zusammenhangen, so dass sich carried off by Poseiddn, as GanymMes 
also schon dadurch die Boziehung anf was taken by the eagle to Olympoa. 
Prucht und Erndte ankundigen wurde ’ 01. i. 40. ^ 

Gr. Myth, li 137. ® Preller, Gr, Myth. ii. 385. 



311 


Section IV.—THE PRIESTS OF THE GREAT MOTHER, 

The earth itself, as the soil disting-uished from the fruits 
which grow from it or the power which nourishes them, is ' —r— 
known as Gaia in the Hesiodic Tlieogony, where she is 
described seemingly as self-existent, for no parents are 
assigned either to her or to Chaos, Tartaros, and Eros. All 
this, however, with the assignment of Erebos and Nyx as 
children of Chaos, and of Aither and Hemera as children of 
Nyx, ihe night, may have been to the poet as mere an 
allegoiy as the birth of the long hills which together with 
the troubled sea are brought into being by Gaia. Then 
follows the bridal of the earth and sky, and Gaia becomes 
the mother of a host of children, representing either the sun 
under the name of B[yperi6n, or the forces at work in the 
natural world, the thunders and lightnings, here called the 
round-eyed giants, and the hundred-handed monsters, one 
of whom, Briareos, rescues Zeus from the wiles of Her6, 

Athene and Poseid6n. But in all this there is really not 
much more mythology than in the little which has to be 
said of tlie Latin Tellus or Terra, a name, the meaning of 
which was never either lost or weakened. It was otherwise 
with Mars, a god who, worshipped originally as the ripener 
of fruits and grain, was afterwards from the accident of his 
name invested with the attributes of the fierce and brutal 
Ares of the Greeks.' In his own character, as fostering 
wealth of corn and cattle, he was worshipped at Prseneste, 
as Herodotos would have us believe that Scythian tribes 
worshipped Ar6s, with the symbol of a sword, one of the 
many forms assumed by the Hindu Linga. As such, he was 
pre-eminently the father of all living things, Marspiter, or 
Maspiter, the parent of the twin-bom Romulus and Remus. 


* Tho rCK)t is vnar^ which yields the 
xiame of the Maruts an4 many other 
mythical l)eings. See vol. i. p. 32, &c. 
Mars, with his common epithet Silvanns, 
18 tho softener of the earth and the 
riponer of its han-ests. The name 
occ«r« under tho forms Mamers and 
Mavors. Of these Professor Muller says, 


■* Marrmr and Marmor, old Latin names 
for Mar<», are reduplicated forms, and 
in the Oscan M&mers the r of tho 
reduplicated syllable is lost. MAvors i.s 
more difficult to explain, for there is no 
instance in Latin of m in tho middle of 
a word being changed to u' — LccUma^ 
second series, 324. 



312 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAI^ i^ATIOYS. 


BOOK As the ripener and grinder of the corn he is Pilnnmns and 
>__ Picumnus,^ although the process of disintegration con¬ 

stantly at work on mythical names converted these einthots 
into two independent deities, while another myth afHrined 
that he received the name Picumnns as being the god to 
whom the woodpecker was consecrated. 

Rhea. Another representative of the earth is Phea,^ herself a 

child of Ouranos and Gaia, and the wife of Kronos, by 
whom she becomes the mother of the great Olympian 
deities Hestia, D^m^t^r, Here, Hades, Poseiddn, all swal¬ 
lowed by their father, and lastly, Zeus, who is saved to be 
brought up in the cave of Dikt^. But throughout Rhea 
remained a name and a power, worshipped as the great 
reproductive force of the world, as producing life through 
death, and thus as honoured by the sacrifice of the repro¬ 
ductive power in her ministers. Thus she became pre¬ 
eminently the great mother, worshipped under the titles 
and Ammas, and perhaps even more widely known and 
feared as Kybel^ or Hyb^be.^ 


’ ‘Pilumniis et Picumnus, deux 
anciens participes presents, le dim gui 
hroie et le dww qux fend, Le 
avant d’etre Tarme du soldat romnin, si 
c^l^bre chez les hi&toriens, fut le pilon 
qui sert a broyer le bl6 PUum est une 
contraction de fistxlhm et vient de 
pinsere, Fila est le vase oii Ton broyait, 
et Pilumnus, comme le dit express^ment 
Servius {JEn. ix. 4), le dieu des boulan- 
gers. Ficimnxis vient d’une racine yjic 
qui vent dire fendre : on la trouve dans 
picus, le pic-vert qui creuse le tronc 
des arbres, pour y ehercher sa nourriture 
et y loger ses petits ’—Br^l, Hercule et 
Cams, 34. 

The Latin Jupiter Pi&tor is another 
god whose name belongs to the same 
root with Pilumnus Of this deity 
Professor Muller says that he ‘was 
originally the god who crushes with the 
thunderbolt, and the Molse Martis 
seem to rest on an analogous conception 
of the nature of Mars ’— Lectures, second 
series, 324. It seems more probable 
that Jupiter Pistor, like Mars Silvanus 
or Pilumnus, was a rustic god The 
expression Molae Martis, like the Greek 
puKos ’'Aprjos, is one which might suit 
either the crushing or the softening 
god. 


* The origin of tho name is doubtful, 
Preller, Or, Myth, i. .502, inclines to 
regard it as a form of Gea, Gaia, 1)66, 
instancing as changes of 6 into p the 
words Krjfii^Keioy, caduceue; mendies, 
medidies. 

* This name Preller explains, after 

Hesychios, as denoting her abode on the 
lulls: but such interpretations must be 
regarded with great suspicion. A large 
number of foreign words were associated 
with the worship of such deities as 
Rhea and Dionysos, and we are as little 
justified in identifying one with another 
as. we are m adopting the conclusion of 
Herodotos, that Ath6n6 is only another 
form of the Egyptian word Neith To 
Mas, as a name of Rhen, Papas as a 
title of the Phr'^giaii Zeus precisely 
corresponds Preller, d). i. 511 They 
are no more than tho terms Pater and 
Muter applied to Zeus and D66, or All- 
Pather as a name of Odin. The old 
title of Rhea is applied, whether with 
or without design, to the Virgin Mary. 
Thus Dr Paber, writing to Mr. Watts 
Russell, asks him to think of him * amid 
the glones of Christian Rome on those 
Sunday evenings in October, all dedi¬ 
cated to dearest Mama p. 329. 



PIIOIBOS AND THE TELCIllNES. 


313 


Witln the name of Rhea are connected the mystic beings CHAP, 
known as the Kouretes, the Korybantes, the Idaian , ^ 

Daktyloi, and the Kabeiroi. Into the ethnological specn- The Kou- 
lations of which these names have been made the subject 
it is unnecessary to enter. It is as possible that they may, Baktyls. 
some or all of them, denote races displaced and overthrown 
by the advancing Hellenic tribes, as that the Trolls may 
represent aboriginal inhabitants driven to the mountains 
by the Teutonic invaders. But in the absence of all his¬ 
torical evidence it is as useless to afirm with Dr. Thirlwall, 
as it is unnecessary to deny, that the name Telchines is 
only another name for the historical Phenician people, or 
that the legends related by them ^ embody recollections of 
arts introduced or refined by foreigners who attracted the 
admiration of the rude tribes whom they visited.’^ It 
is enough to remark here that the art of the Telchines is 
simply that of Hephaistos, Like him, they forge iron 
weapons or instruments for the gods: and they resemble 
the Kykl6pes not only in this their work, but in their 
parentage, which exhibits them as sons of Poseiddn, or 
Thalassa, the troubled sea. Thus also we see in them not 
only the fellow-helpers of Hephaistos in the Iliad, but the 
rude shepherds of the Odyssey. The "clouds from which the 
lightnings dart are the one: the mists clinging to the hills 
are the other. Hence they are creatures without feet, as 
the Pluiiakiau ships have neither rudders nor oars. They 
can pour down rain or snow on the earth, and, like the 
clouds, they can change their form at will 5 and thus they 
are destroyed by Phoibos in the guise of a wolf, as the sun’s 
rays scatter the mists at noon-day. In this capacity of 
changing their form and bringing storms upon the earth 
we have all that is needed as the groundwork of their 
reputation as sorcerers, even if we refuse to indulge in any 
conjectures as to the origin of the name.^ Their office as 
nurses of Poseid&n* is even more significant, as showing 

‘ Greece, part i. ch. iii. Schlage, welche das Bewusstftein ver- 

» * l)«r Namr dankc-ln, genanut luitte/— 

ron 64\yta m der Bodeutung Lezaubern, Preller, Gr. Myth. i. 473. 
ilurcii IkTuhruiiR berucken, daher • Thirlwall, Hist. Greece, i. 76. 

Stesichorort die Keren und betaubende 



314 


BOOK 

II 


The Ka- 
beiroi and 
Koryban- 
tes. 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAX KATIOXS. 

tlieir close affinity to the ntirses of Zeus in the cave ot 
Dikt^,—^the soft clouds which hang at dawn on the eastern 
sky as contrasted with the rough mists which seem to brood 
over and to feed the sea. Hence the story recorded by 
Strabo that those of the Telcliines who went with Ehea to 
Crete were there called Kour^tes, the guardians of the child 
(icovpos) Zeus.^ These are the dancers clad in everlasting 
youth, like the lovely cirri which career in their mystic 
movements through the sky, the Baktyloi, or pointers, of 
Ida, the nourishing earth, the bride of Dyaus the heaven.^ 
These also are beings endowed with a strange wisdom and 
with magical powers, and from them Orpheus received the 
charm which gave to his harp its irresistible power. Their 
numbers vary, sometimes only a few being seen, sometimes 
a troop of fifty or a hundred, like the fifty children of 
Danaos, Thestios, or'Asterodia. 

That the Kabeiroi and Korybantes were sometimes re¬ 
garded as exhibiting only another phase of the idea whicb 
underlies the conception of the mythical KourStes, is a point 
scarcely open to doubt. Like the latter, they have a pro¬ 
tecting and soothing power, and hence are nourishers of the 
earth and its fruits, and the givers of wine to the Argonautai. 
They are sons or descendants of Hephaistos or Proteus, or of 
Zeus and Kalliope, all names pointing to the generation of 
vapours from the sea or the sky. But as the myths of Cacus 
or the Kykldpes seem in some of their features to indicate 
the phenomena of volcanic action, so it is quite possible that 
such phenomena may have modified the stories told of the 
several classes of these mysterious beings. The fires of the 
Eykldpes may be either the lightnings seen in the heaven or 
the flames which burst from the earth ; and the mysterious 
flash which reveals the treasures of the earth to the Arabian 
prince or the Teutonic Tanhaiiser may equally represent 
both. 

^ Preller, Gr. Myth i. 103. grow up when the real meaning of the 

* The connection of ddKrv^os and name was weakened or forgotten, 
digitus with the root from which sprung although it would bo scarcely an ex- 
the Greek delKuvfxi, the Latin indico and aggeration to say that the clouds are 
other words, is generally admitted. The the fingers of the earth which she can 
myth that they served Ehea as the point as she wills, 
fingers serve the hand would naturally 



315 


Section V.—THE PEOPLE OF THE WOODS AND WATERS. 

Tlie woods and lulls form the special domain of the Satyrs, chap. 
a worthless and idle race with pointed ears, small horns, and v 
the tail of a goat or a horse. Their life is spent in wild Tho Sa- 
hunts through the forest, in tending their flocks, or in idle 
dalliance and dancing with the nymphs. Their music may 
constantly he heard as they play on the flute, bagpipe, or 
cymbals, or on the syrinx of Pan. Their capricious and- 
cunning natare makes them no safe companions for man. 

Nay, if the .sheepfold were entered and tho cattle hurt or 
stolen, if women were scared by goblin shapes as they passed 
through the woods, this was the doing of the Satyrs. We 
can scarcely bo at a loss in our search for the origin of these 
mythical beings and their characteristics. When we find 
them represented as sprung, like the nymphs and the mystic 
dancers, the Kouretes, from the daughters of JHekataios or 
Phoroneus, or as the offspring of Hermes and IphtMm^; 
when also we find that Pan, whom they resemble in outward 
form and powers of music, is also a son of Hermes and the 
nymph Hryops or Kallisto, or of PenelopS who weaves the 
morning cloiids, we can scarcely fail to see in these Satyrs 
the iihenomcna of the life which seems to animate the woods 
as the branches of the trees move in wild dances with the 
clouds which course through the air above, or assume forms 
strange or grotesque or fearful, in the deep nooks and glens 
or in the dim and dusky tints of the gloaming. At such 
hours, or in such places, the wayfarer may be frightened 
with strange sounds like the pattering of feet behind him, or 
ugly shapes which seem to bar the path before him, or en¬ 
tangle his feet and limbs as he forces his way through the 
brushwood. If we translate all this into the language of 
mythology, we have more than the germ of all that is told 
us about the Satyrs. But the source thus opened was found 
to be a fruitful one, and the Satyrs became the companions 
of Dionysos, the lord of the wine-cup and the revel, or of 
Herakles, the burly and heedless being who goes through 
life toiling for a mean and worthless master, yet taking 



316 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK sBcli enjoyment as the passing hours may chance to bring 

V ^ him.^ The burlesque form in which they exhibited Herakles 
as robbed of his weapons, or teased and angered by their 
banter until they take to their heels, suggested a method 
which might be applied to other gods or heroes, and called 
into existence the Gr^ek satyric drama. Nor could a limit 
be placed to their strange vagaries, or the shapes which 
they mig'ht assume. The wild revel of the woods might 
be followed by a profound stillness, of which men would 
speak as the sleep of Satyrs wearied out with dancing and 
drinking. The white clouds, which may be seen like ships 
anchored in a blue sea, hanging motionless over the thicket, 
would be nymphs listening to their music or charmed by 
their wooing. 

The Sei- Of these Satyrs the oldest are named the Seil^noi, or 

lenoi. children of Seil^nos. But although there are between these 

beings many points of likeness, both in form and character, 
there is this marked distinction, that while the Satyrs dwell 
among woods and hiUs, the Seil^noi haunt streams, fountains, 
or marshy grounds. They are thus, like the Naiads, spirits 
of the waters, with attributes borrowed from, or shared with, 
the clouds that float above them. The gTotesque form which 
Seil^nos is made to assume may be an exaggeration of the 
western Greeks, who saw in the ass which bore him a mere 
sign of his folly and absurdity, while it points rather to the 
high value set on the ass by Eastern nations. It was, in fact, 
the symbol of his wisdom and his prophetical powers, and not 
the mere beast of burden which, in western myths, staggered 
along under the weight of an unwieldy drunkard. The same 


^ With these creatures we are brought 
almost into the domain of modern fairy 
mythology, of which it is enough here 
to say that there is scarcely an important 
feature in it which has not its parallel 
in the so-called classical mythology of 
Greece and Rome The Latin Lares are 
the Brownies, the Venus who takes 
away the lover of Psyche, the Kalypso 
who seeks to lay the spell of her beauty 
on Odysseus, is the Faiiy Queen of 
Tanhauser and of True Thomas, the 
Kyklops is the misshapen Unsk. the 
limping Hephaistos is Wayland the 


Smith- and thus tho whole fabric of 
modern superstition is but a travesty of 
myths with which in other forms we'are 
already familiar. Thus in these myths 
dwarfed or maimed beings abound; 
among those being the Kabeiroi,the Idaian 
Daktyls, the Athenian Anakes, the 
Etruscan Tages, and the Lakedairaonian 
Bioskouroi. So too tho Latin Lemures 
and Larrje arc tlio ghosts of modem 
days, and the Manes are literally the 
Goodies of popular Teutonic super¬ 
stition. 



MIDAS AND MARSYAS. 


317 


iiloa doubtless lay at the root of the story of Midas, to whom 
the ass’s ears were at first not his shame but his glory. 
This Phrygian king is, in short, only Tantalos under another 
name, and with Tantalos, as with Sisyphos, the idea of wealth 
is inseparable from that of wisdom or craft. If, again, Tan¬ 
talos and Sisyphos have palaces rich in all conceivable trea¬ 
sures, Midas has his beautiful rose-gardens, in which the 
country folk catch Seilenos, who is brought bound before the 
king. By him Midas is instructed in the knowledge of all 
events, whether past or future, as well as in the origin and 
nature of all things. In return for the kindness with which 
he is treated, Dionysos promises to grant to Midas any wish 
which he may express. Midas asks that eveiything which 
ho touches may be turned into gold, and finds to his dismay 
that it is as impossible to swallow his food as the dishes on 
which it is laid. To his prayer for deliverance the answer is 
that he must gb and wash in the stream of Paktolos, which 
has ever since retained a golden hue. This myth is nothing 
more than a story framed on a saying, like the German 
proverb, ^Morgenstunde hat Gold im Munde,’ ^Morning- 
hour has gold in her mouth,’' and simply expressed the fact 
that the newly risen sun sheds a glory over all the earth, in 
other words, turns everything into gold. The sequel, which 
speaks of the misery of Midas, would be suggested by the 
literal interpretation of the words, while the command to 
bathe in the river finds a meaning in the fact that the 
flaming splendours of the sun are quenched when, like En- 
dymion, he plunges beneath the waters. A faint reflection 
of similar ideas seems to mark the story which accounted for 
the ass’s ears, as a punishment for adjudging the prize to 
Marsyas in his contest with Phoibos. It now becomes a 
mysterious secret; but his servant discovers it, and being 
unable to keep it to himself, digs a hole and whispers into it 
that Midas has ass’s ears. A reed growing up on the spot 
repeats the words, and the rushes all round take up the 
strain, and publish the fact to all the world. 

’ Max Muller^ lectures, second series, 378. This proverb Has acquired tlio 
didactic meaning of the English distieh, 

‘ Early to bed and early to rise 
Makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise,* 
which keeps up the same connexion between wealth and wisdom. 


CHAP 

VIII. 



318 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

11 . 


Tlip Latin 
Silanns. 


Priapos. 


The name of SeilSnos as a water-sprite suggests to Preller 
its affinity with the Italian Silanns, a word for gushing or 
bubbling water; nor is it easy to avoid a comparison with the 
Seirenes, who, like Seil^nos, haunt the waters. As the 
dweller in the fertilising streams, he can bestow draughts of 
wonderful sweetness; and the wine which his son Evanthes 
gives to Odysseus is pronounced by Polyphemos to be more 
delicious than honey. As such also, he is the guardian and 
teacher of Dionysos, for from the life-giving streams alone 
can the grape acquire its sweetness and its power. 

But this higher and more dignified aspect of Seil^nos, 
which led Plato to speak of Sokrates as getting wisdom from 
him as well as from his scholar Marsyas, was obscured in 
the folk-lore of the western tribes by the characteristics of 
jollity and intemperance exhibited by the Satyrs and the 
Herakles whom they cheat and tease, while his office as the 
fertiliser of the vineyard brought him into ^close connexion 
with Priapos, who exhibits the merely sensuous idea of 
reproduction in its grossest form, and of whom we need only 
say here that he is a son of Dionysos, Adonis, Hermes, or 
Pan, while his mother is Aphrodite or the Naid Chione, 
names denoting simply the relations of the.waters with the 
winds or the sun.^ 

^ Priapos is, in short, only a coarser to come. The same idea was expressed 
form of Vi&huu, Proteus, Ounes and by tho Latin Mutmns, Mutimus, or Mut- 
other like beings * and as such, he has tiinus, who was represented by the 
like them the power of predicting things same symbol. 



319 


CHAPTEE IX. 

THE UNDEE-WOELD. 

Skction I.—BLVDES. 

The mytlis of Demetor and Persephong liave already carried chap. 
us to the hidden land beneath the earth’s surface, in which . 

the seeds of all life lie dormant, until Zeus sends Hermes to Thetencd 
fetch the maiden back to her mother, or in other words, 
until Sigurd comes to waken Brynhild out of her sleep. 

Hence, as containing the germs of all future harvests, this 
unseen region becomes at once a land of boundless wealth, 
even if we take no thought of the gold, silver, and other 
metals stored up in its secret places. This wealth may be of 
little use to its possessor, and poverty beneath the sunlit 
heaven may be happiness compared with the dismal pomp of 
the underworld; but its king is nevertheless the wealthiest 
of all monarchs, and thus the husband of Persephond' is 
known especially as Plouton, the king who never in 

the midst of all his grandeur. 

On this slender framework was raised the mythology of Haap<i or 
Hades, a mythology which runs continually into the stories -A-iddum. 
related of the dark powers who fight with and are vanquished 
by the lord of light. The dog of the hateful king, the 
Kerberos of the Hesiodic Theogony, is but another form of 
Orthros, who is called his brother; and Orthros is only a 
reflection of the Vedic Vritra, the dark robber who hides 
away the cattle of India. But the conception of TTnrlpg as 
the ruler of this nether region is precisely parallel to that of 

* A fitory was told that Hades was transformation is, of course, a mere play 
also a lover of the nymph Leuk^, who on her name, while the myth resolves 
on her death was changed into a white itself into the phrase that tho night 
poplar and planted in Hlysion. The loves the tender light of morning. 



320 


MYTHOLOGY OF T?HE ARYAIS' NATIONS. 


BOOK Poseid6ii as the god of the sea, and of the sea alone. So 

_long as the word Kronides remained a mere epithet, the 

Zens of Olympos was also Zenoposeiddn, and as Zeus 
Katachthonios he would be also Hades, Ais, or Aidoneus, 
the king of the lower world; and the identity of the two is 
, proved not only by these titles, but also by the power which, 
after the triple partition. Hades, like Poseiddn, retains of 
appearing at will in Olympos. Zeus then, as Hades, is 
simply the unseen, or the being who can make himself as 
well as others invisible. As such,. he wears the invisible 
cap or helmet, which appears as the tarn-kappe or nebel- 
kappe of Teutonic legends. This cap he bestows on Hermes, 
who is thus enabled to enter unseen the Gorgons’ dwelling, 
and escape the pursuit of the angry sisters. But his home 
is also the bourne to which all the children of men must 
come, and from which no traveller returns; and thus he 
becomes the host who must receive all under his roof, and 
whom it is best therefore to invoke as one who will give 
them a kindly welcome,—^in other words, as Polydekt^s, 
Polydegmdn, or Pankoit^s, the hospitable one who will 
assign to every man his place of repose. StiU, none may 
ever forget the awful character of the gate-keeper (ttu- 
Xaprrjs) of the lower world. He must be addressed, not as 
Hades the unseen, but as Ploutdn the wealthy, the Kuvera 
of the Eamayana; and the averted face of the man who 
offered sacrifice to him may recall to our minds the horrid 
rites of the devil-worshippers of the Lebanon.^ 

The Rivers Hades, then, in the definite authority assigned to him 
of the iTu- after the war with the Titans, is the only being who is 
seen Land. ^] 3 L 0 remains always in his dismal 

kingdom, for Persephon^, who shares his throne, returns for 
half the year as KorS to gladden the hearts of men, and 
Zagreos, Adonis, and Dionysos are also beings over whom 
the prince of darkness has no permanent dominion. Of the 

^ Like Hermes, and Herakles, Hades and rofii«!es to lot it free until he givrs 
has also assumed a burlesque form, as her the ladder by which ho climbs out 
in the German story of Old Rinkrank, of the mountain-depths into the open 
who dwells in a great cave into which air. Thus oseaping, she returns witli 
the King’s daughter falls in the moun- her hetuenly lover, and despoils Rink- 
tain of glass^(ice) The unwilling wife rank (PloutSn) of all his treasures, 
contrives to catch his beard in a door, 



THE RIVERS OP HADES. 


321 


geograpliy of this land of the dead we need say little more chap. 
than that it is no genuine growth of mythology. It was 
easy for poets and mythographers, when they had once 
started with the idea of a gloomy land watered with rivers of 
woe, to place Styx, the stream which makes men shudder, 
as the boundary which separates it from the world of living 
men, and to lead through it the channels of L^thS, in which 
all things are forgotten, of Kokytos, which echoes only with 
shrieks of pain, of Pyryphlegethon, with its waves of fire.^ 

Section II.—ELTSION. 

But, in truth, such details as these, produced as they are, The 
not by the necessities of mythical developement but by the of thf 
growth or the wants of a religious faith, belong rather to the 
history of religion, and not to the domain of mythology, 
which is concerned only or mainly with legends springing 
from words and phrases whose original meaning has been 
misunderstoood or else either wholly or in part forgotten. 

Thus, although the ideas of Elysion in the conception of the 
epic or lyric poets may be full of the deepest interest as 
throwing light on the thoughts and convictions of the time, 
their mythological value must be measured by the degree in 
which they may be traced to phrases denoting originally 
only the physical phenomena of the heavens and the earth. 

With the state and the feelings of the departed we are not 
here concerned; but there is enough in the descriptions of 
the asphodel meadows and the land where the corn ripens 
thrice in the year, to guide us to the source of all these no¬ 
tions. The Elysian plain is far away in the west where the 
sun goes down beyond the bounds of the earth, when E6s 
gladdens the close of day as she sheds her violet tints over 
the sky. The abodes of the blessed are golden islands sailing 
in a sea of blue, the burnished clouds floating in the pure 
ether. Grief and sorrow cannot approach them; plague and 
sickness cannot touch them. The barks of the Phaiakians 
dread no disaster; and thus the blissful company gathered 

• Acheron, the remaining river, is have been in the earlier myths the one 
probably only another form of Achel6o8, river of Hades, 
the flowing water, and may perhaps 

VOL. M. 


T 



322 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The 

Asphodel 

Meadows 


together in that far western land inherits a tearless eternity.* 
Of the other details in the picture the greater number would 
be suggested directly by these images drawn from the phe¬ 
nomena of sunset and twilight. What spot or stain can be 
seen on the deep blue ocean in which the islands of the 
blessed repose for ever ? What unseemly forms can mar the 
beauty of that golden home lit by the radiance of a sun 
which can never go down ? Who then but the pure in heart, 
the truthful and the generous, can be suffered to tread the 
violet fields ? And how shall they be tested save by judges 
who can weigh the thoughts and intents of the heart ? Thus 
every soul, as it drew near to that joyous land, was brought 
before the august tribunal of Minos, Ehadamanthys, and 
Aiakos; and they whose faith was in truth a quickening 
power might draw from the ordeal those golden lessons 
which Plato has put into the mouth of Sokrates while 
awaiting the return of the theoric ship from Delos. These, 
however, are the inferences of later thought. The belief of 
earlier ages was content to picture to itself the meeting of 
Odysseus and Laertes in that blissful land, the forgiveness of 
old wrongs, th<^ reconciliation of deadly feuds as the hand of 
Hektor is clasped in the hand of the hero who slew him. 
There, as the story ran, the lovely Helen, ^pardoned and pu¬ 
rified,’ became the bride of the short-lived yet long-suffering 
Achilleus, even as Iol6 comforted the dying Herakles on 
earth, and H^b 4 became his solace in Olympos. But what 
is the meeting of Helen and Achilleus, of Iol6, and H6b6, 
and Herakles, but the return of the violet tints to greet the 
sun in the west, which had greeted him in the east in the 
morning? The idea was purely physical, yet it suggested 
the thoughts of trial, atonement, and purification; and it is 
unnecessary to say that the human mind, having advanced 
thus far, must make its way still further. 

To these islands of the blessed only they could be ad¬ 
mitted who on earth had done great things, or who for 
whatever reasons might be counted among the good and 
noble of mankind. But of the beings who crossed the fatal 
streams of Styx, there would be some as far exceeding the 

* UBeucpvy viyLoyrokt aluya. Find. 01, ii. 120. 



TARTAROS. 


323 


common crowd in wickedness or presumption as tliese were 
unworthy to tread the asphodel meadows of Elysion. Hence 
one of the names of the unseen world, which denoted espe¬ 
cially its everlasting unrest, would he chosen to signify the 
hopeless prisons of the reprobate. There can be little 
doubt that in the name Tartaros we have a word from the 
same root with Thalassa, the heaving and restless sea, and 
that Tartaros was as strictly a mere epithet of Hades as 
Plout&n or Polydegmon. The creation of a place of utter 
darkness for abandoned sinners was a moral or theological, 
not a mythical necessity; and hence the mythology of Tar¬ 
taros as a place of torment is as scanty and artificial as that 
of the Nereid and Okeanid nymphs; for when the Hesiodic 
Thcogony makes Tartaros and Gaia the parents of the Gi- 
gantes, of Typh6eus, and Echidna, this only places Tartaros 
in the same rank with Poseidon, who is the father of Poly- 
phSmos or of HSr6, who, according to another myth, is her¬ 
self the mother of Typh&on^ another Typh6eus. 


Tl 


CHAP. 

IX 



324 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The story 
of Saratn^ 
and Helen. 


CHAPTER X. 

THE DAEKHESS. . 

Section L—YRITRA AND AHL 

Xo mytMcal plrrases have so powerfully affected the history 
of religion as the expressions which described originally the 
physical struggle between light and darkness as exhibited in 
the alternations of day and night. These phrases stand out 
with wonderful vividness in the byinns of the Rig Veda. The 
rain-god Indra is concerned with the sacrifices of men, chiefly 
because these supply him with food to sustain his steeds in 
the deadly conflict, and the drink which is to invigorate his 
own strength. On the Soma, of which, as of the Achaian 
Nektar, all the gods have need, the might of Indra especially 
depends; and as soon as he has quaffed enough, he departs 
to do battle with his enemy. This struggle may be con¬ 
sidered as the theme, which in a thousand different forms 
enters into all the conceptions of Indra and into all the 
prayers addressed to him. Like himself, his adversary has 
many names; but in every word we have the contrast be¬ 
tween the beaming god of the heaven with his golden locks 
and his flashing spear, and the sullen demon of darkness, 
who lurks within his hidden caves, drinking the milk of the 
cows which he has stolen. The issue of the battle is always 
the same; but the apparent monotony of the subject never 
deprives the language used in describing it of the force 
which belongs to a genuine and heartfelt conviction. So 
far from the truth is the fancy that great national epics 
cannot have their origin in the same radical idea, and that, 
the monotony which would thus underlie them all is of itself 
conclusive proof that in their general plan the Iliad and the 



OUTLINES OF THE STOBY OF HELEN. 


325 


Odjrssey, the story of the Volsungs and the Nihelting Song, 
the Eamayana of Hindustan and the Persian Shahnameh 
have nothing in common. In the brief and changeful course 
of the bright but short-lived sun; in his love for the dawn, 
who vanishes as he fixes his gaze upon her, and for the dew 
which is scorched by his piercing rays; in his toil for crea¬ 
tures so poor and weak as man, in his grief for the loss of 
the beautiful morning which cheered him at his rising, in 
the sullenness with which he hides his grief behind the 
clouds, in the vengeance which he takes on the dark powers 
who have dimmed his glory, in the serene and dazzling 
splendour which follows his victory, in the restoration of his 
early love, who now comes before him as the evening twi¬ 
light with the same fairy network of luminous cloud, there 
can be no monotony. It is a tale which may be told a thou¬ 
sand times without losing its freshness, and may furnish the 
germ of countless epics to those who have hearts to feel its 
touching beauiy. They who see monotony here may well 
see monotony also in the whole drama of human life. It is 
no exaggeration to say that the phrases which produced the 
myth of Indra must have given birth to the Iliad. 

The two stories are, in truth, the same. The enemy of 
Indra keeps shut up in his prison-house the beautiful clouds 
which give rain to the earth; and the struggle which ends 
in their deliverance is the battle of Achilleus with Hektor, 
and of the Achaians with the men of Ilion, which ends in the 
rescue of Helen. The weary hours during which the god 
fights with his hidden foe are the long years which roll 
away in the siege of Troy; and the lightnings which seal 
the doom of the hated thief represent the awful havoc in 
the midst of which Paris the seducer receives the recompense 
of his treachery. Of this deathless story the most ancient 
hymns addressed to Indra exhibit the unmistakeable out¬ 
lines. In its simplest form the fight of Indra with the 
demon is nothing more than a struggle to gain possession 
of the rainclouds.^ But the ideas soon become more fully 
developed, and his enemy assumes a thoroughly hateful 
character as the throttling snake of darkness. But in the 
> HercuU st CacitSf 89. 


CHAP. 

X. 


Iiid,ra and 
Achilleus. 



M7TH0L0GT OF THE AHYAK NATIONS. 


326 


BOOK 

n. 


TIi« 

Struggle 
between 
Light and 
Darkness. 


less simple hymns the strictly mythical imagery is, as M. 
Br^al well remarks, intermingled with phrases which speak 
not of anthropomorphised gods, but of floods, clouds, winds 
and darlaiess.^ 

Throughout these hymns two images stand out before us 
with overpowering distinctness. On one side is the bright 
god of the heaven, as beneficent as he is irresistible; on the 
other the demon of night and of darkness, as false and 
treacherous as he is malignant. On both of these contending 
powers the Hindu lavished all his wealth of speech to exalt 
the one and to express his hatred of the other. The latter 
(as his name Vritra, from var, to veil, indicates,) is pre-emi¬ 
nently the thief who hides away the rainclouds. But al¬ 
though the name comes from the same root which yielded 
that of Varuna, the lurking place of Vritra has nothing to 
do with that broad-spreading veil which Varuna stretches 
over the loved earth which is his bride. But the myth is 
yet in too early a state to allow of the definite designations 
which are brought before us in the conflicts of Zeus with 
Typhon and his monstrous progeny, of Apolldn with the Py- 
th6n, of Bellerophdn with Ghimaira, of Oidipous with the 
Sphinx, of Hercules with Cacus, of Sigurd with the dragon 
Pafnir ; and thus not only is Vritra known by many names, 
but he is opposed sometimes by Indra, sometimes by Agni 
the fire-god, sometimes by Trita, Brihaspatx, or other deities; 
or rather these are all names for one and the same god. 


iroXXav hvofiirtav fiop^p^ fiia. 


The great IsTay, although Indra is known pre-eminently as Vritrahan, 
^^ 7 ' the Vritra-slayer, yet Vritra, far from being petrified into 
a dead personality, became a name which might be applied 
to any enemy. The Vritra of the Vriiras denoted the most 
malignant of adversaries.^ So again Vritra, the thief, is 
also called Ahi, the throttling snake, or dragon with three 
heads, like Geryon, the stealer of the cows of Herakles, or 
Kerberos, whose name reappears in <J!arvara, another epithet 
of the antagonist of Indra. He is also Vala, the enemy, a 
name which we ti-ace through the Teutonic lands until we 


' £r4al, Eercuie et Cacus, 93, &c. 


* 16. 92. 



VIRITRA AND ORTHROS. 


327 


reacli tlie cave of Wayland Smitli in Warwicksliire.^ Other 
names of this hateful monster are (^ushna, 
mnki;® but the most notable of all is Pani, which marks him 
as the seducer. Such he is, as enticing the cows of Indra 
to leave their pastures, and more especially as seeking to 
corrupt Saramd, when at Tndra’s bidding she comes to re¬ 
claim the plundered cattle. 

The name Pani reappears in Paris, the seducer of Helen; 
but as round this destroyer of his house and kinsfolk ideas 
are grouped which belong to the conception of Phoibos and 
Helios, of Achilleus, Theseus, and other solar heroes, so in 
its Hellenic form Vritra has sometimes a fair and sometimes 
a repulsive form. Orthros is the hound of Geryon, slain by 
Herakles ; but it is also a name for the first pale light of the 
dawn,^ just as the night may be regarded now as the evil 
power which kills the light, now as the sombre but benignant 
mother of the morning.'* This difference of view accounts 
precisely for the contrast between Varuna and Vritra. 

Between the Vedic and the Hellenic myths there is this 
difference only, that in the latter the poets and mytho- 
graphers who tell the story recount without understanding 
it. They are no longer conscious that Geryon and Typhon, 
Echidna and Orthros, Python and Kerberos, are names for 
the same thing, and that the combats of Herakles, Perseus, 
Theseus, and Kadmos with these monsters denote simply the 
changes of the visible heavens- Each story has its own local 
namesi mythical geography, and this fact alone 

constituted an almost insurmountable hindrance to the suc¬ 
cessful analysis of the legends. But the language of the 
Vedic hymns explains itself; and the personality of Indra and 
Vritra is after all, as M. Br4al has noted, only intermittent.* 

Vritra then, the enemy of Indra, reappears in all the 
dragons, snakes, or worms, slain by all the heroes of Aryan 
mythology; and if the dragons of some myths w^ar a less 
repulsive form, if they are yoked to the chariot of Medeia or 
impart a mysterious wisdom to lamos and the children of 

* Grimm, JDeut$rh6 UytMogU^ 943. * 

* Br^l, flercule et Cacus^ 93. • Br^l, ffercuh et Cam, 97, 98. 

» 105, &c. Muir, iV&w?. D, of J?. F. 662. 


CHAP. 

X 


P.iiu and 
Paris. 


Groek and 

Hindu 

myths. 


Snakesand 
Worms. 



32S 


MYTHOLOGY OP THB ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK Askl^pios, this is a result only of the process which from the 
.——- same root formed words for the very opposite conceptions of 
Yaruna and Yritra. The dragon is hut the keen-eyed creature, 
and the name may well seem to denote the beings who are 
yoked to the chariot which Helios gave to the daughter of 
AiStls, and who teach strange lessons to the children of the 
Dawn. The serpent form of these dragons is of later growth. 
In itself, the name is but an epithet which denoted the keen 
sight, as the Yedic Haiits and itohits denoted the glistening 
colour, of the steeds who drew the car of Indra. Then, when 
for the same reason the name was applied to certain kinds of 
reptiles, these steeds were by an inevitable process converted 
into serpents. Yritra, however, is properly not the dragon, 
but the snake which chokes or throttles its victim; and the 
names which are used to describe his loathsome features are 
the names which the Iranian and Teutonic tribes have given 
to their personations of moral and physical evil. The Yedic 
Ahi is etymologically identical with the Greek Echidna, in 
whose home Herakles finds the cattle of which he is in 
search, although in this story they have strayed instead, of 
being stolen. 

The stolen Whether the rain-clouds were converted into cows by the 
Cattle. process of radical or poetical metaphor * is a question of 
comparatively slight importance. If the Sanskrit go, the 
English cow, designated at first, like the Greek vpo^arov, 
simply the moving thing, the name might be applied as 
strictly to the clouds which move in the heavens as ^ the 
cattle which walk on the earth.® The myth would come 
into existence only when the name had become confined to 
horned cattle. It is but another instance of the process 
which changed the flocks of Helios into the apples guarded 
by the Hesperides,® and by transforming Lykfion into a wolf 
laid the foundations of the horrible superstitions of lykan- 
thropy.^* 

Hellenic tribes carried away from their common Aryan 
Fountoms. home not merely the phrases which told of a battle between 

* Max Muller. Lectwres on Language, feet that the word gili\a has the meaning 

second series, 353, &c. both of apples and sheep. 

* Oaous, 108. ^ Br5al, Hfffcvhet C&ous, 115; see also 

* This is at once explained by the yoI. i. appendix F, p, 469. 



THE ENEMIES OP INDEA. 


329 


tte god of the heaven and his cloud-enemy, but those also CHAP, 
•which described the nature of the struggle. If the name ^ 
Vritra remains only in that of the Hellenic hound Orthros, 
his evil work, as imprisoning the waters, reappears in almost 
every western myth of monsters slain by solar heroes. When 
Phoibos smites the Python at Delphoi, a stream of water 
gushes out from the earth; the dragon slain by the Theban 
Eadmos blocks all access to a fountain; and the defeat of 
the Sphinx can alone bring rain to refresh the parched 
Boiotian soil. This warm and fertilising rain becomes from 
mere necessities of climate the hidden treasure guarded, in 
the Teutonic legend, by the dragon whom Sigurd slays on 
the snow-clad or glistening heath. 

A later stage in the developement of the Hindu myth is Tho stolen 
seen in the few passages which speak of the victims of 
Vritra not as clouds but as women. As sailing along in the 
bright heavens (dyu), the clouds were naturally called devi, 
the brilliant, and the conversion of the word deva into a 
general name for the gods transformed them into Gn4s, 
yvyaiKBs, or Nymphs, in whom we see the fair Helen whom 
Paris stole from Menelaos, and Sita, the bride of Rama, who 
is carried off by the giant Ravana.* But here also, as in its 
earlier form, the myth remains purely physical; and we 
have to turn to the Iranian land to see the full growth of 
the idea which the old Hindu worshippers faintly shadowed 
in the prayer that Vritra might not be suffered to reign over 
■them. 

In the later Hindu mythology the power of darkness is Havana 
known by the names Bali, Havana, or Graha. The first of 
these is in the Ramayana the conqueror of Indra himself, 
and after his victory over the sun or the rain-god he enjoys 
the empire of the three worlds, intoxicated -with the increase 
of his power. But the darkness which has ended the brief 
career of Achilleus must in turn be subdued by one who is 
but Achilleus in another form; and Bali, the son of Virochana, 
meets his match in Vishnu, who confron'fcs him in his dwarf 
incarnation as Hara.® In the readiness with which Bali 
yields to the request of the dwarf, who asks only for leave to 
* Br6al, Jlercttle et Cmm^ 117, 118. * Muir, Sanskrit Texts, iv. 117. 



330 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK step three paces, we see the germ of that short-sightedness 
^ to their own interests which has imparted a burlesque cha¬ 
racter to the trolls and fairies of Northern Europe.* No 
sooner is the prayer granted than the dwarf, who is none 
other than the sun, measures the whole heaven with his 
three strides, and sends Bali to his fit abode in the dark 
Patala. But Bali himself is closely akin, or rather identical, 
with the giant Eavana, who steals away Sita, the bride of 
Kama, by whom he is himself slain, as Paris falls by the 
arrows of Philokt^t^s. This story is modified in the Vishnu 
Purana to suit the idea of the transmigration of souls, and 
Bavana we are here told had been in a former birth Sisupala, 
the great enemy of Vishnu, whom he daily curses with all 
the force of relentless hatred. But these maledictions had, 
nevertheless, the effect of keeping the name of the god con¬ 
stantly before his mind; and thus, when he was slain by 
Vishnu, he beheld the deity in his true character, and 
became united with his divine adversary.^ But Vishnu, the 
discus-bearing god, has another enemy in Graha, in whom we 
see again only a new form of Bavana and Bali.^ Against 
this wise and powjerful being, for the Panis are possessed 
a hidden treasure which passes for the possession of know-^ 
ledge, not even the discus of Vishnu nor a thousand thunder¬ 
bolts have the least effect. The darkness is at the least as 
difficult to subdue as is the dawn or the day. 

TheTrojan The three names, Pani, Vritra, and Ahi, which are 
specially used to denote the antagonist of Indra, reappear in 
the mythology of other tribes, sometimes under a strange 
disguise, which has invested a being originally dark and 
sombre, with not a little of the beauty and glory of his 
conqueror. With these modified names appear others which 

^ The Pani appears in the German deceive him. The brothers and kins- 
story of the Peather Bird as a sorcerer, folk of the bride now come to rescne 
•who went begging from house to her; ‘they immediately closed up all 
house that he might steal little girls, the doors of the house, and then set jftre 
He is, in short, Pans Gynaiman^s, the to it; and the sorcerer and all his ac- 
Blueheard of modern stories, who gives complices were burnt to ashes; * a hum- 
each successive wife the keys of his ing which is manifestly the destruction 
house, charging her not to look into a of Ilion. 

certain chamber. At last he is cheated * Muir, Sanskrit Tsxts^ 180, note, 

by the Helen whom he carries to his * Ih, 169, 

dwelling, and who dresses up a turnip to 



THE TROJAH PARIS. 


331 


virtually translate the Vedic epithets. But in no case are 
the common and essential features of the myth so much lost 
sight of, or rather overlaid with colours borrowed from other 
mythical conceptions, as in the case of Paris. That the 
Helen of the Iliad is etymologically the SaramS, of the Vedic 
hymns, there is no question; that the Pani who tempts, or 
who prevails over Sarama is the Trojan Paris, is not less 
clear. Both alike are deceivers and seducers, and both 
bring down their own doom by their offence. But when we 
have said that Paris, like the Panis and Vritra, steals away 
the fairest of women and her treasures (in which we see 
again the cows of Saramfii) from the western land, that he 
hides her away for ten long years in Hion,^ as the clouds are 
shut up in the prison-house of the Panis, and that the fight 
between Paris and Menelaos with his Achaian hosts ends in 
a discomfiture precisely corresponding to the defeat and 
death of Pani by the spear of Indra, we have in fact noted 
every feature in the western legend which identifies Paris 
with the dark powers.* 


* This Hion Dr. 0. Meyer, in his 
Quasitones Homerica^ has sought to 
i»i<‘ntify with the Sanskrit word -vi/d, 
which he translates by stronghold. On 
this Professor Max Miiller {Miff Veda 
bkinhiia, i. 31) remarks * that vi^u in the 
Veda has not dwindled down as yet to a 
mere name, and that therefore it may 
have originally retained its purely ap¬ 
pellative power in Greek as well us in 
•Sanskrit, and from meaning a stronghold 
'in general, have come to mean the strong¬ 
hold of Troy/ 

* Professor Muller, having identified 
the name Pans with that of the Panis, 
although he adds that the etymology of 
Pai^i 18 as doubtful as that of Paris, 
thinks that I am mistaken in my ^ en¬ 
deavours to show that Paris belongs to 
the class of bright solar heroes/ and 
says that * if the germ of the Ilmd is the 
battle between the solar and nocturnal 
poVers, Paris surely belongs to the 
latter, and he whose destiny it is to kill 
Achilleus in the Western Gates 

ry tre xiv (r« Xldpts koX <^oi$05 
*Air6K\o3v 

iirOkhv Uvr' iXetroanv ip\ 'Sxtu^at x^\%<nv 

could hardly have been himself of solar 
«r vernal lineage.^— Leoiwres <m Lan¬ 


guage, second series, 472. Doubtless 
the germ of Pans is not solar. So far 
as he 18 the seducer of Helen and the 
destroyer of himself and his people by 
his sin, he is the eouiitcrpait of the 
Vedic Pani. But this explanation covers 
only this part of the myth: and it must 
not be fo»gotten in the mythology of all 
the Aryan nations that the sun is not less 
fickle, capricious, and treacherous than 
the darkness itself. In every case the 
solar heroes either lose or desert their 
brides. Ariadn4, Brynhild, Prokris, 
Kor6nis, Echo, S^l^ne, Aithra, with 
many others, form a mournful company 
link^ together in the same sad destiny, 
which makes it impossible forHerakles 
or Phoibos, Perseus or Sigurd, to tarry 
with the women whose lo\e they have 
won. Hence there was nothing hut the 
name of Puns to prevent the Hellenic 
tribes from investing the tempter of 
Helen with the characteristics of the 
deserter of Ariadn4; and the meaning 
of this name seems to have been wholly 
forgotten. This is more than can be 
said of the name of Hermes, which 
clearly.conveyed the idea of motion to the 
author of the Homeric Hymn. Yet we 
have seen (ch. v. section 2) to what an 
extent the features of the Hellenic 


CHAP. 

X 



332 


MYTHOLOGY OF THS ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


Helen and 
Penelop4. 


In the Odyssey, Saramfi; reappears as in the older Vodic 
portraits, pure and unswerving in her fidelity to her absent 
lord. The dark powers or Panis are here the suitors who 
crowd around the beautiful Penelopfi, while Odysseus is 
journeying homewards from the plains of Tlion. Bixt the 
myth has here reached a later stage, and the treasures of 
Indra are no longer the refreshing rain-clouds, but the 
wealth which Odysseus has left stored up in his home, and 
which the suitors waste at their will. Tho temptation of 
PenelopS assumes the very form of the ordeal which 
Saram^ is obliged to go through. She, too, shall have her 
share of the treasures, if she will but submit to become the 
wife of any one of the chiefs who are striving for her hand. 
The wheedling and bullying of the Panis in the Vedic hymns 
is reproduced in the alternate coaxing and blustering of the 
western suitors; but as Saram 4 rejects their offers, strong 
through the might of the absent’Indra, so Penelopfi has her 
scheme for frustrating the suitors’ plans, trusting in the 
midst of all her grief and agony that Odysseus will assuredly 
one day come back. This device adheres with singular 
fidelity to the phenomena which mark the last moments of a 
summer day. Par above, in the upper regions of Hypereia, 
where the beautifiil Phaiakians dwelt before the uncouth 
KyMdpes sought to do them mischief, the foiiy network of 
cirri clouds is seen at sundown flushing with deeper tints ^ 
the chariot of the lord of day sinks lower in the sky. "1?^ > 
is the network of the weaver PenelopS, who like lold spreads 
her veil of violet clouds over the heaven in the morning and 
in the evening. Below it, stealing up from the dark waters. 


Hermes differ from those of the Vedic 
Sarameya, and how completely in this 
case the idea of the morning has given 
way before that of air in motion There 
can be no doubt that the Greek Orthros 
IS in name identical with the Vedic 
Vritra; and yet the former, as taken to 
denote the first wakening of the dawn, 
assumes a shape far less fearful than 
that of the hated snake who chokes the 
rain-clouda And again, although as 
fighting against the children of the sun 
(book 1. ch. X.) who come to recover 
Helen and her treasures as the Argonauts 


went to seek and if need be to fight for 
the ^Ideu fleece the Trojans represent 
the Pa^is, it can as little be questioned 
that some of those who fight on the side 
of Hektor belong as clearly as Phoiboe 
or Heraklos himself to the ranks of 
solar heroes. It is enough to mention 
the instances of Sarj)6d6n and Memn6n, 
even if no stress be laid on the fact that 
Paris himself IS the darling of Aphroditfe, 
which ho could scarcely b© if regarded 
simply as an embodiment of the dark 
and treacherous night. Such modifi¬ 
cations are obviously inevitable. 



PENELOPfi AND THE SUITORS. 

are seen the sombre clouds which, blot the light from the 
horizon, and rise from right and left as with outstretched 
arms, to clasp the fairy forms which still shed their beauty 
over the upper heavens. At first their efforts are vain; 
twice it may be, or thrice, the exquisite network fades from 
sight, and then appears again with its lustre dimmed, as if 
through grief for the lover of Eos or of Daphn^, who has 
gone away. But the shades of night grow deeper, and with 
it deepens the tumult and rage of the black vapours which 
hurry to seize their prey; and the ending of the web which 
the suitors compel PenelopS to finish is the closing in of the 
night when the beautiful cirri clouds are shrouded in im¬ 
penetrable darkness. Then follows the weary strife in which 
the suitors seek to overcome the obstinacy of Penelopfe, and 
which corresponds to the terrible struggle which precedes 
the recovery of Helen from the thief who has stolen her 
away. But like the Panis, and Paris, and Vritra, the suitors 
bring about their own destruction. ‘I do not know th^t 
Indra is to be subdued,^ says Saram4, ^ for it is he himself 
that subdues; you Panis will lie prostrate, killed by Indra.^ 
So too Penelope can point to a weapon which none of the 
suitors can wield, and which shall bring them to death if 
ever the chief returns to his home. In the house of Odysseus 
there may be servants and handmaids who cast in their lot 
with the suitors, as Saram4 proved faithless when she 
accepted the milk offered to her by the Panis ; and for these 
there is a penalty in store, like the blow of Indra which 
punished Saraina for her faithlessness.^ Einally, by his 
victory, Odysseus rescues Penelope and his wealth from the 
hands of his enemies, who are smitten down by his unerring 
arrows, as Vritra is slain by the irresistible spear of Indra. 

The wealth of the Ithakan chieftain has assumed a dif¬ 
ferent form from that of the cows of Saram4: but there are 
other myths in which the cattle of Indra reappear as in the 
Vedic hymns. Herakles has more than once to search, like 

’ As in the case of SaramA, so in that mother of Pan either by Hermes or by 
of PcnolopA, there are two versions of all the suitors. This merely means that 
the !!».> th, one representing her as in- the night breeze springs up as the dark 
corrnj tiblc, the other as faithless. Ac- clouds veil the clear light of the upper 
cording to the latter, she became the heaven after sun down. 


333 


CHAP. 

X. 


Herakles 

and 

Echidna. 



334 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 

BOOK Phoibos, for Stolen cows, or sometimes horses, and each time 
. they are found hidden away in the secret dwellinpf of the 
robber. In the story of Echidna we have not only the cattle 
and the cave, but the very name of the throttling snnlce Ahi, 
the epithet by which the Hindu specially sought to express 
his hatred for the serpent Yritra. Accordingly in the 
Hesiodic Theogony Echidna is the parent of all the monstera 
who represent the cloud-enemy of Indra. Night and day 
follow or produce each other, and as Phoibos is the child of 
L 4 t 6 , so is he in his turn the father of the night which is 
his deadliest enemy. The black darkness follows the beauti¬ 
ful twilight, and thus in the Hesiodic version Echidna is the 
daughter of Chrysidr, the lord of the golden sword and of the 
beautiful KaUirho^. But although her offspring may cause 
disgust and dread, she herself retains some portion of her 
parents’ beauty. Like the French Melusina, from the waist 
upwards she is a beautiful maiden,* the rest of her body 
b6ing that of a huge snake. Her abode, according to Hesiod, 
is among the Arimoi, where Typhdeus slumbers, or accord¬ 
ing to Herodotos, far away in the icy Scythia. Among 
her children, of some of whom Typhftdn, ‘ the terrible and 
wanton wind,’ is the father, are the dogs Orthros and Ker¬ 
beros, the Lemaian Hydra, the Chimaira, and the deadly 
Phix or Sphinx which brings drought and plague on Thebes. 
But whether in Hesiod, Apollodoros, or HerOdotos, ihfe 
of Echidna is intertwined with that of Geryohes, 
herself is not only a child of ChrysSdr and EaIlirho6, btrefr* 
monster, who has the bodies of three men united at the waist. 
This being lived in Erytheia, the red land, which, in some 
versions, was on the coast of Epeiros, in others, near Gadeira 
or Gades beyond the Pillars of Herakles. In either ease, he 
abode in the western regions, and there kept his herds of red 
oxen. In other words the myth of Geryones exhibits a fiery 
and stormy sunset in which the red, or purple oxen are the 
flaming clouds which gather in the western horizon. These 
herds are Warded by the shepherd Eurytion and the two- 
headed dog Orthros, the offspring of Echidna and Typhon. 
These herds Herakles is charged to bring to Eurystheus, 

‘ Hes. Thsog. 297. 



GERYONES AND KERBEROS. 


S35 


and accordingly he journeys westward, receiving from Helios CFap. 

the golden cup in which Helios himself journeys every night >__ 

from the west to the east. Having slain Orthros and 
Eurytion, Herakles has a final struggle with Geryones, in 
which he wins a victory answering to that of Indra over 
Yritra; and placing the purple oxen in the golden cup he 
conveys them across the Ocean stream, and begins his 
journey westward.^ The stories of Alebion and Derkynos, and 
again of Eryx, as noted by Apollodoros,^ are only fresh 
versions of the myth of the Panis, while the final incident 
of the gadfly sent by HerS to scatter the herds reproduces 
the legend of the same gadfly as sent to torment the heifer 
16. The myth as related by Herodotos has a greater in¬ 
terest, although he starts with speaking of oxen and ends 
with a story of stolen horses. Here the events occur in the 
wintry Scythian land, where Herakles coming himself with 
his lionskin goes to sleep, and his horses straying away are 
caught by Echidna and imprisoned in her cave. Thither 
Herakles comes in search of them, and her reply to his 
question is that the animals cannot be restored to him until 
he should have sojourned with her for a time. Herakles 
must fare as Odysseus fared in the palace of Kirke and the 
cave of Kalypso; and Echidna becomes the mother of three 
sons, whose strength is to be tested by the same ordeal to 
which Theseus and Sigurd are compelled to submit. He 
only of the three shall remain in the land who can brace 
around his body the girdle of Herakles and stretch his bow. 

To the girdle is attached a golden phial or cup, of which we 
have already traced the history. 

As the name Ahi reappears in that of Echidna, so that of Orthro*. 
Vritra is reproduced in Orthros, who, in the Hesiodic Theo- 
gony is simply a hound sprung from Echidna and Geryones, 
but in ApoUodoros becomes a dog with two heads, as Ker¬ 
beros appears with three, although in Hesiod his heads are 
not less than fifty in number. It must however be noted 
that Orthros is sometimes himself called Kerberos. He is » 
thus the being who, like Vritra, hides away the light or the 
glistening cows of the sun; but the time specially assigned 
^ Max Muller, Chi^j ii. 184. * ii. 5, 10. 



336 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN NATIOXS. 


BOOK to him as to the Aavins is that which marks the first faint 
- streak: of dawn, the time in which darkness is still supreme 
although its reign is drawing towards its close.' It was at 
this time that Hermes, having toiled all night in the kindled 
forests, returned home gently to lay himself down like a 
in his cradle, as the soft breeze of morning follows the 
gale which may have raged throxigh the night. This 
Orthros, who with Kerberos answers seemingly to the two 
dogs of Yama, is slain by Herakles, as Vritra is killed by 
Indra»who thus obtains the name of Vritrahan,—a name 
which must have assumed in Greek the form Orthrophfin. 
Nor is the name of Kerberos, who, armed with serpents for 
his mane and tail, has sometimes even a hundred heads, 
wanting in the Veda, which exhibits it under the form 
Sarvari, an epithet for the night, meaning originally dark 
or pale. Kerberos is thus ‘ the dog of night, watching the 
path to the lower world.’* 

Typhon. The Same terrible enemy of the powers of light appears again 

under the names Typhon, and Typhfieus, which denote the 
smoke and flames vomited out by Vritra, Geryon or Cacus,—in 
other words, the lightning flashes which precede the fall of 
the pent-up rain. This being is in the Hesiodic Theogony,® 
the father of all the dreadful winds which bring mischief 
and ruin to mortals, destroying ships at sea and houses and 
crops on land. By this fearful hurricane, Ssa>i» v^pt<rri)v 
oj/s/iov. Echidna becomes the mother of Kerberos, the 
Lernaian Hydra, the Ghimaira, the Sphinx, and the NeanMian 
Lion, all of them representing under different forms the 
dark powers who struggle with and are conquered by the 
lord of day, and whose mightiest hosts are seen in the 
armies of the Titans leagued against the Kronid Zeus. Of 
these beings it is enough to say that later mythologists 
arranged their names and their functions almost at their 
will. Among the former appear some, as Hyperidn and 
Phoihe, which are elsewhere mere names for the sun and 
, moon; and in this its later form the myth is little more 
than an attempt to explain how it was ^at Kronos, time, 
was not able to devour and destroy all his children. With 
* Max Muller,. CAyi«, ii. 185. * 188. • 869. 



THE STOLEN CATTLE. 


337 


this insatiable parent Zens must be inevitably engaged in an 
internecine war, the issue of which could not be doubtful. 
The thunderbolts by which Indra OTerwhelms his foe re¬ 
appear in the G-reek myth as the Eykldpes and the Heka- 
toncheires or hundred-handed beings whom on the advice of 
Gaia the king of the blue heaven summons from the depths 
of Tartaros into which Kronos and his associates are hurled. 
This struggle is, indeed, reproduced in myth after myth. 
The enemies who had assailed Ouranos are seen once more 
in the Gigantes or earth-bom beings who league them¬ 
selves against all the gods. These giants are mentioned in 
Hesiod merely as children sprung from Gaia along with the 
Erinyes after the mutilation of Ouranos. Elsewhere they 
are a horrible race destroyed for their impiety, fearful in 
aspect, and like Echidna and Ahi, with snaky bodies,^ 
Against these foes even Zeus himself is powerless unless he 
can gain the help of the mortal HeraHes, and the latter in 
his turn can prevail over Alkyoneus only by taking him 
away from his own soil, from which, like Antaios, he rises 
with renewed strength after every dovrafall. When at 
length the struggle is ended, the giants are imprisoned, like 
the Titans, beneath the islands of the sea. 


Section II,—THE LATIN MYTH. 

The main features of the myths of Vritra, Geryon and 
Echidna reappear in the singular Latin legend known to us 
as that of Hercules and Cacus. This story had undergone 
strange transformations before it assumed its Euemerised 
forms in the hands of Livy and of the Halikamassian Dio- 
nysios, with whom even the account which he rejects as 
mythical has been carefully stripped of all supernatural inci¬ 
dents. According to Bionysios, Herakles driving before him 
the oxen of Geryon had reached the Palatine hill when, as in 
the myth of Echidna, he was overcome by sleep. On waking 
he found that some of his cattle had been stolen by some 
thief who had dragged them away by their tails. Doubtless 


CHAP. 

X 


Hercules 
and Cacus. 


VOIi. II. 


* Pans. viii. 29, 3. 
Z 



338 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK Dionysios means that he saw through tho chiinsy device, 
. ^ which the writer of the Homeric hymn discreetly avoided by 

mating Hermes drive the cattle hither luid thither, until 
all possibility of tracking them was lost; and with him the 
story goes on with a colloquy between Heratles and Cacus, 
who stands at the entrance of the cave and denies all know¬ 
ledge of the cattle. But his guilt is proved when the lowing 
of the other cattle whom Heratles brings up nmses the 
imprisoned oxen to reply. He then slays Cacus with a 
blow of his club, and builds an altar to Zeus the discoverer 
(svpsaioi) near the Porta Trigemina.' 

Caeus an- The myth as related by Vii^l and Ovid carries us back 
of VrinlT* language of the Vedic hymns; and this fact, 

of which the poets were of course proftmndly unconscious, 
shows the fidelity with which they adhered to the genuine 
tradition of the country. Here we have the deep cave of 
Vritra, with its huge rocks beetling over it,—the mighty mass 
which represents the dark thundercloud in which the waters 
are confined.^ Into this cave the rays of the sun can never 
enter; ® and here dwelt the monster, who, like Echidna, is 
hut half a human being, and of whom the fire-god Vulcan is 


* Dion. H. i. 39-41 This version 
Dionysios rejects as fabolons ‘because 
' the expedition of Herakles to drive oxen 
from the far west, in order to please 
Euiysthens, is an improbable event, not 
becauses it contravenes the order of 
nature’—^Lewis, Credibility/ of Early 
HoTTian Historyy i. 289. IHonysios has 
no scruple in converting the myth into 
history by making Herakles the leader 
of a great army, and by stating that the 
stolen beasts belonged to his commis¬ 
sariat Herakles is also invested by 
him vith that high moral character on 
which the apologue of Prodikos is made 
to turn. Sir Comewall Lewis re¬ 
marks that in a legend of the Epize- 
phyrian Lokrians ‘ Latinus fills the place 
of Cacus and steals tho oxen of Hercules/ 
— I/j. 335. That the myth took a strong 
hold on the Latin imagination cannot 
be doubted. ‘The den of Cacus is 
placed in the Aventine; but the steps 
of Cacus were on the Palatine; they 
are known to Diodorus; and the latter 
hill IS in his narrative the residence of 
Cacins, who with Pinarius hospitably 
and reverently entertains the Tiiynthian 


hero, and is substituted for Potitius, 
nay, for Evandw; the latter does not 
appear at all,, nor do any Arradians: 
none but natives are mentioned. So a 
sister of Cacus, Caca, was worshipped 
like Vesta, with eternal fire. — Niebuhr, 
Huiory of Rom, i.: ‘The Aboriginee 
and Latins” Niebuhr saw that in this 
legend ‘the worship of the Ssblne 
Semo Sancus was transferred to the son 
of AlkinfinA: * but he merely states the 
fact without attempting to account for 
it. 

The version of the lep«md given by 
Livy differs from that of Djonywon only 
in the description of Chcur a«n shcpliewL 
Dionysios simply speaks of him as a 
thief, Tho former ranks him with the 
past-oral Kykl6pos: the latter degi^es 
him to the level of Sinisand Prfikroustes* 

* Of Indra it is said that he has 
slam Ahi who ^ was seated cm the 
mountain summit; the word ptvrwita 
being used to denote alike a hill and a 
cloud, j?. V. i. 82. Br4al, HortuU et 
Cacasy 94. 

* * Mis inaccessam radiis.” 

Viig. JEn, Tiii. 195. 



HEECULBS AND HEECULUS. 


339 


the father. In the lowing of the imprisoned cattle, as in 
the dark speech of the Sphinx, we have the rumbling of the 
thunder before the rain bursts from its confinement in the 
clouds. The hurling down of the rock by Hercules is the 
shattering of the castle of Vritra by the spear of Indra. No 
sooner is the blow strack than the horrible abyss of his 
dwelling is lighted up by the fiames which burst from the 
monster’s mouth, in other words, the darkness of the storm- 
cloud is pierced by the lightning. Then follows the death 
of the monster, to whose carcase the poet applies an epithet 
which links this myth with the legend of the Chimaira slain 
by Bellerophon and thus connects it again with that of 
Vritra.^ 

But we have here to meet the difficulty noticed by Nie¬ 
buhr. Whatever is to be said of the name Cacus, it is clear 
that the name Hercules cannot have been contained in the 
original Latin story. There was indeed a Latin god Hercu- 
lus, but, like the Lares worshipped by the Arval Brotherhood, 
he was strictly a god of the country and the guardian of fences 
and land-marks. He is known as the Rustic, Domestic, or 
Genial Hercules, a name which points to an old verb hercere, 
herciscere, akin to arcere, and the Greek sipyeiv; but this 
very fact precludes the idea that the Latin Hercules, of 
which the old form Herclus, Herculus, survives in the ex¬ 
clamation Mehercule, Mehercle, is identical with the Greek 
Herakles.* But the god who overcame Cacus must have 


* ‘Villosa setiB Pectora semiferi.’— 
JEn, viii. 267. 

* In this case the name, as M Bn'al 
remarks, should b<^n with s, as in the 
change of the aspirated Greek numeral 
into the Latin sex, septem, of ^irofxai 
into sequor, &c. Hercvle et Cacus, 52, 
M. Br6al fiirlAer remarks (and great 
stress must be laid upon his words) 
that Herakles, like Perseus, Theseus, 
Achilleus, and the resty is in the Greek 
mythology strictly not a god. Though 
the son of Zeus himself, he is doomed to 
toil, weariness, and death; and the only 
offset to his short career on earth is the 
assurance that when his journey here is 
done ho shall enter the hauls of Olympos, 
there to live in everlasting youth. But 
it is most doubtful whether the Latin 
mythology knew anything of heroes in 


the Greek sense of the word. * L’esprit 
4 la fois net et abstrait du Romain ne 
lui a pas pcrmis de cr4er des 6tres 
intermediaires entre les dieux et les 
honimes. Sans doute, il connait des 
g^nies d’un ordre plus ou moms relev4, 
qui president aux actions humaines etin- 
tor\nennent dans la vie ; il sacrifie aux 
M&nes de ses ancfitres qui apr6s leur 
mort ont pris place parmi les dieux; 
inais des demi-dieux comme Th^s^e, 
P^rsee, H^racl^s, tenant 4 la fois du 
ciel et de la terre, on n*en voit pas dans 
la mythologie Latine. La transforma¬ 
tion de Romulus en dieu Quirinus est 
une tentative tardive et mal rdussie, que 
Rome ne renouvela pas, jusqu*«iu temps 
oh elle fit de C^sar mort im demi- 
dieu.~P. 61. 


CHAP. 

X. 


SancuR or 
Eecaranus. 



340 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


Lad the characteristics of the Greek Heraldes and the Yedic 
Indra; and hence when the Eoman became acquainted with 
the Greek hero, whose name so closely resembled that of one 
amongst his own ancient gods, he attributed to his own 
Hercules the deeds which were rightly told of the son of 
Alkm^n^, and doubtless also of the god into whose place he 
was thus intruded* The god thus displaced was, in M* 
Breal’s judgment, the deity known as Sancus or Eecaranus. 
The former, answering to Zeus Pistios of the Greek and the 
Dius Fidius of the Latins, imparted to the Ara Maxima the 
peculiar sanction which rendered all oaths there taken in¬ 
violable.^ The name Eecaranus, which is actually given 
by Aurelius Victor as that of the slayer of Cacus,® must in 
M. Br^al’s judgment be referred to the root cr% or fcn, which 
has famished to Sanskrit, Greek, and Latin a large number 
of words denoting the ideas of creation and powen M. Breal 
cites from Festus the word cerus as an epithet of Janus,^ and 
connects with it the Greek Kronos and the K^res, who have 
power over the life and death of men.'^ If then Caranus or 
Garanus, is the maker, Eecaranus must be the god who makes 
again, or who, like DahanS;, renders aU things young; and 
thus Eecaranus would denote the Ee-creator, and so theEecu- 
perator or recoverer of the cattle stolen by Cacus, Geryon or 
Vritra, When, however, the Eoman, becoming acquainted 
with Greek myths, found the word Alexikakos among the epi¬ 
thets of Herakles, he naturally came to regard Eecaranus as 
only another name for that hero. But the quantity of the 
name Cacus leaves no room for this identification. The first 
syllable is long, and the word, given by Diodoros under the 

^ Br^al, Kercule et Cacus, 57. The here preserved the genuine Roman tra- 
name Semo with which that of Sancus dition. 

is so often connected is an epithet denot- ® ‘ Buonus cerus es, duonus lanus.* 

ingfertility and wealth, as in ‘semen:* The namo is found on a cup preserved 
and Herculus himself is necessarily in- in the Gregorian museum at Rome and 
eluded in the number of the Semones, inscribed ‘ Ceri Poculom.’ 
along with Ceres, Pales, and Flora. eavdroio. The words K^pios 

. * Orig. Gen. Botti. vi. ‘ Recaranus and Koipavos have passed into the notion 
quidam, Grsecae originis, ingentis cor- of mastery from file obvious fact that 
pons et magnarum virium pastor. ... he who has made a thing must have 
Hercules appellatus.’ That Victor should power over it. So Kpaivuy is to decree, 
look on Recaranus as strictly a Greek because an effectual command can be 
word is not surprising; but as it docs given only by him who lias a constrain- 
not occur in any Greek myths, the ing authonty, i. e. who can make others 
evidence becomes conclusive that he has do his bidding. 



CMCVS AND KAIKIAS. 


341 


form Kakios, and reappearing in tlie Praenestine Cseculus, 
leads M. Br 6 al to the conclusion that the true Latin form 
was Csecius, as Ssetumus answers to Saturnus. What then 
is CsBcius ? The idea of the being who bears this name is 
clearly that of the Sanskrit Vritra, the being who steals the 
beautiful clouds and blots out the light from the sky. Such 
is Paris; such also is Typhon 3 and the latter word suggests 
to M. Br4al a comparison of Cacus with Caecus, the blind or 
eyeless being. ^ But in a proverb cited by Aulus Gellius 
from Aristotle^ a being of this name is mentioned as pos¬ 
sessing the power of drawing the clouds towards him • ^ ^nd 
thus we have in M. Br^al’s judgment the explanation of an 
incident which, translated into the conditions of human life, 
becomes a clumsy stratagem. In storms, when contrary 
currents are blowing at different elevations, the douds may 
often appear from the eairth to be going against or right to¬ 
wards the wind. Then it is that Cacus is drawing the cattle 
of Herakles by their tails towards his cave. 


Section III—BELLEROPHOK 

Yirgil notes especially the rough and shaggy (viUosa) 
breast of the monster Cacus: and this epithet carries us to 
the names of similar beings in the mythology of other Aryan 
tribes. That the root var^ to hide or cover, has furnished 
names for Varuna the brooding heaven, as well as for Vritra, 
the enemy who hides away or imprisons the rain, we have 
already seen. We may follow Professor Max Miiller as he 
traces the root further through the Sanskrit ura in ura-bhra, 
a ram (in other words, the wool-bearer), to urn 4 , wool, the 
Greek slpo^ and Ip-^ov, in urnS;yu, a goat and a spider (the 
Greek dp-dxyjji)y the one as supplying wool, the other as 

^ If this can he established (and the Csecns, then, is made np of this 
affinity of Cacus, Csecins, Kakios, and pnrntive particle, and ika or azha, ange, 
the Greek koukIos seems to leave no the eye. The second compound of hdts 
room for doubt), the word Cacus is at is found in the English phrase ‘ lithe of 
once accounted for. Csecus is one of limb.’ Cf. Kokalos and Codes, p 88 . 
many words in which the ne^tive is * ictbc* aurhy Iakwv, &$ 6 KaiKlas 
expressed by the particle ?ia denoting a proverb applied to a man who 

the number 1 , which Bopp discovers in is his own enemy. Breal, ib. 111 ; 
the Gothic haihs=c 8 ecus, blind, hanfs, Maury, Croyances, ^c. 177 . 
one-handed, haHs, lame, halh^, hdf. 


CHAP. 

X. 


The 

monster 

Belleros. 



342 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


appearing to weave it^ in Aurnav^blia, tbe wool-provider, 
one of the enemies slain by Indra, in tbe Eussian vblna^ the 
Gothic vuUa, the English wool, in the Latin villus and 
veUus, and the English fleece. But as in Varuna the idea 
of covering gives place to that of guarding or shielding, so 
urana/i is a ram, but ur^w^a/i is a protector. The meaning of 
the word is further modified from hairiness or woolliness 
into that of mere roughness, and the term varvara was 
applied by the Aryan invaders to the negro-like aboriginal 
tribes, whom the Greeks would have termed barbarians. 
That this last word can be referred to no other root is 
further proved by a comparison of the Sanskrit lomasya with 
the Greek SaovrrjSy words in which the shagginess of hair 
furnishes a metaphor denoting roughness of pronunciation.' 
But the Sanskrit varvara transliterated into Greek would 
yield the word Belleros: and thus we retain some notion of 
a being of whom the Greek myth gives otherwise no account 
whatever. The invention of a noble Corinthian of this 
name, to serve as the victim of Hipponoos the son of 
Glaukos, is on a par with the explanations given by my- 
thographers for such names as Pan, Odysseus, Oidipous, or 
Aias. Belleros then is some shaggy or hairy monster, slain 
by the hero named from this exploit,—in short, another 
Cacus, or Ahi or Vritra; and as Indra is Vritra-han, the 
slayer of Indra, so is BeIleroph6n the slayer of Belleros.* 
Although no mythical being is actually found bearing this 
name in the Eig Veda, yet the black cloud is one of the 
chief enemies (dasas) of Indra. This cloud is sometimes 
called the black skin, sometimes the rain-giving and fer¬ 
tilising skin,^ while the demon of the cloud appears as a 
ram, or a shaggy and hairy creature, with ninety-nine arms. 
This wool- or fleece-covered animal is therefore reproduced 
not only in the monster Belleros, but in the Chimaira which 

^ It IS needless for me to do more Sanskrit kan, tho Greek <f>6pos, and the 
than refer the reader to Professor Max English banc. Tho precise Greek equi- 
Mnller's chapter on BellerophOn {Chi^s, valent for Vritrahan would ho Orthro- 
vol ii.), where he will find the subject phon, a word which is not actually 
treated at length and most convincingly, found, although Horakles is really 
Were I to repeat my obligations as often Orthrophontoa, the slayer of the shaggy 
as I feel that I ought to repeat them, I hound Orthros. 
might become wearisome. « Max Muller, Chi^s^ ii. 180. 

We may trace the root in tho 



CIIIMAIEA. 


343 


Hipponoos is said to have slaia, a being, like Geryon, Kerberos, chap. 
Ortbros, and Echidna, of a double or triple bodj'. In the •—I,—■ 
Chimaira the fore-part is that of a lion, the middle that of a 
goat, while the hinder-part, like that of his mother Echidna 
and all other cognate beings, is the tail of a fish or serpent.' 

The death of Yritra or the wool-weaver (Aurnavdbha) is 
followed by the loosening or the downfall of the rain; but 
although it is not said that this is the effect of the slaughter 
of Chimaira, the idea of rain or moisture as repressed by the 
monster is not absent from the myth of Bellerophdn. His 
victory is won by means of Pegasos, the winged horse, 
whom he finds feeding by the fountain or waters (Trijyij) of 
Peirend, and from its back, as he soars aloft in the air, 
Hipponoos pours down his deadly arrows on the offspring of 
Echidna, as Indra from his chariot in the heaven htuls his 
lance against the gloomy Vritra. 

But Vritra, Ahi, the Panis and the other dark beings are L»oplion- 
all of them enemies (dasas) of the gods, and he who destroys 
them is dasyuhan, the slayer of the dasas—a name which 
translated into Greek would yield Leophontes. This epithet 
is applied to Hipponoos as well as that of Bellerophon; and it 
is clear that he cannot be so called as killing lions, for he 
would then be Leontophontes. Nor is it easy to connect 
this Leo or Peo, of wlxich he is the conqueror, with anything 
but the Sanskrit dasa, which reappears in dasapati, the 
Greek Despotds, or lord of subjects, in other words, of con¬ 
quered enemies.* In the Theban legend this foe is re¬ 
produced as Laios,* who is doomed, like Akrisios, to perish 


> It is possible that the iatroduction 
of the word Chimaira into this aijth 
may be the result of a confusion like 
those already noticed between Arkshus 
and Rikshae, Leukos and Lukos, &c. 
At the least, Chimaira is a name not 
for goats of any but only for those 
which are one year old. The older 
goats aie called Aiges. Theokr. i. 6. 
A Chimaira then, is s^ictly a winter- 
ling, (he. a j’eai’ling), just as the Latin 
bimus or trimus (bi-himus, hiems), 
denotes things of two or three winters 
old. Rut the sun is the slayer of 
winter; and hence the creature which 
he slays would bo the Chima ira. 


* With this we must compare not 
only the Greek Ka6s^ A.€(6s, people, but 
the selective dijios, hostile. This word 
Profcfesor Max Miller {Chips, ii. 187), 
traces to the root das, to perish, although 
he adds that, ^ in its frequent applica¬ 
tion to fire the acyective Bd£os might 
well be referred to the root du, to 
bum.’ The difference in meaning be¬ 
tween them is not greater than that 
which separates Varu^a from Yritra, or 
Uranah from UrAnah. 

* Laios, in the opinion both of Pro¬ 
fessor Muller and of M, Brt^al, is an 
exact equivalent of the Sanskrit Dasyu. 
To the assertion of M. Comparetti that 



344 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK by the hand of his child, as the night must give place to the 
day. 

Section IV.^THE THEBANT MYTH. 

The The close affinit y of the Theban Sphinx with the Ahi, the 

Sphinx. throttling snake, is manifest from its name, which belongs 
to the same root with the verb a(f>Lyyci>y to bind tight, to 
squeeze, and so to choke. In the Hesiodic Theogony this 
word is given under the form Phix, and points to the con¬ 
nexion between the words Tn^ywiMi^ and the Latin 

figo, to fix or fasten. If the Thebans derived this name 
from the mount Phikion, their mistake was but a repetition 
of the process which traced the surnames of Phoibos to the 
island of Delos and the country of Lykia. The Sphinx, then, 
like Yritra and the Panis, is a being who imprisons the rain 
in hidden dungeons. Like them, she takes her seat on a 
rock, and there she utters her dark sayings, and destroys the 
men who cannot expound them. In Hesiod, she is a daughter 
of Orthros and Chimaira, who with her mother Echidna ex¬ 
hibits the same composite form which reappears in the 
Sphinx. In the Sphinx the head of a woman is combined 
with the body of a beast, having like Typhon the claws 
of the lion, the wings of the bird, and the serpent^s tail: 
and in Apollodoros Typhon is himself her father.^ It is, of 
course, possible that the so-called Egyptian Sphinx may be 
an expression for the same idea which has given birth to 
Ahi, Vritra, the Panis, and the kindred beings of Greek 
mythology; but neither the name nor the figures of the 
Hellenic Sphinx have been borrowed from Egypt. The 


an Aryan d never appears in Greek as 1, 
Professor Muller replies by saying that 
the instances in support of his own 
position were supplied by Ahrens, ‘ De 
Bialecto BoricA’ "who cites xdcpvri^!^ 
dd<ptfr}, ’OXuo'treiJsas’OSuo'o'eiJy, andXl<r/coy 
=a dlo-Kos. ( Ckt^fS, ii. 168) He adds (186) 
a large number of instances in which 
the same word in Latin exists under 
both forms, as impedimenta, impeli- 
menta, praesidium, praesilium ; consi- 
dium, consilium, dingua (Goth, tuggd), 
and lingua, &c. Professor Curtius, 
when he speaks of the transition of 5 


into X as unheard of in Greek, must, in 
Professor Muller’s opinion, be speaking 
of classical Greek, and not of tho Greek 
dialects, ‘ which are nevortheloss of the 
greatest importance in the interpreta¬ 
tion of the names of local gods and 
heroes, and in the explanation of local 
legends.’ But if we sought for a Greek 
equivalent to the Latin Tavo, we might 
look for a form Seftw, not less than for 
XoiJw; and we find both, as in IL ii. 471, 
8x6 yXdyos dyyta Seiiei. 

' lii. 5 8. 



VRITRA AND THE SPHINX. 


345 


Egyptian Sphinx is never winged, and is never represented 
except as prone and recumbent, or in any form except that 
of a lion with a human head and bust. The notion that the 
riddling Sphinx of Thebes was derived from the land of the 
Nile may have originated with Herodotos, or may have been 
taken for granted on the bare assertion of Egyptian priests 
by others before himself; but the name existed in Greek 
mythology long before the port of Naukratis was opened to 
Greek commerce. The conclusions which Herodotos drew 
from his Egyptian informants on the subjects of ethnology 
and mythology were in almost every case wrong; and the 
Sphinx is too closely connected with Echidna and Zohak, 
with Orthros, Vritra, Geryon and Oacus, to justify any 
classification which professes to account for one without 
explaining the rest.^ 

In point of fact, few Greek myths are more transparent 
than that of the monster which is slain by Oidipous. The 
story which made her the daughter of Ortbxos or Typhon, 
said simply that the cloud in which the thunder abode, and 
in which the rain was imprisoned, was the child of the dark¬ 
ness : the version which made her a daughter of Laios * 
spoke of her as sprung from the great enemy of Indra and 
Phoibos—the darkness under another name. The huge 
stormcloud moves slowly through the air: and so the phrase 
went that H4r6 the goddess of the open heaven had sent the 
Sphinx, because the Thebans had not punished her enemy 
Laios, who had carried off Chrysippos from Pisa. Others 
related that she had been sent by Ar^s, the grinder, to 
avenge herself on Kadmos for slaying his child the dragon, or 
that she was come to do the bidding of Dionysos or of Hades. 
The effect of her coming is precisely that which follows the 
theft of the cows of Indra by the Panis. The blue heaven is 
veiled from sight, the light of the sun is blotted out, and 
over the city broods the mighty mass, beetliug like a gigantic 


* Ib the Vishi^u JPurana (H. H. Wil- branches of which it struck down abun- 
son, 514) the sphinx appears as the dance of fruit, like raindr^s pourocl 
demon Dheanka, whom ‘ Kama seized upon earth by the wind/ The simile 
by both hind legs, and whirling him here gives the original form of the myth, 
round until he expired, tossed his car- * Pans. ix. 26, 2. 
case to the top of a palm-tree, from the 


CHAP. 

X. 


The Riddle 
solved. 



346 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARY'AX NATIONS. 


BOOK. 

II 


rock, wliich. can nover be moved tintil some one comes 'witli 
strength enough to conquer and to slay her. The robbery and 
rescuing of the cows are the only incidents which have 
fen^Tt out of the Theban legend, but in the discomfiture of 
the Sphinx, who dashes herself from the rock when her riddle 
is solved, we have the sudden downfall of the waters when the 
thundercloud has been pierced by the lance of Indra. The 
issue of the Boiotian story was determined by an explanation 
given of the name of Oidipous. According to some, the name 
denoted the swelling of the child’s feet as he lay exposed on 
the slopes of Kithairon; by others who rejected the derivation 
from the verb olSieo, to swell, it was referred to his wisdom 
in solving the enigma of the feet. That the unintelligible 
muttering of the thunder should suggest the introduction of 
some popular riddle into the old m3d;h, was natural and 
perhaps inevitable; and the time at which it was engrafted 
into the legend is a matter of little or no importance. Wis¬ 
dom is among the most prominent attributes of the beings 
who do battle with the powers of darkness. Whether it be 
Helios possessed of a knowledge which he cannot impart 
even to Hermes, or of a robe which makes Medeia the wonder 
of all for her sagacity and her power, or whether it be Tantalos, 
or Sisyphos, or Ixidn, whose wisdom is no security against 
their downfall, whether it be Phoibos endowing his ministers 
at Delphoi with the gift of prophecy, or Kadmos instructing 
his people in all art and learning, we see in one and all the 
keenness of wit and strength of purpose which do their work 
while gods and men think little of the dwarfs Vishpu and Hari, 
the halting Hephaistos, or Apoll6n wrapped in his swaddling- 
clothes at Delos. Their career begins in weakness to end in 
strength, in defeat to be crowned by victory. In three 
strides the child Vishnu traverses the heaven; and the 
despised Oidipous, ‘ who knows nothing,’ solves the riddle of 
the Sphinx as surely as Indra and Herakles discover the 
hiding-places of their cattle. It is but another version of 
the story of Odysseus flouted as a beggar in his own haU, or 
Boots sitting among the ashes while his elders laugh him to 
scorn, but each winning a victory which is due rather to 
their wisdom than to their power. 



THK SNAKE OP WINTER. 


347 


But if the riddle was introduced into tlie story at a com- CHAP. 

paratively late stage, the idea which suggested it is essential ■__- 

to the myth. It is that of the fatal voice of the thunder,^ The Voice 
the utterances of Typh^n, which even the gods can only Thwider. 
sometimes understand,* and which cease when the cloud has 
been pierced by the lightning and the rain has fallen upon 
the earth. Thus, in two or three mythical phrases, we have 
the framework of the whole myth. The first, ‘ Oidipous is 
talking with the Sphinx,’ indicates the struggle of Indra 
with the Panis, of Zeus with Typhon, of Apolldn with the 
Delphian dragon; in the second, ‘ Oidipous has smitten the 
Sphinx,’ we have the consummation which sets the land 
free from the plague of drought. 

Section V.—THE DELPHIAH AND CRETAN MYTHS. 

In other myths the incidents of the imprisonment and ThePy- 
liberation of the waters are marked with scarcely less clear- 
ness than in the history of Indra himself. The being with 
whom ApoUdn has to fight is the dragon of Pytho, who had 
chased and vexed his mother during her journeyings before 
she reached Delos, and at whose death the imprisoned waters 
started from the sources opened by the spear of Phoibos. 

In the Theban myth the snake who is slain by Eadmos 
guards the well of Ar4s, and slays all who come to fetch 
water until Eadmos himself deals it the death-blow.® The 
snakes or serpents are no other than the dragon of the 
glistening heath, which, in the myths of the frost-bound 
regions of the north, lies coiled round the sleeping Brynhild 
and aU her treasures. The myth is changed only in the 
point of view which substitutes deUverance from the deadly 
cold of winter for deliverance from the not less dreadful 
plague of drought. The latter idea may be traced in the 
strange story related by Pausanias * of the hero of Temessa. 

* fipomris ^ 0 tov <l>$dyfjLa. Pind. JP^th, les Tochers, i la place oil il disparut 

iv. 350. source s’elan 9 a de la pxerre.’ This 

* Hes. Tkeog, 837. monster, under the form of a huge wild 

» M. Br4al {UttcuU et Cacus, 113) ass, who haunts a spring, is slain again 

adds the instance of Bury bates: bj the Persian Pustem. Keightley, 

* Eurybate ayant tir5 de son antre le if airy Mythology, 
monstre Sybans qui di'solait les enri- * vi, 6. 
rons de Delphi, et Tayant bris4 centre 



348 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


The Mino- 
tauros. 


The enemy here is not a snake but an evil spirit, or rather 
the demon of one of the companions of Odysseus who had 
been slain for wrong done to a maiden of that city. The 
ravages of this demon, not less terrible than those of the 
Sptinx, could be stayed, the Pythian priestess said, only by 
building a temple to this hero or demon, and oflfering to him 
once a year a beautiful maiden. Prom this point the story 
is but another version of the myth of Perseus. Like him, 
Euthymos (a -wrestler -who is said to have -won several vic¬ 
tories at Olympia between the 70th and 80th Olympiads, but 
whom his coun-trymen regarded as a son of the river Kaikinds) 
resolves to rescue the maiden, and wins her as his bride,‘ 
while the demon, like the Libyan dragon, sinks into the 
sea. Of the mode by which Euthymos mastered him no¬ 
thing is said ; but Pausanias adds that Euthymos was not 
subjected to death, and that the demon whom he overcame 
was a creature terribly dark and black, with the skin of a 
wolf for his garment. With this legend we may compare 
the story of the monsters slain by Beowulf, the wolf-tamer, 
the first of these being Grendel, who ravages the country of 
King Hrothgar, and whom he slays after a struggle as 
arduous as that of Indra with the Panis. The second is but 
another form of the first. It is a huge dragon which guards 
a treasure-hoard near the sea-shore, and which sinks into 
the waters when smitten by the hero, who, like Sigurd, 
becomes master of all his wealth. 

The same devouring enemy of the lord of light reappears 
in the Cretan Minotauros; and here also, as we resolve the 
myth into its component parts, we see the simple framework 
on which it has been built up. The story in its later form 
ran that at the prayer of Minos Poseiddn sent up from the 
sea a buB, by whom PasiphaS became the mother of a com¬ 
posite being like Echidna, Orthros, Geiyon, or Kerberos; 
that this monster was shut up in the labyrinth made by the 
cunning workman Daidalos, and there fed with the children 
whom the Athenians were obliged to send yearly, until at 
length the tribute-ship brought among the intended victims 


’ In a, still more modem sliape the story may ho found in Southey’s metrical 
tale of the Dragon of Antioch. 



THE TRIBUTE CHILDREN OF ATHENS. 


349 


the hero Theseus, who by the aid of Ariadn^ slew the 
human-headed bull, or the bull-headed man, for this being 
is exhibited under both forms. To search this myth for a 
residuum of fact, pointing to some early dependence of his¬ 
torical Athens on the maritime supremacy of some Cretan 
king, is, as we have seen, utterly useless. We know nothing 
of Minos, Athens, or Crete at the alleged time to which 
these myths relate except what we learn from the myths 
themselves, and these utter no uncertain sounds. The Mino- 
tauros is the offspring of the bull from the sea, which appears 
again in the myth of Europ^ and is yoked to the chariot of 
Indra, and of PasiphaA who gives light to all. This incident 
is but a translation of the fact that the night follows or is 
born from the day. The same notion assigns Phoibos Chry- 
sfi6r, the lord of the golden sword, and the fair nymph 
KallirhoA ^ parents of the frightful Geryon. The mon¬ 
ster so bom must share the nature of Ahi, Vritra, the Panis, 
Cacus, and the Sphinx. In other words, he must steal, kill, 
and devour, and his victims must belong to the bright 
beings fe*om whom he is sprung. The Panis can steal only 
the cows of Indra, and the Minotauros can consume only the 
beautiful children of the dawn-goddess Ath^n^; in other 
words, the tribube can come only from Athens. But all 
these fearful monsters lurk in secret places; each has his 
cave or mountain fastness, where he gorges himself on his 
prey. The road to it is gloomy and bewildering; and in 
the expression put into the mouth of the Panis, who tell 
Saram4 that ‘ the way is far and leads tortuously away,^ we 
have something more than the germ of the twisting and 
hazy labyrinth—we have the labyrinth itself. This intricate 
abode is indeed the work of the magnificent Daidalos; but 
the walls of Hion, to which Paris the seducer takes the 
beautiful Helen, are built by Phoibos and Herakles them¬ 
selves. In this dark retreat lurks the monster who can be 
slain only by one invincible hero; but although Indra is the 
destined destroyer of Vritra, he cannot find out wliere his 
enemy is hidden away except by the aid of Saram^. In 
this lovely being, who, peering about through the sky in 
search of the stolen cattle, guides Indra to the den of the 


CHAP. 

X, 



350 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK throttling serpent, we see the not less beautiful Ariadnfi who 
V- ^ points out to Theseus the clue which is to guide him to the 
abode of the Minotaur; and thus the myth i-esolves itself 
into a few phrases which spoke of the night as sprung from 
the day, as stealing the treasures of the day and devouring 
its victims through the hours of darkness, and as discovei’ed by 
the early morning who brings up its destined conqueror, the 
V sun. 

Sectioh VI.—the gloaming AND THE NIGHT. 

The Phot- Nor are myths wanting for the other phases of the heaven 
Gr^ai and between the setting and the rising of the sun. If the lovely 
Gorgons. flush of the flrst twilight is betokened by the visits of Seldnd 
to Endymidn, the dusky gloaming is embodied in the Graiai, 
or daughters of Phorkys and Ketd, who are grey or oahen- 
coloured from their birth. Thus tho phrase that Perseus 
had reached the home of the Graiai only said in other words 
that the sun had sunk beneath the horizon. In the Hesiodic 
Theogony* they are only two in number, Pephrddo and Enyd, 
the latter name being akin to Enyalios and Enosichthon, 
epithets of Ards and Poseiddn as shakers of the earth and 
sea. In the scholiast on .ffischylos * they appear as swan- 
maidens, who have only one tooth and one eye in common, 
which they borrow from one another as each may need them. 
The night again, as lit up by a grave and sombre beauty, or as 
oppressing men by its pitchy darkness, is represented by the 
other daughters of Phorkys and Zdtd who are known as the 
Gorgons. Of these throe sisters, one only, Medousa, as em- 
bod 3 dng the short-lived night, is subject to death; the others, 
Stheind and Euryald, as signifying the eternal abyss of 
darkness, are immortal. According to tho Hesiodic poet, 
Poseiddn loved Medousa in the soft meadow among the 
flowers of spring; and when her head fell beneath the sword 
of Perseus, there sprang from it ChrysSdr with his gleaming 
sword, and the winged horse Pdgasos—an incident which is 
simply the counterpart of the birth of Geryoneus from Eal- 
lirhod and Chrys^r. According to another version, Medousa 

2 Jhrom . V , 793 . 


* 273. 



MEDOUSA- 


351 


had once been beautifdl, bnt had roused the wrath of Ath^nS 
as becoming the mother of glorious children, or as having 
dared to set her own beauty in comparison with the love¬ 
liness of the Dawn herself. The rivalry was indeed vain. 
The serenest night cannot vie with the exquisite hues of the 
morning; and henceforth, to requite her daring, the raven 
locks of Medousa must be turned into hissing snakes, the 
deadly glance of her joyless face should freeze all who gazed 
on it into stone, and even Perseus could bring her long 
agony to an end only by fixing his eye on the burnished 
mirror while the sword of Phoibos fell on the neck of the 
sleeping Gorgon. 

The notion of these serpent enemies of the bright gods 
runs through the mythology of all the Aryan nations. 
Sometimes they have three heads, sometimes seven or even 
more: but we cannot forget that the words Ahi, Echidna, 
anguis, expressed an idea which had nothing in common 
with the thought denoted by the dragon. The latter was 
strictly the keen-sighted being, and as such belonged to the 
heavenly hierarchy. The dragons who bear the chariot of 
Medeia through the air, or who impart to the infant lamos 
the gift of prophecy, are connected only by the accident of 
a name with the snakes whom Herakles strangles in his 
cradle, whom Phoibos slays at Delphoi, or Indra smites in 
the land of the Panis.^ But when by the weakening of 
memory the same word was used to denote the malignant 
serpent and the beneficent dragon, the attributes of the one 
became in some myths more or less blended with those of 
the other. In the popular Hindu story of Vikram Maha¬ 
rajah, the cobra who curls himself up in his throat and will 
not be dislodged is clearly the snake of winter, who takes 
away the gladness and joy of summer; for this disaster is 
followed by the rajah’s exile, and his people mourn his 
absence as D^mStfir grieves while her child Persephon^ is 
sojourning in H!ades. It is in fact the story of Sigurd and 

* In Teutonic folk-lore the night or with her scarlet robe of twilight. In 
dnrknes.s is commonly the ravening wolf, one version of this story Little Red Cap 
the Penris of the kdda. This is the escapes his malice, as Memn6n rises 
evil beast who swallows up Little Red again from Hades. 

Cap or Bed Riding Hood, the evening. 


CHAP. 

X. 


The Night 
and the 
Winter, 



352 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYA^* NATION’S. 


BOOK Brynliild reversed; for here it is Vikrain who is banished or 
. ^ sleeps, while the beautiful princess Buccoxilee sees her 

destined husband in her dreams, and recognises him among 
a group of beggars as Eurykleia recognises Odjsseiis in his 
squalid raiment. Him she follows, although ho leads her to 
a hut in the jungle, where she has but a hard time of it 
while the cobra still remains coiled up in his throat. This 
woM state is brought to an end by an incident which occurs 
in the stories of Panch Phul Ranee and of Glnnkos and 
Polyidos. Buccoulee hears two cobras conversing, and 
learns from them the way not merely to rid her htisband of 
his tormentor, but to gain possession of the splendid trea¬ 
sure which these snakes guard like the dmgon of the 
glistening heath or the monsters of the legend of Beowulf.' 
Modifioa- Still more notably is the idea of the old myth softened 
down in the tale of Troy, for Ilion is the stronghold of Paris 
the deceiver, and Hektor is the stoutest warrior and the 
noblest man in all the hosts of Priam. To the treachery 
of Alexandros he opposes the most thorough truthfulness, to 
his indolent selfishness the most disinterested generosity and 
the most active patriotism. But Hektor had had no share 
in the sin of Paris, and there was nothing even in the 
earliest form of the myth which would require that the 
kinsmen of Paris should not fight bravely for their hearths 
and homes. We have, however, seen already that the 
mythical instinct was satisfied when the legend as a whole 
conveyed the idea from which the myth sprung up. Ilion 
was indeed the fastness of the dark powers; but each chief 
and warrior who fought on their side would have his own 
mythical history, and threads from very different looms 
might be woven together into a single skein. This has 
happened to a singular extent in the Trojan legend. The 
warmer hues which are seen in the pictures of Phoibos, 
Perseus, and Herakles have been shed over the features even 
of Paris himself, while Glaukos, Sarpdddn, and Memndn are 
children of the dawn who come from the gleaming eastern 

* In the story of Muehie Lai, the fact, the snake who dwells in the shrine 
seven-headed cobra is the friend and de- of AthSnS, the goddess of the morning, 
fender of the dawn-maiden, and is, in Deccan Talw^ 244, &c. 



AHRIMAN. 


353 


lands watered by golden streams. Hence it is that Apbro- CHAP. 

ditS the dawn-goddess has her child Aineias within the ._ ^ __ 

Trojan lines; and when the brave Hektor has been smitten 
beneath the spear of Achilleus, she keeps his body from 
decay as Ath4n5 watched over the corpse of Patroklos. 

Section VIL 

THE PHYSICAL STRUGGLE SPIRITUALISED. 

Thus far the struggle between the bright being and his Contrast 

enemy has been entirely physical; and nothing more than , 

j.T.j-j.j. i!> i . °.. Hindu and 

the laintest germs of moral sentiment or conviction as Iranian 

attaching to this conflict can be traced in the mythology 
whether of the Hindus or the Western Aryans. In tie 
mere expression of the wish that the wicked Vritra might 
not be suffered to reign over the worshippers of Indra, and 
in the admission made by Zeus' that the fight between the 
Hronid gods and the Titans is one for sovereignty or sub¬ 
jection, for life or death, we have all that we can cite as 
symptoms of that marvellous change which on Iranian soil 
converted this myth of Vritra into a religion and a philoso¬ 
phy. So completely does the system thus developed exhibit 
a metaphysical character, and so distinctly does it seem to 
point to a purely intellectual origin, that we might well 
doubt the identity of Ahriman and Vritra, were it not that 
an identity of names and attributes runs through the Vedic 
and Iranian myths to a degree which makes doubt im¬ 
possible. 

This agreement in names is indeed far more striking identity of 
between the Hindu and Persian mythology than between 
that of the former and the Greeks. The names of ATii^ Persian 
Viitra, Sarama, and the Panis reappear in the west as 
Echidna, Orthros, Helenfi and Paris; but Trita or Traitana 
as a name of the god of the air has been lost, and we fail to 
find the form Orthrophontes as a parallel to Vritrahan, 
although such epithets as Leophontes and Bellerophontes 
would lead us to expect it. In the Zendavesta not merely 
does this name seem but little changed, as Verethragna, but 
* Heaiod, 646. 

A A 


VOL. IL 



354 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AUYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK we also find the Trita, Tama and Erisasva of the Veda in 
^ ■ the Tima-Ksha^ta, Thraetana and Keresaapa of the Avesta, 

the representatives of three of the earliest generations of 
mankind) jnst as the Germans spoke of the Ingrevones, 
Herminones and Iscsevones as spmng from ^dannns the son 
of Tuiseo (Tyr). The identification of these names with 
the Teridun, Jemshid and Garshasp of the modem Persian 
epic of the Shahnameh is regarded hy Professor Max Muller 
as among the most brilliant discoveries of one of the great¬ 
est of French scholars.* Going beyond this, Eugene Burnouf 
asserts that as Vivasvat is the father of Tama in the Veda, 
so is Vivanghvat the father of the Zend Tima, and that the 
father of the Vedie Trita is Aptya while the fatlier of ThraA- 
tana is Athwya. 

Azula- But Thraetana is also known as Verethragna, the Verethra 
^hak or Vritra slayer, although his enemy is commonly spoken of 
under the name of Azidahfika, the biting snake, the throttling 
Ahi of Vedic, and the Echidna of Hellenic, myths.* These 
names again M. Burnouf has traced into the great epic of 
Firdusi; for the Pehlevi form of his name loads us to Feridun, 
and Feridun is in the Shahnameh the slayer of the tyrant 
Zohak. But the struggle, which as carried on between 
Indra and Vritra is clearly a fight to set free the pent-up 
waters, is between Thraetana and Azidahfika a contest be¬ 
tween a good and an evil being. The myth has received a 
moral turn, and it suggested a scries of conflicts between the 
like opposing powers, until they culminated in the eternal 
warfare of Ormuzd and Ahriman. In India the thought of 
the people ran in another channel. With them Indra, Dyu, 
A gnij Vishnu, Varuna, were but names for one and the same 
divine Being, who alone was to them the Maker and Pre¬ 
server of aU things. If it was said that they had enemies, 
their foes were manifestly physical; nor was there anything 
in the phraseology of their hymns to lead us to the notion of 
, any evil power as having an existence independent of the 

great Cause of aH things. But on Persian soil, the word 

^ Lectures-on Language, the changes which from the same root 

522 . have ptwuced the Greek ZdxpVf 

® The w©’'d Dahak reappears in the Gothic t^, and the English tear, with 
Greek Zdicya, and in the name for the Latin lacryma and the French 
any biting animal, and may be com- larme, see Idax Muller. Leotv/ru m 
pared with tig&r and with dog. For Langm<je, second series, 259, 



OEMUZD. 


355 


Yerethragna, transparent in its meaning to the worshippers 
of Indra, so thoroughly lost its original sense that it came 
to denote mere strength or power;' and as from a metaphy¬ 
sical point of view the power opposed to the righteous God 
must he a moral one, a series of synonyms were employed 
which imparted to the representative of Yritra more and 
more of a spiritual character. The Devas of the Yeda are 
the bright gods who fight on the side of Indra; in the Avesta 
the word has come to mean an evil spirit, and the Zoroastrian 
was bound to declare that he ceased to be a worshipper of 
the daev4s.® Thus Verethra and all kindred deities were 
placed in this class of malignant beings, and branded with the 
epithet Drukhs, deceitful.® But the special distinction of 
the being known to us under the familiar name of Ahriman, 
was the title of Angrfi-Mainyus, or spirit of darkness.* 
This name was simply an offset to that of his righteous ad¬ 
versary, Spento-Mainyus, or the spirit of light. But Spento- 
Mainyus was only another name for the Supreme Being, 
whose name Ahuro-mazd4o we repeat in the shortened form 
of Ormuzd.® In this Being the devout Zoroastrian trusted 


' As such, M. Breal remarks that it 
"became an adjective, and is sometimes 
used in the superlative degree, a hymn 
being spoken of as Verethra 2 an 9 teina. 
Hercule et Cactis^ 129. 

* Max Miiller, Ckips^ i. 26. 

* The word is probably found in the 
Greek d-rpf/c-'ijy, not deceitful*trust¬ 
worthy, sure. 

M. Maury, regarding the name 
Ahriman as identical with the Vedic 
Aryaman, sees in the Iranian demon a 
degradation of the Hindu sun-god, an 
inverse change to that which invested 
the Trojan Paris with the attributes of 
solar heroes. * Mitra a un autre par4dre 
que Varouna, e’est Aryaman .... 
Cette divinity nous oflfre i Torigine une 
nouvelle personniflcation du soleil dans 
son action fortifiante et salutaire: a ce 
titre il est souient associ^ 4 Bhaya, 
lAditya qui dispense des bienfaits et qui 
b^nit les hommes .... Mais, plua- 
tard, Aryaman devint I’Aditya de la 
mort, le soleil destructeur; car, sous le 
climat brillant de ITnde, on sait com- 
bien est dangereuse Tinsolation . . . . 
Voil^ comment Aryaman fournit k la 
religion de Zoroastre le type du dieu 

A 


mauvais, I’liUe d’une divinity adversaire 

constante d’Ormuzd et de Mithra’_ 

Croyances et Lkgendes de VAntiquiU, 61. 
The degradation of Aryaman involved 
the exaltation of Mithra ‘Une fois 
devenu la personnification de la v4rit6 
et de la bonne foi, Mithra re 9 ut le 
caractSre de m6diateur entre Uieu et 
I’homme, fj.€(rlr7js, comme I’appelle 
Tauteur du Trait4 sur Isis et Osiris,* ib. 
164. 

® Like ThraStana and Verethragna, 
the name Ormiizd is Sanskrit. Plato 
speaks of Zoroaster as a son of Oro- 
mazes, which is clearly only another 
form of the name of this deity In the 
inscriptions at Behistun it appears in 
the form AuramazdA; but in Persian 
the word conveys no meaning. In the 
Zendavesta it is found both as Ahuro- 
inazdio and as Mazdao Ahuro; and 
these forms lead us at once to the Sans¬ 
krit, in which they correspond to the 
words Asuro medhas, wise spirit—a 
name which suggests a comparison with 
the Metis and Medeia of Greek myths. 
See Max Muller, Lectures on Language^ 
first series, 196. 

i. 2 


CHAP. 

X. 



356 


MYTUOIiOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


Iranian 

dualism. 


Its in¬ 
fluence on 
the Jevs. 


witli all tlie strength, of spiritual conviction: but the idea of 
his enemy was as closely linked with that of the righteous 
God as the idea of Vritra with that of Indra; and the exalt¬ 
ation of Ormuzd carried the greatness of Ahriman to a pitch 
which made him the creator and the sovereign of an evil 
universe at war with the Kosmos of the spirit of light. 

Such was the origin of Iranian dualism, a dualism which 
divided the world between two opposing self-existent deities, 
while it professedly left to men the power of choosing whom 
they should obey. ^ Ahura-mazda is holy, true, to be honoured 
through truth, through holy deeds.’ ^Tou cannot .serve 
him and his enemy.’ ^ In the beginning there was a pair of 
twins, two spirits, each of a peculiar activity. These are 
the Good and the Base in thought, word, and deed. Choose 
one of these two spirits. Be good, not base.^ But practically 
Ahriman took continually a stronger hold on the popular 
imagination, and the full effects of this process were to be 
realised elsewhere. The religion of Zoroaster has been re¬ 
garded as a reform 3 in M. Br^al’s judgment, it was rather a 
return to a classification which the Hindu had abandoned or 
had never cared to adopt. ^ While Brahmanism kept to the 
old belief only in the letter, Mazdeism preserved its spirit. 
The Parsee, who sees the universe divided between two 
forces, everywhere present and each in turn victorious until 
the fiLnal victory of Ormuzd, is nearer to the mythical 
representations of the first age than the Hindu, who, looking 
on everything as an illusion of the senses, wraps up the 
universe and his own personality in the existence of one single 
Being.’ ^ 

With this dualism the Jews were brought into contact 
during the captivity at Babylon. That the Hebrew prophets 
had reiterated their belief in one God with the most profound 
conviction, is not to be questioned; but as little can it be 
doubted that as a people the Jews had exhibited little im¬ 
pulse towards Monotheism, and that from this time we 
discern a readiness to adopt the Zoroastrian demonology* 
Thus far Satan had appeared, as in the book of Job, among 

' JliTcule et CoLcus^ 129, The same logy is taken by M. Maoiy, {jrcyaffut$8f 
view of the origin of the Dualistic theo- 97. 



ST. GEORGE AND THE DRAGON. 


357 


the ministers of God; but in later boohs we have a closer CHAP, 
approximation to the Iranian creed. In the words of M. ^ . 

Br^al, * Satan assumes, in Zacharias and in the first book of 
Chonicles, the character of Ahriman, and appears as the 
author of evil. Still later he becomes the prince of the 
devils, the source of wicked thoughts, the enemy of the 
word of God. He tempts the Son of God; he enters into 
Judas for his ruin. The Apocalypse exhibits Satan with the 
physical attributes of Ahriman : he is called the dragon, the 
old sei'pent, who fights against God and his angels. The 
Ycdic myth, transformed and exaggerated in the Iranian 
books, finds its way through this channel into Christianity.’ 

The idea thus introduced was that of the struggle between 
Satan and Michael which ended in the overthrow of the 
former, and the casting forth of all his hosts out of heaven; 
but it coincided too nearly with a myth spread in countries 
held by all the Aryan nations to avoid further modification. 

Local traditions substituted St. George or St. Theodore for 
Jupiter, Apolldn, Herakles, or Perseus. ^It is under this 
disguise,’ adds M. Br^al, Hhat the’Vedic myth has come 
down to our own times, and has still its festivals and its 
monuments. Art has consecrated it in a thousand ways. 

St. Michael, lance in hand, treading on the dragon, is an 
image as familiar now as, thirty centuries ago, that of Indra 
treading under foot the demon Vritra could possibly have 
been to the Hindu.’ ^ 

That this myth should be Euemerised by Pirdusi was The epic 
natural and inevitable, when once the poet had made Feridun Firdusi. 
a king of the first Persian dynasty. He could no longer 
represent Zohak as a monster with three heads, three tails, 
six eyes, and a thousand forces; * but the power of the old 
myth gave shape to his statement that, after the embrace of 
the demon, a snake started up from each of his shoulder^, 
whose head, like that of the Lernaian hydra, grew as fast as 
it was cut off. Nor has it influenced the modern poet only. 

Cyrus is as historical as Charlemagne; but from mythical 
history we should learn as much of the former as we should 
know of the latter, if our information came only from th^ 

* Hercide et CacuSt 138. * iZ>. 130. 



358 


MYTHOLOGY OP THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

11 . 


Th« Semi¬ 
tic Satan. 


myth of Eoland. What Cyrus really did we learn from 
other sources 5 hut in the legendary story he is simply an¬ 
other Oidipous and T^lephos, compelled for a time to live, 
like Odysseus and the Boots of German tales, in mean dis¬ 
guise, until his inborn nobleness proclaims him the son of a 
king. But as in the case of Oidipous, Perseus, Theseus, 
and many more, the father or the grandsire dreads the birth 
of the child, for the sun must destroy the darkness to whom 
he seems to owe his life. This sire of Cyrus must belong 
therefore to the class of beings who represent the powers of 
night—in other words, he must be akin to Vritra or to Ahi; 
and in his name accordingly we find the familiar words. 
Astyages, the Persian Asdahag, is but another foim of 
the modern Zohak, the Azidahdka, or biting snake, of 
Vedic and Iranian mythology; and the epithet reappears 
seemingly in the name of Deiokes, the first king of the 
Median nation.^ 


Section YIII.—THE SEMITIC AND ARYAN DEVIL. 

Thus far it is only on Iranian soil that we have seen the 
struggle between day and night, the sun and the darkness, 
represented as a conflict between moral good and evil, the 
result being a practical, if not a theoretical dualism, in which 
the unclean spirit is at the least as powerful as the righteous 
being with whom he is at war. This absolute partition of 
the universe between two contending principles was the 
very groundwork of Iranian belief; but the idea was one 
which could not fail to strike root in any congenial soil. To 
a certain extent it found such a soil in the mind of the 
Jewish people, who had become fiimiliar, by whatever means, 
with the notion of a being whose office it was to tempt or try 
the children of men. The Satan who discharges this duty 
is, however, one of the sons of God; and in the book of Job 
there is no indication of any essential antagonism between 

* The story of Deiokes is certainly this self-xnudo sovereign, and his inao- 
not told by Herodotos^ for the purpose cessible retrwit witlim a palace fh>m 
of establishing the divine right of kings, which, he never emexges, may have been ^ 
but it is more than possible that the suggoated by the myth to which Mft 
selfishness and rapacity which mark name belongs. 



IRANIAN DEMONOLOGY. 


■359 


tiiem. The position of Satan in this narrative is indeed in 
strict accordance with the Hebrew philosophy which regarded .. 
Grod as the author both of good and evil, as the being who 
hardened Pharaoh’s heart and authorised the lying spirit to 
go forth and prevail among the prophets of Ahab. But 
when a portion of the Jewish people was brought into 
contact with the fully developed system of Persian dualism, 
the victory of the Iranian theology seemed complete. Hence¬ 
forth the notion of two hierarchies, the one heavenly, the 
other diabolical, took possession of their minds; and the 
Satan, who ruled over the powers of darkness and exercised 
a wide dominion as prince of the air, was confined to a level 
lower than that of Ahriman, only because he had once stood 
among the most brilliant angels in the courts of heaven. At 
this level he remained a fallen creature ruling over hosts of 
malignant demons who did his will among mankind, plaguing 
th em with sorrow, disease, and madness, until the convictions 
of the first Christian societies magnified him into proportions 
if possible more overpowering than those of the Iranian 
enemy of Ormuzd. The Jew, chiefiy, if not wholly, from 
the conviction which led him to regard God as the author 
both of good and evil, drew no sharp distinction between 
mind and matter as existing in irreconcilable antagonism; 
and since as a nation they can scarcely be said to the last 
to have attained to any definite ideas either of the fact or 
the conditions of a life continued after death, Satan could 
with them obviously have no definite dominion beyond the 
bounds of our present existence. He could torture the 
bodies, afflict the souls, or darken the minds of men; but of 
his everlasting reign over countless multitudes ruined by his 
subtle vnles we find no very definite notion 

But-Christianity, while it rested on a distinct assurance of 
personal immortality altogether stronger than any to which 
the most fervent of the Hebrew prophets had ever attained, 
took root among nations who had filled all the world with 
gods or demons, each with his own special sphere and office. 
These deities the Christian teachers dethroned; but far 
from attempting to destroy them, they were careful to insist 
that they had always been, and must for ever continue to be. 


CTTAP. 

X. 


Effect of 
(Jhiistian 
teaching. 



360 


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ABYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


malignant devils;' bnt nnless their horrible fellowship was 
speedily to come to an end, they mnst be under the rule of 
some king, and this king they found in the Semitic Satan. 
Of the theology which sprung from this root it is enough to 
say that it endowed the king of the fallen angels with the 
powers of omnipresence and omniscience, and made him so 
far a conqueror in his great struggle with the author of his 
being as to succeed in wresting for ever out of the hands of 
God all but an insignificant fraction of the whole race of 
mankind. The victory of the Almighty God could not 
extend either to the destruction of Satan and his subordinate 
demons, or to the rescue of the souls whom he had enticed 
to their ruin; and if power be measured by the multitude of 
subjects, his defeat by Michael could scarcely be regarded as 
much impairing his magnificent success. Of the effect of 
this belief on the moral and social developement of Christen¬ 
dom, it is unnecessary to speak: but it must not be forgotten 
that this particular developement of the Jewish demonology 
was the natural outgrowth of passionate convictions anima¬ 
ting a scanty band in an almost hopeless struggle against a 
society thoroughly corrupt and impure. It was almost im¬ 
possible for any whose eyes were opened to its horrors to 
look upon it as anything but a loathsome mass which could 
never be cleansed from its defilement. What could they see 
but a vast gulf separating the few who were the soldiers of 
Christ from the myriads who thronged together under the 
standard of his adversary? Hence grew up by a process 
which cannot much excite our wonder that severe theology, 
which, known especially as that of Augustine, represented 
the Christian Church as an ark floating on a raging sea, 
open only to those who received the sacrament of baptism, 
and shut both here and hereafter to infants dying before it 
could be administered. It was inevitable that under such 
conditions the image of Satan should more and more fill the 

1 The Christian missionaries were tind siindlich, nicht als absolnt nichtig 
further conscious that thoir own thau- scliildorte: die Wunder des Christen 
maturgy might be called into question, erscheinen dadurch glanbhafter, daw 
if that of the old crood were treated as auch dcm althergrbrachten Heiden- 
mere imposture or illusion. ‘Die neue thum etwas uburiuiturliehes geLeu^en 
Lehre konnte leichter keimen und wurde.’—Grimm, D, M, 757. 
wurzeln wenn sie die alte als gehassxg 



LOKI AND IIEL* 


361 


CHAP. 

X. 


theological horizon for the few whose enthiisiasm and con¬ 
victions were sincere. But these conditions were changed 
with the conversion of tribes, in whom the thought of one 
malignant spirit marring and -undoing the work of God had 
never been awakened; and although henceforth the teaching 
of the priesthood might continue to be as severe as that of 
Augustine or Fulgentius, it was met by the passive resistance 
of men whose superstitions were less harsh and oppressive. 

^ The Aryan Nations,’ says Professor Max Muller, ^ had no 
devil. Pluto, though of a sombre character, was a very 
respectable personage: and Loki, though a mischievous 
person, was not a fiend. The German goddess, Hel, too— 
like Proserpine—^had seen better days.’ ^ It was thus no 
easy task to imbue them with an adequate horror of a being 
of whose absolute malignity they could form no clear con¬ 
ception. 

But these tribes had their full share of that large inherit- Thr^ Teu- 
ance of phrases which had described originally the covering 
or biting snake, Vritra or Ahi, who shuts up the rain-clouds 
in his prison-house. Probably not one of the phrases which 
furnished the groundwork of Iranian dualism had been lost 
or forgotten by any other of the Aryan tribes; but like 
Vritra or Ahi, like the Sphinx or the Python, like Belleros 
or Chimaira, or Echidna, the beings to whom the Ger¬ 
man tribes applied these phrases had already been over¬ 
come. The phrases also had varied in character from grave 
solemnity to comedy or burlesque, from the type of the 
Herakles whom we see in the apologue of Prodikos to the 
Herakles who jests with Thanatos (Death) after he has 
stolen away AlkSstis. To the people at large the latter 
mode of thinking and speaking on the subject was more 
congenial; and to it the ideas of the old gods were more 


* CJ^ips, Sec., voL ii. p. 285, Dr, tongue. This notion Chriatianity 
Dasent'e words are not less explicit, brought with it from the east; and 
* The notion of an Arch-enemy of god though it is a plant which has struck 
and man, a fallen angel, to whom power deep roots, grown distorted and awry, 
was permitted at certain times for ap and borne a bitter crop of superstition, 
all-wise purpose by the Groat Ruler of it required all the authority of the 
the universe, was as foreign to the Church to prepare the soil for its recep- 
hoathcndom of our ancestors as his name tion .’—Popular Tales from the Norse^ 
was outlandish and strange to their intr^uction, p. xcvui. 



362 MYTIIOLOQT OP THE AEYAN XATIOXS. 

BOOK readily adapted. Hel had been, like Persepbou6, the queen 
■ ■ of the unseen-land,—in the ideas of the northern tribes, 

a land of bitter cold and icy walls. She now became 
not the queen of Niflheim, but Niflheim itself, while her 
abode, though gloomy enough, was not wholly destitute of 
material comforts. It became the Hell where the old man 
hews wood for the Christmas fire, and where the Devil in 
his eagerness to buy the flitch of bacon yields up the 
marvellous quern which is ‘ good to grind almost anything.’' 
It was not so pleasant, indeed, as heaven, or the old Val¬ 
halla, but it was better to be there than shut out in the 
outer cold beyond its padlocked gates.* But more particu¬ 
larly the devil was a being who under pressure of hunger 
might be drawn into acting against his own interest; in 
other words, he might be outwitted, and this character of a 
poor or stupid devil is almost the only one exhibited in 
Teutonic legends.* In fact, as Professor Max Muller re¬ 
marks, the G-ermans, when they had been ‘indoctrinated 
with the idea of a real devil, the Semitic Satan or Diabolus, 
treated him in the most good-humoured manner;’ nor is 
* it easy to resist Dr. Dasent’s conclusion that ‘no greater 
proof can be given of the small hold which the Christian 
Devil has taken of the Norse mind, than the heathen aspect 
under which he constantly appears, and the ludicrous way in 
which he is always outwitted.’^ 

Wayiand But this freedom was never taken with Satan. While 

the Smith. 


' ‘Why the Sea is Salt^ Dasent, 
Norse Tales, ii. This inexhaustible 
quepn is only another form of the trea¬ 
sures of Helen or Brynhild But though 
the snow may veil all the wealth of 
fruits and vegetables, this wealth is of 
no use to the chill beings who have laid 
their grasp upon it. These beings must 
he therefore so hard pressed for hunger 
that, like lilsau, they may be ready to 
part with anything or everything for a 
mess of pottage or a flitch of bacon 
* The Master Smith, in the heathenish 
story so entitled, entraps the devil into 
a purse, as the Fisherman entmps the 
Jm in the Arabian Tale, and the devil 
IS so scared that when the Smith pre¬ 
sents himself at the gate of hell, he 
gives orders to have the nine padlocks 


carefully locked. Dr. Dasont remarks 
that the Smith makes trial of hell in 
the first instance, for * having behaved 
ill to the ruler 'of heaven, and ‘actually 
quarrelled with the master’ of hell, 
ho ‘ was naturally anxious * to know 
whether he would bo received by either. 
Ibid, cii 

* It has been said of Soiitboy that he 
could never think of the devil without 
laughing. This is but saying that he 
had the genuine humour of our Teutonic 
ancestors. His version of the legend of 
Eleemon may be compared with any of 
the popular tales in which Satan ia 
overmatched by men whom he despises, 
Grimm, 969. 

^ Nom Talcs^ introd. ciii. 



WAYLAND. 


that name remained unchanged in the language of theology, 
the word devil passed into an immense number of forms, the 
Gothic tieval, diuval, diufal, the Icelandic djofull, Swedish 
djevful, all of them, together with the Italian, French, and 
Spanish forms carrying back the word Bid^okos to the same 
root which furnised the Latin Divus, Djovis, and the San¬ 
skrit deva.^ To this devil were applied familiarly those 
epithets which are bestowed in the Vedic hymns on the 
antagonist of Indra. Like Vritra, he is often spoken of 
simply as the fiend or the enemy (o nrovrip6s ); more often 
he is described as the old devil or serpent, the ealda deofol 
of Cmdmoii, the old Nick^ and old Davy of common English 
speech at the present day. Like Pani, he is VSlant, the 
cheat or seducer,® who appears in a female form as Valan- 
dinne.* But to the Germans the fall of the devil from 
heaven suggested the idea that, like Hephaistos, he must 
have been lamed by tiie descent, and hence we have the lame 
devil^ or devil upon two sticks, who represents the limping 
Hephaistos not only in his gait but in his office. Like 
him, the Valant is a smith, and the name, which has 
assumed elsewhere the forms Paland, Phaland, Foland, 
Valland, passes into the English form Wayland, and gives 
us the Wayland Smith whom Tresilian confronts in Scott’s 
novel of Kenilworth,® Like the robbers who steal Indra’s 
cattle, he is also the dark, murky, or black being, the 
Graumann or Greyman of German folk-lore.® Like the 
Fauns and other mythical beings of Greek and Latin 
mythology, he has a body which is either wholly or in part 
that of a beast. Some times he leaves behind him the print 
of a horse’s hoof, and the English demon Grant, another 

* Grimm, Deutsche Mythology, 939, Scott’s romance, Wayland is a mere im- 

* This name, one of a vast number of poster who avails himself of a popular 

forms through which the root of the superstition to keep up an air of mystery 
Greek about himself and his work: but the 

laitiiply a water-spirit, the nicor of the character to which he makes pretence 
Ikjowulf, the nix or nixy of German belongs to the genuine Teutonic legend, 
faiiy tales. The devil is here regarded ^ Grimm, D. AT., 945. This black 
as dwt-lling in the water, and thus the demon is the Slavish Tschemibog (Zer- 
name explmns the siiilor’s phrase ‘Davy’s nibog), who is represented as the enemy 
locker.’ Grimm, D, Af., 466. of Bjelbog, the white god,—a dualism 

* yih. 1334. which Grimm regards as of late growth, 

^ lb. 1686; Grimm, i>. M,, 943. D, Af., 986. 

* Grimm, D. AT., 946, In Sir W. 



364 


MYTHOLOGT OF THE AKYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

n. 


form probably of Grendol,^ sliowed itself in tbe form of a 
foal. The devil of the witches was a black buck or goat; ^ 
that of the fathers of the Christian Church was a devouring 
wolf.^ Like Ahi, again, and Pythdn and Echidna, he is 
not only the old serpent or dragon but the hell-worm, and 
the walfish or leviathan (a name in which we see again 
the Vala or deceiver).'* Like Baalzebub, he assumes the 
form of a fly, as PsychS may denote either a good or an 
evil spirit. As the hammer which crushes the world, and 
inflicts the penalty of sin on the sinner, he plays the part 
of the Aloadai and Thor Miolnir. As the guardian of the 
underworld, he is the hellward and the hell-shepherd or 
host. His gloomy abode lies towards the north, whether as 
the gloomy Ovelgunne, which has furnished a name for 
many places in Germany,—the Hekelfelde, Heklufiall, or 
hag’s fell,—or the nobiskroech, nobiskrug, which answers 
to the gate beyond which the lost souls leave hope behind 
them.^ The same process, which converted the kindly 
Holda into the malignant TJnholda, attributed to the devil 
occupations borrowed from those of the Teutonic Odin and 
the Greek Orion. But it is no longer the mighty hunter 
following his prey on the asphodel meadow, or the god 
traversing his domain in stately procession. The brave and 
good who had followed the midnight journeys of Wuotan 
give place to the wretched throng of evil-doers who are 
hurried along in the devil’s train, or in that of some human 
being, who for his pre-eminent wickedness is made to 
take the devil’s place. In Denmark the hunter is King 
Waldemar, in Germany Dietrich of Bern, in Prance King 
Hugh or Charles V.; in England it is Heme the Hunter of 
Windsor, and the one-handed Boughton or Lady Skipwith 


* Grimin, D. M. 946. 

2 Grimm, ib 946-7. The buck was 
specially fejicred to Donar or Thor, but 
it is possible that this transformation, 
like that of LykAon and Arkas, was sug¬ 
gested by an equivocal name; and the 
buck may be only a kindred form to the 
Slavish Bog, which reappears among us 
in the form of Puck, Bogy, and Bug. 

* Grimm, ih. 948. With these Grimm 
couples the hell hound and black raven, 


the former answering to the Hellpnic 
Kerberos. Ho also comparoH the (>ld 
German wnrg, a wolf, willi the Polish 
wrog^ the Bohemian wrah^ the Hlovinian 
vrag, an evil-doer. 

* Grimm, ib. 

* Ib. 964. This word nobie is formed 
from the Greek Hfivcrtrosy through the 
Italian form nahiitao for in ahif»»o - a 
change similar to that which converted 
U K^tpas iSdMciv into (rKbfiaXa. 



POLYPHfiMOS. 


a65 


of Warwickshire tradition.' Other myths were subjected to chap. 
the same process of degradation. The kindly D^m^t^r be- -—^— 
comes the devil’s mother,^ grandmother, or sister, who stiU 
shows something of her ancient character in the part which 
she plays towards those who throw themselves on her pro¬ 
tection. Thus she shields Thor and Tyr in the house of 
Hymir, as the giant’s mother shelters Jack in the nursery 
story. In the lay of Beowulf Grendel’s mother is less com¬ 
plying, and avenges on the hero the death of her son. The 
binding of the devil, like that of Prometheus and Ahriman, 
is implied in the phrase ' the devil is loose,’ the sequel being 
^ the devil is dead,’ 

One legend of the devil’s death furnishes some singular The 
points of comparison with the myth of Polyph4mos, although 
it seems rash to infer any direct derivation of the story 
from the Odyssey. The devil asks a man who is moulding 
buttons what he may be doing; and when the man answers 
that he is moulding eyes, asks him farther whether he can 
give a pair of new eyes. He is told to come again 
another day; and when he makes his appearance accord- 
higly? the man tells him that the operation cannot be per¬ 
formed rightly unless he is first tightly bound with his back 
fastened to a bench. While he is thus pinioned, he asks the 
man’s name. The reply is Issi (^himself’). When the lead 
is melted, the devil opens his eyes wide to receive the deadly 
stream. As soon as he is blinded he starts up in agony, 
bearing away the bench to which he had been bound. 


i Diiflont, TaUs, introd. Ixxxiv. 

Grimm. D. U, OOO, 968. In other 
IpgpndB it IB Herodias, who. confoundt^ 
with her daughter, is made to dance on 
for ever; or Satia, Bertha, Abundil, 
{names denoting kindliness, brightness, 
or plenty), who, with Fngga, and Froya, 
Artemis and Diana, are degraded into 
leaders of midnight troops. 

* Here Dionysos is lowered to the 
same level with Orion or Wnotan, 
Grimm, D. M, 961. The devil, of 
course, has his children, * devil’s brood, 
‘devil’s imps.’ Grimm remarks that 
Teufelskmd is synonymous with Don- 
nerskind, and that here again we are 
confronted with old mythical expr^- 
sious. Thunder is red-beaxded, and the 


devil therefore has a heard of that colour, 
and the thunderbolts are his followers. 
Many expressions common to England 
and Germany come from the same 
source. The compassionate phrase ‘ der 
arme Teufel’ was formerly *der arme 
Donner;’ and the expletives ‘Hagel’ 

* Donner-wetter ’ and ‘ unser Herr-Gott ’ 
point to the time when the heathen 
Donar was lord of the atmosphere 
966). His conduct to his wife also 
carries us hack to some of the oldest 
mythical phrases. He is said to beat 
his wife when the rain falls in sun¬ 
shine, and the rapid alternation of sun¬ 
shine and shower is said to be caused 
by his blanching his grandmother. 



366 


MTTHOLOQT OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 


BOOK 

II. 


and wlien some workpeople in the fields ask him who had 
thus treated him, his answer is'Issi teggi' (Self did it). 
With a laugh they hid him lie on the hed which he has made; 
‘ selhst gethan, selbst habe.’ The devil died of his new eyes, 


and was never seen again.* 

* Grimm, D. M. 963-980. It is Tiime- 
cessary to trace in detail all the fancies 
and notions on the subject of the devil 
and his works whiclx Grimm has 
gathered together; but it may be fairly 
said that scarcely a single point men¬ 
tioned by him is without its value, as 
throwing light on popular forms of 
thought and expression. 

The blinded deni reappears in 
Grimm’s story of the Robber and his 
Sons, which reproduces the narrative of 
the Odyssey. Here the robber is the 
only one who is not devoured by the 
Giant, and he blinds his enemy while 
pretending to heal his eyes In the 
sequel, instead of clinging to the ram’s 
fleece he clings to the rafters of the 
ceiling, and afterwards wraps himself 
in a ram’s skin, and so escapes between 
the giant’s legs. But as soon as ho gets 
out of the cave, he cannot resist the 
temptation of turning round, like 
Odysseus, to mock at his enemy. The 
giant, saying that so clover a man 
ought not go unrewarded, holds out to 


him a ring which, when placed on his 
finger, makes him cry out. * Here I am, 
here I am.’ But although he is guided 
hy the sound, the giant stumbles sadly 
in his blindness, and the robber at last 
makes his escape by biting off his finger 
and so getting rid of the ring. 

The blinded Kyklops forms the sub* 
ject of the third voyage of Sindbad; but 
the myth has gained nothing hy being 
dressed out in Arabian garb. He is the 
Uri&k of the Western Fairy Tale. 
Koightley, Fairy Mythology^ 396. The 
Lap story runs as follows * * There was 
a Karelian who had been taken by a 
giant and was kept in a castle. The 
giant had only one oyo, but he had 
flocks and herds. Tho night came and 
tho giant fell asleep. Tho Karelian put 
out his eye. The giant, who now could 
no longer see, sat at the door, and felt 
everything that went out. Ho had a 
great many sheep in tho courtyard 
The Karelian got under the belly of 
one of them and escaped.’ Latham, 
Nationalitisa of Euro^if i. 227. 





367 


APPENDICES. 


APPENDIX A._Page 72. 

Laios and Dasyu. 

Tie objections raised by M. Comparetti (Bdipo e la Miiologia 
Oomparata)^ can scarcely be regarded as of weight against the 
identification of the Greek Laios with the Yedic Dasa or Dasyu, au 
' enemy. Professor Max Muller, who thinks that ^aoc as a name of 
slaves, on which M. Br4al lays stress, may admit of a different ex¬ 
planation, still holds that Le6phont6s as a name of Belleroph6n is a 
Greek equivalent of the Sanskrit dasyuhantu, the slayer of the 
enemies of the bright gods, i.e., of the dasas or demons of the Yeda, 
‘ such as Yritra, *'Opf)poc, Namuki, ’Ajaufcoc, Sambara and others.’ He 
would even be inclined to trace back the common Greek word for 
people X«oc, to the same source with the Sanskrit dasa, were it not 
that the change of to 2 in Greek is restricted to certain dialects, 
and that * it cannot be admitted as a general rule, unless there be 
some evidence to that efiect,’ Chips, ii. 167, 186-7. Some such 
evidence may be furnished by Scuw and Xovoj as being both the 
equivalents of the Latin lavare in our Homeric poems. Of the 
adjective ^aioc or hostile, he says, that it is clearly derived 
firom the same source, the root being das, to perish, though it is 
true that in its frequent application to fire the adjective S6‘iuc might 
well be referred to the root da, to bum.’ But surely a root which 
conveys the sense of perishing, i.e., of an abstract result, must itself be 
referred to some means or process which produced that result. We 
could not say that mri was a root signifying, in the first instance, 
to die : but this meaning is accounted for, when we see that it first 
meant to grind, and hence that the thing crushed may be said to 
die. The root das would thus be simply the root da in a different 
application. 



368 


APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX B.—Pago 102. 

I give tliis conclusion in Professor Max Muller’s words, Chips &c, 
ii. 234, not onlj because they must strengthen any inferences which 
I may venture to make, but because I wish to disclaim any merit of 
having been the first to proclaim it. I must be forgiven if I notice 
here, once for all, the strange plan which some writers have thought 
fit to adopt of quoting as coming from myself passages which I 
have quoted from others. Thus Mr. Mozley, writing in the Gontem- 
per ary Eevieiu, rejected the solar character of the Trojan War on the 
ground that this conclusion was a fancy on my part shared by none 
others, and cited without inverted commas words which in the 
Manual of Mythology I had quoted with inverted commas from 
Professor Max Muller’s Lectures on Language^ second series, p. 471. 
These words are the simple assertion that the siege of Troy is ‘ a re¬ 
flection of the daily siege of the East by the solar powers that every 
evening are robbed of their brightest treasures in the West.’ I am 
fally prepared to share the responsibility which may be involved in 
this belief, supported as it is by a mass of evidence which it is almost 
impossible to strengthen, and which might rathor bo thought, and 
probably hereafter will be thought, ludicrously excessive in amount; 
but I cannot claim the merit of having been the first to propound it. 
The solar character of Achilleus and of the Odyssey I had fully 
recognised and distinctly declared m the Introduction to the Tales 
of Thebes <md Argos but on the meaning of tho siego of Troy 
itself I had said nothing. 

I cannot but regret the remarks with which Mr. Gould has closed 
his excellent chapter on the Tell story, which he tliiiiks has not its 
signification ‘ painted on the surface ’ like the lego rids of Phoibos or 
Baldur. ‘ Though it is possible,’ ho adds, ‘ that Gesaler or Harald 
may be the power of evil and darkness, and the bold archer tho 
storm-cloud with his arrow of lightning and his iris bow bent 
against the sun which is resting like a coin or golden ajqilo on the 
edge of the horizon, yot we have no guarantee that such an inter¬ 
pretation is not an overstraining of a theory,’ Such an <>\ (‘rstraiii- 
ing would probably be confined to himself. Tho cleuiontH common 
to all the versions of the myth are tho apple, or some other round 
object, and an unerring archer: but here, as we have soon, the abso¬ 
lute agreement ends; and it is enough to say that the attributes 
assigned to Tell, Cloudeslee (whose very name marks liim as an 
inhabitant of the Phaiakian or Oloudland), and the rest are the 
attributes of the sun in all the systems of Aryan mythology, while 
no such unfailing skill is attributed to the storm-cloud. Still less 



THE MYTH OP TELL. 


369 

was it necessary to insert here a caution which in its proper place may 
he of great service. This caution is directed against a supposed tempta¬ 
tion felt by Comparative Mythologists to resolve real history into solar 
legends, and it is supported by an ingenious and amusing argument 
proving that Napoleon Bonaparte was the Sun. The parallel cited 
by Mr. Gould is drawn out with great cleverness; but with refer¬ 
ence to the legend of Tell it is absolutely without point. Mr. Gould 
has demolished its historical chai’acter and cast it aside as a narrative 
based on actual facts not less decidedly than Professor Max Muller 
or Dr. Dasent. Like the latter he is perfectly aware that ‘ it is not 
told at all of Tell in Switzerland before the year 1499, and the earlier 
Swiss Chronicles omit it altogether.’—Dasent, Norse Tales, Intro¬ 
duction, XXXV. Hence we are dealing with matters which have not 
only no soi-t of contemporary attestation but which cannot be made 
to fit in with the kne^n facts of the time. Thus the warning 
based on the supposed mythical character of Napoleon applies only 
to those who may resolve Perikles or Alexander the Great into the 
sun; and we may well wait until some Comparative Mythologist 
gravely asserts that we may treat or regard as mythical events and 
characters for which we have the undoubted and unquestionable 
testimony of contemporary writers. The lack or the complete 
absence of all such evidence is an essential criterion in the assign¬ 
ment of a narrative to the respective domains of mythology or his¬ 
tory or to the^ border lands wMch may separate the one from the 
other. All, therefore, that Professor Max Miiller does for the story 
of Toll is to group it with other Itegends more or less closely re¬ 
sembling it, and then to state the meaning of a myth, which 
is not more a myth in his own judgment than it is in that of Mr 
Gould. 


APPENDIX a—Page 115. 

The Stauros or Cross. 

The forms of these crosses varied indefinitely from the simple 
Tan to the most elaborate crosses of four limbs, with whose modified 
outlines the beautiful designs of Christian art have made us familiar. 
‘Ware das Kreuz keine Phallus-zeichen, so firagt sich, was sollte 
die Kreuzigung der Psych6 (die Seele ist hier, weil sie zur Sinnlich- 
keit sich hinneigt, als weibliohes Wesen aufgefasst) duroh Eros, fiir 
einen Sinn gehabt haben? Oder welche Absicht leitete jenen 
Maler, dessen Kunstwerk den Ausonius zu der Idylle, Cupido cruci 
aflfixus, begeisterte ?’—Nork, s. v. Kreuss, S89. The malefactor’s 
cross or gibbet, the infelix arbos or accursed tree of the old Roman 
VOL. II. B B 



370 


APPENDIX. 


law, is as distinct from the stanros or pole of Osiris as is the Vritra 
who opposes Indra from the subtle serpent wliich tempts the 
woman into transgression. But in both cases the terms applied to 
the one are, according to the mind of later thinkers, blended with 
the language used of the other, and on the subject of the cross 
both ideas have notably converged. But the cross of shame and 
the cross of life are images which can be traced back to times 
long preceding the dawn of Christianity. In his chapter on the 
Legend of the Cross Mr. Gould, Curiom M^ths, ii. 79, gives a 
drawing of »a large cross found in the pavement of a Gallo-Roman 
palace at Pont d*01i, near Pau. In the centre of this cross is a 
figure of the water-god, with his trident (another form of the 
rod of Hermes) surrounded by figures of fishes (the vesica piscis or 
Toni). Mr. Gould also gives engravings of a large number of 
crosses of various shapes which are certainly not Christian, and 
then expresses his belief that the cross was a Gaulish sign. Doubt¬ 
less it was, but Mr. Gould has himself shown that it was also 
Egyptian. It is unfortunate that he should have looked on this 
subject as one which might be suitably dealt with by means of con¬ 
jectures, assumptions, and arbitrary conclusions. He needed not to 
enter upon it at all; but having done so, he was bound to deal with 
the facts. Among the facts which he notices are the cross-shaped 
hammer or fylfot of Thor, and the cross of Se^rapis or Osiris: he 
also mentions a coin of Byblos on which AstartC is represented as 
holding ‘ a long staff surmounted by a cross and resting her foot on 
the prow of a galley,^ (96), and an inscription to Hermes Chthoniosin 
Thessaly ‘ accompanied by a Calvary cross ’ (98). Having collected 
these with many other specimens, Mr. Gould contents liimsolf in 
one page (94) with saying that ‘ no one knows and probably no one 
ever will know wbat originated the use of this sign ’ (the cross with 
the ovoid handle) ‘ and gave it such significance.’ Elsewhere (105)> 
he asserts that the sign had a religious signification, and that all 
these crosses (108), were symbols of the Rain-god. We can but ask 
for the reason; but from Mr. Gould we get only the assurance that 
he sees no difficulty in believing that the Cross, as a satTod sign, 
formed a portion of the primaeval religion, and that trust in the 
cross was a part of the ancient faith which taught men to believe 
in a Trinity and in the other dogmas which Mr. Gladstone declares 
to have been included in the revelation made to Adam on the Fall. 
The difficulty of accepting Mr. Gould’s solution of the matter lies 
in the absurdities into which the theory must lead everyone who 
adopts it. To assert baldly that the phallic hypothesis is untenable, 
is unphilosophical; to say that he has reasons which he cannot 
give in a work addressed to general readers is to assign an excellent 



THE STAUROS OR CROSS. 


371 


reason for not treating the subject at all, but certainly not for dis¬ 
missing the question with the dictum that he has examined the evi¬ 
dence for a given hypothesis and found it wanting. Every fact 
mentioned by Mr. Gould through the article points to the very 
conclusion which he curtly pronounces untenable. 

In an illustration inserted in his Tales of the West Kiglilands^ iii. 
339, Mr. Campbell has * copied all the fish which are figured on the 
Sculptured Stones of Scotland, together with some of the character¬ 
istic ornaments which accompany them.’ Among these the phallic 
serpent and the budding thyrsos are conspicuous enough. 

I have confined myself in this chapter to the citation of facts 
which few probably will dispute; I am not bound, therefore, to 
examine theories which do not take into account all these facts or 
their bearings on each other. But I refer gladly to an article in the 
‘ Edinburgh Eeview,’ January 1870, on the Pre-Christian Cross, as 
bringing together a mass of facts, every one of which points in the 
direction indicated by the earliest form of the emblems under dis¬ 
cussion. Of the reviewer’s theory as to their origin and meaning, 
I can but say that it is a theory resting on assumption. It may be 
true, but until it is proved, it cannot satisfy those who object to 
having one set of facts put aside in order to explain another. The 
reviewer’s conclusion is that the worship of the cross or tree was 
suggested by the date-palm, the ‘prince of vegetation,’ and asks 
‘ what better picture or more significant characters could have been 
selected for the purpose than a circle and a cross; the one to denote 
a region of absolute purity and perpetual felicity; the other those 
four perennial streams that divided and watered the several quarters 
of it ? ’ I confess myself quite unable to see either the force of this, 
or any connexion between the symbols and the ideas; but on the 
other hand we have the indisputable facts that the earliest form of 
the cross (a word which has acquired a meaning so equivocal as to 
mislead almost every one who uses it) is simply the pole or the Tau, 
and that with this stauros or pole, the ring, or the boat-shaped 
sign, has from the first been associated in every country. These are 
everywhere the earliest forms, and for these alone we must in the 
first instance account. To go off to later developements in which 
the sign has assumed something like the form of the date-palm is a 
mere hysteron-proteron. When it has been disproved that the Linga 
and Toni have in every country been regarded as the emblems of 
vitality and reproduction, and as such have been used everywhere 
to denote the vivifying power of the sun, and therefore adopted as 
emblems in his worship, we may go on to test the value of theories 
which, until this is done, have no base to stand on. I feel confident 

B B 2 



372 


APPENDIX. 


tliat OIL fiirtlier consideration the reviewer will soo that the facts 
which he has brought together do not support his conclusions. 

I avail myself, further, of this opportunity of referring to a 
suggestive paper by Mr, N. G. Batt, on tho Corruption of Cliris- 
fcianity by Paganism, Ctmkmpnmri/ h\v/<7r, March 1870, and of 
quoting his remarks on the pliallic character of the columns used 
by the ‘pillared saints.’ 

‘ One of the most extraordinary accommodations of heathen ideas 
to corrupt Chnstianity is the now obsolete form of asceticism, intro¬ 
duced by Simon Stylites in the neighbourhood of Antioch, and very 
popular during the last age of the Roman empire. We are told by 
Lucian in his interesting treafiso on the Syrian goddess, that in 
Hierapolis on the Euphrates there stood a renowned temple of the 
Assyrian Juno, in front of which two columns, each thirty enhits 
high, were set up in the shape of phalli. “ Now it was tho annual 
custom for a priest to climb to tho top of one of theao pillars by 
the aid of a cord drawn round tho column and his own body, 
in the same manner as the gatherers of dates ascend their 
palm-trees. And the reason of his going up is this, that most 
people think that from this height he converses with tho gods, and 
asks blessings for all Syria. Ho remains tliore seven days, drawing 
up his food by a rope. The pilgrims bring some gold and silver, 
and others brass money, which they lay down iHibru him, while 
another priest repeats their names to him, upon which ho prays for 
each offerer by name, ringing a bell as ho does so. Ho never sloops, 
for if he did it is said that a scorpion would bito him. Moreover, 
this temple exhales a most delightful perfume like that of Arabia, 
which never leaves the garments of such as approach it,” Now 
with the classical author’s account compare tho narrative of Kvagriua 
four centuries later. “ Simon of holy memory originated (?) tho con¬ 
trivance of stationing himself on the top of a column forty cubits 
high, where, placed between earth and heaven, he holds communion 
with God, and unites in praises with the angols, from earth offering 
his intercessions on behalf of men, and from lieaven drawing down 
upon them the divine favour.” ’ 

In other words, the so-called Christian practice was indubitably 
heathen; and the heathen rite was indubitably phallic. 



INDEX 


ABA 

A BAEIS, ii. lU 

Abstract Words, tisQ of, i. 45 
Absyrtos, li. 40, 153, 162 
Abiindia, li. 306, 365 
Acca Larcntia, ii. 82 
Acorbas, i. 433 
Achaia, i. 361 
Achaians, i. 234 
Achaimenidai, i. 235 
Aeh'erfin, ii. 260, 266, 321 
Achill5is, i. 176, 244 gi seq. ; ii. 166 
Achilleus, i. 90, 191, 236, 292, 430; 
ii. 76,166, 326 

— the ■womanly, i. 248; ii. 64, 163 
— the bondman, ii. 163 
— armour of, i. 246; ii. 168 et seq. 

— career of, i. 245 et seq, 

— character of, i. 254 et seq, ; ii. 165 
et seq. 

— horses of, i. 341, 434 ; ii. 252 

— vengeance of, i. 249 

Adam Bell, li. 100 

Adeva, i. 364 

4diti, i. 333 

Aditya, i. 332, 334 

AdniAtos, ii. 41 

Adonis, i. 66,286; ii, 6, 66,113 
Adrastoia, i. 360 ; ii. 20 
Adrastos, ii. 184 et seq, 
iEacus f Amlcos] 
iBgina lAiginaJ 
[Aigia] 

j®gyptu8 [Aigyptos] 
iEneas, i. 260,432 
.ffineid of Virgil, i. 260, 432 
jEolua [Aiolos] 

A6r, i. 347 
Aerd, ii. 290 
Aerth, ii. 119 
AAshma-daAva, i. 210, 364 
.ffisir, i. 336 
iEther [AithAr] 

^ Aethlios, ii. 80, 212 

AgamAdis and Troph6nios, L 116; ii. 
24 

Agamemnon, i. 269, 261; ii. 48, 160, 
164 et seq. 


AKB 

Agathos Daimbn, ii. 20,129 

Agenor, i. 438; ii. 195 

Ages, Hesiodic, ii. 201 

Aglaia, ii. 3 

Aglauros, ii. 232 

Agni, 1 . 105; ii. 190 et seq, 

Agraulos, ii. 309 

Ahaly4, i. 86, 346 

Ahan4, i. 418 

Ahans, the two, i. 390 

Ahi, a. 342, ii. 72, 328 

Ahriman, i. 336; ii. 14, 353 et seq, 

Ahura, i. 336 

Ahuro-mazd4o, i. 210, 335 ; li. 365 

Aiaia, ii. 174, 178 

Aiakos, ii 87, 322 

Aias, 1 . 448 

Aid6neu8, ii, 297, 320 

Aidds, ii, 203 

AiAtAs, 1 . 304, 429; ii. 150 
Aigai, li. 263 
Aigaidn, li. 88 

Algous, i. 274, 436; ii. 64 et seq,, 88 

Aigimios, ii, 183 

Aigina, ii. 88, 263 

Aigis, i, 348, 383 ; ii. 219 

Aigl6, li. 8 

Aigyptos, ii. 30, 266 et seq, 

Aineiadai, i. 92, 453 
Aineias, i. 260; ii. 4, 853 
Aiolians, i. 236 
Aiolic migration, i. 202 
Aiolidai, 1 . 202 

Aiolos, i. 202, 237; ii. 177, 252 

Aipytos, ii. 81 

Air, i. 349 

Als, li. 320 

Aisa, ii. 17 

Aison, ii 154 

Aith6r, i. 251, 327, 329, 347, 373 
Aithiopians, i. 234, 432 
Aithra, i. 435 , li. 37, 166 
Ajax [Aias] 

Akastos, ii 162 

Akersekom^s, i. 107, 369; ii. 33 
Akm6n, i. 358, 359 
Akraia, ii. 20^ 



374 


INDEX. 


AKB 

Akrisios, i. 436; ii. 66 

Aktai6n, ii. 288 

Akt6r, ii. 54 

Aktondai, ii. 253 

Alalkomen5, ii. 41 

Albanians, i. 227 

Alcis, i, 286 

Alda, i. 308 

Alebios, li. 335 

Aleian Plain, li. 65, 68, 274 

Aleos, i. 437 

Alexandros, i. 64; ii. 78 

Alexiarls, i. 432 ; ii. 65 

Alexikakos, ii. 340 

Alfax, i. 381 

Alfheim, i. 381 

Alfur, i. 286 

Ali, ii. 95 

Alkaios, ii. 47 

Alkfistis, ii. 41 et seq. 

Alkides, ii. 47 
Alkimos, i. 251 
Alkinoos, ii. 276 et seq, 

AJkmai6n, ii. 185 et seq. 

Alkin4n5, i. 309 ; ii. 41, 136, 181 

Alkyonens, li. 337 

A116kt6,11.16 

All-Pa ther, li. 312 

Aloadai, i. 32 

Alop5, ii. 63 

Alpheios, i. 400; ii. 28, 143 
Alraune, i. 280 
Altbaia, i. 438; ii. 73, 188 
Amaltbeia, i. 360; ii. 296 
Amata, i. 239 
Amdzons, li 65 
Ambika, i. 389 
Ammas, ii 312 

Amnisiads, or river nymphs, ii. 143 
Amphiar&os, li 184 et seq, 

AmphiOn, ii 249, 279 
Amphithea, ii. 172 
Amphitrit^, i. 441; li. 21, 260 
Aonphitryon, i. 309; li. 92 
Amshaspands, i. 335 
Amulius, i, 80; ii 63, 82 
Amykos, i. 343; ii. 28,152 
Amymon5, ii. 268 
Anank5, i. 365; li 13,17 
Anchirrho^, ii. 268 
Anchises, i. 434; ii. 4 
AndrogeOs, li. 64 ^ ^ 

Androgynous Deities, i. 346, 393, 
444 

Andromeda, i. 437 
Andvari, i. 277, 282 
Angelburga, i. 457 
Angels, guardian, ii. 21 
Angiras, i. 342, 414, 417 
Angro-mainyus, ii 365 
Anik^tos, i. 432; ii 55 


km 

Aniroddha, i. 417 
Anna, i, 432 et seq. 

Anna Perenna, i. 433 
Anostos, i. 411 
Antaios, ii 61, 337 
Antaug^s, i. 86 
Anteia, ii. 66, 68, 73, 162 
Anthropomorphous gods, i. 4 et seq.^ 
26, 356 

Antigonfi, ii 73, 188 
Ajitikleia, ii. 172 
Antilochos, i. 432; ii. 91 
Antiopft, ii. 66, 78, 249 
Antipnat^ ii. 177 
Anygros, i. 430 
Apatfe, i. 58 
Aphaia, ii. 146 
Aphareus, ii. 79 

Aphrodltfe, i. 48; li 1 et seq. 79 

— Anadyomen5, ii. 2 

— Argynnis, i. 48, 425 ,* ii 4 

— the armed, ii. 8 

— Enalia and Pontia, i. 48; ii. 2 

— kestos of, 1 . 304 

— Ourania, li. 4 

— Pandemos, ii. 4 • 

— Philom6d^s, i. 357 

— Philomeid^s, i. 357 

— rmgof, ii 115 

— shell of, ii. 118 
Apis, ii. 129, 140 
Apoll6n, i 442 ; ii. 21 et seq, 

— AkersekomSs, ii 33 

— Daphnephoros, ii. 66 

— Delphinios, i. 292, 436; ii, 25 

— Delphian, i. 414 

— Hekatos, ii. 102 

— Klarian, ii. 113 

— Lyk6^en6s, i. 266 

— Lykeios, Lykios, ii. 28 

— PTomioH, ii 34, 121 
— Olympios, ii. 65 
— Pangenet6r, li. 56 
— Phanaios, ii. 23 
— Sminthios, li. 242 
— Thymbraios, ii 170 
— Thyrxis, ii 34,121 

— the four-armed, i. 370 
Apna Purna, i. 433 

Apples, golden, i. 234; ii. 22, 38, 78, 
301 

— and sheep, ii 38, 251, 328 
Apsaras, ii, 268, 282 
Aptya, i. 441; ii. 364 
Apulians, i. 239 

ArA, i. 424 
Arbhu, ii. 240 
Arcturus [Arktouros] 

AreiOn, i:. 187 
Areinpagos, ii. 189 
Arethousa, i. 400; ii. 11, 28 



INDEX. 


375 


AEE 

Ar4s,i.32, 369; ii. 12, 61, 254- 
Arg4, ii. 296 
Argeia, li 186 ^ 

Argeiphontes, li. 139 et seq. 

Argennos, i 230 
Arg&s, 11 . 213 
Arghanautha, ii. 126 
Argiopfi, li. 75 
Argives, the, i. 230 
Argive legf*nds, i. 220 
Argo, the ship, i. 278, 313, 322; ii. 
118, 175, 151, 241 

Argonautdi, i. 204; ii. 149 ct 241 
Argos, the dog, i. 269 

— Pauoptes, 1 . 231, 382 

— the land of, i 230 
Argynnia, i. 48, 230, 425 
Argyros, ii. 30 

Ariadn^, i. 429, 435; ii. 66, 87 

Ari6n, li, 26, 245 

Art, i, 414; ii. 118 

Arkas, i. 48, 231 

Arkshas or Shiners, i. 414 

Arktouros, i. 47 

Ariahta, ii. 64 

Aristaios, ii. 290 

Ariateas, i. 376 

Aristhanas, ii. 36 

Aristodemos, ii. 183 

Ariatomachos, ii. 182 

Aristomenes, ii. 121 

Ariuna, i. 425 ; ii. 132 

Arjuni, i, 424 

Arkadia, i. 361 

Arkadians, i. 230 

Arkah, the sun, i. 231 

Arnaios, i. 139 

Arrows, poisoned, use of, i- 49, 66; li. 

46, 80 ^ 

Arsin*^^, li. 34 

Artemis,!. 430 ; ii. 29, 92,142 et seq,, 
290 

— Diktynna, i. 364; ii. 146 

— Ephesian, ii. 66 

— Orthia, ii. 143 

— Tauropola, ii. 144 
Arthur, i. 308 ^ aeq. 

Arthur^s Bound Taole, ii. 121 
Arusha, i. 426 

Arushl, I 426 
Ar7aman, i. 334; ii. 356 
Asas, i. 836, 872 
Asdahag, ii. 83, 358 
Asgard, i. 371 
Ashera, ii. 86,112,118 
Ashtaroth, li. 141 

AskUpios, i. 430; ii. 33, 66, 196, 290 
Askr, ii. 19, 184, 196 
A8lnk,ii. 100 
Aaiauga, i. 61,107, 284 
Asmodous, i. 210, 354 


ATJR 

AsOpos, ii 249 
Asphodel Meadows, ii. 322 
Astart5, ii. 141 
Asteria, i. 233, 418, 429 
Asterion, ii. 10, 87 
Asterodia, i. 418 ; iL 30, 138, 212 
Asteropaios, i 164 
Astolat, i. 315 
Astrabakos, ii 116 
Astraios, i. 432; ii. 38 
Astu Phoronikon, ii. 195 
Astyages, i. 80, 442; iL 83 et seq.^ 
358 

Astydameia, ii. 162 
Astymedousa, ii. 71 
Asura, i 335 
Asuro-medhas, ii. 355 
Asvins, i. 423 
Atalant4, ii. 29, 143 
At5, i. 866, 424; ii. 15, 19, 43 
Atergatis, i. 400 
Athaxnas, ii. 272 et seq. 

Athenai, i. 440, 443, ii. 181 
Atb5n5, i. 141, 269, 365, 418 et seq.; 
ii. 11, 44, 79, 199, 264, 308 

— Ageleia, i. 443 

— Akna, i. 228, 344, 441; ii. 12, 20 

— AlalkQmen^, ii, 41 

— Challnitis, ii. 289 

— G-lauk6pis, i 443 , iL 8 

— HellOtis, i. 237 

— Hermaphrodites i. 44-4 

— Koryphasia i. 228, 441 

— olive of, i. 443; ii 309 

— Ophthalmitis, i. 443 

— Optiletis, i. 443 

— Oxyderkes, i 443 

— Pallas, 1 . 367 ; ii. 114 

— peplos of, i. 444 

— relations of, with Zeus, i, 16,444, 

ii. 47 

— serpent of, i. 444 ; ii. 128 

— Tritogeneia, i. 228, 440 
Athenians i. 228 et seq .; ii. 67 
Athwya, ii. 354 

Atlas, i. 337, 371; iL 11, 18 6^ seq., 
60, 201 

Atli, i. 189, 283 et seq., 342, ii. 97 

Atman, i. 372, 373 

Atn, i, 342 

Atropos, ii. 16 

AttiK 1. 189, 289, 290, 301 

Attabiscar, song of, i. 189 

Attes, ii. 118 

Atthis, iL 308 

Atys, ii. 8 

Audhumla, i. 371 

Aug5, L 435, 437; ii. 63, 157 

Angelas, ii 49 

Auramazda, li. 355 

Aureola, i. 370 



376 


INDEX. 


AUB- 

Aiarinia, ii. 280 
Aurnayibha, li. 841 
Aurora, i. 415 
Auster, ii. 196 

Autolykos, i. 334; ii. 44, 139, 172 
AutotnedOn, i. 261. 

Autono6, ii. 288 
Avatars of Vifchnu, ii. 206 
Avcngmf? of Baldur, li. 96 

— Grettir, i. 325 

— Sigurd, i. 284 et 
Avilion, i. 316 
Azidahaka, li. 83, 364 


"nAAL, Altar of, ii. 118 
Sj Baal-peor, ii. 118 
Baaltis, 11 . 118 
Bacchos, li. 4 

Bacon, Lord, his method of explaining 
Greek mythology, i. 28 
Bala, 1 .343 

Balarama, ii. 107,133, 136,137 

Balcan, li. 199 

Bali, ii. 104, 329 

Balia, i. 308, 311 

Baldag, ii. 93 

Baldur, i. 286, 291, 369; ii, 93 ei 
seq. 

Baldringas, i, 239 
Balios, 1 . 247, 341 ; ii. 162, 253 
Balmung, i. 292, 300 
Barbarossa, i. 413 
Bassarides, ii, 296 

Baudry, M., on the origin of myths, 
i. 43 

Bears in mythology, i. 162; ii. 78 
Boast epic, Northern, i. 63 
Beasts in mythology, i. 140, 162,406, 
li. 78 

Beatrice, ii. 284 et seq 
Beauty and the Beast, i. 402, 406, 
459 

Bebrykes, ii. 60, 152 
Bedivere, i. 315 

Beggars m mythology, i. 158 et seq., 
257, 301, 321 , ii. 158, 179, 303 
Bego, i. 317 
Beidsla, i. 371 

Bellerophontes. Bellerophon, i. 324, 
448 ,* li. 55, 68 et seq,, 162, 342 
Belleros, li. 67, 341 et seq. 

Belos, 11 257 

Beowulf, 1 . 274; ii, 93, 200, 348 

Berchta, Frau, ii. 306, 365 

Bertha Laigefoot, i. 317 

Bestla, i. 371 

Bevis of Blampton, i. 316 

Bhaga, ii. 104 

Bhava, i. 337, 416; ii. 24 

Bhavani, ii. 133 


BUN 

Bhayannnn. ii. 120 

Bhvki, i. 165, 400; ii. 26 

Bhrtgu, i. 413 

Bhu, ]. 334 

Bhuvaim. i. 346 

Bfiuranyu, i. 399; ii, 191, 195 

Bihlindi, i. 377 

BiiroHt, i. 382 

Ihkki, i. 284 

B.ielhng, ii. 92, 363 

Black, i. 247 

Blanche Flor, i. 817 

Ble<ia, i. 289 

Blindness of solar heroes, ii. 71, 72 

Blodol, i. 299 

Bludi, i. 289 

Boabdil, i. 418 

Boar, bite of the, ii. 172 

— Kfdydonian, ii. 53,148 
Bogjs ii. 361 

Bolina, ii, 29 
Bolthorn, i. 371 

Bondage of solar heroes, i, 92 ; ii. 18, 
28, 41, 86, 163, 174, 264 
Boots, i. 138, 168, 266, 321 : ii. 179, 
214, 346 

Boreas, i. 432; ii. 221, 248 
Bor, i. 371 

Borrowed myths, hypothesis of, i- 
129 et seq., 166 
Bors, 1 . 314; li. 123 
Bosi, h, 245 
Bobporos, ii. 140 
Souths, 11 . 8 
Bragi, i 287, 381 

Bmhma, i. 337, 844 et seq.; ii. 136 

— the four-armed, i. 370 
Brahmanaspati, ii, 104 
Bran, ii. 120 

Brandenburg, Piper of, ii. 243 
Br^al, M., on the mytli of Oidipons, 
i. 464 et seq. ; ii. 70 et seq. 

— on the m;^h of Cacus, ii. 389 et seq. 
Breast of Light, ii. 158 
Breidablick, ii. 96 

BriaroCs, i 360; ii. 12, 311 
Bridge of Heimdall, i. 144 
Brihaspati, i. 420 
Brisaya, i 246 
Briseis, i. 246 , ii. 164 et seq. 
Bnsingamon, i. 380 
Britoniartis, ii. 145 
Bi’ond, 11 . 93 
Brontes ii.l98, 213 
Brownies, li, 806 
Bui, ii. 96 

Bulls in mythology, i. 107, 437, 438: 

n. 49 ' 

Bunsen, on the influence of the Iliadi 
and Odyssey on Greek literature, L 
213 ct seq. 



INDEX, 


377 


BTTR 

Buri, i. 371 

Burning brand, the, i. 439 


O ABIRI [Kabeiroi] 

Cacus, 419; li. 88, 280, 337 
Cseculus, ii. 3tl 
Camilla, ii. 29,143 
Cumulus, ii. 143 
Cambara, 11 327 
Camelot, i. 311 
Cap, invisible [Tarnkappo] 

Caradoc, li. 120 
Caranus, li. 340 

Cattle of the Sun, i. 64, 421; ii. 213, 
280 

Cave of Dikt^ i. 367 ; ii. 146 
— KylK'iK\ n. 224 
— LatnioH, ii. 31 
— Lyktoa, i. 357, 364 
Cave-lH)rn gods, ii. 133 
Centaurs [Kentaurs] 

Ceres, ii. 308 
Ceridwen, ii. 120 
— caldron of, ii. 122 
Cestus [Kestos] 

Chalybes, ii, 140 
Chalk6d6n, ii. 63 
Chaos, i. 829; li 212 
Chando, the bull, ii. 84 
Chandragupta, 1 . 260; ii. 84 
Charis, i. 48; ii. 2 

Charites, the, i«48, 210 ; ii. 3 et sea,, 
296 

Charms and talismans, i. 410 seq. 
Char6n, 11 . 144 
Charybdis, ii. 260 
Charlemagne [Karl the Great] 
Chatumerus, 11 . 93 
Cheirfm,!. 280; ii. 36, 150, 162 
Chimaini, ii. 49, 68, 342 
Chionfi, li. 276 

Christianity, inhuonco of, on mytho¬ 
logy, 1 . 314; li. 357 , 369 
Chronos, ii. 212 
Chrys&Or, i. 388 ; ii. 101 
Chryses, ii. 164, 188 
Chrysippos, ii, 70, 345 
Chthonian gods and chthonian wor¬ 
ship, ii. 144, 808, 320 
Chumuri, i. 343 

Cinderella, i. 139,167, 304, 438,440; 
ii. 179 

Cities, meaning of the names of Greek, 
i. 227 at seq 
Ciza, ii. 66 

Clym of the Clough, ii. 99 
Clytemnesta^ [Klytaimn5stra] 

Clouds, ii. 91,136,161.269,272 ei seq* 
Clouds, as apples or sheep, ii. 38 
— as cows, 1 . 426 


CYC 

Clouds as eagles, i. 405, ii. 216, 304 

— fingers of the earth, ii. 314 

— maidens, ii. 65, 281 et seq. 

— ships, ii. 276 ei seq 

— Bwams, i. 405, 456; li. 216, 281 

et seq. 

Cloudeslee, William of, 11 . 95, 368 
Codes, li. 88 
Cocytus [Kok;]^os] 

Ocellus Mons, i. 382 
Comparetti, M., on the myth of Oidi- 
pous, i. 454 
Conall Gulban, ii. 157 
Consontes, Dii, i. 316 
Conaualia, 1 347 
Conaus, i. 346 

Correlative Deities and Twin Heroes, 
i. 286, 389 et seq., 423 ; 11 . 40, 268 
Correlatives, Asvins, i. 390, 423 

— Amphtfin and Zeth6s, ii. 249 

— Ahans, 1 . 890 

— Danaos and Aigyptos, ii. 268 

— Dioskouroi, 1 . 390 

— Dyava, i. 423 

— Eros and Anteros, i 393 

— Etfiokl^s and Polyneik^s, i. 391; 

ii. 184 

— Eurysthen4s and Prokles, ii 183 

— Glaukos and SarpMon, li. 85, 89 

— Grettir and lllugi, 1 324 

— Heraklfis and Iphikl6s, ii. 43 

— Hermaphrodites, 1 . 393 

— Indragni, i. 390 

— Krishna and Arjuna, i. 394, 425 

— Patroklos and Achilleus,i.247, 394 

— Peirithoos and Theseus, i. 394; 

ii 40 

— Pelias and Helens 

— Phaethfin and Helios, i. 247,394 

— Phoibos and Artemis, ii 141 

— Podaleirios and Mach46n, i. 391 

— Prometheus and Epimetheus, ii. 

201, 208 

— Rama and Luxman, i. 426 

— Romulus and Remus, ii. 74, 82 

— Rudrau, i. 391 

— Soma and SfiryA, i. 393 

— Telemachos and Odysseus, i. 394 

— Theseus and Hippolytos, li. 66 

— Uma and Soma, i. 389 

— Ushasau, i. 390,423 

— Vanina and Mitra, i 330 
Credibility, historical, i. 117 et seq. 
Creusa, i. 260, 434 

Cromwell, Oliver, traditions respecting 
i. 187 

Cross of Osins, ii. 114 
Cross and Crescent, ii. 115 
Curetes [Kour5tes] 

Cybele [Kybeli] 

Cyclic Poems, the, i. 86 



378 


INDEX. 


CTC 

Cyclops [Kykl6p8] 

Cyclopes [Kyklopes] 

Cyrus, i. 260, 309 , ii. 74, 83 
Cups, divining, ii. 122 
— and drinking-horns, ii. 120 
(?ushna, ii. 327 


AO, i. 287 
Dagon, i 400 
Dahak, ii. 84, 354 
Bahan^, i 104. 341 
Baidalos, li. 65, 199 
Daimones,ii. 202 
Baityas, i. 334 , ii. 133 
Baktyloi Idaioi, i. 364; ii. 314 
Baksha, i. 334 
Bamaskos, ii. 295 
Bana4, i, 435 ; ii. 58 et seq., 133 
Banaides, ii. 152, 266 
Banaoi, i. 234 
Banaos, ii 30, 266 

Bancers, the j^mystic, ii. 161, 264, 
274 

Bankwart, i 296 

Baphn^, i. 52, 400, 418; ii. 28 

Baphnis, ii. 29, 

Bapplegnm, i.' 296 
Barkness, ii. 31 
Basra, i 423 
Baunii, i 235 ; ii. 59 
Bawn, the, i. 328, 394 et seq.^ 416 ei 
seq. 

— ever young, i. 358, 399 

— as the weaver, i 265 ; ii. 173 

— devouring her children, i, 358, 
416; 11. 1 

— names of, i. 417 

— as a horse, li. 35 
Bay and night, i. 390 
Bays of the year, ii. 39, 280 
B^ianeira, i 150, 439 ; ii. 53 
Beiokes, ii. 83, 358 
Beimos, ii. 4 

BAon, li. 91 
Beiphobos, li. 156 
B5ipyl4, li 186 
Belians, i. 233 

Belos, 1 . 101, 106, 232 ; ii. 21 et seq. 
B6m6t5r, i. 357 ; ii. 296 et seq, 

— Thesmophoros, ii. 307 
Bemodokos, lay of, li 2, 198 
Bemons, i. 322; ii. 20 

— guardian, ii. 21 

— Hesiodic, ii. 202 

BemophoOn, BemophOn, i. 436; ii. 

297, 299 
B55, ii. 297, 312 
Berketo, i. 400; ii. 84 
Berkynos, ii. 335 
Bespoma, i. 361; ii. 262, 307 


BRT 

BeukaliAn, ii. 87, 210 et seq, 

Beva, ii. 329, 355 
Bevil, the Semitic, ii. 369 
Bevil, the Teutonic, ii. 51, 361 

— the word, i. 354 ; n. 363 
Bevaki, li. 130 et seq. 

Bew, myths of the, li. 187 
Bharma, ii, 131 
Bheanka, ii 345 

Bhuni, i. 343 
Bia, i. 266; ii. 92, 147 
Biabolos, i. 354 
Biana, i. 354 
Bianus, i. 354 
Biarmaid, i. 316 
Bido, i, 432 
Bietrich, i 297 et seq. 

— of Bern, i. 60, 806; ii. 364 

— and Sigenot, i. 280 
Biewas, i. 354 
Bike, ii 16 

BiktA 1 357 ; ii. 146 
Biktynna, i. 364 ; li. 59, 88 
Biktys, 1 . 364, 436 
Biom5dA, i 246 
Biom5d5s, i. 247; li. 6 

— horses of, ii. 50 

Bion Chrysostom, his account of the 
Trojan war, i. 184 
Bi6nA i. 361; ii. 2, 9, 21, 296, 310 
Bionysos, ii. 9, 84, 66,292 et seq., 315 

— Antheus, ii. 132 

— the womanly, ii. 295 
Bioskouroi, i. 436; ii. 22, 34, 67, 316 
Birghotamas, i. 441 

Biti, i. 334 
Bins Fidius, ii. 340 
Bivination, ii. 208 
Bjovis, i. 364 
Bobruna, ii. 33 
Boliones, ii. 152 
Bolios, i. 269 

Bollinger, Br., his theory of Greek 
mythology as an eclectic system, i. 
94 et seq. 

Bonar, i. 378 
Bonnerskind, ii. 365 
Borian Migration, i. 206 
Borians, i. 227 
Boripp5, i 237 
Boris, li. 256 
Borkas, i. 230, 428 
Bracse, ii. 116 

Bragon of the glistening heath, i. 157 
Bragons in mythology, i. 428; ii. 88 
—"b teeth, li, 86, 163, 202 
Braupadi, i. 180 ; ii. 286 
Brought, myths of tBe, ii. 273, 280, 
329, 343 

Brukhs, i. 421; ii. 355 
Bryades, ii. 257 



INDEX. 


379 


DET 

Dryops, ii, 284, 314 
Dualism in theology, i. 121 

— Iranian, i. 121; ii. 14, 356 ei 

— of nature, i. 121, 389 
Durandal, i. 274, 308 
Durga, i. 343; ii. 193 
Dyaus, i. 327 et seq, 

— pitar, i. 828 
Dyavaprithivi, i. 389 
Dymas, li. 183 
Dyotana, i. 418 
Dyu, i. 325, 327, 349 

Dwarf Incarnation, ii. 104 et seq. 
Dwarfs in Hindu mythology, li. 104, 
130, 316 

— in Teutonic mythology, i. 276, 369 


E arth, ii. 119 , 293 et seq. 

Echemos, i. 76 ; ii. 182 
Echidna, i. 224, 390 ; ii. 11, 50, 261, 
334, et seq. 

Echo, i. 398; ii. 32, 78, 249 

Ecke, Dietrich and, i. 305 et seq.. 

Eckesahs, i. 383 

Eckhart, i. 165 

Ector, i. 310 

Eelliats, i. 236 

Egeria, ii. 66 

Egg, Mundane, i. 345; ii. 133, 212 

— of Nemesis, ii. 283 

Eggs and apples, ii. 246, 282 

EgSl, ii. 100 

Eileithyia, li. 21 

Eileithyiai, ii. 13, 43 

Eilimir, x. 286 

Eindridi, ii. 100 

Ekata, Dwita, Trita, myth of, i. 441 

Elaine, i. 312, 314 

Elberich, i. 412 

Elektra, i. 366 

Elektrian gates, ii. 182 

Eleusis, i. 440; ii. 187, 297 

Eleutherai, i. 365 

Elf, ii. 29 

ELfiand, i. 381 

Elidoc, Fouqui’s, ii. 217 

Elissa, i. 483 

Ellide, the ship, iL 277 

Elves, i. 381 

Elysion, i. 846; ii. 821 

EndymiOn, i. 306, 365 ; ii. 30 seq. 

Enkelados, ii. 212 

Enosichtbon, ii. 350 

Enyalios, ii, 850 

EnyO, ii. 360 

E6s, i. 431; ii. 92 

Epaphos, ii. 140, 267 

Epbialtes, ii. 264 

Epic cycle, i, 86 

Epic poems, Aryan, i. 108, 209 


EVE 

Epic poetry, origin of, i. 42 
Epigonoi, the, ii. 187 
Epimenides, i. 413 
Epimetheus, ii. 201, 208 
Eponymoi, ii. 82, 84 
Ercildoune, i 324, 412; ii. 218 
Ercules, ii. 238 
Erebos, i. 329 

Erechtheus, i. 442; ii. 128, 308 
Erginos, ii 46 , 

Enchthonios, i. 86, 346; ii. 124, 199, 
308 et seq. 

Erigon6, i. 430 
Ermyes, li. 13 seq. 

Erinys, i. 419, 423 ; ii. 188 
Enphyl5, ii. 185 et seq. 

Eris, i. 58, 424, ii. 11, 78 
Erl king, the, i. 121; ii. 244 
Eros, i. 829 
Er6s, i. 401 et seq., 427 
Erp, i. 284 et seq. 

Erymanthos, boar of, ii. 49 
Eiysichthon, li. 308, 809 
Erytheia, ix. 11, 334 
Eryx, ii. 336 
Eteokl5s, li. 184 et seq. 

Ether [Aith5r] 

Ethiopians, i. 234 

— table of the, ii. 120 
Ethnological distinctions, i. 240 
Euemerism, modern, difficulties of, i. 

172 et seq. 

— of Thucydides, ii, 81 
Eu6meros,i. 170 

— his method not devised byhimself, 

i. 171 et seq. 

Eumenides, i. 423 ; ii. 14, 73 
Eumolpos, ii. 309 
Eunomos, ii. 39, 53, 162 
Euphondn, ii. 166 
Euros, ii. 196 
Euryal5, ii. 287, 290 
Euryanassa, i. 434; ii. 310 
Eur6p6, i. 107, 417, 437; ii. 85, 195 
Eurybat^s, ii. 347 

Eurydik6, i. 316, 400; ii. 30, 34, 42, 
239 

Eurydomen6, ii. 3 
Euryganeia, i. 417, 439; ii. 71 
Eurykleia, i. 266, 270 
EurykreiOn, ii. 172 
Eurylochos, i. 263 ; ii 39 
Eurynom6, i. 359, 417; ii. 3,198 
Euryphassa, i. 417; ii. 38 
Eurystheus, i. 293, 365, 424; ii. 41, 
et seq., 181 

Eurytion, ii. 162, 334 
Euthymos, ii. 348 
Evadn5, ii. 81 
Evanthes, ii. 318 
Ev5uos, X. 439 



3S0 


INDEX, 


BVI 

Evidence, historical, i. 178 seq.^ 191 
Ewain, i. 312 

Excalibur, 1 . 138, 274, 310 


TJAFNIR, i. 276 
JD Fairyland, i. “ill 
Fairy Quoen, i. 411, 418 
Faith, the ship, i. 313 
Fatal children, the, i. 80, 273, 312, 
436; 11. 9, 33, 68, 65, 69, 78, 132, 


154, 191 

Fatal sisters, the, lii. 16 et seq, 
Fatnin, ii. 17 
Fanstulns, li. 82 
Eavonius, ii. 221, 248 
Fenris, i. 370 , ii. 351 
Feridun, i. 441, ii. 354 
Fetish worship, i. 73 
Fialar, i. 369 

Fiction, plausible, i. 171 f t seq. 

Fifty Argonauts, ii. 150 
— children of Proteus and Doris, ii. 


256 

— Daktyloi, ii. 314 

— daughters of Asterodia, ii. 30, 138 

_ — Danaos, ii. 30, 266 riJ srj;. 

--Sel6iu\ ii. 30 

-Thestios, ii. 45 ^ 

— sons of Ai^yptos, li. 30, 266 d seq, 

.-Pallas, ii. 64 

-Priam, ii. 183 

Fionn, i. 316 

Fingall’s Cave, i. 92 

,Fire, myths of the, i. 226; 201 icq* 

'— j Gods of the: 

— Agni, ii. 190 et seq. 

— Bhuranyu, ii. 191 

— Hephaistos, ii. 12, 104 

— Hermes, ii. 233 

— Loki, i. 370 ft srq. 

— PhorOneus, il 194 Sfq, 

— Prometheus, li. 201 ft seq. 

Fish, the emblem, ii. 116 

Fish sun, the, i. 292, 400 ; ii. 25,124 
.^-god8,i 164,311 

Fleece, the golden, i. 204 
Flegetanis, ii. 122 

Flexibility of the characteristics of 
the Vedic gods, i. 833, 337 
Flora, li. 340 

Folk-lore, Aryan Jpopular Tales] 
Fool, Lay of the Sreat, ii. 157 
For^ the dark, i 409 
Forgetrme-not, li. 217 
Forseti, ii. 93 
Fortuna Hammosa, iL 66 
Fosite, ii. 98 
FreW, 1 . 376 

Freya, i. 372, 380, 381 j iL 115 


OLA 

FrojT, i. 372 
Frigga, i. 372 
Fn>, Friiya, i. 381 
Ij-riHli, quern of, ii. 121 
Frt'g sun, i. 165, 233, 400 j ii. 25, 26 
124, 184 

Frost giants, i. 371 
FuncH [FrinvoH] 

Fylfot of Thor, ii. 167 


G aia, i. 328 , 330 ; ii. 300 

Galahiyi, i. 3l3c;^ 437; ii.l23 

Gnhir, i. 369 
Galatyin, u. 256 
Galaxy, ii. 136 
Guldiier, ii. 246 
Gnniiharha-S«*na, i. 273 
GandharvHH, i. 226, 395 ; ii 36 
Gnnt'sa, i. 347 
GanymM^, i. 432 
Ganymodrs, i. 432 ; ii. 70, 310 
Oanzhliek, ii. 96 
Garamw, li, 3l>8, 3t0 
(tanli.»n, Great Hose, i. 307 
QanlenH, !lypt‘rla»rfRii, i. 307 
—, Hesperian, i. 238 
, Phuiakian, i. 307 
Garin, the l.iorrainer, i. 317 
Oarslmap, ii. 354 
OarutRiat, ii. 193 

Gata and Karpara, story of, 1. 115 

G^ PammfttOr, ii. 305 

Geierstein, the Lady of, ii. ^89 

GelanAr, ii. 268 

Gemini, i. 391 

Ge^traphy, Homeric, i. 184 

—, mythical, ii. 85,154, 274, 807 

GiKiT^, 8t., ii. 857 

Ocriurai, ii. 117, 126 

Oeri, i. 876 

Geryon, Geryones, Geryonens, 290, 
860; ii. 50, 826, 834, 849 
Goyti, ii. 100 

Giants,!. 870; ii. 214, 311 
Giants’ Causeway, i. 92 
Gibicho, i. 303, 375 
Gigantes, ii. 213, 323, 337 
Girdle of AphroditA, i. 304 
— Brynhild, i. 292, 304 
— Froya, i. 372 
— HippolytA, ii. 50 
Giselher, i. 292, 299 
Gluki, i. 281 

Gladstone, Mr., his theory of mytho¬ 
logy as a perversion of revealed 
doctrines, i. 14 srq. 

—on the historicalauUiority of ilomer, 
i. 449 ft seq. 

Glaive of Light, the, i, 188 
Glam, i. 322 



INDEX. 


381 


QLA 

Glaukfe, i. 429, ii. 154 

Glaukos, i. 161, 232; ii.90, 257 

Grlcnkundie, Harp of, li. 245 

Grlotiming, ii, 38, 350 

Gnas, ii 329 

Gnostics, ii. 128 

Goblins, ii. 144 

Godiva, i. 121 

Godmund, li 89 

Godwins, Earl, traditional hiistoiy of, 

i. 285 

Gokala, ii. 134 

Golden Ap;e, i 373 

Golden enps and beds, ii. 39 

Golden fleece, the, i. 204; ii, 160 et seq. 

Goodies, ii. 316 

Goo&e-girl, i. 321 

Gopias, ii. 135 

Gorge, li. 36 

Gorgons, ii. 37, 60, 287, 360 ei $eq. 

Gorlois, i, 309 

Govinda, ii. 130 

GAR, the root, i. 34 

Graces, the, i. 426 

OrfiBci, i. 237 

Graha, if. 329 

Gr&iai, ii. 60, 140, 286, 350 seq. 
Graikoi, i. 237 

Grail, the holy, i. 309, ei. seq. 

Grainne, i. 316 
Graioi, i. 237 
Gran, i. 247, 279 
Granmar, i. 287 
Grant, ii. 363 

Gram, i. 160, 224,274, 281,298,310; 

ii. 62 

Gratiae, i. 426 

Grwit Fool, Lay of the, i. 139 
Groat Rose' Garden, the i. 307 
Greeks, i. 238 

—, belief of the, in their mythology, 
i. 76 seq. 

—, tribal legends of the, i. 220 
Grein, i. 280 

Grendel, i. 279; ii. 200, 348, 363 
Grettir, i. 300, 320 st seq, 

— Saga, i. 319 
Ghreyman, ii. 363 
Grimhild, i. 281 
Gnmm’s law, i 327 
Gripir, i 274 
Grom, ii. 263 

Grote, Mr., his method of treating 
Greek myths, i. 7 

—, his remarks on the structure of 
the Iliad, i. 244 
Ghiardian angels, ii. 21 
Gudrun, i. 62, 89, 280 et seq., 304 
Guenevere, i 311, 326 
—, Round Table of, ii. 119 
GunAdhya, ii. 247 


HEL 

ryvaijuai/^s, ii 77, 88, 135, 192, 330 

Gundicar, i. 290 

Gungnir, i. 376 

Gunnar, i 62, 281 

Gunputti, i. 130 

Gunther, i 189, 288, 303 

Guttnrm, i. 282 

Gwyddno, basket of, li. 121 

Gyges, 1 . 144 

—, ring of, ii. 125 


H ABONDE, Dame, ii. 306 
Hacon, i. 321; n. 306 
Hadupraht, ii. 93 

Hades, i. 337, 360; ii. 302, 319 et 
seq. 

—, helmet of, ii 320 
Hagene, Hagen, i. 156, 281, 283, 288, 
292 et seq., 303 ; ii. 80 
Hagno, i. 361 
Hags’ fell, ii. 364 
Halinir, i 277, 372 
HaimOn, ii. 73,188 
Hakolherend, i. 376 
Halfdan, i. 288 

Hall of Slaughter, i. 258, 299,307, 322 
Humdir, i 284 et seq, 

Hameln, piper of, i. 121; ii. 243 
Hammer of Thor, i. 265,369, 380; ii. 
115 

Hand cf glory, ii. 219 
Hansavati Rich, i 342 
Han, 1 426; ii. 105, 130 
Hants, i. 48, 229, 426; ii. 2 
Harmonia, necklace of, ii. 86 
Harold Fairhair, i. 321 
— Gormson, li. 100 
— Sigiirdarson, ii. 100 
Harpagos, i. 300 

Harps and horns, inchanted; ii. 246 
Hartmut, i, 304 

Healers or Saviours, the, i. 377, 391 ; 

li. 27, 33, 36, 66 
Heaven, ideas of the, i. 326 
mu, 1. 432 ; 11. 12, 66, 67, 194 
Hedin, i. 286 Ae 

Heimdall, i. 144, 381 
Hekab6, i, 245 ; li. 78 
Hekale, li. 64 
Hekataios, i, 321; ii. 316 
Hekat4, i. 428, 429, ii. 39, 141 
—, Kourotrophos, ii. 141 
—, the three-handed, i. 370; li. 142 
Hekatoncheires, u. 214 
Hekatos, ii. 141 
Heklufiall, ii. 364 
HektOr, i. 262 et seq. ; ii. 6, 77 
Hel, i. 370, ii. 94, 361 et seq, 

Helche, i. 295 
Helen [Helen^] 



382 


INDEX. 


Hit 

tlio three, i. 286 
Helgi Haddingaheld, i. 27 
—, son of Hiorvai-dur, i. ‘286 

— Hundingsbana, i. 286 
Heliades, ii. 40 
Helias, i. 457; ii. 284 
Helikon, h 268, 289 
Helios, i. 263 ; ii 26, 89 
—, cattle of, i. 54, 421 
—, robe of, i. 150 

Helenfe, i. 64, 139, 206, 311, 422; ii. 
6, 67, 76 et se^.^ 165 et seq., 283, 
292 

— Hendritis, i. 430 ; ii. 157, 161 
—, the name, i. 458 

Hellas, i, ‘237 

Hell6, i. 236; ii. 160, 272 

Hellfen, i. 236 

Hellenes, i. 236 et seq .; ii. 273 
Hellespont, i. 237, 435 
Helmet of Hades [Tarnkappe] 

Hemera, i. 239; ii. 91, 307 
Heming, ii. 100 
He6sphoros, i 432 ; ii 38 
Hephai&tos, i. 370, 427, 441, 444; ii. 

12, 104, 168, 197, 290 
Herakleids, expulsion of the, i. 206 
et scq , ii. 67, 181 et seq. 
return of the, i. 199 seqr, ii. 
67 182 

Herakles, ii. 42 et seq, 136, 318 

_, Daphnephoros, ii. 55 

—, labours of, ii 43 et seq. 

MaivS/ieyos, li 41, 47 

— Olympics, li. 66 

^— Pangenetor, ii. 55 

— pillars of, ii. 19 
Hercules, ii. 66, 339 
Herculus, ii, 66, 238, 339 
Herentas, ii. 9 
Herleus, i 311 
Hermanric, i. 284 
Hermeias, ii. 230 
Hermaphrodites, i. 346, 393, 444 
Hermes, i. 366, 375, 441, ii. 173,192, 

224 etseq.; 315, 320 
—, the god of song, ii. 26, 226 et seq, 
the Master Thief, i. 119 , ii. 226 

— Psychopompos, ii 232 

— Tnsmegistos, ii. 237 
Hermodhur, or Heermuth, i. 287 
Heme the hunter, ii. 364 

H6r6, i. 357, 366 ; n. 9 et seq.; 43, 79, 
135 

— Akraia, ii. 12^ 

—, the matron, ii. 12 
H6r6, i. 434, 435 
Herodias, ii. 366^ 

Herodotos, his idea of the Trojan 
var, i. 183 et seeq. 

Herodotos, historical method of, i.181 


HOR 

Herodotos, scepticism of, i. 181 et 

Hemes guarded by Ath^nA i. 269 
Heroic Age, the ii. 203 
Hersfe, i. 430; ii. 30, 91, 282, 309 
Berth, ii. 119 
Hesiodic Ages, ii. 201 
— poems, morality of the i. 19, 361 
—Works and Days, i. 19 
Hesionft, ii. 48 

Hesioneus, i. 226; ii. 36, 147 
Hesperides, ii. 38 
—, apples of the, i. 284; ii. 22 
Hesperioi, i. 288 
HesperiOn, ii. 89 
Hesperos, ii. 88 
Hestia, i. 367 ; u. XI, 192,196 
Hettel, i. 304 
Hialprek, i. 276; ii. 198 
Hiarbas, i. 433 
Hierodouloi, ii. 4, 117 
Hilaeira, ii. 34 
Hilda, i. 304 
Hildebrand, i. 301 
Hildegund, i 303 
Himeros, i. 48, 334; ii. 2 
Himmbiorg, i. 382 
Hitopadesa, i. 113 
I Hipponobs, li. 67 
Hippot6s,i. 202, 262; ii, 183 
Hippodameia, i. 393; ii. 29, 310 
Hippokr5n6, ii. 289 
Hippolyt6, ii. 60 
Hippolytos, ii. 66 

Historical credibility, law of, L 178 
HJarrandi, ii. 247 

Hjordis, i. 276 et aeq,, 322; ii. 46, 
168, 198 
H16dr, li. 34 
Hlorridi, i. 381 
Hnikar, i. 377 
Hnossa, i. 372 

Hoard, The Niblnng, i, 283, 293 et 
seq. 

Hodr, i. 369 ; ii. 93 
Hogni, i. 281, 283 
Holda, i. 317; h. 116, 606 
Holle, i. 317 

Homer, i 176, 449 et seq. 

— biographers of, i. 196 

Homeric poems, historical value of, 
i. 194 et seq 

-age of the, i. 214 etseq. 

-materials for the btructureof the, 

i, 196 seq. 

— geography, i. 184 

— history, i. 449 et seq, 

— mythology, i. 242 
Hope, ii. 209 

Horai, i. 360; ii. 10, 286 
Horant, i. 304 



INDEX. 


383 


HOB 

Horos, ii. 209 

Horse, the wooden, ii. 175 

Horses, immortal, i 434; ii. 162 

— of the sea, n. 263 ei seq, 

-sun, i. 152 

Horselberg, i. 165, 412; ii. 218 
Horseshoes, ii. 127 

Hours, the, ii. 285 

Hrimgerda, i. 286 

Hrimthursen, i. 371 

Hrodmar, i. 286 

Hrothgar, ii 348 

Hrungnir, i. 369 

Huginn, i. 376 

Hunding, i. 275, 279 

Hundingsbana, i. 286 

Huon of Bordeaux, i. 412’; ii. 120 

Hvergelmir, ii. 18 

Hyadea, ii. 38,286 

Hydra, ii. 48 

— and Lynkeus, ii. 271 
Hymir, i. 364 

Hyllos, i. 206; ii. 57, 181 
Hyperborean Ghirdena, i. 102, 807, 
423; ii. 11, 60 
Hyperboreans, ii. 23, 279 
Hypereia, ii. 182, 279 
Hyperidn, i. 357; ii. 38 
Hypermnistra, ii. 268 
H'ypnos, i. 366 
HypsipyW, ii. 152 
Hyrieus, i. 116; ii. 24 


TAMB£, ii. 297 
X lamos, ii. 33, 81 seq, 

Ia6, ii. 113 
Ia8i6n, i. 364; ii. 307 
lasios, i. 364 
Ias5, ii. 150 

Ias6n, i. 429; ii. 1X8, 150 
lasoa, h. 195 
lapetos, i. 357; ii. 201 
larnsaxa, i. 369 
Ice, mytlis of the, ii. 279 
Ichor, i. 368 
Ida,i. 860,364; ii. 78 
Idl, i. 361 

Idaioi Daktyloi, i. 161, 364; ii. 274,, 
314 

Idas. i. 364, 395 ; ii- 75 
Iduna, ii. 298 
Idyia, i. 429 
I«aine, i. 809 
Ikaros, Xkarios, i. 430 
Bias, i. 254 ; ii. 164 
Iliad, historical character of the, i. 
176 et icq.j 449 et seq. 

— didiictic purpose of the, i. 261, 

267 

— essential story of the, i. 66,178 


JEM 

Iliad, idea of the, as originally a 
written poem, i. 447 

— present form of the, i. 241 et seq, 
Ilmannen, ii. 208 

Ilmatar, i 120 
Ilsan the monk, i. 307 
Incorruptible bodies, i. 160, 249, 253; 

11 . 5, 169, 269 
Indra, i. 336 et scq. 

— Parjanya, i. 340, 379 

— the rainbringer, i. 340 

— Savitar, i. 303, 384 

— Sth4tar, i. 340 

— the wanderer, i. 324, 340 
—, the wife of, i. 343 
Indragit, i. 338 

Indrani, i. 343 
Iiigobjorg, 1 . 411 
Ino, 11 . 179, 265 et seq. 
Interchangeable characteristics of the 
Vedic gods, i. 20 et $eq , 337; ii. 
Invisible cap [Tarnkappe]' 

16, ii, 138 et seq.^ 304 
lobatfts i. 235 : ii. 68 
Iokast6, i. 223, 435 ; ii. 71, 188 
lolaos, li. 48, 51, 181 
Iol6, i. 258, 435; ii. 52 
I6n, i. 237 

lonians, i. 227 et seq. 
los, poison, i. 230 , li 81 
los, an arrow, i 230, ii. 81 
Iphianassa, ii. 30 
Iphigeneia, i. 314; ii. 145, 157 
Iphikles, li 43 
Iphimedousa, ii. 253 
Iplithim6, li. 315 
Iphitos, i 270 ; ii. 62 
Innc, 1 . 299 

Ins, i. 366; ii. 168, 298 
Irmin, li. 19, 184 
Irminsul, ii. 19 
Iros, i. 367; ii. 162 
Ischys, ii. 34, 80, 92 
Tsco, i 240 
Isfendiyar, i. 92, 156 
Isis, ii. 66, 140 
Ism6n6, ii. 71 
IsBi, h 365 
Iswara, ii. 106, 127 
Italian tribal names, i. 239 
Itys, ii. 250 

Ixlon, i, 225, 292, 324; ii. 3, 12, 14, 
27, 35, 36 et seq.^ 92, 302 


TAN, i. 354 
U Janus, i. 354 
Januspater, i. 828 
Jandrddana, ii. 133 
Jason [lason] 
Jemshid, ii. 121, 354 



384 


INDEX. 


JON 

Jonakr, i. 284 
Jbrd, i. 372 

Joseph of Arimatha>a, i. 314; lu 122 
Jbtunhotm, i- 380; ii. 80 
Jbtuns, 381 
Juno, ii. 13 

— Matrons, ii 13 

— Monota, i. 41.5; li. 13 

— Virgmalis, ii» 13 
Jupiter, i. 328 

— Indigos, i 435 

— Pistor, ii. 312 

— Pluvius, i, 348, 376 

— Stator, i. 340 

— Tonans, i. 379 
Juturna, i. 239 


K ABEIEOI, ii. 142, 314 

Kadmoa, i. 107i 438; ii. 85 et 
$eq., 265 

— the bondman, h 87 
Kaikias, ii. 88, 252, 341 
Kalchas, ii. 164 
Kal^, li 3 
Kalewala, i, 316 
Kali, 1 343, 370; ii. 193 
Kalinak, li. 136 
KaUiope, u. 241, 310, 314 
Kallirhoe, i. 290 ; li. 189 
Kalh&to, 1 , 48, 231; li. 314 
Kalyk6, ii 30,212 
Kama, i 329, 375, 427 
Kamsa, ii. 133 
Kara, i 2vS8 
Karali, ii. 193 
Kami e, 11 116 
Karnos, i 2015: ii. 183 
Kasandra, ii 7S 
Kassiopeia, i 137 
Kastor, ii. 44, 283 
Kaunos, i. 58 
Kuuravas, i 180 

Karl tho Great in mythology, i. 189 
et auq. 

Kebrfin, ii. 78 
Kedalion, ii. 290 
Keingala, i. 319 
Kekrops, i. 363, ii. 128, 309 
Keleos, ii. 297 

Kentaurs, i. 226 , ii. 35, 47, 162 
Kephalos, i. 49 , ii. 80, 91 
Kepheus, i. 437; li. 47 
Kerberos, ii. 46, 95, 142, 240, 319, 
386 

Kerdo, ii 195 
K^res, ii. 17, 340 
Keresaspa, li, 364 
Kerkbpes, ii. 63 
Kerkyon, li. 63 
Keryneia, stag of, ii. 48 


KYZ 

Kojhc, ii. 51 

Kestos of AphroditA, i. 804 
Kikones, ii. 176 
Kilix, ii. 85 

King and queen, the 'words, i. 88 

Kipicho, i. 375 

Kirk^, i. 159, 824; ii. 178 

Kia-rm (xvcrrMal^ ii. 119 

Kloitos, i. 432 

Kleiatbones, ii. 269 

Kleodaios, ii. 181 

Kleopatra, i. 283, 439; ii. 161,188 
K16te, 11. 8 

Klim of the Clough, ii. 99 
K16th6, ii. 16, 17 
Klymen4, ii. 167 
Klytaimnfestra, i. 261; ii. 288 
Klytia, ii. 310 

Knights of the Bound Table, i. 818 

Kobalos, ii. 144 

Kobold, ii. 144 

Koios, i. 357 

Koiranos, ii. 36 

Kokalos, 11 . 88 

Kokytos, li. 321 

Kor6, ii. 39, 296, 320 

Korbnis, i. 430 ; ii. 33 et seq. 

Korybantes, ii. 161, 314 

Korythos, ii. 74 

Kourfitos, i. 360; ii. 142, 161, 259, 
274, 200, 314 
Kraka, i. 61 
Kranaoi, i. 227 
Kraunos, i. 227; ii. 308 
Krataiis, ii. 261 
Krebn, i. 429 ; li. 73, 188 
Kxvs, ii. 88 
Kresphonti'R, ii. 183 
Kretoa, i. 361 
Kriemhild, i. 288 
KrioB, i. 367; ii. 215 
Krisasva, ii. 354 

Krishna, i. 336, 346, 367 > ih 107, 
130, 

Krommy6n, son of, ii, 63 

Kronidfis, i. 368 

KroniOn, i. 358 

Kronos, i. 356, ct seq .; ii. 132 

Kteatos, ii. 49 

Kumara, li. 106 

KumArila, i. 87 

Kuvera, li. 320 

Kyanean rocks, ii. 242 

Kybel5, Kyb6hi\ ii. 118,312 

Kykiopes, ii. 356, 361; ii. 41, 176 

Kyklops, ii. 176, 213 et seq. 

Kyknos, ii. 51, 255, 288 
KymodokA, ii. 256 
Kynthos, ii. 22 
Kypselos, chest of, i, 215 
Kyzikos, ii. 152 



INDEX. 


385 


LAB 

L abyrinth, tho Crotan, ii. 65, 

139,109 
Lr diesis, ii 16 

Ijiulders to lira von, i. 144, 367 
Lail5n, ii. 22, 38 
luiios, i 442 ; ii. 69, 83, 343 
— tho word, n 367 
Lake, Lady of the, i. 313 
Lakslmii, i. 433 ; ii. 308 
Lamia, li. 261 
Lamos, ii. 177 
LampotiC‘, i. 421 
Xijimpos. i. 431 
Lamyroi, li. 11-4, 177 
Lancelot du Lake, i. 314 et seq^ 312, 
325 

L'lndmima-hok. i. 321 
Laodanicm, n. 89 
Laokoun, li 287 
Liiv)imKt6n, i. 01, ii. 31, 47, 265 
Iviip version nf the myth of PolyjdiA- 
mofl. ii. 366 
Ivnpithni, ii. 151 
Lar, i. 422 
Irfirofi, ii. 316 
Larvfip, ii. 316 
Latini, i, 253 
Ijatmos, ii. 22, 31 

Laimfal and the Fay Triamour, i. 
402 

I/aunuR, i. 225 
Lavinia, i. 235, 260, 434 
Ijoandor [TjoinudroH] 

Loda, i 439} ii. 3, 22, 156, 283 
liCiundros, i. 434 vt ;ieq. 

Loibotliron, ii 296 
LemuroH, ii. 144, 177, 316 
Lonoro, Burger’s, i. 287 
Leophnntos, ii. 72, 343, 363 

IvOoM, ii 61 

Ii{*rnuuLn hydra, ii. 48, 271 
I^the, li. a', 22, 321 

i. 359; li. 3, 21 seq,, 279 
Leuk^ ii. 156, 174, 319 
LeukippoH, ii. 34 
Leukoth^ ii. 273 

Lewis, Sir G. 0., on the early history 
of the Hellenic and Italian tribes, 
i. 2ol et seq. 

— — on the laws of evidence, i. 179, 
lil et eeq. 

-on the return of the Herakleids, 

i. 201 

Liber and Libera, i, 381 
Libya, ii. 267 
Lichas, ii. 54, 55 
Lif, i. 370 

Light and darkness, conflict of, ii. 14, 
148, 170, 324 et seq. 

— Breast of, ii. 158 
— Kmgof, ii. 159, 199 

VOL. II. 


MAI 

Liftlitning, myths of the, i. 161, 198, 
11 . 212 C/5 seq, 

Ligyron, ii. 163 
Linga, 11 113, 118 
Linos, ii 44, 251 
Lion of Kithiiiron, ii. 44 

— Nomcii, 11 . 44 
Litai, ii 19 

Loathly Lady, the, i 402, 404 
Lodur, i 372 ; ii 34 
Loki, 1 277, 370 ct seq ; ii. 95, 199, 
298, 361 

Lotos, the, ii 120 

— eaters, i 158, ii. 120, 162, 178 
Lueifor, ii 38 

Lucius of Corinth, i. 403 
Luck of Edunliall, ii. 120 
Luck-flower, li 217 
Luena, ii. 72 
Liipercus, i 306 
Lusman, i. 393 
Lychnos, i. 442 
Lykabas, i 435; ii. 65 
Lykaian Hill, i. 362 
Lykanthropy, i. 63, 363, 459 
LjkAon, i 363 

— son of Priam, i. 251 
Lykastos, ii. 87 
Lyke, ii 29 
L^kegen^s, i. 2C7 
LykomcclcR, ii 67, 163 
Ljkoreia, ii. 210 
Lykos, li. 50, 249 
Lykosoura, 1 361, 362 
Lyktos, 1 357, 364 
Lykourgns, ii. 72, 259, 294 
Lympha,Lympliaticus, ii. 257 
Lynkeus, ii 152, 269 
Lyrkeios, ii. 271 


M l, ii. 312 

Macabuin, 1 311 
Macduff, i. 312 : ii. 33 
MachAOn, i 391 ; ii 3C 
Macusi Indians, myths of the, ii. 211 
Modhu, 11 . 132 
Maghavan, i. 340 
Magni, i. 369 
Magnus, Lay of, li. 199 
MahAbhArata, i. 180 
MahAdeva, i. 345; ii, 131 
— bow of, i. 389 
Mahakab, ii. 120 
Mahendra, ii. 131 
Maia, ii. 224 

Maimed deities, i. 303, 325, 369, 370, 
376, 385, li. 19, 104, 130, 197 
Mainades, li 295 
Maion, 11 . 187 
Maira, i. 431 

0 



386 


INDEX. 


UAU 

Miimora, iu 311 
Man, ii. 184 
Manduci, ii. 144 
Manos, ii. 316, 339 
M&nia, i. 445 

Mannus, i. 206; ii. 184, 354 
Manu, i. 414; ii. 87, 191 
Manus, ii. 199 
MA.R, the root, i. 34 
Marathonian bull, ii. 64 
Marhaus, i. 312 
Marko, i. 247 
Marmar, Harm or, ii. 311 
Mars, i. 32 ; li. 311 
Marspiter, Maspitcr, ii. 311 
Marsyas, ii. 317 

Maruts, i. 32, 117, 132; ii. 221 et scq. 
Master Thief, the, i. Ill et 127 ; 

ii. 105, 223, 226 
Matabrune, ii 284 et seq. 

Matari.s\an. li. 193 

Mater Dolorosa, ii 297 

Matuta, i. 445; ii. 156 

Materials of rhe Arthur romances, i. 308 

— Grettir Saga, i. 319 

— Helgi Sagas, i. 285 

— Homeric poems, i. 259 et seq, 

— Nibelungonlied, i. 289 et eeq. 

— Shahnaineh, n 357 

— tale of Itoland, i. 307 

— Volsung story, i. 273 
Maurice Connor, ii. 215 
Marors, ii 311 
Ma\polo, li 127 
MecU'ia, i. 428; li. 142 

— robe of, i. 429 
Medoidos, ii. 293 

Modousa, i. 101, 221; ii. 82,287, 350 
JMegairu, ii. 16 
Megapenthe.s, n. 61, 157 
Megnra, li. 47, 54 
Megarian tradition, i. 223 
Melanthios, i. 209, 271; ii. 180 
Melantho, i. 200 

Moleagros, i. 90, 254, 412, 439 ; ii. 
76, 160 
Meba, ii. 195 

Melikcrtes, i. 401 ; ii. 86, 265 
MelitS, fountain of, i. 233 
Melkarth, i. 401; ii. 86 
Melpomene, ii. 260 
Melusina, i 161, 401; ii. 60 
Memnon, i, 232, 432: ii. 19, 91 
Menelaos, ii. 79, 106 
Menestheus, ii 67 
Menoikeus, ii. 187 
Menoitios, ii. 167, 201 
Mentor, i, 415 
Menu LManu] 

Mercurius, ii, 237 
Merlin, i. 311 


MYR 

Mermaids, ii. 282 
Mcropc, ii. 69 
Meropos, ii. 53 
MetaneMm, ii. 297 

Metaphor, influence of, on mythology, 

i. 42. 48, 425 

MM IS, 1. 358, 441; ii. 355 

Michael Si'ott, ii. 121 

Midas, i. 132, 385, 403; ii. 317 

Midgard, i. 371 

Milky way, ii. 135 

Mimas, ii. 18 

Mimir, i. 376; 5i. 18, 91 

Minerva, i. 358, 374, 417, 445 

— Capta, i. 228, 442 

Minos, 1 . 298 ; 5i. 66, 86, 307, 322 
Minotauros, ii. 87, 264, 848 et eeq. 
Miolnir, Thor, i. 82, 380 ; ii. 18o 
Mist, chililren of the, ii. 272 
Mithras, i. 335, 367; ii. 365 
Mitra, 1 330 et seq. 

Mnemosyne, i. 359 ; ii. 215 
Mnevis, ii. 129 
Modml, i. 315 
Moira, li. 16 

Moinii, i. 287, 365, 438; ii. 16 ef ^eq. 
Mola' MartJs, ii. 312 
Molione, ii. 51 

Molioiios, i. 32, 117 ; 64, 253 
Momos, i. 58 
Moneta, i. 415 

Monk and the bird, the, iu 247 
Mont li« of the year, ii. 285 
Mount lieism, Aryan, i. 72, 97, 882; 

ii. 110 

— Semitic, i. 97, 831, 332 
Moon, the, li. 138 eeq. 

Morana, i. 32 

Mbrdur, i. 372 
Morgan, the Fay, i. SU 
Mora, ii. 17 

Muller, Professor Max, on the myth 
of Paris, i. 65 

-Toll. ii. 102 

-Troy, ii. 368 

Mxininn, i. 376 
Muina, ii. 253 

Murdered and risen gods, i. 301 ; ii. 

91, 95, 96, 113, 300 
Murclha-diviih, i. 440 
Mure, Colonel, on the text of Homor, 
i. 244 

-influence of Honker, i. 213 

-myth of Hermes, ii, 228 

-chara4‘ter of Odysseus, i. 264 

Muses, i. 427; ii. 188, 282 
Muspelheim, i. 871 
Mutinus, Mutnnus, Muttunus, ii. 818 
Myk^nai, i. 184 
Mylitta.i. 164, 401 ; ii, 117 
Myrmidons, i, 141, 247, 405 et seq. 



INDEX. 


387 


MTR OBIT 


Myrtilos, ii. 153, 310 | 

Mysteries, ii. 241 

— Eleusinian, li. 126 

— Hellenic, li. 126 

— Semitic, ii. 125 
Mystic chests, ii. 119 

Mythical geography, i. 355, 361 seq.^ 

440 ; li, 85, 154, 238, 274, 30 7 

— heroes, i. 60, 78 et seq,^ 92, 220 

— names, significance of, i, 84, 189, 

270 

— phrases, i. 41, 53, 93, 100 ei s^q.^ 

326. 395,424 ; ii. 27, 76, 32, 347 

— speech, developcmonts from, i. 54 

— weapons, i. 49, 138, 274, 308 : li. 

170 

Mythology, relation of, to language, 

1. 31 

— repulsive, aspects of, i. 3, 56, 72, 

81 

— and religion, contrast between, i- 

2 ei 3eq,t 74 

— Aryan, key to, i. 18, 69, 86, 106 

— Egyptian, i. 66; ii. 56 
•— Northern, I 67, 92 

— Vedic, i, 20, 52; li. 102, 190, 221, 

324 

— later Hindu, ii. 130 
Mythopoeic Ages, character of the, i. 

39 et seq. 

Myths, allegorised, i. 58, 102 

— arising from equivocal words, i. 

47, 385, 414; ii. 11, 50, 76 

— borrowed, hypothesis of, i. 99, 

109,129 

— circulation of, i. 142 et seq, 

— combination of, i. 140; ii. 149 

— disintogpition of, ii. 4, 76, 231 

— Euemcristic interpretation of 

— Finnish and Mongolian, ii. 101 

— imporlathni of, i. 99, 101 

— localised, i. 51, 68, 76, 356 

— xnondaspoctsof, i.57,84,220;ii.44 

— primary and secondary, i. 42 

— proverbial, i. 385; ii. 317 

— relative age of, i. 63 

— solar, L 41, 43; ii. 66 


N aiads, i. 877: ii.257, sie 

Names, signidcance of tribal, i. 
220 et seq, 

Namuki, i. 342; ii. 152 

Nana, ii. 298 

Nanda, ii. 130, 134 

Nanna, ii. 93 

Naraka, ii. 137 

Narayana, ii. 130 

Narcissus, the fiower, ii. 33, 299 

Narkissos, i. 306; ii. 32 et seq, 

Nasatya, i. 428 


Naubandhana, i. 414 

NausikaA, i. 257 ; li. 278 

Nausithoos, ii. 279 

Neaira, i. 436 ; li. 172 

Necessity, doctrine of, li. 13, 37 

Nectar, i. 225, 387 

Neda, i. 361 

N4is, li. 30 

Neith, 11. 313 

Neleus, ii. 82, 150 

Nemesis, ii. 19, 203 

— egg of, li, 20, 283 
Neoptolemos, ii. 46 
Nephel6, ii. 35, 148, 272 et seq. 
Neptunus, i. 376 

Nereides, ii. 257 
Nerous, ii. 256 et seq. 

Nerthus, i. 381 
Hessos, ii. 54 

Nibelungenlied, i. 189, 289 seq. 

— historical value of the, i. 189 et 
seq., 2#8 

Nick. i. 377 
Nicolaitans, ii. 128 
Nicor, i. 377 
Nidhdgr, ii. 19 

Niflheim, i. 370, 371; ii. 306, 362 
Niflungs, i. 281, 285 

— treasure of the, i. 290, 297; ii- 
80 

Nikostratos, li. 167 
Nine worlds, tho, i. 382 
Ninos, ii. 84 

Niob5, i. 437 ; ii. 195, 278 
Nioi’dr, i 381 
Niijuts, ii. 221 
Nirriti, i. 344 
Nishtigri, 1. 344 

Nisos, i. 48, 108, 224, 249; ii. 262 

Nixies, i. 377 

Njal, i. 300 

Nobiskrug, ii. 364 

Norns, i. 287, 365 

Nostoi, i. 205 ; ii. 159,171 et seq. 

Notes, i. 432 

Numa, li. 72 

Nuodung, shield of, i. 297 
Nykteus, li. 249 

Nymphs, i. 306; ii. 257 et seq., 281 ei 
seq. 

Nyx, i. 68, 329; ii. 311 

C ANNES, ii. 84 

Oberon, i. 412 ; ii. 120, 245 
Ocean, stream of, ii. 38 
Odin (Wuotan), i. 274, 277, 368 et 
seq. ; ii. 364 
— on Yggdrasil, i. 371 
Odin’s Eune song, i. 371 
1 Odur,i.372 


2 C c 



388 


INDEX. 


ODT 

Odysseus, i. 139, 257,325,399; ii. 46, 
70, 105, 346 

— the womanly, ii. 174 

— cliarnctor of, i. 264 et sfq. 

— return of, from IIinn, i. 267 

— vengeance of, i. 269 

— weapons of, i. 256 

Odyssoy, didactic purpose oftlio,ii. 46 

— story of tlio, i. 256 

— structure of the, i. 196 
(Edipus [Oidipous] 

Oegir, i. 381 
Oegishialmr, i. 383 
Offa’s dyke, i. 92 

Ogen, i, 383 

Ogior the Dane, i. 317, 412 
Ogres, i. 382 , ii. 222 
Ogyges, i. 383 
Oi^ros, ii. 241 

Oidipous, i. 222, 423, 464 ei seq.; 

li. 16, 23, 69 rt 186 
Oineus, i. 439; li. 47, 161 
Oinomaos, ii. 310 
Oinon^, i 64, ii. 78 et seq, 

Oinopia, ii. 88 

Oinopion, ii, 290 

Okennos, i. 356; ii. 10, 266 

01af,ii 100 

Old Davy, li, 363 

Old Nick, li. 363 

Olgor Dansk [Ogior the Dane] 

Olive of Atheni'^, ii. 309 
Olyseus, li. 172 
Olympia, i. 364 
Olympian deities, ii, 312 
Olympos, i. 356, 361 
Olympian hierarchy, later, i. 336 
Omphal5, ii. 52 
On, Onnes, ii. 84 

One-handed gods and heroes, i. 303, 
325, 369, 386 

One-eyed gods, 1.104,869,376; ii. 19 
Oneiros, i. 58 
Ophites, ii. 128 
Ops, ii. 308 

Oral tradition, value of, i. 187 
Oreads, ii. 257 
Oreithyia, ii. 249 
Orestes, ii. 183 

Oridn, i. 432 ; ii. 262, 289 et $eq., 307 
Ormuzd, ii. 14, 354 et seq, 

Oromazes, ii. 366 

Orpheus, i. 120, 283, 292; ii» 42, 96, 
151, 154, 239 et seq, 

Orphic hymns, i. 86 

— theogony, li. 212 
Orthros, i. 66; ii. 48, 319, 827 
Ortlieb, i. 299 

Ortwein, i. 304 
Ortygia, i. 23a;ii.23, 298 
Oaci, Oski, i. ^7 


PEL 

Osknhyrr, i. 376 
Oskastein, i. 375 
OHknu‘\jjir, i. 376 
i. 316 

Othyradrs, i. 70 
(hint, 1 . 3tl6, 412 
ntns, ii. 261 
(hirani5n«’‘», ii. 213 

OuraiinN, i. ;(3t, .'UO, 367 ; ii. 12, 216 

— and (iaia, i. 331 

0\vl:jruiiin', ii. 361 

Owl in fnlk-Iun*, i, 163 

(Ixylos, ii* 183 


P AIKAN', i. 153. 28<5j ij. 3« 
Vnii)ni»>H, i, 361 
Pakkols. 1 . 379 
l^ilaimnn, ii. 265 
Palji!nvdv'<, it. 174 
Palrttiuin, ii. lU 
Pairs, ii. 1 U 

Dairy, .Mr., on the inllnrnrr of Homrr 
on th»* (tn rlv lyric nml tragic pui'ta, 
ii. 213 rt 
Palikni, ii. 1 14 
Palnatoki, it. 160 
Pullmtion, li, 113 
PnllantidvH, ii. 64 
Pallas Arh»‘m\ ii. 114, 118 
-*-* the giant, i. 442 ; ii, 64 
Pamphylns, ii. 183 

Pan. ii. 138.113, 173, 221, 247 eiaeq., 
315 

Paiidia, ii. 62, 138 

J Mini ion, ii. 62 

Pundnni, i. 444; ii. 208 
I’amlavaH, i. 180 
PniidnjHoH, ii. 809 
Puni, i. 64, 420, et Mg.; ii, S27 
Paiikoit^H, ii. 320 
Papas, ii. 812 
Parameebthin, ii. 108 
Parjanya, i. 340, 879 
Pans, I. 64, 268; ii. 6, 76 et eeq.^ 166, 
_ 292, 881 ei erq. 

— judgment of, ii. 3, 11 

Pasiphai^, i. 436; ii. 87, 266 

Pasupata, i. 393 

Paul Pry, i, 121 ; ii. 236 

PtHilirur, King, ii. 123 

Pooping Tom of (^»vcnti^', i. 121 

PegasoH, i, 279; ii. 68, 287 ei Mg., 360 

Pehrkons, i. 379 

iViifMif*. ii. 289, 343 

Poirithoijs, ii, 47, 67 

Poith5, ii, 196 

Pelasgians, ii. 196 

Pelasgos, ii. 196 

Poleus, ii. 11, 162 

Pelias, i. 429; iL 82, 160,164 



INDEX. 


389 


PEL 

Pellos, ii. 123 
Pttllmore, i. 310 
Pelopids, story of the, i. 224 
Pelops, 1 . 393; ii. 140, 310 
Penelope, i. 2o8, 270, 399 ; ii. 173 
ct 248, 310, 322 ct 
Pentheus, ii. 294 
Penthesiloia, u. 171 
PophrMu, ii. 350 
Peplos, 11 . 113 
Pereival, i. 31»5 , ii, 123 
Periklymenob, li. 187 
Perilous seat, the, i. 312 
Peripheteb, ii. 62 
Pori'^, the, li. 283 
Perkuims, i. 379 

Pereephorie, i. 60; ii. 33, 67, 136, 
296 et ^seq. 

Perseus, ii. 37, 58 et nrq. 

Perun, Pioniii, Peraun, i. 379 
Phaeiinu, ii. 3 

PhaethOn, i. 431, 432; il 39,161 
Phaethousa, L 421 
Phaia, ii. 63 

Phaiakian ships, i. 377,381, 457,276, 

H seq, 

Phaiakians, ii.l54,176, 274 et $cq* 

Phaidra, ii. 66 

Phalaris, ii, 153 

Phallos, li. 113, 116 seq, 

PhauaioH, ii. 23 
Phanes, i. 86 
Pliaraililis, ii. 306 
PhogeuH, il. 189 
Pheniios, i. 299 
Pheiiix, li. 23 

PhemeuiiiH, i. 229, 362, 438 

Plieredur, ii. 124 

Philokt5t^s ii. 80, 171 

Philomela, il. 250 

Phimms, ii. 60, 152 

Phi.x, li. 314 

Phlegraiaii Pields, ii. 53 

Phlog>'aa, ii, 34 

Phobos, il. 4 

PhoiW, ii. 34, 336 

Phoibos, i. 837; ii. 21 et 818 

— Akersekomfis, i. 311 ,* ii. 33 

— Akesios and Akestor, ii 27 

— the bondman, ii. 28, 46 

— Dolphinios, ii. 25 

— Lykfigen^a, i. 48, 232; ii. 23 

— Lykeios, 1 232 ; ii. 23 

— Pai&5n, ih 33 

— Phanaios, ii. 23 
— S6t5r, ii, 27 

i^hoibos and the Telchtnes, ii. 313 

— and Ilermes, ii. 26 
Phol, ii. 93 
Phorbiis, i. 246 
Phorkys, i. 379 j ii. 38 


K>P 

Phoronous, i 399, 441; ii. 191,194 
et seq., 275, 315 
Phorkides, li 281 
Phosphoros, ii. 38 
Phrixos, 11 , 150, 272 
Phyleus, ii. 54 
Pickle, 1 . 379 
Picumnus, li. 312 
Pioria, ii. 224 
Pierides, li. 289 
Pikollos, i, 379 
Pilumnus, 11 . 312 
Pinarii, ii. 56 
Piper of Hameln, i. 121 
Pipeib, mysterious, li. 242 et seq* 

Pipon, i. 343 

Pillared saints, ii. 114, 372 
Pillars of Atlas, li. 37 

— Dionysos^^ ii. 114 

— Herakles, ii. 19, 114, 372 

— Rolfui^ li. 19 

— Osirf^^ii. 114 

— Sesostns, li. 114 
Pinarius, ii. 338 
Pit&maha, li. 131 
Pitys. il 248 
Pleiades, il 37, 286 
Pleion^, il, 37 

Plough and Ship, ii. 119 
Plouton, ii. 36, 307, 319, 320 
Ploutos, il. 307 
Pluto, 11 . 361 
Podaleirios, i, 391; li 36 
Podarg5, i. 247 , ii. 167, 252 
Pohjola, il. 246 
Poias, li. 55 

Poisoned jirrows, I 49, 66, 230, 265 ; 
il 46, 80 

Poisoned robes, I 56, 429; il 54, 
155 

Polybos, ii. 69 
PolydegmOn, i. 370 ; li. 296 
PolydektSs, i. 370, 436 ; li. 59 
Polydeuk6s, i. 395; ii. 152, 283 
Polyidos, i. 161; ii. 36, 217, 352 
Polykrates, i. 406 
Polyneikes, ii. 184 et seq. 

Polyonymy, as a source of myths, i- 43, 
219; il 110 

PolyphSmos, i, 267, 356; li. 3, 52, 
176, 213 et eeq., 366 
Poly theism, Aryan, li. 110 

— Semitic, il IH^^ 

Polyxena, I 314, il 170 
Polyx6, ii. 157 

Pomegranate seeds, the, ii- 298 
Ponlos, il 256 

Popular tales, noticed or analysed : 

— Ahmed and the Peri Banou, il 218 
— All Baba and the Porty Thieves, 

1114,127 ;il 247 



390 


INDEX. 


POP 

Popular Tales, contimisd: 

— Alluh-wd-cleon, i, 121, 282, 402; 

ii. 39, 121, 125, 217 

— Almond Tree, ii, 34 

— Babes in the Wood, i. 162; ii. 72 

— Ball of Crystal, i 234 

— Battle of the Birds, i. 158; ii. 49 

— Bearskin, i. 408 

— Beaxity and the Beast, i. 403, 406 

— Bcdreddin Hassan, ii. 121 

— Best Wish, 1. 159, 266, 375 

— Big Bird Dan, i. 159, 281; ii. 277 

— Big Peter and Little Peter, ii. 185, 

280 

— Bluebeard, ii. 36, 330 

— Blue Belt, ii, 72 

— Boots mado of Buffalo Leather, 

1. 159 

— Boots who ate a match with the 

Troll, i. 266 

— Bnihman and the Goat, i. Ill 

— Brahman, tho Jackal, and the 

Barker, i. 133 

— Briar-rose, ii. 33, 301, 304 

— Broken Oath, i 146 

— Brother Lustig, i. 375, 429 

— Brown Bear of the Glen, i 138 

— Bushy Bride, i. 132, 422 ; li. 18 

— Champa Kaiieo, i. 126 

— Chest, the, i. 404 

— Chundun Rajah, i. 249 

— Cinderella, i. 139, 265, 376; ii. 

125, 302 

— Conail Crn\i, i. 144 

— Conall Gulban, ii. 157 

— Cuchullin and Kerdiah, ii. 30 

— Dame of the Pine Green Kirtle, 

i. 291 

— Dapplegrim, i. 154, 891 ; ii. 20 

— Daughter of the Skies, i, 403 

— Doc and the Sparroa*, i. 224 

— Doll in the Gniss, 5. 266 

— Donkey Cabbages, i 375 

— Drummer, tho, i, 375, 408 

— Dummlinc, li. 251 

— Dwarfs, the, ii. 301 

— Easaidh Buadh, Young King of, 

i. 136 

— East of the Bun and West of tho 

Moon, i. 408 

— Faithful John, i. 145, 161, 898: 

ii. 281 

-beasts, i. 234, 376 

— Farmer Weathersky, li. 18, 26,282, 

291 

— Fearaehus Leigh, i, 81 

— Feather Bird, li. 330 

— Ferdinand the Faithftil and Ferdi¬ 

nand the Unfaithful, ii, 185 

— Fir Apple, ii 26 

— Fisherman and his Wife, i, 292 


POP 

Popular Tales, 

— Fishrnnan and the Jin, ii. 254,222, 

362 

— Forty Thieves, i. 114 

— Kmir aeetunplished Bmthers, i, 117 

— Fri'C Dnnce, i. 147, 231, 375; ii. 

26 

— G.iinlharha-Sonit, i. 403 

— Gatu and Karpara. i. 115 

— Giant who hatl no Hi.irf in his 

IbHh, i. 138, 457 ; ii. 283 

— Ghi-^s Comn, i. 205 : ii. 219 

— Gold Child, i. 150 ; ii. 58 

— Gold ClnldicMi, 1 . 202 

— Golden Bird. i. 141 

— ~~ i. l.)9 

— Gmal Bargain, u 138 

— <?no**i‘-gjrl at the W*'!!, i, 420 
->• Governor Maneo, i, I5i 

— (»nzm Bai, in 2H5 

— Hneon (triz/Iehi'iijil, i. 150 

— ll.iiitlle^-s Maitli'ii, i. 3Ho 

— Ifaiis and the liedgiht^g, i. 408 

— naiiwel anil Gi*»tla I. i. 401 

— l!nu^e in th«' Wiiml, ii, 3ii2 

— JIow Six tra\eiled through tho 

World, i. 382; ii, 20 
-- ni-teMi|»<*red IVmeehM, ii. 308 

— Inehanted Horne, i, 154 

Iron Stove, i. IMl. iU8,436; ii. 36 

— Jm*k tho Giant-killer, i. 144; ii. 

246 

— Jungfrjiu Mnleen, ii. 302 

— Jew among the Thoms, i. 120; jL 

26, 241 

— J<iriiHle and Joringel, i. 410 

— Katie Wofuleiieh-nk, i. 438, 440 

— Kingof Lochliii’s three Daughters, 

i. 382 

— King of the Golden Mountain, i. 

144, 150 

— King who wished to miury his 

Daughter, i. 817 

— Knapsack, the Hat, and the Horn, 

i. 150, 375 

—- Lad ami the Devil, ii. 225 

— Lad who went to the North Wind, 

i. 12», 133. 135 

— I^avra J^o^lc^eeh, i. 132, 403 

— Little Ahs, i, 403 

— Little Brother and .Sjnter, i, 404 

— Little Farmer, ii, 226, 281 

— Little Redcap, ii. 357 

— Little Snow’wliite. i. 404 ; ii, 34, 121 

— hIac-a-Uu8gaieli, i. 266 

— Mac lain Direach, i. 406 

— Man of Iron, i. 234 

— Muwui, the Poor, i. 115 

— Master NlHid, ii. 49 

— Master Smith,!. 876, 429 ; H. 198, 

225 362 



INDEX 


391 


POP 

Popiilur Talcs, coutiiuicd: 

— Mubtcr Thief, i. Ill et scq,, 127 

— Miller’s Son and the Cat, u lo9 

— Moors Legacy, li. 218 

— Muchio Lai, li 352 

— Nautch Girl and the Parrot, i. 125 

— Nighcan High Po Thuinn, i. 402, 

406 

— Nix of the Mill-pond, i. 234 , n.302 

— Nnad of the Silver Hand, i 385 

— Old Dame and her Hen, ii. 303 

— Old Griffin, i. 234 

— Old Man and the Hind, li 139 

— One who travelled to learn what 

tshivering meant^ i. 138 

— Osgar, son of Oisoin, i. 356 

— Panch l^iinl Kauoo, i 155 
Pilgrnii of Love, i. 151 

— Pink, the, i. 376 

— Pour Man and the Hich Man, h 375 

— Vruwv who was afraid of nothing, 

i. 280;ih72 

— Princess on the Glass Hill,i. 169 

— Punchkin, i. 135 ; ii. 283 

— Putraka, i, 144, 169, 376 

— Q,uoon Bee, i. 410 

— Queen of the Five Flowers, i. 155 

— liama and Luxman, i. 146 1 

— Kapun70l, ii. 72, 301 

— Uod Riding Hood, li 351 

— Riiikraiik, ii. 303, 320 

— Ritter Rod, i. 281 

— Robber and his Suns, ii. 305 

— Rogu(‘ and his Master, i. 117 

— Roland, li, 26, 244 

— Rost* of the Alhambra, i. 121 , ii. 

246, 301 

— Rumpelstiltskin, 265 

— Sea-maiden, i. 160 

— Seveiiteo Bai, i 151 

— Sharp Grey Sheep, i. 318 

— Short shanks, i. 159, 206; ii. 18, 
105, 222, 279 

— Shifty Lrtd, 1 , 112, 116, 225 
— Sick Quoou, ii. 26^ 

— Simeli Mountain, ii. 219 
— Sindbad, Voyages of, i. 160; ii. 
36, 366 

Six Servants, i. 382 
— Six Swans, i 404, 409 
— Snake Loaves, i. 160, ii. 36 
— Snow White and Rose Red, i. 266, 
427 

— Soaring Lark, i. 407 
— Sodewa Bai, i. 167, 249 
Soldier, the, ii. 226 
— Son of the J^ottish Yeoman, i. 127 
— Soria Moria Castle, i. 169 
— Spindle, the Shuttle, and the 
Needle, i. 265 

— Spirit in the Bottle, ii. 224, 226 


PPE 

Popular Tabs, continued: 

— Star Lady, i. 164, 310 

— Strong Hans, i. 280, 408 

— Surya Bai, i. 165, 282, 304; ii. 

303 et seq. 

— Table, the Ass, and the Stick, i. 131 

— Tailor’s Son of Basic, i. 412 

— Tara Bai, i. 164, 310 

— Tatterhood, li. 139 

— Three Aunts, ii. 18 

— Throe Feathers, i. 234, 375, li 36 

— Three Little Mon in the Wood, 1.132 

— Three Pnneessos of Whiteland, i. 

144 

— Throe Soldiers, i 138 

— Throe Spinsters, ii, 18 

— Throe Widows, li. 280 

— Thrushbeurd, i 138 

— Tom Thumb, li. 105 

— Travels of Dummling, i 117 

— True and Untrue, li. 72, 186 

— True Bride, i. 280, 408 

— Trusty Henry, i. 149 

— Truth’s Triumph, i. 165; ii. 291 

— Twelve Brothers, i 404, 409 

— Twelve Wild Ducks, i. 266 

— Two Brothers,!. 141,142,161,281, 

393 

— Two King’s Children, ii. 26 

— Two Sisters, i 137, 410 

— IVo Step-sisters, i. 371 49 

— Two Wanderers, ii. 71, 2o9 

— Valiant Tailor,! 266, ii 236,244 

— Vicram Maharajah, i. 156, 351 

— Whito and the Black Bride, the, ii. 

284 * 

— Wliito Snake, i. 406 

— Why the Soa is salt, ii. 121, 362^ 

— Widow and her Daughters, li. 36 

— Widow’s Son, 1 . 164, 159, 185 

— Wishes, The Three, i 144,159,375 

— Wolf and the Seven Little Goats, 

i. 358, 410 

— Wonderful Musician, ii. 244 

— Woodcutter’s Child, i. 280, 409; 

ii. 36 

— Young Giant, i. 117 
Portia, judgment of, i. 404 
PoseidOn, i. 267, 369, 369, 443; li. 

176, 262 et stq. ^ 

— the bondman, ii. 264 
— Pylnochos, i, 335 

— prophecy of, i. 91, 453 

— tridont of, li. 116 
Potitii, ii. 56 
Potitms, n. 338 
Pradyumna, ii. 26 
Praj&pati, i 87, 337, 391 
Pramantha, ii. 208 

Prelbr, on the Myth of the Danaides, 
ii. 269 



392 


INDEX, 


vm 

Priamos, Priam, i. 43-1; ii. 78 
Pnapos, i 34C; ii. 4, 113, 318 
Prisni, 11 . 223 
Pritinvi, i 328 

Prodikos, apologiio of, i. 306; ii. 44 
Proitos, 1 , 418; li. 68 
Prokles, ii. 183 
Prokne, ii. 91, 250 

Prokris, i. 49, 61, 430; ii. 30, 91,137, 
261 

Prokronstos, li. 63 

Prometheus, i. 332, 368, 369, 441, 
444; ii.2()l etmq, 

Prophasis, n. 208 
Proserpine, li. 3C1 
Protagoras, i. 363 

Proteus, i. 164, 183; ii. 26, 256, et 
srq.; 291, 314 
— trident of, li. 115 
Protogeiieia, i. 86 ; li. 30, 211 
Protogonos, i. 86 
Prytaiicion, ii 197 
Psyche, i. 402, vf firq. 

Ps} chopomixis, i 392; ii. 193, 232 
Puck. 11 . 301 
Punclicr, 11 . 100 
Pururavas, i. 103, 395 
Pu&han, ii. 104 
Piituna, li. 135 
Pygmalion, i. 133 
Pylades ^ 

Pytliagoiifi, li 120 
Python, i. 270; li. 24 
Pyr.ikmwn, ii. 198 
Pyriphlogethon, ii. 321 
Pyronia, n. 307 


Q ueen of the Fi^o Flowers, i. 166, 
158 

Queen, Fairy, i.411, 418; ii. 218, 316 
Quorn of Fn'ili, ii. 121 
— wishing, ii. 121 
Quiriims 11 . 339 
Qvasir, i. 369 


R ADHA, ii. 136 

Kagnar Lodhrog, i. 61, 92, 281 
Rakshas, i. 280 , ii. 304 
Rakshasa. i. 330 
Rama, i. 393; ii. 131 
Ran, 1 . 383 
Randrer, i. 284 
Rirana, i. 281; ii. 332 
Ravens, i. 376 ; ii. 329 
^ys, solar, in myths, i. 141, 247, 406 
Recaranus, ii. 56, 308, 340 
Reidartyr, i. 377 
Reidmnr, i. 277 

Regin, i. 274 et aeq ,; ii. 16$, 198 


8 Ar 

Remu«*. ii. 82 
Kernniait. i. 318 
iierir, i. 273 

Revid.ition, original, i. 9, 37 
ivh.uininaiitliys, li. 84, ,322 
RlminpMiiitnh, 8tt*ry of, i. 113 
Rhea, Rluia, i. .3.)7, 364; ii. 10, 133, 
312 

— Hi.i or 8ilvin, ii. 82 
Rhi>i!«*>piH, i. 157, 219 

Kh\<hh'ieh, limh of, ii. 121 
Kililms, i. 120 ; ii. 2 40 
Ivieiiee, i. 311 
Rimi, I. 369 ; ii. 97 
Uing.s in nuthohgv. i. 277, 278, 282 
292,303' li. ll.>, 

Ri'hiM, the SVten, i. 47. 413 

Rohes. pi.is.»iie(!, I. 150; li. 51, 156 

Roe, the, ii. 281 

R»«l «if phnty, the, i. 159 

Roll its, i. 126 ; ii. 2 

Knmnlus, i. 310; ii. 74 , 82 

Rol.iml, i. 188. 190, 307 

IiMiieesialh s, hattli* of, 5. 189 
Ixoflo p. king, i. ,301 

loMUnl I'ahlt*, tile, i. 308rf jeff.; ii, |21 

ixinligt f, i, 297 

Rudin, 1 . 316; il. 1.31, 223 

— the .M,inter Thief, i, 121 

Rmlniii, i, 390 

iJusl. ni, i. iia, lft6. 28a j ii. 33, 3-IT 
Rutuliuns, i. 239 


Q.VCRTl'TrES, human, i. 2d; ii, 144 
i^acti, li. 117 
8 a*tere, ii. 200 
Saga, i. 382 

.SipBH of Northern Europr, i, SIS 

yalmakis, i, 393 

SaIni7>ni*UB, ii, 82 

Sam hum, i. 342; ii. 26, 46 

Snmojed myths, i. 466 

SnmjK), ii. 246 

Sanisa, ii. 104 

Sainratnara, ii. 193 

Sangaros ii. 298 

SaiUMiN, ii. 3 40 

Sangmil, the, i. 166; ii. at aeq, 
Sapuriias, i, 427 

SuramA, li, 207, 301, 419 at m. • ii 
156. 229 ei w/., .333 
Saranieya, i. 422 ; ii. 230 
Saran^h, i. 415,419, m it am, 
SniM.s\afi, j. 344 

Sarpeddn, i. 232, 419; ii. 85, 89. 167 
Survara, ii. 46 
KiaMufras, ii. 217 
Satan, ii. 356 et aeq, 

SAta^dhana, li. 247 
Sttturuus, il. 200 , 308 



INDEX. 


393 


SAT 

Satyrs, ii, 315 
Stiurli, i. 284 et scq. 

Savarna, i. 415 ; u 35 
Savitar, i. 303, 384 vi seq. ; ii. 220 

— tho <)no-haiult‘d, i. 370 

— tho wandoror, i. 324, 340 
Saxifrngo, ii. 217 

Scpaf, i. 458 , ii. 33, 278 

Schamir, ii. 216 

Scharatz, i. 247 

ScluTui, li. 179, 274 

Solid, 1 . 458; ii. 278 

Soburk, i. 305 

Sfilonoi, ii. 316 

Soilonos, ii 316, 318 

St'uvnoa, S«‘irona, li, 154, 242, 260,318 

Seinos, li 290 

Soi&tron, ii 114 

S(‘I5nis li 30 rf 8cq., 73, 138 

Sidb'oia, i 236 

S«‘lloi, i. 236 

ii. 9, 34, 59, 294, 296 
Si'inirRinis, i. 228 ; li. 84 
Somo Sancus, ii. 338 
Senipia, i. 166 
Sorpent of Aakl^pios, ii. 36 

— Ath^nfi, i. 444 

« wornhip, treo and, ii. 36,116 et eeq, 
Sorvius TulliuH, ii. 36 
Sesame, ii. 217 
SoHostris, ii. 84 

Sevon Champions of Christendom, i. 
47, 165, 413 

— days of tha woi'k, i. 358, 410 

— Manoa of Lemstar, i. 413 
*— llishis, i. 47, 413 

— ShiuiTM, i. 165 

— shicpors of Kphesua, i. 165, 413 

— wiso men of Ilellus, i. 47, 413 

— years, i. 413 

Sheep and apples, ii. 38, 251, 328 
Shelby, mythical mebiphors employed, 
by, i. 57 

Ship, the Panathennic, ii. 118 

— of Isis, ii. 119 

Shoea, superstitions connected with, 
ii. 127 

Short shanks, i. 159, 326 
Sihylhne books, ii. 247 
Siehfeus, i. 438 
Sid6r5, ii. 82, 260 
Siegbert, i, 60, 189 
Siegfi Porilons, i. 312 
Siegfried, i. 288 et seq, 

Siegvater, a name of Odin,i, 374 

Sifrit [Siegfricdl 

Sigenot, i. 280, 306 

Siggeir, i. 274 

Sigi, i. 273 

Sigmund, i. 60; ii. 62 
Signy i. 27 4, ‘-^75 


SPR 

Sigrun, i. 287 
Sigtyr, 1 . 377 

Sigurd, 1 . 60, 276 et seq. 321, li. 89 

Silanus, ii. 318 

Silvanus, ii 311 

Simoeis, i, 251, 270 

Sintiotli, i 275 

Sims Pit 3 ’okamptcs, ii. 63 

Sintians, ii 198 

Sintram, i. 40 4, ii. 67 

Sisupala li. 330 

Sisyphos, i 152, 324, 367,438 ; ii. 12, 
14, 27, 36 et seq. 

SitA, i. 281; ii. 132, 329 
Siva, i. 392 ; ii. 106, 131, 193, 223 
Skadi, i. 371 
Skalds, ii. 18 
Skamandros, i. 251, 270 
Skamhha, i. 337, 386,388; ii.37, 103, 
131, 191 

Skephros, ii 270 

Skidbladnir, i. 381; ii. 277 

Skirnir, i. 247 

Skiron, ii. 63 

Skuld, li. 18 

Skylla, i. 224, ii. 260 

Skyrios, ii. 62 

Skythes, i. 224 

Slaughter, Hall of, i. 258, 299, 307, 
322 

Sleipnir, i. 377 ; ii. 94 
Snaekoll, i. 322 
Snako-leayes, i. 160 
Snakes in mythology, i 81,428; ii. 
43, 49, 81, 127 et seq., 136, 137, 
351 

Society, evidence of archneology and 
language as to the earliest condition 
of, i. 36 

— state of, as described in the Ice¬ 

landic sagas, i. 319 seq. 

-in tho Iliad and Odyssey, i. 2 et 

seq. 

Sokrates, ii. 318 
Sol, li. 38 

Solar myths, i. 43; ii. 38 et seq. 

— moral aspects of, li. 44 
Solomon, ivory ewer of, li. 122 
Solymoi, ii. 68 

Soma, i. 369, 386 et seq. 

— a name for the moon, ii. 131 
Somadeva Bhatta, i. 115 
Sophokles, i. 363 

Sorcery, i. 428 

Spear of Abaris, ii. 114,123 
Spells and talismans, li. 125, 284 et 
seq. 

Sphinx, i. 222, 465; ii. 70, 344 etseq. 
Spirit, meaning of the word, i. 31 
Spiritual place, i. 314i 
Spring, myths of the, i. 300 et seq. 




394 


INDEX. 


SBA 

Sraddha, i. 344 
Sri, ii. 308 
Sientor, ii. 222 
Sterope, ii. 260 
Steropfes, ii. 198, 213 
Stheino, Stheno, ii. 286 
Stymphalos, birds of, n. 60 
Styx, ii 322 

Suitors of Penelop4, and tho Panis, 
ii. 332 

Summer, sleep or death of, i. 146 
Sun. the fi&h, lii. 25 

— brides of the, i. 61, 435 ; ii. 136 

— cattle of the, i. 64, 421 ; li. 213 

— horses of the, i. 162 
Sunbeam, ii. 159 

Superstitions arising from eq^nivocal 
vords, i. 428, 429 
Shrya, i. 237, 384 et 
Sury4, i. 237 
Sushna, i. 343 
Sutala, i. 346, 392 
Suttee, 1 . 223 
Svar, i. 427 
Svayambhu, i. 415 
Swadha, ii. 134 
Swaha, ii. 134 
Swan, knight of the, i 457 
Swan n^idens, i 296, 318, 456; ii. 

135, ^8, 281 et seq, 

SwanhiM|^ 189, 284 
Swans, the singing, ii. 282 
Swava, 1 286 
Swiss myth of Tell, ii. 97 
Sympathetic trees, gems, and stones, 
i. 292, 401 

Symplegades, ii 152, 242 
Syrinx, li. 249 


T able of the Ethiopians, i. 166 
Pages, n. 316 
Taliesin, li. 122 
Talisman, li. 125 
Ttil6s, li. 88 

Tamanaks, myths of the, ii. 211 
Tamlane, ballad of, i. 411; ii. 115, 
291 

Tammuz, ii 90, 113 
Tanarus, i. 379 

Tanhauser, i 324, 409, 412; ii. 218 
Tantalos. i. 303, 367; ii. 27, 275, 317 
Taranis, i. 379 

Tarnkappe, i 144, 292; ii. 69, 320 
Tarquin, li. 247 

Tartaros, i. 329; ii. 141, 206, 323 
Tegan Euroron, ii. 120 
Teiresias, i. 444; li 3, 178, 187 
T41aug^, 11 .172 

Telchines, i. 391; ii. 269, 264, 274, 
291, 313 


TIS 


Teleboiins, ii. 02 
TeU'gonos, ii. 174 
Telomjichos, i. 278 
Tidophassa, i. 438; ii. 85 
Telopheiun wounds, ii. 76 
Telfphos, i. 436; ii. 74 H sea. 

Tell, William, ii. 95 
Tellms, ii. 311 
T^lothk^, ii. 195 
Telphoussa, ii. 24, 26 
T^menos, ii. 183 
Temessa, Hero of, ii. 347 
Tereus, ii. 250 
Termagant^ ii. 287 
Termilai, i. 233 
Terra, ii. 311 

Tfithys, i. 356; ii. 10, 266 

Teutamidas, ii. 61 

Teuthras, i. 437; ii. 74, 167 

Thalassa, ii. 313 

Thaleia, ii. 114 

Thanatos, i. 232; ii. 41 

Tlmumn.s i. 366, ii. 257 

Theban legends, i. 221 

Thebes, founding of, ii. 85 

Thebes, sieges of, i. 219; ii. 186 ct 


Theia, ii. 38 
Theifloa, i. 361 
Themis, i. 359; ii. 215 
Theodore, St., li. 366 
Theodoric, i. 190 
Theogony: 

— Hesioldic, i. 427 

— Orphic, ii. 212 

— Teutonic, i. 427 

— Hindu, i. 427 
Theoplmn^, ii. 160 

Theseus, i. 309, 321 ; ii. 61 etseq, 

— the womanly, i. 386; ii. 63 
Thefitios, ii. 46 

Thptis, i. 279, S22; ii. 11,22, 26, 46, 
78,164 et seq., 269 

Thirlwall, Bishop, on Homeric credi¬ 
bility, i. 297 et seq., 461 

— on the Trojan War, i. 197 

— on the unity of Homer, i. 197 
Tho6sa, ii. 213 

Thorgerda, ring of, ii. 116 
Thra5tana, i. 441; ii. 364 
Thrakians, i. 227 

Thnai, ji. 18, 227 » 

Thucydides, treatment of the Trojan 
legends by, i. 183 ei seq. 

Thunder, i. 378 et soq,' u, 339 , 345 

Thunderbolt, i. 343 

Thyrsos, 11 . 114 

Time, i. 86 

Tirfing, ii. 311 

Tisamenos, ii. 183 

Tisiphonfi, ii. 16 



INDEX. 


395 


TIT 

Titania and Bottom, i, 402 
Titans, ii. 206, 212 ei seq. 

Tithonos, i. 413, 415, 431; ii. 31, 89 
Titurel, ii. 122 
Tityos,'* 438 ; ii. 143 
Tlepolomos, li. 48, 51 
Tradition, oral, value of, i. 187 et scq. 
Traitana, i. 441^; li. 353 
Transformation, power of, i 391,395; 

ii.26, 223, 2o6,259, 291 ct seq., 313 
Treasure, the lost or stolon, i 204, 
276, 283, 313, 413; ii. 80, 147 
H sfq.t 319 

Tree and serpent worship, ii 36, 116 
Tnhul legends, Greok, i 77, 83, 219 

— the Argive 8t(>ry, i. 220 

-Athenian story, i. 224 

-Mi'ganan stor}, i. 223 

-Polopid story, i, 224 

-Teutonic story, i. 239 

--Thohnu story, i. 221 

Tribute children, ii. 65, 349 
Trikorythos, ii, 182 
Tnmurtti, i. 346, 372, 384 
Triptjlemoe, i. 292 ; ii. 162, 309 
Tristram, i. 312 ; ii. 33, 120 

— and Isenlt, i. 323 
Trita, i. 440, 441 ; ii. 354 
Trito, i. 440 
Tntogeneia 

Triton, i. 440 
Tritonis, i, 440 
Tritopator, i. 441 
Tnvikrama, ii. 131 
Trolls, 2 . 141, 408, 438, 21 . 51, 303, 
313 

Trophonios, 2 . 116 ; ii. 24 
Tros, ii. 84 .. .0 

Troy, sieges of, i. 190, 219; 11 . 48, 
160,368 . ^ 

— wars of, 2 . 156, 193, 254; 11 . 6, 

160 

^ .... gbs related by Dion Chrysostom, 
i. 184 

— — Herodotos, 2 . 183 

— — Stseichoroe, i. 183, 186 

_Thtw^dides, 2 ,183 at seq, 

Tscbernibog, ii. 863 

Tttisco, i. 354, 416 
Tullius, Servius, i. 260 
Turanian myths, i. 456 
Tun^ns. i. 239, 260 
Tvashtar, i. 391 
Twilight, ii. 38 

_of the g^s, 2 . 70 , 368 f 11 .95, 211 

— the sister of Night, i.^ 418 
Twelve Olympian gods, i. 360 
Twins, the, 2 . 891 

Twin deities, i. 391; n. 82, 114 
Tychfe, ii. 20 
— Agath4, ii. 20 


YEN 

Tyche Akraia, ii. 20 
Tydcus,i 380; 11 . 186 
Tyndareos, ii. 79. 1S6, 283 
T\pli56n, Tvphocus, Typhon, i 359, 
360, 365 li. 21, 71, 212, 334 
Tyr, i. 370, 377 
T}rins, i 184 
Tyro, 11 . 82 

TTCKERAHS, i. 383 
U Ukko, i 120 
Ulyh-es*, Ulyxcs, ii. 172 
Cnm, 1 313, 389 

Una and the Red Cross Knight, i. 
437 

Undine, Fonqin^’s, 1 . 400 

Unliolda, ii. 364 

Upendra, ii 131 

Urd, ib 11 

Urisk, ii. 316, 366 

UiTO of Hungary, i. 316 

Ursula, St. i. 164, 231, 410; ii. 218 

Uriiki, i. 397 

Uranus [Ouranosl 

I’rvHsi, 1 . 103, 397 et seq. 

Ush^Lpati, 1 . 427 

Ushas, 1 20, 115, 415, 440 

Uiher, i. 309 


Y ACH, i. 344, 382 

Vaisvanara, 11 . 192 
Vala, 1 . 441; ii. 230, 326 
Valandmne, ii 362 
Valant, 11 . 362 
Valhalla, i. 375 ; ii. 326 
Valkyne, i. 280, 375; ii. 285 
Vali, i. 369 
Vampire, i. 363 

Vanaheim, i. 372 , 1 

Vanatnali, the flower-crowned Krishna, 

li. 132 

Vanir, i. 381 

Vanina, i. 327, 330 et seq, 

— horses of, i. 335 
VAS, the root, ii. 123 
Vasishtha, 1 . 396 
Vastoshpati, i. 422 
Vasu, i. 342 ; ii. 130, 196 
Vayu, i. 153 ; ii. 221 
Vedic hymns, language of the, 1 . 
102 

Vedjovis, Vejovis, i. 354 
Vengeance, mythical, i. 160 
— of Achilleus, 1 . 249 
— Brynhild, i. 289 
— Conall, ii. 58 
— Grettir, i. 323 
— Kriemhild, i. 299 et seq, 

—* Odysseus, i. 160, 269 



396 


INDEX. 


TEN 

Vengeance of Perseus, ii, 60 

— of Siggeir, i. 274 
Venilla, i. 239 

Venus, i- 402 ; ii. 8, 115 

— Barbata, ii. 9 

— Calva, 11 . 9 

— Cloacina, ii. 9 

— Equestris, ii. 9 

— Mill tans, ii 9 

— Myrtea, ii. 9 
Venusberg, i. 324 
Verdandhi, ii. 11 
Veretlira, ii. 354 
Verethragna, ii. 353 
Vesica Piscis, li. 115, 120 
Vesta, ii. 126, 192 
Vestal Virgins, u, 117 
Vibhvan, ii. 104 
Vigblar, 1 . 287 
Vikramaditya, i. 273 
Vilkina Saga, ii. 100 
Vindbialm, i. 287 
Violet coloiu’, the, i. 81 
Vipar, i 341 

Virbius, li 66 
Virocliana, li 104, 329 
Vish^iu, ii. 102 ct seq, 

— avatars of, ii. 106 

— dwarf inearnatiDn of, ii. 329 

— the flfb-armed, i 370 

— thr^illllddcs of, i. 378; ii. 103 
VisvdkalHii, 1 . 316 
Vivanghvat, i. 392; li. 354 
Vivasvat, i 392, 415 , ii. 35, 354 
Volcanoes, li. 314 

Volker, i. 296 scq. 

Volsung, i. 273 

Volsiinga Saga, i. 66, 189, 273 

Vohuidr, i. 457 

Voluspa Saga, i. 370 

Vor, i 381 

Vnshakapayi, i. 390 

Vritra, i. 50 342 ; ii. 102, 326 ef seq. 

Vritrahan, ii. 326, 336 

Vulcanus, ii. 194, 199 

Vurdh, ii. 18 


ALT, n 95 

Waiimmoinon, i. 120, ii. 208, 
246 
"Wanen, i. 381 
Waltam, ii. 95 

■Walihax of Aquitaine, i. 302 et seq, 
325; ii. 80 

Wanderers in mythology', i. 159, 291, 
324, 394, 406 ; li. 95, 294, 303 
Wanderer, Bellerophon the, ii. 68 

— Bntomartis, ii 146 

— Dionysos the, ii. 294 

— Dummling the, i. 117 


W’L’O 

Wanderer, Grettir the, i. 323 

— Ileraklvs, ii, 46 f/ 

— Indm, i, 324, 340 

— Id, u. 140 

— Th« Jew, i. 415 

— OiK.ssens, i. 2.>7 

— Oiitiptnis, ii. 15, 23, 69 

— PerseiiM, n. 68 

— Phoihcis, ii. 22 

— Siegfrunl, i. 291 

— Sigurd, i, 279 

— Theseus, ii. 6*2 ei ftrq, 

— Wuotan, i. 291,372 ; ii, 95 
Water, in comioxiou witli nnthaof the 

Dawn and the Sun, li. 250 
Water, mytlia of the, ii. 256 rf »rq. 
Wayland, i. 343; ii. 65, 199, 316, 
327,363 

Weapons, mythical, i, 49, 138, 150, 
256, 274, 308, 311, 376; ii. 46, 59. 
17(3 

— poisoned, i. 49, 265 

Weavers, the, i, 205, 317; ih 173, 
333 

Web of IVnelopA, i. 265; ii. 173 
WMa, i. 374 
Wegtam, ii. 95 
Weird ehes, li. 18 

— Lady of the Womls, li. 18 

— Sisters, the, i. 312, 315; ii. 18 
While Flower, i. 317 

William of Cloudesloo or the Cloud- 
land, ii. 95, 368 

— of Orange, i. 317 

— Tell, ii. 95 

Winds, the, ii. 221 et seq. 

Winter, myths of the, i. 62; ii. 299 
et seq. 

Wish, 1 . 135, 829, 370, 375, 438 

— breeze, i. 292 

— maidens, i. S75 
Wishes, the three, ii. 62 
Witchcraft, i. 71. 428; ii. 142 
Witoge, i. 297 

Wodan, Woden [Wuotan] 

Wolf, his theory of the composition 
of the Iliad, i. 174, 24 i 
Wolfdietrich, i. 305 
Wolves in mythology, i. 140, 165, 
233; 11. 274 

Womanly aspect of mvtlneal her<->e8, 
i. 248, 380; ii. 63, i63, 174, 295 
Wooden horse, the, ii. 175 
Words, use of abstract, i. 45 

— equivocal, as a source of myths, i. 
47 

Writing, introduction of, i. 217, 447 
Written liteniture, late growth of, i. 
4 47 

Wuotan [Wuodan], L 388 et seq, 

— All-Father 




INDEX. 


397 


wuo 

Wuotan Harbard, i. 376 

— the ont"-eye(l, i. 104, 370, 376 

— Siogfadr, Siegvator, i. 374 

— Wegtam, ii. 95 

— on Yggdrasil, i. 371 
Wuusch [Wish] 


X ANTHOS, 1. 232, 341 
— tho horse, 12, 162 
Xfiiophanos, 353 
Xerxes, canal of, at Athos, i, 92 
Xouthos, 1 . 237 


T AHA, i. 392, ii. 47, 364 
— dogs of, ii. 336 
Yaman, i, 391 
Yamen, i. 392 
Yami, i. 392 
Yariahtha, 427; ii- 194 
Yggdrasil, i. 274, 370 ; ii. 18 
Yima, i. 392 
YimH-KshaAta, ii, 364 
Yimir, i, 371 
Y“ng. i. 240; ii, 184 
Yoni, i. 278; ii. 113 et seq. 


Z AGBEOS, ii, 294, 320 
Zaloukos, ii. 72 
/almoxiH, i. 136, 412 
Zamolxis, i. 136 


ZOB 

Zen, i. 354 

Zophyros,i. 247, 367,432 ; ii. 177,251 
Zrrnibop, ii. 303 
Zethos, ii. 249 

Zeus, 1 347 ct seq ,; li. 11 seq , 207 

— forms of the name, i 354 

— the judge, i. 360, 367 

— relations of, with Here, ii. 12 ct seq, 

— Arkadioa, i 361 

— Aigiochos, i. 347 

— Cretan, i. 361 

— Daplmephoros, ii. 55 

— Dodonaios, i. 364 

— Horkeios, ii. 56 

— ITourcbios, n. 338 

— Katachthonios, ii. 320 

— Konaios, li. 64 

— Kerauneios, i. 379 

— Lykaios, i. 362 

— OlympioB, i. 364 

— Ombnos, i. 376; ii. 264 

— Ourani6n, i. 349 

— PangenetOr, ii. 65 

— Pat5r, i. 348 

.— Phrygian, ii. 312 

— Pibtios, li 340 

— PoseidOn, ii. 264, 320 

— Sabazios, n. 128 

— Swtinshaped, ii. 283 
Zio, i. 354 

Zizi, 11 . 66, 119 p 

Zoh&k, ii 83, 354 et seq. 

Zoroaster, i. 339 


THE END. 


iifta iBggrAttnifg iri C Ki 

SPOXnSWOODI AHJ> CO., 2CaW-STBBW SQUISH 
iJtB IPiJKUiJCSKT ST&SBT
