ft A
'/B. y«
22102264900

I
I


MALLEUS
MALEFI /
- CARUM

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2019 with funding from
Wellcome Library
/
\
https://archive.org/details/b31349717

-
'

INNOCENTIVS . VIII. PAPA GENVENSIS

4
MALLEUS
MALEFIC
ARUM
translated
with an Introduction, Biblio¬
graphy and Notes by the
Rev. Montague Summers
THE PUSHKIN PRESS
LONDON

FIRST EDITION I JOHN RODKER 1928
FIRST PRINTED IN THIS FORM 1948
Bv'/S.
14
A A
-
PRINTED BY THE REPLIKA PROCESS
IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
LUND HUMPHRIES
LONDON • BRADFORD

CONTENTS
PAOE
INTRODUCTION xi
A NOTE UPON THE BIBLIOGRAPHY xvii
THE BULL OF INNOCENT VIII xix
THE FIRST PART
TREATING OF THE THREE NECESSARY CONCOMITANTS OF WITCHCRAFT
WHICH ARE THE DEVIL. A WITCH, AND THE
PERMISSION OF ALMIGHTY GOD
*
PART ONE Question XI.
That Witches who are Midwives in Various Ways
Question I. Kill the Child Conceived in the Womb, and Pro¬
cure an Abortion; or if they do not this, Offer
Whether the Belief that there are such Beings as
New-born Children to Devils page 66
Witches is so Essential a Part of the Catholic
Faith that Obstinacy to maintain the Opposite
Opinion manifestly savours of Heresy page i Question XII.
Whether the Permission of Almighty God is an
Question II. Accompaniment of Witchcraft 66
If it be in Accordance with the Catholic Faith to
maintain that in Order to bring about some Effect Question XIII.
of Magic, the Devil must intimately co-operate
Herein is set forth the Question concerning the
with the Witch, or whether one without the other,
Two Divine Permissions which God justly allows,
that is to say, the Devil without the Witch, or
namely, that the Devil, the Author of all Evil,
conversely, could produce such an Effect 12
should Sin, and that our First Parents should
Fall, from which Origins the Works of Witches
Question III.
are justly suffered to take place 71
Whether Children can be Generated by Incubi and
Succubi 21
Solutions of the Arguments.
Question IV.
By which Devils are the Operations of Incubus and Question XIV.
Succubus Practised? 28 The Enormity of Witches is Considered, and it is
shown that the Whole Matter should be rightly
Question V. Set Forth and Declared 73
What is the Source of the Increase of Works of
Witchcraft? Whence comes it that the Practice Question XV.
of Witchcraft hath so notably increased? 31
It is Shown that, on Account of the Sins of Witches,
the Innocent are often Bewitched, yea, Sometimes
Question VI.
even for their Own Sins 77
Concerning Witches who copulate with Devils.
Why is it that Women are chiefly addicted to
Question XVI.
Evil Superstitions? / 41
The Foregoing Truths are Set out in Particular;
Question VII. this by a Comparison of the Works of Witches
with Other Baleful Superstitions 80
Whether Witches can Sway the Minds of Men to
Love or Hatred 48
Question XVII.
Question VIII. A Comparison of their Crimes under Fourteen
Whether Witches can Hebetate the Powers of Heads, with the Sins of the Devils of all and
Generation or Obstruct the Venereal Act 54 every Kind 82
Question IX. Question XVIII.
Whether Witches may work some Prestidigitatory
Here follows the Method of Preaching against and
Illusion so that the Male Organ appears to be
Controverting Five Arguments of Laymen and
entirely removed and separate from the Body 58
Lewd Folk, which seem to be Variously Ap¬
proved, that God does not Allow so Great rower
Question X. to the Devil and Witches as is Involved in the
Whether Witches can by some Glamour Change Performance of such Mighty Works of Witch¬
Men into Beasts 61 craft 84
Vll

VI11 CONTENTS
THE SECOND PART
TREATING OF THE METHODS BY WHICH THE WORKS OF WITCHCRAFT ARE
WROUGHT AND DIRECTED, AND HOW THEY MAY BE
SUCCESSFULLY ANNULLED AND DISSOLVED
Resolved in but two Questions, yet these are divided into many Chapters.
QUESTION I Chapter XIV.
Of those against whom the Power of Witches Here followeth how Witches Injure Cattle in
availeth not at all page 89 Various Ways page 144
Chapter I. Chapter XV.
Of the several Methods by which Devils through mi ■ lilii m
How they Raise and Stir up Hailstorms and
Witches Entice and Allure the Innocent to the
Tempests, and Cause Lightning to Blast both
Increase of that Horrid Craft and Company 96
Men and Beasts 147
Chapter II.
Chapter XVI.
Of the Way whereby a Formal Pact with Evil is
Of Three Ways in which Men and not Women may
made gg
be Discovered to be Addicted to Witchcraft:
Divided into Three Heads: and First of the
Chap ter III.
Witchcraft of Archers 150
How they arc Transported from Place to Place 104
Chapter IV.
QUESTION II
Here follows the Way whereby Witches copulate
with those Devils known as Incubi 109 THE METHODS OF DESTROYING AND
CURING WITCHCRAFT
Chapter V.
Witches commonly perform their Spells through Introduction, wherein is Set Forth the Difficulty of this
the Sacraments of the Church. And how they Question.
Impair the Powers of Generation, and how they
may Cause other Ills to happen to God’s Creatures
Chapter I.
of all Kinds. But herein we except the Question
of the Influence of the Stars 114 The Remedies prescribed by Holy Church against
Incubus and Succubus Devils 164
Chapter VI.
How Witches Impede and Prevent the Power of Chapter II.
Procreation 1 j 7
Remedies prescribed for Those who are Bewitched
by the Limitation of the Generative Power 167
Chapter VII.
How, as it were, they Deprive Man of his Virile
Chapter III.
Member 118
Remedies prescribed for those who are Bewitched
Chapter VIII. by being Inflamed with Inordinate Love or
Extraordinary Hatred 170
Of the Maimer whereby they Change Men into the
Shapes of Beasts 122
Chapter IV.
Chapter IX.
Remedies prescribed for those who by PrestidiHow Devils may enter the Human Body and the gitatory Art have lost their Virile Members or
Head without doing any Hurt, when they cause have seemingly been Transformed into the Shapes
such Metamorphosis by Means of Prestidigita¬ of Beasts 173
tion 124
Chapter V.
Chapter X.
Prescribed Remedies for those who are Obsessed
Of the Method by which Devils through the owing to some Spell 175
Operations of Witches sometimes actually
possess Men I28
Chapter VI.
Chapter XI. Prescribed Remedies; to wit, the Lawful Exorcisms
of the Church, for all Sorts of Infirmities and
Of the Method by which they can Inflict Every
Ills due to Witchcraft; and the Method of
Sort of Infirmity, generally Ills of the Graver
Exorcising those who are Bewitched 17g
Kind 134
Chapter VII.
Chapter XII.
Of the Way how in Particular they Afflict Men with Remedies prescribed against Hailstorms, and for
Other Like Infirmities 137 Animals that are Bewitched 188
Chapter XIII. Chapter VIII.
How Witch Midwives commit most Horrid Certain Remedies prescribed against those Dark
Crimes when they either Kill Children or Offer and Horrid Harms with which Devils may
them to Devils in most Accursed Wise 140 Afflict Men 192

CONTENTS ix
THE THIRD PART
RELATING TO THE JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS IN BOTH THE ECCLESIASTICAL
AND CIVIL COURTS AGAINST WITCHES AND
INDEED ALL HERETICS
Containing XXXV Questions in which are most Clearly set out the Formal Rules for Initiating a Process of
Justice, how it should be Conducted, and the Method of Pronouncing Sentence.
QUESTION I Question XII.
General and Introductory Of the Same Matter, Declaring more Particularly
how the Question of Personal Enmity is to be
Who are the Fit and Proper Judges in the Trial of
Investigated. The Seventh Action. page 220
Witches? page 194
Question XIII.
THE FIRST HEAD
Of the Points to be Observed by the Judge before
the Formal Examination in the Place of Deten¬
Question I.
tion and Torture. This is the Eighth Action 222
The Method of Initiating a Process 205
Question XIV.
Question II.
Of the Method of Sentencing the Accused to be
Of the Number of the Witnesses 208
Questioned: and How she must be Questioned
on the First Day; and Whether she may be
Question III.
Promised her Life. The Ninth Action 225
Of the Solemn Adjuration and Re-examination of
Witnesses 209
Question XV.
Of the Continuing of the Torture, and of the
Question IV.
Devices and Signs by which the Judge can
Of the Quality and Condition of Witnesses 209
Recognize a Witch; and how he ought to Protect
himself from their Spells. Also how they are to
Question V. be Shaved in those Parts where they use to
Whether Mortal Enemies may be Admitted as Conceal the Devil’s Masks and Tokens; to¬
Witnesses 209 gether with the due Setting Forth of Various
Means of Overcoming their Obstinacy in Keeping
Silence and Refusal to Confess. And it is the
THE SECOND HEAD Tenth Action 227
Question VI. Question XVI.
How the Trial is to be Proceeded with and Con¬ Of the fit Time and of the Method of the Second
tinued. And how the Witnesses are to be Examination. And it is the Eleventh Action,
Examined in the Presence of Four Other Persons, concerning the Final Precautions to be Observed
and how the Accused is to be Questioned in Two by the Judge 230
Ways 21 o
THE THIRD HEAD
Question VII.
Which is the last Part of this Work. How the
In Which Various Doubts are Set Forth with Process is to be Concluded by the Pronounce¬
Regard to the Foregoing Questions and Negative ment of a Definite and Just Sentence 232
Answers. Whether the Accused is to be Im¬
prisoned, and when she is to be considered as
Question XVII.
Manifestly Taken in the Foul Heresy of Witch¬
craft. This is the Second Action 213 Of Common Purgation, and especially of the Trial
by Red-hot Iron, to which Witches Appeal 233
Question VIII.
Question XVIII.
Which Follows from the Preceding Question,
Whether the Witch is to be Imprisoned, and of Of the Manner of Pronouncing a Sentence which
the Method of Taking her. This is the Third is Final and Definitive 235
Action of the Judge 214
Question XIX.
Question IX.
Of the Various Degrees of Overt Suspicion which
What is to be done after the Arrest, and whether render the Accused liable to be Sentenced 236
the Names of the Witnesses should be made
Known to the Accused. This is the Fourth
Question XX.
Action 216
Of the First Method of Pronouncing Sentence 240
Question X.
Question XXL
What Kind of Defence may be Allowed, and of the
Appointment of an Advocate. This is the Fifth Of the Second Method of Pronouncing Sentence,
Action 217 when the Accused is no more than Defamed 241
Question XI. Question XXII.
What Course the Advocate should Adopt when the Of the Third Kind of Sentence, to be Pronounced
Names of the Witnesses are not Revealed to him. on one who is Defamed, and who is to be put to
The Sixth Action 218 the Question 242

X CONTENTS
Question XXI1J.
Question XXX.
The Fourth Method of Sentencing, in the Case of
Of One who has Confessed to Heresy, is Relapsed,
one Accused upon a Light Suspicion page 244
and is also Impenitent page 258
Question XXIV.
Question XXXI.
The Fifth Manner of Sentence, in the Case of one
under Strong Suspicion 246 Of One Taken and Convicted, but Denying
Everything 259
Question XXV.
The Sixth Kind of Sentence, in the Case of one Question XXXII.
who is Gravely Suspect 248
Of One who is Convicted but who hath Fled or
who Contumaciously Absents himself 261
Question XXVI.
The Method of passing Sentence upon one who is
Question XXXIII.
both Suspect and Defamed 250
Of the Method of passing Sentence upon one who
Question XXVII. has been Accused by another Witch, who has
been or is to be Burned at the Stake 264
The Method of passing Sentence upon one who
hath Confessed to Heresy, but is not Penitent 252
Question XXXIV.
Question XXVIII.
Of the Method of passing Sentence upon a Witch
The Method of passing Sentence upon one who who Annuls Spells wrought by Witchcraft; and
hath Confessed to Heresy but is Relapsed, of Witch Midwives and Archer-Wizards 268
Albeit now Penitent 254
Question XXXV.
Question XXIX.
Finally, of the Method of passing Sentence upon
The Method of passing Sentence upon one who
Witches who Enter or Cause to be Entered an
hath Confessed to Heresy but is Impenitent,
Appeal, whether such be Frivolous or Legitimate
although not Relapsed 257
and Just 2^x

I
INTRODUCTION
T has been observed that “it is for the King’s safety. In the reign of
quite impossible to appreciate and his son, Henry VI, in 1441, one of the
understand the true and inner lives highest and noblest ladies in the realm,
of men and women in Elizabethan Eleanor Cobham, Duchess of Glouces¬
and Stuart England, in the France of ter, was arraigned for conspiring with
Louis XIII and during the long reign “a clerk”, Roger Bolingbroke, “a most
of his son and successor, in Italy of the notorious evoker of demons”, and “the
Renaissance and the Catholic Reaction most famous scholar in the whole world
—to name but three European coun¬ in astrology in magic”, to procure the
tries and a few definite periods—unless death of the young monarch by sorcery,
we have some realization of the part so that the Duke of Gloucester, Henry’s
that Witchcraft played in those ages uncle and guardian, might succeed to
amid the affairs of these Kingdoms. All the crown. In this plot were further
classes were affected and concerned involved Canon Thomas Southwell,
from Pope to peasant, from Queen to and a “relapsed witch”, that is to say,
cottage girl.” one who had previously (eleven years
Witchcraft was inextricably mixed before) been incarcerated upon grave
with politics. Matthew Paris tells us suspicion of black magic, Margery
how in 1232 the Chief Justice Hubert Jourdemayne. Bolingbroke, whose con¬
de Burgh, Earl of Kent, (Shakespeare’s fession implicated the Duchess, was
“gentle Hubert” in King John), was, hanged; Canon Southwell died in
amongst other crimes, openly accused prison; the witch in Smithfield was
by Peter de Roches, Bishop of Win¬ “burn’d to Ashes”, since her offence
chester, of having won the favour of was high treason. The Duchess was
Henry III through “charms and incan¬ sentenced to a most degrading public
tations”. In 1324 there was a terrific penance, and imprisoned for life in
scandal at Coventry when it was dis¬ Peel Castle, Isle of Man. Richard III,
covered that a number of the richest upon seizing the throne in 1483,
and most influential burghers of the declared that the marriage of his
town had long been consulting with brother, Edward IV, with the Lady
Master John, a professional necro¬ Elizabeth Grey, had been brought
mancer, and paying him large sums to about by “sorcery and witchcraft”, and
bring about by his arts the death of further that “Edward’s wife, that mon¬
Edward II and several nobles of the strous witch,” has plotted with Jane
court. Alice Perrers, the mistress of Shore to waste and wither his body.
Edward III, was not only reputed to Poor Jane Shore did most exemplary
have infatuated the old King by occult penance, walking the flinty streets of
spells, but her physician (believed to be London barefoot in her kirtle. In the |j
a mighty sorcerer) was arrested on a same year when Richard wanted to get
charge of confecting love philtres and rid of the Duke of Buckingham, his
talismans. Henry V, in the autumn of former ally, one of the chief accusations
1419, prosecuted his stepmother, Joan he launched was that the Duke con¬
of Navarre, for attempting to kill him sulted with a Cambridge “necroman¬
by witchcraft, “in the most horrible cer” to compass and devise his death.
manner that one could devise.” The One of the most serious and frighten¬
conqueror of Agincourt was exceeding¬ ing events in the life of James VII of
ly worried about the whole wretched Scotland (afterwards James I of Eng¬
business, as also was the Archbishop of land) was the great conspiracy of 1590,
Canterbury, who ordered public prayers organized by the Earl of Bothwell.
xi

Xll INTRODUCTION
James with good reason feared and whose children should inherit the
hated Bothwell, who, events amply
throne. The Duchesse de Fontanges, a
proved, was Grand Master of a com¬ beautiful young country girl, who had
pany of more than one hundred witches, for a while attracted the wayward fancy
all adepts in poisoning, and all eager to of Louis, they poisoned out of hand.
do away with the King. In other words, Money was poured out like water, and
Francis Stewart, Earl of Bothwell, was
it has been said that “the entire floodthe centre and head of a vast political tide of poison, witchcraft and diabolism
plot. A widespread popular panic was was unloosed” to attain the ends of that
the result of the discovery of this
“marvellous beauty” (so Mme. de
murderous conspiracy. Sevigne calls her), the haughty and
In France as early as 583, when the
reckless Marquise de Montespan. In
infant son and heir of King Chilperic, her thwarted fury she well nigh resolved
died of dysentery, as the doctors diag¬ to sacrifice Louis himself to her over¬
nosed it, it came to light that Mumweening ambition and her boundless
molus, one of the leading officials of the pride. The highest names in France—
court, had been secretly administering the Princesse de Tingry, the Duchesse
to the child medicines, which he ob¬ de Vitry, the Duchesse de Lusignan,
tained from “certain witches of Paris”.
the Duchesse de Bouillon, the Comtesse
These potions were pronounced by the
de Soissons, the Due de Luxembourg,
physicians to be strong poisons. In 1308,
the Marquis de Cessac—scores of the
Guichard, Bishop of Troyes, was accused
oldest aristocracy, were involved, whilst
of having slain by sorcery the Queen of
literally hundreds of venal apothecaries,
Philip IV of France (1285-1314),
druggists, pseudo-alchemists, astrolo¬
Jeanne of Navarre, who died three gers, quacks, warlocks, magicians, char¬
years before. The trial dragged on from
latans, who revolved round the ominous
1308 to 1313, and many witnesses and terrible figure of Catherine La
attested on oath that the prelate had
Voisin, professional seeress, fortune¬
continually visited certain notorious
teller, herbalist, beauty-specialist, were
witches, who supplied him philtres and
caught in the meshes of the law. No less
draughts. In 1315, during the brief
than eleven volumes of Francois Ravaisreign (1314-1316) of Louis X, the
son’s huge work, Archives de la Bastille,
eldest son of Philip IV, was hanged
are occupied with this evil crew and
Enguerrand de Marigny, chamberlain,
their doings, their sorceries and their
privy councillor, and chief favourite of poisonings.
Philip, whom, it was alleged, he had
During the reign of Urban VIII,
bewitched to gain the royal favour. The
Maffeo Barberini, 1623-1644, there
fact, however, which sealed his doom
was a resounding scandal at Rome when
was his consultation with one Jacobus
it was discovered that “after many invo¬
de Lor, a warlock, who was to furnish
cations of demons” Giacinto Contini,
a nostrum warranted to put a very nephew of the Cardinal d’Ascoli, had
short term to the life of King Louis.
been plotting with various accomplices
Jacobus strangled himself in prison.
to put an end to the Pope’s life, and
In 1317 Hugues Geraud, Bishop of
thus make way for the succession of his
Cahors, was executed by Pope John
uncle to the Chair of Peter. Tommaso
XXII, who reigned 1316-1334, resid¬
Orsolini of Recanate, moreover, after
ing at Avignon. Langlois says that the
consulting with certain scryers and
Bishop had attempted the Pontiff’s life
planetarians, readers of the stars, was
by poison procured from witches.
endeavouring to bribe the apothecary
Perhaps the most resounding of all
Carcurasio of Naples to furnish him
scandals of this kind in France was the
with a quick poison, which might be
La Voison case, 1679-1682, when it
mingled with the tonics and electuaries
was discovered that Madame de Mon¬
prescribed for the ailing Pontiff, (Ranke,
tespan had for years been trafficking
History of the Popes, ed. 1901, Vol. III,
with a gang of poisoners and sorcerers,
PP- 375-6)-
who plotted the death of the Queen and
To sum up, as is well observed by
the Dauphin, so that Louis XIV might
Professor Kittredge, who more than
be free to wed Athenais de Montespan,
once emphasized “I have no belief in

INTRODUCTION
Xlll
the black art or in the interference of which they were writing believed in¬
demons in the daily life of mortals”, tensely in it, and it was their business as
it makes no difference whether any of scholars to examine and explain the
the charges were true or whether the reasons for such belief. It was by no
whole affairs were hideous political means all mediaeval credulity and
chicanery. “Anyhow, it reveals the ignorance and superstition. Mackay
beliefs and the practices of the age.” and Lecky fully recognized this, as
Throughout the centuries witchcraft indeed they were in all honesty bound
was universally held to be a dark and to do. They met with facts, hard facts,
horrible reality; it was an ever-present, which could neither have been acci¬
fearfully ominous menace, a thing most dents nor motiveless, and these facts
active, most perilous, most powerful must be accounted for and elucidated.
and true. Some may consider these The profoundest thinkers, the acutest
mysteries and cantrips and invocations, and most liberal minds of their day,
these sabbats and rendezvous, to have such men as Cardan; Trithemius; the
been .merest mummery and pantomime, encyclopaedic Delrio; Bishop Binsfeld;
but there is no question that the the learned physician, Caspar Peucer;
psychological effect was incalculable, Jean Bodin; Sir Edward Coke, “father
and harmful in the highest degree. It of the English law”; Francis Bacon;
was, to use a modern phrase, “a war of Malebranche; Bayle; Glanvil; Sir
nerves”. Jean Bodin, the famous juris¬ Thomas Browne; Cotton Mather; all
consult (1530-90) whom Montaigne these, and scores besides, were con¬
acclaims to be the highest literary vinced of the dark reality of witchcraft,
genius of his time, and who, as a lead¬ of the witch organization. Such a con¬
ing member of the Parlement de Paris, sensus of opinion throughout the years
presided over important trials, gives it cannot be lightly dismissed.
as his opinion that there existed, not The literature of the subject, dis¬
only in France, a complete organization cussing it in every detail, from every
of witches, immensely wealthy, of al¬ point of view, from every angle, is
most infinite potentialities, most clever¬ enormous. For example, such a Biblio¬
ly captained, with centres and cells in graphy as that of Yve-Plessis, 1900,
every district, utilizing an espionage in which deals only with leading French
every land, with high-placed adherents cases and purports to be no more than
at court, with humble servitors in the a supplement to the Bibliographies of
cottage. This organization, witchcraft, Graesse, the Catalogues of the Abbe
maintained a relentless and ruthless Sepher, Ouvaroff, the comte d’Ourches,
war against the prevailing order and the forty-six volumes of Dr. Hoefer,
settled state. No design was too trea¬ Schieble, Stanislas de Guaita, and many
cherous, no betrayal was too cowardly, more, lists nearly 2,000 items, and in a
no blackmail too base and foul. The note we are warned that the work is
Masters lured their subjects with mag¬ very far from complete. The Manuel
nificent promises, they lured and delu¬ Bibliographique, 3 vols., 1912, of Albert
ded and victimized. Not the least L. Caillet, gives 11,648 items. Caillet
dreaded and dreadful weapon in their has many omissions, some being trea¬
armament was the ancient and secret tises of the first importance. The
knowledge of poisons (veneficia), of herbs library of witchcraft may without
healing and hurtful, a tradition and a exaggeration be said to be incalculable.
lore which had been handed down It is hardly disputed that in the
from remotest antiquity. whole vast literature of witchcraft, the
Little wonder, then, that later social most prominent, the most important,
historians, such as Charles Mackay and the most authoritative volume is the
Lecky, both absolutely impartial and Malleus Maleficarum (The Witch Hammer)
unprejudiced writers, sceptical even, of Heinrich Kramer (Henricus Insti¬
devote many pages, the result of long toris) and James Sprenger. The date of
and laborious research, to witchcraft. the first edition of the Malleus cannot
They did not believe in witchcraft as be fixed with absolute certainty, but the
in any sense supernatural, although likeliest year is i486. There were, at any
perhaps abnormal. But the centuries of rate, fourteen editions between 1487

INTRODUCTION
XIV
♦
and 1520, and at least sixteen editions authorship, unless there be some defi¬
between 1574 and 1669. These were nite declaration on the part of one of
issued from the leading German, French the authors as to his particular share in
and Italian presses. The latest reprint a work, or unless there be some unusual
of the original text of the Malleus is to and special circumstances bearing on
be found in the noble four volume the point, such perquisitions and analy¬
collection of Treatises on Witchcraft, ses almost inevitably resolve thefnselves
“sumptibus Claudii Bourgeat”, 4to., into a cloud of guess-work and bootless
Lyons, 1669. There is a modern Ger¬ hazardry and vague perhaps. It be¬
man translation by J. W. R. Schmidt, comes a game of literary blind-man’sDer Hexenhammer, 3 vols., Berlin, 1906; buff.
second edition, 1922-3. There is also an Heinrich Kramer was born at
English translation with Introduction, Schlettstadt, a town of Lower Alsace,
Bibliography, and Notes by Montague situated some twenty-six miles south¬
Summers, published John Rodker, 1928. west of Strasburg. At an early age he
The Malleus acquired especial weight entered the Order of S. Dominic, and
and dignity from the famous Bull of so remarkable was his genius that whilst
Pope Innocent VIII, Summis deside¬ still a young man he was appointed to
rantes affectibus of 9 December, 1484, in the position of Prior of the Dominican
which the Pontiff, lamenting the power House at his native town, Schlettstadt.
and prevalence of the witch organiza¬ He was a Preacher-General and a
tion, delegates Heinrich Kramer and Master of Sacred Theology, P.G. and
James Sprenger as inquisitors of these S.T.M., two high distinctions in the
pravities throughout Northern Ger¬ Dominican Order. At some date before
many, particularly in the provinces and 1474 he was appointed an Inquisitor
dioceses of Mainz, Cologne, Treves, for the Tyrol, Salzburg, Bohemia, and
Salzburg, and Bremen, granting both Moravia. His eloquence in the pulpit
and either of them an exceptional and tireless activity received due recog¬
authorization, and by Letters Apostolic nition at Rome, and for many years he
requiring the Bishop of Strasburg, was Spiritual Director of the great
Albrecht von Bayern (1478-1506), not Dominican church at Salzburg, and
only to take all steps to publish and the right-hand of the Archbishop of
proclaim the Bull, but further to afford Salzburg, a munificent prelate who
Kramer and Sprenger every assistance, praises him highly in a letter which is
even calling in, if necessary, the help of still extant. In the late autumn or
the secular arm. winter of 1485 Kramer had already
This Bull, which was printed as the drawn up a learned instruction or
Preface to the Malleus, was thus, com¬ treatise on the subject of witchcraft.
ments Dr. H. C. Lea, “spread broad¬ This circulated in manuscript, and is
cast over Europe”. In fact, “it fastened (almost in its entirety) incorporated in
on European jurisprudence for nearly the Malleus. By the Bull of Innocent
three centuries the duty of combating” VIII in December, 1484, he had
the Society of Witches. The Malleus lay already been associated with James
on the bench of every judge, on the Sprenger to make inquisition for and
desk of every magistrate. It was the try witches and sorcerers. In 1495, the
ultimate, irrefutable, unarguable au¬ Master General of the Order, Fr.
thority. It was implicitly accepted not Joaquin de Torres, O.P., summoned
only by Catholic but by Protestant Kramer to Venice in order that he
legislature. In fine, it is not too much to might give public lectures, disputations
say that the Malleus Maleficarum is which attracted crowded audiences,
among the most important, wisest, and and which were honoured by the
weightiest books of the world. presence and patronage of the Patriarch
„ It has been asked whether Kramer of Venice. He also strenuously defended
or Sprenger was principally responsible the Papal supremacy, confuting the De
for the Malleus, but in the case of so Monarchia of the Paduan jurisconsult,
close a collaboration any such inquiry Antonio degli Roselli. At Venice he
seems singularly superfluous and nuga¬ resided at the priory of Santi Giovanni
tory. With regard to instances of joint e Paolo (S. Zanipolo). During the

INTRODUCTION
xv
summer of 1497, he had returned to
activities were enormous, and deman¬
Germany, and was living at the convent
ded constant journeyings through the
of Rohr, near Regensburg. On 31
very extensive district to which he had
January, 1500, Alexander VI appointed
been assigned. In 1488 he was elected
him as Nuncio and Inquisitor of
Provincial of the whole German Pro¬
Bohemia and Moravia, in which pro¬
vince, an office of the first importance.
vinces he was deputed and empowered
It is said that his piety and his learning
to proceed against the Waldenses and
impressed all who came in contact with
Picards, as well as against the adherents
him. In 1495 he was residing at
of the witch-society. He wrote and
Cologne, and here he received a letter
preached with great fervour until the
from Alexander VI praising his en¬
end. He died in Bohemia in 1505.
thusiasm and his energy. He died
His chief works, in addition to the
rather suddenly, in the odour of
Malleus, are: Several Discourses and Vari¬
sanctity—some chronicles call him
ous Sermons upon the Most Holy Sacrament
Beatus”—on 6 December, 1495, a*
of the Eucharist; Nuremberg, 1496; A
Strasburg, where he is buried.
Tract Confuting the Errors of Master
Among Sprenger’s other writings,
Antonio degli Roselli; Venice, 1499; and
excepting the Malleus, are The Para¬
The Shield of Defence of the Holy Roman
doxes of John of Westphalia Refuted,
Church Against the Picards and Waldenses;
Mainz, 1479, a closely argued treatise;
an incunabulum, without date, but
and The Institution and Approbation of the
almost certainly 1499-1500. Many
Confraternity of the Most Holy Rosary,
learned authors quote' and refer to
which was first erected at Cologne on 8
these treatises in terms of highest praise.
September in the year 1475, Cologne, 1475.
James Sprenger was born in Basel,
Sprenger may well be called the
1436-8. He was admitted a novice in
Apostle of the Rosary”. None more
the Dominican house of this town in
fervent than he in spreading this
1452. His extraordinary genius attrac¬
Dominican elevation. His zeal enrolled
ted immediate attention, and his rise to
thousands, including the Emperor Fred¬
a responsible position was very rapid.
erick III, in the Confraternity of the
According to Pierre Helyot, the Fran¬
Most Holy Rosary, which was enriched
ciscan (1680-1716), Histoire des Ordres
with many indulgences by a Bull of
Religieux, III (1715), ch. XXVI, in
Sixtus IV. It has been observed that the
1389 Conrad of Prussia abolished cer¬
writings of Father James Sprenger on
tain relaxations and abuses which had
the Rosary are well approved by many
crept into the Teutonic Province of the
learned men, Pontiffs, Saints and Theo¬
Order of S. Dominic, and restored the
logians alike. There can be no doubt
Primitive and Strict Obedience. He
that Sprenger was a mystic of the high¬
was closely followed by Sprenger,
est order, a man of most saintly life.
whose zealous reform was so warmly
The Dominican chroniclers, such as
approved that in 1468 the General
Quetif and Echard, number Kramer
Chapter ordered him to lecture on the
and Sprenger among the glories and
Sentences of Peter Lombard at the
heroes of their Order.
University of Cologne, to which he was
Certain it is that the Malleus Malefi¬
thus officially attached. A few years
carum is the most solid, the most impor¬
later he proceeded Master of Theology,
tant work in the whole vast library of
and was elected Prior and Regent of
witchcraft. One turns to it again and
Studies of the Cologne Convent, one of
again with edification and interest.
the most famous and frequented Houses
From the point of psychology, from the
of the Order. On 30 June, 1480, he was
point of jurisprudence, from the point
elected Dean of the Faculty of Theology
of history, it is supreme. It is hardly too
at the University. His lecture-room was
much to say that later writers, great as
thronged, and in the following year, at
they are, have done little more than
the Chapter held in Rome, the Master
draw from the seemingly inexhaustible
General of the Order, Fra Salvo
wells of wisdom which the two Domini¬
Cassetta, appointed him Inquisitor
cans, Heinrich Kramer and James
Extraordinary for the Provinces of
Sprenger, have given us in the Malleus
Mainz, Treves, and Cologne. His
Maleficarum.
B

INTRODUCTION
XVI
What is most surprising is the think, all who see, or are endeavouring
modernity of the book. There is hardly to see, the ultimate reality beyond the
a problem, a complex, a difficulty, accidents of matter, time and space.
which they have not foreseen, and The Malleus Maleficarum is one of the
discussed, and resolved. world's few books written sub specie
Here are cases which occur in the aeternitatis.
law-courts to-day, set out with the
greatest clarity, argued with unflinch¬ Montague Summers.
ing logic, and judged with scrupulous
impartiality.
7 October, 1946.
It is a work which must irresistibly
capture the attention of all men who In Festo SS. Rosarii.
NOTA.— To Dr. //. J. Norman I wish to express my grateful thanks for his kindness in
having read through the proofs of the Malleus Maleficarum. Those who realize the labour and
sacrifice of time such a task demands will best appreciate the value of such generous assistance.
M.S.

A NOTE UPON THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE MALLEUS MALEFICARUM
The Bibliography of the Malleus Maleficarum is extremely intricate and
difficult, as many of the earlier editions both folio and quarto are without place
or date. Thus the British Museum possesses a copy (Press-Mark I B, 1606), folio,
which in the catalogue stands as ‘T485?”, but this can hardly be correct. The
British Museum has five editions of the fifteenth century: 4to, 1490? (I A 8634);
folio, 1490 (IB 8615); 4to, 1494 (IA 7468); folio, 1494 (IB 5064); 4to, 1496
(IA 75^3)* **
Graesse, Bibliotheca Magica, Leipzig, 1843, gives the editions of the fifteenth
century as Nuremberg, both 4to and folio, 1494 and 1496. He also mentions an
early folio and an early 4to without date or place. He further records a 4to
published at Cologne in 1489, and a folio published at Cologne, 1494.
Malleus Maleficarum, 8vo, Paris, an edition to which the British Museum cata¬
logue assigns the date “1510?”.
Malleus Maleficarum, 8vo, “Colonie. Per me Henricu de Nussia,” 1511.
Malleus Maleficarum, 8vo, Coloniae, J. Gymnicus, 1520. (Copies of these two
Cologne editions are in the British Museum.)
Malleus Maleficarum . . . per F. Raffaelem Majfeum Venetum et D. Jacobi a Judeca
instituti Seruorum summo studio illustratus et a multis erroribus vindicatus . . . Venetiis
Ad Candentis Salamandrae insigne. MD. LXXVI, 8vo. (This is a disappointing
reprint, and it is difficult to see in what consisted the editorial care of the Servite
Raffaelo Maffei, who may or may not have been some relation of the famous
humanist of the same name (d. 25 January, 1522), and who was of the monastery
of San Giacomo della Guidecca. He might have produced a critical edition of the
greatest value, but as it is there are no glosses, there is no excursus, and the text
is poor. For example, in a very difficult passage, Principalis Quaestio II, Pars II,
where the earliest texts read “die dominico sotularia iuuenum fungia . . . perun¬
gunt,” Venice, 1576, has “die dominica solutaria iuuenum fungia... perungunt.”)
Malleus Maleficarum, Impressum Francofurti ad Moenum apud Nicolaum
Bassaeum . . . 8vo, 1580.
Malleus Maleficarum, . . . Francofurti . . . apud Nicolaum Bassaeum . . .
8vo, 1582.
Malleus Maleficarum, . . . Francofurti . . . apud Nicolaum Bassaeum, 2 vols.,
8vo, 1588. This edition also contains in Vol. I extracts from Nider’s Formicarius.
Vo'l. II, which is dedicated to John Mundzenberg, Prior of the Carmelite House
at Frankfort, contains the following nine Tractates:
Bernard Basin, De artibus magicis. (1482.)
Ulrich Molitor, De lamiis. (1489.)
Girolamo Menghi, O.S.F.C., Flagellum Daemonum. (1578.)
John Gerson, De probatione Spirituum, [circa 1404.)
Thomas Murner, O.M., De Pythonico contractu. (1499.)
Felix Hemmerlin, De exorcismis. (circa 1445.)
Eiusdem, De credulitate Daemonibus adhibenda. (1454.)
Bartolomeo Spina, O.P., De strigibus. (1523.)
Eiusdem, Apologiae III aduersus Ioann. Franc. Ponzinibium. (1525.)
The title-page announces that these works are “Omnes de integro nunc
demum in ordinem congestos, notis & explicationibus illustratos, atque ab
innumeris ^quibus ad nauseam usque scatebant mendis in usum communem
uindicatos.” It is true that the earlier editions did swarm with errors, and some of
* Jules Baissac, “Les grands Jours de la Sorcellerie,” 1890, p. 19, says—I do not know on
what authority—“La /re edition du Malleus Maleficarum’ est de 1489, in —4, Cologne, cinq ans
apres la publication de la Bulle Summis desiderantes.”
XVII

A NOTE UPON THE BIBLIOGRAPHY
XV111
these blemishes have been duly corrected, but there still remains much to be done
in the way of emendation. It is to be wished that even the litde care given to
Vol. II had been bestowed on the text of the Malleus Maleficarum in Vol. I, for this
is very poor and faulty.
Malleus Maleficarum, Lyons, 8vo, 1595. (Graesse.)
Malleus Maleficarum, Friburg, 1598.
Malleus Maleficarum, Lyons, 8vo, 1600.
Malleus Maleficarum, Lyons, “multo auctior,” 8vo, 1620.
Malleus Maleficarum, Friburg, 8vo, 1660.
Malleus Maleficarum, 4to, Lyons, 1666. (Graesse.)
Malleus Maleficarum, 4 vols., “sumptibus Claudii Bourgeat,” 4U), Lyons, 1669.
This would appear to be the latest edition of the Malleus Maleficarum, and the text
has here and there received some revision. For example, in the passage to which
reference has already been made, Principalis Quaestio II, Pars II, where the former
reading was “sotularia iuuenum fungia . . . perungunt,” we have the correct
“axungia”* instead of “fungia.” I have given in the Introduction a list of the
collections contained in these four noble volumes.
Quetif-Echard, Scriptores Ordinis Praedicatorum, 2 vols., Paris, 1719, Vol. I,
p. 881, mention a French translation of the Malleus Maleficarum, Le Mail let des
Sorcides, as having been published, quarto, at Lyons by Stephanus Gueynard. No
date, however, is given, and as this book cannot be traced, it seems highly probable
that one of the many Lyons reprints of the Malleus Maleficarum was mistakenly
supposed to be a French rendering of the original. In answer to my inquiries
M. le Directeur of the Bibliotheque Nationale has kindly informed me: “L’ouvrage de Sprenger, Le Maillet des Sorderes, edition de Lyon, ne se trouve point a la
Bibliotheque Nationale. Mais, de plus, je me suis reporte a Fexcellente biblio¬
graphic lyonnaise de .Baudrier, XI® serie, 1914, et la non plus, P edition de Stephanus
Gueynard ne se trouve point.” Le Maillet des Sorderes, 4to, Lyons, by Stephanus
Gueynard, does not occur in the valuable Essai d'une Bibliographic Frangaise methodique et raisonnee de la Sorcellerie of R. Yve-Plessis, Paris, 1900.
There is a modern German translation of the Malleus Maleficarum by
J. W. R. Schmidt, Der Hexenhammer, 3 vols., Berlin, 1906; second edition,
1922-3.
In 1912 Oswald Weigel, the famous “Antiquariat & Auktions-Institut” of
Leipzig, sold an exceptionally fine, if not—should it be once permissible to use
a much over-worked word—a unique collection of books dealing with witchcraft.
This Library contained no fewer than twenty-nine exemplars of the Malleus
Maleficarum, of which the dates were catalogued as follows: (1) Argentorati
(Strasburg), J. Priiss, ca. 1487. (2) Spirae, Peter Drach, ca. 1487. (3) Spirae,
Peter Drach, ca. 1490; or Basle, J. von Amorbach, ca. 1490?. (4) No place nor
date. With inscription “Codex moasterij seti Martini prope Treuirim.” (5) Koln,
J. Koelhoff, 1494. (6) Nurnberg, Anton Koberger, 1494. (7) Niimberg, Anton
Koberger, 1496. (8) [Paris], Jehan Petit, ca. 1497. (9) Coin, Henricus de Nussia,
1511. (10) [Paris, Jehan Petit, no date.] (11) Lyon, J. Marion, 1519. (12) Nurn¬
berg, Frederick Peypus, 1519. (13) Koln, J. Gymnicus, 1520. (14) Venetiis, Io.
Antonius Bertanus, 1574. (15) Venetiis, ibid., 1576. (16) Francofurti, apud
Nicolaum Bassaeum, 1580. (17) Francofurti, ibid., 1582. (18) Lugduni, apud
Ioannam Iacobi Iuntae, 2 tomi, 1584. In this edition the title is misprinted
Malleus Maleficorum. (19) Francofurti, Sumptibus Nicolai Bassaei, 1588. (20)
Duplicate of 19. (21) Lugduni, Petri Landry, 2 tomi, 1595. (22) Francofurti,
Sumptibus Nicolai Bassaei, 2 tomi, 1600. (23) Lugduni, Sumptibus Petri Landry,
3 tomi, 1604. (24) Lugduni, ibid., 1614. (25) Lugduni, ibid., 1615. (26) Lug¬
duni, Sumptibus Clavdii Landry, 3 tomi, 1620. (27) Lugduni, 3 tomi,
1620-21. (28) Lugduni, 4 tomi, 1069. (29) The modern German translation of
the Malleus Maleficarum by J. W. R. Schmidt, Der Hexenhammer, 3 vols., Berlin,
1906.
* Axis-ungo. See Palladius, I, xvii, 3. Also Vegetius, “De Arte Veterinaria,” IV, x, 3 ;
also IV, xii, 3.

THE BULL OF INNOCENT VIII
D
Innocent, Bishop, Servant of the servants of God, for an eternal
remembrance.
ESIRING with the most heartfelt anxiety, even as Our Apostleship requires, that the Catholic Faith should especially m this
Our day increase and flourish everywhere, and that all heretical
depravity should be driven far from the frontiers and bournes of
the Faithful, We very gladly proclaim and even restate those particular
means and methods whereby Our pious desire may obtain its wished
effect, since when all errors are uprooted by Our diligent avocation as by
the hoe of a provident husbandman, a zeal for, and the regular observ¬
ance of, Our holy Faith will be all the more strongly impressed upon the
hearts of the faithful.
It has indeed lately come to Our ears, not without afflicting Us with
bitter sorrow, that in some parts of Northern Germany, as well as in the
provinces, townships, territories, districts, and dioceses of Mainz, Cologne,
Treves, Salzburg, and Bremen, many persons of both sexes, unmindful of
their own salvation and straying from the Catholic Faith, have abandoned
themselves to devils, incubi and succubi, and by their incantations, spells,
conjurations, and other accursed charms and crafts, enormities and horrid
offences, have slain infants yet in the mother’s womb, as also the offspring
of cattle, have blasted the produce of the earth, the grapes of the vine,
the fruits of trees, nay, men and women, beasts of burthen, herd-beasts,
as well as animals of other kinds, vineyards, orchards, meadows, pastureland, corn, wheat, and all other cereals; these wretches furthermore
afflict and torment men and women, beasts of burthen, herd-beasts, as
well as animals of other kinds, with terrible and piteous pains and sore
diseases, both internal and external; they hinder men from performing
the sexual act and women from conceiving, whence husbands cannot
know their wives nor wives receive their husbands; over and above this,
they blasphemously renounce that Faith which is theirs by the Sacra¬
ment of Baptism, and at the instigation of the Enemy of Mankind they do
not shrink from committing and perpetrating the foulest abominations
and filthiest excesses to the deadly peril of their own souls, whereby they
outrage the Divine Majesty and are a cause of scandal and danger to very
many. And although Our dear sons Henry Kramer and James Sprenger,
Professors of Theology, of the Order of Friars Preachers, have been by
Letters Apostolic delegated as Inquisitors of these heretical pravities,
and still are Inquisitors, the first in the aforesaid parts of Northern Ger¬
many, wherein are included those aforesaid townships, districts, dioceses,
and other specified localities, and the second in certain territories which
lie along the borders of the Rhine, nevertheless not a few clerics and lay ? )
folk of those countries, seeking too curiously to know more than concerns
them, since in the aforesaid delegatory letters there is no express and
specific mention by name of these provinces, townships, dioceses, and
xix

XX THE BULL OF INNOCENT VIII
districts, and further since the two delegates themselves and the abomina¬
tions they are to encounter are not designated in detailed and particular
j fashion, these persons are not ashamed to contend with the most unblush¬
ing effrontery that these enormities are not practised in those provinces,
and consequently the aforesaid Inquisitors have no legal right to exercise
their powers of inquisition in the provinces, townships, dioceses, districts,
and territories, which have been rehearsed, and that the Inquisitors may
not proceed to punish, imprison, and penalize criminals convicted of the
heinous offences and many wickednesses which have been set forth.
Accordingly in the aforesaid provinces, townships, dioceses, and districts,
the abominations and enormities in question remain unpunished not
without open danger to the souls of many and peril of eternal damnation.
Wherefore We, as is Our duty, being wholly desirous of removing all
hindrances and obstacles by which the good work of the Inquisitors may
be let and tarded, as also of applying potent remedies to prevent the
disease of heresy and other turpitudes diffusing their poison to the destruc¬
tion of many innocent souls, since Our zeal for the Faith especially incites
us, lest that the provinces, townships, dioceses, districts, and territories of
Germany, which We have specified, be deprived of the benefits of the
Holy Office thereto assigned, by the tenor of these presents in virtue of
Our Apostolic authority We decree and enjoin that the aforesaid In¬
quisitors be empowered to proceed to the just correction, imprisonment,
and punishment of any persons, without let or hindrance, in every way as
if the provinces, townships, dioceses, districts, territories, yea, even the
persons and their crimes in this kind were named and particularly desig¬
nated in Our letters. Moreover, for greater surety We extend these letters
deputing this authority to cover all the aforesaid provinces, townships,
dioceses, districts, and territories, persons, and crimes newly rehearsed,
and We grant permission to the aforesaid Inquisitors, to one separately or
to both, as also to Our dear son John Gremper, priest of the diocese of
Constance, Master of Arts, their notary, or to any other public notary,
who shall be by them, or by one of them, temporarily delegated to those
provinces, townships, dioceses, districts, and aforesaid territories, to pro¬
ceed, according to the regulations of the Inquisition, against any persons
of whatsoever rank and high estate, correcting, mulcting, imprisoning,
punishing, as their crimes merit, those whom they have found guilty, the
penalty being adapted to the offence. Moreover, they shall enjoy a full
and perfect faculty of expounding and preaching the word of God to the
faithful, so often as opportunity may offer and it may seem good to them,
in each and every parish church of the said provinces, and they shall
freely and lawfully perform any rites or execute any business which may
appear advisable in the aforesaid cases. By Our supreme authority We
grant them anew full and complete faculties.
At the same time by Letters Apostolic We require Our venerable
Brother, the Bishop of Strasburg,* that he himself shall announce, or by
some other or others cause to be announced, the burthen of Our Bull,
which he shall solemnly publish when and so often as he deems it neces¬
sary, or when he shall be requested so to do by the Inquisitors or by one
of them. Nor shall he suffer them in disobedience to the tenor of these
presents to be molested or hindered by any authority whatsoever, but he
shall threaten all who endeavour to hinder or harass the Inquisitors, all
who oppose them, all rebels, of whatsoever rank, estate, position, pre-
* Albrecht von Bayern, 1478-1506.

THE BULL OF INNOCENT VIII
xxt
eminence, dignity, or any condition they may be, or whatsoever privilege
of exemption they may claim, with excommunication, suspension, inter¬
dict, and yet more terrible penalties, censures, and punishment, as may
seem good to him, and that without any right of appeal, and if he will he
may by Our authority aggravate and renew these penalties as often as he
list, calling in, if so please him, the help of the secular arm.
Non obstantibus . . . Let no man therefore . . . But if any dare to
do so, which God forbid, let him know that upon him will fall the wrath
of Almighty God, and of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.
Given at Rome, at S. Peter’s, on the 9 December of the Year of the
Incarnation of Our Lord one thousand four hundred and eighty-four, in
the first Year of Our Pontificate.
The translation of this Bull is reprinted by permission from The Geography of Witchcraft,” by
“
Montague Summers, pp. 533-6 (Kegan Paul).

.

MALLEUS
M A L E F I C
ARUM
believes that any creature can be
changed for the better or the worse,
or transformed into another kind or
likeness, except by the Creator of all
THE FIRST PART TREAT¬ things, is worse than a pagan and a
ING OF THE THREE NECES¬ heretic. And so when they report such
things are done by witches it is not
SARY CONCOMITANTS OF
Catholic, but plainly heretical, to
WITCHCRAFT, WHICH ARE
maintain this opinion.
THE DEVIL, A WITCH, AND
Moreover, no operation of witchcraft
THE PERMISSION OF
has a permanent effect among us. And
ALMIGHTY GOD
this is the proof thereof: For if it were
so, it would be effected by the opera¬
☆ tion of demons. But to maintain that
the devil has power to change human
PART I bodies or to do them permanent harm
does not seem in accordance with the
teaching of the Church. For in this
QUESTION I
way they could destroy the whole world,
Here beginneth auspiciously the first part and bring it to utter confusion.
of this work. Question the First. Moreover, every alteration that takes
place in a human body—for example,
HETHER the belief that a state of health or a state of sickness—
there are such beings as can be brought down to a question of
witches is so essential a natural causes, as Aristotle has shown
part of the Catholic faith in his 7th book of Physics. And the
that obstinately to maintain the oppo¬
greatest of these is the influence of the
site opinion manifestly savours of
stars. But the devils cannot interfere
heresy. And it is argued that a firm
with the movement of the stars. This
belief in witches is not a Catholic
is the opinion of Dionysius in his epistle
doctrine: see chapter 26, question 5,
to S. Polycarp. For this alone God can
of the work of Episcopus. Whoever
do. Therefore it is evident the demons

2 MALLEUS Part. I. Question i.
cannot actually effect any permanent Answer. Here are three heretical
transformation in human bodies; that errors which must be met, and when
is to say, no real metamorphosis. And they have been disproved the truth will
so we must refer the appearance of any be plain. For certain writers, pretending
such change to some dark and occult to oase their opinion upon the words of
cause.
S. Thomas (iv, 24) when he treats of
And the power of God is stronger than impediments brought about by magic
the power of the devil, so divine works charms, have tried to maintain that
are more true than demoniac operations. there is not such a thing as magic, that
Whence inasmuch as evil is powerful in it only exists in the imagination of those
the world, then it must be the work of men who ascribe natural effects, the
the devil always conflicting with the causes whereof are not known, to witch¬
work of God. Therefore as it is un¬ craft and spells. There are others who
lawful to hold that the devil’s evil craft acknowledge indeed that witches exist,
can apparently exceed the work of God, but they declare that the influence of
so it is unlawful to believe that the magic and the effects of charms are
noblest works of creation, that is to say, purely imaginary ana phantasmical.
man and beast, can be harmed and A third class of writers maintain that
spoiled by the power of the devil. the effects said to be wrought by magic
Moreover, that which is under the spells are altogether illusory and fanci¬
influence of a material object cannot ful, although it may be that the devil
have power over corporeal objects. does really lend his aid to some witch.
But devils are subservient to certain The errors held by each one of these
influences of the stars, because magicians persons may thus be set forth and thus
observe the course of certain stars in confuted. For in the very first place
order to evoke the devils. Therefore they are shown to be plainly heretical
they have not the power of effecting any by many orthodox writers, and especi¬
change in a corporeal object, and it ally by S. Thomas, who lays down that
follows that witches have even less such an opinion is altogether contrary
power than the demons possess.
to the authority of the saints and is
For devils have no power at all save founded upon absolute infidelity. Be¬
by a certain subtle art. But an art
cause the authority of the Holy Scrip¬
cannot permanently produce a true tures says that devils have power over the
form. (And a certain author says: bodies and over the minds of men, when
Writers on Alchemy know that there is
God allows them to exercise this power,
no hope of any real transmutation.) as is plain from very many passages
Therefore the devils for their part,
in the Holy Scriptures. Therefore
making use of the utmost of their craft, those err who say that there is no such
cannot bring about any permanent
thing as witchcraft, but that it is purely
cure—or permanent disease. But if imaginary, even although they do not
these states exist it is in truth owing to
believe that devils exist except in the
some other cause, which may be un¬
imagination of the ignorant and vulgar,
known, and has nothing to do with the
and the natural accidents which happen
operations of either devils or witches.
to a man he wrongly attributes to
But according to the Decretals (33)
some supposed devil. For the imagina¬
the contrary is the case. “If by witch¬
tion of some men is so vivid that they
craft or any magic art permitted by the
think they see actual figures and appear¬
secret but most just will of God, and
ances which are but the reflection of their
aided by the power of the devil, etc....”
thoughts, and then these are believed
The reference here is to any act of
to be the apparitions of evil spirits or
witchcraft which may hinder the end
even the spectres of witches. But this is
of marriage, and for this impediment
contrary to the true faith, which teaches
to take effect three things can concur,
us that certain angels fell from heaven
that is to say, witchcraft, the devil, and
and are now devils, and we are bound
the permission of God. Moreover, the
to acknowledge that by their very
stronger can influence that which is less
nature they can do many wonderful
strong. But the power of the devil is
things which we cannot do. And those
stronger than any human power {Job
who try to induce others to perform
xl). There is no power upon earth
such evil wonders are called witches.
which can be compared to him, who
And because infidelity in a person who
was created so that he fears none.
has been baptized is technically called

I. MALEFICARUM
Part Question i. 3
heresy, therefore such persons are and merely in the imagination, those
plainly heretics. who suppose that all the effects of
As regards those who hold the other witchcraft are mere illusion and im¬
two errors, those, that is to say, who do agination are very greatly deceived.
not deny that there are demons and Secondly, with regard to a man who
that demons possess a natural power, believes or maintains that a creature
but who differ among themselves con¬ can be made, or changed for better or
cerning the possible effects of magic and for worse, or transformed into some
the possible operations of witches: the other kind or likeness by anyone save by
one school holding that a witch can God, the Creator of all things, alone, is
truly bring about certain effects, yet an infidel and worse than a heathen.
these effects are not real but phantas- Wherefore on account of these words
tical, the other school allowing that “ changed for the worse ” they say that
some real harm does befall the person or such an effect if wrought by witchcraft
persons injured, but that when a witch cannot be real but must be purely
imagines this damage is the effect of phantastical.
her arts she is grossly deceived. This But inasmuch as these errors savour
error seems to be based upon two pas¬ of heresy and contradict the obviops
sages from the Canons where certain meaning of the Canon, we will first
women are condemned who falsely prove our points by the divine law, as
imagine that during the night they ride also by ecclesiastical and civil law, and
abroad with Diana or Herodias.* This first in general.
may be read in the Canon. Yet because To commence, the expressions of the
such things often happen by illusion Canon must be treated of in detail
(although the sense of the Canon will
* “Diana or Herodias” This decree, which
be even more clearly elucidated in the
was often attributed to a General Council of
following question). For the divine law
Ancyra, but which is now held to be of a later
in many places commands that witches
date, was in any case authoritative, since it
are not only to be avoided, but also they
passed into the “De ecclesiasticis disciplinis”
are to be put to death, and it would not
ascribed to Regino of Prum (906), and thence to
the canonists S. Ivo of Chartres and Johannes impose the extreme penalty of this kind
Gratian. Section 364 of the Benedictine Abbot’s if witches did not really and truly make
work relates that “certain abandoned women a compact with devils in order to bring
turning aside to follow Satan, being seduced by about real and true hurts and harms.
the illusions and phantasms of demons, believe For the penalty of death is not inflicted
and openly profess that in the dead of night they except for some grave and notorious
ride upon certain beasts with the pagan goddess
crime, but it is otherwise with death of
Diana and a countless horde of women, and that
the soul, which can be brought about
in these silent hours they fly over vast tracks of
by the power of a phantastical illusion
country and obey her as their mistress, while on
or even by the stress of temptation.
other nights they are sullen to pay her homage.”
This is the opinion of S. Thomas when
John of Salisbury, who died in 1180, in his
he discusses whether it be evil to make
“Policraticus,” I, xvii, speaks of the popular be¬
use gf the help of devils (ii. 7). For in
lief in a witch-queen named Herodias, who
called together the sorcerers to meeting at night. the 18th chapter of Deuteronomy it is
In a MS., “De Sortilegis,” the following passage commanded that all wizards and
occurs: “ We next inquire concerning certain charmers are to be destroyed. Also the
wicked crones who believe and profess that in the 19th chapter of Leviticus says : The
night-time they ride abroad with Diana, the soul which goeth to wizards and sooth¬
heathen goddess, ’or else with Herodias, and an sayers to commit fornication with them,
innumerable host of women, upon certain beasts,
I will set my face against that soul, and
and that in a silent covey at the dead of night
destroy it out of the midst of my people.
they pass over immense distances, obeying her
And again, 20: A man, or woman, in
commands as their mistress, and that they are
whom there is a pythonical or divining
summoned by her on appointed nights, and they
spirit dying, let them die: they shall
declare that they have the power to change
stone them. Those persons are said to
human beings for better or for worse, ay, even
be pythons in whom the devil works
to turn them into some other semblance or shape.
extraordinary things.
Concerning such women I answer according to
the decrees of the Council of Alexandria, that Moreover, this must be borne in
the minds of the faithful are disordered by such mind, that on account of this sin
fantasies owing to the inspiration of no good Ochozias fell sick and died, IV. Kings 1.
spirit but of the devil.” Also Saul, 1 Paralipomenon, 10. We have,

4 MALLEUS Part I. Question i.
moreover, the weighty opinions of the that if witchcraft takes effect in the
Fathers who have written upon the event of a marriage before there has
scriptures and who have treated at been carnal copulation, then if it is
length of the power of demons and of lasting it annuls and destroys the con¬
magic arts. The writings of many tract of marriage, and it is quite plain
doctors upon Book 2 of the Sentences that such a condition cannot in any
may be consulted, and it will be found way be said to be illusory and the effect:
that they all agree, that there are of imagination.
\ wizards and sorcerers who by the power Upon this point see what Blessed
E
of the devil can produce real and ex- Henry of Segusio J has so fully written
Drdinary effects, and these effects in his Summa: also Godfrey of Fon¬
not imaginary, and God permits taines § and S. Raymond of Penafort,||
tmrtobe. I will Hot mention those very who have discussed this question in
many other places where S. Thomas in detail very clearly, not asking whether
great detail discusses operations of this such a physical condition could be
kind. As, for example, in his Summa thought imaginary and unreal, but
contra Gentiles, Book 3, c. 1 and 2, in part taking it to be an actual and proven
one, question 114, argument 4. And in fact, and then they lay down whether it
the Second of the Second, questions 92 and
94. We may further consult the Com¬
+ “Blessed Henry.” Blessed Henry of
mentators and the Exegetes who have Segusio, usually called Hostiensis, the famous
written upon the wise men and the Italian canonist of the thirteenth century, was
magicians of Pharao, Exodus vii. We born at Susa, and died at Lyons, 23 October,
may also consult what S. Augustine says 1271. After a most distinguished career, on 4
in The City of God* Book 18, c. 17. See December, 1261, he became Cardinal-Bishop of
further his second book On Christian Ostia and Velletri, whence his name Hostiensis.
Doctrine.f Very many other doctors
His “Summa super titulis Decretalium” (Strasburg, 1312; Cologne, 1612; Venice, 1605),
advance the same opinion, and it would
which was also known as “Summa aurea,” or
be the height of folly for any man to
“Summa archiepiscopi,” since it was written
contradict all these, and he could not
whilst he was Archbishop of Embrun, won for its
be held to be clear of the guilt of heresy.
author the title “Monarcha iuris, lumen lucidis¬
For any man who gravely errs in an
simum Decretorum.” One portion of this work,
exposition of Holy Scripture is rightly
the “Summa, siue Tractatus de poenitentia et
considered to be a heretic. And who¬
remissionibus,” was very popular, and is con¬
soever thinks otherwise concerning these tinually referred to as of high authority. The
matters which touch the faith that the book was written between 1230 and 1261.
Holy Roman Church holds is a heretic. § “Godfrey.” Godfrey of Fontaines, Doctor
There is the Faith. Venerandus, scholastic philosopher and theo¬
logian, was born near Liege within the first half
That to deny the existence of witches of the thirteenth century; he became a canon of his
native diocese, and also of Paris and Cologne.
is contrary to the obvious sense of the
In 1300 he was elected to the See of Tournai,
Canon is shown by ecclesiastical law.
which he declined. During the last quarter of the
For we have the opinions of the com¬
century he taught theology with great distinction
mentators on the Canon which com¬
at the University of Paris. His vast work, “XIV
mences: If anyone by magic arts or
Qiiodlibeta,” which in manuscript was exten¬
witchcraft . . . And again, there are
sively studied in the mediaeval schools, has
those writers who speak of men im¬
recently been published for the first time with an
potent and bewitched, and therefore by ample commentary.
this impediment brought about by |j “S. Raymond.” One of the most dis¬
witchcraft they are unable to copulate, tinguished names of the Dominican Order.
and so the contract of marriage is Born in 1175, he professed Canon law at
rendered void and matrimony in their Barcelona and Bologna. At the request of his
cases has become impossible. For they superiors he published his “Summa Casuum,” of
say, and S. Thomas agrees with them, which several editions appeared in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries. His reputation as a
jurist was so great that in 1230 he was called to
* “ The City of God.” S. Augustine's great Rome by Gregory IX, who directed him to re¬
work “De Ciuitate Dei” was written 413-26. arrange and codify the ecclesiastical canons.
t “On Christian Doctrine.” The “De Doc¬ Having completed the work, he refused all
trina Christiana” was originally written in 337, honours, and returned to Spain. He died at
but S. Augustine revised his work with addition Barcelona, 6 January, 1273. FftV feast is
in 427, leaving a monument of hermeneutics. celebrated on 23 January.

Part I. Question i. MALEFICARUM 5
is to be treated as a lasting or temporary degrees, so that anyone who is notori¬
infirmity if it continued for more than ously given to it must be refused Com¬
the space of three years, and they do not munion. If it be secretly practised the
doubt that it may be brought about by culprit must do penance for forty days.
the power of witchcraft, although it is And if he be a cleric he is to be sus¬
true that this condition may be inter¬ pended and confined in a monastery.
mittent. But what is a fact beyond dis- If he be a layman he shall be excom¬
ute is that such impotency can be municated, wherefore all such in-/
rought about through the power of the famous persons must be punished, to¬
devil by means of a contract made with gether with all those who resort to
him, or even by the devil himself with¬ them, and no excuse at all is to be
out the assistance of any witch, al¬ allowed.
though this most rarely happens in the
Church, since marriage is a most ex¬ The same penalty too is prescribed by
cellent sacrament. But amongst Pagans the civil law. For Azo,f in his Summa
this actually does happen, and this upon Book 9 of the Codex, the rubric
is because evil spirits act as if they had concerning sorcerers, 2 after the lex Cor¬
a certain legitimate dominion over nelia,% concerning assassins and mur¬
them, as Peter of Palude* in his fourth derers, lays down: Let it be known that
book relates, when he tells of the young all those who are commonly called
man who had pledged himself in wed¬ sorcerers, and those too who are skilled
lock to a certain idol, and who never¬ in the art of divination, incur the
theless contracted marriage with a penalty of death. The same penalty is
young maiden, but he was unable to enforced yet again. For this is the exact
have any connexion with her because sentence of these laws: It is unlawful for
the devil always intervened, actually any man to practise divination; and if
appearing in bodily form. But never¬ he does so his reward shall be death by
theless in the Church the devil prefers the sword of the executioner. There are
to operate through the medium of others too who by their magic charms
witches and to bring about such effects endeavour to take the lives of innocent
for his own gain, that is to say, for the people, who turn the passions of women
loss of souls. And in what manner he is to lusts ol every kind, and these
able to do this, and by what means, criminals are to be thrown to the wild
will be discussed a little later, where we beasts. And the laws allow that any )
shall treat of the seven ways of doing witness whatsoever is to be admitted as
harm to men by smuIaF^perations. evidence against them. This the Canon
And of the other questions which treating of the defence of the Faith
Theologians and Canonists have raised
f “Ago.” Early in the thirteenth century
with reference to these points, one is
Portius Ago stood at the head of the Bolognese
very important, since they discuss how
school of law which was accomplishing the
such impotence can be cured and
resuscitation of the classical Roman law. He was
whether it is permissible to cure it by
the pupil of the celebrated Johannes Bassianus,
some counter-charm, and what is to be
and his fame so eclipsed all his contemporaries
done if the witch who cast the spell is
that in 1203 Thomas of Marlborough, after¬
dead, a circumstance of which Godfrey
wards Abbot of Evesham, spent six months at
of Fontaines treats in his Summa. And
Bologna hearing his lectures every day. Ago was
these questions will be amply elucidated saluted as “Master of all the Masters of the
in the Third Part of this work. laws,” and the highest praise that could be given
another canonist was to declare him to be
This then is the reason why the “second only to Ago.” Savigrey says that Ago
Canonists have so carefully drawn up a was alive as late as 1230. His chief work is a
table of the various differing penalties, “Summa” of the first nine books of the Code, to
which he added a “Summa” of the Institutes.
making a distinction between the
No less than thirty-one editions appeared
private and open practice of witchcraft,
between 1482 and 1610; of which five are
or rather of divination, since this foul
earlier than 1300. Throughout the Middle Ages
superstition has various species and
these treatises were in highest repute.
J “Lex Cornelia.” De Sicariis et Ueneficis.
* “Peter of Palude.” Peter of Palude, who Passed circa 81 b.c. This law dealt with
died 1342, of the Order of S. Dominic, was one incendiarism as well as open assassination and
of the most distinguished Thomistic theologians poisoning, and laid down penalties for accessories
during the first half of the fourteenth century. to the fact.

6 MALLEUS I.
Part Question i.
explicitly enjoins. And the same pro¬ most Catholic opinion that there are
cedure is allowable in a charge of heresy. sorcerers and witches who by the help I
When such an accusation is brought, of the devil, on account of a compact
any witness may come forward to give which they have entered into with him,
evidence, just as he may in a case of are able, since God allows this, to pro¬
lese-majesty. For witchcraft is high duce real and actual evils and harm,
treason against God’s Majesty. And so which does not render it unlikely that
j
they are to be put to the torture in order they can also bring about visionary and
to make them confess. Any person, phantastical illusions by some extra¬
whatever his rank or position, upon such ordinary and peculiar means. The scope
an accusation may be put to the torture, of the present inquiry, however, is
and he who is found guilty, even if he witchcraft, and this very widely differs
confesses his crime, let him be racked, from these other arts, and therefore a
let him suffer all other tortures pre¬
consideration of them would be nothing
scribed by law in order that he may be to the purpose, since those who practise
punished in proportion to his offences. them may with greater accuracy be
Note: In days of old such criminals termed fortune-tellers and soothsayers
suffered a double penalty and were rather than sorcerers.
often thrown to wild beasts to be de- It must particularly be noticed that
\ voured by them. Nowadays they are these two last errors are founded upon
burnt at the stake, and probably this is a complete misunderstanding of the
because the majority of them are words of the Canon (I will not speak of
women.
the first error, which stands obviously
The civil law also forbids any con¬
self-condemned, since it is clean con¬
niving at or joining in such practices, trary to the teaching of Holy Scripture).
for it did not allow a diviner even to
And so let us proceed to a right under¬
enter another person’s house; and often standing of the Canon. And first we
it ordered that all their possessions
will speak against the first error, which
should be burnt, nor was anyone says that the mean is mere illusion al¬
allowed to patronize or to consult
though the two extremes are realities.
them; very often they were deported
Here it must be noticed that there are
to some distant and deserted island and fourteen distinct species which come
all their goods sold by public auction.
under the genus superstition, but
Moreover, those who consulted or re¬
these for the sake of brevity it is hardly
sorted to witches were punished with
necessary to detail, since they have been
exile and the confiscation of all their
most clearly set out by S. Isidore* in his
property. These penalties were set in Etymologiae, Book 8, and by S. Thomas
operation by the common consent of all
in his Second of the Second, question 92.
nations and rulers, and they have
Moreover, there will be explicit men¬
greatly conduced to the suppression of
tion of these rather lower when we dis¬
the practice of such forbidden arts.
cuss the gravity of this heresy, and this
It should be observed that the laws
will be in the last question of our First
highly commend those who seek to Part.
nullify the charms of witches. And
The category in which women of this
those who take great pains that the
sort are to be ranked is called the
work of man shall not be harmed by the
category of Pythons, persons in or by
force of tempests or by hailstorms are
whom the devil either speaks or perworthy of a great reward rather than of
any punishment. How such damage * “St. IsidoreThe “Etymologiae,” or
may lawfully be prevented will be dis¬ “Origines” as it is sometimes called, must be
cussed in full below. Accordingly, how regarded as the most important and best known
can it be that the denial or frivolous of the works of S. Isidore of Seville, born circa
contradiction of any of these proposi¬ 560; died 4 April, 636. It has been described as
tions can be free from the mark of some “a vast storehouse in which is gathered, systemanotable heresy? Let every man judge tized, and condensed, all the learning possessed by
that time.” Throughout the greater part of the
for himself unless indeed his ignorance
Middle Ages it was the text-book most in use in
excuse him. But what sort of ignorance
educational institutions. Arevalo, who is regarded
may excuse him we shall very shortly
as the most authoritative editor of S. Isidore (7
roceed to explain. From what has
vols., Rome, 1797-1803), tells us that it was
een already said we draw the following
printed no less than ten times between 1470 and
conclusion: It is a most certain and
J529'

Part I. Question i. MALEFICARUM
7
forms some astonishing operation, and him. And the first point is this: It is
this is often the first category in order. absolutely incumbent upon all crea¬
But the category under which sorcerers tures and Priests, and upon all who have
come is called the category of Sorcerers. the cure of souls, to teach their flocks
And inasmuch as these persons differ that there is one, only, true God, and
greatly one from another, it would not that to none other in Heaven or earth
be correct that they should not be may worship be given. The second
comprised in that species under which point is this, that although these women
so many others are confined : Where¬ imagine they are riding (as they think
fore, since the Canon makes explicit and say) with Diana or with Herodias,
mention of certain women, but does in truth they are riding with the devil, j
not in so many words speak of witches; who calls himself by some such heathen
therefore they are entirely wrong who name and throws a glamour before their
1 understand the Canon only to speak of eyes. And the third point is this, that
imaginary voyages and goings to and the act of riding abroad may be merely
fro in the body and who wish to reduce illusory, since the devil has extra¬
every kind of superstition to this ordinary power over the minds of those
illusion : for as those women are trans¬ who have given themselves up to him,
ported in their imagination, so are so that what they do in pure imagina¬
witches actually and bodily trans- tion, they believe they have actually
ported. And he who wishes to argue and really done in the body. And the
jj fironi this Canon that the effects of fourth point is this: Witches have
j
witchcraft, the infliction of disease or made a compact to obey the devil
1 any sickness, are purely imaginary, in all things, wherefore that the words
utterly mistakes the tenor of the Canon, of the Canon should be extended to
and errs most grossly. include and comprise every act of
Further, it is to be observed that those witchcraft is absurd, since witches do
who, whilst they allow the two extremes, much more than these women, and
that is to say, some operation of the witches actually are of a very different
devil and the effect, a sensible disease, kind.
to be actual and real, at the same time Whether witches by their magic arts
deny that any instrument is the means are actually and bodily transported
thereof; that is to say, they deny that from place to place, or whether this
any witch could have participated in merely happens in imagination, as is
such a cause and effect, these, I say, err the case with regard to those women
most gravely: for, in philosophy, the who are called Pythons, will be dealt
mean must always partake of the nature with later in this work, and we shall
of the two extremes. also discuss how they are conveyed.
Moreover it is useless to argue that So now we have explained two errors
any result of witchcraft may be a at least, and we have arrived at a
phantasy and unreal, because such a clear understanding of the sense of the
phantasy cannot be procured without Canon.
resort to the power of the devil, and it is Moreover, a third error, which mis¬
necessary that there should be made a taking the words of the Canon says that
contract with the devil, by which con¬ all magic arts are illusions, may be
tract the witch truly and actually binds corrected from the very words of the
herself to be the servant of the devil Canon itself. For inasmuch as it says
and devotes herself to the devil, and that he who believes any creature can
this is not done -in any dream or under be made or transformed for the better
any illusion, but she herself bodily and or the worse, or metamorphosed into
truly co-operates with, and conjoins some other species or likeness, save it
herself to, the devil. For this indeed is be by the Creator of all things Him¬
the end of all witchcraft; whether it self, etc. ... he is worse than an
be the casting of spells by a look or infidel. These three propositions, if
by a formula of words or by some they are thus understood as they might
other charm, it is all of the devil, as appear on the bare face of them, are
will be made clear in the following clean contrary to the sense of Holy
question. Scripture and the commentaries of the
In truth, if anyone cares to read the doctors of the Church. For the follow- t
words of the Canon, there are four ing Canon clearly says that creatures
points which must particularly strike can be made by witches, although they j

8 MALLEUS Part I. Question i.
necessarily must be very imperfect afflict and it is He alone who can heal,
creatures, and probably in some way for “ I kill and I make alive” (Deuter¬
deformed. And it is plain that the sense onomy xxxii, 39). And so evil angels
of the Canon agrees with what S. may and do perform the will of God.
Augustine tells us concerning the To this also S. Augustine bears witness
magicians at the court of Pharao, who when he says: There are in truths
turned their rods into serpents, as the magic spells and evil charms, which ■
holy doctor writes upon the 7th not only often afflict men with diseases ?
I chapter of Exodus, ver. 11, —and but even kill them outright. We mustj
Pharao called the wise men and the also endeavour clearly to understand
magicians. . . . We may also refer what actually happens when nowadays
to the commentaries of Strabo, who by the power of the devil wizards and
says that devils hurry up and down over witches are changed into wolves and
the whole earth, when by their incanta¬ other savage beasts. The Canon, how- 4
tions witches are employing them at ever, speaks of some bodily and lasting
various operations, and these devils are change, and does ndt dlSciiss" those
able to collect various germs or seeds, extraordinary things which may be
and from these germs or seeds they are done by glamour of which S. Augustine
able to cause various species to grow. speaks in the 18th book and the 17th
We may also refer to Blessed Albertus chapter of Of the City of God, when he
Magnus,* De animalibus. And also S. reports many strange tales of that)
Thomas, Part 1, question 114, article 4. famous witch Circe, and of the com-/
For the sake of conciseness we will not panions of Diomedes and of the father
quote them at length here, but this of Praestantius. This will be discussed
I? remains proven, that it is possible for in detail in the Second Part.
i
certain creatures to be created in this
way.
Whether it be a Heresy to Maintain that
With reference to the second point,
Witches Exist.
that a creature may be changed for
better or for worse, it is always to be The second part of our inquiry is
understood that this can only be done this, whether obstinately to maintain
by the permission and indeed by the that witches exist is heretical. The
power of God, and that this is only done question arises whether people who
in order to correct or to punish, but that hold that witches do not exist are to be
God very often allows devils to act as regarded as notorious heretics, or
His ministers and His servants, but whether they are to be regarded as
throughout all it is God alone who can gravely suspect of holding heretical
opinions. It seems that the first opinion
* “Blessed Albertus." Albert the Great, the
is the correct one. For this is un¬
Dominican doctor, scientist, philosopher, and
doubtedly in accordance with the
theologian. Born circa 1206; died at Cologne,
opinion of the learned Bernard. And
/5 November, 1280. He is called “the Great"
yet those persons who openly and
and “Doctor Uniuersalis" on account of his
obstinately persevere in heresy must be
extraordinary genius and encyclopaedic know¬
proved to be heretics by unshaken
ledge, for he surpassed all his contemporaries in
every branch of learning cultivated in his day. evidence, and such demonstration is
He is certainly one of the glories of the Order of generally one of three kinds; either a
Preachers. Ulrich Endelbert speaks of him as: man has openly preached and pro¬
"Uir in omni scientia adeo diuinus, ut nostri claimed heretical doctrines; or he is
temporis stupor et miraculum congrue uocari proved to be a heretic by the evidence
possit” (“De summo bono," III, iv). Perhaps
of trustworthy witnesses; or he is
at the present day his extraordinary genius is not
proved to be a heretic by his own free
sufficiently recognized, for he was certainly one
confession. And yet there are some who
of the most learned men of all time. The latest
rashly opposing themselves to all
edition of his complete works, Paris (Louis
authority publicly proclaim that
Vives), 1890-99, in thirty-eight quarto volumes,
witches do not exist, or at any rate that
was published under the direction of the Abbe
they can in no way afflict and hurt
Auguste Borgnet, of the diocese of Reims. “De
mankind. Wherefore, strictly speaking
animalibus" will be found in Vols. XI-XII.
The feast of Albertus Magnus is celebrated on those who are convicted of such evil
/5 November. He was beatified by Gregory XV doctrine may according to the com¬
in 1622, so in this translation I call him mentary of Bernard be excommuni¬
“Blessed" by anticipation. cated, since they are openly and un-

Part I. Question i. MALEFICARUM 9
mistakably to be convicted of false Giovanni d’Andrea, f and in particular
doctrine. The reader may consult the to his glosses upon the phrases Accused;
works of Bernard, where he will find Gravely suspect; and his note upon a
that this sentence is just, right, and true. presumption of heresy. It is certain
Yet perhaps this may seem to be alto¬ too that some who lay down the law
gether too severe a judgement mainly on this subject do not realize that they
because of the penalties which follow are holding false doctrines and errors,
upon excommunication: for the Canon for there are many who have no know¬
prescribes that a cleric is to be degraded ledge of the Canon law, and there are
and that a layman is to be handed over some who, owing to the fact that they
to the power of the secular courts, who are badly informed and insufficiently
are admonished to punish him as his read, waver in their opinions and
offence deserves. Moreover, we must cannot make up their minds, and since
take into consideration the very great an idea merely kept to oneself is not
numbers of persons who, owing to their heresy unless it be afterwards put
ignorance, will surely be found guilty forward, obstinately and openly main¬
\ of this error. And since the error is very tained, it should certainly be said that
common the rigor of strict justice may persons such as we have just mentioned
be tempered with mercy. And it is are not to be openly condemned for
indeed our intention to try to make the crime of heresy. But let no man
excuses for those who are guilty of this think he may escape by pleading
heresy rather than to accuse them of ignorance. For those who have gone
being infected with the malice of astray through ignorance of this kind
heresy. It is preferable then that if a may be found to have sinned very
man should be even gravely suspected gravely. For although there are many
of holding this false opinion he should degrees of ignorance, nevertheless those
not be immediately condemned for who have the cure of souls cannot plead
the grave crime of heresy. (See the invincible ignorance, nor that par¬
gloss of Bernard* upon the word Con¬ ticular ignorance, as the philosophers
demned.) One may in truth proceed call it, which by the writers on Canon
against such a man as against a person law and by the Theologians is called
who is gravely suspect, but he is not to Ignorance of the Fact. But what is to
be condemned in his absence and with¬ be blamed in these persons is Universal
out a hearing. And yet the suspicion ignorance, that is to say, an ignorance
may be very grave, and we cannot of the divine law, which, as Pope
refrain from suspecting these people, Nicholas^ has laid down, they must and
for their frivolous assertions do cer¬ should know. For he says: The dis¬
tainly seem to affect the purity of the pensation of these divine teachings is
faith. For there are three kinds of entrusted to our charge: and woe be
suspicion—a light suspicion, a serious unto us if we do not sow the good seed,
suspicion, and a grave suspicion. These woe be unto us if we do not teach our
are treated of in the chapter on Accusa¬ flocks. And so those who have the
tions and in the chapter on Contumacy, charge of souls are bound to have a
Book 6, On Heretics. And these things sound knowledge of the Sacred Scripcome under the cognizance of the
archidiaconal court. Reference may
| “Giovanni d’Andrea." This distinguished
also be made to the commentaries of
canonist was born at Mugello, near Florence,
about 1275; died 1348. He was educated at the
* “Bernard." Junior, or Modernus, a canon¬
University of Bologna,, where he afterwards
ist who lived in the middle of the thirteenth cen¬
became Professor of Canon law. He had
tury,-called “ Compos tellanus' ’ from the fact that previously taught at Padua and Pisa, and his
he possessed an ecclesiastical benefice in Compocareer as a lecturer extended for nearly half a
stella. He was also known as Brignadius from
century. His works are “Glossarium in VI
his birthplace in Galicia, Spain. Bernard was
decretalium librum," Venice and Lyons, 1472;
chaplain to Innocent IV, who reigned 1243—54,
“Glossarium in Clementinas"; “Nouella, siue
and was himself a noted canonist. Bernard's
Commentarius in decretales epistolas Gregarii
Commentaries on Canon law are very copious and
IX," Venice, 1581; “Mercuriales, siue com¬
very celebrated. He is termed Modernus to dis¬
mentarius in regulas sexti"; “Liber de laudibus
tinguish him from Bernard Antiquus, a canonist
S. Hieronymi"; “Additamenta ad speculum
of the early thirteenth century, a native of Durand" (1347).
Compostella, who became Professor of Canon
+ “Pope Nicholas." Nicholas V, 1397-1455,
law in the University of Bologna, the great patron of learning.

MALLEUS I.
IO Part Question i.
tures. It is true that according to in the Romans (ii, 4): Knowest thou
Raymond of Sabunde* and S. Thomas, not, that the benignity of God leadeth
those who have the cure of souls are thee to penance? says, If thou dost not
certainly not bound to be men of any know through thine own fault then thy
extraordinary learning, but they cer¬ sin is very great and grievous. More
tainly should have a competent know¬ especially then in these days, when souls
ledge, that is to say, knowledge sufficient are beset with so many dangers, we
to carry out the duties of their state. must take measures to dispel all ignor¬
And yet, and this may be some small ance, and we must always have before
consolation to them, the theoretical our eyes that severe judgement which
severity of the law is often balanced by will be passed upon us if we do not
the actual practice, and they may know use, everyone according to his proper
that this ignorance of the Canon law, ability, the one talent which has been
although sometimes it may be culpable given. In this way our ignorance will
and worthy of blame, is considered from be neither thick nor stupid, for meta¬
two points of view. For sometimes phorically we speak of men as thick and
persons do not know, they do not wish stupid who do not see what lies directly
to know, and they have no intention of in their very way.
knowing. For such persons there is no And in the Flores regularum moralium
excuse, but they are altogether to be the Roman Chancellor commenting
condemned. And of these the Psalmist upon the second rule says: A culpable
speaks: He would not understand in ignorance of the Divine law does not
order that he might do good. But of necessity affect the ignorant person.
secondly, there are those who are The reason is this: the Holy Spirit is
ignorant, yet not from any desire not able directly to instruct a man in all
to know. And this diminishes the that knowledge essential to salvation,
gravity of the sin, because there is no if these things are too difficult for him
actual consent of the will. And such a to grasp unaided by his own natural
case is this, when anyone ought to intellect.
know something, but cannot realize The answer to the first objection then
that he ought to know it, as S. Paul is a clear and correct understanding of
says in his ist Epistle to Timothy (i, 13): the Canon. To the second objection
But I obtained the mercy of God, Peter of Tarentaise (Blessed Innocent
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. VJ) replies: No doubt the devil, owing
And this is technically said to be an to his malice which he harbours against
ignorance, which indirectly at least is the human race, would destroy man¬
the fault of the person, insomuch as on kind if he were allowed by God to do
account of many other occupations he so. The fact that God allows him some¬
neglects to inform himself of matters times to do harm and that sometimes
which he ought to know, and he does God hinders and prevents him, mani¬
not use any endeavour ta make himself festly brings the devil into more open
acquainted with them, and this ignor¬ contempt and loathing, since in all
ance does not entirely excuse him, but
it excuses him to a certain degree. So
elusion de VEpitre aux Hibreux), qui au moyenS. Ambrose,! writing upon that passage
age, peut-etre meme des Vepoque de Cassiodore,
fut impute inexactement a saint Ambroise.
* “Raymond of Sabunde.” Born at Bar¬ Cette paraphrase est tout a fait remarquable;
celona, Spain, towards the end of the fourteenth Pest rune des plus intiressantes que Vantiquite
century; died 1432. From 1430 to his death he chretienne nous ait legumes.” Labriolle, “Histaught theology, philosophy, and medicine at the toire de la Litterature Latine ChrUiennej c. III.
University of Toulouse. Of his many works only { “Innocent V.” Petrus a Tarentasia, born
one remains, “Theologia Naturalis.” It was in Tarentaise, towards 1223, elected at Arezzo,
first written in Spanish, and translated into Latin 21 January, 1276; died at Rome, 22 June, 1276.
at various times: Deventer, 1487; Strasburg, At the age of sixteen he joined the Dominican
1436; Paris, 1503; Venice, 1381, etc. Montaigne, Order, and he won great distinction as a Pro¬
who translated the book into French, Paris, 1363, fessor at the University of Paris, whence he is
bears witness to the extraordinary popularity it known as Doctor Famosissimus. He is the
enjoyed in his own day. author of several works dealing with philosophy,
I “S. Ambrose.” “On disigne depuis le theology, and Canon law, some of which are still
XVIe siecle sous le nom d'Ambrosiaster (= unpublished. The principal of these is the “ Compseudo-Ambroise) Vauteur anonyme d'un com¬ mentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard.” I
mentate sur les Epitres de saint Paul {a lex- have used the edition, Toulouse .1632.

Part I. Question i. MALEFICARUM ii
things, to the manifestation of His influence of certain stars. It appears
glory, God is using the devil, unwilling that they do this for two reasons. First,
though he be, as a servant and slave. Because they know that the power of
With regard to the third objection, that planet will aid the effect which
that the infliction of sickness or some the magicians desire. Secondly, They do
other harm is always the result of this in order to deceive men, thus mak¬
human effort, whereby the witch sub¬ ing them suppose that the stars have
mits her will to evil, and so actually some divine power or actual divinity,
as any other evil-doer, by the volition and we know that in days of old this j
of her will can afflict some person or veneration of the stars led to the vilest {
bring about some damage or perform idolatry.
some villainous act. If it be asked
whether the movement of material With reference to the last objection,
objects from place to place by the devil which is founded upon the argument
may be paralleled by the movement of that gold is made by alchemists, we
the spheres, the answer is No. Because may put forward the opinion of S.
material objects are not thus moved by Thomas when he discusses the power
any natural inherent power of their of the devil and "how he works: Al¬
own, but they are only moved by a though certain forms having a sub¬
certain obedience to the power of the stance may be brought about by art
devil, who by the virtue of his own and the power of a natural agent, as,
nature has a certain dominion over for example, the form of fire is brought
bodies and material things; he has this about by art employed on wood :
certain power, I affirm, yet he is not nevertheless, this cannot be done uni¬
able to add to created material objects versally, because art cannot always
any form or shape, be it substantial or either find or yet mix together the
accidental, without some admixture proper agents in the proper propor¬
of or compounding with another created tions, and yet it can produce something
natural object. But since, by the will of similar. And thus alchemists make
God, he is able actually to move material something similar to gold, that is to say,
objects from place to place then by the in so far as the external accidents are
conjunction of various objects he can concerned, but nevertheless they do not
produce disease or some circumstance make true gold, because the substance
such as he will. Wherefore the spells of gold is not formed by the heat of fire
and effects of witchcraft are not which alchemists employ, but by the
governed by the movement of the heat of the sun, acting and reacting
spheres, nor is the devil himself thus upon a certain spot where mineral
governed, inasmuch as he may often power is concentrated and amassed,
make use of these conditions to do him and therefore such gold is of the same
service. likeness as, but is not of the same
species as, natural gold. And the same
The answer to the fourth objection. argument applies to all their other
The work of God can be destroyed by operations.
the work of the devil in accordance
with what we are now saying with This then is our proposition: devils' ?
reference to the power and effects of by their art do bring about evil effects
witchcraft. But since this can only be through witchcraft, yet it is true that
by the permission of God, it does not at without the assistance of some agent
all follow that the devil is stronger than they cannot make any form, either
God. Again, he cannot use so much substantial or accidental, and we do not j
violence as he wishes to harm the works maintain that they can inflict damage !
of God, because if he were unrestricted without the assistance of some agent, but
he would utterly destroy all the works with such an agent diseases, and any
of God. other human passions or ailments, can
The answer to the fifth objection may be brought about, and these are real
be clearly stated thus: The planets and true. How these agents or how the
and stars have no power to coerce and employment of such means can be
compel devils to perform any actions rendered effective in co-operation with 1
against their will, although seemingly devils will be made clear in the follow- J |
demons are readier to appear when ing chapters. }
summoned by magicians under the
☆

12 MALLEUS Part I. Question 2.
by the fact that nobody performs an
QUESTION II
unjust action merely for the sake of
I
doing an unjust action, and a man who
F it be in accordance with the
commits a rape does this for the sake of
Catholic Faith to maintain that in
pleasure, not merely doing evil for evil’s
order to bring about some effect of
sake. Yet the law punishes those who
magic, the devil must intimately co¬
have done evil as if they had acted
operate with the witch, or whether one
merely for the sake of doing evil.
without the other, that is to say, the
Therefore if the devil works by means
devil without the witch, or conversely,
of a witch he is merely employing an
could produce such an effect.
instrument; and since an instrument
And the first argument is this: That
depends upon the will of the person who
the devil can bring about an effect of
employs it and does not act of its own
magic without the co-operation of
free will, therefore the guilt of the action
any witch. So S. Augustine holds. All
ought not to be laid to the charge of the
things which visibly happen so that they
witch, and in consequence she should
can be seen, may (it is believed) be the
not be punished.
work of the inferior powers of the air.
But bodily ills and ailments are cer¬
But an opposite opinion holds that
tainly not invisible, nay rather, they are
the devil cannot so easily and readily
evident to the senses, therefore they can
do harm by himself to mankind, as he
be brought about by devils. Moreover,
can harm them through the instru¬
we learn from the Holy Scriptures of
mentality of witches, although they are
the disasters which fell upon Job, how
his servants. In the first place we may
fire fell from heaven and striking the
consider the act of generation. But for
sheep and the servants consumed them,
every act which has an effect upon
and how a violent wind threw down the
another some kind of contact must be
four corners of a house so that it fell
established, and because the devil, who
upon his children and slew them all.
is a spirit, can have no such actual con¬
The devil by himself without the co¬
tact with a human body, since there is
operation of any witches, but merely by
nothing common of this kind between
God’s permission alone, was able to
them, therefore he uses some human
bring about all these disasters. Therefore
instruments, and upon these he bestows
he can certainly do many things which
the power of hurting by bodily touch.
are often ascribed to the work of witches.
And many hold this to be proven by the
And this is obvious from the account
text, and the gloss upon the text, in the
of the seven husbands of the maiden
3rd chapter of S. Paul’s Epistle to the
Sara, whom a devil killed. Moreover,
Galatians: f O senseless Galatians, who
whatever a superior power is able to do,
hath bewitched you that you should
it is able to do without reference to a
not obey the truth? And the gloss upon
power superior to it, and a superior
this passage refers to those who have
power can all the more work without
singularly fiery and baleful eyes, who
reference to an inferior power. But an
by a mere look can harm others, espe¬
inferior power can cause hailstorms and
cially young children. And AvicennaJ
bring about diseases without the help of
a power greater than itself. For Blessed
Albertus Magnus in his work De pas- f “Galatians.” Hi, i. The original Greek is
j sionibus aeris * says that rotten sage, if TQ <£v67)toi TaXarai, t£<; u|xa<; e@acncavev Tfl
aX7)0ei<? (XT) 7TC'.0ea0aa; Curtius doubts the etymo¬
used as he explains, and thrown into
logical connexion between paoxcdvar and Latin
running water, will arouse most fearful
‘fascino” as from a root <X>A£. In classical
tempests and storms.
times the charm was dissolved by spitting thrice.
Moreover, it may be said that the
Cf. Theocritus, VI, jg: {xrj paaxavQco 8£,
devil makes use of a witch, not because
rplq eiq !(xov eTCxuaa x6X7rov.
he has need of any such agent, but
X “Avicenna." Abn Ali Al Hosian Ibn
because he is seeking the perdition of Addallah Ibn Sina, Arabian physician and
the witch. We may refer to what Aris¬ philosopher, born at Kharmaithen, in the
totle says in the 3rd book of his Ethics. province of Bokhara, g8o; died at Hamadan, in
Evil is a voluntary act which is proved Northern Persia, 1037. It should be noted that
the Schoolmen were aware of the pantheistic
* ‘ "De passionibus.5 ’ This treatise on physical tendencies of Avicenna'sphilosophical works, and
science may be found in Vol. IX. of Abbe Borg- accordingly were reluctant to trust to his
net's edition of the “Opera omnia." exposition of Aristotle.

Part I. Question 2. MALEFICARUM
13
also bears this out, Naturalium, Book 3,
can produce wonderful effects, and so
c. the last, when he says: “Very often a living man if he pass by near the
the soul may have as much influence corpse of a murdered man, although he
upon the body of another to the same
may not be aware of the dead body, is
extent as it has upon its own body, for often seized with fear.
such is the influence of the eyes of any¬
Again, there are some things in nature
one who by his glance attracts and fas¬ which have certain hidden powers, the
cinates another.” And the same opinion
reason for which man does not know;
is maintained by Al-Gazali* in the 5th such, for example, is the lodestone,
book and 10th c. of his Physics. Avi¬ which attracts steel and many other
cenna also suggests, although he does such things, which S. Augustine men¬
not put this opinion forward as irrefut¬ tions in the 20th book Of the City of
able, that the power of the imagination God.
can actually change or seem to change
extraneous bodies, in cases where the And so women in order to bring
power of the imagination is too unre¬ about changes in fhe bodies of others
strained ; and hence we gather that the sometimes make use of certain things,
power of the imagination is not to be which exceed our knowledge, but this
considered as distinct from a man’s is without any aid from the devil. And
other sensible powers, since it is com¬ because these remedies are mysterious
mon to them all, but to some extent it we must not therefore ascribe them to
includes all those other powers. And the power of the devil as we should
this is true, because such a power of ascribe evil spells wrought by witches.
th6 imagination can change adjacent Moreover, witches use certain images
bodies, as, for example, when a man and other strange periapts, which they
is able to walk along some narrow beam are wont to place under the lintels of
which is stretched down the middle of the doors of houses, or in those meadows
a street. But yet if this beam were sus¬ where flocks are herding, or even where
pended over deep water he would not men congregate, and thus they cast
dare to walk along it, because his spells over their victims, who have oftimagination would most strongly im¬ times been known to die. But because
press upon his mind the idea of falling, such extraordinary effects can proceed
and therefore his body and the power from these images it would appear that
of his limbs would obey his imagination, the influence of these images is in pro¬
and they would not obey the contrary portion to the influence of the stars over
thereto, that is to say, walking directly human bodies, for as natural bodies
and without hesitation. This change are influenced by heavenly bodies, so
may be compared to the influence exer¬ may artificial bodies likewise be thus
cised by the eyes of a person who has influenced. But natural bodies may find
such influence, and so a mental change the benefit of certain secret but good
is brought about although there is not influences. Therefore artificial bodies
any actual and bodily change.
may receive such influence. Hence it is '
Moreover, if it be argued that such a plain that those who perform works of
change is caused by a living body owing healing may well perform them by
to the influence of the mind upon some means of such good influences, and this
other living body, this answer may be has no connexion at all with any evil
given. In the presence of a murderer power.
blood flows from the wounds in the
corpse of the person he has slain. There¬ Moreover, it would seem that most
fore without any mental powers bodies extraordinary and miraculous events
come to pass by the working of the
* “Al-Gazali.” Abu Hamid Mohammed
powers of nature. For wonderful and
Ibn Mohammed, the celebrated Arabian philoso¬
terrible and amazing things happen
pher, born at Tous in Khorasan in 1038; died at
owing to natural forces. And this S.
Nissapour in mi. He passed through complete
scepticism to the mysticism of the Sufis. It is Gregory points out in his Second Dia¬
often said that Blessed Albertus Magnus wrote logue.f The Saints perform miracles,
thus: “Non approbo dictum Auicennae et Algazel
de fascinatione, quia credo quod non nocet t “Second Dialogue.” The “Dialogorum
fascinatio, nec nocere potest ars magica, nec facit
Libri IV” is one of the most famous of S.
aliquid ex his quae timentur de talibus.** But
Gregory's works, and very many separate
this passage is more than suspicious.
editions have appeared.

MALLEUS Part I. Question 2.
J4
sometimes by a prayer, sometimes by book on The City of God are very much
to the point, for he tells us who magi¬
their power alone. There are examples
cians and witches really are. Magi¬
of each: S. Peter by praying raised to
lifeTabitha, who was dead.* By rebuk¬ cians, who are commonly called witches,
^are thus termed on account of the mag¬
ing Ananias and Sapphira, who were
nitude of their evil deeds. These are
telling a lie, he slew them without any
they who by the permission of God
prayer. Therefore a man by his mental
disturb the elements, who drive to dis¬
influence can change a material body
traction the minds of men, such as have
into another, or he can change such a
lost their trust in God, and by the ter¬
body from health to sickness and con¬
rible power of their evil spells, without
versely.
any actual draught or poison, kill
Moreover, the human body is nobler
human beings. As Lucan says: A
than any other body, but because of the
mind which has not been corrupted by
passions of the mind the human body
any noxious drink perishes forspoken
changes and becomes hot or cold, as is
by some evil charm. For having sum¬
the case with angry men or men who
moned devils to their aid they actually
are afraid: and so an even greater
dare to heap harms upon mankind, ancj
change takes place with regard to the
even to destroy their enemies by their^ 1
effects of sickness and death, which by
their power can greatly change a evil spells. And it is certain that
operations of this kind the witch works !
material body.
But certain objections must be al¬ in close conjunction with the devil f
Secondly, punishments are of four kinds:
lowed. The influence of the mind can¬
not make an impression upon any form beneficial, hurtful, wrought by witch¬
except by the intervention of some craft, and natural. Beneficial punish¬
agent, as we have said above. And ments are meted out by the ministry of
these are the words of S. Augustine in good Angels, just as hurtful punish¬
the book which we have already quoted: ments proceed from evil spirits. Moses
It is incredible that the angels who smote Egypt with ten plagues by the
fell from Heaven should be obedient to ministry of good Angels, and the magi¬
any material things, for they obey God cians were only able to perform three
only. And much less can a man of his of these miracles by the aid of the devil.
natural power bring about extraordin¬ And the pestilence which fell upon the
ary and evil effects. The answer must people for three days because of the sin
be made, there are even to-day many of David who numbered the people,
who err greatly on this point, making and the 72,000 men who were slain in
excuses for witches and laying the whole one night in the army of Sennacherib,
blame upon the craft of the devil, or were miracles wrought by the Angels
ascribing the changes that they work of God, that is, by good Angels who
to some natural alteration. These errors feared God and knew that they were
may be easily made clear. First, by carrying out His commands.
the description of witches which S. Destructive harm, however, is
Isidore gives in his Etymologiae, c. 9: wrought by the medium of bad angels,
Witches are so called on account of at whose hands the children of Israel
the blackness of their guilt, that is to in the desert were often afflicted. And
say, their deeds are more evil than those those harms which are simply evil and
of any other malefactors. He con¬ nothing more are brought about by
tinues : They stir up and confound the the devil, who works through the
elements by the aid of the devil, and medium of sorcerers and witches. There
arouse terrible hailstorms and tem¬ are also natural harms which in some
pests. Moreover, he says they distract manner depend upon the conjunction
the minds of men, driving them to of heavenly bodies, such as dearth,
madness, insane hatred, and inordinate drought, tempests, and similar effects
lusts. Again, he continues, by the ter¬ of nature.
rible influence of their spells alone, as
it were by a draught of poison, they can It is obvious that there is a vast differ¬
destroy life. ence between all these causes, circum¬
And the words of S. Augustine in his stances, and happenings. For Job was
afflicted by the devil with a harmful
disease, but this is nothing to the pur¬
* “S. Peter"Acts of the Apostles,” ix,
36-42; and Vy 1-11. pose. And if anybody who is too clever

I. MALEFICARUM
Part Question 2.
*5
and over-curious asks how it was that And according to S. Augustine in his
Job was afflicted with this disease by book Of the City of God, Cham laughed
the devil without the aid of some sor¬ aloud when he was bom, and thus
cerer or witch, let him know that he is showed that he was a servant of the
merely beating the air and not inform¬ devil, and he, although he was a great
ing himself as to the real truth. For in and mighty king, was conquered by
\ the time of Job there were no sorcerers Ninus the son of Belus, who built
» and witches, and such abominations Ninive, whose reign was the beginning
were not yet practised. But the provi¬ of the kingdom of Assyria in the time
dence of God wished that by the ex¬ of Abraham.
ample of Job the power of the devil
This Ninus, owing to his insane love
even over good men might be mani¬ for his father, when his father was dead,
fested, so that we might learn to be on ordered a statue of his father to be
our guard against Satan, and, more¬
made, and whatever criminal took
over, by the example of this holy
refuge there was free from any punish¬
patriarch the glory of God shines abroad,
ment which he might have incurred.
since nothing happens save what is From this time men began to worship
permitted by God.
images as though they were gods; but
this was after the earliest years of his¬
With regard to the time at which this tory, for in the very first ages there was
evil superstition, witchcraft, appeared,
no idolatry, since in the earliest times
we must first distinguish the worshippers
men still preserved some remembrance
of the devil from those who were merely
of the creation of the world, as S.
idolaters. And Vincent of Beauvais* in
Thomas says, Book 2, question 95,
his Speculum historiale, quoting many article 4. Or it may have originated
learned authorities, says that he who
first practised the arts of magic and of
pauerunt; caelestia suspicere, atque adorare
astrology was Zoroaster, f who is said
coeperunt.”
to have been Cham! the son of Noe.
“Realite de la Magie et des Apparitions,”
Paris, 1819 (pp. xii-xiii), has: “Le monde,
* “Vincent” Little is known of the personal purgt par le deluge, f ut repeuple par les trois fis
history of this celebrated encyclopaedist. The
de Noe. Sem et Japhet imiterent la ver tu de leur
years of his birth and death are uncertain, but the pere, et furent justes comme lui. Cham, au
dates most frequently assigned are 1190 and 1264 contraire, donna entrSe au dimon dans son coeur,
respectively. It is thought that he joined the remit au jour Vart exkrable de la magie, en
Dominicans in Paris shortly after 1218, and that composa les regies, et en instruisit son fils
he passed practically his whole life in his Misraim.
monastery at Beauvais, where he occupied himself “Cent trente ans apres le deluge, Sem habitait
incessantly upon his enormous work, the general la Perse. Ses enfans pratiquaient la religion
title of which is “Speculum Maius,” containing
naturelle, que Dieu mit dans le coeur du premier
80 books, divided into 9885 chapters. The third homme; et leurs vieillards se nommaient mages,
party “Speculum Historiale,” in 91 books and qui veut dire “sages” en notre langue. Dans la
3793 chapters, brings the History of the World suite, les descendant de Cham se partagerent, et
down to a.d. 1250.
quelques-uns passerent en Perse; Cham, qui
f “ /fro aster.” Pliny, “Historia Naturalis,”
vivait encore, etait a leur te te. II opera tant de
XXX, ii, says of magic: “Sine dubio illic orta in
prodiges par ses charmes et ses enchantements,
Perside a Zoroastre, ut inter auctores conuenit.
que les Bactriens lui donnerent le nom de
Sed unus hic fuerit, an postea et alius, non satis
Zoroastre, c’est-d-dire, ‘astre vivantet trans¬
constat.” Apuleius, “De Magia,” XXVI,
porter ent d ceux de sa secte le nom honor¬
mentions fproaster and Oromazus as the in¬
able de “mages,” que les adorateurs du vrai
ventors of sorcery. “Audistisne magiam . . .
Dieu abandonnerent, des qu’ils le virent ainsi
artem esse dis immortalibus acceptam.. .a
profane: et Vest de la que nous est venu le
Zoroastro et Oromazo auctoribus suis nobilem,
nom de ‘magie? pour signifer le culte du
caelitum antistitam?” demon.
+ “Cham.” “A. V.” Ham. Lenglet du Fres-
“Cham, ou Zoiroastre,fut encore Vinventeur de
noy in his “History of the Hermetic Philosophy”
Vastrologie judiciaire; il regarda les astres comme
repeats an old tradition: “Most alchemists pre¬
autant de divinitis, et persuada aux hommes que
tended that Cham, or Chem, the son of Noe, was
tout leur destin dependait de leurs bonnes ou
an adept in the art, and thought it highly probable
mauvaises influences. Ainsi Von commenga d
that the words ‘Chemistry’ and ‘Alchemy’ are
leur rendre un culte religieux, qui fut Vorigine de
both derived from his name.” Lactantius, “De
Vidoldtrie. La Chaldie fut le premier thMtre de
Origine Erroris,” II, says of the descendants of
ces igaremens; et alors, ‘Chaldeen, astrologue et
Cham: “Omnium primi qui Aegyptum occumagicien’ etaient trois mots synonymes.”

MALLEUS I.
i6 Part Question 2.
with Nembroth,* who compelled men devil. And any objections to this may
to worship fire; and thus in the second briefly be answered thus.
age of the world there began Idolatry,
which is the first of all superstitions, as 1. In the first place, nobody denies
Divination is the second, and the Ob¬ that certain harms and damages which
serving of Times and Seasons the third. actually and visibly afflict men, animals,
The practices of witches are included the fruits of the earth, and which often
in the second kind of superstition, which come about by the influence of the stars,
is to say Divination, since they expressly may yet often be brought about by
invoke the devil. And there are three demons, when God permits them so to
kinds of this superstition:—Necromancy, act. For as S. Augustine says in the 4th
Astrology, or rather Astromancy, the book Of the City of God: Demons may
superstitious observation of the stars, make use of both fire and air if God
and Oneiromancy. allow them so to do. And a commen¬
I have explained all this at length tator remarks: God punishes by the
that the reader may understand that power of evil angels.
these evil arts did not suddenly burst 2. From this obviously follows the
upon the world, but rather were devel¬ answer to any objection concerning
oped in the process of time, and there¬ Job, and to any objections which may
fore it was not impertinent to point out be raised to our account of the begin¬
that there were no witches in the days nings of magic in the world.
of Job. For as the years went by, as 3. With regard to the fact that rotten
S. Gregory says in his Moralia, the sage which is thrown into running
knowledge of the Saints grew: and water is said to produce some evil effect
therefore the evil craft of the devil like¬ without the help of the devil, although
wise increased. The prophet Isaias says: it may not be wholly disconnected with
The earth is filled with the knowledge the influence of certain stars, we would
of the Lord (xi, 6). And so in this point out that we do not intend to
twilight and evening of the world, when discuss the good or evil influence of the
sin is flourishing on every side and in stars, but only witchcraft, and therefore
every place, when charity is growing this is beside the point.
cold, the evil of witches and their 4. With regard to the fourth argu¬
iniquities superabound. ment, it is certainly true that the devil
And since Zoroaster was wholly given only employs witches to bring about
up to the magic arts, it was the devil their bale and destruction. But when
alone who inspired him to study and it is deduced that they are not to be
observe the stars. Very early did sor¬ punished, because they only act as in¬
cerers and witches make compacts with struments which are moved not by their
the devil and connive with him to bring own volition but at the will and
harm upon human beings. This is pleasure of the principal and agent,
proved in the seventh chapter of there is a ready answer: For they are
Exodus, where the magicians of Pharao human instruments and free agents, and
by the power of the devil wrought although they have made a compact \
extraordinary wonders, imitating those and a contract with the devil, neverthe¬
plagues which Moses had brought upon less they do enjoy absolute liberty: for,
Egypt by the power of good angels. as has been learnt from their own reve- \
Hence follows the Catholic teaching, lations—and I speak of women who
that in order to bring about evil a have been convicted and burned at the
witch can and does co-operate with the stake and who were compelled to wreak
vengeance and evil and damage if they
* “Nembroth” S. Augustine, “De Ciuitate wished to escape punishments and
Dei ,” XVI, 3, quotes: “Chus autem genuit
blows inflicted by the devil—yet these
Nebroth; hic coepit esse gigans super terram. Hic
women do co-operate with the devil
erat gigans uenator contra Dominum Deum.”
although they are bound to him by
Nebroth is the English Nimrod, who was con¬
that profession by which at first they
sidered a past master of magic, and even by later
freely and willingly gave themselves
ages a demon. So we have: “Nembroth. Un
over into his power.
des esprits que les magiciens consultent. Le
mardi lui est consacri, et on Vivoque cejour-ld: il
With regard to these other arguments,
fautfpour le renvoyer, luijeter- une pierre; ce qui
est facile ” Collin de Plancy (“Dictionnaire in which it is proved that certain old
Infernal,” sixieme Edition, i86f). women have an occult knowledge which

Part I. Question 2. MALEFICARUM 17
enables them to bring about extra¬ looks through their eyes, for their coun¬
ordinary and indeed evil effects without tenances are most evil and harmful, and
the aid of the devil. It must be under¬ often terrify young children of tender!
stood that from one particular to con¬ years, who are extremely impression-;
clude a universal argument is contrary able. And it may be that this is often
to all sound reason. And when, as it natural, permitted by God; on the
seems, throughout the whole of the other hand, it may be that these evil
Scriptures no such instance can be looks are often inspired by the malice
found, save where it speaks of the of the devil, with whom old witches
charms and spells old women practise, have made some secret contract.
therefore we must not hence conclude The next question arises with regard
that this is always the case. Moreover, to the influence of the heavenly bodies,
the authorities on these passages leave and here we find three very common
the matter open to question, that is to errors, but these will be answered as we
say, whether such charms have any proceed to explain other matters.
efficacy without the co-operation of the
devil. These charms or fascinations With regard to operations of witch¬
seem capable of division into three craft, we find that some of these may
kinds. First, the senses are deluded, be due to mental influence over others,
and this may truly be done by magic, and in some cases such mental influence
that is to say, by the power of the devil, might be a good one, but it is the
if God permit it. And the senses may motive which makes it evil.
be enlightened by the power of good And there are four principal argu¬
angels. Secondly, fascination may bring ments which are to be objected against
about a certain glamour and a leading those who deny that there are witches,
astray, as when the apostle says: Who or magical operations, which may be
hath bewitched you? Galatians iii, 1. performed at the conjunction of certain
I In the third place, there may be a cer¬ planets and stars, and that by the malice
tain fascination cast by the eyes* over of human beings harm may be wrought
another person, and this may be harm¬ through fashioning images, through the
ful and bad. use of spells, and by the writing of
And it is of this fascination that mysterious characters. All theologians
Avicenna and Al-Gazali have spoken; and philosophers agree that the heav¬
S. Thomas too thus mentions this fas¬ enly bodies are guided and directed by
cination, Part 1, question 117. For he certain spiritual mediums. But those
says the mind of a man may be changed spirits are superior to our minds and
by the influence of another mind. And souls, just as the heavenly bodies are
that influence which is exerted over superior to other bodies, and therefore
another often proceeds from the eyes, they can influence both the mind and
for in the eyes a certain subtle influence body of a man, so that he is persuaded
may be concentrated. For the eyes and directed to perform some human
direct their glance upon a certain ob¬ act. But in order yet more fully to
ject without taking notice of other attempt a solution of these matters, we
things, and although the vision be per¬ may consider certain difficulties from a
fectly clear, yet at the sight of some discussion of which we shall yet more
impurity, such as, for example, a clearly arrive at the truth. First, spirit-j
woman during her monthly periods, the ual substances cannot change bodies to]
eyes will as it were contract a certain some other natural form unless it be
impurity. This is what Aristotle says in through the mediumship of some agent.
his work On Sleep and Waking, f and thus Therefore, however strong a mental
if anybody’s spirit be inflamed with influence may be, it cannot effect any
malice or rage, as is often the case with change in a man’s mind or disposition.
old women, then their disturbed spirit Moreover, several universities, especially
that of Paris, have condemned the fol¬
lowing article:—That an enchanter is
* “Cast by the eyes.” In Ireland it was sup¬
able to cast a camel into a deep ditch
posed that certain witches could cast a spell at a
merely by directing his gaze upon it.
glance, and they were commonly called “'eyebiting witches.” And so this article is condemned, that
t “On Sleeps This is one of the smaller a corporeal body should obey some
treatises connected with Aristotle's great work spiritual substance if this be understood
“On the Soul," rcepi simply, that is to say, if the obedience

i8 MALLEUS
Part I. Question 2.
entails some actual change or trans¬ suffering from his eyes may cause the
formation. For in regard to this it is eyes of those who gaze upon him to
God alone Who is absolutely obeyed. dazzle and feel weak, although to a
Bearing these points in mind we may large extent this is nothing else but the
soon see how that fascination, or in¬ effect of pure imagination. Several
fluence of the eyes of which we have other examples of the same sort might
spoken, is possible, and in what respects be discussed here, but for the sake of
it is not possible. For it is not possible conciseness we will not discuss them in
that a man through the natural powers any further detail.
of his mind should direct such pov/er All this is borne out by the commen¬
from his eyes that, without the agency tators upon the Psalm, Qui timent te
of his own body or of some other uidebunt me. * There is a great power
medium, he should be able to do harm in the eyes, and this appears even in
to the body of another man. Nor is it natural things. For if a wolf see a man
possible that a man through the natural first, the man is struck dumb. More¬
owers of his mind should at his will over, if a basilisk see a man first its look
ring about some change, and by is fatal; but if he see it first he may be <
directing this power through the able to kill it; and the reason why the
mediumship of his eyes entirely trans¬ basilisk is able to kill a man by its gaze
form the body, of a man, upon whom is because when it sees him, owing to
he fixes his gaze, just as his will and its anger a certain terrible poison is set
pleasure may be. in motion throughout its body, and this ^
And therefore in neither of these ways it can dart from its eyes, thus infecting
can one man influence and fascinate the atmosphere with deadly venom.
another, for no man by the natural And thus the man breathes in the air
powers of his mind alone possesses such which it has infected and is stupefied
an extraordinary influence. Therefore, and dies. But when the beast is first
to wish to prove that evil effects can be seen by the man, in a case when the
produced by some natural power is to man wishes to kill the basilisk, he fur¬
say that this natural power is the power nishes himself with mirrors, and the
of the devil, which is very far indeed beast seeing itself in the mirrors darts
from the truth. out poison towards its reflection, but !
* Nevertheless, we may more clearly the poison recoils and the animal dies.
set forth how it is possible for a careful It does not seem plain, however, why
gaze to do harm. It may so happen that the man who thus kills the basilisk
if a man or a woman gaze steadfastly at should not die too, and we can only
some child, the child, owing to its power conclude that this is on account of some
of sight and power of imagination, may reason not clearly understood.
receive some very sensible and direct So far we have set down our opinions
impression. And an impression of this absolutely without prejudice and re¬
kind is often accompanied by a bodily fraining from any hasty or rash judge¬
change, and since the eyes are one of ment, not deviating from the teachings
the tenderest organs of the body, there¬ and writings of the Saints. We con¬
fore they are very liable to such im¬ clude, therefore, that the Catholic truth
pressions. Therefore it may well hap¬ is this, that to bring about these evils
pen that the eyes receive some bad which form the subject of discussion,
impression and change for the worse, witches and the devil always work
since very often the thoughts of the together, and that in so far as these
mind or the motions of the body are matters are concerned one can do
particularly impressed upon and shown nothing without the aid and assistance
by the eyes. And so it may happen that of the other.
some angry and evil gaze, if it has been
steadfastly fixed and directed upon a We have already treated of this fas¬
child, may so impress itself upon that cination. And now with reference to the
child’s memory and imagination that it second point, namely, that blood will
may reflect itself in the gaze of the flow from a corpse in the presence of a
child, and actual results will follow, as, murderer. According to the Speculum
for example, he may lose his appetite naturale of Vincent of Beauvais, c. 13, the
and be unable to take food, he may
sicken and fall ill. And sometimes we
* “Qui timent.” Psalm li, 8: Uidebunt
see that the sight of a man who is iusti et timebunt.

MALEFICARUM
Part I. Question 2. 19
wound is, as it were, influenced by the lawful, as indeed is obvious enough, f
mind of the murderer, and that wound Or even let us conceive that if they
receives a certain atmosphere which has superstitiously employ natural things,
been impressed by and is permeated as, for example, by writing down cer¬
with his violence and hatred, and when tain characters or unknown names of
the murderer draws near, the blood some kind, and that then they use these
wells up and gushes forth from the runes for restoring a person to health,
corpse. For it would seem that this or for inducing friendship, or with some
atmosphere, which was caused and as it useful end, and not at all for doing any
were entered the wound owing to the damage or harm, in such cases, it may
murderer, at his presence is disturbed be granted, I say, that there is no ex¬
and greatly moved, and it is owing to press invocation of demons; neverthe¬
this movement that the blood streams less it cannot be that these spells are
out of the dead body. There are some employed without a tacit invocation,
who declare that it is due to some other wherefore all such charms must be
causes, and they say that this gushing judged to be wholly unlawful.
forth of the blood is the voice of the And because these and many other
blood crying from the earth against the charms like to them may be placed in
murderer who is present, and that this the third category of superstition, that
is on account of the curse pronounced is to say, idle and vain observing of
against the first murderer Cain. And times and seasons, this is by no means
with regard to that horror which a a relevant argument as to the heresy of
person feels when he is passing near the witches. But of this category, the ob¬
corpse of a man who has been mur¬ serving of times and seasons, there are
dered, although he may not be in any four distinct species: A man may use
way cognizant of the vicinity of a dead such observations to acquire certain
body, this horror is psychic, it infects knowledge: or he may in this way seek
the atmosphere and conveys a thrill of to inform himself concerning lucky or
fear to the mind. But all these explana¬ unlucky days and things: or he may use
tions, be it noted, do not in any way sacred words and prayers as a charm
affect the truth of the evil wrought by with no reference to their meaning: or
witches, since they are all perfectly he may intend and desire to bring about
natural and arise from natural causes. some beneficial change in some body.
In the third place, as we have already All this S. Thomas has amply treated
said above, the operations and rites of in that question where he asks, Whether
witches are placed in that second cate¬ such observing be lawful, especially if
gory of superstition which is called it be to bring about a beneficial change
Divination; and of this divination there in a body, that is to say, the restoration
are three kinds, but the argument does of persons to health. But when witches
not hold good with reference to the observe times and seasons, their prac¬
third kind, which belongs to a different tices must be held to belong to the
species, for witchcraft is not merely any second kind of superstition, and there¬
divination, but it is that divination, the fore, in so far as they are concerned,
operations of which are performed by questions concerning this third class are
express and explicit invocations of the wholly impertinent.
devil; and this may be done in very We now proceed to a fourth proposi¬
many ways, as by Necromancy, Geo- tion, inasmuch as from observations of
mancy, Hydromancy, etc. the kind we have discussed certain
Wherefore this divination, which is charts and images are wont to be made,
used when they are working their spells, but these are of two separate sorts,
must be judged to be the height of which differ entirely one from the other;
criminal wickedness, although some and these are Astronomical and Necro¬
have attempted to regard it from mantic. Now in Necromancy there is
another point of view. And they argue always an express and particular invo¬
thus, that as we do not know the hidden cation of demons, for this craft implies
powers of nature, it may be that the that there has been an express compact
witches are merely employing or seeking and contract with them. Let us there¬
to employ these hidden powers: assur¬ fore only consider Astrology. In Astro¬
edly if they are employing the natural logy there is no compact, and therefore
j
powers of natural things to bring about there is no invocation, unless by chance
a natural effect, this must be perfectly there be some kind of tacit invocation.

20 MALLEUS I.
Part Question 2.
since the figures of demons and their an act of the body, but separate, there¬
names sometimes appear in Astrological fore the emotion can be changed by the
charts. And again, Necromantic signs influence of the mind whensoever there
are written under the influence of cer¬ is some bodily change, heat or cold, or
tain stars in order to counteract the any alteration, even to death itself. But
influence and oppositions of other to change the actual body, no act of
heavenly bodies, and these are inscribed, the mind is sufficient by itself, unless
for signs and characters of this kind are there can be some physical result which
often engraved upon rings, gems, or alters the body. Whence witches, by
some other precious metal, but magic the exercise of no natural power, but
signs are engraved without any refer¬ only by the help of the devil, are able
ence to the influence of the stars, and to bring about harmful effects. And the
often upon any substance, nay, even devils themselves can only do this by
upon vile and sordid substances, which the use of material objects as their
when buried in certain places bring instruments, such as bones, hair, wood,
about damage and harm and disease. iron, and all sorts of objects of this kind,
But we are discussing charts which are concerning which operation we shall
made with reference to the stars. And treat more fully a little later.
these Necromantic charts and images Now with regard to the tenor of the
have no reference to any heavenly body. Bull of our Most Holy Father the Pope,
Therefore a consideration of them does we will discuss the origin of witches,
not enter into the present discussion. and how it is that of recent years their
Moreover, many of these images works have so multiplied among us.
which have been made with super¬ And it must be borne in mind that for
stitious rites have no efficacy at all, that this to take place, three things concur,
is to say, in so far as the fashioning of the devil, the witch, and the permission
them is concerned, although it may be of God who suffers such things to be.
that the material of which they are For S. Augustine says, that the abomi¬
made does possess a certain power, nation of witchcraft arose from this foul
although this is not due to the fact that connexion of mankind with the devil.
they were made under the influence of Therefore it is plain that the origin and
certain stars. Yet many hold that it is the increase of this heresy arises from
in any case unlawful to make use even this foul connexion, a fact which many
of images like these. But the images authors approve.
made by witches have no natural power We must especially observe that this
at all, nor has the material of which heresy,jyitcfficraft, not only differs from
they are formed any power; but they all other heresy in this, that not merely
fashion such images by command of the by a tacit compact, but by a compact
devil, that by so doing they may, as it which is exactly defined and expressed
were, mock the work of the Creator, it blasphemes the Creator and en¬
and that they may provoke Him to deavours to the utmost to profane Him
anger so that in punishment of their and to harm His creatures, for all other
misdeeds He may suffer plagues to fall simple heresies have made no open
upon the earth. And in order to in¬ compact with the devil, no compact,
crease their guilt they delight especially that is, either tacit or exactly expressed,
to fashion many such images at the
although their errors and misbelief are
more solemn seasons of the year.
directly to be attributed to the Father
With regard to the fifth point, S.
of errors and lies. Moreover, witchcraft
Gregory is there speaking of the power differs from all other harmful and mys¬
of grace and not of the power of nature. terious arts in this point, that of all
And since, as S. John says, we are born
superstition it is essentially the vilest,
of God, what wonder then that the sons
the most evil and the worst, wherefore
of God enjoy extraordinary powers.
it derives its name from doing evil, and
With regard to the last point we will from blaspheming the true faith. (Male¬
say this, that a mere likeness is irrele¬ ficae dictae a Maleficiendo, seu a male de
vant, because the influence of one’s own fide sentiendo.)
mind on one’s own body is different Let us especially note too that in the
from its influence upon another body.
practice of this abominable evil, four
For since the mind is united to the body
points in particular are required.
as though the body were the material
First, most profanely to renounce the
form of the mind, and the emotions are
Catholic Faith, or at any rate to deny

Part I. Question 3. MALEFICARUM 21
certain dogmas of the faith; secondly, tain extraordinary power when per¬
to devote themselves body and soul to formed under the influence of certain
all evil; thirdly, to offer up unbaptized stars. Thirdly, whether this abominable *
children to Satan; fourthly, to indulge heresy is not widely spread by those
in every kind of carnal lust with Incubi who profanely sacrifice children to
and Succubi and all manner of filthy Satan. Moreover, when we have dis¬
\ delights. cussed the second, point, before we pro¬
ceed to the third, we must consider the
Would to God that we might sup¬ influence of the stars, and what power \\
pose all this to be untrue and merely they have in acts of witchcraft.
Imaginary, if only our Holy Mother the With regard to the first question there
Church were free from the leprosy of are three difficulties which need eluci¬
such abomination. Alas, the judgement dation.
of the Apostolic See, who is alone the The first is a general consideration of J
Mistress and the Teacher of all truth, these demons, which are called Incubi.
that judgement, I say, which has been The second question is more particu¬
expressed in the Bull of our Holy Father lar, for we must inquire, How can these }
the Pope, assures us and makes us aware Incubi perform the human act of copu-1
that these crimes and evils flourish lation?
amongst us, and we dare not refrain The third question is also a special|
from inquiring into them lest we imperil one, How do witches bind themselves
our own salvation. And therefore we to and copulate with these devils?
must discuss at length the origin and
the increase of these abominations; it ☆
has been a work of much labour indeed,
but we trust that every detail will most QUESTION III
exactly and most carefully be weighed
Whether children can be generated by Incubi
by those who read this book, for herein
and Succubi.
will be found nothing contrary to sound A
reason, nothing which differs from the
T first it may truly seem that it is
words of Scripture and the tradition of
not in accordance with the Catho¬
the Fathers.
lic Faith to maintain that children can
Now there are two circumstances
be begotten by devils, that is to say, by
which are certainly very common at the
Incubi* and Succubi: for God Himself,
\ present day, that is to say, the con¬
before sin came into the world, insti¬
nexion of witches with familiars, Incubi
tuted human procreation, since He
and Succubi, and the horrible sacrifices
created woman from the rib of man to
of smalPcThldren. Therefore we shall
be a helpmeet unto man: And to them
, particularly deal with these matters, so
He said: Increase and multiply, Genesis
* that in the first place we shall discuss
i, 28. And again Adam being inspired
these demons themselves, secondly, the
by God said: They shall be two in one
witches and their works, and thirdly,
flesh, Genesis ii, 24. Likewise after sin
we will inquire wherefore such things
had come into the world, it was said to
are suffered to be. Now these demons
Noe: Increase, and multiply, Genesis ix,
work owing to their influence upon
1. In the time of the new law also,
man’s mind and upon his free will, and
Christ confirmed this union: Have ye
(
they choose to copulate under the in¬
not read, that he who made man from
fluence of certain stars rather than
the beginning, Made them male and
under the influence of others, for it
female? S. Matthew xix, 4. Therefore
would seem that at certain times their
men cannot be begotten in any other
semen can more easily generate and
way than this.
beget children. Accordingly, we must
inquire why the demons should act at
But it may be argued that devils take
the conjunction of certain stars, and
their part in this generation not as the
what times these are.
essential cause, but as a secondary and
''There aJeTHree^hief points to dis¬
artificial cause, since they busy themcuss. First, whether these abominable
heresies can be multiplied throughout * “Incubi.” For a very full discussion of the j f
the world by those who give themselves whole subject see SinistrarVs “Demoniality” I
to Incubi and Succubi. Secondly, with my Commentary and glosses, Fortune Press,
whether their actiSns have not a cer¬ 1927. "

22 MALLEUS I.
Part Question 3.
selves by interfering with the process of argument they put forward. The soul
normal copulation and conception, by is purely a spiritual essence, so is the
obtaining human semen, and them¬ devil: but the soul cannot move a body
selves transferring it. from place to place except it be that
Objection. The devil can perform this body in which it lives and to which it
act in every state of life, that is to say, ives life: whence if any member of the
in the matrimonial state, or not in the ody perishes it becomes dead and im¬
matrimonial state. Or he can perform movable. Therefore devils cannot move
it in one only state. Now he cannot a body from place to place, except it be
perform it in the first state, because a body to which they give life. It has
then the act of the devil would be more been shown, however, and is acknow¬
powerful than the act of God, Who in¬ ledged that devils do not bestow life on
stituted and confirmed this holy estate, anybody, therefore they cannot move
since it is a state of continence and human semen locally, that is, from place
wedlock. Nor can he effect this in any to place, from body to body.
other estate: since we never read in Moreover, every action is performed
Scripture that children can be begotten by contact, and especially the act of
in one state and not in another. generation. But it does not seem pos¬
sible that there can be any contact
Moreover, to beget a child is the act between the demon and human bodies,
of a living body, but devils cannot be¬ since he has no actual point of contact
stow life upon the bodies which they with them. Therefore he cannot inject
assume; because life formally only pro¬ semen into a human body, and there¬
ceeds from the soul, and the act of fore since this needs a certain bodily
generation is the act of the physical action, it would seem that the devil
organs which have bodily life. There¬ cannot accomplish it.
fore bodies which are assumed in this Besides, devils have no power to move
way cannot either beget or bear. those bodies which in a natural order
Yet it may be said that these devils are more closely related to them, for
assume a body not in order that they example the heavenly bodies, therefore
may bestow life upon it, but that they they have no power to move those
may by the means of this body preserve bodies which are more distant and dis¬
human semen, and pass the semen on tinct from them. The major is proved,
to another body.
since the power that moves and the
Objection. As in the action of angels, movement are one and the same thing
whether they be good or bad, there is according to Aristotle in his Physics. It
nothing superfluous and useless, nor is follows, therefore, that devils who move
there anything superfluous and useless heavenly bodies must be in heaven,
in nature. But the devil by his natural which is wholly untrue, both in our
power, which is far greater than any opinion and in the opinion of the
human bodily power, can perform any Platonists.
spiritual action, and perform it again Moreover, S. Augustine, On the
and again although man may not be Trinity, III, says that devils do indeed
able to discern it. Therefore he is able collect human semen, by means of
to perform this action, although man which they are able to produce bodily
may not be able to discern when the effects: but this cannot be done without
devil is concerned therewith. For all some local movement, therefore demons
bodily and material things are on a can transfer the semen which they have
lower scale than pure and spiritual in¬ collected and inject it into the bodies of
telligences. But the angels, whether others. But, as Walafrid Strabo says in
they be good or whether they be evil,
his commentary upon Exodus vii, 11 :
are pure and spiritual intelligences. And Pharao called the wise men and
Therefore they can control what is be¬ the magicians: Devils go about the
low them. Therefore the devil can col¬ earth collecting every sort of seed, and
lect and make use as he will of human
can by working upon them broadcast
semen which belongs to the body.
various species. See also the gloss on
However, to collect human semen
those words (Pharao called). And again
from one person and to transfer it to in Genesis vi the gloss makes two com¬
another implies certain local actions.
ments on the words: And the sons of
But devils cannot locally move bodies
God saw the daughters of men. First,
from place to place. And this is the
that by the sons of God are meant the

I. MALEFICARUM
Part Question 3. 23
sons of Seth, and by the daughters of And as to their will, the reader will
men, the daughters of Cain. Second, find that it cleaves unchangeably to
that Giants were created not by some evil, and that they continuously sin in
incredible act of men, but by certain pride, envy, and gross covetousness;
devils, which are shameless towards and that God, for his own glory, per¬
women. For the Bible says, Giants were mits them to work against His will.
upon the earth. Moreover, even after He will also understand how with these
the Flood the bodies not only of men, two qualities of intellect and will devils
but also of women, were pre-eminently do marvels, so that there is no power
and incredibly beautiful. in earth which can be compared to
them: Job xli. There is no power on the
Answer. For the sake of brevity much earth which can be compared with him,
concerning the power of the devil and who was created that he should fear no
his works in the matter of the effects of one. But here the gloss says, Although
witchcraft is left out; for the pious he fears no one he is yet subject to the
reader either accepts it as proved, or he merits of the Saints.
may, if he wish to inquire, find every He will find also how the devil knows
point clearly elucidated in the second the thoughts of our hearts; how he can
Book of Sentences, 5. For he will see that substantially and disastrously meta¬
the devils perform all their works con¬ morphose bodies with the help of an
sciously and voluntarily; for the nature agent; how he can move bodies locally,
that was given them has not been and alter the outward and inner feelings
changed. See Dionysius* in his fourth to every conceivable extent; and how
chapter on this subject; their nature he can change the intellect and will of
1
remained intact and very splendid, a man, however indirectly.
although they cannot use it for any For although all this is pertinent to
good purpose. our present inquiry, we wish only to
And as to their intelligence, he will draw some conclusion therefrom as to
find that they excel in three points of the nature of devils, and so proceed to
understanding, that is, in the subtlety the discussion of our question.
of their nature, in their age-long experi¬ Now the Theologians have ascribed
ence, and in the revelation of the to them certain qualities, as that they
higher spirits. He will find also how, are unclean spirits, yet not by very
through the influence of the stars, they nature unclean. For according to Dio¬
learn the dominating characteristics of nysius there is in them a natural mad¬
men, and so discover that some are ness, a rabid concupiscence, a wanton
more disposed to work witchcraft than fancy, as is seen from their spiritual sins
others, and that they molest these chiefly of pride, envy, and wrath. For this
for the purpose of such works. reason they are the enemies of the
human race: rational in mind, but
* “Dionysius” A series of famous writings
reasoning without words; subtle in
was attributed to S. Dionysius the Areopagite
wickedness, eager to do hurt; ever fer¬
(“Acts” xvii, 34), who was also popularly
tile in fresh deceptions, they change the
identified with the Martyr of Gaul, the first
perceptions and befoul the emotions of
Bishop of Paris. The writings themselves form
men, they confound the watchful, and
a collection of four treatises and ten letters.
in dreams disturb the sleeping; they
These will all be found in Migne, “Patres
Graeci,” III. The treatises are generally re¬ bring diseases, stir up tempests, disguise
ferred to under their Latin names, “De Diuinis themselves as angels of light, bear Hell
nominibus”; “Caelestis hierarchia”; “Ecclesi¬ always about them; from witches they
astica hierarchda”; “Theologia mystica.” usurp to themselves the worship of God,
The main source from which the Middle Ages and by this means magic spells are
obtained a knowledge of Dionysius and his made; they seek to get a mastery over
doctrine was undoubtedly the Latin translation
the good, and molest them to the most
by Scotus Eriugena, made about 838. There are
of their power; to the elect they are
ample commen taries by many great writers such
given as a temptation, and always they
as Hugh of Saint-Victor, Blessed Albertus
lie in wait for the destruction of men.
Magnus, S. T 'homas, and Denys the Carthusian.
And although they have a thousand
The works of ‘ Dionysius the Areopagite and the
ways of doing harm, and have tried ever
identification >of this writer with S. Denys were
since their downfall to bring about
accepted by S'aints and Schoolmen, and perhaps
schisms in the Church, to disable
we should do well to follow them without curious
questions anal impertinent discussion. charity, to infect with the gall of envy

24 MALLEUS Part I. Question 3.
the sweetness of the acts of the Saints, there is the gloss which we have touched
and in every way to subvert and per¬ upon before. He says that it is not
turb the human race; yet their power outside belief that the Giants of whom
remains confined to the privy parts and the Scripture speaks were begotten nott
the navel. See Job xli. For through the by men, but by Angels or certain devils/?
wantonness of the flesh they have much who lust after women. To the samer
power over men; and in men the source effect is the gloss on Esaias xiii,* * * § where
of wantonness lies in the privy parts, the prophet foretells the desolation of
since it is from them that the semen Babylon, and the monsters that should
falls, just as in women it falls from the inhabit it. He says: Owls shall dwell
navel. there, and Satyrs shall dance there./
These things, then, being granted for By Satyrs here devils are meant; as the
a proper understanding of the question gloss says, Satyrs are wild shaggy crea¬
of Incubi and Succubi, it must be said tures of the woods, which are a certain
that it is just as Catholic a view to hold kind of devils called Incubi. And again
that men may at times be begotten by in Esaias xxxiv, where he prophesies the
means of Incubi and Succubi, as it is desolation of the land of the Idumeans
contrary to the words of the Saints and because they persecuted the Jews, he
even to the tradition of Holy Scripture says: And it shall be an habitation of
to maintain the opposite opinion. And dragons, and a court for owls. The wild
this is proved as follows. S. Augustine beasts also of the desert shall meet . . .
in one place raises this question, not The interlinear gloss interprets this as
indeed as regards witches, but with monsters and devils. And in the same
reference to the very works of devils, place Blessed Gregory explains these to
and to the fables of the poets, and be woodland gods under another name^
leaves the matter in some doubt; though not those which the Greeks called Pans,
later on he is definite in the matter of and the Latins Incubi.
Holy Scripture. For in his De Ciuitate Similarly Blessed Isidore, in the last
Dei, Book 3, chapter 2, he says: We chapter of his 8th book, says: Satyrs
leave open the question whether it was are they who are called Pans in Greek*"
possible for Venus to give birth to and Incubi in Latin. And they are
Aeneas through coition with Anchises. called Incubi from their practice oT
For a similar question arises in the Overlaying, f that is debauching. Fof
Scriptures, where it is asked whether they often lust lecherously after women,
evil angels lay with the daughters of and copulate with them; and the Gauls*
men, and thereby the earth was then hame them Dusii, | because they are
filled with giants, that is to say, preter- diligent in this beastliness. But the devj|
naturally big and strong men. But he ! which the common people call an In-}
settles the question in Book 5, chapter cubus, the Romans called a fig Faun;$'
23, in these words: It is a very general I ■ 0
belief, the truth of which is vouched for
*
‘'Esaias” See my gloss upon this passage,
by many from their own experience, or
“
Demoniality,” Introduction, xxvi—xxviii.
at least from hearsay as having been
t “ “
Overlaying.” Nider, Formicarius,” ix,
experienced by men of undoubted
writes: “Incubi dicuntur ab incumbendo, hoc est
trustworthiness, that Satyrs and Fauns
struprando.”
(which are commonly called Incubi)
t “Dusii” “De Ciuitate Dei” XV, 23,
have appeared to wanton women and
where S. Augustine has: “Et quosdam daemones,
have sought and obtained coition with ,
quos Dusios Galli nuncupant adsidue hanc
them. And that certain devils (which immunditiam et tentare et efficere , plures
the Gauls call Dusii) assiduously at¬ talesque adseuerant, ut hoc negare impudentiae
tempt and achieve this filthiness is uideatur.”
§
vouched for by so many credible wit¬ “A Fig Faun.” “Jeremias” l, 33, the
nesses that it would seem impudent to desolation of Babylon, has: Propterea habitabunt
< deny it. dracones cum faunis ficariis: et habitabunt in ea
struthiones: et non inhabitabitur ultra usque in
Later in the same book he settles the
sempiternum, nec exstruetur usque ad genera¬
second contention, namely, that the
tionem, et generationem. Which Douay trans¬
passage in Genesis about the sons of
lates: “Therefore shall dragons dwell there with
God (that is Seth) and the daughters
the fig fauns: and ostriches shall dwell therein,
of men (that is Gain) does not speak
and it shall be no more inherited for ever, neither
only of Incubi, since the existence of
shall it be built up from generation to generation.”
such is not credible. In this connexion ‘ ‘
The English gloss says: Eig fau ns.5 Monsters

Part I. Question 3. MALEFICARUM
25
to which Horace said, “O Faunus, lover
last part of the 6th treatise. Moreover,
of fleeing nymphs, go gently over my
S. Thomas speaks of this (I. 25 and
lands and smiling fields.’* *
II. 8, and elsewhere; also on Esaias xii
As to that of S. Paul in I. Corinthians
and xiv). Therefore he says that it is
xi, A woman ought to have a covering
rash to deny such things. For that
on her head, because of the angels,
which appears true to many cannot be
, many Catholics believe that “because
1 altogether false, according to Aristotle
of the angels” refers to Incubi. Of the
(at the end of the De somno et uigilia,
same opinion is the Venerable Bede in and in the 2nd Ethics). I say nothing
his History of the English ;* also William
of the many authentic histories, both
of Parisj *n his book De Uniuerso, the
Catholic and heathen, which openly
, affirm the existence of Incubi.
\ of the desert or demons in monstrous shapes:
‘ But the reason that devils turn them¬
such as the ancients called fauns' and satyrs':
,
and as they imagined them to live upon wild figs selves into Incubi or Succubi is not for
they called them fauni ficarii' or fig fauns' " the cause of pleasure, since a spirit has
, (
Mirabeau “Erotika Biblion” pseudo-Rome), not flesh and blood; but chiefly it is
1783, under “Behemah" writes: “Les satyres, les with this intention, that through the
faunes, les Sgypans, toutes ces fables en sont une vice of luxury they may work a twofold
tradition trh remarquable. Satan en arabe signifie harm against men, that is, in body and
bouc; et lebouc expiatoire nefut ordonnSpar Moyse
in soul, that so men may be more given
que pour ditourner les Israelites du gout quits
to all vices. And there is no doubt that
avoient pour cet animal lascifi (Maimonide dans
they know under which stars the semen
le More Nevochin, p. 111, c. xlvi, s’etend sur les
is most vigorous, and that men so con¬
cultes des boucs.) Comme il est dit dans VExode
ceived will be always perverted by
qu'on ne pouvoit voir la face des dieux, les
witchcraft.
Israelites etoient persuades que les demons si
When Almighty God had enumerated
faisoient voir sous cette forme. ... On a ensuite
many vices of luxury rife among the
confondu les incubes et les succubes avec les
veritables produits. Jeremie parle de faunes unbelievers and heretics, from which
suffoquans. (Jerem., I, 33. Faunis sicariis et He wished His people to be clean, He
non pas ficariis. Car des faunes qui avoient des says in Leviticus xviii: Defile not ye
figues ne youdroit Fen dire. Cependant. Saci la yourselves in any of these things: for
traduit ainsi; car les Jansenistes affectent la plus in all these the nations are defiled which
grande purete des moeurs, mais Berruyer soutient
I cast out before you: and the land is
‘
le Sicarii' et rend ses faunes tres actifs.)
defiled: therefore I do visit the iniquity
Heraclite a decrit des satyr es qui vivoient dans les
thereof upon it. The gloss explains the
bois, et jouissoient en commun des femmes dont ils
word “nations” as meaning devils who,
s' emparoient.'5 But the Vulgate has “Fauni
on account of their multitude, are called
ficarii," which settles the point. That the
the nations of the world, and rejoice in
reading was very disputed is clear from Nider,
all sin, especially in fornication and
“Formicariuswho has: “Quem autem uulgo
idolatry^ because by these are defiled
Incubonem uocant, hunc Romani uicarium dicunt.
Ad quem Horatius dicit: Faune Nympharum fhe body and the soul, and the whole
fugientium amator meos per fines et aprica rura man, which is called “the land.” For
lenis incedas. Insuper illud Apostoli I Cor. xi. every sin that a man commits is outside
Mulier debet uelamen habere super caput suum his body, but the man who commits
propter Angelos: Multi Catholici exponunt quod fornication sins in his body. If anyone
sequitur, propter angelos, id est Incubos." The
wishes to study further the histories
quotation from Horaee is “Carminum," III, 18.
concerning Incubi and Succubi, let him
*
“Bede." Born 672 or 673, died 733. This f ?
read (as has been said) Bede in his
great work, “Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis
History of the English, and William, and
Anglorum," giving an account of Christianity in
finally Thomas of Brabant in his book
England from the beginning until his own day,
About Bees.
has been recognized as a masterpiece by the
To return to the matter in hand.
scholars of all ages and countries. An authorita¬
tive edition was published by Plummer, two vols.,
Oxford, 1836.
a science of reality on principles opposed to those
t
“William of Paris." William of Auvergne,
of the Arabian commentators upon andperverters
,
the celebrated philosopher and theologian was
of Aristotle. His theological works are par¬
born at Aurillac in Auvergne towards the end of
ticularly interesting as devotmg much attention
thy twelfth century, and died at Paris, of which
to a refutation of the Manichees, whose heresies
city he had in 1228 been consecrated Bishop, in
had been recently revived. There is a good study
f 49- Although not a “Summa theologica," his
by Valois, “Guillaume d'Auvergne," Paris.
de Universo" is a practical endeavour to found 1880.
D

MALLEUS Part I. Question 3.
26
he may infect body and soul of all
And first for the natural act of propa¬
humanity, that is, of both woman and
gation instituted by God, that is, be¬
man, there being, as it were, actual
tween male and female; that as though
by the permission of God the Sacrament bodily contact.
Moreover, devils can do invisibly
of Matrimony can be made void by the
more things which they are not per¬
work of the devil through witchcraft, as
mitted to do visibly, even if they so
has been shown above. And the same
wished; but they are allowed to do
is much more strongly true of any
them invisibly, either as a trial for the
other venereal act between man and
good, or as a punishment for the wicked.
woman.
Finally, it may happen that another
But if it is asked why the devil is
devil may take the place of the Suc¬
allowed to cast spells upon the venereal
cubus, receive the semen from him, and
act, rather than upon any other human
become an Incubus in the place of the
act, it is answered that many reasons
other devil; and this for a threefold
are assigned by the Doctors, which will
reason. Perhaps because one devil,
be discussed later in the part concerning
allotted to a woman, should receive
the divine permission. For the present
the reason that has been mentioned semen from another devil? allotted to a
man, that in this way each of them
before must suffice, namely, that the
should be commissioned by the prince
power of the devil lies in the privy parts
of men. For of all struggles those are of devils to work some witchcraft; since
the hardest where the fight is continuous to each one is allotted his own angel,
eTen^bnr^amongHEhe
and victory rare. And it is unsound to
argue that in that case the work of the because of the filthiness of the deed,
devil is stronger than the work of God, which one devil would abhor to com¬
since the matrimonial act instituted by mit. For in many inquiries it is clearly
shown that certain devils, out of some
God can be made void: for the devil
does not make it void by violence, since nobility in their natures, would shrink
he has no power at all in the matter from a filthy action. Or it may be m
except as he is permitted by God. order that the Incubus may, instead of
Therefore it would be better to argue a man’s semen, by interposing himself
from this that he is powerless. on to a woman, invisibly inject his own
Secondly, it is true that to procreate semen, that is, that which he has in¬
a man is the act of a living body. But visibly received. And it is not foreign
when it is said that devils cannot give to his nature or power to effect such an
life, because that flows formally from interposition; since even in bodily form
the soul, it is true; but materially life he can interpose himself invisibly and
springs from the semen, and an Incubus without physical contact, as was shown
devil can, with God’s permissioh 7 ~ac- in the case of the young man who was
c.omplish this by coition. And the semen betrothed to an idol.
does not so much spring from him, as it Thirdly, it is said that the power of
is another man’s semen received by him an angel belongs in an infinite degree
for this purpose (see S. Thomas, I. 51, to the higher things; that is to say, that
art. 3). For the devil is jSuccubus^to a his power cannot be comprehended by
I man, and becomes Incubus "to a woman. the lower orders, but is always superior
In just the same way they absorb the to them, so that it is not limited to one
seeds of other things for the generating effect only. For the highest powers have
of various things, as S. Augustine says, most unbounded influence over crea¬
de Trinitate 3. tion. But because he is said to be infi¬
Now it may be asked, of whom is a nitely superior, that is not to say that
child so born the son? It is clear, that he is indifferently powerful for any work
he is not the son of the devil, but of the that is propounded for him; for then he
man whose semen was received. But might just as well be said to be infinitely
when it is urged that, just as in the inferior, as superior.
works of Nature, so there is no super¬ But there must be some proportion
fluity in the works of angels, that is between the agent and the patient, and
granted; but when it is inferred that there can be no proportion between a
the devil can receive and inject semen purely spiritual substance and a cor¬
invisibly, this also is true; but he prefers poreal one. Therefore not even the
to perform this visibly as a Succubus devils have any power to cause an effect,
and an Incubus, that by such filthiness except through some other active

I. 3. MALEF
Part Question GARUM 27
medium. And this is why they use the
higher heavenly bodies are moved by
seeds of things to produce their effects;
the higher spiritual substances, as are
see S. Augustine, de Trinitate, 3. Where¬
the good Angels, so are the lower bodies
fore this argument goes back to the pre¬
moved by the lower spiritual substances,
ceding one, and is not strengthened by
as are the devils. And if this limitation
it, unless anyone wishes for S. Augus¬
of the devils’ power is due to the essence
tine’s explanation why the Intelligences
of nature, it is held by some that the
are said to have infinite powers .of the
devils are not of the order of those
higher and not of the lower degree,
higher angels, but are part of this terres¬
given to them in the order of things
trial order created by God; and this
corporeal and of the celestial bodies,
was the opinion of the Philosophers.
which can influence many and infinite
And if it is due to condemnation for sin,
effects. But this is not because of the
as is held by the Theologians, then they
weakness of the inferior powers. And
were thrust from the regions of heaven
the conclusion is that devils, even
into this lower atmosphere for a punish¬
without assuming bodies, can work
ment, and therefore are not able to
transmutations in semen; although this
move either it or the earth.
is no argument against the present pro¬
This has been said on account of two
position, concerning Incubi and Suceasily dispelled arguments:—One, re¬
cubi, whose actions they cannot perform
garding the heavenly bodies, that the
except by assuming bodily shape, as has
devils could also move these, if they
been considered above.
were able to move bodies locally, since
For the fourth argument, that devils
the stars are nearer to them in nature,
cannot move bodies or semen locally,
as also the last argument alleges. The
which is substantiated by the analogy
answer is that this is not valid; for if
of the soul. It must be said that it is one
the former opinion holds good, those
thing to speak of the spiritual substance
bodies exceed the proportion of the
of the actual angel or devil, and another
devils’ power: and if the second is true,
thing to speak of the actual soul. For
then again they cannot move them,
the reason why the soul cannot locally
because of their punishment for sin.
move a body unless it has given life to
Also there is the argument that ob¬
it, or else by contact of a living body
jects that the motion of the whole and
with one that is not living, is this: that
of the part is the same thing, just as
the soul occupies by far the lowest grade
Aristotle in his 4th Physics instances the
in the order of spiritual beings, and
case of the whole earth and a clod of
therefore it follows that there must be
soil; and that therefore if the devils
some proportionate relation between it
could move a part of the earth, they
and the body which it is able to move
could also move the whole earth. But
by contact. But it is not so with devils,
this is not valid, as is clear to anyone
whose power altogether exceeds cor¬
who examines the distinction. But to
poreal power.
collect the semen of things and apply it
And fifthly, it must be said that the
to certain effects does not exceed their
contact of a devil with a body, either in
natural power, with the permission of
the way of semen or in any other way,
God, as is self-evident.
is not a corporeal but a virtual contact,
In conclusion, in spite of the conten¬
and takes place in accordance with the
tion of some that devils in bodily shape
suitable proportion of both the mover
can in no way generate children, and
and the moved; provided that the body
that by the “sons of God” is meant the
which is moved does not exceed the
sons of Seth and not Incubi devils, just
proportion of the devil’s power. And
as by the “daughters of men” is meant
such bodies are the celestial bodies, and
the descendants of Cain; nevertheless
even the whole earth or the elements
the contrary is clearly affirmed by
of the world, the power of which we
many. And that which seems true to
may call superior on the authority of
many cannot be altogether false, ac¬
S. Thomas in his questions concerning
cording to Aristotle in his 6th Ethics and
Sin (quest. 10, de Daemonibus). For this
at the end of the de Somno et Uigilia. And \
is either because of the essence of nature,
now also in modern times we have the
or because of condemnation for sin. For
well-attested deeds and words of witches
there is a due order in things, in accord¬
who truly and actually perform such
ance both with their very nature and things.
with their motion. And just as the
Therefore we make three proposi-

MALLEUS Part I. Question 4.
28
his book on the nature of the Good), so
tions. First, that the foulest venereal
also the computation of the Evil is based
acts are performed by such devils, not
upon confusion. But as among the good
for the sake of delectation, but for the
Angels nothing can be without order, so
pollution of the souls and bodies of those
among the bad all is disorder, and there¬
to whom they act as Succubi or Incubi.
fore they all indifferently follow these
Second, that through such action com¬
practices. See Job x.: A land of dark¬
plete conception and generation by
women can take place, inasmuch as ness, as darkness itself; and of the
shadow of death, without any order,
they can deposit human semen in the
and where the light is as darkness.
suitable place of a woman’s womb
Again, if they do not all indifferently
where there is already a corresponding
follow these practices, this quality in
substance. In the same way they can
them comes either from their nature, or
also collect the seeds of other things for
the working of other effects. Third, that from sin, or from punishment. But it does
in the begetting of such children only not come from their nature, since they are
the local motion is to be attributed to all without distinction given to sin, as was
devils, and not the actual begetting, set out in the preceding question. For
which arises not from the power of the they are by nature impure spirits, yet
devil or of the body which he assumes, not so unclean as to pejorate theii good
but from the virtue of him whose semen parts; subtle in wickedness, eager to do
it was; wherefore the child is the son harm, swollen with pride, etc. There¬
not of the devil, but of some man. fore these practices in them are due
And here there is a clear answer to either to sin or to punishment. Then
those who would contend that there are again, where the sin is greater, there is
two reasons why devils cannot generate the punishment greater; and the higher
children:—First, that generation is ef¬ angels sinned more greatly, therefore
fected by the formative virtue which for their punishment they have the more
exists in semen released from a living to follow these filthy practices. If this is
body; and that because the body as¬ not so, another reason will be given why
sumed by devils is not of such a sort, they do not indifferently practise these
therefore, etc. The answer is clear, that things.
the devil deposits naturally formative And again, it is argued that where
semen in its proper place, etc. Secondly, there is no discipline or obedience, there
it may be argued that semen has no all work without distinction; and it is
power of generation except as long as submitted that there is no discipline or
the heat of life is retained in it, and that obedience among devils, and no agree¬
this must be lost when it is carried great ment. Proverbs xiii.: Among the proud
distances. The answer is that devils are there is always contention.
able to store the semen safely, so that its Again, just as because of sin they will
vital heat is not lost; or even that it all equally be cast into Hell after the
cannot evaporate so easily on account Day of Judgement, so before that time
of the great speed at which they move they are detained in the lower mists
by reason of the superiority of the mover on account of the duties assigned to
over the thing moved. them. We do not read that there is
equality on account of emancipation,
therefore neither is there equality in the
☆
matter of duty and temptation.
But against this there is the first gloss
QUESTION IV
on 1 Corinthians xv: As long as the '
world endures Angels are set over j
By which Devils are the Operations of Incubus
Angels, men over men, and devils over!
and Succubus Practised ?
I devils. Also in Job xl it speaks of the ^
S it Catholic to affirm that the func¬ scales of Leviathan, which signify the 1’
tions of Incubi and Succubi belong members of the devil, how one cleaves
indifferently and equally to all unclean to another. Therefore there is among
spirits ? And it seems that it is so; for to them diversity both of order and of
affirm the opposite would be to main¬ action.
tain that there is some good order Another question arises, whether or
among them. It is argued that just as in not the devils can be restrained by the
the computation of the Good there are good Angels from pursuing these foul
degrees and orders (see S. Augustine in practices. It must be said that the

Part I. Question 4.
MALEFICARUM
29
Angels to whose command the adverse
we must agree with this, since they are
Influences are subject are called
both immaterial and incorporeal. See
Powers, as S. Gregory says, and S.
also S. Thomas (ii. 2). For sin does not
Augustine [de Trinitate, 3). A rebellious
take away their nature, and the devils
and sinful spirit of life is subject to an
after the Fall did not lose their natural
obedient, pious and just spirit of life.
gifts, as has been said before; and the
And those Creatures which are more
operations of things follow their natural
perfect and nearer to God have
conditions. Therefore both in nature
authority over the others: for the
and in operation they are various and
whole order of preference is originally
multiple.
and in the first place in God, and is
This harmonizes also with the Divine
shared by His creatures according as
wisdom; for that which is ordained is
they approach more nearly to Him.
ordained by God (Romans xiii). And
Therefore the good Angels, who are
since devils were deputed by God for
nearest to God on account of their
the temptation of men and the punish¬
fruition in Him, which the devils lack,
ment of the damned, therefore they
have preference over the devils, and
work upon men from without by many
rule over them.
and various means.
And when it is urged that devils
It harmonizes also with their own
work much harm without any medium,
wickedness. For since they are at war
or that they are not hindered because
with the human race, they fight in an
they are not subject to good Angels
orderly manner; for so they think to do
who might prevent them; or that if
greater harm to men, and ,so they do.
they are so subject, then the evil that is
Whence it follows that they do not
done by the subject is due to negligence
share in an equal manner in their most
on the part of the master, and there
unspeakable abominations.
seems to be some negligence among the
And this is more specifically proved
good Angels: the answer is that the
as follows. For since, as has been said,
Angels are ministers of the Divine
the operation follows the nature of the
wisdom. It follows then that, as the
thing, it follows also that those whose
Divine wisdom permits certain evil to
natures are subordinate must in turn
be done by bad Angels or men, for the
be subordinate to themselves in operasake of the good that He draws there¬
tion, just as is the case in corporeal
from, so also the good Angels do not
matters. For since the lower bodies are
altogether prevent wicked men or
by natural ordination below the celestial
devils from doing evil.
bodies, and their actions and motions
Answer. It is Catholic to maintain
are subject to the actions and motions
that there is a certain order of interior
of the celestial bodies; and since the
and exterior actions, and a degree of
devils, as has been said, differ among
preference among devils. Whence it
themselves in natural order; therefore
follows that certain abominations are
they also differ among themselves in
committed by the lowest orders, from
their natural actions, both extrinsic and
which the higher orders are precluded
intrinsic, and especially in the perform¬
on account of the nobility of their
ance of the abominations in question.
natumr AnTfhls is generally said to
From which it is concluded that since
arise from a threefold congruity, in
the practice of these abominations is
that such things harmonize with their
for the most part foreign to the nobility
nature, with the Divine wisdom, and
of the angelic nature, so also in human
with their own wickedness.
actions the foulest and beastliest acts
But more particularly as touching
are to be considered by themselves, and
their nature. It is agreed that from the
not in relation to the duty of human
beginning of Creation some were always
nature and procreation.
by nature superior, since they differ
Finally, since some are believed to
among themselves as to form; and no
have fallen from every order, it is not
two Angels are alike in form. This
unsuitable to maintain that those devils
follows the more general opinion, which
who fell from the lowest choir, and even
also agrees with the words of the
in that held the lowest rank, are
Philosophers. Dionysius also lays it
deputed to and perform these and other
down in his tenth chapter On the
abominations.
Celestial Hierarchy that in the same order
Also it must be carefully noted that,
there are three separate degrees; and
though the Scripture speaks of Incubi

MALLEUS Part I. Question 4.
30
and Succubi lusting after women, yet sin with a threefold knowledge, being
\ nowhere do we read that Incubi and powerful in the subtlety of his nature,
Succubi fell into vices against nature. m his age-long experience, and in the
We do not speak only of sodomy, but of revelation of the good spirits. He is
I any other sin whereby the act is wrong¬ called also Belial, which means Without
fully performed outside the rightful Yoke or Master; for he can fight against
channel. And the very great enormity him to whom he should be subject. He
of such as sin in this way is shown by the is called also Beelzebub, which means
fact that all devils equally, of what¬ Lord of Flies, that is, of the souls of
soever order, abominate and think sinners who have left the true faith of
shame to commit such actions. And it Christ. Also Satan, that is, the Adver-/ [
seems that the gloss on Ezekiel xix means sary; see 1 S. Peter ii: For your adver-.
this, where it says: I will give thee sary the devil goeth about, etc. Also
into the hands of the dwellers in Behemoth, that is, Beast, because he
Palestine, that is devils, who shall makes men bestial.
blush at your iniquities, meaning vices But the very devil of Fornication, and
against nature. And the student will see the chief of that abomination, is called
what should be authoritatively under¬ Asmodeus, which means the Creature
stood concerning devils. For no sin has oFjuHgement: for because of this kind '
God so often punished by the shameful of sin a terrible judgement was executed
death of multitudes. upon Sodom and the four other cities.
Indeed many *s2y5 and it is truly be¬ Similarly the devil of Pride is called
lieved, that no one can unimperilled Leviathan, which means Their Addipersevere in the practice of such vices tion; because when Lucifer tempted
beyond the period of the mortal life of our first parents he promised them, out
Christ, which lasted for thirty-three of his pride, the addition of Divinity.
years, unless he should be saved by some Concerning him the Lord said through
special grace of the Redeemer. And this Esaias: I shall visit it upon Leviathan,
is proved by the fact that there have that old and tortuous serpent. And
often been ensnared by this vice octo¬ the devil of Avarice and Riches is called
genarians and centenarians, who had up Mammon, whom also Christ mentions
to that time ruled their lives according in the Gospel (S. Matthew vi): Ye cannot
to the discipline of Christ; and, having serve God, etc.
once forsaken Him, they have found the To the arguments. First, that good
very greatest difficulty in obtaining can be found without evil, but evil
deliverance, and in abandoning them¬ cannot be found without good; for it is
selves to such vices. poured upon a creature that is good in
Moreover, the names of the devils itself. And therefore the devils, in so
indicate what order there is among far as they have a good nature, were
them, .and what office is assigned to ordained in the course of nature; and
each. For though one and the same for their actions see Job x.
name, that of devil, is generally used Secondly, it can be said that the devils
in Scripture because of their various deputed to work are not in Hell, but
qualities, yet the Scriptures teach that in the lower mists. And they have here
One is set over these filthy actions, just an order among themselves, which they
as certain other vices are subject to will not have in Hell. From which it
Another. For it is the practice of may be said that all order ceased
Scripture and of speech to name every among them, as touching the attain¬
unclean spirit Diabolus, from Dia, that ment of blessedness, at that time when
is Two, and Bolus, that is Morsel; they fell irrecoverably from such rank.
for he kills two things, the body and the And it may be said that even in Hell
soul. And this is in accordance with there will be among them a gradation
etymology, although in Greek Diabolus of power, and of the affliction of
means shut in Prison, which also is punishments, inasmuch as some, and
apt, since he is not permitted to do as not others, will be deputed to torment
much harm as he wishes. Or Diabolus the souls. But this gradation will come
may mean Downflowing, since he rather from God than from themselves,
flowed down, that is, fell down, both as will also their torments.
specifically and locally. He is also Thirdly, when it is said that the
named Demon, that is, Cunning over higher devils, because they sinned the
Blood, since he thirsts for and procures more, are the more punished, and

Part I. Question 5. MALEFICARUM
3i
must therefore be the more bound to
not destroy free-will, for this would
the commission of these filthy acts,
militate against liberty: therefore the
it is answered that sin bears relation
devil cannot be the cause of that or any
to punishment, and not to the act or
other sin. Again, in the book of
operation of nature; and therefore it
Ecclesiastic Dogma it is said: Not all
is by reason of their nobility of nature
our evil thoughts are stirred up by the
that these are not given to such filthi¬
devil, but sometimes they arise from
ness, and it has nothing to do with
the operation of our own judgement.
their sin or punishment. And though
But it is submitted that the true
they are all impure spirits, and eager
source of witchcraft is the influence
to do harm, yet one is more so than
of the celestial bodies, and not devils.
another, in proportion as their natures
Just as every multitude is reduced to
are the further thrust into darkness.
unity, so all that is multiform is reduced
Fourthly, it is said that there is agree¬
to some uniform beginning. But the
ment among devils, but of wickedness
acts of men, both in vice and in virtue,
rather than friendship, in that they
are various and multiform, therefore it
hate mankind, and strive their utmost
seems that they may be reduced to
against justice. For such agreement is
some beginnings uniformly moved and
found among the wicked, that they
moving. But such can only be assigned
band themselves together, and depute
to the motions of the stars; therefore
those whose talents seem suitable to
those bodies are the causes of such
the pursuit of particular iniquities. actions.
Fifthly, although imprisonment is
Again, if the stars were not the cause
equally decreed for all, now in the
of human actions both good and bad,
lower atmosphere and afterwards in
Astrologers would not so frequently
Hell, yet not therefore are equal
foretell the truth about the result of
penalties and duties equally ordained
wars and other human acts: therefore
for them: for the nobler they are in
they are in some way a cause.
nature and the more potent in office,
Again, the stars can influence the
the heavier is the torment to which
devils themselves in the causing of
they are subjected. See Wisdom vi:
certain spells; and therefore they can
“The powerful shall powerfully suffer
all the more influence men. Three
torments.”
proofs are adduced for this assumption.
☆ For certain men who are called Lunhtics are molested by devils more at one
QUESTION V time than at another; and the devils
would not so behave, but would rather
What is the Source of the Increase of Works molest them at all times, unless they
of Witchcraft? Whence comes it that themselves were deeply affected by
the Practice of Witchcraft hath so certain phases of the Moon. It is
notably increased? proved again from the fact that Necro¬
I
mancers observe certain constellations
S it in any way a Gatholic opinion
for the invoking of devils, which they
to hold that the origin and growth
would not do unless they knew that
of works of witchcraft proceed from
those devils were subject to the stars.
the influence of the celestial bodies; or
And this also is adduced as a proof;
from the abundant wickedness of men,
that according to S. Augustine (de
and not from the abominations of
duitate Dei, 10), the devils employ
Incubi and Succubi? And it seems that
certain lower bodies, such as herbs,
it springs from man’s own wickedness.
stones,. animals, and certain sounds
For S. Augustine says, in Book LXXXIII,
and voices, and figures. But since the
that the cause of a man’s depravity
heavenly bodies are of more potency
lies in his own will, whether he sins at
than the lower bodies, therefore the
his own or at another’s suggestion.
stars are a far greater influence than
But a witch is depraved through sin,
these things. And witches are the more
therefore the cause of it is not the devil
in subjection in that their deeds pro¬
but human will. In the same place he
ceed from the influence of those bodies,
speaks of free-will, that everyone is the
and not from the help of evil spirits.
cause of his own wickedness. And he
And the argument is supported from
reasons thus: that the sin of man pro¬
1 Kings xvi, where Saul was vexed by a
ceeds from free-will, but the devil can¬
devil, but was calmed when David

MALLEUS Part I. Question 5.
32
struck his harp before him, and the evil standing. Therefore it is seen that it is
spirit departed. in the devil’s power to influence the
But against this. It is impossible to will, which is directly the cause of sin.
produce an effect without its cause; and Besides, everything which has a
the deeds of witches are such that they choice of two ways needs some deter¬
cannot be done without the help of mining factor before it proceeds to
devils, as is shown by the description action. And the free-will of man has
of witches in S. Isidore, Ethics VIII. the choice between good and ill; there¬
Witches are so called from the enormity fore when he embarks upon sin, it needs
of their magic spells; for they disturb that he is determined by something
the elements and confound the minds towards ill. And this seems chiefly to
of men, and without anv venomous be done by the devil, especially in the
draught, but merely by virtue of mean- actions of witches, whose will is made
tations, destroy souls, etc. but this sort up for evil. Therefore it seems that the
of effects cannot be caused by the evil will of the devil is the cause of evil
influence of the stars through the will in man, especially in witches. And
agency of a man. the argument may be substantiated
Besides, Aristotle says in his Ethics thus; that just as a good Angel cleaves
that it is difficult to know what is the to good, so does a bad Angel to evil;
beginning of the operation of thought, but the former leads a man into good¬
and shows that it must be something ness, therefore the latter leads him into
extrinsic. For everything that begins evil. For it is, says Dionysius, the
from the beginning has some cause. unalterable and fixed law of divinity,
Now a man begins to do that which he that the lowest has its cause in the
wills; and he begins to will because of highest.
some pre-suggestion; and if this is Answer. Such as contend that witch¬
some precedent suggestion, it must craft has its origin in the influence of the
either proceed from the infinite, or stars stand convicted of three errors.
there is some extrinsic beginning which In the first place, it is not possible
first brings a suggestion to a man. that i t originated from astromancers and
Unless indeed it be argued that this is a casters of horoscopes and fortune¬
matter of chance, from which it would tellers. For if it is asked whether the
follow that all human actions are vice of witchcraft in men is caused by the
fortuitous, which is absurd. Therefore influence of the stars, then, in con¬
the beginning of good in the good is sideration of the variety of men’s
said to be God, Who is not the cause of characters, and for the upholding of the
sin. But for the wicked, when a man true faith, a distinction must be main¬
begins to be influenced towards and tained ; namely, that there are two
wills to commit sin, there must also ways in which it can be understood
be some extrinsic cause of this. And that men’s characters can be caused by
this can be no other than the devil; the stars. Either completely and of
especially in the case of witches, as is necessity, or by disposition and con¬
shown above, for the stars cannot tingency. And as for the first, it is not
influence such acts. Therefore the truth only false, but so heretical and contrary
is plain. to the Christian religion, that the true
Moreover, that which has power over faith cannot be maintained in such an
the motive has also power over the error. For this reason, he who argues
result which is caused by the motive. that everything of necessity proceeds
Now the motive of the will is something from the stars takes away all merit and,
perceived through the senses or the in consequence, all blame: also he
intellect, both of which are subject to takes away Grace, and therefore Glory.
the power of the devil. For S. Augustine For uprightness of character suffers
says in Book 83: This evil, which prejudice by this error, since the blame
is of the devil, creeps in by all the of the sinner redounds upon the stars,
sensual approaches; he places himself licence to sin without culpability is
in figures, he adapts himself to colours, conceded, and man is committed to the
he attaches himself to sounds, he lurks worship and adoration of the stars.
in angry and wrongful conversation, he But as for the contention that men’s
abides in smells, he impregnates with characters are conditionally varied by
flavours and fills with certain exhala¬ the disposition of the stars, it is so far
tions all the channels of the under¬ true that is it not contrary to reason or

Part 1. Question 5. MALEFICARUM 33
faith. For it is obvious that the disposi¬ Ptolemy in Almagest* says: A wise man
tion of a body variously causes many will be the master of the stars.f For
variations in the humours and character although, since Saturn has a melanof the soul; for generally the soul
imitates the complexions of the body, as
* “Almagest.” Claudius Ptolemaus was a
it is said in the Six Principles. Where¬ celebrated mathematician, astronomer, and geofore the choleric are wrathful, the grapher. Of the details of his life nothing
sanguine are kindly, the melancholy are appears to be known beyond the facts that he was
envious, and the phlegmatic are sloth¬ certainly at Alexandria in a.d. 133, and since he
ful. But this is not absolute; for the survived Antoninus Pius he was alive later than
soul is master of its body, especially March, 161. His “Geography,” retoypa^ixr]
\><f>T]yrfsi<i, is very famous, but perhaps even
when it is helped by Grace. And we see
more celebrated was the MeyocXt) aovraJitc tt]<;
many choleric who are gentle, and
darpovopha?, usually known by its Arabic
melancholy who are kindly. Therefore
name of Almagest. Since the “ Tetrabiblus,”
when the virtue of the stars influences
the work on astrology, was also entitled auvxa^u;,
the formation and quality of a man’s
the Arabs, to distinguish the two, called the
humours, it is agreed that they have
greater work (xeyaXi), and afterwards \izyiaxri;
some influence over the character, but
the title “Almagest” is a compound of this last
very distantly: for the virtue of the
adjective and the Arabic article. The work is
lower nature has more effect on the divided into thirteen books, of which VII and
quality of the humours than has the VIII are the most interesting to the modem
virtue of the stars. astronomer, as they give a catalogue of the stars.
Wherefore S. Augustine (de Ciuitate The best edition of the “Almagest” is con¬
Dei, V), where he resolves a certain sidered to be that by Halma, Paris, 1813-16,
two vols., qto.
question of two brothers who fell ill
t “Sapiens homo dominabitur astrisThis
and were cured simultaneously, ap¬
famous tag is continually quoted. Cf. Tomkis’
proves the reasoning of Hippocrates
“Albumazar” (acted at Cambridge, March,
rather than that of an Astronomer. For
1613), I, 7, where Albumazar says:
Hippocrates answered that it was owing
Indeed th’ ^Egyptian Ptolemy, the wise,
to the similarity of their humours; and
Pronounc’d it as an oracle of truth,
the Astronomer answered that it was
Sapiens dominabitur astris.
owing to the identity of their horo¬
scopes. For the Physician’s answer was In Book III, Epigram 186, of John Owen’s first
published volume, we get:
better, since he adduced the more
powerful and immediate cause. Thus, “Fata regunt reges; sapiens dominabitur
therefore, it must be said that the astris.”
influence of the stars is to some degree Sir Sampson Legend in Congreve’s “Love for
conducive to the wickedness of witches, Love,” produced at Lincoln’s Inn Fields, 30
if it be granted that there is any such April, 1633, II, 1, bantering old Foresight, who
influence over their bodies that predis¬ loudly acclaims the influence of the stars, throws
poses them to this manner of abomina¬ at him: “I tell you I am wise; and sapiens
dominabitur astris; there’s Latin for you to
tion rather than to any other sort of
prove it.” According to W. Aldis Wright’s note
works either vicious or virtuous: but
on Bacon’s “Advancement of LearningII,
this disposition must not be said to be
xxiii, 12: “Mr. Ellis says this sentence is
necessary, immediate, and sufficient,
ascribed to Ptolemy by Cognatus.” The refer¬
but remote and contingent.
ence is to Cognati’s collection of Adages, which
Neither is that objection valid which
together with the “Adagia” of Erasmus and
is based on the book of the Philosophers
other famous repertories of saws and proverbs
on the properties of the elements, where may be found in the volume “Adagia” compiled
it says that kingdoms are emptied and by Joynaeus. Joannes Nevizanus, “Sylva
lands depopulated at the conjunction of Nuptialis,” II, 36, notes: “Dicit tamen Bal. in
Jupiter and Saturn; and it is argued c.j. at lite pand. quod sapiens dominabitur
from this that such things are to be astris.” Bal. is Baldus, Baldo degli Ubaldi
understood as being outside the free¬ (b. 1327), the most famous canonist of his day
and Professor utriusque iuris at the Univer¬
will of men, and that therefore the
sities of Padua, Perugia, and Piacenza, who
influence of the stars has power over
wrote ample glosses on the “Corpus Iuris
free-will. For it is answered that in this
Ciuilis.” Burton, “Anatomy of Melancholy,”
saying the Philosopher does not mean to
quotes “sapiens,” etc., and A. R. Shilleto in his
imply that men cannot resist the
notes says that it is also cited by Jeremy Taylor,
influence of that constellation towards
and that C. G. Eden, his best editor, could not
dissensions, but that they will not. For
trace the origin of the phrase.

34 MALLEUS I.
Part Question 5.
choly and bad influence and Jupiter a
part of space near the fire, and that a
very good influence, the conjunction of
conjoined globe of that hot and dry
Jupiter and Saturn can dispose men to
vapour assumes the likeness of a star.
quarrels and discords; yet, through
But unincorporated parts of that vapour
free-will, men can resist that inclination,
stretch in long extremities joined to that
and very easily with the help of God’s
globe, and are a sort of adjunct to it.
grace.
And according to this view, not of
And again it is no valid objection to
itself but by accident, it predicts death
quote S. John Damascene* where he
which proceeds from hot and dry
says (Book II, chap, vi) that comets are
infirmities. And since for the most part
often the sign of the death of kings. For
the rich are fed on things of a hot and
it will be answered that even if we
dry nature, therefore at such times
follow the opinion of S. John Damascene,
many of the rich die; among which the
which was, as is evident in the book
death of kings and princes is the most
referred to, contrary to the opinion
notable. And this view is not far from
of the Philosophic Way, yet this is no
the view of S. John Damascene, when
proof of the inevitability of human
carefully considered, except as regards
actions. For S. John considers that a
the operation and co-operation of the
comet is not a natural creation, nor is
Angels, which not even the philosophers
it one of the stars set in the firmament;
can ignore. For indeed when the
wherefore neither its signification nor
vapours in their dryness and heat have
influence is natural. For he says that
nothing to do with the generation of a
comets are not of the stars which were
comet, even then, for reasons already
created in the beginning, but that they
set out, a comet may be formed by the
are made for a particular occasion, and
operation of an Angel.
then dissolved, by Divine command.
In this way the star which portended
This then is the opinion of S. John
the death of the learned S. Thomas was
Damascene. But God by such a sign
not one of the stars set in the firma¬
foretells the death of kings rather than
ment, but was formed by an Angel from
of other men, both because a king is a
some convenient material, and, having
public person, and because from this
performed its office, was again dissolved.
may arise the confusion of a kingdom.
From this we see that, whichever of
And the Angels are more careful to
those opinions we follow, the stars have
watch over kings for the general good;
no inherent influence over the free
and kings are born and die under the
will, or, consequently, over the malice
ministry of the Angels.
and character of men.
And there is no difficulty in the
It is to be noted also that Astronomers
opinion of the Philosophers, who say
often foretell the truth, and that their
that a comet is a hot and dry con¬
judgements are for the most part
glomeration, generated in the higher
effective on one province or one nation.
And the reason is that they take their
* John” S. John Damascene, Doctor of judgements from the stars, which,
the Church, was born at Damascus about 676, according to the more probable view,
and died some time between 754 and 787. The have a greater, though not an inevitable,
quotation is from ’TxSocj'.c axpifirj^ influence over the actions of mankind
opQoSo^ou Tucrxews, which is the third part of in general, that is, over one nation or
the most important of all his works, IT7^
province, than over one individual
yvcuaeco?, Fountain of Wisdom. This third part,
person; and this because the greater
“The Orthodox Faith,” to which reference is
part of one nation more closely obeys
made here, must be considered the most notable
the natural disposition of the body than
of all the writings of S. John Damascene, and
does one single man. But this is men¬
it is in this treatise that he discloses so compre¬
tioned incidentally.
hensive a knowledge of the astronomy of his day.
And the second of the three ways by
It may be pointed out that Sprenger regards the
authority of S. John far too lightly, for the which we vindicate the Catholic stand¬
Doctor's words carry great weight. The only point is by refuting the errors of those
complete edition of the works of S. John Damas¬ who cast Horoscopes and Mathe¬
cene is that by Michael Lequien, O.P., published maticians! who worship the goddess of
at Pans, 1717, and Venice, 1748. Migne has
reprinted this, “Patres Greed,” XCIV-XCVI,
f “Mathematicians.” Although in Cicero and
with the addition of certain works by some
in Seneca mathematicus” means a mathema¬
attributed to the same author.
tician, in later Latin it always signifies an

MALEFICARUM
Part i. Question 5. 35
fortune. Of these S. Isidore (Ethics, haps have no great quantity of books.
VIII. 9) says that those who cast It is there noted that three things are to
Horoscopes are so called from their be considered in man, which are
examination of the stars at nativity, directed by three celestial causes,
and are commonly called Mathe¬ namely, the act of the will, the act of
maticians ; and in the same Book, the intellect, and the act of the body.
chapter 2, he says that Fortune has her The first of these is governed directly
name from fortuitousness, and is a sort and solely by God, the second by an
of goddess who mocks human affairs Angel, and the third by a celestial
in a haphazard and fortuitous manner. body. For choice and will are directly
Wherefore she is called blind, since she governed by God for good works, as
runs here and there with no considera¬ the Scripture says in Proverbs xxi :
tion for desert, and comes indifferently The heart of the king is in the hand
to good and bad. So much for Isidore. of the Lord; he turneth it whither¬
But to believe that there is such a soever he will. And it says “the heart
goddess, or that the harm done to of the king” to signify that, as the
bodies and creatures which is ascribed great cannot oppose His will, so are
to witchcraft does not actually proceed others even less able to do so. Also
from witchcraft, but from that same S. Paul says: God who causeth us to
goddess of Fortune, is sheer idolatry: wish and to perform that which is good.
and also to assert that witches them¬ The human understanding is governed
selves were born for that very purpose by God through the mediation of an
that they might perform such deeds in Angel. And those bodily actions, either
the world is similarly alien to the Faith, exterior or interior, which are natural
and indeed to the general teaching of to man, are regulated by God through
the Philosophers. Anyone who pleases the mediation of the Angels and the
may refer to S. Thomas in the 3rd book celestial bodies. For Blessed Dionysius
of his Summa of the Faith against the (de Diuin. nom., IV) says that the celestial
Gentiles, question 87, etc., and he will bodies are the causes of that which
find much to this effect. happens in this world; though he makes
Nevertheless one point must not be no implication of fatality.
omitted, for the sake of those who per- And since man is governed as to his
body by the celestial bodies, as to his
astrologer, a diviner, a wizard. The “Mathe¬ intellect by the Angels, and as to his
matici” were condemned by the Roman law as will by God, it may happen that if he
exponents of black magic. Their art is indeed
rejects God’s inspiration towards good¬
forbidden in severest terms by Diocletian (a.d.
ness, and the guidance of his good
284-305): “Artem geometriae discere atque
Angel, he may be led by his bodily
exercere publice interest, ars autem mathematica
affections to those things toward which
damnabilis interdicta est omnino.” The word
the influence of the stars inclines him,
“mathematician” was used in English some¬
that so his will and understanding
times to denote an astrologer, a fortune-teller.
become entangled in malice and error.
So in Shirley's comedy “The Sisters,” III,
However, it is not possible for anyone
licensed April, 1642, when the bandits dis¬
guised as diviners visit the castle, Giovanni enters to be influenced by the stars to enter
crying out: “Master Steward, yonder are the upon that sort of error in which the
rarest fellows! In such fantastical habits too; witches are ensnared, such as blood¬
they call themselves mathematicians.” “ What shed, theft or robbery, or even the
do they come for?” the steward asks. “To offer perpetration of the worst inconti¬
their service to my Lady,, and tell fortunes,” is nences ; and this is true of other natural
the reply. When Antonio sees them he grumbles:
phenomena.
Her house is open for these mountebanks, Also, as William of Paris says in his . .
Cheaters, and tumblers, that can foist and flatter De Uniuerso, it is proved by experience
My lady Gewgaw. . . that if a harlot tries to plant an olive *
What are you, sir?
it does not become fruitful, whereas if
Strozzo. One of the mathematicians, noble
it is planted by a chaste woman it is
signior.
fruitful. And a doctor in healing, a
Antonio. Mathematicians! mongrel,
farmer in planting, or a soldier in
How durst thou take that learned name upon
fighting can do more with the help of
thee?
the influence of the stars than another
You are one of those knaves that stroll the
who possesses the same skill can do.
country,
And live by picking worms out of fools' fingers. Our third way is taken from the

36 MALLEUS Part I. Question 5.
refutation of the belief in Fate. And may be said that He has ordained
here it is to be noted that a belief in intermediary causes for the realization
Fate is in one way quite Catholic, but of some of His purposes; and to this
in another way entirely heretical. For extent Fate is a rational fact. And in
Fate may be understood after the this way Boethius speaks of Fate (de
manner of certain Gentiles and Mathe¬ Consolatione IV) : Fate is an inherent
maticians, who thought that the differ¬ disposition in things mobile, by which
ent characters of men were inevitably Providence binds things to that which
caused, by the force of the position of It has ordained.
the stars, so that a wizard was pre¬ Nevertheless the learned Saints re¬
destined to be such, even if he were of a fused to use this name, on account of
good character, because the disposition those who twisted its meaning to the
of the stars under which he was con¬ force of the position of the stars.
ceived or bom caused him to be such as Wherefore S. Augustine (de Ciuitate Dei,
he was. And that force they called by V) says: If anyone attributed human
the name of Fate. affairs to Fate, meaning by Fate the
But that opinion is not only false, but Will and Power of God, let him keep
heretical and altogether detestable on his opinion but amend his tongue.
account of the deprivation which it It is clear, then, that what has been
must entail, as was shown above in the said provides a sufficient answer to the
refutation of the first error. For by it question whether all things, including
would be removed all reason for merit works of witchcraft, are subject to
or blame, for grace and glory, and God Fate. For if Fate is said to be the ordainwould be made the author of our ment of second causes of foreseen
evil, and more such incongruities. Divine results, that is, when God wills
Therefore such conception of Fate to effect His purposes through second
must be altogether rejected, since there causes; to that extent they are subject
is no such thing. And touching this to Fate, that is, to second causes so
belief S. Gregory says in his Homily ordained by God; and the influence of
on the Epiphany: Far be it from the the stars is one of these second causes.
hearts of the faithful to say that there is But those things which come directly
any Fate. from God, such as the Creation of
And although, on account of the things, the Glorification of things sub¬
same incongruity which is detected in stantial and spiritual, and other things
both, this opinion may seem to be the of this sort, are not subject to such
same as that concerning the Astrologers, Fate. And Boethius, in the book we
they are yet different inasmuch as they have quoted, supports this view when
disagree concerning the force of the he says that those things which are near
stars and the influx of the seven to the primal Deity are beyond the
Planets. influence of the decrees of Fate. There¬
But Fate may be considered to be a fore the works of witches, being outside
sort of second disposition, or an ordina¬ the common course and order of
tion of second causes for the production nature, are not subject to these second
of foreseen Divine effects. And in this causes. That is to say, that as regards
way Fate is truly something. For the their origin they are not subject willyprovidence of God accomplishes His nilly to Fate, but to other causes.
effects through mediating causes, in such
matters as are subject to second causes;
Witchcraft is not caused by the Powers
though this is not so in the case of some
that Move the Stars.
other matters, such as the creation of
souls, glorification, and the acquisition It follows that, just as witchcraft can¬
of grace.
not be caused in the manner that has
Also the Angels may co-operate in the been suggested, so also it is not caused
infusion of Grace by enlightening and by the separate Essences which are the
guiding the understanding and the Powers that move the stars; although
capability of the will, and so a certain this was believed to be the case by
arrangement of results may be said to Avicenna and his school, for the follow¬
be one and the same as Providence or ing reasons. For they argued that those
even Fate. For it is considered in this are separate Essences of a higher power
way; that there is in God a quality than our souls; and the soul itself can
which may be called Providence, or it sometimes, by the force of imagination,

MALEFICARUM
Part I. Question 5. 37
or merely through fear, effect a change Essences that move the stars is to influ¬
in its own body, and even sometimes ence any creature for good, although
in another body. For example, a man it often happens that it becomes
walking on a plank placed at a great corrupted by some accident. There¬
height easily falls, but in his fear he fore those Essences cannot be the
imagines that he will fall; but if the original cause of witches.
plank were placed on the ground he Besides, it is the part of a ^ood spirit
would not fall, for he would have no to lead men to that which is good in
reason to fear falling. So by the mere human nature, and of good repute;
apprehension of the soul the body grows therefore to entice men away from
* hot in the case of the concupiscent and such, and to betray them into evil
wrathful, and cold in the case of the things, belongs to an evilly-disposed
fearful. It can also, by strongly imagin¬ spirit. And by the wiles of such a spirit
ing and fearing such things, be affected men make no headway in those things
with illnesses, such as fever and leprosy. which are worthy, such as the sciences
And as with its own body, so it can and virtues, but rather in that which
influence another body either for health is evil, such as the knowledge of theft
or sickness; and to this is ascribed the and a thousand other crimes; therefore
cause of bewitchment, of which we the origin is not in these separate
have spoken above. Essences, but in some Power evilly
And since according to that view the disposed toward virtue.
deeds of witches have to be attributed to Besides, that cannot be understood
the Powers that move the stars, if not to be a well-disposed spirit which is
precisely to the stars themselves; there¬ invoked as a helper in the commission
fore we must add to what we have of crimes. But this is what happens
already said on this subject, that this in the deeds of witches; for, as will be
also is impossible. For the Powers that shown by their performances, they
move the stars are good and intelligent abjure the Faith, and slay innocent
Essences, riot only by nature but also children. For the separate Essences
by will, as appears from their working which move the stars do not, on account
for the good of the whole universe. of their goodness, provide help in these
But that creature by whose aid witch¬ works of witchcraft.
craft is done, although it may be In conclusion, then; this kind of
good by nature, cannot be good by works can no more arise from the
will. Therefore it is impossible to hold Movers of the stars than from the stars
the same judgement of both these themselves. And since they must origi¬
Essences. nate from some Power allied to some
And that such an Essence cannot be creature, and that Power cannot be
good in respect of will is proved as good in its will, although it may be
follows. For it is no part of a well- naturally good, and that the devils
disposed intelligence to extend patron¬ themselves answer to this description,
age to those who act against virtue; it follows that it is by their power that
and of such sort are the actions of such things are done.
witches. For it will be shown in the Unless, indeed, anyone should bring
Second Part that they commit murders, forward the trifling objection that
fornications, and sacrifices of children witchcraft originates in human malice,
and animals, and for their evil deeds and that it is effected by curses, and the
are called witches. Therefore the placings of images in a certain place,
Intelligence by whose aid such witch¬ the stars being favourable. For example,
craft is performed cannot be well- a certain witch placed her image and
disposed towards virtue; although it said to a woman, “I will make you
may be good in its original nature, blind and lame”; and it happened so.
since all things are so, as is evident to But it happened because the woman
anyone who thinks about it. Also it is from her nativity was destined by the
no part of a good Intelligence to be stars for such an affliction; and if such
the familiar spirit of criminals, and to words and practices had been used
extend patronage to them and not to against anyone else, they would not have
the virtuous. For they are criminals been effective. And to this I shall
who use witchcraft, and they are known answer in detail; first, that such witch¬
by their works. crafts cannot be caused by human
Now the natural function of the malice; secondly, that they cannot be

38 MALLEUS Part I. Question 5.
caused by magic words or images, And now as regards the effects of
whatever stars may be in concurrence. witchcraft. From the effects we arrive
at a knowledge of the cause. Now these
effects, as they concern us, are outside
Witchcraft does not operate from Human
the order of created nature as known
Malice alone.
to us, and are done through the power
And first to prove that witches’ works of some creature unknown to us,
cannot arise from human malice, how¬ although they are not miracles, which
ever great. For a man’s malice may are things done outside the order of
be either habitual, inasmuch as by the whole of created nature. As for
frequent practice he acquires a habit miracles, they are wrought by His
that inclines him to commit sin, not power Who is above the whole order
from ignorance but from weakness; of the entire natural creation, Which
in which case he is held to sin from is the Blessed God; as it is said: Thou
wickedness. Or it may be actual malice, art He Who alone workest great marvels.
by which is meant the deliberate choice So also the works of witches are said
of evil, which is called the sin against to be miraculous only inasmuch as they
the Holy Ghost. But in neither case can are done by some cause unknown to us,
he, without the help of some higher and outside the order of created nature
Power, work such spells as the mutation as known to us. From which it follows
of the elements, or the harming of the that the corporeal virtue of a man can¬
bodies both of men and beasts. And not extend itself to the causation of
this is proved first as to the cause, and such works; for it has always this
secondly as to the effect of witchcraft. quality, that the cause with the natural
For a man cannot effect such works effect is, in the case of man, recognized
without malice, that is, a weakening of naturally and without wonder.
his nature, and still less when his And that the works of witches can in 1
nature has already been weakened; as is some way be called miraculous, in so
clear, since his active virtue is already far as they exceed human knowledge,
diminished. But man, through all sorts is clear from their very nature; for they
of sin and wickedness, becomes weak¬ are not done naturally. It is shown
ened in his natural goodness. Both also by all the Doctors, especially S.
reason and authority prove this. For Augustine in Book LXXXIII, where he
Dionysius (de Diuin. ffom. I V) says: says that by magic arts many miracles |
Sin is the effect of natural habit; and are wrought similar to those miracles
he speaks of the sin of guilt. Wherefore which are done by the servants of God.
no one who is conscious of sin commits And again in the same book he says
it, unless he does so out of deliberate that Magicians do miracles by private
revolt. contract, good Christians by public
I answer thus. The sin of guilt stands justice, and bad Christians by the signs
in the same relation to the good of of public justice. And all this is ex¬
nature as does the good of grace to plained as follows. For there is a
the sin of nature. But by grace is Divine justice in the whole universe,
diminished natural sin, which is as a just as there is a public law in the
tinder prone to guilt; therefore much State. But the virtue of any creature
more is natural good diminished by has to do with the universe, as that of
guilt. And it is not valid to put forward the private individual has to do with
the objection that a bewitchment is the State. Therefore inasmuch as good
sometimes caused by an old woman Christians work miracles by Divine
evilly looking at a child, by which the justice, they are said to work them by
child is changed and bewitched. For, public justice. But the Magician, since t
as has already been shown, this can he works through a pact entered into
only happen to children because of with the devil, is said to work by private
their tender complexion. But here we contract; for he works by means of the
speak of the bodies of all sorts of men devil, who by his natural power can do
and beasts, and even the elements and things outside the order of created
hailstorms. If anyone wishes to inquire nature as known to us, through the
further, he may refer to S. Thomas in virtue of a creature unknown to us;
his questions concerning Evil: Whether and it will be for us a miracle, although
sin can corrupt the whole natural not actually so, since he cannot work
good, etc. outside the order of the whole of

Part I. Question 5. MALEFICARUM 39
created nature, and through all the cannot be good in respect of will, since
virtues of creatures unknown to us. it always works for evil; and such is the
For in this way only God is said to devil, as has been shown above.
work miracles. As it is said: Thou art And they cannot effect such things
God Who alone workest great marvels. by images influenced, as it were, by the
But had Christians work through the stars. For such images, marked with
signs of public justice, as by invoking whatever characters and figures, are
the Name of Christ, or by exhibiting the result of a man working by art. But
certain sacraments. If anyone pleases, the stars cause natural effects; a term
he can refer to S. Thomas in the first which cannot be applied to the effects
part of the questions, III, art. 4. He caused by evil witches, to the harm of
can also study the conclusions in the creatures, proceeding apart from the
Second Part of this work, Chapter VI. accustomed order of nature. Wherefore
this argument is not relevant.
Again, it has been shown above that
That Witchcraft is not exercised and wrought
there are two kinds of images. Those
by Voices and Words under a favouring
of the Astrologers and Mages are
Influence of the Stars.
ordained not for corruption, but for
Neither does witchcraft proceed from the obtaining of some private good.
words uttered over images by men But the images of witches are quite j
under favourable constellations. For different, since always they are secretly \
the intellect of a man is of such a nature placed somewhere by the command of
that its knowledge springs from things, the devil for the hurt of a creature;
and phantasms must be rationally and they who walk or sleep over them
examined. It is not in his nature, are harmed, as the witches themselves
simply by thought or by the intrinsic confess. Wherefore whatever they effect
operation of his intellect, to cause things is done by means of devils, and is not
to happen just by expressing them in due to the influence of the stars.
words. For if there were men who had To the arguments. For the first, we
such power, they would not be of the must understand the words of S.
same nature as we, and could only Augustine, that the cause of man’s
equivocally be called men. depravity lies in man’s will, meaning
But it is said that they effect these the cause which produces the effect;
things by words when the stars of the which is properly said to be the cause.
nativity are favourable; from which It is not so, however, with the cause
it would follow that they would be which permits the effect, or arranges
able to act by the power of words only or advises or suggests it, in which sense
under certain conditions, and that the devil is said to be the cause of sin
they would be powerless without the and depravity; God only permitting
help of the stars of their victim’s it that good may come of evil. As
nativity. But this is clearly false from S. Augustine says: The devil provides
what has been said before concerning the inner suggestion, and persuades
Astromancers, casters of Horoscopes both inwardly and outwardly by more
and Fortune-tellers. active stimulation. But he instructs |
Besides, words express the conception those who are entirely in his power, as
of the mind; and the stars cannot are witches, whom there is no need to I
influence the understanding, neither tempt from within, but only from j
can the Powers that move them, unless without, etc.
they wish on their own account, and And through this we come to the
apart from the motion of the stars, to second argument, that everyone is, by
enlighten the understanding; and this direct understanding, the cause of his
would only happen in regard to good own wickedness. And concerning this
works, for not enlightenment but dark¬ it is to be said that, though it would be
ness is given to the understanding for contrary to the doctrine of free-will to
the performance of evil works; and believe that a man may be influenced
such is the function not of good,, but by direct command, it is not so to say
of evil spirits. Therefore it is clear that he is influenced by suggestion.
that if their words are in any way Thirdly, impulses to good or evil
effective, it is not by virtue of any star, can be caused to be suggested by the
but by virtue of some Intelligence, influence of the stars, and the impulse
which may be naturally good, but is received as a natural inclination to

40 MALLEUS Part I. Question 5.
human virtue or vice. But the works of the harp. And hence an attempt is
of witches are outside the common order made to argue that some men can
of nature, and therefore they cannot work witchcraft through certain herbs
be subject to those influences. and occult causes, without the help of
The fourth argument is equally clear. devils, but only of the influence of the
For though the stars are a cause of stars, which have more direct power
human acts, witchcraft is not properly over matters corporeal for corporeal
a human act. effects than over the devils for effects
For the fifth argument, that the of witchcraft.
Powers that move the stars can influence Now, though this must be answered
souls. If that is understood directly, more widely, it is to be noted that
they do so influence them by enlighten¬ herbs and music cannot by their own
ing them towards goodness, but not to natural virtue entirely shut out the.
witchcraft, as has been shown above. molestation which the devil can inflicti
But if it is understood mediately, then upon men, with the permission of God
through the medium of the stars they and the good Angels. Yet they can
exert an indirect and suggestive mitigate that molestation; and this
influence. can even be of so slight a nature that
Sixthly, there are two reasons why they can entirely remove it. But they
devils molest men at certain phases of would do this, not by acting against
the Moon. First, that they may bring the devil himself, since he is a separate
disrepute on a creature of God, namely, spirit against whom nothing corporeal
the Moon, as S. Jerome and S. John can naturally act, but by acting against
Chrysostom say. Secondly, because they the actual molestation of the devil.
cannot, as has been said above, operate For every cause that has limited power
except through the medium of the can produce a more intense effect on
natural powers. Therefore they study a suitable than upon an unsuitable
the aptitudes of bodies for receiving an material. See Aristotle De Anima. They
impression; and because, as Aristotle who act do so upon a predisposed
says, the brain is the most humid of patient. Now the devil is an agent of
all the parts of the body, therefore it limited power; therefore he can inflict
chiefly is subject to the operation of the a fiercer affliction on a man disposed
Moon, which itself has power to incite to that affliction or to that which the
humours. Moreover, the animal forces devil means to inflict, than upon a man
are perfected in the brain, and therefore of a contrary disposition. For example,
the devils disturb a man’s fancy accord¬ the devil can induce a fiercer passion
ing to certain phases of the Moon, of melancholy in a man disposed to
when the brain is ripe for such that humour than in a man of the
influences. contrary disposition.
And there are two reasons why the Moreover, it > is certain that herbs
devils are present as counsellors in and music can change the disposition
certain constellations. First, that they of the body, and consequently of the
may lead men into the error of thinking emotions. This is evident in the case
that there is some divinity in the of herbs, since some incline a man
stars. Secondly, because they think to joy, some to sadness, and so with
I
that under the influence of some con¬ others. It is evident also in the case of
stellations corporeal matter is more apt music, as Aristotle shows (Politics, VIII),
for the deeds that they counsel. where he says that different harmonies
And as to what S. Augustine says in de can produce different passions in man.
Ciuitate Dei, XXXVI: Devils are at¬ Boethius also mentions this in his
tracted by various kinds of stones, herbs, Music, and the author of the Birth of
trees, animals, songs, and instruments of Knowledge, where he speaks of the
music, not as animals are attracted by usefulness of music, and says that it is
food, but as spirits by signs, as if these of value in the cure or alleviation of
things were exhibited to them as a sign various infirmities. And thus, other
of Divine honour, for which they are things being equal, it may help to
i themselves eager. weaken the affliction.
But it is often objected that devils But I do not see how herbs or music
can be hindered by herbs and music can cause a man to be of such a dis¬
from molesting men; as it is alleged in position that he can in no way be
the argument from Saul and the music molested by the devil. Even if such

Part I. Question 6. MALEFICARUM
4i
I
a thing were permissible, the devil, cross of wood with the strings stretched
\ moving only in local vapour of the across. And even at that time the devils , *
spirit, can grievously afflict men super- fled from this.
naturally. But herbs and harmonies
☆
cannot of their own natural virtue
cause in man a disposition by which
QUESTION VI
the devil is prevented from creating
the aforesaid commotion. Neverthe¬ Concerning Witches who copulate with
less it sometimes happens that the Devils.
devil is permitted to inflict only so
small a vexation on a man that, through Why it is that Women are chiefly addicted
some strong contrary disposition, it to Evil Superstitions.
T
may be totally removed; and then
HERE is also, concerning witches
some herbs or harmonies can so dispose
who copulate with devils, much
a man’s body to the contrary that the
difficulty in considering the methods by
vexation is totally removed. For ex¬
which such abominations are consum¬
ample, the devil may at times vex a
mated. On the part of the devil: first,
man with the affliction of sadness; but
of what element the body is made that
so weakly that herbs or harmonies
he assumes; secondly, whether the act
which are capable of causing a swelling
is always accompanied by the injection
and uplifting of the spirits, which are
of semen received from another; third¬
contrary emotions to sadness, can
ly, as to time and place, whether he
totally remove that sadness.
commits this act more frequently at one
Moreover, S. Augustine, in his Second
time than at another; fourthly, whether
Book On the Christian Doctrine, con¬
the act is invisible to any who may be
demns amulets and certain other things
standing by. And on the part of the
of which he there writes much, attribut¬
women, it has to be inquired whether
ing their virtue to magic art, since they
only they who were themselves con¬
can have no natural virtue of their
ceived in this filthy manner are often
own. And this is clear from what he
visited by devils; or secondly, whether
says. To this sort belong all amulets
it is those who were offered to devils by
and charms which are condemned by
midwives at the time of their birth;
the School of Physicians, which con¬
and thirdly, whether the actual venereal
demns very clearly their use, in that
delectation of such is of a weaker sort.
they have no efficacy of their own
But we cannot here reply to all these
natural virtue.
questions, both because we are only en¬
And as for that concerning 1 Kings
gaged in a general study, and because
xvi: that Saul, who was vexed by a
in the second part of this work they are
devil, was alleviated when David played
all singly explained by their operations,
his harp before him, and that the devil
as will appear in the fourth chapter,
departed, etc. It must be known that
where mention is made of each separate
it is quite true that by the playing of
method. Therefore let us now chiefly
the harp, and the natural virtue of
consider women; and first, why this
that harmony, the affliction of Saul was
kind of perfidy is found more in so
to some extent relieved, inasmuch as
fragile a sex than in men. And our in¬
that music did somewhat calm his
quiry will first be general, as to the
senses through hearing; through which
general conditions of women; secondly,
calming he was made less prone to
particular, as to which sort of women
that vexation. But the reason why the
are found to be given to superstition and
evil spirit departed when David played
witchcraft; and thirdly, specifically
the harp was because of the might of
with regard to midwives, who surpass
the Cross, which is clearly enough
all others in wickedness.
shown by the gloss, where it says:
David was learned in music, skilful
Why Superstition is chiefly found in
in the different notes and harmonic
Women.
modulations. He shows the essential
unity by playing each day in various As for the first question, why a
modes. David repressed the evil spirit greater number of witches is found in
by the harp, not because there was so the fragile feminine sex than among
much virtue in the harp, but it was men; it is indeed a fact that it were idle
made in the sign of a cross, being a to contradict, since it is accredited by *
E

42 MALLEUS Part I. Question 6.
actual experience, apart from the verbal again, The tongue of the just is as
testimony of credible witnesses. And choice silver: the heart of the wicked is
without in any way detracting from a little worth. And again, The lips of
sex in which God has always taken the righteous feed many; but fools die
great glory that His might should be for want of wisdom. For this cause he
spread abroad, let us say that various adds in chapter xvi, The preparations
men have assigned various reasons for of the heart belong to man; but the
this fact, which nevertheless agree in answer of the tongue is from the Lord.
principle. Wherefore it is good, for the But concerning an evil tongue you
admonition of women, to speak of this will find in Ecclesiasticus xxviii: A
matter; and it has often been proved by backbiting tongue hath disquieted
experience that they are eager to hear many, and driven them from nation to
of it, so long as it is set forth with dis¬ nation: strong cities hath it pulled
cretion. down, and overthrown the houses of
For some learned men propound this great men. And by a backbiting
reason; that there are three things in tongue it means a third party who
nature, the Tongue, an Ecclesiastic, rashly or spitefully interferes between
and a Woman, which know no modera¬ two contending parties.
tion in goodness or vice; and when they Secondly, concerning Ecclesiastics,
exceed the bounds of their condition that is to say, clerics and religious of
they reach the greatest heights and the either sex, S. John Chrysostomf speaks
lowest depths of goodness and vice. on the text, He cast out them that
When they are governed by a good bought and sold from the temple.
spirit, they are most excellent in virtue; From the priesthood arises everything
but when they are governed by an evil good, and everything evil. S. Jerome
spirit, they indulge the worst possible in his epistle to Nepotian says: Avoid
vices. as you would the plague a trading
This is clear in the case of the tongue, priest, who has risen from poverty to
since by its ministry most of the king¬ riches, from a low to a high estate. And
doms have been brought into the faith Blessed Bernard in his 23rd Homily On
of Christ; and the Holy Ghost ap¬ the Psalms says of clerics: If one should
peared over the Apostles of Christ in arise as an open heretic, let him be cast
tongues of fire. Other learned preachers out and put to silence; if he is a violent
also have had as it were the tongues of enemy, let all good men flee from him.
dogs, licking the wounds and sores of But how are we to know which ones to
the dying Lazarus. As it is said: With cast out or to flee from? For they are
the tongues of dogs ye save your souls confusedly friendly and hostile, peace¬
from the enemy. able and quarrelsome, neighbourly and
For this reason S. Dominic,* the utterly selfish.
leader and father of the Order of And in another place: Our bishops
Preachers, is represented in the figure are become spearmen, and our pastors
of a barking dog with a lighted torch in shearers. And by bishops here is meant
his mouth, that even to this day he may those proud Abbots who impose heavy
by his barking keep off the heretic labours on their inferiors, which they
wolves from the flock of Christ’s sheep. would not themselves touch with their
It is also a matter of common ex¬ little finger. And S. Gregory says con¬
perience that the tongue of one prudent cerning pastors: No one does more
man can subdue the wrangling of a harm in the Church than he who,
multitude; wherefore not unjustly Solo¬ having the name or order of sanctity,
mon sings much in their praise, in lives in sin; for no one dares to accuse
Proverbs x.: In the lips of him that hath him of sin, and therefore the sin is
understanding wisdom is found. And widely spread, since the sinner is
* “S. Dominic.” Before the birth of S. f “S. John Chrysostom.” Born at Antioch
Dominic, his mother, Blessed Joanna d’Aza, 347; died at Comana in Pontus, 14 September,
dreamed that she had brought forth a black-and- 407. His fifty-nine homilies “On the Psalms”
white dog carrying in his mouth a lighted torch. (iv-xii, xli, xliii-xlix, cviii-cxvii, cxix-cl) are
The dog with the torch is accordingly the pictorial very famous. For a full study of these see Bawds
attribute of the Saint. Nor must the play upon “Der urspriingliche Umfang des Kommentars
the name of his sons be forgotten—Dominicani, des hi. Joh. Chrysostomus zu den Psalmen” in
Domini canes, Hounds of the Lord. XpuaoCTTojjLixa, fasc. I, Rome, igo8.

Part I. Question 6. MALEFICARUM
43
honoured for the sanctity of his order. virtuous wife, for the number of his
Blessed Augustine also speaks of monks days shall be doubled. And throughout
to Vincent the Donatist: I freely con¬ that chapter much high praise is spoken
fess to your charity before the Lord our of the excellence of good women; as
God, which is the witness of my soul also in the last chapter of Proverbs con¬
from the time I began to serve God, cerning a virtuous woman.
what great difficulty I have experi¬ And all this is made clear also in the
enced in the fact that it is impossible to New Testament concerning women and
find either worse or better men than virgins and other holy women who have
those who grace or disgrace the monas¬ by faith led nations and kingdoms away
teries. from the worship of idols to the Chris¬
Now the wickedness of women is tian religion. Anyone who looks at Vin¬
spoken of in Ecclesiasticus xxv: There is cent of Beauvais (in Spe. His tor., XXVI.
no head above the head of a serpent: 9) will find marvellous things of the
and there is no wrath above the wrath conversion of Hungary by the most
of a woman. I had rather dwell with a Christian Gilia,f and of the Franks by
lion and a dragon than to keep house Clotilda,X the wife of Clovis. Where¬
with a wicked woman. And among fore in many vituperations that we read
much which in that place precedes and against women, the word woman is
follows about a wicked woman, he con¬ used to mean the lust of the flesh. As it
cludes: All wickedness is but little to is said: I have found a woman more
the wickedness of a woman. Wherefore bitter than death, and a good woman
S. John Chrysostom says on the text, It subject to carnal lust.
is not good to marry (S. Matthew xix) :* Others again have propounded other
What else is woman but a foe to friend¬ reasons why there are more super¬
ship, an unescapable punishment, a stitious women found than men. And
necessary evil, a natural temptation, a the first is, that they are more credu¬
desirable calamity, a domestic danger, lous ; and since the chief aim of the
a delectable detriment, an evil of devil is to corrupt faith, therefore he
nature, painted with fair colours! rather attacks them. See Ecclesiasticus
Therefore if it be a sin to divorce her xix: He that is quick to believe is
when she ought to be kept, it is indeed light-minded, and shall be diminished.
a necessary torture; for either we com¬
mit adultery by divorcing her, or we
f “Gilia.” Rather Gisela, the devout sister
must endure daily strife. Cicero in his of Duke Henry of Bavaria (the future Emperor
second book of The Rhetorics says: The S. Henry II); in 993 married S. Stephen of
many lusts of men lead them into one Hungary, who succeeded to the throne in 997.
sin, but the one lust of women leads She was untiring in her efforts to spread the
them into all sins; for the root of all Faith throughout the kingdom. The coronation
, woman’s vices is avarice. And Seneca mantle of Hungary, a purple damask cope,
embroidered in silk and gold by Queen Gisela,
[ says in his Tragedies: A woman either
dated 1031, is preserved at Budapest.
i loves or hates; there is no third grade.
+ “ClotildaBorn probably at Lyons about
And the tears of a woman are a decep¬
474; died at Tours, 3 June, 343. The feast of
tion, for they may spring from true
S. Clotilda is celebrated 3 June. From the sixth
grief, or they may be a snare. When a
century onwards, the marriage of Clovis I, King
woman thinks alone, she thinks evil.
of the Salic Franks, and Clotilda, which took
But for good women there is so much
place in 492 or 493, was made the theme of epic
praise, that we read that they have
narratives and many legends. Clotilda soon
brought beatitude to men, and have acquired a great ascendancy over her husband, and
saved nations, lands, and cities; as is she availed herself of this influence to win him to
clear in the case of Judith, Debbora, the Catholic Faith. For a time her efforts seemed
and Esther. See also i Corinthians vii: unavailing, but Clovis, who in a great battle
If a woman hath a husband that be- against the Alemanni saw his men on the point
of defeat, invoked the God of his wife, promising
lieveth not, and he be pleased to dwell
to become a Christian if only victory should be
with her, let her not leave him. For
granted to the Franks. The tide instantly turned,
the unbelieving husband is sanctified
and, true to his word, he was baptized at Reims
by the believing wife. And Ecclesias¬
by S. Remigius at Christmas, 496. His sister and
ticus xxvi: Blessed is the man who has a
three thousand of his■ noblest warriors at the
same time embraced the Faith. Thus S.
* “S. MatthewThe ninety Homilies on S.
Clotilda was the instrument in the conversion of a
Matthew were written about the year 390. mighty people.

MALLEUS Part I. Question 6.
44
The second reason is, that women are tiones, III): No woman understood
naturally more impressionable, and philosophy except Temeste.J And
more ready to receive the influence of Proverbs xi, as it were describing a
a disembodied spirit; and that when woman, says: As a jewel of gold in a
they use this quality well they are very swine’s snout, so is a fair woman which
good, but when they use it ill they are is without discretion.
But the natural reason is that she is
very evil.
The third reason is that they have more carnal than a man, as is clear
slippery tongues, and are unable to con¬ from her many carnal abominations.
ceal from their fellow-women those And it should be noted that there was a
things which by evil arts they know; defect in the formation of the first
and, since they are weak, they find an woman, since she was formed from a
easy and secret manner of vindicating bent rib, that is, a rib of the breast,
themselves by witchcraft. See Eccle¬ which is bent as it were in a contrary
siasticus as quoted above: I had rather direction to a man. And since through
dwell with a lion and a dragon than to this defect she is an imperfect animal,
keep house with a wicked woman. All she always deceives. For Cato says:
wickedness is but little to the wicked¬ When a woman weeps she weaves
ness of a woman. And to this may be snares. And again: When a woman
added that, as they are very impres¬ weeps, she labours to deceive a man.
sionable, they act accordingly. And this is shown by Samson’s wife,
There are also others who bring for¬ who coaxed him to tell her the riddle
ward yet other reasons, of which he had propounded to the Philistines,
preachers should be very careful how and told them the answer, and so de¬
they make use. For it is true that in the ceived him. And it is clear in the case
Old Testament the Scriptures have of the first woman that she had little
much that is evil to say about women, faith; for when the serpent asked why
and this because of the first temptress, they did not eat of every tree in Para¬
Eve, and her imitators; yet afterwards in dise, she answered: Of every tree, etc.
the New Testament we find a change of —lest perchance we die. Thereby she
name, as from Eva to Ave (as S. Jerome showed that she doubted, and had little
says), and the whole sin of Eve taken faith in the word of God. And all this
away by the benediction of Mary. is indicated by the etymology of the
Therefore preachers should always say word; for Femina comes from Fe and
as much praise of them as possible. Minus, since she is ever weaker to hold
But because in these times this per¬ and preserve the faith. And this as re¬
fidy is more often found in women than gards faith is of her very nature; al¬
in men, as we learn by actual experi¬ though both by grace and nature faith
ence, if anyone is curious as to the never failed in the Blessed Virgin, even
reason, we may add to what has already at the time of Christ’s Passion, when it
been said the following: that since failed in all men.
they are feebler both in mind and Therefore a wicked woman is by her
body, it is not surprising that they nature quicker to waver in her faith,
should come more under the spell of and consequently quicker to abjure the
witchcraft. faith, which is the root of witchcraft.
For as regards intellect, or the under¬ And as to her other mental quality,
standing of spiritual things, they seem that is, her natural will; when she hates
to be of a different nature from men; a someone whom she formerly loved,
fact which is vouched for by the logic of then she seethes with anger and im¬
the authorities, backed by various ex¬ patience in her whole soul, just as the
amples from the Scriptures. Terence* tides of the sea are always heaving and
says: Women are intellectually like boiling. Many authorities allude to this
children. And Lactantius (Instituf “Temeste.” “Denique nullas unquam
mulieres philosophari docuerunt praeter unam ex
* “Terence” “Hecyra” III, i, 30-32: omni memoria Themisten.” Ill, xxv. But on
Pueri inter sese quam pro leuibus noxiis iras this Xistus Betulaeus (ed. 1536) glosses: “Putat
gerunt! fortasse Leontii coniugem, ad quam Epicurus
Qua propter? quia enim, qui eos gubernat ani¬ scripsisse legitur. Quid dicemus de Thermismus, infirmum gerunt. toclea, Pythagorae sorore? quid de aliis pluribus
Itidem illa mulieres sunt ferme, ut pueri, leui quarum bene longum catalogum Textor
sententia. recenset?”

Part I. Question 6. MALEFICARUM
45
cause. Ecclesiasticus xxv : There is no one who knew. For S. Jerome in his
wrath above the wrath of a woman. Contra Iouinianum\ says: This Socrates
And Seneca (Tragedies, VIII): No might had two wives, whom he endured with
of the flames or of the swollen winds, no much patience, but could not be rid of
deadly weapon, is so much to be feared their contumelies and clamorous vi¬
as the lust and hatred of a woman who tuperations. So one day when they
has been divorced from the marriage were complaining against him, he went
bed.* out of the house to escape their plagu¬
This is shown too in the woman who ing, and sat down before the house; and
falsely accused Joseph, and caused him the women then threw filthy water over
to be imprisoned because he would not him. But the philosopher was not dis¬
consent to the crime of adultery with turbed by this, saying, ‘T knew that the
her (Genesis xxx). And truly the most rain would come after the thunder.”
powerful cause which contributes to the There is also a story of a man whose
increase of witches is the woeful rivalry wife was drowned in a river, who, when
between married folk and unmarried he was searching for the body to take it
women and men. This is so even among out of the water, walked up the stream.
holy women, so what must it be among And when he was asked why, since
the others? For you see in Genesis xxi. heavy bodies do not rise but fall, he
how impatient and envious Sarah was was searching against the current of the
of Hagar when she conceived: how river, he answered : “When that woman
jealous Rachel was of Leah because she was alive she always, both in word and
had no children (Genesis xxx): and deed, went contrary to my commands;
Hannah, who was barren, of the fruitful therefore I am searching in the contrary
Peninnah (I. Kings i): and how Miriam direction in case even now she is dead
(Numbers xii) murmured and spoke ill she may preserve her contrary dis¬
of Moses, and was therefore stricken position.”
with leprosy: and how Martha was And indeed, just as through the first
jealous of Mary Magdalen, because she defect in their intelligence they are more
was busy and Mary was sitting down prone to abjure the faith; so through
(S. Luke x). To this point is Eccle¬ their second defect of inordinate affec¬
siasticus xxxvii: Neither consult with a tions and passions they search for,
woman touching her of whom she is brood over, and inflict various ven¬
jealous. Meaning that it is useless to geances, either by witchcraft, or by
consult with her, since there is always some other means. Wherefore it is no
jealousy, that is, envy, in a wicked wonder that so great a number of
woman. And if women behave thus to witches exist in this sex.
each other, how much more will they Women also have weak memories;
do so to men. and it is a natural vice in them not to
Valerius Maximus tells how, when be disciplined, but to follow their own
Phoroneus, the king of the Greeks, was impulses without any sense of what is
dying, he said to his brother Leontius due; this is her whole study, and all that
that there would have been nothing she keeps in her memory. So Theo¬
lacking to him of complete happiness if phrastus says: If you hand over the
a wife had always been lacking to him. whole management of the house to her,
And when Leontius asked how a wife but reserve some minute detail to your
could stand in the way of happiness, he own judgement, she will think that you
answered that all married men well are displaying a great want of faith in
knew. And when the philosopher So¬ her, and will stir up strife; and unless
crates was asked if one should marry a you quickly take counsel, she will pre¬
wife, he answered: If you do not, you pare poison for you, and consult seers
are lonely, your family dies out, and a and soothsayers; and will become a
stranger inherits; if you do, you suffer witch.
perpetual anxiety, querulous com¬ But as to domination by women, hear
plaints, reproaches concerning the mar¬ what Cicero says in the Paradoxes. Can
riage portion, the heavy displeasure of he be called a free man whose wife
your relations, the garrulousness of a governs him, imposes laws on him,
mother-in-law, cuckoldom, and no cer¬ orders him, and forbids him to do what
tain arrival of an heir. This he said as
* “Contra Iouiniamm.” This treatise was
* “Seneca.” “Medea” 579-82. written 392-95.

46 MALLEUS Part I. Question 6.
1
l| he wishes, so that he cannot and dare And now let us examine the carnal
not deny her anything that she asks? desires of the body itself, whence has
I should call him not only a slave, but arisen unconscionable harm to human
the vilest of slaves, even if he comes of life. Justly may we say with Cato of
the noblest family. And Seneca, in the Utica: If the world could be rid of
character of the raging Medea,* says: women, we should not be without God
Why do you cease to follow your happy in our intercourse. For truly, without
impulse; how great is that part of the wickedness of women, to say
vengeance in which you rejoice? Where nothing of witchcraft, the world would
he adduces many proofs that a woman still remain proof against innumerable
will not be governed, but will follow her dangers. Hear what Valerius said to
own impulse even to her own destruc¬ Rufinus: You do not know that woman
tion. In the same way we read of many is the Chimaera, but it is good that you
women who have killed themselves should know it; for that monster was of
either for love or sorrow because they three forms; its face was that of a
were unable to work their vengeance. radiant and noble lion, it had the filthy
S. Jerome, writing of Daniel, tells a belly of a goat, and it was armed with
story of Laodice, wife of Antiochus king the virulent tail of a viper. And he
of Syria; how, being jealous lest he means that a woman is beautiful to look
should love his other wife, Berenice, upon, contaminating to the touch, and
more than her, she first caused Berenice deadly to keep.
and her daughter by Antiochus to be Let us consider another property of
slain, and then poisoned herself. And hers, the voice. For as she is a liar by
why? Because she would not be gov¬ nature, so in her speech she stings while
erned, but would follow her own im¬ she delights us. Wherefore her voice is
pulse. Therefore S. John Chrysostom like the song of the Sirens, who with
says not without reason: O evil worse their sweet melody entice the passers-by
than all evil, a wicked woman, whether and kill them. For they kill them by
she be poor or rich. For if she be the emptying their purses, consuming their
wife of a rich man, she does not cease strength, and causing them to forsake
night and day to excite her husband God. Again Valerius says to Rufinus:
with hot words, to use evil blandish¬ When she speaks it is a delight which
ments and violent importunations. And flavours the sin; the flower of love is a
if she have a poor husband she does not rose, because under its blossom there
cease to stir him also to anger and strife. are hidden many thorns. See Proverbs
And if she be a widow, she takes it upon v, 3-4: Her mouth is smoother than
herself everywhere to look down on oil; that is, her speech is afterwards as
everybody, and is inflamed to all bold¬ bitter as absinthium. [Her throat is
ness by the spirit of pride. smoother than oil. But her end is as
If we inquire, we find that nearly all bitter as wormwood.]
the kingdoms of the world have been Let us consider also her gait, posture,
overthrown by women. Troy, which and habit, in which is vanity of vanities.
was a prosperous kingdom, was, for the There is no man in the world who
rape of one woman, Helen, destroyed, studies so hard to please the good God
and many thousands of Greeks slain. as even an ordinary woman studies by /
The kingdom of the Jews suffered much her vanities to please men. An example
misfortune and destruction through the of this is to be found in the life of
accursed Jezebel, and her daughter Pelagia,* a worldly woman who was
Athaliah, queen of Judah, who caused
her son’s sons to be killed, that on their * “Pelagia.” “Pelagia meretrix” or “Pelagia
death she might reign herself; yet each mima,” a beautiful actress who led the life cf a
prostitute at Antioch. She was converted by the
of them was slain. The kingdom of the
holy bishop Nonnus, and disguised as a man
I} Romans endured much evil through
went on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where for many
Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, that worst
years she led a life of extremest mortification and
of women. And so with others. There¬
penance in a grotto on the Mount of Olives.
fore it is no wonder if the world now
This “bienheureuse picheresse” attained to such
suffers through the malice of women.
heights of sanctity that she was canonized, and
in the East, where her cult was long very
* “Medea.” V, 895-6: popular, her festival is kept on 8 October, which
Quid, anime, cessas sequere felicem impetum ? is also the day of her commemoration in the
Pars ultionis ista, qua gaudes, quota est? Roman Martyrology.

Part I. Question 6. MALEFICARUM
47
wont to go about Antioch tired and More such reasons could be brought for¬
adorned most extravagantly. A holy ward, but to the understanding it is
father, named Nonnus, saw her and sufficiently clear that it is no matter for
began to weep, saying to his com¬ wonder that there are more women than
panions, that never in all his life had he men found infected with the heresy of
used such diligence to please God; and witchcraft. And in consequence of this,
much more he added to this effect, it is better called the heresy of witches
which is preserved in his orations. than of wizards, since the name is taken
It is this which is lamented in Eccle¬ from the more powerful party. And
siastes vii, and which the Church even blessed be the Highest Who has so far
now laments on account of the great preserved the male sex from so great a
multitude of witches. And I have crime: for since He was willing to be
found a woman more bitter than death, born and to suffer for us, therefore He
who is the hunter’s snare, and her heart has granted to men this privilege.
is a net, and her hands are bands. He
that pleaseth God shall escape from her;
What sort of Women are found to be above
but he that is a sinner shall be caught
all Others Superstitious and Witches.
by her. More bitter than death, that
is, than the devil: Apocalypse vi, 8, His As to our second inquiry, what sort of
name was Death. For though the devil women more than others are found to
tempted Eve to sin, yet Eve seduced
be superstitious and infected with witch¬
Adam. And as the sin of Eve would not craft; it must be said, as was shown in
have brought death to our soul and the preceding inquiry, that three
body unless the sin had afterwards general vices appear to have special
passed on to Adam, to which he was dominion over wicked women, namely,
tempted by Eve, not by the devil, infidelity, ambition, and lust. There¬
therefore she is more bitter than death. fore they are more than others inclined
More bitter than death, again, be¬ towards witchcraft, who more than
cause that is natural and destroys only others are given to these vices. Again,
the body; but the sin which arose from since of these three vices the last
woman destroys the soul by depriving it chiefly predominates, women being
of grace, and delivers the body up to the
insatiable, etc., it follows that those
punishment for sin.
among ambitious women are more
More bitter than death, again, be¬ deeply infected who are more hot to
cause bodily death is an open and ter¬ satisfy their filthy lusts; and such are
rible enemy, but woman is a wheedling
adulteresses, fornicatresses, and the
and secret enemy.
concubines of the Great.
And that she is more perilous than a
Now there are, as it is said in the
snare does not speak of the snare of Papal Bull, seven methods by which
hunters, but of devils. For men are
they infect with witchcraft the venereal
caught not only through their carnal
act and the conception of the womb:
desires, when they see and hear women:
First, by inclining the minds of men to
for S. Bernard says: Their face is a
inordinate passion; second, by ob¬
burning wind, and their voice the hiss¬
structing their gererative force; third,
ing of serpents: but they also cast
by removing the members accommo¬
wicked spells on countless men and
dated to that act; fourth, by changing
animals. And when it is said that her
men into beasts by their magic art;
heart is a net, it speaks of the inscrutable
fifth, by destroying the generative force
malice which reigns in their hearts.
in women; sixth, by procuring abor¬
And her hands are as bands for binding;
tion; seventh, by offering children to
for when they place their hands on a
I devils, besides other animals and fruits
creature to bewitch it, then with the help
of the earth with which they work much
of the devil they perform their design,
harm. And all these will be considered
To conclude. All witchcraft comes
later; but for the present let us give our
from carnal lust, which is in women in¬
minds to the injuries towards men.
satiable. See Proverbs xxx: There are
And first concerning those who are
three things that are never satisfied, yea,
bewitched into an inordinate love or
a fourth thing which says not, It is
hatred, this is a matter of a sort that it
enough; that is, the mouth of the womb.
is difficult to discuss before the general
Wherefore for the sake of fulfilling their
intelligence. Yet it must be granted
lusts they consort even with devils.
that it is a fact. For S. Thomas (IV,

48 MALLEUS Part I. Question 7.
34), treating of obstructions caused by
QUESTION VII
witches, shows that God allows the
devil greater power against men’s Whether Witches can Sway the Minds of
venereal acts than against their other Men to Love or Hatred.
I
actions; and gives this reason, that this
is likely to be so, since those women are T is asked whether devils, through the
chiefly apt to be witches who are most medium of witches, can change or
disposed to such acts incite the minds of men to inordinate
For he says that, since the first cor¬ love or hatred; and it is argued that,
ruption of sin by which man became following the previous conclusions, they
the slave of the devil came to us cannot do so. For there are three things
through the act of generation, therefore in man: will, understanding, and body.
greater power is allowed by God to the The first is ruled by God Himself (for,
devil in this act than in all others. Also The heart of the king is in the hand of
the power of witches is more apparent the Lord); the second is enlightened by
in serpents, as it is said, than in other an Angel; and the body is governed by
animals, because through the means of the motions of the stars. And as the
a serpent the devil tempted woman. devils cannot effect changes in the body,
For this reason also, as is shown after¬ even less have they power to incite love
wards, although matrimony is a work or hatred in the soul. The consequence
of God, as being instituted by Him, yet is clear; that though they have more
it is sometimes wrecked by the work of power over things corporeal than over
the devil: not indeed through main things spiritual, they cannot change
force, since then he might be thought even the body, as has been often
stronger than God, but with the per¬ proved. For they cannot induce any
mission of God, by causing some tem¬ substantial or accidental form, except
porary or permanent impediment in by the help of some other agent, which
the conjugal act. is as it were their artificer. In this con¬
And touching this we may say what nexion is quoted what has been said
is known by experience; that these before; that whoever believes that any
women satisfy their filthy lusts not only creature can be changed for the better
in themselves, but even in the mighty or the worse or transformed into
ones of the age, of whatever state and another kind or likeness, except by the
condition; causing by all sorts of witch¬ Creator of all things, is worse than a
craft the death of their souls through the pagan and a heretic.
excessive infatuation of carnal love, in Besides, everything that acts with de¬
such a way that for no shame or per¬ sign knows its own effect. If, therefore,
suasion can they desist from such acts. the devil could change the minds of men
rAnd through such men, since the to hatred or love, he would also be able
witches will not permit any harm to to see the inner thoughts of the heart;
come to them either from themselves or but this is contrary to what is said in the
from others once they have them in their Book of Ecclesiastic Dogma: The devil
power, there arises the great danger of cannot see our inner thoughts. And
the time, namely, the extermination of again in the same place: Not all our
the Faith. And in this way do witches evil thoughts are from the devil, but
every day increase. sometimes they arise from our own
And would that this were not true choice.
according to experience. But indeed Besides, love and hatred are a matter
such hatred is aroused by witchcraft of the will, which is rooted in the soul;
between those joined in the sacrament therefore they cannot by any cunning be
of matrimony, and such freezing up of caused by the devil. The conclusion
the generative forces, that men are un¬ holds that He alone (as S. Augustine
able to perform the necessary action for says) is able to enter into the soul, Who
begetting offspring. But since love and created it.
hate exist in the soul, which even the Besides, it is not valid to argue that
devil cannot enter, lest these things because he can influence the inner emo¬
should seem incredible to anyone, they tions, therefore he can govern the will.
must be inquired into; and by meeting For the emotions are stronger than
argument with argument the matter will physical strength; and the devil can
be made clear. effect nothing in a physical way, such
as the formation of flesh and blood;
it

Part I. Question 7. MALEFICARUM
49
therefore he can effect nothing through the wilderness, appearing to Him in
the emotions. visible form.
But against this. The devil is said to But it is not to be thought that this is
tempt men not only visibly but also in¬ the only way he influences a man; for in
visibly; but this would not be true that case no sin would proceed from the
unless he were able to exert some in¬ devil’s instruction, except such as were
fluence over the inner mind. Besides, S. suggested by him in visible form.
John Damascene says: All evil and all Therefore it must be said that even
filthiness is devised by the devil. And invisibly he instigates man to sin. And
Dionysius, de Divin. Nom. IV: The mul¬ this he does in two ways, either by
titude of devils is the cause of all evil, etc. persuasion or by disposition. By per¬
Answer. First, one sort of cause is to be suasion, he presents something to the
distinguished from another: secondly, understanding as being a good thing.
we shall show how the devil can affect And this he can do in three ways; for he
the inner powers of the mind, that is the presents it either to the intellect, or to
emotions; and thirdly, we shall draw the inner perceptions, or to the outer.
the fit conclusion. And as to the first, And as for the intellect; the human in¬
it is to be considered that the cause of tellect can be helped by a good Angel to
anything can be understood in two understand a thing by means of en¬
ways; either as direct, or as indirect. lightenment, as Dionysius says; and to
For when something causes a disposition understand a thing, according to Aris¬
to some effect, it is said to be an occa¬ totle, is to suffer something: therefore
sional and indirect cause of that effect. the devil can impress some form upon
In this way it may be said that he who the intellect, by which the act of under¬
chops wood is the cause of the actual standing. is called forth.
fire. And similarly we may say that the And it may be argued that the devil
devil is the cause of all our sins; for he can do this by his natural power, which
incited the first man to sin, from whose is not, as has been shown, diminished.
sin it has been handed down to the It is to be said, however, that he cannot
whole human race to have an inclina¬ do this by means of enlightenment, but
tion towards all sin. And in this way by persuasion. For the intellect of man
are to be understood the words of S. is of that condition that, the more it is
John Damascene and Dionysius. enlightened, the more it knows the
But a direct cause is one that directly truth, and the more it can defend itself
causes an effect; and in this sense the from deception. And because the devil
devil is not the cause of all sin. For all intends his deception to be permanent,
sins are not committed at the instiga¬ therefore no persuasion that he uses can
tion of the devil, but some are of our be called enlightenment: although it
own choosing. For Origen says: Even may be called revelation, in that when
if the devil were not, men would still he invisibly uses persuasion, by means
lust after food and venery and such of some impression he plants something
things. And from these inordinate on the inner or outer senses. And by
lusts much may result, unless such this the reasoning intellect is persuaded
appetites be reasonably restrained. But to perform some action.
to restrain such ungoverned desire is the But as to how he is enabled to create
part of man’s free-will, over which even an impression on the inner senses, it is
the devil has no power. to be noted that the bodily nature is
And because this distinction is not naturally born to be moved locally by
sufficient to explain how the devil at the spiritual; which is clear from the
times produces a frantic infatuation of case of our own bodies, which are
love, it is further to be noted that though moved by our souls; and the same is the
he cannot cause that inordinate love by case with the stars. But it is not by
directly compelling a man’s will, yet he nature adapted to be directly subject to
can do so by means of persuasion. And influences, by which we mean outside
this again in two ways, either visibly or influences, not those with which it is
invisibly. Visibly, when he appears to informed. Wherefore the concurrence
witches in ffie visiple formTof a man, and of some bodily agent is necessary, as is
speaks to them materially, persuading proved in the 7th book of the Meta¬
them to sin. So he tempted our first physics. Corporeal matter naturally
parents in Paradise in the form of a obeys a good or bad angel as to local
serpent; and so he tempted Christ in motion; and it is due to this that devils

MALLEUS Part I. Question 7.
50
can through local motion collect semen, away because the wolf is his natural
and employ it for the production of enemy. And this he knows through
wonderful results. This was how it hap¬ some instinct or fear, which is apart
pened that Pharao’s magicians pro¬ from thought, which recognizes the
duced serpents and actual animals, wolf as hostile, but a dog as friendly.
when corresponding active and passive But the repository of those instincts is
agents were brought together. There¬ memory. And reception and retention
fore there is nothing to prevent the are two different things in animal
devils from effecting anything that nature; for those who are of a humid
appertains to the local motion of cor¬ disposition receive readily, but retain
poreal matter, unless God prevent it. badly; and the contrary is the case with
And now let us examine how the devil those of a dry humour.
can through local motion excite the To return to the question. The appa¬
fancy and inner sensory perceptions of a ritions that come in dreams to sleepers
man by apparitions and impulsive proceed from the ideas retained in the
actions. It is to be noted that Aristotle repository of their mind, through a
(De Somno et Uigilia) assigns the cause of natural local motion caused by the flow
apparitions in dreams through local of blood to the first and inmost seat of
motion to the fact that, when an animal their faculties off perception; and we
sleeps the blood flows to the inmost seat speak of an intrinsic local motion in the
of the senses, from which descend mo¬ head and the cells of the brain.
tions or impressions which remain from And this can also happen through a
past impressions preserved in the mind similar local motion created by devils.
or inner perception; and these are Also such things happen not only to the
Fancy or Imagination, which are the sleeping, but even to those who are
same thing according to S. Thomas, as awake. For in these also the devils can
will be shown. stir up and excite the inner perceptions
For fancy or imagination is as it were and humours, so that ideas retained in
the treasury of ideas received through the repositories of their minds are drawn
the senses. And through this it happens out and made apparent to the faculties
that devils so stir up the inner percep¬ of fancy and imagination, so that such
tions, that is the power of conserving men imagine these things to be true.
images, that they appear to be a new And this is called interior temptation.
impression at that moment received And it is no wonder that the devil can
from exterior things. do this by his own natural power; since
It is true that all do not agree to this; any man by himself, being awake and
but if anyone wishes to occupy himself having the use of his reason, can volun¬
with this question, he must consider the tarily draw from his repositories the
number and the office of the inner per¬ images he has retained in them; in such
ceptions. According to Avicenna, in his a way that he can summon to himself
book On the Mind, these are five: the images of whatsoever things he
namely, Common Sense, Fancy, Im¬ pleases. And this being granted, it is
agination, Thought, and Memory. But easy to understand the matter of exces¬
S. Thomas, in the First Part of Ques¬ sive infatuation in love.
tion 79, says that they are only four, Now there are two ways in which
since Fancy and Imagination are the devils can, as has been said, raise up this
same thing. For fear of prolixity I omit kind of images. Sometimes they work
much more that has variously been said without enchaining the human reason,
on this subject. as has been said in the matter of temp¬
Only this must be said; that fancy is tation, and the example of voluntary
the treasury of ideas, but memory imagination. But sometimes the use of
appears to be something different. For reason is entirely chained up; and this
fancy is the treasury or repository of may be exemplified by certain naturally
ideas received through the senses; but defective persons, and by madmen and
memory is the treasury of instincts, drunkards. Therefore it is no wonder
which are not received through the that devils can, with God’s permission,
senses. For when a man sees a wolf, he chain up the reason; and such men are
runs away, not because of its ugly colour called delirious, because their senses
or appearance, which are ideas re¬ have been snatched away by the devil.
ceived through the outer senses and And this they do in two ways, either
conserved in his fancy; but he runs with or without the help of witches.

MALEFICARUM
Part I. Question 7. 5i
For Aristotle, in the work we have Second Part of this book we treat of the
quoted, says that anyone who lives in remedies by which men so bewitched
passion is moved by only a little thing, can be set free.
as a lover by the remotest likeness of his
love, and similarly with one who feels
The Method of Preaching to the People
hatred. Therefore devils, who have
about Infatuate Love.
learned from men’s acts to which pas¬
sions they are chiefly subject, incite Concerning what has been said
them to this sort of inordinate love or above, a preacher asks this question:
hatred, impressing their purpose on Is it a Catholic view to maintain that
men’s imagination the more strongly witches can infect the minds of men
and effectively, as they can do so the with an inordinate love of strange
more easily. And thk is the more easy women, and so inflame their hearts that
for them, just as it is more easy for a by no shame or punishment, by no
lover to summon up the image of his words or actions can they be forced to
love from his memory, and retain it desist from such love; and that simi¬
pleasurably in his thoughts. larly they can stir up such hatred be¬
But they work by witchcraft when tween married couples that they are
they do these things through and at the unable in any way to perform the pro¬
instance of witches, by reason of a pact creant functions of marriage; so that,
entered into with them. But it is not indeed, in the untimely silence of night,
possible to treat of such matters in they cover great distances in search of
detail, on account of the great number mistresses and irregular lovers?
of instances both among the clergy and As to this matter, he may, if he wishes,
among the laity. For how many adul¬ find some arguments in the preceding
terers have put away the most beautiful question. Otherwise, it need only be
wives to lust after the vilest of women! said that there are difficulties in those
We know of an old woman who, questions oq account of love and hate.
according to the common account of For these passions invade the will, which
the brothers in that monastery even up is in its own act always free, and not to
to this day, in this manner not only be¬ be coerced by any creature except God, A
witched three successive Abbots, but Who can govern it. From which it is
even killed them, and in the same way clear that neither the devil nor a witch
drove the fourth out of his mind. For working by his power can force a man’s
she herself publicly confessed it, and will to love or to hate. Again, since the
does not fear to say: I did so and I do will, like the understanding, exists sub¬
so, and they are not able to keep from jectively in the soul, and He alone can
loving me because they have eaten so enter into the soul Who created it,
much of my dung—measuring off a cer¬ therefore this question presents many
tain length on her arm. I confess, more¬ difficulties in the matter of unravelling
over, that since we had no case to the truth of it.
prosecute her or bring her to trial, she But notwithstanding this, we must
survives to this day. speak first of infatuation and hatred,
It will be remembered that it was said and secondly about the bewitching of
that the devil invisibly lures a man to the generative power. And as to the
sin, not only by means of persuasion, as first, although the devil cannot directly
has been said, but also by the means of operate upon the understanding and
disposition. Although this is not very will of man, yet, according to all the
pertinent, yet be it said that by a similar learned Theologians in the 2nd Book
admonition of the disposition and of Sentences, on the subject of the power
humours of men, he renders some more of the devil, he can act upon the body,
disposed to anger, or concupiscence, or or upon the faculties belonging to or
other passions. For it is manifest that a allied to the body, whether they be the
man who has a body so disposed is more inner or outer perceptions. This is
prone to concupiscence and anger and authoritatively and reasonably proved
such passions; and when they are in the preceding question, if one cares
aroused, he is more apt to surrender to to look; but if not, there is the authority
them. But because it is difficult to quote of Job ii: The Lord said unto Satan,
precedents, therefore an easier method Behold, he is in thine hand. That is, Job
must be found of declaring them for the is in his power. But this was only in
admonition of the people. And in the regard to the body, for He would not

MALLEUS Part I. Question 7
52
give his soul into his power. Wherefore into so great and foul a crime unless he
He said: Only save thou his life; that were totally corrupt, and grievously
is, keep it unharmed. And that power tempted by the devil. Wherefore the
that He gave him over his body, He gloss says: This is a warning to us, and
gave also over all the faculties allied to was permitted by God that we should
the body, which are the four or five always be on our guard lest vice should
outer and inner perceptions, namely get the mastery over us, and the prince
Common Sense, Fancy or Imagination, of sin, who promises a false peace to
Thought, and Memory. those who are in danger, finding us
If no other instance can be given, let ready should slay us unaware.
us take an example from pigs and sheep. Mention is made of this sort of passion
For pigs know by instinct their way in the Book of the Holy Fathers, where
home. And by natural instinct sheep it says that, however far they withdrew
distinguish a wolf from a dog, knowing themselves from all carnal lusts, yet they
one to be the enemy and the other the were sometimes tempted by the love of
friend of their nature. women more than could possibly be be¬
Consequently, since all our reasoned lieved. Wherefore in II. Corinthians xii
knowledge comes from the senses (for the Apostle says: There was given to me
Aristotle in the 2nd book On the Mind a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
says that an intelligent man must take Satan to buffet me. On which the gloss
notice of phantasms), therefore the devil says: It was given to me to be tempted
can affect the inner fancy, and darken by lust. But he who is tempted and does
the understanding. And this is not to not yield is no sinner, but it is a matter
act immediately upon the mind, but for the exercise of virtue. And by temp¬
through the medium of phantasms. Be¬ tation is understood that of the devil, not
cause, also, nothing is loved until it is that of the flesh, which is always venial
known. in a little sin. The preacher could find
As many examples as are needed many examples if he pleased.
could be taken from gold, which the The third point, that infatuate love
miser loves because he knows its power, proceeds from the evil works of the
etc. Therefore when the understanding devil, has been discussed above; and we
is darkened, the will also is darkened in speak of this temptation.
its affections. Moreover, the devil can It may be asked how it is possible to
effect this either with or without the tell whether such inordinate love pro¬
help of a witch; and such things can ceeds not from the devil but only from
even happen through mere want of fore¬ a witch. And the answer is that there
sight. But we shall give examples of are many ways. First, if the man
each kind. For, as it is said in S. James tempted has a beautiful and honest wife,
i: Every man is tempted when he is or the converse in the case of a woman,
drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. etc. Secondly, if the judgement of the
Then when lust hath conceived, it reason is so chained up that by no blows
bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is or words or deeds, or even by shame,
finished, bringeth forth death. Again, can he be made to desist from that lust
when Shechem saw Dinah going out to And thirdly, in especial, when he can¬
see the daughters of the land, he loved not contain himself, but that he is at
her, and seized her, and lay with her, times unexpectedly, and in spite of the
and his soul clave unto her (Genesis roughness of the journey, forced to be
xxxiv). And according to the gloss: carried through great distances (as any¬
When the infirm mind forsakes its own one can learn from the confessions of
business, and takes heed, like Dinah, of such men), both by day and by night.
that of other people, it is led astray by For as S. John Chrysostom says on
habit, and becomes one with the Matthew xx concerning the ass upon
sinners. which Christ rode: When the devil pos¬
Secondly, that this lust can arise sesses the will of a man with sin, he
apart from witchcraft, and simply carries him at his will where he pleases
through the temptation of the devil, is Giving the example of a ship in the sea
shown as follows. For we read in without a rudder, which the winds carry
II. Samuel xiii that Ammon desperately about at their pleasure; and of a man
loved his own sister Tamar, and firmly sitting a horse; and a King
yearned greatly for her, so that he grew having dominion over a tyrant. And
ill for love of her. But no one would fall fourthly, it is shown by the fact that they

MALEFICARUM
Part I. Question 7. 53
are sometimes suddenly and unex¬ the body: for where he works, there he
pectedly carried away, and at times is, as S. John Damascene says. And
transformed, so that nothing can pre¬ then he works within the bounds of
vent it. It is shown also by the hideous¬ corporeal matter, but not within the
ness of their very appearance. very essence of the body.
And before we proceed to the further From this it appears that the body has
question of witches, touching the powers two properties, matter and spirit. And
of generation, which follows, we must this is like the distinction between the
first resolve the arguments. apparent and the real. Therefore when
devils enter the body, they enter the
powers belonging to the bodily organs,
Here Follow the Resolutions of the
and can so create impressions on those
Arguments.
powers. And so it happens that through
But for the answer to the arguments: such operations and impressions a phan¬
for the first, that the will of man is ruled tasm is projected before the understand¬
by God, just as his understanding is by ing, such as the seeing of colours, as it is
a good Angel, the solution is clear. For said in the 3rd book de Anima. And so
the intellect is enlightened by a good this impression penetrates also to the
Angel only to the knowledge of the will. For the will takes its conception of
truth, from which proceeds the love of what is good from the intellect, accord¬
that which is good, for the True and the ing as the intellect accepts something as
Actual are the same thing. So also the good either in truth or in appearance.
intellect can be darkened by a bad As for the third argument: a know¬
angel in the knowledge of what appears ledge of the thoughts of the heart may
to be true; and this through a confusion come about in two ways, either from
of the ideas and images received and seeing their effects or by reading them
stored by the perceptions, from which actually in the intellect. In the first way
comes an inordinate love of the appar¬ they can be known not only by an angel,
ently good, such as bodily delectation, but even by man, although it will be
which such men seek after. shown that an angel has more skill in
As to the second argument, that the this matter. For sometimes the thoughts
devil cannot effect physical changes in are made evident, not only by some
the body; this is in part true, and in external action, but even by a change
part not, and this is with reference to in the countenance. And doctors also
three sorts of mutation. For the devil can discern some affections of the mind
cannot change the body in such a way through the pulse. Wherefore S. Augus¬
that its whole shape and appearance is tine says (deDiuin. Daem.) thatsometimes
altered (which is rather to be called a it is very easy to tell a man’s disposition,
new production than a change) .without not only from his words, but from his
the help of some agent, or with the per¬ very thoughts, which are signs of the
mission oFGocfrBut if we speak of a soul expressed in the body; although in
change in quality, as in the matter of his book of Retractations he says that
sickness and health, as has been shown no definite rule can be laid down how
before, he can inflict upon the body this can be done; and I think that he is
various diseases, even to taking away reluctant to admit that the devil can
the reason, and so can cause inordinate know the inner thoughts of the heart.
hatred and love. From another point of view, the
And a third kind of mutation can be thoughts of the intellect and the affec¬
added, which is when a good or bad tions of the will can be known only by
angel enters into the body, in the same God. For the will of a rational creature
way that we say that God alone is able is subject only to God, and He alone can
to enter into the soul, that is, the essence work in it Who is its first cause and
of life. But when we speak of an angel, ultimate end. Therefore that which is
especially a bad angel, entering the in the will, or depends only on the will,
body, as in the case of an obsession, he is known only to God. Moreover, it is
does not enter beyond the limits of the manifest what depends only on the will,
essence of the body; for in this way only if one considers things by their resultant
God the Creator can enter, Who gave it actions. For when a man has the quality
to be as it were the intrinsic operation of of knowledge, and the understanding
life. But the devil is said to enter the that comes from it, he uses it when he
body when he effects something about wills.

MALLEUS I.
54 Part Question 8.
It is proved, then, from what has been
said, that a spirit cannot enter the soul,
QJJESTION VIII
therefore he cannot, naturally, see what
is in the mind, especially what is in the
Whether Witches can hebetate the Powers
inner depths of the soul. Wherefore,
of Generation or obstruct the Venereal Act.
when it is argued that the devil cannot N
see the thoughts of the heart, and there¬ OW the fact that adulterous drabs
fore cannot move the hearts of men to and whores are chiefly given to
love or hatred, it is answered that he witchcraft is substantiated by the spells
does learn men’s thoughts through their which are cast by witches upon the act
visible effects, and is more skilful in this of generation. And to make the truth
matter than man; and so by subtle ways more clear, we will consider the argu¬
he can move men to love and hatred, by ments of those who are in disagree¬
creating phantasms and darkening the ment with us on this matter. And first
intellect. it is argued that such a bewitching is not
And this must be said by way of com¬ possible, because if it were it would
fort to relieve the apprehensions of the apply equally to those who are married;
virtuous: that when the sensible ex¬ and if tl iis were conceded, then, since
terior and bodily change which accom¬ matrimony is God’s work and witch¬
panied men’s thoughts is so vague and craft is the devil’s, the devil’s work
indeterminate that the devil cannot by would be stronger than God’s. But if
it arrive at any certain knowledge of the it is allowed that it can only affect
thoughts, especially when the virtuous fornicators and the unmarried, this in¬
at times take a little leisure from study volves a return to the opinion that
and good works, he molests them then witchcraft does not really exist, but only
chiefly in dreams; as is known by ex¬ in men’s imagination; and this was
perience. But when the physical effect refuted in the First Question. Or else
of thought is strong and determinate, some reason will be found why it should
the devil can know by a man’s appear¬
affect the unmarried and not the mar¬
ance whether his thoughts are turned ried ; and the only possible reason is that
towards envy or luxury. But we find
matrimony is God’s work. And since,
that it must be left an open question
according to the Theologians, this
whether he can by this means have cer¬
reason is not valid, there still remains
tain knowledge in respect of all circum¬
the argument that it would make the
stances, as such and such; although it is
devil’s work stronger than God’s; and
true that he can know such circum¬
since it would be unseemly to make such
stances from their subsequent results.
an assertion, it is also unseemly to main¬
And fourthly: although to enter the
tain that the venereal act can be
soul belongs only to God, yet it is pos¬
obstructed by witchcraft.
sible for a good or bad angel to enter the
Again, the devil cannot obstruct the
body and the faculties allied to the body,
other natural actions, such as eating,
in the manner which has been shown
walking and standing, as is apparent
above. And in this way hatred and love
from the fact that, if he could, he could
can be aroused in such a man. For the
destroy the whole world.
other argument, that the powers of the
Besides, since the venereal act is
spirit are greater than the physical
common to all women, if it were ob¬
powers, which themselves cannot be
structed it would be so with reference to
changed by the devil, it is answered that
all women; but this is not so, and there¬
the physical powers can be altered by
fore the first argument is good. For the
the devil, in so far as they can be has¬
facts prove that it is not so; for when a
tened or retarded in the flesh and bone.
man says that he has been bewitched,
But he does this, not for the sake of im¬
he is still quite capable as regards other
peding or stimulating the inner or outer
women, though not with her with whom
perceptions, but for his own gain; since
he is unable to copulate; and the reason
he derives his chief benefit by the decep¬
for this is that he does not wish to, and
tion of the senses and the delusion of the
therefore cannot effect anything in the
intellect.
matter.
On the contrary and true side is the
☆ chapter in the Decretals (If by sortilege,
etc.): as is also the opinion of all the
Theologians and Canonists, where they

Part I. Question 8. MALEFICARUM
55
treat of the obstruction to marriage And he continues in agreement with
caused by witchcraft. what has been treated of above by
There is also another reason: that since other Doctors. For God allows the
the devil is more powerful than man, devil more latitude in respect of this act,
and a man can obstruct the generative through which sin was first spread
powers by means of frigid herbs or abroad, than of other human acts.
anything else that can be thought of, Similarly, serpents are more subject to
therefore much more can the devil do magic spells than are other animals.
this, since he has greater knowledge and And a little later he says: It is the same
cunning. in the case of a woman, for the devil can
Answer. The truth is sufficiently so darken her understanding that 'she
evident from two matters which have considers her husband so loathsome
already been argued, although the that not for all the world would she
method of obstruction has not been allow him to lie with her.
specifically declared. For it has been Later he wishes to find the reason why
shown that witchcraft does not exist more men than women are bewitched in
only in men’s imaginations, and not in respect of that action; and he says that
fact; but that truly and actually in- such obstruction generally occurs in the
£i“e[aie bewitchments can happen, seminal duct, or in an inability in the
with the permission of God. It has been matter of erection, which can more
shown, too, that God permits it more in easily happen to men; and therefore
the case of the generative powers, be¬ more men than women are bewitched.
cause of their greater corruption, than It might also be said that, the greater
in‘ the case of other human actions. part of witches being women, they lust
But concerning the method by which more for men than for women. Also
such obstruction, is procured, it is to be they act in the despite of married
rioted that it does not affect only the women, finding every opportunity for
generative powers, but also the powers adultery when the husband is able to
of the imagination or fancy. copulate with other women but not with
And as to this, Peter of Palude (III, his own wife; and similarly the wife also
34) notes five methods. For he says has to seek other lovers.
that the devil, being a spirit, has power He adds also that God allows the
over a corporeal creature to cause or devil to afflict sinners more bitterly
prevent a local motion. Therefore he than the just. Wherefore the Angel said
can prevent bodies from approaching to Tobias: He gives the devil power
each other, either directly or indirectly, over those who are given up to lust.
by interposing himself in some bodily But he has power also against the just
shape. In this way it happened to the sometimes, as in the case of Job, but not
young man who was betrothed to an in respect of the genital functions.
idol and nevertheless married a young Wherefore they ought to devote them¬
maiden, and was consequently unable selves to confession and other good
to copulate with her. Secondly, he can works, lest the iron remain in the
excite a man to that act, or freeze his wound, and it be in vain to apply
desire for it, by the virtue of secret remedies. So much for Peter. But the
things of which he best knows the power. method of removing such effects will be
Thirdly, he can so disturb a man’s per¬ shown in the Second Part of this work.
ception and imagination as to make the
woman appear loathsome to him: since
Some Incidental Doubts on the subject of
he can, as has been said, influence the
Copulation prevented by Evil Spells are
imagination. Fourthly, he can directly
made Clear.
prevent the erection of that member
which is adapted to fructification, just But incidentally, if it is asked why this
as he can prevent a local motion. function is sometimes obstructed in re¬
Fifthly, he can prevent the flow of the spect of one woman but not of another,
vital essence to the members in which the answer, according to S. Bonalies the motive power; by closing as it ventura, is this. Either the enchantress
were the seminary ducts, so that it does or witch afflicts in this way those persons
not descend to the generative channels, upon whom the devil has determined;
or falls back from them, or does not or it is because God will not permit it
project from them, or in any of many to be inflicted on certain persons. For
ways fails in its function. the hidden purpose of God in this is

56 MALLEUS Part I. Question 8.
obscure, as is shown in the case of the who has plenty of books, will refer to
wife of Tobias. And he adds: the Theologians and the Canonists,
If it is asked how the devil does this, especially where they speak of the
it is to be said that he obstructs the impotent and bewitched. He will find
genital power, not intrinsically by them in agreement in condemning two
harming the organ, but extrinsically by errors: especially with regard to married
rendering it useless. Therefore, since it people who seem to think that such
is an artificial and not a natural ob¬ bewitchment cannot happen to those
struction, he can make a man impotent who are joined in matrimony, advanc¬
towards one woman but not towards ing the reason that the devil cannot
others: by taking away the inflamma¬ destroy the works of God.
tion of his lust for her, but not for other And the first error which they con¬
women, either through his own power, demn is that of those who say that there
or through some herb or stone, or some is no witchcraft in the world, but only
occult natural means. And this agrees in the imagination of men who, through
with the words of Peter of Palude. their ignorance of hidden causes which
Besides, since impotency in this act no man yet understands, ascribe certain
is sometimes due to coldness of nature, natural effects to witchcraft, as though
or some natural defect, it is asked how they were effected not by hidden causes,
it is possible to distinguish whether it is but by devils working either by them¬
due to witchcraft or not. Hostiensis selves or in conjunction with witches.
gives the answer in his Summa (but this And although all the other Doctors con¬
must not be publicly preached): When demn this error as a pure falsehood, yet
the member is in no way stirred, and S. Thomas impugns it more vigorously
can never perform the act of coition, and stigmatizes it as actual heresy,
this is a sign of frigidity of nature; but saying that this error proceeds from
when it is stirred and becomes erect, the root of infidelity. And since infi¬
but yet cannot perform, it is a sign of delity in a Christian is accounted heresy,
witchcraft therefore such deserve to be suspected as
It is to be noted also that impotence heretics. And this matter was touched
of the member to perform the act is not on in the First Question, though it was
the only bewitchment; but sometimes not there declared so plainly. For if
the woman is caused to be unable to anyone considers the other sayings of S.
conceive, or else she miscarries. Thomas in other places, he will find
Note, moreover, that according to the reasons why he affirms that such
what is laid down by the Canons, who¬ an error proceeds from the root of
ever through desire of vengeance or for infidelity.
hatred does anything to a man or a For in his questions concerning Sin,
woman to prevent them from begetting where he treats of devils, and in his first
or conceiving must be considered a question, whether devils have bodies
homicide. And note, further, that the that naturally belong to them, among
Canon speaks of loose lovers who, to save many other matters he makes mention
their mistresses from shame, use con¬ of those who referred every physical
traceptives, such as potions, or herbs effect to the virtue of the stars; to which
that contravene nature, without any they said that the hidden causes of
help from devils. And such penitents terrestrial effects were subject. And
• are to be punished as homicides. But he says: It must be considered that the
witches who do such things by witch¬ Peripatetics, the followers of Aristotle,
craft are by law punishable by the held that devils did not really exist;
extreme penalty, as has been touched but that those things which are attri¬
on above in the First Question. buted to devils proceeded from the
And for a solution of the arguments; power of the stars and other natural
when it is objected that these things phenomena. Wherefore S. Augustine
cannot happen to those joined to¬ says (de duitate De'i, X), that it was
gether in matrimony, it is further to be the opinion of Porphyry that from herbs
noted that, even if the truth in this and animals, and certain sounds and
matter has not already been made voices, and from figures and figments
sufficiently plain, yet these things can observed in the motion of the stars,
truly and actually happen just as much powers corresponding to the stars were
to those who are married as to those fabricated on earth by men in order to
who are not. And the prudent reader, explain various natural effects. And the

I. MALEFICARUM
Part Question 8.
57
error of these is plain, since they re¬ permanent, it never annuls a marriage
ferred everything to hidden causes in that has already been contracted. Here
the stars, holding that devils were only is where they speak of those joined in
fabricated by the imagination of men. matrimony. Now in refuting this error
But this opinion is clearly proved to (for we do so, even though it is little to
be false by S. Thomas in the same work; the point, for the sake of those who have
for some works of devils are found which not many books), it is to be noted that
can in no way proceed from any they refute it by maintaining that it is
natural cause. For example, when one against all precedent, and contrary to all
who is possessed by a devil speaks in an laws both ancient and modern.
unknown language; and many other Wherefore the Catholic Doctors make
devils’ works are found, both in the the following distinction, that impotence
Rhapsodic and the Necromantic arts, caused by witchcraft is either temporary
which can in no way proceed except or permanent. And if it is temporary,
from some Intelligence, which may be then it does not -annul the marriage.
naturally good but is evil in its inten¬ Moreover, it is presumed to be tem¬
tion. And therefore, because of these porary if they are able to be healed of
incongruities, other Philosophers were the impediment within three years from
\ compelled to admit that there were their cohabitation, having taken all
devils. Yet they afterwards fell into possible pains, either through the
various errors, some thinking that the sacraments of the Church, or through
souls of men, when they left their bodies, other remedies, to be cured. But if they
became devils. For this reason many are not then cured by any remedy, from
Soothsayers have killed children, that that time it is presumed to be per¬
they might have their souls as their manent. And in that case it either
co-operators; and many other errors are precedes both the contract and the con¬
recounted. summation of marriage, and then it
From this it is clear that not without prevents the contracting of a marriage,
reason does the Holy Doctor say that and annuls one that is not yet con¬
such an opinion proceeds from the root tracted; or else it follows the contract
of infidelity. And anyone who wishes of marriage but precedes its consum¬
may read S. Augustine ('de duitate Dei, mation, and then also, according to
VIII, IX) on the various errors of some, it annuls the previous contract.
infidels concerning the nature of devils. (For it is said in Book XXXIII, quest, i,
And indeed the common opinion of all cap. i that the confirmation of a marri¬
Doctors, quoted in the above-mentioned age consists in its carnal office.) Or else
work, against those who err in this way it is subsequent to the consummation of
by denying that there are any witches, the marriage, and then the matrimonial
is very weighty in its - meaning, even bond is not annulled. Much is noted
if it is expressed in few words. For they there concerning impotence by Hostiensay that they who maintain that there sis, and Godfrey, and the Doctors and
is no witchcraft in the world go con¬ Theologians.
trary to the opinion of all the Doctors, To the arguments. As to the first, it is
and of the Holy Scripture; and declare made sufficiently clear from what has
that there are devils, and that devils been said. For as to the argument that
have power over the bodies and imagi¬ God’s works can be destroyed by the
nations of men, with the permission of devil’s works, if witchcraft has power
God. Wherefore, those who are the against those who are married, it has no
instruments of the devils, at whose force; rather does the opposite appear,
instance the devils at times do mischief since the devil can do nothing without
to a creature, they call witches. God’s permission. For he does not
Now in the Doctors’ condemnation of destroy by main force like a tyrant, but
this first error nothing is said concerning through some extrinsic art, as is proved
those joined together in matrimony; above. And the second argument is also
but this is made clear in their condem¬ made quite clear, why God allows this
nation of the second error. For they obstruction more in the case of the
say that others fall into the error of venereal act that of other acts. But the
believing that, though witchcraft exists devil has power also over other acts,
and abounds in the world, even against when God permits. Wherefore it is
carnal copulation, yet, since no such not sound to argue that he could destroy
bewitchment can be considered to be the whole world. And the third objecF

MALLEUS
Part I. Question 9.
5®
tion is similarly answered by what has But devils have created many natural
been said. shapes, as is clear from Pharao’s
magicians, who with the help of devils
made frogs and serpents. Also S. Augus¬
tine, in Book LXXXIII, says that those
QJJESTION IX
things which are visibly done by the
Whether Witches may work some Prestidi- lower powers of the air cannot be con¬
gitatory Illusion so that the Male Organ sidered to be mere illusions; but even
appears to be entirely removed and men are able, by some skilful incision, to
separate from the Body. remove the male organ; therefore devils
H
can do invisibly what others do visibly.
ERE is declared the truth about But on the contrary side, S. Augus¬
diabolic operations with regard to tine (de duitate Dei, XVIII) says: It is
the male organ. And to make plain not to be believed that, through the art
the facts in this matter, it is asked or power of devils, man’s body can be
whether witches can with the help of changed into the likeness of a beast;
devils really and actually remove the therefore it is equally impossible that
member, or whether they only do so that should be removed which is
apparently by some glarnour or essential to the truth of the human body.
illusion. And that they can actually do Also he says (de Trinitate, III): It must
so is argued a fortiori; for since devils not be thought that this substance of
can do greater things than this, as visible matter is subject to the will of
killing them or carrying them from those fallen angels; for it is subject only
place to place—as was shown above in to God.
the cases of Job and Tobias—therefore Answer. There is no doubt that cer¬
they can also truly and actually remove tain witches can do marvellous things
men’s members. with regard to male organs, for this
Again, an argument is taken from the agrees with what has been seen and
gloss on the visitations of bad Angels, heard by many, and with the general
in the Psalms: God punishes by means account of what has been known con¬
of bad Angels, as He often punished the cerning that member through the
People of Israel with various diseases, senses of sight and touch. And as to
truly and actually visited upon their how this thing is possible, it is to be said
bodies. Therefore the member is that it can be done in two ways, either
equally subject to such visitations. actually and in fact, as the first argu¬
It may be said that this is done with ments have said, or through some
the Divine permission. And in that prestige or glamour. But when it is per¬
case, as it has already been said that formed by witches, it is only a matter of
God allows more power of witchcraft glamour; although it is no illusion in
over the genital functions, on account of the opinion of the sufferer. For his
the first corruption of sin which came to imagination can really and actually
us from the act of generation, so also He believe that something is not present,
allows greater power over the actual since by none of his exterior senses,
genital organ, even to its total removal. such as sight or touch, can he perceive
And again, it was a greater thing to that it is present.
turn Lot’s wife into a pillar of salt than From this it may be said that there is
it is to take away the male organ; and a true abstraction of the member in
that (Genesis xix) was a real and actual, imagination, although not in fact; and
not an apparent, metamorphosis (for it several things are to be noted as to how
is said that that pillar is still to be seen). this happens. And first as to two
And this was done by a bad Angel; just methods by which it can be done. It is
as the good Angels struck the men of no wonder that the devil can deceive
Sodom with blindness, so that they the outer human senses, since, as has
could not find the door of the house. been treated of above, he can illude the
And so it was with the other punish¬ inner senses, by bringing to actual per¬
ments of the men of Gomorrah. The ception ideas that are stored in the
gloss, indeed, affirms that Lot’s wife was imagination. Moreover, he deceives
herself tainted with that vice, and men in their natural functions, causing
therefore was she punished. that which is visible to be invisible to
And again, whoever can create a them, and that which is tangible to be
natural shape can also take it away. intangible, and the audible inaudible,

Part I. Question 9. MALEFICARUM
59
and so with the other senses. But such impressions derived from actual pre¬
things are not true in actual fact, since vious experiences stored in the mind.
they are caused through some defect It has already been defined how thus
introduced in the senses, such as the eyes certain appearances convey the im¬
or the ears, or the touch, by reason of pression of new experiences. And since
which defect a man’s judgement is this can happen naturally, much more
deceived. can the devil call to the imagination
And we can illustrate this from cer¬ the appearance of a smooth body un¬
tain natural phenomena. For sweet provided with the virile member, in
wine appears bitter on the tongue of the such a way that the senses believe it to
fevered, his taste being deceived not by be an actual fact.
the actual fact, but through his disease. Secondly, some other methods are to
So also in the case under consideration, be noted which are easier to understand
the deception is not due to fact, since and to explain. For, according to S.
the member is still actually in its place; Isidore {Etym. VIII, 9), a glamour is
but it is an illusion of the senses with nothing but a certain delusion of the
regard to it. senses, and especially of the eyes. And
Again, as has been said above con¬ for this reason it is also called a prestige,
cerning the generative powers, the from prestringo, since the sight of the eyes
devil can obstruct that action by im-? is so fettered that things seem to be
posing some other body of the same other than they are. And Alexander of
colour and appearance, in such a way Hales,* Part 2, says that a prestige,
that some smoothly fashioned body in properly understood, is an illusion of
the colour of flesh is interposed between the devil, which is not caused by any
the sight and touch, and between the change in matter, but only exists in the
true body of the sufferer, so that it mind of him who is deluded, either as to
seems to him that he can see and feel his inner or outer perceptions.
nothing but a smooth body with its sur¬ Wherefore, in a manner of speaking,
face interrupted by no genital organ. we may say even of human prestidigiSee the sayings of S. Thomas (2 dis't. 8. tatory art, that it can be effected in
artic. 5) concerning glamours and three ways. Forthe first, it can be done
illusions, and also in the second of the without devils, since it is artificially done
second, 91, and in his questions concern¬ by the agility of men who show things
ing Sin; where he frequently quotes that and conceal them, as in the case of the
of S. Augustine in BookLXXXIII: This tricks of conjurers or ventriloquists.
evil of the devil creeps in through all the The second method is also without the
sensual approaches; he gives himself to help of devils; as when men can use
figures, he adapts himself to colours, he some natural virtue in natural bodies or
abides in sounds, he lurks in smells, he minerals so as to impart to such objects
infuses himself into flavours.
some other appearance quite different
Besides, it is to be considered that from their true appearance. Wherefore,
such an illusion of the sight and touch according to S. Thomas (I, 114, 4), and
can be caused not only by the inter¬ several others, men, by the smoke of
position of some smooth unmembered certain smouldering or lighted herbs,
body, but also by the summoning to the
can make rods appear to be serpents.
fancy or imagination of certain forms The third method of delusion is
and ideas latent in the mind, in such a effected with the help of devils, the perway that a thing is imagined as being
perceived then for the first time. For, * .” ,
“Alexander Alexander of Hales the
as was shown in the preceding question, Franciscan theologian and philosopher , Doctor
,
devils can by their own power change Irrefragabilis was one of the greatest of the
, ,
bodies locally; and just as the dis¬ scholastics. He was born at Hales or Hailles in
position or humour can be affected in Gloucestershire towards the end of the twelfth
,
this way, so can the natural functions. century and died at Paris at the convent of his
Order in 1245. Elis principal work is the
I speak of things which appear natural
,”
“Summa Uniuersae Theologiae begun about
to the imagination or senses. For Aris¬
the year 1231, and left unfinished. It has several
totle in the de Somno et Uigilia says,
, / ,
times been published: Venice 475 1576;
assigning the cause of apparitions in , ,
Kurembnrg, 1481, 1302; Pavia 1481; Cologne
dreams, that when an animal sleeps , ,
1622. A critical edition which is much needed
much blood flows to the inner con¬
has been promised by the Quaracchi editors of the
sciousness, and thence come ideas or
works of S. Bonaventura.

6o MALLEUS Part I. Question 9.
mission of God being granted. For it member has been taken off, and he does
is clear that devils have, of their nature, not know whether it is by witchcraft or
some power over certain earthly in some other way by the devil’s power,
matters, which they exercise upon with the permission of God. Are there
them, when God permits, so that things any ways of determining or distinguish¬
appear to be other than they are. ing between these? It can be answered
And as to this third method, it is to as follows. First, that those to whom
be noted that the devil has five ways such things most commonly happen are
in which he can delude anyone so that adulterers or fornicators. For when they
he thinks a thing to be other than it is. fail to respond to the demand of their
First, by an artificial trick, as has been mistress, or if they wish to desert them
said; for that which a man can do and attach themselves to other women,
by art, the devil can do even better. then their mistress, out of vengeance,
Second, by a natural method, by the causes such a thing to happen, or
application, as has been said, and inter¬ through some other power causes their
position of some substance so as to hide members to be taken off. Secondly, it can
the true body, or by confusing it in be distinguished by the fact that it is not
man’s fancy. The third way is when in permanent. For if it is not due to witch¬
an assumed body he presents himself as craft, then the loss is not permanent,
being something which he is not; as but it will be restored some time.
witness the story which S. Gregory tells But here there arises another doubt,
in his First Dialogue of a Nun, who ate whether it is due to the nature of the
a lettuce, which, however, as the devil witchcraft that it is not permanent. It
himself confessed, was not a lettuce, but is answered that it can be permanent,
the devil in the form of a lettuce, or in and last until death, just as the Canon¬
the lettuce itself. Or as when he ap¬ ists and Theologians judge concerning
peared to S. Antony in a lump of gold the impediment of witchcraft in matri¬
which he found in the desert. Or as mony, that the temporary can become
when he touches a real man, and makes permanent. For Godfrey says in his
him appear like a brute animal, as Summa: A bewitchment cannot always
will shortly be explained. The fourth be removed by him who caused it,
method is when he confuses the organ either because he is dead, or because he
of sight, so that a clear thing seems hazy, does not know how to remove it, or be¬
or the converse, or when an old woman cause the charm has been lost. Where¬
appears to be a young girl. For even fore we may say in the same way that
after weeping the light appears different the charm which has been worked on
from what it was before. His fifth Peter will be permanent if the witch
method is by working in the imagina¬ who did it cannot heal him.
tive power, and, by a disturbance of the For there are three degrees of witches.
humours, effecting a transmutation in For some both heal and harm; some
the forms perceived by the senses, as harm, but cannot heal; and some seem
has been treated of before, so that the able only to heal, that is, to take away
senses then perceive as it were fresh injuries, as will be shown later. For
and new images. And accordingly, by thus it happened to us : Two witches
the last three of these methods, and were quarrelling, and while they were
even by the second, the devil can cast taunting each other one said: I am not
a glamour over the senses of a man. so wicked as you, for I know how to
Wherefore there is no difficulty in his heal those whom I injure. The charm
concealing the virile member by some will also be permanent if, before it has
prestige or glamour. And a manifest been healed, the witch departs, either
proof or example of this, which was by changing her dwelling or by dying.
revealed to us in our Inquisitorial capa¬ For S. Thomas also says: Any charm
city, will be set forth later, where more may be permanent when it is such sis
is recounted of these and other matters can have no human remedy; or if it
in the Second Part of this Treatise. has a remedy, it is not known to men,
or unlawful; although God can find a
remedy through a holy Angel who can
How a Bewitchment can he Distinguished
coerce the devil, if not the witch.
from a Natural Defect.
However, the chief remedy against
An incidental question, with certain witchcraft is the sacrament of Peni¬
other difficulties, follows. Peter’s tence. For bodily infirmity often pro-

Part I. Question io. MALEFICARUM 61
ceeds from sin. And how the charms that this is not possible, from the follow¬
of witches can be removed will be ing passage of Episcopus (XXVI, 5):
shown in the Second Part of this Whoever believes that it is possible for
Treatise, and in the Second Question, any creature to be changed for the
chapter VI, where other different better or for the worse, or to be
matters are treated of and explained. transformed into any other shape or
likeness, except by the Creator Him¬
Solutions of the Arguments.
self, Who made all things, and by
For the first, it is clear that there is no Whom all things are created, is without
doubt but that, just as, with God’s doubt an infidel, and worse than a
permission, they can kill men, so also pagan.
can devils take off that member, as well And we will quote the arguments of
as others, truly and actually. But then S. Thomas in the 2nd Book of Sen¬
the devils do not work through the tences, VIII: Whether devils can affect
medium of witches, concerning which the bodily senses by the delusion of a
mention has already been made. And glamour. There he argues first that
from this the answer to the second they cannot. For though that shape of a
argument is also made clear. But this is beast which is seen must be somewhere,
to be said: that God allows more power it cannot exist only in the senses; for
of witchcraft over the genital forces be¬ the senses perceive no shape that is not
cause, etc.; and therefore even allows received from actual matter, and there is
that that member should be truly and no actual beast there; and he adduces
actually taken off. But it is not valid the authority of the Canon. And again,
to say that this always happens. For it that which seems to be, cannot really be;
would not be after the manner of as in the case of a woman who seems to
witchcraft for it to happen so; and be a beast, for two substantial shapes
even the witches, when they do such cannot exist at one and the same time
works, do not pretend that they have in the same matter. Therefore, since
not the power to restore the member that shape of a beast which appears
when they wish to and know how to do cannot exist anywhere, no glamour or
so. From which it is clear that it is not illusion can exist in the eye of the be¬
actually taken off, but only by a holder; for the sight must have some
glamour. As for the third, concerning object in which it terminates.
the metamorphosis of Lot’s wife, we And if it is argued that the shape
say that this was actual, and not a exists in the surrounding atmosphere,
glamour. And as to the fourth, that this is not possible; both because the
devils can create certain substantial atmosphere is not capable of taking any
shapes, and therefore can also remove shape or form, and also because the
them: it is to be said with regard to air around that person is not always
Pharaoh’s magicians that they made constant, and cannot be so on account
true serpents; and that devils can, with of its fluid nature, especially when it
the help of another agent, produce is moved. And again because in that
certain effects on imperfect creatures case such a transformation would be
which they cannot on men, who are visible to everyone; but this is not so,
God’s chief care. For it is said: Does because the devils seem to be unable to
God care for oxen? They can, never¬ deceive the sight of Holy Men in the
least.
theless, with the permission of God, do
to men true and actual harm, as also they Besides, the sense of sight, or the
can create a glamour of harm, and by faculty of vision, is a passive faculty, and
this the answer to the last argument is every passive faculty is set in motion
made clear. by the active agent that corresponds to
it. Now the active agent corresponding
☆
to sight is twofold: one is the origin of
the act, or the object; the other is the
QUESTION X
carrier, or medium. But that apparent
Whether Witches can by some Glamour shape cannot be the object of the sense,
Change Men into Beasts. neither can it be the medium through
H
which it is carried. First, it cannot be
ERE we declare the truth as to the object, since it cannot be taken hold
whether and how witches trans¬ of by anything, as was shown in the
form men into beasts. And it is argued
foregoing argument, since it does not

MALLEUS Part I. Question io.
62
exist in the senses received from an Antoninus * in the first part of his
object, neither is it in the actual object, Summa, V, 5, where he declares that
nor even in the air, as in a carrying the devil at times works to deceive a
medium, as was treated of above in the man’s fancy, especially by an illusion
third argument. of the senses; and he proves this by
Besides, if the devil moves the inner natural reasoning, by the authority of
consciousness, he does so either by pro¬ the Canon, and by a great number of
jecting himself into the cognitive faculty, examples.
or by changing it. But he does not do And at first as follows: Our bodies
so by projecting himself; for he would naturally are subject to and obey the
either have to assume a body, and even angelic nature as regards local motion.
so could not penetrate into the inner But the bad angels, although they have
organ of imagination; for two bodies lost grace, have not lost their natural
cannot be at the same time in the same power, as has often been said before.
place; or he would assume a phantas¬ And since the faculty of fancy or
mal body; and this again would be imagination is corporeal, that is, allied
impossible, since no phantasm is quite to a physical organ, it also is naturally
without substance. subject to devils, so that they can trans¬
Similarly also he cannot do it by mute it, causing various phantasies, by
changing the cognition. For he would the flow of the thoughts and percep¬
either change it by alteration, which tions to the original image received by
he does not seem able to do, since all them. So says S. Antoninus, and adds
alteration is caused by active qualities, that it is proved by the following Canon
in which the devils are lacking; or he (.Episcopus, XXVI, 5): It must not be j
would change it by transformation or omitted that certain wicked women,
local motion; and this does not seem perverted by Satan and seduced by the
feasible for two reasons. First, because illusions and phantasms of devils, be¬
a transformation of an organ cannot lieve and profess that they ride in the
be effected without a sense of pain. night hours on certain beasts with
Secondly, because in this case the devil Diana, the heathen goddess, or with
would only make things of a known Herodias, and with a countless number
shape appear; but S. Augustine says of women, and that in the untimely
that he creates shapes of this sort, both silence of night they travel over great
known and unknown. Therefore it distances of land. And later: Wherefore
seems that the devils can in no way priests ought to preach to the people of ,
deceive the imagination or senses of a God that they should know this to be
man. altogether false, and that when such 1
But against this, S. Augustine says {de
*
“S. Antoninus.” The famous Dominican
Ciuitate Dei, XVIII) that the transmuta¬
Archbishop of Florence, born at Florence, 1
tions of men into brute animals, said to
March, 1389; died 2 May, 1459. His feast day
be done by the art of devils, are not actual
is 10 May. His chief literary work is the
but only apparent. But this would not
“Summa Theologica Moralis, partibus IV
be possible if devils were not able to
distincta,” written shortly before his death, and
transmute the human senses. The
marking a very considerable development in
authority of S. Augustine is again to
moral theology. Crohns in his t(Die Summa
the point in Book LXXXIII, which has
theologica des Antonin von Florenz und die
already been quoted: This evil of the Schatzung des Weibes im Hexenhammer,”
devil creeps in through all the sensual Helsingfors, 1903, has set out to show that the
approaches, etc. very pronounced misogyny which is apparent in the
Answer. If the reader wishes to refer “Malleus Maleficarum” can be traced to the
to the method of transmutation, he will “Summa” of S. Antoninus. But Paulus, “Die
find in the Second Part of this work, Verachtung der Frau beim hi. Antonin,” in
“Historisch-Politische Blatter,” 1904, pp. 812chapter VI, various methods. But pro¬
go, has severely criticized this thesis, which he
ceeding for the present in a scholastic
declares to be untenable.
manner, let us say in agreement with
Within fifty years after the first appearance of
the opinions of the three Doctors, that the
the “Summa” of S. Antoninus, fifteen editions
devil can deceive the human fancy so
were printed at various important centres of
that a man really sefcms to be an animal.
learning. Many other editions followed, and in
The last of those opinions, which is that
1740 it was issued at Verona in four volumes,
of S. Thomas, is more subtle than folio, edited by P. Ballerini; in 1741 at Florence
the rest. But the first is that of S. by two Dominicans, Mamachi and Remedelli.

Part I. Question io. MALEFICARUM
63
phantasms afflict the minds of the with S. Thomas, I, 91. And of this sort
faithful, it is not of God, but of an evil we may believe to have been the acts
spirit. For Satan himself transforms of Simon Magus in the incantations
himself into the shape and likeness which are narrated of him. But the
of different persons, and in dreams devil can do none of these things with¬
deluding the mind which he holds out the permission of God, Who with
captive, leads it through devious ways. His good Angels often restrains the
Indeed the meaning of this Canon wickedness of him who seeks to deceive
has been treated of in the First Question, and hurt us. Wherefore S. Augustine,
as to the four things which are to be speaking of witches, says: These are
preached. But it would be to misunder¬ they who, with the permission of God,
stand its meaning to maintain that stir up the elements, and confuse the
witches cannot be so transported, when minds of those who do not trust in
they wish and God does not prevent it; God (XXVI, 5).
for very often men who are not witches Also devils can by witchcraft cause a
are unwillingly transported bodily over man to be unable to see his wife rightly,
great distances of land. and the converse. And this comes from
But that these transmutations can be an affectation of the fancy, so that she is
effected in both ways will be shown by represented to him as an odious and
the aforesaid Summa, and in the chapter horrible thing. The devil also suggests
where S. Augustine relates that it is representations of loathsome things
read in the books of the Gentiles that a to the fancy of both the waking and
certain sorceress named Circe changed the sleeping, to deceive them and lead
the companions of Ulysses into beasts; them to sin. But because sin does not
but that this was due to some glamour consist in the imagination but in the
or illusion, rather than an actual will, therefore man does not sin in these
accomplishment, by altering the fancies fancies suggested by the devil, and
of men; and this is clearly proved by these various transformations, unless of
several examples. his own will he consents to sin.
For we read in the Lives of the Fathers, The second opinion of the modern
that a certain girl would not consent to Doctors is to the same effect, when they
a young man who was begging her to declare what is glamour, and in how
commit a shameful act with him. And many ways the devil can cause such
the young man, being angry because of illusions. Here we refer to what has
this, caused a certain Jew to work a already been said concerning the argu¬
charm against her, by which she was ments of S. Antoninus, which there is
changed into a filly. But this meta¬ no need to repeat.
morphosis was not an actual fact, but an The third opinion is that of S. Thomas,
illusion of the devil, who changed the and is an answer to the argument where
fancy and senses of the girl herself, and it is asked, Wherein lies the existence
of those who looked at her, so that she of the shape of a beast that is seen; in
seemed to be a filly, who was really a the senses, or in reality, or in the sur¬
girl. For when she was led to the rounding air ? And his opinion is that
Blessed Macarius, the devil could not so the apparent shape of a beast only exists
work as to deceive his senses as he had in the inner perception, which, through
those of other people, on account of his the force of imagination, sees it in some
sanctity; for to him she seemed a true way as an exterior object. And the
girl, not a filly. And at length by his devil has two ways of effecting such a
prayer she was set free from that result.
illusion, and it is said that this had In one way we may say that the forms
happened to her because she did not of animals which are conserved in the
give her mind to holy things, or attend treasury of the imagination pass by the
the Sacraments as she ought; therefore operation of the devil into the organs of
the devil had power over her, although inner senses; and in this way it happens
she was in other respects honest. in dreams, as has been declared above.
Therefore the devil can, by moving And so, when these forms are impressed
the inner perceptions and humours, on the organs of the outer senses, such as
effect changes in the actions and sight, they appear as if they were
faculties, physical, mental, and present as outer objects, and could
emotional, working by means of any actually be touched.
physical organ soever; and this accords The other way results from a change

MALLEUS I.
64 Part Question io.
in the inner organs of perception, in the case of witches. And touching
through which the judgement is de¬ the passage in Exodus vii, where Pharao
ceived ; as is shown in the case of him called his wise men, he says: The devils
who has his taste corrupted, so that run throughout the world and collect
everything sweet seems bitter; and this various germs, and by using them can
is not very different from the first evolve various species. And the gloss
method. Moreover, even men can thereon says: When witches attempt to
accomplish this by the virtue of certain effect anything by the invocation of
natural things, as when in the vapour of devils, they run about the world and
a certain smoke the beams of a house bring the semen of those things which
appear to be serpents; and many other are in question, and by its means, with
instances of this are found, as has been the permission of God, they produce
mentioned above. new species. But this has been spoken of
\
above.
Another difficulty may arise, whether
Solutions of the Arguments.
such devils* works are to be deemed
As to the first argument, that text is miraculous. The answer was made clear
often quoted, but is badly understood. in the preceding arguments, that even
For as to where it speaks of transforma¬ the devils can perform certain miracles
tion into another shape or likeness, it to which their natural powers are
has been made clear how this can be adapted. And although such things are
done by prestidigitatory art. And as to true in fact, they are not done with a view
where it says that no creature can be to the knowledge of the truth; and in
made by the power of the devil, this is this sense the works of Antichrist may be
manifestly true if Made is understood said to be deceptions, since they are
to mean Created. But if the word Made done with a view to the seduction of
is taken to refer to natural production, it men.
is certain that devils can make some The answer to the other argument,
imperfect creatures. And S. Thomas that concerning the shape, is also clear.
shows how this may be done. For he The shape of a beast which is seen does
says that all transmutations of bodily not exist in the air, or in actual fact, as
matters which can be effected by the has been shown, but only in the per¬
forces of nature, in which the essential ception of the senses, as has been
thing is the semen which is found in the demonstrated above from the opinion of
elements of this world, on land or in S. Thomas.
the waters (as serpents and frogs and For the argument that every passive
such things deposit their semen), can is set in motion by its corresponding
be effected by the work of devils who active, this is granted. But when it is
have acquired such semen. So also it is inferred that the shape which is seen
when anything is changed into serpents cannot be the original object which sets
or frogs, which can be generated by in motion the act of sight, since it arises
putrefaction. from none of the senses, it is answered
But those transmutations of bodily that it does not arise, since it originates
matters which cannot be effected by the from some sensible image conserved in
forces of nature can in no way be truly the imagination, which the devil can
effected by the work of the devils. For draw out and present to the imagina¬
when the body of a man is changed into tion or powers of perception, as has been
the body of a beast, or a dead body is said above.
brought to life, such things only seem to For the last argument, it is to be said
happen, and are a glamour or illusion; that the devil does not, as has been
or else the devil appears before men in shown, change the perceptive and
an assumed body. imaginative powers by projecting him¬
These arguments are substantiated. self into them, but by transmuting
For Blessed Albertus in his book On them; not indeed by altering them,
Animals, where he examines whether except in respect of local motion. For
devils, or let us even say witches, can he cannot of himself induce new appear¬
really make animals, says that they can, ances, as has been said. But he changes
with God’s permission, make imperfect them by transmutation, that is, local
animals. But they cannot do so in an motion. And this again he does, not
instant, as God does, but by means of by dividing the substance of the organ of
some motion, however sudden, as is clear perception, since that would result in a

I. MALEFICARUM
Part Question io. 65
sense of pain, but by a movement of the are so roused up in two ways. It
perceptions and humours. may happen without the operation of
But it may be further objected as witches: and so it was in the case of the
follows: that according to this the devil two-and-forty boys who were devoured
cannot present to a man the appearance by two bears coming out of the woods,
of anything new in respect of things because they mocked the prophet
seen. It is to be said that a new thing Elisaus, saying, Go up, thou bald head,
can be understood in two ways. In one etc. Also in the case of the lion which
way it may be entirely new both in it¬ slew the prophet who would not per¬
self and in its beginnings; and in this form the commandment of God (III.
sense the devil cannot present anything Kings xiii). And it is told that a Bishop
new to a man’s sense of vision: for he of Vienna ordered the minor Litanies
cannot cause one who is born blind to be solemnly chanted on certain days
to imagine colours, or a deaf man to before the Feast of the Ascension, be¬
imagine sounds. In another sense, a cause wolves were entering the city
thing may be new as to the composition and publicly devouring men.
of its whole; as we may say that it is But in another way it may be an
an imaginatively new thing if a man illusion caused by witches. For William
imagines that he sees mountains of gold, of Paris tells of a certain man who
which he never saw; for he has seen thought that he was turned into a wolf,*
gold, and he has seen a mountain, and and at certain times went hiding among
can by some natural operation imagine the caves. For there he went at a cer¬
the phantasm of a mountain of gold. tain time, and though he remained
And in this way the devil can present a there all the time stationary, he believed
new thing to the imagination. that he was a wolf which went about
devouring children; and though the
devil, having possessed a wolf, was
What is to be Thought of Wolves which
really doing this, he erroneously thought
sometimes Seize and Eat Men and
that he was prowling about in his
Children out of their Cradles : whether
sleep. And he was for so long thus out
this also is a Glamour caused by Witches.
of his senses that he was at last found
There is incidentally a question con¬ lying in the wood raving. The devil
cerning wolves, which sometimes snatch delights in such things, and caused the
men and children out of their houses illusion of the pagans who believed that;
and eat them, and run about with such men and old women were changed into
astuteness that by no skill or strength beasts. From this it is seen that such
can they be hurt or captured. It is to be things only happen by the permission
said that this sometimes has a natural of God alone and through the opera¬
cause, but is sometimes due to a tion of devils, and not through any
glamour, when it is effected by witches. natural defect; since by no art or *
And as to the first, Blessed Albertus in strength can such wolves be injured or *
his book On Animals says that it can arise captured. In this connexion also Vin¬
from five causes. Sometimes on account cent of Beauvais (in Spec. Hist., VI, 40)
of great famine, when stags and other tells that in Gaul, before the Incar¬
beasts have come near to men. Some¬ nation of Christ, and before the Punic
times on account of the fierceness of War, a wolf snatched a sentry’s sword
their strength, as in the case of dogs in out of its sheath.
cold regions. But this is nothing to the
point; and we say that such things are * “A wolf ” There are two kinds of wer- J
caused by an illusion of devils, when wolves, voluntary and involuntary. The voluntary
God punishes some nation for sin. See were, of course, wizards, such as Gilles Gamier,
who on 18 January, 1573, was condemned by the
Leviticus xxvi: If ye do not my com¬
court of Dole, Lyons, to be burned alive for (<the
mandments, I will send the beasts of
abominable crimes of lycanthropy and witch¬
the field against you, who shall con¬
craft T More than fifty witnesses deposed that he
sume you and your flocks. And again
had attacked and killed children in the fields and
Deuteronomy xxxii: I will also send the
vineyards, devouring their raw flesh. He was \
teeth of beasts upon them, etc. If
sometimes seen in human shape, sometimes as a
As to the question whether they are
“loup-garou.” During the sixteenth century in
true wolves, or devils appearing in that
France lycanthropy was very prevalent, and 1
shape, we say that they are true wolyes, numerous trials clearly show that murder and
but are possessed by devils; and they cannibalism were rife in many country districts, i

66 MALLEUS Part I. Question 12.
QUESTION XI Also, in one single year, which is the
year now last passed, he says that
That Witches who are Midwives in Various forty-one witches were burned, certain
Ways Kill the Child Conceived in the others taking flight to the Lord ArchWomb, and Procure an Abortion; or if duke of Austria, Sigismund. For conthey do not this Offer New-born Children firmation of this there are certain
to Devils. writings of John Nider in his Formicarius* of whom, as of those events
H ERE is set forth the truth coiwj* which he recounts, the memory is still
cerning four horrible crimes which fresh in men’s minds; wherefore it is
devils commit against infants, both in apparent that such things are not in¬
the mother’s womb and afterwards. credible. We must add that in all these
And since the devils do these things matters witch midwives cause yet
through the medium of women, and greater injuries, as penitent witches
not men, this form of homicide is have often told to us and to others,' ,
associated rather with women than saying: No one does more harm to the
with men. And the following are the Catholic Faith than midwives. For
methods by which it is done. when they do not kill children, then,
The Canonists treat more fully than as if for some other purpose, they take//
the Theologians of the obstructions due them out of the room and, raising them
to witchcraft; and they say that it is up in the air, offer them to devils.
witchcraft, not only when anyone is But the method which they observe in
unable to perform the carnal act, of crimes of this sort will be shown in the
which we have spoken above; but also Second Part, which we must soon
when a woman is prevented from con¬ approach. But first one more question
ceiving, or is made to miscarry after must be inquired into, namely, that of
she has conceived. A third and fourth the Divine permission. For it was said
method of witchcraft is when they have at the beginning that three things are
failed to procure an abortion, and then necessary for the effecting of witch¬
either devour the child or offer it to a craft: the devil, a witch, and the
devil. Divine permission.
There is no doubt concerning the
first two methods, since, without the
help of devils, a man can by natural
means, such as herbs, savin for example,
QUESTION XII
or other emmenagogues, procure that
a woman cannot generate or conceive,
Whether the Permission of Almighty God is
as has been mentioned above. But with
an Accompaniment of Witchcraft.
the other two methods it is different; N
for they are effected by witches. And
OW we must consider the Divine
there is no need to bring forward the
permission itself, touching which
arguments, since very evident instances
four things are asked. First, whether
and examples will more readily show
it is necessary that this permission
the truth of this matter.
should accompany a work of witch¬
The former of these two abomina¬
craft. Secondly, that God in His justice
tions is the fact that certain witches,
permits a creature naturally sinful to
against the instinct of human nature,
perpetrate witchcraft and other horrid
and indeed against the nature of all
crimes, the other two necessary con¬
beasts, with the possible exception of
comitants being presupposed. Thirdly,
wolves, are in the habit of devouring
and eating infant children. And con¬ * “Nider.” John Nider, O.P., was born
cerning this, the Inquisitor of Como, 1380 in Swabia; and died at Colmar, 13 August,
who has been mentioned before, has 1438. He gained a wide reputation as a preacher
\i/ told us the following: that he was and was active at the Council of Constance. An
advocate of the strictest reforms, he became
summoned by the inhabitants of the
eminent in the annals of his Order by his energy
County of Barby to hold an inquisi¬
and example. The most important among his
tion, because a certain man had missed
many works is the “Formicarius,”a treatise upon
his child from its cradle, and finding
the theolo _ g ical, philoso ^ p hical, , and social
a congress of women in the night-time
- , , , • 1 ... V. , .. 1 questions of the day. A complete edition was
swore that he saw them kill his child published at Douai, 3 vols., 1602. The tractate
and drink its blood and devour it. “De Maleficis” has often been printed separately.

MALEFICARUM
Part I. Question 12. 67
that the crime of witchcraft exceeds all men were made responsible to them¬
other evils which God permits to be selves by God, according to Ecclesi¬
done. Fourthly, in what way this asticus xv: God made man from the
matter should be preached to the beginning, and left him in the hand of
people. his counsel. In particular, the sins
Concerning the third postulate of which men do are left in their own
this First Part, namely, the Divine counsel, according to the text: He gave
permission, it is asked: Whether it is to them according to their hearts’
as Catholic to affirm the Divine per¬ desire. Therefore not all evils are sub¬
mission in these works of witches, as it ject to Divine permission.
is quite heretical to contradict such an Yet again, S. Augustine says in the
affirmation? And it is argued that it is Enchiridion, as does also Aristotle in the
not heretical to maintain that God ninth book of Metaphysics: It is better
does not permit so great power to the not to know certain vile things than to
devil in this sort of witchcraft. For it is know them, but all that is good is to
Catholic, and not heretical, to refute be ascribed to God. Therefore God
such things as appear to be to the dis¬ does not prevent thd very vile works of
paragement of the Creator. And it is witchcraft, whether. He permits or not.
submitted that it is Catholic to main¬ See also S. Paul in I. Corinthians ix:
tain that the devil is not allowed such Doth God take care for oxen? And the
power of injuring men, since to hold same holds good of the other irrational
the opposite opinion seems to be a dis¬ beasts. Wherefore God takes no care
paragement of the Creator. For it whether they are bewitched or not,
would then follow that not everything since they are not subject to His per¬
is subject to the Divine providence, mission, which proceeds from His
since the all-wise Provider keeps away, providence.
as far as possible, all defect and evil Again, that which happens of neces¬
from those for whom He cares. And if sity has no need of provident permis¬
the works of witchcraft are permitted sion or prudence. This is clearly shown
by God, they are not kept away by in Aristotle’s Ethics, Book II: Prudence
Him: and if He does not keep them is a right reasoning concerning things
away, then God Himself is not a wise which happen and are subject to
Provider, and all things are not subject counsel and choice. But several effects
to His providence. But since this is of witchcraft happen of necessity; as
false, therefore it is false that God when for some reason, or owing to the
permits witchcraft. influence of the stars, diseases come,
And again, to permit a thing to or any other things which we judge to
happen presupposes in him who per¬ be witchcraft. Therefore they are not
mits it that either he can prevent it always subject to Divine permission.
from happening if he wishes, or he And again, if men are bewitched by
cannot prevent it even if he wishes; Divine permission, then it is asked:
and neither of these suppositions can Why does this happen to one more
apply to God. For in the first case, than to another? If it be said that it is
such a man would be thought spiteful, because of sin, which abounds more in
and in the second case impotent. Then one than in another, this does not seem
it is incidentally asked: As to that valid; for then the greater sinners
bewitchment that happened to Peter, would be the more bewitched, but this
if God could have prevented it, and is manifestly not so, since they are less
did not do so, then God is either de¬ punished in this world. As it is said:
spiteful or He does not care for all; Well is it for the liars. But, if this argu¬
but if He could not have prevented it ment were good, they also would be
even if He wished, then He is not bewitched. Finally, it is clear from the
omnipotent. But since it is not possible fact that innocent children and other
to maintain the opinion that God does just men suffer most from witchcraft.
not care for all, and the rest, therefore But against these arguments: it is
it cannot be said that witchcraft is submitted that God permits evil to be
done with the permission of God. done, though He does not wish it;
Besides, he who is responsible to and this is for the perfecting of the
himself and is the master of his own universe. See Dionysius, de Diuin. Nom.
actions is not subject to the permission Ill: Evil will be for all time, even to the
or providence of any governor. But perfecting of the universe. And S.

68 MALLEUS I.
Part Question 12.
Augustine in the Enchiridion: In all first permissions, namely, the fall of
things good and evil consists the admir¬ the Angels and that of our first parents.
able beauty of the universe. So that From which also it will be clear that
what is said to be evil is well ordained, obstinately to disbelieve this smacks of
and kept in its due place commends heresy, since such a man implicates
more highly that which is good; for himself in the errors of the infidels.
good things are more pleasing and And as for the first, it is to be noted
laudable when compared with bad. that, presupposing that which pertains
S. Thomas also refutes the opinion of to the providence of God (see Wisdom
those who say that, although God has xiv: Thy providence, O Father, govern¬
no wish for evil (since no creature ed all things), we ought also to main¬
seeks for evil, either in its natural, or tain that all things are subject to His
its animal, or in its intellectual appe¬ providence, and that also He immedi¬
tite, which is the will, whose object is ately provides for all things. And to
good), yet He is willing that evil should make this clear, let us first refute a
exist and be done. This he says to be certain contrary error. For taking the
false; since God neither wishes evil to text in Job xxii: Thick clouds are a
be done, nor wishes it not to be done, covering to him that He seeth not us;
but is willing to allow evil to be done; and He walketh in the circuit of heaven:
and this is good for the perfecting of some have thought that the doctrine
the universe.
of S. Thomas, I, 22, means that only
And why it is erroneous to say that incorruptible things are subject to
God wishes evil to be and to be done, Divine providence, such as the separate
for the good of the universe, he says is Essences, and the stars, with also the
for the following reason. Nothing is to species of lower things, which are also
be judged good except what is good in incorruptible; but they said that the
itself and not by accident. As the virtu¬ individuals of the species, being cor¬
ous man is judged good in . his intel¬ ruptible, were not so subject. Where¬
lectual nature, not in his animal nature. fore they said that all lower things
But evil is not of itself ordained for
which are in the world are subject to
good, but by accident. For against the
Divine providence in the universal, but
intention of those who do evil, good
not in the particular or individual
results. In this way, against the inten¬ sense. But to others this opinion did
tion of witches, or against the intention
not seem tenable, since God cares for
of tyrants, was it that through their
the other animals just as He does for
persecutions the patience of the martyrs men. Therefore the Rabbi Moses, wish¬
shone out clearly.
ing to hold a middle course, agreed
Answer. This question is as diffi¬
with their opinion in saying that all
cult to understand as it is profitable
corruptible things are not individually
to elucidate. For there is among the
entirely subject to Divine governance,
arguments, not so much of Laymen as
but only in a universal sense, as has
of certain Wise men, this in common;
been said before; but he excepted men
that they do not believe that such
from the generality of corruptible
horrible witchcraft as has been spoken
things, because of the splendid nature
of is permitted by God; being ignorant
of their intellect, which is comparable
of the causes of this Divine permission.
with that of the separate Essences. And
And by reason of this ignorance, since
so, according to his opinion, whatever
witches are not put down with the
witchcraft happens to men comes from
vengeance that is due to them, they
the Divine permission; but not such
seem now to be depopulating the whole
as happens to the animals or to the
of Christianity. Therefore that both other fruits of the earth.
learned and unlearned may be satisfied
Now though this opinion is nearer to
in each way, according to the opinion
the truth than that which altogether
of the Theologians, we make our answer
denies the providence of God in worldly
by the discussion of two difficulties.
matters, maintaining that the world
And first, that the world is so subject
was made by chance, as did Demo¬
to the Divine providence that He Him¬
critus and the Epicureans, yet it is not
self provides for all. Secondly, that in
without great fallacy. For it must be
His justice He permits the prevalence
said that everything is subject to Divine
of sin, which consists of guilt, punish¬
rovidence, not only in the general,
ment, and loss, by reason of His two
ut also in the particular sense; and

I. MALEFICARUM
Part Question 12.
69
that the bewitching not only of men, extract good out of evil. But God is the
but also of animals and the fruits of universal controller of the whole world,
the earth, comes from Divine and and can extract much good from par¬
provident permission. And this is plainly ticular evils; as through the perse¬
true; the providence and ordinance of cution of the tyrants came the patience
things to some end extend just so far of the martyrs, and through the works
as the causality of them itself extends. of witches comes the purgation or
To take an example from things that proving of the faith of the just, as will
are subject to some master; they are so be shown. Therefore it is not God’s
far subject to his providence as they purpose to prevent all evil, lest the
are themselves under his control. But universe should lack the cause of much
the causality which is of God is the good. Wherefore S. Augustine says in
original agent, and extends itself to all the Enchiridion: So merciful is Almighty
beings, not only in a general but also God, that He would not allow any evil
in an individual sense, and not only to be in His works unless He were so
to things incorruptible. Therefore, since omnipotent and good that He can
all things must be of God, so all things bring good even out of evil.
are cared for by Him, that is, are And we have an example of this in
ordained to some end. the actions of natural things. For
This point is touched by S. Paul in although the corruptions and defects
Romans xiii: All things which are from which occur in natural things are
God were ordained by Him. Which is contrary to the purpose of that par¬
to say that, just as all things come from ticular thing (as when a thief is hanged,
God, so also are all things ordained by or when animals are killed for human
Him, and are consequently subject to food), they are yet in accordance with
His providence. For the providence of the universal purpose of nature (as that
God is to be understood as nothing man’s life and property should be kept
else than the reason, that is, the cause intact); and thus the universal good is
of the ordering of things to a purpose. preserved. For it is necessary for the
Therefore, in so far as all things are conservation of the species that the
a part of one purpose, so also are they death of one should be the preserva- \
subject to the providence of God. And tion of another. For lions are kept alive |
God knows all things, not only in the by the slaughter of other animals.
mass generally, but also in the indi¬
vidual particularly. Now the know¬
It is Explained with regard to the Divine
ledge which God has of things created
Permission, that God would not make a
is to be compared with a craftsman’s
Creature to be Naturally without Sin *
knowledge of his work: therefore, just
Secondly, God in His justice per¬
as all his work is subject to the order
mits the prevalence of evil, both that
and providence of a craftsman, so are
of sin and that of pain, and especially »
all things subject to the order and
providence of God. now that the world is cooling and ' ^
^UWUIII - --
declining to its end; and this we shalla ^
But this does not provide a satis¬
prove from two propositions which
factory explanation of the fact that
God in justice permits evil and witch¬ must be postulated. First, that God
would not—or let us rather say, with
craft to be in the world, although He is
the fear of God, that (humanly speak¬
Himself the provider and governor of
all things; for it would seem that, if ing) it is impossible that any creature,
this is conceded, He ought to keep man or Angel, can be of such a nature
away all evil from those for whom He that it cannot sin. And secondly, that
it is just in God to permit man to sin,
cares. For we see among men that a
wise provider does all that he can to or to be tempted. These two proposikeep away all defect and harm from
those who are his care; therefore why * “Naturally without sin.” The theology here
is very intricate and must be followed with the
does not God, in the same way, keep
utmost caution. All have free-will, and therefore
away all evil? It must be noted that a
might sin. But Our Lord and Our Lady did not
particular and an universal controller
sin; and the thought that they might have sinned
or provider are two very different
is blasphemy. And S. John says (I. iii. 9):
matters. For the particular controller
“Whosoever is born of God, committeth not sin:
must of necessity keep away all the
for his seed abideth in him, and he cannot sin,
harm he can, since he is not able to because he is born of God.”

70 MALLEUS I.
Part Question 12.
tions being granted, and since it is a to make something out of nothing; and
part of the Divine providence that this, if left to itself, perishes, but en¬
every creature shall be left to its own dures so long as it preserves the influ¬
nature, it must be said that, according ence of its cause. You may take, if you
to the premisses, it is impossible that wish, an example from a candle, which
God does not permit witchcraft to be burns only so long as it has wax. This
committed with the help of devils. being so, it is to be noted that God
And that it was not possible to com¬ created man, and left him in the hand
municate to a creature a natural in¬ of his own counsel (Ecclesiasticus xvii).
capacity for sin, is shown by S. Thomas And so also He created the Angels in
(II, 23, art. 1). For if this quality were the beginning of Creation. And this
communicable to any creature, God was done for the sake of Free-will, the
would have communicated it; for He property of which is to do or to omit
has, at least in kind, communicated doing, to recede or not to recede from
all other graces and perfections to His its cause. And since to recede from
creatures that are communicable. Such God, from free-will, is to sin, therefore
is the personal union of two natures it was impossible for man or Angel to
in Christ, the Maternity and Virginity receive, and God did not will to give,
of Immaculate Mary, the free fellow¬ such a natural quality that he should
ship of travellers, the blessed com¬ at the same time be endowed with
panionship of the elect, and many other free-will and also be incapable of sin.
things. But we read that this quality Another imperfection by reason of
was* not given to any creature, either which this quality cannot be com¬
man or Angel; for it is said: Even in municated to man or Angel is that it
His Angels He found sin. Therefore implies a contradiction; and since a
it is certain that God will not com¬ contradiction is by its nature im¬
municate to man a natural incapacity possible, we say that God will not do
for sin, although man may win to this this thing. Or rather we should say
through grace. that His creatures cannot receive such
Again, if this were communicable, a quality. For example, it is impossible
and were not communicated, the uni¬ that anything can be at one and the
verse would not be perfect. And its same time alive and dead. And so it
perfection consists in the fact that all would imply this contradiction: that a
communicable good qualities of crea¬ man should have free-will, by which
tures are communicated in kind. he would be able to depart from his
Neither is it valid to argue that God, Creator, and that he should also be
being omnipotent, and having made unable to sin. But if he were unable
men and Angels in His likeness', could to sin, he would be unable to depart
also have caused his creatures to be from his Creator. For this is sin: to
by nature impeccable: or even that despise the incommutable good and
He would make that condition of cleave to things that are variable. But
Grace, which is the cause of confirma¬ to despise or not to despise is a matter
tion in goodness, an essential part of of free-will.
the nature of Angels and men, so that The second argument also is not
through their natural origin and natural valid. For if the confirmation of grace
condition they would be so confirmed were so essential a part of the original
in goodness that they would not be creation that it became a natural
able to sin.
quality of the creature to be unable to
For the first argument will not hold. sin, then his inability to sin would
Since, although God is all-powerful arise, not from any exterior cause or
and all-good, yet he will not bestow from grace, but from his own very
this quality of impeccability; not be¬ nature; and then he would be God,
cause of any imperfection in His power, which is absurd. S. Thomas treats of
but because of the imperfection of the this in his above solution of the last
creature; and this imperfection lies argument, when he says that whenever
chiefly in the fact that no creature, man there happens to any creature some¬
or Angel, is capable of receiving this thing that can only be caused by a
quality. And for this reason: that, being superior influence, the lower nature
a creature, its being depends upon its cannot of itself cause that effect with¬
Creator, just as an effect depends on out the co-operation of the higher
the cause of its being. And to create is nature. For example, a gas becomes

I. MALEFICARUM
Part Question 13.
71
ignited by fire; but it could not of its
of the universe takes precedence over
own nature light itself without fire.
the good of any particular creature.
I say, therefore, that since the con¬
Therefore we must add that, if men
firmation of a rational creature comes
were prevented from sinning, many
only through grace, which is a sort of
steps to perfection would be removed.
spiritual light or image of the light of
For that nature would be removed
Creation, it is impossible for any
which has it in its power to sin or not
creature to have, of its own nature,
to sin; but it has already been shown
that confirmation or grace, unless it be
that this is a natural property of man’s
made one with the Divine nature; that nature.
is, unless it be of the same nature as
And let it be answered that, if there
God, which is altogether impossible.
had been no sin, but immediate con¬
Let us conclude by saying that the
firmation, then there would never have
inability to sin belongs by nature to
appeared what debt of grace in good
God alone. For He does not depart
works is due to God, and what the
from His nature, Who gives to all
power of sin has been able to effect,
things their being, neither can He
and many other things without which
depart from the righteousness of His
the universe would suffer great loss.
goodness; for this belongs to Him
For it behoved that Satan should sin,
through the character of His nature.
not through some outside suggestion,
But for all others who have this quality
but that he should find in himself the
that they cannot sin, it is conferred
occasion of sin. And this he did when
upon them through the confirmation
he wished to be equal to God. Now this
in goodness by grace; by which the
is to be understood neither simply and
sons of God are made free from sin,
directly, nor indirectly, but only with
and they who in any way consort with
a reservation; and this is declared
the Divine nature.
according to the authority of Esaias
xiv: I will ascend above the heights
☆ of the clouds; I will be like the Most
High. For it must not be understood
QUESTION XIII simply and directly, because in that
case he would have had a limited and
Herein is set forth the Question concerning erring understanding, in seeking some¬
the Two Divine Permissions which God thing which was impossible for him.
justly allows, namely, that the Devil, the For he knew that he was a creature
Author of all Evil, should Sin, and that created by God, and therefore he knew
our First Parents should Fall, from that it was impossible for him to become
which Origins the Works of Witches are equal to his Creator. Neither, again,
justly suffered to take place. must it be understood indirectly; for
T
since the whole good of an Angel and
HE second question and proposi¬
a creature lies in its subjection to God,
tion is that God justly permitted
just as the whole transparence of the air
certain Angels to sin in deed, which
consists in its subjection to the sun’s
He could not have allowed unless they
rays; therefore nothing which would
were capable of sin; and that in like
be contrary to the good of its nature
manner He preserved certain creatures
could be sought for by an Angel. But
through grace; without their having
he sought for equality with God, not
previously suffered temptation; and
absolutely, but with a reservation,
that He justly allows man both to be
which was as follows. The nature of
tempted and to sin. And all this is
God has two qualities, that of blessed¬
clearly shown as follows. For it is a
ness and goodness, and the fact that
part of Divine providence that each
all the blessedness and goodness of
single thing should be left to its own
His creatures issues from Him. There¬
nature, and not be altogether impeded
fore the Angel, seeing that the dignity
in its natural works. For, as Dionysius
of his own nature transcended that of
says (de Diuin. Nom., IV), Providence is
the other creatures, wished and asked
not a destroyer, but a preserver of
that the blessedness and goodness of
nature. This being so, it is manifest
all the inferior creatures should be
that, just as the good of the race is
derived from him. And he sought this
better than the good of the individual
in his own natural capacity, that just
(Aristotle, Ethics, I), so also the good
as he was the first to be endowed in

72 MALLEUS Part I. Question 13.
nature with those qualities, so the Therefore, just as the Angel was not
other creatures should receive them preserved from his fall, in order that
from the nobility of his nature. And the power of sin on the one side and
he sought this of God, in perfect the power of the confirmation of grace
willingness to remain subject to God on the other side might work together
so long as he had that power granted for the glory of the universe, so also
to him. Therefore he did not wish to ought it to be considered in the case
be made equal with God absolutely, of man.
but only with a reservation. Wherefore S. Thomas (II, 23, art. 2)
It is further to be noted that, wish¬ says: That by which God is glorified
ing to bring his desire to the point of ought not to be hindered from within.
action, he suddenly made it known to But God is glorified in sin, when He
others; and the understanding of the pardons in mercy and when He punishes
other Angels of his desire, and their injustice; therefore it behoves Him not
perverse consenting to it, was also to hinder sin. Let us, then, return to a
sudden. Therefore the sin of the First brief recapitulation, of our proposition,
Angel exceeded and preceded the sins namely, that by the just providence of
of the others in respect of the magni¬ God man is permitted to sin for many
tude of his guilt and causality, but not reasons. First, that the power of God
in respect of duration. See Apocalypse may be shown, Who alone is unchang¬
xii. The dragon falling from heaven ing while every creature is variable.
drew with him the third part of the Secondly, that the wisdom of God may
stars. And he lives in the form of be declared, Who can bring good out
Leviathan, and is king over all the of evil, which could not be unless
children of pride. And, according to God had allowed the creature to sin.>
Aristotle (Metaph., V), he is called king Thirdly, that the mercy of God may
of princes, inasmuch as he moves those be made manifest, by which Christ
who are subject to him according to through His death liberated man who
his will and command. Therefore his was lost. Fourthly, that the justice of
sin was the occasion of sin in others, God may be shown, which not only
since he first, not having been tempted rewards the good, but also punishes
from outside, was the external tempta¬ the wicked. Fifthly, that the condition
tion of others. of man may not be worse than that of
And that all these things happened other creatures, all of whom God so
instantaneously may be exemplified by governs that He allows them to act
physical things; for the ignition of a after their own nature; wherefore it
gas, the sight of the flame, and the behoved Him to leave man to his own
impression formed by that sight all judgement. Sixthly, for the glory of
happen at one and the same time. men; that is, the glory of the just man
I have put this matter at some who could transgress but has not. And
length; for in the consideration of that seventhly, for the adorning of the uni¬
stupendous Divine permission in the verse ; for as there is a threefold evil in
case of the most noble creatures with sin, namely, guilt, pain, and loss, so is
regard to the one sin of ambition, it the universe adorned by the corre¬
will be easier to admit particular per¬ sponding threefold good, namely, right¬
missions in the case of the works of eousness, pleasure, and usefulness. For
witches, which are in some circum¬ righteousness is adorned by guilt,
stances even greater sins. For in certain pleasure by pain, and all usefulness by
circumstances the sins of witches are loss. And by this the answer to the
greater than that of the Angel or of arguments is made plain.
our first parents, as will be shown in
the Second Part.
Solutions of the Arguments.
Now the fact that the providence of
God permitted the first man to be
According to the first argument it is
tempted and to sin is sufficiently clear heretical to maintain that the devil is
from what has been said concerning
allowed power to injure men. But the
the transgression of the Angels. For
opposite appears rather to be true; for
both man and the Angel were created it is heretical to assert that God does
to the same end, and left with free-will,
not permit man, of his own free-will,
in order that they might receive the
to sin when he wishes. And God per¬
reward of blessedness not without merit.
mits much sin, by reason of His power

Part I. Question 14. MALEFICARUM
73
to hurt men in the punishment of the
maintain that all things are not subject
wicked for the adorning of the universe.
to Divine providence, and would be
For it is said by S. Augustine in his
contrary to the praise which is spoken
Book of Soliloquies: Thou, Lord, hast
in Holy Scripture concerning the Divine
commanded, and it is so, that the shame
wisdom, which stretches mightily from
of guilt should never be without the
end to end and disposes all things well *
glory of punishment.
and it would be the error of the Rabbi
And that is not a valid proof of the
Moses, as was shown in the arguments
argument which is taken from the wise
for the truth. .
ruler who keeps away all defect and
For the fifth argument, man did not
jY" 25 ^ar. as he tan* For it is quite
institute nature, but puts the works of
different with God, Who has an univer¬
nature to the greatest use known to his
sal care, from one who has only a par¬
skill. and strength. Therefore human
ticular care. For God, Whose care is
providence does not extend to the in¬
universal, can bring good out of evil,
evitable phenomena of nature, as that
as is shown by what has been said.
the sun will rise to-morrow. But God’s
For the second argument, it is clear
providence does extend to these things,
that God’s power as well as His good¬
sjnce *s ^mse^ the author of nature.
ness and justice are manifest in His
Wherefore also defects in nature, even
permission of sin. So when it is argued
if they arise out of the natural course
that God either can or cannot prevent
of things, are subject to Divine provi¬
evil the answer is that He can prevent
dence. And therefore Democritus and
it, but that for the reasons already
the other natural philosophers were in
shown it does not behove Him to do so.
error when they ascribed whatever
Neither is it valid to object that He
happened to the inferior creation to
therefore wishes evil to be, since He can
the mere chance of matter.
prevent it but will not; for, as has
For the last argument: although
been shown in the arguments for the
every punishment is inflicted by God
truth, God cannot wish evil to be. He
for sin, yet the greatest sinners are not
neither wishes nor does not wish it, but
always afflicted with witchcraft. And
He permits it for the perfecting of the
this may be because the devil does not
universe.
wish to afflict and tempt those whom he
In fhe third argument S. Augustine
sees to belong to him by just title, or
and Aristode are quoted on the subject
because he does not wish them to be
ol human knowledge, saying that it is
turned back to God. As it is said: Their
better for a man not to have knowledge
plagues wefe multiplied, and they
ol that which is evil and vile for two
turned them to God, etc. And that all
reasons: first, that then he will have
punishment is inflicted by God for sin
less opportunity to think of evil, since
is shown by what follows; for according
we cannot understand many things at
to S. Jerome: Whatever we suffer,
the same time. And secondly, because
we deserve for our sins.
Knowledge of evil sometimes perverts
Now it is declared that the sins of
the will towards evil. But these argu¬
witches are more grievous than those
ments do not concern God, Who with¬
l*16 ^ad angels and our first parents.
out any detriment understands all the
Wherefore, just as the innocent are
deeds of men and of witches.
punished for the sins of their fathers,
For the fourth argument: S. Paul
so are many blameless people damned
excepts the care of God from oxen, to
and bewitched for the sms of witches.
show that a rational creature has
through free-will command over its
actions, as has been said. Therefore
Ood has a special providence over
him, that either blame or merit may QUESTION XIV
be imputed to him, and he may receive
The Enormity of Witches is Considered, and
either pumpmen!; 0r reward; but that
it is shown that the Whole Matter should
God does not in this way care for the
irrational beasts. be rightly Set Forth and Declared.
C
®u^to. "gue from that authority
oncerning the enormity of
thai the individuals of irrational creacrimes, it is asked whether the
mn have no part in Divine providence
crimes of witches exceed, both in guilt,
would be heretical; for it would be to
in pain, and in loss, all the evils which

74 MALLEUS Part I. Question 14.
God allows and has permitted from the sacraments of the Faith, as many of
beginning of the world up till now. them have confessed.
And it seems that they do not, especially Answer. The evils which are per¬
as regards guilt. For the sin which a petrated by modern witches exceed all
man commits when he could easily other sin which God has ever per¬
avoid it is greater than the sin which mitted to be done, as was said in the
another man commits when he could title of this Question. And this can be
not so easily avoid it. This is shown by shown in three ways, in so far as they
S. Augustine, de Ciuit. Dei: There is are sins involving perversity of char¬
great wickedness in sinning when it is acter, though it is different with the
so easy not to sin. But Adam, and sins that contravene the other Theo¬
others who have sinned when in a state logical virtues. First in general, by
of perfection or even of grace, could comparing their works indifferently
more easily because of the help of with any other worldly crimes. Secondly
grace have avoided their sins—especially in particular, by considering the species
Adam who was created in grace—than of the superstition and into what pact
many witches, who have not shared in they have entered with the devil. And
such gifts. Therefore the sins of such thirdly, by comparing their sins with
are greater than all the crimes of the sins of the bad Angels and even
witches. with that of our first parents.
And again in respect of punishment: And first, sin is threefold, involving
the greater punishment is due to the guilt, punishment, and loss. Good also
greater blame. But Adam’s sin was the is correspondingly threefold, involving
most heavily punished, as is plainly righteousness, felicity, and use. And
proved by the fact that both his guilt righteousness corresponds with guilt,
and his punishment are shown in all felicity with punishment, and use with
his posterity by the inheritance of loss.
original sin. Therefore his sin is greater That the guilt of witches exceeds all/’
than all other sins. other sins is apparent in this way. Foil
And again, the same is argued in according to the teaching of S. Thomas
respect of loss. For according to S. (ii, 22, art. 2), there is in the matter
Augustine: A thing is evil in that it of sin much that may be considered
takes away from the good; therefore whereby the gravity or lightness of the
where there is the more good lost, there sin may be deduced; and the same sin
the greater evil has gone before. But may be found heavy in one and light
the sin of our first parent brought the in another. For example, we can say
greatest loss both to nature and to that in fornication a young man sins,
grace, since it deprived us of innocence but an old man is mad. Yet those sins
and immortality; and no subsequent are, simply speaking, the heavier which
sin has brought such loss, therefore, are not only attended by the more
etc. extensive and more powerful circum¬
But on the contrary side: that which stances, but are in their nature and
includes the most causes of evil is the quantity of a more essentially serious
greater evil, and such are the sins of sort.
witches. For they can, with God’s per¬ And so we can say that, though the
mission, bring every evil upon that sin of Adam was in some respects
which is good by nature and in form, heavier than all other sins, inasmuch
as is declared in the Papal Bull. Be¬ as he fell to the instigation of a smaller
sides, Adam sinned only in doing that temptation, since it came only from
which was wrong in one of two ways; within; and also because he could
for it was forbidden, but was not wrong more easily have resisted on account of
in itself: but witches and other sinners the original justice in which he was
sin in doing that which is wrong in created: nevertheless in the form and
both ways, wrong in itself, and for¬ quantity of sin, and in other respects
bidden, such as murders and many which aggravate the sin the more in
other forbidden things. Therefore their that it is the cause of many yet heavier
sins are heavier than other sins. sins, the sins of witches exceed all other
Besides, sin which comes from definite sins. And this will be made still clearer
malice is heavier than sin which comes in two ways.
from ignorance. But witches, out of For one sin is said to be greater than
great malice, despise the Faith and the another in one or other of the follow-

Part I. Question 14. MALEFICARUM
75
ing respects: in causality, as was the It is clear from this that the heresy
sin of Lucifer; in generality, as Adam’s of witches is the most heinous of the
sin; in hideousness, as was the sin of three degrees of infidelity; and this fact
Judas; in the difficulty of forgiving it, is proved both by reason and authority.
as is the sin against the Holy Ghost; For it is said in II. S. Peter ii: It had
in danger, as is the sin of ignorance; in been better for them not to have known
inseparability, as is the sin of covetous¬ the way of righteousness, than, after
ness ; in inclination, as is the sin of the they have known it, to turn from it.
flesh; in the offending of the Divine And it is reasonable to suppose that,
Majesty, as is the sin of idolatry and just as he who does not perform what
infidelity; in the difficulty of combating he has promised commits a greater sin
it, as the sin of pride; in blindness of than he who does not perform what he
mind, as the sin of anger. Accordingly, never promised, so the infidelity of
after the sin of Lucifer, the works of heretics, who while professing the faith
witches exceed all other sins, in hideous¬ of the Gospel fight against it by cor¬
ness since they deny Him crucified, in rupting it, is a greater sin than that
inclination since they commit nasti¬ of the Jews and Pagans.
ness of the flesh with devils, in blind¬ And again, the Jews sin more greatly
ness of mind since in a pure spirit of than the Pagans; for they received the
malignity they rage and bring every prophecy of the Christian Faith in the
injury upon the souls and bodies of Old Law, which they corrupt through
men and beasts, as has been shown badly interpreting it, which is not the
from what has been said before. case with the Pagans. Therefore their
And this, indeed, is indicated, accord¬ infidelity is a greater sin than that of
ing to S. Isidore, by the word. For they the Gentiles, who never received the
are called witches (maleficae) on account Faith of the Gospel. But concerning
of the enormity of their crimes, as has Apostasy, S. Thomas says in the Second
been said above.
of the Second, question 12 : Apostasy
Our contention is also deduced from means a turning away from God and
the following. There are two gradations religion, and this may happen accord¬
in sin, a turning away, and a change ing to the different ways by which man
of heart. See our quotation from S. is joined to God; that is, by faith, or
Augustine: Sin is to reject the incom¬ by the subjection of the will to obedi¬
mutable good, and to cleave to things ence, or by religion and Holy Orders.
that are variable. And the turning
S. Raymund and Hostiensis say that
away from God is as it were formal,
Apostasy is a rash departure from the
just as the change of heart is as it were state of faith or obedience or Religion.
material. Therefore the more a man is
Now if that which precedes is removed,
separated from God by it, the heavier
that which follows from it is also re¬
is the sin. And since infidelity is the
moved; but the converse proposition
chief cause of man’s separation from is not true. Therefore Apostasy from
God, the infidelity of witches stands the Faith is a greater sin than the other
out as the greatest of sins. And this is
two forms of infidelity, since in its case
given the name of Heresy, which is
a precedent Religion has been removed.
Apostasy from the Faith; and in this
But according to S. Raymund, a
witches sin throughout their whole
man is not to be judged an Apostate
lives.
or deserter, however far and long he
For the sin of infidelity consists in
may have strayed, unless he shows by
opposing the Faith; and this may come
his subsequent life that he has no
about in two ways, by opposing a faith
thought of returning to the Faith. And
which has not yet been received, or by
this would be shown in the case of a
opposing it after it has been received.
cleric if he were to marry a wife, or
Of the first sort is the infidelity of the
commit some similar crime. In the
Pagans or Gentiles. In the second way,
same way it is an Apostasy of dis¬
the Christian Faith may be denied in
obedience when a man wilfully spurns
two ways: either by denying the
the teaching of the Church and the
prophecies concerning it, or by deny¬
Bishops. And such a man must be
ing the actual manifestation of its
convicted of his infamy, and be excom¬
truth. And the first of these is the municated.
infidelity of the Jews, and the second
Now when we speak of the Apostasy *
the infidelity of Heretics.
of witches, we mean the Apostasy of

MALLEUS Part I. Question 14.
76
perfidy; and this is so much the more an Apostasy from the Faith. And he
heinous, in that it springs from a pact answers: In such there is always
made with the enemy of the Faith and Apostasy either of word or of deed.
the way of salvation. For witches are For if invocations are made, then there
bound to make this pact, which is is an open pact made with the devil,
exacted by that enemy either in part and it is plainly Apostasy in word.
or wholly. For we Inquisitors have But if their magic is simply a matter
found some witches who have denied of action, then it is Apostasy in deed.
all the articles of Faith, and others And since in all these there is abuse of
who have denied only a certain number the Faith, seeing that they look for
of them; but they are all bound to deny from the devil what they ought to look
true and sacramental confession. And for from God, therefore they are always
so, even the Apostasy of Julian does to be judged Apostates. See how clearly
not seem to have been so great, although they set forth two degrees of Apostasy,
in other respects he did more harm understanding a third, namely, that of
against the Church; but we cannot thought. And even if this last is lack- s
speak of that here. ing, yet witches are judged to be
But it may be incidentally objected Apostates in word and deed. There¬
that it is possible that they may keep fore, as will be shown, they must be
the Faith in the thoughts of their subject to the punishment of Heretics
hearts, which God alone, and not even and Apostates.
any Angel, can see into; but do rever¬ And there is in them a third enormity
ence and obedience to the devil only of crime, exceeding all other heresies.
in outward form. The answer to this For S. Augustine (XXVIII, 1 and 2)
seems to be that there are two degrees tells us that the whole life of infidels is
of the Apostasy of perfidy. One con¬ a sin; and the gloss on Romans xiv says
sists in outward acts of infidelity, with¬ that everything which comes not of
out the formation of any pact with the faith is sin. What then is to be thought
devil, as when one lives in the lands of of the whole life of witches, that is, of
the infidels and conforms his life to all their other actions which are not
that of the Mohammedans. The other pleasing to the devil, such as fasting,
consists in a pact made with the devil attending church, communicating, and
by one who lives in Christian lands. In other things? For in all these things
the first case, men who keep the Faith they commit deadly sin, as is shown as
in their hearts but deny it in their follows. So far have they fallen in sin
outward acts, though they are not that, although they have not lost all
Apostates or Heretics, are guilty of power of amendment (since sin does
deadly sin. For in this way Solomon not corrupt the whole good of their
showed reverence to the gods of his nature, and a natural light yet remains
wives. And no one can be excused on in them); yet, because of their homage
the ground that he does this through given to the devil, and unless they be
fear; for S. Augustine says: It is better absolved from it, all their works, even
to die of hunger than to be fed by when they appear to be good, are
Idolaters. But however much witches rather of an evil nature. And this is
may retain the Faith in their hearts not seen to be the case with other
while denying it with their lips, they infidels.
are still to be judged Apostates, since For according to S. Thomas in the
they have made a treaty with death Second of the Second, question 1 o, Whether
and a compact with hell. Wherefore every action of an infidel is a sin; he
S. Thomas (II, 4), speaking of such says that the deeds of the unfaithful
magic works, and of those who in any which are, of themselves, good, such
way seek help from devils, says: They as fasting, almsgiving, and deeds of
are all Apostates from the Faith, by that sort, are no merit to them because
reason of a pact made with the Devil, of their infidelity, which is a most
either in word, when some invocation grievous sin. Yet sin does not corrupt
is used, or by some deed, even if there the whole good of their nature, and
is no actual sacrifice. For no man can there remains in them a natural light.
serve two masters. Therefore not every deed of theirs is
To the same effect writes Blessed mortal sin, but only those which pro¬
Albertus Magnus, where he asks whether ceed from their very infidelity, or are
the sin of Magicians and Astrologers is related to it. For example, a Saracen

Part I. Question 15. MALEFICARUM
77
fasts, to observe the law of Mohammed
they do not deny the Faith for any fear
as to fasting, and a Jew observes his
of men or for any delight of the flesh,
Feast days; but in such things he is
as has been said before; but, apart
guilty of mortal sin. And in this way is
from their abnegation, even give hom¬
to be understood the above dictum of
age to the very devils by offering them
S. Augustine, that the whole life of
their bodies and souls. It is clear enough?
infidels is sin.
trom this that, however much they are
penitent and return to the Faith, they
That Witches Deserve the heaviest Punish¬ must not be punished like other Heretics
with lifelong imprisonment, but must
ment above All the Criminals of the
World. suffer the extreme penalty. And because
of the temporal injury which they do
The crimes of witches, then, exceed
to men and beasts in various ways, the
the sins of all others; and we now
laws demand this. It is even equally
1 declare what punishment they deserve,
culpable to learn as it is to teach such
whether as Heretics or as Apostates.
iniquities, say the laws concerning
Now Heretics, according to S. RaySoothsayers. Then- how much more
mund, are punished in various ways,
emphatically do they speak concerning
as by excommunication, deposition,
witches, where they say that the penalty
confiscation of their goods, and death.
for them is the confiscation of their
The reader can be fully informed con¬
goods and decapitation. The laws also
cerning all these by consulting the law
say much concerning those who by
relating to the sentence of excommuni¬
witchcraft provoke a woman to lust,
cation. Indeed even their followers,
or, conversely, cohabit with beasts.
protectors, patrons and defenders incur
But these matters were touched upon
g
the heaviest penalties. For, besides the in the First Question.
unishment of excommunication inicted on them, Heretics, together with
☆
their patrons, protectors and defenders,
and with their, children to the second
QUESTION XV
generation on the father s side, and to
the first degree on the mother’s side,
It is Shown that, on account of the Sins of
are admitted to no benefit or office of
Witches, the Innocent are often Be¬
the Church. And if a Heretic have
witched, yea. Sometimes even for their
Catholic children, for the heinousness
Own Sins.
of his crime they are deprived of their I
paternal inheritance. And if a man be
T is a fact that, by Divine permis¬
convicted, and refuse to be converted
sion, many innocent people suffer
and abjure his heresy, he must at once
loss and are punished by the aforesaid
be burned, if he is a layman. For if
plagues, not for their own sins, but
they who counterfeit money are sum¬
for those of witches. And lest this
marily put to death, how much more
should seem to any a paradox, S.
must they who counterfeit the Faith?
Thomas shows in the Second of the
But if-he is a cleric, after solemn
Second, quest. 8, that this is just in
degradation he is handed over to the
God. For he divides the punishments
secular Court to be put to death. But
of this life into three classes. First, one
if they return to the Faith, they are
man belongs to another; therefore, if
to be imprisoned, for lif$ti But m prac¬
a man be punished in his possessions,
tice they are treated more leniently
it may be that another man suffers for
after recantation than they should be
his punishment. For, bodily speaking,
according to the judgement of the
sons are a property of the father, and
Bishops and the Inquisition, as will be
slaves and animals are the property of
shown in the Third Part, where the
their masters; and so the sons are some¬
various methods of sentencing such are
times punished for their parents. Thus;
treated of; that is to say, those who
the son born to David from adultery
are arrested and convicted and have
quickly died; and the animals of the
recanted their error.
Amalekites were bidden to be killed.
But to punish witches in these ways
Yet the reason for these things remains
does not seem sufficient, since they a mystery.
are not simple Heretics, but Apostates.
Secondly, the sin of one may be
;More than this, in their very apostasy
passed on to another; and this in two

MALLEUS Part I. Question 15.
78
ways. By imitation, as children imitate all were one body. An example is the
the sins of their parents, and slaves and sin of Achan in Joshua vii.
We can add to these two other
dependents the sins of their masters,
methods: that the wicked are punished
that they may sin more boldly. In this
way the sons inherit ill-gotten gain, sometimes by the good, and sometimes
and slaves share in robberies and unjust by other wicked men. For as Gratianus
feuds, in which they are often killed. says (XXIII, 5), sometimes God pun¬
And they who are subject to Governors ishes the wicked through those who are
exercising their legitimate power at
sin the more boldly when they see them
sin, even if they do not commit the His command; and this in two ways:
same sins; wherefore they are justly sometimes with merit on the part of
the punishers, as when He punished
punished.
Also the sin of one is passed on to the sins of the Canaanites through His
another in the way of desert, as when people; sometimes with no merit on
the sins of wicked subjects are passed the part of the punishers, but even to
on to a bad Governor, because the sins their own punishment, as when He
of the subjects deserve a bad Governor. punished the tribe of Benjamin and
See Job : He makes Hypocrites to reign destroyed it except for a few men.
on account of the sins of the people. And sometimes He punishes by His
Sin, and consequently punishment, nations being aroused, either by com¬
can also be passed on through some mand or permission, but with no inten¬
consent or dissimulation. For when tion of obeying God, but rather greedy
those in authority neglect to reprove for their own gain, and therefore to
sin, then very often the good are their own damnation; as He now
punished with the wicked, as S. Augus¬ punishes His people by the Turks, and
tine says in the first book de Ciuitate did so more often by strange nations
Dei. An example was brought to our in the Old Law.
notice as Inquisitors. A town once was But it must be noted that for what¬
rendered almost destitute by the death ever cause a man be punished, if he
of its citizens; and there was a rumour does not bear his pains patiently, then
that a certain buried woman was it becomes a scourge, not of correc¬
gradually eating the shroud in which tion, but only of vengeance, that is, of
she had been buried, and that the punishment. See Deuteronomy xxxii: A
plague could not cease until she had fire is kindled in mine anger (that is,
eaten the whole shroud and absorbed my punishment; for there is no other
it into her stomach. A council was anger in God), and shall burn unto
held, and the Podesta with the Governor the lowest hell (that is, vengeance shall
of the city dug up the grave, and found begin here and burn unto the last
half the shroud absorbed through the damnation, as S. Augustine explains).
mouth and throat into the stomach, And there is further authority con¬
and consumed. In horror at this sight, cerning punishment in his Fourth Dis¬
the Podesta drew his sword and cut off tinction. But if men patiently bear their
her head and threw it out of the grave, scourges, and are patient in the state
and at once the plague ceased. Now of grace, they take the place of a cor¬
the sins of that old woman were, by rection, as S. Thomas says in his Fourth
Divine permission, visited upon the Book. And this is true even of one
innocent on account of the dissimula¬ punished for committing witchcraft,
tion of what had happened before. or of a witch, to a greater or less degree
For when an Inquisition was held it according to the devotion of the sufferer
was found that during a long time of and the quality of his crime.
her life she had been a Sorceress and But the natural death of the body,
Enchantress. Another example is the being the last terror, is not a correc¬
punishment of a pestilence because tion, since of its nature it partakes in
David numbered the people. the punishment for original sin. Never¬
Thirdly, sin is passed on by Divine theless, according to Scotus, when it is
permission in commendation of the awaited with resignation and devotion,
unity of human society, that one man and offered in its bitterness to God, it
should take care for another by re¬ can in some way become a correction.
fraining from sin; and also to make sin But violent death, whether a man
appear the more detestable, in that the deserves it or not, is always a correc¬
sin of one redounds upon all, as though tion, if it is borne patiently and in

Part I. Question 15. MALEFICARUM
79
grace. S<* much for punishments in¬ of the sufferer or of another man, you
flicted on account of the sins of others. may refer to the five methods which
But God also punishes men in this the Master expounds in Book IV, dist.
life for their own sins, especially in the
15, cap. 2. And you must take the
matter of bewitchment. For see Tobias three first causes, for the other two
vii: The devil has power over those refer to personal guilt.
who follow their lusts. And this is clear For he says that for five causes God
from what we have already said con¬
scourges man in this life, or inflicts
cerning the member and the genital
punishment. First, that God mav be
powers, which God chiefly allows to be glorified; and this is when some punish¬
bewitched.
ment of affliction is miraculously re¬
However, for the purpose of preach¬ moved, as in the case of the man born
ing to the public it is to be noted that,
blind (£. John ix), or of the raising of
notwithstanding the aforesaid punish¬ Lazarus (S. John xi).
ments which God inflicts on men for
Secondly, if the first cause is absent,
their own and others’ sins, the preacher
it is sent that merit may be acquired
should keep as his basic principle and
through the exerci§e of patience, and
preach to the people this ruling of the
also that inner hidden virtue may be
law; which says, No one must be
made manifest to others. Examples
punished without guilt, unless there is are Job i and Tobias ii.
some cause for doing so. And this ruling
Thirdly, that virtue may be pre¬
holds good in the Court of Heaven,
served through the humiliation of
that is, of God, just as it does in the
castigation. S. Paul is an example, who
human Courts of Justice, whether
says of himself in II. Corinthians xii:
secular or ecclesiastic.
There was given unto me a thorn in
The preacher may predicate this of the flesh, the messenger of Satan. And
the Court of Heaven. For the punish¬
according to Remigius this thorn was
ment of God is of two kinds, spiritual
the infirmity of carnal desire. These
and temporal. In the former, punish¬
are the causes that are without guilt
ment is never found without guilt. In in the sufferer.
[the latter it is sometimes found quite
Fourthly, that eternal damnation
without guilt, but not without cause.
should begin in this life, that it might be
The first, or spiritual punishment, is
in some way shown what will be suffered
of three kinds; the first being forfeiture
in hell. Examples are Herod (Acts xii)
of grace and a consequent hardening
and Antiochus (II. Maccabees ix).
in sin, which is never inflicted except
Fifthly, that man may be purified,
for the sufferer’s own guilt. The second
by the expulsion and obliteration of
is the punishment of loss, that is, de¬
his guilt through scourges. Examples
privation of glory, which is never
may be taken from Miriam, Aaron’s
inflicted without personal guilt in
sister, who was stricken with leprosy,
adults, or contracted guilt in children
and from the Israelites wandering in
born from their parents’ sin. The third
the wilderness, according to S. Jerome,
is the punishment of pain, that is, the
XXIII, 4. Or it may be for the correc¬
torture of hell fire, and is plainly due
tion of sin, as is exemplified by the case
to guilt. Wherefore when it is said in
of David, who, after being pardoned for
Exodus xx: I am a jealous God, visiting
his adultery, was driven from his king¬
the sins of the fathers upon the children
dom, as is shown in II. Kings, and is
unto the third and fourth generation:
commented on by S. Gregory in his
it is understood as speaking of the
discourse on sin. It may, in fact, be
imitators of their fathers’ crimes, as
said that every punishment that we
Gratian has explained, Book I, quest.
suffer proceeds from our own sin, or
4; where he also gives other expositions.
at least from the original sin in which
Now with regard to God’s second, or
we were born, which is itself the cause
temporal punishment: first, it may be, of all causes.
as has been said before, for the sin of
But as to the punishment of loss,
another, or even without personal sin
meaning by that eternal damnation
or that of another (but not without
which they will suffer in the future,
cause), or for personal guilt only, with¬
no one doubts that all the damned will
out any other’s sin. But if you wish
be tortured with grievous pains. For
to know the causes for which God
just as grace is followed by the blessed
punishes, and even without any guilt
vision of the Kingdom of Heaven, so

8o MALLEUS Part I. Question 16.
is mortal sin followed by punishment in classed as Sortilege for the finding out
hell. And just as the degrees of blessed¬ of something hidden, such as the con¬
ness in Heaven are measured in accord¬ sideration of pricks and straws, and
ance with the degrees of charity and figures in molten lead. And S. Thomas
grace in life, so the degrees of punish¬ speaks also of these in the above-quoted
ment in hell are measured according reference.
to the degree of crime in this life. See Now the sins of witches exceed all
Deuteronomy xxv: The measure of punish¬ these crimes, as will be proved in
ment will be according to the measure respect of the foregoing species. There
of sin. And this is so with all other sins, can then be no question concerning
but applies especially to witches. See smaller crimes.
Hebrews x: Of how much sorer punish¬ For let us consider the first species,
ment, suppose ye, shall he be thought in which those who are skilled in
worthy, who hath trodden underfoot the sorcery and glamour deceive the human
Son of God, and hath counted the senses with certain apparitions, so that
blood of the covenant, wherewith he corporeal matter seems to become
was sanctified, an unholy thing? different to the sight and the touch, as
And such are the sins of witches, was treated of above in tfie matter of
who deny the Faith, and work many the methods of creating illusions.
evil bewitchments through the most Witches are not content with such
Holy Sacrament, as will be shown in practices in respect of the genital
the Second Part. member, causing some prestidigitatory
illusion of its disappearance (although
this disappearance is not an actual
☆
fact); but they even frequently take
away the generative power itself, so
QUESTION XVI
that a woman cannot conceive, and a
man cannot perform the act even when
The Foregoing Truths are Set out in
he still retains his member. And
Particular, by a Comparison of the
without any illusion, they also cause
Works of Witches with Other Baleful
abortion after conception, often accom¬
Superstitions.
N panied with many other ills. And theyji
OW the foregoing truth concerning even appear in various forms of beasts Jl
the enormity of witches’ crimes is as has been shown above.
proved by comparing them with the Necromancy is the summoning of
other practices of Magicians and and speech with the dead, as is shown
Diviners. For there are fourteen species by its etymology; for it is derived from
of magic, springing from the three the Greek word Nekros, meaning a
kinds of Divination. The first of corpse, and Manteia, meaning divina¬
these three is open invocation of tion. And they accomplish this by
devils. The second is no more than a working some spell over the blood of a
silent consideration of the disposition man or some animal, knowing that the
and movement of some thing, as of devil delights in such sin, and loves
the stars, or the days, or the hours, and blood and the pouring out of blood.
such things. The third is the considera¬ Wherefore, when they think that they
tion of some human act for the purpose call the dead from hell to answer their
of finding out something that is hidden, questions, it is the devils in the likeness
and is called by the name of Sortilege. of the dead who appear and give such
And the species of the first form of answers. And of this sort was the art
Divination, that is, an open invocation of that great Pythoness spoken of in
of devils, are the following : Sorcery, I. Kings xxviii, who raised up Samuel at
Oneiromancy, Necromancy, Oracles, the instance of Saul.
Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, But let no one think that such
Pyromancy, and Soothsaying (see S. practices are lawful because the Scrip¬
Thomas, Second of the Second, quest. ture records that the soul of the just
95, 26, and 5). The species of the Prophet, summoned from Hades to
second kind are Horoscopy, Haru- predict the event of Saul’s, coming war,
spicy, Augury, Observation of Omens, appeared through the means of a
Cheiromancy and Spatulamancy. woman who was a witch. For, as
The species of the third kind vary S. Augustine says to Simplici anus:
according to all those things which are It is not absurd to believe that it was

Part I. Question 16. MALEFICARUM 81
permitted by some dispensation, not about the dawn, when digestion is com¬
by the potency of any magic art, but by pleted. And I say this of us who are
some hidden dispensation unknown to sinners, to whom the Angels in their
the Pythoness or to Saul, that the spirit Divine piety, and in the execution of
of that just man should appear before their offices, reveal certain things, so
the sight of the king, to deliver the that when we study at the time of the
Divine sentence against him. Or else it dawn we are given an understanding of
was not really the spirit of Samuel certain occult matters in the Scriptures.
aroused from its rest, but some phan¬ For a good Angel presides over our
tasm and imaginary illusion of devils understanding, just as God does over
caused by the machinations of the our will, and the stars over our bodies.
devil; and the Scripture calls that But to certain more perfect men the
phantasm by the name of Samuel, just Angel can at any hour reveal things,
as the images of things are called by whether they are awake or asleep.
the names of the things they repre¬ However, according to Aristotle, de
sent.* This he says in his answer to Somno et Uigilia, such men are more apt
the question whether divination by the to receive revelations at one time than
invocation of devils is lawful. In the at another; and this is the case in all
same Summa the reader will find the matters of Magic.
answer to the question whether there Secondly, it is to be noted that it
are degrees of prophecy among the happens through Nature’s care for
Blessed; and he may refer to S. Augus¬ and regulation of the body, that certain
tine, XXVI, 5. But this has little to do future events have their natural cause
with the deeds of witches, which retain in a man’s dreams. And then those
in themselves no vestige of piety, as is dreams or visions are not causes, as was
apparent from a consideration of their said in the case of Angels, but only signs
works; for they do not cease to shed of that which is coming to a man in the
innocent blood, to bring hidden things future, such as health or sickness or
to light under the guidance of devils, danger. And this is the opinion of
and by destroying the soul with the body Aristotle. For in the dreams of the spirit
spare neither the living nor the dead. Nature images the disposition of the
Oneiromancy maybe practised in two heart, by which sickness or some other
ways. The first is when a person uses thing naturally comes to a man in the
dreams so that he may dip into the future. For if a man dreams of fires, it
occult with the help of the revelation is a sign of a choleric disposition; if of
of devils invoked by him, with whom flying or some such thing, it is a sign
he has entered into an open pact. The of a sanguine disposition; if he dreams
second is when a man uses dreams for of water or some other liquid, it is a
knowing the future, in so far as there is sign of a phlegmatic, and if he dreams
such virtue in dreams proceeding from of terrene matters, it is a sign of a
Divine revelation, from a natural melancholy disposition. And therefore
intrinsic or extrinsic cause; and such doctors are very often helped by
divination would not be unlawful. So dreams in their diagnosis (as Aristotle
says S. Thomas. says in the same book).
And that preachers may have at But these are slight matters in com¬
least the nucleus of an understanding parison with the unholy dreams of
of this matter, we must first speak about witches. For when they do not wish/ |
the Angels. An Angel is of limited as has been mentioned above, to be
power, and can more effectively reveal bodily transferred to a place, but desire
the future when the mind is adapted to see what their fellow-witches are;
to such revelations than when it is not. doing, it is their practice to lie down on
Now the mind is chiefly so adapted after their left side in the name of their own
the relaxation of exterior and interior and of all devils; and these things are
movement, as when nights are silent revealed to their vision in images. And
and the fumes of motion are quieted; if they seek to know some secret, either
and these conditions are fulfilled round for themselves or for others, they learn
it in dreams from the devil, by reason
of an open, not a tacit, pact entered
* “Represent.” For a full discussion of the
appearance of Samuel at Endor, see my “ History into with him. And this pact, again, is
I of Witchcraft,” c.v.: “The Witch in Holy not a symbolical one, accomplished by
i-rmryp. 176-81. the sacrifice of some animal, or some act

MALLEUS I.
82 Part Question 17.
of sacrilege, or by embracing the wor¬ and cries of birds; Omens, which
ship of some strange cult; but it is an observe the words of men; and Cheiro¬
actual offering of themselves, body and mancy, which observes the lines of the
soul, to the devil, by a sacrilegiously hand, or of the paws of animals. Any¬
uttered and inwardly purposed abnega¬ one who wishes may refer to the teach¬
( tion of the Faith. And not content with ing ofNider, and he will find much as to
this, they even kill, or offer to devils, when such things are lawful and when
their own and others’ children. they are not. But the works of witches
Another species of divination is are never lawful.
practised by Pythons, so called from
Pythian Apollo, who is said to have
☆
Been the originator of this kind of
divination, according to S. Isidore. This
QUESTION XVII
is not effected by dreams or by con¬
verse with the dead, but by means of
A Comparison of their Crimes under Four¬
living men, as in the case of those who
teen Heads, with the Sins of the Devils
are lashed into a frenzy by the devil,
of all and every Kind.
either willingly or unwillingly, only S
for the purpose of foretelling the future, O heinous are the crimes of witches
and not for the perpetration of any that they even exceed the sins and
other monstrosities. Of this sort was the fall of the bad Angels; and if this
the girl mentioned in Actsxvi, who cried is true as to their guilt, how should it
after the Apostles that they were the not also be true of their punishments in
servants of the true God; and S. Paul, hell? And it is not difficult to prove
being angered by this, commanded the this by various arguments with regard
spirit to come out of her. But it is clear to their guilt. And first, although the
that there is no comparison between sin of Satan is unpardonable, this is
such things and the deeds of witches, not on account of the greatness of his
who, according to S. Isidore, are so crime, having regard to the nature of
called for the magnitude Of their sins the Angels, with particular attention
and the enormity of their crimes. to the opinion of those who say that the
Wherefore, for the sake of brevity, Angels were created only in a state of
there is no need to continue this nature, and never in a state of grace.
argument in respect of the minor forms And since the good of grace exceeds
of divination, since it has been proved the good of nature, therefore the sins
in respect of the major forms. For the of those who fall from a state of grace,
preacher may, if he wishes, apply these as do the witches by denying the faith
arguments to the other forms of which they received in baptism, exceed
divination: to Geomancy, which is the sins of the Angels. And even if we
concerned with terrene matters, such say that the Angels were created, but
as iron or polished stone; Hydromancy, not confirmed, in grace; so also witches,
which deals with water and crystals; though they are not created in grace,
Aeromancy, which is concerned with have yet of their own will fallen from
the air; Pyromancy, which is concerned grace; just as Satan sinned of his own
with fire; Soothsaying, which has to will.
do with the entrails of animals sacri¬ Secondly, it is granted that Satan’s
ficed on the devil’s altars. For although sin is unpardonable for various other
all these are done by means of open reasons. For S. Augustine says that he
invocation of devils, they cannot be sinned at the instigation of none, there¬
compared with the crimes of witches, fore his sin is justly remediable by none.
since they are not directly purposed for And S. John Damascene says that he
the harming of men or animals or the sinned in his understanding against the
fruits of the earth, but only for the character of God; and that his sin was
foreknowledge of the future. The other the greater by reason of the nobility of
species of divination, which are per¬ his understanding. For the servant who
formed with a tacit, but not an open, knows the will of his master, etc. The
invocation of devils, are Horoscopy, or same authority says that, since Satan is
Astrology, so called from the considera¬ incapable of repentance, therefore he is
tion of the stars at birth; Haruspicy, incapable of pardon; and this is due to
which observes the days and hours; his very nature, which, being spiritual,
Augury, which observes the behaviour could only be changed once, when he

Part I. Question 17. MALEFICARUM 83
changed it for ever; but this is not so all, withdraw ourselves from God by
with men, in whom the flesh is always our sins, while, in spite of his permis¬
warring against the spirit. Or because sion of our sins, He continually pities
he sinned m the high places of heaven, us and prevents us with His countless
whereas man sins in the earth. benefits.
But notwithstanding all this, his sin Fifthly, when he sinned, God re¬
is in many respects small in comparison jected him without showing him any
with the crimes of witches. First, as S. grace; whereas we wretches run into
Anselm* showed in one of his Sermons, sin although God is continually calling
he sinned in his pride while there was us back.
r yet no punishment for sin. But witches Sixthly, he keeps his heart hardened
j
continue to sin after great punishments against a punisher; but we against a
have been often inflicted upon many merciful persuader. Both sin against
other witches, and after the punishments God; but he against a commanding
which the Church teaches them have God, and we against One who dies for
been inflicted by reason of the devil and us, Whom, as we have said, wicked
his fall; and they make light of all these, witches offend above all.
and hasten to commit, not the least
deadly of sins, as do other sinners who
The Solutions of the Arguments again
sin through infirmity or wickedness yet
Declare the Truth by Comparison.
not from habitual malice, but rather
the most horrible crimes from the deep To the arguments. The answer to
malice of their hearts. the first is clear from what was said in
Secondly, although the Bad Angel the beginning of this whole question.
fell from innocence to guilt, and thence It was submitted that one sin ought to
to misery and punishment; yet he fell be thought heavier than another; and
from innocence once only, in such a that the sins of witches are heavier than
way that he was never restored. But all others in respect of guilt, but not in
the sinner who is restored to innocence respect of the penalties that they entail.
by baptism, and again falls from it, To this it must be said that the punish¬
falls very deep. And this is especially ment of Adam, just as his guilt, may be
true of witches, as is proved by their considered in two ways; either as
crimes. touching him personally, or as touching
Thirdly, he sinned against the the whole of nature, that is, the pos¬
Creator; but we. and especially witches, terity which came after him. As to the
sin against the Creator and the Re¬ first, greater sins have been committed
deemer. after Adam; for he sinned only in doing
Fourthly, he forsook God, who per¬ that which was evil, not in itself, but
mitted him to sin but accorded him no because it was forbidden: but fornica¬
pity; whereas we, and witches above tion, adultery, and murder are in both
senses sins in themselves, and because
* “S. Anselm.” Doctor of the Church;
they are forbidden. Therefore such sins
Archbishop of Canterbury, born at Aosta, a
deserve the heavier punishment.
Burgundian town in the borders of Lombardy,
1033-34; died 21 April, nog. High praise is As to the second, it is true that the
given him in the Breviary Office for his Feast, greatest punishment resulted from the
21 April, Second Nocturn of Matins, Lection first sin; but this is only indirectly true,
VI: i(Obdormiuit in Domino, famam non solum in that through Adam all posterity was
miraculorum et sanctitatis (praecipue ob insignem infected with original sin, and he was
deuotionem erga Domini nostri passionem, et the first father of all those for whom the
beatam Virginem eius Matrem) assecutus, sed Only Son of God was able to atone by
etiam doctrinae, quam ad defensionem Christianae
the power which was ordained. More¬
religionis, animarum profectum, et omnium
over, Adam in his own person, with the
theologorum, qui sacras litteras scholastica
mediation of Divine grace, repented,
methodo tradiderunt, normam coelitus hausisse ex
and was afterwards saved through the
eius omnibus apparet.” There are several
Sacrifice of Christ. But the sins of
collections of the works of S. Anselm, but of
witches are incomparably greater, since
these few, if any, can claim to be critical, and
they are not content with their own sins
none are adapted for modern requirements. At
the same time there are very numerous separate and perdition, but ever draw countless
editions, and even translations of the more others after them.
important treatises, in particular the “Cur Deus And thirdly, it follows from what has
Homo”
been said that it was by accident that

84 MALLEUS Part I. Question 18.
Adam’s sin involved the greater injury. are submitted to prove that God does
For he found nature uncorrupted, and not permit it, and that therefore there is
it was inevitable, and not of his own no witchcraft in the world. And the
will, that he left it defiled; therefore it first argument is taken from God; the
does not follow that his sin was in¬ second from the devil; the third from
trinsically greater than others. And the witch; the fourth from the affliction
again, posterity would have committed ascribed to witchcraft; and the fifth
the same sin if it had found nature in the from preachers and judges, on the
same state. Similarly, he who has not assumption that they have so preached
found grace does not commit so deadly against and punished witches that they
a sin as he who has found it and lost it. would have no security in life.
This is the solution of S. Thomas (II, And first as follows: God can punish
21, art. 2), in his solution of the second men for their sins, and He punishes
argument. And if anyone wishes fully with the sword, famine, and pestilence;
to understand this solution, he must as well as with various and countless
consider that even if Adam had kept his other infirmities to which human
original innocence, he would not have nature is subject. Wherefore, there
assed it down to all posterity; for, as being no need for Him to add further
. Anselm says, anyone coming after him
punishments, He does not permit
could still have sinned. See also S. witchcraft.
Thomas, dist. 20, where he considers Secondly, if that which is said of the
whether new-born children would have devil were true, namely, that he can
been confirmed in grace; and in dist. obstruct the generative forces so that a
101, whether men who are now saved
woman cannot conceive, or that if she
would have been saved if Adam had not does conceive, he can cause an abor¬
sinned.
tion ; or, if there is no abortion, he can
☆ cause the children to be killed after
birth; in that case he would be able to
destroy the whole world; and it could
QUESTION XVIII
also be said that the devil’s works were
Here follows the Method of Preaching stronger than God’s, since the Sacra¬
against and Controverting Five Argu¬ ment of matrimony is a work of God.
ments of Laymen and Lewd Folk, which Thirdly, they argue from man him¬
seem to be Variously Approved, that self, that if there were any witchcraft in
God does not Allow so Great Power to the world, then some men would be
the Devil and Witches as is Involved in more bewitched than others; and that
the Performance of such Mighty Works it is a false argument to say that men
of Witchcraft. are bewitched for a punishment of their
F
sins, and therefore false to maintain
INALLY, let the preacher be
that there is witchcraft in the world.
armed against certain arguments
And they prove that it is false by argu¬
of laymen, and even of some learned
ing that, if it were true, then the greater
men, who deny, up to a certain point,
sinners would receive the greater pun¬
that there are witches. For, although
ishment, and that this is not the case;
they concede the malice and power of
for sinners are less punished sometimes
the devil to inflict such evils at his will,
than the just, as is Seen in the case of
they deny that the Divine permission is
innocent children who are alleged to be
granted to him, and will not admit that bewitched.
God allows such things to be done.
Their fourth argument can be added
And although they have no method in
to that which they adduce concerning
their argument, groping blindly now
God; namely, that a thing which a
this way and now that, it is yet neces¬
man can prevent and does not prevent,
sary to reduce their assertions to five
but allows it to be done, may be judged
arguments, from which all their cavil¬
to proceed from his will. But since God
lings proceed. And the first is, that
is All-Good, He cannot wish evil, and
God does not permit the devil to rage
therefore cannot permit evil to be done
against men with such great power.
which He is able to prevent.
The question put is whether the
Again, taking their argument from
Divine permission must always accom¬
the infliction itself, which is alleged to
pany an infliction caused by the devil
be due to witchcraft; they submit that
through a witch. And five arguments
they are similar to natural infirmities

Part I. Question 18. MALEFICARUM 85
and defects, and may therefore be sins, by sending plagues and other
caused by a natural detect. For it may afflictions beyond all the influence of
happen through some natural defect the stars; as when He punished the sin
that a man becomes lame, or blind, of pride in David, when he numbered
or loses his reason, or even dies; where¬ the people, by sending a pestilence upon
fore such things cannot confidently be the people.
ascribed to witches. Secondly, it agrees with the Divine
Lastly, they argue that preachers and wisdom that He should so govern all
judges have preached and practised things that He allows them to act at
against witches in such a way that, if their own instigation. Consequently,
there were witches, their lives would it is not His purpose to prevent alto¬
never be safe from them on account of gether the malice of the devil, but
the great hatred that witches would rather to permit it as far as He sees it
have for them. to be for the ultimate good of the
But the contrary arguments may be universe; although it is true that the
taken from the First Question, where it devil is continually held in check by the
treats of the third postulate of the First good Angels, so that he may not do all
Part; and those points may be pro- the harm that he wishes. Similarly He
ounded to the people which are most does not propose to restrain the human
tting. How God permits evil to be, sins which are possible to man through
even though He does not wish it; but his free-will, such as the abnegation of
He permits it for the wonderful per¬ the Faith and the devotion of himself to
fecting of the universe, which may be the devil, which things are in the power
considered in the fact that good things of the human will. From these two
are more highly commendable, are premisses it follows that, when God is
more pleasing and laudable, when most offended, He justly permits those
they are compared with bad things; evils which are chiefly sought for by
and authority can be quoted in support witches, and for which they deny the
of this. Also that the depth of God’s Faith, up to the extent of the devil’s
Divine wisdom, justice, and goodness power; and such is the ability to
should be shown forth, whereas it would injure men, animals, and the fruits of
otherwise remain hidden. the earth.
For a brief settlement of this question Thirdly, God justly permits those
there are various treatises available on evils which indirectly cause the greatest
this subject for the information of the uneasiness and torment to the devil;
people, to the effect, namely, that God and of such a sort are those evils which
justly permitted two Falls, that of the are done by witches through the power
Angels and that of our first parents; of devils. For the devil is indirectly
and since these were the greatest of all tormented very greatiy when he sees
falls, it is no matter for wonder if other that, against his will, God uses all
smaller ones are permitted. But it is in evil for the glory of His name, for the
their consequences that those two Falls commendation of the Faith, for the
were the greatest, not in their circum¬ purgation of the elect, and for the
stances, in which last respect, as was acquisition of merit. For it is certain
shown in the last Question, the sins of that nothing can be more galling to
witches exceed those of the bad angels the pride of the devil, which he always
and our first parents. In the same rears up against God (as it is said: The
place it is shown how God justly per¬ pride of them that hate Th*ee increases
mitted those first Falls, and anyone is ever), than that God should convert
at liberty to collect and enlarge upon his evil machinations to His own glory.
what is there said as much as he wishes. Therefore God justly permits all these
But we must answer their arguments. things.
As to the first, that God punishes quite Their second argument has been
enough by means of natural diseases, answered before; but there are two
and by sword and famine, we make a points in it which must be answered in
threefold answer. First, that God did detail. In the first place, far from its
not limit His power to the processes of being true that the devil, or his works,
nature, or even to the influences of the are stronger than God, it is apparent
stars, in such a way that He cannot go that his power is small, since he can do
beyond those limits; for He has often nothing without the Divine permission.
exceeded them in the punishment of Therefore it may be said that the devil’s

86 MALLEUS I.
Part Question 18.
S
ower is small in comparison with the can expound the truth that God permits
>ivine permission, although it is very evil to be done, but does not wish it to
great in comparison with earthly be done, by the five signs of the Divine
powers, which it naturally excels, as is will, which are Precept, Prohibition,
shown in the often quoted text in Job Advice, Operation, and Permission.
xi: There is no power on earth to be See S. Thomas, especially in his First
compared with him. Part, quest. 19, art. 12, where this is
In the second place, we must answer very plainly set forth. For although
the question why God permits witch¬ there is only one will in God, which is
craft to affect the generative powers God Himself, just as His Essence is
more than any other human function. One; yet in respect of its fulfilment,
This has been dealt with above, under His will is shown and signified to us in
the title, How witches can obstruct the many ways, as the Psalm says: The
generative powers and the venereal mighty works of the Lord-are fulfilled
act. For it is on account of the shame¬ in all His wishes. Wherefore there is a
fulness of that act, and because the distinction between the actual essential
original sin due to the guilt of our first Will of God and its visible effects; even
parents is inherited by means of that as the will, properly so called, is the will
act. It is symbolized also by the serpent, of a man’s good pleasure, but in a meta¬
who was the first instrument of the phorical sense it is the will expressed by
devil. outward signs. For it is by signs and
To their third argument we answer metaphors that we are shown that God
that the devil has more intention and wishes this to be.
desire to tempt the good than the We may take an example from a
wicked; although he does in fact tempt human father who, while he has only
the wicked more than the good, for the one will in himself, expresses that will in
reason that the wicked have more five ways, either by his own agency, or
aptitude than the good to respond to through that of someone else. Through
his temptation. In the same way, he his own agency he expresses it in two
is more eager to injure the good than ways, either directly or indirectly.
the bad, but he finds it easier to injure Directly, when he himself does a thing;
the wicked. And the reason for this is, and then it is Operation. Indirectly,
according to S. Gregory, that the more when he does not hinder someone else
often a man gives way to the devil, from acting (see Aristotle’s Physics, IV:
the harder he makes it for himself to Prohibition is indirect causation), and
struggle against him. But since it is this is called the sign of Permission.
the wicked who most often give way And the human father signifies his will
to the devil, their temptations are the through the agency of someone else in
hardest and most frequent, as they three ways. Either he orders someone
have not the shield of Faith with which to do something, or conversely forbids
to protect themselves. Concerning this something; and these are the signs of
shield S. Paul speaks in Ephesians vi. Precept and Prohibition. Or he per¬
Above all, taking the shield of faith, suades and advises someone to do some¬
wherewith ye shall be able to quench thing; and this is the sign of Advice.
all the fiery darts of the wicked. But And just as the human will is manifested
on the other hand, he assails the good in these five ways, so is God’s will.
more bitterly* than the wicked. And For that God’s will is shown by Precept,
the reason for this is that he already Prohibition, and Advice is seen in
possesses the wicked, but not the good; S. Matthew vi: Thy will be done in earth
and therefore he tries the harder to as it is in heaven: that is to say, may we
draw into his power through tribulation on earth fulfil His Precepts, avoid His
the just, who are not his, than the Prohibitions, and follow His Advice.
wicked, who are already his. In the And in the same way, S. Augustine
same way, an earthly prince more shows that Permission and Operation
severely chastises those who disobey are signs of God’s will, where he says in
his laws, or injure his kingdom, than the Enchiridion : Nothing is done unless
those who do not set themselves against Almighty God wishes it to be done,
him. ,
either by permitting it or by Himself
In answer to their fourth argument, doing it.
in addition to what has already been To return to the argument; it is
written on this subject, the preacher perfectly true that when a man can

Part I. Question 18. MALEFICARUM 87
prevent a thing, and does not, that wished to go out; and loudly swore
thing may be said to proceed from that, unless he beat her, there was no
his will. And the inference that God, honesty or faithfulness in him. At these
being All-Good, cannot wish evil to heavy words he stretched out his hand,
be done, is also true in respect of not intending to hurt her, and struck
the actual Good Pleasure of God’s her lightly with his open palm on the
Will, and also in respect of four of buttock; whereupon he suddenly fell
the signs of His Will; for it is needless to the ground and lost all his senses,
to say that He cannot operate evil, and lay in bed for many weeks afflicted
or command evil to be done, or fail with a most grievous illness. Now it
to be opposed to evil, or advise evil; is obvious that this was not a natural
but He can, however, permit evil to illness, but was caused by some witch¬
be done. craft of the woman. And very many
And if it is asked how it is possible to similar cases have happened, and been
distinguish whether an illness is caused made known to many.
by witchcraft or by some natural There are some who can distinguish
physical defect, we answer that there such illnesses by means of a certain
are various methods. And the first is practice, which is as follows. They hold
by means of the judgement of doctors. molten lead over the sick man, and
See the words of S. Augustine On the pour it into a bowl of water. And if
Christian Doctrine: To this class of super¬ the lead condenses into some image,
stition belong all charms and amulets they judge that the sickness is due to
suspended or bound about the person, witchcraft. And when such men are
which the School of Medicine despises. asked whether the image so formed is
For example, doctors may perceive caused by the work of devils, or is due
from the circumstances, such as the to some natural cause, they answer that
patient’s age, healthy complexion, and it is due to the power of Saturn over
the reaction of his eyes, that his disease lead, the influence of that planet being
does not result from any defect of the in other respects evil, and that the sun
blood or the stomach, or any other has a similar power over gold. But
infirmity; and they therefore judge what should be thought of this practice,
that it is not due to any natural defect, and whether it is lawful or not, will be
but to some extrinsic cause. And since discussed in the Second Part of this
that extrinsic cause cannot be any treatise. For the Canonists say that
poisonous infection, which would be it is lawful that vanity may be con¬
accompanied by ill humours in the founded by vanity; but the Theologians
blood and stomach, they have sufficient hold a directly opposite view, saying
reason to judge that it is due to witch¬ that it is not right to do evil that good
craft. may come.
And secondly, when the disease is In their last argument they advance
incurable, so that the patient can be several objections. First, why do not
relieved by no drugs, but rather seems witches become rich? Secondly, why,
to be aggravated by them. having the favour of princes, do they not
Thirdly, the evil may come so co-operate for the destruction of all
suddenly upon a man that it can only their enemies? Thirdly, why are they
be ascribed to witchcraft. An ex¬ unable to injure Preachers and others
ample of how this happened to one who persecute them?
man has been made known to us. A For the first, it is to be said that
certain well-born citizen of Spires had a witches are not generally rich for this
wife who was of such an obstinate reason: that the devils like to show x V’
disposition that, though he tried to their contempt for the Creator by buy¬
tr %
please her in every way, yet she refused ing witches for the lowest possible price.
9^T
in nearly every way to comply with his And also, lest they should be conspicu¬ C,
. v
wishes, and was always plaguing him ous by their riches.
with abusive taunts. It happened that, Secondly, they do not injure princes
on going into his house one day, and because they wish to retain, as far as
his wife railing against him as usual possible, their friendship. And if it is
with opprobrious words, he wished to asked why they do not hurt their
go out of the house to escape from enemies, it is answered that a good
quarrelling. But she quickly ran before Angel, working on the other side,
him and locked the door by which he prevents such witchcraft. Compare the

88
MALLEUS MALEFICARUM Part I. Question 18.
passage in Daniel:* The Prince of the Persians withstood me for twenty-one
days. See S. Thomas in the Second
* “Daniel” x, 13: “But the prince of the
Book of Sentences, where he debates
kingdom of the Persians resisted me one-andwhether there is any contest among the
twenty days: And behold Michael, one of the
good Angels, and of what sort.
chief princes, came to help me, and I remained
there by the King of the Persians.” The Prince Thirdly, it is said that they cannot
of the Persians is the angel guardian of Persia: injure Inquisitors and other officials,
who, according to his office, seeking the spiritual because they dispense public justice.
good of the Persians, was desirous that many of Many examples could be adduced to
the Jews should remain among them. prove this, but time does not permit it.

THE SECOND PART,
the various ways in which witches pro¬
TREATING OF THE fess their heresy. And in the second of
METHODS BY WHICH the main points, six matters will be
WITCHCRAFT IS INFLICTED, examined in order, relating to the pro¬
cedure of witchcraft, and its cure.
AND HOW IT MAY BE
First, the practices of witches with
AUSPICIOUSLY REMOVED
regard to themselves and their own
bodies. Second, their practices with
RESOLVED IN TWO ONLY QUESTIONS,
BUT DIVIDED INTO MANY CHAPTERS regard to other men. Third, those
relating to beasts. Fourth, the mischief
☆ they do to the fruits of the earth. Fifth,
those kinds of witchcraft which are
practised by men only and not by
QUESTION I
women. Sixth, the question of remov¬
T Of those against whom the Power of Witches ing witchcraft, and how those who are
availeth not at all. bewitched may be cured. The First
Question, therefore, is divided into
HE second main part of this eighteen heads, since in so many ways
work deals with the method of are their observances varied and multi¬
procedure adopted by witches plied.
for the performance of their It is asked whether a man can be so
witchcraft; and these are distinguished
blessed by the good Angels that he can¬
under eighteen heads, proceeding from
not be bewitched by witches in any of
two chief difficulties. The first of these
the ways that follow. And it seems that
two, dealt with in the beginning, con¬
he cannot, for it has already been
cerns protective remedies, by which a
proved that even the blameless and
man is rendered immune from witch¬
innocent and the just are often afflicted
craft : the second, dealt with at the end,
by devils, as was Job; and many inno¬
concerns curative remedies, by which
cent children, as well as countless other
those who are bewitched can be cured.
just men, are seen to be bewitched,
For, as Aristotle says (Physics, IV), although not to the same extent as
prevention and cure are related to one
sinners; for they are not afflicted in the
another, and are, accidentally, matters
perdition of their souls, but only in their
of causation. In this way the whole
worldly goods and their bodies. But the
foundation of this horrible heresy may
contrary is indicated by the confessions
be made clear.
of witches, namely, that they cannot
In the above two divisions, the fol¬
injure everybody, but only those whom
lowing points will be principally em¬
they learn, through the information of
phasized. First, the initiation of witches,
devils, to be destitute of Divine help.
and their profession of sacrilege.
Answer. There are three classes of
Second, the progress of their method of
men blessed by God, whom that detest¬
working, and of their horrible observ¬
able race cannot injure with their
ances. Third, the preventive protec¬
witchcraft. And the first are those who||
tions against their Witchcrafts. And be¬
administer public justice against them,
cause we are now dealing with matters
or prosecute them in any public official
relating to morals and behaviour, and
capacity. The second are those who,^i
there is no need for a variety of argu¬
according to the traditional and holy
ments and disquisitions, since those
rites of the Church, make lawful use of
matters which now follow under their
the power and virtue which the Church
headings are sufficiently discussed in
by her exorcisms furnishes in the asper¬
the foregoing Questions; therefore we
sion of Holy Water, the taking of con¬
pray God that the reader will not look
secrated salt, the carrying of blessed
for proofs in every case, since it is
candles on the Day of the Purification
enough to adduce examples that have
of Our Lady, of palm leaves upon
been personally seen or heard, or are
Palm Sunday, and men who thus
i accepted at the word of credible
fortify themselves are acting so that the
witnesses.
powers of devils are diminished; and of
In the first of the points mentioned,
these we shall speak later. The third
two matters will be chiefly examined :
class are those who, in various and
i first, the various methods of enticement
infinite ways, are blessed by the Holy
adopted by the devil himself; second,
Angels.

MALLEUS Part II. Question i.
90
The reason for this in the first class guardianship from witches, either be¬
will be given and proved by various cause they fear their conversion, or
examples. For since, as S. Paul says, because they desire and hasten their
all power is from God, and a sword damnation.
for the avenging of the wicked and the This fact is proved also by actual
retribution of the good, it is no wonder experience. For the aforesaid Doctor
that devils are kept at bay when justice affirms that witches have borne witness
is being ‘done to avenge that horrible that it is a fact of their own experience
crime. that, merely because they have been
To the same effect the Doctors note taken by officials of public justice, they
that there are five ways in which the have immediately lost all their power of
devil’s power is hindered, either wholly \h witchcraft. For example, a judge named
or in part. First, by a limit fixed by/\ Peter, whom we have mentioned before,
God to his power, as is seen in Job i wished his officials to arrest a certain
and ii. Another example is the case of witch called Stadlin;* but their hands
the man we read of in the Formicarius were seized with so great a trembling,
of Nider, who had confessed to a judge and such a nauseous stench came into
that he had invoked the devil in order their nostrils, that they gave up hope of
that he might kill an enemy of his, or daring to touch the witch. And the judge
do him bodily harm, or strike him dead commanded them, saying: “You may
with lightning. And he said: “When I safely arrest the wretch, for when he is
had invoked the devil that I might com¬ touched by the hand of public justice,
mit such a deed with his help, he he will lose all the power of his in¬
answered me that he was unable to do iquity.” And so the event proved; for
any of those things, because the man he was taken and burned for many
had good faith and diligently defended witchcrafts perpetrated by him, which
himself with the sign of the cross; and are mentioned here and there in this
that therefore he could not harm him work in their appropriate places.
in his body, but the most he could do And many more such experiences
was to destroy an eleventh part of the have happened to us Inquisitors in the
fruits of his lands.” exercise of our inquisitorial office, which
Secondly, it is hindered by the appli¬ would turn the mind of the reader to
cation of some exterior force, as in the wonder if it were expedient to relate
case of Balaam’s ass, Numbers xxii. them. But since self-praise is sordid
Thirdly, by some externally performed and mean, it is better to pass them
miracle of power. And there are some over in silence than to incur the stigma
who are blessed with an unique privi¬ of boastfulness and conceit. But we
lege, as will be shown later in the case must except those which have become
of the third class of men who cannot so well known that they cannot be
be bewitched. Fourthly, by the good concealed.
providence of God, Who disposes each Not long ago in the town of Ratisbom
thing severally, and causes a good Angel the magistrates had condemned a I
to stand in the devil’s way, as when witch to be burned, and were asked why
Asmodeus killed the seven husbands it was that we Inquisitors were not
of the virgin Sara, but did not kill afflicted like other men with witchcraft.
Tobias. They answered that witches had often
Fifthly, it is sometimes due to the tried to injure them, but could not.
caution of the devil himself, for at times And, being asked the reason for this,
he does not wish to do hurt, in order they answered that they did not know,
that worse may follow from it. As, for unless it was because the devils had
example, when he could molest the warned them against doing so. For
excommunicated but does not do so, as they said, it would be impossible to tell
in the case of the excommunicated Cor¬ how many times they have pestered us
inthian (I. Corinthians v), in order that by day and by night, now in the form of
he may weaken the faith of the Church
in the power of such banishment.
* “StadlinStadelein, who is described as
Therefore we may similarly say that,
“grandis maleficus,” “a most notorious wareven if the administrators of public locklived at Boltingen, a town in the duchy
justice were not protected by Divine and diocese of Lausanne. John Nider sat as
power, yet the devils often of their own assessor at his trial. See the “Formicarius
accord withdraw their support and c. III.

II. MALEFICARUM
Part Question i.
9i
apes, now of dogs or goats, disturbing us
some danger to the child, she placed
with their cries and insults; "fetching us
consecrated herbs under it, sprinkled
from our beds at their blasphemous
it with Holy Water, put a little Blessed
prayers, so that we have stood outside
Salt to its lips, signed it with the Sign
the window of their prison, which was
of the Cross, and diligently secured the
so high that no one could reach it
cradle. About the middle of the night
without the longest of ladders; and then
she heard the child crying, and, as
they have seemed to stick the pins with
women do, wished to embrace the
which their head-cloth was fastened
child, and lift the cradle on to her bed.
violently into their heads, and so they
She lifted the cradle, indeed, but could
were found by us when we had risen,
not embrace the child, because he was
as if they had wished to stick them into
not there. The poor woman, in terror,
our own heads. But praise be to
and bitterly weeping for the loss of her
Almighty God, Who in His pity, and
child, lit a light, and found the child in a
for no merit of our own, has preserved
corner under a chair, crying but unhurt.
us as unworthy public servants of the
In this it may be seen what virtue
justice of the Faith.
there is in the exorcisms of the Church
The reason in the case of the second
against the snares of the devil. It is
class of men is self-evident. For the
manifest that Almighty God, in His
exorcisms of the Church are for this
mercy and wisdom which extend from
very purpose, and are entirely efficaci¬
end to end, watches over the deeds of
ous remedies for preserving oneself
those wicked men; and that he gently
from the injuries of witches.
directs the witchcraft of devils, so that
But if it is asked in what manner a
when they try to diminish and weaken
man ought to use such protections, we
the Faith, they on the contrary
must speak first of those that are used
strengthen it and make it more firmly
without the uttering of sacred words,
rooted in the hearts of many. For the
and then of the actual sacred invoca¬
faithful may derive much profit from
tions. For in the first place it is lawful
these evils; when, by reason of devils’
in any decent habitation of men or
works, the faith is made strong, God’s
beasts to sprinkle Holy Water for the
mercy is seen, and His power mani¬
safety and securing of men and beasts,
fested, and men are led into His keep¬
with the invocation of the Most Holy
ing and to the reverence of Christ’s
Trinity and a Paternoster. For it is
Passion, and are enlightened by the
«aid in the Office of Exorcism, that
ceremonies of the Church.
wherever it is sprinkled, all uncleanness
There lived in a town of Wiesenthal
is purified, all harm is repelled, and
a certain Mayor who was bewitched
no pestilent spirit can abide there, etc.
with the most terrible pains and bodily
For the Lord saves both man and beast,
contortions; and he discovered, not by
according to the Prophet, each in his
means of other witches, but from his
degree.
own experience, how that witchcraft
Secondly, just as the first must neces¬ had been practised on him. For he
sarily be sprinkled, so in the case of a
said he was in the habit of fortifying
Blessed Candle, although it is more
himself every Sunday with Blessed Salt
appropriate to light it, the wax of it may
and Holy Water, but that he had neg¬
with advantage be sprinkled about
lected to do so on one occasion owing
dwelling-houses. And thirdly, it is ex¬
to the celebration of somebody’s
pedient to place or to burn consecrated
marriage; and on that same day he was
herbs in those rooms where they can bewitched.
best be consumed in some convenient
In Ratisbon a man was being
place.
tempted by the devil in the form of a
Now it happened in the city of Spires,
woman to copulate, and became greatly
in the same year that this book was
disturbed when the devil would not
begun, that a certain devout woman
desist. But it came into the poor man’s
held conversation with a suspected
mind that he ought to defend himself
witch, and, after the manner of women,
by taking Blessed Salt, as he had heard
they used abusive words to each other.
in a sermon. So, he took some Blessed
But in the night she wished to put her
Salt on entering the bath-room; and
little suckling child in its cradle, and
the woman looked fiercely at him, and,
remembered her encounter that day
cursing whatever devil had taught him
with the suspected witch. So, fearing
to do this, suddenly disappeared. For

MALLEUS Part II. Question i.
92
the devil can, with God’s permission, grace and glory); yet, when God wishes
present himself either in the form of a to bestow some especial grace, He does
witch, or by possessing the body of an so in a dispositive way through the
actual witch. agency of a good Angel, as S. Thomas
There were also three companions teaches us in a certain place in the
walking along a road, and two of them Third Book of Sentences.
were struck by lightning. The third was And this is the doctrine put forward
terrified, when he heard voices speak¬ by Dionysius in the fourth chapter
ing in the air, “Let us strike him too.” de Diuinis Nominibus: This is the fixed
But another voice answered, “We can¬ and unalterable law of Divinity, that
not, for to-day he has heard the words the High proceeds to the Low through
‘The Word was made Flesh.’” And he a Medium; so that whatever of good
understood that he had been saved emanates to us from the fountain of all
because he had that day heard Mass, goodness, comes through the ministry
and, at the end of the Mass, the Gospel of the good Angels. And this is proved
of S. John: In the beginning was the both by examples and by argument.
Word, etc. For although only the Divine power
Also sacred words bound to the body was the cause of the Conception of the
are marvellously protective, if seven Word of God in the Most Blessed Virgin,
conditions for their use are observed. through whom God was made man;
But these will be mentioned in the last yet the mind of the Virgin was by the
Question of this Second Part, where we ministry of an Angel much stimulated
speak of curative, as here we speak of by the Salutation, and by the strength¬
preventive measures. And those sacred ening and information of her under¬
words help not only to protect, but also standing, and was thus predisposed
to cure those who are bewitched. to goodness. This truth can also be
But the surest protection for places, reasoned as follows: It is the opinion of
men, or animals are the words of the the above-mentioned Doctor that there
triumphal title of our Saviour, if they are three properties in man, the will,
be written in four places in the form of a the understanding, and the inner and
cross: IESUS t NAZARENUS t REX outer powers belonging to the bodily
t IUDAEORUM t. There may also members and organs. The first God
be added the name of the Virgin MARY alone can influence: For the heart of
and of the Evangelists, or the words of the king is in the hand of the Lord. A
S. John: The Word was made Flesh. good Angel can influence the under¬
But the third class of men which standing towards a clearer knowledge of
cannot be hurt by witches is the most the true and the good, so that in the
remarkable; for they are protected by second of his properties both God and a
a special Angelic guardianship, both good Angel can enlighten a man. Simi¬
within and without. Within, by the larly in the third, a good Angel can
inpouring of grace; without, by the endow a man with good qualities, and
virtue of the stars, that is, by the pro¬ a bad Angel can, with God*s permission,
tection of the Powers which move the afflict him with evil temptations. How¬
stars. And this class is divided into two ever, it is in the power of the human
sections of the Elect: for some are pro¬ will either to accept such evil influences
tected against all sorts of witchcrafts, or to reject them; and this a man can
so that they can be hurt in no way; and always do by invoking the grace of God.
others are particularly rendered chaste As to the exterior protection which
by the good Angels with regard to the comes from God through the Movers
generative functions, just as evil spirits, of the stars, the tradition is widespread,
by their witchcrafts inflame the lusts and conforms equally with the Sacred
of certain wicked men towards one Writings and with natural philosophy.
woman, while they make them cold For all the heavenly bodies are moved
towards another. by angelic powers which are called by
And their interior and exterior pro¬ Christ the Movers of the stars, and by
tection, by grace and by the influence the Church the Powers of the heavens;
of the stars, is explained as follows. For and consequently all the corporeal
though it is God Himself Who pours substances of this world are governed
grace into our souls, and no other by the celestial influences, as witness
creature has so great power as to do Aristotle, Metaphysics I. Therefore we
this (as it is said: The Lord will give can say that the providence of God over-

Part II. Question i. MALEFICARUM
93
looks each one of His elect, but He sub¬
Collations of the Fathers, in the first con¬
jects some of them to the ills of this life
ference of the Abbot Serenus. This
for their correction, while He so pro¬
man, he says, laboured to achieve an
tects others that they can in no way be
inward chastity of heart and soul, by
injured. And this gift they receive
prayers both by night and day, by fast¬
either from the good Angels deputed by
ing and by vigils, till he at last per¬
God for their protection, or from the
ceived that, by Divine grace, he had
influence of the heavenly bodies or the
extinguished all the surgings of carnal
Powers which move them.
concupiscence. Finally, stirred by an
It is further to be noted that some are
even greater zeal for chastity, he used
protected against all witchcrafts, and
all the above holy practices to pray the
some against only a part of them. For
Almighty and All-Good God to grant
some are particularly purified by the
him that, by God’s gift, the chastity
good Angels in their genital functions,
which he felt in his heart should be
so that witches can in no way bewitch
visibly conferred upon his body. Then
them in respect of those functions.
aP .Angel of the Lord came to him in a
But it is in one sense superfluous to
vision in the night, and seemed to open
write of these, although in another sense
his belly and take from his entrails a
it is needful for this reason: for those
burning tumour of flesh, and then to
who are bewitched in their generative
replace all his intestines as they had
function are so deprived of the guard¬
been; and said: Lo! the provocation of
ianship of Angels that they are either in
your flesh is cut out, and know that this
mortal sin always, or practise those im¬
day you have obtained perpetual purity
purities with too lustful a zest. In this
of your body, according to the prayer
connexion it has been shown in the
which you prayed, so that you will
First Part of this work that God permits
never again be pricked with that
greater powers of witchcraft against
natural desire which is aroused even in
that function, not so much because of
babes and sucklings.
its nastiness, as because it was this act
Similarly S. Gregory, in the first book
that caused the corruption of our first
of his Dialogues, tells of the Blessed
parents and, by its contagion, brought
Abbot Equitius. This man, he says, was
the inheritance of original sin upon the
in his youth greatly troubled by the
whole human race.
provocation of the flesh; but the very
But let us give a few examples of how
distress of his temptation made him all
a good Angel sometimes blesses just and
the more zealous in his application to
holy men, especially in the matter of
prayer. And when he continuously
the genital instincts. For the following
prayed Almighty God for a remedy
was the experience of the Abbot S.
against this affliction, an Angel ap¬
Serenus, as it is told by Cassian* in his
peared to him one night and seemed to
* make him an eunuch, and it seemed to
“Cassian” John Cassian, monk and
ascetic writer of Southern Gaul, and the first to him in his vision that all feeling was
introduce the rules of Eastern monasticism into taken away from his genital organs; and
the West, was born probably in Provence about from that time he was such a stranger to . ,
360; and died near Marseilles about 433. The temptation as if he had no sex in his
two principal works of Cassian are the “Insti¬ body. Behold what benefit there was in
tutes; De institutis coenobiorum et de octo that purification; for he was so filled
principalium uitiorum remediis libri XII”; and
with virtue that, with the help of
the “Collations” or “Conferences,” “Collationes
Almighty God, just as he was before
XXIV.” The author has himself remarked
pre-eminent among men, so he after¬
upon the relation between the two works: “ These
wards became pre-eminent over women.
. . .
books (‘the Institutes') are mainly taken
Again, in the Lives of the Fathers col¬
up with what belongs to the outer man and the
‘ lected by that very holy man S. Hera¬
customs of the coenobia; the others (the Con¬
clides,! in the book which he calls
ferences') deal rather with the training of the
inner man and the perfection of the heart.” The
Paradise, he tells of a certain holy Father,
best edition of the works of Cassian is that by a monk named Helias. This man was
Petschenig, Vienna, 1883-88.
Although never formally canonized, from very t
“S- Heraclides.” Episcopus Tamasi in
early days Cassian was regarded as a saint. At
Cypro, cuius Festum agitur die xvii Septembris.
Marseilles his feast (with an octave) is celebrated
See “Analecta Bollandiana,” XXVI, 238-g;
23 July, and his name is found in the Greek
and Fr. Nau, “Revue de l'Orient chretien,” XII
Calendar.
i1 97), 123-38.

MALLEUS Part II. Question i.
94
moved by pity to collect thirty women gift of chastity, went, to sleep. Two
in a monastery, and began to rule over Angels then appeared to him, saying:
them. But after two years, when he was Behold, at the bidding of God we gird
thirty years old, he fled from the temp¬ you with a girdle of chastity, which
tation of the flesh into a hermitage, and cannot be loosed by any other such
fasting there for two days, prayed to temptation; neither can it be acquired
God, saying: “O Lord God, either slay by the merits of human virtue, but is
me, or deliver me from this tempta¬ given as a gift by God alone. And he
tion.” And in the evening a dream felt himself girded, and was aware of
came to him, and he saw three Angels the touch of the girdle, and cried out
approach him; and they asked him why and awaked. And thereafter he felt
he had fled from that monastery of himself endowed with so great a gift of
virgins. But when he did not dare to chastity, that from that time he ab¬
answer, for shame, the Angels said: If horred all the delights of the flesh, so
you are set free from temptation, will that he could not even speak to a woman
you return to your cure of those women? except under compulsion, but was
And he answered that he would will¬ strong in his perfect chastity. This we
ingly. They then exacted an oath to take from the Formicarius of Nider.
that effect from him, and made him an With the exception, therefore, of
eunuch. For one seemed to hold his these three classes of men, no one is
hands, another his feet, and the third secure from witches. For all others are
to cut out his testicles with a knife; liable to be bewitched, or to be tempted
though this was not really so, but only and incited by some witchery, in the
seemed to be. And when they asked if eighteen ways that are now to be con¬
he felt himself remedied, he answered sidered. For we must first describe
that he was entirely delivered. So, on these methods in their order, that we
the fifth day, he returned to the sorrow¬ may afterwards discuss more clearly the
ing women, and ruled over them for the remedies by which those who are be¬
forty years that he continued to live, witched can be relieved. And that the
and never again felt a spark of that first eighteen methods may be more clearly
temptation. shown, they are set forth under as many
No less a benefit do we read to have chapters as follows. First, we show the
been conferred upon the Blessed various methods of initiation of witches, yj
Thomas,* a Doctor of our Order, whom and how they entice innocent girls to
his brothers imprisoned for entering swell the numbers of their perfidious
that Order; and, wishing to tempt him, company. Second, how witches pro¬
they sent in to him a seductive and fess their sacrilege, and the oath of
sumptuously adorned harlot. But when allegiance to the devil which they take.
the Doctor had looked at her, he ran Third, how they are transported from
to the material fire, and snatching up a place to place, either bodily or in the
lighted torch, drove the engine of the spirit. Fourth, how they subject them-f
fire of lust out of his prison; and, selves to Incubi, who are devils. Fifth,
prostrating himself in a prayer for the their general method of practising
witchcraft through the Sacraments of
* “jBlessed ThomasAt the instance of his the Church, and in particular how,
mother Theodora, Countess of Teano, S. with the permission of God, they can
Thomas, who had received the Dominican habit afflict all creatures except the Celestial
some time between 1240 and August 1243, was Bodies. Sixth, their method of obstruct¬
whilst on his way to Rome from Naples captured ing the generative function. Seventh,
near Aquapendente by his two brothers, Landolfo
how they can take off the virile member
and Rinaldo, officers in the army of the Emperor
by some art of illusion. Eighth, how
Frederick. They confined him for nearly two
they change men into the shapes of
years in the fortress of San Giovanni at Rocca
beasts. Ninth, how devils can enter
Secca. He revealed this vision of Holy Angels
the mind without hurting it, when they
who endowed him with the white girdle of
work some glamour or illusion. Tenth,
chastity to his faithful friend, Reginald of
how devils, through the operation of
Piperno. One of the particular devotions of the
witches, sometimes substantially inhabit
Dominican Order consists in wearing, as a
devout memorial of this event, a white girdle for men. Eleventh, how they cause every
which a special form of blessing is prescribed: sort of infirmity, and this in general.
“Benedictio Cinguli S. Thomae Aquinatis Ad Twelfth, of certain infirmities in par¬
Seruandam Castitatem.” ticular. Thirteenth, how witch mid-

II. MALEFICARUM
Part Question i.
95
wives cause the greatest damage, either
human intellect is ordered by God
j lolling children or sacrilegiously offer¬
through the mediation of the Angels.
ing them to devils. Fourteenth, how
Accordingly also all things corporeal,
l|they cause various plagues to afflict
whether they be interior as are the
animals. Fifteenth, how they raise hail¬
powers and knowledge acquired
storms and tempests, and thunder and
through the inner bodily faculties, or
lightning, to fall upon men and animals.
exterior as are sickness and health, are
Sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth,
dispensed by the celestial bodies,
the three ways in which men only, and
through the mediation of Angels. And
not women, are addicted to witchcraft.
when Dionysius, in the fourth chapter
After these will follow the question of
de Diuinis Nominibus, says that the celes¬
the methods by which these sorts of
tial bodies are the cause of that which
witchcraft may be removed.
happens in this world, this is to be
But let no one think that, because we
understood as to natural health and
have enumerated the various methods
sickness. But the sicknesses we are con¬
by which various forms of witchcraft
sidering are supernatural, since they
are inflicted, he will arrive at a com¬
are inflicted by the power of the devil,
plete knowledge of these practices; for
with God’s permission. Therefore we
such knowledge would be of little use,
cannot say that it is due to the influence
and might even be harmful. Not even
of the stars that a man is bewitched;
the forbidden books of Necromancy
although it can truly be said that it is
contain such knowledge; for witch¬
due to the influence of the stars that
craft is not taught in books, nor is it
some men cannot be bewitched.
practised by the learned, but by the
But if it is objected that these two
altogether uneducated; having only
opposite effects must spring from the
one foundation, without the acknow¬
same cause, and that the pendulum
ledgement or practice of which it is
must swing both ways, it is answered
impossible for anyone to work witch¬
that, when a man is preserved by the
craft as a witch.
influence of the stars from these super¬
Moreover, the methods are enumer¬
natural ills, this is not due directly to
ated here at the beginning, that their
the influence of the stars, but to an
deeds may not seem incredible, as they
angelic power, which can strengthen
have often been thought hitherto, to
that influence so that the enemy with
the great damage of the Faith, and the
his malice cannot prevail against it;
increase of witches themselves. But if
and that angelic power can be passed
anyone maintains that, since (as has
on through the virtue of the stars. For
been proved above) some men are pro¬
a man may be at the point of death,
tected by the influence of the stars so
having reached the natural term of
that they can be hurt by no witchcraft,
life, and God in His power, which in
it should also be attributed to the stars
such matters always works indirectly,
when anyone is bewitched, as if it
may alter this by sending some power
were a matter of predestination whether
of preservation instead of the natural
a man be immune from or subject to
defect in the man and in his dominating
witchcraft, such a man does not rightly
influence. Accordingly we may say of
understand the meaning of the Doctors;
a man who is subject to witchcraft, that
and this in various respects.
he can in just the same way be pre¬
And first, because there are three
served from witchcraft, or that this
human qualities which may be said to
preservation comes of an Angel deputed
be ruled by three celestial causes,
to guard him; and this is the chief of
namely, the act of volition, the act of
all means of protection.
understanding, and bodily acts. And
And when it is said in Jeremias xxii:
the first, as has been said, is governed
Write ye this man childless, a man that
directly and only by God; the second
shall not prosper in his days: this is to
by an Angel; and the third is governed,
be understood with regard to the choices
but not compelled, by a celestial body.
of the will, in which one man prospers
Secondly, it is clear from what has
and another does not; and this also can
been said that choice and volition are
be ascribed to the influence of the stars.
governed directly by God, as S. .Paul
For example: one man may be influ¬
says: It is God Who causeth us to will
enced by his stars to make a useful
and to perform, according to His good
choice, such as to enter some religious
pleasure: and the understanding of the
Order. And when his understanding is

9^ MALLEUS Part II. Qu. i. Ch. 1.
enlightened to consider such a step, and nations, that through them He might
by D ivine operation his will is inclined prove the people of Israel; and it
to put it into execution, such a man is speaks of the neighbouring nations of
said to prosper well. Or similarly when the Canaanites, Jebusites, and others.
a man is inclined to some trade, or any¬ And in our time the Hussites and other
thing that is useful. On the other hand, Heretics are permitted, so that they
he will be called unfortunate when his cannot be destroyed. Devils, therefore,
choice is inclined by the higher Powers by means of witches, so afflict their
to unprofitable things. innocent neighbours with temporal
S. Thomas, in his third book of the losses, that they are as it were com¬
Summa against the Gentiles, and in pelled, first to beg the suffrages of
several other places x speaks of these and witches, and at length to submit
many other opinions, when he discusses themselves to theif counsels; as many
in what lies the difference that one man experiences have taught us.
should be well born and another un¬ We know a stranger in the diocese of
fortunately born, that a man should be Augsburg, who before he was fortylucky or unlucky, or well or badly four years old lost all his horses in
governed and guarded. For according succession through witchcraft. His wife,
to the disposition of his stars a man is being afflicted with weariness by reason
said to be well or badly born, and so of this, consulted with witches, and
fortunate or unfortunate; and accord¬ after following their counsels, unwhole¬
ing as he is enlightened by an Angel, some as they were, all the horses which
and follows such enlightenment, he is he bought after that (for he was a
said to be well or badly guarded. And carrier) were preserved from witch¬
according as he is directed by God craft.
towards good, and follows it, he is said And how many women have com¬
to be well governed. But these choices plained to us in our capacity of Inquisi¬
have no place here, since we are not tors, that when their cows have been
concerned with them but with the pre¬ injured by being deprived of their milk,
servation from witchcraft; and we have or in any other way, they have con¬
said enough for the present on this sub¬ sulted with suspected witches, and even
ject. We proceed to the rites practised been given remedies by them, on
by witches, and first to a consideration of condition that they would promise
how they lure the innocent into becom¬ something to some spirit; and when
ing partakers of their perfidies. they asked what they would have to
promise, the witches answered that it
☆ was only a small thing, that they
should agree to execute the instructions
of that master with regard to certain
CHAPTER I
observances during the Holy Offices
Of the several Methods by which Devils of the Church, or to observe some silent
through Witches Entice and Allure the reservations in their confessions to
Innocent to the Increase of that Horrid priests.
Craft and Company. Here it is to be noted that, as has
T
already been hinted, this iniquity has
HERE are three methods above small and scant beginnings, as that at
all by which devils, through the the time of the elevation of the Body of
agency of witches, subvert the innocent, Christ they spit on the ground, or shut
and by which that perfidy is continually their eyes, or mutter some vain words.
being increased. And the first is through We know a woman who yet lives,
weariness, through inflicting grievous protected by the secular law, who,
losses in their temporal possessions. when the priest at the celebration of
For, as S. Gregory says: The devil often the Mass blesses the people, saying,
tempts us to give way from very Dominus uobiscum, always adds to herself
weariness. And it is to be understood these words in the vulgar tongue,
that it is within the power of a man to “Kehr mir die Zung im Arss umb.”
resist such temptation; but that God Or they even say some such thing at
permits it as a warning to us not to give confession after they have received
way to sloth. And in this sense is absolution, or do not confess every¬
fudges ii to be understood, where it thing, especially mortal sins, and so by
says that God did not destroy those slow degrees are led to a total abnega-

Part II. Qn i. Gh. i MALEFICARUM
97
tion of the Faith, and to the abominable of that town came to visit her and,
profession of sacrilege. among other scurrilous words, made
This, or something like it, is the the following proposition; that, if she
method which witches use towards liked, she would take her to a place
honest matrons who are little given to where there were some young men
carnal vices but concerned for worldly unknown to all the townsmen. And
profit. But towards young girls, more when, said the virgin, I consented, and
given to bodily lusts and pleasures, followed her to her house, the old
they observe a different method, work¬ woman said, “ See, we go upstairs to
ing through their carnal desires and the an upper room where the young men
pleasures of the flesh. are; but take care not to make the sign
Here it is to be noted that the devil of the Cross.” I gave my promise not
is more eager and keen to tempt the to do so, and as she was going before me
good than the wicked, although in and I was going up the stairs, I secretly
actual practice he tempts the wicked crossed myself. At the top of the
more than the good, because more stairs, when we were both standing
aptitude for being tempted is found in outside the room, the hag turned
the wicked than in the good. There¬ angrily upon me with a horrible
fore the devil tries all the harder to countenance, and looking at me said,
seduce all the more saintly virgins and “ Curse you! Why did you cross your¬
girls; and there is reason in this, self? Go away from here. Depart in
besides many examples of it. the name of the devil.” And so I
For since he already possesses the returned unharmed to my home.
wicked, but not the good, he tries the It can be seen from this how craftily
harder to seduce into his power the that old enemy labours in the seduction
good whom he does not, than the of souls. For it was in this way that the
wicked whom he does, possess. Similarly bath-woman whom we have men¬
any earthly prince takes up arms against tioned, and who was burned, confessed
those who do not acknowledge his rule that she had been seduced by some old
rather than against those who do not woman. A different method, however,
oppose him. was used in the case of her companion
And here is an example. Two witches witch, who had met the devil in human
were burned in Ratisbon, as we shall form on the road while she herself was
tell later where we treat of their methods going to visit her lover for the purpose
of raising tempests. And one of them, of fornication. And when the Incubus
who was a bath-woman, had confessed devil had seen her, and had asked her
among other things the following: that whether she recognized him, and she
she had suffered much injury from the had said that she did not, he had
devil for this reason. There was a answered: “ I am the devil; and if you
certain devout virgin, the daughter of wish, I will always be ready at your
a very rich man whom there is no need pleasure, and will not fail you in any
to name, since the girl- is now dead in necessity.” And when she had con¬
the disposition of Divine mercy, and sented, she continued for eighteen
we would not that his thoughts should years, up to the end of her life, to
be perverted by evil; and the witch practise diabolical filthiness with him,
was ordered to seduce her by inviting together with a total abnegation of the
her to her house on some Feast Day, Faith as a necessary condition.
in order that the devil himself, in the There is also a third method of
form of a young man, might speak with temptation through the way of sadness
her. And although she had tried very and poverty. For when girls have been
often to accomplish this, yet whenever corrupted, and have been scorned by
she had spoken to the young girl, she their lovers after they have immodestly
had protected herself with the sign of copulated with them in the hope and
the Holy Cross. And no one can doubt promise of marriage with them, and
that she did this at the instigation of a have found themselves disappointed
holy Angel, to repel the works of the
in all their hopes and everywhere
devil.
despised, they turn to the help and
Another virgin living in the diocese
protection of devils; either for the sake
of Strasburg confessed to one of us. that
of vengeance by bewitching those
she was alone on a certain Sunday in
lovers or the wives they have married,
her father’s house, when an old woman
or for the sake of giving themselves

98 MALLEUS II. Qn i. Ch. i
Part
up to every sort of lechery. Alas! his mistress. Seeing her, and not at all
experience tells us that there is no thinking of the spell that was on him,
number to such girls, and consequently he spontaneously addressed her kindly
the witches that spring from this class for the sake of their old friendship,
are innumerable. Let us give a few out asking her how she did, and whether
of many examples.
she was well. And she, seeing the
There is a place in the diocese of Count’s gentleness, in her turn asked
Brixen where a young man deposed very particularly after his health and
the following facts concerning the affairs; and when he answered that
bewitchment of his wife. he was well, and that everything
“ In the time of my youth I loved a prospered with him, she was astonished
girl who importuned me to marry and was silent for a time. The Count,
her; but I refused her and married seeing her thus astonished, again spoke
another girl from another country. kindly to her, inviting her to converse
But wishing for friendship’s sake to with him. So she inquired after his
please her, I invited her to the wedding. wife, and received a similar reply, that
She came, and while the other honest she was in all respects well. Then she
women were wishing us luck and asked if he had any children; and the
offering gifts, she raised her hand and, Count said he had three sons, one born
in the hearing of the other women who in each year. At that she was more
were standing round, said, You will
astonished, and was again silent for a
have few days of health after to-day. while. And the Count asked her, Why,
My bride was frightened, since she did
my dear, do you make such careful
not know her (for, as I have said, I had
inquiries? I am sure that you con¬
married her from another country),
gratulate me on my happiness. Then
and asked the bystanders who she was
she answered, Certainly I congratulate
who had threatened her in that way;
you; but curse that old woman who said
and they said that she was a loose and
she would bewitch your body so that
vagrom woman. None the less, it
you could not have connexion with
happened just as she had said. For
your wife! And in proof of this, there
after a few days my wife was so be¬
is a pot in the well in the middle of
witched that she lost the use of all her
your yard containing certain objects
limbs, and even now, after ten years,
evilly bewitched, and this was placed
the effects of witchcraft can be seen
there in order that, as long as its
on her body.”
contents were preserved intact, for so
If we were to collect all the similar
long you would be unable to cohabit.
instances which have occurred in one
But see! it is all in vain, and I am glad,
town of that diocese, it would take a
etc. On his return home the Count
whole book; but they are written and
did not delay to have the well drained;
preserved at the house of the Bishop
and, finding the pot, burned its con¬
of Brixen, who still lives to testify to
tents and all, whereupon he immedi¬
their truth, astounding and unheard-of
ately recovered the virility which he
though they are.
had lost. Wherefore the Countess again
But we must not pass over in silence one
invited all the nobility to a fresh wed¬
unheard-of and astonishing instance.
ding celebration, saying that she was
A certain high-born Count in the ward
now the Lady of that castle and estate,
of Westerich, in the diocese of Strasafter having for so long remained a
burg, married a noble girl of equal
virgin. For the sake of the Count’s
birth; but after he had celebrated the
reputation it is not expedient to name
wedding, he was for three years unable
that castle and estate; but we have
to know her carnally, on account, as
related this story in order that the
the event proved, of a certain charm
truth of the matter may be known,
which prevented him. In great anxiety,
to bring so great a crime into open
and not knowing what to do, he called detestation.
loudly on the Saints of God. It hap¬
From this it is clear that witches use
pened that he went to the State of
various methods to increase their
Metz to negotiate some business; and
numbers. For the above-mentioned
while he was walking about the streets
woman, because she had been sup¬
and squares of the city, attended by his
planted by the Count’s wife, cast that
servants and domestics, he met a
spell upon the Count with the help of
certain woman who had formerly been
another witch; and this is how one

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 2 MALEFICARUM 99
witchcraft brings innumerable others and certain future events, by the
in its train. information of devils, though this may
sometimes have a natural cause (see the
☆
question: Whether devils can foretell the
future, in the Second Book of Sentences);
CHAPTER II
they can see absent things as if they
Of the Way whereby a Formal Pact with were present; they can turn the minds
Evil is made. of men to inordinate love or hatred;
T they can at times strike whom they will
HE method by which they profess with lightning, and even kill some men
their sacrilege through an open and animals; they can make of no
pact of fidelity to devils varies accord¬ effect the generative desires, and even
ing to the several practices to which the power of copulation, cause abortion,
different witches are addicted. And kill infants in the mother’s womb by a
to understand this it first must be noted mere exterior touch; they can at times
that there are, as was shown in the bewitch men and animals with a mere
First Part of this treatise, three kinds look, without touching them, and cause
of witches; namely, those who injure death; they dedicate, their own children
but cannot cure; those who cure but, to devils; and in short, as has been said,
through some strange pact with the they can cause all the plagues which
devil, cannot injure; and those who other witches can only cause in part,
both injure and cure. And among that is, when the Justice of God permits
those who injure, one class in parti¬ such things to be. All these things this H
cular stands out, which can perform most powerful of all classes of witches
every sort of witchcraft and spell, can do, but they cannot undo them.
comprehending all that all the others But it is common to all of them to |
individually can do. Wherefore, if we practise carnal copulation with devils;
describe the method of profession in therefore, if we show the method used
* their case, it will suffice also for all the by this chief class in their profession of
other kinds. And this class is made up their sacrilege, anyone may easily
of those who, against every instinct of understand the method of the other
f human or animal nature, are in the classes.
- habit of eating and devouring the There were such witches lately,
children of their own species. thirty years ago, in the district of
And this is the most powerful class Savoy, towards the State of Berne, as
of witches, who practise innumerable Nider tells in his Formicarius. And
other harms also. For they raise hail¬ there are now some in the country of
storms and hurtful tempests and light¬ Lombardy, in the domains of the Duke
nings ; cause sterility in men and of Austria, where the Inquisitor
animals; offer to devils, or otherwise of Como, as we told in the former
kill, the children whom they do not Part, caused forty-one witches to be
devour. But these are only the children burned in one year; and he was fiftywho have not been re-born by baptism nve years old, and still continues to
at the font, for they cannot devour labour in the Inquisition.
those who have been baptized, nor Now the method of profession is
any without God’s permission. They twofold. One is a solemn ceremony,
can also, before the eyes of their like a solemn vow. The other is
parents, and when no one is in sight, private, and can be made to the devil
throw into the water children walking at any hour alone. The first method is
by the water side; they make horses when witches meet together in con¬
go mad under their riders; they can clave on a set day, and the devil
transport themselves from place to appears to them in the assumed body
)r place through the air, either in body or of a man, and urges them to keep faith
P in imagination; they can affect Judges with him, promising them worldly
and Magistrates so that they cannot prosperity and length of life; and they
hurt them; they can cause them¬ recommend a novice to his acceptance.
selves and others to keep silence under And the devil asks whether she will
torture; they can bring about a great abjure the Faith, and forsake the holy
trembling in the hands and horror in the Christian religion and the worship of
minds of those who would arrest them; the Anomalous Woman (for so they
they can show to others occult things call the Most Blessed Virgin MARY),

IOO MALLEUS Part II. Qn 1. Ch. 2
and never venerate the Sacraments;
they did so in both ways; according
ai?^. ^ ^e finds the novice or disciple to the truth which we shall declares
willing, then the devil stretches out his
later of the manner in which they are
hand, and so does the novice, and she
transferred from place to place. She
swears with upraised hand to keep that
said also that the greatest injuries were
covenant. And when this is done, the
inflicted by midwives, because they
devil at once adds that this is not
were under an obligation to kill or
enough; and when the disciple asks
offer to devils as many children as
what more must be done, the devil
possible; and that she had been
demands the following oath of homage
severely beaten by her aunt because
to himself: that she give herself to him,
she had opened a secret pot and found
body and soul, for ever, and do her
the heads of a great many children.
utmost to bring others of both sexes
And much more she told us, having
into his power. He adds, finally, that
first, as was proper, taken an oath to
she is to make certain unguents from speak the truth.
the bones and limbs of children,
And her account of the method of'
especially those who have been bap¬
professing the devil’s faith undoubtedly
tized; by all which means she will be
agrees with what has been written by
able to fulfil all her wishes with his
that most eminent Doctor, John Nider,
help.
who even in our times has written very
We Inquisitors had credible experi¬
illuminatingly; and it may be especially
ence of this method in the town
remarked that he tells us the following,
of Breisach in the diocese of Basel,
which he had from an Inquisitor of the
| receiving full information from a young
diocese of Edua, who held many
girl witch who had been converted,
inquisitions on witches in that diocese, j
whose aunt also had been burned in
and caused many to be burned.
the diocese of Strasburg. And she added
For he says that this Inquisitor told
that she had become a witch by the
him that in the Duchy of Lausanne
method in which her aunt had first
certain witches had cooked and eaten,
tried to seduce her.
their own children, and that the follow-! ! (
For one day her aunt ordered her to
ing was the method in which they"
go upstairs with her, and at her com¬
became initiated into such practices.
mand to go into a room where she
The witches met together and, by their
found fifteen young men clothed in
art, summoned a devil in the fornTof
green garments after the manner of
IfTnan, to whom the novice was com¬
German knights. And her aunt said
pelled to swear to deny the Christian
to her: Choose whom you wish from
religion, never to adore the Eucharist,
these young men, and I will give him
and to tread the Cross underfoot when¬
to you, and he will take you for his wife.
ever she could do so secretly.
And when she said she did not wish for
Here is another example from the
any of them, she was sorely beaten and
same source. There was lately a general
at last consented, and was initiated
report, brought to the notice of Peter
according to the aforesaid ceremony.
the Judge in Boltingen, that thirteen
She said also that she was often trans¬
infants had been devoured in the State
ported by night with her aunt over vast
of Berne; and public justice exacted
distances, even from Strasburg to
* I full vengeance on the murderers. And
Cologne.
when Peter asked one of the captive
This is she who occasioned our
witches in what manner they ate
inquiry in the First Part into the
children, she replied: “This is the
question whether witches are truly
manner of it. We set our snares chiefly
and bodily transported by devils from
for unbaptized children, and even for
place to place: and this was on account
those that have been baptized, especi¬
of the words of the Canon (6, q. 5,
ally when they have not been protected
Episcopi), which seem to imply that
by the sign of the Cross and prayers”
they are only so carried in imagination;
(Reader, notice that, at the devil’s
ID whereas they are at times actually and
command, they take the unbaptized
bodily transported.
I*' chiefly, in order that they may not be
For when she was asked whether it
baptized), “and with our spells we kill
was only in imagination and phantastithem in their cradles or even when they
cally that they so rode, through an
are sleeping by their parents’ side, in
illusion of devils, she answered that
such a way that they afterwards are

II. Qn i. Gh. 2 MALEFICARUM 101
Part
thought to have been overlain or to seduced. But I believe my wife to be so
have died some other natural death. obstinate that she would rather go
Then we secretly take them from their straight to the fire than confess the
graves, and cook them in a cauldron, smallest part of the truth; but, alas!
until the whole flesh comes away from we are both guilty.” And as the young
S
the bones to make a soup which may man said, so it happened in every
easily be drunk. Of the more solid respect. For the young man confessed
matter we make an unguent which is and was seen to die in the greatest
of virtue to help us in our arts and contrition; but the wife, though con¬
pleasures and our transportations; and victed by witnesses, would not confess
with the liquid we fill a flask or skin, any of the truth, either under torture
whoever drinks from which, with the or in death itself; but when the fire
addition of a few other ceremonies, had been prepared by the gaoler,
immediately acquires much knowledge cursed him in the most terrible words,
and becomes a leader in our sect.” and so was burned. And from these
Here is another very clear and dis¬ examples their method of initiation in \
tinct example. A young man and his solemn conclave is made clear.
wife, both witches, were imprisoned The other private method is variously
in Berne; and the man, shut up by performed. For sometimes when men
himself apart from her in a separate or women have been involved in some
tower, said: “If I could obtain pardon bodily or temporal affliction, the devil
for my sins, I would willingly declare comes to them, at times in person, and
all that I know about witchcraft; for I at times speaking to them through the
see that I ought to die.” And when he mouth of someone else; and he
was told by the learned clerks who were promises that, if they will agree to his
there that he could obtain complete counsels, he will do for them whatever
pardon if he truly repented, he joy¬ they wish. But he starts from small
fully resigned himself to death, and things, as was said in the first chapter,
laid bare the method by which he had and leads gradually to the bigger
first been infected with his heresy. things. We could mention many
“The following,” he said, “is the manner examples which have come to our
in which I was seduced. It is first knowledge in the Inquisition, but,
necessary that, on a Sunday before since this matter presents no difficulty,
the consecration of Holy Water, the it can briefly be included with the
(novice should enter the church with previous matter.
the masters, and there in their presence
deny Christ, his Faith, baptism, and the
A Few Points are to be Noticed in the
whole Church. And then he must pay
Explanation of their Oath of Homage.
homage to the Little Master, for so and
not otherwise do they call the devil.” Now there are certain points to be
Here it is to be noted that this method noted concerning the homage which
agrees with those that have been the devil exacts, as, namely, for what
recounted; for it is immaterial whether reason and in what different ways he
the devil is himself present or not, when does this. It is obvious that his prin¬
homage is offered to him. For this he cipal motive is to offer the greater
does in his cunning, perceiving the offence to the Divine Majesty by
temperament of the novice, who usurping to himself a creature dedi¬
might be frightened by his actual cated to God, and thus more certainly
presence into retracting his vows, to ensure his disciple’s future damnation,
whereas he would be more easily which is his chief object. Nevertheless,
persuaded to consent by those who are it is often found by us that he has
known to him. And therefore they call received such homage for a fixed term
him the Little Master when he is of years at the time of the profession
absent, that through seeming dis¬ of perfidy; and sometimes he exacts
paragement of his Master the novice the profession only, postponing the
may feel less fear. “And then he drinks homage to a later day.
from the skin, which has been men- And let us declare that the profession
! tioned, and immediately feels within consists in a total or partial abnegation
- himself a knowledge of all our arts and of the Faith: total, as has been said
an understanding of our rites and cere¬ before, when the Faith is entirely
monies. And in this manner was I abjured; partial, when the original

102 MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. 2
pact makes it incumbent on the witch former is the case with those whom he
to observe certain ceremonies in opposi¬ knows to have denied the Faith both
tion to the decrees of the Church, such with their lips and in their hearts, and
as fasting on Sundays, eating meat on also to have given him their homage;
Fridays, concealing certain crimes at for he is sure of their constancy. But
confession, or some such profane thing. in the latter case he withdraws his
But let us declare that homage consists protection, since he knows that they
in the surrender of body and soul. are of no profit to him.
And we can assign four reasons why We have often learned from the
the devil requires the practice of such confessions of those whom we have
things. For we showed in the First caused to be burned, that they have
Part of this treatise, when we examined trot been willing agents of witchcraft.
whether devils could turn the minds And they have not said this in the hope
of men to love or hatred, that they of escaping damnation, for its truth is
cannot enter the inner thoughts of witnessed by the blows and stripes
the heart, since this belongs to God which they have received from devils
alone. But the devil can arrive at a when they have been unwilling to
knowledge of men’s thoughts by con¬ perform their orders, and we have
jecture, as will be shown later. There¬ often seen their swollen and livid
fore, if that cunning enemy sees that a faces. Similarly, after they have con¬
novice will be hard to persuade, he fessed their crimes under torture they
approaches her gently, exacting only always try to hang themselves; and
small things that he may gradually this we know for a fact; for after the
lead her to greater things. confession of their crimes, guards are
Secondly, it must be believed that deputed to watch them all the time, c
f,
there is some diversity among those and even then, when the guards have
who deny the Faith, since some do so been negligent, they have been found
with their lips but not in their heart, hanged with their shoe-laces or gar¬
and some both with their lips and in ments. For, as we have said, the devil
their heart. Therefore the devil, wish¬ causes this, lest they shotlld obtain
ing to know whether their profession pardon through contrition or sacra¬
comes from the heart as well as from mental confession; and those whose i
the lips, sets them a certain period, hearts he cannot seduce from finding A
i
so that he may understand their minds grace with God, he tries to lead into
from their works and behaviour. despair through worldly loss and a
Thirdly, if after the lapse of a set horrible death. However, through the
time he find that she is less willing to great grace of God, as it is pious to
s
perform certain practices, and is bound believe, they can obtain forgiveness by
to him only by word but not in her true contrition and pure confession,
heart, he presumes that the Divine when they have not been willing
Mercy has given her the guardianship participators in those foul and filthy
of a good Angel, which he knows to practices.
be of great power. Then he casts her This is exemplified by certain events
off, and tries to expose her to temporal which took place hardly three years
afflictions, so that he gain some profit ago in the dioceses of Strasburg and
from her despair.
Constance, and in the towns of HageThe truth of this is clear. For if it nau and Ratisbon. For in the first
is asked why some witches will not
town one hanged herself with a trifling
confess the truth under even the
and flimsy garment. Another, named
greatest tortures, while others readily
Walpurgis, was notorious for her
confess their crimes when they are
power of preserving silence, and used
questioned (and some of them, after
to teach other women how to achieve
they have confessed, try to kill them¬
a like quality of silence by cooking
selves by hanging), the reason is as
their first-born sons in an oven. Many
follows. It may truly be said that,
such examples are to our hand, as they
when it is not due to a Divine impulse
are also in the case of others burned
conveyed through a holy Angel that a
in the second town, some of which
witch is made to confess the truth and will be related.
abandon the spell of silence, then it is
And there is a fourth reason why the
due to the devil whether she preserves
devil exacts a varying degree of homage,
/ silence or confesses her crimes. The
making it relatively small in some

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 2 MALEFICARUM 103
cases because he is more skilful than term when a witch is burned; for this 1
Astronomers in knowing the length of the devil ultimately causes when, as J
human life, and so can easily fix a term has been said, he finds a witch reluctant, '|
which he knows will be preceded by and fears for her conversion; whereas »
death, or can, in the manner already he protects even up to their natural
P|
told, forestall natural death with some death others whom he knows to be his
accident. willing agents.
All this, in short, can be shown by Let us give examples of both these
the actions and behaviour of witches. cases, which are known to us. There
But first we can deduce the astuteness was in the diocese of Basel, in a town
of the devil in such things. For accord¬ called Oberweiler situated on the
ing to S. Augustine in the de Natura Rhine, an honest parish priest, who
Daemonis*seven reasons are assigned fondly held the opinion, or rather error,
why devils can conjecture probable that there was no witchcraft in the
future events, though they cannot know world, but that it only existed in the
them certainly. The first is that they imagination of men who attributed
have a natural subtlety in their under¬ such things to witches. And God
standing, by which they arrive at their wished so to purge him of this error
knowledge without the process of that he might even be made aware
reasoning which is necessary for us. of the practice of devils in setting a term
Secondly, by their long experience and to the lives of witches. For as he was
by revelation of supernal spirits, they hastening to cross a bridge, on some
know more than we do. For S. Isidore business that he had to do, he met a
says that the Doctors have often certain old woman in his hurry, and
affirmed that devils derive their mar¬ would not give way to her, but pressed
vellous cunning from three sources, on so that he thrust the old woman into
their natural subtlety, their long experi¬ the mud. She indignantly broke into
ence, and the revelation of supernal a flood of abuse, and said to him,
spirits. The third reason is their “Father, you will not cross with
rapidity of motion, by which they can impunity.” And though he took small
with miraculous speed anticipate in notice of those words, in the night,
the West things which are happening when he wished to get out of his bed,
in the East. Fourthly, just as they are he felt himself bewitched below the
able, with God’s permission, to cause waist, so that he always had to be
diseases and famines, so also they can supported by the arms of other men
predict them. Fifthly, they can more when he wished to go to the church;
cunningly read the signs of death than and so he remained for three years,
a physician can by looking at the under the care of his own mother.
urine or feeling the pulse. For just as After that time the old woman fell
a physician sees signs in a sick man sick, the hag whom he had always
which a layman would not notice, so suspected as being the cause of his
the devil sees what no man can witchcraft, owing to the abusive words
naturally see. Sixthly, they can by with which she had threatened him;
signs which proceed from a man’s and it happened that she sent to him
mind conjecture more astutely than to hear her confession. And though the
the wisest men what is or will be in priest angrily said, “Let her confess to
that man’s mind. For they know what the devil her master,” yet, at the
impulses, and therefore what actions, instance of his mother, he went to the
will probably follow. Seventhly, they house supported by two servants, and
understand better than men the acts sat at the head of the bed where the
and writings of the Prophets, and, witch lay. And the two servants lis¬
since on these much of the future tened outside the window, so eager
depends, they can foretell from them were they to know whether she would
much that will happen. Therefore it confess that she had bewitched the
is not wonderful that they can know the priest. Now it happened that, though
natural term of a man’s life; though it she made no mention in her confession
is different in the case of the accidental of having been the cause of his malady,
after the confession was finished, she
said, “Father, do you know who
* “De Natura Daemonis” “De Diuinatione
Daemonum” written 406-11. Migne, “Patres bewitched you?” And when he gently
Latini ” XL, pp. §8i-g2. answered that he did not, she added,

104 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 1. Gh. 3
“You suspect me, and with reason;
bodily vectitation. But here it must be
for know that I brought it upon you
notea that this transvection offers a
for this reason,” explaining as we have
difficulty, which has often been men¬
already told. And when he begged to
tioned, arising from one single author¬
be liberated, she said, “Lo! the set
ity, where it is said: It cannot be ad¬
time has come, and I must die; but I
mitted as true that certain wicked
will so cause it that in a few days, after
women, perverted by Satan and seduced
my death, you will be healed.” And
by the illusions and phantasms of devils,
so it happened. For she died at the
do actually, as they believe and pro¬
time fixed by the devil, and within
fess, ride in the night-time on certain
thirty days the priest found himself
beasts with Diana, a goddess of the
completely healed one night. The name
Pagans, or with Herodias and an in¬
of that priest is Father Hasslin, and he
numerable multitude of women, and in
lives yet in the diocese of Strasburg.
the untimely silence of night pass over
Similarly in the diocese of Basel, in
immense tracts of land, and have to
the village called Buchel, near the
obey her in all things as their Mistress,
town of Gewyll, this happened. A
etc. Wherefore the priests of God ought
certain woman was taken, and finally
to preach to the people that this is alto¬
burned, who for six years had had an
gether false, and that such phantasms
Incubus devil, even when she was lying
are sent not by God, but by an evil
in bed by the side of her husband.
Spirit to confuse the minds of the faith¬
And this she did three times a week,
ful. For Satan himself transforms him¬
on Sundays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays,
self into various shapes and forms; and
and on some of the other more holy
by deluding in dreams the mind which
} nights.* But the homage she had given
he holds captive, leads it through
to the devil was of such a sort that she devious ways, etc.
was bound to dedicate herself body
And there are those who, taking their
and soul to him for ever, after seven
example from S. Germain and a cer¬
years. But God provided mercifully:
tain other man who kept watch over
for she was taken in the sixth year and
his daughter to determine this matter,
condemned to the fire, and having
sometimes preach that this is an alto¬
truly and completely confessed, is
gether impossible thing; and that it is
believed to have obtained pardon from
indiscreet to ascribe to witches and their
God. For she went most willingly to
operations such levitations, as well as
her death, saying that she would gladly
the injuries which happen to men,
suffer an even more terrible death,
animals, and the fruits of the earth;
if only she could be set free from and
since just as they are the victims of
escape the power of the devil.
phantasy in their transvections, so also
are they deluded in the matter of the
☆ harm they wreak on living creatures.
But this opinion was refuted as hereti¬
cal in the First Question; for it leaves
CHAPTER III
out of account the Divine permission
with regard to the devil’s power, which
How they are Transported from Place to
extends to even greater things than
Place.
A this: and it is contrary to the meaning
ND now we must consider their of Sacred Scripture, and has caused
ceremonies and in what manner intolerable damage to Holy Church,
they proceed in their operations, first since now for many years, thanks to this
in respect of their actions towards pestiferous doctrine, witches have re¬
themselves and in their own persons. mained unpunished, because the secular
And among their chief operations are courts have lost their power to punish
being bodily transported from place to them. Therefore the diligent reader
place, and to practise carnal connexion will consider what was there set down
with Incubus devils, which we shall for the stamping out of that opinion,
treat of separately, beginning with their and will for the present note how they
are transported, and in what ways this
* ,
Holy NightsSaturday however, was is possible, of which some examples
always particularly avoided as being the day will be adduced.
sacred to the Immaculate Mother of God. See my It is shown in various ways that they;
,
History of Witchcraftc. IV pp. 115-16.
can be bodily transported; and first,:;

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 3 MALEFICARUM
105
from the operations of other Magicians.
are often carried through the air by
For if they could not be transported, it
devils for long distances? And some¬
would either be because God does not
times they even persuade others to go
permit it, or because the devil cannot
with them on a horse, which is not really
do this since it is contrary to nature.
a horse but a devil in that form, and,
It cannot be for the first reason, for both
as they say, thus warn their companions
greater and less things can be done by
not to make the sign of the Cross.
the permission of God; and greater
And though we are two who write
things are very often done both to
this book, one of us has very often seen
children and men, even to just men
and known such men. For there is a
confirmed in grace.
man who was once a scholar, and is »
For when it is asked whether sub¬
now believed to be a priest in the
stitutions of children can be effected by
diocese of Freising, who used to say
the work of devils, and whether the
that at one time he had been bodily
devil can carry a man from place to
carried through the air by a devil, and
t place even against his will; to the first
taken to the most remote parts.
question the answer is, Yes. For Wil¬
There lives another priest in Oberliam of Paris says in the last part of his
dorf, a town near Landshut, who was
De Uniuerso: Substitutions of children
at that time a friend of that one of us,
are, with God’s permission, possible, so
who saw with his own eyes such a
that the devil can effect a change of the
transportation, and tells how the man
child or even a transformation. For
was borne on high with arms stretched
such children are always miserable
out, shouting but not whimpering. And
and crying; and although four or five
the cause, as he tells it, was as follows.
mothers could hardly supply enough
A number of scholars had met together
milk for them, they never grow fat, yet
to drink beer, and they all agreed that
are heavy beyond the ordinary. But
the one who fetched the beer should
this should neither be affirmed, nor
not have to pay anything. And so one
denied to women, on account of the
of them was going to fetch the beer, and
great fear which it may cause them, but
on opening the door saw a thick cloud
they, should be instructed to ask the
before the grunsel, and returning in
opinion of learned men. For God per¬
terror told his companions why he
mits this on account of the sins of the
would not go for the drink. Then that
parents, in that sometimes men curse
one of them who was carried away said
their pregnant wives, saying, May you
angrily: “Even if the devil were there,
be carrying a devil! or some such thing
I shall fetch the drink.” And, going
In the same way impatient women often
out, he was carried through the air in
say something of the sort. And many
the sight of all the others.
examples have been given by other
And indeed it must be confessed that
men, some of them pious men.
such things can happen not only to
ForVincent of Beauvais (Spec. Hist.,
those who are awake, but also to men
XXVI, 43) relates a story told by S.
who are asleep; namely, they can be
Peter Damian* of a five-year-old son of
bodily transported through the air
a nobleman, who was for the time living
while they are fast asleep.
m a. monastery; and one night he was
This is clear in the case of certain
carried out of the monastery into a
men who walk in their sleep on the roofs
locked mill, where he was found in the
of houses and over the highest buildings,
morning. And when he was questioned,
and no one can oppose their progress
he said that he had been carried by
either on high or below. And if they are
some men to a great feast and bidden to
called by their own names by the other
eat; and afterwards he was put into the
bystanders, they immediately fall crash¬
mill through the roof.
ing to the ground.
And what of those Magicians whom
Many think, and not without reason. 7
we generally call Necromancers, who
that this is devils’ work. For devils are
of many different kinds, and some, who
S Peter Damian.” Doctor of the Church, fell from the lower choir of Angels, are
Cardinal-Bishop of Ostia, born at Ravenna tortured as if for smaller sins with
1007; died at Faenza, 21 February, 1072. His lighter punishments as well as the
works, which have been more than once collected
punishment of damnation which they
,
may be conveniently found in Mime “Patres
must suffer eternally. And these can¬
Latini,” CXLIV-CXLV. S &
not hurt anybody, at least not seri1

106 MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. 3
.V
11 ously, but for the most part carry out Although he excels all things, yet he is
only practlcaTjoCes. And others are subject to the merits of the Saints.
r Incubi o-r nSucncubin, whJo p.ulniish nmwemn in Two objections which someone may
the night, defiling them in the sin of bring forward are not valid. First, that
lechery. It is not wonderful if they are man’s soul could resist him, and that
given also to horse-play such as this. the text seems to speak of one devil in
The truth can be deduced from the particular, since it speaks in the sin¬
words of Gassian, Collationes I, where he gular, namely Lucifer. And because it
says that there is no doubt that there was he who tempted Christ in the wil¬
are as many different unclean spirits as derness, and seduced the first man, he
there are different desires in men. For is now bound in chains. And the other
it is manifest that some of them, which Angels are not so powerful, since he
the common people call Fauns, and excels them all. Therefore the other
we call Trolls, which abound in Nor¬ spirits cannot transport wicked men
way, are such buffoons and jokers that through the air from place to place.
they haunt certain places and roads These arguments have no force. For,
and, without being able to do any hurt to consider the Angels first, even the
to those who pass by, are content with least Angel is incomparably superior to
mocking and deluding them, and try to all human power, as can be proved in
weary them rather than hurt them. many ways. First, a spiritual is stronger
And some of them only visit men with than a corporeal power, and so is the
harmless nightmares. But others are so power of an Angel, or even of the soul,
furious and truculent that they are not greater than that of the body. Secondly,
content to afflict with an atrocious dila¬ as to the soul; every bodily shape owes
tion the bodies of those whom they its individuality to matter, and, in the
, inflate, but even come rushing from on case of human beings, to the fact that
! high and hasten to strike them with the a soul informs it; but immaterial forms
most savage blows. Our author means are absolute intelligences, and there¬
that they do not only possess men, but fore have an absolute and more universal
torture them horribly, as did those power. For this reason, the soul when
which are described in S. Matthew viii. joined to the body cannot in this way
From this we can conclude, first that suddenly transfer its body locally or
it must not be said that witches cannot raise it up in the air; although it could
be locally transported because God easily do so, with God’s permission, if
does not permit it. For if He permits it it were separate from its body. Much
in the case of the just and innocent, and more, then, is this possible to an entirely
of other Magicians, how should He not immaterial spirit, such as a good or bad
in the case of those who are totally Angel. For a good Angel transported
dedicated to the devil? And we say Habacuc* in a moment from Judaea
with all reverence: Did not the devil
* “ .” “ ”
Habacuc Daniel xiv, 32-38: 32.
take up Our Saviour, and carry Him up
Now there was in Judea a prophet called
to a high place, as the Gospel testifies?
Habacuc, and he had boiled pottage, and had
Neither can the second argument of
broken bread in a bowl: and was going into the
our opponents be conceded, that the
field, to carry it to the reapers.
devil cannot do this thing. For it has
33. And the angel of the Lord said to
already been shown that he has so Habacuc: Carry the dinner which thou hast into
great natural power, exceeding all Babylon to Daniel, who is in the lions’ den.
corporeal power, that there is no earthly 34. And Habacuc said: Lord, I never saw
power that can be compared with him; Babylon, nor do I know the den.
as it is said : “There is no power on earth 33. And the angel of the Lord took him by
that can be compared with him,” etc. the top of his head, and carried him by the hair
on his head, and set him in Babylon over the den
Indeed the natural power or virtue
in the force of his spirit.
which, is in Lucifer is so great that there
36. And Habacuc cried, saying: 0 Daniel,
is none greater among the good Angels
thou servant of God, take the dinner that God
in Heaven. For just as he excelled all
hath sent thee.
the Angels in his nature, and not his
3J. And Daniel said: Thou hast remembered
nature, but only his grace, was dimin¬
me, 0 God, and thou hast not forsaken them that
ished by his Fall, so that nature still
love thee.
remains in him, although it is darkened
38. And Daniel arose and ate. And the angel
and bound. Wherefore the gloss on of the Lord presently set Habacuc again in his
that “There is no power on earth” says: own place.

Part II. Qn i. Gh. 3 MALEFICARUM 107
to Chaldaea. And for this reason it is ceal a body by the interposition of
concluded that those who by night are some other substance, as was shown in
carried in their sleep over high buildings the First Part of the treatise where we
are not carried by their own souls, nor spoke of the glamours and illusions
by the influence of the stars, but by caused by the devil. And although the
some mightier power, as was shown devil for the most part performs this
above. by means of this unguent, to the end
Thirdly, it is the nature of the body that children should be deprived of the
to be moved, as to place, directly by a grace of baptism and of salvation, yet
spiritual nature; and, as Aristotle says. he often seems to effect the same trans- ;
Physics, VIII, local motion is the first of vection without its use. For at times he
motions, being the most perfect of all transports the witches on animals,
bodily motions; and he proves this by which are not true animals but devils in
saying that local motion is not intrinsic¬ that form; and sometimes even without
ally in the power of any body as such, any exterior help they are visibly
but is due to some exterior force. carried solely by the operation of the
Wherefore it is concluded, not so devil’s power.
much from the holy Doctors as from the Here is an instance of a visible transPhilosophers, that the highest bodies, vection in the day-time. In the town
that is, the stars, are moved by spiritual of Waldshut on the Rhine, in the diocese
essences, and by separate Intelligences of Constance, there was a certain witch
which are good both by nature and in who was so detested by the townsfolk
intention. For we see that the soul is that she was not invited to the celebra¬
the prime and chief cause of local tion of a wedding at which, however,
motion in the body. nearly all the other townsfolk were
It must be said, therefore, that present. Being indignant because of
neither in its physical capacity nor in this, and wishing to be revenged, she
that of its soul can the human body summoned a devil and, telling him the
resist being suddenly transported from cause of her vexation, asked him to
place to place, with God’s permission, raise a hailstorm and drive all the wed¬
by a spiritual essence good both in ding guests from their dancing; and the
intention and by nature, when the good, devil agreed, and raising her up,
who are confirmed in grace, are trans- carried her through the air to a hill near / •
orted; or by an essence good by nature, the town, in the sight of some shepherds. f
ut not good in intention, when the And since, as she afterwards confessed,|
wicked are transported. Any who wish she had no water to pour into the
may refer to S. Thomas in three articles trench (for this, as we shall show, is the
in Part I, question 90, and again in his method they use to raise hailstorms), I
question concerning Sin, and also in she made a small trench and filled it J
the Second Book of Sentences, jdist. 7, on with her urine instead of water, and
the power of devils over bodily effects. stirred it with her finger, after their/
Now the following is their method of custom, with the devil standing by.
being transported. They take the un¬ Then the devil suddenly raised that
guent* which, as we have said, they liquid up and sent a violent storm of
make at the devil’s instruction from the hailstones which fell only on the dancers
limbs of children, particularly of those and townsfolk. And when they had
whom they have killed before baptism, dispersed and were discussing among
and anoint with it a chair or a broom- themselves the cause of that storm, the
1 f stick; whereupon they are immediately witch shortly afterwards entered the
carried up into the air, either by day or town; and this greatly aroused their
j by night, and either visibly or, if they suspicions. But when the shepherds had
j wish, invisibly; for the devil can con- told what they had seen, their suspicions
became almost a certainty. So she was
* arrested, and confessed that she had
Henry Boguet, “Discours des Sorciers,”
done this thing because she had not
Lyons, iggo, 'XVI, 4, points out that this
been invited to the wedding: and for
flying ointment is of itself useless. The actual
formulae for its confection have been preserved this, and for many other witchcrafts
and the employment thereof is to be considered, which she had perpetrated, she was
say most demonologists, as a piece of vain and burned.
empty ceremony of Satan, yet more to delude his And since the public report of this
votaries. sort of transvection is continually being

io8 MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. 3
spread even among the common people, own confessions, not only of those who
it is unnecessary to add further proof have been burned, but also of others
of it here. But we hope that this will who have returned to penitence and the
suffice to refute those who either deny Faith.
altogether that there are such trans- Among such there was the woman in
vections, or try to maintain that they the town of Breisach whom we asked
are only imaginary or phantastical. whether they could be transported only
And, indeed, it would be a matter of in imagination, or actually in the body;
small importance if such men were left and she answered that it was possible in
in their error, were it not that this error both ways. For if they do not wish to
tends to the damage of the Faith. For be bodily transferred, but want to know
notice that, not content with that error, all that is being done in a meeting of
they do not fear to maintain and pub¬ their companions, then they observe
lish others also, to the increase of the following procedure. In the name
witches and the detriment of the Faith. of all the devils they lie down to sleep
For they assert that all the witchcraft on their left side, and then a sort of
which is truly and actually ascribed to bluish vapour comes from their mouth,
witches as instruments of the devil is through which they can clearly see what
only so ascribed in imagination and is happening. But if they wish to be
illusion, as if they were really harmless, bodily transported, they must observe
just as their transvection is only phan- the method which has been told.
tastic. And for this reason many witches Besides, even if that Canon be under¬
remain unpunished, to the great dis¬ stood in its bare meaning without any
praise of the Creator, and to their own explanation, who is so dense as to main¬
most heavy increase. tain on that account that all their witch¬
5 The arguments on which they base craft and injuries are phantastic and
their fallacy cannot be conceded. For imaginary, when the contrary is evident
first they advance the chapter of the to the senses of everybody? Especially
Canon [Episcopi, 26, q. 5), where it is since there are many species of super¬
said that witches are only transported stition, namely, fourteen; among which
in imagination; but who is so foolish as the species of witches holds the highest
to conclude from this that they cannot degree in spells and injuries, and the
also be bodily transported? similarly species of Pythonesses, to which they
at the end of that chapter it is set down can be reduced, which is only able to
that whoever believes that a man can be transported in imagination, holds the
be changed for the better or the worse, lowest degree.
or can be transformed into another And we do not concede that their
shape, is to be thought worse than an error can be substantiated by the
infidel or a pagan; but who could con¬ Legends of S. Germain* and certain
clude from this that men cannot be others. For it was possible for the devils
transformed into beasts by a glamour, to lie down themselves by the side of the
or that they cannot be changed from sleeping husbands, during the time
health to sickness and from better to when a watch was being kept on the
worse? They who so scratch at the wives, just as if they were sleeping with
surface of the words of the Canon hold their husbands. And we do not say
an opinion which is contrary to that of that this was done for any reverence
all the holy Doctors, and, indeed, felt for the Saint; but the case is put
against the teaching of Holy Scripture. that the opposite of what is set down in
For the contrary opinion is abun¬ the Legend may not be believed to be
dantly proved by what has been writ¬ impossible.
ten in various places in the First Part In the same way all other objections
of this treatise; and it is necessary to can be answered: that it is found that
study the inner meaning of the words of some witches are transported only in
the Canon. And this was examined in imagination, but that it is also found in
the First Question of the First Part of the writings of the Doctors that many
the treatise, in refuting the second of
three errors which are there con¬
* “5. Germain.” Bishop of Auxerre, bom
demned, and where it is said that four
circa 380; died at Ravenna, 31 July, 448. His
things are to be preached to the people.
body was brought back to Auxerre, and later
For they are transported both bodily
there arose the celebrated Benedictine Abbey
and phantastically, as is proved by their known as St. Germain's.

Part II. Qn i. Gh. 4 MALEFICARUM 109
have been bodily transported. Who¬ assumed body should be in some way
ever wishes may refer to Thomas of inspissated, and approach the property
Brabant in his book about Bees, and he of the earth, while still retaining its true
will find many wonderful things con¬ property as air. And devils and dis.-
cerning both the imaginary and the embodied spirits can effect this con¬
bodily transvection of men. densation by means of gross vapours
raised from the earth, and by collecting
☆ them together into shapes in which they
abide, not as defilers of them, but only
as their motive power which gives to
CHAPTER IV
that body the formal appearance of life,
Here follows the Way whereby Witches in very much the same way as the soul
copulate with those Devils known as informs the body to which it is joined.
Incubi. They are, moreover, in these assumed
A
and shaped bodies like a sailor in a ship
S to the method in which witches which the wind moves.
copulate with Incubus devils, six So when it is asked of what sort is the
points are to be noted. First, as to the body assumed by the devil, it is to be
devil and the body which he assumes, said that with regard to its material, it
of what element it is formed. Second, is one thing to speak of the beginning of
as to the act, whether it is always accom¬ its assumption, and another thing to
panied with the injection of semen re¬ speak of its end. For in the beginning
ceived from some other man. Third, as it is just air; but in the end it is inspis¬
to the time and place, whether one time sated air, partaking of some of the
is more favourable than another for this properties of earth. And all this the
practice. Fourth, whether the act is devils, with God’s permission, can do
visible to the women, and whether only of their own nature; for the spiritual
those who were begotten in this way are nature is superior to the bodily. There¬
so visited by devils. Fifth, whether it fore the bodily nature must obey the
applies only to those who were offered devils in respect of local motion, though
to the devil at birth by mid wives. Sixth, not in respect of the assumption of
whether the actual venereal pleasure is natural shapes, either accidental or sub¬
greater or less in this act. And we will stantial, except in the case of some small
speak first of the matter and quality of creatures (and then only with the help
the body which the devil assumes. of some other agent, as has been hinted
It must be said that he assumes an before). But as to local motion, no
aerial body, and that it is in some shape is beyond their power; thus they
respects terrestrial, in so far as it has an can move them as they wish, in such
earthly property through condensation; circumstances as they will.
and this is explained as follows. The air From this there may arise an inci¬
cannot of itself take definite shape, ex¬ dental question as to what should be
cept the shape of some other body in thought when a good or bad Angel per¬
which it is included. And in that case forms some of the functions of life by
it is not bound by its own limits, but by means of true natural bodies, and not in
those of something else; and one part aerial bodies; as in the case of Balaam’s
of the air continues into the next part. ass, through which the Angel spoke,
Therefore he cannot simply assume an and when devils take possession of
aerial body as such. bodies. It is to be said that those bodies
Know, moreover, that the air is in are not called assumed, but occupied.
every way a most changeable and fluid See S. Thomas, II. 8, Whether Angels
matter: and a sign of this is the fact that assume bodies. But let us keep strictly
when any have tried to cut or pierce to our argument.
with a sword the body assumed by a In what way is it to be understood
devil, they have not been able to; for that devils talk with witches, see them,
the divided parts of the air at once join hear them, eat with them, and copulate
together again. From this it follows with them ? And this is the second part
that air is in itself a very competent of this first difficulty.
matter, but because it cannot take shape For the first, it is to be said that three
unless some other terrestrial matter is things are required for true conversa¬
joined with it, therefore it is necessary tion : namely, lungs to draw in the air;
that the air which forms the devil’s and this is not only for the sake of pro-

no MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. 4
ducing sound, but also to cool the heart; certain other instruments, as Aristotle
and even mutes have this necessary says in the de Anima. For certain fishes,
quality. when they are caught, suddenly utter a
Secondly, it is necessary that some cry outside the water, and die.
percussion be made of a body in the air, All this is applicable to what follows,
as a greater or less sound is made when so far as the point where we treat of the
one beats wood in the air, or rings a generative function, but not as regards
bell. For when a substance that is sus¬ good Angels. If anyone wishes to in¬
ceptible to sound is struck by a sound- quire further into the matter of devils
producing instrument, it gives out a speaking in possessed bodies, he may
sound according to its size, which is refer to S. Thomas in the Second Book of
received in the air and multiplied to Sentences, dist. 8, art. 5. For in that case
the ears of the hearer, to whom, if he is they use the bodily organs of the pos¬
far off, it seems to come through space. sessed body; since they occupy those
Thirdly, a voice is required; and it bodies in respect of the limits of their
may be said that what is called Sound corporeal quantity, but not in respect of
in inanimate bodies is called Voice in the limits of their essence, either of the
living bodies. And here the tongue body or of the soul. Observe a distinc¬
strikes the respirations of air against an tion between substance and quantity, or
instrument or living natural organ accident. But this is impertinent.
provided by God. And this is not a bell, For now we must say in what manner
which is called a sound, whereas this is they see and hear. Now sight is of two
a voice. And this third requisite may kinds, spiritual and corporeal, and the
clearly be exemplified by the second; former infinitely excels the latter; for it
and I have set this down that preachers can penetrate, and is not hindered by
may have a method of teaching the distance, owing to the faculty of light of
people. which it makes use. Therefore it must
And fourthly, it is necessary that he be said that in no way does an Angel,
who forms the voice should mean to either good or bad, see with the eyes of
express by means of that voice some its assumed body, nor does it use any
concept of the mind to someone else, bodily property as it does in speaking,
and that he should himself understand when it uses the air and the vibration of
what he is saying; and so manage his the air to produce sound which becomes
voice by successively striking his teeth reproduced in the ears of the hearer.
with his tongue in his mouth, by open¬ Wherefore their eyes are painted eyes.
ing and shutting his lips, and by sending And they freely appear to men in these
the air struck in his mouth into the likenesses that they may manifest to
outer air, that in this way the sound is them their natural properties and con¬
reproduced in order in the ears of the verse with them spiritually by these
hearer, who then understands his means.
meaning. For with this purpose the holy Angels
To return to the point. Devils have have often appeared to the Fathers at
no lungs or tongue, though they can the command of God and with His per¬
show the latter, as well as teeth and lips, mission. And the bad angels manifest
artificially made according to the con¬ themselves to wicked men in order that
dition of their body; therefore they men, recognizing their qualities, may
cannot truly and properly speak. But associate themselves with them, here in
since they have understanding, and sin, and elsewhere in punishment.
when they wish to express their mean¬ S. Dionysius, at the end of his Celestial
ing, then, by some disturbance of the Hierarchy, says: In all parts of the human
air included in their assumed body, not body the Angel teaches us to consider
of air breathed in and out as in the case their properties: concluding that since
of men, they produce, not voices, but corporeal vision is an operation of the
sounds which have some likeness to living body through a bodily organ,
voices, and send them articulately which devils lack, therefore in their
through the outside air to the ears of assumed bodies, just as they have the
the hearer. And that the likeness of a likeness of limbs, so they have the like¬
voice can be made without the respira¬ ness of their functions.
tion of air is clear from the case of And we can speak in the same way of
other animals which do not breathe, but their hearing, which is far finer than
are said to make a sound, as do also that of the body; for it can know the

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 4 MALEFICARUM in
concept of the mind and the conversa¬ men, animals, and the fruits of the
tion of the soul more subtly than can a earth, and that Incubus and Succubus
man by hearing the mental concept devils have always existed; for the tra¬
through the medium of spoken words. ditions of the Canons and the holy
See S. Thomas, the Second Book of Sen¬ Doctors have left and handed down to
tences, dist. 8. For if the secret wi|hes of posterity many things concerning them
a man are read in his face, and phy¬ through many hundreds of years. Yet
sicians can tell the thoughts of the heart there is this difference, that in times
from the heart-beats and the state of the long past the Incubus devils used to
pulse, all the more can such things be infest women against their wills, as is
known by devils. often shown by Nider in his Formicarius,
And we may say as to eating, that in and by Thomas of BrabanT^tiT hls j
the complete act of eating there are four book on the Universal Goof or on /
processes. Mastication in the mouth, Bees.
swallowing into the stomach, digestion But the theory that modern witches
in the stomach, and fourthly, metabol¬ are tainted with this sort of diabolic
ism of the necessary nutriment and filthiness is not substantiated only in
ejection of what is superfluous. All our opinion, since the expert testimony
Angels can perform the first two pro¬ °fthe witches themselve^has made all
cesses of eating in their assumed bodies, these things credible; and 'fKaFfEey'Ho
but not the third and fourth; but in¬ riot now, as in times past, subject them¬
stead of digesting and ejecting they have selves unwillingly, but willingly em¬
another power by which the food is sud¬ brace this most foul and miserable servi¬
denly dissolved in the surrounding tude. For how many women have we
matter. In Christ the process of eating left to be punished by secular law in
was in all respects complete, since He various dioceses, especially in Con¬
had the nutritive and metabolistic stance and the town of Ratisbon,
powers; not, be it said, for the purpose who have been for many years addicted
of converting the food into His own to these abominations, some from their
body, for those powers were, like His twentieth and some from their twelfth
body, glorified; so that the food was or thirteenth year, and always with
suddenly dissolved in His body, as when total or partial abnegation of the Faith?
one throws water on to fire. All the inhabitants of those places are
witnesses of it. For without reckoning
those who secretly repented, and tSose
How in Modem Times Witches perform the
who returned to the Faith, no less than
Carnal Act with Incubus Devils, and how
forty-eight have been burned in five
they are Multiplied by this Means.
years. And there was no question oft
But no difficulty arises out of what credulity in accepting their stones be¬
has been said, with regard to our prin¬ cause they turned to free repentance;
cipal subject, which is the carnal act for they all agreed in this, namely, that
which Incubi in an assumed body per¬
they were bound to indulge in these
form with witches: unless perhaps any¬ lewd practices in order that the ranks of
one doubts whether modern witches their perfidy might be increased. But
practise such abominable coitus; and we shall treat of these individually in
whether witches had their origin in this the Second Part of this work, where\
abomination.
their particular deeds are described;}
In answering these two doubts we
omitting those which came under the
shall say, as to the former of them,
notice of our colleague the Inquisitor
something of the activities of the witches
of Como in the County of Burbia, who
who lived in olden times, about 1400 in the space of one year, which was the
years before the Incarnation of Our
year of grace 1485, caused forty-one
Lord. It is, for example, unknown
witches to be burned ;wTio all publicly
whether they were addicted to these affirmed, as it is said, that they had
filthy practices as modern witches have §ractised these abominations with
been since that time; for so far as we
evils. Therefore this matter is fully
know history tells us nothing on this
substantiated by eye-witnesses, by hear¬
subject. But no one who reads the his¬
say, and the testimony of credible wit¬
tories can doubt that there have always nesses.
been witches, and that by their evil
As for the second doubt, whether
works much harm has been done to
witches had their origin from these

112
MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. 4
abominations, we may say with S. sake not of pleasure but of corruption.
Augustine that it is true that all the And this appears to be the order of the
superstitious arts had their origin in a process. A Succubus devil draws the
pestilent association of men with devils. semen from a wicked man; and if he is
For he says so in his work On the Chris¬ that man’s own particular devil, and
tian Doctrine: All this sort of practices, does not wish to make himself an In¬
whether of trifling or of noxious super¬ cubus to a witch, he passes that semen
stition, arose from some pestilent asso¬ on to the devil deputed to a woman or
ciation of men with devils, as though witch; and this last, under some con¬
some pact of infidel and guileful friend¬ stellation that favours his purpose that
ship had been formed, and they are all the man or woman so born should
utterly to be repudiated. Notice here be strong in the practice of witch¬
that it is manifest that, as there are craft, becomes the Incubus to the
various kinds of superstition or magic witch.
arts, and various societies of those who And it is no objection that those of
practise them; and as among the tour- whom the text speaks were not witches
I j teen kinds of that art the gpecies of but only giants and famous and power¬
witches is the worst, since they have not ful men; for, as was said before, witch¬
a Tacit but an overt and expressed pact craft was not perpetrated in the time of
with the devil, and more than this, have the law of Nature, because of the recent
to acknowledge a form of devil-worship memory of the Creation of the world,
through abjuring the Faith; therefore which left no room for Idolatry. But
it follows that witches hold the worst when the wickedness of man began to
kind of association with devils, with increase, the devil found more oppor¬
especial reference to the behaviour of tunity to disseminate this kind 01 per¬
women, who always delight in vain fidy. Nevertheless, it is not to be under¬
things. stood that those who were said to be
Notice also S. Thomas, the Second famous men were necessarily so called
Book of Sentences (dist. 4, art. 4), in the by reason of their good virtues.
solution of an argument, where he asks
whether those begotten in this way by
Whether the Relations of an Incubus Devil
devils are more powerful than other
with a Witch are always accompanied
men. He answers that this is the truth,
by the Injection of Semen.
basing his belief not only on the text of
Scripture in Genesis vi: And the same To this question it is answered that
became the mighty men which were of the devil has a thousand ways and
old; but also on the following reason. means of inflicting injury, and from the
Devils know how to ascertain the virtue time of his first Fall has tried to destroy
in semen: first, by the temperament of the unity of the Church, and in every
him from whom the semen is obtained; way to subvert the human race. There¬
secondly, by knowing what woman is fore no infallible rule can be stated as to
most fitted for the reception of that this matter, but there is this probable
semen; thirdly, by knowing what con¬ distinction: that a witch is either old
stellation is favourable to that corporeal and sterile, or she is not. And if she is,
effect; and we may add, fourthly, from then he naturally associates with the
their own words we learn that those witch without the injection of semen,
whom they beget have the best sort of since it would be of no use, and the devil
disposition for devils’ work. When all avoids superfluity in his operations as
these causes so concur, it is concluded far as he can. But if she is not sterile, he
that men born in this way are powerful approaches her in the way of carnal
and big in body. delectation which is procured for the
Therefore, to return to the question witch. And should she be disposed to
whether witches had their origin in pregnancy, then if he can conveniently
these abominations, we shall say that possess the semen extracted from some
they originated from some pestilent man, he does not delay to approach her
mutual association with devils, as is with it for the sake of infecting her
clear from our first knowledge of them. progeny.
But no one can affirm with certainty But if it is asked whether he is able to
that they did not increase and multiply collect the semen emitted in some noc¬
by means of these fouls practices, al- turnal pollution in sleep, just as he col¬
hthoug, devils commit this deed for the lects that which is spent in the carnal

Part II. Qn i. Gh. 4 MALEFICARUM
II3
act, the answer is that it is probable place God says: “I am a mighty and
that he cannot, though others hold a jealous God, visiting the sins of the
contrary opinion. For it must be noted fathers unto the third and fourth genera¬
that, as has been said, the devils pay tion.”* Such punishment was exempli¬
attention to the generative virtue of the fied in the children of the men of Sodom,
semen, and such virtue is more abun¬ who were destroyed for their fathers*
dant and better preserved in semen sins.
obtained by the carnal act, being The third reason is that they have /
wasted in the semen that is due to greater opportunity to observe many
nocturnal pollutions in sleep, which people, especially young girls, who on j
arises only from the superfluity of the Feast Days are more intent on idleness 1
humours and is not emitted with so and curiosity, and are therefore more
great generative virtue. Therefore it is easily seduced by old witches. And
believed that he does not make use the following happened in the native
of such semen for the generation of country of one of us Inquisitors (for
progeny, unless perhaps he knows that there are two of us collaborating in this
the necessary virtue is present in that work).
semen. A certain young girl, a devout virgin,
But this also cannot altogether be was solicited one Feast Day by an old
denied, that even in the case of a mar¬ woman to go with her upstairs to a
ried witch who has been impregnated room where there were some very
by her husband, the devil can, by the beautiful young men. And when she
commixture of another semen, infect consented, and as they were going up¬
that which has been conceived. stairs with the old woman leading the
way, she warned the girl not to make
the sign of the Gross. And though she
Whether the Incubus operates more at one
agreed to this, yet she secretly crossed
Time than another: and similarly of the
herself. Consequently it happened that,
Place.
when they had gone up, the virgin saw
To the question whether the devil no one, because the devils who were
observes times and places it is to be said there were unable to show themselves in
that, apart from his observation of cer¬ assumed bodies to that virgin. And the
tain times and constellations when his old woman cursed her, saying: Depart
purpose is to effect the pollution of the in the name of all the devils; why did
progeny, he also observes certain times you cross yourself ? This I had from the J f
when his object is not pollution, but the frank.relation of that good and honest)
causing of venereal pleasure on the part maiden. -
of the witch; and these are the most A fourth reason can be added,
sacred times of the whole year, such as namely, that they can in this way more
Christmas, Easter, Pentecost, and other easily seduce men, by causing them to
Feast Days. think that if God permits such things to
And the devils do this for three be done at the most holy times, it cannot
reasons. First, that in this way witches be such a heavy sin as if He did not per¬
may become imbued not only with the mit them at such times.
vice of perfidy through apostasy from With regard to the question whether
the Faith, but also with that of Sacri¬ they favour one place more than
lege, and that the greater offence may another, it is to be said that it is proved
be done to the Creator, and the heavier by the words and actions of witches
damnation rest upon the souls of the that they are quite unable to commit | \ t y
witches. these abominations in sacred places. *
The second reason is that when God And in this can be seen the efficacy of
is so heavily offended, He allows them the Guardian Angels, that such places
greater power of injuring even inno¬ are reverenced. And further, witches
cent men by punishing them either in assert that they never have any peace
their affairs or their bodies. For when except at the time of Divine Service
it is said: “The son shall not bear the when they are present in the church;
iniquity of the father,” etc., this refers and therefore they are the first to enter
only to eternal punishment, for very and the last to leave the church. Never¬
often the innocent are punished with theless, they are bound to observe cer-
/temporal afflictions on account of the
•I sins of others. Wherefore in another * “ Generation.” “Exodus” xx, 5: xxxiv} 7.

n4 MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. 5
tain other abominable ceremonies at the
That Incubus Devils do not Infest only those
command of the devils, such as to spit
Women who have been Begotten by their
on the ground at the Elevation of the
Filthy Deeds or those who have been
Host, or to utter, either verbally or
Offered to them by Midwives, but All
otherwise, the filthiest thoughts, as: I
Indifferently with Greater or Less Ve¬
wish you were in such or such a place.
nereal Delectation.
This matter is touched upon in the
Second Part. In conclusion, finally, it can be said
that these Incubus devils will not only
infest those women who have been
Whether Incubi and Succubi Commit this
generated by means of such abomina¬
Act Visibly on the part of the Witch, or
tions, or those who have been offered to
on the part of Bystander*
them by midwives, but that they try
As to whether they commit these with all their might, by means of
abominations together visibly or in¬ witches who are bawds or hot whores,
f
visibly, it is to be said that, in all the to seduce all the devout and chaste
cases of which we have had knowledge, maidens in that whole district or town. |
the devil has always operated in a form For this is well known by the constant
visible to the witch; for there is no need experience of Magistrates; and in the
FdFTnm to approach her invisibly, be¬ town of Ratisbon, when certain
cause of the pact of federation with him witches were burned, tEese wretches
II
that has been expressed. But with re¬ ^affirmed, before their final sentence,
gard to any bystanders, the witches Tfiat they had been commanded by
themselves have often been seen lying their Masters to use every endeavour
on their ba^ks in the fields or the woods, to effect the subversion of pious maids )
and widows.
naked up to the very navel, and it has
been apparent from the disposition of If it be asked: Whether the venereal
those limbs and members which pertain delectation is greater or less with In¬
to the venereal act and orgasm, as also cubus devils in assumed bodies than it
from the agitation of their legs and is in like circumstances with men in a
thighs, that, all invisibly to the by¬ true physical body, we may say this:
standers, they have been copulating It seems that, although the pleasure
with Incubus devils; yet sometimes, should naturally be greater when like
howbeit this is rare, at the end of the disports with like, yet that cunning
I II act a very black vapour, of about the Enemy can so bring together the active
stature of a man, rises up into the air and passive elements, not indeed natur¬
from the witch. And the reason is that ally, but in such qualities of warmth
that Schemer knows that he can in this and temperament, that he seems to ex¬
way seduce or pervert the minds of girls cite no less degree of concupiscence.
or other men who are standing by. But this matter will be discussed more
But of these matters, and how they have fully later with reference to the quali¬
been performed in many places, in the ties of the feminine sex.
town of Ratisbon and on the estate
of the nobles of Rappolstein, and in cer¬
☆
tain other countries, we will treat in the
Second Part.
CHAPTER V
It is certain also that the following
* \
has happened. Husbands have actually
Witches commonly perform their Spells
seen Incubus devils swiving their wives,
through the Sacraments of the Church.
although they have thought that they
And how they Impair the Powers of
were not devils but men. And when
Generation, and how they may Cause
they have taken up a weapon and tried
other Ills to happen to God’s Creatures of
to run them through, the devil has sud¬
all kinds. But herein we except the
denly disappeared, making himself in¬
Question of the Influence of the Stars.
visible. And then their wives have B
thrown their arms about them, al¬
UT now there are several things to 1
though they have sometimes been hurt,
be noted concerning their methods
and railed at their husbands, mocking
of bringing injury upon other creatures
them, and asking them if they had
of both sexes, and upon the fruits of the
eyes, or whether they were possessed of
earth: first with regard to men, then l
devils.
with regard to beasts, and thirdly with \

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 5 MALEFICARUM XI5
r regard to the fruits of the earth. And as the devils can by their natural power in
to men, first, how they can cast an ob¬ every way cause real defects and in¬
structive spell on the procreant forces, firmities, and this by their natural
and even on the venereal act, so that a spiritual power, which is superior to ?
woman cannot conceive, or a man can¬ any bodily power. For no one in-11
not perform the act. Secondly, how that firmity is quite like another, and this is
act is obstructed sometimes with regard equally true of natural defects in which
to one woman but not another. Third¬ there is no physical infirmity. There¬
ly, how they take away the virile mem¬ fore they proceed by different methods
ber as though it were altogether torn to cause each different infirmity or
away from the body. Fourthly, if it is defect. And of these we shall give in¬
possible to distinguish whether any of stances in the body of this work as the
the above injuries have been caused by necessity arises. *
a devil on his own account, or if it has But first, lest the reader’s mind should
been through the agency of a witch. be kept in any doubt as to why they
^Fifthly, how witches change men and have no power to alter the influence of
I women into beasts by some prestige or the stars, we shall say that there is a
glamour. Sixthly, how witch midwives threefold reason. First, the stars are
in various ways kill that which has been above them even in the region of
conceived in the mother’s womb; and punishment, which is the region of the
when they do not do this, offer the lower mists; and this by reason of the
( children to devils. And lest these things duty which is assigned to them. See the
should seem incredible, they have been First Part, Question II, where we dealt
proved in the First Part of this work by with Incubus and Succubus devils.
questions and answers to arguments; to The second reason is that the stars are
which, if necessary, the doubtful reader governed by the good Angels. See
may turn back for the purpose of in¬ many places concerning the Powers
vestigating the truth. which move the stars, and especially
( For the present our object is only to S. Thomas, part 1, quest. 90. And in
adduce actual facts and examples which this matter the Philosophers agree with
have been found by us, or have been the Theologians.
written by others in detestation of so Thirdly, it is on account of the general j
great a crime, to substantiate those for¬ order and common good of the Uni¬
mer arguments in case they should be verse, which would suffer general detri¬
difficult for anyone to understand; and, ment if evil spirits were allowed to cause
by those things that are related in this any alteration in the influence of the
Second Part, to bring back to the stars. Wherefore those changes which
Faith and away from their error those were miraculously caused in the Old or
who think there are no witches, and New Testament were done by God
that no witchcraft can be done in the through the good Angels; as, for ex¬
world. ample, when the sun stood still for
And with regard to the first class of Joshua, or when it went backward for
injuries with which they afflict the Hezekiah, or when it was supernaturhuman race, it is to be noted that, ally darkened at the Passion of Christ.
apart from the methods by which they But in all other matters, with God’s
injure other creatures, they have six permission, they can work their spells,
ways of injuring humanity. And one is, either the devils by themselves, or& f
to induce an evil love in a man for a devils through the agency of witches; \
woman, or in a woman for a man. The and, in fact, it is evident that they 11
second is to plant hatred or jealousy in do so.
anyone. The third is to bewitch them Secondly, it is to be noted that in all
so that a man cannot perform the gen¬ their methods of working injury they
ital act with a woman, or conversely a nearly always instruct witches to make
woman with a man; or by various their instruments of witchcraft by
means to procure an abortion, as has means of the Sacraments or sacra¬
been said before. The fourth is to cause mental things of the Church, or some
some disease in any of the human holy thing consecrated to God: as
HI organs. The fifth, to take away life. when they sometimes place a waxen
The sixth, to deprive them 01 reason. image under the Altar-cloth, or draw a
In this connexion it should be said thread through the Holy Chrism, or
that, saving the influence of the stars, use some other consecrated thing in

MALLEUS II. Qn i. Ch. 5
ii6 Part
such a way. And there are three reasons viousness when they run about at the
for this. time of Carnival * with masks and
For a similar reason they are wont to jests and other superstitions. Similarly
practise their witchcraft at the more witches use these revelries of the devil
sacred times of the year, especially at for their own advantage, and work their
the Advent of Our Lord, and at Christ¬ spells about the time of the New Year
mas. First, that by such means they in respect of the Divine Offices and
may make men guilty of not only per¬ Worship; as on S. Andrew’s Day and
fidy, but also sacrilege, by contaminat¬ at Christmas.
ing whatever is divine in them; and And now, as to how they work their
that so they may the more deeply witchcraft, first by means of the Sacra¬
offend God their Creator, damn their ments, and then by means of sacra¬
own souls, and cause many more to rush mental objects, we will refer to a few
into sin. known facts, discovered by us in the
Secondly, that God, being so heavily Inquisition.
offended by men, may grant the devil In a town which it is better not to
greater power of tormenting men. For name, for the sake of charity and ex¬
so says S. Gregory, that in His anger He pediency, when a certain witch received
sometimes grants the wicked their the Body of Our Lord, she suddenly
prayers and petitions, which He merci¬ lowered her head, as is the detestable
fully denies to others. And the third habit of women, placed her garment
reason is that, by the seeming appear¬ near her mouth, and taking the Body of
ance of good, he may more easily de¬ the Lord out of her mouth, wrapped it
ceive certain simple men, who think in a handkerchief; and afterwards, at
that they have performed some pious the suggestion of the devil, placed it in
act and obtained grace from God, a pot in which there was a toad, and hid
whereas they have only sinned the it in the ground near her house by the
more heavily. storehouse, together with several other
A fourth reason also can be added things* by means of which she had to
touching the more sacred seasons and work her witchcraft.f But with the help
the New Year. For, according to S.
Augustine, there are other mortal sins * “Carnival” These Pagan practices are
besides adultery by which the observ¬ sternly reprobated in the “Liber Poenitentialis”
ance of the Festivals may be infringed. of S. Theodore, seventh Archbishop of Canter¬
Superstition, moreover, and witchcraft bury. In Book XXXVII is written: “If anyone
arising from the most servile operations at the Kalends of January goeth about as a stag
of the devil are contrary to the rever¬ or a oull-calj, that is, making himself into a
wild animal, and dressing in the skins of a i
ence that is due to- God. Therefore, as
herd animal, and putting on the heads of beasts;
has been said, he causes a man to fall
those who in such wise transform themselves into
more deeply, and the Creator is the
the appearance of a wild animal, let them do
more offended.
penance for three years, because this is devilish.”
And of the New Year we may say,
See my “Geography of Witchcraft,” Chap. II, I
according to S. Isidore, Etym. VIII. 2,
pp. 65-73. The Council of Auxerre in 578 {or ,
that Janus? from whom the month of
58f) forbade anyone “to masquerade as a bullJanuary is named, which also begins on
calf or a stag on the first of January or to dis¬
the Day of Circumcision, was an idol tribute devilish charms.”
with two faces, as if one were the end of f “Witchcraft.” It is not unusual for
the old year and the other the beginning Satanists to go to Holy Communion in various
of the new, and, as it were, the protector churches of a town, and instead of consuming the
and auspicious author of the coming Host they spit God's Body from their mouths
year. And in honour of him, or rather of into a handkerchief or cloth and take it away to
abuse in their horrid worship. In the notorious
the devil in the form of that idol, the
case of the Lancashire witches, at the first■ trial—\
Pagans made much boisterous revelry,
1612, James Device Tonfessed uthat vpon
and were very merry among themselves,
SKettfe Thursday was two yeares, his Grandholding various dances and feasts. And
Mother Elizabeth Southernes alias Demdike, did
concerning these Blessed Augustine
bid him this Examinate goe to the Church to
makes mention in many places, and
receive the Communion (the next day after being
gives a very ample description of them
Good Friday), and then not to eate the Bread the
in his Twenty-sixth Book.
Minister gave him, but to bring it and deliver it
And now bad Christians imitate these to such a thing as should meet him in his way
corruptions, turning them to lasci¬ homewards; Notwithstanding her perswasions

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 6 MALEFICARUM 117
of God’s mercy this great crime was de¬ Faith, either by Confession or by re¬
tected and brought to light. For on the ceiving the Sacrament of the Eucharist;
following day a workman was going on and secondly, because in this way it is
his business near that house, and heard easier for them to take the Lord’s Body
a sound like a child crying; and when out of their mouths so that they can
he had come near to the stone under apply it, as has been said, to their own
which the pot had been hidden, he uses, to the greater offence of the
heard it much more clearly, and think¬ Creator.
ing that some child had been buried For this reason all rectors of the
there by the woman, went to the Mayor Church and those who communicate
or chief magistrate, and told him what the people are enjoined to take the ut¬
had been done, as he thought, by the most care when they communicate
infanticide. And the Mayor quickly women that the mouth shall be well
sent his servants and found it to be as open and the tongue thrust well out,
he had said. But they were unwilling to and their garments be kept quite clear.
exhume the child, thinking it wiser to And the more care is taken in this
place a watch and wait to see if any respect, the more witches become
woman came near the place; for they known by this means.
did not know that it was the Lord’s Numberless other superstitions they
Body that was hidden there. And so it practise by means of sacramental ob¬
happened that the same witch came to jects. Sometimes they place a waxen
the place, and secretly hid the pot under image or some aromatic substance
her garment before their eyes. And under the altar-cloth,* as we said be¬
when she was taken and questioned, she fore, and then hide it under the thres¬
discovered her crime, saying that the hold of a house, so that the person for
Lord’s Body had been hidden in the whom it is placed there may be be¬
pot with a toad, so that by means of witched on crossing over it. Countless
their dust she might be able to cause instances could be brought forward, but
injuries at her will to men and other these minor sorts of spells are proved by
creatures. the greater.
It is also to be noted that when
☆
witches communicate they observe this
custom, that, when they can do so with¬
out being noticed, they receive the CHAPTER VI
Lord’s Body under their tongue instead
of on the top. And as far as can be How Witches Impede and Prevent the
seen, the reason is that they never wish Power of Procreation.
to receive any remedy that might
ONCERNING the method by
counteract their abjuration of the
which they obstruct the procreant
this Examinate did eate the Bread: and so in his function both in men and animals, and
comming homeward some fortie roodes off the in both sexes, the reader may consult
said Church, there met him a thing in the shape that which has been written already
of a Hare^ who spoke onto this Examinate, and on the question, Whether devils can
askeTWnirwhether he had brought the Bread”
through witches turn the minds of men
The toad constantly appears as a familiar.
to love or hatred. There, after the
In igjjg at Windsor “one Mother Dutton
solutions of the arguments, a specific
dwellyng in Cleworthe Parishe keepeth a Spirite
declaration is made relating to the
or Feende in, the likenesse of a Toade, and
method by which, with God’s permis¬
fedeth the same Feende liyng in a border of greene
sion, they can obstruct the procreant
Hearbes, within her garden, with blood whiche
function.
she causeth to issue from her owne flancke.”
Ursley Kemp, a S. Osyth witch (1582), had a But it must be noted that such ob¬
familiar, Pygine, “black like a Toad.” Ales struction is caused both intrinsically and
Hunt of the same coven nourished two familiars, extrinsically. Intrinsically they cause it
uthe which sfcekept in cTlittle lowe earthern pot.” in two ways. First, when they directly
Margerie Sammon, another S. Osyth's witch, prevent the erection of the member
hath also two spirites like Toades, the one which is accommodated to fructifica¬
called ‘Tom' and the other ‘Robbyn.' ” When
tion. And this need not seem impos¬
Ursley Kemp peeped through Mother Hunt's
sible, when it is considered that they are
window she “espied a spirite to looke out of a
porcharde from under a clothe, the nose thereof
being browne like onto a Ferret.” * “ Altar-Cloth.” These practices still survive.

ii8 MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. 7
able to vitiate the natural use of any same year fecundity was restored to the
member. Secondly, when they prevent wife and to all the animals. /
the flow of the vital essences to the mem¬ Another instance occurred hardly
bers in which resides the motive force, four years ago in Reichshofen. There
closing up the seminal ducts so that it was a most notorious witch, who could
does not reach the generative vessels, or at all times and by a mere touch be¬
so that it cannot be ejaculated, or is witch women and cause an abortion.
fruitlessly spilled.
Now the wife of a certain nobleman in
Extrinsically they cause it at times by that place had become pregnant and
means of images, or by the eating of
had engaged a midwife to take care of
herbs; sometimes by other external her, and had been warned by the mid¬
means, such as cocks’ testicles. But it wife not to go out of the castle, and
must not be thought that it is‘by the above all to be careful not to hold any
virtue of these things that a man is
speech or conversation with that witch.
made impotent, but by the occult After some weeks, unmindful of that
power of devils’ illusions witches by this warning, she went out of the castle to
means procure such impotence, namely, visit some women who were met to¬
that they cause a man to be unable to
gether on some festive occasion; and
copulate, or a woman to conceive.
when she had sat down for a little, the
And the reason for this is that God
witch came, and, as if for the purpose of
allows them more power over this act, saluting her, placed both her hands on
by which the first sm was disseminated,
her stomach; and suddenly she felt the
than over other human actions. Simichild moving in pain. Frightened by
. larly they have more power over serthis, she returned home and told the
j pents, which are the most subject to the
midwife what had happened. Then the
[ influence of incantations, than over
midwife exclaimed: “Alas! you have
other animals. Wherefore it has often already lost your child.” And so it
been found by us and other Inquisitors
proved when her time came; for she
that they have caused this obstruction
gave birth, not to an entire abortion,
by means of serpents or some such
but little by little to separate fragments
things.
of its head and feet and hands. And this
For a certain wizard who had been
great affliction was permitted by God
1
arrested confessed that for many years
to punish her husband, whose duty it
he had by witchcraft brought sterility
was to bring witches to justice and
upon all the men and animals which in¬
avenge their injuries to the Creator.
habited a certain house. Moreover,
And there was in the town of MersNider tells of a wizard named Stadlin *
burg in the diocese of Constance a cer¬
who was taken in the diocese of Lau¬
tain young man who was bewitched in
sanne, and confessed that in a certain
such a way that he could never perform
house where a man and his wife were
the carnal act with any woman except
living, he had by his witchcraft suc¬
one. And many have heard him tell
cessively killed in the woman’s womb
that he had often wished to refuse that
seven children, so that for many years
woman, and take flight to other lands;
the woman always miscarried. And
but that hitherto he had been com¬
that, in the same way, he had caused
pelled to rise up in the night and to
that all the pregnant cattle and animals
come very quickly back, sometimes over
of the house were during those years
land, and sometimes through the air as
unable to give birth to any live issue. if he were flying.
And when he was questioned as to how
he had done this, and what manner of
☆
charge should be preferred against him,
he discovered his crime, saying: I put a
CHAPTER VII
serpent under the threshold of the outer
door of the house; and if this is re¬
How, as it were, they Deprive Man of his
moved, fecundity will be restored to the
Virile Member.
inhabitants. And it was as he said; for W
though the serpent was not found, hav¬
E have already shown that they
ing been reduced to dust, the whole
can take away the male organ, not
piece of ground was removed, and in the
indeed by actually despoiling the human
body of it, but by concealing it with
* “Stadlin” “F'ormicarius,” c. III. some glamour, in the manner which we

MALEFICARUM
Part II. Qn 1. Ch. 7 119
ected anyone of having so bewitched
have already declared. And of this we
im. And the young man said that he
shall instance a few examples.
did suspect someone, but that she was
In the town of Ratisbon a certain
absent and living in Worms. Then I
young man who had an intrigue with a
said: T advise you to go to her as soon
girl, wishing to leave her, lost his mem¬
as possible and try your utmost to soften
ber; that is to say, some glamour was
her with gentle words and promises’;
cast over it so that he could see or touch
and he did so. For he came back after
nothing but his smooth body. In his
a few days and thanked me, saying
worry over this he went to a tavern to
that he was whole and had recovered
drink wine; and after he had sat there
everything. And I believed his words,
for a while he got into conversation with
but again proved them by the evidence
another woman who was there, and told
her the cause of his sadness, explaining of my eyes.”
But there are some points to be noted
everything, and demonstrating in his
for the clearer understanding of what
body that it was so. The woman was
has already been written concerning
astute, and asked whether he suspected
this matter. First, it must in no way be
anyone; and when he named such a
believed that such members are really
one, unfolding the whole matter, she
torn right away from the body, but
said: “If persuasion is not enough, you
that they are hidden by the devil
must use some violence, to induce her to
through some prestidigitatory art so
restore to you your health.” So in the
that they can be neither seen nor felt.
evening the young man watched the
And this is proved by the authorities
way by which the witch was in the
and by argument; although it has been
habit of going, and finding her, prayed
treated of before, where Alexander of
her to restore to him the health of his
Hales says that a Prestige, properly
body. And when she maintained that
understood, is an illusion of the devil,
she was innocent and knew nothing
which is not caused by any material
about it, he fell upon her, and winding
change, but exists only in the percep¬
a towel tightly round her neck, choked
tions of him who is deluded, either in
her, saying: “Unless you give me back
his interior or exterior senses.
my health, you shall die at my hands.”
With reference to these words it is to
Then she, being unable to cry out, and
be noted that, in the case we are con¬
with her face already swelling and
sidering, two of the exterior senses,
growing black, said: “Let me go, and I
namely, those of sight and touch, are
will heal you.” The young man then
deluded, and not the interior senses,
relaxed the pressure of the towel, and
namely, common-sense, fancy, imagin¬
the witch touched him with her hand
ation, thought, and memory. (But S.
between the thighs, saying: “Now you
Thomas says they are only four, as has
have what you desire.” And the young
been told before, reckoning fancy and
man, as he afterwards said, plainly felt,
imagination as one; and with some
before he had verified it by looking or
reason, for there is little difference be¬
touching, that his member had been
tween imagining and fancying. See S.
restored to him by the mere touch of
Thomas, I, 79.) And these senses, and
the witch.
not only the exterior senses, are af¬
A similar experience is narrated by a
fected when it is not a case of hiding
certain venerable Father from the Do¬
something, but of causing something to
minican House of Spires, well known in
appear to a man either when he is
the Order for the honesty of his life and
for his learning. “One day,” he says, awake or asleep.
As when a man who is awake sees
“while I was hearing confessions, a young
things otherwise than as they are; such
man came to me and, in the course of
as seeing someone devour a horse with
his confession, woefully said that he had
its rider, or thinking he sees a man
lost his member. Being astonished at
transformed into a beast, or thinking
this, and not being willing to give it
that he is himself a beast and must asso¬
easy credence, since in the opinion of
ciate with beasts. For then the exterior
the wise it is a mark of light-heartedness
senses are deluded and are employed by
to believe too easily, I obtained proof
the interior senses. For by the power of
of it when I saw nothing on the young
devils, with God’s permission, mental
man’s removing his clothes and showing
images long retained in the treasury of
the place. Then, using the wisest coun¬
such images, which is the memory, are
sel I could, I asked whether he sus-

120
MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. 7
drawn out, not from the intellectual Second Collation of the Abbot Sirenus, we
understanding in which such images are must answer that they cannot. And
stored, but from the memory, which is from this it follows that all who are de¬
the repository of mental images, and is luded in this way are presumed to be
situated at the back of the head, and in deadly sin. For he says, as is clear
are presented to the imaginative faculty. from the words of S. Antony: The devil
And so strongly are they impressed on can in no way enter the mind or body
that faculty that a man has an inevit¬ of any man, nor has the power to pene¬
able impulse to imagine a horse or a trate into the thoughts of anybody, ,
beast, when the devil draws from the unless such a person has first become
memory an image of a horse or a beast; destitute of all holy thoughts, and is
and so he is compelled to think that he quite bereft and denuded of spiritual
sees with his external eyes such a beast contemplation.
when there is actually no such beast to This agrees with Boethius where he
see; but it seems to be so by reason of says in the Consolation of Philosophy: *
the impulsive force of the devil working We had given you such arms that, if you
by means of those images. had not thrown them away, you would
And it need not seem wonderful that have been preserved from infirmity.
devils can do this, when even a natural Also Cassian tells in the same place of
defect is able to effect the same result, two Pagan witches, each in his own way
as is shown in the case of frantic and malicious, who by their witchcraft sent
melancholy men, and in maniacs and a succession of devils into the cell of S.
some drunkards, who are unable to dis¬ Antony for the purpose of driving him
cern truly. For frantic men think they from there by their temptations; being
see marvellous things, such as beasts infected with hatred for the holy man
and other horrors, when in actual fact because a great number of people
they see nothing. See above, in the visited him every day. And though
question, Whether witches can turn the these devils assailed him with the keen¬
minds of men to love and hatred; where est of spurs to his thoughts, yet he drove
many things are noted. them away by crossing himself on the
And, finally, the reason is self- forehead and breast, and by prostrating
evident. For since the devil has power himself in earnest prayer.
over inferior things, except only the Therefore we may say that all who
soul, therefore he is able to effect cer¬ are so deluded by devils, not reckoning
tain changes in those things, when God any other bodily infirmities, are lacking
allows, so that things appear to be in the gift of divine grace. And so it is
otherwise than they are. And this he said in Tobias vi: The devil has power
does, as I have said, either by confusing against those who are subject to their
and deluding the organ of sight so that lusts.
a clear thing appears cloudy: just as This is also substantiated by what we
after weeping, owing to the collected told in the First Part in the question,
humours, the light appears different Whether witches can change men into
from what it was before. Or by operat¬ the shapes of beasts. For we told of a
ing on the imaginative faculty by a girl who was turned into a filly, as she
transmutation of mental images, as has herself and, except S. Macharius, all
been said. Or by some agitation of who looked at her were persuaded. But
various humours, so that matters which the devil could not deceive the senses of
are earthy and dry seem to be fire or the holy man; and when she was
water: as some people make everyone brought to him to be healed, he saw a
in the house strip themselves naked true woman and not a horse, while on
under the impression that they are the other hand everyone else exclaimed
swimming in water. that she seemed to be a horse. And the
It may be asked further with reference Saint, by his prayers, freed her and the
to the above method of devils, whether others from that illusion, saying that this
this sort of illusions can happen in¬ had happened to her because she had
differently to the good and to the not attended sufficiently to holy things,
wicked: just as other bodily infirmities
can, as will be shown later, be brought
* “Boethius.” “De Consolatione Philoso¬
by witches even upon those who are in
phiae.” Liber /, Prosa ii. “Atqui talia con¬
a state of grace. To this question, fol¬
tuleramus arma, quae nisi prius abiecisses,
lowing the words of Cassian in his
inuicta te firmitate tuerentur.”

Part II. Qn i. Gh. 7 MALEFICARUM 121
nor used as she should Holy Confession ample, to be deprived of his member,
and the Eucharist. And for this reason, since he is not subject to lust. In the
because in her honesty she would not same way the converse is true, as the
consent to the shameful proposal of a Angel said to Tobias: Those who are
young man, he had caused a Jew who given to lust, the devil has power over
was a witch to bewitch the girl so that, them.
by the power of the devil, he turned her And what, then, is to be thought of
into a filly. those witches who in this way some¬
We may summarize our conclusions times collect male organs in great num¬
as follows:—Devils can, for their profit bers, as many as twenty or thirty mem¬
and probation, injure the good in their bers together, and put them in a bird’s
fortunes, that is, in such exterior things nest, or shut them up in a box, where
as riches, fame, and bodily health. This they move themselves like living mem¬
is clear from the case of the Blessed Job, bers, and eat oats and corn, as has been
who was afflicted by the devil in such seen by many and. is a matter of com¬
matters. But such injuries are not of mon report? It is to be said that it is
their own causing, so that they cannot all done by devil’s work and illusion,
be led or driven into any sin, although for the senses of those who see them are
they can be tempted both inwardly and deluded in the way we have said. For a
outwardly in the flesh. But the devils certain man tells that, when he had lost
cannot afflict the good with this sort of his member, he approached a known
illusions, either actively or passively. witch to ask her to restore it to him.
Not actively, by deluding their senses She told the afflicted man to climb a
as they do those of others who are not in certain tree, and that he might take
a state of grace. And not passively, by which he liked out of a nest in which
taking away their male organs by some there were several members. And when
glamour. For in these two respects they he tried to take a big one, the witch said :
could never injure Job, especially the You must not take that one; adding, 1 /7 f
passive injury with regard to the because it belonged to a parish priest. t
venereal act; for he was of such con¬ All these things are caused by devils
tinence that he was able to say: I have through an illusion or glamour, in the
vowed a vow with my eyes that I shall manner we have said, by confusing the
never think about a virgin, and still less organ of vision by transmuting the
about another man’s wife. Neverthe¬ mental images in the imaginative
less the devil knows that he has great faculty. And it must not be said that
power over sinners (see S. Luke xi: these members which are shown are
When a strong man armed keepeth his devils in assumed members, just as they
palace, his goods are in peace). sometimes appear to witches and men
But it may be asked, as to illusions in in assumed aerial bodies, and converse
respect of the male organ, whether, with them. And the reason is that they
granted that the devil cannot impose effect this thing by an easier method,
this illusion on those in a state of grace namely, by drawing out an inner
in a passive way, he cannot still do so mental image from the repository of the
in an active sense: the argument being memory, and impressing it on the
that the man in a state of grace is de¬ imagination.
luded because he ought to see the mem¬ And if anyone wishes to say that they
ber in its right place, when he who could go to work in a similar way, when
thinks it has been taken away from him, they are said to converse with witches
as well as other bystanders, does not see and other men in assumed bodies; that
it in its place; but if this is conceded, it is, that they could cause such appari¬
seems to be contrary to what has been tions by changing the mental images in
said. It can be said that there is not so the imaginative faculty, so that when
much force in the active as in the men thought the devils were present
passive loss; meaning by active loss, not in assumed bodies, they were really
his who bears the loss, but his who sees nothing but an illusion caused by such
the loss from without, as is self-evident. a change of the mental images in the
Therefore, although a man in a state of inner perceptions.
grace can see the loss of another, and to It is to be said that, if the devil had
that extent the devil can delude his no other purpose than merely to show
senses; yet he cannot passively suffer himself in human form, then there
such loss in his own body, as, for ex¬ would be no need for him to appear in
K

122
MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. 8
transmutation), although it has been
an assumed body, since he could effect
his purpose well enough by the afore¬ sufficiently proved in the First Part
said illusion. But this is not so; for he of the work, Question io, Whether!
has another purpose, namely, to speak witches can do such things: neverthe¬
and eat with them, and to commit other less, since that question with its argu¬
abominations. Therefore it is necessary ments and solutions may be rather
that he should himself be present, plac¬ obscure to some; especially since no
ing himself actually in sight in an actual examples are adduced to prove
assumed body. For, as S. Thomas says, them, and even the method by
Where the Angel’s power is, there he which they so transform themselves is
not explained; therefore we add the
operates.
And it may be asked, if the devil by present exposition by the resolution of
himself and without any witch takes several doubts.
away anyone’s virile member, whether And first, that Canon (26, Q. 5,
there is any difference between one sort Episcopi) is not to be understood in
of deprivation and the other. In addi¬ this matter in the way in which even
tion to what has been said in the First many learned men (but would that
Part of this work on the question, their learning were good!) are de¬
Whether witches can take away the ceived; who do not fear to affirm
male organ, it can be said that, when publicly in their sermons that such
the devil by himself takes away a mem¬ prestidigitatory transmutations are in
ber, he does actually take it away, and no way possible even by the power of
it is actually restored when it has to be devils. And we have often said that
restored. Secondly, as it is not taken this doctrine is greatly to the detriment
away without injury, so it is not without of the Faith, and strengthens the
pain. Thirdly, that he never does this witches, who rejoice very much in such
unless compelled by a good Angel, for sermons.
by so doing he cuts off a great source of But such preachers, as has been noted,
profit to him; for he knows that he can touch only the outer surface, and fail
work more witchcraft on that act than to reach the inner meaning of the
on other human acts. For God permits words of the Canon. For when it says:
him to do more injury to that than to Whoever believes that any creature
other human acts, as has been said. can be made, or can be changed for the
But none of the above points apply better or the worse, or be transformed
when he works through the agency of a into any other shape or likeness except
witch, with God’s permission. by the Creator Himself Who made all,
And if it is asked whether the devil is is without doubt an infidel. . . .
more apt to injure men and creatures by The reader must here remark two chief
himself than through a witch, it can things. First, concerning the words
be said that there is no comparison “ be made ”; and secondly, concerning
between the two cases. For he is in¬ the words “ be transformed into
finitely more apt to do harm through another likeness.” And as to the first,
the agency of witches. First, because he it is answered that “ be made ” can be
thus gives greater offence to God, by understood in two ways: namely, as
usurping to himself a creature dedi¬ meaning “ be created,” or as in the
cated to Him. Secondly, because when sense of the natural production of any¬
God is the more offended, He allows thing. Now in the first sense it be¬
him the more power of injuring men. longs only to God, as is well known,
And thirdly, for his own gain, which he Who in His infinite might can make
places in the perdition of souls. something out of nothing.
But in the second sense there is a
distinction to be drawn between crea¬
☆
tures ; for some are perfect creatures, like
a man, and an ass, etc. And others are
CHAPTER VIII
imperfect, such as serpents, frogs, mice,
etc., for they can also be generated
Of the Manner whereby they Change Men
. from putrefaction. Now the Canon
into the Shapes of Beasts
obviously speaks only of the former sort,
j T>UT that witches, by the power of not of the second; for in the case of
JO devils, change men into the shapes the second it can be proved from what
of beasts (for this is their chief manner of Blessed Albert says in his book On

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 8 MALEFICARUM 123
Animals, where he asks: whether devils Now when the companions of
can make true animals; and he answers Ulysses were changed into beasts, it
that they can, but only imperfect was only an appearance, or deception
animals; and still with this difference, of the eyes; for the animal shapes were
that they cannot do so in an instant, drawn out of the repository or memory
as God does, but by some motion, of images, and impressed on the
however sudden, as is shown in the imaginative faculty. And so imaginary
case of the Magicians in Exodus vii. The vision was caused, and through the
reader may, if he likes, refer to some strong impression on the other senses
of the remarks in the question we have and organs, the beholder thought that
quoted in the First Part of the work, and he saw animals, in the manner of which
in the solution of the first argument. we have already treated. But how
Secondly, it is said that they cannot these things can be done by the devil’s
transmute any creature. You may say power without any injury will be shown
that transmutation is of two sorts, later.
substantial and accidental; and this But when the guests were changed
accidental is again of two kinds, con¬ into beasts of burden by the inn¬
sisting either in the natural form be¬ keepers’ wives; and when the father of
longing to the thing which is seen, or Praestantius thought he was a packin a form which does not belong to the horse and carried corn; it is to be
thing which is seen, but exists only in noted that in these cases there were
the organs and perceptions of him who three deceptions. *
sees. The Canon speaks of the former, First, that those men were caused by
and especially of formal and actual a glamour to seem to be changed into
transmutation, in which one substance beasts of burden, and this change was
is transmuted into another; and this caused in the way we have said.
sort only God can effect, Who is the Second, that devils invisibly bore those
Creator of such actual substances. burdens up when they were too heavy
And it speaks also of the second, al¬ to be carried. Third, that those who
though the devil can effect that, in so seemed to others to be changed in shape
far as, with God’s permission, he causes seemed also to themselves to be changed
certain diseases and induces some into beasts; as it happened to Nabuchoappearance on the accidental body. As donosor, who lived for seven years
when a face appears to be leprous, or eating straw like an ox.*
some such thing. And as to the comrades of Diomedes
But properly speaking it is not such being changed into birds and flying
matters that are in question, but round his temple, it is to be said that
apparitions and glamours, by which this Diomedes was one of the Greeks
things seem to be transmuted into who went to the siege of Troy; and
other likenesses; and we say that the when he wished to return home, he was
words of the Canon cannot exclude drowned with his comrades in the sea;
such transmutations; for their exist¬ and then, at the suggestion of some
ence is proved by authority, by reason, idol, a temple was built to him that he
and by experience; namely, by certain might be numbered among the gods;
experiences related by S. Augustine in and for a long time, to keep that error
Book XVIII, chapter 17, of the alive, devils in the shape of birds flew
De Ciuitate Dei, and by the arguments in about in place of his companions.
explanation of them. For among other Therefore that superstition was one of
prestidigitator'/ transformations, he the glamours we have spoken of; for
mentions that the very famous Sorceress, it was not caused by the impression of
Circe, changed the companions of mental images on the imaginative
Ulysses into beasts; and that certain faculty, but by their flying in the sight
innkeepers’ wives had turned their of men in the assumed bodies of birds.
guests into beasts of burden. He men¬ But if it is asked whether the devils
tions also that the companions of
* “An Ox” “Daniel” iv, 30: “The same
Diomedes were changed into birds, and
hour the word was fulfilled upon Nabuchofor a long time flew about the temple
donosor, and he was driven away from among
f of Diomedes; and that Praestantius
men, and did eat grass like an ox, and his body
tells it for a fact that his father said that
was wet with the dew of heaven: till his hairs
he had been a packhorse, and had
grew like the feathers of eagles and his nails like
carried corn with other animals.
birds' claws”

MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. 9
124
could have deluded the onlookers by
CHAPTER IX
the above-mentioned method of work¬
ing upon their mental images, and not How Devils may enter the Human Body
by assuming aerial bodies like flying and the Head without doing any Hurty
birds, the answer is that they could have when they cause such Metamorphosis by
done so. Means of Prestidigitation.
For it was the opinion of some (as
S. Thomas tells in the Second Book of ONCERNING the method of caus¬
ing these illusory transmutations it
Sentences, dist. 8, art. 2) that no Angel,
ood or bad, ever assumed a body; may further be asked: whether the
ut that all that we read in the Scrip¬ devils are then inside the bodies and
tures about their appearances was heads of those who are deceived, and
caused by a glamour, or by imaginary whether the latter are to be considered
vision. as possessed by devils; how it can hap¬
And here the learned Saint notes a pen without injury to the inner per¬
difference between a glamour and ceptions and faculties that a mental
imaginary vision. For in a glamour image is transferred from one inner
there may be an exterior object which faculty to another; and whether or not
is seen, but it seems other than it is. such work ought to be considered
But imaginary vision does not neces¬ miraculous.
sarily require an exterior object, but First we must again refer to a dis¬
can be caused without that and only tinction between such illusory glam¬
by those inner mental images impressed ours; for sometimes the outer percep¬
on the imagination. tions only are affected, and sometimes
So, following their opinion, the com¬ the inner perceptions are deluded and
rades of Diomedes were not repre¬ so affect the outer perceptions.
sented by devils in the assumed bodies In the former case the glamour can
and likeness of birds, but only by a be caused without the devils’ entering
fantastic and imaginary vision caused into the outer perceptions, and merely
by working upon those mental images, by an exterior illusion; as when the
etc. devil wishes to hide some body by the
But the learned Saint condemns this interposition of some other body, or in
as an erroneous and not a simple some other way; or when he himself
opinion (though, it is piously believed, assumes a body and imposes himself
it is not actually heretical), although on the vision.
such appearances of good and bad But in the latter case it is necessary
Angels may at times have been that he must first occupy the head and
imaginary, with no assumed body. the faculties. And this is proved byBut, as he says, the saints are agreed authority and by reason.
that the Angels also appeared to the And it is not a valid objection to say
actual sight, and such appearance was that two created spirits cannot be in
in an assumed body. And the scrip¬ one and the same place, and that the
tural text reads more as if it speaks of soul pervades the whole of the body.
bodily appearances than imaginary For on this question there is the
or prestidigitatory ones. Therefore we authority of S. John Damascene, when
can say for the present concerning any he says: Where the Angel is, there he
visions like that of the comrades of operates. And S. Thomas, in the
Diomedes: that although those com¬ Second Book of Sentences, dist. 7, art. 5,
rades could by the devil’s work have says: All Angels, good and bad, by their
appeared in the imaginary vision of the natural power, which is superior to all
beholders in the manner we have said, bodily power, are able to transmute
yet it is rather presumed that they were our bodies.
caused to be seen by devils in assumed And this is clearly true, not only by
aerial bodies like flying birds; or else reason of the superior nobility of their
that other natural birds were caused nature, but because the whole mechan¬
by devils to represent themi ism of the world and all corporeal
creatures are administrated by Angels;
as S. Gregory says in the 4th Dialogue:
☆ In this visible world nothing can be
disposed except by an invisible
creature. Therefore all corporeal

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 9 MALEFICARUM
125
matters are governed by the Angels, spirits cannot separately exist in the
who are also called, not only by the same place, and that, since the soul
Holy Doctors but also by all the exists in the head, how can a devil be
Philosophers, the Powers which move there also? It is to be said that the
the stars. It is clear also from the fact soul is thought to reside in the centre of
that all human bodies are moved by the heart, in which it communicates
their souls, just as all other matter is with all the members by an outpouring
moved by the stars and the Powers of life. An example can be taken from
which move them. Any who wish may a spider, which feels in the middle of its
refer to S. Thomas in the First Part, web when any part of the web is
Quest. 90, art. 1. touched.
From this it is concluded that, since However, S. Augustine says in his
devils operate there where they are, book On the Spirit and the Soul ,* that it
therefore when they confuse the fancy is all in all, and all in every part of the
and the inner perceptions they are body. Granting that the soul is in the
existing in them. head, still the devil can work there;
Again, although to enter the soul is for his work is different from the work
possible only to God Who created it, of the soul. The work of the soul is in
yet devils can, with God’s permission, the body, to inform it and fill it with
enter our bodies; and they can then life; so that it exists not merely locally,
make impressions on the inner faculties but in the whole matter. But the devil
corresponding to the bodily organs. works in such a part and such a place
And by those impressions the organs of the body, effecting his changes in
are affected in proportion as the inner respect of the mental images. There¬
perceptions are affected in the way fore, since there is no confusion be¬
which has been shown: that the devil tween their respective operations, they
can draw out some image retained in a can both exist together in the same part
faculty corresponding to one of the of the body.
senses; as he draws from the memory, There is also the question whether
which is in the back part of the head, such men are to be considered obsessed
an image of a horse, and locally moves or frenzied, that is, possessed of devils.
that phantasm to the middle part of But this is considered separately;
the head, where are the cells of namely, whether it is possible through
imaginative power; and finally to the the work of witches for a man to be
sense of reason, which is in the front obsessed with a devil, that is, that the
of the head. And he causes such a devil should actually and bodily
sudden change and confusion, that possess him. And this question is
such objects are necessarily thought specially discussed in the following
to be actual things seen with the eyes. chapter, since it has this special diffi¬
This can be clearly exemplified by the culty, namely, whether this can be
natural defect in frantic men and other caused through the operations of
maniacs. witches.
But if it is asked how he can do this But as to the question whether the
without causing pain in the head, the temporal works of witches and devils
answer is easy. For in the first place he are to be considered as miracles or of a
does not cause any actual physical miraculous nature; it is to be said that
change in the organs, but only moves they are so, in so far as they are beyond
the mental images. And secondly, he the order of created nature as known
does not effect these changes by inject¬ to us, and are done by creatures un¬
ing any active quality which would known to us. But they are not properly
necessarily cause pain, since the devil speaking miracles as are those which
is himself without any corporeal are outside the whole of created nature;
quality, and can therefore operate as are the miracles of God and the
without the use of any such quality. Saints. (See what was written in the
Thirdly, as has been said, he effects First Part of this work, in the Fifth
these transmutations only by a local Question, in the refutation of the third
movement from one organ to another, error.)
and not by other movements through
which painful transformations are
* “On the Spirit.” The treatise “De Natura
sometimes caused.
et Origine Animae” was written towards the end
And as for the objection that two
of the year 419.

126 MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. 9
But there are those who object that for the marvels so done by Divine per¬
this sort of works must not be con¬ mission are true in some respects and
sidered miracles, but simply works of false in others. They are true in so far
the devil; since the purpose of miracles as they are within the limits of the
is the strengthening of the Faith, and devil’s power. But they are false when
they must not be conceded to the he appears to do things which are
adversary of the Faith. And also be¬ beyond his power, such as raising the
cause the signs of Antichrist are called dead, or making the blind to see. For
lying signs by the Apostle.* when he appears to do the former, he
First it is to be said that to work either enters into the dead body or else
miracles is the gift of freely given grace. removes it, and himself takes its place
And they can be done by bad men and in an assumed aerial body; and in the
bad spirits, up to the limits of the power latter case he takes away the sight by a
which is in them. glamour, and then suddenly restores it
Wherefore the miracles wrought by by taking away the disability he has
the good can be distinguished from caused, not by bringing light to the
those wrought by the wicked in at inner perceptions, as is told in the
least three ways. First, the signs which legend of Bartholomew. Indeed all the
are given by the good are done by marvellous works of Antichrist and of
Divine power in such matters as are witches can be said to be lying signs,
beyond the capacity of their own inasmuch as their only purpose is to
,
natural power, such as raising the dead, deceive. See S. Thomas, dist. 8 de
and things of that sort, whicn the devils Uirtute Daemonum.
are not able to accomplish in truth, but We may also quote here the dis¬
Civ»* *
only by an illusion: so Simon Magus tinction which is drawn in the Com¬
moved the head of a dead man; but pendium of Theological Truth between
such manifestations cannot last long. a wonder and a miracle. For in a
Secondly, they can be distinguished by miracle four conditions, are required:
their utility; for the miracles of the that it should be done by God; that it
good are of a useful nature, as the should be beyond the existing order
healing of sickness, and such things. of nature; thirdly, that it should be
But the miracles done by witches are manifest; and fourthly, that it should
concerned with harmful and idle be for the corroboration of the Faith.
things; as when they fly in the air, or But since the works of witches fail to
benumb the limbs of men, or such fulfil at least the first and last con¬
things. And S. Peter assigns this differ¬ ditions, therefore they may be called
ence in the Itinerarium f of Clement. wonderful works, but not miracles.
The third difference relates to the It can also be argued in this way.
Faith. For the miracles of the good are Although witches’ works can in a sense
ordained for the edification of the be said to be miraculous, yet some
Faith and of good living; whereas the miracles are supernatural, some un¬
miracles of the wicked are manifestly natural, and some preternatural. And
detrimental to the Faith and to they are supernatural when they can
righteousness be compared with nothing in nature,
They are distinguished also by the or in natural power, as when a virgin
way in which they are done. For the gives birth. They are unnatural when
good do miracles by a pious and they are against the normal course of
reverent invocation of the Divine nature but do not overstep the limits
Name. But witches and wicked men of nature, such as causing the blind to
work them by certain ravings and see. And they are preternatural when
invocations of devils. they are done in a manner parallel to r (
And there is no difficulty in the fact that of nature, as when rods are changed -,
that the Apostle called the works of ‘into serpents; for this can be done
the devil and Antichrist lying wonders;{ naturally also, through long putre¬
faction on account of seminal reasons;
* “Apostle” S. Paul, “II. Thessalonians” ii,
and thus the works of magicians may
8, 9.
be said to be marvellous.
f “Itinerarium.” Pseudo-Clementines.
It is expedient to recount an actual
J “Lying Wonders.” “II. Thessalonians” ii,
8~g: “That wicked one . . . whose coming is example, and then to explain it step
by step. There is a town in the
according to the working of Satan, in all power,
diocese of Strasburg, the name of
and signs, and lying wonders.”

Part II. Qn i. Gh. 9 MALEFICARUM 127
which it is charitable and honourable his mind back to the events of that day
to withhold, in which a workman was and that hour, and said: Never in all
one day chopping some wood to burn my life have I struck or beaten a
in his house. A large cat suddenly woman, and I can prove by credible
appeared and began to attack him; witnesses that at that time on that day
and when he was driving it off, I was busy chopping wood; and an
another even larger one came and hour afterwards your servants found
attacked him with the first more me still engaged on that task. Then
fiercely. And when he again tried to the judge again exclaimed in a fury:
drive them away, behold, three of them See how he tries to conceal his crime!
together attacked him, jumping up at The women are bewailing their blows,
his face, and biting and scratching his they exhibit the marks, and publicly
legs. In great fright and, as he said, testify that he struck them. Then the
more panic-stricken than he had ever poor man considered more closely
been, he crossed himself and, leaving on that event, and said: I remember
his work, fell upon the cats, which were that I struck some creatures at that
swarming over the wood and again time, but they were not women. The
leaping at his face and throat, and with magistrates in astonishment asked him
difficulty drove them away by beating to relate what sort of creatures he had
one on the head, another on the legs, struck; and he told, to their great
and another on the back. After the amazement, all that had happened, as
space of an hour, while he was again we have related it. So, understanding
engaged upon his task, two servants of that it was the work of the devil, they
the town magistrates came and took released the poor man and let him go
him as a malefactor and led him into away unharmed, telling him not to
the presence of the bailiff or judge. And speak of this matter to anyone. But it
the judge, looking at him from a could not be hidden from those devout
distance, and refusing to hear him, persons present who were zealous for
ordered him to be thrown into the the Faith.
deepest dungeon of a certain tower or Now concerning this it may be asked,
prison, where those who were under whether the devils appeared thus in
sentence of death were placed. The assumed shapes without the presence
man cried out, and for three days of the witches, or whether the witches
bitterly complained to the prison guards were actually present, converted by
that he should suffer in that way, when some glamour into the shapes of those
he was conscious of no crime; but the beasts. And in answering this it should
more the guards tried to procure him a be said that, although it was equally
hearing, the more furious the judge possible for the devils to act in either
became, expressing in the strongest way, it is rather presumed that it was
terms his indignation that so great a done in the second manner. For when
malefactor had not yet acknowledged the devils attacked the workman in
his crime, but dared to proclaim his the shapes of cats, they could suddenly,
innocence when the evidence of the by local motion through the air, trans¬
facts proved his horrible crime. But fer the women to their houses with the
although these could not prevail upon blows which they received as cats from
him, yet the judge was induced by the the workman; and no one doubts that
advice of the other magistrates to grant this was because of a mutual pact
the man a hearing. So when he was formerly made between them. For in
brought out of prison into the presence the same way they can cause an injury
of the judge, and the judge refused to or wound in a person whom they wish
look at him, the poor man threw him¬ to bewitch, by means of puncturing a
self before the knees of the other painted or molten image which repre¬
magistrates, pleading that he might sents the person whom they wish to
know the reason for his misfortune; and injure. Many examples of this could be
the judge broke into these words: You adduced.
most wicked of men, how can you not And it cannot be validly objected
acknowledge your crime? At such a that perhaps those women who were
time on such a day you beat three so injured were innocent, because
respected matrons of this town, so according to previously quoted
that they lie in their beds unable to examples it is shown that injuries may
rise or to move. The poor man cast happen even to the innocent, when

MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. io
128
someone is unknowingly hurt by a their consent, the devils transported
witch by means of an artificial image. their bodies with that ease which
The example is not apposite; for it is belongs to a spiritual power over a
one thing to be hurt by a devil through bodily power. Thirdly, having in the
a witch, and another thing to be hurt way which has been told been turned
by the devil himself without any witch. into the forms of beasts by some glamour,
For the devil receives blows in the they had to attack the workman; and
form of an animal, and transfers them the devils did not defend them from
to one who is bound to him by a pact, the blows, although they could have
when it is with such an one’s consent done so just as easily as they had trans¬
that he acts in this manner in such a ported them; but they permitted them
shape. Therefore he can in this way to be beaten, and the one who beat
hurt only the guilty who are bound to them to be known, in the knowledge
him by a pact, and never the innocent. that those crimes would, for the reasons
But when devils seek to do injury by we have mentioned, remain unpunished
means of witches, then, with the per¬ by faint-hearted men who had no zeal
mission of God for the avenging of so for the Faith.
great a crime, they often afflict even the We read also of a certain holy man,
innocent. who once found the devil in the form
Nevertheless, devils at times, with of a devout priest preaching in a
God’s permission, in their own persons church, and knowing in his spirit that
hurt even the innocent; and formerly it was the devil, observed his words,
they injured the Blessed Job, although whether he was teaching the people
they were not personally present, nor well or ill. And finding him irre¬
did the devils make use of any such proachable and inveighing against sin,
illusory apparition as in the example he went up to him at the end of the
we have quoted, when they used the sermon and asked him the reason for
phantasm of a cat, an animal which is, this. And the devil answered: I preach
in the Scriptures, an appropriate the truth, knowing that, because they
symbol of the perfidious, just as a dog are hearers of the word only, and not
is the symbol of preachers; for cats doers, God is the more offended and
are always setting snares for each other. my gain is increased.
And the Order of Preaching Friars was
repr esented in its first Founder by a dog ☆
barking against heresy.
Therefore it is presumed that those
CHAPTER X
three witches attacked the workman
in the second manner, either because Of the Method by which Devils through
the first manner did not please them
the Operations of Witches sometimes
so much, or because the second suited
actually possess Men.
I
more with their curiosity.
And this was the order which they T has been shown in the previous
observed. First, they were urged to do chapter how devils can enter the
this at the instance of the devils, and heads and other parts of the body of
not the devils at the instance of the men, and can move the inner mental
witches. For so we have often found images from place to place. But some¬
in their confessions, that at the instance one may doubt whether they are able at
of devils who constantly spur them on the instance of witches to obsess men
| to commit evil, they have to do more entirely; or feel some uncertainty about
than they would. And it is likely that their various methods of causing such
the witches would not, on their own obsession without the instance of
account, have thought of attacking the witches. And to clear up these doubts
poor man. we must undertake three explanations.
And there is no doubt that the reason First, as to the various methods of
why the devils urged them to do this possession. Secondly, how at the in¬
is that they knew well that, when a stance of witches and with God’s
manifest crime remains unpunished, permission devils at times possess men
God is the more offended, the Catholic in all those ways. Thirdly, we must
Faith is brought into disrepute, and substantiate our arguments with facts
the number of witches is the more and examples.
increased. Secondly, having gained With reference to the first, we must

Part II. Qn i, Ch. io MALEFICARUM 129
make an exception of that general there are five ways in which devils by
method by which the devil inhabits a themselves, without witches, can injure
man in any mortal sin. S. Thomas, in and possess men, so they can also do so
Book 3, quest. 3, speaks of this method in all those ways at the instance of
where he considers the doubt whether witches; since then God is the more
the devil always substantially possesses offended, and greater power of molest¬
a man when he commits mortal sin; ing men is allowed to the devil through
and the reason for the doubt is that the witches. And the methods are briefly
indwelling Holy Ghost always forms a the following, excepting the fact that
man with grace, according to I. Corin¬ they sometimes plague a man through
thians, iii: Ye are the temple of God, his external possessions: sometimes they
and the spirit of God dwelleth in you. injure men only in their own bodies;
And, since guilt is opposed to grace, it sometimes in their bodies and in their
would seem that there were opposing inner faculties; sometimes they only
forces in the same place. tempt them inwardly and outwardly;
And there he proves that to possess a others they at times deprive of the use of
man can be understood in two ways: their reason; others they change into
either with regard to the soul, or with the appearance of irrational beasts.
regard to the body. And in the first We shall speak of these methods singly.
way it is not possible for the devil to But first we shall rehearse five reasons
possess the soul, since God alone can why God allows men to be possessed,
enter that; therefore the devil is not for the sake of preserving a due order in
in this way the cause of sin, which the our matter. For sometimes a man is
Holy Spirit permits the soul itself to possessed for his own greater advantage;
commit; so there is no similitude sometimes for a slight sin of another;
between the two. sometimes for his own venial sin;
But as to the body, we may say that sometimes for another’s heavy sin; and
the devil can possess a man in two ways, sometimes for his own heavy sin. For
just as there are two classes of men: all these reasons let no one doubt that
those who are in sin, and those who are God allows such things to be done by
in grace. In the first way, we may say devils at the instance of witches; and
that, since a man is by any mortal sin it is better to prove each of them by
brought into the devil’s service, in so the Scriptures, rather than by recent
far as the devil provides the outer examples, since new things are always
suggestion of sin either to the senses or strengthened by old examples.
to the imagination, to that extent he is For an example of the first is clearly
said to inhabit the character of a man shown in the Dialogue of Severus,* a
when her is moved by every stirring of very dear disciple of S. Martin, where
temptation, like a ship in the sea he tells that a certain Father of very
without a rudder. holy life was so gifted by grace with
The devil can also essentially possess the power of expelling devils, that they
a man, as is clear in the case of frantic were put to flight not only by his words,
men. But this rather belongs to the but even by his letters or his hair-shirt.
question of punishment than that of And since the Father became very
sin, as will be shown; and bodily famous in the world, and felt himself
punishments are not always the con¬ tempted with vainglory, although he
sequence of sin, but are inflicted now manfully resisted that vice, yet, that
upon sinners and now upon the inno¬ he might be the more humiliated, he
cent. Therefore both those who are prayed with his whole heart to God
and those who are not in a state of that he might be for five months
grace can, in the depth of the incom¬
* “Severus.” Sulpicius Severus, who has been
prehensible judgement of God, be
styled the Christian Sallust, was born in Aqui¬
essentially possessed by devils. And
taine about 360; and died circa 420-23. He
though this method of possession is not
became a personal friend and enthusiastic
quite pertinent to our inquiry, we
disciple of S. Martin, and lived near Eauze, at
have set it down lest it should seem
Toulouse and Luz in Southern France. His
impossible to anyone that, with God’s
“Life of S. Martin” was very popular during
permission, men should at times be
the Middle Ages, as also were his “Two
substantially inhabited by devils at Dialoguesformerly divided into three. His
the instance of witches. works are to be found in Migne, “Patres
We may say, therefore, that just as Latini,” XX, 33-248.

130 MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. io
f
ossessed by a devil; and this was done. fault should remain in him, is clear from
or he was at once possessed and had his miraculous cure. For by continual
to be put in chains, and everything had prayers and submission to the Abbot
to be applied to him which is customary Macharius, the vile spirit was quickly
in the case of demoniacs. But at the driven away and departed from him.
end of the fifth month he was im¬ A similar case is that related by S.
mediately delivered both from all Gregory in his First Dialogue of the
vainglory and from the dqvil. But we nun who ate a lettuce without having
do hot read, nor is it for the present first made the sign of the Cross, ana
maintained, that for this reason a man was set free by the Blessed Father
can be possessed by a devil through Equitius.*
the witchcraft of another man; al¬ In the same Dialogue St. Gregory tells
though, as we have said, the judgements an example of the fourth case, where
of God are incomprehensible. someone is possessed because of the
For the second reason, when someone heavy sin of another. The Blessed
is possessed because of the light sin of Bishop Fortunatus had driven the devil
another, S. Gregory gives an example. from a possessed man, and the devil
The Blessed Abbot Eleutherius, a most began to walk about the streets of the
devout man, was spending the night city in the guise of a pilgrim, crying
near a convent of virgins, who un¬ out: Oh, the holy man Bishop Fortu¬
known to him ordered to be put by natus ! See, he has cast me, a pilgrim,
his cell a young boy who used to be out of my lodging, and I can find no
tormented all night by the devil. But rest anywhere. Then a certain man
on that same night the boy was sitting with his wife and son invited
delivered from the devil by the presence the pilgrim to lodge with him, and
of the Father. When the Abbot learned asking why he had been turned out,
of this, and the boy now being placed was delighted with the derogatory
in the holy man’s monastery, after story of the holy man which the pil¬
many days he began to exult rather grim had invented. And thereupon the
immoderately over the boy’s liberation, devil entered his son, and cast him
and said to his brother monks: The upon the fire, and killed him. And
devil was playing his pranks with those then for the first time did the unhappy
Sisters, but he has not presumed to father understand whom he had
approach this boy since he came to the received as a guest.
servants of God. And behold! the And fifthly, we read many examples
devil at once began to torment the boy. of men being possessed for their own
And by the tears and fasting of the heavy sin, both in the Holy Scripture
holy man and his brethren he was with and in the passions of the Saints.
difficulty delivered, but on the same For in I. Kings xv, Saul was possessed
day. And indeed that an innocent for disobedience to God. And, as we
person should be possessed for the slight have said, we have mentioned all these
fault of another is not surprising when so that it need not seem to anyone
men are possessed by devils for their impossible that men should also be
own light fault, or for another’s heavy possessed because of the crimes of, and
sin, or for their own heavy sin, and some at the instance of, witches. And we
also at the instance of witches. shall be able to understand the various
Cassia, in his First Collation of the methods of such possession by quoting
Abbot Serenus, gives an example of actual examples.
how one Moses was possessed for his In the time of Pope Pius II f the
own venial sin. This Moses, he says, following was the experience of one of
was a hermit of upright and pious life; us two Inquisitors before he entered
but because on one occasion he en¬ upon his office in the Inquisition. A
gaged in a dispute with the Abbot
* “Equitius.” In 487 Equitius was Bishop
Macharius, and went a little too far in
of Matelica, a diocese now joined to Fabriano.
the expression of a certain opinion, he
Only one other Bishop [Florentius) of the ancient
was immediately delivered up to a
see is known.
terrible devil, who caused him to void
f “Pius II." Enea Silvio de' Piccolomini was
his natural excrements through his
born at Corsignano, near Siena, 18 October,
mouth. And that this scourge was 1405; and elected to the Chair of S. Peter, 19
inflicted by God for the sake of purga¬ August, 1458. He died at Ancona, 14 August,
tion, lest any stain of his momentary 1464.

Part II. Qn i. Ch. io MALEFICARUM
131
certain Bohemian from the town of full of grace, and loved by all. But I,
Dachov brought his only son, a secular the Inquisitor, wishing for proofs, had
priest, to Rome to be delivered, be¬ him taken for a fortnight and more to
cause he was possessed. It happened various holy places, and especially to
that I, one of us Inquisitors, went into the Church of S. Praxedes the Virgin,*
a refectory, and that priest and his where there is part of the marble pillar
father came and sat down at the same to which Our Saviour was bound when
table with me. We saluted each other, He was scourged, and to the place
and talked together, as is customary; where S. Peter the Apostle was cruci¬
and the father kept sighing and praying fied ; and in all these places he uttered
Almighty God that his journey might horrible cries while he was being
prove to have been successful. I felt exorcised, now saying that he wished
great pity for him, and began to ask to come forth, and after a little main¬
what was the reason of his journey and taining the contrary. And as we have
of his sorrow. Then he, in the hearing said before, in all his behaviour he
of his son who was sitting next to me remained a sober priest without any
at the table, answered: “ Alas! I-have eccentricity, except during the process
a son possessed by a devil, and with of any exorcisms; and when these were
great trouble and expense I have finished, and the stole was taken from
brought him here to be delivered.” his neck, he showed no sign of madness
And when I asked where the son was, or any immoderate action. But when
he showed me him sitting by my side. he passed any church, and genuflected
I was a little frightened, and looked at in honour of the Glorious Virgin, the
him closely; and because he took his devil made him thrust his tongue far
food with such modesty, and answered out of his mouth; and when he was
piously to all questions, I began to asked whether he could not restrain
doubt that he was not possessed, but himself from doing this, he answered:
that some infirmity had happened to “I cannot help myself at all, for so
him. Then the son himself told what he uses all my limbs and organs, my
had happened, showing how and for neck, my tongue, and my lungs, when¬
how long he had been possessed, and ever he pleases, causing me to speak or
saying: “A certain witch brought this
evil upon me. For I was rebuking her * “S. Praxedes.” Praxedes and Pudentiana
on some matter concerned with the were the daughters of the Senator Pudens, a pupil
discipline of the Church, upbraiding of S. Peter. There was an old title-church of
her rather strongly since she was of an Rome, “titulus Pudentis,” called also the
obstinate disposition, when she said “ecclesia Pudentiana.” The two female figures
in the mosaic of the apse of S. Pudenziana, via
that after a few days that would happen
Urbana, are Pudentiana and Praxedes. In the
to me which has happened. And the
fourth century a new church, “titulus Praxedis
♦ devil which possesses me has told me
was built near Santa Maria Maggiore, and
that a charm was placed by the witch
when Paschal I in 822 rebuilt the church in its
under a certain tree, and that until it
present form (the basilica and title-church S.
was removed I could not be delivered;
Prassede alV Esquilino) he translated to it the
but he would not tell me which was the
bodies of S. Praxedes, S. Pudentiana, and of
tree.” But I would not in the least have many other martyrs. Under the High Altar are
believed his words if he had not at once the chief Relics of the Saints. In the Chapel of
informed me of the facts of the case. S. Zeno, which dates from the ninth century, is
For when I asked him about the length the Holy Pillar of the Scourging brought in 1223
of the intervals during which he had from Jerusalem by Cardinal Giovanni Colonna.
the use of his reason more than is usual Another portion of the Holy Pillar is preserved in
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem,
in the case of persons possessed, he
where it is publicly venerated each year on Easter
answered: “I am only deprived of the
Eve. S. Prassede is one of the richest churches in
use of my reason when I wish to con¬
Rome in Relics. It contains the Bodies of S. Zoe>
template holy things or to visit sacred
S. Feldian, S. Candid, S. Basil, S. Celestine I,
places. For the devil specifically told
S. Nicomedius; important Relics of S. Matthew,
me in his own words uttered through
S. Luke, S. Bartholomew, S. Philip, S. Andrew,
my mouth that, because he had up. to
S. Peter, S. Paul, and S. John Baptist; some of
that time been much offended by my
the garments of Our Lady; a piece of the seam¬
sermons to the people, he would in no less robe of Our Lord; three Thorns from the
way allow me to preach.” For accord¬ Crown of Thorns; and four fragments of wood
ing to his father, he was a preacher from the True Cross.

132 MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. io
to cry out; and I hear the words as if in their inner perceptions; some only
they were spoken by myself, but I am in their inner perceptions; some are so
altogether unable to restrain them; punished as to be at times only de¬
and when I try to engage in prayer he prived of their reason; and others are
attacks me more violently, thrusting turned into the semblance of irrational
out my tongue.” And there was in the beasts. Now the priest we have just
Church of S. Peter a column brought mentioned was possessed in the fourth
from Solomon’s Temple, by virtue of manner. For he was not touched in his
which many who are obsessed with worldly fortunes or in his own body, as
devils are liberated, because Christ had it happened to the Blessed Job, over
stood near it when He preached in the whom the Scripture clearly tells us that
Temple; but even here he could not be God gave the devil power, saying to
delivered, owing to the hidden purpose Satan: Behold, all that he hath is in thy
of God which reserved another method power; only upon himself put not forth
for his liberation. For though he re¬ thine hand. And this refers to exterior
mained shut in by the column for a things. But afterwards He gave him
whole day and night, yet on the follow¬ power over his body, saying: Behold,
ing day, after various exorcisms had he is in thine hand; but save his life.
been performed upon him, with a great And it can also be said that Job was
concourse of people standing round, he tormented in the third manner, that is,
was asked by which part of the column in the inner perceptions of his soul as
Christ had stood; and he bit the well as his body; for it is said in
column with his teeth, and, crying out, Job xii: If it is said to the Lord, My
showed the place, saying: “Here He bed will console me, and I will take
stood! Here He stood!” And at last comfort to myself on my couch, then
he said, “I will not go forth.” And Thou wilt terrify me with dreams, and
when he was asked why, he answered, shake me with the horror of visions:
Because of the Lombards. And being though these dreams were caused by
asked why he would not go forth the devil, according to Nicolas of
because of the Lombards, he answered Lyra* and S. Thomas: Thou wilt
in the Italian tongue (although the terrify me with dreams, which appear
poor priest did not understand that to me in sleep, and with visions which
language), They all practise such and come to me waking by a distortion of
such things, naming the worst vice of my inner perceptions. For the phan¬
lustfulness. And afterwards the priest tasms which occur to the thoughts in
asked me, saying, “Father, what did the day-time can become the terror of
those Italian words mean which came sleepers, and such were visited upon
from my mouth?” And when I told Job through the infirmity of his body.
him, he answered, “I heard the words, Therefore he was so shut off from all
but I could not understand them.” comfort that he saw no remedy or way
Eventually it proved that this demoniac of escaping from his misery except in
was of that sort of which the Saviour death, and said that he was shaken with
spoke in the Gospel, saying: This sort horror. And no one doubts that
goeth not out save by prayer and witches can injure men in these ways
fasting. For a venerable Bishop, who through devils, as will be shown in what
had been driven from his see by the follows, how they bring injuries upon
Turks, piously took compassion on the fortunes of men and upon the
him, and by fasting on bread and water bodies of men and animals by means of
for forty days, and by prayers and hailstorms.
exorcisms, at last through the grace of And there is a third way of injuring
God delivered him and sent him back the body and the inner perceptions,
to his home rejoicing. without taking away the reason, which
Now it would be a miracle if anyone
* “ Nicolas of Lyra ” “Doctor planus et
in this life could thoroughly explain
utilis,” the famous exegete, was born at Lyra in
in what and in how many ways the
Normandy, 12J0; and died at Paris, 1340. He
devil possesses or injures men: yet we
is the author of numerous theological works, by
can say that, leaving out of account his
far the most famous of which is his monumental
method of injuring men in their
“Postillae perpetuae in uniuersam S. Scrip¬
temporal fortunes, there are five ways.
turam,” which was so popular that it gained the
For some are affected only in their own distinction of being the first biblical commentary
bodies; some both in their bodies and to be printed.

Part II. Qn i. Ch. io MALEFICARUM 133
is shown when witches, as has been said, character, for it has its character by
so inflame the minds of men with creation from God. Wherefore He
unlawful lust that they are compelled alone is able to influence its inner
to travel long distances in the night to essence, and to preserve it when He is
go to their mistresses, being too fast pleased in His mercy to preserve it.
bound in the net of carnal desire. * So we conclude that, speaking of all
We may mention an example which other perfections in the good or defects
is said to have happened in Hesse, in in the wicked, when these are caused
the diocese of Marburg. A certain priest by a spirit operating in the head and its
was possessed, and during an exorcism attributes, such a spirit enters into the
the devil was asked for how long he had head within the physical limits of the
inhabited that priest. He answered, physical capacities of the body.
For seven years. And when the But if the spirit is working upon the
exorcist objected, But you have tor¬ soul, then again it works from the out¬
mented him for hardly three years; side, but in various ways. And they
where were you for the rest of the are said to work on the soul when they
time? He answered, I was hiding in represent phantasms or shapes to the
his body. And when he asked in what intellect, and not only to the common
part of the body, he answered, Gener¬ understanding and the outer percep¬
ally in his head. And when he was again tions. And when bad Angels so operate,
asked where he was when the priest there follow temptations and evil
was celebrating the Sacrament, he thoughts and affections, caused by an
said, I hid myself under his tongue. indirect influence upon the intellect.
And the other said: Wretch! How But good Angels cause phantasms of
were you so bold as not to flee from the revelation which enlighten the under¬
presence of your Creator? Then the standing. And there is this difference
devil said: Anyone may hide under a between them; that good Angels can
bridge while a holy man is Crossing, as even directly impress enlightening
long as he does not pause in his walk. fancies upon the intellect; but bad
But with the help of Divine grace the Angels are said not to enlighten but
priest was delivered, whether he told rather to darken by means of their
the truth or not; for both he and his phantasms, and they cannot influence
father are liars. the intellect directly, but only in¬
The fourth method applies to the case directly, in so far as the intellect is
of the priest who was liberated in bound to take such phantasms into
Rome, under the proposition that the consideration.
devil can enter the body, but not the But even a good Angel is not said to
soul, which only God can enter. But enter into the soul, although he en¬
when I say that the devil can enter the lightens it: similarly a superior Angel
body, I do not mean that he can occupy is not said to enter into an inferior,
the essential limits of the body. although he enlightens it; but he
I will explain this further; and in works only from the outside, and co¬
doing so it will be shown how devils operates in the way we have said.
sometimes substantially occupy a man, Therefore far less can a bad Angel enter
and at times deprive him of his reason. the soul.
For we may say that the limits of the And so the devil occupied the body
body can be considered in two ways: of the priest in three ways. First, as he
they may be physical or essential limits. could enter his body within its physical
Whenever any Angel, good or bad, limits, so he occupied his head by
works within the physical limits of the substantially inhabiting it. Secondly,
body, he enters the body in such a way he could extrinsically work upon his
as to influence its physical capacities. soul so as to darken his understanding
And in this way the good Angels cause and deprive him of the use of his
imaginary visions in the good. But reason. And he could have so tor¬
they are never said to enter into the mented him without any intermission
essence of the body, since they cannot or respite; but we may say that the
do so, either as a part of it or as a priest had this gift from God, that he
quality of it. Not as a part, for the should not be tormented by the devil
angelic and the human essence are without intermission. Thirdly, that
entirely different from each other; although he was deprived of the power
/
and not as a quality, as if giving it its of the sane use of words, yet he was

MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. ii
134
always conscious of his words, though use of their reason. He adds also that,
not of their meaning. And this differs without the use of any poison, but by/
from the other methods of obsession, the mere virulence of their incantations,!
for we generally read that those who they can deprive men of their lives.
are possessed are afflicted by devils It is proved also by S. Thomas in the
without intermission; as is clear in the Second Book of Sentences, dist. 7 and 8,
case of the lunatic in the Gospel, whose and in Book IV, dist. 34, and in general
father said to Jesus: Lord, have mercy all the Theologians write that witches
on my son, for he is lunatic, and sore can with the help of the devil bring
vexed (S. Matthew xvii); and of the harm upon men and their affairs in all
woman whom Satan had crippled for the ways in which the devil alone can
eighteen years, who was bowed to¬ injure or deceive, namely, in their
gether and could in no wise lift herself affairs, their reputation, their body,
up (S. Luke xiii). And in these ways their reason, and their life; which
devils can without doubt at the in¬ means that those injuries which are
stance of witches and with God’s caused by the devil without any witch,
permission inflict torments. can also be caused by a witch; and
even more readily so, on account of the
☆ greater offence which is given to the
Divine Majesty, as has been shown
CHAPTER XI above.
In Job i and ii is found a clear case
Of the Method by which they can Inflict of the injury in temporal affairs. The
Every Sort of Infirmity, generally Ills of injury to reputation is shown in the
the Graver Kind. history of the Blessed Jerome, that the
B
devil transformed himself into the
UT there is no bodily infirmity, not
appearance of S. Silvanus, Bishop of
even leprosy or epilepsy, which can¬
Nazareth, a friend of S. Jerome. And
not be caused by witches, with God’s
this devil approached a noble woman
permission. And this is proved by the
by night in her bed and began first to
fact that no sort of infirmity is ex¬
provoke and entice her with lewd
cepted by the Doctors. For a careful
words, and then invited her to per¬
consideration of what has already been
form the sinful act. And when she
written concerning the power of devils
called out, the devil in the form of the
and the wickedness of witches will show
saintly Bishop hid under the woman’s
that this statement offers no difficulty.
bed, and being sought for and found
Nider also deals with this subject both
there, he in lickerish language de¬
in his Book of Precepts* and in his
clared lyingly that he was the Bishop
Formicarius, where he asks: Whether
Silvanus. On the morrow therefore,
witches can actually injure men by their
when the devil had disappeared, the holy
witchcraft. And the question makes no
man was scandalously defamed; but his
exception of any infirmity, however
good name was cleared when the devil
incurable. And he there answers that
confessed at the tomb of S. Jerome that
they can do so, and proceeds to ask in
he had done this in an assumed body.
what way and by what means.
The injury to the body is shown in
And as to the first, he answers, as has
the case of the Blessed Job, who was
been shown in the First Question of the
stricken by the devil with terrible sores,
First Part of this treatise. And it is
which are explained as a form of
proved also by S. Isidore where he
leprosy. And Sigisbertf and Vincent
describes the operations of witches
{Etym. 8, cap. 9), and says that they are f “SigisbertSigebert of Gembloux, the
called witches on account of the celebrated Benedictine historian, was born at
magnitude of their crimes; for they Gembloux (pr. Namur) about 1035, and died at
disturb the elements by raising up the same place, 5 November, 1112. He was a
storms with the help of devils, they prolific author, and his most famous work,
confuse the minds of men fn the ways “Chronicon siue Chronographia,” is the basis of
already mentioned, by either entirely many other histories. It has frequently been
reprinted. The works of Sigebert may be con¬
obstructing or gravely impeding the
veniently found in Migne, “Patres Latini
* “Book of Precepts.” “Praeceptorum diuinae CLX. There is a study by Hirsch, “De uita
legis Liber,” of which there were seventeen editions et scriptis Sigeberti Monachi Gemblacensis
before 1500. I have used that of Douai, 1612. Berlin, 1841.

Part II. Qn i. Ch. u MALEFICARUM 135
of Beauvais (Spec. Hist. XXV. 37) both account of their perfidy and abjuration
tell that in the time of the Emperor of the Catholic Faith; therefore such
Louis II,* in the diocese of Mainz, a injuries are justly ascribed to witches
certain devil began to throw stones and secondarily, however much the devil
to beat at the houses as if with a may be the principal actor.
hammer. And then by public state¬ Therefore when a woman dips a twig j
ments, and secret insinuations, he in water and sprinkles the water in the
spread discord and troubled the minds air to make it rain, although she does!
of many. Then he excited the anger not herself cause the rain, and could
of all against one man, whose lodging, not be blamed on that account, yet, 1
wherever he was resting, he set on fire, because she has entered into a pact
and said that they were all suffering with the devil by which she can do this
for his sins. So at last that man had to as a witch, although it is the devil who
find his lodging in the fields. And causes the rain, she herself nevertheless
when the priests were saying a litany deservedly bears the blame, because
on this account, the devil stoned many she is an infidel and does the devil’s |
of the people with stones till he hurt work, surrendering herself to his service, f
them to bleeding; and sometimes he So also when a witch makes a waxen |
would desist, and sometimes rage; image or some such thing in order to;
and this continued for three years, until bewitch somebody; or when an image?
all the houses there were burned down. of someone appears by pouring moltep
Examples of the injury to the use of lead into water, and some injury is’
the reason, and of the tormenting of done upon the image, such as piercing;
the inner perceptions, are seen in those it or hurting it in any other way, when:
possessed and frenzied men of whom it is- the bewitched man who is in:
the Gospels tell. And as for death, and imagination being so hurt; although
that they deprive some of their lives, it the injury is actually done to the image
is proved in Tobias vi, in the case of the by the witch or some other man, and
seven husbands of the virgin Sara, who the devil in the same manner invisibly 1
were killed because of their lecherous injures the bewitched man, yet it is
lust and unbridled desire for the deservedly ascribed to the witch. For,
virgin Sara, of whom they were not without her, God would never allow
worthy to be the husbands. Therefore the devil to inflict the injury, nor would
it is concluded that both by themselves, the devil on his own account try to
and all the more with the help of injure the man.
witches, devils can injure men in But because it has been said that in
every way without exception. the matter of their good name the
But if it is asked whether injuries of devils can injure men on their own
this sort are to be ascribed rather to account and without the co-operation
devils than to witches, it is answered of witches, there may arise a doubt
that, when the devils cause injuries by whether the devils cannot also defame
their own direct action, then they are honest women so that they are reputed
principally to be ascribed to them. But to be witches, when they appear in
when they work through the agency of their likeness to bewitch someone; from
witches for the disparagement and which it would happen that such a
offending of God ana the perdition of woman would be defamed without
souls, knowing that by this means cause.
God is made more angry and allows In answering this we must premise
them greater power of doing evil; a few remarks. First, it has been said
and because they do indeed perpetrate that the devil can do nothing without
countless witchcrafts which the devil the Divine permission, as is shown in the
would not be allowed to bring upon First Part of this work in the last
men if he wished to injure men alone Question. It has also been shown that
by himself, but are permitted, in the God does not allow so great power of
just and hidden purpose of God, evil against the just and those who live
through the agency of witches, on in grace, as against sinners; and as
the devils have more power against
sinners (see the text: When a strong
* “Louis II.” Son of Lothaire /, was born
manf armed, etc.), so they are perabout 822. He became associated with his father
in the Empire in 849, and succeeded to the Imperial
Crown in 855. He died in 875. f “Strong Man.” “S. Luke” xi, 21.

136 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 1. Ch. 11
mitted by God to afflict them more Canon prescribes for his purgation, as
than the just. Finally, although they will be shown in the Third Part of this
can, with God’s permission,' injure the work in the second method of sen¬
just in their affairs, their reputation, tencing witches.
and their bodily health, yet, because And it is set down there that, if such
they know that this power is granted a man fails in his purgation, he is to be
them chiefly for the increase of the considered guilty, but that he should
merits of the just, they are the less be solemnly adjured before the punish- ,
eager to injure them. ment due to his sin is proceeded with
Therefore it can be said that in this and enforced. But here we are dealing
difficulty there are several points to be with actual events; and it has never
considered. First, the Divine permis¬ yet been known that an innocent person
sion. Secondly, the man who is thought has been punished on suspicion of
to be righteous, for they who are so witchcraft, and there is no doubt that
reputed are not always actually in a God will never permit such a thing tojj
state of grace. Thirdly, the crime of happen. i
which an innocent man would be Besides, He does not suffer the
suspected; for that crime in its very innocent who are under Angelic pro¬
origin exceeds all the crimes of the tection to be suspected of smaller /
world. Therefore it is to be said that crimes, such as robbery and such things;
it is granted that, with God’s permission, then all the more will He preserve those
an innocent person, whether or not who are under that protection from
he is in a state of grace, may be in¬ suspicion of the crime of witchcraft.
jured in his affairs or reputation; but, And it is no valid objection to quote
having respect to this particular crime the legend*of S. Germanus, when devils
and the gravity of the accusation (for assumed the bodies of other women and
we have often quoted S. Isidore’s saying sat down at tableland slept with the
that they are called witches from the husbands, deluding the latter into the
magnitude of their crimes), it can be belief that those women were in their
said that for an innocent person to be own bodies eating and drinking with
defamed by the devil in the way that them, as we have mentioned before.
has been suggested does not seem at all For the women in this case are not to
possible, for many reasons. be held guiltless. For in the Canon
In the first place, it is one thing to be (Episcopi 26, q. 2) such women are con¬
defamed in respect of vices which are demned for thinking that they are
committed without any expressed or really and actually transported, when
tacit contract with the devil, such as they are so only in imagination;
theft, robbery, or fornication; but quite although, as we have shown above, they
another matter to be defamed in are at times bodily transported by
respect of vices which it is impossible devils.
to accuse a man of having perpetrated But our present proposition is that
unless he has entered upon an ex¬ they can, with God’s permission, cause
pressed contract with the devil; and all other infirmities, with no exception;
such are the works of witches, which and it is to be concluded from what we
cannot be laid at their door unless it is have said that this is so. Fo no excep¬
by the power of devils that they be¬ tion is made by the Doctors, and there
witch men, animals and the fruits of the is no reason why there should be any,
earth. Therefore, although the devil since, as we have often said, the natural
can blacken men’s reputations in power of devils is superior to all cor¬
respect of other vices, yet it does not poreal power. And we have found in
seem possible for him to do so in our experience that this is true. For
respect of this vice which cannot be although greater difficulty may be felt
perpetrated without his co-operation. in believing that witches are able to
Besides, it has never hitherto been cause leprosy or epilepsy, since these
( { 11 known to have happened that an inno¬ diseases generally arise from some long¬
cent person has been defamed by the standing physical predisposition or de¬
devil to such an extent that he was fect, none the less it has sometimes been
condemned to death for this particular found that even these have been caused
crime. Furthermore, when a person is by witchcraft. For in the diocese of
only under suspicion, he suffers no Basel, in the district of Alsace and
punishment except that which the Lorraine, a certain honest labourer

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 12 MALEFICARUM
137
f spoke roughly to a certain quarrel- often found that certain people have
I some woman, and she angrily threat¬ been visited with epilepsy or the falling
ened him that she would soon avenge sickness by means of eggs which have
herself on him. He took little notice been buried with dead bodies, especially
of her; but on the same night he felt the dead bodies of witches, together
a pustule grow upon his neck, and he with other ceremonies of which we can¬
rubbed it a little, and found his whole not speak, particularly when these eggs
face and neck puffed up and swollen, have been given to a person either in
and a horrible form of leprosy appeared food or drink.
all over his body. He immediately went
to his friends for advice, and told them
☆
of the woman’s threat, and said that he
would stake his life on the suspicion
CHAPTER XII
that this had been done to him by the
magic art of that same witch. In short,
Of the Way how in Particular they Afflict
the woman was taken, questioned, and
Men with Other Like Infirmities.
confessed her crime. But when the B
judge asked her particularly about the UT who can reckon the number of
i reason for it, and how she had done it, the other infirmities which they
!she answered: “When that man used have inflicted upon men, such as blind¬
abusive words to me, I was angry and ness, the sharpest pains, and contor¬
went home; and my familiar began to tions of the body? Yet we shall set down
ask the reason for my ill humour. I a few examples which we have seen with
told him, and begged him to avenge our eyes, or have been related to one of
me on the man. And he asked what I us Inquisitors.
wanted him to do to him; and I When an inquisition was being held on
answered that I wished he would always some witches in the town of Innsbruck,
have a swollen face. And the devil went the following case, among others, was
away and afflicted the man even brought to light. A certain honest
beyond my asking; for I had not hoped woman who had been legally married
that he would infect him with such to one of the household of the Archduke
sore leprosy.” And so the woman was formally deposed the following. In the
burned. time of her maidenhood she had been
And in the diocese of Constance, be¬ in the service of one of the citizens,
tween Breisach and Freiburg, there is a whose wife became afflicted with
leprous woman (unless she has paid grievous pains in the head; and a woman
the debt of all flesh within these two came who said she could cure her, and
years) who used to tell to many people so began certain incantations and rites
how the same thing had happened to which she said would assuage the pains.
her by reason of a similar quarrel which And I carefully watched (said this
took place between her and another woman) what she did, and saw that,
woman. For one night when she went against the nature of water poured into
out of the house to do something in a vase, she caused water to rise in its
front of the door, a warm wind came vessel, together with other ceremonies
from the house of the other woman, which there is no need to mention.
which was opposite, and suddenly And considering that the pains in my
struck her face; and from that time mistress’s head were not assuaged by
she had been afflicted with the leprosy these means, I addressed the witch in
which she now suffered. some indignation with these words: “I
And lastly, in the same diocese, in do not know what you are doing, but
the territory of the Black Forest, a whatever it is, it is witchcraft, and
witch was being lifted by a gaoler on you are doing it for your own profit.”
to the pile of wood prepared for her Then the witch at once replied: “You
burning, and said: “I will pay you”; will know in three days whether I am a
and blew into his face. And he was at witch or not.” And so it proved; for
once afflicted with a horrible leprosy on the third day when I sat down and
all over his body, and did not survive took up a spindle, I suddenly felt a
many days. For the sake of brevity, the terrible pain in my body. First it was
fearful crimes of this witch, and many inside me, so that it seemed that there
more instances which could be re¬ was no part of my body in which I did
counted, are omitted. For we have not feel horrible shooting pains; then

138 MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. 12
being caused; and as I was standing
it seemed to me just as if burning coals
in the door of my greenhouse reckoning
were being continually heaped upon
to myself and bemoaning both the
my head; thirdly, from the crown of
passage and the damage, my neighbour
my head to the soles of my feet there
suddenly came up and asked if I
was no place large enough for a pin¬
suspected her. But I was frightened
prick that was not covered with a rash
because of her bad reputation, and
of white pustules; and so I remained
only answered, “The footprints on the
in these pains, crying out and wishing
grass are a proof of the damage.” Then
only for death, until the fourth day.
she was indignant because I had not,
At last my mistress’s husband told me
as she hoped, accused her with action¬
to go to a certain tavern; and with
able words, and went away murmuring;
great difficulty I went, whilst he
and though I could hear her words, I
walked before, until we were in front
could not understand them. After a
of the tavern. “See!” he said to me;
few days I became very ill with pains
“there is a loaf of white bread over the
in the stomach, and the sharpest
tavern door.” “I see,” said I. Then
twinges shooting from my left side to
he said: “Take it down, if you possibly
my right, and conversely, as if two
can; for it may do you good.” And I,
swords or knives were thrust through
holding on to the door with one hand
as much as I could, got hold of the my breast; whence day and night I
loaf with the other. “Open it” (said disturbed all the neighbours with my
my master) “and look carefully at what cries. And when they came from all
is inside.” Then, when I had broken sides to console me, it happened that a
open the loaf, I found many things certain clay-worker, who was engaged
inside it, especially some white grains in an adulterous intrigue with that
witch, my neighbour, coming to visit
very like the pustules on my body; and
I saw also some seeds and herbs such me, took pity on my illness, and after
as I could not eat or even look at, with a few words of comfort went away.
the bones of serpents and other animals. But the next day he returned in a
In my astonishment I asked my master hurry, and, after consoling me, added:
“I am going to test whether your illness
what was to be done; and he told me
to throw it all into the fire. I did so; is due to witchcraft, and if I find that it
and behold! suddenly, not in an hour is, I shall restore your health.” So he
or even a few minutes, but at the took some molten lead and, while I was
moment when that matter was thrown lying in bed, poured it into a bowl of
into the fire, I regained all my former water which he placed on my body.
And when the lead solidified into a
health.
And much more was deposed against certain image and various shapes, he
the wife of the citizen in whose service said: “See! your illness has been caused
this woman had been, by reason of by witchcraft; and one of the instru¬
which she was not lightly but very ments of that witchcraft is hidden under
strongly suspected, and especially be¬ the threshold of your house door. Let
cause she had used great familiarity us go, then, and remove it, and you
- with known witches. It is presumed will feel better.” So my husband and
«A that, having knowledge of the spell of he went to remove the charm; and the
w witchcraft hidden in the loaf, she had clay-worker, taking up the threshold,
told it to her husband; and then, in told my husband to put his hand into
the way described, the maid-servant the hole which then appeared, and take
recovered her health. out whatever he found; and he did
To bring so great a crime into so. And first he brought out a waxen
detestation, it is well that we should image about a palm long, perforated
tell how another person, also a woman, all over, and pierced through the
was bewitched in the same town. An sides with two needles, just in the same
honest married woman deposed the way that I felt the stabbing pains from
following on oath. side to side; and then little bags con¬
Behind my house (she said) I have taining all sorts of things, such as grains
a greenhouse, and my neighbour’s and seeds and bones. And when all
garden borders on it. One day I these things were burned, I became
noticed that a passage had been made better, but not entirely well. For
from my neighbour’s garden to my although the shootings and twinges
greenhouse, not without some damage stopped, and I quite regained my

Part II. Qn i. Gh. 12 MALEFICARUM 139
appetite for food, yet even now I am In the same way, according to the
by no means fully restored to health.— evidence of public report, a certain
And when we asked her why it was that soldier was slain by witchcraft, and
she had not been completely restored, many others whom I omit to mention.
she answered: There are some other But among them there was a wellinstruments of witchcraft hidden away known gentleman, whom his mistress
which I cannot find. And when I wished to come to her on one occasion
asked the man how he knew where to pass the night; but he sent his
the first instruments were hidden, he servant to tell her that he could not
answered: “I knew this through the visit her that night because he was
love which prompts a friend to tell busy. She promptly flew into a rage,
things to a friend; for your neighbour and said to the servant: Go and tell
revealed this to me when she was coax¬ your master that he will not trouble
ing me to commit adultery with her.5’ me for long. On the very next day
This is the story of the sick woman. he was taken ill, and was buried
But if I were to tell all the instances within a week.
that were found in that one town I And there are witches who can
should need to make a book of them. bewitch their judges by a mere look
For countless men and women who or glance from their eyes, and publicly
were blind, or lame, or withered, or boast that they cannot be punished;
plagued with various infirmities, and when malefactors have been im¬
severally took their oath that they prisoned for their crimes, and exposed
had strong suspicions that their ill¬ to the severest torture to make them
nesses, both in general and in particular, tell the truth, these witches can endow
were caused by witches, and that them with such an obstinacy of pre¬
they were bound to endure those ills serving silence that they are unable to
either for a period or right up to their lay bare their crimes.
deaths. And all that they said and And there are some who, in order to
testified was true, either as regards a accomplish their evil charms and spells,
specified illness or as regards the death beat and stab the Crucifix, and utter
of others. For that country abounds in the filthiest words against the Purity
henchmen and knights who have leisure of the Most Glorious Virgin MARY,
for vice, and seduce women, and then casting the foulest aspersions on the
wish to cast them off when they desire Nativity of Our Saviour from Her
to marry an honest woman. But they inviolate womb. It is not expedient
can rarely do this without incurring to repeat those vile words, nor yet to
the vengeance of some witchcraft upon describe their detestable crimes, as the
themselves or their wives. For when narrative would give too great offence
those women see themselves despised, to the ears of the pious; but they are
they persist in tormenting not so much all kept and preserved in writing, detail¬
the husband as the wife, in the fond ing the manner in which a certain
hope that, if the wife should die, the baptized Jewess had instructed other
husband would return to his former young girls. And one of them, named*
mistress. * Walpurgis, being in the same year at
For when a cook of the Archduke fKe point of death, and being urged by
had married an honest girl from those who stood round her to confess
a foreign country, a witch, who had her sins, exclaimed: I have given myself
been his mistress, met them in the body and soul to the devil; there is no
public road and, in the hearing of hope of forgiveness for me; and so
other honest people, foretold the be¬ died.
witching and death of the girl, stretch¬ These particulars have not been
ing out her hand and saying: “Not for written to the shame, but rather to the
long will you rejoice in your husband.” praise and glory of the most illustrious
And at once, on the following day, she Archduke. For he was truly a Catholic
took to her bed, and after a few days Prince, and laboured very zealously
paid the debt of all flesh, exclaiming with the Church at Brixen to exter¬
just as she expired: Lo! thus I die, minate witches. But they are written
because that woman, with God’s per¬ rather in hate and loathing of so great
mission, has killed me by her witch¬ a crime, and that men may not cease
craft; yet verily I go to another and to avenge their wrongs, and the insults
better marriage with God. and offences these wretches offer to

MALLEUS Part II. Qn 1. Ch. 13
140
that she took out my entrails, and put
the Creator and our Holy Faith, to
in something which, however, I could
say nothing of the temporal losses
not see. And when they had gone
which they cause. For this is their
away, and I had recovered my power
greatest and gravest crime, namely, that
of speech, I called my husband as soon
they abjure the Faith.
as possible, and told him what had
happened. But he put it down to
☆
pregnancy, and said: “You pregnant
women are always suffering from fancies
CHAPTER XIII
and delusions.” And when he would by
no means believe me, I replied: “I
How Witch Midwives commit most Horrid
have been given six months’ grace, and
Crimes when they either Kill Children
if, after that time, no torment comes to
or Offer them to Devils in most Accursed
me, I shall believe you.”
Wise.
W She related this to her son, a cleric
who was then Archdeacon of the
E must not omit to mention
district, and who came to visit her on
the injuries done to children by
the same day. And what happened?
witch midwives, first by killing them,
When exactly six months had passed,
and secondly by blasphemously offering
such a terrible pain came into her
them to devils. In the diocese of
belly that she could not help disturbing
Strasburg and in the town of Zabern
everybody with her cries day and night.
there is an honest woman very devoted
And because, as has been said, she was
to the Blessed Virgin MARY, who tells
most devout to the Virgin, the Queen of
the following experience of hers to all
Mercy, she fasted with bread and
the guests that come to the tavern which
water every Saturday, so that she
she keeps, known by the sign of the
believed that she was delivered by Her
Black Eagle.
intercession. For one day, when she
I was, she says, pregnant by my
wanted to perform , an action of nature,
lawful husband, now dead, and as my
all those unclean things fell from her
time approached, a certain midwife
body; and she called her husband and
importuned me to engage her to assist
her son, and said: “Are those fancies?
at the birth of my child. But I knew
her bad reputation, and although I had Did I not say that after half a year
decided to engage another woman, the truth would be known? Or who
pretended with conciliatory words to ever saw me eat thorns, bones, and
agree to her request. But when the even bits of wood?” For there were
pains came upon me, and I had brought brambles as long as a palm, as well as
in another midwife, the first one was a quantity of other things.
Moreover (as was said in the First
very angry, and hardly a week later
came into my room one night with Part of the work), it was shown by the
two other women, and approached the confession of the servant, who was
bed where I was lying. And when I brought to judgement at Breisach, that
tried to call my husband, who was the greatest injuries to the Faith as
sleeping in another room, all the use regards the heresy of witches are done
was taken away from my limbs and by midwives; and this is made clearer
tongue, so that except for seeing and than daylight itself by the confessions
hearing I could not move a muscle. of some who were afterwards burned.
And the witch, standing between the For in the diocese of Basel at the
other two, said: “See! this vile woman, town of Dann, a witch who was burned
who would not take me for her mid¬ confessed that she had killed more than
wife, shall notwin through unpunished.’ ’ forty children, by sticking a needle
The other two standing by her pleaded through the crowns of their heads into
for me, saying: “She has never harmed their brains, as they came out from
any of us.” But the witch added: the womb.
“Because she has offended me I am Finally, another woman in the diocese
going to put something into her entrails; of Strasburg confessed that she had
but, to please you, she shall not feel any killed more children than she. could
pain for half a year, but after that count. And she was caught in this
time she shall be tortured enough.” way. She had been called from one
So she came up and touched my belly town to another to act as midwife to
with her hands; and it seemed to me a certain woman, and» having per-

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 13 MALEFICARUM 141
formed her office, was going back this, he hid himself in the house and
home. But as she went out of the town saw the whole order of the sacrilege and
gate, the arm of a newly-born child fell dedication to the devil, as it has been
out of the cloak she had wrapped described. He saw also, as it seemed
round her, in whose folds the arm had to him, that without any human sup¬
been concealed. This was seen by port, but by the power of the devil,
those who were sitting in the gateway, the child was climbing up the chain by
and when she had gone on, they picked which the cooking-pots were suspended.
up from the ground what they took In great consternation both at the
to be a piece of meat; but when they terrible words of the invocation of the
looked more closely and saw that it devils, and at the other iniquitous
was not a piece of meat, but recognized ceremonies, he strongly insisted that
it by its fingers as a child’s arm, they the child should be baptized immedi¬
reported it to the magistrates, and it ately. While it was being carried to
was found that a child had died before the next village, where there was a
baptism, lacking an arm. So the witch church, and when they had to cross a
was taken and questioned, and con¬ bridge over a certain river, he drew
fessed the crime, and that she had, as his sword and ran at his daughter, who
has been said, killed more children was carrying the child, saying in the
than she could count. hearing of two others who were with
Now the reason for such practices is them: “You shall not carry the child
as follows: It is to be presumed that over the bridge; for either it must
witches are compelled to do such cross the bridge by itself, or you shall
things at the command of evil spirits, be drowned in the river.” The daughter
and sometimes against their own wills. was terrified and, together with the
For the devil knows that, because of the other women in company, asked him
pain of loss,* or original sin, such if he were in his right mind (for he had
children are debarred from entering hidden what had happened from all
the Kingdom of Heaven. And by this the others except the two men who were
means the Last Judgement is delayed, with him). Then he answered: “You
when the devils will be condemned to vile drab, by your magic arts you made
eternal torture; since the number of the the child climb the chain in the
elect is more slowly completed, on the kitchen; now make it cross the bridge
fulfilment of which the world will be with no one carrying it, or I shall
consumed. And also, as has already drown you in the river.” And so, being
been shown, witches are taught by the compelled, she put the child down on
devil to confect from the limbs of such the bridge, and invoked the devil by
children an unguent which is very her art; and suddenly the child was
useful for their spells. seen on the other side of the bridge.
But in order to bring so great a sin And when the child had been baptized,
into utter detestation, we must not and he had returned home, since he
pass over in silence the following horrible now had witnesses to convict his
crime. For when they do not kill the daughter of witchcraft (for he could not
child, they blasphemously offer it to prove the former crime of the oblation
the devil in this manner. As soon as to the devil, inasmuch as he had been
the child is born, the midwife, if the the only witness of that sacrilegious
mother herself is not a witch, carries ritual), he accused both daughter and
it out of the room on the pretext of mE other before the judge after their
warming it, raises it up, and offers it eriod of purgation; and they were
to the Prince of Devils, that is Lucifer, oth burned, and the crime of mid¬
and to all the devils. And this is done wives of making that sacrilegious offer¬
by the kitchen fire. ing was discovered.
A certain man relates that he noticed But here the doubt arises: to what
that his wife, when her time came to end or purpose is this sacrilegious
give birth, against the usual custom of offering of children, and how does it
women in childbirth, did not allow benefit the devils? To this it can be
any woman to approach the bed except said that the devils do this for three
her own daughter, who acted as mid¬ reasons, which serve three most wicked
wife. Wishing to know the reason for purposes. The first reason arises from
their pride, which always increases;
* “Pain of lossy Poena damni. as it is said: “They that hate Thee have

MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. 13
142
lifted up the head.”* For they try as the iniquity of the father.” But there is
far as possible to conform with divine that other passage in Exodus xx: I am
rites and ceremonies. Secondly, they a jealous God, visiting the sins of the
can more easily deceive men under the fathers upon the children unto the
mask of an outwardly seeming pious third and fourth generation. Now the
' action. For in the same way they meaning of these two sayings is as
entice young virgins and boys into follows. The first speaks of spiritual
their power; for though they might punishment in the judgement of Heaven
solicit such by means of evil and or God, and not in the judgement of
corrupt men, yet they rather deceive men. And this is the punishment of the
them by magic mirrors and the reflec¬ soul, such as loss or the forfeiture of
tions seen in witches’ finger-nails, and glory, or the punishment of pain, that
lure them on in the belief that they is, of the torment of eternal fire. And
love chastity, whereas they hate it. with such punishments no one is
For the devil hates above all the punished except for his own sin, either
Blessed Virgin, because she bruised his inherited as original sin or committed as
head (Genesis iii. 15)4 Just so in this actual sin.
oblation of children they deceive the The second text speaks of those who
minds of witches into the vice of imitate the sins of their fathers, as
. infidelity under the appearance of a Gratian* has explained (I, q. 4, etc.);
virtuous act. And the third reason is, and there he gives other explanations
that the perfidy of witches may grow, as to how the judgement of God inflicts
to the devils’ own gain, when they other punishments on a man, not only
have witches dedicated to them from for his own sins which he has com¬
their very cradles. mitted, or which he might commit (but
And this sacrilege affects the child is prevented by punishment from com¬
in three ways. In the first place, mitting), but also for the sins of others.
visible offerings to God are made of And it cannot be argued that then a
visible things, such as wine or bread man is punished without cause, and
or the fruits of the earth, as a sign of without sin, which should be the cause
honour and subjection to Him, as it is of punishment. For according to the
said in Ecclesiasticus xxv : Thou shalt rule of the law, no one miist be punished
not appear empty before the Lord. without sin, unless there is some cause
And such offerings cannot and must for it. And we can say that there is
not afterwards be put to profane uses. always a most just cause, though it may
Therefore the holy Father, S. John not be known to us: see S. Augustine,
Damascene, says: The oblations which XXIV, 4. And if we cannot in the
are offered in church belong only to result penetrate the depth of God’s
the priests, but not that they should judgement, yet we know that what He
divert them to their own uses, but has said is true, and what He has done
that they should faithfully distribute is just.
them, partly in the observance of But there is this distinction to be
divine worship, and partly for the observed in innocent children who are
use of the poor. From this it follows offered to devils not by their mothers
that a child who has been offered to when they are witches, but by midwives
the devil in sign of subjection and who, as we have said, secretly take
homage to him cannot possibly be from the embrace and the womb of an
dedicated by Catholics to a holy life, honest mother. Such children are not
in worthy and fruitful service to God
* “Gratian ” The little that is known con¬
for the benefit of himself and others.
cerning the author of the “Concordantia dis¬
For who can say that the sins of the
cordantium canonum,” more generally called the
mothers and of others do not redound in
“Decretum Gratiani,” must be gathered from the
punishment upon the children? Per¬
work itself. Gratian was born in Italy, perhaps
haps someone will quote that saying of
at Chiusi. He became a Camaldolese monk and
the prophet: “The son shall not bear
taught at Bologna. It is uncertain at what time
he compiled the “Decretum,” but it was commonly
* “Head” “Psalm” Ixxxii, 2. held to have been completed in 1151. More
f “Genesis.” Inimicitias ponam inter te et recent authorities, however, are inclined to suggest
mulierem, et semen tuum et semen illius: ipsa 1140. Gratian died before uyg, some think as
conteret caput tuum, et tu insidiaberis calcaneo early as 1160. He is regarded as the true founder
.
eius of the science of canon law.

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 13 MALEFICARUM
143
so cut off from grace that they must of temporal punishment, how some are
necessarily become prone to such unished for the sins of others. For
crimes; but it is piously to be believed e says that, bodily speaking, sons are
that they may rather cultivate their part of their fathers’ possessions, and
mothers’ virtues. servants and animals belong to their
The second result to the children of masters; therefore when a man is
this sacrilege is as follows. When a man punished in all his possessions, it follows
offers himself as a sacrifice to God, he that often the sons suffer for the fathers.
recognizes God as his Beginning and And this is quite a different matter
his End; and this sacrifice is more from what has been said about God
worthy than all the external sacrifices visiting the sins of the fathers upon the
which he makes, having its beginning children unto the third and fourth
in his creation and its end in his generation. For there it is a question of
glorification, as it is said: A sacrifice to those who imitate their fathers’ sins;
God is an afflicted spirit,* etc. In the but here we speak of those who suffer
same way, when a witch offers a child instead of their fathers, when they do
to the devil, she commends it body and not imitate their sins by committing
soul to him as its beginning and its end them in fact, but only inherit the
in eternal damnation; wherefore not results of their sins. For in this way the
without some miracle can the child be son born to David in adultery died
set free from the payment of so great a very soon; and the animals of the
debt. Amalekites were ordered to be killed.
And we read often in history of Nevertheless, there is much mystery in
children whom their mothers, in some all this.
passion or mental disturbance, have Taking into consideration all that
unthinkingly offered to the devil from we have said, we may well conclude
the very womb, and how it is only that such children are always, up to the
with the very greatest difficulty that end of their lives, predisposed to the
they can, when they have grown to perpetration of witchcraft. For just as
adult age, be delivered from that God sanctifies that which is dedicated
bondage which the devil has, with to Him, as is proved by the deeds of
God’s permission, usurped to himself. the Saints, when parents offer to God
And of this the Book of Examples, Most the fruit which they have generated;
Blessed Virgin MAR T, affords many illus¬ so also the devil does not cease to
trations ; a notable instance being that infect with evil that which is offered
of the man whom the Supreme Pontiff to him. Many examples can be found
was unable to deliver from the torments in the Old and New Testaments. For
of the devil, but at last he was sent to so were many of the Patriarchs and
a holy man living in the East, and Prophets, such as Isaac, Samuel, and
finally with great difficulty was delivered Samson; and so were Alexis and
from his bondage through the inter¬ Nicolas,t and many more, guided by
cession of the Most Glorious Virgin much grace to a holy life.
Herself.
And if God so severely punishes even
f “Alexis.” S. Alexis, Confessor. Feast, /7
such a thoughtless, I will not say
July. The Basilica and title-church of SS.
sacrifice, but commendation used
Bonifacio ed Alessio alV Aventino, Rome, con¬
angrily by a mother when her husband,
tains the bodies of S. Boniface and S. Alexis under
after copulating with her, says, I hope the High Altar. S. Aglae is buried in the con¬
a child will come of it; and she fessional.
answers, May the child go to the S. Nicolas of Tolentino, O.S.A., circa 1246devil! How much greater must be the 1306, was born of gentlefolk, Compagnonus de
punishment when the Divine Majesty is Guarutti and Amata de Guidiani, pious and
offended in the way we have described! devout, living in great seclusion on very moderate
means. He was the child of prayer, his mother
The third effect of this sacrilegious
being advanced in years and vowing her son,
oblation is to inculcate an habitual
should she bare one, to God from the womb.
inclination to cast spells upon men,
His parents joyfully consented to his joining the
animals, and the fruits of the earth.
Order of Augustinian Hermits, of which he is
This is shown by S. Thomas in the
one of the greatest glories. S. Nicolas was
and Book, quest. 108, where he speaks
distinguished by angelic meekness and celestial
purity. He died 10 September, and his feast is
* “Spirit.” “Psalm” l, i9. celebrated on that day.

MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. 14
*44
Finally, we know from experience And she said: I have sometimes seen
that the daughters of witches are men coming in and out to my mother;
always suspected of similar practices, as and when I asked her who they were,
imitators of their mothers’ crimes; and she told me that they were our masters
that indeed the whole of a witch’s to whom she had given me, and that
progeny is infected. And the reason for they were powerful and rich patrons.
this and for all that has been said The father was terrified, and asked her
before is, that according to their pact if she could raise a hailstorm then.
with the devil, they always have to And the girl said: Yes, if I had a little
leave behind them and carefully in- water. Then he led the girl by the
j
struct a survivor, so that they may hand to a stream, and said: Do it, but
1 fulfil their vow to do all they can to only on our land. Then the girl put
increase the number of witches.* For her hand in the water and stirred it
how else could it happen, as it has in the name of her master, as her
very often been found, that tender mother had taught her; and behold!
girls of eight or ten years have raised up the rain fell only on that land. Seeing
I tempests and hailstorms, unless they this, the father said: Make it hail now,
I
had been dedicated to the devil under but only on one of our fields. And
such a pact by their mothers. For when the girl had done this, the father
the children could not do such things was convinced by the evidence, and
of themselves by abjuring the Faith, accused his wife before the judge.
} which is how all adult witches have to And the wife was taken and convicted j j |
I begin, since they have no knowledge and burned; but the daughter was j* I
I of any single article of the Faith. We reconciled and solemnly dedicated to
- will recount an example of such a child. God, since which hour she could no
In the duchy of Swabia a certain more work these spells and charms.
farmer went to his fields with his little
daughter, hardly eight years old, to ☆
look at his crops, and began com¬
plaining about the drought, saying:
CHAPTER XIV
Alas! when will it rain? The girl
heard him, and in the simplicity of her Here followeth how Witches Injure Cattle
heart said: Father, if you want it to in Various Ways.
W
rain, I can soon make it come. And
her father said to her: What? Do you HEN S. Paul said, Doth God
know how to make it rain? And the care for oxen? t he meant that,
girl answered: I can make it rain, and though all things are subject to Divine
I can make hailstorms and tempests too. providence, both man and beast each
And the father asked: Who taught in its degree, as the Psalmist says,j:
you? And she answered: My mother yet the sons of men are especially in
did, but she told me not to tell any¬ His governance and under the pro¬
body. Then the father asked: How tection of His wings. I say, therefore,
did she teach you? And she answered: if men are injured by witches, with
She sent me to a master who will do God’s permission, both the innocent
anything I ask at any time. But her and just as well as sinners, and if parents
father said: Have you ever seen him? are bewitched in their children, as
being part of their possessions, who
* “Number of Witches.” Francesco Maria can then presume to doubt that, with
Guazzo, “Compendium Maleficarum,” Milan, God’s permission, various injuries can
1608, tells us that the witches promise the devil be brought by witches upon cattle and
“to strive with all their power and to use every the fruits of the earth, which are also
inducement and endeavour to draw other men and part of men’s possessions? For so was
women to their detestable practices and the Job stricken by the devil and lost all
worship of Satan” So in the case of Janet
his cattle. So also there is not even
Breadheid of Auldearne it was her husband who
the smallest farm where women do not
“enticed her into that craft.” [Pitcairn,“Criminal
injure each other’s cows, by drying up
Trials,” Edinburgh, 1833.) At Salem, George
their milk, and very often killing them.
Burroughs, a minister, was accused by a large
But let us first consider the smallest
I ] number of women as “the person who had
Seduc’d and CompelVd them into the snares of
Witchcraft.” See my “History of Witchcraft,” f “Oxen.” “I. Corinthians ” ix. g.
J “Psalmist.” “Psalmist ” xxxv, J, 8.
Chap. Ill, pp. 83-84.

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 14 MALEFICARUM
145
of these injuries, that of drying up the spiritual matters; therefore when
milk. If it is asked how they can do witches can be accused of inflicting
this, it can be answered that, according temporal loss, judges are more zealous
to Blessed Albert in his Book on Animals, to punish them. But who can fathom
milk is naturally menstrual in any the cunning of the devil?
animal; and, like another flux in I know of some men in a certain
women, when it is nQt stopped by some city who wished to eat some May
natural infirmity, it is due to witch¬ butter one May time. And as they
craft that it is stopped. Now the flow were walking along they came to a
of milk is naturally stopped when the meadow and sat down by a stream;
animal becomes pregnant; and it is and one of them, who had formed some
stopped by an accidental infirmity open or tacit pact with the devil,
when the animal eats some herb the said: I will get you the best May
nature of which is to dry up the milk butter. And at once he took off his
and make the cow ill. clothes and went into the stream, not
But they can cause this in various standing up but sitting with his back
ways by witchcraft. For on the more against the current; and while the
holy nights according to the instructions others looked on, he uttered certain
of the devil and for the greater offence words, and moved the water with his
to the Divine Majesty of God, a witch hands behind his back; and in a short
will sit down in a corner of her house time he brought out a great quantity
with a pail between her legs, stick a of butter of the sort that the country
knife or some instrument in the wall or women sell in the market in May.
p post, and make as if to milk it with And the others tasted it, and declared
her hands. Then she summons her it was the very best butter.
/familiar who always works with her From this we can deduce first the
in everything, and tells him that she following fact concerning their
wishes to milk a certain cow from a practices. They are either true witches,
certain house, which is healthy and by reason of an expressed pact formed
abounding in milk. And suddenly the with the devil, or they know by some
devil takes the milk from the udder of tacit understanding that the devil will
that cow, and brings it to where the do what they ask. In the first case
witch is sitting, as if it were flowing there is no need for any discussion, for
from the knife. such are true witches. But in the
But when this is publicly preached to second case, then they owe the devil’s
the people they get no bad information help to the fact that they were blasphem¬
by it; for however much anyone may ously offered to the devil by a midwife
invoke the devil, and think that by or by their own mothers.
*this means alone he can do this thing, But it may be objected that the
he deceives himself, because he is devil perhaps brought the butter with¬
without the foundation of that perfidy, out any compact, expressed or tacit,
not having rendered homage to the devil and without any previous dedication
or abjured the FafflLTTIve set This to himself. It is answered that no one
down because some have thought that can ever use the devil’s help in such jl
several of the matters of which I have matters without invoking him; and jj
f I
written ought not to be preached to the that by that very act of seeking help
people, on account of the danger of from the devil he is an apostate from ’
[ giving them evil knowledge; whereas the Faith. This is the decision of S.
it is impossible for anyone to learn Thomas in the Second Book of Sentences,
from a preacher how to perform any of dist. 8, on the question, Whether it is
the things that have been mentioned. apostasy from the Faith to use the
But they have been written rather to devil’s help. And although Blessed
bring so great a crime into detestation, Albert the Great agrees with the other
and should be preached from the Doctors, yet he says more expressly
pulpit, so that judges may be more that in such matters there is always
eager to punish the horrible crime of apostasy either in word or in deed.
the abnegation of the Faith. Yet they For if invocations, conjurations, fumi¬
should not always be preached in this gations and adorations are used, then
way; for the secular mind pays more an open pact is formed with the devil,
attention to temporal losses, being even if there has been no surrender of
more concerned with earthly than body and soul together with explicit

MALLEUS Part II. Qn 1. Ch. 14
146
abjuration of the Faith either wholly look, or by a look only; or by placing
or in part. For by the mere invoca¬ under the threshold of the stable door,
tion of the devil a man commits open or near the place where they go to
verbal apostasy. But if there is no watery some charm or periapt of
spoken invocation, but only a bare witchcraft.
action from which follows something For in this way those witches who
that could not be done without the were burned at Ratisbon, of whom
devil’s help, then whether a man does it we shall say more later on, were always
by beginning in the name of the devil, incited by the devil to bewitch the best
or with some other unknown words, or horses and the fattest cattle. And when
without any words but wi^h that they were asked how they did so, one
intention; then, says Blessed Albert, it of them named Agnes said that they
is apostasy of deed, because that action hid certain things undfer the threshold
is looked for from the devil. But since to of the stable door. And, asked what
expect or receive anything from the sort of things, she said: The bones of
devil is always a disparagement of the different kinds of animals. She was
Faith, it is also apostasy. further asked in whose name they did
So it is concluded that, by whatever this, and answered, In the name of the
means that sorcerer procured the devil and all the other devils. And
butter, it was done with either a tacit there was another of them, named
or an expressed pact with the devil; and Anna, who had killed twenty-three /
since, if it had been with an expressed horses in succession belonging to one of
pact, he would have behaved after the citizens who was a carrier. This f
the usual manner of witches, it is man at last, when he had bought his
probable that there was a tacit or twenty-fourth horse and was reduced
secret pact, originating either from to extreme poverty, stood in his stable
himself or from his mother or a mid¬ and said to the witch, who was standing1
wife. And I say that it arose from in the door of her house: “See, I have
himself, since he only went through bought a horse, and I swear to God and
certain motions, and expected the His Holy Mother that if this horse dies
devil to produce the effect. I shall kill you with my own hands.”
The second conclusion we can draw At that the witch was frightened, and
from this and similar practices is this. left the horse alone. But when she was
The devil cannot create new species taken and asked how she had done these
of things; therefore when natural butter things, she answered that she had done
suddenly came out of the water, the nothing but dig a little hole, after
devil did not do this by changing the which the devil had put in it certain
water into milk, but by taking butter things unknown to her. From this it
from some place where it was kept is concluded that the witch co-operates
and bringing it to the man’s hand. Or sufficiently if it is only by a touch or a
else he took natural milk from a natural look; for the devil is permitted no
cow and suddenly churned it into power of injuring creatures without /
natural butter; for while the art of some co-operation on the part of the J
women takes a little time to make witch, as has been shown before. And
butter, the devil could do it in the this is for the great offence to the
shortest space of time and bring it to Divine Majesty.
the man. For shepherds have often seen
It is in the same way that certain animals in the fields give three or four
dealers in magic, when they find them¬ jumps into the air, and then suddenly
selves in need of wine or some such fall to the ground and die; and this
necessity, merely go out in the night is caused by the power of witches at J,
into a village with a flask or vessel, the instance of the devil.
and bring it back suddenly filled with In the diocese of Strasburg, between
wine. For then the devil takes natural the town of Fiessen and Mount Ferrer,
wine from some vessel and fills their a certain very rich man affirmed that
flasks for them. more than forty oxen and cows belong¬
And with regard to the manner where¬ ing to him and others had been be¬
by witches kill animals and cattle, it witched in the Alps within the space of
should be said that they act very much one year, and that there had been no
as they do in the case of men. They natural plague or sickness to cause it.
can bewitch them by a touch and a To prove this, he said that when

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 15 MALEFICARUM i47
cattle die from some chance plague or this truth is clearly exemplified in
disease, they do not do so all at once, man himself; for at the mere command
but by degrees; but that this witchcraft of the will, which exists subjectively in
had suddenly taken all the strength the soul, the limbs are moved to
from them, and therefore everyone perform that which they have been
judged that they had been killed by willed to do. Therefore whatever can
witchcraft. I have said .forty head of be accomplished by mere local motion,
cattle, but I believe he put the number this not only good but also bad spirits
higher than that. However, it is very can by their natural power accomplish,
true that many cattle are said to have unless God should forbid it. But winds
been bewitched in some districts, and rain and other similar disturbances
especially in the Alps; and it is known of the air can be caused by the mere
that this form of witchcraft is un¬ movement of vapours released from the
happily most widespread. We shall earth or the water; therefore the
consider some similar cases later, in natural power of devils is sufficient to
the chapter where we discuss the cause such things. So says S. Thomas.
remedies for cattle that have been For God in His justice using the
bewitched. devils as his agents of punishment
inflicts the evils which come to us who
live in this world. Therefore, with
reference to that in the Psalms: “He
called a famine on the land, and wasted
CHAPTER XV
all their substance of bread”; the gloss
How they Raise and.Stir up Hailstorms and says: God allowed this evil to be caused
Tempests, and Cause Lightning to Blast by the bad Angels who are in charge of
both Men and Beasts. such matters; and by famine is meant
T
the Angel in charge of famine.
HAT devils and their disciples We refer the reader also to what has
can by witchcraft cause lightnings been written above on the question
and hailstorms and tempests, and that as to whether witches must always have
the devils have power from God to do the devil’s help to aid them in their
this, and their disciples do so with works, and concerning the three kinds
God’s permission, is proved by Holy of harm which the devils at times
Scripture in Job i and ii. For the inflict without the agency of a witch.
devil received power from God, and But the devils are more eager to injure
immediately caused it to happen that men with the help of a witch, since
the Sabeans took away from Job fifty in this way God is the more offended,
yoke of oxen and five hundred asses, and greater power is given to them to
and then fire came from heaven and torment and punish.
consumed seven thousand camels, and And relevant to this subject is what
a great wind came and smote down the Doctors have written in the Second
the house, killing his seven sons and Book of Sentences, dist. 6, on the question
his three daughters, and all the young whether there is a special place assigned
men, that is to say, the servants, except to the bad Angels in the clouds of the
him who brought the news, were killed; air. For in' devils there are three things
and finally the devil smote the body of to be considered—their nature, their
the holy man with the most terrible duty and their sin; and by nature they
sores, and caused his wife and his three belong to the empyrean of heaven,
friends to vex him grievously. through sin to the lower hell, but by
S. Thomas in his commentary on reason of the duty assigned to them, as
Job says as follows: It must be con¬ we have said, as ministers of punish¬
fessed that, with God’s permission, the ment to the wicked and trial to the
devils can disturb the air, raise up good, their place is in the clouds of the
winds, and make the fire fall from air. For they do not dwell here with us
heaven. For although, in the matter on the earth lest they should plague
of taking various shapes, corporeal us too much; but in the air and around
nature is not at the command of any the fiery sphere they can so bring
Angel, either good or bad, but only at together the active and passive agents
that of God the Creator, yet in the that, when God permits, they can
matter of local motion corporeal nature bring down fire and lightning from
has to obey the spiritual nature. And heaven.

148 MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. 15
A story is told in the Fornicarius* * of a and suddenly pierced him through
certain man who had been taken, and with swords and spears, so that he
was asked by the judge how they went miserably died for his crimes. Yet he
about to raise up hailstorms and left behind him a disciple, named
tempests, and whether it was easy Hoppo, who had also for his master
for them to do so. He answered: We that Stadlin whom we have mentioned
can easily cause hailstorms, but we before in the sixth chapter.
cannot do all the harm that we wish, These two could, whenever they/
because of the guardianship of good pleased, cause the third part of the;
Angels. And he added: We can only manure or straw or corn to pass
injure those who are deprived of God’s invisibly from a neighbour’s field to,
help; but we cannot hurt those who their own; they could raise the most!
make the sign of the Cross. And this is violent hailstorms and destructive winds
how we go to work: first we use certain and lightning; could cast into the
words in the fields to implore the chief water in the sight of their parents
of the'devils to send one of his servants children walking by the water-side,
to strike the man whom we name. when there was no one else in sight ;
Then, when the devil has come, we could cause barrenness in men and.
sacrifice to him a Hack cock at two animals; could reveal hidden things to
cross-roads,t throwing it up into the others; could in many ways injure?
air ; and when the devil has received men in their affairs or their bodies;
this, he performs our wish and stirs up could at times kill whom they would
the air, but not always in the places by lightning; and could cause many \
which we have named, and,-according other plagues, when and where the
"toHthe permission of the~ living God, justice of God permitted such things
sends down hailstorms and lightnings. to be done.
In the same work we hear of a It is better to add an instance which
certain leader or heresiarch of witches came within our own experience. For
named Staufer,J who lived in Berne in the diocese of Constance, twentyand the adjacent country, and used eight German miles from the town of
publicly to boast that, whenever he Ratisbon in the direction of Salzburg,
liked, he could change himself into a a violent hailstorm destroyed all the
mouse in the sight of his rivals and fruit, crops and vineyards in a belt one
slip through the hands of his deadly mile wide, so that the vines hardly
enemies; and that he had often escaped bore fruit for three years. This was
from the hands of his mortal foes in brought to the notice of the Inquisition,
this manner. But when the Divine since the people clamoured for an
justice wished to put an end to his inquiry to be held; r lany beside all the
wickedness, some of his enemies lay townsmen being of the opinion that it
in wait for him cautiously and saw was caused by witchcraft. Accordingly
him sitting in a basket near a window, it was agreed after fifteen days’ formal
deliberation that it was a case of witch¬
craft for us to consider; and among a*,
* “Formicarius,” Chap. Hi.
large number of suspects, we par¬
I “Cross-Roads.” In the trial of Dame Alice
ticularly examined two women, one
Kyteler of Kilkenny, 1324, it was shown that
she had sacrificed at the cross-roads live animals named Agnes, a bath-woman, and the
(Holinshed says nine red cocks) to her familiar, other Anna von Mindelheim. These two
Robert Artisson, “qui se facit appellari Artis were taken and shut up separately in
FiliumIn Greek tradition the xepxeo7rts, a different prisons, neither of them know¬
poltergeist, haunted the cross-ways. Lemoine, ing in the least what had happened to
VI, p. iog, tells us: ilCelui qui veut devenir the other. On the following day the ;
sorcier doit aller a un ‘ quatre chemins ’ avec une
bath-woman was very gently questioned (
‘ poule noire, ’ ou bien encore au lcimetieresur une
in the presence of a notary by the chief I
* tombe’ et toujours a ‘ minuit.’ II vient alors quelmagistrate, a justice named Gelre very ■
qrjLun qui demande: lQue venez-vous faire ici?’
zealous for the Faith, and by the other
‘J'ai une poule d vendre,’ repond-on. Ce quelmagistrates with him; and although
qu’un (est) le Mechant.”
she was undoubtedly well provided
I “Staufer.” Staufus. “FormicariusChap,
with that evil gift of silence which is
iii. The edition Frankfort, 1588, Vol. I, p. 722,
reads “Scavius ” and in the margin “Schasius.” the constant bane of judges, and at the
{Marginal note: “De Schasio in murem se first trial affirmed that she was innocent
conuertente.”) of any crime against man or woman;

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 15 MALEFICARUM
149
yet, in the Divine mercy that so great a Miflddheim), but I do not know what
crime should not pass unpunished, she diJ^Tinally, the bath-woman was
suddenly, when she had been freed from asked how long it was between the
her chains, although it was in the taking up of the water and the hail¬
torture chamber, she fully laid bare all storm ; and she answered: “There was 11
IKFTnm^^^ich she had committed. just sufficient interval of time to allow
For when she was questioned by the me to get back to my house.”
Notary of the Inquisition upon the But (and this is remarkable) when
accusations which had been brought on the next day the other witch had at
against her of harm done to men and first been exposed to the very gentlest
cattle, by reason of which she had been questions, being suspended hardly clear
gravely suspected of being a witch, of the ground by her thumbs, after
although there had been no witness to she had been set quite free, she dis¬
prove that she had abjured the Faith closed the whole matter without the
or performed coitus with an Incubus slightest discrepancy from what the
devil (for she had been most secret); other had told; agreeing as to the
nevertheless, after she had confessed place, that it was under such a tree and
to the harm which she had caused to the other had been under another; as to
animals and men, she acknowledged the time, that it was at midday; as to
also all that she was asked concerning the method, namely, of stirring water
the abjuration of the Faith, and copula¬ poured into a hole in the name of the
tion committed with an Incubus devil; devil and all the devils; and as to the
saying that for more than eighteen interval of time, that the hailstorm had
years she had given her body to an come after her devil had taken the
Incubus devil, with a complete water up into the air and she had
abnegation of the Fajth. returned home. Accordingly, on the
After this she was asked whether she lav they were burned. And the
knew anything about the hailstorm bath-woman was contrite and con¬
which we have mentioned, and answered fessed, and commended herself to God,
that she did. And, being asked how and saying that she would die with a willing
in what way, she answered: “I was heart if she could escape the tortures
in my house, and at midday a familiar of the devil, and held in her hand a
I
came to me and told me to go with a cross which she kissed. But the other
little water on to the field or plain of witch scorned her tor doing so- And
Kuppel (for so is it named). And this one had consorted with an Incubus
when I asked what he wanted to do devil for more than twenty years with
with the water, he said that he wanted a complete abjuration of the Faith,
to make it rain. So I went out at the and had done far more harm than the
town gate, and found the devil standing former witch to men, cattle and the
under a tree.” The judge asked her, fruits of the earth, as is shown in the
under which tree; and she said, preserved record of their trial.
“Under that one opposite that tower,” These instances must serve, since
pointing it out. Asked what she did indeed countless examples of this sort
under the tree, she said, “The devil of mischief could be recounted. But
told me to dig a little hole and pour very often men and beasts and store¬
the water into it.” Asked whether they houses are struck by lightning by the
sat down together, she said, “I sat power of devils; and the cause of this
down, but the devil stood up.” Then seems to be more hidden and ambiguous,
she was asked, with what words and since it often appears to happen by
in what manner she had stirred the Divine permission without the co¬
water; and she answered, “I stirred operation of any witch. However, it
it with my finger, and called on the has been found that witches have freely
name of the devil himself and all the confessed that they have done such
other devils.” Again the judge asked things, and there are various known
what was done with the water, and she instances of it, which could be men¬
answered: “It disappeared, and the tioned, in addition to what has already
devil took it up into the air.” Then been said. Therefore it is reasonable tot
she was asked if she had any associate, conclude that, just as easily as they
and answered: “Under another tree raise hailstorms, so can they cause
opposite I had a companion (naming lightning and storms at sea; and so no
the other captured witch, Anna von doubt at all remains on these points.

MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. 16
150
from a person’s head without hurting
CHAPTER XVI his head, and they can continue to do
this indefinitely. Sixthly, in order to
Of Three Ways in which Men and not
gain this power they have to offer
Women may be Discovered to be Addicted
homage of body and soul to the devil.
to Witchcraft: Divided into Three
We shall give some instances of this
Heads: and First of the Witchcraft
sort of practice.
of Archers.
For a certain prince of the Rhineland,
F
named Eberhard Longbeard because
OR our present purpose the last
he let his beard grow, had, before he was
class of witchcraft is that which
sixty years old, acquired for himself
is practised in three forms by men;
some of the Imperial territory, and was
and first we must consider the seven
besieging a certain castle named Lendendeadly and horrible crimes which are
brunnen because of the raids which
committed by wizards who are archers.
were made by the men of the castle.
For first, on the Sacred Day of the
And he had in his company a wizard
Passion of Our Lord, that is to say,
of this sort, named Puncker, who so
on Good Friday, as it is called, during
molested the men of the castle that
the solemnization of the Mass of the
he killed them all in succession with
Presanctified they shoot with arrows, as
his arrows, except one. And this is
at a target, at the most sacred image
how he proceeded. Whenever he had
of the Crucifix. Oh, the cruelty and
looked at a man, it did not matter
injury to the Saviour! Secondly, though
where that man went to or hid himself,
there is some doubt whether they have
he had only to loose an arrow and that
to utter a verbal form of apostasy
man was mortally wounded and killed;
to the devil in addition to that apostasy
and he was able to shoot three such
of deed, yet whether it be so or not, no
arrows every day because he had
greater injury to the Faith can be done
shot three arrows at the image of the H
by a Christian. For it is certain that,
Saviour. It is probable that the devilx| v.
if such things were done by an infidel,
favours tffe "number t'hree more ThSn W
they would be of no efficacy; for no
any other, because it represents aft' ^
such easy method of gratifying their
effective denial of the Holy Trinky.
hostility to the Faith is granted to
But after he had shot those three
them. Therefore these wretches ought
arrows, he could only shoot with the
to consider the truth and power of the
same uncertainty as other men. At
Catholic Faith, for the confirmation of
last one of the men of the castle called
which God justly permits such crimes.
out to him mockingly, “Puncker, will
Thirdly, such an archer has to shoot
you not at least spare the ring which
three or four arrows in this way, and as
hangs in the gate?” And he answered
a consequence he is able to kill on any
from outside in the night, “No; I shall
day just the same number of men.
take it away on the day that the casde
Fourthly, they have the following
is captured.” And he fulfilled his
assurance from the devil; that though
promise: for when, as has been said, all
they must first actually set eyes on the
were killed except one, and the castle
man they wish to kill, and must bend
had been taken, he took that ring and
their whole will on killing him, yet it
hung it in his own house at Rorbach
matters not where the man may shut
in the diocese of Worms, where it can
himself up, for he cannot be protected,
be seen hanging to this day. But
but the arrows which have been shot
afterwards he was one night killed with
will be carried and struck into him by
their spades by some peasants whom he
the devil.
had injured, and he perished in his sins.
Fifthly, they can shoot an arrow*
It is told also of this man, that a very
with such precision as to shoot a penny
eminent person wished to have proof
of his skill, and for a test placed his
“Shoot an Arrow.” This old tradition was
*
little son before the target with a
made the subject of the celebrated opera “Der
penny on his cap, and ordered him to
Freischutz,” the libretto of which is by Kind, the I"» vliiJt J v/il HU ClllCi v/1 v-1 v_.X L-vA 111111 LU ,
music by Weber. It was originally produced at cs nhrovrovtf tt hT» e pec.rn->nrvy»r a*-% wT a r ao yr wa mi tho/mu * 4t- removing * v
the cap. The wizard said that he
Berlin in 1821, and on 22 July, 1824, first per¬
would do it, but with reluctance; for he
formed in England at the Lyceum Theatre,
London, as “Der Freischutz; or, The Seventh would rather have refrained, not being J
Bullet.” sure whether the devil was seducing him
f
f
>#V?

Part II. Qn i. Gh. 16 MALEFICARUM
I5I
to his death. But, yielding to the per¬ less in his steps by Divine power. And
suasions of the prince, he placed one when he was asked by a passer-by why
arrow in readiness in the cord which he stood fixed there, he shook his head,
was slung over his shoulder, fitted and trembling in his arms and his hands,
another to his bow, and shot the in which he held the bow, and all over
penny from the cap without hurting his body, could answer nothing. So
the boy. Seeing this, the prince asked the other looked about him, and saw
him why he had placed the arrow in the Crucifix with the arrow and the
that cord; and he answered: “If I had blood, and said: “You villain, you
been deceived by the devil and had have pierced the image of Our Lord!”
killed my son, since I should have had And calling some others, he told them to
to die I would quickly have shot you see that he did not escape (although, as
with the other arrow to avenge my has been said, he could not move), and
death.” ran to the castle and told what had
And though such wickedness is per¬ happened. And they came down and
mitted by God for the proving and found the wretched man in the same
chastisement of the faithful, nevertheless place; and when they had questioned
more powerful miracles are performed him, and he had confessed his crime,
by the Saviour’s mercy for the strength¬ he was removed from that district by
ening and glory of the Faith. public justice, and suffered a miserable
For in the diocese of Constance, near death in merited expiation of his deeds.
the castle of Hohenzorn and a convent But, alas! how horrible it is to think
of nuns, there is a newly-built church that human perversity is not afraid
where may be seen an image of Our to countenance such crimes. For it is
Saviour pierced with an arrow and said that in the halls of the great such
bleeding. And the truth of this miracle men are maintained to glory in their
o
is shown as follows. A miserable wretch crimes in open contempt of the Faith,
who wished to be assured by the devil to the heavy offence of the Divine
of having three or four arrows with Majesty, and in scorn of Our Redeemer;
which he could, in the manner we have and are permitted to boast of their
told, kill whom he pleased, shot and deeds.
pierced with an arrow (just as it is Wherefore such protectors, defenders
still seen) a certain Crucifix at a cross¬ and patrons are to be judged not only
road ; and when it miraculously began heretics, but even apostates from the
to bleed,* the wretch was struck motion- Faith, and are to be punished in the
manner that will be told. And this
*
“Began to Bleed.” On 29 May, 1187, a is the seventh deadly sin of these
number of mercenaries and bandits were playing wizards. For first they are by very
with diet before the door of the church at Deols.
law excommunicated; and if the
One of these fellows, who had lost a throw,
patrons are clerics they are degraded
,
cursing and swearing, took up a stone which he
and deprived of all office and benefit,
flung at the figure of Our Lady with the Child
nor can they be restored except by a
over the sacred portal. The arm of the Infant
special indulgence from the Apostolic
‘
JESUS was snapped in twain. ‘A stream of blood
See. Also, if after their proscription
poured from the arm of the broken image and
such protectors remain obstinate in
made a pool on the earth below. The wretch who
their excommunication for the period
flung the stone was seized with madness, and
dropped down dead upon the spot.” The blood of a year, they are to be condemned as
was carefully collected in a phial which was heretics.
deposited in an Oratory dedicated to Our Lady. This is in accordance with the
Numberless cures were effected, and a Confrater¬ Canon Law; for, in Book VI, it touches
nity which was founded in honour of the miracle on the question of direct or indirect
flourished until the Revolution. It was re¬ interference with the proceedings of
organized in 1830, and on 31 May there is a
Diocesans and Inquisitors in the cause
solemn Commemoration of the Blood-shedding of
Notre Dame de Deols. a figure of Our Lord Crowned with Thorns.
After S. Paul of the Cross (1694-1775) had Even in this unbelieving age the Most Holy
preached for the last time in the church of Crucifix of Limpias, El Santo Cristo de la
Piagaro, a Crucifix over one of the side-altars was Agonia, sweats blood, whilst tears have been
seen to be oozing with blood. Hundreds wit¬ observed in the eyes, which turn from side to side,
nessed the miracle, and later a chapel was built and the head sometimes moves as in all the
to enshrine the Miraculous Cross. In 1630 at weariness of bitter pain. Very many other
Spoleto, drops of blood flowed from the head of instances of similar miracles might be cited.

MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Gh. 16
152
of the Faith, and mentions the aforesaid oblations, on pain of being deprived
punishment to be inflicted after a of their office, to which they can in
year. For it says: We forbid any inter¬ no way be restored without a special
ference from Potentates, temporal Lords indulgence from the Apostolic See.
and Rulers, and their Officials, etc. There are, finally, many other
Anyone may refer to the chapter. penalties incurred by such heretics even
And further, that witches and their when they do not persist in their
protectors are by very law to be excom¬ obstinacy for a year, and also by their
municated is shown in the Canon of the children and grandchildren: for they
suppressing of the heresy of witchcraft; can be degraded by a Bishop or by an
especially where it says: We excom¬ Inquisitor, declared deprived of all
municate and anathematize all heretics, titles, possessions, honours and ecclesias¬
Catharists, Sectaries . . . and others, tical benefits, in fine of all public
by whatever names they are known, etc. offices whatsoever. But this is only
And with these it includes all their when they are persistently and obstin¬
sympathizers and protectors, and others; ately impenitent. Also their sons to
saying later on; Also we excommuni¬ the second generation may be dis¬
cate all followers, protectors, defenders qualified and unable to obtain either
and patrons of such heretics. ecclesiastical preferment or public
The Canon Law prescribes various office; but this is to be understood only
penalties which are incurred within the of the descendants on the father’s side,
space of a year by such heretics, and not on the mother’s, and only
whether laymen or clerics, where it of those who are impenitent. Also all
says: We place under the ban of excom¬ their followers, protectors, fautors and
munication all their protectors, patrons patrons shall be denied all right of
and defenders, so that when any such petition or appeal; and this is explained
has been so sentenced and has scorned as meaning that, after a verdict has been
to recant his heresy, within a year returned that they are such heretics,
from that time he shall be considered then can they make no appeal before
an outlaw, and shall not be admitted their sentence, however much they may
to any office or council, nor be able have been in any respect ill-used or
to vote in the election of such officers, treated with undue severity. Much more
nor be allowed to give evidence; he is could be adduced in support of our
not to be called as a witness, or to standpoint, but this is sufficient.
be allowed free opportunity of giving Now for the better understanding of
evidence; he shall not succeed to any what has been said, some few points
inheritance, and no one shall be held are to be discussed. And first, if a
responsible for any business transaction prince or secular potentate employ such
with him. If he be a judge, his judge¬ a wizard as we have described for the
ment shall not stand, nor shall any destruction of some castle in a just
case be brought to his hearing. If he war, and with his help crushes the
be an advocate, he shall not be allowed tyranny of wicked men; is his whole
to plead. If he be a notary, no instru¬ army to be considered as protectors and
ment drawn up by him shall have any patrons of that wizard, and to be
weight, but is to be condemned together subjected to the penalties we have
with its condemned author; and similar mentioned? The answer seems to be
penalties are decreed for the holders that the rigour of justice must be
of other offices. But if he be a cleric, tempered on account of their numbers.
he is to be degraded from all office and For the leader, with his counsellors and
benefice; for, his guilt being the greater, advisers, must be considered to have
it is more heavily avenged. And if any aided and abetted such witchcraft,
such, after they have been marked and they are by law implicated in the
down by the Church, contemptuously aforesaid penalties when, after being
try to ignore their punishment, the warned by their spiritual advisers,
sentence of excommunication is to they have persisted in their bad course;
be rigorously applied to them to the and then they are to be judged pro¬
extreme limits of vengeance. And the tectors and patrons, and are to be
clergy shall not administer the Sacra¬ punished. But the rest of the army,
ments of the Church to such heretics, since they have no part in their leaders’
nor presume to give them Christian council, but are simply prepared to
burial, nor accept their alms and risk their lives in defence of their

Part II. Qn i. Ch. 16 MALEFICARUM I53
country, although they may view with ecclesiastical, this does not seem to
approval the feats of the wizard, apply to the case of witches; for the
nevertheless escape the sentence of crimes of witches are not exclusively
excommunication; but they must in ecclesiastical, but are also civil on
their confession acknowledge the guilt account of the temporal damage which
of the wizard, and in their absolution they do. Nevertheless, as will be shown
by the confessor must receive a solemn later, although the ecclesiastical judge
warning to hold all such practices for must try and judge the case, yet it is
ever in detestation, and as far as they for the secular judge to carry out the
are able drive from their land all such sentence and inflict punishment, as is
wizards. shown in the chapters of the Canon on
It may be asked by whom such the abolition of heresy, and on excom¬
princes are to be absolved when they munication. Wherefore, even if he does
come to their senses, whether by their surrender the witch to the Ordinary to
own spiritual advisers or by the be judged, the secular judge has still
Inquisitors? We answer that, if they the power of punishing him after he
repent, they may be absolved either has been delivered back by the Bishop;
by their spiritual advisers, or by the and with the consent of the Bishop, the
Inquisitors. This is provided in the secular judge can even perform both
Canon Law concerning the proceedings offices, that is, he, can both sentence
to be taken, in the fear of God and as and punish.
a warning to men, against heretics, And it is no valid objection to say
their followers, protectors, patrons and that such wizards are rather apostates
fautors, as also against those who are than heretics; for both these are
accused or suspected of heresy. But offenders against the Faith; but whereas
if any of the above, forswearing his a heretic is only in some partial or
former lapse into heresy, wish to return total doubt with regard to the Faith,
to the unity of the Church, he may witchcraft in its very essence implies
receive the benefit of absolution pro¬ apostasy intent from the Faith. For it
vided by Holy Church. is a heavier sin to corrupt the Faith,
A prince, or any other, may be said which is the life of the soul, than to
to have returned to his senses when he falsify money, which is a prop to the
has delivered up the wizard to be life of the body. And if counterfeiters
punished for his offences against the of money, and other malefactors, are
Creator; when he has banished from immediately sentenced to death by
his dominions all who have been found the secular courts, how much more just
guilty of witchcraft or heresy; when and equitable it is that such heretics
he is truly penitent for the past; and and apostates should be immediately
when, as becomes a Catholic prince, he put to death when they are convicted.
is firmly determined in his mind not Here we have also answered the
to show any favour to any other such second difficulty, namely, by what
wizard. court and judge such men are to be
But it may be asked to whom should punished. But this will be more fully
such a man be surrendered, in what considered in the Third Part of this
court he should be tried, and whether work, where we treat of the methods of
he is to be judged as one openly sentencing the offenders, and how one
apprehended in heresy ? The first diffi¬ taken in open heresy is to be sentenced
culty is specially dealt with at the (see the eighth and twelfth methods),
beginning of the Third Part; namely, and of the question whether one who f if
whether it is the business of a sectilar or becomes penitent is still to be put to, ?
of an ecclesiastical judge to punish death.
such men. It is manifestly stated in For if a simple heretic constantly
the Canon Law that no temporal backslides as often as he repents, he
magistrate or judge is competent to is to be put to death according to the
try a case of heresy without a licence Canon Law; and this is reasonable
from the Bishops and Inquisitors, or according to S. Thomas, as being for
at least under the hand of someone the general good. For if relapsed here¬
who has authority from them. But tics are often and often received back
when it says that the secular courts have and allowed to live and keep their
no jurisdiction in this matter because temporal goods, it might prejudice the
the crime of heresy is exclusively salvation of others, both because thev
M

MALLEUS Part II. Qn i. Ch. 16
154
might infect others if they fell again, intact. And some carry the limbs thus
and because, if they were to escape broken off about with them, and others
without punishment, others would have procure their invulnerability by means
less fear in being infected with heresy; of sacred or unknown words: therefore
And their very relapse argues that they there is this difference between them.
f
are not constant in the Faith, and they The first sort resemble the archerare therefore justly to be put to death. wizards in their contempt of the Faith
And so we ought to say here that, if a and their mutilation of the image of the
mere suspicion of inconstancy is suffi- Saviour, and are therefore to be con¬
cT^nfwarrant lor'aW^C^^SKtical judge sidered as true apostates, and so must
to hand over such a backslider to the be judged when they are taken; but not
secular court to be put to death, much to the same degree as the archers, for
more must he Ho so rnmcTcase of one it is manifest that they do not approach
who refuses to prove his penitence and them in wickedness. For they seem
change of heart by handing over to the only to act for the protection of their
secular court an apostate or any witch, own bodies, either above the waist or
but rather leaves free and unchecked below it, or of the whole body. There¬
one whom the secular judge wishes fore they are to be judged as penitent
to put to death as a witch according to heretics and not relapsed, when they
the law, on account of the temporal have been convicted as wizards and
injuries of which he has been guilty. have repented; and they are to be
But if the witch is penitent, the ecclesi¬ imposed a penance according to the
astical judge must first absolve him eighth manner, with solemn adjuration
from the excommunication which he afid incarceration, as is shown in the
has incurred because of the heresy of Third Part of this work.
witchcraft. Also when a heretic is The second sort can magically en¬
penitent, he can be received back chant weapons so that they can walk
into the bosom of the Church for the on them with bare feet, and similar
salvation of his soul. This matter is strange feats do they perform (for
further discussed in the First Question according to S. Isidore, Etym. VIII,
of the Third Part, and this is ample enchanters are those who have some
for the present. Only let all Rulers skill to perform wonders by means of
consider how strictly and minutely they words). And there is a distinction to
will be called to account by that be made between them; for some per¬
terrible Judge; for indeed there will form their incantations by means of
be a very severe judgement on those sacred words, or charms written up
in authority who allow such wizards to over the sick, and these are lawful
live and work their injuries against the provided that seven conditions are
Creator. observed, as will be shown later where
The other two classes of wizards we deal with the methods of curing those
belong to the general category of those who are bewitched. But incantations
who can use incantations and sacri¬ made over weapons by certain secret
legious charms so as to render certain words, or cases where the charms
weapons incapable of harming or written for the sick have been taken
wounding them; and these are divided down, are matters for the judge’s
into two kinds. For the first class attention. For when they use words of
resemble the archer-wizards of whom which they do not themselves know
we have just spoken, in that they also the meaning, or characters and signs
mutilate the image of Christ crucified. which are not the sign of the Gross,
For example, if they wish their head to such practices are altogether to be
be immune from any wound from a repudiated, and good men should
weapon or from any blow, they take off beware of the cruel arts of these warthe head of the Crucifix; if they wish locks. And if they will not desist from
their neck to be invulnerable, they such deeds, they must be judged as
take off its neck; if their arm, they suspects although lightly, and the
take off, or at least shorten, the arm, manner of sentencing such after the
and so on. And sometimes they take second method will be shown later.
away all above the waist, or below it. For they are not untainted with the sin
And in proof of this, hardly one in ten of heresy; for deeds of this kind can
of the Crucifixes set up at cross-roads only be done with the help of the devil,
or in the fields can be found whole and and, as we have shown, he who uses

II. MALEFICARUM
Part Question 2.
155
such help is judged to be an apostate of several others, any doubt as to
from the Faith. Yet on the plea of whether they are to be regarded as
ignorance or of mending their ways lightly or strongly or gravely suspected;
they may be dealt with more leniently but they are always very grave sinners
than the archer-wizards. against the Faith, and are always
It is most commonly found that visited by God with a miserable deatn.
traders and merchants are in the habit For it is told that a certain prince
of carrying about them such charms used to keep such wizards in his
and runes; and since they partake favour, and by their help unduly
of the nature of incantations, a com¬ oppressed a certain city in matters
plete riddance must be made of them, 01 commerce. And when one of his
either by the father confessor in the retainers remonstrated with him over
box, or in open court by the ecclesi¬ this, he threw away all fear of God and
astical judge. For these unknown words exclaimed, “God grant that I may
and characters imply a tacit compact die in this place*if I am oppressing
with the devil, who secretly uses such them unjustly.” Divine vengeance
things for his own purpose, granting quickly followed these words, and he
their wearers their wishes, that he was stricken down with sudden death.
may lure them on to worse things. And this vengeance was not so much
Therefore in the court of law such men on account of his unjust oppression as
must be warned and sentenced after because of his patronage of heresy.
the second method. In the box, the Thirdly, it is clear that all Bishops
confessor must examine the charm, and and Rulers who do not essay their utmost
if he is unwilling to throw it away to suppress crimes of this sort, with
altogether, he must delete the unknown their authors and patrons, are them¬
words and signs, but may keep any selves to be judged as evident abettors
Gospel words or the sign of the Cross. of the crime, and are manifestly to
Now with regard to all these classes be punished in the prescribed manner.
of wizards, and especially the archers,
it must be noted, as has been declared
☆
above, whether they are to be judged
as heretics openly taken in that sin;
QUESTION II
and we have touched on this matter
even before in the First Question of
The Methods of Destroying and Cur¬
the First Part. And there it is shown
ing Witchcraft.
that S. Bernard says that there are
three ways by which a man can be
Introduction, wherein is set Forth the
convicted of heresy: either by the
Difficulty of this Question.
evidence of the fact when in simple I
heresy he publicly preaches his errors, S it lawful to remove witchcraft by
or by the credible evidence of witnesses, means of further witchcraft, or by
or by a man’s own confession. S. any other forbidden means?
Bernard also explains the meaning It is argued that it is not; for it has
of some of the words of the Canon already been shown that in the Second
Law in this connexion, as was shown Book of Sentences, and the 8th Distinc¬
in the First Question of the First Part tion, all the Doctors agree that it is
of this work. unlawful to use the help of devils,
It is clear, therefore, that archer- since to do so involves apostasy from
wizards, and those mages who enchant the Faith. And, it is argued, no witch¬
other weapons, are to be considered as craft can be removed without the help
manifestly guilty of flagrant heresy, of devils. For it is submitted that it
through some expressed pact with the must be cured either by human power,
devil, since it is obvious that their or by diabolic, or by Divine power. It
feats would not be possible without cannot be by the first; for the lower
the devil’s help.
ower cannot counteract the higher,
Secondly, it is equally clear that aving no control over that which is
the patrons, protectors and defenders outside its own natural capacity.
of such men are manifestly to be judged Neither can it be by Divine power;
in the same way, and subjected to the for this would be a miracle, which God
prescribed punishments. For there is performs only at His own will, and not
not in their case, as there may be in that at the instance of men. For when His

MALLEUS Part II. Question 2.
156
Mother besought Christ to perform a witchcraft is none the less to be con¬
miracle to supply the need for wine, sidered permanent; for it is in no way
He answered: Woman, what have I to lawful to invoke the devil’s help
do with thee? And the Doctors explain through witchcraft.
this as meaning, “What association is Further, it is submitted that the
there between you and me in the work¬ exorcisms of the Church are not
ing of a miracle?”* Also it appears always effective in the repression of
that it is very rarely that men are devils I in the matter of bodily afflic¬
delivered from a bewitchment by call¬ tions, since such are cured only at the
ing on God’s help or the prayers of discretion of God; but they are effec¬
the Saints. Therefore it follows that tive always against those molestations
they can only be delivered by the help of devils against which they are chiefly
of devils; and it is unlawful to seek instituted, as, for example, against
such help. men who are possessed, or in the matter
Again it is pointed out that the of exorcising children.
common method in practice of taking Again, it does not follow that,
off a bewitchment, although it is quite because the devil has been given power
unlawful, is for the bewitched persons over someone on account of his sins,
to resort to wise women, by whom that power must come to an end on
they are very frequently cured, and the cessation of the sin. For very often
not by priests or exorcists. So experi¬ a man may cease from sinning, but his
ence shows that such cures are effected sins still remain. So it seems from these
by the help of devils, which it is un¬ sayings that the two Doctors we have
lawful to seek; therefore it cannot be cited were of the opinion that it is
lawful thus to cure a bewitchment, but unlawful to remove a bewitchment,
it must patiently be borne. but that it must be suffered, just as it
It is further argued that S. Thomas is permitted by the Lord God, Who
and S. Bonaventura, in Book IV, can remove it when it seems good to
dist. 34, have said that a bewitchment Him.
must be permanent because it can Against this opinion it is argued that
have no human remedy; for if there is just as God and Nature do not abound
a remedy, it is either unknown to men in superfluities, so also they are not
or unlawful. And these words are taken deficient in necessities; and it is a neces¬
to mean that this infirmity is incurable sity that there should be given to the
and must be regarded as permanent; faithful against such devils’ work not
and they add that, even if God should only a means of protection (of which we
provide a remedy by coercing the treat in the beginning of this Second
devil, and the devil should remove his Part), but also curative remedies. For
plague from a man, and the man otherwise the faithful would not be
should be cured, that cure would not sufficiently provided for by God, and
be a human one. Therefore, unless the works of the devil would seem to
God should cure it, it is not lawful for be stronger than God’s works.
a man himself to try in any way to Also there is the gloss on that text in
look for a cure. Job. There is no power on earth,
In the same place these two Doctors etc. The gloss says that, although the
add that it is unlawful even to seek a devil has power over all things human,
remedy by the superadding of another he is nevertheless subject to the merits
bewitchment. For they say that, grant¬ of the Saints, and even to the merits of
ing this to be possible, and that the saintly men in this life.
original spell be removed, yet the Again, S. Augustine (De moribus
Ecclesiae)% says: No Angel is more
* “Miracle” The sense is completely mis¬ powerful than our mind, when we hold
taken here. It should rather he, “Lady, what is
fast to God. For if power is a virtue
it to Me and to Thee” if these people lack wine?
in this world, then the mind that keeps
Our Lord marvels at the supreme charity of Our
close to God is more sublime than the
Lady. The first miracle was wrought at the
request of MARY. Quod Deus imperio tu prece,
Virgo, potes. It may be argued that all miracles f “Devils.” If the exorcism is not effective it is
are performed at the request of Our Lady, since, owing to lack of faith.
as S. Bernard says, God wishes us to obtain $ “De Moribus.” “De Moribus ecclesiae
everything through Her. Totum nos uoluit catholicae et de moribus Manichaeorum” was
habere per MARIAM. written 388-89.

Part II. Question 2. MALEFICARUM x57
whole world. Therefore such minds can But the devil does this in order that
undo the works of the devil. he may lead on the woman who beats
Answer. Here are two weighty opin¬ the pail to worse practices. And so, if
ions which, it seems, are at complete it were not for the risk which it entails,
variance with each other. there would be no difficulty in accept¬
For there are certain Theologians and ing the opinion of this learned Doctor.
Canonists who agree that it is lawful to Many other examples could be given.
remove witchcraft even by superstitious Henry of Segusio, in his eloquent
and vain means. And of this opinion Summa on genital impotence caused by
are Duns Scotus,* Henry of Segusio, witchcraft, says that in such cases re¬
and Godfrey, and all the Canonists. course must be had to the remedies of
But it is the opinion of the other physicians; and although some of these
Theologians, especially the ancient remedies seem to be vain and super¬
ones, and of some of the modern ones, stitious cantrips and charms, yet every¬
such as S. Thomas, S. Bonaventura, one must be trusted in his own pro¬
Blessed Albert, Peter a Palude, and fession, and the Church may well
many others, that in no case must evil tolerate the suppression of vanities by
be done that good may result, and that means of other vanities.
a man ought rather to die than consent Ubertinusj also, in his Fourth Book,
to be cured by superstitious and vain uses these words: A bewitchment can
means. be removed either by prayer or by the
Let us now examine their opinions, same art by which it was inflicted.
with a view to bringing them as far as Godfrey says in his Summa: A
ossible into agreement. Scotus, in his bewitchment cannot always be re¬
ourth Book, Hist. 34, on obstructions moved by him who caused it, either
and impotence caused by witchcraft, because he is dead, or because he does
says that it is foolish to maintain that not know how to cure it, or because
it is unlawful to remove a bewitchment the necessary charm is lost. But if he
even by superstitious and vain means, knows how to effect relief, it is lawful
and that to do so is in no way contrary for him to cure it. Our author is speak¬
to the Faith; for he who destroys the ing against those who said that an
work of the devil is not an accessory obstruction of the carnal act could not
to such works, but believes that the be caused by witchcraft, and that it
devil has the power and inclination to could never be permanent, and there¬
help in the infliction of an injury only fore did not annul a marriage already
so long as the outward token or sign contracted.
of that injury endures. Therefore when Besides, those who maintained that
that token is destroyed he puts an end no spell is permanent were moved by
to the injury. And he adds that it is the following reasons: they thought
meritorious to destroy the works of the that every bewitchment could be re¬
devil. But, as he speaks of tokens, we moved either by another magic spell,
i will give an example. or by the exorcisms of the Church
j There are women who discover a which are ordained for the suppression
witch by the following token. Whfen a of the devil’s power, or by true peni¬
\ cow’s supply of milk has been dimin¬ tence, since the devil has power only
ished by witchcraft, they hang a pail over sinners. So in the first respect they
of milk over the fire, and uttering cer¬ agree with the opinion of the others,
tain superstitious words, beat the pail namely, that a spell can be removed
with a stick. And though it is the pail by superstitious means.
that the women beat, yet the devil But S. Thomas is of the contrary
carries all those blows to the back of opinion when he says: If a spell can¬
the witch; and in this way both the not be revoked except by some unlawwitch and the devil are made weary.
f
“Uber tinus.” Ubertino of Cas ale, leader
* .” , ,
“Duns Scotus John Duns Scotus Doctor of the Spiritual Franciscans who expressed
, , _
Subtilis the famous Franciscan scholastic died extreme views regarding evangelical poverty He
,
8 November 1308. He lived and taught at was born in 1233, and died about 1330. Owing
,
Oxford and for a time at Paris. His complete to his warm advocacy of the strictest ideas he was
, ,
work with commentaries appeared at Paris severely condemned by the authorities and his
, ,
i8gi-gg, in twenty-six volumes quarto being a history is a matter of considerable difficulty. His
reprint of the twelve folio volumes which were chief work is generally considered to be “Arbor
.”
issued by Luke Wadding in i6jg at Lyons. uitae crucifixae JESU Christi

158 MALLEUS Part II. Question 2.
ful means, such as the devil’s help or some open or tacit invocation of
anything of that sort, even if it is known devils is used; and then again it is un¬
that it can be revoked in that way, it lawful.
is nevertheless to be considered perma¬ And it is with reference to these
nent ; for the remedy is not lawful. methods that the Theologians say that
Of the same opinion are S. Bona- it is better to die than to consent to
ventura, Peter a Palude, Blessed them. But there are two other methods
Albert, and all the Theologians. For, by which, according to the Canonists,
touching briefly on the question of it is lawful, or not idle and vain, to
invoking the help of the devil either remove a spell; and that such methods
tacitly or expressedly, they seem to hold may be used when all the remedies of
that such spells may only be removed the Church, such as exorcisms and the
by lawful exorcism or true penitence prayers of the Saints and true peni¬
(as is set down in the Canon Law con¬ tence, have been tried and have failed.
cerning sortilege), being moved, as it But for a clearer understanding of
seems, by the considerations mentioned these remedies we will recount some
in the beginning of this Question. examples known to our experience.
But it is expedient to bring these In the time of Pope Nicolas there
various opinions of the learned Doctors had come to Rome on some business
as far as possible into agreement, and a certain Bishop from Germany, whom
this can be done in one respect. For it is charitable not to name although
this purpose it is to be noted that the he has now paid the debt of all nature.
methods by which a spell of witchcraft There he fell in love with a girl, and
can be removed are as follows:—either sent her to his diocese in charge of two
by the agency of another witch and servants and certain other of his posses¬
another spell; or without the agency of sions, including some rich jewels. While
a witch, but by means of magic and this girl was on her way, with the
unlawful ceremonies. And this last usual greed of women, she grew
method may be divided into two; covetous of these jewels, which were
namely, the use of ceremonies which indeed very valuable, and began to
are both unlawful and vain, or the use think in her heart that, if only the
of ceremonies which are vain but not Bishop were to die through some witch¬
unlawful.
craft, she would be able to take posses¬
The first remedy is altogether un¬ sion of the rings, the pendants and
lawful, in respect both of the agent and carcanets. The next night the Bishop
of the remedy itself. But it may be suddenly fell ill, and the physicians
accomplished in two ways; either with and his servants gravely suspected
some injury to him who worked the that he had been poisoned; for there
spell, or without any injury, but with was such a fire in his breast that he had
magic and unlawful ceremonies. In the to take continual draughts of cold
latter case it can be included with the water to assuage it. On the third day,
second method, namely, that by which
when there seemed no hope of his life,
the spell is removed not by the agency
an old woman came and begged that
of a witch, but by magic and unlawful she might see him, saying that she had
ceremonies; and in this case it is still come to heal him. So they let her in,
to be judged unlawful, though not to
and she promised the Bishop that she
the same extent as the first method.
could heal him if he would agree to
We may summarize the position as her proposals. When the Bishop asked
follows. There are three conditions by
what it was to which he had to agree
which a remedy is rendered unlawful.
in order to regain his health, as he so
First, when the spell is removed through
greatly desired, the old woman an¬
the agency of another witch, and by
swered: Your illness has been caused
further witchcraft, that is, by the power
by a spell of witchcraft, and you can
of some devil. Secondly, when it is
onlv be healed by another spell, which
not removed by a witch, but by some
will transfer the illness from you to the
honest person, in such a way, however,
witch who caused it, so that she will
that the spell is by some magical remedy
die. The Bishop was astounded; and
transferred from one person to another;
seeing that he could be healed in no
and this again is unlawful. Thirdly,
other way, and not wishing to come to
when the spell is removed without
a rash decision, decided to ask the
imposing it on another person, but
advice of the Pope. Now the Holy

Part II. Question 2* MALEFICARUM 159
Father loved him very dearly, and granted to one does not constitute a
when he learned that he could only precedent for all, and the dispensation
be healed by the death of the witch, of the Pope in this case does not argue
he agreed to permit the lesser of two that it is lawful in all cases.
evils, and signed this permission with Nider in his Formicarius refers to the
his seal. So the old woman was again same matter, for he says: The following
approached and told that both he and method is sometimes employed for
the Pope had agreed to the death of removing or taking vengeance for a
the witch, on condition that he was spell of witchcraft. Someone who has
restored to his former health; and the been bewitched either in himself or in
old woman went away, promising him his possessions comes to a witch desir-f
that he would be healed on the follow¬ ing to know who has injured him.
ing night. And behold! when about Then the witch pours molten lead into
the middle of the night he felt himself water until, by the work of the devil,
cured and free from all illness, he sent some image is formed by the solidified
a messenger to learn what had hap¬ lead. On this, the witch asks in which
pened to the girl; and he came back part of the body he wishes his enemy
and reported that she had suddenly to be hurt, so that he may recognize
been taken ill in the middle of the him by that hurt. And when he has
night while sleeping by her mother’s chosen, the witch immediately pierces
side. or wounds with a knife the leaden
It is to be understood that at the image in the same part, and shows him
very same hour and moment the illness the place by which he can recognize
left the Bishop and afflicted the girl the guilty person. And it is found by
witch, through the agency of the old experience that, just in the same way as
witch; and so the evil spirit, by ceasing the leaden image is hurt, so is the
to plague the Bishop, appeared to witch hurt who cast the spell.
restore him to health by chance, But of this sort of remedy I say, and
whereas it was not he but God Who of others like it, that generally they are
permitted him to afflict him, and it was unlawful; although human weakness,
God Who properly speaking restored in the hope of obtaining pardon from
him; and the devil, by reason of his God, is very often ensnared in such
compact with the second witch, who practices, being more careful for the
envied the fortune of the girl, had to health of the body than for that of the
afflict the Bishop’s mistress. And it soul.
must be thought that those two evil The second kind of cure which is
spells were not worked by one devil wrought by witches who remove a spell
serving two persons, but by two devils again requires an expressed pact with
serving two separate witches. For the the devil, but is not accompanied by
devils do not work against themselves,* any injury to another person. And in
but work as much as possible in agree¬ what light such witches should be con¬
ment for the perdition of souls. sidered, and how they are to be recog¬
Finally, the Bishop went out of com¬ nized, will be shown later in the
passion to visit the girl; but when he fifteenth method of sentencing witches.
entered the room, she received him JLhere are very many such witches, tor
with horrible execrations, crying out: they are always to be found at intervals f ;
May you and she who wrought your of one or two German miles, and these I
cure be damned for ever! And the seem to be able to cure any who have
Bishop tried to soften her mind to been bewitched by another witch in
penitence, and told her that he for¬ their own district. Some of them claim
gave her all her wrongs; but she to be able to effect such cures at all
turned her face away and said: I have times; some that they can only cure
no hope of pardon, but commend my those bewitched in the neighbouring
soul to all the devils in hell; and died signiory; others that they can only
I miserably. But the Bishop returned perform their cures with the consent!
4home with joy and thankfulness. of the witch who cast the original |
Here it is to be noted that a privilege spell. *
And it is known that these women'
* ” have entered into an open pact with
“Against themselves“S. Matthew
,
xii, 26: “Et si Satanas Satanam elicit aduersus the devil, because they reveal secret
?”
se diuisus est: quomodo ergo stabit regnum eius matters to those who come to them to

i6o MALLEUS II.
Part Question 2
be cured. For they suddenly disclose punishing the witches who are the
to such a person the cause of his cause of it; that so they may deprive
calamity, telling him that he has been the sick of the opportunity of consulting
bewitched either in his own person or witches. But, alas! no one understands
in his possessions because of some this in his heart; but they all seek for
quarrel he has had with a neighbour their own gain instead of that of JESUS
or with some other woman or man; Christ.
and at times, in order to keep their For so many people used to go to be
criminal practices secret, they enjoin freed from spells to that witch in Reichsupon their clients some pilgrimage or hofen, whom we have already men¬
other pious work. But to approach tioned, that the Count of the castle set
such women in order to be cured is all up a toll-booth, and all who were be¬
the more pernicious because they seem witched in their own persons or in
to bring greater contempt upon the their possessions had to pay a penny
Faith than others who effect their before they could visit her house; and
cures by means of a merely tacit com¬ he boasted that he made a substantial
pact with the devil. profit by this means.
For they who resort to such witches We know from experience that there
are thinking more of their bodily are many such witches in the diocese
health than of God, and besides that, of Constance: not that this diocese is
God cuts short their lives to punish more infected than others, since this
them for taking into their own hands form of infidelity is general in all
the vengeance for their wrongs. For so dioceses; but this diocese has been more
the Divine vengeance overtook Saul, thoroughly sifted. It was found that
because he first cast out of the land all daily resort was being made to a man
magicians and wizards, and afterwards named Hengst by a very large con¬
consulted a witch; wherefore he was course of poor folk who had been be¬
slain in battle with his sons, I. Samuel witched, and with our own eyes we
xxviii, and I. Paralipomenon x. And saw such crowds drT the village of
for the same reason the sick Ochozias* Eningen, that certainly the poor never j
had to die, IV. Kings i (Ahaziah; flocked to any shrine of the Blessed
II. Kings i. A.V.). Virgin, or to a Holy Well or a Hermi¬
Also they who consult such witches tage, in such numbers as they went to
are regarded as defamed, and cannot that sorcerer. For in the very coldest
be allowed to bring an accusation, as winter weather, when all the highways
will be shown in the Third Part; and and byways were snow-bound, they
they are by law to be sentenced to came to him from two or three miles
capital punishment, as was said in the round in spite of the greatest diffi¬
First Question of this work. culties; and some were cured, but
But alas! O Lord God, Who art others not. For I suppose that all spells
just in all Thy judgements, who shall are not equally easy to remove, on
deliver the poor who are bewitched account of various obstacles, as has
and cry out in their ceaseless pains? been said before. And these witches
For our sins are so great, and the remove spells by means of an open
enemy is so strong; and where are they invocation of devils after the manner
who can undo the works of the devil of the second kind of remedies, which
by lawful exorcisms? This one remedy are unlawful, but not to the same extent
appears to be left; that judges should, as the first kind.
by various penalties, keep such wicked¬ The third kind of remedy is that
ness as far as possible in check by which is wrought by means of certain
superstitious ceremonies, but without
*
“Ochozias,” who when sick “sent messen¬
any injury to anyone, and not by an
gers, saying to them: Go, consult Beelzebub, the
overt witch. An example of this method
god of Hecaron, whether I shall recover of this
is as follows:
my illness. And an angel of the Lord spoke to
A certain market merchant in the
Elias the Thesbite, saying: Arise, and go up to
town of Spires deposed that the follow¬
meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and
ing experience had happened to him.
say to them: Is there not a God. in Israel, that ye
I was staying, he said, in Swabia in a
go to consult Beelzebub, the god of Hecaron?
Wherefore thus saith the Lord: From the bed on well-known nobleman’s castle, and one
which thou art gone up thou shalt not come down, day after dinner I was strolling at my
but thou shalt surely die.” ease with two of the servants in the

MALEFICARUM
Part II. Question 2. 161
fields, when a woman met us. But his power. And so it has surely proved, \
while she was still a long way off my and you will soon be cured; yet I must
companions recognized her, and one visit you for as many days as you have
of them said to me, “Cross yourself been under this spell.” And he asked
quickly,” and the other one urged me me how many days had passed; and
in like manner. I asked them what when I told him that was the third day,
they feared, and they answered, “The he came to see me on each of the next
most dangerous witch in the whole three days, and merely by examining
Province is coming to meet us, and she and touching my foot and by saying
can cast a spell on men by only looking over to himself certain words, he dis¬
at them.” But I obstinately boasted solved the charm and restored me to
that I had never been afraid of such; complete health.
and hardly had I uttered the words In this case it is clear that the healer
before I felt myself grievously hurt in is not a witch, although his method is
the left foot, so that I could not move something superstitious. For in that he
it from the ground or take a step with¬ promised a cure by the help of God,
out the greatest pain. Whereupon they and not by devils’ work, and that he
quickly sent to the castle for a horse alleged the influence of Saturn over
for me, and thus led me back. But the lead, he was irreproachable and rather
pains went on increasing for three days. to be commended. But there remains
The people of the castle, understand¬ some small doubt as to the power by
ing that I had been bewitched, related which the witch’s spell was removed,
what had happened to a certain peasant and the figures caused in the lead. For Nr
who lived about a mile away, whom no witchcraft can be removed by any
they knew to have skill in removing natural power, although it may be
spells. This man quickly came and, assuaged, as will be proved later where
after examining my foot, said, “I will we speak of the remedies for those who
test whether these pains are due to a are possessed: therefore it seems that
natural cause; and if I find that they he performed this cure by means of
are due to witchcraft, I will cure you at least some tacit pact with a devil.
with the help of God; but if they are And we call such a pact tacit when the
not, you must have recourse to natural practitioner agrees tacitly, at any rate,
remedies.” Whereupon I made reply, to employ the devil’s aid. And in this
“If I can be cured without any magic, way many superstitious works are done,
and with the help of God, I will gladly but with a varying degree of offence to
agree; but I will have nothing to do the Creator, since there may be far
with the devil, nor do I wish for his more offence to Him in one operation
help.” And the peasant promised that than in another.
he would use none except lawful means, Yet because this peasant was certain
and that he would cure me by the of effecting a cure, and because he had
help of God, provided that he could to visit the patient for as many days
make certain that my pains were due as he had been ill, and although he
to witchcraft. So I consented to his used no natural remedies, yet cured
proposals. Then he took molten lead him according to the promise made;
(in the manner of another witch whom for these reasons, although he had
we have mentioned), and held it in an entered into no open pact with the
iron ladle over my foot, and poured it devil, he is to be judged not only as a
into a bowl of water; and immediately suspect, but as one plainly guilty of
there appeared the shapes of various heresy, and must be considered as con¬
things, as if thorns and hairs and bones victed and subject at least to the
and such things had been put into the penalties set out below in the second
bowl. “Now,” he said, “I see that this method of sentencing; but his punish¬
infirmity is not natural, but certainly ment must be accompanied with a
due to witchcraft.” And when I asked solemn adjuration, unless he is pro¬
him how he could tell this from the tected by other laws which seem to be
molten lead, he answered, “There are of a contrary intention; and what the
seven metals belonging to the seven Ordinary should do in such a case will
planets; and since Saturn is the Lord be shown later in the solution of the
of lead, when lead is poured out over arguments.
anyone who has been bewitched, it is his The fourth class of remedies, con¬
property to discover the witchcraft by cerning which the Canonists are in

162 MALLEUS Part II. Question 2.
partial agreement with some of the rather to the remedies of which we
Theologians, is said to be no worse shall speak later, though we have
than idle and vain; since it is super¬ touched upon them before, namely, the
stitious only, and there is no pact use of Holy Water and Blessed Salt and
either open or tacit with the devil as exorcisms, etc.
regards the intention or purpose of the In the same light should be regarded
practitioner. And I say that the Canon¬ those who use the following method.
ists and some Theologians are only When an animal has been killed by
partially agreed that this sort of witchcraft, and they wish to find out
remedy is to be tolerated; for their the witch, or to make certain whether
agreement or non-agreement depends its death was natural or due to witch¬
upon whether or not they class this craft, they go to the place where dead
sort of remedies together with the third animals are skinned, and drag its
sort. But this sort of vain remedy is intestines along the ground up to their
exemplified above in the case of the house; not into the house through the
women who beat a pail hung over the main door, but over the threshold of
fire in order that the witch may be the back entrance into the kitchen;
beaten who has caused a cow to be and then they make a fire and put the
drained of milk; although this may be intestines over it on a hurdle. Then,
done either in the name of the devil or according to what we have very often
without any reference to him. been told, just as the intestines get hot
We may adduce other examples of and burn, so are the intestines of the
the same kind. For sometimes when a witch afflicted with burning pains.*
cow has been injured in this way, and
* .”
they wish to discover who has be¬ “Burning pains The following quotation
“
is from an article Witchcraft, Past and
witched it, they drive it out into the
,” ,
Present by Lady Peirse that appeared in
fields with a man’s trousers, or some,
“ ,”
Word-Lore Vol. I, No. 3 {pp. 122-28),
such unclean thing, upon its head or
May-June, 1926. The district to which refer¬
back. And this they do chiefly on
ence is made is “a south-country village in
Feast Days and Holy Days, and pos¬ ”
England. “A local farmer, whose cows and
sibly with some sort of invocation of
sheep ailed mysteriously, and showed all the
the devil; and they beat the cow with ‘ ’
usual signs of being overlooked or bewitched,
a stick and drive it away. Then the
whilst things in general went wrong with him,
cow runs straight to the house of the consulted the witch doctor, and was told to
witch, and beats vehemently upon the repeat a certain charm last thing at night, to nail
door with its horns, lowing loudly all a sheep's heart to his front door, to bolt and bar
the while; and the devil causes the cow up the house, to sit up alone, and on no account to
to go on doing this until it is pacified open the door till morning, no matter what
by some other witchcraft. happened.
“
This the farmer did, and when his family
Actually, and according to the afore¬
had repaired to bed, he commenced his lonely
said Doctors, such remedies can be
vigil by the kitchen fire. After a while there
tolerated, but they are not meritorious,
came a thunderous knocking on the door, and a
as some try to maintain. For S. Paul
voice crying ‘Open and let me in' The voice was
says that everything which we do, in
very urgent, but the farmer, though he trembled
word or deed, must be done in the
exceedingly, kept firm grip of himself and never
name of Our Lord JESUS Christ. Now
moved from his chair. Then came the knocking a
in this sort of remedy there may be no
second time and a deplorable voice begging to be
direct invocation of the devil, and yet allowed in, but the farmer remained obdurate.
the devil’s name may be mentioned: Lastly came a feeble knocking and moaning. The
and again there may be no intention farmer, who was greatly alarmed, remained at his
to do such things by means of any post till the sun was up next morning. When he
open or tacit pact with the devil, yet opened his door a neighbour lay stretched across
his threshold dead.
a man may say, “I wish to do this,
“
The doctor, so my friend was told, believed
whether the devil has any part in it or
it to be a case of heart failure. We can only
not”; and that very temerity, by put¬
imagine that the farmer and his family remained
ting aside the fear of God, offends God,
silent about the voice and the knocking at the
Who therefore grants the devil power
door; perhaps no one but the farmer had heard.
to accomplish such cures. Therefore
To the doctor, a simple though regrettable
they who use such practices must be
episode; to the farmer, an awesome case of
led into the way of penitence, and
retribution. To the world at large, a story that
urged to leave such things and turn may be interpreted in many different ways; but

Part II. Question 2. MALEFICARUM 163
But when they perform this experiment without their permission, even after the
they take great care that the door is service is finished. And they do it in
securely locked; because the witch is this way. On a Sunday they smear the
compelled by her pains to try to enter shoes of the young men with grease,
the house, and if she can take a coal lard or pigs’ fat, as is their wont when
from the fire, all her pains will dis¬ they wish to repair and renew the
appear. And we have often been told freshness of the leather, and thus the
that, when she is unable to enter the juvenals enter the church, whence it is
house, she surrounds it inside and out impossible for any witches who are )
with the densest fog, with such horrible present to make their way out or depart
shrieks and commotions that at last all until those who are anxious to espy
those in the house think the roof is them either go away themselves or give
verily going to fall down and crush them express leave to make their way
them unless they open the door. to their homes.f
Certain other experiments are of the It is the same with certain words,
same nature. For sometimes people which it is not expedient to mention
pick out the witches from a number of lest anyone should be seduced by the
women in church by causing the devil to use them. For judges and
witches to be unable to leave the church magistrates should not attach too much
weight to the evidence of those who
with a lesson for all who run to ready namely, pretend to discover witches by this
that it does not pay to practise witchcraft or the means, for fear lest the devil, that wily
indulgence of personal spite if there happens to he enemy, should induce them under this
a witch doctor in the neighbourhood, since it is
pretext to defame innocent women.
apparently quite an easy thing, with a little
Therefore such persons must be en¬
occult knowledge, to do the witch to death!
joined to seek the remedy of penitence.
Throughout many centuries witches in the long
However, practices of this kind are on
run always seem to come off second best. Faith
occasion to be tolerated and allowed.
and fear in their victims seem to lend them
In this way we have answered the
strength, just as faith and love help righteous¬
arguments that no spell of witchcraft
ness.”
must be removed. For the first two
Not very many years ago a farmer and his wife
who lived in the country just outside Milan came remedies are altogether unlawful. The
to the conclusion that their daughter, who had third remedy is tolerated by the law,
long been suffering from a mysterious ailment, but needs very careful examination on
which the best doctors in Milan seemed unable to the part of the ecclesiastical judge. And
diagnose and cure, was bewitched by an old what the civil law tolerates is shown in
woman dwelling in their village, a wretch of the chapter on witches, where it is said
notoriously bad reputation, whom the girl had
that those who have skill to prevent
unwittingly offended in some small way.
men’s labours from being vitiated by
Accordingly they resorted to a “wise man,” who
tempests and hailstorms are worthy,
lived in a small town a good many miles distant.
not of punishment, but of reward.
He gave them a bundle of herbs, telling them to
boil these in water and at the same time to recite
S. Antoninus also, in his Summa, points
out this discrepancy between the Canon
a certain rune or rhyme which he taught them.
Law and civil law. Therefore it seems
He told them that if their daughter was indeed
plagued by the malice of some individual, as the
water boiled the witch who had cast the spell f The text of this passage seems corrupt and
would be so tormented that she would hasten to varies considerably in the later editions. The
their house and betray herself by begging them to earliest edition of the “Maileus”__in the British
take the cauldron from the fue. They could then Museum reads: “Nam die dnico sotularia
refuse to do so unless she ait once relieved the girl iuuenu fungia seu pinguedie porci vt moris e p
from her sickness. They precisely obeyed the restauiatoe fieri pungut et sic vbi ecclesia intrat
directions which had been given, and hardly had tadiu malefice exire eccias non poterut quo
the water begun to bubble with the heat than adusq: exploratores aut exeunt aut illis licentia
there came running the hag whom they had sub expssione ut sup exeundi pee dat.” “Die
suspected, imploring them with every symptom of dnico” was almost immediately altered to “die
intense agony to throw away the contents of the dominica.” The usual reading is “die Dominica
pot. This they would not do unless the charm Sotularia, iuuenum fungia . . .” Venice, /576,
was broken. In her despair the old woman introduces a fresh error: “die dominica Solutaria
promised to restore their daughter to health, and iuuenum fungia. . . .” The Lyons text of i66g
from that time the child rapidly began to mend has an excellent emendation, which is, no doubt,
until she was as stout and sturdy as any lass in correct: “die Dominica Sotularia iuuenum
the whole country-side. axungia. ...”

164 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2-. Gh. 1
that the civil law concedes the legality human beings by means of Incubus and
of such practices for the preservation Succubus devils, it is to be noted that
of crops and cattle, and that in any this can happen in three ways. First,
event certain men who use such arts as in the case of witches themselves,
are not only to be tolerated but even when women voluntarily prostitute
rewarded. Wherefore the ecclesiastical themselves to Incubus devils. Secondly;
judge must take particular note whether when men have connexion with Succu¬
the methods used in counteraction of bus devils; yet it does not appear that
hailstorms and tempests are within the men thus devilishly fornicate with the
spirit of the law, or whether they are same full degree of culpability; for
in any way superstitious; and then, if men, being by nature intellectually
no scandal to the Faith is involved, stronger than women, are more apt to
they can be tolerated. But actually this abhor such practices. Thirdly, it may
does not belong to the third method, happen that men or women are by
but to the fourth, and also to the fifth, witchcraft entangled with Incubi or
of which we shall speak later in the Succubi against their will. This chiefly
following chapters, where we deal with happens in the case of certain virgins
the ecclesiastical and lawful remedies, who are molested by Incubus devils
with which are sometimes included wholly against their will; and it would
certain superstitious practices belonging seem that such are bewitched by
to the fourth method. witches who, just as they very often
cause other infirmities, cause devils to
molest such virgins in the form of
☆ Incubi for the purpose of seducing
*
them into joining their vile company.
Let us give an example.
CHAPTER I
? There is in the town of Coblenz a
oor man who is bewitched in this way.
The Remedies prescribed by Holy Church
n the presence of his wife he is in the
against Incubus and Succubus Devils.
I habit of acting after the manner of
N the foregoing chapters on the men with women, that is to say, of
First Question we have treated of practising coition, as it were, and he
the methods of bewitching men, animals continues to do this repeatedly, nor
and the fruits of the earth, and espe¬ have the cries and urgent appeals of
cially of the behaviour of witches in his wife any effect in making him desist.
their own persons; how they seduce And after he has fornicated thus two or
young girls in order to increase their three times, he bawls out, “We are
evil numbers; what is their method of going to start all over again”; when
profession and of offering homage; actually there is no person visible to
how they offer to devils their own chil¬ mortal sight lying with him. And after
dren and the children of others; and an incredible number of such bouts,
how they are transported from place the poor man at last sinks to the floor
to place. Now I say that there is utterly exhausted. When he has re¬
no remedy for such practices, unless covered his strength a little and is
witches be entirely eradicated by the asked how this has happened to him,
judges, or at least punished as an and whether he has had any woman
example to all who may wish to with him, he answers that he saw
imitate them; but we are not imme¬ nothing, but that his mind is in some
diately treating of this point, which way possessed so that he can by no
will be dealt with in the last Part of means refrain from such priapism. And
this work, where we set forth the indeed he harbours a great suspicion
twenty ways of proceeding against and that a certain woman bewitched him
sentencing witches. in this way, because he had offended
For the present we are concerned her, and she had cursed him with
only with the remedies against the threatening words, telling him what
injuries which they inflict; and first she would like to happen to him.
f
how men who are bewitched can be But there are no laws or ministers of
cured; secondly, beasts, and thirdly, justice which can proceed to the
how the fruits of the earth may be avenging of so great a crime with no
secured from blight or phylloxera. other warrant than a vague charge or
With regard to the bewitchment of a grave suspicion; for it is held that

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 1 MALEFICARUM 165
no one ought to be condemned unless Brabant, told me the following con¬
he has been convicted by his own con¬ cerning this same woman. On the vigil
fession, or by the evidence of three of one Pentecost the woman came to
trustworthy witnesses; since the mere her complaining that she dared not
fact of the crime coupled with even the take the Sacrament because of the im¬
gravest suspicions against some person portunate molestation of a devil.
is not sufficient to warrant the punish¬ Christina, pitying her, said: “Go, and
ment of that person. But this matter rest assured that you will receive the
will be dealt with later. Body of Our Lord to-morrow; for I
As for instances where young maidens will take your punishment upon my¬
are molested by Incubus devils in this self.” So she went away joyfully, and
way, it would take too long to mention after praying that night slept in peace,
even those that have been known to and rose up in the morning and com¬
happen in our own time, for there are municated in all tranquillity of soul.
very many well-attested stories of such But Christina, not* thinking of the
bewitchments. But the great difficulty punishment she had taken upon her¬
of finding a remedy for such afflictions self, went to her rest in the evening, and
can be illustrated from a story told as she lay in bed heard, as it were, a
by Thomas of Brabant in his Book on violent attack being made upon her;
Bees. and, seizing whatever it was by the
I saw, he writes, and heard the con¬ throat, tried to throw it off. She lay
fession of a virgin in a religious habit, down again, but was again molested,
who said at first that she had never and rose up in terror; and this hap¬
been a consenting party to fornication, pened many times, whilst all the straw
but at the same time gave me to under¬ of her bed was turned over and thrown
stand that she had been known in this about everywhere, so at length she per¬
way. This I could not believe, but ceived that she was being persecuted by
narrowly charged and exhorted her, the malice of a devil. Thereupon she
with the most solemn adjurations, to left her pallet, and passed a sleepless
speak the truth on peril of her very night; and when she wished to pray,
soul. At last, weeping bitterly, she she was so tormented by the devil that
acknowledged that she had been cor¬ she said she had never suffered so much
rupted rather in mind than in body; before. In the morning, therefore, say¬
and that though she had afterwards ing to the other woman, “I renounce
grieved almost to death, and had daily your punishment, and I am hardly
confessed with tears, yet by no device alive to renounce it,” she escaped from
or study or art could she be delivered the violence of that wicked tempter.
from an Incubus* devil, nor yet by the From this it can be seen how difficult
sign of the Cross, nor by Holy Water, it is to cure this sort of evil, whether or
which are specially ordained for the not it is due to witchcraft.
expulsion of devils, nor even by the However, there are still some means
Sacrament of the Body of Our Lord, by which these devils may be driven
which even the Angels fear. But at last away, of which Nider writes in his
after many years of prayer and fasting Formicarius. He says that there are five
she was delivered. ways by which girls or men can be
It may be believed (saving a better delivered: first, by Sacramental Con¬
judgement) that, after she repented and fession; second, by the Sacred Sign of
confessed her sin, the Incubus devil the Cross, or by the recital of the
should be regarded rather in the light Angelic Salutation; third, by the use
of a punishment for sin than as a sin of exorcisms; fourth, by moving to
xn itself. another place; and fifth, by means of
A devout nun, named Christina, in excbmmunication prudently employed
the Low Country of the Duchy of by holy men. It is evident from what
has been said that the first two methods
* “Incubus ” Sinistrari tells of a case which
did not avail the nun; but they are not
came under his own notice when a deacon, a monk
on that account to be neglected, for
of the Certosa at Pavia, was sorely vexed by an
that which cures one person does not
Incubus. Exorcisms seemed unavailing; the
Incubus himself in the shape of Father Prior necessarily cure another, and conversely.
blessed the place with Holy Water. However, And it is a recorded fact that Incubus
the demon was at last banished. See my trans¬ devils have often been driven away by
lation, “Demoniality,” pp. 57-59, and passim. the Lord’s Prayer, or by the sprinkling

MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 1
166
of Holy Water, and also especially by William of Paris notes also that Incubi
the Angelic Salutation. seem chiefly to molest women and girls
For S. Gaesarius* tells in his Dialogue with beautiful hair; either because they
that, after a certain priest had hanged devote themselves too much to the care
himself, his concubine entered a con¬ and adornment of their hair, or be¬
vent, where she was carnally solicited cause they are wont to try to excite
by an Incubus. She drove him away men by means of their hair, or because
by crossing herself and using Holy they are boastfully vain about it, or
Water, yet he immediately returned. because God in His goodness permits
But when she recited the Angelic this so that women may be afraid to
Salutation, he vanished like an arrow entice men by the very means by which
shot from a bow; still he came back, the devils wish them to entice men.
although he did not dare to come near The fifth method, that of excom¬
her, because of that Ave MARIA. munication, which is perhaps the same
S. Caesarius also refers to the remedy as exorcism, is exemplified in a history
of Sacramental Confession. For he says of S. Bernard. In Aquitaine a woman
that the aforesaid concubine was en¬ had for six years been molested by an
tirely abandoned by the Incubus after Incubus with incredible carnal abuse
she was clean confessed. He tells also and lechery; and she heard the Incubus
of a man in Leyden who was plagued threaten her that she must not go near
by a Succubus, and was entirely de¬ the holy man, who was coming that
livered after Sacramental Confession. way, saying: “It will avail you nothing:
He adds yet another example, of an for when he has gone away, I, who have \
enclosed nun, a contemplative, whom till now been your lover, will become I
an Incubus would not leave in spite of the cruellest of tyrants to you.” None)
prayers and confession and other re¬ the less she went to S. Bernard, and he
ligious exercises. For he persisted in said to her: “Take my staff and set it
forcing his way to her bed. But when, in your bed, and may the devil do
acting on the advice of a certain re¬ what he can.” When she had done this,
ligious man, she uttered the word Bene¬ the devil did not dare to enter the
dicite, the devil at once left her. woman’s room, but threatened her
Of the fourth method, that of moving terribly from outside, saying that he
to another place, he says that a certain would persecute her when S. Bernard
priest’s daughter had been defiled by had gone away. When S.. Bernard
an Incubus and driven frantic with heard this from the woman, he called
grief; but when she went far away the people together, bidding them
across the Rhine, she was left in peace carry lighted candles in their hands,
by the Incubus. Her father, however, and, with the whole assembly which
because he had sent her away, was so was gathered, excommunicated the
afflicted by the devil that he died within devil, forbidding him evermore to
three days. approach that woman or any other.
He also mentions a woman who was And so she was delivered from that
often molested by an Incubus in her punishment.
own bed, and asked a devout friend of Here it is to be noted that the power
hers to come and sleep with her. She of the Keys granted to S. Peter and
did so, and was troubled all night with his successors, which resounds on the
the utmost uneasiness and disquiet, and earth, is really a power of healing
then the first woman was left in peace. granted to the Church on behalf of
travellers who are subject to the juris¬
* “Caesarius.” A learned monk of the diction of the Papal power; therefore
Cistercian monastery of Heisterhach near Bonn, it seems wonderful that even the Powers
born about nyo at Cologne, died about 124.0 as of the air can be warded off by this
Prior of Heisterbach. Abbot Henry requested
virtue. But it must be remembered
Caesarius to draw up an abstract of his teaching,
that persons who are molested by devils
and this resulted in the famous “Dialogus magnus
are under the jurisdiction of the Pope
uisionum atque miraculorum, Libri XIIf which
and his Keys; and therefore it is not
it is no exaggeration to say was probably the
surprising if such Powers are indirectly
most popular book in Germany of its period.
kept at bay by the virtue of the Keys,
More than fifty MSS. are extant, and seven
just as by the same virtue the souls in
printed editions are known. The latest, two
volumes, was edited by Strange, Cologne, i8ji; purgatory can indirectly be delivered
an index to this followed, Coblenz, 1857. from the pains of the fire; inasmuch as

II. Ch. 2 MALEFICARUM 167
Part Qn 2.
this Power availeth upon the earth, suffering from a melancholy disease,
ay, and to the relief of souls that are especially to women, as is shown by
under the earth. their dreams and visions. And the
But it is not seemly to discuss the reason for this, as physicians know, is
Power of the Keys granted to the Head that women’s souls are by nature far
of the Church as Christ’s Vicar; since more easily and lightly impressionable
it is known that, for the use of the than men’s souls. And he adds: I know
Church, Christ granted to the Church that I have seen a woman who thought
and His Vicar as much power as it is that a devil copulated with her from
possible for God to grant to mere man. inside, and said she was physically
And it is piously to be believed that, conscious of such incredible things.
when infirmities inflicted by witches At times also women think they have
through the power of devils, together been made pregnant by an Incubus,
with the witches and devils themselves, and their bellies grow to an enormous
are excommunicated, those who were size; but when the time of parturition
afflicted will no longer be tormented; comes, their swelling is relieved by no
and that they will be delivered all the more than the expulsion of a great
sooner by the use of other lawful quantity of wind. For by taking ants’
exorcisms in addition. eggs in drink, or the seeds of spurge or
There is a common report current in of the black pine, an incredible amount
the districts of the river Etsch, as also of wind and flatulence is generated in
in other places, that by the permission the human stomach. And it is very easy
of God a swarm of locusts came and for the devil to cause these and even
devoured all the vines, green leaves greater disorders in the stomach. This
and crops; and that they were sud- has been set down in order that too
denly put to flight and dispersed by easy credence should not be given to
means of this kind of excommunica¬ women, but only to those whom ex¬
tion and cursing. Now if any wish that perience has shown to be trustworthy,
this should be ascribed to some holy and to those who, by sleeping in their
man, and not to the virtue of the Keys, beds or near by them, know for a fact
let it be so, in the name of the Lord; that such things as we have spoken of
but of one thing we are certain, that are true.
both the power to perform miracles and
☆
the power of the Keys necessarily pre¬
suppose a condition of grace in him
CHAPTER II
who performs that act of grace, since
both these powers proceed from grace
Remedies prescribed for Those who are
granted to men who are in a state of
Bewitched by the Limitation of the
grace.
Generative Power.
Again, it is to be noted that, if none A
of the aforesaid remedies are of any LTHOUGH far more women are
avail, then recourse must be had to witches than men, as was shown
the usual exorcisms, of which we shall in the First Part of the work, yet men
treat later. And if even these are not are more often bewitched than women.
sufficient to banish the iniquity of the And the reason for this lies in the fact
devil, then that affliction must be con¬ that God allows the devil more power
sidered to be an expiatory punishment over the venereal act, by which the
for sin, which should be borne in all original sin is handed down, than over
meekness, as are other ills of this sort other human actions. In the same way
which oppress us that they may, as it He allows more witchcraft to be per¬
were, drive us to seek God. formed by means of serpents, which
But it must also be remarked that are more subject to incantations than
sometimes persons only think that they other animals, because that was the
are molested by an Incubus when they first instrument of the devil. And the
are not so actually; and this is more venereal act can be more readily and
apt to be the case with women than easily bewitched in a man than in a
' with men, for they are more timid and woman, as has been clearly shown. For
liable to imagine extraordinary things. there are five ways in which the devil
In this connexion William of Paris is can impede the act of generation, and
often quoted. He says: Many phan- they are more easily operated against
tastical apparitions occur to persons men.

168 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Gh. 2
As far as possible we shall set out the Succubus or Incubus devils. Moreover,
remedies which can be applied in each if he does not find his wife repellent,
separate kind of obstruction; and let and yet cannot know her, bjit can know
him who is bewitched in this faculty other women, then again it is the second
take note to which class of obstruction way; but if he finds her repellent and
his belongs. For there are five classes, cannot copulate with her, then it is the
according to Peter a Palude in his second and the third way. If he does
Fourth Book, dist. 34, of the trial of not find her repellent and wishes to
this sort of bewitchment. have connexion with her, but has no
For the devil, being a spirit, has by power in his member, then it is the
his very nature power, with God’s per¬ fourth way. But if he has power in his
mission, over a bodily creature, espe¬ member, yet cannot emit his semen,
cially to promote or to prevent local then it is the fifth way. The method of
motion. So by this power they can pre¬ curing these will be shown where we
vent the bodies of men and women consider whether those who live in
from approaching each other; and this grace and those who do not «are equally
either directly or indirectly. Directly, liable to be bewitched in these manners;
when they remove one to a distance and we answer that they are not, with
from another, and do not allow him to the exception of the fourth manner, and
approach the other. Indirectly, when even then very rarely. For such an
they cause some obstruction, or when affliction can happen to a man living
they interpose themselves in an assumed in grace and righteousness; but the
body. So it happened to that young reader must understand that in this
Pagan who had married an idol, but case we speak of the conjugal act
none the less contracted a marriage between married people; for in any
with a girl; but because of this he was other case they are all liable to be¬
unable to copulate with her, as has witchment ; for every venereal act out¬
been shown above. side wedlock is a mortal sin, and is only
Secondly, the devil can inflame a committed by those who are not in a
man towards one woman and render state of grace.
him impotent towards another; and We have, indeed, the authority of
this he can secretly cause by the applica¬ the whole of Scriptural teaching that
tion of certain herbs or other matters God allows the devil to afflict sinners
of which he well knows the virtue for more than the just. For although that
this purpose. most just man, Job, was stricken, yet
Thirdly, he can disturb the apper¬ he was not so particularly or directly
ception of a man or a woman, so that in respect of the procreant function.
he makes one appear hideous to the And it may be said that, when a
other; for, as has been shown, he can married couple are afflicted in this way,
influence the imagination. either both the parties or one of them
Fourthly, he can suppress the vigour is not living in a state of grace; and
of that member which is necessary for this opinion is substantiated in the
procreation; just as he can deprive any Scriptures both by authority and by
organ of the power of local motion. reason. For the Angel said to Tobias :*
Fifthly, he can prevent the flow of The devil receives power against those
the semen to the members in which is who are given over to lust: and he
the motive power, by as it were closing proved it in the slaying of the seven
the seminal duct so that it does not husbands of the virgin Sara.
descend to the genital vessels, or does Cassian, in his Collation of the
not ascend again from them, or cannot Fathers, quotes S. Antony as saying
come forth, or is spent vainly. that the devil can in no way enter our
But if a man should say: I do not mind or body unless he has first deknow by which of these different
* “Tobias.” “Tobias” vi, 16 and /7: Then
methods I have been bewitched; all I
the angel Raphael said to him: Hear me, and I
know is that I cannot do anything with
will show thee who they are, over whom the
my wife: he should be answered in this
devil can prevail. For they who in such manner
j
way. If he is active and able with regard
receive matrimony as to shut out God from them¬
to other women, but not with his wife,
selves, and from their mind, and to give them¬
then he is bewitched in the second way;
selves to their lust, as the horse and mule, which
for he can be certified as to the first have not understanding, over them the devil hath
way, that he is being deluded by power.

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 2 MALEFICARUM 169
prived it of all holy thoughts and made already contracted is annulled, unless,
it empty and bare of spiritual contem¬ like Our Blessed Lady and S. Joseph,
plation. These words should not be they are willing to live together in holy
applied to an evil affliction over the continence. This opinion is supported
whole of the body, for when Job was by the Canon where it says (23, q. 1)
so afflicted he was not denuded of that a marriage is confirmed by the
Divine grace; but they have particular carnal act. And a little later it says
reference to a particular infirmity in¬ that impotence before such confirma¬
flicted upon the body for some sin. tion dissolves the ties of marriage.
And the infirmity we are considering Or else the disability follows the con¬
can only be due to the sin of incon¬ summation of a marriage, and then it
tinence. For, as we have said, God does not dissolve the bonds of matri¬
allows the devil more power over that mony. Much more to this effect is
act than over other human acts, noted by the Doctors, where in various
because of its natural nastiness, and writings they treat of the obstruction
because by it the first sin was handed due to witchcraft; but since it is not
down to posterity. Therefore when precisely relevant to the present inquiry,
people joined in matrimony have for it is here omitted. *
some sin been deprived of Divine help, But some may find it difficult to
God allows them to be bewitched understand how this function can be
chiefly in their procreant functions. obstructed in respect of one woman but
But if it is asked of what sort are not of another. S. Bonaventura answers
those sins, it can be said, according to that this may be because some witch
S. Jerome, that even in a state of matri¬ has persuaded the devil to effect this
mony it is possible to commit the sin of only with respect to one woman, or
incontinence in various ways. See the because God will not allow the obstruc¬
text: He who loves his wife to excess is tion to apply save to some particular
an adulterer. And they who love in woman. The judgement of God in this
this way are more liable to be be¬ matter is a mystery, as in the case of
witched after the manner we have said. the wife of Tobias. But how the devil
The remedies of the Church, then, procures this disability is plainly shown
are twofold: one applicable in the by what has already been said. And
public court, the other in the tribunal S. Bonaventura says that he obstructs
of the confessional. As for the first, the procreant function, not intrinsically
when it has been publicly found that by harming the organ, but extrinsically
the impotence is due to witchcraft, then by impeding its use; and it is an
it must be distinguished whether it is artificial, not a natural impediment;
temporary or permanent. If it is only and so he can cause it to apply to one
temporary, ii does not annul the mar¬ woman and not to another. Or else he
riage. And it is assumed to be tem¬ takes away all desire for one or another
porary if, within the space of three woman; and this he does by his own
years, by using every possible expedient power, or else by means of some herb
of the Sacraments of the Church and or stone or some occult creature. And
other remedies, a cure can be caused. in this he is in substantial agreement
But if, after that time, they cannot be with Peter a Palude.
cured by any remedy, then it is assumed The ecclesiastical remedy in the
to be permanent. tribunal of God is set forth in the
Now the disability either precedes Canon where it says: If with the per¬
both the contract and the consummation mission of the just and secret judgement
of marriage; and in this case it impedes of God, through the arts of sorceresses
the contract: or it follows the contract and witches and the preparation of the
but precedes the consummation; and devil, men are bewitched in their pro¬
in this case it annuls the contract. For creant function, they are to be urged
men are very often bewitched in this to make clean confession to God and
way because they have cast off their His priest of all their sins with a con¬
former mistresses, who, hoping that trite heart and a humble spirit; and to
they were to be married and being make satisfaction to God with many
disappointed, so bewitch the men that tears and large offerings and prayers
they cannot copulate with another and fasting.
woman. And in such a case, according From these words it is clear that such
to the opinion of many, the marriage afflictions are only on account of sin,
N

170 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Gh. 3
and occur only to those who do not own concerns to inquire into those of
live in a state of grace. It proceeds to other people; and such a soul is
tell how the ministers of the Church seduced by bad habits, and is led to
can effect a cure by means of exorcisms consent to unlawful practices.
and the other protections and cures The second cause arises from the
provided by the Church. In this way, temptation of devils. In this way Amwith the help of God, Abraham cured non loved his beautiful sister Tamar,
by his prayers Abimelech and his and was so vexed that he fell sick for
house.* love of her (ii. Samuel xiii). For he
In conclusion we may say that there could not have been so totally corrupt
are five remedies which may lawfully in his mind as to fall into so great a
be applied to those who are bewitched crime of incest unless he Lad been
in this way: namely, a pilgrimage to grievously tempted by the devil. The
some holy and venerable shrine; true book of the Holy Fathers refers to this
confession of their sins with contrition; kind of love, where it says that even in
the plentiful use of the sign of the Cross their hermitages they were exposed to
and devout prayer; lawful exorcism by every temptation, including that of
solemn words, the nature of which will carnal desire; for some of them were
be explained later; and lastly, a remedy at times tempted with the love of
can be effected by prudently approach¬ women more than it is possible to
ing the witch, as was shown in the case believe. S. Paul also says, in II. Cor¬
of the Count who for three years was inthians xii: There was given to me a
unable to cohabit carnally with a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
virgin whom he had married. Satan to buffet me: and the gloss
explains this as referring to the tempta¬
tion of lust.
☆
But it is said that when a man does
not give way to temptation he does not
CHAPTER III
sin, but it is an exercise for his virtue;
but this is to be understood of the
Remedies prescribed for those who are Be¬
temptation of the devil, not of that of
witched by being Inflamed with In¬
the flesh; for this is a venial sin even
ordinate Love or Extraordinary Hatred.
J if a man does not yield to it. Many
examples of this are to be read.
UST as the generative faculty can
As for the third cause, by which
be bewitched, so can inordinate love
inordinate love proceeds from devils’
or hatred be caused in the human mind.
and witches’ works, the possibility of
First we shall consider the cause of this,
this sort of witchcraft has been exhaus¬
and then, as far as possible, the
tively considered in the Questions of
remedies.
the First Part as to whether devils
Philocaptiony or inordinate love of one
through the agency of witches can turn
person for another, can be caused in
the minds of men to inordinate love or
three ways. Sometimes it is due merely
hatred, and it was proved by examples
to a lack of control over the eyes ;
which had fallen within our own ex¬
sometimes to the temptation of devils;
perience. Indeed this is the best known
sometimes to the spells of necromancers
and most general form of witchcraft.
and witches, with the help of devils.
But the following question may be
The first is spoken of in S. James i.
asked: Peter has been seized with an
14, 15: Every man is tempted by his own
inordinate love of this description, but
concupiscence, being drawn away and
he does not know whether it is due to
allured. Then when concupiscence hath
the first or the second or the third
conceived, it bringeth forth sin: but
cause. It must be answered that it can
sin, when it is completed, begetteth
be by the work of the devil that hatred
death. And so, when Shechem saw
is stirred up between married people
Dinah going out to see the daughters
so as to cause the crime of adultery.
of the land, he loved her, and ravished
But when a man is so bound in the
her, and lay with her, and his soul
clave unto her (Genesis xxxiv). And meshes of carnal lust and desire that he
can be made to desist from it by no
here the gloss says that this happened
shame, words, blows or action; and
to an infirm spirit because she left her
when a man often puts away his beauti¬
* “Abimelech.” “Genesis” xx. ful wife to cleave to the most hideous

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 3 MALEFICARUM 171
of women, and when he cannot rest in cines may be applied, concerning which
the night, but is so demented that he he gives instructions. Or the sick man
must go by devious ways to his mis¬ may be turned from his love by lawful
tress; and when it is found that those remedies which will cause him to
of noblest birth, Governors, and other direct his love to a more worthy object.
j rich men, are the most miserably in¬ Or he may avoid her presence, and so
volved in this sin (for this age is domi¬ distract his mind from her. Or, if he is w
nated by women, and was foretold by open to correction, he may be admon¬
S. Hildegard,* as Vincent of Beauvais ished and expostulated with, to the
records in the Mirror of History, although effect that such love is the greatest
he said it would not endure for as long misery. Or he may be directed to some¬
as it already has); and when the world one who, as far as he may with God’s
is now full of adultery, especially truth, will vilify the body and disposi¬
among the most highly born; when all tion of his love, and so blacken her
this is considered, I say, of what use is character that she may appear to him
it to speak of remedies to those who altogether base and deformed. Or,
desire no remedy? Nevertheless, for finally, he is to be set to arduous duties
the satisfaction of the pious reader, we which may distract his thoughts.
will set down briefly some of the
Indeed, just as the animal nature of
remedies for Philocaption when it is not a man may be cured by such remedies,
due to witchcraft.
so may they all be of use in reforming
Avicenna mentions seven remedies his inner spirit. Let a man obey the
which may be used when a man is law of his intellect rather than that of
made physically ill by this sort of love; nature, let him turn his love to safe
but they are hardly relevant to our pleasures, let him remember how
inquiry except in so far as they may be
momentary is the fruition of lust and
of service to the sickness of the soul.
how eternal the punishment, let him
For he says, in Book III, that the root
seek his pleasure in that life where joys
of the sickness may be discovered by begin never to end, and let him con¬
feeling the pulse and uttering the name
sider that if he cleaves to his earthly
of the object of the patient’s love; and
love, that will be his sole reward, but
then, if the law permits, he may be
he will lose the bliss of Heaven, and be
married to her, and so be cured by
condemned to eternal fire: behold!
yielding to nature. Or certain medithe three irrecoverable losses which
proceed from inordinate lust.
* “S. Hildegard.” Born at Bockelheim on the
With regard to Philocaption caused by
Kobe, 1098; died on the Rupertsberg near
witchcraft, the remedies detailed in the
Bingen, 1179. This great Benedictine seeress
preceding chapter may not inconveni¬
and prophetess has been called the Sibyl of the
ently be applied here also; especially
Rhine. From her earliest years she was favoured
the exorcisms by sacred words which
with visions, and when she was aged about forty
the bewitched person can himself use.
she received a Divine command to publish to the
Let him daily invoke the Guardian
world what she had seen and heard. After much
Angel deputed to him by God, let him
hesitation owing to her humility she obeyed, and
™ a41 she commenced her profound treatise use confession and frequent the shrines
“Scivias” (“scire uias Domini”), which occupied of the Saints, especially of the Blessed
her for ten years. It is ecstatic and prophetic Virgin, and without doubt he will be
throughout, and demands profoundest study. delivered.
Herwegen, “Kirchi. Handlexikon” (1908), But how abject are those strong men
remarks that in order fully to appreciate this who, discarding their natural gifts and
marvellous writer a new and critical edition of her
the armour of virtue, cease to defend
writings must be prepared, a task entailing
themselves; whereas the girls them¬
immense labour and research. No formal
selves in their invincible frailty use
canonization of S. Hildegard has taken place,
those very rejected weapons to repel
but many miracles were wrought at her inter¬
this kind of witchcraft. We give one
cession, and her name is in the Roman Martyrout of many examples in their praise.
ology. The feast is celebrated on 17 September
There was in a country village near
in the dioceses oj Speyer, Mainz, Trier and
Limburg, and by the Solesmes monks on 18 Lindau in the diocese of Constance
September with a proper Office. The Relics of a grown maid fair to see and of even
the Saint are at Eibingen, of which town she is more elegant behaviour, at sight of
patron. The convent cf S. Hildegard there was whom a certain man of loose princi¬
formally constituted on 17 September, 1904. ples, a cleric in sooth, but not a priest,

172 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Gh. 3
was smitten with violent pangs of love. miraculously consecrated in that dio¬
And being unable to conceal the wound cese to the Mother of God. There she
in his heart any longer, he went to the confessed her sins, so that no evil spirit
place where the girl was working, and could enter her, and after her prayers
with fair words showed that he was in to the Mother of Pity all the devil’s
the net of the devil, beginning by ven¬ machinations against her ceased, so
turing in words only to persuade the that these evil crafts thenceforth never
girl to grant him her love. She, per¬ afflicted her.
ceiving by Divine instinct his meaning, None the less there are still some
and being chaste in mind and body, strong men cruelly enticed by witches
bravely answered him: Master, do not to this sort of love, so that it would
come to my house with such words, for seem that they could never restrain
themselves from their inordinate lust
modesty itself forbids. To this he re¬
plied: Although you will not be per¬ for them, yet these often most manfully
suaded by gentle words to love me, yet resist the temptation of lewd and filthy
I promise you that soon you will be enticements, and by the aforesaid de¬
compelled by my deeds to love me. fences overcome all the wiles of the
Now that man was a suspected en¬ devil.
chanter and wizard. The maiden con¬ A rich young man in the town of
sidered his words as but empty air, and Innsbruck provides us with a notable
until then felt in herself no spark of pattern of this sort of struggle. He was
carnal love for him; but after a short so importuned by witches that it is
time she began to have amorous hardly possible for pen to describe his
thoughts. Perceiving this, and being strivings, but he always kept a brave
inspired by God, she sought the pro¬ heart, and escaped by means of the
tection of the Mother of Mercy, and remedies we have mentioned. There¬
devoutly implored Her to intercede fore it may justly be concluded that
with Her Son to help her. Anxious, these remedies are infallible against
moreover, to enjoy the society of pious this disease, and that they who use
folk, she went on a pilgrimage to a such weapons will most surely be
hermitage,* where there was a church delivered.
And it must be understood that what
we have said concerning inordinate
* “Hermitage.” The famous shrine of Our
love applies also to inordinate hatred,
Lady of the Hermits, at the Benedictine Abbey of
Einsiedeln, in the Canton of Schwyz, Switzer- since the same discipline is of benefit
land. S. Meinrad, who was assassinated by for the two opposite extremes. But
bandits in 861, had embraced the solitary life and though the degree of witchcraft is equal
established his hermitage on the slopes of Mount in each, yet there is this difference in
Etzel, when he built a small oratory for the the case of hatred; the person who is
wonder-working statue of Our Lady which had hated must seek another remedy. For
been given him by Abbess Hildegard of Zurich.
the man who hates his wife and puts
Several anchorites succeeded him, and one of
her out of his heart will not easily, if
these, by name Eberhard, erected a monastery and
he is an adulterer, be turned back
church there. This fane was miraculously con¬
again to his wife, even though he go
secrated in 948 by Christ Himself, assisted by the
on many a pilgrimage.
Four Evangelists, S. Peter and S. Gregory the
Now it has been learned from
Great. Even the rationalistic Father Thurston,
witches that they cause this spell of
S.J., will be unable to impugn this holy marvel,
as it was investigated and confirmed by Pope Leo hatred by means of serpents; for the
VIII, and subsequently ratified by many a serpent was the first instrument of the
Pontiff, the last being Pius VI, who in 1793 con¬ devil, and by reason of its curse inherits
firmed the acts of all his predecessors. The a hatred of women; therefore they
miraculous statue is enthroned in a little chapel cause such spells by placing the skin or
which stands within the great abbey church in head of a serpent under the threshold
much the same way as the Holy House at Loreto,
of a room or house. For this reason all
encased in marbles and elaborate wood-work, the
the nooks and corners of the house
goal of ten thousand pilgrimages. The two chief
where such a woman lives are to be
days are the fourteenth of September and the
closely examined and reconstructed as
thirteenth of October, the first being the anni¬
far as possible; or else she must be
versary of the Divine consecration of Eberhard’s
lodged in the houses of others:
basilica, the second that of the translation of the
And when it is said that bewitched
Relics of S. Meinrad from Reichenau to Ein¬
men can exorcise themselves, it is to be
siedeln in 1039.

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 4 MALEFICARUM
173
understood that they can wear the remedies to be used are those set out in
sacred words or benedictions or incan¬ the Third Part of this work, where we
tations round their necks, if they are deal with the extermination of witches
unable to read or pronounce the bene¬ by the secular arm of the law.
dictions; but it will be shown later in But in the East the following remedy
what way this should be done. is used for such delusions. For we have
learned much of this matter from the
☆ Knights of the Order of S. John of
Jerusalem in Rhodes; and especially
this case which happened in the city of
CHAPTER IV
Salamis in the kingdom of Cyprus. For
Remedies prescribed for those who by that is a seaport, and once when a vessel
Prestidigitatory Art have lost their was being laden with merchandise
Virile Members or have seemingly been suitable for a ship which is sailing into
Transformed into the Shapes of Beasts. foreign parts, and all her company were
I
providing themselves with victuals, one
N what has already been written it of them, a strong young man, went to
has clearly enough been shown the the house of a woman standing outside
remedies which are available for the the city on the seashore, and asked her
relief of those who are deluded by a if she had any eggs to sell. The woman,
glamour, and think that they have lost seeing that he was a strong young man,
their virile member, or have been and a merchant far away from his own
metamorphosed into animals. For since country, thought that on that account
such men are entirely destitute of the people of the city would feel less
Divine grace, according to the essen¬ suspicion if he were to be lost, and said
tial condition of those who are so be¬ to him: “Wait a little, and I will get
witched, it is not possible to apply a you all that you want.” And when she
healing salve while the weapon still went in and shut the door and kept him
remains in the wound. Therefore be¬ waiting, the young man outside began
fore all things they must be reconciled to call out to her to hurry, lest he should
to God by a good confession. Again, miss the ship. Then the woman brought
as was shown in the seventh chapter of some eggs and gave them to the young
the First Question of the Second Part, man, and told him to hurry back to the
such members are never actually taken ship in case he should miss it. So he
away from the body, bujt are only hastened back to the ship, which was
hidden by a glamour from the senses of anchored by the shore, and before going
sight and touch. It is clear, too, that on board, since the full company of his
those who live in grace are not so companions was not yet returned, he
easily deluded in this way, either decided to eat the eggs there and re¬
actively or passively, in such a manner, fresh himself. And behold! an hour
that is, that they seem to lose their later he was made dumb as if he had no
members, or that those of others should power of speech; and, as he afterwards
appear to them to be missing. There¬ said, he wondered what could have
fore the remedy as well as the disease is happened to him, but was unable to
explained in that chapter, namely, that find out. Yet when he wished to go on
they should as far as possible come to board, he was driven off with sticks by
an amicable agreement with the witch those who yet remained ashore, and
herself. who all cried out: “Look what this ass
As to those who think that they have is doing! Curse the beast, you are not
been changed into beasts, it must be coming on board.” The young man
known that this kind of witchcraft is being thus driven away, and under¬
more practised in Eastern countries standing from their words that they
than in the West; that is to say, in the thought he was an ass, reflected and
East witches more often bewitch other began to suspect that he had been be¬
people in this way, but it appears that witched by the woman, especially since
the witches so transform themselves he could utter no word, although he
more frequently in our part of the understood all that was said. And
world; namely, when they change when, on again trying to board the
themselves, in full sight, into the shapes ship, he was driven off with heavier
of animals, as was told in the eighth blows, he was in bitterness of heart
chapter. Therefore in their case the compelled to remain and watch the

MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Gh. 4
174
ship sail away. And so, as he ran here fear of being driven off with blows,
and there, since everybody thought he knelt down outside by bending the
was an ass, he was necessarily treated as knees of his hind legs, and lifted his
such. At last, -under compulsion, he forelegs, that is, his hands, joined to¬
went back to the woman’s house, and gether over his ass’s head, as it was
to keep himself alive served her at her thought to be, and looked upon the
leasure for three years, doing no work elevation of the Sacrament.* And
ut to bring to the house such neces¬ when some Genoese merchants saw this
sities as wood and corn, and to carry prodigy, they followed the ass in
away what had to be carried away like astonishment, discussing this marvel
a beast of burden: the only consolation among themselves; and behold! the
that was left to him being that although witch came and belaboured the ass
everyone else took him for an ass, the with her stick. And because, as we
witches themselves, severally and in have said, this sort of witchcraft is
company, who frequented the house, better known in those parts, at the in¬
recognized him as a man, and he could stance of the merchants the ass and the
talk and behave with them as a man witch were taken before the judge;
should. where, being questioned and tortured,
Now if it is asked how burdens were she confessed her crime and promised
placed upon him as if he were a beast, to restore the young man to his true
we must say that this case is analogous shape if she might be allowed to return
to that of which S. Augustine speaks to her house. So she was dismissed and
in his De Ciuitate Dei, Book XVIII, went back to her house, where the
chapter 17, where he tells of the tavern young man was restored to his former
women who changed their guests into shape; and being again arrested, she
beasts of burden; and to that of the
Sacrament.” One of the most famous of
father of Praestantius, who thought he * “
the miracles of S. Antony of Padua, wrought for
was a pack-horse and carried corn with
the conversion of heretics, was that of a mule,
other animals. For the delusion caused
belonging to one Bovidilla, a blasphemer of the
by this glamour was threefold.
Sacrament. The animal, although it had been,
First in its effect on the men who saw
as agreed, kept fasting for three days, refused to
the young man not as a man but as an
turn to a sieve of oats held out by its master, but
ass; and it is shown above in Chapter
fell down upon its knees and adored the Host
VIII how devils can easily cause this. which the Saint was carrying in the ostensory.
Secondly, those burdens were no illu¬ Some narratives of the fourteenth century say this
sion; but when they were beyond the happened at Toulouse, and some name Bruges,
strength of the young man, the devil but the actual place was Rimini. In the basilica
invisibly carried them. Thirdly, that II Santo, at Padua, this miracle is depicted more
when he was consorting with others, the than once. There is a bronze bas-relief by
Donatello in the Chapel of the Sacrament, and
young man himself considered in his
a fresco by Campagnola. The same subject was
imagination and perceptive faculties at
painted by Van Dyck for the Recollects at
least, which are faculties belonging to
Malines.
the bodily organs, that he was an ass;
Animals have been known to distinguish Our
but not in his reason: for he was not
Lord’s Body in the Host, a fact which, when one
so bound but that he knew himself to
considers their sense and intelligence, is not at
be a man, although he was magically
all surprising.
deluded into imagining himself a beast.
At the trial of the Satanist Louis Gaufridi it
Nabuchodonosor provides an example was proved that upon one occasion during their
of the same delusion. accursed rites a dog was led in to devour the
After three years had passed in this consecrated Species, but he stretched out his paws in
way, in the fourth year it happened adoration before the Body of Christ and bowed down
that the young man went one morning his head, nor could kicks nor blows compel him to
stir. Several of the devotees broke down into tears
into the city, with the woman following
and began loudly to bewail their sins, after which
a long way behind; and he passed by a
it was decreed in future that the Host should he
church where Holy Mass was being cele¬
defiled, but that no animals must be admitted.
brated, and heard the sacring-bell ring
See my “Geography of Witchcraft,” pp. 410at the elevation of the Host (for in that
411.
kingdom the Mass is celebrated accord¬
S. Optatus tells us that certain Donatisls once
1
ing to the Latin, and not according to
threw the Host to some hungry dogs, who
the Greek rite). And he turned towards
suddenly turned on the heretics and tore them to
the church, and, not daring to enter for pieces.

Part II. Qn 2. Gh. 5 MALEFICARUM
x75
paid the debt which her crimes merited. must be believed that It is of great
And the young man returned joyfully virtue in the purgation and protection
to his own country. of both soul and body; and that when
a man receives It, the evil spirit which
afflicts his members or lurks hidden in
☆
them is driven away as if it were
burned with fire. And lately we saw
CHAPTER V
the Abbot Andronicus healed in this
way; and the devil will rage with mad
Prescribed Remedies for those who are
fury when he feels himself shut out by
Obsessed owing to some Spell.
W the heavenly medicine, and he will try
the harder and the oftener to inflict his
E have shown in Chapter X of the
tortures, as he feels himself driven
preceding Question that sometimes
farther off by this spiritual remedy. So
devils, through witchcraft, substantially
says S. John Cassian.
inhabit certain men, and why they do
And again he adds: Two things must
this: namely, that it may be for some
be steadfastly believed. First, that with¬
grave crime of the man himself, and
out the permission of God no one is
for his own ultimate benefit; or some¬
altogether possessed * by these spirits.
times for the slight fault of another
Second, that everything which God
man; sometimes for a man’s own venial
permits to happen to us, whether it
sin; and sometimes for another man’s
seem to be sorrow or gladness, is sent
grave sin. For any of these reasons a
for our good as from a pitying Father
man may in varying degrees be pos¬
sessed by a devil. Nider in his For- and a merciful Physician. For the devils
are, as it were, schoolmasters of hu¬
micarius states that there is no cause
mility, so that they who descend from
for wonder if devils, at the instance of
this world may either be purged for the
witches and with God’s permission,
substantially take possession of men. eternal life or be sentenced to the pain
It is clear also from the details given of their punishment; and such, accord¬
in that chapter what are the remedies ing to S. Paul, are in the present life
by which such men can be liberated; delivered unto Satan for the destruction
namely, by the exorcisms of the of the flesh, that the spirit may be
Church; and by true contrition and saved in the day of the Lord Jesus
Christ.
confession, when a man is possessed for
some mortal sin. An example is the But here there arises a doubt. For
manner in which that Bohemian priest S. Paul says: Let a man examine him¬
was set free. But there are three other self, and so eat of that Bread: then how
remedies besides, which are of virtue; can a man who is possessed com¬
namely, the Holy Communion of the municate, since he has not the use of
Eucharist, the visitation of shrines and his reason? S. Thomas answers this in
the prayers of holy men, and by lifting his Third Part, Question 80, saying that
the sentence of excommunication. Of there are distinct degrees in madness.
these we shall speak, although they are For to say that a man has not the use of
plainly set out in the discourses of the his reason may mean two things. In
Doctors, since all have not easy access one case he has some feeble power of
to the necessary treatises. reason; as a man is said to be blind
Cassian, in his Collation of the Abbots, when he can nevertheless see imper¬
speaks in these words of the Eucharist: fectly. And since such men can to some
We do not remember that our elders extent join in the devotion of this
ever forbade the administration of the Sacrament, it is not to be denied to
them.
Holy Communion to those possessed by
evil spirits; it should even be given to But others are said to be mad because
them every day if possible.* For it they have been so from birth; and such
may not partake of the Sacrament,
*
“Every day.” Since the Sacrament is
“medicina animaeIn “En Route,” Chap. V,
il finissait par les Spurer avec les Saintes
the AbbS Gevresin says: “Jecomprends tres bien
Especes prises a de hautes doses. C'est une
-
le systeme du pere Milleriot qui forfait a com
doctrine tout d la fois realiste et surelevee.” Pere
munier des gens qu’il apprehendait de voir .,
Milleriot, S.J was largely concerned in the
retomber dans leur pkhis, apres. Pour toute
conversion (i8yg-8o) of Paul-Maximilien-Emile
pinitence, il les obligeait d recommunier encore et Littri, who died at Paris , 2 June, 1881.

MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 5
176
they live, just as the Saints in their
since they are in no way able to engage
earthly journey subdued them.
in devout preparation for it.
Likewise we read that the devout
Or perhaps they have not always been
prayers of wayfarers have often ob¬
without the use of their reason; and
tained the deliverance of those pos¬
then, if when they were sane they
sessed. And Cassian urges them to pray
appeared to appreciate the devotion
for them, saying: If we hold the opinion
due to the Sacrament, It should be
or rather faith of which I have written
administered to them when they are
above, that everything is sent by the
at the point of death, unless it is
Lord for the good of our souls and the
feared that they may vomit or spew
betterment of the universe, we shall in
It out.
no way despise those who are possessed ;
The following decision is recorded by
but we shall incessantly pray for them
the Council of Carthage (26, q. 6).*
as for our own selves, and pity them
When a sick man wishes to confess, and
if on the arrival of the priest he is ren¬ with our whole heart.
As for the last method, that of re¬
dered dumb by his infirmity, or falls
leasing the sufferer from excommuni¬
into a frenzy, those who have heard him
cation, it must be known that this is
speak must give their testimony. And
rare, and only lawfully practised by
if he is thought to be at the point of
such as have authority and are in¬
death, let him be reconciled with God
formed by revelation that the man has
by the laying on of hands and the
become possessed on account of the exlacing of the Sacrament in his mouth.
communication of the Church: such
. Thomas also says that the same pro¬
was the case of the Corinthian forni¬
cedure may be used with baptized
cator (I. Corinthians v) who was ex¬
people who are bodily tormented by
communicated by S. Paul and the
unclean spirits, and with other mentally
Church, and delivered unto Satan for
distracted persons. And he adds, in
the destruction of the flesh, that his
Book IV, dist. 9, that the Communion
spirit might be saved in the day of our
must not be denied to demoniacs unless
Lord JESUS Christ; that is, as the gloss
it is certain that they are being tortured
says, either for the illumination of grace
by the devil for some crime. To this
by contrition or for judgement.
Peter a Palude adds: In this case they
And he delivered to Satan false
are to be considered as persons to be
teachers who had lost the faith, such as
excommunicated and delivered up to
Hymenaeus and Alexander, that they
Satan. %
might learn not to blaspheme (I.
From this it is clear that, even if a
Timothy i). For so great was the power
man be possessed by a devil for his own
and the grace of S. Paul, says the gloss,
crimes, yet if he has lucid intervals and,
that by the mere words of his mouth he
while he has the use of his reason, is
could deliver to Satan those who fell
contrite and confesses his sins, since he
is absolved in the sight of God, he must away from the faith.
S. Thomas (IV. 18) teaches concern¬
in no way be deprived of the Com¬
ing the three effects of excommunica¬
munion of the Divine Sacrament of the
tion as follows. If a man, he says, is
Eucharist.
deprived of the prayers of the Church,
How those who are possessed may be
he suffers a threefold loss corresponding
delivered by the intercessions and
with the benefits which accrue to one
prayers of the Saints is found in the
who is in communion with the Church.
Legends of the Saints. For by the
For those who are excommunicated are
merits of Saints, Martyrs, Confessors
bereft of the source from which flows an
and Virgins the unclean spirits are sub¬
increase of grace to those who have it,
dued by their prayers in the land where
and a means to obtain grace for those
*
“CarthageThe earliest Council of Car¬ who have it not; and, being deprived of
thage of which we know was held about a.d. ig8, grace, they lose also the power of pre¬
,
when seventy bishops presided over by the Bishop serving their uprightness; although it
,
of Carthage, Agrippinus were present. After
must not be thought that they are alto¬
this date more than twenty Councils were held at
gether shut out from God’s providence,
Carthage, of which the most important were those
but only from that special providence
under S. Cyprian, relative to the “lapsi,” Nova-
, which watches over the sons of the
tianism, and the re-baptism of heretics and the
Church; and they lose also a strong
synods of 412, 416 and 418 which condemned the
source of protection against the Enemy,
doctrines of Pelagius.

Part II. Qn 2. Gh. 5 MALEFICARUM
177
for greater power is granted to the devil that he saw in a monastery at Cologne
to injure such men, both bodily and a brother who was given to speaking
spiritually. jestingly, but was a very famous exFor in the primitive Church, when peller of devils. This man was casting a
men had to be drawn into the faith by devil out of a man possessed in the
signs, just as the Holy Spirit was made monastery, and the devil asked him to
manifest by a visible sign, so also a give him some place to which he could
bodily affliction by the devil was the go. This pleased the Brother, and he
visible sign of a man who was excom¬ jokingly said, “Go to my privy.” So the
municated. And it is not unfitting that devil went out; and when in the night
a man whose case is not quite desperate the Brother wished to go and purge his
should be delivered to Satan; for he is belly, the devil attacked him so savagely
not given to the devil as one to be in the privy that he with difficulty
damned, but to be corrected, since it is escaped with his life.
in the power of the Church, when she But especial care is to be taken that
pleases, to deliver him again from the those who are obsessed through witch¬
hands of the devil. So says S. Thomas. craft should not be induced to go to
Therefore the lifting of the ban of ex- witches to be healed. For S. Gregory
communication, when prudently used goes on to say of the woman we have
by a discreet exorcist, is a fitting remedy just mentioned: Her kindred and those
for those who are possessed. who loved her in the flesh took her to
But Nider adds that the exorcist must some witches to be healed, by whom she
particularly beware of making too pre¬ was taken to a river and dipped in the
sumptive a use of his powers, or of water with many incantations; and
mingling any ribaldry or jesting with upon this she was violently shaken, and
the serious work of God, or adding to it instead of one devil being cast out, a
anything that smacks of superstition or legion entered into her, and she began
witchcraft; for otherwise he will hardly to cry out in their several voices.
escape punishment, as he shows by an Therefore her kindred confessed what
example. they had done, and in great grief
For Blessed Gregory, in his First brought her to the holy Bishop For¬
Dialogue, tells of a certain woman who, tunatus, f who by daily prayers and
against her conscience, yielded to her fasting^ entirely restored her to health.
husband’s persuasions to take part in But since it has been said that exor¬
the ceremonies at the vigil of the dedi¬ cists must beware lest they make use of
cation of the Church of S. Sebastian. anything savouring of superstition or
And because she joined in the Church’s witchcraft, some exorcist may doubt
procession against her conscience, she whether it is lawful to use certain
became possessed and raged publicly. unconsecrated herbs and stones. In
When the priest of that church saw this, answer we say that it is so much the
he took the cloth from the altar and better if the herbs are consecrated; but
covered her with it; and the devil sud¬ that if they are not, then it is not super¬
denly entered into that priest. And stitious to use a certain herb called
because he had presumed beyond his Demonifuge, § or even the natural
strength, he was constrained by his tor¬ properties of stones. But he must not »
ments to reveal who he was. So says think that he is casting out devils by the
S. Gregory. power of these; for then he would fall
And to show that no spirit of into the error of believing that he could
ribaldry * must be allowed to enter into use other herbs and incantations in the
the holy office of exorcism, Nider tells same way; and this is the error of
necromancers, who think that they can
*
“Ribaldry.” A rubric of the “De exorciz¬
perform this kind of work through the
andis Obsessis a Daemonio” prescribes:
, f “ .”
“Necessarie uero interrogationes sunt ut de Fortunatus Bishop of Naples, who was
numero et nomine spirituum obsidentium, de appointed to that see by S. Gregory the Great in
,
tempore quo ingressi sunt de causa, et aliis
593 uPon the deposition of Demetrius.
huiusmodi. Ceteras autem daemoniis nugas, %“ Fasting” “S. Matthew” xvii, 20: Hoc
risus, et ineptias Exorcista cohibeat, aut con¬ autem genus non eiicitur nisi per orationem et
temnat, et circumstantes, qui pauci esse debent, ieiunium.
§ “ .”
admoneat, ne haec curent, neque ipsi interrogent Demonifuge See Sinistrari, “De Daeobsessum: sed potius humiliter et enixe Deum
monialitate,” LX VIII, in my translation
pro eo precentur”
“Demoniality,” pp. 52-53.

178 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 5
natural and unknown virtues of such at this, for the smoke of a certain tree
objects. when it is burned seems to have the
Therefore S. Thomas says, Book IV. same virtue, as if it had in it some
dist. 7, art. the last: It must not be be¬ spiritual sense, or power of spiritual
lieved that devils are subject to any prayer for the future.
corporeal powers; and therefore they Of the same opinion are Blessed
are not to oe influenced by invocations Albert, in his commentary on S. Luke ix,
or any acts of sorcery, except in so far and Nicolas of Lyra and Paul of
as they have entered into a pact with Burgos,* on I. Samuel xvi. The lasta witch. Of this Esaias (xxviii) speaks: named homilist comes to this conclu¬
We have made a covenant with death, sion : that it must be allowed that those
and with hell are we at agreement. And possessed by a devil can not only be
he thus explains the passage in Job xli: relieved, but even entirely delivered by
Canst thou draw out Leviathan with an means of material things, understand¬
hook? and the following words. For he ing that in the latter case they are not
says: If one rightly considers all that very fiercely molested. And he proves
has been said before, it will seem that it this by reasoning as follows: Devils
belongs to the heretical presumption of cannot alter corporeal matter just at
necromancers when anyone tries to their will, but only by bringing to¬
make an agreement with devils, or to gether complementary active and pas¬
subject them in any way to his own will. sive agents, as Nicolas says. In the
Having, then, shown that man can¬ same way some material object can
not of his own power overcome the cause in the human body a disposition
devil, he concludes by saying: Place which makes it susceptible to the opera¬
your hand upon him; but understand tions of the devil. For example, accord¬
that, if you have any power, it is yet by ing to physicians, mania very much pre¬
Divine virtue that he is overcome. And disposes a man to dementia, and con¬
he adds: Remember the battle which I sequently to demoniac obsession: there¬
wage against him; that is to say, the fore if, in such a case, the predisposing
present being put for the future, I shall passive agent be removed, it will follow
fight against him on the Cross, where that the active affliction of the devil will
Leviathan will be taken with an hook, be cured.
that is, by the divinity hidden under In this light we may consider the
the bait of humanity, since he will think fish’s liver; and the music of David, by
our Saviour to be only a man. And which Saul was at first relieved and then
afterwards it says: There is no power entirely delivered of the evil spirit; for
on earth to be compared with him: by it says: And the evil spirit departed
which it is meant that no bodily power from him. But it is not consonant with
can equal the power of the devil, which the meaning of the Scripture to say that
is a purely spiritual power. So says S. this was done by the merits or prayers
Thomas. of David; for the Scripture says nothing
But a man possessed by a devil can of any such matter, wjiereas it would
indirectly be relieved by the power of have spoken notably in his praise if this
music, as was Saul by David’s harp, or had been so. This reasoning we take
of a herb, or of any other bodily matter from Paul of Burgos. There is also
in which there lies some natural virtue. the reason which we gave in Question V
Therefore such remedies may be used, of the First Part: that Saul was liberas can be argued both from authority
* .”
and by reason. For S. Thomas, XXVI. “Paul of Burgos Paul de Santa Maria,
7, says that stones and herbs may be a Spanish Archbishop, Lord Chancellor, and
used for the relief of a man possessed by exegete, born at Burgos about 1351; died 23
.
August, 1433 The most wealthy and influential
a devil. And there are the words of
Jew of Burgos {Jewish name Solomon-HaS. Jerome.
Levi), and a scholar of the first rank in Talmudic
And as for the passage in Tobias, where
and Rabbinical literature, a Rabbi of the Hebraic
the Angel says: Touching the heart and
community, he was converted to Christianity by
the liver (which you took from the
the irrefutable logic of the “Summa” of S.
fish), if a devil or an evil spirit trouble
Thomas. He received baptism 21 July, 1330.
any, we must make a smoke thereof
His reputation as a Biblical writer chiefly rests
before the man or the woman, and the “ ” ”
upon his Additiones to the “Postilla of
party shall be no more vexed; S. Nicolas of Lyra, Nuremberg, 1481; Venice,
Thomas says: We ought not to marvel 1481; and many other editions.

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 6 MALEFICARUM
179
ated because by the harp was pre¬ power of exorcism in his official ca¬
figured the virtue of the Cross on which pacity; and this power may even law¬
were stretched the Sacred Limbs of fully be used by those who belong to no
Christ’s Body. And more is written Order, but such do not exercise it in
there which may be considered to¬ their official capacity. Similarly the
gether with the present inquiry. But Mass can be said in an unconsecrated
we shall only conclude by saying that house, although the very purpose of
the use of material things in lawful consecrating a church is that the Mass
exorcisms is not superstitious. And now may be said there; but this is more on
it is expedient that we should speak account of the grace which is in the
about the exorcisms themselves. righteous than of the grace of the
Sacrament.
☆ From these words we may conclude
that, although it is good that in the
CHAPTER VI liberation of a bewitched person re¬
course should be had to an exorcist
Prescribed Remedies; to wit, the Lawful having authority to exorcise such be¬
Exorcisms of the Church3 for all Sorts of witchments, yet at times other devout
Infirmities and Ills due to Witchcraft; persons may, either with or without any
and the Method of Exorcising those who exorcism, cast out this sort of diseases.
are Bewitched. For we hear of a certain poor and
I
very devout virgin, one of whose friends
T has already been stated that witches
had been grievously bewitched in his
can afflict men with every kind of foot, so that it was clear to the phy¬
physical infirmity; therefore it can be
sicians that he could be cured by no
taken as a general rule that the various medicines. But it happened that the
verbal or practical remedies which can virgin went to visit the sick man, and
be applied in the case of those infirmi¬ he at once begged her to apply some
ties which we have just been discussing benediction to his foot. She consented,
are equally applicable to all other in¬ and did no more than silently say the
firmities, such as epilepsy or leprosy, for Lord’s Prayer and the Apostles’ Greed,
example. And as lawful exorcisms are
at the same time making use of the sign
reckoned among the verbal remedies
of the life-giving Gross. The sick man
and have been most often considered by then felt himself at once cured, and,
us, they may be taken as a general type
that he might have a remedy for the
of such remedies; and there are three
future, asked the virgin what charms she
matters to be considered regarding them. had used. But she answered: You are of
First, we must judge whether a per¬ little faith and do not hold to the holy
son who has not been ordained as an and lawful practices of the Church, and
exorcist, such as a layman or a secular
you often apply forbidden charms and
cleric, may lawfully exorcise devils and
remedies for your infirmities; therefore
their works. Bound up with this ques¬
are you rarely healthy in your body,
tion are three others: namely; first, because you are always sick in your soul.
what constitutes the legality of this
But if you would put your trust in
practice; secondly, the seven conditions
prayer and in the efficacy of lawful
which must be observed when one symbols, you will often be very easily
wishes to make private use of charms cured. For I did nothing but repeat the
and benedictions; and thirdly, in what
Lord’s Prayer and the Apostles’ Greed,
way the disease is to be exorcised and and you are now cured.
the devil conjured.
This example gives rise to the ques¬
Secondly, we must consider what is to
tion, whether there is not any efficacy
be done when no healing grace results in other benedictions and charms, and
from the exorcism.
even conjurations by way of exorcism;
Thirdly, we must consider practical for they seem to be condemned in this
and not verbal remedies; together with story. We answer that the virgin con¬
the solution of certain arguments.
demned only unlawful charms and un¬
For the first, we have the opinion, of lawful conjurations and exorcisms.
S. Thomas in Book IV, dist. 23. He
To understand these last we must
says: When a man is ordained as an consider how they originated, and how
exorcist, or into any of the other minor
they came to be abused. For they were
Orders, he has conferred upon him the
in their origin entirely sacred; but just

i8o MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 6
as by the means of devils and wicked she said that they who consulted with
men all things can be defiled, so also such had weak, that is to say bad, faith.
were these sacred words. For it is said Now for the elucidation of this
in the last chapter of S. Mark, of the matter it is asked how it is possible to
Apostles and holy men: In My Name know whether the words of such charms
shall they cast out devils; and they and benedictions are lawful or super¬
visited the sick, and prayed over them stitious, and how they ought to be used;
with sacred words; and in after times and whether the devil can be conjured
priests devoutly used similar rites; and and diseases exorcised.
therefore there are to be found to-day in In the first place, that is said to be
ancient Churches devout prayers and lawful in the Christian religion which is
holy exorcisms which men can use or not superstitious; and that is said to be
undergo, when they are applied by superstitious which is over and above
pious men as they used to be, without the prescribed form of religion. See
any superstition; even as there are now Colossians ii: Which things indeed have
to be found learned men and Doctors a show of wisdom in superstition: on
of holy Theology who visit the sick and which the gloss says: Superstition is
use such words for the healing not only undisciplined religion, that is, religion
of demoniacs, but of other diseases as observed with defective methods in evil
well. circumstances.
But, alas! superstitious men have, on Anything, also, is superstition which
the pattern of these, found for them¬ human tradition without higher author¬
selves many vain and unlawful remedies ity has caused to usurp the name
which they employ in these days for sick of religion; such as the interpolation of
men and animals; and the clergy have hymns at Holy Mass, the alteration of
become too slothful to use any more the the Preface for Requiems, the abbre¬
lawful words when they visit the sick. viation of the Greed which is to be sung
On this account Gulielmus Durandus,* at Mass, the reliance upon an organ
the commentator on S. Raymond, says rather than upon the choir for the
that such lawful exorcisms may be used music, neglect to have a Server on the
by a religious and discreet priest, or by Altar, and such practices. But to return
a layman, or even by a woman of good to our point, when a work is done by
life and proved discretion; by the virtue of the Christian religion, as when
offering of lawful prayers over the sick: someone wishes to heal the sick by
not over fruits or animals, but over the means of prayer and benediction and
sick. For the Gospel says: They shall sacred words (which is the matter we
place their hands upon the sick, etc. are considering), such a person must
And such persons are not to be pre¬ observe seven conditions by which such
vented from practising in this way; benedictions are rendered lawful. And
unless perhaps it is feared that, follow¬ even if he uses adjurations, through the
ing their example, other indiscreet and virtue of the Divine Name, and by the
superstitious persons should make im¬ virtue of the works of Christ, His Birth,
proper use of incantations. It is these Passion and Precious Death, by which
superstitious diviners whom that virgin the devil was conquered and cast out;
we have mentioned condemned, when such benedictions and charms and
exorcisms shall be called lawful, and
* ,
“Durandus.” William Duranti canonist they who practise them are exorcists or
and one of the most important mediaeval lawful enchanters. See S. Isidore, Etym.
liturgical writers, born about 1237 at Pui- VIII, Enchanters are they whose art
,
misson, Provence; died at Rome 1 November and skill lies in the use of words.
1236. His career was most noble and distin¬ And the first of these conditions, as
guished. A long epitaph upon his monument in
we learn from S. Thomas^ is that there
Santa Maria sopra Minerva tells the story of his
must be nothing in the words which
life and gives a list of his works. The most
hints at any expressed or tacit invoca¬
important of these is the “Rationale diuinorum
tion of devils. If such were expressed, it
officiorumthe first edition of which by Fust and
would be obviously unlawful. If it were
Schoeffer was issued at Mainz in 1453. It has
tacit, it might be considered in the light
been frequently reprinted, the last complete edition
” of intention, or in that of fact: in that
being Naples, i8jg. The “ Speculum Iudiciale
of intention, when the operator has no
and the “Commentarius in canones Concilii
Lugdunensis II” are valuable treatises upon the care whether it is God or the devil who
canons and canonical processes. is helping him, so long as he attains his

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 6 MALEFICARUM 1&1
desired result; in that of fact, when a shall follow them that believe; in my
person has no natural aptitude for such name shall they cast out devils; they
work, but creates some artificial means. shall take up serpents. From this it is
And of such not only must physicians clear that, provided the above con¬
and astronomers be the judges, but ditions are observed, it is lawful by
especially Theologians. For in this way means of sacred words to keep serpents
do necromancers work, making images away.
and rings and stones by artificial S. Thomas says further: The words of
means; which have no natural virtue to God are not less holy than the Relics
effect the results which they very often of the Saints. As S. Augustine says:
expect: therefore the devil must be con¬ The word of God is not less than the
cerned in their works. Body of Christ. But all are agreed that
Secondly, the benedictions or charms it is lawful to carry reverently about
must contain no unknown names; for the person the Relics of the Saints:
according to S. John Chrysostom such therefore let us by all means invoke the
are to be regarded with fear, lest they name of God by duly using the Lord’s
should conceal some matter of super¬ Prayer and the Angelic Salutation, by
stition. His Birth and Passion, by His Five
Thirdly, there must be nothing in the Wounds, and by the Seven Words
words that is untrue; for if there is, the which He spoke on the Gross, by the
effect of them cannot be from God, Triumphant Inscription, by the three
Who is not a witness to a lie. But some nails, and by the other weapons of
old women in their incantations use Christ’s army against the devil and his
some such jingling doggerel as the works. By all these means it is lawful
following: to work, and our trust may be placed in
them, leaving the issue to God’s will.
Blessed MARY went a-walking
And what has been said about the
Over Jordan river.
keeping off of serpents applies also to
Stephen met her, and fell a-talking, etc.
other animals, provided that the atten¬
Fourthly, there must be no vanities, tion is fixed only on the sacred words
or written characters beyond the sign and the Divine virtue. But great care
of the Cross. Therefore the charms is to be used in incantations of this
which soldiers are wont to carry are nature. For S. Thomas says: Such
condemned. diviners often use unlawful observances,
Fifthly, no faith must be placed in the and obtain magic effects by means of
method of writing or reading or binding devils, especially in the case of ser¬
the charm about a person, or in any pents; for the serpent was the devil’s
such vanity, which has nothing to do first instrument by which he deceived
with the reverence of God, without mankind.
which a charm is altogether super¬ For in the town of Salzburg there
stitious. was a certain mage who one day, in
Sixthly, in the citing and uttering of open view of all, wanted to charm all
Divine words and of Holy Scripture the snakes into a particular pit, and
attention must only be paid to the kill them all within an area of a mile.
sacred words themselves and their So he gathered all the snakes together,
meaning, and to the reverence of God; and was himself standing over the pit,
whether the effect be looked for from when last of all there came a huge and
the Divine virtue, or from the relics of horrible serpent which would not go
Saints, which are a secondary power, into the pit. This serpent kept making
since their virtue springs originally from signs to the man to let it go away and
God. crawl where it would; but he would not
Seventhly, the looked-for effect must cease from his incantation, but insisted
be left to the Divine Will; for He knows that, as all the other snakes had entered
whether it is best for a man to be healed the pit and there died, so also must this
or to be plagued, or to die. This con¬ horrible serpent. But it stood on the
dition was set down by S. Thomas. opposite side to the warlock, and sud¬
So we may conclude that if none of denly leapt over the pit and fell upon
these conditions be broken, the incan¬ the man, wrapping itself round his belly,
tation will be lawful. And S. Thomas and dragged him with itself into the pit,
writes in this connexion on the last where they both died. From this it may
chapter of S. Mark: And these signs be seen that only for a useful purpose,

182 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Gh. 6
such as driving them away from men’s It may be said that a layman who
houses, are such incantations to be does not understand the words cannot
practised, and they are to be done by pay any attention to their meaning.
the Divine virtue, and in the fear of But it is enough if such a man fixes his
God, and with reverence. thoughts on the Divine virtue, and
In the second place we have to con¬ leaves it to the Divine will to do what
sider how exorcisms or charms of this seems good to His mercy.
kind ought to be used, and whether they In the third place we have to con¬
should be worn round the neck or sewn sider whether the devil is to be conjured
into the clothing. It may seem that such and the disease exorcised at the same
practices are unlawful; for S. Augustine time, or whether a different order
says, in the Second Book on the Christian should be observed, or whether one of
Doctrine : There are a thousand magic these operations can take place without
devices and amulets and charms which the other. Here there are several points
are all superstitious, and the School of to be considered. First, whether the
Medicine utterly condemns them all, devil is always present when the sick
whether they are incantations, or cer¬ man is afflicted. Second, what sort of
tain marks which are called characters, things are capable of being exorcised or
or engraved charms to be hung round remedied. Third, the method of exor¬
the neck. cising.
Also S. John Chrysostom, comment¬ For the first point, it would seem, fol¬
ing on S. Matthew, says: Some persons lowing that pronouncement of S. John
wear round their neck some written Damascene that where the devil operates
portion of the Gospel; but is not the there he is, that the devil is always
Gospel every day read in the church present in the sick man when he afflicts
and heard by all? How then shall a him. Also in the history of S. Bartholo¬
man be helped by wearing the Gospel mew it seems that a man is only de¬
round his neck, when he has reaped no livered from the devil when he is cured
benefit from hearing it with his ears? of his sickness.
For in what does the virtue of the Gos¬ But this can be answered as follows.
pel consist; in the characters of its When it is said that the devil is present
letters, or in the meaning of its words ? in a sick man, this can be understood in
If in the characters, you do well to two ways: either that he is personally
hang it round your neck; but if in the present, or that he is present in the
meaning, surely it is of more benefit effect which he has caused. In the first
when planted in the heart than when sense he is present when he first causes
worn round the neck.
the sickness; in the second sense he is
But, on the other hand, the Doctors said to be present not personally but in
answer as follows, especially S. Thomas the effect. In this way, when the Doc¬
where he asks whether it is unlawful to tors ask whether the devil substantially
hang sacred words round the neck.
inhabits a man who commits mortal sin,
Their opinion is that, in all charms and they say that he is not personally
writings so worn, there are two things
present, but only in effect; just as a
to be avoided.
master is said to dwell in his servants
First, in whatever is written there
in respect of his mastership. But the
must be nothing that savours of an in¬
case is quite otherwise with men who
vocation of devils; for then it is mani¬ are possessed by a devil.
festly superstitious and unlawful, and
For the second point, as to what sort
must be judged as an apostasy from the
of things can be exorcised, the opinion
faith, as has often been said before.
of S. Thomas, Book IV, dist. 6, should
Similarly, in accordance with the
be noted, where he says that on account
above seven conditions, it must not con¬
of man’s sin the devil receives power
tain any unknown names. But if these
over a man and over everything which
two snares be avoided, it is lawful both
a man uses, to hurt him with them;
to place such charms on the lips of the
and since there can be no compromise
sick, and for the sick to carry them with
of Christ with Belial, therefore when¬
them. But the Doctors condemn their
ever anything is to be sanctified for
use in one respect, that is, when a man
Divine worship, it is first exorcised that
pays greater attention to and has more
it may be consecrated to God freed
reliance upon the mere signs of the
from the power of the devil, by which
written letters than upon their meaning.
it might be turned to the hurt of merr.

Part II. Qn 2. Gh. 6 MALEFICARUM 183
This is shown in the blessing of water, Baptism, by the living God, by the true
the consecration of a church, and in all God, by God Who redeemed thee with
matters of this sort. Therefore, since His Precious Blood, that thou mayest
the first act of reconciliation by which be exorcised, that all the illusions and
a man is consecrated to God is in wickedness of the devil’s deceits may
baptism, it is necessary that a man depart and flee from thee together with
should be exorcised before he is bap¬ every unclean spirit, adjured by Him
tized; indeed in this it is more imper¬ Who will come to judge both the quick
ative than in any other circumstance. and the dead, and who will purge the
For in man himself lies the cause >.y earth with fire. Amen.
reason of which the devil receives his
Let us pray.
power in other matters which are
O God of mercy and pity, Who
brought about by man, namely, sin,
according to Thy tender lovinglandness
either original or actual. This then is
chastenest those whom Thou dost
the significance of the words that are
used in exorcism, as when it is said, cherish, and dost gently compel those
“Depart, O Satan, from him”; and whom Thou receivest to turn their
hearts, we invoke Thee, O Lord, that
likewise of the things that are then done.
Thou wilt vouchsafe to bestow Thy
To return, then, to the actual point.
grace upon Thy servant who suffereth
When it is asked whether the disease is
to be exorcised and the devil adjured, from a weakness in the limbs of his
body, that whatever is corrupt by
and which of these should be done
earthly frailty, whatever is made violate
first; it is answered that not the disease,
but the sick and bewitched man him¬ by the deceit of the devil, may find
redemption in the unity of the body of
self is exorcised: just as in the case of a
child, it is not the infection of the fomes the Church. Have mercy, O Lord, on
his groaning, have mercy upon his
which is exorcised, but the child itself.
tears; and as he putteth his trust only
Also, just as the child is first exorcised,
and then the devil is adjured to depart; in Thy mercy, receive him in the sacra¬
so also is the bewitched person first ment of Thy reconciliation, through
Jesus Christ Our Lord. Amen.
exorcised, and afterwards the devil and
his works are bidden to depart. Again, Therefore, accursed devil, hear thy
just as salt and water are exorcised, so doom, and give honour to the true and
are all things which can be used by the living God, give honour to the Lord
sick man, so that it is expedient to Jesus Christ, that thou depart with thy
exorcise and bless chiefly his food and works from this servant whom our Lord
drink. In the case of baptism the fol¬ Jesus Christ hath redeemed with His
Precious Blood.
lowing ceremony of exorcism is ob¬
Then let him exorcise him a second
served : the exsufflation towards the
West and the renunciation of the devil; and yet a third time, with the prayers
secondly, the raising of the hands with as above.
a solemn confession of the faith of
Let us pray.
the Christian religion; thirdly, prayer,
God, Who dost ever mercifully
benediction, and the laying on of
govern all things that Thou hast made,
hands; fourthly, the stripping and
incline Thine ear to our prayers, and
anointing with Holy Oil; and after
look in mercy upon Thy servant
baptism, the communion and the
labouring under the sickness of th6
putting on of the chrisom. But all this
body; visit him, and grant him Thy
is not necessary in the exorcism of one
salvation and the healing virtue of Thy
who is bewitched; but that he should
heavenly grace, through Christ our
first have made a good confession, and
Lord. Amen.
if possible he is to hold a lighted candle,
Therefore, accursed devil, etc.
and receive the Holy Communion; and
instead of putting on a chrisom, he is to The prayer for the third exorcism.
remain bound naked to a Holy Candle O God, the only protection of human
of the length of Christ’s body or of the frailty, show forth the mighty power of
Cross. And then may be said the Thy strong aid upon our sick brother
following: (or sister), that being holpen by Thy
mercy he (she) may be worthy to enter
I exorcise thee, Peter, or thee, Bar¬ Thy Holy Church in safety, through
bara, being weak but reborn in Holy Christ our Lord. Amen.

184 MALLEUS II. 2. Ch. 6
Part Qn
And let the exorcist continually many intercessions the grace of health
sprinkle him with Holy Water. And may be obtained.
note that this method is recommended, Finally, he must receive the Sacra¬
not because it must be rigidly observed, ment of the Eucharist; although some
or that other exorcisms are not of think that this should be done before
greater efficacy, but that there should the exorcism. And at his confession the
be some regular system of exorcism and confessor must inquire whether he is
adjuration. For in the old histories and under any bond of excommunication,
books of the Church there are some¬ and if he is, whether he has rashly
times found more devout and powerful omitted to obtain absolution from his
exorcisms; but since before all things Judge; for then, although he may at
the reverence of God is necessary, let his discretion absolve him, yet when he
each proceed in this matter as he finds has regained his health, he must seek
it best. v absolution also from the Judge who
In conclusion, and for the sake of excommunicated him.
clearness, we may recommend this form It should further be noted that, when
of exorcism for a person who is be¬ the exorcist is not ordained to the Order
witched. Let him first make a good of Exorcist, then he may proceed with
confession (according to the often- prayers; and if he can read the Scrip¬
quoted Canon: If by sortilege, etc.). tures, let him read the beginnings of the
Then let a diligent search be made in four Gospels of the Evangelists, and the
all corners and in the beds and mat¬ Gospel beginning, “There was an Angel
tresses and under the threshold of the sent”; and the Passion of our Lord; all
door, in case some instrument of witch¬ of which have great power to expel the
craft may be found. The bodies of works of the devil. Also let the Gospel
animals bewitched to death are at once of S. John, “In the beginning was the
to be burned. And it is expedient that Word,” be written and hung round the
all bed-clothes and garments should be sick man’s neck, and so let the grace of
renewed, and even that he should healing be looked for from God.
change his house and dwelling. But in But if anyone asks what is the differ¬
case nothing is found, then he who is to ence between the aspersion of Holy
to be exorcised should if possible go Water and exorcism, since both are
into the church in the morning, espe¬ ordained against the plagues of the
cially on the Holier Days, such as the devil, the answer is supplied by S.
Feasts of Our Lady, or on some Vigil; Thomas, who says: The devil attacks us
and the better if the priest also has con¬ from without and from within. There¬
fessed and is in a state of grace, for fore Holy Water is ordained against his
then the stronger will he be. And let attacks from without; but exorcism
him who is to be exorcised hold in his against those from within. For this
hand a Holy Candle as well as he can, reason those for whom exorcism is neces¬
either sitting or kneeling; and let those sary are called Energoumenoi, from En,
who are present offer up devout prayers meaning In, and Ergon, meaning Work,
for his deliverance. And let him begin since they labour within themselves.
the Litany at “Our help is in the Name But in exorcising a bewitched person
of the Lord,” and let one be appointed both methods are to be used, because he
to make the responses: let him sprinkle is tormented both within and without.
him with Holy Water, and place a Our second main consideration is
stole round his neck, and recite the what is to be done when no healing
Psalm “Haste thee, O God, to deliver grace results from exorcisms. Now this
me”; and let him continue the Litany may happen for six reasons; and there
for the Sick, saying at the Invocation of is a seventh about which we suspend any
the Saints, “Pray for him and be definite judgement. For when a per¬
favourable; deliver him, O Lord,” con¬ son is not healed, it is due either to want
tinuing thus to the end. But where the of faith in the bystanders or in those who
prayers are to be said, then in the place present the sick man, or to the sins of
of the prayers let him begin the exor¬ them who suffer from the bewitchment,
cism, and continue in the way we have or to a neglect of the due and fitting
declared, or in any other better way, remedies, or to some flaw in the faith
as seems good to him. And this sort of of the exorcist, or to the lack of a greater
exorcism may be continued at least trust in the powers of another exorcist,
three times a week, that so through or to the need of purgation and for

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 6
MALEFICARUM
185
the increased merit of the bewitched
S- Hilary says: The Apostles believed,
person.
indeed, but they were not yet perfect
Concerning the first four of these the
in faith: for while the Lord was away
Gospel teaches us in the incident of the
in the mountain with the other three,
only son of his father, who was a luna¬
and they remained with the multitude,
tic, and of the disciples of Christ being
their faith became lukewarm.
there present (S. Matthew xvii. and
The fifth reason is illustrated in the
S. Mark ix.). For in the first place He
Lives of the Fathers, where we read
said that the multitude were without
that certain possessed persons could not
faith; whereupon the father prayed
be delivered by S. Antony, but were
Him, saying: Lord, I believe: help
delivered by his disciple, Paul.
Thou mine unbelief. And JESUS said to
The sixth reason has already been
the multitude: O faithless and perverse
made clear; for not always when a man
generation, how long shall I be with
is freed from sin is he also freed from
you?
punishment, but sometimes the penalty
Secondly, with regard to him who
remains as a punishment and atone¬
endured the devil, JESUS rebuked him,
ment for the previous sin.
that is, the son; for, as Saint Jerome
There is yet another remedy by which
says, he had been tormented by the
many have been said to be delivered,
devil because of his sins.
namely, the re-baptizing of those who
Thirdly, this illustrates the neglect of
are bewitched; but this is a matter on
the rightful remedies, because good and
which, as we have said, we can make no
perfect men were not at first present.
definite pronouncement. Nevertheless
For S. John Chrysostom says: The
it is most true that when a person has
pillars of the faith, namely, Peter and
not been duly exorcised before baptism,
James and John, were not present, for
the devil, with God’s permission, has
they were at the Transfiguration of
always more power against such a
Christ: neither were there prayer and
person. And it is clearly shown without
fasting, without which Christ said that
any doubt in what has just been writ¬
this sort of devil goeth not out. There¬
ten, that much negligence is committed
fore Origen, writing on this passage,
by improperly instructed priests (in
*ays: If at any time a man be not cured
which case it pertains to the fourth of
after prayer, let us not wonder or ask
the above-noted impediments, namely,
questions or speak, as if the unclean
a flaw in the exorcist), or else by old *
spirit were listening to us; but let us
women who do not observe the proper
cast out our evil spirits by prayer and
method of baptism at the necessary
fasting. And the gloss says: This sort
time.
of devil, that is, the variability of carnal
However, God forbid that I should
desires induced by that spirit, is not
maintain that the Sacraments cannot be
conquered except by strengthening the
administered by wicked men, or that
soul with prayer, and subduing the
when baptism is performed by a wicked
flesh with fasting.
man it is not valid, provided that he ob¬
Fourthly, the flaw in the faith of the
serves the proper forms and words. Simi¬
exorcist is exemplified in the disciples
larly in the exorcism let him proceed
of Christ who were present. For when
with due care, not timidly and not rashly.
they afterwards asked Him privately
And let no one meddle with such sacred
the cause of their failure, He answered:
offices by any accidental or habitual
Because of your unbelief: for verily I
omission of any necessary forms or
say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain
words; for there are four matters to be
of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this
observed in the right performance of
mountain, Remove hence,* etc. And
terra tantum loco cederet, quantum incolae
*
“Remove hence” The miracle of the
auitatis opus habebant. Cum enim uolens
removal of a mountain was actually performed by
aedificare ecclesiam in loco apto, uident eum
S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, Bishop of JVeoangustiorem esse quam res exigebat, eo quod ex
( ),
caesarea d. circa 270-275 as the Venerable
una parte rupe maris, ex alia monte proximo
“ ”
Bede tells us in his Commentary upon S. Mark
coarctaretur; uenit nocte ad locum, et genibus
**•
“Hoc quoque fieri potuisset, ut mons ablatus
flexis admonuit Dominum promissionis suae, ut
de terra mitteretur in mare, si necessitas id
montem longius iuxta fidem petentis ageret. Et
fieri poscisset. Quomodo legimus factum precibus
mane facto reuersus inuenit montem tantum spatii
beati patris Gregorii Neocaesareae Ponti Anti¬
reliquisse structoribus ecclesiae, quantum opus
stitis, uiri mentis et uirtutibus eximii, ut mons in
habuerant
O

186 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 6
exorcism, namely, the matter, the form, causes. But in witchcraft, when adults
the intention and the order, as we have are bewitched, it generally happens to
set them out above; and when one of them that the devil grievously possesses
these is lacking it cannot be complete. them from within for the destruction of
And it is not valid to object that in their souls. Therefore the labour re¬
the primitive Church persons were bap¬ quired in the case of the bewitched is
tized without exorcism, and that even twbfold, whereas it is only single in the
now a person is truly baptized without case of the possessed. Of this most
any exorcism; for in that case S. grievous possession John Cassian speaks
Gregory would have instituted exorcism in his Collation of the Abbot Serenus:
in vain, and the Church would be in They are truly to be judged unhappy
error in its ceremonies.* Therefore I and miserable who, although they pol¬
have not dared altogether to condemn lute themselves with every crime and
the re-baptism under certain conditions wickedness, yet show no outward sign
of bewitched persons, that they may of being filled with the devil, nor does
recover that which was at first omitted. there seem to be any temptation com¬
It is said, also, of those who walk in mensurate with their deeds, nor any
their sleep during the night over high punishment sufficient to restrain them.
buildings without any harm, that it For they do not deserve even the healing
is the work of evil spirits who thus lead medicine of purgatory, who in their
them; and many affirm that when such hardness of heart and impenitence are
people are re-baptized they are much beyond the reach of any earthly cor¬
benefited. And it is wonderful that, rection, and lay up to themselves anger
when they are called by their own and vengeance in that day of wrath
names, they suddenly fall to the earth, and revelation of the Just Judgement,
as if that name had not been given to when their worm shall not die.
them in proper form at their baptism. And a little earlier, comparing the
Let the reader pay attention to those possession of the body with the binding
six impediments mentioned above, of the soul in sin, he says: Far more
although they refer to Energoumenoi, or grievous and violent is the torment of
men possessed, rather than to men be¬ those who show no sign of being bodily
witched; for though equal virtue is possessed by devils, but are most terribly
required in both cases, yet it may be ossessed in their souls, being fast bound
said that it is more difficult to cure a y their sins and vices. For according
bewitched person than one possessed. to the Apostle, a man becomes the slave
Therefore those impediments apply of him by whom he is conquered. And
even more pertinently to the case of in this respect their case is the most
those who are bewitched; as is proved desperate, since they are the servants
by the following reasoning. of devils, and can neither resist nor
It was shown in Chapter X of the First tolerate that domination. It is clear then
Question of the Second Part that some that, not they who are possessed by the
men are at times possessed for no sin devil from without, but they who are
of their own, but for the venial sin of bewitched in their bodies and possessed
another man, and for various other from within to the perdition of their
souls, are, by reason of many impedi¬
* “ .” ments, the more difficult to heal.
Ceremonies Actually baptismal exorcism
is earlier than S. Gregory. From the very first Our third main consideration is that
catechumens were exorcised as a preparation for of curative charms, and it is to be noted
the Sacrament of Baptism. In this connexion that these are of two sorts. They are
exorcism is a symbolical anticipation of one of either quite lawful and free from suspi¬
the chief effects of the Sacrament of Regeneration, cion, or they are to be suspected and
and since it was used in the case of children who are not altogether lawful. We have
had no personal sins, S. Augustine, writing
dealt with the first sort in Chapter V,
against the Pelagians, appeals to it as clearly
towards the end, where we disposed of a
implying the doctrine of original sin. S. Cyril of
doubt as to the legality of using herbs
Jerusalem in his “Catechesesa.d. 347, gives
and stones to drive away a bewitch¬
a detailed description of baptismal exorcism, by
ment.
which it appears that anointing with exorcised
Now we must treat of the second sort
oil formed a part of this function in the East.
which are under suspicion of not being
The earliest Western witness which explicitly
treats unction as part of the baptismal exorcism altogether lawful; and we must draw
is that of the Arabic Canons of Hippolytus. attention to what was said in the Intro-

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 6
MALEFICARUM 187
duction to the Second Question of the
ordained also another. But as often as
Second Part of this work as to the four
you have to do anything or to go out,
remedies, of which three are judged to
cross yourselves in the name of Christ,
be unlawful, and the fourth not alto¬
and saying faithfully the Greed or the
gether so, but vain, being that of which
Lord’s Prayer you may go about your
the Canonists say that it is lawful to
business secure in the help of God.
oppose vanity to vanity. But we In¬
But certain superstitious sons of our
quisitors are of the same opinion as the
times, not content with the above
Holy Doctors, that when, owing to the
securities and accumulating error upon
six or seven impediments which we
error, and going beyond the meaning or
have detailed, the remedies of sacred
intention of Scotus and the Canonists,
words and lawful exorcism are not suffi¬
try to justify themselves with the follow¬
cient, then those who are so bewitched
ing arguments. That natural objects
are to be exhorted to bear with a patient
have certain hidden virtues the cause
spirit the evils of this present life for the
of which cannot be explained by men;
purgation of their crimes, and not to
as a lodestone attracts iron, and many
seek further in any way for superstitious
other such things which are enumerated
and vain remedies. Therefore, if anyone
by S. Augustine in the City of God, xxi.
is not content with the aforesaid lawful
Therefore, they say, to seek for the re¬
exorcisms, and wishes to have recourse
covery of one’s health by the virtue of
to remedies which are, at least, vain,
such things, when exorcisms and natural
of which we have spoken before, let him
medicines have failed, will not be un¬
know that he does not do this with our
lawful, although it may seem to be vain.
consent or permission. But the reason
This would be the case if a man tried
why we have so carefully explained and
to procure his own or another’s health
detailed such remedies is that we might
by means of images, not necromantic
bring into some sort of agreement the
but astrological, or by rings and such
opinions of such Doctors as Duns Scotus
devices. They argue also that, just as
and Henry of Segusio on the one hand,
natural matter is subject to the influence
and those of the other Theologians on
of the stars, so also are artificial objects
the other hand. Yet we are in agree¬
such as images, which receive some
ment with S. Augustine in his Sermon
hidden virtue from the stars by which
against Fortune-tellers and Diviners, which
they can cause certain effects: there¬
is called the Sermon on Auguries * where
fore it is not unlawful to make use of
he says: Brethren, you know that I have such things.
often entreated you that you should not
Besides, the devils can in very many
follow the customs of Pagans and sor¬
ways change bodies, as S. Augustine
cerers, but this has had little effect on
says, de Trinitate, 3, and as is evident
some of you. Yet, if I do not speak out
in the case of those who are bewitched:
to you, I shall be answerable for you in
therefore it is lawful to use the virtues
the Day of Judgement, and both you
of such bodies for the removing of
and I must suffer eternal damnation.
witchcraft.
Therefore I absolve myself before God,
But actually all the Holy Doctors are
that again and again I admonish and
of an entirely contrary opinion to this,
adjure you, that none of you seek out
as has been shown here and there in the
diviners or fortune-tellers, and that you
course of this work.
consult with them for no cause or
Therefore we can answer their first
infirmity; for whosoever commits this
argument in this way: that if natural
sin, the sacrament of baptism is im¬
objects are used in a simple way to
mediately lost in him, and he at once
produce certain effects for which they
becomes a sacrilegious and a Pagan,
are thought to have some natural
and unless he repents will perish in
virtue, this is not unlawful. But if there
eternity.
are joined to this certain characters
And afterwards he adds: Let no one
and unknown signs and vain observa¬
observe days for going out and coming
tions, which manifestly cannot have
back * for God hath made all things
any natural efficacy, then it is super¬
well, and He Who ordained one day
stitious and unlawful. Wherefore S.
Thomas, II, q. 96, art. 2, speaking of
*
“Auguries.” The “De Auguriis” which is this matter, says that when any object is
often ascribed to another writer, may be found in
used for the purpose of causing some
the Migne S. Augustine, Ap. V, 2268.
bodily effect, such as curing the sick,

188 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Gh. 7
notice must be taken whether such with devils; whereas the signs and
objects appear to have any natural characters on astronomical images
quality which could cause such an imply only a tacit pact.
effect; and if so, then it is not unlawful, Thirdly, there is no power given to
since it is lawful to apply natural causes men over devils, whereby a man may
to their effects. But if it does not appear lawfully use them for his own purposes;
that they can naturally cause such but there is war declared between man
effects, it follows that they are not and the devils, therefore by no means
applied as causes of those effects, but as may he use the help of devils, by either
signs or symbols; and so they pertain a tacit or an expressed pact with them.
to some pact symbolically formed with So says S. Thomas.
devils. Also S. Augustine says, in the To return to the point: he says, “By
City of God, xxi: The devils ensnare us no means”; therefore not even by means
by means of creatures formed not by of any vain things in which the devil
themselves, but by God, and with may in any way be involved. But if
various delights consonant with their they are merely vain, and man in his
own versatility ; not as animals with frailty has recourse to them for the
food, but as spirits with signs, by various recovery of his health, let him repent
kinds of stones and herbs and trees, for the past and take care for the future,
animals and charms and ceremonies. and let him pray that his sins may be
Secondly, S. Thomas says: The forgiven and that he be no more led
natural virtues of natural objects follow into temptation; as S. Augustine says
their material forms which they obtain at the end of his Rule.
from the influence of the stars, and from
the same influence they derive certain ☆
active virtues. But the forms of artifi¬
cial objects proceed from the concep¬ CHAPTER VII
tion of the craftsman; and since, as
Aristotle says in his Physics, I, they are Remedies prescribed against Hailstorms, and
nothing but an artificial composition, for Animals that are Bewitched.
W
they can have no natural virtue to
ITH regard to the remedies for
cause any effect. It follows then that
bewitched animals, and charms
the virtue received from the influence
against tempests, we must first note
of the stars can only reside in natural
some unlawful remedies which are
and not in artificial objects. Therefore,
practised by certain people. For these
as S. Augustine says in the City of God,
are done by means of superstitious
x, Porphyry was in error when he
words or actions; as when men cure the
thought that from herbs and stones
worms in the fingers or limbs by means
and animals, and from certain sounds
of certain words or charms,* the
and voices and figures, and from cer¬
method of deciding the legality of which
tain configurations in the revolutions
has been explained in the preceding
of the stars and their motions, men
chapter. There are others who do not
fabricated on earth certain Powers
sprinkle Holy Water over bewitched
corresponding to the various effects >of
cattle, but pour it into their mouths.
the stars; as if the effects of magicians
Beside the proofs we have already
proceeded from the virtue of the stars.
given that the remedy of words is un¬
But, as S. Augustine adds, all such
lawful, William of Paris, whom we have
matters belong to the devils, the de¬
often quoted, gives the following reason.
ceivers of souls which are subject to
If there were any virtue in words as
them. So also are those images which
words, then it would be due to one of
are called astronomical the work of
three things: either their material, which
devils, the sign of which is that they
is air; or their form, which is sound;
have inscribed upon them certain
or their meaning; or else to all three
characters which can have no natural
power to effect anything; for a figure *
“Charms.” Cf Shirley’s comedy “The
or sign is no cause of natural action. ,” ,
Sisters licensed April 1642 where Antonio says
But there is this difference between the to one of the supposed astrologers , III , 1:
images of astronomers and those of “Tou are one of the knaves that stroll the
necromancers; that in the case of the country,
latter there is an open invocation, and And live by picking worms out of fools’
therefore an open and expressed pact fingers.”

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 7 MALEFICARUM 189
together. Now it cannot be due to air, trusting to the will of God for their pro¬
which has no power to kill unless it be tective efficacy; yet even so the practice
poisonous; neither can it be due to is not above reproach, as was shown in
sound, the power of which is broken by the preceding chapter in the words of
a more solid object; neither can it be S. Jerome; for even if he is not invoked,
due to the meaning, for in that case the the devil has some part in the efficacy
words Devil or Death or Hell would of herbs and stones.
always be harmful, and the words Health It is the same with those who make
and Goodness always beneficial. Also the sign of the Gross with leaves and
it cannot be due to all these three to¬ consecrated flowers on Palm Sunday,
gether; for when the parts of a whole are and set it up among their vines or crops;
invalid, the whole itself is also invalid. asserting that, although the crops all
And it cannot validly be objected that round should be destroyed by hail, yet
God gave virtue to words just as He they will remain unharmed in their own
did to herbs and stones. For whatever fields. Such matters should be decided
virtue there is in certain sacramental upon according to the distinction of
words and benedictions and lawful which we have already treated.
incantations belongs to them, not as Similarly there are women who, for
words, but by Divine institution and the preservation of milk and that cows
ordinance according to God’s promise. should not be deprived of their milk by
It is, as it were, a promise from God witchcraft, give freely to the poor in
that whoever does such and such a God’s name the whole of a Sunday’s
thing will receive such and such a grace. yield of milk; and say that, by this sort
And so the words of the sacraments are of alms, the cows yield even more milk
effective because of their meaning; and are preserved from witchcraft.
although some hold that they have an This need not be regarded as super¬
intrinsic virtue; but these two opinions stitious, provided that it is done out of
are not mutually inconsistent. But the pity for the poor, and that they implore
case of other words and incantations the Divine mercy for the protection of
is clear from what has already been their cattle, leaving the effect to the
said; for the mere composing or utter¬ good pleasure of Divine providence.
ing or writing of words, as such, can Again, Nider in the First chapter of
have no effect; but the invocation of the his Praceptorium says that it is lawful
Divine Name, and public prayer, which to bless cattle, in the same way as sick
is a sacred protestation committing the men, by means of written charms and
effect to the Divine Will, are beneficial. sacred words, even if they have the
We have treated above of remedies appearance of incantations, as long as
performed by actions which seem to be the seven conditions we have mentioned
unlawful. The following is a common are observed. For he says that devout
practice in parts of Swabia. On the persons and virgins have been known
first of May before sunrise the women to sign a cow with the sign of the Gross,
of the village go out and gather from together with the Lord’s Praver and
the woods leaves and branches from the Angelic Salutation, upon which the
willow trees, and weave them into a devil’s work has been driven off, if it is
wreath which they hang over the stable due to witchcraft.
door, affirming that all the cattle will And in his Formicarius he tells that
then remain unhurt and safe from witches confess that their witchcraft is
witchcraft for a whole year. And in the obstructed by the reverent observation
opinion of those who hold that vanity of the ceremonies of the Church; as by
may be opposed by vanity, this remedy the aspersion of Holy Water, or the con¬
would not be unlawful; and neither sumption of consecrated salt, by the
would be the driving away of diseases lawful use of candles on the Day of
by unknown cantrips and incantations. Purification and of blessed palms, and
But without meaning any offence, we such things. For this reason the Church
say that a woman or anyone else may go uses these in her exorcisms, that they
out on the first or any other day of the may lessen the power of the devil.
month, without considering the rising Also, because when witches wish to
or the setting of the sun, and collect deprive a cow of milk they are in the
herbs or leaves and branches, saying the habit of begging a little of the milk or
Lord’s Prayer or the Greed, and hang butter which comes from that cow, so
them over the stable door in good faith, that they may afterwards by their art

190 MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 7
bewitch the cow; therefore women of the Most Holy Trinity, and the
should take care, when they are asked Lord’s Prayer and the Angelic Saluta¬
by persons suspected of this crime, not tion are repeated twice or three times,
to give away the least thing to them. together with the Gospel of S. John,
Again, there are women who, when In the beginning was the Word. And the
they have been turning a churn for a sign of the Gross is made in every direc¬
long while to no purpose, and if they tion towards each quarter of the world.
suspect that this is due to some witch, Finally, The Word was made Flesh is
procure if possible a little butter from repeated three times, and three times,
the house of that witch. Then they “By the words of this Gospel may this
make that butter into three pieces and tempest be dispersed.” And suddenly,
throw them into the churn, invoking if the tempest is due to witchcraft, it
the Holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, will cease. This is most true and need
and the Holy Ghost; and so all witch¬ not be regarded with any suspicion.
craft is put to flight. Here again it is a For if the hailstones were thrown into
case of opposing vanity to vanity, for the the fire without the invocation of the
simple reason that the butter must be Divine Name, then it would be con¬
borrowed from the suspected witch. sidered superstitious.
But if it were done without this; if with But it may be asked whether the
the invocation of the Holy Trinity and tempest could not be stilled without
the Lord’s Prayer the woman were to the use of those hailstones. We answer
throw in three pieces of her own butter, that it is the other sacred words that are
or of that belonging to someone else chiefly effective; but by throwing in the
if she have none of her own, and were to hailstones a man means to torment the
commit the effect to the Divine Will, devil, and tries to destroy his works by
she would remain beyond reproach. the invocation of the Holy Trinity.
Nevertheless it is not a commendable And he throws them into the fire rather
practice to throw in the three pieces of than into water, because the more
butter; for it would be better to banish quickly they are dissolved the sooner
the witchcraft by means of sprinkling is the devil’s work destroyed. But he
Holy Water or putting in some exorcised must commit to the Divine Will the
salt, always with the prayers we have effect which is hoped for.
mentioned. Relevant to this is the reply given by
Again, since often the whole of a a witch to a Judge who asked her if
person’s cattle are destroyed by witch¬ there were any means of stilling a tem¬
craft, those who have suffered in this pest raised by witchcraft. She answered:
way ought to take care to remove the Yes, by this means. I adjure you, hail¬
soil under the threshold of the stable or storms and winds, by the five wounds of
stall, and where the cattle go to water, Christ, and by the three nails which
and replace it with fresh soil sprinkled pierced His hands and feet, and by the
with Holy Water. For witches have four Holy Evangelists, Matthew, Mark,
often confessed that they have placed Luke and John, that you be dissolved
some instrument of witchcraft in such and fall as rain.
places; and that sometimes, at the Many also confess, some freely and
instance of devils, they have only had some under stress of torture, that there
to make a hole in which the devil has are five things by which they are much
placed the instrument of witchcraft; hindered, sometimes entirely, some¬
and that this was a visible object, such times in part, sometimes so that they
as a stone or a piece of wood or a mouse cannot harm a certain man himself, and
or some serpent. For it is agreed that sometimes so that they cannot harm his
the devil can perform such things by friends. And these are, that a man
himself without the need of any partner; should have a pure faith and keep the
but usually, for the perdition of her soul, commandments of God ; that he should
he compels a witch to co-operate with protect himself with the sign of the
him. - Cross and with prayer; that he should
In addition to the setting up of the reverence the rites and ceremonies of
sign of the Cross which we have men¬ the Church; that he should be diligent
tioned, the following procedure is in the performance of public justice;
practised against hailstorms and tem¬ and that he should meditate aloud or in
pests. Three of the hailstones are his heart on the Passion of Christ. And
thrown into the fire with an invocation of these things Nider also speaks. And

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 7 MALEFICARUM
191
for this reason it is a general practice to virtue, that is, according to the rites
of the Church to ring bells as a protec¬ of the Church and moral doctrine. For
tion against storms, both that the devils S. Paul says, Romans xii: Let your service
may flee from them as being consecrated be reasonable. And because of this rule,
to God and refrain from their wicked¬ they are foolish who make a vow not to
ness, and also that the people may be comb their hair on the Sabbath, or who
roused up to invoke God against tem¬ fast on Sunday, saying, The better the
pests. And for the same reason it is day the better the deed, and such like.
common to proceed against tempests But again it does not seem that it is
with the Sacrament of the Altar and superstitious to carry out the Sacra¬
sacred words, following the very ancient ment, etc.
custom of the Church in France and The third rule is to be sure that what
Germany. is done is in accordance with the statutes
But since this method of carrying out of the Catholic Church, or with the
the Sacrament to still a storm seems to witness of Holy Scripture, or according
many a little superstitious, because at least to the rites of some particular
they do not understand the rules by Church, or in accordance with universal
which it is possible to distinguish be¬ use, which S. Augustine says may be
tween that which is superstitious and taken as a law. Accordingly when the
that which is not; therefore it must be Bishops of the English were in doubt
considered that five rules are given by because the Mass was celebrated in
which anyone may know whether an different manners in different Churches,
action is superstitious, that is, outside S. Gregory wrote to them that they might
the observances of the Christian reli¬ use whatever methods they found most
gion, or whether it is in accordance with pleasing to God, whether they followed
the due and proper worship and honour the rites of the Roman or of the Gallican
of God, proceeding from the true or of any other Church. For the fact
virtue of religion both in the thoughts that different Churches have different
of the heart and in the actions of the methods in Divine worship does not
body. For these are explained in the militate against the truth, and therefore
gloss on Colossians ii, where S. Paul such customs are to be preserved, and
says: Which things have a show of wis¬ it is unlawful to neglect them. And so,
dom in superstition; and the gloss says: as we said in the beginning, it is a very
Superstition is religion observed with¬ ancient custom in the Churches of
out due discipline; as was said before. France and some parts of Germany,
The first of these is, that in all our after the consecration of the Eucharist
works the glory of God ought to be our to carry It out into the open; and this
chief aim; as it is said: Whether ye eat cannot be unlawful, provided that It
or drink, or whatsoever else ye do, do is not carried exposed to the air, but
all in the glory of God.* Therefore in enclosed and contained in a Pyx.
every work relating to the Christian The fourth rule is to take care that
religion let care be taken that it is to what is done bears some natural rela¬
the glory of God, and that in it man tion to the effect which is expected;
should give the glory chiefly to God, so for if it does not, it is judged to be
that by that very work the mind of man superstitious. On this account unknown
may be put in subjection to God. characters and suspected names, and
And although, according to this rule,
the images or charts of necromancers
the ceremonies and legal procedures
and astronomers, are altogether to be
of the Old Testament are not now condemned as suspect. But we cannot
observed, since they are to be under¬ say that on this account it is super¬
stood figuratively, whereas the truth stitious to carry out Holy Relics or the
is made known in the New Testament, Eucharist as a protection against the
yet the carrying out of the Sacrament plagues of the devil; for it is rather a
or of Relics to still a storm does not seem most religious and salutary practice,
to militate against this rule. since in that Sacrament lies all our help
The second rule is that care should against the Adversary.
be taken that the work is a discipline The fifth rule is to be careful that what
to restrain concupiscence, or a bodily is done should give no occasion for
abstinence, but in the way that is owed scandal or stumbling; for in that case,
although it be not superstitious, yet
* “Glory of God” Corinthians” x, 31. because of the scandal it should be

MALLEUS Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 8
forgone or postponed, or done secretly wherefore men must be urged to con¬
without scandal. Therefore if this carry¬ fess their sins.
ing of the Sacrament can be done with¬ In some provinces even solemn exout scandal, or even secretly, then it communications are pronounced; but
should not be neglected. For by this then they obtain power of adjuration
rule many secular priests neglect the over devils.
use of benedictions by means of devout Another terrible thing which God
words either uttered over the sick or permits to happen to men is when their
bound round their necks. I say that own children are taken away from
nothing should be done, at least pub¬ women, and strange children are put
licly, if it can give any occasion of in their place by devils. And these
stumbling to other simple folk. children, which are commonly called
Let this be enough on the subject changelings, or in the German tongue
of the remedies against hailstorms, either Wechselkinder, are of three kinds. For
by words or lawful actions. some are always ailing and crying, and
yet the milk of four women is not enough
to satisfy them. Some are generated by
☆
the operation of Incubus devils, of
whom, however, they are not the sons,
CHAPTER VIII
but of that man from whom the devil
has received the semen as a Succubus,
Certain Remedies prescribed against those
or whose semen he has collected from
Dark and Horrid Harms with which
some nocturnal pollution in sleep. For
Devils may Afflict Men.
Y these children are sometimes, by Divine
ET again we reserve our judge¬ permission, substituted for the real
ment in discussing the remedies children.
against certain injuries to the fruits of And there is a third kind, when the
the earth, which are caused by canker- devils at times appear in the form of
worms, or by huge flights of locusts young children and attach themselves
and other insects which cover vast areas to the nurses. But all three kinds have
of land, and seem to hide the surface this in common, that though they are
of the ground, eating up everything to very heavy, they are always ailing and
the very roots in the vineyards and do not grow, and cannot receive enough
devouring fields of ripe crops. In the milk to satisfy them, and are often
same light too we consider the remedies reported to have vanished away.
against the stealing of children by the And it can be said that the Divine
work of devils. pity permits such things for two reasons.
But with regard to the former kind of First, when the parents dote upon their
injury we may quote S. Thomas, the children too much, and this is a punish¬
Second of the Second, Question 90, where ment for their own good. Secondly, it is
he asks whether it is lawful to adjure to be presumed that the women to
an irrational creature. He answers that whom such things happen are very
it is; but only in the way of compulsion, superstitious, and are in many other
by which it is sent back to the devil, ways seduced by devils. But God is
who uses irrational creatures to harm truly jealous in the right sense of the
us. And such is the method of adjura¬ word, which means a strong love for a
tion in the exorcisms of the Church man’s own wife, which not only does
by which the power of the devil is kept not allow another man to approach her,
away from irrational creatures. But if but like a jealous husband will not suffer
the adjuration is addressed to the irra¬ the hint or suspicion of adultery. In
tional creature itself, which under¬ the same way is God jealous of the soul
stands nothing, then it would be nuga¬ which He bought with His Precious
tory and vain. From this it can be Blood and espoused in the Faith; and
understood that they can be driven off cannot suffer it to be touched by, to
by lawful exorcisms and adjurations, converse with, or in any way to approach
the help of the Divine mercy being or have dealings with the devil, the
granted; but first the people should be enemy and adversary of salvation. And
bidden to fast and to go in procession if a jealous husband cannot suffer even
and practise other devotions. For this a hint of adultery, how much more
sort of evil is sent on account of adul¬ will he be disturbed when adultery is
teries and the multiplication of crimes; actually committed! Therefore it is no

Part II. Qn 2. Ch. 8 MALEFICARUM 193
wonder if their own children are taken there are no rational creatures except
away and adulterous children sub¬ men and Angels; therefore they can
stituted. only be devils.
And indeed that it may be more Again, in Leviticus xix: Ye shall not
strongly impressed how God is jealous round the comers of your heads, neither
of the soul, and will not suffer anything shalt thou mar the corners of thy
which might cause a suspicion, it is beard; because they did this idolatrously
shown in the Old Law where, that He in veneration of idols.
might drive His people farther from Again in Deuteronomy xxii: God says
idolatry, He not only forbade idolatry, that men shall not put on the garments
but also many other things which might of women, or conversely; because they
give occasion to idolatry, and seemed to did this in honour of the goddess Venus,
have no use in themselves, although in and others in honour of Mars or Priapus. I
some marvellous way they retain some And for the same reason He com¬
use in a mystical sense. For He not only manded the altars of idols to be de¬
says in Exodus xxii: Thou shalt not stroyed; and Hezechias destroyed the
suffer a witch to live on the earth; but Brazen Serpent when the people wanted
He adds this: She shall not dwell in thy to sacrifice to it, saying: It is brass.
land, lest perchance she cause thee For the same reason He forbade the
y
to sin. Similarly common bawds and observance of visions and auguries, and
bulkers are put to death, and not commanded that the man or woman in
allowed to company with men. whom there was a familiar spirit should
Note the jealousy of God, Who says be put to death. Such are now called
as follows in Deuteronomy xxii: If thou soothsayers. All these things, because
find a bird’s nest, and the dam sitting they give rise to suspicion of spiritual
upon the eggs or upon the young ones, adultery, therefore, as has been said,
thou shalt not take the dam with the from the jealousy which God has for
young, but thou shalt let the dam fly the souls He has espoused, as a husband
away; because the Gentiles used these espouses a wife, they were all forbidden
to procure sterility. The jealous God by Him.
would not suffer in His people this sign And so we preachers also ought to
of adultery. In like manner in our days bear in mind that no sacrifice is more
when old women find a penny, they acceptable to God than a jealousy of
think it a sign of great fortune; and souls, as S. Jerome says in his com¬
conversely, when they dream of money mentaries upon Ezekiel.
it is an unlucky sign. Also God taught Therefore in the Third Part of this
that all vessels should be covered, and work we shall treat of the extermination
that when a vessel had no cover it of witches, which is the ultimate remedy.
should be considered unclean. For this is the last recourse of the
There was an erroneous belief that Church, to which she is bound by Divine
when devils came in the night (or the commandment. For it has been said:
Good People * as old women call them, Ye shall not suffer witches to live upon
though they are witches, or devils in the earth. And with this will be in¬
their forms) they must eat up everything, cluded the remedies against archerthat afterwards they may bring greater wizards; since this kind can only be
abundance of stores. Some people give exterminated by secular law.
colour to the story, and call them A remedy. When certain persons for
Screech Owls; but this is against the the sake of temporal gain have devoted
opinion of the Doctors, who say that themselves entirely to the devil, it has
often been found that, though they may
be freed from the devil’s power by true
* “Good PeopleSo in Ireland the fairies
confession, yet they have been long and
are called “good people,” and traditionally seem
grievously tormented, especially in the
to be of a benevolent but capricious and even
night. And God allows this for their
mischievous disposition. In some parts of High¬
punishment. But a sign that they have
land Scotland fairies are called “daoine sithe” or
been delivered is that, after confession,
(“men of peace,” and it is believed that every year
all the money in their purses or coffers
the devil carries off a tenth part of them.
vanishes. Many examples of this could
It will be readily remembered that to the
Greeks the Fairies were cd Eu(xsv£8e<;, the be adduced, but for the sake of brevity
gracious goddesses. they are passed over and omitted.

THE THIRD PART soothsayers obtain their results by
RELATING TO THE curious means, so do witches look for
JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS IN and obtain from the devil the injuries
which they do to creatures, unlawfully
BOTH THE ECCLESIASTICAL
seeking from His creatures that which
AND CIVIL COURTS
should be sought from God alone;
AGAINST WITCHES AND
therefore both are guilty of the sin of
INDEED ALL HERETICS
idolatry.
This is the sense of Ezechiel xxi, 23;
CONTAINING XXXV QUESTIONS IN that the King of Babylon stood at the
WHICH IS MOST CLEARLY SET OUT THE
cross-roads, snuffling his arrows * and
FORMAL RULES FOR INITIATING A
interrogating idols.
PROCESS OF JUSTICE, HOW IT SHOULD
Again it may be said that, when the
BE CONDUCTED, AND THE METHOD OF
Canon says “Unless these are also here¬
PRONOUNCING SENTENCE
tics,” it allows that some diviners and
☆ soothsayers are heretics, and should
therefore be subject to trial by the In¬
quisitors ; but in that case artificial
GENERAL
diviners would also be so subject, and
&
no written authority for that can be
INTRODUCTORY found.
Again, if witches are to be tried by
T
Who are the Fit and Proper Judges in the the InquisitdTS, it must be for the crime
Trial of Witches? of heresy; but it is clear that the deeds
of witches can be committed without
HE question is whether witches,
any heresy. For when they stamp into
together with their patrons and
the mud the Body of Christ, although
protectors and defenders, are so
this is a most horrible crime, yet it may
entirely subject to the jurisdic¬
be done without any error iii the
tion of the Diocesan Ecclesiastical Court
understanding, and therefore without
and the Civil Court so that the Inquisi¬
heresy. For it is entirely possible for a
tors of the crime of heresy can be alto¬
gether relieved from the duty of sitting in
* “Arrows.” Esarhaddon is employing a
judgement upon them. And it is argued
mode of sortilege by arrows, belomancy, which
that this is so. For the Canon (c. accu¬
was extensively practised among the Chaldeans,
satus, § sane, lib.VI) says: Certainly those
as also among the Arabs. Upon this text S.
whose high privilege it is to judge con¬ Jerome comments: “He shall stand in the high¬
cerning matters of the faith ought not to way, and consult the oracle after the manner of
be distracted by other business; and his nation, that he may cast arrows into a quiver,
Inquisitors deputed by the Apostolic and mix them together, being written upon or
See to inquire into the pest of heresy marked with the names of each people, that he
should manifestly not have to concern may see whose arrow will come forth, and which
city he ought first to attack.” The arrows
themselves with diviners and sooth¬
employed by the Arabs were often three in number,
sayers, unless these are also heretics, nor
upon the first of which was inscribed, “My Lord
should it be their business to punish
hath commanded me”; upon the second, “My
such, but they may leave them to be
Lord hath forbidden me”; and the third was
punished by their own judges.
blank. If the inquirer drew the first it was an
Nor does there seem any difficulty in
augury of success; the second gave an omen of
the fact that the heresy of witches is not
failure; if the third were drawn, all three were
mentioned in that Canon. For these
mixed again and another trial was made. In
are subject to the same punishment as some countries divining rods were employed
the others in the court of conscience, as instead of arrows. These were drawn from a
the Canon goes on to say (dist. i, pro vessel, or, it might be, cast into the air, the
dilectione). If the sin of diviners and position in which they fell being carefully noted.
witches is secret, a penance of forty days This practice is rhabdomancy. The LXX,
shall be imposed upon them: if it is Ezechiel” xxi, 21, reads pa^Sopiavrsla, not
notorious, they shall be refused the
3eXo|i.ayrs(a, and rhabdomancy is mentioned by
S. Cyril of Alexandria. The “Koran,” V, for¬
Eucharist. And those whose punish¬
bids prognostication by divining arrows, which
ment is identical should receive it from
are there denounced as “an abomination of the
the same Court. Then, again, the guilt
work of Satan.” See my “History of Witch¬
of both being the same, since just as
craft,” Chap. V, pp. 182-83.

Part III. 195
person to believe that It is the Lord’s heresy. It follows therefore that, when
Body, and yet throw It into the mud to the crime is not purely ecclesiastical, as
satisfy the devil, and this by reason of is the case with witches because of the
some pact with him, that he may temporal injuries which they commit, it
obtain some desired end, such as the must be punished by the Civil and not
finding of a treasure or anything of that by the Ecclesiastical Court.
sort. Therefore the deeds of witches Besides, in the last Canon Law con¬
need involve no error in faith, however cerning Jews it says: His goods are to
great the sin may be; in which case be confiscated, and he is to be con¬
they are not liable to the Court of the demned to death, because with per¬
Inquisition, but are left to their own verse doctrine he opposed the Faith of
judges. Christ. But if it is said that this law
Again, Solomon showed reverence to refers to Jews who have been converted,
the gods of his wives out of com¬ and have afterwards returned to the
plaisance, and was not on that account worship of the Jews, this is not a valid
guilty of apostasy from the Faith; for in objection. Rather is the argument
his heart he was faithful and kept the strengthened by it; because the civil
true Faith. So also when witches give Judge has to punish such Jews as
homage to devils by reason of the pact apostates from the Faith; and therefore
they have entered into, but keep the witches who abjure the Faith ought to
Faith in their hearts, they are not on be treated in the same way; for abjura¬
that account to be reckoned as heretics. tion of the Faith, either wholly or in
But it may be said that all witches part, is the essential principle of witches.
have to deny the Faith, and therefore And although it says that apostasy
must be judged heretics. On the con¬ and heresy are to be judged in the
trary, even if they were to deny the same way, yet it is not the part of the
Faith in their hearts and minds, still they ecclesiastical but of the civil Judge to
could not be reckoned as heretics, but concern himself with witches. For no
as apostates. But a heretic is different one must cause a commotion among
from an apostate, and it is heretics who the people by reason of a trial for
are subject to the Court of the In¬ heresy; but the Governor himself must
quisition; therefore witches are not so make provision for such cases.
subject. The Authentics of Justinian, speaking
Again it is said, in c. 26, quest. 5: Let of ruling princes, says: You shall
the Bishops and their representatives not permit anyone to stir up your
strive by every means to rid their Province by reason of a judicial in¬
parishes entirely of the pernicious art of quiry into matters concerning religions
soothsaying and magic derived from or heresies, or in any way allow an in¬
Zoroaster; and if they find any man or junction to be put upon the Province
woman addicted to this crime, let him over which you govern; but you shall
be shamefully cast out of their parishes yourself provide, making use of such
in disgrace. So when it says at the end monies and other means of investi¬
of c. 348, Let them leave them to their gation as are competent, and not allow
own Judges; and since it speaks in the anything to be done in matters of
plural, both of the Ecclesiastic and the religion except in accordance with our
Civil Court; therefore, according to this precepts. It is clear from this that no
Canon they are subject to no more than one must meddle with a rebellion
the Diocesan Court. against the Faith except the Governor
But if, just as these arguments seem himself.
to show it to be reasonable in the case Besides, if the trial and punishment
of Inquisitors, the Diocesans also wish of such witches were not entirely a |
to be relieved of this responsibility, and matter for the civil Judge, what would
to leave the punishment of witches to be the purpose of the laws which pro¬
the secular Courts, such a claim could vide as follows? All those who are
be made good by the following argu¬ commonly called witches are to be
ments. For the Canon says, c. ut in¬ condemned to death. And again:
quisitionis: We strictly forbid the tem¬ Those who harm innocent lives by
poral lords and rulers and their officers magic arts are to be thrown to the
in any way to try or judge this crime, beasts. Again, it is laid down that they
since it is purely an ecclesiastical mat¬ are to be subjected to questions and
ter : and it speaks of the crime of tortures; and that none of the faithful

i g6 MALLEUS Part III.
arc to associate with them, under pain mit temporal harm and violate the
of exile and the confiscation of all their faith; therefore it belongs to the Judges
goods. And many other penalties are of both Courts to try, sentence, and
added, which anyone may read in punish them.
those laws. This opinion is substantiated by the
But in contradiction of all these Authentics, where it is said: If it is an
arguments, the truth of the matter is ecclesiastical crime needing ecclesias¬
that such witches may be tried and tical punishment and fine, it shall be
punished conjointly by the Civil and tried by a Bishop who stands in favour
the Ecclesiastical Courts. For a canon¬ with God, ana not even the most
ical crime must be tried by the Gover¬ illustrious Judges of the Province shall
nor and the Metropolitan of the have any hand in it. And we do not
Province; not by the Metropolitan wish the civil Judges to have any know¬
alone, but together with the Gover¬ ledge of such proceedings; for such
nor. This is clear in the Authentics, matters must be examined ecclesiastic¬
where ruling princes are enjoined as ally and the souls of the offenders must
follows: If it is a canonical matter be corrected by ecclesiastical penalties,
which is to be tried, you shall inquire according to the sacred and divine
into it together with the Metropolitan rules which our laws worthily follow.
of the Province. And to remove all So it is said. Therefore it follows that
doubt on this subject, the gloss says: If on the other hand a crime which is of a
it is a simple matter of the observance mixed nature must be tried and pun¬
of the faith, the Governor alone may ished by both Courts.
Etry it; but if the matter is more com- We make our answer to all the above
licated, then it must be tried by a as follows. Our main object here is to
ishop and the Governor; and the show how, with God’s pleasure, we
matter must be kept within decent Inquisitors of Upper Germany may be
limits by someone who has found relieved of the duty of trying witches,
favour with God, who shall protect the and leave them to be punished by their
orthodox faith, and impose suitable own provincial Judges; and this be¬
indemnities of money, and keep our cause of the arduousness of the work:
subjects inviolate, that is, shall not provided always that such a course shall
corrupt the faith in them. m no way endanger the preservation
And again, although a secular prince of the faith and the salvation of souls.
may impose the capital sentence, yet And therefore we engaged upon this
this does not exclude the judgement of work, that we might leave to the
the Church, whose part it is to try Judges themselves the methods of
and judge the case. Indeed this is per¬ trying, judging and sentencing in such
fectly clear from the Canon Law in the cases.
chapters de summa trin. and fid. cath., Therefore in order to show that the
and again in the Law concerning Bishops can in many cases proceed
heresy, c. ad abolendam and c. uergentis against witches without the Inquisitors;
and c. excommunicamus, i and 2. For the although they cannot so proceed with¬
same penalties are provided by both out the temporal and civil Judges in
the Civil and the Canon Laws, as is cases involving capital punishment ; it
shown by the Canon Laws concerning is expedient that we set down the
the Manichaean* and Arian heresies. opinions of certain other Inquisitors in
Therefore the punishment of witches parts of Spain, and (saving always the
belongs to both Courts together, and reverence due to them), since we all
not to one separately. belong to one and the same Order of
Again, the laws decree that clerics Preachers, to refute them, so that
shall be corrected by their own Judges, each detail may be more clearly under¬
and not by the temporal or secular stood.
Courts, because their crimes are con¬ Their opinion is, then, that all
sidered to be purely ecclesiastical. But witches, diviners, necromancers, and in
the crime of witches is partly civil and short all who practise any kind of
partly ecclesiastical, because they com¬ divination, if they have once embraced
and professed the Holy Faith, are liable
to the Inquisitorial Court, as in the
* “Manichaean.” For the close connexion
between the Manichees and witches see my “His¬ three cases noted in the beginning of
tory of Witchcraft,” Chap. I. the chapter, Multorum querela) in the

Part III. MALEFICARUM 197
decretals of Pope Clement * concerning detail. For when the Canon says, as
heresy; in which it says that neither was shown in the first argument, that
must the Inquisitor proceed without the the Inquisitors of heresy should not con¬
Bishop, nor the Bishop without the In¬ cern themselves with soothsayers and
quisitor: although there are five other diviners unless they manifestly savour of
cases in which one may proceed without heresy, they say that soothsayers and
the other, as anyone who reads the diviners are of two sorts, either arti¬
chapter may see. But in one case it is ficial or heretical. And the first sort are
definitively stated that one must not called diviners pure and simple, since
proceed without the other, and that is they work merely by art; and such are
when the above diviners are to be con¬ referred to in the chapter de sortilegiis,
sidered as heretics. where it says that the presbyter UdalIn the same category they place ricus went to a secret place with a cer¬
blasphemers, and those who in any way tain infamous person, that is, a diviner,
invoke devils, and those who are ex¬ says the gloss, not with the intention of
communicated and have contumaci¬ invoking the devil, which would have
ously remained under the ban of ex- been heresy, but that, by inspecting the
communication for a whole year, either astrolabe, he might find out some hid¬
because of some matter concerning faith den thing. And this, they say, is pure
or, in certain circumstances, not on divination or sortilege.
account of the faith; and they further But the second sort are called heret¬
include several other such offences: And ical diviners, whose art involves some
by reason of this the authority of the worship of or subjection to devils, and
Ordinary is weakened, since so many who essay by divination to predict the
more burdens are placed upon us In¬ future or something of that nature,
quisitors which we cannot safely bear which manifestly savours of heresy;
in the sight of the terrible Judge who and such are, like other heretics, liable
will demand from us a strict account of to the Inquisitorial Court.
the duties imposed upon us. And that this is the meaning of the
And because their opinion cannot be Canon they prove from commentaries
refuted unless the fundamental thesis of the Canonists on the word “savour.”
upon which it is founded is proved un¬ For Giovanni d’Andrea, writing on this
sound, it is to be noted that it is based Canon accusatus, and on the word
upon the commentators on the Canon, “savour,” says: They savour of heresy
especially on the chapter accusatus, and in this way, that they utter nefarious
§ sane, and on the words “savour of prayers and offer sacrifices at the altars
heresy.” Also they rely upon the sayings of idols, and they consult with devils
of the Theologians, S. Thomas, Blessed and receive answers from them; or they
Albert, and S. Bonaventura, in the meet together to practise heretical
Second Book of Sentences, dist. 7. sortes, or make predictions by means of
It is best to consider some of these in blood or by the Lord’s Body; or in their
sortes, that they may have an answer,
re-baptize a child, and practise other
* “Pope Clement” Pope Clement V, born at
such matters.
Villandraut, 1264; elected to the Chair of S.
Many others also they quote in
Peter, 5 June, 1305; died at Roquemare, 20
support of their opinion, including John
April, 1314; completed the mediaeval “Corpus
luris Canonici” by the publication of a collection Modestus; S. Raymund, and William de
of papal decretals known as “Clementinae” or Laudun, O.P. And they refer to the de¬
“Liber Clementinarum ,” sometimes as “Liber cision of the Church at the Council of
Septimus” in reference to the “Liber Sextus” of Aquitaine, c. 26, q. 5, Episcopi, where
Boniface VIII. It contains decretals of this such superstitious women are called
latter Pontiff, of Benedict XI, and of Clement infidels, saying, Would that these had
himself Together with the decrees of the Council
perished alone in their perfidy. And
of Vienne it was promulgated, 21 March, 1314,
perfidy in a Christian is called heresy;
at the Papal residence of Monteaux near Cartherefore they are subject to the Court
pentras. It is divided into five books with sub¬
of the Inquisitors of heresy.
divisions of titles and chapters. As Clement V
They quote also the Theologians,
died before the collection had been generally
especially S. Thomas, the Second Book
published, John XXII promulgated it anew, 23
of Sentences, dist. 7, where he considers
October, 1317, and sent it to the University of
Bologna as the authoritative Corpus of decretals whether it is a sin to use the help of
to be used in the courts and schools. devils. For speaking of that passage in

i g8 MALLEUS Part III.
Esaias viii: Should not a people seek This being the case, it follows that,
unto their God? he says among other however serious and grave may be the
things: In everything the fulfilment of sin which a person commits, if it does
which is looked for from the power of not necessarily imply heresy, then he
the devil, because of a pact entered into must not be judged as a heretic, al¬
with him, there is apostasy from the though he is to be punished. Conse¬
faith, either in word, if there is some quently an Inquisitor need not inter¬
invocation, or in deed, even if there be fere in the case of a man who is to be
no sacrifice offered. unished as a malefactor, but not as a
To the same effect they quote eretic, but may leave him to be tried
Albertus, and Peter of Tarentaise, and by the Judges of his own Province.
Giovanni Bonaventura,* who has lately It follows again that all the crimes of
been canonized, not under the name of invoking devils and sacrificing to them,
Giovanni, although that was his true of which the Commentators and Canon¬
name. Also they quote Alexander of ists and Theologians speak, are no con¬
Hales and Guido the Carmelite.t All cern of the Inquisitors, but can be left
these say that those who invoke devils to the secular or episcopal Courts,
are apostates, and consequently here¬ unless they also imply heresy. This
tics, and therefore subject to the Court being so, and it being the case that the
of the Inquisitors of heretics. crimes we are considering are very
But the said Inquisitors of Spain have often committed without any heresy,
not, by the above or any other argu¬ those who are guilty of such crimes are
ments, made out a sufficient case to not to be judged or condemned as
prove that such soothsayers etc. may heretics, as is proved by the following
not be tried by the Ordinary or the authorities and arguments.
Bishops without the Inquisitors; and For a person rightly to be adjudged a
that the Inquisitors may not be relieved heretic he must fulfil five conditions.
from the duty of trying such diviners First, there must be an error in his
and necromancers, and even witches: reasoning. Secondly, that error must be
not that the Inquisitors are not rather in matters concerning the faith, either
to be praised than blamed when they being contrary to the teaching of the
do try such cases, when the Bishops fail Church as to the true faith, or against
to do so. And this is the reason that sound morality and therefore not lead¬
they have not proved their case. The ing to the attainment of eternal life.
Inquisitors need only concern them¬ Thirdly, the error must lie in one who
selves with matters of heresy, and the has professed the Catholic faith, for
heresy must be manifest; as is shown by otherwise he would be a Jew or a
the frequently quoted Canon accusatus, Pagan, not a heretic. Fourthly, the
§ sane. error must be of such a nature that he
who holds it must still confess some of
the truth of Christ as touching either
* “Bonaventura.” The parents of S. Bona¬
His Godhead or His Manhood; for if a
ventura were Giovanni di Fidanza and Maria
man wholly denies the faith, he is an
Ritella. He was born at Bagnorea, near
apostate. Fifthly, he must pertinaci¬
Viterbo, in 1221, and baptized Giovanni. This
was changed to Bonaventura owing to the ously and obstinately hold to and follow
exclamation of S. Francis, “O buona ventura,” that error. And that this is the sense of
when the child was brought to him to be cured of the Canon where it speaks of heresy and
a dangerous illness. (This account has been heretics is proved as follows (not by way
doubted, and it is true that others bore the name of refuting, but of substantiating the
before S. Bonaventura.) S. Bonaventura was gloss of the Canonists).
canonized by Sixtus IV, 14 April, 1482. This
For it is well known to all through
formal enrolment in the catalogue of the Saints
common practice that the first essential
was thus long delayed mainly owing to the un¬
of a heretic is an error in the under¬
fortunate dissensions concerning Franciscan
standing; but two conditions are neces¬
affairs after the Saint’s death, /5 July, 1274.
sary before a man can be called a
He was inscribed among the principal Doctors of
heretic; the first material, that is, an
the Church by Sixtus V, 14 March, 1587. His
error in reasoning, and the second
feast is celebrated 14 July.
formal, that is, an obstinate mind. S.
t “Guido the Carmelite.” Guy de Perpignan,
“Doctor Parisiensis,” d. 1342; General of the Augustine shows this when he says:
Carmelite Order from 1318-20. His chief work A heretic is one who either initiates or
was the “Summa de Haeresibus.” follows new and false opinions. It can

Part III. MALEFICARUM
199
also be proved by the following reason¬ understanding of his power and know¬
ing : heresy is a form of infidelity, and ledge. Such would be the case with any
infidelity exists subjectively in the who believed that the devil could coerce
intellect, in such a way that a man a man’s free will; or that, by reason of
believes something which is quite con¬ their pact with him, the devil could do
trary to the true faith. anything which they desired, however
This being so, whatever crime a man much it were forbidden by God; or
commits, if he acts without an error in that the devil can know the whole of
his understanding he is not a heretic. the future; or that he can effect any¬
For example, if a man commits fornica¬ thing which only God can do. For there
tion or adultery, although he is dis¬ is no doubt that men with such beliefs
obeying the command Thou shalt not have an error in their understanding,
commit adultery, yet he is not a heretic holding a wrong opinion of the power
unless he holds the opinion that it is of the devil; and therefore, granting the
lawful to commit adultery. The point other conditions necessary for heresy,
can be argued in this way: When the they would be heretics, and would be
nature of a thing is such that two con¬ subject at once to the Ordinary and to
stituent parts are necessary to its exist¬ the Inquisitorial Court.
ence, if one of those two parts is wanting But if they act for the reasons we have
the thing itself cannot exist; for if it said, not out of any wrong belief con¬
could, then it would not be true that cerning baptism or the other matters
that part is necessary to its existence. we have mentioned, as they very com¬
For in the constitution of a house it is monly do; for since witches and necro¬
necessary that there should be a founda¬ mancers know that the devil is the
tion, walls, and a roof; and if one of enemy of the faith and the adversary
these is missing, there is no house. of salvation, it must follow that they
Similarly, since an error in the under¬ are compelled to believe in their hearts
standing is a necessary condition of that there is great might in the faith
heresy, no action which is done entirely and that there is no false doctrine of
without any such error can make a man which the father of lies is not known to
a heretic. be the origin; then, although they sin
Therefore we Inquisitors of Germany most grievously, yet they are not here¬
are in agreement with Blessed Anto¬ tics. And the reason is that they have
ninus where he treats of this matter in no wrong belief concerning the sacra¬
the second part of his Summa; saying ment, although they use it wrongly and
that to baptize images, to worship sacrilegiously. Therefore they are
devils, to sacrifice to them, to tread rather sorcerers than heretics, and are
underfoot the Body of Christ, and all to be classed with those whom the above
such terrible crimes, do not make a man Canon accusatus declares are not prop¬
a heretic unless there is an error in his erly subject to the Inquisitorial Court,
understanding. Therefore a man is not since they do not manifestly savour of
a heretic who, for example, baptizes an heresy; their heresy being hidden, if
image, not holding any erroneous belief indeed it exists at all.
about the Sacrament of Baptism or its It is the same with those who worship
effect, nor thinking that the baptism of and sacrifice to the devil. For if they do
the image can have any effect of its this in the belief that there is any
own virtue; but does this in order that divinity in devils, or that they ought to
he may more easily obtain some desire be worshipped and that, by reason of
from the devil whom he seeks to please such worship, they can obtain from the
by this means, acting with either an devil what they desire in spite of the
implied or an expressed pact that the prohibition or permission of God, then
devil will fulfil the desires either of they are heretics. But if they act in such
himself or of someone else. In this way a way not out of any such belief con¬
men who, with either a tacit or an cerning the devil, but so that they may
expressed pact, invoke devils with char¬ the more easily obtain their desires
acters and figures in accordance with because of some pact formed with the
magic practice to perform their desires devil, then they are not necessarily
are not necessarily heretics. But they heretics, although they sin most griev¬
must not ask from the devil anything ously.
which is beyond the power or the know¬ For greater clearness, some objections
ledge of the devil, having a wrong are to be disposed of and refuted. For

200 MALLEUS Part III.
it appears to be against our argument understanding. But when a man is a
that, according to the laws, a simonist heretic in the judgement of men, he
is not a heretic (i, q. i: “Whoever by need not necessarily be actually a here¬
means of money, but not having an tic; but because his deeds give an ap¬
error of the understanding”). For a pearance of a wrong understanding of
simonist is not in the narrow and exact the faith he is, by legal presumption,
sense of the word a heretic; but broadly considered to be a heretic.
speaking and by comparison he is so, And if it be asked whether the Church
according to S. Thomas, when he buys should stigmatize at once as heretics
ogr sells holy things in the belief that the those who worship devils or baptize
ift of grace can be had for money. images, note these answers. First, it be¬
ut if, as is often the case, he does not longs rather to the Canonists than to
act in this belief, he is not a heretic. the Theologians to discriminate in this
Yet he truly would be if he did believe matter. The Canonists will say that
that the gift of grace could be had for they are by legal presumption to be
money. considered as heretics, and to be
Again we are apparently in opposi¬ punished as such. A Theologian will
tion to what is said of heretics in the say that it is in the first instance a
Canon; namely, that he who reveres a matter for the Apostolic See to judge
heretic is himself a heretic, but he who whether a heresy actually exists or is
worships the devil sins more heavily only to be presumed in law. And this
than he who reveres a heretic, there¬ may be because whenever an effect can
fore, etc. proceed from a twofold cause, no pre¬
Also, a man must be obviously a cise judgement can be formed of the
heretic in order that he may be judged actual nature of the cause merely on
as such. For the Church is competent the basis of the effect.
to judge only of those things which are Therefore, since such effects as the
obvious, God alone having knowledge worship of the devil or asking his help
and being the Judge of that which is in the working of witchcraft, by bap¬
hidden (dist. 33, erubescant). But the tizing an image, or offering to him a
inner understanding can only be made living child, or killing an infant, and
apparent by intrinsic actions, either other matters of this sort, can proceed
seen or proved; therefore a man who from two separate causes, namely, a
commits such actions as we are con¬ belief that it is right to worship the
sidering is to be judged a heretic. devil and sacrifice to him, and that
Also, it seems impossible that anyone images can receive sacraments; or be¬
should commit such an action as the cause a man has formed some pact with
treading underfoot of the Body of Christ the devil, so that he may obtain the
unless he held a wrong opinion con¬ more easily from the devil that which
cerning the Body of Christ; for it is he desires in those matters which are
impossible for evil to exist in the will not beyond the capacity of the devil, as
unless there is error in the understand¬ we have explained above; it follows that
ing. For according to Aristotle every no one ought hastily to form a definite
wicked man is either ignorant or in judgement merely on the basis of the
error. Therefore, since they who do effect as to what is its cause, that is,
such things have evil in their wills, they whether a man does such things out of
must have an error in their under¬ a wrong opinion concerning the faith.
standings. So when there is no doubt about the
To these three objections we answer effect, still it is necessary to inquire
as follows; and the first and third may farther into the cause; and if it be
be considered together. There are two found that a man has acted out of a
kinds of judgement, that of God and perverse and erroneous opinion con¬
that of men. God judges the inner man; cerning the faith, then he is to be judged
whereas man can only judge of the a heretic and will be subject to trial by
inner thoughts as they are reflected by the Inquisitors together with the Ordi¬
outer actions, as is admitted in the third nary. But if he has not acted for these
of these arguments. Now he who is a reasons, he is to be considered a sor¬
heretic in the judgement of God is truly cerer, and a very vile sinner.
and actually a heretic; for God judges Another answer which touches the
no one as a heretic unless he has some matter nearly is that, whatever may be
wrong belief concerning the faith in his said and alleged, it is agreed that all

Part III. MALEFICARUM 201
diviners and witches who are judged as ists, or similarly with any others who
heretics by legal presumption and not
are judged to be heretics only by legal
by actual fact are subject to the Court
presumption. For they cannot proceed
oi the Ordinary, not of the Inquisitors.
against schismatic Bishops and other
And the aforesaid Inquisitors of other high Dignitaries, as is shown by the
countries cannot defend their opinions
chapter of the Inquisition Concerning
by quoting the Canon and its com¬
Heretics, Book VI, where it says: The
mentators, because they who sacrifice
Inquisitors of the sin of heresy deputed
to and worship devils are judged to be
by the Apostolic See or by any other
heretics by legal presumption, and not
authority have no power to try such
because the facts obviously show that
offenders on this sort of charge, or to
they are such. For the text says that
proceed against them under pretext of
they must savour of heresy manifestly,
their office, unless it is expressly stated
that is, intrinsically and by their very
in the letters of commission from the
nature. And it is enough for us Inquisi¬
Apostolic See that they are empowered
tors to concern ourselves with those who to do so.
are manifestly from the intrinsic nature
But if the Inquisitors know or dis¬
of the case heretics, leaving others to
cover that Bishops or other high Dig¬
their own judges.
nitaries have been charged with heresy,
It has been said that the cause must
or have been denounced or suspected
be inquired into, to know whether or
of that crime, it is their duty to report
not a man acts out of an error of faith;
the fact to the Apostolic See.
and this is easy. For the spirit of faith
Similarly the answer to their second
is known by the act of faith, which is
argument is clear from what has been
to believe and confess the faith; as the
said. For he who cherishes and com¬
spirit of chastity is shown by a chaste
forts a heretic is himself a heretic if he
life: similarly the Church must judge a
does this in the belief that he is worthy
man a heretic if his actions show that
to be cherished or honoured on account
he disputes any article of the faith. In
of his doctrine or opinion. But if he
this way even a witch, who has wholly
honours him for some temporal reason,
or in part denied the faith, or used
without any error of faith in his under¬
vilely the Body of Christ, and offered
standing, he is not rightly speaking a
homage to the devil, may have done
heretic, though he is so by a legal fiction
this merely to propitiate the devil; and
or presumption or comparison, because
even if she has totally denied the faith
he acts as if he held a wrong belief
in her heart, she is to be judged as an
concerning the faith like him whom he
apostate, for the fourth condition, which
cherishes: so in this case he is not
is necessary before anyone can rightly
subject to the Inquisitorial Court.
be said to be a heretic, will be wanting.
The third argument is similarly an¬
But if against this conclusion be set
swered. For though a man should be
the Bull and commission given to us by
judged by the Church as a heretic on
our Holy Father Innocent VIII, that
account of his outward actions, visible
witches should be tried by the Inquisi¬
and proved, yet it does not always fol¬
tors, we answer in this way. That this
low that he is actually a heretic, but is
is not to say that the Diocesans also
only so reputed by legal presumption.
cannot proceed to a definite sentence
Therefore m this case he is not liable to
against witches, in accordance with
be tried by the Inquisitorial Court, be¬
those ancient laws, as has been said.
cause he does not manifestly savour of
For that Bull was rather given to us heresy.
because of the great care with which we
For their fourth argument, it is a
have wrought to the utmost of our
false assumption to say that it is not
ability with the help of God. »
possible for anyone to tread underfoot
Therefore we cannot concede to those
the Body of Christ unless he has some
other Inquisitors their first argument,
perverse and wrong belief concerning
since the contrary conclusion is rather
the Body of Christ. For a man may do
the true one; for simonists are thought
this with a full knowledge of his sin, and
to be heretics only by legal presump¬
with a firm belief that the Body of
tion, and the Ordinaries themselves
Christ is truly there. But he does it to
without the Inquisitors can try them.
please the devil, and that he may more
Indeed, the Inquisitors have no need to
easily obtain his desire from him. And
concern themselves with various simon¬
though in every sin there is error, it

202 MALLEUS Part III.
need not necessarily be an error of the and in other chapters). And it is ex¬
understanding, which is heresy or a pressly said, that he who maintains any¬
wrong belief concerning the faith; for thing against the determination of the
it may be an erroneous use of some Church, not in an open and honest
power which turns it to vicious pur¬ manner, but in matters which concern
poses ; and then it will only be the first faith and salvation, is a heretic. For he
of those five conditions which are neces¬ need not be a heretic because he dis¬
sary constituents of heresy, in accord¬ agrees over other matters, such as the
ance with which a heretic is rightly separability of law from use in matters
liable to the Inquisitorial Co.urt. wnich are affected by use: this matter
And it is not a valid objection to say has been settled by Pope John XXII
that an Inquisitor may, nevertheless, in his Extrauagantes* where he says
proceed against those who are de¬ that they who contradict this opinion
nounced as heretics, or are under a are stubborn and rebellious against the
light or a strong or a grave suspicion Church, but not heretics.
of heresy, although they do not appear The third condition required is that
to savour manifestly of heresy. For we he who holds the error should be one
answer that an Inquisitor may proceed who has professed the Catholic faith.
against such in so far as they are de¬ For if a man has never professed the
nounced or suspected for heresy rightly Christian faith, he is not a heretic but
so called; and this is the sort of heresy simply an infidel, like the Jews or the
of which we are speaking (as we have Gentiles who are outside the faith.
often said), in which there is an error Therefore S. Augustine says in the City
in the understanding, and the other of God: The devil, seeing the human
four conditions are superadded. And race to be delivered from the worship
the second of these conditions is that of idols and devils, stirred up heretics
such error should consist in matters who, under the guise of Christians,
concerning the faith, or should be con¬ should oppose Christian doctrine. So
trary to the true decisions of the Church for a man to be a heretic it is necessary
in matters of faith and good behaviour that he should have received the Chris¬
and that which is necessary for the tian faith in baptism.
attainment of eternal life. For if the Fourthly, it is necessary that the man
error be in some matter which does not who so errs should retain some of the
concern the faith, as, for example, a true belief concerning Christ, pertain¬
belief that the sun is not greater than ing either to His divinity or to His
the earth, or something of that sort, humanity. For if he retains no part of
then it is not a dangerous error. But an the faith, he is more rightly to be con¬
error against Holy Scripture, against sidered an apostate than a heretic. In
the articles of the faith, or against the this way Julian was an apostate. For
decision of the Church, as has been said
above, is heresy (art. 24, q. 1, haec est
* “ExtrauagantesThis word designates
jides). •
some Papal decretals not contained in certain
Again, the determination of doubts
canonical collections which possess a special
respecting the faith belongs chiefly to
authority, that is, they are not found in (but
the Church, and especially to the “wander outside,” (Cextra uagari”) the Decree
Supreme Pontiff, Christ’s Vicar, the of Gratian, or the three great official collections
successor of S. Peter, as is expressly of the '’'‘Corpus Iuris” (the Decretals of Gregory
stated (art. 24, q. 1, quotiens). And against IX; the Sixth Book of the Decretals; and the
the determination of the Church, as Clementines). The term is now applied to the
S. Thomas says, art. 2, q. 2, no Doctor or collections known as the “Extrauagantes Ioannis
Saint maintains his own opinion; not XXII” and the “Extrauagantes Communes.”
When John XXII (1316-34) published the
S. Jerome nor S. Augustine nor any
Decretals already known as “Clementines,”
other. For just as he who obstinately
there also existed various pontifical documents,
argues against the faith is a heretic, so
obligatory upon the whole Church indeed, but not
also is he who stubbornly maintains his
included in the “Corpus Iuris,” and these were
opinion against the determination of the
called “Extrauagantes.” In 1325 Jenselinus de
Church in matters concerning the faith
Cassanis added glosses to twenty constitutions of
and that which is necessary for salva¬
John XXII, and named this collection “Uiginti
tion. For the Church herself has never
Extrauagantes papae Ioannis XXII.” Chappuis
been proved to be in error over matters also classified these under fourteen titles conof faith (as it is said in art. 24, q. 1, a recta, taining in all twenty chapters.

Part III. MALEFICARUM 203
the two are quite distinct, though some-*
and this is because of the temporal
times they are confused. For in this
injuries which they cause, as will be
manner there are found to be men who,
shown in the methods of passing sen¬
driven by poverty and various afflic¬
tence. And all this may be done by the
tions, surrender themselves body and
Ordinary, so that the Inquisitor can
soul to the devil, and deny the faith, on
leave his duties to him, at least in a
condition that the devil will help them
case of apostasy; for it is otherwise in
in their need to the attainment of riches other cases of sorcerers.
and honours.
The fifth condition necessary for a
For we Inquisitors have known some,
man to be rightly thought a heretic is
of whom a few afterwards repented, who
that he should obstinately and stub¬
have behaved in this way merely for
bornly persist in his error. Hence, ac¬
the sake of temporal gain, and not
cording to S. Jerome, the etymological
through any error in the understanding;
meaning of heresy is Choice. And again
wherefore they are not rightly heretics,
S. Augustine says: Not he who initiates
nor even apostates in their hearts, as
or follows false doctrines, but he who
was Julian, though they must be
obstinately defends them, is to be con¬
reckoned as apostates.
sidered a heretic. Therefore if anyone
They who are apostates in their heart
does not evilly persist in believing some
and refuse to return to the faith are,
false doctrine, but errs through ignor¬
like impenitent heretics, to be delivered
ance and is prepared to be corrected
to the secular Court. But if they are
and to be shown that his opinion is
desirous of reconciliation, they are re¬
false and contrary to Holy Scripture
ceived back into the Church, like peni¬
and the determination of the Church,
tent heretics. See the chapter ad abo¬
he is not a heretic. S. Paul also con¬
lendam,§ praesenti, de haere tic., lib. 6. Of
firms this opinion. And S. Augustine
the same opinion is S. Raymund in his
himself used to say: I may err, but I
work de Apostolica, cap. reuertentes, where
shall not be a heretic. For he was ready
he says that they who return from the
to be corrected when his error was
perfidy of apostasy, though they were
pointed out to him. And it is agreed
heretics, are to be received back like
that every day the Doctors h ive various
penitent heretics. And here the two are
opinions concerning Divine matters,
confused, as we have said. And he adds:
and sometimes they are contradictory,
Those who deny the faith through fear
so that one of them must be false; and
of death (that is, who deny the faith
yet none of them are reputed to be
for the sake of temporal gain from the
false until the Church has come to a
devil, but do not believe their error)
decision concerning them. See art. 24,
are heretics in the sight of the law, but q. 3, qui in ecclesia.
are not, properly speaking, heretics. And
From all this it is concluded that the
he adds: Although they have no erro¬ sayings of the Canonists on the words
neous belief, yet since the Church must
“ savour manifestly of heresy ” in the
judge by outward signs they are to be
chapter accusatus do not sufficiently
considered as heretics (note this fiction prove that witches and others who in
of the law); and if they return, they are
any way invoke devils are subject to
to be received as penitent heretics. For
trial by the Inquisitorial Court; for it
the fear of death, or the desire for tem¬
is only by a legal fiction that they judge
poral gain, is not sufficient to cause a such to be heretics. Neither is it proved
constant man to deny the faith of Christ. by the words of the Theologians; for
Wherefore he concludes that it is more they call such persons apostates either
holy to die than to deny the faith or to in word or in deed, but not in their
be fed by idolatrous means, as S. Augus¬ thoughts and their hearts; and it is of
tine says.
this last error that the words “ savour
The judgement of witches who deny of heresy ” speak.
the faith would be the same; that when And though such persons should be
they wish to return they should be re¬ judged to be heretics, it does not follow
ceived as penitents, but otherwise they from this that a Bishop cannot proceed
should be left to the secular Court. But against them without an Inquisitor to
they are by all means to be received a definite sentence, or punish them with
back into the bosom of the Church
imprisonment or torture. More than
when they repent; and are left to the this, even when this decision does not
secular Court if they will not return;
seem enough to warrant the exemption

204 MALLEUS Part III.
of us Inquisitors from the duty of trying decision, leaving other Inquisitors in
patches, still we are unwilling to con¬ other districts to act as seems good to
sider that we are legally compelled to them.
perform such duties ourselves, since we Therefore in answer to the arguments,
can depute the Diocesans to our office, it is clear that witches and sorcerers
at least in respect of arriving at a have not necessarily to be tried by the
judgement. Inquisitors. But as for the other argu¬
For this provision is made in the ments which seek to make it possible
Canon Law (c. multorum in prin. de for the Bishops in their turn to be re¬
haeret, in Clem.). There it says: As a lieved from the trial of witches, and
result of a general complaint, and that leave this to the Civil Court, it is clear
this sort of Inquisition may proceed that this is not so easy in their case as it
more fortunately and the inquiry into is in that of the Inquisitors. For the
this crime be conducted more skilfully, Canon Law (c. ad abolendam, c. uergentis,
diligently, and carefully, we order that and c. excommunicamus utrumque) says that
this kind of case may be tried by the in a case of heresy it is for the eccle¬
Diocesan Bishops as well as by the siastical judge to try and to judge, but
Inquisitors deputed by the Apostolic for the secular judge to carry out the
See, all carnal hatred or fear or any sentence and to punish; that is, when
temporal affection of this sort being a capital punishment is in question,
put aside; and so either of the above though it is otherwise with other peni¬
may move without the other, and arrest tential punishments.
or seize a witch, placing her in safe It seems also that in the heresy of
custody in fetters and iron chains, if it witches, though not in the case of other
seems good to him; and in this matter heresies, the Diocesans also can hand
we leave the conduct of the affair to over to the Civil Courts the duty of
his own conscience; but there must be trying and judging, and this for two
no negligence in inquiring into such reasons: first because, as we have men¬
matters in a manner agreeable to God tioned in our arguments, the crime of
and justice; but such witches must be witches is not purely ecclesiastical, being
thrust into prison rather as a matter of rather civil on account of the temporal
punishment than custody, or be ex¬ injuries which they commit; and also
posed to torture, or be sentenced to because special laws are provided for
some punishment. And a Bishop can dealing with witches.
proceed without an Inquisitor, or an Finally, it seems that in this way it is
Inquisitor without a Bishop; or, if either easiest to proceed with the extermina¬
of their offices be vacant, their deputies tion of witches, and that the greatest
may act independently of each other, help is thus given to the Ordinary in
provided that it is impossible for them the sight of that terrible Judge who, as
to meet together for joint action within the Scriptures testify, will exact the
eight days of the time when the inquiry strictest account from and will most
is due to commence; but if there be no hardly judge those who have been
valid reason for their not meeting to¬ placed in authority. Accordingly we
gether, the action shall be null and void will proceed on this understanding,
in law. namely, that the secular Judge can try
The chapter proceeds to support our and judge such cases, himself proceed¬
contention as follows: But if the Bishop ing to the capital punishment, but leav¬
or the Inquisitor, or either of their ing the imposition of any other peni¬
deputies, are unable or unwilling, for tential punishment to the Ordinary.
any of the reasons which we have men¬
tioned, to meet together personally,
A Summary or Classification of the Matters
they can severally depute their duties
Treated of in this Third Part.
to each other, or else signify their advice
and approval by letters. In order, then, that the Judges both
From this it is clear that even in those ecclesiastical and civil may have a ready
cases where the Bishop is not entirely knowledge of the methods of trying,
independent of the Inquisitor, the In¬ judging and sentencing in these cases,
quisitor can depute the Bishop to act we shall proceed under three main
in his stead, especially in the matter of heads. First, the method of initiating a
passing sentence: therefore we ourselves process concerning matters of the faith;
have decided to act according to this second, the method of proceeding with

Part III. Question i. MALEFICARUM
205
the trial; and third, the method of
of sentence ought to be passed in respect
bringing it to a conclusion and passing
of each degree of suspicion. Finally, we
sentence on witches.
treat of twenty methods of delivering
The first head dezds with five difficul¬
sentence, thirteen of which are common
ties. First, which of the three methods
to all kinds of heresy, and the remainder
of procedure provided by the law is the
particular to the heresy of witches. But
most suitable. Second, the number of
since these will appear in their own
witnesses. Third, whether these can be
places, for the sake of brevity they are
compelled to take the oath. Fourth,
not detailed here.
the condition of the witnesses. Fifth,
whether mortal enemies may be allowed
☆
to give evidence.
The second head contains eleven
THE FIRST HEAD
Questions. I. How witnesses are to be
examined, and that there should always
QJJESTION I
be five persons present. Also how
j witches are to be interrogated, generally
j The Method of Initiating a Process.
and particularly. (This will be num¬ T
bered the Sixth Question of the whole HE first question, then, is what is
Part; but we alter the numeration here the suitable method of instituting
to facilitate reference by the reader.) a process on behalf of the faith against
II. Various doubts are cleared up as to witches. In answer to this it must be
negative answers, and when a witch is said that there are three methods
to be imprisoned, and when she is to be allowed by Canon Law. The first is
considered as manifestly guilty of the when someone accuses a person before
heresy of witchcraft. III. The method a judge of the crime of heresy, or of
of arresting witches. IV. Of two duties protecting heretics, offering to prove it,
which devolve upon the Judge after the and to submit himself to the penalty
arrest, and whether the names of the of talion if he fails to prove it. The
deponents should be made known to second method is when someone de¬
the accused. V. Of the conditions nounces a person, but does not offer to
under which an Advocate shall be prove it and is not willing to embroil
allowed to plead for the defence. himself in the matter; but says that he
VI. What measures the Advocate shall lays information out of zeal for the faith,
take when the names of the witnesses or because of a sentence of excom¬
are not made known to him, and when munication inflicted by the Ordinary
he wishes to protest to the Judge that or his Vicar; or because of the tem¬
the witnesses are mortal enemies of the poral punishment exacted by the secular
prisoner. VII. How the Judge ought Judge upon those who fail to lay
to investigate the suspicion of such information.
mortal enmity. VIII. Of the points The third method involves an in¬
which the Judge must consider before quisition, that is, when there is no
consigning the prisoner to torture. accuser or informer, but a general
IX. Of the method of sentencing the report that there are witches in some
prisoner to examination by torture. town or place; and then the Judge
X. Of the method of proceeding with must proceed, not at the instance of
the torture, and how they are to be tor¬ any party, but simply by virtue of his
tured; and bf the provisions against office.
silence on the part of the witch. XI. Of Here it is to be noted that a judge
the final interrogations and precautions should not readily admit the first
to be observed by the Judge. method of procedure. For one thing, it
The third head contains first of all is not actuated by motives of faith, nor
three Questions dealing with matters is it very applicable to the case of
which the Judge must take into con¬ witches, since they commit their deeds
sideration, on which depends the whole in secret. Then, again, it is full of dan¬
method of passing sentence. First, ger to the accuser, because of the
whether a prisoner can be convicted by penalty of talion which he will incur if
a trial of red-hot iron. Second, of the he fails to prove his case. Then, again,
method in which all sentences should it is very litigious.
be passed. Third, what degrees of sus¬ Let the process begin with a general
picion can justify a trial, and what sort citation affixed to the walls of the

MALLEUS Part III. Question i.
206
Note also that in the case of the
Parish Church or the Town Hall, in
second method the following caution
the following manner.
should be observed. For it has been
WHEREAS we, the Vicar of such
said that the second method of pro¬
and such Ordinary (or the Judge of
cedure and of instituting a process on
such and such county), do endeavour
behalf of the faith is by means of an
with all our might and strive with our
information, where the informer does
whole heart to preserve the Christian
not offer to prove his statement and is
people entrusted to us in unity and the
not ready to be embroiled in the case,
happiness of the Catholic faith and to
but only speaks because of a sentence
keep them far removed from every
of excommunication, or out of zeal for
plague of abominable heresy: There¬
the faith and for the good of the State.
fore we the aforesaid Judge to whose
Therefore the secular Judge must
office it belongs, to the glory and honour
specify in his general citation or warn¬
of the worshipful name of JESUS Christ
ing aforesaid, that none should think
and for the exaltation of the Holy
that he will become liable to a penalty
Orthodox Faith, and for the putting
even if he fails to prove his words;
down of the abomination of heresy,
since he comes forward not as an
especially in all witches in general and
accuser but as an informer.
in each one severally of whatever con¬
And then, since several will appear
dition or estate: (Here, if he is an
to lay information before the Judge, he
ecclesiastical Judge, let him add a sum¬
ought to take care to proceed in the
mons to all priests and dignitaries of the
following manner. First, let him have a
Church in that town and for a distance
Notary and two honest persons, either
of two miles about it, who have know¬
clerics or laymen; or if a Notary is not
ledge of this notice. And he shall add)
to be procured, then let there be two
By the authority which we exercise in
suitable men in the place of the Notary.
this district, and in virtue of holy
For this is dealt with in the c. ut
obedience and under pain of excom¬
officium, § uerum, lib. 6, where it is said:
munication, we direct, command, re¬
But because it is expedient to proceed
quire, and admonish that within the
with great caution in the trial of a
space of twelve days (Here the secular
grave crime, that no error may be com¬
Judge shall command in his own man¬
mitted in imposing upon the guilty a
ner under pain of penalties suitable to
deservedly severe punishment; we de¬
his office), the first four of which shall
sire and command that, in the examina¬
stand for the first warning, the second
tion of the witnesses necessary in such
for the second, and the third for the
a charge, you shall have two religious
third warning; and we give this treble
and discreet persons, either clerics or
canonical warning that they should
reveal it unto us if anyone know, see, laymen.
It goes on to say: In the presence of
or have heard that any person is re¬
these persons the depositions of the wit¬
ported to be a heretic or a witch, or if
nesses shall be faithfully written down
any is suspected especially of such prac¬
by a public official if one is obtainable,
tices as cause injury to men, cattle, or
or, if not, by two suitable men. Note
the fruits of the earth, to the loss of the
therefore that, having these persons, the
State. But if any do not obey these
Judge shall order the informer to lay
aforesaid commands and admonitions
his information in writing, or at least
by revealing such matters within the
give it clearly by word of mouth. And
term fixed, let him know (Here the
then the Notary or the Judge shall begin
ecclesiastical Judge shall add) that he
the process in the following manner.
is Cut off by the sword of excommunica¬
tion (The secular Judge shall add the
temporal punishments). Which sen¬ In the Name of the Lord. Amen.
tence of excommunication we impose
In the year of Our Lord-, on the
as from this time by this writing upon
- day of the - month, in the
all and several who thus stubbornly set
presence of me the Notary and of the
at naught these our canonical warnings
witnesses subscribed, N. of the town of
aforesaid, and our requirement of their
-in the Diocese of-, as above,
obedience, reserving to ourselves alone
appeared in person at-before the
the absolution of such sentence (The
honourable Judge, and offered him a
secular Judge shall conclude in his
schedule to the following effect.
manner). Given, etc.

Part III. Question i. MALEFICARUM
207
(Here shall follow the schedule in its information out of ill-will, hatred, or
entirety. But if he has not deposed in
rancour; or if he has omitted anything
writing but by word of mouth, it shall
through favour or love; or if he has
continue thus.)
been requested or suborned to lay
He appeared, etc. and laid informa¬ information.
tion to the Judge that N. of the town or
Finally, he shall be enjoined, by
arish of-in the Diocese of —-—
virtue of his oath, to keep secret what¬
ad said and asserted that he knew
ever he has said there, or whatever the
how to perform or had actually done
Judge has said to him; and the whole
certain injuries to the deponent or to
process shall be set down in writing.
other persons.
And when all this is completed, it shall
After this, he shall immediately make
be set down a little lower as follows.
the deponent take the oath in the usual
This was done at such a place on the
manner, either on the four Gospels of
- day of the - month in the
God, or on the Cross, raising three
year -, in the presence of me the
fingers and depressing two in witness
Notary or scribe together with those
of the Holy Trinity and of the damna¬
associated with me in the duty of
tion of his soul and body, that he will
writing, and of such and such witnesses
speak the truth in his depositions. And
summoned and interrogated.
when the oath has been sworn, he shall
The third method of beginning a
question him as to how he knows that
process is the commonest and most
his depositions are true, and whether
usual one, because it is secret, and no
he saw or heard that to which he
accuser or informer has to appear. But
swears. And if he says that he has seen
when there is a general report of witch¬
anything, as, for example, that the
craft in some town or parish, because
accused was present at such a time of
of this report the Judge may proceed
tempest, or that he had touched an
without a general citation or admoni¬
animal, or had entered a stable, the
tion as above, since the noise of that
Judge shall ask when he saw him,
report comes often to his ears; and then
and where, and how often, and in what
again he can begin a process in the
manner, and who were present. If he
presence of the persons, as we have said
says that he did not see it, but heard of before.
it, he shall ask him from whom he
heard it, where, when, and how often,
In the Name of the Lord. Amen.
and in whose presence, making separate
articles of each of the several points
In the year of Our Lord-, on the
above mentioned. And the Notary or
-day of the-month, or in--
scribe shall set down a record of them
months, to the ears of such and such
immediately after the aforesaid denun¬
official or judge there came a persistent
ciation ; and it shall continue thus:
public report and rumour that N. of
This denunciation, as we have said,
the town or parish of-did or said
having been made, the Inquisitor him¬
such and such a thing savouring of
self did at once cause him to swear as
witchcraft, against the faith and the
above on the four Gospels, etc. that he
common good of the State.
was speaking the truth in his deposi¬
And the whole shall be set down
tions, and did ask him how and why he
according to the common report. And
knew or suspected that what he said a little lower:
was true. He did make answer either
The case was heard on the-day
that he saw, or that he heard. The
of the-month in the year-, in
Inquisitor did then ask him where he
the presence of me the Notary of such
saw or heard this; and he answered on
and such authority, or of such and such
the-day of the-month in the
a scribe, and of such and such witnesses
year-in the town or parish ofwho were called and interrogated.
He asked him how often he saw or
But before we proceed to the second
heard it, etc. And separate articles shall
Head, which deals with the method of
fbe made, and the whole set down in
conducting this sort of process, we must
irocess, as has been said. And particufirst say something of the witnesses who
arly he shall be asked who shared or
are to be examined, as to how many
could share in his knowledge of the case.
they should be, and what should be
When all this has been done, he shall
their condition.
finally be asked whether he lays his
☆

208 MALLEUS Part III. Question 2.
by virtue of his office, inquire into any
QJJESTION II
personal enmity felt by the witnesses
towards the prisoner; and such wit¬
Of the Number of the Witnesses.
S nesses cannot be allowed, as will be
INCE we have said that in the shown later. And when the witnesses
second method the evidence of the give confused evidence on account of
witnesses is to be written down, it is something lying on their conscience, the
necessary to know how many witnesses Judge is empowered to put them
there should be, and of what condition. through a second interrogatory. For the
The question is whether a Judge may less opportunity the prisoner has to de¬
lawfully convict any person of the fend himself, the more carefully and
heresy of witchcraft on the evidence of diligently should the Judge conduct his
two legitimate witnesses whose evidence inquiry.
is entirely concordant, or whether more Therefore, although there are two
than two are necessary. And we say legitimate and concordant witnesses
that the evidence of witnesses is not against a person, even so I do not allow
entirely concordant when it is only that this would be sufficient warrant for
partially so; that is, when two witnesses a Judge to condemn a person on so
differ in their accounts, but agree in the great a charge; but if the prisoner is
substance or effect: as when one says, the subject of an evil report, a period
“ She bewitched my cow,” and the should be set for his purgation; and if
other says, “ She bewitched my child,” he is under strong suspicion on account
but they agree as to the fact of witch¬ of the evidence of two witnesses, the
craft. Judge should make him abjure the
But here we are concerned with the heresy, or question him, or defer his
case of two witnesses being in entire, not sentence. For it does not seem just to
partial, agreement. And the answer is condemn a man of good name on so
that, although two witnesses seem to be great a charge on the evidence of only
enough to satisfy the rigour of the law two witnesses, though the case is other¬
(for the rule is that that which is sworn wise with a person of bad reputation.
to by two or three is taken for the This matter is fully dealt with in the
truth); yet in a charge of this kind two Canon Law of heretics, where it is set
witnesses do not seem sufficient to en¬ down that the Bishop shall cause three
sure an equitable judgement, on ac¬ or more men of good standing to give
count of the heinousness of the crime evidence on oath to speak the truth as
in question. For the proof of an accusa¬ to whether they have any knowledge
tion ought to be clearer than day¬ of the existence of heretics in such a
light; and especially ought this to be parish.
so in the case of the grave charge of Again it may be asked whether the
heresy. Judge can justly condemn a person of
But it may be said that very little such heresy only on the evidence of
proof is required in a charge of this witnesses who in some respects differ in
nature, since it takes very little argu¬ their evidence, or merely on the strength
ment to expose a person’s guilt; for it of a general accusation. We answer that
is said in the Canon de Haereticis, lib. II, he cannot do so on either of the above
that a man makes himself a heretic if in grounds. Especially since the proofs of
the least of his opinions he wanders a charge ought, as we have said, to be
from the teaching and the path of the clearer than daylight; and in this par¬
Catholic religion. We answer that this ticular charge no one is to be con¬
is true enough with reference to the demned on merely presumptive evi¬
presumption that a person is a heretic, dence. Therefore in the case of a pris¬
but not as regards a condemnation. oner who is the subject of a general
For in a charge of this sort the usual accusation, a period of purgation shall
order of judicial procedure is cut short, be set for him; and in the case of one
since the defendant does not see the who is under strong suspicion arising
witnesses take the oath, nor are they from the evidence of witnesses, he shall
made known to him, because this might be made to abjure his heresy. But when,
expose them to grave danger; therefore, in spite of certain discrepancies, the
according to the statute, the prisoner witnesses agree in the main facts, then
is not permitted to know who are his the matter shall rest with the Judge’s
accusers. But the Judge himself must, discretion; and indirectly the question

Part III. Qns 3, 4, 5. M A L E F GARUM
209
arises how often the witnesses can be
in proving a charge than in disprov¬
examined.
ing it.
☆ This is made clear in the c. in fidei de
haer., where it says: As a protection of
the faith we allow that m a case of
QJJESTION III
inquiry into the sin of heresy, persons
under excommunication and partners
Of the Solemn Adjuration and Re-examinaand accomplices in the crime shall be
tion of Witnesses.
B admitted as witnesses, in default of other
UT it may be asked whether the proofs against heretics and their patrons,
Judge can compel witnesses to protectors and defenders; provided that
swear on oath to tell the truth in a case it appears probable both from the num¬
concerning the Faith or witches, or if ber of the witnesses and of those against
he can examine them many times. We whom they give evidence, and from
answer that he can do so, especially an other circumstances, that they are not
ecclesiastical Judge, and that in eccle¬ giving false testimony.
siastical cases witnesses can be com¬ The case of evidence given by per¬
pelled to speak the truth, and this on jurers, when it is presumed that they
oath, since otherwise their evidence are speaking out of zeal for the faith, is
would not be valid. For the Canon Law dealt with in the Canon c. accusatust
says: The Archbishop or Bishop may § licet y where it says that the evidence
make a circuit of the parish in which it of perjurers, after they have repented,
is rumoured that there are heretics, and is admissible; and it goes on to say:
compel three or more men of good re¬ If it manifestly appears that they do
pute, or even, if it seems good to him, not speak in a spirit of levity, or from
the whole neighbourhood, to give evi¬ motives of enmity, or by reason of a
dence. And if any through damnable bribe, but purely out of zeal for the
obstinacy stubbornly refuse to take the orthodox faith, wishing to correct what
oath, they shall on that account be they have said, or to reveal something
considered as heretics. about which they had kept silence, in
And that the witnesses can be exam¬ defence of the faith, their testimony
ined several times is shown by the shall be as valid as that of anyone else,
Canon, where it says that, when the provided that there is no other objection
to it.
witnesses have given their evidence in a
confused manner, or appear to have And it is clear from the same chapter
withheld part of their knowledge for of the Canon that the testimony of men
some reason, the Judge must take care of low repute and criminals, and of
to examine them afresh; for he may servants against their masters, is ad¬
legally do so. mitted; for it says: So great is the
plague of heresy that, in an action in¬
☆
volving this crime, even servants are
admitted as witnesses against their mas¬
QUESTION IV ters, and any criminal evildoer may
give evidence against any person soever.
Of the Quality and Condition of Witnesses.
N
☆
OTE that persons under a sen¬
tence of excommunication, asso¬
ciates and accomplices in the crime, QJJESTION V
notorious evildoers and criminals, or
Whether Mortal Enemies may be Admitted
servants giving evidence against their
as Witnesses.
masters, are admitted as witnesses in a
B
case concerning the Faith. And just as
UT if it is asked whether the Judge
a heretic may give evidence against a
can admit the mortal enemies of
heretic, so may a witch against a witch;
the prisoner to give evidence against
but this only in default of other proofs,
him in such a case, we answer that he
and such evidence can only be admitted
cannot; for the same chapter of the
for the prosecution and not for the de¬
Canon says: You must not understand
fence : this is true also of the evidence
that in this kind of charge a mortal
of the prisoner’s wife, sons and kindred;
personal enemy may be admitted to give
for the evidence of such has more weight
evidence. Henry of Segusio also makes

MALLEUS Part III. Question 6.
210
this quite clear. But it is mortal enemies quarrelsome women should be alto¬
that are spoken of; and it is to be noted gether rejected, saying that no faith can
that a witness is not necessarily to be be placed in them, since they are nearly
disqualified because of every sort of always actuated by motives of hatred.
enmity. And a mortal enmity is con¬ Such men are ignorant of the subdety
stituted by the following circumstances: and precautions of magistrates, and
when there is a death feud or vendetta speak and judge like men who are
between the parties, or when there has colour-blind. But these precautions are
been an attempted homicide, or some dealt with in Questions XI and XII.
serious wound or injury which mani¬
festly shows that there is mortal hatred ☆
on the part of the witness against the
prisoner. And in such a case it is pre¬
THE SECOND HEAD
sumed that, just as the witness has tried
to inflict temporal death on the prisoner QUESTION VI
by wounding him, so he will also be
willing to effect his object by accusing How the Trial is to be Proceeded with and
him of heresy; and just as he wished to Continued. And how the Witnesses are
take away his life, so he would be willing to be Examined in the Presence of Four
to take away his good name. Therefore Other Persons, and how the Accused is
the evidence of such mortal enemies is to be Questioned in Two Ways.
I
justly disqualified.
N considering the method of pro¬
But there are other serious degrees of
ceeding with a trial of a witch in the
enmity (for women are easily provoked
cause of the faith, it must first be noted
to hatred), which need not totally dis¬
qualify a witness, although they render that such cases must be conducted in
his evidence very doubtful, so that full the simplest and most summary man¬
ner, without, the arguments and con¬
credence cannot be placed in his words
unless they are substantiated by inde¬ tentions of advocates.
pendent proofs, and other witnesses This is explained in the Canon as
supply an indubitable proof of them. follows: It often happens that we insti¬
For the Judge must ask the prisoner tute a criminal process, and order it to
whether he thinks that he has any be conducted in a simple straightfor¬
enemy who would dare to accuse him ward manner without the legal quibbles
of that crime out of hatred, so that he and contentions which are introduced
might compass his death; and if he says in other cases. Now much doubt has
that he has, he shall ask who that person been experienced as to the meaning of
is; and then the Judge shall take note these words, and as to exacdy in what
whether the person named as being manner such cases should be con¬
likely to give evidence from motives of ducted ; but we, desiring as far as pos¬
malice has actually done so. And if it sible to remove all doubt on the matter,
is found that this is the case, and the sanction the following procedure once
Judge has learned from trustworthy and for all as valid: The Judge to whom
men the cause of that enmity, and if we commit such a case need not require
the evidence in question is not substan¬ any writ, or demand that the action
tiated by other proofs and the words of should be contested; he may conduct
other witnesses, then he may safely re¬ the case on holidays for the sake of the
ject such evidence. But if the prisoner convenience of the public; he should
says that he hopes he has no such shorten the conduct of the case as much
enemy, but admits that he has had as he can by disallowing all dilatory
quarrels with women; or if he says that exceptions, appeals and obstructions,
he has an enemy, but names someone the impertinent contentions of pleaders
who, perhaps, has not given evidence, and advocates, and the quarrels of wit¬
in that case, even if other witnesses say nesses, and by restraining the super¬
that such a person has given evidence fluous number of witnesses; but not in
from motives of enmity, the Judge must such a way as to neglect the necessary
not reject his evidence, but admit it proofs; and we do not mean by this
together with the other proofs. that he should omit the citation of and
There are many who are not suffi¬ swearing of witnesses to tell and not to
ciently careful and circumspect, and hide the truth.
consider that the depositions of such And since, as we have shown, the

Part III. Question 6. M A L E F CARUM
211
process is to be conducted in a simple
as a witch. Asked what was the report,
manner, and it is initiated either at the
he made answer. Asked whether he had
instance of an accuser, or of an informer
seen or heard him doing such things,
actuated by zeal, or by reason of a
he again answered accordingly. Asked
general outcry and rumour; therefore
where he had heard him use such
the Judge should try to avoid the first
words, he answered, in such a place.
method of beginning the action,
Asked in whose presence, he answered,
namely, at the instance of an accusing
in the presence of such and such.
party. For the deeds of witches in con¬
Further, he was asked whether any
junction with devils are done in secret,
of the accused’s kindred had formerly
and the accuser cannot in this case, as
been burned as witches, or had been
in others, have definite evidence by
suspected, and he answered. Asked
which he can make his statements good;
whether he associated with suspected
therefore the Judge ought to advise the
witches, he answered. Asked concern¬
accuser to set aside his formal accusa¬
ing the manner and reason of the
tion and to speak rather as an informer,
accused’s alleged words, he answered,
because of the grave danger that is in¬
for such a reason and in such a manner.
curred by an accuser. And so he can
Asked whether he thought that the
proceed in the second manner, which
prisoner had used those words care¬
is commonly used, and likewise in the
lessly, unmeaningly and thoughtlessly,
third manner, in which the process is
or rather with deliberate intention, he
begun not at the instance of any party.
answered that he had used them jok¬
It is to be noted that we have already
ingly or in temper, or without meaning
said that the Judge ought particularly
or believing what he said, or else with
to ask the informer who shares or could
deliberate intention.
share in his knowledge of the case.
Asked further how he could distin¬
Accordingly the Judge should call as
guish the accused’s motive, he answered
witnesses those whom the informer
that he knew it because he had spoken
names, who seem to have most know¬ with a laugh.
ledge of the matter, and their names
This is a matter which must be in¬
shall be entered by the scribe. After
quired into very diligently; for very
this the Judge, having regard to the
often people use words quoting someone
fact that the aforesaid denunciation of
else, or merely in temper, or as a test
heresy involves of its very nature such
of the opinions of other people; al¬
a grave charge that it cannot and must
though sometimes they are used asser¬
not be lightly passed over, since to do
tively with definite intention.
so would imply an offence to the Divine
He was further asked whether he
Majesty and an injury to the Catholic
made this deposition out of hatred or
Faith and to the State, shall proceed to
rancour, or whether he had suppressed
inform himself and examine the wit¬
anything out of favour or love, and he
nesses in the following manner.
answered, etc. Following this, he was
enjoined to preserve secrecy. This was
done at such a place on such a day in
Examination of Witnesses.
the presence of such witnesses called
The witness N., of such a place, was
and questioned, and of me the Notary
called, sworn, and questioned whether or scribe.
he knew N. (naming the accused), and
Here it must always be noted that in
answered that he did. Asked how he
such an examination at least five per¬
knew him, he answered that he had seen
sons must be present, namely, the pre¬
and spoken with him on several occa¬ siding Judge, the witness or informer,
sions, or that they had been comrades
the respondent or accused, who appears
(so explaining his reason for knowing
afterwards, and the third is the Notary
him). Asked for how long he had
or scribe: where there is no Notary the
known him, he answered, for ten or for scribe shall co-opt another honest man,
so many years. Asked concerning his
and these two, as has been said, shall
reputation, especially in matters con¬ perform the duties of the Notary; and
cerning the faith, he answered that in this is provided for by Apostolic author¬
his morals he was a good (or bad) man,
ity, as was shown above, that in this
but with regard to his faith, there was
kind of action two honest men should
a report in such a place that he used
perform as it were the duty of witnesses
certain practices contrary to the Faith, of the depositions.

212 MALLEUS Part III. Question 6.
Also it must be noted that when a progeny is infected; and when the in¬
witness is called he must also be sworn, former has deposed to this effect, and
that is, he must take the oath in the the witch herself has denied it, it lays
manner we have shown; otherwise he her open to suspicion.)
would falsely be described as called and Asked where he was brought up, and
sworn. where he chiefly lived, he answered, in
In the same way the other witnesses such or such a place. And if it appears
are to be examined. And after this the that he has changed his abode because,
Judge shall decide whether the fact is perhaps, his mother or any of his kin¬
fully proven; and if not fully, whether dred was not suspected, and had lived
there are great indications and strong in foreign districts, especially in such
suspicions of its truth. Observe that we places as are most frequented by
do not speak of a light suspicion, arising witches, he shall be questioned accord¬
from slight conjectures, but of a per¬ ingly.
sistent report that the accused has Asked why he had moved from his
worked witchcraft upon children or birthplace and gone to live in such or
animals, etc. Then, if the Judge fears such a place, he answered, for such a
the escape of the accused, he shall cause reason. Asked whether in those said
him or her to be placed in custody; places or elsewhere he had heard any
but if he does not fear his escape, he talk of witches, as, for example, the
shall have him called for examination. stirring up of tempests, the bewitching
But whether or not he places him in of cattle, the depriving of cows of their
custody, he shall first cause his house to milk, or any such matter of which he
be searched unexpectedly, and all chests was accused; if he should answer that
to be opened and all boxes in the he had, he must be asked what he had
corners, and all implements of witch¬ heard, and all that he says must be
craft which are found to be taken away. written down. But if he denies it, and
And having done this, the Judge shall says that he has heard nothing, then he
compare together everything of which must be asked whether he believes that
he has been accused, and everything of there are such things as witches, and
which he has been convicted or sus¬ that such things as were mentioned
pected by the evidence of witnesses, and could be done, as that tempests could
conduct an interrogatory on them, hav¬ be raised or men and animals be¬
ing with him a Notary, etc., as above, witched. ' l
and having caused the accused to swear Note that for the most part witches
by the four Gospels of God to speak the deny this at first; and therefore this
truth concerning both himself and engenders a greater suspicion than if
others. And they shall all be written they were to answer that they left it to a
down in this following manner. superior judgement to say whether there
were such or not. So if they deny it,
they must be questioned as follows:
The General Examination of a Witch or
Then are they innocently condemned
Wizard: and it is the First Action.
when they are burned? And he or she
The accused N. of such a place was rm/st answer.
sworn by personally touching the four
Gospels of God to speak the truth con¬
The Particular Examination of the Same.
cerning both himself and others, and
was then asked whence he was and from Let the Judge take care not to delay
where he originated. And he answered, the following questions, but to proceed
from such a place in such a Diotese. at once with them. Let her be asked
Asked who were his parents, and why the common people fear her, and
whether they were alive or dead, he whether she knows that she is defamed
answered that they were alive in such and hated, and why she had threatened
a place, or dead in such a place. such a person, saying, “You shall not
Asked whether they died a natural cross me with impunity,” and let her
death, or were burned, he answered in answers be noted.
such a way. (Here note that this ques¬ Then let her be asked what harm that
tion is put because, as was shown in the person had done her, that she should
Second Part of this work, witches gener¬ have used such words to threaten him
ally offer or devote their own children with injury. And note that this ques¬
to devils, and commonly their whole tion is necessary in order to arrive at

Part III. Question 7. M A L E F
GARUM 213
the cause of their enmity, for in the end
her answers have been negative, or
the accused will allege that the informer
affirmative, or ambiguous, let them be
has spoken out of enmity; but when
written down: Executed in such a place,
this is not mortal, but only a womanish
etc., as above.
i quarrel, it is no impediment. For this
☆ «.
/ is a common custom of witches, to stir
up enmity against themselves by some
QJJESTION VII
word or action, as, for example, to ask
someone to lend them something or else
In Which Various Doubts are Set Forth with
they will damage his garden, or someRegard to the Foregoing Questions and
thing of that sort, in order to make an
Negative Answers. Whether the Accused
occasion for deeds of witchcraft; and
is to be Imprisoned, and when she is to
they manifest themselves either in word
be considered as Manifestly Taken in the
or in action, since they are compelled
Foul Heresy of Witchcraft. This is the
to do so at the instance of the devils,
Second Action.
so that in this way the sins of Judges I
are aggravated while the witch remains
T is asked first what is to be done \
unpunished.
when, as often happens, the accused
For note that they do not do such
denies everything. We answer that the
things in the presence of others, so that
Judge has three points to consider,
if the informer wishes to produce wit¬
namely, her bad reputation, the evi¬
nesses he cannot do so. Note again that
dence of the fact, and the words of the
\ they are spurred on by the devils, as we
witnesses; and he must see whether all
have learned from many witches who
these agree together. And if, as very
have afterwards been burned; so that
often is the case, they do not altogether
often they have to work witchcraft
agree together, since, witches are vari¬
against their own wills.
ously accused of different deeds com¬
Further, she was asked how the effect
mitted in some village or town; but the
could follow from those threats, as that
evidences of the fact are visible to the
a child or animal should so quickly be
eye, as that a child has been harmed by
bewitched, and she answered. Asked,
sorcery, or, more often, a beast has been
“Why did you say that he would never
bewitched or deprived of its milk; and
know a day of health, and it was so?”
if a number of witnesses have come
she answered. And if she denies every¬
forward whose evidence, even if it show
thing» let her be asked concerning other
certain discrepancies (as that one should
bewitchments, alleged by other wit¬
say she had bewitched his child, another
nesses, upon cattle or children. Asked
his beast, and a third should merely
why she was seen in the fields or in the
witness to her reputation, and so with
stable with the cattle, and touching
the others), but nevertheless agree in
them, as is sometimes their custom, she
the substance of the fact, that is, as to
answered.
the witchcraft, and that she is suspected
Asked why she touched a child, and
of being a witch; although those wit¬
afterwards it fell sick, she answered.
nesses are not enough to warrant a con¬
Also she was asked what she did in the
viction without the fact of the general
fields at the time of a tempest, and so
report, or even with that fact, as was
with many other-matters. Again, why,
shown above at the end of Question III,
having one or two cows, she had more
yet, taken in conjunction with the
milk than her neighbours who had four
visible and tangible evidence of the fact,
or six. Again, let her be asked why she
the Judge may, in consideration of these
persists in a state of adultery or con¬
three points together, decide that the
cubinage; for although this is beside
accused is to be reputed, not as strongly
the point, yet such questions engender
or gravely under suspicion (which sus¬
more suspicion than would be the case
picions will be explained later), but as
with a chaste and honest woman who
manifestly taken in the heresy of witch¬
stood accused.
craft; provided, that is, that the wit¬
And note that she is to be continually
nesses are of a suitable condition and
questioned as to the depositions which
have not given evidence out of enmity,
have been laid against her, to see
and that a sufficient number of them,
whether she always returns the same
say six or eight or ten, have agreed
answers or not. And when this exam¬
together on oath. And then, according
ination has been completed, whether
to the Canon Law, he must subject her

MALLEUS Part III. Question 8.
214
to punishment, whether she has con¬ penalty, according to the chapter ad
fessed her crime or not. And this is abolendam, or he is to be imprisoned for
life, according to the chapter excom¬
proved as follows.
For since it is said, that when all municamus. But if he does not confess,
three of the above considerations are in and stoutly maintains his denial, he is
agreement, then she should be thought to be delivered as an impenitent to the
to be manifestly taken in heresy, it must power of the Civil Court to be punished
not be understood that it is necessary in a fitting manner, as Henry of Segusio
for all three to be in agreement, but shows in his Summa, where he treats of the
only that if this is the case the proof is manner of proceeding against heretics.
all the stronger. For either one instance It is therefore concluded that it is
by itself of the following two circum¬ most just if the Judge proceeds in that
stances, namely, the evidence of the manner with his questions and the
fact and the production of legitimate depositions of witnesses, since, as has
witnesses, is sufficient to cause a person been said, he can in a case concerning
to be reputed as manifestly taken in the Faith conduct matters quite plainly
heresy; and all the more when both and in a short and summary manner;
these considerations are in agreement. and it is meet that he should consign
For when the Jurists ask in how many the accused to prison for a time, or for
ways a person may be considered as several years, in case perhaps, being
manifestly taken in heresy, we answer depressed after a year of the squalor of
that there are three ways, as S. Bernard prison, she may confess her crimes.
has explained. This matter was treated But, lest it should seem that he arrives
of above in the First Question at the at his sentence precipitately, and to show
beginning of this work, namely, the that he proceeds with all equity, let us
evidence of the fact, when a person has inquire into what should next be done.
publicly preached heresy. But here we
consider the evidence of the fact pro¬ ☆
vided by public threats uttered by the
accused, as when she said, “You shall QUESTION VIII
have no healthy days,” or some such
thing, and the threatened effect has Which Follows from the Preceding Question,
followed. The other two ways are the ’Whether the Witch is to be Imprisoned,
legitimate proof of the case by witnesses, and of the Method of Taking her. This
and thirdly her own confession. There¬ is the Third Action of the Judge.
I
fore, if each of these singly is sufficient
to cause a person to be manifestly sus¬ T is asked whether, after she has
pected, how much more is this the case denied the accusation, the witch
when the reputation of the accused, the ought to be kept in custody in prison,
evidence of the fact, and the depositions when the three aforesaid conditions,
of witnesses all together point to the namely, her reputation, the evidence of
same conclusion. It is true that S. Ber¬ the fact, and the depositions of wit¬
nard speaks of an evident fact, and we nesses, are in agreement; or whether
here speak of the evidence of the fact; she should be dismissed with the secur¬
but this is because the devil does not ity of sureties, so that she may again
work openly, but secretly. Therefore be called and questioned. As to this
the injuries and the instruments of question there are three opinions.
witchcraft which are found constitute First, it is the opinion of some that
the evidence of the fact. And whereas she should be sent to prison, and that
in other heresies an evident fact is alone by no means ought she to be dismissed
sufficient, here we join three proofs under bond; and they hold this opinion
together. on the strength of the reasoning brought
Secondly, it is thus proved that a per¬ forward in the preceding question,
son so taken is to be punished according namely, that she is to be considered as
to the law, even though she denies the manifestly guilty when all those three
accusation. For a person taken on the considerations are in agreement.
evidence of the fact, or on the deposi¬ Others, again, think that before she is
tions of witnesses, either confesses the imprisoned she may be dismissed with
crime or does not. If he confesses and the safeguard of sureties; so that if she
is impenitent, he is to be handed over to makes her escape, she can then be con¬
the secular court to suffer the extreme sidered as convicted. But after she has

Part III. Question 8. MALEFICARUM
215
been imprisoned because of her nega¬
time to go into her room; for they are
tive answers, she is not to be released
wont to secure in this way, and bring
under any safeguard or condition of
away with them, some object or power
bail, that is, when those three con¬
of witchcraft which procures them the
siderations noted above are in agree¬
faculty of keeping silent under exam¬
ment; because in that case she could ination.
not. subsequently be sentenced and
This gives rise to the question whether
punished by death; and this, they say,
the method employed by some to cap¬
is the general custom.
ture a witch is lawful, namely, that she
The third opinion is that no definite
should be lifted from the ground by the
rule can be given, but that it must be
officers, and carried out in a basket or
left to the Judge to act in accordance
on a plank of wood so that she cannot
with the gravity of the matter as shown
again touch the ground. This can be
by the testimony of the witnesses, the
answered by the opinion of the Canon¬
reputation of the accused, and the
ists and of certain Theologians, that this
evidence as to the fact, and the extent
is lawful in three respects. First, because,
to which these three agree with each
as is shown in the introductory question
other; and that he should follow the
°f this Third Part, it is clear from the
custom of the country. And they who
opinion of many authorities, and especi¬
hold this opinion conclude by saying
ally of such Doctors as no one would
that if reputable and responsible sureties
dare to dispute, as Duns Scotus, Henry
are not to be procured, and the accused
of Segusio and Godfrey of Fontaines,
is suspected of contemplating flight, she
that it is lawful to oppose vanity with
should then be cast into prison. And
vanity. Also we know from experience \
this third opinion seems to be the most
and the confessions of witches that when
reasonable, as long as the correct pro¬
they are taken in this manner they more
cedure is observed; and this consists' in
often lose the power of keeping silence
three things.
under examination: indeed many who
First, that her house should be
have been about to be burned have
searched* as thoroughly as possible, in
asked that they might be allowed at
all holes and corners and chests, top
least to touch the ground with one foot;
and bottom; and if she is a noted witch,
and when this has been denied them
then without doubt, unless she has pre¬
and they have been asked why they
viously hidden them, there will be found
I ; made such a request, they have an¬
various instruments of witchcraft, as we
swered that if they had touched the
have shown above.
ground they would have liberated
Secondly, if she has a maid-servant
themselves, striking many other people
or companions, that she or they should
dead with lightning.
be shut up by themselves; for though
The second reason is this. It was
they are not accused, yet it is presumed
manifestly shown in the Second Part
that none of the accused’s secrets are
of this work that a witch loses all her
hidden from them.
power when she falls into the hands of
Thirdly, in taking her, if she be taken
public justice, that is, with regard to
in her own house, let her not be given
the past; but with regard to the future,
unless she receives from the devil fresh
*
“House should be searched.” Thus in the powers of keeping silent, she will con¬
famous witch trial of Dame Alice Kyteler and
fess all her crimes. Therefore let us say
her coven before the Bishop of Ossory in 1324,
, with S. Paul :f Whatsoever we do in
John le Poer the husband of Dame Alice\
word or deed, let all be done in the
deposed that in her closet were discovered
, name of the Lord JESUS Christ. And if
mysterious vials and elixirs strange necromantic
the witch be innocent, this form of
instruments and ghastly relics of mortality which
capture will not harm her.
she used in her horrid craft. Holinshed in his
“Chronicle of Ireland” ( London , 1387, p. 33), Thirdly, according to the Doctors it
sub anno 1323, has: “In rifling the closet of the is lawful to counteract witchcraft by
ladie, they found a wafer of sacramental bread, vain means; for they all agree as to
having the divels name stamped thereon in steed of this, though they are at variance over the
, ,
JES US Christ and a pipe of ointment wherewith question as to when those vain means
she greased a stafl'e, upon which she ambled and may also be unlawful. Therefore when
gallopped thorough thicke and thin when and in Henry of Segusio says that it is lawful
what manner she listedSee my “Geoerabhy of
//,
Witchcraft Chap. pp. 83-31.
t Paul.” “Colossians” iii, /7.

2l6 MALLEUS Part III. Question 9.
to oppose vanity with vanity, this is that he is not bound either to publish
explained as meaning that he speaks of the names of the deponents or to bring
vain means, not of unlawful means. All them before the accused, unless they
the more, then, is it lawful to obstruct themselves should freely and willingly
witchcraft; and it is this obstruction offer to come before the accused ana
which is referred to here, and not any lay their depositions in her presence.
unlawful practice. And it is by reason of the danger in¬
Let the Judge note also that there are curred by the deponents that the Judge
two sorts of imprisonment; one being a is not bound to do this. For although
unishment inflicted upon criminals, different Popes have had different
ut the other only a matter of custody opinions on this matter, none of them
in the house of detention. And these has ever said that in such a case the
two sorts are noted in the chapter mul¬ Judge is bound to make known to the
torum querela; therefore she ought at least accused the names of the informers or
to be placed in custody. But if it is only accusers (but here we are not dealing
a slight matter of which she is accused, with the case of an accuser). On the
and she is not of bad reputation, and contrary, some have thought that in
there is no evidence of her work upon no case ought he to do so, while others
children or animals, then she may be have thought that he should in certain
sent back to her house. But because she circumstances.
has certainly associated with witches But, finally, Boniface VIII* decreed
and knows their secrets, she must give as follows: If in a case of heresy it
sureties; and if she cannot do so, she appears to the Bishop or Inquisitor
must be bound by oaths and penalties that grave danger would be incurred
not to go out of her house unless she is by the witnesses or informers on account
summoned. But her servants and do- of the powers of the persons against
| mestics, of whom we spoke above, must whom they lay their depositions, should
be kept in custody, yet not punished. their names be published, he shall not
publish them. But if there is no danger,
their names shall be published just as
☆
in other cases.
Here it is to be noted that this refers
QUESTION IX
not only to a Bishop or Inquisitor, but
to any Judge conducting a case against
What is to be done after the Arrest, and
witches with the consent of the In¬
whether the Names of the Witnesses
quisitor or Bishop; for, as was shown
should be made Known to the Accused.
in the introductory Question, they can
This is the Fourth Action.
T depute their duties to a Judge. So that
HERE are two matters to be any such Judge, even if he be secular,
attended to after the arrest, but has the authority of the Pope, and not
it is left to the Judge which shall be only of the Emperor.
taken first; namely, the question of Also a careful Judge will take notice
allowing the accused to be defended, of the powers of the accused persons;
and whether she should be examined for these are of three kinds, namely,
in the place of torture, though not the power of birth and family, the
necessarily in order that she should be power of riches, and the power of
tortured. The first is only allowed malice. And the last of these is more
when a direct request is made; the to be feared than the other two, since
second only when her servants and it threatens more danger to the witcompanions, if she has any, have first
*
been examined in the house. “Boniface VIII.” Benedetto Gaetani, born
,
at Anagni about 1235; elected Pope 24 Decem¬
But let us proceed in the order as
ber, 1234; died at Rome, 11 October, 1303. He
above. If the accused says that she is
was one of the most eminent canonists of his age,
innocent and falsely accused, and that
and as Supreme Pontiff enriched legislation by
she wishes to see and hear her accusers, “ )
the promulgation (Bull Sacrosanctae,” 1238
then it is a sign that she is asking to
of a large number of his own constitutions and
defend herself. But it is an open ques¬
those of his predecessors since 1234, when
tion whether the Judge is bound to
Gregory IX issued his five books of Decretals.
make the deponents known to her and
In reference to this, the collection of Boniface
bring them to confront her face to VIII is known as ilLiber Sixtus,” i.e. of
face. For here let the Judge take note Pontifical Constitutions.

Part III. Question io. MALEFICARUM 217
nesses if their names are made known follows, towards the end : We command
to the accused. The reason for this is that in all cases the Bishop or Inquisi¬
that it is more dangerous to make tors shall take especial care not to sup¬
known the names of the witnesses to press the names of the witnesses as if
an accused person who is poor, because there were danger to them when there
such a person has many evil accom¬ is perfect security, nor conversely to
plices, such as outlaws and homicides, decide to publish them when there is
associated with him, who venture some danger threatened, the decision
nothing but their own persons, which in this matter resting with their own
is not the case with anyone who is conscience and discretion. And it has
nobly born or rich, and abounding in been written in comment on these
temporal possessions. And the kind of words: Whoever you are who are a
danger which is to be feared is ex¬ Judge in such a case, mark those words
plained by Pope John XXII as the well, for they do not refer to a slight
death or cutting off of themselves or risk but to a grave danger; therefore
their children or kindred, or the wast¬ do not deprive a prisoner of his legal
ing of their substance, or some such rights without very good cause, for this
matter* cannot but be an offence to Almighty
Further, let the Judge take notice God.
that, as he acts in this matter with the The reader must note that all the
authority of the Supreme Pontiff and process which we have already de¬
the permission of the Ordinary, both scribed, and all that we have yet to
he himself and all who are associated describe, up to the methods of passing
with him at the depositions, or after¬ sentence (except the death sentence),
wards at the pronouncing of the sen¬ which it is in the province of the
tence, must keep the names of the ecclesiastical Judge to condtict, can
witnesses secret, under pain of excom¬ also, with the consent of the Diocesans,
munication. And it is in the power of be conducted by a secular Judge.
the Bishop thus to punish him or them Therefore the reader need find no
if they da otherwise. Therefore he difficulty in the fact that the above
should very implicitly warn them not Decree speaks of an ecclesiastical and
to reveal the names from the very not a secular Judge; for the latter can
beginning of the process. take his method of inflicting the death
Wherefore the above decree of Pope sentence from that of the Ordinary in
Boniface VIII goes on to say : And that passing sentence of penance.
the danger to those accusers and wit¬
nesses may be the more effectively ☆
met, and the inquiry conducted more
cautiously, we permit, by the authority
QUESTION X
of this statute, that the Bishop or
Inquisitors (or, as we have said, the What Kind of Defence may be Allowed,
Judge) shall forbid all those who are and of the Appointment of an Advocate.
concerned in the inquiry to reveal This is the Fifth Action.
I
without their permission any secrets
which they have learned from the F, therefore, the accused asks to be
Bishop or Inquisitors, under pain of defended, how can this be admitted
excommunication which they may in¬ when the names of the witnesses are
cur by violating such secrets. kept altogether secret? It is to be said
It is further to be noted that just that three considerations are to be
as it is a punishable offence to publish observed in admitting any defence.
the names of witnesses indiscreetly, so First, that an Advocate shall be allotted
also it is to conceal them without good to the accused. Second, that the names
reason from, for instance, such people of the witnesses shall not be made
as have a right to know them, such as known to the Advocate, even under an
the lawyers and assessors whose opinion oath of secrecy, but that he shall be
is to be sought in proceeding to the informed of everything contained in
sentence; in the same way the names the depositions. Third, the accused
must not be concealed when it is shall as far as possible be given the
possible to publish them without risk benefit of every doubt, provided that
of any danger to the witnesses. On this this involves no scandal to the faith
subject the above decree speaks as nor is in any way detrimental to justice,
Q

2l8 MALLEUS Part III. Question ii.
as will be shown. And in like manner But to return to our point; the Judge
the prisoner’s procurator shall have full must make the above conditions clear
access to the whole process, only the to the Advocate, and finally admonish
names of the witnesses and deponents him not to incur the charge of defend¬
being suppressed; and the Advocate ing heresy, which would make him
can act also in the name of procurator. liable to excommunication.
As to the first of these points: it And it is not a valid argument for
should be noted that an Advocate is him to say to the Judge that he is not
not to be appointed at the desire of defending the error, but the person.
the accused, as if he may choose which For he must not by any means so con¬
Advocate he will have; but the Judge duct his defence as to prevent the case
must take great care to appoint neither from being conducted in a plain and
a litigious nor an evil-minded man, nor summary manner, and he would be
yet one who is easily bribed (as many doing so if he introduced any compli¬
are), but rather an honourable man cations or appeals into it; all which
to whom no sort of suspicion attaches. things are disallowed altogether. For
And the Judge ought to note four it is granted that he does not defend
points, and if the Advocate be found the error; for in that case he would be
to conform to them, he shall be allowed more damnably guilty than the witches
to plead, but not otherwise. For first themselves, and rather a heresiarch
of all the Advocate must examine the than a heretical wizard. Nevertheless,
nature of the case, and then if he finds if he unduly defends a person already
it a just one he may undertake it, but suspect of heresy, he makes himself
if he finds it unjust he must refuse it; as it were a patron of that heresy, and
and he must be very careful not to lays himself under not only a light but
undertake an unjust or desperate case. a strong suspicion, in accordance with
But if he has unwittingly accepted the the manner of his defence; and ought
brief, together with a fee, from some¬ publicly to abjure that heresy before
one who wishes to do him an injury, the Bishop.
but discovers during the process that We have put this matter at some
the case is hopeless, then he must length, and it is not to be neglected by
signify to his client (that is, the accused) the Judge, because much danger may
that he abandons the case, and must re¬ arise from an improper conducting of
turn the fee which he has received. This the defence by an Advocate or Pro¬
is the opinion of Godfrey of Fontaines, curator. Therefore, when there is any
which is wholly in conformity with objection to the Advocate, the Judge
the Canon de jud. i, rem non novam. But must dispense with him and proceed
Henry of Segusio holds an opposite view in accordance with the facts and the
concerning the return of the fee in a proofs. But when the Advocate for the
case in which the Advocate has worked accused is not open to any objection,
very hard. Consequently if an Advocate but is a zealous man and a lover of
has wittingly undertaken to defend a justice, then the Judge may reveal to
prisoner whom he knows to be guilty, he him the names of the witnesses, under
shall be liable for the costs and expenses an oath of secrecy.
{de admin, tut. i, non tamen est ignotum).
The second point to be observed is
☆
that in his pleading he should conduct
himself properly in three respects.
QUESTION XI
First, his behaviour must be modest
and free from prolixity or pretentious
What Course the Advocate should Adopt
oratory. Secondly, he must abide by
when the Names of the Witnesses are
the truth, not bringing forward any
not Revealed to him. The Sixth Action.
fallacious arguments or reasoning, or B
calling false witnesses, or introducing UT it may be asked: What, then,
legal quirks and quibbles if he be a should the Advocate acting as Pro¬
skilled lawyer, or bringing counter¬ curator for the accused do, when the
accusations ; especially in cases of this names of the witnesses are withheld
sort, which must be conducted as from both himself and his client, al¬
simply and summarily as possible. though the accused earnestly desires
Thirdly, his fee must be regulated by that they should be made known? We
the usual practice of the district. answer that he should obtain informa-

Part III. Question ii. MALEFICARUM 219
tion from the Judge on every point of is presumed that the depositions were
the accusation, which must be given laid against her from motives of ven¬
to him at his request, only the names geance, and she is to be discharged as
of the witnesses being suppressed; and innocent and freely dismissed, after
with this information he should ap¬ having been duly cautioned against
proach the accused and, if the matter seeking to avenge herself, in the manner
involves a very grave charge, exhort which is usually used by Judges.
him to exercise all the patience which The following case may be put.
he can. Katharina’s child, or she herself, is
And if the accused again and again bewitched, or she has suffered much
insists that she should know the names loss in her cattle; and she suspects
of the witnesses against her, he can the accused because her husband or
answer her as follows: You can guess brothers had previously brought an
from the charges which are made unjust accusation against her own
against you who are the witnesses. husband or brothe'r. Here the cause of
For the child or beast of so and so has enmity is twofold on the part of the
been bewitched; or to such a woman deponent, having its root both in her
or man, because they refused to lend own bewitchment and in the unjust
you something for which you asked, accusation brought against her hus¬
you said, “You shall know that it band or brother. Then ought her
would have been better to have agreed deposition to be rejected or not? From
to my request,” and they bear witness one point of view it seems that it
that in consequence of your words the should, because she is actuated by
person was suddenly taken ill; and enmity; from another point of view it
facts are stronger evidence than words. should not, because there is the evidence
And you know that you have a bad of the fact in her bewitchment.
reputation, and have for a long time We answer that if in this case there
been suspected of casting spells upon are no other deponents, and the
and injuring many men. And talking accused is not even under common
in this manner, he may finally induce suspicion, then her depositions cannot
her to enter a plea that they had borne be allowed, but must be rejected; but
witness against her from motives of if the accused is rendered suspect, and
hatred; or to say, “I confess that I did if the disease is not due to natural
say so, but not with any intent to do causes but to witchcraft (and we shall
harm.” show later how this can be distin¬
Therefore the Advocate must first guished), she is to be subjected to a
lay before the Judge and his assessors canonical purgation.
this plea of personal enmity, and the If it be asked further whether the
Judge must inquire into it. And if it other deponents must bear witness to
should be found to be a case of mortal the evidence of the fact as experienced
enmity, as that there has been some by themselves or others, or only to
attempted or accomplished murder the public reputation of the accused;
committed by the husbands or kindred we answer that, if they give evidence
of the parties, or that someone of one of the fact, so much the better. But if
party has been charged with a crime they only give evidence as to her
by someone of the other party, so that general character, and the matter
he fell into the hands of public justice, stands so, then, although the Judge
or that serious wounds have resulted must reject that deponent on the
from quarrels and brawls between grounds of personal enmity, yet he
them; then the upright and careful shall take the evidence of the fact, and
Judge will consult with his assessors of her bad reputation given by the
whether the accused or the deponent other witnesses, as proof that the
was the aggravating party. For if, for accused must be strongly suspect, and
example, the husband or friends of the on these grounds he can sentence her
accused have unjustly oppressed the to a threefold punishment: namely, to
friends of the deponent, then if there a canonical purgation because of her
is no evidence of the fact that children reputation; or to an abjuration, be¬
or animals or men have been bewitched, cause of the suspicion under which she
and if there are no other witnesses, rests, and there are various forms of
and the accused is not even commonly abjuration for various degrees of sus¬
suspected of witchcraft, in that case it picion, as will be shown in the fourth

220 MALLEUS Part III. Question 12.
method of passing sentence; or, because person or his property, yet it does not
of the evidence of the fact, and if she follow from this that the accused wa?
confesses her crime and is penitent, she the cause of it as a witch, for illnesses
shall not be handed over to the secular may be due to various different causes.
branch for capital punishment, but be Also he submits that it is a common
sentenced by the ecclesiastical Judge habit of women to quarrel together
to imprisonment for life. But notwith- with such words, etc.
standing the fact that she has been The Judge ought to answer such
sentenced to imprisonment for life by allegations in the following manner.
the ecclesiastical Judge, the secular If the illness is due to natural causes,
Judge can, on account of the temporal then the excuse is good. But the
injuries which she has committed, evidence indicates the contrary; for it
deliver her to be burned. But all these cannot be cured by any natural
matters will be made clear later when remedy; or in the opinion of the
we deal with the sixth method of physicians the illness is due to witch¬
passing sentence. craft, or is what is in common speech
To sum up: Let the Judge first take called a Night-scathe. Again, perhaps
care not to lend too easy belief to the other enchantresses are of the opinion
Advocate when he pleads mortal enmity that it is due to witchcraft. Or because
on behalf of the accused; for in these it came suddenly, without any previous
cases it is very seldom that anyone sickening, whereas natural diseases
bears witness without enmity, because generally develop gradually. Or per¬
witches are always hated by every¬ haps because the plaintiff had found
body. Secondly, let him take note that certain instruments of witchcraft under
there are four ways by which a witch his bed or in his clothes or elsewhere,
can be convicted, namely, by wit¬ and when these were removed he was
nesses, by direct evidence of the fact, suddenly restored to health, as often
by indirect evidence of the fact, and happens, as we showed in the Second
by her own confession. And if she is Part of this work where we treated of
detained on account of a general remedies. And by some such answer
report, she can be convicted by the
as this the Judge can easily meet this
evidence of witnesses; if on account of
allegation, and show that the illness
a definite suspicion, the direct or in¬
was due rather to witchcraft than to
direct evidence of the facts can convict
any natural causes, and that the accused
her, and by reason of these the sus¬ must be suspected of causing such
picion may be judged to be either light
witchcraft, by reason of her threaten¬
or strong or grave. All this is when she
ing words. In the same way, if someone
does not confess; but when she does,
said, “I wish your barn would be
the case can proceed as has been said.
burned down,” and this should after¬
Thirdly, let the Judge make use of
wards happen, it would engender a
all the foregoing circumstances to meet
grave suspicion that the person who
the plea of the Advocate, whether the
had used that threat had caused the
accused is charged only by reason of a
barn to be set on fire, even if another
general report, or whether there are
person, and not he himself, had
also certain evidences to support the actually set light to it.
charge by which she incurs slight or
strong suspicion; and then he will be
☆ v
able to answer the Advocate’s allega¬
tion of personal enmity, which is the
QUESTION XII
first line of defence which he may
assume.
Of the Same Matter, Declaring more Par¬
But when the Advocate assumes the
ticularly how the Question of Personal
second line of defence, admitting that
Enmity is to be Investigated. The
the accused has used such words against
Seventh Action.
the deponent as, “You shall soon know T
what is going to happen to you,” or
AKE notice that only mortal
“You will wish soon enough that you
enemies are debarred from giving
had lent or sold me what I asked for,”
evidence, as was shown in the Fifth
or some such words; and submits that,
Question. But the Judge may consider
although the deponent afterwards ex¬
that to come to a decision about such
perienced some injury either to his
enmity by the means we have just

Part III. Question 12. MALEFICARUM 221
explained is rather dubious and un¬ let her be asked whether she thinks
satisfactory; and the accused or her that she has any mortal enemies who,
Procurator may not be willing to setting aside ail fear of God, would
accept a decision arrived at on such falsely accuse her of the crime of heresy
grounds as to whether the enmity is and witchcraft. And then perhaps with¬
mortal or not. Therefore the Judge must out thinking, and not having seen the
use other means to decide concerning depositions of the witnesses, she will
the alleged enmity, so that he may answer that she does not think that
not punish the innocent, but exact she has any such enemies. Or if she
full justice from the guilty. And though says, ‘T think I have,” and names any
these means may savour of cunning of the witnesses who have laid informa¬
and even guile, yet the Judge may tion, and the reason for that enmity is
employ them for the good of the faith known, then the Judge will be able to
and the State; for even S. Paul says: investigate it with more certainty after¬
But being crafty, I caught you by guile. wards, when the accused has been given
And these means are especially to be separate copies of the process and of
employed in the case of a prisoner who the names of the witnesses, in the
has not been publicly defamed, and is manner we have explained.
not suspected because of the evidence The fourth method is this. At the
of any fact; and the Judge may also end of her second examination and
employ them against prisoners who confession (as we showed in the Sixth
have alleged enmity on the part of Question), before she is granted any
the deponents, and wish to know all means of defence, let her be questioned
the names of the witnesses. as to the witnesses who have laid the
The first method is this. The accused more serious charges against her, in
or her Advocate is given a copy of the this manner. “Do you know So-andprocess with the names of the de¬ so?” naming one of the witnesses; and
ponents or informers, but not in the then she will answer either Yes or No.
order in which they deposed; but in If she says No, she will not be able,
such a way that the name of the wit¬ after she has been given means of
ness who comes first in the copy is defence and an Advocate, to plead
sixth or seventh in the schedule, and that he is a mortal enemy, since she
he who comes second is last or last has said on oath that she does not
but one. In this way the accused will know him. But if she says Yes, let her
be deceived as to which witness deposed be asked whether she knows or has
this or that. And then she will either say heard that he or she has acted in any
that they are all her enemies, or not; and way contrary to the Christian faith
if she says that they all are, she will be in the manner of a witch. Then if she
the more easily detected in a lie when says Yes, for he did such and such a
the cause of the enmity is investigated thing; let her be asked whether he
by the Judge; and if she names only is her friend or enemy; and she will
certain ones, still the cause of the enmity immediately answer that he is her
will be more easily investigated. friend, because the testimony of such
The second method is similar, when is not of very great account; and conse¬
the Advocate is given a copy of the quently she will not be able afterwards
process, and separately a list of the to plead on oath through her Advocate
names of the deponents; but there are that he is her enemy, for she has
added other matters perpetrated else¬ already said that he is her friend. But
where by witches, but not set down in if she answers that she knows nothing
writing by the witnesses or deponents. about him, let her again be asked
And so the accused will not be able to whether he is her friend or enemy, and
say definitely that this one or that one she will at once answer that he is her
is her mortal enemy, because she does friend; for it would be futile to allege
not know what they have deposed enmity on the part of someone of whom
against her. she knows nothing. Therefore she says,
The third method was touched.upon “I am his friend, but if I knew any¬
in the Fifth Question above. For when thing about him I would not fail to
the accused is questioned at the end reveal it.” Therefore she will not be
of her second examination, and before able afterwards to plead that he is her
she has demanded to be defended or enemy. Or perhaps she will from the
an Advocate has been allotted to her, very beginning allege reasons for mortal

222 MALLEUS Part III. Question 13.
enmity, and in that case some credence or not the facts are in agreement with
must be placed in the plea of the her statements, let the Judge call into
Advocate. consultation learned men of every
A fifth method is to give the Advo¬ faculty (if such can be had), or at least
cate or the accused a copy of the pro¬ some honest and reputable persons (for
cess, with the names of the informers this is the purport of that statute we
suppressed. And then the accused will have so often quoted); and let him
guess, and very often rightly, who has cause the whole process to be read
deposed such and such against her. through to them from end to end by
And then if she says, “So-and-so is my the Notary or scribe, and let the names
mortal enemy, and I am willing to of the witnesses be made known to
prove it by witnesses,” then the Judge them, but under an oath of secrecy;
must consider whether the person and he shall first inquire whether or
named is the same person named in the not they are willing to be bound by
schedule ; and since she has said that such an oath, for if not the names
she is willing to prove it by witnesses, must by no means be declared to them.
he will examine those witnesses and Then let him tell how he has inquired
inquire into the causes of the enmity, in such and such a manner into the
ha ving secretly called into consultation alleged enmity, and has not been able
learned and aged men of known to find any testimony of fact. But he
prudence. And if he finds sufficient shall add that, if they please, one of
reasons for mortal enmity, he shall reject two courses shall be pursued. Either
that evidence and dismiss the prisoner, they shall decide then and there in
unless there are other grave charges consultation whether the evidence of
against her, sworn to by other witnesses. any of the witnesses shall be rejected
And this fifth method is commonly on the grounds of mortal personal
used; and it is found in practice that enmity; or let them choose three or
witches quickly guess from the copy four or five persons who have most
of the process who has laid information knowledge in that town or village of
against them. And because in such any friendship or enmity between the
cases mortal enmity is rarely found accused and the informer, who are not
unless it arises from the wicked deeds
present at the consultation, and let
of the witch, therefore the Judge can them be informed of the names only
easily come to a decision by the above of the accused and the witness, but
means. Also it is to be noted that often
not of the information which has been
the informers desire to confront the deposed, and let the whole question
witch personally, and to charge her to
be left to their judgement. If they
her face with the bewitchment which follow the former of these courses,
has befallen them.
they cannot very well reject any wit¬
There is still one more method ness, since the Judge has already used
whereunto the Judge may finally have
his own methods of investigation; but
recourse, when perhaps the other
by the second course he protects him¬
methods, and especially the first four,
self perfectly, and clears himself of all
seem to some to savour too much of
ugly suspicions. And he ought to
cunning and deceit. Accordingly, to
observe this last method when the
satisfy and content the scrupulous, and
accused has been taken in a foreign
that no fault may be found with the
town or country. These methods will
Judge, let him take care, after he has
suffice for examining the question of
found by the above methods that there personal enmity.
is no mortal enmity between the
☆
accused and the deponent, but wishes
to remove all grounds for complaint
QUESTION XIII
by settling the question finally in con¬
sultation with his other assessors, to
Of the Points to he Observed by the Judge
act as follows. Let him give to the
before the Formal Examination in the
accused or her Advocate a copy of the
Place of. Detention and Torture. This
process, with the names of the de¬
is the Eighth Action.
ponents or informers suppressed. And T
since her defence is that she has mortal
HE next action of the Judge is
enemies, and perhaps she has alleged
quite clear. For common justice
various reasons for the enmity, whether
demands that a witch should not be

Part III. Question 13. MALEFICARUM 223
condemned to death unless she is con¬ made good their defence (or have
victed by her own confession. But here failed to defend themselves because
we are considering the case of one who this privilege was not granted them;
is judged to be taken in manifest heresy and it was not granted because they
for one of the other two reasons set did not ask for it). But what we are to
down in the First Question, namely, consider now is what action the Judge
direct or indirect evidence of the fact, should take, and how he should pro¬
or the legitimate production of wit¬ ceed to question the accused with a
nesses ; and in this case she is to be view to extorting the truth from her so
exposed to questions and torture to that sentence of death may finally be
extort a confession of her crimes. passed upon her.
And to make the matter clear we And here, because of the great
will quote a case which occurred at trouble caused by the stubborn silence
Spires and came to the knowledge of of witches, there are several points
many. A certain honest man was bar¬ which the Judge must notice, and these
gaining with a woman, and would not are dealt with under their several
come to terms with her about the price heads.
of some article; so she angrily called And the first is that he must not be
after him, “You will soon wish you too quick to subject a witch to examina¬
had agreed.” For witches generally use tion, but must pay attention to certain
this manner of speaking, or something signs which will follow. And he must
like it, when they wish to bewitch a not be too quick for this reason: unless
person by looking at him. Then he, God, through a holy Angel, compels
not unreasonably being angry with her, the devil to withhold his help from the
looked over his shoulder to see with witch, she will be so insensible to the
what intention she had uttered those pains of torture that she will sooner be
words; and behold! he was suddenly torn limb from limb than confess any .
bewitched so that his mouth was of the truth.
stretched sideways as far as his ears in But the torture is not to be neglected
a horrible deformity, and he could not for this reason, for they are not all
draw it back, but remained so de¬ equally endowed with this power, and
formed for a long time. also the devil sometimes of his own
We put the case that this was sub¬ will permits them to confess their
mitted to the Judge as direct evidence crimes without being compelled by a
of the fact; and it is asked whether the holy Angel. And for the understanding
woman is to be considered as mani¬ of this the reader is referred to that
festly taken in the heresy of witchcraft. which is written in the Second Part of
This should be answered from the this work concerning the homage which
words of S. Bernard which we have they offer to the devil.
quoted above. For there are three ways For there are some who obtain from
in which a person may be judged to be the devil a respite of six or eight or
so taken, and they not so closely con¬ ten years before they have to offer
joined as though it were necessary for him their homage, that is, devote
all three to agree in one conclusion, themselves to him body and soul;
but each one by itself, namely, the whereas others, when they first profess
evidence of the fact, or the legitimate their abjuration of the faith, at the
production of witnesses, or her own same time offer their homage. And
confession, is sufficient to prove a witch the reason why the devil allows that
to be manifestly taken in that heresy. stipulated interval of time is that,
But indirect evidence of the fact is during that time, he may find out
different from direct evidence; yet whether the witch has denied the faith
though it is not so conclusive, it is still with her lips only but not in her heart,
taken from the words and deeds of and would therefore offer him her
witches, as was shown in the Seventh homage in the same way.
Question, and it is judged from witch¬ For the devil cannot know the inner
craft which is not so immediate in its thoughts of the heart except conjectureffect, but follows after some lapse of ally from outward indications, as we
time from the utterance of the threaten¬ showed in the First Part of this work
ing words. Wherefore may we conclude where we dealt with the question
that this is the case with such witches whether devils can turn the minds of
who have been accused and have not men to hatred or love. And many have

224 MALLEUS Part III. Question 13.
been found who, driven by some neces¬ And they are induced to do this by the
sity or poverty, have been induced by Enemy, lest they should obtain pardon
other witches, in the hope of ultimate from God through sacramental con¬
forgiveness in confession, to become fession. This chiefly happens in the
either total or partial apostates from case of those wlio have not been willing
the faith. And it is such whom the agents of the devil; although it may
devil deserts without any compulsion also happen in the case of willing
by a holy Angel; and therefore they agents, after they have confessed their
readily confess their crimes, whereas crimes: but then it is because the devil
others, who have from their hearts has been compelled to desert the
bound themselves to the devil, are pro¬ witch.
tected by his power and preserve a In conclusion we may say that it is
stubborn silence. as difficult, or more difficult, to compel
And this provides a clear answer to a witch to tell the truth as it is to
the question how it comes about that exorcise a person possessed of the devil.
some witches readily confess, and others
will by no means do so. For in the case
bonnet) not above the length of two span long,
of the former, when the devil is not
his kneyis not being from the grund halfine span,
compelled by God, he still deserts
and was brocht out of the hous, his lyf not being
them of his own will, in order that by
so layt expellit: but notwithstanding of quhattemporal unhappiness and a horrible somever meines usit to the contrair for remeid of
death he may lead to despair those his lyf, he revievit not, but so endit his lyf
over whose hearts he could never miserable by the help of the devill his maister”
obtain the mastery. For it is evident In i64g the lady of Pittahro, Mistress Hender¬
from their sacramental confessions that son, “being delated by many to be a witch, was
apprehended and carried to Edenbroughe, wher
they have never voluntarily obeyed the
she was keiped fast; and after her remaining in
devil, but have been compelled by him
prison for a tyme, being in health all night,
to work witchcraft.
vpon the morne was found dead. It was thought,
And some also are distinguished by
and spoken by many, that she wronged her selfe,
the fact that, after they have admitted
either by strangling or by poyson.”
their crimes, they try to commit suicide
It is recorded of the Renfrewshire trials (/697)
by strangling or hanging * themselves.
that John Reid, a notorious warlock of Bargarran, “after his Confession had called out of
* “Hanging.” There are recorded many his prison Window, desiring Baily Scott to keep
instances of this. In iggy the Scotch warlock that old body Angus Forrester, who had been
Playfair, having killed Lord Lothian by witch¬ his fellow prisoner, close and secure; whereupon
craft, was laidfor, and “being soon apprehended, the company asked John when they were leaving
was made prisoner in Dalkeith steeple, and having him on Friday night the 21st of May, whether
confest that and much more wickedness to Mr. he desired company or would be afraid alone, he
Archibald Simson, minister there, and that con¬ said he had no fear of anything: So being left till
fession coming to the ears of Robert, Earl of Saturday in the Forenoon, he was found in this
Lothian, my lord’s son, he had moyen to get some posture, viz• sitting upon a stool which was on
persons admitted to speak with the.prisoner in the the Hearth of the Chimney, with his feet on the
night, by which means he was found worried in floor and his Body straight upward, his shoulders
the morning, and the point of his breeches knit touching the lintel of the Chimney, but his Neck
about his neck, but never more inquiry was made tied with his own neck-cloath (whereof the knot
who had done the deed.” was behind) to a small stick thrust into a hole
Alice Gooderidge, a Derbyshire witch, who above the lintel of the Chimney, upon which the
was tried in iygy and condemned, “should haue Company, especially John Campbel a Chyrurgeon
bin executed, but that her spirit killed her in the who was called, thought at first in respect of his
prison.” John Stewart, a warlock of Irvine, in being in an ordinary posture of sitting, and the
1618, “for his better preferring to the day of the neck-cloath not having any drawn knot {or “ run
assys, was put in ane lockfast buith, . . . and loup ”) but an ordinary one which was not very
for avoyding of putting violent handis on himself strait, and the sticke not having the strength to
was verie strictly gairdit and flitherit be the bear the weight of his Body or the struggle, that
airms, as us is.” He was visited by two he had not been quite dead; but finding it otherministers, who exhorted him to repentance, and ways, and that he was in such a Situation that
seemed very contrite, confessing his witchcrafts. he could not have been the Actor thereof himself,
However, almost immediately after “he was concluded that some extraordinary Agent had
fund be the burrow officers, quha went about him done it, especially considering that the Door of the
stranglit and hangit be the cruik of the dur, with Room was secured, and that there was a board set t
ane tait of hemp {or a string maid of hemp, over the Window which was not there the night
supposed to haif been his garters, or string of his before when they left him.”

Part III. Question 14. MALEFICARUM 225
Therefore the Judge ought not to be lion, they have spat on the ground as
too willing or ready to proceed to such if it were in the devil’s face, saying,
examination, unless, as has been said, “Depart, cursed devil; I shall do what
the death penalty is involved. And in is just”; and afterwards they have
this case he must exercise great care, confessed their crimes.
as we shall show; and first we shall But if, after keeping the accused in a»
speak of the method of sentencing a state of suspense, and continually post¬
witch to such torture. poning the day of examination, and
frequently using verbal persuasions,
the Judge should truly believe that the
☆
accused is denying the truth, let them
question her lightly without shedding
blood; knowing that such questioning
QUESTION XIV
is fallacious and often, as has been said,
Of the Method of Sentencing the Accused ineffective.
And it should be begun in this way.
to be Questioned: and How she must
While the officers, are preparing for
be Questioned on the First Day; and
Whethef she may be Promised her Life. the questioning, let the accused be
stripped; or if she is a woman, let her
The Ninth Action.
t
first be led to the penal cells and there
ECONDLY, the Judge must take stripped by honest women of good
care to frame his sentence in the reputation. And the reason for this is
following manner. that they should search for any instru¬
We, the Judge and assessors, having ment of witchcraft sewn into her
attended to and considered the details clothes; for they often make such
of the process enacted by us against you instruments, at the instruction of devils,
N. of such a place in such a Diocese, out of the limbs of unbaptized children,
and having diligently examined the the purpose being that those children
whole matter, find that you are equivo¬ should be deprived of the beatific
cal in your admissions; as for example, vision. And when such instruments
when you say that you used such have been disposed of, the Judge shall
threats with no intention of doing an use his own persuasions and those of
injury, but nevertheless there are various other honest men zealous for the faith
proois which are sufficient warrant for to induce her to confess the truth
exposing you to the question and tor¬ voluntarily; and if she will not, let
ture. Wherefore, that the truth may be him order the officers to bind her with
known from your own mouth, and that cords, and apply her to some engine of
henceforth you may not offend the torture; and then let them obey at once
ears of the Judges, we declare, judge but not joyfully, rather appearing to
and sentence that on this present day be disturbed by their duty. Then let
at such an hour you be placed under her be released again at someone’s
the question and torture. This sentence earnest request, and taken on one side,
was given, etc. and let her again be persuaded; and
Alternatively, as has been said, the in persuading her, let her be told that
Judge may not be willing to deliver she can escape the death penalty.
the accused up to be questioned, but Here it is asked whether, in the case
may punish her with imprisonment of a prisoner legally convicted by her
with the following object in view. Let general bad reputation, by witnesses,
him summon her friends and put it to and by the evidence of the fact, so that
them that she may escape the death the only thing lacking is a confession
penalty, although she will be punished of the crime from her own mouth, the
in another way, if she confesses the Judge can lawfully promise her her
truth, and urge them to try to per¬ life, whereas if she were to confess
suade her to do so. For very often the crime she would suffer the extreme
meditation, and the misery of imprison¬ penalty.
ment, and the repeated advice of honest We answer that different people have
men, dispose the accused to discover various opinions on this question. For
the truth. some hold that if the accused is of a
And we have found that witches notoriously bad reputation, and gravely
have been so strengthened by this sort suspected on unequivocal evidence of
of advice that, as a sign of their rebel¬ the crime; and if she is herself a great

226 MALLEUS Part III. Question 14.
source of danger, as being the mistress way, lightly or heavily according as the
of other witches, then she may be nature of her crimes demands. And
promised her life on the following con¬ while she is being questioned about
ditions : that she be sentenced to im¬ each several point, let her be often
prisonment for life on bread and water, and frequently exposed to torture,
provided that she supply evidence beginning with the more gentle of
which will lead to the conviction of them; for the Judge should not be too
other witches. And she is not to be hasty to proceed to the graver kind.
told, when she is promised her life, that And while this is being done, let the
she is to be imprisoned in this way; but Notary write all down, how she is
should be led to suppose that some tortured and what questions are asked
other penance, such as exile, will be and how she answers.
imposed on her as punishment. And And note that, if she confesses under
without doubt notorious witches, especi¬ torture, she should then be taken to
ally such as use witches’ medicines and another place and questioned anew,
cure the bewitched by superstitious so that she does not confess only under
means, should be kept in this way, the stress of torture.
both that they may help the bewitched, The next step of the Judge should
and that they may betray other witches. be that, if after being fittingly tortured
But such a betrayal by them must not she refuses to confess the truth, he
be considered of itself sufficient ground should have other engines of torture
for a conviction, since the devil is a brought before her, and tell her that
liar, unless it is also substantiated by she will have to endure these if she
the evidence of the fact, and by does not confess. If then she is not
witnesses. induced by terror to confess, the tor¬
Others think that, after she has been ture must be continued on the second
consigned to prison in this way, the or third day, but not repeated at that
promise to spare her life should be present time unless there should be
kept for a time, but that after a certain some fresh indication of its probable
period she should be burned. success.
A third opinion is that the Judge Let the sentence be pronounced in
may safely promise the accused her her presence in the following manner:
life, but in such a way that he should We the aforesaid Judge, as above,
afterwards disclaim the duty of passing assign to you N. such a day for the
sentence on her, deputing another continuation of your questioning, that
Judge in his place. the truth may be heard from your own
There seems to be some advantage mouth. And the Notary shall write all
in pursuing the first of these courses down in the process.
on account of the benefit which may And during the interval before that
accrue from it to those who are be¬ assigned time the Judge himself or
witched; yet it is not lawful to use other honest men shall do all in their
witchcraft to cure witchcraft, although power to persuade her to confess the
(as was shown in the First and Intro¬ truth in the manner we have said,
ductory Question to this Third Part) giving her, if it seems expedient to
the general opinion is that it is lawful them, a promise that her life will be
to use vain and superstitious means to spared.
remove a spell. But use and experience The Judge should also take care that
and the variety of such cases will be during that interval there should always
of more value to Judges than any art be guards with her, so that she is never
or text-book; therefore this is a matter left alone, for fear lest the devil will
which should be left to the Judges. cause her to kill herself. But the devil
But it has certainly been very often himself knows better than anyone can
found by experience that many would set down in writing whether he will
confess the truth if they were not held desert her of his own will, or be com¬
back by the fear of death. pelled to do so by God.
But if neither threats nor such
promises will induce her to confess
the truth, then the officers must pro¬
☆
ceed with the sentence, and she must
be examined, not in any new or
exquisite manner, but in the usual

Part III. Question 15. MALEFICARUM 227
not be able to weep: although she will
QUESTION XV
assume a tearful aspect and smear her
, cheeks and eyes with spittle to make it
Of the Continuing of the Torture and of
appear that she is weeping; wherefore
the Devices and Signs by which the
she must be closely watched by the
Judge can Recognize a Witch; and how
attendants.
he ought to Protect himself from their
In passing sentence the Judge or
Spells. Also how they are to be Shaved\
priest may use some such method as
in those Parts where they use to Conceal
the following in conjuring her to true
their Devil’s Masks and Tokens to¬
tears if she be innocent, or in restrain¬
gether with the due Setting Forth of
ing false tears. Let him place his hand
Various Means of Overcoming their'
on the head of the accused and say: I
Obstinacy in Keeping Silence and Re¬
conjure you by the bitter tears shed on
fusal to Confess. And it is the Tenth
the Gross by our Saviour the Lord
Action.
T JESUS Christ for the salvation of the
HE Judge should act as follows world, and by the burning tears poured
in the continuation of the torture. in the evening hour over His wounds
First he should bear in mind that, just by the most glorious Virgin MARY,
as the same medicine is not applicable His Mother, and by all the tears*
to all the members, but there are which have been shed here in this
various and distinct salves for each world by the Saints and Elect of God,
several member, so not all heretics from whose eyes He has now wiped
or those accused of heresy are to be away all tears, that if you be innocent
subjected to the same method of ques¬ you do now shed tears, but if you be
tioning, examination and torture as to guilty that you shall by no means do
the charges laid against them; but so. In the name of the Father, and of
various and different means are to be the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
employed according to their various Amen.
natures and persons. Now a surgeon And it is found by experience that
cuts off rotten limbs; and mangy sheep the more they are conjured the less
are isolated from the healthy; but a are they able to weep, however hard
prudent Judge will not consider it safe they may try to do so, or smear their
to bind himself down to one invariable cheeks with spittle. Nevertheless it is
rule in his method of dealing with a possible that afterwards, in the absence
prisoner who is endowed with a witch’s of the Judge and not at the time or in
power of taciturnity, and whose silence the place of torture, they may be able
he is unable to overcome. For if the to weep in the presence of their gaolers.
sons of darkness were to become accus¬ And as for the reason for a witch’s
tomed to one general rule they would inability to weep, it can be said that
provide means of evading it as a well- the grace of tears is one of the chief
known snare set for their destruction. gifts allowed to the penitent; for S.
Therefore a prudent and zealous Bernard tells us that the tears of the
Judge should seize his opportunity and humble can penetrate to heaven and
choose his method of conducting his conquer the unconquerable. Therefore
examination according to the answers there can be no doubt that they are
or depositions of the witnesses, or as
*
his own previous experience or native “Tears.” The beautiful devotion, to the
wit indicates to him, using the following Sacred Tears of Our Lord is well known. The
,
precautions. Premonstratensians have a Mass “De Lacryma
,”
If he wishes to find out whether she Christi proper to the Order.
,
is endowed with a witch’s power of Our Lady of Tears Santa Maria delle
Lagrime, is the Patroness of Spoleto. A picture
preserving silence, let him take note
of Our Lady, painted upon the wall of the house
whether she is able to shed tears when
belonging to Diotallevio d’Antonio, which stood
standing in his presence, or when
on the road from Spoleto to Trevi, was seen to
being tortured. For we are taught both
shed tears in great abundance. Many graces and
by the words of worthy men of old and
favours were obtained before the miraculous
by our own experience that this is a
picture. A small chapel was erected on the spot
most certain sign, and it has been
in August, 1485, and Mass was daily offered
found that even if she be urged and
therein. On 27 March, 1487, the large basilica
exhorted by solemn conjurations to was begun, which on its completion , 8 March ,
shed tears, if she be a witch she will 148g, was entrusted to the Olivetans.

228 MALLEUS Part III. Question 15.
displeasing to the devil, and that he at the time when they are exposed to
uses all his endeavour to restrain them, torture.
to prevent a witch from finally attaining And we know from experience that
to penitence. some witches, when detained in prison,
But it may be objected that it mi^ht have importunately begged their gaolers
suit with the devil’s cunning, with to grant them this one thing, that they
God’s permission, to allow even a witch should be allowed to look at the Judge
to weep; since tearful grieving, weaving before he looks at them; and by so
and deceiving are said to be proper to getting the first sight of the Judge they
women. We may answer that in this have been able so to alter the minds
case, since the judgements of God are a of the Judge or his assessors that they
mystery, if there is no other way of have lost all their anger against them
convicting the accused, by legitimate and have not presumed to molest them
witnesses or the evidence of the fact, in any way, but have allowed them to
and if she is not under a strong or go free. He who knows and has experi¬
grave suspicion, she is to be discharged; enced it gives this true testimony; and
but because she rests under a slight would that they were not able to effect
suspicion by reason of her reputation such things!
to which the witnesses have testified, Let judges not despise such pre¬
she must be required to abjure the cautions and protections, for by hold¬
heresy of witchcraft, as we shall show ing them in little account after such
when we deal with the second method warning they run the risk of eternal
of pronouncing sentence. damnation. For our Saviour said: If
A second precaution is to be observed, I had not come, and spoken to them,
not only at this point but during the they would not have sin; but now they
whole process, by the Judge and all his have no excuse for their sin.f There¬
assessors; namely, that they must not fore let the judges protect themselves
allow themselves to be touched physic¬ in the above manner, according to the
ally by the witch, especially in any provisions of the Church.
contact of their bare arms or hands; And if it can conveniently be done, j
but they must always carry about the witch should be led backward into
them some salt consecrated on Palm the presence of the Judge and his asses¬
Sunday and some Blessed Herbs. For sors. And not only at the present point,
these can be enclosed together in but in all that has preceded or shall
Blessed Wax* and worn round the follow it, let him cross himself and
neck, as we showed in the Second Part approach her manfully, and with God’s
when we discussed the remedies against help the power of that old Serpent will
illnesses and diseases caused by witch¬ be broken. And no one need think that
craft ; and that these have a wonderful it is superstitious to lead her in back¬
protective virtue is known not only wards; for, as we have often said, ther
from the testimony of witches, but from Canonists allow even more than this
the use and practice of the Church, to be done for the protection against
which exorcizes and blesses such objects witchcraft, and always say that it is
for this very purpose, as is shown in lawful to oppose vanity with vanity.
the ceremony of exorcism when it is The third precaution to be observed
said, For the banishing of all the power in this tenth action is that the hair
of the devil, etc. should be shaved from every part of
But let it not be thought that physical her body. The reason for this is the
contact of the joints or limbs is the only same as that for stripping her of her
thing to be guarded against; for some¬ clothes, which we have already men¬
times, with God’s permission, they are tioned; for in order to preserve their
\
able with the help of the devil to be¬ power of silence they are in the habit
witch the Judge by the mere sound of of hiding some superstitious object in
the words which they utter, especially their clothes or in their hair, or even
in the most secret parts of their bodies
* “Blessed Wax.” The “Agnus Dei” which
which must not be named.
is a disc of wax, stamped with the figure of a
But it may be objected that the
Lamb, and on certain stated days blessed by the
devil might, without the use of such
Holy Father. These Agnus Deis may either be
worn suspended round the neck, or preserved as charms, so harden the heart of a witch
objects of devotion. They are to be regarded as
Sacramentals. f “Sin” “S. John” xv, 92.

Part III. Question 15. MALEFICARUM 229
that she is unable to confess her crimes; so that at the slightest torture they
just as it is often found in the case of admit everything, even some things
other criminals, no matter how great which are not true; whereas others are
the tortures to which they are exposed, so hard that however much they are
or how much they are convicted by tortured the truth is not to be had
the evidence of the facts and of wit¬ from them; and this is especially the
nesses. We answer that it is true that case with those who have been tortured
the devil can effect such taciturnity before, even if their arms are suddenly
without the use of such charms; but he stretched and twisted.
prefers to use them for the perdition Secondly, it may proceed from some
of souls and the greater offence to the instrument of witchcraft carried about
Divine Majesty of God. the person, as has been said, either in
This can be made clear from the the clothes or in the hairs of the body.
example of a certain witch in the town And thirdly, even if the prisoner has
of Hagenau, whom we have mentioned no such object secreted about her
in the Second Part of this work. She person, they are sometimes endowed
used to obtain this gift of silence* in with this power by other witches, how¬
the following manner: she killed a ever far they may be removed from
newly-born first-born male child who them. For a certain witch at Issbrug *
had not been baptized, and having used to boast that, if she had no more
roasted it in an oven together with than a thread from the garments of
other matters which it is not expedient any prisoner, she could so work that
to mention, ground it to powder and however much that prisoner were ;
ashes; and if any witch or criminal tortured, even to death, she would be
carried about him some of this sub¬ unable to confess anything. So the
stance he would in no way be able to answer to this objection is clear.
confess his crimes. But what is to be said of a case that ]
Here it is clear that a hundred happened in the Diocese of Ratisbon?
thousand children so employed could Gertain heretics were convicted by j
not of their own virtue endow a person their own confession not only as im¬
with such a power of keeping silence; penitent but as open advocates of that
but any intelligent person can under¬ perfidy; and when they were con¬
stand that such means are used by the demned to death it happened that they
devil for the perdition of souls and to remained mharmed in the fire. At
offend the Divine Majesty. length their sentence was altered to
Again, it may be objected that very death by drowning, but this was no
often criminals who are not witches more effective. All were astonished,
exhibit the same power of keeping and some even began to say that their
silence. In answer to this it must be heresy must be true; and the Bishop,
said that this power of taciturnity can in great anxiety for his flock, ordered
proceed from three causes. First, from a three days’ fast. When this had been
a natural hardness of heart; for some devoutly fulfilled, it came to the know¬
are soft-hearted, or even feeble-minded, ledge of someone that those heretics
had a magic charm sewed between the
skin and the flesh under one arm; and
* 11 Gift of Silence.” De Lancre, “Tableau
when this was found and removed,
de Vinconstance des mauvais anges et demons,”
Paris, 1612, has: “Pour ne confesser iamais le they were delivered to the flames and
secret de Vescole, on faict au sahbat me paste de immediately burned. Some say that a
millet noir, awe de la poudre du foyer de quelque certain necromancer learned this secret
enfant non baptisi qu'on faict seeker, puis meslant during a consultation with a devil, and
cette poudre avec ladicte paste, elle a cette vertu betrayed it; but however it became
de tociturnite; si bien que qui en mange ne con¬ known, it is probable that the devil,
fesse iamais.” Five Forfar witches, of which one
who is always scheming for the sub¬
was Helen Guthrie, in 1661 dug up the body of
version of the faith, was in some way
an unbaptized infant, which was buried in the
compelled by Divine power to reveal
churchyard near the south-east door of the church
the matter.
(iand took sever all peices thereof, as the feet,
From this it may be seen what a
hands, pairt of the head, and a pairt of the
Judge ought to do when such a case
buttocks, and they made a py thereof, that they
happens to him: namely, that he should
might eat of it, that by this meanes they might
rely upon the protection of God, and
never make a confession (as they thought) of their
witchcraft.” by the prayers and fasting of devout

230 MALLEUS Part III. Question 16.
persons drive away this sort of devil’s Secondly, if this should fail, let him
work from witches, in those cases where consult with other persons; for per¬
they cannot be made to confess under haps they may think of some means
torture even after their clothes have which has not occurred to him, since
been changed and all their hair has there are various methods of counter¬
been shaved off and abraded. acting witchcraft.
Now in the parts of Germany such Thirdly, if these two fail, let him
shaving, especially of the secret parts, have recourse to devout persons, as it
is not generally considered delicate, and is said in Ecclesiasticus xxxvii: Be con¬
therefore we Inquisitors do not use it; tinually with a godly man, whom thou
but we cause the hair of their head to knowest to keep the commandments of
be cut off, and placing a morsel of the Lord. Also let him invoke the Patron
Blessed Wax in a cup of Holy Water Saints of the country. But if all these
and invoking the most Holy Trinity, fail, let the Judge and all the people at
we give it them to drink three times on once put their trust in God with
a fasting stomach, and by the grace of prayers and fasting, that the witch¬
God we have by this means caused craft may be removed by reason of
many to break their silence. But in their piety. For so Josaphat prayed in
other countries the Inquisitors order II. Paralipomenon xx: When we know
the witch to be shaved all over her not what we should do, we have this
body. And the Inquisitor of Como has one refuge, that we should turn our
informed us that last year, that is, in eyes to Thee. And without doubt God
1485, he ordered forty-one witches to will not fail us in our need.
be burned, after they had been shaved To this effect also S. Augustine
all over. And this was in the district speaks (26, q. 7, non obseruabitis): Who¬
and county of Burbia, commonly called soever observes any divinations or
Wormserbad, in the territory of the auguries, or attends to or consents to
Archduke of Austria, towards Milan. such as observe them, or gives credit
But it may be asked whether, in a to such by following after their works,
time of need, when all other means of or goes into their houses, or introduces
breaking a witch’s silence have failed, them into his own house, or asks ques¬
it would be lawful to ask the advice tions of them, let him know that he
in this matter of sorceresses who are has perverted the Christian faith and
able to cure those who are bewitched. his baptism and is a pagan and apos¬
We answer that, whatever may have tate and enemy of God, and runs grave
been done in that matter at Ratisbon, danger of the eternal wrath of God,
it is our earnest admonition in the unless he is corrected by ecclesiastical
Lord that no one, no matter how great penances and is reconciled with God.
may be the need, should consult with Therefore let the Judge not fail always
sorceresses on behalf of the State; and to use the lawful remedies, as we have
this because of the great offence which said, together with these following final
is thereby caused to the Divine Majesty, precautions.
when there are so many other means
* &»
open to us which we may use either in
their own proper form or in some
QUESTION XVI
equivalent form, so that the truth will
be had from their own mouths and they
Of the jit Time and of the Method of the
can be consigned to the flames; or failSecond Examination. And it is the
ing this, God will in the meantime ,
Eleventh Action concerning the Final
provide some other death for the
Precautions to be Observed by the Judge.
witch. T
For there remain to us the following HERE are one or two points to be
remedies against this power of silence. noted with regard to what we have
First, let a man do all that lies in his just written. First, that witches should
own power by the exercise of his own be questioned on the more Holy Days
qualities, persisting often with the and during the solemnization of the
methods we have already mentioned, Mass, and that the people should be
and especially on certain days, as will exhorted to pray for Divine help, not in
be shown in the following Question. any specific manner, but that they
See II. Corinthians ix: That ye may should invoke the prayers of the Saints
abound in all good works. against all the plagues of the devil.

Part III. Question 16. MALEFICARUM 231
Secondly, as we have said before, the confess the truth, but always become
Judge should wear round his neck Con¬ worse.
secrated Salt and other matters, with But in the first place let him cause her
the Seven Words which Christ uttered to be well treated in the matter of food
on the Cross written in a schedule, and and drink, and meanwhile let honest
all bound together. And he should, if persons who are under no suspicion
he conveniently can, wear these made enter to her and talk often with her on
into the length of Christ’s stature against indifferent subjects, and finally advise
his naked body, and bind other Holy her in confidence to confess the truth,
things about him. For it is shown by promising that the Judge will be merci¬
experience that witches are greatly ful to her and that they will intercede
troubled by these things, and can for her. And finally let the Judge come
hardly refrain from confessing the truth. in and promise that he will be merciful,
The Relics of the Saints, too, are of with the mental reservation that he
especial virtue. means he will be "merciful to himself or
Having taken these precautions, and the State; for whatever is done for the
after giving her Holy Water to drink, safety of the State is merciful.
let him again begin to question her, all But if he promises her her life, as we
the time exhorting her as before. And showed in Question XIV that he can
while she is raised from the ground, if do in three ways, let it all be written
she is being tortured in this way, let the down by the Notary in what words and
Judge read or cause to be read to her with what intention mercy was pro¬
the depositions of the witnesses with mised. And if the accused begs for
their names, saying: “See! You are mercy in this way, and discovers her
convicted by the witnesses.” Also, if the crime, let her be promised in a vague
witnesses are willing to confront her and general way that she will receive
face to face, the Judge shall ask her if even more than she has petitioned for,
she will confess if the witnesses are so that she may speak with the greater
brought before her. And if she consents, confidence.
let the witnesses be brought in and As a second precaution in this case,
stand before her, so that she may be when she refuses altogether to reveal
constrained or shamed into confessing the truth, the Judge should, as we have
some of her crimes. said before, examine her friends and
Finally, if he sees that she will not associates without her knowledge; and
admit her crimes, he shall ask her if these have deposed anything which
whether, to prove her innocence, she is might lead to her conviction, this must
ready to undergo the ordeal by red-hot be diligently investigated. Also, if any
iron. And they all desire this, knowing instruments or unguents or boxes have
that the devil will prevent them from been found in her house, they should
being hurt; therefore a true witch is be shown to her, and she should be
exposed in this manner. The Judge asked for what purpose they have been
shall ask her how she can be so rash as used.
to run so great a risk, and all shall be A third precaution can be taken when
written down; but it will be shown later she still persists in her obstinacy after
that they are never to be allowed to her associates have been examined and
undergo this ordeal by red-hot iron. borne witness against her, and not for
Let the Judge also note that when her. If she has no friends, let some
witches are questioned on a Friday, other trustworthy man who is known
while the people are gathered together to be congenial to the accused and to
at Holy Mass to await our Saviour, they some extent a patron of hers, enter to
the witch one evening and engage her
very often confess.
But we must proceed to the extreme in a protracted conversation. And then,
case, when after every expedient has if he is not an accomplice, let him pre¬
been tried the witch still maintains tend that it is too late for him to return,
silence. The Judge shall then loose her and stay in the prison with her, and
and, using the precautions which follow, continue talking during the night. And
shall take her from the place of punish¬ if he is an accomplice, let them eat and
ment to another place under a strong drink together, and talk to each other
guard; but let him take particular care about the things they have done. And
not to release her on any sort of secur¬ then let it be arranged that spies should
ity; for when that is done, they never stand outside in a convenient place, and

232 MALLEUS Part III. Question 16.
listen to them and take note of their certain things. At first she refused, say¬
words, and if necessary let them have a ing that they were trying to entrap her;
scribe with them. but at last she asked what it was that
As a fourth precaution, if she then they wanted to know. And one asked
begins to tell the truth, let the Judge on how to raise a hailstorm, and another
no accouht postpone hearing her con¬ asked about carnal matters. When at
fession, even in the middle of the night, length she agreed to show him how to
but proceed with it to the best of his raise a hailstorm, and a bowl of water
ability. And if it is in the day-time, let had been brought in, the witch told him
him not care if he delays his luncheon to stir the water a little with his finger,
or dinner, but persist until she has told and herself uttered certain words; and
the truth, at least in the main. For it is suddenly the place which he had
generally found that, after postpone¬ named, a wood near the castle, was
ments and interruptions, they return* visited by such a tempest and storm of
to their vomit and will not reveal the hail as had not been seen for many
truth which they began to confess, years.
having thought worse of it. It yet remains to show how the Judge
And let the Judge take note that, is to proceed in pronouncing sentence
after she has confessed the injuries done in a case where all these means have
to men and animals, he shall ask her failed, or what is further to be done
for how many years she has had an even when she has confessed her crimes,
Incubus devil, and how long it is since that the whole process may be brought
she abjured the faith. For they never to an end; and we shall complete this
confess to these matters unless they have Last Part of this work with a considera¬
first confessed their other deeds; there¬ tion of these matters.
fore they must be asked concerning
these last of all.
☆
*
As a fifth precaution, when all the
above have failed, let her, if possible,
THE THIRD HEAD
be led to some castle; and after she has
been kept there under custody for some
Which is the Last Part of the Work: How
days, let the castellan pretend that he
the Process is to be Concluded by the
is going on a long journey. And then
Pronouncement of a Definite and Just
let some of his household, or even some
Sentence.
honest women, visit her and promise H
that they will set her entirely at liberty AVING by the grace of God
if she will teach them how to conduct examined the proper means of
certain practices. And let the Judge arriving at a knowledge of the heresy
take note that by this means they have of witchcraft, and having shown how
very often confessed and been con¬ the process on behalf of the faith should
victed.
be initiated and proceeded with, it
Quite lately a witch was detained in remains to discuss how that process is
the Castle of Konigsheim near the town to be brought to a fitting termination
of Schlettstadt in the Diocese of Stras- with an appropriate sentence.
burg, and could not be induced by any Here it is to be noted that this heresy,
tortures or questions to confess her as was shown in the beginning of this
crimes. But at last the castellan used Last Part, is not to be confused with
the method we have just described. other simple heresies, since it is obvious
Although he was himself present in the that it is not a pure and single crime,
castle, the witch thought he was away, but partly ecclesiastical and pardy civil.
and three of his household came in to Therefore in dealing with the methods
her and promised they would set her of passing sentence, we must first con¬
free if she would teach them how to do
sider a certain kind of sentence to which
witches are in the habit of appealing, in
which the secular judge can act on his
* “They Return.” “Proverbs” xxvi, n: “As
a, dog that returneth to his vomit, so is the fool own account independently of the Ordi¬
that repeateth his folly.” II. S. Peter, ii, 22: nary. Secondly, we shall consider those
“For, that of the true proverb has happened to in which he cannot act without the
them: the dog is returned to his vomit: and, The Ordinary. And so thirdly it will be
sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the shown how the Ordinaries can dis¬
mire.”
charge themselves of their duties.

Part III. Question 17. MALEFICARUM 233
for the safety of the community, may
QUESTION XVII
lawfully allow a smaller evil that a
•
greater may be avoided; as he allows
Of Common Purgation, and especially of the
the existence of harlots in towns in
Trial by Red-hot Iron, to which Witches
order to avoid a general confusion of
Appeal.
T lust. For S. Augustine On Free Willf
HE question is now asked whether says: Take away the harlots, and you
the secular judge may allow a witch will create a general chaos and con¬
to be submitted to a common purgation fusion of lust. So, when a person has
(concerning which see the Canon 2, been loaded with insults and injuries
q. 4, consuluisti, and cap. monomachiam), by any community, he can clear him¬
in the manner in which a civil defendant self of any criminal or civil charge by
is allowed the trial by ordeal, as, for means of a trial by ordeal.
example, that by red-hot iron. And it Also, since less hurt is caused to the
may seem that he may do so. hands by the red-hot iron than is the
For trial by combat is allowable in a loss of life in a duel, if a duel is per¬
criminal case for the protection of life, mitted where such things are custom¬
and in a civil case for the protection of ary, much more should the trial by
property; then wherefore not the trial red-hot iron be allowed.
by red-hot iron or boiling water? S. But the contrary view is argued where
Thomas allows that the former is per¬ it says (2, q. 5, monomachiam) that they
missible in some cases, when he says in who practise such and similar things
the last article of the Second of the Second, appear to be tempting God. And here
q. 95, that a duel is lawful when it the Doctors affirm it must be noted
appears to be consonant with common- that, according to S. Paul (I. Thessasense. Therefore the trial by red-hot lonians v), we must abstain, not only
iron should also be lawful in some cases. from evil, but from all appearance of
Also it has been used by many evil. Therefore the Canon says in that
Princes of saintly life who have availed chapter, not that they who use such
themselves of the advice and counsel of practices tempt God, but that they
good men; as, for example, the Sainted appear to tempt Him, so that it may be
Emperor Henry* in the case of the understood that, even if a man engage
virgin Cunegond whom he had married, in such a trial with none but good
who was suspected of adultery. intentions, yet since it has the appear¬
Again, a judge, who is responsible ance of evil, it is to be avoided.
I answer that such tests or trials are
* “Henry.” S. Henry II, German King and unlawful for two reasons. First, because
Roman Emperor, was born 372, and died in his
their purpose is to judge of hidden
palace of Grona, at Gottingen, 13 July, 1024.
matters of which it belongs only to God
He was canonized in 1146 by Eugenius III; and
to judge. Secondly, because there is no
his wife Cunegond on 3 March, 1200, by
Divine authority for such trials, nor are
Innocent III. Later writers are inclined to believe
they anywhere sanctioned in the writ¬
that the ascetic theme of his maiden marriage has
ings of the Holy Fathers. And it says
no foundation in fact. Saint Henry on assuming
in the chapter consuluisti, 2, q. 5: That
the Imperial dignity took to wife Cunegond,
which is not sanctioned in the writings
daughter of Siegfried, Count of Luxemburg. It
has been beautifully said that she shares her of the Sainted Fathers is to be presumed
husband's celestial, as she shared his earthly superstitious. And Pope Stephen X in
crown. When scandalous reports were circulated the same chapter says: It is left to your
concerning her honour, although her husband judgement to try prisoners who are con¬
could not for a moment suspect her purity, she victed by their own confession or the
insisted upon an appeal to the trial by ordeal, and
having walked unhurt over the red-hot plough¬ f “On Free Will.” S. Augustine's “De
shares, publicly testified her innocence. The story Gratia et libero Arbitrio” was written 426-27.
is immensely popular in German poetry and It will be found in Migne, “Patres Latini,”
German art. A print by Hans Burgkmair shows xliv, pp. 881-312.
her stepping over the shares, one of which she f “Pope Stephen.” Stephen (IX) X, elected
holds in her hand. Upon her shrine in the 3 August, 1037; died at Florence, 2g March,
» Cathedral at Bambvrg a bas-relief by Hans 1038. He was buried in the church of S.
Thielmann of Warzburg depicts the same Reparata. He was distinguished for his learning
incident. Having already retired to a Bene¬ and even during the few short months of his
dictine cloister, upon the death of her husband S. Pontificate he showed himself a zealous re¬
Cunegond took the veil. former.

234 MALLEUS Part III. Question 17.
proofs of the evidence; but leave that the respondent, but also on the part of
which is hidden and unknown to Him the Judge and his advisers, who are all
Who alone knows the hearts of men. equally to be considered homicides or
There is, nevertheless, a difference parties to manslaughter.
between a duel and the trial by red-hot Thirdly, he points out that a duel is
iron or boiling water. For a duel ap¬ a single combat between two men, the
pears to be more humanly reasonable, purpose of which is that the justice of
the combatants being of similar strength the case should be made clear by the
and skill, than a trial by red-hot iron. victory of one party, as if by Divine
For although the purpose of both is to judgement, notwithstanding the fact
search out something hidden by means that one of the parties is fighting in an
of a human act; yet in the case of trial unjust cause; and in this way God is
by red-hot iron a miraculous effect is tempted. Therefore it is unlawful on
looked for, whereas this is not so in the the part both of the appellant and the
case of a duel, in which all that can respondent. But considering the fact
happen is the death of either, or both, that the judges have other means of
of the combatants. Therefore the trial arriving at an equitable and just ter¬
by red-hot iron is altogether unlawful; mination of the dispute, when they do
though a duel is not illegal to the same not use such means, but advise or even
extent. So much has been incidentally permit a duel when they could forbid
admitted in respect of duels, on account it, they are consenting to the death of
of Princes and secular Judges. an innocent person.
It is to be noted that, because of But since it is unlikely that Nicolas
those words of S. Thomas which make the Commentator was unaware or igno¬
the above distinction, Nicolas of Lyra, rant of the above reasoning, it is con¬
in his Commentary on the duel or cluded that, when he says that in some
combat between David and Goliath, cases a duel can be fought without
I. Regum xvii, tries to prove that in some mortal sin, he is speaking on the part
cases a duel is lawful. But Paul of of the Judges or advisers, namely, in a
Burgos proves that not this, but rather case when such a trial is undertaken,
the opposite was the meaning of S. not on their responsibility or advice, but
Thomas; and all Princes and secular purely on that of the appellant and
Judges ought to pay particular atten¬ respondent themselves.
tion to his proof. But since it is not our purpose to
His first point is that a duel, like the linger over and debate such considera¬
other trial by ordeal, has as its purpose tions, but to return to the question of
the judgement of something hidden, witches, it is clear that, if this sort of
which ought to be left to the judgement trial is forbidden in the case of other
of God, as we have said. And it cannot criminal causes, such as theft or rob¬
be said that this combat of David is an bery, still more must it be forbidden in
authority for duelling; for it was re¬ the case of witches, who, it is agreed,
vealed to him by the Lord through obtain all their power from the devil,
some inner instinct that he must engage whether it be for causing or curing an
in that combat and avenge upon the injury, for removing or for preventing
Philistine the injuries done against God, an effect of witchcraft.
as is proved by David’s words: I come And it is not wonderful that witches
against thee in the name of the living are able to undergo this trial by ordeal
God. So he was not properly speaking unscathed with the help of devils; for
a duellist, but he was an executor of we learn from naturalists that if the
Divine justice. hands be anointed with the juice of a
His second point is that Judges must certain herb they are protected from
especially note that in a duel power, or burning. Now the devil has an exact
at least licence, is given to each of the knowledge of the virtues of such herbs:
parties to kill the other. But since one therefore, although he can cause the
of them is innocent, that power or hand of the accused to be protected
licence is given for the killing of an from the red-hot iron by invisibly inter¬
innocent man; and this is unlawful, as posing some other substance, yet he can
being contrary to the dictates of natural procure the same effect by the use of
law and to the teaching of God. There¬ natural objects. Hence even less than
fore a duel is altogether unlawful, not other criminals ought witches to be
only on the part of the appellant and allowed this trial by ordeal, because of

III. MALEFICARUM
Part Question 18. 235
their intimate familiarity with the devil; we shall show that in some cases they
and from the very fact of their appealing must not arrive at a definitive judge¬
to this trial they are to be held as sus¬ ment without the authorisation of the
pected witches. Diocesans.
An incident illustrative of our argu¬ But first we must consider the sen¬
ment occurred hardly three years ago tence itself: secondly, the nature of its
in the Diocese of Constance. For in the pronouncement; and thirdly, in how
territory of the Counts of Fiirstenberg many ways it is to be pronounced.
and the Black Forest there was a notori¬ With regard to the first of these ques¬
ous witch who had been the subject of tions, S. Augustine says that we must
much public complaint. At last, as the not pronounce sentence against any
result of a general demand, she was person unless he has been proved guilty,
seized by the Count and accused of or has confessed. Now there are three
various evil works of witchcraft. When kinds of sentence—interlocutory, defini¬
she was being tortured and questioned, tive, and preceptive. These are ex¬
wishing to escape from their hands, she plained as follows by S. Raymund.
appealed to the trial by red-hot iron; An interlocutory sentence is one which
and the Count, being young and inex¬ is given not on the main issue of the
perienced, allowed it. And she then case but on some other side issues which
carried the red-hot iron not only for emerge during the hearing of a case;
the stipulated three paces, but for six, such as a decision whether or not a
and offered to carry it even farther. witness is to be disallowed, or whether
Then, although they ought to have some digression is to be admitted, and
taken this as a manifest proof that she such matters as that. Or it may perhaps
was a witch (since none of the Saints be called interlocutory because it is de¬
dared to tempt the help of God in this livered simply by word of mouth with¬
manner), she was released from her out the formality of putting it in writing.
chains and lives to the present time, A definitive sentence is one which
not without grave scandal to the Faith pronounces a final decision as to the
in those parts. main issue of the case.
A preceptive sentence is one which is
☆ pronounced by a lower authority on the
instruction of a higher. But we shall be
concerned with the first two of these,
QUESTION XVIII
and especially with the definitive sen¬
tence.
Of the Manner of Pronouncing a Sentence
Now it is laid down by law that a
which is Final and Definitive.
I definitive sentence which has been
N proceeding to treat of those cases arrived at without a due observance of
in which the secular Judge by him¬ the proper legal procedure in trying a
self can arrive at a judgement and pro¬ case is null and void in law; and the
nounce sentence without the co-opera¬ legal conduct of a case consists in two
tion of the Diocesan and Ordinaries, things. One concerns the basis of the
we necessarily presuppose that not only judgement; for there must be a due
is it consistent with the protection of rovision for the hearing of arguments
the faith and of justice that we Inquisi¬ oth for the prosecution and the de¬
tors should be relieved of the duty of fence, and a sentence arrived at without
passing sentence in these cases, but in such a hearing cannot stand. The other
the same sincerity of spirit we endeav¬ is not concerned with the basis of the
our to relieve the Diocesans also from judgement, but provides that the sen¬
that duty; not in any desire to detract tence must not be conditional; for ex¬
from their authority and jurisdiction, ample, a claim for possession should not
for if they should elect to exercise their be decided conditionally upon some
authority in such matters, it would subsequent claim of property; but
follow that we Inquisitors must also where there is no question of such an
concur in it. objection the sentence shall stand.
It must be remembered, also,- that But in the case we are considering,
this crime of witches is not purely eccle¬ which is a process on behalf of the faith
siastic; therefore the temporal poten¬ against a charge of heresy (though the
tates and Lords are not debarred from charge is a mixed one), the procedure
trying and judging it. At the same time is straightforward and summary. That

236 MALLEUS Part III. Question 19.
is to say, the Judge need not require a from which the various methods of
writ, or demand that the case should passing sentence follow as a conse¬
be contested. But he must allow oppor¬ quence.
tunity for the necessary proofs, and issue
☆
his citation, and exact the protestation
of the oath concerning calumny, etc.
Therefore there has lately been a new
QUESTION XIX
law made as to the method of procedure
in such cases. Of the Various Degrees of Overt Suspicion
To proceed to our second considera¬ which render the Accused liable to be
tion, namely, of the nature of the pro¬ Sentenced.
B
nouncement of the sentence, it must be
noted that it should be pronounced by OTH the old and the new legisla¬
the Judge and no one else, otherwise it ture provide an answer to the
is not valid. Also the Judge must be question as to in how many and what
sitting in a public and honourable ways a person can be held suspect of
place; and he must pronounce it in the heresy or any other crime, and whether
day-time and not in the darkness; and they can be judged and sentenced by
there are other conditions to be ob¬ reason of such suspicions. For the
served ; for example, the sentence must gloss on the chapter nos in quemquam,
not be promulgated upon a Holy Day, which we quoted in the last Question,
nor yet merely delivered in writing. says that there are four means of
Yet it is to be noted that since, as we convicting a prisoner: either by the
have said, this case is conducted in a depositions of witnesses in Court, or by
simple and summary manner, it may the evidence of the facts, or by reason
lawfully be conducted on Holy Days for of previous convictions against the
the sake of the convenience of the pub¬ prisoner, or because of a grave suspicion.
lic, and the Judge may cut short any And the Canonists note that sus¬
digressions. Therefore the Judge may, if picion is of three kinds. The first, of
he pleases, act in such a manner, and which the Canon says, “You shall
even pass sentence without putting it in not judge anyone because he is suspect
writing. For we are authoritatively in¬ in your own opinion.” The second is
formed that there are cases in which a Probable; and this, but not the first,
sentence is valid without its being put leads to a purgation. The third is
into writing, as, for example, when such Grave, and leads to a conviction; and
is the custom of any particular locality S. Jerome understands this kind of
or Court. Also there is excellent pre¬ suspicion when he says that a wife may
cedent for a Bishop, when he is the be divorced either for fornication or for
Judge, allowing the sentence to be a reasonably suspected fornication.
pronounced by some other person. It must further be noted that the
Note again that, although in criminal second, or highly probable and cir¬
actions the execution of the sentence is cumstantial, suspicion is admitted as a
not to be delayed, this rule does not kind of half-proof; that is to say, it
hold good in four cases, with two of helps to substantiate other proofs.
which we are here concerned. First, Therefore it can also lead to a judge¬
when the prisoner is a pregnant woman; ment, and not only to a purgation.
and then the sentence shall be delayed And as for the grave suspicion, which
until she has given birth. Secondly, suffices for a conviction, note that it is
when the prisoner has confessed her of two kinds. One is of the law and by
crime, but has afterwards denied it the law, as when the law fixes and
again: that is to say, when the con¬ determines some point against which
fession has not been repeated in the no proof can be admitted. For example,
way which we explained in the Four¬ if a man has given a woman a promise
teenth Question. of matrimony, and copulation has
Now before we proceed to our third ensued, then matrimony is presumed,
consideration, namely, the different and no proof to the contrary is admitted.
methods of passing sentence which we The second is of the law but not by the
shall proceed to treat of up to the end law, as where the law presumes but
of this work, we must first make some does not determine a fact. For ex¬
remarks about the various ways in ample, if a man has lived for a long
which a prisoner is rendered suspect, time with a woman, she is presumed to

III. MALEFICARUM
Part Question 19. 237
have had connexion with him; but are not two kinds but the same kind
against this proofs are admitted. of suspicion. Giovanni d’Andrea also
Applying this to our discussion of the says: Vehement is the same as strong,
heresy of witches and to the modern as the Archdeacon says speaking of this
laws, we say that in law there are three Canon. Also Bernardus Papiensis* and
degrees of suspicion in the matter of Hugucciof say that vehement is the
heresy: the first slight, the second great, same as strong or great. S. Gregory
and the third very great. also, in the First Book of his Morals,
The first is in law called a light sus¬ says: A vehement wind sprang up.
picion. Of this it is said in the chapter Therefore we say that anyone has a
Accusatus, de Haeret, lib. 6: If the accused vehement case when he has a strong
has incurred only a light and small one. So much for this.
suspicion, and if she should again fall Therefore a great suspicion is called
under that suspicion, although she is to vehement or strong; and it is so called
be severely punished for this/ she ought because it is dispelled only by a vehe¬
not to suffer the punishment of those ment and strong defence, and because
who have relapsed into heresy. And it arises from great, vehement, and
this suspicion is called small or light, strong conjectures, arguments, and
both because it can be removed by a evidence. As, to take an example of
small and light defence, and because it simple heresy, when people are found
arises from small and light conjectures. to shelter known heretics, and show
Therefore it is called small, because of favour to them, or visit and associate
the small proofs of it; and light, because with them and give gifts to them,
of the light conjectures. receive them into their houses and
As an example of simple heresy, if protect them, and such like: such
people are found to be meeting together people are vehemently suspected of
secretly for the purpose of worship, or heresy. And similarly in the heresy of
differing in their manner of life and be¬ witches, they are brought under sus¬
haviour from the usual habits of the picion when they share in the crimes of
faithful; or if they meet together in witches.
sheds and barns, or at the more Holy And here are especially to be noted
Seasons in the remoter fields or woods, those men or women who cherish some
by day or by night, or are in any way inordinate love or excessive hatred,
found to separate themselves and not to even if they do not use to work any
attend Mass at the usual times or in the
usual manner, or form secret friendships * “Papiensis.” Bernardus Papiensis, a
with suspected witches: such people famous and prolific Italian canonist of the
thirteenth century, who died 18 September, 1213.
incur at least a light suspicion of
He was born at Pavia, studied law and theology
heresy, because it is proved that heretics
at Bologna, was provost of the Cathedral of
often act in this manner. And of this
Pavia until ngi, Bishop of Faenza until ng8,
light suspicion the Canon says: They
and then Bishop of Pavia until his death. The
who are by a slight argument discovered
most celebrated of his many works is the
to have deviated from the teaching and
“Breuiarium extrauagantium” [later called
path of the Catholic religion are not to
“Compilatio prima antiqua”), a collection of
be classed as heretics, nor is a sentence
canonical texts comprising ancient canons not
to be pronounced against them. inserted in the “Decretum” of Gratian, as also
Henry of Segusio agrees with this in his various later documents. The work was com¬
Summa; de Praesumptione, where he says: piled between 1187 and ngi, and was edited by
It is to be noted that although a heretic Friedberg, “Quinque compilationes antiquae,”
be convicted by a slight argument of Leipzig, 1882.
that matter of which he is suspected, he f “HuguccioHugh of Pisa, a distinguished
Italian canonist, who died in 1210. He was born
is not on that account to be considered
at Pisa, but the date is unknown. He studied at
a heretic; and he proves it by the above
Bologna, where later he professed Canon Law.
reasoning.
In ugo he became Bishop of Ferrara. Among
The second or grave suspicion is in
his works are a ‘Tiber deriuationum” which
law called grave or vehement, and of
treats of etymology. He also wrote a “Summa”
this the above Canon [Accusatus) again
on the “Decretum” of Gratian, which has been
says: One who is accused or suspected
considered the most extensive and one of the most
of heresy, against whom a grave or
valuable commentaries of the time. There are,
vehement suspicion of this crime has however, certain omissions, but these gaps were
arisen, etc. And it goes on: And these filled by the industry of Joannes de Deo.

MALLEUS Part III. Question 19.
238
immediately or after some interval.
harm against men or animals in other
For then there is direct evidence of the
ways. For, as we have said, those who
fact, or indirect evidence when any
behave in this way in any heresy are
instruments of witchcraft are found
strongly to be suspected. And this is
shown by the Canon where it says that hidden in some place. And although
when some interval of time has elapsed
there is no doubt that such persons act
in this way out of some heretical the evidence of the fact is not so strong,
such a person still remains under strong
sympathy.
The third and greatest suspicion is in suspicion of witchcraft, and therefore
law called grave or violent: for the much more of simple heresy.
Canon and the glosses of the Arch¬ And if it be asked whether the devil
deacon and Giovanni d’Andrea explain cannot inflict injury upon men and
that the word vehement does not mean, beasts without the means of a woman
the same as the word violent. And of being seen in a vision or by her touch,
this suspicion the Canon says (dist. 34) • we answer that he can, when God
This presumption or suspicion is called permits it. But the permission of God
violent because it violently constrains is more readily granted in the case of a
and compels a Judge to believe it, and creature that was dedicated to God, but
cannot be cast off by any evasion; and by denying the faith has consented to
also because it arises from violent and other horrible crimes; and therefore
convincing conjectures. the devil more often uses such means to
For example, in simple heresy, if harm creatures. Further, we may say
persons are found to show a reverent that, although the devil can work
love for heretics, to receive consolation without a witch, he yet very much
or communion from them, or per¬ prefers to work with one, for the many
petrate any other such matter in reasons which we showed earlier in this
•accordance with their rites and cere¬ work.
monies: such persons would fall under To sum up our conclusions on this
and be convicted of a violent suspicion matter, it is to be said that, following
of heresy and heretical beliefs. (See the above distinctions, those who are
many chapters on this subject in Book suspected of the heresy of witchcraft
VI of the Canon.) For there is no are separated into three categories,
doubt that such persons act in this way since some are lightly, some strongly,
out of a belief in some heresy. and some gravely suspected. And they
It is the same, as regards the heresy are lightly suspected who act in such
of witches, with those who perform a way as to give rise to a small or light
and persist in performing any of the suspicion against them of this heresy.
actions which pertain to the rites of And although, as has been said, a
witches. Now these are of various person who is found to be suspected in
kinds. Sometimes it is only some this way is not to be branded as a
threatening speech, such as “You shall heretic, yet he must undergo a canonical
soon feel what will happen to you,” or purgation, or he must be caused to
something similar. Sometimes it is a pronounce a solemn abjuration as in
touch, just laying their hands curiously the case of one convicted of a slight
on a man or a beast. Sometimes it is only heresy.
a matter of being seen, when they show For the Canon (cap. excommunicamus)
themselves by day or by night to others says: Those who have been found to
who are sleeping in their beds; and this rest under a probable suspicion (that is,
they do when they wish to bewitch men says Henry of Segusio, a light suspicion),
or beasts. But for raising hailstorms unless, having respect to the nature of
they observe various other methods the suspicion and the quality of their
and ceremonies, and perform various persons, they should prove their inno¬
ritual actions round about a river, as cence by a fitting purgation, they are to
we have shown before where we dis¬ be stricken with the sword of anathema
cussed the manner and methods of as a worthy satisfaction in the sight of
working witchcraft. When such are all men. And if they continue obstinate
found and are publicly notorious they in their excommunication for the period
are convicted of a violent suspicion of of a year, they are to be utterly con¬
the heresy of witchcraft; especially demned as heretics.
when some effect of witchcraft has And note that, in the purgation
followed upon their actions, either imposed upon them, whether or not

III. MALEFICARUM
Part Question 19.
239
they consent to it, and whether or not gifts, or shows favour to them, etc., he
they fail in it, they are throughout to be is worthily and truly to be judged a
judged as reputed heretics on whom a backslider; for by this proof there
canonical purgation is to be imposed. is no doubt that he was in the first
And that a person under this light place guiltv. Such is the tenor of the
suspicion can and should be caused to Canon.
pronounce a solemn abjuration is shown From these words it is clear that there
m the chapter Accusatus, where it says: are three cases in which a person under
A person accused or suspected of heresy, strong suspicion of heresy shall, after
against whom there is a strong suspicion his abjuration, be punished as a back¬
of this crime, if he abjures the heresy slider. The first is when he falls back
before the Judge and afterwards com¬ into the same heresy of which he was
mits it, then, by a sort of legal fiction, strongly suspected. The second is when
he shall be judged to have relapsed into he has abjured all heresy in general, and
heresy, although the heresy was not yet lapses into another heresy, even if
proved against him before his abjura¬ he has never before been suspected or
tion. But if the suspicion was in the accused of that heresy. The third is
first place a small or light one, although when he receives and shows favour to
such a relapse renders the accused liable heretics. And this last comprises and
to severe punishment, yet he is not to embraces many cases.
suffer the punishment of those who But it is asked what should be done
relapse into heresy. when a person who has fallen under so
But those who are strongly suspected, strong a suspicion steadily refuses to
that is, those who have acted in such a comply with his Judge’s order to
way as to engender a great and strong abjure his heresy: is he to be at once
suspicion; even these are not neces¬ handed over to the secular Court to be
sarily heretics or to be condemned as punished? We answer that by no means
such. For it is expressly stated in the must this be done; for the Canon (ad
Canon that no one is to be condemned abolendam) expressly speaks, not of
of so great a crime by reason of a strong suspects, but of those who are mani¬
suspicion. And it says: festly taken in heresy. And more
Therefore we order that, when the rigorous action is to be employed against
accused is only under suspicion, even those who are manifestly taken than
if it be a strong one, we do not wish him against those who are only suspected.
to be condemned of so grave a crime; And if it is asked, How then is such a
but such a one so strongly suspected one to be proceeded against? We answer
must be commanded to abjure all heresy that the Judge must proceed against
in general, and in particular that of him in accordance with the chapter
which he is strongly suspected. excommunicamus, and he must be ex¬
But if he afterwards relapses either communicated. And if he continues
into his former heresy or into any other, obstinate after a year’s excommunica¬
or if he associates with those whom he tion, he is to be condemned as a heretic.
knows to be witches or heretics, or There are others again who are
visits them, receives, consults with, violently or gravely suspected, whose
forgives, or favours them, he shall not actions give rise to a violent suspicion
escape the punishment of backsliders, against them; and such a one is to be
according to the chapter Accusatus. considered as a heretic, and throughout
For it says there: He who has been he is to be treated as if he were taken in
involved in one kind or sect of heresy, or heresy, in accordance with the Canon
has erred in one article of the faith or Law. For these either confess their
sacrament of the Church, and has crime or not; and if they do, and wish
afterwards specifically and generally to return to the faith and abjure their
abjured his heresy: if thereafter he heresy, they are to be received back
follows another kind or sect of heresy, into penitence. But if they refuse to
or errs in another article or sacrament abjure, they are to be handed over to
of the Church, it is our will that he be the secular Court for punishment.
judged a backslider. He, therefore, who But if he does not confess his crime
is known to have lapsed into heresy after he has been convicted, and does
before his abjuration, if after his not consent to abjure his heresy, he is
abjuration he receives heretics, visits to be condemned as an impenitent
them, gives or sends them presents or heretic. For a violent suspicion is

MALLEUS Part III. Question 20.
240
sufficient to warrant a conviction, and victed of heresy, or is found to have
admits no proof to the contrary. been convicted of heresy but to have
Now this discussion deals with simple escaped or defiantly absented herself,
heresy, where there is no direct or or is found not to have done injury by
indirect evidence of the fact, as will witchcraft but to have removed be¬
be shown in the sixth method of passing witchments unfittingly and by unlaw¬
sentence, where a man is to be con¬ ful means, or is fdund to be an archerdemned as a heretic even though he wizard or enchanter of weapons with
may not actually be one: then how the purpose of causing death, or is
much more is it applicable to the heresy found to be a witch-midwife offering
of witches, where there is always in infants to the devil in the manner of an
addition either the direct evidence of enemy, or is found to make frivolous
bewitched children, men, or animals, and fraudulent appeals with a view to
or the indirect evidence of instruments saving her life:
of witchcraft which have been found. Therefore, if she is found to be en¬
And although in the case of simple tirely innocent, the final sentence shall
heresy those who are penitent and be pronounced in the following manner:
abjure are, as has been said, admitted Here it is first to be noted that the
to penitence and imprisonment for accused is found to be entirely innocent
life; yet in this heresy, although the when, after the facts of the process
ecclesiastic Judge may receive the have been diligently discussed in con¬
prisoner into penitence, yet the civil sultation with skilled lawyers, she can¬
Judge can, because of her temporal not be convicted either by her own
injuries, that is to say, the harm she has confession, or by the evidence of the
done to men, cattle, and goods, punish fact, or by the production of legitimate
her with death; nor can the ecclesiastic witnesses (since they have disagreed
Judge prevent this, for even if he does upon the main issue); and when the
not hand her over to be punished, yet accused has never before been suspected
he is compelled to deliver her up at the of or publicly defamed as regards that
request of the civil Judge. crime (but the case is different if she
has been defamed as regards some other
crime) ; and when there is no evidence
☆
of the fact against her. In such a case
the following procedure is observed;
QUESTION XX
for she is to be absolved by the Bishop
or Judge by a sentence to the following
Of the First Method of Pronouncing
effect :
Sentence.
S We N., by the mercy of God Bishop
INCE, therefore, the accused is of such a town (or Judge, etc.), con¬
either found innocent and is to be sidering that you N. of such a place and
altogether absolved, or is found only to such a Diocese have been accused
be generally defamed as a heretic, or is before us of the crime of heresy and
found a proper subject for the questions namely of witchcraft; and considering
and the torture on account of her that this accusation was such as we
reputation, or is found to be lightly could not pass over with connivent
suspected of heresy, or is found to be eyes, have condescended to inquire
strongly or gravely suspected of heresy* whether the aforesaid accusation can
or is found to be at the same time be substantiated as true, by calling
commonly defamed and suspected of witnesses, by examining you, and by
heresy, or is found to have confessed using other means which are fitting
her heresy and to be penitent and not according to the canonical sanctions.
to have relapsed truly, or is found to Wherefore having diligently seen and
have confessed and to be penitent but examined all that has been done and
probably to have relapsed, or is found said in this case, and having had the
to have confessed her heresy and to counsel of learned lawyers and Theo¬
be impenitent but not really to have logians, and having repeatedly ex¬
relapsed, or is found to have confessed amined and inquired into all; sitting
and to be impenitent and certainly to as Judges on this tribunal and having
have relapsed, or is found not to have only God before our eyes and the truth
confessed but by legitimate witnesses of the case, and the Holy Gospels being
and otherwise legally to have been con¬ placed before us that our judgement

Part III. Question 21. MALEFICARUM 241
may proceed from the countenance of aspersion: so that no particular act of
God and our eyes behold equity, we witchcraft can be proved by which she
proceed to our definitive sentence in this can be brought under strong or grave
way, invoking the name of Christ. suspicion, as that she has uttered
Since by that which we have seen and threatening words, for example, “You
heard, and has been produced, offered, will soon feel what will happen to you,”
done, and executed before us in this or something to that effect, and after¬
present case, we have not found that wards some injury has befallen the
anything has legally been proved person or the cattle of the man she
against you of those things of which you threatened.
were accused before us, we pronounce, The following procedure, therefore,
declare, and give it as our final sentence is to be employed in the case of such a
that no act has legally been proved to one against whom nothing has been
us against you by which you can or proved except public obloquy. In this
ought to be judged a heretic or witch case judgement cannot be delivered for
or be in any way suspected of the sin the accused, nor can she be absolved as
of heresy. Wherefore by this present in the first method; but a canonical
declaration, inquiry, and judgement, purgation must be imposed upon her.
we freely discharge you. This sentence Therefore let the*Bishop or his deputy,
was given, etc. or the Judge, first take note that, in a
Let care be taken not to put anywhere case of heresy, it is not necessary that a
in the sentence that the accused is person should be defamed only by good
innocent or immune, but that it was and respected people; for the calum¬
not legally proved against him; for if niation uttered by common and simple
after a little time he should again be folk carries equal weight.
brought to trial, and it should be And the reason for this is, that the
legally proved, he can, notwithstanding same persons who are admitted as
the previous sentence of absolution, accusers in a case of heresy are also
then be condemned. admitted as detractors. Now any
Note also that the same method of heretic can be accused by anybody,
absolution may be used in the case of except his mortal enemies; therefore
one who is accused of receiving, pro¬ he can also be defamed by anybody.
tecting, or otherwise comforting and Therefore let the Bishop or Judge
favouring heretics, when nothing is pronounce his sentence of canonical
legally proved against him. purgation in this or some similar
A secular Judge commissioned by manner:
the Bishop shall use his own manner of We N., by the mercy of God Bishop
pronouncement. of such a city, or Judge of such a county,
having diligently examined the merits
of the process conducted by us against
☆
you N. of such a Diocese accused before
us of the crime of heresy, etc. We
QUESTION XXI
have not found that you have confessed
to or have been convicted of the afore¬
Of the Second Method of Pronouncing
, said sin or that you are even lightly
Sentence when the Accused is no more
. suspected of it, except that we find
than Defamed
T that truly and legitimately you are
HE second method of delivering publicly defamed by both good and
judgement is to be employed when bad in such a village, town, or Diocese;
he or she who is accused, after a diligent and that you may be in good odour
discussion of the merits of the case in among the company of the faithful we
consultation with learned lawyers, is impose upon you as by law a canonical
found to be no more than defamed as purgation, assigning to you such a day
a heretic in some village, town, or of such a month at such hour of the
province. And this is when the accused day, upon which you shall appear in
does not stand convicted either by her person before us with so many persons
own confession, or by the evidence of of equal station with you to purge you
the facts, or by the legitimate produc¬ of your defamation. Which sponsors
tion of witnesses; nor has there been must be men of the Catholic faith and
anything proved against her except of good life who have known your habits
that she is the subject of common and manner of living not only recently

242 MALLEUS Part III. Question 22.
but in time past. And we signify that, That is to say, he shall deny on oath
if you should fail in this purgation, we whatever it is for which he is defamed.
shall hold you convicted, according to After this, all his sponsors shall place
the canonical sanctions. their hands on the Gospels; and each of
Here it is to be considered that, when them severally shall say: And I swear
a person is duly found to be publicly upon this Holy Gospel of God that I
defamed of some heresy, and nothing believe him to have sworn the truth.
is proved against him except that And then he is canonically purged.
defamation, acanonicalpurgationshall It is also to be noted that a person
be imposed upon him. That is, he must defamed of heresy is to be purged in the
produce some seven, ten, twenty, or place where he is known to be defamed.
thirty men, according to the extent to And if he has been defamed in many
which he has been defamed and the places, he must be required to profess
size and importance of the place con¬ the Catholic faith and deny the heresy
cerned, and these must be men of his in all the places in which he is known as
own station and condition. For ex¬ defamed.
ample, if he who is defamed is a religi¬ And let not such a person hold in light
ous, they must be religious; if he is a esteem this canonical purgation. For it
secular, they must be seculars; if he is provided by the Canon Law that, if
be a soldier, they must be soldiers who he afterwards falls into the heresy of
purge him from the crime for which he which he has been purged, he is to be
is defamed. And these sponsors must handed over as a backslider to the
be men professing the Catholic faith secular Court. But the case is somewhat
and of good life, who have known his different if he falls into some other
habits and life both recently and for a heresy, of which he has not before been
long time. purged.
But if he refuses this purgation, he
☆
must be excommunicated; and if he
remains obstinate in that excommuni¬
QUESTION XXII
cation for a year, he is then to be con¬
demned as a heretic. Of the Third kind of Sentence, to he Pro¬
And if he accepts the purgation and nounced on one who is Defamed, and who
fails in it; that is, if he cannot find is to be put to the Question.
T
sponsors of the number and quality
desired; he shall be considered as con¬ HE third method of bringing a
victed, and is to be condemned as a process on behalf of the faith to
heretic. a conclusive termination is when the
And it must here be remarked that, person accused of heresy, after a care¬
when it is said that he must purge himself fful consideration of the merits of the
by means of so many men of his own >rocess in consultation with learned
station in life, this is meant generically awyers, is found to be inconsistent in
and not specifically. Thus, if a Bishop his statements, or it is found that there
is to be purged, it is not necessary that are sufficient grounds to warrant his
all his sponsors should be Bishops; but exposure to the question and torture:
Abbots and other religious who are so that if, after he has been thus
priests are admitted; and similarly in questioned, he confesses nothing, he
other cases. may be considered innocent. And this
And the defamed person shall purge is when the prisoner has not been taken
himself in the following manner. At the in heresy, nor has he been convicted by
time assigned to him for his canonical his own confession, or by the evidence
purgation, he shall appear in person of the facts, or by the legitimate pro¬
with his sponsors before the Bishop who duction of witnesses, and there are no
is his Judge, in the place where he is indications that he is under such a
known to be defamed; and, placing his suspicion as to warrant his being made
hand upon the Book of the Gospels set to abjure the heresy; but nevertheless
before hirp, he shall say as follows: he is inconsistent in his answers when
I swear upon these four Holy Gospels interrogated. Or there may be other
of God that I never held, believed or sufficient reasons for exposing him to
taught, neither do I hold or believe such torture. And in such a case the follow¬
heresy (naming it) for which I am ing procedure is to be observed.
defamed. And because such a judgement in-

Part III. Question 22 MALEFICARUM 243
eludes an interlocutory sentence which exhortations of the accused, the Bishop
must be against and not for the prisoner, and the Judge are well persuaded that,
the Inquisitor must not divide it into all circumstances considered, the ac¬
two sentences, but include it all in one. cused is denying the truth, let them
And in the first place, if the accused torture him slightly, without shedding
remains firm in his denials and can in blood, bearing in mind that torture is
no way be induced by honest men to often fallacious and ineffective. For
confess the truth, the following manner some are so soft-hearted and feeble¬
of sentence, which is in some respects minded that at the least torture they
definitive, shall be used. will confess anything, whether it be true
We N., by the mercy of God Bishop or not. Others are so stubborn that,
of such a town, or Judge in the territory however much they are tortured, the
subject to the rule of such a Prince, truth is not to be had from them. There
having regard to the merits of the pro¬ are others who, having been tortured
cess conducted by us against you N., before, are the better able to endure it
of such a place in such a Diocese, and a second time, since their arms have
after careful examination, find that you been accommodated, to the stretchings
are not consistent in your answers, and and twistings involved; whereas the
that there are sufficient indications be¬ effect on others is to make them weaker,
sides that you ought to be exposed to so that they can the less easily endure
the question and torture. Therefore, torture. Others are bewitched, and
that the truth may be known from your make use of the fact in their torture, so
Jown mouth and that from henceforth that they will die before they will con¬
ou may not offend the ears of your fess anything; for they become, as it
udges with your equivocations, we were, insensible to pain. Therefore
declare, pronounce, and give sentence there is need for much prudence in the
that on this present day at such an matter of torture, and the greatest
hour you are to be subjected to an attention is to be given to the condition
interrogatory under torture. This sen¬ of the person who is to be tortured.
tence was given, etc. When, then, the sentence has been
If the person to be questioned is both pronounced, the officers shall without
found to be equivocal and at the same delay prepare to torture tfie accused.
time there are other indications suffi¬ And while they are making their pre¬
cient to warrant his being tortured, let parations, the Bishop or Judge shall
both these facts be included in the use his own persuasions and those of
sentence, as they are above. But if only other honest men zealous for the faith
one or the other of these hold good, let to induce the accused to confess the
that one only be put in the sentence. truth freely, if necessary promising to
But let the sentence be soon put into spare his life, as we have shown above.
execution, or let them make as if to But if the accused cannot thus be
execute it. Nevertheless let not the terrified into telling the truth, a second
Judge be too willing to subject a person or third day may be appointed for the
to torture, for this should only be continuation of the torture; but it must
resorted to in default of other proofs. not be repeated then and there. For
Therefore let him seek for other proofs; such a repetition is not permissible
and if he cannot find them, and thinks unless some further indications against
it probable that the accused is guilty the accused should transpire. But there
but denies the truth out of fear, let him is nothing to prevent a continuation of
use other approved methods, always the torture on another day.
with due precautions, and by using the Let it then be said: We N. Bishop and
persuasions of the friends of the accused N. Judge (if he is present) aforesaid,
do his utmost to extract the truth from assign to you N. such a day for the con¬
his own lips. And let him not hasten tinuation of the torture, that the truth
the business; for very often meditation, may be known from your own mouth.
and the ordeal of imprisonment, and And let all be set down in the process.
the repeated persuasion of honest men And during the interval appointed to
will induce the accused to discover the him, let them use their own persuasions
truth. and those of other honest men to induce
But if, after keeping the accused in him to confess the truth.
suspense, and after due and decent But if he has refused to confess, the
postponements of the time, and many torture can be continued on the day

MALLEUS Part III. Question 23.
244
assigned, more or less severely according if, having been questioned as to these
to the gravity of the offences in question. under torture, he confesses to none of
And the Judges will be able to observe them, he is not on that account to be
many lawful precautions, both in word absolved in accordance with the first
and deed, by which they may come at method; but he must be proceeded
the truth: but these are more easily against according to that which has
learned by use and experience and the been proved against him, and he or she
variety of different cases than by the must abjure the heresy as being one
art or teaching of anyone. under suspicion of or taken in heresy, as
But if, after having been fittingly the merits of the process may exact or
uestioned and tortured, he will not require. And if, after torture, he con¬
iscover the truth, let him not be fesses all or part of that for which he was
further molested, but be freely allowed tortured, then he must abjure both this
to depart. If, however, he confesses, and the former heresy which was
and abides by his confession, and un¬ roved against him, and sentence must
covers the truth, acknowledging his e pronounced against him in respect
guilt and asking the pardon of the of both of these.
Church; then according to the Canon
ad abolendam he is to be treated as one ☆
taken in heresy on his own confession,
but penitent, and he must abjure the
QUESTION XXIII
heresy, and sentence must be pro¬
nounced against him as in the case of The Fourth Method of Sentencing, in the
those who are convicted by their own Case of one Accused upon a Light
confession as being taken in heresy.
Suspicion.
This will be explained in the eighth T
method of sentencing such, to which the HE fourth method of concluding
reader may refer. the process on behalf of the faith
If, on the other hand, he confesses the is used when, after the merits of the
ftruth, but is not penitent but obstinately process have been diligently examined
iersists in his heresy, but is not a i;e- in consultation with expert lawyers,
apsed heretic, then according to the the accused is found to rest under only
Canon, after a decent interval and due a light suspicion of heresy. And this is
warning, he is to be condemned as a when the accused is not taken in heresy,
heretic and handed over to the secular nor is convicted by her own confession
Court to suffer the extreme penalty, as or by the evidence of the facts or by the
we show later in the tenth method. But legitimate production of witnesses, and
if he is a relapsed heretic, he is to be there are no other strong or vehement
condemned in the way which is again indications of heresy against her; but
explained in the tenth method, to which only small and light indications of such
the reader may refer. a sort as, in the opinion of the Court,
. But here it must be particularly to engender a light suspicion against her.
noted that in some instances he who And such a one must be required to
is to be questioned confesses nothing abj ure the heresy of which she is
against himself before the torture, nor accused; and then, if she relapses into
is anything proved on the strength of heresy, she is nob liable to the punish¬
which he can be required to abjure the ment of backsliders, although she must
heresy or be condemned as a heretic; be more severely punished than would
and in such cases the above procedure be the case if she had not previously
should be adopted, as we have said, abjured the heresy (see the Canon c.
immediately. But in other cases the accusatus). The following procedure
accused is taken in heresy, or there are shall be followed in such a case. For
other proved indications by reason of such an accused, if the matter be a
which he ought to be required to abjure public one, will publicly make the
the heresy, or he is to be considered following abjuration in the Church:
either lightly or strongly suspected; and I, N., of such a Diocese, a citizen of
he is not to be tortured in respect of such such a city or place, being on my trial,
matters; but if, apart from these, he do swear before you the Lord Bishop
denies some points which are not proved, of such a city, and upon the Holy
but of which there is sufficient indica¬ Gospels placed before me and upon
tion to warrant his being tortured; and which I set my hand, that I believe in

Part III. Question 23. MALEFICARUM 245
my heart and profess with my lips that should relapse, you would suffer the
Holy Catholic and Apostolic Faith due punishment of a backslider, and
which the Holy Roman Church believes, would without mercy be delivered to
confesses, preaches, and observes. Also the secular Court to endure the extreme
I swear that I believe in my heart and penalty.
profess with my lips that the Lord JESUS But if she makes her abjuration
Christ, in company with all the Saints, secretly in the chamber of the Bishop or
abominates the wicked heresy of Judge, which will be the case when the
witches; and that all who follow or matter is not a public one, she shall
adhere to it will with the devil and his abjure in the same manner. And after¬
Angels be punished in eternal fire unless wards sentence shall be pronounced as
they turn their hearts and are reconciled follows:
by the penitence of the Holy Church. We, by the mercy of God Bishop of
And therefore I abjure, renounce, and such a city, or (if he is present) Judge
revoke that heresy of which you, my in the territory subject to such a Prince,
Lord Bishop, and your Officers hold me having carefully seen and examined the
suspected: namely, that I have been merits of the process conducted by us
familiar with witches, have ignorantly against you In., accused before us of
defended their errors, have held in heresy, nnd that you have committed
detestation their Inquisitors and prose¬ such and such (naming them) which
cutors, or that I have failed to bring render you lightly suspected of heresy,
their crimes to light. Also I swear that I on account of which we have judged it
have never believed the aforesaid proper to cause you to abjure that
heresy, nor do I believe it, nor have I heresy as one lightly suspected of it.
adhered, nor do I adhere to it, nor shall But not for that can you be dismissed
I ever believe, adhere to, or teach it, unpunished. And that you may become
nor do I intend to teach it. And if I more careful in the future, having con¬
should hereafter be guilty of any of the sulted with many eminent persons
aforesaid practices (which God forbid), learned in the law and with religious
I shall willingly submit myself to the men, and having carefully weighed and
punishment provided by law for such digested the whole matter, having
who are so forsworn; and I am ready to only God before our eyes, and the
undergo any penance which you see fit irrefragable truth of the Holy Catholic
to enjoin me for those words or deeds of Faith, and with the Holy Gospels
mine for which you hold me deservedly placed before us that our sentence may
suspect; and I swear to fulfil such proceed as from God’s countenance and
penance to the best of my strength, and that our eyes may see with equity, and
to omit no part of it, so help me God sitting in tribunal as Judge, we con¬
and these Holy Gospels. demn, sentence, or rather impose
The above abjuration shall be made penance upon you N., standing in
in the common speech, so that all may person here in our presence, in the
understand it. And when it is done, the following manner. Namely, that never
Judge, if he is present, or his deputy hereafter shall you knowingly hold to,
shall speak to her in the common speech associate with, defend in your speech,
to the following effect: read (if you are well learned), or here¬
My son (or daughter), you have not after, etc. And let there be set down that
unworthily abjured the suspicion which which she has committed, on account
we entertained of you, and have purged of which she* was held suspected of the
yourself by the aforesaid abjuration. crime of heresy. This sentence and
Beware then lest hereafter you fall into penance were given, etc.
the heresy you have abjured. For And let the Notary take care that he
although, if you should repent, you sets it down in the process that such
would not be delivered up to the secular abjuration was made as by one under a
Court, since you made your abjuration light, not a strong, suspicion of heresy;
as one under a light, and not a strong, for otherwise great danger might
suspicion, yet you would then be far ensue.
more severely punished than you would
have been if you had not abjured, and
you would then rest under a strong in¬
stead of a light suspicion. And when you
should abjure as such, and afterwards

246 MALLEUS Part III. Question 24.
phrase, and the accused shall repeat it
QJJESTION XXIV
in a loud and audible voice in the
following manner. The Notary or clerk
The Fifth Manner of Sentence, in the Case of
shall say: I, N., of such a place, and
one under Strong Suspicion.
T
the accused person shall repeat after
HE fifth method of concluding a him the same words, but always in the
process on behalf of the faith is vulgar tongue. And so on up to the end
used when she who is accused of heresy, of the abjuration. And she shall abjure
after a careful examination of the in the following manner:
merits of the process in consultation I, N., of such a place in such a Diocese,
with learned lawyers, is found to be standing my trial in person in presence
strongly suspected of heresy. And this of you reverend Lords the Bishop
is when the accused is not legally taken of such city and the Judge of the terri¬
in heresy, nor has been convicted by tory subject to the rule of such a Lord,
her own confession or by the evidence upon the Holy Gospels set before me and
of the facts or by the legitimate pro¬ touched by my hands, I swear that I
duction of witnesses; but strong and believe in my heart and profess with
weighty indications have been proved my lips that Holy Catholic and Apos¬
against her by reason of which she is tolic Faith which the Holy Roman
held to be under strong suspicion of Church teaches, professes, preaches,
heresy. and holds. Also I swear that I believe
.The procedure in such a case is as in my heart and profess with my lips
follows. For such a person should that, etc. And let her pronounce the
abjure that heresy as one strongly Catholic article of the faith against that
suspected of it, in such a manner that, heresy of which she is strongly suspected.
if she should afterwards relapse, she For example, if the heresy of witch¬
must be delivered to the secular Court craft is in question, let her say as
to suffer the extreme penalty. And she follows :
shall make her abjuration publicly or I swear that I believe that not only
secretly according to whether she is will simple heretics and schismatics be
publicly or secretly suspected, or by tortured in fire everlasting, but that
more or less, high or low, as was just those above all will be so punished who
said in the case of one under a light are infected with the heresy of witches,
suspicion; and she must abjure that who deny before the devil that faith
specific heresy. which they received in Holy Baptism at
And the preparations for such an the font, and practise demoniac lewd¬
abjuration should be as follows:—When ness for the fulfilment of their evil
the Sunday comes which has been fixed desires, inflicting all sorts of injuries
for the abjuration and the hearing of upon men and animals and the fruits
the sentence or the imposition of the of the earth. And consequently I
penance, the preacher shall deliver a abjure, renounce, and revoke that
general sermon. After this, the Notary or heresy, or rather infidelity, which falsely
clerk shall publicly read out the crimes and mendaciously maintains that there
of which the accused has been con¬ are no witches in the world, and that no
victed, and those of which she is strongly one ought to believe that those injuries
suspected as a heretic. can be caused with the help of devils;
Then the Judge or his deputy shall for such infidelity is, as I now recognize,
say to her: Behold! according to that expressly contrary to the decision of our
which has been read you are strongly Holy Mother the Church and of all
suspected by us of such heresy; where¬ the Catholic Doctors, as also against
fore it behoves you to purge yourself the Imperial laws which have decreed
and abjure the aforesaid heresy. And that witches are to be burned.
then the Book of the Gospels shall be Also I swear that I have never per¬
placed before her, and she shall set sistently believed in the aforesaid heresy,
her hand upon it; and if she can read neither do I believe nor adhere to it at
competently, she shall be given the the present, nor have I taught it, nor
following written abjuration, and shall intend to teach it, nor shall teach it.
read it in the presence of the whole Also I swear and promise that I will
congregation. never do or cause to be done such and
But if she cannot read competently, such (naming them) of which you hold
the Notary shall read it phrase by me strongly suspected as a heretic.

Part III. Question 24. MALEFICARUM 247
And if hereafter (which God forbid) I Apostolic Faith, having set before us the
should do any of the aforesaid, I am Hnly Gospel that our judgement may
ready to undergo the punishment pro¬ proceed as from God’s countenance and
vided by law for backsliders; and 1 am our eyes see with equity, and sitting in
ready to submit myself to any penance tribunal as Judges, we condemn, or
which you decide to impose upon me rather impose penance in the following
for those deeds and words of mine for manner upon you, N., standing here in
which you hold me strongly suspected person before us: namely, that you shall
of the said heresy. And I swear and never hereafter presume to do, say,
romise that I will perform it to the or teach such and such things. And let
est of my strength, and will omit no there be set down those things of which
part of it, so God and this Holy Gospel she has been convicted, and by reason
help me. of which she was strongly suspected of
And the said abjuration shall be made the aforesaid heresy, as well as certain
in the vulgar tongue so that it may be others which, if she were to commit
understood by all, unless it be made them, would make her guilty of a slight
only in the presence of Clerics with a relapse into heresy; but this must be
competent knowledge of the Latin as the particular nature of the case
tongue. But if the abjuration be made demands and requires. As, for ex¬
secretly in the Bishop’s palace or ample, that she should never wittingly
chamber, when it is not a public follow such practices, nor receive those
matter, it shall be made in a similar whom she knows to have denied the
manner. And afterwards the Bishop faith, etc. This sentence was given, etc.
shall admonish her as above to beware But it must be noted that those who
lest she relapse and incur the penalty are suspected, but not taken in heresy,
of a backslider. And let the Notary whether they be strongly or lightly
take care that he set it down how such suspected, must not be imprisoned or
abjuration was made by such a person confined for life. For this is the punish¬
as one strongly suspected of heresy, so ment of those who have been heretics
that, if she should relapse, she may be and afterwards repented. But they may,
punished as is proper for a backslider. because of their deeds for which they
And when this has been done, let the have come under suspicion, be sent to
sentence or penance be pronounced in prison for a time, and afterwards, as
the following manner: will be seen, released.
We, N., Bishop of such city, and Neither are they to be branded with
Brother N. (if he is present), Inquisitor the sign of the Gross, for such is the
of the sin of heresy in the domains sign of a penitent heretic; and they are
subject to the rule of such a Prince, not convicted heretics, but only sus¬
especially deputed by the Holy Apostolic pected, therefore they are not to be
See: having in mind that you, N., of marked in this way. But they can be
such a place in such a Diocese, have ordered either to stand on certain
done such and such (naming them), as solemn days within the doors of a
lawfully appears from the carefully church, or near the altar, while Holy
examined merits of the process, where¬ Mass is being celebrated, bearing in
fore we reasonably hold you strongly their hands a lighted candle of a certain
suspected of such heresy, and have weight;* or else to go on some pil¬
caused you to abjure it as one $o sus- grimage, or something of the kind,
ected, being persuaded to that course according to the nature and require¬
y ponsiderations of justice and the ments of the case.
advice of men skilled in the law. But
that you may be more careful in the
future nor become more prone to the * lcA Certain Weight.” This was exactly
specified when sentence was delivered. Thus
like practices, and that your crimes may
JJrbain Grandier on 18 August, 1634, at
not remain unpunished, and that you
Loudun, was sentenced “to make honourable
may be an example to other sinners;
amends, with bare head, a rope round his neck,
having consulted with many eminent
and with a burning torch of two pounds' weight
and learned lawyers and Masters or
in his hand, before the principal door of the
Doctors of the faculty of Theology,
church of Saint-Pierre du March6, and before
having carefully digested the whole that of Sainte Ursule of this town, and there,
matter, and having before our eyes only upon his knees, to ask pardon of God and the
God and the truth of the Catholic and King." His execution followed.

248 MALLEUS Part III. Question 25.
commonly happens that they are con¬
QUESTION XXV
strained to manifest themselves by
threatening words, by deeds, by a
The Sixth Kind of Sentence, in the Case of
one who is Gravely Suspect. look or a touch, and this is for three
T
reasons. First that their sins may be
HE sixth method of bringing to aggravated and more manifest to their
a conclusion a process on behalf Judges; secondly, that they may the
of the faith is used when the person more easily seduce the simple; and
accused of heresy, after a careful thirdly, that God may be the more
examination of the merits of the offended and they may be granted more
process in consultation with learned power of injuring men. Therefore a
lawyers, is found to be gravely sus¬ witch must be gravely suspected when,
pected of heresy. And this is when the after she has used such threatening
accused is not convicted of heresy by words as “I shall soon make you feel,”
her own confession or by the evidence or the like, some injury has befallen
of the facts or by the legitimate the person so threatened or his cattle.
production of witnesses, but there are For then she is not to be considered as
indications, not only light or even lightly suspected, as was the case with
strong, but very strong and grave, those who are familiar with witches, or
which render her gravely suspected of those who wish to provoke someone to
the said heresy, and by reason of which inordinate love. See above where we
she must be judged as one gravely deal with the three degrees of suspicion,
suspected of the said heresy. light, strong, and grave.
And for a clearer understanding of Now we must consider what pro¬
this, we shall give examples both of a cedure is to be observed in such a case.
case of simple heresy and of the heresy For in the case of one gravely suspected
of witches. For the case would fall of simple heresy, the following is the
under this head in simple heresy if the procedure. Although he may not in
accused were not lawfully found con¬ actual truth be a heretic, since there
victed by his own confession, etc. as may not be any error in his under¬
above, but for something which he had standing, or if there is, he may not cling
said or done. As, for example, he may obstinately to it in his will: nevertheless
have been summoned in a case not he is to be condemned as a heretic
concerning the faith, and have been because of the said grave suspicion,
sentenced to excommunication; and if against which no proof is admitted.
he should continue obstinate in ex- Such a heretic is condemned in this
communication for a year or more, he manner. If he refuses to return and
would come under a light suspicion of abjure his heresy and gi*e fitting
heresy; for such behaviour is not satisfaction, he is delivered to the
without some suspicion of heresy. But secular Court to be punished. But
if he should then be summoned on a if he is willing and consents, he abjures
charge concerning the faith, and should his heresy and is imprisoned for life.
not appear but contumaciously refuse And the same holds good in the case of
to appear, and therefore be excom¬ one gravely suspected of the heresy of
municated, then he would be strongly witches.
suspected of heresy; for then the light But although the same method in the
suspicion would become a strong one. main is to be observed in the case of
And if he remained obstinate in that one gravely suspected of the heresy of
excommunication for a year, then he witches, there are some differences.
would be gravely suspected of heresy; It is to be noted that, if the witch
for then the strong suspicion would maintains her denial, or claims that
become a grave one, against which no she uttered those words not with the
defence is admitted. And from that implied intention but in a vehement
time such a person would be condemned and womanish passion; then the Judge
as a heretic, as is shown by the Canon, has not sufficient warrant to sentence
c. cum contumacia, lib. 6. her to the flames, in spite of the grave
An example of a grave suspicion in suspicion. Therefore he must place
the heresy of witches would be when her in prison, and cause inquiry to be
the accused has said or done anything made by proclamation whether she has
which is practised by witches when been known to have done the like
they wish to bewitch anyone. And it before. And if it is found that this is

Part III. Question 25. MALEFICARUM
249
so, he must inquire whether she was standing in person before you my
then publicly defamed in respect of venerable Lords the Bishop of such city
that heresy; and from this he can and Judges, having touched with my
proceed further so that, before all hands the Holy Gospel placed before
else, she may be exposed to an interro¬ me, swear that I believe in my heart
gation under the question and torture. and profess with my lips the Holy
And then, if she shows signs of such Catholic and Apostolic Faith which
heresy, or of the taciturnity of witches; the Holy Roman Church holds, pro¬
as that she should be unable to shed fesses, believes, preaches and teaches.
tears, or remain insensible under tor¬ And consequently I abjure all heresy,
ture and quickly recover her strength and renounce and revoke all who raise
afterwards; then he may proceed with themselves against the Holy Roman
the various precautions which we have and Apostolic Church, of whatever
already explained where we dealt sect or error they be. Also I swear and
with such cases. promise that I shall never hencefor¬
And in case all should fail, then let ward do, say, or cause to be done such
him take note that, if she has per¬ and such (naming them) which 1 have
petrated the like before, she is not to done and said, and for which, in my
be altogether released, but must be guilt, you hold me gravely suspected of
sent to the squalor of prison for a year, the said heresy. Also I swear and
and be tortured, and be examined very promise that I will perform every
often, especially on the more Holy penance which you wish to impose
Days. But if, in addition to this, she upon me for the said crimes to the best
has been defamed, then the Judge of my strength, and that I will not
may proceed in the manner already omit any part of it, so help me God
shown in the case of simple heresy, and and the Holy Gospel. And if (which
condemn her to the fire, especially if God forbid) I should hereafter act in
there is a multitude of witnesses and contravention of this abjuration, I here
she had often been detected in similar and now bind and oblige myself to
or other deeds of witchcraft. But if he suffer the due punishments for back¬
wishes to be merciful, he may set her a sliders, however severe they be.
canonical purgation, that she should Let the Notary take care to set it
find twenty or thirty sponsors, sen¬ down that the said abjuration was made
tencing her in such a way that, if she by one gravely suspected of heresy, so
should fail in her purgation, she shall that if she should be proved to have
be condemned to the fire as convicted. relapsed, she should then be judged
And the Judge can proceed in such a accordingly and delivered up to the
manner. secular Court.
And if she should purge herself, then After this let the Bishop absolve her
the Judge must sentence her to an from the sentence of excommunication
abjuration of all heresy, on pain of which she has incurred as one gravely
the punishment for backsliders, together suspected of heresy. For when a heretic
with a perpetual penance, in the returns to the faith and abjures his
following manner. The preparations for heresy, he is to be released from the
the abjuration will be the same as were sentence of excommunication which is
explained in the fourth and fifth passed on all heretics. Similarly, such
methods of concluding a process on a one as we are considering was con¬
behalf of the faith. demned as a heretic, as we have said;
Note that in all the following methods but after she has abjured her heresy
of pronouncing sentence, when the she is to be released from excommunica¬
Judge wishes to proceed in a merciful tion; and after this absolution she is
manner he can act in the way we have to be sentenced in the following manner :
already explained. But since secular We N., Bishop of such city, and, if
Judges use their own various methods, he is present, Judge in the territory
proceeding with rigour but not always of such Lord, seeing that you N., of
with equity, no fixed rule or method such a place in such a Diocese, have
can be given for them as it can for an been accused before us of such and
ecclesiastical Judge, who can receive such touching the faith (naming them),
the abjuration and impose a perpetual and that we have proceeded to inform
penance in the following manner : ourselves concerning them as justice
I, N., of such a place in such a Diocese, demanded by a careful examination
s

250 MALLEUS Part III. Question 26.
of the merits of the process and of all this garment over all others for such
tEhat has been done and said in the a length of time (setting a period of
resent case, have found that you one or two years, more or less as the
ave committed such and such (naming guilt of the person demands). And
them). Wherefore, and not without m the said garment and crosses you
reason holding you gravely suspect shall stand in the door of such a church
of such heresy (naming it), we have at such a time for so long, or on the
caused you as one so suspected publicly four major Feasts* of the Glorious
to abjure all heresy in general, as the Virgin, or in such and such cities in
canonical sanctions bid us. And since the doors of such and such churches;
according to those same canonical and we sentence and condemn you for
institutions all such are to be con¬ life, or for such a period, to such a
demned as heretics, but you holding prison. (Let this be set down as seems
to wiser counsel and returning to the most to the honour of the faith, and
bosom of our Holy Mother the Church according to the greater or less guilt
have abjured, as we have said, all vile and obstinacy of the accused.) And
heresy, therefore we absolve you from we expressly, and in the sure knowledge
the sentence of excommunication by that it is so ordained by canonical
which you were deservedly bound as institution, reserve to ourselves the
one hateful to the Church of God. right to mitigate the said penance, to
And if with true heart and faith increase it, change it, or remove it,
unfeigned you have returned to the in whole or in part, as often as seems
unity of the Church, you shall be good to us. This sentence was given,
reckoned from henceforth among the etc.
penitent, and as from now are received And when this has been read, it shall
back into the merciful bosom of the at once be duly put into execution, and
Holy Church. But since it would be she shall be clothed with the aforesaid
most scandalous to pass over with garment with the crosses as has been
connivent eyes and leave unpunished said.
your offences against God and your ☆
injuries to men, for it is a graver
matter to offend the Divine Majesty
QUESTION XXVI
than a human monarch, and that
your crimes may not be an incentive
The Method of passing Sentence upon one
for other sinners, and that you may
who is both Suspect and Defamed.
T
become more careful in the future and
less prone to commit again the afore¬ HE seventh method of bringing
said crimes, and may suffer the less to a conclusion a process on behalf
punishment in the next world: We the of the faith is employed when the
aforesaid Bishop and Judge, having person accused of the sin of heresy,
availed ourselves of the wise and con¬ after a careful examination of the
sidered advice of learned men in this merits of the process in consultation
matter, sitting in tribunal as Judges with men learned in the law, is found
judging, having before our eyes only to be both suspected and defamed of
God and the irrefragable truth of the heresy. And this is when the accused
Holy Faith, with the Holy Gospels is not legally convicted by his own
placed before us that our judgement confession or by the evidence of the
may proceed as from the countenance facts or by the legitimate production
of God and our eyes see with equity, of witnesses; but is found to be publicly
sentence and condemn, or rather impose
* “Four Major Feasts.” Presumably the
penance in the following manner upon
Annunciation, the Visitation, Assumption, and
you N., appearing in person before
Nativity of Our Lady are intended. Candlemas,
us on the day and at the hour which
which in the Middle Ages had an octave in many
was before assigned to you. First, you
dioceses, may be intended instead of the Visitation.
shall put on over all the garments which
The last Pope, Sixtus IV, had in 1470 published
you wear a grey-blue garment after
a work on the Immaculate Conception. By a
the manner of a monk’s scapulary,
decree of 28 February, 1476, this Pontiff
made without a hood either before adopted the Feast of Our Lady's Conception for
or behind, and having upon it crosses the entire Latin Church and granted an indul¬
of yellow cloth three palms long and gence to all who should assist at the Divine
two palms wide, and you shall wear Office of this Solemnity.

Part III. Question 26. MALEFICARUM 251
defamed, and there are also other of heresy, then he shall, as above,
indications which render him lightly abjure all heresy in general. And if he
or strongly suspected of heresy: as that relapses into any heresy, he shall suffer
he has held much familiarity with the due punishment of a backslider.
heretics. And such a person must, But if the indications are so small and
because of his defamation, undergo a slight as, even taken together with the
canonical purgation; and because of said defamation, not to render him
the suspicion against him he must strongly, but only lightly, suspected
abjure the heresy. of heresy, then it is enough if he makes
The procedure in such a case will not a general abjuration, but specifically
be as follows. Such a person, being abjures that heresy of which he is
publicly defamed for heresy, and being suspected; so that, if he were to relapse
in addition to this suspected of heresy into another form of heresy, he would
by reason of certain other indications, not be liable to the penalty for back¬
shall first publicly purge himself in the sliders. And even if he were to relapse
manner which we explained in the into the same heresy which he had
second method. Having performed this abjured, he would still not be liable
purgation, he shall immediately, as to the said penalty, although he would
one against whom there are other be more severely punished than would
indications of the suspected heresy, have been the case if he had not
abjure that heresy in the following abjured.
manner, having before him, as before, But there is a doubt whether he would
the Book of the Gospels: be liable to the penalty for back¬
I, N., of such a place in such a sliders if, after his canonical purgation,
Diocese, standing my trial in person he should relapse into the same heresy
before you my Lords, N., Bishop of such of which he was canonically purged.
city and Judge in the territory of such And it would seem that this would be
Prince, having touched with my hands so, from the Canon Law, c. excom«
the Holy Gospels placed before me, municamus and c. ad abolendam. There¬
swear that I believe in my heart and fore the Notary must take great care to
profess with my lips that Holy Apostolic set it down whether such a person has
Faith which the Roman Church be¬ made his abjuration as one under a
lieves, professes, preaches and observes. light or a strong suspicion of heresy;
And consequently I abjure, detest, for, as we have often said, there is a
renounce and revoke every heresy great difference between these. And
which rears itself up against the Holy when this has been done, sentence or
and Apostolic Church, of whatever penance shall be pronounced in the
sect or error it be, etc., as above. following manner:
Also I swear and promise that I will We, N., Bishop of such city or Judge
never hereafter do or say or cause to in the territories of such Prince, having
be done such and such (naming them), diligently in mind that you, N., of such
for which I am justly defamed as having a place in such a Diocese, have been
committed them, and of which you accused before us of such heresy (naming
hold me suspected. Also I swear and it); and wishing to inquire judicially
promise that I will perform to the best whether you have fallen into the said
of my strength every penance which heresy, by examining witnesses, by
you impose upon me, nor will I omit summoning and questioning you upon
any part of it, so help me God and oath, and by all convenient means in
this Holy Gospel; And if hereafter I our power, we have acted and proceeded
should act in any way contrary to this as it behoved.
oath and abjuration (which God for¬ Having digested, observed and di¬
bid), I here and now freely submit, ligently inspected all the facts, and
oblige, and bind myself to the legal having discussed the merits of the
punishment for such, to the limit of process of this case, examining all and
sufferance, when it shall have been singular which has been done and
proved that I have committed such said, and having consulted with and
things. obtained the mature opinion of many
But it must be noted that when the learned Theologians and lawyers, we
indications are so strong as to render find that you have been in such place
the accused, either with or without the or places publicly defamed by good
aforesaid defamation, strongly suspected and sober men for the said heresy;

MALLEUS III. 27252 Part Question
wherefore, as we are bidden by the required by the condition of the
canonical institutions, we have imposed enitent and for his correction and
upon you a canonical purgation by umiliation; for the Bishop has this
which you and your sponsors have power by law.
here publicly purged yourself before ☆
us. We find also that you have com¬
mitted such and such (naming them),
QUESTION XXVII
by reason of which we have just cause
to hold you strongly or lightly (let it The Method of passing Sentence upon one
be said whether it is one or the other) who hath Confessed to Heresy, but is
suspected of the said heresy; and not Penitent.
T
therefore we have caused you to abjure
heresy as one under such suspicion HE eighth method of terminating
(here, if he has abjured as one under a process on behalf of the faith
strong suspicion, let them say “all is used when the person accused of
heresy”; and if as one under light heresy, after a careful,.examination of
suspicion, “the said heresy”). the merits of the process in consultation
But because we cannot and must not with learned lawyers, is found to have
in any way tolerate that which you confessed his heresy, but to be penitent,
have done, but are injustice compelled and not truly to have relapsed into
to abominate it, that you may become heresy. And this is when the accused
more careful in the future, and that has himself confessed in a Court of law
your crimes may not remain un¬ under oath before the Bishop and
punished, and that others may not be Inquisitor that he has for so long lived
encouraged to fall into the like sins, ana persisted in that heresy of which he
and that the injuries to the Creator is accused, or in any other, and has
may not easily be passed over: There¬ believed in and adhered to it; but that
fore against you, N., having so purged afterwards, being persuaded by the
yourself and abjured, standing per¬ Bishop and others, he wishes , to be
sonally in our presence in this place converted and to return to the bosom
at the time which was assigned to you, of the Church, and to abjure that and
We, the aforesaid Bishop or Judge, sit¬ every heresy, and to make such satis¬
ting in tribunal as Judges judging, faction as they require of him; and it
having before us the Holy Gospels that is found that he has made no previous
our judgement may proceed as from abjuration of any other heresy, but is
the countenance of God and our eyes now willing and prepared to abjure.
see with equity, pronounce sentence or In such a case the procedure will be
penance in the following manner, as follows.. Although such a person has
namely, that you must, etc. for many years persisted in the said
And let them pronounce sentence as heresy and even in others, and has
shall seem most to the honour of the believed and practised them and led
faith and the extermination of the sin of many others into error; yet if at last
heresy: as that on certain Sundays he has consented to abjure those
and Festivals he must stand at the heresies and to make such satisfaction
door of such a church, holding a candle as the Bishop and the ecclesiastical
of such a weight, during the solemniza¬ Judge shall decree, he is not to be
tion of Holy Mass, with head uncovered delivered up to the secular Court to
and bare feet, and offer the said candle suffer the extreme penalty; nor, if he
at the altar; and that he must fast on is a cleric, is he to be degraded. But
Fridays, and that for a certain period he is to be admitted to mercy, accord¬
he must not dare to depart from that ing to the Canon ad abolendam. And
place, but present himself before the after he has abjured his former heresy
Bishop or Judge on certain days of the he is to be confined in prison for life
week; and any similar penance which (see the Canon excommunicamus, where
seems to be demanded by the particular it provides for the absolution of such).
nature of his guilt; for it is impossible But great care must be taken that he
to give a hard-and-fast rule. This has not simulated a false penitence in
sentence was given, etc. And let it be order to be received back into the
put into execution after it has been Church. Also the secular Court is not
pronounced; and it can be cancelled, at all bound by such a sentence as the
mitigated or changed as may be above.

Part III. Question 27. MALEFICARUM 253
He shall make his abjuration in the Civil Law, knowing that, according
manner already set out, with this to canonical institution, the judgement
difference. He shall with his own mouth is sound which is confirmed by the
confess his crimes before the congrega¬ opinion of many; and having on all
tion in church on a Feast Day, in the details consulted the opinion of the
following manner. The clerk shall ask said learned men, and having diligently
him, Have you for so many years and carefully examined all the circum¬
ersisted in the heresy of witches? And stances of the process; we find that
e shall answer, Yes. And then, Have you are, by your own confession made
you done this and this to which you on oath before Us in the Court, con¬
have confessed? And he shall answer, victed of many of the sins of witches.
Yes. And so on. And finally he shall (Let them be expressed in detail.)
make his abjuration kneeling on his But since the Lord in His infinite
knees. And since, having been con¬ mercy permits men at times to fall
victed of heresy, he has been excom¬ into heresies and errors, not only that
municated, after he has by abjuration learned Catholics may be exercisedreturned to the bosom of the Church, in sacred arguments, but that they
he is to be granted the grace of absolu¬ who have fallen.from the faith may
tion, according to the manner used by become more humble thereafter and
the Bishops with Apostolic authority of perform works of penitence: having
absolving from the major excommuni¬ carefully discussed the circumstances of
cation. And sentence shall at once be this same process, we find that you, at
pronounced in the following manner: our frequent instance and following
We, the Bishop of such city, or the the advice of us and other honest men,
Judge in the territories of such Prince, have with a healthy mind returned to
seeing that you, N., of such a place the unity and bosom of the Holy
in such a Diocese, have been by public Mother Church, detesting the said
report and the information of credible errors and heresies, and acknowledging
persons accused before us of the sin of the irrefragable truth of the Holy
heresy; and since you had for many Catholic Faith, laying it to your inmost
years been infected with that heresy heart: wherefore, following in His
to the great damage of your soul; and footsteps Who wishes that no one
because this accusation against you has should perish, we have admitted you
keenly wounded our hearts: we whose to this adjuration and public abjuration
duty it is by reason of the office which of the said and all other heresies. And
we have received to plant the Holy having done this, we absolve you from
Catholic Faith in the hearts of men the sentence of major excommunica¬
and to keep away all heresy from their tion by which you were bound for your
minds, wishing to be more certainly fall into heresy, and reconciling you
informed whether there was any truth to the Holy Mother Church we restore
in the report which had come to our you to the sacraments of the Church;
ears, in order that, if it were true, we provided that with a true heart, and
might provide a healthy and fitting not with simulated faith, you return to
remedy, proceeded in the best way the unity of the Church, as we believe
which was open to us to question and and hope that you have done.
examine witnesses and to interrogate But because it would be a very
you on oath concerning that of which scandalous thing to avenge the injuries
you were accused, doing all and singu¬ done to temporal Lords and to tolerate
lar which was required of us by justice the offences committed against God
and the canonical sanctions. the Creator of all the Heavens, since
And since we wished to bring your it is a far greater sin to offend against
case to a suitable conclusion, and to the Eternal than against a temporal
have a clear understanding of your past Majesty, and that God Who pities
state of mind, whether you were walk¬ sinners may have mercy upon you, that
ing in the darkness or in the light, and you may be an example for others,
whether or not you had fallen into and that your sins may not remain
the sin of heresy; having conducted unpunished, and that you may become
the whole process, we summoned more careful in the future, and not
together in council before us learned more prone but less apt to commit
men of the Theological faculty and the said and any other crimes: We the
men skilled in both the Canon and the said Bishop and Judge, or Judges, on

254 MALLEUS Part III. Question 28.
behalf of the faith, sitting in tribunal investigation of the circumstances of
as Judges judging, etc., as above . . . the process in consultation with men
that you put on a grey-blue garment, of good judgement, is found to have
etc. Also we sentence and condemn confessed her heresy and to be penitent,
you to perpetual imprisonment, there but that she has truly relapsed. And
to be punished with the bread of this is when the accused herself con¬
affliction and the water of distress;* fesses in Court before the Bishop or
reserving to ourselves the right to Judges that she has at another time
mitigate, aggravate, change, or remit abjured all heresy, and this is legally
wholly or in part the said sentence if, proved, and that she has afterwards
when, and as often as it shall seem good fallen into such a heresy or error:
to us to do so. This sentence was or that she has abjured some particular
given, etc. heresy, such as that of witches, and has
After this the Judge shall proceed afterwards returned to it; but that
point by point, pronouncing sentence following better advice she is penitent,
in the following or some similar manner: and believes the Catholic faith, and
My son, your sentence or penance returns to the unity of the Church.
consists in this, that you bear this cross Such a one is not, if she humbly ask for
during the whole period of your life, them, to be denied the sacraments of
that you stand so bearing it on the Penance and the Eucharist; but how¬
altar steps or in the door of such ever much she may repent, she is
churches, and that you be imprisoned nevertheless to be delivered up as a
for life on bread and water. But, my backslider to the secular Court to
son, lest this may seem too hard for suffer the extreme penalty. But it must
you, I assure you that if you patiently Te uridefstood that this refers to one
bear your punishment you will find who had made her abjuration as one
mercy with us; therefore doubt not nor manifestly taken in heresy, or as one
despair, but hope strongly. strongly suspected of heresy, and not
After this, let the sentence be duly to one who has so done as being under
executed, and let him put on the said only a light suspicion.
garment and be placed on high upon The following procedure must be
the altar steps in full view of the people observed in this case. When, after
as they go out, surrounded by the mature and careful and, if necessary,
officers of the secular Court. And at the repeated investigation by learned men,
dinner hour let him be led by the it has been concluded that the said
officers to prison, and the rest of the prisoner has actually and prepense
sentence be carried out and duly relapsed into heresy, the Bishop or
performed. And after he is led out Judge shall send to the said prisoner
through the door of the church, let the in the place of detention two or three
ecclesiastical Judge have no more to honest men, especially religious or
do with the matter; and if the secular clerics, who are zealous for the faith,
Court be satisfied, it is well, but if not, of whom the prisoner has no suspicion,
let it do its pleasure. but rather places confidence in them;
and they shall go in to her at a suitable
time and speak to her sweetly of the
☆
contempt of this world and the miseries
of this life, and of the joys and glory
QUESTION XXVIII
of Paradise. And leading up from this,
they shall indicate to her on the part
The Method of passing Sentence upon
of the Bishop or Judge that she cannot
one who hath Confessed to Heresy but
escape temporal death, and that she
is Relapsed, Albeit now Penitent.
T should therefore take care for the safety
of her soul, and prepare herself to con¬
HE ninth method of arriving at a
fess her sins and receive the Sacrament
conclusive sentence in a process on
of the Eucharist. And they shall visit
behalf of the faith is used when the
her often, persuading her to penitence
person accused of heresy, after a careful
and patience, strengthening her as
much as they can in the Catholic
* “Distress.” ‘7II. Kings” (A.V., ‘7.
Kings”) xxii, 27: Put this man in prison, and truth, and they shall diligently cause
feed him with bread of affliction, and water of her to confess, so that she may receive
distress. the Sacrament of the Eucharist at her

Part III. Question 28. MALEFI CARUM 255
outside the church, and the Inquisitor
humble petition. For these Sacraments
shall preach a sermon, and the prisoner
are not to be denied to such offenders.
shall be set on a high place in the
And when she has received these
presence of the secular authorities.
Sacraments, and been well disposed by
And if the prisoner be a cleric who is
these men to salvation; after two or
to be degraded, the Bishop shall don
three days during which they have
his Pontifical robes, together with the
strengthened her in the Catholic faith
other prelates of his Diocese in their
and induced her to repentance, the
vestments and copes, and the prisoner
Bishop or Judge of that place shall
shall be clothed and robed as if he
notify the bailiff of the place or the
were to minister his office; and the
authorities of the secular Court, that
Bishop shall degrade him from his
on such a day at such an hour (not
orders, beginning from the higher and
a Feast Day) he should be with his
proceeding to the lowest. And just as
attendants in such a square or place
in conferring Holy Orders the Bishop
(but it must be outside a church)
uses the words ordained by the Church,
to receive from their Court a certain
so in degrading him he shall take off
backslider whom the Bishop and Judge
his chasuble and stole, and so with the
will hand over to him.
other vestments, using words of a
And on the morning of the day fixed,
or on the day before, it shall be directly opposite meaning.
When this degradation has been
publicly proclaimed throughout the
accomplished, the proceedings must
city or place in those towns and villages
continue in the legal and accustomed
where such proclamations are custom¬
manner, and the Notary or religious
ary, that on such a day at such an hour
or clerk shall be bidden to read the
in such a place there will be a sermon
sentence, which shall be after the follow¬
preached in defence of the Faith, and
ing manner, whether the prisoner be a
that the Bishop and other Judges will
condemn a certain person who has layman or a degraded cleric :
We, N, by the mercy of God Bishop
relapsed into the sin of heresy, deliver¬
of such city, and Judge in the terri¬
ing her up to secular justice.
tories of such Prince, seeing that we are
But here it must be considered that,
legitimately informed that you, N., of
if he who has so relapsed should have
such a place in such a Diocese, have
been ordained in any Holy Orders, or
been before us (or before such Bishop
should be a priest or a religious of any
and Judges) accused of such heresy
Order, before he is handed over he is
or heresies (naming them), of which you
to be degraded and stripped of the
were lawfully convicted by your own
privileges of his ecclesiastic order. And
confession and by witnesses, and that
so, when he has been degraded from all
you had obstinately persisted in them
ecclesiastical office, let him be handed
for so long, but afterwards, listening to
over to secular justice to receive his due
better advice, publicly in such a place
punishment.
abjured, renounced and revoked those
When, therefore, such a one is to be
degraded from his orders and handed heresies in the form provided by the
over to the secular Court, let the Bishop Church, on which account the said
summon together all the prelates and Bishop and Inquisitor, believing that
religious men of his Diocese. For in you had truly returned to the bosom of
this case, though not in others, only the Holy Church of God, did absolve
the Bishop together with the other you from the sentence of excom¬
prelates and religious and learned men munication by which you were bound,
enjoining upon you a salutary pen¬
of his Diocese can degrade one who
has received Holy Orders when he is ance if with true heart and faith
unfeigned you had returned to the
to be delivered to the secular Court,
or is to be imprisoned for life for the unity of the Holy Church; but where¬
as after all the aforesaid and the
sin of heresy.
On the day appointed for the de¬ lapse of so many years you are again
grading of the backslider and the hand¬ accused before us and have again
ing of him over to the secular Court, fallen into such heresies which you
had abjured (naming them), and
if he be a cleric, or, if he be a layman,
for leaving him to hear his definitive though it was sore grief to us to hear
sentence, the people shall gather to¬ such things of you, yet we were by
gether in some square or open place justice compelled to investigate the

256 MALLEUS Part III. Question 28.
matter, to examine the witnesses, and although you are penitent; and as one
to summon and question you on oath, truly so relapsed we cast you forth
proceeding in each and every way from this our ecclesiastical Court, and
as we are bidden by the canonical leave you to be delivered to the secular
institutions. arm. But we earnestly pray that the
And since we wished to conclude this said secular Court may temper its
case without any doubt, we convened justice with mercy, that there be no
in solemn council learned men of the bloodshed or danger of death.
Theological faculty and men skilled in And here the Bishop and his
the Canon and the Civil Law, and in assessors shall withdraw, and the secular
consultation with them maturely and Court shall perform its office.
carefully examined all and singular It is to be noted that, although the
which had been done, said and seen in Bishop and Inquisitor ought to use their
the process and diligently discussed utmost diligence, both by their own
each circumstance, weighing all equally efforts and those of others, to induce
in the balance as it behoved us; and the prisoner to repent and return to
we find both by the legitimate evidence the Catholic faith; yet, after he has
of witnesses and by your own confession repented and it has been decided in
received in Court that you have fallen council that, though he is penitent, he
into the heresies which you had is nevertheless truly a backslider and as
abjured. For we find that you have such to be handed over in person to
said or done such and such (let all be the secular Court, they ought not to
named), on account of which, with the inform him of such sentence and
concurrence of the said learned men, punishment. For the face of his Judge
we have judged and now judge that terrifies the prisoner, and his words are
you are a backslider, according to the more likely to cause one who is to be
canonical institutions, to which we punished to be impenitent than peni¬
refer in grief and grieve to refer. tent. Therefore from that time, neither
But since it has come to the know¬ before nor after the sentence should
ledge of Us and of many honest they present themselves before him,
Catholic men that, by the inspiration that he be not moved in his spirit
of Divine grace, you have once more against them, a thing which is very
returned to the bosom of the Church carefully to be avoided in death of this
and to the truth of the faith, detesting sort. But, as we have said, let them
the aforesaid errors and heresies and send to him some honest men, especially
with true orthodoxy unfeigned be¬ those in religious orders, or clerics, in
lieving and protesting the Catholic whom he has confidence; and let
faith, we have admitted you to receive them inform him of the sentence to
the Church’s Sacraments of Penance come and of his death, and strengthen
and the Holy Eucharist at your him in the faith, exhorting him to have
humble request. But since the Church patience; and let them visit him after
of God has no more which it can do in the sentence, and console him and
respect of you, seeing that it has acted pray with him, and not leave him until
so mercifully towards you in the manner he has rendered his spirit to his Creator.
we have said, and you have abused Let them, therefore, beware and be
that mercy by falling back into the on their guard not to do or say any¬
heresies which you had abjured: there¬ thing which may enable the prisoner
fore We the said Bishop and Judges, to anticipate his death, or place them¬
sitting in tribunal as Judges judging, selves in an irregular position. And,
having before us the Holy Gospels as they have burdened themselves
that our judgement may proceed as from with the care of his soul, let them then
the countenance of God and our eyes share also in his punishment and guilt.
see with equity, and having before our It must also be remarked that such a
eyes only God and the irrefragable sentence which delivers up a person to
truth of the Holy Faith and the extirpa¬ the secular Court ought not to be pro¬
tion of the plague of heresy; against you, nounced on a Festival or Solemn Day,
N., in this place on the day and at the nor in a church, but outside in some
hour before assigned to you for the open space. For it is a sentence which
hearing of your definitive sentence, we leads to death; and it is more decent
pronounce in sentence that you have that it should be delivered on an
truly fallen back into the sin of heresy, ordinary day and outside the church;

Part III. Question 29. MALEFICARUM 257
for a Feast Day and the church are of such city, or Judge in the territories
dedicated to God. of such Prince, seeing that you, N., of
such a place in such a Diocese, have
been accused before us by public
☆
report and the information of credible
persons (naming them) of heresy,
QUESTION XXIX
and that you have for many years
The Method of passing Sentence upon persisted in those heresies to the
one who hath Confessed to Heresy but great hurt of your immortal soul; and
is Impenitent, although not Relapsed. since we, whose duty it is to exter¬
T
minate the plague of heresy, wishing
HE tenth method of completing a to be more certainly informed of this
process on behalf of the Faith by a matter and to see whether you walked
final sentence is used when the person in darkness or the light, have diligently
accused of heresy, after a careful inquired into the said accusation,
examination of the circumstances of summoning and duly examining you,
the process in consultation with skilled we find that vou are indeed infected
✓
lawyers, is found to have confessed his with the said hereay.
heresy and to be impenitent, though But since it is the chief desire of our
he has not relapsed into the heresy. hearts to plant the Holy Catholic
Such a case is very rarely found, Faith in the hearts of our people, and
but yet it has come within the experi¬ to eradicate the pest of heresy, we have
ence of us Inquisitors. In such a used diverse and various suitable
case, therefore, the Bishop and Judge methods, both by ourselves and by
must not be in haste to sentence the others, to persuade you to renounce
prisoner, but must keep him well your said errors and heresies in which
guarded and fettered, and induce him you had stood, were standing, and even
to be converted, even to the extent of now defiantly and obstinately stand
several months, showing him that, by with stubborn heart. But since the
remaining impenitent, he will be Enemy of the human race is present
damned in body and soul. in your heart, wrapping you up and
But if neither by comforts nor hard¬ entangling you in the said errors, and
ships, nor by threatening nor persuasion, you have refused and yet refuse to
can he be brought to renounce his errors, abjure the said heresies, choosing rather
and the appointed period of grace has the death of your soul in hell and of
expired, let the Bishop and Judges pre¬ your body in this world than to re¬
pare to deliver or abandon him to the nounce the said heresies and return to
secular Court; and they shall give the bosom of the Church and cleanse
notice to the herald or bailiff or secular your soul, and since you are deter¬
authorities that on such a day, not a mined to remain in your sin :
Feast, and at such an hour they should Therefore inasmuch as you are
be in such a place with their attendants bound by the chain of excommunica¬
outside a church, and that they will tion from the Holy Church, and are
deliver to them a certain impenitent justly cut off from the number of the
heretic. None the less they shall Lord’s flock, and are deprived of the
themselves make public proclamation benefits of the Church, the Church
in the customary places that on such a can do no more for you, having done
day at such a time in the aforesaid all that was possible. We the said
place a sermon will be preached in Bishop and Judges on behalf of the
defence of the faith, and that they will Faith, sitting in tribunal as Judges
hand over a certain heretic to secular judging, and having before us the Holy
justice; and that all should come and Gospels that our judgement may pro¬
be present, being granted the custom¬ ceed as from the countenance of God
ary Indulgences. and our eyes see with equity, and having
After this, the prisoner shall be before our eyes only God and the truth
delivered to the secular Court in the of the Holy Faith and the extirpation of
following manner. But let him first the plague of heresy, on this day and at
be often admonished to renounce his this hour and place assigned to you for
heresy and repent; but if he altogether the hearing of your final sentence, we
refuses, let the sentence be pronounced. give it as our judgement and sentence
We, N., by the mercy of God Bishop that you are indeed an impenitent

258 MALLEUS Part III. Question 30.
heretic, and as truly such to be de¬ with true heart and faith unfeigned
livered and abandoned to the secular you remained converted to the unity
Court: wherefore by this sentence we of the Holy Church, received you back
cast you away as an impenitent heretic in mercy. For the Holy Church of God
from our ecclesiastical Court, and is not closed to such as return to her
deliver or abandon you to the power bosom.
of the secular Court: praying the said But after all the aforesaid you have
I Court to moderate or temper its to our great grief been accused before
sentence of death against you. This us of having again fallen into those
sentence was given, etc. damnable heresies which you formerly
abjured in public; yea, you have done
so and so (naming them) in contraven¬
☆
tion of the said abjuration and to the
damage of your soul; and although we
QUESTION XXX
are sore wounded and cut to the heart
to have heard such things of you, yet
Of one who has Confessed to Heresy,
we were in justice compelled to inquire
is Relapsed, and is also Impenitent.
T into the matter, to examine the wit¬
HE eleventh method of concluding nesses, and to summon and question
and terminating a process on behalf you on oath as it behoved us, and in
of the Faith is used when the person every particular to proceed as we are
accused of heresy, after a diligent bidden by the canonical institutions.
discussion of the circumstances of the And as we wished to conclude this
process in consultation with learned case beyond any doubt, we summoned a
men, is found to have confessed her solemn council of men learned in the
heresy, and to be impenitent, and To Theological faculty and of those skilled
have relapsed into it. And this is in the Canon and Civil Laws.
when the accused confesses with her And having obtained the mature and
own mouth in Court that she believes considered judgement of the said
and has practised such and such. The learned men upon every single parti¬
procedure in such a case is the same as cular which had been brought to
that above; and because she is mani¬ notice and done in this case, after
festly a heretic, sentence shall be repeated examination of the whole
pronounced in the following manner process and careful and diligent dis¬
in the presence of the Bishop and cussion of every circumstance, as law
Judges: and justice demanded, we find that
We N., by the mercy of God Bishop you are legally convicted both by the
of such city, or Judge in the terri¬ evidence of credible witnesses and by
tories of such Prince, seeing that you your own repeated confession, that you
N., of such a place in such a have fallen, and fallen again, into the
Diocese, were formerly accused before heresies which you abjured. For we
us (or before such and such, our pre¬ find that you have said or done such
decessors) of the crime of heresy (nam¬ and such (naming them), wherefore
ing them), and that you were legally we have reason, in the opinion of the
convicted of that crime by your own said learned men, and compelled
confession and the testimony of worthy thereto by your own excesses, to judge
men, and that you obstinately per¬ you as a backslider according to the
sisted in it for so many years; but that canonical decrees. And that we say
afterwards, having listened to better this with grief, and grieve to say it, He
advice, you publicly abjured those knows from Whom nothing is hid and
heresies in such a place and in the Who seeth into the secrets of all hearts.
form required by the Church, on And with all our hearts we desired and
which account the aforesaid Bishop and still desire to lead you back to the
Judge, believing that you had truly unity of Holy Church and to drive out
renounced the said errors and had from your heart the said foul heresy,
returned with Catholic faith to the that so you may save your soul and
bosom of the Church, granted you the preserve your body and soul from
benefit of absolution, releasing you destruction in hell, and we have
from the sentence of excommunication exerted our utmost endeavour by
by which you were formerly bound, various fitting methods to convert you
and, setting you a salutary penance if to salvation; but you have been given

Part III. Question 31. MALEFICARUM 259
up to your sin and led away and et, though so taken and convicted,
seduced by an evil spirit, and have e firmly and constantly denies the
chosen to be tortured with fearful and charge. See Henry of Segusio On Heresy,
eternal torment in hell, and that your question 34.
temporal body should here be con¬ The procedure in such a case is as
sumed in the flames, rather than to give follows. The accused must be kept in
ear to better counsels and renounce strong durance fettered and chained,
your damnable and pestilent errors, and must often be visited by the
and to return to the merciful bosom of officers, both in a body and severally,
our Holy Mother Church. who will use their own best endeavours
Wherefore since the Church of God and those of others to induce him to
can do nothing more for you, having discover the truth; telling him that if
done all that was possible to convert he does so and confesses his error, and
you: We the Bishop and Judges named abjures that vile heresy, he will be
in this cause on behalf of the faith, admitted to mercy; but that if he
sitting in tribunal as Judges judging, refuses and persists in his denial, he
having before us the Holy Gospels that will in the end be abandoned to the
our judgement may proceed as from secular law, and will not be able to
the countenance of God and our eyes escape temporal death.
see with equity, and having before our But if he continues for a long time in
eyes only God and the honour of the his denials, the Bishop and his officers,
Holy Catholic Faith, on this day at now in a body and now severally, now
this hour and place before assigned to personally and now with the assistance
you for the hearing of your final of other honest and upright men, shall
sentence, we pronounce judgement summon before them now one witness,
upon you N., here present before us, now another, and warn him to attend
and condemn and sentence you as a strictly to what he has deposed, and to
truly impenitent and relapsed heretic, be sure whether or not he has told the
and as such to be delivered or aban¬ truth; that he should beware lest in
doned to secular justice; and by this damning another temporally he damn
our definitive sentence we cast you himself eternally; that if he be afraid,
out as a truly impenitent and relapsed let him at least tell them the truth in
heretic from our ecclesiastical Court, secret, that the accused should not die
and deliver and abandon you to the unjustly. And let them be careful
power of the secular Court; praying to talk to him in such a way that they
that the said secular Court will temper may see clearly whether or not his
or moderate its sentence of death depositions have been true.
against you. This sentence was given, But if the witnesses, after this warn¬
etc. ing, adhere to their statements, and the
accused maintains his denials, let not
☆
the Bishop and his officers on that
account be in any haste to pronounce
QUESTION XXXI
a definitive sentence and hand the
prisoner over to secular law; but let
Of one Taken and Convicted, but Denying
them detain him still longer, now
Everything.
T persuading him to confess, now yet
HE twelfth method of finishing and again urging the witnesses (but one at
concluding a process on behalf of a time) to examine their consciences
the faith is used when the person well. And let the Bishop and his
accused of heresy, after a diligent officers pay particular attention to that
examination of the merits of the pro¬ witness who seems to be of the best
cess in consultation with skilled lawyers, conscience and the most disposed to
is found to be convicted of heresy by good, and let them more insistently
the evidence of the facts or by the charge him on his conscience to speak
legitimate production of witnesses, but the truth whether or not the matter
not by his own confession. That is to was as he had deposed. And if they
say, he may be convicted by the see any witness vacillate, or there are
evidence of the facts, in that he has any other indications that he has given
publicly practised heresy; or by the false evidence, let them attest him
evidence of witnesses against whom according to the counsel of learned men,
he can take no legitimate exception; and proceed as justice shall require.

26o MALLEUS Part III. Question 31.
For it is very often found that after punished as false witnesses, accusers or
a person so convicted by credible informers. This is made clear by Paul
witnesses has long persisted in his of Burgos in his comment on the Canon
denials, he has at length relented, c. multorum. And sentence or penance
especially on being truly informed that shall be pronounced against them as
he will not be delivered to the secular shall seem proper to the Bishop and
Court, but be admitted to mercy if he Judges; but in any case such false
confesses his sin, and he has then freely witnesses must be condemned to per¬
confessed the truth which he had so petual imprisonment on a diet of bread
long denied. And it is often found that and water, and to do penance for all the
the witnesses, actuated by malice and days of their life, being made to stand
overcome by enmity, have conspired upon the steps before the church door,
together to accuse an innocent person etc. However, the Bishops have power
of the sin of heresy; but afterwards, at to mitigate or even to increase the
the frequent entreaty of the Bishop and sentence after a year or some other
his officers, their consciences have been period, in the usual manner.
stricken with remorse and, by Divine But if the accused, after a year or
inspiration, they have revoked their other longer period which has been
evidence and confessed that they have deemed sufficient, continues to main¬
out of malice put that crime upon the tain his denials, and the legitimate
accused. Therefore the prisoner in witnesses abide by their evidence, the
such a case is not to be sentenced Bishop and Judges shall prepare to
hastily, but must be kept for a year or abandon him to the secular Court;
more before he is delivered up to the sending to him certain honest men
secular Court. zealous for the faith, especially re¬
When a sufficient time has elapsed, ligious, to tell him that he cannot escape
and after all possible care has been temporal death while he thus persists
taken, if the accused who has been thus in his denial, but will be delivered up as
legally convicted has acknowledged his an impenitent heretic to the power of the
guilt and confessed in legal form that secular Court. And the Bishop and his
he hath been for the period stated officers shall give notice to the Bailiff
ensnared in the crime of heresy, and or authority of the secular Court that
has consented to abjure that and every on such a day at such an hour and in such
heresy, and to perform such satisfac¬ a place (not inside a church) he should
tion as shall seem proper to the Bishop come with his attendants to receive
and Inquisitor for one convicted of an impenitent heretic whom they will
heresy both by his own confession and deliver to him. And let him make
the legitimate production of witnesses; public proclamation in the usual places
then let him as a penitent heretic that all should be present on such a
publicly abjure all heresy, in the man¬ day at such an hour and place to hear
ner which we have set down in the a sermon preached on behalf of the
eighth method of concluding a process faith, and that the Bishop and his
on behalf of the faith. officer will hand over a certain
But if he has confessed that he hath obstinate heretic to the secular Court.
fallen into such heresy, but neverthe¬ On the appointed day for the pro¬
less obstinately adheres to it, he must nouncement of sentence the Bishop and
be delivered to the secular Court as an his officer shall be in the place afore¬
impenitent, after the manner of the said, and the prisoner shall be placed
tenth method which we have explained on high before the assembled clergy and
above. people so that he may be seen by all,
But if the accused has remained and the secular authorities shall be
firm and unmoved in his denial of the present before the prisoner. Then
charges against him, but the witnesses sentence shall be pronounced in the
have withdrawn their charges, revoking following manner:
their evidence and acknowledging We, N., by the mercy of God Bishop
their guilt, confessing that they had put of such city, or Judge in the territories
so great a crime upon an innocent of such Prince, seeing that you, N., of
man from motives of rancour and such a place in such a Diocese, have
hatred, or had been suborned or been accused before us of such heresy
bribed thereto; then the accused shall (naming it); and wishing to be more
be freely discharged, but they shall be certainly informed whether the charges

Part III. Question 32. MALEFICARUM 26i
made against you were true, and eyes only God and the glory and
whether you walked in darkness or in honour of the Holy Faith, we judge,
the light; we proceeded to inform our¬ declare and pronounce sentence that
selves by diligently examining the you standing here in our presence on
witnesses, by often summoning and this day at the hour and place ap¬
questioning you on oath, and admitting pointed for the hearing of your final
an Advocate to plead in your defence, sentence, are an impenitent heretic,
and by proceeding in every way as we and as such to be delivered or
were bound by the canonical decrees. abandoned to secular justice; and as
And wishing to conclude your trial an obstinate and impenitent heretic
in a manner beyond all doubt, we we have by this sentence cast you off
convened in solemn council men learned from the ecclesiastical Court and deliver
in the Theological faculty and in the and abandon you to secular justice
Canon and Civil Laws. And having and the power of the secular Court.
diligently examined and discussed each And we pray that the said secular
circumstance of the process and Court may moderate its sentence of
maturely and carefully considered with death upon you. This sentence was
the said learned men everything which given, etc.
has been said and done in this present The Bishop and Judges may, more¬
case, we find that you, N., have been over, arrange that just men zealous for
legally convicted of having been in¬ the faith, known to and in the con¬
fected with the sin of heresy for so long fidence of the secular Court, shall have
a time, and that you have said and access to the prisoner while the secular
done such and such (naming them) on Court is performing its office, in order
account of which it manifestly appears to console him and even yet induce
that you are legitimately convicted of him to confess the truth, acknowledge
the said heresy. his guilt, and renounce his errors.
But since we desired, and still desire, But if it should happen that after the
that you should confess the truth and sentence, and when the prisoner is
renounce the said heresy, and be led already at the place where he is to be
back to the bosom of Holy Church and burned, he should say that he wishes
to the unity of the Holy Faith, that so to confess the truth and acknowledge
you should save your soul and escape his guilt, and does so; and if he should
the destruction of both your body and be willing to abjure that and every
soul in hell; we have by our own efforts heresy; although it may be presumed
and those of others, and by delaying that he does this rather from fear of
your sentence for a long time, tried to death than for love of the truth, yet
induce you to repent; but you being I should be of the opinion that he may
obstinately given over to wickedness in mercy be received as a penitent
have'scorned to agree to our whole¬ heretic and be imprisoned for life.
some advice, and have persisted and do See the gloss on the chapters ad
persist with stubborn and defiant abolendam and excommunicamus. Never¬
mind in your contumacious and dogged theless, according to the rigour of the
denials; and this we say with grief, law, the Judges ought not to place
and grieve and mourn in saying it. much faith in a conversion of this sort;
But since the Church of God has waited and furthermore, they can always
so long for you to repent and acknow¬ punish him on account of the temporal
ledge your guilt, and you have refused injuries which he has committed.
and still refuse, her grace and mercy
can go no farther.
☆
Wherefore that you may be an
example to others and that they may
QUESTION XXXII
be kept from all such heresies, and that
such crimes may not remain un¬ Of one who is Convicted but who hath Fled
punished : We the Bishop and Judges or who Contumaciously Absents himself.
T
named on behalf of the faith, sitting
in tribunal as Judges judging, and HE thirteenth and last method of
having before us the Holy Gospels that arriving at a definite sentence in
our judgement may proceed as from a process on behalf of the Faith is used
the countenance of God and our eyes when the person accused of heresy,
see with equity, and having before our after a diligent discussion of the merits

262 MALLEUS Part III. Question 32.
of the process in consultation with and abundant harvest in that vineyard
learned lawyers, is found to be con¬ of the Lord of Hosts, which the right
victed of heresy, but has made his hand of the Most High Father has
escape, or defiantly absents himself planted in the bosom of the righteous,
after the expiration of a set time. And which the Son of that Father has
this happens in three cases. plentifully watered with His own lifeFirst, when the accused is convicted giving Blood, which the reviving Spirit
of heresy by his own confession, or by the Paraclete has made fruitful within
the evidence of the facts, or by the by His wonderful and ineffable gifts,
legitimate production of witnesses, but which the whole incomprehensible and
has fled, or has absented himself and ineffable Blessed Trinity has endowed
refused to appear after being legally and enriched with many very great and
summoned. holy privileges; but the wild boar out
Secondly, when a person has been of the forest, by which is meant any
accused and certain information has sort of heretic, has devoured and
been laid against him on account of despoiled it, laying waste the fair fruit
which he rests under some suspicion, of the faith and planting thorny briars
even if it be only a light one, and he has among the vines; and that tortuous
been summoned to answer for his serpent, the evil enemy of our human
faith; and because he has defiantly race, who is Satan and the devil, has
refused to appear, he is excommunic¬ breathed out venom and poisoned the
ated, and has stubbornly remained in fruit of the vineyard with the plague
that excommunication for a year, and of heresy: And this is the field of the
always defiantly absents himself. Lord, the Catholic Church, to till and
The third case is when someone cultivate which the only first-born Son
directly obstructs the Bishop’s or Judges’ of God the Father descended from the
sentence or process on behalf of the heights of Heaven, and sowed it with
Faith, or lends his help, advice or miracles and Holy discourse, going
protection for that purpose, and such through towns and villages and teach¬
a person has been stricken with the ing not without great labour; and He
sword of excommunication. And if chose as His Apostles honest labouring
he has obstinately endured that ex- men, and showed them the way,
communication for a year, he is then endowing them with eternal rewards;
to be condemned as a heretic who has and the Son of God Himself expects to
defied the administration of justice. gather from that field on the Day of
In the first case, such a person is, the Last Judgement a plentiful harvest,
according to the Canon ad abolendam, and by the hands of His Holy Angels to
to be condemned as an impenitent store it in His Holy barn in Heaven:
heretic. In the second and third cases But the foxes of Samson,* two-faced
he is not to be judged as an impenitent like them who have fallen into the sin
heretic, but to be condemned as if he of heresy, having their faces looking
were a penitent heretic. And in any both ways but tied together by their
of these cases the following procedure burning tails, run about with many
should be observed. When such a torches amidst the fields of the Lord
person has been awaited for a sufficient now white unto harvest and shining
time, let him be summoned by the with the splendour of the faith, and
Bishop and his officer in the Cathedral bitterly despoil them, speeding most
Church of that Diocese in which he cunningly here and there, and with
has sinned, and in the other churches their strong attacks burning, dissipat¬
of that place where he had his dwelling, ing, and devastating, and subtly and
and especially from where he has fled; damnably subverting the truth of the
and let him be summoned in the Holy Catholic Faith.
following manner: Wherefore, since you, N., are fallen
We, N., by the mercy of God Bishop into the damned heresies of witches,
of such city, etc., or Judge of such practising them publicly in such place
Diocese, having in our charge the (naming it), and have been by legiti¬
welfare of souls, and having above all mate witnesses convicted of the sin of
the desires of our heart this most heresy, or by your own confession
earnest desire that in our time in the received by us in Court; and after
said Diocese the Church should flourish
and that there should be a fruitful * “Samson” “Judges” xv, 1-6.

Part III. Question 32. MALEFICARUM 263
your capture you have escaped, refusing humbly praying to be admitted to
the medicine of your salvation : there¬ mercy, he is to be admitted if he has not
fore we have summoned you to answer been a backslider; and if he was con¬
for the said crimes in person before us, victed by his own confession or by the
but you, led away and seduced by a legitimate production of witnesses, he
wicked spirit, have refused to appear. shall abjure and repent as a penitent
heretic, according to the manner
Or as follows:
explained in the eighth method of
Wherefore, since you, N., have been concluding a process on behalf of the
accused before us of the sin of heresy, faith. If he was gravely suspected, and
and from information received against refused to appear when he was sum¬
you we have judged that you are under moned to answer for his faith, and was
a light suspicion of that sin, we have therefore excommunicated and had
summoned you to appear personally endured that excommunication obstin¬
before us to answer for the Catholic ately for a year, but becomes penitent,
faith. And since, having been sum¬ let him be admitted, and abjure all
moned, you have defiantly refused to heresy, and repent as t one gravely
appear, we excommunicated you and suspected of heresy, in the manner
caused you to be proclaimed excom¬ explained in the sixth method of pro¬
municate. And in this state you have nouncing sentence. But if he shall
remained stubborn for a year, or so appear, and not consent to abjure, let
many years, hiding here and there, so him be delivered as a truly impenitent
that even now we do not know heretic to the secular Court, as was
whither the evil spirit has led you; and explained in the tenth method. But if
though we awaited you kindly and he still defiantly refuses to appear, let
mercifully, that you might return to the sentence be pronounced in the
the bosom and the unity of the Holy following manner:
Faith, you being wholly given up to We, N., by the mercy of God Bishop
evil have scorned to do so. Yet we of such city, seeing that you, N., of such
wish and are bound by justice to con¬ a place in such a Diocese were accused
clude this case beyond any question, before us by public report and the
nor can we pass over with connivent information of worthy men of the sin of
eyes your iniquitous crimes. heresy: We, whose duty it is, proceeded
We the Bishop and Judges in the to examine and inquire whether there
said cause on behalf of the faith require was any truth in the report which had
and strictly command by this our come to our ears. And finding that you
present public edict that you the were convicted of heresy by the deposi¬
aforesaid, at present in hiding and a tions of many credible witnesses, we com¬
runaway and fugitive, shall on such a manded that you be brought before us
day of such a month in such a year, in in custody. (Here let it be said whether
such Cathedral Church of such Diocese, he had appeared and been questioned
at the hour of Terce appear personally under oath or not.) But afterwards,
before us to hear your final sentence: led away and seduced by the advice of
signifying that, whether you appear or the evil spirit, and fearing to have your
not, we shall proceed to our definitive wounds wholesomely healed with wine
sentence against you as law and justice and oil, you fled away (or, if it was the
shall require. And that our summons case, You broke from your prison and
may come to your knowledge before¬ lace of detention and fled away),
hand and you may not be able to pro¬ iding here and there, and we are
tect yourself with a plea of ignorance, altogether ignorant of whither the said
we wish and command that our said evil spirit has led you.
present letters, requisition and sum¬
Or after this manner:
mons be publicly affixed to the doors
of the said Cathedral Church. In wit¬ And finding that against you, accused
ness of all which we have ordered these as aforesaid before us of the sin of
our present letters to be authorized by heresy, there were many indications by
the impressions of our seals. Given, etc. reason of which we judged you to be
On the appointed day assigned for lightly suspected of the said heresy, we
the hearing of the final sentence', if the summoned you by public edict in such
fugitive shall have appeared and con¬ and such churches of such Diocese
sented to abjure publicly all heresy, within a certain time assigned to appear

264 MALLEUS Part III. Question 33.
in person before us to answer to the of this cause on behalf of the Faith has
said charges against you and otherwise in all things been conducted as the laws
on matters concerning the Faith. But require; and whereas you, having been
you, following some mad advice, legally summoned, have not appeared,
obstinately refused to appear. And and have not by yourself or any other
when, as in justice bound, we excom¬ person excused yourself; and whereas
municated you and caused you to be you have for a long time persisted and
publicly proclaimed as excommunicate, still obstinately persist in the said
you stubbornly remained in that ex- heresies, and have endured excom¬
communication for more than a year, munication in the cause of the Faith for
and kept hidden here and there, so that so many years, and still stubbornly
we do not know whither the evil spirit endure it; and whereas the Holy
has led you. Church of God can do no more for
And whereas the Holy Church of God you, since you have persisted and
has long awaited you up to this present intend to persist in your excom¬
day in kindness and mercy, that you munication and said heresies: There¬
might fly to Jhe bosom of her mercy, fore, following in the footsteps of the
renouncing your errors and professing Blessed Apostle Paul, we declare, judge
the Catholic Faith, and be nourished by and sentence you, absent or present,
the bounty of her mercy; but you have to be a stubborn heretic, and as such to
refused to consent, persisting in your be abandoned to secular justice. And
obstinacy; and since we wished and still by this our definitive sentence we drive
wish, as we ought to do and as justice you from the ecclesiastical Court, and
compels us, to bring your case to an equit¬ abandon you to the power of the
able conclusion, we have summoned secular Court; earnestly praying the
you to appear in person before us on said Court that, if ever it should have
this day at this hour and place, to hear you in its power, it will moderate its
your final sentence. And since you have sentence of death against you. This
stubbornly refused to appear, you are sentence was given, etc.
manifestly proved to abide permanently Here it is to be considered that, if
in your errors and heresies; and this we that stubborn fugitive had been con¬
say with grief, and grieve in saying it. victed of heresy, either by his own con¬
But since we cannot and will not fession or by credible witnesses, and
delay to do justice, nor may we had fled before his abjuration, he is by
tolerate so great disobedience and the sentence to be judged an impenitent
defiance of the Church of God; for the heretic, and so it must be expressed in
exaltation of the Catholic Faith and the the sentence. But if, on the other hand,
extirpation of vile heresy, at the call of he had not been convicted, but had
justice, and by reason of your dis¬ been summoned as one under suspicion
obedience and obstinacy, on this day to answer for his faith; and, because he
and at the hour and place heretofore has refused to appear, has been excom¬
strictly and precisely assigned to you for municated, and has obstinately endured
the hearing of your final sentence, that excommunication for more than
having diligently and carefully dis¬ a year, and has finally refused to appear;
cussed each several circumstance of then he is not to be judged a heretic,
the process with men learned in the but as a heretic, and must be con¬
Theological faculty and in the Canon demned as such; and so it must be
and Civil Laws, sitting in tribunal as expressed in the sentence, as it is said
Judges judging, having before us the above.
Holy Gospels that our judgement may
proceed as from the countenance of
God and our eyes see with equity, and
QUESTION XXXIII
having before our eyes only God and
the irrefragable truth of the Holy Faith,
Of the Method of passing Sentence upon one
and following in the footsteps of the
who has been Accused by another
Blessed Apostle Paul, in these writings
Witch, who has been or is to be Burned
we pronounce final sentence against
at the Stake.
you, N., absent or present, as follows, T
invoking the Name of Christ. HE fourteenth method of finally
We the Bishop and Judges named on concluding a process on behalf of
behalf of the Faith, whereas the process the Faith is used when the person

Part III. Question 33. MALEFICARUM 265
accused of heresy, after a careful dis¬ ronounced as shown in the Twentycussion of the circumstances of the rst Question.
process with reference to the informant And if the civil Judge orders this
in consultation with learned lawyers, purgation to be made before the
is found to be accused of that heresy Bishop, and ends with a solemn
only by another witch who has been declaration that, if she should fail,
or is to be burned. And this can happen then, as an example to others, she
in thirteen ways in thirteen cases. should be more severely sentenced by
For a person so accused is either found both the ecclesiastical and civil Judges,
innocent and is to be freely discharged; well and good. But if he wishes to
or she is found to be generally defamed conduct it himself, let him command
for that heresy; or it is found that, in her to find ten or twenty compurgators
addition to her defamation, she is to be of her own class, and proceed in
to some degree exposed to torture; or accordance with the second method of
she is found to be strongly suspected of sentencing such: except that, if she has
heresy; or she is found to be gravely to be excommunicated, then he must
suspected of heresy; or she is found to have recourse to. the Ordinary; and
be at the same time defamed and sus¬ this would be the case if she refused to
pected ; and so on up to thirteen purge herself.
different cases, as was shown in the The third case, then, happens when
Twentieth Question. • the person so accused is not convicted
The first case is when she is accused by her own confession, nor by the
only by a witch in custody, and is not evidence of the facts, nor by credible
convicted either by her own confession witnesses, nor are there any other
or by legitimate witnesses, and there indications as to any fact in which she
are no other indications found by reason had ever been marked by the other
of which she can truly be regarded as inhabitants of that town or village,
suspect. In such a case she is to be except her general reputation among
entirely absolved, even by the secular them. But the general report has
Judge himself who has either burned become intensified by the detention of
the deponent or is about to burn her that witch in custody, as that it is said
either on his own authority or on that that she had been her companion in
commissioned to him by the Bishop everything and had participated in her
and Judge of the Ordinary Court; and crimes. But even so, the accused firmly
she shall be absolved in the manner denies all this, and nothing of it is
explained in the Twentieth Question. known to other inhabitants, or of
The second case is when, in addition anything save good behaviour on her
to being accused by a witch in custody, part, though her companionship with
she is also publicly defamed throughout the witch is admitted.
the whole village or city; so that she In such a case the following is the
has always laboured under that parti¬ procedure. First they are to be brought
cular defamation, but, after the deposi¬ face to face, and their mutual answers
tion of the witch, it has become and recriminations noted, to see whether
aggravated. there is any inconsistency in their words
In such a case the following should by reason of which the Judge can decide
be the procedure. The Judge should from her admissions and denials whether
consider that, apart from the general he ought to expose her to torture; and
report, nothing particular has been if so, he can proceed as in the third
proved against her by other credible manner of pronouncing sentence,
witnesses in the village or town; and explained in the Twenty-second Ques¬
although, perhaps, that witch has tion, submitting her to light tortures:
deposed some serious charges against at the same time exercising every
her, yet, since she has lost her faith by possible precaution, as we explained
denying it to the devil, Judges should at length towards the beginning of this
give no ready credence to her words, Third Part, to find out whether she is
unless there should be other circum¬ innocent or guilty.
stances which aggravate that report; The fourth case is when a person
and then the case would fall under the accused in this manner is found to be
third and following case. Therefore she lightly suspected, either because of her
should be enjoined a canonical purga¬ own confession or because of the
tion, and the sentence should be depositions of the other witch in
r

266 MALLEUS Part III. Question 33.
custody. There are some who include to conceal the truth or in some way
among those who should be thus falsify it. Also all those who wittingly
lightly suspected those who go and receive, or visit those whom they know
consult witches for any purpose, or to be heretics, or associate with them,
have procured for themselves a lover send them gifts, or show favour to
by stirring up hatred between married them; for all such actions, when done
folk, or have consorted with witches with full knowledge, bespeak favour
in order to obtain some temporal felt towards the sin, and not to the
advantage. But such are to be ex¬ person. And therefore they say that,
communicated as followers of heretics, when the accused is guilty of any of the
according to the Canon c. excom¬ above actions, and has been proved so
municamus, where it says: Similarly we after trial, then she should be sentenced
judge those to be heretics who believe in the fifth method, explained in the
in their errors. For the effect is pre¬ Twenty-fourth Question; so that she
sumed from the facts. Therefore it must abjure all heresy, under pain of
seems that such are to be more severely being punished as a backslider.
sentenced and punished than those who As to these contentions we may say
are under a light suspicion of heresy that the Judge must take into con¬
and are to be judged from light con¬ sideration the household and family
jectures. For example, if they had per¬ of each several witch who has been
formed services for witches or carried burned or is detained; for these are
their letters to them, they need not on generally found to be infected.
that account believe in their errors: yet For witches are instructed by devils
they have not laid information against to offer to them even their own children;
them, and they have received wages therefore there can be no doubt that
and vails from them. But whether or such children are instructed in all
not such people are to be included in manner of crimes, as is shown in the
this case, according to +he opinion of First Part of this work. ' * *
learned men the procedure must be Again, in a case of simple heresy it
as in the case of those under a light happens that, on account of the
suspicion, and the Judge will act as familiarity between heretics who are
follows. Such a person will either akin to each other, when one is con¬
abjure heresy or will purge herself victed of heresy it follows that his
canonically, as was explained in the kindred also are strongly suspected; and
fourth method of pronouncing sentence the same is true of the heresy of witches.
in the Twenty-third Question. But this present case is made clean
However, it seems that the better in the chapter of the Canon inter
course is for such a person to be ordered sollicitudines. For a certain Dean was, ,
to abjure heresy, for this is more in owing to his reputation as a heretic,
accordance with the meaning of the enjoined a canonical purgation; on
Canon c. excommunicamus, where it account of his familiarity with heretics,
speaks of those who are found to be he had to make a public abjuration;
only under some notable suspicion. and ' through the scandal he was
And if such should relapse, they should deprived of his benefice, so that the
not incur the penalty for backsliders. scandal might be allayed.
The procedure will be as above The sixth case is when such a person
explained in the fourth method of is under a grave suspicion; but no
sentencing. simple and bare deposition by another
The fifth case is when such person is witch in custody can cause this, for
found to be under a strong suspicion, there must be in addition some indica¬
by reason, as before, of her own con¬ tion of the facts, derived from certain
fession or of the depositions of the other words or deeds uttered or committed
witch in custody. In this class some by the witch in custody, in which the
include those who directly or indirectly accused is at least said to have taken
obstruct the Court in the process of some part, and shared in the evil
trying a witch, provided that they do deeds of the deponent. *A
this wittingly. To understand this, the reader should
Also they include all who give help, refer to what was written .in the
advice or protection to those who cause Nineteenth Question, especially con¬
such obstructions. Also those who in¬ cerning the grave degree of suspicion,
struct summoned or captured heretics how it arises from grave and convincing

Part III. Question 33. MALEFICARUM 267
conjectures; and how the Judge is First the Judge must consider
forced to believe, on mere suspicion, whether those denials do or do not
that a person is a heretic, although proceed from the vice or witchcraft of
perhaps in his heart he is a true taciturnity: and, as was shown in the
Catholic. The Canonists give an Fifteenth and Sixteenth Questions of
example of this by the case, in simple this Third Part, the Judge can know
heresy, of a man summoned to answer this from her ability or inability to shed
in the cause of the faith, and defiantly tears, or from her insensibility under
refusing to appear, on which account torture and quick recovery of her
he is excommunicated, and if he strength afterwards. For then the grave
persists in that state for a year, becomes suspicion would be aggravated; and
gravely suspected of heresy. in such a case she is by no means to be
And so likewise in the case of a freely discharged, but, according to the
person accused in the way we are sixth method of sentencing, she must
considering, the indications of the facts be condemned to perpetual imprison¬
are to be examined by which she is ment and penance.
rendered gravely suspect. Let us put But if sne is not infected with the
the case that the witch in custody lias taciturnity of witches, but feels the
asserted that the accused has taken part keenest pains in her torture (whereas
in her evil works of witchcraft, but the others, as has been said, become
accused firmly denies it. What then insensible to pain owing to the witch¬
is to be done? It will be necessary to craft of taciturnity), then the Judge
consider whether there are any facts must fall back upon his last expedient
to engender a strong suspicion of her, of a canonical purgation. And if this
and whether that strong suspicion can should be ordered by a secular Judge,
become a grave one. Thus, if a man it is called a lawful vulgar purgation,
has been summoned to answer some since it cannot be classed with other
charge, and has obstinately refused to vulgar purgations. And if she should
appear, he would come under a light fail in this purgation she will be judged
suspicion of heresy, even if he had not guilty.
been summoned in a cause concerning The seventh case is when the accused
the Faith. But if he then refused to is not found guilty by his own con¬
appear in a cause concerning the Faith fession, by the evidence of the facts, or
and was excommunicated for his by legitimate witnesses, but is only
obstinacy, then he would be strongly found to be accused by a witch in
suspected; for the light suspicion would custody, and there are also some
become a strong one; and if then he indications found which bring him
remained obstinate in excommunica¬ under light or strong suspicion. As,
tion for a year, the strong suspicion for example, that he had had great
would become a grave one. Therefore familiarity with witches; in which case
the Judge will consider whether, by he would, according to the Canon,
reason of her familiarity with the witch have to undergo a canonical purgation
in custody, the accused is under a on account of the general report con¬
strong suspicion, in the manner shown cerning him; and on account of the
in the fifth case above; and then he suspicion against him he must abjure
must consider whether there is any¬ heresy, under pain of being punished as
thing which may turn that strong a backslider if it was a strong suspicion,
suspicion into a grave one. For it is but not if it was a light one.
resumed that it is possible for this to The eighth case occurs when the
e the case, on account of the accused person so accused is found to have
having perhaps shared in the crimes of confessed that heresy, but to be penitent,
the detained witch, if she has had and never to have relapsed. But here
frequent intercourse with her. There¬ it is to be noted that in this and the
fore the Judge must proceed as in the other cases, where it is a question of
sixth method of sentencing explained those who have or have not relapsed,
in* the Twenty-fifth Question. But it and who are or are not penitent, these
may be asked what the Judge is to do distinctions are made only for the
if the person so accused by a witch in benefit of Judges who are not con¬
custody still altogether persists in her cerned with the infliction of the
denials, in spite of all indications against extreme penalty. Therefore the civil
her. We answer as follows: Judge may proceed in accordance with

268 MALLEUS Part III. Question 34.
the Civil and Imperial Laws, as when the spell is taken off one person
justice shall demand, in the case of one and transferred to another. And we
who has confessed, no matter whether have already made it clear in a former
or not she be penitent, or whether or part of this work that it makes no
not she have relapsed. Only he may difference whether the person to whom
have recourse to those thirteen methods the 'Spell is transferred be herself a
of pronouncing sentence, and act in witch or not, or whether or not she be
accordance, with them, if any doubtful the person who cast the original spell,
question should arise. or whether it be a man or any other
creature.
It may be asked what the Judge
☆
*
should do when such a person main¬
tains that she removes spells by lawful
QUESTION XXXIV
and not unlawful means; and how the
Of the Method of passing Sentence upon a Judge can arrive at the truth of such a
Witch who Annuls Spells wrought by case. We answer that he should sum¬
Witchcraft; and of Witch Midwives mon her and ask her what remedies
and Archer-Wizards. she uses; but he must not rely only upon
T
her word, for the ecclesiastical Judge
He fifteenth method of bringing whose duty it is must make diligent
a process on behalf of the faith to inquiry, either himself or by means of
a definitive sentence is employed when some parish priest who shall examine
the person accused of heresy is not found all His parishioners after placing them
to be one who casts injurious spells of upon oath, as to what remedies she
witchcraft, but one who removes them; uses. And if, as is usually the case,
and in such a case the procedure will they are found to be superstitious
be as follows. The remedies which she remedies, they must in no way be
uses will either be lawful or unlawful; tolerated, on account of the terrible
and if they are lawful, she is not to be penalties laid down by the Canon Law,
judged a witch but a good Christian. as will be shown.
But we have already shown at length Again, it may be asked how the lawful
what sort of remedies are lawful. remedies can be distinguished from the
Unlawful remedies, on the other unlawful, since they always assert that
hand, are to be distinguished as either they remove spells by certain prayers
absolutely unlawful, or in some respect and the use of herbs. We answer that
unlawful. If they are absolutely unlaw¬ this will be easy, provided that a
ful, these again can be divided into two diligent inquiry be made. For although
classes, according as they do or do not they must necessarily conceal their
involve some injury to another party; superstitious remedies, either that they
but in either case they are always may not be arrested, or that they may
accompanied by an expressed invoca¬ the more easily ensnare the minds of
tion of devils. But if they are only in the simple, and therefore make great
some respect unlawful, that is to say, show of their use of prayers and herbs;
if they are practised with only a tacit, yet they can be manifestly convicted
and not an expressed, invocation of by four superstitious actions as sor¬
devils, such are to be judged rather ceresses and witches.
vain than unlawful, according to the For there are some who can divine
Canonists and some Theologians, as secrets, and are able to tell things which
we have already shown. they could only know through the
Therefore the Judge, whether ecclesi¬ revelation of evil spirits. For example :
astical or civil, must not punish the when the injured come to them to
first and last of the above practices, be healed, they can discover and make
having rather to commend the first known the cause of their injury; as that
and tolerate the last, since the Canonists it arose from some quarrel with a
maintain that it is lawful to oppose neighbour or some other cause; and
vanity with vanity. But he must by they can perfectly know this and tell it
no means tolerate those who remove to those who consult them.
spells by an expressed invocation of Secondly, they sometimes undertake
devils, especially those who in doing to cure the injury or spell of one person,
so bring some injury upon a third but will have nothing to do with that
party; and this last is said to happen of another. For in the Diocese of Spires

Part III. Question 34. MALEFICARUM 269
there is a witch in a certain place And the number of them is so great
called Zunhofen who, although she that, as has been found* from their
seems to heal many persons, confesses confessions, it is thought that there is
that she can in no way heal certain scarcely any tiny hamlet in which at
others; and this is for no other reason least one is not to be found. And that
than, as the inhabitants of the place the magistrates may in some degree
assert, that the spells cast on such meet this danger, they should allow no
ersons have been so potently wrought midwife to practise without having
y other witches with the help of devils been first sworn as a good Catholic;
that the devils themselves cannot at the same time observing the other
remove them. For one devil cannot or safeguards mentioned in the Second
will not always yield to another. Part of this work.
Thirdly, it sometimes happens that Here too we must consider archerthey know that they must make some wizards, who constitute the graver
reservation or exception in their cure danger to the Christian religion in that
of such injuries. Such a case is known they have obtained protection on the
to have occurred in the town of Spires estates of nobles and Princes who
itself. An honest woman who had oeen receive, patronize, and defend them.
bewitched in her shins sent for a But that all such receivers and pro¬
diviner of this sort to come and heal tectors are more damnable than all
her; and when the witch had entered witches, especially in certain cases, is
her house and looked at her, she shown as- follows. The Canonists and
made such an exception. For she said: Theologians divide into two classes the
If there are no scales and hairs in the patrons of such archer-wizards, accord¬
wound, I could take out all the other ing as they defend the error or the
evil matter. And she revealed the person. They who defend the error are
cause of the injury, although she had more damnable than the wizards them¬
come from the country from a distance selves, since they are judged to be not
of two miles, saying: You quarrelled only heretics but heresiarchs (24, quest.
with your neighbour on such a day, 3). And the laws do not make much
and therefore this has happened to special mention of such patrons,
you. Then, having extracted from the because they do not distinguish them
wound many other matters of various from other heretics.
sorts, which were not scales or hairs, But there are others who, while
she restored her to health. not excusing the sin, yet defend the
Fourthly, they sometimes themselves sinner. These, for example, will do all
observe, or cause to be observed, certain in their power to protect such wizards
superstitious ceremonies. For instance, (or other heretics) from trial and
they fix some such time as before punishment at the hands of the Judge
sunrise for people to visit them; or say acting on behalf of the Faith.
that they cannot heal injuries which Similarly there are those in public
were caused beyond the limits of the authority, that is to say, public persons
estate on which they live; or that they such as temporal Lords, and also
can only heal two or three persons in a spiritual Lords who have temporal
year. Yet they do not heal them, but jurisdiction, who are, either by omis¬
only seem to do so by ceasing to injure sion or commission, patrons of such
them. wizards and heretics.
We could add many other con¬ They are their patrons by omission
siderations as touching the condition when they neglect to perform their duty
of such persons: as that, after the lapse in regard to such wizards and suspects,
of a certain time they have incurred or to their followers, receivers, defenders
the reputation of leading a bad and and patrons, when they are required
sinful life, or that they are adulteresses, by the Bishops or Inquisitors to do this:
or the survivors from covens of other that is, by failing to arrest them, by not
witches. Therefore their gift of healing guarding them carefully when they are
is not derived from God on account of arrested, by not taking them to the
the sanctity of their lives. place within their jurisdiction which
Here we must refer incidentally to has been appointed for them, by not
witch midwives, who surpass all other promptly executing the sentence passed
witches in their crimes, as we have upon them, and by other such derelic¬
shown in the First Part of . this work. tions of their duty.

270 MALLEUS Part III. Question 34.
They are their patrons by com¬ Finally, it is asked who are they who
mission when, after such heretics have are said to be obstructors of the duty
been arrested, they liberate them from of Inquisitors and Bishops against such
prison without the licence or order of heretics; and whether they are to be
the Bishop or Judge; or when they reckoned as heretics. We answer that
directly or indirectly obstruct the trial, such obstructors are of two kinds. For
judgement, and sentence of such, or there are some who cause a direct
act in some similar way. The penalties obstruction, by rashly on their own
for this have been declared in the responsibility releasing from gaol those
Second Part of this work, where we who have been detained on a charge
treated of archer-wizards and other of heresy, or by interfering with the
enchanters of weapons. process of the Inquisition by wreaking
It is enough now to say that all these some injury to witnesses on behalf of
are by law excommunicated, and incur the Faith because of the evidence they
the twelve great penalties. And if they have given; or it may be that the
continue obstinate in that excom¬ temporal Lord issues an order that none
munication for a year, they are then but himself may try such a case, and
to be condemned as heretics. that anyone charged with this crime
Who, then, are to be called receivers should be brought before no one but
of such; and are they to be reckoned as himself, and that the evidence should
heretics? All they, we answer, who be given only in his presence, or some
receive such archer-wizards, enchanters similar order. And such, according to
of weapons, necromancers, or heretic Giovanni d’Andrea, are direct obstruc¬
witches as are the subject of this whole tors. They who directly obstruct the
work. And such receivers are of two process, judgement or sentence on
classes, as was the case with the behalf of the Faith,»or help, advise or
defenders and patrons of such. favour others in doing so, although they
For there are some who do not are guilty of great sin, are not on that
receive them only once or twice, but account to be judged heretics, unless
many times and often; and these are it appears in other ways that they are
well called in Latin receptatores, from obstinately and wilfully involved in
the frequentative form of the verb. such heresies of witches. But they are
And receivers of this class are some¬ to be smitten with the sword of extimes blameless, since they act in communication ; and if they stubbornly
ignorance and there is no sinister endure that excommunication for a
suspicion attaching to them. But some¬ year, then are they to be condemned
times they are to blame, as being well as heretics.
aware of the sins of those whom they But others are indirect obstructors.
receive; for the Church always de¬ These, as Giovanni d’Andrea explains,
nounces these wizards as the most are those who give such orders as that
cruel enemies of the faith. And if no one shall bear arms for the capture
nevertheless temporal Lords receive, of heretics except the servants of the
keep and defend them, etc., they are and said temporal Lord. Such are less
are rightly called receivers of heretics. guilty than the former, and are not
And with regard to such, the laws say heretics; but they, and also any who
that they are to be excommunicated. advise, help or patronize them in such
But others there are who do not actions, are to be excommunicated;
often or many times receive such and if they obstinately remain in that
wizards or heretics, but only once or excommunication for a year, they are
twice; and these are not properly called then to be condemned as if they were
receptatores, but receptores, since they are heretics. And here it is to be under¬
not frequent receivers. (Yet the Arch¬ stood that they are in such a way to be
deacon disagrees with this view; but it condemned as heretics that, if they
is no great matter, for we are consider¬ are willing to return, they are received
ing not words but deeds.) back to mercy, having first abjured their
But there is this difference between error; but if not, they are to be handed
receptatores and receptores: those temporal over to the secular Court as impenitents.
Princes are always receptatores who To sum up. Witch-midwives, like
simply will not or cannot drive away other witches, are to be condemned and
such heretics. But receptores may be sentenced according to the nature of
quite innocent. their crimes; and this is true also of

Part III. Question 35. MALEFICARUM 271
those who, as we have said, remove
QUESTION XXXV
spells of witchcraft superstitiously and
,
by the help of devils; for it can hardly Finally of the Method of passing Sentence
be doubted that, just as they are able upon Witches who Enter or Cause to be
,
to remove them, so can they inflict Entered an Appeal whether such be
them. And it is a fact that some Frivolous or Legitimate and Just.
B
definite agreement is formed between
witches and devils whereby some shall UT if the Judge perceives that the
be able to hurt and others to heal, that accused is determined to have
so they may more easily ensnare the recourse to an appeal, he must first
minds of the simple and recruit the take note that such appeals are some¬
ranks of their abandoned and hateful times valid and legitimate, and some¬
society. Archer-wizards and enchanters times entirely frivolous. Now it has
of weapons, who are only protected by already been explained that cases con¬
being patronized, defended and re¬ cerning the Faith are to be conducted
ceived by temporal Lords, are subject in a simple and summary fashion, and
to the same penalties; and they who therefore that no appeal is admitted
patronize them, etc., or obstruct the in such cases. Nevertheless it sometimes
officers of justice in their proceedings happens that Judges, on account of the
against them, are subject to all the difficulty of the case, gladly prorogue
penalties to which the patrons of heretics and delay it; therefore they may
are liable, and are to be excommunic¬ consider that it would be just to allow
ated. And if after they have obstinately an appeal when the accused feels that
endured that excommunication for a the Judge has really and actually acted
year they wish to repent, let them towards him in a manner contrary to
abjure that obstruction and patronage, the law and justice; as that he has
and they can be admitted to mercy; refused to allow him to defend himself,
but if not, they must be handed over or that he has proceeded to a sentence
as impenitents to the secular Court. against the accused on his own responsi¬
And even if they have not endured bility and without the counsel of others,
their excommunication for a year, such or even without the consent of the
obstructors can still be proceeded Bishop or his Vicar, when he might have
against as patrons of heretics. taken into consideration much further
And all that has been said with evidence both for and against. For
regard to patrons, defenders, receivers, such reasons an appeal may be allowed,
and obstructors in the case of archer- but not otherwise.
wizards, etc., applies equally in respect Secondly, it is to be noted that, when
of all other witches who work various notice of appeal has been given, the
injuries to men, animals, and the fruits Judge should, without any perturbation
of the earth. But even the witches or disturbance, ask for a copy of the
themselves, when in the court of appeal, giving his promise that the
conscience with humble and contrite matter shall not be delayed. And when
spirit they weep for their sins and make the accused has given him the copy of
clean confession asking forgiveness, are the appeal, the Judge shall notify him
taken back to mercy. But when they that he has yet two days before he need
answer it, and after those two days
are knowh, those whose duty it is must
proceed against them, summoning, thirty more before he need prepare the
examining, and detaining them, and in apostils of the case. And although he
may give his answer at once, and at
all things proceeding in accordance
once proceed to issue his apostils if he
with the nature of their crimes to a
is very expert and experienced, yet it
definitive and conclusive sentence, as
is better to act with caution, and fix a
has been shown, if they wish to avoid
term of ten or twenty or twenty-five
the snare of eternal damnation by
days, reserving to himself the right to
reason of the excommunication pro¬
prorogue the hearing of the appeal up
nounced upon them by the Church
to the legal limit of time.
when they deliberately fail in their duty.
Thirdly, let the Judge take care that
during the legal and appointed interval
☆ he must diligently examine and dis¬
cuss the causes of the appeal and the
alleged grounds of objection. And if

272 MALLEUS Part III. Question 35.
after having taken good counsel he the appeal is lodged would have to
sees that he has unduly and unjustly discharge the appellant. Therefore let
proceeded against the accused, by him assign to him a term, that is, such
refusing him permission to defend a day of such a year, for the giving and
himself, or by exposing him to ques¬ receiving from the Judge such apostils
tions at an unsuitable time, or for any as he shall have decided to submit.
such reason; when the appointed time Sixthly, he must take care that, in
comes let him correct his mistake, assigning this term, he shall not in his
carrying the process back to the point answer say that he will give either
and stage where it was when the negative or affirmative apostils; but
accused asked to be defended, or when that he may have opportunity for fuller
he put a term to his examination, etc., reflection, let him say that he will give
and so remove the objection; and then such as he shall at the appointed time
let him proceed as we have said. For have decided upon.
by the removal of the grounds for Let him also take care that in assign¬
objection the appeal, which was legi¬ ing this term to the appellant he give
timate, loses its weight. the appellant no opportunity to exercise
But here the circumspect and provi¬ any malicious precautions or cunning,
dent Judge will carefully take note that and that he specify the place, day, and
some grounds of objection are reparable; hour. For example, let him assign the
and they are such as we have just twentieth day of August, in the present
spoken of, and are to be dealt with in year, at the hour of vespers, and the
the above manner. But others are chamber of the Judge himself in such a
irreparable: as when the accused has house, in such a city, for the giving and
actually and in fact been questioned, receiving of apostils such as shall have
but has afterwards escaped and lodged been decided upon for such appellant.
an appeal; or that some box or vessel Seventhly, let him note that, if he
or such instruments as witches use has has decided in his mind that the charge
been seized and burned; or some other against the accused justly requires that
such irreparable and irrevocable action he should be detained, in assigning the
has been committed. In such a case term he must set it down that he assigns
the above procedure would not hold that term for the giving or receiving of
good, namely, taking the process back apostils by the appellant in person,
to the point where the objection arose. and that he assigns to the said appellant
Fourthly, the Judge must note that, such a place for giving to him and
although thirty days may elapse be¬ receiving from him apostils; and then
tween his receiving the appeal and it will be fully in the power of the Judge
his completing the apostils of the case, to detain the appellant, granted that
and he can assign to the petitioner the he has first given negative apostils; but
last day, that is, the thirtieth, for the otherwise it will not be so.
hearing of his appeal; yet, that it may Eighthly, let the Judge take care not
not seem that he wishes to molest the to take any further action in respect of
accused or come under suspicion of the appellant, such as arresting him,
unduly harsh treatment of him, and or questioning him, or liberating him
that his behaviour may not seem to lend from prison, from the time when the
support to the objection which has appeal is presented to him up to the
caused the appeal, it is better that he time when he has returned negative
should assign some day within the legal apostils.
limit, such as the tenth or twentieth To sum up. Note that it often
day, and he can afterwards, if he does happens that, when the accused is in
not wish to be in a hurry, postpone it doubt as to what sort of sentence he
until the last legal day, saying that he is will receive, since he is conscious of his
busy with other affairs. guilt, he frequently takes refuge in an
Fifthly, the Judge must take care appeal, that so he may escape the
that, when he affixes a term for the Judge’s sentence. Therefore he appeals
accused who is appealing and petition¬ from that Judge, advancing some
ing for apostils, he must provide not frivolous reason, as that the Judge held
only for the giving, but both for the him in custody without allowing him
giving and receiving of apostils. For the customary surety; or in some such
if he provided only for the giving of way he may colour his frivolous appeal.
them, then the Judge against whom In this case the Judge shall ask for a

Part III. Question 35. MALEFICARUM 273
copy of the appeal; and having received this appeal. For he has not acted
it he shall either at once or after two unjustly towards him by detaining him
days give his answer and assign to the and keeping him in custody; for he was
appellant for the giving and receiving accused of such heresy, and there was
of such apostils as shall have been such evidence against him that he was
decided upon a certain day, hour, and worthily convicted of heresy, or was
place, within the legal limit, as, for strongly suspected, and as such it was
instance, the 25th, 26th or 30th day of and is just that he should be kept in
such a month. And during the assigned custody: neither has he acted unjustly
interval the Judge shall diligently by refusing him sureties; for the crime
examine the copy of the appeal, and of heresy is one of the more serious
the reasons or objections upon which crimes, and the appellant had been
it is based, and shall consult with convicted but persisted in denying the
learned lawyers whether he shall sub¬ charge, and therefore not even the
mit negative apostils, that is, negative very best sureties were admissible, but
answers, and thereby disallow the he is and was to be detained in prison.
appeal, or whether he shall allow the And so he shall proceed with the other
appeal and submit affirmative and objections.
fitting apostils to the Judge to whom the Having done this, let him say as
appeal is made. follows: Wherefore it is apparent that
but if he sees that the reasons for the the Judge has duly and justly pro¬
appeal are frivolous and worthless, and ceeded, and has not deviated from the
that the appellant only wishes to path of justice, and has in no way
escape or to postpone his sentence, let unduly molested the appellant; but the
his apostils be negative and refutatory. appellant, advancing pretended and
If, however, he sees that the objections false objections, has by an undue and
are true and just, and not irreparable; unjust appeal attempted to escape his
or if he is in doubt whether the accused sentence. Wherefore his appeal is fri¬
is maliciously causing him trouble, volous and worthless, having no founda¬
and wishes to clear himself of all tion, and erring in matter and form.
suspicion, let him grant the appellant And since the laws do not recognize
affirmative and fitting apostils. And frivolous appeals, nor are they to be
when the appointed time for the recognized by the Judge, therefore the
appellant has arrived, if the Judge has Judge has himself said that he does not
not prepared his apostils or answers, admit and does not intend to admit
or in some other way is not ready, the the said appeal, nor does he recognize
appellant can at once demand that nor yet propose to recognize it. And
his appeal be heard, and may continue he gives this answer to the said accused
to do so on each successive day up to who makes this undue appeal in the
the thirtieth, which is the last day form of negative apostils, and com¬
legally allowed for the submission of mands that they be given to him
the apostils. immediately after the said appeal.
But if he has prepared them and is And so he shall give it to the Notary
ready, he can at once give his apostils who has presented the appeal to him.
to the appellant. If, then, he has And when these negative apostils
decided to give negative or refutatory have been given to the appellant, the
apostils, he shall, at the expiration of Judge shall at once proceed with his
the appointed time, submit them in the duty, ordering the accused to be
following manner : seized and detained, or assigning to him
And the said Judge, answering to the a day to appear before him, as shall
said appeal, if it may be called an seem best to him. For he does not
appeal, says that he, the Judge, has cease to be the Judge, but shall con¬
proceeded and did intend to proceed tinue his process against the appellant
in accordance with the Canonical until the Judge to whom the appeal
decrees and the Imperial statutes and was made shall order him to cease.
laws, and has not departed from the But let the Judge take care not to
path of either law nor intended so to commence any new proceedings against
depart, and has in no way acted or the appellant, by arresting him or, if
intended to act unjustly towards the he is in custody, liberating him from
appellant, as is manifest from an prison, from the time of the presenta¬
examination of the alleged grounds for tion of the appeal up to the time of the

MALLEUS Part III. Question 35.
274
return of negative apostils to him. But note that, as soon as he has given these
after that time, as we have said, he can fitting apostils to the appellant, he
do so if justice requires it, until he is pre¬ at once ceases to be the Judge in that
vented by the Judge to whom the appeal cause from which the appeal was
has been made. Then, with the process made, and can proceed no further in it,
sealed under cover, and with a sure and unless it be referred back to him by our
safe escort and if necessary a suitable Most Holy Lord the Pope. Therefore
surety, let him send him to the said let him have no more to do with that
Judge. case, except to send the said appellant
But if the Judge has decided to in the above manner to our Lord the
return affirmative and fitting apostils, Pope, assigning to him a convenient
let him submit them in writing in the time, say one, two or three months,
following manner on the arrival of the within which he must prepare and
day appointed for the giving and make himself ready to appear and
receiving of apostils: present himself at the Court of Rome,
And the said Judge, answering to the giving a suitable surety; or, if he cannot
said appeal, if it may be called an do this, let him be sent under a sure
appeal, says that he has proceeded in and safe escort. For he must either
the present cause justiy and as he ought bind himself by the best means in his
and not otherwise, nor has he molested power to present himself within the
or intended to molest the appellant, assigned time before our Lord the Pope
as is apparent from a perusal of the in the Court of Rome, or his appeal
alleged objections. For he has not must necessarily fall to the ground.
molested him by, etc. (Here he shall But if the Judge has another case,
answer to each of the objections in the and proceeds against the accused in
appeal, in the best and most truthful another case in which he has not lodged
manner that he can.) any appeal; in that other case he
Wherefore it% is apparent that the remains, as before, Judge. And even if,
said Judge has in no way dealt unjustly after the appeal has been admitted,
by the appellant nor given him cause and the affirmative apostils have been
to appeal, but that the appellant is given, the appellant is accused and
afraid lest justice should proceed denounced to the Judge in respect of
against him according to his crimes. other heresies which were not in
And therefore the appeal is frivolous question in the case from which he
and worthless, having no foundation, appealed, he does not cease to be the
and not being admissible by the laws Judge, and can proceed with the
or the Judge. But in reverence for the inquiry and the examination of wit¬
Apostolic See, to which the appeal is nesses as before. And when the first
made, the said Judge says that he case has been finished in the Court of
admits the appeal and intends to Rome, or after reference back to the
recognize it, deferring the whole matter Judge, he is free to proceed with the
to our Most Holy Lord the Pope, and second.
leaving it to the Holy Apostolic See: Let Judges also take care that they
assigning to the said appellant a certain send the process to the Court of Rome,
time, namely, so many months now sealed and under cover, to the Judges
following, within which, with the appointed to execute justice, together
process sealed under cover given to him with a digest of the merits of the pro¬
by the said Judge, or having given cess. And Inquisitors should not con¬
suitable sureties to present himself at cern themselves to appear at Rome
the Court of Rome, or under a sure and against the appellants; but should
safe escort appointed to him by the leave them to their own Judges, who,
said Judge, he must present himself in if the Inquisitors are unwilling to
the Court of Rome before our Lord the appear against the appellants, shall
Pope. And this answer the said Judge provide their own advocates for the
gives to the said appellant as affirmative appellant, if they wish to expedite the
apostils, and orders that it be given to case.
him immediately after the appeal Let Judges also take note that, if they
presented to him. And so he shall hand are personally summoned by the appel¬
it to the Notary who has presented the lant, and appear, they must beware at
appeal to him. all costs against engaging in litigation,
The prudent Judge must here take but must leave the- whole process and

Part III. Question 35. MALEFICARUM 275
cause to those Judges, and so manage and more boldly proclaim their here¬
that they may be able to return as soon sies; and when they are accused, they
as possible; so that they may not be will appeal in the same way. Other
sorely troubled with fatigues, misery, Judges, also, will have their authority
labour, and expense in Rome. For by weakened when they proceed on behalf
this means much damage is caused to of the Faith and are zealous in extirpat¬
the Church, and heretics are greatly ing heretics, since they will fear lest
encouraged; and thereafter Judges will they may be troubled with miseries and
not receive so much respect and fatigues arising from similar appeals.
reverence, nor will they be so much All this is most prejudicial to the Faith
feared as before. Also other heretics, of the Holy Church of God; wherefore
seeing the Judges fatigued and detained may the Spouse of that Church in
in the Court of Rome, will exalt their mercy preserve her from all such
horns, and despise and malign them, injuries.
Official Letter of Approbation of the Malleus Maleficarum from the
r Faculty of Theology of the Honourable University of Cologne
HE official Document of Approbation of the treatise Malleus Maleficarum, and the
subscription of the Doctors of the most honourable University of Cologne, duly set forth and
/
recorded as a public document and deposition.
N the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. Know all men by these presents, whosoever shall
read, see or hear the tenor of this official and public document, that in the year of our Lord,
1487, upon a Saturday, being the nineteenth day of the month of May, at the fifth hour after
noon, or thereabouts, in the third year of the Pontificate of our most Holy Father and Lord, the
lord Innocent, by divine providence Pope, the eighth of that name, in the very and actual presence
of me Arnold Kolich, public notary, and in the presence of the witnesses whose names are hereunder
written and who were convened and especially summoned for this purpose, the Venerable and Very
Reverend Father Henry Kramer, Professor of Sacred Theology, of the Order of Preachers, Inquisitor
of heretical depravity, directly delegated thereto by the Holy See together with the Venerable and
Very Reverend Father James Sprenger, Professor of Sacred Theology and Prior of the Dominican
Convent at Cologne, being especially appointed as colleague of the said Father Henry Kramer,
hath on behalf both of himself and his said colleague made known unto us and declared that the
Supreme Pontiff now happily reigning, lord Innocent, Pope, as hath been set out above, hath com¬
mitted and granted by a bull duly signed and sealed unto the aforesaid Inquisitors Henry and James,
members of the Order of Preachers and Professors of Sacred Theology, by His Supreme Apostolic
Authority, the power of making search and inquiry into all heresies, and most especially into the
heresy of witches, an abomination that thrives and waxes strong in these our unhappy days, and he
has bidden them diligently to perform this duty throughout the five Archdioceses of the five Metro¬
politan Churches, that is to say, Mainz, Cologne, Treves, Salzburg and Bremen, granting them
every faculty of judging and proceeding against such even with the power of putting malefactors
to death, according to the tenor of the Apostolic bull, which they hold and possess and have exhibited
unto us, a document which is whole, entire, untouched, and in no way lacerated or impaired, in fine
whose integrity is above any suspicion. And the tenor of the said bull commences thus: “Innocent,
Bishop, Servant of the servants of God, for an eternal remembrance. Desiring with the most heart¬
felt anxiety, even os Our Apostleship requires, that the Catholic Faith should especially in this Our
day increase and flourish everywhere, . . .” and it concludes thus: ‘ Given at Rome, at S. Peter s,
on the g December of the Tear of the Incarnation of Our Lord one thousand, four hundred and
eighty-four, in the first Tear of Our Pontificate
Whereas some who have the charge of souls and are preachers of the word of God, have been so
bold as to assert and declare publicly in discourses from the pulpit, yea, in sermons to the people,
that there are no witches, or that these wretches cannot in any way whatsoever molest or harm either
mankind or beasts, and it has happened that as a result of such sermons, which, are much to be
reprobated and condemned, the power of the secular arm has been let and hindered in the punishment
of such offenders, and this has proved to be a great source of encouragement to those who follow the
horrid heresy of witchcraft and has very notably increased and augmented their ranks, therefore the
aforesaid Inquisitors, wishing with their whole hearts and strength to put a check unto such abomina¬
tions and to counteract such dangers, have with much study, much research, and much labour, indited
and composed a certain Treatise in which they have used their best endeavours on behalf of the
integrity of the Catholic Faith to rebuke and rebut the ignorance of those who dare to preach so gross

276 OFFICIAL LETTER OF APPROBATION
errors, and they have also been at great pains to set forth the lawful and proper way whereby these
pestilent witches may be brought to trial, may be sentenced and condemned, according to the tenor
of the aforesaid bull and the regulations of Canon Law. But since it is very right and altogether
reasonable that this good work which they have wrought for the common benefit of us all should be
sanctioned and confirmed by the unanimous approval of the reverend Doctors of the University, lest
by some evil chance ignorant and ill-intentioned men should suppose that the aforesaid Rectors of
the faculty and the Professors of the Order of Preachers are not wholly at one in their view of these
matters, the authors of the aforesaid Treatise, exactly written out as it is to be printed in fair
characters, in order that when it is so printed it may be recommended and honourably approved by
the recorded good opinions and mature judgement of many learned Doctors, handed to, and laid
before, the most honourable University of Cologne, that is to say,'before certain Professors of Sacred
Theology, who are commissioned and required to act as representatives of the most honourable
University, the aforesaid Treatise in order that by them it might be perused, examined, and dis¬
cussed, so that should there be found any points which may seem in any way doubtful or hardly in
agreement with the teachings of the Catholic Faith, such points might be corrected and emended by
the judgement of the said learned Doctors, who shall, moreover, ojficially approve and commend
whatsoever the Treatise contains which is agreeable to the teachings of the Catholic Faith. This
accordingly was done as hath been set forth above.
In the first place, the honoured lord Lambertus de Monte with his own hand subscribed his judge¬
“/,
ment and opinion as here followeth: Lambertus de Monte, Professor (albeit unworthy) of Sacred
Theology, and at this time Dean of the faculty of Sacred Theology in the University of Cologne,
do here solemnly declare, and I confirm this my declaration with my own hand, that I have read and
diligently perused and considered this Treatise, which is divided into three parts, and that, in my
humble judgement at any rate, the first two parts contain nothing at all which is in any way contrary
to the doctrines of sound philosophy or contrary to the truth of the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Faith,
or contrary to the opinions of those doctors whose writings are approved and allowed by Holy Church.
Moreover, in my opinion, the third part is to be entirely approved, and is to be put into actual
practice, so far as in the trials and punishment of these heretics, of which matters it treats, nothing
is done that may infringe the Canon Law. And again on account of the most weighty and salutary
matters which are contained in this Treatise, which, even if it were only because of the honourable
estate, learning, and good report of these most worthy and honoured Inquisitors, might well be held
to be useful and necessary, all diligent care should be taken that this Treatise be widely distributed
to learned men and men full of zeal, who thence may very profitably have the advantage of so many
and so well-considered directions for the extermination of witches, and it should also be put into
the hands of all rectors of churches, particularly those who are honest, active, and God-fearing men,
who may by reading therein be encouraged to arouse hatred in every heart against the pestilent heresy
of witches and their foul craft, so that all good men may be warned and safeguarded and evil-doers
may be discovered and punished, so that in the full light of day mercy and blessing shall fall upon
the righteous and justice shall be meted out to those who do evil, and thus in all things God shall
be glorified, to Whom be all honour, praise, and glory.”
Next the Venerable Master Jacobus de Stralen with his own hand subscribed his judgement
“/,
and considered opinion thus: Jacobus de Stralen, Professor of Sacred Theology, after having
diligently read the aforesaid Treatise, declare that my opinion entirely and altogether is in agree¬
ment with the judgement which hath been set forth by our Venerable Master Lambertus de Monte,
Dean of Sacred Theology, as he hath written above, and this I attest and witness by my own signature
to the glory of God.”
In like manner the honourable Master Andreas de Ochsenfurt wrote with his own hand as
follows: In the same way I, Andreas de Ochsenfurt, Junior Professor of Sacred Theology, record
that my considered opinion of the matters contained in the said Treatise entirely and wholly agrees
with the judgement written above, and to the truth of this I bear witness by the subscription of my
signature.” r j s
And next, in like manner, the honoured Master Thomas de Scotia subscribed with his own
hand as followeth: I, Thomas de Scotia, Doctor of Sacred Theology {unworthy though I be), am
fully in agreement with all that our Venerable Masters have written above with regard to the matters
contained in the said Treatise, which I also have carefully examined and perused, and to the truth
of this I bear witness by subscribing my signature with my own hand.”
Here followeth the second subscription with regard to those discourses which have been pro¬
nounced from the pulpit by ignorant and blameworthy preachers. And in the first place it seems
good to set forth the following articles:
First Article: .The Mas ters of Sacred Theology, who have subscribed their names below, do
much commend the Inquisitors of heretical pravity, who, according to the Canons, have been sent
as deputies by the supreme authority of the Apostolic See, and they would humbly exhort them to
fulfil their exalted office with all zeal and industry.
Second Article: The doctrine that witchcraft may be wrought by the Divine Permission owing
to the co-operation of the devil with wizards or witches is not contrary to the Catholic Faith, but is in

OFFICIAL LETTER OF APPROBATION 277
/
every way agreeable to the teaching of Holy Scripture nay more, according to the opinions of the
Doctors of the Church it is a belief which must surely be held and steadfastly maintained.
Third Article: Therefore it is a grave error to preach that witchcraft cannot be, and those who
publicly preach this vile error notably hinder the holy work of the Inquisitors to the sore prejudice
j
of the safety of many souls. It is not convenient that the secrets of magic which are often revealed
to the Inquisitors should indiscriminately be made known to everybody.
Last Article: All princes and all pious Catholics are to be exhorted that they should use their
best endeavours always to assist the Inquisitors in their good work^of the defence of the Catholic
Faith.
Wherefore, these Doctors of the aforesaid faculty of Theology who have already signed above
and who have also signed below, have affixed their signatures to these articles, as I, Arnold Kolich,
public notary, who have signed my name below, have learnt from the sworn information of John
Vorde of Mechlin, good man and true, sworn Bedel of the most honourable University of Cologne, who
declared this upon oath unto me, and as {for their hands as signed above and below are well known
unto me) I myself have seen set forth as here followeth: “I, Lambertus de Monte, Professor of Sacred
Theology, Dean of the faculty, stoutly maintain and entirely approve of the articles here rehearsed,
and to the truth of this I bear witness by my signature subscribed with my own hand. I, Jacobus
de Stralen, Professor of Sacred Theology, similarly maintain and entirely approve of the articles
_
as rehearsed above, and to the truth of this I bear witness by affixing my signature with my own
hand. I, Udalricus Kridwiss von Esslingen, Junior Professor of Sacrtd-Theology, likewise main¬
tain and entirely approve of the articles as set forth above, and to the truth of this I bear witness
by affixing my signature with my own hand. I, Conradus von Campen, Professor in ordinary of Sacred
Theology, declare that I assent to and am in entire agreement with the judgement of the Senior Pro¬
fessors. I, Cornelius de Breda, Junior Professor, maintain and entirely approve of the articles as
set forth above, and to the truth of this I bear witness by affixing my signature with my own hand.
I, Thomas de Scotia, Professor of Sacred Theology (albeit unworthy), entirely agree to, maintain,
and approve of the opinion of the Venerable Professors who have signed above, and to the truth of
this I set my name with my own hand. I, Theoderich de Bummel, Junior Professor of Sacred Theology,
entirely agree with what has been written above by the honoured Masters who have signed their
names above, and to the truth of this I bear witness by my signature written with my own hand.
In confirmation of the above articles I declare that I am wholly and entirely of the same opinion as
the above most honoured Masters and Professors, I, Andreas de Ochsenfurt, Professor of the faculty
of Sacred Theology, a junior member of the Board of Theologians of the most honourable University
of Cologne
Finally and last of all, the aforesaid Venerable and Very Reverend Father Henry Kramer,
Inquisitor, was in possession of and showed us another letter, written out fair on virgin parchment,
bestowed upon and granted unto him by the most Serene and Noble monarch the King of the Romans,
which parchment bore his own royal red official seal, impressed upon a ground of blue wax, which
seal was suspended from and hanging at the bottom of the said parchment, and this was whole
and entire, untouched, not cancelled or suspect, in no wise lacerated or impaired, and by tenor of
these presents the most Exalted Lord, the aforesaid Noble King of the Romans, in order that for
the benefit of our Holy Faith these businesses might be dispatched with the greater ease and expedi¬
tion, in his royal office as the Most Christian King, wished and wishes that the same Apostolic bull,
whereof we have spoken above, should be in every way respected, honoured, and defended, and the
provisions thereof enforced, and he takes the Inquisitors wholly under his own august protection,
commanding and requiring all and everyone who are subjects of the Roman Empire that they shall
show the said Inquisitors all favour and grant them every assistance of which they may stand in need
in the discharge of their office, and they shall afford the Inquisitors every help according to the pro¬
visions which are more fully contained and rehearsed in this said letter. And this said letter issued
by the King commences thus, and concludes thus, as is set forth in order here below: “Maximilian,
by the Divine Favour and the Grace of God, most August King of the Romans, Archduke of Austiia,
Duke of Burgundy\ of Lorraine, of Brabant, of Limburg, of Luxemburg and Guelderland, Count
of Flanders'. . . and it concluded thus: “Given in our good city of Brussels, under our own
hand and seal, on the sixth day of November, in the year of our Lord one thousand, fourteen hundred
and eighty-six, in the first year of our reign.” Wherefore, with regard to all that hath been rehearsed
and set forth above, each and every, the aforesaid Venerable and Very Reverend Father Henry,
Inquisitor, on behalf of himself and his aforesaid colleague, sought from me, the public notary,
whose name is written above and is subscribed below, that each document and all these documents
should be officially drawn up and relegated in the form of a public instrument or public instruments,
and this was done at Cologne in the house and the dwelling of the aforesaid Venerable Master
Lambertus de Monte, which house is situate within the immunities of the Church of S. Andrew at
Cologne, in the room where this same Master Lambertus pursueth his studies and dispatcheth his
businesses, in the year of our Lord, in the month, on the day, at the hour, and during the Pontificate,
all which have been set forth above, there being present there at that very time the aforesaid Master
Lambertus, and the Bedel John, as also Nicolas Cuper von Venroid, sworn notary of the Venerable

,
Curia of Cologne and Christian Wintzen von Eusskirchen, a cleric of the diocese of Cologne, both
good men and true, who bear witness that this request was formally made and formally granted.
And I, Arnold Kolich von Eusskirchen, a cleric of the diocese of Cologne, sworn notary, was also
present whilst the above businesses each and all were being performed and were carried out, and
to this I give my evidence with the aforenamed witnesses; and in accordance with what I saw and
with what, as I have stated above, I heard upon the sworn testimony of the said Bedel, good man
and true, I have written out fair with my own hand and engrossed the present public instrument,
which I have subscribed, and have caused to be published since I have drawn it up in this official
form for publication, and being requested and required so to do I have signed it and, sealed it
according to the wonted manner with my own name and my own seal, that it may be officially
approved and may be a sufficient and legal testimony and probation of all and single that are herein
set forth, rehearsed, and contained.
LIBRARY


■
.
