MICROCOPY


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Microfilm Publication M887


RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)
NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUGUST 20, 1947

Roll 6 *

Transcript Volumes (English Version)

Volumes 13-15
Mar. 12-Apr. 8. 1947


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTON: 1974


INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this microfilm publication are reproduced
the records of Case I {United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et al ., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of 6erman- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings, prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as
prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official court file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.

The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as are the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record series offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
are predominantly affidavits by various persons. They are
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
languago. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which the exhibits were presented before the
tribunal.

The minute book, in one bound volume, is a suanary of the
transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution comments thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and commitment
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids suonarisc transcripts, exhibits, ^.d the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I from November 21,
1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as the

1


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (IWTFE) war crises
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of World War
II War Crises Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before
several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U.S. Zone of
Occupation in Gernany against officials or citizens of the Third
Reich, as follows:


Case No. United States v.


1 Karl Brandt at at.

2 Erhard Hilck

3 Joaaf Altatcetter
at al.

4 Oeuald Pohl at al.

5 Friadrioh Flick
at al.

6 Carl Krauok at al.

7 Vilkalm Liat at al.

8 Ulrich Graifalt
at al.

9 Otto Ohlendorf
at al.

10 Al fried Krupp
et al.

11 Emat von
Weixeaaoker at al.

12 Wilhel* von Uab

et al.

Authority for the proceedings of the International Military
Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9547 of May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlin Protocol of October 6,

1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

Authority for the 12 subsequent cases stee»ed mainly from
Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 1945, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7 and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces, European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24, 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further
developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.


2


Popular Name

Medical Case
Milch Case
(Luftwaffe)
Justice Case


No. of
Defendants

. 23
1

16


Pohl Case (SS) 18

Flifck Case 6

(Industrialist)

I. G. Farben Case 24

(Industrialist)

Hostage Case 12

RuSHA Case (SS) 14

Einsatzgruppen 24

Case (SS)

Krupp Case 12

(Industrialist)

Ministries Case 21

High Command Case 14


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The crises charged in the Brandt case consisted largely of
medical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
instates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, and ethnic
and racial groups; and the murder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.

The following medical experiments were conducted:

1. High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure
on persons.

2. Freezing: to test human resistance to extemely low
temperatures.

3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature
of the disease.

4. Mustard gas: part of a general research program in gas
warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
muscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater: to test methods of rendering seawater potable.

7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the
disease.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.

9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.

11. .Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus

bums.

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these
experiments were not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
with particular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive
by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatoriums in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for
these forerunners of much larger installations in the mass
extermination camps.

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration
camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their
skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments
of the following 23 persons all of whoa were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfram Sievers:

Karl Brandt: Personal physician to Adolf Hitler. Gruppen-
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Major General) in
the Kaffen SS, Reichskoaaissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswesen (Reich Commissioner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the Reichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council).

Kurt Blooe: Deputy [of the] Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeino
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Himoler (Personal Admin-
— istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Hinnlcr), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuehrer (Senior Colonel) in the
Kaffen SS, Oberster Hygieniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef des Hygienischen Institutes der Kaffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Kaffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Chef des
Persoenlichen Stabes des Reichsarztes SS und Polizei (Chief
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Polico).

Kolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Reich Manager
of the "Ahnenerbe" Society and Director of its Institut
fuer Kchrwissenschaftliche Zweckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Genzkcn: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Kaffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsaats der Kaffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Kaffen SS).

Karl Gebhardt: Gruppenfuehrcr in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Kaffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Himmler, Oberster Klinikcr, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

Viktor Brack: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Sturmbannfuehrer
(Major) in the Kaffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
des Fuehrers der NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Kaldemar Hoven: Hauptsturnfuehrer (Captain) in the Kaffen (

SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Camp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Camp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Sturmbannfuehrer in the Kaffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Army), and Chef des Kehr-
nachtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Armed Forces).

Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Army, and Amtschef der
Dienststelle Medizinische Kissenschaft und Forschung
(Chief of the Office for Medical Science and Research)
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Reich Coooissioner for
Health and Sanitation.

Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef des Stabes,
Inspekteur des Luftwaffe-Sanitaetswesens (ChieT of Staff
of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef des Sanitaetswcsens dor Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).

Hermann Becker-Freyseng: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe.

Georg August Keltz: Oberfeldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fuer Luftfahrtmcdizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich.

Hilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Gcneralarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President,
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.

Siegfried Ruff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute for Aviation).


Hans Wolfgang Romberg: Physician on the staff of the Depart-
Bent for Aviation Medicine at the Genian Experimental Institute
for Aviation.

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for
Aviation Medicine in Berlin.


Adolf Pokorny: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal
diseases.

The indictment consisted of four counts. Count one charged
participation in a common design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charged
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty.

The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of defense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Blooe, Pokorny, Romberg. Rostock,
Ruff, Schaefer, and Weltz). Death sentences were imposed on
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hoven,'Gebhardt,
Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Genzken,
Hand loser. Rose, and Schrocder; varying terms of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyseng, Beiglboeck, Obcrheuser, and
Poppendick.


The English-language transcript volumes are arranged numer¬
ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11S38. The German-
language transcript volumes are numbered la-30a and paginated
1-11756. The letters at the top of each page indicate morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court time and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more commissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages are
added to the transcript volumes and given number plus letter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use,
570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunal.
These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the Reiakegeeet^latt (the
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number


of the medical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.

The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits
is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare cases the exhibits are followed
by translations or additional certificates. A few exhibits are
original documents, such as:


ibit No.

Doc. No.

Exhibit No.

Doc. No

301

NO-1314

410

NO-158

307

NO-120

441

NO-1730

309

NO-131

443

NO-890

310

NO-132

451

NO-732

357

1696 PS

462

NO-1424

362

628 PS

507

NO-365

368

NO-817

S46

NO-3347

403

616 PS


So certificate is attached to sevoral exhibits, including
exhibits 433, 435-439, 462, 559, and 561. Following exhibit 570
is a tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of the Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by 519a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper
clippings, reports, personnel records, RaichegaaatxbUxtt excerpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits are arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.

The translations in the prosecution document books are
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numbers, biased
descriptions, and page numbers of the translation. They are
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 are missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 arc followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mineographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number for each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers are generally not provided. There are sevoral unindexed
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution and defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
pleas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar

7


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


scheme. Pagination is consecutive, yet there are many pages where
an "a" or "b" is added to the mineral.

The English-language final pleas, closing briefs, and replies
to prosecution briefs of several defendants are missing, as are
a few German-language closing briefs and replies to prosecution
briefs.

At the beginning of roll 1 are filmed key documents from
which Tribunal I derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration,
U.S. Executive Orders 9547 and 9679, the London Agreement, the
Berlin Protocol, the Charter of the International Military Tri¬
bunal, Control Council Law 10, U.S. Military Government Ordinances
7 and 11, and U.S. Forces, European Theater General Order 301.
Following these documents of authorisation is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

These documents are followed by the transcript covers giving
such information as name and number of case, volume numbers,
language, page numbers, and inclusive dates. They arc followed
by summaries of the daily proceedings providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits are listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit number and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
description of the exhibit, and the date when it was offered in
court. Tho official court file is indexed in \he court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

Not filmed were records duplicated elsewhere in this micro¬
film publication, such as prosecution and defense document books
in the German language that are largely duplications of pros¬
ecution and defense exhibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which can be found in
the transcripts of the proceedings.

The records of the Brandt case arc closely related to other
microfilmed records in Record Group 238, specifically prosecution
exhibits submitted to the International Military Tribunal, T988;

Nl (Nuernberg Industrialist) Series, T301; NOKM (Nuernberg Armed
Forces High Command) Series, TU19; NG (Nuernberg Government)
Series, T1139; and records of the Milch case, M888, the List case,
M893, the Greifelt case, M894, and the Ohlendorf case, M895.

In addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal
at Nuernberg has been published in Trial of the Major War Crirrimle
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42
vols. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub¬
lished as Triale of War Criminals Before the Nuernberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Council Lav No. 10 (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 1950-53), IS vols. The Audiovisual Archives
Division of the National Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Hilitary Tribunal proceedings.


John Mendelsohn wrote these introductory recarks and arranged
the records for BicTofilning in collaboration with George Chalou.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 6
Target 1

Volume 13
Mar. 12-20, 1947


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT «t al
VOLUME 13


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


12-20 March 1947 pp. 4376-4788


C -urt Sc. i

12 wr iter (Int. Bream)


Officirl tr/asc'ria? of the /ncricrn Military
Trlbuari I ia the setter of the United States
f A .erica r^einet ;>rl Brrndt, «.t el,
defendants, sitting et Sueratcr*;, Scr.-asy, sn
12 Kirch 19---7, 0950, Justice reel* presiding.


TEE r.ARSHAL: rersone in the c.urtrooe vill olcrse find their cents.
Z'c.%. Hon-retie, the Ju'^es of Kilitrry Tribunal 1. • Hilitrry Tribunal 1
ie bov in session. Gvd srve tho United Strict of Ascrica rr.d this hon¬
orable Tribunal. There vill be order in thi ccurtro a.

TEZ rBhSIDHT: hr. Marshal, vill you nseerteia thrt the defendants
rrc rll present in c .urt.

TFI MARSHAL: Hry it -rlerso Your Honor, rll defendants rro ’oroeer.t
in court vitfc tho exceoti .a -f the lefcadent Ot rhcuscr vfco is eisent


duo to illness.

PE tfSSXXfcfT: Tho Sccrctrry Gvrurol vill note for the roc -rd tho
presonce -f rll tho defendants in c urt teve the defendant Cberhousor,
vfco is eteont in the henitrl »n recount >S illness.

C-ur.sol no y or .coed.

FRITZ IISCKih - Boomed

HR. HARDY: I hive no further ou«sti'.nt on cr-os-orar.i nation.

HBDIRiCT AXAnllATIC*

BY LB. SaILL (C unscl for the defendant Fischer):


Witness, rasu'.iar thrt in tho yerr 19-.2 you hrd ttm condo-.nod

to denth for refusing to obey .rders, would you then hrve jcivon n.rnis-
$

si ,n thrt in ttocrlhent should be eerried out on you, if yai voro thereby
offered, the cfcrnce to h/vc y.ur sentence coanutcd?

A. Yes, I valid hrve trfcen this ffor rad chrnco.

The erocri entrl aers ns, -n vhon the erarioonts voro errried
i\tho r Jllsh resietnr.ee rutvottfit. They hrve rdnitted

{SirA t rll here iftiblso c .nfir ed it in their affidavit. Conscoucntly,

I it \

C . they wore conictned t death. I isle you n-v, c-uld yitt not a.ssu* c ct

cxoerleonte that these <irls alrt would, tafcc ed-
.-rtunity end would consent to the exaerlrents, und that
thi t££3-'-frrive at this conclusi on, arrticularly if they rrdc a.


Court S-. 1

12 .ter *--7-fc-l-2-£Sh-?oster (let. 5r-vc)


critical aupraisal their situation?

A. Tea, I esturod thrt thr.t vt» ao rt that tine.

v fho aulfonrnide exoerlr.enta were for the ourocse of testing a'
cfirtala eyries of *>rcocrrti .ns, ca you described yesterday. la It
correct th-t one 4 tfceae nroperpti-ns vr& ultrraa^til, developed by Dr.
Horrell, Hitler's otra nal ohyaicien, and that tfcla vae a ureoaratlon that
had not yet teen used by field arny physicians?

A. Y«a, .no of the oro-vxatlons to te teated vaa ultrrsootil. I
did not know about tha t preparation M that tl-.c nor had I heard thr-t it
had been used by rr;y physicians.

*

v Did y-u kn.v that rr-feasor Dr. Oebhirdt vr.a ordered by Hitler
o treat Ob^rgrunoenfuehror Hoydrlch, chief «f the F.SHA, eurglcrlly,

a

after the a ttor.it on hia life?

A. Toe, I knew tha t Gebhaxdt vra at tent frea Kohenlychon in Juno
and vr.a ottondlng Hoydrlch -oa hla sickbed.

Y.u yesteriry dcoeribod the contents of the order that Frofoasor
Oothrrdt f-rve you rt tho start of tha sulfona:ldo exooriaonts. Van it
cl*rr t. you in this -i tt«r thrt the legal oa met of the croblcn, nonely,
the oucatl-n 4 vhother .-r not the uxoarlMinta «ero neroicaitlo ar.A vho
van cocnttcnt tv docido about then, lry not only ontlroly outside y<ur
competence but also outside Oebhardt’e e-juetonco?

A. Tea, I vra clearly told that this van an affair thrt had beer.
le,;rl‘.red by the atotc and I hrd to ataunu that rrofeaaor RabLrrdt nloo
vna not the uaraon »Av legally hrd to decide on it.

Ha. Eat-DY i I aubr.lt that vc have g.no over this accu line of
duration the end tL:*» again and I objiat t tvi« or aumMt.en of tliln
tort.

THI rEiSIDLST: The Tribunal la of the opinion thrt this natter has
been gone int. ouite thoroughly on esaninotlon of counsel. It does not
desire t. restrict counsel's examination of the witness but rcootition
ch-uli bo avoided.


Dr.. S2ZJL: hr. President, I shall do ry beat to avoid rauotitiona.

*377


C urt Si. 1

12 Kar -.7^.-1-^ter (It*. 2--vr.)


BY Da. BSrDL:


The vitfcii /rrkr testified here cat* adaitted thrt she could

• •

•e« cxeeriaeatol subject* -aly sun^rf icirliy an: relied largely or.
vhPt others arcBoat, ni-nely, the -.ritoaers or the nurses, told her. It
doc* a;t iu: beyond the rv.ela of •jossibility thrt it =u*t hrvo bcoa in-
nossiblu *4r Ir. Kaska to echievc really e clear iclture of the sickness


rad its course.


A. Yes, '..crate tho :recisw rcrlysis of a esse of illness is very
difficult rr- unless y u rre in the ir.cdifte vicinity of thrt sickness
it is air.ost imossiblw.

*

Y-u yesterday described or strtod that you felt ilty for the
Polish girls on *h-a tho sjenerisonts '-ere carried nit. Vrc not tho de¬
cisive thin,; fir both you and Dr. Oobhirdt the off irt to save the lives
of those iers as vhich, vitfc « fov regrettable crscs, you v cro success¬
ful in?

a. Yes, I know thrt rr^ess,r Oebh-rdt wished above all. and told
no so frooucatly, thrt everything should bo done to save tho lives of
th.se ia danger.


-373


12 March 17-4^. 7D-2-l-Cook (In| Brown)
Coart Ko. 1


Q «cccr 'ire to the alle -ations of the Prosecution ojperlnents were
carri! cut on 7U Polish slrls, of whea accordin.-* to Prosecution's statonont
at l.ast 61 live 1 .. The Prosecution states subsequently six woro shot for
racsona that wa do not know. Doesn't it follow fros this that the responsible
office, neaaly, the BSBi, kept its proaises to lir. Gebhr.rdt?

rt Yes, I have always boon of the opinion that that was prrof the
assurance given Dr. Gebharit was kept,

Q Is it true that Professor Gtbhnrdt corrissionod you to concern
yourself only with the experimental subjects in the concentration canp

.Ravonsbruock and avoid any othor contact with the canp?

*

A Yos, I received that prociso and .’eflnito ordar from Dr. Gebharit.

Q Professor Gobhardt himsolf went to Ravonsbruock a few ttmos. Did
ho also ebaorvo this basis policy xr. ’ not concern biaself with what wont on
othorwiso in the ccao?

A Yos, that la *3, so far as I was able to observo hin, ho only
visited thj n»a of tfia rosi 'or.t physician am' the sick bay.

Q Un J or theso circumstances, thireforo, it would have boon inporsibl
for you to concorr. jcurcolf for instanco with the work which tho Polish
prisoners did?

A That was quite out of tho question.

Q Is it true that in 19U3 Dr. Stumpfo^or caoa to.Hohonljrchcn with
a apodal order from Hinder on 1 was to that extent not undor tho aodioal
suporvisior, of Dr. Oobhardt?

A Th t was in 19h2 a Yos, Zr. Stunpfe ;or carao at that tine with a
special crier fr:m HLsiler, whoso escort physician ho was, to Hohenlychen, and
informed Oebhar It about that.

q Tho Prose ration spoke yestor 'ay of the deliberate nisloading on
the .art of Oobhardt, 'recauso ho un'ertook a free transplant?.tion, allogcdly
r.ocauso of a case of cancer on a ati’r.t. Oobhar !t in his liroct oxanirwtlon
only d' a limited opportunity to testify rogardinr this, but it is truo that
the wholj infection or swelling which had infected the whole arm, could only bo
treated if tho operation was carried out, is that not so?


12 Ifcrch L7— 2 -Ccok (Int. Trorr.)
Court So, 1


.v I bolicve Professor •Gobhardt stated that in his direct examination
that this was a confine J operation, which on the one hand was to ronove the
diseased tissuo, supplenuntad by a second operation aiaed at plastic restor¬
ation with functional aim, vis the restoration of th^ remising Joint, namely,
for tho purpose of saving the arc,

3 Is it corroet that from tho publications of Profossor Loxor, who
had in :ary casoe successfully transplanted Joints from on- person to another,
was it not true ycu coul' count on succoss?

A Too, I know that Loxor in tho !-5onich school had carried out
transplantation of Joints an' arts of Joints frea one person to another, par¬
ticularly ime lately after tho first vorl' war, an! that his operations woro
successful. On* the basis of Lexer's opinion, whoso pupil Gobhardt was, ono
coulcount or. succoss, ha! to count or. succoss*

Q Do 70 U aia*oo with no when I say that Profossor Gobhardt would
himself havo chocked on ani published tho results of such oxporirwmts and
operations hinsolf, if you had with'rmm at his requests and that in this caso
ho would not havo loft it up to Sturipfoftgor to pivo a report in tho paper
published by Vohoiarnt Sausrbruck about this work*

A So far ao I knew Oebhardt concornad hicsalf with tho work that
lay within his own sphoro of interest; ho took into his own hands and directed
personally, ani that if these nattjrs woro published, ho at least would havo
writtim a profaco In tho case of publication about such work.

Q .iftor tho locturo at the ’ttlitory 'kidical Acadcny in May 19b3, you
return© 1 to tho front, to tho Tenth iS Paraor Division "Fruniaberg". In Aurust
19U3 you woro in France, Is it truo in ..ut,ust 19U3 Gobhar'fc visited you and
your b-visior. In Franco?

A"* Yos, tho division o.:peoto' at that tine an «n 5 lo-.ircericnn Invasion
b7 lar.l an: air, ani at that tiro :.u ust-Soptcnfcer, I was callod to Paris for
a confarenco cn military nodical natters aixl thoiv net Professor Gobhardt.

Q Tho expurlrontal persons in tho 3ulfcnanido series were subsequent¬
ly oxardnod by you. ihon did tho checkin;, on than eensa and what was tho


12 March U7-»-uT>2-3-Cock (Inti Broun)
Court Ho* 1


diagnosis on then when you turned then back over to the canp physicians?

L For the cost part the acute cases had boon arrestor! and tho wounds
Woro beelod* a fe* of than had inflametion of the nature of a boil, and very
tax had an infection which was of the nature of a can? phlognono. There was
no diagnosis of ary case that light have'been construe I as ondaneorinr. tho
lifo or lixbs cf the patient at the tisto that I loft tho oaap and turned the
patients ovor the ceap physicians.

Q In the sicnor, an! ospecially August of 19U3, you were in Franco,
and Frofossor Gobhardt was there also. If now a 'oliah prisonor, who
apparently was operated on in Au- ust 19U3 in the bunker there by other physi¬
cians still suffered a bono narrow infection, I sRould -’ran tho conclusion .
that this was nothing that boro ary connoctior. with your aulfonanido experi¬
ments?

A I an of tho sane opinion*

Q The Frosocutor asked you yostorday why cconotic operations woro
not carriod out on tho oxporinontal subjocts in order to inprovo their nppoar-
anco? ‘.tom is the oarlioot date at which such an op-,ration could have boon
carriod out, and wore thoro still possibilities at that tino oithor in

Hohonlychon or anywhero in Goroary of carrying out such cosmetic oporations?

0

A I have already said that tho school at Hohonlychon reprosontod
tho ninciplo that boforo a lapso of at least two yoar3 after tho operation
no plastic or cosnotic operation should tako place, because othorwiso thoro i-
always tho dangor that tho infla-ration reappears and thus on-lancers again
tho irv'ivi’ual. On tho basis of this, therefore, a plastic or oo see tic
operation could not tavo been carrio! out before the end of 19UU. At this
tino in Hohonlychon neat assuredly no plastic oporations wero carried out in
Hotenlychon because at that tino the whole of Germany was aflaao, an ’ all
clinics, especially our clinic, wore overcrowded with patients in need of
surgical care. Plastic or coscctio operations were certainly not carriod out
at that tine.

q Ok last question. Tho ,-rosocutor asked you yesterday whether you

would hive obeyed Professor Oe\hordt»s order, evon then if the objoct of the

4331


12 fcrch L7-?-<.TD-2^-Co« (Int. ~ro>rr$
Court Ko. 1


cr’.r ms to carry out such an jxperi ^nt on Dr. Ob.rhsuser, an' you then said
that you oouli not answer that question. Sboul' yoi not, however, attempt g°
r± 70 seno reasonable a rarer to that question?

If I ralcn an effort to answer that question, I nust point out the
essential an 1 decisive liffereqces. In opinion, the .decisive thing, aside
fron the fact it was an order, was the fact that ny sotive was that of
helping wounds-! parsons, an-', sooon arily, tho belief that the persons on whom
experiments wore to be carried out had boon oonienned to death. I have already
locusaod tho difficulties ecLraced in the psychological situation in which
one can rind oneself, an 1 I car. say in ad dition only that it is asked of
] iors for instance that, let us say, ho But shoot at his own horco towns,
and hi curios out this order in tho boliof of a hi-hcr authority on tho part
of tho Stato an' scoo in that hi-her authority his basis and security. Thoso
two fr.otcrs, tho belief in tho othicil rotivu, rewarding tho helpinr of
vroan to' persons, seoon U.y, the faot that tho State sanctioned this order
legally, ar.!, thir 1;-, that th. ox; orim.nts wore to be carried out cn persona
who had boon condemn© d to loath an! shrull non bu ."ivon a hurr.no chanco to
save thoir lives, I tollers thoso thn- pcir.ta lve an a loquate answer to thnl
question.


ttaroh 12-i^~K-3-l-Crcsc (Int, Brcwn)

Court Mo. 1


C, So the decisive -'iffcrcr.ee lies in the f^ct that Dr. Cbcrhauser was
net at that tine ccndtcr.od tc death?

/. Yes.

«. I have nc further questions to the witness.

Dr.. KELTS FCh HaNDI/SER*

£ Dr. Fisher, ‘Jr. Hardy yesterday discussed with you the question whether
tho behreacht, end this nears in this cr.se Chief cf the Jodical Inspection
Handle oar, had any conn metier, with tho experiment* in Kevursbrueck. The
prosecution tried tc prove that the l<ehmacht wns concerned ir. these Sulfona¬
mide experirnnt s . You wer<! asked whet your opinion cf this problesa was frcci

*

a military point cf view, .jvd, as I r-i-tnber it, I dcr.'t have the record
before no, you answered that you considered this sulfcnaraide natter an
important problta for the '.chtracht. Is it eerr-ct that you said that?

Dr. f.elte, I cannot rcacabcr tho exact scntonco but that is what I
said substantially.

Q Tho trucncss of this statement nc cno will deny, but if you look at
this otat-aent without the context isolated, it could be misunderstood. There¬
fore, I ask you - waa tho aulfenanido experiment only a 'rtohr-.acht problem?

n He, Dr. Mclto. It was not. It waa a profcleo that effcctod modicino
as a whole.

Q In ether words, tho situation was is fellows:

In tho acuto state of the \:r particular stress wrs layod cn particular aspocts
cf tho sulfonamide problem, but that s.lfcnaaido research, as a wholo, was
a field that cnfcracod both military end civilian lifo. Now, so far as tho
acuto incentive is ccncumoi that led U the jcpcriaents in Kaver.sbruock you
heard free Dr. Gothardt wh.n he testified as a witness hew this crier caao
to b j fiver, and what thu txtivea for it were.

A Yes, I rcmuabvr that.

m Tho situation was that Frefesser Gethardt said at cno point, perhaps
ir. su- cu -izir. , "The purpose cf this order was that under nc circuastancas tc
suffer any unnecessary losses in the '..affon-SS." Thus, acccrdinr to what
Dr. Gobhrrdt said, the SS had a particular interest in this and this intorost


Karsh 1 2-J-5£->-2-3rcss (Int. Srcwr.)
Court lie. 1


was definitive and decisive. Is that the ease?

.. I can only answer that tc this extent - that ir.et Dr. Gobhardt said to
your question concerns cnly what Dr. Gobhardt said, is that net sc?

Q Yes, that is sc but I wanted to -cake it clear that the general
interest ir. this ratter was -dlitary and civilian, but the actual incentive
fer Ravcnsbruock oeperir-ents was inter-st cn tho part of Himler?

A Yes, according to what Gebharit said. Hinder was interested cn it.

0 Dr. Gebhardt a'so said in the witness hex clearly that the Kehnaacht

was net concerned either in the cri.in of cr the execution of these Rovons-

%

bruock experiments Can you answer that.stattmj.t?

a In order tc nni-rcr that I -sist say I received free. nc Wuhroacht office'
an order to carry cut these experiments but only :y suporicr c-neral
Gobhardt who was neater cf th> toffen-SS.

Q Then, no department of tho '..chmccht interfered ir. ycur experiments
in any way?

In ry fiuld .f work no ‘..ohraacht officer turned up.

Q Ycur own clarification of this error in your affidavit re -ardinc
the order I do not htv. to toll ycu. However, I shculd llko to clarify one
thin:, namely, when was tho erdor for the Ravcnsbruock experiments *;ivon?

I. I cannct toll ycu tho exact date but 1 can reconstruct tho situation
and believe it oust have been cn the 10th cf July 1942. In any case 1942.

Q At any rate in July c i 1942?

Yes.

Q Do ycu knew r.hen the tffico Chief of Helical Inspection was set up?

a Nc, I dc not know that.

C. It was by an order cf 28 July 1942. «t that tine, therefore, tho
Chief cf the U.lical Inspection oculd not have issued orders because ho
didn’t exist at that time.

A Yes, that is so.

£ I have nc further questions.

IKZ Fbl^IDEirr: If there are no further questions tc be propounded tc the
witness the defendant Fischer is excuse as a witness and will resume his plac-

4334


March 12-IM S-?-3-Grr * a (Int. Brcwr.)
Ccurt Sc. 1


DK. ShIZL: Hr. President, the hearin.; cf the defendant concludes ray
presentation cf eviderec in this ease.

1HS {RESIDENT: I undcrstccd free counsel yeatordey that counsel had
another document book containing documents to be admitted in evidence. Is
that ccrroct?

Dr.. SMJL: les, that is so. The documents ir. the supplununtary volume
are a second doo—onf boot for if I throe defendants when I represent. As in
tho caso of th- £i r».l. wzc-t beck 1 ci.aii present all cf the documents
under the herein- *0 .V\trIf, but slould jike to retain the rifht to refer
tc these docu-’cn'.? in the defense t< .zy cthor defendants.

THE Ph&lFS&T • Mill the* . ftr’oe'. docisonts be offered when counsel
presents the dofcnse cf tho def-nden-. ^jorhauser?

0*.. SLIDL: When tho d of indent Oeorhsuscr in tho course of two wooks
can leave the hospital, or when at a later date aho tokos the storvi, I shall
at that time submit these documents.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal understands arl tho documents may thon,
cf ccurao, be considered in counsel's defense of tho defendants Gebhardt
and Fischer also.

0

Eft. S22DL: Thank you.

THE FRESXttJfTt la the defendant Blcao ready to presont his defense?

». ShUTSR FCR THE DSTSD/fn 3LCJE:

DP.. S..'JTSt: For the defendant 91ooc.

THE {RESIDENT: I probably misunderstood thv. translation. I thought
the translator said Nolte for Blomc.

Dk. S..UTZB: Sauter for tho defendant Blomo. That cast hevo been a

%

mistake. Soutcr fer Blcco.

-tr. President, fer the defendant 3lcme I have aubalt'ted a document, book
somo time ago that contains documents number 1 tc 8. I then in addition to
this document took submitted two sup* lucent ary volumes, one number 9 to
14, and the little second containing 15 and 16. In other words, there arc
in tote only 16 documents. In these 16 documents are also included the


affidavits cf 9 witnesses. Ir. othe>r words of a larre number cf witnesses thi


Ifcrcfa 12-4-aK->-^-G^ 9a (I'-- Brc»)
Court Bo. 1


Utamov u relatively hlcf - so brief that 1 could contort. qyaelf 1m
affidavits. I shall call only t» Itnesses to the atar.d in addition t.
defendant Blent himself at the conclusion. The first Itnoss .hen I
to call .as a certain Pcrltschky .but I cannot call him today because
he has not yet been brought hither. I ask the right to sutoit an al 1 davit
free this Itness Penritschky or to bo pertaltted to call hin to the .itnec
tand as soon as he is brought here and is available. Do., before I t in
.,ith ay ease for the defendant Blcm. =ay I perhaps make a general eugge.tif
in the eaau of the Proaocution certain problcma .ore treated that had pre¬
viously not been part of Prosecution case. We defntse counsel are not clea
in our minis -.other those additional prebltns *ich the Prosecution treat,
are to be mad. part of the Indictment or net. Consequently, »o consider 1
expedient if the Prosecution makes seen . statement on this subject, nsmoly
-.ether and tc .hat extent they are including these further problems In t
charge against the defenlsnt. Because, if that is not the case, than
defen-. oounaal do not need to oonoom ourselves 1 th those further prcble-
in our defense of the defendants. Porhap. It «uld bs -all if thu

jcution made a statement on this subject soon. It .ould also be ->U
U another point .ero clarified, to.lt. 1 believe that on tho last lay
of the opening statement tho Prosecution stated that it .ould at the rljW
time state -.ether and to —t extent a charge arainat ono or anoth ef O.
Juf aidants .ould bo dropped. 1 should be glad If this point, too, -ere
soon clarified because if the Prosecution is going to drop one or another
charge then .. of tho defense laid not have «o concern ourselves 1 th it
further and .cold save ourselvea considerable time. In this case also
perhaps it oould be expedient if the .rcsecuticn made a statement.


12 Jfcrcb- :-J?Ji-l-KsrTCw (Int. v.n Schoc, . Brown)

C&crt I

3. H.J2JT: 2y it. f 1c2sj tlx. Cc rt, la cora-ction with r. Sut-r'-
oowcorn ob*t th. experiments m ’ virr us cri-os ouplin.d by the prosuei -ic
i its c -.bo in chief, wh ch xcr. not specific lly rofonv-d t, in -
rtaunt, th t baa b—n aimvod her- by r. cHincy, and 1 r
- ttonticn of Or. Sautcr to piri r b6 of the i.dictront which st-t.a
in tlx. lest 8-nt.nco "_uch ^na.r.t: inclm'-d but wore not li.it. 1tr
followi.r Th. prcs.cution her. hr.s .>v-n hi-w - bill of pirticul-ra in
• ition’to .in indictamt, am’. n« b. is-skin, for <crc an th-r. is
,rgui.nt, .s£t eta I c-n so., thifc w. h-v. not inc ude * in th- in ict:.ent
everything th t tea been presented. h-r. in t.ecr.so in chief, =n p
I beUeVe, covers anything th-t we h-vejr.scnt-d. In rogir' to the -’ropping
of ohirg—s on my of the dof.ndmts - I cenferrc ’ with Dr. Siut.r yeaterdiy
no’ i told his: .h t I would tike it upvlth r. KcHanoy ant*, hr.vo <liacua»i...
of .ro-Jiu c rg.s perhaps igrinat . r. I h-vo not yot hi r. n

opportunity te a., Mr. cHnncy, in w. ur.y n.ll do so, but, r.t pros.nt,

I r.n incluix.-’ to feel thit w. will r .-.'.in in the position t.rtn. r. i. .

a

r.givd to the dx.f.n/~nt Bloo- -n .'le . t t tx- of-ns.oul fh-tc.
c. linos.

tH SIO :T: Tho Tribunal r ul su .at th-t th. prosecution, asor¬
is convenient, d.oter inc its position in the _?.tter in advise th- .•‘.- a.-,
but, meanwhile, defendant's couno.l . ; prcco.tl with his rtafonso .gencr l^r.

DR. S..UT.Jt* Mr. President, 1 begin tlx. c-.se for th- .def.n'infc --
calling th. witness, Dr. Herbert Koaoehl, with th. pomssi-n of tho Court,
to the witness stand*

JUTX3 SZ3RING: la t hit Dr. Robert Kosnehl orj*. Herb-rt Koc -.'.l?

DR. S..OTMR: Dr. Bcrburt Xoao-hl - iK-R-E-S-R-T.

DR. HMRBsKT KOScEHLj a witn-ss, totl< tn. stmt an 1 ' testifle *. it follr -

by juxz . :;r.‘ G«

]. Hold up y-.ur right ban in* b_ sworn, r.p -tin. ift.r a. the Oit
I aw.-x by God, t . .Oninghty in' Cmisci-nt, th-t I will sp, k th- *u»
and wi -i withhol. one* id nothing*


12 aarcb^-JJWi-5-Saprow (lit. Von Scfton, BKkiJ
C .rt I

(The witnoss repeated the oath.)

JTOGd S23SI G: Ton say be seated.

3*. », SiOT Rs

Q. hitr-oss, please state y;ur full nano.

... Doctor of La* Herbert Knosa-hl.

Q. How old are you? •

... fort7»four years old.

4. You were last resident in unich? .

... Stock 'erf b/Omdins, In the ^i&bborhoc.’ of Kunich
Q. You ore r. Doctor of lr.r, net *. -dical doctor?

... *C3.

'1. You U .cv: Doctor Blor.-?

... Too.

;. How die y:u ««t him?

... In January 193lj I went t- unlc. t tix. .tcichs ..~rx- -c :t.

Q. Please wait - little sot.i t t interpreter can ke-p up It;, you,

■ it <«.C3. Plo-sc repeat th. last. sent- .co.

... The Ger.an ....rzteschaf t consisted, *t that tine of th- ..erzto jroi 1 .

m * ant! t!-- so-called Hauptaarm Bund. Dr. -lave was, at th-t tl.-o, .

.'the .yalclr.no' Chanber In -ockl-nour^ on G a Office leader for tiu.

pcoplosI health. ..Iso chief of Gru Oauob-.arn of the Aatlcr.al o cl Hot ihy-

• •

sici.ans' Onion. In this capacity I a- a ».ls acquaintance mien he c k, to
tho .uorstoociaaft,

Q. Doctor, what w,.re yau before ca. e t the '-hwbor of rhysicians?

... pr-’d usly, I was an assist'. Judj.o an', previously .an advisor

fir the Landesaron-hrersichorungannstalt (C_ur.tr} Fir- inrurnce institute)

?t JOTTU.

4, Th-n, in Ix.cer.ber 1933 .... si pay say sr
» ’recant- a tarty -ecber?


1933, r-s-

]. You are now auto-itic'lly un or arrest?


22 »-.rcfc-=-J:W*-3 -E-utcw (Inti von Sc.on, Brown) -
Co rt I

... Yc-a.

Why?

... I preso_c because I n?l a p*''.tic -1 r-nk, I n.vcr en.^.d in r.y
political activity, since, as a legal advisor for the ..erztosc'.rut r-lly
i* not concern nyself with politics. If I nevertheless ha? a c,rt-in
political rank, that was the wish of tho Reich Fhys«ci».n fender, Or. Wegner,
to when it wasvery inportar.t that the interests of the Gerr»*n physicians she
bo represents ’n upheld. <>.-._n, in Jam ry 193U, I wont to Munich, the
Oorxin ..urxtoschrt was rot in r. prec. *e!y '-.vorbl- position icc-.usc Rcic-
."-nister Hess ha , in December 1933, l'r;;e public g-.th rin:, opokun

against the G<*r n ^tniooehofl - oraan lay Beelers. Dr. fognor

wish. ', wit i res,-ct to th- Party ant* oth-r off:.eS, un or all clrcunc*
to rest r tty. - r-'.t nma of tn_ Germ ..urotoachaft. In the Party thor
w.re many high loaders, Reicbsloiter cn Oaulultcr, particul-rly -iulc^c
.Lstor Hoss an? Hin-lor, who had tx.n treated by the -.forewent; nod La;
lore. It was i port ant to hi i th*t I, as a 1 , should, in ay nog< •

with .v.mttnt'l -n Party offices, trve nc difficulties, because -v .The
whore on- went there were reprvsent-tivus in uniform, witn wno-r. one h?d
st'te one's point of view. Dr. Vagner, ?t that ti o, saw to it th"t i
-as «ivcn a political rank.

Q. .Jid that is why you are autaaaticr.lly under arrest new?

a

*»• : .s.

q. Dr. KosMehl, since th. end of 1933 V v wore with the doctors?
orfrnizatior. which was first c- i-d t:. Vr .-n league of h.ysicians and,
later, th_ Char.ber of p.ysicif-ne?

A. Yes.

q. You always held this ;-cst until 19h5?

... ..pril, 19 Jj5-


4JS9


q. Until the capitulation?

... fee.


12 .. (1=*- - 3rows. Ton School:)

Cicrt 53. 1.

N.

Ifc.t wura your duties rcfcront (oxpcrt) of the Hole's Ch?obor of
?nyaici:ns?

... pirst, to give tneu lcf.ol . dvlcc and to give information to individual
physicians if they wished It. Lfcen is the uela I h d to dorl with conplcint

.d

thit c no frit, ell segaents of the population regarding bad conditions in
hygiono in gonornl. or the state of guneri.1 health. Since the loader of ;h ( -
Fnyolcians ct that tiuo. Dr. ‘igaer. also occupied ? rty offices, tho iiiin
Offico for tho Pooplos* hoalth * nd tho K.S. Doctors' Longuo. I, as ft lawyer,
also hah to take caro of such natters, and such cou/l&ints as c-no fron t’*
popuL-.tlon to the party. Those tasks often overlapped those of tho Aor:

t

hoc:.u. V gaor h.d both offices. This was an honorary position and wit..out
rouuaoratlon, I worked on these t-lings also.

_. If I understand your correctly, thon. Dr. Xosnchl, you oaid ther w
two Orgi nlint ions. One wou the Reich Chamber of Physicians and th. *tha > :•
ization w s -ho lain Office for Public Health?

... Tos. ’

A Tho latter or,-a izatlon, the so-cnllod Ivin Office for Public I-onltl-
wns r. ? rt; organization, .\nd tao Roich Cfcanbor of Hiysiclras ...?

_ tfas an organization th t represented the Ooruan doctors' profonsion.

. *f. s it n prxty org nizat!on?

A. It was an or*, citation th-1 had no connectl'n with the party but tr.
a profoosi .nsd roprosentntivo of two gr«;< t doctors' or Ttaizations.

\ It was an indoponiont legal ontlty?

... To.-, th t was the case* since 1936. after, in Deconber 1935i t-
was ad regarding the forcction of tho Helen (Juuiber of Physicians.

\ Dr. Xosnchl, in ill the affairs of tho R-ich Chnnb.r of Jfcy.oic.'

.»• :no hand, and the .-dn iff ice for Public Health on the oth^r hand, d. *o
a a logoi adviser of the two or^mirations, know about all their af/rirs?

... I cm s-y that I was perfectly dequaintod with both tho port; organ¬
ization red the other.

. .nd is it true th t in both organ!rations you workod together v'.th


tco Defendant Dr. Slone?


i.390


12 Ho*-:i-<H&-5-&-Lc»«or (prows, Ton Schoon)

fear* U. 1.


.j i“aat is not entirely correct. Ir. the first period I h-d noro.to d
with the poichsforzto puchrer, Dr. tfagnor, end tho lunich i Iodic* 1 Soccial*
than ! h i ;o do with Dr. 3loaa, who at that tine vta still in Kocklonb* * .

It wr. Only :eicn later th t Dr. 3louo entered tho Seich Fhysjcians I o'"' *r-
.* itself, rsugfaly 1935 or 1S36. Theretofore I hr/ se^n hin in the c
t..c years at doctors''nootings or sow his if he wr.s on official busin-;
in .jinioh.

> Dut then froa 1935 or 1536 on how vr.s it then? :-:ew was tho rolr.ti
between you and Dr. Slone th-n?

... Tor' early vo end 0 friends at conferences und in other official
contact*. Cur relatione were T-ry good and friendly.

> Is it true th .t fro:: 1935 or 1936 on r.t lecst, you hnd a great deal
to do with Dr. Blooo officially?

.I In 1935 end 193$, only when Slone was cor. issioned by Dr.

/ .gner with a special order to reconstruct tho Dodlc 1 furthor instruction.
It was thon he c-no into the Roichsnorzteschaft. Th t was in 193^-37• 2?‘ ,

then c r.e to Munich rather often and in particular after tho doath of
•/ oT„r z worked vith uin r v ry often.

. ‘,/itnoss. you ire spooking of tho Roichsaerstc JUohror (RoiCi. Ir
: .•l-.’-siclrms) Dr. 7 >.r.cr. Sen. in the trial we h.-.ve nluost : lw ys hear
:r. Con:i. Sow nbout that? .

. Dr. V. sner,. tfc>. first 3- ic - Physician Le."4or, died ln.-Kro - of 1
.t eh. .t tl..e Dr. Conti beooao ait successor. Originally Dr. Slone - to bo
~*.o successor ond oil preparations had boen mde for that: but nft.r Dr.


Vagr..r wan buried no was told that co should.


> ’.fitness, I don't think th/it is very important.

... -*11 it is inportaat to the extent that it throws o donr light on

the rol.itions between Conti -ad 3looo. it tho lest aonent "itler, for for

political reasons, had to la.ro Munich ned go t> Kcael. In tho ceantioo

Tzvrlous perty orpaiisations, tho SS, tae Si. -te., strove for this post of

lelchs Poyslcian Lender cad each organization wnacod to get its owr. ar

-391


12 :: r—;i-529-5-3-I^s«-r (3r3vn, Vir. Schoon)

C^urt r*. 1.


: position. S3 It hcpponcd ta t Hitler was pros sod froa jvll sides to choc
inch rad such orgonlz'-tlon's a\n. He decided consequently nad suddonly,
-it to - point ary of the proposed successors for nr. '.ft finer but to ojrio'

Jr. 0 all because ho v-.s en old P.G. with tho g>ld honorary nodal -<nd v
Ciovm s cr.c doctor vno h. d trentod ff orst Vcssol.

.. ..nd so y>u »*.y Dr. Conti bocno tho successor of nr. \fr. nor ps 1c
.lei. a Lender. Ubr.t bcc:-*x> of Dr, 3lonoT
... Si- p«.rty wr.s Pltogcth.r In f vor of tho line that Ur. Wign e Ivd
urcu-d, the policy he h d pursued, vhorens Dr. Conti w s not so veil liked.

If th-y wanted t' c ontinue In the tradition as established b; 1..

%

'! gncr; con aquontly they thought tr.oy could not do so in any better way th:
ty p/ pointing Dr. 31ono as deputy for’Dr. Conti, ns ho hd belonged to tho
Inner oirdo around Dr. V .-jirl Tor that reason, by n specific ■order on tho

p rt f :!itlor, ho v s np.olr.ted ns deputy, sonet in/, which was in ltoolf

*

r.ot tho usui -1 course.

.. ak XDsnehl, wo will lator dc.-l with the <juostlon to whet oxtont f
Dofondnnt Dr. 31o=c knew of tho buslnoso done by Dr. Conti. 3ut first I
•ak y-.y noth r question us th t the coapotoncies aro elariflod. Coy,
r. Juri t, tell us exactly wh-.t the functions of tho Reich Leader of shylci'

* . Conti, w r T jul when you toll us th t, plo so say i n win t funct 1

:1 v r. represented by tho Defendant Dr. 31 one. ■ > that we c-n soo tho o ••
-tone;* cl- -.rly, and also tho r-spoasl'ollity.

.. ?or soueoao wno does nit knovtho general situation anong Oorr.il
ysldans, It Is difficult t* explain t<-is. Dr. Coat! bocuuo Reich *-• th
: dor. Zh t vna hit title. 7a t was tuc designation v..ich, - e the la Aor .
the ..in jffic- for Puolic Health end of tho !\S. P.^sici-no 1 Longue, v b u*;.
to include tl.~so titles, the'e functions, .'.s 3 ich Fhysici-n L-nder ho iru
rt of the a-lcn Cnanh-r of physicians. In thos two c-pacitlos Dr. 3?-0 :uj
r TOEor.tod Dr. Conti. Over r-d ab/vo that Dr. Conti was also Stantnsokret
(St\to Socret ry) in tho 3-ica l-iniatrr of ta- Inter or, in other words, lo •
3f the Health Dep-Jt:x>nt of the Govornncntal Health S rvico. In t .is crx.
hr. 3lo.no did not represent Dr..Conti.

U392


12 Itarch 47-M-7 jC-6-l-iSoofcon tint.. Brown)

Court Ko* 1

HO had nothing to do v-fth tho G<r ;rr=ont-a Health Sorrfco end l«.tcr
-/tor August 1942 tbo dofoal-nt, Dr. I writ, b'-ceao Solchs Ccrmlssionor
for Public Hoalth. Dr. Conti also toi.-rs culof of tho Civilian Health
Sorvico under Dr. Brandt. In this capacity also. Dr. Blow did not re
Dr. Co-ti.

^ If I havo undoratood you corrootly, Dr. Blono roprosontod jr. .

1y ln tho Roicha Charter of Physicians and aocoudly in tho Jloin Office r
lie Hoalth?

A That la corroct.

1 But not In the Stato Hoalth AdidnistraUon as Strto Socrotter?

*

A That la corroct.

rx now, I cow to a concroto pfint. Dr. Kosrohl, tho dofondant Dr. Blow
lo undor lndictront in tho quostlon of BithaaoSin; you kao* ia coant
by aithanrsla.

A Too, I do.

f\ Did you loom that in tho Third Roioh during tho second rforld war
thoro r-a a certain Juthaaonic. progra '• e-rriod out?

A Of tho fcithnnoain progran on tho part of tho Gorran Rolch, I ho-H
only la tho couroo of thla trial; thorotoforo I hod know nothing of it. -
poroon-lly concornod r^solf tilth th, quostlon of Sithamaia, I ron! r
' bk on the subjoct ontitlod: "Thou Shalt Hot Kill," tho author of whlc
Wir In favor of Suthanoaia. A* far as I know, Dr. Blow aloo trontod on
thin subjoct la hia book ontitlod: "Tho Phyaicion in oocftnt and *w ho.
takoh tho attitudo vorsus aithacc3ia without c lognl basis. During tho
-r and aa tiro w— on, I boliovo during tho firat yoars of tho wa>
'.□dividual oaaplnlnta vjw brought to :» in ny official capacity, ca:plalnta
fra; oocbors foxu tho pooplo who had rolativoa In Gon.cn Ilontal Inotltutions
anl they tcld no that they fcri hoard that tholr rolativoa whllo boing
transported fren ono Institution to anothor had diod. Thoso ltdivldual
cccpiointa statod that they doubtod Aotfwr tho doath was natural. It
was ro quo a tod of tho Roichs Physician Lo-dorshlp that tho truo c-uso of
death should bo chockod into. I, who hai to deal with such ca;plaints,


IS larch 47-i:-?jC-6-2-4'sacan (Intli ar»*B}
Ccxirt H q . 1


al, m I Bald, no notion of a aithanaslg program and had hoard nothing
of It. I h*3 first thoroforo assured that this porhaps was basod on
foreign radio propaganda or s coo thing of that sort, jor this ronson I
sutedttod those individual cosos to tho offico of tho Doputy of tho
Tuohror, nar-oly Hobs, with roquost that they should bo Investigated.

'I Dr. Kosrohl, you scy that during tho war you rocoivod various
ooiplai:..s in thin fiold; to whoc woro thoso cccploints oddrossod, roxd
t‘ •• addroasod to you porsonally or to Dr. Blaro or to scoo
to; plonso toll us.

A Alright; tho cex-plaints thoro woro only Vo or throo, no r.oro.

Tho lottors complaining I would say woro addrossod to tho Rolch Physic'in

'nnb r or to tho Wain Offico for Public Hoalth, today I cannot scy for

%

ro which ono, but it was ono or tho othor.

r[ Thon as tho Jurisdictional export, i prosvxio you woro glvon thoso
attora?

A Yob, thoy woro in :;y sphere of ca-potonco and l rocoivod than to
work on porsonally liko all ouch things.

1 troll, did tho a^iOhs Chanbor of p ysiciona or tho Hale Offico for
Public Hoalth, that is this party agoncy, did those two arGanizations huvo
-nything vhatsoovor to Jo with the .Sathcncsia progr-di? Juot a narant,
Doctor, ” asking you this to cloar up, to dotomine why tho complaints
woro aont to thoso offleast

.. !to, nolthor tho Raichs Chur.bor of Rjyslclans nor th. liain Offlo for

’ Health was moncorrud in this prcgrnn in any way at all; T si: • 'i.‘
itttod that whon I said boforo that tho »itharasia program of tie Gonwn
~oich was ontiroly unknown to no. If novortholoas thoso complainants t"rnoO

organizations, tho Roicha Chor.bor of Physicians and tho Uain Offico for
:blic Hoalth, I c~n only assir-o that th oy boliovod that tho Roichs
:ysicions Loodorship rust sore thing about such ovonts; on tho othor hand,
hoy turned to thoso organizations spoclfJcally because q few yoors prior to


at, whon tho law regarding harodltary diseases was possod :ony porsons
turnod to thoso Two organizations with c a-plaints in casos which did. not foil


12 “arch 7-y.-? jC-6-3-Jfeoban (Int., 9-own)

ZOfXTt Jfe. 1

'or cortaln under tho tor .a of that la'-'. Jor instances, c«.sos in which tho
arson was aot actually re n tally ill, but a narginol enso. Ifcon Dr. ".'ognor,
ij Raichs physician's loedor at that tir-o, who in contro-distination to tho
St'.to Ho alt h Sor.'ico, was groatly concoraod that this ^aw should not bo
broadly constr-iod, as tho statu was ovurdoing it, but ;soro narrowly cosuit.•
and only those ahcxild bo storilizod or troatai ir. his opinion uhsei

actually dosignod to covor. Consoquontly, ho took up those cot .plainly
r.'ustlgotoi tha . Ho ascortcinod ct that tl:a that ofton tho fniluro to
r ur a 30 -callod lntolligonco quostionndro was onough lor tho

ovorir.ontal authorities to porau.-do then that tho porson was nontally ill,

m

1 to nnko thas suggost sterilization. as Dr. ’Tagr-ar hino-lf odd, thin
tolli(onoo quontlonnairo contdnod rv.ttora, which ovon for i\ trair.od
-rsons, woild hnro boon vory difficult rad that it s qu_co isipocsiblo
o nnottor sororal of thoso questions in tho quostionnairo or. tha spur of
o necont. Ho otntod his porsoml opinion on this :-attar; that tho law
ao bolng adninlot;rod and construed too bror.dly; ho stated this to Hods
and Hitler personally and so brought it about that ho and his office should
bo appointed to inroatlgotc tho oxcoasoo being ca lit tod ir. tho nrtfio of thir
la'-/.

Kocnohl, then If I undorstaol "you corroctly; you :aau.........•

1H3 PRBD3T: H-y I intarrupt you for a noant; t!.j Tribunal 11
. r-Coss at this ti.va for a fow no. .ants.


(.1 racosc ; 3 takon)


1? itar hi-- -iAA-9-1-Beard (Int. voa Schoen)

Court Ho. 1

i

THE MARSHAL: The Tribunal is again in session.

Q Witness, you said before that various co-plaints about tne
Euthanasia question were received by the Reich Chaaber of Physicians.

You were given this kind of complaint and you passed then pn t-o the Party
Chancellery. I am interested in finding out why you passed then on to
the Party Chancellery. Why did you just send then on to this office?

A The Party Chancellery 1 was competent for all cceaplaints that
arose froa th- State or Party circles or froa the population. Since I
was not coapetent in the natter of Euthanasia in the sain office for
Publi - Health or the Reichs Physician Chaaber, I transmitted these com¬
plaints to the Party Chancellery because there was the opportunity tc
stress these complaints on the spot through the Party. •

Q Witness) did you talk to your chief, Dr. Conti, or his doputy,
Dr. 9loose, about these complaints concerning Euthanasia?

A I believe I did talk to Blonc about thorn.

Q Do you know what Bloae's .position was at that t£»e, what hio
attitude was?

A So far as I can receaber, I asked him if he knew anything about
these natters or whether there is anything to it. I also found out ho
knew no sore about these natters than I did. At that tine he knew noth¬
ing of Euthanasia program of the Geman Reich.

If you sent such coaplainu you received on to the Party Chan¬
cellery, did you get any answer froe the Party Chancollcry or did you
learn anything about what was being done about such complaints?

.. I'worked during the course of the years very often with V
rty Chancellery with such matters, and in general I received scae st-.
vents regarding what became of the complaints, concerning these few com¬
plaints about Euthanasia, I hoard, however, nothing from the rarty b -n-
cellery.

Q Tou got no answer?

A That is right.

Q Can you rtneeber whether the Reich Chaaber of Physicians or the
ain Office for Public H e a lth issued any orders or instructions concerning


12 Aar -9-2-Beard (Inti von Schoen)

Court So. 1

the Euthanasia program to the subordinate agencies, or whether the Reich
Chamber of Physicians received any orders or reports or statistics about
the Euthanasia program free any superior agency from above?

A In the course of our business I never saw anytning sinilar to
this nor did I pass on any instructions or orders in this matter.

Dr. Kosmehl, did you perhaps talk to other experts or other
tcloyees of the Reich Chamber of r hysicians, and did you learn from
:n that Dr. Bloae had something to do with Euthanasia questions?

A During lunch tine we spoke about all sorts of things but. T cir.-
not recall that any single word was said about Dr. Blcoe and about
Euthanasia in this connection.

Q Dr. Kosaehl, did you ever learn that your former chief. Dr.
Gerhard Wagner, that is the predecessor of Dr. Conti, was supposed to
navo prohibited any talk about this problem? Do you know anything about
that?

A Yes, I know*about’hat; that at a conference of the leaders of
the Physicians Chamber in 1931* or 1935, tho Chief of the Physicians
Chamber, in Sachsen, tried to bring up this subject at the conference
and spoke in favor of the Euthanasia Program. Dr. Vagner did not lot
him sneak, he interrupted his iame-dlately with the specific instruction
that thero was to be no discussion of this question. It was forbi .ui
'j Hitler, and was not yet ready to bo discussed openly. Consequently
'* was not discussed.

Q Dr. Kosaehl, we know froa the evidence given during this tr A
that Dr. Conti had a very important, position in the Euthanasia progran,
and, therefore, I should like to hear free you something about the rela¬
tionship between Dr. Ccnti and his deputy. Dr. Bloae. Was that relation¬
ship such that one could assume that Dr. Conti informed his deputy of all
details, or was it such that cne could ausuae that Dr. Conti had privato
contact also with his deputy and discussed everything with him, and what
io you know ab*~ut this free ycur own observation?

A Firet of all, I did not knew that Dr. Conti had any role in the
Euthanasia program. If that was the case, then that could only be poesi?


397


12 kar liT-M-lAA-9-3-8eard (Int* vcr. Sphoefl)
Court So. 1


.n his capacity as State Secretary in the Reich Ministry of the Interior,
because that is the ainistry »hich its ccecetent for these legal questions.
However, in tt.is field. Dr. Blcoe did not represent Dr. Conti. Insofar
as the relationship between Dr.' Bloae and Dr. Conti are* concerned I c-
only .ay that fcha relationship between then free the very beginning was
definite poor. Consequently at the beginning of ay testimony I state

t really Dr. Blow had been Intended to take the position of Dr. Coi.,1.
_r. Conti was a very axbitious person, hungry for power, also very dis¬
trustful of his follow aen, and was Drejudiccd against Dr. Blooo fron
the very beginning. Neither of tho twj understood tho other at th tine
they had equivalent offices in the Physicians Cnanber; Dr. Conti hid
the sano position in Berlin.ttat Dr. Blcee had in .cckUnburg, vis,
bauacts loiter, now, Co..ti became the Chief, and Blooe, against his will,
bveamu his deputy. C Q nti Ocv^r would hove made Blonr his deputy on his
can initiative.


U353


12 liar L?-u-JiAA -10-1-Cook (Int. von School i Brown)

Court So. i

A Also they were totally different in personality and philosophy.
Dr. Conti wet a fanatic opponent to to-- indulgence in alconol and nicotin*
wtereas Dr. Bice* took a coderate attitude toward such indulgence. Dr.
Ccati was wr/ anbitious and distrust d even his clceest collaborators,
particularly Dr. Bloae. Dr. Bleat on the otter hand liked to pur. •
rect path in all natters, to speak frankly and was above all not ar-
'tious, and consequently did not undertake Jobs which were not vrithin
r.is caapetence, that which Dr. Conti would do, and in general he wuu avi*c
tolerant and nodcrato. He had an opon heart toward all of his co-workcrs
und subordinates.

Q Dr. Koeaehl, if I understand you correctly you nssuae that the
relationship between Dr. Conti and Dr. Bloco was so tense one cannot
as subs that Dr. Conti inforad his deputy, Dr. Bloae, of everything? Can
you say yes or no?

A I can absolutely answer this by saying that Dr. Conti not only
did not work well together with Dr. Bloae, tut deliberately refrained
from infcralng hie on all important natters.

Q Dr. Kosachl, I should like to ask ono last question on the
oubj t of euttenasia. Sow on the basis of the trial we know that th<
4~.ocution of tho euthanasia pr-ogrr™ was in the hands of the aatoosr-U
d directors of tho insane aouluss. *111 you please tell us were thes
ciflcial doctors and directors of tho insane asylucs under the Ik "cl
Chanter of Physician a and the discijlinary power of this organisation,
or wero ttey not?

A The SS physicians and SA physicians and physicians of tte Reich
Labor Service, tte official doctors (Antsaerate) were not under the dis¬
ciplinary power of the Roich Charter of Physicians. They were subordinate
toa special state disciplinary Jurisdiction or to various organizations
of the party, tte official doctors were subordinate to tn. Reich Chaster
of Physicians only if in addition to their official activities, they had
a private practice of their own, and that was in individual cases possib?
and the.: if they cemitted any offense against the rulv3 and regulatir
in th-ir private practice then tte Reich Chanter of Physicians with


12 tar L7-^-LAA-10-2 -C ook (Int. vcr. Dchoen c Brown)
Court So. 1


approval of the coepeWnt office could take disciplinary action against
then, otherwise not.

Q Then you say that the Act3acrsto'dealing with the euthanasia
- rograz were not under the Raich ChMber of Physicians and Dr. Blonc.

If these doctors received any instructions on statistics and so forth,
did they get then from Dr. Bloec or through the State Health Adninlstratl
with which Dr. Bloao had nothing to do?

a In gonoral we did not receive such instructions at all bees
the Reich Chaaber of Physicians or tr.c sain office for public he? 1 *
thing to do with Oeraan Health politics.

$ Doctor, I asked you whether the AntXaerste got their instruction/
and reports through the Reich Chamber of Physicians or whether t.. . ct
It through the State Health authorities?

A I oisunderstood the question. Thu Antaaerxto received th.
orders directly fror. the State, freo the Helen ministry of the Interior,
not fren us. The JLlch Chaaber of Physicians was simply unC.r th.. super¬
vision of the Reich ministry of the Interior but had nothing tc do with
it actually.

And If theso public offic. .is of th e dical administration,
tho Aateaersto orvi heads of the ins asylums, sent troorts In, then
the Reich Cha= or of Physician* did not see th.sereports?

A Under no circumstances did tho reports of tho Antsaurxtfl g<-
the .ich Chamber of rhysicians. Such reports went to their superiors,
-long tlx. official channels totte ministry of tho interior.

3 Dr. Kossohl, in connection with ycur description of the ro-
Utionahip botwoen Lr. Conti and Dr. Bloat, I aa interested.in at!v •
thing, because we have hoard an or rt who made several disguised •. rgof
against Dr. Blase, ani nade Dr. Blcoe responsible for conditions ir tho
-edical profession, in particular, the eliaination of Jewish doctors stop
by step froa practice, did Dr. Blcoe have any part in these acasures?

I an referring to the limitations icooscd on the Jewish doctors, and then
tho regulations, they had to use the naac Israel, and they had to wear
‘he Star of David, and so forth. Were these orders of th: Reich Chamber


4400


12 *-'-T k7-e.—J-.A-lG-3-Coek (Int. von Schoen 4 Brown)
G:\irt Ho. 1


of Physicians and did Dr. Blceac have anything to do with then, and if so,
how?

A Dr. Blaau did n^t have any part in these things. Also measures
on tr.e part of the Reich Chamber of Physicians or the office for public
health were not taken against Jews. After Gustloff was murdered in
Switzerland and von Rath in Paris, reoirsol erasures were introduced
against Jews and also measures to eliminate Jewish doctors. Tne Reich
Doctor, rather Dr. Conti, was ccnsisr'oned at that tine to carry out the
necessary regulations in this field, and he commissioned in turn not Dr.
Bloox, but a certain Dr. Grotto in Berlin, who was the loader of the
Kassc .rztlichtn Vercinigung of Germany, an independent organisation
for panel doctors within the R*ich Cftnsbcr of Physicians, »lich advle. . 1
i. O.-rxan population, so far as they were subject to social security,

:>d among the population th«. Jews also. Dr. Grothc at that titu err'ed
out tneso acasurcs on orders frea Dr. Conti, and I can remember that
the Reich Chamber of Physicians in -unich, and thus also Dr. Bloae,
llko all foferente in Munich, received these orders as an acccaplisbod
fact but in working thta out Dr. Bloco was not in any way involved.

Q Do you Know, Dr. Kosoehl, where theso regulations originated,
these restrictions on the Jewish doctors, and at a later tine the exclu¬
sion of Jewish doctors free practice, the regulations about the nine
Israel, the Star of David and so forth?

A A3 far as I know these Manures originated with a government
office and not froa the organization of tha doctors themselves, but a-
not only to * he doctors but to the whole of tho national economy.

Q Thun, in other words, th«. Belch Chamber of Physicians r-s
n .xecutlve organ?

a As 1 just said tho Reich Chamber of Physicians had nothing to
:c with these things, but simply was theP.ysicians' Union in German. , A
because it had to do with social security it was the executive offic- for
c-rrying out these measures, and perhaps Dr. Conti suggested Dr. 3rot.

Wjc leader since he seemed a particularly good person to carry then out.


4401


12 Mar liT-a-JLU-lC-k-Cook (Von Schon 4 Brown)
Court No. 1.


There was a directive at the Reich Chanbcr of Physicians that had a per¬
manent deputy and that he occasionally can give soaeone a special
assigrsent, ani that was the case here just as earlier Dr. Grothe
becane the leader of the public office of the Chaabcr of Physicians in
Berlin. Also in other cases this pat was pursued.


liarch 12-/#-eJC~il-l-Grcss (J^t* Brcwn and Yen School)

Court So. 1

Q Dr. fcosceci, dc you knew that in the course of years the relation'
between Dr. Blcee and the Reich leader of physicians. Dr. Cer.ti, be cane ::
tense that t the end Dr. Blcec ever. :?cJcc at public aoetinrs of doctors
against tho plans of Dr. Conti? And, when was this?

A I n the course cf the years tho relationship between Drs. Cent.'

Blcm became werse end worso. The reason for this was that, esi V jv -
rscnality differences, they differed in their opinion or. basic nail . .

Bleme was interested in the removal of physicians in general from ti,c
influence of tho party, to keep physicians clear of politics alt: * r.
Whereas, Conti construed his office as Chief Health Officer as purely pel-’
Thus already in 19fcl Dr. Conti, for personal advantages sado a oar.. 'so
with Dr. Ley. who at that tine was planning a health program for tho whole
Goman people. In this it was provided that all Gomans, net only workers,
also those privately insured, should be brought under a unified national
insurance program. «nd, in connection with this, of oiurso, priveto inour
should eoose to exist so th<-t It wcull not bo possible to chccoc tho phy:
one wanted frcoly. Hew, cf course, -11 these natters affected the German
physicians very intimately. Dr. Blcne objected and oppocod energetical!•
these plans cf Dr. Conti. They quarrdod net only on this matter, bt
turn ' to tho Party Chancellory fer assistance, and Dr. Blcao did roc. ivo
assistance free the Party Chancellor} - in his opposition to Centi's

Dr. Loy's plans. «t that tine Dr. Blcee was ooaaissior.ed Vy Boauu.

. rhaps without Conti's knowledge, to work against these plans, r.v'
so with tha Jurists in the Party Chancellory. Blcao also called pullie
n.otings of German physicians, and there openly opposed those piano •r tlu
socialisation cf medicine, for caking physicians officials in tho group,
and sc on. It was also planned in this program to appoint a number of
physicians for a certain number cf Germans and to give then, official pcsiti
31cmc, as I say, brought these natters up in public meetings, and I attends
one in Munich and saw with wh t enthusiasm most of the German ph} - sicians
•rested Dr. Blase's remarks, seeing him as a representative cf their inter..


4405


It rch 12-if3K-il-2—Cress (I n t. Brcm aaj von Schcen)
Ccurt Ko. 1


I knew aloe that because of these open -cetir.ra Dr. Blcnc had greet

troubles with Dr. Ley, who did not want Blcae to interfere openly in

these natters. Blcae was forced by Lay at that tiae to break off hi:

plan for public coetings which ho had planned for nany large c'-l .

.cd already spoken in Hanburg and buesaeldcrf. Because cf tb 3e ni

r. Ley wanted to bring Blcae before a Party Ccurt, charging hie with

carrying on activities prejudicial to the Party. But, because of -r.

Beraann's intercession this proceedings was dropped.

Q "itness, you said that Dr. Blcae approached the Party Chaj.c l-.ry

for support in hia battle for the free sulectfcn of the physician. That

is, tho right for overy patient to cell in the ooctor he wishes, end

•

also in his struggle against socialization of tho nodical profession.

Now, did you lcam that thereupon that Dr. Conti gavo an


«04


Z -vrt I

12 'ar U7-M - ICO -


11-la


rcer that Dr. 3loro should no longer go to higher r nrty agcnc' >s
to th_ Ministry for inf oration and Could ret report undesirable condi¬
tions*’

A. Yes, I knew that. This was in shoot 192 j 2 or 19h3: then !>r.
Conti issued an order that all the specialists in his office in ,- unich
end Berlin, according to which it was forbidden for an export rr a
specialist to turn diroctly to a ?*'ch ^lnisUr, Rei chsloitcr, or s
Oauloi ter. Included under this ordor was also Dr. Pl^e as his 'ooutv.

herons such r'ors had not previously been issuer* tc Ocr-an ohysici-

*

And, Dr. agxver, on the contrary 1-t his Physicians 'hnt *h *• —j
This aeasuro of Dr. Ccnti'a surprised overyone, because it include'

"r. Plena who was his deputy. «c, in Munich at least often discussor*
this, and all had tho impression that this roasrre was -ain'y ti ' at
eliminating aoru and swro Dr. Blcm.

M

Q. Then cpparontly y u assure, if I my draw tho conclusion
your testiac-nr, that or.o cannot boli^vo that Dr. Conti infomod hi a
deputy of his rt rr. knclc:so in all eases, especially 1 t us say in
questions toolin' with tho Euthanasian progr'-w.

A. I an sure that Conti did n-t d 0 that. It was part of his wholo
nature that ho kept such thir. s trhi-sclf. It is also to be assumed
that Dr. Blrra was not informd cf *• sc irrertant things bocauoo Conti
ftarod Dr. Bln.'s competition. In this centoxt I mst -nntion one
'thjr thing, which puts Dr. Centi's rlstrust t-ward t*. Bl«»a into
pr.- • lii^t. hon Dr. Bloro frequently objected to r >r. Conti
h« "as xot consulted in inportant natters. Dr. 31—> then ■^th'rcw a" 1
- ther free political activities. This was at the end of io^i or j t
A ht have boon 19C2. Dr. Bla-j oov.d frer 5 rlin to "unlch in \-‘ r
tc 'ovate hinsolf scloly tc tasks that concerned tho interest f Ger—ai
physicians, that is, first of all, mtters concoraint tho Reich 7
f rhysiciaro and tc devote himself to cancer research. It was particu¬
larly noticeable to all his associates ir. Munich, that at the sare 'i-c
Blcoe now;d tc :funlch. Dr. Cent! transferred two physicians frep Berlin


4405


Crurt X

12 Mar U7-" - ll-2e - LJO - nr-ss

to Ifenlcb wno enjoyed hU p-*^icular confidences. These were Vr. Rochrs
and Dr. Schuets.

Q. Dr. Hochrs and Dr. Schuets?

A. That*3 rif»ht. Tho latter had connections with the Oostapo
within tho scope of the nain offlc. for Public Health under T 'r. Conti.

So noticed that every week packages with -on 11 cawe t- tlv-.ee t*- ecnf
r-n lr. unusual Banner free Berlin at Cor.ti*s office, af these wero
ei. r sent by courier or In special envelopes 'n »h1ch was rrir.- - 1
- Dr. Rcchrs. Ih-sa voro inportant natters of official.^.‘sir ss vh*<
were sont to .unich fren Conti's fficc in Berlin to be worked -nj
-horoas it was otherwise custonary that all *-ail went thremrh V..
cfficlal rail chanr.uls_ f tho twa r$cnisat«rns, nar^ly, the Belch
Charter if Physicians an-* rein office for Public Health af thor. - *,

5lv«m to tho specialists to ehor it was ad rosso* 1 , s*- far as it ms
not secret or oonfl&ntial fitter. In this caso with these snociol
envelopes this tf.as not the case. Ihoso two workers sis- led us other
associates to bolicvo that it was thoir particular J'b to sun rvise
the officoo in Munich, Of to isolate Or. PJc~ frrn all Iwwrtnnt occ*'-
roncos and o - far as I can Ju:Vo th -• woro lor^oly successful In this.


4406


12 Jfcrcfc h 7-M-.. 7IV12 -i-Karr <r> r (Ir.t.Bmwn an! Yon Schcn)
Court’ So# 1


Thus I reneabor a case which concerned tho reform tion of Gernan social
security, in other words* a field in which Geroan physicians wero cost in-
rately into rusted. In a aattor so inportant as this. Dr. Conti stated his
position in Berlin to tl» Reich Ministry of Labor an! to the Party leader
without saying a word about this to his Doputy, Dr. Bloao. This occur:'
like t o previous ones, lod to a fi;ht botwuen tho two non. Dr. Blorao, ib
law* fren hearing it fren hie hinsolf, oxpressod hinsdf not only to
*r. Borman in the larty Chancellory and put all his offices at thoi:

.. 33*1 • Under thoso conditions ho did not want to carry on ary further
official activity. In othor words, h.j wanted to resign. Neither Dr. Ccnti :
Boncann accepted his rositnation on tho grounds that this was war tl~ and
that ovoryono should ronaln at his post and do what hu was asoignod,

Q Dr. Xosnohl, do you know that Dr. Conti went so far as to issue
written Instructions to tho personnel of tho Reich Chanbor of ihysicians sa;.
that Dr. Blcro was to deal only with uninportant things - that all importer,
-attors wore under Dr. Conti hins&Lf?

A I knew of such an order. I saw n aonomivhin of Dr. Conti's perse
ly. It was s- clfically rentioned in this mnornn un to Dr. B1 c:jo, that Dr
Conti ru-iorvod for himself all inportant nattors and that Dr. Blcrnc was
ol only to ' -al with incidental an’ uninportant natters hiisftlf. On tho -u.
of this ticaorandun, Dr. Blcne reputedly said to us, his associates Ir
■'•vat this was oiMugh for thin, that ho no laigor wanto l to work under t* •*
:itions. Ho wanted to return to his privato practice, or dovoto hinst-lf ,
cancor rosoarch exclusively. Ho was so serious in this intention that .;u hi.
'oubt that ho would cany it out. Vo specialists in Wrnich, who bolonrji t Y
irnor cirda of friends, then tried to porsuade Dr. Bloce that this tu , ...*i
Impossible. "to pointed out to hie that he would bo betraying Goman physicls*
if ho withdrew when 'r. Conti was not cencorninr hinself in the interests of
Goman ptysieians at all. It was an opan secret that Dr. Conti, as Reich Hoa*
Loader, paid nore attention to C-eroan rddwivos - his nether was leader of ir
than he did to Goman physicians. Dr. 3lono had an open ninJ in this natter.


4407


12 March U7-4t-A7I>-12-2^tarrow (Int; - Brown and Von Schon)
Zxrt So. 1


so retained in his official capacity.

q Dr. Kosnahl, do yru know that Dr. Conti repeatedly attempted to
tavo Dr. Blcce e Ha l r ated completely froc his offices? If I an not mistake •
tids was with the aid of a certain Dr. Xaufnann. What io ycu know about thf
A *hat is correct. I hare already said that the relationship bel
those two non .-ot worse fren year to year. After Dr. Blcr.o ceased concr
fcinsolf with political natters altogether - as early as 19lj0 - he wont
cancer research vory deoply, and later devote 1 hinself to tuborev* ’*
rtto scientific papers ir. these fields which wore written for the Ctni ;.r.

..arty offices. Ho pointed out to tho Party that thoso two sicknesses c

%

rro human livos than any othor diseases, and he wanted to inaugui- , 1*
h\Lp of sciontific research, a covenant to assist people sick with tlwso
diseases. Ho also inf oread Dr. Conti of what ho was planning bocftueo .:•>
eur»d that Conti would loavo him a free tend in this; but whon Dr. Conti sa
this material ho interfered inodintoly an' forbado Dr. Ulorvj to son.’, there
papers, that he had rritten, to Hitler or to Party officoe. Ho askod hin to
rdvo thoso papers to hlnsolf Dr. Conti, so thit Dr. Conti could transmit t!


3ignod with his nano to thua to ilitlor. It is un tors ton 'ablo that

Bloro objoct • to this. On tho oth_-r n!, it was in tho very naturo of Dr
Conti that ho answered that in political sphoroa ho ha 1 had puccobg in m
'lff< ront branches, an! it was obvious that h* wanted to take all tho .


this rk of Dr. Blooo's, Dr. Bloc© thon, in opposition.to Conti's ins frue.


his paper to Dr. Bormnn with tho requost that it bo transnittc *
‘itler and info rood Dr. Conti of what ha had done afterwards throur-h a
•n ordor to olirdnato Dr. Blcno, Dr. Conti had earlier taken a Gnu. . •*. -

frin Steyorsark; nanaly, Dr. Kaulbann, with hin to Berlin aa his porn nil
advisor, particularly in tho important natter of Dr. Ley's health c. s.


viffcann was to bo his advisor in this mattor an! Dr. Xaufaann was able, in
course of yoar3, to pain Dr. Conti*3 ccnplotc Confidence, an-’ he exorcise I.
influence in all fields and ruled Dr. Conti, in ill thoso fields. At the on
1?U3, or th, beginning of 19U^, Dr. Conti -avo a retaliation to all collator


in Munich an! Berlin in which it was stated that all important natters sheu.
• 44C8


12 Ifrirch Ji7-^-..TO-12-3-fcrrcw (Int.~3rc*m and Von Schcn)
Coart So* 1


first be submitted to Dr. Satrsam, and, only via Sonflaam, should they prcc
to tho indivi ?ual socialists. It was specifically emphasized horc that Dr
Conti's taro deputies - Dr. Blcoa for tho Reich Chanber of T-hysicians and ti.
Office for 1 'blic Hoalth, end, on tho other hand, Dr. Qrothe as the leader
tho Karsennerztlicho Voreinisung I>3utschlar.da (Goman social socurity)-
not except froa this measure. This sKasuro on the part of Dr. Conti o .
aroused tho protest of both Dr. Blor^j and Dr. Grothoj and, in thd t

Bloao turned to tho Party Chancellory for support, an’ micco?;*.

.- far os this broad interpretation of Kaufbann's plenipotentiary powur3

liaitod. But so far ns practical purposes wore concerned, he retail- ..v..:.

*

power he had had*

TTE PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal will now bo in recoss until IS¬
C'. recess was taken until 1330 hours, 12 I'arch 19ls7)


4409


v-a Sc on)


n+ 7

u - rch -a-JF- 13-1-?o:r (Ir.t. 'ra - .


"C .urt I


T-: Ifcrsonc in t c rtroor. till please fin;' t eir seats.

Th- Tribunal is ig* n in suaeitn.

HEB^T KCS 3 L - Reaured
DIRECT • ,'J.TKii - Continued.

Dit. S.JJT (Counsel for tiv. iX.-fea'--at -lo.-_:)

■i. “v. loffachl, boforu th- naan roceas 7 u w_ro sp. Itlnj, >1 the rela¬
tionship botKi«n Dr. Conti m Dr. .-i the

court will K. .1- to jndgs » no ean oeeiao th t Dr. Conti infer,.

h‘3 oputy oi 31 _t-ila, fcrex-.-ple, crneomir.f ^cuthw-si'., an yu told
us that Dr. Slave r.p-tu. ly offer;-' his rw3i .n-.tion but th t if is not
aecopto ’. , 1 * ■ i.

tutw.cn tlwa. tro-.r-s ie b- • is ? u -v .scriVo' itj th.n c-n 3 u any why

Dr. Conti i ''ct aircly fir isr. "r. lo , :. thJi v . - Intcv Dr.
JCiuftmn, f r ex- pie, whoi yi.v .ti tu .

... I -a '^“liny now with »- qiwaf <.n torn when

I a poke of '-.nti's bein*. crlK ’ Reich's toalth leader on.' : *r. TLan u ~ a
til csMaf.nt. ..t tint tlae I sal! Dr. i-.._ woe Explicitly rcuv.! Dr.
e.r.ti'a uty bwC'.uo. it was visile* t.; . .r tilers, -a established by
C.-. ■' r,.ri ul' carriof or, by >:*. Jlo.u. It w-.e not '- •. u onti'a

p<«v.r t-* ? iyvi.it iiio own :'uput7, %cr c ul * he Jiiw me '.oputy ;n ills jwn
’U.;uth he c_r‘. • nlytottld have iikw ’ to.

)• ink that was the. Jr. Conti had t- r. ‘Just

nl self t lv*vA:. a deputy who- he cvul' .: t agree with?
a. lea. /

Q. Dr. Kcarvrl, yen tol ‘ oa this nonun \ this Dr. Conti was
r.prasentcd jvy Dr. “loac in th. .3 h't Gi.'- -_r f i-.yoici'-ns 10 >’ 11 no


Li th.hiblic ile-lth?

/£>• ■. "A


> ■ r • ; ;..'lth' w-.s n.t tr-nslutcc!


U*. \ . , i

T.ry'iwll, f- .rv.-n JxprLSzi

it Milt


n is ffhvQtessi fvop Volksgcsunfftcit*. I


to t ell ycd


kin:'. ~n -ifice tr-twis, *"s it a st-.to office
4^1C


j, - rc ---v'?-13-2- -3t4.r (In-, ~r -.n: *u. ‘ von Sc on)

Court I

cr ccc. v it* of ice rns it ;.ur.l/ rty ofiicc?

... .r., aa the nedeha Cfccfccr -C r jsicicns ww purely a professional

society, t • v .t fuer Voiles 0 uaun/; tit was, sc t: s-y, the he 1th office
of th. pert , roly p rty * i=h had nothing t ith >vemr-ntal


i. .*■ since the p-,rt> office had actually nothing to V. with - -.sia,
■ ~-t th s Hnuptant filer Volltc'esundhwit have t <*c ..ith outhdaasir.?

wanted clo -

Dxtjr, la it .r e t t in t v -n c 1 -ms b-c ' £ difficult Wv<T^
for .x- iple. Dr. - ntt. regul rly *

appwn»dan! vie* ruraa, bcciufc. J ai to- r=nu * t. v.id n-ttn on&

tnlkln no »:t - ficial rr.tter»?

... ‘h't is correct. leas’ . t.< i Ui." .• ul ! r .thor soo

cnch t5k.r fr.. ck i '* •

l, r t void this c-n il.'.n, Or*. dlotw. i:i 19U1 issuppbsod

3’i .-ti r. a . . r, J * : r ‘tl UK*. Dr. Bloioo,

should * t th-ft r.t iltormtciy a t-rt w ul' oe at t .t "tv at lor n
erf. n l -a 9i Mat, ’• *.1. the othor waa at b end aftor a-curtain length
i exchange places. Do you


4^11


I


12 —^r-SBH-I3-l--3'oster-Int« brovra-voaichon
court no. i.


«cnow anything about that?

A Yus, I icnoY^ of this, I ..card this repeatedly from Dr.
Slome Himself, ir.d ho also told me that he hud drawn up a memo?-
randum regarding u conference in which ho made tho suggestions
to Dr.~Conti. Dr. blome made the.suggestion to Cor.ti particu¬
larly because he had tu.<cr. part in >.orld -r.r I from the begin-
• •

nine until its conclusion as r. combat officer nna not as a doc¬
tor. © had been decor-ted vdth the highest decorations,
whereas Dr. Coi.ti ad realiy never been a soldier. Consequent¬
ly, ae considered it necessary tn. t Dr. Ccmti should ,o to the
front since so many German physicians ..ere at the front, Dr.
Conti snould -Iso see what wont or. there.

% .It.-. subject of outhanasia

then and go on to .not., r pel. t. In t. lourtroo* rge

h a been r-isud . ;.lnst Dr. Dlome tM during tho Hitler per¬
iod medic- 1 tr-inias, post-gr du to training, suffered, that
the ethics of the modloci profession had fallen • nd that Dr.
bloat* vrs ns deputy -loichu It ;dcr of p.iypici.no more or less
wholly responsible for this degeneration. u*s your Knowledge
of conditions so dcop nd so o.\tensive that you c.n givo us
any infonartion on this subject?

a I believe 1 c.n ive ir.: 0 r.. tior. on this subject.

It is not correct to say thnt the standard or medical ethics
r.d medicel post-graduate training ,ot vjorso duri.ig this per¬
iod. on the- contrary, Dr. blo-.e received from the neichs
deader of cftyslclans, Dr. .-igaer, the t-sK of building up me¬
dical post-grt.du.te study, tr.at means, in ther words, that
-edical post-graduate training t..erctoiore h-d been at a lower
a age. The situation was that for m.ny years many physicians
tad had no . urthor tr ir.ing in their fields, at least so fnr as
I Know. It lay at the discretion of the individual whether he.
'-Quid do anything further to train himself or not. «nd so it

happened that many aoctors remained scientifically retarded

A412


12 #j-££K-i3-2j'-Fostt:r-Int. Brown-vonSchon

Court No. 1.

because they didn't v.-ant to taxe the tLje to attend lectures
in . ateis t-.-t ii ,ht have been important to theca. Dr. Bloae
put medical post-.;r_duate training on an entirely now basis,
both -s r voluntary fc sis and s a physician*3 duty, ne set
up -odio 1 post-graduate training.


1-»lo


Court So. 1

12 Her -.7-A-i-i-l-i=H-Les» t r (let. Br-vn a VcnSchoen)


Q. Kov do you neac, as a duty?

A. In tho one case It vas left to the discretion of the Physician
end ves to be left so in the future whether or not he studied any certain
field further, *ut for certain specific fields, and, as far as I recall,
this applied Particularly to specialists, certain arr/uvenenta for fur¬
ther study verc nedt and this study ves nendatexy. If the onysician did
r.:t attend hu could he fined. This vas nccosaary because n lar^e nxnber
German physicians had specialised in a Particular field and did not

know the hunan tody as a vkolo orrfeRls:: but sl-nly cav the or^anls.n es a

*

vfcole free their orrticul or field of special! rati on, and this vas to bo
avoided.

if 1 have understood ym correctly, Hr. Blcne issued regu¬
lations that K*.r.crcl practitioners had to continue tholr studios, is
that true?

A. It is.

Then vhert did this training teko olaco? Is it t Tx f that in
tho individual Onus or in the individual provir.ciil offices there wore
such training c.urso, d- you know?

A. That depended. Thoso courses depended on local conditions.

They took place in university roosts or in health centers or nlacos like
that. aIs. in Alresc in Kecklonburg such c urscs vere hold.

Because of this nodical leader school at Altrcso, I ropcat
Altri.ce, ir. Hecklenbur^;, i s-xcicl chrx r ;e hos been raised o^ainct Er.
Blor.v here. It has been assorted thet it ves the obligation of each
d.ct.r to s-^er.d a fev vcoks every year for several years at this podienl
Bchw.l in Altrese. Is is true that there ves this obligation to attend
this school at Altrese?

A. That is not correct. Kcthor, Altroso, rs you car. see in the
aare itself, vas thought of as e scho-l f-r nodical leaders - ns a
juehrerscfcule. Thus, primarily, functionaries if the nodical profes¬
sional societies vere concerned here. Tho Seich rtysicians Leadership


used this school in order to instruct the local physicians' leaders to

- 4414


Curt Sc. 1

12 Mar 47-A-14-2-5Ejt-Lesser (let. Brown & YonSekoen)


inculcate the-, vith their ideas, to sake Certain -a'Oblcnt known to then,
such nrobler-s as concerned the body of ohysicicns aa a whole. To tfcio
extent one cen spoek of a certain obligation to ettend, but let no reoeat,
cnly for these functionaries artoag the physician*.

s.. “ r ordieery doctors vfco did not have any oosition aa function-
trios there vna no obligati n to attend this ec-callcd Fuehrerechulc?

A. So, none ft all. Young doctors vfco had Juct nested their ejtani-
eatlons jr had Just started orccticing viahed to attend these courses,
tut precticiag ohysiciens of long standing end socclelicts vere never
obliged to attend C' ursee ct Altrcse. ,

Q. 2- you leno*» that this course at Altrcsc found grept approval
ffi'O: th«. cedierl nrofossion rod that the nu-ber of voluntary noplica-
tlons cv<_ry yerr w-s do Tort thrt all doctors could not/ncccoted? Do
you kaev that?

A. The list thing y u eaid is true. The rctunl stato of offniro
van that :.rny voluntary aoollcati-ns cult* not bu cccoptod boci-uce of
-vercr vdlng.

v I coked this cue'stion, Pr. Kotuehl, </nly tocruoc a chorgo hf-o
teor. rclscd rgalnst Dr. Piece in this courtroom saying that attendance
at this echo 1 vre obligatory. So, ro to tho scientific lovel of tho
Oer .cn -uCicr.1 nroftssi .n and Otr cn research, mi the cuection of Dr.
cI ca'b underv-rt in this connection. D.ctor, do you kne- thf t Dr. Blono
t- k i*. gnat lntorest in r.cdicd vst-gredurto training a an internn-
tl.ncl brsis? shat con y„u tell us about that and about his success?

«. In the field -f nedic.-l *>.st-graduate trtinlng Dr. Plono had. In

oy opinion, grert success. Eo rlco worked ir. tho international field ct

nsdicrl post-graduate training tad accomplished P groat dorl. That is in

the yvrr 1937 there vre nn internet* nal nodical ■jest-grrduato training

c arse in Berlin in which 44 nrtiens participated end which vaa carried

-ut with great success. Scientists of world rono“n wore there in variuo

B0,ciclist fields and at this congress, on the suggestion f Dr. Blono,

the cv-criled Internetioncl Medical Acede^r for Post-Graduate Training

4-15


C:urt 5;. 1

12 iter «7-A-14-3-EH-Lesscr (let. 5r-va & VenSchoeu)


yes fcon&ed. One ycer later, In the year ISM, Dr. Blcco founded this
ecadery la Budeoest. Gobalsrat Professor aorst vat aooointcd orosident
-f the acedecy end Dr. Blose sesunnaiscuoly anointed ^resident of the
Bornanent CocaittM*

<i» Just r. ulnuto. Y-u nontioned Ceheiarrt Dr. Boret. Io thnt the
v.rld feaju# cracer research worker of the University of Munich '•h' died
a few yocies a^.,7

A. Y«b, that la the one.

He vns ^resident of this Xnttrnrtioatl tendany for Kodlcal Poet-
Graduate Yrrlain^ - that la, a scientific institution f'-r nodical nost-
,-rrdupto training -r. m internetlonnl tesla - and Dr. Blcae, y^u said. ..7

A. Dr. Blone vj.a orosldent ef the ^trnaoent Offlco, thrt lc, nrnn-

rf«r.

And '.no yyrr earlier, you said, under the direction and roooon-
•ibility i Dr. Sloco thoro vr« an Interneticnnl Con^rooa in Berlin, I
bolluvo 1

A . Yea, In Berlin.

Q. Are you ewr.ro that thin c.r..rrcco, vhich vro tho v rk of Dr.
Bloao, vas attended by reiresontetivoa -f *H nations?

A. Shat la vhrt I said. Thrt v6 1 knw thnt oorsonolly.


-«16


12 larch. -ir-15-l-PKP- Csck (Int. v-o Schca L 3r»a)
Sart Ko. 1


Then Dr. K-sa-hl, I have nly a few very brief quest! .ns tc. clarify the
.rs-r, lit 7 f Dr. 31:aw. Dr. E saehl, fr-o y ur official activities and fraa
7 or private conversation a with Dr. 31::.c, da y.u kn.w nrrt his attitude is

• ward the nodical tretaent -f Jews, that la, what it r.-s. In -th.cr wards,

,.r he th-u at that Christian ct rs sh oK not tre t Jaws ar vise versa,

• y. u kn.w what he thought n this cucsti .n?

A. as re. ar '.s the erasures th tthe State ar.: n-t the physicians br.u lit
ut t oliair- to the Jewish oct-rs there ves at th. s-no tine .an rdor th"t
f r lu Jewish ct.rs fr-t treatin’ ecn.be rs f the Geraan a-pulati n -nd
c aversely German duct rs e-old n.t tre t Jewish patients. This was accirdJnt;
tj thj arran -i-nt y th* Knssenorzto Ver.in ur. , which I .-.Ire’ey nentionod
.f re. But it id ha~ -r. th . r , vr fa Jewish c enmity fell sick are,
n J.nish ct r .ms avail-' lo. Ir. these caa-e Dr. <1 -ver. in c nferoncos

at which I • art, rcpocU ly intod ut ir. •>« cits t. :th-.r ! ct ro,
his -pini.r. that it .-s an a slut- hum luty fra Gurr.-.n '• ct r t tales sver
treataent f a Jewish ..-rs r. un er such circuaot s.cec, r. if I recall c.rroctly
tc ala st'ted this t a C n ress ir. a* dloter in 1912, the quooti.r. havin’

.ut :r-u ht up specifically y tho Reich dr. -r f Physician. I kr. t alsp

that Munich, I ra n.t sure wh* t year it was , c ‘ ot r .nee in ouch an

• v.r ency refuse’ t tre*t a Jewish ati-nt. Tho -an jor -r So that ho would bo

tried an-.: Dr. 1 v o nce-m- hiaoulf roatly s t this question r. reported
r. this rr.tter. Dr. II.au s n t it th t this ct r wh* ha.’ rofuse t help

the ati-nt was /l* Cod ,.f ... 1 .r. .

!l *, Dr. E.s.-~hl, y u just us-- the eX.rcssir. "k-ssenoortzlicho Voroin-
raa ", a nodical insurance unit. 1 h've eon t 1 - th t tho tr nslati n f this
«.rI int - En lish i3 very ifflcult .and m the basis jf the translation aro

. s r. t ret very clo-r picture as t what s rt f an :r-nizr.ti.-n it was,

7 u c n toll rae very briefly.* wh t "k- ss.n «rtztlie he Voruinrun£" aer.ns, what
trie uties f th. -r. nizati n *er-, v-ry * riofly Just s_ tho Tribunal will be
ible t; hav_ a picture f wh-t s-rt f n r -nizati.n it io.

A. The "rl isson .ertztliche Vorcini uq n was an assembly -f “U th>se ‘jetors
•h had the ri ht t . tre-'t patients who »er- nen*>.rs :f the national health

ir.sur'.ace in c .-ntra—cistincti r, t- such patients had a ney jf their Jin

4417


12 Itrch 1947
Coart Ho. 1


L5-2-PEP- C--k (Ir.t. v^i Sch^n £ 3r:*n)


r through prlvto insurance called on a physician. In other w-r 'e, the
physicians in Gercany who were allowed to be r-hbors were ir.ciu’ue in this
■E-.ss&ir.ertslicfao V.ruini; ur. " nl .thcr '.actors were not -11 :wc.' to treat
tbair patients. Ihcro ,i-r,, I eli^v_, sixty pcr-cont of 11 the Ger.uan
physicians.

An the he .', t tills .r nizati-n was Dr. Gr.tbo?

... It was Dr. Gr-thc, y-s, wh-c I ror.ti nee*, this t rain:.

Dr. K saohl, yiu rent! .n~. net in as sin th t Dr. B1 ao cn'.oav r-c', to
h-cp the profession ut f . litics .as Ir. .• u sib Is. Ho trie ’ to

Litics fr interfering in th. interest f vhw rv.’ic'l >r fvssi.n. In
this c-nnoction I sh.ul'. Like t aek : y u kr. v that Dr. 31 ao constantly
ona'Vjrc- ir. vi-w of the. f- ct th't the Ksupt-aat F «.r V-lke.-csuiy’heit rn' the
a*in fiicv l -r ~ : lie h. 1 th w-r. unfor thv *n.ie porsvn, ho trie ’ to have this

fret chan-u.. bo trio, t kee the -- leal irofosai n, the he.-' of tho nodical

ir f Jssi n c ..r. lotoly <my fr *r. rty influence..

... Yes, Dr. Die' a. want*. t effects t. this sop- rati-n c ntr.'ty to the

ilrin f Dr. C :.ri. Role . H it.. L - r. .,t I ani this .a rnir.-, Dr. Conti

«rr.to t stay in cl &er tuch «ith .» rty r nizatl r.c an inieol wunt so
far that the Reich Ch'.i'«r f Physicians *ns t ' - c rlnatc.'. with the party
r nniz-ti n, thus f-r uv.-ry au that the party hr.he wante to out up r.
a dal char, it f phyaici*ns. Th t was n-t therwiso the c s-. .o hr fr
.xas. lo, in flnvrria, ne eh .a'or f physicians, nhero .s-this district of
•varis c-.nsistu f fivu llticr 1 aur, r.' it is Dr. Dl o-'a ichieVBont that
situ ti-n r *.aincd in Bavari c it was, a! the five chambers that Conti
•antoi! w«ru nev-r set u. . In Westphalia the situ - ti n was th- same mv' in thu
>-';ir..Lan I. Tho no physicians clrahor -f th- Rhino 1-n.: inclu.’.o ’ s-v^ral r.aus
r. h->re Dr. 31 ie was urn' lu t , re vent Dr. C.nti fra c r.'in.tion tho chcnbcr
f physicians with the art7.

Thun, if I un’orstan. 7 ju c rrectiy, y-u say th-t this arain was an
eff-rt to keop th.- a. leal pr fessi n free fr a th. influence f the party?

A. Yes.

w, c-n you toll o- with respect to tho last statement, what elf tho

'Jty -ifices have to say o-ut it? ‘..hat die! they 'io in -rler to retain their

•W16


■i-rch 194.7 Cook (Int. v-n Sch-x.n i 2r^in)

rt h.. l


inflnt-OCc :r. th. Reich Cheater of Physicians?

A . '..bet yja just sai.' is a t quit*, true. .Th- party <iiC r. -t have any
i-te influence .n the Reich Chapter of Physici'ns. It nttaaptu yo r after
war t j i;<-t such Lnfiuvr.ee, evon at th- v«ry e; Lnnin , in the ye'ra 1933 ond
1934, the . eich Physicians 1 1-* -r, Dr. a n-r, successfully jpp-.se.’ these
vf:.rts xi tho ; '.rt f the ..arty. «t thrt tiao «o knot f the claim tv c-xnplotc.
-.nvr th*t thu .’Tty exercised. It rope:telly happened th't ,n Ortspru. ponloiter,
r a Kreiolcitor r eve n a Gauleiter >r. his -.in initi tivo interf-ro! in
-i..ic-l natters, cr. ’. particulrly in natte-rs .f health insurance in r. certain
. y. Then Dr. a nor s-w t it that the r-ulnti-n w.s . “sc->i' accor-’ir, to which
such -xcesses n the part .f th. political leaders an?! interference in natters
thr.t c.nc-rr.e’. physicians wer- frr i ’.on. This prohi iti n was very L\ rtant
f r thi physici nc in oneral r. a s f re-.t hoi.-*. Dr. 31.110, ns tho sub¬
sequent representative -f Dr. '..a r.er's ideas, wante t. sc parr to the two

. y oh ul t bo in clv.r.o f the saao ,’ers >n.

juontly r.u ht tnis u f r iscurelr. n trie’ t httv* his way in this,
ft. ’iscuss.. this n-e with th- O’ or'-ofchloloiter Frio richs in ny . r-conco.
ftj was the political 'o.uty within th- . rty L -rshi .1 Reicno Lea'or

j r. -rir.. 3 r.v.r-n hinoulf r. th lea-in -e»ro v ~o r-fuse , h.weVer, to carry

tit this separation f the rl-ich Chan -r f Physicians -n : the nain office
f r jiu’ lie Dr. j-T.r nn even went s< far as ta f r . JT cention

-f this vffico -'n- - tirufttone his su! r in'.Us in the vTty chancell.'ry
with .-ir.' fine’. i!f they br-u/ht it up.

DR. S..UTE?.: Kr. Pros! lent, 1 hve m further questi ns.


•.-.15


12 Har L7-A - LJB - 16-1 - Putty (Ints. vcn Sch^n, Ercwn)


CRC5S-EX.V 'IKATICJ 1


BY OR. S"RV;.TI!Es

Q. Strvatiua fcr the Defendant, Karl Brandt.

'itnoss, 7 u have said that in 19L2 when Bran’t baca* o-.ich Cmt-
alssicnor, Ccntl becano head of the Civilian Health Service under
Dr. Brandt. Is that tru : 0

«. I said that this - rnin?, yes.

. t was the racial rolat Ip between C'nti and Brandt?

A. The relati on was one neither f subordination rr sun..ri-rity.
Tho a*—called I\ichror Deere-. f August, ’lr2, which na-=d tv. Brandt
as tho Reich C Tnissi-r.-r far health an vedicn] -atk.rs had <ts deeper
pjanln" In the fact that certain contra ’ictirns and rlanpinns between
th>- .dicol inspoetl n f tho "chrmcht rn the 'no hand an*' tho civilian

sect r ;n the th„r hand shnal be rcnrvtd. It had hanjvnod —

Q. itnoss, ’.'j y u knew tho 'xcrco'’

A. Y 3 , I <to.

I ohall oh -r it t ru a rain. It ir freu-nt v-'-oSq, Exhibit
5, 0:cur..nt B It 1 f the Pr Socuti n. "itn-.ss, if vu will look at

nu-b r 3 ir. the Decree, that is tho C'r.fimati n f rhat vnj have testl-

fic 1.

A. ??u-b.r 3 is ri;ht. The qu..sti<'n at that ti-c was sscntinliy
•hat Dr. 3ror.lt sh ul try to straighten things ut b'th <n tho natcrial
sphere* an*! In the question f p rs nncl.

Q. lh--n if y u sail C{ntis positi n un-'or Fr^ndt," y~u -»o,an this
r-.laticnship occ.rin? t«- the Decree".

n. Xos, that is what I -x.ant.

Y u called ?r tho Pclch si^n-.r. Is it

right that this Decree cnly appointed hir r -cntral C--n’ ssi-ncr, n^t
R-ich C-jrdssioncr‘ s

A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Inter h. becaex. Reich Cc*wrissicner.

4-.20


12 !<ar U?—A - 16-2 - LJ3 - Futty (Ints. ven Schren,

DR. SIH7ATIUS: Ko furthur questions.

caoss-Buynancw

9Y DR. HKESCMRit

Q. Dr. FT cschrvmr. f'.r Viktor Brack. ' itncss, y-u ware business
rsnagor f the -nin ffic« f:r public health an J r f the Reich Cha-bcr
f FTtysieians, is that true?

A. Ko, I was not business rvanacor. I ras leral adviser in the
syndicate cf those tw-.

Q. Y u sp ko this r. ming f tho plans which C<- n ti ha-* ab ut the

s'.cializaticn the radical pr' fossi n aiy* tho abolition *f the free

*

cboloo cf tho dcct'r.

A. That is true.

Q. Die! Conti dye yj tho assi. r.-ent t- 'cal with those ouostions
fr>n tha legal p int f viowt

A. Me. In conversation* -‘urin? lunch r In *th r such s-cial sit¬
uations, wa discuss . 1 this -nttor becauso fra c-nai^oraVo i>-rl<v' ~r
tine Dr. C nti was aich c neomed with it.

Q. itncss, nssu-irvr that C-nti had 'iv n yu such an ansi^n-ont,

' y u a/roo with ~u that this w uld. havo been a -Hfficult pr^blew
fc .cause thoro aro rr>ny factors t bo c-ns'.'orud nr an- 1 c^n 9

A. That c uld bo, yes. It was a very extensive w«rV if I nay
^xpross ayoclf. I n^v^r read it in 'otail, an-’ since it di<* n*t fall
within pqt c nfidor.co, I art -nly sup-rficially acquaint- ’ with this wh^lo
aafttor.

Q. ?ul ‘ you in this caso in tho 1-tal tavat-vnt <-f this question
*f tho s cialisati n f '.ct'r3 hav w spoken f n pr-era- 9

A. I can't cay.

Q. Vhat J 3 y u understand by tho were! "pr-rran" 9

A. Under tbo wrd "pregrar" I un J crstan' it in this context, that
oliborato erasures waro taken t~rarc socialization. In this casw, at
w/ rate, I do runeabor that this wus tc bo taken in a bargain a*-re or
l‘-ss. Dr. C.ntl did n t think aich f the plans that TV. ’ey was
pursuing. Rather Dr. C.onti wanted V pay this hi eh price f-r r *r. ley's
supp-rt tc bocruo Stato Socro tar y. the Reich Lab-r Ministry which be


C urt I

12 Har U7-v - 16-3 -UO - futty (Ints. ran Schoen, 3r~wn)


w:.s n t y.-t at that tiso, and because that is his highest edition,
nanaly, because in this way ha would buc mo essentially closer t-' the
Reich Health leader, an J in addition t the rth;r ffices that ho occu-
pie-' — ho was already a State SwCrvtajy in the Reich Ministry f tho
Int.ri-r — h- wanted to b.c--c a State Secretary in tho Reich labor
ministry. Then his p *er as health loader f the Ganran Raich would
have be^n c. ^)lotc, an-' it w-uld have nly bean a s-uill sten to his
final oal, narvjly, Roich Health -inistor.

q. Then, itness, if I understand y u c-rroctlv, by "provrnn"
y u renn a definitely c*ofin.d field f w rk which’is d e clt with accord¬
ing t- a certain «eth <i. Is that ib-ut right?

A. That p aid be, y*.s.

Q. Hew what -vi'unco ’ y*u have that th Reich G-vcrn-ent had

a Euthanasia pr-ora-.?

A. I ha r. pr f this pro gran because I '’I'’ nt Wi -f this
pr-gran.

Q. Then why v u us. tho t>.n "Euthanasia pr-rran" hero in
tho ceurtr r. as a fact?

,i. I usi this torn "pr-.*rar" because I have here f'und >ut fr-n
Dr. Th na that there was actually such a pr <ran, in' I had t~ assu^o
that It was a fact.

q. Ihon if I un'.ratand y u crrrcctly, y u t -k -ver a subjective
idea f tho lawy.r f tho Defendant Bl sic, w J that is why y u used the
r. r’o "Euthanasia pregran"?

A. That is true.

Q. itnoss, when y u heard ab ut Euthanasia at all, -*i J y~u
Hava anything t d with tho C* vernront plans n this ou st' -n?

n. That "as n t very p ssiblc because —

q. Lct*s n t use the w>rd "pr gran" anyrr-rc. It is inc'rrect.

n . All right. I hoar*' f these plans only hert In ry intermwnt
caap r ir. tho ciurse f this trial.

Q. C nsequontly, the legal basis -*f Euthanasia is as far as it

4422


Court I

12 Mar h7-A - 16-L - LJG - Putty (Ints. v:n Sch'xn, Br~wnl

«3S carried ut unknrgi t' you?

a. Ho, it isn't.

Q. D y-u kn w f tho dcc-ee f Hitlor -f the 1st -f T>torbcr,

•39?

A. I '.*'t kn-w ob-ut it.

Q. Then I nay toll y u briefly the c-ntents f tMa '’ecroe.

DR. F?.OF-SCHr..KN» ir. President, unfertunatoly, I n-t havo
the Coerce hure, but it is Ifccu.'xnt "C-630. At ;ha r*-ont T *4 n't
itn w tho exhibit nuaber, but I shall find it ut.

.. Vitnoas, this ’ooroo says tho f 11 *in~i Rcichsloitcr 3-uhlor
an* Pr foss'r Dr. K'.rl 5r*f’t aro .riv.n th, r sp-nsiMlity *f oxtondirr
the functions f curtain [net rs -enti nod by n'-c t tho extent that
Incurably sick pera-ns tA,- b. -iven a :~rcy d ath.

Have y*u uivlorstcx! no?

n. IwS.

Q. D y u agroo with ro that this was rarely an auth-Station to
certain ‘ ctrro t bo all wl t want a rrcy death'’

A. Th\ '.croc that yu aro roforriiv. t -as novor in the inter-
prutati n f this ocroe, if it r.a'*s an y u qu> to- 1 i t t- -c. T sh-uld
like t agree with y u. la- f tho sarx pinion.

H..PJJT: Y ur H'n r pl.oso, I -b;Joct t any answer t~ this
questi n by the Tdtnvss. The witness i n t su the decree? he r^osn't
kn w anythin.- ab-ut tho -Veroo. Oivin- his oini n f such a ’ccroo
is strictly rut f r‘._r.

TCS R»SS.'DS2-T s The bjccti n is woll tak-n. The decree sh uld
be pr cured if C ,unsjl ’osiros t- qu^sti-n the witness c ncomiar it.

DR. yp.CESCHHAHK: I bog y ur parr’m. Excuse re a --ent. Then f^r

tho tire being I shall g' nn t- an thor quest!-n.

4422


V


12 :larch 47-17- 1-7'C-ritxeoraId (Int., von Schoon -Brour.)
court yo.l


1 '.Itnoss, ::her. were tha cofayialcta rocoivod which you mor.tior.od
this morning

i I do not rvur.ter the exact date. It :mst havo fcoon around the
*i:a, 1941. I aseuxa it was about that tiro that two or three inquiros
of thin sort coco to our office.

1 ’41, *42, you noon?

A fos. That la right.

" "hat was contalatol In tho so co.nilalntc':

A A3 I said this norni.t , they Kyra inculrlos of tho Solch Physicians’
iiadors t? asking whether thoy knew tranaporta ver. taking patients from
c;j mental institution to another a»‘- tha. in t:..- course oi t..ose transports,
ationto dial an unnatural death. This is the Qonorol eoaso of their
cccplolnta thoro oro . ts about. ?ijy sail fro lafomatlon they hoi
resolved, they knov .ooyle had diod.

Did tho so ccaplnints rofor to to- killing of inso poraona?

A Yoo. At loaflt *1 to okobo that It ocncarn ioh Mattoro.
a D 1 J the contents of the tho so co .plaints indicated a punichoblo
action, that i:-, "3 hilling .*/ human ’• jinga?

A That s cor.coivabl'., but In tho oourau of a yoar, many complaints
/jttor o' a lull or naturo ca *o tbor.o two offices. Ttieso complaints
SSd not Boko any particular Impression, particularly, if one know that moot
those tilings xoro oor.t by pooplo or tad faith or eraek-pott.

a "itnaao, la It true that thoro u. j frequently complaints donling
• th ta, fato of scr -j relative rihioh •-.•ore cent by porsoao xho themolvos
rjr’j psychopathic ca-os?

A Tmt I cannot Judgo.

- 4 3hy did you son: thus a complaints to the Party Shoncollory*?

A I asplalnod that this momln. .. That was the genor'l preceduro, Just
v t few years prori oua to that, complaints c m inrogarding tho Implemen¬
tation of /tcrilizcticn. Ihoro is a certain similarity botvoenihoso two
l-e-*lons. sterilization ffocced lnE-.no arsons and tho inmates of .ontal
Institutions ora also insane. Consoquonily, our troatnon of -ho two
-'.tiers y-s the B'_o.


442 -,


12 s'Arch 4?-A-?jO«17-2-7itse»rald (Int., ron Schoon - Brows)
C« ' So* 1


^ Shat is your personal opinion, Titnoss?

A ?0“*

n You tax nothing further to do with t o 3ach.-_cp.si* pro^r-s in
pnctico, did you?

a :»*

You lid sot know tho reasons astbnnaai* was introducod In 1939. In
;;rir tOBtiBK-;, 111 you not confuse tho Party Chancollory ’•■ith tho
rirscollory of tho Fuehrer?

A »•

e Did you know tho Chancollory of tho Fuohror was cccpotont to doal
»itb such caaplalnt? f-cc'ho popu ation?

A Vo. 1“ ‘-ho eour?- of tho tor. :\Ara that I hold cy offloo, wo only
Individual dealing with tho Fuehrer's Chancellory. I do knew that
ottuoon tho Fuehrer'n Chancollory on tho one hand *r. Chancellory of tho
nputy of t!n Fuohror, lctor called tho Pcrty Chancellory, thoro xoro
disputes. Thoy.-lr.y close together geographically specking. Only ono
street lay between thou in ::unlch. I •••ont ith mieh cutters to tho
p--ty chancellery, particularly since Dr. 3orcwn, who wan n oputy,
remitted such things.

• If I understood you corroc ly, you said this nomine, tlmt you do not
,:con v/hat the ?aTty CUancellry Hi with those complaints?

A That Is trie.

- Then conaoriontly, you cannot ca: 'at tho re was no reaction at

-11 co thoso eosplaints?

A --At 1 oannot say, but so far a e hneu, there was no reaction.

^ Did you loam frees another oonrarsation that certain church circlos
rant cosplalr.ts to cho Chancellery of the Fuehrer or to any othor agency*

‘•to Soich Ulnie -y of the interior, for example?

A l!o. I hner nothing of that.

* Thor., l!r. -resident, if I aay, I shall qo b-ck to tho document of

1 Seytenbor 1X9, » 630 I should like to show thin document to tho

Itsess.


-,-25


12 ;:-rcb 47-1-rJC-17- -?1 tr -orald (Int. tot Schoon - Brews)
Court Bo. 1


T». JSTf. KIgr* I ash dofosso eotmsol wiv.t Lis intjntior. is in
ti»int this locroa to tLo vitnoss? I? it Lis intention to -yds this
uitnoar, a quoitior., .as osrort or !•. lawyer, as to nhat of foot this
toeroo or letter of tho Fuehrer Lad?

"r: S3 ITT* •; "hat is counsel'-: 7ar oso in o-t-inin. tho wltnonc
so tho st'j-d in cannoction irith this iocu..or.t?

D^.TSCSSCSXCT; Ilr. Pro3ldo:;t, I re roly wanted to ask the ultnoss
cso quostlor., ubothor tho docroo cf Puohror loads to tho conclusion
;i-.t thjro "-a - irc^ ...

IT.. "AT).': ::o objootioex, Your Honor.

?®D3*7s Counsol arjr pvooMi.

^ .’itnoss, have you ro d th docroo?

A I Juat ro-.*. it, ;oe.

q Can tho-conclusion bo dr-..T. faon this docroo that thoro *.rrs r.
^•csrar. of Suthra-sia?

A "O. that ir.foro: r-rm. It ia not to

to «oon fro* V-.i doouaoat -lor-. Ir - itlon to this, thoro ni&Lt
vr. boon "V'.'tlor.al or’.-rr boc-uao it saya hero tho uthority of certain
;'y.* iclar.r ie -o fc; onlarul.

4 I ' av'. no . . .• quoatioas, lj*, Pr'.tidor.t.

~2 ?83»X3X r ?: Is thoro any other ox-rdnation of Isle uitnono by
'.ofoaao counsel?

(r.o response)

.. , . Trosooution nay croso-o^-tdnt ;!*. -.itr.oss.

<rtcss - 2'sAX A-ic:;

*. Vitroou, luri:. tho cour'Q -hie an-filiation I voll dolvo
lot. i : :J-ct of 3i -:ia-la aC r arc r-; . I s'to that 1 , -3 - oil

- -I* distil. -13::-: collo-^uo, Dr. S-<'-or, cor.3idory, it as such.

"ou roforrol this noraln& on dlroct oi-nin-vior. that Hitlor issuod

- Trdor aafoiatir. 31oao an Do-"ity to Conti, “hon dll ho Issuo thr.t
s-'-or?


2^*oh 4?-.ir?JC-17-4-?itae5r»ail (Int. von schoon 3roan)
art %. 1


■


x At tho naaant, I c-nnot toll you tho proclco i*J. At ray ivta,
i* v-a la April, 1339.

- 4 »«, vihr.t u-a poculiar to tho ar.turo of tho iutioo of siaa
b 7 tills ardor?

I do not quito undorctrjil your enaction.

« .hr.t I driving at, “itnoss, Is 111 Hltlor o tlir.o hat tho
•ctlos of Hero voro ir. conn-action -. It:-, th. v-rl as posltionr hold by Conti?

I A ro.

r\ ’Toll, a«. at that tlr.o.

*

X Hltlor did not know Blccn Doraeonlly so f-r os I knoa. Eo know
Nothin, vary yroclsoly about Biota*a -or-oaollty. If 1= this dooroo, Slono
is auy.atod, thjn this aueioovion c frai Solchrloltor 3or~-;-.n r:ho was
| rc-.tl;' iatorootod la Dp. Bloc-. Ko :r.o" at. '-oU.

- i r^aitto you rocolicct you st-tod thin ooraiJt, that Hltlor ordorod
•la:; tc boca-o tho Doputy of Cor.il. !->.• I put to you thii quostion. Did
sot slo-ij h-.vo act-a sort of position ol lnflujcao tilth Hltlor or ho-./ did
Hltlor hnppont ct appoint ht_ .y ioovoo to bo r deputy to Conti?

A Butt o-ooo a out thro-... tho fret that Eoichsl jitc.- Borwarn was vary

---o ?oioh Phyololan ha». Dr. tf-xrnor, tho
vxaia boforo hla doatb, lot a loitor to Hltlor lr. -:hloh ho did not nano
•r s.joolflco ouccooooro to hi-solf, but bo soatianod In hie lottor, flvo or
ax lo-dlc; poroanrlltloa In tho world of .udielno whoso r.-.aos night bo

r . • no who wo: o horo


, adchrloltor Botcnnn ohooo Dr. loins. Ko know all tho pooplo
. dp cldod in favor of Dr. „la=x>. Boxmutt thon told
htlnr vhat M-* opinion txas ia this nattor.

t "’at tavu Hltlor ?r Bornanr, roason to bollovo that Blcco could bo
Mthfnl to tho irinciploo of tho Hoich Physicians* Lo-dor *T- nor and to

:ed«p?


Uh27


12 rcJ -18-1- ,-r (Int- r rr.)


C urt I

... ->Ie- v. ra ' the i u. Roicss .i-ysi.ci-n lacker h- r. t ml; official
osoo-ctl as • Itl r.. 't.. r, but i -r_ ,ri. s. filosi kr.e« _>r_caswly vhat

’- : • * -r ctors.

Cr. •...;•& last r teat t*.s! a t bo, i b tel •> - -at r„ tho

.•>rici".s, 1 r.-; to ractiooj

•at is to a-.y, in tho future nly A tr in. -’octcrs »'.r v. r_-t p~-

. 1 ole to this 1 r ...r'r; he -l,r.. late e th-.nkud

!:r i c f-.ct t . t lay pr ctlc'.i t-r:. \ . .e r* v; tc prvctice, OvC -use

31c - aucctaafully c<.r.clu-\--* t... lost .... tiatiena on this eubj-ct.

*

I . h e v*3 ^1« -'t r 1 *t: i t r ~rm?

... ». £ r -o I c n Ju I -1 i-*. . t.u;. c<- t t * .vth.r

In t:- c tra- of th.ir «ork.

” 1 . «ar -n..»rs f .ni f v-an't he?

... Yoa, c^rt-lnly.
t , Sc K".a r .loo_?

... -o r la. i ptrt y o her.

J. i i a.. ,olden rt; v.'t he?

..... r

1 . 100,000. But, -lu - i. -i e

f the; tty e .>.rs fch' r^Cv •. - . 1 -n nor^ry b*f!-u in 1 ?U or 19li3

ilont «ith ot..r cereal -» in - olio i. '• , lt um.h .* v.r. not

*.bcrs of the party, received ... r ry - -• bv.r~.

<• Ho-, Decor r, re I tin erst , . ail n tc'.o no in which

rstf r. r, iwichagosun’.leitofuehrc r,

Jret rv . st tc for Hoclth atte’rs in ti*. .rdatry of the Interior;
i t ri >it?

•*. Y-s, t is riuit.

1 . 1 o vc: is -puty only insofar . tl « s Reichsarstcftiohrcr

*' -.c.ic .sunahoitsfuehror?

... i is ri r.t.

•ry int-r.-.r supervise

■ a . .'•.- ..ichsu* 2 r_fu_:u_r r .. jRsiKltsf . r..r?

11*28


12 tircb-.WP-l8-2-3cirt ( A nt. ‘?roun)


Ccurt I


... r>_ U_lci tdatri of Iru.r.cr h* t f notions of t - . lice
stiy* it ■ 3 fcc i cii.-.r.t I’m in -v_ry spiwr. in* s >r ",8 * . r. matter
is eyxereo , c, i pin tent l-.irs iM ht“l t s.cvrity in contrast t. *.X

•

J:. in err .f bt Icily -*-h.

thi p-.rty leadership of th. ,'SV.S smr icr t -sfc in trie rer-ln A he-1th -a tho
1 ; cr f h\x:~: Ar^s in th. -tc* r. he-lUi. . . in tho ‘i forenti-.tion,

£t-.t vs. --Ich rlatry of I.tori.r, t.-i illuTentiition 'ntcrnina also

v«. r-sp-ctiv- s hurts ofc. r ev.r.c. . .... eich Ministry of Int r r was

*

npwior in this r-sject t.« 11 rci-sci.r. i : 'cities that ha anything
ts do with te-lth, art rnly Vr.-.-n -ctra bet -Iso the r f.:si n-1 aocietius
:{ re lata, ‘ootiat, an so ~r. \ -n t r.urata; t.- th-t xt.nt th. Reich
• iatry of Interior, entiat, an* ac oh down to nursosj to that ext ..at
Vie Reich .nxatry of Interior mis the u«v.rv.sory - .ncy over titc. professional
?,• ,oa- i no.

1. Mot,', yet* at t- th-t thfc Ci lUD itsftte r r Reich

4 1th L»- -r c neernu<* tft..-4S.lVeB -it.’: o rlth livsj ia that right?

... o, . .. .• • of -ich Health Put, r.r, the. Rolofcs

fty»icim Le -r of pur..r.i.aui .vl :.-turu, -.n’ dlUoi\.d ir^.i
tho ■ ich o-J.th Le-' .re taDci inly !•. t . £ ct th t *t. Conti m a elevated
the p-rty t. sucervirion v.r 1 i. err Very v . r .; thus the 1-tUr
lncl'i- 1 '.: t . .. - err ip over - tis -,z, rr, r.urs.s .in cviiyth*n&, but

.

f i cl . * - rtveifc. in e .. - i\< Int.rl r.

..... ’
cr.t-tr T ot- e in the .v_ic.» # listry of .nWrlor?

... :o, hen Dr. .igifc-r v s a till nlivj r-j _nly R-ich ihysicinn

-v.r, ii. his p rty functions a- irs c-ile ’ the eputy of the ’eputy

itiers »f putiic n.iUh* In other vorc's, it that tiro,
-n. w-s ru ReicbegcsundhcitafuJta'cr, ~icb _-lth KaJar, but Dr. ' n.r
;?h Physician U -r * ' *vis;r in it'.cra of -.--lth l ty le.Vcr-

'■•-P, jurticulnrly of th. ..icns.l. iEt»j Ices, in-' in - lessor n j. ilso of


U»29


12 .r-rch---J. -1 ;-3-'<-'rd (Int. or m)


Ccvrt I

fuuhxxr, nrr.-ly, Hitler.

Ccntl —.3 th_ successor t a&ncr .ieichsarztcfuehrer, ir ih-.t

rKht?

... Y-.s, tfrt is riuht.

i. 7k.r- »~.a nc connection ix-tn-cn t . u-.sk *n th- .no oi the
*. str. of i t.rj'T?

... Ih-Tw >-s nc connection butMeun the fctcj there v ia c .unoction
only to tfc. extent th t tit- Reich -raster of the Int .rlor h * to -'r..
if 2 no* professional Lr'-r :f any sort inclu in^ the. Rcicha fhysicim
Lcv’.r vr.s np cinte", r r a- pL., il -ru .-st leader or «ntiot L-n'Jor
were \-c :s. an - n-.r vna to t>e cltcson, then th- .i-ich ‘ ,ru:;ter f tho
Interior -n t ;e i-rty Chanc-ileo h' t- their », vrov -1 . •. ru.w

clcoticiii Tv is, in th- c-oo of be f.tysicii L.-.-’^rshlp ns not t!u c-s-
otcaoBe '.l th rank of the prof scion f .'yrician *uvt vie elect-' 'ireCt
ItlyTi 1 1 • . r a . ir.. ... . K} irtry

,f Inter* r .. . only suporvl* ary ,x r=.

i. jfow, y*-J stnU"! h-r. in nation to Dr. Ssuter, that

.-nor — -.s -. natter >f f-ct • ac-tw , . 3 *bl tc rucc&c i«i -ov.rnlnjr
ntr llin oi lass -.*• >net. hero . ... il, now, t

ooccssor, Conti, -is RcichoarxteKiohrtr, woul hnv.
tf s . c r city re r in,- Euth-oosln, > vl'n't it? -

. question is not correct Is. < io s_nc.. 5r. -■ • -

.t .fuehrer 1 • n. t havo th- possibility of i 1 -s-ntin.. or carryin »t
lavs on hereditary 'Pisceses, K- su^nised cnly tr.- State
- • • .. to the lee-1 v_ 1, -1 fficials. I .

. Dr. . tomb

: -1 i.-.tn t t cy. frt- the popil ti n, collect- the nos*, i rr-nt . . inte
• vl. th s.;ke in ; -vox- ox »<t c-oryin th. lav t strl .i.ly, and
■•ter - lecture, to Hcs. -n ’ itl-r, he l.ok plenip?tonti-ry jxvers
eh pottd hia to loresti- b :• s i t.

T. ell, then it is true thrt - rtr 6ucooct J od in gevonmv ~n c aircllin

1 * 1*30


12 I - rch-. k -JP-13-b-Bfi r- (Int. Br -a)


Cc-irt I


tc sc o extent th- execution or the iwe -mat h.rv<3tnry '’isonscs, wns


it .net?


u< Yes.

Th . '-.SI ?: Th- Tribun-1 rill trie recess.


L


Court I

12 Mar L7-A - 20-1 - LJG - Qrcss (Von Schoor.)

TVZ MARSHALLi The Tribunal U agaip in s-s«icn.

BY MR. HfeRDIi

Q. New, 'fitness, vfcat do ycu understand that Euthanasia includo'’

A. I was not clcsoly connected with this pr-blI <*n'y dealt
with it privately. I read a book about it in which tho author sooko
in favor cf Euthanasia; and in tbs resu’t I agree 4 with hir. Tf anyone
is incurably ill, and is a constant bur'or. t' his relatives and tho
population as a whole, then I p-rsonally would c^nsi 4 or it rieht, in
individual cases which have boon carefully in^istigatort, f'r tho Buffer¬
ing to bo ended.

Q. How, witness, I hava nskv-d you what 4 id v*u understand
euthanasia in Gomany t" inclu-’o? Iou have giv,n -u- tho thorry of
Euthanasia as yru understand it, but -’i-’ y - u un 4 cratin 4 that this
Euthanasia rent beyond that of persons incurably ill an 4 subjectc 4
othjr persons to exUninaticn 9

A. I cannot ji-.dgo that. I i’ n t doal with this ou sticn oven

nco.

Q. • oil, n *• thuou c •plaints that y t» -ontion d rotMr'irw tho
Euthanasia problem. Did you s»c these c rolaints v ursolf 9

A. Yes, I saw tho-.

Q. hon?

A. In tho C.-urso <f tro ti a , l^Ul or 1^, perhaps.

3- aero 'i ’ y u 3 jo th so? is that in y-ur -'ffice which was
p-rt -f the aoichsr.rstfuuhrer»s cffico’

A. This ffice was n-t separate ’, wboth* r It was tho ->ffica -f
the Roichsarstsfuehrcr or tho rain f'icu. The Roichsarztsfujhrer and
h ad -f tho Public Health w^re the k g p.rs n an 4 , c-nseaucntlr, all
the -ail was received togeth_r. Cttly tho a-’-'r^ss indicated which «ffico
sis scant.

Q. That was the nature of thoso ccnplalnts?

A. I have alrea-’y stated that -’cubts w.r. expressed as t-> the .
iccuracy ;f a rep rt received by tho relatives, acc-rMiur t- which tho

Uii32


Court I

12 Kar ii7-« - 20-2 - ' JG - Gross


patients h3d died a natural d_ath.

q. Veil, nor these ren-rts as I ur. — rstan J It »cre sh~wn t- FVre,
wcren*t they? ^

A. Id; not know at tho nrrvnt, but I ossu-o that I shown* than
to

Q. Die’ yu have any discussion with Blouo about thon' 5

A. I assu-a; sc.

Q. • hat did ho do about it?

A. &> had n- i-'aa ab ut this any nor* than I <'ld. Ha n" '’'ubt
r e co-mnd«n* that th.se or plr.ir.ta sh-ul* bo tumod over t- the ^arty
author! tioa.

Q. oil, n-.w was it n-rral that Blony sh uM 5m<-ro such cr-nlnints
as this - of a nature that j*.oplo wero settlor vi'lod’


12 }^re"--,^ T r-21-A-*?: irrcv (irst. V. . tchcn)


Court I

... It tza r t t-xcr.ss- ;»siti7-ly en c a, sc th*t ;no c ul actually
'.sacsi- r -r co plair.ts th~t p-.plt. vcr- oin : killc-. On t._ ,-„r

bftn'» -s I sai ' this corning, th-re ’r-r_ r. ;r--t vny letters ev i of a

t. s inference :’r ; ho r- io or fr .

ait aim- -•v.ith r th_ Reichs Ghreber cf * ysicians nor tnc Vlir. GT;tc* £cr
rujlic Health nr.: ever :c?.lth with ouch tr. n^a - I expr.ssly .„nti nwf* this
cernifl£ the caa- *h-n the first ^ichanorxtcfu^hrer Cr. Signer \y

prohibit-.' 1 th- lscuasion of ti*ls uestien - ... turr~ * these e. .ver

tr th. r-rty which, thr.u«h to. Oau cr r lis OX ic_s caul ’ i.vrjir. l,c~liy
M’* lrv.ati t_. Th t n-a Ul. . c_ ur...

1. cw, th.s- v riouB r siti :s 1 . h_l a* IX-puty - tt. ,y ner.
©encorn-:’. with h. tlth in O.r.vny - health <t tUra. th t v-.i Mb a.-.ciric
c nc.m, wasn't it?

..a Yu® a

I\v.cn't it a.e.- loeic 1 l.: t r ul exc-mt with auch a thin.
ia euth“na»ia?

... Ke i; .11 r 1 l’, £ s ro-lc ap clfic lly > as not
ta o_ -iacuas Tj -jV wa.s nat t> ee cnlt with, »t, ’ nacu *. tlrt h .r. th^
pooitlcn o.C ti:- church playc a very isper .ant r 1.; an i>lo - war no Cm bt
>rt xa b x -. • I r«, na a ley r-n, an -V . * t k. *ny part in tain

>luia -.aiVs, c loa.. w's n2y ... w -ioci. -o c.rt-in intervnla -
f ur v.wka o t ,~t it io quit- posiid. t- t 1 ‘i- n:t t lk t. 1 at all
’o-'ut to-a- in ’i-l u -1 cc-.plaints.

• > : • :
c atr-.l fch-w.-cvti.r. cf la/.s a tnst u.r. ry is-'s.-s, ' . ‘ .--he i

YSit.CBn.o! R-ifibaaerct-fo-hr-T. *t also foil

til'* h .. interfor-*: in ouch

J : successful as - n-r h:v' lx..n,

•

... I - i: r . • o t . . SCitj r .._ j chr v. .rzWiuehror

ution law, r. - -.r ias qilt tor iinry

n - r. -ut.crity wh in -v-rj r_ap-ct, in oentr-st t. .ms ncc-asor.


12 -.rc::-..-Jr-2i-2- arrow (I_t. 7ca Sc'. on)

Court I

Or. Conti* was recognized everywhere* Dr. in c:r,tr . i,

r.-Jthc opportunity of sowing Kiti-r .~t zi — he visa.* zr. t _r ress

• 1. r - r . - ,

Ui„ other b.’Ti, *.s Me successor, _ri.-. 3 rtv- yo re -e ic‘ O'll
-r. ’ Reich jhyslc inns'Lea or, with the ,

•*le 'o sped: tc Hitler for ton oinutes a. kerlth asttors -Von in -V-
v-.r. T -v.: , if it w-.s Kit stioi. r w i, . .. t'. r. v.r tho

. ritj Dr. •.n«n-r'9 oi - ic- - ii it to b

i-. Hitlor, although ho , iti ■ Laposribl. for

*

Slo-o t. See tin. cuohror, litlur, il> s. c~ they 'i*' r. t mo o-.ch

•.her nil. IVu .r.* n c... . • r r i . \--.c ilv*ya in t ... veny,

j>j JeciV. w.j-tlxr s_r„-. vao wne t. nldtu, fer n poracr.'.l rw, -rt -r
• | , ci»’

ri^ht,

,. , you rt to then, :ir - - . . r. t ; . _rn in C-ntrol fcho

jT ti.. l.-vB n.-inat hero it"iy tfibooM in hia ooaiti -o Hoichs-
aanttlwAaor, but sorely, beexe tho . -ct th-t V-«yv.r, bains "• hunano
person cir’ ixln; f atr m chirct.r, or u ..t Mr influence -n r- utntion
t: r if • t rvtiA ct. Ia t!i ri . t?

it ./.-ct :y, .j: 1 s~l • a

mttcrfl the . -r?>, rutf, in td& c , bitinu - ho nr In vhen
then: i. a t question i un .sir- 1 - c r.liti i tli.r qv.ta - in tic

■

.. '
tat it r-a uj un err, nrlne u ctili 19 • un -rct-r. in th -. nti'r

;

f i. hV?

... 7-o, • us. > s ‘ it.

ari , isn't it?


* k »


1


Wi35


I hr


23 ^rrc— ( Tnc. 7-_n 6ehon)

Ccurt I


-• -- - •

Is drt


I so-j^w tii t 31c-i. ics iust is littlu iitfoiute ib


i" xt-y.


*-» I v-.s, "js ‘ c • ! . .

tint ia t>.<i c T3. af the t J»u vhtl- I r-.n in idch no oti.-:* _ ic-1

■. :.S_ . in s.

-• r -0 rotait to >it.*wfc, t


, ■ fuehrer, Heidis*; -

• ••• •• • - • -• iR nay ahi.y rctlvittofl,

thit tli fo -.ctivities nly nrue*. .nt i hia j sit: -n •» Secret 17 cf Sw-.tci
in tli icichu .-da. 17 . f :.uri«.r sn :.t L hie p ait? n-s n.ichs-^rjn.cfu-h\r
'•»- .felcftr c/ un --.atafu.hr. r. Ia th“t it?

... T.vt ia ay opinion, rue b«. onG th-.t, Conti *me - p.r^ nal c nlidrjit
f t . T<oi«ho:V-hr.x S5 KteLf, »•» via .da ir-.ct aupcrii-r r.3 Helens
- r* r Interior, in’ th.r. r-.r^ r.ny • ..a . ...eh i n. . nv.v ’nythin


•«ith t!u : i.- . •.

. 11 , I <fc not sup.>.r. >tly . ii nf rwu* i., ■ ur

, ci-.i. n ii o£lioo, Odai -si -ct. may • jt r, t . t tu~t

? Im


f l! y m?


•• • , I Jt.o'. nly th. c ntr-ry. ;


•uy tr.-t tr.w nchip


•1 ■ i_r, t nt 1912 \ 1 ... ie

»


.


.


• » . . it.

* r

r ana thnt H'.ti£1boce

-rr-; ct n* . .ro-* - t. t t . Evvry • in ju ic*l

• 0 I 3 un ul r. . •. ,7 F --21 r inttast


Ui36


12 ..rcr.—* (Int. V a Sc n)

C ^rt J

» »

, i : " J t

hr ’ n - ri-r. e.

'• . *■ •

:;„W, -i-: 1 a» have *ny cocnccti=a with r jrcblraa? *>i ha ruyttiinf
r■ :. . a e p citg - L utj . ortUf -hr r : oichago-

eun IwitaiMJ.rur?

•. : v t:. t I Jaw of.

1. ■ell, : r Inst ..c-, Hupf--3v - ~,,rs.R . 'S . Jr-lf-J • • ~ a

r'colr-blc. til ft:.-, prm .r Sr Hity b. utilix- * f r t!,. of

-

Christian cr W.t.-vcr It b- Vrt -n^ht it nrccss-r; f r !*isi tj bo
a t\ : r r . subject?

.

1 , ■ v r f.K b r -r f bio

'nty v t *Vu hir t. t r.uth rit :7

- r v Ho* r the.

th .3. ■; lets.

.

r-ei-: r bl. c?


U:37


12 ’JfTch 4’7-»,-JJC-22-l-Lo3Sor (Int., von Schoos)

0«rt r*. 1


Ho no doubt disc us sod ouch thirds in ir.dividu.-a c -jje nrd norkod oa
thon, but ahothor bo vns o=r-s*orod to docido, I doaot know. I nysolf onco
cutcdttod r. c-.c to bin. During the w-r ir. Trftnco I h*i ft conc-do whoa
I rot in tho fiold; -ftor ho had gone threueh ft fa* b-.ttlos togothor ho
aatructod hiusolf not to tfva CE?-sy ccenc..dor but to no, pomoa aiy,
booftuoo ho *fts oao of thu tor. --oplo whcc I hftd hftd ftS ccab-.t a curd
ccBCtrdor. Ko told =o tbr.t ho n-s n holf-Jor, thftt ho fa.-jl arransui for
Viartorfl cad th* t ho vnntod to est narriod, but the JJurr.borfc Ift.ra a-do it
ir.poeolblo for hie, »inco tho .-arrioco was farbidlor.. I prcaisod thia
cccrftio r*.t thftt tiao th-t i would t-ko o-xo of this anttor, slr.co I xca
always chit to obsor/o hlr. parsaanlly mi «n.ov th t ho \:~a ft _ood crj'do
and a bravo aolilor. .'nor I c~r-o beck frta tho front I took u: tho ar.ttor,
and shortly nftorw rds thia r.-n erno back too. Ho had boon roioraod frero
tho cmy rftoc tho c-nFftlgn in ?rmco. Ko viaitod no nt :ay offico, nnd
ho told no n.b.-ut hia o<so again. I rocolvod hin lnr<odintoly, nnd I diacuoood
tho do toils vdth bin. I had loomed th-t in th-ao oason -.rhon n. porsoa
hr\* lletiagulshod hlnaolf ir. tlu war or had boon ; rccotod bocauso of
irevory, an oncoptioa could bo cdo in tho rulo agqlast narrift ,oa. sinoo
thir cna h-d boon promoted boo uao cf brnrory I conoid ,:oi tho Cftoo
ruitc'io for no to toko hln port. It happened that Dr. Dlcro wo in
::r.ich on that satw -icy, hnvinj; ccco fra-. Borlin. I took ny casr-.do to
Or. rvlcKo, end I told hln of tfvj casu. Ho irr.odintoly doclnrod himself
■tiling to do somethin*; to furth.r tho approval to marry . I lost oiflht
r. 10 cr.. o th.n, boo nano i. VS sottl-yi ir. different wry.

- i uoll, thoa, it io truo thftt slxm cculd ong-^j ir. uxtrxoly inport run t
vltcr ertsidj :f ... .r.cc;.j of his J 5b s doputy to {Jo. ti, isn't it?

Yo r, thftt is t uo, and I knot: thftt Blano hftd an acoi ..nriont in addition
to ‘•to C ftr.be r of Physicians ad tho Cffico for Public "aaich; far asai-pl?

-• •' 3 fiold of car.cor research.

' Kaw, rltr.osc, you Gtfttoi this ncming that thoco ra3trictiana on
f.vich lectors orlginQtol vitr scro othor govurnn_r.tal offico. You don’t
ri:2 lli offhand, aunt othjr povomrontal offico thoy ori'inr.tod in, do yru?


12 : larch 22-2-Lossor (1st., von ^l.con)

Court *ro. 1


X I 3-1- thla acrr.ir- that thoso restrictions ecoro r. Soich i^onsuro,

Sat tho Soich G O T o r a saat had t.-;-:or- then, -ri I -lco - -id that within
: :0 -:Alc-l ?rof-c;ior. tho Dobuty Chiof of tho C-o-rorr:oat Insur-nco Socioty
&jger:? c-rried out thoso regulations.

« Toll,sow, tbo Soichsaorztofuohror's offico, -a I unflorst'd it,
crocutod or c-rrlod cut thoso rost ictions cn tho Jowirb 'rctor.*, didn't

— tho Hoicha physioiaaa' Chaabor? Yes -v Ifc.?

"o. It ms c«t tho Hich Charter of physicians. It wan th;
H-rsonf.rztlioho Yoroinl^iuy*. It r-s -a part of tho Toioh Chatfbor of Physicians
loh wnc a scriarato local or.tity. It rr-.a not situ.-.tod in Kunloh with tho
2oJch Ch~;ibor of Pbjoloiar.8 ut i:. purlin. ,

'i Toll, who w-B tho C. of of tho Solefc ChrtJbar of Physicians?

TJv.t was thj Hoichs- oratifuoho: o.

^ Conti?

Cbatl at th-t tl t, roo•

•j Tn was c:nti(a da out;-?

1 la tho Hoi oh Char-bor of Physiolana, Dr. .'la In tho Iasurnnco
3 oloty, Dr. trotho.

'j ®if*t Is ouffioior.t. Jfew you st-tod th-t D-. Here »-■ senowhat of
s export la tho caacer fiold, ir that rU' Vi

I could . . - -lode- tv ox-part. I

';s that ho had an rroi -meat to ooordir.~to c-r.cor rono-rch rad tunor

li oacor.

r tj& you ax© r.vr-a C tho aasifcaooat to rocoirod fr C-torlir rr.d
. ~eic‘ Hosoarc] Council 'ort-lrias io tho r- o-rc' on bll £lcai warfaro,

-r-.a't you?

/. ro.

- You lever aot .ia; f . Iv.-o's lnstituto rt r ro:l?

.. gorar peson. I hotd about it. That v s whan ala-o was li7ln& in
::1., r * docidod t Ivo u hi© cfficos ir. th> Hoi oh Ch-rbor cf Phyaiciare
* th- :>ia Cffico for Public Hoalth hoc -oso of -Is y^cr roi-tioashi? -'ith


12 :>jci 47-.>?JC-22-3-Lo350i* (Inti, von Sehoan)

Court 5^. 1

v- .rrod fra. iiunich to Poser, with his f-sdiy. Ho told his friends and
o -'.- rhors thr.t ho nantod to dovoto Mnsolf oxclusivoly to tfto fight acninst
cancor, that ho Vj *1 a» asslyratt to do so frcn c vory high authority.

'-othor ho said fr... Ilitlor or fra. Ooarir._, I io not rar.ar.bor. In any cooo

SB

ho had all the facilitlos noor Poson, at a fai^, to c-rry out his rosonrch
in this field. I no Tor hoard any •- ro about,it. That 51 om is supposod
*o :>.avo had any part ia biological ..arfcro, I ard a few co-wori:ors loornod
:hat in tho intorxxjnt cm? in Gac43ch-P~rtonfc:rshon ir. tho fall of 1946
for tho first tL-d, ovor tho rrdi , vhaa Coror-lstnbs-rr.t Dr. Schroibor
tostifiod to thr.t offoct horo in t: * first Mf trial'lr. IVr.borg.

a Of oourso Bloco t.-'uld r.-vor hr.vo hr.d my *cafi liccucs tho
sacrot projocts assignod to hie with you, wccli ho?

I do not boiioTo so, no.

a :5c« you ct'to thr.t Blceo r.-—od to Kur.ich fr .. Berlin in 1942 cr 1943
boc uuo of his qurjTolo with Conti, is that right?

?ro, that w-r oorlior. That was 1941-42, and ho loft Munich at tho
and of 1942, as I rocoll.

o 'roll, v, D ctor, you era •. lawyer, aron't y^u?

A Yop.

a thoco odicol probiv j o. a cocrot nature—suppose that tiuy

■•oro dlscuaaln outhr-iaela, Blorj • Conti—thoy wouldn't invito you lr.to
any c .nforoacos, rt-uld thoy?

A Ho.

^ And it in highly possible at 3lcr.. co li I; v- boor onctfiod in a
»Toat remy activities X a .-vjdlcri atura of hi ?h ; u ;jcuU r. t hr.vo any
imowlodga, ia ti.-.t right?

.. I did net loom of ov-ryt'.iin . I boliovo if-oro vuro any things that
I lid net "aor about. Undoes v o told no in priv-to a vernations with
t or specialists, I w a not chlo to Jud»fj.

a yon n-o Ktrsro °f tho Fuehrer's order of socrocy, aren't you?

A Yos, I kr.oir that#


hixliO


12 Mrch 47-*-?JG-22-4-Lossor (Ir.t-, toe SJliooa)

Court Bo* 1

tj 'host af thoao attorn that ara und ,r aiscusaiau horo roro socrot in
-ntoro* Blcco old novor discu- tiaa vith y u, *.auld ho, insofar as tricing
ir.t3 consideration t Tuohror's rdor cf socrocy?

A Tos, I ngroc with you.

IT, Hasnr: I h-.vo no furth-r q ■actions, Your Ht::or*

■’H SRSEUDSIT: Any further axninntioa of this uithose by nay dofonso
c inn sol?

awiasrr sc;.'iE:.vno:

FY rf~. aiOTT. (Counsol for t o Dofoadont 31cco)

*

* ’itnoss, I bare a fow brlof quostlor. to clarify a fow points. Tho
jr-'Sjoutor sold tlot Blow hrd vory good c-rnoctions with Simla:. At tho

<ont I do not tow...havo you already sold whon Bloao or;«, to Sta lor for
tho first ti: --: y u know that?

A I said a nhilo r^*o that I Anew only of tho yoorjr relationship bjtwoon
Hlenlor ard Blma, and I knew that lava was vi t": Eimlor vory soldcn; I said
this oonditicn oxlstod until 19d^. It is possible that tho relationship w-o
L.provod lata?. Dr. Blanc told,a, far 1- -t o., that ho had bottor relation¬
ships with tho SS nr,/.

^ But you d: . it know whor. ha • a to "1:. 'or tho first ti.-.o?

A ho, I do a t know tho tiro -'Id' n t i v tha sc as in:.

1 Did y u hoar anything about Dicro’o c-'ii t Hi-: lorf

.. Pore ..ally I did r.ot know It.

* Do y u len^ anything oleo about it? Do you : v.: whothor it is correct
that ii :a was ropoatodly oskod to Join the SS and that ho rafucod ta do so?

yi know anything about th t?

A I consider that quito possible and I know that i:. tho eourso of tho
. rs, ii- . o • axaotly whon, that ;a - a ackod to Join tho SS. I know
••At .


1 ? r ii 51 —j hinnolf?

, . olf.


12 kar -- ab*n (Inti von Sdhocn)

Court Mo. 1

Q And what reason did he ;ivc for not joining t,«. 32?

,-v i belioro I can bring t..at in coonectica with sqt owr. person. I
--Iso was naturally fr auer.tly asii-d to join tfr Sn or the 3S, -•xpocially
under the era o: Conti, who was higfrr So Cfc^rgrupoenfuchrer, who would
nave liked to have oc or Blocc join the SS. I p.rsonally did not do so
b.causo I did not want to sell syself to Dr. Conti, and that also was
probably the reason for Blast too.

• Q Would you knew that Blcce was approached and asked to Join tho
SS and hu reused?

a For no in any ease this was the lccisiv H thing at the tie* and
I issuae It was the sane for Bio . I did not belong to any foraations
and certainly not the SS, cons q r.tly Dr. Conti was very reserved toward
nt and very condesc-nding. I =if .t say I could -xpress ay opinion to
film rnor*. op-.nly than others coul becaus I did not belong to the SS.

The a.'seoiates, even they held a -igh rank in the S. r oould not do anything
against him, th-y hod to stand at attention, -r oft n tfry had to carry
suitcases ad p.rforc otfrr services. He Just gave orders to these people,
and Blco. did not want that possibly and 1 certainly did not.

-1 Dr. K os tael, tfr prosecution spoke of Conti's gr<-it influence
nl asked why Conti had this position uxi this influence if fr wio so
Mted ev.rywh.r.?

n 1 t.liove tfrre is soae confusion there. The prosecution spoke
of Ur. gr.-t influence in connection with -r. »agncry-and then afterwards
Pitiei that Dr. Conti was a pitiable person because he was unliked.

3 Bu*, didn't Dr. Conti r sain ir. his office although he wa3
hated tv rywhere? .

/» Yes, .that is l fact.

Q And to what do you attribute that?

«\ Dr. C nti had a Very -1 ficult position in respect to oil party
• .

agencies; Wat Dr. «ign.r had built up in five y^-rs Dr. Ccr.ti tore down
again in five years because fr. was not abl to aake his ideas prevail,
‘.v-ryanc in tfr party leadership, who had a Large organization, was against
■in; such as ~r. I-.y, or the organizations tfr. S«, the S3 and all sorts


12 kar L7-n-.-A-23-2-..ceh.m (Iflt. von Scicen)
Court So. 1


of organizations suer, as the Organization Tcct, which h i t.;eir ov.n
health organizations and were ind.pcndant of C a;: and even work' d against
lc. I . t - a not possible under Dr. *ign< r, because Dr. “agner had
rr; • authority and that was why Dr. Conti lest ?or and noiv influence.

~f w-.a able to hold on, oven though he was clcso to collapse, the
reasons wore internal party reasons such as the personal attitude of the
Beichaleit-r : a!«ann. Bohraair. had Cf.-b-tt. * Conti for years, but
inter, to the surprise of all initiated p rsors, he supported Conti at
the v-ry a =.at vhsn he was gone rally conaid.r.d . dead nan. That ms
at the tine when D r . Brandt received his .ssignt.nt of coordination.

Cr. Sosa.hi, do you -1 bdlev tint there is a certain sig¬
nificance for Dr. Conti in containing his position? First, that he

•ns a very old party neober, and s-condly, that S*e had n high rank in
I

th. S3, that he ras an SS Grup . ..fucure-r, do you :»ot fculix-Ve that these •
tiro circuastances wen decisive n Dr. Conti aaint-uinirg his position
ns F~ichsu< rztefuchrer and Roichs Health Lender?

* Dcu v tloss thoso two qualities, being as SS offic-r and having
old p .rty - nbership, helped hit. for a long tine and oupported hin, but
Row, fc .-.t I able to soc the whole dcv.lofaeat, I believe th. t there
rfere a lot of decisive and core important reasons than the on. I have
Juut Dcntione .

W *> . a - tiling else, Dcctor, thu prosecution said that it
aigiit hnve- t. n in th.. authority -ad por.r f Dr. Blooo to hove a half
Jew nade a full eryan ar.d a go©: citizen. ... par^atly t.ere- is reference
to a natter V icke which ust c 11 be d alt with, you apparently do
not know ab ut this?

A I h v tMltd the none tenti O 1 :y : .*• Blade alien lw -13 staking
r.port to hin in th. new bull ;.ng we occuoied at tn end of the war
.fter We rcr borbv-d out when it in th-r_ reporting to Dr. Blo-«. and
Lr. Thick* arrived as a visitor. Ho --sk.d a. to go out because- this
visitor arrived. He told ne only that he nad to receive this nan because
m.3 carrying out a research asaignaent or soocthing like that, and I
t lie vc ho referred to HlcnUr in so*. W17; ani I know that this name was


12 »ar J*7-A- -u»-23-3-~:ehan (Int. von Schovn)
Court So. 1


c '-nested -pith see- drug for stopping blading.

YuS, that is polygal and I don't want to discuss it vriti: you.

a Mo, I know nothing more about it.

Q In ay concluding question, I would be inter-stud in the following:
do ycu fc-liev; that the point of view of the prosecution is right that
the Deputy R lch3 Leader of Physicians, no matter in what function, had
the right cr th. . ewer to tavu a half Jew proclaimed a full Aryan, or who
was competent for this?

« I do not believe that tint would ev-r have been possible as
ones high r personalities tri- .a vain to accomplish this. I know of
only one case whore the Reich rshal manag'd it, but Hitler himsulf
reserved the decision. I do no know who could r Influence.

Q Do you know that sue: -tters w. re dealt with in the Rcich3sip-
penant In Berlin?

A That office had nothin? to do with it in -y opinion, but I
conr c s*.y for sore.

5 Thu opinion was expressed a littl. e irlicr today that the

forv.r P<icij r-tcfuehrer D p . ogner, ir. his capacity as Rcichaa rzte-

f ;:hr.r, h ! t opportunity to rup.rvis to law about hereditary diseases,

or to chung. it cr soce such th:..g; now : snould liku to knew th. follow-

• *

ing: He y u r.rr that tnc fora r Reichsratefuchr.r Dr. *Vagncr in the
press ir.d at i.eloh rnrty rail! s .t Murnberg rupoatodly dealt in detail
with such questions? that h. b-e- ... r_*ll knov.n for this and that p.r-
n.-.ps for that r. nor. that peopl rre t hi . cith their ccsplaints if
they hid oecplaints about th- ex.cation of th. rtcrllization law?

a XwS, that is quit- tr . 1 cm reseat r that Dr. .Vagner spoke

public ally h-r- in Mumb.rg abc ; it lr.d ale in oth.r occasions of
congresses of doctors. The nac >:* Lr. \. k.a sn far beyond

eedic-.l circles, therefore, I c .asider it quit possible that pcpplo
case tc Dr. -?gner by %*irtue of : is o. rsonality, without tninking of him
s:-cifically as Rcichsaerztefuehrer, althoog: it w. uld be possibl- that
-hu population did not know his ooapot.ney exactly.


12 _jsr Ii 7 -*-^- 23 -il-fachan (fcti rca Schc-.n)

Court Ho. 1

And new ay last quest! , Dr. Kossctal. The question has been
brought up as to what did Er. Bio. - do if he h-* rd that people wore in¬
quiring about Euthanasia questions at tb. Rcichs Charter of Physicians
er at th tfain Office for Public ualth, ar.. you said that you turned
over such inquiries to the Party Chancellory; I should like to have you
iikt it quiix clear rtiy you went to'the Jarty Chancellory; that is the¬
ca.. nr.icfc had fomerly been under boss as Deputy *x The Fu«hr-r and after
Hess »ent to England, it was ur.d^r his succ. saor Bohnoann?

A 'leaf'


12 Aar L 7 -r.- -Lt-2u-I-rutty (Inti von 8 c. icon}
Court No. 1


Q Thy did you go to this arty Ch-anccilery? .fill you please ex¬
plain that v>.ry cl arly?

A I think I answered thi- question when one of year colleagues
asked c-_ about it. He said that it ins the Chancellory cf the Fuehrer
which wu- cccpct.r.t for such questions; tut *c in .-unich, I said, for
ten years, aw long as I was there, had th. practic. of going to this
unich agency which was closer to us ani witr. which we led bott.r con¬
nections, .specially because *. w-re son. or loss kn'-wr. there personally,
and we knew th t In general things which we turned over to tb.n We re
actually'token into ccnsidcraticn. ,

I specifically In the courr of yc.«rs wh.n I *crk,J thor- in Munich

t

had 6'.v-r^l ac .ool friends th.r rhoa I could call up and prepsr. and know
that they wo Id de l with tht M'V.r. Ttot wot, perhaps, on-_ imnc.rtant
reason, but, on tte other hand, I said. Dr. «agr.er had had success
th.re with the st.rilixation 1 st, and I had to i suce that th.y would
deal with this entt-r too thoro ,.,ly*

r j fid you net know, Do:t , that tula io-callvd iurty Chancellory,
that is, the Chancellory of Ke*: r.J laur Bor.-umn, - is i.eland ccapctont
for ail coaplalnts coning frea th population about abuses within tho
i-orty or In th- Statu 2

/. f.. - ’, I believe I said that sysclf this corning* That wos a

regulation wi -.ctivated us, ai ■ true. .rty Cnanctllory

claixed for its.. If to be coapetcr.i in all fields, whether it was a purely
organisational rotter or a professional Ei.tt.-r or whetherit was a Stato
legal matter.

T : Party Chancellory asatr. th* jurisdiction, .and ti’O Party, Chan-
: .lory organised in such a • »y that it went up to ideological questions,
un to churc! qu.3ticns, and had arts r.ts f r such things.
jh. Srt'JT r: I have no furtr.r qu.stians, _r. rr.sident*


rRESIDE:rT: Arc there a— oth_r questions b,* Defense Counsel?

• .-HDY: I have no furt. •• questions of this rito.a, four iionor.


IK’- i rJLC IUE’C: TTho will be ycur next wian-.ss, “r. Saute- r?
L.-. SAJTiR: The Defendant, Er. cion-., bissclf.

IM


i


12 mr h'-~-.*A-2k-2-?vtty (let. tot. Soboca)

Court Mo. 1


7 • rRESEZST: In view of the la tones* of tv hour, *c will not
sriir the Doctor tonight.

The Tribunal will now be in recess until nine-thirty tomorrow morn¬
ing.

tR. ARD'f: Pardon no. Your Honor—

DR. Just a sinut., Hr. President. Hr. President

DS. KrtURC. for Rudlof Brandt.

hay I a- ke an application t :.t the Defendant, Rudolf Brandt, be
exouod tomorrow because ho she- . like to -jr-.>:r<- his ease. He is the
rvxt defendant after Bl<nx who will tak th. witness stand.

THE fP.ESIKHT: Und^r the c rcucstineas, th« D. fondant, Rudolf
Brandt, Is excused froc attenda:. in co-art tomorro-. to trepiro his
caa.. which will follow.

C*. Kn'IFiiA.'CI: I think you.

H*?EY: Hay it please Your Henor —

7 - . r RESIDENT: Yes.

E. !iAPDT: Tho Prosecution n^s considered the Blono case and are
now at this tin of the opinion that a prise. f-.ciu ease exists against
th. Defendant Blots, a: charged In th ind'etaent. Honco, we do net. wish
to withdraw ;• of the charges i inst the Defendant at this tine.

T;. ::-7 T: The Tribur, ' trill nnr b. n recess until nin^-thirty

o'clock tr*orrcw morning.

(Th. Iribimal aijuoumed * ! L 13 -arch l°Ji? -t 0930 hours.)


LLL7


Ccurt 5-. 1

13 Mar 47-K-l-l-XEH-7oeter (Int. ElIdeshelper)


Official transcript the .-.-.erican Military
Tribunal in the natter -f tfco United Stctes
f Ar.erica against Earl Brandt, et el,
defendants, fitting et Kuernber*, Ger-.ary, ?n
13 Kerch 1947, 0930, Justice Seels ureelAlng.


Tri tuRSEAL: ?ors ns in tfco ccurtroco will -ileeso find thoir seats.
The K'.n.rnblo, the Judges of llilitcry Tribunal 1. Military Tribunal 1
new in sobs in. Gtd save the United States A Ar. erica and this hen-
crabls Tribunal. There vill be .rder in the ccurtrocn.

TEi PBSSrilLST: nr. Harefcal, will ycu ascerteln that tho defendants
ere ell prooent in c urt.

TEE Ki r.SE AL: Iiay it ^loaso your Emr, ell the defendants aro nro-
•or.t la o«.urt with the exce*>tl<n A the defendant Obcrhouoer, absor.t duo
tv illnoss.

THE PHfcSXDffilJ The Secretary General win nctc f r tho reeerd tho
Tecor.ce of all tho defendants in ccurt save the dofcnder.t Oberhcusor,
vfio it in the h.spital ill aj* has boon excused &n account A her illness.

C unsol aoy ->r .ceod.

TEX MARSHAL: Tho defendant Rudolf 3randt is also absent, having
beer, excused, by tho Tribunal yooterday.

7H2 rriSITXKT: Tho Sccrotrry General will n tc for tho roc'rd tho
ebsonco cf P.ud.lf Brandt, vho was excused yesterday by tho Tribunal in
rdor t- prepare f r the precenta.tlcn cf his ca.so.

TE. SZEDL (f r the defendant Bltr.o, instoad f ZT. Sauter): Kr.
hroiidont, T>r. Sauter fcr.i asked ue to toil y u that et tho nonoat ho is
»lck '.n rcc.unt f his n sc bleodin.- and asks the Tribunal tc bo a.blo t
be«in/c fev ninutes. He hrs nly left the c urt f .r a fuw r.inutes.


Very veil, cloned, the Tribunal will awnit the

the Tribunal, Dr, Srutcr is at the diepon-

f

rb'-Ut e half h.ur. Is it ecnvcnlent f r tho
half h url

I think eo. Tho Tribunal will be in recess
able tc proceed with thu ease.


C-urt S-. 1

12 r -i7-K-3-l-£a-c«ard


TEE KAfiSHAL: The Court vill co~e to order.

JUDGE CHAVTCrJJi Dr. Sputur is still Indian eed rnd the Court will
it recess until 1350 k-urs this nftsraooa.


13 lar k?-*-j-iA-13-l-Po8tar (Int. Hlldesheiaer £ von Schoen)
Coart Ho, 1


a- v:=: session

•

(rne- Tribunal reconvened at 1330 hours, 13 karch 191:7.)

T-; >v.RSh»: The Tribunal is again in session.

Th£ .RESIDENT: Counsel ray proceed.

DR. SAOT'R (Forth* Defendant Blor.e): 2 aust apologize, Hr.
President, that this court was delayed for such a long tine.

THE rRESIDENT: I hope it ray not interfere any core.

DR. SAUT R: I would like to ask your Honor to permit ne to
exarine Dr. Blocs, to have his take the witness stand.

Tr2 IP. SILENT: The Defendant Blono will take the witness stand.
Bafore swearing the witness the Secretary will note the wit:^-.3 Koscehl
excused froc the stand la;t evening. The record will show that.

XU^T 310 £, a witness, took the stand and testified ns follows:

32 JUDGE SE Q fcl! ? 0:

"ho witness will please raiso his right hand and be sworn,
repeating aftor not

I swear by Ocd, the ..1-ighty and Cfcnisciont, that I will speak the
pure truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(The witness repeatod the oath.)

ThE f RESIDENT: You cay sit demn.

Dlfi-CT EXAMINATION

’• 0?- Sa'JTER (Counsel for the Defendant Bla-c):

Q Dr. Blooe, how old are you?

A 53.

* * wculd like to have details about your past life, are you

tried?

A 'ins.


13 Mar .7-.-.-kAA-13-2-Fca ter (Int. Hildesheinsr & von Scboen)
Court So, 1


* You studied in institutes and became a professional doctor?

a Yes.

Q And you started your oro practice in Rostock?

A Yes.

Q as prac tic loner there in dermatology?

A Yes.

Q Ycu were in the first world war, you were at the front?

A Yes.

Q Ir. what capacity?

A As a Lieutenant in the Infantry.

G You wantcJ to b-caac an activo officer?

A iYes.

Q And how did you decide for aedlcine finally?

A Boforo I be care a soldier on th< 1st of ..pril 1911i, I had already
studied codicim for four s^scstcrs, t»*n I fulfilled ny nilitary duty,
sad on the 2nd of August 191L the first .'orld fTar broke out. I went to
the front vith eg- regiment.

G Flooso bo brief, witness, because those details arc not of
special interest for the trial. Why did you decldo tofcecono a doctor, and
did you net retain in the airy? I ask you theso questions because in
cc meet ion with your choico of th. profession the prosecution has already
saJe a reproach. ill you please give us your details?

•* Yea. Th prosecution reproached do that I had becoae a doctor

• r * orJ r to be a caspor over life and death. In this connection the

prosecution refers to cy bock titled "Art* in Kacp,~ Doctor in Battle,

■'ich I wrote in 19h0 and finished in the beginning of 'hi. If tho pro-

^■cutlcn -akes this assertion against =c, that is not true. Tho quotation

=*dch the prosecutor has cited when taken fres the context, does not

Ratify that interpretation. The basic thought underlying ny choice of

5 profMBioa was tho wish to help the sick. If in qy bcok I frequently

rationed thc ^portent position which a doctor holds in the population,

thIs done intentionally and with Justification, for the doctor actually

13 ^tcr of life and death. A good doctor seans life and a bad doctor

••*.51


13 Ear Ii7-r.3-3-Foe tor (Int. Hildesheimer i von Schoen)
Court !I . 1


means death. The aim of ay work, as I shall prove in the course of cy
examination, and as is clearly shown by ay book, was to create ths best
trained doctor with high professioral ethics, -y aim was to help in
this great cork. What I wrote in ny book, from which this accusation is
made agair.ut so, I should like to read briefly.

3E. SaLTER: kr. Frcsidcnt, this quotation froa the book of the
defendant Dr. Blast, entitled ”/vrzt in Xarpf," Doctor in the Fisht, is
found in Document Book Blooi, page 15, Document iJo. 5. It is the true
quotation from this book. The book itself I have with sc horc. It is
in th. possession of the prosecuting authorities.


4,52


13 March l:7-A-^TD-13-la-?=3tcr (Int.HUdeshoiaer-VonSchcn)

Ccurt No. 1

;n. HftilDYs Your Honor, it is su^gostod that this entire book writton
by the dofondont bo intro *uoed under ona exhibit nunber rather than having
cash extract containing a different oxhibit rubber, in as nuch as tho prose¬
cution 037 well use sections of this bock during the course of cross-cxani-
raticn, and I woul In' t want to bo hold to giving an exhibit nuebor to variou:
suctions of the book*

D . SAUTEH: The whole bock, !‘r. Presidoht-, The Doctor in tho Fight",
is Blouo Exhibit !fo. 1, so that the oxhibit nurbor properly includes all
further quotations which I shall quote rysolf and which also will bo brought
by tho prosocution authority, that is Blooo Exhibit No. 1

T~ FJSSIDBHTt Do I un.’oratan', counsol, you arc offoring tho or.tiro
book ns Dloaj's Exhibit No. 1?

DR. SAUTE: Yos.

TiF PRBSUEOT: Has the book boon translated into English?

D'!. SAUTE'*: No. On our .art only those ports hivo boon translated
which aro ropre luce ’ in -y book. I coul not oxpoct that fron tho translation
deportoont, to translate a wholo book on account of a few pages, as I only
want to br.vo a fow pogos.

THE 'iESIT. fiT: I understand counsel's position. Has tho prosocution
try objection to offerin- tho entire book in ovidonee?

!C(. KARDX: Tho prosocution desires that tho ontiro book bo offorod as
or. oxhibit ranber, an- 1 , urin- tho corss examination if I aoo fit to uso tho
took, I way h-.vo to Just refer to tho pages and have the lofundant road it
ir.to tho record in as nuch as wo do not havo the facilities at. this tine to
translate soeo three hun 'ru.i pages. So it would oxpodite natters to do it in
this nanner, ycur Honor.

THE RESIDENT: There being no objection, tte book of which tho Dofeix-
ant 31oexj is the author will bo admitted in evidence as Bloao's Exhibit No. 1.

Tho Tribunal has not roceivud tiv_- 3losu dccunent bocks. Aro they avail¬


able hero?


4453


13 :ari Ii7~A“ATTV-13—2a-Fcstor (Int.-HUioshoirer-YonSchon)
court So. 1


88 . SiiriEP.: They have boon sulaitto J . sore tine e.~o. document book has
boor, subdttod for translation on ti» 6th of February. That is quite oarly.

THE rRESIZEtfii Counsel aay procood.

3f D3. SAUTSRi


q Dr. 31ono, porhape you will give the exact quotation, with which
the prosocution rvproachod you c once min; your choico of profossion at that
tira. As I havo toll you*^; is in the docunont book Blono, Docunont Nunbor
5, rQRO 15.

A After intro *uctory sonjral reflections about tho choico of a pro¬
fossion by us school boys, I say tho following in this book.


4-. 54


13 rch 19-'* ---1--Ecart! (Int. Hil !o8chciacr)

C tat X I


I qu.tc: r 'rt r.u ha the ic-al fcssi.n nu-.ror t- as w-s a r- f a
purs.ncl o*peri-aco« E“turall7 *•- he.: n i.oc f the hist ry jf oouicino r.n.’.
its re t non. lut at h-iao, in the n-« 5 ..f life, we knot tf» physician as c
-r! .vlity .f e./.ci 1 chrractor. S> I alaaya r-ra’ cr thr.t fr ;a ay ninth
year I always full ill with appendicitis with 8 ev_ro pains exactly at Chris toe 1
tin-. Tot fifth tL_», h Mov-r, it was usp.ci-ily '. Ibo stua- d.ctar was
always call- y jy . arents -.V I h: rent c nfidonco in his skill. This time
:hj ti n f-aro ’ 33 tuch ' y ny y routs c ul no lea cr he av i .e.’.

C Rfl-'-wko in ti- ct r kc >t ce fr.a xia; *frai .

"If until t:*r. I hr c ..si ere kin-’liness the afiin characteristic of the
et r, I Mas n.w io>trass- ' y the clinic an* by tho .’.octor ca its sovoroirn
wlor.«s I saw it, ho was tho List *.uth.-rity t- oci-.o .vur life an' -Urth of
.v-ry in i. that ttou impressed ;ii lly, as r. bay,

ms that even uiii.r-ra rd kin s n-odud th. d-ct-r, and th't tteir lives
-.Is. depended .n Id® skill."

1. This is th- ou-tati r. fr -a the 1^-k f tb- defendant, which at tho tin*
ms submitted by tho pr s-cuti.n 'inst Dr. 'La.?

3 am t -.-.ke a cr.-r o a ninst n lmjwr f r that rfeosien,

and n no will went t accuse r. lawyer f h via eh. sun thrt career so thr.t
ho c.uld 1 tur -c..a. tr*. .tester \\>r tlx. lif and de th f his follow citizens

v ltnurs, y-u liN-idy sunti ned th -1 you *- an y.ur practice es a
9 •eciclist in .. st ck, ir. .Lckle.V ur ; then, y u ve up tint prnctioo, why
ana f*r what purpose?

«. 1 sot ir> this . r :tice it thi end 1942. It was the lrr ost practice

' t.is type ir. all f .Ickl-rf ur . I -v« it up in 1934 f r reasons which I
VO *'Lined in ay - k. Uwn, in 1931 I J irwd tho y rty ind SA, I did
= • t/ie UA.--JCCU J r.r.t sacrifice, , .cause I -.anted t. help provent Germany

Tho :: .i ml Socialist German Labor Party was, at

%

t tine, th.- .nly . arty which was a nee -2 sful ‘p-n-r.t f Cx mun ian, is
■air. s were in Gora ay t tho tiae. /vftcr tho first * rid war, through tl»

• iaar C r.stitutijn, « - had received r. f-ra f G Vernaont which c' 11s it3clf

i- critic, ut which in reality was n-rely r. diet rtod picture of r. dejrocracy.

445S


p li-.rch 1%7 -A-U-2-FKP- Board(Int. Hild-scheicor)

la the course of the j^rs fr_n 1919 or. until the time which I have just
KBtionod, 1931, this Government red demonstrated itself inefficient, which is
sletrly sh.wr. from the ownt.ua c >llnpse of ccon^ -.nd tr a its millions of

unemployedjwhich wor. not reduced hut after «*» fluctuations always ^turned
*.. th. -Id level.

* friends nd I w^ convinced tint th.ro was only no choice, that was
°* ChjiCtt b ° t * COn &“ ^ciaUat am C-^uniam. In theao years, wo ^vo
i n- c naidcrati n •« to whether wo should not Join the C.ncunista, as a
r.-.U .'arty of the so-called intellectual circle a Cora* ns hed done. The
a-et Orient reason for ur rejecting Communism uni its dictatorial form
• f :,VurnojRt ' T;vt Kati.nal Socialism would cv-r develop into m absoluto
V«.r I did n t suspect at the tia..

itneaa, in thU Wy, nc r those motives you Joimd the ?■ rty.

•V.t attitude did you dove lope in the ansuia time in the Party "nd its
lsatituti -ns, -nd what rnk did y-u h.lri in the Party a. well as in the SA
n! ther*ise?

«. In thu Pnrty I '.cm S-j: -nino I tie Ifctlanij. Sjalaliot Uncuo at
»«.ra rt tie -oElnnin ,f 193i, art ttia 1934 -n I Suc-.oo GnumM.luitor for
•Villa SfcnUb in l-dtlwiiur.. I } liu tb. s» a tbc lot t July 1931 „

SI Startartunfuuhror, nna • r_. ,., k . L - t „ j Ucdlc , L 0borfuoh .

J Art - r 1 h ' d L - ft S~ i" 1936, In 1961 I raooivwd Iho tltlu

1 -wdic -1 Gru.,ponfuuhrur.

•* ^ w - l ' ro 73Ur ? cities and ranks within th- x^rty and in its
’ 4t Huti ,na?

AS Y\aC #

.. ita-aa, y«stcr day, it waa aenti .nod tht y_ u -ot the . olden pyty

■' 3i ' %V - CAa  iv - us When, and t.hy, and f.r what reason you

••-■iv.d the olden party insi nr.f Perhaps y.u could explain first under what
-•i :.s, normally, received the • lden party insirna, and why in your
: r -n exception aaa.ar.de?

' rTr U7 thL " ldcn Lrisi ■» ivon to people who hod n oenbor-

fci; * * 1= " W0 ' C00 ' «*  *•-•« to th, party without interruption;

“ lr ' iiti;n *7 inai r.a were also iwr. in individual cases to

■*■’£6


13 2-rch 19-'
C art :: . 1


-L.-3-rK?- 3ocrtJ(Hildoschoincr)


,,-3 as :* s. ;ci-.l =..rit,* uvur. if they did r. t '.el on t the party; 'nd every
il-'~ ywars, c.u.itcd since the Svizur- of pjavr, they «eiv • ivun t- party
j^-^rs f special a-rit; thus in 1933, -n the 30th f Jw ry, the
S-ic.ht' rztefu-hivr, Dr. Unor f:r ne this award 'xc use f cy

, rviee ir. th - r. ti nr.l - nd international audios! trainin ', ' ut Hitler tank
v yr . ff the list. Dr. * a ner r-ached an a re^aunt with the Huichsloitor
3 .rrcnn tfe t th. noxt tin* , of award, that is, five years la-tor, -n tto 30th
f January 190, I '• t- t tho ,olden v?rty insi. na. This pr aise was kept
- -.i.ist tb* ex rwssud oppositi-n ef ay chief, Dr. C r.ti.

Vlinesa, y-t'erday y.ur differences with C r.ti w°r~ already mentioned.

Dr. C r.ti unlik e y u was n-t a ata-e-r f the . e *» ‘out / the SS, an SS
SruipenftMhrvr?

A. O.-er ruppenfuchrer finally.

.. That was the hi best rand in ti» SS, was it n*t?

A. TeS.

;. VuX’o you rla cue. r f the SS?

A. No.

In s-a- docusent I rend that y u »vr asked to fra the S« to the SS.
Is that c rroct, nd c n y u explain lids p-int, especially ri\ Ait the notivo
».-y y.u aid r..t Join th- SS?

«. Tht is true, th*t I was n vari us occasl ns asked to Join the SS. A T
tb. end f 1933, r in fcbo ’.v innir. of 193A, I suddenly called to
3-rlin, r.d thu Office f Raichs Physician SS was jffared tjix. I refused
tais ecause I did r. t want t rivo up ay inducend-nco r.nd practice for tlsc
s-i. f this jisitiai. I refused 1 Ur requests 1 e cause, accordir.; to ny
inf rvti.n, Hir-aior played n un.bj-cti.n* ‘.bio r 1- in the mrder of Hoelir. ana
iher z.% l.adors. Als. Later the late Reichoarstofuhrer sr. rtly Vuforo his
,ta*t SeU t :t th t the lack cj 1 o», ha event the S>, docs not
-t Lat . ur ffice. a ner and I wur- p» -runts f the spy system set up by
tbs SD. «. refused t fc 70 ethers spied up r. and ak.- did not want to bo spied


u n urse It. s.


-r 57


a (Ir.t. -shcixr, V r. Sc. .n)

C.'-xt 1

ir. th. c ;-rs. of th. ry e. >n-., ko rill c:xt. the fact

in Beat • ith t „ Hoicha—

Uhrwr So, that is inrich Hi 2 i.:-j - -xOc' 111:, tc 2 k y:u n if y u did
• • "-vk.is it thrfc 1 ->r 5 ; r-ccivc'/. rsai,-ir..r.ts froo Heinrich

*i.-alcr, sh- Arohrur of the So. »w . am cx.jlsncticn f r this?

.. Yes. it l t fr .eich.-ri-.-i G cri:.-, tbc rests '-.'.si na«nt
fr c untw-* vrnpj f r ticloric-.i warfare, I c old fulfill this tr.sk ..nly
L' : cillrb-r to T.i-.V th e ffic-s vhjen w. r_ posioneible f r c untur -ensures
-• irJt PJch 0 iv. of th rot 1 TcrWnt ir. this connection was the

l1c.: 8 inist«r of he Bit rt r wi:_ tms ir. cVr^- -f c b ttin & opMooiea, and
«* " n and the* pests r.rc hold by Heinrich Hiwalcr.

c , • . Iwr in this Hold.

•' w » ‘ n ct r, an v Ur r-se nsibility in this trial
f -t / . iv. us inf r tl .rut r:\rt . •-sitir.no y u fcul« in the
I - Pin • ye rs« Plcrae v. os Inf r:\ti n cn tell us
r. .-eh crea hot.. r it »•* n Oeverr. r.t ffir cr wu-tber it was r. District
,::c - * ’-hethur it sos c Patty Office rvf , . r it was.

*• ..t tiu. r. cf 193u, ut la &, »r, 1 Ocervjo Adjutant in tho

m ia fiwrtin. At (ho saac tine, I ibis r.ivcn
r sit; ?.s -r.-'v* ir. the L- - 1 -r :n rhysicirns which Inter deVvl^ped
•-ic.j C t;b.v* f f»y Ole ions. In 1935, I hoc-so Deputy f-r rfcVwlojncnt
y ' ^ -5-' Q.r rny. In 1939, I bee t D.puty

'..'-r . r .ysician, (R.puty .'ojchsrorztcfuchrcr), air* it tho sauo tine
-•in-1 !X^ut; f.u_f rt th. - --in office i.r .-uclic Kcrlth at the rr.rty end cf

ich Ohacber -f 2 %ysicinns
Srras ins rise, but I

• • 1

Cl “ iet - - x *. siciarjs » :-rt- ract.-11-ti.-ns an ry r.sit. .r. thoro

: f v. -v.rary n ture.

* # itr “- s *» y ° C :-P^ ^ r Ties .siU.ns wtdeh y u hell during the

J! - -f years, .1 - ri ' y u ., t t t...s - citi s, nn ' »hy -'id the choico of

e46c


13 Hrd»%Wr-lS-2~j.yl rd iiic -s ;i. , » i. Sch n)

Crirt, I

v^s- f>.rts fill ; j?

' r - - t r. f icon. Ic 39Zn, t... 1 to , „ic

> ' • ww Bp tv practice on<’. work

f r V. r Jf, : -C _ . ... bc~

c-rus- I c old .. c*n> n -y pr’.ctlco :-nv h_-lth p litlcff it the-

■ ' , th-t lo t rlc i.i tbii now r.i-

• . * I hru» •- - Cr cz, booau;

\_r.c_ *— f-td Cr sa ?n‘ veke. Roich L-.'.r SS, Dr. Gr=witz, irwsi-

z-i th-.t the Gcr_f.a Ee l c.-;r - lv t ruacti .nray

•

, ...

t- pi * _ i the :.^3tr.jX’.

:.v qujstl.r. v*.y * r^rv.r h i : 'ponci' t a-i_c'. 3 c-.n oxplain as f.lltvss

r/.r vc - jr.n Jit!, b. t!; f .^t .n thi r u i , r.r?or -v.-rv.sti .-to-! his

1 • “.'Jillty. n5p al: ' t - .../•••


13 iar-EBK-15-ie-Gaylord-Ints. .-iidesheiner, von Schoen
Coart Ho. 1.


■ ^iity to detest so-called breotures', that is, willing tools
It the -unas or taeir superiors- He therefore selected for his
close jssoci-tes^nen witn opinions of their own, and courage.

~e thought he had round such a nan in *ae, and I do not bolievo
stet I disappointed ui_i in this respect.

itness, the witness whoa we heard yesterday, Dr.
iotaefcl, told us that it was nuinly c aett6r of instruction
for doctors which you were interested in. ..as that one of the

tasks on account of your office and what most .essential accoa-,

*

jlisfcacnts did you do in this r.spoct? hould you please tell
as about this?

a The post-srsduute training of doctors was oaong ny

M'.ics ns doputy-post-graduate in acdical training. Until the

la* to r the oBtcblisliaent or the rtelch Chuaber of Physicians

la 1935, post-.;radutite studies were up to the choice of the

Individual doctor, -ost doctors had not participated in any

:i:h courso in thoir whole life, on trto basis of the oxperi-

«ace of Dr. ..agner and aysolf ~s practicing physicians, we

^03iderud it rijht, in the interest of public hoslth and also

•- ti.o interest of c c.i doctor, to ..axo post-graduate study a

:;ty lor the doctor. That wus dono in the law w..ich I have

‘,.:t nontloned. avery weraun doctor :.ud to t .Kv a three weeks

:c.rse every few yours. This -.us in j.cnei-1 -edicine. All

Actors had to participate in this tr.inin.j with the exception

•■ Governaeat officials, university teachers, heads of largo

3::;itals, .r.d si—liar people. Specialists also had to parti-

I etc ir. this general training, for it had been discovered

*• *- the specialists, in particular, lost contact with general

itliciae in tne course of years end decades, nr.d considers,

* : ' :t - r lt-ss, only nis own specialized field und neglects the

l7:r --l picture of the huaan being; and in addition to this

^- cr - pcst-groduote study which was e duty, I created a nun-

4460


12 -lar-Z=»15-2a-Geylord-Ir.ts. aildeaheimer, von Schoen
Court No. 1.


6e r of voluntary medical courses. I knew that in the beginning
::.c doctors would object to tmis compulsory post-graduate .
.'udy, but in order to convince myself that my arrangement
;s ri£,ht, I openly colled upon ail Sermon doctors who were
tiding a post-^radu-te course to report to ao directly, per¬
sonally, -ad not through official channels, to tell ae their
Impressions and tncir experiences in connection with theso
•raining courses.


*


13 *3r-£BH-16-l-A.upperstein-Ints. .;ildesheimer/von Scnoen
oourt No. 1.

I received hundreds of letters. They said at first we
•re -fra id of it, we opposed it, but ali the letters closed
with recognition <nd approval of this new organization. It
is interesting to not<? that in spite of the compulsory post
graduate study, voluntary training in special fields increased
enormously throughout Germany. This was characterized espec¬
ially by the fact that more foreigners than ever attended our
aedical post graduate courses.

* witness, in connection with you^ aims to raise the
standards of too medical profession and of the medical scic-r.co,
the witness Dr. i.osmohl, I believe it was, told us yesterday
t.mt an international congress for medical instruction courses
in august 1&S7 v s organized by you; is that true?

n Jes; taut is true.

^ ..cw many nutior.s were thorc in this congress?

A «fter a medical post graduate training in Germany
aid begun with obvious success, I decided on the third intor-
n.tionul pert graduate medical training congress in Berlin,

1037. I myself v.s president of this congress. 44 nations
participated in this congress. I had an opportunity to ac-
iuaint ell these lorcign r presuntativos with.the new medical
arrangements in Germany, and on the basis of the recognition
f these intern tion i circles I decided to submit a motion
to the congress; that is, t.u:t ~n international academy for
J09t ^raduc* . dical stuaios should be created. This sug-
>3tion was accepted without objection, and for the coming
...r, that is for l'J39, the establishment of the academy in
-v; __st was decided upon. This ceremony toon place in buda-
-■«w in 1138, and numerous n-tions participated; and -et this
congress, after-the charter wmich I had suggested was accepted,
- v. .s elected president of the per-anent oureau of this acs-


13 tter-Kfr.:-l£-2—. pp —teia-Ints. Hiiedsheimtr/von Schoen
Court No. 1.


•

i ..itness, -bout the Third International Congress in
the year 1937, which you mentioned, xte aavv a report, which
I have in ay hands, with contributions of c number of acdicol
scientists, Gorman ond foreign. One of taose contributions
is your own, with tne caption: "Organisation of t'r rann

.• ductc nodical training." This article is yours?

A Yes.

On. : 7 AUTZd: ror this trial, the nost important thing,
Your Honor, you will find in the supplement volume of Dccu-
nt Book BIo.ig, page 1 to 4, Document 9. ft is an excerpt
. ja the report of this congress. I have here, Your nonor,
t::is book, which I should submit to the Tribunal, but us I
have thi3 letter—* r ..Ived t:.is booh freu a library and I
:..vo to give It back. I don't .enow, Your honor, whether under
those ci: in-st .ncos it is nooosscry to submit tills book and
hot sou it again. Tnet I ..oula not like, our honor.

TriS .-nESIDi-*?: Has this book been exhibited to tho pro¬
secution?

1.. _AUT2n: Tne prosecution will not bo :..ccrortci In

ttcr pert of the book. V..c parts that are of interest
re in the Locu- nt 3ook Slone, Document 9.

T;.^. 'nSoIDi^T: I understand that, counsel, but the pro¬
secution will be entitled to know where the printed volume:-
ccaid be found if they dc-sircd to consult it et some future

• U •

—a• i*%nDT: Your honor, I have no objection to an -dmis-
rion of thv_ i. I:. itt-r certifies that this is a true

xtr-ct ana gives a sketch of . .st what the boor, is, ond where
lis nd where it muy be made available.

Dn. loiL'lih.: If t.,%. prosecution uuth rities would like
-3 borrow this eook for some time, in order to oxu—ine it or
•>-v- it examined by the- medical experts, -no to submit excerpts


4463


,3 *fir-£e -is -3-Eupperstein-Ints. nildesnciccr/von 6choen
Court .»o. 1.


fro— it themselves, then of course the Look is the disposal

^■i

of tnc orosecutlon, only I would like to h~ve- the boo.-c back.

THE PRESIDENT: Is the iaforuati'on requested uy tnc pro-
:.cu.' j- atained in your document book?

JH. HARDY: Yes, Your Honor.

THE ESI-E* v Tu Very well; counsel may proceed.
tY DS. &iU7Ea:

* Dr. Bionic, in this book, in this report of which we
are talking now, you have, ns I can see, with special emphasis,
pointed out t o t’ ln-s, nd I herewith najc you whether that is
correct? .o t.*ut I don't havt 'o read the whole re-port and
thup save tia«, the first point is, that also the practicing
physician -nd the lloons-.d doctor just go 'hrough u oertain
training in or: r to n ch the- necessary heights of science,
and the other point, which I can see from year reports is
your sp:oi l emphasis that also the specialists .oust not only
’root one pert of the body, but that every doctor —. t ulwcys
. .roblo- of wholeness, of completeness of tho body,

.f the human body; is tnst correct as I see it?

a thet is correct. The specialist gradually dc-

v loped to be too specialized, and it is beyond ell doubt

t an ve dincose cannot bo considered merely from the- point
f view of the eye, but that very frequently other parts of
tho body, oth.r organs re connected with this disease, and
it is the a- in the case of *hor specialties. Therefore,

I considered it important that every doctor in this compulsory
study she Id reircaft his knowledge, and should lccrn the new
things in the field of medicine -as n '.hole. In -addition to
tr.i. 1 • .vc him an opportunity which had never before existed.


-r_in hi—self as


c specialist.

v.v-


i


13 Kerch li7-i-ATT-l 7-1-Grc s s ( Hil da ste imr/Von^ choen )
Coort Sc* 1


1 Your Honor, tha excerpt froa this bock, cf which i would ask you
cc tike notice so that I do not have to read tha whole, is DocununtNo. 9
in th. Document Hook Supplernt, Volume 31oma, page 1. With your pomission
I shall give it Exhibit No. 2.

Dr. 51 ore, as you have heard fren the opening spaech of the .~ro3e-
4 tion, you are reproached for activities in connection with tho hone for
doctors Altresc. You reaeebor that tho witness Dr. Kosn hi spoke about
Altrcso yesterday. In su.-l-oont of this could you toll us some noro? Could
yc-a toll us sene details which woul be iv:co33ary for the Tribunal- anything
of sifnl'icanco?

A Altreso w a s the leader school of the Oe man r»licol profession.

It was ‘tho institution an' property of the nodical profession. It was not a
.-.attor of tho Party. '•'a.n.r and other inportant pooplo in tho nodical pro-
iom1:b after 1933 dedlod that tho training of doctors should bo taken i ito
•or cwn hands ar>'. not lift to aiy training officials of tho Party. Tho law
on tho establishment of tho Reich Chamber of Physicians says that it is the
lical t-.sk f tho Roich Physician load or, first of all, to ?ivo post-'-radu"*
training to lectors, and in tho second place, to train then in health
litics. This natter was of post—raduato training, the purpose' of Altrose.
j.tro3o roo undor ao. Tho responsibility for what was done thoro and taught
there is borne by cu alono and I an glad to boar this repcnsibility. What
>rr,s taught th.r; was an ood. It wrs norally and nodioolly on a

high 1>jvo1 and it car. bo defonded before the world. Lectures on hurvan oxp< ri-
nants u -• not dvon there as tho Prosecution assune3. Tho nain.purposo of
this training was to ta5o the doctor away from EE-tori alia tic thin;a into whir
h • was unfortunately forced after the period of the first TVorld War by all
tr« unfortunate conditions. In this connection I should like to mention on
r, ai.ln, I have noticod - that two lofens counsel have - - k ’ their cl' nt
r. the witness stand "Did you attend ary training course at Altroso?"
An!, the defendant truthfully sai , "No." I can understand this quostion of
the dofonre counsel only for, of course, I have thought about it — to ■ r
that the Prosecution has assart©' that everything criminal In the Qcmar.

4465


-

13 Jfcreh ii?—.-..7“-I‘’-2- Grass (r2‘-'o3holr:_r-7enSchoen)

"curt Ho. 1

o.iical . ofosoion was taught to then by th- training at Altrese. I should
llic. to state very briefly in this connection an' to mkc it unnecessary for
- ther dofonso counsel to ask the sarc question which trro already havo asked.

of the twenty toctors ir. the dock with the exception of rysolf over
participated in any course at Altreso oitter as a student * teacher. T j
- - tion has assertod that tha crininal spirit of doctors of tho Third
Saleh was taufht there under :y responsibility.

T itness, in connection with this nac&cal school Altreso the Prose¬
cution authority in session of 9th of December, obviously nooning you, have
iid, I auotoi "Th; so-callcri ccvxado rolationship^and sports activities
*ss only a canouflago for political supervision and espionage and further
that tho participation in thoso ccursos bocano a duty - ono ha l to & through
£1v<j years training - ov.ry your f ew weeks trainin'*. Ono has roproached ycu
on part of Trosocutior. authorities, fill ywi answer this?

A The Irosicution has apparently been cdsinforoad. Othorwiso they
would not ht7o s i' that I ir. convince '. Participation in coursos at Altreso
-i voluntary. Th.ni vroro so rcry applications for course fron Party nonbor:'

-aI non-Party oanbors th-.t far froo all applications could bo constdorod*
Itoroovar, there was no political supervision of those who t ok thoso cou -os.
n h c utrary Dr. “ognor and I woro supervised by tho SD at Altroso. Evory-
-r.j could open his noith thoro and oxpross his opinions openly. Altroso was'
th. place out-spokonrjss ar. ’ a^nor an;*. I ropoatoSJy spoke quite openly
r’:out ovorythirv: that wo did not oensidor right in the Third loich and wo
•iito op rOy object to things wo did not con3idor riiht. Tho result was that
ognor was rope ate-’ly called in to Bornann - was given a rjorirxmi and Bor.ant
said that -'agnor in'. I shculd bo careful - wo should keep our nouths shut or
;:r,. thin- -oul hapj n tc us. a-T- r tss not nuch affectot by this. Ho rnca
sal' to ?' nvann, "I !ont rive a ',ann. If this >33 too far for no I *-dll <-
t- Hitler an' vill tell hir southin' and ho will agrte with nc-." As far tu.
our public opir&:n v.-.s concerned an ’ th. trainin of our -'actors wo had such
ar. ap_crtuaity without th- C-orian Hoich that all other professions onviod u.
this position of our3. Besides not only doctors wore trained there at


«66


13 rfcrcfc 7-A-ATO-l7-3-0ro 3 8 < HlldBshe j r-^7cnScboer.)
Court Jfo. 1


Altr-so it was also available for nidwives, '.or.tists, oni pharmacists. And, i.
v-.u can inagim that the hirhost number of rnrticipants in the cou&so at
^.troso was 123. Ttat we had to havo a vacation of throo aenths here in ‘ .a
j . -»>on enc can soo that it is nonsense to say that every Goroan doctor
had si»nt a few weeks at Altroso every year. If that ha 1 boon the caso thon
Altroso w l not have boon able to accomodate 128 people p^r courso but r.
v-ul 1 tavo had to put a few zeros after 128. That is hew I fi urn it accor
ing to Aden Tioso.

q '/itnoss, I would like to ask you - that nicht bo interesting to the

• •

Tribunal, what war tho no. her of G.r an doctors', approxinr.toly?

A The nuabor of Gur-in ct'rs in 1933 was about 60,000. At the end
of 19Uli there was 85 to 90 theusan’. inclu ’!«* the nodical officors of tho
Araod Fo jos an! thoao doctors who had com to Germany through Austria and
tho Sudiltonlar.

q itrtoss, you are eh r,;od by tho Prosecution, as you ronwnbor, to
hevo not 1.1 tho patient choso lhio own doctor, oven if ho is a nonber of an
association of Stato insuranco. If ho cimo. ,-ay it .dll ’ i by thi;
as- "! M or., In this connection ono spoko about allopod attempts of tho
socialization f tho na VLcal profession and tho clir.ination of this freo p: -
fossicn. -t was your attitudo to those problons and how did you deal wi 1 .


this?


13 Kirch 1947 Karrm (2nt. Hildoshcifser i v.n S:h-n)

;.urt So. 1

As f <r th Terell question which y» hrvu nut to ac, I should like t
:ii the ir. . r_et char o f the corruption f th- Gcrcen aedicr.l science. It
is true, ttot in the years aft^r 1932, there wer- s. ri-us cispivin. s about
•ci-r.tific d-velopour.t A rx-dicine and that th-y w-r. justified. I shared
*h;3<- nis *ivir. s aystlf. I never xdo secret of this. The rc'scfis were a
certain -/position of th- Party to academicians rri also th- Jr-J<nrti-n of
* . no t .wards r.atur- hoalin nd quacks. ..crd-clc cedicin-, that is,

s -c ll-d "sch.-l a-dicirv,", was frequently disavowed by icnortmt pq . 1«
ai tho Lay h^ltr in Gcr_i ay was adnir-d y those ,«o,ple. Thus, Dr. .a nor,
ii.ut th- - innirv f 1934, had to invite th. 1 y ho'lor wh- troated Kota t

• ra.-tin* f d ct rs at Munich. Hess toik part in th- be.innin -f tho acotin.

. —If. aut t::is did not prevent us, and .>r-vent Wo ner s ‘ocificaUy, durin,
this neetin fr a havin this nan who was treatin H-ss arr-:t d *y the polio-

.cause <f fr ud whic:. c e.. - r v-d. This ictasplo is -r.ly a son 11 cantribut-

1 n t the discussion f the situati r. in which wo f ound .uroulvcs. To clear
i- tlx qur I-’ s ir. c-rr-any was an .-.in f thu N' ti rval Socialist Loa..ue of
Physicians fr-s th- tiow bof -r- 1934, and it was U n-r's doin'; that th- so-e
colled "now G-raan u-dicin-" w- s created ard this was frequently node fan f,

•it unjustly. It is th- synthesis A sch ol n-dicine -nd nature hoalin , but
... et sc loud* is th- foundatixi A it. This ir 1 U ri.. - L I froquontl •
a* d ut in s.xakir. end writin ; that natur- h-nlin. .;nv- us -xcollont
-i jsti ns f .r sci-atific aodicir.o nd always h-d. I noed ( ;ivu -r.ly a
f • -x aplos th t the o -c'll-d th-rapy f experi-nco that is nature h-'lln
Is : ch t .f di it Us to scientific c-dicirv.. F-r example t quinine, Vit'.ans

* ad l, c ichicin, -tropir. , aaffein, all tho -pictoc, balnoolo.y, end tho
iy or c Una to s, which, in spite of a-nturi-c A rej-ctin by scientific

edicinu, ir v-d its.If. Then the ther-py in perici-ous n-.oi", nd, finally,
x-rcin. therapy un-ur . in p 3t- ry-Utic cripplin , a therep/

■ ich was intr duccd by Pr-sid-nt F.. o.v-lt. ith.ut this * sis f the now
B-dl-in. .:ith which I «ark-d with the utst ndin repres-ntativo f
sai.T.cu, it would n_t have b-un p ssi‘ lo that ir. IS 9 I succ—d-d in h'vir.
thu ly ho-lors d-iriv-d by l'w f th-ir rirht to practice. ..h-n th- oros-nt

in October, 193^, was aado th. subject A a discussion withtiv lu-.di.ng

4468


•3 M-rch 19A7 -«-18-2-?K?- farrow (Int. Sildoshoiaer & v« Schon)

C.art H. . 1


v


; ,rs r. litics of the State and Party \y H-ss pers-nclly, I c-.uW --r.lv .-ako ay
5 prevail referring to this now Gurar.n roedicir.e. The defendant Gc’jhnrdt
-.x~, n the witness stand, ricfly referred t this meeting. I sh aid like t
•id a-roly th't, in addition t- Hess, -rri-as Gauleiters and Reichsloitcrs

«

-Unded this - ting. An ag the gauleitors, f r cxanplo, was Julius Str-ijchor,

• r* Gauleiter IL-ewcr Oldenburg end -.ihcm it was intended w-uld ’.econo
Health Uir— .or; nd a nur..ur of the persona who wor. nore r less opposed
. th* medical r f.ssicn. ..her. the Lw was almost -.ist I turned to He as,

, n-.c sitting ft - ay right, and I said t hi;: "It was y.u y.urself, !Ir. Hcnr

■h at A ’.ef >ru tb- new Gorman cedic-1 science y giving y ur nano t - the.

%

Eua.lf Hess Hospital." I evicted sy stat-aents and I said: f / j gcntl -n
d.ciC- hr t, in addition to the d-ct.r, tho lay healer is t; to given legal
rrcti n, then y u wiU •- th. death -f th- new Gcrsnn n-dicrl science."

I d t * eli that -no c uld clo rly than thr.t. I regret

•.at tbs ?r a-cutton h s not submitted any d.cuaents in this connect! >n, Ti*
le c-urs. I events c-ncerning this law - I put this to -no side. It was n t
: .tr y«d with the th-r d cuaents. It was put into American h’ ndo at my
Instigation. I c nsiderea it y dut ,* • preserve these documents an a document
f nodical rultur 1 hist.r; fra a tL-.e when the d-ct r was fighting f r
ri rity in t. .cal science. It can r ved th -1 I have always uiduav red
t preserv. b. ri,.hts i Corson science nd I did so with success. All G> r tu
idealists end noccirlists f any roput&tl n had a -rt In tho training of tho
oora.n nedical pr:f- 86 i.r.. Uy office chiefs had instructions fr a iai to got

St ma aa t rs witr. ut c .nsiderati r. f P- rty a • hip. 1 cxoressly
Md rep., tedly pointed out that oedical p st gru-ur.U. trainir. i t an
a Party ‘.ut f specialized kn.wledgc and a ility. Th t t hat
’.raining, fr a 1935 to 1939, was Lipr^vod there is no d ubt at all for any
.:tive -rver, and I elieYe l:;l if Gem n c.dicrl post graduate


ir-iring h d ee-n as p- r, and the level -f the G-raan cedic 1 .»r fesr_ n 3
•o or ,'i.n-r.ts like t say tbr. I would certainly h Vo n:t, in November,
r-ccived an fficial English invitation to L-ndon to give a lecture n
>-rr r. medic - 1 1 post graduate training. I received this invit.ti n thr ugh tho
r. d f th- 5 tat English .. at gradu-to treinirg, Colonel Proctor, who know


13 - rch 19-

C'ort Sji i


18-3-?Sr- K rr-:. (Int. iild< shclacr & von Schon)


i-ri-", tr.air.isg system very well and »ho was „n the 3oard of the Third
.^rTf-ti in al Congr-ss '-nd who was also on the Board of th- International
A c-.desy. Ir. connection with the training of the acdicrl profession I must
rJ«r t tw oth-r circumst- sees. It is due t:. mu that the students in their
..---clinical studi-s were giv-n the o ligation f porf.raing nursing service,

I

Trls ■‘•a an rmng*-aont which the pr»secuti:n witness. Professor Leibbrrndt, 1

••4 to ackr.-wledgu had its value, am I also introduced a three months'

*

%rl d X w.rklng *dth practicing doctors .r in hospitals.

C. The express! n "Fasulatur" was n >t underst d * y the interpreter, ’./ill
ja i plu.se ropoet th> expression ■Faailatur"?

Is introduced the arrangeo-nt that e'vory student, during his clinical
iiddicSj hod to spend at let st three months with a roc -gnized practicing
Rician .r In a hospital .as .-"fanlus" - th-t is, aracticing student -
jf his State occminati-n. This was an arrang-sent which had not cr.istud
.' re which -sly holpod th. training A the German doctor.

IH£ PRESIDENT: Thu Trilunol will ruw bo in recess.

U reCess was t/ken.)


-M7C


torch 13-- 1 K-21-l-iIeehan (Int, Hildesheimer & Brown)
Ccurt Ho. j.


TH3 The Tribunal is arain in session.

■

:i 'A.. oJFTJLt

■itness, Me stepped at your explanation of the charges r. ainst you that

ycu were partly cuilty of being responsible for the decline cf the standard

A the Gersrn medical science; would ycu like to add something to this pcir!,

;r have ycu finished with your explanation?

-» I would like to lay stress on the following fact, with the fight to

-ogate the right of the unprofoasicnals and nature healers tc practise, 1

ichieved the consuaation of a wish that has been the doctor's wishes for

seventy years; for sevent, years ny ignorant person or crack-pot could, if

he wanted to, inaugurate a physician's practise, hang cut his shingle, call

himself - rofcssicnal tnd thus be turned loose to the general detriment of

•»

carkind. Pleaso let ae statv also the following, nd this is an assertion th

%

oo or.e could refute If ho examines it objectively; I state that if all
professional organizations and associations of the Third Reich were as decent
x... ha. .acn directed as decently and with sue;: a spirit of responsibility

German physicians, then this .ar that began in 1939, and the casualtios
-nat are associated with it, would not have taken place.

3 Your Honor, it was cy intention to submit a book to ycu in this
connection, which was initiated by the defendant 31cmo and cone cut in 1910.

:h was published by C. Fischer of Jona arel bears the titlo: "The Latest
-icine hi Seen By Their Creators." This bock deals with a number of
ltcturos, which wereheld by members cf his Berlin Acodeqy for aodicol instruc-
•dcr.s in 1910, w,-ic;. r.as .. pi ..shed by tho Berlin ..cademy for military
Instructors, this is the academy vtuen the Dfendant Blcae Croatod.

his ook wa3 dedicated to the German medical Society and was supposed
■*o Instruct then ab-.ut latest research in a short ay and woo for their
i.f nation. I sr.sil wait with this ar.d I shall submit this bock at a later
Ki., because the translations free this fccck arc net ready yet and there i-
p-i..t iving you the German text only if tho translatena =re hot at on-
-■ 1 . But, Your Honor.

H*KDY: ifcy it please Your Honor, the Prosecution respectfully request


Ifarch 13-^-aK-21-2-Meehan (Int. Hiide*hci-er & Brown)

Court Sc. 1


that these bocks be made available fcr cur perusal after Or. Sauter finishes
-sins then after liis -Ire xaoln'.tdon.

DP.. SrSJTSts Certainly. Your Hc-or, I would like to ask you now to take
cctc f t-. documents, which arc contained in Document Book Blcce and a
supplementary volume 1. These ore contained in Doc ument 3cok Bloac on Pago II
cf Document Bock So. 3; a letter of Frofessor Dr. von Bergcann. I repeat
Document Bcok Blcce, pare 11,-Document So. 3, a letter from Professor Dr. vcr.

= --i rr. director of the Second Uedi’cal University Clinic in l&mich.

The ether Dccuaent, which I shall sake use of new, is a letter in the
tuppluaentary volume, pace 23, Docuaent Bcok Blome* pace 23, Document No. 13;
a letter cf Frofessor Dr. H. Ucrtius, Chief .of the women's Clinic at the.
University cf ioettingon.

These two persons uro well known in Gonaany throu.-h their anti-iasoist att
they ore octh certified by tho American occupation and they have beer,
instituted in their offices. They are two scientists who arc famous all over
tfc« world, thoi: nnr.< ‘—cus nil over Europo.

-ih. H«i.DY: ay it please the T: .unal, both of these Documents referred
%c, the Er. lish copy in ny Document book, contain no curat; I wonder if tho
Sermon ccpies havu been sworr. to; do ycu.havc tho c.lginal exhibits, Doctcr?

DB. S^UTJi: :.'c. Your Honor. These documents noud no affidavit for the
following reason, these two professors who sent me those certificates are
i 1 ’ -'.cr- f University Clinics. The universities in Gcm'r.y are net private
istituticna, but public institutions and institutes of public law. The
■iroct ... uch institutes arc public servants. The documents, which are
~od by such officers within their authority, are legal documents, public
ivid docuacn. , end such dccuments need, accordin'; to Gorman law, no ccrltiii-
vi.r :r signatures of their writers.

I, therefore, assure Ycur Honors that it is the same in «norica. I can
Imagine that in the United States a Judge who signos a sentence cr some
- -I'll official *ho su v -±' - - copy f such a document; that he should go to the
!:.ary Public ir. order to have his si is-turc certified, otherwise there would
^7 rsc public legal documents.

4>n>


l\rcfc 13—A-cK-22-3--lt-d'X. (irvt. Hlldesheimcr & Brown)

'curt Sc. 1

I, therefore, present the point of view that the rule cf the Tribunal,
about this certification of Documents am affidavits, can not be carried cut.
If it is a natter cf public documents cf a public servant or cf a civil
_.rvwhich he writes within the authority of his office.

T nay therefore point out that the Tribunal, if 1 an net mistaken, in
ether casus has also asserted themselves cn the same point of view and until
this point, fer instance, I have not seen the Prosecution have any doubts tc.
sake use of sentences and other official documents, although the signature c

these documents was not publically certified. This is not noecssar., as the

%

-ffurencc is between the public servant and the private individual and the
difference between the public legal document end a simple . rivato document,

I would also li^e t- ,-int c t, Your H c nors, I do not think that a
tugh official can understand or see y point if I would ixturn tho Document,
which he 'n his.copacity as a public logal servant, in his capacity as a
lir-.ctor cf his institute, has sent to mo. He would not understand if I
would ask him tc fo to a Notary Public and to have tho signature certified;
he would not understand it. Your Hcnors, if the Prcsecutlon would not
r.cc r. ' • publically tho statosont because it has not been stampod.


Ui73


Court So. 1

13 Her 47-A-22-l-£EX-?u:ty (Int. Eildeeheiner & Brovn)

*iH. EAB2Y: Ycur Eonor, in view of cement of counsel, I out' object

0

t; the adniesicc into evidence of these tvo documents. These docur.ento
feOteer to he testimony of fact concerning the defer.dent Blcno, testimony
as to nor* onrl kacvled^e on behelf of affitnts. Shagr ore no senblnnce
of e le^cl inetru-.tnt as proscribed by this Tribunal And have no >rcnnW«
executed in lieu of e note, and there isn't any evidence that they are
executed in their official caoecity.

further*'.ore, they are not testifying as to facts of state interest.
They arc testify!; -s to facts concern!; the Personality of Bloro, and
I odd in nasal; that If I *«*- on trial and Hooeevelt or Trunan executed
an affidivit in py behalf, I would be rer.dy to assune that they oust also
have their signatures ev..m to. Therefore I object to the adnission of
these docur.onte in»o •tiicnsc.

THE PSlSIDOTt In thalr uresent for*. thoeo docu.ror.to arc entirely
inatoUslblo In srldencs. The nrosocuti.r.'a objection is suttainod. Of
course, the Aocunsnte ray be eotplcted and offered *«nln in thoir urcoor.
ford, butin their orosent forn they are ontireiy inadmissible.

aa. SaITI?.: Your Honor, I do not think I shall do this bocauoo 1
believe that those tftmtler.en vfco are wll-taovn nil over Euronc vould
not understand if I vould ask then to do this. I shell, therefore, nok
•hose tvo .ntl on to co .o to Suornbcr* ns vitnessos. I vn afraid
that those tvo ,:sntlenen in question vill not understand this cither,
but ! shell drev the consequence frun this. In the future I shall ob¬
ject to all documents of the orosecution if they ere not certified by
a notary public because vfcet the defense counsel have to do can also bo
asked of the prosecution authoritios. and the ri*ht of the -xosecutlon
authority is else the ri*ht of the defence counsel end. therefore, if I
have to have these documents certified, the sane allies to the nr.secu-
tion authorities.

SHE PESSIMIST: These documents vould certainly be refused by the
C.urt if offered by the Prosecution if I hewd any objection by the

. If counsel desires to recuest the attendance of these vit-


dofeadant


C-urt Si* 1

13 Xar •,7-A-22-2-E2:-Pu'.ty (1st. Eildasfaalaer i Srown)

the Tribunal will asprcre the reoueat.

2Y SU SAUTES:

v Witness, you hero hcarl that I an sot In the oceition to sutcit
>).• dr^» r.« h‘o. Pc you Jcnov tltcic drcurentel

A. Yob. Yob, I do.

v Vhat do you know clout the writer of these two docunents7 One is
Professor Dr. Yen Sermons rnd the Other Is rrefoseor Dr. fortius. Plcroo
to short if I any rsfc you.

A. Professor Beripenn wns until the cad of tjje wrr director of tho
Socoad Hod Leal Clinic Cerrito ir. Sorlia, rnd thereafter was director of
the Second hedicrl Clinic in hunlch with the specific authorisation of
the A orienn couprti.n ruth it 1 os. ho is tho recognised iaterniot in
Cemcror with an lntern.i.lorcl reputation to be cajoerod with only n few
people in the whole world. ^

Professor fortius in Gcettir,;®:. lu director of tho GynrcolOrfy clinic,
-f tho vonon'o clinic. I id.ove ho took oa that •josltion in 1933. Ho
hrd nothing to do with the Perty tut dosolto the lrv relating: to outlie
.fficicls end dospito off^rts aado against hin ty Party officials ho
could not to dopjsod desoite the fact that ha has scno Jewish tlood. He
Blso is c oerson of intornrtionrl refutation rs a torchor, univeroity
tr -'foosor, rad is intornntiinilly known :,c c ayaccol «*lst.

... I will not deal with iotcilc f these t<-o ctnta-ente. I nn
iatarss6*d In t»< fsll-.viiy; —

a?.. H^rDYf Your Honor, I object to rny further c«r*nt ty counsel
''• C' t vj A rur.vats. They have Von ruled out hore in this caso rad
further extent is unnecessary.

THE PEESIDEET: Counsel _nde no ibjocti .natlo c. - .ent about the
d»cunentc. Counsel noy proceed.

—• SaQ 52B: I did a-t understand this.

THE PEESIZEITT: The Tribunal rules that counsel for defendant Plrne
kd -ede no otjecti;natlo connent about these documents end thet counsel
“«h. proceed.


Ciurs So. 1

13 Kar ,7-A-Z2-3-21C'.-rutty (1st. Kildesheiner « 3rw=J


5? ZB. Sima:

v Dr. Slcce, Is the session of 20 February the defendant Professor
Dr. Hostodc gave evidence here end steted that Cost! continually tried
to :eku -.iiticrl p, rtlcB a part jf tfco nodical scionce and the Oernan
aodied Association. On the 20th of Fotnmry Dr. Bostick steted further

S

•hat Conti had a olar. to close levs the German nodicel inetitutOB, uni¬
versities, to eliminate th- litoraturo, nodical literaturo, ar.d eo on.

Perhaps you could tell me, not in detail, whether it is right,
whether it is correct that you, in the interest,of medical education and
in r.edicel standards, fought lorainst these regulations on tho part cf
Cr. Conti although you wore hie subordinate. I would 'tk you, Dr. Bloese,
not to deal with your relationship to ~r. Conti in deteil. This will
cocio up later. Please -nly talk about this articular point.

A. It is truo that Dr. C-nti interpreted his office alaost oxclu-
sivoly rs a Political one ond that ho uood his training no a Physician
-nly as a rcas:neblu oxcuou for hlo holding that office. It is truo
that th<.ru wes a Plan in 19 i3 to close tho Ocr ^n ur.ivorsitios in ordor
to oond all the otudonto either to tho front cr to tho labor forcoo.
However, it vr.s net Conti alone who tureued such plcns. I believe that
Sjobbcls aloi ployed a role in these plans at that tine. At my rnto,
th-oo who prrticiortcd in this, the circle •A the" vac r.;t specifically
United. 7urth.orr.oro, in tfco yoor 193-;, clle f ;odly to cave oanor, r
lrr.;c number .i *.ovsocoors md eeri-dicalo were linlt-.d, including
scientific pari dicnl*.

At that tino there wore negotiations is the EoichcorceceScannc-r or
in the Solchsschrifttu:»skan:er. the Beich frees Denartnent, and I took
•iir*. in ,r.e ouch conference. There ware -.resent various gentlemen and
representatives f veri .us organisations and they spoke systeratically
' • -ut the scientific oeri idler!s. At that tlr.o I "rousted very cner-
itically c.-r*inst the Units that they were r.ttemptin.- to put r. scien¬
tific periodicals and did bring it about that the limitations were of c
'in*:. urn. I further kniw that against the necroros to close the univeroi-

hk76

- -- — ----—- - - 3


"curt S'-. 1

13 Met 47-A-22~.-ISi-?»t'' m V-- & - -


tius rrofesa-re Brandt cad Hostoek ale- protected ener.'e ticrlly. Thoro-
usen, I Ijed e considerable difference of opinion with rrofcaaor Conti,
tad the coaeecuence vas that I *'« thereafter excluded free attending
6 uch conferences.

Dr. Bleat, I tolievo that you ,;rvt a wroa^ deto. Thi" oaoor
ahorte*je vc# la '43.

jL. My error. I -oeont to icy in '*.3, not '34.

^ Dr. ?lo-.c, you_re.". enter that the nrosccutlcn tad the export,

Dr. Lelbtrendt, ala- chtr,;od you vith -Jer.nittiu*, as-celled "nature
science* Uyown to nrrcticv. This, f-r instnnee, la the cr.se of Dr.

Eoraton, vhsa ix have -.oatlonet^ioi-. rcrhr.aa you e -uld give us a
rouort. Kw jay .( those laynos verc .-lio'-ed to crccticc in Oernany
cad vhy in individual *iiit *.r«. they cll.vcd tv Practice?

(


*3 rcb-^.-S^-l-ritt -r Id (Inc. Er ■ :, . 1 -sl-irrr)

C urt Z

’ , w . *iw cr.nti .n it. s - c 11. ttipe 1 r ..-’tur. He-iir. uns r. ncco3-

:-ry cai.xi ise 1 hod t strike . ttli K.ss i:. rder t oc nblu t. pass the law

y,,t f-rbvl.- lay in. i-re t practicy. I c cl' uit.r iat.. this c ..-r-a-Sw

•itft ut s ivw. 3 b-cnuso in the 1 -st .-.r.niyais, thw r. r ul’.ti.nc th t dct-r-incd

•

rretncr :r a t - p-rs.n c ul- boc. . p. pRysicim in nature hc.'.llr^ ■’cjxndcd
up n th eppr:v?l f th- Raich Physicians' Chnhhtr.

In th- c ra. f tir-, nly n. such physician was nppr.vcd and that
LraUii, t- in-.lt. , - ' 1 c.ur.atlcr. I knew that Korston

- 1 rp.. i".ur ti - m 1 pr-.ctic.. lot: ' It Mr p-rs icl -.o fro.; nil

v^rth-h rl. 1- r fnlttice, rts, scientists nn-‘ht- 3s tr-ntod
. x , D-rfl -1 : vo-s. r r p rt f th- y--r, he

practiced in S-ed-c Ur whteh r-c-ire. .Ifici'l apjrcvrl fra th. O-rnn
r.-temwit. Thus, rv. e re . t e.i r, r ts r w i.brtr t ol c -rs- nsswwd

L c uld, th-t n w such ct rs i r .. ir n- lin w-rc u«in. in'iscri. inntcly
appr^v-d*

* *.tur f ct, tiv.r- •• nly r.e such t -ctsr.

Dr. 21COC, 1 «uld lik. t ‘ t thus- -r..r-l qu-t* as .n- —re

>.{ r- Ideal nth the -th-;r p lnts. Ihc r.s-cuti nas oll as .T ;_e-:r Uibbran
tan. sh wn h:w C- r -n-Jjwish d ct.ro wer-cccludod frvj practicing; h-.w th-y ; ere
t reed t — - r r D-vi«‘ Lt-r, t have i Jewish First nno, t hr.v- nly Jewish
patients, nr. .uv th-j eur- nrt all-... t- pr-.cticb at -11 m ouch like. 1

- ul-: . t like et-ils in t! is .nttor a in b.c use Dr. Kostaohl already -'-nit

• • : •_? terday. : . : Lik- t . u, th u,n,

n ant, 'V-th-r y.« psrticip-.tc' ir. t .s. «. svreS nnlnst y ur Jewish
r lie'^uus?

S c r. 1; , 1 TiSsr t 8 SUV*? 08 it tiv fl ' - bCT or

sh.t r-'nizati n rr.s it? that enn r'« t- l ut e.ut this v-.tter?

... first . all, : i - ' Uc ntOjr, it was a

- f c'.rryir ut - er-.r'l le.-l ;r -rtsi ns >-c ut.- n t nly thv Jevdsh

ci . 18 •• r- tiu. Sfr of D-vi., bvt .- - . r it. It was :■ t -s if

er.. j.vian ;!iyrici'n .»-.s c. .-ill- ' t carry r. cert in civitieS, '.rnt -v^ry poy-


13 '3-2-Fits:trair*, (I.t. r rn- il -sUi-.r)

Ccurt I

jj^stcimw sc pOlwf si l»rt Jwrisn *e c.ul practical bw limited

ccrfc'in Mel's.

ZOattiticn t this, that effects rsan physician, aria -n feoalo.

, e i3 • t c ;.i -r :rri_ c uples. i.hon
f tto. -arrive wore physicians, c ul-* o t c nsi 'or that fact,

, b-, • f li at -.cc-r-'ls-j t lav, -wither t.u. rife r th. huabrn c uld
pr*etlc-.« 3 - f c ul .. -•

% “h -v. •.- r '-ro f r th.n -j* t - rin : of thw D-vi-' Star, rr

in 193ii, t c -.11 c ti n f Jewish citi?wnr t 1 ' rk?

*

a .... .wicn HI i: r r.

. r . d ot ra r f r all ... ibera of

-11 t-..r pr fwSJicr.e?

... .‘or -Jxro I il : * -'~t

it:; so, I .. « c . . . » .* . 1 ;, th* qu-atj n t ; vr

r.l ti ns i-. Dr. C nti, ^ ul 1 . t *, t . rtiy, nb.i.5 t us •

t.U us *nicn ic . . tti « i ‘ in *a c.. fiiown yaiw-ro

hli J cputy?

... I ma Dr* .'a '-put>, er. r Us.- in nis capac ? Reich

ftyoicinns •Char.'ur , th.. r.f.rsi r.-.l • oi-ty f 3onvtn physicians. Here, too,

•A-r .1 l£ net r-,.i. *.c • : *CC r ‘ii. t 1"'.',

-. . jnioi »I ur c ul • c i:r .. . r .....pi. pioi tty

.wff* wit, I aza rJy r. ti-

r.-u. .is c'yput "i-c t’Ei. it-- -S .iti's Ini r. th't her- r. 'fcputy wfta

*

access ry.

Th- .S Physicians* Ic* u. ha _.n -at lie ’ dsc. 193U after tho
- tiun f the ’ ain Party - - ry in l portanoo.

r, : .2, v■ . i ... r 1 r. .

•ctiviti.s in t:_ vr. Party He .1th CfiiCw : <c.ir.. oinly tils: 1 att_nptod

. rr, m

Etr. .. - -. st 1 r t-sc-.lc anti nni iseoSwC such as concur an- ty^culrsis
’-*■ i: t , q .it. :n th t c ntiranliy ar.sw rc;.T in, the r anisnti n f sicial


33 _,rcl.^.-J?-23-3-?i-z -r i . Int* Sr -1 -sheia;

C:urt I

Kcurityj in Conti's plans t- s:ciclisc I^r.cn u.dicino ant’t er-atc a so-called
geicns^wBuxvf'hoitswcrk and tlu.^ ».l*. in =any tfccr i p.rtsnt qcstl ns. • r
at’-plt. in 15U, C nti ccnooived the clan a sterilizing tho Prlish intwili-

£Ottia.

•e_. r''m y pers nnl r-lnti.ns with C r.ti —

Just a a nt, B ct r. I »afli life. *- interrupt y r u have
.V ua invJrt ? siti ns y u v rfc- *.c deputy ef 0 cUr C nti in the ■ -.in
p>rty gc-it: :rric- .i the S1.4?. I ~ uft-r-stc in rcl'.ti n t th- 2uthwv>sin
pr r-.., in . Ml ain,.. D. y « =*t '3 C nti's-oputy n the national

M ct r of to* Ik *lth pr r-.7

M • I I n. t r .pr : . -U :: U nnl r th- v.mounts!

Motor, n r did I to * in 6 -pU xr .. 1959 , that C. nti h.ert State Soorotaxy
itthat ti a. If I ha s< u aus - 1

B h uld hr.v. tt» -t. t •• e in * ut ti. xettusc it is • standp mt,

Ifint fclai R»ich F ysici'-ns*Letter ctn *■ -t t:w sr.x> tl-o t>- ft St te S-cr-t-ry

ir. t.;c ....i.istry of tha Int.rl r, pa thm ro r less to bis «n
jlcr knur's 'c-.th, mv-n I was n p tcntinl n«cws: r t hL-i, (deb .-iniatar
f the Int.ri r i-rieU cello-’ au t ni- an If%xvic" — a p sitie-n ns a State
S.cr. *. r • rtr; fuel r r. I. us. ft, nh’ns rt-nn, with

Btifi • n as i h\r„ just ^ivun . r_. ! was n t w nti'o - .ut y ~b loador
f Ub, Civilian -.rich Servi:., -.it.r .r W’t h* ' >OC - 0 • Uci ncr

Gcneml f r .nolle ■_ 1th. L. th-r . r s, -> i"‘-» s t sp. k hT cxvatod

i iffur_rvco betwo-R Sr ndt's fencul ns in thw chraent one" th» luncti ns in
th. Civilian S c tr.

Q. litre sc, y u h.-.r . - : ...r-’-. «... Dr, » a chi 8«i! in ot-il

,. D ; r :^r

i. Ir t - interest f S'v'..i .1 , ul lik- t fsk ; ii

. v c yosterdny ia e-rrvot in yrur pint n? u ye r

•ith 11 he s -Id?

... loc.

). - vl v like t - ’ s • -U.i.'. sp_cinl, s c.t-p-nv-ps w!:iob


y _\rcJf- 23 -L-fitz> eril; (Ir.t. Bj xo- Hil'fesacdj.cr)

C.urt I

Kcaachl hat* a»( ::cntir*. ? Or or- y.u satisfied with 2II Dr. s '-hi UnUt
•v. He. I sh Ul like t s=e- , :s s« ut .y lUati as wit!i C.nti nly in
?a r fficid .x er^ ces. I <« t b-U-Vv fch-t tho -thar c nstfernti ns rrc


relevant#


jjreh 13-/.-3K-2.-1-3card (Brcxr. ft Kildeshciscr)

Court No. 1

Q Dr., you, therefore, agree what Dr. Koaaehl stated as a witness
yesterday?

A lea.

Q I cs interested especially in one thing, when Dr. Ccnti received orders
free his superiors cr if he passed such orders cn to his subordinates or visa
versa do you knew about these natters, were you told about thca so that one
could assuse that you knew about the activities cf Dr. Conti, or was this not
the case, perhaps you could tell us about htis question?

a No, that was net the cast, a greet rounder of very important natters,
particularly t hose of political interest, wore kept from ay knowledge. This
resulted fron the basically different attitudes that Conti and I had regarding
politics and the ceJical j rof« ssion in general. It cuat bo added that never
•h.r. I differed ir. ay opirden frea Ccnti, did I refrain froa expressing it
-pcnly. Often those expressions of ay opinion on n y part did net fit into
Ccnti's political plans and the consequences cf that naturally was a certain
..Kniation and a '.rowing distrust cn the part of Ccnti toward no aroao.

However, I was net afraid, if nvcessary, in order to avoid an orrer to pursue
other channels, to turn frequently to the Party Chancellory or Party Uunbor
b'.rrjmn, and that brought it about that Ccr.ti forbade no by a specific order
n-.t tc turn either to the RdchsAinisters, Ruichsleiter cr Gauleiters cr
write then any letters.

Q hitnesa, perhaps you could answer with a short yea or no the following
questions: Is this correct, the statement cf Dr. Conti to tho effoot that. .
Dr. Blcno, that you. Dr. Blcee, repeatedly put ycur office at the disposal of
the Chancellory and Dr. Conti, and that had tho intention ongoing back to
ycur private practice?

a Yes, that is true. I offered to resign.

Q Frcfesscr, ycu have heard that the Prosecution is very keen to have tin
rtified that Dr. Rostock and Dr. Gcbhardt had their rcoas in the sane
'--ildin.;, and free this fact, that they discussod that it was not very likely
Vva one person in one rooa wouldn't knew about the activities of the person
ir. the other re as. c"iy for this reason 1 wculd ask ycu t o let ne know and


;krch 13-«-2X-2.-*-3eard (Int. Brcra & Hildeshdoer)
Court o -


tcU US, did you also work in tho s-:s house with Dr. Conti or were ycur
effices and those of Dr. Conti's in different houses?

„ ^tvr ftpril 1939 we were parted, he had cur offices teth in the Haus
der Deutsche .crate on Ur.denstrasse. In 1940 the Haus der ^utschen Aerate was
hit by a boefc, knccking cur a few rooms, and Conti mevod to Wilhelms trass e into
the building of the Berlin Party Chancellory. I remained in tho Lindenatrassc.
Then’during the next year I waq asked several times by Conti to transfer my
office to the building in uhich he had his office. He had moved several tines.

I always was afclo to prevent this and until the contusion cf the war I kept

ay office in Berlin in the Unionstres

q You have noticed. Witness, that I said in the statement Restock and
"«bhardt, and the names mentioned wore linstock and Professor Karl Brandt, but
that does net charge ycur statement.

« Ho, it dcoa not.

Du. S.LTI3: I would like to soy the association between Conti and blcme,

I would net like to add anythin: to it hero because that was nentionod by Dr.
Kosochl her., tut at the end of thu in to rro ration of Dr'. Blcae, I shall submit
t»c afficavits which have been cortified in tho proper manner, as they arc
private letters; namely, of one from a certain Adolf ..itmann and Dr.

Dingoldcy who was in the Chamber of Physicians. 2 only point cut this now,
the documents, sc that theso two affidavits can bo admitted Inter on. Tho
exhibit numbers of these affidavits will bo given later.

Q h few short questions. Dr. Blcae, tho answers of which can be given in
a short and conciso fora. You were a specialist on cancer research and in
1943 you received a new office as plenipotentiary for cancer research in tho
r-.search Office of the Reich.

„ That is true.

q Perhaps you can toll us shortly as ycu were a bob ter, and 1 think , a
Uriin, maafcor of the Research Counsel, 'hat was the t^sk, hew was the- position
arranged and hew did it work. I should only like ycu to answer those questions
in order to give us a complete picture which wo have already received by other
people, but in order to complete it?


U.63


jfereh 13-A-5:<-2i-3-3card (Inti Brew: & Hildeshoimer)

Court :»o. 1

„ In 1942, a new law was predated for the reformation of the eld Reich

Research Counsel. I belonged to the eld and new Reich Research Counsel.

The president of the eld cne was Dr. Becker who was succeeded after his

death by Rust. Thu president of the new counsel was Hermann Gearing* The

purpose of reformation was to coordinate and centralize to a greater central

research in Germany. The president of the Reich Research Counsel had at his

disposal for carrying out of his business the fellowing: First the Planning

Counsel Whose director was Frofessor Uer.zel. This was in charge of all

administrative and financial natters of the Reioh Research Counsel. Tho

research activities of the Reich Research Counsel was Justly in tho hands

of tho leaders of specialists under the plenipotentiaries. Later others

Joined this group wr.o « r-. co-vdaslonud for lessor tasks. Tho spccirlizod

lenders wore specialists in the field cf medicine and science, fer instance,

physics, chemistry, and sc forth. Beside th.se specialists, loaders cn an

oqual level, there wore the plonipctentiarlM. There were plenipotentiaries

in the foliewin • fields — nay 1 interrupt tc say I was tho plenipotentiary

for cancer resetreh, and also cn setters to ccobot biological wcrfnrd. There

wan a plenipotantiary for autcoic physics. In other words, there were very

spocific fields of Investigation which were particularly fcnpcrtant during

the war. These specialists leaders were i»odiately subordinate to Hermann

•

Gearing, and because of tho nodical nature Gearing *«s tho only ono who
could give then orders or instructions. Specialized leadors and plenipo¬
tentiaries determined what research was to be carried out and by when,
and in cconiesionine curtain persons for research, and of tho personal equip¬
ment which was put at their disposal. The arrangement, and gc- called
priority soqucnco was dene through the -Jar Economy Department cf the Reooarch
CoonsoLv He assigned priority number:: depending or. the pressing of the
or-'ties, and I believe the armament industry made availablo certain centin-
gertts. Dr. Grauer who was in charge cf tho cf the classification informed

specialist leaders and plenipotentiary sc far as he had the priority
numbers at his disposal. Research orders given in this way went directly
tc the Reich Research Counsel cr University or Clinic Directors, and they


and I


torch 13-A-T-X-2V-~-£card (l„t. 3rc*r. & Hildcsheincr)
Cc&rt Sc. 1


received esairr-.ents fer this fer theasolvos and their collaborators
Q 1 *ill ask ycu a question teaerrew Dr. I think it is tine,
tM that the 1 resident wants the Tribunal tc adjourn.

KvESIDrir: The Tribunal will be in rtccss until 0930 tenerrew

ocminr.


%•

Uu85

e.


Court S3. 1

1-, .lar -r7-&-l-i-iav-?oster (Int. Eildesheiner)


Official transcript of the American kilitery
"rlbur.r.1 In the natter of the United States
of A erica C4sBinst Sari Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Sueraberg, Gernaay, on
14 ..arch 1947, 09K, Justice Beals presiding.


TEE a*aSHaL: Persons in the courtroca vill please find their seats.
Ib* Eonjr-l .. the Judges of Military Tribunal 1. Military Tribunal 1
•s a-v In session. 3^d »:-ve the United States of America and this hon-
.talit 5r found. There vill te order in the enurtrooo.

XSS JELSnaiK: la-, itcrshcl, will ycu ascertain that the defendants
pre p.ll ore sent in court. ,

r?3 .oJiSrAl: hry it >lerse Your Hon a*, all defendrr.ts are oresont
in court with the exception of the defendant Oberhouser vho is absent on
ccemat of illness.

TO. ?BiSUa..ft Tha Secretary Gone: cl vill noto for tho record tho
ortsonce of all the defendants in court save the defendant Oberhouser
Vho is excused on recount of illness, boliv; in tho hospital.

C'.tsncol nay protend.

HURT 2L02 - Rccnv.od
DIRECT xXw.XXa?!Q» (Continued)

BT 3R. SaUTLB. (Coaw«j for tha dofoadiwt Bla*.):


rrofesior, I v.»U like to r«r.lnd you thrt today you pro also


.*< ( • rr.ifi. v . eterday you told uo bcf.ro tho court adjjurnod about tho
:-.«ich Resetrch Council, and you told us that within tho Roish Recorrch
C -mcil there vere deoerv ent lenders rnd pj onipotentlarioe. I would
Uko to len.v today hov the Reich Research Council vcrJtcd. As far as I
know, the Reich Restarch Council brought orders rnd .;ave then to various
scientists. Is that true?


‘i'-'-t out? ukc.t \ eY interested in is - I v-uld like to hr.vo clear infer-


a - did the Reich Research Council as e. control office ^rlee any in-
r.irles about the ptoblens’of, for instance, food, and oucstlons of the
truy, end on she- basis cf these exaainations did they giro out orders?


C .art So. 1

Act 47-K-l-^-SBt-?o8ter (Int. Sildesheiner)


7z'.a v.uid h:.ve been one o'.ocllilit”. The ether possibility is this.

lid indivldnsi research workers who derlt with ray orcblens - Aid these

cr. ecv-T&cch :ha Reich Foscarch Council end did they report about the

nrotleae with --tich they were dealing with at this tine, and which nrob-

ions they .-i tc eyaain-s in the future? And did those scientists on

•

their own accord ask f-r etnisaisn -r cake the proposal thrt t:.-/, or
their nss'.etwits cr their institutes, be ordered to exerine these oucs-
tioas rod to financed by the Eeich Research Council? These oui-nticns,

?rifessor Sites, I would like you to answer clearly, so thrt the Tribunal

*

h/c e clonr idea at ut the way the F.eich Eoorrrch Council worked and its
trOkS.

A. I only know about the lest case. I know no cases in which the
Roich Fooearch Council V/ itself h-.d detlt with the source of those Prob¬
lems or decided which problem vr.e l-roortant, and hr A cn-'r-rchcd the
scientists thcpselvc* end ai<ccd then to w-rk an these nroblone. In -jy
,vn sphere I only know cases in which scientists end research vjrkoro
,r institutes aoolied to tho Foich Scsonrch Council, or no torched ne
dirootly and pekod ae to #:ive then a ccrtrin order red financial end
personal support.

Sj it was, as a rule, thrt tho initiative ctr-.e fron the outoldo,
fro. tho scientists rnd the institutes, t- tho Fcich Resoorch Council?

A. Yes.

v And how VTS the >rdor .riven? Did th* socialist loader (ruch-
r -ort. nloitor), vit. the depart-vntd leader cr tho respective ocior.tif ic
c-ntrol, the individual eoecieliet leader vho was cr. expert, give these
Tiers ki aelf, or did the entire Foich Fesecrch Council or a nrjor
• cti,n of it have tv r.eet in order to decido thesv orders? Hov vro this,
hr ,f<.ss ,r?

Ju Bo. On the bcals of such reoucsts no sessions or discussions
' * ~i:cv. It vns rather a aattcr of the specialist lender, or the
^•-nic v-nti ry, to give these orders. In this res-tot he wco only
------nciclt, to Ooerit^. Thor! was no possibility cf objection or orotest


C;urt So. I

I, Abi ■«7*3i-l-3“2ai-?o»tar (Int. Eildeshainer)


_ t v.„ par-, of the ..enagc-ent or on the part cf the President's Council.

I nay cuote ra exemle. Oae day Dr. cit i ar:roaehtd no; I should give
e certain order to such end such a scientict. As I did not agree vith
•hi. particular ord«r, I refused to give this order, for nohod* could
vo no orders exeeot Goeriag.

„ When such e reau-st arrived, vfcich. for instance, car- 'ato your
croviaco, then you decided yourself, personally, either to giro ’nlo
order jr to refuse t» do •<., >r y-« discussed this ratter vith '.no aviU-


csntl


A. Yes.


U*58


14 Har-ZBK-2-l-Scbwub-Int. Hildcsheimer
Court Xc . 1.


1 is it also cornet to deduce from your statements
that the chief of one dope l-castt--stall we say Gchoin: .t
2muwrtru-r for Classical -icdicincs—was absolutely working
on his own and had nothing to do with the chief of another
department. 7or instance, he had nothing to do with your
own department fer cuno-r res..rch? «nd that one plenipo¬
tentiary director of c specialist section was not even en¬
lightens a do at t:io tasks of another department.

a that you say is true. ..h_t the one did, was not
thj otner's concern. I hed no possibilities to tell Sauer-
oruch anything about his own matters, and ho had no possibi¬
lity to tell uc what to do. Only about t..o entity of ell
'.S3lgned tasks of nil specialist leaders (iucaspurtcnleitor)
and plenipotentiaries un crientutior. of the ontlro ncich
Research Council took plr.ee; that tt-pp-ned every six months
cv^ry director of ; sp-ciclist section gave o general roport
.Bout the tasks, giv^n hie. T! esc orders wore collected and
printed urd copies were cent out to '11 concerned.

1 has the purpose of these suoaarios—was the purpose
to inform the iniividaal responsible officiol, cs for instunco
you or Cchciamt Sauerbruch, what .ssignments wore given by
other fleabers of the Salehs Research Council 30 that tho same
problem was not given out in different assignments to differ¬
ent scientists, or did this orientation, given from tino to
time, serve another purpose too?

A 1 should like to correct one expression which you
used. You used the word official.' .0 were no officials
tr._ Reich nese rcil Council; we were not p..id lor our act¬
ivities. uur work v.,.s honorary. 1 have never received a
P-nny fro..: the neich Research Council—not even so-called per
That I would like to scy in order to correct your ex¬
pression 'official. - .....


14 .1 r-ii?ii~2-2-Sc!hcb-Int- -.ildeshciiuer
"C'urt 1*3. i


r.s Inc as tnes6 reports were ccncc.rr.ed, their purpose
vis -inly La jy opmioii, to iafore- Goering and tnc toers
of the Prerl 'cat 1 s Council, generally. It was not the pur¬
pose of thtue reports to givo information in order to pre¬
vent the* individual plenipotentiaries would prevent overlap¬
ping in . *s • ata. She purpose of the new-organi¬
zation or the Keioh 1 oscareU Counsel under Ooering wen eo
transfer th .oc various spheres to responsible individual aen
ia order to cvcid overlapping. I shell givo r.n oxcaple:
-eheimrat SkUorbruch was icsponsiole for Cho whole sphere of
-edioine. .% second a.;n responsible for medicine, apart free,
ap^.cial assignr.cr.es, suoL us i.er an .aid..ler nosearch did
eot uxist. The r-fort*, It was dsT.on.in-d viit, with the ex¬
ception of 0 up i: no c nc^r ruscareh. ell orders with-
ifl the .Huich ve:. oonthuiized in the s.'i ice or Sauorbruoh.

Tu s ■’..to was trui l’cr -il the other PieJQs.

I ftitnefls. \r *:u follow up the routine In the itoioh
..esenreh Council, ro t.r ipvlloatioi: lilce it was in tno
translation emeo fro., the oetsld ic the noieh Research
-iur.cii. The Hatch P.escCroh Council juve out, tnrough you,

•a assignuunt, a rose rrnh .sri.gnm'.nt. On order, the scien¬
tist, the research warKer or the Institute received t.io
konien for carrying out >r rcsoaroh iscigouentn. .os

tr..t ij.l the xvcicl. acse-rah Council n.d to do with it*-or
••V-t hepper.cd tn<.n? Perhaps I could -.OK you wh.t did the
f-cciver of the reso-rch J3f.l.'.n.ent do, and what was his

rirst, on- got acquainted with the .aun who was to
•' I'eivc this order und only Anve out this assignment if one
rt-in that the -.n concerned really v:or£id ia this

«pcrt I ro- this, the .o_n concerned was under duty--
1 ■ ir *. every throe months; I don't exactly remember—to

U-90


14 -ir-a_-h-2-3-bchwcb-Int. .illaosa-i-er

Court .-o. 1.


give e working report to the Reich Research Council, to the
parties concerned in the ;toich Rosen re h Council. On the bo-
sis of this report, I could convince myself whether it was
really worked out; whet:. . the work vrcs successful. Pad,
tn_rcforc, I aid two possibilities: I hod the possibility,
if necessity ero30, to withdrav. this research assigns r.t.

; ..hot happened then, witness, with these reports?

For inst: r.cc, which were given to the persons concerned, end
to wnon you reported...

The reports I undo use- of for Jy full report which,
it regular intervals, I hod to submit to t:.c Keioh Rosuarch
Council; -nd it v*-s not matter of secret assignments. The
research worfctr concerned was not told hew fr.r he vns to
®Kc v lue of these -soignmunts. For inst-nee, in the clinic
-f Professor von hick-n in oarlin, if tncrc was an order in
this clinic ebout throat caucwT, it s certain that the
scientists concerned publish d t..is report in ..eg-zincs, end
g.vc it thus to the scientists end doctors.

* Therefore, it was net the case thet, for instance,
tac whole Reich Rosourch Council mot every montn--or deport-
nent within the Reich «ece.rch Council—and discussed the
cerr.nt results, end consulted about them and decided how
the3o results--for instance, in the interest of all nnnago-
-.r.t concerning profession of rms—or other purposes could
be made U3e of. ..us this the cast or r.ot?

* No; not in this particular way. In bigger intervals
t;..r wero sessions of the neich i.oseirch Council. During

•li t..is ti_e in which I was u member of the neich .research
'-ir.cil, there v._s not single time it happened that Goering,

. uc s.ii . 1 . would come on occasions but ho
never ,-rrived. The sessions took part in the following man-
: -r: Vhe director of specialist sessions reported ubout their


14 -Inr-2Bi:-2-4-Schw:_b-Int. .-.ildcshci^er
Court Bo. 1.

current woi <, t;nd in these sessions—to these sessions, tile
_..-:&ers e: prcsiclaa council were invited. «nd, Z regret

to s-:y, tl. t pert of these con hod no interest in these ses¬
sions ct ell oeceuso they Just did not co.;e. I could inngine,
of course, that if, for instance, the plenipotentiary for hish-
frequuncy research reported—iv.d to report about new r« suits—
it such a session, end the Reich Post -sinister or his deputy
hid tricen pert in 3uch a session, thet certainly new results
would hevo been aade use of, so far cs it was in the interest
of the Reich Post ministry or the Inf or.it tf on Office.


1: ‘torch l7-::-..TI>-3-l-Lc3s-r (Int. Hildoschoiaor)

drzrt !%><» 1

5 I youI! liko to ask yo; a last question about the Reich Resm.-ch
; -u nr- il, witness, cone ami rg the importance end the significance of the chan
cf the Prosecution about conspiracy. This is the nain reason why we aro doal-
ir-" with the Retch Rosonrch Council so explicitly, .'hen these r< search assign-
r.:nts wore iven cut to in’ivi !uol research workers, or to institutes, was
special care talcon about the receivers cf thoso aasipnaonts bco Party
r-jabors or maskers of formations like the SS, or was it nocossary that they
roro politically sound, cr according to what principles in personnel I'lrectior
rjrc thoso assi.Txxints ; ivan cwt? *Tould you like X$ any something about this
natter?

A "fe, as directors of specialist sections, woul'* have boon fools if
wo had plvon out thoso assi .rtajnts according to political views. Political
7iows wore not concornod in this at all — th. nain point was tho ability and
efficiency n£ the research worker.

q And if I leave this spuainl sphjro now I should like to know onu
thing noro. ’hat you have tol ’ us new, was that the whole activity of tho
Reich Resoorch Council — tho riving cut of assignments, tho financing of
mao, tho rocoivirr of reports, etc. — or had the Reich Research Council
othor purposes an’ if so, which?

A I knew nothin: about a 'diticnal tasks of tho Reich Research Council
wd I also do net krv.-w what other tasks could have boon loalt with by the
Reich Rosoftrch Council.

q So thoso, thoroforo, w ro th. only tasks of tho Roich Rosoarch
C'uncll?

A Yes.

Q Apart frer. this activity -.dthin th_ Reich Research Council did you
fcav. oth^r tacks to perform, witness? In 19l*3 you bocaae Plonipotcntiaxy for
ar^cr P.osoarch, which was an honorary office an’ which waa somehow in connoo
ttoa rith the Reich Roc oar ch Council. I roul' like to know hew it was that
'•-st you received this special ordir for cancer research. Sinco when and in
way !i ’ you deal with ttv: ccnccr research an! how was it that you were


1L 'rnrch 19!i7-iW.r>-3-2-Lo3Sor (2at. ELldoschcinar)

ccurt -to, 1


Interested Jn it?

A no concur problca ha-’, always interested ao. Since 1535, apart from
th. problon cf tuberculosis, I had boccce interested in the cancer problen.

In 1936, perhapa it was 1935, I was a noebor of the Goman del .-action which
was led by OJuirrat Bcrst which took r^rt in the rroat International lon^res
in Brussels for cancer research, .'.t the sarx ties I founded th. Council for
Infl'irr.atlon research in Hockloriurs, under collaboration of Hr, Lasch. This
was the first tino that in a country with h-noroneous population any cancor

research was dealt with in the statistic. I ireuli like to draw the attontion

*

of tho interpreters to tho word "krankonstatistikfc" This moans statistics of
sick poopla. This was the first tine, unlike all other statistics in tho
vorl , sc-callol ncrtality statistics, hospital statistics, and succoes sta¬
tistics — this was the first tir.o. ns I said, that statistics wore nadu abov
tho fate of cana.i which deal- with over;- case of cancer disuisu Within tho
country* In spito of tho foet that .h_ru was no authoritative notico that
over/ enso of cancer ha.* to bo reported, throu ,h a special sorvico which I
create:• in.^ocklonbur , evorj case of oar.cor in tho country, from its report
until doath, was ro,-i«tei*od and was Iffurontinted within cortain quostlorm.
All questions w^rc. taken into account which had coao up in the scientific
literature ao receive' an cr.:icor* Thu voluntary cdloboration of university
professors, directors of institutes, chiefs of hospitals, and all tho prac¬
ticing physicians within the country, pronisod such success that I plannoJ
tho 3aaa sort of institution for Saarland, for Saxonia-Anhalt, and for tho
country aurreunlir.• Vienna, and I actually created those institutions. Thus,
vll casos of cancer were beirv dealt with in a way thit had novor boon dono
before* To mice uso of all material, a larf’Q nunbor of questionnaires w.'io
fill ! out, tut our ni’.v rsarios wore taken by surprise fron !tus3ian part in
W<*5 and tho material woul' not bo retume !j but I hope that in the future
there- will bo a possibility to make uso of all this material as it trill bo a
?--rvico to humanity.


hk9h


Us Harcfa L7-^:-..T>-2-3-Lcs5cr (Bit .-Hildas cbeiner)
Ccurt »o. I


la i?37 Gehsisrat Borst elected uj into the liroctiry of the Reich
Council of Cancer Research, of which Pehoisret Kocnir was a »:nbor from "'uerz-
W;r-, rr.' I~-;fessor Huettnar in Berlin, apart fron 3orst hinsslf. R’o signed
for thu into rationally roecnizod sciontidic nagazlne for career research. At
there is z~> disease which has as nary causes as cancer and which has boon
dealt within so nuch literature and on wJiich so zaich research lias boon dor.o,

I cade a spscial stu y of tho wholo sphere of cancer and arrived at tho
result that tho creation of a control Institutu for cancor research would
bocoew necessary, Lcr;a suns wore nocosairy for tho financing of this and wo
had tho support cf Trofossor Loonne in iWsscldorf until tho boflnniiv' of tho
warj 50,000/<X) na-dcs were riven over to r.i f~ca voluntary scurcos witliin th«
industry and wo oxpoct<rd to increase this te lC.dCD,0X narks The war
endod ry plans su Idenly, In cpito ef ttae i attempted to proceed further.

In 19U0 I s u nt - .v.'.cran'ua to Hitler, an’. Hess an' dor.iann tolno, by ordor
of Hitlor, that after the war I woul tu ablo to To and a contral institute
which I had aste;d for. I had ashed for t2* sun of 350,000,000 narks fron
"oraann an' sal * that this »cs thj nocossnry on~unt. Hitler told no, through
Bormnn, that the mount was a noglif^blc n-ttor and th.it tho m to rial and
suns which I model would bo put at ry disposal. As I Id not want to wait
for tho ond of tno war, ir. 1 $Jj2 I foun’ed tho institute for oancor rosoarch
on: ha-’ it financed wj.thir. tho Reich Research Counoilj tho instituto booano
one of tho fonations of th_ Kaiser ilholn Institute. Gaultdtor Groisor, in
Mrtholand, who hit h.ar 1 of ey plans, offered all possible support provi lin r
that this instituto woul*. bo built in his awn country. I accepted his offer
and rocoi-od for tho foun ‘alien of a temporary instituto that littlo estate
(Iv’cssolstodt) which was a .art of rovormont property„ This littlo estate was
near rosea.


C'-urt I"-. i
.‘-ET T*’ .


l-^:-resicl8 (let. Hildasheiner)


Vi will c'ae back t«. 'Mr later i- correction with the intended
research foi 'ha fl^htin^ of biolo*-ieal warfare nethods.

Cn thu ‘ ..t of June 1S-.3 I toe* over tils S. Kcwlstedt off ir.iplly. I
-uat alto r.cntion that this Central Institute for Cancer Hosoaiefc which
I had found-d • after T had heon rec.e the Plenipotentiary for Crnccr
Bwwaroh, : ti elected ns a xerdi*v: ocabar ,f tho Eoleh Boson .ocell.

v ‘r-f'-ei-r alone, In tfcie b .k vhich I offered to the T-fbunal
!>« inhibit So. 1, which l-icro the title ’She Due:' in v rrfrre* which 1 b
e kinc of Lutobio.jrcnhy, you deal with this r.rr.co? -vroble; . I t-oald be
ictorcstod in knovic*. in order to roelisu the ir-'rtrnce >f cancer re-
Bsrrch, vhrt y-.ur opinion ie ns a o’.eciaaiet How vay -dole in Gor.nnny
died uf cancer, not coaaiierinf; those ce.ec- in which tho d.le.-;no8io of
crncor c ..uld net be Mu ctly:

A. at thrt tl'ie vj.on I a .tvrt«d ■,' cancer otavisiice noat nconlo
vero of the -n'. niou tho'. v:;i---ul-cie hr.I t )* flitc nlrco in the aortcllty
st'tUtlOB. X nrevstf then W r.o 6 tut that dunth tha-u,;l. cancer task
*.h« firat Piece In the a .atUtic of urtalivy.

Purbcna I c-uld TdW an additional ov.ltnation. Tho life •moctancy
.f i fcivn holro, !■ ever 60 yerre. lh-;reforo. s.rc than half of ill
hum iein.;# l*r. I ih f r.ucll o.ro Huj *5, Of thooc novT.lt, who

live t* nc »lCer n<;« than -.5 every aLcch .r ecvon*h nor a on diea Of cancer.
TM* can fca proved. Those are not only c lot cf Onrrnn statisticc but
tho sr.ro con be soon fr-a ctntictie-l ren .ru of the Uni tod Stotce of
A.:crice.

It 1b therefore ou* '.c evident that cancer io tho r.cat torrlblo
liocnao vhici Ltfc.nit, jufferj free. 71rat, death by cancer is for fron
»~t .otlu; ajstly that death is connected Athlon,: end bed suffering.
Secondly, the solutlvn A thu cancer problon, also free, the point of view
•: the social euetticn, 18 very innurtant. 'A couroe, .no suet coneider
■ s ‘•cielly in this e^-e that nnny pevnlo die when they rre atill accessary
: r the education and the voll-bein^ of their children. These children

-i“e without oerenta and at an e^c when they need their parents especially.

Ih*


mm


C-urt S:. 1

14 Xar •»?- : A--i 2-aEK-DBnIols (Int. Hildashoinor)


£anecL-ily as cancer tikes the first olaco in mortality statistics
etd because free the c -ci“1 ?oint of viev, it presents suck t- Lugo
wibis-, ta -uisc ’f these reasons I ha:' decided t: work on the ablution
,f this nr -bleu which wus i; i” .rtant.

C

ind y . Dr. Saular era cult- correct If you 'r'.v tn. «-• •••*< >.
the Tribunal t. this book, 'wcr.us» the Inot chanter of roy hook ahevs
the? y lest ala ves, as far as it was within cy nowor. to work towards
a a.luti-n .f this -roller..

DH. S«-T1R: Uitnesc, io it crrrcct thit re^rrdln/; your efforts -

*

ffih rhhSin_^T: This exr-:inr tion hrs run. for srr.o tine, far beyond
the field of evidence in this c<a<. The Tribunal dots not desire t&
unduly ll-.lt witnesses. The witn-ss nay t ;-l whet ha hrs done tut these
extensive excursions into fields wholly unconnected with thlo case has
really, in this instanco, ,:oao fir enough. The b.ok which the witneno
hrs writton ie In evidence and io th<j. Tritun* 1. I think that tho

•xmincti n sh'.uli to .:.ro nearly c-nfiaod to tho cr.so at bar.

?T 3H. SA'CTnH:

^ 'itneco. I tc,tin with another chanter now, which I w .uld hrve
arrived nt in cny or sc. Is It correct thrt, ro,yrdlz« y.ur efforts
t vrrdo tho fi.thtiru; -f cancer in 19-.2, you were offered tho Jot of nro-
fesscr rnd received it with tho ordor to deal with the assi^-cont of
30-<1o'b diseases!

a. 3o f ;lnnii_ • in 1942, ^n tec ur.t cf ay work in deelin,: with naonlo' s
diseases, I Mis ncoiinrtod it -.rofvss.r hon-rio ceusc cn tho aedicrl
faculty in Berlin.

Vltn<.ss, you rocolvcd mother research cssi,:tt".ent which wr.s
Cf lied r. secret research assignment; that io. tho research assi^nt of
-l-I^ical warfare. This assi.rsaect vre dealt with oxnllcitly by tho

r -n.cution. I v-uld like to ask you. therefore, to *ive a short account

•

: y.ur work within this secret assignment end '-hTt general octivitios
were yours in order to deal with this assignment.

A. with ay ncc.inetion as rlcninotentiary for Biological Vrrfrre the

lh9 7


Goon j-. 1

: • -t-r .--.•■Safr-Braiele (lat. Hildeshcii-.cr)

lucret cBct^vst vec Conni-cted viih research on defense agninsl hiolGgi-
cd VcJ-frrc The icrposo cf this erder ves the c&naectlr* and ho nakirv;
fetivo -f *h- fields vhich were dselt vlth hy the Vehmacht ae tvo dif¬
ferent one 9 . Thu three oroviaecs verc huran Kin*-, aniaal, End olant.
v- ’Jjk die ;/cu receive this research essi*a.-.ent?

4 - father with u/ toriina.tion at ficnitoteatlrry, vhich st have
l«.*n 19<s3

ri 2 ju.o*. the to vie "The Doctor in Varfnre" has Ken nenticned -
•Artt la if- - vhich is Exhibit So. 1. The Kolc crcio out in 1941,
ct n tire th;j 0<r ay h-r ailltery successes in tho East and Vest.
*'■» did n-t hcati in the tocoad Vc,rl/ r ^ this t ok. Hov is that?

A. I vs-jto that K-- in 13-0 r.r.d I ?-»:shd it in 1941. In this
I deal V.th o-o urinate ih. i .rid Waj - I aenn, tho first
•,rli "nr - rad tot «..»t»r ilr.c until 1930. hTicov-r reeds this tocif vlll
to ftic t-j steto. eoace.-aln,; v life rad activities, that I devcltnoi
T life froa the Clliw .7 o^io tv. the side ,f scKnco aad research. In
the c-urs - .f u/ cutavitus in health nol'cjr ry hi.rhoat nln had cryotrl-
il:od Itfnlt. r.s I ba.ve uontloncd tef-rc, »o vir» :y ir.fluor.co and ry
ability f-»r the fi^htln,, ef 01 J-*^us If I r.oflc these trtico

the ntin rifie of y V.fo it la obvl.es tha.» a ver can only hinder or
: »»tr these a.lets.


Uh98


r-arc'- <7-?:-?j0»5-l-i?oldt (Iat., Kildoskoi^or)

3 rt ?P. 1

I did not r'-tink tho r.ar nocoarary just bocauso of the polish corridor—
dooTjr otortou this war. I hr.tod tho second *.7orld *.7or froa its /-.ry
lr.-~.lnc. our pooplo boc~a to rocoror fren tho last 30 yonrs, a non

v- arises which is =.oin*, to dost, oy r^.in. I know tho si,.nific-nca of
*-r only toe ..." •'ought ir. tho first TTorld :i-x as r. front offtcor in
tho first lino. I was wcuadoi fivo tines. X soy this to convince you
that I know what tho horrors of w r aro. Thoroforo I abhorr v;->r, and
I a» its nocos3ity only if y cr.rn pooplo aro attached. Ir. ry toe?: I
b-ro not nontlonod tho socoai 'Torld ’far with a slncVi word boc-usc I did
tot knew and I havo no attitude toward this soconl *'orld Tfar, booaueo 1
1 cub rod tb\t this war could rot havo boor, av t-aui ■

1 '.’ltnosa, I would liku to ask you ecu question in connection with
•_-.j ebarco of conspiracy. * hich of tfcu a .food nts hftvo y u knorra boforo,
sol h<w? Did you know tbo.:; well or only Superficially?

1 Ton of tho dofoaianca I did not know at all. Tho othors I know.

MrinG this war I b-d noth.'aj \o do -ith tho folloaln. gontlocon: Schroodor,
3-e/ rjn, Gobhardt, and Voltz. T.uro rxwtin thoroforo Karl Brandt, vfccn
I jt ab«xt six tlzus. K adlocor I had to do with throo tirioe during
b;i= ~ar. I cot TJostock throj tiruo in conforo.-wes, but I had nothlnc
1 10 with Ma dlrootly, 3u:oJ :r. Ir r.lt I caw tulco during ay vislto in

t -~'o, tut I had nothin.- to do ith Rudolph Brandt, oxcopt that
^°lph Braedt durln: tho *./ar by or lor of Kia-lor, wroto cr.o or two lottoro
*.o rj whoa I conpialnod to Hlrsilor a out tho 1-ck of organization in
• - ’if.lit -gainst foot and couth diso-so -noisily. I snv Ilrugowsky
’•r.. tir on. Onco Just shortly ir Graritz's Cffico, onco ho ri3itod no,

| 'i~.ee I inspoctod his instituto. I c^r Siorars coro often, ospoclolly
• Jn Roich Roig-rch Council. Oir aootinr.s ~roro o no rally vory
’ • ~02o I not throo tiros during this war and Brack onco.

'itnaS8, os you -ontionod tkuso pooplo you did not xr.or.ttpB Dr. Polorny.
him, Pokoray?

•* ~o t PQkorny I did not know. Ho was ono of tho ton whan I did not know.


14 ::-ro . !7-::-?iC-5-2-?oldt (Int., Hlliosho' -ar)

Jcurt Ho. 1

1 "Ith -hi -a of tfc. lofond-cls when you know did you discuss ozporironts
on buam Sola'S of th_ iad thr.t rro Solas io-lt Ith in this tri-C-.?

A Only ’.ith SloTors.

i You did not discuss it with otbor dofondmts, area if you know than ?

A Do-

•

^ Also too euthazraii progr-n is dbnrgod. You ara ch-xgol with having
tr.l-.jd '.bout this with tho dofondrnt Br-.ck. Vhon -.ad whoro wm this, md
hy* ?lo-.co bo shor t, buccuso uo sust do-1 uith this point 1 .tor.

A I did not spank r.bout tho outhnncsir. pro^rrc: with,tba dofondmt
Brack. Br-.ck w-s onco nt r. sooting which u~8 under tho lo-dorshlp of
?r. :onti. I think thr.t =ust fcr.vo bear: 19*1, la Munich, rad do-lt with
thus a questions shortly.

'i Thr.t wra your cr-n point of visa on the tfoostlon of outhanrslr?

Homo toll us hbcut th*t ruito shortly.

A Imodintoly *Xtor th> rooting I voht to soj Dr. Cor.ti, rad I -skod
lln agrin thr.t uo of tho Hoich Vhysicims lo-dorohip should rlso do -1 with
:: >sj question, true this tinu Dr. Conti rofusod such cont-cta, rad ho
ri! thr.t wo of th. Saleh Phyalciras lor-iorshlp. hnd nothing to do with
:x!: nnttors.

* !’ou I woull lli:o to donl with the point of conspiracy. Did you
til to Hltlor or Klrxslor or 3ouhior, who */?s, rs wj know, rahponsiblo

for tho outhiuv-.sia pro-jr-s, -ni hed you my discussions about this

thaOO?

A I did not t-lk to Kitlor durin., Vo whc.o w.-.r I novor opoko vdth
lor rad Eoufclor r.bout tho avth'nrsi.t progrra. I did not spork to
'i. l»r during tho w.-jr, -.ni with Eimlor 1 first eras In touch officially

• - l-.to susx»r of li*3 whoa tho so-c Hod outh-ansi.-. ration hrfl rlrordy

-*« otonpad.


«*»


14 ;:-rch 47-::-?JC-&-2^olit (Int., Eildoahciaar)
ourt :«3. 1

* 'fitness, tho Prosecution in Doeunent Book 4, Pago 11, tho docuaant
book about roloria oxporiBoats, r. docuno-t No. 065, submitted by tho
provocation under tho number 12?. had sutaittcd this affidavit of tho SS
Obcr-Tupponfuohror Pohl, vho v-s sainly responsible for tho concentration
In this affidavit of 23 July 1346 Pokl spooks r*d roplloa to a
fjoatiOD to tho fact who uor- tho cozsult'nts to Hiaalor abcut thcao
<juostions; f^d in on affidavit of 23 July 1946 ho soys vorb-lly that
ojjoior had onough opportunity to discuss i^.ttors with eontlocon of his
staff rtnd his surrounding about nodical -uostions, aM I -» suro ho
did that. lhat is tho ond of tho <*iot~tion. And Pckl nontions cthor
consultants such as, for instance, Conti. I ash this boo-use you noro
th- deputy of Conti. Did you bolons to thoso consultants of Himlor
-z£ did you hoar about thoso uattors or not?

A :.'o, I w-s not ono of those consultants, and i do not b.liovo ryaolf
•hat in ?onoral D r . Conti uas ono of then, because I know fraa Hlnxnlor pur-
jonnrly that ho did not llko Conti. Ho told no about Conti and saado atuolvo
ro-arks about hln >.* 10 ;. uero cortifiod by pooplo liko stuupfoegor. I also
*004 that thoro was ono foraor co-ct’jlont of H las l o r who told nu that
Hinder oado 1 nbucivo rocarks about ccati at a tiw *.hon Gorhaxd tfaenor was
still "iivo. I also know that Hitilor w-s not in favor of Conti succoodinc
Oorhard n’o^or.

^ Also on tho point of conspiracy I prosont you with tho following:

I: -.lay 1544 tho 4th ruoting of tho Consulting Physician of tho ..ohrrr.cht took
place in Hohonlychon, which wo havo ho-rd about a lot horo. Iho thooofl
•'hioh won doalt with on this occasion, -ad which partly donlt with
utc'iTI runts wo hr.ro hoard about free Dr. 3i3chor and Dr. Gobhardt. Soro
r a jrunout at this nutia;, ’ itnoss, and did you hoar tho spoochos and
r.. rtc about tho3o oxporinonts?


' L501


I. h l''-::-?*c-o-4-7oUt {1st., HildoPhoisor)

* t- no. i


A :to, I xlaci^Oly avoid si sessions and nootin&3 ir. which Conti took ? rt
a Urdcr tlccuront Ho. 61S tbo Proaocutlon in Dociroont Book BO. 10
about oxporineats with sulfonaridos, a participation and MUOtinj
rotator has boon subeittod, Dscunor.t 3ook of iho Prosecution Ho. 10,

Pa'c 97, and i: this roeistor under >*o. 38 is rontionod Conti,

S3 irupponfujhror, Staatssokrotnor, and thoa thJ quarter whoro bw «.ao
tillotod. ir<d under 33 -a is a straneo not, tho only ono of its k'nd,
boro it says that cocporatior, Sta* tssokrotaor Cor.ti, Hurhotol. 2io
of this assistant has not boon ceaion^d. T^oro could bo thj
auopiclcn that perhaps you ;ioro this aaoaynoos assistant In this roeistor.


L502


1-* ~.r-EBH-6-2-Cook-Int. Hildaaheicor
C-^rt —. i.


interrogate xrugowsky and Poppendick in their cross exnnina-
ti.n.

^ witness v.ith reference to the point of conspiracy,

I r— ind y-u of the records within their document book No. 3
the Prosecution about freezing experiments, p:.ge 68. This
iocument 401, document of the Prosecution No. 401, exhibit 93,
» record about c. soi^r .Ific iiscussion of the 27 October 1942,
in Nurnborg. This is the famous moeting about freozing ex-
perimont . ‘..ore you present at this mooting,and did you hear
about these horrible Dachau freezing experiments wnich Raschor
carried out in Dochau?

A I was neither a participant in this meeting nor did
I -.u-r .y reports .bout this meeting.

You rouomber, Dr. Blomo, thet in connection with
inis report about the freezing mooting, so to speak, of Octo-
t r 1942, the Prosecution cade the point that tho K c lch Phy¬
sician Loeo^r, Dr. Conti, v«-s in this meeting, which can be
proved, end thr.t the Prosecution said th.it you had been t.,o
Jty, c subordinate of Dr. Conti, and, therefore, you cer-
-y would h.ve be._r. informed by Dr. Conti about this. Do
you still say t. : . ve r.-vor known . nything about those

-itt(.rs?

A Yes, I still say the same. ^Thc assumption of the
Prosecution c .n be understood, but the Pro: -cution ought to
snow by now how unploo'sar.t tho -relationship between Conti end
5JSfilf v. s, end I would like to explain with reference to

'"t that in the year 1941 to 1943, 1 only corresponded
’*h Conti and did not talk to him without a greeting .nd

... title to tho letters, end that in this relationship
• *l should hove informed no -bout such secret matters. This
C r - h-rily assumed.

3. V. it ness, -t the same time, in the end of November


USOU


jiar-Sbr.- -3-CooK-Infc. hildesheiaer
Court No. 1.


a at the beginning of December, 1942, there was also a aoet-
• ag in the Military -edicai Academy in Berlin which took piece
.nd before that a disc-seion in St. Johann in the Tyrol about
_;untein physiological questions, and these freezing experi-
aents war mentioned and were discussed. ..ere you present nt
these meetings which I h_ve just mentioned, or did you in any
nay during tnis war hear -bout these discussions end Know
anything about thorn?

I neither tooK part in these ace tin $8^ nor did I
cm- about these meetings .nd the so-called mount- in phy¬
siological institute in St. Johann. I only heerd about it in
ijrnberg. I h d not known oaything about it's existence boforo.
^ .ith reference to the point of conspiracy I would
> Ukc to Jcnov. your relationship v.ith Dr. kosciicr. now did you
. to Know hia end when?

A 1 act Dr. Kascher through ..r. Sicvers.* This wns in
the late suaa-r oi 1 ; .hen ievors received the order from
.-.lamler to discuss :n allegedly new cancer drug in which Dr.
Conti -r.- Dr. Luotzelburg had V.kon part. I invited tnoso
gcntleaeo xor a further discussion into -*y office and In this
discussion ?roxe. sor holz Iso took part on ay iaiativc.

Q ehut impression did you gain froa Dr. nasener as n
c-.tor ~d es a person?

A hescher made a favor Mo impression on mo to start
ith cut without question he was a so-called bluffer. .»e is
who undertakes to make an impression, a good iapression
f-r short or a long period, to pretend to have good qualities
r. ,ood knowledge of things without tnere being any very po-
Lv qu lities. Later on he got annoyed with a certain ton-
-«v:y for business, jtascher wanted to take part financially
the prcductien t . Llc.d coagulation drug end polygol,
ad tri.d to get no to take pa.c, which, of course, I refused,

li505


14 ifcr-EBi-.-d-4-Cook-Iat* Hildcshciaer
Court Ko. 1.

-d I told hin that it -./os not the setter of a doctor to ockc
use of aodiccl knowledge in a financial way and in the way of
production.

Ta£ F. 1SIDLNT: «t this tiao the Tribunal will bo in
recess.

(a short recess was taken)


IL ifcrcfc-U-Jr-o— 1 -Kirr sm (Ir.t. c-rwn)


C-urt I

TKa 1-.RSH.J.: Pcra ,:.s In tho c..urt will ;>lu-ao find their a unis.

The Tricur/.l is .in ir. s-ssion.

31DE. S.UTH1:

itneas, w_ -vrv intvrrujtvd in tho aidst if - ,-v.rticuL'rly icnortsnt
n.int; n*a-_y, th- qu-sti n -f Dr. R-schur, end I arnt-d t nak y a 'x.f r. die
j\u, t.g-thor with this Jn R:schvr, c-rry .ut -.ny vr ot'-ri. onts, p'rticul r
fr-oiir.g r ’)lyg'l r c nc-r ox:orlabnt» -nd such cxx^rlsunts n ha™ '>oinfr

H *•

NuY^r?

... Nuv.r.

.• Did y u giv- .'.ny rdv,ra t this Dr. R*schor t c rry ;ut such ex.vri-
a.r.*.a -n ha. i icings?

». lb.

I ah LI n w ah » y u wh t y.u act i rth in rn ’ ffid'vit of tho 25th
: Oct u.v 194.6. Thia - 1 rid vit ».-.s su *sittud by tho Pr-a.cutin in Proa cuti
-cu's.r.t 3 k V . 11, r-g rding M - c.v>gul tiin, end c rrioa tho naa or /«71,
r locution Sxhi it 238. Undor .join* 8 in thia ffid:.vit it la at't-d, nrai I
citt 7>rb tin - thia ia y ur at t-a-nt: "Dr. R'.achur t Id at th t in tho
.ntr ti a C- D-.ch u r.s. h'd c rried .ut vX,»rlatat« -n hairn ’• vingc .

Or* Borv^d ti. ur ao .f U a ting th- effoctivvnvss f -..lyg'l for bloid
c pul ti n in th- c a-, f trr w unda me or ti n~l w anda, «tc." Th’-t is
'll uncer int 8 in / ur Mid vit. Thu* f-.ll ws 1 int ?, which r--ds:

’It w“a quit- cL*r t -:c th't uxpori-auits n cua n -oings « . ving cr.ri. j
cu-.tr ti n c'-.-a. Dr. Riaclwr ini n—d sc A ux.vrin.nts <n humnn
-ings th't h-.d .vn c ncludod." I rorvr.t: "th'.t h*d ' ..on c nc.udod". "I r<--
“' - fl t nnworod ay qUvSti.na with th- roly th t nu fot lity h

IV --’ Th-t is thv vXt-nt f tho quotation I wish t, 'ut t. y u. N.w, thia
t-noit f y.ur n tho 25th A Cct.’.ur, 194.6 in y ur rffid vit - d y.u
•ill .v-ko thosv e v. .-6'vrti-ns nt ah' t d y,u h“vc t s-.y r-g rdrng tho-n?


1- • - S- $ - --L ^r (?nt. nross)

Cwr? '• --


— ' i " t T - tai± is tra. lacker infomod no briefly of his concluded
.xporincata or- hunr.a be in. s and also about the technical way in which they
voro carried cut. I ackted hin then whether nothing had happened during thoso
oxperinent* and ho the.--u or. told no tt-C^therv hr* boon only one fatality.

.. "itneae, I a-Juid lilt- to fc .vc it stated perfectly clearly — did
Sr. 2 ^cuer on tnit occaoi->n or on another occr *icr. tell vou about cxiori-
:.vo:i on hu.cn being* that voro to bo carried out in the future, or only
about expert cent* :h-: hrd 1 reedy been concluded V

... r oho expernnont* that had air. dy '■eon concludod. Incidont-
lly, ho did c-ntioa th t ho trie, doliv.red a lecture on oxpcricoat rogr.rding
jarrehuto l—.p* : •and.rvtood thie w.n at tar.; tiao, — to bu ourc, I

ocboq^ui.t3y lvf.rr.o4 in t..e trial that th .ee v. re lo-;>roe'urc experi-
t-nto — tin •. octur.ll;* those wore per. c.tuto Ju:n# f->n airplane*. That of
c urc. lPtore»tod no. I should ha\o liked to fcr.v* vkat hnvponod during ouch
;i.rc..utv Ju:x* fro., r.rj; alcUudo* . nd I thrr.'foro chcd Bnehor but ho
- v 0 °‘ t 1 ’-ib-rty to tell no about thlo; noroovor, tho

c: ri -r. .* vc/e not yet concluded and he needed for ta.fo oxporiuont* c. low
:-vir^_ clvu.ber but th t h; 1 : d bee:, refused t..4o low proruro chamber by
,,;c loftvoffo. H- t'ld wo uto tno jentloncn in quoctior. were — he cr.llcd
.raitor* — rnd ae.-.tioucd tno auyi of Eip'-ku, VJ.t* and Puff.

.. T-v told :.e before t ho spoke only of er.crinont* that hr d boor.
«ac:.udod, n.-oiy exuvrieent* ir. the pnst. 3ut in connection with tho tvot-
lv co~b .tting cancer, did ho not spoil: of oxperinont* ho

1: "‘- c —rj* out in the future, and what did you sny rbout that?

... I t.;, conference !n :^r office th.it I already nontionod which :-:i..u.ilvr
' n od for _d in v. ich Sicv rs, Professor Sols, Herr von VUctzolburg rood
”* r • axT-irt, thv.ro v..-, diecueBitn of cr-rinent*. ?rov the very bo^in-
c clarr ny point of view, that wo should not begin test in,: a
-- -f'-re precise chj; 1 analysis of this :.edic -1 scans had boor, under
• 1 *::ci Profess>v "-lz to undcrvrJw t..e analysis of this vegetable


•' c: ^rVj on; ox. vri—uns. Including ox cristate on cjAix\1s 9


1- >;-.r-:HGZ5*£-3-Lossor (Drown)

court “o. 1.


uctil that was concluded, Accuse it v s scientific nonsonso to attenpt to
find cay — na t' contort cancer «dthout knowing what tho effectiveness of tho
tre taont could ho trrcod hack to if it were effective. dfter I hod infornod
2i..2^r of this conference ho spolo to no of c*pcrincnt 9 . He told no ho ir-
tcadod to sot up r. so-c:llod cracer station for Stacker oo that this vegetable
oxtrxt could be tested there. Eo hid instituted inov'rir.; « . . concent ;lo:

_ ' been infornod that there wero none or only one person sufferin,,’
fron cancor in all tho concentration cr_pe. I rortindod Hi: tiler of the r.ni’lt'
f a: t r.for entimed conference and told hiu tfc t,it wao nonsensical to
undertflko cr,cri:ienta without tho necessary ccicntific basis.

> Did you then h vo tho fe.linc or Aid it occur to you then that tho
c-.-oriacnco that Dr. Rancher was carrying out with Dr. tAictsolburg — now
n»ns ...Jilnat Oi-ncer*— were crinia 1 expcrlaonto on 2;u:tn boir o, or could bo
erinlsrl boc use of tneir tan -rousr.-ss or bee. .use of tne rnino th t woro
-rn,ctei -ith the—, or crlcinol for co:x other reason?

... 1‘ , t*.v.re was so question of that nt nil because after vhr.t Dr. v n
.*i«trelbur r : h d told ::o I saw t.; .t t..i8 was n continuation of work on tho :>rl
: . - 1 r physloinns w..o hi■worked on t robio.. until I933. If-,
•C.reforo, net loots oick of cancer had boon *ivon t..io vo.70tr.blo extr ct to
Irlnk, or if It hnd boon used for innocuT.tiox.-, th t could r .. vo dor.

*••• . :• or cr.uscd th-. r.ny particular difficulties. i:»rcover, it ic

•/ell :c-. w fret that if a nears of conbrttin,; crncor turns up, th .t see o to
- - .rospoc •. persons with crncor apply in «;rer.t numbers for this dru,---
th * it should be tostod or. tncu. Every doctor win has hnd oxporiocco in
=er res..'vrc.. has had this ozporionco.

?T3n si ever 'c -ffi‘.vit wo hoard and now know that Hr.schor v.e to cot
*• inetitutu for crncor roGoarc. in Dexhau or perhaps oven di sot it u;.

18 i- st ted ir - a affidavit on t.. • art f Sievors on 25 October 1946 , ir.
*‘ :l ~t 1 -ok 11 of tao Prosecution. ..g a cancer rosoarcher Aid you hrve any-
:: * l ~ * • it.-. t..i3 inctituto of anchor's in D chr.u?

— , th.r vrs no c ncer institute under Hr.ocher.

.• P.ier. it w-g acrely planned?

4509


i-:in*-!.-:-z^-3- 3 - 6 eo r (rrown)

C-—’* • 1 -


— 3wso vcro big ideas on t.:o part of HLi ler.

.• Si lor, of whon you fc-vo Just been speaking, -ad this is also to bo
ic-r. fr : Siever's affidavit, apparently frequently expressed the wiai th t hip
jrito, nr-cly Snschor, should collaborate with you, and, if you raionbor,
vishod that Baach.-r should toll you regularly of his work. I ask you.

Hi such collcbor: t*-n b — oca you ad Bnschor tako plnco on the basis of
Hirnlcr 1 s vich r_d did you receive an.- reports of this sort fror; 3-schor?

-• Stare was no such thin.;; as rw.ul:-r scientific collaboration betwon
tu. 3:—Ur asked ny to *ork together with Bnschor in tho fiolds of cancer,
sf polygal, the blood coagulant, and also in connoction with a newly dovolopo'
cannod poi-to, which was of gre .t interest to uo froa the point of vio«r of
proridin: food. But I did no work in this fiold of any sort. Thu work that
.ns do no is to be trncod brek to tho efforts on the ?:xt of ken Falks, who
. j s . ortod in this by Baschcr. Th^re wao no^rcgul-.r reporting on Haochor 'e
; rt -bout his work or at least I c a speak of it only rolntivoly. I did not
rccoivo "fit re-orto but fro^ ti.;o to tino Bnschor told no that in iir-
jrcvwxjnto h d bocn reached in the production of polyrr.1 and also in -ho fiold
vds forc^ntlonod conned potato. I nssural rysolf of how ,~ood thoco
jotr.toos wuro whon I visited Bnschor nnd found then oxcollor.i.


h5lO


u» Hards -T-7-. i-A7D-lC-l-«&lcy (Inti Brown)

Court Ko. 1

q rfhct I brought up with ycu just nc is tc be traced back to an
.ffi '.-.rit or. the ,-ort of co—defendant Siovors on the 25th of October, 19h6,

0

: ration Docur-nt Book li, Pape 7, where ho writes: "An orl.r ras issued
that all concentration cam imates with cancer in tho various concentration
cr-rs should be transferred in thj future to Raschor's Department. Expori-
■v.r; to be carried out on such irrvatos that could servo cancer research,
that ycu dr. Blanc had vial tod Rascher several tines, had received reports
.•3: laschor and knew all about Rascher*s work." Is that assertion corroct
cr. the . art of Siovors, which he rcado under oath in aq affidavit?

A This is his as'.rticr. n' it is in art true. As I said Hirclur
asked no in the fiolda of cancor, rolyeal and thoso potato natters,to work
to ;oU>ir dth Raschor, arvd to support his, anti actually Raschor did roport
*.o no on those natters, hat other assi qsaonta Raachor nay havo had fron
Hirnljr I do not know. Th-ru was no rxmtion of then, an l if that was the cab
at least Rasctor 11 not roport to m on then. I cannot concoivo that Rasoh..
roe jiv- '. fron HL-nlor the or’.or to carry out f'rbidion oc.»rinonts, an', t'at
' * r coul have wants* hi:: to r .art to ue then, becauso ry connoctions
with Hi alor wore not so closo as all that. "orcovor I nust point out that T
--a not an >S Loa lor, so that in this rospoct I was noithor aubordinato t*
HL-rlor nor was Raachor in any way subordinate to no.

q In this connection, howovor, the co-!ofondant Siovors in his affi-
ivifc of 25th October 19U6, which has alroa* boon renticnod several tines
r. •, . ’o th assertion to Dr. Blow, "that Dr. Blcre ha specifically askod

^.oichsfuohror SS ni-rJ.«.r -a ,ut -jeher at ycur dsp^s.al for research at your
Institute in "sssolstoit in Boson, an’ apparently sone such thin,-: was apr id
UFO) * • Id yru care to nako a statement on this subjoct?

A Raschor ask«, * nc tc use hia in ny Institute. He told this to Hinnl
I also suck with Himl.r about this. All tMs is true, but Raschor was
• r actually used by m. First of all I had nc opportunity or possibility
' usi.*x; liascher with rc because zy Institute ir. :-osr. .:as ’ -’ r c.nstrur' Ion,
’ the necessary equipr^nt was at hand, an’ even in January 19U5, when
’•he Russians reached boson it was not y«t cc&pleWd.


Ut 'Sorch 19k?-:.7T-1C-2-: .oipy (Ir.t. Brcxn)
Court Ho. 1


Q dtncss, ir. Prosecution Uocicjnt Book 3 resardin; odd or frucsin?
experiments, wo wire shown a few docunonts in which you ore incrininatod,
nan=ly 'ocirants fron which it is to bo soon that Pr. Haschsr on the basis of
his Dachau experinonta he:', attested to bo habilitate-! by a Gorman University
In order to 'occnc a university professor. It is conclu *ed fron this that you
v r- vary precisely inforce! of Raschor»s Dachau experinents, an’ that you
nevertheless approve-! of thtnj rhat can y u say about this?

A First of -.11 it is wot correct to conclu ’.c that I approve! such
at; rirunto, bocauso first of all I id not kno». that these oxp.rir.. nts v; u ro
bdr, undertaken? socon ly, I found out about then only after thoy had Ion *
3ir.co boon concluded; it is tr- that Himlor aske \ so to bo of assistance to
Xaschor at his habilitati ;n ir. c Oorain University. First of -.11 Fnschor
would have to bj c.rtifio! as a specialist. Jtaschor -a !o efforts so to bo
cortifio !, canu to co an! aai ’ that the Instituto office in ?*urdch had refuse
to c .rtify Mrs as a socialist. Th n I no) ! hir. to hand in the necossary
ocUrunt'.tion .an' data to the ' .ich .hysicians Chanter in lturdcih hiasclf.

Th-s ‘/DOE-nts w nt to thj Institute socialist tc -o workod on and ho then
roporto ' to no an! state * aotuoily the c rtificaticn as a specialist ms lr.
or mr. Th enly thin* that was nissir.* ms a certificate to tho effect that
?asohor hot! carri . ! out a certain nuabor of surcieal operations of a specific
r-atur hirsulf. Bo tol this to taschor* Th.rcu.on baachcr wont to his ’’unich
teacher, a well kn-wn sur.*jsn, an ! also brcuht ths certification to the
ffect that, he ha! hiraclf carri c ’ out the surdcil op rations in. question.

! th m tumod the natt r oy.r to ry sp. cislist. Ho a aln reported to no,
svln that ths c.rtification of nsch.r as a sp.oiolist ms net in order an!
th n tol' ry specialist to ivc 'aschor a tnporarv certification, as
>ciallot. Ilo final e rtifications of that sort were i*3U' 1 birinr thvWar.
dhir. road ‘. ’ c< rt-.ir. f th r .requisites fra her Hit tion. Ho then trek
: ' iu . titn «-f thi- ha:illt-.tion -rith r:f->s-or in bin capacity as

'f^ice Chief in the. fcienco Peparfcxnt of


*-512


14 -ar-iBH- 10-lfl-— lov- In t; Brown
Court So. i.

I: xinf-try of Culture, _._rticulariy bwcause the works that
- sober hid carried out in his Institute on .ianler's order
.re considered in general secret. I proposed that he should
not turn to Professor Pfannenstiel in iiarburg in the- -utter
of this hx-tiLit-tion. The.reason 1'mentioned this name lies
in the feet that in the end of 1942, I h.d ande Professor
nnenstiol' s acquaintance on a trip to kinrburg, end hod as¬
certained th-t he had once been Ordincrius and v.r.■? moreover
:n SS Stcndurt-nfu.hr r, in the ..offen SS which corresponds
to a Colond in the ..uc-rienn «r.y. I then,wrote a letter to
?rof.ssor Pf nncnstiel. I received froa hia c r^ply in the
negative. Thereupon I did nothing further, but told Reseller
*.h_t he concern hi..self with this business or a professorship
■ith a prof-ssor who could get hia this habilitation, ho would
d Lost *o turn to an SS coar.dc. I myself, however, Knew
liKcly nnaes.

Bloue, tnis antter interests ao ocinly froa the
following point of view; I ask ayself whetner at that tiao
frea the d. uae.ats th t Kascher gave you regurding hiasolf,
would you h vc had to sey that those experiaents were cri in:l
; in th r words, whether you thought frou these documents
tael they wore experiaent3 in conccntrution ccnps, or whether
vou could concl :! m, thes aocuaents something about tho
nature of the wxperlnentcl ?erL as, for instance, whether they
*- r '- Gem ns or foreigners, whether politic 1 or criainal pri¬
soners, 7.1 . ther they h-.d boon condemned to lecth or not, whe-
-htr they w re to bo pardoned, or not; it is only froa this
joint of vievi I ja interested in this whole business of Rcsch-
-* itlitetion, and so I ask you now to ....Ke statements re-
' rding the question, what did you learn froa thes^ u-cuaents
-i .r's on the points 2 Just mentioned, and if you did
find out something in this way how did you rc<-ct?


14 kar-EBH-ie-2a--^loy-Int. Brown
Court No. 1.


A '..hen in the late siunc-r of 1943, rii-ualcr asked ae
to support finscner in his efforts to be habilitated, I rpoke
-n ..-schcr about this aattor. Hcscher told mo that ho wan¬
ted to be habilitated in a work thnt concerned tne coagulation
of blood. Once when I visited hia in Dachau iiascher showed .c
extensive statistical preparations and charts of his oxpori-

- -.ts with Polygcl, and all of these were perfectly permissible)

1 moratory oxperiaents, and then for a while I heard nothing
further -bout this latter, the ouestion of having hc.schcr cer¬
tified as n specialist, n^ce^y. And then ^s I recall, at the
end of 1943 I received froa Raschcr a very extensive paper
with the qu^-st that I help hin be cone habilitated. I opened
up this paper, re .d through it, paged throe jh it, that is. I
rcauabor it was lull of charts, but 1 didn't actually road tho
paper, which did not intorcst ao, nor vr s it _iy Job to study
tnis bec-usc I was not tho Profengor who u s to c-rry

.a -ah.ar's h.bilitatior.. 1 hud only, on i.iualcr'8 r-quost,
played n Intermediary role in thi3 whole -attcr. I state this
now under truth, I did not read this work, because it didn't
interest me. In no respect did it follow under u specialized
f i Id th-.t touched on ay own interests, and aoreover I received

- many speci;l scientific papers from all over Germany, that
I would have had to h vo several heads and auch --re tL-e to
study all of tneSe — -ao; consequently I really cannot give
you any inforaation about evon what the title of this paper
was -r t. contents were; if I knew it I would be only too
happy to do it.


•-rch li.-;.-SK-li-l-Jechan (Lit. 3rc-m»)

-curt Uct 1


Q Witness in Prosecution Dec. .oat Beck 3, Mo. 432, Exhibit 119 cn
p . . UO, there is a letter frea Dr. hascher tc Neff cf 21 October 1943, wil¬
ls presented by the Prosecution. Naff is the mar. who was heard hero e8 a
witness. In this letter to Neff, hascher writes to the effect that the Roici
Research Counsel had commissioned him to carry cut freezing experiments in
run sir; they were tc be carried cut in winter cn the Sudclfold, that is r.
skiin' turpin in the Upper Bavarian Zips cad this 1 -ttur cf Rrscher to Neff cl
21 Oct:tor, 1943, is compared with a card in the card in-tox file cf tho Reich
Pest'rch Counsel. New plaao make scoo statement about theso experiments in
tho open ; H you issue the orders for those'* frocrinc experiment: in
epen air?

.% .k, I tid net issue such an erdor and I consider it cut of the quoat*
thit sea. other department of the Reich Research Counsel should have issued
such an order.

JUDG- S££:.;;Ss Before thia , r point is left; I should like to ask ye
cn cr tv questions ccncemi nc the exhibits which you have referred to.
bltnoss, s I underctani your at-.t^ent, certain -xperiments that were
conducted ty ReaeiK? iurinj the ported of time you knew him wore classified,
cr were tc be classified rs secret, ;r as top s.crct; is th-t correct?

T ! Z -.ITTCSS: Nc,Ycur, H.nor, that is net correct. Durin. the tiao that
I knew Rascher such experiments were, net carried cut; at tne v.ry most it
ocul : ;.ly have boon experiments that were carried out lcnp before I nv-.do
La sheer's acquaintance.

Jl^X. 3REJG: Well new then, of the experiments carried out bufere y
-!e Rascher* s acquaintance; do ycu knew which ones wer- at the tim. clcssifi
1 secret or top sacr«t?

iH - bITKESS: Sc far as I know, all haschcr's cxpcriminta in his instit-.fi
wure called secret; f-r x*mple rise this business of the canned potatoes
that I mention-: before.

JUiyr SS&IHG: In Prosecution document 3cck No. 3, which has been re¬
ferred tc your counsel. Document Jfc. 240 is offered in evidence -s U-.see
Uen Exhibit 112, there appears a letter supposed tc have been written by


-*ch U-..-BK-li-3-Meehen (Int. 3rcwr.)
Court Sc* 1


Raschcr tc Hinder bearing the date 11 .'.pril 1943, which reads as follows;

"Derr Reichsfuehrer 1 Enclcsod I beg tc sufcdt a brief report concernin'-
freezing experiments on human beings exposed tc th- open air.

"early in Xy I hope tc be in a position, deal- Reichsfuohrer, tc submit
tc ycu ay habiliteticn thesis. So Cberstu^abannfuehrcr, Frofcssor Dr.

1 ‘ inner. oi_i of X-.rburr is prepared to use and accept it -s a secret thesis
f h‘ilitaticn."

o.m, is that, cr is that not, the thesis thet was presentod to Ffanner.-
stiel for the habiliteticn of F-aschcr cr atteepted habiliteticn of Raschor?

THa Of this habiliteticn thesis e* application to Pfannonstiv

which y.u Just mentioned, 1 knot nothin:, Raschcr toll no n; thing -cut that
1 it is purely an accident that I also turned to Pfannensticl, which 1 did
b-.causo cn this trip at thy end of 1942 to Ltcbcrg, I made Pfannenstiol 1 a
acquaintance. -c .r’in-.-i:ua, a full professor was necessary as tho
purs.n to ci-prcvv. a habilitaticn th.sia. when I discussod with Henzcl my •:
3u.; -.'tl a about i fannenstid, Uenzel rlso certainly did not know that •
Raschor he*, already mio off rts t. ichievc his h: ilitaticn through ifannen-
atid, as c-n be seen fr.c Kascher's letters tc Kimlcr, which w^ro 1 believe
in ..pril of 1943 end this, es you can sec, it w-.s long before the tine I
- .u Rancher's acquaintance.

JUDGE SEEKING: '..hy is it that in the event the efforts cf ivaschor t. bo
hatilitotod K'.rc successful that his appointment ee a lecturer wa3 to bo a
secret qp.intncnt; can you tell me that?

7H£ U...2SS: I nly knew that during tho war such sccrot hebiiitati. i.
w-ro froquontly undertaken. I n these cases the habilitaticn thesit s;as jf
•;at laportanco f:r one military roason cr another and should bo kugt secret.
F r example, the thesis in the field cf physics cr in the field of the phyri-J
f explosives r ?u-h !. Ms. ll-y I add one pcint; the awarding cf the title
itself Dectcr ha-il was net kept 5t rX, only the thesis was kopt secret cn th
• ir* - in *'nich the p-.Tsrn in question was habilitated. Sc far as I knew thi
secret was kept within tho ntdical department cf the University in qu6*sti.n
and was coni'in.; t the three cr four sjwjcialists _av, thoir opinion of


"area i4-«-BX-iI-3-Hc■ han (Int. Brown)
Ccurt Sc. 1


the value cf the haMlitaticn thesis in question. In other words, this
thesis was not prosattod in any scientific peried.

JUEC- SJ2MfE: The feet, however, that an appointment had boon cade
vculd 'cc sr.de known; is that true it wculd not be r secret?

THE '.cITIiESS: Yes, that is tr-ao; it would net have been c secret.


lii -r -,wv-12-l-?utty (Int. Brown)
Court $Oi 1


JUDGE SESRLiG: Th.n will you please explain: in docunent book 3 of
the Prcst-c- tion, Docunent NO-229, r res ecu tier. Exhibit 116, fron Sievers to
Rudolf Brandt there is a letter da tod 27 Septetsber 1963: ‘'Ro: Appointment
f SS—Hauptsturofuchrcr Dr. Raschcr as a lecturer. Habilitation.

Jear Cenradc Brandt:

"I have itaken up the natt.r of tte appointment of Dr. Rascher as
lecturer. I rysclf broe t .-.t togetr..r Dr. Raschor with Professor Dr. Bloae
as well as with -Brigadefuehrer kunzcl. The procedure and the possi¬

bilities .re thoroughly discussed.

’’Professor Bice., talked with Professor Pfannensticl at Uarburg, so
that thu path toward effecting this appointeent, which is to be a secret
appointment and, thcrofoiv, causes setae difficulty, is aaoothcd.

"Kind rogards ani Hell Hitler!

Yours,

Sievers•*

What do you have to say about that?

7K WX1JE8S: On thu whole these sta tenants of s iovcra arc true except
the state-.nt that I had previously spokon to Pfannenstiol. Ycu read thrre:

lcnc spjk.. to Pfanne ns tic 1," but at that tine I had not scon Raschor's
habilitation thesis nor had I spoken with Pfannenstiol.

This talk wit., oiu... -u th sane as the one I mentioned before.

Sievers also tcck part in this talk. In this tilk it was a question of
det_r in whet was to be the foraal way in which this habilitation was
tote achieved, and In order to 'a clear in =y mini about this, I had to
turn tc K-.nzol because ho was thb chief of the scientific office of the
Ministry of Culture.

SEBP.I’KJ: The point I .a talking about, though, i* th> refercr.c.

;• ~ r.rs to 5 r andt of the fact tfc t any appointment that woul . cone to
cc. r .;o^Li J.nve tc be ' secret appeintoent, - and free that I geo the
expression that not cnly is the subject of the thesis to b. secret, but
that the app,inicent of Raserter as well is to bo secret.

ri- .ITNESS: No. Your Hcr.or. Sievers expressed hinsolf pearly in
s letter of his. I knew cf no single ease in which anyone was secretly


Ill k--r L7 -::-:a,- 12-2-Putty (Inti Br'*n)

Court Sc. 1

appointed a Dr. Habil,' and - b.Ii- vc everyone r lid hav_ himself objected
to receiving suer, a Secret appointment because the purpose cf a habili-
tation was that the- person in question could perfectly publicly call
-_s ' r 'Dr. Habil, and the appointment as Dr. Habil' 1 was the ncces-
- r" prerequisite for a later proftssorship. S c bore it can only be a
qucs-ica cf Siovers having expressed himself clumsily or poorly.

JUDGE S : 9 3 JIG: Well, then, cn page 157 of the same docuoent bock.
Document NC-290, i rcsecuticn Exhibit 212, is what appoars to be anotl^r
letter written by Sievers to Brandt dated 21 i’-.rch 19lilj!
ear Comrade Brandt:

*iiy last letter to ycu cn this subject was written cr 27 November
1913. In spit* f • ’ .* rr. n n of SS-Bridado fuehrer Professor Dr.

.icnr.l and the coputy Roicn*i4crst«.f nrer Professor Dr. Bloac, of whlvh
I 1-forat ycu at the tine, adaissicn to tx* faculty with Professor
Pfanncnsti-l -.t '.orburg was not possible.

■■Or. til 30t.. of Wcvtnb.r i'fanncnstiel wrote tc Professor Blomc on
the subject as follows:'’

I quot.:

"I tried to pave the way for Mission tc the faculty ner.. since it
.3 . r i: r. personal discuosicns with Dr. Richer that cur spheres of

work ran parallel to a great extent. The fact that Raacher's activities
vc tc be t • cret makes the a/fair very difficult to handle. In
t sc circumstances I was unable to persuade the uiarburg medical ft .. ulty
adr.it Rase her."

Thai there is sc-, discussion about an attempt to have Rancher
admitted to th fnctlty 'n Frankf- rt or Munich. Then he says:

"I os 0 -om i.ly sorry that I c iat fulfill as I originally hop«.d to
do Rrreher'3 Justifiable desire to gain admission to the faculty in
•i-.rburg or. th, basis of his scientific work, with diieh I -o acquaLnted,

I oak hin t-~ c r.sider my ctJv.r proposals on th, subject."

«ind:

I • undertake- such an attempt in :unich <. uld serve no purpose since,
know, a similar attempt was already aaoc wit) negati\. s-suits.


1ii L7- -'.-.-12-3-Fatty {Int. Brown)

Court Mo. -

The director of th. Institute for Aviation Itedicina in Frankfurt, who had
're c-nocntad to take part in the present tion -f th thesis in liar-
Vrg, wculd neat certainly have be - induced to favr admission to the
;ecu_.. in Frankfurt. However, owing to the need for secrecy, we wculd
h vc bc^n exposed to the sane difficulties with the nodical faculty in
Frankfurt.

’’A discussion with 3S-Hauptstumfuchrer Dr. Hirt, who is thorc-gnly
iliar *ith Dr. Rascher's work, revealed that the easiest thing would be
to have hla adsitUd to the Strassburg faculty. Here it is possible to
have the work * b” SS Fuehrers only and a^aission to the faculty

carried nut in c.crocy. r

And so, frankly, I aa rather confused. I gained the inprcsslon free
these docu_unts that not ’ nly w.. the habilitetion thesis to be secret
in its content a:: nature, but that also the appointment of R ischcr as a
lecturer. Could ycu help the Tribunal in that particular?

TH 7 nTMFSFt I can't re lly recall this lottcr. P_rnit bo to ask
is all that you read Just new one letter to ac frea t^io b-g..j.ii^ to the
,.»dT

JUDGE SEBfc'.O: Mo. This is not a letter to you at all. It is a
l-tt*.r IT- ~ ’uV'.rs to SS-Obcrstundxinnfuchrer Dr. Brandt, but throughout
it talks not only of a secret thesis but also of a secret appointee"*., and
•a Int.r Jt. ! in knowing whether within the framework of your knowledge
it is a custcmry thing in Gcrunny either in wartiae or in peacotimo to
navu secret appointments to the faculties of the universities?

I n_Ver ever he-: ' of a secret appointment. I think it
Is ut of the quustion. i do know, 33 1 said, that there w„rc secret
habilitati ; tr..scs, namely, that the papers on wj :ch the apocintacnt r. •,
ba3.d We:i kept SvCTot, but I think it is quite out of the question that
*:..re should be such a thing as a secret appointment.

JUIT-F SEStETO: That is all.

=” Dr.. SaUTER:

"r. 9lone —

-520


Hi Har l»7-i-AAA-12-li-Putty (Int. Brown)

Court Sc. 1

THE FRESHEST: It is -linest tine for the nocn recess, and when the
Tribunal takes its recess at nocn today, it will recess until nine-thirty
'clock next Monday corning. There will be no afternoon session of the
Tribunal this aftemern.


(Th. Tribunal --.jooroc. until 17 :iarch 191:7 at 0930 hours.)


Court So. 1

17 Xar i7-X-l-l-ia'.-7cs?cr Cat. Easier)


Official tronscrint of the American Military
Tribune! in the natter of the United States
-i arcxi.cc easiest Earl Brandt, et pi,
defendants, tit tin.: at Fuernter. 7 , Gcr ray, on
17 March 15-*7, OS50, Justice Beals orcsidi&~.


TEL. KAHSEALt Persons la the ecurtroon vill fierce find their evats.
The E:aoreclo, the Judges of Military Tritunrl 1. I.ilitpry Tribunal 1
is a-v in seael.n. Sod save the United States of Ar.erica an' this hon-
-rablo Tribunal. Thero will be order la the courtrocr.

TFL rhhSIULyi: iir. ..ershcl, will y,u rscert'in that the defendants
are ell -resent in c urt.

SEE SEAL: Key it ol re. T.ur Honor, all defendants rro ^resent

\

in court vith the exception if the dofonirnt Oherhvuscr, reseat dut to
illness.

TEL rBiSIDiTTs The Secretary General vill n-te for the record the
orosunce of ell the defendants in court save the defendant Gberhouccr
vhi is absent on account of illness, beixv; in the horiitnl.

Counsel nay orocsed.

XUBX BLCt2 - Bv.su :ed
BIfJiCT LXALI.-'aTICS (Continued)

I-Y DH. SAUTnH:

Vitnuss, I rscind you that you a.re still under oath.

A. ?eS.

v Before the ndjwum-.ont your relationship to Er. Raechcr *ri *1 —
cussed and at the end you vvrt asked in particular vhnt thio secret
hebllitntion of Or. Hoscher ncent. Key I rok you to tell uc clearly on
-.ire vhrt exactly vrs k«it stcrot in that coco or vhrt it vjm that vre
fuo coed to be kept secret?


A. She procedure t rj t vbg necessary to adnit oor.etcdy as a lecturer
t r iT-tw«rw‘-tv vos never Secret. Also, the fact that sor-obody had, in

rs a lecturer w.s not kc-t secret ns a -.ettor .f
the title "Tr. Eabilitation” cwtrlaly cirried
t.'.lc titlo vith iriV* oven if it ves rained by tht or-ceduro of "secr-.t
debilitation". /In /he ceso of r seer t hrbilitrtlcn the secrecy r.f-.rr .'


Court So. 1

IT Her -iv-H-l-2-EEX-roe t or (1st. Eanler)


rarely t: the scientific *trk of the -<- concerned; that is, when It re¬
ferred to e subject vhich, ovin,: to “ilitery reasons - thnt ia, in the
Interest of the defense of the country - hid U keit oecre>. For tfcio
rotaon we hed sot only secret hat 111 tot lose, ~iut there were secret orcr-.c-
tiona too, conferring of doctor decreet, tut only In n crao •he:. the sub¬
ject of the doctor thesis had to to keot eccrct for r.ilitrry reasons. I
know, for Inetrnce, e certain Dr. tfahsko wrote r treatise about or^ulclon
,* certain urojoctilea. Shis thesis of course hrd to be kent strictly

ocent. Ae far ca I know the orotlen of the liouid rocket wo treated

*

there. That la an invent! .n »*.lch la of highest i’rcrtmee, or could to
of hi cheat luor*nnci, for thu wc.;ir.; of the wr end therefore hrd to to
kuot oecret. I tellcve thet in ceoco like that Ir. other etrtce aierct
hntllltrtl .n hr a to exist, too.

Let ua eaaujo thet o research worker during the vrr hrd invented
radar or tho aton tort, rr.d with e scientific th»eia about thnt Invention
ho wonted to bee or.o r lecturer. In n case like thrt auch c thiols would
hrvo had t> be kect secret. Kcwovor, uob-dy would have thoucht of keeping
tho od.-.leaion of the research worker concerned r secret.

*v Vltncea, thia oecr.t he.Ulitatios which Pr. Hrxchor wanted - io
that a very unlouo case? la It very extraordinary or did auch accrct
habilitctions oxlet nore frequently lr. Gcrsocy, especially during the war
Krlcd?

A. So, thrt wasn't a unloue crew. Secret habllltetlccs rr.d s< •
prouotlons occurred here and there, 'hentvor scientists worked with cer¬
tain rgencies f :r nary ycere, especially with scientific agencies f a
“ilitery character, they could nrturelly only deal with cmerinenta end
Troblece which full within the inhere of the-ir official activity. Th-co
ettcrc nerrly rll were keot ctcret. 5 -v, one did not vent to keen cuch
ociur.tlst 6 cvny froc the ccndcnic career. That would hrve teen cr. injuc-
tlcc end thnt vr.o neither is the interests of the agency itself, therviee,
'-very scientist would, hi ve endeavored to get away frou r.n agency w- er e ho
c-ul.’-n 1 * ai-oultmeously Uc.oe a lecturer et a uaivc-r6ity. An r * Ju it: art

4523


Court So. 1 '

17 far .i7-U-l-3-2HK-7oet«r (Int. Se n ior)


izr these contrary intercste vac found in the nanner; araely, that the
research worker was (given the possibility of habiliteticn hut thr.t the
subject of his. thesis yes hoot secret. Such secr.t hetillteticn#
naturally were not especially favored, for very ecsily a suspicion could
arise that this secrecy was only carried out because the scientific
thesis concerned, or tho ceadldato concerned, hnd not achieve.! n cuffi-
cleat scientific steaerrd.

v Uljtaess, vhen iaterrc*;rted earlier, did you yoursolf start to


discuss the so-ccllod secret habilitations of Sr. Haschcr, -r vwre y-u

%

ashed by the interruptir.; officer about that subject?


17 :v-iK.-SL$- 2 -l-COQk (Sr-nelcr)

cwt 1.


O. I was latorro.r’tod about Dr. Enschcr f r tho first tino when I stayed
at Ct-to at Oborursol in Dccc .her, IA5. Thor , however, I vs jot naked r.bout
Dr. 2'echor. Hy iatom.rrtion officer, Cnptaln Urbach of tho united st-tco
naked no on tae occ-nair. of n» intorro.r.tion whoth r I already know tho
icturoa of tho atrocities in tae cincontr tion c-.y-s. I affimod th t
question. Ho thon asked *VCrc y-> u over in a concentration c-_o yoursaif?"

I nffirood that too. Ho further naked .x way I vioitod : c’ncor.tr .ti*n
■Jii. thorotoon I str.toi th-t nco beforo tho J-.r I t ok a rt in an ir.o_xcti on

of tho c rxor.tr ti n o-. . 3rxh.au, -ai I furthjr_oro ar-id that ir. tho yoer 13U3

*

in tho fall, I vial tod tho iuntltut- of Dr. R-.ach.r, In achnu, Vacr.uoe of
iii.. lor'o cu.y.-ation. "he:. I v c aked n;ut y rolr.ti-nehin to Dr. kr.ocfcor
in dot 11, and X vr.a alao akod r. v 'ut the ur 000 «f ry rolr-tionahl , I
dock-rod K t thr.t tlno th t one reraon vna tho hr.* 11 it.at lor. of Dr. Tnochor which
vr.a dooirxd by Fii-lor.

> jod ta-t la how y:u yourself docidod t roeck nV.ut that u ttort

Tea.

.. •Itnoca, 'ofore aAJruraaeat, -ou told ua, if I undcratnnd you correct¬
ly, that c.t that tix:o y u received tee thoaia of Dr. Ifcaschor, hla retort a out
the concludod ox.'eri ,or.t, th*.t you rccoivod it 'rut you did not rend it. Io
tr.at corroct?

2. Tjs.

• Veil why didn't y u road th t thesis? I a:, not cuito clear a v - fc V:. t-

... Sic 3 riper itaclf did not interest rx bocr.uoc .y interests w
very ifforout field of work to Dr. Br.schor's. In eirtltion I receive', r.j-
n nrund nee of scientific work fra. t.-.r,u.:hout 3 cr any, th-t X h«d Unicoi,
ys.lf t- re-/ only th^ro -r. era weica interested no llrectly. I certainly
tol(. h-Vc h. to reed t.:ie pcaor -- 1 a * had the rssi -nr.cnt to t.-Jco jv^r
the hrkilit.ationa of Dr. Srachcr, iircctlr, th .t is to a y, if it h d ':cor. y
t s': t cvniurto ..is work, t. t-kc u.o connections with the corraoon'.in.-
• • deal Faculty, end whatever formalities r.rc required in the c.a-u of ouch
- ilit tion.


17 iSMKr-Sy-&-3-CooJc (3r.-_.lcr)

Court 1.


&:t Is to Dcy you did not rend tho report Uy Dr. Rnacher niout .:1 b
experiment•?

— Tos.

*• Did Dr. Rnacher ev.r inf rm y.u verbally about details of his
experiment 3 , /od la -articular about tho kind of experiments subjects or.
v..ick theae ox;erisunts v.rc errriod out, or did any ’no olao, for inatnneo,
t.-.c O-dofond nt, slov-ra, in>far y*u about the so ant tor at

-• Sh a ll I toko it 3 r. on^r. 1 question, or nro y u oapocl-lly refer¬
ring to hcMlitr.tionl

«• Tea. I £-• onookir. 'out ha Hit /1 Ion, that is hrt vc /To spor.iCiiv;
a; -ut now. I n fakir..- y *4.cth r r.t th/ t ti -o or Inter you v ro informed
-y a.achor or any ac. olao no out vl.it ox-orl:.ont-I au’Jocts v ro unod for
those experiment*. X ..-Jco this quoRti a roxy concrotc. Vorw thoy or ninal
oncor.tr ti -r. cr.prisoners r lltic i in:* t-e, -ooplo condemned to 4c th,
or othora flonw or non-G r..nnt Vor. they riaonora of war, etc?

— I Ud not apeak t * cchvr r >ut ox/erl.-entra aubjocto in t..la
c-naoction.

Professor, you hc."o heard hero about .n or lor of "im.-J.or, I think
it wan detod October, 1$42, araoly th t ?-lea '.mi Russians. whonovor uaod
for auoh ®r >orimonta, v^re clwnyo uxcludod fun d . u x n trJ.ly frw; any p rt’.on.

This ia r letter of Dr. Rudolph 3r. mdt addressed to Gberaturribnnnfuohror
Rudolph sennittlor, dated tne 2a i of October. 1 > 2 , which c-n be found ir.
ftaeuaoat r lur.o 2 . :-i ( n ltltudo Zr erinonts. Dii you nt th t time,
ir.n; a c ia the y^-or 1S3» , ‘"> n this hr. ill: tion t ok Ir co, know /.

: is or:'or fr .. :-:i...Jer or vhon did .u first lcx rr. r.' ut that or lor?

... Shi a order v a kept accrot before me. I only h rrd r.b ut it hero,
r. -Ir, ,h t PoIob nd Suvainn a were excluded.

tttnoas, Dr. Rr.ach.r, I t..irJc in the year 1>-?. received n ri inrl
: r t.-.v r ich Research C uncil o.atitled, "The Re-*’r dr. • f Ruivn Pcir-T ., 0
I repeat* ■Rcvr.rrdn.: of •\u , --a join s. * ?.;it c-n c ao_r. fr :. r document
•..ic;: was aubi.lt ted in eridonce in dtument volui-O 11 , p--.*e 2 p, tn b in xv-o
:f tho G-man document. It io document S 56 , exhibit 2h7- Dhis is n file
r. 3 t :l-n jf sicrora. It is bole,- asserted that thia ro scare. . order unf.-r tho


17 3-cmSs (2r-_icr)

c urt . i.

title: ■ao-Tfcrt^nf: of Rosen Delays*. vns ,-ivcn hy you to 3r. Rnsch-r in the

•

ar.no of the Reich Research Council, 1 b correct?

— So, -no 4 oy I anv in ra axe-rut -f tie Reich Rjoc<ixch council th t
t..lc order fiven to Rr.sch.r v-.h accredited to no. Such excerpts I think I
rccoivod onco in three norths. This entry «r.i waft. ?or I hr ^Tcod -dth
Rnschor th -t ho V ■ to rocoivo a. uoly.T’.l r.ssi.-micr.t fror. the Haich lieoo'.rch
Council, rad no r.ssl.'pvjjat for cold oxporioonts vt.b riven hy no to Rr. t'-nchor
•Jhcr. I or.-..' th-t the '.tai.TV-jr.t which v a ontitlod ■Re- , Jnn:i!V- of *!u.!rn Gein-s"

was accredited t- ..o, I s oho t. haach.r rhout tnia .-.utter and t Id hi:, th t

*

t..is nasi. nner.t was n>t ny concern hut holes-o* to the Jurisdiction f the

Gchokjrat Dr. Sauer ruch, a. c the or. try 'n Jjy c rd index w a ohvi ouely

n oftOtAko which vt o .. o la thu Reich nescrrch council. ..t th-1 ti .o I nlso

Ul .honed tuc R-ich Reoe-rc.. CHmcil -ad x.olcei. th-.t t..ic <tai RUXRt should

not ho listed in y s-..© :cc\uo- t .ia w.a soiutni.;.; th*-t 'cloned to "r.

*

S-uer’.ruch hy v penrin,; as a who ;>ssl -nod re sc.-re:-, r.eri anonta ii. -.

s.h*rc which foil wlthlr. S-uorhruch's field of activity. x I t 1«. th-1 to

rfc.scher, too. Rnecher at th t ti.j r id th-.t thor. were v-ri *uo o-;ini'<nn

rhn t order, that io, '.otvc-.i hi.-ier .icl.a-.rst SS Or vitl.

The 1:. r h; v.atcd t cor. net t.;eso ox.erlsenta on froten s ldioro r.t tho
front, while ~1 -1 .r did not want to > it «.t ;ha front hut in the ;; unt-ino.
:-;Wwver, tho tine of tho ya-.r it *.hi ti a h.-d ro, re seed nlr-ndy ao fdr that
cuen or.oriaonts ir. tho winter .\t thr.t ti::o co-old n t c a into c re‘ ’.err.t' n
onyuoro.

> Mines#, Anris- your at .tenant# you were aryl a; th; t y-u f oj:
tint n r.t'i ssent for Rascher with th- title: *Ra- , Jbrir-r 0 tni vr-a.-ly
-ntercC. on y ur card is. ox, nl th t it r ally hclor.^od to the a-hero of
Geheinrr.t Dr. Srour^ruc:.. I sh-U now h wo these tv c-rd index r-"->' 0B
sni'.-n a y u in their photoat tic f-m. lours is A cuaent 6^0, ox..i it 120,

I re ~.t d- cur- at 6 ; C. h.iit 120. *t;ich erm *-.c f -and in locuncnt v lu o 11.
T..e c. rl in‘.ox systeii for Gr. $-.ucrhruch is the next conost. This io
cu.:.nt Sgi, oxhinit — well it is the next one in th-.t document. ?:-re rare
two .ujen s, one is 6-0 tn’ the otn-r is 6jl. I think th-1 the irh.i it

ii ' r 27


17 ■ 5-2—— Cook (=-. 1-r)

C'UTt . 1.


au-hcr is tho sra.e in *: th docuaont, nr~oly, 120, since they vur. suhlttcd
toother. Vltnoss, I a’x yon t . look : there d* u:*;nta very oxnctly nnd
ive us v_r- rr cisfl inforcati n on th.so docusunts. I want yu to tttAorstnsd
cl.nrly ta these documents tire the inly basis for the assertion ''t the ?r>-
secuti-u th'.t y u, witness, w^rc a -wirticipant ir. rjjywny in the c 1 cx>ri-
uenta -f Tr. msehor, atod th t yu Iso prjtlci;v'tod in tfco poison .re ex _ri-
:;.nts of Zr. -Firth in Strr.abour r :. Tnis -uonnin.: of thoso tv> dbeunonte wee
interpreted in t..is -~.nr.or by the prose cut i »n t the session f the
13 Zee—her co Ul6 of tho G^r m lnutos with spooled oirhnsie nnd tho
Prosecution states that fr th t it con bo soon ;h-t you participated in
theso horrible oxyeriraonts. :*-v, if y u look r.t those documents tho first
thine i*> oj-rd index ;--o for Mono, you.lent Jo. f 0, then y u will see th t
under tho current U.. G32J then, is on entry, nnd I m> spenkinr a' out your
ear* index >-,.0: "B: sctu^-i.uaich". Tho title >f t..io nssl^nrat is r.s follows
nnd : qv.oto* "H>-7rrjlh , after the .^onornl c' lin of the hur.ui ‘.»-y, curod
by vest f roe sin,-, odd adjustment *f tho hnunn body." Or. the ri v.t it snysi
There is r. further nun’, .r tho re IJII-I 5 . '..’ell vh~.t hr.vo y>u -t to ary
njout tV.in entry On y ur c r’ index -?


►


-525


17 :-;-.rcb u 7 -!rr- 3 -i-Or;S 3 (RanLor)
Court !fc. 1


k At first it cannot be 3cer. frc- this title .-it all that --o are con¬
cern: J . irith any exporinents vhich ar: not poraissihle. As I look at the
fi .urc at th-- ri ht of th- title, n a ne ly 1679-15 I can say that 15 refers
to mr sphere of rrork in the Reich Research Council, "heroes, the sphore of
work of Cob irxai Sauorbruch bore the fl airs 10. Under this assi-mant for
Raschor the order is xxntionol which allegedly was riv^n to ”irt, navly"
•Chango of Living Organism by Dsirr. Ch-rdoal "arfaro Agents". Or. tho pa,:o
of Oohcinrat Sauerbruch it says, T quoto, ""ith rjfor.-nco to lYofoasor Hirt
Strasbourg*, an^ tho subject is, "The Reaction of Lost (I^O-S-T)in tho
living Organism". That is tc say, in offoct wo are concerned with tho anno
subjeot ir. tho case of Saxitrbruch an’, in qy case, "ith rcforonco to this
assigroor.t Rirt I have to say that ho ii ’n»t oldn* to =y srhsro of work,
in tho ssas way as tho so-calloi cold essignaant to Rnach-r 'i'n't belong*
Both of thosj assi nr..nta holongei in to tho Jurisdiction of general rwdi-
cino fer which Profoosor Sauerbruch is con.: etont. Furthimorc, I voul *. lik<
to point out that ov-n in th title of th order • iv^n to Hirt, nanoly,
"Changes of Livin* Cr~--.niar." it oannot bo soon in any »my that wo are h„ro
concomo ! with oxparinonts on hcr.n bcin s and you can finally sco that
this concern ! any cxp.rirv.nts which arc not p missi' lo. Both of thoso
nssi'Tr-onts wore r.ot iven by no. Furth.rcoro, I say looking "-t ny car!
in'ox pago and I ask ycu to lrok at tho fir-ures on the loft hand sldo an!
folio-.: thon up with no. At first it sa>*3 0!;53 black Oli96.

DR. S.UTS7: Just a u<r.ont, ‘ f r. .rosi iont, hivo you this document in
front of you? I rr.vo a photostat of this Ujcunont with no if you woul ’ like
to soo it.

r~“ <RESIDEXTt ill ycu pass the photostats to th: Tribunal?

D?. SAUTEI: On. is th: hot estate for uLorsc an! the other Tor Sauer-
ruoh. It rrili be ::uch easier for you tc follow the stat<xa.nto of th do-
ferdant.

JUrc-E STBRIT-s I an unable to fin* ’~cunont 691.

:r. H..RBT: Tour Kocer, I rcul' like to call tc your attention that
bocuaent $?1 was never introduce 1 by Frosc-cuticr.. 'o -jr_ly intro bJc«' 690.


1? "arch ii7-!MYD-3-2-Oross
Court 1

JOECE SSERIHG: I fir.-'. OocUBJirt 690 -nit I could not fir.’ Docunont 691.

T. SAUJER: The ocurant 691 is naturally n.-« ’o’ in order to judfjo
Document 690 correctly. The Tocuaint 691 contains th. assi.^nraont Sauorbruch
and the docunont 690 contains the asslpnaenta cf Rlcne. as ~-ionc wantp
to shew you that an assicvsier.t -which was contains 1 in his err 1 in lex pa.’o
is also contained in the card in dex pafjo of Sauorbruch, *.dth which hu Is
inoriainated erroneously, then of course ono has to look at Docunont 691,
too. This Docu-r.r.t 691 wo received ir. th. Dacuaent Roon and it vas attache
to 690. In addition tJvro was attache ’ the document 699 to which I shall
rafer lator and also tits at 738. Those wore four Socuaonts whloh
bolon?oi topother.

Jimz STE-i:":-: Dr. Scat, r, «ui su -jst that if it is truo that the
Prosecution has r.:t offers. I ary of th-so .ccuaonts but locunont 690 that ir
or hr to keep your recor’ straight that you yourself have those docunonts
i lentUicThat is to say, 691 ar.' any othur conpnnion '.oeunonts .an’ of for
th .n as ; xvrt cf your ovidonee.

MR. R.RDIt Anl in a Ution thor to Prcoocution would bo ploasod if wo
coul* rooclvo a translation of 691. Ihat has novor boon resontod for trenr
ion by rrosocution in as nuch as we nevor ir.tondri to uao tho MB .

T.v. 77‘oSIDEKTt If counsel for dofonlant Blorw c .res to offor in evi-
•onco locucont 691 it >.oul bo a ‘nitty! at once -an-’ tho translation cm
bo fumisho ! in 'uo tlno. Evidently locusont 691 has never ’ em effort-d or
rocoivud in evi V.nco in tho caso.

DR. SnOTERi Hr. President, th. ".attor is as fellowst You cannot
un'lorstan' the 'ofenso of Dr. Blcce —

THE rTtSSUB’rT: Tho- Tribunal undarstan’s that i.rfsctly an ' If you
off^r in ovi ’enc. - art of your c:?3o '.ecrxnt 6?1 it .111 bo nbdttoi in
ovi.lnnco as .-art of y-ur case.

DR. SLUTSRt Tes, but Ir. .resident, z mist r.r , ven if this docunont
ha3 not ye t bocn abiittc! fcmali;.-, rvfcr to that •esurvnt. Othervi-s.-, you

coul* not understand chat Blcno -dshes to 3cy.

U55O


1? Kirch u .TD-3—3-Gros s

Court !fc. 1


TaS RESIDENT: Counsel. nay offer the docuaont in evidence now and
it will bo received in evidence nor.

DR. SvTTEHi Io3. At a later date I shall subnit translations aw* I
an now off-line doceaanfc 691 as Exhibit Blcoo 3.

THE FI3SIEEHT: The doconnt will be reoeived in ovi ’.once.

DP.. S..UTER: In a Bition I of for the '.ocuaent which belongs to it.
wmo 699, as Exhibit Elceie lx, and also the ‘ocuncnt which bolonga to it,
’ocunent 738, as Exhibit Blcoo 5*

J1EGE STDTLST.i Is it not true that tho statement of Professor B^r.-ranr.
is now in ovidenoo as Elcao -xhibia 3? '

DR. SAOTEai ttr.t so far as not to; n a '.*•/.-t» T t uaa not

a baittod by you. Cons-iquontly this Eachi*. it ’3 has so far not boon uso-!.

TH" TnSSIEBKTi Counsol is correct.

B7 DR. S..UTERI

Q '.tttnoss, tho Tribunal now has tho photostat copiosof those two car
index vages in front of then. I already said that thoso card index pagoa
/jaturally bole wo :1 tcrothor an' they wero accor 'inrly all attached whon th«.
dofonso rocslvui tb. .hotostr.t copies. Perhaps you can very shortly 'ofino
your attitude toward these two card in'ex p=EC3. I want you to otato thoso
points of vi«r which, ocoor IJivt to your opinion, it rust bo concluded that
tho assigrwjnt hirt an ' tho proco.’in assi m<nt Ttoschor w^ro crronoously
entered or. your car' in ’ox pago?

A Hoy I ask th. Tri'und to eon-aro the followin things. On tho
card index pago done, it says un’or no. 329 th t thoro is an order Ivon
to Hirt at Strasbourg titled "Chan .es of Living Or.-onisn under the Influonc
of I-oison Oases". On tho car’ in Vx ~r.o of Sauerbruch .an asci nr.r.t to Hir
Strasbourg car. bo soon titled "Th. ..ttitu ’o of "nulbkraus* (Lost) ir. tho
Livin- Or.-anisn." e are obvir.sly concerned with tho sane subject which
was Ivon as a research assi xrwnt by Professor Sau- r’>ruch an ’ which in
addition was suppoe * to have boon Ivor, by no, too. Free these two subject
it cannot bo seen that one in aqy way is cc nee me 1 with exporirants which
arc not pomissible. ?fc n-ntdor. is node of experiments on huaoa \-ein~3. Or.-
is only concerned with experiments in the living orranisn. ' .

4531


17 :>rci 47-li-?JC-4-l-Snrrow (1st., Pa.—-lor)

; urt I

JTD02 SS^I'C: Dr. 31c ess, In that connection, =SU ycu plooso oxplain
t: on why in Docuront Ho. 690, horotrf'ro admitted n3 n Prosocuticn ®hibit
there appo-ors tho sorial nunbor SS Ho. 0329 and Bogistry Ho. 1831-15,
ahilo In Docuaont No. 691, Blau' Srhibt 3, tho SS nunbor is 0325 and tho
SMfistrr Umbor is 548-10? TTculdn't that soon to indicate that th.‘ro «oro
tn. soparato subjects altogothor?

’.17N3SS: I bo 1 yur yarden, i havon't found tho so-called SS nuabor. Do
y .u . nan tho author cn tho loft iv\ii sido?

na. SdJJTIH: Yos, - boro tho nunbors thoro is a notation "S3 author.

MTJOSS: Tho dlffororco In thoso v.ta flgaros, according to jy opinion
doosn't :nan anythlnf. It is cbvi us that tnis aasigr-ant was ontorod by
tho PorJonnol Cffico on ny cord iaiax syaton an’., at ornthor tiuo, on
Sauor;ruch»e cord isdox systoti. If it says ir. tho aoslenmnt which was
ollogodly giv-n by no "undor tho influoiico tf poisjn cantos", thon this is
axprossod in a coro particular :uxcnor in Rirth's. aosics nnt whoro it says
•attltudo of 'Golbkrouz" (L^st)'." ’Thon looking at tho SS nunbors I soo
scsothlne olso which r-thor nurprisos If caeiparo thoso S3 r.unboro
in D-aur.ont 690 with -no anothor, that is, going fr~i th« top towards tho
b tt you will find a COnsidrablo difforonco. Tho fi.uros bogi:- 03 tho
loft hand cido on tho ttp, and I cito tho foil win; fl, uros: 453, an ardor to
hr. Schwarz; 496, an ordor to Dr. Siohl; thor. 328, an ordpr to Rasohor, 329,
on rdor to Birth; and thon 'v ain, rad this is th„ twrprisiJK thine. 15 ;
r_. or lor tc Colonol Von 3orstol. This soquor.co I con only oxplain by tho
fact that tho p>rs nnol docling wit. 1 -r.d tho ro v lstration of thoso assl.n.^ntc
v 3 art oxact, r, at loast, not roiintlo. Othorwiso it couldn't bo oxplainod
-at thoro could bo tho soquor.co 453 , 495 , 326, 529, end thon again 415,

" ~r zz :n:

*. Yot you havo tho Sam situati-n in 691, do you n:t? Tr.o S-uorbruch
'carl L lax. do you havo tho sa- oxplanati a for that? It c°os 0273, 0274,
^53, 3325, C025, 0327, 0419, 0420, 0279. Sc . You soo.. to hr.vo tho SOTO


17 : 47-K-FJC-4-2-£nrrcw *Iat, Hauler)

I Tt:^l

A liny I reply to thr.t? Sfcot :s obviously sa-athinG difforail. Hy caxd
lr.iax pr£0 says scnothiss ccaplotoly different. 0:. thio Document Nj. 691,
wo strxt with the low figures 273, -d wo step with tho xi; h fit-roe 491,

&3l wo hr.vo saa crdorly soquanco, 273 , 274, 323, :>25, 315, 327, 419, '20,

424, 279, 481, 491. Thnt is to sty, accordin: to tho fi'uros, it is corroct
03 to its soquonco, whorona on :ay ca-*d laiox po.co you find thr.1 tho first
figure i3 453 and tho lost or.o is 415 and in botroen that ycu coo fir^ros 32c
nr.d 329. Thut is, ycu havo no proper 3«jquor.ro.

; --hot do those mc-bora indieato, Dr. Blcs.o? \7snt is the purposo for t:
nit-fcors?

A Svory rosifjch assi&aiont rocoivol a wzbor, and x&nC thoso nu::b»rs
thoro t;oro various prioritios. One priority was, as '.t con bo soon at tho tot
on th loft hood sido lr. tho caso of both dccunonta, tho Priority SS. Now,
if a ronorxch workor ont<S to Tier cortain oquljr.3nt at various finis; for
iuatxaco, instruments, then iw always roforxod to tho priority nuiibor which
W'.a -.ivon to hici by tho Soich Hoeo-rch Council Hhon roforrinr. to that order,
la that case the fir a always know in what soquonco, r r thor vhr.t priority
any ouch businosa ardor hd and ho«i t.;oy hd to doal *lvh it.

n h*hat do th, numbers on the richt indie-t«». in ot.ior words, tho
643-10? I unlorat-jd ycu tc say that the nui.bor 10 lnlicaion thr.t that
particular probloc. 13 within tho sphoro of Da. Sauarbruch*’s Ml. ty. /hat
f.on d os tho n ichor procodiac it - - i-:dlo-tJ?

A 1h.t I conn~t toll y~u with cort-Anty. Now for t’o vory first ti:.o I
lock*! at auch card irdox m-os while in prison. Por.V.p3 they rxo saa
ro Ictrrtirn finures, but I couldn't toll ymi wit’ cortainty.

* can you toll by l^kln; at tho card index systcc fofloctod in tho
Prosocution Dshibit, Doctront 690, and Blcno 2thibit 3, Docccant 691, *"~on t ,
sards i.oro pro par oi? That ir tc say, tho day and tho dato?


-533


1" -iT-ir-FjC-:-3-->jro* (let., R.-rr-lor)

3 art I

I caa*t find tho dr;to h»-o. I crji't toll you that. Tfcoro is no dr.to
t'.jaro and, ns i scid baforo, I sn» those oard iadoxos for tho first tii_o
xhil- in prison.

~ Do you Haow what o£uncy proporol or Hoot thoso cards?

S la njr opinion, they could fcava only bo done in tho Roich Rosor-xch
Council. In tho Roich Rosor-ch Council thor- woro mrious jfficos. I,
porsonr.Uy, had n- cffico in tho * v oich Roso-xch council.

q Do you Hn;w whothor or not tho Soieh Roso-rch Council koot sov^rol
sorios of nvt-burs to indlocto thj iiiportaaco of tho various projects thoy hr£


bof ro thcr.?


17 ' r r -*7 --:-S -5-1—- 3sor - Int; lici.-lor
C -it -o. 1


... £ .t, lr. uy opinion , cnn only l>o soon by lc fcixv; at tl:o
S£ nunbor. s. 5ho sc-c.-ilud S^> nu , icfc

tl in fe f* ra felon, 1- 1 various do-

To.s of uryoncy. I bncv t!. t. In cV’ition to tb.o S3 numbor
tbor* was ac-c: llod S nun or, tl* t is, mo sin~lo . Ifcis
E, in rr. opinion rr cc :vlin' ti ny . emery, 3 owed leas
inportunco tbon tbo pri rifcy •: oro t) <. double E- w s r.ontlon-
t-l. 'ft on, bey'nil t is priority £?, fchoro v r. y t M~b.gr
priority; tl t v s jE, I ropoct, 1>E, bvfc^I dc ret 3uo it
nohfeloned «.ro. Tl - oxplcn. tir.n fer DE noons, in offset,

"ur -ont lovclc -i.ent" n. t* : t iv-cnt ) iyb.or priority. Doyond
tbr.t tl ore v/-.. a yofe .. li t.or priority but I cermet tell you
c v ctly Y.< u t io loai n. tod.

. E l.^SIbE T: ''cunao 1 will iou to it tl .t tbeco docu¬
ments wl i 1 b .vo b on . duittod inovilonco cn bobclf rf
leforv ent 3} no rro crrr.rl to nC inclu ex in Blono 1 a aupp-
lo -.ontal decuronts, \}ponlisc 2. Wo br.vo ' pondlx 1. \'o hxtvo
Dc^unor.t 3co!r 1, t! on vo b • o/.pyondix 1. ft<.ao si rul bo
lncludod end furoisbod un or covor i.ppondix 2.

DR. EiUTE : Yea, cortoinly. Dontloncn of tl u Trl 1 'un:.l, I
tx.'j perbsp3 bo r.blo to .naw-: no quosti n f tl o Tribunal
by uxuirinc tbo vitnoss.

.'itnoss, boftre no I 1.: vo dccu ont xA icb I r ocoivod
fr tl o ‘V aocuti ..t tfcct tliso. I do not liner wl otb.or 1
rocolvcd it by i vorai 1 t. I r ci.lly r ust asauno that I roeolvod
it v^rsitt. ib.i3 is tbo d'cu: ont 733, if I reed it c-r-
:• ctly, end I eve it tie Exl f it tr&or 31 uj Ho. 5. I
3 ! .11 procont this decu:>ont tc tbo Tribunal vory seen. is
is cn iniox ontitlod, end I to tl.o title: "Ro -istr..ti' n
:*tt-.bor in tlo Ba.~istretii.i. Offico cf tl o Expert Offico cf t: o
R.J.R." v, leb is t* c -oicb dcsoorcb C uncil. T. t is tl o tit¬
le. Tbon it Irs "1. Research on ‘orcstry end >ed Rosocrch.

U535


II


17 r -.7-:.-r--5-2-Losscr - Int: lor

Ccurt No. 1

Hon it ca ys ''Science 1 ' etc. end it -cos on in tr 10.
tinier ITc. 10 it sr.ys "C-cr.cr. 1 ••odiclno. That is ’Tc . 10,
Soxwrr.l Kodicino. Ur. .or Ko. 15 it sr.ys 1 .’loni ..<. tonti: ry for
Cancer noser, rch."

dn ttl.o vrl *lc it contains 27 aud. d o.x.rtronta. ‘Vir is
y ocunont No. 7£6, °lcrw Exhibit Hr. 5; it is supploricutod
’yy furt! or dccu.cnt whi ;v. vhay o vzs r.lao *lvon tr ro *)y

vorai ;1 t, w*. ic! is docuront No. 6.9, did I pruvi- osly -r.vo
•*1 rjj Erd ihit lie. 4. I s', nil proaent tile lfcm-cnt, t< o,
v:itl tie photostat crploa, t- tl -ri' .. 1 very seen. : cro
tl.ro ic re title end nc si iv.tvro ‘ut it sr.ys: "1. ’3r: ncl ,

*r f< a3-r Dcyorlir.. 11 Aren it ycos on, 2, 3, etc. I slip tl L .

tl on it tr.ya "l”. Jr.' .nd , 5r.uo*.''rucl . Aon I skip .nr-
tl „ r : .w Ru.--*iur8 tc wh-ro it er.ya "15. .''refosser “lrno. I
sub:.it t! tvt ex ta , which iv a Hr. •:

and Nc. 5, in fctoir phet ct ccpios end I shc.il, . t c. futuro
Jr.to, auhjdt trmsi;.ti r.c tl ore dre rior.ts end r. thon to
tho ^ccururt kok Blc :o, f r tl o approval r.f tlo Tr !>unc.l,
"itr.^sc, ftor h .vin- l..r‘ f t- . t\,. doontonta can you,
un’.or path, toll us whotlcr it is corroct to sr.y tint fren
t! oso twr ;lfCUi.ont3 it err be ccnclrdod tl r.t • No, 10 wr.r tho
nur.bor cf Oohoinrr.t Scuorbruch, f i r hi a fiold cf v rlr,
n. :ol-, ’'Gonorc.l *:odicin« u rod whotlor tho nur.’-.cr 15 wr. s
yur own nuribor frr pur field cf verk "'loniprtontii.ry
for Cmcor -ios arch"? I3 tl ut ci rr ct?
foa.

. Nut, if yru wcul ’ r.'-Mr. ii ck r.t tie So twr docur.onts,

• tnoss, wild nro in f rent f you in thv ph^tcstr.t c pios,
t t is :\ccui.ont 590 f.r.l ccurvmt G91, rod if ycu r. r.in lrrk
t tl o nu;:b<_rc nl icl can o found at tho ri^-thtnd si 0 cf any
sripncioit , 61*on you will, for instraco, fir.2 in decu’.or.t
691, Cord In.*ox Fn;o Sr.uchbruch, n tho ri^htl end silo if tho

^536


17 r /7-ll-S -5-3-^3£_r - Int: Rem lor
C urfc Ko a 1

cgsirnr-nt, "i.'lrt-Str abcur-' 1 th- r.u::'*cr £<-3-10.

Jos.

. la it correct th t tils nu::bcr neons ti" .t t’is rp.’.or
5-.0 -elrn s tc tic ficll of w< rk !f~. 10 3r. ncl Se.uor* ruch,
is thr.t correct?

Yoa.

If ycu thon 1 ok t "cevnont 690 you will, fer instance,
find r.t tl:o silo «-f tic or.’.or tc "Eirt, Strr.cbrur- n yrur
curd inlox pr. o, tic nirf or t tho ritf-.tl end aide, 1881-15.
"culd ycu think it ia ccrr. ct te tr.y cr. tie basin rf your k • v:--
lo -u that tile ir d.omt ..a °rdor ho. 1-81 »f 3r..nch He. 15,
wl ich wt .a un’.or 7 cur eh: r ;o?

*■% Yoa, that ia correct.

Q. "itnoea, cr. tlo lcfth.nl silo f tl o Drcu.-.ont 691,
tint is Sr.uorbrucL'a card intlox pr. o, witl roforonco to crO.or
■Eirt Str-.a’<rvr •" you find thoro tho msftor t t loftfcand 0325.
on : ur wn cr.r-l in lo 3c ;>• ~o, tV.-.t is "ccunont 690, ;.ru find
n tho loftl nd silo r. nicSior V icl ia rjncct the anno,
nc. cly , 0329. C n rnocmclu'o fr the fr.ct tlvt tt c tv;-
r.urAora : ro alnrat syr*nyirur, vcc r’ln- t yrur knowlad^o
f tho altur.ticn, tl t those tr»r r.llo"ol aaairn. onto tc 1 ‘irt
w.re -dvon .;pr xir-.toly :t tlo s:-o jerisd rf t?..c *'_cr.vro
they berr .licet tlo sr-iO nuu’or, »r v. ull yru ccneilor tv. t
it is pc ssiblo that tlo muibur 052. ic in orr-r onl thr.t
n SI - ctV or hen ’ .'.nether figure clrule. bo substitute .,

052C, . s it cm bo feund in tho r-.rd index pro cf Sftuor' ruc’. ?

-. J oth cf tloso p- ssibilitioa nty exist; Icmnct toil you
t!.t huro r-itl certainty, but ju yin * fr- r tie slight lii'for-
-r.ee in 0323 m 0529, it ia obvious tir t tl.ccu s» -cr.llod
sc p:. re.to assign:ionts nust ha* o beer. *ivvn at the smo tine.

.. "itr.oss, we knew now, cn ti e basis f tl o d cunonts sub -
it tod, thr.t you w ro ontrustod ir. tlo ftcici Roscarc: Council


17 • r 17-1'— z -5-4-lesser - Ir.t - licr; ler
Ctvrt IT- . 1

rati the Doprjtnont Crnccr Research end *c nice knew thr.t Gc-
hoinr.-.t Dr. iauerbruci* l~.l ttc ^oprrtaont Sonoral '-cuic-
lno cr, rj.it scys in ofclor Oocvnocits, "Classical ••c'icino."

I . :J: you t_ nco :^.ro lcck~..t those r.s3i'7v:cr.ts, nanoly
-,t tl.o -sal Tuxnt "Rr.schor--unic! “ un cr the l-ft nu. ' or 0328
n.. I :.cV ycu tr lrrk t t. o nssiTxnont n I!irt" xnui*>or 0320.

One assi'jn-:ont reals "Rowrjjnin", etc. 1 ' 51 o otter o.caiiv»nt *
re ’a , cr refers t' cl nnros in tie iivin: imrnlKi inlor
tl - lnfluonco of .. is-n -nss.s. • v I cu r.skinf ycu, ;\o tl oro
tv;r r.soi'Ti:.onts •xol'-n t tic sphere f cancer roa—rchwitl
y-u u-rc on true tv.:, wit*, in tic ixicl .-oa-c rd Council, cr
V tl oy kolcn tt tic spier- an,r 1 cr c’raricr.l aoaicino
-..It: w! icfc Gol cinr. t Sc.uor*>rucl wa- -ntrustod a tl - ’o-
part:icnfcr.l h-:..? I ak ycu to ansu r tl ia quvcti*n very
clearly ^ocr.uc. fr ri tl t tl o ccncluai'n tir.y * o dr'.vm whotlor
n cm r xt. a r-Jo in ti e entries.


17 r -_BH-6 -1 -aia 1 oy -I.at . n— .lc-f

Court Ho. 1.

« These assignments quite equivocally belong in the
sphere of work of Cehelnrot S-uerbruc.<, vr.iich is the sphere
cf general (classical) medicine.

2 •itness, looking, at the documents one*, .acre, and
now for the Inst tine, you will find in the Document Vo.

690 mentioned of, ar.d I quote, "Cancer Research ,,’orked on
By Professor Dr. 31c:je." Underneath that you find the word,
“Deputy Dr. Srcuer," and his address is given; now, ad
looking at Document 2»o. 691, which is the card index page
of ouuerbruch; you* will find a similar notation worke-d on
by St; at'srat Professor Dr. Sauerbraca; underneath thut the-
words, md I quote, "Doputy Dr. brour," and ti.en the words,

:.o ..ich I attach particular value, "Cenorul lCius3icul)

• led 1 cine, * — 'General" or.d parenthesis Classical, end or
parenthesis, and ’Walcint." on mother occasion the .'ro-
aecution attached v ,luo to the evaluation tnut Broftssor
Breuer won your representative, your atputy; now, v.ill you
plc-ase tell U3 whether it is not correct on the basis of
these documents, nd whether it c n not be concerned r you
that Dr. broucr was :lso your ;• paty, but »lso t‘no deputy
of Dr. ocuernruch?

A Yes, that is correct.

2 '.as ho a physician?

A He was a physician.

2 as he an employee of the n ich iiesearch Cohncil?

i he wu8 on aaploy.ee of the aeich .-.ere. rch Council.

.i * i>; address it is given under Dr. S.uerbruch's name, Ber¬
lin- -it/., Grunevrald Stress* :.o. 35. r:. t is the iddrost

cl* the Be ich Res-, .rch Counoil.

c Ana then 1 • sk you to once* more look t Document

o. 690, which is your c:.rd index *-.~e, ana L ive us your >p-

ir.ic:. ..bout the question whether your na_e is only writ eon


17 r-EslH-6-2——aloy-Iht. knmler

Court No. 1.

ty typewriter, cr whether it was put on by your hand?

A iiy nsne by head?

1 Yes.

A Well, it is there three ti_es, but there is just
a stsap there .

3 Yes, but there is no handwriting?

A No, I said before I saw these card index pee--3
for the very first time since .y imprisonment.

1 Now, I would again bo interested to Know when exac¬
tly this order "Raschor" vns given or when "you gained Know¬
ledge of it, ana 1 neon the order under No. 0328 on your
card index pege entitled Rewarding niter General Freezing
of the Hunan body;" -hen was ti.i3 assignment given?

A I can conclude from another document, and 1 believo
tr. t Is the lottcr by Hascr.er to Neff, where it says that
Raschor received a research assignment from the Reich Rese¬
arch Council about similar subjects. If in the letter from
Rcschcr to Neff it says that knschor had already received
th« assignment, thor. in ay opinion this ;ssigrm»ent must have
been given in October.

Q ’..hon?

A Yes, October, 1143.

0. October 1*43?

/x Yes, it would have been given at thut time. Natu¬
rally, I cun't sey with certainty v.huthur the assertions made-
by Rcschcr ir. his letter to ileff were correct, or whether
Rancher was only counting on receiving that assignment at
t.. *. tiao, and inspitc of tr. t -1 ready wrote to Neff that
-c ive :n order air*, ay. That, og course, i can’t Know,
and I can't Judge it. If I consider that question nd if 1
tnirdc when I received it, .bout tr.e fact that 1 was supposed
to have -:ivcn tnat order, then I esti-^te thut it was appro-


17 . .nv -BEH-6 -3-aicloy-Int • Homier
Court :*c. 1.

xLustely ir. the beginning of 1544. I said before 1 think
that the Plenipotentiary, the departmental heads, from time
to tL-c- received excerpts of the entries of their research
essignaents, end I think that occurred once every quarter,
once evtry tore© aonth3.

Qi Witness, with reference to that date, I uttac.. par¬
ticular value to that date, er.c I shall oil you why; but
before that I wont to remind you about Sievcr’s file nota¬
tion, that is the file notation of the /.nnenerbe dated 9th
of ~cy, 1544 -- 1 aentioned it before — this is an index
of the research ossignnonts which xteoohcr received froo the
nelch ncscarch Council ond it soys under iiguro I, it suys
til • t .eschar hud recoivod the oracr .or too roworaing of
..u_ .. beings on 4th October, 1943. I repeat the date, 4th
October 1542. .tow, if you recollect this lilt notation,
would you believe toduy tint this dato cen be correct, ap¬
prox i—a tcly?

A Yes, I thins it s..ould be correct.

3 Huscher ot that tiuc received the asslga.cnt; can
you tell uo whether hnsoher, ir. effect, execute this assign¬
ment; taut would have been in tr.o period October 1543 up to
the spring of 1945; whet So you know about that?

a No, the ordor, the ussignacat, was net executed now-
in tnc wint-r of 1543-1544, end certainly not ir. the winter
of 1944 to 1945. In the winter of 1944 -r.d 1545 Roschcr had
been arrested for soactime. Perhaps h- wasn’t living anymore
t t. it ti-.c. In the winter of i.43-15i* it v is not execute!
-it. r. That can clso be seen from biever’s Diary. It can
!e se^n from an entry u^ac on the 22r.d of a^.rcli 1544, wfccr--
•;cr. everything v,e.s to fc. prep, red for such experiments in
th. -..inter of 1944-1945. This is in accordance v.ith wfcc t
.-v.schcr had tola me. according to it there were differences


17 mr-EhK-6-4-»aloy-Iat. iic-lcr
Court .io. 1.

-i pinion between Hi mm ler and h c ichssrtz Grawitz Qbcut
v;bothor the experiments wore tc bo conducted at the 1 ront
or in mountain territory, -s demanded by nimmler, .nd I
already said that heschcr had told me that the winter of
1943-1944 had pro3rtssod to for ti-cly in order to ovon
thlntc of such experiments.

THE rtuSSIDET.’T: Counsel, tho Tribunal will be ii re¬
cess at this tine.

(n recess was tnicon)


U542


♦


17 'torch- -JB-E-l-Putty (Int. Von Scr.cn)

C.ert I

?H. : Th- Tribunal is - ain in session.

BY B *. SSJf -is

> ..itr-eas, 1 hav. :nl; -no trie! - in-.l ru-sti n n the su > joct vhich
*U h V- Just bw-c discussi/\. Y u said th . th;s_ tw. entries * -schor
r.i Firth v,r_ cut y ur card and-x *’ ’ccidont. F.r thisseac-n I v uld
be intcrost^d in kr.win.. was th- ..cich .'cs-rrch Council an Id e.icy with
trained rollnblu port nntl, or *\s it n-v institution which v .- rcav-d
nly (furin- th- \ r which had a w roap srr.rcit;- >1 perasnnel and rhich fre¬
quently hit ... rk with p.rs iu»l »h;cli »..£ si t -x*ericncco end was chan-ud
r. -.rent --! ivriiH the bar? bh-t c-r. y.u t. 1 us r. this p.int, but
plena- •- bri-C.

A. Ir. 19b2 a new ft-ich ?.ca-*rch l-uncil .”scr.atcd by la-. . Th- t-cks
f this ..-ich AeS-Tch - uncil v-rc :uch • r* cxtei.siv. than th s- -i tfi-
cld Reich ,u,s«-rch t uncil. This rocr -nizsti-n w o primarily crrriud «.ut
in 19^3. . .dth ti; ..any ad^iti nal tuks, e... no-d f r p-rc nnol, .£ c urso,
been c greater. Or tba : tn r , i -reports, the -vile purr and,
th t ic, were drafted int- th. or.y. Th- pc hod t be filler up, but there
trns n trained pora.ir —1 avail-. -1-.

In ..tony coa-s nly pe pie ^or. veil- lc vb. c- uld >.-/k half day,
f.r «lXtt ffia, wstum ill hid fnaili-s r:-rly been sec-.’-i rieS .-nil

w-ro r.ow called up n t w.rk half dajs un-r the total mi' . .f:rt. I
ostiomto th t eh. trl j-r Irandrudp |> 1 -. Inedditi n,

tfcj business ci t?v- >.vich Res-arch S.wcil r-s interfered with bJ the fact
that th. buildir- was hit .t lease ,iic. i j- r iids, p rtly JjBtr.y ,

■•.a, : c urs-, brought ccnsidoraule dis«.r-*er.

• I. Kow I c .nc t an thor point, witnoss. Th- witness, 01 - fiyor, in
the session <f th- 15th ef January hero stated Ur t the Reich .::s- ren C’xc.
h 1 un h-r cm i rices or ' : :r. in Str-.ssb-.ur;., arsion:its r typhus
r yolltr lover research. Did . u hav_ anythm t d with th-so ■ m-nts
ich rr.^.sr r _n w-s ,iv..n o; ui- v.ich -re rch e uncil?

A. ?!o, I % r, thin t d *.d.wh th-r. Such ssi .. t!.c


17 :<-.rch-: -JP-:-2-Putty (Int. 7cn Sch.n)


C art I

a>h-r v rU f Fr-fcss r Schr-i -r. Tfc '■ ns in char c feai&nic r.so-arch.

Q. Did : u have -ny c ntr.c. with It I-ssrr *?v,en in Str 3b vr -incut
this -.ssi;.TcRt I.r tyrhus ~r /ell ■. f-ver expuri-xnts, er di-‘ y t hrv- cny
c.otect vdth ir-.'-ss r Hirth in btr-sbeur: n nssirnrent c ix r.u.nj
che ic-1 -arf-T- ?. .ate? Did y u h w nap mi c.r.v^rs-ti n with th.,::?

Did y tt ivu th~- -ny instructi ns? Did ;• *.• _-t any inf rv ti .. r . tlicn?

A. I did a t kr* v cither jr L\.as r Klrth jxrs nally. I did n:t
h-v. -nythin t d vith th.r. ffici-.Uy citfc-r.

Q. Did v u fr : this rr.f^s: .r *irth, r a epic, * tl-sc had
r s.-rch asci-r.-.nts f r chc ic -1 v-rf-T. - _r.ts, . ^t re ul*r mperts
-hich I a. - ut ab ut the werk iw -n his nssi.^naont?

.v. Ns. I did n t rucoivo -ny rcp.rts it r fr Pr fois r Hr.v^n
r fr Pr. so r '?irth. In ny cpinl r., cvch rep rts c uld have 'o ten c nt
nly t rr ess. r Schrciber.

> Ft fees r Schrciber < .1 fc-.t -vd «xnti n d here rtpc'tcdly?

<*• Yes, thit is the /m.

Q. Fr.i.fBT, 3L n, y ur U hri i Rt ... : ..nooticn with
r.nl-ri- oxperiarnts, t . Die' v u have rye in t d vith tii a?

A. No.

Q. h.an die! y u first h»-r such _r.eriii.ntc?

A. I lx re! .1 th-s. oxvxrirxntc i r th*. first tico rher. I wns a
>ris.a.r in the prl: n infjrnnti.n ct 0»X/rurs_l.

Q. *hen *ne that for th_ firit ti. e?

a. rvt was accut the end rf »U5 cr the xjglmxia 1 •.

Q. But y;u wot- in Dachau severaltLrso, _ren't yeu, when yev rnre
Dyrnty ..ich P. ysidans Leader? In these vie its it D'ch-u, or *s Deputy :f
the .ech P-.ysici.ans Lc-ior, Oenti, did 7 u n_vcr h: ar anythin}. eb" ut t. re
r -...;rs?

JU Bo, 7 di'* n t hear mythin ut be-. I doft*t Ir
Schlllin . I n.versaw this institute .rsvti n : Fr :.r: r Sc *s.

I tv-v^r receivuc ary rvp rts n.L .v.a indirectly thr u h Dr. COrsti.


o' b


17 Krjoh -17-;>7jc-9-l-Cook (Int., 7oa Schoon)
Ccort I


} Deputy Hoich Physician Loader, or in nay at';.or c-.F~.city. diu
y u St.to anything to do diroctly with tho ss officons, ospocially in tho con-
costmtlan c-_:?s, or lid you havo anything t~ do with tho Ho.ilth Sorvico
-f tho coneontration err.?a?

A Ho»

o Nothing at all?

A !fr>, nothin- At all. ?~r tho SS d ctors ir. concentration cr;i?s,
for th- doctors of tho -'offon SS, for all tho doctors of tho T/ohrraoht,

an* for all tho official .ovom^nt d.ctors, tho Rdich Char-bor /hysiciono

*

;/as not tho suporvlsor/ authority. Thoy voro not undor tho disciplir.-u y
authority of tho Roich Chx.bor of physioian? r.ni thoy woro not undor any
authority.

q Now, Dr. Blcra>, I should liko to shew you sa.o :Jng which you;
c'-lof j.uSaat, Rudolf Brandt aasortod at cno tlnj, on tho S-ith of October 19dG
ho .jxz o tvio affidavits. Ono of tha: has tho exhibit nunbur 329- docuuot
'.V: This affidavit doals with tho axpori outs ia tho concor.tr-tion ca»ps.

In this affidavit, tho co-dofonl at, Knrl Brandt, r-ontiens various parsons wh
ho soya know all a out thoso axporL-onts. T.ils is Rudolf Braalt. r'.i
ontions Karl Brandt, Orawitz, Gonh-rdt, Krupsky, PopporJ-.ck and Siovors,
anl finally o-ys, ar.d this is tho point I a;: ah-»iry to your "Kart 31cno In
his capacity as Doputy of Conti :rust tv vo boon 'nfonxj.', Just as wall ao tho
latter hi: iso If." -hat do you haVo tc say about this atatomet of your
co-dofondont, Rudolf ^rardt?

A This ctato.or.t has no basis in fact. T^uroforo, I ask you to oxa’iino
tho dofandant ^ldolf Braralt, how ho c-:o to oko such a 3tatasont.

a Thon how do ycu oxpLaia tho fact that Rudolf Brandt -iakos such a
ctata-o.-.t?

Ono cculd find various explanations.

You knor: n-thing dwfiaito?

A So.


a Yhor. wo will ask hi:, hiiiiolf oftorwards. llj* I go oa to another
subject in connection with which your n-no hes also b. on nontionod, 'lost gas


17 Ifaxch -i7-:«-»jC-a-2-Cooi (Xr.t., avrOor)
Sturt I


311 you bftfo any part in tho lost gas oxporL .ont3, for ozrs-plo, -s thoy v:oro
carriol out in tho concentration ercp SachsonV.auson nnl Katzwollor?

•V no.

\ 7,*hon did you hoar *-r tho first tic-a of tho3o oxporL..onts?

A Koro in Humborc-

n Horo in Hurabors?

.v Yos.

'I ini how do you explain tho fact that in spit a of your various
j;aitlons y;u did not hoer about th bo o-rlior, that .is, bofcro 1945?

A »at had nothing to d? ::ith ny rcrk oithor In Tho Roich Chor.bor of
Fhyatoloxia or in »alth r in tho Roich Rosoorch Council.

o Thon it -./os ccr.plotoly outsido f "our caipotonco?

A Y 03 .

'i Did you ovor visit this concentration c-s.p Snchsonhouson or Katr/oiilor
uh-jfoloat3B« oxporirants wore carried out? Did y u ovor talk to tho doctors
t'.jro about such :attorc?

A Ih, I lid net visit thoso concentration cajips, consequently I din not
talk to tho looters thoro. I kac M only tho ooaooatrati n c j.p Dachau. I was
t: ,ro tw: or thr^o tir-jc, cortainly tvico 1 visited Dr. »>sokor and a third
ti: o bof ro tiio wit 1 \'us with tla iato Roich Physician Locior >„-nor to
ir.spact tho concentration c-;-.p Dachau. I know no othor, c-onoontration cap.

\ Pr'foacr 3ic.o, a nhilo a o I sh'.od ycu an affidavit f Rudolf Brandt

/loro ho char‘os you -./it!, tho alaria arporlxants. 1 2 ir.ro horo an othor

ffidavit cf this Rudolf 3ror.it. In deem ant bock 13 of tlw Prosecution,

■ h « 1 , Ho. 372, ft-.Mention 2*.hibit 252, horo Rudolf Brandt says at tho and,

JLll-j- to tho othor affidavit: ’Pr-fesscr Dr. K-jrt 31c* j, also, Deputy

“olch Health Loador, anl Deputy Raich Physicians Loaior was certainly" - ho

*

■vs "cortainly" - "infomod about thoso atoori. ants." T-.ut was what Rulalf
ra .lt says: ‘."hat io y~u havo to say ao.-ut that?

A This is air an tun* undo! st-txor.t, just -s roll as t!uj or.j ab it


17 ::-ic 'i7-::-?'c-s-o-3-Jc> (mt., a-mior)

c-urt :r=. i

a 311 htvo any pert ir. tho sulfonarddo oxpori:cents?

•i H"*

n *'oro 7 "u ovar ir. a c Dnoantr-.ti n c-r.p Havonabraock cthoro thoy v;oro .
carriotl cut?

A Jfe.

a Did y -u talk to tho dofondants spocificelly rospoasifalo for this
eb:ut it?

A No.

a Did you 113CU33 i£ wit:, othor -lectors who vorhod in that ok-??

A ao.

prof 003 :r 31c: .o war® yy at a noting, a oonforor.co cf consultln<;
pivysiciana at which thoso auife;.-, ddo oxporinouts wore roportod on?

A I dll nut partiol.nto i:. suoh a notinc.

} no ouch 300tine?

A No, not -ay of .y aa6oclatoa.

i Mot thU D r . 3r :is who . wo talked abcul r. fovr fl-ya aco?

A No, net Dr. Cr as oit or. I havo elrordy poir.to.’. cut that thin was r.n
orror or. tho pert jT tho Pr-aocuti-n apparently.

Now I core t r typhus Teccir.oa, Dr. plao. In * socaion f 16 Jobruary
' 1 cuor.t, 1.723, Praaoeutien a lotto? f Dr. Kar-lloaor to tho Reich Health
Lo* ’or, Dr. C ntt. Ir. this lottor, Dr» Sarvllosor roforro to tho lneroasinc
noo! fer typhus v-.ccir.j eal su lcata', that tho product! :a .of typhus vaoclno alioul
; put ir. t:.j hanla -f tho pfcnr acoutlcal industry. Did you, as Duputy Hoi oh
7yalclan Loador, lotrn of thia lottor?

«

A !T n , I HI r. it imos a* ut It, and thin lottor was probably not aoat
t t: - lioich Physicians Lo-ior, Dr. Conti, but t th_ stato Soorot ry in tho
U '.stry of tho Intori : , end I *aa not a Comity ir. that c-rr.civ .

a “ on that roforroi nl. to tho ccr.potonay of Dr. as Stato

".oc.-.tar/ in tho Hoich ::iaistry f ; - intorlor fer tho Stato Honlth Syattfi?


17 .Irrc:-. -17-j:-?jc-a->Coo5c {Ir.t.,
C<«rt :jc i


Rr.;.lor)


'i I- tho ar;x> sossioa, 18 7obrwry, r^othor d.cn oi.t w-j safcittoa
JTO. 1315, Stfclbit IK, - fil j n - to r tho 4 j-j-i-.r.-, 15-1-2, vhich n io-Is
-'It/, tho production -f typhus vcccino. 7.-.0 ho-din is: Hoich 2 'i-.istri¬
ct tho Ir.tori r n&i rifalatorlnltftt, Or. 3iobcr, is r/jntioaod. Did this
Dr. Biofcor h*>.vo mythiao to io uith y.ur offico? *Jf»s ho undor y ur
c$ith:rity? Did ho rop^rt to you?

.1 !l*. IlirdstorirJr^.t Profo3s ~r? 3iobor h«4 nothin tc io trith tho Eolch
C-'x-.bor of Physio inns of \rith tho ffico of pihlio hoolth. Ho W".a

ilniatoriolmt lr. tho ir.lstry tho Ir.tori a. Ho w«s uolor Dr. Conti thoro

<•

Ho to a in chfjco -.f tho loi-'rt 0 - : i- o pi io: do control. Ho ar.a ro export
lr. Hyclono *tnd Hector! 1' y.


17 Ifarch ii7-41—ATD-10-L-Gross (Von Schoen)

Cairt No. 1

; Now, witness, I cccc to a different -rcble.ru That is, the suggestic
nade that tir that the Foies should bo liquidated, that is, the F 0 I 03 suffer'
ir .5 fron incurable conta.ri.ous tub rculosis. A Docurunt Book was subnittod on
that subj-ct. Concerning your participation in the plan for the extermination
of tub:*rculou3 Foies you were oxanined in January 19i»6 at Oberursoi, tnd on
9 and 22 October 19U6 here in the Prison, Verc the staten^nts you made at
that tirvo true?

A Yos. But, I rsust add that concerning this business about the
tuberculous FoI-js, as f r as I reca l l, I said it .3 in 19U3, whil i in r.-ali-
ty, as tho files now show, it took placo in 19142 , I nust also say that ay
lottor to Oroiscr in Jfovenbar 19k? has boon shown to oe hero. I was asked
whether this -as rjy lotter, nhothor I had written this letter. I 3ald "!.’o",

I said this bocauso it was not a photostatic copy, but a photostatic cop;' of
a copy, I objected to several things in th^ letter and did not acknowledge
it at that tin . Thjy * re external sitters vhich occasioned no to make that
statement. Later, however, ir. Dcccnbor, when you took ov*r ny case, you pave
no this photostatic cop;’, and I had an opportunity to study It carefully and
reconstruct conditio had oxlstcd at th and, thorofero, I now

acknowledge this letter as authentic,

%

Ia it tree, 9r. Blcoe, that tho Prococution learned for tho first
tine of tliis plan to oxtemir.ate tho ’oloc through you? 3 r. Blono, what can
you say about that?

A "os, Tl» Prosacution learned froc rw for the first time of this
plan. In 19U2 I told my interrogator, Captain Urbach at Oberur3ol, after hu
had described the details of th: ntrocitios which I had not known about up to

that tire.

Q Toy just said 19k2.

A I Ooant 19k5. 2 neant Lecccbcr 19a 5. I bog your pardon. I do not
fcoli-.va that th Prosecution had any knowledge of this, at least net at
Fborursel.


•1549


17 torch ^ !-A~-10-2-Gros 3 (7on Schoen)
Court So. 1


Q Dr. Blase, this -..•hole natter begins Kith a letter of the Reich
Governor Greiser of th first of toy 19h2 ahich is in Document Book 9, page
1. It is T'ocuzont 216, o;*ibit 196. Tell us briefly who was Groisor.

A This was Arthur Groiser, Gauleiter of the Warthegau, the Reich
Governor of the Kartheland, and tho Raich Defense Corralssioner of tho
Tfartheland.

0 This Gauleiter Greiser, who was a Gauleiter in a district which no;
bolaigs to Poland, on tfc. first of toy 19L2 sent a letter to tho Roich
Fuehrer SS suggesting that Poles suffering fron tuberculosis in the Wartho-
land 3hould bo liquidatod if the existence of open tuberculosis and tho
incurability of tho patients was established by official doctors. In this
regard Grfcisor writes, and this is what I want to ask you about, I quote,

"Tto increasing dangers woro also recognized and appreciated by Deputy Reich
Loader of Public Health, Dr.'Elau, as well as by SS Foreigners Battalion
SS "roradonstumbanr. Loader S3, Dr. Hohlfoldur." Thit is tho quotation, That
can you toll us today about tho apparently early discussion bofcwoor. you .and
Ottulaitor Groisor?

A I talked to Gauloitor Groisor about ooobating tuborculosis in
Wartheland about three tines, certainly onco in tho prosonco of Profossor
Hohlfoldor. These discussioas go back to tho year 19U1. I can recall that
Groisor onco said that tho 3inplcst thing would bo to troat tho incurable
tuberculous Fblos exactly like tho insan. persons by Euthanasia. I pointed
out that tho cacparison was not valid* The Polos, 1 aaid also, wero not
Goraan citizens. Tho plan which Groisor was considering rms a radical i^olutio
but I could not agree to it. fh-n 3<>n3ti»• lator I learned of tho so-called
Fuehrer order according to which the Euthanasia action was stopped and pro¬
hibited I considered this natter, respectively tho statement of Greisor,
settled. Tten the yonr 19h2 was filled with purely organizational preparation
for tho tuberculosis action. For «mplcr All the population had to bo col-
looted ir. card index files, Germans as well as Polos; preparations had to bu

aado for the nodical and clinical care of tho sick, preparations for x-ray

*93/ 55U


17 Karen h 7-K-W!>-10-3-Gro59 (Von %hoeh)
Court !v0, 1


axflainations. Th:-n these scan! nations had to be evaluated, >tc. The latter
was a natter for the State Health offices, the KSV, that is the National
Socialists ' ilfare organisation and the- X-Ray Battalion (Stumoann) ;hich
was to carry out these eX&ninatioQS technically. Pros tine to tisc I had a
report frhn Professor Hohlfelder about tha preparations. Only when all pr«—
requisites wore fulfill-d, did I give ~ r approval for such a big aotion.

The oxocution of this aotion ras dependent upon ny p rsenal approval. Only
then did I tab; .any aotion in this tuberculosis oatt rr in tho V’arthogau —
when I received alaraing reports about the insensiblo liquidation order from

Hinder. I learned of it because at the beginning of 'Sovuabor Sturnibannfuchr.-

<•

Poxvitschky case to ny office in Berlin .and report-.d to no that Greiaar had

an order froc Hisal.r that incurably sick cases of tuberculosis, found in the

0

planned jcardnr.tions in the ».arthcland, woro to bo liquidated. Per itschky
balongod to thi X-P.ay Battalion. Ho :i3 business nanag. r for the society
caabatting tuberculosis. Then I irr diately reached an igreonent with
Ponritschky that I would a-ot Profossor Hohlfeld r at Foson to discuss tho
natter and to provant "if.nl .r> a ar.i Creiser's plans free b.>ing carried out.

I wont to Foson. I discussed th cat tor with Kohlfold r. *o woro both
groatly astonished at this erd. r fron Him’ r, ‘‘c agr .'d that thi3 order must
not bo carried out, and that no os O-rrvm doctors could not lond our hand to
such an aotion. "fu discuss <d the r.annor in which this Hinmlor^ircicor plan
could bo frustrated. \te doeided that I should go to Grcis r first of all. I
telephoned Groiaor frrr. this conforemo and said that it '.-as very inportant
that I should speak to hiru Then I talked to hin on th sanj day, or or. the
next day. fh r. I asked Or is,r vhothor "inrl r's criers fer liquidating voro
correct, ho said ’’Toe. ' Ho said ha had the order in his hands. I 3aid that I
xas willing to prevent this plan in ary case ind I explained why. 1 said that
as >a doctor I could not participata in this and, in the seoond place, I
pointed out the political danger connected with -ugh a crice.

•J5S1


Court Sc. 1 _ e . .

17 .-lar 47-*-ll-l-ffiX-£errov (1st. . jcSch.n)

Than Greisor cgreod that I ves tc '-rite a letter f.r hie vhich he
v.uld -3R81 on t'- Hicr.lor for a decisi-n. -s J-r Greiscr’c letter to
Hi-dcr of the let of hey 1942, vhich you Just nontioned, Dr. Snutor, I
leerced of It for the first tiiie fr.n the files here, and. Elrlor's
nid.n on -y letter of Screoher 19*2 I learned A here for the first tf.e
t(W . up to that tine I did not know oh,ut Ei-wler's 1-ttcr to Grciser.

In tho letter of tfc«- let of Kay 19*2 free Greiser to Hlanler Grcieor
vritc. - I ouote, "that Eohlfeldor rad Bi«o recognized the evcr-incrcncin,:
risk, end appreciated ther..- Sat he doesn’t vritc that Ethlfeldor and I
apuroTed liquidation. The letter dees not ear that. Jfr hreic epinln
cn the oroUer. is the fcllovln. s let us eunooso that ve, ir. G«r any. had
r valid 1 nv for the licuiatl-n of incurably sick nercone tut, aesunin*
that such t lav did exist, then it vould. A courta, he out of tho
ouestion to «rrly it to aon-Geraans. igwliontlon in this oree v-.ul . he
a crl o, •snoeially during v«xr. Gorncny h>.d occupied f tfeign territory
and. r.s occinyln* never, had to observe International lav in the tror.t-
nent clv-n to the occupied to tho occupied territories. As for tho
problem of tuberculosis, I had dealt vith it for >ooe tine. cs*»eiolly
since 1926 vhea I had Incorporated tbs tuberculosis ouceti-n into the
uost-gradunte sedical tralnln,;. In 192? Professor Janker. Bonn, a voll-
knovn X-ray specialist, celled upon os for rid in dcvolooln,: a nov nro-
ceduro vhich, vith e ninirmn of cost, v.uldnake it -possible to oxp.-ino
lor^c croups A the population. This vos the so-celled X-ray screen
photography vhich was developed. I eholl dive you a brief explanation
.f this. ?or rn X-rey picture of the lunce a fil= had been needed of 24
by 30 eestinotere. This nev -jrocodure recuired only a fil= A about 4
by 4 contiuotcrs. That is. the so-called Loica size. The uicture. are
taken vith a Loica. The X-ray screen v PS nhotc*raphed. The successful
develotncnt of this orocedure neant that in olrc. of the ^rice for rn
X-rry ricture, vhich the Serial Insurance had -.aid, A fr^ tvelve to
thirteen narks, it nov could be nreduced for eb-ut ten ofennige; Shut is


\


Ices than 1 percent


4332


Court So. 1

17 Her 47-K-ll-2-i£X-£frr-v (mt. VonSchcc)


“he further vtlue of the devolopccnt of this ~r -cchuro "-t)b thr-t one »<uld
r.-t need several ninutes for pn X-rey •oicturo, hut that thie *-r ccc.urc
vr.» devel.ped to such rs extent that we cculd take tvi hundred to three
hundred -.icturcs per ninute. I-ficther vith Jenkor I developed thie
screen Picture procedure until ve erne t, the resulto vhich I hvo <ust
described. At the X-rey Confess in 1226 in hunich in Kry Z nedo thie
procedure nuhlle and I ctserved that vith the rid f thie procedure rouhllc
end I observed that vith the rid cf thie ^roccduro -no could. h$,;in n
lpr f :c eerie fi^-.t r,'c inet tuhercul-eio. Cnly n ftv ucorolo bollevod :y

v.rds et the tine rnd ao:x -/«. 1c silled nityin«*ly. After thie Con-rress

<•

Professor Hohl folder, vjio vr.s liter co rxdor -f the X-rny hattnlirn, cr.no

to .re rnd, v.rfcin.: together with X-ray ecier.ce, ontierl induetry, filn
I

induetry, X-rty industry. screen industry, etc., ve develonod the pro-
ceduro durin,- the couree of that srr.o year to ouch rn extent thr-t in c
short tire w ver« thlc to X-rry the vholc rr vince -f Xecler.hu rr. -ho
'roceduro vie then gradually dcvtl .nod so that vo could oroily hrvo

X-royod ton pillion or nor*. in 5cr-.any per yorr. Thon, during tho v,, r ,

•

at v iMti.-nti'.n ir. 123S md 19 .0 v t X-rryod tho vholc Provir.co of

’.oetfolip; then in 19sl the vholc -,r vince -f -\i« rttonhorf, lnclu'ln,:

H ihontollorn, rnd n-v there ves e >lnn to X-rey tho Vrrthclrnd. Gauleiter

Oroieor hr.d ettr rchod no tcceuec epor vrl had to ho >htrincd fr-n no pr.d

I m such approval ,sly if oil proreouieitce «.re -riven e thi t tho

•31 tiente vhc vero discovered could. he .riven the necessary nodicrl rnd
•

clinicrl attention. It hnc been our experience in those cx/mini tiono
that vv found 1 percent nov tuberculosis cree# vhich hrd hitherto boon
conplotely unknovr.. 7 or the Vprthe.-ru plop,;, ^ith e Polish oarmlation
f f-ur end one-half nilli.ns, that vjuIA hevc been forty-five th-uernd
nev crees of tuberculosis, not c.ur.tin.: the ter. thousand fror. tho one
nillinn Sor:»n population. I hr.- reserved the approval for such rcti.no
Leceuso 6t that tine, vith the develounent of this invention, r rlpn >i
irresponsible X-raying vrs he is.-: cj-rried. out hy various Cruldtcrs rnd by

1 - r-*c industries. Svaryona vented t - take up the battle cgclnot trerr:-

45^3


©urt S;. 1

ir riiir ,7--ll-3-£HH-harrov (In.. . w»Scr. .n,

• %

I'.tiB tut tlv t wjuIA have, toes a .'isccter unl-cc there hn; teen this
hl.de that, ^on vfcole ;r.u-5s of ncpulatir verc i-rayed, there hrf tc toe
the necessary ^reparation >f nodical su-.:lics fr, the t^innir-?. Other-

vise, there v old hive tecs a catestr.phe. Thresh thle action rr.d through

• •#

r.r& r-ev caeca ,f tuberculosis vhich vere die covered, I k-virifly -ut the
state in a difficult situation. I force- the sta*e to issue a nev lav for
•ho fi.ht Minot tuberculosis. This lav vhich ves issued W t the Tutoor-
culceie Aid Irv. This lrv famed the basic f.r the lun,: examinetione of
the -ionulrti.n >f the Vartholm.- ’*.ich vto actually c-rried out in 19-13-
19 --, m: thi arvnntr res >f thit lrv, it can >o .roved, vero not to the
/dvrntf -e jnly A the Osr-^n a- -'ti-n in the "«rthef.au, hut also of tho
rolish populi.ti o, es is clwr^-uva frj. th. affidavit of Re.-icrun.:c-
direktor Dr. Gunter iann. Dr. Gu. •-•mann vro tho Chi f Kedicr.l C-ficer *<f
the Vcrtfceland; that is, he he-' the win rscnoneitilitjr for the fipht
p.;ninnt tutorculosis in this Gnu.

... Dr. 31 no, tef.ro v U ^ into tho letter f the 19th A Inventor
19 -. 2 , vhich ic D'-cunsat 250 in D.cuncnt ?. k 3, I should like to trek
t. tho ti.:e in tho corin.; of lS-,2. "c Juct hoard of n letter frort Gau¬
leiter Grcltcr -f the let of Kay 19-.2, vher* ho tussle that 2 Act cur¬
tain,- fr .z tuberculosis should be llouidetod. Where he vrite. "that tho
over increasin' risks verc else realised rad m-'recintod toy tho Deputy
.f the. Bolen .-rtofUehrer. Professor Dr. 31 ere.' S: far the rotation.

Yor. sold that ©reiser does net -cation that y.u r.-*.roved the ulna for tho
liouldati.n A the roles. X v-vl:. to interested in fcnovii: "hat W
attitude vrs a*. that tine in tho -irlnc of 19-2 t-vard this nlan. Did ycu
ec-r vw A the lr t- liquidate tutorcuiar P-dos? Did you reject it?


Vhr.t did yuu soy ntoout it?


17 Lessor (In*, vo Scnoeu)

court ;:t. 1.


T 3 ; . e spring of ig42 I ex;ressc.i no attitude In redact to this plf
at all. T-'-e 'iccussion with Grelser. as I said, went back to the year 1941,
at tho if .o when :no euthaaasi; icti >n vrs still in operation. In 1942 I
did n-t talk to Graiser about cue- c plan at all. I h d no fcnovlod £0 that
Grcisor i..;cndo4 to writo this I ttor i. l/.y t' Himlor, or that ho did

writo it. I learned of it on!;- -.ore. Aft-r Greiaor nrdo his et tc-aonts in
conn-ct n ’..-it., outhanasir., hut -no cuthancsin ectl-n had beer. nto-r-od by
Hitler's order, of course I a-su .1 ta : sue., i'em or. t.e • rt of Grciscr
were so;tied too. I did not c rove of his I'o-.ff. o I vt 1 '. loforo.

.. Sun, if I understand ; u correctly, you 'id r.ot dcr\l with thin
ar-tt r in the foil of lghg wh.n t .is Irnvitse.ucy jrou-Jit you elnruin,; nous?

... Yes, th: t is right*

.. ;o t 11 us why Gauloit-r Groicor diccureod this tuberculosis
problca ctool- lly with you?

... 2*.i r .son wns, ns I h v .lr dy a. Id, th t tho cxocution of such

on action *c;o\icd on ay npp.rov.l. If : a 11 the xthopui will r.ot bo
X-rryod, it r not Z-rayod, c*. if th Goiloitor stood on ..is hand.

.. Dr. rloue. G .ulcltor G i*or w s not tnl-Jda- of X-rnyinf.- a. su-ontly

but of liquidating. 3u 1-tt - f 1 K-; l$“c. ''--.r. ho nekos tho BU^-o’stlor

spunks only -f iiquidnti Jr.. I. says nothin, n: out X-nyin.. I vould 11 ho

to find out how you ot into t. *. L,.ttur — vhon you heard of Oruisor's
l:n for th- first tine, this r. t oll.dr.t- th. tu:<.rctl r Poles?

... Of course G uloitcr Gr : cr vn; !ri: . of X~r ; in.*: th-1 is the
pro-roqcisitc for finding incur >lo cases of tub rculosis.

> s- . withocB, on tho 1 th of .:over.bcr you wrote r. lottor, which ic
ir. apmu.-nt ~oofc 9, ns Prosccuti»n D"»cu:ent 25C, 3* libit 20}. Tnia is tho
Utter c uc.r in.; which the Prosecution has said tlv t it was c •arstorpoico
of -ur. orous i s.ntion." Did you discuss t..is letter beforehand with tho
HOica SSi siei;Lender. Dr. Co i?


Aft. r : h v talked to Gr.icor I saw Conti briefly in Berlin


17 y.~-.:-CSfr-12-a-Lcss*r (T^a '-on)

Court SO. 1.

or I vcat to «cc Conti and report to hia .-bout the -laa and about =y talk
vita Jreiccr. cr. Conti said - *ahut do you Ihct'a aa order fron tho

2-icfcsfuchror, that is, aiaalor.* Then I said to Conti vhrt I had r ?ood
urou -it.. Zroiaor and th^t I Hiv'd write a letter to that effect to bo sont
on to K'-~Ier. fliea ho c,?ccd to that nad agreed to ry writing this lettor.
But I did not discus■ thu contorts with Sir. Conti. 2 Aid not see any point
in doin* co. r/.io tetocnt of coati's showed th t he knew about this plan
of liquid f. ...

> Vitae* . this letter v. lc- you «ttte *• S vloitcr Groioor, \dicre
you o;. ore ’ liquidation of th- riles — did y e,vrito t-is by youroolf or Ai
; >u discuoa t; formulation >f t is letter with anyone?

pirst : wrote tho let. •• by .clf. -ftO» Z ha' cone tack to 3crli
fro- Poser. I had to go to IMr.lc.. .tftor I c -o \/s' fr r. ltaalch I -rote
t..ic 1-tt.r. I nndo various r ; ,e drafts. It ,..t easy. I hod
cuaeod the ca.rrl ( tactics vith Sohfeli-r ta r. v would start right at tho
be,4ax.ia: Of the letter by r.rprrently rvToelsg to tho ideas but then in tho
toconf. p-rt of the lettor to list all politick f ctors v.icn night induco
Sit-dor nr.: th. others ti give up reef, rn action. It wan not easy to write
*uch a lot: r. I worried about tr.io letter n ,^-at dord until I th outfit I
finally Led. .- ritfit draft.

In .$• 1 --li iinrry ir.t.rre, t‘on or. intern,* tor ' shod no aouctaing to
t..ii effect: -Shy ill yiu not ‘ -ly 5fflco ,mi r:nl,7i tlhon

heard about t..is plant- I W- y tha : 16 " 414 • of c,urM »

be * . oi mlest thing : r mo to take fil Rt c if thill .portunity
t. ,,ivo up ny position. “men I v'uld nure Lad nithlnq more ta d*> -ith the
vn le .-/--.tor, at least hO.OCO I les


^556


'Jr rch 17-rffE:<-12-la-Lc5sur (In*.. /ca Sch;en)

Court Bo-. 1

veal hr.vc Lew turlor*’., and I ».culi ret be ®'cr in ictr-.t today for this
-int. .loose -ctcuco for s .-in' this cut I eaxst scy it when such a char<*
ir aade c*sinst I will try t: spc Ha passionately possible. Dr
S.tutor hal Just s rJA that the Prosecution considers r=y letter r. "afterpiece
cf zurdercus iatwqticO." I ac* state the fell: .!?-. The lrcsccutien, in
itirn t. this qucsticnablo af fid-wit cf bn ’.elf irenit, h-s net a single

-i-r l.lcs 'y a.-. On the contrary,

the irrsecution bns submitted Hi =l_r's Mksworln letter :f th- er. ! of
:i;va',r 1942, ccccrlin tc , Kirri.r, in wu-r tc y letter, prohi-
bitcl the lisj.ui i ticn cf the tu’ -rculrx I ties nr. ! this letter -xjrcssly says
that ny su ,sticn was to be r. -lee: that this ...-.tter ms tc be used in

pre, a ania. . 2 -v-r-t! .- 1 -ss, t rescoution srifos such c.-'res in this fern
- ftiast nw. I i accuse-: of bci • r. arbrr 10 ,C<X) ti ..s f.r - crino which
1 did net cdssit \ eh I prevented, i 1 • uld like

say sc: a.- thin -lc-. The preso, f ccurs., has teken u; this ch r-o. 1
can n_t hell thet r.-inst the press. 11 k ernsevueno- . f this news, hewover,
r.» thet =y f rally, =y wife am y little children, nr; subjected tc unploae
-r, *ven throats. Threu-h thic assertion cf th« ircsecuticn the none of D1
been iofmetcl in such a ucy a; it ices no* leservo, especially net if it c-
bo prev-d that cnc pr-vonted the criuv with which one is ch-r-oi.

.h. H-Ibit If it plcaso *. er H,r..r, 1 J cct lz “V further cement of
tikis ty c frees the witness.

TtS ihSSIDLHT: Objection ferrule . Utooss. may continue.

t. 2 *cur pa rpen if 1 ■ *- mtb-r - • . I sir ccnclu.

atetcaoat by scyirv thr.t I hep- -but this cra^ idll seen lit clcarod up and

that then the .res* .-.ill bo c Ircus oi u h to stuto u. t I net cnly did

net ccrcdt this osiaa bat that I -ctucliy ;■r-veatol It.

Dr.. S.l-.u.: Jr. President, I abed* like tc tlseuss with tho witness tl

litter cf 18 Hevutfer 1942 in which tl;- lane ,-uv-r.ted the murder cf th

. : take seme time. 1 bo e .ooi tiao tc Vrea’

TJE iBZSiDlhT: The Tribunal csi'-s tc •uwcufice to -11 cencornod that

t: xt f.w !-; 3 , ;t least, the Trftunr -1 will net take cn efternoon roccss ‘

-t j :?0 i' 1 ck till recess until 9:30 .'deck the r.jefacmin -. The Tribu

?rill new Ic in recess until 1:3»'«

(„ rvoefs w .-2 token until 1330 heurs)


Ifrrch 17-rffa 5-12-la-L -s? cr (In*., cr. Sch-n)

Court 21c. 1

cuT h-v_ .ten xr;o-cair! I wcuid not lc ur. er in Ictment today for thi3
ir.t. rii-sac secure no fer s ,-in * this out I must say it when such char*
i a - last m-. I *111 try -.0 speak as dispassionately *s possible. Dr.
5-u* _ r he : Ju-t arid thet the i-rcsccution c nailers my 1-ttcr r. "aaatespiocc
f ».r m« iatunticn." I new -’tatc th. fell: . The Frcsecuticn, in

liti-n t. tfcit cucsticrvilo rii.vit of i.-’xll r-n .t, h's net a single

irdcr no. at rary,

the ireaecuticn has submitted F-lal.r ’j msw-rin l.tt.r -f tho enl of
:i;v‘X”tr 1942, :cecrlin tc wM~- , Hicrl-r, in fwwjr t- ..y letter, prohi¬
bited the li-jui I'.ticn of the W reulcr itl-5 r_V. this 1-ttcr grossly says
that cy 3 u cati.n -'.a Ub.r Msoi or. I that this natter was tc ho used in
prept on la. Sevuxvth.-less, t Iroscout rsk.c such ohr.r :et in this form
-Inst m . i -- wetwod cf 1 -i Hardercr 10,CC f .r a crime which

I did not ccmsit but which 1 prevents : .r ... I should like to

ary rrr.-tkir.* ole— The pruas, -t course, has token up this oh trio. I
can net hcl! thr.t r.inst tho press. The «n»vuuv.na- f this nows, however,
«•* thet ay Tally, ay wife car! 5>* little children, nr: subject-! tc unploar
an even t reits. Threw-h this nssurti.m :f th. i rosecuticn the nemo cf D1
b««o icf:-. tc . in such a way 08 it dees apt *.es.rv., ospoddly net if it oc
bo prevei that cae preVcntol th. crime with which one is ch-rcl.

;h. H.J - If it plenau *. ur H.n:r, I Ject tc any further comment of
this ty c from tho witness.

T^ P rhSSHOT: Objection ■* rrul. . as any continue.

„ I be.* ycur pardon i.* 1 . rather excited. I sifeuld like to ccnclu::
atetcecat by s&yiiv that 1 hep. --.r.t t.iia crae kill seen be cleared up and
that then the pres* will be c Irrua en u h tc state* tfc't I net only did

■ -rit this c:i—. tot tr. t - cw.'ll; Put Qtoi

BE. s.i.T2v: ;?r. President, I t...ui -ike tc Hbqu*» with the witness t!

litter -f 18 H:venf cr 1942 in which th- lefcr.lant prevented the aurlor cf th

pel ; • .Li: t'Jrc seme tin-. I believe this weald bo e oci tine to brea

TKL ;KZSID2IT: The Tritunei leci-'-s tc aancupco to '11 c-ncomc! that

• aJc t : *_Tt i~s, r.t ler^t, tho Trfbun~.l till net teke an rfternc-n recess

■t 3:X 4cl r-ccas until 9:30 adeck the r.-Xt jurnin;. The Tribu

will new U in recess until 1:3*'«

(„ re-Celi- *;j taken until 1330 heurs;


17 “arch L7-..ID-15-l-ifoobim (Herder)

Court Ho. 1

I S HiHSEALL: The Tribunal is again la session.

DIRECT SX.ja:L;nOH - Resunsd.

31 DR. SADTER*

fj "itnoss, during the nomine session you explained to us among
other things the new aaruv-r of x-ray photography, the so-called scroon
photograph] you stated that using this now nothod one could use 200 to 300
photos pir minute; were you not wrong, didn«t you mean perhaps por hour am
not por ninuto?

A Yes, par hour. .

5 I just wanted to correct that so that it does not nppoar orronoo
ly in the record. shall continue, witness, with tho lottor, which we ha'
disoussod ropeatedl;', th. 1 « r of Hovuaber 16 , 1912, which is to bo foun
in Oocusv.nt Book !.'o. 9 r gnrdinr th xt-naination of Polos, it is Ho. 250
Exhibit 203, that is Docursunt 25C, Exhibit 203. It is a lottor in which yo
dofinu your attitude to tho propos'l nado by Gr.isur nanoly to liquidate
thoso tubercular Poles; do you know the contents of that lottor?

A Yoa.

0 In this lottor you mdo curtain proposals, r.ay I ask you to toll
us what suggestions ycu .actually iv*.do in that lottor; do you nood tho lotto
for that purpose?

A Thank you, I ha to it. As the cost suitabl. suggestion, I conoidor.
7 eu joction to create an area, an area ir. which one could jwt tho tuborcuj
Polos end I roninded of tho woll known throughout the world lup r areas. I
sust emphasise that there is a considerable diff-ronco botwoon tuberculosis
and leprosy,*

"Thor. I nad the last draft o.~ -.* letter, th? loading radical office
the 'ar the Gau was suddenly announced to no -.nd Dr. Gundormann was tho
‘•i. - st state nodical officer of th. arthc Gau. Dr. Qundoroann reported to
.nd said that h- had Just coi fren Dr. Conti, he said that ho hoard run
rcr. th. ~'orth< Gau, according to which tub rculur Poles wero to bo liquid'.*
Cent! maintained a 7ory evasive .attitude toward hir. -so h»- actually loft


A 555


17 March L7-A-A7D-45-2-ifcehin 'Hauler)

Court 'to. 1

Dr. Conti without having acquired any results and thereupon he had decider
ccoo to aa. I told hln that he had coho at the cost suitable nonent, I ex
plained to hin the position as it had developed in the noontime. I told h
of ay conversation with Hohlfcldor and of y conversation with Dreiser an
tho lettor which was arranged* Re was very ploascd about it and was pleas
that I had the sane rejecting attitude that he had. I showed hin tho draf
sy letter and ho r^do a few suggestions in th'.t connection. Tho nuabor of
geographical details in the lettor originated actually from Oundcroann* Ir

particular, ho craphasizod the inportonco of a special settlement of tho

*

tubercular Polos and ha recognized this as tho cost suitable solution. Sue
suggestions I had already known, especially ccoing fron the tuborculosis
nooting of thj year 1937. Oaring that Booting, two noil known Daman tuboi
losis oxports, Dr. lorn and Dr. {toin had lectured about tuberculosis sottl
rants, oxcorpts froc those speeches aro contairad in ry document book. I l
that oxperlnunta had boon nado with such tuberculosis sottlcrants not onl.
in Do many, but .also In England* Khun asking ry suggestion to Hirmlor I 0
plained in detail how such a suggestion caild bo roalizod, in ry lottor I
oxplainod thj tactics that wore to bo used, taking into consideration the
tolity of people like Orois.r and Himl.r and rr.do it appoar as though I
war.tod to agree to their liquidation progran, /.ftorwards I citod all tho ;
liticol nisglvings I had by nailn - individual oxarpls that I could cito.
thon said that on one oxpurirfc.nt the aovorely ill pooplo and tho pooplo wh
there was a danger of infection would bo excluded and I said that Polish
physicians ani Polish nursing porsonnol waro to bo attached to tbeso sever
ill patients in onfcr to avoid tho appearance of a d oath caap. Every physJ
knows, an it is Iso known in lay-con circles, that if one isolates sever
ill people, such an isolation is soon being considered as an isolation for
loath and that is why I said that tho necessary Polish physicians and tho
nursin,- personnel had to bo attached to thoso carps. I considered ns qy b(
suggestion thj creation of a reservation for all tubercular Poles.

In particular, I ifish to point out the following in i$* lottor, I s
and I quota: "I could lmgjno that th_ Fuehrer having soaotime ago stoppoc


4.559


17 livrcfc L7-A-..'-E-lS-^iMhar. (Renler)

Court Sc. 1

thi progrr i in tta insane asyluas night at this raonont considers a spccia
troatcort of the incurably sick as unsuitable and irresponsiblo frona pel
cal pciro of view." I mentioned that bocauao Grieser's suggestion fron U
yacr ISjI pointed to a cceparison with the Euthanasia action, but in ordo
bo quite sure that these political misgivings also reached Hitler and tha-
tho decision was not mainly in th: hands of Hisnler, I sent a copy of ny 1
diroctly to ’nrtin Boraonn. I furthornor- .cr.t to point out tho following
mat tor, I said: "I consider any secrecy as completely inpossiblo." In this
connection, I should like to point to a lottoj concerning a different act!
nanoly the letter of tlv, dojxity gauloiter of tho Lower Bambo, dated tho :
19 U 2 , whjro oxporir-nts are boin. suggested for th« sterilization of natio
groups such as gypsies. In this letter, contrary to ry lottor, a complete!
different tactic is usod. Thocfcputy gauloitor of the Lower Danubo states i
one has to k«ep such an action very socrot, bccauso otherwise it would ha
serious consequences fron th. point of view of tho stato.

H?.H;.RBTt Is it your intention to put this lotter you are roferrin
in ovidonco or is ho n-jrcly quoting free his own lottor?

7K5 i;:Ty. r P n Z T ? . Hi The quostlon did not co=» through
iC*. H.RDT: Is it the intontior. of th- defendant to put the letter h
is roforring to in as ovidanco, or is ho n roly quoting fron his own lotto-.

TK5 .HESIDFHT: Can counsel for th; dofondant Blorv. advise tho
Tribunal or. that point?


17 : fcrch—A-v -lS-1-Iutty (tat. ’ralvr)

C ,-rt I

D-i. I-: This is - L. _r - cat ; i-r_- y use by th_ Frs-cuticn
and th'.t in tSnfc nannar c~:~ t u., *r. "I, *. £ tL. indieand, bhcro£ar«,
enn'e. quoted by hi - .. It is cortnirJy . . Cw-r: ~.ry t mbclt this 1. ttcr ‘nec
r r->

£H- . . SID3.T* T» uld C uns.l t1_-s_ i.^ntifj th. letter, th, Sxhibit
-nd Ftv.ru it -.yto X und.

DU. S-.WJ.s One n hunt, -lvcsc. :tr. .resident, this lot ter vr.3 toub-
nitte by tfl* s,cuti n in their«' coa.nt i. k nunber six in re. 'tC t-
sterilitr.ti n It r-a sub.dttv *s beua.nt r.unbtr 03 9 — I rexx.' 4 '

03? — exhibit X the rtvs-cutivn res. r 153 — 153. Tnie ia r. Ltt-r by the
Ifcputy 0“ul-it«.r i the Luer D'nub- 'istrict "dirusacd t' the .I-ichsfuchrtr
SS Uia-ilvr tv the 22, th f .iu uat 192:2, .‘hit Utter w-e -lre-.dyr submitted
by the .r.BvCutJ n.

Wis - SITIVT: In 0 ea&ent b k S c . u i-. v • * tho pc. - of the
d cun_nt > k.

D*. S.i': Tit In th- <Ur an c rt b . it c~n jc f uni n ;v a ono,

alx, 16.

r: . .i> D>~Ti 7*ry w.li, th t ie aiuiicioot.

Dl. UiT At D cu.icnt 039.

T7. n.eSBUtfTs Thu -j in-ei : -.ay r e,..

31 D’.. SAtTKi

•1* 1c- r, rill y u pU.ase fiiah y ur nnsvor?

In vhis J_ttvr the *V.puty G-uloiter f t v L rr TV-nubv district
■rit,3 l U .L_ !_r, -nJ I qu:to:

"Tt r- uit- clonr.nb ut tl». .net U. t such* xnTlnnteUn ;juat bj ccn-
ri rv’ 'S'lutv L -tc Sucre t3. a Th i . “ctly c.r.trry . thvtactics

* •‘'■eh I - i - .ay:

"I taink th e nnya.cri.cy isq;i , 1 sribl-," ind I ive y rur.arns
: r ..;-t '.--’ivi-' liy. I ah uld er_ij ive- . u ; I hrt excerpt Xr y lettu.
I ’• p.intin -t h » r.'ry Polish v r!;«ra re in ti«. Gvrt>m ’eich. I pcinb
ut tl.'t th.. re ir aid bu qu.sti ns I r their r-Iativ.s ab.ut th.ir ’.7l.crcr.b*'uts.


45&1


17 ----rch-si-Jr-iS-2-Putty (Int. Rv.l^r)


C urt I

I p int t : ;.imr f 3_r .ns u c-lat-d - these ?-l~s. I pci t
ut th't in t _ c:.sj f the J'.l.s r_ r_ = r_r.v.:' v ith b-rs f a ccn-

quorcd rxti-n. I further p int ut th6 cert .. circles wouT spread -
rur-r aet-Q' th. .. .ulati n th't si--.il?r .i_th -'s v uld be us-fi in c-sc :f
j-r r.n tubercular catianta in th. future. I further sh n th“t in connection
with the or c:intent f Fr-feseor Brandt t. the Ccndsal nor Goner-1, f toil r
br iricrata aoread r., rts acc rdin t. which :r ndt was n lcn.or c naidorod
wit i the roIii.-ilit-tL n f aeri uely un’e * pie but nly ritr. th s. ,:o pic
hod nly all hUjr w unded. I . t he r.acti n which uld
result in the c-.s_ f such a cri-»_ rit th l-'llan physicians an-’ scientist:
it-li •: . I r- p -;:t te th.

cnurch, end Isa;, then an ‘ I qx te:

"Tlt-vef;! think it ic n c *r. t -xpl In all t.ieOe p into cf
view t the Fuehrer tx.f v*. un .rt-:;>.i V . r r

..ith reference t ^ au «.cv • • Settle! -nt, a reservation, I
say in th- ne but lr.et p r- r-.h . y let .r, an 1 qu tet

"Ifter a pr per >xi. in*ti n f -11 thtft- c usi *er tl :.s an *, circunatanc
th. cr_ ti r. f r-f.rv ti r. such a* tb- r-Serv-ti ns f r lepers s.eMS t
b. the 3 - .TT.Ctic-.l 5 luti n."

„ Bof-r- utl h. su ate tVt those Set&loxet.ta -f tuborcuLar pora t
sh uld be arran e'“ is. ouch a manner tlrt the -ubors f their froilioa who
wer- villir. c uld lc be settled t.-.-re. I: tnis a-aflner in -..Viti n t tho
nececa-r. t.ursin purs nnel and L.;, n-C -.r - r; lish phyrici*.ns, the ncccsa-r
oe ileal c r. • ul bo safeguarded.

Q. itn .n, j u ft orrvd t y uT au osti na, and you

• rp ie ab ut a c -n ress r- ar in —c :c6ir *r— Hi ;.r in uhich j u partici¬
pated.

D .. &JRJRt Mr. Preai ‘.at, I . * e.»_.*pt fr th r-c r' f this

- sis c p rose wnich : - sent d:.k Sloes. Vc m lit*

Ihat is D cits.nl - :< oloa lii, pa.ru 2u t. 30. Thir is c rep rt ab ut
t.. t lirr i.i wm nal c n r-ss — n-taunt. Yes, it is Ho. lii. It io


1562


17 ifarcb-^-JF-lS-3—Fiatty (Ir.t. Ha - ~)

C.urt I

%

■\ rcp-rt in th- pr cc-din?s af th- G-r^an Tubcrcul.sis G.afor-rec '.-.m. the
; t 20th .f :-crch 1?37, which tcck plr.co at ?.i-sba J -n. Tw- r. views
-.-reduced here.

jSnjj.Tt counsel, this ekeuaent is f.und in supplemental docu-
r.:c. . : pc - 21. coaont b- :k — auppleaental ' enroots .

DR. TJU Yes, in tlM 8upplA»ntaI v:luro. In this r -p rt a pojxa:
two-wlll-hnjm O r an tuberoul - ned, r - a 3r. Krvrin

n, it roe t u c .icf physician .f a lun sr.ait.riro, ChnrletUnhi ©he, and
i certain Dr. J achir Hein, wh. was th- xr-c; r,of a lun r-nit riurt at
H la to in. I • . ror.f - j. pr.ix.rs in ©tail, bat 1 ask tho

tribunal t take Judicial n tie© - . I prusjntcc' th-s- r«.i rts f tho
in r\r t sh w th~t the s'-x su -it! m which this Defendant,

Dr. 31or», ftcd v - in tb ye r l 19U2 w.~n writi. t U ulcitor Groisor
nr- ala : n<*>. ..-r ir th- rear 1937 rar' *-r<- »’« durin; the Coman

ruN-roul sla C afcr-nco. Thus- ,r ;.s-ls w-r- n t deilin, with roi r.

•. • r arcii.s, but dcalin mh Cerrn tubercular , . n.

TH RESIDENT: D C unsel Offer this d cu-xr.- Ir.t vJ :cof
U... SAlTOt: It win bocso Exhibit No. 6, Bine Exhibit M->, 6.

37 DR. Si!T a*

xtnoss, In this lcttor cf U» 10th i DoccAcr 19U2, «b u. . . ich
i sp. kin t r, y ur ally -alt ith tire- p. p.*sols; r.-, a -ex 1 trent-
t i Oh., -ra usiy ill pars ns; tr , -.at riyr us Is lata f th- c-ri ur
U1 pers.ns, t'. t is t ®y, s-rr-tl n fr. the UtS ;

crsati.n .f . . £ - -11 tubercular patients In Pslnnd. New

>:.cn rue ’MV y - r letter, an 1 put - t y u, r* ains th- iaprossi n,
r — c uld “tin the iapr_ssi n, that y u wore spc-alcin in favor

n in fir xwt - - t,.r, naaoly, tho spoeir.

tr at:i no . .iv : ricualy ill p.r:-.ns, W*ic v . is t say their liqiddati nr. s

. an w rt.-' by Hi "•

V- -- n is: Shy didn't y u si ply dare ir. / ur 1 .* t!

r ' v.:-b.r l?li 2 , vory frankly . t this liquidati on f th- incurably


A5o3


17 E3rch-..-JM6-i*-Putty (Lnt» Raalor)


Cr.urt I

ill tuxrculr-r Poles, -.a it wns so _st_d by Qr-is.r nn ilia l_r, is a
rri jj - c .. r. ;r r. circu-stances be porcictod ancthat 2, Dr. Jl w uld
-Vi lutldn tc d with any such pr ~ s=l? ihy di n't y u*. .-i >. t_ Grcicur


1’ i7-^r?jc-17-l-Cock (Int., SeniorJ

Cc*irt I


A I think that :hij oraing I already defined =; at'.itude toward that
question Tory sh -rtly and I st-.t-j - -* n the no3t favorable thing to _u would
dr.TO toon . ist to point out ta<i crL i-sal ascoots of this proposal whon v/riting
-7 -otter, out 1 knot* tho nor.tr.lity of thuso Gontlonen and it Vas quite clear
is zy sir-.', hr.t tio otpro33icn of any such point of view could only have a
nogativo rosalt, -nd in doing that 1 wouldn't havo savol nysolf and much loss
30, COO tutoroular ?olos, rad they would havo thor. boon actually liqultod. if
I bad not vrntod to roprocoa. — truo point of viow, frankly thon I wouldn't
havo hrd to think for days atout writing =y lottor. Thon f * m Id havo oon
• ,a. r of at ioaat five or -on sdnutos. I would Just havo had to diotato thi
lottor and nail it, but I had boca-o cloar in ny nlnd, and that was also tho
opinion of -ofosaor Hohlfoldor, that I would havo appoafod as if I agrood to
this proposal If I wantod u? have any succoss with =y countor ropos-lo. I wa
.fineO'! that tho list of all tho political aspocts which could bring ny dan
••11 onl. bo of any offoct if tho ouccoas of ny procedure quite eloarly ayo- .
fo ay tactics. Yos, Elrsfior uantof roally to roalizo ti.is proposal l arAo an
.3 uqatod t oxilolt it prop-fi-ndlcticljr, that is at -od eloarly in tho lottor
5!! :lor to Groic&s, datod at tho ond of Hovoabor, 1942, the docuraontary value
ny lottor d objectively >o soon only in the follow inti' it shot 8, firstly,
ring that tlx o of brutal thinking, aou llko Hi:dor had no roor. for -ny ailnon
:f any huunn naturo; uocoally, only through an opon and clo-r fltatoaont of tho
alL-oats cold tho or iso -«-inot 10,000 of p 0 loc bo arovostod, and 1 w-o only
::.xornod with auocoss.

'Itaoac, tho ono ouegostior. .....ch you put forth In your lottor w-o Ho. £
•>tek oaya:

" oot r rous isolation of the sorloun ill persons". ’’ith roforoaco o t
ict, tho Prosecution st-to3 that during the nootin of tho 19 Docoator tha
-ioa to ring those tubercular pationts into institutions rnd I

I’-.a:

’"cj void j! that opinion so that a rolatlvoly now tockniquo of those
could to offoctwi in thoso institutions."

h565


17 Itarch 47- -?jC—17-2—Cook (1st., ?j-^lorJ

Co-at I


j that ro-ally your iz.Cor.%1cc, and lid you thick of any such possibility
at that tlso, tba ; is whoa you -ado tha suggestion?

On tho oortrciy 1 e- c* roco-nizo tho ovidance of the Prosocutioc
raganling that point as boing lawful. &*1 it boon =y intention to lot thaso
patients die, thoa I wouldn't kr.ro doaandod that thoy bo givon nocossnry
physicians nd :ha nocassary nursing porsoncol. I: addition i want to point
out what i have r.Iroidy said dealing with that point,

Q Xfco other suggestion you nr.io at t at tina n;.l which is listed under
fl uro 3 of your letter is tho croation of a reservation for all t B pationts
1 luring tho 3cco Booting of the 1? Doc cob or tho Prosecution s-id with
wforonco to -hat proposal, ml i quoto:

"’ith this pl-a, that is, to bring all potlants into a rosorvr.tion and
thoroby tool- to than free t :o rest of tho population, you, Dr. Blceo, have
n-tjd to bring -.bout that tfcjso ill polos would fca loft with vary f« ' physloie
rtth llttla nursing porsonr.ol to thoir fato, end in this way tho ain of
liquidation of tho so Po oa wa.’ to bo roallzod". *Jhat do you br.vo to s-y,

Dr. Blono, to . I: tlto. -9 it a assort ad by tho Prosoeutior.?

.. This aotivo is not coiToct. The contrary era cloajly bo soon fra- sy
lot tor. i- that concoction I ncy point to tho explanation which i and© pro via -
ly rouixdl;. ay letter. ?rt jraoro, I point to ti . affidavit of Dr. Cucdoxmr
I fca'- oxaotiy tho oortrary interest to what tho Prosocutioc trios to ohargo
M with, i had this contraty intorost only for tha reason beoauso I was

tho vary aaao -hlz. for Corcaay after tho war, a: if I had boon ablo
*■' «w/ through suoh an action *>nd if j had boon ablo to shew ny ouccoss in
t: st action it woul' havo boon oasior for no lator on to havo stopped thoso
-la.aa, rather tno plans already nontionod, during that tuborculosio cooting of
1-" by pointing to tha guccj3s which i rado lr. tho Uartho Gau. iVau

a: I r-alizo as woll wj haven't boon ablo to bring about any ronll. effoctiv
jr-i troatcont against tuberculosis or any v ccination against tuboroulosin;
tho only roaly offoctivo solution 13 tho Croat ion of such sottlocont
•areas or rcsorrr.ticns


456o


17 ::-x=h 47-A-?JC—17-3—Cock (Iat*, P.^cnler )

Cc rt I

. Blara, frets your book, entitled: "Physician ia Caabat*, which has
toon sufcalttod ia evidence as 9iccu Sxhibit S».l, m it’s entirety, it crux
be soon for -to a long tine to have w-g*>d a fight against tuberculosis. c-
you toll ua on tho b<\si3 of your oxporioncos vhothor these pro;~als ..icL you
ia year letter 18 Dococbor, 1942, that is, either the housing of tho
tuberculosis institution, accceod-.tlon of the tuborculars ia a reservation av;
wfcothor those di gestions sore canpl,-.«.ly different fro:- the tanner of the
tuberculosis control as it »j» oxorcl-ed in various fore if y. caintrios up to
that tiso tr If one didn't spook -.bout the fljit against tubsrculoslo e..o coil
stock about Jtlur infectious dlsoases or the sr^o importance ns tuborculrelsy
.. Jfaturally tho plan to Install a tuberculosis oettlosout on a largo
scale doesn't represent anything absolutely new boc-.uce as it c'-n bo oon
fr*. tho flocuaar.ts subcittoi r- :ardlnt the tuberculosis scttlcx-ento, such
tuberculosis sett later, ts h->i existed In Siglanl cud Holla-.'. . . fd-.tion to
• It., ro-.t succoss, but or. tho othor hood the roalixatlon of this
Jettlo3o:.t Idea would ropresont an onomous proiiroas In th- tuberculosis figh
- —rally. .o oxlstonoo of tho vir dlffioultloo, that oxisterd in th- y% ir

1X£ nr.l 1943 did not porjit this plan to be roullzod as it w-s s-j^v-.al
o for tho " ortho 0-u, but tho fight v.ainot tuberculosis continues iu the
- -al character as it was possible during t e sx*und as it f\s hcndlod throu-
ut tho Roich, ir.cludin the Goraans. In othor countries, othor experiments
•uro :ndo. For -.stance in tho year 1925 certain woll known pooplo in the cit:
' Detroit in .xorica, mada a largo scalo oxparlnont for the ccobat of
tuborculosi . ;S t ir the procurations were sale the entire population of
Detroit was cskoi by tuans of an or.ortous pro pa,and. by press axil radio to
r<?ort to jxaaination stations for tuberculosis ia order to find out th sour:,
o' * e infection. The cit;* of fotroit had pjt necoss ry f-cillties at the
'•'.:oool necessary to carry out tho oxaalih'.tion on' a certri. ees aai3t j
fs-ocidlly, the colored pcpulatioa of Dotroit reported i:. their
J ‘ -raty, or almost their entiroty, for tho purpose of these ox or—nations, and
1 ricoa li. T.turo or. the other hand cccplain^d that this wasn't fully the
:i; 1 ^th ^ho 'rtiito population.


17 Jfcrch U?-v.-~TI>-l6-i-0ros3 (BaEler)
Court Vo* 1


A (continued) This action started in 1936, was continued in 1937,
and I thin reed - I could not h~ar az^tMng further about it - tho final end
of that action because the had started* nil of thvse actions as that
action in Detroit, as -.•oil as t*v: little sattloaants in the forr. of little
tubercular villages, do not.solvo tfeo entire problen if it isn't done on a
cass scale and there is no doubt about the fact that ttvj tubercular problun
has not fce^n attacked properly in ths world today. That is only one reason
tuberculosis cannot be corparod lith any other contagious diseaso - diphthori;
cholera, typhoid. These epi i ics l-aro a shorter course which quickly got
th-.ir vie tins. If that had b: a th case th.n 'o wduld hivo progro3sod nuch
farther rith th. firfct arainst ths tub.rculc s* Tho tragical thing

ir. that prcbl a io t:.. amn r of t’ie oisja-o itsulf, tho slow tricky course.
That i3 why, accordix^ to ry knowledge, th:rc ir no where in the world a law
which asks for th'. final isolation of tuberculosis sick and which safeguards
that course. Such plans are b in* considered, hcrwv r, during ill congresses
dealing with tuberculosis all over the world* ..s far is 1 know nobody has
nbardked or. th. final tt.j; and 2 f.dnk thu reason is tho slow tricky course
of tuberculosis ini that ir. spits of tho fact that tuberculosis io regarded
In its nortality second plnco of 11 serious diseases.

1 In addition to that letter of 18 December 19lu2 about which wo arc
}.„aking new did you any :i:ro stops in ord.r to frustrate the plan by
r,reiser, K-suly to liquii.to all tubercular Fol s ind In particular did you
•.urn to Hitler or Mimicr personally in that natter?

„ lio I didn : t 3pjak tc Bboalur at all throughout tho entlro War*

'l How about filml.r?

.. I spoke to Hbnlor on vario*is occasions but that was about one year
later. At that tise I had no official relationship to Rircoler asyet and I
didn't know hia. Had this happened one year later when I already had official
contact -with Hi-clor and had I knexm hin hotter I wouldn't havo -.rritton n
letter. Then I would have approached Hindi:r personally and I would have been
able to frustrate tho action rlthout having to -.rite a letter. Having written


156S


17 Harch L7-A-^T!>-l8-2-Cross (Easier)
Court Ko. 1


this letter I received a r.ucrt through ;x« Greiscr very shortly thereafter
that HJJnslar had vithora r. Us order and that finished this affair for no. I
was only inforaod to the effect that everything vms handled in "«artho-^}ou
orderly as r 7-rls examination and list cf Poles in .'-'arthe-Oau.

r . '..o . r.t you this report that this plan had boon withdrawn on tho
barfs cf your sag--action?

A I h-.ari that frc= Hohlf-ildor nsioll as Forwitschky.

Q Those wero tho two gentleman-

A oil, Hohlf older was tho Coman ding Officer of tho X-Ray Battalion
and P-rwitschky was tho business manager of the association for planning
tubercular control# *

Q Did you sain knowledge bow it really case about that this plan was
rojoctod an-i, in particular, do you know that HL'sdI r had said that Hitler
bins elf had to acku a decision and do you know that Hitler hirasolf according!;
doddod that this plan bo given up for tho reasons which you. Dr. Bloiso, hnvo
stated in your 1jttor to Preiser? lid you gain knowledge of that later?

A ..t that tine I only learned free; Professor Hohlfeldor and
rdtochky that • h r jo no ct tod in :=y letter had novod Hiianlor to withdrn»
hin order, .j r rdfl tho lett r of Hlwal.-r I only gained knowlodgo horo in
ehia courtroom bucause of th document and la::, therefore, vory grateful to
the Proaocution for not bavin* kept this lottor fron no,

Q 'ltnoos, when you say that thi3 plan of Gniscr's had boon frus-
tratod because of you, I nu3t r.aind you of what Prosecution has said horo on
the 9 Doconbor in thi3 court rocc. The Prosucution said at that tine "Wo shnV
bring evidence which will show that the pro-ran was being executed nt tho end
of 19U2 and tho beginning of 192x3*' and by that the program of tho liquidatio
of tho tubercular Poles was noant, " Fur th_ mere, tint on th. basis of tho pro¬
posal by Cruiser and Piece nary Poles had boon o-rcllossly uxter.ainated and
that, furthermore, others had b. ..r. roaovjd to r.-ote c_mps where there woro
:>0S3ibilitt 3 or curir, the , wh^r th.re rare no facilities provided for
th a, nhoro thousands net their death. 1 ’ These wero statsoonto aodo by Proso-
cution. I rai3t again ask ycu vary definitely did you at ary tin.- later hoar


17 Jferd* L7-A-AE>-l8-*3-Oro8s (itnLr)

Court :;q. i


that or. th. basis of those tubercuiars were in effect ext-rrdnated?

A Ho. Tho assertions of oho Prosecution arc nor. true, ‘•■■ithin the
fraaovovk of this tubercular action in tho artnj-Qaunnothing happened to one
?ol, . On the contrary h- was ttdioally decently t re "tod.

1 Can you even maintain this your assertion when you renenber that
the co—defendant Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, has stated in one of his very numerous
affidavits, namely the affidavit of tho 21 October 191*6, that and tried to in-
cr In i n a to you in this point. This is tho affidavit of tho dofondant Rudolf
Brandt which can bo found in the Docu-.ont Book of Prosecution 9 as Document
U*l, Exhibit 205. It is th. last docu.runt of this voluno. Hero Brandt says
and I want to pit that to you and I quote i "„t tho nd of l?lj 2 , and tho be¬
ginning of 1.9-3» Gruis r carried out tho oxt.rninatlon of the Jews in tho
'^orthj-Gau and also th. ox cutlor. against th, tubv-rcular Polos was brought to
an end oir.ultarv.ously with tho Jewish notion, Accordim-; to ry nor»ry as a
result of th suggestions mdc by ; lou and *lr.im.r between oight to ton
themrad r .xt.rlr.it ." You r -..r.b-r that during an oarlier sosaion

it bad already boon maintained that the defendant Rudolf Brandt had substi¬
tuted eight to t:n tfaoWMBi Poles by the word "maorous Polos." -.h-t. Dr.
Blcru, do you have to say about this affidavit of Herr Dr. Rudolf Brandt?

A I cannot be evade responsible for tho oorr/ctnes3 of such .an affi¬
davit by Dr. ^ldolf Brandt. I gained the conviction today that Rudolf Pr.andt
ban .’-•igmd everything that vas suldttjd to hia by th Prosecution. I, ther«j-
fen , oa«>9t b. nado rooponedb ] n 'or any laoorrootnoss in his statofliont. I
know of no caso - I know of not even on„ killing .and 1 an convinced that if
tb* assertion of Rudolf cr •*■- , or th. assertion of Prosecution, would bo
c orroct, r.oi> ly that mny Polish . -rso.as had bo. n xter-.in.atod, then the Pro-
' ■cation, just as in th case of th rulfomnida oxp* ri>-, nts, would hnvo boon
"'"1 ‘ E'-t witnesses from Poland because I or. sure it wouldn't bo difficult
• - o that if thousands of Polish persons had boon liquidated to got members
th ir farili. s to testily hare in this court roori about their orinas.


17 Kirch L~-l8-c-..- .73-Grcss (Easier)

Ovirt 1

Q Ir. Bloo.-, it cr_: be s --.n froa the aary documents which had been
subnittod that ir. the later .’ears, especially ir. tb; year 19U1*, nunarous
persons had been oxteirdnated in the concentration oanpa because they had
long disea s es. DiJ jx knew arything cbout that up to the- tino of this trial
and do you havo ary reason to bolievj today that these killings can bo
brought into connection with the plan of Orciscr ft*or that tlco?

A There is r.o indication for that. titan at a later date as for
instanco in Hadanar. Tolish tuborcular patients vers killsd thero is no
Indication that in ary try can bs connoctod with artho-flau. during tho last
yof.r vtun I xr.s Intomish in c -• of arc iadt 7 "found out for tho first
• : -v t' any <f ,j.ir a of .ub.rcui, r patients had taken placo and I learned
about -he Rada:—r j re.- dia.T aca rdJ.ng to • hich so and so na*y tuborcular
p tiv-nts had be n hill i. That is tXonl$ t*no I hoard about these things and
■hat I hoerd about h«ro luring thj trial.


1? M'Tch-^-jp-XJ-l-T-rr. w (Ir.t. °-v1. r )

Overt I

i. s- : . r.-crttr, D.et th t ir fe. Jtlwfc vistituti - n, kta

• • ah y v - b -“  • *■ 30,000 U.a, ft t:.. year -t

isat B-. - w M .

fr ^ th. S_ lna 31 IT Jra., Bib, ottu .-eh IStS? Thx n o. f rs ,

-- - r. * ■■■■ . th. ft , etiei a J£, Y 1 TO 16, ft,c 52. . ... evt .nt

«- naicr =»- -m^r Win. M , lc, „„

raPf> 3 - ;! - ' «-*»• — -th-r, r. thoo tui.r-

culu" r I... I£ I tmdcrrt'jti m InUrp-.t j t o-rrecHy, y. n have

“ • ' * Ult ^ •«->• 1*. 1 =••. .-.th th.

plm r Or-is-r lr that tire?

“• I’ , t.rt is ut f t.i- qi'.sti n.

Q. a.; ^rm tote c*ptcr I , ul-lilc. t ;ut ’ ria.l q U . 8ticn
c.., U r w v-y, is o no.ct_*‘ with it. D. y u kn w tint ir. tho

^ •"* 1Ch * L:a * - 5d0V ' * n * * -xtwr imtv tn. i.tclli ontsl*

•f i'lwll 3 • i ; u ’.in ka-wloOgo -0>-tit such a pl-.n an what -'id y.u
* -3 -t it?

“• ' U - . ;---r r Bill .... 1 , r » »„ It.

1 - 1 '- r r C - iV ' e 1 ;r - - - • -=a -nt, r -n. a tho .ontL^n.r

f “• , ‘” y amja *T • • I c mt t.li » th-t oxiotly. Dr.

' nt * • k ' c ’ n * v vlv. . lm *n »o,r. 1 -u ‘T at • » \

• v, r r•tn^r

'* r r 1 t — j ij... int.ili -ntsia cl-so, Tho*

W o. t£OM • -rt xL-, t p ;;..it,. .vlish p v„r •/ resist*nee f.>r
' " - ;Ur 1 tur ‘ ' 3 > r ^ - thair 3* . In cL-ss. I ^ iatuJy

-- savaiv aravr. I define y

1 ' r “ ±a * riti -‘- 8aw 6 ife w attituAi n th:t qu.sti n wont

r ttti F r -: - -=-• ny. i -v lotciled rens ns
• • - '- r attars I st tc<? in letter that it

• .ic-a:. at itn.ui lx. hi^kl. inc asujuanti-l tc pmt to r-^y

: .... si

I rsiy vxccut. such >lane mcsolf,

-n 5 . JIMS f Dr. Stufiruir. - Qcr. n pres. r«p rtsTar. c noornod


4572


17 ‘ rcI:-.,-JF-l : :-^_x- rr * (Int. ?. . 2 ,r)

Curt I

. -Vrt ia t . Cnitu ' Mdtos f iavrica
paalicly « t •>*». lx.c-_-.aV: t, -at_r a net it cv.r i,,- w a lags
art .- -n art! a atarilu.i. Ia .. „- s , prats r., rt oftich ace

.rally '.'bllsicc in -r. lay -r, , If 1 e Utct ri.htly, It as .-Is broad-

c ' :: ' ' ' ' «n is c rroet I d a-t to* bewuw

I .-v. a CC1--U1CJ .1 ,r r. fnrtw re, in ry pr teat ■■ th-.t ti.o
I plat.', at - n- X inwwy U. •. .rcU, - tie t 11 air.,. to later, his-

et.r, cltor th- -n r h stilities,
cr c. -'a t p r ly. th. pr r.aa to. c <n. r. »tl n. Li r.iat ry

it la n thin n_. to t -Yrin t . c rc_ : h .etllitils olviUnna -n’ tho
i nx n : citl -8 m rlUseoa 1 so t: -;r liv^a tn.-.selves, but thoro
lc a f.c. o.m i -ni- such yluia eftor to. a n l.<. * nlre-. y b^.i c nquerod

: : Such ..r'.Ce. ’ur— Th.n,

r.. -ntl«4rn fr the Arty Chaacol^yy t 1 * .. t t '-r.-nr. h-f im-.rst oC.
py p Jit I Vi-v -r V. • it. . . a i • * t tr at- w.a_nta I wo

JfcPfootly "i t. -fter t. t . r d 6.11 .-rthwr abut at.ril,. n up

1 ; • U> lct ..nt c.rv. : ^ Jvrv.

‘ 1 • • • Stance ainco

- . :>t Dr. ci. * with rot uronco

•- . l_a.. i ilaW, l.i c no-cti dto t; e s in* I auhrtt t. y.t ic

; •••

nt b ’ 1 -» Dcin.it t, p- _ 13 „ 21. j
‘ CU '  * lbit P1 “* * 7- Bl - "^l*'vit tri-.an t_s fr a tVmversity

»-« «>0 27 th ; Oct .r, im, Giessen,

“ -P 3 tr *-0- ill. Hes-yo n “th, aik.’ I quote j

_l '' ; * flr?t p '- r ' r "*> hB ‘ n ’ I Pt-irt re-.-’in tot toirt pnra-

«• r.


f^ * r^


» - v


I *•


S tt 1911, D.. 1 . e If

' * r :.r. C oti . - t

^.cr-.t r .r, r ir. y clic.ic 1 such -j ri.r,

1 p-vpl. ros tc be -xt-raim*


: *h eh th- an


17 'brch-^.-j:--19-3-5r'jrc (irX. -


Z.'^rt I


by eteriiizrtt er.

■Dr. <auu ana highly inirn=nt .it la# plcn of Dr. C;nti'c and told
- - th - ~~ ' lr -‘ i tiicn appropriate seep- - the firfcy :hnnc. 11 . ry tc
- - 1 r - f Conti's. ly ccavoKntionwith Dr. Sla-u atthat

£ u i ok r th.r - l.nr tine. Dr. 31c.x r.^-tc iy •.clarc- th-teuoh n plan
t. Uontl Inti a ~ y it. '6 tbsolutoly inhavitvi and, tfxrefcrc, had to be *
prevented ur. _r 11 circvnet-ncor."

Th ~ Xert-wi c nt.nta r.f.r t. tlw f; *.r *r. Kaufaaan which 3 no©

. : - - .. Jo ic: 1 tic, f t- entire j . idnvit;

3tl r_ l.-vin. this ca-.pt-r re rdm t:*._ *cti'n ’ -.inst tuo.rcul'.r
F=lts I sub -It t y u -# - forth.! I . vi ,nc. -j> tlfi • vit r'.ach con

 foon in D:cuxr.» S. «k  . 1, y . 1 -r^ 5. This is an

Of Ox*. Cak-.r Oon .r ran, * ive it J. Exhibit Hu Vour Dloao
K^. 8. Tnkin. int c lax iapertancc of this problca,

ln * ' ' 1 -• ' r ' U:a ‘ • -s;>ci lly nincc 1 '.n't knew

- r '» • nd achlfc, ill -v,r b. .r u ht horo.

. O n-.r. inn, «h ms b-r;> i-. the yerr f 1991, und.r oath,

r lr2-! «* I was-in the s.rvica : state is st-.tc octor, Pron

1,35 n T trs on * ici*l ..cter an- her! of the Dopirtxr.t el Health in the¬
ir . In nntun of 1939 I «as ort'arod by ray
• *t vnt t tho 1 t.r * xtlx-lm t s -r7. a official physician. Prai tho
8a ' ' r f WM n 2 was prlrcipal a.ILc-l *13 ic.r in the eparfcount of tho


fcleh


' ‘i^tics r.c.r . 1939 - t tho Uao Of L)k


*t!i -


“ rtr tl n - c lax -r- -e - . .r th-.n in th. »r.n n ::uich


-rn wolf nr. 5 .-vie- for t.B.

«* • - •• th-r»icre instil r.t

• -

"" r ' -• ~ n thw b’aio : t x strtiitical .iturinl, i.J.cticus

• »

: r ' ' t a r and fi vn> £ twenty t twonty-flwe theasoad people


«7A


17 ' rch-wjr-i:—3-4arrc* (Infc. •!,;•)
G:art I


by at-rJ: izrtl

"Dr. . *ns highly i nt at ; v . s pLm cf Dr. c ,..i- ..

te_t ^ ^ ?ixv - J t ™“ n awrcprictc st-ps at th. Party 7hir.c-ll.r-/ te
frurtr-.t- ti.it .'l-r. <f ’T. C-nti»5. 7y c ov-roitton rith Dr. Bla'-J itth.it
r - - - Itm tine. Dr. Blcsso repcctc ly .dir.’ t.; touch - plan

• - - lately ihhnano in. , tterofcrc, tee to bo

;r.v_r.tod or; .r 11 circmfit-ncoa."

Th. t \artisz c nt-nts r.f.r t ttv. iff air of •*. Kaufnann uhich I need
n t r.i *. Li .r 11. I -flic yau t t .-Ja, Ju icirl .i tic.- cf th. -ntir. -Iiidivit
3cf;r. 1. .vJn. ti.ia ch-.pt.r rt rdin th- "ctlon • -Insc luvrculu
Fclca I aubdt t ; u -a - f ur t;i.r i .-.a -he- in vit rhich cm

• 1, ?r : 1 iry*. 5. This is in
th- Exhibit XuJbor Dime

K.. 8. TiJein. int lrx i pcrtincc of this problai,

I -«k U te pee ia. t r, - this - .iv.it, -o. b! Uy oticc l !on>t knew
ia-oo th-t I want- ill _v-r b. >r , ht hero.

TM: nr. O.n.r. inn, *n ma b.rn in t .o ycr f lfcii, atat.a, und-r oathi

»ir-. i 1729 on I via ir. the : .rrioo ' the ststt ir at ■. .r, ?roa
1935 n 1 ’“  ■ r lci ‘ 1 -cter m 1 her ’ cf th- Dcpirta-ni -1 H-;lth in the

araebux . In taa ;39 I was .r r ,y
'• X..t * th- : t.r r xth-lm' t r-rv- c fficiil physlcim. Fren the
S’x. r .• 197*0 n I *is principal a-cic l - I/ic.r in th- -p rtn-nt of the


-i.lC..


■ • •  1 •» I Tulls


" ,

1 • 1 *’ :• £ . .'.'39 - t th. tick) Of tn-

r ‘ r 7 - . . , r th-:: i. tz._ hdtu n :-ich

is’r ti n» as tafc-n , If r :• ...

• • ‘ • • •

r 1 ' -c, - nth. o-sis : td strticiicil nt-riil, • iuf-ctions

' ‘ - t • r ^ W® - twenty t. tK-nty-fiv. t. us-.: people


L574


17 Telf-u-JB-lS—!>-£«rrot (Ir.t* R L-r)

Court Z

1 - • -r : v r :.3. Cjdt'u^c ttu. riti.s

L-.Vc.iy^ m ; ... *Q to-ltfc ... ,5^. .. torn nlbK canter., , s

18 teci *» 5 npprcadmteljr £,500 c.-'r f.r Gurnanr
TvL.3 (the 1-tter un or gJlUhjx.eierl Ir.cti -n with f-.lish re tors and
Frliaii nuroin st-Xf.) Thc«sirox\.* . “hcs_ r^.sur,:: V.- the

bj the auporlcr :.-ich -uth.rity,
lth ' Gti ri : th - -ich : .nji.tr.. r the. Interior. Since,
p-rticol-rly -.in * the iadrw alo 'ilfictatUa -risin fr i the «, ths

ln8t3U,ti - 1 r ' • C t ... ic

t • c-rt-.ln 'u r.., but art t th- ur -ntiy neccts-Try s-nit-ry ixisuroa
r*"' in ' *iotiVvjly, -11 th *- ic-.l ievrs l thu * arfctelan' untlrinrly
0 ntinuu-' to v art. thOr Mp.ri-ra an. ) W f dopvtsnnta f tint j*r„ wiling
in or.


4575


->rch 1 C—i-L cs s cr (L-.t. . aider)

Ccurt IS>. 1


B ^ h - ch - 1 - had an c :>c'..: tu-.a 'n *.hc autuen of 39..? b


ccauso


the G-uldUr end the i.tdeh Gev : icr Groiscr supposedly said th-t in ease of
necessity he i.culd stj r , at not!_' - tc eh .ck the tuberculosis e; id^ic in the
'..arthclru-' effectively in the ir.-.rest cf tho entire population.

"l!y endeavors tc <*ct a clc:. ar.i authentic atrtcner.t frea C.-dciter Grei
cn this subjects cro bcund tc -nsucccscful, ' .c ua, _t...cn Grdser, who
sea ioddodly hostile tc civil - .vrnts, -nd qyadf, r 1 tie ns wore definitcl
str-inul, fer reasons which nee. .=t to dsous.-.: here. ..s, heaver, 1 cculc

net lo vo Greiser's supposed st-t-aents at th*t, I th u ht it ny duty to tali

<•

person liy tc the herd of the De rtaent cf hV3ih in the Kcich .llriotry of
the Interior end hcich Health Le ier, Dr. C.nti, in Derlin, r ':cut this nattoj
-n th whole tut.rculosis probl. .. ..t th.. en: of October cr the Lcr-innin-
cf ..’tvecher 19t2, I tins receive y Dr. •'enti at his office rs i.eich Horlth
Le ',r. I ft -‘ly inferred Dr. nti, referrin* ic the state i health in
the- . rthd.a.. , - hicn wr.s knew.-, t. hie fr. j nua.rcus re. .rts, th.t I had hoax
rurers cf tho aKveUenticnod all. cd st'tua-nt fcy GatdolUr Cr.iser. Dr. Ccr
ov; ’id t. in a wry, tut he ndrl'. thrt cert-in planr for r red I c al aclutici
the tubarculosi? profclca'of th rthd -.: w. r . r cooaidorrtlcn. As I
wr.3 vnr.'le tc *et a dear enow.; Dr. C.nti *nJ c.ull net be srtisfied

with such infi rxaticn, I innedi ly crlio 1 cn the d-puty ..eich Health Locdci
Dr. Diene. Uir th.t he deal' ith r.ecirl tu' rculooia questions in tho
-eh Health Leader's Office, i . . - eloarly

nc-.ative -ttitude tcaard any pes. ido sclvticn c-n.r.--y tc human principles c
<v.c lied ethics. He Shewed ao th. lraft of a letter addressed to Groioor; I
cr-kv. hiu f.r o few additions an -lWaticns.

"• e discuss.J tho fcraulrticn of th Ictajr in dct-dl free the pcint of
'- B c * convincin' Grdser th .t .i intensive continuation of the health and
welfare n.rsv;- - 3 . fj token -n a forth.r extension cf the h. 1th prolan j
u ? - cr - •- * ir.st tuhercu". sis c. d! off* ctivdy ' v.rt the acute dan>-e

ir.e su - -cation ;.r .a 1 r'e tu' rajlcsis flettl-aent k.s particularly discussed
‘••is plan w as b zei cn surlier e: .epics, and its find aia rs tho cstablishr.
.fiidy spr-ad, but never-*. -less cicsu Settl^cnt f.r tutorculc sis


-i-rch 17—*-8:-20-2-Lcsaer (Lit. . -
Ccurt !.'c. 1


? ---r-'- th_ir fuailics. Ir. -his scttlca-nt, all .ard-rn <atcai nation,
trcctacnt, is cl- tier., an' wdfrj facilities should 1 . provided fer the patic
-r.'l aucl-rs _f their feallica she =i t.t U in danper. In this cay it should
’ - in a few decides * reduce ie .rculcsis casos to c .ainisua. The

fore cf acttlaacnt for the cni-n rod f-dly wr.s su^ cst&lj t cc'.uac the
cr’crlj trcr.taent cf tufcerculcci and isolation take y.cxs end the Separation
free the ftally in s-nctorir. cr.- Love *21 in iscl ticn heces tine ?.nd again
lo- i to the Te'.tcst spiritual ’irficultles r. the . art cf the patients and
their f allies, an! therefore u del- y in t!. cur . ..ccorixng t. tfcpcrlcnc
the dancer f:r the fDaily ausbor* is snail, smeo* th- . n. .rip trnlnod,
hy ienic-Uy livir. , nodicelly attended n! r.urs-i . .ti-r.t 'c-a r.ct represent
r«y ’ R - «P " rth aunticnin- fer his fcdly. Dr. i l .ru an‘ I hr via - r.Tood
cn the tactics to be taken touar! Gruiscr anJ m th- contents cf tho said
le" r, Dr. DKao ’ o-n in ay presence t. iictat- the ’reft of ■ new letter.

"..fter this c-nf-rencu with Dr. bl-ce I returned satisfied tc .esen, *.i.
th- cznvictier. that I hnd dene th- utnest in accord with cy duty to keep on
the only c. ic ily correct way f r the fi htin- cf tu>erculcsis ir. the : f.rthe
I ccncludod oos-ntiallj rvn the dev I it in the fi ht c-ainst
tuberculosis in the .srthclond • t the 1-tt-r f Dr. Blcao t- G:ul-it-r
Or-is-r w* P successful. Tho r ihtlcn t c ut tu> -rculcsis rollh-vin ■ bocc
effective fer the uhclc i.eich t« riltcry cn 1 ..pril 1%>, a sL-ilr.r rurulf-Uor.
for th '' pr-tccticn arrinot tube: eulcsis - el*. ’ - !ecr.cd in the ertheland
in favor cf tho Fclish pepul U ccntrrl ffic- for the fi ht r.-ainst

tu’ -rculcsis w s -stdliahcd un - the ern i_. r.t - cellist. This offi
r ’-‘ tr-ctoait to tho C xu and t t«. .. Urh ccscs. Tho proparati
r s n-t-rla-. nd bods, ee ccirOl; far th : Hah sector, was secured.
*'■' -c: u- j s. .port nt ;«rs the retention cf -u; ’ :ccd r?tic ns also fer

incur-tl- c-s s cf tul rcul sis. This, tec, jroa ranted
t -he .clish rs Well r.s tc th- G ran. patients. In ppito cf the difficulti
• .-ir. frc.. the .or, Tfiich in t . - years V)U')/tJ* *ero incr^-sir. free, day to
: . h- ir.r .r tr- tauit for ecch case was stt^ted. fn this bonnocticn
r rs *er- 13. iv-n, that in it- . f r. -oi tions tc the contrary ro~ardin


.5 77


Jtrch

Z. art


17---=: -2C-.-l -££ -r (lot. l«-r)

Sc. 1


■ ' - - ■ m n,

tr.‘tra_nt, iselti.n, on' *olf-.r facilities tr.ul' ' » . rovi:_:i f r the pati.
. ,rr r -h-ir fcnilies *.r. ii ht i _ ir. ienper. Ir. this it should
: dcs t< r_iucc ui -rculcsis cc-ses te : aAninua. Thu
fora uf scttlcacnt fer the cni-n red f .lly su- cste-.’., hec-usc the
r'-rl; tru:u=ur.t _f tul erculcsi -nd isil.tl.n take y-nrs m : th_ seperatier
the fmLly in s-nr.terl~. -n :vc '21 in isvl ti;n h.Sea tine and c-.-.in
1. ! t the re* test sniritunl irficulties r. the ; th. -f the ; r.ticnts nnd
•heir : riliua, *u>! the-ref. re • deity in th . cut . ..cc< : l\n_- te ucpcricnc
th*. ’ xipvr f-r the f -dly n-nber is f.. 11 , sirTc-. th r . _rly tr'ine-d,
hy ienic liy livin , nodici-lly UteMci r.t i.uis. ’, . ,ti..:t 'c-s net represent
■ y • r rth a-r.ti:nin fer nis i ill;. Jr. 1 .. n I hrvin real
cr. th- tactics te be tnken tcusr! Gruiser r.-.j ,r. th- c. nter.ts cf the acid
l'-t -r. Dr. Z\- iv v -”n in ny pre wnc. t. iictnt_ th- irr-ft .f new letter.

"After tide Cunf.rence- with Dr. .1 cac I : iturnod satisfied te . n, wi.
th. c. r.victier. that I h-i dene t! . utc-ot in acc rl vdth ry duty te keep cn
the cnly :». lie lly correct wry f r the fi htin cf tuV-rculcoio in the ' nr the

v 1 . ~ .r.t in the fi ht Inst

tuUrculvris L-. th*. tartholnnd t the letter of Dr. to G .l.it.r

- ticn out lu' .rcil.sio relief he via
; r I - *.eich let • rj ril 1943> a siioilrr repair tier,

f r th*. ,.r. t.ct: n srninet tube-.:elu3is c *.l ’ -t cd Ir. the arthelfind
in f’Vcr <f tho Fclish t.pul ti .. central jTie. t r th< fi ht a ninst
-rcul.cia " a -st-.’lish-i un t ie n . :.t . lint, ihis effi

v tiie .. tre. taint te the G an. t *» . _ra • . r. Tho proparati

: 3-ctcr, r.-s secured.

■ 1 .; -,-;t at -s the rete-ticn ■■; 1 s nt 1 rtLiens else fer

, - - . .

. iiafc. nat w-11 -s t; tn. G rasn * i a - .. 1

rr: t. ..-r, rhieh in t yc-rs 19- -r - incr. six. iren dry t.

.- In t hif : nnocticn

r rs ii.: . Is. iv-n, th t ir. it, r .1 tions to- the c_r.tr-ry re-ardin


.577


;•.cr. 17-,.-:'X-eG->-L-sscr (Inc. ..'fidtf)

Court 5e. 1

the cspUyn-nt cf i'clish persein .u'-lic fficcs, •- tuloraul:sia welfare
systeci with . li.sh !cctcrs nurses shtul* le estblish fcr the relish
pc.:ul tirn ~X *-h- Kcrith Offic .

"Durln qy p„rlc ’ in s aa in \ic*l Cf-ic^r in i'oeen, unti

January 1945, n. tul«.rculcsis iients n<.r •li.-.uidttcd* in the .,-rtholand
zb tor s I kr.cv. I never rcc. va! :r. .rl.r for such n^-sure, :.aich le3s
: r-u ht enc ' -ut either iircc ; r inlir cel;. C~ t:-.. contrary, the offii
"lwys trie i tc ivc -'ll tuier •.1.sis ti.i.ts . rej .r ■*. .-nt. Only in t!
BXEZKr cf 1946, durln ay int j..ient, 'i I l.'rn e Ur. is -llo;cd to
have "con j concrete rrdcr free Hiaslcr fur’t • '.i li-' tion f incurable
.:Lish tuberculosis patients'".

Ihwn the si-nature of Dr. taker Cur. ’-m-nn and t Un the certification
i ‘.his si n’tur, in the proper ;*nnvj.

Q fitness, in connocticn *ith thic 1-ttcr I oust ask.y u, it this let
in the ‘r ift f ibich Or. Gunv: xxn . rtici; ted an ’ which he a-.nti«ns on •
few ooeaCLcfiV— is it th. «gao letter which ve dc:lt with : is- -:.v’ vain,
dated :.cvi' r 18, 1942?

.. y , t.;. t is the or; tUr ■ ni I ex. ressly iccl re that et nc tin.
uer- there ny ropir-.ticns ..c - liqui ti. n f i :lish tuberculosis

. nti v.ts.

Th:t Cr. Gunlemann c .ms, t: . Idth t! • I lervo this chnptor
p-.sr over t. m.thor chapter, .hen-si .

•-. HJ Yr I su cat th »r. Ssutu* • a it nunber and
i at affidavit in: n nc . »t dene th».t ac yet.

■: . L. - Thank you. 1 ir of ill vit .. v Dr. Sunderannn. will

r solve ti:c exhibit nun* .r 8 — -lcau Kc. 8.

IK. ..ISITr-NT: Counsel st toe th t th.n the .xu.it r.es first offer-
I* is roCeiv. z Defendant 11 .o's Ex i it c.

■ • ’ ise the Triiimd ill rec.-s art 1 9:30 .'1 sk tc errOw

rnir. .

(The Iri' un i aijeurnod un L 16 i * 1947, 09>: r-urs.)


Court Sc. i

18 :ar 47-i;-iostcr (Int. 3a.nl cr)


Official transcript -f the Anerisrn M'itery
Tribunal in the natter of the Isited S.ctes
of Anericn against tori Brandt, et rl,
defendants, sitting at 1'uornberg, Gcraany, oa
18 Kirch 1947, 09c0. Justice Seals presiding.

ZYL MARSHAL: Persons in the ccurtrox; will please find their seats.
Tho Honorable, the Judges of Ailltary Tribunal I. Military Tribunal I
is no- in sesoiur.. God save the Inited States of Ancrica ani this hon¬
orable Tribunal. Ih<.re win bo order in the courtrocr..

-HI PRISIZEKT: Kr. Marshal, will you ascertain that the aefondants
arc nil present in court.

*

THE MaHSHAL: k ay it olcrse your Honor, ill defendants ft present
in c-urt with tho execution of the defendant ''b^rhounsr vho .1 absent
duo to illness.

ZY1 PRESIDES®: The Sucrotory General w.ll note for tho record tho
presence .t ell the dofcndnntt ir. court save the defendant Obcrhcustr
ho to in the hospital and h-c boon excused >n account of hor illn.se.

Counsel nay pr-ocod.

HURT Strttt - fiosuacd
DIRECT LXAJ4IEASICK (Continued)

BY TE. SAUCER (Counsel for the defendant Blor.o):

Vltnoss, you re=c:ber tlxt you »ro under oath?

A. Yos.

tfc. Euthcnnsin - did you hive anythin* to d- with it?

A. lie.

^ Did you have nay close inforaation rbout this nott." the
officially or privately?

A. J . Only about 19-1 did I hear rusors thi t insano DOT*ono were
fctlng billed in Insane asyluno. I did not lonrr. anything definite r.fc ;e

recall the cLixt which w C6 -n the wall t. hir.i " u
r.nt tir.e ego? This chart ^ s driw- up on iafomrtion given by the defer,
dont Brock. Cn this chart there was c souare with the official position

I

ciaas Lender Dr. Conti. You recall that it the right,

4579


: tr.= Eeichs. Pir-’c


• I “


Cc—*t 1

16 APT 47-K-1-2-i®-iC9ter Cat. Hauler)

-oxt to this square :-r Dr. Conti, there *«$ s srcll sou-re ^ith your
cr.:e. "hi6 gave the inp-ression that yen were connected with the argrr.i-
seti-n of euthanasia, that you had soee offieirl euthority end duties.
Will you ple. se eau-ont on thic, whether this chert iE correct -r n t.

So, the chert it not ccr*vct. Dr. Conti was connected with
the euthanasia action -nly in his capacity as State Secret; ry in the
Eelch Ministry of the Interior. In this cron city I v» 8 not .is dcouty,
howevor. As State Secretary in the Ecieh Kinietry of tho Intorior Dr.
Conti hrd a different deputy, thrt was Ministerial Dirigcr.t Dr. Linden,
vho is therefore listed under the nice of Dr. 3onti or. the chert, which
r rr 3reck h»s supplied,rs nunber 253, Exhibit 231.

Doctor, you h<vc already said that in this function you vert
not Dr. C-nti's doputy. Sov, I would like to know Sot only Dr. Conti
m-rticip; ted in this cuthrnroir action Vat also a r.u.bor of doctoro,
cri-rrily, goverenant physlcicns and aliocicts. Thcoc dcctoro connected
with vuth.nrcio - were they under you ct Deputy President of the r.oich
Chester of Physiciana end rs Belch Loader of Phvsicinno? DC you hr-vo
rny supervisory euthority over these doctors - discipllnr ry authority
rnd So forth?

A. I lid not have any right -f supervision or any disc'-.Unary
ruth rity ov*r these doctors. The execution of the orogrrn *as in the
hands A tho governnont physician* «r the doctors of the insrne asyluhc.

q. And under whoso authority were those doctors?

A. They wore under the Boich Ministry of the Interior.

With which you hat nothing to d-i

A. With which I had nothing to do.

D-ctor, you were nlsj Deputy Chief of the hein Iffice for
Puciic Health in the SSDAP, thr.t is, yju held c definite Party -ffico
coition, and in this functi nei the title Deputy r.oich Health Leader.
Did this Main Office f r Public Health, this Party office, hrve- rsything
tj do with thv euthanasia action?

A. First, 1 ah raid like to correct something you said. T'-u said

.580


Court Sc. 1

16 Ki-r 47-k-l-S -7ccr.«■ (St-. ?-=l-r)


I w £ e Djbwxfcy notch Health Leader is this capacity. I vps f ‘ ’..on f.
u, B tM , title. I ves ncrcly call-4 Senuty Chief of the Kali*
jj-.v, r. for the question Itself. the =nin -ffico for Public Health of
the SSUa? did not have any «rt is the cuthawsic action.

v WitscBB. in connection vith this euthanasia natter did lctvrc
ei- •. ccnpleints or inquiries end so forth cone to the fcoich Charter f
fhy.tolon., of -hich you «r. It OhOrgo. ond. If .o, -hot did you do In


response to those letters?

A. Any official Utters, order., instruction., stateuonts, and to
forth, concerning the euthaxxsir action did not cone to the Reich Chrubrr
of Physicians or to the Hein Office for Public Health: hovever. ‘-ho
Reich Chrr.bcr of Phytioient ,r the Hr.in Office for Public Health received
half a dozen or a dozen Utt.ro free the public in 1940 rnd *41.

And at vrs done about these letters?
a. I took notice of these letters rnd according to ir ructions
freu Sr. Conti cent then to the Chancellory of the Fuehrer.

. vhv did you send then tv, the Chancellory of the fuehrer?


hhy did you send then to that office?

A. Because upon ny c^nlaint. ^.en I nchod Conti about th'.s notion

>, refused to give r.c cay inform tion, end aurcly arid that this va. a -
aoelgosoot Iron Hltlor to Boohlor ond Prof... or Broddt. Hr. C»ti o>U
tbht rny It tor. ooclng to -. 1 . Ho,eh. OMtor of Bhy»lcl.« or to .ho :*>•


offlco .hould tv oeno ou t tM Ctoncollory of .ho fuehrer.

you juot .eld. Hr. Slot. 1«4- no .0 .hide th»t thl« J-*»
luoulry or.d oonplolnt. fren .ho uopolotlon ooco»lo».d you.
t . lt ». . urlr.tc olt.ron.to op«k .0 Hr. Conti oh out .ho —e. !• » '

thrt on thl. 0000 .I n you o«Wd Hr. Conti -hotter ho ><•«”* ... *—•
Ourroat nnong tho nonunion vo, , -rue. rnd thot on thl. occ.lon ^0 «
■ 3r. Conti. 'If thoo. ru or. «r« truo. ono --old v “ 1

suMthlng ognlnot Hidy— • ' • -• ““


13 : rciv-JWF-2-l-Haloy (Int. 7 . Sc n)

Court I

... Yes, I sii s.-.athxn t t.ds c 1 lt-ct tc Centi, in. ' ?i.gOcCt«ad
.7 vir Itcicii f*ysicir.r.s - rs £ ul tike t. r_ i .-.---S- i.. t:.is

.

rs, - r. r ' r it,

in' I i. - vint th:t to *», .c, C.nta t epp: sin, r.ttitu'o an c *.

chit t . ict: physicians ha'* nothin t ’ nit., th; sntfcor, anf. he vis
1.' th’t. ..: T L rrv. ' l't~r, this -a - Gilbertto falsjheof, i.r .

ft. be innin. of tn. -x, at r _r Swicl. ‘ iniste-r l- .-:*s 1,3-
.: :i • r., 'r. C r.ti hi' hc<’ a c r/.rc:c ftb \t hie , 1:— .

Hitler i.i tlv- ;r,s,nc- f Lt err.

..s Dr. Kosnohl, h -.s xx as. her; t min of

th-c?*., tc-1 uo t.. t it that vi— . i- ■ t: i_xtl'.<.r 6tw;s in the :.:-.twr of
Uthrj-si-, . .. drily in c n.-e.ctx *. itn - lr :-si^r D. Ki-rwj .rh.,‘3 y u

ils r*b ut t.-l:.

... Ye iVta-r K1• r- io <--i- crl-iculaois r-s rch v. r!c.r

lr. Ocr ny, . . rkc' csjvci » 1 } .r. tuberculosis in chil’r^n. *L c :

rty . - r was {.ready r.s>ct. *. j. ' faun _ra

efth- Hatlcnal t ciiliat L.- no i* . - r.:. I hi’ be-n cor It',

hi. : -.* fear a at may quuBt; ns taicU b th r. both oi us, c.--.ufly c com

■. • • . 1 *

, t

,i. .-1 sit r. i'w r,-.s t vrlto : B r.n inn in jt _rc, i.

r at the euthanasia r.ct. n, fa-oUot -

i: ti It Ties Lv.cs- . - -• ■- bt ti*o t vt r.ny etc tall.

. r.c. :ru. Oth r. . c., .1 cortai.ily have nttmptCf' to intervoco

. i.r *. 7 *il have . t> ini tlf-r.ia -nerci

. r.., : L .ten .cti i ' * *. y -i in sy r. .ora r-s * n-

' »

. Th • wee not the c'c.. - • - • - ,v.n .do t i* an .:yV;«r. *.b ut

. b ... : a r. •.*.tlv. ; • .. Lnsoix isyluo, «" • nsi .

4532


13 : rch-!£-JF-2-2-\iIey ;int. . Seh n)

C-. art I

Fr .'ftSEor *lir- th- , -st suit'hi. ...re ci It tin infer ti t

ire.rrvTfc., -i.-' Dr. Klaro : i' -ctaniiy ri._ 3 C v r-'l cutspfken 1 iters t
tr~ - rs r.s v.. ; 1 _enti r.od, nn he c-nt u c-pi-s -fthes- letters*

Dr. ..1 r ; Btfvcr, 'i r.ct have any snocess iUi thus. l_tt_rs. Only i • u

Dr. 1 re 'i I Lrm mytiiin defi.iit. ab ut th outh'.-.isia -.cti_n, a. .

! lr-a y be-n sal- 4 , I Kent t. 5e- the, i^ich Hysiciir.s le '“.r — I bv.
y ur . trion th-.t ie th. wrong ten in this caso — I wunt to cea State Secre¬
tary Dr. Conti, I have ilr . 1 ; • t s is st w "is unsuccessful*

4. Dr, blc*~, in the qu— U a i euthanasia, c’i y u have this
aio~ basic attitu'e r.s ir-fes.-or hi r.?

... Or. t..- qu ,sti n .-f e o -'nasi*, iieei-f 1 r.V a . ifi-r. .t ittitudo
than Dr. Qcro* Dr. : . thmasln in my - r . 'ut,

for this -uthaoasl.' aeti n, I share-.* Ud -., Dr. . Jt. an ’ !, -t lc.iot

frx. er pars nal . ‘-:.t £ hrloir, c laiVjxxC t. s: ct:.-i ill- -I, tapMidl}

beenus- n. las had b.»n xssu-' an publisiw .’h-r_ r.» n ul ,1 .nly fir/,
i lc. •! o r tho whrlc set! nj x v _v_ th.it it was ’Nlnru vho

pi te* ut th-.t in the pr.eeAir. vs. •> whs. t i.ther wts friuc' sine-

. ath "to iv.r. in tie

D i. SJJ? .s I i rj ask tno c.-r t t i - nj suh-t in affr.'avi

.- Kliru iri this cis.. It is ir. th- ’ coxcnt b k "'l . ) t

D caa-nt N . 2, I shill raxo it Zx. »? 9 And than i ctx -fit

1 . . ' >:v.i.nt b; k , pa, •, D cusent Nc. 2 -.., Bnextr
*3-.r. .iic- Xll-ostr:Urt«i .nchtauaribo" : 21 I'.vestocr 1936, r.-ltich I sir.11 ivc
cunuit ixhibit R-, l-« ihu i.; x ’ v,t. f xrofess r Kiiro, Documont
“■ . 2, Haiti bit :: • 9, is certified -.cc r-.. i the rorulnti.no,

Kl'.r. 3*/s Ui. f rlltwin, ab ut cutiimssis, th. killin :! the :

"I, (Pri.fes: r r-lnro) f.rsc. rt -Qthancsia (killin f Liomc

r . r • L.;. .:• (-- .

rlsrufcu). I tocr-up n coUect ' v

in * r-.y ii.c .a. r-n.-nsicl. t at — v- - 1 ,*th -.is. uncc.-nu- ir v r :


:. • s t >rs -


4533


18 ",-rch h?-’:-..TD-2-lc.- '.nicy (Int. 7or. Schocn)
Court Jfo* 1


’ ‘old the Deputy Physicians' Leader Dr. Elone about ry objections.

■'It is therefore true that during ry stay in Berlin I repeatedly
iscussud the question of uuthenasia with Dr. Blone.

"On the occasion of these discussions Dr. Bloxu made remrks to th-
effect that, thrush euthanasia should not be principally rejected, an
irreproachable legal basis should be created for It, and that euthanasia
should never bo applied in the fore of a 3ocrot proceeding.

"On the occasion of such a conversation. Dr. Blonc told no that ho
had discussed this problem with Reich Physicians' Loader Dr t Conti, and V
Dr. Conti had explained to hin that th-- Charter of Physicians and tho Offi
of tho Physicians' Loader had nothin; to do with tho natter, that, as far
as ho (Dr. Conti) know, it. ras a direct >rd-r from Hitler to Roichsloitor
Bouhlor and the defendant Dr. Brandt, Any interference of tho Chamber of
Physicians and th> Physicians' Loader in that aattcr was inpossiblo he oai
ar. , bosidos, would bo antirely uscloss.

"I told Dr. Bloro of y intention to apply to loading personalitiw
in rdor to achieve a chan o r discontinuation of eut han a si a. Thus, I
triad to got int- touch with f*. Brandt and tho Propaganda ’.'.inistry."

I nay roanrk this. Dr. Brandt obviously is Karl Brandt, not tho
defendant Rudolf Brandt. I continue.

"On the occasion of hio visit to Bethel Dr. Brandt intended to have
a detailed discussion with r*j. F r reasons unknown to oe, tovovor, this
visit did not take place. This voant that ay attonpt to *et ’ntc direct
contact with Hitler via Dr. Brandt -Hi not succeed. !^y com 3pondonco wit)
t*x Propaganda !linistry was fonmrdcd to D«.ichsloiter Dr. Bcreann. Vith - 1
boipj sur wood in order to explain ry point of view personally, as I had
.la hod, I surely received - indirectly vie tho Reich Health Loader Cc
r .prirvmd. :y last attempt, a Ion- oral discussion in 'rdor to in uco ?-
Conti to intervene, -.ras likewise -without success. As f -r as I rvi,- .uber, :
j.r.t ry correspondence in this matter to Dr. Blonc for his information or
talked with him about py vain endeavors.


e58A


13 jfcrch U7-J5-&TD-2-2a-iSaloy (Int. Von Schocn)
Ccur- flc. 1


'It is true tho order of Roich Physicians* Leader Dr, Conti not to
concern hinsal f further with the cattor, cade it entirely inpossiblo for
Dr, Blcoo to tako effective stops in the question of euthanaeir. c Dr, Kurt
Kloroa 1 '

/aid then follows tho ccrti .'ication.

The next Docunant, Exhibit 10, I shall not read, I ar' tho TribunaT
to take Judicial notice of it, 1 have sutuitted this extract only in order
to shot.* you that this Professor Dr, Klare as early as 1936 spoke in exact*
the 8art. way on the euthanasia problen as he felt during tho War, accordir

to tho affidavit which has been read,

• #

f« fitness, Dr, Blonc, did you Larn at that tine or later, that th
point of view which Dr. Klaro took, viz, that there should at least bo a
legally published law, was shared by nary othur doctors, and that nary
doctors had tho point of viuw that if such a Law wero issued then ono coni
not have oiy soricus objection to this law?


C .. rt I


l'j Har i.7- it - 3-1 - LT3 - ochan (-nt. vor. Shoen)

--s, I knot that, and I frequently •Jscussed this letter with
rrof -53cr 11are. Klara, as wd;i as I, hold the point of view that if
—' had hejn cide public at that tine, t >j Ooman people would h.avo
v. Justed thooselvos to it just as they previously hid subtittc o
d utilisation law in 1933 and 1931;. That is still ny conviction today.

Dr. Bloau, wo know today th t your co-defendants Professors
Brandt ar.d Brack dealt with the Euthanasia -question; did you d-ccuss
the Euthanasia questions with such arsons as wore oliicially connuatod
with this problerj in wh.-.t in_- ajy i with what success?

*. Ou day, possibly in 1>. 1, ns i-r as I recall, ■ - nbnths
before tho euthanasia action w is stopped. Dr. Conti told k that ho
had arrcjVjed t; conf-runco in .u ich with Professor Prard i:i the ,>rua-
onco of tho l-adors of the Cr.r.bor of Physicians, rh.ro «‘r it ma tc
explain tho euthanasia ction. Tho v.tir,: took olico the, l in tho
• lunich .vrztohaus as far as i rocoll, Brandt was not pi -r.ont, but
tho dofordor.t Victor Brack was tr.^ru as intsloi tor in tho Chnncoli< ly
ef tho ‘‘uohror, of which Aoichsloitor Bouhlor was In charge, as r
' I recall, Brack said that t. ei-c was a Hitler iB3i6nn*.nt in i.-opoot
to the Althnnaaia action, and then rack said all possible salo-.usrds
had boon takor. Whereby .nly - -uj cases w«ro elinin ited, which w_r..

*7 Sorio-is and were proven to bo incurable. *r. ir -.a 1 re¬
call, Erack poinv.-d out th-t tho church and a part of the . ovulation
or-.- opposed to this ,ction, but that, or. the other hand, 1 » ;roups

ol the population did nevertheless approve t icti n, 1 1

rr. tills occasion. Dr. Ir v : -lr: said th t the action was liscucsed

Dr.

. • ivo of the St it

in the jichs am s try of tbs Interior in tbs -nthanosla action, -rack
Je sh iTjd a la.., r - or ft of a i-aur, which hud net boon puMi!»-
and which was to regulate euthanasia «=n *--• ue iisivRnd after the .r;


baliovo that this was enly a draft aid not a finished law

i5£6


Court I


io -o_r L?~ - 3-2 - LJG - -ahar. - (ir.t. rcr. Sheen)

ich. I or air. suggested tr Dr, Conti t'.v.t
if z. o .Toicha Gtieb-r cf Physicians should try to ir.tcrv_r.-; but
Cmti again said that so far fco had not participated, th t j.. h-.d not
t.-n called upm fzr participation, and it tas coopl-t^ly ho^lcss ior
is to try to intervene.

<. Dr. 31.C-, this discussion you h..d in 9li «!♦ Brack in
vr.tth in tho A.rzt-haus, I cssusw is identic .1 with the discussion
~ -eh you conticn in your affidavit of 25 October 1516; is that troo?

A. ies. %

tr. October 25, 1:46, Docuaont 171, exhibit 238, in Dvxjument
Book 11, you dose lbod it -.t that tit- Just as you h v- doscjibod it
today.

No;;, itr.css, did you l-.arn whether in this Euthanasia ction
foreign -.’erkors -r crisonurs f r, «te., »vr_ included?

I can givo no inforn-.ti -about that, I did not. um nothing
b ;t it l.. the fol , ...r^ tis»j. . for-lgr. work-rs brought into
;.raor,y vert. impposod to be healthy, tint is enable of voi cing, as
i r bo : know, thoro wjr« ft at asdic inations of : rjign

workers, ac.-t -,.z already when *J>uy tero r.cruiUd ir. the occupied
rritorios. if .. foreign worker was discov.r..d tc be incapable of
r kad an infectious dis-. e.s,-he c re Joe d. If a
.• ' las uw I bui.Ve that ho had

- sunt to a a-ntal institution; but I n-_v_-r l.-rnsd anything about
r - *'- 1 .3‘iono r _ ..it f labor *-rc r.ot tho busirusr >f tho
chs C - ior .hy-vici as.

<• . ! Dr, '•onii, the Hoichs Hi

rc-.atadly s-.v-rai ac.asior.a c d tc you th-t tnis -ntjr. ttor
• *x:n-. c ..c .rr. f t .dical prof-ssior., th t it did not h'.vo
anything to do with this cticr. , end that he a_id clc_riy th 1 y u, as
-.-ad of tho -•oicho Cii ajor of rhyeici-ans, should k-^p ysv: mis ’
i it; did you subsequently Lam that *h .r doctors ir. ~i ici.al


. 03itions contacted Dr. Conti beet this Euthanasia action, and th: ’

A5I7


C art I


1: " U7 -*— 3-3 - L.'l- - &ehan \~r.t. vcn ohoen)

•a

-v.r-s tcok the sv_ - attitude to a »se ;? ordoctors, tr.~- .. clwa-s add
---at has nothing to do vith us, vj nal competent, wc c.n'o: intervene.
d_d you know of such c .s«s?

A. -kilo I was in thu ccsp at Darnstadt in 1?.';6, I h ird fr',.

' -o broadcast about the trial before the International al tary
Tribunal where an affidavit of Dr. u_r a road, who .as far as I
r,call I believe t at he * : tho hoed mudical ciiicer of Br.dor.. In this
affidavit. Dr. Spr u^r d«scr bed how he a proichod Dr. Conti to object
how Dr. Conti said ion did viot concern tho d( ctors.

I buliovo that this affidavit uas subn&tted hero to well in so 30
Dccu.ujnt book; ; boliovo th t -:3t be the ease thing.

Q. ^hja, Doot.r, did . u 1 n later ‘.hat fer wh t roasona this
Euthanasia action w-i stopped; whon did you learn about it*’

«. I belie/e - laired about It it the jnd of l?ljl -nd t was
ctopped because of tho unrest r.aon, the population on this .ccount
had because o t rjpy ..ed protests fro Catholic ^nd Protestant dishc; -
fld fcJWspe. -r articles in lor*. i • . : . . I d-c not sou any of

* articles at the ti*>u, he >.vor, I la med this from Boxono i::
c rt-y Chancellory.

Dr. 81c,x>, re *--.v, he rd h. re that -J t. r the *uthrjtcsift
-Otion was stopped, th. s -c „d !*dch -aricine Coordttwo l.teichsarboit-
geoolnscb&ft) continued to exist, ihis was the organisation in vrhich

• eVeral c SeS f ac-caliod "Mi. Unworthy of living" ar- «: or.-ln.atjd;
<i;d you hoar about this -ich or kin* Coanitteu - \rli_r bef u this
trial or dad you Lam of it nor daring the trial?

aruod of ocoj thing 'i<e t.jt frm i priv.te inquiry,

a a . -srl; high official who cn b.h- 2 * of an
.ce of oLsj who had an idiotic dafersod child, apj roachod s .

- than asked Dr. C nti w.vjtbor x know anything bout this, hp

* that ti-j that a nagbt b. t.i t there s.-- such thing, but
roi^rrod only to snail child; . in incurable condition. Dr.

Ci --i could r.ot, or would not, t-_ >_ aayt ir.g aor_ .t foe tine a;. .


C UTt I

18 - r L7- - 3-U - LJG * Hc-cbcn - vcnShe-n)

•»

nt the person 1*0 h o inquired of n. to the °henc„llory ol the
■: rj-er. Dr. Conti had told a*. crrlior that all inaiirios concornl.Tg
t-j Buth&nnsia prcgr^c should bo passed or. to the Chancellory cf tho
>uohrcr.


15S9


15 . ^-IHHS-Vl-Coolc Cine. von Schrocn)

Court .1.

S u.33: hr. President, in uis connecti I should like to refer
-o.I-...- ..unent in th- dscum.nt book 32o. .. r„i s is document 6 ir. t:.a
doe-'—at bool: 3lo •_. on p s 17 rd le. I nj-cd r,->t mi". *...ic document r.ny
ox~ oi; .oumb-r bee use it i- n extr ct fro- t.'.e b o!: o' r. 3lo~c, which *
i v.-.olc I; e be n given exhibit lk>. 1. «..is extr ct will -Iso, V^r.-foro, f

uxti.r exhibit I. I sk'.ll r. d tnis quotrtio.. bccr.uso it shown the fundouon:
r tsit-do of the defend:.-.*., Dr. 31c.-, or. t2w quoetion of euthanasia. ?..is
VT-5 - t . time when he a d no id© th t in the yc\r 19^7 he vo bo c llou
ujor. to def-nd hiaeolf before : Court.

*

I- thin took, ".irst L- fc.-pf", v..ich »p>er_<i in October, 19UI, the
dcf-.vl Ut, 3r. 31000, writes 0:. 221, to kbj, is follows: I a r_ di;..

fro ; document l*o. 6.

"Storilisr.tion ia not dlshonor-.elo: It io no Dlef^cj. Sven loss io 5
^x n iol t m- nt. It ic t. sr-crifica «fcica the individu J concerned i.vikoc to tiu
ccc:omit; ..ad to the futur- of ..is nation.

'-do :! 10 v : not yot ri..j to undorcti nd ouch thoughts, frr loon to or!
t.-.e-: she nu'ojoct of I. public discussion. 3ut tho hytlcinn in pr ctice

, in mat c .aec vale., amoved aim this problem in ite nurcilosr truth
iid ur,-omcy.

n '.;io : :oa for. .d subject 0 dlscusr' -r.s ir. the cloaer circle of
frien o, liiwt—r it vouV not be better to put ns artificlnl ond to cn cxir,
wworthy of .. . a bole, • : t not even r..lt by tho perso . concerned.

"X or rid red it sono.los: :, for ln6tn&co, inornc -ernono Who

' a - ,;crcf. ir own .Ivor :.i tno lives of others, idiots of hi;£*. d;, roO
V ..0 er.. >a c rum ke.p do . or . t by the. .selves, vor: brou,*ht up zA kept
ii--- • t.: —_r.t effort ad expense. In fre n-.tur- taosu ere-tur. a v hid
•*•'!- *0 exist n'. vaild b. act. r d.v ted c ordin#; to divine lr.tf,

"V- ’s: did not understsad th t persons inf.rior ir. ehj-r cter nd .opirf
- nti-aoci 1 cr tur z who mod .ure.crod, w.re, it io true, condemned to do t.
-u: ...... s e. rile p rdanod nd kept riivo ir. pcr.itor.tiru-i. c r.t the c>r onso

of ::.c ublic.


h550


1£ ri'-.-S. 5-1—2-cook )Vou 3ckoca)

Cour: o. 2.

“But . loo ia c.sos of Quito another a taro, it is . •. cuoctia

:f t..c oxtcr_iar.tion of inferior life, v_- wondered ’it.then tho ohycici .r.
Bio.-.: r. : be Ivor. tao log-'l possibility", i _uph sixe 'local possibi ity>,
to _.x. .. unhappy life pro- our el y. Me verc thi r.di: of seriously Buffering-,
Incur -ly sick persons, w..o, until their da-.th, h-i to expect only oner us
. . * a physical suffering *s& uho theuaolroa eked tho hyaici. n to free

thi -"r th-ir suff. rirv;.

ro:jab«.r eo..c c a.:8 of ij.curj.ele cuff rin in uy nr dice, in which
tee floats inplored ae to put ... ond to their livea. 'DoctorJ the; o .id,

ipl : o ivo t>o <a injocti r. ro tit t I don't vsto up .-r.y core. I ern't s .tf
it .. longer.* Cases in v ic.t tao/-whtcr dre-- r.cido r.d rlao a shod I
'Pi. co help uy f-ither, fulfill hie request'. _nA ho tho:. ends : r. qua. t> :
”ith the w>rds: “I could only a y: Mccordir : to the l/>v the phyaiclr* in
fotbiddon to do that.'

Xjsi yet there r.ru casus in which the juyslci.\n urdc ..in • a o..mo of

r.. oouaibilit;’ un c higher l.vr b* r* at as of profound huainity. ■

•.Hi* it no oxtrect fr . thu book by tho dofondtnt, ^:icn -nit' , \r

published in tho year 19 tt. I lry epeei:■! oapfe; nio on thin date, boc ua- - t

;» . .L - «ho outluumaia rctlon of Zitl-r w .a still in op-mtlon »wd t

d-f. 31o-«, w - dicaotric-lly oppoeod to thic action of K’tl-r.

.. •..‘i.r.-so, it for the question of euthaanair.. to conclude thie ctf.pt

I r.. u. d no rely like to .-.o y.c .bout document w-t'ch wro submitted .fro or.

... :i.. of ?.bru-xy. It is t... Proo^cution docuaont 119. exhibit 1 5* It

fuehrer order of ?obru ry — Jutt 4:.utc - rauhror order of 3. Cw. bar,

1 j-H, Z belli" , Pee.: bor, igh2, published in Jru:u r; . 1?U3, record >: to "

in cor .in c.s.t, eh; ob*.i tion of silence cf the doctor ic rep. led end tho

ittty to report, r : !U ..r r rtl r of the SJrd Doc >or, v

v..ich ia do cun.- 1 at, 119, rid you know ;out it t the tine. Did it h vo ray

onnecti r, irith the euthnnasis, action? Vhut do you h r. t*> a rb out ii?

h. -V.i= Fuehrer ardor.. I a connects . outer nneic ct . :i. I

vis issued, i:. Dcc-..b-r 13-2 rhea the c.csl a h- lony been stoppen. —

r . . for is Paohror order vs th t londin, p-rt ooliticr in *n»blic life

4591


Is . C-rs— J-Cook (Ton Scnoor.)

Court o. i.

' ir * * Gtulciter j-jxd Gcnorcl, And feller, ill of pernlyelr. Suae
c-_B.s a A unfortunate consequence*. “ha; w.r. r-porj-d to the PUohv r s\
Ki-1 r folt it .vcjsvr;- . is ue an ord.r th. t 11 doctors, Izy ha. A or b,
etc., hriI ;i report various illnesjcs of l v ding person, litics in th. St. to
.ae P rtv, the j'jfarnacht v.d In-uttry, disregardIn, the obll,r tior. of
sil-r.ee.. flty n d to report it to Hitlor thr . faaoor 3 rndt. 5

order :•. • nothing to lo vita euthanasia. Cno inis: n ;• objectivcl- that it
hi-d r. car. in Justification.

.. D . jlouc, in corxluslon. vill ;*ou lots- b ;• i\ fa- words about th

*

qua-tlor. of outhnn&slr.f ‘J-.e it cl- r to you during tlso courco of these lor.
proceedings vhy you re indicted for euthanasia?

So.

Sov, I go on to mother Onepter, Profoisor 3lona, which will
unforten toly be conplicntcd, tie t ir biological vatrf ra, end the proe'cun
co. ...cted vith it. Dr. 31o:«, vfir.t does biolotfc. 1 v xf-ro aoonl

• 2iis sar>no th. uec of teall orgnnisua oxiatin 1 in n: turo which hrr
or durtroy httii-x boin ; ;o, caltrlo xd plrnto, in mai n boingo end r.niu lo
pri -xilv brct.rln rad viruses vdeh enuso disouco iud opidouics, /nd in th
c se of plants, insect poato.

.. Dr. 31 one, froa .o.. did y>u recolvo an nsnigneont to prepare for
biological varf-ro 1 nl vhon v»*o that?

... Vhlenn I ulaur.derstood y you a-la, un nREijm-ient to orop ro
ololo.ic. 1 v. rf-rc. I never received ny such nasi r—-j,.t.

> li ic rdlogod th : you did. tfv t rani,-jicnt did ; JU r<-coivc?

... Z received *x c ssi.T-'.or.t for r. Bor rch, for c >untor no: ouroo
t-inrt *:i lo,.icrl vrxf ro.

.. .n css lament for counter -er.sur.t <« dnst i iolo,-ic.*il vnrf: r ?

A r-sslgnacnt for define. zaccourefl.

.. ".ten vfr.a thr t?

... 3-t v s3 rz out t.-e r. f inninr of 19-2 in olscuoB .on of Ucoti:

.. ...incsecrca council in P.rlin in it-ich . i.-.isterirlrr.t Profo- c r

•i552


1 - .. .i'-.-: ‘——--Cook (r;- season)

OTcrz . 1 .

Scau.i an o'li Cl Is j ;■ t :« ch-r^e of rcceixch for uo-:.£ur-G r -innfc bit-
io.leal v-rf-jc. _ccordiiv. t-> ; «s ir.fori-.tior. thor ver^ reports th 6 tho
I' s- ■•‘rkiag in this field, raeroforo, .v coordin. tion of roscr.rch in
t-- three sectors wt.b accessary. Chv.#c sectors ,-jc huanr. . .ini •. la

od Irnts. ?..io utter h d eo fer beer. dealt vita oonrrotel; by three
eot te r.-ncies, the .n^* odlcal I ns too t orate, tac .jay V-t-rir.-ry
Inspector tc, and finally tao Chief of ..Hit r; Scioaco in tho
Of : . =c ..ir.'C atrarcat >encl.* van tod to subordirv to itself to t ..

----- ncj v. a t j be -iver. the ajxprcoo author .

*

a . ;.ou.:tc of the Rilck rhysicl r. I*.- der. ?r. Conti, for taio, but for -oei>

r. 0 r. 1 r aonc no «*•? r.ot v r.tod, red, therefore, the choice Juid filler, on

a . .:u ;. is whole u ttcr v ; ;o be put into civilian hreods boc una thoro

vno rer.t d«rv:cr for ta. vh le civlliroi popul; t’ n. In any c~*c, I

dec'. i-L '. If villlc, to t»-he over t.,le i:asi,nv.ent.

.. 'fh-.t v:io r.t the beginning of 19^2, y^u ar id?

... .'.bout the begiania, of 191*2, i c nnvt any esuctly *hon.

V vnon did y U f,ot the nsalgaauat rx.d fro., uhOBt

•


-£ 9 ?


i- .-ir 1. 7 -.— _J.-5-l-Grcs- (Int. von Schoen)

"curt .io. I

a Scnctome after the fir3t discussion with frofessor Schumann
t:-rc- was a talk with Field Marshal Keitel at -.is rlin.

t 1 toll ne trat he was now givinr re this assignment. It was tr
•ret assignment uoitr n;. cancer research which already existed,
heitcl emp.asized that the Fuehrer, that i «dclf Hitler, had strictly
forbidden any provisions for the use of biological warfare. Keitel also
explained to ne that he himself did not believe that biological warfare
would be used at all in this war. He did r.ot believe that tr.ere would
be any gas rarfan but Keitel eschaiszed that by way of precaution every¬
thing .old to fce investigated ir. case defense measures should t o. •ne
sassary. There were no definite legitiasc or authority fron Keitel
to ae. Consequently, on the basis of thi- talk with Keitel I could not
yet begin ay work.

Professor, in the talk with Schumann, whoa you Jusi mentioned,
in the »lk with Keitel, which you hav- Just described, was It said
1 . any *aj that thero night Dcssibly b« an offensive on our part, for
cx lo . against Russia or soec other cr.c-\, state, <■:. i under vhat cm I-

a C-nly defense measures wero discussed in the event tl*t thu
• ORi should begin b:olof : . arfaru.

•1 Only defensive rms xcs?

a Zoo, only defensive measures.

^ In trie connection, rrofessor Bloat, 1 should like to point
out to you a document submitted by tho rrosscution. This Is D. ament
• • oiler that it is in any Document Bo-.k.

It was submitted separately when dealin. with biological warfare on the
• of January. 7 ; ■ , xrilit 325, is a file tote .. .oh

. rat ro-

. . v you have heard the flam a nticnod here frequently.

Is i h c report rnlcfc .' rofesror Kli* v« side in the presence of ti.l:-

- .--f :=3or Schumann, rfaoc you have Jr.. - .;aud, tc the Chief of

. _r. Schumann is supposed to have said, I quote: n 7!t must no sit

idi >' ~'j and »aech -'J‘ must prepare for the mass use of biological

*£S4


--ar U7- - -aciA-5 -2 -uros s (Ir.t. von Schoen)
"ocrt 1


warfare. America must bt attackec. with epidemics for human beings and
ar. i s al s and insect pests and the Fuehrer oust be son over to is plan."

I -h is the statement of Professor Schumann and rrofessor K1 ? .-ve she
- r x U P this file note writes, 'It has less to do with the matter but
bit apparently rejects this idea." I should like to ask you, was this
-at to be nreparation for ar. offensive biological arfare? I boliev- you

• : not pre-ent at t is report and I think this is the only document,
Professor, which has been submitted with any such contents but perhaps
you will comment on tnis one document.

a As for the rxeting with th' Chief^cf Office AAA, I believe
that is the abbreviation for General Ordnance Office. I lcarnui of it
only here. That Schumann aac- a statement I consider quite possible.

I r.eird Schumann say on various occasions that thing wa. ling,
that the dangers threatening Germany were net recognised ar.d uverybody
■ i fighting about jurisdiction. Inc had to exaggerate to wake people
up. everybody thougnt the war was almost over. Inn.yard tc morieft hi
said to me vhen we happened to be together, that one would <nvc to
attack America if there should b* a biological warfare. .Vi.cn I askid
r.<r.7 he thought that co Id to done hv said he did no* see any technical
porrlbility but or.e should examine the general opportunities for the
ck, on should have to know then in order to find defonst methods.

• Maann did not an 1 knowledge of biological narfaro. Briefl;

th-. following about the personality of Schumann: h 0 was generally con¬
sidered fantasltc. K was considered a “busytod f - a person who wants

to have nis finger in ev..ryt:.ing, It * a s knoantint he did not nimselX
t Hove everything that he said. His field of work was physics but ht
‘ '-It primarily *.rith nu3ic ar.d c'-rosii a great deal. To cak« it brief,
r- was 'inreliable and not to be t-ak'-n seriously, on! an English lajor in
an interrogation at Karlctarg ex'-r.osed the same opinion.

■ t. Blcco, file nott of rrofessor Flicvo is a . r

r. ; ..3. Xou alrtady had a t aent m biological warfare at twit
,£: ar/ -» I bcliuv., >ou had received your .a-.poiutornfc which we.- i.-su.
in aay 1913.


-.SSS


15 Var L7-!!-:AA-5-3-Grcss (Ir.t. von 3cheer.)
Court So. 1


A Yes, that must have been a;.- 1SL3.

But, nevertheless this talk t-c . \’iich the file not* referred,
yc: did not hear about it at the time, you were net called upon, you
re .ot informed?

A No, I heard of it here.

Frofesaor Bloae, in this same document 1308, Exhibit 325, is
a report of a meeting of tno forking Cocsitteo with the name Blitzablt-itcr
(Lightening Rod Co.uaittee). This neotine nan on the 21ith of September
19L3. You yourself arc suppose' 1 tc have been present at t.-.is meeting and
the record said, "Further experiments to be* conducted in the fivld of
!. man bacteriology." And then it said, "Since it is unknown whether and
under what conditions acres ole a which arc breathed in or drops vMch arc
sprayed on certain pathogenic s«r■s’ 1 shall repeat, ’sorn/'-d drops of
C rtain cathopenic eras create dlMUSS :r. human beings, Professor Dr.
Float suggested exoex ingots or. human beings.’’ Now, with thi you arc
cc;ir.ee ted with human experiments and i-^k you what kind of -xporimonta
rcr- they which you oro said to have augrested et that time? Were t:
experiments Involving danger to life »nd health of tho subjects, severe
lain, *jtc?

A from examination of Frenchmen or dcocumonts found after the
campaign in th. *eat I knew that tho French were dealing with the quovtlcr
-f receptivity of human be in - for bacteria which were sprayed. They
thought that contagion war yossibl*. only if poison guses were alro inhaled
19L5 th English i.ajor in Heidelberg, who was an expert in the
problem of bact.riological warfare, ocplainoa th< see*, thing. I wanted
to knew whether this assumption was true an", that was why 1 s. the sug-
•i-3tion. It m.s quite ger.cr-.l - I iid not ruggest any specific bacteria,

• '-cr 1 would have had tc be a dofi.iitc discussion, for example, whetnor
!riflucr.zal bacili or pr.eumccocei, or other bacteria should chose... I
-- Hkci to know whether c ntagicr. by spraying rossible at all
expert® ntc had era about w. would have cleared up the- question
'• r * - re Vict- ria as possible. I w. t-.ink r.r experincuts with v'l.:r.-


-r5G' :


Court So. i

18 Mar 47-K-6-l-SSi-S£crr ow (Int. TonSchen)


v You were thinking -f excori-.exts with volunteers, y:\ 5 7

it true that y'u node the suggestion that c7rr£Ti::er.t6 should ^ conducted
it the Military hedical Acadecy is Berlin!

A. Yes, I suggested nodical students, -.odicpl students of the Vohr-
-atht. s.-called rsedical offic-r candidntac, but Professor hiieve refused
t.rl-;ento in the Military Hedical Acadw-/ because there vac no clii.icpl
ssstl'.n tl^ro where the course of the exueri-.ents c-uld have been observed.
Sxporln®* ou soldiers vere prohibited in principal becousc soldiers were
ajt to be taken out of service f.r 6uch purposes. Exoorlnents on civilians
could set be conducted because f the ::att«r of secrecy. Exnerlrjonto on
ailitrry doct-ro and nodical students secr.cd i practlccblo because thoso
persons would not hnvo been available long enough, at In* eo uc'oaorry
f’jr the experinento. Thus it ck;o about that no ouch exponent o were
conducted ft all.

v In the oar.o document, the file a^to f tho 24th of Sc- e-.bor. 19^3,
2 .cuvent 1308, it says on tho «oc.nd page thft, as wo have *1 oody orld,
you o^geetud oxperi-unto on hunan bolngs t. be crxriod out in the lrb)r-
at.ry ef tho "HA". That is oowxontly tho abbreviation for Kilitary
Hodlcnl Acodcy. This was refused, "it vro still to bo dlocuosed, If
Ye i oecr Bloao visited tho HA laboratories." Thi t is roprrcntly the
lrb rrtorioo of rrofeosor Klieve. Vhot can you scy about that an.*, what
happened then! You said so exrcrinoats were conducted?

n. So, &v cxwri ente conducted. I vr.c present at this tooting.
Thftt vrs , bout tho extorinont a.b^ut breathing is bacteria. This vpo a.
ou^ustion of -.ino. 3, e-.nclusi-s vue reached end I cover on- move's
Ic'atrct -rico.

v The next d-.cur.cnt, 3r. 21:r.e, submitted by tho prosccuti »n had

the nu .ber 13C5, Exhibit 326. it Is n.t in p document bo h. It was sub-

ittd -n the 10th i January, in this D «cur.eat 1309, whic -v.nt t

put t y-u, there is again a file a .to A rr fese>r Xlicve the 23rd

: 7 f krufcry, 1544. It refers tv a discussion with you on the cr-.c day.

23r of February, 1544, and it say B that "rt P.een c now institute is c

4557


Court Sc. 1

16 X-r 47-4t-6-2-13i-Karrcv (Ir-t. V nSchcn)

bv built, under Dr. Bloae, rt vhich biolopicel verfrre agents iro to tc
studied and tested." Kliovc then ,:oea on to spy. "The Vohrr/icht, at the
reeuwst f Field Hrrehel Keitel, is not t have a resp nsible part ir.
these expo-ri.ier.t8 since expert onts with fcur.an brings would be conducted."
7fc.t is the ou teti n. You recall that, in connection with th charge
against a different defendant, this rcu .r.t hr a already been c.-cusse; 1 ..
Since this document also refer* to / u, perheps you will nlco eorcont on
it rnd tie. refer t. this where the drcuuent goes cn tc any, "Abovo all,
rn exer.inntlcn f ur vaccinoa would bo accessary, especially f the olaguc
vaccine. Rxpcrloenta cn hutan beings would have to be conducted. There
are cuitc wrong •-piniir.a prevalent eb-ut the effect end rvoclnun doaoo cf
nan;.' poisons vhich can also be removed only through cyporlr.cr.tc or. hurian
bcir.-a. At soon at arofossw Blocs report* t the Reich Kprshal Oooi lur
rr.' Jvncrclcrst arofesssr Brandt, he will t. report." That in the end r,f
the Gustation, and I can rla put this t you rt the oar.o tino. It cryo
thr t y-u arid that ir. Zurcpcrc Turkey four th uoand casus f plague had
-ccurrgd. Profeotcr, c asidcrln,: whrt I have jmt put to ycu, vill you
nloaoo cc.n.ont -n thio file n .tc ,f ?rofoasor Kllcvo which ia vory lupor-
tant for y.ul

a. “hit part f the file n »tv .f Professor Zllevo lc correct. Kirmla

did givo no the ncalgn.iont to teat the plflguc vrccine and t- ootablieh,

by leans of expori-entc .a hum beings, who the r the plague y cino which

* C had wes effective :: not. That v a s d ubted by Deny pooplo Therefore,

Hi lcr gave nu the assignment to disc ver # nd nr-dueo nr. effective plnguo

vtcclno in erst the eneny chcul*. v r:< nth plague end the necessity ah uld

.-let t. take corresponding measures in -rder tc or -tect cur ponulati-n

- * B ‘ the ?lcjT*e. a curtain SS Sturobeanfuehror Karl Greet hod been

£...* c .'ccselstedt b7 Hi-.-.lcr where ;:c wrs tc build ny institute to d*>

this w.rh -n plague free, tut Z hove reason to think thnt the thin.- vac

dcngereuB for hie. In the beginning I considered the ideu >f Plague

--ri.icf.c seriously. Of course, for defensive uurcoses, but the i:re I

dedt with the pr-bleu the clearer it beennu to nc that ve had t cxron-

-556


Court 5;. 1

IS Mar 4 7 -K-6-2-l;>.-Harr .v (let. Y nSchon)


eaced doctors pad nursing personnel and that ve hardly c ul* lad erpe i-
ncntal subjects f-r claque cxtcrlreats. If w had vr.nted to i etnefc with
cli -ue, the nr .tier. could have been cleared un la t few -.ontba, but th-t
vre culte out cf the cucstion frcu the very tc,rinr.la.-. I roccivod
H! —l*-r' a nssl,3i;:oat la Aivpist IS-? but la January 19-.5 the iaetitut-. «i a
-•* finished end ccasaouently the v,rlc could not t* be,run for that
reason alone. I did not oven have ta lacubat-r there. I had only one
pl-^uu culture which «c received only shortly bef-re ve loft Keooolstodt

In January 1945. In Soetc-.ber 194* I dlceussod with Hla.ler tho oosslbllit;

*

f- evacuating tho r -ter. Institute. He agreed to a new c.notruct 1-n entor-
orieo lr. Bcsselotedt. Until the A ericons arrived, however, only t.ho
foundation vrs built. I did nt hrve the intent!-n of dcin.* an i.inr,
pnd r. thin* done, as f .r -y bu -estl ns t. test tho effect -f prieon
or the uaxinua d< boo, nothin,; wae done. It vai n.t in y sphere f dutioo.
It was aeroly r. su^,:esti-n on ay part. I ’.ado th« au,:.*eotior. cocruot
Kllevc, vhon he visited no, cpofco rb-ut the now® >i oabotiuru with poison
rod t< ctorie In tho hast. Since p.io.nln,* io froauor.tly treated vith c
called anti-toxins and the fflcial anxlrrx: d ooe ere very low, I c-njld-
tred it desirable to ascertain h'.w hi -h -no ern r, in the rtosoo t c rll*
entl-t.xins.

THE PKISDEITT: Counsol, the Tribur.rl will i.-v bv In rocoso.

(A recces vr.6 taken.)


4535


1 -rch liT-W-iTD-9-1—Ifeoban (Ir.t. Srorn)
rt So. 1


THE T1.RSHAL: The Tribunal is again in session.

Q Witness, I roul ! like to return to the Inst Document 5ook 1,
Occurssnt Wo. 1308 , r file note, an ’ it roods there in the first sentence,
and I quote: ";.t the beginnin- of September 1913 it was asked what pro¬
tective seasurc-3 w_rc- be-in taken against the use of baetdri ’ ''deal moan,
Cffico Chief .. A should bo infor m ' of this. You thought previously that
- tos the abbreviation for .Jlgenoines affon Ant, General Ordlnanco
Cffico. I as no* told that that is not so. It is AUgenoinoi ohr.iacht /j;j
General 'ohrnacht Office. I should li!u to correct that for the record so
that there is r.o concision here. I now t> to the document last menti >n< i
b r-, Dccuasnt He. 1309, Sxhibit 326, filo note from Kliwrro on the 23rd oJ
Aroary 19U*, about which you have air tostifi c 1 in part, Mem, in thi

u. ont there is mention of human experiments. You havo already undo at-',
i.'.nts or. this subjoct. And then it roads th.ro are rontlonod oxporiaonts
human bo in;, a that you are supposod to have nontionod, you woro spooking n
that tir». about ovoriments or. human beings to tost vaccinia, particularly
v-.ccinos a : ainst plague, that and to bo carried out. ’hit havo you to say
rbout this?

A Yos, I spoko specifically only on vaccines against . plague. 1

’i ' not mantlen any *.h r v .-cio.- nor id that interest no greatly at th

tin . It ‘•'.as -y th u lit at that tiae that such oxp.rinents should be carrl

out at Nos3olstodt near Pcs.n on voluntary subjects. After t nocessary

r. 'ilt* had bo n achieved on uxp.rin.-nts on anirals. it would have boon do

ci lid whittar hur.an bo in • uxporinonts uuro necessary at all. In the s.- ,\

vaccines a, .i.nst the pla.au, th. situation t.-as that such vaoolSM hr.*. n->t

n vjiufacturod in Got-. arty for decades, with th exception of inai -ific

fiction on the part of th. Bohrin works in Marburg. The effectiveness

thJ.s war vucoino was lauht.d by tho specialists} it was known that in pro

tic-., vaccines against the gla uj .aroused very serious reaction^ nbcooses

internal collapse an.* they were frequently poisonous. Consequently, 1 tl*r:

~~ was rucossary to make clear jurt what vaccines could be used in Gcrrr/?

sh uld it boc:- n,> '.fory. Fbr thi - ft lr h->-! h.>-n -.-rkod on ml;

•;soo


13 ’'arch /;7-?$-A' r D-9-2-Heehan 'Int. Prom)
Court no. 1


foreign countries. Th. To* institutes in C-errar$- that were jrstifiod r.t
all in wrrkir. or. this cat* jr had only r.'j uso cf this pep-ioility or op;
tunity to the extent that they kept special laboratories ready to carry ru
the necessary diagnostic examinations steul they bocorvj necessary. rid
ipacial precautions enforced by tha State, -von the question discussed in
: r ign countries, whether the cultures for -.-accir.cs shiulJ be bred t 37
or c2 centigrade, could bo answered by no one in Oer-aany fren his own ox-
peri^nce. Since th. discovery of vaccines against the plane by Kollo and
Otto in 1907, only foroi.-n countries had orked an the production of such
vr.eeinos an had developed 3uch vaccines further.

That human being oxpori:-.:nts are inevitable in thi3 connection is
proven by Strong's paper, °tr n co- os freo Manila, v.*rks fay Otton in tho
Motherlands East Ir.dios and papers by a Frenchman in Jfcdafjoskarj also
rocontly works by SCarl ?• ?i-ior in San Francisco, wh.> carried out uxp_ri:u
-n prisoners who had volunteered.

Q In connection with thin e. tin , wliich I br. u,-ht i p, you spoko
•:<p.ri~.n’.3 on human Vin s, which . .ro e tv at our vaccines, particular*,
our plvue vaccines; did you also at that ti say anything about on what
p none and under what conditions and with what experimental alia such «.xp
ts voro to bo carriod out, an’, ‘id yzu reflect it that tino on tliu quos
i..th-r such experiments at a later date ari; ht be -bjuctcd to?

A I .lid r.->fc have any reason to think about that or that tho oxpjid
ikjnts at a later 1 tc • ulcl a j objected to, because I would havo only mdo
uch cxp-rixi.nts as worn p-rdtto l by scientific standards. Rut, as I sal
before, this • rk was nov„r carried out, and our krwwlodgo cf pis lie vaccl
roaninod at the s-ux, inaccurate level it occupied during the *r.

Q !'r. /rcsi .nt, in this rvttor int resting scientific articles ha

e.n mdo available t a. , which appeared in an .cnorican Medical periodic

•hich carries the naae "Philippine Journal." Those exCOrpts . - old - j u

are at the .isojnt b-dn, nisei, -rr.pr ;, th-;* rc English iceu nts in the

"nrlish i-n.-ja-n and t'.^se -xcerpts Crcr. ’Phiilippinc Journal’* Z .-

ir. evifence at a later date as soon as i r coivo then fr — the 'Inc r .phi

4601


15 "arch L7-B-. 7D-9-3-: whan (Int. pr^sn)

Curt »• 1

'.'.pzrfctnt. This is scientific ir.tvri-l frcn \n lish -ni African sources
to chock or. arhat the "ofon-"-r. ?lo:.s haa just t: stifle that is to s-
I shall submit those deettoents later.

"itr.ess, tha Blitzableitur li.-htnin. conductor comitt. i. ./hich has
bojn oantioned h--rej wore you a rjrJbor?

Q '<is Professor Kliuve a raonbar?

A Yos.

Q Ministerial Dirigor.t Setaranr. was ho a rvrb.r or n t?

A I novor saw hin there, but oiw of his cc-workers; I don't belie;

*

that he belonged to it.

Q hr* J - "hr. in addition bolon- od t- th. Blitzablcltor cosmittuo?

A Coltnol Hirsch as chair van, Hinistoriolrat Dr. Standin, an’ two
tlonon frcca tho ..rny Votorinary Inspection, one by the nano of r, Itarr
ft lieutenant colonel fron th„ Counter Intelligence Cervico of thu ohrmc!
Professor Reno, and I believe tlv t is all.

Q f. 91cnj, you oai* tV.t i f rofosuor Schunann, who has frequently
been nontdonod h,iv, inforru ‘ y u in a conversation thr t there wna nows t)
ir. the fiel ' r biological nrfaru, on the oncer's side, supposedly on th.
Russian side, onursefclo » rk was buin carried out; can y u 1 us arythi

about this inf nvition th t Professor Schumann :avu you at that tine; can y
t.ll tzj whether th.3u reports wore cbickod on, and whoth- r later on thoy
proved to bo truo?

.. Those r ports referred net only ij Russia, but to all of our on.

incIndia Anorica and tho oth.r countries. Th reports w._ro f,-ivon to ur e/

t o r -called Abwohr, a counter intelii-onc o and espionage organization, .

r. il 19U3 was part of tho rohrnacht under tho la tor xecutod Adndr. ’ Can:

. ' later was subordinate! t- R i tn lor. In other words, this was official

inforiation which accordin; to rjy experienco was usually correct.

Q Is it true th t particularly Professor Kliewo, who was a aorbeU

the -lit zobl alter c- -_tto., enstartly delivered reports on the unony's

•’ctivi ti wrt in tjv.no fii lds, and that in these reports thorc was alv.ays a

4A02


13 arch 7-!'-..T!J-9-li-'.vhar, (Ir.t. Drown)

C -:rt Ho. 1

repeated aontion that cur cn-ics in the _- s t wit-- c-rryin - out peisenin •
oxpericonts ad infection u'orinents of infectious diseases?

<- That is corroct,

*

3 Can you toll us fch- 'etails about thoso rop rts?

“ &icn oxporLnonts in poisonin and frets infections with a dangcru
baccilli occurred in the previously Polish territory very ft . A typical
ease was, fer instance, that occurred ir. Posur., whore P'li3h miters wore
ordered to , 1 -aj loading parsonages thr.-m .h thoir food typhoid baccilli and
f;oy Ud so. They used for this fountain pons filled with typ! old baccilli.
and wMlo they brought th_ food fre : th/kitchen to thu dining room, they
squirted this baccilli int- tho food, "ary other eases f poisoning otcuvr
an' I nanticn this only .as an - cv plc.

In this oonnection, I ri ht nticn r. lecture that Ir fosses ’rth

1 ' at tho fourth nootin of tho Consulting Physicians. I believe it S
r intention *>r. Sautor • r this natorial os a docuront.

1 !r. 'resident, this 3-cture l tj Profuss >r irt I cannot sufaUit to
elivc; it has not ben return \ yet frci; the TTanslctin; Branch. 1 shall su:
U it to yju la tor in sucgl* watery v.iu-iu 2, as Docunont Ho. 1$. I canno
rca' the oxcorpt t lay because, as I said, th translation has-not cono bar
to no.

A I Lay I continue?

' I don't un ratal*}.

A 'Lay I contir.au?

q Tea.


-.603


I. ..r .. - '-1-C r. (Ir.:. vcn Screen)

3c-n. ..'o. 1


A -or this «:rcn I ranwd tc have the zaxinua doses d-termined,
ir.d ir. this connection I sho-id like to say t.aat tne reports I r etived
about the enenj activities ir. tin Le fields of bacteriology and toxi¬
cology ./ere received fr a tr. aforementioned rrofesror Klieve tnd the
aforementioned Lt. Colonel in the 31itzableitcr Co-asitteo.

•1 Dr. Bloat., a correction in connection with the plague vaccinc-
vaccincs that were to be tested. You spoke of living vaccines, is that
30?

Yes.

The word ‘’living’’ did not con. through in the interpretation,
-hat should be added to the record, "living vaccines."

. Bloeo, when one ; id docuacntswhich refer to biological

warfare which wero suboittod by th>. Prosecution, on* gains the iaprtssion
tl/.t in thir field preparation to defend against bacteriological warfare
went on very slowly. It strikes nc that by the tlao Koitel -tvo you
your .as si green t ir. the beginning of 19h? and your official appointment
by Gotrini in kay cf 19!.3» there r. a lapse of tine, almost a y^ar .and
a quarter, and iron th file not of Klieve on the 23 Fobrear • l?li/i which
r hoard about fcoforo, document 1309, it con t seen that »LI th-' 23rd
r .-troary 19U* r.ct oven an answer had boon received to the proposal which
t. O' icf of t:.at section cade on lath of *oril, that is almost tlireo
vjjrt'.rs of a year before then, and again on IS- ‘October 19L}, to th.

• ■nee office, how do you explain th- slowness t;at Um.-so officor

- • . t ..a precarinr to defend against bacteriological warfare?

<i Undoubtedly, thir r.ir in connection with th- wcliknown Fu-hr-r
o:- ■_r, according to whici ill preparations for o;fenrivti bacteriological
warfare were forbidden. If this fa! not been forbidden then yc

- cured that .-rent .activity in this field would have developed, mid that
•- s .cull not nav had such difficulties ar we did have in c;: study of

. ncivc preparations. Svn- Gotring, who gave ac ay irsignn-.r.t, was
- . entire * lac I woe assigned to do this work.

••'.tr Hitler himself you did not spL&k cr. th* ffub^.-t af biolo,;-
1 warfare at all?

;~fr -


1. - :-..iA-10-2-Cock (Int. Von Schoen)

' ;r* Ac. 1


-v !lo, I hive already said I did not speak with Hitler at all
throughout the war, I r-hasise particularly 1 recciv.d no instruc¬
tions frc_ hie ir. id i f bacteriological warfare.

Q Car. you tell why this assignaent to work .~ndeffr.se a.-ainst
t .cteriological warfare was ilso a secret assignoent?

A ies, I car., First of all the- enecy -os not to kr.cr o extent
of cur defensive reinsures, and secondly, the population ms not tc he
t» .rried. “host arc the clear rer :or-s.

Do you knew anythin'* about why precisely you, Dr. 5 * *.rac, reri
given this assignpent regarding a reparations *to def-.nd again .-1 biological
warfare, and why this aasigrrsent war. broui.t into any connt ction with
the a. signnent of cancer research?

a Xes, I can tell you veiy- precisely about that. This idea was
of tcitel's who knew of ay accermdun to Id tier regarding the cancer
;r tUaj which he had discussed with sc in dotail. A,t that tiao he said
it would bo exedient that ny biological rcsoarc:. a;signmont should run
concurrently with the canc.-r isaignracnt as secret.

•fitness, I should r.or be interested to bear fren you, when was
y -r work to corbat biological warfare actually begun and rhat ild It
.Cilcvc? iTaa work done, and what war this work?

A R nghly in ay of 19J»3 » received a document inferring mo of
av assignment as plenipotentiary f Cancer Research Reich Research
c unolllbr. This assignment had •.ok e ' ..e through Goerin. Then in

19u3 I invited tns Chiefs of the corresponding KehnnacK' departments
to a discussion in Berlin, naa* ly, the r=y .. iical Inspector Handlor r.
t. - xrx 7-t.rir.ar> Ins-actor, -'r.f .ssor Sc? :;t», and the Chief of t:

itific Off let of th. C!Pf, t rofcjscr Schuxann. After I had infer I
* *.ntlcsK.n who turned up of xy li. logical assignxunt, 1 a.iked th._ . r
art of wliat work had previously bc-n Icpu in t.ios. threw sectors.

- —" report «. :s refused to ce. Dr. -andloser -ad Dr. Schultz* deputy,
‘.jrlnary l-norai Rlcr.t.r, t Id re on th. contrary that the.-;, knew nothing
of xy assigraent ani i.'-at fer this reason tr y co .Id give- ae no inforaatio;


t . t this net- rial was secret work. 1 then told Professor Aenzei about

•ioOc


-r :*7-.-IAA-10-3-Cook (Int. Brow.)

• . 1

tr.is meeting, the -Chief of th- -anaging Connitto. in the Reich Research
Cjur.cil. Then ir. 'ctring at ay request, asked ft eit*-l tc tell

t: . thre. tranches : . . A: ay to give =e reports, and to state .-h3t

t r.i. results they had had and what new work they intended in t is field
of biological warfare. Then in August, 19h3, J received &sit- '.'s order,
uc Chief of the CZX, to this -ffoct. I b;li vc this order wis dated June,
19J.3, and it reechod ny hands in August. In other words, it took quit.,
a while. This order provided that every two months the Blit I'oloiter
Ca.nitte-- and I should oarticipat*. in discuss lens on tils •ju.stion.

Si aultar.ecusly with .tcitcl's order on t:,u hasfs of tno above mention' J
Fuehrer ordor, 1 was told that all orepur lions for employment of bic-
lo.icn! warfare r re forbidden. T us it n.;ain b.cn- clear that th. . .

• \r .lions for biological warfare rcr of a purely defensive nature,

-,:.d were r.ot for offensive purpos.a.

1 »t tncas, you spoke previously of the- fact that tiie order you
received was designat'd as s.cret, but in the documents it can be seen
that thouf^.t ntii being given von to having this MtUr reports.! in the
pr. ss. 'iow, r.ow ceulu the so two facts be reconciled?

A I believe you ar. referring to Dr. nnndloser's test! ny or. tho
Wltnoss stand, ar.d as a natt.r of :act at tS.it aforementioned Congress 1
aid bring u tic question of whether there should not be reoorts in the
pr.-is regarding t:-. danger innlicit in ar. offensive effort tin part
cl our c-ises^ in the- field of biological rn-far . T.:is was, nosever, un-
an- '.ousi. x. jeeted.

* Hew, Dr. 31cn-, aofar you hav tola ur cnl> of conferences
• -t tc.’k plac. as a r suit of this -rsirna r.t. 1 c.« ould now bo in s-
:i I aust re re it a question I afcfced b. for , in know in; what activity
d Velorcd ir. t;u p rloc that folicrrec in conn ctior. with this defense
:.;iinst biclogicsl r-r? 'Shat .33 actually done?

I shall be brief in t is jo that I dc not us. u-> toe ~-c:. time.
I shall motion tlx .sr-:.tlF.l sattort- Ir. ti human sector r.c xscntial
• carried cut. ± was satisfied with th rk

i.. t. civilian s ctor. T..isc w.re exclusively aiijir.s tc cc a at _ny

-606


16 -r 1.7- ->.iA-10-U-C ; ok (lat. rrcvr.)

Z -rt ia. 1

infectious disuses - L~- sight break out, and I considered the rt^uli-
tiona which had :'.r r. issued os sufficient. If I had wanted l

ff:nsivc prepa i. • ; then .should hare had to make the necessary
as3i.~rx.nts for research. i-t least I would have had to agr. on this
with the Physician General Zr. r.ifcer, because Schroiber was tin pl.no-
potentiaxy for epidenics research. Regarding biological warfare p_r so
I spoke with SchreibeT or. the 30 January 19a5 for th. first tiu;c, but 1
did not give to Schroiber or to any other scientist an asiigneent to
carry out research. In tno annul sector no es: .is

carried ait during ay assignment. *


-6G7


C: rt I

1 ‘-ar i.it - 11-1 - LJB - Gross (Sat ?nc*r.)

.-v. (coat- «:■ • * etforta were directed toward the foot

. 3CU -h disease V-er- 1 troctfrt about increased production of vaccines
and corrected thv : c>- of ^ sufficient aaonnt of vaccine, loreover, I
brought it about tr.it vr. or appearance of rinderpest, immediate
R ,rk should be done in prediction of vaccines and the scientific v. rk
in toat siUject. In the botanic sector, ay first efforts were directed
toward having chemicals ready to coibat insect peats, aw t;-.o research
into new rothods of cosfcatins «wch .ests. The latter natter a vary
ia^ortant or. acodunt of the Gensm raw saterial situation. Thore was
sufficient knowledge already about insect pests. A special institution
was -.forking on the prcolor 1 - bug. ^ore was n “

ry for the extracting of chemicals from theearth. Houovex, I had ft
r.eu disseminating machine dovelopod which as to coifcat insect p-sto
free airplanes on a large scat. The work to develop a method for
cc.bating a possible artificaliy effected opr„ id of 'cods had not .

.n concluded, no opraod poUto bus fro airplanos in order to ascer¬
tain whether or not the potato bug could bo dropped from groat holghts
... | in nmiTi is the essential aspect of the work

that was actually carried c t.

a. Ur. Blcoe, ware thore defensive oeisuren, that ic r arutlons

for defensive bi- -l warfare, had they prepared so 1 ir that

lercan. was In a position to dolcnd itself in this field hat It boor,
rwcoseaty? H.wS this work novel , id so f‘ri¬
ft. Ko. Wr eofor-si- preparations '.ore insufficient *.n this
field.

.}. - u to d us before th-t u --d h~i no conversation with
id received no Orders free hla. “ year previous
int .r: ations, it c m be seen : .at you must have nad fr«oier.t dls-
- - these questions, in any

- .

cussed -ic twit tisw? -• * ni t, yourself to the sub.iect b^olo^ical

USC3


offensive w-u-faro.


Court I


16 -ar L7 -i - 12-2 - L ~- - Gross

a. Mil - :<i .< and to# that 1 had baen giver, a vox;

3. t reason he wanted to give me his support.

He had alrtidy , tier collaborator. Dr. Strahfaurgor, the

assignment to - - . xth c. Hinder .asked -re of ray opinion

regarding the possibilities of u sin g biological means of warfare, ar.d
i explainjd to hi. tr.i folic ing: - v cr the plant sect r I toad hi .:
of beetles lor potatoes a.xd for sugar beets and rape-seed, ‘he plant
froa which sargarine is developed, and a fungus for wheat. nia:lor
cor.tradict-jd no about the latte.', but t * - is, in his opinion, the
greater danger was the potato bug. In the animal sector I -antic nod
the hoof and mouth disease and rinderpest and the hog pie 'o. Himmler,
however, thought tx.it those could bo oeebatted essentially by vaccin¬
ation. 1 told hin that or. t;x» oasis of I I rnstionsl ngreunonts li.a
virus tant brings ah out rindorpasts and the hog plague could not b i
•opt alive in- duropo, and tost only after such epidemics broko out
could rro bo^ln to manufacture the vaccine*

... i>r. Blooo, you raid oof ora that it was always your point of
view that biological irf;. * could only bo considered ui i dofonsivo
cnasure, that is, if tho a noay began a^-ir.st Germany. "hat v as
. -ichsfuohrur-3S Hianljr's at’itudo toward this question?

a. kivsl.r asked -j -Aat cy opinion was, and - told h' tout in
view of Gumany's gyojraphica} ituation tho consequences of such
warfare would be devastating for Gerseny. If the enemy wore well
prepared and ;u-ocuedcd rapidly against tho animals and j :s —
jimmy 1 s whole foed production • uld d_ in danger and tr.Ls would bo
contrary to premises aado >t tr.c beginning cl tho .ar to tho *or.rn
people. higgler opposed my point of vim -.t that time regarding <1
•xixstance of such a denser for Gomany, hut ir. l.tcr talks with
- admitted t.iit I was one h*undrc rcent right. Ir. tho tall# in
1 r .vU vat 1 .3 Hiaaier brought the subject m-oand v :r. off-n-
■'-vi- biological v .irfsr.* cr. :ort of ar-i nskod n« hut i though*

cl that. I answered that iitlor had frequently ordered in. t no new

-oC9


Coart I

1 -±r - 11-3 - LJ3 - Gross (trt Brow)


rl:ansive preparation should be aide in this field, *.r.d tnr.t 'r. vi-. cf
. _r_-\any*s geographical and strategic position such warfare would be
an incalculable danger to Germany. *he beginning of such offensive
warfare would institute a fcoesarang that would strike Germany. I
pointed out at this occasion that offensive biological warfare was im¬
possible for Germany because wa had not yet node sufficient preparations
in this field.

n. Is it correct that in this discussion which you had with
Hj'v.tlvr in July or August L9U3 egarding tKc problun os' biological
warfare, that *n> intorosted hiuself in the question of p'i~ a? if so,
•'hr?

A. That is true. When Hinaler .sked .bout the dangers in the
huaon sue ter, I na;ad tnj various opidc*dcs possible and also mentioned
uaon ; , thoa tho pla;,uo. <vr.d Hiralor oxpliin.d to r. that according to
t-.e roporto, that had ccr* in, t .e plaguu Wus possible’ tho gyentout
a. ;ei* for Germany * objectively spooking because of tha dangorousnocc
of the plague itself,ar.d else because of tho psychological ropurcuoslom
a plague would have in ror.:-»ny. e ° r centurios the pluguti iid been
«d in Goman, no the greatest affliction of mankind. HLumlsr told rae
on thia occasion, byway oi exaapl-, of events that h:d taken place
ir. tho Caucasus, thet oven GS troops had refused to -*rch .• * when
they hoard teat they were to enter areas infected with the plague.
During tiiic talk E&9 lor told rco that ?j rust, by way cf huraon urp-rl-
•aenta, find ar. effective vaccine c ainst tho plague.. Bo
fch how t-hi* best be broa '.Ho tolo no then that

r.e would


IE "arch 47-A-?jC-ll-lft-Cross 3rr..*i

COort I


off or no space aal facilities in a concentration cnap and ho -lsc told no tS»

- yj’/ had fcuni a vory offoctivo typhus rcccino through osporit-o ~s in
2ucha:.»»'ld. Ccnsoquontly, I should carry out plaguo oiporiroats in
concentration c-aps to fini a good plaguo vaccina. Bocnuso cf ny spiritual
repudiation of this id on I rojoctod this order. Iho fact that I did not v-nt
t' o tor tho 3S and thus bo lsadintoly subordiuatj to Hinnlor, also pin. od
Q r lx in this, dovoloptont which otborwiso I ehaild hardly havo boon
atlo to provont. In -'rdor to dofloct Him!or free thoao notions I pointed
ut tho danger of infection tint culd arlso if exporirants u ro carried
cut in concentration cnaps oivl p intod out tho T.ocossity of particularly is-
latod laboratories for such oxporlaonta which would havo to bo spociulhy
constructed. jiossoletodt no r pooou sooaod to no to bo .ho appro riato pluco
for this.

*


1511


Court SO. 1

IS Har -.7^-12-!-£3i~orr^v (Int. 5nvn)


V Ur. 31cce, fros your previous cssvcrs it fcee set yet v 'cono cl err
t- o how it was that Einslcr cere to interest hlssolf is thir *iole
pr-tlec. Vcb Eiaslcr is any way cuspetcnt for natters concerning bio¬
logical vnrfcre?

Certainly he vns cccoetent hccrusc ho m*.s s- t only chief of the
Gvr ~ft Police, ir. chart*e cf all solico sonsurcs, hut fron the sractic: i
z 1st of view Sicsler vae also hinistvr for Health is hie capacity ae
£oich rtiniater .f the Interior which vf.s loyally is charge of health
natters is Oerneny. That Hi.t -l-.r concerned hinsdf so intensively with
the plague or-hi on la to to tn ced buck to a pathologically exaggerated
aabiti on is the part of Eialor. Ke wanted to be the one who would he
hold roascncitlv for the successful conbatting .f any scourge so torrlble
PS tho plc.jue. I bulievo this rise is the reason why Hinnlcr so inter¬
ested hinsolf lr. car.cer resonreh. %t rsy rate, c1 that conference with
hi a that I mentioned he had ne give his r su'-mry survey f •) status
f crncor rosocrch. I stated =y opini.n ch ut exocrineate cr. ftunan
beings in ccnnoctivn with cascor research and Hitler told no it that
tln.w that he wns in fnv^r A husra being exocrisonto in view A the in-
c rv.sco cf th*. orotic:;. Ho c.ssidored tho ar.ttcr, of courso, that for
r-.:h experiments only cosnon criminals should be ured and nancly, oriov,-
r.»rc who had tees c oudenned to death. Such cr in Inal a would, if thoy cur-
vived tho experiments, to urrdoned with Ait further rdo. That at least io
-i.at }ic acid. In certain circles, to to euro, efforts had boor, nado
t. hevo corteln cx^erlrents carried out which he had r.rrented f »r under
■'•nsnhor, but he t ,ld the office in cuostics unmistakably that he regardful
it *c LlgU treason to rofuse t- carry ut cxocrixnte that v,.-.- ncraccrry
f-r the wer and hewforrod in this to an order of Hitler's expressing
thi sere point jf view. la connection with >ur dlfau«slrgii< i* the cancer
or-iblttl, Hir.-laj* OAntl .n->0 c <vn*.;.ii. TV. v-a Lucttoibur.:


-612


IE r:h 1947 -a-12-2-rKP— Kar (Int. 3r-*n)

C art - . 1

AT.. Visits- » lr.ter an.: who .cliovad that ho h:d found e scans f cJn’^ittin
cancer in th. ret fa certain Alpine plant.

Dr. 31-©-, tie* lator then there Here further discussi ns 'utwocn
7 i and Htaalr? LTiat was ah. suvject f the so discussi.r.s?

A. Tho next 'iscussion mbs r-u„hly r. c.nth Later. The reasjn :ii..lor "sko
a, t. visit his this tin. was that Dr. v.n Luetzul\urg, uh a I • vo Ju.t
-cnti.nod, together with Dr. Silvers awl fteschor, had 'consent y hia tj
I ay sc if he:’, called Pr-feas^r H.-z to this discuss! n. It was hero n
question ,f fcostirv. tho efficacy -f this s^-call-'’ Albino vege*- 3 a. extract.

I * n Hall were .f the vie* that first f all this extract sh uld ’jo chemical

<•

analyzed and that '-ef-ro this question was clarified I should refrain from
casing Judgnent in tris drug. Only after the necessary analysis ha ! '-.r.
c-rrie’ Ait sh.uld cniar.l ex.^riswr.ts Legin. Tr fess r i lz .and 3 w»ru f tho
or. ini-n.

... HARDY: dir. President, I an net aw'r. th t th. prosecution has Charge-
the defendant with cancer r.search r anything involving cancer ..xperimonts
that requires such .a i.r., ex lanr.ti n -s this.

THL PRESIDENT: C ur.sel's atr.tonent is c nvct. There is n; chnr against
the defendant inv.lvin , ct.rcer experLxnts. The ar.tter ern 'e t ached u.un
very lightly '.ui c ^ t dcr.l f tlso sh uld n.t - taken up i.. u’ylnj tho
def-nc.-.nt*n .activities rl ng thr t line.

DR. SAUTEc: l^-. President, »e n* c.nfr nted here with a difficulty
• • c nfr r.ts the thor defense counsel:la . o have r.ceiv lut 1
Indictment awl assurv- tint the indicant c at ins prticul re f virt the
individual defendants ar\> chrgcd with. H»uver, in the course f the trM
a, riuB f ther pro* leas were r ught up; na-.Oy, pr -leas th -1 were n t


d6l3


.v.n nti n, : ir. tho


--JI-22-3-Karro (Lit. Brown)
Court I


.crictecr.t, an secbfense c ouns jl _r_- rut sure vhothor the proixcuticr. is
ils; char ic the *.efen jnw it:; thcs ot;«r problem. I’o.- £y: - sen, at

the "»■ innin cl the- niax-i cas- ~rvl iter alfcin. with certain cr>i\e vts I
Breu ht up the question of what t . ros„cuoivn intended to ;r ; these fur¬
ther prohlocs an ' the prosecution st't.’’ t - r. ii that wasbreu :.t up in
V~ course of the trial nu tote chni^d 1 -inst the '.efendput. flirt, r.t
Last, is hew I understood it. Entirely ssi uf ren the fact • ..r or not

tncao points wiro nontioned in r.' c. . . . , ; r.r-t .it s-nv v.

thcr, vhon T finish ry defense tcuorrcrr, tl.c . rap.cution won't o * t.
and snyi "Here in this cancer rose re:; aid i other research there wort
eXf rlnntc on inr.vitain s an , of course, thus to si. uld b_ chr.rcc ’ inst
t. _fl’ant."

T'... .! 2 £SIDJ 1 T: The .rostcution has cios itr c^si in chief civ in¬
troduced its ovldonco. 0 ter. ncrtf not only the indiotoant, .u evidence
in chief fir the prosecution* .. ■ c o- iothin that 1 r
e neern .. 0117 charge ftancornin. c «ccr r-socrch*

DR. SAVTJ.tr :t ir.ci 0 mbter of docuacnts wurj sutoivtod which
cencorn thensclv-s witn cancer reS^rxeb, and if th_ prosocutitn 1not
... avtitudo that because of this inoss and hurnboin. exte¬

nts i 1 association vith the char cs should te raised ^.n Inst Dr. Bienne,
than I u n.t un erstrr.d why octnxncs were presented ot .

H.JJJT: .ay it plecsu . ir 1 r, il the pres .cuti • ob^vit-s tot
the particular position taken otu. dofjnso c enrol or anothar, ofonsc
couns. 2 .V.rys tetters back .and 1 rth or.! cons ua.s the tiro th't he col li
’. up in takin that subject. I object t: thiscaco

Uidmch tire the 'iif^nso cninscl cusos teok with a len ar.,v
I hara ted tiio uar.o discussion


balh


16 t-ar-L3L-lh - - --or r ov;-i ,t. brov. n

Court -.a. 1.

a least four til.es with Dr. ouuter *.o ay knowledge, :«nd I
dor.' t xncw how . r. : 3 bed it. - think

t tuts tiiie should ask Dr. Suuter to refrain froc any
... -j.itr.ts aloni these iines.

Tfc3 r.-LoIDih?: I would osk counsel for the prosecution
ix ..t this th.e he expressly disclcl-os -ny taoory taut tie evi¬
dence Icr the prosecuti an i.. any vay connects this defendant
Dr. bicne *.itft ..r.y -lit ,-U offenses in roi-rd to cancer re¬
st .rch?

D.'v. a«o7_ic: .dr. -rasiit.it, let ..t'aay t..e 1 olio-.. in; in
this ^ttcr.

Tnh -l.hSlli: 7: (Int.rru .ir.j) Counsel, -iy question is
propounded to counsel :or the prosecution aid the tribunal • culu
liKc to h.vc ills answer boforc nc-rin^ you.

uut. ;wu>DY: Durin_ the cose in : .iof for tho prosecution
wo, it no ti.vj, introduced .ny evidouce jorlelalns to c.r-ci"

rofro .. had lntcii. a,

..I xirnt, to introduce suoh wle r.cc out Seci-vU it would

vloublc, and \«c h.vc, .t no tLie, nude - specific c -r e
.Last the defence at bloan th t he expori-^ntud or w.s Invol¬
ved in cx^crl.entr jr cede- :• resu rch on hu~. n btin .s in r.
joncentration c^.

.■hi I Z&i.r: Counsel for tna prosecution fcevl.. i.uc ti.

:tt t.-.unt -..-ic.; he JU3t a.u« no uisci i—d ti.y theory u.aju -..fli
t..is jef-ndaiit could be cn-rcj ith ny ofl'cuc-s con. ted

c nc_r xeso rch, U .t -- tt r i. or -vun o

.ro,-r subject :-r discussion . vl cs it -i^ht arisu inciaaitull
:onncotion *ith so.it oth>c ttor.

hr. Sresidont, let ..e s.*y on« tIt is
v r y ui.;l-_.:Eont to us defense counsel th- t every few uinute f.

-• _.;uti:r. cones up to the -icroyncnu .ad objects to the ;

: i_r.sa counsel is h.r.dlii; r.y s>: If Is _e.tter. Ir.


15 : '-.re:', 19ls7-5S-r.7H-12—5^arr - - • (Infc. rr m)
Cart "o, 2


this trial an! in the X.. process I jkv. r xvsaeribor a case ; i._ - the doferu
c ansul went up to th. ..aorlcnn prosecution and told then ..-hit they could
;usE±t ani rrh-t they couldn't. I believe I an spe.akin- no: for all ry
collaa ues Titan I say that it should bo loft to thu sins*. :? :t.y of the
' fenso counsel t !ocido to what extent h„ •ish_-3 t intorr 3 to his die
anti that the prosecution should not keep rvUdn. objections to tta way he
c nducts his case, e, on or pert, have r. ver thought *f objectin' to thu
•■ray the prosocution carries out his,

TIE IBBSIDSjrT: Counsel for either the pr Secutii.:: or lofonso r.ir.y
lwnys rbjoct to questions which are d j Bproj&r, Thy nay also interp-so
to (utters which ttay any ntir ly irmtorial,

Tta Tribunal rill n in recess until 1:30,

(A recess wno taken until 1330 hours, 18 T larch 191:7),

I


1616


arch IB-i-cK-13-l-Poster (Int. vcn Sc:.;-.-)

Scurt iio. 1

,jt_ liea i sssic:;

(The h earing reconvened t 1300 hours, 13 U?reh 19i»7.'

7K£ itiBSHiiL: Ih; Tribu n al is join in session.

15-. H.J3Y: Ifcy it plccso the Tribunal, the Dofendrnt hos- has submit
. request cf prosecution in cK-r to .‘Id him in the prep.* rations of his
icteae , namely, he hos requested t strtv^-nt free tr.e prcsccuticr. as t:
v-huth-r or not tha prosecution intends to use the su.joct cf *.ho nir
s.-.urdrens for forest protection end of aalari; control .irplcnos ry.J.
th- D-fcadrnt nose. In addition, he requests *s tc uhatfcor or not the
prosoevtien intends tc conclude that irofosscr Lose p. rticipeted i.; the 1
C's experiments wul the akclotor. collection. Iho prosecution announces
this tin- that they have no intentions f furtherin' either Count .-:<inat
the Def-nd. nt nose.

THL .KISIDZST: Counsel, dees the Tribur.-l und-rstcnd-i th-1 !,- pre
ti;n h*a -tendered thesu eh r;.» rycinat the Dependent Lose?

X.. ILJvTY: In c-juwcticr. .ith the skeleton collection and l.it vxrc
,.nts, th- D-T.-vl.il •• r. *'.a u.vjp chrrped with thvfl specific 11;- in the
ir.iiatiH.-.t.

T: riXSEEKT: I un-rst nd that, but any possible dirge e: then
. ? ’ey the prosecution?

15.. HUY: Yes, Your H c nor.

THL LSID-lIT: Thu Secret xy -Gen err 1 rill note for the rte-ori the
at . . nt by the prosecution.

-cunskl for the J.fcnd.r.t Flcr.e vy proceed.

UT..T :i.QJL - hesuaed
DIhZCT JU..TI0H (Cor. 1 , .need)

Y . S..JT:i. (Counsel for the D-f~r.l nt elsu):

iuent answers you cm rlwrys ' which i tc «-..cer.

> rk fer th- ppropri- ti;r. of del-ns. measures - *^in3t liolc iccl v.rfare

j h'vc srii, w/s or.-.- t y.ur institute nerr I ;sen, JivSSelstndt. Kin—

■v. ; .tsiit fer Ls, S->-Stu: . r Dr. Gross. *

__‘ A J^> *617


sa, you hrvc heTi thr.t the orcsecution hr.c st:t. ' -I-

/HP* l £'>

itl^s• cfifctv ill V- r. c!-. r.-e - .Inst you; consequent:


. 1c-;.-EK-l y~ 2-Fc*tcr (Int. ven Schccr.)

'-'art :.'c. 1

jr. Kcsachl h s already t.stified ebcut this. I want ccnfiror.tion frrn ye.

• .th.r : is tru>_ what we h’.vc heard froa ether sources, that this Dr. 3r
. - Hier-1-r assigned tc ycu . s rr. assistant is not identical with the Dr
Gr-ss who w s t the ccct'.n; of ccr.iJltin- physicians -t Hcheniych-Ji and i
include ; in the list. Ycu err. rr.swcr that question, yes cr no.

.. First, I should like to c- . to two points ir. your question.

: understood ycu correctly, you spek- cf work done at the l.’cssolstadt Insti

• Yes.

. 'mt I h vc explained carefully that up to 1945, "her. the Rissians

*

c Z<J to .'os-n, th.re w..s nc opportunity to do any work yet, and nc .crk cc
t- done. That by way cf ccrr-cticn. In the second place, you ue..i . i Dr.
. : xhl. Is th:t net - rxistf.x? ..s far os I knew, Dr. Kcsrc.hl . net kn
Press at 11.

r, Thai it was on sooc other cccesion, at le.-st Dr. Orcss has Loon
n r.ticne'’ several tires.

"r. Gross was Mentioned cr. a dif'erent occasion. Ir. cnsitor tc the
-u.sticn whether this »r. Gress wi.cn Hiacd-r srijned t; so ettendoJ the
n.-tint of consult! deigns . nlych . rtcr, No.

. Hew, Dr. Diene, in the Better of preparation for defense .. injt
. 1 . ir I vrf-re, ir. specific the plr;uo prcbl^, iid jou have any furth
discussions with Iicichsfuehror Hiaxl.r?

.. I spoke cf the ts.c discussions with Hicrnl.r, on- in July ir ..u uat
•L}, and the second about four we-ks 1/ter. Then six tenths later in
r- ru-iy cr drrch cf 'hi, durir. the visit of Horthy to Hitler, I h i tc
- rt t- H~r.der aicut qy * crk an plr uj and th^ prebl.xn of bid . :rx
rf re in ecn.r -1* his discussion took pLce is; Hiculcr’s he - urrUrs
r S labur,. I said that the SturnK*nnfu_hTer Dr. Gross > s : lloctinp
liter ture, th:t th-r- w-r- difficulties for the ocncepti.n cf

the toil in-a .’.Id tho freiiiti r , and so forth. Orders fer oqui

i-r wra v _ry slow, rxj-t he could net h-lp ie. He said th-t h- h
:if: ilties. I h d to see hew I could arr.-.x these thin s by ^ .
r.-r.tt i that the oueSticr. ci biolc ie -i warfare had r.ot fc _er. trk-r. \.

v;ia


ttirch lS-w-SK-13-3-Fcster (Int. vcn Scboun)

Court So.- 1

yeors - L c, -r.d h- askud aie whether r.cthinj cculd bo done trains’. •. .• 1

ric.-r, invasion in the ,.<.st rfiich was e xpoctod, ir. erder tc ir.i .ill

it or tc postpone it.

•

He ics thinking, for excaple, cf rrippe cr influence, end :.e recalled
iho Spanish Grippe which hid ardc such difficulties fer the Gemrn: ..rtty i:
the Firsi '.crld Mir; 1 told Hi.- J.er th.re tea no such thin;, and the que
cf the h -f end acuth disease cpidotic in '!/. and '/.!» «»s discussed, since
pceordin; tc experience s return cf this epidemic car. be expected aheut e.
five veers.

*

Hinder coked ax wh: t had be»n dene n- r.inst this end I ref_rr>-1 tc cu:
.xccLUnt vtccines, end *lsc the l^ck of cr.’rnisaticn on the part cf the
l.eichs Ministry of the Interior, with ref.rcnce to the protective v .ccir.rt'.
which h:s to be undertaker.. The hocf n-. j.uth disease wrs boijinrdn;; tc
}„-.etrr.te intc Otr r«nj free the oat. Qto question ;f rinderpest was also
cussed. I *loin referred to the prohibition of the International t tic:-, r
( r urepe, that rinderpest virus cculd net be kept in Europe-., •*.: t. t >.■
v ccir.o cculd bo produced consequently. Hiteder said ho would tv. l jet
rinderpest virus.


13 "arch L rr—H-l-Loss-r (In*., rea Scbocn)

C r. 1'0* 1

Q Then I believe y a hr.-; a fev discussions with Hin—_r w’Ach rr.
net o int- in detail* I believe they -re acre r less to the sailo cf.
as th- aorliar •’iscussicns, is that true? *

i. Essentially, yes. ..bout four weeks after *-lv lisc’03o: i .Itch
Just osntioacd, I had another o"e with Hirr.ler. He called o_ *r .

ostensibly bio' leal warfare a. ants were used in mnn-ty, . . ..n.

that this news was n t -m_. Than about the be innln- cf Sjpe .1 . 19Ui 1
visitod H^rKl^r r.;pin at his field headquarters in the "-at, abc. ljO ki’i
taotora frets Saarbruoci n. I*: .at was th. last tine.

itness, th. Prosecution 3utr.ittad a d>cunjnt, No* Hi 1 , _xhib
32L, a letter fren Reich* hysicin Grantta to Hir-nlor. It refers -o doi
.-.jssuroa against biolo teal Tc.rf. rc an * refers to the crgpilation which
Cb_r . '”,x;nfahror '.u .ku!;', year co- lef .-ndant, ray h-.A, .vide iVea th.
important sul. ntific materials, It says that at the instigation of Bluno
.tni^-vrsky 'oalt with the question of J feuso a*;ain»t biolo;:ica\ v.rfar is
with the ccrirrilaticn of th* uost ii.,:. '.nt scientific notorial an l to vie
which I enclose, End cf quotation* Ii. this lotter the word "doCon?o" is
underlineJ. Bid you knew of this lott-r tt th. tino oud lid y•
the v.orie 'lone by Dr. “rv .owsky?

/. I kn :.f about the lutter. The only tine when "ru -rsJy vf .<ito ‘ t.
'-.a tha delivery f r. c-nx-ben copy or this letter. The report pria.\rily r.
forrod to tho necessity of a well -rranisod intellJ/.onco service .:i ex
r'iclo ! cal warfare oh ul. bo .applied a ainst Oor.'-nny,

1 Ifcn if, in conclusion, recall nil ycur answers on the prd
f bide ianl warfare, car. you, Bl~a-, with a clear conscience. u:i
say that y.u y ursalf were think ir. always only of defensive noasuras J-
bicl leal i or faro, that yu always r-puiiat. I ffonsl re bialo;ie'.b v..

furthermore, that y.u Sid nothin,- ir. order t prepare a biol c, 1 >J
fare offuiisiva against Russia or other c am trios? Can y u say that -n ;•


Id --.re i-—lii-2-L;:s_'.- (Int. von Schocn)

Court H : 1


Tos 3

1 : -ctor, nw I rcaind ynu, it is supposed to have happened that
HinaLer askod of you that acasurcs of retaliation in the fluid of Molv.ii
ar.-po *•_ bo undertaken. I bcllovc it was a ainst Russia. dees

that neon?

.. That is true. KiiriLr undo t at request,

•1 .hen v*as that?

A In 19U*»

Q And K. y?

“ I bcliev* it was the second discussion fn the Sprln,. A .'.yhh who?
ho redo this request, but this was r. t specifically .v-ainst Russia Ho sp-'
quito con.-rally. Ho smi • that it rrould bo nocossary t prepare isuros o
retail- Am ir. the ovont that tho onw^ a»vul I bo.dn biological warfare
t:ld HLrOor at tho tine that I was in no position, cn tho basis of i V r
search nasi rrkmt, tc pr paro su'-. rotoiintoiy asur-js. To propar i such
retaliatory nansurus as KL-nUr had in rdnd I would i«avo noodod a spjci.v
assi ramt frer. tho Fu.hrorj but I Jcr.rr as wall as Hlmlur, and I wll h\i
that Hitler had prohibited all ffonsivo preparations,

a Mtruss. now I put to yru a t 3tLaory in t o first !.\irr.b„r. trir
'jy a ftitnoss, a person who has been n-r.t: jno.l sovoral tinos in this trial,
Frofo3sor Dr. ’ hltor Schroibor. Thio witnosa. in th. suasion of 26 August
l;L6, ir. this re-n, wa3 tfcadnod boforo tho Inturnational Milita — • , r .

I facilitate rvattors fer the Court, I havo included his affiiav and hie
V.stinony as DDCu.-v.nt Ho* 7 in the Blor» Tfccunont Be-*, that iu, nr. extract
fren it, so that the Court will bo able to oxnrdno thoso parts >f ohroib
t-.stimor. - and .affidavit in s: far as we nust rofor to thwE in oxnriniu
r.‘-—, nr. Slone. This is Docurvint |fo. 7 ir. tho ~lcc-> Docuaont ':?!• ..
bo ivL-n *.hi Exhibit .-amber JO-.no .Vo, 11. I ask that this ontir.
nt, even thj parts which arc not road, should bo accepted as evidence.

itr. ss, r r Krsa y u kn -t Profess. r Schivibar?

4521


18 :fereh h .7I>-lli-3-Lcsser (Tnt. von Schoon)
Tourt Jfa. 1


Yes.

1 You th_ testimony which he ^avo on 26 ..uniat 19L6 l f-.r.
Inter tional '"ilitary Tribunal?

A Yes.

Q You knew th_ affidavit .hich •/as submitted -t that tliio?

A Yus.

3 In this testieory, th. witness, Schroiber, spoko of oxpori:iontt
for tbo purp-se of biological warfare or for tJv> preparation of dofonse
-irjt biolo leal warfare in Poson in your institute. He says, and I qu'
"I da not know ary totalis about then. I know only that sprayir. experiru:.
fron planes with bactoria emulsion, so-called a*:. 'ci oxp-rinwr.ts, -ror. car
out an', that oxp.rii-jnts with insocts an'. bufs haraful to plant;, ore
carrio'l cut. But I ar. not in a position to live any dotailod inf.r uation
b.causo I lysolf -i ’ r. t .rticip.ato and .? net knew the details. End M.
•;uotaticn.

If one r t in th. ctaosptaro of this oourtrooao, one rd ht

thj in fussier, that these wore oxpuri-xnts which nl-ht bo const do rod as
inhunano r illc.al. Can y u plu: j explain briefly whst kin' of export*
those wuro?

<» Tho stater..nts of Professor Schroibor ab ut tho oxporinunts cu
uatj' lr. ry institute at Posen aro not true. I havo nlruady sal \ that ir
January 19L5> wh<?n tho Russians oaixi V Poson, th. in3tituto wss not avo:
finished; that at this tiao thoro wore about 3CO workers still working M
that nothin was ovor dona at this instituto as fir as research is concer
t«: no airplane exporlrents wore con-ructod at F sen. Durin ry s ’ per
in -ffico not a sin ;lo such airplane oxp-irlrvnt was carried out, not oVb:.
tfcer axvas. The oxp-rinont which Schrelb.r mentions was on. ’on. before
'"•3 lvun y as3i Tr-nt, which Professor Sliowo onco VI i .ao about, but *
t-. 3 net for an offensive purpose an 1 th-. result of the expurinont t.T.3 nr-
lutelr r>. .-ativo.

4622


' - 73x A7-..—..7D-iu-L-'_JS3.,r (Int.-vcn Schoen)

-curt e 1

Q Tlkin, if-1 understand you correctly. Professor, those no th*.-
■ hich L'./c nothin,- to do Kith husan oxp-ri-aents such as have boon V.u t.
f thin trial?

A .Vo, ih^y ha7c nothin^ ir. cocr.on,

Q itness, Professor Schr.iber in his tastin'ny, and this ~s ain
:hon by the iocur. nt, also saic’ that ir. '-arch 1915 you ha'! to fl-a iron
risen before the Rod . 0 ^ 3 y, that y,u went to see hin at Berlin r<a' vi
him that you wore quite wtrriod that the arran cnents for hunar. c riiV)*.

Z ojiphasize — -.rranxronts for honan oxporiaonts which wore in 1 j lnoti
in Poson an.’ which wore roc nixahlo as such, ni ht very easily b*i /ocoyn'.
by thi Russians,* an-! that you .asked Schreibor t- sec to it thar y or pr..-
fossor nl your pla axe cultures which you had saved :ii, ht bo able to c r.‘
to v at Sachsonbur . That is »at i*ofosscr Schrdbor said. !«’ in c
.-.Herat*. .1 :f tho si nificancc wh ;h the w r l "pi- uu” has in ove.y ins'

I sh ill 1 like to ask - -/bat <’ you have tc say about this state .s.nS cf
.•Itnosa. tthraibor, specifically about th->so nrran. oontr for burr n oxnc:

1 .*.n’ about thi plague cuit’iros?


4523


Ccurt I


j8 nr b?— - 1C-3 - • Ton scnc^n)

•». I shall be- as brief as possible. It is not true tnet I
visited Shroibor ir. -arch 19U5. I visited hir on ‘Jte 30th of January
171.5. * r._c learned b” accident ; .it under Schreiber's supervision
that in l?h3 there were L.baratorios .• Sachstiburg to produc pi n ' v
vaccine. I wanted to sand Dr. Gross there with the siterial ns hia
yd froa Posen, because I was looking for a place for hie to work.
ah for as I -yr• jI f was concerned 1 dir. net want to go there. V.*at
was out of tr.e question because I hid otoer duti«3. I had other things
to do besides sharing _y only laboratory with 3b. Gross. Shr: a

description that I had had to fleo free ry Institute at Poser., * . that
I was not ablo to blow it up, test is net true. 1 mist a3Sinw
givo Shrolber tha benofit of tho doubt, that his rwaoiy failed hie;
ir.d this is indicated by tho fact that he confused January with -arch.

I told Shrolber the foil-ring about the evacuation of th< Institute, and
this is what truly happenedi It was on a Saturday, about January lf’th,
whor. tho order to evacuate the n;_~the-Gau was ,,ivcr.. Unaware of thin
order or. the day before I hod .one to Berlin wi*h two cars to get tiio
aost important things to safety. On the next day, on Saturday, 3
returned to Posen. Or. tho way 1 ct onerous groups of refugees. Ir.
tha utomoon I arrived in hDs^n. I Went inosdiately to tho timber
of Rysicians to find out about tho situation. Hero I learned ir. t-aa
corning thero hid beer. or. order issued *o evacuate the ».arthe-Gau and
or. tho coai evening tho eauleitung world leave Poser.. I wont to tro
.ast across .the river larthe to ry Institute. 1 stayed ther.

Sunday after:, r.. I saw to it hat ay people and p^rt of the an Uriels
ft rutioved, and t. the last Genan * iw the Inatilulc.

During this 2k hours I ccrsi dared Whether I should blow up the r .aeo
..t.icr. had been built for tho bacteriological work. -

:ayr .for- tho night, fre- Thursday to Friday, 1 had called or. the
•--ich I fensd Con-d35i«n-r oreis-r, who had given -o the order :r. r.c
■:asu to i-t the Institute cr the valv ule equipment fall into the ham 1

- - • usiiians. If It should be oecessaxy to evacuate Posen I t

*-d24


Ccurt a

r L7- n - 15-2 - L-3 - -ley - (int. vcr. 3cht^r.)

hie r__ up. n^ricus eonsidtntijc, hci...v_r, I decided

. -,b to bits it ;p, In 3pit-. cf t..u f :ct ! hi plenty of *i zj nr.d
; -ert' _"-y to de so. civon if this hid not be-n the case I cculd
hod t destroyed by Stoics ^o^fas, by dir-, brcb.rs. .’hat is too
z’.-.t- cl J l -irs, ar.d t. it is v.-.t I tcid Shrxiber.

«. aith, What about too plague cultures; * asked you about

the pLymo cultures.

a. I did not a an la$u ilturos ' scys. I

i.: : tly before. 3hr know

thatj I had told hi-, s-. It was he cn the contra xy who l-t^r, and
thio ms probably ir. . to fer ay o.

Dr. .ross, tc tiw 3arha«rfc . t Dr. Green cculd coll iCt the
ruieua ;1 t cuitutwS *hich r.r« at Sachs-rg. Shreib-r had tcld
- Lfl .t ti.u vilcua :1 -iuo atrtino .viiL.oi j ir. hnsny, in europj,
uro -ulr.. trad by hi.’ r x the institute, a plugue v.ccino was to bo
produced. X c u:.jet .. stand he’ 3hr-jih..r c x. s.y in too s •.•■■a atntc-
—r.t, ar/i - ou't .* ". X ssor Schuhrv.r. md his ^inir.t.rialr.-.t

• , r.d a BD bar : ehar Ot ra, scientists, rh<.«*. hi did not
• • Ivrkod . .-son. " “his Institute was not r-ndy

clxor-dy stated. The rost netuvertrvy thing
- - . . . . . • . . ribunol, Shrelbsr cancelled ..hL feet

a rch In j.rrany. I ac convinced
«■ f this 1 .ot thu ? .f;jise counsel »culd h-vo c css-
J - •.. 1 ‘ — -* such err- thoroughly at th-t ti.ro, b-enuno \t rhculrt
rious, ..-.r r . in the c'cj cf any intc-ntionnl

. nic rose inch, — that

. :.r-4h.jj- tr.jld have been in eh r^o. He ms the tan in 3onsa«y in
thread; t .. r. The rmuo

h - i - .ti • -* r* n •tM.nudi in this <*.>nn<oti..'n, .and in
tlin trial*

you seed cm <-r.ly cca plngae culture «t this
-625


Court I

16 -r L 7 -» - 5-3- LJG - .-oloy - (Int. vcr. Schocn)

*wS.

• u liy~-r. understand very little about istdicine, or n thir. ; .

-ou _ ' * explain to us why you h'.a this cno plague culture?

a. To obtain plague vaccines which I rev Id hive lacked to produc.
it, I would have needed plague c.ituras of course, not just or.c but
qui . a nui>or of the-., becauso not ov^ry strain of a bacteria is
suitable for producing vaccine.

4 , Did this Professor Scfcroibur, du> cxpr-ssly sal’s that yoi hid
plague cultures, did ho hicself have , 1 -gue Cultures?

a. les, I -lr .idy said so, at S chs-rfcurg ho hid a r.uobor of
cultures, as he explained to n- all of thoso th .t were available in
jonxiny or in Europe.

-i. fou hive clr.zdy s_id that Dr. Blcoe, but you did not .
they uero Schr-ibor's plvguo cultur-s; then SchrwiOor hid plr.^u cul¬
tures r.t Sachsonburg in other words in his institute?

*. ijs, h- or tto Ins tits to under hin. But when he was uraninod
her- n. did not say arything about that.

■». witness, this professor Scfrolbor in the q ustion of th- appli
cation of plaguo bacteria, he s.iid so-ething,-Td I should like t.o hu r
whet. i* ycu share his opinion. He t id, and 1 quote fra.-. Shr-ib ,r‘s
’ >:tlionys "would the us- of plague bacteria r.ct involve enornoes
dr.iger for our own troops?" ho was-s'' d, and Schroiber answered, "i.s,
net cr.' for the Xraan troops but for the whole leinan people, for the
refugees going froa: east to vest, and plague would have been carri^l
into eoraary with great speed. 0 rest was the testimony of Schr 1 r;
perhaps you c on aaavr "yas" cr °nc° whether that was your cj r. in
re gam to this type of b-.ct_riolor.ical warfare?

A. *o3.

.. -hen or. the subj-ct f bio’c deal w.rf-r« I h .ve a ' ’.si

. r.: witness, lr. the judgauft of the International >-lliuiry

Tribuml it said aiong other things, i dl quote: "lr. addition,

452 *


Court I


15 .r!)7-*- - LJj - ---Icy (-:.t Von Schoea)

•

Soviet prisoners w«rc loads the subject of itdical wxp_riner.ts of the
'.xt horrible and inhumane type. In July 191.3 cxpvri:icnts for tho
..-operation f bact-jriologic.-erfore wtre begun. Soviut pries-: rs
.ere usod for 'l.cso nodical experlaents." Then this a mu Jvdgi.i.t f
the International Military Tribunal says that in r«,g-rd to tho scatter-
af a bacterial wrulsion fras airplanas fer the purpose of spoiling
tho harvest and coating a fasdr*., cnly prop-rations w t r<- -ado but
it vr- not carried out, porhaps, th* Court says, because of dotorievtw
tion of the : ilitary situation for Germany. eiChess, 1 should lik- to
r.-.ar fren you under o .th, did . ou over heir aiythine that preparations
*ur. ado fer bacteriological warfare on the Goman side, an that
Soviet prisoners were used for radical experiments?

«. No, I njvor hoard anything about that. I have tried tc find
an explanation for this, bet I c xplonatlon. 1 can

say h*>ro on oath or.\> that in thi itoolw field cf biological wrrf-.ro
r.ot a singlo human uxporiixnt was ccnduct-d, whether permissible, or
forbidden in the whole field of biolo-ic .1 warfare.

rtitn-i;, i: ‘ 3 asserted hero is true that nodical -.-ri-

eor.ts of f.o mat hcrii l. or inira .na typo ifv.r., conductod, then you
on tho basis of your position as Plenipotentiary for the reparation
f dofw-.se rv^asur&o -.gainst biological v irfare would you have hat. to r.
as cut r. -,t?

-i. Normally, yus.

«. out ycu did r.ot know abort it?
iio, I hoard nothing wh tev_r.

.. Ard in the ecurso of this trial you h.ard nothing which uight
: -• proof of the correctness : th r esu-ptirr.?

-. So, no.

627


-- 16 - 1 -■ -'fist. vcn Schoen?


1® ~.rch 1:7--..-

; irt 7.1

1 jfo-, witness, I 3*01 loPTO tiu sublet of Mole leal warfare ani
turn to another subject, Diryl.' The : r,osocation on the 10th of January after
bids leal warfare ’- It with this question an’ icc.r'in; to the principle
f prira feci , it bee ~ a char-o of tho indictment. itn^ss, first I refer
count So. 6U1, Exhibit 327, which is r.:t in cagr toeuaent b <• "»

sabedttei on January 10th by tho prosecution. This l^cur.unt ieala with Dorylj
it is a teletype ncssa o from Hie '.rs to SS Stanlnrt_r.fu.nror Hr. Brandt of
18 ;.u ust 19 Ui. This .essa _ says n'lar. quotin'j "Professor Bloae asks
,n appointment with tl« olcMfi'/'r.r S3 fer r_port fn 25 ust 19Uli or.
because f r-cossity f Atrinin c-rt in ir.frymtion n*t possible before that

tiffc."

-• - * hich i r.p-rt is to bo ivenj tho

• ry i c at v th rt. The third r int is end I
TU to. : 1 a.n _x?_r Mie * r niuct: -n - 1 th r_ ; rt iven to Reichsfuohror

SS or. 21 Juxv , ?r foos r *1 j ’.s Mn vr a.' V test p iscn now."

This subject r o -Is i V> a chftrjO 7 th indictODnt and I therefore
ask y:u whit was th laonj What was ttw purple f th- oxjx.ri i. nts which
• r t ho uh Vartoban an' wore such actually oontootofl?

This was T> ryl, which is in the lary f Siovers on 11 ..u ust 19U*.

On 21 July 19UU, Pnfcasor Slluvo ooi* tc w. an- ’isoussort varies uittors
: ido ical r-rfr.ro. Ho asko’ .v n this cession whether there was a possi¬
bility to have the p ison ~ r -1 trie ! 7 r its offobt a »m an buir.-s, ho said ,
th-1 • :rl ha tica on : dish saboteurs. in his

race, th-t is nijwo's fCic- this ryl was n-t known an’ for that reason
l- t - bo testa*. . ffcct ns tc bo ascortalnei and an altitude found.

Th. odicil inspect rate had ns si ne Sievors t clear up this natter, but ho
c ul’ ted • r. ro boemus. - f V.ia secrecy. I rap rto4 tliis conversation to
KL l.r nn’ I -..-ante' to kr. w -rhothor they intonlod to uso poison in warfare
r. , althou h it was r rhi -n by international law.

q Icusay y u reporte! this conversation t Hit lor, Hoichsfuohror SS

i 7 ;h t business is that f Hi: Ocr, thy *il y e rape rt it to Himler?

-.625


if *v rch .T'-i6-2- ..chan (Tnt. v.n Scboon)
Court "-.1


.. I reported it b-cause HLsOer was chief f th-_ reserve a ray and as
P. 2 ich i'inist r f the Int ri r, ho ins chief officer f:r the civilian health
r/otoro an' because wher. I ms -iven as si rra.nt f-r hioloyical warfare

research, Bcraiann ha* tel' no that in all quo 3 tic ns if n cessary I should io
to HLaol.r,

q And then what else ‘d 1 ’ you ‘a in this aatt.r of Dcryl poison and
•rhat v as thu evasion f-r this tel type :io3sa..e frea the Defer, bint Sicv.ra
to Pudolf Srandt on 16 -u u -1 l?iw?

.. Ttu Dcryl question soeaoi fc. : yoat inportance, especially
since I hod th- assi nrojnt fer biol ic 1 warfare rosoorch, I mntod to cot
clarity an' after four w--ka I went t: iiev.rs so that he could nrrmv;o the
interview ith Bimlir. : ich I ■vaut.- • for thi3 an’ other roasons. Siovers
sent the teletype of 10 ..u ant 19Uh to ttudolf Bxan'.t,

Aal why, Dr. d w, wore you interested in this Dory. torj why
was this in your c -tency r - >n y or int.-rests?

.. Th.t ms r. t a n y c- • jtencies on interns to, but I had to
barter the suspicion that poison an’ as ni ht be use-' in warfare mu', the next
stop would f nooosslty have boon tho uso of biol leal warfaro a jontaj that
was tho reason why I wnntc ’ t- btain certainty and that is why I want to
•i taler. Thar were q ru rs a*, that tho nary r vjn that Qornoiy was

r'or I -t oartainty n this question, I
• :> . it. : quwstioned whether certain

p:isen an as riro t usl * ir. warfare no.-; Hircolur 'unied it ’cfinitoly

. rearm' that settled the natter.

0 "r. Prosi ont, ir. this conr-ctlon I -ffer to the Tribunal fron the
cun nt >n pa^os 13 an' 19.- D -cua-nt Ko. U, which is
Exhibit k>. 12. It is a wry bri.f affi davit, properly cortlfioan affi-
’c.vit by Prof .35 r fOie-.;e, the ssnu ?r. fusser KUe-wo wh. so nan wo have hear!

..11; • It ir -i. 7 FAruary 191-7 With re-or t t) Doryl char*:e. I
think this wry brief affidavit is of root si nificonco an' perhaps I nay
“ :e ’ it. Ko says:


•462S


18 :torch 1 7- -..~-l6~3-: Meehan (Int. von Scboen)

C'-’JTtr S3. 1

'ton thj chorcLcd substances br:u-ht by r. Polish r ent frca arsaw
to Eorlir. in il.-r.tifi i in tfc- Fharaacli leal - T.xicl leal Institute
of tho ,\rxy ’adical School, D:ryl -as : -in ’ in ' liticn to arsenic, norcurio
chi ri' , st, l tulinns toxin, etc. e r- at the tic- astonished that
this - ratiwhich is usol for iisorsos of tho ayes an*, intestines, was
r -d' ‘ r s t'. . puri -os. ..s I coilccto.’. infomrition about acts of

.ta.o \n "tun ncc-~s “~7 rnn unco xvt-ctivo . -.surea for the troops, I
asko-/ ?r' ss r r l no rhon I -at hi^ whether ho knew Doryl, ani whether it
c.ul. bo use! f s.b V- v purp-sos* .r lessor B1:no sail ho id not know
tho prupsrr.tion either, an' it n ui' Ou v ry ifficult tc have uxp-rinents
porf-.r. 1 n criiinals scuto-icoi t * nth, as Ht-ador hir&self had to Rive
pordssicn. bun I a>t r. “i u a-ia a few woiks later I tol' hin I had
Iscovoro 1 that in \\w t»: -'.cv luor.t :y f tho Pharraool leal Toxiede-
•ical institute, attached to th- Rraxodo leal Institute in Diesson, aninal
oxperlnonts with !V-ryl ha', bo n . a' , hoe-use it -..as th u ht that other
c untri s ir.vjn'a’. t uau thi. rwp.ration for chcrical mrfaro. Tho rosulto
tho aninal oxjvrl. ..its sh ~othat the preparation vas f no iiaportanco
- r or' to 0 nu-p sc-3. 7iv.rof ru, I ha n • ro interest in the preparation.
Put, as a r.c-.uti—v.r>* asur , the nrcjxirati n was ordered only tc- bo odd

;. ainot . r-acripti;n."

then the *it.vjss srys:

•I .-a flr.dy c nvinco*. that Or. " 1 . o r.rran oi for nc humn exporlnent
dth Doryl, f r th_y v.uTl have s-rv^' nc pure sc, an ! also when we woro
t ether in th. bustbin ca.q>, h never r.-ntiono ' that ho porforaad experi¬
ments. "

That is tho af ri lavit -f itnus3 Klievre.

T>3 T-.vSlbl’T: G 'ii3oi, will you a ain ivo n. th. mr bor of that
exhibit; was that exhibit 12 ?

D~. S.'.QIBt: Th53 last affi T.vit hr.3 tho Aibit !? . 12, Bionic Exhibit

" . 12 .

i650


18 ? torch h7—-■^.TD-16-1;- '~«hr.n (Int. v r. Sch: on)
Court So* 1


3Y OP. SWITCH*

1 Fr:foas r 81 a have ht- _ r tho -ffi tovit >f Pr foisor Kliowe;

nro Its c r.tonts truo?

-1 Yos#

q Y u arc suppose.! fc; 'vv. said that it was vory 'ifficult to havo
uxpjir .-n a ccrrio* ut on orLdnOs con ^jnod to loath, as Hiaalur hioiself
ha' t . ivo . raissi n; wh t to y u havo t: say about that?


u631


13 :; .rch I5- 7 -A-lT-l-PK^ Patty (Ints. v r. £ch -r., 3r «n)

2 art H.. I

A. Y„s, Hiaalfcr t >lh -x th t hias-lf wten he- «s talking with Qw Mt

 ' 1 r :V " 1, ‘

At. than tctu rlaentt ' 1?

A. n.:.- rare c^Juctvd, 'rvi ^si-s it was n-t ay uuty. It was that ■*

, t ode I fitet t, r.tto seen U». The, auvsU h f .o.n up odcquattlor

y nniar.i <-x, -rir-nts.

Dh. SAUTZ;: !i w. Hr. ?r-si^nt, ta c ?L. to thU a;Urial an rtoryl,

I sh.uld like t. su-:ait n Mfit- vit f Pnfussor Dr. ' ;irth ;f th °

13th I Fo!urnry 1947. It io augur IP in fcha -1 <*. & :u-..-nt • k, in tho
su.oLaount 4c l, Bocurtnt 12, , > »-22. This will - Siven th. exhibit

r Bi 0» 13. This fiffi •.!- • • r:. : * - wrfcifi ' * r t< ' a3r

■■ - «* Ontw-ruity f rlt


rt r-o r.t in th


« riO no says:


1 h'. s fir. 11? :r iv. lS-$ -r'.rrt r.’. boa! f th. Institute for
i . ic : 7 f thU W * ‘ lc 1 £ch ' L ’ CB WuU aa

>•.:• i- iry p fofl* p t t nivuisity i -fl±n.

■X to.* th. /-.u r- r t - ryl: V r^'.toly in Uny 1 %U

1 boC t, give c luduiv r. ".n.^S sta^u ‘ y l^nns f ?-io-no" "t tho

tin f »h. c.nsuitint: physici-ns. I t--k .vor this Ucturu
:• Dr. KlioUy in wh o. r h.re -f Mark this Joct * «l*ntftC.

•ia-usal. Thoro'y, I lotrfc. th t Polish s tours had use : n loug nlK
ryl rgainst G-rar-ny.

-A f» a nths rr f.» r Dr. Kilo* . ini r.. ti n ~ S r ins th.
.xioity .( O.ryl. Ba inf.ra.tf a. ih-.t Its- -f tf.ryl brtf

f ur / in Polish tWHtW. 1 « •= in »i--i-- t Biv. Pr,fc»s.r Dr.
Eli... th. f .ll.T'in; inf .rn.li.n: in a, in«H.t. -.RSn-1 .SW^wntB Wtf
Uvrrly ..n n n th. -ram <Uitp ■! '-ri u. M .V.-.C.3, --nr thus tfwjrl.
In th.» nxpurinunto it hrtf -.n :.Ur.sin..l th t fisrpl in « v.ry .ffcotivo
n. ut n t n Str-n- p is n.

"I! . Mnits / thin, in OP inctit lt. in 15U. 'r. in eo rtf.sr.ee .ith tho
r soils J-ntol .r, -ri-.-u-.ts .rich he slrortfy -n c-.rri.: ant in 1W0-U


- .-\r T-tClLY f th.


til- H* nr.


—i «n th. S-,rjvl'U k"; 3 jfon.se


13 - rch I9u7 -A-I7-2-r£f- Putty (Ints. v r. Sch-r., Or * )
C urt !• • -


J. r t ,ry. Theau axrixaj in 1940-1941 vsi*. st rt -vcbubc in 194C
-ft-r the CM^aisn, «l-ryl ta«: -n fr-ua! n the French side c.a c

ch-siccl vtrfnr- -. O oat in the -rp.rL-nV-.l st-.ge. The French apparently hr:.

th. intention t: us- .ryl ca c chusicKl warfare ng-nt, tut had n-t advanced
jv.r.i the exporirxnt-l ata^e. *» the results f th. Gerntn exp-rinonta in

1940-1941 sr.-w-: thrt d^ryl .'esseas-d n-nc f th- prv-rtics of a chemical
,,-rf-re ent after th- o: rlior -x.-rim~r.te hr. 'x-n c rrisr- ut, th- .y.tt-r


s c nsiu-r-- settle'.

*In 1944 r-1 ■ s still


•. t-in-.Mv ir -i 5-r.vr. ch-nists with ut r n-iicnl


rdacripti.n. Tnerof-rv, ft-r ur -x.-rL--xr.ts in 19U, 3 t!u :u,;h

.fficir-1 ch'nn-ls te th- Aney JL :ic-J. Ir.sxct r to f r d>ryl to ^ inclulo. 1 .

nly - teiiw inst a a. ictl rcscription,
C| in ay .-ini .., ia x. t •- f this ru c uU eaaao f Pawning,


-.rt I «mntc<! t. ,-r.v-nt a filacso f it. *»
r-nUd, thrt i-, the r-1 -? ' ryl -nly
or. - Uv.tjry."

Th- witn-ss s-.;-s:


: r e I kn«, ay T-licrti-n wns
ir.ot • n-dictl .rescription wto


"I ctn certify th-t t ty kn ..1- - r. frrrn -x -rirxnts -.t -11 "-ro

... n-t n. c.story booausB tt ftniaol

uxp-rittents bn. Ir- iy tchl-vcd :-finite cl'rity -.a t the ch-rr.curistica of
ryl, i.u., its suits’ ility «! / r n n-cuitc ility r ch-aic 1 tnrfnro
v, ' : ita -r:~e ility.

"Pam-hlility is th- quality .f c-rt-.in liqui Is t intr .ucc '-ru^a into
!y through fehu skin aitr. ut ti.-r-'.y injuring the skin its-lf."

h * h. c.rtific-.tea. This “ifi ' vit is : v-lu' 1- supplant
f tho -ther nffiCnvit Which no h'.v- just hu r‘ -y th- ritnusB, Prafowoy


Klituu.

tt-.. 0A'JI3:

.itnuss, c u 1 lw v- th- su-j-ct f C ryl n!cxt: -nothor drug,

L. In - cu«it 3x* U r. blood c - p* 'invriua d.cue>.ntr hr.vo ‘con
it ted V I stall -ir. nithO cuaxnt 656 ir. this Djcaawnt 3 H, xxhi'rit
.7 ... -. 25 ir. thu Sara a : embat \ ;k. It it U n v. :r.c tn, lfic-

; r r a thy Keich I»eSor.rch Council in


1.633


IS a rch 19-7 Putty (Int. v r. ^ch _-r tr.)

C irt K . i

* • iti.n t. 'r.-th-r ssi nr. nt n the 23r f r- ru ry, 19U, un'.vr rvn’:cr 2,
i r-setrch r.rsL nc-nt with th. .si.;.Vti r. t - v^l th-.'s f f'.bricnti n
f.r the ?r 'ucti r. f the 1 c.r ,ul ti a 'ry;, ? lyg'l. I re v-nt: to

duvuiop noth..Is _f fa' ric-'.ti n f r th- v tuctian f th- i c i.-ulntian

ru-;, lygci.

Is th t an aai. r.HjRt, Dr. Jl ao, which y-u =ssi,;r.<.2 with th. Ucich huaenrch
C jndl, “h- if 3 . whr.t v. .s the- ur; a. f this r.sci;r.„nt?

A. YeB, I isau. ’ the •' SSi T. -Et. * ru _* W~3 t - r. -UCei Which in CT.SeS jf

r.r ti na an* fejuri-a w il .v k. th- .1 c * ultc c.rc quickly so that

th fr ... 1- i". unless lap rt r.t Mood Vessels were hit.

*

.. Dr. ‘1 r. . st this .ru v r. h -n ex>rirsonta neevs-otry?

A. , f r 1.. 1 t... re .._'v ... ^h c ses in which this drUfi

could ’ o tvste -r. ,).-ri - Jei’ r 1 c s-s.

Can y>u tell us : w t.ds ra w~a ur '? ..as it in thu fora f tablets or
was it a liqui.’.? Aha it inject. '?

A. In contra- istincti n t U tr.er c j ul-r.ts, thie .ru. ha* the advant-

-.,u f : win., taken r.a * t l.t. It-v-.s >r lucef n ~. ..octln ' -ay with the addit-

i.n -f A certain aci.. I-.ctin La th t sobsthnee which enkv 8 L~ And Jolly

thicken. I h-jo I h v. ex,;roase ayaolf civ rly here.

... ' itrvss, it a~.ya In the .cun-r.t tr. t Lr. Ti cch-r use! r.e r several

c neentrnti n c-.. .rij.n-ra n inflict, si.-t ur.ls ir. r or t test n this

rio r>.r r these iris r..rr this !ru;, y ~1. *: far a I kn w, this is in

tha affi nvit f .:- r onfuoJirer r hi f th* 23rd f July, 1746, D cuaont 065,

jhi'it 237. h-t y.u h v- t s y - at '.ids rt

.». I -.Is ne-rf ~ at this iri;: the course f th: trial, ut 1 cmn t

ar.-erat-nl tnio ' eOattSv such n -.cti r. t test th. efficacy f poly t :al wouU
be-n

. ve/c-n lvte-ly r tun -r.t. rr f-ss.r 7 ' h.r.t s.i ke _t ;re".t len th ;n this
-.-.ttjr. He kne» f n rtifiai lly-inflict- x a.' f .r the s-.ke f ox.-eriaunt.

ther such ier cr.rrie .ut, I :.'t ta.r vVcn t- r.y. If era-no :Lro nctuclly

11 * y -x-vri.-.ental sr. tin,, then th t certainly :i. r. t tak- 1 ce in ?r*er
le t test Ly. 1 '.jcuuse .s s ,n ~\s tb- su'Jvct is , the a;> licat-

i r. r use .f , ly ; \1 is n 1 it -r r*c 8sary. Ir. -ther » -r :s, tr. t w ul-’ Hr.ve

.r. e;_: L-toly r. .-a.. nsic-J. ivi r.

h63ii


:* .rch 13-..-F X-18-rl-Ccck (Ir.t. Vcr. Scho-a i Ircr.n)

3=urt lie. 1

r Did jcu s;y tius tc Dr. i.ascher -nd iid you point out that there w
- h axporincntcl su'jccts con L persons in ailot ry nd civilian hcspit
rhc hrd to bt. op rated cn?

htschor tcld xo one- previously thvt he cr -nctr.-r doctor had rutl
the upper thi an cf r. person ur/d-r .'nrsthesi- until it tceexe blcedy and tl
tested the efficacy Of pclvrai, tut I didn't t~ke this st-teoient of his
seriously. Fran th- v.ry t.e-.innin; at tht-t tine I tela hix that h- 3l!culd
rive olyol to several well kncun clinics vo th t it could bo used durini
L. y -rations. In this iay he ccula best test the usefulness of this
pre; r r« ticn. kaachur then did, rs t r.-tter c i fact, ivu this dni L * to a
number cf clinics to be tested, i.eUrt ..-ix , the Haoov rer pol>c«l,
•-•a ra ir.-trte in u chau, visited x. in 19U, nr. tell r.e this pcly.jol
re", ived ft splendid r-ccaacnd tier. fr;u r sur.>c.- :nd 1 eliev. he nentior
: .. scr ~r«itl-r, Innsbruck. - rtter f fret polyed did prove to l
v iurVl Jrj- tc cccl-t bleeding .

This pcly. al which h s teen discussed h-re in connection with the
wX, -ria-nts wvs disccv.-red by r cert?in acUrt feix, vhc wra in c concent •
tun err. I , end yeu tc.k m inter.st in this Feix a ahevn by ; letter ir:

vera of the 15th of 3 ptu&er, 19*.3. This letter ia ir.
kTOxeeutica ^cuxer.t Seek 11, pc 11, lecuacot ill. Itaschcr writes u-
Giov.rs that .lex- had -iv.n hia : -.rc.*t hopes -’•cut the rolor-ae cf Feix, in
c ru th. h-ichsfu. hr-r SS, that is Hirsaler, ct r ncx.vh t different pictu-
ut the y.rs.n f Feix. This Feix, Jr. Blanc, is tho sroe Foix, is he i
the nitn-cs J.’efi xenticnod hero cn the otand?

.. Ye«S, this i : the 0 he cne.

.Jil V.h t lid y:u dc for this xan Feix? C n you teU ua thrt bri.l
« Feix w-s c je*, but h- h d ' -on 1 . -ally dcci red a hclf Jen cf
: cne. H. hod hrd - hi.-h position ia the my -s cn offlclrl -r.i w: s
-ut t be put on trial f :r corruption. He was rtriod nd was ecquitted
n was l.-via - the court rocs he »-s tckoi into custody wll oraann'a
-r-ass:tr. by girder end put ir. ccr.centrati. n camp ia Occheu, despite !

- .. ia. j: chr.u Feix c; 11 ' cr&t d . had


rch ir- -^:<-ie-2-Cc ol: (Int. Yon School u brown)
v-art 1

h-'-rd r-ix wc-s an export ir, the Icod question and the bled ccr ulcticn
qujsticn; end Hinder u3ked =_ about Kcix, and I ’eld h_i tfcrt in =y cpini
cr. injustice had beer. dene tc Foix because if he h;d beer, cn trial and the
f. ! beer, acquitted, it wr.j net rl ht that he should then e; In Le arrested,
KifiBler told ex there w;.s senethin, arenj with the situation, but he said
"If yen .appear in his behalf rnd tell ec he is a decent respectable follcw,
•n.n we will sue wh* t I can dc fer hin", end then independently SieVers uls
ado the ar.ce su t'ostien tc Hiailer. I aede application tc h ve Foix But \
rx.d proposed to Hir..0.er th:t Fax should be dec! r8d lo • ally a half Jew by
i.elchoaippenrr.t *:.Ieh was sui-ertfinr to tc Hicd-r in his capacity as Ilinist
f the Interior. I:.-.n :'t-r I hrd received th>. nocuss.ar; rssij.rr.ents frea
KLaicr, I, -.a I acid, cu - .red in behalf of Keix, n'l it raiat be ddtd th
F^-lx* roth.r, whe was r full Heeded J.», h. d been transported frera her he
in Fr-nkfurt tc the Qhotto in ThcroSienntrdt. 1 did trip. it cbout that F
< :s set free but I lid net succeed in havin hia dcd. rod 1. • lly r. half J
Th« Chief cf the i.eichssip, wnant opposed this : . ec..us- he f-cred sene diffi.
with Lcrarnn. Bcro&nn w.a said tc be intor«etud in the cr.se personally boo
•T-egedly r rel tive cf one cf Corasnn's serv.-nts hrd stolen : rood deal cf
Feix' property after he h J been arrested, end that »:s the* rer.sen i was rl*
i r .rvnn'c interest in the natter; rnd then in the spruv. cf iyi.4, r.hon
1 s r. .-in with Hianler, I put these tilings tc nin end su:'estod thet ho
•M.ui-J lve n*. ’.;it.en order t- the heichssippenrot so that Foix should b
i lly dccl red r half Jen, beceus- in t- do in - we vould simultaneously hi.
free his ucther fre-.i the. Ghetto ir. Thoresienstedt; nd KLirler rnswered thr
if Bornann wanted it that wey, he could dc nothing.

. SaHTcK: ..:*. r r sident, I wmtod tc sUfcsdt rn affidavit frora this
rt F-ix. Any wcek3 - ;c I t-lked to the witness z’xut this nd he dec:

• s If willing tc ive the. rf;id-’/it bee use he l -ii-v.d that in that wry
• -lit- die t: help th_ d-fcr.dant -lo;., tut ' .fore this affidavit ecu
t k-n i.vr., and the witnes: = approved tc i>r. wei33 _rbor tc-, the wit.

-VeR an order t. the xrcsecuti.r. that until further notice he was net t

.. :. rfccr, toe.


It:ch, 18-1-3K—IS—3-Ccc k (Ir.t. Yen Sehc-n Brown)

Court 1

whc err. cenfim the correctness cf what I c-ra sryir.-;, wo wor_ unable tc &
this rffidrvit fre-: the witness. Subsequently, we froqu-r.tly tried tc je
ir. touch with the witness. In p?rticulor, ».e reportedly inquired whethor
the edircss cf the witness could rxt t- iver. to us, but in spite cf all
efforts we did net succeed in x’ir.din^ cut the -ddress cf the witness. ..
few ys r ft.r the witness h'd discussed the c. ttur with Dr. '.kiss-erbor
with Qe, he discppccred frera Mumberg. He wes net rllcwed tc trlk with •
:ry acr ., end thc.t is why I rra unr le tcd:y tc iv_ you this affidavit.

Sc , I should like tc ask the Prosecution tc ive us -n opportunity tc \
in touch with this witness so thrt we idll be -lie to ot rn affidavit fx
r.ira, '-ec*usc without the cocptr.-.ti,n of the ircsec-tion it will be iraposs
for He tc fine cut th- address of the witness.

HjiJY: Ifey it please I c ur ikners this situ ticn his arisen in
ccnnecti n with other witnesses, lut in this instance he’ _rt I.oix was br.
to h'urr.i -r£ ns " rrosocuticn witness and transported her- iy the Ircsccut
Ho w- s brought here as a voluntary witness and placed ir. the voluntary
Witness h.use run by the i rcsecuticn. /.ftcr h- . rriv.d in Nurni ,rr he w
iacedi'tely ccntccted by defense counsel, -t.J the Prosecution is net awn:
th;. defense counsel roquesWd ixb.rt Feix a a witness. ,.t least I era :

w interne :t-d hobert Feix end det.rdr.-d we could not usu Ida - a a witi
and they interne cted his, and whether they w-nt-d V us, hia _r net, I <
net knew; lut in th- acantino :.c‘ rt F_ix h-a ' eer. ,-lcced und-r orrest -r
r.cw received cr. indictment and is .in tc trirl in Dachau in the concent
ticn crcp casco bdn; held there. If they idehtc -t cn affidavit of
-r'. F-ix they say dc so by contactin’ the Dachau authorities.

h. S*.UT3t: Jr. irusldont, I thank th- frosocutor that new I knew
:h.re Dr. Feix is. If I hod kr.cwr. th t ai,-ht w-^ks a :o I would have in th
•. ;.tirao beer, o Lie to ret an affidavit because I hve been in Dachau c fe
in etween, and I would h*ve b--r. r.ble to specie tc F-ix th-re, but at ary
r 1 :: satisfied. I fcnci it no t last, I thank you.

i: *.IDL::r: bell, counsel, if ‘-t tira-s ccunsel finds it iifficul
: see: tain the a!.'re33 of witnesses ir. on; such situ?tier, as thrt and r

1637


1B-.rl-ifc—0: c k (Iflt. Von Schocn i 3sxvr.)

Gturt :.'c. 1

request is nrdo tc the Tribunal, the Tri-unrl would arkc scat invcstiratic
ccr.cerr.ir.; th- oatwr and ascertain nh.-t the situaticn is, -nd whether the
witness is available, and sc ferth.

Ku S/iJTLF;: I thank you, Jr. President. -f ccUw:u. \cisaPerbcr or
I inquired repeatedly cf the General Sccr.tary's ifflee because cn such ar
;e naturally always ;c first tc the General Secretary's cfficc, but the
Address cf the witness w?.s unknown there; tut new I knew Mr. Feix is at

3scheu And I can -t an effidnvit frc.= bin, end cf course I pc net respans:

*

for th- delay.

THE i-lSLOT: Of course, I did net ctfn tc inply the Tritur.cl can f'.
the eddresa cf witnesses but if the defendant's counsel has difficulty in
findin * thea, th-n the Tribunal «culr*. assist in any wav pcssiblji in ascert
inc wheth-rcr net the witness is r.vrilcMe ns such ana the answer may be ;
and it cry be nc, but the Tribunal would en'oever tc re Certain the no-cess:
infernntien fer c-unscl.

Dh. S.m: I th-nk you v.r; ouch, Mr. Fresiduit.


13 .lurch !;7-..-..TD-19-l-Gr.ss (Rr-.n 1 Vcn .ichccn)
C urt Ho. 1


Q "itnoss, in connection with tho poly jal nntter I hav- a for nor-
questions. The rr.socution has alia c l that huaan exp-rinonts were ccn’uct
dth poly-al, an:! Prosecution has su'enitte ' D.cuiant U36, Exhibit 2U0, in
D.curont 3;ok 11, on Bl-o^. Coa ulation, This lecunent c ntains a report f
tho o .—colli: 1 Institute for ItUitazy Scientific Research. I repeat, Instit’
Sr "ilitary Scientific Research. This Institute was Dr. Raschor. In this
report the in? rtancc of the <!ru poly al for the fi-htin tr ops an’ in
operations is explains *. I u recall five operations are 'loscribod in which
p.ly rl was use!. D you recall thoso five operations which are dcscribo-i*
A Yes, Th-y woro publish- ' ir. the ’iuenchoncr Hodizinischo ochen-
schrift,

\ What loos this report show for a specialist lector? Does thu <!o
fren this report t that thoso woro n .—.-.1 operations, wh

poly nl by chance hacr, no * to b. uso , while in othor cases sc;vj other bl
c a illations ’ru was use 1? Or loos tho oxp.rt -ot thu impression that th>.
operations wore n t necessary as such in tho interest of the patient, that
they were sutk) s rt of oporaticn tho only purpeso 'f which was to toot pel;
j. In thoso five casus they woro certainly n.t experiments but each
ct r can soo fr n thj report that thoso wore n nul an l nooossary oporat
..ccorlin ly, I ha* n: mis ivin s an*. Icubts about than an’, allowed tho ros:

th-’j t b-: publishein tho ! 5aunchan.r 'orlizinischj chcnschrift. That
th u ht never -ccurro l to me. Tho publication, in addition, really had ns
scientific value. Raschor rant a’ the results t. bo male kno.m early so th:

< ul-l assure binself priority, -fc, fcoro! : -rk *sas bein carri.1 out by
'•'nr physicians in this fioL'. an' wantc.l t anticipate thoir results.

fitnass, if on r\>a *s this report about the five operations is it true
■hit th.r. "ere the Toll .in five rati.ns* 1) thi h ar.putaticn, 2) -r
fracture o^rati.n, 3) pnourteth rex ip ration, ii) carbuncle op-ration, 5)

1 r.tter - that is, rvrraal operations that occurr . s that

iruo?


1x639


15 ''arch ii7-i.--TD-19-t-tr.s3 (Int. vob !fcho_-n)
court l

. yes, and- ir. 3 >ac cases the i-orl operation is an exa -u.* :i
7 - doctor, i: you know this ary experiments »J».h ooncont»fi .o-. l
ii^atcr . c n’uctod ith poly no ncttvir what typo of experiments
w -r. r whit th_ consequences wore?

•* 1 knr11 t*»t perfectly normal laboratory cxojriacr.ua .^r. ua le
?■ _ al, ir.! the four or five prism is rrvdo th is.lv^ availably as t.
■ritnjss Hoff horu testified. These. vcj _ ir,- no ,ans dan -..roue . ,- x. '

experiment hut ware ncnal exp_ri. .cute ,f the sort, thit .ire cu.st -enry ir-
every laboratory. Th so so-cillo' exports.: nts rv.ro ass .ciate.*. : no p.
no 'isc -viforts r any s.rt, an!, in opinion, when ono coul
tablets for ninths on uni without sufferin any m effects vh- 'r-..-ur -
viin basis of chose tablets una pectin.

" nr. 51.no, ym ; ursolf ive in affi'ivi* .vhioh 1 imi-l vl to
S '* lr ttf-i.'.avit of <25 Oct * r J9'i >, an Document Sick II rv>cunv... F-
239* * tnis affidavit of the Zy October 1?I*6 ycu tell about thin t vV-
Or. roportod to you coiice’-nJn: his oxpei*l-k:nt3. "his was a

8. Nu.v .r 9 r. ■-< has the hoadin, L=; nts r. Kuann Eoin:s". Up to rai.
th-r -.n.8 not this hjadin "Expjrlnen fjj on H'uaan • ir. •n", anl 1 :,t urV,r
9 wo su '-'only fir.-! "Expori. 7 vr.t 3 on Hu.r.n 7ein;s", Sor*. tSrw a-, v- c-lL.
fact to y vir attention. 'hat ‘o ycu have to say about it?

.. I kr.nr that expori.-vn-s on ! .an bo in 3 hi! bevn carr-.c ! out, 7
c-iuse ttfcrlQr hinscif had told r>o so. Bo to! • v. about the typla-c vnanin
•ixjvrlnerst^ in Buchjnw.iT', an 1 than ir. connection viih Rascher v v.t th.

7 —called fruotin; uxp rii-n'-3 in */hich there was one fatality,. .. u
in nr affi-'ati when i ■ ku . about this I had tc ray tiut * u * Tfor
.'xporictn s on h-ir.in b in 1 he * been carrie cut in concentration camps,

0 Tou recall that on 12 October 19u3 a canp .lector of . j by
hr. Xihl na.*o a re; rt, hich Prosecution subnit tel as ’

. -f Ebcun.nt Beok 11. He r.ports on a thi. h amputation en a f r
1' nil, patient. This op.ritier. '5 identicii -.rith the first of five
1 hie:, cu-.r.- 1x36 refers. in this oonnccticn the- further fact

1x3*0


IS ''-'.re:: U7-Wn>-I9-3-C-rcss (Int. Von achocn)
Court ifc, 1


serves consideration t&v- Q*.c- r:p;.i 7^to;r 7 hi f the SS in his letter to
Saschor o 10 February lSuh, B-c!t 11, p.c 2U, D-cun.nt 6l5>

Exhibit 2L5, bjocts t: basch-n^s publication f his experiences with
Polyyl* Can you explain thin natter?

A ^.rst I nust say than tr-ia £>-ci11j’. thijh op.ration montiono 1
t other wish Dr. Kanl*s r.aro ust bo absolutely i'.ntical with tlv thiah
anpuiation that is - ,:.t' on. *. *. an those five operations in the publication
:f th. 'u nchrn r ' j Ic.'.nijcho vch nschrift. So far as P-hls ocr.plaint is
c :rc.rr_ , I rmt say tV t t ‘.hat tl„ 7 as ashe * an' hr.’, no rds ivin s
about th so natters beta puV-ishoi an’ it as only because I ha’ no rris-
Ivin a that th. xU r tra_ p« Jisi.j' at all,

Th-at F ihl sh:ul‘ '.av hjaeto ’ t this publication I can only explain
to ryself on th- up. j. : ... < ha ‘.a. f a jvi un uxpjrlnonts of a for-
bi.'*!e:i nature m Dachu,

q Dr, “l-r.., yru :«vo alr-a ^ sai ’ that the witness Noff testified
h,ro that he nr.' f< ur o.* five cth-r v.>pl. voluntoere l for this poly::nl and
that they use \ nly v lurt jrs. J- , I Should like t know tha foil, win-: If
1 io u»j *. it can either have an offjet r without offoot# Nor;, this
p-ly al if it is n t effective cr It -n’.m- er the health r can it brin;’
about tho loath of the p.rs.n, r is it true, if I as a lay-nan assuuo, that
than polyr al is Juo*. t ary effect, P .r’nps, as a • , i can explain

this natter to U3, Ivt c foe. ’..s poly -.1 have?

.. r-o nly if foot that >ly nl can have is t c a ailnto bl Any
th r .ffect h r never be . 'srvo!, n;r I bill v. that ary other effect
c-ul' occur, I hav.- air. a V oai that pal - nl is rale f an absolutely
un '.an orcu3 base,

q *-itness, the lofonlmt i-v.rs in his affidavit f 26 October 19h6,

7 re .nt : jzk 11, pa : 6, . L73, rbhi' it 23c, sai* c.ncornin y-u, ''That

, Dr, =i n. , t Yds 't. -le ’ w ro inf rood f all w rk, inclu'ln Dr,

-rh r's jxp ri-.ntc, That y u irast have kn -m of then," I '*o not know how
' offii -ivit r-.s ’r- .r. u~, I ' not knrw hat the af-n'ant -.iov.rs will

lrSIil


15 arch L7-v.7D-19-4*-Gr sj (Ir.t. vji Scfaoer.)

C.iPt :.'c. 1

-vo fee say .-.bout it, cut I s v . vl' li‘--e t.. r fr:“ you fc.t y-u have to say
“bolt it,

.’. I con say th-t Siovors* 3tr.t_uv.nts in this affidavit -ro partly
true, "zp.cz : r ha* been c uisri m * by Hfc.ilor to _rk dth r_o in tho field
;f cancer roMvehi blo^' c r. ui-.ii r’.tiao f eonnod potatoes, an!

* forth, Consequently, hero t.. Snscher ms un’.er obli-ation to report to
ns, Ih .re tms n. rvnticn f cry other x.rk by Kirrlor,

J ~T-Z S"""!’": Dr, ^-utor, ,/hil th litn-as is or. this question of
tho naJbor of -xp .rl-._n 1 s hi hv*. - cancer, bl o.’. c a ulatior., eanno! potatoes,
itc, - will yi plocso have Idn toll the Tribunal n in lotail .That oxpori-
:-ants ho actually “ rte. ! on, oithir in coUabvraticn with R&sehur, or vdth
Taschor *warkin un ’jr ■! ; r •: f: hi r rkir. un r Raschor at Dachau, That
is to say, any .xp.rL ..a s hie o’, y ha* nry :rs edition dth oach other
either at r-.ch'u r jIs.-.'Iv.-.v,


15 _ar li7-r.--l~---2C-I-£arrc»t (Ir.t. von Schocr. Brown)

C - -. -'o. 1

2 . SAIT - ffitn.as, yew have heard this question connected Kith
previous question. You arc asked whether you worked at Dachau, or in
any other eonccntrst cr. ca.-.ps, or anywhere else carried out exp^ri-uents
of the type under consideration here or under Roscher?

JUDGE SE“ IliG: Hot necessarily this type of experiments, but all
xp. risen ts of any t pc that he carried cut.

• d" . ShUTtrs

, Any kind of-xp.ricents together with Raschcr, whether together,
or superior, or os a subordinate, or in any relationship. Please
'ive a clear, frank, honest answer.

A lo. Rasch.r r.olly .s not subordinate to sc in the tru- sense
of mu word. :erhapo legal collaboration between us sight have developed,
in th- fi Id of cancer research or in this field of developing vegetable
canning or .n polyy. tlblood coaguatlon. Ir. th.s. latter fields I am not
an export at all. These things int.rwstud me only the point of

view of hwAlt. and th- business of canning pot.toes ond vegetables
inUrest.d no froa th. nutrit.onal point of view. T.-..re t .c no imnediat.

xbor tioa b tvc«n at and Raschcr in tfca suwc / this question*

. i'cu say. Doctor, "direct collaboration.*' Ifnat do you moan by

that?

a *hat -o.anr that, for oriaplu, I did not h v anything to do wit»
in laboratory experioents in coagulation. This was pur-ly a Raschcr
, to x surhow th- people were working thore, namely,

. SosotiaJ previously to whoa Isaw them tn.s. r.en had
Hewed a poly -.1 tabl.t and new, after a certain lapse of time aft.r
tfe polygal was taken, th. d-gre. of blood coagulation was aecortainod.

..ia was done in thi ... a cubic centimeter of blood was taken from
v ot these peonl., th.Se- blood sxrclvS were put in test tubes and

*• Were t.Vn stirred with u gla . or st 1 needle and the length of

tint it toe' for r . blocd to coagul-.; .. These were
so-called exper affair.

Q fl hcre wen t . se things done?

hop Dachau. In the so-called -ilitary Scientific R


18 „_r L7-. k -..^-20-2-K-rro7r (Ir.t. von Dcaotn ^crm)
Court So. 1 -


Institute Of Raseher.

4 That wia in thj concentration carqs? B

A its.

Q These experiments with th. five, volunteers, which apparently

included K-ff and ha tails about then, did you set th-cf once?

• •

A I .saw then once.

9 Frequently? . . ' • • . ...

A Cr.ee or twice. x t is nossibl- that 1 saw than twice. I can't

.say for sure nos today. - ,

» • *’•

4 Eut you did not take any art in the experiments yourself?

• •* *•

• a Soy indeed. . • ,

. - * •

And it sce.is to .ic that they were very haraloss things. Row

V * •

each blood did tn.se people take?

a' They took roughly on. cubit c-ntt-.et r of blood frwt.u.ch other
4 And ho* ib-ut oth.r .xporinc.its tog.ti-r with Hhschcr - none .

at all?

A .lone at all.

EVjdcGL\ so?p..'«g-: : * •_ • * -';

w’ • hav the witness put his earphones on, will you?

Professor Bloc-, th. Tribunal has before it Prosecution Document •
being Prosecution Exhibit 123, which is Sluters' diary for 19 Wj.
"rxl.r th. date 22 1 -bruary 19l*li, betw- n 1630 and 1630 hours uppers the
hotatipdi "Dachau 3, bauptsturafnohrer Dr. Raschcr* supply questions'
for oroduction of polygaj., cxocriounte Professor Blo-tc." .lew, war that
•J::cu3sion inn-card to or in connection with the polyg^l situation which
j'm hero just bo-r. describing? Answer "yes" or "no.'

" » A *3 this a talk betwu-n SilsWers 'nd-.ijstlf, my I :sk?

. This is the Siegers' ry which is supposed, as 1 assume, to
contain his diar; entriis for the matters th t h. is attending to during

■it Jay of his work and orportodly cade b> him during the course .of . -

* • - . « • . •*’

, nd. iUs is on 22 February

i .rfcaps, Dr; S.uter, if yea have th. Gersan. I'a.going to ack about *
r.v r-.l of th^s- entries ard if you will nlace 'then all be for-, hie I Shoiu


von -e’.xa


rt..;)


r -- ~

O- 1


' -•


liic. tc go ns ji a nfr nb — L *

- •


*v f


F - r. U2.L. "i 1 -t." r. :r.t.r;ut ra or a

cu • v !f cti T2 7--. Ij-.'.f z nc .rir r.tr'oi

r i-x Kind? . -

A -j - ms 1 as a conference be¬
tween jib tJ> : n it. - , .f' -c-Jbt of Uiet. Her.,

uaU r *'0. }, 173 j bflirf u it?U .‘.our. .• : .-inV T w . - 'qund 'he package
• « *i J •

j “i ar» nferr t-.

.■ ■. » , > v «•< .»r


r- 'l r f-.* V-i


>>  * • • »’ » •

. •* -


f • f rv/>.


W< ■--d-rst'-ni ry entry

• •

v . • r>: j- 1 i 1, but only

•. hoi th-rt.


• • -


• # v ••


• I : .


-r .. -nit-v, -CSv si


\ i yov hare th«.a


• r- • • it t; . y.

• B

F rd tv J>tr _ 'ox ••• -•'* j .V ':.

• • * f 1

„ - .... p i fj, .».■ - r - * pai- t”io in oivkr

’ ■ : -.r L- • r, x\ •* « • ?•.* : « tlv.t

•• r r It Is .el ix <r

. . : .ii . n • t • ••«...


• I •


Very 11. Li ... .. r «.b: .rsonal otsfl

'c .r St-irul’T mfr..'n- >• t-. Is •; l„:n. o.-c.r of 15 FuiS’u~Xjy'<jftS

>si ' hly dissufsjd tor infer *.icn uptstumfta r. Raschur

'!)•. Hr * . Jar; ,ca t. 11 rv. Iricoird n.: 't tint ha;; reference to?

* m

« . r c;l; Lij o n .• _r -nly .to ti; following order

; ' :?. L .u J thtr •*- 1 r troribit.d that leading

. : r .'re- t. r r;. .. >c :1a -1 .u r^h If of ao-3'dl<.d ’ eniri>_6

'.s order ■ fron


- r - :r -7---. o' lint. von Schoen - r:*rr.)

f.crt 1

* T 3 °* ; c< ^5sln.-x fror Hicnler, and according tc which, for instance,

cceriii^ to isolcr's nttituc. aoeat it i c-uld not hsv anp^al.d on

•

’ e * H rr r<Lx. 1., 2 rcf.r tc tix prohibition of npptnl-

:n --.. if of sc—called '-ncnic3 of tfx. ^c.-lc.''

-c .r. • ites for 25th of *cbrunry, *900-1520.
" ^ - i3 copy of Si.v.rs' Diary tn. 25th of February is

lasing, rr... 23rd of F iruar.. is r., ththe 2'.v and the 2,’th. L t
: ... it th - leg at of order hor- . ; 0 , ov rythiag a to b«.

orh r. 22 :, 23rd - in oth.r words, ti. ?5t isn't in h n..

• . tjtv it ia outaidv of th doe <.

-- ' 1 -a sorry to say that it is not here*.

■* .-a 1 •' ‘id urdcrat-.no it, he read to

? . ti ??. i .0:

•25 KVrj-r, -900-X$tt> - ft«pft*8©r Blpoo, bj twlophonc, udvis.d
conc-roini ,ia work .nt Dae!.-! and collnbcr.tlon with Haachor.
: ;c. tA'i tl;. Irifc'inal wr. t that r.iera to?

c- not. I c r.not b th. sr-.cinl order sine, that ord.r I

..ntic.nsd r* ut - a? :.lir.g In b_hnlf of .ruaics f U. people was issued
■’■ ’it the day before. Ihia can only concern cmc<-r r.ai'.rch in which
p » • • - lot reft f. i.or r e t it dcr.n in y
ths. words in • ’s iinrjr - t -t, of course, I c moot till you.

0 *Vtryv. II-

•t:i irn *o «.S February - 915-1700
* c» r it is.

* 3 ’ icr. -.re. Council; Dr. urauc nr rang d a di?-

- . Dr. I ■ eh. r. Com daaicvh*

• -••••,. . - Lon ra. tro-

. . <-•: ‘.eu/ir.lou of I-.ee.. rch.'


• I


<l >t. do. •) • j-. f r tr?


lo -l'x-~—l?-21-l-Lesser (Ir-.3rr--)

C'-urt . 1.

3‘.1« entry refers i - c ‘-r c titled. etc 21y did trio -lr.ee.

7 -.rd.-v -3 lea s'-;- z..-i tdic l.c; sct’.vsed r L r poserr-d sdv.ld n-rl' vc rex.

3 3;oo red, Bi'.lo.lc ?._x red; 7 . rd :.e ; i3 tyTOrrr.-hicnl error. Dr.

jr .ue * ' dr f tdc ‘dr 7 c?r.-).y in the ioh b ®c□ erxeh Council, nad ho

•

•Jr: f. t"-lk ’-It; Dr. Thieurone or txe lcn-'irv- cdw. lots in Gvr. -.ny -ad

director v* r-ro; l:v.nt cvsrJ.cnl inctiiuto of t.. s : iscr "ilhein Gcaellach'ft

in 3 rlix. 3 '-a ' liciMri r c bout prowrin cdo.ic.le which wore noodod

o„ re hrjsd t . rodveo 7 sly 1. ’ -"J. 0 /7roduco ; eotln, r- e. octively

.jy.'. l, -i'. I b olive th r. V •- •. qjUBii'ft of .rottiiv rtrylica *f vi - ir.

OOli • id i'..ie. ;n St lit - . 7 -- 0 -. -r- .. Ovid i.Ot bb r.J.vi* CtttTOd.

3.;on rorcl;.r n c. o crj: «- r. r -ci..r •'.> t.;. r cl- of c..o dcrl

; ctJT*' I. ' * 'r' • . ■' 0 ' .-. »oct -.ata. BOiiothin,"

...1 x . 4 -.ui ; r ■ • • V I Ml,*. *.h *. the rr.w

.. -,eri A ci.c ti .. 1 i r..u. i-n v cute ' : : d I h A t> ace in viou

•

>f c:.‘n r v tort • litu-i .. *. ah •; la naald bo found. Mo

vno the <cr_>oao *7 '-.ic.. v.o to 00 oqoooinlly onl.-.r;;od.

It Juot icedra to no th . tLi* u.til*: I obteiaod vir. Prof. ftyasoa fr«

H rich arid,; ‘Cdoniatry* ad fr ■. t'.v H.icdo Office for Zconxjy s-c ‘instruction
r. Its .0 r..:u..t of Pyri,rir. 3 co c-. . led '.o oiriot ir.ccct "ootc •uul for
ox.^r.'.r.ontin,,- in the ciueotii.-. Jf corwcttin,: the ;v 5 t:.to ootlo via r. i^osinl
iffico tit t oxlttod for tho owbattiaj; of tdio potuts beetle.

7 -j Pi-SSTBSM?: Tdo Tribun:! trill r.w be in roc jo 1 until 5-:30 o*cioc!t
•.2 -.<rr;w .‘train. T

(2 . Tribunal rdjoamed until 19 -9’-7 a? l> 2>0 hoar. )


C-urt So, 1

IS Her -7-H-l-lster (Jnt. 3r.v-)


Official Transcript of the A.:erieen Military
Tribunal in the natter of the United States
-f an erica puniest ».rl Brend.t, et cl,
defenda n ts, sitting t Xuernber.-, Ger-.eay, on
19 JIarch 1S*»7 , 0930, Justice Beale nresidins.


THI 1IAHSKJL: Persons in the c'-urtrocs vill olerse find their seats.
The h-norable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I. Military Tribunal I
is now in session. God sere the United States *f America end this hen-
.rati© Tribunal. There vill be order in the c'.urtrocei.

TH* PEBSHSETj * ; r. Marshal, will y u ascertain that the defendants
ire rll present in curt.

TKL hAPSKAL: Hay it piece© y«.ur Hon r, nil defendants m Present
lr. court with the exception >i the dcf«n*ant Ob^rheuser, absent due to
Illness.

T75 PHiSIDSST: Tho Secretary Gontral vill note fer the record tho
•reecnee of all the defendants in court save the defendant Obcrhoueer
* is in tho brs-jltcl and has boon excused, cn account of illness.

C-unool nay nrocood.

XU&5 3LC«a - ?.utu;vd


DISaCT aXaHIRATXCS (Continued)

BY DP. SAUTaB (C unstl f r tho defendant Blor.e):

f lenss re-^r.ber that you arc still under oath. I hpvo tvo or
throe additional sh-rt ouostions, Dr. 31 .•©, then I shrll have c ncludcd.
2 of re the c ncluslon f yesterday’s session y u v©rc asked ab ut certain
entries in Slivers' diary. Or. the 26th f April 19-. - there is cn entry
- this is still B cu’ent 25-16, Bxhibit 12? - and here is r n c r - -' v-h'.ch
: Bh uld like y.u to clarify. Under 26 A-ril, 1600 hours tt 2000 hours,
*1700, 51 - o (by telonhne) Belch Chnn.er cf Doctors, Tr. Sl-ne, continu¬


al .. f research v--rk with Dr. Hr sober, r.eutr no research." Then nn ihor


'-•try, "rr fesscr Bloie (by telonhono) 1. Neutron er>eri'cnte, rorc * rl
7^^>sReichsfuehrcr-SS recucstcd. 2. Pcrhr-.s us© -f Beecher in
■\)3. clctvt? VaxI- first of all recuire three nonths bacteriological trr ln-


Can y-u tell us briefly vhrt this all noanc?

A. Yes. First, re regards the so-cellcd ntutr ne research: 1944

U&'-qa


* .


Court So. 1

15 liar 47-M-l-2-I&>Toster (In*.. 3rcva)


; vjtcfc Fc*tua.ster General tcld ne that the cydctr r. being const r-
uthen would be nut at ny disposal so that I could use it ir. -y cancer
research. Pir this I needed a treined X-ray socialist end radiologist,
vis, an exoert. Since I could not have cne, at lepst not thrvc.;h the
donning -ffiee of the Soich Leader -! Hctltfc, I turned to Hi: le- who _
c^uld not dc this either, feat because I lacked such n ran, and because it
t > quite c vhiio for this cyclotron to be-finished.'I never .:-t rr*und
to carrying on neutron# research, ns regards cancer.

... D^ct-r 31u:e -

A. Let ie sty thet I haven't yet insured the second *xrt >f yur
cuosti'.n. around this tl-.o EL-'ler *skcd r:e whether I cculd rr-
ufic -f Haschor. He had been arretted pnd could no longer vorx in Drcha.u.

I then anavored that nt soft Sascher c -uld be used as Dr. 5rc.sc : c'»31/'-
.rrt -r. Since he wet n-t u bocterlvl .1st. ho v-uld firoi need ht'.r.
treuri logical training. However, the institute wrj not yet finis.

• I should have to ask Dr. Gross whether ho agreed to hove ar. rss?c..:; t
I certainly nyself had no volnion a.b*it ernloying Srschcr, nor did Dr.
Gross hove an opinion, and the cuootUn vto finally settled by the ffet
that Hcschor vns egain arrested and not released any sore.

v Dr. 21 as, in the sossl n tf 2 January tho orosocution declared,
"21 no cor.sld.ors crccriwmtc on hu-.ans illsgnl," and in connection *ith
this otate-.ent they reforred to ymr rffidnvit of the 25th .* ‘ -^ or

1946 , to be found in Prosecution D cunent 2 k 11 , on 31cc J Cosgulati:a,
a yt/o 8 -f tho Gerran text, Docuncnt Kur.ber * 71 , Exhibit 1'unb.r 238.

It can be seor. frou y.ur ovgrn affidavit that you sneko of a ±rct that
y.u were inking efforts to brio.; nbout sere legal reaction of the

ruestion of experiment. on bu^n beings f-r the *>riod tubseauent to th

•

'r.

iihnt ccr. you say to this, now that you have hear' tha.t fren t!
tenant cf yours the nroaeeutioa has believed that it can dr-v such o
c nclusion?

a. At the end of 1940 I spoke with Professor Sorst in 'hir.ich, the

u6hs..


Court Kc. 1

25 .-Is-r -7 H-1C- BEK-Fos t er (Ir.t. Br^vn)


eiowo ci-ncer research can, on the onestion of sclvin.: the ccr.ccr
Question. I cx-jinlned tc 3<-rst that in :;y opinion we would not -irc.prcsr
rny further in the crncer protle- unless ve were -sre->are& to carry out
jr-xjrL:entfl ;n hu-urn beings. I Justified this in dcteil end drov u- a
v-rkin.; hypothesis with which Sorst agreed, and he i ckncvledged it as the
only workable olnn for the future. He then, however, rnlsed the objection
hcv doos thet natch your orcfcssionnl ethics. * answered Borr* "If I
thus succeed in this v r y in solving the cancer trcblea only five years
etrlior, then cilli'-ns of -ersone will he snared s oainful early death."
Oeheinrat Bcrst then sold to ne, "Sr. Bio- 20 , that is rlso.t- sure,
nodical ethics." Fron this conv^rs: tior. : erne to the conclusion that
after the war • should undertake to have legal reflations np.oood r.Vul
errorLicuto on huriaa tein,,a in connoctl -a -ith solving the cancer *>rct-
loa, and I s-.ko to Eiuuler on this ouhject. Hitler then ox^rccso
v : ‘ opinion rc-'nrdln exr.crinents on hurmn he inf during the w, nandy,
f ,r numesos thet v«ro of nilltwy ianortanco, such rs ! hrvo already
dooerited. Between the trwritnti for allitary purooeoo and the omurl-
3eats that I lr.tor.dcd tc carry cut after the vr-r to solve tho cancer
orebloo, there in to this extent a vory gront difference, that thoso
crncer research undertakings hu ve nover boon of nllltary l-raortoncc.
Ccnsecuently, ry efforts were t- have lows oatsed tfter tho >* i for
llitary low dlfforc in ocscr.ti.-l *.»rticulars frer. ncr.cetine lew, in
y opinion.


-Sl-9


Cjort I


19 U7-M - 2-1 - LJG - -^ohan - Int Brown.

• 5r * 3loi», tc ba sure, y C u yourself did not carry on any
cxjx.ricor.ts sad were not actively participating in th„ carryir.- cut
of experiments, hoxovor, during the Hitler period you vro . uty lender
of tho Reich Chedsor cf Riysicians, consequently, you are -bio to give
partly reliable data on tho opinions that acre hold at that time; now
toll ~o , during your tine of office, did any laws cither i- loraany or
cutsido Of luraanf bocoao knom to you; lows passed rog-rd' .ig experi¬
ments on h'iacn beings?

a. Ko such questions w-ro ov^r asked of tho Raichs Chaster of
Rysici-ons either in peaco or in war. Lows for this in Germany c
r t known to re, aside fron Hirraler's remarks tc t*i In regard to tho
ccxrying out of experiments if .military i*portwco during tho war.

:Jor do I know arything pcaitivo about laws pass-d cr. these otters in
foreign countrioe. In Cc.negations with colleagues, I opcnsionally
heard tiu-.t America had passed se.vc such law, mainly in the s.uthorr.
at tos, a JLaw providing that cx ; x.rl~onts on hue an beings could bo
carried out on cor.djr-n.d cri Inals for scientific purpes-s, t 1 havo
no positive assuranco that this 's sc.

ir. ny opinion, • n tho t?iestior. of carrying cut cxp-rinonls on
huar - n beings for research purposes and particularly sinca .o begin-
nirg cf this century, 3uch experiments bucarv. veiy n^wroos, which
can be soon from international mdical literature. T.nt is tc scy,
this is noro of loss c. Matter cf to It; of custom, if I cai 30 ox rose
yrolf, which ir. the course of dcc.-ros has b-.ee>. part of tho w; *
--arch practico.

Q. Did the Reichs Ch:ui>or of Fhysici.-ns, of rhich y~u were tho
deputy presidont, olt or b-fero jr during the war, lay down ahy -olicy
for Gw rear, physicians, freu which th. doctors cculd see what it vno
.-omitted for than to undertako cn ojperisunts cr. human bcdr.js ;.nd
-'i-.t tt-.s not pjrnittedj v^rc such policies, or indications if such
..iven to Vo aodical profession?

"• So, I have alr.aqy sai t no l och -Uestiocs -..era asked f

h65C


C -it I


1? “ar hi -K - 2-2 - LX- - *aefaan ( i nb. Brown)

the Roichs Chamber of Biysicians.

Tour “or.;r, I h-.-.vu r.o further questions.

TH_ ERESXD5NT: 13 th^r_ azjr other w-xasdnation of this r.itnMS by
any dofonso counsel?

HT DR. NEL3*

Q. First, I, taking tho pluco of =y coll.ague Dr. Sor^tius,
should like t- :sk a f-v- questions for the defense counsel of Professor
SrzrtLt, the witn.ss> Dr. Kline's fil- not*., Docuaont 1309, Mbit of
tbo Frosycution 326, has be^n the subject cf diivct intorrs ation. In
this file note it says that General Field darshul *eitel approved
the construction ir. Hoasolatodt, Posen, :rd that the Rcichsfuchrer cf
SB and Professor Brr.tvit had pre-dsd hi = consider :bl- assistance*.

Did you Jjpenk to h-of^ssor Brandt 1*05 rding the purpose of this inetl-
tut., such as it is hurt prvsontcd, na. -ly to study and to tost biologic
aeons of war faro?

A. Hw, I did n t ap-ak n this subject with ft-ofossor r"J.dt.

Only onco, if I xxoechor rightly, at the ond of 19!j2, i tuljphc!U,d

rrofosscr ^ranot and asked hii. tc support cy construction w rk in

Jiessulstodt, which was a career institute; I intended t- idd this

institute an institute for the production of vaccines in general, there-

•

f.ro, I turned t Profossor 3r -ait, because I had f und out that be
gave expert epini n to Speer's jftnistxy rhuther construct! wen.

acosanry, as approval for tho construction :f buildings depended cn
Sheer's Ministry.

q. Thft is correct, in ether words y •: simply telephoned Profess r
-r ndt and asked his to "support yeur wishes with Spar's Ministry *
halp you ir. your construction Drears-.; but that docs not sean that
Pr lesser Jrandt knew that this an institute for the study ana tho
♦ esting cut cf naans cf biological/warfare?

Am X tS.

i. Then, Dr. Eli--.:o further says in this file noto that you - anU-r
to propose to Scoring and Brandt to dissolve tho Blitoabloitar Ccraitt*.


I* •‘ar U7-V - 2-3 - LX- - Ac han (nt. 3row.)


Did you 07ur either before cr aft-r this talk with Kli.wc-, spook about
this ncr'.: eon unity, Slits-abloitor, with Professor Brandt?

So, neither with Brandt, nor with Gocring did I speak, on
this raattor, and ay research efforts w.ro not receiving the •necessary
support at that tine as I already testified yesterday. It r ay
intention perhaps to ask Br ndt or Gearing, but I thought sb-ut it
later, and beliov.c that s nc point tc it and did not do it.

Q* In your present ansvjr, as w-11 as in yost-rday's -tumors,
frequently tha concept Siitznb loiter work cr-.-unity is kss elated so
clesoly with Posen that it see a o.-.podiur.t tc za to Jjavo it clnrifiod
by tho followingi Did the work co..-.-unity Slitzabloleit-r have orything
t' dc with your institute in SiosselsUdt netr Pcsor.?

No, nothing wtoteoovor. -ho institute in P.3cn was a cancor

*

Institute in tho Bedehs Research Council, and was or. a quite different
level froe tho Blitsabloitor coccdttoo, which was purely a military
at tor.

W. liu kn-ir about tae rlitiahlaitor cor.ritte- aincu you wora a
o.*>ur?

a. x us.

Q. Then is it corroc’ when I a ay th-t tho purpose f the Blitz-
abloltor work c-roiUou was tc liscuss r.oasuro3 th t night h vo to
o« taken as pr.wetive —asurcs f r th- treeps -.r>d ci-.lli fcouLaticn
should bactoriol'uical or bi clerical w .rf .re rise?

a. In part I oust answer this cu-rti n in the -ffirnativo,but

I z st Unit ay answer by saying that th- olitzabloitcr court ttoo wrs

n. position to take- protective e-sures. Protective in^asuros,

t might have to bo taker. Were, s far as the troep3 wor- crncern-d,

aters that the .ury Hodicoi Inspect -ratu or the- ..ray V.^rimr;

Inspection had t: toko car. -f; and far the civilian p pul alien, it

was the noich Ministry £ the Interior's concern.

ar.d it fir this reason.thdt I ssid purpose of this w< rk

CvTOittoe was t-. discuss such noasuros', t rake propose Is r ox- ino

•


. “’x L7-U - 2-ii - ljg - -ieohan - (ir.t. Brown)

ox to how the tr-ops and the hoaa country could be pr tectcc?

To that extent you are correct; yes.

w * 10 >- :ur affidavit .f 25 Cctcbor 1516, D;ctmont 1*71, Frosocu-
ti:n Zahibit 228, you said thefollowing* In 191:1 "itler f rbado far-
ther cction in tho Euthanasia action, 3 and t continue: -*n v.iao
-edical circles this program wr_- regarded as c-ntrary t > general
usage and corals, and illegal." fe.v, th -1 is . ratn-r jen -lizod
3f tonor.t that you nakc thoro, and I eh uld ba thuikAil, i ircfessor
Brandt's behalf, if yui would sry -urn cancisely what y u aeon by this
whan you said in "uido r-.Uical circle. 11

• A t was 'xn i’t. that theoc doct rs wj war- particularly
rdigicus held tho view that the Kuthansaia pregrtn would need as it3
f.sis .an oponly published law, and if I used tho word “wide” in con¬
nection with tho ".lido • -dical circles" that tera sh uld certainly not
be concerned with sy saying tho caj.rity ;f physicians because that
raa by no roans tho case. It is hard t <ivc statistics in -.'.'Sc u ttor,
and it is f r ttor.t reason I tised the words "wide nodical circles. 0


19 .~ir-Hul.-3-l-?utty-Int. 5ro-.

CCUTt AC. 1.


i-ouid it have been nore correct to say “in certain
.edlcal circles there ..ere basic objections to this iro.ru..?

* That is icdibitubly true, nd I believe th.t the
formulation thut you j;e-d to .ie from the ui'fidr.vit v-s Ir.n/n
up by the rrosccution rather then by _yself, ulthou 1 c:r.
not s.y lor 3ore.

% In the 3u>uc cfl'iacvit you spo_K of t.ie conference
ir. .Munich in 1 C*; 0 —li ut v.’nich :.r. _r ch re./ort-.u or. the uii-
thanusin order of i.itltr. Dr. hr-udt would IIko to ..now
whothor the statement you, in you lav it, .. . .t i y ,
that he, Dr-ndt, hud sent -'r.-cS s his representative to
thl3 conference, i3 positive .<no-. Ud Cl c on your put or v.n< -
th;r it ai<ht not be ur. error or. your put bccjusc no hin-

:■ is of the opinion lo s or os ho ru^e-bers that ho h-.U

not s« nt ora cic.

* -itner ny autiory lty or hr. Conti :.n un-

intvntioiv.l in las to to..lent .having said •LracK’ when ho hi/.nt
to 3'iy -Louhi . I, of cours , d a only report on • t, I

lbor. Bo :‘ur .3 I onn jud-^o the ttor non on •.. evi¬

dence of documents, I tnituc it must u vc been .n error on my
rt jnd tli t the person snoi not a-vc b-en »>r.c!c but
uoualu.

I Should liiCu to .34 now : .w auctions in ay c ?-
. lty a .. .luiosvr’s counsel, i’o vuut sector diu the P.oich
;\ei». rch Council belong?

a I shall try to ..nsv-er the question, thut is, if I
rscood your question correctly.

I shall oc aoro precis.;. Did tne- I.uich husourefc


oi-ncii b-.lor-s to tr.e liiitnry s-ctor or the civiii* n sector
r to some - 50 Verr.r.ent 1 s ctor?


1 . .. r-Ebri-3-2-iutty-Ir.t. Brown
Court -»o. 1.


I believe its legal for- \.r s that of a corporation, tut ur.-
Icr no circuasv.nces vus the Itcich r.. s<-..rch Council c .chr-
_echt orgur.izjtior..

- Could State Socrut.ry Conti give you orders re ..- r-
dinj rose rch of cmcer.

A lie. I told you that he triud to once or.d t. t I
refused to accept thua. -y plenipotentiary powers ir, tho
qu-stion of cancer t .ounted to this: that I could report
directly to Gocring as ^resident of the n-ich ;<oeerii .. Coju-
cM nd v-s lanud lately subordinate to hia, end, consequent¬
ly, no onw olsw could five se orders.

<1 .;h-t you just sr.ld, is tu.t true . Iso of tho oth-.r

plenipotentiaries of the iveieft :.u' rch Council ir. v..rlou-
-Jr?

9

A 1 find l roa or.e or tro otn.r docun^nts appointing

persons to oert-in offic.s, I n.vc never s^en my of tho ..o-

)Olnt.ienta of the other plenipotentiaries or specialists'

U-dero, but I .ssuai- tlu t I v*jb no exception ir. thin that

'...is we* gerwr.ii> valid for .11 of thca. 1 sex no / -sen
•

fer .ay diffei-r.t .ssunptlun.

1 I ULit you in cor.side. ition o.* this pleni.-ot.nti-ry
power regarding Prol-csor Schrciber w.*o -..'.s plonipotunti: ry
for rase .rch into epidemics, non >ou would any i.V- .c.irei-
c :'r plenipotentiary powers r.d i.io function -s u .-caber of
the lieieh neSw.rcli Council were tne s-aw 3 yours?

A I thiaic th. t ..-on-;. tncsv -poiiltUunts to plenipot-n-
,:v power thct.I saw one of t.n - was ochreiber' c, jJ'-c.u;
r- -ivon this plcnipotenti ry power, routnly, nt the

* v. tiae, ..nd I saw this dOcuaait in the rt~ich Aoseorch

* :-ncil.

; ,tt ti.e S.-.U tL.- f th t Is, th-.t you bee iuc plonipo-

* r.ti ry for c r.c-r r. source?

* ^55


- -- r-icii-d-S-Putty-Int. Brown
r . »• o. i.

Yes, thr.t is the vay I roae.ibcr it.

' And tact was roughly, when?

/i mey 19*5.

i 5c.irtibcr's gitu.tion v.as, roughly, siaii_r to yours

•

bv.c U3C Qv hud doable function. On the one hind .. \.as

stili in the *cdic.il Inspector te of the «raiy, and on the

other hand he -..s u-jb^r oi t..c r.eica x.csecrch Council for

the combatting of upide-ics, end for that reason 1 >: you

T.hetn-r you can coni ire to us t... t aenreiber, on the basis

of thin plenipotentiary p.ouer t>i_t he had, was informed of

the -ctivity or whether ho was n^itn.r subordinate to Prof-

cssar bond loser ncr reported to .._r.dioncr ...bout his -ictivi-

vi tics, end, in fact, pork.ps v s not ever, permitted to

report to nia. Is that the i.oy that this should be stated
*

es aol rciber’a position?

* Yes, t.i t is corr.cl.

3 ..o\, rovrdins t.ie question oi the Llitz bl-itor Cow-

..ittoe in supplement tion to the ouections n jerUir.g .rofes-
scr 3rcndt, 1 -..anted to 3K you v.ho v.as the c.r ir.. .. ’ tee

iiUublciter Cajaittec?

* ..hetiier tnere was - 1 . official chairman I can't s y
icr sure, out I o.n sy for sere th t the sessions

ided over oy Colonel nirsch.

Ih- t is correct. Colonel ..iron, oi tile ..cl f an-nt,
t... ordin-ncu Office of tut. «r_y, i: that aorrect?

» Y-s — no, I -uu not sure whether it vis nu .-vruy
r or n On*/. act ter.

- 2ut tiu -Ibr.viotion . .-.''ruef. n. aocs at n erer.-
OPficc. hot I v._:: ed to 3 .-: you whether you Know that
ctu 1 direction of this Coaaittec s a .aiiitriry m.. tt-r
- ur the co..pi t-cc- -of the Urdu ace Office -r.J hot ~r tt-r
-- the -.--die 1 Inspectorate. lo you •enen. bout th.it or don't


- - ■ - :tt -I * . .

Court ->o. ..


you?

•' 1 C n r.y for sur. tli t t..is s r.ot . .iodic I

- .t r.

— • .-: So farther questions.

CriUiS-L:—EL.TlOh’

l,-.. EL. i: . eis^ruh.r for oeiv rc.

v Lr. - . ou t vc c:ioea co-£'ci'ond-.nt Citvvra

tinea bout the _i!dle or ii-,3?

<% Yes.

- iou . v... . -rii.ssor -er.Zei,

1 . ucr or th- U n ,5iafc co—ittee of the acich Rosoerch

Councils introduced you to *.i... s his deputy?

A i-s.

h.r. did , u timl out tn t clovers \r.e the .o :i £ias
ttir.owor ol the <iUflvcyrhw?

..Ou- iUy, tout the £ .e ei_.e.

£iu you loo fenov; t tn.t tl. th- t the office chUr
- '■ - olr*etor of t.ic uciintifio _ . at...at of the .Jir.cn-
rU s •T01-S3JT’ Ueot or t.. university or a’.uiiieh?

.» Y .

. Lid .ou i. . ov tii. t .rofessor ..uett \, i- t.»- sup¬
pler or t»iuv.ru?

.% Y..i .

Iu .. ii. -he el... z.. t . uilov.eCi you c _e to..-t.iur
i*:. 1 .-. r: for oi'iici 1 *r<. s on- ti—e or .no her?

s% . 1 * •

1 t.. 11 i.ov ;.et to you -i-verc' di ry ;roa the ye r

4 , . it ho. 123 -f the I

-ulor. .i ;.. •. ,>u z i:. .videace in connection *<ith locu-

•• t 'oh ..o. .3. C rt in ?.:i. es fro., tain di ry have been
you. .1. s_ loc:; .tthe entry of li 194' .

It ; • : it .icurs-ldOO ..v ich Cn _»ecr of rnyoicians,


roi.n


.. l-C'-ok (Int. 3 r

: .urt I.

-• •- i« »?■ *U3C - Pr-fess r 3 loac, teltrohonicrlly. ro-: rilin’

.1 - 'iXnr.tai Dic 5 ccrJv(T('« opinion is onfimod that n't pectin rJono

;ut ci ii effective. ■ 3 :e entry f the 11 .must, 19*441, plonso turn t'

Z c: "II o'clock to I3I.5, the ‘House «f D'-ctirs', cinforonco

•

•it. Sr. ~ 1 . . , Dr. l.-y n‘ Pr. 3 rschora. Discussions of the co.. n working
t v -o' : t:.v possibilities of c; rryin,; out the COCOterry c’nploti n of

1 r.t r.t .ltru-rzbcr, .

1,:; 5 t 2 : 30 . talk with ?r. 31 .:o re.rrdia- r. report to tho Hoicli
Ti^aror SS rc. r.lir. (:•.) cM> tin. tho point 1 bootlo, (b) conbr.tijv; insects
fir. liu;. n boin «, (c) porut-.no ,:-r.ta, -nd (.) Daryl." Then on tho

12 of S-:-ta:.bor, 19 ^. tiur, io n entry cad on tr.o ilth of Dctobcr 194 ^ \fcich
I Io r.:t into::l to r-r.' la dotsil but which -Iso list r. nur.ber of points that
c :.o u :.ur r. iocu . "..is >11 xy. woloh qlvos the outward i.^rooslon
.1 on.-.st)nld.la<* o.oci l;.l :a;'wlo*. J, ould load mo to tho deduction th:-.t
Si-rorc h.V. pxofound scientific knovl. of nil the :r.ttors that r.ro :»i>-
:1 no.' iu this llaxy. ;*ow on the .-.sis of whet y;u kn w of thcoo mttoro,
x.-: c . u 0 y ro,;rxlin,. uhothcr Eiuv rs really hod such n pruciso know-
led;j if theov t.'.ia e, cad furtnor * bother siovors h'A anythin,: to do with
:r.g scientific si 11 f v.ia business, or only vith tho purely

'-iniatr tivu aspect of it?

• • It la v.ry tru» tht it is striking vith whet accuracy this dicry
lr - : • -o n., it includes evoa «h rt brief telephonic conversations. I
• wliivo t.iat this .Iiary v - >ac he we obi i cod to keep for official roe sons,
•it vr.D thon shown to •. superior r.t one ti..o or another, but, of courso, I
ca«: xy whether that is true. I knar it is true for soao diaries but I

whether it is fr t-is on*,. Thu entries in tho dir\ry do not civo
'• *•' *5 ony prticulfr sciontific knJvlod.;o, and that c n bo soon fron

- =t * rol; tively frequently th. v-rd untorsuchun^ is in uso, whore It
.0 the word versucho, tho first word nonnin,: oxr. i ant ion end tho oocond
oor ,ri:._nts, n r wr.s Siovors ixtivo i.. any ld.nl of scientific or


v fl: of . ny r. tur_, but purely rxe iniEtr tivc.


13 &-C'ok ( 3 ?'im)

S:\irt . i.

-• i - ~ E 11 --.-s*. under "3« the word »doxyl« spoors.

2u:- one cuesti u -rises whether Siov-rs kr.ov :t this ti.-c whr.t Loryl v:.s
at rill

... • , he certainly ii'jm kr.vv wh~. it w.a. Sxr.t vor. ori.-inr.cod

vit.. j.

> lf this ward * '.Jryl* ppc: rs is i>- .diory, it is ai. ly ;;in
*. .. -f Ver/ short conversation?

- '■ • ’ » : 1 »,

•hie. then trrasforroh ir.t toe Mry.

S'. Wtuun Of I3U3, y .u, hi . l.r S-ac.'.or net in the riold
0--- • •• • off ic- i "toiler, you t.ttifiod yjntcrV-y thr.t anchor r.t th t
.. ul.ittod lo>:. co- ulnat, r. .ly, 7. 'ly 1. 3-. you »ar*v whr.t >-rt
Si.vex’c >l..yod i:. 1 ;n-iat of p'ly 1 n-: vhj.t hie order* v.r frou

Zlo.le.-?

... ■/-»-, SIjvc ra vr.n ; . the accessary prop-.rr.tlor.s f -r producing

-ly :1‘ ir. quantity.

. . rticin'ti n f nay sort in ox;vrinont« wr.s nothin.- with which

Si .vers v- ' ooucwrnod r.t r.ll?

.. V, t:.io u ci ly j. order of “Lalor v .. ; c nolloroi > oly.yol to
. .r..i. uoly i tort...*, : Siev-ro shull d orcrythia/: to rvkc it

• i Ic t.. t »ly 1 c ee rorr.uf ctured ir. cru-t quantities.

V 0-r.'.-.y, you .one. ecd fir. .vr.t no ic which poly ol wan tented.

: "h-t...r Sicv.rc v 0 pros ;.t t thee. - or tiono or whether ho

.-yt.-iio •* -.ut th- : all?

-■.. ... that, leery a t..i. . least 1 rev.r hoard th-1 Siov ra

t these ti n&. I ere r.sa.ci .te Sievero with this oily vita

-file ; r. i:. th. .‘-ocr-choner .. lie ini echo fochonoehrif t, an-'. %olccs I
- 1 er.* l-iov. ra the 'n- we*, rake ’ :c r.t th: t tine whether I h reiy

• : ut thin - u lie ;i eeo/ -ftor I h oniod th-1 he c* ir. t uch

editorial rt ff th Kuencaonor lhiiziniochc •Jochonochrlft.

. .iter si overs ’.et lie-*, to y u t find -ut your opinion -sooth ;• or
v. -• ay hj-'eti nr t o tho . uhlic-ti r- i thi ; . :tter. did he do so

♦

r* .


: ?-3 * (3r-.vs)

: urt r.. l.

i.:. c-aci'.or ai>c of :.. scientific contents or boc use of ~cr.er I c naidor-
•i r.s f licy -a". r. - inifitr; tivc olicy?

... „ irJ.Btrr.tiva policy, no, Siavors tel. ..c .-it that tine th t every
.ycici T ncicr.tist who bclcn : *ei t tin. ’’ Sior. SS M r..l intondod t
• u^libh c :u;t.Jr_- of scientific nature, needed tncci 2 -or-iseion, or/. for
:„lc i-.t.bt. Si-vara r.afcod -to vhotker I hod nay it l-in-s rad since I hr/,
t nc, I tcld hi. si.

\ Ch- this wna exclusively the f »rr.l buainosi f ,:cttin,: n-J'rcvr.l for
u.Iic ti n?

... Y- • :.r.d I believe tho aa.;o re ul'.ti'r.s -.•r.iliod t • .a.-jberc of tho
but pr'-feoo r " ..'.loc.-v c .ul tell y t ■ t thin I cr ...

m . 2 i;. :*iu .nc. t v» t- lit .'/it.. Sievero re.-rdin.- ocoorincnta on
, r •: r. r-. t - tho level uiont >f ?oly.:'lT

... *.'u . : *r i • • si.v rr. t ‘i-lcr'a office, Siov.ro -.t ended only

4

firot . rt f y c u*jr.-nce -fit.; Hi-l-r. r.^on I IbcubsoI with jii.uiLir
:• l-; t t.; t c .Xerr.. ’ us rl ' ut -o c*-.o b-c.c toother, Siov ro
: .v'. '1. Sr.schur wr.a with ub or: th. v. ry Ion trip hack, o» th t wo
: • e • ut OX srii ..-..n a ha :. boltu a. I told hir. whit "i;. Ur

. i 1 th f .2;- cri: lixls c ;c.x.e2 to drr.th c uld bo uaod and that

would bo re . .n : run. her in thio connectl >n, I rwntionod

• lk with G- .ci. r -t ? rot, re r’.in • cxL-orlncntn in c.--.c.r reBO.trcut, I

•

Intended t carry ut later ouch r.a I doecribod thia .r-rninr hurt-.

. ZoBiiOfl th t, '1 \ y• u -r. other occaol r.n Uscubb with Siovoro dotnilo
; : r r.ooi,ju-onts and rose rch V ske with Siov.rst

... ;• , .. iscu 3 ..a vih SieVerc vor n't of a ccicntific n turo.

I

I - • : .c. alcal r ar_i-i.tr tire connections with Si over e, tuA ho would hr.vo

• . ittle -t -ut iny urely scientific v rk t ivo :ic any .’^vico.

. r ; u rz. ^ v.._t ..r Si-r^rc vns erre v-red t r-xrivo t indcroondont

i . • - *“ ct 5 t

r iv’;- *..iuir-tr tlvc .ocisi :.s?

-col


r - - -5-1-Gross [Zst« -mm)
CrUTt I


n I can toll you nothing about -'hnencrt.. I :<r.ow too little -.beat
i*. and was net a aceibv.r. In the P^ich Research Council xh.ru Silvers
represent »d -easel I had very little to do with Me. Other points of con¬
vict were th. pclyjal canning cj potatoes and vegetables publications that
1 ■ vu aenti nod but I nev_r wont U Siorers to gut his d-cision on any-
tSdng because, in -y opinion, he cculd reach no decision.

Q Hie position, both in the R ich R.suarch Council and in the
..--ncr. r- under the resp.ctiv. 1 cad.re Prof, .-.nz'l and v/ucat - you con¬
sidered hit to be pur.ly subordinate in capacity?

subordinat , of course,

i So forth* r questions.

BY D . FP.0E5CK .»NH : :F BfUCK:

• css, . .. : affidavit of 25 October 19^6, No. 1*71, Exhibit
228, you ccnticnel t f ct that the Euthanasia arograa ms to be used in
tbo elimination cf persons with nervous diseases. Did you understand
tnv. to uian insane persons?

Investigating authorities.

; b 11 Ve tfr.t i objected to that teru at the tiac but it .ris told to no

that thin did r. i* :n persons.

♦

mors, each and uyery tine the defense,
-m ether defendants, refer to an affidavit secured by the Prosecution
r « which fchuir signature appears. If there exists an anbiguity or an
imcuiirity, it Is lways th. fault . f * rose cut ion and 1 want to lnpross
the Tribunal that this particul .• affidavit «?s secured free Dr.

self. Ih ; in interrogation with Dr. Blase, in fact several.

• thereof I wrote up on taining important data.

- " v. it ti Dr. Blase "J Er. Elco., b in, t c precis, van that ho.is,

' nd f .'lit witi: each and .v r> -ere therein. Th refer., I left hin with
".:.rr.c.r uu h_ die tit i tc ttv stenographer an affidavit which was
-•I. tc hie ana sign . - not in =y pres . And, that is

*1 n Exiibit Sa. L71.

. :-R.\ ~t —■ . I.sy T off. r - cooc-nt tr. this c. nr,-_cticn?

- -:r. 1 for rrcs.cuti.cn nay hinself take

kite


via IX.'7: Of c urse, c


19 --r -5-2 ~jt:ss (Int, =rcro;

Court :k. 1


stand in rebuttal znl testify any facts which you know.

=Y Dr-. FECBSCKuHN:

••itness, at .any rate tcaoy ycu vcint to say that the t.ir_ "Persons
with ncrvcu 3 diseases" ncant insane persons?

a *~s, that is what I want to say.

Q New, the s-ccnd question I want to ask you is this. From the
t> -k ycu wrote and which ycur counsel put ir. evidence, I can deduce that
basically ycu approved of trt*. theory- of Euthanasia. Is th.t so?

A *os.

'i .-ay I than ask you to t-11 the C ; .urt briefly ycur reasons why
ycu took an affir ativc .attitude in t:.e qu-stion of Euthanasia?

« 1 bell-v. that the reasons are given briefly and pithily in :y

tack in the -xcerr.ts ti it wor- h-rc subnitt.d .as a document and read
-aterday.

• #

4 '••itness, this .xcerpt lr h re before no but I should likt it if
t s .. . rv;t<-r length I could hear ycur reasons in justification of
7 t.ui ittitude regard ini; Euthanasia.

: y u to ask —e sp.cific questions.

Q TThat do ycu und> rstand os Euthanasia as such?

.. Eutta.i-.ela is . word with u Greek root and means literally a
• d and painless dc-ath.

•itness, d- you rc.goxx! it ; rcissibl- frcm the medical point of
* in special rises tc ,Tmt ■ sick person such a death?

?I* tii- s-dic 1 and human. point of view 3 do regard that as
rrdssibla. *

A s it not tv. , witness, that th re an conditions of illness
•'ilch th' wish is _xp~ ssed strenuously not only by th- patient and
v patient's relatives but by th- oa.sici.n hiesclf that this suff-ring
r- should K r-licvcd cf his suffering?

ck person and his ro-lativ-s, y s. « sir nuous
- .a rt ci t. pnysiclan, La cy opinion, would signify an active

-- a . p-rt '-f t;. physician. 1 s. the ysician's mission Tiairily

• - Ling hi: if it is passible. *nd, in


If. *ar L7-~-.--.a-5 -2-Gr:ss (lit. Brown)

Ccurt 1

•

th- l-.jt .x. 17312 , if cur«. is impossible, i: the physician sees that the
patient's fate Sr hopeless, then interference on the cart of th- physician
i« p--r-.issitl ., net r.ow-ver as an active volitional expression m his

• art but rati :r n the basis tf helping the patient by rodceninc the
p* ti.at.

4 If I understand ycu correctly, witness,- then it is your point
f viiv that •h.rj ar_ the high-st ethical principles that Justify this?

A tea.

..nd these grands ycu sua-aris. in the c ncludin,; sentences of
y.urfc. .k th it ycur defense counsol re ad her- ycu said: M I had no alter¬
native but to say that according to law this is forbidd-n tc the doctor,
yet t;^rc are- cases in which the physician for doeply hunane reasons
is imposed on by a hi,;l .r law.’’

« _ I included t.-'i 1 ot sentence into ay testimony intentionally
t-cause occasionally such acts hnv.. been c -flitted by physicians who have
. high ethical standing-. If I rn t . other hand repudiate such an action
-rt in ill- jal, then * d. a. from a purely external point of view.
'•>. t i Hint ! view cf ethics i:kJ . rality 1 an nly too r.ady to say
t to t.acn. d ct m f r I sp k in ay book, namely doctors who
dcanite 1 ?» t c r r^ at * A. ill j re: rui rut f thoir misery, I
can r ake n*. rl r :t t ’.cal cbjcctl r. whatsoever.

■itn-S5, you dr not object t the fact that they had offended
aminofc Laws of hmnity?

It i9 ny ccovicticn that tne laws cf haoanity were net offended
In ny particular way - they have offended against paragraphs in an
.xlrtlng la~.

I kiv ,i- furtiur qu stiens.

?w.wT-f r Rue*-'If ;r?.ndt:

Profess.., I s-omc f -tyeu spoke frequently with Kinder

-*In>. the lust years?

?r : lat. 5‘ir.r of 19L5 until S^rb-tb^r 19 LL 1 saw hijml-r

• v tim.-s in t:to.


Did y u v r s e -“-udrlf -r.vit present at these footings?

L66*


19 -v'r 1 - . J.-5-l-^rcsr (Int. 5 rc*n)

Court ••o. 1


A So.

Q ^id you krvrw Rudolf -rsr.dt:

A 1 believe Is- Rudolf Sr-_. • rrict ourir-s ruop^r on h. wos
sittin.* s'trcTfhcrc in n ccmvi*.

Q Thank you.


!fcrch (I_- . rows)

Ceurt .fc. 1

_Y Dir. KifiB (I -ppfescatin- Dr. rritt, I-fense Counael f.r *--fe.- :,i ' r.

Eose):

Q l.itn-.ss, id y.u infers rxvfe.o r hose cf yrur pirns rr. : .-rlin. the
NcflBvIatrut Institute?

.. frcfcaaer iveso? I :, that be thin;- tc do with xrcfcsi r K 80 .

q out it ecUL. Iw. b-.cn. Dil\ tell Prefosarr ^su ttv t y:u had

been ordered by Hircl-r t- concern y ..xlf with el' uo vr.eein-s -r with
testing cf pciacna?

<. I did net sy enythii. -t • . rd-r re • -x in* .1’ - vneines, end

I ccui: net h*vc Si'! rnythin rt :--t eh an : r! .r to teal is ns «■ -cruse 1

dii r.ct knew ouch an order.

q Did you talk W IioBu o .ut th ' nct«ri-:l-. ic-1 . jA -lid «• ref oat :
he s.. tell you hi a views r. -r-ini: thi. j~lt..r?

' /.a I r---iiL-r, cr.ee I s. tWdaor hese, t . It

:.litt»>leitcr C-a-dtteO. Ihis ir.? ~.t the tine in which rw. rtr
thc p-., era th-t ? u. .nic 11:. ue had br n cut in »1 ori. ' >>

.J.'-orin na the subject of c.nv_rs.ti a at this s.sri *n -f t . tc'i-itoi
Ccaalttco. tvcttMfCX t.tw aertc r ' atatcaoats x ut th Vr.rrer inplicll
in the plr -u- nn l nUdni:> rue!. - r even in the cnae t! t tho enuay
succeeded in sj r.: in t .!■ u ir. cf th- *>•- it 1 r, er citi-s.
Bee use this the-*. w-J ex.er'3i> -i:. iacuss-l ir. th - , «, . ref eoaor
Beau wrct_ an -rticie n tho auLJwd ‘ the j eric !ie l • r . deb".

• Did irefesavr hoao re r; . l ir-i wrf r., ftt*» • urely
technic.-1 -xint -f vi.v, -.5 ir ssill-*’

.. Ircfecs-r n.sc's Uitu-w.:, r. the whl-, no v. .a rojwrda tho
success froti lactwricl ic*l w“r r ~.rc.

q Sot only in siticn t- it, ut he rise a n.-_ f cri Anri,
lid he net? Crirdnni tce-rds .nc*s cm trcc; s :nd K-ti ..?

A I cm net reseaher the lotail if til thia, ec' »fe
%ith Br. L s. tips c-rtriniy s r.e.*li lo, and in the lit?.- i ’
th- sit-, t 3 n W.-S thrt Uf r- Grier.J liirsch ;me' ft fwssi r. . . ii t«-
Hitler's v-t crier -r Jr.- !i-1. icol n-rf r; :.-r.:-iy, that it

-ore


\L rch 19 -..--K- 6 - 2 -K^r (In-. Brc.n)

C-urt ! i


shculd net ' •- pr-. r^ ter,

■y * ref css- r u:s-*s Atitttdc r ; -ted biclc-dc'l wrf r., m the cne
hand, i»I t:.c !i«v>:rev-1 cf ’ ccW I -leal ^rfrr. w.dch h- r- -xd.J, fr.
the tcchnic’-l vcint of vita r.s cr'*:, is that net s<-?

.. Y-s, jr-u c-ui: strt. it r-c ; like thrt.

DT.. KJLTE: He further qu-sticruV

TH-: I1..5ID K7. Tr.-*- is nc furth-r ~ -’-.v-i *• this

witness by dvfcnao ctunsJ-. The 2 rc-.cuU.n nay or:. :

CIdJS 5


:Y .it. H.JLY:

q Dr. lcno, during the ccurse *f this orc.s-ex-ninntin I result
that yeu c nfin- yew nwera fee the ;u.ti:n I tk  ' - ■ "
such as *«r direct Jaurtnrticn ha. •.-> trk-n lonpcr than W ^

I will nako an atat t finish ay c: ss-cxaainti r. t: I c is, if ?

will C. porttwhltb

I efcrll try t .

fj UhOk •• ur ... ;c : lucatl a intorru t©2 7 <•'- - ot ~ r » ycU
r-suacd your uv’ie-i stufiu. in WS, is that c.nxct?

.. Yea.

• In th- y r 1919, hh • *• : * : *' " ?

19, for t^o first tie., *,•: • •

Abb* ms oloctoi. i-t , t , : IrrV

ttrt I re* v.rr . r-cisc. lb .i:« ». r-; ... «, 1 * *» f '«"

, r ,.rv tivc tarty, i:t * th hn «-•• ^ «*

cruof. inrtlc. -t tht Co.t.r, tbt. O-aM. ><&»• l»i. - •••«•"

• : the. bad r u lOy tbu aw >11 1-1 -rt-uUca. T; , ft , ^
Left, the Scci -1 Jw-cr.tts, Indc; n at S-cirl Duaccmt,, ,

- ill ri-ht, 0 cUr, *cn £ . * first boccoo Inter «to ... *9

. - rra .f the KS3.T? > - Y c ' T-?

*• I w

th t I « -etlr*. 1 = a W n»< Orr-ti-t.. a; t.. t I

• ^-=h at acn. ^ rrU n » « I ‘sttWi ia «*U *> «“ ‘ '•» ^

-cf?


It rch 19 -.- 3 K- 6 ->Xrrrc» (I t. ?,rc^n)

Court He . 1

h vc tc rcr.ch V.\. -.in'- f toccoin.,, on the cno hand, Socialists, ?ni, cr.
ether hrnd, we c.uld cnly ku Sc delists if we did sc rn - n-.ticnalistic I
In ccnnccticn with this, I think this was 1921 , mi it ms rt this tine
I hc-r' fer the first tie- f tho NS2,.i .

q ThPt« s rirht. On i r rt 137 cf ycur bo k ycu state that in tho
succor cf 1922 ycu sew, for the first tin-, the -re ran -f tho KSD.u and
thet, t y u, this prrjraa seen-', t- \l an idoal s luticn. New, 'id ycu
cv-r h" vc nny int_nticn cf p-rtici ti:. in these !ISD« activities?

„ Yes, it w:s cy firs int-nti:n rt .hr.t tin- to take part in then.
Then, hewever, this wps interrupted by the fact th?t the Deutsch-Voclkiac
Freiheits; rrtd (G-man Peeples 1 Fro-I n Tarty) was feunio: , -s I
described in By beck. 1 then Joined this party an! loft it then -.pain
In 1923.. In 1924 , I sot u.. an cr&uisati .n, the Voelkiacho ..rbdts.-.ccein-
achrft (Gcr.-vti Lalcr Ccccunity) which I ent-r-d the .’ucicl-r. ur;
which I then 1-ft. .11 the l.-.t-s arc in =y lock w’. pre ccrroct. Then,
«hilv, I ' -lcn/c* to t. party until, on the 1st > f July, 1931 # I Jcin.xl
ItSDtS .

„ .11 rlpht, now, uoctor.

If til- Tribunal wishes tc ndj urn at this tine I till be strrtlnc
rnether su' joct.

iRESDSTf: Th- Tri unci • ill bo in recess nt this tin-.

(,. recess was taken).


19 ■ rch 1?/.? 1-?KF- 'Jrl.y (int. Resale-',

: urt •* . i


TH£ I&RSHaLL: 7h_ Tribunal is - b nir. in sessi.n.

C. Dr. 31-a-, ia the rrac Gnefe to y u?

«. I :iun*t quite -t art nose.

.. Ia tix ar-aj Graufc fr-siU-r t you; that ia spoilt 1 G-r-a-e-f-e?

«. Yes, I kn-w th't nc.au.

;. iJh-. wea Graufo?

... Thu Srnofc I -a ape'tkin,. ocut was clic:’. „lbrecht v-n Gr-efe, the lo-<’
f the Geroan 7\. l_*a Liberal Party.

Di' y-u over c -.>or* tu with Gr-efe?

«. up to the tic*. when in 1923 I ana exclude fr a tb- Party ,n th- b sis
£ 2 cert-in Jwaut' 1 jr.c!c to Gr .cfe.

. Now, Gr-.vf. x-rku * t .utter with hitler r.! Lu 'une’ rff, Git! he not?

A. Yea.

Doct r, wore y ,u ev.r involve.- in cry- .* litic'l tri la?

a. 1 aaa ’.ir.ctly nixo : up in n iitic-.l tri -1 wr.-n I wan nc- in’ictcd
-..'tor the fi u hts at u. -r Lil-si-.. Thu r-ae-r. f-r the indictment .tae the
r-cruita-nt f ;r f r ; ti ns .t C ailit ry eh r cter which woro irohibitOC!. I
.-.a .ruauntu- b.f-re r. C urt at that tic*. :n . I wee then acquitted. Afterward
r. th- Ix aio of the influence ->f th. Re.: yeckl-nbur.. G verna-nt, .‘n appeal
*»« » ■ inat th't acquittal and :: r.-w d.-.u was aet f r .-ay tri -1 before r.

hi her iturt. Hon vur, this trial did not exao -bout aince I h 1 applied to
c-11 the R-ichs President, Dr. Ebert, nd th- Finance Hiniater Dr. Gmdonhaue.

witness.s. Th-t an r.t d-aire" lor ex* p litica 1 reasons, -«d therefore
r cu. in. s wore quashed.

. K«, y-u participate in the s.-c- lie d. Knpp upriain- which wr.a r.inod a*
vorthr.w ,f th- G-r.arn Republic, an ! which id not succeed, 'i’n*t yo u?

.. Yea, I participate in that Kc/p-Putsch. I participated as > re ,ul r
-• i'ior with th. i-cichswehr. I n*.3 -a so-call- v lunt—r. « new Government w:

: t th t tl^e when th- Ka.vo-Putscfc -r:se, ni I h- n.« knowled.e about

- ir intentions. «t th t tiae th. Garment .ffici'lly oakec'. f r vrlunteera
c.'.ry int« th- Hoichswehr. Subsequently -.11 the students of the Univorsit;
'k report-' .as volunteers, ah. h‘ b-en c-abr.t skiers ‘.urin. the nas

• : u st't- you id r..t kr.-w th- intentions f this Kapp upricir. r what


-arch .1 'L? -::-3-2-?SP- Ifcloy (Ir.t. a-asaler)
• jrt 1


it was i r. On >-.c 105 f y-*ir b ok y-u -Ascribe y.ur partici.artion in the

3 -colic1 K= .i-rutach, which y .u state rdaod at the overthrow .f thu Ccrann

ublic, which i' n-t succeed. You further state thu f-ct y.u wer. 'ble- to

-scapo thu Police who want~ to yrest y.u i-r th'-t crino. How, Doctor, you

«

w.r« aotxwh-at of cn r/.anizer in th-s_ lays, weren't you?

. k . !f-<, I Cort inly was rut. I was - simple s Idler. I said before that I h
h* no kn.wl.l u bof_reham about this inters:e Happ-Putsch. «ftorwards I
- otainly gained kn-wl.dfcu cb-ut the c tives which lo.':<‘ to this Putsch, and ti
oins ttat were pursued, th t was clear, -nd I wr^tc about that ir. ay book.

Di- y u -vor r_-.nize a re.Joount t> b_ us. in ill-,'1 warfare against
l)>. ToKs ir. Jr -r iilcsiu?

... Ho, v*. wor. nt c.nccrm. with nny ille : 1 wrfaro. I r. rdzei a rofir.
ahich was t- b. c cuitt. in up,our Silesia, but 't th-1 tint wu wore conccmo
■ith ru, ulnr tro.;a -f thu Gurnan Govcrnaor.t under thu eh rre of Gorur-1
•• -f®r• Tfcoy fought in ... r SiUsia, r.nd • wa« to sec th'.t c per Siloi
i» ul not fall over to ?ol'n . At th-'t tLae frtisr.n fi.hts wore occurring
b.tw.vn Poles n . Gurams, and this was con. r. thu Polish side under thu eh
f Corvnti. Th. Goman GovuTODunt call. : r v lunto.ro 't th t tine, nt*. r.i
it nos •. case r -z.r -r.cy all f m s.ldiors f th. first World liar report*
fr this pur jsc. The firvancin, r. r nizir. .f these troops was ’.one by

f Reich fun.s which wer. f wt t th. -is sal .f ibert by the Reich Fir.-
V inister Dr. Gr- ’.er.au.r. Th t is the reason why 3 a. lie 't that tiao to h v«

f

r on uier s witnesses in sty o~au. nftor thr.t tho , r coodings woro

quashed.

.ya* otzto n p'.,o 120 f y.ur o. k 6hrt you. Dr. Bloeao, Gssunblo ’

. r iz.r.t in the ILL. 1 Nationalist orgnniznti r.s, which wego.’ illoj-rl
r -irtat th- r let in u.-. .r Silesia. N w, D-ct r, i y.ur .v-rticipc.li.n
*• ctiviti.s ai you in thu a. ‘ic'l or f.ssion?

. !:. th t •• cn ; : oust say s a. thin-, ulsu bef.ru answering the quest
: t ink that thu words are contained in the b.-ok th t y-u h‘v. just

• - .’I =!■: y u to show s- tho bo k, so I can look at the e r

-, r. r; tho . :ssc > th’.t y.u r. roforrinr to?

. Y u .a-y read th t .al.ud, D ^t.r.

-67O


i? liTch 1947 Stalky (Int. Ra=alor)

• art .. . 1


... Yes,

.. It is n-rkcd ;n pace 120 in lead pencil, 'n' ho re it is otrkoC with a
black L-- pencil with an - rrow pointing to it.

A. I read it - laid, and I quote: "F r foreign . .lit leal reasons this
rccruitip caul: r.t be lone in public. ?* rt f ~'j friends went into the conf:
r.ce -f Lt. C-cr. odor Jfcnfred v n KiHinder un.er Copnnti, who were .alxoady
fi htir. in upper Silesia." This is what is underlined in blr.ck pencil. Froa
th-t it c n bo seen cle'rly th t this is n >t r questi-n of ny illc_.al fight
a ainst Poland, but th t the lot /1 Gcrarn Roich Government nt that tine for
foreign . .litic-l r .-s ns i not wish for -.ny public recruit.?.-nt. The fi.hte
which wore »n>. by the Gcrmns which were e. pr-vcd -.n! finance-' by the
Reich Gevorrxxnt wore le -.1 fi;htc whore the P -lish silo, or the C-rv-nti,
a it ..as ot ted r.t that tine by the c anissi nor f the Lor. uu f Nations,
were warfaro <f ilic.-.l P lish Partisans. They went b«y nd the ventures th’.t
*'.re- set out in the Versailles Treaty. The Polish likod to tako iso more
Genaftn territory and th t is the back r.un f these fi : hts.


•*671


1 !' r .-7- n - Hit: ... ; ler

C.cifc 3c. 1

* •> , 7J cc r, v_ -riII proceed tr the n. S qu_at:rn. I

will urc qui*- 1- ritl yol cut tl . It alifcy or t2 e ille^al-

it;. :.f that Vfurr . i in n in Upper gxleaia. 4ox», did

--u ;x.rticip..to ir. tloeo political ctivities in order to

•

id ycurcelf in tho ..xdlcai profession?

»lo, c;: tie cor'cr.-T;. 1 participated in tl t so ctl- ltios
since i c noid-r- t! u: to e -;y duty as m oi l decent coufo-
c a 1 ut to it t< • t no p. rts of

,7 uld ‘ c Iren . :.y fro. tlx:: cent ry t tl e ’/.rr ill. s
Treaty ar.d tirou 1* :y p.-rtiexp. ci«. ad cr'* ni: .tun o<"
these fi*hta, I ro :.11 . prefusel n 1 '.'.la... xs.

• . /oil, Dootcr, r p c 121 of your ‘ ■ abt tod in

o :1 -t f r t! ia roue n •■i p : ri'• tic-n cf r. Doctrr»a
title v* a - ..n.'llt.c *. . prcfccs^r d o 1:. \r-eretmlin /

f r your g. sit.m i J <i t yrvr ..eiu.»'»lmj* cr 1 irir. of a
. :i c:;t \:..a c ..pielo aucc^a: ; sn*t y<ur ijudieal pr.ctico
nstin'.ioa lnciiUnt-.l t your k lltic:.l nd ...litary com¬
ic U. 'tiles?

. . , I cun c „,ii i.i teat tc y< u very clearly. Zvon •>«

i u't wl.cn writin; .ry 1 etcr'e p..pi.r, I 11 ulro d y been
r!'*n s.t tlx hy x-nic institute p. ri: ontallj at tho Univ-
rsity <f Kcsti eh nd it v s .iy .-jibitier tc write a v.ry
• i paper. -ft r • . ;x:j*'c : otivity, don l:\iny to leave
•i.-otccT: in r. ,r i.rt to * rsocutod politic..lly, I :t ti .t
t e wont to y prcfecsir and ..shed i tc correct r.y wrrl:.
Kremrn !e a..id tl . t 1 tt v ld net re cl cv cl. l i d: results ind
- r il t! .t all I YC.B erne mod with * -.a tl. t ay do etch's
r was considered : - ificient. x i cn, -n tie l-:.sis of

ct i 's p.- ;.-r. Whirl is quite Well known, I war pronctod
“ t x In . v r; aicintific find f..ir . ..nrxr.

. , CtJl -CU tell LS lfi. t S V : ' v ;


: of tl c r r i pi ati wl - s it?

U672


IS •• r -9-2- ' Int: -r.alor

Ccurt :rc. i

-v£, I c. n Cell you . u ti e "rl-v.uo -i* r.lt \u.s c.
froe corps, it s fr .« corps t;3 ici v.. r cr:rr.nlyd ' y
Cepe, in 3rl .rc’it c -:pC3yd cf fr-nvr navy, s Idlers rad eff-
ic .rs. r or j Irn tiro. it i s uaod f r ti ~lr.tonr.ncc of '

, in ardor fee aurj 61 y thre..tonin C'.:-.vr.is::. It
• sco. fitted :.C tlr.t ti a> *>y tic I.cicl a Defense. T'inictcr
- T sko, t! .n tie >1 ;:.do > r It „xrticip tot, in tko :.pr
roitsc!. Ti -,c \ r c. c pc.ny fin;.neecl r.nd cmplefc -
ly :• • . I di r.. t tr tils c "'lei- i ape:.’

cf, t 5Hb ti. .o, *?ut I c i:.cti nr wild tig:..

'• r.lt - - t r r .- ; . r.irr Cion

Consul; vYr t v r el t rv.niratien?

, rater of tho c.r ot r r. ni*< tlcn U rnaul,

tie ir »4iir.f.Cion Consul \e.z oaitlnu ti-n .- r. r. srr.ll ocr.lc
r ttl Jurt on tie n. -r r...o 1'rli.x It. . i tl t tiro v/3 on

o v.ittin tie «ri.*./;o -ri. r-lt, in - r.ler tc protoot the
rcvornr.ont, tl io free corps, ..a well r "ray tier free
corps, wore prortiaod roqral c< v» : it .re f r t’oir acr-
vicca ;x.:; c; .orifices *>;• so-tl. *mt, tier, tl ir prrniac for
: j r., c n v:.& 1 - cor not Vent; t!\.c prc':.‘ ly 1 r.ppanod in
nr.eetl * t! ruteci.. ^fcen tl o qucrtl n .rcc< for

C'Ptr.in -rl.r’.t hot? he c nil e:.ro f r 'is .u< pie v]. folt
tlcr.colvos oo6ive, he went fee V.w.ri:. tsiC. tried t*- find vrrl:
i- r is ferrtor proup. *3 ..s r rl .v.inl consisted rf thoir
.ctivitiod r.s tir.vi :r. fcroct wrr’-.ers. "rlr.r't t t> • t tir o
ip* - - o :i ' of .. tx ' -r fir» .-ikl for oonpletoly oxbt^r-
1 r.r.s-rs he t;. t sp-kon t: .3 r. Crnsul .r. 1 tl is lr. tie

t) n ''.C. ri id tiems Or' , ix.i'..ti-:n Cen-

■ '‘1.

3ut, i v exit tt sr .se u r;- c prossly .1 i., tl t ti ls Or rui-
. 1 Cinsul erntr. ry t tie lei -rif^do -xt..r'c, .s a

i .1 c2 -r.nlz fc.« n I * 3 elon ..1. t« £ t . r-.-rjiir t;i n.

1*673


19 " .r v7-:’-S -9-3-:kv>L .n - Ir.t: -iltr
- urt No. 1


^£u i r c.ni r.ti ns u.r. v. rl:in s7sicuc.tlci.lly for

etc overtired cf tl o * ti ni.listic “ov-m. ,cr.t; vvr-n't tluy?

leu cc.n lv.rdly sc.y it in c* ..t fen . oft re, r.a’ u you usod

Cl - u.-mruisicn :. r.inst tl o -*-cpu : ;lic; new you. i.rc crying 1( tion-

•

listic (joYcmaont .ml Xu.nt to femul .to it cxr.ctly. 'Ihuso
.r ..niz.ti-.ns u^ro workin" <ir the turtlrcw of tl.o Gcv<_ro-
;xr.t ..c it cr.iat.d i.t tJ.r.t ti:x. ‘or ror.senr of tl*.u “cnor..l
.c noiilc c-ilc..jso wi icl c.~- *jcut *-cr.uso tl.c "oin r censtit-
utiin did oc c »ivo ua any dooant possibility oi u doDecri.cy,

’•ut .-ijccoly difltertod picture rf .. Do corrcy; c.nruquunt-
i -1 :• forts parties uxist-d in u -r-.r.;. t tl.c tir.o,

• ow, jiur p.rticiy ti n in Cloro- or .r.l2..-i ns vrt ich
re vrcricin f r ovo.thri x' cl ' or. r. “wpu lie, wore
rrtl.ur afiri.r - .ctiviti^s for j. ‘itieus y un- ..u’.icr.l
0-n.. n ijj.n; w ror. 't tl ey?

... '••ell, it is r t str n.vj .11, v.ot >vo i' tl u c;.s< of

.r. r.c:bltirU 3 w -lodieel i..n; in i) - first inat:oiCo 1 w-.s

:• end r. m -r.t . t a rid vr.r,

i ocu] cl-so uVentc in 0 *•; ny ? r tl cy provrilvC

tK.t ti t, b it c s tie c so wit! -illli iia i tl-r
- r.-u.nr mi tl b 1c tl o r ..sen ti y I p i t. cip t . *. in . vo-
-nte v.lc.c- c.L-. it r e t .ci:c ;o «.. c «rti row tl-so inc.'.pr.Mo
' Hnuiiite in ' r.\ ny t tl .c tJ,no.


4674


15 -arch (Int.,

Court I

'l .Tot-, Doctor, -s I undorstani 1'- free your book, the fir 3 t visible 8
of procrosa done tho lines uf your political ioanincs was :i 1322 u ; :on tho
foundation of to Gorr-r.n -‘ationalistic Tarty and its coouar-tion -.:1th .yiolf
Hitler, Is that enroot?

A I don't kner whothor you nado a rd stake or whothor thoro was a
nl stake in the translation. You -roro spoakinr about tho Gonvm ?htiomvl
r-nrty. Do you oar. the Goiean Pooolo'a Liborol Party?

o It Itxa boon translntod for :zo free your took a 3 tho Gorr/m Ilatioml-
iatio Party and coc^ritod with Hitler, nd that found'ion was in 1922 , and
you stated that that vaa the first visiblo ai=n of progress alon^ tho linos
in which you '..-ore intorastod, is that ri&ht?

A Yes, that is correct, and that is in accorinnco with facte oo tho
objoetlvo ObserTO aoos thor.. Ct-t is here tho situr-tior. was at that tins.

'I You wore a nctlvo of looklonbur , wo; oa't you?

A Yes. I case fron :/ostpunlla. i hd boon living in .-ocfclonbur6
for aeca tL.u, -ns I considor h-t s .;y real hero.

JK*: it wan the oia to mice ;ue oloctor to iA>ckleuib:irc into a
-.'tionaliotlc bastion, wasn't it?

A "Bastion" or "fortress" rounds like cone thine ailit ry, sonot” l»c
cornoctod ::itL arar an! forco. Ilaturally it was the ala tc.bii.-v about
a tron. paint i- J'-ocklonhUrs of a national char-ctor.

1 Tow you wore also a publisher of a -lationalistic no- opapor n-sod
’ i •loal", if zz r pronunciation is oorroct. That is 3 pallod H-o-i-nwl-n-a-l,

! • that ri ht?

A 'os, Kaisdaal,

•. You didn't h'-.Ve such tiza for xxlical .arJc, dii you. Doctor?.

A - 03 , I had such tiao for chat. I was vary industrious.

°“i nov, « did you oror -*irt ciaata as a speaker In nationalistic
^ . j-atln.s?

.. -OS.

You alje participator ac an a; - edition spookor in Casr.uni3tic
- •• s, didn't you?


19 ; larch '7-:-?jC-lC-2-p < itty (Int., )

C°rrt I

ycr./, -s a iiattor of fact, you «oro so busy poll tic ally that you aai
year f riania orGant nan pro toe tier, .'or those nestings consisting or pooplo
free, t’.j iri ado £*hn dt -ad y.ossbock, both of ■ hich •• oro socrot Bilitexy
organizations, didu't you?

I dir.' ~ rocolvo -any personal protection froa tho ?roo Corps of

4

“osnbaoh, Vat I ro >11 y had nothin; dlroctiy to do with that orsenizatioa.

Perhaps in ordur to hit at tho cora of your quant lor., and Vat i r*n c^ln/i

to say no- I think In r/bat you roall" roar., naturally *.ro nrotoctod

cur cootij. ,a at that Zit.a. If :;a an old national naa and as docont front

•

soldiors ;iho rad r ‘oiltod natlonnllotic opor.od our souths during a aootine,
aa 4 vovo not r.t tho nano tl a in a position to dofoal oursolvcs, •.« would
haYo boor, baa tor. co pieces, by thj cas.unlnt and wo certainly had no
Vsiro '.o bo bouton to piocoo. On th.- contrary, It wo* our intention to
: tho up th- fi..ht against thano paoplo, and vo proved that va woro nblo to
do that.

1 lkf: in thoso oarly days Hitlor*s success or failure was of iloop
coreorn :o you accord. -g to your boo*, is that richt?

'Jo you <um /1th t!iat Xayp Putsch of 1923 ?

*. Tha'i's rliht.

/. Yob, I rocrottod that. I roGrettod it, nod that can bo soon in ay
. Pocont national 0 o rsun pcliccr.an an! docont Cor.i-x r.tional thinking
•c -hoot and sacrifice, as ro altoi. I ry rotted that as I havo
'V'ayj ra ratted it ovoa lator whinovor '-or -uas hod to boot ono anetkar up.

1 -■, doctor, after -itloro tmdrccor.sful attaspt to ovarthrar tha

Jl " - , ’ enao to tho corclusi'r., didn't 70U, that ? T -.tionalistic

: - ; J 0 -• re hit. and that they covld n't bo shopped? Ir. that what you

*

In y ’*r book?

A "1-. I - : tad that in ny-book, ondahed A one uritln* a'-.-at actually
rr:. : ir ofIVict. Va darjloy-.aae a: it succeeded lator or. had to folia.;

: -a free a iu-yal point of viow. That is, not cccoi\ii:i: to tho written
-- lo Ifiticz, - accor'iry. to tha uevritto:: rut iho sar.d fold.
- - rlcaliy lews ay f.a l.val; ;,-n* of political ovonts at that tit*


1 ? !larch •; -::-?< 3 - 10 -C-Petty (Iat.,
Ca rt I


asxsio-)


. -oro tho lr.tolarar.C 33 and suppression was th highest princi lo of a
Sovorroout system, and that «cs tho enso at that tlco. perhaps you will
bo epookl&r about lntor tinos, c.r»i thora nrjtin I shall prove to you tho
fleas thins.

i *Joll, Doctor, how do you account for tho fact-that your illogal
units did not portloipa o in Hi tier's attaaot to overthrow tho Cuiuon
oovornnoat?

A Do yo • noon tho 9 th of Ifovoebor 1923 ?

*1 Tha-t 1= -hat I coon.

I';.at is vary sluplo to ouplain, .it that ti&o I rooalvad no inforoatio:
bout that putsch. If I hri rocoivan lnfe.va-tiOB In ti-io In t.'.o .-coralat of
tha 9 th of :: 0 vaabor at olcht or nlr.o o'clock In tho :»raln; tho Putsch will
start, than I cort-lnly weuldn't have partlolpatod In that Putsch. That la
- suro thing. I hovo nothing to hoop qulot about in that connoction. That
la ho. the situation was at that tina pal today I confess to th-t honootly,
tn! Just us I on flaying it hore today, it la written in ny took which is
public.

■> tfoll, no-.:, have you over boon a poll tic-a candid to, Doctor?

.. Yos. you roan sarllrontary o-nlidcto?

I Vos. .

A Yos.

1 You booaho ir. Tobruar/, * 24 , a oiior of tho llocklonl-uri Doanty
Lu-.lalttturo, didn't you?

*» Yos.

1 Vou woro a njacor of a National * ork-ro Calamity, la that It?

.. Yos, ii-.tlonr.l -orkors Ca .unity.

1 •'hut caused you to boccr-e a politician Doctor?

o .oason is von* cloar, and 1 thin-. I cyiito u:I- ;o explain it
-j.iriy. pp to 1923 i had hole Bqfcen National nharty Party

itruofo. "roafo '-al cioso con-.octions 1 th Hltlor - I/edoiriorff.


In t: ; yrvr of 1 S 2 I I loft tlv.t ?prty bocp.uso d oreads wcxco «da which i
._cnun- of raolir. of fnitk coul- .not fulfill. Than in Jobrurry 1024 ,
lie. oloc ;or“.to for thn ^-ockloabur; Jiot c%v> u~. Since i h«*d .-. rronbor
cf follower!. ir llooblor.hur:., I V: o fon? thr.t tlw vat.3 of tbaao
follcwora would at loot. 2:o roaelt uoclfl - to boos rot nnothor aad

Ljnbura ruled by Co ..ur-icta p.nd Socip .1 Do:cocr- ... It
\rj& not r.y '-ooiro to brln„ r.hout r. victor.* of :!.o Rai Pr.rtios by loovinc
-ho to" ".. -"-.;lov*JLiborty ?.“rty. Coasoquontly, in ordor to so. to it
:>-t taoco to. 00 *.;oro ..iron to r. ;ro-or ;-rxt ., 1 docidod to find - now
: rtwhich boro t':o a-AO r-.tittvl Torhors Sacaudty. I rocolvod four
ooria in '"10 ::oolo;*. v ur^ Jiot with th-t >.rty, -ad f'oao r.op.tc lntho
blot B-j*o_urWol t',:o ivtiovj. cr.;o rity in Kocklonburi. Wo ot p.
f-.tionnl Covornnont in liochlanbur. * hlch vo ul-’ r.ot hrvo eai. “.bait if
I -.c ad lfforo.ntly t>.t ti o.

'c Ha or. ; vv. j 179 of your book, Sector, 1 ncto with lntoroot thr.t
you Btr.t j thr.t you boecao - x>litlcip.n “n you, be Inf. n old fighting
:o* lior, folt tho shrjio of Vorcr.Uoo. Isn't th“.t tho bp. e voasoa th“.t
' or rr. ' 00 : in o Sonlod?

/. I . :.-. be tbo - - : idn'tdiscuss t: 1:: qu action ./th

1 . At p.ny rp.;-j, it would bo uro:i_ of : . Bteto l.oro t

t >.t fia- I id n*>'. fool t>.t‘VorcaiUoa wp.r ah/vao fa tho
' - . • *3 T - - • - r: rl fcj

-r -v li, p.-v* I rJLso royrooartad thp.t point of viow.

‘ - • . - folt ,:.0 of Vorc-illos,

■> - Jr. :r.on id you t.co o of tbo SA, Doctor?


.. C tho first if J : 1 :;, i:bl


IS -~r-_j„-U-i-Coo.e-Xi.t. .urel.r
Court -.o. 1.

; -»o\., iro- .o-;- boox I tl.-t the r*.-sca *.JUy ;.cu

•-cc-t - ^.—ot-r oi t:.u \._s t.~ t you to a _iOrc _nd _ore

to j f active in politico! ii_.iL between national soci.i-
isui *-ad coesuais^, is tlu^t ri at?

«

« ies, tiiwt is correct, for tee devuio,uc-nt of -ff^irs
in Geranny ;.cr«- coaiu.. to a he.d witn on.encr_.ous speed end
were lee ding to - dispute between tbe two extroaes. Those ex¬
tremes v.ero co-scan 1st. -.id mtioiu.1 soci-lisa on tne- other hend-
t th.t tiec, s I believe I Ireedy sfcutcd here in Court, 1
consiacrou ior e Ion-: tLao whether to buco.c. rational socin-
list or - co^aunint. The d. r reason I diii.'t beoo.ro con-
cunlet -1 th t tLuc u;b because of the di t. torsni o of jovict
ixussl , the fore of 'fovernaent of uovi-.t *-.u::ul .

T; 2»cn. you bv.ce.iu c Giusturs.rzt, th t i3 . doctor for
♦

the j u if. th. o.i,. doctor, tn t v>s your titlu or r n.<?

.> "os, th t •... s desi„(. tier, wnioh i ttr ch.n^cd to
enter ra, ; .a. re i . »,-.i3 comprised the on -tjbera in the 3 tu,

you r,. thu c- Hid tr.u i-utter.. .t t.. t ti..u nd tl. t

• s t;.v title for ts.e doctors, ..-atur.. .r/.t.

'four 1:3 0 r. .ax ;.hich you r^oeiv d in xv4l, vus 'hr t
of Ger.or 1 /»rzt or General »ru..j.en-r.-t, 1 understand tnu titlu
to be, is th.t ri-nt?

« .y 1 st re ok, t.io nnK which I received in 104 .; was
- aic .l roup ie ior, Tuppcnfu< hror in tne

Lid you ctivciy p.rticip to in the functions of thu

1 p.rticip. t d ctivciy in the .... up to the y*,.r li< 35 .
i th a l«:t t nu active cj. service.

i noted ca eiiO 233 ci* your too.- *ou st.to th.t frou
l-3l n ,ou nx.rchod regularly with thu ..... iou wore pretty
roud in those d-.ys, vorer/t you?

. u . -i e ly tp.fc'hs-t lest ion. ‘sou ;ut


13 .. r-- ..-11-i-Coch-lnt
Court - J. 1.


question ir 1_not „i_t f. .

1 Stride it, COct^r, ad

quo Stic...

h-n ti& . _u for- the so-u
the n. tlocal -pcir.il: t ..u r.xt
bcoD chtcr, v.-ru d ILy .Uscurs.
if n«ctS3.ri. - -

.nd tac other * ptT, r’.f.
circle. hen did j tor., ta t
« I don't tfnov. tc ’ in.,

i - - • J.

PcT3 were in ay nt- rco ..t ;.h_r.
tie-, -ad thet l ti noc \.:io
vcys -'.intir.f. to rt d vr.-ss
-*y poli tical o ijor, cut 1 ..
ij>. i-.rhipn it i.: . «Ui iCc
Loctor. •• - i o o:..


W *,111 C Oii tc . -t.

l-d discassio; cir -e ..-rein
, taut is the »Cci.;i t :.

I will nd- th’-t : or :cu,

- - - - . c - - - - x ,
you ror...d lisouesion
‘ rcic?

t er.y aircuo&i-- rouy. • J.ich
scow vux-y - these pr.-

h:d .»y v. ry . -no'.ve pr c-
crc sitting out.rldu -acre i-
, cad th t : s .-.loo tre, d
nothing tcut the '.l
r. the tr i.: l: tion.
aid you or., r.i *.e t..u .edlcr 1


aervice oi t—

I or -.d i


. ale trvice oi t..u ... la ....c.ticn-


bur-, not lor t..e s.-lch. - .


er. p. j- h *»j of your c-


you st't-G you oi^ ..iced the


nodic-.l service or C;~ a- .nd - : part in t,.c -r ini.^ of tho

or. the b.tis o:‘ :o... re i-et .3 widen ur. / ill ^or tac


.racd forces, hoi you st t it r only for ..tCA.-nlmra County

for .id. yuu or.y ni:. . -ed ‘; 1 units-, ' ri ;ht?

V tr..t is sorrudt. n the c.:<t oi ds dcscripl
-

• c v.vr' concerned -it.: the Pet* a up or ied‘c 1 i 1 1 !

Jnivrrsity City ol ii03tock. ?his *.edic - b tt 11
uio..,.d in -.\ ctly the :<—c vtuy s r- aedic i co -y ny c •/ •

sn.er it t tt t ti... , icoordiaa tc the swe butte Hon.

sou coatinu. i to be- . aber of the - t-r


or Li id .n by your


• r l,r


t you?


it -- r-_------- -Cooic-In-.--i -i

Court - c. i.


After tnc- -■* • es forbi ucn by ~y --ov._*-:;t?

i by tat- j<- r— a Gc7urnfio..&?

.v You no-a the j cur I.-3L'

l Tt-s.

. wloru .tr.tioaui Social l« c^_it about?

; •

A th-t ti-it SA . been prohibited in so-e of

the Sercan count 1 e. Thia . -r. tru : no ntiro .. ica.

It was not a prohibition ext*• to the cntii .. . • •

•

In „oo..acr.bcTo -it tfiut ti *. U i a .led >0T.xn£ioiit .r.a this
Gov rn-..nt prohibit, a t..c . ft. oiling t..- ex .pi- of u titer
countic b in ucra.oy. ...t ii *

1 note :>in v-th lute, -at, doctor, on e 245 of
your booft, you otttc you iOd yo r friends a- . n ... .1-A
•..hie!: dediect. t: ..itl^r. :ou v.u‘o uh*. ;-s -oy 1 t<


the Fut.ircr, i.cr-n’t you?

y i isfc you *..ru-t do you -oan by ’ulwuya .
you uc.-.n tu t period of ti~u?

1 That period or tL-e, j .a.

T-ere I * £ loy - It ".jura to t<iu*t ti-w. That
is correct.

hov. then on >.,e 546 . . state you went to meetings
in t:.-:t p rt of : . ny • h : % x . la pa* r, nd,

therefore, aeny or tno purty or nizc-tions were nut forbiddon,
in that ri ht?


, tfc.it . t: . In 1.3., . i . t-.ly

%

in October, taeft ‘ ~

: t ttafc tiao :. : . tie- i socialist

Inc« •..- vert*not .cue .rr.ed wit the neicn -r ition i *'
i, it z . tt.-r, of course, that c r.-tio...1 ‘3Ci i
ov.riu :.t ir, if-vir own county didn't prohibit t:. . ,


:or


-itl-r ir.vit.c the a.. Tor . 1- r . -

4631


1 - .r-__:.-li-- 1 -Coo.;-Ir.t. • _ r

Court .. 1.


. . ted in t i

i’iut v_s - lor.. -it, _nd I a tvII you t..- ; i. civilian

cloths I t-ontt .? f x* . . leK front! r. once ..o


crrtv i .t the brunawiC'C :rt..tiw, we stop.-c- • _• . r.i
wont Into a aitcli _^d too:< off tur civili_r. civ’... o • . a ret
on the « uniform. jso were aditioas n. .y pr.v 3
in Ocr:.;ny tt t.. t ti..c .

i .'ou alao .tteui_d n&ny iss acetlc£s rcr i.-iM I


lcr, didn' t you' 4

A In the year liJC I ;• rtlcipr.tcd In all .xctln-<: of


Hitler i.i eo.t ■ :.L-r-, t.: ..
tion wit;. t 11;n.

these -utters.

. -X notice !u-o on t..e

off

your uooic, It %!».:• .,-ur .. .
post-r lcr -..*u .. ti.v- : r .
or Joetin you tt. . :, is it.

.» 1 believe - u xv not a

or .*ioii ..l'.l .r. i *-. t.~t *.


.a which hv Lu La coanoc-
turnlly participate in

to r-.-h .. re or. • ~7 of

very pro ilneat -l ce or.
f ..Itier. .. t i •tj ik

p

:-e concern.- *.l. —ctina
.ic Is •. a.etl ol t ie -


tioa-1 socle list 3 er —:: .or*.i s' .arty, L-t i . t y ..r _ . .
j.. the OCCUBlon or th< :cnst-.ut elootiou. . :


wasn't spea/.-n,. 1 w r ..ii.. .

.low no yce -ccount for t::e bole ty.-e, t..e .. . ,

.. olf ..itl.r , u t. to. :f t.._ poster, ioctcr' a..'t

;.itl r

a ny 1 Be-' ‘t j:.cc .or , I -v'*n t.nu leo.-c?

, .he oooi i r . r.'i_o to the .tnescJ

.y 1 continue?

1 I a y, -ar.'t iLitl-r -*e it t!. t r.oeti


a :.o, Hitler, . I

orter Very Shortly. on to it says: ..u:-..
Saitn - .1* ..illi-oj.r.


•-. : L. i;.


19 .. r-: n . .

Co-rt ..o. i.


slo.„-fi under n..ic.. t:.u .-ivir._, curried. .-.c . r re

•aenticn.c _s t..-. ,i_ue 2 iocfc^- of ----- .. .,d

31o~c in nostock.

You were -tost L .iu3s«-u kith i you,'

when upptnred la ..ostoc::, -ae :eve a speec:.

~ Yus, I ULS.

•; You u;.d : * vor -ble i.._.-ession of Go-ring t..
tL.u you i.ut.rd hi- aoc-.c too, didn't you?


.v Yes, Sotrlns sa't a
le-st. I . fro- * u

.

shot dov.A :L.:- vv t thi

ilcillfu] r. . . . r

syapat'oy cok .rdo . old ri : i
of course,‘ that Is oY tv

..ov cn p. . -50 J -. ;u
tior.il Soci.lia . •. 1. r: .ish -..1
ralL. -»r.d you rurta.r ! u.t»
you Ic'd the ftolir.c » 0 i.;in, v.s

. Olu. leU lt-t - 3 th.

y ou?

« -XCU 6 - . I iLinK so
translation. ..::j you l

tioa. I U;.ueret0CG tl.c 1 St 01
btr ir.nir.-j?

i I £■ id, >a j o.

b s.ji:.y. .’a.* U tio.c 1
son .u th t .. - ill X 11.

s*n. 3._ctior. of year boon you *
r you . i th-. *-_iinr :.o. ri«■.

. • . Jftcrel’orc, ; ou f-~ 1 *
~r. lor la. ;o‘ , :idr.’t


nknovn pcrsc.ruiity ir. t..

Id .orld r r, ti.ou .u not
ion to v. tell jo-rir.o o ..c
oat in vurv export ad
.t soloi-r 1 ;.ur full of
lot, end tm.i ir tter,
Country in t:. world.

-d Goer: .

i * ' ill

you vor. - . . infi d s

—in VllO '..OUl . :.eV V LeCO.-c

1 .it .u.n . :• ... . ju, : i- * t.

.tiling -..-s incorrect
t tnc be .iani-j 01 , :

our question o-t re. -- t t..o

-r book you quoted T-Oerins

•ill i tri -

- furti.tr i—clot ted i.. tr. t

: rin ,

s a nr.r. nuo v.. -- n r r
*.u t Goer in _ • ..t


. .. O


19 .. -Coo'-lr.t. .-utilcr

Court :.o. 1.

.-v . o, this duscrio-ioa i:

is duv to t..c truasl-rtion. 1
to sty, or r-t.._r 1 t %-nt
nal ooci-lis- v.ouid il i -ita ..
treason, tltot Sooriar ic t.i. r L
fall.

Just -.o_-.it, doctor,
section troi your boo.<. It is


not quite tru_. -!->bc it
Il ..x^l-in it. — t I -i-un

soy in •. boot, t Katio-

.,1c v.i.o h.d caa-itt. d. ci^h
t «-n, enc t.„t ..-..a: .ould

I Vi ill r..v _ jOu re i t..c
?£,& ir. ruu - . ii.


19 . r ,7- --12-1-Gr r-r (Ir.t. -"-nl r)

C urt il . 1


« --8, any dcn^t y u d th'fc? ica. Ifejr I reed al. — lit 1.

fr - that paragraph? I qut.: 'Ir. G.str:. I saw H,_r.--ar.:i Jr:. • r


the first tine is i sp--.:-r. It «-.a :
-:ti n-.l * clallsr. ft t o r.r it 7.
had c-T-itt-- hi, h tr ; a and th* t *
heard hie er.. k « . rxtrv -.ly
that hero was a . or. Th x .11 n.Yvr Y
tr say tr>_ f 11 oin : *t 3ayr her :
a?aln3t the fathcrlonl, ir. • n * p, :
wh had c ; :itU i tr.-.- i; a. aia a *_tv
pc * pic *r. had c mitt. ' tr- - u ..
rhe c .5-ittt; tr. a-n ..a' ir c
every civilised c urtr; in t r rlu
can t ier te a man o* c --.Its tre ta
5* st oh-m.ful erk e,"

Q' N:x, d ct r, In tb e*um
stated that tU re a n /?-; ; u didn’t
li in fc k v.j t.c- i. f t>* f .

*• it. , - skin ; . ... re y :

nade by tr a’.y t - a. - • r wive


id ab ut i.i_ that as s a .a
1 quickly deal with 1 v.:
r heads w uld fall. «ft r .raving
led far re ha.*. t.'. assur-nee
ft.'' In th t o nnecti a I want
e-plt wh r. i c =ltt ( tre-a; n
had c .

tborland, an! s thtr ren
r level. fact th.t a man
•try w uld lr ' ; a. ad in

v a well kn wn ,< c untry

..raiost Ms c ifitry. That La t*

the direct xarinitL a
Include any ref renc. v . •
that y-Ai w.ro definitely . red
.tcrast.e in preparations being
•?


« I liwr a thin k ut any :
!:itl._r or Oorrnny. 0 . :a .nt:.-,

Q Tid you ovj r - tlcl -t *
a £ yru ajar. whottaur I v r
f Germany?


. jsivc prepamti ns a the part of

Interested*

- seer, t ir:iLn. • f d many?
-ticipaUd in *ny recr-t arming


2 That's right.

« I asa»t in a tksVi’n t. d_r ee? rf an y arrs . •. - Sb.r;21y
e ulc participate ir. n 3ecr-t -.rain f Germany.

2 Eiu yru cv„r reeuirc. funds t equip illoral .die 1 -aitr.
Il-esal cedical unite? «ra then? On, yes, I kn. t
• ‘ • ‘ t • r V moan is teesettirv. up f the a cl

’ *- £.. in r. .st el: * ich 1 h ! .at. nod bef re, the B tuali- a ?hi u. -as

mi

i : 2 my* f Seiohsw hr at tj.at tint,

^5


19 .. r ii?- - -_-.-12-2-Gt-c?s (lat. Rial r)
C urt .'J-. 1


That In effect happened bnt that v.s

place in public, th, iquirc. ns b

the -cr.-y can- fr r. fur. a f tht «cr-—

Q St r, d.ct r, r

P'isrns, m idic-l tactics in th :•

A lu h- 's f th ie 1L Heal

physicians, '.a nU t v r n hu—

in a ccerse which I activated in th .

up f r the. rurpta. f rivii. t _r_ ;.

knewlodfe, as well as *th r

It that ti.* there ~i r. t y • t*

in Qcmnjr but n. c ill r 'n f r .i

Socialistic State f un rry iittl .-
0

indirectly interpret U*. f r-ign pro?
all .xnccted that a n r r 1 -Ur s
start wnr with us. 6 incc > c s' the
generally re arte!. Or -n> via pine-
was naturally ala i n In ten > lie i
lntl n at U. t tl * *cll sitisfi
these flbasur b :f r r xnt n*. 1 1.
That, a the th.r . n 1, . r.’thin

if I trivi t. get t t . c re f ;
the Gersan p- Die, t.» a ha t set u
ctivc t:. epn.rtunity - set v. •;:.
ab ut th* military int nt: so f Kit!

that if wa r the 3craan e. 1 tu.

•

p: rati rn 8 utr-g'.in^ t serr -.3 f f
Hitl. r's lays, 1 an sure, ..old inve
Q Toll, n w, - .1 ape 265 y u
Seer t rr.Lap « f G.ra.iy, In fact
a:, ante f n.y ; r- f_* u^uinaent f
— r sur. ery, .s . is ns, inn ocdic .

I wish y*u « ulJ read a a .1 «1 t t


r. very publicly. Trrf.rRr < -k
•ht at rfficial u_r j . fir .

.. Hod Crass at .xcklenburg.
i lectures ab it r tvrrCry, --as
.rly days?

0

alien, that is t say x Z3
in :x-eklcnburj. They .i-ticupatcd
-r 1933 r 193& vu' which w.as set
"clans 1 J die a 1 t oi:nc~l
lodge n.accasary c !' 0 war.

1 duty f r -.lii*. r. c nscriptl’n
\ papers '.lily •- * .’ati.ml

nnthy in tr- w -i . n ouuld
8 express in: t:.r tr f r r.
c untry a aid fir.: a u> r-„: ..
siti n in Ui t 11 -ht r. :j
int< the dof ns- sib; ti .. .n v L
Service. The entir O r ; pu-
Titn this r.-rr rd. r ni relc led

by t

all t? dc with ifh.t y u r.aan and
3 ti n, na-nly that 7 r . n- rally
at die .1 c ap.v.l r r t • .“in re-
f. rces bccuur. we :=ie .r c . ,ctiling
, I can a?sure y u .. r. nir oath
a m at that ti- t t ti se pre-
ive urns f1 ltier tier,

en nu=b,r. d t : t *j-. .

:<e nb ut y • r partici; ti - * •
centimed that ; 1 r c- iv
^dical units, ..in .1 1 -

-actics. That is ,'riced -.nr n.ncij
Tribunal. R-ad sl-rwly s: the


19 1 r L?h - ...-l.-2-ir 3? (Lit. Rail
Court . 1

interpreter c n f.llew. «t th- to page.

„ Y.s. I - uU like t . "I o Id n:v begin t r \Ii - -j Id

plan, nicely t set up i neiic»l bv. • n which w_s start, in 1932 2 nd

equip it just as n regular c my f - Scichsxehr ii-c (krtaqjr had

n. t y-t regained its cilitarj liberty had nc ci; ice . • v rk qui-tly

for the cccrgcncy "f again and again * reatedod war, a* f v r r

• •

The ^dical Service f th r.e hundr- th usand mn . , i-. it
fined by the Versailles TV-aty ccrtairjy c tild net suffice as it ..
very reserve was vrjlc . I succ--- t- .btiin a lr.r e bv-'. f _ : .
and with that c jploto equip- nt necessary f r a aodictl c y.

Th. physicians v rv ardently w rk d f r th- war tiae ..quin, nt f lids
racdic :1 c at y. , c r - have be.n in a p sitl n t -iv.

to th- Vfchra-cht a c . i.r-dy -qulnp. ,-diool c auony uni lace th.u
ontirely at their lis ■ s 1. ' Thi a which has b- < n r.entl ned here

originated fr th Ir n d Cr nj ecklenbur-: which • s her- f r

tool pur . at . : c » ufc- It w uld ive

anJ flick S' Idlers - th ldl-rs f a any m well . th s Mi rs f
tf*eir ppnents.

Isn't th-re r.n th r tail n n that sr*. p b_: re we finis):
up this n n, J cfcor? Isn t there an n-r quotati n --t • b tt a f the
pa go that I have narked with r-d pend.? Tiill ymre-d that al: ? «. <
n: tint es < ver : the n.xt pa;. , t uld you r>.ad that, te •, pi ?

, • is the c ntlnaoti n 'f what I have justr

c nvunient br :k . vint, } n r, I u. inf n

t< an ther subj ?t.

h rxibwul till i b. in recess -atll 1330.
i- /.C M - ;e-n.)


h i?


n* 7

15 jv (lat. 3r *a)

C art . 1.


3s szssr::

- s : -3S£i : Fc. s'..s ir. the c *urt reo vill plcr.se fir. their so tc.
r.'.o jrilmnrl is : .-.ir. ir. soasi r..

F.-.-TIB& 1 ?: CounRfl cey prtcood.

mas 3WXS — tested

CROSS IX. EfI 3 — Continued

Of 3. K 3)Y:


t the r. n rocoa3, Doctor, I inepirci r.a : - vhoth-r or n't y u h d
r^’ c ‘'*° 1 * ;cc #cctl - t.v.t ; rticuV-r eubjoet c r.c^rnin ■ the lectures -.b
r '° < W*ISW» • o :• in .r.ir. •. c f rt... ta y call, uo, 3r. H>chtclfi,
iafr Os /to :h 6 y v. intro J»t; S-, t this tLto. X'n -ir. : tl n«k th t y u
vill r. d this 1 at m, r- I h Vo pn# s-rfccd *:. blue ink. It oeo

t 7 o 2 $;, Dtct r.

— - tu'-tc: "I. or “. f'r.xr >ffic r, vs ir.-. rested ir. the lilt ry
t mini a - 11 SI '.ict'/rs. US’cr r. Tce.cn: -lth tho C'-nUr of the
R-- t30b-n>iehswehr, lieutenant C»lor..l vr. 7 y, I ordered ov.r o r ..o hundred
S.. ’tetors t CI O t . tick for \t. Id voofc. Everyone voro r. unifr.. ns
ti;ey '. ’ I’.urla,; ti:-c of c -‘art . c.t tr.clr r./r. ox or.ee. Tho courors t pl-.ee
la tho C.iivorslty clinic. IT-:: lilt ry surgery to the c:.b.\ttinr f opldon.*
fp > - iro ptiaonla to the t-ctica If ncdicino In fionor.nl. Everythin vr.a
incur no-', here. I lilt ry oxorcioor woro tho conclusion, vhicr. took pl-.ee In
Uo r.ci ;hV>3urhood of H'stocJc vith SA. ir. vCicr. SCH, tho battalion -y.ysici.-x,
vh- v u c. friend of hoc, took -> rt. ■


.. here in ytur book, doctor, you st-to th •£ you rccoivofi funds t

Jull . u nodical units: th-.t you rticiytoi in t.-.io secret nmy and you t-

;  Jn ioctuxes. rov, is it py un'orptmvdin^ th-.t -r>\r purpose ir. \zi.. k ,-ai

' i - 3 rey/iro f r :i event vnoreby nno.h r country nirht ntt-.ch jj

njr?

f

... fv-s, ft\t is clearly W ho sc .. fr- the roriius citation fron this


• !. vlich it V s .ctu-


; vJ


lly set * vr. in -ritin th -1 our r.ar.sv.ron w_rc t.-Jtc:


" si. /el • r tt chcd. Th i is result vhich is r :rttcr f course

/


4C36 -


is r-_-z:s-15-rr" (I.:. 3nv.\)
CJurt :v. i.


'll - v.ro y-ur idcr.s ~i:n.■ racial iin.s, Doctor?

_ 0 uld I csk yiu ylc-.-c t’ ns’.c so i Uviintl rucpti ns in tills n-.tt-

I boliovo t.i t tnorvias it —i> at v.kc to-- Ion.’.

.. Vol ., veil . ot t tho ore quickly, Diet r. Yu ''.re Ao'cidodly
anti-So- itic, v-ren't ym?

— I i sir want 7 u understand "rnti-So .itic a v> bo □' th-.t Z vr
correctly rnav-r th.. quest! n?

... - 7 *>u v. re la f v r if : ; rr; isititutoi a.—.last tho Jews.

I o.. 11 calc v r t ua^retra'. yur cuosti r. correctly in' to also
endear r : !«,; .7 asv r ,'rief.

I.-. thu l>‘:ti r-'d Soci-ditt ; ro.-r.. t.icr. is one ; ‘i:.t th t rc.*ul ten tho
racial questi‘n. X, .ysolf, h 1 c>nc«-mod ysolf with the n cir.l quosti 11
•inco the conclusion of the “irrt Vo rid ‘Jar, rad X c-.n n v *<nly honoctly
s y ;ho f ollovia.. ..ftcr the ?irat ’Jorld U r I t 3 : • -citi .n • .alnst
:n- end re o .0-roe t vhich tho Jo"iah pv<ul.*.tl".n tried t • .'rticivto lr.

G»r - :: life os 1*. ot.-lo. I snv tills oxtrc:.c r.ttitulc raifostod ir. tlio

f llovin . rc.-inai.. vith tho v ry first soldiers* C u:.ciic there wo hnrfll

>r.o in vhich thcr. v.s r. t a Jew a o nerd) r. In the devolution -t th t

ti tho Je-f tule a l-'.in ■ n*. ".ofi :itivo r 1-. Ir. th- r-c -natructl'n of
:ao S. i;0 t.. t 1 llovo., -Jr. t.ic Jov took :i ;>r>:in-nt p rt. In tile ur.tiro
1 it.c 1 ife f th- : ti n, ir. the ccm ic life, in tho firvnci.l vorld,
i;. ncior-Cv, .nd in tn. cultural life r.r.l in th- .rtc, r rror.t nunbor of tho
1 i.. claims v.ro -ci.upic-1 by Jews. This . rticiytion of tho Jove,

"t tl.-.t .1 , id t, t Jiy do too, correc r»a' t tho royorti n -f Jovo ii

S ... :* r vn« it over .y point of view that, for
» lc, th- J-vc 1 ,-rtlol ti r. in l.r ’.in ;ositi as— in 11 th-00 v r‘.tv
-cition; t.i t I Junt .ionti.»r.cd — snould bo r- ul'-tod ir. • ccord/inOw vrith
tc- fcrcoatnro of Jove ‘.n the tot'l inulati-■n. H'tfcvar. in Gvr.'.~ny» tho
Jvclap.:.nt vat such th*t vo etui, list nu-h-rs such as vorc rleo lictod in

Jh — .r.-.- h-rs rol-tir.- t tho intolloctoal lifo nr. f the posit i on thr
’ -ecu:led i- the froe yrtfcEBione. Pcrhrps, if ;• u vill let no have «y


(3rvc)


'-5

c •


y.-.Y. for a Jfl r.t, I cab rend these su-bera out to yu.

Don't bother. Doctor. Continue.

— Yes. In too co-c-aj of artsy othors I s v v.ir dovelopocnt rr'en
oxtro c ".tiitu'.o -.a the ; rt of in. Jens which I thou, at should bo l v - 11 "
r ,iulr.tcd the VP- nay oxtrea- positi Atst be r; ul IX.. She roncti ::

• "tact this took lco ir. ;Hiticrl life na* I \jt--g does vho -l c.. ?,:o

1 'Oact' .i a f the Jews ir.c~. 11 lcr/.is ~»siti nc u-c ir.tcrru"tod by the

.* / il--r.nl S ci lie . K~ti nrl Socinlic ;— a’. :..io I ;ust neat in
bore t ulzi. va t ; . ia. t 17 c':nrcJieasiblo — vra si stupid »‘jv*.
ncr.rol iito' t it, ia its turn, : V ‘it-.vcd -.i extr-.cly r.c the Jews iud
r-v uoly job. rod cxtrc.*jly.


13 11 J*-w5-1’— I-Les . .- (?i- ; vn)
I'urt . 2.


2 't-i* -.'.is lo^niirati n I r.-.i u t sr-uld i k- pi c- ir. -clitics .af. in

t - •' A s r - vv - - c urac it h-d t aap-jr. th ; tno cxtrcuo bokr.vi r

- c -'— a"ti nrl 6 cirlist .aisc-ir. its turn r -so uc rrc-.t > r ncti.r. •« thi

provi.ua oxtrc-c bcr.-.vi -r of t.„ Jews nd t..is r.v.cii s ;int u/illy did doc io

- 'r-vl icd 3 1 v. .v .sly -i:n cnacquorc-o th t coul 1 r.-.t bo i~r. ooon iid

v-icl: i in. 11 rofrain fr.u describing here but which ov.ry--.nc in taia ro n

lu : iii r "ith. r.ttitudo fv-.r*. tr.c nonotmti r. f fev-o in 0 rw-ny di

•

n t re t ir. ny wry >r f.clia • -f per* a -1 ii-.trci townr 4 the Indivi.’.ujil

^- v * ^ - - V ri.n'.o »: :n- .« Jwviw c 11. • U08 11W t :

•

.ccor w. 1 t-r. i. t..c -ri.'. ft r : ti :. 1 s ci-lio . c• ::c in, I
nslo: If I ‘ known th t thi ?r oocuti r. would t J:o up trie the o I

c ui h .. :’.-vi:.ctyoulf viU • ffid. .vita th ; would hnvc exonerated c )f
;• f.-’i.-. •• .. trod t v' r‘.a J.-va. ! cr . .-.a-. ut -graclf, Jur , :

I ’.id I: .w the focli:. -f h-tr-d ; 11, n-t to-r rf.o rr-upa of . o'l'lo r.n
. t to-.r .n indivi .u-.l p-ra r.a. ?nj von, n- trod, in vord th t does t c::i
ir. y 'let* r. ry. jy .ur-l- '.J.ctivo *bacrv. :i re v. re ■irvlccjatoA by
BtuMhB purely ocicatific nature • ad hv.-v *. • j I ak>uld like i oxpr.no
briefly -V r.f.r t th. f-tier f r CO hy ic:o, th. 2r.. 'io.-...x,

• :*r . 1822 t 911. . wS: ir wn in t... •• ic

. er. •-,r )f r.n. re., into the r .. . if vino. Ho in r lly t.

v c. .-.y. ioco. y.r'. z* e t.t.n J .ir.'. bj -,:i known .. ric.u-e. :

. .1 t .,3Uti Ur. :..ia oea uac I wr_.t t> ..-he . ricrj.c r. rr.ii'.lo f i¬

re Ir.tr.d ir. ye- -ny u: nly b cut. trio lc hist *ric-.l dcvol'p unt

ir: I u:; util.. , ir :... ir. f trr. . : . ri C - .

.. L-. s t c'r.c r;. urs.lv. 3 .. ^ vita th- i-t»ricr.l brtek r Und f

A

: -i- - - .cul'-r oubj-c:. I vill a-.» n fov qu)t-:i...s ir. yo U r b I: rad

•-:il c v.r t.: r ur. uc. . r. ro.irly. 2 To v ! : (i a pr..-o 25 T y iu*

: ic is - rr-ps y ur first r^.-irk ir. c' ..-,-ct n -ith the Jov8, in ls'.ia

. 0 t.. t ?r. re.. -i.. tr.:. in th- h r. s f t :. f.-s. t.u: Ir durir. :

- ' r, '.r r . o r. drUinll i- h. : trey ; r - ir,./ . r c>

i r r. w-aen -n. -iris -r r.v-.-' : r .r v. ' - ttlc. 5.

_ : r c is. t.. : tno Jews hr u „t c.. : r ci-ilisr .i n?

-1D?1


: - - -


15 H r-..-:; -1—a-L-'Bs-r O r'vz.)

. . i.


I nciv^r c.qjnrod t-w Jews vita th nc.T.ec. riv t is n quite ’.iff . re

rnco.

. r u enii th t sac Jews ir wit ekr_;c r. civilisnti r. cocnus- they —
:ac Je-s — a.- 1 _*r .iso’ vnitc 5.r;: van *n ^irlc .-.s re war', for brr.vur
ir. c :il_. liln't ;* u s ;• Z.-.-X in ynir :-<k?

It ia . veil te '”n f-xt. •'.‘".lea hr. a -c-n c afirxi ^y a.ric rir. Jiicrr
t they v.a :-r\dscd -..itc vV.ee ns reword after :n» vict'ry. ji’. t

t..io I :.act say, quite rtnly -a' frankly, I c t .who c ::ci.*

t-.lc Just. I ccc ir. -ixir.* if tv f rci n rc.c un>.'-—inesa f r *.:th

r .ceo r.'. . is c Gr-nt, r. .. rlc a -1 > rticul rl” ir.tv. nit t in f ct

Ir. ..ic * •!: — 1 ; 3-clir„ if t .o C-r t Ti-x-r..

\ r.l u V Tv 1 : *. .. i- i : *..._ • re v.f r fito rn»

verenU ” u?

... 7k i t.u Jews v.r. vrr ;r-fltcor» I vc ;it rly »f ; lr.1 r. 'exit

I ic; wit is fact — t..t is hist ric.l f ct.

:W hiiVo ;• u cv.r .; c ny rxnti-Sc itic r„. rkn. p: rticxtlnrly in
c ..n et! a •rl:-. t... i -c lie' ur.* lltlc 1 univorsitiosT

... In ..y ' .ic I In A on It "ltk the questi n *<f tho univeroitivn and
sot '. wa in . y h ic t x m‘t r ..l it '.j.t.v C r n f Celtics v. •oror-fillod
Vit.. «C*’3.

.. I -'ill h-.xw y»u r- * th t s.cti a, D ct r, 1 - t. ®V 0 cfcJ

w.i r. rked ir. rci pencil. £o tn.sj tv s.cti nr >n a*, o S5 V’.dcu c.r

. rite.', i.. rw pencil.

... ’fall, first f 11, it a.r-8 h.re "Tree Jewish id’s vat 1: rv-i’od
f -in -t ir v r. s.t t..> - e.\* let ;-c r in *. .is ct) .r.ccti rn t.: t .
t:.ic Wr a 7 .i .. inventi :.* n;* rt tat : v '.s.rT'-tl n .r. t .*y, ;t -

rt f t — c C- r.. n i’ouul ti >r. fn. the olnrlc (krt. r. It' r r t the intellect
Vi, til If I sLtuld write r. A\:r . :.y ;.r.: if I • re ci.r.r.dr-riot, ti.cn I
. t - c.-scricc. events ir. :a. vr.;- thr.t z.. y c.ctw -1 ly v- r j at -.‘ty ;:;c

*-l . ; .. ■ q-ittc furtu-r: “Here it v ■ ti. t I firrt crr.c t • c. v f U s

•

ell u litic -1 u.dv-reiti-'. 7 r fr r.-lisi:. n:cv rdy :nc :~.l —

*. c l-.ir science : r its wr. ; J:., vnet:. r Jc--g r C-.r...ns. vhetlwr fr nt

•1-3S3


-3 - C5-1--5-L-E2.r

- .


(3r


line s I i--5 -,r :-alir.-oror3. — ir. weir life and 'a tr. ir rxtivitics th.ro
vr .3 a thin difference. ?*r tne.: there v & *.nljr no v.in. — t h .vc an
lnt_mr.tivn.-i rorutntim nr .Trent at ->s‘ idle. ?~is -ttitudo ... the *. rt if
stt-e f tkounivorsities vr.s ?t he extended in the ncri thi t vt.t* f llou
r.d w-j t jr'kiuco ta rt - sc ctr r. :o c •..--sequences. " E-is •jarn.T-a h til t I
it"vc Juat rot-.l — I c n nly a y f It til t it is the *irc truth a f~r a
f cto -.re cncoraod. tut since Us tnano h .a toon bruacho.'., ;ile so > iv.it
ar. ' f_v atr.tisties in t..is c'nn.cti n.
jur, a t.ujn , Dtcttr; bof re y*u -icnti r. that,' at tiotics turn t>

:-..v5x.

— si. y-f-

.. • It vo .rrka. cl^re In ro-’. .encil r.._re y u sneak -f ;• ur \qxj li hr

• t. e J ". Jflail;* re v' tint t the Iri’ ur.d.

J •?. Jr t... ..t.0 Tvn -it- C it'lis ' t.._r J.-isn c.i r-ctcro mid
.. c t . .. vR.rn >f c ic-i. t.. rvite tcoy v ul n t h-v. boon r.Mo t
ronrin in the >vvrr_x-.t. w s tie fr atti to fi :.t_ro f r J

..wl;>a* r . c..v Jevs t -".as !nt f rei r. hru/s :... 1 rt -a-.cta tnr.t the (-.ram
. 1. t « r v s. & ' - itOiXC *... ■ r z ' 1000

. r U it; : ‘.-tr laud b-.c a f t...ir tu lit; 1 0 c r.ocl. r.c_, ’

a .tod It nine f-r tiiolr f rei.*. nature ••-.ic.. trial t narert itsolf vithin
•..._ r n r.t! n it .r’.or the better nd tr.o :.>r_ effectively •«■*. t.te . ro
v treativ.ly t erl.it t... r. ro^le. 'll- i >re ’I Jr' they cried i tho
-vl , rc ir. or. *... . •' : - h rr.ra f thv ye-ro Jurt mewl, rut in socrot
-v ; - r. i. c-'h U via- the vict rs. ~it.\ :,a. io va- h- run th* block-do,
iu —a c r- uotod th-ir dirty intern ti rei ta lc, vnilo the povjlo, '.nr.er
, 1 . st rv; ton th-uar-nds. -i»en 2CC.000 r-ill:

e t •• r- ’oliverod r.d v.ich, :.a I rc. -j. r. f 2 : 1 c- ir. r.cc’rixcj rl^h
t-o Versailles .Tc ty -i t_o *. >ct»ro *.\ioct-1. n J^vlf... r. cir.1
u r—.ic . euber -f t.._ ?>ich-.t."_ ste.te -1 th.it t .if v'o r. srtter t.i t did n

r.c ct ra -.t 11 . 8 Lot — re-, ri: in t. ir c nnocti :. th_ f llevda

- Just n_i; £ t w ;. cl trly in ilsdc • ' •v.ito. T-- t-v
-,u . . i„ ;.- • t» : ti. ., ucf rtur. t_ly tr. u it the c- sc - y «>o.


i— h—1 -ss.r ( 3 r:vr.)


-15-1--ioy (In . rcrr.)

Court I

... I can say only the follorin co that, if the ease th .v should
happen to oe th t hn.-pened to t . ,s . who bs-c t'n: Jew Ivculd have o'ore
the sane. .Ji-.u hi cened to him was this: ..'is r^r.'s fiance line bwn o'j'ende<
indecently by th?a of :ice-r, sad -nether th:i had been a Jewish professor
or a -err'r. 'vofassor is of no c.nscsucrvce, bet the aar. who ind-ccntly insult
ay fiance rill take be 3 tin. froa co whether Jew or a German.

*i:-s^ o. r all, don't sh ut. The hear you# fine thi

o:ntin o. re oh iur-ort^nc. tin tit shculo - v oar in the- rutobio r-phy of one
Kurt -l'o .?

... ?.'o, —c I h". asid i \ c co '.-otic:;, i: 1 ' *rl .in

and book, and it - -;e:rs to n cort ■

adhere as to rl . troth about t'.r • riot?, ;-ftcr ice I C'..*t thro-v Illuminati
on that .rlod,

Q# -il rlpbt. Tell us -.bout t.»_ Jt rich • i lister ol roroi'n ... "iru,
R'ther.'.u?

... xov :i h" the mu, t .o for., r."or. : r. r.ist.r?

.. » Isr l; ht.

. r, :c*b-rs ol Srhtrdt lri{ «ao, Burdorud thun-u.

nr for.i n lnist . scacsin itiohcf ftnthannu

:• Mod iirout Lntorcst, not only in \-rsnry, b . ’.bo entire .orld ot
: tire, n »r. con., ctior. .ith th r.:s-ssin-.lion I stated 03 - views miito
. .r .• , • in ry took vorb ■1 , in

* .‘.sc i > s ui: cx : * .

i ; :r ;ri:.i ' .• fui - :>. - : : ion

1 : 131 yo re of

*n v Ur . y • jour eircU. • * ' -r.; t.\u - r .. : o. .r Foreif

tj . ..ctu’Uy, Doctor, yo wore

5 r* ~ r t - h_ f-.ct so -sri:.* oi =-thvn*x, xr. yrt not?

Ir tri:. rtios c . jeh you ran -t off^r my

. ; 1 -.o f . . e cry - -s rurair, which c . cluirly

• 139 ^


-


I? it rci-u-JM5-2-*fcloy Vint. Brora)


Court I

c. 8»>B : r .* bock, nos Should I like 8SJ “hr*, y- . . :-~i'

‘ •
word tir t r Crst in jay tod*. b eai =orry th\: v. c

.d • j_~ *:r-i a inictor, bat tfco erMrtaoafch t tcwj led b t n

-uri.r 5v".d t «..» rus n discuiCior. h cr. i.i no w.y correspond? .1 ith

, 1 book.

1 . 0.. 132, -first 0 : II, D -or, do you knov v.f. - ccostory

- o. ; Trill 0 or. r.i p-

thc folio. . or-t .ly d-scrlh-d tv rur< _r= of 1 .th-r~.u t\u two

sxnt, Kara -:.d Vc.v-r, w-ro froUot-d an< cc. c- l-.d by you and .o r riondai
isn't that in the r Is of -a ' <x3ser *-t : ... f-ct 0 -v -r of

!'• th.r.vx?

'o. . . : is q-it. ci r'y i- J

. • .

-A V.- -Xl.v. lty for t»: i: . - r to:, -t r u , Ut

fict th-t \ h lixo rcvlo-x rUud? or cor d.: froath. fi ld‘ .Id not
c tr :• h.c, wit! to b sun. v \ jx. 1.-d 'dt» on- y .• In r-.oon
tut this h-.r retain to do with tho pltmia o. trtlcip'tion ii ' n ird r.

Th. aitvtio.i w-s r.a friends, I -wi ay friers »xr u n ti»v. time. rou.lily 25
. I old front

s 0 ol r-.i-t -etu-.Uycoa^itt-d each - -r. • • a i-. vi .! ..Mo

itu-.tlon -c U t ti:: I r -U> could r..- . u ry nli.d tob.tr \y IhwC eon-

av.c t -. ol-c-. Iho r

•ii;d:«.5t.diy -o o found ir.. >.ol 1 r/3 .co-.otric sitvision ft

.

■f -y youth md in vix. of tru. f-.ct ...s. • , cocr d.s, on3 in viov of

th chotic cr Jit -ns it to t ti*., -•-! rntt-r -u?t, be-- iuii^d and

. 3 new th t. T -

. lid o - I should tew*

ccr, cut - tr ' should hcv. :ctv ily '1 trayed

• • - , ■ '


15 '


5-3—iov (l-t. rcrr.)


Court I

in ay book sono-Z-iore, -.r.c that iff still esi ion today, “lid I cr. .ahoro
*o tiv.t oosiitcn today, ty-C-usc th'.t ret that in an:-' -"7 ° do

. .ct;n:_ or.c*a-fconor.

lh-n cnly connection you had itin thonaaaaaimtion cf
R t-.anu .-a n^.vly that you and yr- rJriwrt coi;c-al-d I ron th. polio,
th- xur< - it, ic -.n it?

, • Bint v \£ - only

connection v . h ■ i: ti. - jr -r.

a -- li jo»« t; Joruaalcs?

«

... So.

• tion on F l$7,

Kh.r-.in you at-t. ; »* diatribut. 6 to .i : in ‘ ft cluc-a t-o,..ts in the

fora of milroc ticteta, • , to 4 one i •'?

,

r.nd oonotrut.

hoaorcuoly, nlco L\ ctu t. Xlrt io, my aatint-'nt r.t

Eootock r,_r ?lo,y Inotitut- -1 so t-.cu. ::t thi: . In other

, t..r Iff in uv. (lei 1 oi bu or vs politic?, • ./ i uld n

. t k-r to:-rL fly.

>t--.-:;-l-h-a-l-»-? rhia war • .it •.— ‘if

...

Un. oold'err itn-ur thu 1 ^ d.r:..ii? ■* -at. nd fi^ldt , *r.d £±r

.c - .so .oi. . i.-aia ii. 1/33 - .r join.- L.*. ..S')..; or joinaf


•• *• •


,• - :.»t y:i ’ v . . I

.

K ’ -It ! id no s .ci. " "


' n, Doctor?

• cl i r o- 1;-,

-r i.itur. to/, rd *. • - -ci'l cuustic


‘ red

r ' • . :.:r. . c-.: 2Ui«*. boea% --aber oi t do :Ct i i.•; tic


^1-?


.. •i‘7


. loy (Int. Erevn)

Co rt I

... TV is ri ht.

... Xovr r-cial V.tr.d, • s I c*li it ycv s-j it isn't ifc t didn't cr:d
rith - - Jc.-s oiv.rj you didn't rv. "c’r s. !c: the -rv- aso.v*, -'id you?

... *r -.son qu-s _;n i: t - rv-i lqj_stio>n In the ~r^o

t h r b r*. nor. only

Tr.. :-sor. probl-a «ms r.ot - r citl rool—a ir -h_ s««- * -/ U:*t '.he qu-stion

pi hiv- just d'-scusfl-d'r.a - racial . stion, ut it ct. o. s ron the

rr-u .’f'.son literature, tr- ir.t.r;s-V . i . t. to 1 r _cet . t under

•

ls.j L. • p, the cuclo's r.. oono i- s car.

raced 3 tele to ol<' J.cish custons. hnt ir - historic 1 Xet«

1 , r.ctor, >* t «-s iudcndorl *s “anntnbcr.-Bund?

... Lu war \ nation'lisitio cs* “nish l.on

Ktiich quite s .cL ic- 11 ; tooic a point 01 vJ.ew .v'inti the. Fr— ■ 0 na publicly

Q. ; t:. t er ..as ;J ain't you?

... ? 5 .

Q« «nd o tt t. *.5 r-aoo - r ;,o. .r, t or. ur. tiwn - -

3 :.c, ■ nc o. 'ortnj rr. . r r . r r-'Sor.?

.

.

ran fa: -' 0 ,.o'.d - •

. ’ * , . . :

L, „£. ci : si 01-r o :.i-i in-. the Jure played in Gurrny


-.-c ."-a-. oo'-" (int., Jraa)

Court I

~l Thon, rjs you st-.to on ?rta 210, you voro sh ryly against :roo i:-sonry
5 C-.U 30 or its conaoction '..ith tSo Jou-s; is thr-t right?

.. ‘.rould you ploaao ropo-t tho " - last!on?

■ I rri - , you at ho or. pogo 210 you troro sh-rply -'.oinst ?rao Ilnsoanry
boc^-sa of l .. connection with cha Jo'.:-.; ia that ri.\ht?

I carrot ronor&or th.it phmaoolo&y procicoly, can you ylo-ao shou so
roo’.c?

“ Cortuinly, It la ceric’..’ith n rod pone II, Loctor. 3 oad it out loud.

I rood -lcud, "Darin/. ay oil tic-1 rcctivitios in too yo-.ro 1C22 rad
1923 I rtovolopod a sharp uttltudu e. oi at ?-oo :>'.onry baeauso of its conr.octi
with ;:-.J jovio." 3 cnt la truo s 1th a junt anid, that

all tho uaaj.0 rad ari .in of t . _'ooo -von lol os can to b-ck »o the.

J«3 •

i ly .jvory public a poo avor sr/.o, lalvod Into th o

ncirj, quootlono at oat Ion th, 11-..' t you?

.. v , i raall; cannot coy that a&ry address of . j co . « ;J i lot

tt^out tho racial lusatlon. =wroro - si. took ©to , I fro^uo spoko

-.t poll .leal looting, thano t/oro election c-r. ~.ir.n* for various oloctiors;
i other words aloetions :o _«i out acco.aiiay to yrolit victory and

. . «v:r- lc rules In. which ovj-yo’io covl' Qpouly -ni frojly ot-*o his o *inlon
‘ha- ia whet 1 did. In fthio corractior I of ton cold BOJothiny about

of ewreo '.3 truo.

' ''jli nou on s 233 o* “our booh ycu spook a’out -our -utile ipjjchon

:• ■ racial q .. ; pu

- * ! •'" i i /ou Zurt Blocs;-, vrlto a.i'.)'!^rr ? There o:j a.^noro

:.^ ll ihl. lech, they did’.nt -ri.o au;o' 1 •> rr.~hia?; u.;\t -..as your *


'•?.* ritir. an -.utobloyr-. ihy :ic: containr r.othl. >f


jfit to


:: -rch < 7 -.-r 3 c-is-a-:tosia: (i-t, v.-»

: -t i


: should liko to till you that youx assertion is .-.ot oatiraly corroct.

I isn't -.livra th-.t you could hnvj rati th- book bocnuso if you had, tho .

•

"Ou ..-Mi* L-T3 so-:, tli'.t throughout th. jntirj book liko - r»l ihro-d f-a*
t: . var. . tp. - on, t.:,ro runs tho vi -.o or thj physiol-.Ms rohlcaa, '
rjd than you ugull havo to boo fth -tiro ch-.pt ara of this bo-k -.ra da voted
purely to . _i:al s-.ttors .id thr.t i.; mllty I oxurocaod o >inion cn -11
onl -11 a-.ttora uldoh offoctod tha ph aloina* i.: -r. .

•_a, vo could fissure tha quMob bothor ay ;oi:.t of via'.. in this or
th-.t c-.so v»s •>. .ood xio r*l should -a racoyrlcol, hut th-t Is a -r.ttor of
opinion* "r: rsoorti , , * - this o. tiro -ooh,

1 ‘ r-:l 1 -oliti :-! 3-ttttr , •

uhy I urot© 1' -utobior r-'l-O', lit aa tall you *.Vl I st'-tjl tilth a oifijitoon
rjr.rr -V. a 0 ;dln ~t tho -go of fifty -nd 1 ttinl It le tlichouoet 1 -nyono

4

-j'ron n :: - • r.utoMo. rtphy ovary i Mr.; th-.t doas r.oi h vu ta do dlroctly
-.lth ...licrl ::»ttarc; at t>.t this book Is l- slc-.lly orlj-it tot tow!

oro, that cry. radii? ho *osr. through tl» otrjful robins of tho

.

tt r...< woro rally cor-.^cc, then I >ovld hnvo astitlud . book differ:..,
.1 . ii.-, fetu oil Khtiac-iiotio . tor, t it 5 ---CJ «x... .• . .t
: -jvjrt horo la setter* of euitto e of honlth '.nd for th.'.t

hr- I r 1; .

-V, . *: 1: ; .. fra. : - ..4. oal U i: : - -i: , - - c-. .1 lif.^rj. -

« 0 r-.c L-A Mas Cra. ... 0

.

* •• , 1 , . 1 . JrB ' i , ' 1 ' j ' Lillt

j -s. --•* . .. a -i vj-. 2*xrt E.-1 .a; mr *•’ :a *-—= ttrichj 0.1 th- llofr

. "i :.4 , *t t?


; I , i-.-a ye- • 1 rctor tt noHavjd ~oido . P-xty >.d.,a; nftar
-• «ru '. 7 .-• t . -nidi . r-rty 3-.* a- ia*t‘ u?


Is . 'arc'-

* -rt I


- ..


. " , KUrrdad I roeai-rod it.

:: t .j : r ' .v-aar rccox.’-j’fia-!, c:V* f.:o :.-oro approval: thoroupor.

:r. 'a SJ7 objoctod -'id tho fuehrer t- i! that bo did not waat hey inttatloa

^oldon party bodsoc. I i^solf woe >t / jr-o..-J.ly
as I eoid jorlior, so J >.ias oao* of shoco who w*
sot aiprovod ani t u th- r~.:t w»a, wliicfc vos -or. yooro oftur t: - IV-zi's
-- ocw--’, I *11 roealvi ; tod a.

a Matbllitj I coJTOCt la nMualOi, that tho

..tocj the boo:'., vhloh you vroto similar to Hitler's • :oi ■
v. "Jhy.iicion*: air- :; rif" • -.3 to ohou ::itlor what a -,ool littlo :.'azi you
j-.a voro arj :*<r. you atooi i:. thj Jo lab ^uoation «© th i /ov. c Id ot tho
wtortaft gtfsr&t rs i eorroct ocr ea t w osi la that itesusftloa?

.. I oa* aotaro u that you ara ..voa* 1:. that aaiuvitlj that St a
soiwaary c. ... to lo .. at all to .\r/j t.at 2 v~: a ood II'-. 1 - '.•-si
>t l, x.ac a cc-r.'Ical >,tioa*a 3ocl-:.lat u-c fcuxn to ova .vuo \i:o Itr.u'..' no
« of nano. 2 rfsould not »xvo had to vrito mwh a booh to <3*ova It
to rocalvo a.: r;rr of a part” V- '• j.

I‘i'. . a- * ro you that 1 thla ;r.:c‘.- :oo -rue!. i "'coll* to aeMova th-t

ynl by.yritlsc « booh. If rw hr/. -r.~ • ll; r-.a’- -y -oar, -'.oa you would

la 6* «* -• Moo

lot J aa . t a Boldoa eftrty - a Id ir. a Way l r- SO, 1 Vlo.: of tho
aft L, at a ooa /r ft llna ooldior, bod rocolvad tiu :.ai J-.t’r Cronr.

: : . Z-jo •- an: tho "ohunsollov Bade a and had tho boJjfl for bair^

,

r, .-vj toatifioi ora in liiajct OMabltioa th ; tho
*. trio 1 au b cal Jo .uL c lcio. & *-o.ai ori^tuatal •. -h- --iaiatry of tho

-.as t. j •• lo uaO h ...ilol .• • t . * arwtofUq ror;

. a t t *

l -'Ac ri

,

•' it; r. racial oolitic-— ujstia-s of •. la. 1 -tiuro *- s th-

• a :o:tcor ai a 1 -ic:::i » s‘ r Ir.to-n ; t j iator.tion

1'; j r to 5ar®3 - rt a sa coro tf ..ori f - v* ioUs 1 s

/: ‘I


(Int., Brcwa)


12 • '.re:. 47-
CV rt I

in question, thon tho cccipotont organizations of th. p-Jty carried out tha
law. So, i:: ny opinion, aftor tho Ministry of tho Intorior h'.d ?a£2od cortrin
laws, tho i: .plincnt j-I authority could only bo tho Foich Chatf-or of Physicians,
cr tho P.oichs.-.orztofuohror or Dr. Grotho, tho no u'oro tho channels as laid
down by lav rjd I cannot thiri of -ay othor fo-siblo w-y.

e "ou, thoa, tho execution cr the r4nir.istr-.tivo t-ndling, whatever yo’
nay call it, of thoso restrictions which voro nl-.cod or. Jowiah phynicians
>.r>.n JiT. Jlod by rjonti • ' offico ir -s -ositio-. as Roichsaoratafuahror; v-an't 1
.. "ould you nlcaao rop=-t t:_ yu.atlon, I ii not quitt u: .durst-.:.:! it?

\ I stated thr.t t!*. execution wvJ Mair-lctr- tlvc hcndli:^ of tho
T.rticul'r restrictions pine A on Jewish physicians vac hr^dlod by tho offico
of tliu Roichsaorztofuhror; is thr.t rlfiht?

:r r , not by the offico of tho Roi.cheaorztofuhrcr, but by tho P-lchs
Fhyslolnna londor, Who l tern dlscussod thio quostlor. with Dr. Grotho, tho
noad of t!;. Goman Insurance Coo-nay and thon sottlod this ur.ttur with hlu*
;/tor..-rda hi put :x, ar.i ccvo of r-y ncccr.plic-s boforo thu accomplished
f.-.ct, tut had j boon rshud fc-fore, I -r. euro i would have chans-* a nunbor
f th , hut i don't think it is a quostlor. of debate horo what 1 wadd
-vi done.

*i 2'o‘-. Doctor, this particular preeran rfirinot Jowiah jihyoiclr.no,

sh I .ill n<Lait or accept -a tl ro< it of the to: :* up witnosa,

•

Jrl.^'. utcd 1 .. th- -inlntry of tho Intorior and ti t oxocuticn -f plans thoroof
Conti's office in hie capacity-: Rttehsarstofuehrori new,

•t it ridiculous to say thr.t n min like ycvroolf, iio has exhibited cuch
a -on ir.tt ont Ir this racial procr-r., that you did • -t :or.c-r:. your3olf
in pl-nr.vi tre-nt-j. i if Juwioh physiciana?


19 Tlarch L7-..-ATD-17-l-?utty (Bits. 3rora, Paal.-r)
Court So. 1


A it is not ridiculous at all, as ycu like to say. You -vay W
it is, but ha', you Iowan th. situation aa it sxistc 1 with us, 1 an euro t
y u mul'tel't const ridiculous at-.all. This is hew it was: whenever
any question regur-Uz* thc'lottleoant of sh physicians eaao up, the
question f social insurance fca' to play a x'ol-. Ivory Gtr.ian rtw in any
was e : 1 ycd an' who couldn't 'Anpssc cf *. Ini&e or. unt of nonoy was of

• a neobor of a social in. ur U n, quito indapondont o

whothor he os a J-m or c nen-J- , a i>: ro or a Japan, s.In order to safe-
ucrthis s . insurance, va ha' tho sc cial insurarc .a . .i in 0« r
Chief of hich .as Conti, ant* whose 1 1 ’oputy in this sph.ro .as ;s r.

Gxvtho. : in conn cti n with this activity Df settling the problon of
Jewish physicians, th sottleoont of the sc cial insurance activity Ter th
ben.fit of J-. ish potionts ha/ tc bo discussed of necessity at the sane ti
I was net nt all surprlsod that Dr. Qrotho was oomissicnod with loin. th'
kin', of fork, who was tho export in that ratter.

, Dr. , bc r 'ir. to y ur cm tostinony, y^ wore aotiv
th.- 3;. until 1936, is that ri ht?

.. Yos, after 1936.

1 How"you forr...: tlwso various -e’icil units of tho S A only in y-v
County ‘ ..ckL-niur , is that ri ht?

: jcklcnbur , yen. Xicxt'o ri ht.

Ydu ha' nothin t c It: th v.rall formation of .w'ical unit.'
for the 5,., la that ri ht?

.. "r. tho yosr of 1935 to 1936, appraclratoly ever a year, 1 ha!

• •:* i> t-'up p'syrician f the area F-rlin-3ran.l nlur-. I then rcsi n I r

rfice.

./aw, you —

A But there I nlrea’y foun’. cr.-anizetions that had alrea jy ‘'con s

ill, n , ’ y u recall the t stirony cf Professor Lei' ran'.t

■' eh in ;n ;a \ 1973 f th- ffidal transcript •■•her -in Fr rfcss r L i rat

•17 OF


19 !ferch h7—.,«.-.TT—I7-2-Pttfcty (Ints. Brcnm, Ranlzr)

Ccuri No. 1

S 2 i ' that on th, 1 st of 1933, ho unfortunately was obligati to expo*

onoo tho raatest dis-race of thi radical profession, in that he saw his
Jewish colleagues culldi out of their hois ir. the nomine and mistreated b
other rv.dical non. the medical non wore in 3.'. uniforms, weren't they?'

.t I h-.ar \ that hero. I hoard this expressed by !!r. Lcibbrar.dt, ar.
if !!r. Loibbranit testifies that under oath, I have no reason to 'oubt ths
corrcctn.ss of that testimony. In that connection I can tell you that in *
year of 1933 when this happened I was livin' in Rostock and not in Bcrlir
and I can only stato in that connacticn that in Mocklunburs i» Jewish
physician vas takjn out of his bel or in ary way aistreated. ;.t no tine <

I hear of it and certainly didn't couso any such acti-r..

0. In 1936 you loft yrurposition in the Fo*. Cross, and at that tir
.a?<rcr select-;: you as the Chief of tho Fuehrer Sch- <1 of Gorman rjysici-
at 4 J.troso and. ’deckle nbury, is that rl ht?

4

/. Ifo, not in that for. . ..t first I' didn't voluntarily leave tho
Oormn Rod Cross as I nlrca V sail. Because of ny —

Q Just a -aonort.

A — prr.ctico I loft the Red Cross.

Cl Just a r-ra-nt, Doctor. Lot's not quibble over worfa now. In 193<
that is rhen a nor 3.1ccto'. you as Chief of tho German Physicians School
..ltreso in 'fccklcneur , is that ri ht?

A No, that is not ri/ht. I was novor tho Chief of the Fuehrer Sch
:t ..ltrosc. The loa lor of that Fuehrer School was Dr. Df-u3chul.

Q rhat was y ur p-slticn in tho Fujhivr School at ..ltrcsc/?

: had ns j osition at all in the Fuehrer Sch'.al of Altrosc. In t
fra::./?rcrk of ry ;r.tirc tasks taking care of ‘leal trainin: an.’, oducati e
Altroso wa3 subor linafco to no. It bclonrcl to one of the or'aniaa’-ions rh
was conr.octe J with tho radical trainin' an - o ducaticn.

r\ hat is this school that you were Chief of that you mention^ d on
'ir.-ct oxrrdnation at .Jtrcso?

A I len't think I wanionci ary thin- like that, an’ I certainly w
net Chief -f any school.

'dlO*


19 Ikrch .'.7-..-/.TD-17-3—Putty (Tnts. Trr.r., racier)

Court :o. 1

*3 Do y-u mean to tell ras on direct examination you I’r.'t mention
school in .Itrsse for ycun=- physicians of which y u stated that only a sr.
aiiount of tho icctcrs rent -on! not one of ttesc defendants over attended

A Durirv ny -‘iroct oxarlraticn 1 stated that litrese was under ny
charje. Durinz ny direct examination I stated that I ns the only nan ret
siblo f .r the education, since Dr. m nor is eaan ! I furthcmcro atat
that I ^La-’ly bear that rcspcnsi’ilit;- since -whatever fits tau ht an ', proa
at ..ltreso ms ccjplutoly ocont, or-brly and radically ethical so that i.
noo ’ fear no attack from nnywtorc in rolcino, a... that is what I sai l .abc
this "uohror School in litreso.

r} ell, ill ri ht, 'Adn»t you state in liroct examination that thl
post- mdu.ato stu fer physicians, that that 'uty was assigned to you by
’a; nor to control that e 'ucatdonal jrcuy>, .ar.! thon you at roat length
nontionol tho school at ..ltrosu?

A Porhaps I could p-int out .an orr.r cn y ur part. You aru :dxin
two fun’anantal thin s. I was r-sponsible for thi 0 rr.an nodical c dues tic
..•hieh was ivon ovor to the Gmean physicians as part of thoir 'uty cn th
basis of tho law of 1935 by tho o-.-ich Chamber of Physicians. ..ccor 'lnz
that law, every physician in Germany apart fren certain cato.Torloc had to
un’or,:o a , -rio ! cf three weeks .Medical trainin ' ovary 5 yoars, .and tho
*toich Chcsibor of Physicians boro tho c-3t of that trainin'-.

Q '<ait —

A That • is tho lit-' for fivo yoars. That hr.! nothin tc ’o v.ith
Itres . Tills *rainin. ,-s carrio' -n at universities, at various largo
oo rjnal hospitals, hospitals of - • various r lid. us missions, Evan lit

nissiens, Cath'lic missions, ..t ny rate, it ms carrio'. on in such hospit

w

,/hich ha' O'-’ t -achin' Tit oriel an! also teachers. That ha’, nothin.; vihatr
iver tc do with -ltrcso. That was the 'uty,

q ,11 ri ht, rhat was the school at .Itrese?

.. Th; sch >1 at .ltro3e was a health political trainin' course, r.
c -1 olitical trainin curse for the sc-callei radical fuehrers an! tho
leal fuehrer reserve. Furthermore, dentists wartrained there, pharmac


xi '-..-ivos


:705


1? Ifercfc L 7-..-..TA-17--- rutty (Ir.ts. 2rown, Sealer)

Court ::c. 1

q “ho had control over that school?

A. Tho lirect superior of the school was Dr, Rahso, an ! the super¬
vision -aas exorcise! Ay :ic, an: I aloe hr.', to sear responsibility for the
school#

C, "'all, nw, they tho Tuc'-irer dohccl f G:mnn 1-hysici.ans at ..Itr
in tfccklerlburg was your respensi' ’.lit;.'?

A Yos, that is rtet I sai on ir-ct oxanlnation, but I nay correc
or-f) other thin• which you nentionod in your quosiicn. Tho participation ir
tho sc-callei courses at .J.troso whera at th- r.ost one hundro ’ tWonty-oic’
people ! artlcip- 1 Jwas ccqplctoly volurtary.

Q I vill ret to that, :>-ctor. I will :« t to, that# You wait till I
ask you that question. Dr. arnor qovo you this job a3 supervisor of
school at Altrosv, is that rljht?

A If I hat boon tha supervisory lea.'or at Aitrosa, I woul have h

to bo stqtionot there# ?or that purpose wu ha'. n : pelnto 1 a h.ad for that
school. .Jtroso bolon;ol within ny ontirc sphere of aotivitios. I 1 'Ji*t
livo at Altros . I hold lectures there quit- frequently.

Q ".'ell, n.-r then t» clear n jvint up, it o-^r's t<- c ncorn you pro
that tho Prosecuti'n ronton’s that attendance in this school at Altrc-so wn
pulsory. How you will recall t ation's witness, Professor

I.ai’jfcran’.t, tostittc 1 that wan net sur, . h th r or not this trainin' wn
cen ulsory, an h- stat I in fact that a nuBbor of yearn- physicians when Y
r.okj-1 about th t -.afctor ha’ toi *. hir. that they wore not in attendance at
your school# ” , then, to cl<or a oint up, you nontiane’ this post-Trntu-
ato stu'y of all ’octors hich 1 " not tnta . ir.ee at .ltroso. as that cor
pulsory? Thi3 r. st-;ra *uata study of all 'ct-rs in Gerrnny that you r. n-
fcicnpd oarli- r and you say is net to bo confused with the couraos Ivan a
..ltrose, was that a coaaulsory course?

A Yes#

q I sco. '• oil, then ’i* tho no '.ical students in atton’anco at the
3ch:ol f -A.tr:se have to *<elor. to Party r T nnizations?

■-7 06


1 ? ''arch 17 -.T:-I 7 - 5 —(Ints. Src*n, Raaler)

Court !>o» 1


« So. “laical students participated ir. the courses of Altrose. The
trere young physicians who had Just about completed their study. Those ner
oourscs for tho benefit cf students.

Q .01 right, Tfector, when — did ycun; nodical non — ’id they be
fcteao youn-; neical i*jn in attan nnco at the school, have to belong to .anj
Party cr ;r.nizaticns?

1 No, that was net nocossary.

*i - oil, isn't it true that if they i'n't belong to tho Party orga
rations or to the National Socialistic Loa ns of Stu ’.onts or Physicians t:
thjy woro const iarad os suspects, and thet if a stu lent bolonrod to no or.
ration whatsoever an\ ttan had tho intention *x take the State oxardnatior
ho had no other alternative but to join sono Party r- anizaticn? Di 1 ho?


Itrch I9---3K-13-1-C fc (Int. km.-lcr)
l.urt i


.. I sh;ul' like to answer that what .rfcssrr Lit.rendt sis said cb
thet natters when .r f-sscr Lictr-nit was .skcd whether he deemed it p-as.
that the attendance 2 *- ..Itrase wta rrt c-= •.ilf.ry, md thr.t many acre ;hysi
ciens ha' 1 , reported at that schc. 1 than c:uli >e accepted there, 1 rtrfcsacr
Lie’ rendt, aeccrJin*- tc -=y rcccllccticn, answered the fcllcwin.;: I believe
th-t the y:un perse n tried tc ret eppertunitivs tc prc-rcss, sn 1 in effcci
it v rs true thr.t nearly nil aedicel students in seme wey cr ether, tried
t. Join r orti-nd sicir-liat formation, there were very few who wwre net :
ata’ cr cf ny such r nniz&ticn. I think y:u etui a c ur.t th*A cnyur fin
Her: ntny y un; Gc*sw. d ct rs went thr u.h these c urs-s, sponsors,
ty this clue ticnal system under y-ur Juris-licticn, that is, hew ---.ny <"-n
'id y:u have in ittovlanco -t .Jtroao?

Veil, ra y:u cr- oeprosain • tht question in the letter part, y^u

4

were correct. Ycu nrked hew neny ncturlly visited .Jtrese, hut h-fero tha
yeu were speakin r.’-cut the criuc-ti r.-_ system. I ra rather surprised at
thet, buosuso y.u hr4 -v ie si; . , hioeU n, aporta, etc.,

which weald hr.vo noont •• rilitr.ry r;vj.it'ti enal ch*r ct.r. Th t wasn't
the rucsti n t - 11 . These y;un • people there weren't educated lut they


.. rely attended auch courses ml 1 -ctun.o ir. ur-iur t: -in kn.wlcdrc ftr
tht University. Y.u coolin't iv- thtm <.r. the basis cf their curriculum,
nr .rely, rtcut er.trel subjects "*nl official quoati-na as they r-l-tui tc
medicine* . 3 to the narunt -f y< un - physicians who attended this scl.c 1,

I think I c-n . wt th .t f.r ycu. ..ccrr’in tc qy aco;ry the ached vr i8
c is; luted nr uni 1935, nnd 1 d n't think rny jrcun- physicians were in
•ttunlmce then. Then c urses sl-rt i f r dentists, ldur physicians, ode
wives, and phnraeeiat3 A which 11 t ether zus untc-1 to ut five .to six
c arses, even if y u think th .t ther ren n.pr xiaatdy six courses,
r.un£ erirw ibQ noi each, y u would h'.vc r u-ftly 750 i-n . or year, .'lew
tMrfdn ' cf the year 1936, 1937 and 193? :tA theft enly part cf 1939 - 1939
n.t c-s^lctoly, tcceuso th. war st-rte l th l3t f Sopten. cr, 1539,

* . r jdavtcly ycu c. ul*. arrive at fi-urc .f the arr.unt f pc.-pic -..he

ttended, p.-.i that .asre! thr.u h .dtresc. -c redly couldn't -ccraudatc 1

•i7 00


;:~rch 19-i.-5K-lfl02-C- .k (I i.r=3ltr)
Curt Sc. 1


ftU nfcc wanted t. cent 1 -ceruse f so aaay reasons.

' I .undent-at that. H:w, dccter, y u h-vc stated just what I havu
been writin,* for, the purpose rf this Fuehrer schc.'l ?-.t ..ltrese, w.s tc
c:=?letc rn*! r un! cut the ycuar doctors' educatim, t furnish what wsa
necessary c nsidcrirv; he did net receive that in nodical achcl. -y u
stated in -ui interred tier., arrrvj ether su' jecta, net hero cn direct tocaain
ticn, tut in * previews interrelation, that aoert* ether subjects, y-u wore
also in ch'r-c cf instructing youn.- Gcr-vn lectors ir. y litic.-l orientation
h'-t cx-.ctly 'if you tc-ch then ir. dtresc in the line :f politic'1 criente-
ticn?

.. Tl-.ia ;• litic'l erient-.tien is public health rientr-.ti n, •-nit is
cuitc cle'-r th-t I pre-.ched no cp. -sitlcn t the national socirlist re-iao.
that is quite vie us bocruao r.t the tiao, I oyself n -- convince nation
socialist, -ni there ws ne reen n t. hide :->• c-.nvicti n in the least.

r, Veil, did thr.t political orientation include the ;..ints . f view wh:
y.u se d quently oepressed in ycur leek?

rt 15ry l perhaps nok y.u shat ; int: of view y u arc rofcrrinr tc, bee
I aa sure there nr. « few hundred different p ints auntimod in rny Kck.

oil, f r inotcnco, *h-.t lid ycu s-y in y.ur lectures about the lif
vji rthincss -f individuals *.s applied t. individuals cf specific national oi
moinl r ups? Zil y u aenticn that at all?

.. The quest! n sccos tc xa s: Lor rtent and 1 wr,uld ask ycu tc ropoat
th-t ;ucsti n once Bore in rdcr t. avoid any tisunderstnn-.'in .

r. In y.ur lectures at Altre-sc, did y.u s:ncern ycursclf with the lif.
y. rthincss cf individurls ns aprliod tc individuals rf specific national o>

r-cl^l r upa? . £

.. One word was translate.'. -a individual life ValUo . I dtn't think

ir quite correct, that is senethin. that d.can't lend c correct sense U t>

ntdro quest!. ny

.. Did y-u draw any racial lir.es in the c-.urse cf y.ur lectures at the
cch; 1 ir. dtrese?

.. iith reference to the lectures th-t c r.ccrned the fid: .f r-cid

4769


I'-rcl. 1?-..—1X-1-3-3-C: ' (Is. K-JL-r)
; urt 1


c.odic'l 3ci-_ncw -nd questions :f hc.rf.ta50 which v.re ; ursuod ;n a c.-/ lctclj
scientific basis, hid a s;cci 1 prcfcsscr whs had - haritr.gc research
institute, and at this dcj.artaent which had ir.ttmsti-.nrl characteristics t:
rr.chod rs £ r as - .-ric?, this professor h-li purely scientific lectures .
field f racial hy-ienc an*! hwrite-c quest! ns, as y u cculi find it all :v

s

the wcrl'i ir. pH lcn^ua^os. He hd these lectures cn a very objective and
factual ' asis.

- , ct r, t wh t ract it : i 1 stress ha trxy I tcrndnnti 1

.. Excuse isc, I i.r. 1 . r stand the question.

11, : y u - I rill r - ' , ct r, in another manner. We

« *

will ;ot ir the c-rc quickly, and lc aray with this su’ Ject.

To wh t oxtent were y ur teachings r-s;>.nsibl- f r the thwrrtin,; and
’.iat rti-n f -if to ’ y:un Gcrarn .hysicians, wj. without pro; er •uid.-ncc
. wrf'.ravJ the evil Seeds which wo if v- hw'r in this court re ra, and the.
terrific ot ;l s :f ir. -.sch.r m 1 Dr. -in -Schcd r?

A The trrr.nl ti.n H mi c 0 thr u.h very well, ut I KlieVe that l
understand theoonac cf y.;ur question. 1 had already at ted hoi* re luring q
Iroct .Jircinaticn that this chv-t.r erne-.min; ex, eri.-v.ntD cn human Win a
1 - never dealt with ir. «ltrcsc. These was no re sen t v r

t. Ic-1 with my suer, quostiens. r v.r, ur tccchin , sit
IrwCtr: Ua-rla rfl physicians, ased a %ner.'l inter..cti n-l rec. -ni:

f t. Heel rci nco at lcr'jc. y u will net

1 in a ,. siti n, even if y u c.ul‘ search ;* r t.i years, t ct any ;.'wr3wn i
‘.ttuidud ..ltre 3 w t. t_U ; u th t rny evil n r! w s sd ; in tSrt c ni.ccti.-n
ir, ..ltr<-Be r any W exr.Tple a-; set there', -an ’ that i: the reason why I
Ire'.ij s: t I her. thi t I War th Tec, nsi.iiity f r the schc 1 at .Jtre-se,
: T it l an! that I IS r it.

•.-11, th.n y.u n v.r iscussed- with y ur stu ier.ts at .Jtr sc, r
otriirted y ur students, alcn - ilvri lines, that is, establish in the
ier.ts hatred for the Jews, r my eth.-r such N’ozi Hey, i- that ri ht
, in ..ltrese, j-licy f hatred was pursued, neither t. mrls J* v

r 1, r t. war's ay ,1 thr u-h ut t*j v. rid.

-.-710


- ..... _

; urt. .... 1


Q Own yu loro that •-=» f y-“’ * 5 '-- r - r ' s; Mifl ° in cnc "' ur
in; «»» dcetora ta 4« interta acnde. U tha :<. P«J»  fiI
Uticrl. rad'l and rdi^ua rspaen. «rt d=«al un-icair.-Vlo by the •
sad natur-Jly .ora cmlinod in «n«ntmtirn canya, ia th-t ri >t?

A *. X «k y.-u tc ull the interpreter net tc.traadaf "ieny" with
I did net havo the intention tc -Unjr anythin;, *«t I 4= hwc «
intent!.n t. t»t acoathln* ri ht U it ia ~.n> fltncrally I «nt tc
sM tc .... -in in c-nn-ott n 1th thr.t emeaii.n, in -Itrcao, neither ty «itiw
r hy leaturea, cay »• Joel «a preraM, *nieh *» »» "=» 0 h " vt f
tho toaia tor any =ri--.-a pertomed in the fiMN, a r-U at- « hint.


19 March 19/.7 -..-19-1-.”!?- -r (Int* f.anlcr)

C-urfc !:-.i

i Lr. L-ibbr-an. t hr ‘ r 'iffcrcnt vie*, i r.'t he?

... : wli, rr.y I uu y-u in that c nnectlon th t I a-n't hoi*. the fact -f
•* ur uttir. th t quest! n ainst y u, cut wnen s>akir, ab ut the testimony
f Lcihbrrr. t I oust say th-1 I a ru.: to vrt -f his atrteaent. One has to
state th t nvltfKT Leibbr-n.lt n;r or.e of the >-yle ho syokc bout ftttn-c:

-his c ur&v -.t litrehso. £ , thorof-ro, ho c nr t soy nythin ' sitiv- about
. hntovwr ho kn.ws ho any .«rh-, s only kn »> fr-a what h r in ny book.

.. ’.oil, ... will oy th t, :-ct.r. How in y.ur b ;.k y>u hr.vc stateyou
b Vo iv-n y.ur reasons f.r statin s in .ircct ^in-ti n, -n .oa.e 221 that
sterilisation is r. arr.au, it is won & t a yunistaont, it is a sacrifice which
h-3 t bo b.mo by th- in ivi ual f.r the future >f his nation. N-w yau
Mhroentc.: this licy ij r Gorctny ir. rl.r to cecuro healthy ffs-rinrs for
tfcu nati , is th : ri .*?

a. ..it I ,«r; n 1 .;. : l * i n t ri irv to on ny initiative. ..t tho
tlao tho Law n. s issu-.. In n. influence r. it whts -vor. 1 rust bt*to,
,wwr, th t th, br.sic Urv -r.cy of this i“w is absolutely c-rroct an., fauni*.
r v 1 n t nty t h no but la. ebr a . Other sfUs .iho havo cco^to.’

: sterilisation lrws. I lots* f

. - • • isl turu in c-ao states f tht nature. 1

Mink tht sincv 1.. to ply to tho entire Unite* Status* It t is

I ooftainly’ c ul . «. •. iliiU i;. i- risownt. Ihc ala >f sterilization is

,v i gotten . ihu itby horif -*int- ?h« kj ?lc and therefore creating .a
ha* lthy bro- •.

.. ht is / ur -L-.t f View c,.c-mirv -b^rti nr, Met r?

..b.rti r.c? It is cy .drJ.:n that o rti.n is c . unish blo act. In
a.r-rny there *r v li laws in th t c.nn.ctijr. which back to th- tiau of
th-*;«rchy, which :-.1 sj b ck t tho tin. f tho Gorahn Republic unlor tho
-iv.r c nstitutien n continue into tho ..orio f Hrti .nal Sod-lisa. <>t nil
tious abortion w-.s ..unichablo ir. Goraany n‘ I think that is quitu
c rr.et.

. - 11 , th.r. y -u ciink th t abort! n .. ala bo criav a.-.ainst the nation

-h t it .:dor :h. fath-.rlan* f h-'lthy err* nuocrous :ffs.iria s?

A. r.s.-Th t ir • 1 st f view, I think th t borticn is a criac a:*.inot

-712


15 l£'rch 1947 -..-19-2-PK?- Grjss(lrt. *-ilor)
: Jirt K-. 1


th, fithcrl'-n'. Tcct is -uy a ini n.

.. -11, in y.ur ; siti ;r. ir. the —dch K-lth Of fie- as deputy ta Car.ti
fi* y u tvor r,c-iv- -cr-.s .r ur'.rs which woxv jiv-n -ut by OT.ti?

This question is ,,ut in axch >-nurcl way tbrt I c n h-r’ly ’.a anything
■ith it.

. :.-U, I ill br-'k it u fir you. Di y-u h-.vo ccnsitA to o— oyory ordsr

9

t»rt Dr. C-nti iasuu- in Us .* siti r. as Reich Health lu". Vr?

... Yu .mm vbwthur I h * tba a. rtunity t. at- t -r ers r define ;\y
siti-n towar' this.


. I nk ’ y u i ’ y u n v. th. /i rtunity t suu each ar&r th’t Dr.

Cti issue in rde capacity as Reich Health i- 'or hurt?

... :: , i i r. t.

Di •/ u h vu a rtunity t- e«. r. .r. t mny -f tho ardors that woro

issue • by the file, f C nti ir. his ; siti n as r.eich Health l^.dor?

... It is r. t e sy : sr t answer th t quceti,n bee- us- 1 ’. n't kn-w vihat
r vrs C*r.ti isfuJ' ir. nis ear city :r :.-l:h Health Fu^hr-r. Y-u .oust consider
th t C nti in his pc siti-n a Reich —

... Ufa n-t int th t, ..ct r. I ur. erst n fully the ca.vcitios f
Inti. DI v u wor iawss with C r.ti the questi-n -f 'b rti.r.s?

... iseaesi : srtry. That w.-s m tpirdan which tins quito

clear t. U m I - * • tt-r . c.urfti.

Di' l _• vc!::: - - cu-ttin f -fc.rti ns with C.-nti in the case >f

r.aot jrr >. -dvrs - r. - r.r~ r. .jojoIoT

It# J 1 *

. hit vruroy. ur iscttaijn f r.

... . • t. ti, pprrontly in cjUal»r-.ti»

»itr. U *h- i.-.xentim to c'rry ,ut as auny .> <csi';lo -.b rti no in

• - c 3-s f t- nr at Eastern w.acn. In this c.nnecti n r -l*n was t'ken
r c.nsi -r-ti a <hich ,ul ask- b^rti n c-a. ulsr.ry. I r-sistod this
1 very v.he . r.tl;, in very a. n ifterw rdc a rulin w.a cede by 3-x»ti in
r . ,.r.t with ri-Ti-r acc rdl. t which -b-rti no in th- case of £ stern

-r.v. r th-y u,sir-c then. D«rt

r via . Ir. -..-At c nr.-c i.asi 3 t r-vent thu nisus- f such -.b.rti.ns. The


' fi'/iortti ~A -/‘f'l- ?*P- M Jrf-

_x.-rt dv. .lir. -ith th t qu-sti.n was SLrieh i^m-col ist with wh..a C:nti

iiacussvd these .natters in detail ana I reccaber that r. the basis f ay

bjacti r. a r.inst those c-mulsary ob.rtirns Hr. C:nti .:r.Ve tho rd..r th.it in

: 9 . future ho, C.-nti hias-lf, sh.uld be c nt-acted find I sh-uld be loft out of

ta.se quenti.ns. Tfc t r-sult-.d lr *s ny bj-ctim nd nls.: the fact that those

-.b rti ns v«_r- n-t c :.*ulsnry. _

.. Va-xv y.u 'far- f th. fast, Dr. 31 rv, that th- r.eich Health luhd-r 1 s

ffic- issu-.d decru, r an .rd.r t. th- effect th't th. unborn ffsprin.-s of

Eastern v rkwrs sh.uld be d.rv. nw.ny with?

'.- 11 , aay I -x. r^sr th. cuesti n in a diffv.r-.nt srtnnor 3-> f.s to avoid a

-isund-rstaniin, . Y.u are s-yir.. th t Z r.ti h s issued an -rdur to carry out

c a u la ary r.b.rti r.s In the case .f Eastern »^n. Is th t ri-ht?

That's ri.ht, Y u kn.w th t?

Id n r t kn.v it nd I think this rd-r was issued.

. .11, t. r-frosh , .ur amaory I will *h.i» 7.11 I r, d ct r. This is

. nt ND-190. It ..ill be <r Secuti r. Exhibit U1 fir idantificati n.

*

JUI>:.£ SE3KIX: Is that nuaber 461?

UR. KbEDY: T.Tt is Pr.secuti n Exhibit 661, y ur Hon r, : r id.ntific-ti;n.
ill u kindly *lvo th- witn-ss here a Goraar. c py?

BYKK. H-:DY:

. !i . 1 , will y u turn t th. T st a -e .f this d.cuoont, Dr. Bl-ao, tho

l-rt

... If • u want ie ti anrw-r exactly-

•

.. I juut Hint t h• v- y u torn t the l“st 'f this d-canont. N{M

y.u will n tic. there the s-ntenc- "I hrve bovn inf rr.-d recently, that
b rti n n .-re n-nt Eastern £-z U . rkers nay b. vrf.ro. d. This c ar.unicnt-
Ln c node t ... c .nf id-nt tally. I w uld lik- t vt a re d-linit- inforsr.tion.
*4 this quest! n any also c u here." H », if y.u will turn to the next


... Tho towns* - idn't c thr u.n. -ill y u . 1 -ac- re,-, t y ur quosti m?
. 1 .s the Inter r-b-r hr v. a Gersr-n c . y f this d-cuawnt?


19 ::-rch l .L?
V .rt y-’. 1


13-i


S^.ss (Jot. ii - .al*r)


-- • ft-TiDT: Ihc. lest pp^c, thv 1-st .-v.ra r-.h. I Mill ro>'t it again.

"I h .v. 6c«.r. inf-rr^d r.c^r.tl/, th* t ab rti-n -.n :rv n'-r.t Sastum fwsnlo
ffcora any b- . erf ra-d, This c namicati . n was aide t .-sc evidentially.
I * uld lik*. tj ct sin- definite-— "

(ir.Wrru;tud by Dr. S&atcr)


19 5-20-i- 5 -.m v (?. ._ior)

csurt i.


b=. S.7TU-. (Defeato c ur.sol f r tUu dofcadnat Ulono): IT. Pr-sido/.t, I

a. la r. .'.ilo.-- . b t B~oak, fir I really ’.'n't kn w that tho dofonf.at ZSlono

is boin ccusod if. ? r tkw-l et tv. 1: ure I tsur.od th t ho v *- eccuaod

•

.c v ■ - :o b-c no CO.bor f th ii :;*1 Socialist f rty r bcc-.uso ho was
" :i ii sal S'ci list. fhor. f r ra -thor h~lf i-ur I '.trancd th-1 ho is boin,-;
cchsod - h via.- f-.ua'.cd - " ti r.l Socialist TUchrcr schv»l f-r ;• un--

/byaici-a:: avverviaod it, but a v it is ry i -prcoai n th-t it io tho tc.sk

ft- :.c‘onI at t rr.sw.r t i-.is .^.ric r. Tribunal bocrusv ho nllc«odly
rticip .tod ir. --iota ’f b'rti a. Z~ t is e ... 1 toly nov t no and it io
Quito no* t ro th t t..ia Tribunal sft uld h vo f- Jud -o *b ut • llo/-od acts -,f
ort' ... T.t.kt io Just • qoootl >a >f -rcodure. i! v, r. Fr.olf.ont, s*.r.othla£
ia ;oir. sub.ilttcd t us; s .x:tain,- •* ich f.'os n*t an .vtdross, d'.oo nit
r.e x < . o nr. hr i r. ii a ture. IS; :, -ontlocon, ic a.thin.: at "til. lSth
:h .i tho dcf ord-mt r the defense c-.n y ' a thin... If i cunonto h-.vo t- bo
sub ittud a evidence in t it ourrisln.- enan. r r.t r. tlno vhon, f~r fl yi nil
v . tho r •ocutlo&'o c-ac h e boon o aelurioA -v-innt tno iofondant, I uuot,
t io--.t, f.n.’: tt-t tho A of or.’.-.at ax', tho dof.nso c ur.sol bo .Ivor. r. .uitist-.t
c y .cc -ri hi. t vaich it c a ' be sooa vhoro this d cuawnt -rl.in t-u, tth t
tv It b t "c;... it in V r.-scod, -a’ vhi • ctu lly di' oi.Ti it. 2

J it t * t:-._ 07 lu..ti a : t. iaJdad -f d>cu*ioat Z «k y u t - rojoct it.

: . : C ur.r.d't bjootl a ia v 11 thfcon. *-cu.-.-nt which

•ur.-lo.lvl t . thv “ribua d is tin ly t t boll. 27 £ ] ; 3.

it or .. t n v vhar- it c a. fr by vii t -.uth rity, nr. losuo.d it r rdv.t
n is.


. “3>Ys T-.ia •-'cur-jat ;ur irtr. t bo a'to' -ji'. -nrjat* f rc'-irto
... ’ *1j:is ia ” y r rv_.‘.ir f 1. -3. 2si« r-n n . cunont vhlch irto r.

: turod :-.r.-u. cu...at. S o - it ip written r. tho brick. It aocio t bo
1 r hod r. t 0 if too 3S Tficon a it is, \c I e id, fr*vt>.nt ry evidence
■ rt cr- tured :y th. French. I vill turn it ver t tho Tri' uivJ. for
r i'ora*al.

3 *~r.: rr eidont. in th t c’-nncctl a y I sny th t if ny such

-l-c: f cvi occc is sub dttc’ I -.-uat lo:r_n th the- m: 'ittel c ioB nro r.t

*- 3 c In c y ther_ is a Bi,-a-ture uhilo ther aoent to be a


19 (H osier)

C'-urt I.

turc r. th. ri:in*l.

r3 ? C uss-’l ia correct. ?hj »ri£i:v.l iril' b. sub.dttod tJ

C ur.5cj» r _ h~-c*.at-ttof. c-lea, a It c:ic be studiod. Shore should clot
_ .r tha ur^'sc >f Mij cr-38 ox/-: in-ti n f this defendant In connect! n

--it.. * cur.ont. H- c Id be -shed if he hftd ovcr.hcnrd f it. hut it

•

saiuld h- clw rly identified t hi., bof re th .t c-vn he eked.

.. .. :: HDY: 2be urn: f t..ia u.;-at, Y-ur HJa*r, is t Bhov th .t
th Horl'.h office, the Re’eh 7e- 1th Office, ia \e:ich the defendant Illono vat
D. uty t' . ich Hcrlth U dor C>nti, v-.a la- lvod an iasued o decree con¬
cur, in- 'rti r. f S atom ferric v -rkors. 5*. t i» e ur-.iBc in intri-

..ucin it nr.i ic •-rir.in.: t..ia subject u:- t'< the defendant. t • aoe if ho hr.a
ny kr. vlod,- f it in hi* c-accity r.a rw.nity.

'.'•I 7K';SI03 ’T: C .. yu, this o" .in . au\ it the santOBtr.t or nhiw tho
»ri led t tho C'.ur.a.i u.‘. ?in nrJce y^ur >ffcr la tho :.*rnin.:T

y.jQU I'll do th t, Y«ur K-a.r. Yea. Y-ur H-.a-r. Vill y~.u hr-wl no
xi ri ir.l f th-.t, ~lo\oo.

JTO:-:: EaHL’S: ITrAy, l> y u related a that Mb thin* y*u h vo hreiiod

u. hero ia au;: jsc'. ’ ■J •~hc kind Jf n decree?

;a. 3 5DY: Hi. I .- int in th-t this aouti na r. docrco iaauod by the
-.ich Ho.-vi.th Office. Y r e vi'l a to, 7*ur H-n'r, a -he next U the ’art .>r^O,
the tone once ir. the boc ad .rr ra.th ir. the Mdflo: "Ia this cmnecti n it
.urt ";o ..anti-awl that the .'.ccroo if tho Xoich Cr.icf fir Public Health
(Roicl-.o o sundae itcfuohrer) c acorrlar t— ir.-.orrx'ti .. >f ro.-n- ncy in
.* stem f. -lc wJrkcrr ie i , oner*! -illin-ly fc lied with. Tims, in tho
i.-trict of Si -cr ret i 10 rer-rted c isos - f -.roscrvccy, G hnvo boon
Interrupt o', ricccssfully." v, ur-Jsc in i-.tr ducinr this is t Tin A ut
Vhothoi* or a t the De uty f this -ffico th t issued the docroo h-id -ny
hnJvlodtfa -f it.

JTT'03 SE33Ii- ? G: Wh-.t d* y u —:inf ir. t-.is thin/; is?

3S. H HIT: I -alnt: in t. is is fm.scento ’f • ror irt. On th. b ch f

first . o y-v vill a to th -1 it is -n Jri,4nr-: c-: turod d^cunent or.

4717


IS .. - 3 -Zfcrr V (s -njr)

Cvirt . I.


c-rt-ir- -isoactlui r?- - the ■- ^ '>”• d= ti r. annoci K- V lcr.z.

I -rill on-'.oar-.r t :o tl-ia -h.vatnttod r I vill turn it vcr t v
‘.ofonao c unsel x.. he nny oxe-lnc it t.-.i# ovo.ir- -r-c. wo will .r ’.fith it
. aorretr, ; ur r n*r.

Dr.. .£ rsa: hr. ?r Pi e.: . -Ay I drr.v y*ur 'ttonti r. t> b not i a clco
r so t r. gr’y c-n cr.sidcr this f-thor jhjccti a until twrrw, I h vo
.lust ho -’ th -1 chore is none! r. in this d-cu^-nt r. ut - roy^rt vhich v a undo
5y . Cert'in "Y.th". 'V. .. ’cc.r'ia; t' ^ tavvlod-o, is the -.V'revi tioa

f r C’ . .f i’or.: ir.i -. r :cr.t belnr, in,’ f tho Security $-rvlco (SD) which w.»
indicted '.o - cri ir.-.l - r- iz.ti.s ’.urir.-; tac Intora'.tinnl Kilit'uy ’ritunnl
r.cc..ilh b hero ir. t-.ia Vwrj r- , naC it i« . :t-.ttor f-r tho ;-naocuti r.
vnoth-r they vnnt f roly -a tho r<r Vrt f n c nfi .’.eat 1.-1 r.vont belojvrijv:

: . cri : 1 r - r.i r tl n. I. eroi.vUly. v Id n t : 1 ' th-t.

. .. : n vc u cr.or.t. V ur rwr.

r i:.“:s: rurhrrfc I C- . cl -r u t..io quoit1 n and :orhn-.?a T c -_n clo- r
It u- Vw/y quickly. la y * lnl-n, tj;i» c .-.cure nhn lately with vh- t Z h-vo
si .id ".or <ro vhor. this fr.v;-or.tr.ry doom.:.. w o rehnittod t-> uo. I & id thnt
those rti r.n vore-t lomtod; that they w re v lunt ry end, lr. ny pinion,
in tho heat c ::fir .-hi.:. r uwt I h .vo stated dof:ro nr..', it c yo horo,
v.rd f’r v.rd: "Dfcuo, ir. th r,; f Sl~:or, ir. th- c i*a ->f 10 ;remnant
•• :$ had ’ocr. interrupted cuccoanfully.• Tr.io oh*.vs quite do-.rly sh t vo
r. c atwith v lunt ry - rtiinc, f r if they h *. boer. done by f -rcc,


r. t ly ; w Id hf .vc ' eon Inter rented, but nil 10.


Vo’ll la: th t quest! *n later in dct'dl.

•• v..r, y ur firet 0 - 1 .eri r. v a Seicho’xrztjfu*hror nnd i.ichs-

-r - .?.t5fue..ror fr l^jh until hie 4«rf.th. Is th t c rrect?

, t.. t i* n-t jiltc c rrcct. rr. "" .r..-r v never v ie;: r.-lth

I _no ; ••ltl >n :* Vie. L- dor vnr nly ere ted 'ifter ’J :.jt 'b

. ; . : v s i:. . rii, l-;*;. V t ta t th.e thor w a m sue. Iti n.

. a. Dr. tor di n t h i' -ositi -c - 9ccrct'ry ’f St-tc f r

:h ttcra in the 3 nip try ->f the Ir.t ri'-r. Is th t ri.nt?

•-71b


13 rdE3-£X-4-3-rr-.v (Dnnal'r)

C'-urt . 1 .

... ? *:■- t is ri.-.t. Sals was hole’, y . irdstorialdirockfcor

Dr. Wo^t'dar t days "-of' re the uthroefc f tfco war. The Dr.

Guettrea v s relieved by pr. C<nti and this position. \r. s pr>mtoA t : position
a tho lord >f n Secretary .f St* to.

. "oil, then Dr. C'-nti succeeded Dr. ’2rr.cr only ir. th t cap*.city of
Hde.. 0 '.orz 6 otuchrcr. Is thrt rlsht?

... Yus. Helen physicians 1 Lender and Hoi eh lender f the Public Hcr-lth
Office Jt t.-.c JSD. 1 P.

Th t is r.*-t t ho c nit sod with Hoichsyrotunihoitofuchror? I ns
talkir. h<w nb ut C*>nti. flum C^nti succeeded "..-nor, Uaftnor hnd inly ->no
'aid - Helds: .orzot-fuehrer! V* rr.cr v 3 never Reichs^osundhoitsfuohror.

Io th t rl;;:t?

... .: ■ U :ner v s r.c 7 cr Rdchs ;osundhoitsfuahror. The onccpt of
Roich nosundlio 11 sfuchrer ko nly ere-tod -ftor 7 -.,T.cr'o donth. V*y:nor u.~.c,
fire*., P.o iehsrorzotcfuehrer (Reich physic! -.no' Lor/or) — that is, the head *f
the r*iioh Chan jo r f physicians, 't.' s.c r.'iiy, ho w the hood tho lialn
j- - t..or.t f r Public Health f the JTSni?. Jnirdly, he vn* tho hoed of tho
t :: 1 S'Ciriint '..yslci r.o' Lc~-uo. Vr. nor hold r," state position.

.. .11 ri then Z' nti tooooolod v-nor in 11 Chase c.-citioo. io
ttv 6 ri, v tf

... Tos. ,

, "dl the, it ~i ht o sail t;. t -ftor C nti t ok ever office, Conti
hel’ .lly t..rcw eiti ..a, t.. t is, t..roo titles — KoicSonorxotofuohrori
adchn •osurluioitsfuohror rr.l Secretary .f State f'r Health Hatters ir. tho
. lnictr- f the Interior. Is tn* t rl.-ht?

... Y- 3 , th -1 is c-rroct, with tr.o li&itati r. th* t Conti didn*tJ joc vio
“ crot ry f 3 :ate ir. t .10 ministry Y Intori .r i .:odi toly after .Tier's

tn but ly in .u ust, 1539 — th : io, few aanths 1 -tor, and, thrt furthor-
r-, in 1532 C r.ti hoc- .0 the hoe f the cirili \n health systc; un'er tho
-ri licti .-.of limndt. ((Transcript: 1932))

. "ell then, “r. v .-r.cr *u. Dr. C :.ti ware ;-our superiors ir. your


-rid r.


Dej aty t e *c am


Isn't th t ri .t? Yu v-ro Deputy fir re to

4719


\ VO


V^-X-7-^rnv (Hv_l:r)
art I'-. I.

V:-T~r ; tv". then 7 -u v^r_ Deputy t Ctnti?

— - » that is r. *. correct. I 2nd n:t been deputy 3 «j i eh eccr z t efUehror

-of re t»i t. *v t vr.s a _36itin held by a cert in Dr. 3 rtols.

.• "oil, Kc, y'i first title ra Deputy ce-:c vhen Cmti t^k -‘ffico. Ib
*... t ri. v.t?

... ye 3.

I see.

. '. :-:: 2 JY: Yur K-.vr, : re .-.in.- on t' the subject ef outhrjvaflir.

:.'w :i*. t'.is .4 ht be r o.l brenkir, \.int.

PXbSlDSVT: S.e Tri'.ur. 1 will bo 1:. ro:Ooa until 9:30 torv'rrsv

rrif- ’•


(.. Itecoac vtit -'■-’cor. until O 93 O h urc, 20 y rch 1947.)


/W , >

I-W»w r (tit-

.urt '*• !•


£=££ ££

JO ■:- rot 1547. 0S30. *»“« - r0,!

a _«= *-» i= * =- — - « ttJlr

9» KW'roMo. tho J»W. * J»<« * rt!raaal *’
jailtory WISH! 1 '• » 13 ‘ Qc,! ' a - ^ *" V ° *”

M «d -. 10 . « *»« "1 » hon'm' lo 7rl4^1.

3u.ru vill order is the c urtr-ou.

m «««, Hr. K W. r-u * h 1 • ~

nil roco.-c i*. c'nirt.

e, ,^: :., it u .= 7 - H»«. ^ ««— - »“-* ln
«. ore » r tho rcloov.ni —or. — - * *U—

5 B »n ;: »- s =rot-.r:-Oonond .111 » » - - ~” 4 *“

r .«l / 11 140 le— in 0 »« . vo 140 »•*. ~~~

U c nnr.o .1 1. «... 4^1. a 4 400-uni -7 lllnoit. n^or orou.o fr-c tho

:rl 'ran-j..

art: rw.*s —

.1 . ^«n.o, n«^ M c=V„ ,:, In

„ - u... .... _uc, rottttn ., , 11-* «U «■» «n. 1» « Ho-,

.. * 4 »—•—- • ■ - ~ -* to

0 t 9130 17 It !• . Uft ' ilhT °

c . latoA.

.• , - 4 . tfc-t this rjmnconont in *

- p—t-'g/: 3 >w -ri:ur.-.l unr.arrt • -«■ *••

f ct ry t c-.unsvl Dr the 3 crfcn.v*fc *


-i


^ •


fre the viCTUB- ->


until tho


2 ~TiK-s:s-l-c-j5,acor ( 2 .;-,lcr)
O-urt . . 2 .


^ ! t>v •..‘itncsc -.i. BV'-rn is finishod.

—3 ”213 (C-ucaci f'-r Pcfcr.i-.ut Swcn): jith tho • ;\rov\l of the
Hi rriVuc-l, I r*_: C'-llir-- tac xizz^ca Henri Flock.

- - -SI33.T: « J .-es t.ia witness spnJ:, vh> t Irovu -;c

will ho testify ir.?

: '- 'LIKs t&ca ansnoria; -y qu.sti no tho witness will r-o.-.: G-.rrcji

a - nnautria tee- quo-tl as if the -.ros-cut->r ho will sponk 2 jviieh.

~ rh'oITH. s 7-^ h’-rsh 11 vill nin:m tho "itnonn H.O. Flock,
re t>~ translators .'NjyuMd t over thc«lturtl n that h~.o ho.n referro-’.
t-, tho vitb..s? aesv.rin Sorsoa nd a. lion?
i:*. .K.(:<T _lor): Tec.

H.C. PX3CX, 4. witness, f k tho \taa <1 and teatifiod as follows:

T JUBJS 3Sail*(J:

> "*• Crihur.'.l will ill dais tor tho >nth t y u in tho SarMth lan u- to.

. .»oc.t rft-r .\c: Z nv.< r ta-.t tho evi or. cc u c I shall ivo in this cauoo,
..-.l jo tho truth, tho vh lo truth, and nothin: 2 ut tho truth, so help co

• i

r *•

(ZJ-.e wit no on r>_ .toi tho oath.)

*2 S72S223i I! T’U hay ait d wa.

C-unncl f r t.to >fwa’. at >:>r«n cay proceed with tho oxnulnntion of
vi'.nocu.


4722


2J sir Ii7-v--
C _;-t :: . 1


-_-.-2-I-L.-s-r [ Ir.* . R a m i r".


&ir:ct \r*. lUaTiox

at DR. a. -IK:

r -i ••Itr._ss, y.ar nine is h nry :i-.ck, is that right?

- *cs.

Q Tih.n and rrter. were y u b rn?

« I was b m in D.n Huldc, in H Hand, n the- 19th f npril, 189b.

G »nat is y. ur nati-nality?

.. i <3 a Dutetann. I c=«- free th. .Netherlands.

Q V<hat is , ur pr feC3icn at tido tint?

•• I ma an architect an? * painter.

» old y. u ahrrtly d- scrib- y ar career t tfr. Tribunal?

*• *ce. ..a I oald bcf. r-, I ms b.rn in h;ldc and w;s brcu.-ht up
tterc until I wxs 11 year® 11, a.- the c n :f a naval fficer. After ry
fnth.r r.celv-. . Ho - nsl . ».. went t Tn*. H..;ue whoro 1 started _y studies.
Afterwards * went t private sch 1 where I studied art, and I later
went t th Acndcry nt ADstentan. . t en pointed and tr :velcd. *4y
present pr-f-.3ci« n, which I h v. ux rciatd far s -e tint, is architect
f r ur • vtnvront. I take car> f foreign exhibit! ns and things of
thr.t nature. I ba it cart f th .n -_ic Partition 1 th l>utch Pavil-
li n t th. Exhi 1 Ifci.i, in N w Y rk and x :_a still working at this type if
w rk.


•*r n nd fr what reno ns acre y u arr-st-d by the Gtrrnns?

•* i vrj ftrrontcd by the u r~ans n the 17th f June 19lil, in The

<’ t ©a. e f bavin: print, d ilL.gal nTitings in ay - rkr ta.

3 t'herc were y u i-pris* ned?

i ms first L-oris n-.d at Sch-.veninn in th. s -called cell

rarr-.cks, later I ms sent t; the penitentiary whor. I stayed f-r a year.

..fterr r : *• ms sent f r tv. lays t .. icrsf ri and then f:r a year- and

quart r I x.r.t t Such- r.wal 1 , wh.r I stayed until t:. lib.rati n.

. n.n, exactly, :i’ y u - * th; c nentrti n caap f Buchanwald?

.. T‘ t ms r. the 2nd r 3r f April, 19U2.

“frit was y'ur .ctivity in th. c ncentrati n canp f Buchtrnmld?

.. .t first I was str >.t w rker at Buchenwnld, which was rather

-.72c


20 ...r -2-2-Lc=s^r ''Int.

C urt S.. 1

hard » rk. I was lot r ue l as e nurse la tti hospital. *ith tho
oil f Dr. H v n I t-.k care -f th- sick but really did aostly painting
tj>.re, I p irtly did scientific gaintin-^s and partly painted just as a
painter - uld.

Q "h ru3 head f the hospital?

^hat was Dr. H-v_n—D'\ TTiOd^aar Htr^n.

D y u r.c nisc Dr. r. run -_n. rj; the pers ns in the defendant

bex?

Ye s, certainly- H, is th. fourth nan in the last row lc kins
fr z th-. ri.’hth- ad side.

TH- fiTSZDEif?: The Secretary General rill n tv fer the rcc .rd the
fiat that the .-itn«.s.-. c rr.etly identified the Dofendsnt H ven in the d ck.

BY DR. a. .UK:

• ’

"hat kin; f nrir. n.rs wtr- th r. in the c neentrati n ca-.p f

Buchtnwnld?

Thr were a nunb.r f pris n.rc, firstly, tho -vat Inprrtint

r up wtr. tho p liticil Fris ners; then there w.ro criminal pris-nensj

U..n there w.re ?ecplu «h were 1 af raj then there wore h nscxuals; and

ta.n there were pris n.rr f war. .J-turally there were Jews—thoy wero

a gr up in thens lvus. I ai » g inp -i n3 .

•

Q "hat pris .aerr r^re -lesi nr.t.d is or fesfli-nal crininals?

A : r ' » • : r- . : r r. h- 5.

W ••'r.t chcvr n Ji I the o liticil nr is ners have?

They hi • red cr.tvr ns but there iris a little difference later
•'icausc i Ur ilUe p liticai pris r.-.rs c. . ver wh als lad red cne%'r ns
li f!ith fc!;o n ' r >n th-r 1 - v.r which desi.yiat^d the c untry jt-

•Ich tfc y b 1 r.:e .

•h't kin f pris a.rs Were th. r. n-G. r-*-xn pris ners, especially
acrb.rs f the Unite-i «<rti ns?

y -11 v.. r-_ TO ■ in *’. s,

th n ther --r> tic pris ners f war.

"hat w . th. attitude f Defendant H v^n t words tie pris ners?

It wns very favorable.


4724


20 -rr L7-.-.^-2-3-i-css r (Int. ---v 1- r)
C /art . 1


h Can y u state _x:u_ples rhicr. illustrate the attitude cf th_

Defendant H v a t w*ris the inaatcs?

.» *ea, I think I c uld cije a large mtbcr f examples, and it is

•

bard f r kc t ch- sc then. If yu Till perrlt sc tc 1 k at s bc cf ay
n tea I shall be able t- givo ycu a short repert. P.r instance, the SS
in the earn treated the innates very r ughly and it was always the ease
that nh.never any such SS =on entered any r - n an irente had t call
.ttenti n in a very a.raan feshi n. Evoryb-dy sv k it attentirn very
quickly until th- a -c'llod fUehr-r said that they c uld relax new.

This kin 1 . C business was nov. r appreciated by Dr. H vcn. For instance,
it *ns cust nary that an innate will walk thr-ugh the casp with an
S3 uon and this "leader" always insists’ that the iraate walk five
atepa behind t._ S3 ran, with hia h ml n his cap and the ether hand

mar hia leg. On t: t. r hand, I ften walked with D r . Moron through

the carap an. he always ad Tease 1 ce da Herr Pieck and ho always said,

M D n't be sill}, keep y ur hat on." This is Just a snail cxacple which
lr characteristic f hia. I aa Just n w speaking nly abcut his behavior
I think wo will Inter have an rprrtunity tc speak at r details*

* Ulu Ilk t • 11 ; •’ ab ut v* . • rived

it the carp 1 rent 11 .wed t write any letters, and I was net per¬
mitted t trite t ny -if- wh did n* t lav w I had g no t Buchonwold.

rt r having established c ntact with Dr. H~v..n after ne r. nth in the

ea an-' aft r havin. t la hie. at ut that cituati n, he t k bo along

1 and weighed ao there. I rr.i$hc » s nothing like 75 kilcgraias,
.p n which he filled ut an ffici-1 f r= whore it stated that oy weight
- 75 kil -.ror-s an.' that I.w>s in a v.ry 1 c nditi n. After that*
t t. ny wife, un- iici-ally, saying tlx; f 11 - wing: "In answer
• y ur inquiry 0 , an*' I .^ain repeat tint there was n -1 an inquiry
cause i-j wife did n t kn r. I was ir. Buchimwali, *1 ac sending y u this
rr..'' .» few weeks later Dr. H.von even went s f ;r as t: personally
■ -te * By wife Then he was utsii era®, he had the address fr n ac,
c urre, Tsritia t ivr ao an 1 friend. In this letter he asked ny

1 t wrap ah s, cl- tfccs and may ether things in i parcel and send

4725


'.r _7- - 2 ss-r > Int. ~-=l r)

C*urt I. . 1

- . - t ,.i- rus . 'y r.ifv •■r.i rat * that th.re ~'.s s ic intri,*ue geing
n =ni naturally i^rudiatdy '-tst: red, and just as a g J Id acquaintance
r 'll ’ act. Dr. H ven t-_ a li.tt.-r t ay .rife. Th.n Dr. H v»n again
r.c ive. letter fr-S h.r and sh we: ~c this letter fr = ay •♦if'- where
;.C wr*. tc r.b ut ay five children and ab ut her vm situati:n, and he also
hutf id nc all the things that she had sent hie.

I .ant sittin.: her-, h rev r, fcecaur. i se s auch tc Dr. H->vcn
pern rally. I a her. b cause it is ay oini n that the entire carp if
I>uch<.nr.l is indcbt.d t Dr. K vexj oner;, usly.

Q In alditi n t the SS and OeStap car.p :u!ainistr sti n was there
any illegal canp ndrinistrati n in Buchcmrald?

* -feS.

Q 7 rcr. y s a r» at r f this ilia *al car-p adainistrati n?

A fir lli n . If ; l arc speakin-- f this illegal canp adrainis-

trati n yu have t c nailer that wh r. re cane t 3uch,.nnld in the year
. , ' : c .istr-ti n O'nsistod f nly Gjnaans, people

i had V.en arrested oft.r 1933 on dr had already had a re than 10
years f lr.pri3 nnent behind thee. Ti. y were th nes vrh had set up
this ill .jal carp iainirtr ti n. *h. nose- "ill..: 1" f c arse wruld
r. t be nec.soiry if it x .1 r. t t tru. that th.re were :nly very few
pc pic in th. cinp nr. knew ab ut the existence af such nr. illev .1
c .-.a adainistruti n.


4725


C.UTt Eu, i

20 ki-r 47-a£-3-l-iSt B lfal (lot. £ft- :ltr)

I

After foreigners had arrived it the cr.it w a tried tr the Gcrrnn
illc-vl cK'.'f a dsi&istra.ti n to cste'-lish contact vith various nrti-nsli-
ties, rs' especially in y s-ikere f work at the hospilrl, where I worked
with Dr. Hove a, where the center of this llle^el cr: n r.-rnizetion really
vre, vnich vent ever the hosuitel entirely, I rac. other Outchr-an very
•'-■•a established c-at’ct vith lcadia.* iacr.tCB vho vith'.ut hardly snyisv;
r word used ->ur services f r the leavfit -.f the or^cnizrtion.

.. Vere you n center of the Inter International Cns-> CcanlttoeT
*. Yes, only Inter. That w.s a.oxroxi :atoly n yerr rod a half
'Oforo our literati*.n. It '-as a very -cculiar tad, w C roelized at thr t
tine, n historical acetin,: nleco. Every nationality sent one rciroeen-
tetivo, one so-crlled newsusner era, who rll thoroty fonteA an Intcrna-
ti nnl C.r. ittoc. It ay .c '.oatioau.* hero that there wre also two
Oor.j\ns ;.r count there who wre leadiar nolitleal Innate*. This con lttoo
v-o rctlvo until the very end, until the literati on, undo 1 norove r:cnto
in the of to, ar.d vrs divided ir.t a rliticol and military a-varatuo.

Y u nr - tally will know, the tasia -f testimony ty thcr uotnlo, that
the c neontretion crar. of huehenvald .-.ore or leso liberated itself a
few hour# before the arrival of the Ancricrne. 5hoy thonsolvoa took
rio auro -f the SS -,o. 1. and ourtr;cpc used tho voenons that hod
ojr. or u-vied ir.t the cars, and the «r is of the SS in mot is* the
Aiicricrn tr . ic.

v. Did tho defendant I- von c'.llaV.rntc with tho lc^al com edninis-
trnti r. cc wll ro with the re-'reeenta.tive -/f the individual nations!

.v. Yes.

.. Di' tho defendant Huvoa recist r.ecsurcs :>f tho SS?

% Yes. I tc.: your -ard.n, D-.ct r, with reference t; ir' first

( !'nr I eh uid like t . c-rrcct c.. .cthir..*. When I said yes St looks all

Inclusive, tut r few words have t to added. Zr. Hovec collaborated

vith the liticci innate* ir. such r > —or that he rerlly f rtied a

: lot= fr ,:.t vith tho... Certainly ?-.s far as I know never -no v rd wre

exchanged between the-., never no v ri vts exchanged any c llnbora-

4'’27


20 r .,7-k-3“2-2a.-:>ljy Cl., aei ler)

•

ti 'L ir. the scare thrt he vrc r softer ,f the c tsittee or anything like
tbut; tut rr.oa trkin: ir.t- c:Mi'«rrti.r. the situation as it -reveller,
rt 5uch«Lv Id, this vtuld reitlly'hrv tees .ssislc. I seen con»T>ira«r
hr«cc - c r. necessity ?hru.;hout Gerrxsgr durin.; the ver cad it vrb
hardly -.ssiile f.r tv. ler-le tv sicrk t; one another freely, and this
certainly vls the case in "ucheavrld. 3uehenld ty reason f the SS
there rad the rray crir.iwls rr.:* tad eleje&te vhicfc c ulr. ho f ur.d moa
tho reds In --u«*her.veld, you have tv trice into csnsidcreticn that not rll
rcT .• *vr. ovlitlcel ■jriecr.ers in that senoo. F.r iattrr.ee, men.' the
Dutohnen end Csooho there vero o auntor of -eoole vho aedo fclrck nnrket
/ctivitUo re' vere ir. nrlson hcetuce of Hack j-rkot nativities, rad
vero then fiw.ll:* cl re ted ia Suchonvild re o.liticil inartet, inr.r.tes
wf-ria. the re:* ch-vr a. *.>.• t I rerlly voat t correct in ay firot nnewr
1# th-t I vratyou tc understand tho tohnvior vf Dr. K'vcn rod hie rid
t vrrd CO and ti every nc «lo« vh -r: ia hie eloeo onvir ancat, and vh‘
were v rkir-: ir. the clot* envir onxont f the ctcn c'S. it toe. It nust to
underct .>d thrt .n« -.uut ory thrt Ir. k'.vcn -uroosoly cclloborrtoA vith
uc i-r.4 tolctw»d t vur front.

V.u further-. Te nnevyrud the "uccti.a la the nfftractive vhen
I coked jr.tt vhothcr Dr. H.vor. resisted tho rxrsuroo f the SS. Crn you
cite r fov sxrxolee of this resistance t tho Tribunal?

A. Tfcero arc »• mn.tw f oxroalos here; for iastw.ee, Rusrirr.s rad.
.* c ve vlTw a:t nil ^ed to he odnittod iat the hosnitrl »nd couldn't to
cared for. Ir vro -ale* cut t. thi - id and vith the ka-'-ltd.-o f IT.

: won rnd trhc s tecruae .f Dr. •- voa, tut that ic ensthlrw I

*

ern't tell exactly, IccruEe* he rlvryc c-llr-.rrtvd vith tho lor.'i nr in-

: tcs. It is E f ct that c r.trrry t. every tfcer cr.-ia ve r.rnrro: t

rintria n Jtvieh. h s-itrl illc,roily vh-re sick «*ev= vcrc cared f r. This

fret al-.no vould suffice t kill Dr. H ver. hr.d the SS fca vr. ot-ut wy

c. ch situr.ii. Ia the cr:e r-f at le vh, ^re tenter, rar vcrc a t rllcyOd

• c- erred for, Dr. H'.ven ca-- t it that rr. exceoti.a vr: rf’e t. j srv t-

it thrt these -x, .-?le vere erred far *r—.erly ir. the hoaxitrl. I -uist spy,

472S


C-ur* Sc.. i

2C Her 47-*-5_ Z -SEi-Moy (Iat. E^nier)


" * ! reC - 1U “ “ =»1« -«ch vere reti.tored *

tt “ 6  « “» »• : e» t«tify t0 ,vt „ 1!; .

 year eueptfa. I ocu’d ««» {or . Ua* tlae. He coadl-

1= — "* ■“« -• vture thr., eve-,, hit.,; tv, la .ay vay

e.-.ellod llle. ea v^d cuff,cleat r«.oa t. We «ayo„.

.--rwed. :, 1. »W« fco- Dr. rorer, ,„ =w ceca.Ua. fated, and ,.

.a ev.-. r ,U I vy adatiGB a .-tala Sr. Do leaa. a Dutch he.t*;., c ho
rawed threu# th. „d f Dr. Vv.b. nai a> I. ecaflraed V thl.

^.ct-r hf .elf thl. vac ,aly aoe.lhlo to fat,a, the X-r,y f hi. healthy
lcr.tc ad erevvla.- 1= vlth X-ray. f la.-., f ., ,1„ vith , lek ^

Vh. acre already la a trw.„ , ,atercal..„. I toller. tvt

thee. tv. «ar.a„ vlll .ufflce to .Car lace yea h.v tea every .tea
f ST. H-rea c, evactiy a. -a. the er.e vi, h every et.a of — -.aitleal

lnnetco.


4725


- _ -i_


Int. .


C *rt :


1. ,.e c 11-0 rti.n f Dr. Eov-ji vitii t*»t . 11 . 1 s

«

•r tl ::j .~.e if. _ lly --nowr. ia 1 „ c r&cr.tr-.. c-.-p ii. vacfunwold?

, • i . . ... c nspirz cf» I: - c : •

I ,-.mt .. e\ • .1’ c ntrr/ t tl- t crccy th-.t ms striven fcr -n; the


c: C L t . ill ' c p J .-.nistr- ii n.

.... -IV

Dr. HsTvfl 1 i S3 .n
r.. aifw ( in.' XB ofch-r?

... I v. t id, U: • -»• cr.x, li.t- p re a?l c ..tnet with

I fine, -.a I t. -r. • *.l ci«p ada>nirtrr.ti a and

. . : rix c... 7'.. c li ib rr.ti n of

Dr. n« o» ' rttUr aura, not

• ? pul-r ni r.U- 1 . * oopla -..i d.ubtftd Or. ,

*,lc u .1 n . t £-' c r up uo.:lw, v.r- p-ic re » « wur- ovry,X8u>. by

• c . ’M. b.i; vi r J Dr. H von *. r . x.vll f>.r. , nt It ■ n w?v . kind

-r. Tfuo *.-s r. c . r ry t * .. n mil beastly bohnvior
». 1 r . t.:- 1 eufficiontly .

• . nontj t,..r. th^ytho

iW-r-sto •- t i u r •- > Lit-r etf * tiu. Jitic 1 in- t~s?

o litic i . -r-

Vlnly h t if t I'-.pl 'tic- .y • - r ul n t hiv» r„ ain. r* at his


.

. • •

1. •' c nt *ai bl _e, Xii XX 1 * •- ' fc d * nu:.x.r it t«J ti £ in

. . 1 .

S3 • •

’. C- : ti ur kr..rl^*’ .. J : ?

••• • r7 .... ?

1 . £

b. i cl.3_ c .tact

" • •

- - D-otclr^a vh >;.r, in c- vh_- t h,r. v is not y-t ,£t“ lish-d an

473C


a: (int. s- :.r)


Ccurt I

litem'Si :i-I c -iitfc. and thereby vrs air. c r.r.ecti r. rith the ill. -.1
: ; r. eh. ct.-r bvln lur: 1 peri; that i ms in


5cch;;-ild, - xcs.pti it*. -..v tte Dr. v.n v.'j :.i.as_lf • rrastwd

Or. t I r. nly belonged

v r ojpl- - tec*. . : - tt.r fr .1 both sides.

3 . ‘ ‘ . ,

ep ol lly rr.ach Dutch eititAS> r belli transferred t» Batzuoilir


in t .. r'aeht rn.' h’.bol ..cii n ( !i v v.’ ,-‘i r.}?

... I very It. t be ir. '* ■ iti.vr tla; qu.sti r. vith

;ca, bvoviSw V\tint t bwer.th. c-fc- i v »Q »*t t Lttin hero ri ht


. • Dr. I rt nr^ly can ... I

, • .._ kept fr i it.

• , I c r-pw-.t it a ton on ah, ! .'i<' n t
r . : •• thanks to Dr. Woven, I aa ,- nly fcoru f r th_
r s u V . ' in the cap, nit • r. :y l vi- tin Iron ; ur

qu.. . 0 c/ u * r. ak« > . ci : cxtnpieB and 1 really


at- rt ’ h . Cm • *-nt,

;• u pi:-Be r it?

3. Die t . .r *r.t . v .. pr-V
-l. . ' Dutch dti. r. ,

uriri t.._ ;I“.cht ua:t I'cb.l ..„ti n t'- _

,

ivx xr - Dv-eh ..*• *.• r. ...t

“n* l ut u.. *-tcrk 1 -.
• f i-lc! hxuj 'ir if I i/.iia.

r .-c‘ bjot, i pain* .r • ’ -

r • 1 > £_.1 -'ili n t be *.cL. t .;


,, ; .a, h t . : y ur qu-atibnj. vill

toin trial* .md t :.etsffoilor

n.o - -T-nch a .. Dutchaon
• •

r :5 rt oy Dr. :: ven,
i’-ch >0 *s in>:isp..r>aa 1 - experts in
.. v fi .* t ,*t a- n t.. s- yjj
. rartiwr . 1 ts 8 - rk-.rs, , u ill
• •cl. ’ctonti:: t the c .1 rds f


SS.

' ‘ .scribe th j an.;

i. - . It *


.r ... Dr. H-vin i?. » c ttcr?

, icturaj


Dr. -'--a*s . ur pairte:

4751


■ : • 11 5 1 * think


; _.: n (int. it :le?)


C vrt I

r. l it ri, rs. -v. - r t - i .r

: 11 . ■. . . \r. H v. •; c • - - *- *.

, , : or; - v r ' list,

: v.ry c r.iM, r.it b-ck t on. cnap, I dll sec tto-.t I cm do." I Inter
1 kcd Bt th t list. an■ It wna Hat rai b..r of ^r.ncfcxn, Dutchi-n, etc.,
-h were s-L-ct--' t be tr-nsferr-d t !-.tzr_il_r in the s -c-Ilec! Nncht und
. . rt. .dl ! thufl*. pu pi c ■„ ’.tiil f SOrCOllod

, rtre. c alle In.t . - .-?• rh.oe wh; w.«l>’ bo ernsiCored

f r th hr-ns rt,- -r. tr naforred t '1 ck 50, vhichvsa just btin 4 built,
i apecinliota. Dr. H ven eclcotcfl o..-s- ; pic. i r th-.t at-t>. n, which

36. Dr. tv.SC people n a list, which he

t k t r ,r.U •-.ier h. carried .ut that -.11 these pe pie were excluded
fr tht tr .»: rt.

I believe tars t l cm re it ir -.r. hnrd f r t t b..r,

.8 n t rls-ya c.'te.: vn. I think th-.t th. Hr;, tr no rt
l 3 m- th iuip f tr. ten b v-ri va tctics, which Were

V -i f Dr. •; v. .• - ■ :>

r ■ r t v r porl , eh • uld have no ant a oor-

ats . r.

Hit 1 pie; when Dr. He Yen wr.s
r , r. I- Via r I -.or. hi -.n ' t i' hint

y , ~b y nake f r us, Ulen it -ill

t' 1-tc 'i-c-.ns. u r n't x herct"

•


2- . -r 17-. - -*-5-1-Putty (Int. .--ad. r)

€• urt 12 . 1

Dr. Hrven answered:

"i-u rt sick. That applies t ill the 'there, t . If necessary,
just • t beV

-t any r:t*., I <r-s re ister«-d .is boia; sick, an. 1 I seen ti rcoorabcr
th-.t c-rt-In tubercul- sis charts an! things <f that nature were pivpared
f r ry ease, but I ar. n t quit-, sure f that. Ju-.t leave that utside
ay Ustie n;/.

nt any rat-., it was quite cert in that Dr. Heven said,

"D n't wi rryj y u arc all rirht." "henevor -ay a call, f r. y u r
r. f y ur nc plu, that is, if y u were asked f-r-st tho .’.ate by -rdor
f the SS, usually it was always called ut in the caapl

";uib~r 's -and 1 r«-p rt t the -ate," and if ne didn't report to
tho £ to quickly .n u ri, thvn this in itself w:: rave . flease. Excuse

r.c; I a lain.; up r.y 1 .varar a.

V» H ven's a vie,. t stay in bed an! t wait until he cano back was
re t by ne. That certainly was a -ratter, t , that w uld have
br u . t »b it nis death had it been faux' ut.

Q .Th rlcr.i ttosc transports?

.« The list hr.' c n fr Berlin. I cyst IT saw that list. It was
it< 1 Doorec.

*

Cj DI t: Defendant H*v_n haw anything t- J. with these transp'rts
!r. his capacity as c- .t physician?

, n thing t -all. n- .fust tried t frustrate tho aatt r and
t help as carqr p-. pie as p- ssifalo.

T*i! th. Defendant !; ve.a sc-. t it that p-litical innate s r
a«-hers f th.. Unitod tfiti ns wore release i? 4|

“ H>v n ^ana.;e i t rdu^sv a nurh.r f p litical iresaUs, irainly

r j. • thecrc it was e-slcst, as 1 crust issuoe, but that was also

:n th. c a. I f rci.ners, Czechs, ^utehnen. far ns 1 rc-aenber,
r - nly Dutehees c ain,; fr a the h stare r up wh had already

• - ic. it.. la rrt.n T t t r .

/. v. ry £. acquaintance f air.., Ear. n v n rre.a’e, has t thank

m

• H t a f r his being :aut at liberty, and also Dr. van icr Laan whin I

47£3


, -j .7--- v' (lot* - -tO~r)

C urt - . 1

r v . —nti r. fcvf r~. I call ve tr t there ~ust be 3 number f tn«.rs.

I buUiv s *. I-ir. n-t sure.

Si Dr. h ven ri?k rds life in rdcr *. save p litical inmates
r alleviate their I t?

I believe, Eoct.r, that this quest! n is rathor superfluous :i
tr. baric -f Thai - hcvu already said. I hink that y u mist have under-
ato ' by n i7 what .n rr.-us risks were taken by Dr. Hoven in :r*cr to i a-

r ve ur f .te an’ in :r r t. liber te political pris nors.

q ..re we c- r.cemcv with individual cases r systematic support -f
the c. litlcil inmates?

.. If we were c ncern- l with Individual erases, even if it cncorncd
nly jo, I certainly v.uldn't bf.Vv c me hew. F:r inatanco, D r . Sing—
he wus later in char r SI ck 50— xcusc ilo; cy German isr.' t d
- rv u ;li. -hat I wanto-' t a y as Dr. Ding, under wh ae charge 1 later

* rkc in bl rk 50 aivl un’.r uhcs'all Dutchmen wre irrking wh. had been
av/i by Dr. K Ven, c ntlnuin.; Sr. H von'a prepara t: ry work, did much

: n r or t help us. I oust say that th nly thing ta Jc is to be prate-
t a can like tl it. ^ut don't 1 t tint Dr. Ding—ho ia dead now

• . it ic curt :r, t spook nly f tl»- dca", but I haw nc .bjacti<n

t making on excvpti n here—when Germany ms victorious m all fronts

> a pi, r. later c. .nly turn : into a Very arniabl- an' kind p rson.

Tr.. .ntire camp ms c r lately -nknewn t hin in its narking from a
: litic 1 p int f view an i fr r the p int f view f th. Illegal camp

II a. Later r., f ecurso, when Oorreny's fa to changed, Dr.

D‘-v' trl. 1 t b. helpful t vnrls hia collib.r t.rs. I, therefore, repeat
*- t . certainly - illn't have c me here if wo hadn't here been c neerned

th a aatt- r nhich wint far bey n ny per- ml gratitude.

. n Dr. H.v-n ims arrest ,tv re there still a number f Jewish

V.s in cucii.r.Tr.l «7

.. ..rv y utalkin* .afc ut the liber-ti n?

, 1 - talkin': abut th. ti-e Dr. H~wn was nrr.sU.!.

1 e, certainly,

h.t d y u knew ab ut that? T xirz extent .

47c4


these Jews thank


2V r •-5-2-? 'O (In:. ?.anlir)

C art •*’ . 1

their 117.3 t D r . H-vcn?

.. 1 a art quit. sur. ib at that. I an a t very Troll inforacd

rb ut it. I knew ab;ut a f .v iniiTi hml cases. r r instir.ee, I kn it
h' .• Sr. K ven trie t bide Jess in nearly ivery c.rntr in the casp, and
I kn r fr wi.at I hive b_ c t li that a f»-T, th-usan* Joes wh were still
in cuc!.-rml : at that ti.. neve t- thank Dr. HCvcn f r their regaining
in Buch enrolb.cause re prevented a transport which ns tc b. sent
3-.retfhero an*. whid; t!«ey wuro sup: sod t. jcin.

3 .Yitrwss, 1 cz n * presenting t y u U.e ‘current NO-1063 which
is exhibit 325. This is c -.c rm^ with the fil:s f the search f.r r,-ar
cri. .Inals in ..mt .r -ca.

D. . a. LIK: I ! n't kn m rhethur this dcune-nt is available before
the Tribunal, mi I, t!i»r:f re, hav« a nutber f Lry;lish translati ns
which 1 can sub nit t th. Tribunal. y I bo perr-ittod to subt-.it tkea
t the Tribunal"?

Vf- rnklOEhT: Sub-.it then t tl>- Tribunal, nan 1 , thus up, if ycu
b.aot.

FIT Dr. (L'JLXX:

"itn ST, 1 k t the pa.tue 12 and 13. These arc tostiacnics f
Z. <Ut ar. n anr V n .ling.

D=. a. .UK: :r. rr si nt, thrt can be f end n pu.vs 11 and 12
f the English translati n.

A Yore y u say in: 11 an * 13?

Q , 12 and 13. Th t.stl. ny f Dc «it ar. bans V ndeling arc
n c ntradicti n with ne an-th. r. Do ''•'it says, an1 qu te:

"The De: r-rte nt L6 war un'.cr the loa 'crshin f SC-Stunabannfuchrer
Dr. Erwin Din -." It furtk.r says n 13, witn_ss:

tl leadership cf Dr. Erwin Dine but
t! th • roct a: sis tone e ft. cb-arc-ccati r. ..rthur "iotreh.”

If ; u c ntinu t 1 k t Do “it's testis, r.y, y u will find that Dr.
is a t at all -.anti n- ‘ ir. tr~t tcstic ny. C ntrary t that,

linn — ills t .sti- ny can be f un r. p-£c 13 f the Genaan trans-

n .r. ’ 12 .f the hoglisr. translation — has stato; that Dr. Hr ven is

4755


20 r li7——-5-u-Putty (Int. tatter)
C urt -<• . 1


reap nai'oiv. f r tb-: nodical --xp-rii.cr.ts which were earrici ut on the
inrates in El ck L6.


■4726


::-r=. 20-.- --c-l-C (In’.. : - - i.r^

C urt . 1

: - t. ia: - Lcn %y iaj eti rs with typhus t -ctvria,

' result i’ which trny 'iol. The a<-xua was pr. ’ucod in Meek 50 under
the supervision Of SJ> physician, Or. ileasa, end U. V ndelinr, cn the
t: -r her.:, .-an't autti.n >*-• : et rll. Do y.u knew Vonddint?'

. I know bbth f thua. I knv. then v«7 iwU*

a

r -.111 y:u .lease tell the Tri l unnl which :n_ cf these tv. persons
hr a acre ■-...'■I- ;- r* cut th.. siturticn in Block 16 ms*. 50, and which tcatiiaoi
si ' . ;rferr-i?

:., the -ns.-r - Ui • stdtn is wery staple, : otor. Both

jk..1o r.re Very lucent persons, n. --ult o' ut th t, rod I sur- that they

• _ th wrote in th. ‘ cat at frith. Tnc diXfiraicc is that Do '. it who worked
on .‘luck 50 Isa*. uxrctly *-t the situation rs ir. the c:p fren the bc-

innin until t:. :i' . -t . .. 1 rk -1 there t end can testify that thia

testis* nyew*. y - itt ia efcsclutely correct, at Veniuline, «hc ia n

v.ry r.iiV U -ra r., c-u r. • ‘1 :ci -1th u-h hie Uatl-.v-ny ia corapletoly

ridiculous, ridiculous f.r my uhc kn--r.a tho suljoet. Fer instance,

. a-ys - m •- the Clock 50 was un r tho SS physicirn Jr. riassA, and I am

. .. . I • ur, nad I don't think it ir possible that Or.

.lrsta v;:a -v r i: - ck 50, it w-.vl thnt he h :lr^ '.y left Duchonwald

f.r r lcn * tir*. I file: 'leek 50 hv ' out nctiv;te 1 and fer that very reed

•

1 '

in charrt f Block 16.

• 1 , h never. This n-.n

stud at ... work ’ i t in shop. That is a complete,

'iff.-rent : ut-.il - lies h- n thin ■■ with tU hospital, with --leek 50
. . • t testify pJ • ut ; c-.rt-j, lotail

l.*_!tr . r v ricus * rrr-cirs lv rev , r rf the 32 n.r. . . were wcrkir.r in
til-, cl thin* she., 1 rn .-it-, so. . -net i ■ .-ulln't 1 c rie t: speek correct:

• ut -11 er these rdu - xce r.-nes I rly sc-..tinea heard end wl.cso facer

.Ii r it quit

• l ny ur.Tcr tfc.se clrc-rr-a. Therefero, this

t.rtir _ . v ’y - rtinus kiU is net only v iuell- ' ecouse it is in


atzrdt. 20- -k (In . Iro-iur)

Court ll c . 1


ccaplisnce with the truth, * it, ■•is- Seceusc .iartinus -itt was in a position
tt ’ . acquaint with the. situation p s it w*s. His testimony is correct an1

the testia.ny K ns V.-n’.elir. ' Sc • i*-r ut v.l. .

: 1 , td.ll y u pleaso la k ct^ tfistiaany cf Van Loeuwardon. It
can e fain’ - n 13 :f the Gtratn translation an: pc x 12 cf the English trans?
ti.-n. Lc_i*'r<on t. stnW. that h. hr.i been inject-i with typhus by Dr.

H vc, n contrary t that is the testiaeny of ’.c '..itt t. ’ c f^un’ cn ’x-ve 1 .
.f the Go arm trnnsl'ticn , p. e 11 f the Hr-lish translation, ar. Ven .>nlon
. n ,a c 15 f the G-rsm tranol-.ti n, c- e 13 f the 2r. -lish translation, an 1
Jhmnts i.-ini-r . ert n ,v*. c 15 f the German trcnsleticn ml pare 1/. on.’
15 f the an lioh ti-nsl'-ticn. Th.Se 1 -at acntionc/l ire three persons vchc
hive testifi- that .-r. 1 /in - cirri-- cut these experiments -m’ h v- net
r.cntionci jr, >i v i.. ; .u think it is poasi'-le that Le.uw.ir len oxchm^oi

Dr. .in -r. lir. H v a?

/. r.ut .~y I s'.; 3 -- .Uin els ?

if . H-J/.Y: Tear H-n.r:, I object U my further quest! ns ' eir. put tc
this sitnoss thor&y he is naldn the •itnesa tc Je - the rJli'.avita. Tho

fy tc fnct on-! net act ns a Ju!,« in this ease.

: 21 ..It ;itnooe 3.7 state sheth-r r not ho is acquainto 1

with the aen at, r. n -1 in-this exhibit -n*. whit eppertunity the

..itn«so J.n • a U y h* : 1 ' . s-rvio sitters c.ncernir.; which they male their
statement. The witness cm net s\v whether - he cm net testify as t whotlu
*. liIn tt truth. t - ttor for tt 1 , but he

state th.ir opportunity f Is.rv-.ti.n an' shat the witness kn ws ;f
tie. 5 - , i<rtunitiea f Serv-tin. The witness ary nlso, f c.ur3c, state
ny rs he kn vs a .ut these matters fr = his .m scrvi.tdcn. He may
t.stily t anythin he «tr. .-r himself.

n _ S7UL 6: sxcuse i*y I sk a ouesti n.

..! . Giu* JX: leu can't ask any questions.

; Just ticn. . . r ’ e * *. the

tr" Slits a f thit 3_r..on since I -n't quite - t it cn ay e r, henus?

(The Interpreter *iv«s the trsnslntien)


-a (Int. 1 . r)


—*.rcl;
:


Y 3... G.3LIK:

•

0 I cm not su=Utin- u you the testimony cf Sch-lkcr, which can bo
f;ur. - -n j: *cs 15 rn’ 16 cf the German translation an' ya-e H cf the
Er. lioh c _:y. 3c y.u knew the witness Sdudk.r?

Yea.

'hrt you knew ckcut the witness Schsiker?

.. I know he is r very 'ecent aen. hhet else lo ycu want to knew?

. Smothin. a .ut his ; crscnclity.

.. He is • y-'.un; son. I elievu he is new ox.rcisin seme kin! of

. rty in Rdloni. 1 know nothing olsa about hint.

r i.t wr.g the auUcal situeti n in the coup?

.. Th. me iccl situation ir. th canp - !c y.u nenn matters connoctci
with cere on* sc f.rtl.?

H,.. G.. Mr.: .x, . real ent I na rskin, ycu fer your ’ocisi-n whether
I c<-i eak witness t:.. f u uoaticn:

H-.. ritnoss Schnlker h a ani*. that ’ .cause f insufficient nourishment
the .cf -n ant Hcv.n h».' i ler’e nun' -r .f poc.slc lose c nscioucncss an'.

1 .vant t. cak th. witness ..heth.r h- is «.f the aamu opinion r a different
.yini' n. liv I r-ai t t <ju sti n?

JU3G", Si. IMG: C.ujisd, s' th*t ycu mry un’. rst nthe view cf tho
G-urt i ut th. extent t which y u '.--y examine c ncernir. * this '.ccuracnt
:: . 1063, which hrs huso rcc iv I . y the Court -s not bdn

V. . lly r-:tl ut ; r ’ ativ value. .tly this witness cm not state whether
in his yir.i n -ny y-rticular a-sen wh.se str.tincnt appears in there was
r tns a t toliir. the truth. ' h-t ho wit -tc, if ho Knows, is tc say that
he kn T.a thrt snn f his personal kriewle-’.-n.; th t he knows his roncrol
r utati.n f r truth an Veracity in th-t ccsnunity an’. that fr::- his knowlc-
an’ -crural r-.utaticn he i*ul not ’ cl: ,v. him upen oath.

1739


20 rc:s- -Jl— >I---r:ss (R-rO-r)


- UTt I

JUD . . (c r.tir.u_'’) ih t v vl' b- a . -.Uwr th-r. :< r tMs
Curt t e uffiA.r ir. vi. hi.-. th. * t t Jc uociv. t thip rticolar
affidavit. U a ka»8 thst i i- t ht -U ba int.rr -.tor'. s*to

. th-t.ccupivd in thu c- p. .^v', ii ho

icm/R, t - . * t - ... t:r c 11 c up . >= rturuty f r -bs.rv .ti.r.

. situation as ut which he relate*. Patently,
n its Cceo b won on occpont f a particular block r c-il vf.r. ecrr-

tiln -Xj.rixnta ha 'a.n c r.’.uct.'’, on oi - rtrusty in th*t pro-

cc’ur,, \r i:l x .. r_ in a p sit*, n t tz»tiSy c rrcctly c nccmin, the
truth I v:.rvt ccurr. ' th-r. thv. s - a*. nl;- incidentally war In the
c np but •-. \ vc o..u far r„ v. ’ rr. Urvw -ir_ ’ his kr. rl_d c nly ty

» .ole- _ 1 . T u unAirst ad t. :-»• - *th- Tri unil in that

6

particular? Xt f ^ witness Un.us ir Idi *m • ho

r.-.-.y hinself U» ;lly t thv c rvlici na -xintin i. th- pirticul r np t r r.t
tv p‘rtlcul.r . .. flit-'* a ut .y • * rfc t;.-t tb-u„h h- was

thin. it tit; ti~ h- kr~w rf hie n 1 . vlv ’ - U. t c n-iti na :‘.l ;r die*.

. . , n it ul r t:.ic Tribunal t' ’atemino

when it c nnl jv ' U ’ th. -vi _ a., -th.r it > ul' ivc cr_:’oncc tc
the of tv .nt of tnis v l r t: tnoss -t~i. ’ r crtfwnco t. tbi

thu situation ic June, an sjnplc -o

•. r v.e and s_ i n -.a thu ‘iruct- nti n

V. -ps trlthin th a 1- it: y •. i . . ,

t. . ii - 2 - - -r is t it.

* . . . 7: Of c urcw, c -.u.: 1, it it true -.s state 1 by cy br thor

; arin : 6&_ss rr.y t_si.Jy A h- Ur. ws s ct i t;i_c_ vri»_nt.i ned

ir. th. inwri- -U an:' tb «s-ir - . oh

livy - .. ----- • - • - c- . air say U h. kn:vs

. , rvpntati-n that clwy

■

t- :r - .1 n ir .

_ ill •- bu in recess.


ML


2 C rcb-'-»'.*- 3 -l‘
C urt I


(Int. .


_ |urs r-s in th c art r . ill pl-“S- fir. their s--.ts.

Tin LTibeml if ' in in c-isi
T- . . lSS.Cn '•: t uns-1 'V p* c- ..

37 i. IV* LIE*

- iv r u; Schnlk.r - rk in Jtchcxarald?

just * i .at*, pl.iac. Schnlfc-r... Vie arrived together, 11 fch- anno
i'l. . - 1 * s

- lB oust. ?jy. I ;:'t kn c -xactl - . br. -t we-pln * r ' c cstrncti n, or
-.thin , Vj v-6 put in th- Cantl : "!:s r-.tLr a .n u - -i'l

rJdn ill. rut he r« ala . rial - f- W list, an i:. r'*r to

:* P . .. : . . rt f r ii>*. firat tir- newaaamt t -Ifrn'tk «the

• ••

; ici«p hi . fi.c tr-.i'JF rt ..cause - -T. th-r Dutch an t -tWr v-ro
call.-'b-ck th- SS tuv’ ah-n h- c-.- Vek t th- c- p h- w\b t b- s.nt

: "•.tr.wil-r« -ith the aid . ic 1 ;:m ocr, an c-rtaanly with

.... . r. 1 : t. ' «ic5c and

rphus pati-nto, t .v . * th- ’.r -Qy rt. In

til , y . i t.r h- -r a narau -r h- r rk. ' In the lab r'tory

-a a laboratory -n.-et .at un-ll t - • r--i r.«

Q. .ill i-'c rcA Schalk-r'c t-sti.- 15 ’ thr u h nee r-?

. -n able t tk ■ it /-t. Can 7 u pl^»- * -1 '


r. u?


3. 1 u 16 . P*. Hi


. i


7 -s, - i< la.

,Uyuc »

: n t in strik- y u ic vais tjOti.’ Sdrlk-r's? Just k-P tins

i-ct ir. r,d.


20 *:-rb: :o-?-i- ; .3S3.r Jr.' , vcr Scboon)

C=urfc "o. 1

.. r.K> ror • sup; ly?

Q -o, l .lo'!SO read on pa?e 15 titat Schalkcr says about the typhu3

lock*

A Tho typhus block?

r> Yob. h t loos lctalker talk about? Does ha talk about the typhus

block?

.. "o, he \l ’ not say a wor.*. about it,

3 If Dafon '-ant Seven ha ' anythin, t- 3c .dth th- typhus block then
caul * one assure ttac :=halk^r rr-ul. have s i ssethin • a*.out that?

A I rmlas at a so, yes.

was tho .leal care nhioh Dr, Hovon rave? Do you staro tho

ojdnl n of 'chalk .r? look at Ida t^atiaony. Just toll us yaur opinion an i

tho opinion > 1 * th olitioal prisoners about tho os-deal caro,

0

dl, tho deal caro in tho ca , r, , of couri , not
adequate. I o not kn<v he.. :»ry, I think ttaro toro c'>out 2,000 bo-ls, per¬
haps not ovon that rvanyj that only in th’ 1-st period. But h an nnny
th J3* n a r >.td nts .to ha. ..n .t tho on ', vh n th.; poplo car*; fron

1 % an' Grarsroac, when the uastorn front approacho - '., thon thoro was
•Toat : Ac ry in th ca. .

n ltnor=, v . ar r. t inVrustc * in th- last porio ‘ booausa tha
'ofun bmt 'hr/, was nc*. thora,

, , ":ly y * . - •' Ac -1 ai* in tho canp in th<?

AV.ic carrio’ out operations an!
stacdos an.’ 11 kin's of thinys. Of course thero woro
t r* . rz r'.ct' -' but *. r. - • r \c’us th ’leal care

iquato, In opinion it .. t

- which Dr, Hoven i'., th t -ctors -’ho were for pi r

- , that he us: 1 th s :tor$

., ut b • ha ■ thua listc ' .as nurses; an 1 30 he

:• ~ T.-.ii: rov r.‘ ia tr V r.t in th cam. Of ccurs

" r. •* v • 1 r- • h a: - Tlir.

for 3,000,000 arks to build a H r his c . . v •*. n san -

h7t£


20 !&rch (Int. vor. Scbeen)

Court ::c. i

stand that, “ut it is ry opinion that ho ’i . vhat ms pxsiblo at the tine
unier the circumstances.

1 1-3 you !:nrr that prisoners '.rcre killo' ^»ith the kncrclerlro of Dr.
H:vcn ~n‘ in smi cases ^rerc kill:* by Dr. Hovcn?

I V-li.v- so, . : was : h* it is, of courso, diffi¬

cult t 3v altheu-h as on:. 1~ ms C thin--s boeeuse rnj has such a function
I think * car s*.y yes,

*? Di’ yru nrlto r. Ijttor - fcl j hea l of th; Scconi Soction of tho
Dutch iris try f Justice concorris. these killinr*?

A Yos.

1 ‘..n i 1 you ssr' this - fetor tr th: :*:tch. Ministry of Carnary?

ufe 2 » ?aths a ll or 2 months a o, I think it ras 2 norths.

'I • fill ; u i * toll tho Tri'ur.al what you sal’. in your hotter to
th Dutch 'didstry af Justice about those killin s?

r vlU raa-l a snail extract frar. it. It bc-insi "In this function
th op; rtunity..." by “this function" I van as a responsible nan in
thu onir. dornlfet t ...'I hr.: tho c;;-ortunity t- sao th-. inner rry.ni*ation at
Bach.re al' r.r. ’ th- r inis ' rusiotanco an* a-.b^ta-<j an’ to loarn aero than

.

3 ' ami ur'jWV.r,' thi arra.ua un ;rroun! activity, rhat ;njat ieprovonent
- r- sj.v n to ur r-n-.r-.l situation, aa* th. ell r mm 15 - ion.

r n '-hi: h.:r:ic stru 1 th aost roliablo .--rt of the pri-oners woro la tor

1 ' '. Or. Sot r. h: 1 > ’ us to realise the con-Hiions in such .a way that

*h: - lift re/- only for th thru v. >f c- tisdcus aliborato collaboration. In
caco, '.11 Ms notions vara 'uli j ir llf - ainst th Or .■•-■ns
rt-.n i,. ins t the SS. “ver/er tho knsws th situation oust und :rstand
'• :.r notions for- very ft--r. rirarous ar. must bo const ; .-jrc ' within tho

n r-rr.- Greons an 1

tho car.u :a :* :vakc Dr. Hoven, in the v yos of nany
1 , a -rlr r. r r . for -th rs b: un' .rstnr. • the situation, herr-
•, this . \k :s bin a sol Her on our side trhe rlsku 1 a : ~ro=t * .


u7i-3


20 :torch 7-. .T T-9—3—1 ~ss- r (Int. van Schocn)
C urt Ho. i


' I *- cliavo this extract is '.’hat you • -ant.

Q ' h-.t p-rsens si no-l this lettar in a-liition t: yourself?

*'• ^ lett.r -7ns si nci by Scorers, th_ City C-ur,cill r of An3t riar
an ' ! " r « Tr^-rir.-, S-.ction Chi f of the State Institute for nr Documentation
ir. the Ka .uo, both people -ho .r-r- in SnchoRual! as lcn- as I as. I shoul 1
lik ta a:: that r« re or-.nice-’ in ruchora.rl* by political .-roups. Tho
renrosontativ. of the- catholics, Jan Hc*:-rt, one of ry -oo' friunis with hhen
: co 11a ore to 1 fren the K inrln • in tto hospital an: latar in Block 50, n
.nn who ha ’ a roll cl car or in the c?ur> to ?y own, everythin'; with tho
arsenal ai f Dr. rf-.von,—ran also to si n this paper, bon T asked hin to
to 80 n ^- I rr iH T.rito a slrilar letter in English rysolf.” But now

I :o n*t knew whether this statau,nt km ovor sent ir. b leaueo, unf .rtunatoly,
Jan P.' ort was kill * n out 6 rfo;ks . o in an r.utxoobile ned-Jont. Othorwiso

0

I wtul-' not , h ra nln in this unusual pcsiticn, as on ally in tho t’ofonse
---' n - ' * but T f -n Robert waul: have boon horo too.

n . h-t can yau so.y a* out tho number of these killin-s?

that isn't poosillj to ivo a correct answer. I vroul! net
tr-st ry elf t -ivo such ar. answer?

Ci Per wh t roa- . r.?

.. I ’wli .v i th •- i: to to 6 h olor.-nt of conspiracy which surr' un'<• 1

these i.v.tt rs.

n - Iwn was th. ruchmnal’ C~..i tumo’ aver t the Unite:’ States ..rry?

. Or th: 11 th f ..prll, I9L5.

:. .t ha.r-.nj’ ta thi -v: iors of th. SS wt»a wore in tha ccup?

I havo alroaljr s-il thy .jrc taker. prisoner by the prisoners an!
V’rr.j! over to tho .cmixican ..rry.

■) »n* -.-hat hap:on: ' to th? Dofon hnt S. vcr.?

.. •; v r. v-as ntai f th . can.. Ho ria capture ! by tho bnOrlcnn

"• - •• " r this, I 'i' not s. ysalf. 5e was taken to tho oaap an’ a
* G •« ta r riser re, went re th *neriean£ an’ :a-!c it clear
it this is 8 > — : - » unifonj but ho bdon

. The . ris Iters -ark ! for Hu- nr.* in 'i.cfc 50 v. task r. H-ven in an!


20 ’torch -..rD-5-i:-I^-s.r (Int. vcr. Schoan)

Court "e. 1

took car-; of hire. On the next icy the lasricans ordered us to turn Mrs over
'.n 4 :f c-urso *o put hta in th_-ir hands.

rj ;-.-t f/.rc the :xtivo 3 for which chi Defendant Hsvon collaborated
with thu illegal cur a Ministration an’ with tho r.-pre-sente tives of the
various nations?

.. I ' oliov th ro woro various stives. Soaetir.c-s it was sympathy wit
certain o.i., we have tc acknowl- ’ c that, but in ,-unoml, aotivos on a
level with tho illo -.1 erwp a iinistraticn of political prlsonors, so to
o.x-ak, in an anti-rascist front.


i&rch 23-J-: Z-lQ-l-Zrl y (Int. .. l.r)

C-urt . . 1

ii the ' -fcnv-at Hrvcn c. pcrate with iho I!lc;-al Cmp ..’rdnitr--
tic:: ;r th- representatives cf the. various naticns for reasons -f ccrruptic
.. It is sra_tia_5 ■•-ssert^' y ,.ec,lc who i n.t un'.erstrn’. the.
situation Well cn.uh that :.r. Seven h' prefit fren the prisoners, perhaps
ir. jy c’ 9c, f:r instance, I rn - .'inter. 1 painted all of his fanily. Cn

- that. I the rir.-t place Dr. Hovon

was a own tv. wa villin to live w I t live, an! ir. the scc.n: place he
ht ac isrJee jaintin a an- portraits fer Certain liplcn-.tic purposes in
r r nothin fer tho p risen era with hi h . n ns. Sc that

I xz r.Vsvluot-ly eppes-.’. t.: th~ cnccpti.n th't ;r. H;vtn htl;:e ‘; persons
f r r.fjta f corrupt! n. V. r is ether proof f.r this. In Ouch envoi 1,
thanks i Dr. r.v n, 1 it x. en'ur.-blc life, -n’ I was r. person freu

*ti i: ..r. Itvui .t . in ' -eh. I was -1 ! f this, but from nest
pe he hei;<-., i r inat nee th. -lass tlcwors, or y-.un popple, wh.
wars sj :t teachers^ -r. a Jewish rchitect when he holpc*, Hex Fuerster,
fren /ronfef urt/2rin. There nerc nuaurcus pot pie When ho hdpoi fren when
ythin- i.; cochcn’o. H. t is sy eraser.

attitu:o r .-r. Hovon t

the Katie vail: he was c yhysicieh?

n not toll y.u anythin': atcut that. I toliovo
vui sea t • - cist* t \ju* y his -ct: ns, : ut the situo-
ti n in 1’-cf r.vrl i n. t .^rdt it, cn-l Dr. Hcvui's str n • point was

nuVur t anythin -'^finite fren
. ."ut if y.u »ili ,-omit ii k tell • littli st ry cl ut the life -xcur.

r. H v n, I ' olieVi thrt will throw a littlo li -ht on his personality.

*

..s 1 sde 1 , 1 ••".a thocrctic ily loye-* “s r.ur3*> in the ccaa-. In the
r.OT 1 hr • r-..“ vherv I live -1 r. ir, th u'innin , rsvl l~ter with «

Lnt . *. intin s i win s an'" i w rko

his irife t. chil'ron ir.u ;ht t
: • 1 i . , v.- p tKSfdtrl, a Dr. Hcvun tock ae

■Jt .f c r ir. ■ . ctiiHs suit, 'r.i rs it t.cu ccs.itl. he introduce'.

= » :ctcr there ir. the tro :p hcspitnl, and they - -r.v*_ nc a rc.s -.s a


’rch 7 (int. . -_i r)

c.urt i

: .rl: :h ., s a stu'.ie. I wss th.re- n ‘ I kn.n his wife end his children
= -n-r th.re. I rust say that ry n^xri.s -f these .epic are
-.r.r. • the Boat vduntle of ifo. I would never h noi orod it

,<.ssi lu :-.t th't tine t be quit- -xi frcUlo with r. wenen end chil'nn who
treat cne nsra-Uy r.e in o-irwl life. Thr.t is quitu in ecr.tr: at with the
'* r * : * f Li; - other SS officers h: eifly cun lirty prisoner. ..

X aet his wife ant his cettux, when -fter s.a.tine when they realized they
c:ul trust no, we iacusacl Hitl.r end the Nazis in the sene fora as wo
i i:. the c-;.. v. r. the ; c2itic*l'yris liars. I oust .-.er.ticn that lira.
H' VJI at thic tine, thct ia wh-n Gemmy w-s still fict.ricus cn ell fronts
one t.l' ac the ui iish news which she hr 4 h&ard r.n the rc’ic every evening
Cfl tc JJRM it iin the eup. And'his ncth.-r was a V.ry \ccnt

Jc t .le \s the saao effect. ..nether cx/ua;>lo
la n Prl. jr. .'J».» rielie Kre' oer, frien*. f <r. Hovui, wh o I w.s pointing
utri .c :f the c-a; with wh-r. I h extensive political conversation*, rnd
wh. w-s an utsjxken Stoci hater; >n: I av’.c rn ille rl -“intir. cf cnli-
ti.na in the emp which I cut in ,icce: .1 rut of the oc, and

I T*vo it to thla.W' am t; koc; until Inter when everythin wna ver.
hhctii r this . i. tin , whether Fr. *r. Kre'. scr, wh- live! in Stutt .art
still wdst?, I c r. net ary, ' icrn?o the city was t a’ly hit. Another
oca/;. 1- i:: - r f-ss.r fr :a Frci’.ur * # an -.1 oitlcasn, - netlcnalist or
n 1' ccr.tr 1 Gcr.vn, I r.*t kr.:w exactly wh t h- was, ’ ut at luast he
w-8 rn Rent f Kitl.r's - v'-ry.nicc 1* : ;ontlaaan who knew n thin - clou

v.h--t was in n in uchenwal *, : then Jan i..- ert, an ' 1 tell hira about

c nliticna L. i uchcimrld. I aaainc if the fdaily cf & nan like Jr. Hovon
-n his cl 3e frier. 3 :11 -re Isc vcral t be anti-Ilazis, th'.re i/little-

fer him . hero t neke - sicns.

^ have three final questions ty my cf suaanry.

On the iaaia f y.ur 'tally nee tin,*s r± t!s the defendant Ktvui, did ycu h.-vu
e:t,t.-ive kn;wl ef his . rs.r.alitj*?

.. Yes, a fairly - 1 kr. rleirc.

. her. *11 f the --ndesvers cf the =cf«n'.ant

U7h?


23 iarrfE-s-lO-la-, Zl.y-Int.
C urt . . i.


• iv ' n :ir ^^ t - ^Plns tho p IS tic .1 pris n_rs, particularly the
n r.-Ger an prls-tv^s?

.1 Y- 8 , ccjrtaixOj.

3 On the basis uf Ui 3 pjra^r.al knowledge d y u trust tho e-
l -rular.t v„n, y -u ’i-llevu the ’ofuneant HtVon c ql have danu any
trd.*v t.'tf prisoners which na net to supp rt tho p liticil pris.nors
in their fi*ht 1 'at tho professional cri Inals and which were n t
n-cessory t preserve-tho life f *hc political pris rura?

• fc Svtrn iVoo within the fret ow-rjc :f c r.liti ns at Buchcnwald and
v-m sir aiuiati r., I h^liu e a t.

Q Hava - u anythin* t a::i t> this festli ny?

.. Mo, n. t r,ally, but tw. snail p ints I oh •< like tc >jntirr.,

if I It is thiig -ill t gethor. y presence horo

““' 3 v ' iy r -i ^ et r r /.uld never have c nsir’erocl it

P 33*olo nyeuir, since l.r„ b„f ro tho ar I was always n the Do vcrntic

antifascist fr.r.t, and la:.. MOSS* a victi.. f tho Ifculo when

’! : . *ftor rv titan f ur year;

^ ' if - 0 » S i rth, I say I t ult! nuvor have

: nsidwrod it p.ssial t c w hero t. lumber^, t sit n this chair in

' j ° rur - sa on 31- ufc 1 befiovu I can say that it is praise .f

•

tho Dwj cratic an. bjjctii-o .aniu-r in which y u, t . . .rlc-.n Tribunal,

: inistur the law quite in c ntrut t whit exp-.ri.nco-; in tho Third
ch » thit 1 5lt horo an- can spook ant that I have the fusfen* that I
helping •:, that I tc r. y ur si o t help y ut . inis tor tho law
.*. iMvoly. i than:: , u.

*

1 a i.iiSIBS!;*'?! D. any f the ^tiense c uns.l losire t pr.pc.un:'. any
1 • ‘ *-i as t this witness?

• : : . : ti»0 efefctant ru. ..=k/.

- ..iu:.33, y.u n.re in Mrs nbtirc ir. B1 zk 50?

a 70S«


- ert . 1 .


3 Di-' y a cv-r noar the ukuj :f the -of on ant i’ru - vsky there?

.. i-t, frequently. If I re - bor he was Dr. Din 's sup-

•ri .r, -fe- the. f BljJk 50.

i In v*h t c.rx.-cti r. i : y u hoar the n-v» 'ruj.wsky?

.* : : o ~as thu chiuf.-bat y u -an?

1 Di( u 3-o xu; rsky in Suchoiwal-?

I 3vy f r cert-In, • n't c-li-ve 5 . rug W3ky was a

3 rt f ythicnl th a t us, there wore -rx.y p- pic '.fith nice onif.ris
-no C3 .vj fr Purlin in fancy cars. o hat. t p lish m’ clean uvery-

- in a • the f tho po ut it is possi¬
ble that rtu .-s’.y »ns thoro nee, but t -y kn »l-c.' { ;o I r.-vor saw bin.

i nly o-U y-u that tho tore to rsky was a vury special no with uo.
xu.. vsky uant V. :t . .-.a,’ t. p Hah; th it was always thu throat that

thu Cap us. , r rfcy i: -* in., t- rr», r hu is c<rir.~ this aftor-

n n, then hr t p Uah, p lish, . lish an-J ov-rythir.f ha' t ba as
possible. .hia is -.s ■ uch a I know t ng wsky.

3 Than ho ys us-.‘ os a throat t . aku /up lish thir. sj

-'it y.u : i n t 3-u hi ?

.i 1 e n’t buliovo pars rally and that I -v-r caw hlr., 1 '.n't bo-

, .

irther quosti ns.

Tlui .T.2STDE .oXj thura .-ny p-’jsrl ns t be pr .puin.'u:! t» this
i‘r...ss n thu part -f any !ufoit6J c.uns-1?

th •• r 9 ct -ay cr M-fOta inc.


1:71:9


20 l-rrcii— ,-JI—ll-l- .hah (Int. V _c
C ; rt I

cox I;..''It ■

LY R. JSSit

r, .t.cfc -r_ y u c nsiler.c* - vint^r f d r-put-.t., r. in

Hillin'?

... f rew 0 an t li it ysolf, but I think I c-n s-. yua. ,.s

uvi -r.Cw, I c il iVw jr.u y b k f clr-rtr.. e at BaeboRa 1 , hicb is wall
kn *n 1 , 'toil n•«

3* f r w nt * itn-r., ; .‘.sir.. t testify in j*. lish?

— - lie!: n i if yu

.. ill eh a tn. eh*.i -lr h- 111 w t the ir. lis„ , hio .-r
ph a_s?

... I nly h ; ..1 r' •• . i: it is n t ; ' -o I h-.vu

‘ “P •. liah in

-*• K'.V. ; u . 'ir liVwl;;. t.x p rtr.it piintin ?

- * '• » ' • • l it v.ry r.ll. .Tybo I

: r. rr* ; - it t Ui t Z cn Ii»fc-n L chu _r n . irph n^a in 1 .fill reply


■" - 5 ' t.i if « u >111 c r.^inuc t t atlfy for .in

• : > L b u quite sv.-cf-ct.ry.

I r-jvr.t ; v\u ti h v. u - \ ur liv^lyh •> thr v h p.rtr it
f in tin 7

' ‘ -

. r

: > l! c r rkin - rlculturtl

•

2» •’ 1 » . : pointed, cc r c ur t-sti i.-, - rtr.iit
i -iJyj ia t..-*. ri h»7


...


-.if r„-iU ’ p rtrM'-i*
T_n; y _• s, yet,

*il y c.


v.r.'s fri-n’c; ir . ri ht?


> -


W


v r r_


v.r. ill am


Pi.ck?


20 i roh - Cl- 11 - 2 -. eehi: N i-t. . r. Sch

C urt I

... Hii_vtr.

Q. Di y _ .v.' ocur t y u that H v-n cy hiv_ kill-' pj plcj th fc
it p. oL_ l than th s-Lct.' is _ litic 1 pris ners?

... ..s f-r t ~y to ’ o -r, 1 * a c ‘j-li-Vw th~t h- i'.’..

Q. y bkit- cf th. p. lie: .itldntv. Thir ‘ Reich th o ,x plw . h

-.r. un 1 - t r’.., r r- ur_l.se caturs in in c nc-r.tr ti n crv.ps th_y were
usui 11;' -xt-r

... I, er5...;iy eann, t s. .. *-• 1 .aeu - thit it exist the v rst

thin tr. t huir. be in. a c n l in. ..act. * in c ncar.tr-ti nc v.ps in
a r .my.

Q. Y-.u nev-r iscucsc-' any of tlw iciiviti.a f H v-n in c-nnecticn
with th Se in.-.t.o . rt_." t th. spltil in such i physical c.iv’iti'-n

they *-r_ vur -- t * • i

A. I, c-rthinly n t»

4. -1 n, i, is p.ssibl t Dr. lister

ph .n 1 injocti r.c t such pc- pie vith ut y ur k.uWl- ; wasn't it?

A. Such r. . In ic f c uro- ::1., ut I * ul' n t c nai-’or it pos¬

sible. 1 t s , r . r. v.r Ui.r..

'!« Vel*- y U e'. r li J ok li6, Mlv.'._53?

... X.t, i c urs..

•*. Die’ . •• r r . K-vtn in .J uric l>6?

id Jjb, n. I nover s-.w hi p^ro na ly in 1 ck 1.6. I was s^nt
51 ok 1.6 irci -n cxa~.pll fie til y. hue c :-r; th-.t n *.s £ r a report

r r Dir. f r -rlin. I «i: t r i..m plific ti n ft- patients*

Ur. H v nine in 51 ck u 6 fr.qu.nt ; . . - h. hi c nc-r.l- 1 hi# pee pic

, c.: - akers, -tc. .h.th-r Dr. '• v.n x ' anything
thej* be hi c nr._cti /ndtr. win *r k rk, 1 - n't kn w. In tnb es.p the
rs .x ctly t.;_ pp si? . . _rt r-nt

r .

:• hi,.

L ’ c r, ' in t -.sk . u c kir. ly o nfinc y urs-lf t; the

1.751


20 March-' -Jr—11-3— «-haa (Int. 7-u Sch.n)


C.urt I

questionI a. aa-’ 'ill f inirh axels rv r i.ly. N't', I> ctor Din was
t.-u Ci-iol 1-cU !i6; if that ri ht?

... Y_s.

Q. .. , ft i v ur ur. -jv’ . vx . 1- * «. f rue r-’o chats

ri th t- . s, ir. y ur c . scity i u cf .:._vr rk«-rs in :leek 50;

u un . rsi V. Hr. ru -sky - : uptrior «.f Dr. Di.. ; is that ri ht?

... Yus.

.»• -.ii vr. ,rr* • •.-•■.•.-r Dr. ‘In hoi t o-Jco fi trip, such

-.a .‘tv. u i'ria ,r t b. amy f r cxy c«t~nrV l^n th


/


rcfa 194? -^-U-la-PSF- SSedian I t
• :H i


f title th • .Ij (K.-at;* -3 E.vcn; is :h t ri hi?

, , I : old sr.y th t Dr. Dir..; was in th. hospital

-n d o~dw th- first -erLt-ntc in 3i.ck 46 b*_f :r.- I rriv-d ir. 3uchi.rwr.ld
-nd th-t •n.r.h-r 3ori~3 f .x rr.de Irt-r nd *.fter the arrest- f

Dr. I: v-r. uc.s c timed Is by Lr. Dir-c .

S it is true thet when Dr. Di:. was*away his deputy was Dr. H van?

A. . I . ;.'t :<n .. tha». internal setters very wall, - uull es Dr.

K c n f r i-, -ut J.w-.ya considers that Dr. Hmn was the nan ri
t k his pi/co.

unsul h* 3 auhsittod soau ^ifid'vits, th i~- f tthor
Ins. Ua, 1 rear 5 . tea t Such.rr-Id c r.c-ntr ii n c-*_v "nd therein ne f
the ir.-. tv-o chid.he t:.".s inJ-cUd with typhus virus; r..w I want t "sit yju
did y.u kn . •! ny r o^e Mlwr. Dr. 1 Vvn injected irertes ..i.h ty huo
virus whill fc- .•* ’t . cA 46?

A. I d r. ;>• . c sws, definitely n .

osiM ity tte t Dr. v«.n tatty well hnvu
riven ty huo lnj.ctl n. t irrv.tes wit., ut y ur kn.itlc.dee; is th'.t rir.ht7

... Th: t Would hu quiu -csiblw, but I cswunu th t I V *:ld hnvo had to
itr. w -b ut it r- r Uao, \: .cause ir. *ir inUrr.'l cnay circles we always
onid e>. ctly ! - r it-.

.. Did y u r .*▼ r hvtr th r Dr. Censken; Pro onfuehr r

- nzkv-r.?

*. Iv®, 3 kn *1 and I -vundrsw hia ne., U 1 re- r : «m .

, . • grs ' 1 r.


20 r '7- - ...-12-1-Putty (2nt. v r. Sc c
C irt . 1


Dr. lensken ov_r at euc.xnw&ld?

Ju— ? -s in the case ;f *ru waky, r whatever :.ia nntc is, 1
cr-TT. t r.-_ .r exactly. I llyjrcn. r a a:ne that res 'rince v n uldcck

i: t. t a~r>- n, t be his ru~a., but '■thcxnriao we diir.'t have ouch
i:.t rest in th. nancs f tf-sc visit rs, .and 1 can't tell y-u, but, ;f
c urso, it is p-saiMo.

Dili y*u un-’-rst-n' that Dr. Oanskon w s ala: no ~f th. M.;
chiefs Vvr Din,.?

.. I bell, vc s . 1 believe s , Cut t/ testis* ny in this case is
•ly ivtu valuable t oti ny f Dr. X f r oxaaplo,

bh- r « the clerk f Dr. Din.- nr.: rn in J.in, his wrrk was exactly
inf r .. at t t v rithin*'.

4 itn..se, -.111 . u 1 k v-.r ot tl. !ck •« ace If y-’u can leek
wn the line f .c' r. /these \fondant® -n.2 lotcrriae whethor r


r ao n aoj rf thcfl in Buchcnwnld.

.. I n v. n very acn:r y h r f c<.s, but with ut all the *;ct-up
tdth which th-y usually appeared in i id» troll -n clinbe - md, it is
fficult frr dc t. pick ajjyb y at. It is werthloss t any


• • •,. Vv seen beferw. Hnt ia quito

t rt:*lcos, I ru . c :.'t ary anythin -finite.

. li..PD7 , witness. I mvo nc further quest!rns.


IX. 1V.II0.-I

J'JDG. zi-h::r,i

C-n ; - rt v -vi-h ny. r xnctness than y u have hcrct f-rc

•r-.t i unierst 1 ru.; wwky's fficiul c nnocti r. with the cacp was?

.. inf rtu-nt ly, i us n.t able t. .nrer th.t qu.sti n, but hero

•."in 1 cu. say t‘nt £ur-:n Y n r. .3? b th. ri'ht ten t yea all

t necessary inf rrnti.n because he was the clerk f Dr. Ding and ho

*.uw v.ryt in.-, m= I, :• i sniri, - * n mintcr thcra uni had n-thing

t with th, r -unizuti r..

* .

* . th. ^ r -si a, th.n, fr a -tp-.a y u kn,w f K g. n’s
r ivitics th t fc. t. ul: b .n a p.siti n t detail accurst .ly wfcat trans-
r : within th*. Units f tis kniwlci^e and range cf observeti.n while


2 r .„.-U-2-r\it:.y tine, v
C -rt - . 1


he. r t the. case?

is, !e:: and, -bcvc all, with reforcnc - ck 50,

tr. - • r- nality f Dr. -i.a , tr- =r uctirn f typhus r.at-riuls, the
ini cti as 't Block 1:6, b-c-.usc as f .r as I knew, everything rent through
K r n • inistr-.tivoly, through K : n's hands, that is. There is a big


difference.


Q H-.t: rcll did y-u kr. s t n?


.. I rs ir. the a'-.u Uitz.il Kith hir.fr ala- at n« year. f e a to
t geth r; . lived t -ether.

•text would you s.ay c nc rainc y or stiaato cf his reputation
f r truth and ver city - x. ’ his ability t Ictail accur.-tely at a-nc later
d-.t the things that h_ ha. baerv. r 2 n ' experience : at a prior date?

.. I fcJi.v-. that th. re is ».r:ly any nc better able te .;ivc teati-
a-ny tf a nwlity s.o. :r. K n r-.s able t , n t nly because
X'P n wsr In a p fit! a fc h Ve extensive knarlo but also because ho
ia a nan nth a : i acc.ry, go. lit rar. ability' and h snn t be taken
acri usly : Christian. He stall the .1 y, an’. 1 knnr hia na n serious
and, Ob 7. all, very truthful nan.

y :r pint n free ycur acqu a i n ta n ce with Dr. K ven
that h f ul b an wh * ul! understand 'tho quality f ar. rath takon
a- a c n'iti n *xxc lent . .;iv n t.stioa ny in a ease r this typo
Kf re •- Tribunal?

.. In y oini :n, Y n is a =an rfc :: I uld n t expect t .assort

:nyt ir.- a hi® ~n reap r.sibilit> -Rich ' 1 ! n.t c rrcsp nd t his defi¬

cit c .victi n url kn rl^ ! • .

JMX& S£Bh: id: Thank y u very uch.

D.:. li.-.ITX: i Jive r. furtii-r qiusti ns, l ur H a r.

r r_ -ID' The Witness ir -XCUSO.l, there be in- n further ques-

*1 ns - ’ ;r ; tm ! t ir, an tl. Tribunal will n » be in rucesa

.r.til a -thirty 'cl-ck.

(a r-Cess -zs taJr- 133“ k urs.)


L755


20 ’larch 47-z.-?jC-13-i- ? cacor (1st., Bigxilor)

C.urt I


zstbhocb SSSSION

(The hearing roco-rorod p.t 1330 hturs, 20 March 1947.)

23 ".as-Vi: Tho Tribunal is r^io is Bossies,


KURT BICC'3 Ho3unod

C3. FL2-3JE: (Counsolf for tho Dofond'x-t Uruga.sky): Mr. President,
tho c-.ao of tho Dofoataat !'-rug?wsky will bo SonXt with on Monday w Tuccdoy.

I boe t= roquost that ho bo rolooadd free th La session for this nftoracen
30 -i> to (;ivo :a rn pportunlty to discuss r nur.bor '•* m.ttors with hin.

2-3 FS3D3T. C'ursol fox tho Dofondant ^rus^sky, whoso cr.ao has boor.
C'llod next, hr.s roquested that Dofondant Krufc-*:sky bo oxcusod frti ntto-danoi
boforo tho Tribun-1 thi3 aftornoon in xior that his c:unsol my consult with
hin propnrat ry tf proso^ting his dofonao. Ifco roquost is grantod.

Dofowlnr.t Jirugrwsky zry bo c/.cu3>I frr. Attendance bofc ri the Tribunal f >v

0

this Afternoon's cosci''n.

23?. H/-TDY: I wish t- clarify that,' ia it thoir intontion to put fin tho
crao ,f ’IrugowsJtyprlcr to that of Rudolf 3r*:x It?


2*3 PR3SIDKT: Is it cv.unsole ur'orsWdin th-t tho Defoliant Hrucoweky'
ooco will procodo tho orldosxo to bo offorod by “udrlf Br r.dt?

DR. FL32IC: !lo, Ur. Prosidor.t, Urug^vaky -.ill bo doqlt with of tor
Rudolf Brandt. I think, howovo*, that tho c-.se f Rudolf Brandt will n t
take up a loni, tlru.

23 PRBJIDiffff: Upon requoct of c lunaol f r thj Do fond .-r.t Idrug'srsky
tho defendant my bo oxcusod free-t tend-r.c j tof.ro tJ:o Tri bur.-1 this afterno©
::?. S.'JJTJR (Counsol for tho Dofondant Blcro): !Ir. Prosidont, r.t tho

c r,elusion f t’o scssl'n tho Prcsocuti n sutrdttod a now deeunont against

•

whlcl^^f rt^ ^t.od yostordey. ThI ~ i3 the D curiont Nunbor 190. 2!r. Hardy
/jj(^^jidroh«'ush'Co giro no tho Tl sinal f this docunaat last niehi and I
. h ri nyoolf fosood to mintain Zv cbjoctlen tc tho aiilssibliity of this


doouaor.t, LoOkix


t


this dronnont in its original — y u will
•J7E6


v

'... ^


20’^orch 47-.^?jC-13-2-?:stor (Int., ftsnlor)
Court I


03 PilEIDZOP: Counsol, this docurent has only boon cfforoi for
identification, not offorod ns on exhibit in ovidonco in the enso. I’ot uo
tc this tiro hr.3 it boor, -fforod os an oxhibit.

K?. .'T/jrnH: In this caso I ask the prosooutiea to stafco whothor they in-
tord t' uso thi3 docicont against tho Oofondent Bicao, or whether they pro
leg to withdrew that deeunont.

MR# HUB?: Key it ploaso y :ur Honor, at such tinos wfcon tho prosocution
viU f email? introduco each ono f thoir oxhibit3, that is, of tor tho cpso
of tho dofondants is in, 1 assur-o *0 will introduoo nil tho exhibits that
hpvo boon offorod ct this tiuo and during cress oxciination for purpssoa cf
Identification, only than vj will bo ablo to answer D r . Scutor's question.

/.t this tiuo 1 ru r.:t ;ro -prod to nKor «*;so.

DH. SUJTSt: troll, .’h*. Pr.sldont, if tho prosocution intonds tc uso this
iociciont, no nattor unlor what iosienrtiens it .j-y uso it, no .axri bo clear
about whothor this d-cuno.it can to used, whothor it la authontic, onl whoro
fro; it :ricinatos. Nothing is g-lnod by tho dafonso If It is said by tho
nroaocuti.n that wo aro noroly submitting this dcounont to tho dofondant,
t!^.t tho Tribunal will tako Judicial noto of it, and then at a lator date
11 ir tliat it will got no oxhibit mnbor. I know it is being discueood
.»ro, it io being subnittod horo, and in ny opinion it has to bo olonrly
established whether it is ponsiastblo tc uso that doou:-ont.

TK 2 IHSTD8HT; Tho quo3ti:i su^gostod by ccunsol fer tho Defendant Blono
io at tliis ti:-j purely a :xot quostim as the document had not boor fferoJ
It bps n:t boon proven, n: f.ur*lati n for its admission has boon laid, Tho
Tribunal doos not know tho purpeso of tho pr 30cetion. It :v*y bo usod simply
- Jr jurp-JS03 „f asking quostienc. Tho Tribunal trill have to docido such
question* 08 thoy oriso, hut tho question Is promaturo at this tino. •


47£7


20 h 47-A-?jC-13-o-7ostor (Int., Senior)

Court I

35. SiBTS?: iir. Prosidont, excuso zia if i again revert to thi3 point.
Tho quostion already c-^o up yostorday roftardirg that dccunont. This
docvcont was subnittod to tho dofoadant, this document w-s distributed
f*r. r-s ali:dofonso ccur.sol, red - assuso that tho prosecution intonds to nako
uso of that dccuaont. I, thoroforo, don't understand, Kr. President, why
tho question ro®trdin£ tho authenticity or tho adrdssibality of this d'euront
ahuild net bo discussod ut this prosor.t stage bocauso tho pr-30cuticn
certainly will not bo ablo to uso this dccunont in any othor way but shosirf;
it to tho dofondant, and this alroedy happonod yostorday. It was dono by
-•r. Hnidy.

1?IZ FR3SIDaJT: At this tira there is no quostion idiatovor bofero tho
Tribunal, r.o will ai/ait tho furthor procoodii^ and erase oxonination by
counsol for tho prosecution. If c unoel fer tho D-fonlnnt Blona dooris my
quostion propoujjdod by tho prooocutlon objoctionablj, couasol uay then
Jbjoct to *tho quostion but thoro is nathlng boforo tho Tribunal at this tlr-o.

CRCS3 SCJiniVnOH (Cor.tir.uod)

HAHDY:

'i Dr. Elcro, durine tho courso of your diroct oxrsaination you
knvo strossod that tho outhanrsia procra; w-o of no cor.corn tc Dr- Cor.ti
In his capacity as Roichsnrrtafuohror and Soichs osuhdhoitsfuohror, to tho
c'ntr-ry, only f ccncorn tc c onti in his position as Socrotary of the
Ct~to f Hoalth .‘letters la tho Ministry f t.o Intorl-r. Is that right?

/. I have otatod that that w-6 stated to by d*.. cor.ti.


20 ;>j-oh 47—A-.JJC—14—1—Cock (Ir.t., Senior)

Court I

Q isn't it trio thpt ytur f-nor ehiof, Dr. “p&aor, in his position pa p
proiocoscor to Conti, wpa Tory inch concornod sith tho outhpnpsi- proerpn?

.. I don't kr.vs thpt. Fortppa yea c-n ^ivo no noro or.plr.-.,pvi ns pt at
thpt w-.ttor. in thpt cpso I shpll fci gH t; r-swjr you.

I pt. £0ins to psh you to ropd tho ooctlir. in yair book :n pp^o 272,
which is duly nprkod in rod poncil. This ic p curroy of e 3poooh of Xppnor,
*;hich -.:-a boll In tho Roicha Pprty Ccagroso in 1934. 77111 you kindly r<rl
thin pzo, d-.ctor? Rcrd slmly so thpt tho intorprotors cpn follow you.

A TTo Pro C 'ccomod with tho roprodoction of p epoooh rvdo by tho l-.to
pbyaicipna la-dor, Dr. :/p£-or, n t’-o occpaion of tho Roich3 Ppr$y Rpily
lr. tho yopr 1934. I quoto tho ppsapga uivlorlinod by.tho Pr-aoouti-ni

"T'o oceanic burlon plpcod up-n tho people by aick poraona suffering
fra*, .'-orodlt-iy diao-aoa, poopio without thoir cam (.ullt, rro in such
P norrl pad phyaicrl at-to fr i: tlio rrror.ts silo, thpt pay iadooo:. or.t lifo
ia i.-. oaalhlo for t\or. without p:jr Iiol. frn. euUldo, who buc%/- - 4pr<or to
tho 3tpt» prd to r cioty. if thoao -ocplo voro listed -11 t vothor it lc
aocoacpry tr Iipto oOl rdllion Roichaa-rka por yopr for tho uyXoop of- thooo
horodit-ry alok ;ccpl>, not includol i3 tho ozpa-ditur- for 200 thoua-nd
irun/.prda pnd “.bout 400,000 pcych'p-.thic epaoa. Tho funda itr thpt purpono
hr "i toon paoacal pt pb;ut 200 : dill on, -ml tho work which c-::r.ct bo oorvi tto
om t t\. horodit ry disoproa, pMouctofl *.:• a t toi .:oo ailliQn por yo-r.

i>. ior o pointed .ut how thoso I.pforior fpniloa rro throu .*• sulocvi

tlxj .on wh brvo tho mot chiliron - sd thoroby p-orrdttod such - di3tortod
picture f fcj future to -rlao. Toropo, tho p--7.ilptlc:: of tho Gor.irn Roioh
ia tho yo-r 1370 mounted tr p p'pulptlm ->f 41 nillion pocplo, mi in tho yo
191^' Hr l inexopBod V 65 nil*ion, tho r.irilor rf iasrno po-plc roro housed
ir. instituti'uc lr.cror.-od durir. thpt poried frr.i 40,375, th-t i^ao out of -
thouapnl of tho pooulPti r., t 220,801 which ic oqu-1 tz 3.4 por th usml
tho r .pulpti . 7*18 ic pa Ir.oro'io f th. p pulpti a fr~ - 50 to 103. *7o
"• r “- pa incro-so of tho inspno as.-. - 1 * 45C£, .-r.: ho doclpro*. v- -y Sollborpti-
* pt tho ri :-ht --f tho ho-lthy 3 tmnp a-- :-d to b^ rf final -pcr:.t3t tho vo-!:

- 1 i-rr.-xi rir_ lifo, h'-r wo -ro toli-rd.,, in thi fufrire pat iho nrortnocr
h-x .pnity.


47JS


20 Vpxch •-7-.1-? jC—14-2-Ccok (1st., ?-:::lor)

Court I

a» pr-.blca T reelcl nixturo which ha lantionei cs tho lest subject,
loccribod by usin& very lr.jrossiro figures. I- tho yo-xs fra 1910 to 1920
thirtoon jaws oaigrrtod d-lly frc-.: 3-2torn Siropo into Cos tray, f oroby
rorcrvullns -11 of th- froo profocsions. Ir. tho ceso of physicians, ono
f fend in tho yo-.r 1945 thoro woro 32£ Jowish persons in tho profession, end ir.
tho ccao of lrwyor 3 thoir prxticiprtion wes oron ^rortor, *dth I .2 per oont.
Berlin in the yo-x :f 1931 h-rd fifty per-cost Jovs .-t its fr.culty, cad
Ceottiaior in it's Julie el f-.eulty hrd -15 por-cont lows, cal Trenkfurt on
tho K-lr Go por-cor.t. In th-.t c-.rocticn I s' -uld lifco t- reed “Iso short
oxobrpt »liieh not uoSorllnod by tho Pr'socution boeruso this wcvld bottor

i.llastv-to tho oonao of whrt ’feasor scid.
q Co chord.

/. *Jo cro ccr.vlr.ood, ccid "-enur, rt the tins :f his spooeh, th-.t in t'.e
not too distent ti.x over/ netin rad over/ pooplo will rorllzo th-.t in tho

0

rurity of its spirit end bl ro llos its strossfat. "0 bollore thet in

tho doer difforontirtion botuoor. blood end blood, botuoou spirit end spirit
thoro lies t’io r.ly cmre-.too for w.coful llfo, toflothor, .-f f . vrrl ua
'Inlc f Insva boln^a Urine in ila < rid.

r fJ'Ktf ct r, will you roturn t c book, plo-.se• I ca clnS fihet you xccd
thet lest oztrect in eddltlcn t v: rt 1 hero utliaod. /joa't . 1 ccariaood
thet 09 . 00 k iroo ororythia, fr . th. I'esi point -r riow t J -.stlfy outhmeoir
end 3trocsos very ruoh tho hi eh oxponsos ineurrod f r tbs inscio end ovon
./os c fer en t ■ dofino pa ?lo :;h* *xo b’ily rai a-ntrlly doficior.t ro e
S-.n:.or . tho st-to -nd oocioty, d-osn't it?

.. :* , .'oro you e -byslcien, y u T.uldnt 3-y such e thine. 2hoeo ot-.to-
y-ts r. dn .bt rofor t the storilisetion lew which w-s -lxor’y ectiro rt
• rt i u. It s-y In tho.pesse os kick I hero Just re-’ th-.t it \:-m : t
o t3i'oroi t-. be d,sir“bl. f c r.tirao t lot 11 vo usoloss horlte^o. In
•-'.-it* h tioror, it *-r3 stetod * rt tho lifo of t o nest sovoroly ill croup
. v.-plo is cart-inly r life with ut vrluo, This lettor f-ot e-nnot bo

: nto.-tod by my inter, toir..., by it physici-x. r be it ler-eii.

■•760


20 :>jch k (Ir.t., Hr^ilor )

Court I

7urt'.\or:'XO, I sruit t- ir-.w rur -.ttonticu t- t l .o f-ct th-.t this spcooh
.fra r.lvor- diroctly *ftor the storlliz.-.tion lnw h«4 bcor. proailrc-.tod ir.
Corrr.ny in tho yo-ro 1933 red 1934. I point rut to you thrt the. nucossrjry
uialoratmllc«l n't ahern t-w-iis utorilin-.ti u Ir.w 'ey di circlos, but rt

tho so-o tino I ::ust point out t>.t lurin' tho c.-urso of tho yo-xs, tho
ctorilizntlcn lr& wofl rccoptod r»* boc.-;-o r.ttor of ccurso in tho rori:
of tho .. r-\l th ufihts of tho com*n p-'plo, to i; is truo of -XL artlona
of the orth.

1 3o th-.t rs it :-.y, C cC-r, it soor.3 f ■ a thr.t tho dlfforonco y u
h-.vo . -io in Jiroct oxr;dn-.tioa in y ur entire Xfonro - r-inat tho ch-xjo
£ outhr. -.sir la ;h-t C'nti, thj Soerct-ry f °t-c, tho ”inls ry f tho
^atori-r, wA att C^r.ti tho *'oloh Ho-ltt. Lo-dor r-c cot.eornod with
rut>r.roi , is th-.t rl.ht?

I crid vary oiocrly thr.t Crnti florlt 'With outhmrslr. in his c-.p-.oity
-a u:.dor Socrotrry of St-.to ir. tho *'oioh Ministry of tho Intorlcr. .

o -roll n-w -jo 7 u r.w-ro *f tho f-.ct t r.t m os^ Comn lo(. 1 oircloc,
u”on Lr.rora, they Tf.ro r't a- ahrxply ocacoraol with tho fret th-.t this
wm nly Coati»a Job in no f-r rs ho rnn Soorotrry f tho Strto. I *wrt tc
hr.vo y u lock rt tho l cuaat, 621-P3, r ich hre boon -hwltto* in ori*. noo
re pj aocutioa ftchiMt 3?5. Tho Cor.-m lo r. f.a better, rnl tho Bne.liah
a the t p. ;r y u will n to this is r ah rt lottor fra. L ; .: oro t*

Tho Hoich.Iinir.tr;' f Juatico, Dr. Quortuor, *.hich st-.toa: "Dorr Dr. Cuorti.o
1 horo- ith rckncwlo'. o y-ur letters 'f 26 So.Jto or, for.f-.rloi tc wi with
further . r.torirl r.bcut the dorth r i: -rtor f nurs. n. ha.oa. I f :r.>.r-od
th or.cl .sod rojrrt f tho Chiof pr sjcutvc f Stutt^.-rt m 1 . Ihirnbore
t tho 3oioh Ministry .* tho Ir.torl r, ?.oich Mo-lth Lo- '.or, f-r furt.-.or rcti


4761


20 ::- r c-ie-i-cooi (i-t., ivraor )

Crart I


:r- that iallcotoa that thosa rop-rts wro act rocolro* by Conti only
in hlo capacity os Socrotory of °t-to, but os It states la the D-cu;-Qat,
by Conti, tho Reich Health Loader, -r.ro they n't?

.. :to, that is not crrroct. Perhaps I :a." road tho bob toxt t ycu
r.co :.:ro.

1 Bo, you nool n t bthor, doctor, you nosin't both or reading tha toxt.
I have ro-.i thu toxt. It in vori* ?lc*r. "o *131 c ntinuo.

“oil, if ycu aro r.aJcinG a chargo against :-o, y u :aiot givo an

PP rtur.ity t dofon: ysolf, accordingly, tfcat is :ty right.

a «:o ;/lll let tie d ciriOUt spook f .r itself, ioct-.r. Thera is n>
.-.oooaaity of you reading it. I havo provl usly road it rni I dr net wish
y a to ro-d it. Vo -./ill go on to another question.

.. In that case I :; net porr-ittod to ansiror t-» that chrr-o which y*t
hr.ro vast :ir.do against :c.

^ I askod y u a quostlor..

TC3 pnESIEIT: *-.o witness -ay explain r.hat to ioslros in conr.octl<n
with that Jccurioat.


,762


t rcfc 2j-..-:-K-15-l-3r.. ..lor)
Court Ac. 1


.. It. this document it srys clcrrly "I have -iv-n thw letter tc th
Reich Minister of interior — Reich Health Lender, for furt - :■ ic-lin- - .

‘ r. Conti w-s quite "cncr'ily -'.eaiWite 'a Reich Health Loader in the
German Reich. He didn't went to be edlei Secretary of State -jv‘, *a i‘
here, Reich diniatcr cf Interior (Reich Health Leader), it means v .ry
clearly that the Reich Minister cf Interior is meant, -sil in this the j
of Health. Thu heal of the Dep rtmont f Herlth »?s -Iso thw Reich Kv
Leader b jvJ Sccrotcry cf Stete Centi. He wrs that in his State capacity
in his function as leader cf the . r Tcssicnrl ..s5wci-ticn cf Gera.-.;, .hy
Th't ia rthat I wanted to say a’ out that document.

Q Re vf n't quil'lc fl v cut it any further, ’..o will allow th- iecum
tc sp‘ k fer itself hut I must ar^- the words "Reich Health Leader" it n
appotir in parentheses. He;., teeter, >'o you approve cf Eulhonasia an it
vas carrie! cut in Germany -'urin the ,.;r?

.. I wouldn't want tc to Is elite new. It is very far frun no an
ia net within ^y dimity. I * eliovc, hewev.r, tc hive wv'.c it clear -
nr Ic it resolutely clo-r - in n; ‘ cck an in ry statement ac far what a,
tuio toward Euthanasia was.

. I was cin~ tc ask ytu tc road that, Doctor. Y - uny r*. so. It
; - e 222 ef your hpck,markod in ro! ; on oil.

.. j. ycu scan tho j -esn.u un erlinod?

, The pass circled in r oell, .ect-.r, on . • 222. .. .

that passaao where it is ranrku!.

.. Way I -’raw your nttonti tc th- fact that this has air only ' o.

• jun -r. That c-

in ay document .cck.

. .11 ri-'ht. Rood it far me, Teeter, please.

A In that case I ask y:u tc let s. read it in tho wry which leer
tear it cut cf its context : ut I want tc read it os submitted ’ y r.e ir.
locuBeot book, otherwise I would not care t. ret*, it cncc :u.re.

THE 7RES23Si?: .ill th ■ itnoss lo .ce r^a-T the portion of tfio i

. ..rter re*-in it ho aty rorJee - -ny -x iSftntl

* -.763


requested ' y . rcsccuticn


—arch 2C-.,-38—15-2—Grcss (Int. .-.-nnl.r)
Court Sc. 1


'osires tc mekc within reason.

.. Yes, Ycur Hencr. ccnsi'-red it tc be nonsensiccl th: t, fer
instance, ins.mc >;;U whr threatened their wn life r.s .<-11 :s ethers,
cr idiets cf a hi-h dc too whs perhaps c_n net -ven keep theaisclv.s clem
cr eat by themselves, K-r- dreu-ht up ary! kept olive with rort effort mi
expense. In free nature these creatures wculnet '1- t exist cn;
v. ul! ‘ c extorsdn accordin' tc the divine law. rise id net un'. er¬
st--i! that persons inferior in choradtor md spirit, r.scci.l crenturer., •.
hr ! mirdorc'I were, it is true, ccn-icuae: to death, c ut were then pardoned
prliiciplo and kept alive in pcnit-ntiaries rt the expense cf the pu' lie;
ut also in quite different casta where it is net a question cf puttin. an
eni to inferior life, we wondered vhether the . hysicim should net be -iv.
the 1 e 1 ; -ssi l ility to e.-.! m unhappy life prooi-turcly. We arc thinkir.
seriously sufferin', incur.’’le sick persons, whe until their duth hr! tc
oc.icct cnli enormous Ks.nt -1 n*. physic-1 sufferin' nnd who th-iisilvea ask.
tho physician tc fret then free their sufferin’." liay I ary ecnothinj- a

T Ce ri<-ht ahead.

.. I further any I rav-u’ cr senc coses of lncurn'le mfferin • in ry
in tiiich the patients L^dorod *. to put en on-' tc their life, "Doctor,
ivc no another injection so th t I dcr.'t nrJco up any more. 1 c n't atan
it eny lender." Cases where the dcuchtcr aid nl-lso aakc

l .M' h i; ay father f-ulfill his request." There was nothin left f :
t a-y, "i.ccorlih tc th. law - hysicim is fcr> i den to dc that." ..n ,
yet thuro ere cases in wh ch the physician for dooply humanitarian reSscm
anxi'-red his own sense cf res.onai’ ility s d -her law.

, 8:*, Sector, in the passage you hr.Ve Just re: S, if ray underst-n ‘i.
cl tar, you say it was nonsense to keep .-live insane people who were dm ■
t- themselves an. ethers or th Se. whe had idiocy f a hi h lerrec, with t
car- ar. -xj er.se an*! further y u speak a cut v.-jple of littl- value,
o 11 tr.---, as- ci i cr vur.s, who cay hov. ccrxdttei uurder and wore , r
and k ; t live in penitentiari 3 at the oq sasc f'sccioty. u t-_

— this > pinion is v.ry much the s jo. -is the c,. Lnicn ef your Chief Conti in t
mott.r, and wasn't it on this

t7o<.


20 .. r-.-SS—l^la-Grsar. lcr)

Court . 2.

Vale ZuthcET.airt voa .i’ur.ed ud c xried out by t..: ‘lusic?

In th t connect! a I *fnd'. like t t-il ;-u th t this opini n, vhic 3
I c.; r.p. -tin. her., nd uc it is expressed by ::c in the preceding text, ’ o
r.-t nly ..y 7 ini .n hut -1 b the vital n i inr.u.:. rr’ io yhysicinns'. I -Jet
be -fitted t s y. vita reference t' your oxplnnnti -is of ny book , t
ssXy wh t I actually wrote — black and v.ito — in ny book. ;%
auitui .ir. will ho rule t bl~=o -e th t I a vo written euc.. aattors in iey
*: le '.at of.-.11 will — eeusible hu.. n boln.; he in n ositin to aou.xt

th.co at itenoats v..-r^ a'-t driven by a uorrl ond prof-uni feel in: >f hit: .:i
Doctor, hoy do y u xcount f*r t.;c at'taunt, and I will ruote fro::
y.ur 2 ilc as it It hero in t.:is exhibit. *Ve -lo. did r.ot un'orpt.-.nd th t
. ore-no infer! r lr. char cter s’ eplrlt, r.soci 1 cro.oturos, vh k ;iurd.ro
w.r., i; io true, c -ndo.ir.ed t do th. out thor. -.a rule p-rdonofl nd kept
ivlivo ir. penitentiaries t the oxpenso «f tho jwhlic." It w your opini-n
nd tho '•inion 'I your c lie uoa, m dotcribod in thio hook, t. *le' ou’.J.
t.. t: ext ruin tl n un'or th. .uloo of eut.iuwsl-., w-.on't itt

... In th t c’cnectl n I cay point out that nt lorist according to t o
tr atl ;2 n r.s it c ..e thrvo,^ ay onrph~aoa. wo rc c -ncorncd with cart-in
Ictirtl a of .y words .; in- by y ur deacripti 'n. I met say th-t wo h »
u;. . .cl :.'.in for altuatl >r. th .t in G~r:-.-ny ov ry cri.inr.l uurderof who 2v
loei. c*ndoanod to death, oh-ul he principally p-xd>nod and nov.r he oxecutc
Thr.t In * 1 . • . I want to 3 y in t-.is very briof ? azrj;c very cler.rly, .nC.it hr
nothin to d with Euthanasia.

> .11 ri ht, lector. Pirst I want to toll • <u that wo h vo hhd now
Bcvon of t... dof.ndrntB 0 n tho stand, and you «xu tho first that h.-.o hid
1 iffice.lt; with tho translations and Interpretation of tho non -a* xo th.r
ttto :00th. I want to inf r you th t thoy r • protty capable non rad I d*h
w ~.nt you t- cou-lr in any wore rivet tr-r.olati'ns. ”u will continue.

23 r^ZSIDZ:^: ?h_ ^rihunr -1 is uvr.ro t.v t errors ir. trr. slr.tior. xy

hr.;.cn —. i.' witness, or nay counsel, holiaves tticro hns ‘:ocr. an err;r

tr. r.l t u it is :;.e dut: : t_is pers-r. f c 11 .h. a.tter to the t

4765


20 r- 15-2.--:^ss (= - 1 r)

C . . 1.

c— rr'.rx; 1 -,t sees.

:r. ~Z3X: Y,S, air.

V - v-; . pr-a-nt in ..cctir.,' ir. 194C .r 1941, ccT'llr t> j ur -ffidrv
vl..r_ Dith-jv-aia wr.c iscusaod. .'/V, :-.t tk.t r. waa C'-r.ti vit.'. "Xi?

. .. I:: .*• rXfi.rr.vlt I st tel tJ t Dr. C>r.:i 'ac A:;-, ni I think tk-.t v
in 19 1, cs to'. t lurlxv; ootir_: v.ich vr* t ; k. placo.in liinick,
?r.f-co?r rr r.lt v.ul’ iv.. r. ox.--laar.ti r. r~ xit the b‘-c..11cA Suthr-nnoic.
actl n In fr nt of too Hoick C~rv':or -f rhycici-.no. rko roae r. -hy Cviti
told .0 til't v a thr.t I t..ic «itur ti 'n cl rifiod but c Id n t Vet in

clnrificr.ti ... Th-roup-. n ho one d ;• t Ixl no t.. t v.ie cretin.? wra ,;3in/; to
t'ucc ”.l CO. 7nia r.cctir.: -'.ctunlly tv>fc pL-xo ir. I9UI, I think, r.o f r -.a :
kn'w it vr.t 1941, ir. ifcnich. ?ro.. vk t I still re:x..b_-r -.k>ut the ncotin,;
eh-c : royCiitol in r r. int.rrvflvti n t Cfcerurool tota oot d»vn lrtor ir. cn
ffi ' .cit.


-,766


20 iferc

Court lie. 1


Q Njw tten, Doctor, wr.s Conti present at that rue tin ?

L Yos.

Q as Professor Brandt present?

.. So, I already stated that this ror’. Bran : t was cither a nistake
ny part or that, at • ♦. tics, it ns a nistake on the paz*t of Conti. j.t

that tiro, Victor Brack -..-as pr .sent, 'an' Victor Brack represented '.oich-
loitor Bouhlor. 3rzr.lt, as I convince ay: if in th. nj.antiru, was not a
participant of this rootin'.

3 ell no*.;, vbftt was the reason for your be in- in attendance at the
see tin. ? Purely at th roquost of Conti?

.» ..s f-r r.a I knew, all the Gaua_wloitor an' R.ich Chaubor of
Physicians leaders hr.I boon invito', an*, it was a natter of course that I we


ir.vito 1 too.

Q (Intorruptin ) . ell th -., -as this natter —

Par ’on ro. Go ahoa Doctor.

I was sayin that *u cuStrr.ary urin: such r.'.otin-.s.

Q >as this a vattor which concarnc ’ the Reich Ch.a.-.bor of Physician:

.. In that connection : f llowimrt Just as raid

I wa3 inter J3t. in this secret prec. '.ure, a nun - r of lea'in physicians
b jlonliv: to the Reich Chsnbor in Gjrtany woro also in loros tod. In addition
to tv® 1 If, -a nur.b.r of oth r l'a’.ors cf th. Reich Chanbur of Physicians an’.
BattanMoitor want. Conti's explanation cf that affair, an', .-orhaps I iaay
> rocs r.ysulf in such a rumor, that th result of th. various roquostu
hich wor.t into Conti was, in .fleet, .his '.e, tin which took place in
unich ir. 19ltl.

1 New, i you v i e ary Election; tc this propose *. cu^anasio lav
r ’raft at that tin*?

-1 ’fay I .ask you just what you .van? Do you r, an the ’raft or do yi
Mean the law which was later to bo published - the law to bo jm’'lisho d in-
-CO tiro v.-hich I spoke about in ry .affi ’.avit?


. *11 tak that .1 c: y i &., teter, ri 1 y:u voice any objec¬
tions as t. the carryir. -n f euthanasia without havin: duly published the
law?


4767


20 *ferch u 7 -..- .Tr-l 6 - 2 -ctarrc-. (Ir.t. damlcr)

Court Ifc. i

y C 5 . r an there- reforrin to the affi .avit which was already roa
rado by Professor Xlare of Biolcfcl.'., an: I rjf^r also to what I sai ! Mrin
-'.tract examination. I venter', a publicly -..renal .ntei law an:, for this
reason, I rtofino ry «attitu*c to that question ir. sy bock. I chose this fo'rri
of ry cvn experience as I found it in practice. It is ry . oin of view thi
oven after cur oxparloncas of to'ay an ', aft r 'everythin: that I have heard
that the sottlon-nt of th- .uthr.nasia question is well a problem which shov
bo sottle ’ by way _f lar. This is ry eint of view in particular because
apart fr : factual experiences, I, myself, - nco ir.

ry own fondly. ..t the '. c innin ' of 19l»0 ry nothor was afflicted with canco
.Ivan scoin ry =cth.r for the lest tirj in Decolor, 19U, her aufforin
had procrossu’ to such a terrible extent that ry nether asked mo laily Mr
that visit - she said* " V boy, pluose :o : a favor. Give no an injection
so that I will r.ot vak* up a oin an * v ul ‘ finally bo reliovo ! fron pain."

I '.lid not do this favofi to ry nether. I trlu.i to help her. I lio:l to hor. 1
kept hor true con lit ion free hr and I r... roaonte 1 it in a Afferent fan hie
free what it really was, I trio’, to lvo hor bopo, and In March, 19h5, ry
□other, after torturing herself for rsonths, finally Hod. In that connooti
I wist say that this ras ry nest orconal ex; ori-nco an! thin is wly I
assured the point of viuw that the euthanasia question i3 worthy of a local
sottlononfc. Lnt r.f .vio: that. throo *«xxn:ls havo to ’

The first: w - . concerned ..lth incurably nick porsona. Secondly*

havo t havo pceplo who havo ox rosso’, th- sire r, rather the cumbers o.
•heir family, to union .uthanasia as so -lacs th y thonsolvos can not
overlook the extent of thuir suff rin , an’ thir Hy: there has to bo a pub
lc al basis for ary 3uch pr-ca "'u' ,

rj Kew, Doctor, inasmuch as y u HI net const•'•-r this lc al unless \
law had been ,<u’ liahod, Ud yu , after this uetin , tc Conti an', object
ar.I ask Conti to act, as afterwar s atythin- that '.i hapl -n ul-ht backfiro
on the Reichn.resun Iheitsfuehrer?

.. I 1 'n't ur. Mrs tan 1 the last art »f yur qu rtion. I ’on't !:n w

jxcctly what 70 U sEont - what f rfcabl c nsoquonc s?

h76c


20 March _?-..-.TO-i6-3-^rrCT (Int. Samlor)
Court '.'c. 1


Q Bib you ----a to Conti an-'. ask hill tc act in rcs-nrl to euthanasia “h,
yai understood that the la.: foul' not be Vuly jab li shod?

.. Is I sai 1 'ofore, I cent to Conti irae.Vistely after the nootinr a*
cnandod that wo had to interfere- on th~ behalf of the Physicians’ Loactersh
q Do y u r.urctor, ir. or.o of the ir.terra tteLens, Doctor, where you
state’, that y nt to Conti after this conference an! askol Ua to act,
bucaus'- ya; d 'n’t want anythin fc- backfire or. the Hi eh Health Loa’.er? a
you rononbor that?

.. Ho, 1 Vi "n’t say that '.urixt an lnturro ‘.tier.. I said son*, thin: •
pletoly 'Iff .rent, an’ I an quito Sure of it.

q oil, Doctor, wty ‘I ’ you a to Conti an* oak Conti to not, and
object to Conti after tho rxotin ? as it purely a , era- nal roaocn why you
want, or .'i' you •: bocsuuo you *

h-.vinr your fficc yartici. a tin - or consontir. t th.: .uthanaoia ;ro.*ran?

„ r L. '• i.fr .1 ! BU8t tc-U you that 1 was

now afTil fchrou teat ny .r.tin. lifo. C^ar’leo is one thin that I roillc
test. I i n’t t, Conti because I v s fri htorv !. I .rmt to Conti be¬
cause I consi '-.r,' it to ' ry 'uty an! for no oth r reason.

• 1 ull, then, y u felt, an’ it xtrjt y w opinion, that in your titla
ho Deputy ReichBaorztefuehrer an! Deputy »lcicha;*esun'h-it3fuchr«r you troro
or., of the rear nsi'd.* fficils.ir. this attar, ’1’.n't you?

.. KO, that is n . : iidn’t -.r a local r

I now thou ht that I sh ul ' boar any such ic al responsibility. For tho
responsibility for an act is V.urno by tho ir.divi 'anl who is car,.,tent for
the oxecuti n of that net, The buich 'iniotry f th Interior vas cocrctont

and r.-t tho Hoich Ffagrsioians* lea 'or ship. If, in spite of that, 1 trie' to

*

interfere in th t , - --• » " •' •- M alroa3y atato^.

1 Row, Doctor, ' subjoct af blood Lon. Horr,

in this question, takin up • air. the: Mortality of 7-ohort Foix. as the
reason why an -tt-_r.pt m •


• , r

c tl’ still have c nfcinuu ’. his work with lascher. Ho n_-odn«t bo release;! ir

1*769


20 ".arch L?-..-.17ViS-L-!:arror (In'- iteasler)

Court Ho. I

or 1st to continue his -..uric, Foix •..•nr* to to ' e relr,ns_d on his own initiativ
on' he. was than transferred to soe» other piece where there was a factory,
’_ut ha could have worked there as a prisoner just as in the case of concon
’-ration cany tons or tens of thousands f incites ha ’ been detailed to worl
ir* certain facterie3. The reason why J interfered on Foix’ bohalf, was enT
because I was convinced that on injustice was !cno to Foix. Quito accident!
by pure acci'cr.t, without knorrir. Fiix cicely, I bal the op..ortunity to
intorforo or. his x-hlof, an! I di" that, not xovod by an official ol align tie,
but frea rarely huran reasons, and I ras very la* to be able to help this
nan.

Q ull, was Robert Foix able to o about tc these various nanufnctu
ini- ostabliohaunta whore th,y Inter. !od to aarufaoturo pdy.-al? *‘as hoabji
to about in the classification of a concentration cnap inrvato?


20 1 arch U7-.-ATD-i7-l-Lcssar (Int. 2er)

court ::c. i

A ». I already stated durin or, intcrrc -aticn that Falx was given
vacation. I cr.'t know whether ha t-s finally released fron the concentrati
canp, but I know that ho ms in a ; c si tier, to nova about frody. Ho hiasdf
viaitad cc ir. civilian dothos, in the sureor of 19!Ji, without bain/ cccorj-
rani o', by anyone j therefore I condudod ho :aast havo boon ado to novo abou'
quite freely.,

a Her.:, -toctor, I have a f an entries to nontion in Siov.rs* Diary. TI.
Court has covere • thcjs^ .rotty well on iroct exardnation, ami I havo one o-
two I want to *o vor with you ncm. Saw on th~ entry cf 22 Fobruary — I
'.on* t have a Goman cc;.y available, ’octcr, so you will have to boar with
— on tho ontry of 22 Fobruary, this is cf the Siovors' Diary, Document No
35U6-PS, which is Prowcutisn E>hi it No. 123 on ! is tho Slivers' Diary fo
tho year 19UU.

HREPJ'r3TE?.i hat locunant look is it, "r. Har.fr?

0

!R, H.JtDXi Docunont Book Fe. 11 wil f the docunont ka,

Document Book No. 11 in tho Emjlish, er.’. D nt Book . 3 in tho Ooman,

X bdioVOa

q Do you fin* that entry of the 22ad of Fobruary, doctor?

/. Yes, I have four. ' tho 22nd ,.f Fobruary.

1 it states: "10C0 h-urs. No. 7. Furth r work in thi natter of SS
Biu> tsturnfu-.hr r 'ir. Flootivr to 1 o ' no threw, h RGr." eul.! that ROF
no.an th *• ichs -usu:. 'h itsfuehrer? Do ycu follow no?

I 'o net think I un!eratco* sew thin correctly. I havo tho 22nd
of Fobruary but thur in. rxntion :i *r. r f 1000 heurs.

Un dor tin 22n’ of Fc'ruaiy yen will fin I nur.'n-r 7 — under the 2;
of Fo' ruary, nunbor 7.

« Yes, ye3. r havo f.ur.it.

q That stat j: ’’Further ..rfc in tia ratter <f SS Hauptsturnfuahror
Dr. Ploc tner to be •’one threu h W ." ?vcir tho initials RFG — that initial
was tho cccnon initial for tho Office of th*.- rkichs.~vsunlhcitsfucr.rer,
.•asn«t it?

.» Thar-- war net :.n abbreviation for the Rcichs.resundheitsfu* ihror ir.
that f rv. Tor instance,...well, I really lonlt kno* 3GF. Forhape you could

h771


20 'Larch U7-..-. .I>-!7-2-Lass'-r (In--. R^rnlir)

Court !k>, 1

Inter ask r. Sierra. I really .*on»t know. I. Jon't know Sturabnnnfuehror
Floutner. I nov_r rsv.Lo his acquaintance,

1 *cu n-.vor work-i in collaboration with Ploctner or hear' anythin
about hi:: in your official !utia 3 , is that ri ht?

*. Ifo, I Li ’ not know hin at all.

3 y:u will notice in the mxt entry un :,.-r the 3ano date, hoaJo '
Dachau, at 1630 hours, you o down to f2. It says arain "SS Baurtstumfuehr
Dr. Plcotnor" an! un’.r Entry 3-"Curator's aprocncnt to workir.; throu h RQF.
!k>r.o of that is fariliar to ycu, is that correct, doctor?

*• ” > ^ cannot oxploin it. In this cmnccticn whore ycu say ROF an
Curator, if PDF i3 to r~an R.ichs osun'hoitsfu. hrer tb-ro cannot l -o tho
oxi rossion of curator ’ aeauso not argr such oxprossicn -xisto!. In a ’ ition
have to say with reforonco to this entry that this is not a aootln? in whit
I ; rTtieij-.t. in in;' wry. He re -v : ivcusly concern ! with a conforonc

which took . lacs in Dachau, hurt r k*. Sloven was lisoussir. ra rith
Plootnbr and .Taachor an’ StumMmfu u tsolbur . I, at anj rqt ,

’i ’ not participate in any auch conference. I was not in Dachau a sit l„ tii
throu hout tho <.ntir year of 19b; , 30 , therefore, I cannot really toll you
■ hi*, 'r.v is mi pi oao! to roan. I oust thoroforo ask you to kin'ly ask Ifr,
Silvers a-out that natter.

•1 oil, n ..v Doctor, I have another entry hero, rir ht on tho sane
line, which is No, 3, which will bo ri ht un ’.-month the entry- wo vero Just
liscussin , which the Tri' unal t ok up with y u, an ! I have one quoction t-
ask ycu in that r\ nr'. !' .. it states: "3. SS Hau; tstumfUchror Dr. Rancher
c) Supply questions for pr action C . ly .nl. ’) Exp rinen’.s Prefonsor
r lono. n Ar,’ then it toes to n to ’f) Poly nl report to SS Grup, jnfuuhror Pr
Dr. Gobhar It." Then it continues on, incus sin iyl problem, etc.,

.n'in up with "1) Successrei rt on ely - 1 .” ; w - I un or star, it correc
1;.- that when the Tribunal asks i you what ... by Movers, statin?

•Txp riner.ts Professor ?!>-” scant, that you answer1 that that t»b silly
~oznt ac:-c w.rk ir. e-rev.ctier, -.rith cancer?


arch - ' 7 —..-..73—17-3—Lesser (Int. Ra.'tdcr)
Court !’c. 1


I sv>.ta 1 in that connection. that I an not responsible for the
to ro d n ol y which Dr. Silvers cared to apply in his iiary. In this ccnnccti-
it is out of the Question that we are concerns 1 with poly.jal. Tho poly.-al
problem hr.', already boor, cleared at that tine. Therefore wo can oply bo cor
ccrno 4th oxoair.ations of this new successful cancor !ru?. There is no
ether cssibility. I should liko to ask you to see !!r. Siovors about that
v.ttirs, Siovors is tho one r.ho wroto that ’iary. I an stein- those ontrior
now for tho first tine, an-’ I really cannot tell you what HOF is supposed *
roan in that connection. I cannot toll you for cor tain. I want to toll you
or.co noro that we are not concorhei hero with any conforencos ir. which I
-.rticipntc !. Othorriso I tfoull ; orhape bo in a position to ivo you some
ox. location, fr< r. renory.

n .ell, sow of those entries refer to tul phono c narrations an',
othor conforuncos at which your noi . nticsv In this conn-ction,

doctor, you aro not iware of iry*uxpcrironts pcrfomo -1 on hi oin;s in
or 'or to- tost tho ffuctivunoss of ;jolyfial, is that rl *ht?

•* Yes, th t is c rroct. I neroly foun 1 out afterwards, fron r:hit I
hoar! in Oboruraul, that skin of the upper thi h of th hunan bedm ha!
boccno blno^jr 'vsrin • .a narcosis* That is th, only thin that I aftor
hoar’, about Raochoro It is absolute scientific nons-nso, as I said at tho
tij.j, an only hare in th.. files 4! I learn about th so experiments.

q ib'll, new, you recall that tho ?ohl r.ffi \avit which was, 3 boHoa
-current ;D-C3?, state! that .'devors ha! tol ' Fchl that in r*!or to tost
this poly ,al that inmates •.•_ro shot in thj lo , an I ' j11c.vo Professor
Gobhardt corroborate’ that rh.r. x r.son thu 3 tan . You never hear! of .any
of these experiments or tests aa u y • - schor?

*

A >b, T hoar! nothin at all c' -ut thro «.x:>.rinants,

1 ' "in’ t. rc.a' to y u a -iction f anaffi'.avit to see whothtr
»vo :/fr hoard of this condition, ’.cctor, in connection with poly. nl.
This is D cun-nt 0-ll;2U, which is effuro! for i .ntifieation as Frose-
cuti n dxhi it :;r. 1*62, which is an affidavit by Fritz Frio.irich Karl Has eh
an undo of Dr. rtascher. .1*773 . —


20 y-.rch U7W.-ATD-174*essc-r (Int. laanlar)

Court Xo» 1

“'--SIDE'.:?: ill ycu iv. thj Tribunal the- identification mnber?
’'L. RDT: The identification nunber is U62, Tcur Honor.

3 Jlorr, be tor, I-.Tint you to turn to paragraph 5. How I will rca'
this pamrraph* -

"In ;.u ust 19U3 I tras f.dco with ncrhjv: ir. the Dachau
concentration can;. Tha first tino I went only to his yrivato
quart-.ro an ’i * not s=o the laboratory. The second tine ho
ahsiro l =u his laboratory an* intro loco! no to his collea vc3 n
I still raocobor the following nuns: Dr. Punton;-rubor an’ Dr.

. :• cbesdcal evaluation of clot-f loodU

..t that tin. ho also told no of sub-coolin: xj riaenta. Ho
sai * that he ha ', carried ttwso out on hirsolf -t first and
then ho introduced to ro one of his ccilo.vucs who had
• volunteered throo tines for those oxporin-nts. If I ronodbsr
ri htly, Hinslor is su.-po.' to havo been ; resent at one of
these ox: riaents an' to havo par 'one ' tha nan who wore con-
dorno-l to tenth. Purin • the o’.-aonco of :y nephew 1 accidentally
found the following 'ocmmt in his \oki


- --- -

r. • -


"It Tii. ara vj a r-part vt too sh tin., eX.cuti.r. -f f-ur p-.o!c
f r the , nr 23b .1 exvri. -r.tr.n *i~- -he ha static preparati n "I - -
ill 10". ..s far as I re t js er thsj rare a Russia : -ss.r a Cr-t-
. ktbi The Russian > as shit ii

n « choir.

..

a c.r.v laiVv .1 , then sat im r. a chair an i-. ;ft«r a 0 :u,t 20 .Inu-

: '

. Uras farther cscrih.
were * -cl ts.- ihat c

nation f r thu c • pai-ativil^ 1 n. I Jlle :f'«r the ah K ..it .r

roa.in thlo lirot pr:ix 1 I was's- shecku that I i.’ r. t raa-' the
. : the r»- -...r t;tic preparation Tr

. mxj at herewith to the tll.s."

.. w, D t. r, 1 u ever 3u< ..at r-r rt oh ut the sho.tin; f
theou ,i r ... ..la . r the ..urp:ao f ax -ri.-ntln, *ith y 1/fal?

.. . , if I . : ..a it the. i veul hivu - h ir.tc ut t« laacher

• •

hM , «A-»r ct.T rito r.y '« r.. i tralnln. :.t ill Vn s thu rt.si wiy
m ti'.o nurwot ra> t> s. la r. rvr al .^rati ns, on that U.e ot

icouratu isorvatd ns oan ha i:. this way, it 1 sh. .t s a one

.a;.: 1 cram r jv . another p-ly.-il *3 ' -Uv f r c - ulc;J

.

4 ii ct:r, r.rc in i rl tth r rln

the c urse .i ur c..U .r u n if. ;i ?


. .


*k

at to •.*

aav r aA*e-"

. C, k- :

iinin. I tr

-V /.t ■

. h.'lv: sat

&. I 3.


.


. . 1. • r r.-ss-lilct. attits a ir. r t shoring pr ucti n tr'.r.nac-

, eafltft »:.• tut I * a

, his

775


- - - - -

e rt .1.


or.: he v/.:s ::.t y s rdinc ..

'3 Then ycu cintain cl ; :nlj ^als hoachtr t 2- ;■ u r.*> i-t in c n-
r.«.ctl n .ith this , I : al < rk, was tfew t.st vhi.xs.ia he t: k r s f
:1 lr fin -rs of s .-o f tho pris r.cr z, iz thnt ri ht?

.. that ia :iit true. I have alre . y t- 1 : y u that .anchor

t.l. .. at a thigh Which %cs ru.o.v elu* y, nn£ i ala tel tho ft-ibu-
nal that I -self new t;e In':ora; ry testa ir. Dacha where the c a ulat-
i.r. f tno ->lc a aacc-rtniiw-:, -hero pris aura i th* .. rk n tu.

- 2n ' ,thor * "•' 1 ‘ th - r * 1 -Is sai ’ that, at :y su ^sti'a, th. ru. tj ocr.t
04 x 1 Dr. six l-.Ur tpld «. that a -ell Imam sur e n,
i ocliovo it *ao roi toor ir. Inabruok, he. hi. -xcdUnt results - th
P-1 al in orations. That, ia mr.t A k, ut bl wata vith ly-
al.

♦

~i . », D ci r, I : t • • - • na c s -

ont KO. c 9 C, Which

120 , which - cu wnt 3 k. . 3 . Shis ia the

list I ruaora-ch aaai n.unte that no 'a.vL visas*. w<- at r.at lon,th
4 cba . aa^nrch « undl. «t w t . : this cu jnt it
«rt -1 Jorlin j. 68 , Mr. *natr. 1 : 2 , TUoph no
Vlt671, or . : ,r.a oJur.s r. 12 ?

.v '-a, t; ~t i.in y -ffico in trlin/

1 no -Ur xl-ph ra nu >jr 17h071?

tno 3 l7ui'71.

TOS . SXK&Ts ill u .i
nu 3«r j Uu. cu. v.-.t?

• : f 1 ,

3 cu vnt . . c 0 , 1 ^ 0 .

L r-SIDE! ': ft,, hrt?

• : f 1 , 1 .r

2fc*: -us.


- a -in tne *, •_ f thu b:k n' thu

It is J cuo-nt It 3,

r.

a-n r? ,


776


- - -


-


. •

ct ... 15 • 3 . r n: - ,r, u?

, . r.

1 bo, 10 .. s

A - 3 .

.1 u --Intain t .t tvc >:.lri«s, W, r.u c ncornia.

bp p :. tar . . . : .r..: : thu nu. r. , .

t/.j . .* - . .Pj c . . . rt’a -.cciv .tj it Stxv.33’• it :, \* ir. t»:is

-cv jnt - • s icv.ku w.-.jr th-y <>•„ Mi- in

tho •.<: uit-, ic I ... . vr c. . -.1 ...

£ ... th l. V lulU ti:u cu i 1 . 1 ak 1

v.. lit in. i. i •- oil t th- n .• ”.C-

c :r.t . r t lc. , j. i otr.U. 'i':. r.vl ri .vt th-t Ua. t- isci n-

9

c attune.- of G-.V-i r c u-rbruch. .Jtjr I ro-
•ivo m ::-r.ct r j .cc oat fr aich MOavrca C:unoil,

thucu t-.. aoi r. u-.tc -.csx list. , i cf.'.lv u,; Uiu -ulch :<>.o-nrch C.vuicilj

. ittorp ha£ rrthin U : Pith tta.v bel n t SwiftPb-

•

'i Tior. t-.ia tv. _r 1 679/15 c.ncwmin,. ..-.schor'c rta-a . ... v ,n ln-
:«-rVc' in tuo CU „ t r l USi n .rt sVa y istnk., thrl is
r

.v -s, m ...; ’ 3 Li n v _r .

, n : Cl .-r.t 3 Kl', ! .. ..u r. - tho tor, c. ■

n r *

% ^ ic ‘ t 1 k IV? +

..

. .

IT.. 2. .

St: v ; -si: . r . rx - -ir.’

• •

. -

, ...

h?77


- art . . 1.


3 u ..-.TJ it, u :ct r?

. w XO-, I think I ar.vc it.

n ^li ri ht n , this :ccu jnt is :r the ahrx.nort>Q Seciaty. It
5-./s .t uw t p f ht iJttert “Tho :.=ichsfuchr«r-SS, F.rs.nal Staff,

Office , .vV„r.jroJ.'' Thu af-r.sc ccuns-,-1 iscus3c£ tna s~c n< p rti n rf

ncarair .3 the subject "PoXlotl^” • K,
f the ext .t nfce.ro it soys ! . 1* v.ich ro-
f t Cc: 19 U 3 , - urnal re. Rf* 1157A3 £, C

. Then it states ".ias » .1. Row&rains, after :,on-

f t • - frw,z “

, . . . c .

O. <‘.y variavsly r..urio.it.: to ostGbU* ifc.»t*.r * inc -nsw f r-.sisF.nc-

• >

1, u find "Pricrity 8S.

• r. • on .r '^Sa. r 1-0328". Ihon in paronthosis
• “1679/15—ji2A3." «- •’ *.8 it appear t y u that o. 15

appears in tale cu. . .t r t-. . rbe. 1 ouppss 9-th U -eh

u •• iotako, 1 b

that rt;*.tv

* X tfc'nk l can v-r easily .x In n this: Inis fil- n-to f thu
.v.n.nor o, Xcr l:. * is h i it , 3 tos t it .- .'.rch essi .>

tela • ora sent t. . cic;-. Rosioroh C urtcil y th J n n r o, i nek

u . .

, ....

fr ■■ t

q .o tn-t ^ it :v, . e : : , \lilw a tu £p4rs •*- ~

. issi ... i.- -• ich ,

• £ s ic j . . 15, in c rmacti a with


. .r receive -T reports -s _ result I ..sc -r


r. i l. i.-


it X A3V-


r '. - it e rr.ct, d


•c-r


is 3i. -r


j t V - *cich iws--rch C.uncxI usj i

//IS, - sai rwp-.rts v ul _ n .v-_ b-_r. eld -r.

177


r-_ZH-lS-S- cl jr-infc. a
1 vrt . 1 .


it suer, a xhxa s as that «.v_r -ccur?

X a_v-r sas any r-p.rt jn Wi* subject by E'seher,
f x -j I s.:;n Kisetwr r..v.r_--nt in a re* rt n r-s.-rch t- the
H.s.r-rch C.c.’icil, n: * n . 1. *al


C'-urt m'-. 1

20 -xr -,7-19-1 -A-iai-keeh?r. (In*. VonSchten)

'x. S-v, Doctor, vt vill go os.

a. nry I add socethlcg?

Go right ehced.

A. Hay I ooint -ut once nor* vhat I have already 6Pid ir. direct
examination - that was that such ex^erinentc verc not cerriod out rt oil
that vintcr end not later either end that enothur entry In thifl diory
confirm* this. Conseauently, the £©ich Reserrch Council could not havo
roceivod eny reoort on ray rooult* of ernorlr.er.ts. And nay I odd some¬
thing elel It ccurs to no thet there vere other mistakes .ord in
rooeorch csslgntente; for ext le, I wr* by nSotrfce Beat thing* «hleh
hid nothin,; to do vith teJicino rt ell, hut vith agriculture end that
vp.o floe a nit take ty the -ffice personnel ir. the Reich Research Council.
Aisigmehts f-r the cor bet ting of insect tests verc ontcred by -ietnko on
the account of the agricultural men. vhich actually tol.nged to ny bio¬
logical research assignment. It vi.s n-t r. u.-.iouo occurrence t have such
« ".iotnlco.

^ a11 right, vc vl 11 go >n. “he Tribunal md defer.no counsel hnvo
tikon you rather elaborately -vv,r Documents *0-290 end 229 regarding
tho appointment of Kcschor to a university ^rofeso-rchio cr lecturer.

In that connection, D-ctvr, do you deny that y.u talked to 'rofcocor
rfrr.r.enBtiol cor.cerr.in-- Roocherl

A. aO far ns I ern recall, I did n>t talk to r rofeoBor Pfunnur.otlol
ab-ut Rtocher, but I vr:te c letter to ‘r-fcBsor Pfccncnstiol Sr. '•hich
Kir. -lcr 1 s dosiru fjr Eascher'o hrbilitnti .n vac -resented, i nd then 1
received a r-fuccl fr-• -»r. Pfannenstiul, rs he did n-t *rnt Raschcr to
hr bilitato vith hia, cr.d then I did noting .-.ore in this natter cr ! did
n.t see vhjr just I ch.uld take any cto-e ir. the .fitter, re not even
Erschor'o superior, who vac rt the seme time a vr-feeeor cad c-uld hrve
rried out this rurlificeti n is a loctunr, «r 0 not billing to do it.

I told Rr-scher nt the tine that he should find another nr-fcoc r, he
sh uld :ake Gug.-csti-ns and I vuld take care :>f the at ter. but Hnechor
did n-t lake any suggest! ns either^! I don't knov that Rrscher rcc-ived


Court So. 1

2C „rr 2-L2'.-.iechan (let. T-aSchoen)


re hebilitption ft ell.

’..ell sev, did ycu contect ^rofessor Dr. kenzel regrrdin* Eeschor
tuc-int ’.ent?

A. I did telk tv ..enzel e*ccut it.

v And after that tine -easel depit directly with rfennenstiel r.t
:i< rbur,; • ni y-u were a:t lesser in tho oicturc, is thpt right?

«. So, I consider it ouito impossible thet .-.enrol went to Pfrnncn-
atiel. I turned tu Koazel bcccuao I knew either from Hlnmlcr hi.-.self,

.r fror. fiascher or Severs, ! don't know, tfcr.t t secret hcbillti-tlon was
doBircd, red in order t- clore that uc when I visited the Reich Hcscprch
Council I rent t j ‘'rofuss-r r.onzel, but not in fclo ernreity tc hend of
tho nugln* c. .lttoo cf tho Reich Reto/rch Council tut aonsol w,.r rice
n chief cf the Office for Science in the Mniatry of Culture. I could
;et tho best information fr-r. hin tut I do not believe th*t consol did
mythic* in this nr.ttor.

k* bell now, this oecrot thesis which concerned Reechor's work rt
Dfchnu, uc-n which ho v: s to br«i hit receiving his university

locturcr'f - .siti„a -r title - did you aee that sccrot thssis arior to
the ti o It wrs submitted t- tho university? rid you sec it?

a. f.csekwr oont the docu.cnt to .:o na.*. rskod o to help hie with
the hntilitfetion. I rocoivcd it‘by nnil, • loolcod through it, I rcncr.bcr
that, rr.4 it hed ouitc p nuiter of chrrts cr.d tnblcs. I did not read it.
Chen I wr^ti to Pfnnccnstiol but I cannot toll you whether I sent thin
document to- Pfcnncnstiel -r wfaoth.r I -.oroly incuirod by nnil without
oorhot* fiendin* tho document rl-n . I ernnot toll you. All I rener-ber
it that Pfonnonatlel refused end I b-iivv-. thrt ie in tc.-.o doonent
w ich hrs boon submitted during the c um of this triel.

v The document has n-t yet teen submitted; however, we have it rad
- "ill sh w it t'j ycu in r .:v.iont. Didn't you knew tho tv^o of work
aracker vps diin.; after you had scon this thesis?

a. 1*-, I cannot tell ycu the title end it ie not true that I rep.d
it. : ceid ex resely thet I did not rerd it. If I hed reed it I v;uld


Court So. 1

kC Ilrr v7-iw-I9-3-S£k-^oehen (In*. V nSch'cc)


be ,;lcd t. tell ycu the title end the contents because that would not be
any thin,' punishable if I hear eubseouently about such scientific ex-ori-
ntnte that valuable results night be expected for future research.

I should like to enohatize once ore that I was n:t Hr. Haecher's
so-called habilltatioa profess.r; I ves -croly asked to negotiate- f-r hin.
*f I had been fcis habilltatlon irofcssor, I vould hevo had to study axd
Judge the thesis In detail and then turn It in to the faculty end several
other nrofessor• vould also hero to deal with it and

give their opinion.

tv D.ct.r, I rls- recall y-u etetod in direct «xn:lention that «n
Batcher submitted the thesis to yjur -ffice that you had a specialist in
your office chock it over.

A. So, that is e uistoko on your oart. There ves no specialist in
ay office.

<v Novt Toct-r, y.u vero t- intercede for Rnechor vith ^rofcssw
rfnnnonotiel at xarbur,* University. Do you ncan to toll no you vould
attend t'o intercede for another nan so as to oavo the wy for hin
receiving the title "University Lecturer" without a.caurlr.tixv: yourself
vith his ibility and without ccouaintlng y-uroolf with hlo thesis? U culd
y-u roc: i .end a ucn to another :.an vith'ut knowing whether ho vac fully
ouolified to hold down that Job 7

A. I nusc inj‘ the following. It vib not py duty t- take caro of
Letcher's habilitati.n. I vts ercly asked to look for a :r'.fci»Oor wh -
vould toko charge f this. It would have been tho business ,f this
nr .foes -r, aa I often s'-id, t-o study Ihc thesis thor ughly.

Inrsnuch ps this vsi a secret th.sis and ycu had it in your hands,
didn’t the hur.rn elouent of curiosity bother y u a little V find ut
vhnt it v: a eb .ut?

A. If I hay say s .nothin.* ab ut thit, I vas well kr. vr. ns never
bolr. • curi*.us and =y duties were s; extensive that I hed no intorcst in
'culla vith things that did sot concern it directly. I err. assure you
■ t dir.ntly.


1:762


Court So. 1

20 «r *7-A-l9-4--2H-Keefcan (1st. Vc-nSckoun)

v Ve viil nov refer to Document SO-1C57, vhick is to be .ffered
f r identification re Prosecution exhibit -i6S. Bow this document is
hoe dir.’ by the cteti scry of Dr r S lg aond Reseller, Beehau 3-K, IB Sov ea¬
ter 1943*, addressed to University rr.fese.r rfannenctiel, SS-Otcrsturn-
bannfuehrer, Xrriur,;, Hygienic Institute ,-f the University:

■Beer Professor,

"I ves inf -mod by the Deputy Belch Chief of Physicians, SA-Grucoen-
fUchrer Pr-f. Dr. Slu.c, vith vhea I ea working together, that he hns
cunt you .y pT' batlcnarjr treatise scnc tine r,;o.

""hie vpy had to be trices eir.co the Rcichrfuehror-SS hrs ordered
that tho trertioe vill te treated as too secret. C'.neeouently, I vos
not alloyed to hand you ver the treatise per* nelly. Therefore I bo#:
your »rd#n for having teken this voy. Kay I respectfully ask you, derr
orofoseor, vhen I could Possibly ccc yon fer i conversation ro/rardlnr tho
fornai adaitcior..

"At the sane tiao I would like to ask you whether you arc still inter¬
ested in oxnori -oats to eotrblieh increasing hl*h altitude resistance
ty administration >f vitaMns. In tho offiroatlvc I vould resncctfully
nok you to ho kind er.tu.-h t o ooly to the rrooidont of the Reich Research
C >uncil, chief -f the : ana-: in,; advisory b.crd, SS-Star.dortenfuchror
Sievors, 2eriin-Stt f ;llt2. Gruenwldstrrso 36. f r a portable lov-presBuro
cna'itor -f the Luftv.-ffo f ,r -ur oxoerinuntc. I discussed such cjr-.eri-
ner.to vith thu RoichEfuuhrer-SS .n 27 Oct .t«-r 19-3 rr.d he r-CToed fully
thrt such experiments could be c-nducted here. I a., in a cood position
to co rdinctc such invest lotions vith ny nrcrest v rk. I be#: to ask you
respectfully, dear nrofoss'-r, t. let r.u have y ur ro-ly at y ur convenience.
Hell hitler."

And tho signature Raschor.


Ifcrch 20-..-IK-2G-1-. tty (In:, vca Schccn)

Court, Sc. I

lien, Sector, is i: net clear frea this document thrt ycu net only
su'mitte d Irscher's ?r:' aticr.ary tre-.ti-s : .r.fesscr i frnnenstiel, tut in
ndliticn ther-tc hcscher states that he ms inferood 'y ycu, "S..-Gruppcnfucrer
3r. Bl:m«, fit:. uh a I is . ndr, tc -^th-r,” that he has s«-nt th« treatise,
h'cw this ah: ,3 a pr~tty dese .-ssccinti n ' ctwetn y u -nd huschor, icean't it?

.. , it r.just t I h ve escri' ol ia t. y u. It wp.s no different.

This document dees net in any way refute what I hr.vc told ycu. I said
HiBtlcr naked ac t. hcl] I said that I went tc Ifonnonstiol. I

telievo in the preliminary intern. ~i*ti i n I tell ycu why it was I f.-nncnstiol
th*t I went tc, that that w-s due tc a coincidence, that in JocaaKr 1942
I di-ve I act : fannenstid cn the wry U. Lea) er', end that was why I

ve ‘t. octuso he nza a hi h SS officer. He was

r. SS-Strnl'rtonfuehiv: , I lievo, p rh:;s ev.r. O'trtaehrer, at lor.st in the
renk f a C-i.nel ir th US .rry. He ws university professor, and ho
soused t V . th- a: at suite Me person, ml I did net knew, as 1 learned
later, th .-1 I.-.acher had had somethin tc 1 . with hia ’ eferc. I did net know
that, .r.d this document in no way rotates wh't I said truthfully, that I
’.i rut know a’ .at the c;:.t r.e? •' the thesis ' ec .use I actually did not

read it. It could h-v n .. entirely different suijeot.

I think that hen !urin th. tri-1, unless I rim quite mistaken, ether
witneafiec i, v- tclkod r ut this hali-itatien f has ehor. I think that
Oeh-rdt a;x-kj t i it, th t I ra«ihcr s;ck. tc hia a'cut hcillitaticn in the
our lc'l li-1 1 . In the e iredn i» scher acid te me thrt he wanted tc
qualify a lecturer in th. field of lc: J c illation; rn:l then I think
in acme c her ccnn.etin r .tecusent was su'oitted here, * letter cr seme

euch thin , in ihici xch r :r Sievera c.._ lninei 3.3e-hc\.. One had tc

•

e'i .-te - Cert- in su Jeet. Z c n't s-;- exactly , 1 ut nyi.ew what I h ve testi¬
fied is the truth.

' tell, I t. rut cin tc ar uc a cut what the su Jeet of this treatise
•■3. It i3 perfectly c. vicus fr^n this letter that it wrs rn the hi -h-
■Ititudo or ire.si n , whichev.r it may hrv. ’ .en, and net specific. 1 .

• u ht y u would kr.jr,. lut new hero is ■’nether wjerticn I h-vc tc ask ycu

4751i


:: rch 2C-,.-:.K-2C-2-.ytv>- (la*-. ver. Screen)
Court Sc. I


ir. ccnnocticn with this dcosent, teeter. leu stated in iroct extinction
thr.t in th^ acich Lose:rch Council nothin cri dneted fren the i._ich
kcsc-rch C.uncil, thr.t is, the i.cich ht3».rxch Council wos merely nn cr*rniza-
ticr. which h- i severe! pleni. ctcnti ri.s, end the plenipotentiaries cri -incite,
in rose--rch. Is that ri ht?

.. I sorry, ut I <1 n't quite understand. The hoich hesenreh Council
h- the principal duty .f dcrlin with research. I d;r.'t quito understand —

C» ’..oil, then —

i. — wh-t I herx. in th- translation here.

r . «-tll, then, if th-ir principal duty was concemin reserreh, then
thea. .. tt-rs ccncerain rc-vnin th t »;r. "ssi nod to h-.acher on that
“«8i r-u.r.t eh .t th hcdchsf rschun-srat with ycur none "..erked on by
Diene" — rxsune : r .. i nt that th t was true, that y u lid work cn that
experiment, whe :i in-ted th-.t r.ssi wacnt? *h. -a do that as si rua.nt in
the I.eichsferschun sr:t?

.. The cri ir.-t.r f th- roae-rch sri na,nt is estrl lishe-1 Ly documents.
It v.'o ivun y HLsalor. l.asch-r cculh;v- c-nductod hio rc-vrx.ain*
experiment with.ut any c nnecti n with the ivdcJ • incil.

understand no, Sector. 1 U icn*t . Just a

moment. o_ Document j; . :;o-690 that w.. h. ve tne over s • tinoe, you
h'.v- list 1 th i. f.ur nasi iraents. Thr.- cf the assi nrv-nta nru in connec¬
tion with i l-_ ic 1 warf .re, r. ’ t»; ci th-:. which you deny rs h-vin- boon
r-Di nvl t; y u Wwr. one * s with Mirth's -ctivitius and the ether conccrn-
ir. hrscher's activities; no?, r.h. ri in t.s t; cc cssi n.-.-nts en that
.-asi M .■ l is t J wich h^r . rch C uacil y , IK’- Himmler. V.hc

.ut these nasi no-nts or. thr.t sheet an.: sent it to y.u?

*

i. You ne'r. this : ap-r th t s sh xn t. nc little while a-o?

f . Yes.

.. Th-t was It a the huich Lesorreh Council, ocurao.

Ye 3 . '..ell, new, who ct .rair.-s ;.h t Sics,. ill work cn, whnt
- u-r ruch --ill work nhat H.ar.dl 3-r rill rk n, :r John dee will werk
..t..rrir„J thr t ir. the :.»ich i.cSv rch Council?


5 tty (1%. Von Setecn)


z~zzr.z'-?zzr~'~-*~

I Dover km > , d ‘ c •» lotot cart,

- - - of ere, T t -„ th. t cm, in ccpUoit,. I * n , t * n0 „.

' ruch Tt 7’ ' 3aiT ““ S C ’ '' 1CUalJ ' 1 “* -««*■ « Scuor-
>r ' ;°“- "  ette “*« r *c Kdohafor.chunrarrt.

4. IL .

_ r ; ;■^ ^ *" rf *» — » « C„ the

■

,„i a3 r .' . 1 r * 2 ° rn £nl * V UU ,CU " llh ^Udatgr tha-t mi the

CT 7 nM rM u - -• - —-

-n L kncn thw a-n.

s U. IX « H^unu-a,- W th. «„ thut a

'." Ui ” ' I'* r '‘ r r "“« h » ^ for sur.-orv '

.. " ««* *-« ---• Ufa, m ...

77 ■ ^ -—— - ** s , ucrlruoh ln

tun, r .. rt tc? I;i w ?rc3l ;ua c „ ., - .

u ,. . B “ ScuvAnic* ln turn rope,*

' th - .rcsHtoal c.uncil?

- Hi net quit, un'-rstuv: this,

■ HI, *ctcr, option tfct „ Kcrc

-- * . ,,3


rch 2C-..-:K-2G~--.utty (Int. von Schoen)
Court lie. i


cr rticul : rest: rch scientists to a he- jo -ssi n»' tfc.se- tasks reported
t. you r.s lonirotenti.ry . Ihcn ycu said that ycu in turn lid net report
to th< l.-ich . s.arch Council; there was n_t siy such ,:l-ce tc report tc,
th t they i. hav. .etin s cf the prcsidual council et various intervals,
end th’t you wcul! cvdtc rep rts at those noctir. s, ut nc’.ciy Ictherod tc
rttend the acctin s -Cause they acre 'll lisint.roste and that tho cnly
person ycu reported tc or h\: uty t naann Soot •.

Sen, is that ri ht? Did I uw-erst&ni y.u clearly?

.. Hr. Y^u did net understand ac quite. . orhr.-s I did net speak
oc: .sc th.-.t you ceul: uni crstand _-.e. It wes like this: tho

ann who received ft rose rch aasi r.a-nt Jr-: t rop.rt U the her.! cf his
specialist ier rtoent (Prohspcrteiloiter) every throo months or every six
• . . 4iti ry or the he.-! f tho spodcl department sent —

0

1 clievc it was o\vrj six -oaths — re. .rt on the whole fi -Id cf research

^ -

tc th i.cich Kose rch C.uncil, t: the ad’ress f the her’ of the mana-ina
c ordttoo, Hu had tho re, rts fr . th. he-is f tho vcrl us departments
hut tii!s «-3 prlnlod in the ,.oich inntin Office. 1 ’ Oiovo
it Wa kept t e; suorot then it wj sent out. It war sent tc Gcorirv,

.•i • uncll, to -ll th. plenipcttntiorio?
: • nci 8 Ul t W -1' - i: t-r, 8t0 l. That
ht.c the rep rtin mil a convince*, that the .uiericans rwst hav. at.no cf
these r-.-rts. BCQ3 O' thJB Were sent .ut thnt then, cm be nc que3tlcn

tfcrt all of them havin lee., .-str.y. !.

lull, then you wcul ’ ..illin- t: stt,.lcUr, th t any as si nr lent
nr ’L on the 1 dir If _f th- ..eich rch Council, t!mt v.luminous reports
BvUll h v. I con sent cut o th v-rf ui 1- th t y u oentigDOd.

.. !.'.t fr the in'ivi .u.*l ha ! of the 3 . eci-lizod iepartnont (F.achs-
-rteileit .r) ut the c il -1 re; :rt el the : -ich hes. rch Council, was sent
nuaop ... • - - - ■ - ■ uncil, l sent

it, rl all th* ethers sent theirs .. rts u the same jOaco,
a-.J the nwt *uacnt 3ut up ut. :rt which was uni in red and was printed as


i •


Strch 2CKx-EK-20-S-i«tty *cn Schc«)

Ccurt He. 1


A

tc. seer-'- in the s -ich,. rir.tin Orric- end th-n s.r.t cut.

'HE .UrSL^ri: Tn- Tri’ und rill nc* r-ccss until nine-thirty c’dcck

tccxrrcx a: min - .

(Th. Tri' 't .'I edjeurned until 21 Jfcrch 1947 ’ <- 0930 h-ur3.)


Roll 6
Target 2

Volume 14

Mar. 21-28, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT of al
VOLUME 14


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


21-28 March 1947 pp. 4789-5197


Official transcript .f ti c -ceric n Millt .ry
Tribunal I In tho :...tter cf tl.o Unite* Statoe
c.r *ticrlca, chainst Karl 3randt, et al,
defendants, tit tin; r.t I'um'Krs, «cr any, on
21 Hard 1§47,0930, Ju s tico Bor.lc pr-ndin,".

E „ . nsr.-Xj Persons in tl.o ccurt rcon v ill plor.se find
tholr soc.tc.

Ho I* .orra’-'lo, tl.o Julios of Military tribunal I.

::ilitf.ry Tribunal I is nc\7 in sossicn. Qa'. sava tl.o
gnito States of •• jrlcn rad tl le 1 . r-.*'le Tribunal,
n.cr. will bo or'-r in tho c urtr:tr.i,

'3S l-.lESIoEM?: • r. KaraU.1, : u ascertain that tho dofon-
h.nto ;r r.ll present In-ccurt.

r. . : y it plot.so y vr * r. r, - 11 b.dondttlfcs . ro

procont in c< urt with tho oxcopticn of tho Eofondrat Obor-
' user, sont ’.uc to iiinoss.

z~ JiSr.IDSyT: *ko w 0 crot;.ry-Ounuiv.l will no'xo •' r tl.o
reC !»’ tlo yroaenco cf r.ll tl.o defendants in court nave
tl.o hofondrat Oborheueor, a'sunt on r.cc .unt cf illness pur¬
suant t. oxcuco by tl.o Tribunal,
unsol -.y procood.

w.J. r.vdd:c:iM:r (Ceunaol for tie b of On d: Jit bracl:): !r.

» •

rrosilont, in r. ;rco:.io::t with tie pr. soctui n and colloac-
uo, *>r. Ccutor, I:, sic fr two lir.utcc . f j ur afctonti r.

o defence Ins c. c od d in findi: tie filii "Ich K3 *o
r.n" (I accuse). This irrnln;* r.t 9:30 ttoro will bo r. tost
fI'- . -ft r tl ..t will *. discuoaod what tocl:-

ns rj*G nocorr .ry t pr : ert tills ovldonco,
^ I .sir t: .A D of on..ant Vikter dr cl: bo excused fren the,


ssi^r. tlis ::jmin- and that lx bo permit ted tr at ton*, tho

trial run/f /is filn.

'

s-it’i/j• T: Eo c urt hr.vino K.-rd the ccunsul fer tho
Dufon .ant brack, a request that ho bo oxcusod — was tl .t

1x769


21 ’!r.r 47— Il-S* -l-l-rostcr-lnt :Vcr-fc' cn
3rin& Uc, 1


21 r-.r G7-H-S -1-2-Fcstor - Hit: VcnScfcon
Court HO. 1


oxcueod tor tMfi ncroins ct '- 1 7?

DR. FROESCIFiJIH: Yos, *dr. Pruoi.ont.

TO iCSSIL >Ts - o Dafonfleat Vik r 3n c!r nr.y * er.cua-
od frcn ctfconilcnoo bofcro'tfco Tribunal tMe rrming pur-.

SUCCt ter oqUuSt ur. .0 to t o In Open 803Ci’ r. 'V

1 is ccunsol.

.jR. PR0ESC12I/JH s X thenk you, ! r. Prosidont.

KURT HLO!C - RESUl^H)

CROSS BJWIlhTlON (Continued)

:*u. HARDY:

0. Hew, Doctor, I do not Intond to dolvo into tho quenticn
of ti e tuborcul..r Pcloa to r.ny Croat oxtont, rn,\ I do wish
Co -3r.il ycur ettontien to Docu? ont Kuubor 110-250, w! ich m.o
proaocutlcn JSxkiMt Ho. 203, Ich is contain* in Docanont
KutfcOT 7 on PC^O 11. ©tl: *■ letter to Groicor.

• w, in this lott r ia r. solution rf the tu' orculrr Jelo
problon, and you sot forth tl roe prep, ar.lc; no, apociel
tr - t lit (f n-. boh r-lv:v) of I « • ri-aly 111 P«•
twe, root ri" rcua Isolate! n f «0 ot rcri uoly ill por-
• , ; nr.'or tliroo, croati* n of roaorvr.ti n for r.11

-i pr.ttionta. Kow, vill you *o>y»lr.in tc the TriMunr.l ri-. t the
Urtt nontod,r.* r, solution of this problon w.a, vhr.t «r.s the
* infconticn of tio special tr rt;;ont f tl-o aori«uel; ill
pora- nc, nun* or one?

A. x v.c.vo r.lro:.ly at .to*, and *oliovo I proved, I nov. r l r.d
hi- nny such intention, wrs Greiaor-a intention ccnfim-

od by hii-Oor , end I prevented it. Proper ti-ns w^ror-do,

:r l , -id not X rtioipr.to in such propnret-

ions. Bov Greisor rnd lU«fllor prrp<*eod to do t: is I do not
Jmov nnd Gruisor -id net toll no unytlin.: jVut it. ’.hon I
lonmocl . *'rut ri • l«r's order I cr.t to a cu Groisor m 1
pointed cut tc lia t'tt InpcasiNlo sue*, r. project «r.s nnd


u-90


21 "m* /7-::-r.-l-3-"c£tcr-Ir-t; YonSchon .

C urt ro. X


eiC-ostcC r. decent liuer.no eel uticn rad discussed It with
hlr . .fer.fc Grois^r's i’or.s .bcut t: o technical lot ils w oro,

I c.nn-t tell yeu, ho ’idn't toll t:o.

3c lie vo cone . 11 ever that boferoj -Veter. fa* I wa
is in ; ur lottor you st.-.to tl oso throe nothods,
three vnye oc bo tcicon into 'ccnsiuorr.t; n. r.v, ti.o first
voy r.-.c Bpooir.X tl f -bo Seri Ucly ill persons.

,-ould tftu-.t -»c.n outricht extor inr.ticn cf all ti e Tj Pries
-t woru considorod tc bo in c. seri ns ccnditi n?

... Tkis expression "siocir.l troatoent" ccncs tror. drolaor.
It would 1 -vo noont the IrlllinG cf those incurably nick Pcloo
-. hero did you hear tlio nrr.o “cn'.or ‘d rndluni- for the fir

ct tiro?

■ ... I err. 1 1 toll you oxr.ctly. I vculd cssurx* tfcr.t I hoard
this expressionfron Oroicor fer the first tino.
n, Y u never hoar, it in rjiy t: cr crr.r.octlcr.?

... I oentt toll v v. itbor : over he : it • • <•*

crnnoction. In any or.so, I nover in :.y lifo h-d any part in
: tr r p^ens of tc-c Hod * - *o: dZttCSxiaSi
a. ..s s' n t.B you hoard tl o nerd “cr. or^fcandluns 7 ™

irliodic.toly rer.iizo wlV.t it ;»nnfc?

.t tl is ncixmt, i oamc t t.ll you, lxv in .. disouss-

n in 19-1C, that is almost five years r.jo, ny roarticn van
in -ut: il tr _n;* specific exproosien . 1 at would ‘ c .'.skin;;
tec nuch cf ny rncory if I an to answer tl ..t trvttfully

. .>

n p O 12, * 'or 7,

- cu;.o. t -:0 25C, y u str.to, after the first p: po, olicitin .-

tho pr-’lort, “Sunber f rors, Awrcvlcris, in t/o Gr.u.

her, v

:: T rofero , scfiotl inc sic rust o 'one seen, One r.a:rt
■ aoi.de do - rt offici-rt way in.v! cl this cm c dor.o.


u791


21 ::* r - 7 -~-s

C- urt i* -. -


--r a : r - ---: •


ft e„ rto tfcroo «yl to ' o token tat. ccndaeretlm." M* 7™
elicit t': — civet M« nX :• u e-. i.t:.:.v. nta m r.ci : ,--r.--
jrr.ph ta\ r.-y, "Ser the plrnnln-, ettont on mst ho paid

to ilfforont potato or rt the ;>r. ctic-.l, political

• pfeyscfcolocicr .1 nr.turo. u cnal..-ri - It uost eoVorly, tl-o
;•* ploct re.y weulf. *o tl-o followin'-: AMott - -y tl-o :-rx.y
•-r.tto.llon «o eculX ro-.cl tl.c entire pcpulnlcn, <w«i ;t&
Pclloh, f cl-c 0:.u, lorlnn the first 1.-.1T of M-iS. -a to the
0.rae, the tror t -nt ml loolr.ttan lo to 'c prepare’. .»’■
cr.rr'lo *. cut o.cc-nltay t- ti e ro vl tl nr of t»-.,rc»l. da re¬
lief. r.l r.tcly 55,000 lea who eve Incur.-->lo end in¬
fectious vclll ho speclt-ly troeto . r.H tl.or ’-llah e.n-
- V tiv c vlll" o rtf Jeet.-. tc an cwpv. -*« ««« ln * !or
tcn-.Ce then fer work -nf. tenV-M tlolr cousin- contc C lon.“

- V, i u offer tc :.o-, 5- « -rl* v: t.l, « b tie
pui-p- so -f this letter v .a to prov.nt tie or.tcmln. tlon
of the tu’ croul .r roles, ttut lr.n-u -c tint I Just roi.’.

■ unis pretty Joelslvo, cl r. '• •• nd tc » no If

. Is pice tc r.veifl tho ox tor.vtac.ti n. X'-u et-. t th t t!-o
r xlnctelr 55,000 roles who eve Incur: Me and Infectious
, 111 - e specially tveato . : i : u * « 6 J r '" : ' °*

ue r?

. . r Clio VO tfrr.t in tie- Oiroct or. iw.ti-n I ^presood
nycolX yarv cio rl;* sn.l vory unoquiv cr.liy - n t:.lc p in* .

If u r . .v:.- ate - ser.tonco froUuy letter tfcicfc I -ct-
11,. ly VT> to, r) ick is tc m


U?92


21 ~ V *7-1-2-1-12 .-F«s ter (let. 7-cSch ca)


of c toxt. thou. -i c.uri»j * o rs n vk he* = 4 read «01 of this
letter sight  tke inprecion that I -.cruelly v ulc have proved
such t ill’ll* I eir.l*. thrt «SA.aa vh. h.:.f vk- '-ct of c,_
s -ot such an 1 ore salon. Fat"in :* direct cxnr.ir ftion I have, Plained
thtt it took ^ days to vrit. this letter, tv fi.^e «* vhet successful
. ice I v;uld hrve tv trko in .rdcrw ur«Vvr.t this crine. I discussed
uctics with Professor CUfclder and rise vith Dr. Sander • r. - ! cc/t
y.ar xrd-n - Gundcrurnn. I hr.d to consider the r.entclity of the ->ccolc
ic ,or«r, end even t*cy I consider it thrt it would hnve been hv)loo.
for .a t; try at the tL.e. -ftrt is e crine; thrt is out of the suction/
: fcnvo elrerdy said thr.t the si olest thin,; i or at would h^vo teen
to spy this, thrt letter would hnve trken five rinutes to write. I hnvo
rise oxoleined thrt the sittiost thin f^r :c would have teen to take
.• 1 . W rtunitr t rod -n fr,i rjr office. Mit I .*.v rented you that in
dlacusoi:^: this nrobl*: I pointed out ouitu clcrrly that ir. each n cose
tho frtc f these tucorculcr Pole, veuli hnre bea. scrlcd, thne lo. I
don't knw who oloo would have prevented this rdc fr-M Ki^Ur. That
would hnve been the si/.olost thin.; f-a -» to do at tho tins. Tho result
—id have boon the following 40,000 ?.loo would have boon klll-d. I
ht ever, hnve been put in a concentration cenu. In an." c« -o. ' would
ntt .it here today for r crinc which ! neither planned nor ure^rod but
which I definitely crovcntcd. a. Hirer's answer to letter sh
suite clearl;.-; ond that the trctics which I toe* had 1<X* ouccec. should
be clear fr-n Hiaalcr's letter, who accented sy cu,vosti.n to set uo a
sneciel tuberculosis settl«=ent - reservation - and oven to uto it for


propo.jr.da pur'occa.

^ Sow. this SK.-.0 document. the last -vrn^rsnh on ne 12 of the
..cu_ent took. ;-ai state, 'There car. be no d ubt t. . intended womans
tciw the - st .L-nlo rnd r,.t radical solution. If absolute secrecy
err. be rubr;—teed, ril scrunlc readies -f -hot nr.Varc could be nver-


cvr.e, but

Tor,


I c-csider si nly nainteinin.- secrecy irascible."
doctor, you stated there that there cmld be no doubt rb ut


Court Sc. 1

21 Aer 47-i:-2-2-ZE*-?-ster (I:.t. YucScfcc.es)

the intended trcTa: ex' oxter .irjtl^a heir.- the nest e! ;le rad radical
solution if "ts-luto secrecy c uld le .pmrrnteed. S v, wasn't the elor.ont
of secrecy the only thiar that ccacerncd y u?

A. S;, let refer y-u to'-ur discussion in the prelininrry later-

•

reaction, and specifically t. the interrelation vr.ich I hod *'ith you after
I had already leer. ,:ivea the ladictr.ont, md rt vhich I vrs net even
warned that I wo act allied t- testify without hevi&r .jy defense counsel
present. I did x.ot hove any levy or yet rt that tire. At the tine I hrvo
rv.et willingly testified rad y.u vill c nfim thrt you asked rie soveral
Questions rad thrt the -cur- ow ■.! those o-esti-ae v-rs t: .tot a state-.eat
fron uc; f-r cxo’.olo, ns y u t o': it r.^v in the fern of r cuosticn. Today
I can only repeat vhrt I cr.ld clerrly rt thrt tine, thrt tho notivesof
qy action rxd ny ck’lco -f vctics tow.rd K larger -ere exclusively honed,
oa orinclnlco ef hu-raity rad ;:edic.*l ethics.

0

I rc-er t thrt hero orjrccsly ho coast it Is true and it cor.forno with
ay lnr.cn.tot .'ttitudes tcvrr'. such Plrnc. Porhnpt la this ccnnoctlon I
nay rise refer to ao point in ay d.ireot uxrainnti&n. I v*o not only
tho one vfeo provoated tho iurd«.r of these %0,0C0 Polos tut it vro also
thanks to so that the lntvatl.n ws not roeliroi thrt tho Polish lntolli-
•,-ontsir wore to bo oliuinoted by sterilisation. Ir.c thinking or. tho
latter point is txsci -a tho cr jC aorrl principles ns ay action in thio
Case. I vrs interacted in proventlxn: the olr.r. at any cost, thrt la why
I chooo this trctic rs tho aly possible -no. That theso tactics vero
rifyh.t is proved t: tho 10C£ success rod that i* tho important thin*.

C* Tou ca t. say in connection with this nrintAininf socrecy,

"Whet I c-.;rider oiaply aeiattiai&s secrecy is inuoscitle", and your
non Sentence on top i nr. » 1 ?, •Sxpcrioaccs taui^.t us thr.t this rs-
oumtion is true." ’-hit sr*ori.ac« is that, doct r?

A. If I refer to a cricnce here, then that is based on tho infor-
tioa which I .;st fr.r. the fcrei r ?i rrdio. If «hea listening tc foreign
broadcasts one is ouit. : st.niched, that -thor ccnu.trit6 knew hundred tines
nore thra vc did .urr-olvec, ut •'ill you : 1 c-se in this connection perr.it

U79h


Court So. 1

21 Apt 47-s<-2-2-ZSi-ro6tcr (Int. 7cnSchocn)


ze briefly to refer to i ainilor epee.

1 ^. JuEt a cccont, doctor. I an .;oing to refer to another sentence
of the bp-.o ■acro^p.ok rnd you nay answer it nil ct one tine. You state
that experience hta tnu.:ht thc.t this assumption is true, thpt secrecy
c.uld not bo maintained. Thon in the sene nara^ra-ah, in the middle of
the paragraph, y-u state th--- ..o-thcncsir -ro.-ram - trikin- of the rainnor
in which this vc.- done pnd which -isthV.o verc uccd. Sow, it Been* free
that lcr.Rurco thrt yeu vere -uitc fcmili-r vith the activities concerned
in the cuthenrBir iro n . -u knew that th-ae owcrets leaked cut or.d
y u were ferrin* thrt the o.urotc v.uic Urk out If you carried cut such

a

or. extermination or. rr«:i. 1 ' - you >y aovor.

A. No, thie deduction of ycuro la n.t ouite rL-ht. You Just cold
sore jT lesa 6hct I hud ien.-f tho nroceduro of the cuthrnnaia


action, ^nfortunrtely, I ha n- kn-wloiLjc of it. Thoee ore thiroro
whicl. I Juot li'eo tv- ry c-hcr ^r v r. learned by ru-.ore without having any

e

oract r:.d fflciil inf-r- li n. at.' if : uce euthinnoia rs p cowjprieon
hero, I did oo In -rdcr to •jruvtnt Groioer'o pnd Et-ilcr'c nlan because
Oreioor end E in tier hod n. d.u’.t refilled ^ut reaction the euthnnoeic
pro,p:or. had brought f-rtn f.m the oocmlc. Ihrt ic vfey : referred, to on

e

wxaaplo of a cir.ilm nature which had has oaed r chart lino before, which
vns dealt vith not only by the Ger.-rn o-'io tut r.la- by the foreign
troodccetc.

^ 2:ct:r, But urn a fcymithetical situation. Assume the*, tho oxtor-

ninatlon ,i those 35.0CC lu:vrcul-r r.ie-c c-ttld krvo beer, ctrrie'd out

with absolute e«.cr-ey mi n lexica whatsoever. Ir. other words, the only

onoa vh. would hrvc -enow- ab.ut it v uld have coon Kirroler, Grcicor, end

yourself. Vouid y-u have ben on -sed to it then?

A. I cm eraser y-u cult, clearly. I »-suld never heve marticioated

•

in any such thin,:. I erid s- tcf.re and r believe conduct is p doctor
Is th-. test evidence thrt Bo.cn cri i; c.uld nit be .committed vith ny


ftssistnncc.


21 :-rch 17-M-..TT>-3-l-^lc.y (Ir.t. von Sohoer.)

Court Ko» 1

0 How* I ask 7=u a sin, Doctor, why ’d' you “rite this Laot cr.a-
on •,n-;o 12 "If absolute secrecy couTl bo unrantco! all scrubs r
cr-ios3 of shat nature ccul' bo ovorc-r-aj" was that purely a ’ofonsivs
arjuaont?

u It has nothin tc lo with .’ofenso, I 'll not have to .fefonrl vyr
than. I have to lofond rysdf to /ay. The entire text of rv 2 ttor was bui
up under •'o finite tactics, acccr’in- to only tactics rhich .lordso.' succ
I :± \ not refer tc hunanitcrion reasons but to the political factors an !
t'.wir inevitable consoquoncos, thj only on* which were of in 'rtanco to
Hinalcr,

?fcw lot's KOTO to another section of th. letter; pc :o lh of tho P
runt Book which is on s 5 of tha cri in l Oornon lottor there, Joctev
y. u o into the socon£ solution, you say another solution, that is the
- .nnu/raph on ,>n':u 1U of tlw In lish Jocujjnt BcOk. This will -j -
,;j -- o 5 of ttw ori Inal Genian, Do the inter, rotors have that? "Another
solution to he taken into consideration woul’. ho a strict isolation of
the inf jctu.us an' incum’.la consunptiv.s without exception in nursin';
ostc'-lishiionts. This (solution voul lo..* to the comparatively npi’ '»t
-r thu nano. ith th. ixjcossrry a "ition of iclish ’octors an‘ nur3os
Fjrsonnji th- chnrr.ctor o' a pure Ymth oa:^ 'oul 1 be seno hat rdti .ate ’
"jeplain that lan-un , D-ctor?

.. I will bo In * to. -I y u back to Uvj explanation which 1 !vn
already iven. It is orw rally knoim th t soricusly infect ' 3 ati.nts

isolate'.. The re at majority of tiw ‘.octrro in the -'orl ’ will no oubt
su. port opinion. This unfortunately not tho case in tu’x-rculo3is.
have boon ’.abates La all cour.trios aiidn tc create laws with provision,
i r isolation of severely infectious tuberculosis patients. This is th
ral .>oint of view of the hy lards to. I have taken into consi brntir,
hero, on-*, it is c woli knesr. fact, new known only to !octors but .'oil la
aeons l*-ynon, that homeless cases, an;’ thoao an. th; enos wo arc tclkin
about, fin’ it very unplicsant tc be isolate or hospitalize in lar o

-796


21 : torch li?-r>ATD-3-2-»Slcy (In*- von Schocn)

Court So, 1

itcls, oven in tho caso cf nor. infectious cases they ara :>ut in so.::
races whore rwople usually ’ie, an', not ccn_ out a-ain alive; an' hen
nor in this specific case, the nost serious eases -f tuberculosis are
isolated, Then those yc.tL.ms un'orstan'. an' so *o their relatives, what
their fa to is, an' nev in'ordcr to avoi ’ the fcclin- of hopelossnoss an!
;-.-vin; to ilo.


*


U797


21 . —h 1947 -1C-4-1-PK?- li-elr-n (Int. v n Schun)

. 1

I surest*.'. -h't this ~ It. should be decided an, then the®. v: 'le sh.a.1
h-v*. to be given the n-ccss ry c.lish nurs-s nl th. n.cesr ry d-ct-rs; then
; j-i’ in conclusion to this r blwa the- .nly right c-luti n, th. best solut?

to a. the. -st-.' lishcunt f - big uttlcaent r a reaurr.ti n, such os
is well known in Gorann on! foreign literature =n for which we ' exoplc®
ir. Genaeny, England ~n I believ- Holland.

r. Be thit *:a it my, D-ct.r; fr o wfiing this LtUr which you wrote to
Gr-isor, don't you think there is r. ...int tb t Kinder u n r.- *ir.- this let
w.uU hrvt reason to believe frun your langu- '.rv'. y.ur appr ■ eh th t you
won c npletuly in favor of th- oxtercir.tix. of the Polos, if it could h-r.
boon kept p. s.cret and th- /uohrer-fc-d n.vr v ~ it| now Hinder 1 a 'ttitu-O,
of tor re- 'i n- the let Ur th*t y.u wrote?

.. I do not beliove so, you nuat c.noidcr in r.-r to Judge r. question
r.« r a to road th. wn le letter. F.r ev-ry.n- ah knows con'it ion in Cor
~ t th't.tice, it ia quite o'.vi .us th.t I could n-t t he ny other tactics
if 1 wonted to b v. cucc-aa. I Xn.w auch .x a 1-. a fr n the rdlit ry si e, fi
y u c _ y yea and tten y 1 try to • o »ht ia really the right thin;; in order t
v i’. oppoaiti n p, rC then let the oiapltst n‘ vie Cento at views prevail* ..a
for thio pint jf.secrccy, I oh.-uid Uke to point 'Ut tht I h v. • difforw.
attitude thrn tr.‘t, fro. raplo, the u.JUty g-uloitor of liie'ord jnru in his
Utter to Heinrich Hiaalor f 24 Au ust, 1942; this letter is a *»t atoriliff
.f gypsioa, and tils letter shews clearly th*t tho G-uleiur v - n.t
t. this pirn, r. for that r-as.n he doo® not write, concurnii aecr-cy, m
th-t secrecy ia inoossiblo, but he writes 'ni I qu-te, it is * very brio:
suntunc., *U realise quite veil th t such a tfcura awst bo treated as r at
c cr-t of a st octree dangerousnosa. Y u any that is c-aothing entir ly
• rant; n.w oinco you are citing n ~r. cplo f.r the rot con jf clnrity, 1
o. y Iso give an oxtaoIu, Lt us ssuc- th-t we tr.. know «:ch othdr *t that
tine r.nd y.u sh-red ay of view n-* y u rejected such a thing, I w ul

h \*e toll', y.u .ut the ..It. nd 1 w.uld h'vo written you a letter t. tho
f 11.wing effect:

BBcar lx. K-r.y: Fimlor h‘s the foliaai n r >l«n «h*t is n nsenu, t> t


21 It rch 1947 -iS-4r*2-?XP-
G-urt ?»-<. 1


h'.n (Int. v n Schocn)


—

ia acquainted with the cortliti ns of the authorities in Goroony rn! with
c nsi oration of the ^ont-'.lity of th-su in power I hove n w written the lett-
to Heinrich Kinalcr 'r*I I h-pa I will h vc the necessary success with it."

I believe if we nor. rot o,>p.sinr -ach other hero as pr-s-cut-r - nd
-feadant, if wo »«.n. to -iscuu® th. case, trwn, after you h* "line, such
jTe‘t knowlcdyo of tho nature and th, thinking 'rrcoss f th. 1 - 'iri >ro .
elitios in Gcrorny at that tLao, th/t y .-u w.uld thor. holt! the s ou vie*., .'s I.
You w dd say,"Blotto, I say today it *“s the only way to pr-v-nt such n cr'
That is ny inion. Sir:

Then y-u offer s y_ur defense for the extorairrti n of th- tubercular
} lec, th t the reason for you writing this 1-tt.r was t- prevent any ouch
r-rr^a bcinr carried _ut; and y.u aft*, in substance f j>- that the reca-n
why y-u express— yourself in the c'nner you di , w s bocauco you f-lt that
it a" le a greater i. rossi,n Kinder th n if y u expressed .-ut-ri ht
p- siti >n to the ro i,r z; ic -h: t right?

... Yes, y-u tw- ex^r-cse ay point A view correctly. If I h t k-n
difi-rent point of view this Jrc-r jf Palish tubercular .r tie: tr could n-t
h‘ ve been pruvuntotl.

Q. Of c.urso, Rudolf Brandt says it was n t . re vented, ho'll o ,nt'

IjI fical warfare, Lector, Reich " rs.aal Goer inf.

Y u :n't think it ic noCess ry I ra- » answer-the Ir.f question?

Y.u ary newer; I said quuoti-n: Rudolf Brandt has testifio' that
F ies mr. exto mine ted; y^u h-.Vv n. kn.wle’ e f that?

I oh Ul-’ like to state that the testis ny .f ho' If Brandt is r. t tru.
:• 'a n .t up to cic to tor.r apart th- t-stia ny f :'x. Brandt; and I intent!
ally .i’nt hrv. cr. affidavit taken fr a F.u If Brandt to present it to the
Tribunal. It is n t necessary in this c's., for in the c.urs. A the trial i
will be proven ‘x-y.n’ ry* ’ t thrt the testf -. ny f hud If Pr.andt^lfa n^t
true -t ' 11 .

'. Doctor, that is up t. the Tribun'1 to d.ci’e.

... Very well.

i.eich il rch 11 G-.-ri:. in his capacity -s the ;resident of th- Reich
....-- .rch C-uncil -rd- y:u ^-nipjt- .ticry f bl l-.ic'l warfare; is th.t ri

L->99


21 • 1?17 -3-4-3-PKF- —-chan {Ine. v r. Scr.-cn)

. 1

... I - ill f-mul'tc it c-.r .fully. appointed ae »Untip tenti'.ry i r
cancer rus^rch -.r. with this .-ssipe-nt then- was connected, s a s-arct
assirs 3 fcni, the research a c ur.tvr _esur~s -r. biological » rf -.r--; tlrt io
the c-rrwct way.

Ml correct in r.ssu!iin&.that then y u carried on «>rir nts cn'.
research of biological r.rf r--j ;* u til it in the n- rv nn.: title -- pluni-
Uiotiary f r cancer research?

... I id net quite urxlerst nd that.

. Arc a; the t Gooring ; v- ;•-u U* > siti.n of pi- nti

for cancor reSerch ant'. . ttach-C thret • was tfc* secret -r xr jf rosearch
fer bij^L>t'ic L tmrdarej n-t whenever y-u trnspiret'. any business in y.ur
resc-rch for biol^ icol wtrfcru; y-u •i.’ it under the. r. ::e jf ,>loni‘/.t.nti r
f:r c: ncor research; what I an getting rt is that cancer research is con s
title f r Mol-.iic 1 u-rfrro activities?

«. Yea ‘r.: n ; 11 cancer r c-arch was under o-. I, ayself, h" w.rk-i' b-

that jn cancer res.rrch r. I eliove I can ex.-roso it u‘at cle* rly. Under
the f ira .plonipotonfcltry. f r cancer reSe rch there was t the roe tiae
c ncer re see rch going » as well - MAiglorl warfare rosoarch. 1 hf
.nly .ne letterhe“', ihlch seid pl-rl, tentirry f^r cancer res.-rch an* 2
used this letter hand f r all c~i,cer res- rch which "as under ae, -s well
-a f.r 11 >l.'ttic“ 1 r-se rch. I die* n *. h v any social lvttvrhe- ‘ f r
Ic 1 rcso r : : - ins the .ftter n>ot cl ? 2

q, ii, f^r this tir tint is the lu* 1 purpose .1 ernccr research and
i l.gic"l warfare yj>: set up .an instituti.n in Husaelstodt; is that ri

... It .j-,a under c.nstruction; it was n t finish. ', in Kossulstedt n»~r
? sen.

. In Nessulstedt near Posen?

: s, Uossolstc t ‘.5 ' village ;r .a su'xirb f ? sen; it bolo£s t- the
'irtrict .f ? >3«.n.

a. Did Schrcibor work with ;-.u there?

... No, n- work was ’.ne there.

Q. Yju never :i>' any w.rk then, -"t 11?

Ko x-rk at ?U, it was 1 possible. If I tell y u t

liSCO


21 - rck 1747 -*-c-4-?KP- liechnn (Ir.fc. v a. Schien)
Court 2. . 1


' ir.t ?-son thcro ware three hundred laborers still - . n th¬

ill .. ur'. n:t a single roan was ready to be us-d, tirt is th_ b-st r -f
thst no work rs den. in ? s-n.

Q. Did you set ?mrself up there in r.scn; il you h ve -any ific« -r
saintsin an office ther- y^urt-lf?

... In Hu3aolatedt near Posen y u a--n?

V. Yes.

I .id not h-vu an ffico there, I hr soouthing in Posen itself es
there was a sort A biological aor.il institute ther- -o lirg v.ith the
c-jbrttine of insect posts, which sas trying t. fin-: new cht.dc Is to era'-*
inject- posts Bn- than in the Pollfih - forcer ? llsh University f Poson,

I hr r .ae r on* f-r cy st tistical sasistn-ts, who evaluated the wo 11 kn •
cancer r_se rch. I h - no office in liessilitcdt * si’e ft.a adoinistrati n
let us say .f ~n "gricultur. nature, beer use t r. certain extent it ha.'
n t i. » t do with reoearch.

. Y.u ct-u that y-u did r.-t start any ex;verioentc -r bi-Ideal w.arlare
in y.ur inrtitutu n -'r Por-n?

... YeS.

C,. D n't you r.c 11 in y ir vr. D.cua*nt bttk on 22, which is the
Ustiinujr .r '.Mter Schrttibsr . tbs hu st:t.s in insw ‘ the

quootiun:

"K ;« do y-u ex. ldr. that the .Guram Hirh CxnecA did not carry -ut the
plans?"

Schroibor answers a.s f Llows:

•'The Hi-h C send probably did n-1 carry at the l'ns fori he f;lifting
r-ts r.: In hrrch 1915..."

That is y.ur first Dvcuc~.lt b..k, D.ct r; y u h vu it?

- *

... Teo, what page?

*. It i3 >'ce 22 of the English. It is Ki. 7, D.-cua-ont No. 7 in the

... Yes, I f ;und the u.cm-nt.

.. It is p 3 e f-ur f the ri irr.l which y-u have, it st'U3:

"The High 3 csrnd .rotably 'id not carry ..ut the pirns for the frllotiin
:.• s In Ifcrch L%5 Profoss r 31oa visit* -a ay If ice in t'.. Slit .


u301


21 r : 1947 —4-5-FK?- Ikehan (int. v n £cfe on)

4 -. 1

■;*j . Ho catio frca Posen, ••as very occitcl 'rr sake so v 1-xl -o hix. oncl .is

lw in th- in; xat .rics in E'chsonberg, s th't th.y c ,ui_ continue their

a rk tho^O. Ho tolc’ -e th't h- h - boon f :rce«. t.- lc'Ve his institute t

•

? -5vT. ' the advance f th. Ro-. «ray» th t h- h 'x-n cor^llc ' t. flco frxi
t.iv Institute, cn:’. th t U hrrt n;t evun '.v-n able blm it u-. H, s.oi:' ho
K’.a quite w rriod that the arronoucxnt for huarn ex.vrinonts ; hie ’-r- in
th -t institute .anti tfiich wore r-c ^nj- f .s such, ai^ht rocjgnizod by
th. Russians very -rally. Ho said ho hr..: trio, t h v. tho institute dostray
• - StuJr- bash, but th t this had not been possible and n w lx ske . .os. to
Sou ti it th't it. eight be -blu t.‘ continue t. * rk with hia l.guo culture a
. v. at the G'chsctfburf. D.ion this I told Hr. BLw thr.t the
Sachsonlurg had f.r a .ex iLti n.t ' o-n ur.d-r ay c^arnl, that I cju 1‘ at,
thorui ro, give hi-, thr.t .^raisai ,r., n' r lorr. ' him t. tho chiof of tho
:ht l-dic* 1 Scrvicu, Conor - . 1 burstabs'rxt Krn.-l.svr."

N-w,.Etoct r, Schrci’-cr ate.to a that you wer- oxcitc ;;hor. y u loft ? .-ion
•T.th't you could n-t c r.tirai. * ir n rk there n' you wore quite v rrie.'
r.r.'ut tho'Drrn^c.mr.ts y u h - . err do for hu.a r. <-x,»rirxntr and y u th.u ht it
ri ht 'x rscognisod by the Russians; why Hero y^u w .tried r'j-ut ou;h thin
s this. Doctor?

... Itn «tly. rogu t wh t I sol' in ay direct uxaainati n, 1 . ul. oujjoot
t • j, if y u n.t .olioVo t.\ t r. ».->rk tins *ctu lly fono thcro, th't. y^u
inquire A tho Polish Gov.rncxnt,. .'-a tfeun y u * ult' receive c.nfirvtix. th't
it *r.a n inatitutv, which ho® unfinirho , that n; w^rk was ov r Gone '.hero,
th t .< hlL‘. x the aia luBt or.' coaioat c.nfimrti^n f jy tostia ny.

y u ha.' ottcc: t-i to -x..rit~r.t r. huann ’.«oint3 r.t ?--3on hr.c! v u
r. t, cc r 'ir., t Schre-ioor's tosticr .-y?

. Vfcr.t Schroi or saya ia n t c'.ocioiv- i r lk; in Schroibur'a test! y I
-io 'y intu ut aoVural inr.ccur'.ciot. I.’j w rk was '.nv at i Bonj
; "x. Schroibor fijuxxJ X. this toatii.ny f his, I c # nn t tell y u n J

v. trio* t finf -an -x Lan ti-n f r it -ni f-ol th t this -x’l nation is
-r..-liev*bio. I sr.ii' too f-li 'ing in c :y iroct txa_-ir/.ti,n with r x rl.tr
* r.ta, I . .-liovc when ay 'of.ns. c uns_l .asku-' _-.o ab .ut .. ; nvvrc rijn
-th H i g i r J o r, I rail; •'KLxoler had asked -u t- r uco a .ir-aio arccine on I

U302


21 li'.rch 1917 -- - .iKh'n (Ir.* . v n ic;. -r.)

C. irt N . 1

as -r.'cr t gut suer. >1* z- v- :1 '">s t a n c rv.uct ux;urLsur.ts
r. hits' n juin.s. I sr-i.’ tr. r nt first it -3 latently!, -.ftcr >ttin : ; this
r--r fr .a H i. 'X .lxT tc 1- s-, .at than 1 tv.r I b ais ivir.es cat! ti.un
C-nscquor.tly no such ux uri--_:its 7 vi\. ur. :_rtnk>n.


- .


o*03


21 . or 17- —-$-1-5 "ty In*. v a Sc -r.)

c.-u.-t 1


4 'Jrx, didn't yea st in direct exsainatien that if ycu were
going tc c nduct :m*.a -r. ; rir_ .tc that it ic-uld avc been necessary tc
obtain tba approval cf Sebruibor?

,v Bo, that w-.s nrt what was said. I said that if Germany had
wanted tc sake -n offensive -r-var ti a f.r bi,h.-c.l warfare, this
cculd not have been d -no without callin - upon Schreibur as tho nan in
charge of cpiduaic control, ochreibcr -as the -an in G.rrany in whose
lands all tba thru.ds f cpid.ab) ecatr-1 ran together. That is what I
said, and th.n I went cn t z ./ tlrt neither Schreibor or any other cpi-
d nio rcaocrch nan ever ruceiv : ouch . i-wsearoh aaaignoent free nc.

Well, new, fleeter, i nr.ro rt t.. in y.«nr direct cxr.si:iaticn
that all of ycur activities :• t.«. -ctiviti s cf th. Buteabli it .r in
connection with this bi o.,t' • i rfur-. husir.-sa s allegedly cf a
defensive nature; tint is, t rooc :f your r search was to prepare

v res rt d t: bi gicol warfare. Now
what would b an*. differ-nco b .-tween dcf'.nsivc rcaoarch ar.d offensive
research in biclogioal wurf-r.?

Tix- ilff r.ncv Is sscntlal :i*/. Ycu nay b- sun. if I had
assign! ant :• - tfcw* t.' i it it i a biological offensive, I would
tw urviortekur. quito diff rent tiir.-a, and r.s Is -cm rally known and has
been shown by the v'.'.. xc s far, tu;\ - Id not have boon such negligence
la tho troataent of t:. wfccl. arcblcc. There a b-^n a great

dual iaor«. enorgy behind t. r, * re , t . a .a. inocrtancc which was given
to rocket rosc-.rc.. r tl: r i r.r pr*bl. c.

tf ell, now, " ct r, i. Ace vault ... .'£-1303 wt Ich is Pr socutior.
Exhibi * M . 325, y a ret- t. i .s c er. S.utcr refers tc as the file
• i i • .. I", t:. : c r r it states: - * :

"Especially Aa.ric -1’ ...v t c .tt eke’ sixrultanccusly with

different huflnn and an_ 1 disease agents ua well as »ith jlant parasites."

7 .r in that c nnoett a tl. .* d esn’t iniicat anything cf - defensive
r sur , -1 .s it, n ft. -brran ri ic? 2 -.'t u :.-r withe, thers?

•i It c.rtr. nl. . ’er ; cullar, but y*u =ist c'asidcr 1 had nc


wlodgc f - - - -.- I . act rticipatd in this session


21 '- r U7-U-i'^ -5-2-patty (Lit. von Screen)
C art Hr. 1


-r.is sossicn and the statement of r rcfesscr Schumann I learned about
cnly hero, and I have expressed =y opinion n the personality cf Pro-
fcoscr Schumann. I said that he ins net tc be taken seriously, that he
:~.s notorious for net even-be lie vine hinstlf what he said, and besides,
the- document which was f und in the possession cf Professor Kliewe shows
clearly that cnly dofensivt research was carried on.

3 “oil new, where it st.tos here in this document 1308 that "Pro¬
fessor BIoeuj suggests experiments :n human beings,’ 1 d y.u deny that you
over made such a suggestion?

a No, an. that is net forbidden either.

Q Sell, wore the so suggested experiments on y'ur part tc be taado
on Russian prisoners of war?

A Ho.

Q Voll, dc you knew that the —

A T hc dccum.cn*. v.ry cloarly says that I suggost-d that these experi¬
ments should bo c nduoted in the -ilit-ry icnl Academy. The unitary
ileal Aoadeny was Li Berlin, n t Li any ?risonor-or-*r oanp or con¬
centration comp.

4 Soil new, d: you know when you were fully j»ar of the fact that
the International llitary Tribunal fruni in its ,'u.i-T.cnt that experiments
vrere actually cirri'd ut Utzt tl~y i* re carried ut on Russian prisoners

!' nor and th^y very c ften or ved fatal? H. w dc ycu wont tills Tribunal
? believe tint you in yrar capacity os plenipotentiary f-r biclogiool wor-
far , hnvimr received this ccm-issi :n fr: = Gearing, really did n r t know
that these experiments were carried cut ar.i did not take part in them?

.. I do not want tt ~~k. the C art believ. anything, and I d not
r at to make .any false statement. f irot, I lenm_d c-f such thirds which
t. supp sed t‘ have happened only here in the prison when I read ti«o
'u'.~.nt cf the JJurnberg trial. Sec nd, 1 ernsider it quite impossible
* t such -xperiments .actually tc. k placo. That is what I can answer
- rly and truthfully, tut perhaps i may r> int cut in this connection
t I believe in the iiurnberg judgment there is sea-, mention cf nugust,

^3. Ferhaps y i might le k that up f;r me. I-don't have tnc judgment here

uQOp


1 r ia7---:iu»-5-3-Patty (Int. von Scfeocr.)
C art *'• 1


■ All right, ^oct.:r.

*> «r.i rirot pportonity for c:operation with the "Chraacht,
.rlth the Bliteabloi'—r Cccnittcv, was giver. =y by an-authoriiaticn froa
Ultol cn behalf cf (boring, and- that can b. proved that that was in .
..ugust, 191:3. That is at the sane tirj. wi_n these things arc supposed to
•vc happen.-:. For that rear nal a ! cauld net have had any shnro in
then, 'and if in the d cuncnts which are doubtless men.’ ny files in your
hands — if you will lock through then, y.:u will find this rd^r fraa
5-cring t- K.itcl, mi you will find a notation as t= when it -was sent :n


ta cc.

I ewe ny knowledge- abcut this sntt.r t ay ir.ti.rr *at r in July, 191 j5j
I n Hcidolberg. I rs in «oidclbor.’ for tw. weeks, and I talked tc the
English and tbs nncrican genticoen and ab ut all questions cf birlogical
mrf.ar alj day lent and a actir.cs into thu night. 3 was askud about
dovdopoents, and I t Id about this order frea Gearing tc Keitel which
K itcl passed on tc the .rersens conocrn* u, .nd x was told:

5 Wo will show you an rrdorj perhaps it is th< cno."

And 1 recognise J the ord_r and, th.rof r-, I raxnber the date
xactly. I think it to k two cv.aths. It w-.s dated Jun., and it to k
n until ..unist be ft re it g.t into aj* hands.

I think that I h/.ve proved wcll m enough tfv-t I c- uld have had nc thing
t ! with such thifw as ar«. stated in the .•urnlui- judgment

w«j3 l, :. x t <* - u aoaiiU-. ti-.at th. .ctivities which tc k placo
iv r. listed in th. "urnb.rr judgaent raop. n.,d -urin; the ti=e when y.u
ufc plenipotentiary f r bi 1 gic~.l w-.rf-.ri.? L- y u answer for ycur
r ra nsibility f r then?

“ I -ssune ?il res-'nsibility f.r things which happened :n ayf'-rdcrs
r undvr ay supervision, hut if a nan frru r.y office, for exaaplo, with.ut
-n-wledshould ceardt a taard.r, then it w-uldn’t b_ quite ri-ht if I
• * v..r t. c. reap nsibility for that.

.11 ti t, .*id you ever report t C £n ti that y u intended t cx-
•t n hurnn bcirys ir. y. ur institute near P-sen?

I nardly talked tc- hr. Conti. *hc relationship between Jr. C nti

I18O6


Z1 -r L7- -- .-.-5-U-Putty (Int. v:n Schcen)

0 rt :• . 1

ntf ac con fcc prrvcu was sc peer that wc hardly saw each other.

Q X. In .order to see if I car. refresh yoir racocry as to whether

r n: t you cv-r h;: discussicn with Dr. c nti ab at y or intention
t -Xpcrlnent r. hmoar. bcin^ct Pesun, I on going t. introduce Deauaent
. K0-3061 which till b- offered for idcntificati n -.3 sVaecution
Exhibit :: . Uoh. his, if the Tribunal . 1«. sc, is a penciled r.te nado
y Dr. C nti in his e ll here in Hurnber.; prior t his suicide last
v mber, th suicide n:tc that he 1-ft t tr. interrogator.

DR. SAOTBRi Ur. President, I bj-ct t tlx use f this document
it this tine. In December I enJe opplicati. n t/ use trv, sc-culled testonent
r the f naur R.ich Physicians 1 L-ader C-ati. Than I r ccivcd a dcclsi n

f the C urt n th 8th <f January, 191*7, which says that the Pr sccuti: n

•

inten > t cuc.tit this d curxnt hir.eelf. In par Tflph 2 it says that in
this c sc th. d cur.-nt aict be subdued twenty-f ur h urs bef re it is
reduced in crurt. I rust rely n this ruling f the C.urt, ind I, thcrc-
f r , tak the C mr' t rule that this <!■ cue. nt if it is t be. submitted

by the Pr sccuti n be subrltt d nly S‘ :• Cwcnty-f ur h urs, that it c n

t i ark the fliibj. ct f an ex“ninati n nly -ft r tc-nty-f ur he urs.

it. -.iRDY: ..ay it nleasc the C.urt, I wn't discuss th- adnicsi-
bllity f this : cuncnt at this tin. inasmuch as 1 an nly narking it
r i lcntific . ... ■ It. * trust

that I will off. r it fcraallj os ui exhibit t c ;:c three r f ur we. ks
*V a now, and Dr. Saut-r is receiving a eppy nr and that rill ba
-ufficienfc tc t c -• ly with tlx t.-. nty-f ar-h.ur ruliiv f the C.urt.
‘‘urth'-rr. r., t ur h n rs, tfcc Pr sccuti n Selected t retain this
cuccnt f r cr S3- -xardnati n purposes, and as 1 understand, the rales
i Vlienee 1 n t c il as t- su- r-ly th- D u f-ns- Crunsel with a c*py
f a ! cunent vn, ore * in - t- use- f r cr ss-cxaninatii n purr 3es twenty-
: ’ir heurs b.f r such t. e as we <os- sine.


U807


ir-f-1-Cook--r. _ . vcn Ser.oen
rt o. 1.

;.!>•;= S- El : ell, nor r. ianjy, you art. asking *-hat t is be

danttrication only- Cf course, by Terely sarkir.r, it ior id-
.jj.vi. ication only it cio^s not ir, any sense becoae an exnibit in the trial
and never could r-cc.o ar. exhloit in the trial until it vas or v’y i*e-
Mlvttd in evidence and given an exhibit nu-oer. -cu understand, that,
jf course?

r.'-H i Tr.at is ri* t.

J11XH 86ZXL G: ?fow *fcat la the ur.-ose at this tiro for having it
Identified?

. : That *<as t,;«s procod re tie est. when

van the dafonae started their owe at t.- suggestion cf tno ri *u» .

J JJ SJ. 0: I -.uiorsU•rK•, 'ut . ou .wo n<rr iskin, tiie ' itr.usa a-
iout certain'aspocts of it snd it as not quite clear to rto v-.at vour
. traa. X aoe.i to havo pissed that.

I as-tod the rilnoss if he hod ciacussvo any Intention

to expert ent »n hux_m boin-.a in .-.is institute at i-oson with C nti and

r.o said /.a r/.-.or tal! od to Ccr.tl in that regard and In this d-dng decla¬
ration of Conti ho has stated Chat r.o talked to 51os» about oxoerii.or.ts
to •. rfor od nt ho: n.

J 1>1 S- n ii 7nis xs not a dyin^ declaration in the aunaa that a
ftratian is rccofnized in the rules of evidence. t I

*. rakiny is V.uro i. xt he stav„, n ' ring t.Ar to oe Conti's state ent
md asauauxt, it to >e trio, he s\z:

"tioLC always told • u of sis itio:. to oxporirent on huisan Binge,
ir.d to t Lhe cusccccxon I had planned did not satarlalizc because "loro
i> constant! txa-.-• tnd -_c.nso *. - ear boca.u so awful, 'oa sorely
x -,ncv3 caisricn. io«n -hat he.was doin'. .•Urthar-

■ r .0 started the expertise

E. «. 3 : Kat is the suction about which I want to put a ques-

.

rs to lo!- r.t?


■ '


21 . vcn 5c. c_n

- c. 1 .


/.a ccen jiven, it sec. -s to oe o-i- an excerpt or a heart of another
document, to •.'•fcich the author refers. I do not see any svidenc '
authenticity of the signature. It is quite obvious that there was no
official ho could certify to The si ^nature, and tare is no certificate,
ird, therefore, in 7 opinion, no *.ios can t>a rads of this doeussat. I
the usa s 1 this document for this reason as well. He starts
the doc u ao n t vitfc the sentence* "I part Iro lil - -^use I --ne’e a false
gtr.ti..unt :»fcr oat..." That is the Conti cn -hor. the rrosjcution wants
to b.*o faoir evidence, MI do not o- 1 j ave that this docur^nt can bo
used aihee honti is dead, ard in this docuasnt, as I can prove, ho Is a-
jfiin not tolling ruth in the foeo of '-oath, .no if the Prosecution
icar.ta proof of t..ot .ufctvr they nu-d cnlyloo’t at the Dachau records and
m shat ..art Dr. Conti nod in th- "*-c luu . arinanta obout
.ndant taww nothing tt all. ■ -s another Uo and I

don't think *e need to jo into that. I as of trio opinion that this docu-
*nt i!• inao dssiblu.

. a , r lonora, that consistent with tho ruling

of tie Tribunal ;jstordv to •«» orjjctloa that this is-not the tiie to
o-Joct to this docu.jr.t and tiir.t no objection could bo *wdo t.i«-roon until
e Prosecution for ally introduced it as an exhibit.

P36 . _5 E2.Counsel for the Prosecution :.as off-rod no idonttfi-
:on of this document »h'-t;v-r. The original which has b-jn oxhi it
the Tribunal indicates nothing except there is 1 documr.t, and what
that doc ..at is.

. .. : Didn't t-io original have c.rtiticato?

.-.is sitter can . • « c-rtific .U can

. .r, in cost jr to Dr. ^tutor's objection About not having a

notar:., it is si.nl. L-.possible ior a-v-n writing a suicide note to cor-
Ide with a notary prcaant. I dori*t know how that is pcssibl
1 '. '.o:;.:n-'-r.t.

. : - - . t •

r -'.i:a ta- cocu--nt should ba established beferc the Tribunal in so .a


iioO?


ir-i

rt o. 1.


ir.rv r.

•Y .

3 Doctor,31o tm have stated that, tr,_ Usti *>nv of ttu -itr.uss

z 1 Lncofteot.

But <ou ni-or told tChrci>.r that u any , 1 -rvs or n-d «ruia p.rran_o-
-.•jr.ta for hnn.in expert stitute at Posen. You ilso at

th Conti about these --tt.rs. You hod no inten¬
tion o l export ion on hu ioinja ia your institute at Posen. • o*.f,

1 -. rl... o. ia C--*L-onj of Schroi _r r.d Conti, and thu doc vj_nta tr.it
..avcj booh offered . - - ia avid* , -:e *cu still stato you did not -x-
o-ri*jr.t or. hu.._n beings in * r institute in .•essolstoot noar i-ocon?

A - lvo tbu ollortn*, anst-or to th.t: 1 did not say that -
discus sod oui 3h a thi.v, »ith Conti. 1 said I eonsidorod it iocos-
iiyla thel * ilscuss-b such n tel . with Conti o-coust of tho poor rc-

U unt about r. Conti

^ 0 u 5 , .3 j or tii* T'Ijo of too sttWanteDf rrofcsaor Sci.rvi.-jr, f uvo
«ono into L . root »xa*lru.tdon i disprove *ro-

fussor Sonroi .r*a

list quite oxactl/r.totc-r I don- h Pin: c^rrioi out hur-m cx -ort oat a

. rV *".s done in i-o-

r.n jd Cor-Ctnl* o »-jr_issi'-l- orVt. .«i ‘ssiol* hi~i.n >xp-rl-' J r.tr 'cro

.v quickest coral. -

. .V

- p

} . cv cut-.r ou flud ir:r os.n md tcoV the l-i-uo cultures 'iih

cu, -xcordiLi* to to, t 8 t& ,rn ni 3 cbr«i -r :.ich "ou deny, -’id youjjJt-

*

-ii 4 -r.■ c;. u,.n .x a >.a .a - - 1 c., :or 1 - Sachc-naurg?

1 c ..n toll cu t:. : irst - old ret il - r

>•-7 ; . .;r_n .r; in c-:.- ar-'.i - .i* .r -c. air-"-. •>. ! . o-

. . at ct cs-n me -uas in BJ sc-ctll-d Inati< . 1 . for

- vr .ours, v - 1 ftvr tin 1 .st Gyr-an ;:c 1 -it


-.j Irstitutw. lhora‘was no qu-stior. of iloo-


■i von sev.oah


. ..-v-r at Sciehscnburg. » 'o not ev-n kno it adc -- assoc 1 st

. ros -• . . sfcjd r . room -- • m •.-

-fel. -.1 s-c.uj.r.bvr-. cut for rccsoaa . d-.i - -h-LI ugtijJA I ci.i nol ..v 4 »

uso of tiau, 's ftiitiwr I nor he. - - , -

. . ~y.Lz i.v_ici.t_s tr.t no hu , r jriir^nta at -.11,

,

•nd - . — *©ru vary QaptaticaUy, ir. ttu. -:.ur_ fi-ld of Qiolo&i-

rc. u . co - JaKKladgc, ’dth .y support, or. ry or dors, or
. TouMiod ., cot b sin fau sn oxporiasnt is contacted, huthor

. i&aiblu or '.Ton .isn.


. I ■ ao tnri ^ons,

. iSUiSi' i tto Vi un..l -dll . in r.c.aa.
(«. abort r-cuas ».j ■r'*ur.)


.7-::-S -7otfi-l-C-rr sa-Int: "rcra
rurt V~. 1

TT 2 ...SIAL: 'He Tri.unr.l is : ..min in sccsicn.

r." ?RSSI Z HT: ?r sccutim havinc finished its crrss oxrnin-
. ti:r. of tho witnoaa 31c:io counsel fcr "lr.^o ix.y proceed with
rodiroct o::ani nation.

jR. Sj.UTER: ”r. President, ’-ocr.uad f tho nr.turo rf tho
charge against Dr. Blono iths cr;.o .' out thrt tlo direct
cxrj.iinr.tion of this d of orient lasted r long tir.o. J nd, tl o
errsa oxrj'in..tinn -n tho part 'f tho ?vc :~cuticn lihowioo
Irate.? r Irnr tixio. In ccnai.or.t on cf f is ml :f tho f..ct
tl.-.t the cross oxc.ninr.ticn .i*. m t * ring to lici t anything cro
: L rtr.nco J cm dispense with. r. rodiroct oxnninr.tlen.

7 is c ncludoa ny oxoin tlcn f tho O.cfon'.r.r.t hr. -loix
: nly now r. fow rtccunonta V c u' .it inr. r.iticn.

IKS ihBSIDSN7: You :r.y pr-cood.

rhoao docunonta wl ich couneol will < ffor, will thoy r oqulro
ir.y oxplrnntlon -y tho IpfonVsnt 31 no r r nr.y tlo jV./on'.rnt
3L.no n'-w lor.vo tho witness s xnd?

DU. S/.U71.: Tlo witness cm lor.-o tl.o at.nd.

.TS ii:o : ofon i-nt rx, r. vltnoar in 1 io ovn

. c.nrt nr.y tr co.

•

Dn. SATTClU: Bofrro I turn to tho If-euaonfea ttuit still romln
I c perl pc ’ o :f c.asictmca in rno n:.btor t tho ’’rc-
cccution. The Erosobuti n a ti. rv.d yoatorday in cmnccti< n
vrri'-us .ntrior in ^iovor's diary tho id'rcvi tl-n H.O.V.
rv*. oxplcinod this, frying tl t in 1 pini n thoy thought
... were tho i: itfrla for Roiohe c rv.n'l 1‘. -
ruohror. hot :o tai tho -r aoeutlon th t tl.o interpret ti-n
thoso initials is rr:n~. D t itronlly no etna is “Jlcicfca

scl aofts Fuohror”, in ti er rorde, *'olch ; ctooss Lor. or.

.t t.t.s the title :Iat tl.o -cfor. mt Siovors hoi in tl o nh-
. En ther — r s, this :.'.d«rovi..ti r. fc 4 n* thing t.
tho ^xichs Goaundhoita-FUohror, (Kolch 1 oclth L ~ or)

m2


21 r *nr -7-7-S -7«8-2-0rc es-Int; 3r . vr.
C urfc :rr. 1


5r. Conti, ncr wit* tho DcfonJnnt Dr. ^lc o„ I wrmtod fco
sr.y this so thr.t tho ^rcsocuticn wcvl' hr.vo rn . .'.ale? 'c'
of trr.nsl: tin- those- initials.

IVon I nust correct c. typ' '-rr.phicnl orrrr tv-t .’1st rte
do nervin':, nnnoly, In Dr. D lcno «e D reuraont Dor]:, Drcuncnt
7, pr.-oa 19 tc 26, Perl \pe I coull O.ictr.to this Uctr.tirn
f tto tyn-'T'.pUc.-.l orrer ir.tc ti c roc. rOn p.-.-o 21, r.t
t!u top, it ro.V.a: few 'r.yr Ir.tor —“ ns tl o wltnoar Schr¬

einer str.toa, Pc,- o 21 .-f t: o Ubmnn -' evtnent Book, ^ir !;0
Exhibit 11, ^ cunont HO. 7, it run s t: ore, r.s I vr.-.a er.ying:

few '.r.ya lrtur I l.rjno.l fren tie Ci i v f f strff of tho
.\r.Ty ic 1 Inspectsr:.to Ocnorr.larjt Sch;-ruockon wlo w. o
n t direct euporl< r." Tint ic nn orrrr. It si uh 1 . net *o - no
lroct aupori r “ but "ny c'.Jroct nuporicr". It ohi ul:l ronf.
tlon: "Oon^rc.lnrst Seh-iicUbrrockon w.-.s ny lircct superior."

I ncJco tils c. rroette n so thr.t it u- ul£ n»-t *o pvorlrnkoft
l-.tt-.r -n’ 1 tor it will % o set >wn in -Jlono ‘Hnplonontr.ry
- cur..r.t 7jO k, * ut I profor: -o tc rtr. i-Yt^r. it ut riftl t
r >OCAUSQ tl o ’ofon'.r.nt of X n'.i ccr w vl'. i v o * oon injur-
tri' tho orr-r *-uon Allowed tor on in,

.".r. .rosi out, tto x\.rt cf t: o ccunor.tr in tl*o Jlr>no Doc-
unor.t ~'c oh I :.p- rr.iscl t r. 1 :;c -r :ort in tl o ’.iroct oxrn-
irr.tion, Shoro rcnr.ins r-nly tl . ; i: 2 f t; o f. llrwir.'*
cunont a in 31 odg u cunont 4n6k: Do cunont 8, xA 1 \a

Exhibit Ho. 14; tl cn ^ - cunont 10 rocoivos exhibit No. 15.

‘•’* c is ir. tl u first supplonqnt.-ry vcluco r. ’ tw: rlrcunonts
-r. the supplementary v lunc 2, .iccrr.ionts 15, w» id. -ots

* it n' - 15, n>'. :i cunont-

I ' ::"5ID3 T T: w unsd, will you pic so \o~in nrr.ln tho

a-r-pti n f t: c cunonts in ^lor e's Supp.lonontr.ry 3c -k?


- -’ J: : : i tlwll :• •. -r 1 .k "ociTwnt 3cok 1 , the

cic.or.t is cunont lie. 8, wrier* occr:os oxlT'it nr. 14-


■


21 r .7- '—S -7*8-3—Grcss- Ir.t: -r;ra
; wit ’'c. 1


:in rlf llr.vit n tLo p. rfc f mo Littcram. That 13 -xl’i" It Vo.
1-,. 4 :on In tl.c fcupploaontarr v clunc 1 T<r Jlonc, cl cunont
. 1 - n rtt r. tfco pr.rt rf cno ^r. DlngoLloy , re¬

ceives Exhibit lie. 15. Then in tho aoccrvl Supplosnunt ry Vol-

u. 10 , tri-.ich ccnt.-ine cr.ly twe 1< cunor.tc -

E r 2 l r itilSH>Z;T: '■'ounsol tlo 'rV un.,1 Cua n-.t !.:.vo tl'f.t
Soc nl upple vjrt'O '7 ^ccunor.t -'tele.

Jii. Si. Jl^Tv: Y„u al'.ould lir.vo I cC it If n- tine ;o 'mt
I o'.n au’j.it it to 70U Liter ‘ ocnuau L tor :n I nunt introd¬
uce a fo\7 oro cu-'ior.ta. Let o ; y tl.on tl.r.t thcco ;.ro
le cu lents 15 and 16 in tl ia *-oc<-n'. Sun^loaont ry Vluno n 1
I vill ahow then to you r.t that tirio.

T!2 FISSILE;?: V.ry woll, ccunsol, tlo -'for f thoso ox-
hibita nay ’o atponol until that ti 0 . ill t‘. 0 -ocrot-ry
Oonorr.l invuatirjc.to tlo -oc nl ^ipploiiont of clone's ^ccu-
r;ont 3..c3c and 0-0 that it ia furrislol tl o Trl* uns.l.


hSlii


. Ia. 7 -:£-9M0-rK?-Lu st >r |Ir.t. 5r na)

. 1

DB. S.-t/T-T.: Yury wall. I ivtum now to Docua nt !o. 8, Dxhiait . U,
r. rffi :-vit on tho ,-c.rt -f « if hittncnn. This -f! idavit has eon sjorn

• -r.I tho sijncture* ccrtifie ’. This littaana ras an executive, ay -rt the
ich Ch other of rhysicf'ns an . he i-cd the m -sitisn in the i.cieh Office

fr Health ..f tho NSDa?. That “la tlx- s*jv fficu f which 31 to v .. tix Do. ut
l dor. In !i . U -f this :ii vit the witness concerns hinsclf with tho
c retry’, relationship#. His test la ny re os .iitr. that .f the lufcn'nt. And

run I ah .uld like to ro-a. ho. p bucauflo it is f interest s r- r a roL-tio
.•tween Dr. C-;iti an.! Dr. Bl-oo:

"5) Fr a .ay Ion years A c jllabemti -n with Dr. Bios.- it is known t
th t tho roi tier.ship botweon Dr. C.nti an Dr. 31 .ex w.as very V.d .and 1-ft
.Tick t . o :-.siro . They won- c.cplcte c.ntr-sts .as far . s personality os:
I v.. lo-rnibd to knar Dr. 31 a thr urh tho y- rs as an open, honest 'nt*.
—•ont character, while Dr. C.nti ;ave tto imr-ssion A ’-eir-; coldly
calculating, nysterioua individual, uxtru.a.ly n’oiti .us .an terrifically
bus ici-uc f every r.-, inclu in ur. 31.-.

"The collahor-ti n 'oetwuon Dr. 0 r.ti *nd Dr. B1 a suflored very .:uch fr
tbsiu contra at*. In the c ur:x f y.-rs I l. m.. opsin and n<Jain that Dr.
Conti withhold f t a Dr. 31 x a ranter A La.-orient events, alth ■ h they

* r. thine, which, in ay oini n. Dr. Blna f s e Uty f Dr. C nti,
b aId have known «! out. : .is. hoard ----in n.: - in from differ nt

: nsultftnts. f the Reich Clvua’our J ?hysicir.r.s when they t-.lk- Ij a'oout
ffiejcl setters, th t they were surprise* t i-n-ranco .f Dr. 91-nx as
: r s certain h peniUfs xr c.ncurn*. ’ whibh th-y themselves, .as cocs-.ilt
bad ’ oun assi.-noc: t n.rk n Dy Dr. C nti, at f which Dr. 31 a h" ! r.ocia
r. te. rie l u thr.u^h Or. Conti. «ls-, ut 19..5, I re’ ’ a n-to by Dr. ’ n
. 31 ao, the noaninc f which was th t ho. Dr. C r.ti, ros-rve.'. tho ri. I
l oi n .all important matters hiaself, r it =i ht h ve r-ad, re-ch the
decisi.n himself. Dr. 31 a was nly authorized t sixain -thur, les
'a rt nt natters. This notic. f Dr. C.nti's struck ae "t th t ti.o, since,
ac rdlrv t ay jud- «:r.t, this did n.t d: justice t - Dr. ol -ao 1 s sitian


i*y r.elch ?r.; oici’nt 1 Leader.

"Gonorrily, ' a., entleaun, • : r. fl --r ■ sent rt


21 reh 1947 -!S-9S10-2-?sr- Lessor (Int. 5r w.)
t . 1

llonich tother; If -r.e i th^a was there, the thor >:-£ n. t there s • rule,
and returned ally when the -tfc.r was not there ■'ay ~-r-.

n fc) The C-nditi.ns wore tfco saac at the- lie.in Office f r . u’lie H 1th . i
K5P/i? which she red j i.-.t >.rs-:.r.-l with tbu .ich Cfr -'.or f Physicians.
This Ilain Of fic. r.d tb- i-eich Ch*aber f Physici: ns were tr li thud in the
ss*. uildirv, -rtly in th. sar._ roe-s. The trek A this lain Of lice was to
a-k«. suggestions f r tb. njyilKtior. -f the isoalth policy and f>r th- tasks
f hvrlth vocr.ti.re, whoxvaa the orecuti n f such sui «sti r.s - e -rtly
th- tack A th- cv.te health authorities, 'rtly f the vocati nal s .ciwti-c
(for Physicians, dentists, vet-rirr.ries, -to.)

»7) In - >th offices, the :-oich Cfcabor ' Physicians rs well .-.a the Pin
Of fic-, th. a. dic.nl consultants continually c _;>L-ir.-d a-:ut the fundrauit 1
- sts between Dr. Conti and Dr. 31os.; they c splain-d that they ft-n
(dd r..t kn w which .ooint >f vi.w they wwr- t. re.ore sent in the detailed
questions f their sob-re A activity; the c -nsult r.t.n ;fton said th t their
t choice 1 w rk tea thoroby rv d- vary difficult.

”S) I kn-* fr . ctnvers'.ti.n with Dr. 01 j- that he xv.'wat.dly -r/J
t.vr etic-lly ox. reased his -,v< si.v -int .f view to tr. O^nti .and ch't h-
often tri-d to :.uh the ?=rty Ch rceiiary f r hoi r asoist-r.c when h- did
:: t euccoed in ,orsu din,; C nti. I C r.it kn v • nythinf '.*» at the success of
auch ef: rts.

'"?) Tho foil-wine circucstcjjce Sevas ospoei' lly ch'rctorie - f ( h-
rol .*.« ms ' utwton Dr. C-nti and Dr. fli-cu: -Ivn „r. Blwno earn t livo ir.
Munich in the -utu.cn £ 1941, \» r xia tolr at the eaa* tione tw c nfid “i
Cents f Dr. Conti (2 physicians) fr - the rffico in Berlin eaac -tie
the tour t 3ettl- u.mn in 'iurich. Very s. n I was order tb. inprvssi ft,
y an obeervati.ns, that thes. tu. -n hr« th- t sk f watch !ik ov-r
th-. ctivity jf Dr. 3lrx and per ha. s also A the -th'-r «t,'orts f tb
ixttich l’fice. Quite by accident I Kurd out later th* t f-r ao-ie tine acil
bid been c.ri.r. rogulflrly i:. 1 r.> er.volaa-s iron Dr. C r.ti ir. Berlin t-
f th- two non (a certcir. Dr. Biehrs'.) The n-ca f the oddrossce, D r . u -»u
. s rinted on thesa envelopes sor.t by Dr. C;r.ti. I theref.-ro c-ae t the
c r.cl-tsi. r. ti. *. such letters cr a Dr. C- nti t Dr. ohrs


; r.t fttn


21 .' CIS- 3 a lC-la-Lcsser (Drovr.)
C:sri - !•


- ;dn inquiries I f un. out t.. t Dr. H'-ehr* I; ordered the ?ost .f.’ico
^il t . iotr ;ion Df fie- .t ta- P.-ic. Chxhcr if rkysiciras not to oycn such
.svelopoa, but to deliver the*. sealed, whereas it wns the cuctoa t' o?en 11
ir-co.in :-il except letters xejrtoxl ’secret 1 o r • confidential'. :tion I
foun' Dit the*. f ct6 I t' 1-1 Dr. Dio— d- nit it. K- ioc a.- vor; ry and
l-l a nt r." sk rod ay /l alt a th t ho v s Vein.: v-tched by Dr. Conti in thl
v . n;. 6h t ho v • tt b. excluded fr a ill ir-port-nt tn nsr.cti ns of the

offic- ■: th- ?.cica ?r.yoici'*cs • Lordor.

“Sue.- lord in. s continued -ad v-r: n-t no v " with. I h ve n>t the
li-htoot d <ubt thnt those letters wer. offict 1 ::-.ttcrs, for such li a - 1
cke.c uoed ti cone in ocv-rol ti.-os r vook, -cc r.dinr to :y oh 8 jrv ti n.

:c ibwuasin such events, Dr “loao co;r;l- inoi to o frequently •Ed ox cui
i.:i a thi.t ho, r.s deputy bond of the T. .ich 3 k aber of Physici .no, oho.
•:o isf'r cd 'f 11 ccurrer.eeo •„cc..u*w h- was r-sy'nuiblo.

■ 10 -) Dr. Dlo..c told o -nc., X‘holier* In I9U3, thrt ho h- •*. 1 cod hio
fflceo t the dioyos-l f Dr. : hi. ~ls . in c .so hio resignation frw hi.
.fflceo sh vlt a t bo «-.cc- tod, no nsicod to Do .llovod t* t. he hin turn with
Dr. Cinti in ,-oir. t' the fr nt. "0 t -Id jw n\ the c nsultnnto of tj:o ’ole
C*. • ,r of Physicians, tkr.t tho ro.-.so:. for t.lio w-s th:t ..in fur.’ . -ntr.l
iff*ronecs with Dr. Conti .. do ;r of it'■bio ctUabtr tioa i.poostblo. Inter


:r. rii. - t'ld .. ta t Dr. Conti h d refused .-.is request, sryinr that durSr.r
.r. r no -t the post to which ho iui ho r. as si ....

r. ...er occ-il a Dr. Dlo.x *. Id ao th t .urir,- t .e c -erao of diocueni’n vJ-
c. icf of t.:e 1 rty Ca nCwllerj* he h- ds ut .is offices -t their *1 l-
iked f r another -osition, but r. -.in a. nrd boon unsuccosful.
:.v .ext -.r.-ra a, nu her 11, I .'.: - vo t r. n i..to^the rue r \ la

judici.J notice V t her. of it. It cl rifles the tv c'-ntr-ntin
i i -x x* the a j two . catlc-En c.nc^rain,- populti-r. policy. Then t—rc


l.-.twa nu.b r 12. It re--' a:

* 12 ) It c—-v t -m '-lc.-.-e d urine; work at t..e Hoich Che doer '

' .yaicians, tie t Tr. Din-.•olio; , 'ne of t.;u c -nsulv-exts at the Reich ch^’o.r
yoiciar.a, >n ais own irdti'-tive, ti Iked f v-ri.tB influenti-1 p-rs »•


U617


21 e: ia-2r.-lessor (Sr-ovn)

C I.


■litioo -f the Forty, r rticul ri;- the He-ich . inlet ;r f the Intori- r, 3r.
Trick. a 3 ioholoitor 3"'^cn , ?cr^, in ordor t 1 oalii.ton thou rib-ut tho vicu
f t-.- '~o-io, about the :i«r.'4Vi.;e.%jnt inside the p-rty, nnd :i mt the
uaftl-nifiod behavior f -ie' -in ? rt;- personalities. 3r. Pinto 1 \cy hi.-.t.lf
r.pwf.tedly told ins of thee- efforts of aia a:', ••lc' infornod ..o th i .*.o a t
;r.ri usl;* '.iecusaod these steps with 3r. r.lo.u-. 3r. ”lo ..o hr/. expressed c,. •
.1-to W.-Toorwat x.. v.lc od t- t 3r. Dia.;eldcy, :1s; w-o .-ivin those
-x. 1 ~-tl mi t the lw Hn personalities, hoc. ucc he, 3r. 31 oj*., ai.iBolf
cmJ • r. t ic. iovw rnyiaiac.

n l}) C-nc.mir.. :.:o quhati a f Fr-fecs r J)r. hlojic'a (ittitudo to
rcet t ao -f . _dlc-l professional ethics, ! c .a, *a the basin of iy ctivity
lc . ' r .dciisns, SVO r : ... *..: I

'.incus# na vita yoelf -xd with the aodic;-! consul tmtn, hr. 3l^:~ r.lvr.-n c
that eho 1 -wB >f the ncdic 1 . rofoeslor. 1 ethics uat ho hold hi.h, doctors
_uat .rice pr foooi >«vd ot..lco th. . lphr. re/. o_e, of th. practice of t.ioir
.•rofet.ni n. yor instance, he fr.^uontly coir.trod th. ucdic'l profession *.rltl
c: r.--, .-.ad arid th t :* r. ia distress aevor rovo-ls hir’.solf to people in
other c Ilia t as openly s ho dooc to a priest >r a doctor. It v c th.rc*-
r -»-v the physicir ns 1 dut; v'\ 11 ;* i/. fully t ’ Juitify t..is faith which their
.’ tior.to put ia thoi. I v.s the riy. ici. r.a* duty not ^nly to hol;> there
.''ti.r .,0 in their physic 1 suff.ria, , but nlso t<. assist and help the. in
'•••-ir .ceat.-d distress. -jr. 11 o;:’ho ia t..i w:y a't only t jo but loo

'• ; t-r doct ro, %fcoa I happened to be preoent, r.f. no ox--ros^cA thlo o.-..

”l-’r Ir • ia speeches . t naid'. I v .a presor.t. ■

(aimed) olf •'itt:wan"

• , rt the be.riuaia- of aio et tc-ent, in 3 , stftcB th-t fr
-.re r: 1«37 until th. c • ituliti a he wirkod ia the ?.eich t'-^.b.r >f
‘ci ao under Tr. ~do •.. *. t ie, taen, “lore ■oocUi.ent :•>. 5, 3x.i’oit
• - •

in t..e Su;ple..cat"l 3 cu.^at Volume 1 , of the Document 3 k 3lo 0 ,

: = - “ cu.;.r.t 10, Sat'hit />. 15 . Z.i ■ i= ui affidavit of ~v ■

f. :-io


I1-. *f. s. a ~ vr.s Ju t nenti;a.d ia t.. - -ffidavit Jur-t r


a . :-~-S 5-S '1 10-3'^S- ' r c rm)


Silixxtt ..1%' is sworn Car ri coir eortifioA. Dr.

He.jailor o « i*- -is introduce! - zL t k_ v s librui-'-T. and consultant ir.

f - Ch ~Vr or x-ysici usa; *.a t cc v a b >m in 1893. - Ao not believe

: £rvo co re A Ko. 1; it c at ins a outline of nr. Din ddoy's c\rc,r. jje. 2
; c - hri -it r. .’.ir.-, I v oli vc. It iscuosoe Dr. ~lo::c'e •ffici-1 -rooitiono,
'-1-i -'O Ir dy be.a .Vo -rf-ctly cl* r by tic ‘ofoadant*s ad other
.rt nc 1 :-a:i uy .-r„ . 3 concerna if b.I f '-it.! tie rel-.ti r.a hetiroca r.

; nti :i .I-<*.«._uty, nr. hi e, rr r.-i:

■ 3 ) If I sked 'r. v>. t tcr.-a Dr. Conti hit deputy Dr.

31 - V®r« Witt - c . I c ■_ <nly a- fr . ;• ;vr. ox;>cricr.cc,

: i. v: a r t~jr .Via r_ •< 1c, ad t.mt ;io 'ifforenccs of lni-n

‘ jc^rjcn t.to tw* ~.t. 'r • ro .-1 r cooper tJ .. extr-.or'Vin.'iril:’

ifficult. ;.t the i , .f-re r. c at? took v? ftia poaition ca

. f til- -V.c 1 A. - b-r, n.. •• .ntodly r/.vlsod uo

: a vis . * 3.ic.. iMio l ch bor), thr.fc it wa

■ lately i. -or .i-c new bread, r.

0-1* 2M s-'rtl;-* -ft rv r n, rel-tV :.o .o tween Dr. Vlo;.o \nd Dr. Cnti


c . - ntr-ir.jd,


! & " a r. f til- r.nt f t.t t r r si. It •- re-n vita the prev. maly
r c. ;t e:.to of t..e ~itnjic, Itt .-a.. I aov c atinuo t the end of thii
j:


■‘Dr. L 1 -. ... m .. :t„ r -orA, al;owe'. *•. fr. :Jt rat hor.oat car . met or
■•-ria 11 til- tl a • - - rhad to ct..«r: a- tr. t-d ua in r. frio:Aly \rr-y
- • iao i ,-rc. .a t ... oe.o c-rt Inly 3 *t diauonset idt.i uo.

. I. tic .r. : tie. o .. rl : c- ' -tvecr. 'r. ©Onti ad Dr.

-c - ^ rc-e * ree. I vr e never rosor-t r.t priv to Uccurnions
. - . C~«-.ti 1-—, n I aev.r k_ -« nytaia -bout thao

~r. C’Rti. uc aev-r : Ike! *. ae 'r *. i cu.r toe :Ac-l -Aviaera
t ali raoa l ffnlra. nr. nlo.^j, ta the th-r hrad, took uo into
•n.*i Ver.ce; he v a fill-’ vit.; t... Mfficvltiea r aultin,- fr ji

‘ o reluti r. to Dr. .ti, tht -e reforr-d t the:; ti-o nad ti-.o rr-ic,-

:«-19 *


ZL :: .-GZ5-9 j 1C-4 c.-L-hs r fcr^O

C-cri J . 1 .


-'ta ~si _ rt t- .w 3 fcj use?. >. . --a* nis frt^nf.o.

--- t- 18 iafor...ti r. — • • ••- ft._ r-cciv.vi ccafimr.ti on

■ f t-'-c existi - . 'iff lenities v..ich we iiu J , lr . cz^octort rind forxed
froa tile bc.-ir.nia,*.

■ 5 ) 7 h_- tir-i.. if; of r , lotvooa ?r. OO-ti and 3 r. .“lono v .o with
r X'-. to ta- wry lr. *„f * ._c lirfic -1 ;r fosoi n v:s to bo or.raised.

H’O.-j tri \ t free i... ic 1 ;'r.foao' ana* ito ->r. -jii-

s-.ti as cb fir .a "si: fr . r*..~ r 1UU 1 influences: ho therefore

ii-i.; Cisr>lvo t.v. . a 1 ..- o.-r. i 'f t~v Tvlc-.o Chamber of
r.'-yiici- na (F-ic.ii <t. vr) a: t.; 1 ors.io -f the i -ia jfflco
: ? Public P.walta (.7 u *. fuor ~ -lks 0Bu.v’_:cit) bcc-<u»e the 1 ttcr

'• v : . . : • , t.:.

f 3 ci i.tin - •. i r, r’V l _x fc#e< r. n\ f tho ;*ysicinr.a into

V. lid fic 1 . . M J str>n ly sc 8 Or. "Ic .a. ::e v n

• ! • ’' - lo 1 nrofots . in opoaiont

 ^

rofonrioa... 0

• 11 1..11 re- 41 .V J-. 6 V. io fill 'd : s : : -u t t:-ko JnAlolrl notico

1 . It alto ooerl jii, it:.a:.- loo i , r v tlono of the

. ;.s ' otvjon e v lo.u. I ovitiauo ntv with y-.. j:

«I :firoolf Joined rt;* bof ro 1 * 33 , out of pure idoc.liiu,

bec ue« I bolivvod i_ c..o.•

• -- —T! '-“ul - It to to h vo t..o li^ort r.t oocti no of thin

• fi* vit i-.c-.r or- to* i..o the rcc rviUirnt r..cotoit tin,- the re-Ala:

c ••it, v - la Trituanl V>. 2, %faorcty tho court

r '°- • "° 6 ■•’«* 1 « .~r. i .«d tv counsel r. iacor-.oratoo theu iuto

: ioi 1 tr r.Bcri t i. li.v f rendir-t tho- lou , tliio-B'via ;

‘ic .2

- t: I - t vine-' x t Whota-.- r n>t Tribunal r'o, 2 n b

- -ct.-ic r^c r .in .cricc. I thirJc th t if counsel for fiofoataat tlosircB
• •-- • - ; ' rs th r.-c .r • - - nllovod to &o so. =3 -.-ill


ict


rcc r" t- t ‘. 0 j 8 .. t door, aoccss-ry, I sure

i; : 20


o r>


;• r •17-.U-S -11-1- - v - - -• -»r..wn

ui’t . 1


i/H. - - : I ■fisi'd W - V- fc tU:& *u ici 1 n tico f

« 0< 7 Iji w id ur, "in xl'-jy Xoacri'ws 1 is -Tfc rt with tho
!:nevlo V*c ri \: cn rz - '1 M, lio offorfea to eferai<$»ton
d ir. s cut ;iu‘. fci i -ifVu t! c roh'.ti na -it! hr. c «ntl
Is vl.ich offcrta , i • cv r, bo a unauccoaaful. I orn r t-ad
r.o pr.r: -r..ph fr r: tl.ir "u:: on

Cnly *>r. -Id.. I -1 - rc tclf-c ntrol than I m did
art ioucnatpr.tc wUtcrnrJl;- hie .'.iar.p clr.fesonfe .--oat the
’ovolopnont f the : itl r • :... . -• nui - '• 3

c<nvorot.tiono vi.id. I wit). Zr* ^lono r.ftor 1 030 I knew
f:r Curtain fch t ’ i, i r •• - nee, uialilc *. t! o war policy
of i.itlcr :.a '.oci'odly £ I .‘i .. 1

: - r t: - .-riVi U8 affil-

. *.jiv voly, v.- ilc » “.capita ell lifficultioa

hy * o ^ net si .’.ply \

: t; ink I n

rofer tc t ' it V • C.

* 1

«i-fc Vuifcor. : v cut Dr. 31oao»a

.ttltu.v towr c ;:u ie.-.l. £ ice. Fm rva c* a rvo.ti-ne
I cr.n at. to t) o f llcwir-: If. 1 • o L«d r. very Viph o t) ie.-.l
rplniin « f do .1 cal pr< f-r:i n. - (fton tell no tl t ho

t, id:!.:;: oicnaj ho wr.s oopocl^lly
:n.:i ue c* . ut t.: a. aired rojH>c.tolly tint ' re¬
in at vl*. dw;s jo "P t tie -.fit' lie scientific !cnoW-

. u, feint a ccmtrj ct :• s! uil aly s ' c ti o cul-

v rr.l ?r.utor cf : ia vil . . ■

of .. p -hysieiea si»uld always jo tc 1 olp on r - euro,
r- ...tter m ufel.or tl-- do ir. m, f : -ly -“.re W.rieticuic or


<J> \S.


ho21


£1 - r t7-:L”—11-2- . c tv- j_t_ t: I:vra
Ccurt ITc . I


"Onco ho : - - -- ' ir Is .. 'ircct quot-


cticn:

D flio tfc u sand-year-old ..uicl ::ay perish, ' vt . ical sc-
ioaco ml odicr.l otiles will r 0 : r.v.r.' ! ; u-

sanl -yo r- 1‘ R d to aught the - ll ^lc3 ' AOelf Hitler
vie r.lva ye spoko r.’ ~<tt r. tlrusa. II rvlo cf r. tl nal

Sccinliosi.

"On c.r. tl co sion 1 o r i". t no: "In a lun '.r yoars

a no will spec!: eff t:'s . • lit- - rt! *-ut srcr.t

•iclnn cr rciuntict will r: :• . »*t in t! Puo h’n '.rex',

cr feur lun.'ro years.

V c. 10 ?.t :■ 1 w *. t c urnc lerio's

..ttltu.'o torr.r.*. -Ut: .w ei .. in i’.r • .r r, it in a :r.ttor cr.

*Jlch tl o r :

"I Ir.Vo noVur ' :•*. V.t t'.. -aid .' or f Tlr oloirno

r tl-o Lain r.ltl Office f Slu I d nyWinq to

-f Lcnr.sia. I kn w tl -

in rf tl.o ir:C :rv; r utj in: np.rc cf ffleer -.3


1 v;:.o ;. li* r ri.ul .. tf. 1: l t Ci ream .a. ro 5 . ortant

tmro Mocuflood ro tlo S«c!-nicnl .vlviaora,

•

>ti: oa .t jonoral , , \ , y

the iridiv? ii'-.l Socl nier.l .. v re -.i fficlnll;- aixn~ tl on-
cclVjp. IT ( r r_ i :o ' . 1 • ;t in- t« dc vitl. sucl an in-

rtur.t ..ss. ,-.s t: o -uthmr.si -r x it uid cortain-

i; J...YO * own Lscuicod ro. r.to&ly r.~ vo tee. ric 1 .


viscrc.

r.ttonti nr., r Iri.rr t tl -ut: :.r: ri pr-Mcn frr tho

• r cf< r Dr.

- j — it: ro tl _t this is tVo sai.o Dr.

t. T. Ir.vit I put in ovilonco, i'ccuriont Z\ . 2 , c?


' IE


a . S-ll-1--Jutt(~r-v=)

owt : . i.

„ . . a: ait riu.. f r c^il'.rv: suffarir- dr:.. tuVreulois in ".nTnri-r.

..11 »i I .. -• 1:1 o scqa i-: -.c. : - *.s r.; x r go:;i tire if tlu. rfoanxv-

critic i : cf«rlcs. Cfcia rxc.:; ir.t .ca iovolonc 1 ir.t* ! -stir_x ftiondal-i;:,

s'. : c rvoaj >r_oi f r ro ~i: . ?r fwss r rr II u. Frofosnr 7?r. KL’-ro

•

vr’t~ - taon t ho h A rl u : ir.a r.o rovl ■ « r 'icir-: killed la
•a. lim-.tic -a/lu-.a, r. e.; : a.:i» v-u *j. Is- . ::j eccrotly without any a»ocinl
1 -r. rX*“i‘ooa *r J>r. £L r. v .c vV.rso t rich • e lutix. -r.’ m if the
lai r. . t..ia Sutacur*! rroSlas :art - r . : tod a eel 1 law. In
: • • .• : CTtns. -i*. •• tathoaral t.-vi.. . .t th t tiao : rOao ar.u

.a. fllo “I couaj s v-icl. do It with tlw ^utli-XT-al rahlo... I .-.altod:

hav i- 1 - ' 1 tat th. £:•:.! ..r f phyalcl r.o >tf, ltn Sanity

rircct r, Tv. :::*. , I. r. .1" V V *“.h 3st,:-v' al * mi did n’t roccivo
.. iff id 3 Id r. nlon t it, -lta v .. Sr. i:.:l h • jlnyM pa l;v Ortant
r: la 2ut ..- 0 ' • : . u s: to S-cr-t r; t th. adch . lalftif of

U In*. ..-'.or,

T c . 1 1.. : ii i.. . . •• . : I . v t Dr. T- .d u p


£•. ;

-cr

-V r. • t t..

lc..

i 1 -r:* -f 1 ... “At .rl-r

• u* ’ 0 nucl. \f r

in

ca r v


t.ic ;ooiic •;
•

h it

1 lstr tl n. T. v

t. ii vcvrr. r.-'i

■ jiki'.itod

la : *t

1 0

.clt;* -y r

. ?\r

-» f r b ! ki ^ r.

~l >:x* •- n n’t cij»-


^y 4 .

.. an rl

..to "-a

t. 5^cr t ry t t— *’

‘c.. l.sintr;- Of

tllO


.


r - li c r. 1*0. 11. It c>ac.r.e rs.ttorc if t:u *v>7ul> ti .n "ilicy.

I r., : c.. 1 ctt-.c- -f it.

.'.la affidavit, :# : t 1 . la cirro.lly cv r f itf the d-x turc
; ClU If ?t t f ti... ~lo

I a.-: r c.r._ f r -j-Swlf rl -..t t' ou'iit fc” rd itiir. l <V>cur.cnto In
fU'.v.rj •d:lc.; h v. n . t . rival, a . .or.: -e, . uth rity t- c*il tho

r-r-ltBc.^y, v.. 0 f.-r h.-H r.n jw-a f tx ;v rmtly.

^..' f, I 32 :: Cout.sjI, ~rl' ar.'J tw h > :..v accond raryltaxat tc
- r nfc -ok c -r.v i-i- Itecu—r.t a lp 16 . Counsel :v

W ;


-v-'-te a-v 1


:rir. a t d 60


>-12-l-3r-.E (I-;. 7r m)


; i- --:-t “ • la - to tiw 3lo . s ora at

V - 'c^ _ . ' -v 3.-ca sa; iti.'i to ;-art v.ic c at-ins *>al" t” co¬
st . ... ir« in Ma . r . 1:. -•*•-’-t ' • - 1 ^

.. : ii r cu:: St r .1 . : ' It: I silbit T>. 3

■•» 4 ; ’ -ca - ct -at -.1 ’:%! r - 13. i* Vw-rv brief r.-; rt

.rc . b rst Prof.-s r 7-. "irt~. vi. h fr-ottoatlr boor. x.-.. in


- c oroo


: t..ii trii. Mi I* c-'.v : Pnf.wi r ’.Irt/. of - Is


»: U ' I.'. Vl; In -... lv.„ 2 >tca: ss - Sonplotfoat/vry ” hi,

: • . 12. Sxnibit 7 . 1}. lU taew at, ’■ ■ c X •- H » - S&

_ie. i- v r :ri»f. la a oxc.nt frte. • Vok t.t : h « Mk aubalttoft t' fao
it r.'ts.r c /jno.i . , : '~ic~ >ta.r :> « ,>» Air- been ut in

r ’-.r o: ... - 1. Mr JSM *-ic ^ at t at in

- "'.an re-- 4 .. I: to a sxovr.:t t • ■? : *r- o- tn Uti c rone©

: 1 intuit in, F. s -*ict at m lo -a?. 17 7 -t tho SS- r-ifl

Ret UT or» ? r f o--.r Virta ab«t *S. .• S b •: a 7 it
7 . 1 . cur- : 1 * j.ia Mr ^ - ia ooar.oet'. - -it:. tn. ran v 1 c no
tf i 1 ic 1 vr.rf jy. I r Irt.. r» on ’F • 0 -5 - 51

«; v.o> <T -Ola-at f r oetr.tc. f •rbotr.ja - n "ocn clc- rlr “r ilb'tod

..a by tf So.. Ttv-aror. ?ac onc-r a v-ver, *lr *y un.4

• r. -..’I /La :. 1 « v-r. 2 ; * iaeiof r. r.cc.r,«. . 7 ,
nr;, V f ta. p ? ctB r. • i» 1 " tf. «s Opto i .

« - • t..c cr.:=r c -.*!•'.< . i.2? Jo -'it’^at f f. «?/- ftrliftt. - ’ca ro

1

vo^donl-v; -it. r«rr -.r-a f.ro.*t, tuc.. » ..-.r-ilno, 0 - H%
*;c. r :o ;':rcl 1 narti . t «na 'cc . I t'-io c «• . • to

2 r>lo. 1: ex io.-l :or5ccop ^ t!»

-.-C f 1 -'old is of B- i ac. aoflc.r.r .01-ill ait, ticrofaro, ' o
h j . _.ro."

•i - 3 .r 2 c acorns iteolf viv. too c--.Hl xr -isoa dlchlc-iaa r id.
v.tci ? 70la;a f r '.urtows :* s *t-

r 7 . oi fi r : . : - . r


21 xK.-E S-12-2->r-B3 (_'r '-a)
cwrt . 1.


^~atfcctati :.a f \ctuf.l ; iu'ai-. , -erf., -.# has ' c.s :roved, v 8 'fton added
. :i.. c)ffcc t.t» Snssira : 0x111-5“- «tn ft. jCoibI orally it « , 8 found

IsJvCWd in- o - a -It., ta_ refolt t liquor tide vita men o.”b v~.e r)6>
ci I;:. :rir-o."

Bhoa taii.r 6 c t, '’IMrt.:.r_oro, t..v c *lir._ derlv to, doryl, \nd,
;..o a or; .tie pola an, r-a'.’.i to • n -ot-.aciu:. cynaidc should 'jo

: th«i .-. la .... Wei • ••vis'*.-.! f r pup^oaaa -f s'.V>tc^o."

a’ r.ov I cv-c t C’ 1 *t cuaect for t..« t’ o ?ocu\er.t l£,

Srai'.ic ~lo. o 17. 7-it iu n accor.-t fr>; . i: 'k n v.Mic ti -nt tic ilorlir.
ncr’.cay f -r furta.r ».odic 1 iaij, o". J. a t.c :. k la entitle. ’V-
crcco occtiia if t.. lntcat r cvlti f ux.ic<I 8ci.:co» — reseated *:y their
tri ir. .tors. I*, ia V. series f loctur.o sponsored ‘-'y t .o 3-rlin .x /.cay
fir further oiler 1 .1 , : rlin, “

In t .io V>ok yiu c a t o o'ant offorto lo.to - .o, ovoa •'.uriac tho \'.r,

:* v nc j . .‘.le 1 ocioacw a' lrf r ^ ut results oljtalnoA in tho vholo
e'.ic 1 u- faiD .. I c.. .. like t . ro-. a.w Just one excor. t valch In on
. - j, ;a rticlo Dr. : i;_o i n.lf, under the title .f ■».ltk Ouidanco

a •.cior-ao". 7 n •. ti I r 11 a>. r 4 t.. rtielo wor-’ fr v-ord, 'out
1 .11 ok ;• u to t >.c ju.ici * r. tie- f t... oat onto -f t..i» rticlo 00


t- : y


c ivoa ictur. of r. 1 ..e'a cfirtn ir. title field rad hlo


-.itiiuslo in thee . ttorc. I: I briefly eu . rise tho oatentn, illono
Jlr-. 11 u .r.-_"tlxon t.— f ct tn t :... a.-lth utn>rHl." / a*. .Xidic/’.l
»:l-nc B.'.ouirf. of.nl It cl'c-rt r.l t! . si.l. , t ; the .. .-lth -uthorltioo
lt'-v/p jo inftr .wi l-^oOt oclontifio ’cn-wlor-n. ntn, is' further
•• cufficiwr.tly tr ' ... J r.ce.-tifled '.tetoro oh>uld do nllowod to
;rc ncico. 2 ‘~.a, :..o fief . > i — . k-r f-nrt* _r r-. rkB to the offcct*

•c fro-do,, f - ic 2 sci-nc. ahtulf. >c r c_-ctod xoii tiv.t tho cxrrri-
- 1’ ...t ‘.0 .. .0 ; i - tr on Pcl.-ntietE c.rtr la 2*ia-. 7h. cci-ntiEts
.. ir ’.iac v:rijB a kr.ovl- ..o viiL '.lo to tn. . or..ri "ractition-
-* 3 ' : , ,;,a fr. 3lo;.o >ol.-.to -»nt rtlcul 1 r 1 ort* nco of irly


: -* T - . n .1; tn. ii •‘ir. * lea is r.oc 00-r; ia ti


-f c-acor --‘ad


" jv .,-5 —12->-Groa* (~r .vr.)

jart I-

:_JcrcuLOBis if thw di»w w ia : < :o effcctivel" coh ted. for corccia £?’«?»

-isi- .Ofl ex ;o tko >r off-stivcl co.bitoi the earlier they nro civ,-

:lM j, .jt* Sr. 3l03c a ;*s ia tail c nnectii.: t : .t Gwr.rmy hr.s Justly '.one

,-.v.- •ri:: the ri./.t if lettin -r vetiti nor* r ctico ao tkr.t an rxy quack

•

- f a: i us c a .v- nee.so to tick r -r^r.«. conclude. with the vorls

h ic 1 fill rer-.* "Sci-acj .u<t r-,."lc science rad aiat sot ’cronor ,to into

..V ae risea 8 u*l in. no r 1- o irre - csnirlciKS.■

v revita, .r. ?r--si*er.t, I f r the ti o * -in. conclude ny def uao of the

jf.y at Slo.-. : tkftnk for ta. 1 r.-c >ri of tixo t ..-1 you h .vo u...o

av-Al ;Xo t ub f r *.ui- . r-c ..t cl.in.

S33S232 ‘Is c-unn-l r,t .r.v? ri,;.t t ff r further ovi’.;nco

la ; .£ if of -.ifl .'.of CBJ, V.arivll.vo iB r- rve*. -ia. I would like to

Jic cl. -r -no - ---..a Aocu. r.s Ib rdr-itted in -vl-.once before the

rrl.v.-. -rhoU r it 1 b r ••.* r not, tn t dieuner.t hoc :~n . put >f the

r.c-f' in t. Id c bo r.A usoi by C'ur.sfcl f r oith-r *i'.o f-r i-.ny ;nu-

/.b. — rofwrrv'. t< in ri f .r r Wont or ox. ‘nation of r vitnonu.

Corr.ctlr B-.-a Sdn . th. riVi. ! -*a a t t:kc JuMcil n.tice of auch docur-

..ati, it takes notico of «... . a . rt >f troenh -oforo the Tri’nuvl,

r/ .rlbunrl in . r->. rir. itc Ju '-..at, ft.r c r.Bidomtion, .tiven t’ -11

... 0 . ... -i u • 1 •- . » t.i.r ro entitle’ t .

I: Vo itor of a.. 11 c -e.(.u ..ce, but the tor.. 'Judicial notice' io uoed

•

C ie.pl c.rt ir. oxtr ttoro which noo‘ .’t « off red in oviAonco,

r.c a 1 vo, rtr. tior .t"u c a:ri o. or ..*nj- cuwnti. Yw, cort-.ir.
■' .. UO ' 'cu.-jnti f *... t cl tB • riour. i t ’ton JuMci-l notic. of th--
ri th.t t J Off-re ovi "ut, rv. to r. -.ocuiiwnt

i: h c jo on offered rc.'ioi in ovi .oac., th t it oof ore the jrihunr!
f-r c nsiftr ti'-, w.-.o*. .ori. r- * i .t *— r:c r.' r not. ..r^hftv: to
--IT Cert A ' documento of v..‘c-. t.io rihun 1 fkt judici 1 -otico -ro tho
! r.-.r II- . 1C. Ir '...-nco f. 7. cort ir. iters f co;a on Icioylo nd

. i raided in Conor 1 L.v 10 v..ich ovcrr.e this frihunrl'o

':J26


w


I r-JJ5-12-—Srcss £jr*»u)

jurfc -•

roccduro — t.: .t tic _'ri;n_vl si. 11 t-.I-o Ju'ici 1 notice ’f suci s-.tterc.

: • scort-in fr\ ex . i.ti:«: C'at- '1 1 •• . 10 .. tt-rs of v..ici tiie

1 itoo t-ic JuAicirl notice. I wld the titter Is of no portleulnr

•

'.ut s frequently t.:. ter- ju'lcl.i notice Is us-d vr.cr. it is r.-Uy
lie- lo to t.;j rticul r situ ti'-n in tie 1 . to in v.sich it ie usofl.
_c. rri oun 1 will r. c.'os un;il 133®*


a . JV (L - .. l.r$

C t 1.


rr _.\. x.~ S55i ::

Z ’£.£! P.rsin in c-tort n- will ?lo*>sc fini thuir so-vto.

_V„ rl'Minnl is In in seas! .. : y it 7 Is. *.c T ur Ximra, t'.ic

;f n'.-Jlt Zr-ck via: hccr. excused fr<u tho ,:-r.di seas:in h-.s 'v.r.ln taken
iis nl cc in C<urt.

I P23SI2ZST; Is ill.- Aof.n o.t axiolf ~r nr*.t r- -’.y ti 71 -icocf. with hin


c.so?

3 . Iv.g?.. IT ("or the Scfendnt, ax.‘If Sms’.t):
r. President, this hiw I r-lm th- c if defonVni Dr. nd.t. ?irnt I
in.-n'. ti ro.il brief .iffid vit of too vita-ao, schollonbor,;, nd thou
follovili. th t I wiuli lik- .3 ox:..iso th- witness Jtto ..cine 'in’., then I
vat v ox . ino th.* lofoB* nt 3r ndt e vritnoos.

... S!33. :: SfeO T~ oolttrc ou: -at. ;■ 0 vuiocl is t* tiofr ctiry. l»tt

. ey yr»cood.

: . Ir. .y 'ico :-nt b>.k >n n o lS th.r. is -r. affidavit of tho

it...co J it.r Soollon r . : •.. it thl . t hthi - it . . 1 .

.‘•M I il: ad', lik- t> r- i hla at to-ant:

"i, Vltor SCi.ollo-.h-r :-" I noo*. ait r- * th- intri’uction. I lir.a tho
uai ;vo\S1q I Jo.in with *J«. 1. a! quito:

"I. I h vo known 'r. 3n.'ilf "ra'.t aiuco tho ye r 1939: I ^>°c ^0 nro
clicoly vc:.u* into ’ with 1 ir. tho ye r 191 . 2 . r-oc uc-' if his rM o.'.uc *.tion

. ha qv-ict, reserve\ .v . ;or I "roforro'. hi ., - c f r .« iffici-a contact 0

nr. cl;icomo'., t* 11 th *. aurrjun ir. Xi-t 1~. , in* rt. led •*. Icin’

if life th ; v:.b emtr m t* tno -jc-r.cy r. stinonco if itu’ilf Srendt.

■I cl i..c - 2 a"ilf r. *. t cr oc illy in >r .or t ttr.in cuit...lo aac. quick
cvoforcncoo with lor. I ; .mi» lly w 0 fin lly SMrifin'.ofuchror, and
!ri ’ler^i.cnor. 1 f t.v i-fica SS, ;r*fosri>r. lly Chief if tho VI

il« — th t _o. r.s ilitivry Intelli er.ee Semico — "if tho S-lch .,-.in


S.c*x?>i. rn- ifficos included the Com r. 'Intolliconco S.rvic. «

. r * ( 7 . -litic.il> r.nl . Hit .rily)

• - - 1943* or.v ;* s : inf.xaod ^dilf 3 r xAt rh'ut ny efforts t-

s: re n c. n* fthor c.v . vira in tne interests f hur-nity. Ir. i ds

‘1828 -


a i'- -CT 5 -IV 2 -C ok (R -lor. *■"- Sch>en)

Cm-'-

; -rticul r r-E-cct Jr-xit .Ovoys su;.-ortcd Jhen in iifficult individual
c res ry efforts vlth ji.. lor vero successful, then his continuous support
u;Sodly hvlpc’. t' effect t..is through socurin, i-c interviews.

"If I h ve nentitnoi y efforts f r securir..:pc-co in tee *£ iv- ’stntoaont.
ih-a I -iy to this the f ollovic,: rcrark:

■Uroedy in I9U2 1 rcc raised the :.iiit:x - defeat waiting Oemnap. I
trie". by lc 1 s'. llle -1 .u -ns t. 1 vn.~.t I :sei' 1;- coul ir. -.rbor *.2 help
t brin :h ut the terain ti a f the Vr.r. In capacity os Chief of tho
J.r-a “■'rci^n Sevs Sendee I eat ere *. ir.t' m.r us c nr.eeti r.e vith f-.roi.-31
-err irjitios for t-.is purpose, >-vlc v.i I •» ul\ n't like t' noeio nou fir
•pocific re .sons. ly r. o ie, hover.r, kr. vn ir. foroi.T. circles, tad laioed
Ucnnocti n vith . y attar ir to or.’, tac Wir.

■I occasion, lly *.ro- Ru'. If r-run it 'c attonti n to the political aspects,
even if he could not recognise tho general >.spocts because >f tho lack of
eooeatial prerequisites i.i ..is oducr.ti >a.

■do to Sul If "n n.it's character, ab ut vhlch 2 .1 entitle:*. to rrivo an
-ccur.-.tc . ini in, I re trie ua t f llovss

" ec ur„ f ..in ility g -erf.ct Bton-.r .'hor, hio punctuality, Ills
tcilria Uli. occe, ho hoc -i Ur*s c irrenioat, .lvnys attainable, 2
u. a o.rw. istcrinvritir. a’. ro.hr.‘.la,: i c.ir... Rudolf Jr exit alirrys
r. oi .0 -f writ in. acca-nisa; nly such . typo of person can, -a
:... ee h. co.plain about boiu* overv'rke 4 ., r.i n the 'thor hand ioclr.ro
ri bo tlirt he h f r ’.ucc 30CC to UXX5 out : in: letters per aontli.

: r...,-.toUy saw i.U. stop ut of Rl.-lcr's rt>. vit.i :.ony stom.Taphorc.

fflcc, a.', in 7 rt if*s floor, v.o c\u.let-1 littorod vith . cunonts.

: V ;h t :*i.-lwr v s afrrdf of sca'-in,: lett.rs bo?jin,T hie ci.-nature

directly t* a third pere'C, ’lctoted the., to pa -7 If Jrrnlt in or’.or t

i.: In an anonjr-.ous bek re uni. Siceo “i:.J.er sh vod only >no aido 3 f nia
•' Cter t 3 ran.it, -x* thcrof >rc unlerstooi h;v to at nch Rudolf 3 randt to
-. 1 . ir. aycr. lo.ric-lly vor;. clover rare.or, r .-.it too lost the bility

'v- i. -l~r correctly. Ra.'.If iranit h:.a certainly frequented a

-162 9 *


«


21 .ols l_r. r*»r. Scljc'n)
C’-ort 1 : . 1.


u^lvcrsiiy out he h s at the -at :vora.» ..oner 1 oduenti'a, since lurin,-
the curso f the years h- cnild n t i.-prove his oduc-.ti*a in consoquonco of
as trenondUus profession! rctivKlcs.

"hecodirv to .y convict! na TSr'olf hr.- a'X or-uld r...vor have boon -.lie to
. rxtici-.iatc la ~xy vny whatever ir. Offences- r cri es rv-inst hunonity.
.hrahor,:, 7 305 ru-\ry, l$h7. *

•a*. -he;; si r. turc nr. ’ r. c rtiflento.

Kl SX33JT; ll'H aour.Pl I n>tico in tno tmnsl/ tiJn in the third
r xr.Tjvh, the fourth line i tho 2a lie., docua.n-, referring to tho Chief
:f Office 17, in th. d .-ur^3t >1 h it v s tr. nal t.»d "I, wolca is correct?

i-"» Six io rl it. E>v I «sJc th-.t tho witness leino ho
c’llod .5 the st^nrt.


Court I


21 .for L7-.-. - lii-1 - IJj - Putty (Ints. vor. Scboon, Real-r)

THE RESHJHff: Tho Marshal will ammoa the witness, August ifoina.

a'JG'JST a witness, took tho st~nd and tcstifi.d as follows:

JUDGE SSRIlQi Hold up your right hand and be sworn repenting: I
suear by God, Tho AL-ughty and Ctenisciont, that I will speak the pure
truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(The witness reported the oath.,

JUDGE S33IW3: You ncy bo seated.

direct mitnunoj;

3Y DR. KkUFlUNH:

i. You are the witness, au uat eine?

a. Yes.

..hon w„rj you bom?

a. r was born on tho 13th of October, 1916.

Mr. tftino, you woro on- of tho closest associates of Brandt
for several y^ars. You w r- often his Deputy. Now I should like to
question you about c group of facts, and for that r„'.eon I shall ask you
few specific questions right way. 1 should like to know your eba-nra-
tiona you nadc on tho staff of tho Roichsfuehror^SS. I should like to
know how you saw tho personality of Brandt, how you s w the p-rscnnlity
of Hlmler, rxd th> Influence wMch HLril-r had on his -nvlromxnt, in-
cluriing Brandt. Finally I should li! u to know free, you how the d ily
*" rk on the personal st Si was c rri^d out, how Brandt worked specifically,
how extensive his work was, and how his sign ituro on v^ry inportant
'ccu.:_nts can bo explained. Mould ;*cu pic .s_ first explain your position
ir. '.ho personal depart^xent?

a. I was a Li-utenint in the J,r in a rry xnd had been transferred

*.o the riaffon-SG when I .nt-red tho p.rsor.il staff of Rcichsfuehr^r-aS

- ler on tho 1st cf N'avv.*or 19U0. -fter having had six weeks to get

-- d to the, work, I represented Dr. Brandt for the first tic* for a period

: fourteen drys. Since this _xp,ri_oont was successful, it was intended

* - should te nti_ to represent h - oven in the future. The division

'* ^ork .part fror: these periods m.n I represented hie, after Hinder

4£.~1 '


21 ,:-r 17-.-. - l!i-2 - LX- - rutty (late. von Sc'nocn, Pcul.r)


sine- the liddlo of 19!il ;od r_noved his h-adquort-rs fro- 3_rlin, was

Mat I was to b- in charge of tho offioo at Berlin, and then, nft-r

<forudx.r, 19u3, -fter we had b~on bcr.b-d cut in Berlin, I was to take

cr-r t»ia evacuated office of tho personal staff of Hioslor. T is.ro I had

issccbiod cost of the clerks and c tj* coll borators, whereas Dr. Brandt

■is continually escorting Hi al_r hLaSelf. finally I was prcootod to

jS-Stumbannfu-hrer, a position which corresponds to the r ink of a major.

v In order to .-nko your position clear, and in order to explain

to tho Tribunal what the ~rsor. .1 #Wf of Ro'chsfu^hrer Hiirder looked

lid., I shall now show you r. sk-tch prep: r.d by Rudolf Jrandt and ask

you to co.rxmt on this sketch and perhaps explain it briefly.

DR. KiwVRi^KHi In vy doew-nt boot, :-.r. rr.aidont, this sic-tch is

cn pago 1. I offer it as -xhibit Rudolf 3r-ndt No. 2.

HR. H—RDTi *fc;' it pie se 'four Honor, this sketch that is being

.'lured as Exhibit No. 1, I have no obj.ction as to the >d:ilssion of

this into evidence, but it a.cci to w th t it could cait dn the nanus

the people that ho.d down the various Jobs. He has the titles of

various org Jtiactions, but it i3 going to be rather difficult for

I’,. iTcseCution and I a3su e tho Tribunal to follow the organizational

i.tup without the na-.s of tho personalities fitUng into each block.

•

: wonder if it would bo possible to have a chart of this typo raodo la tor
c-rhape subrlttod with tho na-os Of tho particular people thoro.

DR. KaUFKaXH: Hr. FTosident, of ccurse I can fulfill the wi3h of
Prosecutor, out I don't believe that will be necessary I think
•' would be enough if the Tribunal 3.so in g.n.r.l how the personal staff
3 organised. In y opinion, the nx.*os of the individual persons arc
: important. I would only h;_iper the Trib r. 1 if nones were given
■-c i;o t.iese na ,3 w_re constantly changing, of course; but, os 1 havo
: -li, I will b. glad to fulfill this vish especially if it is also the
r -3h ,f tho IVibnai to hare th«s. n* ws given.

•3 ivlESlPS VSi I think it night be • convenient to the Tribunal if

• ’.at sax. of the higher nones were filled in so th -t one could get

£832


Cotrt I

21 Har - lh-3 - LJO - ratty (Int. vor. Shoen, Raaler)

ir. icoa from .her; tho chart stcras.

31 Eft. KuBRLJffi:

Q. aitnoss, would you bo in a position in spite cf the complicated
nature of the personal st-ff to say which people held th^sc v-rious
positions?

Yes.

%. Do you have the chart?
a. No.

Q. One prolinimry ou-stion, Hr. ;inc, what you have before you
io tho personal staff of the Hoichsfushrer-SS Hlcml-.r, is that true?

A. fjS.

v. 13 it also true thit this entire personal staff was a so-called
lain Ofi ice, Ha up t.ant?

a. It was considered to be a Jenin Office, tut this staff had a
iifferont moaning.

I ask one ixro qu_stion first: hew - .ry such ilain Offices
*-re there in Oexrary?

A. The .'-.ichsi'u.jhrsung- SS was composed of twelve !>ain Offices.

Iho personal staff ms one of thera air. Offices.

1. How ;arv persons v w re tb-r.. ir. this y-rsor.al Biff if Hi-x.ler,
ipproxi' .'-tely?

a. Ap^roxi .toly five hundred p.rsons, but this figure fluctuated
-iring the co;jsj of tho Hrx since a R*sb_r of ti3ks received noro
. phasis vihile other tasks had to be n^glect-d.

Hoi pleaso explain this sketch in a few words.

••• I . tho personal • ;s_d the

i: udiato circle of collaborators of Himvl.r, upon T.hcr- he rolled for t ho
-rser.al doalin* with his own afiairs, sad in addition, a rab-r of agencies
■ 'dch for jaateriol r aoons could not bo placed in the other hair. Offices,

-■d for that reason, for reasons of simplicity, wor^ attached tothis
--rs.-r.al staff.

5. -hat r. s the nr-e of the Chief cf t .e person 1 st aff?


Cwirt I

21 r li7—-* — Hi - U - LJO - ~uttj (Int* von Schocn, R-.nl^r)

a. Tho na: _ t.._ Chi of of t-._ personal staff was SS-Cbtrgruppon-

fuohrvr :;oif. Ho only hold this position up to the tioa he received a
cccrvand in Italy. .-^s far as I rer./fcar, that happened towards the end

of *U3.

*. and after 1?13 who was Cnial of tho personal staff?

... ..ft-nrirds r.cocdy boeax Chi.f of tho personal staff. Tho tasks

•

is far as tho/ could r.ot be dealt >ith by Hi-- l.r personally, w.rc dealt
with by tho Chief of Staff, SS-St\ncartcnfuchrcr Bau ort —

«. PI ease look at the sketch .T- ^apl.ain x. th.r tho r._;:t box with
tho word "Strhsfu.hrur'’, staff aiv^or, whether that was tho person you
navo just nentionod?

... Iho bco: "Stflbsfuchror", .r*. f t a nog or, w.s h_ld by SS-Stand.artun-
fuchrer Bnu _rt.

Wh-t v s tho position of th. St:bsfu.hr-r?

... * s rjuponsiblo for personnel rotters concernin* tho ontiro

staff. Ho «na in char-.,, cf tho b> - >t of vehicles, transportation,
and moroov.r, was tho disciplincr;- superior of all tho narfccrs cf tho
•ff. That appliod to aa?.o one funolo aenbers of tho staff.

Q. Jfaw, pleaso explain tho next row.

... Iho next row co prises the ffices which dealt with special

tasks, tasks to which Ei.vl«r .tt-chod valuo, and which hid not found

i plfico in tho other >.a?n Offices. St -ting fron the lufthond sido wo

fine tho cffico .cirxnurbo which erne or ns itself dth the scientific

' -i.s : -i t ,r. lhat ia pre-hisa.-ric.il r.search work there and

-ther litor.ary research work originating fren Germanic culture in which
•

Hi l.r w.as inUrostod.


■I :>rct 4?-—-?jC-15 St 16-I-Lcssofr I at., von Scfcsoa & B-vnlor )

;~rt I

/. Do you know -,o was in chargo nf this .'ffico?

Y03, this ->ffico, "Ahnonorbo" had a prosidoat and that was
prior hlnaolf. Thoa it hnd">. scientific curator, '.he was a university
: rfossor, Dr. ’Tuost. ?..a letter was a di roc ter of tho Uaivorsity of
ssioh; In addition, this office had a-business ;sanngor, who was
c-St‘rdartoafuohror tfolfr-ti Siovors.
a I think that '-111 bo acugjj. :;-j t- m t: thj next -ffico.
i Eo soernd of fie o -.fas tho "Saw Materials offico". ’.Dion, during tho
rso cf tho war, .^ro and .rro sphoroa of htisan activity wore dealt with
! tho St a to ia an iaoroasing -loaouro, tho Rolchsfuohr_r-ss doo:-od it to bo
rr>:t t soo that n t ovory lain Offico oh aid rotator tholr noodo with
vto -uth ritlos *1 t/.oir cwn bohaif, but that all tho so applications and
j;w 3 to.bo centralized in :o spot .and frer. thoro to bo aont on to tho
: iatry ( SBoaoaios *r tho Slinistry f Ar.-a- jor ts r tho Agency
•' * ‘3 7 ur Yoar Plan.

'I *on tho hoad f this -ffic-?

•* f tliin ffico van SS-Stondartonfuohror Kl-th.

1 Stoat will ba o:.-uch.

Too.

* T’-w tho r.oxt ono.

. 7. i aort ffico c .arlsod a castlo in ‘lostphalia whoro tho Roichsfuohror-
9 Uocfcud " nu.bor .f valuablon it a histcrlc and artistic nature. This
• vc uas intondod by IiL: as a placo f looting W t -,3 loadoro.

,7ir > that r.ovor cao int of fact daring tho war. Tho castlo hadn't
~ finished yot.

V irf vh: was hoad f'thic?

- Tho hoad was SS-0bar., xupporfuohrur r-.ulort. ?hj next offico is tho
"lubo.-i3b.rii." Thi3 ffico doait with tho cara f.r mothers cf
H ‘ ' lto chi 1 Iron. I; he' P _ .tor f -ator.ity h -os ir. Cor-«iy, voro
-e -ore carol for a to.; woc-s pro-sat-lly a.: aftur thoir children
1b - ,J hbt int tho rid. r.-o ho I f this -ffico was
h : ri “"tonfuohror :>z 3-Uor.na. .^'5


• T-rch 47 -->-JC-15 raid 15 - 2- Lossor (Ir.t., von sch.on & ?.r_r-Jcr)

2 1 - zoxt office, tl.a Cffico »?f£ron3ca..j>', doalj with tasks of nn
chi tec rural ncturo, and intorlor architectural n-turc. it draft-d
.-tlturo for f- r.-ore and -ado pl -^3 in c;nnocti r. with sthor houso
ialtu» which was noodod fr tho SS.-Tho hoad ~f this cffice vqb
. urbannfuohror 7-hronka:p — the .aa;o is saollol

thJ cL " rt * Ccnaoctod with that was tho Cffico "IMr.ich", idioro dr-fts
x v .rkod cut f r porcelain -bjocts which wore rvsnxfacturod in tho ?'rcolaln
:: rios 1 by tho SS. Tho head of this afficu w-s SS-Oborfuohror
ibltsch. But this . at. spor.t a ere at reribo;- -f tho war yo-rs with tho ariy,
t>.t tills ffioo wr.3 aloe undor tho provi usiy :«ntl :.od -fficor,
C»ur..taruifuohror Fnliro: kawp.

* Tho s --called Air. oooti :m which f ill u r. v, tho -ala Jopart jnts ia
f urth rew— did th.y alo have chiefs .h . y .u c uld aa 07
.. lot. Tho :Ain dopertaonts listji in t - watt r .1 Chipriood tho
ltf> rat ra if HLoilor, tloco cthor rorccns a uhu. ho roliod f .r tho
- llw f ]lia P° rn ,l "-l affairs, it otarts lth tho I Bair. Do part.-oat
iw.iy," which was divid-l into tw lepart e.its, iticl; wore independent f
v. thor. Or. tho no hand thoro uao tho ao&istry f:r r ■; Socrot Hotter*
t: oro w - TtolXetvy f • Public r Opoa Directives. Tho hoad
SS-Stur. b-aafuohrjr Trousch.

Ter. : 11 t.j Ia!:. Dopart. *»nt '.‘Jt dal strati ,» which Joalt with
.ui;°t for tho personal st-ff. - . . . iS-Cborotuxv.bannfuohror,

To noxt do;artout w«a 'a lc AH*. -Ms ffico ri ijwtod fra.

* tl * u ' :o: t!lJ laiehsfuoliror-ss pl-annod STocial oasuros IntondoJ f t
o: ors wh Bad c .. into oc r. .ic aoo', .. t by their xn fault.

•• co Ic-ool 1 ans t a Xareo extoat. ?ho :»-! was an ss-Stur .baanfuohror,


■ * . .


C:urt I


v


- U7-& - 15-16- la - LJG - i^ss^r (ir.ts. von Schoen, Ramlor)


i. Eofcro you discuss tho personal dopart-unt I would suggest that
you first deal with the other ruin departments and that we coao back to
tha personal department, and‘discuss it at the end.

Vary wo 11. The Vain Department "Staff leaders Office"', (Stabs
fushrung), capris.d the collaborators which were used by tho c*-ff
esnagor when dealing with his disciplinary tasks. There is no special
no® to bo nontioned in connection with that office. Then follrws'tho
Chief ..djutant's Office which received all of H isc l or's visitors and in
Edition constantly accompanied HLr ler's official Joumios. Jt.r 19lj2
it dealt also with rdlitory tasks as for as they concerned divisions of
tho ir.affon-SS at tho front. This sain department maintained direct
contact with tho SS (^rational liain Offico (SS Fuehrungshauptont)

• rich was tho highest operational office for tho ffor.-SS. Tho hoed
jf this sain department was 5S-<Wsturrfcannfuohrur Grothnann.

I havo or>- question to ask iu.ro. You Just said that tho Chief
adjutant's Offico had direct connection with tho SS Op-rational Offico
(S° rush rungs amt)?
ft. Yes.

Q. "ho was head of tho SS Operational Offico?

ft. That was S^-C'o.rgruppv.nfv- jot Juottn-r. The n-xt is tho Main
Dopartaont "SS Jedgas". Tfhon in tho course of tho rar the .taffen SS was
bttilt up, tho SS and police Jurisdiction ^xtandod largely. Hia lor

* r.ted to havo SS Judges in his vicinity who would be in a position to
report to hia about tho curront casus ar.d who would bo able to gut his
decisions. Tho head of that department was SS-Cberfu_hr-r Bonder. Tnis

- I-.: aoportrsnt maintained a direct contact with the Kain Ju‘go«s

-rtaont of tho S3. (Hauptaat "SS tierlcfat")

5. Who w 13 the head of the offico Wich ycu have- Just aontionod?

«. Excuse ro. 1 only knew the rus'i t the first hoa:., who diod
ia the year 19L2. This was SS-tburgrupponfuuhr-r Scharfe, am' I now

- mi or .hat tho later head was SS-Cfeorgruppunfuehror Brelthaupt.

•1837


Court I


21 .-nr k 7-.v - 16-16 - 2a - LvG _ Lessor - Int. vcn Schcen, ?-*- l_r

■i, Please go on.

• - , ’' r deal with tho Vain Department Police .idjutcnt*s Office.

5vc~- iho ti. o on when Hinol-r had becoixj Chi.f jf the Gtrnan Police, wf-lch
- 17 July 1936, ho had a special adjutant who dealt with all polico
matters. This car. maintained direct contact with .the fain Department
' 'r -r Polico" (Ordnungspolizoi) and with tho Uain Department Security
fclice, tho so-called Reich Security fain Offico (RSKA). Iho head of
this -lair. Dopartasr.t was S3 Cberstur.-bannfuehrur, ant Lieutenant-Colonol
of tho Order police, Sucharak.

Tho next in depart,^nt only existed as long as 5S-(toergru unfuohrer
Jolf was Chief of the Personal Staff, thet is, until the end jf tho year
19!*3. The head of this department at tho last was SS-Hauptstumfuohror
fcekunstailor,

Tho next main dopartsont, tho Personnel Depirtnont, dealt with
personnel mature of all tax'bera of tho p.rsonal st-.ff. I a-a sorry, I
forgot tho name ef th. heed ;f this department.

Ihon wu have tho Dopartnont ..wards and Gu.sta, which originally
- a with all awards which wer- received by 3S rjorbora in war or poooo
However, this department decroasod in irjpsrtanco during tho war

.r poftco ti e. However, this dopartaont decreased in ixportanco during

«w far and finally cuased t uxi t altogothur. The3_ tasks Were thon
: it with by the General 1'air. Dopar taunt, the 3S-Personnel fain Offico,

•» he .d cl .rhich *~x SS-Mjurgrupp-nfuwhrer von Hurt.

Tho Last department rs tc pass spec! .1 wishes of Hlmler n to
the prj3s. This dop-art-.ent was els. to supply hin daily with Goman
y.-os3 reports. Tho boat, if this dopert^ nt changed frequently, it was
•. -tly a y-u-.g journalist, so th t it is hardly possible to r. *, the
* -o > nsihlo aan.

«. «*ne new wo ci ^ to the Personal .•.,p'xt:^nt. Rude If Brandt » J

• Jou cf teat. .r.U y.'u please toll -a first h • large this pars anal

•taont was, numerically — hoir-any people there *<.re?

It co.prisod between 16 and 20 people. .Jtor Kirnl.r ha. moved

*18 oS


Court I

21 Ixx u7-.. - l5-ic-3- - LX - L-sser (Ir.t. von Schoen, Resaler)

into his c_manor.t headquarters, four or five of these people stayed ^vith
Dr. B r ondt, There'3 th.- other ten or fifteen v'ero with no in :, cr in or
at tho Evacuation Post.

Q. Could you toll us in cr» or two sentences what the subject - f
the work of this Personal Depart eat ros?

*. I bclicvo I can differentiato b-t«oon four groups. First, all
-era of the 1-3S (Allgoaelro SS) Group. Hisraler h
giren the right to tho 15,000 oldest ncefcers cf tho 3S to avail thcnsolves
f th; opportunity of approaching hi-a r.t all tin-s, ‘.irectly. This v:.c
-,n p. irtunity which w-s nado use of '.-cry frequently. In addition, in
.vurj case where on SS corb-r had iod or fallen luring the war, Bhanlcr
received a report about his fa ily's situation and wh-.t kind if help was
given by tho SS in th-'t case, those events in theasolves ancunted to
hundreds or ovor. thousands during tho course of ono month. In addition,
in cases where a fourth «r fifth child was born tv an SS r*. ber, personal
c ngratulations .are sent b; Hi*:il.r. Hired, r also approved ©Very marriage
3- chat daily there wore ten to fiftoon rr.rrt.xgo applications which had
tc bo aubaitt.d tc hi ;. In itien tc th t were tho numerous -«reson*.3
which he gr.yo—presorts of p.rcelain, fruit Juices, children's candles,
a ks, lad all a r'-s S other thirds.

Iho second group c& prised, op-licaticns c;uing fr n the Goman
people. Thoro w«ro n.stly requests for help er requests f r advico in

ly • .tters. It frequently occurred that th.s. -;p licaots had other
•i-.-l -'.cations dealing in other agencies of the Reich, and asked for the
support of. the SS or. their behalf.

The third greup co prisjd proposals of all kinds. It happened vexy
frequently th t non and v- en, belonging tc tho Goman pcrplo, sho had
icquair.tancos in tho S3,


48 r 9


21 .. 53 5-15 & l6-l>-tcsscr (v n Sch“-on, ?...lcr)

Ciin Ho. 1.


felt the no.I t tell Sfcrior n o mi tr.cir thmezts f their bw: cations.

■'.:c last cr -up fin ely c^crrisod the official corre8~ondor.ee, th t in,
tr.c c at ct with i ll .pennies 't tno H-ich and tho party, and ospoci the
c ct vith the other -AinHcpr-rtcenta, with the cxccati a of tho 4 :*.ain
iff. rtaenta which I lrs&dy oxccptoi when spenkia.7 .a* ut tho eh rt. *..'o li v
to cxclu’.o 4 offioos of the 12 nrdc -offices, th t is, tho Soich security
..In Office, the _.in Office Or’.or Ullcc, the tain Offico SS Court, and th.
Oper .ti anl hr-in Offico.

!iow ie it correct, witness, that Kir.-lor drew r. shrxt distinction i
tho Fcrsor.nl 3c; rt.ujr.t ’ etwoon thaeo fields which y-u hrvo Jus*. -.entionod,
•r. the police natters?

... Yoi. It w • .no f his rinclplos to nnfco a otrict distinction
etween theso aattora. It happened p :-jti..es that our nttonti r. van drawn
t. _ lieu affairs 5y roae'n f th- n ; lie ti ns tl. t cru fro;, tho niblic,
an’ I would have '-.oca v_ry .an.’, t fallow u the further leal in.*: wit. th-
-ittoi'B in tho ollco sphere; Kl.lcr, however, r.t treked .Tout value to o.
tn . ve only n:pronchod tho P lice ..’Jut. At w.i h * t .oal with m: ’
furrier.

.. S th-1 3r-ndt trr.r.sforrod all police ;; tt-rn t > the .«ar. ir. eh n o?

... ..11 palico .-.atterc v.-re transferred ti tho ? lice ./.Jutnnt vd:*> hr/,
-is own ro ristry at his dispoo U Hatters c mcer.air. tho -oilCO were not
c rioo-.l -'ithin the -or. v~l re.-istry of the Personal st< ff.

.. H , witness, 3r adt hr.' t work with all those thin-: which you h
Just li todl
Yes.

> -a Chief f the Of:ice?

— Y-a.

.. l-.s that a .re t deal 'r work?

~. I - y perhaps clarify that .y .ivin.: y u few fi.uros. Durir. t .
'■r .hero woro, r.s a rule, d.COO ta 10,000 letters o;inr«atiar frar. >ur

t:—nt rcr ::T.t::. :ltr si.nud perhaps 5' 0 f these lottora ir -a'

*:e-:o


cl .. --J-52&-15 alS-Sb-Los^r (v n Sch'or., 3 - l_r)

* . * 1
U 'ta* « • • ••

a-'-' "°rc than that. Dr. Trandt si-mod perhaps 3,000 to 4.COO lcttorr. -.cr
; nch, th .1 io, : hundred r r..ro per day. la .y c:.so it w r.a a lcttlc less
aai fluctuated between 2,500.rad 3.0CO. ifco rest, ohout 1,500 were 6-Jeon
caro f by ;y coUabornfrs, < a*, those Vera xsnttors f nin'-r innortnneo.

.. Kw, witness, I * tl’. like to attempt to Koko it clear to tho
Iribunl hw it c:xo about thrt Brandt sicsol very in^ertent A'*cttaants. Mil
y u le so toll us what n rsal workin.- lay was fro., mndt: t bvoninr,
what obsorv ti'o y u nndo, tod want Brandt's activo part was?

.'.part fr>n tho tiaos when I had to represent hi.., I oft on went to
t.;o ?iolA C'l—and, since I h-vl t receive ell t.;e visitors in Berlin to •rh
Kl.ler mated t speak personally. Those wore rfton :v-.ttors concernin'. 1
fn ily affairs. I took the opportunity t rup-rt the r ; lienti ns f those
J le collectivoly t Dr. Brandt so tr.-1 he c ul’ ain pass n there re-
. r: . Burin these occnsi ns I -fton experience’. h*v n d-vy ‘f work pr.oroA
• * • Z> ’. ition, I lyself vs subject to si:.liar cor.Utiens of work

vhenever I reyresontohi . Tr. Brandt slept very little. Ho could r.lro C
c • ’■» M ••it desk at 7:00 o'clock in thw ;.orni:v:. Then he lookod at hin
eter.j;-rnphlc notes rn* t his notebook: ir. order t check vfcoth r ho for .ot
' -V urz-ont request of the previ us ay. In elditi n he dictated a na ber
letters t .is secretary.


46-1


21 :.r L 7 --*-w--17-1-Gr's: (Lat. v n Sch -r. * Hanler)

C art " • 1

r.hit liruct assistants did Brandt have?

Brandt tad a secretary an : a y .ung r c llab rat r f nine. In
iti n, ho had an ffice cessen^cr b y»

G .n and describe the day.

.»t apor xinataly 5:30 the c urier train arrive’, with the nail,
y "here did the train c ae fr a?

n H case fr s Berlin an: was destined t g t all headquarters

in East Prussia. That is, n t nly Hisslcr's, but als Gtrinf's,

iv.-h ntr p's, and Hitler's he a quarters itself. Dr. 3r:n t then ha! t

a rt the sail. Tnst is, sattars. .'calinr with was affairs, «. leal ns

f r -rri:..-5, fn.tll; lctt.rs etnt f r Hi- ler pers tally. »ls , his

secret nail had t be a .rt-'! ut fr a the th. r sail. »n! all th se

letters which w v rc pcnc 1 had t be checked ir. ricr t s.e -th-r they

.it-r. t be ir etc t Rimlor hma If. *itfc >. they pers n lly were

addr-aSe! t Bran It they .ay still haw r-quirvd Ki-neder's aers nal

. He ften didn't finish that because HiscOor fton invito
t nr -.kf'-at. HLslcr slojpt uif.ht h ura r y a a rule. «nl aint

1; In 3 ? alti n t t bed Very Into at id ht, he har’ly • t u-

t.f re 9 t 9:30 in the n roin;. Toe first n. f his c llab rat rn h.
n th. ccasi n f his br id fc was Dr. Bjtttft. Darin that break-
t Hinder ; »ve Bran’.this first rdera; t sen tel-ty>e3, t w; is tor
t i, .n ne calls, r t writ- letters s nctiaes. Th-e ar- tatt.rs which
l.r had. c nsi’.er.. iurin th- c urse f the nisht. Lmudiatoly
after breakfast hlccdtr want*. t s.e his ntire nail s td t b r. It was
i—. ys pr-ss, i f r tLao blcaus he c didn't J.al with that bef re break-
;.rt. In a iti n he ha t rep rt ab ut ids m nail, t . Kinnler
w - in the habit f wantin.: t Vcidc all natters by hfcaself . therc-
f r , this -.ail c prise' a nur.t-.r f ban. >.Tittan letters, the c ntenta
f • hich .rcr- r-p rt,' t hin by Brandt since the readiit, f those letter
token up t nuch -f h.ns.l-r’s tice*. .'.ftarwards - well, n w
Tw aln st appr-achimr n- n tin and bran’t had t take car- f r rs
t: r.in 'urir.c breakfast ar.:, in a!'iti n, re ictar tele::. n_ c r.V-r-

.ar -It\ 1 k tar u an th. rest f the tail an! s rt it ut. Lunch

4642


21 :r L7-r.- ,-17-2-Or s: (Int. v Schren £ Easier)

; art •* . 1


r-.: usually it liiOO h urs. Durin; that Hia_Jcr, f r the first tine, saw

ill th.se pers ns wh .a he rdcrcd t attend c nfercnc-S f r that lay.

laacb : stly lasted f r three quarters f an h ur. Then Bran 't usually

t mt difficulties with tine because, n the ne si -, th» nail c sin,:

:r t.. inistry f the Intcricr was just c nin t his lesk one'., in

a iiti n, the visit rs which ha 1 been rdor-1 t see Hiralar, in evor-

atir.iti n f Dr. Branit, .rs nally th j ht that they wed hin a visit,

t . It was fter. painful t watch h w Dr. “ranit, wh himself wasn't

v< r/ Versatile, wh war rather awkward, n' in additi n 'i 'n't have .iiuch

: rtunity t tell these pe pi- h w little ti:ze he really ha:’ ' r tiler..

In aV'iti n the rcntliacn fr n the vari us ffices waited, wh h-1 br u,*ht

tne JT.il t HLncler's ffice anL wh want. : t sp-ok ab ut a nunbor f

.tails. Dr. Brandt c ul 1 nly hcl.. himself by writing all th se natters

int his sten ;raphic n te b k, h ,in- that wh.n bringing this i ail t
¥

: r he X. uld find the right n> te at tn. ri ht a oent.

Q N *, when '11 Hirv.l r dictate his letters?

i. That varied. His quietest ti— f w rk was either late at n*. ht,
r t really .’.iin't like t .'.ictatc tner. becau c he :i *n't want t
r a his secretary. He - stly 'lctau ' urin the . rnin h urs, alter
Or. Brandt had already br ught his ail t hie. H, fun it with it

i .c 'lately, an." s it hasten. ' that tn- 1 -tUrs wnicr: ere written by
t secretary -'urin; th- c-urse f the afUrn n nly received Hitler's
■i’a’.ture at the Inst a nent when the .essunger already wuite - 1 * r th.

il U t Berlin. Hi:&aler attached value t aail bcinr transp rt-«l
In th. speediest -.inner. Dr. Bran't receive’ th. file f 1 tters which

• -r. sine ! by Biml r nly at the v-ry last a nent, an' was then able
•- si n the c. pi-s. Hir.-_ler sent fUn aany letUrs sroultan* ussy t

mrtocr f agencies but he nl ne ... - • rest b Dr. Brandt

lor in - the time I re presented Brand t. It was ften nly’orsslblc

• -i n very hastily since th Dcssus .ers Wurc alr-ady waiting at the trai.

- : . r .call a number : cases where the train ua clth.r t be st pf . ,

• .. th t f c arse was- a difficult r.atUr becaus. the train was

... meant i r Hitler, G- rir.' _nd hibber.tr • , .s I ner.ti ncC bef r-j

4843

H


21 ~T L7-..-M^»-17-3-Gr ss (Ir.t. v n Sch cn k Jlaalcr)

C u.-t . 1

r t.:it wo ha’ t send a car t catch up with th ta train, a car that has 1

t c tot hur.’reds f kil ro ctcrs it a tic*., t catch up with s ac train

-t s - -thcr atati'n. The tclcph-ne c-nversati ns f Dr. 3ran!t ncr

-!y miner us. I can renenber that durir.- the tine I represented

•

his, I nee had between sixty and seventy tclcph ne c nversati'ns, an-’
it is t. be ossiu*..! that the nuaber f tolc?h;ne Cenvursati ns in th-
ease f Bran’t at least was .qually hi#!.

K *i witness, yu 3ai! that secret nail was a Is rece-iv. ’ and
t t tills secret pjiil was sh wn t* Hiaal-T Lore‘lately. Is that true?

n Xes. Hianlcr attached re it value t rvccivim; a ail rith ut
’-lay

Q N w, after such secret sail arrive.’., it was p-ssibly sh^wn t.

If Brandt iaaodlatcly?

.. s, Tnc f lJcrs were pcnc-, an *.’i_ *icil c r.taine therein
w-s put n Ur. Bran It's desk, and he then ear t it that the t p secret .
a *.t rs were las. liately turned ver t HlnsOcr's batch f tail, inasmuch

* *« r secret natters w.re oddressoi t Higgler ers nally. Cf

= r , there were Up socret tatters a ! i\5S.i t Dr. Brandt, which he
peno.l. In the ease f secret sail the f 11 win* measures were
■apliedt In the cases whore the. lctt.rs b re him Ur's ress, and nly
' ^OTK.t atom? then Dr. Br.«n‘t w ul! pen thwj. If, fa wevor, in ai'iti n
t .v b re the rc.-nrk "pers-nol-‘ tnen ttuy were treated as very t a secret
•-Urs (Ojfoi.:; Hoichssichcn).

By jxrs nally, y u an f r Himi-.l.r p^rs nally?

Ics, in th t the r:-3 r t ‘'k. inrich fai-rilcr, ers nally."

• w, witness, ; i bserv. fa n fed If rran't w.rke.' 'ally. Can
/ U tell us in Whr.t way ho dealt with, this uail which yu si; * vciy
;slVc? c ul n » soy that in Tenoral he studied the inc in./ letters,

• " c ally os r._ 1 ks at a letter which ne receives in the c urse 1'

ttat h ‘- c nsidcr^I thus and reached a ’.cisi n? Or what are y ur
■ mti ns?

C nsiicrinr the extent cf the inc sin,; nail which al ne was sub-

^ us, bvcauSw, in au liti a t. ravine- fc c nsiicr the letters

4644


21 -r -u.-17-^-Gr sc (Ir.t. v n Sch cr. & Rader)

C urt . 1


= rln fr--inistry fficc, an c nai :_rin■■ th. great valu. which

Hi-' iltr attach. t receiving the l.tt_rs icacJi&tcly, it was crolctely

at ' the qu.sti n f r hia t rca ’ all th.se things. In the rule, an

' 1 ,T * S iriu. in --O' cast, t , he acruly real the n st in, rtant w. r 's,

see he f und at that this lctt.r wa scant f r Hicaler personally

he put it asi-!c ixscdiately. Kail which was : r. by Dr.

- 3 far as I bserve:!, c sariscl all these letters which nc lidn't have

•

t sub-nit. He was able -nly k throe, h U sc letters 1 ( t niqht,
• stly after sur-xr. Then he =ls- -!calt *ith -Uctati n as far as he
ni-.self ha ! t ictate any letters.

0. H n, h'w ab ut tho cut-: in,: ^ail? Sh- letters which HUalcr
sl.nce personally which were sent by Ruirlf Bran't, be- it a c py i f an
acc arcnylhg letter, t thirl p.rs ns? DLS y u assure, s xtMn- f the
sax nature cr what were y ur ebservati ns here?


--S45


::ur: tz. 1

21 .'jtr 47-A-18-i-2Bt-Ccck (Ir.t. Ear-oler ic Y.nSchsea)


«. I already nttenntdd to describe what the nrocedure was vith
tfcosc si^aa.tures which EltSilor ^cde bcf re the departure of the c-urier
:r i . I hero a* e rule it was inpossible to study these orders or letters
ty Hi:- ler. It sufficed for us t- see that Eir_-Jer has gtren his fci t -ne-
ture. After that ho erpccted us to take the rest of the vork fron hia
end sl<n the copies neant f .r tr.er Ai ices.

v *ut you concede that Euf-lf Brandt read ora cprefully the
Utters which were fd-rossed to h.Lt?

A. /.s fer as h« did not recognize already in the nernin* when
vjrkirw. at the letters thet his address wro only used instoad of Kin-.ler's
address, end so far rs he did not eutuit the letters which w®ro directed
*t hia, he reed it, tut he -nly had tine to do that lato at n -ht.

Did you observe that HUvlcr dictated letters end then told
the oechotary she “ns not t - si*m it vith Kir. ler's na.ne tut the nar.c
.f nudvlf Brcndt, rad vhy did he do that, if he did?

a. I had that ©xnerienco at first in ~y cr.so. I w„ 8 very ournrlScd
• fret to roceivo tclotyoco vhich contained ordoro ty Kinnlcr aad
re ay si.-naturo, nlthovuth uo tc that tlno I had no knovle&o cf the::
vhotevivor. That con be cxz lainod ty the fact that Elnr.lsr spdo an
er.vro..us or.our.t A dociol.r.e personally. This nr.ee urc or. the other
hand ho did not like to ud.it tovnrds .".on A o lower rank, that ic, if
h wra not c accrued with the chiefs A the donart.nont tut Just ordinary
:cc in tho SS.

... Tou acan tc cay if I underctond you correctly thrt he nut his
Bi.xr.turo on letters only if they ~vre tc i-'iocrtant people A tho Party
.r tho SS?

... Yes, that wre the rule tcciusc they had to to people who oven
f r .illy c uld expect to - et si matures fr z bin. Ctherwiso ho -ftor.

8 u-ht this way out. I found that cut in .ny cise, I also nnko tho

- -hserveti n in the case of Hud If Brandt.

. S-v, I telieve we have spoken cn-u-h pVut the technical wry
... w-.*ch the ;itii v?t handled. S-v I th uld like to ask you vhat


-.6*16


: ur; Si. 1

21 -i£T • a 7-i-ia-2-£Hr.-Cco£ (Int. Harder ^ VonSchoen)

Brandt's is the, -.ere-.sal deaertaeat rodly vrs. it has ban

repeatedly snid here that he had the Position of an adviser t- Himlcr.
D1-: you -eke any observations ±z this respect? Vhel car. ycu tell ue?

A * I vrs once personal vitaeas of one such a report c B rril by Dr.
5 rr.sdt vhoa eutnittin* nail. I v* e Very uncertain of ryself rad I vented
l ' tev hov hs VTS derila * this re-.-rt in erder to *ot scro idee of
"■*' it vrs d>R 0 . I can reoeater exactly that ^n the one head I vat. very
ica-esoed end oa tho other head I ves ouit. satisfied. I could not fct-
•ervo cay advisory tid .a thv sort of Dr. 3randt during that r«n%rt ,3
ail. She oheervnii'.a I nndc vro that Eirvilor gave Brandt his orders ir.
tho sr.io short -leaner according to'the contents f the letter, i t ho
did in ay case t.o. I think that it is completely out cf tho nuoetlon

Dr. Brandt vas Klaclor'e advisor. I «e, convinced n the cthor hand
that considering his extra .rdincry stenographic ability ho vro rr. extrn-
-rilnory stenographer. Dr. Brandt vns one .f the r.ost sklllAil otgno-
rraahers ,f Oorasny. That dates back to his youth.

V 3, y-u vast tc soy anythin.- else?

a. 'cs; • vent t. supplement this description by citing an oxoorl-

CBC * vhicfc I hed in the y^cr 15-.1, that ic, after the var had started

ivalnot Bus sir. When the war otjrted Hlrdvr "rshfcilcd Brrndt fr on

•

t * klCf1 ' ,ay -^ict-Tios rlon,- vith h’ .. In that case thoro v rB

&«lth«.r a secretary for Kimlor nor for Brandt. Hianler exacted Brandt
'* use all of tho hilp of our office and deal vlth rll additional
V '' rlc * A t that ti ic I vas detailed to the front in nusslc vhoro I reccivod
r letter froa Dr. Brandt vhcro ho complained about this additional wer-
.irden of v,rk In a Vur distressed j.nntr. I»c very glad a t to to*
tMrc at the ti::c rr.d I merely ey^thizc-fi vith hie.

Hjv did ho tyoc these thirds hirself <t vhat did ho dc?
i. He then had t take all shorthand dictations fror Hinder and
tt '“ d t5 re-dictate them to -so if ,ur younger verkers. Of course.

• -Id r.vt type himself.

Hov ling M's Brandt’s v-rkia; day?

4c47


C-urt S-. 1

21 .-.rr -*7-A-!c -3-ajuv-Cuok (Int. Han der & YonSehoen)


a. It started rt seven o'clock In the r.ornls- and ended rarely
cf -t ddni-ht, emetines even later, e rule I only *ot to bed rt
-se r tw o'clock it ni^ht, Einalor exicctvd up to be ready f,r. work
just re 1-n.* r.s ho was still up an c vrs staying behind his deck.

V y -u vent to nr Inteln the state cat that you hr.ve just nade,
even if one considers that kudolf Brandt formally bad a rather hich
p.Eition. He was a Sttndertonfuohrer after all and vas the so-called
head :f the lialsterial office and had a oositicn of ninistcrirl coun¬
sellor red aa .uteider hearing these titles vrald consider It -uite un¬
likely that 3randt vruld be c loyed Just os a first stenc.rrauher.

A. I es ruito clear in ay uind that this description sounds vory
1 probably, tut I c/.r. only describe it rt it actually vcs. I hono th£ t

I'urin.: tho c.urtc ,i yeur further cuostions I shell have the opportunity
v. show because of vhat psychol^.-lcal .reasons it is oxuli ince lr. Brandt 1 o

stture hiaeolf that this situation or-se. *\it a .:reat influence on

c avoir 1

that vrs oxcrclsod by the/rethoA of «-rk used, by HI lcr. Dr. Brandt,

• " inotanco, -aa never r pcrtlcl'ax.t in nay c.nferencc. Ko v uld. have

: edictsly t.ld ae about any such event to bo in.: sc ethirv; extraordinary,

r I would have hoard it frr. st::e f tho other workers there. It w U o

•.he rule that durln,: any confwoncoe of Kli Itr Dr. Brcndt r.i.-M perhaps

•

-■ called In t. the c-nfercr.co rccu rt suae ti:.o curia.: the conference

in rr.tr t- receive any -rd.or, „r it is orohrblc that after the or/, ^f

tuch r conference Ein.ler w.uic. cell hi*- and v^-vlr shortly dictrto the

-.into which ca c u- during tho conference. He would, dictate tho occon-

not

tid c.ntonts of cay letters in crBos where/EL. tier but ~r. Brandt had
-rss on the result cf-rny such c.nferencc.


46*iS


21 rch i:L7
: art . I


1-cher. (Ir.t. r.-nlvr ra v^n Sch.en)


.. h: -re ur -'-•sorv tisns concernin; the c a>lcteness of the
c.stents ofth- files; ih:t ia I ac s.—nkins f the case where certain files
*ero sh-wn to &td:>lf 3 r. not and that Hints lor h d c. rfer-nces _n the subject
f such files; n » I ask y*u whether the contents of the files al.no,
uith.ut kn. wl-d u f the conferences, aould cake it clear exactly -.that .it
K6 OSUt?

... .\ , the connection *ns -nLy ■ '-.rent in very rare cases, not as a rule,
jb t can - v.x .L ined -y the division S these t*o svaistries. Himmler did isot
have to rocegnisb any coanoctions of .r-tt-ri fr:a th- files, he jot it
11 during c nfer-nces, _r it cast, fr a his wn head whenever ho h"d to
iv. ny rdors. I -..as ften very dissatisfied -t-ut the f ct that a
little could be 3 e-n !r c the files. I nly cite as ex .r.*lu the institution
f :he voluntary divisions -f th- rff~n SS, an institution which c-a riz-d
rwah-rs fr a nuaor -us sor >an countries .

... Ull jrjtt Uaoe » friuf in n nno rin stion?

... Yes, I Just «mnt to say I was .ften ash aed f bavin coordus tell
"How c you ci.n't know that, y u are with Hi—ler." An c result
fr 1 the files n connection c.uld realized. In 'dditi.n, c nsidorinj the
- Influx f . . il, very extensive c rr.s nd nco could hardly be re~d, r.d
tr.ey c-uld nly be read at tir*. when Kimler was * lready d-ne with them nd
o.n’. them b ck for r-. istry.

;. H V., witness, in the d-.ily nail did y u seo inc-air. : letters do-- 111 *.

*ith .0.die. 1 ex eri ents r a.-diea 1 res-'rch with th- use f human einj:s?

... I can zvaoabur no such or.so: Tw Dutchswn th-u.- ht that they had
i ord o vcial dru rinst tuberculosis end then carried .n rccordin. ly
-i. rinents in Ornnietfiurg, th-mise I f und n indications which led .ne
* -LieVe th-t .- edic -1 -X -rimer.ts u,r> c* rri-d ut .n burn beings within
tfeu is. 1 belieVe t e -• 1- t- sty th t thcOc matters, af which I n..w
ria.d kawled^u :n the b sis X documents, rust have boon c.a.l-tely in the
ra r-line Or. Brandt's s.-hcre >f work.

. Th-n !-... d you explain the fact tfrt certain letters Went thr uph the
-v . rndt nd centi rvd his n-a., and’tb-su dealt with hum n eX.:oriaontt

‘-a that i-.avc 3 ce thing to d, with his si.cirl high .Position or bo cause he

4649


h 19A7 - A -19-2--=K?- Hech'.r. (inti Harder rad Sch n)

3 art :> • i

_-j : nsiciwPcd a c.nfidcnt f Kiaalcr; r what -x teii-r. can y.u giv- us?

rt . I now hav- had an -pp.rtunity to link t hr-ugh the. D-cuchmts hv.ro -and
; - v- had an -pportunity to gain kn-wl-dg- shout tho Subject natter, I
.v.v- ’^n thinking for .a long tin- n.w how it c.uld fcv- boon a.ssibl-
*. r /t tho a- lottors did not c-co tj qy kn.wl-da- *r.a 1 believe that I na able
• cy that n tho on- hand tho extraordinarily strict socrocy -xercised by
Hi-clcr vlr.yod th- d-cislv- r-lu rd that m tho other hand ther- Woro also r
to t-chnic'.l fsetora which h v- tj to t k-r. int naMcrotion, I...

Do you have soothing -Iso t- s y thon r. k'cino? I s hauld like
t. -sk you >ut 8 -a .thing olso. You w.rkcd 1 r -o'rs in tho onvironaunts
f Hiaalor ■ rd Brendt, n-w I ehuld like to sk y-u what influonc- did tho
xrfl-tr.lity -f Hinnlor ttvu n his clcs. o.nvir no-nt including ifudolf
Er*ndt»

n . That is a v.ry difficult question ljr aw to answ-r, i-r wu haw DOW
l mv-d h -w ■ Hinder diotertod tho .*icturo f huamity, h.w ho violated tho
fjni.anunt.nl principles of humanity, tho princi. lu on which our ontiro
sir . -an culture is bas-d.

If I as r.w to state what influunco Hid-r exercised on th.oo pcoplo

with uro conscience -nd pure heart epproached nin and got to know

dna.ro cl suly, I .a f-rcod to toll *-ut 1=.. r-osions that I h d rnd to

rite -x -ri-ncos which are c-<a. lU»ly in entrdiction to what terrible

m kn-v. it hin today. Sir,.*'. ”y f 1945 "hun 1 was inurn-d in a

irlti.'h Internment C.amp, 1 sked ays-lf am than once, and I considered

. ri isly, H-W it could h v- case about th- 1 we had n.t realized th-s- thing

--.rlior, h.w it c-uld hnvo boor. ...ssible th t k misinterpreted tho charactc

f Hinder so fundamentally. I a*M =yself whether I was tho victim of - n

LLLuoi n, nd It vas - decisive queSti r. i r ay -«r. noral -xist-nco to gain

• t inty whether 1 c-uld roly m ay heart r '.rain, or whoth-r I had also t

r;r. d*nger i kir> such a cat str 'hie irr r in tho future.

no t.rri-'lo as it -ay s and t-dny, I c-.n mly say th‘t by >rsorrily

with Hiffol-r, ~cd y his utterances and talking there was no indicat

- • uli le- i rv- t r-e.gniso those t-rri'l- outhods which ho us-d in

rd r t: rrivo at th-s- aias, which ho soec-d t re. r-s-nt in such • pure

-*65C


-3-PKP- . - r _ v r Schoen)

a. .rt 'i • 1


.nd dignified cEruior ' ef~r_ our eyes.

Kj» "-^1 'gain ay ‘tt-r.ti-r. nos drawn to reparts by the foreign press and
rdia, hut the vX--ain-ti r.3 which Were carried .r. n.guL-rly an rder of
Saaler hewo ill jrs >rovcn tho incon-ectr.es: _«f such reports. I tbar(*faro
recr.t to h'Ve to s'y that these report wn - ngor credible far u3.
-dditixi tj th t wore our ncstories -f the-horr:r st-ries -f the First './arid
'.'nr, therefore, the reports of this last w-rld war did n.t scon credible
either. Hiffr .i o r's ,A»rsonnl nanrer was with.ut fe:r. 2 experienced that durir
the heavy 1-obir.g attack in the ytT f 19 V.. He was always ready to help,
always .1 lite, always sympathetic uv>rd us -nd he ms always ready ta spunk
t us nd ex r_ss his thought. H L aal er vns r. rilliar.t conversationalist,
it no time ..as he a fr a ntic, ho was always c>r.erxis and ready to r.ppreciato
noewm else ' s opinion, that was true in th. c-.ae ,f officers .f scientists,
ffici-.ls ,or SS leaders, They often tald oo h-w happy we can bo that wu had
th- >p irtunity t work in the vicinity of such a ann.

.hen Hlaol-r developed his thoughts everything had .a 1-gic'l s iprdficanc*
everything wr.s a natter -f course, h. did nit shy Tm approaching such
questions which coca up during th. war t -very responsible huarn -inr.

It *ns ^ften apparent hJi h- hel>d his listeners, how he relieved then of
:d-n which wan on then by aerely expressing his thoughts. It was
int renting to hcr.r his attitude toward religion nd the individu'l freedom
f c riacience hur.ar. oings. He considered the concentration c.iaps as a stvar;

trunent:>foi ocl necessities. He said t tho

B’nc tiia., n wever, th t there w.as an -n r .>us r.a. -nsibility connect-d
■1th -in on thrt .account. It was int-resting t .. nr the way In which he saw
th. r blen of the G-man rac- and n ■* ho cl • rly and unaquivocally rejected
ta ught f the ala la for German leodurrhip. Sverycno :f his thoughts
nlight-ning nd convincing r.d shaved Hlcnl-.r in ur eyes -5 a nan
*'• “ith h n.st he rt errieav.red to deal with the questions of .ur tines rnd

* trying to find way in wnich he could justify .to hioself and his An

• acct_.-Ke.

I : uld pr w. the:c assertions by giving .rnya- -les, -xatil-s which I

:• exactly. Since - growing y;ung sen, I want-b ts understand under al

-*651


2, _'--rch 1)L7 -«-19-4-?EP- lk-h^n lint, I.r ai v_r. Schstn)
C-urt Ns. 1

jircxasV ncos fcr.i thv W'rlci reflected itself in the aind ;f th-.t nnn
I nn n-thing *rjr.g ir. ttat.


iSS2


; r 47-.. -S' -20-1- icisi - I t: slcr

C urt . 1

w i'. l.c tr.lk “ o ycu r. cut C c quosti r. -f ccncontr* ticn
c :pa rn\ .x. rirxmts rn lunrn * oin^s; lid 1 c '.iacusr it with
; u pc.rh-'.pg? -

:'«,vcr .cut oxpc.ra.onts, In tl*o ~>rin- of 1S-.2 ftor
L.vin^. rotvxno;’. frra I.uasi:. .a .. scl ‘.icr 1 shed h*;: clout
c ncor.tr..ticn c:-:pa. It« 1 '. kin ..t tl .t tiro tJ t I crul'.

c ualurstt nd low wo ociii.l \wrdcn .urr.lvos with concontr..t-
: r. c..-ps m.* uitl c.il t; la p. llco cr niiati n vkcro wo in
~ o SSL/. tc sot ;; cl ex., .plo, n vkv.ru tl o o luc.-th n .1
• i:; .l icl- vo 3vt ruraclvo* in tlo SS w.a tc oxtond tlrcu/J.-
ut r'onorr.ticna and was tc uso cv-.r; ' it cf on^r-y «f tl o
. icesM very thoughtful then ;*.nd tried to o x.olr.in to
.w fr whr.t ro'arna tlo Institution of ccnconcr..tl. r. cnispe
a r.i-cona ry.

•. itnuaa, r.y I interrupt ycu f<r cuont. i'l ler v.-.r
crnai «rod *y l,.r ;o s^ctl r.a <1 tl o Cor. ~n popul ti n a

f -re t aoverity an*. rutkluaanoaa. I will n< t :ct..rj;ino

C. . ; > r ir. wild tl ia cpini r. vr.a 1 ul - ’nit I -ale ycu, v a

6’..la p.ni> n nit alr.rc'. 'y the jor3 nr.l at ff — *y ycu r.nd

1 r..n’t?

••• V r., ' ut i .. Lk.de . '.iff uront ux.: n elly*.

• •• * "1 rope t vhr.t ;*cu 1 vc just o . 1 .'.?

Ye a.

.. Or -i> ycu * ;nt t o rplrJn it?

. r . . t tc c ntinuu in ..*• aac.lptl.n f ; lor, I
t .*t r sr.y -

'• .. 1»Y: i r.y it plo.. so y< ur :*„ncr — this chr.rr.ctor

r-nc-. r IV. lor is iia.ir.tpri .1 in t lie tri.-.l, Unfr rtunr.t-
- vo n't 1 .vo ginrick Ilij-lcr in tha '-eh. I t! inlc tlo
' - s* 1 . o nflno kin* so If to t oetify pert:.Inin- to tic
- nfc d. if dr n't’

* ; uT? - : *' 7 I sr.y s not: in£ . * ut tf-.t, *!r. rroeidont?

,653


21 r 47-..-S"—20-2-Mclsi - InC: R....lcr
C urt ircl


I l . ct feared tl C the prosecution wcvl. rrJ.su this c -
jeCtion - * ut tl or., I oliuvo cno c.mnct see tfcle case
prcperly; t; is caso not inly n cuter Juctivo s^‘.o -

’ ut ti is C- .sc f 'iran.lt wit! its v ny si n txnvs cn the so
t-rri' lo a-cunonta - 1 s n internal ’si: pif leant si o too,
an nc c:si un.-ratar.. it inly - c .n unlora -and lev/ l.o cne
tc lee -.ist'Jcua enly if nc sooa un'or via* t influence l:u
n is witness - s r.'t intoni t> c .y nnytl'in' ' ut
!'i. lor Xcr vi icl ho c.\nnr-t take tie respen IMllty, n ‘

9

Iw sets Liu a elf ' sdutely t itt sc- fren Mo'-lcr, and ho
series *nl; what lo ' e c‘ aerve , ..n ho tolls us low
uxiler, witl ! is u* lu n turo, infiuunco.’. Ms envir n-
.•.wi.t .nl lev L c lo tc r w r.n't in Ms spoil, ’-r'n t

I

ec.t.o . vietin r! ri-Siler. >' t it ne si o rf ny .ofenco c
I see it, I i w.l t • C i.lo t c..rry < ut t: is ofonso.
If I Were ;i t .xmlttCA'. t« tlrcuyl. tie outh cf

witness l.tv. tl is- fcerri* le .-.n riurlur was «•.’ lo t< i^c nn
^ntiruly lifforont iapresaim *-f 1 luaolf tc Mo onvin n-
lant. ~r ' silos, wo 1 .vo nearly finisl of..

n2 ?.3SH>aJT: Tic ii'i' qpr.l mdo rater, la tl u portinonoo,
f ; 1 '.cr.l rf tl is tost&u ny .s rclc vr.nt to tie

opinion cf tie cl ;.r..cter f the lofonicnt liuColf Ir nit.

. r that r*ur.8< n vo i .vo parsitteC t’ro witness tc c<~ntinua
- stify c ncernin I'ir.ilor ut it w-ull soon quito r.pp-
: pn to t su oat that it i;;l t 1 vo icon fairly 'oq-
tu nu ci-voroCl. c . insol nay prrcood.

Dll. ;_UFL im: :ir. ?roai onf, I fclank y u. I si .11 ro on
n t! er su’ ject n w.

“ Ja. IC.UFMV:

. itnoso, • u laiuw “.Jilt for years; you wore lo to
rvc M. .ally, .n' I as uuo tl .t y u loiow 1 in as n.
j.—u. ;<-ri .ps ; u c..r. toll ua sene c“>sorv ti< n rf lor !o


Lu Z.3.LT


.1 *' r -7-. -c -20-3-31:lsi - Int: I
7 irt 2 *c. 1


c. u;It C'-ncorninc tl o pr * le f burtrnity. Tlx ' cmicnta
iol to ir.vo 1 -re int: voa mo vory incrininr. t ivo•

2uc vl-fc c..n ;• u toll cL~ cf 3 r-n't's p-racnr.lity* 1 . a’- yru
soo 'r- n’.t; would y v ever !• vo exp-ctel 1 i:i to t.Jco n
ctivo p.rt in sue! cri. -a ;. -.inst 1 urv.rilty? lV_.t wi.ul.l irro
r 1 - s s ’ c ny L fit quosti- n.

.. r. •-.-.n't nui.oroua : * c

Ocr. .n - wit!, yrc.t leva, • v/ tier: bo r.tt-

.do.' '■• ^ i P rt.jico t< acu t! ..t net no f tlo:o pi- s

■ t-Vwrletkci', if -ovor.il p. int: v: .ro .-lontionci in tl.o

t - lotti.i*. In t! o ■ w' inr.ins I -...-.a 1-er c..roful \7it3 tl r.t-
un I .u:. It!: wit!- t’.uao quotti na — jj 3 I v\ a eft on c rr-
c-c y *.i? n t! t sc ro. !To fton t 1 . .... \;1 ot! or I

•••’•°n*t in .. p sxtion — to place :yrolf in tl o p axticn cf

•: ::o tin ix oin a vie, fill-; wltl: c fiionco, ..ro
proaain? .. pier. *3t1 • "icl I V a juat *,o. lintf vitl in .. ou -
-nnor. -a*. ~r.r.'t .a 1 \ -c vtr: nxi .« ti aoo
chin:; wr.B cottiod por.cofu Ly. I
rrola w«ro avoided. Ttr e rton m . poflitlon to
‘ .rvo t: .t U profurrcl lie. tc M:.colf r.'.t! ur tlr.n

• .v..- o t nyonu olao. Ir. . .iti n, l;o v..a

—:y f lifo. - “ .n t novor iimou . era.

»ao. r.r * e ljy - bo, 1 'ccauoo
’ - bonci-lcrod --.a ..n < fleer, vr.a in vrorco poo it Ion
4 • r i' staff, l

lBC P° n rjl -- 1-n<,ot ..nl t t tine *.i‘ I l.e..r 1 iu £y
- »Vcdy olt in hia i/ssonco. Bo /.i.'.n't
irc: t-l‘:. :o iln't c.iro f*r alrjxlor. ..sf r t! o tl cu-

‘ : - tic to in erioas — it s! ..11

- ccur fee :x.

-*• rt: r qu fci nr.

" L T: -* 0 Tri*'unr.l \ti 11 n w rocora until 0030

4655


o t-


m


- • r 17-: -S’ -20-'l-2ic lei - --- -: ? lor

urC ITc. I


iclock : r. . • -rr.ir. •.


(io Tri-j nr.lr ocossc' until 26 • r 17
r.t 0950 hear a.)


-656


2-1 -re:. 47-::-7JC-i-l-?-stor (1st., 3rrjnJ
C - - I


Official Tronscriot .* tho £.oi-lCnn Military
•ribunal I in tho ratter ‘f tho Unitod Staton
-f xTorica, against Lari 3rn:4t, ot ai,
dofosdants, sitting at Humbert, Car-any, on
24 ::-roh 1947 , 0930, Justice Tools presiding.


TrZ : .’JivHdl: Toraoiia in the c art ror . '.Ill ploaso find thoir scats.
Tho Honcrr.blo, tho Judsoa of Hllltary Tribunal 1.
unitary ~ribur--l i la rev In socslcn. hod s-ro tho Uni tod Ototos
f .V-oricr and this hr.rratlo Tribunal.

There '/111 bo rdor in tho ccurtrce:,

~3 PR35I *'3"T: ilr. ntrshal, ycu asoortain that tho dofonionta nro
rll Tssont in court.

7H2 JURTHlLs Kay it plooso yrur Hjt. t, -'ll dofonionta oro prosont

i.. t!;o c urt.

♦

7H2 IflZSIOTOs Baa Soorotory-So orol /ill n-to f r tlw roe ru
tha ;roconco -f all tho Jofo.-ilnnta in c art.

Ccuuool ny jrccood.

AUOJST '.JZ'.V - 2osu.iM.

"JIT:": Dofonno counsol hos n further direct, yu r
.. r. I -ill li:<o t. cr ao oxodno ot thla tiro.

BQ FHZXDSf?: Tho aitcooa August Koino is atiU or. tho stand. Tho
'•it coes is ra t!v>t .o la ctlll urdor CQth.

caax; zc m:';5io:i.


r.’JOY:


" ‘‘Itnose, t:» Dofonlont Hud-lf Brar.lt lr hla copoclty as chlof of tho
rri56 f tho -ora.nnol stoff t Hlrxrlor had tho nuth.rlty tc sign lottora
r r-'ore ca boh-if -f Hirrdor, did ho n t? •

.'. 1 .lor Tiorod hx. t .


^■Xs If


y-u in y ur co*neity ir. that 3one ffico hod tho


--.nty * ri a lottor^or cr ordors In behalf f Hi::dor?


-■ -j


L^7


Court I


2u or LI— - - 1-2 - LuG - Poster (Int. Oram)


*• I ha that only if Him! r ordered no to, ir. other words, when
I ras representing Dr. Srsndt.

i. How for did this authority of Rudolf Brandt or yourself acting
instead of Rudolf Brandt, extend, that is, did Rudolf Brandt sign lottors
or orders on behalf of Hisala r pertaining tc top secret and secret
alters?

a. That can't be ansrrarad in general. That depended on whether
Htad^r issued the nocoasaiy crcer. I had no right at all, for oxanplo,
during Hit llcr's abaonce, te issue any orders for hi- and I a-, convinced
teat the Defendant Rudolf Brandt also did not have such plenipotentiary
p-ver.

«• !.*ow, di the Defendant Rudolf Sr&ndt have the authority to
0

algn Hlralor'a naxj?

... I hrn Just 3 id th •- >an Staler r.-.s .%ls«nt he did rot have
t.: t right, a neoosoary prerequisite was on ordor from HianlOr.

Tou hove stated in the course rf year direct examination th’ t
perused il of the doCTpnnts ir. . eo Ir. this case, and
r.o doubt you have se.n aany ''ocuoonts which contain the signature of
?Ji - If 5r.-n-t.. Tiicso documents woj - In tho fora i r rs, in aoqp
instances thoy follor-d instructions and others. Now, tc what ortftnt
e:uld Rudolf Brandt issuo orders hLaclf?

*». Or. his cm Dr. Brandt could not issuo any orders.

- no hsru ir. ivi tnca, witnoss, s.v.r .1 instances wh^rc Rudolf
3rMtlt 3ignod cr ors issuin? Instructions to non like Dr. Rcscher
f : instance. How o y-uxccunt Xcr ffjch t.lv .s that?

a. Ir. _y *-u3tirv:ny « *ridy I triod tc - k- it Clear according to
• • p Uciws Hi-sl-r die! his work, and how in the technical aspect what
* if Brandt's work was, ant whe t aLno was wncr. 1 represented hi ... 1

ut r.t the tiieo that Hi tv er did r.'-t always wish to appear under


r. e. I* frequently horned z* that he gave x an order to

-lie* and tel ' ae th .t h*. *-S not going to sign it
L5$6


Ccurfc I

2^ L7- - 1-3 - LJj - ?rst-.r (Ir.t-Brcvn)

= tint I nysolf «<es to 5i^*n it, if this letter for exatplo, was net
i"'-cti to a chief of s . lit office. But tbs usa-ntial point is that
eVun in tiiw c: - 3 '’ th-a« L-ttors that I personally signed, the contents
* lotfcjr hoc boon '^tonslne? by Hianler. .end in vest f tho cases
“• 3 f: t.4u1'A.-' thwS- contents so pre«t*!_ly t..i I sinply had to add cither
t:.a salutation or the ocnclusion. «r. ’ 1 believe this rust also hay© boen
cr8Q v *tii ?r =" I fc'-v- -lr-' y .'Or.ticncl that l was once
present when ho tfolivureJ a rep rt about his roil.

witness, I believe in ir-ct oxarlnation you stated th t any of
tie particulars ccr.corning tne subject which is at issue here in this
c*u wore not knsro to yc-i during the time th .t you w.ro in the p-rscnal
:rrico. Now, r.3 y u kn fr.-n the ir-'ictr^nt the prosecution has charged
ti-t froesing and hi<;h altitude exp.rir.wnts were c nductcd at tho Dachau
concentration c&ip. Did you cv.r h r ;b:»ut those when you war. working
in the of 1 ico of ^ueolf jraix’t?

a. I did knew that tho .lolchsfujhrer-SS had given Stabsarst Dr.
P-scN.r the opportunity to carry out oZperiaonts but I til not know any
f tho .-toils.

f JU hoc’ no idea that these e* rir^nt s _r. criminal in nature,

"ltr..3s?

Ho, cf that I know nothing.

Q. D y u kn w t * they n.-ro using concentration esap inaatos for
t .so oxv^ri^-tc?

— - c > til t 2 did • t • s in • 1 ly known, t

f r tporim nts. Or. Fr#ay

- a- od tho jxp.rin«r* t- c tno ftitch br.th.rs eahn carried out in

--.iurburg in 193'f, and I als- m... Dr. a scher personally.— I can’t
- r dint year it vros, right ; been 19h2. I net hi. in tho

-roMmol of.ice.

<• D i: knew i ut the .alar! a experiaants at Dachau?

... Ko.

iw>9


C- irt I


2L r L7- - 1-L - LJG - F-st-r (Int. Broro)

Do y.a knr- about the L:st s experiments, tv.t is, nastnrc 1 gas
axp^rinanta ~hich roro c r,"acted r.t > tseiltr?

Ho.

-i. Do .u kner about tho eulfa. nl load do exp_rio»nts t. ';t wore con-
aetod at thj Ruvcnsbruock concentration conp on Polish n?

He.

"■ r you li vu no lov. .tlu: .;c, specific knowlo&o, of any
,f those particular o^erf^ats that I have .utlinud, is that right?

*• He#

I assume th t Pud; If Brandt ecu’. »ell hare issued those
ins tractions, ardors, nod parsed cn t-.o instructions f Hi--.Ur without
y.ur lav.sloti'Se. Is thvt rl?ht?

... t-\t upon's cn t.;o 7 tr.o ray the rk nr rp-.niod technical!:
• i have air. V said n Friday th.t wo of th

personal Staff hud two cain dopnrtoonts in ur Xfico, a secret rugistra-
ti.n and a public no, and it was «. rule t t the r .rs * maintain

•. . o. strictly bearvcft. fto a_cr«t letters *-ro, as a rulo,

•ir.'. ;• -j ' od ir. -e ilwi.’ cen Tn> effico f HiaaLr's, boenuao thay
.u untruatu*' t. rdlnary .enf r r ro than .n- ni ht who 3_nt them to
a.riin. It was thcr f ro tho rulo t • - so letters that I hnd n thing
, ra n lly, w ro s-nt Uroctly t these registry cfficos.

.'r.l/ vie so—cailed .pen ' r ol.'ers with sign a ur..' put in*, envelopes
in ur fdico, sonlod and nil .


u &


-r=r. 24-^-CX-a-l-rutty (Ir.t. rcwn)


*U2^ •• •


i


' Her, witness, in connection with the fretain acpcrfnonts rt 'Jachrcu,
Lid you kr.-W that ieoscher used w:ce.o for revandn* urprs-s?

-He.

' , • itnoss, I ea "in to ask you tc leek at this document.

I.. This is jeeunent He. 1Q9-IS, Y.ur Honor, which has ucn

-.Litt-d inti evidence s ircaoeution Sxhllit h . :.’ 0-2 — pr.ricn a* —

SxhU it 7 which will ‘ v. found in hocus.nt Jeek Ho. 3 cn pa -e 20.

hill you re d that iecuaent, witness?

.. "To S3- ri -dcfuchrer Gluecks, Orani -ri ur . SS-0’ cratural rnnfuohrc
*jr. . rrnr’.t oaks you u ivc instructions for the four - cam cricred 1 y tho
Ecichafuchror-SS to ‘ pit at the of ,r. . seller tc \ « suit free

Jw'.vtfw’ rucck tc jrch-u ," si-no.; *y aysclf.

. Th't is -i no! ly ;.\u, isn't it?

i. Yel.

;id you over he r cf rrcfcscor ;r. Hirth, witness?

Yea, I hear.', cf -r. Hirth.

:id : u ever he'r ef r. lina.r?

.. YvB. : knew th t ^r. .k. r tra t. ..asict rt x* .ric.nts, and I
c n r -r thrt I to Jr. r r.’.tk triers sent rn cr'-r t: the SS .Mn
Office to the effect th .t r. Usner ah ul 1 c rel.-acd fren hia provieus Ji
n sh.ul’ le meie \ii- lo t. r scientist, hut I c:i't rmaahcr whether

it -a 2 r fesner Kirth.

tfolij now, jeu didn't knew thrt jr. '.direr w: ■ ork with Ircfoas

r. hirth in his “lest" exj orla mta t the Hatswdlor Concentration Osip?

.. No. I cm r..t r.x:-c r th t.

..itness, I n'; kneuvh' r r* f filic eysfci you mi hudclf
-rrnit hr i, * ut I cm well in- inc th t 11 letters y.rt. inin tc tho arao
je«t Were fil.d in the 5-Ule fell V , Wei th.y 1 't?

.. K . „c I h v. rlrocbiy aril cn Prddpy, there, were twt re istry offic<
Secret ono «a on pen cno, sc that one cceplex j-.Uer, tfc-t hod ,r-vicusl

riled -rny in the ct-n r-- istry .ffice, rt the accent when a secret
. - -c arrived, this secret c-.cumic-ticn woa jut in the secr-t ro-ia

ub6 1


. - K-2-2-I t [Int.

Crurt lie. 1


office. Ifc-t is why we ner^ un-M- tc knew just *hrt v.rs .in . n sicnly
fr:- lc'kir. -.t tho files, '..c etui 1 erfly have recess tc what wrs iaoodicta
-• ,ur 'rasp, nnd there n-s'"-lw:ys a -re't deal jf treu’lc for us whenever
KC t-ntel t. c.licet tho tvo ?urta, the sccr-t part mu the epen pert cf
aycnc natter.

I ar-ny tinea aado effort tc leek u. aatt-ra that prrticulrxly intci
jl _e, r-.tters of ' cnor'l politic -1 n-.turo, for inatcnco, : ut this, tee,
•rsu very difficult, ' ec use ft the accent nhon c military office wrote
* adthln- in oonn-cti-n with this c.tter, it went to the chief r ljutcnt,
r if the police took * pert in it, the letter went tc the ;clice adjutant
I rlre" iy ;-ir.tod cut that for nircl-r thca- lifficulti^s were conpletdy
irrelevant. He knov the ocmooticn. He c. rri. i cn the ccnv-ratlcns nnd
c nicl* cnees perstnlly an l Hi net h:.v. to rei;- e;. th- ccrroaycr/.onoo, nnd
f:r ua it wsa cf no c nc.rn.

I cnee a&de thia ex. erfnent: 1 ointk i out te hie th-.t thia ayntun m>
r. difficulties for ua when «- wanted t. ut an cverdl picture, ml th:
it aheuli • e j:c ssi lc th. t 3k;.ly for pr-cticd ;urpese 0 a one chan u»ahcul 1
Y u ht r. rut. Waaler replied th:.t he h'd j.revic.ualy nc c!Jectiena tc
tii_ w.y his ii.8tructi.ii8 were e:Tried cut md, c-naoqucntly, he arm nc
r. n for effectir. sny eh a-s hero. Hitler'r order t. nxintrin aecrecy
ir- kn-wn tc nc; it r veil' 1 f r rvo md Tor every Geram nch end woman,
clao it certainly hod tc U v lid in his cwn ot,*.ff,
well, new, you untienu 1 - lottur yeu wrote to the SS l in Office.

. . lh t lottuT, Xcur H.n.r, is - c_ . HO-196, .r.socut

Zx i it Ho. 211 which ir f s lc. 13 on pn o 25.

. Ir that th l.t.-r you wr.te?

.. "wB, vh.t is the letter.

. Yeu a y, the l*at phraae ir. the first pr. ra h, ttot Dr. Ursaer ia
resist 3S-HcuptrturafUehr~r Irofocscr Kirth in a seiies ef ocp.rincnta.

' in' t kn.— th: t these wer- "lest” aq^riainta _n esttcentratien caaj>.


-1 tsv;_ii^r. Is th t ri ht?


.. .. , I i- net kn - that.


1x362


rch 2 - 3 -i (L . rci.n)

^urt Si. 1

♦

. . H.,"/: I h-v<_ nc further questions, -ur Koncr.

IK3 ..J£I.E:.T: Is th-r> iny rodir_ct oc* ir.r.ti n f this illness ' y
«aa fer ivuicif ^rrjiitr

E3:T IX. 2N..TICH:

. . r.-.S: Eaufmum fer Irant.

■ ».. r -

‘-ness, ycu . Just skcl quest! . 1619,

_ i’ i*- ::c. 7. Yea sr> this 'jcura-nt nhich v-a ccncomc.1 with the fret that
four • --en ».r«i t. te usd in n concent:nticn c.a ut yru lid net nako r.ny
atrt^icnt r; cut this .eui.nt rt tht tiie. Y:a h ’ . r.vi ■-usly sri-l thr.t you

it a huoi r. ' dn s,

Her., this letter, this , accaa tc eci.»: •. Jcnaoquontly,

I chculd like tc ask ycu -nice r pin tc rt-te y.ur view mi this locunent.

. y.u rutuV <.r this :l;cuaa;t?

Yes, I still rcacn’ or it.

. .h t d ycu xnew cf the ie tills f trio '.ocununt? H v. -liJ it eerie
tils, mi »hr.t did you toko thio ;c orient t. ixmi?

lea net rcr^o’ er the toils on! tho circuostmceS vrl-r which I
r.coiv. i the instruction fpen r. rni ana un !.r which I a-ilci it, ' ut
.a. in m may ccaca thr.t I rec H instruct!. ns ttoa dr. .'rrnJt
' 3 -li \v I c.-n now r-trcap-ctively ruc.nstruct that the situation must
- a nl why this l-.tt.r is ri nol y Te.

1 ., -. loaori* trikin * out L filer's a acci.il

.. errryin or. wir< t i he ILaitei r.i.io-If t. cl-rrly f.rrailr'tc'l
era : in-: ictic. . H- vrf r.. .xrlsr. .I -..:, i. fr - -s I t.n o’ liod

t. -ai r. his rlors, I h It. * thr.t Here .r less cn .to am. The sono

. .. . : this ccau .... rsndt rcccivod

‘ - ri_r fr-.*o Ki-d.r t. take c_re f these i :r . lisfc wr=_:i -ni that a

ir.utC3 1 ter cause I arts in his office, h» ia cider t. coke hi3 work

r toll Te cr*lly, ". loese se.vi r tel t;; - a. ri adefa firer Gluecks


rr-n - fer tint."

I kr. .*. ir. w.v.r-1 thr.t huarn-i.ein- oeporioents Were ein carried


itrch X-2—Wutty (Ir.t. rc«n)

&_urt 1


. it, ar.i Since- is a natter - • principle huara- a.i cccporin-nts c-ntinuid tc
fo prrer. for, fer exeaplc, in thet the rosw-rch icrir-rs cr-rriei cut expsri-
•:.nts ;r. themselves, or us~d th-ir cell"- :r r.- f r such experiaents, cr
need . racnrl friends cf theirs fer such cawer^ncnts, end since, furtherracro,

; toes n-cut the series cf ^erin-r.ts in Or-nien'.ur that the prisoners
n- in Jroves tc volunteer f r these eacporlnents, lee'us- fr_:» thr.t nenent
n the;- rw Ion-or had tc work -ut r-ccivcd tetter feed, si it ur.s thr.t during
tjjer ye-re I ii! rv:t tccaao syspicicus. 1 »:-= fit thri tide net frailiar
dth the t-rri’le back round cf these catpurlnenti. Even in the fern-1
iesuin cf criers fer these experLn.ntc, I nysolf vies involved, nnrt it was
niy hero in seuin.* these J^cu-...nt3 that 1 found out & cut it.


6 ’;


? re..-. -< (Int. Br.v-a)

C -urt X

■j. -ttn-38, j u just soi' t. t y v Ire be-.re t-. :t pria i.w?a he-' volunteered
-v,s f rtheso cxp-rl I , " I k- - : rk. tar-t sar prcc^a?

... In 19 u 2 , t»: DutebreiT, - - hr-tk-rs Lain p-intc-J ut t Hixanl-r that

: and S ' -ru. t cere T.B. Hiei 1-r ,-.v_ t fei cn
opportunity t ur.-~riront In Oraninnb-rr*, but since thus. Dateoauu were net
-cor int '' nit!. G.-con credit! ns one el*> wanted t receive s e. ot the

r . &X ctiy i • -r 1 r,

■-a qoortUn 1 cinor dotr.ils,

kcvor cc i 5 - 1
, -. V art possible they

e . , Hi 1 r '“ visitors.

ni t - .'lr_ct rs I SviiJi oX experta-nts* -•. t i ,, 4
Sum >r ' ra, tclh e- the er-vl usl;. l-r.t^ nd -toils.

3, lnct<ur furdf, y u went t any t t e " ‘‘ ® 1 ;x v - 1 t -s. fnur
,.n u^vi t be us-.: in «g exvvri tuft* . o neoatratl ft f-ap in. tea, oltbor
: . 'Jr.ctly or t be ooei in c.n action vith uxp-ri.»-r.ts tfiichvuro

•. »: rr’_ "t :i r - thir* p-rs iu


... t i . * PI i r

t .X;o.r».*fttr * • • . 1 . a. v.. I

lr ‘-y it cl r t. U w ci - tt» e* tr •< •'•-

t e urot* r a‘ Inal purp ceo.

j. . .r in ; c :Ce.itr ... 7

. X ., ii - mrjy 1)1}, s Cr • l'* «*”i “


t-r .i. -- w -i - hid -sc-rt- ...


virite c ir..ntr-ti n


.

v.«-. - c central - e- ??

.. • ‘ i

_u- I ! ' -r. gov- hi- or. i... re uii visit, b-.caus- Qf visit

'0OT4 >T _• it Ut r. t: sc S- - 1 . :jr bs-rv-ti rx <1. the wh le

t I . r -i *n enrps fr . .

L665


;;_jjW3-2-C:ck (Iat. BrTru)


CjuiC -

j^yr-S SJBfJ.XJ: Just a . -nt, vill y « ro -r.t a^ain the '-'to up n
irtich >' U %'isiu.:. the c nc-ntr-.ti n er p?

IT HESS: J-rnruy, 1913} It .©errt ct shi t I s-id? It c uld have
t . first . as f Tebruriry, 19U3

JUDGE SS3SIH0* But it *as in eh; year 1913?
ios.

... „ D’fj h ■*, is the qtt-sti n I tod, : ar n r,
gv; Dl. Vv!is

cited a c 4c-s.tr* ti n c~ ? nee  s tvcr-1 '-i -s 'urinL 19U3I
... 2 3 ' iv . visit nui ottor ooncontr- i-n c;.p but frequently T vicited
3cntr"l -r : Qprx • -nbur*, 1 © «• taoro v-r- ;eod ah o and clo-


a « p.

.

;-_-t f.' ::ivf-ct»irin, ur.rtr in tto C-" .?

... £ vi:ito the r. ( . L. cr y. I b ri-.cks in which UOrt slept

r. . r: -i ... i»-.r l kitchen ' rftooh thJ food was pPopnrod
• • : r ‘
f-.c ry, tii t f-ct ry, «•* 1- t .r -c.lc unit: to * ' .1 r P ..c'

: .»

T

• .f *• • 4 r.for- tub n t s-en nc?

... .Xt~r,ia tto yo.tr 19U I rc.turfc.cT, f: . Huacin, 1 cpnto t ‘i * 1-r
; ; c.ntr * s - Jnnurry, l?i*2. This I

< r h* 1 -ir Su , ixv. Ik ^nast biv*j zv v. Ixro 1

: -tuts n,i r., \nd*hon to X to- ut . j • . t t tot still ut visited

: t >. oc. Or

1 . ■ • sop to this Vir-i: mj ; -*•

: '  « state tore uielcr oath

• • A - ' 1 ,..- v,:-t th- sitv-ei:.: - 1 thiST4scunontvhich


• a


mntaii)


1*666


2 - ”•


E-3-3-C k l-'.t. wn)


C urt I

i. » tM.-f.-r qu-std ns. Ti_ t it.._ss ..a; lx. fcith T->.n s t-r no I an
c tc-tmed#

Oj?. .livlC* (t’er Sc hr - ’-r ar- Boeder-, roy3cn„)

.. .. I:

5 . T lt !T n_r, I arte poalBskRl f. - ••••-■■ - t. is witness.

Y * r c at--* ; t knew t’. t- tc-.-c re'# ...sear. r«.ra .'r .. tlij
luf» c-.-r - ut x, jri .r.tr. K ’ v this?

... another t 1 r "j- th-t h< s.lf.

3 . y i *sk when h- t'l y that?

. s I r - :-r it *~s 1 ?L 2 .

J. D v r tiu. nth?

&• Mo#

Q, Df / u kn. 1 . th'-t t..o St-.ba-rxt Dr. VseUr r-s tr"nnfe.*r«.d V filler
tr t - U'ffr. -f-'o t th- SS?

... ' t r.’ t ’ ut n-r. ir th. '.oa -ntc.

.. ? • l , ... • vbo ~r tve y u tint inf motion?


Q. D*'.’ y u .:.vr at that *.i - ho ha already boon wrkii 1 r Lt

l.i r •: , hw , ( u?t : .‘-ti.. 1 :. . • C* r, rlt in '-eh u?

A. UiJ c>.ly I c-a..t’v . .

ti. r quest! ns.

.

. ,. SIPl T: If there axv .. .••• .. J : ' ^ aa i


- -; - xc 3-d.

. . • • : . • : | c B,

. *C"- . y ri3 i-i. . ad’r-.ss ti- C rt:

-j 1 T: Th. wit.-as ia -xcuf-c.

. .. . : •; it .i.as. - - ’ rj rad, 2 3> ul ii* - rnis

• -n s rith r\.s.:--ct t the fil "I actus- 0 'hi eh n-s been r-qu_stud by tha

. • in vm-er a we !: :r s ‘ ‘ sine

* •

previa shoir. 0 cf i. b.th the *_:-ns-t counsel an t... ir scaution.


5 . reh-. .-Jr-3-WJock (Int. Brora)


r.irt I


- E-v V.-- t.-i3 flln "I 3B0ttM a has be-n previewed by both dcf.nst and /r.sc-
cuti n . i ? aiw- cc.'i cat th~.-V.ic fili is entirely inadmissible in this

- r setien, out 'I 1. >u.' - •••- ti« tc -.sic if AT- FTOCSCtaany

r any cf the. cth-r ’.cfonse c -wx-l, i U: c. ->.in a f~rr.ii ton£«r of
flt , tV pr nort: c for the cb*.cti.„-: -id b . n th, occtai a when it
is jffcrcu, ut unfcrtunat-ly th t v yl • «. -atircly toe lit- t b- c' -ny
. r ( - • •; - r I V tr ek f t it fli - c - - r-c a ' f - so * ~- d

thaa the 5nV-rprU.ro int-rpr-t th. -r rn lr-t Sa; lish ant’ .'.rJee a running
ice.cnt ii r -r t. t- t >.:• it v - • rt t fellow tl.- sound track
e jrt th- filr. is -jdJibite.*., sinew u : is a Ion, v/ -xc-.diiv.ly
I , &\eh runs lr. th- n-x.hx>rhood c; tie hours an f '*•-» ainvtua,
it ..ill, e uro-, U. n lxm* and lv'« ub v • .. interpret! t..ts iiln,
c nr-c':..iu: 2 - vl like t raise > :i-cti.n OuTtre that wrk ir dcr~,
t-nti.n n tr.» pxrt f Dr. Prooachaan t tfor t iv»
to. Xnsk.to • - rofur t ti«M vj.etinoby

u

~ r " I* sbiUt

• 1* -y ov rti r.= nris-a, . olul. r loti n U • - the

irittunaS*o tH vi.w th. fii . - *•- -• :rt

..*• f , Triouirl i . ' "• .".W t h"v. '• jivli-li.-ry


-.f . I IK Triou -1 i
. . -.tt-r he :‘-r.c


. iribuail *.t 1.30 ti Ir oftotf-


. Xt I thick to- rr

illb- i:. a-,. tor, UttloM

• • •

r is si t view it.

. s irS'Ts It * Ul- dvo the c- urt an opp&rtuiAty t dot-r in- U’etho

... . it .t-r ir. the -r u ur^u

1 - . U, r. cH-r.-y?

. c ...... - } ■ !


o


!-.r -h-l-Gross (In;.Drown)
fffc 2 • I-

j -j P 23 SIKL.T: C’ nscl for the defendant 3 r. adt .iy proceed.

DU. ” .ur.-OT: I aov -?'• yur ?ori«il?a to c 11 the defendant Ml If

Dra.t.

- 133823331: ?ho defendant Rudolf Dr ndt will t. Jee the witness sir..
JB 7 ; SX 3 Ii»: Iloreo mi so y ur .right hand and bo sworn: I swear by
y/ % *hc __V s', .alsciont, tr. t I will spook the pure truth and will

withhold odd nothing.

(*:e 'fitness ropootod tho oath.)

You iv.y bo sontod.

DISC? 2X- IXJI0H

3TJB. IUJ7LJ

U*.ou wo- o jru bomt

2 June 1509 In ?r, nkfurt oa the Odor.

.. til yo lo oo briefly doocrlbo your oarocr?

. per tnroe years I nttondod tho l.ittclschule in yrankfurt. I chon

ottondod she hfor.-r.-l 7 :..-.tsicr. i.-. ay nouo town. T-.ia Refomrcnl,^yrav.oiun

I .t.unlo; until uy ,;r Aunt: on la 132c hr intondoA profession was th t of

tec::a, a ntono,Trnpher in the R.ichotn. .. closed cw.c of "tudy wo

nccea ry . • cr.iovu tali and, laAitior., sufficient Btono.Tr/.phic 0 pood.

I studied lav lr. Dw.-lia -aft Jen „ .ad left the University -dtur pnsslnc v?

i‘c;or« i caL-vdn.ticm in the su..ocr of 1933- 3f «T < ‘- octor,n the o '-0

1 r.ue'tlm of the law of authorsnip. I co.~ fr?: a r th.-r poor faally.

1 :hcr v 1, first of 11 . a locks . 1 th with the Gr.v-a railroad and r.t tho

...'. vs -. .-Jr~r. I h-d te earn ay way thr ucollo.p) or. a ao-c. llod

wsrkinft scholarship, but I h re .fateful nooories of .y parents who h-d c -

•Uorhblo or orifices on tinlr own port i-sd undo It possible for » to .t-—

’ - university and who -Is' during O' period of study gave nc siorc pocuinry

. d. n they were really able to. Ky first work on this working acholr*

»~1 c noisted of v^ry laborious work ns telephone stenographer in a nov:i>-

r-^per office, -ror. the be inning of Koveubcr 1 ° 2 S to tho end of lfcy 1S3°. r -

-du. ; v a still r. student, was being cnoloyod as official stonoflrr.phcr

h869


1


.-Ir-SS-V2-Groaa (Drown)


Gott-'O - -


I Jkotc' co^-lttoo of the Hal eh Scoao^c Council r.t that ti .a. -tor
car-iarxi'.= lr. Deeper 1933 I ©■■-*» tel.phone etono,-.rather in tho
yr n Inforaati a S-rvlco hut only for ten dnyi. Jho C~iof of tho jffico
st -/f of the SS vr.s nt 6 h t ti:.o lr. *cnxch of r. <y>od stenographer. .. frioafi
»f ina arraa».od cue e ;1 oynoat. ly a«v cxrloyor hod no difficulties in
hre-hin,': c ntr. ct with tho Ger n Info mat i n Service (DID)* I bo-rex iy

a;v activity in the offic. of tho Chief of Staff of the SS clerk o n the
11th of Dee . .her 1933, xrith ..'nt~ly eelnry of 120 ri:o. JJrnt six wooks
?r vluc ti that, I art ontorod the. .Ml^ouolao SS* I h? \ olrenAy J Mated t_
F,.rtgr in tho ye r 1932. In JMjr ry 193 1 * 31&lor dictated O fov letters to ,c
when he vr.s in 3orlln for tv. or throe toy. Previous to I h\rt ncitlior
, ' lor nor .lid I kc v anythin.: about hio personality. On tho wvhjoati

of-is .jutnnt, SS-Stur V-onfuchror, and Inter Sf-Ob.x. ru -^cafuehror, "rl
•/■•If, - v: t to tho Roichsfuohror's Ho< ’quarters in J.unieh, ruxd ! be * :y
o.r.-ico on the 15 th of February 193 1 * r.s clerk for Sixtier on-'. Mb throe
.’.jutrat . ifitor. in .rjril of I 93 U Hitler took over the Oestnpo and went to
Berlin ho took :;e nlon;. It w s vy job to toko lottero fr Siurlor rood tf»l
. orcover, ir. the first threo nths, first three or four :r>nths, I hr* to
:r.mr.r t;:» telephone in the nti-roor. and to announce visitors. Orodually
staff w c oalnr,yd. Hourly. fro.. Octob.r 193 U on I wrote only i‘*r
Hial.r : lor.w. T. ic was whoa I w a 25 ye:.ro old. I took dictation an' wnt
r u ixlr -he oed of 193 h, I yc.lf typed up tr.o letters. However, Xter tho
files -.-c'-io ;.or«, ->nd noro. I dictated, what hr/. bc-n dictated to no to r.
st;: t- ist. I w,rtn y service in the SS "B an SS ran. In 19 UU I boeuxo
3 . -rteiifuehrer. » fter I had ,:ono thr u, nil the subordin-t. ranks for
. f ti e >r ot..er.

. Tit acts, l.t no interrupt a uonent. 7c vnr.t to ..-ke it clear uh-1
-J: ; .. 1 ic the .11 ccine SS and in the 7-ffen SS.

... In the JU^osxoino SS I wrxs stnzdrxtcnfuchrcr. Shi® rank ana bo
. iy in -n exterior wry with that of n Colonel in tho Vehmreht.

a', ir. ;uc h’?ffan SS I w 6 3b .rschrxfucarcr. thr.t is to any, n rank th- t


2- >C-r-.s, (3rovu)

C«rt s

r u,.J.y to tho O-moa Scr^at, or for tfc-t sottor. tho purler*

5.r

.. Did rm a rv.» in the tfffcn-SSl

... Tea. In 1935 I v.nt thr* a c^urat of training: for f nr or fivo
-jbC, in too Stnad/irto Deutschland. in Soever 19 W) I wont tfcr V,:

i-.jrt ter course with tho Stnxv»-".rto Westland, and fru. the end f ‘ : '- rc; -

i He >f Ifcy 1941 I «■ "ith the Loihstaadnrte in tho Greek oei&il'Ti.
V " , Pie ec c.ntimia t' describe your crxoor in fa- Poraonnl staff.

■v u . ! 33 7 or 2 . 03 s for urcly tochnicrl rooaona I was onllod nccord-
In.; to of Or^aii ti n personal referent in tho personal atnff.

-x did tala word •pcra^nal referent* noont
„ 2 ;e only run a on for it v.e t' rive ao a .vo sort of title in tho

J-.jla -f v,; J l* ti a.

” C steal return to this, hut orhnpa y u car. irko it clear -lr-
>i ;j w this v.rd Tcra.nnl referent- hod at any tlco -V -*nAK i Mvinorl
neither r.t the h<y .-inula.: n^r at the onl did it h vo vny ner.nla;

f .,.rcJh.a adviser.

.. I na 1 : inr t suV.it » ofcetch to y.u. T» re ai.-rly 0 v ••«*
it ie recur .tc. Y^u h:»o heard Wont the witness .*ino said about it. 1 -u
rortr.io t 1. .ketch If ym Vi* V. I k-w <*» Ay .Avon thl. .ketch
Jxhibit a-. 1.


1:571


£rcr. 1.'47 -it-5-l-rKP- Karr cm (Int. Brown)

,.urt to. i

U 5 m «m .v??g • ell, is this t he chert which was nuebered Exhibit 2, Coun.
IB. KACFJUM: I- -as lumber 2, yes.

BY DR. KAUFIOMH!

q. Is thia sketch correct?

n. Yes. I

q. Did you .sake thia sketch? Draw it up?

... Yea.

ould you please tell us your last salary in your position as Personal
—- •

A. „t the or* I was paid aa a civil servant, freo 1940 or. when 1 entored
the civil curvice, and at the end 2 waa receiving the salary of a Minis tori'
(Ministerial Counsel.)

Hot i-.igh was that salary?

„. It waa saxwhat core than 800 narks a aonth.
q Did you hr.vo cny othor ir.cor.o?

„. In addition I roceivud a auppluasnt of roughly 175 narks a month frat
tfto Pur coral Stuff. This r.rrangooont was srdo because nun in tho stall -
loaders of the affon-SS and also sodburs of the aolice - of the o-<nu rank,
but with much less sork to do, wore ncoiving aon than I was.
q. You wore rlso appointed a Uinistorialrst?


Mow, wh-.t wr.s your function under that capacity?

... r . -- 0 on - in the suaaer Hinaler bccaae Minister of Interior, and
fur his appointment he charged me to take care of tho work in tho w-Oftli
Jnisttrii 1 3urocu or Office. This -as, for all practical purposes, the
li ison office botween him ard Staatssukretaer Dr. Stuckardt, res,' iiveiy
I;d.try ,f the Interior, since during tho war these two offices had

--■-n kept separate.

;. You Just :; i 1 your s too low. lJow, did you

Jr; other irccce?

.>. 2 had no property except ttet which, like uny other careful person,. J

ted been able to save through the course of the years and that, at tho end,

- eleven or twelve tfacuoai* narks.ButMlowi no real property nor automobi

US72


2 l -arch 19t7 -M-5-a-PO*- Karrow (Xnt. &-own)

Court S>. -

rer anything else.

t.. liow, please describe the whole sphere of your work, the exUnt of it,
thui describe any normal working day?

. lot ac add that I was nev^r really officially appointed Personal
afferent. There was » document to that effect, and the position of Personal
? .f uren t ws first that of a referent, and then of a department chief,

: f , attin department chief. My tasks in tnis position were to tell VLnX*v
.... lettero had ccae for hin, either in the so-called "important mail" -
.^vly, the mail that he read himself - or by reporting to hla what letters
md cow for him or through reading hla a pert or the whole of e thf - t

«, -ddroaaod to his. Secondly, I r.-.d to receive his instructions, taking
tfcwn down in vorbftti* notes or in ourline, which I then provided with ft
salutation and a conclusion and drew up in the fora of e letter or ft tele' •
thirdly, I tad to receive instructions- that were to be passed on inaedintoly
by telephone.'Fourthly, I had to teko care of conferences with SS men,
the dependents of SS »n, nd with rubbers of the civil population who had
asked for an appointment with Himmler ia order to present ca-tpVints,

-.or-- nd such. The position of Personal itoferent is probably not tho
^ everywhere. It depends on the nature and ch'meter of the Personal
. forent 'o chief.

THE PRESlDiOT* Counsel, the Tribunal notes that in this chart - Rudolf
V.ndfB Exhibit 2 - that in tlw fourth block froa the left, in the lower li;
r nit Is described M "Pursonol Department" (P £ S S 0 !I /. L). In tno
ninth block free the l.ft we find -Department Chief of F-roonal St ff" -

» way. In tbo tenth block WO ha^o again "Personal Department",
in .iEnglish we have two words "personal- '-nd -personnel" which have a
different meaning. The Tribunal would like to be enlightened as to whether
if*, w.rds contained in Brandt's Exhibit 2 - if any one of thorn should be
:-nstrued as "personal" or if they are eU properly translated in the word

’l-r- «sl”.

. Sty it piece Your Honor, daring a/ orator Men of th. "itnes.

: note in ny ctert that tho ninth block end tenth Mock «m>


* b changed to "personnel".


U973


2!. Strch 1917 -44-5-3-PK?" Karr cm (Int. Brown)

lacxt &>• i

- e PPMTOO .TI I made th. 82 jco note sysclf but I an not altogether sure
counsel for both parties would agree that that is correct.

BTDE. Kn'JR^KH:

Ur. Brandt, did you hear whet the court Just said?

... TeS.

uo you know what they or- talking about?

Yes.

. can you then, in a few sentences, clear this oattor up. Would you like
have the sketch?

. Thank you,.I tevu it. The tenth block thcr- is designated "Perso-.m-l
part-tent". Tlvt was th. department that took care of all personnel Alters
, pej-aavd. Staff. The dopr.rta^nt in the block Just ahead corresponds
roughly to ay Job or to ay specialty. Hero arc included the Personal Reforer.
in th. Pers'XY-1 La otr*r words, the j»rson who took erro of personal

letters involving the Personal Stcfi.

Tfc r. SSmeMT: The Tribunal now understands th-.t Block L, Rudolf Brandt
«M Personal SUTf, And th t in Block 10, th- r .rd should properly oo trtu
I,ted ns "P-rsonnel Department". In the Geroan twet of the chart before tho
Tribunal different words 're used. Th- translator: will d ubtl-as take note
different words - one translated "person-1" nd one vr r.niatud "porhonnul

. K.iUFIWT.1:

IT.nk you.

Pl-r.oe contir.ua in your description of your position and of a nomrl wo:


—

A . llL1 ri€ ht. 1 Just said that th. Personal Referent depended or. the natur
c racter of his toediato boss. *t any rate, this designation was not
chosen for ays- If nor did I haw it introduced becaus- _y position was so
jrt nt as to S ak- It absolutely necessary. If that had been tho case, the.*.

ra rJ*r should have had to appoint me officially as his Personal Referent.

V r, it .jo’ild have been r-cessary, as in the cco. of all other Person
f r ats, for me to draw up ny own Utte-r-h-ad with th- expression "Roieh-
r.r S3" -nd underneath th t the words n ?ersor 1 P.-f-r-nt. Neither i n.or
; r .loe in th- staff gave any thought to such an i«k.a b-cause nothing
= ctr nged in what I was doing, iioivovor, both at that time and later 1 ^
^are -f =y limitations.


C-crt K-. 1 _ ,

2 -. Jter (In*-, vr)

It Vf a ry J :t< trice crr«* A visit#, c -r.lrinto, c n.?i tul? ti ns,
lir8ki| «xy*. 6 f rtfc, tfcrt vsre directed t r.inler fr a the nonul/ti r.
r r n the SS itself. tithe -tino hr* clrerdy testified thrt
had tflven tho senior 15,000 SS r.en the ri ht t. rv-id rt.mlrr
chrnnols end t turn to bin directly,- hut independently -f thrt there
vore osunorr.ble visits fr'--. ell norther* of the SS. I ves eleo res- n-
,.v le { r tehit. c«re f the c'-n-Tetul-ti ns rnd birthday ^resents,
Christ-xo jrecnt # irster -resents, presents vher. *-.-.et«dy mo h rn,
thet Hinsler sent out. el5 his ro-:ulrx rfift of V. he tu higher SS
non end Ictcr t- s-~.o f the Vchrnrcht .-enereis. Furthen'ro, I had
V. supervise tho mr'.or us wlfrru -creures thrt Hi r.l*r prriwod for in
vnri'.us lecrl trenches >f tho SS. nrrticulrrly ir. c-r.r.ectlon ith tho
ierths in SS -ten's fertile*. Those v t rc the thlx-s that fell under =y
rul Jot. h.otly r~.ollcr.tir.* -r. the rrt A tho SS .on rr.d civilirne
wra not yot reedy for nn imodiaU deciei-n -n El. ler'e ->rrt. It *ro
n.ccssrry t- eoic rueoti r.o, to incuiro intv dotrile, or to find, tho
latitude thrt the cu .ericr or ouo -fficirl .ffico hr d trrrd rn." vr-
ticulrr -r.ttcr. Hi .lor instructed cly t ubnlt nil such letter

•., hi efter rll doubtful u.ttoro had toon clorrod.-un. ds'. tho c >r-
rce-o ndcr.cc lr. connection vi th.Hi. -lcr 's aany O f. children t k u" r
,;rcct derl A rjy tine. Ale- lctt.ro t. c.sirr.tulcto ---there f SS non
vfc verc having their second, third, or f urth child durir.- tho W.

I sent tho -there f those children, -n Hlr.olcr's orders, r tolo&ea of
:-n.;rrtulrtl n. nnd al ■ t-Id. then thet they vjuld. receive rs r »;ift
fr .u Hir.ilcr n bv* c-ntriuin- fruit k *uiccs for the there thoneelveo,
end thet the children thcjaelvos v.uld receive r v.rcolrin crndftetick.
in ri-..G* all -f these ccses/thoec children this one letter A c n-trrtu-
iiti n led tv the devel-naent A r. c^-i-uo eerreauonder.ee. The -others,
vt.-se huslrr.de wre n.*t A then rt the front. «erc -rcrtly vlorecd by
ni i.r's sh v of interest.

... *aitn.si, let -o Interrupt f.r c a^ent. I believe you could
A r little .re brief in this end c-uld ccncentrr.to on tellinr ue vhnt


C-urt S-.

2, Her 47-*-6-2-LEX-Xal«.y (1st. rr ~n)


f«ir*.'or fields y-.u bad t. tcfce c/rc f in this 4 -fc rad then to cn'hrsire
• yhet extest yea really finished off these -.etters end what function
ytu fced *nd whet function Killer had.

a. KL .ler reserved for hir.*clf the rl^ht t decide nls - on
--niter* which concerned the individual oein offices. Tfc. -itr^ec
hrt already noati.nod that there were twelve nrin offices rad he ala
vifih the exception cf f ur of theu corrsa-xmdence freo the .th^r
«in fficeo v«t tkrxigh =y office to Hinnler. The four cxce-tiono
*xre the SS Score.-.o hr in Office (Fuchrun-^heuntcst), SS Ju «« SWtft-
wat| the Hrln Office Order Police (C?^ 0 ). and Security Police; vhorcre,
the corrtt-j.ndonec which I Just ooatloaed vr.e really ry rain field of
v.rk, : Should like to characterise this cocodn ^rcuo of rail as the
,f field'end office anil. Then rs c third category there is ale. the
t .-celled alien rail, if ! ray sc. characterize it. that rail included
-11 natters ,t a strictly technical acture. F-r instance, rnorts and
Utters fran the Chief of the FcrmeK'svoocn. other technical rc -rts.
letters, roort., su.vecti.no fru; the hcichcrrzt SS. and other ^'d-
Cirns if. r 11 fields of hedlcine, and ale- re ro.:rrds cxocri -.cr.tc nr.d

r,vrch All .r those were nattsrs that ver, - lotely alien t. «hf t
v,nt or. in :y acturl field of vork cad wore nls- alien t< the r^ulcr
•ntcr r .fflce .4*11. in ooiat of view ,f nu-JWs A those net tore *.

. Juet onfci m i v.r. ne^UiUe m connection Vith th« there.

In this connection I should like describe the ncrr.rl eorrssw
dvr.ec with the -'TEA and the Ahneaerte, which is frequently . vr.-i ned
«fti which occurs in the documentation -f this ensv. : should like to


this in order t rove that the lower* were, in the first -IcM,
v ry few lB nur.ler. as c«rw*red vith the .tfccr rcrulnr corres r/xr.co.

*n. totals they f-r::cd on exec-ti,n t the .rsnerrl rule. For oxr.vU,
c rrepi ndence was carried on with the V7EA on such suh'ectc a* h>- to
.reiare fruit Juicuc.

„ bum., i h«. »«•* 11=11

tell in.- «, «. Vhct .««* JW» twtldwWl urtko p OT 0= ,k£.==c «»t

!;676


CittTt I'ii 1

2 - •i7“it-6—5“&3W*al.y (Inti 3r»vr.)


v-t redly p. “£rt -.f year :ffice, nnd. t- v-. extent y-u had anything tc
-• vith the reseerch and ex c-rl^nts. I think It is ccrr-ct that ycu
c>,uld tell the C-urt Just vhrt year relation vrb tt these various de-
-p.rt ente -r branches.

.-v. In this connect In I should like to nonti-n c collection of
Etctistlcs In order t. dco this situtti-n-ore -r le68 clenr. A-.or.,’
the (*..cu-:cnts of the ir.secutlon I listed roughly 112 natters thrt rrc
rssocleted vith either Kl iler'e nr ■« .r ;y -vt. Of these 22 vers
'.irccted tj Hi-.ler pad written by hi .. Directed t < e and written t-»

•: vert o-i. horoorer, six of tho docur.onts pro in there vhieh I received
fro. other offices for ay attentive. -he other 10 r.ust he oc-iprrtod
fr.. tho 112 becrusc they vero cot rxy t ecirl rv.tters hut codes -
Ki lor'o let tors vhieh I krd t; euViit >c hit orders. If one hre horrd

9

durin. the c-.ureo of thcee rr.ccedin: fr..: tho '.r secutior. ho« onu

ccurrcr.co rftcr tho n«xt is br.u:ht ir.t. css-cifti'.n with - i, rnd thor.

rftor '.r.e rend tho documents one v.uld ,rot the iaaresoltn thrt in those

.Yur.to and ccurroncet thrt those n--tti.ro ^rc the ccr.trrl T.int .i

v rr., to if that vri the -nly thin- : concerned yaelf vith. However,

tfcs .-v■joite is tho truth tecrucc those nrttore In;.- outside r red

field jf activity. In the years 1025 i nd 1929 etrtiotied drtr v c re

•

drown u~. in the vracenl strff in rc.yrds t * tetters thrt were v.rked ~.r.
ini* 'ersvnrl staff, in other v.rds, vfct v.rkod vn w hrt. It wre rscor-
triued thrt ay de-ert-ont did by fer -»et of the v.rk with record to
i il. Sven at thrt tine the nu.ter -ut^oin.: letters dr,-. :y dnrt-
vrs rvnghly three tv four thousen' b aonth, rod in s-.nt nan the tore
*; • four thousand.. The vitneer Heine hre siren statistics fvv the#
rfter thrt.


: 377


Itrdi 2i-.^lK-7-i-.:eehcn (Int, rcwn)
::urt Jz. 1


I wcultl like tc a-nticn rly ?n .-v-ra c nun' -r ;f 3,500 letters a ncnth,

fc - . - -*rc th»-t with the 113 e.cun-r.ts which w_r. hcrcaontiinod, in cri.r th't

•

y.u ct c clcrr picture -f Just whet tho rolrticnshij is here. For the yer.rs

191*1 U i944, you can sco thet with this ninthly, vers e cf 3,500 cut Yin

letters tfc-t th- t.tr -1 r.sc t; ldC^OOO. .‘.'c» c syrru this nun’ v.r 160,000

ait/, the nun -r 113. In this ccsr.srlscn d.un thr:u h th- indivLdurl years yet

: c-ivv. acre cr less the followin': in 1912, cr rether 1941, 42,000'cut-

cin lot.era tc which ycu ^ust o^spr.r. five documents in ehu dteuocnt ’.cck;

70 fccu&cnt* in the yc'r 1942 o red with 42,000 out cin ’letters in 1942;

- I arid 1943, 20 d-cunents in the <*ccuacnt • c-ck : inat 42,000 cut ein •

letters uvi the srs :*un er is true fer 1944.

Stow I Icn't wnt tc Lrw* this -I wr. ccccrdin U every ncnth, ' ut let
0

us trice - leek t the four sectha i«urin which the l--r .?t r.ua’ er cf 2 ccu.-a.nts
r in the dccuacnt ctk. Fer ..u ust, 1942 w. will trice rn ever e if
j,5CO cut cin letters cf which there -r. twelve d.cunents in tho Jccua-.nt
rt. In ...ril nni Octe’ .r cf 1942 a ninthly r.v.r: ;e of 3,500 eut .in letter
3 cc.-^rred with 10 l;cu-..-nts f.r each -xnth. In Soytiif or cf 1942 3,500
xnthly ".verr *o versus nine. I ’ eliuva that these nusfccrs prevo hew far
those raetters re'lly lay frees ny real sphere f -sork rsii ;.bt a ainiaua relo
•v-“ jlayod in ;• ir.t cf view cf nun’ ere.

THE .hSSDEHTi lurln* the nerr-in rec.se, c.unsei ary vhrisc his
-ii r.t ns t. the ossehtirl natters which re r.-t.ri.l u '.his inquiry ruid in
:c;. tr. Tri’ur.-l is c_nc.mci m< h. t stctc these nat.ers ca ’ riei’ly cs


aL le.

Ih» Tri’ un-'l rill n;v . ir. reCe3S


-8-1-BlaJdcy (Int. P-amle-r)


2. sr 7- —. --i
Cc'XTt "c. 1

IKE HSrnL: Fersrns in t're Courtrcec: -ill please find their seats.
The Tribur.il is a^ain in session.

Da. Hn’JF.j»;rs: ir. President, I vus Just being told that I as to be
shorter in conducting ay e xaminati on; and I shall certainly adhere to.
this and respect the wish of the Tribunal. I ask you to take into con¬
sideration, however, that I intended tc g s t finished today at any rate.

THE P R ES I DENT: Counsel, the remarks of the Tribunal were- not in¬
tended as a reprimand to counsel at all. Neither is it the acsir, of
Tribunal to limit In any wise this defendant or any defendant in the
presentation of evidence Dcrtin.nt and material to his defense.

3. ' DR. FUii

Witness, you wtr.- saying before, when describing your sphere
f work, that nodical research work did not bclon" to it. Tneac natters
r.r. alien to your task; la that correct?

s

A fcs.

null, how can ycuocplair. that in th_ case of a number of dccu-

- nto ycur none can be found under such documents? Had your particular

position in the 'Ifie. of Klarlur anythin t: k with it, r was It a

*: oiaivc factor that you yourself .rert inferred ab ut thuSe natters?

•* 4 nc latter vr sn t th. care in any way. Tnt reas.-n tint tlxsc

li a things cant tc x varies. In addition to a number of other affairs,

•

Siaaler was very interested in nodical Batt rs. -l.cnev.r-paysicinn3

•rrnehed hie or wh-n.v r they wore rec a endod to hi :, ho personally

3t blished contact with thu. or referred the- to Holchs.rzt Dr. Grawita,

anr th'un ordered tr giv. H i r .alor a report. This occurred crally v.ry

fr -nd in sax other cas.s it ias done by my of writing. Still

h- r rearm for that, I wvoid say, was tK fact that r.hcncver nir.iir

•cb. confer.nets, he often c-lied x into his office rather than call

:r.t:ry, in order tc .ive r.. sen-. ricr regarding a telephone con-

'-i.r. in the pr-senc. of his visiters, semetines t: dictate a tele-

t ne, cr told r.e hew tc dictate a letter to my secretary.

5 ttet >- 3 wM often say to th. visiter, "ShonoVwr ycu have

• -ti ns" tc ut t r.e of a rat..rial, pcrscnal, .r factual nat-rc. Just

1x379


2_ ;.:,r ^?-..-'.-^-2-2-31akl-_y (lot. Harder)

Court *»c • 1

writ; t Dr. Brandt or give hi- a call. He can always be reached and can

ir.f:n: nc ixncdiatcly. Cn principle, cv.ry official ccnfcr-r.cc ;f Hirclur

ms c-ncludcd by Bimlcr's asking about the p.rscnal affairs of his

visiter. He asked hin abrut the state of his health, about th<- nenbers

f his fa :.ily, ab- ut his cconosie situation, ar.d s* forth. *.t th..sc

tines I was also called in to his effieu and received orders, which rar.

* nothing like this. -- I think I nenticnod theso orders before; and I

aon't have tc rvpoat thee now. Scpoctcdly directives were given in order

•

v supply additional funds for v.acati .n expenses; or in a else whore any
visitors had net had any children frea their carriage, I was to rive
?r f. Knauss' address in Prague tc these visitors.


US30


- - - 2 L-y I-. K-. -1-3 cfc» tin*-.: *- 2 .,?)

; urt «e. 1

itncaa, with r-f.renc- tc the sphere r ic-'l rcst_-rch, th- fidi
•rich is under inlicta-nt here— -1 T . y;u h'V : rn; nuth rity issue
Hpectiv-3? -

A 2 neither h‘ 1 ri ht tc i3su. rd.rs in the ic. 1 sphere nr
la ny ther c;h,r-. I was n.v_r i siticn tc*a n iecisi-ns

r. ir. ry on anher. :f * rk. .hatev-r uent cu tc vrricua oncioa
- ul! ‘ - traced /.clc t - Iccisi.r. ; Kisslu*, ~ :cciai-n which he reserved
a; self in every C! s. .

;Ad j .u -.t -_ny tin. er rt any -r rtuniV 1 level-- y:ur cr.n theu/hts
r;.; jr.tcrirJJ.Ze y ur .wn lociai ns aith rcfer«.r.c- t- burn eXj crinents?

yeti <v -ri *in-te

tr.e theu ht in y:ur ' rain tc undort ic ex.-erinents i. huam ein s?

: .. •• . • .-rived at my auc!; i .

, ’.Atncas—

^specially ainc- 1 n-v.r ie*lt • ith aci-ntific qucatkna fer lack
f intercat.

-Id ycu rt mj tite o.erk t' i.-acher? Ad y.u .v.r diacu:.a JetrJls
»ith hi r, with reference tv x rL ..nt. r. hu.au. ir. r?

I lid t .v'seher - few ti-.es -t n.v.r r. .ut hu=-.n cx ( ericentn

hid he iiituiled t earn thr. u h.

. , . ,r.*dntiin th- arnc statement it!; r-f-rer.cv U *jr. An-Schulei?
.. i nr. _r r. in -Scrwl r.

sne fcitic t .. . - rSt? .<■ : ; is ©v r liscuaa cny dotnilW

• • • clout

-m -xp .risients t 11 ?

.. I the! • rit n r t i.y • th^r , uri n ut

• rlr .nt.. . n haarm ' -in a.

.'jrf that na-ir tru.. .f defer. r.c, If -c. Siovera?

t is

. nte aUut . r r. Elrth?

... r

-■■r :-.ct-cn, I,didn't s t k U hlr.


• .'-}-2-Schwa . . oler)

fccrti


Could you sy the s-~_ thin .ut .ref. Hr.'on?

.. I lid not knew lref. Hr _;. I ’..n't cr hr.via had any exchnn*c

cf correspondence with hi-.. “Thu official lett-rs which I had tc quid to the *
rvs; -ctivc persona 'y order of Hirx a l -r I .*&i not ccnsidcrin when arJcin; that
sf.toaent a' out diacuaai-on, fer in thoso eases I act.-J tcccrdin; tc an order
u ~: 'iroctive -f Hi.Tlur which I trcnc.-ri.tte*!.

:• '•> .renit, i:: th- :;ctn.rX - ka there arc r rtU{£or ex' documents

j J'cun' which ere narked secret. : e it that thurc tr_r» ordinary secret

s fctera, top secret witters ex* Military secret or.ttcra. NO* whan werkir.

a theae orttors, 'y ttetatln - letter ;r 7 . si - nature. Hid that

•lutya happen by th« express cr'er . f Kinder?

••

.. 0_ly 'y order cf Hiaalcr. I cculdn't ai -n in thor xuxnner.

'# Kculd you maintain that you: activity, *s f.r instcnco ‘y ivin
li nature's with rcf-renc. t.. x‘lc*i natters, c uil not ho evaluated in any
‘-taer nay th-n the .i.re * rk f * cte;.. r;h-r, if a paasivo cc-*.;-rker?

.. In ay opinion, it c*n net \c evriuctod in my othur way, since I
.•wither have rny-ujq.-rt tended k n.r a I > equnintod with the connections
• • -U these *ffairs. I svly trenseittoJ what Hiul-r icirtod U no cr what
i - ler t.l 1 n. a* cut.

. C uld y e :t any tin -vci ! t. carry cut HL.l-r'a orders without
*.'an-erin yeur life?

.. „ce rlin • t. shot Wes cur . t would n.t have • een possibla.

Net:, witness, *...ull y u please Juscri' u cs exactly an l shortly and
r: : 1; -- ssi 1- h->. y ur ' ily .rk • :.th Hider v. -s ccrxlul cn? Say,

• firat, ;.h-n lid y ur r. re strt? ’..hen did y.u on it? Hew arny heurs n
7 ’it y.u w.rk?

IS? werkin day a t rted zxstly -fere seven c'clrck in the ncmin;: —
'--.c. i wo s in the ha’it -,f .ttir. u; Very errly. Harder, cn the other
, worked until late r.t ni ht. He r.rke ! , as a rul_, until twe c*clcck
nernin . And only when ho fin ite * his dry. thui qy dry crull erne-
1 n :, toe. In this ar.nner I worked f r fiftt-n t. sixteen heurs pur

•» the av-.rr c, no a. tt_r -bother it was SHr.iay r weekday.

2x532


9-3-Schv- (In*-. :.r—i.r)


. -ii ycu ever et ny vr.cr.ticn?

.. Y-s, ut f cr the jer.ra 1939 • ad lv-0, wher- there ms'- prase cf
clast twe years, I s?s sent r: v?cntica avtry ye r fer feur weeks. ;

than tell ua n:r- c oat t! ridn ley* Kca lii it c-ntinu-?

Th- manner h*s rlrerdy '..er. described nnd'I ’.r.'t h~v<. tc repent it
in letril. In the ,-n;miR • I hrd until nin- thirty tc review the *crk «.f
::-.e prtcedin ley, end I-'-' r .r another* ..t nino thirty

the courier nrrivod nnd then the mtli h 1 t; ' c s.rted cut fer Hirr.-J.cr, which
. h‘ . u h-'Ve ta hia desk*


1*333


:trch 1947 ?u*.ty )int, Rnniwr)

;.-srt So. 1


Professor Gobterdt recently said th t the courier r i-rived nt rdght. I
J®*- »»twd to ocplain ttet this vnriod at the different headquarters. As a
.-d«, tte anil ®wived in the acrrdng sinew were -1 the. Sr.st Prussian
.•w»dqo?rtcrs. In the eat, cn the other hand, sail only arrived at night,
-iaslcr, is ' rule, got up it ten o'clock in the awning after having slept
.-.t hours. He ted br-akfast very briefly end ay presence was doaandod.

*Ting these f-w ainutes no official n tters were discussed. He often dictated
mistypes or letters during fchr.t period of tin- and tten tx, shaved. During
|.efc fifteen to twenty ninutes I had ny own -pp art unity to report about «y
ail of the day. This -at . habit which had crystallied frsn the very early
trips during ponce tine, * nd it bee aw a pwratnont institution in the- cr.se of
v. field he dqu.’-rters.

Subsequently I cLr.lt :.ith -... crcLrs . rich I rec.ived in the Meantime, nni
luss currently called into Hla-lor's office fro* aoming until Into nt night
iadricr to receive orders for'teLr.vori ti ns, tolotypos, letters,
addition to this work I tad to ue-i with conferences with visitors,
cxfcrenews with ay own officii*, letters had to be dictated, r.nd in this
—v-r the d- j .v coed Very quickly.

• • • ■

rt, perhaps thirty-fiv • forty ednutos,

r,t i dinner, nd when he tLzv had caao -fter dinner for -vorybody elso
a, to r-..d c. be k, th. .roric continued .'or Hiaslor r.d that ooant thtt
1: t -4 to continue for ao, too.

'• «rd new »e coaa to the discussion of tho outgoing nail, -.nd I am going
v : 1 - r : docufent books. Toll rx. quite generally how the

•‘aping-anil was handled. M.: l.r, of cours-, signed nunber of letters
J y, but they n.v. r.ly v>ry f„w. fcost signatures were given by
-•rdUeine, is that correct? •


• ( if you :r« looking at th-se docuo^r.ts . hereupon you find your

•••-..Vore, how can you explain th~t your signature can found underneath
* .

'•-cuaents, when you consider the contents of these documents as being

1 - G: .- r - thLt -- iOCyltinod by the fact th t the l‘ck of tirne played a

•

"» * c « "u give- us another Jtplacation?


2, Jkrch 1947 -lS-iO-2-rX?- patty (ini. Baalcr)
..vrt So. 1


o. The witness, Heine, stated already yesterday th-.t Higgler only signed
.-is ctj&- at the very 1* s* =3=-r.t. Tb. courier could nly got to the train in
-.ia- y r cirg •- the risk of breaking hia neck, '..hen Hinder fin'lly .z-.de
sis signotur-s, there nos ncT’longor any tie, to rood hia letters. .1 could only
licit ayself to sign tho copies which ay s-crut'.ry sutoitted to no in -.11
-•'-ate. I had no misgivings in th.-t reject since Kl ara ler ftd signed tho

xigincl.

Q. Litnosa, non c nunb«r of your letters havo the Initials "Bnd I would
that this ass /our initial. liwt I e xclude t.'/.rcfroa thM tljoac letters
•»ru dir ctly dictated by you, or could it hevo been ; jaaibL-, considering
Sl.mler 1 a habit of working, fch-t Hianlor dictated th-a- lett-ra person* Uy
•od thr.t this file note w.ia used in addition t. th: t so th’t it todr.y /-.ppw.ra
j if thea. letters had really originted from ?m?

... fhr t happened, too. Goner-Lly, however, the oitu tion w.-.o whore I
received dictation froa Himler and then transmitted t! rotary.

;. Cad you recall where K im lo r diet t-d teletypes nd wboru thoau tolo-
were nut signed with nia nr-Oe but with saaebody olse's nruao and whore
•f~ other person" onLy received knowledge of his sign lure /.fter the teletype
bd already left?

«. fes, thr-t happened to ie -r. frequent ccnsi r.c, .-.nd 1 aa convinced
tf.t there are yet a number of teletypes of .. .ich 1 don't knar uy thing even
although they .xar sy r. ne.

s. "litnuos, I shall txm diacuas *• fw letters cooing froa tho Docunont
: 6. This docu.-v>nt refers to sterilisation -.rir.e.-its. f.hon putting

atlas to you regarding those documents, I *a interested in establishing

r r.-t you h 'd kr.ar. th. contents of thes. docaTento, whether you had

•

4 •*- tneou documents. I .-.a referrir.’ to th- letters which you wrote _ t t b t
 •In interested in knowing whether you had recognized the seriousness
' - t t -rs which you had signed. I will ask that tho dccuoent volume

•

• '• • - handed over to you. I isk you t turn to page 6 in the Gorman book.


5 in the English book. It is D-cunent 036 , Exhibit U 3 . This is 0
-■’ r given you by Hisd*r or. th- 10 th of liirch, 1912 , at the Fuehrer
• iqu-rters. The letter is directed to ?ohl and .3 -signed by Himler. Then

Ud8S


i - rch 1947 ---10-3-?:^- Putty (Int. RanL-r)

Sooft Bo. 1

• copy of tfcr.t letter was tr.ansaittod by you to Grawits. In this letter Hianlor
u-.cussus the possibility if ixp^rixunts on hua'n cri-ilnal persons,-s ho
r.ys, "ho had to bo sterilized in any ccs_.

3o 70U recall that docuru-nt? “ 3

I don't ru a - n bor the docu=o.nt. This has boon suboittod to r»- during tho
trial* -and 1 assuaD, that since it boars ay signature, I aust havo Seen it at
•hit tin-.

Q. Kow would you pier.so look at pego 13, Document Jfo. OKU, Exhibit 151, and
you "ill find a file notation with your signature. This notation refers to c
wowrsation which you had n ith Pohl, and it says in tho second but last
vrsrcph — I quote:

"The P.oichafuohror r.lso r-quosta that -•ith the ingredients of this plant
on hand, sterilization ex.x>ri -ntb should now in *ny case be carried out in
the concentration ccaps."

So you reou.aber this file notation and th.- entire event as *. result of
■hich it ms aadu?

... 2. 1 , th- same apj : here .a in the previous document. In th t case

:x night ldd that the won! "consultation" cannto be accepted in its usual
atoning. I ms not in any way ;n the sane level as Oborgruppenfuohrcr Pohl.

I had ti : ppronch hi* as an Obersturabannfuehrcr, and as wr.s true in -.11 tlwso
c sea, I had directives of Hiaalcr recorded in =y note book which I road to
. Therefore "a consult* ticn" would bo a wrong way of expressing that*


im


21: :>rci.’U5-::-.n>-i:-l-Ccok (Ir.-. l.r)

Ccurt Ho* 1


Q ..h \ ncr.- sill ycFj Ic.aso look at 'ocurt-nt, -hich is found at
7-a - 19. It i3 ccurxr.t 01:0, exhibit 151. This is a lottt r of the X^ichs-
fuahrer SS rsocal staff which '»ara yur si 'nature. It is a top Socrot
l.ator an' drecte ' to Gohrlant SS-O--rfuhror. I call y ur attention to the
first >untonco of that tocunant, an' it says th.ro an’ I shall only roal a
few wor ’3 1

"On account f the a sonco f tho Hoichsfu.hror SS, who at proaont
is taking n Ion* official tri.., I on aticn nit 'in. y ur latter."

Tho .bcusont also ’cals T.ith tho question -f sterilization '.y U3ir.-
that foroi -n plant* ’culi y- /lease at-to your yoaiti rtly?

/. I can ror .:\r that ovont in a? mch as Hirral r, to hor. tho
letter by C'jhrlon'fc hr,' ’ con au' tto’, .vo th dr.ctivo to -.Trito that
r in that f n. H m vor, I bonnot r. .r any 0 tails

C> ftT. ’i-ril.r -Ir a ‘y ‘:<x n n’.ront for sc.-v tine whan you wore
•rri'-in that lottor?

U I can't toll yau that. It aas often th c-s. .«hcr h. issuer’ a
iroctivo t: write a l^tt.r in that f r.. Just so ho wouldn't have to corvo
ir.t onrnnoo in that fr.tt.-r Qlthou h ha alroa’y krwr tho contents of
th: lottor inictj' to hi::.

•

’tow, w-ul*. yu yloaso turn to a o hi, ~hich is ’ocuia-nt 206 ,
exhibit 16b. This is a lottor by t foir'anfc 3rack, !atod 11

-:ot 19L2. lottor where Hirl.r says that ho was intorosto I in sooinr
that th:so storilizationa - X~ray wore tri ' out in a c-any in a sorios of
nts. T transzdtte! this r for t ttontion cf lohl and
"roritz. no you knew the oontonts it that 1 ttor?

I ton't roanfiur it.

, cun nt 213, axhihit 171.

"• lottor cf tho Hoichsfuahr&r SS, p rsoral staff, ’irectoi to rro-

r ~lau' r . It is .-ark. tc secret. This l-.tt. r rs y: r si nature

' : various other agencies an’ ;ere-ns. Tho ’-r.ir. r.t. c r.-

' rns ti» sterilization of 1,000 Jewesses an it says on tho first ■ a *

ii657


2L 'larch U7-C5- .TD-ll-2-Coak (Int. Punier)
Court So. 1


L-. or- ani the oth-.r css , a r.ctical er-ocri-ent rd ht to arranrod In trier
see whether the sterilization was successful or not. It is a little noro
'rastic-lly oxyresaoi in the locuacnt. Di *. you -..-rite that letter on your
m iniativa cr ‘i 1 you son', this letter off y or’zr cP Hinrcler?

L This lottor this not -.Titter, 'ey sc tut thi3 is Ictate-’. \v Himlor.

I r-iver wcul' have 'roar-of -jx-rassir. qyself in a nannor rtiich i.-as use !
in that letter.

a Di* yu ever Uscu.-ii the quest!;n f sterilization vrith Hlanlor?

.. I neith-r dacusso * the quostion of sterilization vdth RUBUr or
«ry other quest!cns. Hi.'l.r novt>r sreko to b • ouch thin s. I woul!
..qross it that conversations 'ofe.jcr. hin an*, no, ir'^sfiM j as it nay soon
n.v.r took laco. rorhr.s tli-.fc wr.3 boeauso oC :y not bcin; a col convor-
ratiomlist, tut I think it • .s -.airily hoca.usa of thi ’ist-.nco which was
ke/t latt.’oon Himl-r an*, -o on th j basis of cur rcnpectiVo knc-wlo igo an !
intelll once.

On-* rssaxfc - Dr. “Tan‘t - in what :* i! Hiimlor spook to you,

-. "reas y'u?

Hz always call.' .y .ay first nano, an* that totos hack fron
th. early ays.

q ,.n‘ "i1 it continue until tho on"?


Yos, it -i 1 .

a :.Tv.R 1 • you lv.ave Hinnler?

.. Ono lay ’ ef:ro his arrest. I ms arrest-" on-: by ’-oforo M.3
arrest,- that was "hit Sun "ay in 19l:~.

q Hew in -r'er to hack to this locunont, I want to A3k ycu is
it czrroct that you know -JLs lar intonlo t~ carry out sterilization?

.. It i3 ;:o3si":l- that I kr,jw that but I can't toll you that to-lay
c—. 0 ; : really Isn't r. sedbe r thc-s - entir-- v.vents ’ y reason of tho ahun !-
*nco of work I ha ’ to *oal rdth.

.. I shall new han’ you locus-nt bock Ko. 7. This leals with oxpori-

cts tc~ exterminate Jcrs. It leals with TB Polish Joks. foul! you plon3e

- at o 1. This is ’ 'cua.r.t 2hS, Zxhi- it 196. This is a letter of the

ixooo


21 xSsrch is?-""- .11—!l-3-C-x>!c (Int. Ifcnnlor)

Court !fo« 1

-ich C-cvom.r '’•roisor, Vito tho first cf ”y 191*2. It is Greeted to
rinlor an’ is narked "top socrot." C-reiser su-^osts to afford special
troationt to tho ~ Volos, which noons to kill then. Do you renenbor that
letter which Kisalor receive'.

A No, when it was suVrdtcc to co Hirin; ry prelininary intorro-
-ation I coul'n't raataaber that ovont.

a ”o\ a pcssi' la explanation is :ds«ir. h~ro for if these things
actoclly cart to your office through the courier they had to bo solocto:!

-.r.’ sorted out y ■ j re in thou had to bo suhalttod to Bbmer«
;culln»t you say you w re b a sical l y loalin with th. sortin' out of the
1) 13 if * correct that y u road th. in ivi fcal letters whan sortin out
that nail, or was it often -r occasionally the case that you resented thoso
letters to Himl.r without ro 'in th :, an*, that you roaontc ! t ho u to
hia icRodi.atoly, minify ocauso of th. exterior fem of tho lottor fron which
tho contents crul • bo a-or.?

That was nucossr.ry - ;roly by reason of tisu. It was necessary to
a.':-ark on such a way. I have entiono ' before that tho crurlor aorvico only
*"rlv, ' a half in h ur ' of re HL-alcr -ot up. it war irrvssiblo to road all
p :rts cr Letters in th i short rlo* of tine which wore aoant for Hinnlor.
".*• if you Will Irak r.t .a •; 3 70U -.-ill fin', a T>cu-vnt which boars tho

jr 2 ^7j exhibit 197. This is a lott r nhich i3 Greeted to you personally
*.r.' it states i

' " “ran a* "It also r f rs a tho 6<u» quosticn, nanely,

 °xtoRiiiiotion of Pdes, by way of tho sc-calle: social treatment. Doss
‘b-.t hold true in the ease of attars which troro sent t ycu orscnally, or
one hare to ossuiu that you actually road such letters, an* that
7 a erly transnitto! these letters to flfcnlor after havin read thon, and
n ^-itci his "xjcicicns .an ’ his orders?

I certainly road that lott r for it was directed to no, but I
‘■rca-nitto' it to Hl-tal-.-r sinco atrslor was rof erre! to in that rear’., and
^ Illador caul 1 -ako a docisicn.

m?


tu i: rc:-XWF-12-1-.T :s (In*., -rl.r)

C .urt I

3 . fc ;* i v-.nt t s v Is :n-.. cw .ttc jmctlcrlly n <a/ .r.ncu
sbctbcr th-t L-t_r vns ir^ct. : t .* -.-.11; r ir cu.-' t i!i :«L.r?

- H - 10=11 * thus- =-tt9r« : - "Wsh-rt c c Gi 5 5 boin : ;
qa-d t tw r-ts cf HL- l_r.

3* -v’ •:• *i‘ the *.a -rs letters *Kas y u -’Irectly rather

•Jiw ''r-ssiiv. Hiu-icr?

.. It a either ;.c-ur. this way roe sy HlajOcr hi. self, and

I trie- t doseri 1 cth 1 n little vsrli-r, v .cus. the pcej.lt e rc.rv.c!
ir.:-* Ui’.t I-tr.s rittin iu t.w -nti-r •; -n th” it th c *-> t:..s. 1 -ttvra
- ul* -t t Hi 1 r 'Jtpi~y,

' - ilk. t raw y ur sttonti t p-. . 18, D euaent
-ii -it 205 . Tbie is y ur wa -Vi ! vi t t;. 2h ,ei \r !%(>• In
~-j.r £ ur,- . t it -£ft avit y.u sry»

"..0 - r.auis /aw su ..ati ns . - bj 11 * nt Greiccr befevdon vi ht
• ‘ i-l-»»wrc Xtcr. 8 t> i.

rcn.

if li.lv?

— ’ ; - • • • 1 . vc that

rts - ever.

Q. r. 3r.-r. t, 7

• t£.

Ml l.S|

l. Is it c ; vC ir. t y >• -ir . -.it: *rc/v r k f/l vita bcc-.uflv y u
-r i:.cri. m-tia thr vf.-.'-nts ”iti t:w-?

Yes.

•* * y u of tiic ;.ini :i

» t. r •: r. * nfca ir. y ur

-•'! '.-vita?

*• th'.t i; *r plai n.

:• Di : :• -. hrvJ any c acrutc. f-cta-J. inle fci ns f r th. rttoi with


•cr^iiin-U.-' th. -tlwr .r. *- Us ii. - veiy s.ri us a-.ui.-r? That


2_ . rch-» -JP-12-S-Grces (l^t. a.-. x.r)

C.urt I

-u :tca cclTTL.'tcrt thcr tc.'.n its p-rtic-p'.w 1 in _xp-rL_:'.U r that
y -i a-.i:’ th-t certain 'cfon nts Lv. r 2 _ r ul h-v_ t ]r.v>. lai-vlcdi....
•.b ut c^rt- n wxrcri .nts. I a. -skin y u, i ' y u cv^r hsv^ 'ny br.Ms f r
•_V such assert! n?

... I 'i' n.t have any oasis f r that. Oorin. the inturr. .-.ti a peris'*.

-• nfcninc<*. lur- in these b ks.

I:. ! itl :: tlu ir.Urr , itm iiic-r -rt r. rks. Lh".tuv r 1

f r.ulati vr.s V ,1 ; ri..ir.aU fr ; but it t r-.e suo-ltt. 1 ' t. in that

. all : that brings n. t t arrive at, n

•..‘■x basis l th ’ cuaonts which v*rc sateittcd t rc by the :r Secuti.n and

Us- n tru. basis f th- rvairke sr.«\, t. at. by ir.t.rr ±\icer rto.ro

: - rt-d t «:.• t t 1 . H sever, it * * n.t
■ • - r

v.. f ct that w;:xr'.cnts \ *xlr. c-.rri; n ir. c neentr-.ti i; c- ■,« n
Ik- ir. s?

... ?o#»

Q.

•U 1-2.

»• Ttsf arcscyin» fttrt&r :• t nly oW' r/*or?

... fes.

»• x..! is i r rr ^ *i trjr. rv v . ur iff! avlts « arc r. .yiv

or wlu . - , .. wlo .

•ic- wa -ire • :«•• y u after thvf D.c«v-at -,r. systc -ticrJly
1 7 j. I thr.tc rroct?

... T aar perhaps explain t. : r

. rr ,

, n't yu?" aiv* I -v.=-:.r. , , I

r^vntofiy I finally s-i - -in th-t I i-’.n't Jen r a,.-’, i. vt
' ’ I “'s c wiacw 1 that t is ian, nc_ it-rs ur!e Was, r.
r hen asfcu ' abut I. . i-l/ .

• _

■ . .e. V .....


2_ ^arch—[WB-12-3—:-r ss (lot. H -l_r)


C-urt I

1 t::.n stated emt a quarter .i 32 t 35 :-«aar. c.ul .. expected.

.. Brandt, i u cust S. clear cb ut the feet that any such oCti^ati

is ru-.liy a . nstru.slty 11 y-u u-v_ n m.'ic-ti n t pr Vu it. .ere y u

•

: auch un'..* t - ia.Tcsai r. f the *’ counts that y u never the. less-
such a v-. ue estimation,or was ytur st-tc of he-1th r •ncsvry in such a bad
J v ic- in ^ faith when akin, such esti. ati ns.

... 3-th cases rtru true.

THE It is n ir 1230. The Tribunal will be in recess until

1:30.


z* fiar4 u ?- A

&U’ t _f


... I-.i

(The ... ring reconvened -t 1330 h-urs, 24 _ rco 1947)

TKB .-nL5H/»L: The Fribundl is -gain in r_ssi-n.

n'JDOLF 3-UKDT - rtv.so.-ed

IKE cnLSIDEJ.T: Tbo Vribuml will net r c.ur.c.l in re£ ru
tv the sh.ving f the fii-i I -ecus-

In- rnOISCHrliN: Dr.-lrjesch-.n f_r ar-c*:. -r. Pregl-
. it, fchq pr Secuti-n this .—rning pr-test;. against the d-
.issibiiity f the filu "I .ccuse," be.c-.u9c the fiL. dies
t represent any f-eta.il pr..f, but r. freely c. nce-ived uc-
ti na because .wrCeVer t..e trnasl ti n _f the j c r :.:i fiL.
v -*1<1 take a gre .t deal .f tiao, or.d t.iis tr ..nsl ti-n w-ulJ
t- superfluous ir it we f ur.d t.i t tr.e fil_, Is not L.i3r>-
i-.ie -s uvidei.ee. I su.uU iir._ t. s ~y t t.. t t:.e f Hewing:
: :. Ve -lrc-dy in tr.e c-urse -f t..eSe prvceedinga J.-.d several
-pp.rtuaitios t. ape.* v.ith definitive vad i.port.ut witnesses
:..rv in, this C^urt ... — reg-rdins t..e question .f cut!.-:, s i ..

I n Yw s-ne. Int. tr.e b.'.sic c r.ccpt .f e-ut:. a sis, _r.d a rs-
alet.noe ti I jyln,.; p.rs :i, 1 .. vc int eutb-.r. .si, in
Its ..xt .adci sense -nd Tin-ily 1 h ve repeatedly t.uci.ed up n
iucati.n vu.cth.r t..e witnesses r s.occi-.liFts ir. tne c ocs
f -'J-.-.r. life vrr.ich c :.n t p ssibly be s ved, c.milder it
i ic ily, r li i urly, le .rily ad p..ii Sephlc-.lly Justified
i 3t sense cl: uid here b.. . d

* •• '• ’ this with ut rv t m I •. anted i:. -

• i*e b..e r un4 f.r the defense f tile dcjeRd nt Vikt r
•

•..ir ti n f euthon.slc ni tu. s rt :* eut.. ur.si: tr. t in


.. r L?«3 nd l'-,4 t- x ->l.ce in ti .. a. .... r*r ; -o;u-


.w r-S£:»-12 -2-.-si ;y-Int. Br-wn
art :: . 1.


t

;-.rply repudiate that n-tion. The defond-nt Viktor Brack
v:s In his c llsborcti n in what the rrrsccutic-n cells the
euthanasia pr niy _.-tic"ted bj ethical considerations,

by consider ti-ns f sympathy with-the patient. That I could
pr Ve through nis cellab-rat-rs Keve..r.nn, blr.nkenbur3, •• nd
•.h'tevcr their a-_:os were. These witnesses cannot be f und.
Since November -f l.st year I ~-dc efforts in conjunction
v.ith the C-urt to find these witnesses, but we were net ible
z. 1 . so. The fil-. "I Accuse- is the only nd .. • t .ffectiv
o •* .f ti:c defendant Vikt r Brack’s attitude ut th.t tL^,

:-r Viktor Brack *.cs the r.c who c-noeivud the neti»n f
:..is fil in its development, and ~odc his n-tion kn.wa t
the c -.petcnt ril~ —n-3cr, wh- told hi.. ?f nis points f
lew ni br.ucht it in..e to hi., by way -fab rc, that whut
. uld' be f-und in that bo. k sh.uld be co...unic:>ted tJ the
public.


£894


2i, -rcr.--.-JF-1L-1-: birrc* (Bre n)
C art I


•nr; HLSITC-T* UU, C unsci, ' j u kr. * then th't fil c ul' 'x sli \n

. s v ;X the Ju^.s, ictin zs Ceerdssretire n b-ivilf : tr- tribunal?

... oh Tin t ty after half-pest thr.w wKn th- Iribun-.i ill r_cess?

• jut V, r. rE-ney?

;B. c: . If the Tribunal plecau, I k 11 sur th-.t c uli be
. 35 th-re is s _ _r_vi ua en - - «nC i the pr Jeeti r. r , I c uli*.
r: .1 t -.V, r. rl-r y r-> rt t th. Tribunal -t.r th- in\ r Iasi

;r, atncv t,-r. is n interxisai n, I c ol hero hin tap rt 1 - i • ter
vy urn- .ut c rt.

. ry y-U, I v:*U v. «t Ju . . S ria , 3a£ - Crawford

-r. Ju*.. iv-iriiv.-n, n b-half f the ?ri .vn-1, t see th. file an then r.

• - Tribunal -a t -h.th r r n t, in tiwii : a, it c nt ia ntt-r -i

r i. ah ul b- all wn t v th. frlbunal as urii’cnco in the ease.

DR*. FROJSCK .. Hi Let a y th- ! 11.win in tnls c nnecti.n, Prci

• vir. • pera .1 r i Ju ... «h "-c n t sp--’.: Oor.an, it qvtt- '.lisle

t ;n _rst'fv thw v:ra ap ken by the characters in tbo fila* t that.*.
. S *. ( nt-rruptin ): C. .ns- 1 , n. f the int-rorvV.rs inf r:c '

• lift *n ir.tvrpr.t^r c ul-’ bo furniahot’ vith th- C.r-risci n-ra t t.. the


flL-. i»h


noL-t. th. i-.tt.r t t. . s V t th.y w ul'*. un‘.urnt » i


. .. 10 SCS ... : o rec.ntly ah k’ t, - riln • eng urc-lv-o a’ it

t ir. t .ic first p-rt i th- Til: the s un tr ck is rather pc r


a th *. cv.n Oer -.as 1.- ’ ’ifficulty in un cretin in it. C nr T-ntly, it
rill be -.11 f. i ft cult f • v. xnt-rpi.ter s t int.rpr-t th- first

port f fil th t tti. e urt c ■ . • n -rst . it t. a nft.ro n. Thorof r
I il ru st, ir. Pr ai'ent, t. - . be -11 > t iir. t... t^xt f thix

- c ul • ■ ' iii.

. : C...s fils, irithln t.:- next *.r/c -r. th-1 rill, -f c.urao, rJco

i*. sier. Th n ' .nt Sr ck • r.., ‘ p-rs i !1 y the script 1 r «JC

r_, it is actual'facto - - *hicS» I wish t int.r Scv an I

th- 1, I r this reas n, * e c-jjij. t '±ny tu- -f-n’int Sr-ck, rh h-.s
r ..--I’ir.t t twke this p int I r Ju--., t present this filr ns ptrt

i99S


21 .:irch-~-Jf^-U.-Wfcrr


(Int. £r .an)


C "rt I

f nis -vi 6ccc.

TSG .7.-5IIJ.T: I K n cr if th- fil c el* b_ sh vn in the c:vrt r..n
Sjrt with th- s vn' tracks.

. c.ldCY: -i£ t thc*“su^csti.n of Dr. Prooschaann, I think i'.. cvrt

v ry iTv.ll r.atp n- any ’ecisi.n r. th-t crtt-r until 'ftor i- has 1 .ked

% •

; v- -~~—u -s far ''s the first p rtl n of th- filu is c nc-m-it s—..a
: -.o tht It runs f.r 'n int l.r - 1 - 1 -n th : tir. -n-' <’ ts n t yr-tont
in that, in any way, ‘’opr.nchs anythin tori n t c with this cr.so.

• any -v-nt, y.v c ul leave vt th- first h ur on' still tav- n thin lost
. r • Dr, r.-sclv.ann r his '\,;„n;*nnt -r_ c :c.rn. .

DR, FRQLSCR '... >i >*. Fr-si’-r.t, any cuts .-V. ir. t:. fil:. w vld .v-.kc
lM :r-honsi .1 e . uei n, * a such a * rk -f art cnnn.t j- cut int;.
I.c.s -h i ,-iv.c- si .ply rc-i v- ’. If th-r_ is a trial run 1 it I should
,: r Su -at that th- c urt view the -ntir_ fil*. -c a n ac rt. hav- th-
script -.n' it has -.-n translat.

JUDQ- S_ Ri : Cxn Lt be . scort-n-' -ncth-r r n tnnj' ! th- intor-
th- r -.ns1-tin Divisi.n, n.w pr-s-ntly her- in th- c urt r
r a—i; th- fils.

FATTER: Yes, Y-ur H n r.

i a-iid.’iG: Did y u hav any ‘ifficulty in un 'eratan an i- c und
trick? •

I -TeR: Th-y wor. iwst-ricl, lur Il.i r - the ’iff iculti. r.

JTjTC; S3RE!G: I kn V, but c Id. y u un -rst-m’ th.. s ur.'. track?

:* Y-C, v-ry well, f.ur : :

JUT> j .. St2JRIKG: - . . ,

filn h-r- l t — c art r. ’ a? ^

.. c’“_V ~JY: You ;an aft-r :-Coss, Y ur H .•> r?

• •" 522 K-. .St^r th. dose : th- day et 3:30.

R. cHaS-T:: I shall certainly inquir-. I r.'t /... r. vhuther it will

r - r.v-.nar,t • r th- pr '-cti n p. ; >le t ten-1- it La R. an 153 or in

rt ri n, but If han-’, I ? n't kr-w an. r- s a not to V it in the '

’ - 4996 ••


2J. jarch-^*F-lJi->«MrcK (Int. Sr--wr.)


Cart I

c art r- J ,jst » Kal *

jUEjriJ SABRING: It ecurrcd t us tlrt If tiv. file c 1 -- c ' h “ r '
- Pt s ace f ik t tw- of th- translators, the C aaisfi n,rs
, w ^u -oy th_ -r.si ait c Vi., the titalr . her.-. » e •’ >™ the
.wfit f tlvir wXpVuvr.ti ns fr th- translation ->ox.

»HUGX: Ajv-' that * 4il bov.r. v-ry Icsimalc, vt‘ 1 r,±n v; -
. .. . ‘/tf r 3 :U 5 «

JUO,. 6-3RI*0» 3:35.
a. cH.o'-3: 3:35, yes, sir,

. F803SO* I sb ul like t ltqu-st that the af ;n:.-r.t 3raok bo

ilie wad t * -r.’ this porUmancc.

. 8ESQV.I ThproquMt iajrftntod. The dofon-’ant Brock, "bon tho

picture is ah vn, v atten 1 ttic ah ’*in£»

C «na.l f r cfcirV.nt 3ni*'t nay ;r c—d.


3Y Di. KaUT «

.. it::-; 53, I r. W put t y U 0 • * - rns »

, Bvcurin tho skulls of Jewish Balsl *«• 110080

1 t p . 1 not N . 035, BAibit 175. is cu nt f 9 IM -

■ v t- you. It is a secret e iwnieati n, an? it beers Si v-i»»
aL tt-turc. Thuro ore t» • annexes t tills dccunent. One of thui c c :ruc

, •- ,t . icr:tc p> an: th- t.:-r n- e.nctrnt the su .josti.n for
..carin th- skulls >f Jerish Ulslw viatic Ccmdss.-irs f r th- purjr.so f
tciantific ros-orch. H ", I nsk * xhothor yu rcc.lv. t.ds ouaafe
- r :• r. fadllT id toaU r this letter, an whothor

y a ctill ru.Kj:b-r it to '.y?

... I rvcoiv.: th-letter with- inclc-surof, but I recall V U ■ • 1 -

this is I r.c“ll nth- tk-r natters*

D y » «.h t . w uu th-.t 1- a X n t M - the «. inclcsuros t*

• l: Utter?

... I r-ally sh uU’ like t. say that bedtus., -r 1 has v- V » su ‘
,r. destined f r th- ,;-ichsfu-hr-r ror- put int Ui. -nil that


^-ch^u-J?-H;-U-«arr - (int. 3r va)


C urt I

„ "Ut im .-r-.o-Mibl. t n l-.y r.-dcr, this r. rt . ui: n.t h-v. b-cn
. -prcir-nsiblii cs I sale’.

,'crhr.ps I .a ht renin' you that the t incl-.sur.s arc closely bound
• .thcr. The. first incl sure sh ul' c .rorn itself with th. •iscr.scopic
_. . ... t'.w s-e.rv' inclesuro sh ul-' c neern the securing -f skeletons.

I« tfl-t -Is y vr ; jxni«n?

... Y.,, th"t is way the letter I'.'US it. First, c os t. tc-

- r c pic stu’- m then the skulls.

, 2 *sk y u, with particular ru..ard to the f'.ct th-.t y v -re
itsUr/ln uns'or th. -i y u kn:w -'.otr.ila -r y u k>* T * p-rtieultrly thM
„ « tK *w. fr «K rcr-rt, tee. *1».. — * * *H« »' kta * 0,0,1
Ub nkulls r ok-i-t u .or- t - - it t th- tmvorolty f Str-.oVur;.? 8W

y u kn it th se •litails?

* lie f 1 i n t' k.. *thsj ctnils.

}. ; l. 6-11 CS Just Wtf.t y-t \i I'R r, in r MBS?

A . I knew th. c ntents :f the 1 .fetor, which 1 cist font n to Sichrvmn.
i. T s is D.cirwnt 116, Schibit 169, : - 12. In •' L u

t - .icav.nn th-.t u very thin iv-c-ss-ry « vl be no t wil ' up this
: . . skulls an' this - uf b- 1 r :r 1 ss r Hirth ah' y u s,y

further tort Sb Cborstiirofcinnfuohrur Si-vera 'dll c-:ounic-.tc with Bichonnn

. this, ft t , i '^k y.u, «h ir Mchaaim?

... - « litre th-.t I her* any idea wh Sichv.nnw.-s at th t tiao.

; rs s nt J this Wt f thia letter which I certainly did a t send .n
. r . C8 it CITS heru. A® was always the cast, I sh wed it tc
Hlrxdor an, -nly t-a i I sen it n, aa Ton quite sure th-t T hoard Eich
r m -,t th- ti.fr the first ti I *"n'% kn w hin tiwrwi^ n r did
I ic v h- Inter.

i. C-n y.u n.'t tell us wh-th-r y c di'n't fcrve S'- i o or other
,r. na ... n h-r. ia this wh le business? h_n, f r iostsacc, it says

r .h t n c-llecti.n of stole t ns is t b. -- e th_n m w uld rry -xkoi;

. -t . --e _V . . „ h-v St ti- r r ti ns ut


-.If .r nt w uld ask wh-tinr n- 'U 't irv„ s.

-•693


2_ ^rci'.-..-vr-L--5-«' rr ^ (!»• 2r OTr 0

C.'jrt I

rhit v-s r-Mly >in_ •".?

... I cert ir.iy ^ e n . rr : c' •! s in this r-.u-r except those
t v.. <ii • - r i3. in c r.r. cti n tith -h- c 13-cti n f skulj.r f r t:r. w:iic-l
_rp -cs, -n it. ' ul n.v-r .rve -,ccuit--'. t / r th ~0 nny n. k.uI u us-il

-

r. . t, i yvi rie i. --..‘s w.feter in^epea ontly h.r.";ur or
i • y v svV t It l Hinnltr f r his ccici.n?


2t ;r -c> 47- -?jC- 15 -l-Kboh« (lut., • "='
C-urt I


: ycir attontl a r. t ?a20 12, exhibit 181, !fa• 057, this is

yQ 15, a lfi.ttM? dated 21 Jur* 1S43 fr~' Slovara V- Sichrann. The lot tor
-, f - aroatly seat by Solvers -..1th csaios £hr two :thor zeroes vA also

- c::v t? bo Boat t:. you. This lottor says ia t= 115 por»» veto v-rkod
-.-1 that these soloctoi porsias ah-ull bo sent to -tho c acoatr tion c-..ps
n ^.tavoilor. 3 •; was* such a lottor h-adlod by you ir. y-ur rocistry offico
.V. : rofor a.-.: t tho c.*?y which was wart ts ytu; did y=u a,-l.. sue It it to
-h-hor, lid he iWW u; thO lottor or did oa»ao olso; Just h.*.: *•» it iwdlod?

or over h-.vio. DOOtt this lottor. T.o :: to
e-rrios a « 1 „ that a t ~iuo, but sr 7 c lla -.—. r Sort's O-tati - and *-:o

• : irr. no?-..-l £ - * «- * 1 * :c ' ou ° *

; 7 on y u soo 15 £ tho & ='.o t -o:k, as, ploaeo l .h at

•o acain is a =ark V? this chap, 3or . ao-M leek
, . 091 rjA Paco 10, hero t U a axfc atf ihutoh to Dr. Srault

ji « by jo- . ropr luces a talk that ho-:. '/ith Sievorn; • u


r. or jojI- this a tati n?

4

I \ i. t re:., ber ha vie. aeon it.
i .c- *- i::t -ut t - d-to 2 j Oct bor, 19«.

• tho i- t Lay i t Pju la branch. o

.... . .r - L ’

t r.t I c ul ..at final rop~rt t --lor but aiaco ve hV. t dear ut by
that OYJ •, ore . ro i : rt at to t that t sub It ouoh a

■ , vail.

% yu gpra* b-.l 12 a:‘ lr& y ur att,..ti.v: * *OUl»Bt 003.

.. . . r . 504 . Thin in a bo atior t i hi fra he, ©leh

..... f a typo f t&M ^ccia.

: .• 1 . lotto.- t Gi*o i: ..out! n th-t roso-rc" int tho pratacti; £ ty v.us
-ftcl.o W b bu urJerta.on r^I f r this yurpsso --o huUrod auitablo
r: jp~ »r- tahea f ir-t^oilor; w?wl* 7-u c-ro t- aho a state oat


\. t m *


C -. o::t?


dSCO


£i (Ir.t., Brc-r.)

rarrt I

.V I era roranbor -s littlo r.b:ut tiiia iottor ca the tLarr, b l I u u
zr~ tint It aid bo directed to ObcrjrupTonfuohror pohl raft that I rccoiva -2
~ly c ctpy and t'-.oa th-ro w-a a thi— r.ro t- bo :-no about this. I atrply
d'-so'. vor tho first port f thj lott.r and probably crdy yloneod at tho
aoo n*t» - publlcati :n Ohlcb W to bo ado. Hi : dor

nsirrol r r hi^solf tho ri,iit t locilo chothor anythin" w-.s t bo published.
:y reply t Siovors which i3 a tho cost pc 70 f tho deettont book sly
: e.rrol itsoli' ::ith ti. socor.l ?*xt f this Iottor.

a "r.3 that t!» sontoneo uhu. o y.«a steto en\ I qu to: "I oak y u to dee Mo
Ot Mr tho -l?ic: sfuohror SS ah-ull bo r.n od r tho tf V-H.,.. r tho inatltuto
f rhc'.ic-d :ilit-.r/ loaocrch oa tho au..p rtln. one;;" 41:1 thr.t attraot
7 ar rttooti'r. and when you «rW that y u boc.-.o ; ctivo iu t:^i rvrttor?

. "a* t.iqt is cc. 7.-.0 roct f it »-o .-orW .lr^, t an c.jrjjrons that
. reached sari lor.

1 r-.f, 1 ash y u t c .:rjo 3 t 009 on pc jo 95. This ; j a Iottor

*

•• - - J *b>ichofuohror SS poreonal rmX y «r c. ->y dctol 6 Juno *944 1'. root.4
•. IJo'.vrs r.d re. lotorod; c datorol Iottor is r.: t tho or .4 ao a cocrot
~*-tc,r7 .

..

* - : riocso t*ho c 1 h at this iottor and toil ... • ;• u think f it?

.. That -n: 0 is it?

P -1 0 9b *f tho Ggr cn. Zho roc -.1 so:'.^r.co r.-da on 1 ' 11 c; "I h -vj
1 tho -.leis Fuo.’iror SS a* tho -nttor soo: o* i. - rtant 0 Thon

- * f*it z . -t'in • fflcos e all be -3 u j rtln fflcoc oil! that

~ 1-iP 'tie C aid J. acral t a sup; rt ffico; a v what d- y u hevo tc aay
- s « t ct? • •

':.l: was hi. dor's ta3k which I c'-siuicatoC t P hi n tho basis f tho
toncos la his Iottor.


i: r.-rch -:- 7 ^^rj 5 Vi 5 - 3 J:o°hAa tint,, apswr.)
c urt I


q ::•••, "Ocnso look r.t D:o-xa.t C7C, 3:hIMt 29',, yo^g 7-1 :f y-ur d-cuiioat
t ? iia is on nfrie-.Tlt a y:ur port rohojdlnc or portraits o:: typhus,
plor^o l --:k -.t pcrnjoy!: 5 1 :, 1 *. xogt 6 y u any, "I os: olsr quite suro th-t
-osul- - a- ■. if tfoso or orlo.rts sr o risvie-3 Siod." !l oro you
..-.ilai o st-.-u oat r.s t vhothor y u kaan tk~t huuon boia^ oxyori. xr.ts woro
v lu corrlo' ut rrl f r vhrt ill ym Sr.r: tkot hir-jui boiujs S-.’. olio, oily

lio-?

I :c;cr. in .onorol th-.t hu.xx tool v. oxpori orts wore uni or voy, oa thr.t
c - • bo aooa fre : tho c rroayr.-Uor.cj, but I hr', r. kr.-wlo’ o th-t ;ora~M h-U
®so at* to or.t horo Is r»- -la n io’.ucti-'n, -.ihich I iron tho

| cuor.ta 0t£ attofl t .. rjtf fr :.. trfutt the intoxro r t 1'.:- , It 0“ulA

ri; bo noon fra. tha S cir or.to thr.t cx;vori. or.tol eubjocta ufct hoi boon nor.t
• :>tr..llo- lo! a tixo vy, Por.V.ys 1 drew o- o oaa ci.*.tl a botveon thr.t
f-:t rj.*. this boro, j tint u uld bo tko or.-l~.ar.tl a fir :y 3t-.to.xat '•.ire.

:s , t v ctotacut 1 :. tills rffl ir.vit, thr.t tho oxjorl rental pors.-no

•■■wo Mith ? rioaco \ r. r c ui; t ev:i' tho oxyorL-onta, I hr.vo so

rtfirj ku-vlci g oltiior fr* orltton at-.to -r.ta :• ft-., exwl at-.to: ont 3 ca
/M-t - thirl .ora


H w : a. uld liko f spook ta y.u ab ut D cu jat Dr k Ho# a, oeaoorninu
• . Oltiba - ox. orl.outo f Dr. Roto ; . ■nW t lo . ri-. th-t

y-i krou 3usober?


Yoo.

. 3ii 7 u coa bi;. froquoatly?

.. Tory for* tiros ir. fso c. -rao - fair t~ flvo yoora.

1 31 * :.j c o t y-ur rffico a rook with you?

.*. Tr-lco, n' rtly'bof ro a troia loft liunich, whon ho nni i to vifo
-- u -t o lottor t III lor t- tho stiti a on’. Ito it t. o.


*~t *.1‘. io w~r.t whoa ho co a


211 ,v .q br-u/ht r re: rt r a latter; os I sole this, cull n.t
hr. anoi . -re thou frur r firo ttas.


2L -rch U7-..I>-16—1-Blakloy (Int. Brown)
C< urt to. 1


1 ' ore y u over . resent rhon Hirrdar talko’ ..1th Victor?

A to. I k-s never . rosont at those c-nforances.

— •

1 ' Saschor .ver tall yc ; arscnslly either ‘-eferu or.aftor a
cr-feronca with Kiwnler rhy he ha ’ exo?

!fc. ..ftcnr-r '3 \ rv-rar s, ku a' out those visits to othor because
I ha’ no tin: for that,

q But y->i ’a not want to u.-y that y u knot? that Roscher was oarry-
lr. - t or. c.dr*>r.t- r. lai r. heir. * in * !r.u?

.. Too, that I knew*

*i 1 y u over visit Dachau y rr If?

.. to, I w b b not in Dachau r. r in n; ether c ncontration ewv#

q M l y.u over ycursalf toko part in .tjocrinonts cr. htrnn boinrs?

A to.

q Di •. you soc thoao ..'hotc m; hs vhich arc sv; .1 *a to thu ’.ocu-
or.t ’ oka?

.. I e-nnrt recall ov^r bavin sojn th.':,

to, lease turn t< i: >. 53* This is a latter fron Itaaoher to
"1 . r in hich ho for th first tl : V:os su estions to Hi til r that

r.-: r. ’. in ox; rinonte shcul ho car'-io’ cut in Da chav.; an’ ho says in this

letter that in those uxi-rimnts ho r.-ul’ certainly havo to count on .a
i th * cons • u-.no ’ r so of the sub$ -.9, a f-tal c asoquu: ?a* Do yru

r : >r r:Colvin this 1 fetor? If y u jr.»t,c*n you say how you probably

• ‘1 tV. 5 i .tt r when it cam in?

I o not ror> ::V:r the letter, -s a all cases I certainly woul’

-v :ut this letter - '.or. th .-Ail that Hi l r orul * ron:' p«*sonally after

- >n ’y cr lance threu h it that this -rns t - ical ratter in which
-.r was in noral interested*

. K UFi.VN : *o are s ?,akin now, y.ur Honor, -f Ho. 1602-1'S,

SxhT.it

' tow, .lease look at Fa o 5? of th 1 C-ormn ’ocumr.t hook. This is

, ' -hi' it - letter fro:: you to-Vschcr in which you tell hin that,

<:ccg


Ik !fcroh i7W^v.TO-l6-2-Blakloy (Int. Brcro)

Court Bp# 1

coura , risoners Till: 3 la *ly na available for hi h altitude oxperl-
jntr.tion, 'as thi3 letter ,rritt_n on ycur o.x initiative or is it a case
sinller to 'll the othjr coses that you have brccht up her-, n-jaely, a
letter -rritten on :r lors frer. Hider?

.. This i-tt.r '.ccc not ori ini to with n. hut is to bo traool 1 ack to
dear or'era on the part of Hind or,

■ :*c , l-asc tako a look at .a i 61, Oocuix-nt 15'Exhibit
i*S, a luttv-r that ears yeur si-uature, aV’rjsser’. t- Slavers. Hero you writo
that- 1 :h ; rcssure oxjarinjnts are bain carric 1 out by the Luf tvraffo in
lachau on risorvors there. Ih.n look at the next 'ocunant, ?.~:;a 63, of tho
Ooroan )ocunont Hook, Exhi'-it 19, Docunent 1971-..-15, ?a ■ 60 of tho
in liah 'convent Hock, a l-tt-;r frer. Rr.schor to Hirr-lor. In tho first
mntcnco of thin letter there isnontion of cn -ncl SLary report,

-jv*. th»ro- is no loubt that this interim report wns onclcso.’. Nor,', 1 ask you
ehethar y i rea*. this interic re; ori.

.. I ahoul like to ossurva tlrt I 1 J not because such no'leal
wo quit Inc ■ r henslblo to !« os a laymnj ani, aoconily, l>ocauoc
f 'll the v rk rrliich I ha ' to *c, I 1 ' net have enou’h tinu to concern
ysolf with tvports hich, first of all, I 'i n’t unlsrstani an*., aoconOy,
hich i' not int rent ->. Thus it is that 1 iufc this report in with tho
.-r.il tbit ' 1 . :iier was t. real without rca’ir.. it tyaelf.

q Kcv, lease look at ljn-'ViS, Exhibit 52, Fane 65 of tho English
' cu-ant Book, a , nrontly - teloty.-o .ssa c Iron Hnscher to y u. Hero
nchor asks whethor :.lo 3 an’. Hussinns also r.re t- be par'one' if they have
:■ 1 sever- • c irfn r.ts, Jr- the Tocuxxjr.t 19?-- , - It 53,

65 is t-> ' o faun' year nns'-r, a Wlaty o e3sr j t- O'xr3turafuchror
abnitaler in I’unich. In thi3 letter you say that oxpariauntcl subjects aro
-tit to bo . r’.ono’ if they -to boles or Russians. This ’oonajnt m3 ivan
ri'. Filar stress .y th. . rose cation, an' its cruel an atrocious nature was
- Tasiso . * y u rer. r this ‘ocur- r.t or can you -ivo us ary explanation

' it cane a* out that you si no' this tol-type ness:: -e?


-1904


2i arch :j7-.-..Tr i -l6-3-rl=klj;' (In*; vtoun)

Iru-t So* 1

.. T havo no eeaoxy of this corruinication. Of Crur3o, I cannot huro

state un’or oath what her this is one of those cases in which a teletype

-jssa ; was sent on HirrJ^r*s or ars »dth ry si-nature to it. It is quite

•

.-.s os ible that I ha! seen this .-.ossa o an! toow its contents an’, sent it
off.

q But I woui! thick that a ’ocunent with such contents woul! still
':q ronanhoro 4 . by you tc’ayj an! yot you say that you *.o not roiwabor it?

?Jc, I • J on* t. In view of tho onomous run'or of or’.ors that I *ot
frer. -larder, I caul ’ not concern ryaolf with the ’otaila of each natter so
that I woul' rco.-sSjor th n for any lorv-th of tine.

q Do you ; ■ rhothor ytu ifti cawo' this nattor with Bunalor

an l then vaito! for his or'-ors?

• I cannot any that. I asau:<c th t I vat the t.-lotypo aoasr. o anon*
hia Ball an.’, thon rocoivoi his criers alon? -.-ith all thu rost of his or’.oro.

q !to , as last 'ocucent frra thio Vocuwnt book, I brin • up Dominant
L02, Zxhi' it 66, ra;o 89 f tho G.-roan Litton. This is a 1 tt r to thu
Goman Roacarch Institute for ..viation. This lottor icconpanloo a Ion ro-
. ort> tho oubjoct of which is roscuin : .Hots free hi. h altitu !oa. Do you
tar.vo that roport now in front of y u?

.. Yos.

' ms is Page 82 of tho toetsxmt book. Dll you work on tills report
or at loaat iv: a cursory lar.co at it?

.. I certainly II not work on itj an’ 1 1 ’n't oven ivo a cursory
lanco at it, first of all because it's a ao leal report ar. ', sccor. bl ,

-cur it's such too Ion .

q " gw , I sh ul like to 'iscuss vifch you Docus.vnt Book %i ' :r 13.
o ncoms raistar! .as oxporinonts. Lot ao point out Docuraant 193,

■-’.'ri' it 2?h. It's a top secret tatter, a latter to th- : . :*••• nal Staff of
v ■' ’ chsfuohrer SS. In this lottor there is section. ' a then neetT/anyi nr.
art or. th: use of a euro for nustar' as burns, a 1 -ttor frer. Gr.arritz,

j bat is y.air o-.-.:ry of this ratter?

•19C5


21 larch U7-..TD-i6-L-3l'ii y (Xnt. 'ran)

Zc art lie. 1

I fcn't iwranhcr it at all.

n rioaso look new at your affi avia, ?a . 1, !D-372. You say hero
that oxTorlnonba were carrie-i ou on concentration can;: imatesj "So far as
r was aware, tho oxporinonts were lira etc towar' -ivinr tho o xporinantal
subjects :;unls in various parts of tt\oir boiles, an! theso rouftte wore thor
infc-cto l with Lost."


;'tor u '.iad seer, all the c. cuiionts hero, -aid


stutenant jf ’..’hat I


t h&ve Ua ;ra those intcrc anactions


ecaujo


d * ith those otters onl; froa a . u*oll


ternal


otont officers


then


the boat ..ind in the \i rid I could not hove concerned


I point


ou ’.’ill ^riint -o that I


emulated hero


uocut* n th t th


intarr retud I us is such a


tuT3


iscriain-tc bof.oor. uh-t I


* I :aiuv or ut tfco ti..* 'ndor quosti^n


oia- the d cu-u .ts


r *bubl


oi.*. - sue ;


otual


xrrosa tl


.

.. : o- . . s last document bao


are t brir.c up


t Z.*o. 3D. This is ur


nsivo affidavit c


Court l

i-cfe -A-I7- 2 -ED-5c. b-Csr

£\ eriaontal subjects ':cre fco_.t fer fifteen fc-urs
in -bo a.-or* air, naked. ■*

I- A ril of *43 a ref rt or; this -latter ’ -3 sent to #

. A -.73-r. reads tills, -f c urs., ; in- tho
ieer-rossion that y u, y ursclf, had r-cd the entire retort
that in t!*i 3 affidavit you are si.a ly stating that at
-hut ti.ie y u hue • n t only what ';-s s^ing -r. in gwn-ral

d you like to stato

t this affidavit al30 is n statoaent regardi-g uhioh
” ju can say vhnt 'U have alro-dy said in rer.ural about y .ur
-ffidavits?

A. T - . •. ■> t.in is true hero.

; Now, I - o': -*u s ocificoll: nhothor ; u road tho
cu.ont 428— -rather, correct! n—1613 Exhibit 90, y .

.7, hioh is a letter ro:» 2 .char t Hi -. 1 -r, n;nir. '1th
t& oxtonoivo report n cooling or freazir. ax^-rluonts or.
r. -uir.-s.

a. I -ost ccr ly

s. L t :-o oar re-*.; in r--ardt that

•

vit .lino that : m ;.ust brou :.t u;, in Doounont 371,
Jnt 2 eh ::J. 8 , £ hi'it 186, . • it s ye — is

th- dooinont buok on opide..ic Jaundice— I - tf .t thoao
... eriuents • -re carried ut id th t c >r.30t ; uoncc of it.

- . f the inu-tos died.

.it testified here t . t tho : t. or of such
ril.nts is not s cert, in, n r is it certain that t^o
-t rL.jr.ts er . c.'.rri.d out--or c <uld h v. bo«n : rri.d
. , tho question is, how did this sonionca over jet

in* 7 affidavit Bocuuae, a th- b_sis of f cts I could

rrof.

^ fr 1. ret the interrogator told ret, r.u • ..ich I have

--rtified in this affidavit-by jutting signhtur- to it.

4906


2- 3.Z5-17-la-S5&«i (3rovn)

Court -• 1-


Sruait, I should like to take up now the question what your i

v _. ri at die pomissibility of sue., oxporiiwnts a hunan subjects, V u :

that you knew that cxreriaoats ver- boi-v c rried out on humn boin^ti,

-i.*. that noio-volur.toore w^rc bcio£ use?, in sue.: cx-.erincr.ts, nnd, fir-ally,

f-.tclitlos t=ist bo expected. Tow. I should like to know trvx you wV.t

■ ix r.c .B -ore re.-rrdini: th. -oral or ethical aspects of such exporinorits.

.. la tt’k l i y r c-.ro of requests that were odAressod to :ii-- ler, I —’ruy

tried to putt ryself Into the posit‘on of tho person raking t.io petition, •.»

\r.rlz on the petition fna that roir.t of view. The s.u:o is t rue '-let for

.x; ri;w.trl subject. If I were in the position th.-t.na exporinontd sueje<

fla-’.s insolf, I certainly should wish not sU-ply to bo essi.r.od to sv.o

. nt; wither X should like to bo asked whether undor oortoin oondit

! Should be villic.- t • subnit to va ox;vrln r.t ir. orl-r in this.way, for
*

-t: le, to b<- nnrdonod, if a;- sonter.ee wire dor.th. I t". cor.vincod tn t t

v . ’ ve been ennucii volunteers for such oxp)ri.xr.to if they wore rr ror.r

ir. :he correct tanner. r.nd if they v. re trelitod ns .nt.Ji boiru:# — oven th

tec;* i ht be criminals condomed to death — tl;ay oh.uld not bo tre tod

si.ply r.o cli .ttel or as authors. x.' in the way that the oxrerlr.vntc v*vo

c-.rrlo;’. >ut a cert- In ..unrrotoo ;uot bo .:iven th-t the risk for tho subject

1. of r -ini:oi.. Sow, I vill b. t>l’ th. t I a. . kin. those excuoos «ov, r

: V- it th t it is now t.u*t you have oxproscod such lnocs for tho fi. ct ti.u

. ccorr-; ry whole nature it is true that I was of tho sane oplnl'-n

tr.v. tine, r.t the o'*inlca I re- now exproscin,;. On the other hand, I ubt

th t til 0 I r.fleeted nl :r. - the lines which I an iocusoirv now.

“irat, th-.t won't part of .y work; secondly, I was e ov.rvorkod th-t it

V dy with .-rent difficulty tu t ! :< cr.:e to taka erro of th# purely

t-c ic: 1 aspects of these natters; nad thirdly, because I v s ipnorrr.t ~f

. e. tls I was not in the position to cr.lculr.to the iaplicrtion* of .13

.-tiers. I n_ convinced th-.t if oxperinonts are ci rriod out of th

I .. ~i 'usi '.escribed, it would not hivo to bo repudiated by any or.o.

r. ::.l—i.dr.* (counsel for the ^efondmt Brr-ndt): I hare one or two

•1509


2 . .. iv r-C5-17-2a-Schwr.b (3rova)
Z • 1 *


J- qu,sti-aa. but before I csk tie next question I should like t-> have the
t_ ravel. The Court vill roaoeber that on lest Friday the Irosccutr.
o;Jectod to c. cortr-in question relating to the question of ?i.~Ur's influent
, = i yh^lo -ilicu around hi.., could have on r. non liko 3r.-r.dt. "It is

• vision that this question mist bo ventilated.


•i910


Court I

2L nr L7-A - l3rl - LJj - rutty - (-nt. Btm)

to

It is ny opinion that this qu-sticn oust be ventilated so th:t we
c sy, so to speak, resurrect HL-ri-r here fer a fa* accents. That Hirrr.ler
ms Cranny's grave-digger is perfectly clear, but this is a question
which could lead to an -xtonuation of Brandt's guilt. Tr.e question:
h.w did it happen that an innocent young tan was so seduced? The
seducer is always guiltier than the person seduced, and her- it is
3randt who was seduced.

I should Uko to ask t.i'.t he bo allowed to say a f»w words about
the influence that tho d n, Hirsalor, had ever hi a for yea: , and which
fir.aJ.y 1-d hla to sign lott-rs and docusaonta which absolutely contra¬
dicted hie own humane views.

'0. HtoRDXt Kay it please Tear Honor. 1 submit again that Heinrich
K1 a-r or Kissel-r*s influences are net cn trial hero. This case is
Inst the on in the witness box, Rudolf Br ndt. 1 can't see th t
ruy discussion as to tho character of Hirnler will bo r* storial. 'Hiore-
tz r., I object to any int.rr ..ution alcr.g the lines ef the influencos
of KirseluT.

JUDGE SSSRXNC: i.oll, Hr. Hardy, if yrur contention is correct,
then what does th .t portion of tho underlying law which guides this
Tribunal which deals with superior orders -eon when it otic t v *t superior
.rdors shall not constitute a Cofmsw but that the fact of superior
orders nay be hoard in dtigatior. nf the sentence? Now if that does
not allow a considerable inquiry into the type :f super! ,r rdcr and
- circu. .stance ureter which it was -ivtn and the relation th\t existed
between tho superior and tho subordinate, what dees it rear.?

HaRBT: I follow Your Hrr.cr quite cle -rly up to tho point
until you got int- what influ.nca Ki:vi.r had cn this subject hero.

1 Tier's sup-rior orders say we-ll bo pleaded in .-litigation, but I

r.'t See th-.t the influence of HinaL-r upon the personality of one

•

Rudolf Brandt has any bearing thereon.

JUDGE SEBSING: *s a superior cn one hand and as a subordinate


-a the other


4911


Court, I


21* ar U7-A - 16-2 - LJC- - nitty (Ir.t. Brcwr.)

HE. h-RDTs :dll, vo ray rill argue cn th-t free nowuntil Doon's
Day, but I rys&lf don't see whore it has any natcriality hare.

JUDGE SIBRIKzi Bell, if you w-ro to take the other end of the
discussion and all that would be ever relevant would be sir Jly tho
statonent Iron tho witness! -I actc-d.cn superior orders" and quit, and
tho Court under those circur.stx-.cos would never have any yardstick by
which it could naasur© the question of sitigaticn if it thought that
iti .atior. was proper.

HR. HJtDY: I havo no further ocant, Your Honor.

THE KISS IDS! rr: Urxlor these circusatipccs the witness nay give
thv Tribunal a picture of t a situation where ho stood it tho tine, a
brief succinct stetoaont.

Counsel aay propound to the witness tho question which ho su it* .

BY D;.. KiwiraUHN*

Q. Dr, Brandt, f r years and years since 193U, you w rkod with

Hinsler, and tho Court certainly a is u-.ru itrprossion of your purely

oxturior acti/itios. Now -Mild y-u please say how you saw Hiiaalor's

personality and what influence Hiunl^r's personality exercise'’ on y u

during tho course f the yoersT I »«it to kr..w what runorius y u have,

h t feelings you had and how y r whole orientation was influenced

•

by HL,.slur's -annur of thinking.

THE PRESIDENT: The quostion should also include tho .ttcr of

v- fficial relations botroon tho witness and Hinder. That is tho

ain point cf the quustior., tho official relations and how Hinalur's

ch-rector affected this witness in hi3 fficial cutiu3 in the position

-i=h ho <ccupied.

ST DP.. KtUFIlUKi
\

0 . a'itness, did y u understand?

... *es.

Please start.

•>. Professor Gcbhardt has already tea Certain extent given a das-

criptior. ,f Ki nl.-r's personality. ahen I now describe Kir* ‘ r and

4312


C.-rt I

2L -'X li?--. - 16-3 - LJj - Bitty (Int. B rye. )

S3 os I understand then and as I experienced thee, then I ask y-u

c *. toOonstruo that as propaganda because after all that wo hav u found

.-ut in the noantine, there isxo occasion for any such propaganda. X

•

emphasize particularly- the feet that I clearly disappr-vo f Hi-r.ler
the way every docent nan dees and must,.first, because f the c*i es
h- c jaitto-1, secondly, b-causo he comitted suicide.

when I went to HL-aalor I was a ycung SS aan, young b th in years
sir.co I was not oven twunty-flvu in the year 193h, and yun; also in
:y nuihorship in the SS of which I- had been a aerbor less th'-. four

• nths. Tho first Impression that a y-.uni: and ionaturo pers n has -f
the intentions and plans and ef tho hur-ui and official behavior of
his superior maka a particular laprossion on him and, in goneral,

o’oralna what hie future dovolopnont will be. Hi-nler's manner ;f
rkine, working lto at night, caxuying out many fficial trips, br u^ht
it as ait ovon at the very boginnlr*, that I was subjected te tho ear/)

* ridng'conditions. Ho to k overywhero with him to finish up tho
■ rk that he was doiro. so tiat tc a Curtain extent I was his body
;’en.graph-r and was alaest liko his shadow. He diet.ted letters to

. in the trains, airplanes, auVnocblluS in the a.rnlng and at all
h irs of the day and ni ht.

During tho nu-_r us fficial trips I 3ar how u.deot Himlur's
: .'-.vdor was in hwtols wh-ro wo spent the night, h.w friendly and polite
he *.s t the servants. I saw hw simply his way f living . is life was
. sar. t iat ho ruado no special daiar.ds, r/! in this c nnec ion I
:h uk like t* remark that ittmnlor was .n* f the few lea-ding Party cr
fficials wha didn't tla/ the "big sh t" and whe did net augnont
r le^al inccres with a little i-noy fr - tho side. I saw h w c m-
r .x. ho was f :r tho welfare of w run and children *h w^ro in
--*"'-5a because f the death .f the bread-winner. These w ry.n 3h:uld
” -vu to deal fruitlessly with an unfeeling bur cracy. Thu 1 cal
-*-‘.3 relieved them f t-cir cares and difficulties ard t a largo


4913


C-'iTt I

-4 r LW - Ifl-U - &' *»

,,,, teei cor. CT «. children. Thia help - - —- “

aseured of SS assistance.

,ved - *» - *— ^

, t ,o number of chUdr^. — - —. bWth '

,.; s ^ on Cbrirf-o HO chts* hinself. until tb. — - h ‘

r» - -»-—- - 55 - - - faum in ' >atii °~

lai ,ed pr aunt, for Christ. Ht.ever. - SS non ——

*, the boneficlarioo of do ° TT

„*» and SS field hospital. received ^ .1 ail^nte <- -

pottos, etc.cn hi. — --“•«»

.o c:rroapoir-onco that dealt din ~b -tUr. » ^ — -

'•Tla.tter f^—“

Christ- o„ - Christ- day - — ‘ ^

»0 .pent no Christ— * Hone during the «r.
f .=» also he in uatri.ua he b« b. -» the P«* «-
ad .art the price cnsidorati n ■« over thinking -f -
; Ko expected nuch n re f hiraoU than any

, loading P—o f tb. ->• -.e bigbor -ante ™d gone,
ally valid f., the whole X the SS but .ere node Particularly n . a
•iif..v .-.nob rotors.

I sov uw’oi’standlnsly ^ s»*nor< usly hu rocciv,
reboot, that wjro directed V bin fr.c cerhera f the SS .-a
the entire pcpulatien, b « .W He « t help vhere financial -r
t -r assistance Was rucossarf.

.ti7bt at tts beginning * «S* S * °° '

every letter crossed to bin should he fritted t him n natter .hat

it» c nWr.ta night b-. H: l^ttar was t bo filed away withcu
„i, nuch lass thrown int, the wasWc^ct, «* his — t .
,. r was n t oaroly a pr*  »«•  .-sen *» -

4914 *


SS,


C-urt I

2 L aar U7- - 18-5 - LX - Putty (^nt. Br.wr)


letter could s«* fr:a the way it was tr.at^d and the contents -f
•ho letter with what hua'-n sy-npathy his applicati.n *as bans v. rked


•VS15


24 r-S5K-l?-i-C-;::-Int. Brown

C:urt No. 1.


A Hi_l_r's .rdcrs regarding the treat-ent of applica¬

tions tact ca .e in e.rresp nded with the wey I Tclt about
such ntters. In .ay family, end Inter '-s . student, I had
r: ...1 experience with distress and suffering, md I Knew
difficult and impossible it often was f .r the sL.plb man
i t;.e 1 -wcr classes t- pr-tect himself against the cursory
:r ‘t.-nt n the part --f people wb_ were his social superi rs.
T„.nics to Hi—ler’s a ttitude n such matters I was enabled
: iielp such pe-ple and along viith Hi-oJ-er ell of .iy enthus-

s_ wont into this w rk, which I did industri.usly, c-nscien-

•

tiousiy, -nd which v.a the central point of nil f ay activity.

In cvhclusi-n, - ruing -y remarks ns regards this
..titter bout Hi.~xLer's ro&dii:-.ss to aolp, vn-s in agreement
•a it a hio ohnrcctcr :s I o&tiO te icn^v. .nd u estee... It was
a matter of course, t hi., t.. .t a person’ o confidence in -no
sh.uld n t be destroyed, a pors-n who turned to hi.* or to his
ffioe f--r advice or confidence. In the course of ti..o 1
f uni jut when he sp-ko with guests during -cal nd 1,

; present, whut his views » -re in‘ no fi-ld .r n.’ther, and
... Lixo v ry iuah to give a few cxie-plos briefly. For
.x .pie, lie wonted to crecto n healthy working class -

, i.itness, 1 believe y^u could be a little -j-ro brief
. this, Pi s y u c.uld just outline . ii

« Li. t I just wanted to menti n th- fact itself, nc
:.ted tv extend credit t hand workers and peasants s that
they c old start a v live lih -u. In tho racial question
uL.J.»r frequently,expressed »ue -.pini. a that the N rdico
r s n particularly soloctea race th t was destined t

t .-.e ver the leadership in the re. rg .nia tion of the co—.un¬
ity f Lur-pe. The leadership of this ~nin European people was
vie ver, t. be restricted s-lely t i>r.-ns -f the Kerdic

- . They were t. be _on fr— all n :tions ’.ad they should

- i • .*ivcn r.c pp.rtunity in peaceful c— potiti-.n t- prove


24 .. r-EBH-l9-2-C„K-Int.
‘ UTt - •


Br v.n


fitness f.r this leadership. greater Gor_'r. h c ich
...-a t tc the predecoss r f-r this greater c ..unity th t
.. 3 t , f lUw, -na it wss his view th t rfuch n c ..unity c.ull
t 1 ns endure if -nly the- s.-tiler n-ti.ns v;crc c ..pelied

•

6 - sacrifice s. .c if their s.vorcignty. It c:uld nly exist
if tuc ...re p vjerful states .:.cc even greeter sacrifices v -
lur.tr.riiy. .hen n pvrs. n ho was conversing with expressed
tuo pir.i.n tn t G..r..-ny v uld hnrdly be able t. sh-re the

1, tier ship with such pc. pic ::s Eutch_cn, Swcocs, Dunes . nd

d with cn mnlvgy ir— . sp..rt. *»e said
Utah r. _*..tter, f course, th.t f:.ir rules s...-uiu be -bsorv^d
in s ccer. In r.e year there uli be i oasa, i-r instance,
f . well Kft-wn te-... fr..* t 1 .rg. city, ..d in the next ye r
it w all. b.. the 3 :• 11 nd unicn.va tefr. - ajcll t wn r up.

7- us by naiegy, the le-dorslxip in the hur-pe .n Co*..unity
should change hands fra.: ti ~ t- tl.e se th t each nnti n
c ,Uld )s Its best f r this hur pc :: o ..unity. Hlt^dlor be¬
lieved th t in t.hi3 .y t t.lly different step w uli be
t-.icca in the lev^l p .ent f .-.r.kinu, wh t n- c. nceivcl, n .ely,
tn-' first st'-p in tint uirecti n tlir.u;h the cr..ti n V a

tried t put in

-1 nati on-litios through the x'f^r. 88. This ttca Z6 in-
1 , if I re.ni-.bcr c rrootly, i? a tUn nil.-, French,

Lithuanians, ovtfh tassel r presented 1.: these

. ; • . Bor.—as s ..bora 1 - •

- - 1;*_. t. these .b vo ^enti.ned -ur .n.n 3d units, just 3

.x 1 d b: a. -i_rs f t:.^r n.ti n litUo, In :>•.* . .ny
*.:.l i a la principle -f t..uSe .-.ernei tr.-ps ucre the s .e o
3 id 1 -..;i in the 36 .s while.

.1 .. , • oi• •• - u

novGtr te >, ur te£ tih^-ny r- -n tab* qu_-3ti.r. i ti.e
.... ti: sc -bscrv ti ns l.-- -r. y.ur ...oner -f thinKin^,?


-:ri7


— r-lr..-ir-5-C k-Int. Br:v.n

-.art -■ • 1 •


„ All of these thoughts th e were Hitler's '.nd which
,r-_ i i- 1 -v»n in cert-in b.sic p.licics f Lis, I rog rded
£ th t which ..ust be brought t- rc-hlizct i n. In s. -- way
r .th-r these thou.'hta h i to be „ le re lity, -ni th t v- s
r 5ti r. in which ,y eff .rts were bent. Per:; ps I, *

;^u b sis f _y ->wn ideals, I saw j-re in HL-eler intentions
t: -n he re-lly intended, but the difference c-.nr* t Ir.ve b^n
v.ry great. It m.b clear to .e t&i.t hx. n insufficiency in
-.ner i nd the ihevit ole difference between theory .nd pra¬
ctice v. uid push the chieVc.-ent f these Is intc the f r
future, tut I v.-3 -Is- .f the • pinion thut v.e should try in
avery vr.y to .ae r . lity fr-t- these tn-u^uts. I s.;-ulJ like
13 cuphisizo ti, t w.a t I have here o-id is n-t bused -n c
V rc.'.ti no between -0 r.nd Hi—ler, but that I s .w these things
in Me letters nd statements he - J- nd in ::is b .sic -ruers
the SS. Thus I 3 w these g.'.la be ins i*e 11 zed in .y u r'K
nl I believed >; .. n vih lived • cc riina t. such basic rules
r.i g lu c uld nly wish the a nd v; uli Keep his h nds
:1 .r. f cri .

N v;, witness, jy list question. .*t the beginning f
Llr tri i j.u at':t-d tin y.u -id u t c nsihr yuuraelf *-uil-
ty :.i in th. c urse r the ‘present ti* n f the .vid.ncc yeu
•t t :* v. nevertheless y.u p.rticip tod, .nd y u wXplai-
t..ir by s ylnj th t in p;rt the .nr.. us oc t )e f y ur

• •«: 1 d t the f ct tut yu Were i,;n. runt in - n;. fields;
tu t y u were under . r.crs - ys nd s j u .. vt just, s? id,

purs n.lity exercise^ • decisive IuIujic uj- n.

. • •-. f the present ti i -viltnoc, I sic .. ..

• - r a r. still convinced fter -r fare consult-.ti-n with

• -• nscicncc whether y.u c. aside re a y urseif guilty ~r c.t


4518


-20-i-Grcss (Ir.t. rr* n)


Y-_it is the decisive question for ne. rt t any rate I do not
, l rysalt to bo guilty in tte sense and within the scope of the indict-
.. nt . r or the Indictctnt characterizes ce 23 Hiaalcr's -advisor, as a oer-
..afluence, who with 2 clear knowledge and cold calculation took

• - ;n the crises against huaanity. This is not the case. guilt is,

opinion, euc:. 3li£hur. On th*. other hand.I aa honest and con-
si tent enough not to deny oy guilt on principle. If a aon. or less
.x-.lwd 3 uno typist in a relatively high position is guilty by bavin,;
dictation and of having passed that dictation on to subordinate
.;r. .re, or guilty by drawing up letters on hiratl.r's orders, then
! - not without guilt in that sense. When if today eft.r a cal® r«flcc-
Ucr. I sust .nus-r teat ,: atia;;-, nd afUr I have discuss-d the docu-
-rr.W with cy counsel and he point' out to oc the tragedy for the indi¬
vidual,» rvan beings concerned, then 1 =ust say the following: The
leaders an inly responsible to the Geman p-ople in th. last fifteen
J xrs arc dead, -oat of than took thair own life - hitler, Oocbbcls,
Hiselor, Gotrlng and others. *nd, thvt is in .zy eyes a contradiction

• • rinciplea which those sen represented while they »cr st -i iliv .
-! frets everything else they th.reby offended against th. principles

>f . : it; which tir.y represented for oth r persons and persons whom

they led. I eondeah 3uch an act and I nysclf would never havo done any-

•

th r.g liail r. However, I as also of the opinion that ay behavior e n
, V lustly apprised afUr all the conditions are t-ken into consider-
, • eh .cud to det mine cy activity .and ny sph-r- of work. In
ar anu-roca of on. cf th. sighti.st and cost dang.roue jf .sen I never
C-..W dim 1 . r's soul. I on't k:. wteth-r it can b. traced back to the
- at tl at I lack underst.nding for .usan beings, or that I 10 too trust-
, or -hother the- reason lies in the fact that throughout all those
. rs ! livvd -or: or loss like 1 her=it with ay .yes cov-.r».d. Until
‘ v ry f.,w -lay: .fore th: collapse, I lived as a subordinate civil
rv t nu n^v.r had any influence on Hisalcr. The reason for ay pro-
'■ ot nd-.runfuehere and ministerial Councillor li s in th fact
.iler did not want to offend ae or let a.e occupy an inf-.rior


2i ..ir ii7-»»“ l t i -4i-20-2-Gross (Inti irornj
Court Sc • 1


tlon -.5 against his otter employe _s. I should like t ncntJ
•hi chauffeur of his vehicle ted the rank of Stumbannfnctere In the
:f.n Ci which corresponds to tte rink of Major. L.t me remind you of
• subordinate, nature of my position, saa.thing which some witness*s will
•e'tifV to in affidavits. SS Ob-.rgrupp-nfUchrer Dr. or tin is an cyo
witness who trill describe in his affidavit that when ther. sere conferences
f a third pers. n with Hiaalor I was called to him by a busier in the
8'r- way that, let us say, a director of a business concern calls for
Ls st r.ogr'-pher or Secretary.

kr. Brandt, we will avoid repetition. Vc have already gone
into all these things.

“hat was one sid.. The oth.r side for understanding this
gUettlon o' guilt r.sts on the fact that for years, since the beginning
sf v activities with Hisr-lcr, I ms so over-burden ,i th»t 1 war unable
to-lent* th. details of the hundreds end thousands of matters that went
•.•rough •:y hands nor to r. fleet or. all these natters. This is particularly
tr. of th. human being experiments which or here being discussed, which
r. -..itircly lien to ay :ctu: l sphere of work, which has been corrobo-
r > t ; testimony of th witness.s. Th.st two points of view,
r.n.iy or. th. one hand r.y insignificant position, secondly, ay overwork,
a- thirdly, th. rate of 8{ t which I had to work. ..11 of these
factors should play a rol in th- i.cicion of the pt.n~.lty which is to
b - I yed upon B0. I .z sure that th Coart .-ill find its. 1i il del
-'•■L-l- to place its.If in toe position in which I found myself at

•i ... They could not do so with tr.. best will since tnat situation

.

r«- cannot b. reconstruct i. ” :ve-rtr . less 1 call your ntten-
’nos thru. poir.t3 of vl.w that I t:v just enaflu.rated when :sk-
‘ just V.riict bucaus, I an d-eply under tte L-aorvssion that the
brought up a Inst eia is wry serious. :icn, subsequently, \s I
a' ir. .act I si. -y guilt ; lying in th fact tnat I did net
*" ; ; rtuiy th. in and out going mail that went through my tends cr

I could stddy it at 1 —isure which, hewr-


ar,


co:id r.ot io becaus- I w:s so ov.rworiced. In ny basic attitude

• 492D


. r : .-2C-3-Sro3s (Int. rr.n)

Court 0. 1

•caard all p-orlc, -vcn to'.." I rd these who were P'-rsecut-d in S.rmuny for
r.cial or other re sens, it would certainly hav_ been impossible for ne
ee cign U*-sc letters which unfortunately " ictuaily did sign without
taking this precaution of first reading timm. Consequently, in cany
.-.tt-rs I «,s too uninforeaid cf the scope - the implication - that ms
joing on and I should be happy today had I not signed those. letters
.c j=- th.y stand in such utter contradiction to ay basic attitude.,

:ro vie tic ns which *o this day I did not hav- to change-.

Jh PRESIDENT: I would ask if the counsel is .-ivised as to thy film?

H.KY: Your Honor, all arrangements have b-_n * dt to project
fil for fcl - Commission it 3:35 here in the Court Room.

THE fRrS2CE.il: Thu Tribunal se^s na objection to any persona
retaining to 3u th. flln who arc now present in ih. Court Room with
•ic- • -ubhoriting th to b. in the Court Roe ..

«.RDY: Pardon me, 1 didn't n^ar you, your Honor.

• *R SIDE T: (did not com. through car p on s) I soy th Trl-
=ial .3 no objection to persons rcoaining to sc. the film who arc now
r.SvT.t in th Court Roca with tickets authorizing th.: to i>. in the
Court See ..

. I'.JflJYi Dc.a th t inclu . sc ct-tors to , your honor?

T: fFESJDSiTi Those who c*o re a-in should t . willir^ to remain
r. t; film so their eparturo luring the fil . r ill not listurt « .
n.- oi th fil .

fribunal will nor in recess until 9:30 tomorrow aorning.


•1321


-1-1-5aster (Int Rr.-l r)


o --r ?- -- —
C: -rt :.*c. 1


official Transcript of the *ocrican .military
Tribunal I in the natt-r of tht united States
of .eacrica, -gainst Karl 3ran.it, at al,
icfindants, sitting at Hurnborg, Germany, on
25 -^rch 19a?, C930, Justice Beals presiding.


THE -?£u..L. Persons in the. court rcaa will pi find their Boats.
The Honorable, the Judges of M i lit ar y Tribunal I,
ilifry Tribunal I is new in session. Go' save the United States
f. ric- an’ this Honorable Tribunal.

There '^ill be crier in the courtroom.

.-:7SH£:r:: kr. marshal, you ascertain that the 'cfcnlants arc
.11 present in ccurt?

I.-s. ivviSKwL: iiay it please y ur Honor, 11 Icfcn'.ants arc present
In th. court.

TH1 FRESHEST: The See re tary-Go:* r. il will r.oU for th>. recorl the
Fr'.scree of all th- fcfondfiOts in court.

Counsel nay proceed.

RUDOLF BP.iKDT - Rcauned

. IF (Counsel for th. If Brandt): kr. President,

• nt I have no further questions to the Jofendant.

7!;. ?T\: oltUTT: „ny questions tc th- witness on tho part of any of
-f nee counsel?


C r -OSS EX.. IM.TTIOX


(Counsel for the D fen lent Hpndloscr, also representing Dr.
Scrv tius who appears for *rof«sacr Dari Brandt):

Dr. Brandt, you said yesterday that you r-rc never in a ccncon-


a earn.

ever bring you ir.t contact with the execution
in the concentration camp?
had anything to dc Kith tb.se -xperia.nta, anything
free, the documents. ~h.se are ' rcur^nte which J


Himmler cith.r as a dictation or I transmitted thee as


r 'cst^r (Lit Easier;

: x* i

; Did anyone ’iscuss these experiments with you mo personally
carried thos through?

.. :>r, r. such conversation ever took pL~.ee.

Dii anyone who personally experience:’, such experiments discuss
ite- with you?

« That was not the ease oithor. *

Sc you can say ncith_r ft-ea ycur nn knowledge ncr ron direct
• r ,nj:r.-.l report, anything that went on as regards hunan experiments in
ernevatration cacps?

•i We, I cannot do that.

Y:u s~l! yes ter' y that th. gcntlc-ian nhc sutsitt.-' these affi-
ts t you f.r ycur signature hsd liscussd ‘ccun^nts with you before
certain stataaonta in connection with these docuaontaj That,

: r *-r, w 3 ycur desebipti-n yesterday, is that correct?

« Yes.

In that case he put th-. conclusions tc yu which he derived
r t!uso dcuspnta?

i> i s, .an! to which I igr-cd.

he then aske i y u whether that w r opinion too,

l* tat right?

I can t t-li you r. u whwthr h_ put that question to &e llrectly—

I :..an according the sense?

- according to the sense, that in correct.

r. actually cause! the a ft avits tc be forculatod in the way

*

n.:i7 HI ye;: ! :; .t by ‘ictating in that fern, or were they
- ’ to ye* in the-finisbed fora? •

1 nct dictate those e( • . :.'._y were subsdtt , 1 to ns.

: :r amity to Bake corrections,
i su.~-.ri 2 v. yrar testis any A yesterday t* th. effect that
:y factual statements zzadt La the affidavits which ycu signed
r - *---nts cann t b. base' n what you said out are -nly based
tr which .avc be...a submitted t yep in crnaccticn with the


u?23


-w.-l-3-r :stcr (Lit -.r)

: _-t - r :. 1


'Is, it can be based cn the scuscnt and conclusions wM.cn I


:-riv.


Sat c nclusi' ns arc .act facts, are they? I new want to licit
.self u the facts.

ls.3, that is right, no f rta.

Hew, I shall have th. ’-c-iuuit fc nunb.r 6 shewn to ycu.

T:.L5 is the !-cuu.nfc b rfc regor iin;; “aun’ice. In this -cu=cnt b k ycu
.... fin \ on -^.ge 3 » letter by Ir. Orflwits lircctod t.- Hiaaler. In that
ecattotion attf c ncerning that sublet yea aide the affidavit JJO 371,
Is'ibit 1&6. This affidavit starts, "Dr. Growitz, Reichsarzt-SS wrote
v HI 1 r-.run th ns-, ’lc cf the y. »r 19U3 that Cr. Karl Brandt desired
t btiin pris r.-.rs in cr’or tc fir. the cause for cpil.-r.ic jaundice.’'

Is it c rr~ct ir I asr-ur*; that the letter iv.ed the 1st of June 19h3 had
S .n surnitt^ t- yeas ;n that this sontcnce which 1 have just roa.’ was
t c. - copy cf thu first sentence in that lett-r?

A This is possible. During that interrogation I reaerber I had
h n errwersati n with D r . 3ron t> but I dii not reno.ab-r exactly
• • ay be that I br ughfc that t.lcph-n. conversation

c nc.cti n with th .t irxi l.nt.


1-jUl -”-2-I-?SP- Karr-a* (Int. harder)

- -t l

...II, you herv saying that Dr. Gr-witc writ-, around the middle of

, to HircLor, or hasn't this document o-r, submitted to you et all?

A. hell, I really can't tell you that any sore. It is possible that it

, u submitted to no, but I can't toll y-u that et the moc-nt.

At any rate, this is an indication of a lott-r which Grawits was

.... Sed to have sent to Kirsler. But then your toVtiaany in your affidavit

: r.tiruKS as folL-ws: did research work in this field with the collaborat.

fDr. D nesnn an' the Robert Koch Institute." The wording of that sentence

I ls n . t t h. sane ac it is contained in the letter but is composed in such a

I a., that any one reading it must assume that you wore saying that from

, ror -KB kr. nledge. Otherwise, you would have said "Grawitz said in th-.t let.

•.hit Dr. Prandt carried on research work or y-u would have had to formulate

' the s.r.toncw by sayings "that ho was supposed to have carried on research

1 rrk In ’that fiel." fan dirt neither f these mints. Xou an academic

I -.re-n and you know the Genaan language. Is it crrect that such a sontenco,
*

I i.vr. r ad to a non-participant and especially when read to the Tribunal,

I gut create the impression that you yourself kr.ew about th- natter which in
stained in that’letter? In that right?

A. V-S.

. old that impression be incorrect?

A. :.c, that impression is incorrect.

. Sit' you choose this fansulation consci usly, or was it submitted to
a uith.ut having realized what wa3 behind it?
a. I lid. not ch-ose this formulation. It was contained in the statement
111 th t fom when it w^s submitted t- me.

. r .u n.-w realize that this forrul'-.ti m gives SQoatMnB incorrect?


u I ask you to 1. k at ligun. U. "USaslnr wrote to Grav-itz that
• .nr. had th. permission to carry out these experiments in Sacho-n-
r.tration camp, ard obtained a number f prisoners lY>a T.".'HA sir
.1 subjects." Ir. the book which was submitted
• - Lll find, n page 5, the letter which was Sent by you as a copy

- U925 -


- lush 1917 —2-2-2-PKP- Karr;* (Ir.t. Raanier)

; j*. I-. 1


. pahl. as this l_tt^r submitted to you ..hen y_u .were interrogated?

A. I think, yts.

;. And you ar- adding the following sentence in your affidavit: "I kn-w
.-it thos. exporlvunts Were carried ut and that, as a r-sult, a few A tb-
-risr.t-rs died." .o arc here concurred with hopa tit is research and you alread;
r.sterday r.er.tirnod the t-stin-ny of Pr-fessor Gutzeit. N’.obcdy up to that tint
krj» ttat huonn beings died as a result of the experiments. How wore you
,r. a aition to cay: "I know tbit, as a result of those experiments, a few o
•*e prisoners died"?

A. I hv/e no kr..wleJoe f that. That is also a conclusion which I arrived

at .n the basis of the interrogation.

'ell, Dr. 3r-ndt, if you had said "I believ-" -r if you had said "I

issx-jj" then -nc c .uld discuss that question, but here you ore saying "1 knot
0

i f.mul&tion wUch cannot bo aisunderstood, tr.d 1 na asking you - did you
that formulation during the interrogation, r.v.ely, th* t "I kn^» th't
prisoners died"? Did you? •

A. I n't .elievu so owcaur-e 1 really in't kn-w it.

In thit o:sc you are saying trv.t y u did n»t formulate the s-nt-ncu

tr/t manner; "I kn.w"?

A. I aa quite our- tfr t I did not.

1. Ir. ttet case you w-uld l gically hove t soy that the int-rror."ting
fficer f mulatei the sentence in that cnr.nor and in thit manner submitted
-• ' r *.ur signature, aith .ugh y u actually did not say that?

A. Vx t can only explained in that woy.

. T.u re Kyirv, undor xth, today that neither at that time n r todr.y
r e -a that priseners died as a result -f the so experiments? Is that corre ■

A. I . n't know it.

• -r-ier Meure 5 it says: "Dr. Eugon ifea^en, Gborslabsarzt of the

Is. carried -ut cx.-orimor.ls in th C-r.centrati-r. Caop Natzweilor
t !iso_ver effect!v. vaccines againot epieemic jaundice". You aro
"As I remember. Dr. D-hcssnn - rkod • itn Baagen in the year of.

• -• it ' r.centrati-n Camp :.oiz*uilcr. r hen no says: "As 1 remember",

' * pressing th~t -r.e recemhtrs thit event, that is, that one kn ws about

U923 ’ ,


25 12r:a 1547 -1-2-3-Fa?- Harrow (Ir.t. r^znl er)
roust Xo. 1

: -'.t incident,. Da you want to afcetw that you told tfc, interrogating officer
* you ru^e.4>or that Dohsr.nn ani Hangen worked in Jtetzweiler together?

A . I conn-t have said that iiTthet fom becRuso I had no positive kn-^ledgo
at th't.

Ut us lc-.ve out the w-rris Vjsitivo kr.-«ledf*". I an just asking you
_ j. - u kr.M that Dotenn worked in the cia? f Kotswoiler, r didn't you?

!i., I. had ns knowledge ab ut th*-t.

.. l-uldn't y-u also think tnat this :" .'rail* ion, rust, create the Lapression
IT y.u were testifying southing that you y-urs. If kept in y-ur mon.ry
... stated?

A. This iaprewion oust arise.

Thu r~xt sar.tenco roads: "Lxpvrinwnte -n laiaan ’.■eii^s wh. i'. not
v.l'inteor wero carried out or* such experiments r ..suited in fatrliticn."
fa t~ hero raying "experiments on hurvn beings wro corrioci out (a) on
Men beings who ad rut volunteer, (b) and in «hich cn*-s deaths occurred."

Sid y j toll th: t to tho interrogation officer at that ti.no cs buing part of
? ur knowledge?

A. , I cou_! <lo t.--.t Ju- -a little ft Lc tU r-ce . . Cieo.

C. T.'-in y-u ere saying: "That it is i--r>.ssi'ol«. because I didn't kn *

:-d LittU as 1 d t - r.y." Is f. t ri ;ht?

A. Y.-a.

. Are y-u aware that -r.e would arrivo t the logical conclusi >n thrt
Interrogating officer aust have written down southing thor thi.n you had

4 . o •

* l s . i

:• aunt , f course, but naturally I « r.'t rSobabor i° dotail what it
11 - that I t .Li the interr-gation ffi r. ..y etate * healtdVs not
t th-.t tir», for ay attitodo reg rding all those antler* to be
tly sritio 1. In addition, 1 was c.-.-lately under tho spell l tin
t-/.d been sutttitted to ae and also under tr«. innvsBion which
- fr -2 the conclusions _-f th- interr-.c ti on ffic^r.

. . 1 : '
n. It w uld have been incorrect, yes.

I:, th t ose, there is only -no alternative. Either the ir.i--rr .-t ion


o h*


5 11 rch 1947 -ll- 2 -i.-PKP- fcurou (Infc. BaaaL-r)

,'jrt U'. 1

::ic-r ted written d^m a-aothirg to te signed by you that you did not state,
r •>*. .tr.er niternative, what jm hive xwid is incorrect cs you or- s-yirg
oad-r -Qth t-Jay. Is that rigr.t?

A. Yos. %

a:, r.ow, .igux-u * sayo, yai th't is s. othin that k*s frequently waod
b-tha pr-secutior. in order to attccpt to ?r~v* thrt a certain circle rf
ax *.vc hod knowledge of the or per-' ,r.ts and the following words
,.p. put into y-ur aouth: "Karl Brandt naturally knew -f these experiments

he pars>r. r .lly f,stored thee." I bulievu that this sentence wa3 suWnittod
y JU/ since tbo rr.ovj Brandt could be seen in the 1-tter of-ho 1st -f June,

Is ttet right?

A. Yoo.


..art 1

jo.. d5-h-3-l-HD-Lesser-(Ranuler)

... .--ad then y ere told, ‘Tell in tint cc.se he sust
ve h: d linowledge, r is that right?

A. Yes.

s.. Do you ’aw -r - i your un knoi ledge th t Karl Brundt
hei known of these experi-iants end ha: they ere carried
:t?

a. ::o

. T.’.s next a 3ter.ce rods: : : ndloser ad hchrpeder

unt h 70 Leen ir.foraou about that ainoo D^h en and haager.

• ero physicians in the nodical c~r.-s o. the aray, the air

a, Did you kn:w Dohnen?

• #

rt . Dohxien? Ho, no, I didn't.

jont c

.V. No.

.. Did a now his yosition, his function?

.v. Ho.

. 1; c so you onl* .. e\ thot ho MC9 U^aodic::!

officer?

A. I -r.s’ only vhat I could aoa .r- : tho letter f
-oharc

»i. And no.; it s ys here th t Professor :: i.dloser

• hev.n .nf r.nd So ut ox .-l.oc'is in Saohsonhauaen
- In :' .t:*.-;eilor since Doh-isa -ns , ysici. a in the radical

• 4

, you ."..to. another son, under oath,
, t ir ofessor ii v ndloaer would have :_u t h vs ^sdge
3e e::y iriasnts ther th-a that Ir-fossor D :..sn was
-i:-l officer in the sedical c rys?
a. ::o.

4 -e


I. th-t c-35 ve re Vast c accrued vith o.nclusion
e_ re th.t not you nade, bat your interrogating .


* :-HD-Locsov^. -l«r)


c«rt i
. 5 - 5 - 2 -


. • • . • : ' ., 30,-372,

•L ..rt-; • it- L~st sno.

I . sut ..it tins t. u 3 ciurant lorl: 13 ad I mz r^fcvrin.;. to
r ort, Docnce! - 37 , ? : oca fir. • I -1 ,

d ounsnt book. 7..is is - letter fi’Qa £mcn < ,
yj. 3iovert, t 2 ud If 2 rjr.dt, vita cn attached ra_ -rt by
!•: .‘dia:: his ui-.-arlacnta • hich he carried oat by

Just liston

. h t - v. said In y a? cffid-vit: ^SS

tnrufuo 3;-. a n3t 'lirt, Profoss-r at tSxo

j £ 3 •' - x rkor at -a. society

Ahari^rbo, carried ut before tho ••«,*• 1M:, o". jriuvnta or.

*

X .r O' .. uriiflC .t. . - 1*0, you roc

n PO rtS. It soya ’Ay

• ■

i;.i3 rtiort -t.ich is bof *6 u >. E iqo 19—Is
r tfco VO Tt • ich .s jointed -it t -a *mm : u ' -ro
.t vvjaflt647

a. I bell avo so, y«8,

. Did ;• V. discuss that report -It:-, r ur intorro atlnfi

:: 15 -r?

... It -.3 not disc-.::: 1 . it I a in:: i. “* Just

.

. Vo- v vo sold in your affidavit ‘33 v . t - -

- . lot .. d cirri-d /ut rri.^nts bef r. 1'V- ay or.. .r of

■ •

... Vribunol t:i t "hen Eirt -.-as oerryins out ox. ori-ionts

• • • • * *

ov. f . aooondlyy,tkatvlio

. stuv ri G..v-r vith tho 3S? In oilier • ords, that
s inaction there *:•-tv.on tho '-slsraaoht and the. 3S
' it Vi_ld? Isn’t that ri~ht?.

' ... Vos, thro i- rosslor. rust bo created.


... rc. 23-h-3-3-HB-Lossor-(Rmnlor)-


_ .I*? *t tfco data of this report is - : ich

Hir- .. -- -ad rhich is bef;n you noi.*?

A. It beers tic data of A. ril 1942.

A rii i? _ - is — &et- of t!iw l. :.r sent to you,


... . , - • Si ivw5 t - Kirt.

... :*o, ?r •. Sisirars to Brandt o t ; u. It is dated

I m

•n- 1042, is th t correct— -re 10 ?

• # •

A. Y-s, 2 Juho 1942.

. Eho itt c :.i :*t ob ut or.; srinent • -

.*,in. the tine of the or_.-ri.—ita?

... .'o, ts-.aro is d .to :-n i r. .d on it.

. Do ; u in the caupcign c. 3 . ir.ct rrcr.cc. hod

rtod?

A. I think it •• s i-. June 19*11.

? . . : • : •

... -ted June 104: .

<•

. Lot us soy Shy 1940. Ko> look at

v is bofaro you, cuite t tho bottaas M Xho
lie oi n of these, -x.orie.’ -r.ts or. x. a 5 e-old not

c rri-d ait since che c»e; . eija ../j -Inst nee called .oo

: *. ...■ fr r.t duties, fr-.. • tick I onl • t . . in l&y
- . t : i this ro ©rt rofdra t- expori ents : Ich
. curried ut "ben t. .:os still —die 1 officer f the — V |

W. At to t ti...

. ohto -l.dicil Sorviao s yet. .--r.i if : . .. e

you would have found out that t..is s done -n
officer-candidates of th- -Tcdicol ei lit cry
. • ur _h '33

enb ,_hr-r.Dr. August "irt -id n vou re not
in the g its • .rly 1 lo • _ - - ■ ' ~

ad by ord-r of the h'ehraeoht carried -lit.

. * ISJL


C *i-t X

.. cl. c:-::-3-4-^D)-l3ssor-{aralcr)


,2 -ri_;ts Lost j s,- then tb x .::3t cr- t- *<TOas

>tid. First .... ..

S r —i.C ut t.i.t fg?o ?: :* H40;

lv 3_y, Hirt - 3 not .3 you have at t.d

• •

at ... • -o ncdioci -lhTic-r of tbo s; thirdly, I aust


i __ ; -u—I- ays ...


c 11 . boo-, tor itb the


.v ,..rb-. .-_• you saying th'.t.Iiirt, • -n c irryins out

by rd.r of th- •.ft/nr oht, wr.a oolla'oor tor
h tbo Ahnonorbc—r.o- I r_nind ;cu, the cite. v a 1*4.0?

A. \Tiothoi? rt that ti_it ho already h .: t:.o

.v tu.rho I do not .. .o--.

. : ou rv. o yin. thau-h^ro. A:, you .a- n.yinsi

• •

; ur o fa, th r ; u C~ not knot; It?

... * iV.r Own : seor 3irt started to -.ork

.orb- .'or t'.i, lost ti-io.

... Sir.ci -u-t .. d ; i o- hi.?


. :


net -r v 1 i ml. '


l'i rttrs d-.ir5.c-’ the var.


o- o r. ot iv j . j


. = , - r. ou?


-■'3.

. . l .

..... ..o:If V.-.O Tribun .1 .1- sc, I d m’t tainl: this

. :

.

; - V oceivlly th t . is :3Sim.iti us j* Jcuo-.-lud^ on
rt ' ::..ndios.r vith r_; ri to tkhio tt-rs v.z .r.

L( t -. . is :ro:3-. tiou i3 hi-.:.l:

.

a

, . . . 1 - - -tr. . .3 r. th- c “is

Ut at t - * 1". 3 - vit. So c n.

.-' it.t.si dir .at t ut sa t.r.t in his

vi- nd th • itr. ss c-s 1 . short to .r mi vo ca


.nrt 1

;c‘. - 5-11-3-5 -H±KLgs sor-{ Rami: r)

but I nuet j's^vot cj this raur-nt tiv- typo of

-. -±-, n b i-d .o >a dJOUiur.tc void: S' xJi’for fu-s lvos

• /

n tick D.. :' .

j .Loa .id in -la briefs. - c u voint ut xy

inconaiit-iici-s -t* tit- -ffi-d vit of tkis -.-itnoas r.d

• 4,OIL—at3 in the r.c ad btsfc I don't rv’.erat :.d tat

.... ■i’.r.-ss is ::jtiX«- to Dr. 1 ,lv.. It . S CO

• - it i-. a rv t vast- f ti .. t v .r.d '.h_ .. 1 - .torniiif;

I .' -.r ~ cl: of til— r f'fid .vits :v* c. , ri:v tiioa . it’i

•


rj-.t nuab-r ox d cu-uats in th- -tcord


25 - rch-IWiWj-l-. -loy (Int. .t-rler)
Cort I


X. ;.CL : President, ra --re not ...rj ecu corned with one nffi'fcvit by one

-itn.83. o re rer- c nccruud/.it:- : wrief or -:lid vits of c. certain
ss, er r t. r cc-tkfcr.dv.it. js sarl-& of -ifidivita vw < ret' b; the
. t.cu .on vh»:; mb.ri .tie. •. -ir - p'.rtly 3uo i-:-.d *»

ten P ■ cf . vif.r.e., but

. L. or rincc to

•hew th t ...rj her.. concerned 'it:. - cert-4 -thod, n-.rx.ly th'.t s re

m •

eh , M --11 "& . r'.s.cvt va, -r r< Vi u r.nd

rtnehtb. wnclueicnoin bodrewnth t fre thof fc; •. .st.«..3ni~o

.r. ' o tr. " -nu.r ^.e If tsxt vitr-css not .nly jurt r p-*l too«’.6 .ntc

cf • . . Jomwkat5, eut thit A. ..; J 1- NJ c .riw.VC-.'' X e nt invd

♦

• :-o. “I*..a is to e ,:rcvjc‘ i:. th-c-.B- of 'ii of c vo. * qU nts,

ir. ry c rlrJon thrt is of vert-no*. for to. -nt o: >.11 fclw

. >oin touched upca bj t Its; ia£ I thvrMorc

u y •: r it .c to conduct y do. r.s- r-.ti * of -vidoheo in t j s- :o way

. .• .c xo i-i th't respect.

Sin. ?! c. ncJl 1 LX- 1X^1 i it -r-V.a. no

* iU. es v tg 'ifid vitr ir -h c'. t. r.-^a of th clients "f

• . r utvd, 'r. >v t :• rt u stior.6 bj c ..intel "r-

08 ..ncrally

* . -i-.KjSB nr.a t-i-. h- vs net; V; .... eb’ectiv. eo”,%.- b- c unrol
lifllK-dy it £u- : t * .r- . i:r 1, itheut leapt’.; rgUfttntS

. . A f • : ■ -

' - r r.i.dfev. of th-sl tffid'vitE rcrldsLTv likely thu

ru-Jy cc th t rr.de st-.tc. . .ts not b-ecd cr t his err. . vc: rnl

%

. : iw.l c. a< propound .-^s qujst r

: - • _ > - Tribunal is ci th- lei hie riglit v. xild -xest to


it n-zs ~s t t .a- ; - t.

vit, :o —37 -, .. ito.

sp.-.k oi .x e. .r. cir i.-d -vt vith V'phus


25 't: — -JF-ii-2— loy flat. ,/ r )

Crcrt I


:.r: -• --- —itrafci Dcuf '.™r_ luvdur Figure 6 you have t-id

, ■ thOSC. uX.-r'.....; ; •

r :• tfc-t -• r.u-b_r of prissn.rs t i-as - r :ui ui th:s. _x_-_ri nta.“

1 y u pl_r.se ot-.tc fchere fr you sir-: t- . ::ixrludc?

.v. I xwtoinfc v:.ut that. I cn cnly ive the _ w :.r r.c I

-lr y fl*» o. jTw

• •

Jut Lt C uld .1 t be seen -r doccaents which -xic, . ..

•r r c’l - era sufcr ittod to yu ta-t . rio -.era died; r..\i e-.o you state

"I - aur. t:-. a number oi >ris r_ra died?"

• -• .

> ’t •. -ctiwily y. rf. >0 d?

A. '• a.

txt pan r r, i- .,.-..15

: rr ^ •* rhxntr :n tiunn 0..I11 ; in attnoiler witu r„for_r»ce to

•» » - fluunse, .. c, Jaundice, h_; , cholera,

r - * i.-phritis." - r. • .. hritir is?

A. I (5- .«t k.V it.

--it . • -..rote it, •'fl-' i i' ai _rf Lx, didn*t you?


• ' ? OPT lrtfc -Ui ttVOBy

». • itt.?"


at ’tted t rx ic that f-rr^, an. I alr.vjy ,c..nfcod out that
-tut. o_V.--.cn actual kn vl_ds_ and t..v c elusions which
-• r • , nd fr a uha : a . in the


i-V. ; .u C’.I. t ail. . ?_ :-_nc_ -,:._cis I Just r_ad b-

i.v. buun stated r r ’ ' l.-Vo?


. i -U.

■-X , - r.r, i- sys, "Si Gr. yterJ . hr._r, !)r. A rl 'r idt, Reich
r r t;, c -cdicii nnd.^olth Urric^, i-norulobcrFtabsarzt


-


2 ;


'alcy (Lit. P.a .wr)


Z =-rt I

v. , Chief af tlx. -^'ic-1 SvTVdca eft he '.‘chr. "cl-.t,

:-en r-l-i-zt Dr. l-vi Hast ck, .1 i. . -• ; r Science one .-'.-s-r.rch,,

..r-- rstab rzt) r. Csk r Schr 'er, th- . t !icnl c-irvicc of

tb- loftwaffo, -.ust hive kttarn abc _n's .x;-.ri unto :n hit an

r r. I r Y-"tsi" D; jr u Sc.--:. .cr. t_ f etc vr.c.. ■ vid i:. ar.y

«y justify y v t* say tli t tr.. indie at-d p_.-r s hod had fcr.cwL.cV S the

xp.ri~.nta n huaar. subjects?

• •
a. Ko.

.. An n * f.-re is - fir.-l 8ontur.c. i. t. t affidavit ..c!; ' think
is . . rticul p i:. .crtonco, -nil t._r. i. 8 ye: "These entl- -ucr.

-- r f fiU that hnpponwd in c 8a ctt. - wit> ecivntlfie a •' "idlocl re-
• rch .i* tXs. -x>rL'x.r.ts c uld n_*. h'v^ 'x.n carried at *t' at V-jir

U" i • : sort

A. ' Cm

... Cv. . I'iatain th ' : t. v. • ir :th t do;.*.

••• t -• a hot said i. tn. ;*tv ?

•• i—* •

.. J , c- ofc n-ir.t-in it.

-• - Tr uld derive ..jo i tfor-

* rt 11 tlx bo gentler-on?
n * I h'vu n facts, knrrriodgb*

i* ■ • rely a corclusi n t n the basis j| the prriti ... fr v 6ho
c. r .rner! had held.

'•* “4f sn.nffldavi - tbit 329, hiel _ ■ o neons

i t - r^L-cti n cf c.nc-ntr ti . c~ y inr*t-s —

• -A S£t I wonder if itw ulf satis*-/ Tr. «olto if-i._ Frosocirtion
: ‘ t v t s - witness will testify t. t . sax facts as tx. ail tliu
-;fl* -iw ' Ac : h. si r...c* 2 *. 't That a«ry he c . osk

t-.-r. h« h“8 alp.a-.v-* , * . Jr s.cuti i* perfectly

stipulate u; t he eill testify t. tU. far- effect as t -11 tho
—a ii-' v.*,s, and it will s-tv uc a 1 t tice and tr.uble of having
•- gut t ,-ch ffica/it.


1 —Kcchas (lat. 5---lor)


D". ‘. 2 L 1 ' 2 : I would to fur noro expedient if thcprosccution would per¬
ils irf h.lr.-.v all fcne affidavits, •'-•-ich wore sa'.o by 2udolf Brandt. In that
c sc, vo v--uid t;th c U concern ourselves with tho ffidr.vits r>t nil.

. .*2421: That i» hriljr t..c s .e thing r.s wo sii .,,v=t.d. Vo irf.ll not

with r v . affidavits, t.:e vitneec on th. star.: e* a-d th n under oath end

VO - In l .; :..c affirfc.Tf.ts. '<0 ur villin,, to slipul .to th-\t this wilnenc

will -t th '*. .:1a nffid Tits worn not b eod on hie persoerj. knowledge. Ho

- a . siifiod o vr C - nlw. to four or fir., S uaderstrn- th t he tc tifiv

thoy voro U iot bnsod on Ms pors ovlorf^-o. Vo u,«t t

ti;.ul tr -ho w. o .lac t t do will t-stify ir. s:j.«. woy with r spool

• •

.i t j :.-.r f .fid;vv'.ts, w. c. Dr. Sclto is about t .«>. hie iout th x ho
w e -tify.

r :s: I ion 1 : Jo v whether this In t.: ur oto r.f tho or J n,
:..t JTOiccut t. is Just tell in. no tfc-tt the witr.ee*- in ,->in,; to any the i. ..so

•••— U ;.c if t ..'prosecution would t.-ll i-o ..t thoy "p-u.3.' th : id

etc which concern .y elicr.to h vo bo... r.-'o •* : ut :evy personal
htowlo.’. or ly o:. ta I £ t aaoati r seated, acroly the
o .-.elutions, t.. I iy p rfcrps b. satisfied v-tfc it, or if tho
r:e.c.t would *ny th ; o tlu basis of thine ffirf■ vits of Hudilf 3r ndt
• • • toy Till not imw nay oridontiul oonoluoions. if

-•- *. I taint brlr-. th ; ro f ir. over c fe.- wh.ro tho dofend at
H J. ie concerned : t thin suposition in incorrect.

'. c*hh“T: If tho Tribunal pie-.'.-, I think . the distinct r. :
lie clear to OP, Suite and also t*» tho tribunal. So h/rro no
r w ny tastt i .3 t 13 n t tu butio of those iffiCaviti,'

1; willin. t 'tip.ul tw tfcr.t t. is witr.cor v’.ll toetif?*, b ho hue
one ml specific :.ff i-nvits rat *.- kin by Dr. Ho'to,

v. .-e not br.Bcd die pors mil Jenovled w. wish t stipulate th
act t tho r.r. . f eh ffidoritsi. : * n*fc think thor< io

irt of Dr. “.'to, r t-in-t it is inotcur.- do if the tl.w >f th
o by uttin^ t.:ir- type of quostl 1 .. 5ht witness lias ,.*ano

LS97


----- (2x- a r) 5-2


2"- .--:~5.£&-.co
C rt IT-. U


“ v * i:lc ^ vil " everythin- rn. he c-n n't-ir.- -ore fir Dr. "dtc

"i” cli ' r " C ‘“ ~ Jc " s lro v toao. He v c i>ot under a vory short oxr-.ir.nt
%

“ r “ a I tLiafc it is inexcusable that the defense r.^uncol
Vill trdre u; UBtfae? . ;• r :: ,ut:ia: the time ty O Of .-uostims to Si:,,
v_ic . he has dlre.dy aasv-rcd. -- rro willia,; %, std;ulato. re I h y, rarer*
sutlincs, chat he will continue to testify in the sw3c wey or. the ot.;or
' ": *•"•- I toa't tier is aythi Drx> th t he asked for.

:r:I " : " c ’ r - a,t concerned here vih ti c, tii.c cm :^ke no
llff-r^ncc r.o vc are cone erne', with the fir. in.,- >f the truth. ! an oookin,-;
tret.: if the truth ia ir. any wry covered over, it'has to bo uncovered

-• - 1 • riflod * but 1 I as.’utiBflaa with the stntcacnts node by ,r.
.hE-n&y, a"..ely, that ho or rather the prosecution, will r.-»t draw any c o:>-

• - : c •‘ ullt of t -' c > •- t thoio : :i ..vito incriulnftto.

.. 1 . ..c^3T: —V. of c-uraw n*t hour.' by what ho stated cy stipulation
v n; its 1 -. the rwcord, lt'c perfectly clo: r and Dr. Sclto :.ouet un'orctr.nd i

a

i.' o... r..p t tod t.joo tir.es.

CSI ®®* 1 ’ u *r i'-i t.i -t ia wn- % y;u o. id, that you would not
mv <;y c .c Mi on, that is redo el what you ■nif, you would not An-.v my
- • - . ;* u the statcacnts .rdo Vy 3r.-.r.dt 1.: hir affidavit«.

"• ikCKhHZIt He rvako$tu to sti.ui-tc, r.s : understood it, that thi»

• fi.Vvito v.re baaed >n dteurwata rub: dt tod t hi-, and ho ha', no

- ••• - nowlod Obviously th rosecuti vi • ctiyul te t

- c --. . v Will sti ul to that that ie what t.:ic vitnooo will tontify,

entirely different natter. .J 1 th„ vitnooo c- n do n-'w ia to
' i; " : •'' '°-* Bod - u0 Pffidavita on docu:ientf BUbdttod to hi::, ho hr.*

• -t- lud c U repeated:, that ic th- fact. The prosecution *.oo # e not adnit

- ve it na will c-nticuc to testify in thrx way. In order to mv

:1 -• -- * -fillin. t atiyal to t.. t he vill t. tif : - In that respect, but

, c-rti-.inly i n»: addt the truth -f it. In that r.rd, vv cru

- r. t ve -Irw s'.id.

- —Th: In that case the ; rosecuti on ia i.* in - that the --.ffidr.vitr

•t ly contain t_. „.t;crs which* r- cu: ined nlru dy in

1:938


25 r-'i-jZ ^-^- 3 -iJChan (R-.nl or)

C-crt : . 1.

;;c'i- r.tc, t:v; is, they nro not going to draw ray c ncluslono frir. tlx

. nr 2U3-1T 3mr_’.t, but only frm the D';cu.-cni6. I re. quite sr.tir.fic,'

vim th . a: :c_xnt by tie prosecution.

—- ^BSoHEIT: I did not understand t.., stntcsant if counsel for tho
rrJiecut :: r.s 3r. licit c 'cos. Counsel f-.r the -neocution stated that ho
vill -it t:. t thie witness, Bui If 3R«*.t, Defendant Brrndt. nw on the str.

■'ill '.ossify ns ts other xrfrttevits. which any be presented t*. hi *, on cross

cxni-v.t. a by 3r. i'clta, r.s ho has in tho p-ast. tr, t st ten r-t’s in those
:fi vita movo not Vac’ r. f: eta within Ms .or: r.. 1 kmvlod c.

• -iin: But, ::r. icE icy v ’ /lav -ir.\ co.u.h t> say tint tho pro-
necuii-r. Jo :itti.v tht Rif. If 3mndt inly wrote in .:ia affidavit b \ri; t
c.u!'. -.loo bo noor. fro. th~ icu-.cr.tn na'. th. t thcr.f .re they re not relyin,
affidavits, v..lch vjr - Io by Sj If 3rx.it, but they are only cin-
Cwrio-l '- 1 th. .ho interpretation f the documentr rev* that in tho way I unfion-
: . .x. .cE-noy, n- oly that ho dooc not vial. t fir v r.r.y conclusions fru
’•••• *t t 'i tlsa 'of.:,' at ro’. If Br if that is correct, if I
at'cPBtiC:. i: correctly, I co.. 1 . toly sctliflcd.

\ . 3r. I'clto, you and.retool it ox ctly one hundred ;orcont

-r:.*. f r ih«- t. ird ti.x. T.~ Iribunal correctly nt..tod t.u f-n. of tho
3:1 1 -’17 thr-.t vltnoe* vill te'tify hero that theso affidavits

• oi :.... t 9n Ms Personal knovlodgo.

• *.' r. oos not stipulate that 1 in fact is >r w p the cr.co. Vo

■ ul to tit t vill t rtify that tr. t >b the my it vis, and th t is nl.

• t

• . that la 11 that the witness ex testify f hero, and

 ' lr - '*• t t if led t it ut least twenty five ti.js.

JLZ': . r. iiCSmuy, y u vc Just heard to t Judge So bain.' hits unde
r t, tin ny exactly c I di !, nr. oly th: t y u eld you were not coin,
h" c r.clusl -r.a fr a vhrt Sul’If 3mndt has tail*.. I^v, you r ro snyiiy
crcly stipulating to : Rudolf 3randt, r.s ho did in previous car.
r.u_ S' c.; *.. t ;.e would not know mytinr a rrc than that "hich was
•o.o ‘.’Cunenta, voich h .o been submitted t hio.

- - ITZ T: “h Tribunal does r. *. desire t enter into any particul


-i*-: .


25 ... iK^-ES-5-4-»«£in= (2rs— iv-r)
: urt .* . 1.


discussion over vhnt hne been Kid, it iwa be - he-xd rad it is in the record,

.s. .iS-’^y P-t 1 - st h-.r. at-.ted now whr.t hia stipulation will bo; nr.A if that

U not rv tisf-ctory to Dr. Heite, Dr. Helto nay continue with hia oxr-.lnr.tion

tut hi* qu,st* r.a shoe 1 bo lUltod strictly to tho point which has boor.

r-ferrol c:, unices ho C’_- al. «v that the witneas or. the steal will stnto thnt

„ia u-idavita were Mse end he knew tho atutcaocts he ivvlo then v-.ro f lee

v» ^-cim-r.t r ,-UhU, wich is nn Affidavit you r.dc, tho ocloct

of We c nccntrr.ti n cr-._ is liscuraoi. Yt u-ro enyinp thnt It ncodot

’•••- express rev 1 f Pi-idor to e rr;* out tho experiments or. concontr-.ti: •

• •

c--v ir.". t-c; la thnt correct: di you w y th t here?

.* Yon.

.• :-*e:r, it tnia rffl^.vit you ct-i.d th t it u.\o or.sy for tho physicir

t ec-rr.cd t. • ir. ..is per iaol -a t c-.rry -ut ex. orinento or. coneontr.-tion
c.., ire: t a; .. you xno« -Sr. «thi Pr feoaor Eoadloeor, ir one of hin ryjoncict
ir c -iJ' th. Ifehrrncht raile d Service or x.: :cAictd Inspectorate,
ii ever try t It ouch pernio si t fro:. Hinder?

I dtr.'t Jer.-v ubout that.

?m v. re s yin,: furthermore t.. t r. number of persona fro:; Hi nfLor'i
i. . aat VST woll l'nf nted about the experiments, -n* you wore nontioni.

1 - erllc..on. ?urt.. r.-oro, in ao::o v ,uo forn, you any

rc .' r - - hiv.s of the Luff'/fo, the ;.ray r.nd xxivy were alto ir.volvoA in thi

.:.r,' .di. u.„. y u h vo not aa-.ti r.od cay u--::b Iicre, tho fofnulr.tlrm
e -1 - i •- nuspicior. r. -.'.not ay hi.hly 1 coi odierd officer, as for
: v • dear. C :. y - a; to any f ct which c <\d chow tiir.t ?r foucor
r, ;* r itst-ncv, -.cturlly vrt inv lvcd in thnt . tier?

—• J3# *


:.?lo


25 -ir-iSi.-6-I-rutty-lr.T. r.-ezier
Court -«'o. i.

1 .-.re there any facts which justify the conclusion that
rnc- chiefs of his staff, for instance, Generaiurzt huerfler,
:ci'.f of ~cdic:.i Services, or Generarzt w.c:eaidt-Lruccker had
anything to do viith that -latter?

A :»c, I don't even know these gentlemen.

2 It could well be possit.16 that you saw something

in your correspondence which could indicate such a connection?

A SO.

£ I have another few questions which concern the Defen¬
dant, rroiessor r-url Brandt. In your affidavit, Document 440,
you wore saying, speaking about the sterilization experiments,
that Dr. Karl Brandt certainly knew or these sterilization af-
rairs. In this connection you are not giving us my factual
proof ^ror. wllioh it could be concluded by whoa Dr. Brandt was

8( sterilization experiments. Can you still
oaincain that stutcuent that you then made under oath?

A VO.

< ..hen speaking about lost*' gus experiments in your
iffluavit, you said tho following under figure 5:

In .arch, *44, the Fuehfer ordered SS-Brigodofuohrer,
ir. .. rl Brandt, the Plenipotentiary General for noalth and
-'.lie 1 owrvices, to carx*y out medical research in connection
*itfc th., utteoKS."

Brandt s-.nt a copy of this letter to Himmler in order to
tribute it aaonr. tho competent persons in the 3S 3nd ask

.:-t:Lli»h contact with Brandt. 3ii.ee it concerned tx-
•i : r.tr, I distributed copi.s of this Fuehrer ord-.r to Dr.

~ ‘ i’ , r._ioha rzt-i. . md Police, i>t mdortcnfui hrer Sicvers,

. tii- iUinuncrbu, SS-Obergruppenfuchror rohl from the VA'HA

r ,-jived a copy of this Fuehrer order. ;

-c you remember the contents of the xuehror order which
ler.-d ur.u wr.ich ordered Dr. Karl Brandt to work on

h9a


- nrfare agents?


£5 __cr-£Lh-S-2-?utty-Int. Haul

Court ->o. 1.


A No.

% You arv saying that in this ora<_r medical research
„or.< was mentioned -s a special task. Do you maintain this
statement?

A No, I cannot do that.

1 You have sent the order to Sievers, Growltz and Pohl.

Zo ou Know why this was done?

A Here in the document I sew the handwritten notation
of .ilamlor, wnich he made cn the original, where ho himsulf or-
;.:<.d that the three mentioned gentlemen were to receive o copy.
Iba tistribution was not made on ay own initiative.

Did rrofoosor ~orl Dr r.dt desire any such notification

.v This cannot be r en from the document.

* In taut case, ere you saying that your Knowledge is
.erciy b'. 3 ed on th. document and that, t.;cr*.foro, the distribu¬
tion was only carried out on the desire of i.lamler?

-v Yes.

DA. Nid-Tb: I have no further questions to this witness.

Dk .hX: Dr. .-nrs, Counsel for trsc Defendant Professor

_r. ;c. ro.der) r. Resident, I asic you to Permit me to put
l '.uestiona to the t.itnc-ss.

cHcss-sjAi.rn.rioN

Y... .lAr.X:

..itnos’, in - number of affidavits you among others
. .. of . rofessor Dr. Schroedor. You asserted
• -t xperiments were carried out und.r tne protection and by
- :• of the Lufti medical Ins otoratfc. r or that reason
;.Ld lir:o to put a number of questions to you in order to
r if/ number of points. 1 irst 1 shall have the document
tho xrosecution, the doe-.-:,-. Of the Prosecution No. 44^
... ;t 1:. , s:;sir. to you. This can be found in tho document
. 5 of t .lo r’ro xtlon concerning sen-water experiments,
c a -a found on p i.

u9uZ


- _. r -Zlh- 3 -3 -r u z ty - 1st. imaler
Court So. 1.

you that document before you?

--- Yes.

ould you please toil the tribunal -whet you Know •

tout this .coaplex of questions or what you Knew shout *that

coapiox of questions froc your own inov.ledjc and your ovm

•

2.oory.

A During the interrogation i only reaenbered the fact
ttut . request was Bade to aiaoler on the part of the i-uft-
w-ffu to carry cut wxp-ric^nts in order to r-nucr sco-watcr
potable. I vnguely rwauubtr.d —

nnd that is what I na going to t sic you.

A I vaguely rc.auibered that we were concerned with the
testing of two proc dar.s of vnich one •. .a aoro dangerous than
otn^r.

Yea, md now would you please loolc at figure 3 of
this document. Jh-rc it says:

The Luftwaffe hud at its disposal two uu.tr.odn to ..‘.aKo
ter dr laic bio. One of taca extremely dangerous.'

,cu were saying scuet.-ing 1 ire, weren't you? You say tnat one
'...: QOTe cl:.i.-,erous fcnoQ toe other. Ttu t, of course, is sonc-
tai.v: co-apl* tel;* ;irr rent W.:n saying one of thea was oxtre-
L.ly d n S er0U3, isn't it? ..oil, wh t is correct?

a ell, 1 c»n't roacuber to n vo used the word "txtro-
.. lv •

Lid you s y tr.r t one w .s aore dur.;crous than the other'

ieiy r red that.

In ta.t case 1 aust 3suae th t you aid not wish to cx-
-r - it your -.ffidavit that on. or tae methods to auKC soa

• :• . - yd ngerous. You did n ish to


that then nt, aid you?
no, 1 did not.


7-1-Cook (lut. ?. r. l_r)


V u re cor.tinuin,; ".t.; your affidavit: "Consorucutl;,- thr.t is for
;_ij rexs r. thc-t. or.c if theso uctmr.s vus oxtrea.ly -V r.,:croua, &.r.. rr.l
Snircodor, C-iof of tn- -dicol Service of the LoftK/fo, rccu oted Hi:- lor
• j rlcco cx-crii^Etol tu:jcoti r.t t;.o dis;oar.i if i.:o Luftveffo nt Duchr.u.

H:v <y 701 ret thr.t tnovlcd^-c?

... I k vc no knowledge about shot.

\ ’’oil t-.cn hnw ia it tnr.t *..is paBin^o ,; u t8 ir.t your affidavit? UU 3
if: c ncluaiin can he drovr. but thr.t Gcncr-l Schroedor. or Profess r
Seerdc .or, in .is carncitj e .cdic 1 c*-i.f of the r.y, requested Hiiilor t-
le 6X.-.rl*u&tal BUbJuett : t nil dirooanl, tir.ee ho considered these o:r>ori
.etc entre*. ly a.a.;.r-ua, or t lcr.at one of the bo —it.toda oxtronoly <V\r H ~-r'-
tir.'t ;:tr. ri t-t?

... - I .

r coulx't ruv l; / .v’ m did*'I wist : r. v it?


.. DM ’;..Ib ffidrvit nVdttod to yre in th-t fom aftonmvAft Iftur
r.or i ..erro. tion?


*1 n't 70a Object ,.-iTJ8t it?

... I r/ ccte.Uv til'. u t^. reasons. I h .*. r. ;x»r.r of Aifferontinti-
..c .* jjr St to of Health to different into botv-con nOBitivc knowlo-.V.-o rj.f


• "i; -sc, I met r.o you thus*. quciti t.s in t.is cr.lo hecr.uoc it is
.. - further ot toner.' would 00 cxtrc-l;- incrininotir.,: for 15*

:ll «5 -- it vaez.'t corr ct. X.. tU-1 c-so - ash —u not to ,tet nnnoyod. if I
ru_eti,ne ;i you. In figure h it ic further st ted — h*vc you:

■-■oo ? "Hi „1. r n roved Schroedor'i roquoE. and the or cr'aents
*• e . ie' rut. It v exjectv' :. t boivj if riconcrc vould dio as

. 0 oje.-orinent a ut I '.0 not renenh-r '-hotter dor.thi occurred. 0
•• i.. tfiis nr.es c iri ir. te, re—ely, thr.t it v s cx'ectoil I


-ore vouid .io g result f tho 6 jp jri.’onti?


ii9ali


si rcneeb.r t.:cro ia - report contained in the '•ocucont, - rh. I
•_.i: : - his report v:.*. submitted to c. Or. the basis of this r_;-ort nod

:-r rebsequonfc '.iscussio-s this roriuluti r. via chosen >r. the 7-rt of the
jr is^-cixtion.

\ '*ero you eshed vhr.t c nclusions you drew fro;i grid report?

... I c naot reaenb-r any cotails but I don't think so.

V Did you consider yursolf can&blo to drat* any such c inclusions fr :i
report?

- *o.

:: ? 'SIDS r: Counsel at t.hs tin- the Tribunal tdl bo ir. roccoo.

(.. shirt recooa was taJeo:.)


h?hS * .


C IT', I

25 ar hi-


6-i - LJG - Gross - (Ir.t v n Schcen)


KB *:tSHftLs The Tribunal Is a, in in sossi n.

Dr. Soldi t (for the defendant Dr. Cfcerheuser: r. President,
the defendant ft^erheuscr asks to be excused frcn the afternoon session
hccaus- she is still suffering somewhat from the consequences of her
operation. A sidiual certificate will be submitted later.

KB PHESXD&Tt ''a request of Dr. .:«idl, attorney for the defend¬
ant t^erheuser, that she bo excused from thL afternoon's session if
her absence will not prejudice bar she say be excused. . A nodical
certificate is to be filed in due tlae with the Secretary General.

BI DP-. . ArfXi

With the approval of the Tribunal 1 aha.! now continue with
*.he examination of the witness. W. tness, I shall show you the excerpt
free tr.o docucwnt book u. -in. .0 had stepped at the point in nunbor
li whore you said that "Schroodor a-d his associates in the Uiftrraffw
E-Bt hi-.-:, known, according tecy opinion, that these ox, rinunts, as
well as .. 1 - rossuro and frourir, uxp-rinonts, would not have, boon
ducted on volunta-rs only. Beer 1 ask you, did you have any factual
tAldonco for this M-ortion?

A. 3fo.


A9i6


Court I


25 l*7-T - 9-1 - i.Jj - --alcy (Int von Schoen)

Then her. did this coj to be put in the affidavit?

A. Et ...13 an assumption of nine cn the basis Df Officer ..chroodor's
position.

'. Than the question as brought up nhother volunteers uoro used
in -heso experiments, is that 30 .

A. Yes.

<*. Ard you 3 aid that in your c;\'.nion the ox.-.ri-ients were conducted
or. noa-voiur. tears; and cidr.'t you 3 o tmt at all yourself?

K I cannot ro ojoher details. It is possible that I sr-id that.

*■ Did you roaliso that tills was a very leportant change, that
this ;iou d be a v»ry Important charge, or didn't you realise that?

A. no.

e. <i l you . »se look at Document No. 371, rrosecution

Exhibit 136 in Docus»nt Book VIII. T.hst is the second part of tho
excerpt. Cn r Vl . 1 it a /s "-‘. .s in your affidavit of the liith of
Gotcbcr 19U6." In this docuaont you spoke about ojq rii nts of Dr.

, Of:icar Dr. Dohrs.n and Dr. Hagcnj "hat did you know about
ires- uxpurls jr.ta fro- your onn observation or r;h .t d id yeu know
ra o -or whon you woro br-"jfjxt to Kurnborc?

.. I ill not know or ranri^r anything.

% 3ut you oxyroosod cort-ir. in: -:loico; »oro 'xiuaite shewn to you
ti:- Proaocutlon?

.. I cannot sry fro-: x»: ry.

* !’• , " row quorti-ns on tho loounont ltcolf. *oy ary uni or Ho. 5

* j r . 3u on I&'j-cm, Obarot~>s-mt -f tho Luftv-ffo, -.a Co.ibtuitf.nt

l jrlst, h’. -Iso ' oor. loin roroirch work nt tho JS-.tzwoilOr Cr*!i? in
J *-‘ rt to iisc'vor offoetiro inaoculr.tlon nfininat oyilaic mxl jr.urtiioo
I : y ■: first, •f'.-jos it hr upon tho arc basis is .Ivon to Dr. Hru;on*fl

• r -ity ns Charttr.b..->_rr.D in tho Luftw-ffa n»I (^rnsultnnt Hygionlst;

1 y u y ursolf iva thaca, ir. fret?


-ron 3cboon)


47-::-?jC-9-2-iia y (i 3 t.,

yvr t I

.. lie#

^ jll you ho wn. OtorstnbsArst In iho Luftwnffo?

.. I '.ca't boliovQ_th“t i knot it.

' -Hi you knee i.o vna consultant hycioniet?

- ::o, unless t:.- t v-j iniiontod in ti\o -ecu. or.t.

• o J » knar o ... Ultr ; ionist is *.t r.11; 'lo-so toll tho

o-Hrari?

.. I -“.vo no -ctu-i corej.'ticr. of his

$ Dii you ha-v t>.t Officor H-on, rci’o fr::; Ms "sition no

st in tho Left oonsultlas Hr i« lot in tho «ir Fioot

• v. , BC oti . OlOO ( tSftt ho “1 r. eivili--. WitiOJ -• t’,0
' r.lv.rrity ? "tr--- -ur , 'i'. ycu knew thrt?


:i- rch 25-!K.K-9-l&4fel y (Ir.t. Via Scht n)
fcar*- »c. 1

ffc c unless the chcuaent sr ewe-d it.

Li you knew it t-day?

Fren tho files -f the'trir.l, y .s.

Ji! yeu knew whet the work c- -~n fficer cf hy.icno was, what he
bed t: dc with Reich - encies at the i.oich hose'rch Ccuntil, or ether
s-encits; I noan resc:rch v»:rk, research assi rc.nts; dc y u know anythin*:

. ut that?

a !lo.

And you else say under the a*at r.us’ or, K:. 5, that it is Iruo
that IXteu-n celia' crated with Ha -n in 1941 in c.ncontratin ccbjj: h’atxwcilur
>r crlnonta cn involuntary hua-n ’ tin s were ocn • , aid ycu also

?cy tort deaths occurred; c ui ;au rones.’ -r .vkin such - ctrtuBont?

• Ut net en the ’ nsis f I .cncwlcd e.

<el; , then why ii ‘ y.u rvk. such a at; tenant in that affidavit,
such •- ccrlcufl ch:r y u ouruly jiat h:vc rodized tho nature cf ah
-rfibvit, y»u knew thrt that is - virl ti.n ;f an orth if'ycu mko in-
c; rrcct otataaenba, -:r even r.>. nt statements; i ! I understand you
c;n-vctly if 1 a:.y tnr.t “11 f y:ur statements cn this .jcint aro laacd
..r.ly r.n rsstn,tlv.ns n your , Tt, that you h*d n: factual knowledge cf
thcao cxyuriaieats?

II ft Y -3.

. . 4>iwl: Y-ur K r nora, I should like tc ; int ut tr.o thin . Tho
:ri ur.rl will recall that the dtn.ss Schmidt c-llti ‘ the rroaocuticn cn
'• - f J r.-ary 1947, tor • - re-, Gen:.-.', Transcript jm o i375, -and

said tb t r.: hunen caq>crlncnts wore ccnAictod at -ii ccncornin hepatiti .

H w■ r.y last question on this su*joct. ultnass, y. ; Indor Ik. 6 ,
"> '-i. 3-. foment, which if * ofcrc y u, that irefusaor Schreodor was
ra-J .f chviao stonsi’ 1- oc crincnts, -nd he must have >eun infornoi
rv .r.fesa.r H- ;tr. was a -ct:r i:: the aeiical service cf the Luftwaffe
- . YuS'Cj Y: Ury it alt se Y-ur Hener, efcrc- the witness ansKured thia
'•-r., ’ fens- c ur.scl st-t-: Mtnesa Schri t :r. January 9 testified net

w

' . -i i3 .xr rLaents r.-d ' ter. gc a’noted cn human ’ -in s. If ay roccllecticr


4949


-rch 25-.:- (Sit. v.n 3 c r.rcr.)

Ccart ::c. 1

is correct I directed the ex^inrtion c£ th:.t ; r.rticul-r witness, r.nd I
Oieve the witness stated t. her knoded-c nc cx;.erin«.nts were conducted
-- tc the research f hcy.titis, end I rat tc eltxify thrt V e-fere the
.ucati.n is put t_ the witness.

Di.. J, ■Sis Y r ur ii-r.cr, I c*r. r.et s-y with-ccrtrdnty, ' ut r.s f r -a I
rlowlier the Utness Schilt in nswer U cy questien, I eiivvo, said thet
she eculd r.ct assort th't the h.yetitis experiments m.ro: experiments cn
huc.'.n cin r. If the ?: secutcr thinks his cxocry is '• otter, 3 rill say
ndhir.-, ’ut until the contrary is ;r voi I should like to naintnin ay
cint cf view, lut ‘!ii? isn't lit, .rttr.t. The - rly cju-sticr. horc is the
witness wteite rh t wr.s said cn this f eint ».s net said cn the ’ r.sis cf
his »n kxvcwlwi'e.

. . now 1 crau '-.ck tc ay question, yr.:«r I.:. 6, i.i this

d.cu-aer.t which is ’ ei.re you y. u s-id thet Ir-fesscr S cl: reed or, rnd you

Knndl scr, v ut Schrec !tr is the ,nt I ra interested in, you
snid Officer Schrccder aust have kn wlc-'. -o f thu>c rst.x.si'lo experiments
1 ec- use Hr. -n was r. ct r in th. nodicrl s.rvice f the Luftreffo. I
-sk-ycu, a I tv t he it th t this csserti.r. is 3 rin uer-ly rn cssunpticn
en y- ur ; rt?

Ion.

. Y.u id net h-vv -ay ffretu 1 evidence for it?

Th't is true.

The next d.cuuent — .lwcoe keop y.ur af.idavit cf the Hth cf
-? - 1 -..C ef.-r. y u — y u syrkc f tl: typhus raq-crinents cs well,

is it e rin the c-se th-t y u did net vpcsk fron yrur cm knowledge and
;vir era; suury m l'iescri o the l ets, ’ ut th-.t ycu r;erc noredy dr/twln* c.
dualens rr subsequently, fra ’ cuacnts?

.. Yes.


4950


Court 1 , ,

rcr. 25-1I-10-l-HD-IIcrra--. 2or. 3c..or.)


Did ; ju taor .nytfcitkf • z 11 b ut bus ox; -ri.i<-nt3
/..:? Did ; u ov-r ha j? nyxhlne nt> ut typhus oriracnts?

... As f i* f th- d'ett&onts - the corr-s <Jr.dui.oo of our

., but nothin; boy one ... .

. - .

ui: :o radra* the r-^l-ct .m of the Ilodicr.l t rice of the
. 2 11 . ax -ri

. . . c vluct.& on cJncor.tr tion c_v ir_ i-s or. v -h If of
r.i tft eh. ! 0 '.J’ led ,o of the Il.dic'l Inspect -r;tc of tho


A. I hnvo .o f cue subst rati tir. th


... I in.. A in tl.. ?ossi. . •• v.v*..r tho


.•Jt.ctior. Of tho Il.dio 1 Chief Jf th.

didn't uSb this jXi^osaion * uro.if?

*

....


You


. A ioro tuostior.. tint ). 8 in the

:• loborotcbflrrtz Dr. ^sk'.r

3 j c .rt i .1; '.era. b ut II • ; -n*s cryorinonta on

. eriruit 1 aub loots. 1 ' jo. t do : b ao this

• •

man? It is only r. -ssu-iption, but vhy cid you sc.y
. Inly*? v u did r.-t ... this st touont :'jur3_lf?


A. Y.o, I did. Th't o rob bly li.-it tion hloh I


.

-• 1 : r Cvi*t ialy ; * I c uld - oily ivj th. i; -roasior.

••

i- o 3 r.fir:. n. of t ...it.


but it •

a


in 8-nao Jf

bly : .

~ rat t.

s.

V -:i .

'ssuno th t. 1 j_ .ii"I\t

rv.'Vo I.r.J'T.

Th t is *

•

•«

»

t ~-Xi

raerrat to s y?


-.951


C?:rr I

c:. 25-.:- 2 -2-r-3-:I rrovr-(Y r. Set on)


Yo - 1:r * c - : *o- th t •; s tr.-j-sl -.d into the Snglish?

Did you s-o th- Trmslrtion? Did it sr.y 'I suppose-?

A. I didn’t secTihl tr n3l tion.

9

v. "h-a n:.y I st-to in conclusion th t ’ll y ur s3orti 'n:
•..ich conc-ra Irofcasor 3chrojd«.r or the Ilodic 1 In::, -ctorrtc,
ths Lv.ft\ r.ffc nrw aoroly ..asunptions or c r.clusi -t.s drr.vn
; you fron documents proaonted to you?

A. YwS.

3 ut : u cL-lit th t u h 7- :.o frctutl ovidonco
• r your oun luiov.lcdgo for asking such stotoaents?

A. .Vo, I did not.

• it thr.t ; b no right t ir w such
• luaiona. First, froa tho oint of vi. »f ; ur atr.to of
1 th « t. th- tii.w '.ad, in th- c-cond pi co, b-c:.U3v it \i a
; our job but the job of e urt to r •• cor.clusi ns frou
: Joints?

A. I did not realise th. t.

*

• - doit th - , • or .tin tion of your

. 1-•-*'> tA your a-nt Ic.p citi-s, you should h vu r-fusod
d c:. st t-n-nta? •

0

A. ”-a, I should h v-.

. xw. - I h vo n forth r at tone to put to


* o-.YTJLt (Dofonso C.nxns I for th. : 1 ndnnt B] mho):

0

itnusa, I atiat put ffid vit - •• \7hich you

. ;ion. This

T1 - ^ c- .-at £ -oh ?, n the Zrtoraia^tlon of

• I exhibit 5. D you

-r this ffid:.vit?

103.

• 11 : ffi&yifc - : ..icn . 3 b—n rand h.ru

sd nt th- end of :ich ;;-s aor.tiOnc-d tho


i952


C-art 1 - *

rch 25-..-10- -3-.-5-1. rrov:-i7on 3c..or.)


-i or 8-10,000 tubercular 1 i~s, 'hi eh you ties i d

:.:-r.r_d re 'ITunerour ; . Y u r-r.e~b.r this ;ff±d-.Yit?

A. /es.

Vita-ss, do you kaoi; fhzn th_ defend it Dr. Blor.e
:c cqu; iret-i "Itl: Hcichsfuohr-r 33 :.i uelor?

A. !.*o.

You isr.ld *no- ! ?

A. To, I c mot sr.y.

.. D-‘ you h:-.o-. it now? Ac o or die 3 to the trir.l?

A. I've ror otter, ngr-ia. .

?le*ae?

A. I've forgotten y"in.

v . You'vo ror:;ott-r.? But you • ore hero in the court

• •

rJen-;hou the defend r.t Bloa- a id, leer o.th, th t he r.ot

1 ..A r only i*. July or au .not or 1943 . D yo rer.oabor no-?
• *

A. Y e.i, til t'a risht.

.. C -uld tttit be right? C uld it be tru v! t t.h

i-i* ’.dhr.t Bio s. id or. orth here tli t net liirxilwr in

Jul'/ or 1943 ? I'!: shir. y u .c us- you ••ore el- ya

•i :-3 . r .id u .. hie .ci 1 0 .-dicl v-.t, ;.cc or din 3

t 7cur no- led - c r. th’.t be true?

A. I h :: :o re 3 :i t ■ thinlc t is cot true.

. B ;■ - , or 3 ; ur at - lent oh the

* •

•r ot-obvi?, 19 - 5 , did 3 >u tr.o" - sen this 1 .. f r * he
’ - ri *a of the .tub-soul r r-'l-s -histed? Ir. vh .t yanr?
.. - . r-.ier.bwr iis t .11 vh-r. the .document a


d :i


- * r


re::er.ber the t.l:e- t - 11 ?


SS, .1' . : J Ci. 3nt oh fcM8

- rive last thoopOlea? Th t uv. .-.r - f docure-t
-d -- --- b lit this t-rriblw driv- .ich .s

' - t - c cuaents -i-i-iia ted y.dth you?

4953


C-urt 1

- !-l — - .1-.. -{70s -


t you your3.If Urd . ~3scd o; r.ny docinx-ats :c th t
r-U Si-'n-c it :j this ' t t!on? And, today, you

-- *----• , ■ - o thj tfc t you'vo far {jot ton 11 this?

:: v- I uatl_rstood you corroqjly?

A. Yos.

Ih.r., in short tiu-, a h vo aryott on thrt the

.1 a vjcnt thr -h y mr h'nds - th 1 -r. to hill -i jht or

6-r. th o r.d 1 -olcs, or tv/cnty-fivo t.i us r.d or thirty

turns Ad *01.3? You've f ryott.n th t c lot-].y? Do you

• •

. lly .t t 3 y th t, und-r o th, • it::.as.

A. 7eS.

. * 1 *

.... .r.:I.-. tior. -y thoao tuborcui r i- los -::ist d ir. the 19-12?
You a.*. • t o.rt iol; *ro.; tho tri 1 i ;r . th- d c -r.t.s?
Isn't tlx * true?

A. Y;s.

x. Ir. ; ir -. fit ..lich I « xotod ju t : : u y

* f-llo-s: (I . - J.'Dr. Bloiio, fror. tine t ti ., otlled
. ::i Lilo? nd su rt.d Gr-isor's * xstion*. Greiaor’ a
su.-joati.n, dob t r-i’-rriny \ .:•« - t.» t • s da

os .oti a 1 to h v tl.so t.;.r.ty-iiv- y.' t..oua r.u

: .our .bl; ic.. tv . goal r is l-s li< -.id. t-d?
lan't th t true? Isn't th t true?

A. Yos.

*v• .‘h. • h. -;sti i xndo in 1943? You just


-d t, t: t didn't y a*

»• - •


- i


. c -s- t » £ y th .t this l.Ji v.s


. .o-d 'ey Hone ••it.: Mitral.-r - or r th-r tirt Blowo
1 . hi _il.r fr a ti-. t- tit/- i r th t 'or; osc

•hi, ..or- .& •• u : vo .Vast s- id that ou - vo ao r_ 3 n
-1 - hi-.d.r in 1542;.. th t he

6952s


C -W!fi I „ r , . .

I'cl- -S-HJWCarroiMVon ocf.oa)


jni:* in 1943? Do you still -sscrt tod y, th c t the. tine
r t'is .Inn in 1942, is it 3fS fcore, 31XU. c-.ll-d on
Hio.-J.-r fr a tine, t ti.ic?

I never :ernt t a'.y th. t.

*

;-5 so boro itn_3s. V u can reed, can't
.. u, ita-ss? If it s :-s hero Dr. Bloao rolled or.

Ei.ir.Ur fra ti.; t tiae nd sui;-rt-d Oroiscr’s suggest! on*'
t.acro c'a bo r. diffcr-cce of o^-ni-n or. this sentence, not
ovon for you, -md I should like t. fcr.ov fr n ;ou hen did
y u cj.o to i ko such a statement, undor 'orth? Under nth.
•dtnosa? ExpliJi it to ::o.

(i:o rospor.se).

<i. (continuing) Vitnoss, I Lting for four nnswor.


Ccxrt I

25 *Tir L - ‘ - 11-1 - L-JO - l,ss_r von Sehoen)


4 . The si - thing is true of this iffadavit as cf all the others.

I si-r.ed i*. in th_ for ir. vhich it va3 subritted to -u.

•*. Itness, I cannot accept t> t answer, -n this crsu you cannot

•

•v«t out of it i.*_th th t applanation. aitr.ess, in -ill tha other chaos

you h v. always said nh:-.t had bwjn shc>n to you ins only conclusions

*

rhich you had drawn frcfi documents, isn't th t trua? Not toll d- a

•

single document, witness , v.-,ro it is suppos.d to have said t t 31c/r™
called on Hinder fren tk.e to tiMO to support Gr-iser's su, n.

loll nu ol v».n ono docurttnt if it oxists at all.
a. ‘aer- '-r. no dccurvjnts for this.

■*. dut itness, o interrogator or th. prosecution could not
havj shown y u such a decuaont then. He did not hav- my d&cu:oent3
for this.

A . ho.asked rw nhcthor ftrofosaur Bloao a-r c odor

and I said nl es." Then tiles. two sentences wore probably sot up liko
that although they did not balujg toget'^r freo a point of vlow cf ti&o.
«. mid yea, Dr. Brandt, si\nod it r. jrtur ath, di r.'t you?

A. foo.

‘■’hun today yov no lor -r -rintiin thi3 st terent?

A. No.


■*. Kitn-ss, in your -f 1i -i7it 1 the 2Uth f October 191x6, that
is tae s . lii.avit, thorc is tho followirv; sentence, *ou a y first
that Dr. L'lo... c-alod on Himl-.r fTca tin- to tine and supported
Irois-r's s', -sti n, stateaont which you cumot naintain today.

"^ho and . f 19a2 and beginning of i%3,

*

is-r carried ut the ext.r ti - f t to Jews in»?ho her tho QaUj

the drive gainst tub.rcul 'X Foies »as cer^luted it tho s.mo tin)

th the driv- against the J-*s. According to -y -c-cry as a result

- the su^,estior. :vr : o by Bl, ... you s-y Sit's., itn-ss, ..."and

- t'. 10,0 0 -'clos Were extcrriLneted." End of quotation.

‘don lai.r you chan -d this nr ~~r to r.iJ n nu>.rcus Pcl.s." .itness,

* ii556


.itness


Cj rt I

25 *-ar - 11-2 - LJJ - L-ssvr (Int. von Schoan)


do y-u want to r. intain this statec-nt today, under cath?

a. 1 . an explanation .st.rday of howl arrived it t.-eso

figOTOS.

h. No, r.ov.r -dnd the figures f r the noa-nt. «r.s*vr the other
question — bother ycu ;xan t. rdntain, on your c .th, ta t this
drive against tubercular poles raa actually carried cut?

a. -'c, 1 can't do tht because I don't know about th t.

«. .1 , it no as, tit t was a stateront which was =ado by YOU.

Thu intorreystor 1 n t -deo it. I:uwero the confidant cn tho staff
of Hla.lor. .hat ynz n a su- -.'tei by soa-bocy -lav. Icu s i that,
yourself, one on your ath.

A. i g.av- th.explanation yesterday.

,. a" was no explanation, ritr.-ss, it Ivist not for t is st to-
Lnt. "itn.ss, t: you kn..v today that this plan of Orois-r's ro» not
carried cut at all? Dc ycu knew that from the decunonts vfcich have
bo.n r.ad hex*-?

A. ‘-3.

v. io kn-’« ti*. t n *

A. i.s.

•i. And d. y< v real zo th t t:..s- docunents .la- shew th t you
exactly t t tho pi n *--.s r. > carried it? witness, I will -ako
i y quoationn.ro '.t-il: . A 1 -' r .d one ti:x *hich Hi- alor

had written t -rcis.r, .t.-ro he r.forr.d t ji rd_r fr a Adolf Hitlor
and said tint this Klish drive had t bj stepped for the reason which
Dr. 31 . .. ha given. D- :u ruaeibur this letter by Hinder?

a. 1 .s, but I -.3 n sh r. this -tter in the interruption. *
4, Bi t, wii B8S| in 1 .2 this letter rent through your hands*

A. * It was no a hundred thousand letters which wont tfal
1 7 hands that * ; _.

• . • . . i .. ycu knew that 25,000 cr 30,.-.'0 aic!c

. Die W.1-U to 3U killed.


a. If I had xv.ad tho let; r as car -fully at tsat ti-.o os I have


C rt I rli-. - 11-3 - L-JG - >.ss^r - (Ir.fc. v r. Sc:-, -on)

n * j -iv.r.ps*

i u r.'t hr.vo t r .ad thi Idtt.r cir~ful 2 y. If ycu r-nd it
•t -li, if ... - r._ should think that it c -uld n.t

have escaped y ur crazy. D y u rant tc -.-'"it today, witness, un or
, ’ - ' ■ : , ■ -n

up c plotoly, and that the dc currants clj-rly show this? Do you veu-dt
that?

A. Thu dccu-<jQts indie a to it.
v» D- y u re. - bur 3 uthin-_ wise?

I .nr;- - bur thic ease 't all, cnly with tr.e aid f tho
>cu.antB wcich have oo-r. suboittod.

scss, I raxst ask you s teething. Ycu wore n 'a

staff. You ha'*, a responsible position. Did y u sign everything blindly,
without r-ndin* it?

.v. nation y.atcrduy. I a aid that becnusu f tho

v >luiu f v - r ’e it wasoi ,’ly not c-oaiblo to everything.

ditntss. It was nnt Just .ncu ir. t f

Dr. 3). -i'a point jf view tn.it hu was against the Fellah drive, but
twice, and in both c .:^a, as cm bu proved, the lott^rs wont through
y.ur hanas. C:;- tl - *rj jreieur's lot tar t hinsler with tho opinion
Dr. Slaw -nich woe f r t.... os tblishrant f * ratwrvati n ind n ainst
liqui .! • n. tho sue . ti o, : o Answer, .•:*.• 1 -r'a clsl n that

c rriod ut. In sthcr Wvjds, you dealt with
tho xattur twice. X u Isornod twice tn t Dr. Blcao rejoctod it and
y U novor nontienud that. You said quits te the contrary un’or ath.

-itr.-Gs, I .t ve quustl n in thcr subject. L et axperlnsnts.

; u hr.vu again ,iven an affienvit h-ra, nc with ut d to, which is in
D .cunont Bowk 13, i: . ■ . You st tu v_rious persons in this affidavit

h. c xridu ut t.-.a L.st uxpcrlrantia r she www c unacted in s .» Aw

. - j soritioned first, Frofess r Hirt,

U: rrrzt Dr. ■ic-.-.r, and your throu c.- afendants. Dr. Karl Brandt,

• Dr. ek, ax at the one you say, :.n:' I quota:

ubt inf road --.b ut tvs. rinunts.
tntioa. D y »• want t dnfc-ln this stitcdeat t. J .v, Dr.


-rdvlt?


C n I


2r - - li-i - _ - ss_r (- . ran Sc* -n)

*

i - n't. T fey, un-\or nth, y.u s yt t th.it i3 nt true?

It *."vs rniy -jj assumption r. ry part, hich • as cut on record.
Q. Aii assu ption :r. y ur part. Dir y-u h - .vw ary factual evidence
tc supp.rt this assn iptico, hich • it seen pre-bob! t*Dr .

51 u- ‘otusliy nos c nO-Cte^ i i;h thvSu i.st jxr^rirmnts?

A. >h.

•<. Ko. A nd then. Dr. Brendt, a 1.-st question, f ft siniler

nature but I must ask it boenusa youeonti n it her cjcp.ricents and yu

•

tr/ t. inert-air.-.tv Dr. Blcru in connect! n with th-s: other experiments
t . In y ur S'.i avit f 21 Oct.bor 191*6, C c-xient hUi, Exhibit 329,
y u -.onti n l.-v-rre ire oxporiaonts, freezing oxp.rincnts, sen-:.-.ter
exp ri unts, typhus o&x.rlsunte sterilisation oxporla&nts, Lost experi¬
ments, %r.d gas ixp-riaonta, all jf tho» c endue ted on concentration
cwnp inrAtos. ^hon you r^nti.n a nusbor f y ur co-dofondanta wh ,
y v sey, w-rv connected with those riainti, and at t nd you soy,
an: : q .et "Kurt 21 in his c; acity as C.ntl's deputy, nust
nave boon informed, juot as well as C nti hiosolf. " 1 t

un'ur obh, ii’r.'ty.u?

A. 108.

Q. D. y u v int - eintain tiiis stitoswnt t.doy?
a. Just as little as at ti it tj ...

v*. Dr. Brandt; y.u ore a lawyer. Y u bra exp.rlcnco. On tho
f Oc-. bur 1?U6 di you know what functi n tho defendant Dr.

Bl..:e ha.* ox deputy f Conti?

A. So.

.. I u * r. t kn . that?

a. Ho.

«. And, nvvar-thi-lesc, y.u signui an affidavit saying that Dr.

- i. m, . iputy f c nti, rust have boon inf. mod just as well as
C nti hi.-.3elf.

D?-. x. Are si-ant, I h-.v« n. further quest!.ns t put tc


• -as nj.tness. 1 thank y.u


25 -r
C -jrt ' . 1


-12-l-At-.har. (Ir.t v r. Sen.r._)


Si Di.. :iSISSQLa?-= (f r the Defendant »elfgang Severs):

Q Dr. Enn'.t, yostcr-loy in answering th- s-c ni frra -.y last
qQflSticn, is ycur 'efense consol, ycu describe ' s-nc f the traits r
eh .:r '.c t» r is tic s f h-icslcr, which -alt a special iepressien n y u. In
the c ursa f ycur cxaninatl n y u sai several tines that y u actc*. ‘n
r’.traj n.vr I v-uli like t ask y u a ret? questions n this subject in
r J .cr t shew t tno Tribunal briefly the .atsrsph».re which prevailed in
the ffice -f thw «oichs Fuehrer S3. Y u were, in the ideJiaU cnt.uraye
f Hidler f r ten years mi y-u n- doubt gained lastin’ inpresslens
ro, s that y u r.r- still in a p siti n today t- answer ny questions,
•'as an r’er fra Hitler, a so-callo 1 Fuehrer r cr, was it sacrcsanct
T r Hianlwr hi self?

•v ‘us, no ni :ht say that.

Q Then ns f.r r.s y ur kncwlc ! o res, Hiaaler hlrxclf always
0

nbiJe i by these Fuehrer r ’ers?

far as I can judge, y.s.

3 N«, hew i! HLanlcT issue -r’trs, .on' hew lit ho insist -n the

strict cxecuti n cf th-st or’.crs?

k K. lssu- . his 'r ers an t k it fer *rantc' that they would
be carrU' ufc.

Q Was th-re any ebjvcti n p’ssiblo?

» Perhaps no p.rs n ar another c nil have sni ’ sc-Nothing, but
wi ul m t nav. hi : any success.

Q What w ul' have hnr>oonoi‘. if s acme ha. violate 1 tb- Fuohror's
r’.rs r or'ors of Homier hinsulf?

. ho w il l have ha’ t fcaK the c nscqucnccs

2 y u n ■: anythin.- fr « th. c llecticn f the docisicns
Higher S£ in' r lie- C urt as t the c resequences -f failure to obey


r 'era?


At the .. aent I cannot give any cJKsple but I ssuac- that-

1 will n t another question. If. nhn«.norl> was known te


; its roanisaticn?

In general, y.-s.


I


25 —_r u7-.-.-.L—-12-2-dcchan (Int v:.i Schscn)

C art . 1

Q nhnt ins the or, anizati.n :f the *hnencrbc; whe was Silvers'
sap-ricr?

Profess r Truest was the iccodintc superior.

Q ?r fesaer ucst; that was th. curator fr n 193? cn?

A £-s. •

Q .*r.! wh was above the curator?

A Himler hinsclf.

I

Q Hl-ralcr hinsclf; 1 ycu know wheth_r Hicaler repeatelly had
liscuasl-ns with Pr-fessrr "uest?

h lea.

•

Q Iho cr joniaati n :f the ..hnenerbe rar such that specialize’,
'cportmnts exist-; a nusKr cf thee, aft’ at th. her.’ T each iepextaont
vraa the chief of that lopirtc^nt, a aectl-n chief, is that sc?

o lea.

Q ' D y a kn t that Hire! r hlnsclf get in t. uch directly with
these aecticn chiufs with ut «Tu.st r Sievera kn win anythin..: ab ut it?

« Yea, that happened.

w W.* it happen that filmlt r went U see the acn pers nally; scrx
r then Yioro n t in E.rlin at all?

A fes, n fficial trips he paid such visits.

Q D ycu knot that Hi staler in c nnccti n with his research asson¬
ants , which he te k un' r his wn pr.tccti.n, was especially interested
in thus an' watched ver then Joal usly s: that n thirl p..rs^n c uld
interfere in thee?

A f.s.

Q ..n! s you kn w anythin: ab ut ins true*- i< ns fr«a hinder that
•’it!, ut his kn wle a thir pers n ns net t: b aliened t learn any-
In : ab ut th. execution f such research assi.3rc.nt3?

I believe there is even an ;r !cr te that cffe-ct.

’a'hat !v ycu have t/ say ab ut this crier?

I n't rtrijsbur it, unfortunately.


■*


SieVurs was frequently in your office?
ies.


25 -r 7- -- —---12-3- cchan (Ir.t v n Sch or.)
C urt H:. 1


Fr a certain p^ri-d rf tic: n; did Sieves c cpluin t y u
tint the Abnenorbe w.s being burdened with ossisnaonts which were c:n-
plot-.ly alien t its structure?
rt a*, ften aenti-ned that.

q "hat did he say about it; that ms his paint f view, di ’ he
consider this ai'iti n t th. research assignaents a burden ct was he
willinr to support it?

n .1 , be c ns l ie re' it a burden especially becauso :f the an unt
f his werk which was already ale at tee cuch f:r his.

Q D ; . y u Javw that Slovers went t Hirelcr hicaelf and tried to
have tho assi;:n=cnt cf fields f w rk alien t: the »hntncrb. rwc ve.l?

a y.is.

Q Di Slevers talk t y u ab it the w.rk of Dr. *ascher in this
conn^cti n?

.. I ossuoc a r ; but 1 do n. t rescebor it.

Q f'u knew Dr. Rnscher; a nuaber of the .curv-nts horo havo snid

that Siovero w.nte ! Roschcr t be taken ver by the tiaffun SS; did Sicv.ra
: that rn his to initiative or was there an r’or or a wish frem Hicaler?

A A here was an orelcr fr c Kind r an also the wish cf itoschcr

L Self.

Q fi w, I shall have D cuant D k No. 2 sh to t: you, fr »o tiiich
1 shall rof-r t- D cuo-nt 1561-PS, Exhibit 19, n pa^o 60 f tho Ocman
D ci)cent B k, I sh Hr-.: it an’ I quote:

«T the P-cichs Business *ma. or f tr.e »tacnorbw SS, Obersturrbann-
f. hr .r Slevers. Dear C ar ' Slevers: I r f-r t yur inquiry of 9 '-arch

19h2 c neernir..’ Dr. Rnschcr. Reference is m 'c t the lew pro. sure

rir.cnts carri- ' *ut in the Dachau cxld n c> nco.ntrati n canp iawtes
tli. LUftwaffp, th. Roichsfuchr:r SS has approve! these oeperinents
-a'or the c n'lti n tint S“ Unt-.rjturcfUehr.r Dr. Rascher, wn is anyr. w

icnl 1st Iduut nint Oburarzt cf the airf rcc takes part in then."

This inquiry f 9 r h 19A2 is cissinr fr - tr« i cuoent b k,

- qucntly I h.v. t le rn fr y u what the c.ntents f this inquiry

1 .


25 ~ r (Int 7 n Sch:-r.)

Ccurt J . 1

:*r - SL.Vwrs f 9 rch 19lr2 were; can y u r — aber that?

A lie.

3 kc can't renedber.

TIT :?£SHE'..T: E-fere pr cc- ’ir.r further, tr._ Tribunal will be in
r'c-r. «imii 1;^ vhU j-n


IA recwss was tak^n.)


25 '-rch I;7—r.-nTD-13-^fostcr (Parlor)
court ::c. l


jjTiP- do;; sE3Sio;;

(Tha hjarln;: reMrwciBd at 1330 h.urs, 25 larch 19^7,)

T!3 HARSH/.L: Persons in the court roon rill pl,aso fin.! their scat:

The Tribunal is a~oin ir. session.

T!E P'ZSXDEJT: Just a nocxnt Counsel, The Tribunal having received
the certificate si~no'l by tin prison 3urjcon certify*r.r that Ddfondant
Oberh-jusor should bo excused fr ca this afternoon's session, the Secretary
Goncral trill file the certificate,

Yostcriay afternoon, thro. nenbers of the Tribunal, havinp boon
dosi natod as ccmissionors to observe and horr the filn "I accuso",
vtcconpllahjl thoir .nlsion an* a or and toard the filn. They reported that
the transLations wuro entirely offoctivo and the the filn with the acccn-
panyin sown- track vna both hoard as well as seen. The cornissionors have
unanin nisly rjp rto t to th.- Tribunal that in their opinion tbo filn io of
no probative vain-- whatever in this case, Tho Tribunal havin' considered
thoir roF^rt, it is auoidaously of tho sano opinion, Tho Tribunal, thorof
orders that th. filn trill not bo shorn to tho Tribunal as ovi'.onoo, boihe
entirely lackin' in octorinlity or probative value.

Counsel nay procool,

RUlCIG B^JT - Rosunod
CXSS 3X,; i:.7vTI0K - Continued


. .. .. a ' (Counsel Ter th. Dafor.dant -iewrs):

r* ~r'Ji\ty bofero weeS3 I ackc 4 ycu whettar Hinnlcr attach

value th, -.ainto nance :f r a tost secrecy re/arlin,: hi3 research assi,;r>


ncr.t. Vou nffirr.. 1 that question and y.u fUrthornor 3tatod that accordin'
to your knst.-lei-e th.ro ..as in uxistonco a special rl-.r for tho naintonar
spoakin-. about this special order wore you awakin abou*
Wrbar 1 ro.nrdinr tfe mintananoe of secrecy, nanoly, th

' ‘A

' 'order o Hitler, or) was thare yet another special secrecy or !.>r issued by

0

Hi-ol-J* which jest toneerr.a * his research .ssi.xoents?


25 Kfiroh U7-A-ATD-13-2-Fostor (Int. 2asL&)

Court !to* 1

At the. nonent I oapnot rcacefcbr that, I would ascuno that anothor
order was especially issued for that purpose* but I can't toll you that now
for sure*

q In that case you cannot renonbor the year in which this orlor was

issued?

A *>•

q 1 shall new have the dccunont Volur.e 3 shorn to you. I an referring
to the affidavit which you rale on the 6th of Sopterfcar 19^ and which was
submitted by the prosocuticn as foment JJ3-2U2, Exhibit 60. On pafio U.

I will refer to a paragraph which starts with "Silvers was annoyed", and I
an roin.-: to stew ycu this dowsaent b>ok so that you can dofina your attitude
towards it.

(Docuaant book handed to witnoss.)

Q (Continuin ) This passage can ba found at tho and of tho parjo. It
starts with "Sievers was annoyoff'. "Slovors boca-^ anneyod at tho inter¬
vention of Dr. Growlta an * t-taoUatoly raised objections against his
'.■ainin; control of the cxp.rl-.ents. Gi-vors was also nnnoyod with a report
of a conference between Orawits, Easeher end Oborsturrbahnfuohror
Pop-pen Acfe, in which Rasohor quoted OHWit* as havin: said that it was an
untenable atc.to of affairs, that one who was not a physician such as Sievors
should havo Juris’Action over Dj Uosl mttors. '

TTouli you please tum to pa p 126 of tho Go man translation in the
very anno Jocurunt vo1u:>j. -a are concerned with tho ’.ocunont >0-3^0,
exhibit of tho prosecution 103.


25 Ifarch l‘,47 -A-U-l-KP- Putty (Ir.t. LoaUr)

Court N>. 1

T his is * i-tt-r s.nt to y.u by Siuvers n the 28th f January, 1943.

Would yju pUr.se jva>I through that Uttvr end th-n answer the follow in*;
questions? First, was this UUr su -aitt-' t y u urin. y ur intc.rrag--.tior?
Worn the contents of this Uttar tr nsUrr-' t, y.ur affidavit of 6 Septeator
1946 that you su’rsequ-ntly sate?

A. I -ssuito tort this UtUr was suvoitte to but roclly *rt 1 then
sti in ay "ffi vit would be c -ntr diction t- the c ntents A the Utter,

Q. ’..her- do y.u s-e thr.t c.ntr'<'icti-n?

A. N thini, ‘out "'.vine nnojwd" c n e erive'* fr-a th t Utter.

Q. I ttach importance t. whether y-u c n reowi-r th' t this Utter was
submitte to y-u lurinj y.ur int^rr...-ti-n A th- 6th -f Soptuohor, 1946.

Can ym stiLl roauA^r th t?

A. I ‘oclUve it was su fitted t. o..

Q. If y-u lo.k at th- Utter, th. D-cu^nt No. 320, Sxhi’>it 103, r.ro you
then still f th- ini;n that SUv-ra Svnt this letter to you on y.ur
own initiative, an th t h. purs rr Uy w-s am yX -about th. behavior of
Dr. Grawitz, .r is this UtUr kept --Un,; the - vr.-r-.l line which A necessity
was a c nsvquer.ee A the directives .f Hiazlor?

A. The Latter is true.

C. Then y.u re f th- -pint n th t SioVers p-rsmv lly ha no op-cir.l
interest in the eTul^Oent A the situ tisn ••etween Cr-witz m£ Rasclwr,

• ut that he hi’ to write this* Utter in r.rt- c-rry -ut the irectiven
f Waaler who w-r.te th- c .ll-.b.rati n f h sober with Ahn«ner'e?

A. Yes.

Q. You kna» Covers* -iary, n't y .u? D y u .r..w SUv-rs' « , i-ary?

A. Yes, I have s-en it h-r_.

C. Y-u didn't kru» it ’-Ure? t

A. I e ,n»t r-uoU-r.

r t . Urw such -i-nrios ’opt in '11 -f the ^ncUo .f the Reichsfuehrunf;-SS?

A • Yw, 3 •

Q. That was th. result f -n -r-Xr by HinaUr?

A ■ ie?t

Fr .a Sievers' i ry it c n e J-.n th't he r-p» t-tlly h c.nferoncos

4966


25 11 rcr. 1947 -A-U-2-PKP- Putt/ (Int. Staler ;

C-urt . 1

with '/ax. H» i th'.t c ae ' -ut, -nc! a'r.t ^r.-r 11 / w s th. fu-j-ct -f
such c.r.f-r_r.c-s?

A. Hinalur .ririrr.il/ wcntcl t, r-c-iv. .u-st -n;' ..icv-rs pcrs_nr.il/ in
jrtcT to '.iscuss their -ffairs with ttva since h- whs pers_rylly very
interest^.: in tfc. w>rk f Atoencr H *-v_r, it wr.s n t p ssi-1- f r hin
from the paint .1 vi-« f tlx - ‘ nfOroncoa. In

this n^nner the jcO/ up/ >ut kgs th't luest -r»£ Si-v-rs npprer.ch-: bin ’/
wr.y .f writ in., thst is, uritin to hi= per3 rally .r s- r.’ir., their letters
t_. n-. In -r’er t:> :-.v:i. *n oxt-nsive correspixv.'cnce, £l-v_rs to 3 -.rr.-n^u’.
that he vi all visit .r_ frn tlx t- tlx; I c uie then n.tc -rwn wh'Uvor
he ir.! tJ s*y p.nr thon r-t.. ay r. Us t. Him Ur, n then inf .rr. Sicvers
ftb ut his decision -ith Uy r j telephone, th t was his r r.

Q. Th t tlurys cor.c-rrv. very concr-te c*s .eV

A. Y s, v-ry conerot- cr _ 3 . Yh-re wer- \rrious points of liscuonion
which h“. nccuauL' tv throug h the w-ck.

C.. Ar.. then Si-v-rs turn*: to you: you shortly note th- conUnts of the
pointo of vliocuasion on£ then au'xiitU.. titto to HLwal-r who r/i _ his -cisioi

A.

f.. I I. v\ yvt nother thr-v questions «hich concern ilifforont cheptor.
Do you StiU.reswa’ er the case of Profecoor S-i? who was th- rector ol the
university t Osl-7 Seip sir.c- th- nit'. :io of 1942 «rs prisoner of the
Gest _>o in th concentration c-sp of Sachs-nhausen. Do you ranon’ er this coat

n. Y-s, oi-v-r3 report^: this to a—

q. In wh-.t sinner? Di h- Ull you th't Prof-ssor Seip, the rector of
the University of C3le, w-.s in Sachs-nhausen?

A. T-b.

Q. : h -1 o you know out th- furth-r • -v.lopxnt of this enso of
Prof- 3 sor S-i?. Dt* Siev-rs n*ke r. -.ppliction to'Hianlnr in^he F-U ol
1942 which r. as r r-sult that Prof-ssor S-ip was reLxi: freoth-
concentration c~np Sachs-Rh us-r. Christar.s of th t yeir?

A. I . in ccor^nnce «ith »hnt happened?

ntcrv-ntiim thrtboip wes
• » •

r, le- Se '.?

4967


25 - roh l~L7 -..-IL-j-F:?- Putty (Ir.t. ialer)

Court .•o• I

n. Yc5.

Ami now uy L at question; -c ease of the. several hur. ru.’

Norwegian stu oats ..ho in th- -yinrdr. of 1 -J. *-re internet' in tho concon-
tration c'^rp of Bucb-nwclil?

A. Yes.

Q. can you t.ll the 7 r i and nythin out upon -!os«. intervention thos
Norwegian students v_r- rule' sed? .

A. Si-vers h-r- *f .-in .. s active.

C.. Do you know th- russen which =ov-d Siev-ro?

A. If-11, I oon't know thus in di.t-.il, * ut I think th .t h- intori-rrud
'xc m he was not in .r-e«&nt with th-lr inpriooraont, nd th t h-
Lmodiately wanted r. ch'ngu.

C„ Do you knot' wh-n this ch-n,. in effect occurred?

A. I don't knot *-n t, ut I ssur.. that it uns done iaaedintcly.

D! . 1<aXSGE;iB&-.: ifr. President, I h v- no further questions.

DR. ST£I!-’BAU£u: Dr. Stoin* ru-r, counsel for the Dufond-nt Bei,;lbouok

c:css-£i^uiiv.no?;

BY DR. STEIhV

C,. ' itn-os, I h-v r. very short question to put to you: »or- .oLiticnl
considerations of Iportno. re^ardin- th. aosityrx.nls of physicians for
certain -x^.ri.-nto -uch a &- water exp-rioents?

„. I don't r r th V ny *»ch question -v.r -ros-.

rou say th.t this "-.a net the of sc.

A. Y-s, 1 cinnot r-. -a.-r it.

D.;. lOr" : Counsel Koffx no for Dr. Pokorny.

CRQ3S-EXA l:-.TION

by d: . set Fii-:::

' itn-ss, I v. going to au'ait tc you Docuaent Volua-^o. 6. In this
loot. Ho. 6 you jr.de an nffid rilizQtion uXpori % nts, %

you plt-Se look t y* - 2? Ther- ur.d-r nr.r-.raph 5 you write:

•-As a r-sult of Pokorny ’a s«t Ration, oxp-rio.nts w-m c-rri-d out or.

ntr ition c op inset-s in or d«r to tost the effectiveness cf tha dru,;. n
On Wh t is ; ;ur kno-.-1-d.- -'.s-d, ad is ■.?. t you say them correct?


25 U-.rch 1%7 -A-U-W2*- Patty (Int. fc-yal-r)

Court :*o • i

I trvw no'kno«l-d t -, rei in this case, to-, this is an nasaoptior. on
thv. sis of tfc. docunwr.t = t-rir.l su'~itt-d to :nd th- su‘ s-qu-r.t
discussion with th_ int-rro-'.'tion of:ic-r.

C. Witness, wh~t docu=-nts »-r- su’-sitt-d to you on thrt occasion? Crn
you r?-. -i , 'T‘? I rsaus- that thos- wcr. your cmn docun-nts. Just turn to
19 of th- scoo voIuoj ; th-ro you writ- to th- D-puty G-.ul-it-r in
Lower DrnuU. rc£ardin 0 this act ter. Do you r-a-n’o-r th t 1-tt-r?

Y-s, after it was su aitt-d to =- 1 r-s-a'^r-d it.

Q. nrti th-r- in the s-corxi p r-.Tiph you say:

"Th- trowii^ in hot houa-s is a v-ry t-dicus proc-as end th- id-id
does not sous suffici-nt to carry out th- plnnr.-d -xp-rin-nta or. a l".r,;or
BcnL-."

You couldn't d-riv- Ircre this docun-nt th t -xp-rin-r.ts *or- actually
errri-d cut, could you?

n. Ito, I couldn't.

Q. Tft-n you h'd a<*v- furth-r corr-sporid-nc- in th t rv 'tor, -nd t-hia ^
’jrin.;a us to ttu l"3t docua-nt Iso in volute 6 which you find on 2 5»
and th-r- jo u ary ir. Uv- last p ru mph:

"I Srv- a-nt a copy of your 1-tt-r to SS-OV-r.^PP^fu-htvr ?ohl tilth the
r-qu-st for further action. 1 -a aur- th t you -.dll r-c-iv- r-ply from his
- b -ncy within th- next f-w d-.yc.

This 1-tt-r aririnttea fra-‘you rad is also o-nt to th- Gaul-it-r of
LoM-r o r.u - y th. rv-r.- or Garland. I • ssua- fro= this 1-tt-r th t you
gay- th- ontir- aatt-r ov.r to Pohl ft-r th- 25th of October, 192 ^ did
you do r.ythin_ nor- in thr.t n tt-r? Did you cor.tir.u- to d--.l with it?

... I don't r-n-.i «r h-'.vin» «ork-d on th t fur th-r.


25 ' fercb-A—Jr-i5--“C k (Int. ..* -~r)

C-urt I

Q. Th.n it is re illy tru- t ryfe t y u trt -*F-ri fcnts

w_r. carried utr.riht th-y v,r^ n t cirri. * ut?

A. I con«t toli > u vtoth-r nay wx^ri— nts were cirri. ct.

Q . On ;r. . 19 I h-v. sab tto * t , a y.ur lett-r *f tho 29th .1 August
1912, n Ut -tmbekt pr. - 13 -i d saw v la*. Her. y.u «1U tint.
s file n tati n * y u, in n to. ru -ut Uetpar^r ph it is sr.ia: "The
Rcichsfu-hr.r IS ala toqu.ata fvrth.r to t -±th th. p ssibly -^stirv in¬
gredients f tlu.s plant n lun , storilixati n uxjuri^nts eh old n:vr ir. w
ciso be carrier’ ut in to. c neentr tl t c Tn.n to. noxt r« r

which iar » 0 b-r rupponfuchrcr P hi * r.. ’ t tile- to. n-c.ss ry stops at
new." Th» file n-t-ti n 1 t.s fr f.v 22n * f Jtoc 19»,2. On the 29th

«p August 1912 y u '.re etiU ap_-i.i • - ’ 1

true that any ^rxx.nt# «-r. c rri. ut to. b sis f to t file station

io th t ri ht?

I ■ It no * r-rullMK- 14 n't V,-. -ctu-lly

happ-iK'*.

q, j y .. the 29th of Au ust 19h2,

that is a> .-t t ' nth# 1 -tor, to t tow* .-tt.rs > -to : till an c !-«"*

ct. w . U3> i < at toe l.tt r nc . r.?

roast t O-rlon ’ ia based -n a clroctivo by Hialnr.

I c ulfti't have »ratter. anyth.* ilk- t.v.t f y « kn wl.-V.

4 . V.r; wUl, art y u ».ulda«t have vrittdn .x^ri.a-nts *ore plann-d,
if in? wx .ri -hU it* slrea* a-n c u*ri. at, n th- b-sis f t.iw ;rovi us

fil. n t*ti n fr June.

a. T.s, to - is t be -ssv .

— •

Dr.. HC to-: Thank y u.

r-.. el . Tr Is ttor. an. UrtUr ^ -xnatim jf tois %tnwss by
v-f.ns. c uns,l?

DR. ?Ito 1 (C unsci frUv. ■ nfc » ru.. wsky)


Y DR. PL. 1 '


Q. ..it/—s.> . * fU-a-1 s - ru ewsky?


W70


25 - - rch-.--Jr-I5-2”£ - k (Int. .< 2~r)


C urt I

... i 6— hi nec at Hinii-r's iw cu-rters.

H . Di . y m i-c. hir f r any L.n, th l ttw?

a. I nly s-r. hi* vh-n ac rs ir.tr aic- , th t is r. t:su ccnsi.n f
lunch r '.inner.

Q. • hat ’ y is kn * id it ~nr nsky«s activities?

•

... I h-v- n c nccpti at ell eh - activities h- really exorcis-d.

.. I i -11 nave th- ir s-cuti n xv.bit 170mb Ittw t y u. It can
bo f a in " cuont b k N . 6, n pa. 53 .f th- Gor 'nc py. .. ulc’. y.'U
pleas- r—- ' - - 1st p-ra r-aph? It la >* 5<i. itn-ss this ia a Til- n trti n

re -r^in. r. 'iacussi n ab ut st-rilizati n. ul* y u pleas- PN>ftf t’. - lost
pan rpht "The S.ichsfuehr-r SS u.phasi. t vs dl pnrticipatin -ntlciicn
that w- 2T- h-r- c noorno'* Kith t s.cr.t -t.-rs Khich can nly be discussed
int.rn-lly, vhereby th s- *h ar- sked t visits r c nfeavneae had.

t ke-p s-cr-cy." D y u r. .. o-r tft-s Til- not-.ti n?

A. I only r- ejb_r it XOIOS* it i i nub .tt.d to a-.

Q.. KoK vodd you pi- s. look t doc *xnt . o. UtO in th- docuia.nt book
Exhibit 11.1, v.i'ch c-n bo found on pa*- i. *® *« affidavit Wt o by you.

Did yo find it? is Is an af ida.it undo by you which 'lco c -cerno stori-

. n th last para r jfc, »o. 3, >ou sayi "Karl Brandt,
.-..ichs ntysici -r. -h Dr. Gr 'itr, uid *r. Gubh-rdt cortainlyn.ru 1 lli’.r

i-ntoutor, iopfcndlck ind ru^onsky -rehab
had knnrM o 11 lie*. : :.in int ovesidur-tion ttv. flit notation

r.ac vfatroin iscor.t-x ~d t: - a,T-s8 ord-r oy :i url-r to kvop
11 Batters s.cr-t, pertaining to at-rlll£-txor., how do you >‘.s- yo--r assump¬
tion ui t ru.jcr ski tax* a»at xtcrilizati .?

‘lean no lor.g-r axint • . ...

j. Did. yovr st-t-m-nt 't t th h s. itself on any f-cts, facts known
to you that .raid x .fie t_ th. • - ticiy or. o. rufeowsky in any sterilisation
att.r?

:’o. -

q. unt Ho. -lilili, iros^cution 2*htt

■. This decra-nt c-n not b- found i ny ocuaent volume. I 'ngly


25 rcr.-..-Jr-15-2-C. k (Int. .1 2.r)


C art I

... I z~~ hi nee it Hi i-i-r's 'su _ rt-rs.

h• Di" y 1 S.c hir f r anj i.r.th : ti.*:?

A. I nly s * hi* when 2*. was intr h:c- , th t is n tie ccssi.n f
lunch >r dinner* -

Q. hat •' y u Jen w ab it -rue wsky's activities?

... I ;rv. n c neepti at cllwh i. activities h- really oxercis--?.

.. I s 31 have th- ir s.cuti n xv bit 170aib t y v. It can
be f n in CU cut h k H • 6, r. U .A.r -nc ,y. ulC you

pi - -*-t ?rn r-.rh? It ir y :'I. itruss this is a file n trti n

.ar-'in a ’iscusei a -.b ut surillz’ti n. ul* y uplotSw r»a-.'th» last
para r-phj "Th<. ri ichsfu^r.r-r SS . u.fhasix-' t rs 11 participatin'. _ntlc;.ven

th.it w_ nr- h-r. c icurna-' Kit . t <.s.cr_t .U.re which can r.ly be r'.iscussad

internally, rhereby th t wh ar. - s!:-' t att^a' visits r c nfer-nces haO
t kv.jp s-cr-cy." D y u r.v a-r t. s 1- notati r.?

•i. I onl, r. wab.r it cr.’iffw it 1 : r ltt-d to a_.

Q» Kow would you pi--.s- look . t <fea«LAt . o. U.C ir. the document book

Exhibit 111, wlrch can b- found o- \ 1. Cc. s is *n affidavit r ^ by you.

Did you finrf it? : is is an afildavit uad- b.i you which 'Iso c c-rn: stori-
n a. In to last par r h, Ko. 8, you say* "Karl 3r.ndtj
Rcichs Ihysicia; eh Dr. Gr'.uitr., m r. Gubhardt curtainly»er«. 1 liliar
with t"is thrill; ticn natter. luo.ntwuur, lOp.v-ndick ani ru^owsk: probably
had knorrledj oj it Iso". 1 :.in int c..ri«.v.r tier t file not '-ion
I Ich J-C-. v.Ti, hervin iscc .t-i t _ x.t\.ss ordv.r 7J :ivrl-r to keep

s.crwt, r.rv i r bsataon, how do you oas. yonr assump¬

tion Ui nifconsky knew aoout i -trill?ation?

•*. Ic-n nc longer auint'tn ra t sen . felon.

Bid yovr statement -c t.i-. ■ s itself on any T'ets, .facts known
to you that '.ould ia’ic-U ti:. . Lev .r. o; ru, ov.skj* in any sterilisation
waiter?

*• r o.

- docc —at :ro. hlih, ire: .cation Exhibit

. Tals • co ar .t can not b_ found - . my ebeuaant voluau. It .-ly


25 - rch^-JP-lr-5-Cook (Ini. . \I.r)

Ceurt I

submitted by t>*. . ros.-cutior.. i t is an - id. vit nnde 'ey you ' ted t'.v- 2l|th
of Octoowr, 1916. *.'on't ycu pier .so turn to p-r r.i;-h 5 on the s-cond ?-.>?

It s-ys t...r , •- roxinct-Iy tb. middle of the p'rv.raph 5, M :rugo-sky -no
Foppendick, b th L-^bere of Gr vvitz 1 office, s : .11 -s Si.v.rs, oust h-.Ve h.-.d
knowledge -.bout th- experin.nti just I cie ca t'.v; e-sis of th- or’-rs , iv.i
bm." ii. r. * -*r concerned with t.._ £.L.cticn c; th. prisoner:- ut.d for
these txjv-ri er.ts. 'rou wore just s in;., vltneSS, tr. t you h"-' no conception
of .(rugORSky's rctivities. itor ih.r. c n yo» justify this &t-tr--nt th“t
Vru&ows^y must h-.v« kr.oi r. ;ust s -".uc.: - -n.t tb z . exp.rij.nts 's ycu on
the o* sir of orders w you?

I cr.nr.ot a-intnin tn r st*t—.--r.t ei-.v-r.

P . 1 : Thnnk you, i h •. .. ‘.

T . . 6 J.. f?? Is th-r. tv i ert>~r cross .x nin-tion of this witness
by the :'ef-r.r. ctun: i?

Th.v- r.on., th. Pros.cution e-.. croa -.x-pinc hln.

CROSS Kt. .wfiCff

BY MR. H.ei0Tl

•it Dr. for the p at t o dyys t.- ritnrss Moi- : in this

court roc*, t testify in your beh li. o. re^-rding th. witness <-ein., was
he your suoorAin .?

«. Yys.

*

Q. .bon j questioned K-iru c.vc.; ewlodgo of Oediccl expori-
aent-tion up: hvr-.i -ir. 6 r i c. c-i..r tion c j», b. nnsv.^rv:! t. t he hrd
no knov«L.dge thereof, do you rcc-.ll th t?

Y.B.

In addition wtwn I put th- . signed oy .".in. concerning tho

trinsfer o: or... Dr. hl&a.r, to • ff-n Si for the jurpose of collaborat'd ng
with tV0£0B9or Dr. iirth, kcln. st twd ho hr.c no xj.cwlcdgc vn-.tsoover as to
* svjcific -r wria_..tt referred to ir. t;_ docuacnt. Do you r c-llth t?

“• Ivf.


4972


C urt I


25 ..:x L7-.-. - 16-1 - LJG - Grrss 4lnt r.ral-r)

• : t yrur kn.le £e, did -vino nav. kntwledgc 33 t-whether

-r n t Fr.fosi r Hirth was w. rking .n IC57?

If ho said th t there is no c.ntraiieti t. thorc because at
the fact because he was _y subordinate. His place .f w.rk was Berlin.

I was at tho headquarters.

n w, .f c.ur3e, you c!. n.t deny th-t y u know eb.ut
tr-fosser Hirth's w rk with lest a-as?

ft. i: t any ia.r. than cr.n bo seen frea the d.cunonts. That is
fact itsalf.

Q. That is sufficient.

:R. HmRDT: •■ay it pl.:,aa the Tribunal, unf rtur.;tcly I just un-
c v.r-d this . cu>-nt which I c uld n t ut t the witness. ( ^,ino
* t ff tho stand bef.ro I have f urv'. trie c cusont.) It has r.. t been
translate . 1 i n't intend t. put it in as .an exhibit but it is a
docunent si^od by Bran t, and I *.ant hia t. r-ad it f r identification
and ask him a few qu.sti .ns tiwro n. it is vwy ah rt. I . n't think
wo will have t uch f a translati n pr bio with it. This is Dcu-
nont KO-1363.

Is that y.ur signature, witness?

Yes.

-• y«m 3dnfly re t lott-.r al.wly st that tho interpreter
nay f.U w y u?

ft. "Dear C ira'o Si-7-rs — "

• •' ‘ I r ante,

bjliu-.u t:. t it i3 the ru o I the ~ribur.il th t th. •..fensj c unsol
ny kn r ab ut th- d.cu^r.t which is t„in. sub-1 tUJ t the witness

ti n an I sh ui likj, t*ro-
f l '-> 1 ask f r c pies f that cnixnt.

*"-• HftRDX: I sub it a air., y or R n r, t i t wo n t have c.-pies
- this • cu ert. just secured tho cu-.nt. The afondant is n w
.

•itress at an thur ti e t .ut this ' cua*>ni t hi . It's a


curort


C.urt I

25 *r -7-. k - 16-2 - LJG - Gr.ss (lot. Rader)

signed by the defendant. I as requesting hi- t. identify it. The

111 read it. Defense c u:.sel sh.ulo have cue n-tico thereby.
THE r.'-sSIDSHT: to -r the rules -f tic prreo ure, c .unsel is
entitled at th. 3 ti :j t h~.v- jfcu >i taiss i cent ify the c cuoont. It
ray bo surScad os identification but th- cutar.t sh uld r. t be retd'
until cepioa h.vu bo-n furnished t ifonse c uns v l. Iho witness nay
be recalled at s...o Ir.tcr -.to ir. r er t c nsi tr the d cu-ent.

HJ®X* -1 , / ^ H .n r, ay I at this ttuu sub-iit the copy
t: .cfonno c unsel f.r porusnl? i will c ntinu. .y exxdnnti ;n. Later
cn in the oftera n I sill»rert hack t this parties nt.

T»a -RESIDENT: I understand y u have c pies f th- J . curwnt?

w-DIi }; . : sa>, ul it be p.ssiblo f.r r* t let efenso

c nasal peruse this c p> tvt i h*v., a single c ,y. : mil prtc--:’.

t an t: or subj-ct f :y wetiimti :n and b-f r. I c npl-to uy exanina-
ti n I c.-.n re tun..

THE . bSIDB'T: i-3. th .t will bo p.rrlasibl*.

T.ie d cu: .nt sh ul b- arked as an i 'ratification.

R. HttHDTt The cu ent ic e.cujent NO-1368. It id 11 bo oarkod
as Pr".ajcution Exhibit e6. f r 1 .ontiflcati n.

7.-2 t/aSIDEl’?: C , unsol will, f c urs-, at the sar« ti-e copies
f this eus&Rt -re eliv-ro t tho defora- c tinsel, c pi-3 will
ala be jliv.r. t tho Tribunal.

?. MwLDIs Xus, y u H n r, I intonJ t hava it translated and
due c pi-s ado.

9i -Mit

Dr. Bren t, if 1 un -rst. ' y u c rr-ctiy, during a iroct
oxs.-dnatl.-n y u stat-d r-gur-inj; c .adeemed pris n-rs b.in uX^Araonted
up.n, t t such ul. .. . -r isaiblo if th- risks wore at a nininum.
tn-r.f r , y.y I -nsur - t-.-t y u xe- fully in acc r with -xp-rinOnta-
n humn be - boon t oath. Is th t y ur

feeling?

a. X'-s. Ih-so uer©n*t ay =';ns$ -riti ns at tr. t ;i _ but those

4974


C iTt I


25 r - 16-3 - T-“- - 3r ss (Int. Rirl^r)

ar« f igulatl ns which I -.ak_ r-tr speclively.

toll, at i\: .t pTrticul'r ti»:o di y u think it p^rrissiblu
v uxp«rl-;unt n hara buin. s nh h. o-.n c n'amt: t. death?
a. It wasn't up t -a ocido -n th-t.

Q. Sjw, tr-i.sc, particular in dvi ’uals that wore supp.sadly c n-
-’.oin.-: t ’oath but subj-ct-. t- oxporinents, wep- they v luntuurs?

... I cann. t say that. 1 conn t say whoth^r v.o p_ plo edneomod
hod tho epp, rtunity t- Cool- j tn-isolv^s r whuth.r th-y w-ro assignee'
in -Vs.ry case f r tr.at purp s«..

li, n u can r_cn-L *> - rf cur.-nt which was intr ducud hero
by Pr s-cuti n hwrein Hi- i-r state.’, in substance, th:t a an nay
b- per:' fWr b-ing subject. s-v-ro oxpuriscntption, end he
ua.d thu f 11 -.in 3 1-r.^u. , u . This >s D cuaent 19723 IS which is n
p ;o 6ii Ji* D -CiCont 3 k 2, and it is ir secuti n exhibit 51. This
- curent was f r- ad by y.u t the Chief x’ Security P lico ir. tho
3D ans oIs t, 3- fuehrer Qluooks. Paragraph 3 f tho ' cuasnt

status: "t nai -ri:., he i r. c n-ir.ut icti n 1 tho he rt tho
exponent sh ulbo oyjci ideally «?. I ite- in such •. nunnor as <*
detondno whether those :.-sn c.uld bo rocallod t life. Sh uld such
an oxporiixmt succo,« n, f c arse, the «rs n.c n «smoc t loath,
shall bo par ... rhti n ccnp :* r life." ll n, thit ic wh t

.r. he = id r. .,.rs r. oxpwriaantu/ up n c ul J . bo jnrtljnod.
1:. , -- r, * dll . an .r. if ho survives, if

y u cr_~. r_cali hi by r«c r .ti n .* vt t have y u, th.n ho .any be par-
r._ .. Is t. t rm t c- -ant?

-• t t, in I c-.n s:y n chin,
furt -r than -h..t : .e cu.r«r.t sh.-.-s.

■i. oil, r. , ‘ _n / : * t it Is y ur .ini n that it is

-rnissib' e t »x - .ri_ ont n pars as c r .a. t oath, uhat ab ut
* acu P l.s and Husr; v.s t .* --re us--: .t D-chau ..torein y u sent
ins true ti r.s t .izsc-^r st tin.-, tint this car n r aruiesty i n t
•fpl:-' - * l-s ar., ibisaians'i


t575


C-Ult I


25 ---- h 7-ix - 1 -U - Lv-:- - ir.ss (-^r.t. Easier)

... I transmitted this dir.ctiv^, acc r:in._. t ay r :ors, t.
furich .nancies. That is n t ay .to J ccisi n.

• jf u transmitted this t the Munich ..ger.cics vor y ar signature
didn't y u?

-«3. But that is a 'lr-ctivo by HlanUr.

*«• Y u fcn w I n t5.ee thr ujicut tnuso ’ cuaunts whenever y u
wui*e authorized t.- d s aething by Hircler y u always started f y:ur
letters, r c .bios, r telegrams, r Whatever it nay bu, with language
sinilar t. thw f.li win,,: "By r ^r f Seichsfuohrer-SS" r "The
Reich^fuchror-SS request a this" p "the Roichsfu-hrer-SS requests that".
Hero lr. this cable y u i r.'t refer t any r.quest r r or f the
Roich3fuo'.rexvSe. Y u at ir. this ' cuaont, which is D cvnont
19712;S, which is fv s-cuti n inhibit 53, page 6 f D cuswnt 3o k 2 -
"Toletypj t 33-Cfc.rsturnfuehrer Schnitzler - Uurdch. fluasw Inf riu
33-Untorsturafuenror Dr. Rnsehor rith r.g.ird t his teletype inquiry
an instruct! :r. . ivan a n© ti-o ag. by the i^ichsfuehr .r-3S c ncorning
t««t pera ns *. es r. t apply t i l»s an Russians." H .
y.uworo s.n.in; i r. t ?. sener ins true ti ns t t the Roichsfuchror
iss’j^ Sevural r. is rwooks .g.. Did y u c.nsult idth the Roichs-
fuehrer at this tlrw b-f re sending tnis cablegram?

... any 1 a„ .in sou the text he teletype?

• D y u r. .Vu D eta .at B :«• . 3, taw Gwr .n c py? Farf n no,

K . 2.

r. RuMLLRt It is D-'cunent 3 k . 2, "r. Hardy.

*• *fnt pa jU is it?

■*. Pago 6c f the iJnglish. D.-cur^nt 8 . 1P715FS.

v n. I com t fin: ' it in this b k.

•

• .iell, wo will s n r.

“• I can answer tfcw qu-ati c -r. n t c nc^rncf rith
irecti 703 that . .v_.-. rooks _ . This teletype sac subid.ttod t:
ii.; lor fc.. .£. I oa sur© that I i n't rwfvr t any ir_ctdv, which
a. bawn given -Jcs in t.. t ohiractw-r.

4576


C urt I

25 ..ar L7-.-. - 16-5 - LJG - Or 33 (Int. Raalcr)

«. .ell, thon t was Kivl-r's r-as nir_; balin' his r -r that
this :_r.-sty i'. n t apply •- 1 - l-s an.'. Russians. Di'n't Hirmlor ccn-
si _r that P 1-3 ani Russians ~-ro huaan beings?

.w. i cam t that. I canB t Ju.ge wh t he ball aver’ r whet

ho .er.tofi t -xpress. 3 in all cas-s I nly rr.tj it cl tm - *h~t his
Cucisi.-ns wero, He r-v-r saw any re as n f.r Justificati n*.ut Wb tovor
ho .r’.oroda


Z.977


25 :: r'- . 7-—-i?-l-“orrc-: (let. te nlerj
Court So. i


q He*.., 'i Hirrl.r ,var cloak you with the authority to issue orders ax


directives in his ibsor.co?


So, I never ha that authority. During ay entire tL.u of duty. I never
oade any decision or. ay cam initiative and I never issue 1 any ’Arectivos. Evoj
in the cases *..hich concerned letters loalin with v.,lfaro questions or sinil^i
contents, I qnly acted after a decision was taado by Hir.nler an*, only then sun
letters to th. v-.ri'uc v'encios. Of course-, th t -loos not include preparatory
clarification of !^ubtful questions which woul! only enable a decision on the
part of Kiralor.

q Ho.., he nany letters an *. r-port3 ; r nonth ’id you rocoive in Hinnli.
office? You st*.to that you sent out about thirty-five hun'r.. 1 letters a nonth


How nary -A' you receive, approxiivatoly? Round fi ures, doctor.

A That is very hard to say. I think the in ?in,r nail was about 50* nor
oxtonsivo than the out in. nail. That is. If 1 take an avcr.a'o of thirty-fi
hundred as outfoirv* nail, or~ has to tak- into account about five thousand i
fjoin • letters.

a oil, non, I have no tic.- \ tnrou, hout all the .kcunonts wo havo hero

your ncr*j th»r;-n, and fccunonts that were *>nt t t:. Reichfuchror's
officu on', r.parts that these r-:?rts wuro ‘1 recto I in a lar o majority not t
tho Roichofuehrer hincolf but th- Chief of the Personal Staff, R udolf bran it.
How, a .roat racy ?f thuso inccntr. lett.rs w_ro addressed to you, wero thoy
not, in ycur pc3itian?

, on I boor! Chi.f of Personal Staff. I was nova:

f r I jTs r.al staff. It was kncr.n. that I was sitiin- in Himlor*a antoxxx
nothin ■ about *-oplo writin ao. "’hen, howo\ thoy di
writ tt at *• 1 an aa. That was fjoiwrally kne

I ujj, an* y.ur nv becr_i synoxtn. us with that of Hi=Mlora? Is
that ri ht?

A That is nvt what I want to express, *hen I aasirt rod "by order of Hir.
th. ers-n concern- ’. ii’ p-rhaps net turn tc Ht-arler ;--*rs maily, but would tu
t- r.. without kr. dr. (a) what position I h.i » or (b) what caused Hionl r t*
sk n: to si r. the letter,

un


25 March UT-^.TD-IT-S-Sarrcw (Int. Rainier)
C=urt Ho. 1


3 Tell new, you received approxiaataly six th.usnnd letters per nonth.

How did you determine what letters Hinder sbroil * soe? -Did yon ;ivc Mrs the
whclo six thovsand letters each nonth?

A I don't understand ycur question.

q ''ell now, approximately six thousand letters per month cane into your
office. ..rythin that was a ‘Irossod to you or cane to your office was for
Hirclor, not for ?.u !olf Brandt. However, Rudolf Brandt received thorn and
Rudolf Brandt than forwarded then to Hinaler. Do yew tall no now that you for¬
warded to I tinnier each and every letter that was rocelvoi in your offico or
'id you dotornino that Hirr.lcr 'i 'n't want to seo sea- rf than, was disinter¬
ested in the contents f so:i 3 of thorn, ani loci to to act on then yourself or
to aond than to a subor !in.',to to apt >n, or Id Hfcnlor, in oach instanco r did
hj roooivo the latter whatever it any have boon an! road it hinsulf?

A Ho, ho di ’n't road ttora all hinsolf.

Q I don't Jjtafine to ooull, Dootor, cculd ho? Ho was a very busy nan,
wasn't ho?

A Ho was c Tory busy man, but ha roaorro ir. • very case, the decision
for hinsolf task tc submit thaso letters t . ithcr tfivci

then to bin anon:: the nail that to had to road cr roport than to hir. verbally.

q '.ill than, tow Id you totwi-dnj which letters to -ivg to Htenlor?

A 'oil I really !i’n*t mk any listdncticn. I submitted ovory caao to
Hinaler. I only examined before bar. thor aiy i tfbl questions h

to bo cleared up in or lor to enable a ooision by Hirrlor. But afterwards,
finally, the 1 :tt.r was always subrdttc ! to Hi*::lor.

a 01 thin, y i hi’, to roa’ th lott.rs y ursolf tc tote mine that and
to a lvisa Hi l.-r if ottor letters ha! boon rocelvoi on the Sana sublet,

'i’dn't ym? *

.. Toe, for that juti'csq I ha.! an official who a rto ! with ne and who
t--k part if th. bur!:r. of this ork. I coulnt ; rssibly that alone.

Q That *3 rirht ar : HL-rlor coul’n't to it aloe either, could ho?

A Hb.


U.-Tf


25 ::-rch 1;7—..7?—1 ?-3—arrow (Into Rossl-ar)

Curt Hr. 1

0 Then, C3 a ratter f fact, actually Himl.r a 'n 1 t know any more than
you know about these exparinor.ts?

A That is 3cojthin - -ntiivly !iffer_r.t 0 -i—lor personally info rood
hiasdf about the exp- rlc .r.ts, I !±'r.t infoxa ryself about then I explaino
yost-.r'-’.y that ary such reports -hieh oftc caul' rcco~niXi> iiac-diatcly as boir
ao ileal reports or after roa ‘lr. t!x_ first para raph r after 1 okin;; at tho
address, such reports wero always included acony thu uail which ho had to
real. I was la! f r everythin I Udn«t have t road that,

Q -oil now, ycu stated also In direct examination that appxoxinatoly

thirty-fiv.; hundred lottors r^re written oach uenth in your office, an ! new :

stato that about six thousand were receive’• 1*11 -xssuno thoso are roun-J

ft uros. An* ycu r. re r loss dab rat-.ly explain^ ’ to th. Tribunal in firuro*

that out of throe th*usnn: thxro wore only setw cne hundro! and ton iocumonts

intr uco! horo by fch- . rasecuti r. .ertftinin to apical -.xperiuunts - of
which sons thirty si- no! by Hiiralor, socto sixty si r.ed by Brandt, u in-
ten.ijd t: create th. impression that thJso *.;_-ro tdnor natters cooparod to th
ovor-all picture in y nr office, an' as those lottors 'i l not contain any
crininol activities an’ because of the ce.all quantity f thoso letters that
yu cay hav. roa! th-r. but y;u pas3 ' cv.r th r. an'. i 'r.*t realiao th- crlT.ln
nature because y u w-rc a ■ busy, Sr.., is that the tree picture?

A Approitiaatcly it is correct*

■a full r. . h • ad out all those other orlidnal .ctivitius other than
m Heal experiments? Say that th so nodical axporinonts were rdnor an ! that
everythin.; c-lso was nice ar. oo! an* cloan-cut work that HUnlcr's offico
on i_o-l in like ottin* fruit Juices for pro.rn.ant aothers, rottin; special Hi
l auctions f r t!ds 3S car. an that 33 nan, takin cu\ f families? fhat nbov
such thin s as th-- "fH.-r action 1 *? Do ycu recall the propa an da put out by
Co y . Is .d’erein be publish- f literature t.' nad speeches that Anorie.ans and
• British r ,ro "terror fliers" ar.* than, in bio course, an order was issue!

roby th. police ~.ro instructs 1 hot t hin der r r. t tc stop tho Sormans
fr-- .aduflin th. Ai.rc :r step th Gerrans fr r tibusin• the fliers and
v dually lynchin* then? do , ..a y . f~q 11 iar with that activity that wont


thr u '.i th_ office • f Higgler?


25 'krch U?-..-..I3-17-w-Xurr'w (Tat. -omLir)
Court JJo. 1


A That is a mtt-r which boloncoi to the; Juris ’icticn of the police,
krvrr that a ocur^nt ii available. Soaothin; that I an sure you aro cin tt
sutait toDj,

I certainly m. Gc ri ;ht shoal*

A ,i doeuaont which I si n, alshoiL h I practically ha-’, nothin to Jo
with it, ,.nl hero a. air. is aneth-r caao ’ here qy nano is to bo found*

q '..oil than, Sector, you ednit that you passed or. the "flior or lor"? It
that ri ht?

.. :-li a r prir.cl. ally only sigmd one cojy or, nt tha aost, two copies.
Vhonevor copies bo istributod orvonj hi her SS, in' polico loaders, ’

those copies woro either si. no by tha pelice, a’Jutant, chief a 'jutant, or
ew, .an • th-n transiaitto 1. That Li, they woro si 1 an* thjn th^y want on in
norrvxl channels In Berlin. The ctocunont which you aro oin.- to subndt to no
falls within tho cjcpotor.cy of the police. It was ttctatcl by Kiroler, and *
;ccctr.pnryin lotter also cri ir.atos fren Hirt-ler on thu otror. th of which hi
rior was tranxdttut, Tho socrotary, probably by -'r’.-.r of 'iimlor prepare:
the letter for si -nature, and I tii «n si -ac ' it,

Q Have you s. jn this locus: nt sinco your arrival hero in JJurr.h r ?

Yob, I have soon it in ’\>rnb.r . Last yoar.

1 Last year?

To3, last year,

1 Y.:u xurv-rd>.r it quito well?

.. Yes, I Ior.'t knew -ho a3koI no about it, ..t ary rate, it was shown t"
an 1 I was asfre ' how this r ler cri lnat. ,

1 Toll then, y a o aladt that cne !iu '.olf Bran It passed on the "flier
r .ir", Vm*tycu?

.. jll, there was nothin _lce I ccul' do*


25 -*".rch-WP-l6-l-L-ascr (Int. B-cl^r)

Court I

Q. noli, ti;- 1 indie t-5 th t th. office i-. wir.ch you worked vr-.s net onl.
engaged in *jdi.-J. _-x,-rLa_r.t-tion corr_s..ondcn=-; th.y h'd oth-r f. nga
ttot w.r- cqu-Uy -,s shidy. C-.n yo t,lU~ Tri jun-l About £o.- of th-
corr-soor.--jr.c- th t you handled conc-r. n idn- oin o: Cz-c. .oslov.tki.-Ji

childr-n?

A . The conclusion which y.«u r- dr-win, -1 t 1 conc.nud yself vith this
is .rroti-ous* Ir. th- c s. of tola Fly-r Orc-r nil copios v.ould irv. h-.d to
be destroyed in order to obt mttu ciy.-tur- oi the rolic- .djui nt. I think
th-t wool.* h-.vu b-».r. tn. corr.ct .roc-dur. nnd 1 wish tn t thnt vould lrvo
bo-r. done. Jut ior r- isons of t >in , -rx 1 So rot Know wh-.t tot jrocodur-
w.o, why Xin 1 -r n to idgnt.irs l-ttor j-fo. th. couri-r trriv.d, out I

ior- rot-oly wna no cu to cnrji&w tris roetdur- th-n. However,
this si&nr.tur-. coos not in any c~.s- zilov th. co:.cluaion th*.t tija a-tt-r led
anythin) to dc wlto .-a: t-iak.

Q. oil, of court., you refill*- tone this ly-r Orctr • scri innl in
r. lure, ' It w-.s • br--ch oi -v . »r, I sn’t it?

A, 3 Curt-inly did not entry out or-.r. I Just si,,n»d ay nnoo on
. dl lot -v-n th-n «--> *•.- * •

1. .11, yov fr.rr.d it on to -.1 Ki r £-* nd Police to-'.ra, ith two

oth-r oovor lottoro, one to .1 i-. ..r Si rnd .olic- Loaders «.bir-in you
:• . t "I ufldofl- doors v ore'-, o, t - - «fod«W-8! vdth the request

th t th- co _.“r'-rs of to- const-.bul r. r.c of th- s.cirit;. pol c- infora-d
wd that iti-y p-ss it. on v-rb lly to t •- : or i to offices, •urtlwraoro,

• . id,s.iv.hr-r-i r.qunste th t t . - co p- -rt iu c-'t.rs be iniorr.d

81r Ction." -D , : ur. Au ol r ndt# ..r<d

. il - ttor h- r .sc-.’ tc - .1 SS Divisional Chiefs. *ot ;-.v c-gr inly

tr- th co .- nt of tn*t /ly-r Or'-;, di n't you?

... i. -L 'S', clc .r diet t ion b Hie- 1 -r end -.11 1 & ' v,~s put ay sign-,tv

rr..- ti: it. i not dictate ti: l.t ;r on =&• own initiative

-11, . * ill f-O on. Doctor. do ;:u k.ow -bout the ;..r -.niz-.tion

. Jz.c 'csiov kim children?


49'2


25 -•.rci:-..-Jr-l>-2-Loscvr (Ini. fi ri-r)

Court I

.. tit. .... i "ooi-t it.

q. -1! I till suteit to /cu Docir-nt So. ::C—1*35, vhich I -ill mark for
identification, 'our Honor, s rros-cvtion Jcf^bit !i65, S6« t s 1-iWr is
dated 13 'uno 191 ii# in rr-gue, fro. the i-r_n ‘inistor of S.-tc for ohcmin
or rusocd to 8S-StTntertw.JTu-ijr*j Dr. Br-ndt, -ersonrl Staff,

Rcichsfu-iircr-Sc, riel Cost n iO-t.

"Oc-r Co r" l \'r ndt:

"Co..ocr ...it'-.o .. ttcr 'c il r^n of .Xi.c ud Czechs' 1 Tfish to reply
to your lottor diroot t - ppoitfuchr-r ?: ud 6 , 2 . o. this

y ir - iary i.viwx o. 26/2/uii g 'r‘A, tb t th. conversation oetweon
£i-0b-r rupp.r.: c r.r r'r’nk -a 1 anrrtcnfuohrer Sollmnr. took pi ce on

July 2 ol l-at y “r in rr gue. S. and.-.rt-nfuchr or Sollnann st-'t-d during this
convora-tion tb racially v.lu bio ch-10r-;i u> to six y.-.re would )- c- wide.
..li 6 ibi. by ' • naborn 1 . In in'i.vi-'util c-soo ev.n dll ren up to 12
years couir’be opted, but cx^ri-r.haa uv>-t., be. -v^r, t!rl .’i .iiculties
oul'l arise in ovch c's.o, *h.n ptir.. o. - -.roan f-uaily.

"Th. cc -r oi t e Security ,allc. "n t'v SD me instructed the
Sup.rlor St «- olice Offices, nenn v. :r to, to brie, jout - r-gifltr.itio;
of Czech childr.n, rhoae p r ntr r..r. -XeC te.I vn-’or m-rtial 1 u: or had died
:n concentr - tlon c’ p.

"It rrus in to n- - to hav- c-il r... u; tc o ir. y.-rr an.’ suitable for
gur -niaation broi -t into >.r. w n . :~ii.er t.<r?u . tba 'lebonaborn*. Th- other
■, ..r. a j- rr ..t into n . Lly,

• -r co o houp- collcctiv-ly BOxWere ou-ai - thu rrot-ctor te, in order
•o •. _ pt, a coll-ctiv.- ro-oduention."

further. (>ew tiB. rrtt-rr v.r. of
- : - rr. tc- ur . ice in adriticr. e. t-5. uinor crirlmi nr tt_rs pertaining
.-’ic"! -r...'_ciri.nt" tion, r.rcn’t they?

Ir. no »v at all.

•• a*^ is this f 11c irttir., tc you?

.. . . _ it is f roc— by n of nicraler to Sollrrnn and


4^3


(Xr.t. ?.'_icr)


25 ■* rd;---J:-lj-3—L : -er
Court I


£olla-0n, n tii. 21st cf June. 1>'!;3, >-retw -e ' i: ..l_r. SolLaruin is h-r-
a-r-1y ivin-, - r* ort to Hi; 1-r ic he. E-nt to for h- knev th-t this
r-port wrcl *t any rat- get to Hinbl-r. Th t is th- reason why ny offico
had nothin els- to to but recoil t . .-b.-r twn subelt it to Him.dor
and than ;'ir. rec.iv • trana it it. ... s is cn-

of the eases t'. t dc not to Ion tc it ractic-ly. •

3* The letter is dir-»s* to y.u, is it .ot?

... fes, tut it v-.s a. nt for .litl.r.

•}. Xorr, .'octor, i you ki.or »hor. this ....

•w In v ition, I s-e now, t >i£ l-tior concerns the acco-e-nodation

•

of children who hrv lost tn.ir p* rents bocrus- oi their p'rents h-ving b.on
cxcucto ! fay rti-.l law. in t reelly is not an iihuaono activity if th-3u
children -.re iiov an n e-red for.

fpu knew -11 -brut tho activity, r-ver, before ren i this
-ccunfant, didn't yea?

•i. x didn't Jeno anythin^ r.faoir it.

Q. D?ocor r ..‘t, «f. t u . above t * *rsaw Un-t o ..-tim?

... I .. Vw n recoll-ctlor. - -.Hi

^I• You never Jwnrd oi tv. Vara _\jtto ..c ion, ih.rein t’ey raced tho
Ch t’-o '.t Varst* -r. they re-rove': sc-.. 50,OCO puopl. th-refroa; rtfi-r-in 10,000
or >.tt.r rere kille'* — you fi-ver t^-.r ’ o. : .• • in ;.c*ir c parity on tho person
?*• ■. oi Hit- "lor?

*w 1 don't . u~ o-r it.

.. That -s 30 . nor of t-_ ccrr-sjxr cnee th't you Just -rely looked nt
•-r. L.t it . by, is th t it?

::.si erin to- nua.r us correa p.-r.dG:>co, ... - ssibly r -.rb.

- _ #-
IV • -.1 V -iis.

- -- -- were goig to rcoovc the ghetto

■

- -r so c 50,COO people, vh - . t. c usi.'.re ' sub-hur.* r., to a cor-


c • ? It se-as to be a ere:, .fi port r.t thing to b_ pas sir; treu,--


-


?5 _ rcu-..-Jr-l-5-a-^sscr (Int. ?. I-r)


Court I


... oil, 1 can't r-r-.-o^r it

IQ. HlEDTr I h-/_ ’noth.:* docut-nl, Y_:r for. r, which I wont t- put
tc th. \lta.sc in the s -no aannerrs tn- f.rst one. forever, I have only the
original cosy, rtaich I will lot th" -f.no- svns-1 p-ruc whil- I an going
into the ether sub t first nt.

Q. Sow, lector, going bade t t . nc r loJge oi tb- witness, !eino,
you set. e t...ycu agreed tht ein. kG-W n thiny bout tr._

-xp-ri d_nt» end knew :i thin t b ut tho work jf Hirt, *r. * vh-n h- vrret- the
letter r- ar:ln2 th- transfer of Grin -, th t h- h-* r.c knowlc-V- of ~ny of


• tJ-t competed thereto* '-lev I rsk ycu to read slowly till8

.r v.e t . Tribal so tn't th- interpreter ..a; follow you.

... "D- r c • . i . vers* il-'S- -st >lls. ant .ct : quickly -a possibi
Kith bS-3.1j' - i.. ’’.r Sod •••’j:r ... 1 of .olic-, Dr. G-rla.'f? SS-Ob r:

Qyupp.tfuohr-r Dalv.g- told Rcic^fV .Vr-r-c~, n the 12th of • ,, thnb i~s

:.V '. IhiS

. pt&tvr fuehrer lro/essor hirt. In
• -tion, SS Kauptstureftehrer eLa. ill sh-rtly Irv. scn-tt.in., t L.ll you


ut i v-ro-lly."

q. ilex irill j u r. <’ tr. t l*:t c~-.UAB«. -. tin?

... "In ' iti n, St-Haujititvr \.lr.r e ... » ill sh.rtly have ®o -thing
t-11 y a ab <-t it v-rb lly."

t. H JUJY» This gain, Your 3 nor, is t b. cff.r-:' os SO-1368, Vro~
n ■ bit -. U6L, an when I have acquired the n-ccs -v - • -

co i for i vr.tific'ti.r.

. 11 , now, rio -ur t . t you sign-r, an th .-.-nlion

r in., - ft - -ill rep rt r. r c U> -.r. v.rb lly .n tii-se
• . .rs, ...»t y-u think t:_ •-'i truss —u, i 'nsr-r t iy qu--ti-:is in cross
■ :n *.. ri, r.s -ir-g - lit-1. bit car-loss with th- truth?

'ut c ncluaion cannot oe 'roam*


4tt>5


25 - .-^ 3 - 15 - 1 -: ^-'r. ?. —lcr)

Court . 1.


Ho, in ro,.£rd to tne Uarsav -ction. I h re only one do ur.cr.t tb .'.

1 vis., to a vc you identify in order to refresh your rocolivct on. I would
liko ; h vo you road tale document, which you forvrrdoi to 3bercru\ncn-
fuehrer l>iO£er; Just that one p*-;e. doetor. X would like to h .vo you re r
tfccc o..t loud, doctor.

j_. "I order the institution of a concentration nun in tfco 'fr.ctto of
V_rsci/, all Jews livir-: in Varsav vill so transmitted to the concentration
cp.n. -t is prohibited for Jova to work ir. nriv. to concerns, “ho riv-.tn
concorno existing up to th..t momont oxistinr in th. Ghetto of «\r-».v will
bo t.’ nsforrcl into the concentration cn~p (Reich enterprise)...."

> P rden . o. Just . moment, roetor. iill you brir., tho document t*
n r,;or-nc ao I c-r. look it over; I thick he is rerdir..-; the wro nr. document,
r, zouf.r, whoa you r-. A thet will you includo t..o dr to and tho hod lln.J
rod :h. td;ol« Socuuvnt tnruh?

.. !, 1 j Jobnuiry, 19 CC... I cannot red the re it of the year.

1S--3-

I. "ljUj, "o t.;c 2\ t .nor Ler.dor of the SS or/ F'lico, Zrst, SS t*-
r*x :oofttflEiror Krueger, Cracow. per re< sons of oocurity, I ordor thet i :o

Thotto of V. rnnw bo rnsod after tne concentrr.t n cr.jp hno boon trr.r.cforrp...
wr.urnby 11 tnc vdIuaoIg property of that Chotto v-uld h vo to be ox.-loitoh
roforo r xirv, tr.o Sfcotto to tho ground. Tho rarin to tho ,.round of tho
thoUe mod tho transfer of t.-.e concentration cc. _> 1 = noeoennry, for yrobabl;

v :• otherwise novor bo poo alb le to £ot Vr.rcnv quiet. Cri.drrlo c.-nr.et
:e ext. rain. tod ec lo.v; as t.ie ghetto ctill exists thor ». A plan in to bo
ucrdttoc. it ;;o for the ruling of tho Ghetto. Ir. ,r. - czc it hr.s to bo
nchidvoA, :.i t t— houaliy apace, which vac availehlo for hfC.CTC oub~.v.mn
i.-_ • -r, :: that period of tino, utd which would r.ovor be euitablo^or
> r aa ao exterminate! fro . the face of tuc cath »>ni V^rcaw the city of
.111 nc, •£’.*cn w-.s nlwr -s .1 ce for disinte^rat.'on *ad rioto, bo mrdo
ulcr.»

J. tr.t 'a . ieti-r by H—l-‘r to Ob or. rupjo nfuol.ro r Krueger. and 1 cent


1 *. :<.r a' .... Chief 0 : Socnrit; . -ice.


o : r-_- g_:~ i£a-;.j-uu.n (stsEior)
Cour; : . 1.


v v ir si^arturc likewise a.:r.cara on thr.t Docunent; doesn't it?

• Toe, .-5- ei.^ ’-ure unfortunately appears on any latters; tn-rc u

tot Ji I coaid do about tn t.

Y- don't kr.ov 1 nythinT. rtov*. tnet do_u~on; or tho Vnrcov action
eith,r: .ceaac?


. Cao'i everythin, t t r-*=r,ed tiu-.u,h y or hr.nds; you Just el ncA il
1 nd 1 i it or. thr?;; y a v rc not eron lntorsetod in roadl; it; io


:h-: ri t?

... I h 4 so tl_o to r .-d tnonj I a. d too ouch work.

1. 2»m -11 those crl.rJwl lettore, end wo could introduce thousand*

of otk but v. don't a.v«o tho tiao. roctor. ?«-od thrown your hands
unnoticed?

'y c. unfortunate!? thrt io rl^fct.

V V 11.- no- when wore you ajpointud’ chief os? tho poroonnl do rt

01. f,h o. r.ol staff?

. P-'-iol of tho po.&Oi 1 8t ff?

tjiicf Of t..v Personal IV- 'tao.it in the »;raonnol atnffT
. wan nov„r offici lly «;i oiotod to that position. Yooterd ; :
trier- : or It.in tunt tale Aooi,n f n aoly ’p rcon l rvforont 1 wo ’ d;
er- t.d fir tucahicnl ro..«Qno for’tno table of or,-sain tier. of tho -yersonne
nt--; r/ ..it h//penod ir. tho year 1937 or 1 ? 36 .

' now, vi.cn SlaUar wi •. ointed na llttl tor of tht Interior,
you rhea Miantod the Job 0: -dnlstorinlmt; Ai.'r.'t ou, in tho Kinietry
of eht Jns.r or?

w . r v a Ib^Hoelonm. nrct before tr.nt and cix eonths lctcr I rn
routed to the rrnie of .ini at. rial rat.


«.9 7


- *>-20-1-. : / . .. ---1 .r)

Court He. 1


.oil, n.w, -.s .Inistcrid drecter in the .inistry cf the Interior,

*.ru ytu in chrr-e f c icprrtacnt?

, v X had Cl -vile:! .anistcrirl Office un -r sc. Th::t ^3

the piece whore natters free the -Inistry zt the Interior w nt tc Hi r.
r. !Ic> toll a-, her. aany*canityccs were there in the -inistry. ei

the Interior in Gersnny, Th.us'n'.s, weren't there?

.. In the ministry cf the interior? I hr.vJ nc i’cf h*w *ny there


v«<*rv, there..

* *,,011, nev, the Jinistry of th. Interior w:s the lor -at e oncy
in th- j.uich, n-sn't it?

A I dtn't kno th-.t.

He* erny Jiniateri"! /iroctors id they hr.ve in this .liniatry

cf the lotorit r, i y -u knew?

..I n't that either.

/ -i ru tra sure th-re v.ren't sere thrr. five r ten liinisteriol
Idrcctcrs in tho Jinistry cf the Intoricr?

.. I c rt*t 'iv>• ; u the naS -r ec.-ua- I ’--n't knew it.

ell, y u Were Jinif.terir-1 dx-octcr in nn cr . nizr.ticn thrt hei
ads end th.ua-n'.s -.f eaplcyeoa, ei 1 ur.: rat nd it. It is t pretty

l jc> fer cxi fficc ’ y aten, rnjher, isn't it?

.. I wre .inisteri-lr 5ho»o 6 T 0 two r-nks * -lev ilinisterfr.1 .ire t


-ireettr.

401,0V .ister. , thoro wortfi't aanj , , re thcro?

.. Ther- Ti-re «,uite o nun er f these.

leu vor- Chief f the e; rt=_nt, th-u n, v-rui't yeu?

.. V,;, it ~y hr.Ve h • t• uter ", ’r ue-. In re-iity I h'.d
three experts w. ndn there on; aid their -x ; -rt opinions wild; 1

: t. HL-el-r.' I »-c- .-my * » i* « U-i ".r»» Int.r fcri.,-

rn-: th. ■l.himtlcn "He- : cl th. -imijUrltl Ofllsf crcr.t.s » wen'
ja/.rcsBi.n. Vr. v.r, th.re ..re Just =» fc lrttcihcti. r.rJin- "KctJ
t f the- -didst_ri*l Office" -.5 there were 1-ttorhcr s r-.din "Chief cT

" ..11 f that sh.- asv rv cl-rrly th t tho fcsi-sintlm


.'rch 25-..-..Z-ZG-2-. ut(Xnt. .

Court Xc. 1

ir. theraselves ere net -t -.11 in cccordmce with th- ijpertenee cf the pc-aitit
wai; -Yt"r j u • !ani«terir.lr:t; ’i 4 - y.u continue in

year position r.s lers.nnd ■.c;.crtm..r.t .Chief in the SS?

.. Yes. That rrr. fcrrll-1 t cy th-r 'uti.s. This Just extended raj'

work.

Bei li t y.u happen t© -v_i., r. Lrandt, in- tc the frcht ani
aervin in the front with the .:XfeB-SS like every 1 SS nrn hr.i t. do?

.. I didn't quite urv erat-Tv* the question.

H.w lid y.u r.vci I ein sent tc thcft".nt t :i ht with thu : -.ffen-SS
like every c . ‘ SS tu n h-1 t. '.. -rt one tia- cr rjvth .r?

.. Piratly, Himlcr kept no. Secondly, I prrtiei »c cnnpnlnn

in Greece r.lth the Lei oten^eU With the rrnk cf rn Ovcrachcrffuftbror.

f. hhy -lid Kl-uel.r trier thr.t y u U retained in jvur r-.oiticn -nU not
8ent t the fr.nt tc fi ht with the fen-SS?

.. I p-n ivu y.u n. -xyirr.rti.n f.r th .t,

• 1*8 it • ec use cf the -lutieS which y.u fulfill-i on'. the lr.r c
• urdcr. ef Kcrfc y u nsae « : - 1 -r, tr.-t y u u.r. iV-io.-cnar* lc?

I tc ay wtrk since the j r I hiU. He know thr.t 1 w'c o
-t hid dLarea-4 fix* a-rnin until Irto nt ni ht. H- knw thrt I never
utt.rcl rny requests, rr. I th-t .r ' : ly io the ro-s n why he kept me there
cC us- 1 llevi tod his werfc. _

:.i in't the vitness iein< ?VU thrt y-u left *nl n-r. wry f r one ci
tw. d-ya, -n’. Hialor s-nt cut r. SOS ftr y-ur return?

.. I n't rur.ea ,r th t. I Wt on ■• r ut it.

hh t i*. O’ cr ru; cnfuehr.r ‘.-If h--ve t d. wit;, ycur securing
;:ur Jo’ with Kinal -r?

.. then in thu yl> r f IWL I ; cicn c. t . th r. .ency A th Chief cf

• •

Jrnuory, 1V3 h when Hin 1-r spent tr cr three d.ya in . rlii.. Wolf, t
th-t tir.e rX-ler’e cdjutsnt, h llir. th renk ,f : SturaL/nnfuehrer, told
i Ivr hr ! sent his cleric t - Fuehrer sc*. 1. - furtheraorc

— aXjXxfcrt'-onB. Sinca Hinnier


UT9


Mr Ah 25-..-: ('-20-3-:---y (In-, .u-ahler)
courti


hr/. '-CCS. s'tisfivd with sy ..rk, ’...If 'sk-d ae I *-uM 1 e inclined

u .tie Himlcr's office rt lainich in crier to work for hi= there I
a r_cd t- that, and in this srnaor went tc Hinder's office.

* c y wU Knes that C -r Tupacnfuchrcr ..eld t-lls us thr.t hi was
instrua.nt-1 in ettin • y:u ycur Jc? with the I.-ichsfuehrer? He further
..CCS sc far as to say thet p-rfcr.pe the only indispensn' lo nan in the SS is
Uuddf r-nclt. 3: . .u c.ncur with th t?


In no way at all.

r Fcr that ruiacn - cr is that the fecUn- th t Hinder hr :i in kcopinc
ycu nn*i net rllcwin ycu t? serve with the tr::; s in the fr.nt?

That I ca out e is net the reason. That is ex- .1 only «Mid

ny duty. I w/s in .ustrieuc, -n Hircler knew it.

r How, jeotcr, in r- on’ tc thus, affidavits th t y u hrvo executed
in lehalf cf tho Ir.socuticn prior U the ir.v.sti Mien cf this ease, 1
wish tc  y.u - f-> qucstx.ns. tfMMff* rn .affidavit r. su'rittci to
you fcr y ur si nature, y u tv 1 the opportunity tc rur.. it, Ain't ycu?

Yus. I *lro- y aleittod thrt.

C Y.u lid read it, liln' t y u?

.. Y-.s, I re.-: it.

' la, hrd tho cp;ortunity tc nckc c.rrcctions. Ain't y u? .s,\ cn


suverol y u lid .iakc ccrr-cticns.

A Y.s, I did.

r ihj intorre M,r iln't sc luce y.u in writin these, ar ' ofct you
over the head, id he?


u M , in ... nay .t nil.

; He f.re. was used .n ycu?


.. No.

Y .u executed th: sC rffi-Avits ur/'-r -Mh, lidn't y.u?

.. Yes.

it.. H_A. I: No further -uesti.ns, Y:ur Hen r.

nis llMnST: ..re ther any further cucstirns .f this witn-ss cn the


t of any def-nse c unsol?

The Iri* unnl will ' c in r.c-ss until vFhr*

(ihe Tri'ur.al ri.'.umc' until 26 M-rch 1947 t 09>- hrs


4990


tl+l

2 q I-I-”o:t«r (Ir... voz Sc--0n3

C©ur: . 1.


Officl -1 2 " iscri^t of the ..ceric s . -itrxy
Trituc 1 2 la tie iv.tter of u. United Status
of -scric', : inat Er ri 3rrndt, ct 1,

defendants, .citti*t; nt Siircber,;, °~

2 $ inrca l£i". 3530 , J-^'.ioc 3- Is .-roaidir^.

_- -.r-L: Tdrcor-a is. ifao c.urt roou will -Ij-cj find taoir cci.tc. _

■Jhc v r.ora^lo, tao ?jdot- of lUvry r.-itun 1 I.

l-ilit r 2riVan&l I is =av iu nooaior.. tod c : vc the U-titod St ;c*: of
..ceric- .-.id. title r.or.ornblw fricutBl.

'Jhoi-s will to orlor la t.:e ora-trccc.

FllSIIH 7 : Kr. . r&al. 2 »» cacortcir. t. t the dofondiato .*.ro nil

j.roanr.t In c urt.

L: .•■•.• it il^aujour Honor, 11 dofJC ante ere proMRt la

the r-urt.

2 P.LS232 Ibo 3 oral r-'-'V-r.ur. 1 will :.n. for r..oor* t.w
proior.ee of il do!-. v i " lurt *

jo'.uv. -1 r-roeood.

TC-OL? 3 —or - Bowsed

1.1 .122.:: J» :..vr. r. : - f irtevr uccf -"oniod :o :.-.o

vltnot ISXtlf Frarilt? ,

(n . lr. fiMO of in. S39V SIM vho rci*roaor.to Uo ■> : • • "1

Zr rAt)

22 , ;- 7 LS: Prof-oatr prr.sdt aeJeod’co to ufc few nuoeii^r.c to ;.:o
iofon’i it which -ro of towel 1 l- ortonco to ni—

I7S5T: vhoa did r-u sn- roqiuetod r i to t r : hi I
2 . ."IT.: 7r- 5or.- iuo.


. ' :


csrss ire (con-.xnu-c.'


rr. ?r..ndt, is ffidarit. dunli: With tow =olcct‘ n f 0«»?


0 L I xtlculr.r, oa - 1 = sr r>. cantor of ai ter. a
lir't cr.f -iA :c. worn vail Ir.ferrod about too exporlaonta. gii*
si .ZZ- ha. -.. ..X o^Lcte. . cd it cej?a :: rl 3 madt. 3 r o

■ :


urr^S


4391


2$ C-JH-i-2-Hostcr (Inc Tonschoa)

COOT.. . 1.


Profc• ur “rrr-dt I wp.ut t* -.c y u the foliovir. question: Vr-= H r ri :r n&t,
or la Z rl Srendt to do called er. edvlsor of Hi tier, .»nd if co, on vSu.t do
you t so t le ft :t?

.. Ho ooulB not A c lied til- dritor of "i. .or

*/ = ho v.ry frequently witu Hi— l«r?

I C'X rencr.bjr only one ti-X positively th *. I sew hi:- t Hia-lor'n
h. qunrtoro.

T.Vb t..io In connoctio:: vith hu-r r. oxpericents or the selection of
coneontrr.t o. cn_? iasAt.s?

.. I le not Jci.’.v slr.c- I ii : 9mm thu rubject of the dlseail or..

*. 1 'jv you sr.y further nu-bjr of - orcor.n wore well Info rood no out tho
expe.-iuonts. V s Trofeocor ^r-.ndt included c:;»n there ..eoplo 'Aon you c Hod
tew or. tour- a of Hi:—ler who vote supposod to be well inforood7
... 1 ,*».

r.i . you lco a; .n. .-btr xentlonci oo-ilc were honboro of tho
SS-Onrrjoafuahrer corps, and tho ox- wriuo&t« v.r often discussed -v-oiy; en-
f-r-ncoo i; (Jru >nfuchrero. Idd you uvur coo Professor Prundt in r o:>-
fer-.uo of Gru penfuchroro?

. .o, I c/nnot ronotbor.

..... for :r.> s. tc.i-r.to I .ut to you. you h vo :.o fr.ctu-1 ovi'onco,
nothin. ’• lc.i cou'd Justify you in - kin,: ouch .*n cc-rtion or to ra.in.r.in it
tedry?

- V , I do not.

2 iCLGS: I tacnx you.

1 .. ’* .T'.. £ (Counsel for the Defendant P.oubjr,:):

.. VUnesr, in tho interest ef tho truth * choc d li'o to r.n . you
•- -3X1 r.n, in p rticul r, to know your own .nttitudo tow? rdc the .t otiwony

' . . ufcvo .jivor. in writing r .c well M on 11: - • t.ils trial, "ostori’ey

testified her-, that your written testimony, your--, fidnvits, w-re ci.ne-A
- mior oc.tr. without *-ny co_r.ul85on, voluntarily. In that true?

. 1 *.» s not forced f si.jn the., tut tco citui.t or. :ienflt in cf.‘ ect th t


ZUt£~.


2 r r- -5T3-1-5-rostar (voa5B<-o-j

CO-art . 1.

;• So . OU Es*.n to CT; tOAt you did not ei ; ;a t'noa voluntarily?

. I- t is difficult to cy, since ny eu.tc or hm-ltn r.t tho :i.c in
or:-'.*. — ■ 0 it iir.osaibl- for _j ,

'• Tot ^o-it t.-_.t ; ur ori»: tent . try r.ov t' ?. 1 r,o ox..at contr dicto
your vritto-. i.stiony?

... 7-j*..

3 toatit.onioev.r- und-r oath. Yu i.i; tfc/t?

.. Yoo.-

. "ov, ;nor- t..rc.j . C'sitilitioa, wither '-.ur vritton teatiiory
w j : lr.c, -r tho t. ti.iCuy v tea you iro .--i^in r.ov is ir Is-. or both r.ro
f-lao. '/.tic:, or those three oeslbilitlee do you c:r.:idcr the proper orjc?

... I ahculd iikj to cc- tart during t..o interrcp^tior.o I vne ir.trJror.
in pc. ay -x rta in tno conclusion* v.-.lch I drov fro:, the documents vhic:*. vero
o.iovn *,0 -j r«a fro:. ett-tea b(i to int-rro^.-tor.


2c tv.-"3-l-:.QBaca (7or. Sc-iocr.,'
Court .1.


ra you nw&re u : tho affidavits. vr.ich you Si 3>n repudir.to now,

c r. fc.- subsisted is o t r. _ r tri.ls in evidence?

. -inco you cut c..ia ouostion to ue; yes.

j-c. you p 1 bo aware ta t or. tu br. : i a of thtro affldevlta In other

* ]
triile i iciuro as- arise which d 0 o= r.ot corrosion?, t tho troth?

1- Yog.

. ’Jou what ic your position: do you vent to ropudir.to nil yo u - for:.Mr
u tiiOnyT

... I c r. inly ueintain tho testimony which I h vo a do hor sou.

JJoa tnu charge could lw rtletd ajsisat • ou of jcivin,; f Isj tccti- ry
under - now if tn^t ch'r/.u sho Id bo n.isod agninot you, what vnuld you
eny?

... Z did not do th. •• eoncei uoly.

*• ffhf -Jt you, I a vc no further questions.

L-'TJjHZ ’T: jo there iny further quootlons to tho vitr.ueo on hoi. If
of define- ciunod? 7h«r; tolr. ion-, tho Prosecution aoj’ ro-cross ex nino
thw uitnoss.

.3Y: I h VO no 'xu-thor questions to uc to tho witness, Your

Honor.

11 Pv SIDS 7: Th-r boir... no further questions to be proooundod to the
witness, t..c vitnoos is excused fro., tn. ot:.nd to r-suuo nis plnco in '... ''k.

Is .hero nn: further evidence to bo offered on boh/ If of the dofenrUxt
3idolf 3rr.ndt?

y ..IT.-II : 5:r. ProBidont, I should like to sub alt p few =oro

affidvita, which r.ra in document booh, rnd »o fu thor r.f idnvi.c, which

I obj v inod L tor, but there -re only three brief affidavits whicn I should

iih-j ts ro d, -r.d I shall refer tJ tnc eor.tcr.tc of :hc rest of tho “Yfidrviti>*

In «y Socuawnt booh on .,:e 2, I r-. ll ro d tao r.ffidntit of the vit:tonc

*•" lco Her .or. I identify t..i3 docuaent p.s Rudolf 3.i ndt Ho. ?: porsor

♦

• ' a 3S -o.r. ruuponfaehror and ^cr.cmi in th II ffoa SS- I a» 11 re d
'• -in with p*Tr.,;rn-.;i js

"I never knew »idolf 3r ndt to be present when I reported to ~i lor,


2o .. r-..-£.&-3-2-:.eekac (Ton Schoen)
Court . '.


but 7 - 10 v ck.t Hl—lcr c lied for Hudolf Brandt, rcag for hia, ar.d either
dictated t- .in or ,yve hit instructions."

j.’.is is .n p-eju 2 in a;- Ocrn*a Document book. 5^11 I rerd this ?ax»-
,;r K :h «\/ in? — F ragrapa k:

=.j\ l r na I could sec, it w .absolutely out of cue tion th t 5 -uidt, ir.
gpito of ..in extraordinary iciuetry, ever hid t. position of Advisor to ' i- -
lor. for th t ha v s f> r too scall and inel f ;nific nt. He had. accordir./,
to obs-rv.-tions I ado over savors! years, the oai; or. of /. chi of- cl or!:.

I Jcr.ov th : ho w.a ovorwortod. r-ciag . loyrl end industrious worker ho .out
up with boinfi burdened with no re and -ore work wale, it vns i nocalblo for
hi3 t> UCC .fills...

n; coo. d .-.ot see t.i t he was u confidant of i —lor oitfaor, for "i.ilcr
had .10 confidants, .jvyeOV, *ad .if 3r: ndt did not bolon,; to the circle of
persons u.o ivd clon«r contact vita Hi.. lor. ■

irif, t..od : should like to r<*d thu last tvo f r mpho: -I know th t
police .v.ttors veVo not dor It vita V Bodolf Sr writ. rii^ler lifted strictly
s.io c ..potonco of uis oubordlr.. toe.

"ludolf Srrnd's privt to life vuc a uoicl of .roprioty: ho alvryo wr.s
helpful find docent, rhorofo.-o, vita alo soft nrture I think that it is out
of ru..r t'..th t ho co id h.io tukoa jwa-t in any cri -on ».j»inct huv.nUy."

l.o.i thor. f-.l-ows the :l.-n.tur-- erd the certifio to.

% •

How, L chill ru d th- affidavit ef 2 r. .. .-.in on 11 of the
", r... r. Document ? 0 ok.

2 pjjv; ii 1 .- -.o "our Honor cue.. o.\ those affidavits,

< Uhtoon of the-, are in substance the 3 e. I t-ink thv.r \.y.t be a

Lore orpodiont runner teen re din,: each and ov-ry document and each and cnroiy
r r r_.'. thoToOf.

M

3w * TT? K • i*r. Frjsida.it, I intend to rood only tvo roro doeuaants,
v..ic.. .ro briof.

pu siTH-t: T-o rjuarui for the dof-r.c. . roeood.

7 •- H : Ir. rein fciys in Fara-Tc h -.

— ? ..2ID3-T: Vnr.. nuob r do you to this exhibit?


4995


2c r-.-G &-&-3-Heehan (Tor. Schoer)

Court . 1.

4

3?.. rJJ?.^ST: Rudolf 5r*rdt Jo. 4, ;.r. Fr,si:.o=t.

"I -'dc the tcquelnt-rc© of Ruri If Brandt or ;.;t occasion of cy . hir. •
reports . A-lcrafuohrer SS Hi_ler. Rudolf 3r trt - j as far -z Z could
bbo, defini CI 7 ir a subordintto position. If 2 h d known his for.vl r-nk
In the Personnel Dopartuent of “L—J>jr, I would h-ve tehee hlr for r. clor':.

I rcl to you trie as m uxRi-lo:

"In ».’c cuturr of 1-4- Rudolf Brandt vr.a crllod into th. office of tho
Spoci 1 train by niftier b’ rir- lr- c bull. I vr.s thor. together with
Hi-ulor. Jtcr having u do u; roper 1 3 to hi~, Rur-If ?rr ndt ontored the
office rnd t)Ok shorthand rot e dictated to fciu by Ki~lor. Hir.- 1 -r did not
over ask Rudolf Brandt t) toko e Boat. itood fit tho table taking noton.

9

-ftur iuivir.; finished with his dictation, Hi--l«r none .-.in out n,nin. "ha
subject o; report vi.n r. ucooe.dc natter."

ho next docununt v.-.lch I chould like to re d io the doouaont on p ;o o
of tho Co.-., n Document took, Sxhibifc SO. 5 fro - .^dlcimlmt Dr. ?-lix

s

KoroQo.). ..lo is tho oanu usa «fa03 defendant) Frofopcor Oobherdb, has
♦

one .-rod; it was t.iu “in .Ir.: doctor of Hi ulor;

"I herewith due In re under oath tr.«t I hare croonr-lly known Dr. Rudolf
Sr.'.rAt since 1533- Ho w : lwn«e r. proporl; disposal verson, v.-.o v c re y
to noli, r.d always ntror.1' rcjoctod rny force or brutality, Darias ay
r.-souq work :h -1 I carried out In Germany durir. the *w years of 19^3 —

19-»5, i ; the r.quest of tho Swodisa Government, tho Jo via. Vo rid congress
in Hu ? Vor?:, with the result of hi win,, reoettod an brought to 3voder, thou-
condo o: ooople fres. It.zi concontrntioa ci-ps, I often c:-o In cont ct with
'olf 3r: ndt. I foual in Mu an ftoaeat rnd enthusiastic co-vorkar,
.lvryc h-d hie full e-.port in even the .oct o:;:. lie. ted cases. Shis
ft.in 1 cod him in ■. difficul position with Hi. lor. Without his ur.eolfi h
r.d h'lr-.r.o as-ictcaco, it \ould rot h ve be r. possible to so auccearfuHy
• rr out t.:ic rescue work.

"Tr, Br ndt v^s <r. idealist and know no oadty *nd r.o hat rod towrd tho
..ilica. ... the contrary, t.nd undorotasdin vitk .11 actions on . ">o cofvl
= -r e ..in £Onl. Ho often toll iw t.i t he etneidored t..ic war rr u 'r.cns


Zr :-_C -1 -hoehnn. (“0.-. Cehc^' , l

Cou-t *■- 1.

and - o . cr -'O htcrjjitj'. E« v.- i cnockod t the ac.Tr.lciir.ie. end

arro sea of aost of thu higher h-zi lo do.-a, -_nd deeply indignant over the
corruptibility *nd corrupt! n th/.t vae sealfold in t.:- Prrty, or.i mid thr.t
nia Ida Is -i d Ion,; iloco be tea fro:. -liu. 30 (Z*r. Brandt) h d notl
. q con. on »it.. t.-io -rational SccL- 11 :... 7ac result of t;.l* vns th-t Minnl-v
iaol:.to<i ..i;j wit.; .;io worn.

"In f<.li of IS-3 3r JKlt OX] - CCd *.h_ -is.. , nftor 11 thaco

tis tint.sent g to find v* • to retire froa t.;v r rty md «;• i. private

Indlvi* ” 1 oferrt i* new exist.v-c- for ui-Cwlf ■ ac ..in fp. 41;*.

n ?r ; =y oxicrlcnc-a with ni I ilrro rlvoye conaidorod Dr. Brandt ro en
•'.onnr.-.lo

Thor. «-.t irc ..d c.rtific-’.tw.

.ext affidavit onul y ldontify. It i*t he cffidr.vit or.

p :o 3 l." Dr. Boat, Itadoi' ?n . :t ' . t.

the affidavit or Dr. Heitor tad i: ttftndt Jfc. 7.

ffi.'.vit of rr. Htsnor on ; t : ud If Brandt l^o. 5.

Lace affidavit . . . c ’ l: ’.o : ftdolf Brandt 9 .

Jdo r; idivit of Dr. L - - ore or. y *. o 3 1 b to bo Suiolf Brandt .' 0 . 1C.
7.U af idnvit of th. vitnoan hoofcnur on j ,0 1C in to to Rldolf Brandt
Jo. 11.

J/.O cffidr.vit of ?. .uy. Evitsc.; or. p , 1 12 io to bo Ivon tho nu-:b.r
Ifiiol: 3r sdt .. . 13 .

■“ P 1 siDir:: should t . ffi-invit >: "taiteoh r.-> so ::o. 17?

2.‘. : I b.- v or p rd-n; y lS , uunhor 12.

Sen Uon^ior rffid vita on pc,}«s 13 t- I 7 will h'vo tho nuabar
tu* If ‘ .- :A r.unb. r 13 .

Sc..-.ilunb<,r,; nfficcrlt y.- „e ic - 17 vill vc the Rudolf

. r- . nanb-r 1>*.

—; affidavits 3f iofocbcchtr »:r,i I-'orr ocsol tr<. ;.ot in tho . ''cx»-
-.iok; - identify the s roifonierher ‘tadolz* P-Pah Jo. IS ond for
~ rr.yiBsll.


99 ?


2 c 2-7-. ecian (Von schoor.)

Court' . .. 2.

r cirz.'l: She ribural has sot resoivoc. c i-s c:* tho^e t
if re available tho; snould bo before us.

33. '_7T—r.T: ..r. Prcslc.ont. then it will bo host if I sub:.it thoco
tut locuaents later; or '.rill it bo sufficient if I o.Gci,;r. the nui-bors nou
and luda the documents in lntor ' '

ill ?- , .- 2 DZ-' 2 : Sna cause .1 cay suli?. the anchors to tho affidavits
now, :'.ioa r.tttc*; tr.j nu-iborc to tn_ exhibits when to.” are submitted t«~ tho
Trihuari.

. .'.237: lour Ho .jr, ; r r-.v tart the tt-onocutlon cry r. serve tho
ri,;.it Jo o’-Joot to me.: »f idrvittl

:: ? . 5:33..T: Cert inly tdey '-ill m lo cd ict-d until th. • .-.ro
rd.ii.tod in th, ^rofence of in, irocucutlJ:.. 7..o r.srl,*w.ont of tho nu-oboro
to the oxaibite it I~r.lr t-~t ti.ro, but it riyt save v> trouble if tho
nunb.ro -e • oai^rvod nov.

3.. ::4SJ; : Bio ricfuntachor affidavit vill h v u the aunber *bu’olf
3r. idt . 1~ and the Sorr^oooll .ffU.\ it vili n.w. tr.j nueb.-r 3udolf
?r nf.t . o. 16.

Frocldur.t, I h v. concluded uj- c: ro. I thank you.


— r-.-;-: r —3-l-.^icv {Ik. voa Scuoec)

Goars .

- - r?z::zrjzi 7r-_ ribunal will c&Xl t-:<- c- so . yicst the defer, -ni
Joachi: ;.ru,-ovaky.

77-. I'~(J for ta- iofuadaat ..rugovaky.}

I

- • 7-£ I ictoaiod to conduct the e sc for thu defend' -.t

*;; firct calling the vitnoc^os to thj s.i.ad. However, not e. \n;;la
on- ■»- - vitneanoo vao her# too- nrprovo:'. >.ro orrlvol ~ot, k that tho

procedure ic cot possible. .Is-. I ; point out la tUi croe th&t nj
t.;c U- .nos on thero ore tvo v.o ro of tr.e ,;rc test 1. portnr.ee for r.ecortr.irr-
ic, who truth. Z hj are tau o..ly vi*r.ea“es vho hrve beer, four.d at f r tn.o
o c n fro;: thoir ovr. kcowlad^e wvt eotually ha; ■or.ed in Block Un ir.
Buchoran. Id. Oca ic tho C po of -.he block, Tiotach-

7- ;ID3.T: Couuaol ir. r.v ri to t.'.ia vitncio thor. vc.n prorcr.tod

to co :hio r..:r. .1: *... t tfcl» witness be Bunaonod to Vornbor^,

and 6k . .plicatiin ai.a nlre dy boor. ci,.r.ed \nd dolivored to tho Sofonco
0

Information Untor ir. t.;o ffIce of :.... n.cr,.: - i« .;r 1.

Z 23T: Tour £on», ; al^t odd In rc rd t 3tto piotncn, :
infer, od ,jc lr to he indicted cno ,;o o:. tri-1 >.t Jhchau. How coon 3 d .«t
kr.o-7, whothor or cot if '-'ll b.. posribK to h v hln brought hoio
i.jodttoly —

Z2 P~...2E Z: T-io secret. *. - 1 inform I ic r/iralrv; that tho

vltn cc weald b t rvc.liable t .io week. To. :«ttor boir.- ur,;unt 1 ni, ned tho
:alor .. ruled it to Secret* r; G*:uml person, lly *...iu nomine, co tlrt
it c- bo rccO-jliohad t cr.o orrlieat possible .on r.t.

23. ~~ul. .1X6: 7- -ond is the witness SOUaa ... ttitr-ch (?) WAO in One
of ;.-.s _.oc ; lo who v ro infected vit.i tyaus ir. Bloc'.: ho, r.nd survived tho
JXporiuont. He ir in thaSa, :lirh sofio i:. . X hr* that Ir.w Sccrctrrj*

r't. r 1 1 cuceood Ir.-brlr. ir-: hi . ho re lc ti c, red I thould lUco to

r. oo.-v-c ri,or.t to c:2Ll him. to thw at.-.cl : ftor the c: oo of I ju, O’-o.'-y ic
"Oc lotod, if noceaerwry.

:: sk SIDS 7: C0ur.3ol « ;• h vu thr.t ri : ;ht. OOwtcd inf Or. tho
-'i.r. ' *:;c Secret T-/ hwn r 1, if *.h<.r ir cyc.:i.. :_c Tri bun.-1 z . to

3 - ’ - o t.-.r vi t no sc it will ce done.


*


2o - ; .aloy (;.. 3c..=e.a

court

3 - 1 . mi. FjC-: Thur-ic you. T-oa I will call the iefenirat Krugova hy to
tho 3 t-Vl.

>fonL-r.t . rugovsfcy will trim thj at-ad c a vitnose ir.

-:ic own bch- If.

(•I-..C 7 , the - rd tostlfiod a fallow):

vir " 2Jj. 1 . :: YOU Mill hold u; ywr ri .. nd ad bo avorn.

I avc r Tj; Cod thu Id. at .ad -nlcciunt tar; I will aucr.k tho yurc
turth r.:. vill ,.dd rnd vi*..-hcld ntt.in, .

(r.ifc vitru-os rotated tho o. :h.}

ODCJ S3?d*: You an . sit down.

?Y D.;. IS I '.:

*.• •’itnooc, yluioo doscriU to the 'ritur.%1 briefly your youth -nd
-our curse of atudyi

4 . I v 0 torn on thti 15th of ..u --<•*. 19C? i >t Hnthonov. Ky fnthor v a
b doctor, . , .unoral prcctitlonor. I vicl; .1 t...' 1 , 1 y.-rj «iuii in uy ha.uo
tovn nd c.rU: t is ochJol in 1$2 .iturivnton Sxcalnfction.

..t C 0 bo inning or the first ’JOrid *;• r :y f; t.s_r use lied in na r.
a^sorvist, .and ;no first d * of tile vr.* no wont into tho field as r. doctor
nd u i. hillod r f«v vockn ftor tna bu.rii.r.ia, -f tho Throu,h hio

lerj.. •/. Ihe oconouic cvlr..,co of Cor^ny -ftir the wrr, v, loct our
fortune f t.;< z it v n ..>t osriblo for :*j t - study -ftor I finiehod hi,;h
sehiol. ^ th.rcfor* docliod f 1-nrn r. trr-.do, .-.nd I :ocidod to bocoao a
cuci .iS official. t t.:o o d of t..o inflation, however, :viny offieMo u.ro
‘.Is irscd. I 00c jod t is by ,-lvin<7 ut <y por-iti .. voluntarily, nml I ontcrod
. rontlco. : fi.dshcd ^ a pronticod '>. Durin.- this I
tried t oern couo non-iy by drir.: urivr te Iox.d r.c, so thrt as coor. r.o uoosiblo
I vo ' ’ be cblo to carry oat „y lrn of ,x>in to r.ollogo. t th* ond of i-y
r r. •rcntlcceniu, with our. id nd vitn tho aid of rcl tivcs, I w r. r.blo to
t study uodioir...

.. Tor vent r-i cJn did yo-_ dccioi t' otui; -.edicir.o.

1. I cor- frv. r. f,«- My cf doctors. : -a;.- friend of yy frtLerc vjvo

■ " • I -.ysclf it e vor- ca iy ga h 1 grant Interoat ir. biolo.y, \uich

• ■

*-•- - frio;vic of the fa-illy diroctei townrd :^dicino.


Court I


26 l.ir ii7 . - li-1 - LJ3 - Kitty (Inti vcn Schoen)

. -.ere die you study?

A. I studied in HaT Ja on tho Seale.

Ano where you trained as radical practitien-.r?

A. In 1931 I took tho Sf/o oxnaination, ‘her. I became nodical
practitioner at tho internal section cf the Ciry Hospital in KUcstrin
on tho ^dor.

Did you havo any specialized training as a doctor?

A . Yes.

H, And what was that?

Hirst I os as iatont fer internal axdicins at this hospital.

I hod intended to beccaa or. in to mist; but I had to try to got to a uni¬
versity x'ror. t .a nos; -tai in a s ill te n, because as a student I had
node up ny ind to boco .. a hlt^a school teacher. At that tiiao positions
os assistants at urdveVsitioe re.ro vary r re and Very difficult to
obtain. I was, therefore, .La! that cn the 1st of January, 1933, I
obtained tho position cf an extra-ordinary ssistant at tho hygiene
institute, of tho University ef Hallo, Hore A had sjy specialized train¬
ing as a hyi-nist .nd r. b cteriolo 1st, .nc - gave u cy original aim
of buconing an internist ir. this fore.

3. chon did you qualify as a L.ctur-r?

". Ir. 1937 in Hallo I qualified as a lecturer in hy;d»no and
bnctoriol gy. In 1939 I b^c: » a lecturer in this field at tho faculty
in orlin. In Setter er, :?Uh, :t the r-qu<.3t of tho radical faculty,

I was appointed extra-ordinary professor.

Q. And what was your career rfUr you finished your nodical
training?

A. -cause oil rcci.l circu -c‘-..jces, hich I shill descjlbo liter,
I worked outside of medicine far a y ar, id then I b-c.anc hygienist in
the young armed SS, .ich 1 ter c_care. the . Sf tr.-SS. Krcr the begin¬
ning of 1937 until tho collapse I hold this position.

fh -t KOS your positl


5001


Court I


26 . or U7- - U-2 - L 3 - rutty (!nt, vcn Scho.n)

a. At t-.u outbr.afc of war I hygienist, tint is, wxp_rt for
hygicr.o in tho radical office of the SS in Berlin, and at the snr.*e tino
I had a s nail hygienic bacteriological testing at tion for tho units of
the SS, which I had built up.

3. ..are you at the front, and how long?

A. After tho -nd of the Polish Campaign in 1939 thu rcgi:;unts of
■ •

too Mcffcn-sS wore incorportod into division: , and n.dical units ware
sot up for 'Jr.it first tiso. In the Division "SS-V^rfu^gungstruppj" I
was givon tho . nd cwdical corpony. I wo* put ir. charge of it. I was
in charge of this coupon for over a yu-r and I was in tho first .-ronch
Campaign in 19h0.

-hat did you do t tha front?

a. Ir. thu sectors of our division wu s.t up dressing stations
and took caro of tho ro'-ndod.

Q. Did you report for tho front 1 t_r?

a. A*, tho und of 19U0 I as transf.rrud b-ck to P-rlin. Irawitt
rucoivud rvj s ying that now all roans of tho front for nu wore finished

It

for tho rost of tho war, and th t I would bo used only specifically os
a hygienist.

In tiio folio win. y -rs In spitu f this I reported for front service
four tiaos, for fcr.u first tine in l'.'ul, ftur a very significant nd
oxcitod discussion With Qranits, ttiicb will b- -untionud Inter, and in
19U* for tho lost tino. But *11 those attempts woro refused tot it Was
said that s-rvico in ccsfeatting epid-aics »spucially typhus was considered
front sorvico. This r,,- at the tin because * 'deal

corps one. tho .r.-aical personnel had high loss.s fror typhus at the
beginning o: thu campaign in Hussis.

c:-.. I'LS r.’.'t "r. President, in this connection 1 shall sifcnit
Dccievont rugousky Ko. ltC. It 13 on page 8 cf thu Gordon and English

ffon-SS which says that

Loynant f factors nodical . sonr.u ir. c -batti:.- dcs re¬

sulting frea dangerous is_.sus, osy, cholera, typhus, yellow fever.


Court I

26 liar L7-.. - L-3 - LJS- Putty (Ir.t. von Schoor.)

psittacosis, piague, snail pox and abdce l n al typhus, typhoid, as ^oll
as the care and traataont of these diseases is to b_ credited as c onto at
survlco.

I offer this as lirugCKalQ* a>*iibit he. 1.

% . . .at did you do in Berlin ft.r you returned from the front?

A. I res expert for hygiene :n th_ aodJeal office of the iefi"on-
S3 which later r-eax an A-tsgruppo in the Cp-rational l'-in Oflice,
(Fuohrungsh.au/itn it), and in this C-.icu I was in cnarge of offico 16,
hygiene., i v.s also in charge of tho hy ieno institute of the Tiaffon-
SS nhich dovoloped fren the testing station which I have montioned boforo.

Mt. r .rdon . Your Hon. r, but would it t>e possible for

Dr. Flanlng toprovido us with the Gasotte from vhich this ordinance
of tho .tuffun-SS . as taken?

DR. FISWHu: Yes, that is posii.: c m*t do so at tho motnunt,
but I shell iivo It tc tho Frcrocution.

H. HakDYi Thank you.

BY Da. FfJS I MO:

4. a . .t did ycu o as chief <f offic- 16 in the nodical office
of the ualftn-SS?

t for hy&lano I was in chaTgo of all questions of
opit otdc ccatrcl end hygitno, es. scinlly u-.tcr supply md sewage in
t o pee J ox t J . ffer.-S 0 . If t i investigations showed thit sono
ore or h:.i * j be issu.d, ‘I h u to report to ny chief, Dr. Genzkun, and
h« as chief f U - apical cf fie- decided hat ms to bo dono. Ho
lsttkid the -reoro s f u- as they -ero --dlcal orders, or in tho idli-
• h yj tho competent comtnd post.

as chief * of offico 16 ycu h -d no luthority to issuJ orders

then?

A. ::o. r this ---rt of ry activity .s expert I h-.:‘ no authority
to issue orders.

<• h s this .".tt.r handled in the institutes uuior you?


5003


Court I


26 -r U7-- - U-L - ICQ - Potty (Int. von Schoen)

A. <-.3 cfff.cc. I was in charge cf, first of all, ry crrn hygiono

institute of tfrx '.affor.-SS in Berlin and -a nun'oer of other institutes
which developed in the ccurso cf ti >a. I sos a disciplinary superior
for thvso institutes end the troop crx.andcr, Military coarandor. I
had, therefore, the pc. -r to issua cr'ors tr then directly, and I had
the corresponding responsibility.

4. How big was V- responsibility?

a. I roa r .sponsible for orders issued to -y institutes rhich I
issued ayi-lf, Ao hygiene oxpert I -./as responsible for the accur cy
of tho info motion which I g.aw ny chief, or. the basis of 'rhich ho issued
his orders end instructions.

3. How di.' y . isjou tho errors to the institutes under you, orally
or in writing?

A. aft.r ay return fro:- the c- apeign in Franco, cy institute

9

developed rtthor rapidly, “ho sections uero situated spurt — they
were not togutci- r in a snail space — and frea 19kl on outside insti¬
tute wutj uldart. Fro that ti w on there was tho constant custon
teat all import sit ordoro should bo issued only in writing.


5004


26 Her - 7---:_w.-5-l-C k Jlnt v.n Sci - n)

C.urt . 1

Q ’?hy did you d'- b at?

« It .;*s hc-r. ay experience that an rral :rj>r, the e-xecutii n f
rrnich cannct b_ supc.viseJ Isaacdiat-iy, is v,r> quickly f ttcr., r is
dial rt.-i in r.cn ry. In r'jlc boubl- t check exactly what I had
ordered I principally alv.cr-s issued iap.rtant instruct!-ns nly in r.ritin^
al*c in ray «n Berlin Institute t: the Section Criefs.

Q Did veu ,-ive as3igancnte t. y ur ass.ciat-s *.-ha ir.re n t in
E-rlin by tolophno?

^ if' i I issued nl^ written assi 3 . 1 r.cnts, w.aicn nd l.t pcssibly

Lly b:f rehand, but wero f iritten raers.

Q -'cw 1 ct.c t. the i rranizati r. f the epiderde control in the
'.Taffen SS. The o?idv.ric c ntr~l sorrier in the Yhaffen SS was y:ur field
cf w rk as crief f Office 16?

A ka.

Q Dine when w.a all f that cpidc-.ic c ntr 1 >f the Vi'affon SS
under yur char,*.?

a er .a tbt end f 19h0.

"er_ y u T'.sp nsiblc f r epidemic o r.tr l in the concentration
cr.-.ps well?

a tie. c nc-jiitr ti n c*aps had their rm r—diccl service. Tho

d-ct r in c! ! • as Dr. L llin^. ..ie c -petcnci in all ccdical questions
and his inicpenc'onco he :lwayo ruaricJ nnxiucly. In tho field cf
cpf d<xic c r.tr 1 rvl hyricno, h rev r, vjc wer s r-tiaxs called up n by
hi r. t deal with icfinlte sptcializ. ‘ qo-sti ns which ncr sptcil’i-d car*-
fall/ in writin. because to had the -,z rtunity t cake tl.c necessary
bact.ri 1 -ie .1 a! ci.-.ac 1 tests. In r r..ral, aside fr a tpilcaic c n-
trd, this alt with tht quest! r. f the rat.r supply .an 4 tho disposal >f
sesa -w. Ih results -f cur ifw-sti.;at! ns were suhaitted a: rt

pin! n in ft. f-ro f sag. csfci as. They were sent t the- Chiefs f tho
e ileal Service f the c neentrati n carps and ire had n: influence n
whether these su esti ns were actually carried rut r n t. Very ften
M._y were net ‘bscrv-d but Tory -fttn they were.

; -» r. is _oi :_-iic central in the uaff-.r. SS rrarriz-'’?


5005


26 r .7--- ,_.-:-2-C k (lat ~i n Sc:. lr)

Ccort : . 1


^pi J _;ic c ntr:l ms centrally urbanized in th- •Vaffen SS in ay
hands, that is t.: central office ms in Berlin. This was possible b-causc
the entir. ITaff-n S3 was vininist-r-- centrally fr a Berlin. It was net
dccontrdizi.d int: defense districts --r Tfehrkrsiso like the «ray. Therc-
f-.rc, ir. the Go naan Reich and in t.v occupied territories, which were
designated =3 arny rear ar,as, we set up specialized institutes tfhich
worked independently and which were rasp :.vible tc the Berlin ffice.

Frett 19h2 cn, we also had bacter: -1 -cal field lab r t rics with the
oerps -f th- V_ffcn S3 ct the fr nt.

Q Dr. Genzkan ras yrir military suprri r, -s Chi- f f Office 16
and sis: as Ohio:’ f th In_>tituu. w what w-s y ur r.lati nshlp of
subordinr.ti n that is, y-u and Ocnzkcn, t- Qrawitz?

A Dr. Oenskon was ny irradiate superior in qy cap city as fflco
chief ao well a a Chief f th Kyricnc Institute, and his superior was
Granitz, but nly In tit t chnicel fi.ld, in th, c-dical fivld, n,t in
the military ful . Orevritz ha:’ th- rirht t issue instractl ns in his
capacity iu P- ici. Physician f the S3 nd th ht. host ct. r in the SS,
and hi :r . .ntly ised this t issue Ins tractions. On the basis f

rs f -ther staffs.

Q In 19 3 y u bee', e Chi, f ty.:<cr.lst f thr Wiff.n SS. Before
that, in i. lti n t y ur ctiviti-.s ns CJdcf f Office 16, ani as Chief
f th, Hyvicn- Institute, w-.ro ; i Is Chi f hy,;lonist f th. Waffen SS,

I aeon Chief h -icnist f the S3?

A If Grodtz, r. the basis f his ri ht t issue instructions,

called up r. t ie .l with certain pr biers, I hid t use this title,

Chief n}.*icmst, bat tirt iras a rare ccurrence an! it ms sorely a paper
title, if I .ay cell it that.

Q ij hav st.tc tint it was a rare . ccurrenc, f■ r y-u to bo

A

called up n b;. Grawitz fra certain j'b, thin I uny say that r.ly happened
n isolated 'ccasi'^ns?

A Yea, th.r* .r. Jr*.3 certain ‘efinite pr bleis which Gra.ritz
: r urht t :y attenti'n, f r otaralc, whether when c:. lers appear- i it t!.e
: ■-st,rr. fr nt pr tectiv vacciniti r. rr.s necessary, r if the ucccuti n cf


500S


26 ~r f,7-i ---V-5-3-CC k Clr.t v .-i Sc: -_n)

C urt : . 1

snail p'x vaccinnti'n wldch hud be a r'ere'. f r -11 nenbers f the ifehr-

nacht was ncc .3s ry alsr f r the S’affen SS .r a t.

^ Dll ycu always r.prrt t. your Chief G.nzken wh.never Griwit z

called up.n y u fficiaily as Chief Hygienist?

A "r, th.se adiiti aal tasks were n.t in Dr. Gentken's field f

work. Grewitz ha-’ reservod tw„ fields f r hisa.lf, that was plsnnin.; and

research; and Dr. Gsnzken always tr.c-d t cal nly with th sc natters

• •

which carr-s? rule' 1 ti Ills - siti n in the lof m SC; uii n th,; cth.r hand
Grawitz always cn c .v:r-.' t assort his wh:lu c npctc.wy fer planning and
research. f r t:.is reisa, Dr. Gc-ukcn generally r fus.ad t_> have any
kncwlcdo’c f such things which c ncurnod Grawitz because they were nenu
f his busir.oss. 'n th. ther hand Grawitz ms very careful that nc no
sh uld lnt-.rf.rc with hia.

Q las there a #v.it leal f werk In t^eiwral when Oriwitz called

up a y u directly?

*

n S’., 1 h:vo already said t.nat tb-re were individual eases called
f r by special circurst .cos.

Q Did Or salts inf re ym ab ut his r rk?

A Hr.

Q ?e-f rt th. 1st r Sept .aber, l$!i3, bof re th re r,-.anizati n

l the leal Service f the ,/affcn S:', iid yeu participate in c.nferencos

In the staff f Grvritz' 3h»t vnr Uecussod there, h w often did such
c nferenc a tak lace?

A Orarftz ha ‘ a very uncertain r- siti n in respect t his Chief
illy. He was n. t able t at n •; - teres with hln. I knew that
f r ab ut tw years Hisnlor , i' i n't use his services at all as Reich3
Ph.sician. In,ref re, he trie ‘ at Very p ssible pf rtunity t «ot in
Hi ggle r's : ■ > ,-races a.-ain. Th ref re, h want • t- c neentrate hie
- ileal service r strictly than it was at the tier. He had -.any ther
=ain fi'ic.s which wore under hie. I believe it was at the be^innini! f
19L3 he had c nf-.renews in his staff with these chief ' ct rs. Th.so
c aferences usually t < place nee a week, ana th se specialists fr a

• • f Dr. - frequently call.’ up r. by hie t cal with


5007


2-- • r u7--I—.-5-L-C *k (Int v n Schcen)

C urt 'i . 1

spcci-Ur— t.- 'ts ha-! - rt Ln dicaussii ns. j n

quit -tt_n-:in. thca. c nfvrtacir. 7o t: uht up -.xcusoe s that wo
r t h'.va t c because tb a. cnfircnccs r.r- rirh ut w -ractic -1
-i! acr.ly iap.ircd us ixTc..:.yiO£ . ur tVr .ties.


re

* uld
value


530 &


Z6 ’-arch 1 j 7- t-..TD-6-l-Gross (Von 3choon)
Court To. 1


In this connection I subnit to tho Tribunal th- affi Lavit of 3 rr. Gor
'-'-ni- r, the fora-r secretary in the ideal Of fie of the 'affon-SS, This ii
'tuccraoJd. ’fo. !i=. It is on .e- ; of the Doeunent Book. I offer it

an .hi' it * ru o.;5ky VSi. 2. 'rs. f-r.'a '.r -takes the followin'’ affidavit.
First there is the custonary ir.trc Sietion nfcich I shall not re-v'. Than she
says*

''"re- 193 ' to the sorror-Ior in l?!: r , T ’or'.te os a a•-crutary to the office
c'.ii. ? of t ■ . '-leal Office of t’r.-. iffon-r'., "Jr, *arl PluuonrLUth r„

"I taur./ that since about 19U2 v >ciily conf r ices V -two n the office chlef3
and tho Boich Physician S3,' Or* Orarri-. , -s offioo.

.si conferences w re, 'urin, t. first wika, also r- ulr.rly attondod t>y
ay chief Or* Dlunonrouthcr* Later on ho only sent his a nt, S3-Stur -
a-.-:' -Srer ftulolphl, aa 7r. nreuthcr 1 not re/nr l wu a dneusoiona
ha soricur on! oaaontial ones tut rv.th.-r ar a loss cf tino,

"TV.--' ‘ jatlnon often Joke 1 in ry r^sanco -'out th.- unirtcr.stin - a-on’Vi of
t' j » conferences an! rat j else ... -it. naco3 on that ijubjcc«„ Finally o

• Mutant, .sith tho a •« BLvamrauth stayed array from

tiu.so eorforunces altoyothar.

'"re the e ins of u3ol ill t of^ i quit JnrJ. 'dean,

natt rn an' so-.otinoa only -cr-or.l -.ff.-Ara ir.ro 'iscusso!* ..Iso, it appears
that . rivato thir. s ttjtc /iscussc I there,. 11

Is.. tii n sh-- t.-lls of an ojdsoto* n . »t r that,

c Sffoctivi the first of Sept, -Vj 19i:3 -ho I* deal S -rvico of tho "affoi
veuj r.or -anise I. "'hat ms your riL'tionrhip of subor Inn to after tills
renr aniz-ation?

A After th . n:or anisation of tha io-dcal Service of t!u 3S I had two
: ooiticnc, first I ms Chief of the Hy/iona Institute of tha "nffen-SS as
I ' _ n ’ -for-'e An , cecorJly, I •••as exj rt for 'iy i,.ne or. Ora.its's

. bo in xhich as such I had tho title of Chief Ky ienis

1 ''dnh of the tiro ms yoir main • ositicn?

. in -• institute.

tdon r.s or'-n’, r'rawits call uireativ-r, i.ho ms also to '

on his staff, an! he tol us that on ’liimlj-'s or/irS" tt<j were- to leave tho


25 March 7-::-..7T-6-2-Cross (roa Scaoon)
Court -*=. 1


staff of the- Operational ‘hir. Cffico yulirun-siauptamt an l bo transferred to
is staff* Ho orieroi that Siuasnrouther was to b econo . full noaflror of his
- iff, and he was -Ivor, a roon tn ids office, I, cr. the ot...<r hand, wnsto
"‘‘7 in ? institute because I -rms to continue qy scientific .fork, and, in
*■' Itior., I /as to carry out the business of rfcr denist on his staff, I -.ms
only loosely attached to his staff - tho3c -ore hi3 wor !s,

.. About 25 kilometres,

Q Id! the office of the Chief '-Jy ionist have its own personnel?

' Tho work was ’one by the ;orc nnol of th H>viens Institute,

1 Tow Often 1 you a-. ; 'rmita to r ?rb • bin?

.v'out once every week or oi.ee every ts/o :coka for one-half hour o an

hour*,

, to st&cdt Doeui ;owsky

!k>. 26 ut i*. 1 :. in Docur.mt Took 1 -.. ar.' th :rli?h translation in not yet
vallVlo* Thereforo, : shall rer.rvo th ri ht to submit Ids !ocus»nt lator
r r . CSZOBKTi Counsel -vij subedt tha ’ocun.nt lator .her. th.> bool: Is
rod y,

1 "hat ton the ’.utios of too Chief i!;-d niat?

•» Efc was '’•ruritz'a intention that -ll questions of hi' 1 m and opi 1 nio
control, ns -roll as oti> r r. Tic .i qn os Ul tra which he had to *.oal with as Pole
.1! bo ban Hod contrail;- by his staff. Tut this intention
»r.s not carriu . cut because t . noce-v or anisr.tion was lackin', Growltz

:ta • ly tho -i-ht issu Instr -‘ior- r '3tor .an’ had rili-
tery ri-'r.t to i3suj orders, ’!o coal'’ nurvly iOco sui-estions* Ho coul' say yt
-rs‘. tr> t a 'is -as-, dth ouch ,-isr. treat. Put if th? or’or hi’, any

cto outst .. of nodicine us pas no Ion r bl to issue the order, hut thi
r r :r.to ’ o issue by ah e- •*.. ;t?nu -Hi ry ccman lor, ,.s Chief Ry -Unif
* t'w saa~ capacity that I hs\ on th? staff of tho Operational Tain
•ffioo, I laolt with tit- questions that ccbo up but I !i cot have ny rd ht
•t lr3Uv orders,

2 at in'ivi ’’i J. rc Ic-t? 5Lyou *oal «.dth as chief Hy ieidot? *

5010-


26 ’torch L7-e^TD-6-3-Gross (tiit Schoer.?
Court bo. 1


A In the one on' on:-half years that the of flea exist*;-! r-olly only two
major re -.luas for- hon !•- Pirst, tho ; atrib-stior. of lisinfactants to the

suited of'1 cos of the S5 t Because of tho air war, ' hieh had increased in

•

intensity, C-ojrun In'us try fine no lor. :r nolo to supply the n. cossary ’ru~s
or epicLfdc control in sufficient quantities. Tho thin s ir. ivhioh there
.rist ’ th jruatost scarcity woro rational by tha State or... each organi¬
zation, is .hrrr.che or SS, ’olico, or Labor ~ rvlc., etc-, watf iven a
certain cllctn..r.t with which hoi to suffice. The istrJLutiou was ’.ono by
rystaff, Tho requisitions cane in from tho unit loctors to cy 3taff and
delivery waaao'o by the Central Ife tLoal D-pet of the laffon-SS, Thu socor.!
bi .ro'.l rra th. effort tc attain central Iroction of opi '.uniu control ir.
all branches of the S3 on! in the Polio « The necessary prurcouicLta had to
bo A tninO'’ irst, w tt- .-.t thin nee., ry -'ll !sn t. r pur <; v-
ta.itus. Incases in all branch s of the S3 an’ Police uniforrfly# Such an
o’li . Lon to ruport h~. hi a-rto exist.' nly accorln;* to State re'.ulationi
n t:» foffor^SS nni tho Poll . it theoretically .’or the

concentration conps but th»no figures . re kept aacrot ant vr ra not passed oi

•

se that I, pc a hyrierdst, in n, an’ ocul' not intro-

'uco air- forest htot plandn for -pi . 1c control. Ih ro I issued a

, _ on others, with the chief toCtor of
th concentration carps, drat} but, after tion of

,iy c' .n us, j> rosu." his "ty of sicracy and ho took tho point of view
tart raa net a'.lu to iv_ the Ti 'o' t or -ri Conors suffering frcrn opi lomi<
to an a rcy lich ti' r.ot ' 'ion o th concentration cacii itself, Thoro-

foro, the ihtila erasure ir. offtet naa ineffective an’ I was ir. no position t*

a

int:.-runc*

TE rE3IP“!T: The Tri unal will now ’.: in r-cuss.


5011


- r--;0S-9-l-L«s53r (jk. Brown)


_1Z .--ZT-J,: persons in tie Csurtroou -rill pic c fl;-i their ee 3 .

-he fricuacl is again in boss’ :u

3?.. ZIDL: (counsel for ::.« lefendrat Obcrheucer): :.'r. President, the
2 foai ; . i.’ri'.auser asks*the Iritunnl, i.. view of her state of^ health,. to
ho rolo =el . 1 = afternoon fro vjo.rin,: in court. «dic-v. certific. to
vill co coh. ittod hy the rison phyoicion.

ZT. F7JZ1..:: : 11, oo’iasol, you ire oanri. od th : sho ikould he

excusod, ro you?

X. —I: 1‘eo, Y'Ur Honor, :

_. '£■?. .ZDZ-Z: U.on filing the nedie -1 covtiflc-.to the n fond nt ,Vo>
heucer »/Ml ho excused froa ftteadir.ee hofore tao :•-ihur.nl during t .in
*..r.:.>ni3 aeealon -t .at re^ue-t of nor counsel, i: 0 ring th .t hor

r.ca 3 . 1 c fro ; the rribun-i a_is nfternoon will not prejudice . r c- co.

ji .err.. .?p*cvs::r - secui^i

31X131 ZTJ. rjL.TX'S- (Continued)

B’f _ .. 7h’.

. r. frocidont. the Defend.j.t .rogoweky nuie ot. :einte Just procodlnp
tne roco: residing tn« quest‘on of .-.i» ind. 1 tnoko * . ?fi

tr.er. a tod t.i t tno r.lloc tion of :..o di -infoctant «d docor.tf—lw ti 'r. •; ntc
a la in c.v .- 0 . t tic ■- noct: >r. I '.-.it Idf.vlt >f Ju 0 oor£

Jji&iC. It ic on r ,.o 11 offcoth the * r=«a end .he Hn-lish docunent hooks*
cuhalt i-. c ru cvefcy TXnihdt . 3* It lour.,

. m : ,uln leave out the introduction:

’ u : k*..: of duyuct, 15'.h, u on request hy t .0 C-'-iof Hj-, ler.ic;,

of. . rugovsky ... "

j j oiri: Just . xouen;, c>uncel, until the .rihu. 1 oecort .-.a

A

Ju . -u re are cc t -inuii.;.

. SIX: Or. r-r :« 11, tae taird * rr»-ra. ...

1 i-1 II32. *: I h vc she . lrce r.ov. proceed.

•” 11 . : :zjls

- rat ighl;, u or. rec.ue -t hy tso Chief y. ienist, Irofeo-rr lv.

. r ; vrj transferred :r; . th-- : l-.id hospital of the Denth-hc.ud

3C.12 .


(3ro-..)

ZO'-j ; y-. I.


Sivi*'i3 ; .-e 5»glone inr.^icuto of the Uaffo .-;3 ~od in-ScalM'.tOROOO.

“ .o i . »’* ;e recso.-. for v.is trancfer v s =y • ntivity since 1342 an n
'.nijfoctor "itn a eo-Jb.x unit, u=in.j r. tcotorisod 8er.-Gtoriiis."tiu. f
iciafocti • « d iolouci.Vs train decibel by tne '-j^one Ir..*.tute ir.
coil..'- :v f ..-. vita the fira, 3. J. hoedeckor, Jduich. I :..c Ky^.ono li>-
stitvio : u •_ oLr;lc»yod as c. dorr, with the depertBent for Sanit r- S«Chnl<pxo.
Taj io. ’t. c;*.t Sanitary Tochciq.u-1 -.-orkad or. tae deai-,n -ad cor.atruci or. of
stenlis -,1 , disinfoct m tad del ou sir,; eosbir.ea tad drinking V‘t>r n “fly

i-.taaoo, ae well ue delivery of • jm to coub..t units of the f or. gs.
m-» dcr- rt or.*. w«.u ulco ia c„ ...-o of adr.ird3Crr.tior.. rain;cr.ir.co find o >oiv-
-i r. * t id i’stltv* actor »ool. ’.nether .iob v* the dc -rtser* v r she
ou. 1/ Jf « r.ticottica to the cor.cor.ti-tlor. c*:rjc diotsibution of

r-3 tt c r.ot carried _o bat by "r.t or i.t u:r.f uo :or r- bor,

• ftor ; r jv 1 by tuJ do^ rt.-cat calef. 7k« rllocr ti :r.c bu t y:i aoyrOr.itt.taly
at . o. >•: l'-. .. to t*io bo dr-ilnt; of 13 >. r <. .cor<’:'r.- to _y knovlcd/o,

o„ly oxtre «1~ l.-.si. nlficiut Quaatitlea of Zyklon-3 nvwilr.blo.
r.i::'.cbl.iao la production erased by toU>lnt;.) _V.o 'llcul'.m of Ey^-n
v o i r. c.-. IrAlvidu 1 c o decided upon by tai i:iof ^£lo;.-rt. *.

huaetitiitca, ot.-.or cr.o-ic.iio i >r doloucin* — ivc f~r instance sulphur ori>-
>-.r r.n, (^Leautar.). joc eu riled. Ir. sny inctcr-coo tho dosnnda for
“y.-J c d ot bo net />t nil.

"J. . axturuinr.t s of r.un - id r,i in tac concentration cn-.-n, 1 hr.vo

heard mtiiia; of t..lo durir.,. t... ti-t of a r loywot with the :-;- l ;ier.o

Institute. : 1 earaod of it only, fro- tr.e -olaor. fil-, < fter ay RM»a«. I

-uy. r .coord the ext«r_ir. t on of hunr.n bain ir. t-o concentration c * _ u

:oi . f. • a -oi in the '-ly.rior.a Inotxttttv. neither officially •'.or ir. ;;riovt0,

r.d c .-.to- o .tl;* I com d r. vo so ilon th .t 3; *tlcr>-? •- r reir-r sullied for

v

-r j f exterdin- t*o i of etuern beir_-<i. xticoptice wore alwnyo


r :r .nd cu .lie to. t-.. ;5tt j-ycicinn- of tr.c concontir.t c ;n.

_ -.ov, entiCopticc were not s- filed to th-. co or.d ic-v cf the
RQ. :o. Satin tos rep rdir. *. X quRntit.ioa of fklor. r


. 1 on docontJ r.inrtior., c.ieinfoction n.v. dol-ucin^;.


50X5


coil


fo.czor 1 s


2 c .. r—3 5-S-5-I=£'-*r (Stove)
Court " . .


cattle* iiica 1 Cix 1 , 'Gesarol,' OSI'. ad «Xraiot©d' t -oro

la stall qce it--s, or In sjuo e ;o: .-.i: r.t rli, I parson
c.’-1" lac ." : t, out of ~.-2 (.atisepticc aantioned r£>ovo, 'I/tusotod* vr..:

•*lo Id c-i 1 £ttnatitioe, nt t-rt It vr.a to be used v t r economic 21". I
v. re. of r.tlCoptics bain*: used for hr.” o„ 4 c: -urpone th.~» dol’ma.'.i

f.^Mr.st otidouica, decor,ta_ir. tlor. end disinfection.

c _ ' * 'IcS.-feetoro var carried out la disinfector trn'r.'r.r; ncl:o'

of :..c V ; c- . . at 'e ...cicaburf n-r Berlin.

"..otorised Btorlllxrtl'C r.r.d dclouoicj; units vl:* crows wore ».lo: (.

rvail..blu ; the -occj: tretitn c.-pe u. or. roquioitioa. Dccontnninr.t :r.
•qjxdpuon;, like Hv -ccv. ?~.~bore. hot-air cnenbors, . nd various loplouonts,
vir- .» rtly ..vnilnbie in tuo concentration ere . a.

!, 2 .‘. actual ilslr.focti-.r. v* a errriod out by tr-dnod diainfortorn, w..o
voro olt/.or roquloitl ;nod by, or ; crcoaontly nari<v.od to, t.;o concentrator,
or- . cl ways rjeoivod their orders fro. th. r ynyslclr.no In c-V.ro.

I h r. not hoard of risicora bole & ordered to errr out dlolnfoeti'.-. by
tbonoolTc . “loinfcctoro, uorttr,; vi.h highly poloor.cus rasson. h to »
t -ir.n c utm and tno fir. cxanlnntior. of tr.o dioinfoctorc• retool, r.:*l

-d r. offlcl 1 joirvn 21cor.ro.

•

■ 3 couinition& for atlsoptloo voro go no rally . do • ly, but Aollvor;
woo . Uo . o out Ido . ropil-r ou ply, if ordorod by Ci.l'f 3 yi ionlnt.

“l-to i*.. r .rlbution canter for .c vr.v t.io ;-ntrrl I.odlcnl Pupo: of the
V. f - , “orli.’v-Llchtcabtfrg.®

(o; .-.*d) p :?urt d-jorc Nneo"

ri^r..turu certified, in coup i'ouoa&mio.
non: tv. docu.-or.t 3 , . r. President. . ru ovb:^ ‘if. nnd . rugOv&ty ?•->»

1- nd It of .tea document book, I ol: .ply cub.-it, to K iuo.it if led.

I 1 * tided too- ir. concidoret' n of chorees that were ;vdo c.?ir.st tho dofon'
: . rei :us interrogations but I do not consider It nceoss-ry nCV f
•h— in: t.u record — lo. 55 and . . 58, on jwcoc 14 and lb.— I su t
3 7~i‘oi;r ru,-ovcky 4 nd 5.

::o" fro_ an affidavit v..ica is ir. document b'oi 1-.-., or. 0 ,-c 17C,


--Lessor (Brown)

C 'Gar. . . 1.

sh=u. d 111 — .3 road a brief pass/* into the record.

-- KLiSESTT: Zfco 7 ibusal has not yet received Socanent Book l-_.
K5! I •CI’V that, but _ eiapiy want to r. d helf r p/>,;e
into the record.

rBe.i.^ 2 . 1 : ery well, couaeol.

■J.;. i'U. L 5: mi# ic a affidavit of the Chief of the rxdical office
°* t-'-o "" - Qh SG. 3r. JC rl 3'uaenreutker. Ho ar.yc:

72-ZZ2Z 7: '-'ill ; ou rzzif?. that ra exhibit r.unber r.ov? If you
aro r- din. it in*, th_ r.cor- it should h vo ..a ox itit cuitbor.

2T- -1-^- 1-3: I a p l an ned to give it ?. nuubor Inter, when I ro A
c.;: .Ire ffid:.vit inti the record, but it io pork pc .tore pr-etlal if

! lvc it : r.uabor now. It i# IbucdvsKy :?o. 2S.


3C1S


Court I


26 ?- - 10-1 - LJ3 - 3l2Jclujr (In*. Brcar.)

utS PRESIDED: It appears it would bo butter to avoid further
confusion '.n tho records later by giving this docunont an exhibit nunber
now so toot it nay bo identified if counsel desires to read it nenr and
th-n cone bock to tho sajaa-nirbor, rcanob&ring the sane n unon it
- 'fared and read in full.

DR. PLBIISQ* Very well. This, is krugonski Docunont Nu ,r 2c.

It is t '-..fhund in tho Gorcar. docunont bock on Page 167; and I 3Ub-.‘t
it as .irugewsky Exhibit Nurfccr 6. Number 8 in this affidavit readsi
"The oil .tunt if tho disinfectant Zyklon B through Mrugowsky's nffico
took placo ir. such a w .y t at the Iced Standort doctors .ncdu thoir
roquosts quarterly or. regular for. s. The d-livery took ; Lieu through
tho Cent.. - led Off ce, rut ;r tho Central iiodiool «arohouso,
after r. previous conforonco had astCbllshod what the Mount was to be,
in Vios oT tho availoblo supplies. This regulation existed, so for as
I to' frer tho ■■.or 171.3 n. rroviously tho r-qu.ats had boon mado
through Lolling 1 s office."

Xtnbur 10 roads: ■iL.isr'lins tho doliv.ry f Frursic acid frr
oxtorTtL noting huiann beings in concentration cants, I to thing. I
• ’ .ri quit-, out of the question that --rugowaky via giv-.n prussic
acid for that purpcce."

BYD. : . BCiTHGt

..itness, you just testiflod t-;.t you dr..w up a regulation
f'-r t . e-rcontr tirn caupe rugar-ing th_ reporting cf tho outbreak
of opi'.erica but th t y u '-.re not succossful in this. Did you thon
have nc op rrtunitv of takin. i. on tho basis f your siticn is

highest hy . jiiist or •* influanc'-.: Qrcwitz? Grawits was the :-cdical

•

sup.rior el’ tho doctors in the c neentratien c-unps.

. sure Grind ts was the tocfcnic-.l super! r >f tho doefc W

in tho c. icor.tr tier, carps; b-.it as such he could only give instructions

in the —'Heal sphere but net in -t*-.rs of erronisati on. l n all stu-

• *-cal ra.sti ns, tsu> r.u-fcor 'f ir.- tes or t:. a nu ,r f sicV. in-ntos,

‘l net belong in tho nodical but ir. the organizational field in whicn

5C16


-6 r U7-- - 10-2 - LOO - Blokloy (Ir,t. 8rear.)


Jrawitz had no infiu.nco whatsoever.

}. ether tasks did you have as chief hygienist?

with the letterhead of chief hygienist all those letters were

..Titten .foich concern*: v>-_ institutes which previously hid b-on sub-

•

ordinate to Office 16. They concerned the procurcrant of -ateriuls,
or transfer; i .-s: .el, -r technical use of. p-rscraxl, or profession¬
al instructions, or such setters. *11 of this belonged within the sphere
of cc etonco of tho chief hygienist. However, th t was only a relative:
unimportant activity. The entire filing system f this office comprised,
luring this yu-r .nd a half, two folders for ordinary letters and ono
snail filo for a-crut letters.

«. In what way was your Activity as chi,f hygionist Afferent fren
• u erivious activity in Offico 16 of the Fuchrung . ain Off'ce?

• a. AOtivity In tho Qfflco *6 was core oxtensivo, because tho en¬
tire procur„n*nt for the riaffen-SS ns the sain Job of this offico; v.jd
Oflieu 16 kept this Job after tie roor^ miration, whoroas on tho other
.-.and t e 1 r .r vsks, th~t had been planned is th. t ska of tie chief
hygienist, tr.fe not . Ivon to hin.

Vfn-.t ns y< ur activity in tho Hygion- Institute? First f all
wh*t ths *. si/u o. Is Instituto?

41. lie Institute, St-rtint iff on a sr.ill scale, dovolopcd into
. rather l.r , institute, which at tho «i ths war conthinod twonty-
f ve scientists 1 ti© n.t varied fields and t o hundred additional
p-rsonnel in teto. The tasks, tr,- it ufcracdd -lsc grew. Tho origin¬
ally purely practical Job of upiduiic control was supplemented 3 -- r
Oy i\-s- xch tasks in v ri-d fields, i 3ut It as ry t .'

- -o f tiv- practical r.att-rs of opid-mic control but • + study and
to search intc the biology of nan as a whole from the tx icai .-°int l
view.

rrar this there resulted of necessity a nuntar of prof-ssion.l
.nts which generally ar_ not tc b- found in such a radical insti¬
tute vr hyicix institute. Itarindividual research assignments resulted

5017


Gr-rt I


26 -or kl- 13-3 - UG - Biakley (Ir.t. 3 ream)

free practical >xporiu*e. Ite scopo «as -s follow: 'no 61 oat io-
i. .xtaunt - :s that for bacteriology one virology. It, uj a aodical
research office, exaained incccin- xitcrial fer bacteria. This notorial
e-no fr... t>o hospitals, field hospitals, and sc forth. * second de¬
partment was tho Doportcont for itadical Zoology, *hich ; - run by

i- a . x t • s fer -d because of tho. necessity 7 c.: batting
the i:isccts that can carrunicato cont'.gicus laoases; an! U-.cco insects,
08 th- c Se f .t a jt riniuals, have to be subjected to more exact
roa—rch. Consequently, this struck the physician as a special roblom
c bo dealt with. To this viopartrent bslong « of

poisonous snakes ifcich wore to s^rvo as xa.su -rch material intr t he
specific char c* rffics of t b poisons -f European .and l-ar &• .stern
poisonous snakes *ppiy * therapeutically.

■ a third /up srua.nt ttxs that f^r hygienic technique. An or. incur
was in charge; it concerned itself with tho construction of portaVo
or aotwisud ec.r.tmdnation units for tho purpose f deicusing tho
tro< .a, inlts *-ro sot up with the divial M, articularly on

t*-. a- ,rn ?r nt, end in rt .also in c ncontr tl a a -;?o t c 4> .t
thtf spr-sd f lie j. They wore cjuratod ncstly . ith hr*, dr or atoan.

A this :!o;.artccnt 3 also in charge of tho Departr.^.t for

Anti0e«ltlC3.

ft i- orth daperfeeant was tho Chonioal Doj fftoanti which was run
at tho end by six trained choaiots. They had all b^n spocir.t iy trained
jVr t..-ir cpeci .1 tasks in this oportoMit; and this dupartnent had
two as/i nrcer.ts.


sc > 1 C


26 : rc'n-(let. ro*rr.)

C* set I

t’irvt, It - t t.st th- r.t.r fer the various units to so* if it was
safe. But tii* ouch 1-rgcr -no was thu scend mo. .0 wanted to dovlop a
vaccine - ainat atone* typbpoid, W to ascertain ju t - .. t its spe¬

cific quota .-.otiTicloticRljncM c lat-rial should bo, tc ismunit* the
hman xin - , oxt-nsiv* knowledge of y-ctri.l-_ical chemistry, r s - <r-r -
quisit. 8 c .:si ' _r'blo work W 3 t x • on- in tWs field*

•noth-r . -rt „-.t concerned itslf with G-.flojr, connected with finding


water I r t local units, —

Q. I bull.vc ytu c u bo a littL- vr- ori*f?

Thor* was another depart -nt j r Clie-atolc y, whic.. c .c.-rncd itcolf
l :. >1 ciia"t-, an , finally, there was .a Statistied doportoonV

which in p'rticul .r c.ncornud itoolf with research .to, ®*th

th.. pr 1c ictin, epidxncs, and t fin: a procticr.l scluti... to

this pr>l-'inally, etas tbo r-ady know* dopertotnt fer : ,
rue r..c rcii, which was concerned with the pre-due tioi rf i n.*' typhus
vaccina f-r th* ..r ol th* SS. 7h*ro was a largo library a lrr ( M amount of

r » tecvi piste a

l t i uxe t rrcct .stake in th. translation in


protlouo q cation, the witn;s said, V.v £U1 f activity of th* Oiiof
Hy;ionioL Ul. ’ .ily a ft fil* voluu.s, r he ■■■?•*« lr - fold-rs fur '•

r® but as two "taployoos*.

In otner w. r’3, v.h't is concern.d, is r. t <ith th. prt n in char;.* cf tho

tual file, th-r. • *•


V Ol. Fl^HKt

... hoi -i ;• u sup. rvisc . - » •
t-ke p-.rt in it yt-ursclf?

1 work was *isslfx«: jy an to tho department chiefs, a»d ,

ith -n. B'i rti-ns fer the work* One. a 1 n<*e .-’hy ’ir>

nts ft ha Institute. Fron ttoc U time e»ttf--no< with the

e spotont depart vnt-1 chiefs, an c uld always tell hew - report-

unt : antorid th t w.s us* , ant this c.uld be
5019


a r 't

1 CVWc •


----- . .

Court I


seen :‘r_ . . r nt bly r^quir— ints.

3. 'ix-t s j-ur rar rk 3 in

... I rrrkoi :'.-c 9:00 a.c, t ?;•'■• p.a., or v*n 1-u.r in th- Institute •
Q. D i r :u i.. “ iti r. _ ir. r'v * r!c?

Lcsl lnbrrnt ry in which

I worked, At scientific . .

K. FLT irO: I suJ

;.sk> t bo f ur. p- . i • . ■ cu - t Be it, Jforw 4 r RSty '8

Exhibit Sc, 7 .

Bf»U no: begin with the a.c,:.. p51* r h: f ll.via sci. • le w rl.s

■ - . ,

: n c .• Li

l.t.., Tt c :t ina • .roly tho vr. important v.rkt, Site- ! inrt no
•ti 1 r tot •.« r: * > r th .. therefore hv t rely n uy :.r.ry, it io
P !Bible til t tiw titlua f fcii. :• rka i r*.: :y iro n t lit_rr.liy correct

•

*

I c.j, vc.rt .!• i feU r-r:« at, .\1 ‘.*1 * • • .. ?• *- ?,‘«.ct: . -nti

.

Thrn n . . .t - ii*t cf thuou -tries.

3 i 3 !'.. ri •: i -~it

•-ii t .. Tribunal -.fin U.*t y u really vrofca tho
r«, -a* publish-th. »• r<0 th i r- is!*. j y ur r.n?

.»• ’{■- 8 ,

,TB research w«e c-r i«. j • -a'ltut-.?

. T I:--; n' a- •• •• . r.. : with

- ‘ - blew in th. L/ivi a, - ith tbw . r jf

601008, b ct-ri 1 Lc f :

C cl r 11 8 f rth.

—•it- V.1 ur . ;•?

1 C! — *i-vr. & tint li phyaici . : tni. in r.ctcri l.,y

5020


26 :^rc'..--li-3-Gallit-h_r (Int. r--.:.)

C art I

“ -. tic.:./ - . .:.c - v, », in i.n tranaforrud

• .. . r.ly

tv: biotori«-lajiats ir. the. cn 1 _ i..n o', , cf e u rz~, tfccs- Uc Were

n t sufficient U rc-t the. tosks t.V . : c- - result i to*, rir in the

r- , • ,

s- appoints * an technical jr undo* »: r. si • f their provJ us ..x-
parienefc, in ir".onf.

DP.. FLi UjCt ^.f.re I c Oti nu o with :$• intonvgiticn, of the witness,

l lsh>nl* like *.• otflxat t. tho - rt the . :ratic Oith, ta-.t his so iter.

1 : • ■' In this trial «r boon r.-. - in c urt. it .

1 ..r ,r tint it un orsfc ( .

Further, t: o such i:; onth ic ii - nu nth Ir. tJ., smx. s-r.ee ic lirt of in

• >of r. the c urt, or \ty in fiiclr.l# The ith it in lint cv/eky's

D iu :.r.t ; . 35 r. P *. - i? f tiw 3o.k, .. si. ul' like t. c/fcr it

t rt:. r. t;-' ;it : . 9.

. • •

Ih. nth ran si : il *e:

■I oWiii* by Apollo, , .iccr.itpiue (?) rur' jii,

' r ‘ 1 *> -1 tii- do "oc:--s, t ciiry i I following

SCI* t; its

• •

: r.rv.ct ,r wh taught _ : • b».t 1 £ .•;/ p i . : ; / i..tly

»lth r.y life, i( t~CuE3.!ry, t e jar t ; .: 3

' : r«, t. t-nch t -rt i< : iw; a ei i »itl t> in r

• r BritT.cn pr.r.ic-; t l-.pirt shiru f tb~ precepts *n instructs ns jxrtiininn
’ sc ‘ »»• - • ny s no in thu c ns • the Motor rt. t-u.ht re, on tho

'

"' lift ti.us-.il-r.u.

* 11- pr^rcrUc- t. r.,i- w r. f rl ' * i oj/ , t!_uts cc r in » y

r : :l I lv« * . : _ V n n request, .; r lv frico t(

1 r -il I ivo destroying r •..!•. ill'.

• •


i: J*,r.


I


26 i:\rch- -JP-H-4.-Gr.il h_r ,-i.t. r.-.-a)

Court I

ovc-n arJco a cut far 0 'I1 st a_s in ~r., it I viil leave this or»_r-.ti.n tr
th s- wh practise this."

Ia this porajr.pli then. artb. Ins.rti .5 t.. t ttcl ng t; the -*th

itself, but which ware ~z*c by tiTz fr.a ui.-s. v-rsi n v is fc:rin 01 .the

•-s. 3 after "to pert ra a cut wi !ch destroys

: toncy", car* at the &n.' of the paragraph »Whc practise this", th_ st no ren ver
: c ntinuo r.;w vrith cy reVin, of the. text*

«Sv.,ry h us. ! «itor i stoll onto nly r .... of the patients, koeping
- i intent! ml ill-doin^, and espocinll f lust

r. thw b :*i.s f tenon on fro- r slaves. ..11 that toy oiua to

ry kn-tflt ’ - in th* exercise f ny ,r --is! n, r utsif .$r pr fossi n
in infly c eporoo with sen. Mol - t-iix * -> •, I ill koop

3 -crvt by r- 'r-!ing this n .ert If I c-rry ut ar.d keep this oath

islthfully> my I enj .

f r -11 t--osj'but if : rv.fr it, rV t it, m 3 rcv-rce bo
ry 1st."


50 2


20 .-GZS-13-l-Hr-.ynos (It:. 3rown)

Court i'o. 1.

.c aa indication that thia oath of Hippocrates is no oath that hr.s boon
dolivorod to us frin antiquity vith a fimly established text. I have on prgc

21 of the docun^nt took, under tho sauv exhibit cuabor, reproduced the fora
of the or.th used ir. Franco, vhic-T differs considerably froa the text Just
re-.1. It roads:

"r-iio in tno Hippocratic Oath, as taken ot the ?.culty of l-.cdicino in
Paris: In rea.nee of the motors of our school .usd of ay belovod co-
diocipluc and before the i.v. c of Hippocrates. Z prouiso nnd swear herewith
th: t I -ill OC faithful to the rules of honor /•nd probity in the or.-cticc of
sodiclnc* I Will aorist tho poor without foe. -ad never will I eh rgo for
ny work higher foo th r. it Aos-rceo. As n 0 -u.st in other people's houses,

I -ill not let ay eyes pore ive va t is ,;oir.£ or. there; ay tongue will not
fcvoul the secrets which o confided to ac. md I '•ill do nothing In :sy
profocsion*vkica corrupts th- -.orals mi favors criro. Out of ror.p.ct nd
,-r titudo tow rd jy i'-nst-rs, I ‘fill p or on to their children nil th t I
have loarncd fro:, the fc.tr.ern. ley on or.tcc.i no if Z k- .p ay rroniso, nd
J>; . I be cov-rcd with sh-- o cnd despised by ay colic ,.uos if I fail."
t is the Prehch version.

. \ 2DT: Your Honor, would it bo posoibl. for no to see tho original
exhibit?

DA. FLZ- IV',: Th- 0-r. n original is in u libr-ry book which I could
not j,ive to tno Tribunal for ood. I ask that w. follow the sane procoduro
no wr.a followed in tno c re of Dr. S-utcr: a-.el:*, tlvt n certified true
c> y, c-rtifiei by ..e. b- excepted in lieu of the original.

rHZSlDZT: Counsel will cx-.ibit tho book to the Prosecution, .\ftor
a oxaiiced it. • certified co-y nay bo substituted.

2. Z-'Z": Thank • ou, "our Honor. I hnru ox. ir.od it. Your "onor,

1 xv I satisfied.

3Y33. 7LZ 125:

\ "itnets, did you take tnis ontn of Hipocrates?

... ::o.

pro th in ••:lich th o ith is nentionod her. . one could roach


50Z5


26 V-: -3T5-12-2-3yno r. '3r3-- )

cou.t ;* . l.

tr.o conclusion tact it is tho profession/il oath of ;.ic physician. In that
the ccsg?

.1. ?ho oath of Hippocrates has for :;any cor.varies not boon considered
an oat/, in the Iced oonsc_ of too ter., like t.te oath that an officivl toko a
or .ho oath teat a vitness tokos. Tarou-piout -y entire period of study and
ir. y period of training, t..is act.. v-.o never. subaittod to no, raid ordy r. vc
few aoong ay largo circlo of doctor friends bociRc acquainted '-it/, thin or.th
at t..o tluo whoa they ye.-, reccivirv their doctor ,t a. Evan in the c. no of
the universities vr.«jr_ that vr.s cuetohrry, that vr.s not an oath but olr.ply
the basis for r. certain for. of n obligation in which the physic! .a would
bo instructed in ait duties c n •. doctor.

You have concerned yoursolf vith tao quostim of radical otl.ica nd
hr.ve published a book boforo tho beginning; of the war on this oubjoct. I
rub It n excerpt fro t.:lr. booh to t.;o Court r.s rugowsky Soeuucnt }6. It
lo or. pego 22 of the document book. I snould like to offer it no iirugowolcy
Exhibit auobor 9. “ue dofohdnnt uos only >r.o co :y of t..is book ltnolf.
Consequently, I sk po mission to s.iov tho book to th Prosecution and then
to aub/.it . certified c ;.y in liou of tho original. ?ro:i thin docunoi.t
author 36 I should like to road only n fov passages. Hirst, vr.ee 2 3 :

"?..u task of t/.O physician hr o always been the mu.o. to heal tho rick
and to return VMS to life, '-it.; efficiency roitorod. One would think that
tnin dofinod t.ie task clearly and for ill ti~o. But if vo look Into tho
history of -codicil science, vc sot tint the interpretation of ti.is tnok hr.a
found nytking but ur.lvera 1 rgroenont.. It i3 truo that ther has always
been ur.-li ity about tho fir. 1 ila, but for t..is rcroon tHe views <*c to
its ac.iiavcuv.nt differed.

“T .eh caurntlih h -1 its ovr. attitude towards tho problo: 0 of life which
novar recur vita the sr-.o couplet c exactitude. Pro., century to century,
fr doe*.do to decade, over. fro., a y to d y hi-vlcd e advances, and thor- is
-l-r/ys oj.-et.iing re,;, rial os foiogor.c conclusi n by the younger goner tion
•-..ich wan Etill c protlc . for the older. Iher is continuous crumbling
fr* :/.c rock of the unknown, e.. every toei g.ra of knowledge appears to

* CrV? »


2o 3 (Brcvr.)

Court . . i.


t~: younger i.oneratioa at star ssatchod fro _ tue infinite firsanont of
ot-.rr.-_i divinity. Tout: would r.ot be you... if it did not leap wit!, a s.ilo
ov^r the restricting doubts of its cldors; it would bo without stron^th if
i. did .vol experience t.n. unique, newly born feellr.;. v..ich is inr. A .to in
ov^ry rising: generation md which alor.o gives it croative power. 3ach
generation v. a onc« young asd re dy to atom the heavens; tho, us tho de¬
cades passed, it bee. ;.c .-oro alow and -oro deliberate, rnd tho grot problo:.
of life rlwrys repeated tnc.-aclvus, nlthourfi never oxactly, always a littlo
..ore advanced in accord:.nc. with tho : .ro,;rcss of knowledge anduotnod. 3 t
tij<- quoafciona thonsolvos—» •

YZ FHiJSID-.::: council, it 1* now about ti e f Jr the noon rcceon. Crn
yo. ;ivo ._j t..c into? I notice that t..is wai written by Dr. r-Mfcland and
edited Vith ar. introduction by the dofudiat ..n^.-owsky. O n you tvll no tho
du',o 'f this publication?

MS23SS: 1939.

■:C rruSIDS..: Ho-' uc.; of t.iis doru^ont do you ->rooooo to r ad into

t... record, Council?

. :L V I’.ICt I Vlohof. to r.nd tfle first ;> r.-vmuh on tho noxt «>r. o, an
:..c li.nt, ad of p :.v 24 tho flrot four lines, fro.i the next p*-go tho firct
taroc linos, and then on ? go seven of the document, I intondod to read rll
of that, ad a a:all piece n , o 8.

P.*£Sir-.T: It scons to no tn 4 re dir-; so extensively into tho
record, if the Tribunal has tala tjforo it in t .is for.., is rnthor \u>-
neccoc* ?y rnd t'hcos u ti for .o * rticulnrly goo. .urpooc. Counsel :»;•
r i few of t.;e extructs but should c..oose the ..or. lr.portrr.t onoo and r.ot
r-. ; r .-ingr ra were cor.t.. plated according to .-.is recent stntujient.

The “.*ibu,. d is now rccoseod until 1 : 30 .

recess w s V-kcr. until 133® hours.)


- : 0 : 5


C ;urt So. 1

26 «bt 7- A -lS-l-*e.-ftcehon (Int. aimlor)


I


issesocs sissies

(The hteria- ruc-avesed at 12?C hours. 26 l^rch 19V7.)

THL The Tribunal I* e.;ein is sea si os.

Ij, it ole-do the "ri^ustl, duris.: the presentation —

Trl. 1321 Just t .lnuto, .-lr. Fardy* The Secretary General
‘-ill file f.r the record * nediccl certificate in regard to the defen¬
dant Cherhauatr's condition. Proceed.

;tF„ EaSS?: Durlr.* the oreavnteti^n of the defence thus frr to •’’ate
f the other defendants it has hten sore or Ism the practice to -nit
it the decu.’.enter:* evidence during the c-urso A the mnlaatlon of the
defendant, tut it ha* toon true that neat 4 the defense counsel have
United that to documents which ere f-rtant f.r the Wn.se of the
txeninatios. I should reoueet that Dr. Ileuiln-r refrain freo trying to
introduce all .f his docuovntery evidence durirv* the c.urae of his
tXB*Jination, The -.un-io of the excniu-tlon is to asic pointed oueotior.a,
facts, to the defendant and t. save his docu/.entrry cvldonco to ho
introduced separate!y, inaameh tt in scat inetnnceo it lc absolutely
unconnected with the teflavor -f the defendant end I this it would
:c .-.ore wneditieue than the itrnnor in which ho i« * c -innin: to follow
a.v tcieln: document after document in hi* document took. - roouePt
the Tribunal to rule on the BUf^vtti-n of the prosecution.

2S. 7LI»»n»t »ir. President, I r- only -.in,: to suhr.it documents
s e they refer to the count of the prosecution rnd re I an aekliL-
dciosdir.t ..ru owciQ,* re.-ardin,- that d-cu.cst. I v-uld consider it ir.
that case to he r:oro expedient to ouhait this document durin.: the

rathor than 6uh:*.ittin- document rfter document after the
ornir.rti v-uld be c-r.oleteiy jut 4 its c.ntovt.

p:-i.5:r&v Veil, documents which tend to elucidate the tosti-

i the witness' nay ho offered durir,; hi* exeninriion hut only If
C/i I

they are partijcUlr/ly pertinent to the natters on which the witness is

W £ |

itlt interrcgr.tdd. rocumeuts of c .tenoral nature should v c reserved


..til ?frtf<r, tentin-ay the witness ie completed, 'nit when counsel

5026


i


Court So. 1 .

26 Aar -,7--13-2-jiin.-Kceh.*a ( 1 st. Staler)

ceeus it of Importance to present certain doeunentc durin- the explica¬
tion ho cey do bo.

JCACKI*. .SLOOXtt - Sesunad
DISSCT i.^a.IS.xCICS (Continued)

5? IS. Flliw.irCs

q, I c.: not f’-ia: to reed nay aore froa the nedicel report'than
vhrt I hove already read. I viU n:v rsic you; Do you -cir.teln this
ii<h concent of your ur-fession re before, .r did you have strong roeson
in the aeantiae to revise it?

A. As before, it is ay opinion that only that nersoa hat e ri*Kt
cull hi'.self c uhyeieirn vfco tleo fedo the religious side of his
profession and vho is ttkea u-. vith hie Physical tr«.

v Eov vno your took rcccnted lr. the circles of your superiors, o
‘oojc vhi'eh had nothin., rt ell to d. vith the SS siirit?

A. I hrd to submit that book to Crr.vitg boforc ito oubllcrtior. for
his uooroval. Crcvitz then teat it t^ Htailor end S Inal or rejected the
thoughts contrlncd in that book end -rohiblttd this took bcin,: distrituted
to SS okysicii at.

v After the court has lerracd your ocacont of ethical Questions,
after bavin.: ru*d r fev mi - fc c .f that took, I vrnt to oncth to you rtcut
• vdicrl er erL.eati or. hu-.ua tein-.v. Do y-u consider it nernieaitlo that
t ihyslci: n under certain dreu. stances vi.ittcs the rtauest nut to u
nkysiden t. cure o;tier.tc rn.' not to cruse drroa.:c?

rt . This Question lc very h:rd ansver briefly cinco it a acorns
•.he vide field of pMlosanhy sac the study ethics. These viev C , as ere
ill other vi&ve of huurn thought, rre dependent -n tlr.oly currents. It
is ty o-.iniin that vfcea enaveriz; that Question one has to differentiate
Istvoen tv. different CB 61 G.

The first era* is the following: - patient cozes to r nhysicier.

sutr.ita hi self truatia.*ly t. his treatment. This is e ease vhich


i n - mentioned ir. rny count of the indictment and I er. only touchier
-:.n it in .rder to clarify the a.coad cese. I think that it is absolutely

5C27


Court jo. 1

25 --.tr -»7-A-l 3-3-iHh-i:eehtr. (1st. ?.ar.lor)

SOt perulBsitle that a ofcytieian would do rny nodical er-.cri::cnte with

a patient, who confidentially aiproaehod hit for the ourooeo of teine;

cured, without the express at orovcl of that tat lost. This holds true

•

of every operation ace of every ether activity of the ohyslelan in
relation to his oatient. This relation of confidence of physician to
or.tlent is fully applicable to nodical ethics in the'classical sense, as
;tf:ro, end that will certainly also held true of til tines.

3 u: all experiments which era here the subject of the indictnent
vere not carried out on patients who out thorsclvcs into the hands of e
physician with confidence tut those w c ru inirtes of concentration ca^oe.
*hesc ntn were entirely healthy an.' 1 that is =y opinion is tho second case,
"hey wro not •oatlento of the ohysiolnn in the sense of medical ethics
sad in reference to the cenco-ot of the relationship between the Physician
snd Patient, and therefore what ve underctend by medical cthlco can only
cooditi-nnlly he anmlied in thic case.


26 JSrroh 1947 -/.-U-l-PK^- Putty (lat. ?. 'lor)

Court I

Q. Kborein do you see the Vesic dil'i-n-RC. otwecn experimentation by
physicians -n patients or inn tea of a conccntrti.n c«np?

xhu patient r eproaches the physician volunt* rily, and the ic^x>rtant
thing is the relntionship -f confidence '^tnewn hia r.nd his physician. It is
entirely different in the case 'f tho incites ttet ore oing discussed hero.

Tj enter n concentr tion comp, in itself, could only e done by the approval
f the concentration ccap control adainistrati r. at Or.anienurg. I rnysulf,
fr instance, was n-ver in possession >f & ernsn-nt pass and, thur-fore,
c uldr.'t enter a concentration enap whenever I felt like it. Only so : r r.s
I kn:w the lo ding physician f concentration c*aps held such a pemanont
pass, -nd - close circle of his working staff. '..hwnuver r. visitor entered
a concentration coap, he hr.d t re., rt te th. c aarnd-nt's ffice, nd when¬
ever thvro were uoplo -f high r-rk, they h'd t, re rt t. the coecandant
blase If. They were n t 11-w.c t Vv freely within any canp, ut they
l.ad to 'e' accompanied, Thu Be esc rtc -nly 0.1 »ea th-a t. soo the pluc-s
which wore necessary far thus t. uXecut- thoir -rders. In th-t cat rt
from the actual cr^y physicians, n> ether physician even had the possibility
tv Ret int.- contact with the ina t-s in th* concentration carps, and thoro
we find r very essir.ti 1 difference ‘etw er. th- voluntary confidential
re Inti j.aship * tiont t p ysicin n the -no h nd, and the relationship
iaians,*«rt re indicted here, and the insrtos >n the sthor hand.

Q. Tou kn m that at haab .no •: .d - riuaer -f aodiocl oicporiiwnts
were carried ut :i inor.taa asyiuas who ‘Is aren't p-tients f the
physician wh> Mac carrying ut fcbuas, uaporiaonts. In y-ur 'pini.n, were
such ..xperiuvr.ts on patients r insane asyluxs uyn*n tous with ex,voriaonts
r. laa.tes f the c ncentr ti n c =ps?

. This hysicinn would in every c -- estn li*h c nt ct with tho heed
f the insane acylua *r hiasuif *-s - physici'r., t o, nd ... old get every¬
thing necessary fr hin such Ce and oquipoent. In the case -f tho

c -ncentr-ti r. c -a tr.ej-e was r. such c atact " ssi le, contact -twuon >no

f experiments r.-d t n de avail ie to Lia’y th- c =rndant*s fficc .

Ve r 11, he c'.-old nly get the inaates for
5029


which WR3.an tg ncy f Statu.


26 -arch 1517

C urt •* . 1


U-2-HtP- putty (1st. i.aLir)


tftcs- experiments of nr. .rder by the Chief .f the Gorman ?-Iice tad been

issu-d, and, naturally, thrt Chief -f Police is an rgnn -f the State. Thoroin

•

I sj c a very cle?r distincti n between the t* typos >f experiments.

Q. What conclusions re to be derived regarding the permissibility of
carrying <ut atdical oxperimenfs -r. inmates fr-a the f' ct Vh-t the Statu tad
to place these inorces r.t tta disposal of the physician for the purpose of


the®, experiments?

n . If the ircT.tes art put t disposal f-r these experiments by the State,
fie can conclude cle-rly thrt there was at L>at nr. approval by the Statu
f-r the planned oxperim.nt. In a.ct c“»es the Statu was even tho party that
initiated thus- xp--rl .nts • :.d .rckr d then.

q. Ir. yiur pinion, did the bta.ta .. v« -ta ri ht 1 die; so f the
health "nd lives of the irm Us by .-lacing then “t tta disposal oC.ntdic.nl
experiments, -s r result f which permanent disturbances -f their health or


ever, death c juU -ccur?

«. In n raal tires the Stito c rta.inly d es not have thrt rieht. But
the experiments which '.re here the sublet -f the indictment ware carried on
during the -;nr. Ir. Ger ny, Just s in tag! nd, - t ta 1 var off rt applying
t. the entire people was rd.red, that is to say, the State in Germany as
•...11 os’ in tag lard reserved the disposal >w>r its citisuns
;;rt r.ly did the State pr vide such commitment for aim, but also lor non-
s Idlers, even wroon. The Sta-te als. mdar-d tho manner in which tho
citizen, f the State would suffer 1 sc f ho 1th a own death, such as in
Ifevy by drown: • r, r ir. the ..ir 1 rce by cr-shing a pl-nu, in

the orocoont irdustry by is cdr*. Th t nls « Ids true f r the w men
wh were c-.xdtted in th i v.ar effort, -nd th t is true, theref ore, Tor tho

entire German ,voplo. Thest. circuast r.ces of c total war are naturally quite

M

. r ttase very unusual cirtucatanccs whoro the St U exorcises


juris die ti.m ver its entire citizens, I d.s:«t Udnk that inmates :.f con-
Centr'ti.n c m s cannot bo .accepted. X .< when the ot te rdors the cxecuti-n
f nodical ^x eri-oents because s n. oucsti n regarding the c :ob"tting
e tidesics had to be Settled as quickly ns ;>.ssiblv, I w uld imagine that
tta State tas tta right t select p-rs ns for th t special purpose because in


26 Ih.r 47-. -S' -14-Z-futty-Int: hr. nlcr
Court Ho. 1

that cr.so the St etc is cleins nothing -Iso thr.t it is not
loing r itfc its sel'.iorc ur. 1 otj .r population.

i

Q. Under what circu-ist.enccs vcul' you sr.y tlv.t tho apoody
sottlonont of my qr.-stfcrn is of hiylcot - *ic i i prrtrr.ee?

. In or or to r oiir.in w;thin tho seep- of the in -ict ont,

I thirl: th. ro is such r. c so vicn so n feroisn opidovic
is ste.rtire, r! ich so f r net frun' re thin th.o -vcich terr¬
itory, r nl wfc jo a 1 rjo nurto r of o the is to bo rucUon-

o.l with, so thr.t t: ^ .* • i ‘ ilo wnt boo ;xc r.uccrrr.r; .

It io iqporbttit to fin*, ^ut vl .fcfccr . cert .lr. drug or • ccr “
trin v ccxno c t. cci r 1 t' is ' njer.

pros’. *.o you t£ ir.3: thr.t r. ?hy-

ricic.n is or title', toe r:-.; cut ox .ri.icr.ts or. hur.m’xinyn
•sln^ -r '.rupr. or m.rr vr.cci - oc, ever if Imcws thr.t tho
llfo of ;! «. u r'.ontr.l subject is boin.7 on’.r.:vvro' by thrt
procoi’trc?

• •' is justJ fiO • to .*0 thr.t

■ r ■ • own init vo. I thin!:, howovor,

tint he is cbliyo' tc o’vy tl w orf.or elver by his Strto when

t)<- hiyhuot responsible cfficlr.l cf t!a Str.t. is or crinf! such
e/.p ri icr.tr for my cpuolfie purposo w finer expres:ly

' tr.to

; e poaoiblIt ir th o

■ ty Of the r. r. - y h.'.t official of f. Str.to or.nizr.t-
Inn tr f e tv cl r; . cures 1 t- fin’, row ways for

r.wly r. ...rir. ; c r :.

cr.so tv t J siclrji bad Tocoivod
the ert’.-r fro : tic St;.Co to use l.r.lthy vrsene in order tc
•1 rify .. question rf liylcst - lie:.! :_J©rt:ncormf infoct
■ tl C-rir ..r . result f \i ic! Sfcoybocc O ill,, end
. e in r.v >.r, h.t r B.v 1/5 wo 1 ost 11'oly :'ic, *"h..t
;1 ' ■ cr.so rf war qnor-


5031


26 ::rj* 47-..-S'-l4-4-Putty-Ir.tr Rrui lor
Crurt He. 1


or.cy? In c:.so I would :’r.ko tie furtt.r c.ssu::ptier. tfcr.t

tlia ph-eicinn is r. soldier erd wr.s receiving tMs order fron
Ms superior r.-onc~.


5032


26 . ;.r 47-..-C- . 15 .t ~ v T .
Crurt Hr # 1 ' • * " Zgj: <«-


! ‘ lei*


• - C - J-^rr.., h c,,. ,, t _

.«. r . rl .... bo . Ifhcr

■ * —. — sp . nalblUty ^ lb . fe
- - tho r. CWicyw! icr r ; Qtuc \ tfc* - P -i ,* . v .
lim », , r *• * Physician

hiuaolf bur :rs tl u ro cr nsibilit- f- r -•■ -

* 1 1 eRo osocuti-n f

' ’ • urjunt nox-

' »o*Z -0,1.^, h0 » 1M „ ;v# tc

Wt T* r rf M ” ««me,... B ,. cro

: nl,K, r „ ltcm-tivo nr.no-

' r0P,rt “- C

* Yzt cr - co tlu nocuce ftv r c f „

• • ' 035 ori i? r-fflraod,

■ t.-slnet 1 . vr e nvlct, nr , t u „ fco „

l ,b “ y6hft

" rtl ' MK “»*• no ah'uU oxocufco *uei ,,

Z° r '■* : llnt ' “• I'! til 1 p! .

-oly coloct • Krup S5 ber’in-tiir w

,,.,l,n. ” r , alP , „

roooivui 6 I 0 'r cr.rry ut OJ
r— tJttwoatt, «,* , * nl8t

• -r’-t re by , _ , ur .

’ : « mo r t, l lfQ

« r eltlsont 1 c . ln n -uroJ ?

- m »,,* r w A froquontl- ecure ti t rM ,.„ oh

' t . rr , . rt

A '^hts xi] ic r.!*c r. t - > r on - „v-

tn n rin « W'olvoa, but

• Pcr -* -pi-, in a. ox _

.

^ • • b -CO TOfebl ; - •

5033 * -'


61 r-


26 r 47-..--' -15-2- fool:-Inc: It. : .i~r
C urt lie. 1


ho is naturally n t guilty. .kcn.vcr r. fire warrfficor
h 3 tc onovc a be.fo f re:; the ctr- t u* icfcccno t'.c \m r.s r.

;.ud, and if this dud the fire guard n.turaUy can¬

s't be hell, tc account, ; r.: I r.y say th: t In i rye cities
arisen inru.tv .2 :/<.re used fer th t purp sc by the State in
O ny c:.scs and . - c result au fore.’, injury r Hod. One con

n’^r.oiyua ;:.aples .. the fr nt in 12 o c so cf effiCor e,
nh«ro tl o effic-r cculd net overlook victor tfco cr.lor ho
rocoivod is absolutely njoossr.ry, mi x.-l _ro ho often hr.a
to execute .. nlli.tt.ry or or Without having to bo convinced
of it's nocoi-rity. -hia officer is curt inly r.ot guilty of
having brought about do do..tfc of soldiers of bis conpany,
but i‘- ' - eup ri r go c;. til icl beers thu responsibility*

fret it Very ole ;• in tulit.iy life.

.. : th. consequence If the physic! n rofuros to

carry out such uenta on huurr. . oir.go?

... In tl»!0 of • r jVJTT x.lic 1 o r ia aubor e
tc the ti-ii . " ocun •:*; oh hr.a .r. : 1 -

lti.ry' law n th.. ro one : • r finds tl o p.-m'-mph ruforr-
: g to refusal to obey orivre. 3von I*. - rofui tbon

receive r. court aortl-1 nothing n-orl fc Ve 'o r. ‘.one to pro¬
ven t th- intention of tl- S ; ; ~o: r. th r -roon -;o» Id conu

into - is pi. ce Ho probw toul act vlti leai export !o»w-

tl rou •; .

. ysiciona for tl - re.ns one raon-

tionod leaiios to out 3 - infoc .ion, a* ..c l.in’. of p>.r-

rone would Le coiect for 1 is jx _ri :-r.tc?

... :*. cannot select cny p... sons boc.u'. nc nt his

.

. • kir..*. . coi rs tion


ir.


>o;-e


25 T 47-.-£--15-3-Cook- Ir.t: Hraclcr
Court .’o. 1

Ir. auch - crre on-, o' ccur c, thinks cf volunteers first,
-f, :-c*.?ovor, it is rot possible to fin-1 my volwit-_rs rn’ the
£t:.cc, ir. spito of thr.t , thinks tl t tho execution of tho o><-
?-rir:ont is nbcorsc-ry, .'jv/tur-Ti buin c rcull h..vo tc ho pr-
‘orc:'. to subnit chonr ,lvus to xp.ri entc. ®ho Str .to h-s tho
pr-ror to do th t for the esc rci.scr. .r tho St. tc hr.a tho
power to cotr'it it's aolliora r.t the front. On tho oth.r hftncl
Str.to hr.a the poacib-lit* to -ot r. nurhor of it'a
citizens \ii ich it crvnnot uao >rinj r.tr nnJ v* ich it ccvnnot
uco oith-r r.t the front or a :--r- ra, .*r t: oso re tho crir.-
Inr.la, In G -rr:nny, :;ilit ry r rvico ir eor.ri orof. zj\ bonor-b-
io s.rvlco. C-.rvin .;on.-l . 1 :vto :• suite In ' oi- no lony-

• - 'lit. :-* a. rvico. Vror: t'i? cirelo tho

?v.tu Vfo’-ll c'.cocc it'a np rivcr.t .1 subjects If it '.ccides
r’ ;• ox^rinonts ir. viow of : cut -;:cr.

. Ii: • VI* opinion, ir t: U phyoici n tc bo toll vooponsiblo
for t* ir nmiaJir.^ of o::. ri.iont.il subjects?

"• , . . oxoroioofl o i'fl*cnco ■vhr.taoovor

in tl ie r.-.r: r.

• In -our opinion, isn't the yhyeieim obli^ort to anVo
auro before tU boglxmin- cCfcbo or.porl onto th t tho oxpor-
• --..:l avbjuct ..cttK.li;- cc cc fron t:. circle, fron v-Mch th.,y
frov.l- cof u, ccorlir to f. order of tl.o St to?

"• - r f: r - vc re c<-.c rat * rith inn. tos of Opno ntr t-
» ■' j ' ' in . - rn ;r c :. r-

CO trol. •*.. p.rref t: ir- -o

‘ - • - roforo, re cor 1.1 net lock ..t then,

rely c : believe CB * cc.:: -..hr he is ‘'oi*-,~ toll o'f-

• b.* thu CO Owtor.t oncy.

- . or rn, I-r-.or SS

, 1 ich : : . -p.ry to svbrJLt t 2 , tor tc in . liffor-
e;:.ic , ?--iti.' 1 in. X.s l r.. ..Iso be r. army * led into


25 47-A-S -15-4-Coo!:- mt: .x.-i_lcr

C: urt Ho. 1


tho-o Ewrios of oxpwi-inor.tr. ’ o uttncae tcetlficc! to

t:-o s.-o Offoct, «sS wfcr.t ir your opinion new in tiir.t ros-
pwct, .-.a r-v.-.-Ar fcLo responsibility?

"• h - t 1 f ; i ' bofcro r-.tur .lly only rof..rs to .rininr.ls
of G-r..:j citizenship. It >r not r:y opinion thr.fc r. Aovir.tiny
poll tied opi ion roproeor.te . crioo. Political lnor.tcs ,
therefore, err.not ■> conciAercd ns crininr.lc, not ovon wl:on
«y :o co.. amis to. I .- o. tho opinion, tloroforo, th.t
if it ic correct thr.t pclitic..l ir.vtboor, included
in zY .t circle of crininr.l ..orsons, t! e r.jonci would K-.vo to
bo responsible for tMa ich w r responsible , fir ti e furn-
Iflhin.j of f 020 in- xtuc.

-■ t U- ply t:.t »'b« tlon in t! u C.-..-C of Suoho Id.
lo, ir. your opinio: , ..urt be . . c -.■os.onsiblo for f,o or lor
of fclio. or.icrxiionte?

A. In eV.r;- c re it i: w OROy \f ici ireuo: order.

Ir - 11 c : -= ’• -cl I C • O'. wr-loolc it is (A) Dr. Or wits
■:i lie pocit or, r. £ :iuic’ r. rzt SS, or Mo <j..e.'.ir.to super¬
ior Flu :lcr.

• , • ro furnish-

- rtl.t pur. so fr. s Xtchorcr.-.l ., wore roloctod frori
-! -t circl of e^rronc r.ccor ii;y to EL*, tier »a rrC^rs?


26 ’'.arch a7-.'.-..ID-l6-l-Grcss (Senior)

Court ?Jo. 1

So far I hadn't known about that since I am not informed about
internal working of the concentration canps. I myself had never belonged to
rry staff of a concentration cart,, or any other staff of that nature, and I,
therefore, 'didn't know anything about these natters; but on the basis of the
documents which I have seen here nor: and it becuta apparent to no that in the
case of Buchemald the furnishing of the inmates was done by two agoncios at
different tines. During the first eriod of tine it was dono by the local
canp administration and, at a later date, after the year 19l3* it vras dono
centrally by the Reich Criminal Folice Office, which is the Stato Agoncy
which is exclusively competent for criminal prisoners.

q And what, in your opinion, is rr. Ding's responsibility?

A Ho is responsible for the proper execution of experiments vlth which
ho had boon entrusted.

q I shall speak about your own responsibility a littlo lator. I should
ret liko to turn to tbi high altitudo oxperimonts.You know that you nro in-
liotod. booauso of hi*h altitudo ex; urlaonts, too. Did you know Dr. Rasohor?

A No.

q Did you know that hi h altitudo experiments wore carried out in the
concentration canp of Dachau?

A tfa.

q Did you h ar a report about hi h ltituio experiments in Dachau on
the occasion of a mooting of Consulting Fhysiclans?

•A No.

q Boforvi your arrest ’id ycu cn any occasion hoar or were informed
about hi h altitudo exp. rl—r.ts?

A No.

q Did you knc*.T the defendants Ruff and Romberg?

A ”c.

n . Did your official -activity have any connection with tho questions
hich wore to be clarified by thj uso of high altitude experiments?

.. No, mat ir. tte. least.

1 And, now I turn to the aol ; experiments. Did you hear about tho cold
,}X 7 -foments which were conducted by Dr. Rascher at Dachau?

5037


26 J&rch A 7-.'.—.7f—16-3—2-ro s s (Int. ?.anier)
Court No. 1


Q According to the- isctrajnt sutnitted by the Prosecution, that is,
the affidavit of Hooberg, Prosecution Exhibit No. bO, the high altitude
experinenta started ir. the beginning of May 19L2 and lasted until the end of
•'ay 1512, The cold exporinents, according to the affidavit of Rudolf Brandt,
Prosecution Exhibit No. 80 las ter free August 19h2 until April 1913. Wore
you in Dachau during that tl~a?

A I don't believe so. However, in the spring of 19U3 I participated in
a conforonco ir. Dachau which dealt with nouristojnt question. As I rcraoobor
that ocourrod in !'.ay, that i 3 , after the oxporiaents. It is possiblo, however,
that was in April. I do not know.that ntyaoro.

Q ’'ore you in the concentration on that occasion?

A No.

Q !'r. Prosi’jnt, in that cc section I an sttbrdttin;, the Docunont

: t ru(.owsJci No. 2. It is ar. affidavit rado by Oswald Pohl which can bo found

on pa»,e 35. of the document book. I off or it as Hru towaki Exhibit No. 10, I

should only like to quote tho aaccr.d ;»ragr*ph which can bo found on page 35.

•

'trugowslqr in sprin 3 took part in a conforonco on food quostions, which
took place in a bull in of the Medicinal Herb darions at Dachau. All partici-
p- nts in this confurunco waro billotod in hotels in Munich, They wore taken
to tho oonforonoe by buses an 1 autcoobiles and wor a taken back to the hotels
in a group. Hrugawsky, too, 1 th all othor participants wa3 tak„n back to
■'arich in tho sane way. Consequently he ha no opportunity to set foot in tho
concentration cacq. at Dachau, -'arthortxr , such a visit was not plnnr.od."

Durin- your stay in Dachau did you speak to .any of Dr. Raschur's co-
^orkors? • .


~l Tea Prosecution, durin. tb. session of 13 of Decuhbcr 29b6 ns Proso-

nxtior. Exhibit 12L, sukrdtto! a file notation of yur co-defendant Sievors

hich ccr.cernod the oonferenco of 21 October 19b2. .soon.- others it says "The

: liaboration vns iiscussad not only ir. th: field of ccchattir.. insects but

- 1 '- ir. tix field of the work of Rnschor and rorariinr the use of Gastoinor

W39


26 March a7-:.-.vTD-l6-k-J3ross (Ir.t. Racier)
COUrt Y.Om 1


water in case of fr^ezin^.'' Do you rem^zber that conference with Sievors and
what did ho tell you about dascher* s research work?

A The conference ‘."as only very brief. I can renumber it very well.
There vras no nention nado about Raschar's research field.

Q I!r. President, in this connection I should like to submit an affi¬
davit an do by tte ce-i>fendar.t Siovcrs which is Document Hnigowski No. 3 and
can bo found on pajo 37 of the Document Book. I offer it as Exhibit
Hru_wsk± Ho. 11. I should liko to onit tho first paragraph and I roadt "The
Jefonao counaol of tha cc-dofeniant !!rucowsky has asked no about the ronark
I nr.do on 16 Docenbor 19U2, Docurv.nt No. 6U7, Exhibit No. 12Ji,

M?. R'JiDYi May it ploaso, your Honors, in duo ccurso tho defondant
ifolfrar. Siovers rill take tho witness stand. It seems to ho that defonso
counsel for Itrurcwski can pat this question to VTolfran Sievors at that tin
and can disponso with tho a<bzisslon into ovidenco of this '.ocuaont. I objoe
to tho admission into ovidonco of this docuncnt affidavit of Volfram Sievors
DP. rL2?!TO» Hr. .-'resident, my I say in this connection —

TIB PP-SIDEHT: Objection by Prosecution is over-ruled.

DP, FLP23HND: "Th' dofonso counsel of the co-defondant •'rui’owsky has
asked no about the remark I rale on 16 Doccmbor l°’i2, Document Ho. 6h7
Exhibit Ho, 12U, concomin the discussion -of 21 October 19h2 botwoon Krugov;.
3ki or.’ r^/self about Raschoris activity. I can state the follorin. about its
" .ben, by order of Hirr-lur, an intcaolojrical i-partewnt was establish
at the RLlitary Scientific ?.us--.rch Institute of the 7 affon-S3 and Polico,
under direction of Dr. May, , ’ru trisky, a3 Chief of tho Hycione Institute of
tho V'affon-SS, which al3o loalt with .'nt nolt/ical research, asked no what ti
task :f tho new departaent was to bo, I infcmul hin of Hinmlor'r ostatli; V

u_r.t order» and tol J hin that tho Institute would be exclusively concerned

•

rith tho cLvelcpcont of r.:thcds of fiyhtiir; aninal posts, especially in tho
insect sphere by brooding diseases peculiar to insects, but not diseases re—
Itr.-jd to ismar. be in <3 by insects so that there wee no question of ovorlappin
1th one Hy-i ni Institute, .ui taaodiato discussion rith Dr. Hay regardin':
t'ils vrcul l b, expedient. This I arrasrc i, and it took place in ”iUflGvsky»s

>ao


26 I'mxch 73-16-5-^-res 3 (Ir.t« Ranler)

Court :k> 9 1

quarters at th> Instituto of Rj^ionc on 20 ’foverter 1?U2. On that occasion,

ira tLscus3od briefly the other departments in the mitary Scientific Reseai

Institute, ar.i who qs in cterya of then I pointed out to. ’'rurrowsky that th

Institute for Military Scientific Research combined those dopartner.ts in

whose research Kisaler took a__crsonal interest. Ke had founded the Institu

•

becauso ho did not want any otter authority to oarage in the work of th ©30
departments.

"Hiralor, in his order concerning the oxocution of oxperlaonts, (Pro.
cution Exhibit No, 79), had also ccerrissionod Rascher with experiments on
curin.? partial freezing and adlodj *for example with Gnstoinor "ater Com-
prosses ).» Accor Jin,- to !fe« 5 of BiaaLor‘8 latter, the procurenent of equip-
nant noodod for the experiments should bo discussed with tho officos of the
Reich Physician SS, tho ain Economic on * ..dninistrativo Main Offico and tho
Ahnonoxboi

"l r as to p ot c continuous supply of Oastcirur water frosh spring for

Raschor«3 oxpurisv.nta. Since I had no idea about tho organization of tho
*•

offico of tho Reich Physician SS anl Folico, I asked !k*u.~owsky in this con¬
nection if or. offico of tho Reich Physician SS coull telp no with tho auppl;
of tho Onstoinnr ater,

"i/o did not discuss ary other questions about Ra3char»s experiments. I
would also not hav 0 boon in a position to ^ivo any information about them.

Put in tho courso of this '.iscussion I pointed out to "runowsky, that collalx
ration botwoon tho Instituto for H^leno and tho instituto for Military
Scientific Posearch of tho -iffen SS required in ovary case personal poraissi
from Kimrlor, who had rosorvad those decisions for himself,

have only just found cut that, in ^ notu of 16 Doccsabor 19U2 tho
• -ru ''that 13" wora loft out between tho words "Raschor'3 sphoro of rosoarch
the words ''with rojor-.! to the use. ’ It should r- ads "Wo discussed cdla-
- ration not only in the sphere of past control but also in Raschor's sphere
f research, thst is with regard to tte usd of Gasteiner Water in casos of


50.1


26 Jferch .7D-16-6—"ross (In-, R easier)

Court !Io« 1

fraezinj. Because.ve tailed about collaboration in Fischer's sphere of re¬
search only with reference to the supply of Oast-iner Water, in fact, not
afcout collaboration with !rucwsky3 !jr ienc Institute, but abouj which
offico of tho Boich Physician SS could help with the supply of the
Oasteinor Water," “

i'u-.d then follows tto si nature and tho certification.


26 i.*r i.7--ftu.-l7-l-K3.rr (Ir.t. =- xn)

C-urt . i

• •

I c -a r. - t the .-L-ri- experiments. Y u -ar«. als chora. ' with
havinr carried ut nlnrla cxp.rirA.nts. Di 1 y u fcn w Pr.fcss r Schilling?

A .

Q Then y u never sp'kc. with hi=?

n V .

•

Q Did yukn* that he cirri-- 1 ut nalarLa experin-nts in Dachau?

.. ..t the bc*irr.in , ncj but ..n» day I receive: fre Grwitz a

h an’.written n tc f Schilling's re-.ar.'.itw his w rk. It c uli be seen
fr-n this n tc that he was enr:.;.' in xp.ri-i.nts t achiev. iauaunity
frnnalarin. That was n. f SchilUnr's Id research or bluas n which
h-. h written several pap rs. -It turn..- ut that cnural ianunity fr-r.
mlaria c ul ' net be achieve , but nly i=.unity a -ainat ne particular
f rn f that infccti n. Such partial iccunlsati n, f c uni, o n t
play any r ic all in nautr- because in every. r-;i n infect ! with
"• laiyii th :• is n t just no bran f solaria hut jrcat number. C ji-
s.quontly, when I arc ny plni n n tlds r,, rt f Schillin-'s, I state',
that s> far ther- ha 1 been n success an’ c ul ’ n t bo expected because,
ir. Vf pird n, the «h le Batter h . n l:.c rr.ctly hanIlf , m ! 1 ult'od
• Z w ul' ask th, Rcichsar,t SS t toko care f cue: s.

. Q D i' y u have anythin-; else 1 ne?

.. I c ul have r. thin else ' ::e Secauso, as far as 1 knrw, these
ex rir.tnti f Schillin -'s w.r. 'iscusse isze 'lit. ly by hin with Cent!

W HLmlor, and Gruwitz t k a —rt in th.c. nly later. .»t that tin. I

i h t bql n- t Or i its' st- ff, bat t Dr. Gonak n'a «to ff in th. -r.in

Otfic', s h.t I hv! n rtunity t interfere. I c ul 3iaply tell
hla ny pini n nr,’ a int ut that I was f a different pini n in this
tt r , an' that I !il.

* Did y u y ursclf >v.r c-nccrn y. ursclf with rnlariu? •

•• within th sphere f .pi !eaic c ntr 1 I i c nc.rn cyself rather

-f-.nsivel;- with aaiari- since in S utheni Russia n.! La {-.arts f th. H-.ich

lr. u.-.r Italy we na* army c-.s-s f ralaria. I >ls- nclivorcl a lecture-
su-.i.et f U-laria in S uthern^Russia.


26 ; -r h 7-If._»-17-2 -X. rr . (Int 5r fr.)
C urt 1


• =, 13 D*cuc-nt * . 37 I sufcait in excerpt fr the rep-rt n
thu stc-r.i mectin, f c nsaltin physicians fr - 3-’ N-vesibcr t 3 Dcc.-nbjr
19ii2 in Berlin. It is t be f un.’ n pa,7C liO f ih_ i-cu a c a t t k, an.! I

submit it - r Hru wsky Exhibit !»’ . 12. I rrlnp it t the n tice f tne

Tribunal an can dispense with realir.- it int the rcc rJ.

*0 c ae nrw v the sulfrnaci o experiments with vrtiich y.u are" ils ■
Charge*!. Di! y u ever crncern y ursclf with sulf naaido r its use?

A Sc.

Q Bid y.u kn w the .'efen'anta Oberheuser an' Fischer?

Q Did y u kn n re- senth-.l r Schio '1 waky wh .ire sai ’ ta have

pcrticioat. in theso experiaents?

.. «< scnthal I i ’ n't kn w an!, at that tine, I li’n't knew

Sc hit Henley either.

Q Yu knevf Profess r (K.bhar't?

A Yes, but nly by si jit.

Q When ill y u make Schicdlewsky's acquaintance?

a At the be . innln, f 191i5 in Buchtnwal'.

Dr. Oobharit stated .n the witness st • n t liscuss

la sulf'naaido experiaents in Ravcnsbrucck with y-u. Is that c rrcct?

/. Yes.

Did y u ton anythin: n\ ut the fact that those experiments
sere bein' carried ut?


3 T he Hypi nic Institute f the V.-.ffen SS, f which y u were in
cfc -rx, is sail t have ic live re the ;? .aa*ronc bacilli which were use!
" ti; sc naci ’e experiments in Ravensbroeck. •hat dc y u kn w about


that?

» That is , ssiblc because th Institute was f fill the intcrosts
' th_r SSunits. The delivery f cultures f*r sci:.itific purp SeS was cno
a -1 *n' oust mary ftocticns f a bactcri 1 .deal lab rat ry. .Vc

such exefcan -s with many bact.ri^l^dcal institutes. Tbs deliveries


o


25 L?--5ii-17-3-Kcrr v (In* 5r r.)

rt 3 . 1

f bacilli wer\. not a isprrt--nt a that they were anythin ut f

the irdinary. That ihll within the ccapctcnco f • rtaentaX chiefs.

q . k t a later ti»- I shill aufcait t- this a statement fr:c the
Hebert K eh Institute in Berlin, which I have n t yet receive, 1 ., but it
sh *s deliveries f cultures without tcllinr the chief f the institute.

,.ft-r yeur return fr.c the tri > u nide at that tice, were y u Vl '
o.thinp ab ut these bacterial cultures?.

« N •

Q In an affidavit f the cc-dcfcn-Jhnt Fiscr.cr f the 19th f * vea-
bor 19U5, D cuaent No- NO-226, Prcsucutim Exhibit 206, it is sii' that,
n the • basis f c rrosjrn’anco with, y u an.I a c nferenee with y ur assis¬
tants, it was Iccidoi upen t cfcoy.o tl» type cf baeWria cultuVos. «hat
d: y u knew nb-ut this c rr^sp nicncc which, ICC r'in t Fischer’s Usti-
o ny n the st'.n , t k place r-u-hly betwuen the 7th on’. 10 th. f «urust,


2o :;-JV_r-3"S-15-l-Lo&sor (Xnt. Brown)
Court lf>. 1 .


a -.ardisg this correspondence between :-y Institute or no on tho one
and Profassor Gubhardt on the other herd. I know notcing. la J -ttc and
jol I woo on r.a official trip in tno 2 - at end returned fron t..is trip nt tho
cal of .jo^-ust. Consequently, r.t tea ti o teat t..ia correspir-donco too!: 1 co
I wi-.o not pr.sont ia Borli:., •nd I could not h vo written those lottors. If
tain letter vi written ut ill. which L knvo not ho r. able to clarify ,\z yet,
t-v C- y hr/ certainly ir-- -7 b.on filed it way before I returned ot the ond
of .feust, bo thrt I did not bcc it. I four/, out nothing about it.

C, In an affidavit or. the ^ert of t..c co-defendant, Fischer, Fischer
at toe further that tc„ ^.--iono Institute of tho 'J ffor. SS hod arranged v. rlou
combinations of gas gan.,rono bacilli for tho oxperi.ont. Do you know anything
stout that?

- llo.

hr. President, nt this point I should like to road Hrugowsky Docu¬
ment ilo. 33, to be found on pngo 43 of tho document book and whicn I nhnll
jut in ovidonco us hrugowsky Sihibit y . 13. poregroph 9 <>•" P*«« 52. 'J>io
la n excor-t fro:. an affidavit by Suscr.no IXc-or-t. lfugowsky '» fornor cccro-
Mry. ...o first portigncfc is the usual introduct in. Ho. 9 sets forth:
n I still rononbor th t !ru*ovoky wont on n lengthy officlrl
trip to tee 2 0 *. in 1942 and r«p»ln ia 19^3 together with the Chi of

of the Department for Cli-'-atolo.y i_nd fciltur-Geography, Dr. :{Urt

•

SchiTlnu, red was Absent iurir.* Juno. J.ly an-* Au.-unt. In 191*2
Knit'.-owBky did not return until August, after tho dnto fixed for tho
ond of tee trip hud lr dy elapsed. I still ro:xiibcr th t at tho
th.o . rugoveky vws rather s-^ir ly ropri:r\ndod by l.is superior, Dr.
Gor.shen. ;arugowsky r.s very annoyed and tl.d :.c ilout it.

"I remer.b^r tho incident very well bocruso, contrary to Mo
usual custo... Krugevaky did not eelebrato .is birt.iday (15 JA'ist)
is th. Institute, and I could cot congmtulnto hii. on the actual
day. z far as I COB rczm.ior, mo did not return until several
ys 1 ter."


26 *£.r-ZB5i-lB-lG -Lesser-Int.
C- urt . i.


I submit this as ?r.«.f tit t -.ru 3 .*.:skv wr.s r.-t in Berlin .t
thut tL.c.

Profess-r Gebhr rut it s testifies v-n the stand that Cra¬
wl tz cruse', th. b ctoricl cultures to be sect :'r— the Hygiene
Institute. ..h_t were the usual channels f-r such trensais-

si.'ns nnd in the Hygiene Institute who was responsible for
thoa?

A The shipment f cultures of living bacteria wr.s in
the hr.nds .f the Chief A the B ctex - ;ic l Depart it. In
the ..idlie f 1942 the Person wh w::s in charge f this :ep-
erti^nt frequently changed bee-use to « ;i-c .v>r .and to-. tor
extent wo wore fixing up field laboratories r r the - r .y -.nd
uen had t« be token fr l y institute to fill those P-sitl ns.
C.nsoquently I do not know wh., in Juno or July, was chief cf
that Jo part, .on t.

q Lr.. Presi-cnt, in t-cu:.cnt be.k .JflJOi/n'SuI, iaru[pwsky
Document Nc. 4 is nn extract frua the Hoioh L w C zotte 1917.

I J- n-t want t- re' . thin it this ti-e boonuse the passa^o
is n. t herein c-ntninoi. In ethor w-rds 1 shall Jo Sv 1 tor
but net-at tfto .cnb.

Vi. a s Pr-fess-r Gebh rdt ne A the scientists te w
such ga3 gangrene cultures would be sent without further ad-

if he reqUeStCo the..?

A Ir. this se.ich haw Gazette which y u Just .aer.ti:nel
lucre is printed a law regarding the snip .eat »f bacteri '1

since 1917. Here it says

th.t chiefs f clinics r .1 n spitais w_re por-ittol to receive

such cultures. It is' ttor -f course t.a t Profess r dtbh-

t, S chief -f • hospital clinic f 1,000 beds, w s :

th r-_ por-ittel te receive the... C nsaqucntly there w s no

•v 1 fur police p.r. .issi n, which lay i>ers n would h vo h-d

•- : v. , r..r .11 v.e h :vb te inquire t. .a t use these cultures

5^7


26 .. r-Ab:--18-£' Jr v.n

3 urt I»u. i.

•aero tc be put. It Is the custe- in Oer_n clinics that
scientific v.-.rK is c rrie- on cn an!- is, n- frequently, of
course, bacteria and .s -f ~thor sorts re used. '..her. the
onief .f s: lar?e : clinic asks f-r cultures, no bacteriolog¬
ist would consiier it nocossary to inquire o-rc precisely in

•

t the use to which these cultures wore t- be put. That v uld
Curt'inly h ve been construed _s c scientific- indiscretion.

Q You Scr.cw that the witness Safin llsczkr. testified that
V.r-nik' r.r-.sfcu -id f t<.t.nus, This is on 1436 -f the Eng¬
lish rcc r: n- a record «.f 10 “anu-ry 1947.

-ore tet nus cultures brd by the- Hygienic institute?

A ‘..e ha 1 ’ c r.silerablo collect! a ef cultures in » ur
institute including tetanus cultures which v.t require! fr
..>th«r 5. Th r In . a foru in littl less
t'.st tubes, n! were ::.v-r -p^nei. o -id Rot onjn.c in the
breciin; . f each tetanus bacilli, he usd the -.uuser *eth-J
.f investigating tetanus rid n. t ti.c ..eth-d lnv-lviiig b. ct^r-
1.1 leal cultures if the question ever r-se.

I Gobh.rdt ond Fischer -n ifay 1943 -t tnc 3rd Confor-
L f the crnsuxtir.s physicians rtp-rted ->n thoir experiments.
DU y.u hear tills report?

« No, I dil nut he-r th.se rop-rts.

« ..hy n t? ..erun't y-u t the conference?

« 1 vr s present but it t..e S'..*- ti-io there v. s a .icct-
ln f the I.y ionic sect r which 1 attonjc!. Dr. Gebh rit's
Pop rt t «c plice in tnc l-.r > jeotin^ r<.u the surjical
rt.oct, "Bi sir.ee v,e were discussina pr blc-is vursolvce,

- b-litve b -t typh'J3 1 attenic.1 it nthcr than Pr.foss. r •


50h5


. rit's lecture.


26 'brer. .7—TD-lS-lb-Lossor (Ir.t. Brewr.)
'curt 1


Q I cavi nor to the soa-water experiments, of which you arc also
accused, Di' ycu take ary . art in these so-.-.-atar oaqp arinents?

.. No, nc part at all*

Q "flion 'id you first hoar of those experiments?

Or. the day of tho-nrrei rsaor.t*

Tou know that th Prosecution, ir. th. cross-ox r . n ination of Pro¬
fessor Ivarl Bran-It, -m.itiona: tho oxnittac for ir inkin- water utensils. vfhat
itas tho task of this coraittoo?

.. This cotTdttoa ras art of tho 7-ich Ministry for Araoncnts an:’. Wax
Production. The purposo of it ori inelly was to nakc uniform the drink inc
*ntor utensils for stcrilizir. water for the tropps. : f .any power firms pro-
duco'l their cvm cquiprjnt and it was no loiv:or ittsslblu to k.iop usiny these
'rinki: nt nor to use t . Consequently, uni¬

fication was to \o ur.dortakon an . for this reason this drinkir. water con-
itto ns form !. However, I di ’ not concern myself with this problem in
\.r.jrrl, ' ut turned to a special prolix.

Q Ycu concerned yourself with a special problem. that was that specla
problem?

A This’was tho proMco of .uriiyin: water which had boon poisoned

uriny an im lnary cc'-'at and this :«kin it pota'.lc for th population of

cities without avian; 4 orin th.ir health. Particular attention was ivon to

•

th question r nustard .-risonin, and the question was v in what
fora this mstord -as, which had boon put into ‘rinkin water, could bb made
aimless. ..t that tino, from tho Reich !>opartaont for , Land, ai ir

, os a tost ir. this natter which Vr>o to bo carried out on Oerraai

"•t r systems. Th couaittoo I aontionc concern. 1 itself with this problem.

1 Tou were a orator of thi3 co-nittoc?

A Yes.

Cl Di* T i* neet often?


As far aa I knen, it act twice.


26 ' -rch :.7—.,-..72—l8-2_—L , 3 s.r (Ir.t. Brown)
Court Mb, 1


Did the conferences of this carattoo have anythin- to do v,ith
rofc i n g see water potahlo?

Vat the slightest,

Q In your official activities dif you have aiythinr else to do with
seawater, or with cakir,; it potable?

A !fo, nothine,

Q ’ore there any connections botween the Comittoe and the ooa-*rator
experiments?

A I knar of none,

Q :±. Prusi lent, r su'nit no. Kru.;*owoky Document Ho, 5, which is on

0

rafio W of tha document ©ok, .os rtaowaky Exhibit U. This is an affidavit
by Dr, 'omcr Has so in Borlin-Fri-donau,


Court So. 1

26 *-iar .7-----!9-l-S^-31eiclcy (Int. Browa)

H-3. raiSIDSII: Counsel, die you ive the lest exhibit to which you
referred - I think it -as ^n^oveVy Docuacnt Kurher 4 - the number 14?
-id you offer thrt? Did you offer Su'.ber 14?

IE.. FLL.i-.nrd: Hot yet, no.

IHL PELSIDLSI: Should not this exhibit you rro nov offeria: .then
be Sutter 14?

FLIT-i. IS5: Yes, the one I a.3 how sutrittiar shculd to Uu-.tcr 14.
let ::e repeat. Ilrugovsky 37 is Sartor 12; 36, the third froc the totton
in the table of contents, is Suuter 13; end .Mrugcvsky 5 nov tecones
/rugevsky 14.

IK£ rl-LSIDLSI: -nd I understood you to <ivo this exhibit nutter ns
IS. Possi.lo I nisunderstood you.

IS. FLi-OilSJ: So, 14. I say 0.0 it rendia; the first two Peratrooho
/. Document ^ra;ov.hy To. 5 of this affidavit and begin with the words
Vr.f. Dr. .-xu.-owaky" or. ->r,:o .,5, third, paragraph:

"Professor Dr. Dr. Jocchi-. iru ovsky, the director f the Hygiene
Institute A tho Wffon SS in Berlin, end I, togothcr with other gcntlc-
en, vurc •C 'bv.ru of the Cur.isoion f.r Drlnkla- Vntor Koui~;ont.

‘“his cog; lesion is supposed to have teen funded ly order of Pro-
iwso.r Dr. Karl Brer.dt in the Hoich hiniotry Soe^r.

"The cccnission -.ct only twice in all. The on ly nrotte which ws
‘.iocusced ves tho protection of-the centrrl *rtcr oyster, cf tho lnr.ro
e'.tius in enne of .:rs warfare and the -revision of portrelo drinkiar
•''•ter instill/ tion*. Tho cm ieeior. never derlt with the Question of
r.<in Bcr. vat^r Potable or ray ether cuvCtions concernin' scp «-nter."

v - tnov the Docu-.ent Huntar SC-15-,, Prosecution Lxhitit Ifuiher

ir. which poisoned *mtcr is tested after it has been redo her.-tlots.
*'oy.u say soucthia: rb.ut thrt?

«. So f: r as I rc-ro -tor, this is a report A the -'resident of the
; .ve-xntioned Belch Dcn/rtaent for Veter, Land, and «ir Hygiene in
•'■irlin on tho Question of rendering drinkiar water non-toxic, end it ves
"'*■ fauvs l - ;:c ary testin' cf this was carried cut in concontrr.ti r.


Court Bo. 1

2r. .-J*r •17-A-19-2-3iK-3laklej' (Ir.t. Breve)


ct '-s. I e not -actioned in this document nor did I have ecythia: t:
d. vith thet jj tier.

Q, Was It here in tea trirl thet you or thet document f r the
first tina, or he.' you Jcnovn -f it tef-re?

a. I sew *t for the first tine hare.

Professor Brandt testified .n the stand that you had deliverod
a lecture at the neetirv o: the Ccer.ission for Drinkinr Water Installations,
Could you sey somethin.* etout thet?

«. I o-oolco once there, tut thet was not really a locture. The
originator of this orjeess vanted to introduce his oroceso as a r-oncrcly
or.!*. ! stated ny noint of viow chou? this rnd erid that it res dangerous
in tir.es of air vrrfpre to rely on only one -.recess; on tho contrary,
icvornl orocedurco for the sere jutjocc should it rtovclv-oed, to one of
vfclch, of course, ono could ;ivo nrccudonco, tut one should not rely on
just ono. "hit's all X said.

C^. Hoy I co e to tho oroorironts with cnidor.ic Jaundico with which
y.u no also charged. Did y-u j«<rticiorto in any vry in cxncrinor.ts in
0-5iconic Jaundice?

A. Bo.

q, hen did you first h«.cr of these orxiri..cnt8?

a. When the Indict xnt w, s presented. to re.

Bit y-u knjv Dr. Dchren?

A. So.

C^. Did you know -r ofes .r Hoc, on in Stress tour.;?

a. I knew hia ■lightly.

v Did y.u yourself collect any data -n he atitis, that is,
o-.idc-ic Jaund.ice7

a. Dhc -arsons affected vith hepatitis wore, next t typhus and
i Icrip, the ..rcatoGt concern to Gorrac physicians durin.- this vpr. Dr.
hitzeit hos nlrcr'y said that the nunber i versons vho fell ill of this
'-ieepoc r osv into the rill ions. It is p -otter f course that I os a
- r sh-ul ' have bed t concern Tyscif with this crotle - teepuse every


Court I... 1

26 ~r- •'7-A-19-3-£Si*-5l«kley (Int. Brovn)

elide vitk a fcos itcl f-r ouidanic cases received hundreds of such
ersec. la -thcr Mords, I concerned -yself clinically vith the trentnent
it this disease, pad I calculated on the basis A statistical data that
there were !ev cases hut sufficient that fell to ae. There »-crc roughly
* thousand tut I did not concern ryself vith the ^er- that cruses this
disease, nor vrs there p.ny oouipnent in ny institute far breeding that
virus. You need esocial technical eouipr.ent for that vhich ve did not
have.

<t» Did you concern yourself vith how the sickness arioco?

A. So.

Q, r rofossor (>ut*».it in his interrogation as r. vitnese on the 10 th
of February 1947 said that ho had soen you occasionally at conferences
rad sc ler.civ you. Did you ever talk atcut Jaundice ox'ori->er.to when you
a hin thero?

A. Ho, not a vord.

IS. ILDGilHG: hr. President, I nov sut.-.lt Docuav-nt Kruftovsky 6.

MH. HARDY: Aty it nlerco Your Honor, this D.cu'ier.t Hunter 6 of
Professor Gutzclt'o on na^o -.7 in .irvv^vsky'o document took io dated 23
January 19*7, md 6ir.ee that ti - .:o Gutzoit has nt ocrod here as r vitnoee
red van examined ty defense counsel. I think It vili only he clutter in.'
the rec.rd to rd.it this into evidence. Therefore, I object to the nd-
olssion of this Accu _nt.

TH2 PRZSIiaWT: D.es c-unsol desire tc rcor the document into the
record or slTily sutrit it rc an exhibit?

DR. PLLoiXSO: I simly wanted. t -ut it in evidence. I poked
Ittzoit vhvn he was on the stand p.t that ti:o "bother vhat ho had said
c-rc in this affidavit v P » true, so I si-TJly brin,: the Bench’s attention
*• the document.

THI PRESIDES?: 4 he document vill be admitted *a evidence.

DP.. FLE-.ISG: It vill be .ru,r.vsfcy Exhibit Suatc-r 15.

C». The co-defendant Sudclf Srcnlt said in his affidavit, D cunent


Exhibit Hunter 166, that Dr. Grrvit: her direct negotiations vith

y-53


C-urt S-. 1

26 .xs -7-A-19-4-ISi-3lEklcy (Int. Br-va)


Hi=r.lor la order to sot oxnerir.ent* 1 subjects f r Dr. Xkhcen. Did Dr.
Gravits talk about this to you?

a. Ho, a' one stoIcc to -.e at cut the janadico 'robleo.

Q, Then I con state that you neither uartlcluated in Jaundice
emerineats nor before your rrrest did you know anything about then!

a. -hat io correct.

I cone now to the sterilisation ex-.erl-.ent6. Before your in-
-.ri6'-a-.ont did you know anythin,; cf exreri-entatl-n in sterilisation?

a. So, I had heard, nothing about it.

Q, You know Rudolf Brandt'e affidavit, Dccuaent -.40, 'rosocutlon
inhibit Susber 141, in Document Book 6, in vhlch it la taid that Riralor
after n conforonco about sterilisation orcblcas s- eclfieelly orderod
that the whole sterilisation Question should bo troatei with the utnoat
avertcy. V©ro you ever present at conference* on sterilisation?

A. So, never.

q. Did you know r-ofesser Kluber„7

a. So.

Professor Hohlfeldcr?

a. I oav hi-, onco in Ornwit'* antorou but did net •-oak to bin.

DR. JL^a.ISO: Hr. Presidont, fron Sutanno Dur.ont'e affidavit,
vhlch io on *r.:t 46 and which f rr.orly vns ixhlbit Su-.bor 13. I should
like to rood Sttcbtrn 16 and 19 cn

"Su bor 16. I vp.o oio > asked whether I had over heard la the
Institute ,r fron Kru-^vsky anythin* ot-ut:

(a) Luftwaffe hl.*h altitudo ex ori onte at D-chru carried ut by
Ir. Raschcr,

(b) Luftwaffe frecsin- oxneriuente at Dachau carried out by Ir.

Batcher,

(c) rr of ese r Schillings aalaria extriner.ts rt Dachau.

(d) Hepatitis erocriuentt at Srttwoilor and Sachoenhnueen,

(e) Yy:hu3 exoerlo-crots at Ketcwciler.
btoriiirrtl-r. ox-:eri'»at^


o


C-.urt 5c. 1

26 nrr :7-A-2£-5-E3i-31akley (Iat. Sr.vn)


(*) LuftvHffe experiments rt Dfchau oa ronr'.orin cor vrtcr ^ote>.le.

“I have definitely never hoard euythiiu: ecrut ex-erinents cf this
kind. If such erocri'.eats fccd 'car. ciecussed verbally cr in vritiar la
•ho Institute, then 2 av convinced I should have hcerd about the-..

•F-ojardlr-: the Luftwaffe ex-.ori eats ca resderira: sec ^cter notrble,
I should llho tc add that the oueotlon of *mt«r srnnly and draine/te la
concentration ca.vit esc their -utlyia.; *>oets vee dealt vith la the
Isstituto, hut It vp* -urcly e ;:r.tter of voter supplied fro underground
s.urcoa, n«vor of sob vater."

'v So I can you etrte that you kaev nothin*: about sea voter ex->ori-
r.onts n-.r rbout storilirctl.n eriorincnta?

That Is true.

I core nc« to tho typhus experiments. ?Uaeo describo to the
-art vhat'ty-.hue really is.


*'5


2 : .-ar h7-^- ^w- 2 C-l-Gaila,- r*. r (Int Sr to)
C urt -* . 1


.. Typhus is a disease which is r, i a ranlly an cpiieT.ic within the
sir .~n Raich. In Burpr.e there is a c. nsi'.erablc s urce i this cpi ccic,
nth the center c* ir.t ir. <‘hite ~uthunia ir. ••ussia, an: this area ir. which
the typhus opi'enic is exten's ab-ut the dJ '.ic f rcLani. I her*, were

•

nly a few is'latc' cases f tyuhua in n-raal years befrre the war in
Gcr-uany. The is Into ' cases f tynteis in r. rail years before th- war
in Ooronny. 4 h. Qtre-.n ct rs, in utter wr?s, ha n kn-wle^o of this
cpl’aaio, r this llscise. It is kn wn that this typhus always appears
in lar.-e r ups f j,o* pie ih t ar. in; v- riste , ,n that the presence,
tr..ref re, f typhus is a specific wartise cpiVric, n‘ always appears


when f.tainee ccur, r when the p ilati n is, s sal', ir.p-Veriahc , in
it ms first kn-'im by th na . f " .-x,:r Xy hue.”

Presentln th sc fiul.’a r arc's in w.icr. th- Gorn-.n tr 's were
peratin at the »>c lnnln f the t stem cua : ; .L*n, typhus layei .’rent
rv, an.! als' it pi .ye a rent r w when “npcle n inva.'e’ Russia, because
this oanpalijn .collapse because f typhus an r. t becau c f ocli w< ther.
In r 'er t ' away with this cpi -nic since 1*0, in ther w rls, als. st


if a oontury, th r has b< n in Ooraany sharp measures t. cabat it.
rth. wti lo fivl' ,f c nta:t us ’iae.SeS we hav. dvi.Y! Goraany inti two


r • ‘ -* ••• char ctorisc as c nta.;c us tie , whereas.


f.n I Is case s which usually n t ccur in Ge rainy but arc br u ht frrrn
• •

u*.rl!c, an’arc c nsequcntl rin,:ln: fear ar characterise! as c <-aa nly
r us Usonses, onda-K r■ ’ • > a special law. Of ill these six

i !. raics, ty hus is n_.

Di . FI&JffiiG: In this zatU-r I w Ull like, t sub It ru rwsky's

J - * nt • 21, which is « cuaent B «... 1 -.*, .a t yet presents 1 to- the

•"* n »- ■ i53. I n *- kn w whether I si; ;1 ! alrc

r t wait t ive it a nunber wh_n I ut the ’ cuacnt in .vi’ence. I

: - * k *,t_r sequence.

■ - :RESIES:.T: Unless y u firs' it access ry t re s -e p rti n f
c-x-.„ .T, n -V, ! Sf 'd. au s* u wait until t:._ ' cua-nt is fftrel


• v ; er.ce.


PC56


26 :~:r L7--liw.-20-2-Gllls£i|fi (Ut 5r *n)
C ;rt »■ .- I


Dr. FLi'1 ING: li , I t n't want tc real anythin- n , but sisoly oall
th. v'lirt's atwnti'.n tc it.

7Hr. rRESIDEAT: Then yn ruy wait until the Jacucent i read in, and
then tffcr it in cvi 'once at thnt_tis*.,

DR. FLEMING: Thank y-u.

:Y DR, FLE&atfG:

Q Is typhus gainful?

A Clinically, typhus results frai Trap f ty.ahus diseases, ns
thy w ri "typhus’’ Beans, f: an has reference t. nun.Vm.ss. In reference
ta the ’ise se, it is character is tie of th so irrl us synptena, r, at
least, typhus takes rlace «fc lo this patient is in this stu- r, r nuabnoss.
Typhus in .-or.cr.l ! ..a n t cause vain, an that is characteristic f all
■f this t up rf 'ise.sos, chicn can be !in.-n se 1 usually by the fact
that ah. run has fover, an' feels p rly but otherwise cinn t say that
ho hurts inywhor-, r cann t rctlly say nh .t is really wrahd with bin.

7i.it it is a rule that in such cases y<-u lia -n.se> typhus and sp. ttc ! fever.

DK. FIE - :*!G: At this ■ int I shall n' -.it iru - erky's D cusent Nc,

19, wnieh is Is in D cur.ent E k !i . 1-.., which I wish to introduce
"Hen that tocucont ha k is available, "itoess, can y.u state under rath —
n , le v. that ut which ref rs t the < cuncnt.

BX LE. PlEiMIiJO:

Q Witness, chut rr.e the rear n w:y typflus ccssl.nally appears ' in
Ge rainy rith ala st aui '.ieval vi lento?

•> t is .an 1 c =: n sayin n the ?.art r opldccdcs, that th. s.

epidenics t: at an. csv.ei ily ralcss, like :wbj>s, r ncasl-.s, scarletina,
c -v v rj an r us if th./ strike receptive ; eulati n which is r. t
c t t!Wn. If such an epidonic ccurs, thin in the fir3t fury fte* it
rises tf.» a st s-.ri us cases ccur, an s it ccurre ' <s a result f
tr.. .Vissian caajii -n when I for the first tir.e saw these act dan re r us
- - ! f typfais. Th,.re were cases f nen nh cent t c rk La the ra min*,
a fainted, m ixcir.-- ur.c nsci us vdle c rkir. , r-re r u *ht

’• usci us t t!.. . cv r, an -i-_ witr.in .nc r tw .ays with ut rec,v.,rin.~

5-57


26 izr - T -.»- -2G-3-fclla 'her (Ir.t -r an)
C urt . 1


consciousness. Similar eases wire f or.* in Naples b; the "iMicsn Typhus
C =cissi a w: .r General Fx. People died there in the streets. «n1 that
is typic-l of the first appearance f an alien epidcoic in a p-pulati n
that is receptive t. it, an-.:, f c ursc, that is the nst serious 'an.-cr
in which a threatened p.pulatin cull fin' itself.

Q 1.'as c sbattin of typhus under these c-n’iti ns of .TesUst
is-: rtance b'th fr n 3 ne ’-ical an! military rens n, s far as a civilian
p- pulati n was c nccrr.ed?

n Spi Ionics 'raw n lie tine ti n hctw.cn civilian an! a Idlers,
c nsequcntly, it is obvious that the e ntr 1 f no f the Host epi'emica
f the world was :nw f ur ;rir- tasks, as s n as such an opi looic aadc
Its appearand.

D!. FL£ tUNG: i!r. Pr.si ; cnt, * shcui: like t ask f.v» quest i ns
f Dr. Din., but first : sh uld liku t | «nt xt .stake in the int r-
rrcta* 1 n, which was Just cal/.' t cy attenti n. Thu witn.ss sail when
r< forrin. t tli. .-.n 1 sentence in hrin-in- ut a statecent that,
cri-iinal is mt all we t be neat r f thj nnqy»" an tb. interpretation
ma that nors n n t fit f r r.ilitaxy servlet is either a w.rker r is

• • in ris n." I , f c jx-s. is n n-ncnsicol nlsrintorprototl n, and
t • : * , 11 That every

Gvman in r. pris n 1 :ie wit. a criminal xvc r’ cannot bo inductod into
tie army.''

7K i HESlDc.'T: C ur.s_l, b,f re enter!n up n tint subject which y. u
r fcm. a » q rent .: , t.. t ill >e st ( ne.' f r t n rnt.-i min.-'s
- n. Tribunal n • will r.c ss until 9:30 t a rr >? a min .
unal a<y urns u-.til 27 liirch 19i7 it 0930 h-urs.)


2 ? ' 2 T U7~: - 1-1 - LJ} - Pester (Int. Broun)


r ffielal Transcript of the American ilitary
Tribunal I in the natter of the ftdted States
of America, against Karl Brarxlt, et al,
defendants, sitting at .'-urnberg, Germany, on
c' arch 19!i7, 0930, Justice Beals presiding.

7 HS aTSJUL: Persons in the court room will please find their


.ts.

Tne Honorablo, the Judges of Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is now in session, God save the United States
of unarica and this Honorable Tribun ,1.

Thera Trill be order in the courtroom.

THE lESIDS:.?: ''r. larahal, ycu ascertain t at the defendants
are Oil present in c^ irt.

THE PRESIDE?: :<ay it please your Honor, all defendants are present
tho oourt.

i:.E TOSIBBIJTi Tho Socrotary-Ooneral will noU for the record tho

f all t. o defendants in court.

*

Counsel nay procood.


JOEHIH. HRIKO SIX - Rosured
DIRECT EXAMIK.TIO!l (Continued)

: . . I... 1 i (Counsel for the Defendant Hrugowoky):

Before I enter upon a discussion of the typhus oxperlrunts in
Bucharwald I ah 1 like t ask e few questions about Dr. : . Dr.

-ia, cone from your institute, did he not?

A

Yes, I know hio as a result of ar inquiry I i-ccv.
doctors •'! tho •*affon-3S and he volunteered for »ork in tho field of
fv ;-Jt» and t-cturi In.-J*. He was an instrucser In the SS-dcctor's


•x.lxny n Graz, and at tho Hygiene Institute of the university there
" his first b-cteriolcgical training, -hon ho bn.- In -y

had already received his basic training and could develop


vu Bid ycu'knc-w^ n personally very well?

\7 .

“• Of course. I s&«lhic and spoke to him very often on technical
t ors but^jt would bo false for


*1-11zed


to say that I knew


-SOS';-


Court I

27 ..ar U7- ■- - 1-2 - WG - ?<* (Infc - rcKn)


I didn't


M. .oil or .00 in his close confidence. That .05 not the cose.

liko his nature or. the W-.oio,

3 . „hot » your impression of his character?

... von™, -itnesscs of the prosecution ho™ slroody node sf.tu-
on this point. For instance, Dr. Ko S on sold that one could
utally ho deceived as to the doctor; -hen he .os still o conccntrotlon
doctor In ouchcnsnld rds fon~ secretory ciuld corroborate that

in a book that he wr.U before the ..or In Buoher..--Id. I »*

Bln. -os o person in *« one could roly -uod in .hen one could hove
confidence But through Icon's Oust loony ond through careful atudy
of the notorial presented by the prosecution in this procaof I hove
hod to o -a. to -ho conclusion that this assumption on ty port »os r. t
correct. Xogon for lnstone. sold tnot even the root secret iott. ro,

•hlcr. nocerdlnn to relations had to be -rltton by on officer hinsolf,
nod boon turned ever to bin os on innate -lth the order th-t he should
sake n fen typogrephioal orr-rs so that it could he pretended os If
he himself had «&. «h» ^tor. ih. unroUOblllty of oh,rooter th-t
r.as eonlf-xd in this atoll trait 1= probably characteristic of hla
.holo ohorooter. But, of course, at -he tine 1 kne- nothin* of it.
Otherwlso -he .-Ivon chorocterlstlcs that Hogon stated ore correct.

Ding .as in b, i. iatrious, «th pothrlodcolly ombltian, very

vain, liked to take credit Ter vdt.t oth.rs h A done. * Ukcd to
-ention his asooclation -1th people In high offices on - -.V - cession,

t o* it wao a jmitoblo one or net.

Q. iiq huvo alr-ody said -hat Ding's afccializWl b-Ct..iolc^cr.l
trainih ras. I would lilco to ask row «hzt vere hio othor qualii".' ti-;


w a doctor?

. 1 . Ec fed an wwago nodical training. His knowledge of therapy
.nd diagnostics wore average. He was very skilful in tho laboratory

ar.d cculd har.dlv scientific prebtera.

... -hat wis his addition I. Training in tte field of typhus?

A . ..hen the thought arose in cur institute of emufacturing our


5060


Court I

27 :.ar - 1-3 - LJG _ Foster (^nt. Sr own)

to typhus vaccine for own use, I sent him v Frcfissor Gildcr*ister in
tr.o Scbert Koch Institute in Berlin in order to acquaint hi ms .If with
tho whole field of typhU3 bacteria and to have hin learn hov< those
bicillaj ar«. bred ir. chicken ogge. frequently, he was at the Pasteur
Institute to laarn more about how this vaccine is produced, a :ethod
which wanted to use for cur own purposes.

q. Do you consider this additional training as sufficient?
ihis training was, of course, not sufficient to bo a fully
trained specialist. That can only be achieved by years of experience,
out it curtainly nos sufficient to fore a basis for acquiring one's owr.
.... rience in the fluid. His practical activity corresponded to this
training, and he was not theught of as to be enploy-d in any special
r-suarc fork at first. Ho was givon several fully trained bacteriol¬
ogists who wuro prisoners to help hin, one of whon was one of tho best
jcirJJeta in F land in tho fi-ld of typhus, Professor Flock fron
Wfcurg, who waa *o support hin in his work. In this tossing up before
his training was altogether sufficient.


Court 1
::-rch -:7:


._ -l-.-D-C 00 ::-S r o - ,


I esh you now t j _cscrib_ to the c--urt la-',, these

...

jssibilitlea Of coat polling ty.hus -t the or., of 19-il?

A. Aft or the end of the first world typhus

5 . - entirely dependent upon lol uoin . A

orsor. -ith t--?hU3 v;ho hr.s no lice hi-. Cinnoe , ss the

6d Ja . Tti c Ion so is the nocoas rj rorquisito for

. '.asin. typhus froc mo porson to n other. If I c .n

yatr y the . .tl. <f c-nt.-.gi .n *by dostr y±n& the o .rri
•

n . oly, the 1 -use, then I ;iust have suoc<-ss in contr Ilir.g

t yi ... in the first v .rid r this c ntr 1 lothod was

sufficientt At t:.. bo gtr-n ing of the Hussi • - •

• •

this s- rl* 1 r, .uwovor, typhus ap:«e r.d .t tho fron

.or. the Bit ilatio nd in Q -»0 of our oanps,

it •jipoarod '.ith such elo.:ont ry virulence tivt t.iis

In -• • • -

.. ic. 1 i - -'. V ooin tion

f r typhus \ .3 only tiioorotic :lly i«i 0 «rn. ny t th:.t

ant *

’ftiors r.ou h V 30J 108 or. h nd?

>w ; o, th nl? i oo vlioro they o' nii ho nood
i 5 oci:*l rose rch nd :ionuf cturin; institute of tho
<a\.; wr-ka.i vhioh * : s sot u tht.ro ftor tho iolish
.. .. irl trphua v: coin. s produo-4

s .do dr-:, the viscera of infected lice. This
process is oxfcrottly difficult hoc use over- lousu h d to
b_ inf .: .* > 11: Ith ~ c c.ros3od .ir ;ecdlo -.P.d

t.« 7-.cci.v.tc -.no -raon , u h..d to .. Uo u - tu ^

or Of 120 lice. Til. or .cit; J - - J

•

Industry, »n th_ oth-r h nd, or r th-r t?.. ’ivelppouit
e.:is vice in- by industry s onl; In - b«j. inn-in*; st -c.fi


5062


Jr;- race rch. Her a r. j ...-.in methods wore known,
th»u—chod just -ascribed, ir. which iico were used, s -at
but tha r.c-ms * ora brad i;. chiclcen c.^s, mi liar a
----- -VC to Gerahn aitfcods which will piny a role lr,t-r
ar. in tfcu tri 1 , tho Otto *; hirst nd tha Gil: nciator-
IlC'.r.an tliods. Grantor production of thos- v ecines \rc
r. pod for by industry- through those methods. In foreign
countries ther ;;:s still mother _at2:oi which involved

• m 0

the rtittci -J. infect ion f gainer- >i a, r-'bbits, .iico,
r o„s in the nJ 3 c., Milch induced n specific infection
of tho lun.s no tho infected lur._ of the -r.iad vr.s

of - • coinos

ayol nod by this r.atnofi • hich will -1 y role 1 tor
.- tastLi ay, bal clso the. French’method of

Gir uu, the Hoa. ninn siethof of Co.. ; iuich and Zut: ,

- iV thaC3.

he aothod‘..'hioh induatr; used in iro runny
othod with chicken eggs.

.. *Jhy ..id you not leavo tho product! r. of this
vacoir.o s- in’- try?

I u.'.:.it?i 1 ;r d i n h .d n t i . chad sufficient
M orti . :;c t thht tiliO.

ro. iyious :;-ud of typl.un v .ccincs by very .'no end it

caul- ba -h t ir. tit- nont fow .onths tl: t need c mid

* •

not bo oovorod by industry lono. Vo . '

troops n‘ f-r tho c ncontrafcion c: as mrant

luircmont r.lso. Consequently, it v-.a clotr frou

1 ia~ t:- t industry cjut.c r.-t cover this need uid I v»cs

•

*. th-t ti_e of tho opinion which I 3 till h -1 tea ;y,
t\*i. . .o only solution for these difficulties -..-as A
- . .:f cturin of these vaccines for our 0
. i ‘ .-t chocs-, the chicken method ir. Germany
c use eh; food situ ti a there *. .s bvcouinn ^rsa fro:.


5063


Court 1

:: i-oh ok-arb-.m


fr . loath to loath aid because ve knev that in tho use
o * t!ii3 .-.ethod .-6 h.d t c unt on r loss of fifty to
eithty _ .r-esr.t of -.he - ;o used ’.;hich cxild not bo used

4

ir. tlio . :;uf:;cturir. ; , f v cciao. Consequently, I 3 us^e 3 ted

*

c/.rt .-r ' itz use. tho French Giroud -Method, nd Or

',."■3 .reud to tliis. _

other v ccir.es test-- other than those
♦

dc ire r bbits limes, i f it hr.d bee. decided fro.i

z. . - inain, t ._nuf. cturo ot.*n v ccir.es fr *.. evbbit

lua -s?

... Ir. lor;: ny o icr.ov: tt th't ti..e fro., our own

-i mco only of tho Velde vecino fro;, lice. :c lcae.

nothin f the offeCtivonosa of tho vccino f rckick-n

- a, "A hoped the raccin bo offlenoious but -.-o

• • •

•.i: ao; then, n' it is, of course, co;.;rohor.siblo

th t in fi -ht t ooatr 1 typhus oyido.-ica - ®I:ould

. .

any, iply - ' t . uso of

iolu.tri 1 roduetion, houcc the r.Ooos iity of moving

•

- - - •

be C rri.: out?

La teating ims first to .. o rri-: out by
. .... aril* • . such is : - oustoadry in industry,
in Other institutes, r.: secondly tees- re lly
aw-stwti v ccir-s • -ro t be used r.-.or... yopul tion
ir.ioct.1 vith typhus nd it • s our idea t vtccir. tc
G-r .lea ..i ca.o fro.i r. -re fr--- of i refection nd Who
re joi- lit* tho 2 at ••here typhus t; s r ... at, ith
’•*. .1. ccin-, v- thua t !-:cop n eye on those pooplfc
i. c r.p-.ro the rel tivc efficiency of this " cciao -id

bus.


5064


Court I

Lterch 27-U-KD-2—1-Cook-Bro- .n.


q. ’..'hy vvr.s that not d-ne?

A. It vfas in pert done, but :: ther 1 in; of

'•volopnent caught up with and passed it. I d'aelf sug-

this ..cthod of c-a prrativs investigation of

epidemics to Growitz. It was submitted t-> the Scsturn

Ministry, which dor.lt with Occupied Russian Territory.

At tho end of 19*11 there was another conference with

GroA/it-., Ho asked .:e :t that tlno how Ion it would

take before wo knew h.Ow effective those vacoir.:s •:sre

*

and X o&tr.VKtt t it would take a few months, but

th t or.e could not c >unt or. any cortain knowledge before

• •

the and of tho r.oxt yoarrl9i2A3, s- ho asked 10 if there
voro no -thcr v-tys that .ii ht possibly shorten this
longth of tiric. I answered that tho nniacl oxporinonts
and tho testing in endangorol groupc of population took
auon a length of tiuo that tho pr^'css c »ul- n 't. bo
or toned vjithout endangering tho likelihood of ny
auccoso at all.


5065


(c .ntinued) Grrwitz *oe colt discontent to hoar this. Hu had

^r.in taen csked by Kinder when scco pcaltivw ruulu v.uld ba omiv in.

And Crcvits was a foil v *h<^ did net Ilka t *ive «r tr.

hi« boss. Thus tho Ur rclp.ti.no botvesn hij and Hi- -ler nlayed c r. 11

In this natter. ?aa » AMr«Atl> r.o bucr-'o a-r* 08 core crorto. bacauso

Gravitz finally flet to the p»int uf or^la^ thet a way struly had tr, be

•

found t- shorten the period of testin* because it ves cuite iroossiblo

for hie to £ive such a Motive report t- Himler and finally Jre poked

ic whothor the f llovin* way nirfht not be feasible. It would decidedly

shorten tho length A tine if these eroerinents vcrc not c. .-riod out on

ftainelB tut on hunan beings. Thus theoo hunan beings veru first to be

vaccinated ond outoeoucntly artificially infected. Thio thought, which

cr:ic t- r.o for the firot tine, outraged co. I told hin that, of course,

thio procedure v.uld shorten the length of tine necessary because tho

discrepancy butMten aninal and hu n a n boin* exporlnonts io that tho eni-

;al experiments .nut be repeated ovaeral ti--*s in order for tho rosults

cf the eroeri.nent to bo transferable t hunan fcolrv;s, .for eo ovory<>no

knows e ,.uinco dI,* lo not a Lunar, bein.; end in tho very decisive points

it rercto ruch differently freo the way a huran boliu; roacts. Gravitz

said, "bhet do you vant? Thet lo the only way that w can e noidcr now.

Vu -rc confronted by a dlro necessity ned I boliwve wj auot follow this

if vc cec a chance to do o> •.■ I ansverod. hin that hi should not undor-

ttrnd -y statement t«. nean thrt, because thrt way was irpostlblo, nnnoly,

•

t >rtificinlly infect healthy hunan boin^c sirroly to test * vrcclno
becruci the or_:o results could, although somewhat r. ro sl‘>vly, be
rchiiv.i 'ey jthor neons. He sal. 4 , "Then y u d ndrit that wo U6t
CL-nly *>rscivoly accent this loss „f tine rnd ala; coeett tiw rorr-nsl-
• ility f r the deaths thrt will result at e c .r.soquenco of this tine vo
-r« luing motvt the population infooted with tychus7" I told hin thrt
vet i i thin* which those oeoolo would have to take as their fr.te; I ny-
>ilf could see n, .th^r wry. .ind I t<-ld hin ny attitude - thr.t hunan
iifi ves or cr*d - pc attitude which l had set d-vn e few years previously


5066


r.otf.' 1 *


, 4 . ) :


. utipV.C#

.V>1-


I . .


C.urt Sc* 1

27 ,-r 47 -"- 3 - 2 -IH»GroS£ (Inc. 3 r:vn)


- a : > end that, -f course, I cculd end ~ould not set contrary t y
vs convict! as er.<? beliefs. Grt'-lts wrs not satisfied with this. Ho
concluded this conference, vhieh vte enc-m; the nest dxanatic enferenees
I have ever hr.; is ny vh le life, ~ith the state-ant thet he wild sub¬
mit this setter t. «ur ccttv,n_chlef, Hissler, end would tell no later

•

vhnt happened. I then f.usl cut thet e few days leter he actually did

Best Els lor e- -.eh v, end when he told se of this, telk with Hlrmlor he

•

. Id --.v specially that he had infersod Ki: ler of hio end. ny ioint f

view rnd thet Elscler had decided against -ny ooint :f view. He had eer.

t kind to no ro sot to ceanistion ne with those Mcpericente hut.on

Irrltr'c au^eetion Din.;, vh<- had.already boer. trained in the field of

tjnfaue, weo t. he uoed for thle ouri.se.

q, A;. President, I refer now to Mnagcvsky Dccuitnt 38, which I

cut in evidence yesterday as Krasovsky exhibit 13. I eh uld like t;

;( ,d. nu.ihor It 3 .a ca,:o -*8 of the dccu-ent hook. 2 his is tho affi-
*

-avit of Mrurfovsky's f r:er secretory, Susanne IXm-nt. lr,o 48:

"1. I w-.b c-nl yo. as Xru- vsky's secretory froa 1 Kerch 1939 t<
Atril 19iB. I dealt with the .;rci • r 5nrt of his corroso- ndonco.

.ru.:'vtky 0*0 fton talked t: r:o about the vari'.uo -.rttcro connected
with thw c.rrvs-xndonco is order that I sh uld he lnfried in c» so •■£
Bucriw8 during hio ahBunco.

’’Uhwn I ctrrted v rk thcro, the Ky.tlor.o Institute f tho Vnffcn SS

•

••0 in tho -irocooo .f f.rru>ti.n. I thorof ro tok nert in the wh^lo

.-cnt cf tho Institute and havo iors nrl kande^o ’f <ny details.
”2. r.ccuso f the nu*:er .ue cases «.f tytfrus in tho concentrate n
cps is end anon,; tho Vaffon SS tr ois durin.; th« winter f 1941/42
knu; wsky ecided t -.enufacturc tynhus vaccine f or the e« ncentrnti-r.

CP.-: s rr.-- for tho Veffcn SS in the Ey,:icne Institute, in rdcr f *i c indc-
n:.cnt f the industrial supplies.

'Cuw day i-iru*: vek;.- told no that he had spoken to Grrwitr ab.ut the
ttteati n t rnufreturo ty-hus vRccine rnd thrt e der'ertnent cf the
Helena Institute wpe to he f r-^d rt Buchenveld for the manufacture of


Court 5:. 1

27 Her 4?-ii-3-3-2BHhroB8 (1st. 3r«. vr.)


this vaccine. She process vr.s to be ccrrlei -ut la Buchenvnid so that
- vui '- a t - c “'•'Wftf. eir raid on 3erlin. Als it vr.e oesier
t, -htcin furrier thorn for the eni-ials accessary for the tests end there
vr s els - c sufficient nu -cr if experts at Suchenvnlr. to lo-k after the
naiiels oaf to ianufacture the vaccine. I ale * heard thon that Or. DJa<
v.uld ’re la charge of thu veccine production car that he vp 0 to learn
usier Profess r Giidorzeistcr in the Robert Koch lastituto the orocoss of
rraufacturin* typhus vrccin« vtich the professor had developed..

’* icc ‘ ,v frca 2r - that he worked, fur soot tl-o la the Robert

th -tituto with Oildeaeister in <rder t iicrn the Gllder.dictor
oth.' of producing typhus vaccine.

"3. Sooo tire after Sin* hrd been sent to the Robert Koch Institute
1 larr “ th0 r’MUfoeture of the vaccine, Hru*ovsky told no that Oravitx
had. caked hi;: when his vaccino Tcx.ufacture would bo far enough edvrncod
r lar^o Quantities of voccino to be available for inncculatl no. Ko
lie.' that this v.uld trice at least six uonths because the rninal toots
ho t'- be repented before v.rkatlc results were achieved par' Vocruoc even
then the tt eel;., v ul. t vc t. ru ;uro. Grrvit* vrs annoyed at the Ion*
el y and su csted. thrt the mind teste be dlsnonscd with end urlst nore
c used f r the tests instead. hru,;,v*ky .-ruabled at the ti :c about
5r «vitt and ocid thrt he hrd -nly ountested the tests n husnn beings
* W,U8 ° he did n t vrnt to have to report t . Kimler that the vaccino
r the in-culr.ti ns would n't be available for appr.xi-lately an thor six
.i.-.:. R„ told no ho he* re'ectud in the presence f Srcvltr t'e au*-
•- a f testing with iris oner red had. ou ted his book "Kodicnl Ethics"
v.-.ich he r.a' eta tod his opinion about tuch tests.

A short tlcc la.tcr .a his vr;- back fr j seoins Grcvits c,:oia,
ri vaky t.ld m that Hiaalcr had -ecreed that prisoners eh uld be uPud
' the v reel no tests. ~e =cnti-aod in this connection that Grnwits would
•• likely mss Eir.iler’s jrdor directly- on t' Din,:.*

•• w I sh-tild like t road fron Document Ko. 39, ->r.:e £9 f the d.ocu-
” '• ®»i is the affidavit f nra. Kilde<ard Pfaffia^er, vhi vns


5066


C-urt :.. 1

27 Hex ;7-K-3-4-23i-Gr.6s (1st. Sr'-vs)


rsaistrat iecrutEry tad -,r~xy -! Suscaao Dune at. ?e<:c 59. Krw;-«8'<y
Dceur.eat 39. I vich to f ;ive this Exhibit iiru.- ~sky 16. ?rru Pfcffir. or
toy*, cftor the custoiery iatroductioa:


5069


2 ? March 47-J:-?JC-4-l-Putty (let., 3rc"c)
:7^rt I


"?rcc about Octobor, 1940, to March, 1942, I was a Aorthnad typist, and
ubsc^uontly fres January, 1944, until April, 1940, cs assistant secretary
Proforsor D-. Mrugowsky at tho Zyzloixi Institute of tho Taffon-SS.

-ine tho r.bovo periods, as woll as during th. Intervening pori&a, I usod
*o tho -or:: of tho first socrot-ry, Miss Susanna Duaont, when oho Mas
•:6oat duo to sickness or v-c-8lon. Through thoso activities I wr.s ablo
gain an or. :.r.3iva insight into tho corrospondonco and opor-.tlon of th,
iono Instituto of tho Waffon-SS. I still c-n re.x» bor that or.o d ;• re
'.cor >.i«t told -o at tho instituto that tho "old nan", no-ring our
of, Profossor Dr. Ilrugousky, had h-d anothor argtsiont with Crr.vits and
ri advocatod his di7o- Mt opinion against Cr-uitn. Orrjritz h-d ashed hie
conduct the oxjorlswats with typhus vaccine not on -rdaals but on
aonors because tho orporinonts on rnisalo Mould tnlco too such tlso. But
chiof had rojoctad that ar.phatic"lly as contrary to his concoction of
cfoosionul othlb.". 2!y co-workor, Sunanno Duron?, and I wore h^ppy whon
rine of th, upright attitudo of our chiof sinco our concoption of nodical
les was tho sraao;"

fro., hocuront Book 1-:. which has Just bo.a nbtrdttod to tho Tribunal,

M':. to road tho affidavit of co-Dofondant Dr. T.oso, Doaunont

..miBky 46. I should like to . ulnit it as Wrusowsky 2*hibit 17, page 159
*•-- docutaoat took 1-A Exhibit !fc. 17. .J“t,r tho ordinary usual introlucti :
3 oso soya:

"7 controversy with Dr. Ding and Prafossor Dr. Schroibor durin._ tho

rooting of tho consulting physicians cwcurrod in a a or .ling session of tho
don hygiono and tropical h;tiono." I -..ill begin again at tho beginning
} nlcrophonu l. :.ot world. :

'7 controversy with Dr. Din;, and Professor Dr. Schraibar during tho
" c^Jtin, of tho consulting physici-ns occurred in a aornlng session of
-«tion hygiene -.nl tropical rygionj."

" * r^33ID3T: Counsol, or. what pago of Docirio t Book 1-1 is this affidavit


1 IIIfiG: 159 cf Docuaont Book 1-A vhic: ;aS ju~? u : ce ! to tho


rr' •'JC-4-2-Putty (Int., Brown)
Tourt I


-IEZ =223ID2^: That is tho affidavit of Gorhrff-d Soso?

Eg. 7LZ*3:>~: Shat is corroct, Document Ho. 43, tlrugcsrsky 2xhibit "a. 1
| should I boil.a again free the bogisr-ing, Your Honor*?

•3x3 ZlSl3Z’-5 !ro.

DH. piasmO: "Juring the lunch rocoss several listecors of tho Din^

|’octuro c-so to ~~o la rrdor to discuss with so =y ett-ck on these o::?jrinoiri;s.
» or.J. rity aroed to ny opinion. not unimportant ninority, houovor,
•,_ardod cy poi:,t of view as wrong, uhoroby tho latter countod upon tho
|*SUranco givoa by Dr. Dinr during tha discussion that the axporinontal
"bJeetR woro criminals • ho tioro sontoncod to doath.

"I cannot ratsr.bor f r suro who opoko for and -..ho r®-.last it. I ro ra oP b or
:rJy the. aorson of Dr. ”ruf' '-sky bocauao I regarded hi;: as Ding's suporior
ovory roapoct. Dr. Uwgovsky bolongod to thoeo vhc agrood A o X' opinion,
r 1;-, today, after no-rly four years, I do not roseebor tho or act
erdiagj howovor, I rcEOBbor tho fact itaolf. Ho raid approximately that
|.e *d on nr' aelplo tho s-me scruple3 as I bad, and that ho, thoroforo,
lcod tho:; prior to tho oxroricoats to Dr. Grawitz. Tho lottor dlocusood
rlth ! (lmlor a;ul tiioro a docislon against hi:; had boon reached. Ho
; ted tliat ho, toe, tould haw proforrod, in opito of the results achiovod,
tho so would not have had to carry out tho ox «orlnonts.

. 33. n.323?w:

1 ..’oro the available v-.coir.os on hand kaxa as to tholr offoctlvenose?

.. II , aly tho ’o:.7l vneoino was known so far Its off -.osa ii
rcorrod, but tho v re Laos xianufacturou ir tha Hole.; woro not. Tho
Iffioulty with the ';oi,l vr.cciao was net purely technical ir. tho wey that i
. Just doscribod, but was -iso an orgrnirational difficulty bocauso t-.»

'•03 cf llco broods wore nocossory lr. tho instituto. On tho

! --j h-\ to b; trod, agi also infoctod lico had to bo troi, and ^

•h r thoa had to bo foi, but tho only thing they could food on woro hurar.

• :. 7 • oro tho whole hoard of lice Teodors was nocossary to

*7 -O lico allvo. But wo don't knew llco in Germany, our population iz
c those little animals, consequently, it would have been very
to find .ten .he wculd be willing to act ns feed far lico.


-7


5071


signed Dr. Gerhard Rcsc."


27 llarch 47-J'_FjC-4-C-^rtty (let., Brc«m)
Court I


Regarding the chicken egg oroco,e f on the ctaor hand, wo did not know
its offoctivonoss. Later in tho year 1943 it *as not so well known as was
tho :oigl vaccine That can bo soon free a document to bo found in Profossor
Handles or’a d :-cvr.^r.t book ard which is signed by Profosser Otto in Frankfurt,
tho =ro who kna/s most about typhus in all Of Siropo.

i rw this Konilosar document — this Eandlosor Docunont Ha. i-Wi,

'*• Uasor Schiblt 14-;.. I new submit to you tho affidavit to bo found in
^ .atnout jook 12, tho affidavit that Dr. Ding drew up boforo hl3 doath,
Document *0-257 , 3xhlbit 283, Doc«=ont Bock Mo. 12, pago 9 in tho Ooman
document book.

W! PR-erDS-?: ’."hat is tho nunbor of that oxhibit?

DR. rLSDCi'G: :0-257, 2jhibit Ho. 2B3. It is tho third docunont
in this document bock 12 pago 9 of the Coman docuraont book.

Y DR. FL^iX^t

a I draw your attontion to Ra.an !i\z=orr-l II on tho soc-nd oago of thlo
affidavit. Thoro it says:

"In February, 1942, tho c-rryl. .ut of the a porlnonts on tho
jffoctlvcnoso of ty.a.uo v ccino trao ordered. I (namely, Dr. Ding) was
rppointed to carry ut those ox por invents. Sir.ee y -ffico w-s in Borlin,

I .ad t have a doputy in Buchoir.’ald during ay ntnonco. ’ ir this post tho
-rztfi3 Dr. Crawitz, in agroer-ent with tho loading doctor of tho
o oncost ration camps Lolling, tho S3 Oborsturmfuohror Dr. H von as otati

: otor at Buchonnald."

*fnuld y u liko t. say anything ab ut thi3 sttonont of Ding's?

Thi 5 statoooat f Ding's roi.aforco3 what I said, c-o^oly, tVt
. ;..'itz appointor! Ding diroctly for this Job. It can -lac bo soon from thio
*.h't Crawitz app'ir.tod a doiuty, ab ut whose oxistonco, try the way, I know
thing, in knov Dr. r.ovon, and r>do his acquaintance only a i*ok
bif ro his own arrest in 1943, vhoroas thi3 statooont rofors to a poriod of
a yoor ~nd a half oerlier than that. Lot rxe also point out that fror.

* - page f this doccwr.., page 3, it is to be soon that for tho
—I-.rinor.ts, the RS*^ and tho chief of ccncortratl'n camps had frood inmates


5072


27 IS'jch 47-;;-i , JC-4-4-?utty (Int., Brown)

(p-crt I

-rcai ccncontmtion c-n;.s, nrswly, habitual crirdaals who h-d boon coalonnod
to doath, which woro usod by Dr. Bnlnchc«ski nnkos tho s-u~ str.teusnt, i;ho
-ns woi-klnc eta i~ Jtto in Block 50 In Buobonjrnld.

^ lc» now to the ccaforonco which took plr.co or. tho 29th of
Docontor, l.-ll, nccordinc t: Di:^«3 di-ry, -.t -..hich it ouppcsodly w-g
C ocldod t carry rut onporironts on Incan baia«s. The Prosecution has
:a tho O'ntino subnittod Dcctrant 1315, Prosocutlcr. Jthiblt 454, and
1321 Proaocutios inhibit ;i-. 453, tho two dccui^r.ts rom sao unifiod
dcotco&t ppF^runtly. I ahall shew yeti this dc*unoat. it is not in a
; . oat b-. -c but wj$ subnittod aubsoquontly. It r soon
free this d cunor.t that on 29 Doccttbor 1941 thora was a oonforonco on the
typhus probl_ nt tho Boich Ministry f the Intori r, and tho participants
1 :. this c-aforosco woro quito difforont : r thoto "hes: Ding -"trtod.

5.75


March 2f-"-14C-5-l-Xerrcw (iftt. .rc»n)
Gcurt st. 1


- r-J knew whether cr. 29 Decoder 1941 there was, besides this confer¬
ence in the hoich Ministry of the Interior, encther conference on typhus,
let oo j.i : cut ri ht away that_'Jtctsch,in his affidavit, Dccuaent 1114,

; rcsecuticn Exhibit 433, statod that aside free the persona ro-nticn^d by
Ln • -rise ..cso, bin arxl Schreiber supposedly tcok part in the conference? .

.. Such a conference as i3 hero described in kina's licry on 29 DoCid .
1941, which Handlescr, Conti, lieitor, Gildencistur end 1 arj srlJ to have
attended. Hi! .. t take place as here doscri’ od. Not lid I knew that Din -
ever took part in such c conference. I, at any rate, lid not, so far as 1
rcniu'a! or, take hia zlcn . Th*1 en 29 b-Co=.' or 1941 th^re wa. a conference
in the hoich .'ihistry of the Interior * it was, as can lo seen frea ircstcu-
Ucn Dccunent 1315, a conference betw«.»n cua? ers cf the hoich rflnistiy of
the Interior with ir. hiatriaiists - was net known to no. S r is it said
that I took part in that. 0 "ly in the intorro aticna thrt ..receded this
1 - • 1 find out that this conference ever tcck place Pt all. 0 the
-ther hand, it is true that .-t some conference cr other wldch also doi-lt
•tth noth; it ccntrcllin typhus I not *rofv89cr l^ese tut, as 1 ruicJ ur,
•his was a purely any cattor which has nothin to do with tho pro’lens here
• •or discussion but discussod do-lcusin;. 7h t is all I h v to oay about
that.

. ••hen did you find -ut a! rut this conference cn 29 Jocostf or 1941 in
the huich .iniatry cf the Interior?

.. That this ccnfor-nco tcck place in the hoich Ministry cf the Intori
I only diecovored frua seoin this .rcsecuticn Dccuaertt 1315.

*. - ut nocordin tc this .rcsecuticn Jccu=-nt, in this conference it
"As decided that Dr. D-tnitz cf the .ehrir. -jorks w-s tc ct ir. touch with ;

• ;st typhus vaccines, ’few, accordin' tc that, ycu srjet have known al-cut

«

fact that this ccnferenco tcck place. I lease re^d the .acca.-c in quosticr.
* v 2 cf b.cun-nt 1315, Ircaccution Exhibit 454, under (V) it

* that "the vaccine new bein' manufactured by the _ehrin berks, which i.

r-ct.-d . chicken e s, is V. bo tested as t. its efficacy. Fc. ...is

s ; Dr. Jocnitz will act ir. touch with SS Cl -rstunt anftf•-jhrur ru-cwsky.''


5074


March :J-H- .K-5-2-K*rrcw (Int. Ircwn)

>„ur* . 1

Of ccursc , I know Dr. Dean itz. He is the technical aanofur f the Idiri*
erks. feed ccnsiddralle experience in foral 71 lands, brazil, an" /.n-v
a Te't deal a'.cut the prcducticr. cf vaccine tc central ell sorts f discra
In hurrn ' ein s end animals. Lut it was only new that 1 have ' eccae
-;cqunintod aith this file note at the presentation cf this document. I
did net knew that at that conference it --as a-reed that -ai*-s *hrul t
in touch with no, end he did net et in touch with no.

*1 I oulmit now tc the Tribunal, Uru-ewsky Document 62. This is an r
devit OB the part of Dr. Sennits, in Document ...k Hu. 1, - &*• * u ‘

let me su’mit it ?a Uru cwsky Exhi' it Cl 1 '.

1 .. ILllYs my it please Y r ur Honors, this document is an affidavit
vith suverd German documents attachod thereto. ; ricr to rny -daissicn :l
this document into evidence, the prosecutor. «cul lir- f . "•--Ine the :ri 4 ;.

- n 'acuments that ere attached tc this affidavit. Then, if they arc
in duo order, I -ill refrain free objecting tut if they arc not German
decuman. - which should tc su’aLtt.d hero 1 will tender cn objection. 1
.iculd llko tc sue then prior to c. .mission.

T! Vi •dDUrT: Cen Ccunsol fer the Frosecuticn oxamino those Germcn
documents durir. tho acmiiv recess or the neen recuse?

D... FLEl£I:3Gi They nre accessible u him ri ht not.

: C . K.J.DY: Your H^nor, attached to these affidavits aro two letters
which prosuaod to to documents d'tcd in tho yecr 19/. 2. Dr. Fleixdn; has
here, a hie ori inrl exhi' it, a carbon copy which is certified tc ’ y
r ofludstar as ! ein : a true copy cf tho cri duel German document.

.'hw, as durin - the course cf tho presentation of the Irosccuticn'a esso¬
in-chief, end threu heut, we have, in way instance, introduced either
.he testa tic copies cf German dccuaents cr -.to ori Inal - -i ejruner/ ,

«* sec hew it is pcssi'-le for tho Tri’unnl cr tho .rcsecution to
ascertain the authenticity cf this document without a more . 1 :' orate cor
c.-te, r a photostatic copy cf the ord inal, or the cri-incl. Tbi.- ir
c .rt'inly net in compliance with the re -ulaticos that have f-Ilcwcd t

Therefore, I cbjcct tc the admission cf these two car on copies wl-


Ifcrch ST-’J-- K-5-3-Karrct. (In*-. Lrcwn)
curt : ' . i

arc copies the letter -ni no- - phetost-.tie cr the cri incl itself. I

»cul- like t_ pass thee up tc the rlluncl tc leek than ever.

. FLh-CJKG: .Ir. President, these are certified copies which hove

’ e-n token ftvas the files .f the -ehrin * '..crfcs and the authenticity of which

«

has ‘ oan c-rtified t>y the 11-ycr. Tn- Tri'unftl h, s poraitted that affidavit:

shell ho certified either by « notary cr, in small places where there is n

neta-; pu*lie, can ! o certified ty the Mayor. It is -oy opinion that, in

th W* tho Mayer then is also authorized to certify the ccrroctnoss

cf copies cf documents which ere contained ir. tho files cf firms and cf

v«hich to ' fenso counsel can net vt the cri-inol. ..Iso, in snail localit

like Uerlach near i&.riur.-, whore- tho ehrin: '..erks are, it is not r ssi 1 -

U nrko ; hct static copies cf such documents. The only pcsbi' lit-; that w-

.ave t- use these- Socunonts in our defense is tc present certified copies,

tho correctness cf which is certified ly c person when • - Tribunal hr.s

accepted us c n .v,nt *- ha. The Prosecution ern net held it against

this that they have su’nitted phet.stats when they haven't submitted tho

ori In Is, * ecausc the irosecuticn i3 in a position, with its wonderful

equipment, tc nake phot, st*tie c. pi -s cf anythin it wants copies cf. This

opportunity, hov v r, is n.t availn) lo u us in snail country cooaunitics,

•and consequently it would si.iply cut us eff fr prusentin evidence if

J\U takei th t wo produce the cri. inals cr photostats f ’ -cuaents that

•

r in the files of usine-ss fires. If tho Mayer certifies that the copy
is c. v-r' atin cc,y I really can net see hy its authenticity shculd be
su’ stentiate-d ix-re ly the introduction cf a photostat instead of a ver’ ->ti
co Pi'» Th c c:uld only have a purpose if they were d' cuacnts in lcn hand
:n Tihich th. handwrltin had tc be identified fer sene ror.scn ,.r ether, lut
.ev^c ir the case cf ccva.nts written on a typewriter.

Mh. H.Jl 3T: YWr K^ncr, I su' nit that I aa net ' y.ztir, tc th. .affi¬
davit w‘iich recedes th ic cuaenls, this affidavit cf jt, Jeanitz, 1 dc not
- jeCt t th-t at all. I an o’ jeevin.- tc these two documents - letters and
rh.rs r. * techcd thereto on vaccines, sinrly ' ecu sz the so era net corics t
• - : ccpi a - the seas tine. These fire


licrch 2^--[-.:-'-3-z,-Ksrrcx (Int. Lrown)
Ccurt l


copies which weTi mode cn ?e'ruary 2f, 15A7. Nsw, v better this is - ccpy
the ri in=l dccuaent - it is sc certified - ’ ut I think with the
spirit cf the caso ns we have teen cin* alcr.-, the prosccuticn has
j:l: -.Cv 1 the German documents, that this decs not ccoply nit:, the
ro uiations of the Tri’ until, end, therefore, I do net see why wc sheui :

1 e in : po.iticn tc admit this into evidence. ‘Jew, in the case cf its
tin ; certified y a notary or iur-cseistcf, which is true cf tho
vita, "t any time if wo icuht tho authenticity cf a document we con
cell in the document or call in a person in respect to an affidavit,

'ut, in this instance, v. !c net. *vcn have tho ori inol German document.
It scene tu nv th t defense ccunsC could lorrcw it for r period of a
wock or two weeks in every instance to avoid this pro’lcn.


*


*


5077


Cotfrt S<*. 1

2? her VP-a-fi-l-ISMfelcy (!-t. Br *-)


-tr. President, if the object! a of the -r sccution
is sustained, then pjr only alter native v-uld >c t; cell Dr. De-.ait2
vlt - hiB files t Suerncor,; as a vitness. That r. nyor /'oes not certify
anythin.- that is incorrect.-:—

i ^i6I3B'2: D ;ci the Secretary General hevo n co*>y - , Gorrv.ny
copy - ,i arufiovtky's Docuaent *oole Ko. IT

JUTv- Si32!SO: Dr. Jie^lrv:, vill you refer to 7xv;e 2 of the
Dc^nitr affidavit and road te.;innljv; at tha hot tea of thet -w-fio,
o»;lcnln vith the words ■Furthermore, on 3 February 19* 2".

a. FLZa>:!SOl *hat I shall rend in a Alfforent context Inter.

Jl“Gi SD&SSOt I vant you to read it nov because it ennerrs that
this affidavit is not c:.:?loto.

Dr.. TLhfliXKG: Shall I road it aloud?

JUDO- StSHIliG: Just that sr^ll portion. 1 don't think the
Infillsh d.cusant io completed.

Da. FLirG.Ih'G: "Furthermore, n 3 February 19-i2 olfihtoen bottloo
infi

orch c ntr.ift/35 cca tynhuc vaccine voru forvprdod to SS Hauotstur::-
fuohror Dr. Din;, Borlin Knescbcckstrasso -i3/-i."

r'l K-ZSIIE.-I: Shank you.

IE. FLEIiMSG: nr. President, nay I ask vnee more to look whether
It isn't lrer.'y with the Bench. Hy socrotnry tells no that she ,-av*
tho rlfiinnls t . the representative of the Secretory Goncral rn<* that
.i oacc t it in to the Bench.

TF! PR&S1D&S7: Thu Court will be in recess for a few noocr.ts so
that tho matter ry be investifi?ted.

(« recce. vp. o trken.)


5076


27 :: >-:.-KS-$-2r-3lA*l07 (lot. Sac~ler)
Court . . 1.


.12 . —3 S I-T . I : Persona in the courtrooa will plor.so find tholr scatc.

Jfl riounel la again In sossion.

P3ZSIDZLT: Tho Tribunal understands tn t tho Gcrnx docur.cnt book
wll. not co re: dy until noon. It will bo prop rod at tic: hour, however.

D2. ~IZ. ISO* Hr. Frosldont. shell I sub.iit tho nffld-svit which I
previously announced now?

rTSlDSf?: It appears to the Tribunal th t tho copies of letters
-•jfo.To:. . ro ..ctrchod to the ffldavit ore referred to in the affidavit
itsolf.

na. nz. r. j: r«. .

'12 ? r.tl'3.7: The Tribunal is disposed to overrule tho objoction and
nd.dt tho exhibit co offerod.

BE. FL2. IirO: In th t c.-so I offer POcuuont , rugowsty 62 - a Sxhibit
i ru.ousky Id. It c r. be found on it. u 64 of the Document 3ook Krugousky 6?..
I oh. 11 ouit tho opening paragraph. The nffidi.vit refers to tho conference
In tho .ich ministry of the Interior on ti. 29 th of Dec r ber 1941.

" “ *••- 29th of Doc-abor 1941 at c conforoncc in the *7.ich Ministry for
tno Interior in 3orli;., Professor Ollda^iotor comunlc/tod th-1 r. pro;;r;oi
of ox.brirunta for tho testing of tho lice vnccino according to Voigol ••
of tile vnccino of tno Hobart Xoch Instituto hod boon fixod botvoor. tho Kobe
Koc!; Institute rod tho r^giono Institute of tho Vaffon S5. *.%hon tho ro~
proscnt .civOD of tnc 3chring Works heard this, the; rerpiost^d thnt tho typ* *.-
vuccino of the Behring ’forks should alto be included in t. ls pro.:rr:e of
ex x-iuonts. 7a . pro r _ of or rlscnt* itself wns not discussed, which, b;
the uuy in uy opinion was ciuplotcly superfluous bee uso I took it as n
fitter of .course tent the cotpurativc test of tao veecinos would bo co.->-
ductod in the usual nanner on persons ir. typhus --reas *;o were throctonod
by ty. hus.

"Profo8sor Gildoneistcr replied thnt w. 3hould -roach Dr. ,:ru busky
;»rn:.,.lly about this requost. .^cording t a very brief ^-or.-nduu of

i-lrat 3icbor dated 4 January 1942, on tho sectioned conforonco of
2 - DecoObor I 9 U 1 , it v-s to h v- been ay task to conuct Dr. !>ugo:fs::y


5079


27 * - J>- .—0PS-3~&-3lj.klcy (-t=:ler)
Court i<c. 1.


personally. This personal discussion with Dr. rugOvaky novor took place
quite apart frou the fact that 3icbor 'a neaorondur. of 4 January 1942 couldn't
- r-achod -c boforo 6 J.-mirry l$'-2 at the aarllost, that is, at the tino
who:-. Sicoor's instruction hod been rendered invalid by events, Dr. 2 Jnnur:
1942 a contain Dr. Dootzor fron tho Sygier.o Institute of the Noffor. S3
3jrlir. tolophonod karburg end ordorod concentrated typhus vaccine for oCj
--raor.n. -.'.ia vaccine was to bo sent to Dr. Whegonor of the Sett ministry.

_t tho scuio tine concontri.tod vuccino for thirty porsons was ordered to bo
sont to tho Kysleno Ir.stituto of tho V-ffon SS in Berlin for the JurpOoo of
conducting co. .amtivo totts wit., tho Gilioaeistcr vaccino. Thoroforo, I
no longur h- reason to contact Dr. Knv,owsky porson: lly with rogord to th.*
typhus v cclr.os. liy own nciiomndu;. or. the cortf^ronco of 29 Decanbor 1"-1
proven, lioroovor, that Dr. ’ ru. owsky was not duo to return frou Mow until
6 Ji-jw. ry 19U2.

"During tne following yuxrs of tho war I vlsitod Dr. Xrugowtky t*.;o or
throo tii-cs. Che subject of these visits w 0 aorol" tho f-.craont of ov.-

‘ r-'. Joes, who wan tho head of tho Typhus Instltuto in Lvov or olno
tho pootponenont of tho two V. ffon SS training courses v.-.ieh Dr. Ihno had
to attend."


5080


March 2?-..-LK-9-l-Galla -her (Int. iuiesalcr)

Ccurt Kc. 1

In the f.rncr . rt cf the affidavit Dr. Uesnitz states that he lator
apeko tc llru cushy re ariin cne cf his cfficiela ein considered in-
dispensa' le, and, hu, furthermore, states that, ho visited iru.;ewsky in
crier tc speck tc hin re- ardin vaccine cf the . shrin k'erks, an:: at
that tine hucan ex. erisonts were net discussed ct all. ..t the bottom cf
pa,~o 65 ho sail that the invoices were attached with reference tc the
..,*>■? vaccine. Then fellers the usual certification. On pao 67 there
is e document which telcn s to the document I Just road, It is the
_ -• the : c-hrin- ’.erks addressed tc the Hyicnc Institute, which ia
concerned with the telephone ccnvcre«ticn,and also the order c f typhus
vaccine f • six hundred persons. ..t the sane tine thero is c question
there as tc where this vaccine is tc ho sent for 30 persons. On r. e
■y there car. ‘ e found a lettor by the Hy-ieno Institute whore it is
asking that this vaccine for this 30 persons tc bo sent t: 1.rlin to the
Hy. iono Institute- f t) ..nffcn-SS. .area 69 and 70 aro vho delivery
notoo re ardin* the type cf typhur v cclnc cf the -chrin. \crks. Mow I
tff-r document as .iruewsky 63 — tn. ucucnt.

Mi.. H.4 Y: May I th* ordinal of that, air?

FIS.eJI.'O: Document 64 is an affidavit ..ado ’ y-

XKh ,;iSD2.T: You refer first to dccuaent 63 end now you are roforrir
to £4. Ycu refer in the first instance tc Iccuacnt 63, and new ycu oro
rcforrini to 64.

. I was talfcin. a' out dccuaent 64, I cu sorry, Your H 0 ncr.

-coaont 64 is to Lo found on pa c 102, document bock i« . 1. H&a is
file lee • !•: a certain Mr. Zchn. It 1 ucctaus ifcu-twsky • He. 19. I

is found also that deals with conference that tcck pl'.co rt- the i. ich
ura.tr. cf Interior. Ifco quoted note roads cn pa e 102, and I qu^t«:
"Su.Joct: The ccs4.it cf typhus. The session is preside y Ministerislra*.
r. ic'ur, - ir “in char-o cf the department concerned with the fi-ht
.r.st u;ii-jucs. .sid-a the . rsi ned and Dr. Jasiitz/Siar'. ur, and
/Lev.rkuscn, the fcilowin entlcaun took prrt ir. the auctin *:

G arste arzt Jr. Schcl®, as dele ate of th Ir.' actor Gcnovlstabsarzt,


Iferch'27-li- r-?-2-C'l - r (int. ..^dLcr)

Ccurt :>*c. i

^ *

Or. Handlcser —* .

L.. H-o’-Y: Year Honor, in this re srd, incsaich as the Tribunal nr.s
-dsdttod thv, other two iocuaants submitted, end t:.i3 likewise is sulmittvd
itr. - cc y :_ndu end certified tc ’ y the _ur •crsfcistev,::-w dc I understanl
it to Lc the nil in.- of the Tribunal, whenever a Gernqn dccuaent is

. . Tih.cn the cri innl or photostat copy thereof ern net Lc obtain

that e typewritten copy ccitifiod tc by the . urcoraeister will e adnissi
in evidej.o-?

THU .USIDEHT: In th- afiidevit referred to and the letter referred
., the letter mentioned ycu refer tc in the affidavit cf Dr. Duanitz
is in this document? ..here is the cri inal cf this dccuacnt, counsel?

M . PL ' £’0: T> msocu:' :n had it.

.i.. De 1 understand .t counsel for the defendant says that

tho cri inal of this dccu=<-nt is in the possession of the .rcsocutien?

Di.. FLEL-IMG: He.

11C ..ESI -::?t '.here is the ri incl cf this locuoont, counsel?

.... FLBLZDD: ThO rri 'inal cf that d ou nt is to Vo found with th.
fil. r f the Fima . uhrin • at Ucr’ ur : ;, and the ur *or: later of iter' ur"
cc. tifiod tc th«- authenticity of the copy.

iLIJ'i: I say add, Ycur Hnor —

THE rilESlDSNT: Vhon was this dccunvnt * cck subedited tc the . roso-
cuti^n? ill yeu answer, !Ir. ..tterney.

1C.. K.JOY: The document beck itself, Ycur Honor, the Ln lie!., you

. -"X.?

THE ThESlDEiT: Yes.

1Z . H.i'Y: I ■- : toulvcd it yesterday aomin prior tc Dr.

in c-ccaicir. his iissuit. The u. lish translation cf the document
fere the* court at thi3 tiao Veers date of 29 Kcvcolor 19U, and se it
is Dr. FlooMLn' s t ere tho saoa date, althcu h 1 did not carefully scrutir
- quoted cri Inal exhi' it which shews that it is the 29 Hcvomlur, and
ir cn apparent discrepancy inasizich as ‘the* took place -n ^9tJi

r. that as it cay, tho rroscc - requests a rulih/


5082


.i. - K-t- 3-G HI a .her (Int. Locml.r)

Court Sc. 1


ae tc whether cr net the document 'ey sulnittin- a copy therefor,that a
/peuritlen :cpy -..-ill stand .«a an cri Inal tc le introduced here Ante evide-n.
in lieu cf the cri-ir.ri. cr ihotostatic copy thereof, if it is certified tc
by the ! ur cr-v-Iat r. _

THj. iELSIlEST: The court its .If is -cin- tc understand hew counsel
for th-- • Sense can still procure the cri in-vls, cr photostatic copies.

If the I res edition is in dou* t as tc the correctness of any certified copy,
it would ! c ver.. simple natter tc invest! ate th-.t frea that anr.lv tc find
cut if the natter is Incorrect, or not. Tho Tri 1 . unrl will ' o disused tc
r c, 1 <t at^this time tc edmit this document su^ Ject t *. su' sequent invest,
’nticn by the l rcsccutlcn, if the i'rosccuti,n de-sires to any uxaninatio

• a t. tiie correctness cf the document.

It*. HiJOY: Then, Ycur Honor, aa 1 tc understand that t'ccuments in t]

fora o 1 : r.daisai' le in the future. Thor, arc several others in thi.

♦

Dccunent .cck, and I do net wr*nt tc tckj the tine cf the Tr mrl to
JeCti.. V t’utta.

THo. iW31D3iT: Each document offered under these carcunstnnccs con¬
stitute c s *r- c " , *r.d c'unsd, if he can shew any diff-rent circumsl
frea those a;. -nrir. in this docu -at has s perfect ri-'ht to objoct tc the
introduction of any ouch decuaent. It ai fat well bo doterainod that if tl

that this ml. ai ht

L.. ai.'Y: Of course, ’ cfore a?kin - ycur rulin', Ycur Honor, I want
tc cell ycur attention to the fact that whenever the . rosecutien introducej
'it, which purports to- ’-e a captured Gcroiei dee.lent, that we have c
r-thcr ola’crate system by Ccor-in affidavits and ileibor-cll “ffidavits tc
!, _u -i-.e and t. authenticate it end cne need not to authenticate this
Lament Vy thu certification of the .ur -craeister.

TKl . 1SIj 2;T: Exactly, but the Ircsecuticn has ample -..cans t icr
.op:a■ 1 te fellow that procedure, while it is easy soc that the de-fens,
net rny such means cr opportunity.

:... FL3aa«3: I shall sec tc it ioacdiately that - ;hct»tat f th
document * da *1 submit it-subsequently. I shell see u i


5d83


I


Itrch Z7-M-r::-9-- -C*-Ua her (Int. ..eaflcr)
Ccurt N'c. 1


immediately that a photostat cf this dccum_nt is oltain^i, ,.J I shall
-i - 1 in the fdtuvsa
TK1 . Rfi S P BfTt he understand, counsel.

I n this case I sh;.ll offer the- dccuacnt ' _ru a*;.

64 ee -ru*cwsky's Bxhilit Ho. 19. The first port of that kcum.nt ices
nc - the case that we deal with, but I should like to reed

free pt -o lOi. cf the document, I should like to reed th- last . r rrpl.,
the lest p?rr. r h st-rtin : "Or. rccue-st of ISnistorlairat hr. -iol-or,
it is also stipulated, that in - icr.;o-scale experiment - a reed upon
• V th- iu3‘ ert Kcch Institute, and the Hy lenist of the SS, hr. itru jewaky
both ■ ei 1* a Vaccine, end the vaccine cf the „ -hrin ..-rks shall !e in¬


cluded."


urt . 1

27 -.ur v7-.(-10-l-£KK-Heehcn (Ir.t. Srr.ler)


■’In this vf-y it vill pr-bably be possible to cocoerc the protective

value cf th* different vr.ccir.es it a few nonthe. ..11 persons present rre,

however, even no* cvere of the feet, even if the vnccir.es produced of

-cabr.tec. ch'.cken vsuld be socevha.t less effective than the ’'eigl's

vaccines, i.e,, for instance, if the Veigl veccine vould offer e 10-80<-

orotection, *: the vectines «f the jehrieg works only approximately 60f,

tho egg vaccines still could be used in practice since thoy nllovod at

least to expect t nlld course of the disefse."

fittest, the prosecution ‘'ill nov asiert thet the largo ccelo exoeri-

r.er.ts arranged on 25 December 1941 w«rc the firct typhus exoeriaents in

ruchonvr.ld. *h> t car. you say about that?

«. Tree this file notation of Director Lahn of tho Behring \orks

*

'•? bocoEos vvldor.ee thet t large scale exporlacnt had been arranged. Dlrg,
:or the purpose of his first sorios of erperinents, vhich started with
four vaccines, provided 51 to 55 persons including 10 control persons,
reeling with biology vc also reckoned with the threat of accidents pr.d
therefore it ie r. rulo th /1 sufficiently l.rgo nuabera of experiments,
.ia-ls or hur..’r. beings, bo used in order to cvcludo the possibility of
na accident, iurthoraore, there is a rule that in case f pres below
one hundred, n cvrci.u. .*ccults -r. be oxpectcd; thoroforo, one auto-
tntlcclly arrives at so-eallcd lerg* scale crocrlmcnts with a high figure
3f personc,.

It appears evident froc the file notation th- t I vrs thinking of n a
cxperlfiuQt involving cix hundred persons, tfctt is, cix hundred ocrcons
^cly treated with that vaccine. Ding only used a third of the olnuaur.
ur., namely, 51 to 55 persons end it is cl* r the th* gr«-1 r,rselbility
'cidor.t then lr. the case of r lrrge cunb*r of persons and If er.o ^>ini-
> figure of 55 o.rsons, the threat cf accident vould become so
: ilctublo that r prrcticr.1 result would no longer be possible. Vhon
proving such experiments on huspn beings, generally then the ourooe* car.
r * fuly not b* Served with p snail nunber of persons involved. In tho

5c or £1 persons .»urt certainly not concerned w*th a large scale


50”5


lourt So. 1 - -

37 .iar 47-.-10-2-Z&- Keenan (Int. Sxaler)

experiment. Is addition, it further seems evident in this file notation
that in cps*. of this lcrge scale er:eriaent with 600 persons it was
oliiz t. \- thf t froc the Behring Yorks vaccine one could only expect
deliver:.- os free the 6th of January 1941. It can further he seen from
It. Dean its'# remarks that T ve6 only expected heck fron the Ukraine on
the 6th of Jnnuery end considering the long distance it is highly ia-
prohehie that on the 29th of December; which was one week before, I *pe
still in Berlin. It is very unlikely that I had luft eceaetine earlier;
therefore, I obviously was not in Berlin on the 29th of Ivc.jfcvr rnd
•- c;uld not pnrticipite in that noetic*.

Din* started hie first series of exmorizents on 6 JrT.uj-.ry. That
aeons that his order, the ordor for that exoorinent, had to coao onrli..
that thrn for he yet had to obtain the vaccines. Dr. Biobor, who wno in

har.ro «f thr.t conference on the 29th of Dectzbor, vne a direct oubordi-

•

ante of Conti end it becocos clearly evident froz the file notation of
Dr. Zahn that these conferences were called >y order of Conti.

It 1- the-cfore p-selblc that in this way tho orobloa was brought
to Die *'p attention and I would even go further, that it is hot only
probably, it io certain end I shall be in r position to submit the docu-
zent which .riglwiur froa that tiao and clcrrly oroves that tho largo
scf-lu experiment, which vre arranged by the hob rt ?. eh Institute with no,
had nothin* rt rll to do with vhrt Dr. Din* wanted. It vro intended to
use these v< ccir.es or. Gorman civilians who v«rc active in .:.v typhus
•he erst. Shi t can be seen free: Definite*8 assurances. I had
recess t- this circle of persons since they were ?cturlly vaccinated on
my jrder, -net is, bcf.r. they vent to the occupied eastern territory.

•h-.r. Dr. Wegner wre the herd of the he^th department of the eastern

.i try, •'Y.j carried -ut the vaccination of the pe jplc vhc* were committed
:n thr.t territory.

In rdditi.n to the vaccine intended for 600 persons, that is, the
i-r cc-le e* 'Oriaents, Dr. Sennit? mentioned a vaccine intended for
v*' oers-zc. ..at that not for the murm.se of experiments at Buchenvald?


Court Fc. 1

7 .Mir 47-1.-10-3-E3H-si eahen (1st. Hauler)

A. -h't ‘6 not c.csiblc. Ting did not use SO Persons, but 35 or
34. Thrt is t- sc;.* that the ecouat of vaccines intended for 30 '•culd
aot suffice for 35. Moreover, it ccn be seen fr.-J Socunent So. 62,
which vac Just subr.ittci, that these 30 vaccines could only be delivered
or could be expected to be delivered cn the 15th of January. Ihey -ertf
to be sent to Berlin and not to "uchenvald. If they had been seat avny
froa .uirburg on the 15th end if thoy had to go to Berlin rad fror. there
.-invald, they could rt the earliest have arrived in Berlin on tho
20th of January. Ding, on tho other hand, had started to use his vre-
cir.oo already on the 6th of January. The entry in the diary shove
clearly that the vaccinations vor« started at the period of tho 6th of
January and continued up to tho let of February 1942. Shat docs not
correspond vith tho delivery of these thirty uortions of vaccine.

Cc And vhat did you supeJSc those vaccines vero uood for?

A. bhon -persons «srt ontrustsd vith the care of typhus patients,
ono naturally tried to protect then by vaccination. if those arti¬

ficially inf-ctcd pooplo, vho have no lice, arc not infectious, ono
met still rock.r. that their blood contains virusos and therefore could
transfer this disci so. Since for reasons cf trsetnent injections h'-vo
to be undo through the veins in rdor to nake certain discoveries, the
executing persons, the nodical personnel, -r. naturally cu^joct to
r rnd are thoroforo being vaccinated. Thoreforo, it car. cuite

easily be assumed that this vaccine ves ordered by Ting for* that pur- v .

V *

p -so and vns used accordingly. ' -V ,

q. The defendant Just nentionud a document vhich I nev want to
oub--.it. This is Docunont Hrugevsky Hr. 10 and can bo f'-und cn page 66
-f tho document b.ok. I ash you to rccem it as Exhibit Krug-vsky Ho. 20


yyi


27 ;i!>-:r-G2&-lt-l-»loy (H.i=lor)

Court 1 . 1.

I shall sub-.it n photostat of the originrl to dato with tho othor
docuacn: of thv 3chris, ’.'orks, and shnll nubait it in the near future.

T-iia ic letter sent by tho aelchearxt and ? lico, Chief rygicnict,

tho dofoodr-nt . rugovsky sent to the 3ekrlns Vorks, '..arburs/Lnhn and Iso to
the Heidi Heal to Icador, Dr. Cortti, end di the o:~or porsor.B that c p be
on ;ho address.

" ’ .3, . r. Prosidont, that I hr.vc the original available hero, and I
shell than be able to aubnit it. This letter in a report about tho firot
ouries wpuriacats in Buchcnvnld. which begins: "Bio tests of - t
vneeiora oMo by ub on hwvm subjects nt the instigation of tho Held. Kcrlt..

L -£or : i h .* tho following results: - Then the vcccinos nro boing

diocunned. Cho result of the oxporinonta in boin: discussed, and on prv-o
39 it cayc. "I uiis-.tion r. :»lna* typhus can thus dJubtluoo bo ohtninod
by la.an oj v c ino, .reduced -iccordin,: to tho chicken o,y procoss. which,
In ito 1 .unixation offoct, is oquftl to tho Taccino after VBIOL. The
offootiv noso of protection depends on tho sothod usod in producin the
vncciao." ni nod 'Dr. ru.:ovsfcy." I dill r.t u lator dnto cono back to
tnsvt *.->cu cat.

ZSSTt: It ::lc - 0 . Tour “or.or, :«ay X inquire r.o to tho vhoro-

about a of-the originrl >f this locunont?

. SXDZ.'?: Vi 11 counsel for defendant anew.r tho prococutior.'c

quor.bicn?

Da. ZZk TAit TJhoro is too original? Hero?

. .HPY: ;r» objection to that your “onor.
i . Were Just saying that Dr. Ding still had to test the vaccino
j: „ p dir in, Works r.c to its effect ivor.oss: do yn» believe that in opito

th. t ho *vlroi dy usod it for protectivo vaccinations?

•

.. TO hod r.o entice but to •’* that. I can well ronoaber tho v ccino
Sltua; r. no it prevail©! at that tine. The vaccino for tho V-ffon SS wan
-rr.'-n fr the control aodied depot of tho VrXfur. SS ir. 3orlir.. Veip sar.

- unto op t!.^ vaccine of tho jay wort at our disposal, but wo were always
ic.'rr.od ifith v.ry Baa 11 portion* t.ir.t could bo issued, and i*. wp.s ''iffic'd * .


27 (auxilC'g?

Court . 1.


to vaccinato oven a circle of ton persons. I cn th. reforc aor.v>r.cod that
1 v.’ccir.e wds at teat tine not ut our disposal, and no n result of tho
nnitsol expert no at s certain effectiveness of that v..ccino could be asGiuiod
lrcrdy. ?or that reason it wus not only used byDi*^, but by innujeor .
other persons. However, it was no we.ar.on with wnick one could ex. ctl" o
. 'ide..ics bee use its valuo was not fully reco^nizod. ?.:is fact s.:owo once
-ore how very ur.vct tr.o roblcc of vaccine Was in G-n.'-ny at th t tiro.

\ You v-r- Just spcakdiv: about nniaal oxperioont c: v ro r.r.i' -2 cxo.-
iocr.ts conducted wit:, t.:- c-.lcke.>c/v vaccines of th- Bohrin/: Works?

... The 3ohrin.- works belonged to the root well known laboratories in
the world id this field. The preparations of that fin: -ro >rld ronormod,
and are absolutely r.liable. One can thoroforc -.ssu'-o of these preparation:
of the Dohrin£ Works that bofore distributing any preparations thoy wore
cxr.dnod very closely. I also know that n ouabor of physicians, bneteri-
olo,,luto, and vlruo resoorc. workers, a ler - (crou; of 1 - .vtory nssin nto
loyod at tho Institute for that purpose. In the cr.so of other lar;y
firuo .atturs arc very slnilar.

D ;. 7';.. Ii’G: 3ofore wo continue to doal with t.vphuo quoctiono I .
llko t discuss tho question of th- probative v luo of the D-crllod Din*;
Tlcry, bee :se t.ia Diary was ouboittod by tho Prosecution as ono of tho
-ain jloceo of evidence a-minst you.

. Pr sidont, tho Dir.. Wfr; is Pros-cuti'n Exhibit /o. 267, Document
l'G-2G5. I; c r. bo found in iecu t 3ook Ho. 12. It ic tho oifhth docu¬
ment to be foun - . in Docu.~nt 30 ok Toi 12 . lookin.- at the indox. —

Docuner.v /O 265.

You h Vu lro:/<* found out tant the conforonce, of the 29th of
:cc hber lohl r.,ntlOr.od in Dir. *8 Di - .ry, did cot ?•}.- -luce. Tho correct
• f - :r ns*ortioa ia ccufimed by the file r.otico sub-itted by th I.-ooecut
f linietorlnlrct Blebor and tho affidavits of Dr. Daiudts zrlm. I.
anytldnc you h ve to oay about the ontry of Doccr.ber 29 . 19 UI: you


h-.ve tho Dicry before you?

"Oe. In this entry a cu-bor of entries to to bo found


27 :: sv;.-r.7s-ii-3'i-- d—)

court l*a. -.


wry coacLusivo. It says there at first: "President Professor Gildonoistv
of the, Robert Koch Instituto, Sole-. Instituto to (joubat contagious disoacoo.'
On tho 29 th December, 1941 this Instituto vas not a Reich Instituto. It
only booeao n Reich Institution early Jprll of tho next year. Up to that
tirio only a Prussian Institution had oxlstod. Gildenoistor t that tide job
i'c:.*., but no rely vico-prosidont. In addition I nyscl:, an boin,';
aonti .nod as a Stnndnrtonfuchror, waoroas I only hoc no a standartonfuohror
half y, - later, and that occurred on tho 21 st of June 1942.

UR. ria: Itt): xr. prwsidor.t, in that connection I ac suVittinfi R-'cw-
nt ;.rv y.vr’/y Jo. 7, vulch can bo found on pr^o 63 of tho Document Boo):, an
I effor it os Sx..ibit .-r^.-ovsJqr Sxhiblt Ho. 21 . This is a cortific-tion of
tho Robot* Koch Institute rofl r' 4 .. tho fi.$t against coctnffioys dlooooo
ami heart taw nto of J nuury 29, I r ”7._ It rends:

■dftor ...propriate consultations nt tho R~ich Ministry of tho Interior
In Sopto dor 1941, it hna boon docidei to noke t: foruor 'Prussian
Institute f^r Infectious Disoasos Robert Koch' to a institute of tho Reich.

«”ha offici. 1 transfer took place on 1 ..pril 19^2. The instituto vno
nnrjodi >Robcrt-Koch Instituto, Roica Officer for the ?i ht a^ninst Con¬
tagious Disonsos.

10 In-Vo tho certification by the Prosidont of the Robert Koch
Institute. 'This shows that tho Robert Koch Instituto only boc: uo a Rciclx
Instituto on t.:o 1 st of ..pril 19 ^ 2 . and only then rccoivod the nano which

•b

Tir,: already nontlonod on the 29th December 1941 in i? Diary.

. .Tow, would you : loaso turn to tho ontry of the 9th Jluranry 1943 .

. 9th of January 1943.

• 0 . It ir /.« inf • c of tee do ur.ent in the Gor;.£ docu-jr.t booJc.

... th t day there is m o. . ry whicn states '.l-ot tho typhus o*peri-
cf.tion in the concent rat ion c.up of Buchenvald is r~>inc to bo rcr.
'3i* S. . or. for Typhus rerl Virus Research." ‘Sv Id you please re d th t 0 .

.entry reads: "By order of the Sur_-oon General Pf tho *7affcn Sf

S3 :ru ,'enfuehror and 'Mi'-, r Gen rod of :r..> V ffen !?, Genrker. tho hi •■her..-
:.o-tod fover research station at tne c&r.cent. ti^n c. 7

509C


27 '.-vx:r-(ES-ll-4-haloy (Senior)

Crort r-o. i.


3iiCiionv-l eocenes tec “Dcpr.rtr.cnt for spotted fover tad virus re a owe.. r .
ha-', f the depart coat will ho SS Stmrrinnnfttohrcr Dr. Durlns

i: r-caco, the stati a nodical officer of tho ^fEffon SS. UOIuat, SS-
2 MptBtumftiehror Korea will supervise tho production of vaccines. ?fhc c . J .
of tho ocononic and ndalaistrr.tivo .-cln office, S&-0hcr yupcafuohror aad
General of t.. 'Jrft on SS pohl, orders the oxtoaeion of a block of atono
building.

• •

"SS SturaV.anfuohrer Dr. Dir.-; is appointed '.t the sane tiuo r.c Chi-,
depertnont head for apoci 1 :-iosions in .IT XVI (Hy ior.c), of tho Division
(.jjt3.;ruppe) D (helical .ftr.lru of the 'toffee S*>) of tho SS luiin hoed--
q.u.-.rtcfs,"


5091


Court 1

21-rch 27-::-12-l-5D-l-utt y-RLer

"JUld you florae do fine your, position to that

-ocur.ont.

A. The foraar copcrinental st tion for typhus was

no to h-vvi received the neco "Depnrtnent for Ty : hus -nd

Virus Research’. That wcs-J ritten on the 9th or January,

• • • #

I -5. .ho 8h.no titl-, ho over, is .Ire .civ us title

jf the entire diary tho first page f th i ry.

There it s .ys:

'7r-. 19 1 to 19*12. Di ry for the Dt rtaent of Typhus
:r.d Virus P.ose rch of the Hygiene Institute of tho

* •

'/error.-SS.' Then follows tho first entry of Doc caber, 1911,

and I thick 14 3 ito out of tho question that Dr. Dir.

on that day could Irendy ;.onhecy what would coao about

..ore than n y-ar lotor; end ns-fer s position, in this

ontry of tho 9th of January, 19-.3, Dr. loazhon is . uiti nod

as Oruppontuo or or nd Lioutanant-Gonorc.l of the Vnffon-SS.

Howovor, ho only proaotod to th t rush on tho 30th

t cy* This entry, thoroforo, oonnot >. vo boon nndo
• •

-r. tho 9th of January, 19-13, end aust origin -o iron a
1 t .r Cato.

.. Din; calls hir:3oif in tho last pckr.grcph of th
entr: the Chief Dtp* rtnont-1 Hoad for Special Ills ions in
Dor rt. jnt 16. ''ere there cny such "Chier Dopr.rtnon* 1
"u ou 1 in Do.: rt:::nt 16?

• #

A. Do;i rti».nt 16 ’. os subordinated to ao, nd I,

h nit itc i n. There

v.ra never ny dvp. rtaent 1 -.:d (Hauptabtoilungs-Loitor )

i:.-';: t. There oerthinly was hot tel ho d f#r

• i 1 .dssi ns. This docs not aann thin;- to no. Thu

. st ,o_. in c . f Ur*


GonzKon.


Court i

March 27-:S-l2-2-aD-Putty-R .:lor.

IP.. FL31HEG: The Tribunal -..all ioncnbor that when
subaittin^ the so-ccllod 'Diirs Diary", I • cintnincd that

• o are not oncerned -ith a dicry of the, Block -16 ir.

Buohenwald, but ;o are -orned with a forgor’ . In the

•- I submitted this-so-called diary to tro writtins

•

exports or thi polico Office in Xurribor . Thoy .ve no
their "port opinion which I vented to sub.iit to tho--.
Tribunal a Mrugowsky Document No. 8. It can be found On
• 76 of tht document book, and I of for it as Mruaov.-aky
Exhibit no. ZZ, o 76. Tho oxpert Opinion ro la --
tho usual introduction, nd thon tho third p r graph
roods:

"-n 5 February 1967 the undtr3iynod voro shown in tho

9 4 «

Pdlao of Justice, Numborg, Nocuaont .*o. 275, Sxhit it
"o. 287, which arc tho notes of c.rt. in Dr. Dine.

"It vos to bo ostablishod whether thc .30 notes cover
i lone period of ti.-. end if tho typo script •..• a icdc

• ith ono or severe! typewrittor8.

*Ir. the c -ur3c of n thor ugh oxonination the following
vr.s ost bii3hod:

1) Th the paper of 27 lor.vos of Dr. Dins’a notes

• •

correspond ir. color, smoothness, thickness and ncy.

It c n be nssunod with cert inty that the 3 ..e 3ort of paper

was used for all loaros tho nutos.

2) Tho typed soript Of all ..-'tea was zir.de 'ey on chine.
Besides the si. J! rity of  i size rad snnpo of the
types which show repeatedly »n each p c oi'^ho noto3.

•The r^llowinC fees 'cre^discussod here: 4

"The letter :, f h-.s an oblateness in the head bend;
izont 1 stroke on top is nissin in the letter
sane'is the case with the letter "fc". The- right upper
rt f the horizontal fin 1 str *ke is -iasin- the letter


5093


Court 1

2r--"_12-5-:z:-iutty-- :;0.or.

;, v/'. ".ia Liorizont .1 stroke of the letter is

ali htl: dan -.ed.

! dc30 r- ladividuel ficr^ea sh yes, *nl ov/inc

»

t t;:oi? c-ndtant r. ncc thr the *.:Uolo report,

it c n a:fair ’oo sauced that one and thu a . olJ.no *:as
us.d for - co : .

*TI— . chine c uli not h ve fcaen fitted *.7ith an
SS-t: - hec use such


*


— -


Ifcrch 27-W-: X-12-la-?utty (Int. handler)
Court Tc. 1


a type was never used in the document. The a-' re vie tier, si-ns in question
was, tc the contrary,rsada 'y the nark of 0 SS". n

-nc Trl’unal will prctally knew the very characteristic SS-typo
>h is net curved tut has comers.

"3) I arc- 1 has a very fine script while the script on pares 2 ?nd \2
shows c saturated dark cclorin . he cust cone* tc the conclusion tl *
pare 1 was written with a different and elder ri‘ \ on than p' os 2 md l*.
tilth re erd t: pc -es 2 ard 12 it can t e established that ' cth in the
reproduction cf the color as well as in the dorree of scilin , the typewr.
typos correspond. ?a o 13 a ain shews a somewhat fin.r script which nine
ccrrcs ends .c t... eel r :f p: . • 1. Contrary tc that, tho pares 14 to 16
show a-ain r srturated colorin ’ :a scon on p ;cs 2 to 12. iafo 17 shews r
fainter cclcrin : than the previous pa-cs U tc 16. is roe IT and 19
hnvo an oven f.dntcr tint, r.i %: 20 end 21 a -n she* a stronger tint
than the previously mentioned payee which arc, however, net sc intentivuly
dark as pares 2 to 12. Finally per os 22 and 26 indicate c completely
worn out ribbon. The last pa r -o, 27, is vary sindl-r i.. cc'cr to peso 17.

"It is, therefore, established that pc c 13 was not written at the
sane time as pares 2 and 12 and 14 and 16. . ocausc cf the ccrrospcndinr
do -rce f acilinc cf the typewriter typos, it car. be assumed thnt p- -es
and 12 end 14 and 16 were written within a short period cf time. The
do-reo cf soilin’ of tho types of pc-c 13 varies free thnt of the previous
end fcllcwin pt. es.

n ..s it has Leon osta‘lishc-d that the types were it..ttui 1; cno and V
soau machine, end ao Ci-n n-. to assumed that a ribbon with a *ced coles-
in • if pr *.3 2 nnd It was ■cffsr&r'fer pa c 13, it oust, therefore, bo
assume th: t poyo 13 was written at a loter d.-te and introduced subsoqu-
/.) Especially atrikin ■ is the feet that the c.ocr . r an of the writing
is vortical r-lthcu h there ore several signatures ’ y Dr. Dins on various
•-..-os which indicate cn interruption and a rc-inserticn of tho paper int-
tr- -yptwriter. .. rc-inserticn of t{ _ pa: - usu*Uy r. 'ta in a lateral


' reorient rf the cuter nerrin, even if cnly cf a foi> ndirineters


Iferch 27- - K-12-2a-Putty (Ir.t. Kessler)
Court Nc. 1


"This conclusion proves that the entries for dif'-ru'.t tines were tyy
durin- a sir.-lc insertion into the machine.

5) The fourteen signatures cf -r; Din* cn panes 2 and 12 were made in

thin li ht *luc ink and correspond basically with re ard to the exccutic:.

of the si -nature. The appropriate rank cf 8S-H:uptstura and SS-Stur.'. in:.-

fuehrer have ’eon added by a stamp. 0 ^ the other hand, the si-nature cn

pa.-u lp is written in deep black ink, and the rank SS-SturaJ.annfuohror

added in writin. . Cn the followin' pores 14 te 17, the si-nature has been

nadc Ctftin in liftht bluo ink which corresponds tc -.ic col-., f th«

v s cn pc;es 2 tc 12. 0 pc cs 12 and 27 the various si ncturos

have boon made in dark 1 lu« ink which do not shew any essential different:

Prcu pc 22 onwards tho rank has boon left cut, while cn pr.-w 25 the

si nature cf Dr. Schuler was node in part without tho addition cf the* Jr.

Ltl . 'il- fact that cn po o 13 tho type of si nature and the use of a
•Jiffortnt ink is c-aplctoly dificrcnt free tho ro'niler uxocuticn cf tho
signatures as cn pc-os 2 and 12 -.id 14 and 17 also indicttvS that pa jc 13
wno writt-n a different tine."

..t a later date I shall subedt e phctcotr.tic copy cf a list cf rank:
of the which will be mj ulcacntod tc ay document book He. 3* Proa tjhi
het. static copy it can Ve seen that Jr. --in % s n Stum' enndunhror cn
the 9th c f JfcvNialer, 1942.

Y J„. FLOOdNC:

uld y-u please define y ur p. siti,n as t that*.

I : , many places f tho dicry Din - si-;ns hi3 naao with his f rnor
rank f Kanptsturofuchror alth u h he was already a Star. .’ ?n.nfuflhrvr.

These cr the entries made n tho 20th end tho 30th f Ncvar.' cr, 194/,
n ! the 4th f January, 1943, which can V e f uad n pa.;ca 4, 5 or 6 cf
j a- . it 265.

C-nsiderin the vanity, the well-kn.*n vanity f Jin , it can hardly
. assumed that he w uld c. nsi ler ?n event as a pr c.ti.n which was s:
rt*r.'. f r his lile as s *ittlo inp--rtar.ee as not t- include it in
,1 nature. This fact, t. , preves that theso entries were made at a.

- 3096


March 2' K-12-3*-Tutty (I r t. Reader)

Court Ik. 1


.cucr later date and that error was nade -is t th. date when h<. did
eccsw a Stun;, unnfuehrer. This can not be exp l ained in ' ; ether way.

" I.-ESHSIT: The Tri'unal will new lo in rece3r until ,n_-thirty.
V... Tucess was taken until 1330 hours.)


5097


Kerch i7-£-?jC-13-l-Ccok (I -1., Brtwn)


irraiBCOK s3ssio»;

(: j .unrtiC rocoavonod at 1400 hours 27 Si-rcfc 1947)
un J'iP.SI/X: Tho Tribunal Is cenin in sossion.

!2. Tho Tribunal: It has boon called tc ny attention that the

V iant Hovon inton!3 to call a wltnoss na;xd Dr. Horn, a Czocho Slav idan

as a v _u:;tary witness, and I haven't hoard aiy further roporto. Tho *
:! inal intention was to call hin tcr.orrcw an! I would lifco to hner at this
. j vhothor r n"‘ tho;* lntoal tc call Dr. Korn ta:crrc*» an! lr.torrup tho
ination of tho iofondant, Hrucswshy, so that Dr. Korn can rotum to
»cho Slovakia. If so, tho Prosecution is porfoctly acrooable to such procodu
! I >mnt to ann-unco th-t and find cut uhothor thoy intan! to coll hin


'.rrcu.


TKB TRE3IDS!T: Tho Tribunal has not boon ndrlaod T any cuch precoduro.
p. K.JDY: Than will I bo load tc u^doratcr.i wo will not hr.ro tho
i"a Hem tenorron?


r.3 . i;D.T7r: r* , cr.1 if thoro Is any ccccsion f jt oallinc hi. an! it car.
- :.j Without unduly Interrupting tho precoduro, doponiin^ set-jwhat on her 1
tostl.^iy ’...11 to, it jdjht bo rllowd, but 1 do not ro‘ a bor any la r.j*.


conveyed to tho Tribunal, that such a pro^r-:: was in conta iplatl itoro
' cello- .o thor ley for tho nitnoss Heron cut of or’-or.

T. I'JJDYl That Id c.-rroct. I hal notification of an of or ono ho intordol
■all and if ho : itorjl.* t • :a!l an t'.or ono t-rverre*: I r uid 11 ho to hevo tho
yrtunity or nrorarinc frr tho witnofc.

-T. !XS!1?C: I could nay that Dr. Gowllk har r.-t pro crossed so far with
* srocaretion* n- to -tv*' whothor ho car. call th ri--.osr ta'orrcw, porhaps


• i :'lni 'ut this afternoon, but i do not lir.ctr yot whothor or not ho will
•'O'.dy tomorrow ;»rninc.


■'•’T IOBT: 7ill counsol fop tho dofordant, Km^jwphy, fcaro ary
\Y r tR^orTuptine his caso for the calling of this vitnoec n bohalf of
- it is dosirod to do so.

"• n^TD'O: Sir.co tho uitnoss 7111 also tostify ro^ardine rr*ttors which

* I

-tee ir. Bttchosjwald 1 will ha.ro no objection to that.

'• ".Wi: You.

^93


. t*


Court So. 1

27 .its ->7-i.-l£-l-L&.-Gr c.s i (In*.. cr.vn)


DL-iCI aX&HZS&IKS (continued)

5Y DB. JUjsHIWt:

q, '.ill you aUi te draw the necessary deductions free vfcat v. have
v disc v,r«.d p.tuUt DIs^t'b ciery?

•

... Ihe vrri'.us erroneous entries in this document end the facte
vhich the hendvritin-: experts have discovered.wove thr* this document is
not a dicry i_ vhich .atri.s wore cede froa tii e to tine. nether there
rro Ion#: periods of tine that are ..issiiv, soceti: os periods of nor©
then one rear before the entries vere cade. Pa.ree 1 to 3. I telievo,
vore written- ell at the err c tice. and also the eubseouent re,:es. The
d.cunent hrs 27 r.i \o - were vritten devn ct only a few tin«s. That is
testified to by the hendvritin,; •mert'e statement. This explains the
ri-vc diocrc-anclec between the ontrlos and the r.ctu-1 f.-ete; for
'net-nce, of-calllr-: the Kotert Koch Institute e aolth Institute, when
it vesn 1 t, etc. The testimony of a prosecution witness Bnlnhsvskl cor-
robetretes this rffldevit.

q, inis i f: icrvlt is in Docur.cnt BoJe 12 as Dosuntnt 484, Prorccu-
ti.n ixhi‘ it 201. Belehovski sr id, under nunbor 20: "Tho flic notes
ant vuru c • >iod into tho dicry shortly b*for«. the collrosc .ivo the
'reels*. nuabor f the ->avca and the nacber of the experiments." ” '•

'lease eontinuv.

«. In thosu v-rds Bcloh-wski c.rrob rrtes the fret that this diary,
nj.tly, this diary of clock 47, vns drrvr. uo shortly before tho colla-eo,
m arently -n ccvurrl dnye, e-nseouently tho dif--rcr.ee in the typewriters
ue*d. Bow, as t why he did this I ccn inly conjecture - I do not know.
Thr t there vns s ,rers n for cakin.; the entries ir. this f :r: v.ul' r n-
: * >u Obvious.

q. For the cxnlenation «*y Dira: wrote this diary on 31 c> 46 let ne

..j.a -f K-^.n’s testicony, mciely, that Bin.r after 19-3 nt sure
thr * tho war would be lost.

a% Yes, that is true, K-.:on testified during his testicony r_n
* * Bln.: fr/c the be^innir,; of 1943 on cede efforts t- cover hinoelf.

5C99


m T . i

1 .Ipr -A-I4-2-ISW>ro«t (lat. Brovn)

Ho also eeid that froc thet neaent ^n the oral assilent# that he re¬
ceived vere not sufficient hut thet he =ust Insist or. receiving vritten
orders. ^11 the sore rerxrfcable is it then thet in the so-called diary,
this Document 265, srys only very infrequently vho initiated the various
lines of experimentation. And, if I recoil correctly, he does not once
sny vho ordered then.

Shea do the contents of this diary - vet the reouirv-.-r.ts that
. of t scientist's diary?

a. She diary of a scientist has tho nuroose of settin.- d-vr. the
rociev c rce of the v-,rk undertaken. - Conscouently, all offorts rc-
•r.rdlty the initiation end course of experiments should >c set devr..

*-."t ie . :orfcctly conprehonsiblo custco in all institutes because sub-
BOcuently the evaluation of the experiments Is Used on entries in the
scientific institute's diary. In this Bceur.ent 265, hovevor, vhich is
allegedly such a diary of Slock 46, there it not one entry rowdln tho
actual c ursvof the experiments; n-t ever, the results of the ox>orlr.cnts
are set wn there. That is really tho loist that you c-ula. ash of such
a diary, Dr. K -.:on, to ho sure, thought that the number of fatalities
vhich ere set down with clear oroclslon wore a result, to he sure, un
unheouy result, ,f these cxnerimcnt*. That these events are f oun. -
lurontchle car. hardly he disputed but it is a false point viev if on.

- coif -r. the basis of this result toward somethin-:, the our-ose
of vhich vac entirely different. The real experimental result can bo seen
in the f ' 1 jvirv;: As c consequent of the -rotcctive vaccination vh-
Uojens durirw: e rabsvouent case of Infection is that the period -f lr.cu-
-1 r. i: -,r 1-n ed. namely, that period cf tine that lapses better,
the actual infection an: the first epoeararxi of tho disease. Secondly,
the period of fever is shortened, vhvreas usually the >vri S. of fever in
ty hus is 17 days. This -rotectiv* vaccination reduces it to 12. 1C. a.nd
even 5 drye, depending on the strem-th of the -’rmteetive vrecir.e. At
the sa c tine the height of the fever, or ten-'errturv, is reduced. In
■•.her vorc z , the symptoms that arc associated vith fever that effect the


.-urt Ho. 1

27 Mar 47-A-14-3-LEH-GroM (1st. 3rwr)


blood cl: culttloa end the heart, ns well es those that effect the central
nerv-ufi ::*sten, ere after the orotentire vaccine less nronc.ur.ced cr alto¬
gether Rtscnt. Ir.ore crc verious jther anall clinical indice.tlons which
a doct-r r^ndily rec-piizes as c -result of the orotuctlre vaccine and it
oust be said that as the result of less serious clinical arnifestations
:.;c nu.'oer of fatplitles freo tynhue it mnidler. That is not a direct
• • indirect conseouccce of vaccination. Therefore, when Ziar asserts

in this 31ode Diary of 31ock 46 that the roost iaoortcnt result of tho ux-
ourlr.or.ts ^te the nu.itor of fatalities, thor. every doctor will reco^nirc
this as such on erroneous and distorted stetecent that ever, if it is on
•he part of r doctor so reliable as Din^ it it coaoletaly unworthy of
credence.

^ I now show yu Knuovsky Docuaont 9 which it on oi -c 61 to a.:e
65 cf the’docum ent book and I out it in as Mrut/wky Ixhibit 23. It is a.
oheto cony of c oooer by Dr. Din.- on the protective action of various vac¬
cines on hu:.m telega end the course cf typhus after inrun 1 ration. I do
not wjsh to read the document but sinply brln,: i‘- to the attention of tho
Tribuarl. Vould yju care t r.ekc any stat^ent vhother tho lnndocuate
vry in which this diary vrs worked on? Vculd. you like to say that per-
.u»ps _.n#; wee n>t in a position t*. carry on such v-.r>r?

this peior is 1? na,;c* Ion*. First there is tho ranter f tho
.itUnt's tolerance for the vaccine, then the individual noir.tr that I
,‘UEt nentionod ao the c-r.sc-uoncos of the protective vaccination arc * .<
int-. Sable* are presented which #:ivo statistics lr. these natters. Cr.
t c 0£c if the d.cur.er.t book there arc ei,^it sketches In which thor6
rc ,:rr ,hs shovln-: the results and at the very bettor, cr. tho ncXtTo tho
l>ot D£,:o, in the next t) the last inre^ra-h, there are three llr.e»hich
ray that the fatalities in the case-s cf those vacclnnted were fewer in
cv.ber than cnon,: these who were not vrcclnrtcd. That is all nentionod
in the c • :ary - there is c final surcxry. This is also an indication
th-t he W-.8 perfectly er.ortle <f carrying :n sci.ntific •'-rfc. I sh-uld

like t. •.oist -ur that a.t tho top cf this upper it ir reentiuned that this

51C1


t


Court So. 1

27 Iter 47-A-14-4-ZEK-Gross (lat. Srovn)


r.< -rs done la by institute in Berlin.


I krev thft jb »n indication


that I Ip if*, no streas -n keeoin,: these natters secret in any way or thrt

vhich

it vp.s ny ooir.t of view th^t these exnerioental re-sults/hcc been eehioved


-n the r-CBt a ensive -f ell ae.teri' 1 , nencly, hunpn heir^-s, ehould be


carried thr.u^h to conclusion end that rc*ults of then should be nede
fvnileble to pH those vho vere Interested.


27 H r 47-;.-SV?-15-l- f v\rrow- i nfc: vr cwn
C. ur t Ifc . 1


1 . A o Frcsccuti n ;.Iso charges ycu t.-its thefcct Bing
infoctod ,j rs ns in 3u 0 }.orr.id who -had n< t proviruslv ro-
c.iiv> *. cl o . r fccctivc vaccination. Yfeuld eu like Co nnko
r. atntonenfc n that subject?

•*. f<-llcv.'in c .sos eerie into question 3. ro. Or. thtf

br.ris of Dario's diary entries. *irit cf r.ll, thoro ro tho
.x .rolinlr ry oxjx-riner.ts :l . In "ocuuont 265,
four ’ suck prep.l..tor- Gxporiaonta ..ro r.onti no.’ r n un-
vr.cciu :cd per aor.o. *hoso r^ro dono in oruor to ao coriiiii-
vkat \n.y ra a pcssiblo in order co artficially infect hui.mn
ooi:. t ;c v id. typhus. I alw..ys found that tho lay person vrhi
hed nover concerned kinsolf with those nr.ttorr .ro noa it
tc be a -.cv c rao that it is ..l\/..ya pcssiblo to in¬
fect . I.uj tan boin*j ritl: r. li. oaoo. That, hewovur, is by nc
:.nc tho c .ao, -von in tho c-.so cf such a t. ::ic : sat. rial
r.a tho typfc •'« on;, auccosrful ir.focti : ecu .nly occur ii*
f is n <-1 r tc.. iirac tly int; the bl ..d stronn* Unloss
mother way ic choaon it is usually in? -riblo t: bring -bout;
;* o ' foot! . wit: such :. elite:.so. c ncoquvntd”, when sue!

-p rinonta ro t<* bo c: rriod cut n hurur. boir. c, nd this
... int f vior ti t 1 oxorocs with ut r.ny ref renco fcc>
y nm perem, tl u n such. prollninary ox. •■oriuontc c.4\nc t bo
lispono u-ith, ’fhe second case ..ro the so-calldd "cbntr -_e

- .0 a".


. * u kr w .jtything f those prolii.iin.ry ox; ori lonts?

... Kb, If . i . ut - nly through tl i. ry.

■ 'H

C.. “isv . _yc : '. ’r iary undor the 20tl of February,

10-C: ! Case histories sil •. .-vos r n-tl«j ;>rolinin:.ry oxper-
nto v; ru»nt tc Berlin. 11 Did ycu roccivo this ropert?

... : r d( I believe Dinj sor.t it * :_o bee uao ho .a

•*

tc .-.v. in the jo oxpen lonfes itsoous, there¬


at


»


;u r b bio c u th t hcsor.t thou t- C?r:. itr.I

5&3


y


27 :t.r ' 7-A- S" -1 5- 2-dr.rrc n- Ir.t: 3rc rr.

: ert . I


:ny r-'.to, 13 - r.c t so: then.

•, ‘cv/ cm this be n.condii-d ritl: ycur lettor cf 5 Hr.y
1042 t* w cr.tl end c th rs which I ut in oviionco this c.era-
ing r.s “Vott.xnfc ye. 10, lichibit l-rugors’ty 20 , r which ic
tc bo fci id • rs pr.go 86 of the d< cuncnt beck?

Oiio letter ccrrcbori.tos whr.t I h'.vo Just tostifiod tc
:o ti j report cn this sorios j :p ririertr y-z rent
tr Orawifcz nr. 1 I rocoivod v Ins's ropert tc Gr wits fron Ori-
vicz i.ich the c rdor torowrit -j it in r. sultr.blo f:rra
s'.nco Grnwitz did rn t risk thr.t cutaIdo persons ccvld coo ,
withe ut ,y furthor trouble tr thonaolvoa, thr.t the so *v-c
really on rinonta on hunmtoin ;s with art if 1 inflation,

. knur t, t ac o ostont , I could r.c.at r tho stylo
thr.t ho used in hie rfficir.l ocrrumic-* ticno, r: r nr he ’id
not kner v • c i>i ' r n< t. ^cneoquontly, ho ccn-

lccicnod jo t trlroD ing'a -jixv.l rup rt end, fer the pur-
... jo 1 ' .. <1 c- r ionic t ic- e tr tho ::r.uf. cturing finis, tc

cast it is. suit . is I lid thu r.su; la

\

d cunont n .ngo 80 f 5 -r.y 1942,

Y.ur letterhead horo la ^oichrnj t n ' lico Chief Hy~

•. -t. In Cher words, tils is on. f the cr jc in :;ch

Or vdtz nr.de uec cf you whon y u still belonged V the nodic-
l ■ -.•If . tin Trffonf.S?

Yos.

. i 't Grr.witz rophreso tho 1 r 1 in. so If?

A. II- ;o sr.y hr.vc boon trr reasons f« r tfc t, r 5. ret, lwv/Jtz
: v hygienist but ra intmist nsr’ cinco tho letter wr.s
h-ing ront t' specialists; nrnoly, the so wh r.-r.uf r.cturod tic
v'.ccinur, * rmtod t be curb thr.t everything wculd bo in
tJ lottor whch they nooded knew nnd, cn tho ctfcor head, nr
-• tl cn thoy needed tc knew, m.‘ r eer ily, Mis is quito

wit his oust* .ry mnnor - f nox ring; niraoly, t 1

:icu- * --


27 :l-.p _7-j - -lE-3-Xnrrcv-Ir •: or cm
Ccurt 21' . 1

Ms ccllr.b r tcpc writo letters thr.t .cr.lt vith thoir P-~r-
ciculr-r apkero cf * erk, rr.d f^r this rqr.arn, ho cerv'.ir.s-
i-rtM 'x to ire'.ito this letter.

o. On tils occr.airn did you net c co r.crlno xpross bjoct-
_ . . Or-rritz ro.y.r'.inc -cr.pcri: or.ts m hunr.n boil. M

•

fy.: t I did net le bocr.uso tl is series cf cxpor.’nonta hr.'

beer, c- ludod r.nd boenuso I knew th'.t trey Ir.db cen cr.r:

ufc n Fir. lor'a opccific erdora. %ia w.-.r tho first series

f r or.ts thr.t 1 .- I over b-cn c r.rriod 'niter*, itvr.’.s tho

r.rvacr. for ny vory vie lent ahew-down with Crr.wttz r.t thr.t

tine, I r.BOU v’. thr.t t! la Jrb w-.s n w c< nplotod I 2 *2 « r

ror.o n t i iso fort: r obJu^V-na.

Q. VTcro t' v v ccir.os rf tie Behring 'crlrc, when Dr. Dinj

used tl . :r Mo ex.Kri.-or :s, >.n rr. ox;>.rtr.1 r •• vt>?

A. iV. # .t: - v ocln-.r 2 •. Ire *.;• boon t oatod in tho plant

tpore r.c ? t ler. noo fer tho;;. All such pr~;v.r; tirna rf

•• . *• ’ r?.". - • rl:s, before thoy w re sont it 'm t - o world,

roro worked 'n in thoir cwn lr.brrr.fcc rioa.

. b .11 t* tho TTibur-.l rucrwaky D'eunent , be

ftun:l• n .-.;.ro «6 rf 'r C u:ort *>rk 1, snt - put it ir. r.t

- wi • Exhibit 24. *hi3 ia i ffid:.vit by Dr. Doraii- ,

rv' r f the 3 0 1 ring *Vri:a, r y.r/.ir ho • r~ In rS tl o

•

- ■ • - r th Behring Verbs tmo lovol^pod and ;\nd hew they
v. \ tea tod in the irstituto ito3if. On tho frvrth pr.-o, nr.no-
ly p:.go 99 f tho Drdunont b 1:, Bo. 5 re.. Is:

'■-.tun.ir.y , tx B .ft ring "hs *.i3' c err led rut tests to
.r ;..b.i3*. vhotlcr the vr.ccin.s .^roo ■ rith hurra boln;;e f r(r.)
I it wr.s .ococcr.ry tc Vt.ccinr.to tl so cor pi • r‘.:ln In tint t -
b:s lr.b rr.t' nice in - rd r tt" pretuct tl i .,- r.inst typhus
ficti n; (b) it w-3 nocosscry tr< pretoct th«so pocplo rhe
• tho o;:. rU: r.tr.ls mi rJLs, (c) tho vn'c si,r. 1 hi:>
.lf r.-r.s « n soverr.l ccr.aicrs vnccinctoC r. tMr.st t; ;>hu8


5OT


7 liar

J urt .. . 1


- _ .-15-4—“- rrrv/-Int: ir- wn

4

with vaccin-s f t: o Bobrins rks. IhGso vr.ccin ti ns bed
cn bo ropo tod fr'-n ti rx> to tii.o . This ccncomol both r.d
Russian neatatmts. In cur fcyyh.ua 'opartrert, bcut 20 to
25 . reor.o w re ©riplryod."

And Hu:bor 6: "Ihc mirsr.lc. jeriuenta .‘.cc- rcii • ; to Ottc •
r - (;*.) tho hr.r. icasnc-a end (b) tho effectiveness or

insufficient effectiveness."

e *i zly , ir. Wo. 4 on Pr.go 99, it st;.tod i: tl o question,
T.t.uti or .i nni. r.ls olj>wod r. i> stivo r~r.cticr. , Lc h ccy.pro-
l.jnsibl..’’ J-t sc.tod r.lac t! .t m inale x ors onta w-ro errr-
io-1 cut ir tl u Bohr ins “orks. I aubnit this i curunt
• prrvoii w-ro not vneoinoa which hrvl n t boon rovi-uply
proved, but v/oru vr.ocinoa which had geno threw' the noco-
sarry It md offoctivo topting. u c yen rouonbor
Kc&m'b. feoafci > ny tl- c vrl-*r.' r3 wore usou m c) o firat
ta aonoo f experiments? SVia fcoeti xny ia ra pr.go 1162
f tho - ;*J Lai -\.c rd and cn p.vo 1197 r the Gornrn r
If vo b:;:e - i: .pticno rn Ding's ’i'-ry, wl .6 tvr oerioo
f o-yorii cents :mot fcfcoso I.r.vo boor, f r v* ieh v luntoorc v.*o o
uaol?

if wo bf.: ir i ilary tra can cnly

1 - :: K two eorlco wui-w, firot cf rll , .he ;oro-

li.drv.ry Berios .i which began ^n 5 J :nu.\ry :n fel'.o l'irrt
aeries . vr.colno export oouta with 145 purs no rogazClng •... he
o hotter ti..C W.-.3 irovi. usly ro:.d - "rue rsky u erne? j
- _ E : l'V.2 c ncorr.e itself. ‘A is a^rioa began cn tho

next he.;-; r.anoly , n 6 Jrnunry 1942 . -ny -th.-r . syori^onto
t> lc plo.co ’ c lv: r ‘to. ‘hue, v- cn K< gr.n a r.ys tlir.t two
coriv s cf oxpjriionts w oro c .it ion cut with vrluntcors, it
c - : - be ti csotwr soriec f oxporinents.


27 IZarcb 1947 -A-16-1-PKF- Usso- (Ir.t. Brown)

•jt . 1

*. “ha cxporifflants “bout which the letter of 5 Iicy concur.. itself
*-re carried out >n volunteers?

A. A ;7 -cntly they were.

5. Can jvu resuabor the coceunication of 11 April 1913, that the iatosk.
jrun c:.ul ’ Un c or be usod_for experiments?

A. No, I jn't r_ncmber that and I consider it out of the question tii'.t
I over r-coive ny such cceaunicntion . In all b-cwi-l y, part/vcularl.
in virolo-y, 0 :*;ro have o,--r. efforts for centuries to brood living gema
which nr- r. linyor pathogenic whio : do not nakc human beings sick, in or
to use . 5c Living c^rns for the manufacture of vaccine, nrxwly vnccinos
with living attenu-U atr- ins bu.c.-use those re e-or.pleto protection
a*ainae thu disc so.

C.. In other ^rds, you want to eny thot if ou had rocoiveJ this c.«r>-
unic *tion then you would have seen to it th't further experiment a wore
• • . out with this rvo longer c virulent eerua?

„. I should not tiU to .*»t it quite that way but I should Certainly ho'
•ot in t- chwith thu .vrson whos- institute had developed this otrair.,

■ns the Rourt Koch Institute, Profesoor Gi Ido., is ter. Hoover, I r. vor
,ke t., hit about this oattur and 2 should like to boli-v- t'rt ho found
jut nothing about this anttor because Gildoooister was one of our bust vir -
researchers Ti l was very fanlliir with what value ouch r ally : iquu
occurrence w.ul. h vu .

Q. Did y i aoo roports on the C nd D oories of wqwriacnts, rogardim
thu disc Very f a ani'o method. of infection, which wore sail to have take
. Lice jn the lltn r.rk! 13th of April?

A. I found out about thus only her-, while looking through this
cuaunt, an-’ also sai. that Dir .5 does not assort thrt he sent a rop-rfc on
this to Berlin. • *

. On what further typhus experiment scries did you th. sue reports?

In the diary f Black 46, Document 265, Ding M7 8 that r.ly in the c
■f a fev -xp.oria-r.tal series did. he send reports to Berlin, naooly ' •*
r,w tjocriaental series. Series I, II, VII and VIII. Thu rep-rt » —ri-.

- . visj receive’ it from Gr.witz, and --s I said before, I rephrased

3107


17 -arc:. !;•<-? “A-16-2-PK?- Lesser (Ir.t. 3ro*r.)
dourt No. 1


it ir. another r .nstitutes tr* -’.ocusent here submitted. Series II

mss carried eat with the vaccine ol _urnnt-Girou. of --he Parisian Institute.
That was the v-ccine thrt *« intended to produce in _ur own institute. I
really cannot r~call ever having seer, this r-port but it is possible that I
mis inf jme-! ;i it by Orsitz because I rc-av^bcr that Growitz one ’ay told
nc th:t he was ccnwiacod of t!x, effectiveness of this vaccine an! ho' no
. j.cti.n to ay suggestion that mo aanufncturo the vaccinv accordin.

• t'.'.t process. The L-nunization in the course f this suri.s was cerri-

-r. y «L. o-ttwcr 19 August till h Septessber 1912. Frau 10 Septenbor to 9
October he was in Paris with Profoosor Giroud, to loarn his BOthed, an' uh
fte return^ infected persons and sent the charts to Berlin on 20 vcab .

It is probably then, toward tto «:n:’ «f the yc'r 1912, that Grnwits o.ioko
- n- no ut t is cor.

Q. Din was >r jtoJ v. r-port to Giroud in Paris in t :utu<s f 1912
although, r.a . • 1. , i* was already ’ceife t tj.o end of 1911 to

n-.nufhcturo y.ur vm vaccinos ace r ir.* to Giroud's procoso. New how do you
explain ‘-Sc clay?

A. Intne infections carried Mt ir. Seri si n 3 Uarch 1912, Dim inf-,
hinself t riouily ill ef Ty.tfiu , Lto his r tcctivc vaccinsti n.

Subsequently he wont on le’.vo to recover an! when his health vna Gcvauwtot

. ' th-n Lho business of g.-inp t; Paris was . iocurr which uao only

rible In th- autunn.

:ific fctolitios : r. the control cases. Ms* you soy
that Gr wltz r.bnbly discussed this natter with you. Did you do nothin
b.-ut the ; ct tb t there he ’ been fatalities?

A. lilnb Grcwits spoke to it t Is natter I c -uld to nothin,. because

e-ri . * .x-erJjter.tr had already been concluded. a»t I do ruewnbor prut

clearly the situation in his office there. I reacsbcr th t I br.ujht- up the
natter f thorn - f-talitisis an; tclJ hLr that that would probably be the
- ;t series t t .*_■ instigated. He answered th.t Kimlor had ordered these
.rirt-nta ad I nysolf had specifically objected to be La a included in 11 .
•--ttcr, r._ consequently r~ 1 oncer had cay ri. ht * interfere in his busln.

•typhus experiaontal series VII was concluded on 7‘


itrch ■ -A-16-5-PXP- Lessor (Tnt. Browr.)

Court, Ko. I

September ISfc :.liniahe report was sent to 3erlir. on 9 September,

according to Ding's D-ary. Dili you 1-0 this report?

A. N-.

Q. 3ut accordiri to Ding's work report you wes on the }r': of September,
at a tisoo v.liun this series was coopletod bat the report not yot written,
you were, ccarding to this diary, in Buehenwald, visitin,; Din,. Di’- ;.*ou
. .Ik at this uattor then?

4. This entry is apparently correct. This was the peri . in which Block
>0 ..os beix, pr- are for the ,»r Auction of the vaccines. Ding writes in
-r.u of hir documents thrt the 10th »f August this block was .ccupi. *
and tlv t w.rk in .reducing the vaccine was borun. Kogon corroborate
that in Mr t.stiaony. Then 3 w^uks after the beriming of this work 3 wont

BuchcHwai. 60 1 >k over the laboratory an to set h.w his work was '.ettii.

. Kogan also describe! at suae length how I inspect : tha institute,

\ ry :• .. It was r. rather extensive inapeotl n. I ask

c ay questions, had nsmy converse?i ns with the inci tes there; ho further
testifi./ that I was with Ding in his roon for only n very brief period of
tine, an- that la Is. c.rr-ct. In other wor e, t th t tine he id r. t su
t- mo rny enter ini

Q.. Di y-u know anything else -.bout this ex irisu-ntcl series VII?

Thio scries was carried _-ut with a vccino tinil r t the Be hr in

- ’no, manufactured by a ditto rent firm. I kn-u nothin; i -Ms axpori-

.it" 1 CvjlitlOa

,. l sutilt t- the Tribunal •'s the next dcement, Document lirugowsk;-

loont book in pogo 92 ant I pul in evidence
ruvmaky Exhibit 25. This is an affidavit by Dr. Karl Ludwi ; Liters of
. t.yji- i tnu Ail 1. rko. Th. statement reads, after the cust-onry


ir.tr.« action:


Court 1

rcfc 27 -A-l 7 -l-HD-Binkley-Brown.


'The above parser. roe- 3tcd the not ry to drat up
on affidavit r.d declared tnd deposed the following in lieu
of nr. oath one after having boon duly Inf-r.-ec of tho
no rulin': of u affidavit:

'1. The preuuction“of typhus v tccinus br.sod on
• -■ e culture process began 's ocrly as 1941. Later on
the proscribed process according-to GildbucisW -nd

. .s Intr-duced.

'2. Bxpori. or.ts r. nnl::nls for the purpose f twst-
in t aanufacturod vaccines Were tnkon up simultaneously
With the bo&innin; of the production am* r?ore c rri.d out
C-:. 1 •; isly. Tho results f the aninal exporinonts i/oro
not always clear. Tho vaccine tolornnoo was tested by
protect!-a v eeir.ations of oupl^yoos; nil u-.pl yocs
c nnuOted with the Vvthus jpartnont or who c io in c >n-

* i

tnct with- employees v:orkin ; wore vaccinated. 3esidos,
nil other o::ployeo3 had the privilege ;f reooivir.,' protect!
v coi:.vti •- inst typhus >n their damnd nd v/ithout
c'.r r .. in tho c urso at ti. .u a- tit no thousand employ-

inatod agninst typhus.’*

Ilu-liors 3 and «i I si .ply draw to the att .tS n of

-rUiur.l* Kur±-r 5 roods:

'5. .o f r as I Know, there was no corruS. ndonoo

•

lot)'-. . tk- fir.: of .e:id Serum Institute G....b,H.,

9

Dessau, on tho >no hand, and tho former K’viono Institute

*— 'ff-i SS 'r tho Institute for Typhus and Virus

• «

Research it Buchonrald r its chief, Dr. Dir. , r tho
-r vit- :.oy, on th- other hand.

. : the acqu lot-.ace of Dr. Sing during a

ri fr .. Berlin to Grnco*./.

‘7. the test of tho typhus v seines i:. Duosti n

*

I 0 :ld not say. la r.y o SQ, s f r as
511c


*


Court 1

I'cLi w7-..-l7-2-HD-Blrlcley-3r v;n.

I know, I never discussed th t euosti - with Prof.

IIru*;ovsky, nor did I forward the vaccines to hia for the

rposc. of testin' . It is cuite possible that the vaccines

-cached Dr. Din, tfcr)ugh xrif. Glide. :oist or of £0 Robert

-• Institute in Berlin, who received the. in hi a capacity

-s expert c t, suit ant of the Ministry for the Interior for

the *.t r.jz inst opidoaics.

"8. During n discussion vith Prof. Mrucov/eky in the

liy i ... Institute of tho '.•nffon SS in Berlin, I talked only

r.bout general ruostions of hyr.iono with regard t~ tho

occupied o-stern territ ri s and I asked f~r r.aaistraoo ir.

ri.o ri: f d-vol aing the seru. Institute at blow. At

the st.o ti...o the organization or do-lousing by tho

Asi Jaru . Institute Koonigsbors '*~3 discussed. There
also nay hfcvc boon s. discussion of gar—r..l c ; u<-sti.n3 in
connection ith ctivo i,. .uni zati on, :spocirlly ;:inst
so rl>t fev-r, horic

Then thoro is th^ usual c nclusion nd si tufo.
bJ IXG:

It can b- s^n fr ... this th t the v Ocin«a f
this oioa did n t r, vi y u fr.:: Dir.; i3 th t tru
Yos

. ..cc rein t- Dr. Din 's *ork r-port, wiich i3
• •

Dcu.._at i -571, Exhibit ..85, you -rc pr^Soit •.:ith hi.:
on the 3rd f A- * .ftor in Buch.a* Id. Did ou visit
Block id?

... Yos* Dia 2 ’.:. ... a. I .-it - - .- t take

1 6 I ;.nt >vr th.._ * ith nd I

. . u ’ .r Ate . _ 1 I th t I * '3 loti t- ston^ building,,

9

tl*.w lover floor of a stono building,. -/here there
nv b^r of r-o: -like ; rtiti 'us.


5111


Court i

::-rc: : 7-A-17-3-HD-B1 - fcley -Br O- .n.

In the firet rc->._ then- -..-crc f» ere 5 I yinG

c rCs; nd Di t- 1 '. .tht these • re tyy hus c av-los-
o -- - survived ty hus .:e - . ■ be relased.

' t Heed t t'10.. ad found out tlrt their st t- health
* j- tb’t the usu'l ftcr-cffccts of ty hue "ere

33J.S1 aco. There -.or. b ut five Jr si;;

In the fieC r.d r -u I sc:.' about tkr-o - . tionts 1 ; iaa

I 05 . s h- to :. .

tr ..sforrei to 3 uc;\sn- Id a short trio tef ,r fr. - other
0 • 0. : _ - jf tau •. ■ ill oven uhon ho rrived

md the others .*c f lion ill shortly ft or th~ir r rival
in : -c'-en-'-le a:’ than wore tr-v.sfcrrcd to t »ir ty. hus

station. " 0 ocarnod uitli o.lc n-

Aoooxdin? tJ Ding's ontry tlwre r.-erc
no series of n. .rLicnt. ■ rri- ; .

v. *'100 visiting : .didn't t to Dr.

Di b ut is v rious joriic of tyyhue -xyerr s?

. 3 ho h C. nolu ■ .' .ri..er.t *.l

Iu..'oer 7 ith ..aid vnooiacs 0 I c n 3v- fr :: this

'

f t litiia e its result* It ia line -;th Dins'c r et
... — .i ot t . t .b ut sue.: ; *w *ios f -ri-

.ir.tj ui iCe he X:ie*. - h t .uy b oic attitude * v res this
.u..sf.ij^ e.

-• Didn't y u di seine the ty hus cx.iori ents with
Din on th- occ si a of ur visit?

“• •' . idn*t discuss th t . v. ur c
*-i.v. —rely - It * ith the •. rk c rri- r i.a Bloc!: 50
th- . r notion f v ccino, thick r. liy *.- s the ; ur ose
visit. I think.


5112


Court 1

:larch ZT-:.- 17-ilD-B lalcicy-Brown.


that *.;c discuss C aur.bcr or ether. hy i.nic questions s

th_y concerned the vicinity of Buchcmr.ld. I th t

s Iz.ch f r.tor there frxi .:y previous ctivity;

-n I sure th t thi3 s a sub jot t that wr.s discussed.

I 3-. the evenin'- with-Dine in his flat where I not

* •

Dr. 'loven, tho c-np physician of Buchonwr.ld, rad .:is

•

y . -s. Dm, •• s thcro, too. It is natter it c urso

th t v/o liCn’t discuss ny technical qu-3ti :s i:: th t
circle. \*c certainly did r.ot speak rib ut ny oxporL-ents
on nU.er. ',-in's&.

•In this connection I -cy perhaps sr.y th t this w s
tho .ly tir.c, th t I s-v Hovon, v;ho : 11 j edly •. a to

• 's rcpres-nt"tivo. That W ton dnya before
Kovon h i to end hi3 ctivity r.a a o..ip physician in
: .r .14.

<4. ’./crn you of the opini >n th.t the cy;\ . ex ; <eri-
:..ri .8 had boon concludod?

... YwS. I held th t oplai-r. inco it V -o >. -s
evil. * fro::-the documents her- that the o::; cri. :mt 1
surirOB : tli t *.i... ted r.ot l-d t Li8or.so. Th t iu

r. .son th t tho str.in c .;in fr . tho Il-b-rt
ICooIi Inotitutw s net p the enic. Din. di r, ; s y th t
h- sort :iy r- orte to Berlin % b-ut it; nd I th-r-fero
lid r. t :..y f m b the \—y ho vorko:’. in Buchcnvll
o r .3 it .id a t c.>nc-rn Bloch 50. I r .c -f th- -pinie.
that ft .r the 3-c.nd s-ri-s of oxp-r? er.ts ich \ :»

- ncliie. rt *.. -i d -f 1912 r.o furth-r -xv-rii.ents wore
1 Anod.

0

"oil, if : nx believed th r t — ty; hus .xotri:—nts
• d been concluded, the r:ain .ctivity of Dr. - - \i uld
to c r.t ore nclusion?

... Ko, th. t is r.ot the erso. Seen fr y p int of

5113


or.


Court _

:: rch 27-..-17-5-HD-Bi-;-cloy-R''_n

vi-.-.;, he v .3 - bncteri-*lo ist; nnfi I * s ruzzi nisly
'.unitin' the of this sp-ci-1 -is si *n by Gr •:its so

th“t Dir. * »oul. .er.in ‘oc fully t ..y disposal. ..t that
ti-.-, L:. the year of 1913, he had to c rry ?ut tho

prop tions for the. vr.ccino pr iuoti ir. '.t Such-jfc .Id. •
Therefore, tho building v; >rl. hrd t . be supervised. Block
50 • *s very ..odornly furnished b ctoriolo.vicr.l institute
v/ith number of spooir .1 ri*-cos of .voi. :ont, fjiia- is
h »: to be obtained and r.cconodntions ;ottm r y for the .

•• a r.*t only >nc kink of mi.a -1 but four different
ono. It .3 necwss ry to obt in f dder f r the... Then
na- .r of other org. nizeti-ncl ctiviti.s •ore noc-n • ,

which x.’do King's stay in Buchanv.'.ld bsoiut-ly r.ec.os~ry.

. Din '.ir.tr ins that ho sont the report about tho

4

3-ri .s Number C of the typhus experiments. Did you 300
th- t in Berlin? It •ns t h ve been sent on z.:i 13t;. of
iTxino 10 *...

... .ell, I hc-rd .-.bout this Series of o;., .ri..-nt3
July >j loo in t the docunont hero. I h »*n't oo-n or
he re of It bef ro.

.. In th- 1 st entry of ; i , di ry Din,'' says: ‘'By
>rd-r of the Chief Hydenfst of the \’~f.cn >S, dated tho
loth oi August 19'id , it wes to be establish- -rh-thor th
of typhus illnv.33 ern bo ..itir'.t-u by t.-phus
v coin- throu h intravenous or intr- zuscul r i tjerti ns. 1 '
Did ; \i ever ic3uo such rn order?

No. I r-pertcdly pointed out tht on th- b ^Lis
' • - entire - rg-mizntionnl sot-up of the l.'edicnl Institute

i the .nffon 53 I c >uld not ns the 1 - dir.-, hyrdonist of
-h. .* ff-n 35, ' ith the title of Chief Kyyicniat. I

rh . c nd v; s t :ref ^re not in n ositi-on to
:• r :_iy eZ-:.r eriricr.t s to be carried out on

5U-


<_ 'Ll

v rch -7—-17-6-KD-2C—J.cr.

im.r.tco accr.usc I hr.d just ns little influence on the
.wdicnl service of the c ncer.tr tion ca.; ? s r.y oth.r
ef the * rffon SS. The nr.ttor vith vhich u& do-It
vir.s oO^plctoly different t In tho Crinen in one of the
hospitals in the 3:.3t I asw th t the internist thv.ro
v;*s t .ortinf. typhoid illneadcs by injections of aond
tyrh id V'ccines; end this pr >ccduro result-- in the
seizure by f-v-r in :vny of the c cos. -t th t ti..o I
rur:c:ibored thit it beenno uppnront fror: liter: tura d.ttin^
b oh .fr j:\ tho 1 st ’..'orId Urjf when nmUr of p-yurs
written on the very sr.no sul Joct th t there •.•ere
pleil-r tront-ents r- 3 *rdin'i typhus nd typhoid o rriod
o.t by the inj-cti^n of v-ccines.


*


5U5


27 Kirch t7-A-A“-l8-l-C-nila her (Int. Ur.-Jor)

Court So. 1

During the course of fch.se years .-her. I had tc dvl al sJy with
•ir T Yr.d developed a very definite opinion r.bcut th. -ri ination and

'a

davaloyixnt of typhus. I was, thorufor, of th opinion that in th* ease of
this ir so, which clinically is vary close to pare-typhus, it wcul
quite feasible to mko an exrerinor.t with that k i n d of trer.taant. -r c
o-l W's of tyabusand typhoid and stomach typhus -re very sinilar. If
euro can b. achieved with one aothod, it is to be assun.-d that all other
tyuoa of illnesses of that nature cculd also bo treat.i ith success usi:
th-.t ;thcd. After ay return, thorofore, I ostoblishod contact d.th a ms*
of interna js belonging to the hospitals which I knew, and wrote then the*
had 'v horod lik oxporior.cos. I quoted .-ass:, as free literature on th-t
subject, and I said that our new experiences -ro tto snn. os our old. I
:v.do tbo sugtjosticn that the saso aothod bo ’used ir. thu cose of typhus by
inJoetin; with a arotootiro typhus vrccino. One rd. ht consider that at th
tljie wo had Just os little noons of coabaUirv, the *ov. * disenso a3 i

d-y. Wo, therjfore, vora nodlcally Justified to sov.rch for now notv
ods of trootttont.

*r 0 ro thoso to bo a sorlos of osqttrlaonts in the sense in
Pin carried th.n out?

A T'.uat is cor., lately cut of the question. There was no cause to do
that whatsoever. In jrdor to cctfcat such an experiment, one could uso ir.
typhus inflicted ;- rsor. a test by this nothod and th. versa that crx. ha
is th-.t it -mid not help, but - rtainly would not be nocossary to mko n
certain aories or experiments, and I certainly never used any such ord- •.

1 Did you -.Tit to Din- in that sense?

A At that tir.. I infor.wd :y assistants about this therapy in the
o(3o of co ta .,Tus disoasos, an I c:i sure that it was a natter of court
•J ns apii-Tdc specialists wa had to b ir.for-ed about such a .. ssibil.
and ir. this nannor also receiving knowlcd . of it.

You woru 3-yin-; tlr.t thoro would have boon or wcuid not have bo:-
Justification for tho oxporinental theory?

5115


27 rel .7-A-N»7?-l5-2-C<ll^her (Ir.t. Racier)
Court Jfe, 1


A ?to,

'1 r -U, did you or did ycu not or dor 3 uch a s-rics of experiments *
Dr. ^ :?

A "over at no tine.

Q Arc you of the opinion that Dir.- started these exp:rir.cnto on hi
own initiative?

A That is possible! At any rato he did not rocoiv. ordcra fro:.: .e,

. ' ’or.*t know where else ho could have had an order fron,

CJ That bring s aj to another point. You wore saying before that ir.
tho or of exp.ricents which wore carriod out on humn beings by or- 1 ..-
the State, :<hleh persons that tte »Stato placod at th disposal of thoso
axporlnents tho State aust bo told responsible* whoovorrcarried out such
oxporirenta is only rosponsiblo for th: nannor of tho .xocution of thoso
experiments* acccrdinly, Dr Din, wcxild havo to bo held responsible for t
nannor in ..hich those typhus ox: rioonts woro conducted* I, thoroforo, wa:
to exoaino thoso two questions with ycui First, did Dr. Dins carry out
those ;x;>uriiicnt3 for which ho in ary way cculd bo held to bl'noj sccon
did you Ivava tc assuno ary rosponsibility fbr tho oxperinonts which Dinr
did carry out. First, did Din.'? carry out thoso axperinonts in an orderly
manner?

A I alroacy rphasizud wton discus sin, the oxperi ..ntal soriot :te.
t ir. only usad thirty ersons for tfcoir theory, and later that ha de¬
creased that nurilor. If one across to such oxperlrv-nts, penorUy, ono
cortftirl;- sh.uld not use this s*vall -anount of ocparinantal subject, i
oxpoots .any results to bo achiovcd. Din only sanlnod fron vr.c^ino for
“in 1 - ti ., and he did not cxnainc th.:i ary acre frequently than that, ’ T
ualy oxuoj-ac.i ..•as -l*? vaccine, w.ilca e ivjk thi-.i 1 -i; . u.‘e *.i .

Thora ono eftn n->t soeak of .an oxardnation which certainly would not have
boon necessary, sinco its effac ivanoss was already known. Tho effect!ver
■f other vaccines, which woro unknown so far would havo to be coaparod
tho effectiveness if that vaccine, I don*t believo, therefore, that or.

- aid ir. ary - ay rer.ri.-ana Dinr for the r.anr.cr in which ho was carrying o
'•hese experiments, if one agrees to such experiments, Jjenorally,


27 Hare ;7-A-AT!>-l8-3-«=ll^her (Ir.t. RcaLop)

Court So# 1

'l Hor was the clinical treatment cf the cxp-rlr_jntal subject carri

out?

A The documents .f tb_ Prosccutiar. already contain a nunber cf sta
rvintr ith r iforcnco to the clinical trentamt on jxpcrincntnl subject.
Kofon ", J *’.alachowsky did not object# KireWuimor when tostifyin h~s st
that h: was cr. loyod for the specific . urposo to carry cut hydro-thorapev.
cal ensures* In one :f Ding's reports about his a;-re-danc axperinont, whi
is Prosecution's Document ?!o. 562, and Exhibit Ho# of the Prosecution 26c
states in ..rent detail what the manner of the block circulation tror.tn nt
. «o described the various druga which ho introduced into the patient, '
whioh r.r-nnor h. did it, nnd with roforcncc to that point I had n question
to on •• *>f cui- crast famous internists, and in tho docuaont,which later
'join,, to subnit anyway, from tho point of view of the internal ,

thoro onn be no objection raisod against that type of treatment#

A

DR. "LTjdT-: In this connection. Tour iionor, I subnlt document
: f ru;.- ;.:ky " , 23. -his can bo found in the Docuitnt 2 X>k Ho# 1-A, on pap •
161. I offor it an ftrugowsty'a v xhibit Ho. 26. This is an affidavit of
foi. r S' J-. ' Dr. Conrad hr a. I'll repeat, ;a-o l6l, Document Ho#
ExhiW N .# 26. Dr. Hor an, ftor t»v. uustcary introduction, says, an ' ’
quoto: "In connacti n with z' aotivity as 3S jud-o I*o3tsbli3hod the foi
in- in th? concentration coup Buclxnmldi

In th. fi ht botwoon tho sc-ccll d r-e-rs and reds, that i3, bot.ro.
the criminal and political prisoner-, th -tror. sus.ic' r was raise'* that
\ -rtios frequently insti a ted and achieved that hated c.-onents wore
put on the Usts of ersens s elected for the typhus axporinonts in order
have t’\ n oxtominated under the cover of th? experiments#

As a result of ~ renonstmtions the Goman Crlrdnal Felice Bureau
c. '• .r 19U3 redo theso procoedin.3 impossible. It- was dacidcd that frer
th.n on th- selection should be made directly by the Goran C rim i n a l Pol'
Eurc-au, The selection TC3 to be- -r.de by Krluinalrat Ctto, Ho selected th.
.xp.rinontal persons froca tho u .—vy criminals cf the canp Buchoramld, am'
*»un went to ruchcnwald himself. There h_ inquired at th? cam, corrvmd:


n


27 ■'arch 1 7-..-ATD-l&4»-<5=llavbc r (tot. Rsnlcr)
C* rt So. 1


office about th s-1 ictod heavy crL-d.rr.l3. Ho also c.nferred with th_ indi¬
viduals s dice ted in -rd.r to tcsl f.xau By adoptin this ixthod it was red
iivcsaiblo for t*» ;roons cr rods to continue their .-roctico to put hate
porsono on tl» lists of the P^sons selected fer the- experinonts in order
oxtoraimto these arsons by usin- the ox^rinonts as a cover.-


I# «0


7 Mar 67-..-
urt - . 1


-19-1- han (Ir.t P.oal r)


’•51 cr 66 in 5uchcmrild w:s a building with quite a dcrn equipment with
the nest aodem hugicnical installatirns. Tney ha enough trained pers nncl
there. I gained -he impressin that the treatment and supply :f the sick
?- rs-as was careful and g ! in-every respect. ->cz rding t. the impress ion
ii. , th- sick persons were treated similar t: th so in a s >m! -.ilitarv
' 1 • ..gainst disturbances of th- circulatory system, o fi and

- , 'cr available among other reatdioa."

This is as far as I want t r. r . ad that Document.

I renin_ ycu of the affidavit cf Dr. Tfalachcwsky, which in doeunc nt

k 12; it is d-cu=cr.t JB-686, ?rvsecuti:>n Exhibit 291. Y u knew that Dr.
•oh-wokj w-s very ngry cb ut experiments in block 66 and disapproved cf
then; would yr>u talk about that?

» Dr. 1 c. ' ' net work in bl ck 1:6, but in block 50, which

i about five hundred ncters a*ay fr block 66. Ho himself does not

Intoin t t he ever was In block 66, he, hewever, atatos his sources f

f-rcntlcn. It can bu Se,n fro a this that he d.c. n t rep rt on his own

Pledge at all, but that he merely refers to bear-say.

He makes a number f ether stauc.nts, which ->r. oxtrcooly peculiar.

- ir- awe, he speaks ab ut a sr-callcd supreme c arlti , * which a
'■ r f gentlemen allegedly bolcnged. s uch a suprerx c aritt never

. This is o scthlng coaplctcly new t nc. He says that all experi-
it3 wer rdcr.i by a so-called secti-n 5 in Leipzig. He furthora-rc

•'•'-s tJ sent th.ro. That in itself c : tr lets r.

n’s statement here arri there is n r • - r. • cce. t 'hit statce-unt as
credible fer it is bar <-n n h nc.


i kn w of n- secti n ; in u ni', ii. farther r. that special

a r^i-r war a r Intel * r ck tr.e r suits f the .xpericents on

farther issfcrtion that - was that inspector.

-- • t- :t that activity ■ f ,in. thr lgh L.-. "ilachowsky for the first V.

1 can say under th hero that a: special ins; at, r .vcr existed, at lea::
r -c^ive any kn. wl-.ige f his existence and i certainly was not it.

“ * r assert! ns which n lach:wsky cum t hove gained fr a his own
. - number f assorts-.ns Were .aade by him which can be lircjsse-. 1

5120


27 -iir i,7-..--&_i-19-2-;:cehan (Int «a~! r)
C-urt Ht. 1


l2tcr, which indicate - v. ry subjective: pc int of view cn the part f Dr.
.'alachcwsky and i c,. f aqjr objective judgment. Fr a a hmaan pcint of view
I well understand his statcccnts, because he is speaking as an imate, 1 k-

•fiiir ft- o the prespcctivc of an innate. I actually was a

•

- --n r cf war trr a number of yoars and I kn:w h:w diet rted any such a
picture is.

“hen examining the question whether Dr. Ding in any way failed in
•Xv. manner i.. which he c nducted his expcricental series, it is necossary e
-a-rtain whether th- control persons were neccss-ry which he infected in
etc- * -Very ne f his series; you knew in the easo cf Dr. Ding's
typhus experiments ho infected a number ©fpers ns who did t recciv. any
:t:Uj ctive vacc'n. n>' . . tfc cas.-of therapy experiments a number ,f
: *ra ns wore not treated with the drt„ which was th. subject f the exani-
.iti n. 7r au were the so-called ccntrcl persons; was that necessary?
a in bi.logical experimental science such e ntr 1 is needed and is

f all experinonts. They ar necessary, contrary to
-hysical cr chcnical experiments. The Teeters in biology are much cure
"- 1 r>. c --.plicated. If I want t ex line n« f ties f ct rs

l\Sir, lt i8 necessary for esc U have s me- ante rial wher ‘his factor

In rder t c.apare the jther factor and it is only than that

- c aa to any conclusion as t the results, ahonevor there is necessity
• r experin...* m hueur. beings, which are ha logical experiments, tl • ir

a very logical c-nclusicn which i nt sesslty wt •*. 1craved; namely
B'ach c ntr Is cann t t*. *isp — d -»• •

“pplying this tr Ding's -or.-‘o« 5. nc inis, state t he experiment*'-
8 '• h, 5 • ■ ... jrctenth lone,

-iane granulate, and ruui .. t, . t w,i ar. tr cise if the cfltotrcl

;ls th " t is rcas n b eau?a in. rav- In: wh.ch r-v used were not

nic. If any Hd)«.oa • . . . .... failure of


1 . «d. ..lie failure of


'' : ioeaao, ftor tho infection; rx -• .i i • - v u arrived

'• c ndusi.n that this was n t die t the thcrape3tic-.l*ug, but n._relj
strain had failt l. In that case a c npletdy fnls^ c nclusi n » -Id

; --Ide. it can -e seen therefore that ccntr Is have really a practical

5121


27 I'-'r h?-—-..-.-15-3-?Acehan (Lnt Lanier)

C art 1

value.

^ Di-1 Dr. Dine limit his c ntr 1 pcrs.ns .is was humanly p ssibl-.?

Generally yes, he kept then as low as possible. *cr instance, in
* ease of the first series of experiments when he used 1L5 p^rsns, only
.u .._r» use. -s cT.tr 'Is.

Q i*ii ho also try t c-rbine experimental series in rder to save
central pora ns?

«» That is otrrect. He tried t'- start a number f experimental
.ws si it no usly in order to use the saoa c ntrcl pers-ns f r all of
ihoaj th-t ms possible becauso the strain fer bath scrips ms the same.

Q Thor, 't is y-ur oini-r. that Dr. Ding, when carrying cut his
xp'.rinant*, aotod according to scientific principles, that he cannot
be reprimanded forth.. manner in which he executed these experiments.

A In ny cpini n he cannot be so accused as the naanor in which
carried :ut tr,. .xperinents with which he had been entrusted.

: Jm’t bolievc th:t any violations against the e---called experimental
r.c ■ • -k place. I ra always assuming th prerequisite that such
*rcrlacntd ore pcraissablo.

* turn to the agreuin and ruthond experiments. During your
pre-trial interr ration in 25 July 19L-6 you answered th_ questi ns N . 1:5
by h-. Brrr, n a-ly whether y u ever did anything which was against
ir nodical c nscicnco and ycu mentioned a typhus experimental seri.s
.r- . ruth-n 1; w uld y u please state y ur views n that?

- "hon I was interrogated at that time I C-mld only v.ry va.-.j v ly
rcomber this s ri.s *f •>- ^rl-.-nto. Jn th: . ther hand, I remember it very
• 11 that no such exp_rir:ental scrie; wus started with agredin and
r:ti n 1. rurtherr. re, I was in a prsititn tc recall the cowersaticrt
*ith Grawits, h wover, it w-'s all very vague in my dnd, but ny m jy

n refreshed nly a short time befre by a newspaper clipping being
eh wr. t me, which contained a clipping from the L nd.n Tines in which the
• b rep rts ab ut human experiments in 3uehcmtnld by a French
' .ntlst. I think th. French scientist wh; nr -tc that report was Dr.

. menti nod an experimental subject with ruth-n 1 and agrodine

5122


-3T U7-~- — v-19-L-.cchin (Int Pi-.lcr)
C urt He. 1


nd Slid that 53> t- 56$ of fataliti..- had occurred. I thirds these were
the figure: that he used. It was under this inpressi-n that I gave ny -mswe.:
luring that intcrr'g?ti:n and it was =7 cpini-n at that tine that I had
sox thing t da with that series *f cxpcriccnts.

Xhc int;rr;gati*n took place in .Vurnberg, and whon I was afterwards
nof rr A t a can;, I had an eppertunity tc think ab ut ay statements
• '' ubts began tc arise in ny Rind, and shortly before- th. beginning of

.3 trial, * -.ns in a position tc lo k at tha dteuaents, I found a paper
7 Ding rtgnrdin,. ruthcncl and agredin experiaents. This is Prosecution
D cuncnt

Q That is Exhibit 286.

A Then th_ entire situation cnee eoro bccanc very clear in ay aiind,
•“ the investigation which we nadc n w has helped t'- clear t‘ is natter
.vcn further. ac r.'iit; t ay pres-.nt knowledge, therefore, in referring
*. th. naUrial available t ae five i>j I. G. Farben Industry at Hocchst
:nJ this oaper by Ding, I can say that ay statements aa lc at that tine
^ro not c-rrect, it was a deception of ay ncn.ry.

Q I -ist L".t. rject here that ^ shall subsit the material received
.'r e the I. 0. Fnrfcon Industry- at h'cchst at a Later dat in th. fair, f
jpal ent-.l v-ltt=c .»t the nooont it is n t ready tc *o submitted.

'ild you please continue; did you speak tc D r . Grawits ob at this
’-*• - irredin natter?


7 iSr.r-—_;- 2 L -1 -rutty-Int. Ramler

-curt I.'c. 1 .


» Yes. This is how the setter originated, and the do¬
cument that w.s announced by Defense Counsel will prove it in
i.et&ll. On the 10 th of September 1942, two entleaon come to
:.e from the Berlin Bureau cf I. G. F.arbcn and the Behring
errfs. ..e iiscussed various seru_ end vaccine questions, end
in that connection typhus questions came up for discussion,
nd generally wo had spoken about other veccincs. On that
r.e of these gentlemen, Dr. V.ober , said that the I.

7 . Farben in Hoechst had produced a new drug which they wan-
*..i to h o ox .mined cn sick persons. They asked uo whoth.r
I nrd ny patients that I was treating '.nd whether I would a-
-« to usin, that preparation. I said that I would because
. was nntur lly very _.uch interested in that question. .,t
that tL.e, however, i planned an official trip, a. 1 , there-
lore, acquainted these gentlemen with one of my co-workcrs.

Dr. *!otu.i, -hi then : vo him tno necossary directives to
what war tc r.:.ppon to the preparation which wo expected to
rrive within the next few days.

Df\. I’LEiL.IiKr: ...ay I interject here? Dr. v.otuu was ap-
:roved to mo s a witness and will at a later date bp exam¬
ined.

then used this preparation in various hcu. ital3 on
:lcK colliers tut v.lthout any clinical resuit being chioved.

reev r, tr.ero was a difficulty connected with it since •

.r-j .ration did not c/roo very favorably with the p ticr.t.

In the be;inning cf ,»ugust 1943, that is, -no year iftor
•r first oonversatioJ!, a sec-nd discussion took pi .co on the •
-casion cf which I vr s askcJ what :iy experiences with that

• r 'J h l beer.. 1 cc;_untested ;y experiences to them, and

then i-cl .red that they had improved th t drum which made
were :ro cable 'r.d told uc that they would lelivcr it to .c


ranul ted form, which is a coarse pevder for..


7 air. r-ZP: >20 -2 -?u t ty - In t. h: :ler
Court .*o. ..

" Did you speck to Grcwitz about these ruthenoI nat¬
ters?

.» I discussed that with Grcwitz, and I told hi-. that

this was a new preparr:tion f_- the coabttttinj of typhus, but

• •

unfertun t«.±y its tolerance was net very rood, he then s-id
that th t v. s u very important natter and t-ld ac tiiat "V.e
r.re Join ; everything in order to set clarity as to whether
this druc can be used or not." 1 said th. t the unfavorable
* lcr-nce of that Iru; prohibited us fro.a applyin* it on pa¬
tients since Lt would have no success.

the b;cis of docu-aents which I have yet t suhait
to the Tribunal, the* conversations with the -;cntler.on of the
I. G. ? . ,r. Industry took pir.ee -n the 10th of Sopu.abor l..«
ad jn tiic 19th ;f Fobruary, 1943. Do you now rr...cabcr these
:V--r. i .as -*n the basis of the antoricl which is available
to you, .nd would you please speak ab«ut th t?

Veil, I already s-id — yes, that is nil taken oero

of.

oi- y a put this dru._ r.t the disposal wf Dr. Dine ia
a pranu. t«.I f r..?

4k I n- ithur furnished hi.- with that dru., in its ori^i-

•

.v.l r- r.a nor in the .ranul ted for.:. Vho i irst scries of ux-
.ri.-ents by Din, started on the 10th of January 1943. iLw-
v-.r, the druc was only discussed on the 19tn «.f . ^ruary.

•alt . f that convorsition i just mentioned, t:.e contin-
■- nt loft idarbur; on the 19th <-f February, whereas -n tho 20th
r Fehru ay tho series >f experi..onts by Diiaa had -lready a
:. Therefore, the a tion could not have !•• n >i“

•\l - by :ie since I only roceived it after the series of
ri..ents n J boon Cwncludea. I neither ^avc bin the uru,;
it a r.nul.ted for.:, but I think that I sent it to Fr.„ue and
bvrlin in >r. or to have it u: 1 on patients of the SS hospital.

5125


£7 i -Ejs- 20-5-Putty-Int. Rader

' urt . i.

■'he exr ;rimentol scries of Dial's only started en th*. 31st ..f
.. rch 1--. . On the basis of the d«cucer.ts from I. G. Far! -.a
it bec-JQs evident that Dr. Din,; and as.<ei f.r ter. t.tti.3 -f

■ys bof rc. This would not have been access-ry

•

if I had -lready :ivcn it to hiu, for I receive! the r.nul-.te
t the be iania ^f February but fur a different use.

.. cc rdinj tc. the entries in Ding's diary, a third sc¬
ries >f expcrL-onts with o;rc-din .r.d ruthcnel was carricu -ut
on the t-.ta -f rt*»ril until the 4th of Jur. 1943. li- you i;.-
iti-.tc t.v t r ries f experiments?

.. Xo, 1 aid nut. I only found out tout it after looK-
!a threu-h bin:’a r .per which he wrote .:.out it, ad which
h- b boon submitted here .3 a iocu..ent. ..'oil, 1, . uier —
tl 1 . nt, but th: t. the '.per.

£ Trie publication of Dr.-Din; about his experience with
rouin ii ruthonol which were rub_iittod by the Prusccu*/ .

• L cu.icnt NO-571, Exhibit 284, ..cnti.ned thfi werk -f . Her
■ • used the st-io preparation. These two pur-

. ns ... Ut inoi that they had :ood experience with th-t pro¬
mt ion.

Ci iiow io you expl in t difference?

il.is is - typical o: _..)le -f how d.:n ureus it is if
.V- only reports <-r. results .f very few c-sv.y. ir i have tea

. rs-na, it is quitv lively tftt 1 h ve success in the case

r two persons, iespite of tiv:t the dru would be wron.r be-

iso it f‘ lied in the c si of oi nt persons. If, on the ot-

< r hand,, -I only used two. persons, ncciJont _. y 2. :%j it that.

-- -f these tv.o perrons tlic dru; is cff-cti.- whereas
ti.a c ise /f tne next jno hunired twenty or -ne hui.!rcd no
-'Jit v; 1. le achieved. Therefore, in _*y opinion, this
r h s no v .luc wh ts.cver.

i* is y ur .-ini. n tor ay ttu t y ur testimony durin;

5126


27 iu3r-*S3-£0-4-Putty-int. Healer
C-jrt 21 j. 1.


the -r-.-tri 1 interrogation f the 25th of July 19-i6, heel beer,
ir.c. rre *t?

n Y.;3. The docu-ent fr.a the I. G. F-.rben Industry pre¬
yed that 1 v;:s aisttken at that tiao and th_t I was nistaken
ta ay disndvuntr.-o. -

FLr—dING: The next document 1 aunt t. . ffor --
*. PRESIDENT: It is ti-c f .r our recess. I desire to
statu in re_ ru the conversation between C-uncel and the
urt c.i::cernin«5 a witness who was tc be called this week if
pruaont that an order was signed to call the witness and tr.e
rlcr irividuil that tho witness would be he.rd if he appeared
this week. I h : r. t been advised whether or not the witness
was nvnil'-blo, nd had- c—e te Number;, and 1 i. d f r tten
that th t wit nous, v .. c lied by the Defendant H ven, tut that
Is the f ct, If the witness is available txa.rrcw, tho wit¬
ness wi.l te he. rd nd put upon the stand, but I lo n.t know
whether or n.t thu witness is here -..ill be v.ailallo t.-
.. rr.w.

0i\. Ki .dr. ^resident, are you s ' Kin • of the

.itnesy that was discussed by the Pros-outi a Lei ~e?

111. PRESIDENT: Yes.

Dtt. fLudLId.G: Or are y.u —

DU. dx..,i.Ir:: .lr. President, 1 -sk to h.ve permission t
il tho witness, rw-rn, -n xondny. The witness horn t-*l- at
t h w s exhausted as a result _f nis J-urncy :va he h d
e .1 with nuab_r .f f.r ..llties here. I, therefore, hr-
•t t any opportunity ns yet t- spe. k to the witness.

THY P.-ea-jlwLaT: 11*, nev;, Counsel, what is the n-uae of

witness tht y.u mentioned?

.... j.. LI.C: Dr. Korn.

i'.iS PulCIDENT: ,.z I re-eater it, the witness who was sua-
• ■ - t y the Tribunal was Dietsch.


27 ::-.r-E3K-20-5-?utty--nt. Homier
C art Sad 1.


. '♦..‘.LIS: The -.7itness, Dietsch, was called t: :j col¬
ic- ue, Dr. Fle-i-oic .

Da. LEiLIIKC: Dietsch is the farmer Capo cf Block -«C

ni I naked for ai_. Up to-this point I have received r. in-

•

: ‘ * cilia; -;o that the witness has arrived. The witness

'.vitvor, that tne Prosecution talked about at the tu innir. ; of
the session s n^t Diets oh, out it was the witness, Dr. Korn
-bout vmj.. -r. Gawlik was Just spookin-j. Tnis Dr. xiorn has
ireruy rri’/ud acre, but Dietsch h.s not -rrived a yet.

MR. H..HLY: Hay it please Your Honor, the su;. -nd sub-

st nee of 0’ request . rlicr La the day ij si-ply this: Dr.

ILrn 1 :.ssu ...- w s to return ioaediately to Czechoslovakia bo-

%

c* use his Uu3inoSQ or sj-o other such reason, and if they
vrnt Dr. Korn to take the stand on Friday, that i t ,.rrow,

• ft. r direct examination of xirujov/sky or in between
tL.c, I aa perfectly a joo blc. ii-wevor, if 1 start cross-

x’oi-in • n f .-ru v/sKy on Friday • ftorno-n -- end l ot:
it will run into aendoy — I Jo net wish v bo interrupted Ju-

• o urso of the cross-oxumin tion this tL.c in the a*in-
h r that I was the i st tL.c. Of course, if the Tribunal
rules th t I -ay be interrupted — but I will not ..rue to to
interrupted, and if hern is re and they want to put hin on
the stand -- Defense C-unsei 2. s had all day today to talk to
t.L. — . d.r.'t see why he couldn't take the stand to-orryv; .r.
.--turn to wherever 2 :e has to

THE PRE-IDEriT: 1 would ask Counsel for Defendant Hovon
i: th? witness Kara can be used sometime l-.rr prior t# thu
.-aia.; of the cross-exa-in tion of th. Defendant, -ru^owsky

. :L.KDY: In addition to that. Your ittn.r, t..e Delegate
: *-:e Csechuslovnkien Le action just tells me that -r. rjrnf '

— —’ • *w. *•..

o.oc fically requested to depart from here on Saturd* .

hi. D...LIK: Mr. President, I an'-'n-t stir.- to interrupt


27 ~ r-EBH-2G-5-?utty -Xnt. R .ler
C.urt So. 1.


•'.--ox. .in.tion -f the Prosecutin’ attorney. ..Ith a-rce
.ent ‘jf the Tribunal and the Prosecution, I shall either call
t..c wit:; ns, Horn, before the cross-exn-iin tion or after t
or ss-exnalnation.

‘LSLIIIilCI: llr. President, in that connection I r.c.y
. -y th-t the -irect exoaim tion will probably v.ke up :11 of
iridny.

Till PhDoIDSNT: Then Counsel for the Prosecution idvises
11 present, '.11 concerned, that the witness is requested tu
return i CzoohoBlovukia oaturd.y. I ur.uorst--j C.unsel for
Defendant -.ru -ws.ey to str.te tu .t ho \<-z willing th .t his ox-
T.in.ti_n sh ulu Le interrupted to—orr~w for the he rinr of
this witness.

IK. G.V..LIK:' Ur. President, I spiico to the v in.ss this

'• *, ;nd according to what the witness tjli ..e, it i3 not
.‘js.lutoly nccecs'-ry for hid to return on Saturday. It would
<■11 r’ ht, he soil, to return n .Monday, but, :»t r.ny r ,

I shall either examine hi- before the cr-.-ss-oxa.din tion r
• • ' sn-ox .ination.

THE raiddIDL T: Very well. V c ry well. ..ell, now, Just
nc -ie.ient. Yesterd .y Counsel for Defendant .ju. .woky h.j
V r-.l )xhi it8 1 -lie- • t t : not -.ff -re. in evidence.
Hi'y received nailers. 1 would su j-.es t that nt the upon in.’
r to- .row's sessi.n those exhibits bo for— lly offered be-
c Ise the Tribunal n-w h s tv* il tie the jupple-entary locu-
-r.t Lo.Jc, na cm note their entries .s exhibits up^n that
• k. -

iho Tribunal will now be in rcCese- until ni;. -thirty o'

. rruv. .ornin .

(The Tribunal adjourned until 0930 hours, 26 v-irch 19-17.)

5129


n*7

28 j£or-EBK-l£c2-l-Cobk-lnt. Ranler
Court No. 1.


Official Transcript of the .American Military
Tribunal I in the natter of the United States
of ^merica, 0 . 3 ainst Karl Brandt, ec el,
defendents, sitting at Number- , Germany, on
23 iiarch 1947, 0930, Justice 3eals presiding

THE ^vrtShAL: Persons in the court rocn will please find
their seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is now in session. God save the Uni¬
ted States of America and thi 3 Honorable Tribunal.

There will be order in the Court roon.

THE PRESIDENT: Mr. Marshal, you have ascertained that
all of the defendants are present in Court?

TliE M/^RSHaL: May it please your Honor, all defendants
are present in the court.

THE PRESIDENT: The Secretary-Gcnoral will note for the
record the presence of nil the defendants in court.

Counsel uny proceed with tha examination of the witness
MRUOOWSKY.

J 0 ..CHHI wRUGOASiCY - Resumed
(Direct Exa-inution - Continued)

DR. FLYING: (Counsel fur tho defendant -rugowsky)

...r. President, yuoterd y t the end of the session you
ruled that I submit an indek of the uocu_onts which 1 have
road but which I hadn't yet submitted because they arc in the
supplement .1 document booic and ive them exhibit nuQbors. I
should li:<e to offer mru lowsky Document 4-a, v;hich is to be
found in the supplemental document book, I, ,;:,e 76. It is


.n exorpt rrom the neich al Gazette of the year 1917, ro-
' rdln^Eu :t~ c r,t of virus-s. I erfer this as Mrugowsky Ex-
i&bit \tcr-, yTh t is docuient Hru’owsky 4-a.

THE PRESIDENT: Just a . .oment, counsel. ill you please
repeat that offer?

DR. FLEdlNG: It is document Mru-.owsky .-A.

/ 513 ? •


The Tribunal


23 -^r-Z3;i-la2-2-C .Hauler

Court, No. 1.


has not as yet available the supplemental volune, and it hasn't
teen translated yet. It is document .lru:owsky 4:o* in supplo-
mc-ntnl volume I, ae.-;€ 76. I offer it as exhibit -rujowsXy No.
87.

i&.. iuihLY: Hay it plocst your Honor. This is oxtremely
confusing for uo, nr I -inve throe -lru30wsky document books
now: Document ko.ks 1-, l-n rind 2; and now he speaks of 2
supplemental volune which doesn't include the documents in the
index, end I wonder if ho could clear that up.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal his only two English docu¬
ments books of ~ru.ov.sky so far.

DR. FLEHi:<G: T..t Tribunal h..3 a- f .r 1 and 1-A, Docu¬
ment Volua 2 has not yet boon transdatt .. ..ftor it was
completed, I yet received . .a-. :• f thor locunants.

THE PRESIDENT: «c cannot .r ccei with these documents
v/hich are in supplement : ..k ho. 2. ?:.*.ro wore sovcrnl offered

and marked r.3 exhi’. Lt3 v.hioh were t. be included in -Irur.owsky
document book 1-.., which vre new have, and 1 thought in so far
a those documunts w u rt concerned tiiey could nov; bo properly
admitted in oviionce.

Dn. FhLi.li'.G: Yes, 1 be.;* your pardon. I misunderstood tho
Tribunal. 1 offer -ru. ovsky 2, which is to be found on po_:o
153 of the docum-.nt b ok 1-r.. This is :n oxoerpt frc„ tho
Notch Lc .1 Gnzetto cf 1901, to Le found .t e 306, and con¬
cerns the duty of report!::; so-called c:....cnly dangerous di¬
seases, such :s leprosy, choltr., ty nus, yellow fever -jnd
-- . X. : ,ff.r it .a wsky Exhibit No. 23. 4l jain ,

Iru ;ovfSky No. 2., on ,,a *o 153-

.m. iL.ADY: Ycur Honors, 1 • . sure Dr. 5L„ir.; .isunder-
st'- a this Tribunal. Thi3 see .s to be an entirely new offer
that has never been referred t.. I think he is now proceeding*
t. put in nil f his . -cu-cnt'-ry evidence.


23 —' r-1-.i-lS-2-3-Cc -h-naui-r Int.

Court he. 1.

DR. H31EIG: Tno document v.-.s uentioneu yesterday when
ilrusowsky scid in case of dun .erous diseases the SS hospital
treatment was considered to he a front line duty.

THE PRESI DEN T: Counsel is correct.

MR. ILtiDY: I nava never -arreed it in .<y book s beinj
offered before, your Honor, sr.i I understood you tc uain do-
cuuents he has offered before.

T.1E PRESIDENT: .,s I re-e-alor the -otter, counsel stated
for au rc'.Pun tr.is docu-.unt wjb not ready to !•: offered,
but if counsel for the Frcsocuti-n has t-r.y otjocti-n tc the
doouuent Lein ff^red at this ti-.e it will tc delayed, and
if counsel hes no objection v« -..-ill .rocood. That i9 ^-ru^ov/-
3ky docaucnt .to. £1?

Dm. FLMN5: I off or • ru owsky No. 21 in connec¬

tion with the t-.sti. .ony cf the dcfcn-":.t -ru owsky that treat¬
ment of dnn^trous diseases .ithir. tno ».tff^n oS was considered
to bo s front line duty. 1 v sn’t in positi n t: identify
that u^ca.'iit yesterday, buc use tno in lirh tr .aslation was
t y--t .v . - . The cn 11 ah tr a ns inti .. . arrived du-

rin the 3cssi<n yest- rlay. . ;r the s .c re s.n I didn't id¬
entify _n-th'.r two iocu_cr.'.s yesterday, tno first is «ru •ow-
Sity a cu..;r.t 15 which is ff e 15*«. This i3 n excerpt frou
a pa tr -f the .oXtn&nt -ru wsky fro.. the -oiicul clinic
. eriodic- i r rdin ty.-ic I a- abnor— 1 courses of the dis-
U se of typhus. The -efendr nt -ru *<wsKy -icntiwned tnis paper
when asked the question whether typhus was extre .ely prevalent
in G c r_iany. nu st- ted in th t crnnaction th t, far instance,
in Naples, the . fc .cric'r. chiuissi n had found c-ses where hu-
n be in ;s, aft-.r failing ill of typhus, fell do'J in the
-•tr-.t-ts. Similar c were doscri la his , ■ .;er and I au
now sul . air: s Lx/.i: 11 ■ ru .wsky Ho. 25, d-cu. .ent -ru ;ow-
sky 19, on . •; 15-=, which will locoac exhibit I.c. 29. In

5132


28 ^r-bl i-Ccih-Ir.t. Rn-ilvr

C urt . 1 .

that connection I should like to nsfc the defend-nt:

BY DR. TLEOliG:

Q witness, c_u you sente under year cr.tU thnt the c-scs
Which you uenti-ned ir. your ,:-.per v.ere -.ctutlly Ir.ppenin 5 in
the umnner ir. \;nich y>u recorded the-?

The observ ti-r.s wtiich iti£d to this ?;p«r were
ai.oe in the year 1 $-*!, th.t is uuri:. the first ti-ie when ty¬
phus ever evie u; in d Q raony. They :ro not b'.scd on observa¬
tions in concentration c:.nps hut -n observ ti-no with the cr.-y
nnd civili.n populations of ttoo -ecu. L I .. -err. territories.
In that c nnecti- n, oases vero observe l whore within - space
of two itys persons -il with ut n vir.: re ;tinot. thoir con¬
sciousness.

q • This per vv-s •u'jXisn* d in tho .1 :ic i Cilnio Perio¬
dical which ppe r i -n 2 ? robru ry, 1 S. 2 ? ohon dii this pa¬
per n.ve to he su'...ittcd by y .. in -rJer to •. ppoc.r on tho
27th jf Fefcru .ry l*-.‘ .

.v The -onuscri t for ny suer, .u-iic.tien would have
to be ruL .ittod lout three .uonthc Loforu it's »ut licr.tion

. . to tvs

to he correct! n 3 ;• dc, ot cetcr , -.no it is certain that
this ..u.-er w s finie.ie- t the u; .<f i£-.l ne then submitted
to the editor's office.

^ Tn- t v-s t ti_.o v.o-.r. the nu_ experiments in 3u-
ohcmrili a- - not yvt st :t- ?

Yes, th t is ri r»t. ?~.t h.s nothing vsh tsouv-.r to
do with these .xperi .er.ts.

Eh. FL— Jii’J: •>3 tr.e l et .f the Iccu.onts to .0 su.aitted

y<: t, I offer *^ru wsky . . 63, which is to sc found n .

171 Of lJoiL.ent look 1. .t- in . . 63, -n pa c 171 - this is

no f tr« d cu— r.ts ri:ia tin , fro . i&rbur -

..... i*KL IT-ZL.T: Ci.» ..e:.t, c- insel.

bit. rL:.:i:.d; Cn :e 71, ifcT. Pr -si-ent, d

5133


cu. .L-r.t -»ru *ow3fcy


28 ^ar-E3K-lE2-5-C:.k-I.:t. Stoler
Cjurt So. 1.

No. 63, p- *. 71. This is one- of the documents which I recei¬
ved freu .^arbur;, r.nd for which, according to the ruling of
the Tribunal, I shall sul..it p.autostats of the orijinal with
certification of it's authenticity. This is a file notation
which w.s ..: do by Dr. Dun_itz, wno was .-entioned repeatedly
yesterdy, the he .d of tUo behrlnj m«ks in ~ rbur , about
the conference of the 2&th of De-c^-ber 19*1. On the last pa-
;e, pa^o •. of the document, this is pa ;e 7-i of the document
book, it is stated:

•

pi n -f expori.tunes vies -iscussud with Dr. ~ru owsky;
.ici:cl'3 vaccine and tno v.ccir.c -f the nubort Koch institute
were included in this ;.:n. ..hen v;o ai-kud tlr t the vaccino
of the Bohri:. w rks should also be included in this test,
ProfOasor GiIde.-cinter re : .r*e i th t ho w.s a t interested in
the i. In the course of later discussions he ,-ruL ,bly reali¬
sed th t this peculiar point of view - for it was ro atrdoJ as
ouch by ill partici, .:;t3 - cuuld not be .air.tninod and ho ad¬
vised us tc -It in touch with Dr. -ru-wsky hi. .self, sc that
this* vaccine tc , oi t . included in the tost, ftu ;r.rdin-
thi3 it vr.s intended to h Vo tho vaccine reedy In its present
for- and ir. the . ;uBlo cantontr ticn for those experiments
r. i to i.af r.. _r. ~ru cwsky r. 6 Janu ry ftor hi3 return from
iew."

This is a c-nfir.. *.i-n f s. .etui:. • I • Irendy pr-ved yes¬
terday by jthar dccaicnts. I -ffer th t s -«ru cwsky Exhibit
No. 30. I s i- before, 1 shall 1 tur su*-at photostutio
copies tho -ri inal.

THE ?n IS IDEXT: One aoaent, counsel. Counsel, I think
i';u did net understand _^e. On the first day of the oponin;
f the c se f the lcf-nd r.t, ~ru -vsky, s I re.aaabcr, you

caoents in evidence. ..t that tiao D^cu...ent

« *

-k 1-.. h. 1 t been prepared, a; t:.c - cuaents were not av-


23 _ r-E^H-i&2-5-6 ■ k-Int. h -mier
C_urt No. I.

'iinble in the 2 n lish trunsl-tion. -ievcrtheless, exhibit
numbers wer6 --asi nei to these documents, r-.nd these documents
v;ere the only ir.es to which I referred. I v.is not endenvor-
in; to interfere with the" - orderly tri -1 -f your enso ns you
desire to conduct it, tut it ii. occur to _ie th't it would be
- ;uod iden to h vc th /se documents t„ which exhibit mu.eers
hod been nssi r.c-d, Infinitely triced in our btoks ns exhibits
received, nd t tr.e only I . .e.nts tc & I ref or rod.

PR* FLKING: I:. t c-:sc I misunderstood tho Tribunal.

Usin. 'the index I mry .Jer.V.ps cc~.:nrc tho documents nr.J tho
exhibit numbers nco -.ore.

THE sVtESIDfcST: Counsel It is hot r.-.soss ry t- do tnt
... Y;u uny tnko the time .r.j find those throe documents
Inter nnd sub.-lt thorn Inter on in tho J y, so th-.t vc enn
ro julnrly o.rk the...

ILotDY: I .1 ht culuit, y ur H.nor, th t two of the
locutionts you ire reforAn-i t , one is xhibit 17 -.n pa-jo 159,
.mi exhibit 6, •, . o 157, th-cu tv. j.u ., a referred to before.

..u roceivo.: the d.cu-.c:;t book i-. k , t*.-t will lo pu.,e 159,

. o.

THE -ri3Iei...T: I i, not. bfcliovo t.» :t hes Leon ivtn r.n
exhit it number, n a it, ..r. r->?

*®'« Y.s, 1 ft vo it marked S Exhil it N . 6, Your

-r. How th no r-. v. 3ttly -no!' th.t 1 h von 1 1

< een intr-iuce ! Uf. to.

THE .^HESIDid’T: ill u re. c t * in the document nun-

oer C .-.ru mb ky i*o. 6.

•••'• i-.-bY: Phut ir ..cu.o.t -ru ows&y .... 26, Exhibit
• . 6, which is n ffid vi z .f br. icrl Biamnreuther on
c 167 f the document i )ok l-„.

• r. -r >w3ky H . 43 .n x 15-. -

THE PnioIb'iLiT: wsKy . .'ciL-nt Ko. 26?

•

5135


28 -I-r-E5H-l&2-7-Cuok-Iat. i.'_Ier
Court iw. 1.

Za. i LI1.I1.G: Nc. 26 is Exhibit 6. ?h t is on p e 167.

-ii. iv.KSY: Does the Court Is- h ve -Iru ov.s.ty document
23 -r-rked exhibit 26? I think tfc-t tuxes c:re cf nil the
docuaents w.iich h .ve teor. introduced tcdr.y in document took.
l-«.

JUDGE SEBRIJJG: ;<h t pc .e is th\t on.

•’U». IL.RDY: Th.t would ic -n .. . e 161, Your iion-r.

•

Tti -RESIDENT: T s.c ....tter is possibly coaploted -md
counsel .y proceed v.-ita tho cxi .in tion.


*


28 March U7-::-.,~-3 h L-i-Gross (jailer)
Court :<). 1


a The defendant was answering the question yesterday at the closo of

the session whether he renxiborod his tcstir.ory on the 25 July 19U6 on the

occasion of his pro l i nin ary in terror*, tion about Rntcnol and Acridin qxporinents,

and whether he r.s in error at tir.t tire. Tha -.dtnoss stated that ho actually

•

nado a nistake cn the occasion of that fralirdnary interronation, and on the
basis of dooc»nts prosonfcod and thoso he had obtained in tho noantine ho
igain rene:.*hor3 correct!:' tho fact3. In this oonnjcticn I should liko to sub¬
nit a nunber of docunents. Th< first will bo 1 runowsky document No. 2U, on
Fage 128, of Document Book I-a, This docurx-nt Hrurowsky 2h on pago 128. I
offer it as Exhibit Mrugowsky No. 31W This is an affidavit of Profossor Biolinp,
it 'tarburc. After the cuator.-.ry introduction he statesi

"Durin;; a visit “t th. office of Horr'frugowaky, Or. Dinij told no that
ho had rocoivod Nitroacridln iru a Crot: the dyo works in Hoochst, in ordor to
tost tholr- offoct on persons ill with typhus and that the results which ho
had achieved wore unsatisfactory. I r parte that afterwards ir. Hoochst. As far
is I rsmonbor, however, Herr ' ra ;owsky . as net rosont at this conversation s
with Dr. Din::."

As tho noxt docucont I off^r Docurwnt Hru.:owsky L3 which is to bo
found on pare 12? of th; • . locunont book. I repeat Docunont U3 on pago 129.
This will boccoi Exhibit ' ra owricy :b, 32. This is an affidavit of ono
Heinrich Naurunn, ..ho io a r.r.bor of the tyo orks at Hoochst. Ko statos in
his affidavit, aft,r tho customary intro-‘action, and I quotoi

"I kne • Dr. ’(rugor.3ky, the for.:.r Kygi nist of the taffon-SS. His
lafonso counsol subritted tho question to a-, whether I over discussed with
Dr. "ruyowsky therapeutical vt riaonts with tho drugs Acridin, Jtcthylcn bluo
rr Hutonol which v-.ro to bo carried out on persons sick with typhus.

A

"In this connection I state tho following:

"l. The drugs Acri 'in mi Hotlyicn blue Rntcnol, - I do not know
Rutenol, — aro being produce-.’ by the works, Hoochst. The sale was effected
-7 BryaivLcvurkuson. The. scientific harvUinr of these rfrurs was nada by tho
• r Suction dupartoent, by tho scientists of the fim Bay or in Leverkusen and
the scientists of fch. _ jrlin offices of the fim iaycr.

I 337


28 Ifcrch 2i7«?W.7>3 & L-2-Grcss (Roller)
Court Jfo, 1


" 2 . I rysalf was only deputy to the ccmaorcinl manager of the dopart-
Hent Bohrir.; rrorks at Leverkusen and only handled ©xnorcinl affairs,

"3, .,3 the department Bay or and Behring works wore completely separated
fro- ono another, I had rover anything to o with thoso drugs and therefore
could never conduct any negotiations about thora. Therefore I could not have
spoken ant' actually never spok- tilth Dr, Vru ovsky about such therapeutical
experiments, and I nov.r gave Un these dru s f or such oxnerinents,"

The noxt is a dccu^nt - ju^owsky 88, It is to be found on pago 88 of
the Document Book, I bo ycur par 4 on, I :ade a mistake. It is to bo found on
pejto 227. It is "rugowsky 88, cn p&yo 227, of Doauxnt Book 1-a,. This is an
affidavit of Karl LudwU Lautonschlaogor who was the head cf the p hamacouti.es
of tte Ifoochst Dyo forks. I r . -a*. J cunont rugowsky No. 88 on page 227. I
offor this docuaont as Ex ibit ?wcky No. 33. LautonschLaogor statos, aftor
the oustcrr.ry introduction, and I quote*

"Since about 1928 I was dir.ctor of tho pharmaceutical dopartewnt of
the Hoochstar Dyeing Plant of the I. G, Fnrban Industrie A.O, and sinco 1938
taanogor of tho factor:'. Cur phrn-.ooutical preparation Balkanol, has for at
least lSryoars boon usod in clinical tost3 c oin and again causing suppuration
ospodally against sepsis#

"’flfan typhus was spreading rapidly at tho beginning of tho vmr, I

.

su ;o3tcd to tho coryotont experts of the firr, to ascertain whether any of our
preparations would act against t- phus. -'r. Fxissyaengor had experimented with
Balkanol on a typhus str:in pnthogono to mice and had obtained good results.

I therefore arranged that his preparation be distributed to various clinios
and military hospitals and tested titn . ror this purpose it was called
3582.

"Ono dry, I cannot exactly rot- -* _r .-hen, Dr. J ubor told no that a
Z -Doctor, Dr, Din •, wanted to core to ' achst, in crier to inspect our axporl*
r.tal 3et-up personally. T. told Dr. 'dbar to bring Mr. over to ne as wall, ns
I wanted to talk to hie, if ry tir o would permit it, I thought thrt Dr. Ding

came from a military h spital ir. Berlin.

5138


28 Kerch U7-?WSD-3 i U3-Gross (Raalor)

Court :ro. i

,r I hr.a - short talk rdth Dr. Dir. , lurin- which h -ado an allusion

which struck Ho showed ao a acker of curves of th; cas&s treated in his

clinic, the results of .-hich I queried in con.arisen *.ith other results.

Thereupon Dr. Din- said that ry_c-asos are very carefully observed an:' vorywel

•

treated. Ho dropped a raaaric to the of fact that his casas rrjro . artly, or
•ate other, 'osad infection. I re* lied that this did not soan anythin- to no.
and I asked fcin wh jss. Ho ansr-red evasively, and ard

-on st oth_r thin c. that h_- had inoculated as w.ll- I, thereupon, broke of1
the conversation rather abruptly an informd Dr. Din" on his request for
further preparations that unfortunately *ro wur j unablo tc put further mtorit
at his disposal for ex; -rlnents. As tho conversation with Dr. Dins and hi 3
renaric had an do a strorv i=;-rossion on so, I nskod Dr. '.7obur to ccno to no
alone soon aftovvards and I forbade hin absolutely to supply* further prepara¬
tions to Dr. Din.- or tc correspond idth hirxo

"The reports of othjr clinics about their results with Rutonol and
Akridirv-Granulato in typhus casor troro roLativo favorable. I especially ro-
--.abor Professor Hollor in Vionm and. Profossor /J.v <ns in Frankfurt a.:*.,
’funicipal Hospital Sachscnhaus.n iho, as far as I can rcr. nbor, troriod about
30 casos of typhus with that preparation.

"I only kr, Professor ru msly by and I havo hover soon hin n
:poken to hia. there is nothin known to m about our supplyin him with our
: reparations .bii-nol or AkriUn for his oxp.rinonts in Buch.nwrld."

I further off r Docicvmt ?'ru-.owsky 65 which i3 or. pa;:o 108 of tho
s -.13 Docunont Volur... His is r. affidavit nado by Dr. 5ruo r.or of tho Hoochs
Dyo orks. I off-r th t as Aru or.sky Exhibit 3u. Dr. Bni*.rTv.r says, after tho
custooary ir.trcducticni

"I assort und.r cath that acccrdir.; to th- results cf the investiga¬
tions which I carried out rest scrupulously, tho two exposes attached to thl:
?ffi-avit of the I. G. Farb aninrtus trio A.O., Frankfurt on !lain-H6ochst, Chon!
c-l-phoracceutical and Sorc-bactoriolc .leal Depart.-i.nt, w re used in this for
in th; year 19L3 tc- r.ako known the two preparations nitroacridin 3582 .and
ratcnol."

5139


28 -ferch L7-"-. ~-3 « L-b-Gross (ftanlor)

Court Ho. 1

Thc.ro folio, two exposes which 7 only subedit to the Tribunal for its
juiici! notice without rca’in the-, with th: fever charts attached.

Two further io curi&nts in connection with th-1 point ore contained in
the- Sup^Lcsontoxy Vcluro vhich I stall subnit at a later into.,

BY EF. FETOB:

3 You know the entry in th; Din;. Diary of th; 10th of June 19li3,
regarding the typhus therapeutical exporir. nts with Othrcain. "oull you
ploaso define your position to that?

A I don't know thu preparation Othrocin. I only heard about that
oxperinont by locking throu.h !>ocu)jont Ho. 265. At arc* rr.to I tad nothing to
do with that sari os of exporinents.

D7. "LS‘ n 1!i>: I sut:ait to tho Tribunal tho Dominant No* 85. This can
bo found on a. j 222 of the Occur ;nt Book 1 a. T repoat Ifrugowsky 85, on
page 222. This is th. affidavit of tho fonvx Ob-rrwiLainalrat Dr. nod.
Christianson who was r.otiv,. in the I'iXiiatzy of tta Interior. I offer it as
Exhibit liruga'sky Hs. 35. ’•urn-r 'hristinnson says, after th.* custernary intr<
duction, and I quotas

T t.~o fren 20/5A9& oraror: or.o of the .arsons dealing with opideni-
in the ”io-ileal Dopnrtnont of th R.ich !’inistry for Hcr-u Affaire. In this
capacity I received tho r-’ ; arts about apidenics vhich occurred onony tho
civilian population of tho Reich.

"Ir. 19L2 a violent opidenic f typhoid broke out at ttasurn, in
Schlori (-Ifolstoir.. Infected crabs wore soon found to bo tho carriers, fhon
I norkod on this -.pi h—ic, I r.n-rb-rod several articles of irofessor Lcckcn
nr.nn, Director of tta Ctanical Department of tho Ro’ort-Koch-Institutu in
Berlin, Latin: fr-= 1930. In these ..ublication3 Lcckooann reported about the
sacrction of rheianiun in the human -astrie juice. Rhodaniun hero has tho
effect, .as lockor-ann shows, of incr .rriny the micid-l ixwer of tho gr.stri

juico 60 to 200 fold.”

Thar, follows the suggestion of Christianson who developed a propara-
tion in order tc help the gastric juices to prevent. Ha dcscribod hew ho
exp-rlnontod or. hirsllf and continually tad his astric juices axaninod and

51L-0


then ho states:


28 ! larch U7-W-ATD-3 £ L-5-Grcss (Ranlor)
Ccurt He. 1


"These oxpvrirxints on ny ewr. body took plr.ee fron the be^innir,’ until
the niddlo of 19U3. After I bad at the be -innir. cf ry cxpcrirxnts, shown tho
preparation to \~roc with the hunon orranian and had reported to Conti
hereon, he declared: I should roccax-nd the preparation to medical offlcors
in case of typhus, typhoid and dysontoxy cpiiosics, for preventive uso by tho
population* This was done about the. rd^dlo of 19b3 in the districts Oppcln,
Dree den, Poson and Danzig and ^ os torn 'russia.

"Conti told na casually that ho would, if the occasion aroso causo
tho preparation to bo used in c SS-fomation by one Dr. Dinr,

"About tho fall of 191*3 Conti ;;ave co about 30 charts of pationts
which I wns Vi evaluate* He said they wero the charts of n typhus opidordc in
an SS-fonaatdon#

"I gathorod fror. tho charts that Othrcrin had boon adrdnisterod to
tho pationts for therapeutical uso* After tho outbroak of a disoaso it oannot
have any honllng effect acoordUv to its nature, it is intondod for prevention
only and its prevontivu of foot cones fror. its kllllnr in tho storm oh bacteria
that have boon brou-ht thoro with tlva food.

"Accordin ly it had no effect hon it was usod rdth tho S3.

"Through hat channel Othrcdn or the su; ostion to uso the prepara¬
tion ccno frer. Conti V Dr. ->in , I la not know. Cthrorin was also available
through trade channels.

"Dr, In was not known to ne, nor did I knew Orawitz.

"I boc-ra. acquainto I with ifrupotsky in the Roich Ministry for Mono
Affairs at a nootin,- cone mi r. the introduction of tho continuous to3tinp
throug h State Organisations, of all vaccines against typhus nanufacturod by
tb«j phamacoutical in dustry threu h the Institute for axporinental Therapy"
in Frankfurt a/(., and again at a s-ccncl coating of th: Scocutivo Comittoo
for Disinfection and Protection a.ainst “.pi Vries. Hi3 rvana would thcroforo
have definitely 3 tuck in ry narery, if it ha ! bo*.n nentlonod in connection
with the Othrordn businoss."

v Then he further states that he rrr?to a paper about Othronin*


51ia


28 ifcrch U7-W.TD--3 & b-6-C-ross (Harior)
Court Ko. i


BY DR. FIS'UK:


Q Do you hive try thin- tc say or. th.itcffii-.vlt?

A This affidavit shows, first, that this preparation was not develop

upon our instigation but upon tto instigation of tho 'Ministry of tho Interior
• • •

Secondly, that Conti had hlhs -lf tel*' Dr» Christiansen that he, pent!, would
have this dru ( - tea tod by Dr. Dir. • rurtherrcore, that ho hi-, self had received
30 caso histories which ho handed over to Dr. ‘Christiansen for his (Evaluation.


Obviously, Conti exorcised a direct inf l uon co on Dr. Dir,- for ho states that
ho would have this drur used and ho iid not say that Din,- would act on hl3
own initiative in any oth.-r rvannor. Ho is sponJin in a very definite runner,

• V. k

Furthornore. it is also confined hero that there nest have boon a channel ci
sons Icind -pin,.- free Conti to Dir.;: and this, naturally, also confimed that I
had nothinr to ±> with it.

Q Bow, I cone to tho quostion asto whothar in regard to the typhus
oxpofironts con bictoi by Din; ycu can bo hold responsible for any roaoon at
all. Would you please st-ato haw tho subordinate relationship of Dr. Din,- was'

A 'ton Kimlor, in the yc r of 19hl, ordered tho xporlnontation on
huaon bdings Ding was as si :n.d for this err,, :rinont by order of Kirnlor,
probably at tto mi -estion -f Orr-rits. I ronc-ibcr a written order by Hinnlor
which was held tfory brief. He 3aid that thoso oxperiiionts vrero to bo carried
threu'h an * h furth .rnorv stat * tint Dr. 'in' wr.3 t( be assirnod for that
purpose, which w ulf net . roJu*’ico his tasks which ho was corryin out up to
this point. That was an additional task. This task he was enriyin out then


would bo felt v.ry *re-atly outsido tho soopo of his channel of comand, to
tho task which he hold up to that point - tho preparati on of vaccines. Tho
humn :xj-ozirionts, ho'.'ovor, woro a new fiald of work. It muld not fall vithi-


:iis ol! fiald of work and waul ! not fall ..ithin this relationship of coniand.

'I ‘1.3 it possible far such a ricublu subordination to axi3t? In that

case Din; would have to bo subordlnato tc you for tho production of vaccine?

dnd subordinate to Graritz for the typhus expwrirunts.

A Such a drubL. suber Ana cion was not only possible within tho SS be

thr u heut the .r.tir - ".hmacht. It is qui to feasible that one belongs to one

51A2


28 Hatch !i7-"-^TD-3 -1- L-7-Gross (RaoiLor)
Court Ifc. 1


Cfency and, in spite of that, carries threu h an order for another af;oncy and
on Choir responsibility. I personally on on -xonplo for that. .fhen in the year
19U3, bofcrc tho reorganization cf th- '.Jodical Sorvico of the S3, I was sub¬
ordinate to >. Gonzken. liras cssi r—d by Dr. Ora*.<lts for special task3 and,
ir. easo of those apodal tasks, was subordinate to Dr. Grawits and not Dr.
Oonske-n. ;.s it appears technically. Dr. Grawitz had a right to issuo coman
in specialized natters but freu .xrsomel an' art'/filiation point of view, ono
would ha vo to say that the -can ooncomod was as si jne d to that ali«ai agency for
tho carryin out of those special tasks. That is tho technical explanation of
that situation.

Q In order to prove your ccrractnoss cf the statenant that such a
double situation of subor'drr.tion is possible^ I also ri.r to tho affidavit
of tho Chief of tho fener Operational ”aln Offico of the tfaffcn-SS Hans
Jaottnor, which foun lasmtozy Voluao to Doounant Book Bonzken,

docunont no. 15. This confines that situation. In addition I nention tho
affidavit of the forcer l-.\ personnel .ion of th- affon-SS, tho oxp-rt work Inc
on personnel questions. Vnfortur.ataly :y ap llcr.tion to obtain an affidavit
fren that expert has not ;*ot boon a... roved and I shall, thoroforo, subnit it
at a lat.r date. F*ror. tho point of vie m of channel of oomand you had nothing
to do with typhis oxperlrents .f Dr. Din. at 3uchunrrali?

A Ihj insti -ration and basic order cnanatod free tho hi .-host a;;oncy.

As I said before I could oxcrcise no influanoo on the individual series of
experiments. Naturally. I could exorcise no influonoo or furnish imatos sinco
I was not coupetent to doal with concentration canp organisation and had no
accoss to it and, th-rofero* could have nothin to do with it.

DR. rTHKDC* I now rofor to the document which was already subedttod

•

by no - nuebar 38.

TE PHESUEtfT* Ono r.oncnt. You inferred to an application for tho
taking of or. affidavit of a witness, hat was the none of that witness whoso
affidavit you dosir-d?

DR. VISWtKii Ruoff, H-U-C-7-F. The first none is Joachln. Ho is in
Dirnbsrg in prison.


28 Ifcrch U7-:>^TD-3 & b-8-Grcss (Rar-Ior)
Court No. 1


TET. USSHEHTx .'hen did you ^eko an application for approval of your
loavo to tako an affi lavit of that witness?

DR. FlrTZUC: That was probably two or throe wefeks a^o, '*r. President
HE PRES IDS ITT: Ploaso check that rnttor with the Defendants Infor-
nation Center because.- as far ad I an advised, all applications have boon
pas sod on very pronptly. Probably the application had boon nislaido


51UI


»


26 ar k7-..-Jt<i. i -5-l-&arrotf (Int 1. -)

Court lio. 1

I uo» refer to ths document, the affidavit which was submitted is Ex¬
hibit 13 of the former secretary of Hrugcr3ky which is to bo found on P.ige
L5 of the document volume. I a reading from t.iis affidavit, starring at
?:ge 50, paragraph U, and 1 quote. I r out, Page 50, of tho document
book, paragraph U:

"I assume with cert.ix.t; that no vritV-fi instructions for tests on
priscr. ad Ding thro- jh -migossky. I never typed any such instructions.

It also never case to ay knowledge that =y deputy ever rrote such a letter
during ny absence.

"It was custoonry in the Institute for *rugcwsky to issue to the heads
of the specialist dcnarts.nts in writing -.11 inatrvetions for the »vork to
bo carriod out. *h. forsulr.tion r. a : proximotoly la follows: 'The follow¬
ing question scorns interesting in this cr that connection (exactly specified
in thu instructions), ilease tost this question by cxporicont, collect tho
a;st Important-publication®, .nd report buck to no.' This custca to issue
instructions in writing dated t lo st fro= 19L2. ,.11 the correspondence
to tween Krugowsky and D ; r.g war exclusively concerned with the laboratory in
=uchemiald whore th/ vaccir.o ms a nuf etured, and later on, frea 19Ui on-
mrds, as inly with th: i .r -'orks. .regcwcley only gave written instruc¬
tions for these natters and for tv. distribution of vaccine, never for
-ny kind of teats on prisoners.

’’I can also testify that rugawsky never gave telephonic orders for
t- sts to I»r. Ding, because whenever •irugewaky conducted an important
nversatior. cv_r tlx tel ., whether it t s an ir.cctaing cr an outgoing
call, he always dictated tc .a, SI rv.ras a not-, for thu riles giving the
essential point® of th cenversati r.. I c . ray with fert inty tint he never
dictated a note for tlx files about - long distance telephone conversation
* Dr * ^ing-Schulcr in which typhus test? on prison rs wore mentioned cr
kind of instructions for sac;, experiments were given. I c n say this
absolute Certainty because I knew Jirugcwsky's adverse attitude towards
:c ” •-Jcptriment®, ar.d a ax=or?.ndu= of that nature would have attracted ay
-tt- nticn.


5145


23 liar Wr -5-2*. rrc v. (Ini k-aler)
Court Ho. 1


"7. Ding's reports about his tests or. prisoners went via the Hygiene

Institute to Grawitz. These reports, however, waro not dealt with by nc,

but by Stabsscharfuehrer Boinx Hollaender. I do not knew whether ilrugowsky

defined his detailed position in those reports or whether ho node use of

i —■

thee in any way.

"r.'othing became known to ac about Dr. Ding r.aving reported about typhus
passages on prisoners. I neither heard anything about it free conversations
in thv Institute,

" r -ad the tests on huean beings bc-n carried out through tte Hygiene
Institute of th.- :/affcn-S£ under rtnigcwsky's responsibility, the doctors at
the Institute would have been working on the practical application and there
would certainly have been frequent conversations about these experiments in
the institute. I cannot remember any convocation ever having taken place
about typhus tests on prison, rs."

I fu: ther sufcoit the document which ma already offered -s Dxr.ibit 16 .
fclrugcwsky 39 cn Page 59. I repeat, Document Urugowsfcr *39 cn Pago 59. This
is the former secretary of Dr. krugonky and she says, on page 60 of the
document book, and I quote:

"During ay activity at th Hygiene Institute it has n«v 0 r ccoo to ay
attention tbit frcfescor rugowsky over gave an order to Dr. Ding to conduct

- scrieo of typnus experiments cn prisoners. I Know that Professor Krugow-
sky isau d all work orders to the section chiefs of the Institute in form
of written filo notes. If i telephone conversation concerned a matter cf
semo importance, Profess.-r hrugowsky also dictated a file note on it. A
file note -is also made on more important official conferences.

"According to ay observations. Dr. Ding ; c only very seldca at the
Hygiene Institute of the Woffen-SS to see rrofesser iirugowsky. „s far as
I rencaber, I have- seen him only orwe, or, ~t the scat twice, at the insti¬
tute and then only for a very short while.

''1 do not know anything about the requisitioning of prisoners from

- Jchorarald for the purpose of conducting typhus experiments. 1 never heard
•aything cf it at the Hygiene Institute."


sue


28 tbr !i7---;i^.-5-3---'rrc" (Ir.t Rosier)

Court Ho. 1

As Ding's superior, didn't ycu have to excrciso official supervision over
hie and den t you, for that reason, have tc b.ar the c&-responsibility for
these experiments?

n :.’c, an official supervision of Ding and, thereby, a power tc issue
orders I only had in connection with th. oroducticn of vaccines in 31ock 50
and also as regards to oth_r questions of hygiene. « ith reference to these
questions I was Ding's superior. He received orders free no and assignments
for which I fully assume responsibility. This, however, does not include
the activity in Block 1*6 far which it had beer, established by order of Him¬
mler and by the confirmation of Grawitz that this task was not assigned to
me. Dr. Grawitz frequently protested at =y interferences and I therefore
had nothing tc do with Block L6 and could not be held responsible since I
did not exorcise any supervision.

Q I r<-fcr tc Document Krugewsky 4 26 which is to be found on Page 167
of the do'cuaont volume L.. brugowsky 26, t■ ?-. 167, which I nr. submitting as
Exhibit 6. 26 on i age 167. Gn ege 169 I shall read paragraphs U and $:

"That ym-ewsity evor had anything tc dc with Ding's experiments on human
beings, I do not knew. Mrugowsky did not tell no of a conference with Grawitz
in January 19l|2 at which ho (hnigowsky) indignantly rejected t demand that
he should undertake :xperir.nt3 cn human beings. I do not buliuvo however,
that Mrugowsky evor ordered the Ding Berios of experiments cirried out on
prisoners in ruchcnmld, particularly since such .an order, in my opinion,
could cnly bo given by Grawitz or Lolling.

"So far os I rcmvcb-jr the typhus af\air took th-- following course: Tho
lack of typhus vaccines caused it to be decided, as long ago ar the year
19hl, to produce this preparation at th. Institute of Hygiene and a specially
equipped laboratory in Buchonwald. .j-ugewsky appointed Ding as head of the
latter. The only reason why thu establishment of this laboratory did not
ctuaily take place -ntil the beginning of January 191*3 was simply that Ding,
191.2, fell ill of typhus and after his recovery w_s ordered to Paris, where


remained until th= end of November 19L2. In the year 1912 Grawitz obtain-
i an order from filmier for the estublishae-r.t of an experimental station In

514 ?


23 Jar L7-i: -iL-^-5-u-Knrrow (Lit Rgaler)
Court Ho. 1


tht. concentration caxp at Buchernrald /or the investigation of typhus and
appointed Ding as head of to. station. I know nothing of the cocacncencnt
of activities at this station, since this w.s a purely nodical natt_r and
concerned with a concentration c ap. The laboratory was equipped fn first
rata style by the central nedic 1 service- depot (Zontralsanitaetslagor) :nd
th^ production of typhus v-.ccines w.s greatly su; d froa ay end. I had
no connection with the cxpcrir.ntal station except in relation to demands
which cane tc ac through the rdinary way of business."

«nd caragraph 11 at tfcj bottro of Page 171:

"Grawitz never spoko to ct of experinents on hunan beings in tho con¬
centration caaps. r can I ,:iv« any inf ra-tion as to nhothor it was cnly
Grawitz, or whether It was also Kinnl-r, wi gave sue., orders to certain
concentration caaps. r

Dr. Hoven, in his affidavit, DoeuBunt .J0-i*29, Prosecution Exhibit
261, stated that Ding received all orders and directives froa you and that
nio reports went t: ycu. '-ruld you define ycur position to that?

A 1 have reportedly p-.int-d cut t;. • such a general statement cannot
bo correct. It Is correct ins far us it refers to Block 50 but it is erro¬
neous insofar as it refers to Block 16. C - rdsihforood Dr.

Hovon.

Dr. KoVen states as channel of c;csand: D;ng, uirugowsky, Gonzkon
and Grawitz. Is t .t correct?

A *his state -ent i3 c rract as it refers to the ncraal channel, as
- ~ ■ tin C rrcs * th fygldnc Lostltuto of the Waffon-SS.

* ;la only has tc do with th vnecin production in Sleek 50 cr other hygienic
natters but d es not r- f ,r t. Bloc.: 2*0, I his channel of cceaar.d is wrong as
far as Sleek 1*6 i3 concerned.

Ding, according to Lr. ‘’r-v. 1 ; state-sent, allegedly took part in
c nforonca with you thro days ufc of every tr: weeks. .t correct?

Heven, in his teatiaeny, npuiit .dly or. int.d cut that Ding w-s
frequently on trips. In Ids - ric report - •• t.v year 192:3, however, he .

Berlin. That presumably is correct.

Sl-iS


28 ilar k7-ii-M-.-5-5-£orrow (Int Rosier)

Court Xo« 1

r.3 boccocs evident free a number of sy documents he was actually only very
rarely in Berlin and not as frequently as Er. Hoven st-tod. This state¬
ment in the work report scccs very probable to ao for the reason that at
that tie-., &ing, according to Dr. Hoven 1 s t*,stiscny, endeavored to cover
hlcaclf in many ways and he therefore would have tried to state in his
report anything which would indicate a large seal,, activity. But he
naturally could not put down acre duty trips to Berlin than he actually
carried cut for I cortainly ->:uld have nctic-d it.


51-1-9


Court So. 1

26 Knr 47-K-6-l-E3<-Le6s«jr (Int. EaUrf)


X


^ Did the typhus cxoerincnts la ^uchcnvrld have rsy practical
6UCC0S8?

A. The first series of vaccine ex erlaeats alrer'y had. *havn that

the veccinea vere not eaual es t* their effectiveness. It teccnes evi-

•

dent froa Ur. Din.; report how these variances esproti • Ctoe

vaccine hot an excellent effectiveness, whereas two.vaccines wore rather
vcfk in ccr.ccrlson. The ar duct i n of these weak and ceoperatively inef¬
fective vaccines, orotatly ty insti,;nti-n -f the Kcich Ministry of the
Interior, rt-ofeostr Cildeaoistor. was prevented. Gildocoieter vrs in a
position to do thr.t because ho vrs the typhus cx-crt of the Holch Ministry
vf tho Interior, pc enn to seen fr-r. tw. of cy documents. If thoso inef¬
fective vaccines had continued to tc used, they would not have shown
their value in or act ice nnd r.s c result all confidence which was nut
into then.would hove failed and norc oersons would have dlod of tyrhus
than If they had teen properly vaccinated. Tr.c fact that alro; dy in the
beginning of 1942 these ineffective vaccines h; d teen excluded is, in ny
■roinion, only to to attributed to the result of Dirt's work. That un¬
doubtedly is c very 1: urtent and vnluntlo result f tho cx*'orir;cnts
which I a.: oure saved tho lives f thousands f ’.wrs.ns.

(v Before continuing I should like to discuss with you the teotl-

aony A the vitn-ss X-.,;on. In the transcript of 7 January 1947, in tho

•

aernin^ session, peg« 1164 of the English transcript and --egc 1214 of
the Oer:.un tramctint, Kog.n said that c mm by tho nar.e of Kcehlcr had ,
Hen found dead in his cell in the hunker and acute poisoning was nssu-.od;
that Koehler was ruto'.oled in the orcser.ee of n scientist casing f“&o
Jena and certain drugs the rlcclayt series were found ir. hicotorach. In
that concccti in I sutr.it the d.cur.ant Krug vsky 29. This can to f*ir.d
on nago 177 of the decunent ho k, HrqgOVSky 29. r«rs a 177 • 1 ' ffer 11 ac
Exhibit ..rug>vcky 37. This is an affidavit ty a forrer SS Judge, ?r.

Konrad Morgen. Er. Morgen states:

«I .rdcred tho arrest in Lutlin of Hauntscharfuefcrer Koehler and had.
his brought to Suchenwald. Subseouently. he rade very incrinincting state-


5150


Court So. 1

2e rter 47-K-5-2-i3i-Losser (Inc. - ~ - P — ' - l c r)


neats escir.3t vrri.ua ?ere as. I he: t. intorrunt his hearing in -^uchen-
vald to e/-> to Kassel to effect c verrent -f errest e^einst Dr. Eovcn. In
Kassel I wee indorsed ’ey telenhor.® thet Eruptscharfuehrer Koehler had
ettfeintad to c-anit suicide and thrt he hod teen con..ittod t the garri¬
son hoepitd in Veinar in a serious eonditipn. Shortly thereafter, I
received c second telephone cell t the- effect that it vos not n ea.so of
attempted suicide tut that he had teen delivered with serious ci,:ne of
ueisonin^ end thet ho was dyin^.

"After roceivin,; this laforna.tioi:, I vent at jr.ee to Weir.cr nccornn-
nlcd ty the or cold In,; Jud,;« -f Kassel. Koehler vr.s still alive. He vno
fully consci-uo tut already ah.ved ti.. - ns ,f death. Every thine that had
happened fcutvooa Irldcy ao.n and Srturdry evening ra an atoolutc tlerJc
fir hin. Hp vr.s therefore unable to xlco e statc-nont as t* hov ho had
toon poisoned.

■Koehler- died 36 hours after naXin-- hie s tat ore at and his tody vao
diosoctcd ty the court aediccl ojr.ert, rr.fess.r Dr. Sinn, of Jena.

A

Traceo of : Ac .r. wre. neither f -und durir- the dissection nor in tho
sutooquont. cfce let 1-phrr icc >1 ..*icrl oxnnlactlon. Also thort vus no
joioor. f.und in uxncri Hints on 'niunlr. Cr. tho other hand, the dlsooction
cr.ved that K.chler had leer, c' iletcly healthy. ho only had a s~nll
harmless tu r -r. the sunre runnl .-lands."

The further nrrt f the affidavit refers t- a different *i int, t -
which I chill revert If ter. > uld y-u -ilerse tv tc y '®<wciti .n n that
Centradiet1-a?

A. The testis ny -f K .-.n <ivco the i nretsi n that he vea onor'kir-:
f his ovn kn^vledcTe. That* is n t the c.-sc. He ic nly re-'catir.-: vhM
S-.X ue else had told hi-, he are a r.u -or -f err rc. h t states that
Xothlor died ct Suchonvcld. In reality h- died a*. Vviar, that ic, r. t
InS-.e concontrcti-n cenn hut in the h-fitrl. Secondly, he ct-tes that
he VT'.S eut.clod in the cutonay r;o f the c ncentrr.tioa cor-'-. That is
els vron,;. h w vr.s eut osied in the l.cri hospital f the city .i tfolnpr.
Thirdly, he stetec that durin,: that auto-osy deal ii rests vtre found in


asi


Court S-. 1

26 --cr 47-+i-6-3-IHi-Lc3scr (Ini. Hardier)


hia stonach. vherces the Judge vho vrs working on this cast testified
that during that eut'/ssy ao such results vi-rc registered. Xogcn is only
.receetln^ vhat he had heard. All cf these thirds are vrong, pb is proven
ty the testinony of the investigating judge. I nigh*, rdrt that Professor
Tiun, vho vp.2 carrying .ut the autopsy, is a very veil knevn nr.fcsBOr
for legal nodielne in Gernany.

Q. Kog.n further states, on page 1165 of the Snglish transcript and
nego 1216 -f the Gvrirn transcript, that Din.: had sail, "I poo to test a
poison os Suosirr. oris-aera of war. I heve to '.eke an imedl&to report
a it. This is Krugcvtky's direct order." Then in the i.n.;lish tra.neeriot
on nago 1165 end in the German transcript on age 1217 he says, "Dr. Ding
did n^t tend c written ropert a tout that to Berlin. c o said that he vould
hovo to roo.rt to Krugovsky verbally." Ding, according to the work
report aubaittod by tho prosecution, dated 23 Scoteuter t. 4 Cctotor,
vrs in Borlie, Tho crocriasnt to k ilrcc on tho 26th of Oetotor.

According t. tbs docur.eat avrilnblo, Din,: vac not in Forlln after that
oeriid. that do y-u kn.v about that oxocrlaent rnd when and hov did you
get that report?

A. 2 Scn.v nothin,* of this exiorir.ont. I four.' cut about thr.t for
the firot tine on the basis of D.cuoont 265. I never received a
verbal ,r n vritten report about that activity.

TrT. dELSIIEVT: The Tribunal will nov to la recess.

(A recuse vra taken.)


5152


Court Us. 1

26 Mot 47-K-o-l-SEK-Gellr^hor (1st. Eanoler)


Tel KAF.5KAL: Ihc Tribunal Is a^eln la cession.

5Y HE. FlatoOG;

<i* We vere discussing the testimony -f Ko^an, referrinc to page
119e of the English transcript rad nages 1226 r nr. 1227 of the Gerncn
transcript, nad of D,cmeat 1300, Exhibit 269. •ich vjs cutr.itted by
the orosecutl^a. Wc ere c r.ccrned vith the 6xnerL".er.tB connected vith
Dr. Verntt. K^on said la that connection on onge 1198 of the English
transcript thet If he ro.:^ bora correctly thnt ia the firet letter Dr.
Dia,r had received ebeut Dx. V«.raut It vr.s contended contact had been es¬
tablished. The pr.sccutl.c contradicted th-1 by Document 13C0, vhore
your anno lo not ueati-ned rad vhich rcc^dln.; to ita content* is tho
firet letter on that subject. tog a furthermore testified that it wrf
p-soitle that Din#; on hio part hid -ado reftrenco t you for the oornio-
olcn for these oxooriswnte ct Bloch 50. What do yj u have to sry rbout
thnt 7


C art I


23 "ar Ll-il - 9-1 - LJO - Harrow (Int. Hornier)

“in raver approached a.? ir. this natter. ..cc r.'i .-, t. an 1 3

tostincry it seetis that Din^ hi&sdf cxrriod throat thwo exporinehts.

•

. k s becano evident fr;- the latter part f X -.or. 1 s ejeninatitn the experi-
□ents were neither c nductod in cl ck U6_ nor in 51 ck 50 by D*. ..ornet.
They wore cor.; acted in the hospital i the pris r.ers. Dr. Din; was no
longer conducted in the hospital f too prisners. Dr. Dina rns nctMong-
or ccnoomod *i th t -.at natter but th.t »-s the ca-r physician's. Kogans
oxcrossos that Dir.*, actually hr- n thing t .! with that affair himself

and ha said ho didn't knew i*y he was writing letters ab ut that natter.

• ,*

\ • lv •

•*t cry rate, 1 i n't recolve ary lett-.rs fr a; hi- . Ho di n't ask for
ny ocralssi r. f r theso experiments. He dl-n't have t. It that booauss
th. s« oxpariner.ta n : t ocnoorn his w rk. Ir. ad iti n, I nay point out
that this is n t e. questi n f or. uxpcrir.-nt, but a therapy treatment
a diionso and it hs already boon established n pationt3 J that
Danish physician that such tr -Vent had bear, successful.

ito y..u that dacatontbei re yu, dated the 7th f January?

*‘. Xos •

4 . Then t eld y u pi. .s. turn t pi . 1228 in the Soman tranaoript
b k an' 12GO in the English dccucont b< >c rind toll no that y ur pooi-
ti n to ut th.t matter <3? The qu.sticn there r-ads: "And n w, Mr.
Kogan, w.uld yu please speak ah ut -iru,; r. sky's attitude t war 's tho
expwriaonto conducted in tho cencentrati n cacp f Eucho:. .1:. I an
r experiments than typhus exp..ri=t-nts
a. rhis quest! n f •*>r. HcHoncy's refers t all experiments which
Dir... was c nductir. at 3uchenwald. Kowan bvi usly tries t> mention
ay nace as ften as p.st-iblo in c nn.cti n with such experiments and
t horof. re tries t. brin it up .* jvery ouit hie and unsuitable . consign.

I sh ule like t ir.iofject hjro - please take int c nsidcrati ;n
there tho answer t tile question also; nir*>ly: ".is c rep rt f the
r_sult l .ternet*s exporixants n=do? B

les, - it's right. an answer t th-t questi n K. -an says
* as a rule, rop rts w.ro Se.-.t ab.ut tho experiments f .<err.ct but

515 -;


C urt I


Zb ‘■■or h?-. - 9-2-LJG- Sorrow (Int. /rosi er)

that they roro -f a different nature than th.se which rer.. cudo about
the ax:orinont3 in B1 ck Uo ns it was sent t« "his answer is in
contrnaicti n t- tho sc-called "Di.v: ES:.ry" which Kc?on hi.Tself sent
tc tho prosecution and there can be n; d ubt t. at K ran thinks that
this d-cucont is authentic, and I air .ady stated y^sUrday th t Ding,
only in tho case f four r ftvu f theso cxp.rinunts, says tht reports
on then.wore sent t. Jorlin. But ho says in n case that a report was
sent t no« Berlin is naa* are varl us • hoh

discussing that quoSti n K.*?h contradicts hlasolf whon horcas ho
says th t ho hinsolf frequently nr/. tho inpressi.n in tho suraoor f
191*3 that ir,- hlasolf know n longer t xt r. h y su> r ir.ato.

Tn t is t say, th .t rv .a i . -to sup-ri r .Jh.ru an error v/ uldn't
bo* possible anti n.t th*. least d ubt c uld havo arison. This passage,

:n tho’ --nor har. , pr vas by Ko; n*s ” r hi::solf th'.t there wore a .
nurtoor f supori rs Tor Dir. . K , m di n't quite realize what thio
difficult relationship f s’i> rdinati n s. Ir. the sumur f 19li3 tho
production f vccoinos hr/ alr.idy started and, f r that reason, ho
c ntnet with o V. ?. r.uch groatsr oxtont than before.
Naturally, he received a nu.h.r f lutUrs and .lirwCtiv.,0 fnn no
which all roforrod t tho pr ducti .a f vaccines and t th*r hy.ionic
assignaonta which Din r-caived fr . I an c.nvlncofl th .t if
Kogan had s«or. an rdcr roforrir- t huson experiments which onanntod
fr r. a hu would vary clearly have stated th -t in his tost) ny. During
his untiro tostia ny ho i nod n t r.. w rd ab ut that. He always
stated t.-.at ho heard tins r the t^r fr : Din.'. In that case ho
d.es not speak f hi a *r. Sen. via b t is qly repeating nh t had

boor. told. H r unreliable Dir. vas ir. th-t c nnecti n -as soon thrqugh-
-•at tho .h lo trial, ••.-rtn.rr ro, .10 tostifie u. .t Din , sinco 191*3,
anted t cover Mnself t on increasing extent.

3. :.a\ I int.rjuct hur. t- at is t bo f.uni n pa a 1162 , pr.;,e
1162 ft:.. English tr ;scri - 119 f the Jem an tr iscript,

bite:’ the 6th f January l?u7?


28 i!arch 2i7-4t-,.TD-lQ -i H-1-PaM? (In*,. P.-nior)

Court Do. 1

5Y DR. FLKIIIND: ^

Q Ti'ould you please st.te whether Dr, Dir.? ever approached ycu — oh,

»

I be,*' yo'tr pardon. You have sail that already.

Would you please speak about Kc'on’a testimony with regard to that so-
called Ipaen vaccine of his ari^ina tins* from Dsrr^rk? This is fron the Sn~lish
transcript pevgo 1177 of the 7th of January, 19L7, -an 4 pa~o 1209 of tho Genoa
transcript.

A This teatLav-ry of Xo\*on ref rs to the objection raisod by Professor
Rose to Dins experiments, On tho occasion of the thirl meeting of tho con¬
sul tin • phyoici na in fcixs yo\r 19u3 ’Jin- was to have toon very excited about
that indi'lont, .and ho then 3*1.1:

"About thrje-qutrtors o'* a year l-.t r Din triumphantly showed an
order by .rofessor , 'ru* , c. sky to .start a new sorios of o* orirunto vrith a
vaccino codrv* from Coiunhaoon. an-' ho says that this vaccino was furnishod '
Profossor Rose and that Roso had mdo that request accordin*ly."

This tostic-ny is absolutely wron.r. Roso never mdo such a requost to
too. Fortunately, Koron corrocts this staton-int cHirin • his own oxarai nation for
on pago 1252 of the Go naan transcript —

Q ‘‘hich is 122U of tho English transcript,

A — he states expressly that Dir. had brought the order with hin com
fron one of his nunorous visits to Berlin, Ho says further*

'"Von this or lor ri'-inatod, I ’.o not know," Xo.-on is thon askod whothc
this ordor vv’. ecru free no, B: answers that Din-* ha I tol<*. film that, namely,
that h- receive! that orlir fr.'n n.', Ho further is a3kci *h ether ho could
personally testify n that, ..-hoth.r Profossor ’’oso ha 1 askod ne to st-.rt that
sorios of axporinonts, Th^n Ko on dearly answers,

■No."

Q .'cull you plcaso stabo your position roar±Ln Xo on’s testimony c
pa:-;c 1216 of th: En,*li3h transcript an’ pago 12U3 an! Uh *f tho Gorman trans¬
cript ror,*ardin» the fact that certain political or ether prisoners woro

sao there! into Block L6 in crier to bo killod ihoro. Is that ir. connection

%

•ith tho passages *f jxperi=ont3?


el36


28 Kirch UWi-ATTWX) 4 li-2-Putty (Rosier)

Court He, 1

I heard about this mttcr for tho first tin. here durin tho trial.
The situation asit prevailed in a concor.tr.itian con- ms unknown to mo. I
never had belcnrod to tho stiff of a concentration cum., in . 1 only from time to
time I wont there in or 'or 'to deal with vary clear-cut issi rcxn.ts. Mostly
those assi mants Sid not entail ry .r_scnco in the cor.contraticn comp itself
but only ny presence in tho vicinity-of the concentration con;/since the- water
installations are naturally jutsido of tho camp. It is f-r that roaion that I
know nothin;’ about these ratters, but I noticol hero that thoro is a dis¬
crepancy between tha locua-.nt 265 , tho diary,on’, the document which was Utsifr-
r.atod as tho n rk r.port of the year f 19U3. Insofar as tho work report spooks
obout oxporlaants on hu- 0 , rith;-r, t oaks f passi. os on human boin^s,

and this was defined by tin Frosocutc? b; s-yin that this concerned human
boinr-s who wore infected only in r * t kooj t - virus olive, no

nontion of that is m !o in tho liiry. Liter wo shall speak about that in
■roator detail.

I shoul inly like to rmso th. suspicion hero that if this testimony of
Dr, Ko-;on v o c rr.ct f. t in .-.v.r .r.ro s_’it • 3L.ck 1*6 In rdor to bo oxtr.r-
-ir.it,'. there, tl t th - ins. I think I am

Justified in 3ayin that cciuso Xo an an* ‘•nlr.chorsfci testified that thoso
a-.ssv-e persons ha 1 a fat lity rr -o of ninjty-'lvo ; .rcont but this is a por-
contaso which cannot occur in any series cf ty.ftus < xparinonts. Thoso passneo
1 arsons vrrulhavo to bo put on tho can.-, level as the c ntrollo \ persons who
■'•■-'re not icanlsol an' not oven anon tb- oontrol ... , ‘-his is why

ouch a hi.h tito of fatality =currc J « In that 0100 I think wo aro c-ncomod
•ith scr.:thir. jntirely if .r at. I t'ink that rill ba clarified :Hirin; tho
c.urso of tho trial,

Q ul 1 y j ; i>;i3 sjoak 1 out ho - r.»s testimony of tho 8 th of January,
1?U7, of tho En'lish transcript on . 1 o lo , rath r, 127U f tho Gorman trans¬
cript? Ko on sayai

"Tic a;.;lie’ that r. the i practical Hoi^n in’, usg! in tho Iaatuur Insti¬
tute in Inris in Block 16 f r its ofi'jctiven.js. The ta3t from animals lasted
. . roxinatcly f-ur -onths. ’ iiv - u eh a tr nacript bef- ro y u?


5157


28 :trch h7-l^.TD-10 •!- 11-3-Fuety (Int. -rSL.c)

Court He. 1

A Yos. This nethsi of Durant-Gircud was certainly not stolen fren tho
Pasteur Institute cf Paris. That is a rather '-rinr and shaneful tostinony. Tl
nethc ’ wasnublishc 1 by Dir.ant-Giroui in a Fror.ch publication and was, thcrofox
accessible ron:rally to thj scientific world. I repeatedly pointed out as it
con be soon fro$ the !oa=wnt3 of the Prosecution that Din" was sbnt by no to
Professor Giroul to Paris an! was w rkin: there for four weeks in order to :e
hinsdLf acquainted with the sotha’. Fqui-aant was oven obtained which was use
in the Paatuur Inatitut, and which receive! throe-h the h;lp of that institut
This praco bire was absolutely ncm l since every publisho 1 rojthod can bo used

by anyone who is ir.t. r stcThat is really tht rois n for publication. If on*

•

woult dosi Tiato that as a secret iscttvo it waul! certainly not hnvo boon
publisher!.

CJ ;'oul! y u :.-w .lur.so speak about the anir.oi jxj-rin. r.ts that Koi;on

nontionodf

*

A Ko on st tos that the oxa^iratlon of this vaccino had lasted for
four oonths. Ha sai 1 that testa w.,ro carried on on onir-ols. This tostinony
stands ccnplotoly isolated and is not prevoi y tho work, xv port of Dinr; whicl
tools with tho sane natter. Such a to;!tin. of tho vaccino on anlaals would
not have boon xueossory either, .'rofossor Giraud i3 a kn-wlodgod and exact
baotcriolnfist and 1 .lon-s to one :f tho bost—known exports in Franco. Tho
vaccino HV. ‘ e-.n tost;! by Mr. y way f oxperinonts «n nninals. Thoso dis¬
crepancies botwj- n tho tostinortios f X- r., r-ther, thoso liscropancios ^
•.Ithin K: or.'s t_cti.iory can only bo bio:*;-', by his ’.viatin - fron his own
kncwlc l’o -an! by statin what hj inter, r<>tel into .-v.nts.

Q Di ! you Ivo Dir. tho oricr tc start a series of oxixriraont3 with
tho vaccino that ha ! boon ; ro 'uco i at Bucbcxmald?

Ho, I ha' na possibility to to that. Ho was net subor J.rato to no
in that connection.

■1 Do yru think that Din on his ott. initiative c'-n hxetod such s.u*it>a
of oxporinenta?

A I really t tjI not have tho-uht that that was ;> osiblc, but Jurin
th course of the trial so rainy tocur.or.ts have bocono kn-'wn which have a ten¬
ancy tc show that Dir. .ante! to act in‘opon'ently, an! I, therefore, think J


5156


28 ’torch U7^'W.T^.lf> k UJi-Putty (In*-. .trier)
Court Wo. I


Is posslblo that he started these experiments on his initiative*

Q Din; started a series of experiments with the vaccine .’eimar where
he only used five persons for this tost whereas in othor rases ho was us in-
2C to 25 persons. Dcos this iiff^ronco aoan anythin - to you?

A It is quite possible that ho consldarod the selection of only a few
parsons as a preliminary tost an’, that ha selected those persons who bocauso
of thoso camp intri -ues were snothorod into Block b 6 . Obviously ho lidn't rake
any requisition for irrate 3 * Ke probably Just received a few people which ho
used for that purpose. That, howovor, is noroly an assumption on ry part.

Q Or. parro 1252 of the SarUah rcccrd la to! the 3 th of January, 19147,.

•

1252 of tho 8 th cf January, '.nd in the Goman transcript cr. , a.-o 1276, Koron
ncintains that Din* wan not a rorl 'actoriolorlst an', thsroforo, had to
in caso of all questions which crrr.cl up on tho reports which wero nado to
him by tho oxperts of Block 5C* f culd you speak cn that?

A ''hon ?lock 50 st-rtod to rork, Tin was at the on! of his third yonr
if work in bactariolc y. There may bo ruch aaid against Din , but it would
cortrinly bo rron- to sry that ho was stupl 1. On th: c*ntrary, ho was an
oxtrondy intolli’ont poroon and had an easy ability to -rasp natters and was
•xtronoly skillful in tho la' oratory. Ho certainly was not ari£ particular
export or coul bo eonsi-V-roary lca'dn bactariolo -ist, but, on the othor
bar.!, it waul', als*. to wren to assuao that after throe years of export trabiv-
in; ono would net bo in a oitior. to rain the necessary knewlodro that a
bictoriclo let has to have, Official trainin' ir. that fid ! only neods to bo
three years, that is to say. that birin that p rio ! f tlr.o hi3 training could
be concluded.

Q fould you way that Dir. was not in a position to critically evaluate
"hat was tel ! to Hr. by hi3 cc—rorkars in tho fid' of typhus?

A I .already stated 7 js tar day that Tin: w:rk ! on two places for his
trainLn; or. typhus questions and that this period of tine could only have boon
the foundation for tfc- - airln- of ary special knrxl*. in that field. Bowuvor,
typhus Iocs net if for so ~ch from the rest of bacteriology. I think that one

could transfer tho kr.awlod : to bo gained fms-bactoriolrry into that field,

51b9


28 Uarch u7-cW,TD-10 £ ll-5-?utty (Int a Easier)
Court No* 1


too, and he naturally was It. a position to critically evaluate the various
questions that cane up. I personally looked at a number of preparations with
hie, an! I can say that on ry cam knowledge*

Q M l the vaocins soducod in Suchorr-al ’ havo an effect in practice?

A Tho vaccina belonged to tho host we had in Gemary. The Anarlcan
occupational treopa use ’, that vaccine, in their internment cars? after tho
collapao. Profossor Kan loser testified on that hero. 7)nt naturally wouldn't
havo happened if it hadn't boon usable*

Q I now turn to the typhus passe os on hunan bain-s, You knw that
Din.* in his work report of the 11th of April, 19U3 ate tea that "typhus
panac ea cr. thirty-f:ur \ arsons up to no..*" This rk report is ID-571 which
is a Prosecution xhT it 2 « Irt Sc y u know about thos-- paseaqea, and what
docs "paaaa.:o3" sjnn?

• A Tho passe-o ia tho \ as3 It. of a ’iaoaso carrier thrcu. h a hunan beinr
or throu -h an nl-.-.l un 'er control ^f «a j hysiciar.. If an individual .aninal or
porson falls ill an' a hactorlolorlst observes that cause, that would bo con¬
sidered as tho first pas:a . If ho takes bl od fr:n that patient .anl thon
injects that blood into an aninal or into .a nuebor of other aninrl3, an:', if
ho sees that all th.so aim Is Lao fall ill, this is ©ensi lurod to bo the
oocon', th.r , fourth, tc., sv. 1 , This proco Yiro is usod in tho Laboratory

in order to toot thu ability a bacteria for infection, Sinco those tosts ^
wore on do an! sinco about seventy years a;o one ha! four.’ out that thj viru¬
lence, nanoly, thu ability of a bacteria t. infect in other persons !ocroases
very quickly-, if that par. a-o is use! by one an', the same typo of aninal. In
tho case of a nurd or of ‘is .aso bacteria tho custan was introduced into mny
laboratories of tho rorl t chan o the typos -f an l m la use’., that i3 to say,
from tho uinca pi • to the rabbit, and th.n c over t th*j louse and then,
perhaps, a-oir. return tc the aiinoa pi am tho rabbit, an’ thon tho .mouse. In
this case the bacteria rtedvas its full virulence. It v. uld lose it very quick-
ly if or., always applied it to uina -i s cr always applied it to rabbits, etc.
Q If on? applies that to tha case on hand, would tint mean that had tho
ossa is n carri *. •»:- ir. thru cn tastifie', nscely, from one human


51&D


28 ’ferch 1-7-IK.73-10 £ 11-6-Futty (Ranlor)
Ccurt !fc, 1


beim- to another hurar. bcin , -.roul*! then ths virulenco be kept aqually or would
it have boon increase! or decreased?

A If it hr.! actually been the ease that the typhus bacteria in its
poison Trcul'/ increase by asoin it frer, one person to -.nether, than-epidemic
would always increase and caul In*t logically step for the bacteria would become
acre and acre p -is: neus, an ', at the end of the opldodo people would bo in-
foctod by bacteria that beforehand hr.', still bo able U resist, because those
bacteria ha l bocccs r.orc .©is a nous in the process. In reality, howovor, that
is not true. Every opi Ionic at on, tin. raist stop cv.n without any measures of
control, fo c!on*t know the lows which -ovira the cord nr ani loavinr of opi-
! aides, but that ccuch is auro an’, isprovod by ovary opi Ionic all over tho
m rl 1 , aanaly, that over-/ opi’uiic :aist at one tiro stop and is linitod tinoly;
thqt is, tho bacteria lcsca its - oironou. quality .although th ro is n passa^o :*
fron ono hunan boin to another.


5151

2a^rch iZ^-C-IS-l-lIoIcy ( Xat . f art or j


Socoadly tho conso*uonco would bo at tho or.4 of tho opidonics tho noat
sovoro o=J cost fatal cases would occur, but that ie not tho caso. nost
fatal anl riost sovoro cesos with tho crootsst ::ertollty can always bo founl
at tho bocl^dne cf tho op'daic? anl that lr. itself is very si£plfic«nt
for tho physician troatln* opidonic. For ro-linos that ho is concerned
with tho boginuine of tho opiiadc whoa he obsorvos suefc sorious cases.

1 Tho posses vith hirar. bairns, would that hovo brought a:!/ advantages
enparod to passa'os on anlnaln?

A Mo, In no coy at all.

a ■' QS3 ’ t t: '- oro t: ~ that the virus chon transforod to tho ani.alo

vould dio?

A Tho vaccine was to bo ^roducod frr . the lui-.^s cf ani als a:d ono
would t!:orofrro tm to «0 over to tho -..H r. 1 fro tho he a bai . . *i 0
chaneo of typo of anle.nl to bo usol is always a critical rttlittjfc i t
ofton occurs that tho bacteria cannot b. applied, but nut a .-.tic ally Hoy,

tUt ln our 0rfl03 » lr * Dlr ^’ a enso tint wouldn't hv At to roe bocuuao ho
"lwoyc hod .'-any epcntonoou. typhus casoa at 'is dlc^sal, anl would h-vo
toor. ablo to ^ot r. now strain fro.; t':iu

'l ••hon-dld ycu hoar of passrvos of hu. r.u boinco for tho first ti:*?

•* Karo luxlr. tho trial who.. looking through tho work report,

\ didn't you rocoivo Dine', report -13 fra; hlsa
.; This doc*r.o::t is neither slgno! r.-r io tho d-to filial in, zy dco a
" tear t tn. : "cocrot" or *.;• nxior. She report -rly

' iruft. therefore -h t:v>ro was novor sort off; w rr , to , i aoT o r
rocoivo! -any work ropart, & i ~ 0 ~,~ fw it .

'. You ra <;bor, .~:ovor, that your tr-.a a poors or. that work ro?- r t by
Jaalwrlticf.; heu !r yu or-lAin that?

7-Is hanlwrlttan note I es cot .^i.-.ta fra. Din . It x*y - oar.

* in. also. Ketojv-r, all that ie ca OUtt « . rex: : _ rrtvud.

A * Dili > vu MCC!lvo a roport liko that f r tho your 19; 1 r 19*2?


” , I did .»t a?!-: for cco.


5152


28 --arc:. *i7- A tjjC-12-£-;^cy (inti, H-czior)

Court I

'l The draft of tho work ro^rt for »;3 which is available horo contras
Bocothlnc abait Block 46 rutl slock 50; wouldn't you have noticed th-t hod
you receive! t a report?

7b±a aortainly would fcavo d-uvr. ry attention, because I know be*.
cloorly those two blocks tad boor, se-orated. This clo^r distinction
between slock 50 cr.d Sleek 46 was uanalncurly confirmed by all witnossos.

Ono oxcopticn cao:^ to bo "r. 3alac! .-sky's ascuranco, which is I>ccu.ont -18-;,
and Presocutior. 2rhiblt 201, - hare ha says in tho Goran translation that
botwoun sleek fA end Sloe!: 30 there ..-ore close ocaroctiono. r-.ut is in
contradiction to all thor st~tu,z-.t3 ooutaiaed i„ all athor dooa^nte.

I lookod rt tho oricinai nal tkoro ir .in othinc olse contained therein.

It oays there, thoro aro lo rn.-rort etc. c j* nt, that is te a~y thoro
uoro continual relationship* bofjojn th blocks, but it dcuc not say t:*,ao
rolntionsh^pfl uero close. ?o. la t: ot jatlroly different . ?,in
tootlnony lo in a;roo xmt wit!, all the of or teati.-.e-.y,

DR. FL2:x*C: ”r. Preoilont, in that cc.-.action i ^ n co nero rofor tc
Doouaont Hru<.o-./aky 23, shloh is te bo f'.unS or. p-.ao 161 Vole O 1-.., which
I offorod as Sr’.lbit Hrucosmky 2 tMbit 2C, t.-hich is a rosace which doals
«.!: tho oxooptlone—Oocu or.. 2 C, JxMbi* 26 , pn, o 161 . I rill road tho
^racr-ph to bo .’curd on ;:*/« 162 ;

"I WaB n t4;nt Dr* W* is suy^oaod to avo infocted co-callod
josaaco-poraons with typhus lurin' _x ?3 rl-x-r.tr, in -rfor to koop the virus
•1-vo. I ulroaly atnWl fat i utchod the typhus oxvorlranta ir Buc’ onwald
-,rj oarofull:- b.ccuse persons who :jre act liked *.roro put cn tho list for
::•/> expori onts. Durin y observations or] inquiries which -.* 0 ?. c on due tod
1 Jul '/ 1S/ J I MW a-* or hoard anythin, tthwit possa es on htt
*“ t:;j b ft° i8 ,;J ' th ~ .uf.r .aticr that ir. a-swo of passa-yos tho docth r.-to w-s
«;raordlnary hi^h, it loos r.-t soi i .p.ssiblo to .a that as sc-s-llod
-a.os the disliked persons wore usoi, v’;:. should bo extor Jnrted by t!:o
• : -ri..ua3 *n the c.-urp.

1 Ir. Dir. 's Diary rany letters are tv to found hlcr rox’.r tr tho serui.

- iuel by the typhus, rut .er.ei?


5155


2S ".arch ^7-^jC-i2-3-^loy {Iat., P^rior J

Court I


“ Ir - connection ho ora not cncornol with the provonti on to bo
inposod os in tho caso of to ccina, but vo cro concoraod with tho treatment
-f ill persons. I a tho caso of a nunbor vims disoacos, for lnstnnco,
in tho coco of infantile paralysis and scariot fovor, tho axporlroonts,

* Q3 obtaininc that 3onr. fro:, persons who had coao througi that illness,

has a ourine effect la tho c-s j 3 of pocplo who had cowly follon ill.

•

This oxporiuent was applied in tho caso of typhus ct tho -.-or/ early

stato, astd contradictory results ».-ora Qchiovod. Sw physicians had

successes and CCJ-O physicians ha’ failures. Sinco wo havo no irufi in tho

caso of typhus with which wo oouM treat tho pationta, tho sue; os tion

-rielaatod that this serur; of t!u convalescents ucnld havo thorapautical

capacity, in tho case of typhu , loh :.x» one rustwod, -.;o ro n-turally

7ory lntorootod in that quofttloc., -.si i tho entire litoraturo on

that subject. i know hr; contradict ry tho rosults t-oro, but i c ico

ir.ow a lart.o nurbor of cctor.tlfio tho sis which spook of ; ood ros.ilts in

caso of that rot hod treat out. In or’.or to ako up a sons-, wo took

tho sonc: fren tho parsons who ha*, ourvlvoi typhus and applied it as a

thorapouticu;: in cthor oaflos of illnoso, wlht tho oh-.ncinc rosult sonbtlnes

*hich workod and sanotiuos which Ji '.n»t.

DR. 7L?:i’X3: I sub .it to t'.o Tribunal Urutf-eky 2xhibit No. Id,

..lch is to to fTund on para 131 f tho Dfcuont "cofc 1-;., which in a

•

•-:y of tho handbook Pethcctr.lc I'Jcroorrnnisrf’, and shall submit that
-vjlbook to tho Trilur.-l ns s' an 1 ot It fra: tho laboratory. This is
laurent Krucr/.rsky No. K, a a 131 af t » Dccuuont book, and l offer it
43 vthibit No. 37. I only cub.lt t t the OJritunal f :r tlioir attention,


It is said thuroin that a narior f xoso-rcr. vsrkorn had u cc>; or
or or net results at all i:. c tea f thlr aom. by c: aval esc o.ts.


26 :larch •:7-irf-7JC-12-4-:loloy (Int., H.-*dar )

Court I

1 '.loro any porscns herzod iy uslnt that r.othod?

.1 That i:'. ea.plotaly cut of tho quoscion. in tho first plceo thoso
conYalo3conts ware still un'or r.olical suporrisicr.. Tho sorur. w®s
not only drawn fron thx- in Suchoismld but was ir. hospitals
whorovor typhus pr.tior.tc vroro tro-toi. It is a peculiarity of tho
typhus dosor.so that tho vostoIs and tho voir-s ro ir. r.cct dor.cor,
whoroas thj acount of bicod is itsolf dooa not cfcocgo. Tho vos3ols,
thoroforo, nro oborburdono, -«;• tho droein of tlu blood io knorni
for a thousand yo*re in r-ijlono as a tnScine rwry cf thu t urior.
or tho circulation systo: . It cu oc in - -do: to ;;-ir. soru;., for
only that tho blood in tho datar c-no is not bo in. pouro:*. -way
but thr.t it 1-: USOdT *. .-. ti Irrjrinc of

tho blood is oxooutod ckiilf-aily rny .Vac to tho pr.tio t la .-ut of

0

the paction.

E IS55I32C: Tho r r ibunrl vill net* bo in pjcos .

(A rojosc ioo takoa at 12:20 P.:i.)


/f*y.

-&rch iclsi (In.. Frank)

Ccurt He. 1

-=T^WX-J c.JSSIC.1

rfo nvcnc- it U30 h.urs, i. ..ar 1947.)

jpcans .u.ugc:.sky - -..sune

TKr. ~_^n.X: The Tri’ur.rl is * ain in session.

3L£0T SL.I&.Tic:: - Continued

Y Jl. r L 53£l ! C;

- • w-ra the r-ecs 3 w c wore vlidr. - clout the- trhin • off _f Heed
in the croc cf typhus and y:u war- aryin • in thet c-.meets on that a cleverly
carried cut t.Jdn off cf ' Iced would »e rather ’ enuficinl than dene in
in the ceso f tyyhcid. *,Ji“t 5; y.u c nsider ft cleverly carried cut
Cperr.ti.n f that type?

.. . httsta • .in - h*.s a tetd cf n .ut five lit ri cf lud. it h-s

r. knesn for iccedcs that i *r_~ x t. health tfcrcu-h raaovcl ci 1 ,

particulerly l-n-.cr tc life, r.cul.i nly trJco place if cne liter er

nert i? token eff; ut .ever, thr.t licit is not cortrinty. In the case

cf rwvcd ;i. d, tiv.r.f. r_, the vein cne dll ctay well ‘. clew

thr.t iiuit. The rule ic net tc t-J«. a.:re then five hundred cU ic cer.tinotc:

Fren the entires in the s:-c lied ;i-ry it Uc.-i.s ..rxent thr.t cn tho

Average 130 cuiio.-centiaoters Kero takon fr. :a the ccnvclcflcunt patiento.

C nfe.u.ntly, usurd Units rar serve! s. thr.t i*n er X r t!do ruotv-J.

cf ’Ic ' wra ut f the qacstlcn free, the - innin .

. These c nvrlcsccnt patients - wcx. they previously cx'.uined ’efere

the c r.v 1 us cent 3-.ru.-. w.s. t-Jt-.n twiy fr.:s th*x;?

.. They w.r -till under lied c.nsideriticn in tho hcoj itrl end

tha sleet r in «h:oo car*, th y s u rj t thus re' *y for this ruxvrj^cf

’ 1-• ! * <Ih i* * uld n t have ’e.j. if in :ny way th-.r. bed Veen any

rois n or. the stren-th f wider. th-_ p.-tlent :ci ht have ‘con ir. Jeopardy,

• :r iz^nny'tfiSj»u t i. ahead,-. er anythin like that.

/ '-y The per sene fjv-- wh-a c.nv.-lcacent a-.m led was rc-.rvcd - -Ji-i

they ir. any way r.cdVy'.c n enar.ticn?

.. In Gerrvany uv$*Jir. pe-c-tino there has cer. *r. rrron -nuit usually

-cu: riir. • t. which, iythe case .f ' lc. i transfusions an ' ccce such operatic

r.cciti v r.=i f'-.'d^-gs'cr.s c uld ' e'allccatei. .This rulin , which was alsc

5166


^rch 2T- 0 -t»l>-2-oicl3i (1st. Frank)

Ccurt No. 1

apr-iic.'- 1 c t* the arnod forces, was rise rcu fct into coparsticn for
concentration ccsp inn^tes end I knew that a carrcspmdin ricr was : iven
thrcu.ii the chief of ccocuitratica c-^ps threat. administrative channels.

1 saw a ccpy cf that order. The persens in question whose llocd had. Vocn
taken, therefore, had ed itions! rations. Lcinr scr« than 150 cubic centi-
octera cf Heed was rasevod, which is the lowest Halt, such compensation in
tho shape cf food could l.o -iven.

• Ycu self* thet you consider.-? that any Ira c to health was ccnsidercc
cut of the question y you in the ccse- of such rontval of ’ iced in tho case
cf ccnvrl^scunt patients, ilcteo rtouaher that Jr. Kc en has testified
that this rvatvl f Heed was et ie^st po.rt of the reasons for later

fatalities.

.. This t.dnicr. cf -,r. Kc -on is inscrrcct. l.’or does ho speak on tho
strcnjth pf his cun kncwlol e • «c-.uao he hiusoif stated Jurin;; hi.- tostineny
that as f-r r.o tho o vent a in Sleek 16 tore orncemci ho cnly know then ty
hearsay; >-t he hies elf had no ‘usinoss there, s. that ho cculd not collect
ouch experiences of his cm. His -saerti:n, therefore, is 1 nsod en tho
ototomonts 7 third p.rscns nod I would like to point cut that Kc.-cn hiasolf
rls has. o-i thet persens whe later tn word tc e infected with typhus had
previously jut ir. a particularly frvcrrj le condition of r.iurish.ent \y
ceans cf cenailvm le cdliticnai ;\ r -tiens.

t hore is '.nether -i.r.ti n th. r^xvnl cf lee*- when, threu-ft
•'r. SUcahock, ir. tho sc-called rail c*~j- and accordin' to Kb cn's tesinwny
•Iced KM rtneved cad use! for lie : ceassrvoa. Whet is tc 'o understood

'y that?

.. Tc 1 in with - with reference to ccnservin ■ of lord '’urin tho

nuaertus * -un s which happened 'urin r fr.ntnl war ’loc ’ transfusions

iocaaocn-. f the erst ispertant :-ar.= f treatment. In the caao cf nuswrou

such inst.-r.Ce3 there is rv'.'.'itirry’L c:nditi:n rf shcck an! it transpired that

it is net a re 1 t:-ir. in this condition tc carry cut transfusicas cf Hood

. 1 th 1..1 c.r; scl.s ‘ csnusc threu h that circulate n is additionally

’ urdenedw Th. rwf.re, cno passed on u Unin scrua enly; despite all this

rl^7


Ifcrci. 2K-13-3—1-icisi (lat. Kraric)
Court :ic. 1


at th<- front there art cuaercus crsos -Ili fch~ transfusion cf 'Iced appears
advisable and is carried cut. There is net always e sufficient nua! or
cf ’ Iced donors avail tile and f r r. vnri us sources, net only in Germany
’ ut else a' road, particul-riy in Switzerland, the problem v-as tackled cf
rin-in • bleed into a s.rpe in r.J cn it can Ic kept several weeks end in
which it can !xi taken tc the f rent where it c'.n c iven tc wounded
soldi rs. I r ay institute e- wer. nerkin cn this pro'.loa cn Ichalf cf
cur divisions, end such ‘lc: 1 ccns-rvus, which c:ul* *..c kept fer feur

necks, were nanufactureJ ' y us .n a lnr>r scale , cni they wore u3oJ

•

fer cur 'ivisicr.s at the front. This * lo. i did net ori ln-.tu from concen¬
tration camps. 1 j the contrary, "imler had -c.ph:.ticrlly for idtlcn that
fer ur« ~.x r. .effen-SS -urf ere l .cd from concentration .camps should bo


23 llorch 1947 -A-14-1-FK?- Knrrcsi (Ir.t. Frank)

Court Ko. 1

Wo act u.3 a s:cciai lonor or ranigetios ir. Berlin t i.U"h -op*; li:. to tha
population. Particularly women an iris reported in such lar u numbers,
voluntarily that is, to ivo thoir bloo- lor this purpose, trrt to h-d core
than sufficient donors tor or os. Frem the stacks of this conserved
blood wo Is- su. ,lic ‘ kr, quor.titics to cor.cor.trr.tion camps out when, Into
on, transportation robleas tec:.-.e uoro *nd sore difficult because of the
increasing air rttacks, the .:e.nr.n.s ,’f concentration c'~.ra could r.j lonc.ur
bo satisfied. Ftll-wi-.c ■ specie! -rip sol of th.- chief nodical officer of
concer.tr tiu. craps, the requireo-r.ts -f V.nirces w.ro supplied from blood
taken from healthy .-rlsonors. Consequently, to this is uc the entry in Din^.f
Diary that i:. Buckcrw-ld too healthy 'ris r.ers in the s -rlh.: "smaller
caap", which was \ho lose riot ion f^r iLiotr nd quarters, had blood taken
away from them, r. K; on stot.s quite cictrly th t these lonora wore report!
voiunt riiy ir. ;r .r to receive the .-vMiti .nal i y*' supplies.

Q. So that it is your opinion that this rxf.so .f rsaovin blood is
perfectly Justifiable?

n. Yeb.

Q. DiJ you yourself o/«.r iv« bio in tivt r. nn-r?

.

c.. •. lv t was th> quantity of bio < that they to* aery from you?

a. Gcnornlly 500 cubic oontineUrs, rarely less, but a for tines, 750
cubic cer.tinj'.eru.

Q. ”r. ?r-riCcnt, in this com* ction, I submit Document ::ru owsky //15.

It ir- on pe 9 135 -Y kru- owsky’s decuaont took. #15 on p- o 133. I offer it
as Exhibit Iru owsky 3*>. It is ffi'avit froa Professor Dr. Si-bock, Hoidolb
Professor Siobeck, ir. conn.ctizi >dth rov. of th- questions which I put to

hin, only state; briofly th t the question is ... ? o 133, Docuswr.t 15,

m

Exhibit 38. Professor bi-b-ck, in the Casa f in.'ivi ual questions which I
put to hin, only st Us in hie i'Ji-avit th t t..lo questi-n is to lx. answers
in tre of fir oativc and I have, therefore, t ker. th. liberty on P.vc 136,
ince.liate-ly follntin this affidavit, to re rir.t the questions which 1 bad
put to ?r : r Sicbcck and thosa questions c- n be found on pa w 136.

Professor 5i«beck scys in his -f;i vit ir. -r 2i are 1 th t:

516?


♦


5c - rch 1 Ul -,.-L.-2-?KP- terr.- flat. lr rik)

C urt l

"Until the b- innir. • -f this century typhus was ccnsi3cred to teior.

to the reap -f -yphoi Iis--s-s, -caueo the ^cneml Slaytons of tl»
-i 3u -:3u 8h.ii oiril-rities. Sat sin;, then it h c been kn^n tfrt t ,8 tea
no c jnnoctiin with the typhoid dipsos. 7nis ter been pr-vet! for certain
especially since I^ctilc discover--: the : cr=."

Fi.-:r- 5: “Typhus v.kos its c-urse frequently, n it ten .. said,

Uy, with • her V-cte witteut other trouble*.

"3. a «.riso* ,h.n—na t- : . u-.\ *s Tillius, diaturbcncoa of
the circulatory ayoUra, epe- r --t first oiinly urin* th- puri:xl ;f nuebneas
but this ten nlao v ,-r auch L-t-r, especially diaturtences f the circuit
ayot«a.»

• 1 th reference to quottio.i U, 1 shr.ll f irst cf -.11 tevc. to rc-.c: the
question which la: "Is it correct th*t ceopUcati -na .vy rriso in th- coura
of this illn-38 '.n: th t they cni-fly ^c;ur in th- c-.®t -f a severe attack
v fans?" And th. new r (it "Ihic tion is to be anaworcJ in the
affiraat.lv. ."

In quuatix. 5 I had arte : "..r- f boas coe^licatlons bronchial
rnuuinir, infi f th kl t ye, heoon ... the akin, v .itin.,

jtc?" not tte T.ow-r: "The coaplicollon* aontioncx! appear rather frequently
in oeri:.ua cic. a."

Fl-urc 6: " c -:ic.:L'l .n- ... r.iu, at i--.st, in *. fr-qu-nt c'opUcition in

. : t 5 - often Jbeorv- : by us. H» boa rrha a 1

sli ht in or.s-y ,'f un

fr-,r. th- hi n-. o rrv. frequent, cut real *n serious l:ifl-«8catl_n -l the
ki r.-yu -re frodent, tut r_-.l a-rioua infLw-tiin f the ki’noyo
iccur* oclilaa if -v.r. It u, ..-.dr- *• :»•«, . . t -b, whether thoy can bo

as- .r t> iriTlu-nc-s.®

Fi a-. .. is l . .ciri .* rv ! r ..us."

Fi. ur- 6: "It is correct tl t ten •• h s first f ii t : : rt

-

• I : : . .

- lnes, aoasurcs cc LI : r by the rvr. t.-s t , c ur.t-ract tho ; ains c.ac
..s- or • i n. If it is ^rtun. phle'. t.-y.is r-c-nn..*. . : r 11 r a
f infcctl-n.*

517T-


26 X: re:: L9-.7 -.--U-3-PS?- E=rr» (In*. Frank)
--art No. 1


• Fi.ure 9: "B» t'.’.-i.nistwrir.; rf SsrdiaBsl • r. Sjepat 1 Quntionod s-ons
'Pproprintc tone, Keworur, pcr-cal vLninist.rin ie not sufficient in all
ecsua. In serious casor an aii-inisturir-..."

Ikon I can skip this cad .pass os to ?i or- 10: "jtaor.r the irntordcr.l

•

changes which nr- trccotblc in cr.s-s -f typhus, those in the bio.-' voss-ls
(perivascular ir.filtrr:tes) olay the sost iaportent part. The 1 .werin. of the
bl->: pressure is npcr.r-ntly caused by r. isturbr.ncc -f the bl >k‘ vessels
-f the br.in. Only iju cx'jainations -b-ut the quantity f blood in c-'ses .
typhus ore rvailacl*. I personally o not believe that the express 'a
r; iocbi ior »r.) of the blood wuili is quite corroct. If thorn

are net quite opocinl in-ic:tiona, I ays elf 't n^t r-c.ar.und phlob-tojno in
cnees of ty .v:. , but I cr nnot say that hleb-txty, i 1 carri-’. out carefully
n,uL ... - cd stake. tsldn : .30 cubic eti sooos rath

much to do, but I c'o not think that re* 1 ,r >>uanunt ’a o can be oous.tl

thereby."

Fi.wv 11: "D--r such ihl->et if :zrri- ut correctly, h"v- such
-’aor In effect -r. th. wk-1- y t.vt >-tiunt's condition will '.uteri, i
instead f bJini, iivroved?" Ar. ir. SI -ck Irnws your tttention to hio
provi uo etr.tenant,

Fi ure 12: "It is at 1-- st quite icpr.-babl*., If n t impossible, for hueru
who ar- in the cnvnicscent sto.- e after typhus t, be horned by t si:: 1-
bloo: 1-ttir.j of *3 0 cubic centimeters to such ar. extent that death does not
ccur until 1 ter i:. c no-quencc f the 1-es ,t blood. Such c blood lottinr
"as cr.dc. rv-v.r 1 ir. r :.r to use th. s-ruo of thus- patients in f.ho

tr. - e.-. nt if n_» casus."

Fi. un. 13: "Phleb^t-ny, if prja-rly carrici -ut, con b- tho direct cause
f t'o&tfc >.nly if it is -dc e or. 'n -xtr-.ely weaken- oUlvnlooConl

is

Fi ur>- .u.: "It is correct *xv t ir. -. - Se- f typhus the sorua of convalosc


s ‘ -en us- ’ frequently f-»r tier: tic pur -s_3, st-.tcaents as to the
-suits bo in., emtr- lictcry."


Fi ur« 1>: p *..x-.ct _. v_s coat th. r. oney tior. of the blood cannot be


iishei-i. h-'lt.e’ ■- - r- . - r :>i * .200 cubic Centimeter

5171


s of bloc _ I


■"r - I " I

23 rch lv47 -A-14-4-FKP- Kawc* (Int. Frank)

Court fc. 1

xithir. a few ays without ever. foelin . it. Ir. case _f 40) cubic centimeters

jf blood it r.r.y toko a wok or ». Little Ion e-r. Undernourished bodioa lo

not rc. ^r.^rate so well 'nc! take e Ixvor tine than healthy ones. If the foo-

au.jpiy is to ? certain extent sufficient, the blood is re e onvrated also

• •
without any special additional foo rations."

A. Con I add briefly- thrt these clir.ical sUteoonts have bc 6 n made becau.

Dr. Din;, in his acridin work, is rvfe-rrin to thcco under the separate

head in s, -.n:! the prosecution, laris: the submission f this docun^nt, had

aair! that thoao cooplicr tions in typhus c* ses -re traceable to th~ ir.troduct

-f acridin an rutenol. That Is erroneous. Those complications cru due to th<

disease as such, .and Profess.r Sicbuck, who has particularly rent oxperione*

in this sphere, status thf-t the complications which wore aentiono *. happened.

very often in typhus cases and are, therefore, not duo to the radical

treatment which Din ap lied.

Q. you h vo Dir.pts Diary boforw you. On the 21st of Decenbor, 1943,

until the 16th of January, 1944, on th. 25th of January to th- 12th of

February, 1944, W. the 22n .f ilay, 1%4, to the 16th of Juno, 1944, you

find the entry in this diary t, ttv effect '’Control of blood seruu"? What

oxptrisunt is he t lkii\. about in that conno-cti.-n?

"• Thtt hot an at *.ri ..m . 11 . It was a therapy. 1 alrondy :<t -1

this a rnin that incov-ral cases with shock nr. also listurbances throurh
• •

infection, -ne only reluctantly decides a . r bio.: transfusion, preferring
rather to uso blood serum. Durin thir war, hundreds of thousands f soldieri
. r treated Lth s rua con l tbs -r-ntest success. Incidents

r iny type rwv-r hr.; cm* , and it was my aim, therefore, on behalf of
Infection rt sent f Ltals to .t hold A such sori. I did i
uccee- ir... oir. so, '.ecr.us_ the ..roduction f tSxoe blood scrum comftrvus
..as thrau.ii ih_ military nc.a '.way -f the tray, nd ur field units wore
. lied thr u h iraius an! divisions. ..s far ns rear units wore concerned,
i; -h conserves were not at nil ovaiL-hlo. It was only after a Ion-thy porixT
t I nevertheless, Succeedc: ir. pottin r. Id of such alppulee, -nd for
' r f disturbances S the circulatory system I ilrce” such aapulos

bind's i'e. =ml lor r.is .ntiemts.

5172


2S torch 1947
Court to. 1


-U*-5r-P5P- t'-rr . >)


In the _-diifr 7 acadeny or any other iffice :i • they request fed hnvo
this serai conserve trie-: oat or to check rerart’i^ its effects?

.Sc ' ru' there won't any cause whatever to do s o. In hundred of
thousands of eases react! r.s end effects to such conserves had b,un known,
ar.I publications U. Lint effect were available. I do not think that there
was a sir- lo forward. ressin, station ct any front of this last w?r where
this conserve was not used r.t one tiao -r other.


28 ._, r-i:,:-:-i5-i-El,.>lcy-Int. Frank


t? .T


~ s ’ Sresilent, In this connection I 3 ub-


m Z - y '"- L ~ cu * nt f&*OSr Huiiber 16. It is on ?e ;e 140
of Document Book 1 -a, tfru-owsky Kuaber 13, ?•; ;e 140. I of¬
fer it .a Docu. :or.t ,-ru-ot7s«y Sxfcitit Nujber 39. It is *:n

Affidavit fro:, one & onnl Inn. who .reduce! this blued serua
conserve.

Followio.; too oustu..‘try ho first of -11 j„.

oril'ts hem those conserves wcr. „oaufsotured. Then on ?v.o
140 - f t!;0 2ur “'- n versijn *»e says, -.,11 sera, Froeorvos would
‘ ftcr 16W ’*' ot8 “ r - »ll.ht'iancenlnj, which

v.”.o the n-rv.l occurrence of .ous md caused through .ixin.:
Oorjueolee. Derini ion; tr hearts, .. rtioulurly
this process and rorastlon of this ril.. we. ncoelorntel.
...ijulos which Irtssln . stations h-J hell for - ltnjthy period
Showed cl-.riy ilecolorin;. Sfaawous reports \y the Ineti-

tUt " re ? BiTBS > shuwlR *!>' - oh., us; bility whs no worse
thr-n in the c-.eo of clunr i pules.

".o, nevertheless, intr.-iucci the »rooautioir ry acnauro

thr.t in the o-.so f the Infusl.a f carer, ly discolored au-
luloa a -nuso filter sh-ulo la-r.-luood -.no' tint tho in-
fuslcn should tike pl.ee s wl; . ossicle. These ra¬
ters could ho ot frua the .. in hospitals, a ..osuro which

ly used i:. the field.

'Prof. Dr. --ru wsky s sped .... int r< fc in th
::uf ctur«. pf icra. AtfioBOWes tad lisciiafecd th. ..tu>r o„v-
■-” 1 tL *'- s wlt * -s t;ull r.s tho director of the seru..

‘‘ ' ’W *-rgt _r. ;.r isc _ ier. ifL

:-t' in t:.' t on these . • l.as tho question of clouded uapu-
- • r.d its inai nific^nco with rc ,..rd to their coaphtibil-
• s ..IscjssirJ • The necessity „f cxpcrL-ents cn huarns
r.cver .ientinned, fer the excellent thoru^utic.l quali-
' • f seru.-. preserves :nd their a^ccihility hrd teen known


rr ; * * - ‘- v - 1 ^--Suivcs i a sfcce in the field


25 -1 -ir-i3H-15-2—51a.<Iuy-Ir.t. rr .nl<

3eurz I.o. 1.

.. _r •• r.y tens of thousands - . lies.

•Levorui scientific .lasers -ecUn.j with this matter had
.iso t-con pub 2 ishod.

1 c a s&ip fi pnssn ;c~ nd it vill suffice to ror.d the
1 —st i -r raph. I cuutc: *1 \,-.s not infor-ed on which of
tno patients the SS intended use the sOTuu ..reserves they
-sicud for. hut I s:coi i’rof. Lt. ^ra^ov.sfcy to see to it
that .Iso the 35 -..ii etue-r -e. trt-onts v.hich used sv.ru..

preserves uuu.it r«.-vrts their experiences ~l therapeutic
success hi ce... .ti. ility."

Q In the 5o-c- iltd Dir.; Diary, too U9e -f protective
v ccinc is rape.telly aontionod. Cr. the 2 *ith f ... Teh to
the 20th of .. >rll, 1943, there is r.n entry about carrying
out of lcr :o scale ex. ori_iont on forty-five crsor.s nceor-

le f tho riy^lcnc Institute of the ;:ffcr. S3.
* it s- , '..’ill y. u ive us y-ur views on that?

.» In the ini let:.or. t >fu arc accused r-uo.n other things
of bavin curried out inf. ct 1 ns of bu_.n be in -b by -o'.ns of

pox, typhus, j r-.ty.-hu.i .» nd c-r , II.w foyer, and

liphthorln. iruntly this scouantion is b cod or. this paa-
s Din *s pi r; . .... y 1 first wf .11 say th t it Isn't

t ell easy to ..rtuucu r.rtifici 1 infections of hu—un Loin ;s
nd partioui: rly has it Uev-r -oea . :s..itio tu ^reduce arti¬
ficial infections in the c s* .-r diphtheria. There wore ©x-
. ri..e:its ...out this lurin; in Which it v. 3 net possible that
children who h 1 h- J infectious diphtuori --..01111 sprayed
-• to t... ir thr . iH ill ...

ii not V'-ric. In tL t c sc -;o are r.-t concerned at all with
ny i.-.fecti *n ' at v:ith protective v ccinations, in fact, ex-
•tly the opposite; u 2 I io L.iievc th t any ccusction
i-h the .rrsocution a-:ds would net ■ vc Leon ue- n-.in3t
u the context at the natter been rocaynized clearly t

5175


■. ir.tiir.


JAur-LBH-15-3 -Binkley-2nt . 1- r :..:
C.urt Ho. 1.


-i:-- c nnesti-ns her- wore _s follows. oiace t:.e end of
19:2 the traininj .erioo for recruits in the ..'eff c a £S r.t
hu.u. sv ti ns .-.runted to -nly four weeks. During tnose four
v-cejcs, tiicreforr., ,'rt frcEailit.ry tr r.i-nin;, til v. ccina-
ti-r.s nnd inoculations which were essential h - to be curried
ut. In order to can bio the -coicl officer and the co,arir-.r.-
dir. • officer to c-rry this Jitter out .uore easily, I devised
i vaccination ml ir.ocul'.tion plan contr.inia; tno uxact in-
f ir.-ti.-a re ariin tne .y when vccination r inoculation
of recruits h d t . U or rrie uut.

I/H. FLSiMING: This viccis-tl n - :: is L-cu-unt ~ru- jw-
sky Nit-l.cr 17 and cun he f_und or. ?•. v i»3 f Deoiucnt 3>ok
1-... lie to su:. iit It 8 Exhibit u ,e\.3hy Kunbor iO. 1 on
.nly aul.oittln it for the infumition tf tho Tribunal r.nci
will refr in IT. . ru -lr. It. This is Document -j*U'Oweky Kuoi-
lor 17, c* o Exhibit ..ru .ovsfcy -iO.

.» This v coin- ti-n ,*l n shows that tho interval lot-
vveon in-ividuul v ccln ti ue :^ounto. to or. nvors o of onu
week, which is tne custvj.ry .vrio-. but during this «nu wuek
t. r ty.>es of v coin: tions v/.r. applied so th t the entire
peri ; of v coin ti.nc won -b evicted. knew fr~J ion
i. xpori jucea f the 1st v r, rticul: rly fr.... tho British,
tlirou ’h White, th t such v cci:. tions can be wuil carried

• • oti ns Ten't any

. i-e projinont than in the oss* of my jrdiairy vaccination.
But no rout technical .uv .nta o ! es .rise, nuoly, in
rt jvrio ! 'll v'coin tel persons are ctiiA unucr c-ntrcl
.ureas ir. the case tf the spreadin ; ut of such vaccinations
" " len thy peri l they will possibly . e transferred tc
. tions ... there -re tut avails Lie for observation.

d-.v . y the chief ..ciicai fficer - f conoentr..tion ciups,

r

hnia , told ue tii* t in the c.ncectr ti.n c_p Buchcnwcld •;

aa... _r -f -uica.eii hr . been internei. "I think tney nu_-

5176


83 . : r-EBE-15-k-Slokley -In t. Fit nk
Court No. 1.

bereu sever:! thousand. Thereupon I asked r.i^ whether he was
aware of the fact th t these Dutchmen did not know r.ny cououl-
s ion for the v-ccin ti-n a p; last pox s wc knew it in Germany,
an-l .urticui rly th t they ill r..t kr.,w the conception cf the
three v ccinrtions aurin: - cert in prescribed ' c period, and
that, therefore, Dutchmen Keren* t'ns completely protected up
^inct . -x s Germans were. In theory, therefore, at It st it
hr.a to Le expectod th t once pox wore -win introduced free,
outside, •- a i. tr which existed t 11 tl.ts when members ef
so m&ny r. clone r r*. cr t- et —r, then a pox epidemic
would -cour.

Loehnln, v. s jost . .rtur' «4 a'.wut this. Re hadn’t known
these facts; and :.e rented to have -il nis ct.ps vaocinuted
r. air.ct-p-x i~aedi toly. 1 told hi., that th t was not at nil
necessity-. In Germany through v ccino producers under state
control V.v h . the . x v?cclue t our disposal ct nil tl.jea.

Sd I said that there v. s sufficient tluo to or.rry out such n
complete v ccin_tioa >nce the first c. su f p x recurred tut
th t I thou bt tn t it vv s :.n exa • a tod precaution if i.und-
I’-'-a -f thousands f people ve uld to vacoin to- • poinst pox
t such n point.

..t the d-..u tl.e louhnin t Id .e, however, that ’Hussion
or!is. x_rs *r v. r hr.-. -.Is rrivi: t liuch.nw id -tnd -.t other
c_.ps. nere we were c hC:rne it.. different ty c of dr.n-
er because r.t tn t to..-., l. t.. apria . 1V-.3, there were

fcviu ,»rU.,onr f w ir ct .,.8 i:. tr.e Southern Ukraine where cholera
:• . tr^ken out, so that the possibility ^xisto^ th-. c. throu ;h
these nus3i :n prisoners «f war choler- .,i 2 it l-_ s,-rc .d -nd be
r u iit intc cincectr ti n c ..ps in this .inner.

this c:.jo, therefore, i....d to cti-n was essential.

: rec • tended to hi., therefore, • p rt from anti-typhoids and
r -typhoids, v-ccines which :. .d I ten the oust . for a Ion*


23 .. r-5BE-15-5-31ni:Iey-Znt. Frank
Court No. I.

♦ •

ti .e, the introduction of vaccinations - last cholera in thos
c'-.ps which contained itussi-n prisoners. Loehnins subsequent¬
ly coaplained about all the vaccinations which I considered es-
senti-a. tie thought that this s difficult to realize in pr-

ctice; but I told hi-., "You hve to do sc iethiap for the prot-

0

ection of your prisoners in any case; otherwise you'd becoac
uilty :f very consider.-.tie Onission." I iso told hia that
fjr t ut six -.‘nths we in the i.offcn SS had found a different
.aeth„.l of carry in out such vaccinations; .ni I showed iiiu this
v coin tlv»n pi a which we h d used for te-ns -f thous nds of
people in the \. .ffoa-SS with the best of success and without
ny Indi estiLiilty.

In cr-ur to siuplify vaccinations •. .inst 7r.riou3 bacilli,

~ nCs vaccine, for instance, contained bacilli c.-inst four dir-

r.rent tests.- That was tho so-called tetro v:coino which had

already tec ..c well-known fr . two previous war and which now

when cholera .red in the Southern Ukraino, thou :h in a sli-

..tly ch-«n;el nd LuproVc 1 shape, vv s once *. - in introduced.

This v ccir.c had teen developed and tried ut on soldiers thr-

*

->u*h r.e jf ..y osocir.tos; and ay associate Dctzor reported

'• ut this during consultation conference. The ontiro Qpr-

a ;-,.i f rocs wore vaocih tod with this v.aooino. In fact,

‘ nuy “ llllons Jf - iC - lc » without any incidence, and with the
! CCt Cf SUCCv-33.

Those 3 .c v.ccincs were Iso used for .r tuctive v-.ccin-

tlons in c-.ncentr .tien c vs. Sulscqu in this v poitgti a

.1 n v.o introduced vaccin. tiens, first of all, -inst pox,

aoondiy, a last typhoid an- paratyphoid « nnd B, .nd cholera.

...os. v cnir. tic ns were the rale f^r tnc entire G c r.aan aruod

• rces. rurtner^ro, .very -e— er -f toe- ..affen-SS was vaccina-

inst typhus nd, tec use we h i _uch diphtheria in hor.e

’ ti.ns, also - :inst uiphtheria.

5176 .


Court S

28 I ar 1*7 -A - 16-1 - 1J3 _ Blakley (1st. Frank)


Ioehning ask ad e whether he ouAt ct vaccinate against diphtheria
because, of course, occasionally no too ha accumulations of diphtheria
incidence i 1 crixrntr-tior. ca.vs. ' * id hin that this ra e not necessary
since the average age of concentration carp prisoners was higher’ than
that of the recruits f the iaifen S3 and since, therefore, no mere
measures ayairx*. diphtheria wore necessary.

N . This vaccination plan which t:s 3 carried out on forty-five
people, with cosrercial vaccines, that to be considered ac an
experiment?

A. It has been doserred as a L rga scale exporirer.t. I an not
quite sure sh.t Ding meant by the - ore r ,'rosso vcrsuche," "l-r^o expori-
aent", because it ?_ oorr od - * or. forty-five peoplo. a fen pages
before this very or.tr, i.. the F.ary he is talking -bout another scries

9

of oxporissento with typh'ia cn 11*5 people. If you carry out vaccinations
on forty-:' vo people, then t .tTi: not a larjje-scale experiment.
io i, is this 1 cvns.* red as an oxp-rimont?

A. That isn't an exp riront under any circumstances because there

is nothing ir. this, cv •, tch had to bo experimented with. Digestibility

was known for a Ion-; period ir. rho caso of millions of pooplo, both at

homo and abroad. I bellovo that here it i3 language which is cuuning

•

us difficulties because i r. Oerrajjy •. have only one word for something
which is described as "vcrsuche," "Mcpriaent"; and even in tho caso of
the introduction si a r. • drug, c -dicel supplies to the troops, wo
tedk about truppen vorruche," "troop experiments." Those are not
experiments ir. ho s^nsc f the •'. rd *. xr-.rirants," the outcome of viich
is unknown at tho outset.

It is a check-up, as examination. So thut one ought to draw this
dividing line in this case t * ien check-up, examination, in the case
of vaccination recause h-.t no a certainly is not an experiment.

4 . But then why nil you d.va tho advice that in spite of that
not the entire cv. snould be "ceLn jc throcAtout but Miat first cf

517?


Court I


28 ar L7-k - 16-2 - LJG - Blaklay (Int. Prank)


all compatibility should to checked by E*ans of a snail group?

I Is*" that the average age of concentration carp prisoners
was higher than that of troops and t at their condition of nourishment
was worse. Consequently, I reccar ended to Dr. Loehning that before
vaccinating hundr;ds cf thousandsof people ho first of all satisfy
himself as to the digestibility of these vaccines under these special
conditions in concentration c-a_rs. Ihat was an act of extra precaution.
i <0 German doctors, before such large scale application of vaccine is
to take place, love first of all. U try the aime tning on a 3tcallor
nunber of similar people in or<ior to, ur w u cill it, get check of such
vaccines.

Q. Pleaso look it the lor lino on rug 13 of Ding's Diary. Thoro
is mention of a rspoatod vncci:,otion against pox after throe months.

Is that customary?

a. .To, that is not a custon. You only vaccinate onco gainst poxj
but I would asauaa that wo are hero ccnc .rr.t-d with an orror on the entry
since previously ho is talking about rdphthuris. During diphtheria
vaccinations, a gr.at d -.1 expcri^nco with childron was collected
but little oxporijnco in the case of dults, scathing which has occurred
to othor medical men, tor, because the necessity to vaccinate :gain3t

m •

diphtheria woula generally speaking not bo lr. oxistencu in the case of
adults. It was aeon that diphtheric vaccine reactions in the caso of
adults are mere violent ^har. in the case cf children; and therefore a
largar interval is introduced oe ecn two vaccinations which are neces¬
sary against diphtheria. In the caso of a child the interval is twenty-
eight days, on other words, i month. I aould assure that hero*wo are
concerned - itfc tho second diphteria vaccination «.aich was to be carried
out after three months and not, t ._r fere, a pox vaccination.

D?.. fL-: 0 ITG? In this cejection I sir-mit to the Tribunal Document

^rugowsty 17-A. It is on page 1L5- I offer it in evidence as i^rugonsky

Exhibit ‘hiaber hi. It is an -fil d.vit from Director Damnitz; and I sub-

5100


Court I

23 :!ar i»?-A - 16-3 - LJO - Blaklov (Int. Frank)

=it it for the information of the Tribunal without reading from it.

At tho aaoj tine I offer in evidence Docunent :'rugorsky Hunbar 13,
on Pa-o 11x8. I off-^r this in evidence as Exhibit "rugcvrsky 1x2. I should
liicu to r-ad from it briefly zs Toilers:

“Vaccines against typhoid and parathyphoid fever, --Iso cholera.

In the conditions acsc.it.d (crowding of many thousands of hir.:-n beings
of many nationalities into the concentration camp) the presence of
nunaroua bacilli carriers and the constant danger of a tyfhoid or para¬
typhoid apidedc had to be reckoned with saong th. inr.ates of tho cruap.
Thus inoculation was a recosaary preventive health -ucaure. Iho pleas¬
ing fact that cusos of those cisouc-s oidr.ot occur in lirgo nuni'oro in
tho camps is probably eve to thic ir.ocul.tlon. ••hen Russian prisoners
of war too ontcrod the cor.contration ccaps it tho san^ tin® ns cholora
broko out cnong Russian prisoners of -\r ir. tho Ukraine and wuro in
closest contact Tilth tho ether prisoners, th. rt also uxistod in ay opin¬
ion a danger of cholcr\, so th .t inoculation -gainst cholera, too, bo-
cano nocossary as a preventive health n-isuru.

"Iho uao of vacci na - -.nuf• cturod by th- Behring >«orka (typhoid,
paratyphoid, vaccino T.a.B., and tho so-callvd totra vaccine, consisting
of dead typhoid, paratyphoid A and ? bacilli and dead cholera vibrionos)
was correct for th«.so inoculations. The omission of such inoculations
in the conditions d-jscrib.d would prob..bly have been turned a ristako
(profession.-1 slip) by -.03* doctors, oact-riologists, and hygienists.”

Then I aait part of VJ s Joduu-nt and r^ad thu list throo linos
of it: “Its protective value is recogniz.d by tho ovomholnlng number
of a. ecialists. The exact course, tae tolerance of pursons irf regard
to these inoculations and tho of:set of those inoculations hi3 boon
known new for a 1 ng ti.-uj and • .r for>, It is impossible to speak of
theso inoculations ns »3:c\.rla»mt8.

The passage numbered '.HI -.-ill not be r.ad by me. It c nfirirs
Krugcws’cy's ta iimeny. E-rail;-, Ear-crr.ph IX, Diphtheria, concerns
: rugcms-Qr* _ to timony: and i shall ly raad from x ar.rraph 2, aoproxi-

51cl


Court I


28 1 -lar U7-A - 16-1; - LJG - Slakley (Irt. Frank)

esately the con tor.

"Since 1930 rv-ny zillions of children and a lesser nuLbor of grown¬
ups in nany countries have been inoculated with these Absorb at vaccines.
Their harntssnoss and their effect, na-ely on children, is generally
known in medical circles."

The lmt line at the bottom in the t*,man: "It cust be added,
however, that the .bsorbat used neither contained li*lng nor dead
diphtheria bacilli but only bacilli nhicfc hid boon deprived of their
poison by treatment with Forrol."

Then in the final paragraphs -»ho v-ccinatlons proscribed woro
not oxporinonts but reg-f x iaccrlrtlcns internationally recognised,
such as are undertaken in all civilized and onlight.n^d ountri.s as a
protection zainst a strive -f jpidvszic."

This is an affidavit froz Professor Dold, Freiburg, who io one of
the gr.itost experts in this srhoro.

’4. During oxperinontol vaccinations by Dr. Ding, did ho uso now
vaccines which had not bo-n tried out?

A. No, the: w.ro cc. -rcial vaccines which hid also boon used in
tho or,iid fcrc-s and for the civilian population as well ns the Vriffon
SS.

h. Subsequent to the cxp.-rirer.tal inocul itions by Dr. Ding or
connected therewith, wa 3 there any occasion when experimental vaccina¬
tions on tlio vaccinated persons wur-j carried out?

a. Keither in ccnnecticn t! _h such protective; vaccinations nor any
oth-.-r affections was any infection carried cut. In all these cases wo
uro concerned with the first phase .f an inoculation program for all
concentration camp in ntea ar.i for *,oir protection against disease.

DH. FJiT r IMa: I nor. sutcit to the Tribunal Document .xugowsky
?;unbor 87, Pago 226. This is an ox Tact from the Noue ioitung, dated
.-arch 191:7, Page 2. I offer this extract as -irugowsky Sxhibit Nurior
-3. I subrdt it only for your information. It will draw your ct.ontion
to thy fact th :t 7.* rallior. Japanese ar« at present being vaccinated
•t..ainst pox and yellow fever. 5^53


28 3inrcb-u-»JB-17-l-G3llaghcr (Ir.t. 7r= k - it ---.li r)

Cuurt I

«• 'oil th_n rh or fared those v-rios w-xt-rir-mts which have just
’iscuss-:'?

Y:u Bser. the tythus expuricxnts?

Q. I ntia r.il thu experiaoats?

A. Tho vxpori-ents of Dr. Din :oci»rre-’ -t the cr. of 19blthr uih tho
Collective Order ivtn ay Hitler. The td». vas that all -xiatlr.. v-.ccinos

inst typhus sh tOf '=. eh.efc : * . irjffwCtivwncsa an hwacn bcir.ro.
Since this c. fp-honsira cr^&rwAs ir. existence fr a u innin , the
dotailin, f .ria nors h~ t bo.settlefr <rsot case. It was, a si
enphneiza’. rt:uftto&y, tn t at th. v .ci.'win l they were o toilet through
the n-hiniatr ,tiv. cf the ccheontrati n c- ut later fronthe Reich

Criminal icltc. ’ _..nrV-..t in th o central ' n -rf «r.t* Do tails rcocrd.ine
the channels cf t v. rders r n.t lai n*, rx.

Do : u r . her th-.t th Jr o uti n subaitt ’ the cua-nt Ho* 1190,
Proa.cuti n's x Volt K., 321, thieh contains > list : .iris .-..rs who
w«ro furnish. * th. R-.ich Cr. -ir.-l Folico Office f r the iur, .c„ f ex.-.ri-
nento. D- y.v. n a.b.r t-.r list?

«• Y-s, I -it of it fr . th trial h.r«.

q. Dlf y.'.n.quort the*, ia a fr tcich Crindn-.l i-lico Offico

or did y u have any c rvos. :..'ance ith - ?.-ich Crinin-.l .-lie.. Cffico
in that letter?

•\# Kc •

q. m th-.t case .. a nor r in ac vitl tn. ;t ich Ci Lico

Offic- f r the fumiahia _n> -c r r. .x t erisonts?

ac ' •

3. De j u ‘a. th t* K ,>n asr.r- y lu -only c ul n-.f Unvo

exorcise; -ny ibflMcn co n ; v. fr.tishfr f t .. o. inr.:tuS, :ut that there
~-.s - c un-cti i t. the Reich CrL-Inal lico Office, an 1 t. '.heir iirr shin,-
f th- i: ..Ttcs, n ta -t y u < r to- .n/.ac'in link then. C ul ’ y . say
s -Cifthia chat?

-w* This st-te ;.nt is *r n . I r.ci. r iia -aye rres,’ *'nc; .ith the


23«Erch-^-JF-17-2-G-ila. her (Int. Frank - Rr-.2_r)

Court I

Reich Criaind i-llce Office cnih-.t natter, n.r d T kn.ar Xri^nnlrifc Otto;
wh - "=* thi *° rs ' n in chir.a of th. ccr.centr-ti.sc:a; ins'.tcs, and in the
end that Din., nr.; GmwiU nJwtsl:* -c ton criminals rers us.-' f;r these
experiments. Th; fact that since too end, finally -f 1933, the furnishin G
cf those inmates n-3 centrally dene three-h the office of the nid in Berlin
was to-.r-of to use tot actually nly C rl inal pria mars core used for
too exjerinents. Only criminal p-rs .na c old bo dealt with at the Reich
Criudnal Police Office, whore to* p lUictl inmates r^ r . sutc.rdinr.te to
the Mitical relic, that is, t... U-st-ac; th-sutwc r.fficoa had nothin;
t <*j witu one another.

Q. Hovr ft .n were you -t Such*wmid?

A* A. ut thr.e tinea.

Q. .hat ad yru o-there?

A. Upon ny arrival I wont t the car V > ccsuundcr in erdor te rc.vrt to
hia. That was customary pr codure, end I was then roccivod by tho Dr. Dlnp,
wh. was called t. hie office V; way of tolephrno. Cnly by a c aaandant
c uld c person bo -ccrapanlc ary c Id I pnssthrru.-h too-car.. I then went
with hia t Block 50, an then - nor* :* jmsed cn tho qu.stiuo* cf vaccine ..
production cccurrin, in detail. I entered Buchcmrald for too first tine
in toe Fill ;f 19li3, that is, urir, th-war. it i c possible t hat .that--
was th. 3rd of Sjptcmeor, as it is rr.intain*d in Dinr(a rooert. Durin E
ny first vicit, I entered Blcck h6, toe, ut 1 alruahy stated yeeterday that
at that ti-ac there, was n. ox>rin-nt with infection c-rried .ut,.cnd th-t
I only saw a f*w patients tiu.ro rh ha fallen ill ap.ntane-usiy, I 8i . v k«
t the-. tor-, -n ’ I waa of the c ini.n to-t tr-._ihf«tiehocp>rirnts hod

stopped. *

Q. -itness, K een and Kirchheiaor hav. testified that r-ur -risit in
Block 16 -nly loatcd f:r half an :._ur, is that wtk,?

A, At the noat it lasted f-r half an n ur.

• *

Q. Yu ror- v 1ust woyin. th-t y.u nly o-nW*d Block hfi nt-thistiac.

° n "- n ' Kirchhoincr .n to- tour far.' tos'ifiud that y.-n rcr* there cn.

5122*


28 'rch-.Jr—2 7-3-Calla h.r (Ir.fc. Frrr.k-ifc»l 1 _r)
C:urt I


tv .r throe . cc?ai- ns,


r. ov..rr ecasi :: visit.-• 3ieck 1*6, was that


a cc revet situ .1 n?

‘ That ip R 1 iv c~Ti O-Silj* _c Clarifier’. Both =n'c the

stitcocat e ir.co tfc.y wcr. ir. W.ck $ 0 , in’ it is.o factthrt ay arrival


* a ® "Stored, a' --no unc. 1 r.t Block 26, that I actually .1:’ i, t o


there, tut that *- visit d vhit cc iv’ Ilttlu Cmp, which >rs behind
Block 1*6. Or. that .cc-si r. I • n t «nt.r Sleek US, hut I havo, I think,
I state'*, tr.. r.-ns.n f rthtt tine.


J* C * n ~ be ' ,rvj Blcrt r .. Sleek 50 rhero Xpsin nnr‘ Kirchhoiswr

wvre?


L. No, on other 'lock we in botw*.: the • , i rcaostoor corroctly .
i. ftlloohcvsky Mit Visit Littl* Cas you snr tho

one that wao ’oath t.l ck, io thv. c. react?


“• ' • any such institutt a that

wxiat.d. Th- - to n t uat-blitth-'- th t such institute n did oxiat, and
I still i.n't k - ■ r it t ’ij.

J'JK SJ33J < G: Pr. *lt--air , : a. .Ti n l v.nld like to soaothilt
th- ri u of th s- Vl.cko, h lr. - •„ j;_y in * rei, wha*. is their
conpcoitiod, m.d what ir their - . \ ; - pic «.r. in thos, blccks,

prticW-rl: about Block M .' leek

DR. Yes, sur-.l, • - (

\nsv.r it, vitnuss?


esnrUt : cairaUy fw -on bracks.

r * ^r- * for steno bidlrla . • v -i j .

t.vt they wore ct fifteen 1 . i t

1 c n5i £,r ' /;i ’' ’• t 1 - r8 ns c.ul‘ V a r . It w* - qjosticu

* f h nwji-cc . h*s rhwthor n- h:s * . , rbich were, c-n tv r tJiroc

f- -re, t. ., i£ c oral, is r, .n qu.sti n. Block 50 n. h.uciBs

• • - : r -• -h v.rk.d th.ro were

''- ns ’ in ' n -J L * Jir - ws. -'loC -Sr- - s;it-l v. it hri bettor

c ,sir ^ facilities th-j. s»y ta.r f the >iccks f th. c?

SL55


:f I rue ill


20 3'j?rcb-..-JF-17-^«Gaii£rhcr (Int. ?rr.-y. - ?.i=l-r)

Ccurt I

fr -" aiJ'-.l- visit there, tn.r. was =ly ;ao lcv -1 ?f b&da, tber_, th*.

is, n- rt;. i ic's, r-.s there, sin ly. I ’ c*. r. t sac any oth-r block
at that t i~: > an I thor^f r. di ' n t knew h aany r ns it c nt-inodi I
‘-n«t ixl.ov-- th- in neither 'uii 'ir. ;f thu -locks, t h-tp-rsients in
,r '-» - - "1 * ...us- th r- a;r- than a : .r. xirat-ly cno-hundrod That,
huirovcr, is a o-r- catinati n n - j rt, .. I believe that Dr. H von could
toll a* r_, r will l_a lo t ;-il j v . r- ut it.

lath. »3 don t 'treks 1 th..- c the instates w-r- cucb c 2 ; r- t other,
especially unfav.i-.bic ). a in faciliti-s -.ny way n-ar Uttlu Crtapj
that was th. r--r r. why I was as. : 'i by Dir. t insect th- c- p, This lad
to a r-| rt by r- which I sent t Ch ; lu Ujfr-r* Hull ‘in Offices
of the SS. I ccnaunie-U ' ry nr ,*i». r-qn.st * r-- r.-nice the building

in Buchoir/.alt* ir, or .r t. h.l„ v. •. «j *»ti n. In th t c-u.j the lnrr.tus
' r •' - • . r, nl vtTo !ufinitely v-rcr. KdO'U


Court 1

March 25-A-lo—l-HD-Lcsse^-Samler


*. Vith reference to Block 15 would you consider that
Dr. : or ;en's sfcatcaent was correct, that Block -6 was furnichad
just as any r.odern q: r.y hospital end that patients wore erred
for La they would be orrod for in any .my hospital?

A. The impressi n which I twined after ny short visit
there w.s extremely f voreblo. Tho distur.ee frer. one bed
to another was about one _.oter and ?. half, that is the
customary distance ns it is to bo found in hospitals. Beds
wore oevorud with whit. lines; or, tho tables there wore table

0

cloths; rafl I hed a very f^vorebie impression in that regard.

'1. How about tho furdshi x\l in Blcok 30? .hat wero
tho ’work conditions there?

Block 5. was ccdemlr oqulpi'ad laboratory. It had
ell tho spool- 1 .t which could be required. Tho walls

of tho 1 boratory vero painted and there was running cold and
warn water. Tho equipment had oloctrior.1 current os is tho
oaso in ovory well furnished institution. The inmates who
wuro ocployod thoro had nos r us liberties. In particular
a not - . to nttond the c r 11 calls.

3co uso cf danger of infection tk y r.c-ivjd additional
nu*rishccnt 'jiS not on- .■ n'-‘.r of Block 50 who won examined
hero hns assorted th t ho p rs :r. ily fared b dly. Thoy wore
•Joll nourished and k d r.r.y literature t tiu.ir disposal they
desired nhd I knon : prof ssionai a turcs,

• 03 well us fiction, wu: 3eafc to t.:or. froc the university
library at Tent.

*

o. .to the ;u stions cf the Tribunal answered?

JUDOS oSBRIirO: Yes.

. that tho inmates wore well

nourished. In that connection 1 . .r.t to point out to you that
Kogan testified that the inmates working ir. Block SC, because
;f .Vu;;;v,r, hud prepared the r belts used for rir. *C3 for


-sting.


Is th- t correct?


5167


Court 1

March 28- rt -18-3-HD-Lessor-3orr:lor.

I or* convinced that this tost icon;; is correct end
there is really nothin - zo iz. The mbit 3 ere infected
starting free tho nose; there ;.3 only on Inflcnnation in
the luni to be racist.-rs-Ubut nevc-r n gcnar?l infection
of the an ice 1 . Tho lung us trJeen out in order to bo used
for tho production of v ccine. Tho carrier of typhus
reacts vory quickly to tgafurcturo. 3y acre boiling every
bootorie is kil: ith ibso uto oortainty. if the neat

of th-t rabbit Is thoroughly ooilod there is not the least
dengor of any infection. I ;:o/ yoint out that in nil
countries whore thore is food lugis! .tion rnd food rationing
neet of cm inn Is who fell ill of tub-roulosis is -.Iveys
cdxr.issibl - for liucan consur.tion. Thr t Is truo of e
nuebor of other illmssos.

1 . Thank you. Tlr t is sufficient. rhon did tho
delivery of vac cl nos fror. 3uohomjr.ld start?

Tho production st rted in ..ujust 19-.3, whan tho
first prep rations . ro Ti:u ronl lr.rgo-scalo pro¬

duction st<i *tod ft til ad of 1913.

Pa tho nnounts of vi-.ooino produced monthly?

A. On the Gvorngo 30 to 5 O and u r> .0 lltarr. VJ.-O roflucod.

30v _-ny r&rti ns ->r v cclr. t .a v ?.d y>u my th t v 0 ?

A. 5 >- liter* of v eel no r- roacr.t 25,000 ortior.n.

Q* 5“ lit.ro. 25 .CC: ortion . That ;c;un t .-.-1 . bout ? 5 ,OCO
portionc of v.ccino wore '.olivered ..jr.taly?

A. Th t io ri .it.

1 * ::o. n tostifi .«• : t..o i t-s g-Ijoi vd tho nriuctior.*

of vaccine pad only orducod n ,??td v ocir.j for the. selves, thi t «-t.b a
sorll circle, but nnorviso rvucod r-duct v ich vr.a not hixuful
cut 0 r. t useful either, ‘hat do y u .ibiut that?

... "nis is jr.o of t..c . .nt cculirx :.e rkc I he- rd ..cro.

If v ccir.. ii bcir.- r ’uccd it is b.in, done ior tho -ur ooe of

si?e


Court 1

fcarch »rf5-^le»X9-3-S>-IiO*Eor-3ii;slcrf.

v.-otoctis./ cole Sn i-:i©jr sric sc Illness rr. -cr.th, Ssrccinlly

ir. Che c o of concentration corn 1 — cos ic ii to bo known how dxtor.civo

the ty hus anger me. not only In the cm. s but • Iso ir. the ;-.r y ruid -

t..r u.out Jcnniiy. Ss: eel lly in Block 5'* more vero nuhbor o:*

•

lnrv.tc-. v.;o were tr: r.sfc:Tcd fron jifcavitr t 3uchcmr Id sir.ee they wore
eyocirll'ts cd had to work t:.oro. -eschvitn wns ono 'f the l-r.-est
ty.v.un Infected 1- cos v.dcu -o h- d in 2un;o. To hod , 'root oat
difficultice to tecono n stcr of Cr.ia oidcr-10. Those fcyu.us c ccial-
iota c:-.e to Buchontmld-and It is not to o r rsuaod that tr.oy did
not rocliao the extensive dr. . »r *f ty ,;us— woro told r^-cntedly tlir.t
tho root the (reduction vnccinoa vn* thir danger of tyyhuo.

If they now assort tr. t t..cy sab trw:cd the ro&ictior. of vcclno and
reduced t ; ro .r-tior. -.ic:; '-..lie not -wr-fui '.-.a not useful in any
vny , this, ic y . ini ro re onto on nttitude v ilch has nothing
to d. vitk t:.c concc. to ‘.i hu.nnity s io bain.: ox; reseed by thoao
. oatlo or. . oday.

KOf.-or. g-wo the reason for t..is sabotaging that ono of tho

specialists ir. Block 5*. hrd frond out thr.t the viruaoa eontninod

ir. t:.-.t v-ccino '-ero n.t r.ic/.oetsi ir • r.xuki- but other viruses.

Tmld : >u U- so anortly rt'-tc y-ur o; inior. whether rickottaia

?r«r xeldr. it r.cr. i.- lc or e- all. c.:- o lc7

•

"hie obatmti'A : :;r. “leek is quite underotnadnblo.

There ir .. rdly :r.c . ct.ri i. t.ie field of ct.rl log-' which in r.o
c..r Tu e:.blo i: its oxtori r f r ~c t.:. t;-nus virus. Harr “lock in
Cracow - d !». .oer • r . !r. -it.. Bickotcsir that wore bred in tho
louse . .. : oy cater lly lookc ’ ice dirf.ror.t t!um t..o Hickottsi:.

-hiefa "cru ‘.red ir. .’11 lur,:a. There differ* go:: -'ro set down
re ortcdly in liternturo r.‘ it la t.ior„f re t o ur. errtood.
quite easily. I should ii o t revert


516 ?


Court 1

ksrch 2S-A-15-12-4-HD-Les s er-Ka—ler.

\

to the roductlon of the vsccine itself and I oust say

that we had two tyoes*of vaccine at our disposal. Froa

the oir.t of effectiveness they did not differ bat they nly

differed because of the fact tnat the eletrlcity wor/.s in

•

Veiaar nad been da na feed because of air attacks ana we the ref re
had r.o electrical currest at ur disposal in 5-cheneald.

That is why our refri L erat ra discontinued working. How
if vaccine is /.c. t tou wara it changes its oolor but really
does nothing to the effectiveness :r tolerance. It is only
a question f exterior oy;.earance. Or. Jir.g designated
especially that vaccine which becaat disc tiered end
foiled to designate ir. any particular vray the other kind of
vaccine. This, perhaps, =. • be the rocs n why tv different
types of vacoines arc being divcussod. r.a:ovor, there was
nc dlffur-nce in the effectiveness and it is technically
not possible because It -rigin tus fr-s the sono phase of
production.

i.. Could you exercise any influence on the distribu¬
tion Of the Vaccine?

A. Generally, r.o. Thu vaccine was sent to the central
depot f t.-.e .-.’offon-ac at Berlin. Tnis was d.ne because
all tr.o requests for v cclne and drug6 were directed to
th.ls central do ot by all slclar.s nr.u it was from there
tnat dl6trlbuti n v.'.s carried out. I nay point out that only
port of the vaccine, I think o ti.lrd, was us.;d for 1 ur osea
of the *.iaff«n-55, whereas tn_ larger :urt, about two.-thirds
f the entire pr Auction, was L eva at the dlsposal*of the
concentration ca-ps ana was distributed naong inaates for
tneir rot.-ction—naturally only in those casts that were
endangered by typhus.

I an subhitting to the Tribunal, doc-sent
..rug vsfcy 25, which c: r. be

$190


Court So. 1

2S her 47-A-l8&19-la-Z?>.-Lu s* c r Cut. Hauler)


found on page 164 of the D:cuucnt look 1-A, urugoveky 25, urge 164. I
offer it re Exhibit nrugovsky 44. Chi8 ic an rffldnvit by Earl Heinrich
Vehle, the heed of the .-rir. :iedic(l Depot of the ' effen SS. I only sub¬
nit it for the notice of the Tribunal.

At the saac tine I refer to Document Krugovsky 26, vfcich io to be
found on p<<% 167, vhicfc I already sue -itted a.6 -.rug-vsky Exhibit 6, and
I shall cuoto fron urge 170, wragreph n , which so far vao not read.

This is the affidavit of Dr. hurl Blunenreuther end paragraph 7 reede
es follows, and I cuoto:

" . By for the grciteit proportion of tho tyuhus vaccines nroducod
in °uchor.vrid rrd of the eddltind tyohuo vi ccinec rrocured through tho
central nedlcd service deuot v> u transferred t the concentration carps
and could bo so tnnsferrod because the vaccination ordered to bo
carried out in the niliti>ry SS division; , co fer as these vvre oub'.rdinntc
to the arr.ed forces during thoir nobiliration, vero undcrtrV.cn by tho
nodical service of the arsed f.rccs."

I further sutcit an oxccrct fro:: the testimony of Gcncrdrrzt Dr.
SchrSibor vfcich ho nr.de -n 26 August 1S46 before the International Uni¬
tary Tribunal. Iris con to found is the Oeraan transcript of the Intcr-
nrtiond Kilitery Tribune 1 on prge i£747. This io Xrugovsky Document
Ko. 27 and can bo found on urge 17? of the document bo?k. I offor It
re Exhibit ..rugovsfcy l . tf. severing the ouostl r., "Vhet scientific
vduo did the expert ,ntc .f tho racialist Ding fcrvo?" Ocnerdarrt Dr.
Schrcibcr nnaverod, "In ny Opinion they hri no scientific value rt all
bocr.UBv during the v-i»r ve hri dreriy grir.cd :-uch cxtorier.cc and collected
r greet deal of data in this field. Ve were thoroughly reaminted vith
the exposition and auditiee of ur vtccino end no such te*te vcrc rc-
cuired rny longer. Krny of the vaccines examined by Ding vere not used
cny • ,ro rt dl end v*r«- rejected."

Vould you define y-ur ocsiti-n to that strtonont?

A. I do not kn-w h:v Schreiber can exoi-ecs that opinion, nor do I

l-cn.v whether he is i- possession f full knowledge of the results of this

SLjrl


Court Bo. 1 . .

2c Mar -i7-A-loilS-2e-£HX-LcBBcr list. Eeuiar;


vork. I never discussed this euestlon vlth hi- and I therefore cannot
examine it. Shat much is clear, however. Schreiber is speaking of e
letcr period of time for the vaccines that were no longer Produced were
not produced because the croertnents of Ding had proven their inferiority.

She epidemilogical exanination i the various vaccines during the war only
originates froa e letcr Period of tine,, in particular the years 19-3 end
1944. The exploitation of these experiences only originates from the
laot yeert of the war end it is therefore my opinion that this testimony
of Schroiber is incorrect.

^ I interrupt you and I shall have Exhibit Kacdlooer 14 shewn to
you. frea Eandloser Document Book 3. Vt are here concerned with an ox-
corpt of a cclentific thesis by Gchoinrat Otto. Do you know Oohelorat
Ott :1

A.- ioo, I know Co he i-ret Ctt Ho is probably the beet typhus
export of not only Germany but hurepo, who dealt with typhus throughout
his lifo.

Ttjo this excerpt you »H1 soo that Geheiarat Otto says, still In

19*.3:

"bhils the officucy of lice vaccine* het already boon tooted on a
large scale in Poland. Lthiope. and China, and the vaccine has proved its
value, it is still necessary to gather large scale nrccticsl oxoericncoo
with lung cad vitellino sac vaccines. In animal oxoorinente they have
proved of cauftl value with tho former."

^culd you say a oca thing oj: that?

A. Professor Otto is saying here that even in the year 1943 the

e

chicken egg vaccine and the vaccines fr^ lungs of animals vere not suf¬
ficiently know-. Shat’cnfirn* vha*. I have Just testified end tlfet is in
answer t- Dr. Schreiber 1 u statement.

' v The witnoss Berherdt Schmidt. who was interrogated hero, stntcd
that hu-.cn experiments vere superflu-uc for the purpose of testing vaccines
end that the veluo of the individual typhus vaccines could have been
ascertained through an eoideni,logical way.* «.et is year point of view in


Court So. 1

25 Ker 47-A-15&19-3a-£HX-Lesscr (1st. StvOer)


that connection?

A. Thl* ia ny opinion also. It is ny opinion that thc*et tfcBts
could have been carried cut in cr. enideroiolccicnl r.anner. I represented
that point of Yiov before Srevitr ?r.d Eioouler iron the very beginning.

You stated already yosterd>v that when testing this “.attor ia
aa epider.iologicnl way r lorgc aur.hor of persons vould have to he vacci¬
nated and to be compared vith a lirge auaber .f cere:as vfco vero not vuc-
ciaated. V-uld such a lea,: orperi eat have beer, possible considering the
circur.Bt-aces as they prevailed during the vnr?

A. Such a test vould have been possible. It ves actually introduced
by =o vithin the freuevork of the nlniatry. It is e ratter of course,
hovover, that the results cur. only bo collected at a. very late date and
cor. only be exploited at a such later date. Ir. the ento of the entire
oxDtTlndnt vc vero concerned vith bridging over this toacw of tino.

l*. In curbing out this domination one could fcevo found out that
one vnccino has only a very snail effectiveness, r.o vuo acutr.lly found
out in the cose ,f the Behring vaccine. In that cose v,uld you coy that
the ucrtollty of persons vaccinated vith the inferior vnccir.o would havo
been nuch tree cter than the entire a:.-tint of frtalitloc as they occurre’d
in Bucftonvrld? You fcr..v thit the etrtc rent regarding the fatality
figures fluctuated between ICO and 120.

a. That c-uld to ecsu ed t - be the cobc vith certainty. Cvmarioan
is the aar.ner in which all teota are curried out in this field. I shell
give you a fiv oxarples f or that. Wh^n Lnil ven Behring ir. the year 1690
discovered the


28 'torch 1947 - r - /./.I. - ? r. kos lc. l: IS Pavgo IB - 1 -
Los: or (L-.t, Ra r.lor-)

C OUR? 20. 1

diptherlA aerua 1 . * re ct firs t used by r. oh rale inn of
the Berlin Chari to in the cc^e cf cipterlr Infected chil¬
dren. F e tranced about 1200 children sufferinr froa dinterl

with that aerua. He registe r d r rortollty rate in tho

•

c: se of those children, in a* ite of the Mootnent, of
npnroxIcutely 22 prreent. Juat as r.or .7 children did not
receive the torw* b-t -ere tro *- e d In - different tmner
In this rrouDe the rortrlitv rate v -s double, finnroxlv-
rtely 44 percent. T heae 240 or 250 children who died
and who nor* In thofc control "roup certainly could have
beer, saved if they had been r 1 v ° n the blocs in- of thot
dip* her! r aoru- . 2 it tho* \i os ir. realltv the purpose
«f that tost rnd or.c h.tl to tt “e 3ntc ..eeount that r
larrer r-tio ef aortnllelee ' nul. : result in tho control
rr*n? and that then the •» luc of the rorur would bo
rccorr.lr.od.

q. 1 t'ink that thla ex.: “I v'.ll suffice. In thet

care you ore r rll 7 drlttin*- th.t nr. oh.Voflor rpMnrt

oxporinor-to ir Ructorw 'Id could net bo . 1 urMfld?

/. Durlr, tho .tr I did rot r orV on rr dlsorco P3

crdontly :s sn typhus. I tro:red thous.nds of pntlonta
• •

who feli ill of *m':u 2 end exor ime thex. I boxievo that
in tho c: ra of such rr. ©xreriorce one c Sns seno Vi.owlcd-
r* of the diracsc. I of ton co:aitfered thet q uestlon rr.d
T old the oplnJ or. tba* ty objection at the tire w. 0
perhens re* justified by events. “r tho other hmd it
Is 17 ooinlor. that Ir. the c. sc rC 0 "©r? teak one ij. s
to Iroen Ve question I: -:Jnfl uh,other one Is !n * position
to execute t u -.t t:V. I ru£» r.i ever todny thr* Ir suito
of the euccoss of the super 1 -er.* :, .:'- ch cvro* be donned,

I would -ct clrllrrly r ; rt mother '‘os'* Ion 1 rid "Kld
assn-o the sre c* * ' ’ude re I saui of at th t tire, "von

todr” ; v -• red to s. rr- cut or.c -x-*cr-

5193(a)


28 : ercfc 1-47 - / - ;.K. - T. *r-s If ; 19 Prro IS - 11 -
LESSER (Int. Rccrior)

Cr*H7 KO. 1

lconts versor.clly or r- ;vo trier. crrrle- out u^bn rv resoorslb-
llfcy, olthoufh & aucces ; - Id core tadlv.

f’R. U ARDY: Your Honor, It ooocts to t.c thr.t TV. ’'ruf-
ors’ey hns nfclv covered tie typhus riel-: noc; re hr.v© he--*,rd
ril ebout v .cclnoc of fill 3orts cr.d rho thcor* of tynhus; the
question ''ore i3 vhethor or rot © . rtlficS-11*» injected
finyai o with virulent "Iris, one of the r.c.ln reasons for
hln bein' here. T thlr.’: re co»ld cur'ftil this ex rlnrtlon
consider', oly !f wo consider th« t this brc!;£round -oterlrl
now la sufficient.

DR. FLE? ? J80: 7 he question which I .his i nit vrs the
Inst q UOStion .'n tho tophus field. : r nor reIn* 0"cr to
the yellow fever v. cclr.o, v-hlch l: escribed In tho Din,-

Di nry.

.THE PRESIDE”!: '.hllo thorc w is sor.o fccetlvony on tho
fp.rt of tho vltnos. or. the st.cnd coaaibly rot onrtJculrrlv
rnlovcr.t, tho Prosoevtior introduced tho Dirr Dlrr7 In ovld-
or.co ir. Its ontlroly and It !s pcrtlnont for tho defondrnts

w

to vtt-ch tho rcllc'olllty of tho dlrry rny • • the;- pen.

In rn" c\-ort, counsol for tbu dof* * ''rnt 1 rufovalry hr.s now

finished, record Inf to '13 cirtovort, t'-.lo o'rtlculnr

•

nh .'8i, of t he ovidei cc. Counsel r v -*roc<.cd.


C-urt So. 1

23 Her 47-a-20-l-£EK-Siol*l (1st. r-mler)

v, u kr- v the entry in Tint's diary dated the 10 th f January
1945 ru;erdis.; the yell tv fever tests. -id y.u len v A these eznerinents?

A. Yes, I knew ,f these c*-?eri .ents. I knew ebout the test of the
vaccine. -hey really vert n.t er.vrt.eats. *hi.y vcrc tests r.f vaccines.

I sin vested that t Grewitz and he ordered it.

far vtot reason did you initiate that test?

a. I initiated that tost bocruse at that tine nev German divisions,
a car the-: divisl ns -f the Vaffen SS, wre beisu* cceonitted to the Africa
C.ras. The intended ceoooni.n f the Africa Corns was tt eln at Dacar
and v.uld have landed us into yellw fever dan.-er snots. Tfcoroforc, in
th« franovork of all >thor nrenarrti no uf this canoe l*n we carrlod out
nreoarati-ns cor.cernin,* rotective vaee&nati.a against yollov fever.

The entire nronarr.tion was in the hands f Crawltx v+.u wr-s concerned, with
planning.’

i*. Wes rny denser t tho vxceinr.tcd nersons connected with tho
yoll-v fcv«.r teoto7

A. So. *‘ric vr.coinc ia nr duced by virus which is n longer in a
o-sltion to brir~: about ooth^onocic in tho huicr. beinr. In Germany vo
hovo no yellow fover virus at .ur dlsn-sal which is or.tfco«cnic to
hu-er. beings. Shis vaccine, however, is in a nosition to brine about
incunixaticn to yell-v fever, a dan-or tt ono'e self it .ut “f tho
ouostir.n fro-, the start.

q. Was the y«ai v fever vaccine a new vaccine or vac its t lorrncc
end effectiveness kn-vr.7

A. *hc vaccine vac or duced ecc rdin. to a proven French oroccos.
a11 c:l-niol tr ^a in central Africa and lcr.;e oerte f the -onulation
A Central America wrt vaccinated with the aeno vaccine. The cntlro
erjaditioncry coraa A Ancrico vfcick entered central Africa bad to be
vaccinated with a elnilar vaccine. It is a natter of course that
throughout the ti-j-s nilliens A such vaccinations were carried out end
not one denser to one's self becazie kn vo,

v Why did. y u initiate e test of that vaccine if it «-fi co veil


C.urt i'_. 1

2c tier -lei (It.*., Easier)


kr. ..vni

a. Vt had no o-.ro -m! tiX'.criesco ebout that veecine. Dr. Schnirtt
testified here that it vrs difficult t: trens:-.rt because it h'-e t - to
kept c Id and frozen. .. 6-;«cicl treas -rt vessel hid beer. dovel oe*d fer
that .urpree- and ia rrer t- overcoue the technical difficulties in do.-.l-
in-r ‘1th thrt vessel it v fte nceescar; that the --hysiclcr.s teewe a.ccua.ln-
ted with the technicalities c .ncerned with that vaccine.

Were infect ions carried -ut in order to carry ut the effective¬
ness" of thrt vrcoiBcl

a. So, I already 6tr.ted that we bed no oath .;cnic virus in Ger-nny
and, therefore, could not cirry .ut cny infections. In this erse only
two or five cubic centimeters .f blood were rawr. ir. order that in this
manner the innunity ul,:ht .e- disc-vcre: fur oxnerir.cnts -n urn.

(J ^id you -et ru:.rts fr. Din-: rtcut result* of those tcotc?

a. fee.

Dv you 28'jv whether volunteers were used for these toetc7
a. *uo, only volunteers ware used. Dia- otr.teo thr t in his own
doclnrrti ;n, which io £.. Z-i\ Exhibit 262. and ho srys thrt ho knows of
a list and that in ouch ersee hundreds of volunteers could lo found
f,r such vaccines since they dir not have t- work for four woks and
since they received letter nourishment co a result.

^ I now turn to the et -nivrenc eje-'eri ente. When craolnln,: tho
defendants HnndloSer, hoot ck, Schrooc.ur, Gonzken, end the vitr.cos Sern-
hord Schmidt, ve have herri t. “hat o-tor.t mrs -i'.-..:rone tccn-mc prevalent
et tho front. I refer you to the Docunent £7=, Prosecution Exhibit !?o.

2-.-B, which it :ef re y u lr. Docu -.r.t mo.k 12. I shrll have it submitted
to you. -.uld you Plo-nse tell the Trio anal whether, ir. connection with
,:eo ,;en.,T6no, there- w rt an ertre e necessity in concentration epoos and
in the- army ir. .rdcr to discover -r.tectivc -.cans to ccnbnt this disease?

A. It ves pointed out frequently that no infection can to taken no
seriously in the sur.lcel fluid cs the infecti.r. by .-,-s ,:ea-rcr.o since the-
:ort: lily ir. case ;f these injuries vt.e very hi-*. In concentration corns,

51‘o’5


Court So. i

26 -dor 47-A-20-3-SBC-21oIsi Cat. Pallor)


as Koelin,- told ue, *-e often had coses of gas gangrene. Therefore, the
Asid V'orlcc suggested to aoply vaccine ia the aaae sancer be in the case
of diphtheria. This vas carried out hr* these works scaetines in coses of
tetanus. Such vaccine against gas gangrene vta creduced by rebring ’ orks
and vas applied on students at -^trburg University at first, about which u
publication is available. I received-a snail port of this gas gangrene
toxin in order to protoct noople in danger. This gas gangrene toxin I
gave to -.oeling and ho used it at buchusvald. -he chart iu available
about persons where tkie vaccine »* e c used and this it to be found in
Document Book 12, and it beecncs evident fron that that there is even an
inercuso in tenpereture in the caeo of that vaccination and that vo urc
hero cor.corr.ed vith a cosplutoly hrrsl«ee pr-'cct which has nothing at all
to do with on infection.

Sr. Ding in or. affidavit, Oocuner.t 25?, ixhlblt 26.?, lr. Socuncnt
Book 12, which is before you, stated that at the i.llitary kedical Acadccy
• conference took pluco on tho cuostior. of guc gangrono ecruc. ’ hat do
you know about that?

A. It is correct that ouch a c.nferonco had ocutally taken place,
bhoiovar goo gangrene occurred a largo anount of gas gangrene oorun hud
to be uooi for treatnent in order to inturo cucccac. That docs not only
Include ten or fifteen cubic continot.re tut four to eight hundred cubic
cc:.tizotors which is intr -ducei into the noticr.t in the course of a fev
da.vc. In Gvrnuny all ocrurs which are obtained free aninalc, nostly
horses, in order to sair.t.\ir. then betters receive phenol and earbol ucid,
and that 0.5y - i.c., in the an.unt -f 400 cubic centinetcrs I added a
concentration of tvo cubic centinetcrs phenol acid. This anount Ip, of
course, for abovo the tolerance ia the caeo of hunar. beings. ^btdoI
acid iB ;no of the strongest acids ve possess. hen treating oeoolo vith
gas gangrene seruzs a nuster -f cases of death had occurred. It vbs dis¬
cussed whether .ve *^rc concerned vith cases of seruz death which cane as
E result of the Cerun or whether ve vert concerned vith tho ohcr.ol addi¬
tion. Tin/T end T oarticip-;te*d in that conference with others.

pl*S


Court So. 1

25 Kar 47-A-2C-4-lS.-5iolsi (1st. SesUr)

SHE rnlSITiST: It is now tine for recess. Thu Tribunal vill he in
recess until CS30 Monday corning.

(The Tribunal recessed until 0950 hours. 51 March 1947.)


N


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 6
Target 3


Volume 15

.Mar. 31-Apr. 8, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT et al
VOLUME 15

TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


31 March - 8 April 1947 pp. 5198-5593


31 :: r-:?-"3-i-i-r3s5-- (r'nschocn)

Court "o. 1.


Official Transcript of the .^xric a Ulit-ry
Tribunal I ia the ar.ttor of th. bbdtcd St toe
of —erica, c.ninst Harl Brandt, ct -1,
defend-tats, 0 it tin,; .t Dumber,-, Geraeny, on
31 March 19 ^ 7 , O33C. JUeticc Beals presiding.


,*KS i.7SSH-I: ?craor.o in tho court roo:i will pier, so find their sonta.
The Honorable, tho Judges of . llit> rv Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is now la aesaion. God or.vo tho United Staton of
.jicricn and tnis honorable Tribunal.

Thoro will bo order ir. tho oourtrooa,

PHSSID2."?: Mr. iiirahnl, you ascertain that the defendants nro nil
present in court.

'.’HE imRSHoL: i:*.y it pie 30 your Honor, -11 defendant a nro prooont in


the court.

THS ?!3SXD3.T: 8ocrotaiy-£knor 1 will note for the roconl tho

prcocncc of r. 11 the dofond. r.ts in court.

0


Cj.£ X KOTGOTSST- aosursod

;iw. H.JffiY: KCy it lc. n_ y>ur '-'or.-.r, I h vo novornl rsnttorn to c.ll

to tho attention of tho Tribunal. One ia concornlr. tho case of tho Defondant

VOlfrna Siovers. I rocoivod notice on Saturday th-.t tho Dofondnnt '.fOlfrwi

SioVv.ro in celling four witnesses, one n Dr. Bhxnd Hal who will testify ns

tJ the defendant >■ .nrtici.xvt ion in the nolcri. aon-water oxxrluontn.

Tho pronccutlon, of course, hr* no Objection* to cllic,: of that witnoso. The

•

second witness la a Dr. "rodoric Hllschor who is to testify ns to tho dofond-
nnt»* activities in tno roristnr.se uovoccnt. the prooecution hr.® no objoctlon
to tho crllin,. of that •'itr.eac. However, defense couaaol hris exprossod tho
intention* of call in, two witnesses ar..od Dr. ?r nz 3orgoni.u > nd Dr. Edward
Tile wl^trv^-q .n, vour Honor, nro to testify, ns it atntob on tho

notice ;:<& hived by the pY^Bccutio:,, ns to tho wr 'rvality nnd political
nctiv^py of the witness, Dr’. Frederic Hilschox.

• i’ov, I - subnit ta\t tVd« is n :.:st unusul procedure, that is, calling

'to the character and activity of another witness.

* l .-bs. /

Kilsch.rxis not orr-


two witnesses to testify


re. ' 1 nd ve would like to object at this tine to


3- or (ra-Sccocz.)

Court ;:c. i.


tfcu callir.; of the lust two witnesses in the case of the Dcfondnnt h'olfrau
Slav ere; end sy reason for do in,; it at this ti;-e 1b 60 the;.' von't bo .•oiiv;
through tho burdon of bria.de. those two witnesses to Bttrnbcrg and not
hcvi.v the., t-stify here. Therefore, Z request a ruling froa the Tribunal
in connection vita th oso tv*, witnesses.

M-Z r?2SIC2^~: ®io tribunal has not yet rocolvod the fornnl
application for tho cnllir- of thosu vitnoesec.

UP.. •.ZISK? 3 ^ (C^insol for tiic Dofondnnt Sicver*)i Hr. ?residor.t,
in ay opining snocch I minted out that n osr.or.tinl argument in tho fiofonso
of uy client is his aonbership in r. resistance .-.ovonont ugrdnst tho Sazi
rotfino. I realise that this lino of dof-nso ;v rticulnrly hne to be hr.ndlod
with ,\Toc.t conseioQclouenoss, usd Z also ror.liao that thoro is not Irr- ‘
conoidorablo scepticism in this respect. If not b.foro this court, nt leant
la othor trials before Oer.an courts today, uoeborship In a resist nco
i.ovoriont is frequently rcf-rrol to ..nL for that reason I was of tho opinion
that -hie line of def-nso for ay client would have to be riven such c. flrn
foundation that tr.o rrlbr.rl would be rut in tho position to ,;ot on ob¬
jective cad clear icture. I h vo called the witness Dr. Hllscher for tho
activity of :y client in the rosistr.nco .you;- which ho directed. How, it ir
ay argument that in rer jet to this witness particularly, the court should bo
lnfernod about tho oxto.-.t, the development, the nature, n«*. tho significance
of hia resistance activity in order -to b. able to Jufgc whether tho activity
of my clior.t within t.d« resist nc« ,-youy hr.d tho cigr.ificmco nocoonary
for Judicial Judgement an-*., there, I rn of too opinion that to givo a firm
four/-’.! ion to tho activiti-o of t..» witness H 1 ocher thcoo other two wit-
noc 03 wart absolutely appear hero before the court. I believo that this In
-ore easily ; ossitlo since for those two vitnesr.oo, r. ?opf and Borgonau,

I ’/ill a.cd at the nost’ono coning or one afternoon session, and *1 consldor
the oo -. fitnesses so i : ortnnt th t I ash tho court to a- y rove jy aipli cation.

iv-HSITZ'.iT: The Tribunal will role -non tele question r.t the
o.cnis,; of o is afternoon's session.

hJQYi Tour Honor. J ha*^ another question concerning Dr. Horn,


3i 5-raster (Yonschoea)

Court *jo. 1.

t.-.i -*itnc35 that we discussed on Friday last. I hra boor, colled to ay
attention this ^ornin^ by iefoneo counsol for Zftbon that he would like
to call Dr. Eora to the stand upon co*jplotlon of the diroct oxcid nation
of the Dofoadr-nt Krugov sky. Troeecution has no objection to that pro¬
cedure either.

•3 P33SIDZV?: Cour.'.cl any proceed with the oxai nation of tho
witness or. tho stand — Just ft uocent. To tho Secret’ ry-Tenoral, I will
rotum tho so applications for th* calling of those witnesses for tho
Defendant Slower*. If the file c r. bo couplotod this ..orr.in,; wo will
rule on it r.t 1 : 30 . see if tho filo cannot bo co.r letod this corning.
Cwunool tay pro coed.

zirsc? *x. n:r:\: (c>r.tinucd)

BY DR. mm (Counsel for’too Dofosdnr.t «rurovsky)i

a. On Friday, before wo adjourned, vc were spoaJcinf; of tho dio-

cuooion at tho hllitrry Ih licnl .veadoay, which Sit;; uentionod In hio
affidavit, VO-257* prosecution Sxhlblt 253 la which occurronco of doc.ths

after tho a plication f .^.e ijujc rono noru;. at tho front were dincuanod.

*

You e.ld that tho jhor.ol content of tho ,y\s .ruvxcno sorun wan discuoood.
Tho possibility yns discus-,od ta*.t tho phenol content in tho larriw Aocoo
of ,y.s j-'r, rono soru:., wLlah had to bo .Ivor., approached tho ll .it of
coirjat ability. Did you ,ivo Dr. Din,- rn nssl.-nnw.t on tho b»iois of thin
discuss n to tx.nt this phenol question?

... Yes, I told hlr. to study tho litcraturo and th't he was to
uako uco of tho libraries of tho phomacolo.-icrl and lo,:al ncdicino
institutes in Jena. H- h cent xt with these institutoo.


52CO


Court I

31 Har 1x7-.' - 21 - LJG - . ilosl (^nt. vonSchoen)

4. Did you give hia the assignment to participate in euthanasia
with phenol?

. k . No. I never heard ary thing about then, about his having
carried out such euthanasia, or cf such killings having been carried
out.

I could not, therefore, have given hie any 3uch order.

• Q. .You are aware that in an affidavit of your co-defendant Hovcn
it is statod th..t Ding himself carried out killings in Buchentvald
with phenol. Had you given hir. an assignment to that effect?

No, I dia not give hin any such assignment, and there was no
occasion to do so because death by phenol is woll known in literature;
simply reading the works on the subject .-ould have sufficed.

DR. FJiI UNO: I-rusidont, I subnit thu Document ! rugowcky 28.

I should like to submit it as J'rugowsky Eidxibit Number U6. It is on
Fage 17lx of Document Book LV, ' rugowsky 28, togo 17li, Exhibit L6. It
is an affidavit of FTofosscr miliar., who is a University professor
at Halle/Saale. He soys, "In 19lxl-i9lx3 I was consulting surgeon with
the 10th .a*sy in the wst. .o had ox erlenced nuswrous cases of
death and damages to the circulation system duo to tho offects of
gas gangrene serum, in y opinion, theso bad effects cannot only
bo attributed to tho inoculation of groat quantities of unrelated
sorums, but also to tho addition'of one-half percont phenol, as is
proscribed by law. Sir.co up to 150 cbm of gis gangrunu serum - some¬
times even more than t t - yis injected intravenously in tho field,
in my opinion tho total quantity of phenol added then approachod a
dangerous state. This oecaoa obvious after four of my collaborators
had had themselves injected intravenously with pheool kitchen-salt
solution of 0.5* density, n.11 of them shewed typical signs of phenol
poisoning to a different degree. In a letter to the medica1 inspector¬
ate I called their attention to the disappointing effects of the gas
gangrene serum and to the detrimental effect of phenol, and made
proposals for a change. Consequently, I was officially ordered to

report during my stqrin Berlin to Cberstarct r ro fessor Schreiber,

5201


Court I


31 Mar U7-H - 2-2 - LOG - Siolsi ( x nt. vooSchoen)

who was a specialist on this natter, iresent at this conference
were Professor Hrogossky and a junior physician whose name I no
longer roaesber. I did net know any of the three gentlemen; I saw
and spoke to then then for the first tine. Apart from a few general
questions c ncerning bacturioloty, we discussed mainly the gas gpngreno
serve procles. Ih.d to give an exact report about what rook phee
at the front and about the synptsa bf poisoning. Tho discussion
then took two directions: First, if it were possible for industry
to substitute a harmless disinfectant for the dangerous phenol and
which one of the many substances would bo suitable for this purpose."

Ifu' or two is not important. «nd I can skip the next paragraph
too. I cono to tho last forograph*

"I well ru:.onbcr tho substcnco of the discussions and doclaro
tnot no ccntion was oado of any exp-rinonts in a concentration canp
or of achieving outhanasla by injecting phenol. Such c nsidurations
riuvor oven caoj up for discussion, let alonu an order in ny prosonco
by ono of tho nodical cflicore. This would certainly have ronainod
in mjTioaory. I aay add that a reason for such oxporirunts did
not uxict since tho symptoms of Fhur.ol poisonings ore woll known
and nay bo found in any bock on pharn.cology. “part fron this,
tho question had been sufficiently settled by tho obovu-montioj^d
oxp.rir.ent3 which the ph> sici'an3 hid carried out on themselves.

I an convinced thrt Dr. Dirt's statements arc not truo." Signed, %
Professor Killian, and certified.

+. On the basis of the assi no-nt to inf ore hinself fron
literature about phenol poisoning - this assignment which you
gavo to Mb - what did Ding report? .ias the qu-rtion cf gangrene
serun and the deaths resulting fron it settled?

n. Ding's report was given’on this assignment. I waited for
his report for sore time and when it did not cose I qyself read
up on this question, “hen I was no long.r interested in his report.

3. On pirnu 20 of the Ding Diary it says that a special expori-

5202’


31 Ear L7~--~ - 2-3 - LJQ *- Biclsi (Int vonSchoon)

rent on fear persons or. behalf of Gruppenfuohrer Nebe was carried
out. What do you knew about that?

a. I have already mentioned the case of Kauptscharfuehrer
. Koehler who was at the hospital at Weiaar, who died from poisoning.
To his death and autopsy inaccurate state rents were given. It was
said that they occurred in the concentration camp Buchenwald - '

which is not true. ..t the discussion of the autopsy findings in
the dcich Criminal Police Office tho opinion had bc-en expressed
that this doath sight have resulted from pervitin in connection with
a sleeping drug. I participated in this discussion.

DH. FLE. UM3: 2 r. President, I have already submitted

✓

Docuraont Irugowsky 29, Exhibit 36, on page 177 of the Docurent
Book lnj Hrugovsky 29, Exhibit 36, page 177. "h«n I subnittod it
I road tho first one and or.c-hr.lf pages. I should now like to
read tho folio ing portion cn page 178, in the niddlo. "Professor
Dr. Tina" — that is, tho forensic radical expert fron Vienna who
performed tho autopsy on Koehler — "ca.ro to tho opinion that thoro
vero two possibilities existing: First, that a South African
poison had been used which was totally unknown to us and which
dissolves itself caipletol;y in the humn body; second, that a com¬
bination of drugs had been used: onu drug had excited the circula¬
tion until it brought It to the point of exhaustion, tho other
drug had acted as on antidote. Professor Dr. Tinn spoke of tho
possibility that pervitin h'd bo^n usod together with a soporific.

*k° idea that a South African poison had been used wa3 rejected
from a criminological point of view. Fron a technical point of
view tho seccod possibility would-have been quite possible.

"I had to report the case to tho ?.eich kain S ; curity Officoi

Sifcsoquuntly, a conference to-.* place in the Reich kaln Secuiity

Office at which quite a nuabur of persons were present. The

chi-f of the Reich Hoin Security Office, Gruppunfuehrer Mueller,

presided. Oruppenfuehrer .'<obc of the Reich Criminal Polico Office

5203


Court I


31 -IT U?-fc - c-h - LJG - iclsi (Int. vor. Schoen)


was also present, as well as xYofessor Dr. Un'gonsky, at the
conference various persons, anon 5 others also Dr. ilrugowsky,
pointed out that r-rvi^in was not a‘poison, that it could be obtained
without a proscription. Cho of the gentlemen present pointed out
that in u.m.rica experiments oere carried on where up to 100 tablets
of pervitin were administered ard the- effects were net fatal. But
no or.o present could answer the creation of whether a cocbination
of pervitin a.->i a soporific would bo hornless or whether it would

load to an increased reaction in any one director:. The latter

•

appeared improbable to the expats. In ordor to settlo this question
Grupponfuohrcr -aiellor ordered that an exp-rirxnt be conducted. Ho
ordered that Dr. Ding, whom ho kn-w, should conduct this experiment
in Buchcnwald.

"It was mled that in this experiment, which was to settle
puroly the criminal side of the question, only rh.nuto quantities

of p-rvitin and soporific should be usod since it would be impos-

•

diblo to give large quantities of pervitin md 3 soporific unobtrus¬
ively to a prospective victim of a crioo. Moreover, larger
quantities cf these drugs would have boon found in any caso by
.means of -a chcoical analysis, IV.u scientific theoretical problem
concerning the harmfulness r even dcodllncss of maximum dooos did
not interest any one.

"I was present at the oxp.rirx.nts at Buchenwald.


9 9

31 ■“? 5.7-3-l-i-c>S3cr-Jr.’:: vcr. S chccn

Cn^rfe ?!" • 1

''^lvo persons roro prosont d Cc us for testing, because
Grupponf uoir or ..uoUor 1 -d ordorcd oxporirents to be conduct¬
ed on fivo .arsons. I checked the r.pors of tl:o por3cns to bo
cxpori::cntod on prior-to t! c on criiont. - oy v.cra Russians
drnftoos vrho bud dosorted, or u r’rcrs, rho had fornod a
^eng, stolon end plundodor, and led oVon beer. charged vith
nurdar. Hoy -11 1 r.d boon contoncod to do tfc bof-oro r. spec¬
ial court in .’c::c renin. Oru;iponfuobror uollcr had elroc/Jy
previously boon gi-’cn S'o ox’dcr for oxccv.tion.

!, I I.:.' n;recti rith )r, ; tl : t a preliminary oxporlnont

should bo mtao on thro, persons to soo tho kind of ren ction
this co&bin. ’.von 1. on tl o organism, *>oj.:o of tho condoinod
could s. os.!. Gor nn. Thoy *.:orv told that tl osc exporinonts
Move neither d;r.:;urcun ncr pu-nful, end that by taking part
thoy would at least put off their execution, ‘horoupon
thoy all voluntoorod. ^*r. Din choso throo of thon. IV.oy wore
trnn3forrod to Slock 46. H-oro thoy wore givon n doco of
Porvitin ana a subcutanoous i. 'oction of a soporific, fl-oy .
thoy bar to -c to bed. • oy foil asleep, H oir sloop was vory
rostloco. Cr.o cf thoi: slept for 20 hours, lho others cv/oko
a llttlo oarlior. 1 .

Then l-.o my a tint o noof the:* 3 owed t*o snpttoos v/llch
Xoohlrp 1 c’oun, and tl.rt tho orp rir.cnt k.- 3 considered
plotod. in tl c in:t eantoncu cf tio noxt paragraph 1
says: ’• H ..: oforo,I tell r. ^ing cl. t ho should not j.inko
any .. 02 : ox..cr_ncnfcs;, or.. • reverted this to dri’pponfuohrcr
uollor. :: 1 shall road tfco last paragraph 1 tl r cr.r.ncct-
icn

. cco-diny to tl o affilav-t cf Dr. orycn, uollor ordcrod

a.xpcnxxmfc at 3ucfconr»ald. Did yoUrob-
oivo r. roport on t is orgoriront?

-. *'o, I did rot rocoivo a roport or. it.

5205


cl -ar ,*7-::-S'~-3-a-Losser-Int: von Schoon
Court Ho. 1


l ow could 'boiler order the o~. jrlaont, Dinj* was not
Ms subordinate?

... If I was called to a discussion outsido of ny actual
sphere of work I bad “to infora ny chief, Sraritz, of i,; and
that I did in tl is caso, I told hira tl t l Jaiow all cbout
Porvitin. ’iogotl'cr with r.y driver I h..l froquontly takon
lnrco -coos of it, but I also know, fr n liter turo, that
Porvitin war novor fatal. On tfco other hand, tl is Gruppon-
fuohror u.il.r was ono of U pou rful and, no doubt,

or.o of tho mop t dangerous pcoplo in Ocmrny. Ko was head
of tho fcocrot Stato holico, tho Gestapo, and it corresponds
to tlo ontirc .turo c nd character of Gravitz that ho wanted
to ploano tl la ran. H .roforo, in pr^c^nco, ho apoko
to*I’.uollor cr t‘o tolophcno, and uolltr o;v>lain-d his
point of view cr.ca i:oro # and tMr upon trr.v/itz r jrood that
-in£ nan to.fulfil "uollcr'a requost,

lot/ I cc it to etl r point. *1 o rorccution has cubni-
ttod Docursent N0-201, ’rcracition llrJibit 290, w! ich is ot
in any rloci iont bcoh. It ip . rj -ort fror. ; or. to tl a Aoich
Leo 0 fire. It uorJa with conltin. 1 shell
Sod. to you. ‘Jo you hr.vo it?

A . :fo.

. r sla.il r.uk ycu to cots.-ont on it. You ronor.bor the
rop rt?

y“s.

. • v at Gunoral *ry or, in Vis opening spouch,

said tlat tl 1 ;- *: ■ - * : * .n con¬

ducted in crier to find aji r.ntidoto a^.inst vconitin but in
order to ; scortr.in ' ov: lonn it takes to kill a hunen boinc

con-

corni- *. -i- e:: r: .

: anoo of tl o

5ZC* -


31 ~_r 47-!:-S’ -
oiurS "c. 1


word. It :.s t1 c legal oaocutl or. of five robbers, and anno
special obo aecortr.lnoc -1 Is orcocution.

The doti.lls iWtru as fellows: Dr.c .ay the cbcnict of tho
. Cr inln a l Police Offico, -r, Wlttacn, car.o to.r:o. He
caked uo to btond cn oaocution ..s fro official doctor, ,.a
tho reuser, for this request, ho elded tJv.t ir. f.:o u ovornrxnt
OoDnrr.l in .’eland r. hi d- official had boo injured v.hon
ho was attacked with c. rovolv.r; ihr.t tho bullofc bod infliot-
od only r hornless flesh wound, 'out no vor-tho-loss tho pore
heel dlod after c few l»c. a, with synptona of poisoning. 0?o
poracn who had ~tt> eked M. led boon arrested, the root
of tie a-Ami ti on a hollo*./ ball v:5 ich cental nod r. cry¬
stallised poison. Tfco Chorsicnl institute of •’ho *'oicb Crin-
inr.l .'c 1 1 co Office to a tod this and f/und that it vrua . ccn-
itin. A*o In. B uro no

Aconitin in a r n, it is l . . do question was whether

tl is was bto t ir?t ci ao of tl e boglnnins of a* poison war¬
fare a a In at Ourrv y, o h: d been c:;.>.>ct*ny and sot hod of

warfe-ra .for svtia tl.io. For t: t ror.son thuic w a not only
criminal int r« rt in c. ring up tile case but a general
interest of tie jr^c.tont 3 iportanco* flic c luun tion wua
' . tested on 5 rotors vho woru to bo . how, and

it rn.t to bo soor. whotl .r tl ir : ; tr.llijpd pr-isen contain¬
ed another poiaon wl id h . ■ ofc boon found in the ohonicol
tc. iho rust of tlo r -ir. 2 “usrim : mmltion wag to
bo ucod, ard also G-rivn a: .-.unitJ on vrhi * o in

imitation “Ucsicn. -.t t! - and 6-is was

tlo -.ain purpero of S oo::pcri:J?r.t - it w s to bo discovered
hen much ti: o would bo available between the injury ard tho
..ppearmcc rf fcl s ::?fco:<s cf pr soning, in orCL-jr , if nee-
, So bo r.b.lo tc ujo iji antidote. 'A:is q uostlon was

- f s-.-c: ere at iirortnnco because r. antidoto a,gainst ..coni tin

5207 '


31 *-c.r 47-S'-

Court Kb. 1


vcr Scl.oen


is lT.rdly known, end if this 1 cd :xtur.lly been the beginning
cf tho poison werfrro, then efforts wcui 1 _ 1 l.vo to bo iv.do
l*.r.odii.toly to find m antidote. *h_rcforo, tho hcr.d cf tho
Roich Cri: iru-l ?oHco Offico r.akod uo, nd the '-lief cf.tho
Criniruil i'oclnicr.l Offico xlso si.cd lx, to p.'.rticipr.to in
tho oxccution nysclf, ul tho ugh tl t n;.? not ucfcur.lly
nywork but "r. ’‘itttunnn ar.id ho did not know cf r.ny tcxocol-
ogict except cr.o ir. Gorlin wlo h d ..11 boor.Jrt.ftod, rood . s r
biictorlologiet I hi/1 «. cortr.ir. - ovnt of v.xt> rionco in 3;r.ip-
tona cf poisoning connected with b~ct ric. ..r.d tlxrofcro ho
caked no to telco evor this job. 1 v;.a r thor unwilling to do
so. I pointed out tc «r. h'itt).L.nn thr.fc tho Order .'“olico,
tho rogulc.r pclico in V ien.-v., ted :. pi:.r. v. colonist who we a
vox*;- experienced tuid I av goctod tl.vt ho should be ccllod
upon; buttllo w a not do no bcci.uro of tic p; or connections
roaulting frc.: t! o ;.ir vc-rfr-rc. Sinco, on the ctl or hand, this
question w s doubtloas of -nr.t si.'snificcjico :avl ol ould
not bo postponed, I finr.lly eel red nysclf willing to ful¬
fill tl is ruqucW. In-ceordr-co t. itl. tl o purp so of tl is
job I ;.do ct o’ ly tho uaur .1 roport, but r. rr.thor j/.oro do-
ta.ilod report on tie. aynptona cf poisoning. Ihla la tho ro¬
port wl id wo 1 .vo hero in tl ic -rosccuticn d cunont.

7 ulcvo nr.id tli.t tile ..unition whicl we8 cr.pturcd
w a of “ucsi.n production how c:n thr.t bo pnrvcd?

... Hio t’roaooutiun ii3olf proved tl :.t. ^lis docunont HI-290
la followed by *- ,irt of tic filos w) icl woro not included
in ny ropert. *h ro ::rc 5 dr:.winga cf ere:s-aoctions of
thoao bullota wl icl wore xlo md l.jdod in tc tho Iratit-
ucc. -Vo he:, ling is rpisen bi ll, t fr : ; Russian pistol,
cr.lioro 7,65” nd e . ils .'.bout the construction of ti ls
'oullofc.

. • ic Cf. oullc I not

520e


S3 ' *'-' -

Crvurt I T o. i


prrt of ycur rcpcrt. "or ir :I t scm? Ill you conptro tt.o

starips Ir. tlo dl-ry?

... A*.o ro ir-rt *-! -cfc I handed ir. is dr. tod 12 Saptoiibor
10-.4 , and tier. f. c noxt ay itTVao r - Anal .

Technical Office, a r.l c! ^ receipt st:_:p carried tho number
•'S 0 crot 53, o lr-.Trin c, 1 ver, lave : G'ffcvoi.t secret
Journal nu. ber, t: at i3, 15/1V-A, -f the nubor G-53 was in
.optoa'jir, then, if tlo discribvtior of letters received
is ..ssuuid to *oo even, a r. .l eut tl.e y«-ar, I should ass uno
that tie • oi CrL inc.l I’olico Office roedvod these draw¬
ing a in r.ra>ch of tlo are:o yc..r 6 at tl- t tiro I did not Knew
snytlins about tMoatt..cl:, and tlo o.per.. ont l*ad net been
ala.rtod yet, Hor did I h cm any JotaJls r.rot tlo possibility
of ouch a pel oc nr: .rfr.ro.

Q. .1 o \irs present at fch . exocutlqn?

, vie U'vponcd te be in Bar I o I toolc

Wit! cm in ord«r to au :port :»r observations; it was l.o who
conduct. . actual'rodlcr.l -lnatirn. I □ self in roly
ascertained • “loo Dr. "ittixol, re¬

presenting the Cr ; i: : 1 luclniv-l Institute, iIbo i ruproaen-
f tlo cm ip co sjul:nt, : ..d:a-w tl e
,.n Untorswur r : r rfer «,u the >xocuticn, that i: ,

acutally shot ti e people. It is possible tl . t thcro woro
othora vtl o i dc n. t ru ;o: bv.r . ad v /1 esc nr.."us Ido rot


STO


’• ow.


31 *-l-~-'eehsa-Int. vonSchcen

Court .«o. 1.

*■. Lid you investigate in any way who these people were
v.ho were executed, and by v.hiit court they hsd teen condemned
to death?

,. I talced with the people, they understood Oor.rnn,
they were apparently Germans. 1 considered then racial Ger¬
mans (VolK3deut3c::e)oi‘ whoa we h\d iar^e numbers in Geraiany at
that tine. On the other ncr.d, I Anew that in concentretion
caaps executions were carried out, and I hnu been told that
tr.is was on official -nutter cf course ana that there had to
: <; ... : ; . • 1 . ;*•. . . . "-•••- - •• • -r.t .

The fact that s-ch n representative was present® at this exe¬
cution w-r suiTicient lor no to assume tnct tae —otter actu¬
ally was official, and on the other ncr.d, I ana no opportunity
to bo informed tho sentence or anything li*e that.

Q Then you lid not sec the death sentence order before
It was curried out?

„ Ho, 1 lid net have the opportunity boccu3c the doc-

• * •

tor is sorely cnlloi into an execution to \scortr:ir. whun death

occurs, but 1 an convinced that it vine not -y iuty to exanine

the sent-noe or-cr, ior 1 had nothin', to do with the uctual

oxeoution. Tho order was Ivon by the representative of the

•

ca.r.p coui—ndnnt; so, .cone who . 3 ittuohod to t.;c contiandant' s
office ictu-ily snot the ,".o. le, mJ I was xtroiy there to
a seer to in v. ..on death occur,! -nd to note the ays.* tons of poi¬
soning, tut -r. Li., did the latter far HO. The official in-
1 or...tier. fr. . hi .. authority -os sufficient .roof to ;.ic for
the leLa*ity of the- execution.

1 lr: the capo of two of tho five rubbers, the poison
had no effect. You sav the suffering of the other thr«.o fron
the poison; *.vny aid you not shorten this suffering?

A The si’ht of tnis execution was or.c- of the -ost hor¬
rible experiences of ny life. Cn the other hand, I could not

shorten the s;.v.. to-s for in the first _ a-.cc taero was no or.ti

5L10


-----. ■ ---

Court l.o. 1.


dote u gainst eeonitin available. If it is in the circulation
then there is no possibility ox' rc-?ovir.? it. In the second
.Aece, it w.s the express purpose to find out how long the
symptom jo yeisoning lest in oraer in I:;tor cas«'s to be able
to use ?r. antidote, which it v .s hopsd veui- soon be discov¬
ered.

■i Did you Know that executions in 3eri-cny con only be
curried out by 3.;ccti,i;, b, hanging, or by -ene'.uing, and did
you not have cny -is. ivings when this execution was carried
out in q different way?

rt I c.-. nat a jurist, i do not '.now the -ethods of exe¬

cution. On the othv.r hand, I h v© nlrondy said that, in ay
opinion, the state itsulf hnc tr.c right to deterhir.e the -e-
thed of death for its citizen? in rar tiaic end doubtless hno
the right t' ctoi-ine the Jett:ed of -r. execution. Here the
suspicion n. a -ri-un t:. t i .oisor. wit wts beginning against
Joiwny. .This ao _cu to be supported by the liauing of ,'oiaon
rtussi- • lan. Since the investigation* were carried out

by thu ni/hort ..thcrltlcs in tno itcich, I had - r.o doubt about
the juriulaui niui3snoi*ity u,on which I, os a doctor, Jed no
infiu-r.ee.

Til. .-r—EIDSl'.T: > itneds, wore each of t*.ese ..ion struck by
.aore than one tulle-t, or only by one bullet e-..ch?

r -c. h-c.i one v-s shot only once in the thigh;

two of these five persons ware i.^.edi .tciy killed by another
shot, because t.ie first shot cf tnc ,-oisun aeu-nniticn had hit
the artery in tho thigh -ni thflir suffering was Laecdiattly
stopped; t.;t the otaers had er.ly flesh wcunis and after a cer¬
tain period of tUc syjptoas of poisoning appeared; that was
three peo.la.

oft. FL-_ lid: Did ycu have anything else to do with tnc
previous history of this execution?

THE DTT.vSSS: Ho.

5 ^-*-


51 .hah-int. vcnZCaoen

Court -.o.

DR. Jr. President, I should like- to reserve

the ri'ht to further clarify this case 1 subnit the files of
the Reich Criminal rsiice office when I

On the 17th -f Deoc-ocr 19;G 1 applied for the subais-
sicn of these files. Or. 23 January 19.7, I reminded tne Se¬
cretary GenurnI of this in a letter; on the 7th February
19-.7 q letter fra- ~r. Reiser to the Secretary General recal¬
led the matter once ear*., and on 9 -inrab 19-.7 I talked to Cap
tain Rice of the Secretary Gunetr: I's office. Thu wccrotary
General has not y--t succoedod in living ne the fiie-s, there-
foro, I ask *- reserve the rl ht to suboit then Inter. 1 oa
convinced th.t t..e state of affairs can te proven clearly
fro., these files. I a:, also convinced that the files uast bo
available because, s the- defendant -ru-jowsky has already ata
tod, the RroBccution r.-s suboit ted two separate pieces frou
these files which nave no connection with \oh other. For
this roason, I *sk to ruoor/e the ri ht to au‘ait this docu¬
ment Inter.

Tai. . .-.RoIDZl'T: ..ill the representative of tile Secrutary
Gone-ral's office i:.kc sate invest! ;;tion and find out where
that application by counsel for tne introduction of those
files now is .nd endeavor to er. elite it to the Tribunal?

BY DR. KuLT-:

Q 1. you know : ny other indication of the danger of n

poison v rf r_, v.aich .-i ht justify tr.e _e. suros, which wore
1 *-
taken on the i-sis f the discovery of nossian -cison nr.iauni-

tion? ^

A burin v -r the are f r e is i3 frequently uentioijed
and it cannot be . r -. n, but on the other 1 . nd there is an
V 1J proverb, "That .-very new war begins whore the old war

in 1941 - that the f ... n physiolc I

aehderson rurir.: the first ..orld war had received an cssi.jn-


ent fr. i*th: .-.-rio- r.


.r le. rtaent to produce poison anL-aii-
1212


31 iiar-Fisn——-i£eeton-Ir.t. vcnSchoen
Court No. 1.

nition fcr use at the front. Fortunately, it was net used
but since Aosrica '--s at war with us, -t was c possibility
that 3uch use of poison asauniti on could bo fecred in this
war. .Moreover, I knew cf the use of poison in case of sa¬
botage on several occasions. For that reason, I thought
that if such r.n exc-plo cccurud :s this case, there was c re-
son f or thu aesuapti :n that poison warfare .s actually t.ein.;
opened against Jcr.^ ny.


5213


’-‘cr. Schoen


31 --r-r -47-5-1*-: -3"-31a!:Io"-:r t:
Cbrrt lio* 1


iF., FLUlhihG: lr. Frcci-icnfc, I should like to subnit cn exc¬
erpt fren tho bock aVl ventures in ^aspiration, tho author¬
ized tre nslavion roa tho QJglisl . This is Xtocom t -rugov/sky
31. *-l.o book itcolf I si.all 3Ub::it to tho prosecution r.s soon
03 I havo it from the library. I ask th. ..t tho document ba ad¬
mitted as llrugowsky Exhibit 47. It is on Pago 1£2 of tho Gor
:ian and English document beck, ••'rugovaky 31, Exhibit 47,
pago 182 .

MR. HARDY: --ay it plcc.co -our F^ncr, v-o hr.vo h.jro no roly
c. copy of on extract from tl is bock. It states "2x corpts
fren tho’dutt orisod Go men translation of tl o book h.dvonturos
In Respiration.*" I 1 vo ro .'. this over and I cannot soo
lity of this d cv.'.’.'i .r. ti le c;.:>o. r urther*oro
I do not tl ink it is properly authenticated tc bo introd¬
uced in this for:.. 3a tl t . t it may, I si all formally object
to tho admission of t’. is docu-iont into ovidonco,

DR. FLeitttEHO: I norc.17 var.t tc drr.u this document^ tho att¬
ention cf ti.o .Tibunal ; and I ask pornisslfcn, as was *;ivon in
otlcr casoa, to give tl o b ok itsolf to tho presoevtion,
si nco ifc is a llbrc ry bock which I c. m.i t hand in poreonall-
y. I think that this oxcorpt is ie^jort.nt for tho do f on so bo-
causo it says tl. t over. in th.o’provicuo war tho dovolrpiiont
; f pci sene:* unitu n v s u rkod on, r that ono lad to ass¬
ume the danger of such r. trti on boing usod at tho front,

especially if ‘Siosicn nnuunition v .a actually found to con¬
tain such rovers poison ; s -.cenitin, not only ono enso but
t loast a whole clip of pistrl.

"R. HARDY: Your lienor, I sub: it again th t this dccunont

hero concc rns r. war betrewn tie NortI end tho South and

assignments by the United St tos ar Jo.3 rtaont. I dn't soo

chat the .materiality is. -t is net manorial at all to this

issue; whether they first pole l .1 bullets ir» tho Civil V’nr

52U •


51 ::c-r 47 --5-2-BIaklcy-Int: V cn Sohocn
Ccurt HO* 1


in Anoricr. doocn't fc vo cny bo. ring on it.


by th:: -TtiBUHAL (judge s~ 3 rii:g)

‘‘itnoss, r.ro you fauilir.r with this oxcorpt frcri tho
Gorr.ro trrnslction of the beck "Advontur. = in R o pirction T 'by •
hndoll Kordorsen?

a. Yos, I know tho booh.

S C r .n you seyfer tho bonofit cf tho Tribunr.l when you fir¬
st roed ti ls bool: cr bcccno ff-iilir.r witl its erntonts?

... The bcok wr.a published in 1041 in the Gorccn translation,
if I rcrso.ibor cerroctly. t ir r.t tho beginning of tho enn-
pr.ign in A ue:.ir., ap^roxi. r.tol; . I 1 crnod to kner pirta cf
it r.t ti.-.t tine. Her, ! re I w. r«:sind*d cf t! is oxcorpt
whon working on tho trir.l; rod I 1 vo rend this pr.ssr.yo
v:l ich. I hrd r-i.d ;rovicurly.

Q* -bit prior tc your preparation for this trial, wild r
aos uno bogan ir t 46, had you over rood this rtic-

ulr.r oxcorpt w'. ich in r w bolng - fforod by ycur counsoi in
o'idonco?

... Yba, I >• ; r vi ualy. I . r it

r.cr.in ....

. tho ■ -prcxlnctb rt to upon wi ich you first

re tl is oxcorpt?

t L.~: n .It TO r shortly after

tho -or;::ji tr:nsl .tier. oo t. Inly boforo this

r.ttr.c’ , ti is ex cutiro.

R. I 1: • rosidont, 2 t.y I print out tl : t tho pro-^

rccutcr sr.id th t tl is quottr.ti wi ich Iwint to submit refers

tc tho i.urlcnn Civil nr. -0. t is net correct. It w;.s

v. rked on by Rond or 0 on in tho "iz'Et ;, orld r.r, 1014-18. .if tor

• rioiro :. ont rod tho First “orld cr, *‘cndorson did. W is

veric* Also, I a ' • • His nm

5215


31 l7-H-S~-5-S-Blcklcy-InS: 'or. Sofcccr.
Court Ho* 1


is roclly “Honieraon" with cr. a n a ; end I ask that the docu¬
ment bo cdrd tttod.

1S2 ?R2SID3l'T: A s tho counsel for tfco -’rosccution faail-
• irj with t! is took?

HR* H/.RDY: Tho rmocution h'.s never soon tho book bcforo, •
your Honor, r.d hr.a ret aeon it yot.

HTi i 3 KrSIbH'T: ’* a cour.aol frr t: o prosecution evor hor.rd
of this publici tion?

HR. HARDY: N ; until Isr.n tie oxtmet in tho dreun-nt *
b ok, ycur hr.ru r.

IKE PRESIDENT: Von did oopnrol nctico t is ullogod ox-
trr.ct fri r: 61 o book in rugersky'a dcct .ont boo!-?

!!R. JV.RDY: ?r.rden, y- vr *'cr r?

Tl’E RESil-I* I any, nl:on did counsel first oboorvo tlla
rugenaky dreunout Kvnbor SI, w' lei is vw tl o c bjoct rf
tl ia r.rgu'iort?

MR. KA!3>Y: I boliovc t ebr rvod it t: io • rniny bofc ro I
c no t court whon I n r choolflng cvv,r tho t\ curionts in tho
brok. "n- tl r p int trr t I .ig! t bring ut in c-nnocticn
with tile do cur lent, yvr i ; - nor. ^fcoro ia -:o concern horo
-bout nodical experimentation on huuon b olnga. In this ox-
•r ct it doesn't toll whothor or n't they pr p acd oxpor-
Licntt.tirn tn hunnn boin^a or r. an innIs r r wlv.t they lntondod
to do with any results of poisoners \so rk - r. behalf of tho
• r Department*

. DR. FLYTMIHG: :r. .resident, tic document docs net rofor to
oxpuri -.onts but its ccntor.tr helped in .-.T-king it nccossr.ry
'.on Russian nr mini tion -v.s f unci to i..ko up tho question
•• c aso t‘. is w s no cf tho reasons for resuming th t p- sc-
bility. 'hut tir.o will be available t try t r a vo tho -

undod 'orsons by those antidotes? To that ox-

5216


si r 4?-n-S~-5-4-Jiik2oy-rnt: Von Eel con

Ul*C ilC • i

tent tils document is in direct connection with the exper¬
iments conducted cn lur~r. boin 3 .

3 ' E ?; ‘ SSIDE,T : 2,0 ejection will bo overruled end tho dcc-
u'.ont will bo ..fitted in iwidonco. The book should bo furn-
iahod fcc ® "unsol for tho prc-ecctuicn ar that counsol for
the prosecution nay oxaumc the buck to which. counsel las
r-forrod, f roa wl ich tl is is ..ncxcorpt.

DR * PLS - : ^0: Y03, I efcr.ll see to ti..e. :: r . President,
tlcn I should like tc sub,lit " ccurxmt Krugnwsky 32 on Pago
184 cf the deeunont book, "ocunont 32, ?ugo 18 4 , *1 ich I
• r :■ as Exhibit Mrogowaky 48. Jie is ;n affidavit of Prof,
ilury at /uorrburg, ’frugrwaky 32, ?. u 184, "xl-.biti 48. I

' uld like tcrc.fl noroly Kuiibor cr.o sortonco in Huubcr
5, c.nd Humber 6.

?r. f. ^'iory says in K„nbor 4: )! . conitin is cffoctivo both
uhon •<! ini stored t! rcught ’the xutl (peroral . :inlrtr:.t-
ion) and wi on in .reduced in such a way that it does net pass
tl.rcught tlio clinontary tract (parent ral aduinicttratlcn),
r^r oxonplo, injectione.”

lr ' u IiUi: ‘*°vr 5 I si all re id only tl o Last aontonco: »V;ifch
pciBon ® liku fc nitin, w! ich ..ro e. slly md quickly r.baorbod,
death recurs iS ter p, rontcrr.l introduction in a shrrtor t ino
thn of tor per'ral i. tr auction.

K nb0r 6 * M 0 f ’ - - 'oc at:, ted v/i tl r e-nrd tr tie

shortest period within which do: tl nay « ccur. Our experience

rog. rd to hran bcin.; 3 is cc-fined r.l -ct ontiroly to

i' leaning Wrought the stonach. Shis process is slower

n injection, regarding wl ich only United and uncurtain

: '.felon is available rogerding huaon boings. death nay

ccur sene Oinutoa after aconitine has b.on ad mistered,

-a? 1 -cu.ily if tils is deno porcntorally, in which caso tho

*'• n enters the blood vessols. 11 vidua Is arc said b< have

5"17


:: ;V £*• .


died In loss than sever, -inutos. m experiments with nniu-
r.ls, wMc; allow cortain cmdusiens fce •; rr.wn with rc-
ri be fcfinan boings, oven shorter periods br.vo been ob-

8 ° PVOd » R8 ln t: ° crsc *»<• XPePino nt by Xbbort, in w> id
• i crso died tfcroe ninutos ttor throe niloflrcn* of r.con- '
ifco !ud boor, injected under skin (subcutcnocus injection)."


tfercb gi-it^K-^l-GxIlacher (lot. V:.. Schema)
Court Ko. 1


. Did the heich Criminal Police Office with this acurdtin execution
and the court, did it consider the question settled?

« I ass line sc, yes, because after sending up the repert I heard
r.c acre about it.

. Sow I come to the so-called special experiment of Dr. Ding,

which he mentioned in his diary on 26 October 1966, which was conducted

on six persons. The examination of the 'witness Ko. cn revealed that
that Dr. Ding tried cut a .myat^ricus experiment in Buchcnvcald on six
persons, according to instructions frem Dr. Ifrugcusky under the heich
Criminal Police Office. What assi jrnient had you given for this special

e

experincr.t?

A I don't know of thin special export cnt. I lcarnod of it only
fren the diary. I gave no instructions and I dcr.'t knew-that Dr. Ding
ever received such instruction free tho heich Criminal Police Office.

The incorrectness cf this statement is indicated \y testimony cf
Kogcn, who said that since 1963 Ding hod tried to rely only on written
enters, and that he was not satisfied with oral orders, hut this
experiment took place only a y ar later. Ko-on also said that Ding
nns rather excited, perhaps, ar.d that the thin«- wao vvery disagreeable -
that tho matter was vary disa tc jo'-Iu to him. Ho said that Ding told
him everything at the time, private matters as well oa official ones.

i This remark of Kogcr. is ir. tho English transcript on pa i,e
11 ’ 1 , in the German's on pa e 121 o.

A Thor fere, 1 convinced tiict had Din. received a .rritten
ardor frea mo, he would have, no dcult, had shewn it to Kogon, hut
ho did not do so.


<»nd if he had net received a written order freo ycu, what do


>\.u think he rculd have done then?


.. I don't unuerstand tho question.

. I! Din., had not received e written order from ycu for this


experiment, although he had asked for it, rhat do you think he- would


ivv done then?


5b 19


2srch 31—-K-o-2—Gallagher (Int. Vor. Schccn)
Court .’Jo. 1


A Then he would doubtless have expressed his opinion to Kofen.

' »hen it is your opinion that the fact he neither shewed Kogon
a written order, nor expressed his opinion to your refusal to give a
written order is proof he had no assignment?

A Yea, and 1 did net give hie any assi-nmont.

i.hy in your opinion did he discuss this experiment with Kogon?

A He knew, of ccurse, ’ that everything that happened in canp tocanc
knewn rather quickly, especially . things hi eh happened in the crematorium.
Therefore, he had to have seme explanation for his intentions. I assuno
that he used this excuse which is that he gave Kogon, excuses for tho
killin; of people oh his own initiative.

. Do you knew that tho witness Kogon testified that Dr. Ding
had shown hie. a fcruula for a poison, and that he had given it to hire
to .seal,, and that after the experiment this sealed foncula was
Lumod. Did you over .;ivo Dr. Din any poison for tho formula?

A I.'o, I navcr gave Ding any auch formula.

r . Did ycu over gave hia any pcieon to test?

A I myself never worked with poisen. I was never particularly
interested in poison. This raa not =y fiuli of work. Consequently
i would not -ivc- Din,; ary such e.-si rm.nt, and 1 did not give him
my poisen tc test.

DU. PLEiAlIC: President, I should like to suVait new tho

affidavit of the co-defendant Sievers, Docuacnt trugonsky 33, pruo
17 of the* document L :ok, v.hich I offer as SxhlLit ilrugowaky Ui,

Umgewsky 33, page VI, achilit 49. Siovers said , after
cuatonery insrouucticn, "After tho collapse 1 was interned in tho^
ilitary l lice prison in ..’a-icr ;. Thcru wero clout 100 inmates -

uildiiu*. On.' Hey a follow-prison«.-r

If.trclucud hin-


5 - 72 '’


31 March ISA? -l.-c-la-FiC?- Gallagher (ins. von Sc hoe r.)

Court Ifa. i

self to r.o ir. the lavatory as Dr. Schuler. He asked se if I did not know hir
I answered in the negative and he then asked ze if I knew hia by the
name of cinr. k'hjr. I answered that question also in the negative, he told me
that he was the Dr. Din; who nade the typhus experiments ir. the Buchenwald
concentration ca.ip. Ding was very .tuen astonished when I told him that I
never beard of anythin? like th. t buforo. He added that after his capture
he was interrogated several tints about t r.o sc typhus experiments, 'nd that
he wished ho had hie prussic acid capsules iron Buchenwald with hie now.

When 1 asked wtat ho .scant by that, ho said th t bo had prepared about 80
capsules of prussic acicl in 3uc' utt*al<i *t no end of 1933, out had
unfortunately not kept or.o for 'S so '.a to bo able to conait*suicide.

Becauso 1 did not know Dr. Din;, and did not care very -ouch for t.hc
xsnvars&tions, I broke off the conversation. 7h - >ting could

only have lnstod for a short timt, bocauso the stay in the lavatory was
lirdtcd to a few ulnutec only. I was not told the purpose for which Dr. i
Ding prepared the prussic acid capsules, or what happened to tho 80 crpsulos
1 did not speak to Dr. Dins again.”

9V Da. FIKI3..' :

Q. If Dr. Diny had tod prussic .acid in thio special experiment,would he
have explained tt>j effect which Dr. Schiodlcwcky described in his rfliclavit.
wrdch has boon submitted by t:.e Prosecution?

A. Of course I don't know uJ it russic .-cid Dr. Ding used. Ilia customary
prussic acid preparation is of potessiun cyanide, and for use of tho
a-.ru effect, you use russic cid, nd the sr*? rations ..re similar; tho
potassium cyanide, of course, is very well kneton, and they would explain the
Byrptooi which Lr. Schiodlonsky described, -no would be r.lso of quick
•eath.

.6 r. -r roport to you about this poison ,x; ri

n. to, ite did rot.

v. Tix ni truss Kogan or, pa.c 1185 of tho inrlish Document Book, r-Re
1316 of the Guram's, testified that buforu this experiment that Ding was
'"it d. Can you issr.ri.io for what reason this sfisf


31 H'-rch 1947 -::-C-2c-?K?~ GcU:-nor (Int. von Schoon)

G;urt Ho. 1


A. I r«ysalf would tavc no explmv.tion for it, if I tad not read tho book
by’..alter Poller, r.hich ho i.rotc rs c radical cl^rk -it Suchenwaln. He
described Dr. Din, -/cry carefully, fro- t ho period of 1933 to 1940, and Ivo
asserts that •- official h«- rupeatvily kil±-d i:vx.tos by injection, end cnc
tine before such killing he ?.i v_r; .uch -ccitod. Then ta said this change
when observed soon ost'.bliahvd in c.v ooaory ms to -t 3Q tjnical t tat

A

l^-tor I tad only oo note tills change in bin in order to know th"t he
intended to c.r?„uit • med^r, or a criao. I should think that this character¬
istic should explain Dlry's conduct ir. this enso.

DR. FLE£3*C: r. rr-si ent, in this connection 1 cot.o back to Docisaont
frugowoky's i-o. 2>, er. ■- :e 177, in Docuaont Book Exhibit Urugowsk'a
Exhibit !Io. 36, Docuaint 29, pegt 177. Exhibit Ho. 36. I should Uko to
r .d tho last /.rv rr.oh on 181 .

^ihilo n-Jdng ay investigations, I also diacoverec ttat thcr- was a
hole, 40 cj deep, in tr; floor oentath the oflioc dos*k of the shelter
nrahal (Buntoxocistur), in which n strong box containing poison had
r. kept■ Kotravyr, oven prior to Sdehlur'o death tta poison had b^en
thrown into tho l:i\nbcry no flut.. . -.way by order ->f tho shelter mrshal,
so thrt Its ty.A could not K. detcr'cinc.’ 'rv.aore. The origin of tho poison
rcralntd unknown. Lr. Morion."


4


5222


31 ~r.r -17-::-:irr- r Int: ^rown
Court ?e. 1

VARST/I. : .-crsons In tic courtroom will picaso find
tholr ■ ats.

iho iribunal is again in sess ion.

DR. SBIDL; (.Counsol Ter the Defendant Oborhonsor) Kr. Pros-
idonfc, I ask pon:lsslcn to cn ko an opplinati n or tho part
: - Defondant Jborheuaor rogardii g t: o trial. Earlier Ir. the
:rial the '"eurfc ruled that Obcrhouacr's oaso, boenuso of its
connections wit: t: o < t) era, alovld bo tror.tod r.t tho anno
tl::o With t: oso of Ooblnrdt end r Iachor. T5 3a was not p ae -
iblo booauso In tlo voanti c Oborhouao r fell ill. : ask rou
■ ia.it Oborhoua r'a case, r r at least her int rrogat-
!on * Co * “' 0 * jlrco t: o caso of dofon-ont -rugoraky is

concluded. Lot r.o add thrt tlo rococutlon l as a 2 rood to
this suagost on,

R * RDYr *ho rosocutior. has nr 'bjecticn tr tl is procod-
uro, Yeur jonwv ^ wo y ink u . ight oxpodlto natters for

rl onaor cn.os on after ^ 'fon art

-rut ■'wsky.

il.li ?HESI*)2 T : Is thoro any objection to tl 5 a pro coda re

r. tlo rt of any dofonso course!? Ifcoro being nono, tho

•

case cf Clio i) for.lent Obotl.ousor •.•ill takon u. following
enso cf Jefon art .rugoraky.

:-R. SIhDL: !fl a *: : - , ; .

Bi* R. PIC !!IlfO:

. Boforo tJc roco air ‘ ; •

f 1 rr * s c ’-do -In tic floor to : J
u o a statenont or t is subject?

*. ‘.'13 testimony sn tho part of tho co potor.t invostigat-
; ysician proved that tho cap itrolf h-d considerable
D * Evon if :i o nte of tlo-o boxos wer-
• 1 d, td oro is at least rearers to -asauno thet later ano
: ~ ;piy Of pols-nvr s cc llocted, fro Vi icl si pply Ding

5223


51 *-or 47-H-S’-8-2-csscr-Int: Tom
Court lie. 1


night fcnvo got 1 . 1 s poison.

. You know the -ffir.vit by Schiodlowsky, tho ca.->?

.lector r.t 3uckor.wald, Document .’0-5?e, rcsocution Ex¬
hibit 224, In ‘'ccurjont ‘Vok I'o. 10 . br. Schiodlovsky stc.tod

thoroin that Ding r.skod 11::. tc cr;x to tic bunker to r.ttond
• •

r.n oxporlnont with poison, eeordln~ te 1 is r.ffi tvit, ho
roachod tho bunker orly after the oxperi crtnl rubjoct hod
boon given poison; he did not know in whet forn that took
plr.co cr vi c.t tho p-ieon was. Plor.ao toll us vhothor tl o
aynptona tl .t Sch.iodlcwaky obsorved in his brief prooor.co
tier corresp nd to t o c;Tiptoj.ja that you observed ir. tho
casu of *.<k nitln,

... *1 o s aptons that Schlodlcwaky obaorvad wore up^r. rontly
. uo xr.tlon tl ..t tlo aynptona involving tho
ito: inch, such c.s void ting and diarrhea occur in eases
ef no at strong poisons, ron tils aynpton r.lono you oennot
concludo tl t tie two ( >o ic^us .ro idontic/.l; but Sc) iod-
lowaky soya thr.t tho offocta nccurrod rolativoly rapidly, in
otl.cr words woro rapidly tl an in fcachoonhauson, v;i oro two
rs olapsod beforo dorth. In this cr.oo death o currad
:■ thor rapidly. . Iso Schiodlovsky acys tfcx t one poraon bo-
- • u c ..;c- us. -'Con it in prisoning does not load to unoon-
rcicuar.oss,

• • rds, . mi concludo froa this tl t tho poison

ti ;.t L>in 3 used was nett -com.tin?

Is ay opim n ho i.TU3t have used dlfforont poison.


5224


3 1 •' -..-••'.i-5-l-..eeuGn (let. Broun)

Court .0. 1.

> prosecution h s eccused e cumber of the defendants of
pirticivuitinf: and responsibility ir. poi?on experiments: wore any of tho
defendants involved in inis aconitine olson?

A. *J 0 .

•

'• "id you ever spoek vita any of the co-dof entente before their
arrost on the subject of experinent ith poison or effects of poisoning!

A. Ko.

>• >'ow, I cone to Dr. KOf.en who frequently spoko of i»n ojworinor.t
by Dr. Sing vith u phosphorus cooutchove incondiary bomb. and he said that
you ordored these oxrorinents?

••• J dld r -°t Sc-ow who ordered tnis ©xperinont: I found out about
it only from the report wnich lad drawn up after tho experiment had toon
eliminated. Tills report has boon put in evldonco horo as a docunont froc
vr.ich it con bo seen that ar.innl oxperiaentn wore oleo cr.rrlod out. I
nscur-o tlu-.t this did not ha-pon in block U6. but in block 50, which was
undor uy supervision. I vent with tho roport to Crawits and nokod hiu
If ho know nny no re about tnis otter. I nokod hiu if I was corroct ir.

=y r.c adaption thit no»j of the experiments took llnco ir. block 50 ard to
toll Sr. SiBfi to confine aiucjlf to .-.is block 1*6 ir. auch ertiors in tho
future, v-hich was directly undor ».r ‘-it:. Cm-its anrarod tuor* upon that
did not 1 v ko r.ny difforonco ono vt-y or tho other and I should r.ot bo 00
fu-.ry. •; Also know th *. after a few wocks ring crllcd do up and asked no
for .ic '-pore, wr.ich was In =y nrnds. I did not hr.vo it nn;/ lon^r at
:.. t tiv.c as I a d givon it to Grr.vit* end it van in his files whoro it
tu'oncod.

It was r I20 tortifiod that tho oxporiaontcl oubjocts had
B-ri ua pains ani had wounds fron 2 to 2^ css. doop, which lod to tho
: 1 mat ion of scars; I show you now the rroeocution document 2*0-579,
Pro'cccutior. Sxhiblt Ho. 235 , and D 3 k you to mJto a statement regarding
:r.io docunont nrd regarding Dr. nogon's testimony?

(Taa Document is headed to tho witness)


A. first ? rt of t..is Document deals with a discussion of tho


31 has (3rcwn

court :*o. 1 .


rabbit oxporlscnts. la the accord, however, there arc pictures of experi¬
ments on buss boiaca. 2 sc-o picture# show the place on the forearm wsoro
tac oxporimoct was =. do. SOgon said that tai# burning was dono in such a
va; duxt :ho Bast of phosphorus was burlap for quite a while. The docu¬
ment, hovoTor, proves oxuctly the contrary and that the longtfc of tiro
duri:p; which the natter was burning was not long, but the period between
the tine when the nixturc was applied and the tioo.it was lifted was
long; t*nt is possibly tfco reason for tnis sisundorstanding. Horoover in
the description of the individual c- nes. it con bo soon that evening or.
the 2 jth of Pcaonbor. in other words four days after the experiments, the
' Urn V: B ftl!j00t hcnlod * 0r »»d greatly reduced in size, and in one erso
there was still aa opon wound of one half square eontiaotor but there is
no nontion of any doonor wounds, but only mention of purely superficial
opldoroal wounds, rhero la constant nontion of the fact that the wounds
healod ovor nleoly and in oo_o c-scs tho wound w-.-.o completely healed four
dayn after tho experiments. •,founds 2 * cm. deep, or lrrgo scars could not
hnvo boon the case, and that testiaony of Kogoc ic frlse. In this ease lot
=o ;.cim out that ho was not swi-in/; fro.-. :.i 0 own !cnowlod,.o. bocauso ho
“' V ° * u ‘' :!n * tn ° rlrct explanation of these burning oxporiix.nln th t ho

taJ ”®o sxporinoatal subjecto. and thon in that onpo interrogation

hc ' e T y “ W:,c cot the caoo. In otter words, ho is reporting
ww.t he V heard and not what ho knows at first hand.

r-bnittir.„ tc tho Tribunal ..rugovsk; Document 110 ‘jo of tho
- j. And it will b« ffcky z t ». 50 . i sh« iko

t° T - ' umoer two on p a 1^0:

t of horui Bums i*.:. >s 17 *.

Sio dropping of phoso.oruB incendiary bombs, a r-o it necessary to find
.. equate of tr. tdent. ..c the c jppor-sul-.ihato solution nithoiw

ttco cUd ..ot give satisfactory r . :..o firm of Hr. KodflUS i..

- on, looked for a different solvent and produced u liquid Carton
.-‘Ackloriilo w.iich was died 2 17. -fee efficacy of a 17 had boon
. by aeons of experiments on rabbits carried oat by the firm of


? :^.:-G2S-9-3-::cehan (Srova)
Court "o. 1.


.\ftcr the completion of thoco rabbit test#. Dr. Ivndans •\ekod
Hochoror SS and rolizoifuohror von Voymefc, Dresden, to cone nnd soo tho
tests. J.e ,y branch offico was in the building of Gru ponfuohror von
VOyruch, he naked ro to occoupc-y hia to tho fim of jadnus in ay
capacity r.a r. aootor and to watch these tests. That was in the nutunr. of
1943. ..t tho roquett of the Gnriponfuohror von Voyrach aai tho firn of
Hrdnus, I reportod to Roichsarzt SS and poliroi tho results ackiovod by
the fim of Ihdcun in tho trortcor.t of phosphorous bums an 4 su.rgostod
tiu-t the drug R 17 he introduced into tho nir-rnid precaution diopon-
anrios. Or; wits proniaod to h ve another toot n-do.

Sotlo tiao nftorvrvrds ho sor.t Dr. Din,- to ProsAor. for thin puryoco in
hla capacity an hoolth oxport, and inttructod :io to ;..ko nr megononis for
Din- to oco tho rcnul r. . chioved thoro by tho fire of Jfcdaus with S 17 .

I erraafiod this. Ding crxo to Drosdor. and snv tho above .^ontior.od tontn
in ny prcoor.ee. 0 :. tho provisos of tho ladcus fira. .vftor that ho declared
: .rr of tho Reichsortt SGin aocboswald, he vould toot tho
cffuvtcy •• the drug on mbtite. Fo ro.juontcd the fira of lndruo to ->ut
.. 7 ftt Uli disposal. I—.odintoly after inspecting tho fim of
l. . : 1 . » '*. Irncdon.

:::.v .hr.t Ir >.1 : asked t.v o'/iw v: the I.t.O.orur is und
rol.n-- ’um-.' ti procure for hla filing c' on Zrvtlish incendiary
b>'.. . i ... no I kn.v . , .i;r: a ; . . ico prosidont of

boob collected.

.* • l.-j •: . <> that Ding t- 'o r.-norc in ..So axoori aunts. I know this
bueva: .* Din.- r.tkod tho office in Druedon several tir.cn, in writing

■ If tkoy h'A this re;or*., as ho could not find it.
v *c bu> oned to bo a r. ,ort with pictures. I do not know if tho ro;>ort
thr ;vh ay offico, <j I vr.o in Dresden only ono doy a vook. .It tho
»>or. Din,- was lookir for the report it wtvs not lr. ay office. I
' "ua-:, therefore, that he ant it direct to t:.o fir:, of Hadnus, r.r they

interested ir. t_c results of the tent.

5227


J1 :/ 9-5-Koohoc (3rovn)

Court Ho. 1 .


'lion, after a consiccrr lo tiac, I h-.d still nor hoard fron tho
Hoichoorrt i: tho drug H 17 vas to be introduced ir.to tho air-raid pro-
caution dispensaries, I -eked t.io Bcichsarzt about it at r. ccoting. Ho thon
declared tlct tho drug would r.ot_bo introduced, as it only posaoasod

•

phoopkorua-diae olving properties, but did not directly contributo to tho
heeling of tho burr.a. However, u drug *aa in preparation clscwhero that
coOblnod both qualities and this would bo introduced."


I cub nit further tho last paragraph of Dr. iiorgon's affidavit, Doc\>-
aant 23, P 0 l 62 , -au^owsky Ho 23 . Zxhibit 26. Dr. Horten says horo:

n, .£:ile I redo uy observations in tho Block 46 Z paid ropoctod surprieo
visits to Block 46, in ord-r to inspect the running of tho Block. Onco,
uhon I paid a surprloo viait to 3 lock -6 oxaninut ions of trcr.toont of
wo ends causod by phosphor Incendiaries wore carried out.

"Tho Recent I arrived, a big strong prisoner caz*o laughingly into tho
raoa. On e or. of .:ia two vjper nr.as there wore oppliod on a sp.ee, which
v-.' .H-iii _ ii w'.'.o red en Ian.; toco ra—.s of the contonts of « phosphor


l.v.


i


- . net .n i:-?c r nrr. treated vith various oint-

v. • cqr! v: with D:. u'.u, !».: ln/ornoi that tho oxpori-
• '.vUu'.r.J ro thv jt p -zy rocefvoi the diet for

•.1 ,v.'.t h fc .-a" '.V h ve to

• cf tk*» . 1 •• : tnoorfuC by rJj nco,

‘ .'rassior. ,v . *r

:.v! > . ; * • v. iuBcrhonvdd by

*. .. : -ie-v :1 « ulv; Dr. tfbgon's

. r: . • h Cv -.-.re a t done in 31 ochn 46


-


v. a


. t . *-p ... ': the hru.-p phy&'c^r-. rad Dr. Hornet and


. - 5 rjg. -t 3 , ~-l ..

- '•••.'trlvOi b- hv» -I


1224 «f t.io Gorx. record uhleh stated thoro
3t-t«d it was his riraT. *h >t they diod


: . r "in 1 :. a-a you s y to this?


I r.rar received ucr. an order, nor do I know that Ding rocoivod
-• - - o-.eer hr-.l, Dir. told oned that in the c.rp hospital in


new : unco. - land preparerioa h A bcin urod by Dr. ','err.ct or


31 S£r-lr* 32 &- 9 “ 5 ‘Kcofcan (3rovr.)
owt :'o. l.


va- to bo used. v.:A \a z 3r. Wsrnot hui Siszlor's porsonnl protection.
-id you rcccivo any reports on t;.is Cattor or nay vritton

records?

A. -To.


5229


Court So. 1

cl her 47-K-10-1-ZEX-S1 eklejr (lat. 3rcvn)


v ’ cro you told before by any other office of the intention of
carrying out any o'-peri tents vith horcones on hoaosequals?

A. : nor vas there any reason that I should to, beceuso the cenp
hospital was pert of the concentration ce:p and vas not under ry super¬
vision.

J id you over concern yourself vith the effect of hornor.ee on
fcunon beings?

A. So.

'-e. I nov cone to the Question of bacteriological warfare. Vcu
kr.av the rroeecuticn inhibit 22-;, Document VC-11-;, o letter that the
prosecution out in frou Gravits to Elicler. Kcv did ycu hoc-fin to
coapoec o retort on this natter?

A. "hi* letter vos dravr. up on a recuoet fron Dr. Slor.o. I drew
0

up the report ond submitted It to ay chief, Grovitt, vho roooed It on
tc Hicnlcr vith the cococp crying letter vhich vc hove here. It concerns
ltsolf vith defendso egeir.ot tcctoriologicol warfare- or.d vith various
organisational nutters involving research. Che rcaoonc for this •;
v ere the follo/ir-;. iven in the first Vorld Vor tho suspicion hod been
et't-d that ^.dividual act* of eafcotcge a.;cir.st the civilian ©ouul: tlon
end colliers hod beer, undertaken vith the help of bccteric. This asser¬
tion vos looked into by veriouc persons without ony proof being produced.
If ocnothing of this nature occurs durirg 'rr. or vhon anything of this
sort hoopened, the suspicion is ecsily erpreoced that it is artificially
created. I hoard about this possibility for tho first tl c in 1942 .

At Chrlotnoo of 1 S 41 there v C 6 a severe tyohold onidcr.ic in a Paris ion
-:IdierE' fcoao vith about eight hundred cases, and the source of this
vac not clarified. This led us to the suspicion that it vos sabotage
vith bacteria cultures.

3 id 2r. Ding cyanine con:ured taeteriologiccl ratter?

A. “hat ves the- second case, .-.uso i cn parachutists were- fsund to
: ve nr. unknown noteriol cn then which v oe supposed to be sect sort of

•erio. novover, this turned cut to be not bacteria but a neons of

5230


Court Sc. i

.1 liar 47-K-lC-2-lHK-3i£klcy (I at. Srovn)


ecabatting dysentery. Th6a in 19-.2 or 13-;3 many acts of sabotage were
carried out a«ain»t German officials la Posen and Lublin vith the help
of living bacteria cultures by the Polish resistance noveaent. Valters
in German restaurants received syringes vith a fluid bacteria culture and
they adnid it to the noon meal or to the beer of their guests. Several
persons so infected died.

* hit 104 t0 a criaical investigation and a trial. Shis natter v aB
cleared up Very wll indeed. There vere confession, or. the cart of the
defendants and there vas then the necessary verdict V the court. I ny-
.tlf found tut about this natter by seeing a box in vhicfc there v^e a
mater of bottles. These bottles vere called ■furniture polish" but they
einteinod fluid bacteria culture.. I could ascertain that these cultures
*xr< typhoid cultures, euong others, end cholera. These a.certaiaacnts
in -y part vir« corroborated by others. • found out by another case In
the coring of 1944.

x. ! thin* that vill be enough, ’-hat ^ ycur attitude toward the
piscibility of biological varfort?

A. as a bacteriologist, of ccurto. I concerned nycclf «t the bo-
flnning of tK w or vi'-h this <n<*.tioo also, rcrUculaily since for years
previous to that I had conewrn.J nj-solf vith the advent rr.d disaonearanco
*: cpiknlco. I tested these expcrlend.s of nino once again in ay ovn
| :-ir.d end co.-o to the conclusion that the levs determining euidcnics v* r0
so voUHenovn that v. could bring about epidonlc. artificially.

* r, ' 0VCr * 15 bccttrl ° used in the var. there is olvay* the great danger
‘ • hl ° V,Jr?>0n vl11 fcura ‘ffwt. against your cvn treeps because.

" J * r&  tccUria dc n °t <ircv any distinction botveun friend, rnd foe.
"■i-jctly, I a.; act of the opinion thet active bacteriological vurfaro
''-•.id ce carried on.

'• u fchla veE :/cur cciat Cf viev. why didn't you drav uo a rcrort
rV -’ riln#r th6 dercc8lve =^surce against bacteriological verfere7

. hnev that in foreign countries, particularly i r . .-ranee, this
' r Vcs discuS8 «* actively and that there v iro nan:.* oubli-

5231


Court ’Jo. 1

SI Her •i7-j/.-10-2-lSl-i-Bleklcy (let. irove)


ectioss on tho subject. There ves the possibility that ny point of viev
vo-old K proved later in oractice to be vrong end elthough I maintained
=* point of viev I believed that I should see to it that if events took
a different turn the civilian population vould not be taken by surprise'.
Therefore, I cade suggestion, for defending against such a case.

-v. Did you over hare anything to do theoretically or in experiaWts
vith the active voglng of . aggressive bacteriological varfarc?

A. So.

v 1 ci3e ccv t0 Polat *=>“ of the indictaent. „„ chnrvjod vlth
Ui °* ° = l - bor of the S S, vhich is a criminal organisation. When did
veu become a t-.-ibvr of the Party?

A. 1920.


A. At che beginning r described or said that I nysdf v n8 ore tty
ifdl;- -ff ccoccainolly at that tine, and aeoor’ing to the Party program
Vie Soti - b-jli'i/el i-.d hoped that this party vould bo ablo to

frit it* e;or.o.;?o dictresc of that peri-*.

'• y™ Cnrr 2 on oolltictl aclivUy?

A. In 'ho lort • 5*3..'C * — . - a ,.,; 0
the v-.hr 193n fc r on. c .>r * v.v fe r. ; r

,?0 * uit •Jrga.iixotioi. In tfc» Ini' urt Han.
v When did you become a m, :tcr of the SS?
a. 19J1


I ’.-••fiiy 5c~.v.r. in

\o.uc o' a Easel


%. why:

A. it is v»r* difficult to soy todey after the SS has been declared

“ :c 0 crl " !Ml «’#?en-.stUon and vc have found out about all those
, • •
° a -* ul •-• thec t0 -' k *«» ^ich led to tho verdict on the Pert

B.v. it is. T so;.-, hard to mrke clear that other reason, must

V ° ' Ctivatei « ootcr the SS rt that tine. In 1921 the basic prin-

-- :chino the SS vac that this organization «ee to fom a sort of nev

• - -i, end sooe of the main virtue, of the SS men vero defined as honor,

*': • reliability, end truthfulness. The later er.:ity tovard the

523-T


zviT". i

cl -”-ar 4?-K-10~4-ii.'C-31Ci£lc;' (Inr. =r;vs)


church did not exist at thet tine, esc several years later it did not
-xiet either because in the year 1524 ! «« rarried la a church in SS
uniform, and there vert aeny of njr couredes present in the church at
thet tine. -

Y=u cannot cocporo the SS of that tlno vith the SS that ve have
found cut about subsequently. I entered the SS at thet tire because I
believed that I could best serve ny poople in this organisation in the
ccor.cnic reconstruction and particularly in ny capacity pe a doctor.

'v ^lecee describe your SS cctlvitics briefly.

A. In 193-. I vas Untersturrfuohrcr. In 1537 I entered the Vaffon
SS "crfucgungctruppo as Stumbannfuehrer. That corresponds to the rank
:f nodical najor. I bad this rank for five years. Cher, gradually !
rose ir. rank and finally vso Cbcrfuchror, vhich ccrrccpcr.de to the renk
of c colonel in the aedlcrl service, of the troy.

v *cu voro c nenber of the Slcherheitedlcnst. Why?

A. In 1534 to 193c I vas c :.v:.bcr of the Sichorhoitedlcnot, the
Security Service, for the following reeoon. After our accession to
ccvv.r ve expected thot the goals thr.t tho Party had stated wore its
goals Veru to be carried cut, but It ec;n turned out that between vhrt
hed beer, oronlocd and vhat actually now w yi. ted there vas p rather con¬
siderable difference. Thlc celled forth unrest in the poouloticn. At
thet tint ve hrd acted in good faith end believed that tho ccnnvtent
•:verr.-.er.t agencies kr.ev nothing of thlc unrest. Ve considered it our
duty nt thot ti'e t. clcrify this natter and to infora the' cccpotont
if."oo of the vay things really verc.


arc!. •:"-iV-7'C-li-i- 11:1 (Ir.t.,

- I

j- r tills reason I lasort® ryrolf into the ir.toUl.cnco Sarvico alone ‘.4 th
c oral ol* =y cojclco.

o -i-jst sia your activity ir. tie °ocurity Sorvico (GO} at that tiro?

.. At tret tt .o th® Sichorhoitsdionst «cs net -art cf tho polico. its
GCtirltias woro lldtod to ir~~Az& ur ganorcl reports ro£-rdi!)S tho
etiituio and rooods or t;o population, or cultural and econaric realtors, and
ro forth. Observing of nay iaiivldual orldonoo - ir. other words, »ny
^llco spying - •:-r sot port of t.. actlTity f tfco Sichorholtsdionst.

- >y did you lonvo tho Socurity Sorrfeo?

/. In Juno of 19JC Hlinlor toeiso chief of the 3or an Polioo. T“us
Dor at. Polico, end nrticularly the roll tic cl polico, mi tho Security
i.rcleo, rocoivod cro-t :iutual esoistnneo; they ozchongod poroonr.ol,

- Any tv» «.:• , u! -to . I vr* nfrnld thr.t ;rottj soon i \rculd -u

rile, jf.or involrori in t.. ciico. ?\r.t cs r.ot ~rt of :iy orifdnnl
6

: toatloa, nor ry uiohos, • . - t3

fi t At novn.: on to lo-.vo the Soourlty Sorvico -j/> to folio: ny
o: .rofounion.

1 Tnon you loft tho SicfcorittltsiloMt, y ; u, ..o-iOYor, rourdnod in

t 03; uby?

’ — ^

.. I knot* tho oii««OB CT Rlz&£or n&I the Qhi6f - tho SlOhorhoitodiOMt
: o voll to loliovo t; ; I : .i: ri*.;<ly t-to- -il 33 activity ri ht Wny.

’ u- only chnnco i c*r.: ti xrouo ^ c.nroor «a j-otori lo,.iot huslcnist
• ac trlthift the S3 r: ! It v-.s hftppy -eci .or.t t-.-t JU8t -t t:At
ol - ht i.. tfco .-.o-.rly orgraizod 'J-rron-SS.

V'O tly, T re-;rir.o 1 i: tho 33 -.nr! tr-x.aforrol to the 7nffon*SS
• •!". i o*y.: thin «s y -..sly o-;crtunity t iisrilTe rolrtioaa ■& th
»urUy r^r- ico. T-.dt in 1 W 6 .

-t il l yru ~ ~t a;, yau left tho Slchorh itrdionct?

.. I boC“s» ACti7u nodical f fie or in tho Unffon-SS/

Vv: left t:._ ch'srcil?


5 XL


:: arch 47-^7jC-H-2-3iolsi (int., 3rc-f=J

C.-urt I


DR. rL3*H?B: I sutrit to tho c.-jrt first of .-.11 the "Imgorrsky
iftrrlngo Cortiflento, and tho Beptisnal Cortifientos of hi3 childros—
j cuncr.t 46, pc-go 202 of tho Socu&ont 3oc£. I sutoit it as
ISnigowshy Dbc-xtoat 51. Tbo Baptismal certificates of his two chill ran

•

-o DocuEor.t 47, 70203 203 cr.l 204. I put tfcoc ir. 07ldor.co as iirugevsky
•idibit 52. 1 s-ifasit, further, J -roroat lirugcnraky 49 — rx affidavit by
Dr. "llholc Btrl Grotaa-ass, on pr^o 205 of tho Doer. oi;o Seek. This is
ih-usowsky Document 53. yrcc this affidavit cf Sr-to^ass 1 ro-.l r. row
T-jengos. rirst of oil srya boo boo » t Hygloao institute, and
ft®? "It: njr inion Jlrugowsky WfjB, though not bound to the church, n

| loo-ly religious person with c high ottic -1 cor.copti n of his ^oilcrl
| rofocoion, a feet vory frequently observed *y no during longthy
:xv.ro-tlona with hit;. Instituto, b.cauas of its stay ronalo
i-Tloyoos, had an air:eat or.tlrsly civilian sotu; . Ilrusowalcy
j inri to'- vory strictly on Juot or.o thin*;, naaely, that r >rk hoi to bo
trfcxofrl consclontiourly anJ lillsj.-.tly. 0 --or and ovor again !Irugcwaky
.11 ryur us on to a crltlc -1 rovlow of our o:m rork.

jo for finny aanthc 20 conoontratior. caa; arioor.orn woro nt work
: our ontabllslxont royairing ‘ernb d-rn or,, 1 fool that I really can givo
p -' ojinioa on tho trout-.ont nf th prisoners . • rue .;. 3 ho prisoners
you ;/orking in tho Instituto, ni it was for th-.s n special punish:'.on.

I by ardor of tho carp xacagosont, thoy could for covoral days not
-* -r . Jlrugowsky, for ox.-; lo, often ;raise tho or:: and
- r "- clyr the prisv. or -Jocsol who c-so frees Dortard. ’oncol in turn
•*j- t .u;.tly y ml sod Thru, wsfcy 7 or hie good trontior.t. Krug owe ky triad to
0 'Ussol aaployol as carotakor in tho Instittto. Ho onco t.-lkod with
J r •' it, that it 7T-3 too bad that i:. spitu of ell his efforts ho could

A

1 a rolooso fro: tho concentration c»ip for this r*an. 3inco at first
1 r'.oc.orr had only tronchas ar-lir.blo for a sholtor during tho uany air
• ..ruc-jwnky ordo-o! t!iat at tho vary first warning of en attack tho
ur.- v;ors to bo ryircho' 1 . to a fc err-proof bunkar which was within
lc - i-t-nc. or a -ut 15 rinutor.

5^35 *


O (4


1 "arc--47-/#-?jC-U-C-3iolsi {Int., 3rc'..r.)

: ;rt I

I haro froquontly obsorvod hcsr Hxugocslcy sac to it that tho
;,risor.ors got stortod oarly or.cugh.

"nhoa loading 3orlia at tho or-i of ..-ril 1943 co stoppoi for sono
ir» at a plcoo coilod <;•ttstock. 'if tor t*o '-ays sovoral oolucna
of ;risonars narchod through TTittstock. «va coon as Urugoitsky
coticod that scno rrisccors frci our ir.stituto voro in tho colunn
ho spotar.oously oallo- out, 'Thoso aro our


31 Ifcrch-LT—DJG-ll-if—3iclsi (Int. Brora)
Court He. 1


people. ‘Re cast absolutely jive these follows scmethin t tc eat I Ho

saw tc it at once that food and drink was brought cn and also gave the

nan a good portion along for the march after he hed inquired in detail

alout their well tains. Procji discussion with Dr. Hansdieter Ellen! ock,

•

Stutaf. at that time, I knew — for example — that Mrugowsky had proposed
to put vitasdn preparations at the disposal of the prisoners at Luchen-
wald amen’ when, for unknown reasons, socr.-dic oedema appeared in spite
of all efforts.

"In dosin.; I should like tc remark that, from discussions at the
Berlin Institute, for example, I knew that Urugcwaky refused to hive
concentration camp inmates used fer vaccinations with typhoid fevur,
para-typhus and dyaer.tar>' s^ruas for the determination cf the occurring
titre, ‘ uccuse he saintoined the standpoint that such series of axpuri-
nents had bettor bo carried out cn ycung people in military training
ca-q Si.Tied, Grottpaoo.

I su. .ait an affidavit by Dr. Jung, Jfrugowsfcy Document 50, page
2) of tho Document Deo;:, which will bo Ifrugowsky Exhibit Ho. %, 1
ring this to tho attention of the Tribunal, and should only like to
r.r.d one paragraph from page 205: "In „pril 1545 the prisoners free
the Sachsenhausen camp were transported to Schwerin. ..t that tine we
“*T® pkout 10,000 nan." — I teg your pardc.n — Document Ko. 50 is
Kernel's affidavit. Exhibit 54, page 20r, is V.cssol's affidavit, nnd
:r:a lhis 1 should like to r^d the following — on pa e 2f, the next
t- the lf*ct para graph: "The feed w c received free tho camp was very bod
uni entirely insufficient and, therefore, I approached Hrugowsky several
01x1 bia for additional feed for the prisoners. Upon iiis in-

' i ”iticn u u then receive* at noon an additio:.al warm ccal frea thuldt-

r * { the Hygiene Institute. «bout 15 tc 22 prisoners were working

'-’■-ro.

-, ;t KQ3 a daily cccurrcr.ce that prisoners were beaten ty the SS

- “Is, and I -sked Hrugowsky, therefore, to put an end tc this state

- - r_rs, s- uni orthy cf human l -ings. Itrugcirsky thereupon forbade

5 *-


31 Iiarch-!K)JG-ll-2t

Court lie. 1


cl si (Int. 3rc»n)


the ccntir.uar.ee of such ‘-eatings in the *crk ccasande. Only a hen Hrugow-
aky was net present did it still happen that SS guards ’eat prisoners.

"Hrugorsky was always huasn and friendly towards us prisoners. '..hen-
cver we -:reot:d by takii.j off our hats, he always acknowledged it and
frequently exchanged a for. words with =e.

"In April 19i.5 the prisoners free: the Sachsenheuscn camp wore trans¬
ported to Schwerin. «t th t tine wo r .re a'cut 10,000 men. bhile rusting
cn the way in the trick-yard at -iittatoex, insgovsky came out and callc-d
for no. H« inquired about the prisoners of the foxr.tr work co..-*vuido and
had then all called together. He distributed cigarettes, Uv-ad and pump-
Idnganong us. Ho wore very her-y -j cut this - oeau m rc terribly
hun -ry.

"There were also foreigners in the coanandc, especially two or three
Russians and they, too, fevert ly f Kru OWky. He was ono of tho

very*few who always was ccrroct and humane towards us prisoners."

I submit rurth r tha affidavit 'y Dr. S.ukor, .irugewsky 53, cn page

210 .

UR. Hni.DY: ttay it pi once ycur Honor, it aeoas to ac that in accord¬
ance with the rulings cf the Tribunal during the course of the second
Jay of tho examination cf this defendant, that we cculd dispense with
rending these character affidavits now and proceed with the examination
of the witness, and compl to the examination of the witness in a reason¬
able time — This witr.-ss has teen cn tho stand now for nearly threo days,
arvi these affidavits see:; t:- no unr-lat-d tc the testimony of the wit¬
ness, and can be put in nt a later time.

DK. PtSfiQKGs Hr. president, my interrogation is almost completed.
The reason it has been sc long is that despite four requests the prose¬
cution has rvet yet said what charges against individual defendants it
withdraws, ncr has it stated which, of the various counts which arc not in
the indictment are charged against the individual --

IKS PR2SIDS.T: Counsel “ay proceed.

DR. FLZI£JL;G: I put in nor, the affidavit Kenror and 3 associates,


31 U£rch-!i-DJG-ll-3a-^clsi (Int. I-rc.-n)

Court 1

arufpusky 57. It is tc ' o found on para 196 cf the SOeunent Bcok. I
.^i -ht resark that I received this without having asked fer it.

TKb RESIDENT: What nunber did ycu assign to Decadent — is that
53 ? — the affidavit cf Seeker?

DR. FLHIii:-:G: 51 was tH. last or.--, »hich is Dccunuit 50. You neon
i.esrel's affidavit, !Zr. President?


IKS PRESIDED: Yes.

Oh. FLEflGHG: axhil it 51


:larch 31-A-BK-12-tG2lla£hor (Inti Lrc-.mj
Court :fc. 1

THE PRESIDES?: According tc the notes 1 have- the affidavit of
’„ossel is Kc. 54. ’.hat nu=b«r did you assign. Is that the number?

D: . FI£^L‘C: That is correct, yes.

THE FF.FSIDS.T: V.hat number did you assign to the next offer you
-ado. Seeker? S-E-3-K-S-h-?~

DE. FT-FLUX: Yes, sir. Seeker. It precedes the next number 55,
Exhibit No. 55, Dccu=-.nt Mo. 53, cr. pace 210, free, or ty Seeker. This
affidavit is simply brought tc the Tribunal's attention. Then as

the next document we have the affidavit by Kuzper, Arugowsky 1 s Mo.

57 , Exhibit Mo. 56. This is an affidavit by various aaabors of tho
Second Medical Company of the SS Supply troops, which hed workod
under Urugowsky until August 1940. I shall read only tho lest pace,
the 2nd Ambulance Company.

Mh. KnhDY: May I ask for tho official number of this document?

I ask the defense counsel instead of being the signature of one, what
is this? '

DF. . FLEMMING: It is signed in .'tors' vrg free the camp leader.

lfc. HARDY: Mo objection tc it.

Dh. FLEiCD-G: I read frer. papo 200 - rather pages 199 and 2CO:

"Fcn Oct. 1939 until August 1940 »« have been members of tho 2nd
Ambulance Company of the S5 Vorfuegungstruppo, the compandor cf the
company being the then Stulaf. Dr. Dr. :<ru owsky. Our ccepany has
tear, in charge of a .great number of field dressing stations during tho
canpai -n in Franco, Bel ; -ium and Holland, be had to render medical treat-
r.'j \t t-. wounded German men as well as tc English and rrenc! soldiers.
Upon tho order of Dr. lirugcwsky, all these men >*re taken care cf
^discriminatingly as tc their respective- nationality, ho should
emphasize that Dr. ilnigowsky in performing his duties a.^ physician
!i J net cnly comply with and live up to the various provisions and
cri.-rs cf the International hod Cross at cut all cf which we had received
instructions, hut that he want such farther in the performance of his
mest worthy of admiration rdtheut taking heed for his

W*


I .'tics i z. manner


-Mxh 5L-«-=K-l2-2-Gallarhor (Inti hfcxnj

Court :«c. 1


c»n health or safety. Uper. his order, all the wounded aen that were
delivered to cur dressing station ir. a notlcy aray of our own and
of enemy soldiers w.-re scrapulously classified fertreatment exclu¬
sively according to the severity of each case.

'.ihlle we had boccsc familiar with his unselfishness and his human
attitude es a cccrade fr;n the very first day.of the organization of
the company we had additionally aapLc opportunity during the campaign
in the host to learn of his character os a physician when ho expected
the physicians and tho other medical personnel under his coacaand to
do their duty to the point of self-sacrifice to seve tho livuc of
tho wounded. Evidence cf his ora non-sparing efforts may be gather¬
ed frem the fact that ho declined to be kept - posted by other on
tho situation in tho firing-line cut that he used tc organize porsenn-
olly and without regard to his cwn safety the expeditions rcosval
frea the firing-line of the severally and rest severally wounded
cun, not in the 1castaway discriminating thereby between friend and
enury, an attitude which was evidenced by the kind of those dolivorod
tc tho station and by which he livod up to his standards as a physician
where freo he never deviated: that any patient is a patient. While
ir. a therapeutics his manners towards tho wounded were representative
of the highest standards the .-moving care of Dr. Urugowsky in matters
of food, clear, linen and tobaccc-rendorod undiscrininatingly to all
•-bet happened tc be ur.tr sted to him - calls for further attention.

Tho undersigners as roc tor-drivers and sanitary personnel bolongod
tho above mentioned unit":

The folicwing four signatures of and these aen wer. internees of
*-his crap who sent in this affidavit unsolicited.


5211


311i rchl9i7 -U-12-la-PICP- Gallagher (Xr.t. Brown)

Court tfo. 1

DR. PLQ£3-G: I new submit Dr» Jung's affidavit as Ilrugcwsky's lie,

50, found cr. page 213, Tour Honor. That is ?.s lirugowsky's Zb* 52 put into
evidence as Hrugcsisky'e Zb. 57, page 213, Document .»o. 52, Exhibit ?fo. 57 ,
which I brought to tha Tribunal's attention.

3Y DR. FiataJC:

Q. btwit was your financial status?

A. I was paid as a soldier, or as an official doctor.

C. Did yeu drew any -material bonofit iron your membership in the SS, or
Party?

a. Ho, never.

Q. I coca to tho point one, naouly, conspiracy. Plor.se toll who of
the other co-dofend-nts you know at .11 closely?

«. Of all tha defendants I kr.n- only throe. That in, Dr. Gonskon, .ay
chief collator t<r for an ny years, nd of course, whoa 1 knew very well.
Othumift., Dr. Poppondick 1 knew Iron mr.ryr conversations, bccauco wo had
officially known c-ch other. Finally, another, Professor Rose, beoaus- Ik

iso io a Hygienist, r.u I aa, ai if there wore any technical discussions

00

referred to the use of soldiers OO the JVont, no saw oach othor

verd ttais. Hex I h vu had slight acquaintance with nino others of tbo

defendants. Professor Kandlos-r . to whoa 2 twice spoke, onS whoa I saw

several tdae* nhon bo had tho chainannship of the conference. Secondly,

f; rl Brandt with wh=a I had one discussion rod when this drinking-*.-tor

• - founded, -nd that was the only tin, I u v«r saw J . Ird,

Professor R;st:ck, who was -iv deacon of our -• die-1 faculty ir. Berlin,

15. I sow him •••her. I requested to bu p ointed as a professor. Schroodor 2

knew j.-.ly by sight. Profesi :,r Ceb rrdt, 1th.-u h Ik is on officer of t ho SS

- -bership, I spoke with only twice, one-- in the field, 1541, 1 bclivVO,

wd -r.ee previously ir. c corridor -t one of the consulting cor.foron«i3.

• -r. I had two conversations with 31.ee’, one*, ir. his office, and onco at

alac on a nettor of infomation wia.n ho was interested in ay institute,

: • t wa3 th. reason iv. was thcr., “nd then i knew Silvers with whan 1 had

liscussior.s, ace in ay jflic~, an c once at his office, which you can

fir. ut fra is files. Further 2 had nothin to da with him. Rudolph

5242


31 hnrch 194? —.I4» 12-5r.-Fr.F- Gcllcgber (Inti 3rac.)
':irt So. 1


Brandt I saw as l:n- as it takes-to shake hands, and finally, Dr. -oven,
just before be was interred. The others in the dock I saw for the first
tin. in Kurnberg, h~ro.

Q. .hat did /ou talk about to Professor Rose?
a. Individual questions of troop hygiene. • •

<5. This is ay lest question n.-iT. On the report of Jfrugawsky's No. 10,
Exhibit No. 20, th re. rt on th- first typhus exp-rioont series. This report
is that of request of Dr. Conti to Grnwits, • chief of "the hygienic institute
if the SS, to the Robert Koch Institute, of the typhus research office of
the OKH in Cracow and the Behring Work*. This is th> series in which, the
vaccino was tostud in inter nous in Bucherwr.lt!. Is that not true that thooo
officials wurv- cting in a c-caor. plan’ to carry out this typhus exporioont?

a. In ay don this docunont pr;ves exactly opposite. Of those to
tthaa this report wns sent, *rA i«d part in this matter, I had r.ot known
•jything of the intention to cerrying ajt these experiments on human
ieirurs, ■ nd; then r.r wit* or Id hevo at, \ no sense, -n! thon to ro to
roast the Dint report in tk- y that y u h vo it. ..Iso referring to files
i; D> cenber 1741, ti.^r- was uve discussion tfcor\ n ttw opidcaiological
t.otinc t>f tto various typhus vacciux, that otn be ce.n fr:n C-rl
-nit* fiL- cr.K. Grrwita tril l to . rovont this through this report with
ti..oo who I'eccivod it subsequently to find out iA.tr.il how this-
rhaunts vier- c rriotf >\il. I don't I t boro could bo a
re/ut-tion of conspiracy than- provided by this report.

DR* rl—hr. *V.s! .at, that concludes the iirect examination of
th. le fondant Uru jowcky.

Ph£oIDJ2IT: he will recess.

(A r-Cess w"s t'ken to I33O h'.urs)


31 13 4 I--1-Cook (Ir.t. voas&oen)

C3—" _ . . 1.


(So Soaring racor.vcr.od at I33C hours 31 rch 19L7)

-HZ ._=Srl-L: Ferr.ons In tnc Court roo_ will plar.ao find their scats.

S-- Tribunal is .-gain in session.

-H2 PHSSIDS^s Tho Tribunal hr* only Just now received the stnto-
uonts by ciunsel for too defendant Silvers concerning tho two witnesses
w..ich voro referred to by c mnsal this corning. The Tribunal will
onu.ino this str-tosont rd announce it'o ruliro- os soon us possible.

So Tribunal now dociros to announce that t..a Tribunal will recacn
at 3130 o'clock Toured- •’ fteraoon of t .is week until 9:3c o'clock
tuoodey .<orni:.,- followin -.

w

Sc Iribun/1 will bo in receoa fro_ ?hure&,y evening ur.t 1 Tien' .y
corning.

—• ns I.'C: (“or the defendant Xnigovsky): hr President, I Ijt.vc
»o further questions to put to the dofondnr.t.

K !©Y: Your -o .Jrs, in as ouch as t.io witneoa Horn la outoido
now and tnc represent ativo of tnc Crocko siov Od.x dologntlar. infornc no
l ‘ ; 6 the -..ritnoss desires to return to Czocho Slovakia touorrov, it night
be advisable to call t.-.o -Uncos 33re now boforo the cross oxiuiin tlon of
;.rj.;owaky by dofonoc counsel.

3 P3B8ZDS 7: Th t ir s intention. Dofonckmt krugovpky in
oxcuncd fra.: the stand An) will rosunc his pi-.co and tho i-rsh-l will
tu.-or. tho witness -Torn on boholf of the dofor.4 nt Kovon.

JV.102 3Z3?.I; r v: You •'‘ll hold up your ri#.t hroid and bo sworn.

Repeat After .--0:

I swv^r by Ood. the X.lghty and O. nisclent, th t I will spook tho
rurc troth ind will withhold and add nothing.

3io witness repents tho o»t-. as follows:

I eve ,z.Xy- Cod. the A: lfchty and Ounlsciout, th t I will speak tho


-“0 trtfbf’-oid will A': nothin,-.


SPHU-G: a^JOAt this lost part of the oath -.tnir.: That I will


Per- tho pur a troth xd with withhold end odd nothing.

MTHnSSS: I will sp/tk the cure truth raid will withhold and add

52Wi


31 i lU-c-cooh (/or. Schooa)

Court fo. 1.


nothing.

cEDOI SSBHIiiU 1 You be seated.

3?.. X.11I-: (“or the dofotdoat Koven)

d:=sc:_jx- m.Yi'.'i'

3Y 33. R.WJK:

’./Unoas, will pierce toll t. o Yribuncl your n-so?

... nr-no i 3 Vidcslau Korn.

y YOU ere a doctor of nodiciaa, is this true?

... Y i. I : - n doctor of cdici:.o, r. director of the hospital r.t
Ihlr.V'i in Csccho SlOV:

;• *‘cd wh.ro were you born?

... I K a born or. t 2nd of iTorenber 1293 in erbic.

3- ‘ 2 :.t ia your nationality?

... Csccho Slow him.

> Pie. ao doocriio to the Court briefly your cc.reor?

- -i* f'.thor v-.c n doctor. ! atudiod in Crbic end tr.cn in tho
uciicr.l faculty in crejuo. I wr.o aoldicr in tho firot world war. I

voa :aci,‘.icd to aur,;ic.l unit undor Hofrat Prof, sioonborg in Vionnn.
•“ tcr cid of tnc ver I becuoo n assistant of tho surgical section in
Brno, proa there I Vent to ay position in Hlnva . 5 diroctor end surgeon.
”*‘' fc xr -‘- n ln 1 9 2l » 1925 . I -a urrricd. Ky wife is fron ?oln, frou pole
on t..e .dri.itic.

> 17 c, only your professional c. rocr. And vhr.t is your profor.oion

sou?

A. .3 I already 3 id,

> lilien and for vh-1 reason v.re you .rrested by tho Go nunc?

... I *c.b crested on the 17 July 1939 before the beginning of tho
■' J j y "■ 0 GvStnpo. I was not int.rro.-T.tod. L ter I was told thkt Gv>-
•y v~.s f .cin*. vor serious events; th-.t I would bo put ir. protective
custody for political r.. cons. i£y wife tried to find out wart wan wrong
• - t.10 herd of tr.o S^otapo told her sco should not expect cc to coao bade.
‘ rln <: - joare I vs aovor told why I ves arrested. Nothin- was explained


j: .. =-13 & 1 — 3 -C 50 r. (Yor. Schoor)

Court I'o. i.

-° L scr vo learned th-.t tnis drive v:.s criled by the Gestapo the
•Jenoah follower drive.

fcv t vr.s your attitude toward nationa! socialise?

L. „b I wrote no rticlcs ani no books and held no lectures, yet
I was definitely opposed, and t..is cm be sc r. fro the docunor.tr vi'iich
have beer, found r.ov after the liberation in Czccho Slovakia. Kroicloitvjv:
Irlnv asked the Gestapo to proceed .(gainst =0 with 11 possible ncr.no.
bhoro wore you iu custody?

I wi 0 in Gestapo prison in Islr.vn, then in r. collecting cnim

at Sitolna, in the fortress prison Spcilbcrg ir. brr.o, ;X d *hor. I was sent

to tho fa oun G st^ro rises Folixoisof-orchis ir. 3 orlir. vhorc I did

nodical service, but snCdonly I w-,s locked . separately. I was locked

u: for eix nonth* vithout >r.y re son holn, iv. .. ; hrd ..0 ventilation.

It \n. 0 lr. the : iedlo of the wD-.,r. Only I ter did ! learn why this
*

procedure had bo. r. taken with . 0. I took a trip through the prioons of
Oensany. I mis In ;:riao: 1 a, s labor*, : tanich, Plnvon and
fiivlly lr. luchcnvald.

.• ‘.hoe did you core to the corcortmtlor. cr.-p 3 ucner.vnld?

— On the 9 th of Docc-.ber 1941 .

'• *£• - vap your activity in tho concontr.-.tl .n cie.p Suchonvrld?

... I v*o In tao stono ^anrry but I was r.ot tho re very lonr,. 5 hon I
v .o in convora- tier, vith tho Czech Liaison ran. The Ctoch Liaison nnn saif
• Zc. hover, cm o buck fro.. Lc.ds I would r.ot stay in tho stone quarry.

I • r *130 ir. tr.c pond co:cr-.rr. <ad the liaison an, Dr. Soidnk aosurod no
I woul'.l r.ot stay thor... It vac reported th-.t Dr. Hevon would cor-v back
fron cl-.riBtr.Mt lor.vo on tno 29th of Docunber, and I w c to bo roleasod on
••• - ' . • Dr. Koven i edi tely t or 3 o into the hospital. Dr. :-:ovcn
me BO. I Y r accepted there ns n patient.

> f* 1 1 wrs y°ur vositior. ftcr tho liberation of tho cn.ip by the

. - .-iCMlG?

t the end of lohh vhcr. th. cerp vr s nor ,-usly lrr f ~e, I boliovo
in evi^encw -oro then ore fcun.i red thiusnnf -r is oners, I v- s the


31 £ 1--Cook (Ton Sc£oon)

Court-" . 1.

c;ioi* aurgoor. „ v..ek after too liberation I was appointed Cniof of tho
.Uliod . .cdical Staff.

'• You mentioned thO nmo. Dr. Hovon, Just now. Ia this the seno
Dr. Hover. •*.0 is in the dock h-rc?

.... Yes. he is in the second row. tho fifth unn fro- the right.

.'H3 PIS SIDS Dr You will note for the record, taut the witness hr.s
correctly idor.tif led t.-.c witness (defendant) Hovon.

BY DI. sJt’JLIK.

.. \i\ t diu you do ir. the hospital7

... I c. :.o into t.. .'.OB it .1 is a patient. Dr. Hoven told ua that

tr.cr. wore no doctors ther. yet. you will b. the first doctor, and tho

rinonors who work thor. do cot understand their business. They -.11 pot*-

fomed : tionc. Th- oven p 'rforced raipendcctoitias. They VwTo -frr.ld

t.i c they would lose t.iwir Jobs. Dr. Hovon ms rirf.t, no I realised l.-.twr
w.tcr. 2 vo.-.t to see • lo dlttft ; risar.er, OnpO ’-'..--..-tnor, ho said: "Conrndo

Horn, ua It not need -.ay octorc here." I vr.« pat a or. t for three or

four or..hr., I believe. Tr. .-Oven celled no in for operations which I

t'onorevliy uorfon _* nlono . nt book as a patient to ny bod. ?.(ile.ily

I was rwlo..oed frou tho penal co:r. jy and t.:.n I was mt on the detail r.a

n nurse. Generally I worded only i:. tr.c opera tin/; roor. I had the r.uti>-

°rit;- fr Dr. Hover, to prepare for the necossiry operations, i ni if

♦ m

naeosunry to carry out the operations. Qcnor lly, I w.s ,4ven on SS
ioctor suer, o Dr. KTneft assistant or Dr. ?1 ts-r and otners. I per¬
forat'd che o r- t o..s, 1 ter vh.n the SS doctors took nr. int-r. nt in

s

t.:- iper .i ..0 Dr. Hov_ ; t^ld -e th-1 th„ SS doctors would 'loo perfom
op-r.tio B . Hirot, it v c to be • theoretic. 1 discussion and then tho
JV - iQnc '“'-re to oc,;ia. c -r. old surgeon ; t th t tire I pointed out
Dr. Dover, tar.t tr. u.r .tin* technique required certain mount of
tr'.sir;, :.d Dr. Eoveu said: "p: whatever you think in r.ccosr- r * ~.nd
vt-ver cor icier accuse ry.■ The youur cub: Item SS doctors did not

t:::.-. it urs cl. r to -c tr. t they coal inod about ~o. They srid

technique vr.s very c lie-tod. 2 s- id tnr.t they should bc^ir. vith

522/7


31 -- >-..-'523-13 & 1—5-Coo:->-(V3n Schocn)

Court Jo. 1.

slcjlo things iiko nakir.- knots, looming to* to hold tho ir.struncr.ts end

co on. Dr. '•'over was tlvnys on aj sido. He sold i role hrd to bo undo

vhcr. r. doctor con perform r. breach operation, so I :: .'o n plan. The

doctors first hod to understand the cattor theoretically ml then they

worked as assistants for about tor. operations and then they performed

twenty operations with ry help and then we went or. to «,ti.^r operations,

such co cppondectoalcs. ‘.’a w^nt into it ,,radu\lly, '-ad if it was not clear
0

or i. Bonot '.iv went vron;, then ve perfornod tho operations on corpsoc.

.»nd later I w.-.s gradually lot into the war la where tho sick prisoners were
i.nd vo h i' furth r t: Inin.; of tho personnel, nnd 1-tor when oth..r doc¬
tors oauo, that le prisoners, doctors, wo hnd nodical senin-rs. That UOS
up to the tl o when Zr. Kovon wnr t-.Seon Into custody.


21 Ifcr -15-i-C-rcss -Ir.t: Vcn Sckocn

:curt He. 1

Plor.sc describe to the dribvnrl tlx nodical care in
Che Concentration 6&ap Buchorarald unJor D r . Hevon?

... "ton I cane tc tfco conp in xtocosibor 19-11 I boliovo
chr.t wr. Eovon was net ti c cl icf cr-p pfcysicicn. I boliovo.
his prodocosacr had typhus and ho we.a nxrxly ropr-conting
l ir., Tto hospital had r.brnt three hundred bods, c.n internal
•'.nd uxtcmc.1 secti n in throe barracks. It had an ::-r:y stat¬
ion, r. lunt.-.l station, n'* .. f-.w auxiliary socticns, lil:o
t! o lr.ur.drj-, otc.

rt .. *>id ‘■r, Hevon Intredu in.rc-vo. :onts in tie nodlcr.l
cr.ro?

0 found in t* o canp tfc.t cnly nurocc wore treating tho
prisoners - re doctors. o cci t undorst nd this.

:on I wr.a pvt t- worl: thoro wo ('iacureod it onco with Dr.
Movon rad thon furtl r stops w :*o talam. I should liko to
distinguish between inprcvcr.i .nts with r.gard to porsonnol
r.d tcclnioal iaprevononto. *irst, shortly nft.,r ry app¬
ointment r. Kovcncr.llod ir. a.-. tl or doctor. Dr. 1-rtl uscholc^

V. wr.c used in tho in ornalooctic n. ‘l ore wr.s also c. Oer-
;v n lector and I boliovo it vr.c tho assistant r.t tho Drosdon
Orth.cpodic dlinic. Ho .-.1st* wcrlxjd there. ii*.on Inter on othor
•lectors cr:;o hr n .uochritz tc tl'ocorn end I gave r. ropr rt
' — r.y doctors hr.d arrived. I rocoivcd ;.n ordox* fren Dr.
• ; rvcn th t I d.euld bring thoso dcctcrs tc tin. il^ro woro
o;ooi:.lists - an eyo specialist, D r . oick. Ho wr.s usod r.s r.n
oyo doctor in tho : capital. Ih.rc w s ur. "aniatta, r. no so
-*n. car specialists. he wr.s used a a spccirlist t tl o hi s-
* -1. "nd I print cut tfcr.fc tl so ro r.ll Slavic doctors -
•niy Si.-.vie dcctcrs c no fr u -uschwitz rad, tc gc rn, Dr.

-1 rin, a Cclcnol, norvo speci list. -*nd, then Ir.t or, I

r. 't :: ru wittier Dr. Heven wr.s there jxt or net, but thorc

.. Frond X-Ih.y specialist, the pr-foscor of the French

52h9


21 ; -:-r •:?- S' -15-2-Grc sc-Int: • r. Schccn

2 art Ho. 1


Ifodicc.l Fc cult; in Dijcr cr Ly n, Profoascr Kcussr.i. Sfcr.t

wr.s . 11 . -nu in -r. E ven's tine . bibcrculcsis Section w as

croi-tod. o did n t hr.vo any specialist Ter th. t, I rononbor

t!*- t tloro was a Jed si ot r in the can p, ;. tuborculrr-

is specialist tucaoC. Dr. Scl.m.bol, It w..s inptsaiblo to v.so

•• Jowl ah dcct? r, Dr. Sc von -ot tL‘c idc:. tl.i.o vo c.-.n uao : iia

.2 c:.lft.ctt.r in tl e section. Dr. ^cixi.bol w: c rvipointod

t szaj .tISJx tuborculcsis i.i tl 0 priaenurs. 3 fco*o

oux-o tl 0 L;pr. v t:ont3 in tl-o gin up cf d ct<.rs. .:s for tho

crr.lnlng ik tie nursos. . Rc-von vo rJori tl . t tloy voro

*. bo tr.-lnod txA I v. 2 erdoru t 0 nduct this training.

^:on c._ t 'toclai .c -1 i. . r vonunta in tl o crjip. It grow

od r on. . 0 naked f r twi l.undrod bods. Dr.

& fc ‘ !t — - trn b. riv.cl-a tr..ro built wit)- 200 bods.

;c 1...1 .. pi cm oy rx.l tie 1 0. .. - fie prj:r«.cy w 3 ;n SS

. t. i.j '• a vory rolrct.nt be givo -ut tho ’ruga. Dr.

K.von 3 .w tr it tl ..t vo G ct tie 1*053 . nd IT rop-rt cr.no

Iron tl 0 .>2 ..rsu.cj t: t tie ’.rags w-rc net t.vnilnblo l:o gc-t

r Berlin, -infi new tl:o tb r of lnatr uonto < cc-

. 1 :. feLo p-r. ti V c r.bdcnon , etc., v;o could

• '- rj r> " but wo Cid net ht.vo *tl o instruments for tropr.nr.tisn-

p :r ’ C P "• tituo. letter, ...'ter tie brrbl lg - August 1944 ,

.u ; .r. Seven jot thoao instrunonta

sene difficulty ir. Berlin. I uyeolf, c.lttnlgk tfcoro

-»rcworo s .:o aurgicnl l >£ ..iruerty working ir. tko c:. :p-

’renc: aurgocna, wo Y .1 Russi a sur 300ns, v/c

. t tk t ti. o - . time.

1 - J - lf • Uz ‘ in ;; u.; leura porforueft ever fifty brain epornt-

' wl i'-- cnly b ocauso I 1 .* roccivofl tie iratrurents

' '• • - : tocl'i 1 tl on es but thoro

63 - r 1 prevonents, t'(, w! icl: 1 £. gru't value for us

; - r P rs. i-'irst, tic f i cine a. :. n t: :i c -

5250


zl —.r 47-:• -lE-2-Gr:5c-Ir.c: V on Schoon

C urfc He. 1


Ir—£ vror- net c. vrilrblo in tho prison phr.rcrcy Dr. Hevon
poncittod tlo uodicr.l ncn-ccrsiiscimod officor, MU clu
tc g r to !?o lr.:x cr June, me’, buy tho .’cMcinca rad v?c were
very gl£d tc .r.y for tils, .’.on tho prlfionor apocir.list's
wore not !;• the cnrip yot it fcnppor.od tl.-.t vrjicus oyo cr.c-
os era te no. I could nrt do anything olro. -hoy woro well
known po* pic, r cx:...io, tko voll hncun inter, Jccoph
Tr.spcl:, vie wr.c a ri us cr.ao. Tr.apok is r. Czocl . -he nnno
;..c well l:ncwn in cennocticn with PSooidont ••..arryk . The
.-m wr.a r.frr.i * rf losing Ms sight. I went tc Dr. JT-.von rnd
It. r'evon sent r. err to Jcnc r-mlrrly end oonttl'.o pris¬
es rn 3ri ’■ 0 c 1 not ‘ olp f. Lro. \'u looters tco v/oro not
spoeiclists. :ji \ vr.ti n in tho c jp w:.a t! ;.t r. prisrnor
eh cborwr.s son t r; r.n outsido dotr.il with r. err to soo whr.t
v-s going'on. I :.ycolf wr.e ono, sent . r. n dotr.il r.bout BO
Idle, fr. ; uchonwr.ld where r. prisoner , nn rnti-accir.l, fcrd

. Ho led juon tror.tod by doctor fchor . I
- r: ’ : M. to tth surgical section in tic cr. p h c spite. 1 Du¬
el onwr.ld.

. lo Totalled lo script ion I s! -11 subnit to you

'C-1063, -:d.ibit 3C3. Mic- Is tho toatiaeny f Schr.lhor.

:n v ^° 16 f « ' O.tvzxi, re 14 cf ta-.o ^Vigils’ trmeLt-
n, -clr.il: r s:.yr: "Bo ornp d- ct r Dr. Hevon plr.yod r. very
' lV • ll - • J1 ' 1 l-o ie d-ubtljcs roe cnciblc f rtl’c ’or.tl cf
:u reus pe.pl- bocr.uso cf cecplotcly ini.de qur. to r.odicr .1
: r'jinrd *-utc! text seys.


5251


31 'ircr.-..-j;-l6—1-Lesser (Int. Von Steen)


Court I

<*• I cannot rc verier -h, Scholker ns end I do not want ...

3* Dr. " rn, I vant t-j ask you the follcrin questions. Did Dr. Hoven,

13 C2np d-ctor, play an extrenely .cor role?

A. Wo, of a urse not.

/

Q. as Dr, Hcvan responsible for the eath <"f mccr.us pec/le because
of cca.lately inadequate aedical e re?

... That the health care in the c rap, in a. ite of -11 the in.rcvcr.ients,

c

«as for tohin’ any civilian car:, that is q o certain, tut a descrip¬
tion of her Dr» Woven tro-ted the , rise tiers in tenoral valid be acre
-.;:;rcprinto timn what Schalker s-ys dj.ut Dr. Hrve:. Life res' nsiblo for
inadequate 'ic*l err- an . hat he .rir.d peer care — that is not true;
-rthat ho refuse*. care to any:no, I cannot sry that either. Dr. Hovon set
up a network ra.n the ^riscncrc of liaisi n -on. Thoy were- prisoners who
:.ilC at any tl e oak t Dr. lKveru They \ oro all types — rums cr
Macks or whatever they sera. a c ncrote oaouplc, n liaison prisoner

u xray ir..r t ry- ccistant he hospital, a \recn" .risenor. Tho

professional cri inale *ero certainly a very peculiar jrruj of prtecnora.

Oencrally w were politic irt — ; an at t of Dr. Hovon—

t is nt tho cr/ r.f Doceswcr 191il until th. errest in SepU ixjr 191]3.

" <4 . tl : ay ri* ..crs w ro hosto^os,

• » * “-~r, -toe by the Gestapo. ?cr < . lple,

th,ru .r-s - lar-.o rcup ef S.r -n ris. n-ro there, rvstly coa.unists but
r v - r • E - •- cr-tr.j h.r.. r-s a l'r-,.r up of Dutch iiosta>sj

worq Csoch hoatnjcej an ' .r wry

ci 1 p sitidh# Tho political sect! a I the canp, that is tho Gestapo
» r ted tfcw quite differently tiiic treated th h : .

*tr h t.io Ida is n ..ris .n_rc, dr. Hovon ».as in c ntact rith all those groups,

lc croo so r_. rt_d "There is

*

, -rsrr. sic!: h.ro, sc nothin: nust e d_no», and it was always arran'od
pr-sen-rs sh uld be breu-ht tc the hes ital and then th. c - *-.

*• ini strati n i' .. t like this. An crVr was issued that n .risenor


3 - ::'rch-..-Jr-l 6 - 2 -Iesscr (Int vcn Sc hoc r.)

C.urt I

C® h- t- - h - -'-os. it.-.l unless he r-. .rts tc a Robert Lender, that is,
an SS oar. erktn in the c'^p; an then in 'll blocks, whether they
rero Gcrarji, Czech, Jewish -r cri- inalt>ic had n so-called nodical guard.

Dr. Seven, in ulf.ct, t.L the-SS "No -r-scotr -~.y ccne into the Hospital
ilr-ctly" and then lie sai/ "Only „.'i: -.1 ^uarc’s—" cut they had - diffc-
rent tmx at the time of Dr. Hev-n, "r-r'acal non",’ — "Only he can brine
then"* Ins .itc of those r ir that the seni-r block imaato.

Si, kc • -c> mny nor* "1 >t noed to go

*. the hoa.ital, you arc 11 rir,ht." Ho didn't no an it badly, but just
•. avoid Mi Acuities, and fch n It'happanod that the can didn't noed it,

:r the c?re ma still inadequate in 3 ite .<f this syctcc, that was duo
. c n diti ns — th- c nditl:: at c.v.. nsauoh, the food, and

r oays hoTo tii-t Dr. TV-von is rospcnsiblo for
this, I iWist say n. . jr af cf thic o .-to :ont 1 eust say if I cr
cth-.r liaison-oris norr nsk.d'f.-r anythin;,' 1 cannot rtnutour th.-.t we were
.v r refused*

. as Dr* Woven in any ‘Vitorial my i iorcht fres th- ether SS
keters?

I n* It i; unf rtunato that 1 can ..,t
tfcnr y-.u - n I ehii ulu bv. called "Si ir. threu h j broot"*

®lrtiors of the ilrst w rl * war, s Lomu *. narch,wc knew

’ rv f re the ::riser, t sb-t- at attontioh, but What
v whor. on Si enreho thrsu h tho c . I believe that surpasses
f any c nvicti n of .

T rl •« flt ' thin . vie; ry .: tlio Ooraan nati n in

, bon Fuahror said th-t t'a, *-d -j.y can ow out by »lico
I . !-.n in ir. ..fricnj then tho bcs»bin^ cf the .iaorican flyors


" : oust i-.a.:hrsiso that it * *s an ic^jrtrr.b :>-i:ont f-r us later, the
‘ * *'• f v m'\r;.; th. advance f the Sod ..jry—th-t ras roflqctod in
' Ct f tlu SS. In 19hl whoa I c* x. th- ca: F , rh.n th H SS t. int
’ rr • str-ct the ^ris n rs hr t h. ■to, fl re sis r.i


. • ••

5253


31 Jfcr ch-^-JF-16-3-Usscr (inti von Schccn)

C:urt I

g r-r-n mcicnios it its height. Dr. Hovan acted as follows: g^ir.. .around
c-o. with-ut = cap arid ijith his andfl in hi s ockets was normli
S:=etijnes he spike to people, t. the pris.ncrs, end itwss even®er.that

ttia , rio r.ers stopped hit and i; eke t his* I aive a c ncreteac-v-loj

•

n-. Hover, was once stepped n the street by “ prisoner. Ho said he sh ulc!
te re loosed beoauso ti -re'-as ?- cthin 'r.r. in .his fnily. Dr. Hoven could
c>c n-thine, but nover-thc-less ho went t> tho spit-.lnod told the Unison
:3r . ■Ipvestif.ato this fitter". dven if he did n thin., in- neruly ha’ tho
thing invest! .-.toth-t wis a bi , a vantr.io t the jrie ners th-t r.o
: al' Qt least talk t- the SS fficer. and so the answer t. ycur quostirn
c nos up.

q. Think of the other SS Acterr— was there any difforcnco between
H van .and tho thor doctors?

... I wont thr u h i rh series SS pria ns.

Q. How ab ut Schidlovnky, f- r ox*t . -?

... m-. Schidlausky c-« t tho c* ,, I bolinvo, in : or 191)3.

Tr. Schidlausky ha - very r. utr.t. n. 1 w-s exainin.' a i . alo imnto

' the c-...) when ; bean' hi at Dr. Schidlausky had cone t the c : p. I Id
n-.t ko-.w this SS an. Tho wc an sal I di ul' kill her beciuso sho did
nt want to live if Schidlnurky was in tho car ..fter .a few '.aye 1 saw that
r ithin. ..-no i.T.m . This SS rvan wh .. cc by such a bad reputation,

a t rant t si r. death certificates f r pris r.urc vh h*U diud in tho

tospital fr.-: r. raal . oova nia, an - a peculiar situa-

*.i n ' rv Si, th-t ris n.-rt fir-, ha t. initial t.is doath cortifio-to.

:f tho .risener d« ct.rs si -re authorize ’ t c. that an', :nly than
1 1r. Schidlausky sign thus. !: s flhis change in Dr. Schidlausky

tt-.r. T 5 Still - bi;. iifforonco. If h- . as n.twcll pre>#ud. Dr.

. .was t i' ab ut it. Ho : c :. interest "r.o CTinot do

: , thjr. is r. » -r n, ... cann t .t anyi-irq ." .»n'" so, to sir. up,

-ul like t say if s.r.ethin as . ss-n , -dicine, far inst-r.ee,

Jinply went t. the SS Hospital an . t a:- ic icinc.


•I Uarca—.k-JP-16-t-Lcssor (In*., v n Schcca)

Court I

rn’er Dr. Schidlnusky it was the- other way ~x~un r ‘,
1:56 r-edicinc frc;-. the pris ners the SS Hospital
-'Iffurcnce ’oast.


He*, anted ce Wee the
, That iculd sh-T; the


31 lear-EBS-lT-l-Lesser-lnt. vonSchOen
Court llo . 1.

< How wore the nedioines taken fraa the SS hospital
to the prisoners' hospital?

A Drugs and medicines you could put in your pocket
scaetines. But plaster was needed, for instance, for
cast3, and that Ws not so easy to carry. That ves hot ap¬
proved and the prisoner who carried it would be punished.

..c had a tank car which collected garbage fron the troops.
There- were piss in the canp and we had to pick up the
garbage. Soaetines v/e transferred these things carefully
hidden under the garba-.o.

Q Please describe to the Tribunal the general con¬
duct cr the Defendant Kovon toward the prisoners, insofar
as you have not already done so.

n I have already told you nost of it—that the pri¬
soners otopped Dr. Hoven and talked to bin, that he hud
the oedicine aen, that ho had these nodical guards, and
then-there were other separate natters. Thu first Czech
•ubosaador in Switzerland, Scravc , was a prisOQor. had
i stonneL tuior. Dr. Haven learned of it and had hia ta¬
ker., 1 believe by car, to the prisoner hospital and ho had
eallod ..:0U5h t .e public a systfi .. .. said I

’.:s to report everything, that Dr. Scrava noeded and we suc-
Cc Jed ill helping Dr. Scrava to the extent that today he
h b ta ken up his position as Chief editor in Prague.

3uch things n not exceptional. There wore operations
announced where the SS doctors ‘were to co.ae. 1 was to
. vrfora an jbdoainal operation. It wes ay custca and it
T, ‘ ? sensible of io to report to Dr. .-.oven before every
‘-ration. 1 never performed un operation without the
fauwledge of Dr. xiovon.

1h-_r. there- was an orthodox Russian, Dr. Gaisky, 1 be-

1:vV '- Is r.-.de v.-.s Pupa «ndre. .:e had been severely -ils-

. 5256 ,


31 ilar-i&H-17-2-u..,sser-Iat» vonSchoen
Court Ho. i.


treated by the Gestapo. The Soviet Union at one ti_.e had
concluded a peace with the Cnurch, the iiioraohy, which mos¬
tly hud called emigrated people to ,jo home to Russia. It
is probably not technically possible but it was permitted
then to return to Russia, '..hen this orthodox priest. Dr.
Gaisky, fell into the hands of the Gestapo, he was to si^r.
t. statement of the orthodox church that ho would not 3 c to
the Soviet Union. The consequences v/ero the usual ones
with the Gestapo. The prisoner came into the ca.np in n
terrible condition, '..c prisoner-doctors had 2 certain po¬
sition there. I was told quite oponly by the head of the
ca-ip', that is first cr second head -f the cr.;*p, "You won't
hove this nan Ion ." hcVi,rthelo38 we succeeded in koepins
Dr. Gaisky alive for a Ions tine, were cert-.in when he
•..as ih the hospit.i th* t Dr. iiovc-n would have no djjections.
Dr. Gaisky i ter aied because of the terrille food condi¬
tions in the oanp.

Q now about the nair cutting?

A Dr. .ioven hud a peculiarity. He uid not liko
priadners Without heir but to be allowed to koop your hair,
that v.as o very complicated .natter that had to *0 through
cvrlin. But in 3 months we always had our hair. It hap-
;oncd to .10 that ..ftcr a week ..y privilege is a protectorate
prlsonor vr.s token av; y fron uo and I was .Sven a red tri¬
ple, as protective custody prison, r, and I had to ~ivc up
ay hair. It did not tr.k^ 1003 torero Dr. Hoven brought no
note- that was to tc allowed to koep .y hair. Dr. Koven
• Se very difficult situation for ae onco. He had a pro-
rc; ::ional criminal as cn x-r y tocmiician and the rann had
no nair at all. Dr. Hoven decided the t he w _s to be able
»- .r -t le-ast v.net nair ho h .d a little im_er. I was

e.vosoa to r.i-jn :>.n application that the nan v.-.s to set

5257 .


51 ^'-r-EBii-17-3-i-esser-Int. vonScucen

Court Ko. i.


hair. I did not sign it. I did not quite understand no;*,
he was to do that. V.hea I gave up tnis problem I saw that
Lr. Hovec himself had written down th: t the nan v._s suffer¬
ing from a hair disease and he really jot the approval.

Jev.s also ~ot permission from bin, for instance, Jerlinek,
the nurae from the tuberculosis ward, and others.

Q ..hat do you know about novoa's killing of profes¬
sional criminals?

.» 1 saw no such killings, either of these habitual

criminals or of anyone. Certainly hoven uiviacd the pri-
Doners us follows: There -..ere decent prisoners and then
there . ere prisoners v/ho were not so dooent. This was not
the division that the 53 offlci-ls ..ade, this was a divi¬
sion do pending or. Low the prisoners beh.vod; this was net
the way Dr. .-.oven cl rsified the... but the- way the prisoners
themselves classified the other prisoners. If I reported
anything, a great deal depended on whether this prisoner 1
report.. 1 was a- "docent“ .-risonor or whether he was not.

The habitual criminals were pert of this classification
lao.

Lit. G.V..LLC: I -m just told that i chun,o must be
.v:do in the- microphone and that the acctin will bo inter¬
rupted for a few minutes.


5253


Court 1.

rch cast n-3r own.


J%aoB * cntf a5>ic-l crimin'Is, there w^re aony moral
offenders nd they were wry afro Id of Or. Hoven, 3ut I did
r.ot aoc Chat ho over /-lll.d c n bltual criminal.

'• :faR t ? olr -“ of view did you find In the oamo . oo-'t
Justice Chet the c up inmates administered themselves?

rt * Self administered crap Justice w a a wry difficult
rroblos. i ayadf, "3 r physician, W'-a rbsolutely oopos.d
: ny otva tn t was done to huann life or health. I w a

- physician na ny fate there ws aon.wh.-t bctt.r tnnn

•

t,v • of ~ 06C ’ * J y s tiff os t opponents in this matter v.rc
pr ciswly the old politic-1 prla nera rnd I ennnot cond^nn
sometimes they B ot me into wry difficult situations
t.cause of my attitude, /ith - nnss of - f vV thousand
' r8 ' n thcru ' Ctt - r ‘ J h-v. o or, differences of opinion

35aB * theornd there vwre crlnea o.u.itt.d ng^lnst the
rlsenera. «e could not go to ir.e 3d, it vra not possible.

- t r wnen dr. 3cr.idlaus/.y was in tno coop, I was
i-udenl - colled ovoy frou -n op,r/ tier; once ndh* told ne
:r u;l. w-s already beginning with the Creche. 2 did
“ c: • R0V ‘" h 1 ' c -•Peut, he told no 2 Should

t-v- ..1 ;. -r never in two nears. I Went into the coop end
' -r.d cut the following, a prisoner hr . oecn turned over
• ne canr who r.~d accused sixteen ^oplo of our home town
: -o. : uelieve that ten of them were condemned to death,

iatives of these sixteen prisoners wore .air -ay in

- ^ - r.d they found out thr t this o/»n had been brought*

ih.y went nfWr hie, ~:.otr..r ^.rcup Joined tn, cnase

•« 0- r.s.quenco : all this waa that the can died of a

c:,r,d ahull. I was to initial t:. c death certificate. I

?2 ??


Court i.

v-rcr. 3l-*-19-2-HD-He. ban-Erovn.


rtf-sec, however, bec-as that de'th did net h' .per. in the
..03 itcl. Sohidl"ish • HSid he we-Id not si-n it. It wra
:iit nlddU of s r, the de~d rztn red nlr* dy been lying
-r and for two days ::d I aid not /.r.ov wh-t tc do.

how, wr.echtr it was oy accident or -itsi.n, tivi\ c peered
in the no6 it”! n Ho ~nn v-nti.oilc Theologian, a yoan t fellow
•d 3t-a.tr of one ol the lnr t est orders in Cr>.cho-
iiovakln. ^r. ochidiauaiy r.n.w tnla :./»n well 'na so-etimos,
r_ if in JwJt and half In earn-at, wo-ld ".ah; H 'ahnt do you
3 : bout t:.ia r.s priest?* V.la n- nc w a r t r Knjeton

Delhi. He anid "I repudiate any /.lllln^a, I cannot approve
of :iv t, bat I brln b to oat attention tr.. f et tr. t It la
re- t orinu or. tno part c t tue c6 t lerve t;. afl"nds of

р. ra r.s’without r.ny for-: of U-iniatr tlon of Justice or
at u ot wit;; only 6d odmlnistr tl .f justice;* ^t Chit

the il-d rmy V e n long wry off ana it did happen trv>t
zo nar.g persons, including even " phyalci"n and the
.. ms b yah flatted before he was :.unb, whnt ho r."d dono.

’.'dll, to oogln we had - ch-r.ce to turn the non over
!; the oo r r. t to do so. Ihio was a /wry d"r. 0 cr ao

с. oineea. Those w:.o hvd even decontnnin'-t.d and r."d
-ic rjtov^d fron tnom, coaid not oc ennllred 'r.d it

v : alfficult n-tter to lo ve so :-vr.y oeoplo with¬
out r.y form of Justice. ± sc id oefor tfcrt I repudiate
».illin c a nnd I cr.nnot jnd^rstand. Tnla v 6 a very
atr!o..lfi e , tnin e t ..e r.d it • a *i.. Ir.t rr. 1 problem lw- ye
tui: alac-aaed u-_on c us taped lly trie illegal n." e eai,r.t

c up r.d t».w under-^ro-r.d ^nr. e cment r»- d its own
ue toward such hillings.


5260


Ocurt 1.

Xsrch c i-A-18~3-KD-:iehan--Srown.


Tor instance, ir. onae of a or. who c .fitted a ho no¬
se run 1 net, ho was sinply killed.

Again I repudiate that, but If I go none and If a regular
trial takes place on this .ratter, than 1 ns convinced that
for exc ;pla the son, who had donounced tr.e sixteen people
to the Jos Capo, ten of whoa wore hung, I would like to believe
tfc t oofere, a regular Czech court he would be condemned to
dor th.

Ifow, today, I would like to Ive .y answer to that
jn .;r- c r and nnnngooent. Inure le the son wno perhaps Is
do d, but how cany would novo have denounced rt th: t tl_ v

• - •*— net been killed; how ur.y would have died :-s c result
' :ild rets if no nnd not ooon killed then.

Whet do you know of th, activities of Jr. H von
lr< Block 46?

n. 1 know t.rls block; I apo/.o with Jr. Hovon and asked
nla vh*»t was to bo done with block 46; it had beer, fenced
saeclnLly nnd I did not know -t tn* t tine It w s to bo
xxpurlffior.tal block where husnn beings were to be treated
‘■ u .Jlnea pigs. Cr. r.ovor. t Id no then in t Jr. kru^owsky
vor.tc to do bosk.* thing there t n‘. I aid r.ot discuss the natter

• •rthor. I know Jr. Ding at that tluo *>r.d tnnt was enough
;;p -e; however, I was Interested In this setter. The

• -*-'-re slept in a roon containing el._ht beds nnd : long us
: • was n prisoner tailor. Tr.ls ran sold to us, please

1 lvc us tyends or anythin*. o: that sort. '1 her .upon
ala of coarsu r.ot. He enid, "I sow up ciotr.wS *nd t..o •
: -':.cs are sent out to one ulnae and another; there Is no
’•■•* : *'“-re. I want to bo perfectly sure I on in n
- ctly clean roon. In addition, Jr. .-over, cones to us

if no cones s_ o. ton the clothos nust be ny._. jnic. ■
was a shoe repair s..op. ..0 could not ; o around
t; j rating. -5261-


Jcurt 1

Harcn 31 -a-18-4-H0-:ic ehan-Brown.


re on In wooden shoes find there w_re no soles lr. the ermp.
I,;.aa usual, simply turned to Jr. Hover, with the request
for sclee rnd received t.;om from block 45, so I r. suroe
'tr.vrc w'S ft shoe repair sr.op there also. Whether Jr. r.oven
worked on "the typ.uus experiments, I do not now ns I v.:s
r.ev^r in bloc/. 46.

Vhat do you know about Dr. r.ovor.'s activities in

block 50?

Tr.-t v s Che vacoine production Institute of the
Vflffen 53. The origin of this institute with its >roud nano
ala not t,et to 3uchenw' , ld by accident. The 55 aoctcrs were
c.'i'Rgea, the situation - -wont, the prisoners writ uncertain,
there’was a commando or dot" 11 on which the prisoners could
bo out awny.

Lon^ before the detail was founded. Dr. Hoven t^ld us

tr."C it is pooslbit th t a hygonlc institute would be sot

in 3uohorr;ald. Title weald perhaps do something "ur.on &

the lines of producing vncclnec n._nlnot typhus -mi ho told

o that he would h've preliminary dlocacsiono concerning

t.lo In Berlin r.nd again he mentioned the none .<ru b owsky.

nf: r awhile Dr. aoven came book nr.d usid that the institute

VO aid be sjt -p. *.. ? u were ..ot aerologists, vd did not know

y tuin t r.ouut ttnle busln-so rnd it wrs a pretty important

ttar. ’..’e und ho-x-d tr. t Jr. Ding would take It over *'na

-r. din- was a non of v ryin 6 -ooda. Then, we were finally

8are tr.-.1 the institute w uld be tr.ex'c. We were interested

: -o' use we /.now that tne oo would not unkc the vnccines.

*t«r., Jr. .-.oven told us that no one know that nr.d, no knew

or.c woo could come from Anuthausen »-t the time. I

s sr.-re in Anuthnusen end tnere was a Czech serologict,

5262


Court 1.

.v rcfe 31-A— IS—5-HD-.-U enon-Brown i


n University Brofeasor free Brno, by the r.cao of Thoaaecnei:.
I told this to Dr. Keven, who Jotted down the r.aae, bat
Tnosasohek did not cceo at first nr.d case only Inter. After
the liberation we found out that he hod been taken frea
jfauthousen froa Berlin and sent to «uechwltz.


Court So. 1

cl .-.sr 4?-A-19-l-Ea»-*lakley (1st. Brown)


la Auschwitz he wes also usdor the charge of e seriologlat tut the

general situation in Auschwitz was uuch 'orce than it vas la ^chenveld,

• 5 vo Merely did kin barn ty nuking this roimcet fer hin. Veil, the

detail wes Bet up ml ves celled Slock £0. Inar.tcs Vv-re housed there,

•

perticularly Secht usd Betel prisoners, Dutchmen, by the woe of Sick,
Betert, end nany others. There were Jews. It ^s alao r risk to send
•he-: there. Profoasor Sleek vr« one of then fron the University of Len-
ter.;, one of the teat ten ir. typhus rcseerch in v#stern luropc; and Ding
vps chief.

Kov, everyone v n s efrrid of vhrt would haapen if Dr. Ding was ir. c
ted r.ood, fad everybody arid that til of r sudden what would hnpocn
would be that the detril vcull tv shifted to 46. Thuo I can very veil
feaeubtr that these prisoners negotiated with Dr. Eoven or at lenat
pointed out to hln th -1 either Slock £0 should to autordiante to the
Strndort phyeicirn or Dr. Eoven would hrve to rnioint oonotody in chnrgo
cf the- personnel there. This took a lot of weight off everyone's nir.d in
the crap, that ia, that Dr. Kovea wr.a Ding's deputy for Block 60.

v I coao now to a different coint. here you the liaison nan bo-
tveor. tho Ctechoelovnfclna trie oners and Dr. Eoven?

... Tec, I vna onu of the 1 if icon uen.

liero you rlao t neuter of the underground easp nawgenent?
a. Ko, these diffe-rsneos of ooinior. regarding eaao Justice orovonted

thrt.

Vfcr t vro your activity as liaison n.-n for the Czech arisoncro?

A. The following! V* had teen taken over Into the protectorate
*:y Hitler. It didn't coat hie anything to call a part of the prisoners
honorary orisonere, and these honorary nriaonera had cortpin privileges.

One of these privileges vt* the*, now end then such a prisoner v, b freed.

-OV, Dr. H-von cl ways w« n t lnsedlately' end sold, *1 can release about three
ti.ple, yritc ue out three certificates." Vhen ve asked hin >hich
’■ris-.nurs h*. wanted to have freed, he said, "Veil, you talk it over in
your Czech block rnd decide." In other words, this '-a.s done in a very

S26L

-


:,-urt S:. 1

-1 as- 47-A-lS-2-iEk-Blakley (lit. Sr ova)

dentcretic way. Vo decided Vfco ves la greatest need of being sot free.

•„ telked thic over end then I wat beck to Hovca end told Hovca that
ouch aid such n aaa would tv r good aea to set free. Such reouocts were
vbet I took care of rs licisoa nra.

■

Sid you frecuently turn to Sr. Hover. v‘th rccuiste oa the oirt
cf other lasctea?

A. So, I have to correct you. There *'«o sanething of on official
system anon,; the innetes. Iver/cac hi d recess to Dr. Hover, regularly.
Tr.ua regulerly we cede reouvsts. It vet act e natter slrroly of ronuoots
tut of subjections, and til this vi s done very regularly.

Did it ever hroDc-a that Dr. E&von refused r proposal that you
-.rdo ir. boh' If of thv prir or.»ro?

A. Wo nr.do several Justifiable reouosts of Dr. Hovca, tut those
,rv sorious {mentions, particularly ^cdicrl .rtters, vera ill reported
to Dr. Hovca ead I cannot recall that any or* of then yt ever rofusod.

v At Vhrt tl .0 did thv defendant Kovwa help thv nrlscncro?

A. : hive rlrvidy said th't Dr. Hovca did already rt tho point
vfcvr. Ovr-.nny vrs tv lag nost ouccccnful la the wr, even then Kovon
often holpvd the prisoners.

v la eoanvctioa with this tecti--ay I show you again Schrlkcr’o
•.cotintay frau SveuRsnt 50-1063, Exhibit Hunter 328, Pago 14 of the
iaglish rad 16 of the Oarsra translation. I ouotc vorbatin vhit
Scralkcr srid, *Lrtcr, vhoa it vrs ripest certria thrt Ocmrny vould
1 -sc, ho did or a;/ good thiafit."

So*', ia view of this test! :.ay, I rak you again, did tho defendant
Hoven do good things f-r the lam tec only rftvr it bccaaa elerr thrt
3cr-rry vrs going to lose tho vrr? ,

I hrvu already testified red 1 reiterate.

v Vhrt do you kaev about th. prevention of "Secht ur.d Hotel"
transports through Dr. Hovcnl

«. Vc knew if saiotfcing 'ss done in the political department or if
c - -thin.- concerned either us rs individuals or rs grcuos. “lrst of all


Court So. i

51 Xer •«?—a— 19—3-2EX—Hlekloy (I-t. Hrcvxx)


fir. Hovte succeeded is relieving scc-.o prisoners fr:o service ir. the poli-
tlcel deprrtacnt. Pro.*: the Czechs, the present Landcsninister fir. fiolnn-
sfcy, he brought us e meter of things. But fir. Hovcn ves *> very precise
informant, rnd so he c:::e to us cr.cc vith the nevs that there existed er.

•

S.S. coritrado. Vo didn't knov vfc/* zhrt ennt, sad ve vere told that it
•ernt "Sncht und Kobe!". Ve heard fra-, fir. Hovon that this vus a horrible
cap .pado in Setzveilcr, consisting -.ainly of Scrvegiens, and fron the ea-jp
orrticulorly fiutchson vere scat to the 1/cht und Hebei corv.rr.dcs.

There vere a fov nurses eaoag those Dutchmen, Hasscur, F.obert, then
the voll-kncvn pnintcr Pick, tut there vere rlso oris oners of vhon the
illegal cr-’.ip nnnogonent hni sr.id that they should stay la the crap, with
this natter also recourse vr.o taken to Dr. Eovoc. Thu* the conp aiwrge-
.e.*it could not put aria-avre at the disposal of 1 und 1!. and thus it
vro good not to .get in touch vith crlsoners if they vere r cart of that

t

cocorndo. If they vere in rlock £0, they could be kept fron being
shipped to Sr.tzveilcr to the Hrcht und Kobol cu-.:rndo.

•v Do y-u lenov of other transports vhich fir. Hovon orovontud?
a. I cen only tell you the brood outlines. Cr.ce a transport *rs
steading outside the hoop* til vi*h r fev hundred persons, including all
the -Id Cer..,rn politiccl prisoners, Czechs of ell professions, nir.ictors,
university professors, vorktrs, Berbers of oarlir.pent, end so on. I vns
suite rure that this c-:erndo could not *;o .ff if fir. Hove-n had not ocen
the cnorndi, It ws t tv transferred s or. where to the north to Hugde-
’.urr, I believe, Kngdcbur.*, 3ei0er.. I sent sor.e-ne out to fir. Hovon 1 e
h.use vith the reoue-st thot ho cer-.e to the carp. This vrs lrtc afternoon.
Ir. Hover, did cane and lrroedir.tcly Sent the transport trek into the

rni sr.id he vented to exauino the prisoners. Later vc v-orked things
:u ‘ r that ve could save the- nejority af the orieoners. Ve knov that
tr.le era or. extermination conr-ando because these- vert really veak persons
f-d invalids.

5266


^-.rch-.b-l JD-2C-1-G-11 ~h-r (Int. brown)
::urt He. 1


-o

Cm you tell the court the r.ual er cf people who were saved by
Haven frea this transport?

A fcitfc the Scran?, Czechs, a fe*r hundred prisoners, it eight have
beer, two-hundred.

i.he ted ordered trds extermination, the eccoando?

« That was certainly er. the transport 'res the cosp nwv.r-ner.t, it
.13 certainly a BSHA transport.

\ Can you ,-ivo the Court the names of n f. r. Hovon

saved free this transport tc Hfd.-efcurg-ldacn?

A «11 pref-ssiens hero were represented, sorters, ministers, rc-
:reaontativcs, -11 sorts cf persons who were in this transport. Dr. Hoyen
did net concern himself with the names.

Can you tell the Court about the r-ie'so cf coders cf United
Nations, which Dr. Hevon br-u^t -lout?

A Cf the United Nr.ticn, net toe cany of the United .’leticns oa into
. ticn h.rc. It was out -f t wti n tc send z Pole hcr.e, sc any
i'.aticns cczes only of Dutchman ..nd with Czechs at this tino. Later,
rr-r.ch end others w.rc included, Among the Dutch, whatever happened obcut
that, that tcck plnco at time eft or 1 was in the eery, and sofor as
Goochs sro concerned, fr time tc tine three, four cr five were freed,
aa I have already descri’ ol, :ut Gen no rise were set free, ns one cr
V*. -lw.ays ' uir..- let cut fr time tc tine. 1 have dascril-td those events
already.

Flense descri!.o to the Tribunal how the defendant Hcve-n opposed
the measures cf KSHAI

A The general rule tos the e. tin - of [rlscnors, and the SS gave

t -tin s; 5e oil of a sudden r prisoner was tcld th t he- wcuM ru-

5<-tVe twenty-five strokes, • ut this verdict hod tc le approved !y the

effici- ’ KSHa. Prisoners v oaten that whole

' -o-es cf flesh koto torn from their tody; I have s-wn c*ses where the leg

v. cculj • c seen, r • cr.c cf the le' cccld le seen, end this affected

-1 r*.s cf prisoners, hither they were habitual criminals, cr any ether

5267


r :h.r (Int. Brea)

leurt ?fc. 1

Wad. Th.se wero =11 taken to the hospital and tn*ted, : can even
rc -~ Cr a * prisoner free Brtacn »bc siaply cculd not stend to
receive a boating cf fifty strokes, sc this beating we* carried cut under
the supervision cf c doctor, H<rwes kept for Booths in a hospital, and

• believe that the «tter sort cf for C ottcn, because the camp comnnd-
er »hc had breu-ht this ease up .as relieved, and the non was then spared
receiving the rest of his Lotting. Then he w M reassured that in that
connection he Would net be- hoeten to death. lhcn there was thu question
cr the Jens. Tho Jena were siaply loaded into trucks, end disappeared,

-nd a ccuplo of days lr ter people cnab end told us to u-ke thvir names

fr. the file index. These .ere transports in .hich there wore nwor
ray nutter! ocsrdnrticn tc see if r. perse* .as fit to travel, whether

 "* rc flcricufll * lll > cr I I «liwvo this »„• the transport

• the l'inning of 1%2 in r.hich Je.s .ere tc : t way 380 .

Tb.-y »erc nil leaded on stretchers in tho hospital, but as soon as they
-■t = round tho comer, they lock then off the stretchers, and disposed
f then in snether -ay. I =ysulf intervened for c Jen n «ed Cchcn. Ho
*“ 8ont frcc Ctcchoslovckia to Duchcn.ald, free the prison window I
c old s e hla .ife with n novly lom child in her anas, that fren ny
■in-Jew, and this eight of this near* sc acvud oe, end 1 took .hat effort
I pom tc help Ma. Cchcn «U 001 rivd ere uni the corner like the ethers,

I think that was the result cf bavin: hir. freed, uut this .as in oppoa-*

; ‘* iCr ‘ U th& l ' SHk ’ thwl * « activities .ith the tocht and Hotel
:r ' ::nLr8 * Then thorn was also individual actions. /. young octal worker
7 lh " n ‘ J= ° of Stftri > *»» ia «W 11 alive teday and in Freibur-, in a
f rUurant ;ckcd cut Hitler's eyes in a picture, and he was brought to
- -rrille condition. He was a good worker, and he .as put to

- lusrry, but sickly bad sharpened the instruaents in th. quarry,

1*. odor ship wanted his tc stay there. One day aft.r Hovu, case
 3 '" "* 7CU kncV Stari '" 1 ■“ bhat story, and I said, -Yes, I did.-
• • Koven s.-id, s are net going too well with that nan, we

~~-ri into the hsspita^^arri a few days'lator he was called


31 March-A-iDJC-2?-S-Gdla^.-r (In;. L>rcwn)
~-.urt Kc. 1


to the rtcor, and cither i or scaccnc elec wes to cxacinc- hin, and an

answer cane that ho wss sick, and then this was done, end in this way

thc nan's life was saved. This was also a neesure taken a,;ainst the

r-SHA. There was also an affair that ccnccmed ac. I was known in ny

•

region in CzechcSlovakia, and this was the only case in which n ropresent-

ativo cf tbo Kroialeitung ceno tc ; tc teko a leek r.t the si t n.

It was quite dear that ho had cone for that reason, to see tc it that

all pcasiVle ncasures were taken against cc. ;.t that tine I »vcs net

present, and he really believed that these erasures rc.-lly were carried

cut, 'ut these arc net shewn, and specific eases that cocurrcd, and thi?

tc no, is one cf Woven'a activities nrainst the hSHA.

THi: . hZSIOCfT: It will ’e necessary tc suspend the exardnatien cf

this witness at this tir.e until toxrrcw ocmin*.

The Tri unnl has considered the objection cn tho part cf the ?rcso-

cution tc tho calling cf the witnesses Tepf nn! uorkenau cn behalf of

the defendant SieVers. These witnesses rere “pplied for ty the ccunscl

fer tho defendant SieVers, soaotioe c.;c, and an crior was entered ty

the Triiunal that th witnesses to called. This rder was entered with-

it- toy objection cn the part cf the ircsecution. The Pres, cuti^n, hen-

evor, this rxrnin.: sev.d that the witnesses i o not called cn the ,'rounds

that tho stntaaoita nado ocnccminp their testimony were beyond the l«ci-
. •

tinato field of inquiry for tho Tribunal. Tho Tribunal has excr-dned the
applications fer tho nitnossos, and the naaorandua filed today cf Dr.
'.cis/Tcrbtr, attorney fer the defendant Silvers. The Tritun ::1 is of the
-tinier, that the Ustisoqy which counsel fer the defendant Siovers pre-
rcc.s tc elicit cf these witnesses is within the field cf ccnpctcncy
• r ' r - th( - Tribunal, end tljet the testineny ray be a.-re; rlrtc tc be#

4 . signod by tho Tribunal

“ r ir -- th. witnesses jo call. i. I he trier cinr dated February 4th,

, •dll be carried cut.

• v Tribunal ill ne w recess until 9:30 o'clock Ucnrrcw -verninc.
iTr. Trl’.unal • Ijcumed until 1 April 1947 at 0930 hears)

526?


Court 3o. l

1 Aar i s ter flat. Srova)


Official Transcript of the *nericnn tfilit.-ry
Iribunz.1 In the natter of the United States
of Anorice against Kr-rl Srandt, et cl,
defendants, sitting pt Suernterg, Gcraesy, or.
1 .--ori 1 1947, 1930. Justice Ee;.ls presiding.


Tri. HA2SHAL: A-rsons in the courtroce vill please find their seats.
:;.c Hone ratio, the Judges of nllitaxy Tribunal I. .Military Tribuncl I
in now in session. God save the United States of Anerica and this hoc-
-r'tlo Tribunal. There vill be order in the courtroca.

Zrl Kl£S:ifci:2: Hr. Marshal, you ascertain that the defendants are
ell present in court.

Trx riAE.SrAI: Kay it olease your Honor, til the defendants are
-,r«iee..t in the court.

"HI P53SX2L32: The Secretary- General vill note for the record tho
oreaenco of ell the defendants in court.

DH. UIJESIAY HCaH - Hosuned

7KI-K-iSIDlKT: Have pay of the dcfer.ee counsel ouoftionc to oro-
p-und to this, witness!

SV 2n. GAVTIS. (Counsel f,r tho defend-r.t Valdenar Hovon):

v 2-ctor, plunsc doscrite Boron's attitude ar.d behavior toward

the HoleB.


A. Den-.ito the f»ct that the Pcloo *-x r c in o -.uch worse situation


r. ve v vr e, I never snw that Dr. Hover, behaved otherwise to the Poles
t tho others. The boot cxr.nalo is the so-called Oornnniration of
th» r.TeO. The Polos vho vjrkcd in Cvroory and vho hr4 sexual relations
3«raa& VdaOB wire brought t. the cr.-.p and *^rc hanged. After n


t^rt in length of tine i regulation appeared which crid thr t suitable
Us could be Gernrniscd. The (Urbanisation consisted of an matooicol
er< iantion vher» the persons v v re neesured all over the bonds, their
: •, their ouths, their noses. They v, r . given intelligence tests, r

'*:fiCfiW-wo vritton out, and then the roles were released and so-,e
1 •'» v^ro'ihjicted int. the Vehmacht. Thus, the errainntion to which

• # 1

oubjected’-actuclly saved their lives. It. Eovcn usually left
* ^

" im tion up t i us non-Ger - n ,_.ct'.re and olc-ee observe that ve


*


C-art To. I

- ~ r 47-k-l -S-lSk-3 t er (Int. Brown)


* orc doctors vhc did not ev.n usdoretead s.- c -lled r-ci'-l -cdicir.e,
cthaic nediciav. Vc wrote u? the cxrr.izt ti;r. nad the nereo-s vero
moairuS. Ir. this-w? i< fevi .. < r

’• Cfla y:u describe tc the Trituaol -ensures through which the
defendent H.vea -orotectod Grech citiroas?

-w Ur. Haven -rs in touch with the Czeehs Irrgcly in connection
with the protectorate action. This vre the petion in which the Guetr.oo
•a n few dnya disposed of c few hundred Crech intcllteutsi* cad vorkcrc
rr.i a oat the:-, to r concentration danp after the lot of Sececbcr i?3&;
is other w-rio, right Pt the te.tnair. of the -tt. This ,:rour. of -u-raono
••bo, to to cure, coiled ca haa.qrr.ble group of prisoners or hoct-.-cs.

Ih«y were rllovcd to keep their heir end they could write hcr.e every
"•» tut la this vr.-Iv. Hati eye*., • re vp# nothin 1 -.1 ,r.i n this
vtc secure, Cvrtria. After p short Period of ti-:e these -orio.r.vrs rleo
vere given Jurd labor.

:t io r. and thing vhoa pa vfficirl vr.o ert nt his dcak f'.r twenty
ye.-rc nil of r. sudden hr c t, v:rk ir. r. ,vrdcr.. These ngrin were
sinister*, senators, representatives, londicc peri osngss in polltlcel
ll:'e vho si oly Vuro not tble to st-r.d this work vithiut do in,; ther.-
t'.lv -j seri.ue pfcyeicrl fi/v.-ge.

•

Thor*. w ; o i D the coho o so-callwd atockinr reorir chn *hero
st ckia#fB c ould to -r.ehed tut it -po na secret tj.i t thio at .ckir..—
wniif -* dcw.rt .vat voe -aly for the vc.-y old in.~-.ee who hud beer, in
cr..o i few „oaths eg.. Dr. Eovea forned c brraeh of this stockit*:-
t; .din- aocti^r. vhv.ro ho e -cloyed rll the older Grech ir. rtec v*. 3 weren't
•iv * d. phyeicp.l It cor; including Dr. Senher, ryor -f ?rr -uc p.4[

7 ro iintntive .ur -ri .e sinister, ■-.... nny thers.

Ir. PE.ther institution which It. Hover, instigated vris the o:-crllcd
S '■ Staorrch Coaarhda (AhncnforBcLune-sko-.-.-.ado), The wanted

•-* : 17..

tier to find thee i.eu ts. re over, - fi . cere
*»eded erects. They wr« th< new 3Pti : r-:1 erecy, •• line


C-urt u». i

1 ~ r o»ter (lot. 3r_vr.)


:r. Eonm had found ao the Czechs en crn.rt in hcraliry, he for:;od r.
ten.-, vhich recc..-.. t : -- - * tfccr r ;v. t

t.n. bcc« ..e -*-re icoartrst later.

These vere the onerous ne.-suros that Dr. Hover, took to nocist
Czech citizonc.


5272


.hat.nas the SS Cfiaa Administration'« behavior i
after Eaydricfc's ou t:, in .lay, l%±, mj r.hrt .lid hoven then do?

A. The xaos’t difficult days that

rough. V« hoard Xraa tho SS vrious

. o heard it stated

1939 uzs r -bc Zr *- tffa Czech etete snd 1949 iouLq be the . *d -f the
•r. nation. In ti So difficult .r.d danger out

sinatioc. It is certain that the

teasurus in Chechoslovakia bccaare .»1 this, but in various c.ooe ^.rd
•-h.-t. the crap ranaf.eccnt, on its cm*, initiative, hnd r.lso taken nonaurts
ir.st Czechs. -Ihis ttit .... the

•

S.stapo chief in the csq> was a Wy important setter. Cn thi . ay.

In tha afternoon, n!un *.o . to fii»rt out r.h t would hr.pp.m to

»»j : 0 p* H ... -politic;:: nt ii quiet", nd

rop.’ -^ly thereafter every day wc svcMveu such :..us irew Dr. Hover., *ni
.. «ore • o.’ur.u that neither the Gostapo chief nor the ermp o;

Mo OVn intit tivo, wc-.ild take oetsoroo a tlnct us Cxooh lnaates in

tUn xiich Indic-.tod Kovon'i

t^'.roa us Czechs because, In v« t.j-u r. .rdvi by the Jiosis ao

lto^etaor inferior v-i j ...

!•- >-kj not . w SS Kn ora group, "out ratiior the whoL. ZZ mr in
it with nd they said to uo: "Wat need Co Be { r you oi ht

,

i.l a, tul four -IHior- that -r»- left, they \rv then ripe f?r
5 -mturr. 11 sation. " 3r.

..

r sectors th. c.-.p udainiatr Mon rr-.d found *rys of join- CteoJu xiii
* 1 -i-= lr :...rLov : i-. xr. clotr th Dr. veh : .

-• rn iaoortrnt role in urb-halfint ®

• s the s saber f »• wish or. cy im-t-a in 3nc!,««aW
’ -v.n t:ok aver in bapteaber, 190?

». au-.t do ~OU • test

• - . r :Vr t - th.ee it 1 * r it

re.


-'173


1 April 19-7 -X-2-2-F&- K rrr- (Irt. _rc*.n)

“urt *o. i

n. Tb-->- ivrc Jews who staply s-id tir t they vert- or.sar.s by traile and
thus saved their Lives. wLso there u.re J_rs ir. the sick bay detail a jv in
- rracks 50, the vaccination barracks. I should csfciocto th~t they wore
b tween two hundni and three hundred. There could :: vc boon ncroj

And what do you knar cb-ut the fact th t tfco* at e

rurc saved by the defendant Haven?

A. '..hen it •..ns sale th t the Jews Simula bo r^toved irua th- c-ar it
w-.s pointed cut, fro.: the statistics of the c =p, th't there wore nj
a seno there. li.-n the sucr.siion was rs dv that the Jens who were c-p-.blo
of work should : r.: -:t : . : oeny persons

■ re certified by Hcvwn as Msrni. These J.ws Wero certified as n-.ieno
o®«<* *= awes :.nd, ir.;..-: ; t . aworo saved. Those

.. re the two hundred or three r.ur. r-c Jews I .-rationed later.

.. And wr. *- further .-.xasurcs di. the defor.-'ant Hov«n take to a.avo
Jews? 'i.ixre else -'i. accomodate Jewb?

A. I hav .aIre .t.y raid - in Block 50 - n ir. the hospital.

c. Were cho prisoners interested in sooin? to it that Hovon r udn <

in the c nep?

. . Id inoi-tea, whs hsd been thuro : :: c Lens fci -, r inastts
whs htd nose thing t: Jo with tr*. crusp edainlstrr.tion who knew Bov-n'o
dirrriotin’.tJon between decent n.! non-icc-nt prisoners - tr.-y Wore
ir.t.r rte.! in ^cinj to it th-t Seven roatin-d in the c'xo.

...

... It was fviver knwn who his successor would be or how h. nail.: bo haw.
7 th t ti-v, at att~.ci-_-.ent t. Dr. raven was too rr«at .and I point out
• businass with thi Jfccht uni JTc

• r - c dp, the Dut . hove Cior-r.ared without -ur knonin i:hbx*(>

•> nt,

. '..-re the insetco also interested in ving hr. Haven take na>r tne
: -a s*.nt or 3iock 50?

•*. I described tb. r yesterday.

'• -- the ofendant :: voii only b-lp ioetes when ho had a .rcan

’-f-ta* - free it?

527-i


1 A-.ril 1?47
C.urt *'o. I


PSP- Karr


Ur-*-, ^


«. tbit is rvat so. Dr. Hmva fr.-I anny inrates freed h. did
nat cv«r. know an! whoa he cet purteps f_r the fiiot tin. only wiua
tb»7 •«> b^-ini 3et free. Dr. Haven Certainly r-coiv-- sasethinr IV-.n tl»
invites: They spoJc- »cU or hia, for inrt-r.ee. It tor. For instance, the
Dafccbaan Pleck who wa typical wlcioa, a printer. Ko wa
to n-Jco cuuic 1 drawings but ted no talent far th-t, nor coul 1 ho be used
i;: qu-rry or -.ny such heavy work of th-t sort. Dr. Piock c-rtr.ir.2y diO
: Bov on but : cover had Uw iaprtssion th t Pi.ck

■•'.5, in ny way, uxplotied. H- ;.:d been orou ht to the crap from Ibilnrc'
in t.rrihU- physic. 1 aft, t n r-cavj^ Kov-r. r.lso au* to it th-t U
'‘i-n't ,;ot int the .Vcht -n ati on. it was a Is.-. terrible

■ltuntioi th-t he tried to <*-o southing f r n can ir. the car? hospital
nas U:. Let a?. Thu -thcr shojui ,*rv suw, Anri there ties
: in th- dairy it inline Hovun v£ r. ■>. suttor. doubt H
butt r, t . -le hospital r-.. te S butUr boo. Thun l t«r as lo-rtor

thu fB faction ar otetion was Dr. Dupont, r. rr-nch thwol : -i- :.,
isb a loading ph/sioi Li in Paris n St. Inferiouro- ha was sui p d
■r.-t the TB anti-nto r-c.iv-J in U. c ap. \b.t the -ffici 1 .llotaur.t
w otn thin , Ot th- other t:-.:..- is shnt or. Koveri did through .is
:.r.n.cti.no af or. ocanoric nature. J spate yesterday nf the t-ilor
. ..ic.; was ttiilici at both J .

r ;io "Live on' let Uvw«, -r.I thie was true also of Dr. Hi :

Uv it he Iso lut thuro live .

iihat Mas thu iontss 1 botevim- towards Dr. Hovon after tin cesp
- lib.r-.tw-'. by the kst-rienns?

• • r 1 ng tins Dr. Bov-nwas not in the nc

. . rnrtly b-fon. tte iiUr-.ti . .

... with us -n: e-re severaltia,s. .h_n on the lit*, af n ril, i
r *rcsflo that sll SSwon i leave *ito cnap , Me :-jt p trolo
• r ‘ Cwhich re dad ut . - the situ tien :.-s, I rocw*er
— 6 t-o 3e id eci*. "Hovon Ci not run any. Eov r. i:

•' noi :

Ur thu libemtior. in th» e-j .


527c


1 .» ril 1 /.. — >2-4—?K rr I r.t. 1 r. n)

J.ur‘. . i

I ays.. If didn't sec is , bat I t t said. Ala r. that vary first
zLr'a. I ms called by the «=eric r. nilit .r;- -uttoritics tixi I nt.s asked
: 1ok* Mb*ro Or. Dine lived. I kou« only xivt to lii

nfc thrst st'.t^rtc

i»-.tca Era! tir.-dy been nadu cbout Haven to the *o&ricnn ailit'ry
rath ritios.

—■ yen kn m b-^it the contents cf those statements?

.v-:! the report, bat I bad

to 4=«rican aatr. Titles thr t this r-p^rt on ilovon -.ir.a -.n of:'ici- 1 nc
OR. Cn'.iUX: .. further q-i'sii ti.


~.ur* 1

: .-.or -^-y.-3-l-iHh-losser (Int- 3r;v~)


?5Z£I ~ :: Arc thcrc r =>" ’niccti.ns C- the -itness or. the ~,rrt
of defense c-u;.scl?

23. DCEHS (Representing counsel ::r defendant r:-:endich):

UIt " ces - dc *" U reefer freo your rctivity ir. the Suchcnwld
h.soitrl c Itenish doctor vho carried cut homono exoeriuents on in::,.ter?
n ‘ - v - s . c Do&ish S tu mbflcnfue hrc r.

v A r ' " ia ' c SturahnnafUehrcr, yes. Do you ror.euter his nr/co?

A. I don't rcseuter his nene but I renent.r this vac durlw; Dr.
schidlti. 9. tte* Scfcidlrusky cr-.e to » Md rr id. "Vo viil

' • hri very little row.

The cuter coar.nd.s had olrwdy delivered nrtionto to uc -ho hrd Ken

vur.dcd ir. bCObizvrs. Dr. Schldlrusky kxwv this tut he thought It vrs
only r very fv and that this vould be r nt?cr of rpolyln* r ..do
cry.'trl fcorncnc and these vor* t- be r.nplicd to rcrr;r.c -ho v v r. Kir.,-
telly »t rills.d sxr* h^orcxual. I asked Sehidlrusky vfcct c rt
dnv: this vre. This a/ ttor interested :». Shortly after thir eon-
V“ r ‘' , ' tl * thu "Sehveirerleche hed it ini echo Voehcr.achriff hnd rn article
-T.ich described the application or use of these horncr.c cry 0 tn» by r .

• ' •: utter *cy further.

• h '-‘ r r ' r ' u? clx lcr:rtc * orrivci. Cf c.urcc they -ere very fri.-ht-
• • I c.uld toll the:: th: t this vac r sale horn, r:.d thnt •

. • r

, * lck :t f!r * t : fcrd n - arsons for but ! Inter did find rocrone f- r .

:i - *? 1 ” • 5rlf, rt a in vhich the rri-

ra v. ru Rut teiiv; lenten c, -ften. Vhcn they -ere recused of rny-
Shoy  rc t«-f-r. th: erne court, »&& this -re

Scr.‘o..ucky vouid not 6i»*n the de-cth Certific'Ur unices they h-d

ch ' MC criB'.n.r-doctors. Sc : did ma-er thft Z did
‘ T tcI -' s this vculd be r danger-us natter.

” let - e interrupt y u. H:v nsy oc-ole -ere involved here?

- I'.c first ,3-^xu ves not rc than five r si- prirer.erc. -he
: thca c ' ‘ -• • ■--- CXK i.v.d. .ncc, rfter r :. - -ths.


5277


r.ort 5a. 1

1 " ■» 7 ~M~c—2-2H.:-L-5Scr (Int. hrov-;.)


They were accscaoditted sc strev sreks in tho hrllvny tecauec vo had n o
r.^i. Perhaps there ver c twenty to thirty r.eoplc lyin,* on these straw
cedes in the cor rider. —

•

V EjV v ' b 'hie implantation of these tablets carried out?

A. : v-B cat present tut qy assistant, ufab vae ©resent, er.id th-.t
the work va 6 done very slovly end very carefully, a snail o c. ctineter-
incision v r • end the crystal t r nc was inserted, vhcreuoon
the incision vae c^alc Svvod over. Xy resistant, Freer Frrnle, nr. edit >r
fro Sirujen an the Swiss border, Tlrcady knew about this article ir.
the Schvoirorische Xedizlaishe V ocfcencchrift and he or.id, "bhy da thio
is such a r jundrb-ut way if it could to don*, c- uch core sioply?"

•\» "or. those oricoctrs all Gcr.-en or vero there forei,jeers
aeon,: Jhoc?

• tolicvc they v,ro starillted prisoners aaexucle hut,

ID : srid, I did not concern cysdf bout this natter t-. auch.

V r •" u know vi • . re vero t:ld ahead of tine

vr.r* vro rjoinfi tp haoocn to the?

.■. In r^ntrrl it wts cuo„ f ry in the crr.r. not to tell tho -ri-
rs vhnt uni -rein,* to haonn to then. I know tfcrt uwy oorsons who
tr-t for necessary /©orations v*.rc not told that they -'(.re n.irw t. be
<-rrted or. until the list sovent. It vr.c cart f i at 'reduction.

-• v\>rb rent t. ur red then we exulni&cd t. the whit the ouerrt! n
v> r for.

■e. 3r. Schidlrus-cy's affidavit, T-cu .r.t liC-SO t, orys nothin-
• : - - • • Tr. • C tePtii t t ■-

re fr . e :e ne else" that two nerc-nt r_- i i-d io connection -ith
* trentdent. Vhnt d. you ks» t bout this?

-e. The flrct --roup of sir risoners :r.d tfc« ohcre nr treated
ther barrack. y vctj turned loose after sir dtye. She wounds
’-erled veil and :ran this ve c;csou e thrt thic crewr:t 1 on vis
’ ’ sy vry ooie.se-us. The nr is ore rs - re r-1 need and -ere -b-

■"'i lr ter. I cann-t recall any frtelity.


C'jart 5o. 1

1 K-r 47-X-S-3- 1EX-Lc s s e-r (let. Brovs)


v '■*<> carried out '.his i.-nlr&tation of the tablet? Verw they
trfined persons or verc they -ther -creons?

A. Share vac. enORg others, this Danish Stumbennfuehrer yotanen-
ti.nod.

v ' ns « «* conscientious nan ?r-vra he very easucl in his ~ork?
a. You c.uld see that he vrs not r. wofessionitl but, teen but you
could set that he rcrlly understood vhat he ns doir*: in this croarr.tion.

e. So, la connection vith this trcnti-ent vith homo no tablets, you
really, could not coll these ejrceri.ioats but rather cdl it n r.ethod of
*.roctr.ont7

'• 7ht Stur-.biuafttOhrer used tho vord -cxneri-ents and delivered
l;.v* lectures on the subject. Anyone could teJee the rforer.ontionod
SvIob Jpurxxl end put it on the tnblo in front of hia and rhov kin that
this r.othod hr.d nlruady town used. Since vo never herrd anythin/; -.ore
ft.ut this Dree'* nethod, lot say thrt this vro the vholc tcchniouo
of the SS. Let us try thrt I m verkis/: vith horn ones rad I lay, "Kr.
H.spitrl Director, l«t .0 try this out. etc.* Tho SS doctors dvsyo
used the vord •oxp.riaoat". I trv these ocode durln- the nert three
;r.tho. -h.y Cano t the hosoitcl occasionally mi so I believe thnt
" u crar.ot soork of arocrlnc&ts tv* rcrlly of the milled lor. :f o ira-
• rcti.n vhich w = ^ll-knovn end vhich hrd lonr teen ir. uso. Even if
v. did not actually hrvw this ::re?rrrti;r. in our brads, rt least m
•“' v ‘ * ? 1 *" s not poisonous nnd did not kill uerconc.

^ Did you yourself tall: vith Dr. Vernei, vr.s this Danish

i-c*. r who carried out this trert-cnt?

a. When 1 rerd the’or tide, rnd this literature *tb avrlleblf to
°* *rr.u,;h Slock £ 0 , it did not interest us becrucc it v?, 6 P vcll-kr.ovr.
”-r in tho i;edied vorld. Only tho nanufteture of this crystal h:r-
v-s r .ev hut the »--ner#l treat-.ent vre on >ld rxd vt-ll-knovn -®ttcr.


I ccna.i re-.e ter thnt.


:.urs 5;. 1

: a-.r 47-K-o-4-£3t-Lesi t r (Int. Srovr)


v r “ coaBectic ® vilh *• Wernvt'r treatment did ;/;u ever hetr the
are of Poppendiefc?

A. HO.

IS. HOZBR: I hevc no further ouesticna.

— PaiSIDlliT: Any other Questions of the witness on the ts^rt of
ev dofonae consol? If nut, thv prosecution r^- eross-cxanlse the

witness.


52G0


<• ^r. -*orn, Uovj many beds did they have ir, tl;o hospit¬
al b rraclrr ir. ti e °ucror.r/r.:d concentration ccnp?

*'• 1 yesterday, ir. December of 1941, when I caro
to fro cr. p, there wero about 500 bode.

'• How bow cany irr-.tos approxi atoly w. ro inc:.rc rated
ir. tie Bud onwald concontr.-.tioa cr_ p• tv. t ir including
tl o lictlo carps aril all tl o subcili. ry c .- pc t! cro?

.bout 0,009 whon I gotfcloro. TLo r.uubor incroased *
and I boliovo that r/lor. ^r. Eovor was 1 prise nod tl*cro v.-oro
about 15,000 t: ore, t>at la taptonbor 1545. -*-V.on tho r.unbor
irovr or.oxr:ov.sly. I si-id yostorday that wVon ro woro frood
:Uro was won c. r.u.bor as tig cc 140,00^.

• obi '. out tlct ti:-.o tVoro was only oro : oa-

. ital t.r-u hout the Sue: ci.vald ccncontration crap; ir
tlat corr oct?

••• No, tiio na i r; • .1 md tv on wo l ad tl o annll

“ai . lrfcrtur..it..:y E ea t to 1 you rVon tVo sjt.11

l.cs.iitclvr r owned, but when tho 'Y»lcc erno in - roat r.un-

' rs tlo snail leap t:.l .• oponod.

. oil row t v c hont all tl t u nov r It l

•

any -ro than ZOO Vcapital boor cvailtMo; is tJvt r.-'-ht?

' * ' , n

• * • : 1* ^ 300 hour ”*.il..bio f'-r f :nt? or clck

. faonc.

• • . r. 1 - v-

Dr. I’ovon.'! cl i.f -1'ir-c m cn Ms I oa

:* .:T:

— 1 aco r port tre qv : tier..

• - rd-ing your connection wit! i)r. vcr.;

r r.


5261


.“rr.vn


: .. rll
‘'cart Ito. 1


... --- v -o I arrival 6 © prisoners told no dvt tfcoro vaa
surgocr. ..t r.ll t!<-ro. I>. rc vcro lockeaith'e and brick¬
layers aistants, vl o did surgical cpcr..tio; 5 nr-d vl on I
..clrcd rev t? is u..s possible, Ici.3 Cold th t thoy T-.-fl r. few
J_wisk surgeons there wlo had per feroed surgical cp_r..C.cn;
*• re was . - ticularly tl o frisonor I>auor vlo w s to ioarn
surgery fro.-. the Jewish Doctors ti cro,

. Nov v!.t quelificr.ticr.e did -r. Kovon have along the
surgical linos?

“• w r. irovon o.-or.l- t'Id u- t: .t !:o U too little .iodic-
c.1 tre.inin 3 r.r.d that 1 * would lilro to l.am cursory and
r brnclee of :xrdicino. "o drifted ro for r. tir.o,
tut ha did rot h;.vo tho ti 0 rr ti c p.ticrcc tc let fci.-
s If really bo tr. inod.

.. ^id you tl on ;wko m ..cto..;»t to torch „ r . Hovon soao
r your -toeLniquo in srrg ry?

... I did try to do tl. t.

«ou in direct in..ticn, Dcctor, I boliovo you said
!!..t hoven Jolpod considerably curtain political and nation-
•iiro ps, ocpociflUy ti.u o.r.-n Soliaimlata and Crocho Slov-
“ u ‘ r ' Jn?jabos rnf ‘ 1 uoliovq.tho Dutch hostages a r'ng tl 0
• first c 3 tor; tils group *ou aporJs of, .«•

rt -.r tie imutoe of t; 0 c;. is ti*.t borruct?

-1 ii so; /or.

.0

; r ht equally ..c ruthi.r.- as t: r : otori?

* : altu 6100 t!ir, cur .. . :• t on even, VO

tter. c were . shed by t; ... :
shod tc define do $S ctivit
to define the SS f r the -norican autl-ritijs *jul
1 " • '

5282


*


1 ril 17-*I-S--4-2-i:co^m-Ir.t: 3mm
n rt .?o, 1


... Bofero I arrived tj o prison rs told th;t chore was
no Eursoor. ..t c.11 thoro. Sfc ro wcro lcc3:s .1st • r and brich-
l-.ycrs si stents, do did surgical operatic; ? ;;r._ wi on I

rl:cd Yc\: t* is w^s possible, Iv;..s told tb t tfcoy lv.d r. few
w.rir!. air_:oor.s th^ro ul o heu jot forced svr^icul .-nrmonr.
*- ru '”’~ s 1 ticularly tie . : riecr.or :>.-jiop wl o \: s to lot.rn

nursery fron the J.vish Doctors tl oro,

. Uov vv: ~t quclificr.tine did -r. Hovon lu.vo r.lon- tbo
iur^icr.l linos?

*• -r. Ilovor oponly told Ur tl.-.t ho Led too 11 j.c-

cl trr.inins r.r.d that ho vould lii;o tc lwtm our-ery end
-r brunches of nodioino. HO ..nr tod ro for c ti::o,
but ho did not fcc.vo the ti o or tie p tierce tc let hi-
o^lf rwcaiy bo trained.

• oh uako rn tto-ipt to to c: ur. Hovon sooo

cr your toclr.iquo in surp ry?

• . *'w-; I did cry tc do ti . t.

ln lUroofc oxu ir-.tion, Doctor, I bolio.vo you said
■-Ut hovon 1 olpod conaidombly oortr.ln political end nation-
ro'pa, o specially tho 0 r an do nunlstc | Osi c! - Slov-
“ u “‘ ,ni “.t03 p -nrt I uoliovc tho Dutch hostugos vring ti o

- o ... \.es first cap dcctcr; ti is crcup ~ou spook cf,

- o fo ps ti: t you spo’ o f , vciv only .. wry

; 1 rfe * - * of tbo co»*p; Is tl at ccrr.cj?

•* .t it so; .-or.

I Dr. Ten

; .* l.o equally as ruthiucr or tt r EG Ivetors? *

•• •* - oitu c.or ir this, ftor cur liber, t.ov ovon, vo

c uor* . 33 cd by s: (.• rice!

- i-'-ti s several ti..:cr c!*cd todofirc tho SS .ctivifciur.

- • tc lofinc tLo SS f r tho -tiurican tut!critics end

.33


5282


2 Til -S’ —I-5-N 3rvcn

Court No. 1


..Hit ry croup with a n..zistic ideology, w? icl had tc be

r-.-dy tc cxturaln tc individuals, groups or whole nations on

r rs. -very SS ;.ar. was per. it ted to carry out such hillings

his own h;iti. tivo. A.o group cf SS doctors - ;.nd this *.vo

told tlx '«orica n autixritios - we said would be a bloaish

r. .e ’ical history; that in tl o 20 tl century a group cf

.octers, trained at thu host universities in tl o world by

the best teachers, should have sc subjected tl crssolvcs to

Hczistic Moology that tfcoy would not only by order Icillc or-

•

tain groups and :;uss cs of people, b"t oven at tlcir own in¬
itiative. T, is wo said to tho . , .r:ccn authorities.

Hcv, we turn tc ->r. he von's ease; ho certainly war. an SS
debtor, with all tic CL attributes, -itlc gh. I nov-.r a..w
any killings by hi:.. ~'v. K von toe could (kill in. atca, on
• ir own ir.i..tlvc, but hr. hovon took the non sure 8 that I
doacribed ir. otc.il, which which were of great bor.oflt end
' elp :< t; j inuutos.

•*ft-r t; u 4 T.«rican Amy libor tod us, wo stood before a
■ nu wnt to tl . prisoners, vt o lied in “uchonwald, I
beliovo 61, 00 prisoner a ware klllod in "uchonwald. At this
c.roaony, doctors cf all nationalities ci-to together and wo
isciascu the q»v.:ti vL t wo hud dene tc litigr.to tho onor-
cus ouff ring tl t took pic.eo in ouchorwald; re wuro clear

w ro tl a contain oxtoi ccossful.
x heliuVe ours w. r the only ono of tl o 1 rgc cuips wh ro
spread of typhvs hud been fought end I also, knew, hr.
S’.socutcr,tl.et rsy statenant cn ti- subjoct is quito differ-
8tatonants of doctors fron otl _r cr_.ps.

I a : :;uc! concerned with, tho lives cf 'Y.u prisoners in
••l c vr.trlee and luck .a-c-lf, why is it vlut I say is
•liferent fro. ;: 1 . t ntHrs say; how ct.:o c rp-tont d'ctrrs
c.. ps ’.i* not h o tl _ success whereas wo could d6


5263


1 -~ril -7-"-S‘ —4--l-'!cch.an-3r.t: Bror-r.

Cc -:-C ITo. 1

Lz end yet our et. tc.-.nts c.:o difforont? I err. singly sr.y
s::. i; t: o tier doe Cere sinpiy did not h: vo an opportunity
_c v.x ii : to cor:o ir. touch with another Dr. Hoven.

iTo% , m tfco courto of-your duties c.t tho 1 ospitr.l .
b- rroe’er in * J uohont/cld; v. re ycu .'nnilirr with tie roon ir.

tfcu 1 capital nu::lx.r 11 ?

Yos.

. To yur knowlc go, v. ro p..ticr.tr oxter ilr.r.tod in rornll?
... !r. froaocutor, c.:: far r.c I ean v ^lcObcr nunbor 11 we. a
ir. r sMcir.l hctrrr.oks call* d It w. a of tor. discuacod

in tho era p, but I no vox* r r; anyone !: lied tlcrc; they v;cro
collected there for sc:jo lon~th of tiuo r.nl thon t urnod
looco : tin . ’ l.y did I not cue it? There t r. throo eoap
phyaicit£ t o . nd wo rocoivod fron Dr. Hovon

c. vrittun order t’. t v-. 1 d to ci^n th. tt tho aphoro nruiod
fcc bo y..\ ts.ro \ by us r.r.d wo did r.^t c t r it.

If I un or at nd it correctly, you rruld aay t) ss-
v.'bl-ji .... tionta *>r 1 rates in rota 11, thon ovontur.lly the
.r • f inn t. a uoro oxtuminutod. Did you 1 or.r of this?

You naver saw it, you don't know r.f your ovri lir.owlad o; did
you h .r nf such oxtor•in/.tirre frer tic ot! or nonbers r.f
tic staff?

R. OA LIh:Iob.1 .ct to thin question. *fco witnojaa rr.il l o had
r-- r c..n it, th-.t h.. 1: '• novor ontwrwd tlx rerv: cn'. for that
r rr-»n he ennret r.nrwcr tlx qi'c.stim.

.

, 0 ’ it. I . 0

• 00 if ho over heard c'»out ott.minr.ti-r.c ir. reen 11.

dl FillEH»H!T: ?.v qu-rti^n in tl'o f r: propounded to

rltne.88 ir bjccti-,'ublc on- tl. c.bj -cticr. is sustain-

• ' itr.osa bo cslco l if Vo is ewara -i tho gonarnl

p, in Roc; 11 , wlc’t happened *1 cro and
523-1

■


'rcrrn


through tJ -re


1 i-Srcss (Ir.>. Brown)

©wrt 1>


Witness, ci y u ever Acer tr.e ten Buthar-isl.. ir. connection


?uck_uv Id Concentration C


*. *&r.t do you know riout it?


.. JUtnnneoi- vr.a the -ori that wca used for the killing of the


.


. t t too w_re killed undor tfc raise of SuthnnasiA,


•dtnccE?

... I r. v.r g-.v t..~t — not t..is. I don't hr. \i -Ant prioonera "era
chOocn or -ho cr.oce the... C'~ I o not never your queatio...

\ ’-. re did tr.is Sutkn&oeia tnho place, do you know?

... Vo who could : av- rVut frocly in tho hospital could neo th t
this "uthcmsifc could only hr.vc boor, carried out in Roor. 11 .

'• D- you knou v.Mtk.r or not t.xo dofend-tnt Hovon carried out thooo
3ithi-.nr.sir. hillingc?

I t. H- HX: I gr.'.r. object to this cuoatlon. The witnoan etr.tod that
.. v ; never lr th-1 roo , th t he h-d nov.r aeon it. Consequently, ho
c sot ns v.r t.r t rue at or.. Ho iota not hr.vo tho necooonry hnovled o to
t ao.

I. KESirS.?: T-. vitnoss .ay r-r.aw-r tho queotion Yon or ‘To —

•' he knows.

... I c id • t r. •• *.: f I did not -see Dr. H>von ovor kill nnyono.

V Did you ev. r -i-~r t.. t he hilled -nyono ir. t. is Block 11?

$u prison.rr poke ocOflf thousolvos about th. fnflt thr.t

••• 3 verc killed.


. . you V r herx th. t cue., killings Were carried out by


=-••• •?


Tee. It w s sc-i th-1 ir. the hocpitrl tho people were killed
- "■> I- •• r. asking about Dr Hovon. Dr. Horen v r nentionod up the nci'-
r.a or.sible for and c rr;-ir.-: out th.se ki H... c but, os I said, I


it


i ;.—.-j£>=-3-5r03 = (3fovr)
Court /5. 1.


.• i'ow, did you ever hear of people ta-.t ro orted to the hospital
branch® -tor r. h:rd days work for aodical treatnont - ad after reporting
;; :I.o hospital Vrracks they were sent to Soon 11 r>»d eventually
cjr.ie ted? Did you ever hoar of such eases as that?

... I did not near that.

> ->•. you re f.-iliar with Slock 46'in the Duchcnvald C-^o, aro
not?

... Yes, I do. I t-Btifiod about tii»t y.sterd-y.

> Did you undo ret a-*, t.. t Dr. Ding vr-o the Chief of 31ock 46?

• .- Yes. I knew th:.fc,

*. ".o did you uc oretrnd to be the superior of Dr. Ding?

... I uns clear in :y .ind t- t Dr. irugovs'sy was Dr. Ding'c superior
sr t Dr. Ding belonged to Dr. i-TugOusky'• Kygicno Institute but wo
n..-4-d about the (jucation of infection tliat was being carriod out in
Block 46.

*.n» Dr. Seven conoiderod to bo Dr. Ding's Deputy?

-• PI.: ie. I sal' y st rd th *. I know nothing about this and hd
ov. :v.ard anything of it.

• .. lid you know anything about tin. selection of ini. t-n to be used
for t. » orpericents in Dlocfc 46?

-'«• hr. Prosecution, vi.ee. person is in • c*—p as long as I ires.

:.o.; ono hears »:ooi deal .eid *v..n you . ok v.jxt I heard. I can tell you
•••i!:. • 3loc:*. 46-

- Jiirt a .or nt, i-itnoss. ?or yhir iaforr. tion you any hero tostify
3u k. e h.. rd v thin th- c r p erd as t> what you know about as

. r c-.-e.-i exp. rier.c- ar.d - s to your own kr.owlod* c. So. you nay

0

- ■ ■' -uo.

• I ’-.is n-v-r t.. r. and of ry own cxp-ricnco I know nothing* 3ut,

* orj -rfectiy clear ir. the c . p th't experiments wi-r. being p-rfornod
; y^c 5 and tie.- prisoners w r. chosen for tl. s. experiments. I

t the politic* 1 1 department took c xc of that select ion. People


5267


• 3’hey priE^r.crc w'.ie


:.. S-5-3-Crtftfa (Brown)

C ert ' • -•


cr-.p wore afraid of Slock -o.

:;Ior. red t' the uon-f ric.-.ily group of personalities end we who h *.d souo
ior: of o;.ur .ctivitios were not afraid the: v>c v re goir.fi to end up i.i
Slock «6» tut .any did h-.vc tnat foar.

.. ’foil. v r- those experimental subjectc used in 31ock -.6 non who
a ’ -topped out of line and volunteered to be subjected to these cxp.ri-
-r.tr?

h. r o, I doubt th t.

.. kitners, ir. th. operating roo. i.. which y u worked did they keep
a 1 .'fio nuntit” of poisoniue sub at'ir.ee vnich could be used for intra¬
venous ir.J .ct'-ans?

.. . r. FrOBeCutlOii, I V a risked about ovi r n by the aoricun . ilif.ry

i: rltioo v«.r* tpeclf ic-lly. 2 vln< n is r. intr-vonout narcotic
•

• ;:cot..a*i.- . ’.'o hrve to be very careful i:. th t ttcr. you h wo to uoo
Ce.-t ir. i-vint ml t... n yu do r culef nr.oathotic with ovipnn. before
I ins • pointed -r.d when the r.ureec dif the -ncsthetislny they uood Svipra
about i.CO doaoa of Bvipon there i: tbo aurgic \rtuont.

!; i - present medic 1 theory th -1 ovipru*. nhoul bo used in such c -cb
hernia, oppcndoctoay — but I used it o loc 1 onoethoaie. I vt.b
- v-it ad worked only with loc- 1 anesthetic. I -v.a coked wr.-t Jir.d
:o. t Evipan durir, operations by the Ulrica author it lot, for
: q -unt of Evijxta got a oiler ond Kiiller until after about six no nth c
re w o -.on. left. " ry stitll amounts night oo used but they woro very
-11, ir.dowd, r.ot more than 5 Fiecoa. One must ascuno tart the 1 rgo
• r.t of t.. i b rvljaa war v kon out aide the operating room.

.. Veil, now Dr. Hvxea w s t.;e direct superior of the operating room
•rhe?

... Yes, -e v a cnicf of t.; whole hoepit.l cad -iso of the operating

roor..

• ell, did y e er r he x of any 1 teal injections with Svipen?

-• I. *'-a s id in th. c •aoxufror : at icd the word evipan it
: * t * evip. c . e; Ir.- used i:: t.\ic way, bu*. I myself did .vt sc- it.

3288


i ^r-ir-iZS-5-4-Groaa (3rown)
: nrt . - i.


scv about ahc.sol?

. : £loo testified on -.hi6 subject, r.is vt r 1 ter. Dr. Rovon hr&

•ireedy loft the cquj. fie gcn.r.J discipline relaxed tML a prisoner

- -T on '- of the rcctior.3 coso to no anc told no "Dr. Horn*, trke a

: t '—is heart. fio heart is Tory rod and saolls of phor.oi." in the

rose thcr. : used v rlour drugs and so or.w no particular point to
:. remark by t..ic ecn -nd th- renark was dripped. One- we hnd c clinical
3£Cti r - c hoc tion fi-t 11 physicians vnrt.d for our ov-n nodical pur¬
poses. nd again t..ie prisoner brxugnt -tc : corpse and again showed no
where the means conbraic of the heart w s roddoned. Ir. viou of
‘•- c - ;x * 1 ir - th utopsy ropa aany drugs have a snoll I nevertholoos

11 ’ conolu’c th: t t..is una p..en©A. I tostod another corpse, I told the
-rr. to ov.jn up tho storrch of t is corpse. t.;c heart of i*.,ich h d n;xjllod
. ! : ^ 1 ' ®c. rtolnod t tho atomch contained no signs of phonol.

a

I-’- ■'Tis, tho phonol rust have be r. brought into tho organisn aorx

/.• ota r thnn through fc:> touth. I cue conclude fro,* the vcy tho nucous

-iibnr.e l3-kod. r can c-:xludo th t certainly this was a sovoro cc.oo of

-■-'*er r itis.

■

> honor or you visited the autopsy roo in those cases of donth by
- yov nurposod vr.s phenol, could you hrve osoortninod tho nationality
'• ;,;c - and whether or :.ot tho person or a n incurable?

. "o, I c• r.cot nsv r that question, "o saw r corpse which hrd
t.e thifj: r.s its only idontif left ion. There wr-.s no thine
— 1 * b thcc - atua f no ladle tin. of n t nnllty. And vr.on I oov
• : :• the person h-d hod another dicer.so. .!r.

-cutler., y:u r.uat re:~i;b r th t although vc occupied n corf In position
lc : “ lc c • ? vc wer_ otill la the hands of tho SS and C-cstcpo and rli

- •-■'•= if that sort could h Vi. h i Very be., c r.sequcnco thcr. for us.
—. you will understand it, doctor ir. ny position, n rum with coi^-

• : 0 — -sibility, too, nd you will understand why I v s in such natters
* : * superficial s I see: t: have bo xu .. rop.r. who did bccono too
- of phenol injection. K v s injocted ir.to n voir., sono ”r.y
*• I can Only tell you this i.-.n wr.s hil cd with phenol.


1 A-ril 47-ii-?jC-6-l-BlokIcy (Ir.t., 3 pctj=)

CC-iTt I

1 Sw, D r. H^or. tostifios la his affidavit JC-47I that ho
alxlalfitorod phonol injoctions tc iwtos. Did you knar that?

-* I novor talked with Dr. Hovon about this; and I rofor to
that I havo alroai;* tostifiod, that a part of tho prisoners, -.ho’
uoro afrall accuao’ Soros of carrying out thoso killings.

1 -'hat do you know about tho doportation of j 0 ws free
puchorwald to unfcuara destinations?

.. That is truo. At tho beginning of 1912 suddonly tho Jowa
voro carried out of tho hospital; ar*l oa this occasion it happor.od,
as i said yortorlay, thn* wr.s tho Jo-..- Xoha, tho aca, whoso wifo,
aal child, that I saved this r^n. These sick Jaws wore transferred
olsewhoro.

1 Nou, t:ho aolocted those six Joes for transfer, or -..-ore thoy

0

jjst nickel at randoo?

A ”ot si-., but sick. J'.r. Prosecutor, the nay those Jews wore

chosen I as sure that that was an order on the port of the political

Go-tapo departcost of thu co=p; and cy osporlonco is that this

Slroctivo cast have core fro= a political authority in tho ca=p.

"ell, at tho tlj o that thoso Jens ::oro transferred, thoy

)rs pat 1 oats in tho hospital, voro they not?

*

A "os, tho Jo’.'o in t!» hospital uorj sick nost assuredly,
those who *.raro taken away.

'i. <'ol2, suppose that a Jour uca no; .oo sick; in othor lords,
hi “ coalition was ono • ilch would bo cloarod up in a fow days.

• '-li ho havo boor, transforrad awed fro:: Buchorwald on this particular
action? . m

A If I undorstard you correctly, you aro asking nhother Jows
•o could havo boor, curod nora t-kon away also.

1 Yos.

A As I hoard, tha o;:s voro tokon fror. tho details in othur
r ‘ - -ows who varan't sick at all in tho ccep. I don't boliovo it

;3t fc hc sick Jovs in tho hospitals who voro takon away out Jows


5290


1 April 47-j-yjc-^-S-Pickioy (1st., Brorm)
Zk rt 1


who wore working ir. the co^naaios of tho cat?.

1 K<#*» did you over hoop tho nezo Bomburg in that connoction?

A Mo.

", 314 you ovor hoar tho codo lottors "14-7-13" in that connection?

A ?ro.

'I Wall, now, aftor thoso Jews had laft for this unknown
iostinatlon, within u fow Joys woro thoir index cards ar.4 nanos
rooovod frets tho filos?

A W 0 had our am file of tho prisonars in tho wholo cnaP»

Of courso, v.hon 'to hoard that so and so zany Jows had boon tokon froa
thi cacp, thon, of courso, wo woro Tory curious to know whothor tho
•ow3 hod boon trar.sforrod to anotbor cccaaido or whothor they hod boon
ionj qko y with. Aftor a cortoin length of tino the ordor caro to
toko tha carlo free the card lados, so *.;o assusod that thoy hod boon
ll’.od; but I Q: ; only tolling you now what I hoard. It was said
that tho personal offocta of tho Jaws woro not usod by tho Jowa
thcBsolvos; ir. othor words, that thoy olunly woro doud so that tho>
ctuldn*t uso thoir eorsoml offocta.

1 Mow, vrero you oror cognizant of tho fact t!at tto camp
tarar.dar.t waild iasuo ordjrs that oortaln pooplo woro to to
vjztomiratod?

A Onco, it Just occurs to no. i was in t!u corridor to tho
operation room whoro 1 worked. Dr. Hovon usod tho word "outharasio";
o.-.i in this connections he said that tho cabandont hod arprovod it
tr.^t aoriously ill at lone 3 should bon outhnnasla appliod to thon.

I r.c*ror spoke to Dr. Hovon about this further because at that zcoont
- 3a» tho situation :Mch would arise if I es tha only surgeon in tho
->-•> ' 0*111 fall ill; and so it occurred to no frea this titlo
t-t.--asia" that I also night bo aidod via outhrna3ic; in other
r '-=. put out of ny suffering, which, of courso, I ro pud la tod, as I
•-P-i:atvi any outhasasia because I was and. cast bo in a position
• c feliovo tho patients’ ruTferizg.


5291


1 Arril 6-3-ElPkloy (Ir.t., SrotTiJ

Coart I


Aft or tho fconbing of co-ceay, wo had rroat oxporicnco In tkoso
-itttor3. P.rcono Icy for ton or fSftoon days unconscious. Thoy
or- uacblo to control tholr blcddors; tbsy oro ineontinont; they

•

: -Its’ r cct. yio ^lly thoy regained consciousness. Siaco I ‘.avo
furociy aor-tioaod crr-p Justico so such, Yx • Prolocutor, I so'.- and
too:: prlsor.ors to tkoso pooplo and said to "you have boon

l: i.Y .oro for fc:o rooks unconscious, couldn't oc.t, couldn't dr Ini:."

”o too!: t':o : -r to t wo parsons, t an y, b.l wo uoro not aroporod
::r sue! - , a catastrophe as t’is. Tho nan '•'Jl :ey, "I ••“5 unco.nnious;
I folt nothing, folt bo pain; and I an surprised that-you oro
brlnflni thoao -atturs up -<lth -ii."

Thoro lo no roint, It sojT-c to ::e, at : Icli it Is justifiable
for ar.vono to an; ly outhanr.sin and particularly not a doctor In tho

0

2Qtk century. As lor.r as tho oart nuncios aro working, tho person
•- -llvo; “al no oru has a rl. ht to put hi: out of what you think
1 : hi . itory.

r -V - ^uastione, your 'f^nor.

SIA-JVATIO"

( rj-r-r. :;rai*'c ):

'.‘ltr.a-r:, :hO lid you undorstr.nl anpliwl outhanasia at

“ye-, world?

•i i ll * r you as roller.®. i said -t thoro «a» a
r of prisoners Who held *)-. Heron rorponoltlo for Vil l i PG Innatos.
: -c net want to -use tk_ "outlr.nasla.- Th->:i Jr. Sohidlaunky c-ro to

* o ap—ho 1 . tho HS son uhor. I doscri-1 yostorJay who charged so

r .ia-ally; ... in ?,-.70r^bruck -..-ns a r.itllo s scr t of porson, -r.i no-.:

- *i buconu such -n -anxious and frightened *>oroon that ho wouldn't

r*f tor ho ersao th -t

* 1' tt tho-* l-oar that th- porsoca continue', to disappoor fren tho

- . a tad of 1944, 1*- wafl » t necflsirry to kill tit,

I 7 so: - Sach as

5'di‘Z


1 April 47-ii-?jC-6-4-31 -Jcloy (Int., Brown)

Crart I

y:r-. ccaaondo or the 3-3 cccmnndo, wbcro tho cldost transports
Lasted ft naalcu:. of sir v;ock3. I romonbor tiro hundred Froach
Industrialists, including the xoll-kncarn Kicholaino, who diod of tor
•la vooka of such a work comedo, in othor works, it was not
mease ary to kill th. prisoners. ?eoro raro other weya or gotting
rid of then.

mortality at that time was oaorcons. *,;o woro just under
fiv& tnouso-id fatolltl.3 a nonth. JtjTorthaloso, wo still hoard
occasionally that ona or -pother orisor.or hni uiaappoarod. To ho
specific, lr. thic noried •..•o received the nave that frraj tho
construction comrdo t!v Polish consul in 3udarost~his rirst nano
la Jr»n; hut I formt his f-=ily nr*»—was to oerm cnco to tho c-np
hospital and nov&r roturnol to hla worX ooenando. I visitod tho
-•itl: MB. Ho was ontiroly normal. Aftor two or throo
lays I wont to that seno section ag-ln; hut ho was not tloro any
longer. Ho h'-l boor transform! to .on ell of ft suddoi.

. dlscpponrod. I wor.t to tho nurno, beoauoo at that time it was
.os- 1 bio to ha a littlo curious, and i nskod ihat fcftd happonod to

a

tl. follow. Tho roirao laughod end said, «?ou won't soo hin ngain."

I •» convince* 4 . tl-t at th*3 ti=w tho Polish consul frer.

Budapest ilsappo-rod ir this way. Dr. Schidlcusky cortainly didn't

in tho c-ap; rjA so wo oiot try to find
•:.i parsons who did this oloowhoro. " aro • oro othor SS and
oi.col non thoro in the e np; aai I an sura th-t Dr. SchidlauflXy
lid nat do this.

22 I?.33rJ3-: 3ho Tribunal ’ill ho racoss.


5293


, ' r-rll 1917 -"-9-1-fSP- Karr cm (Int. Feeler)
. ,’rt 1


THE ILJ&KnL: Persons in tftj court roar, will please find their seats.

Ire Tribuanl is rrair. in session.

BT JUDGE SSERirC:

Q. row, D-iCt:>r, just bU'ore tho corninr recess, when the court directed

at ions to you concerning the activities of Dr. Kovan.and Dr. Schidlausky,
a 5 lvc the c art your version of what you knew about their activities.

: ,, n, r . th-ro any other doctors at Bucher old, during the tirr.c you stayed
th.ro, r>b .ut wh.se activities you fcn~w? SitJ*r by direct kn.wledfo, by
jtscrvntior. r by general prevail!nr reput-ti;n concerning their
activities in that caapl # •

». In th. c-ncontr tion casp of 3uci.er.wald, in addition to tho head
SS physician. Dr. H von r Dr. Schidlausky, there were two or three
;ub r’ir- tu SS physicians. Uestly, they were very young doctors who had
r. ; y t practice , which no ant that they .nly .ant. rod their sorvico ns
- physician in the carp, aw! .joinc through nil th- physicians I roiwnbor
I cann t pick ut any individual persons. Most f the physicians woro
unknown when they ot tiwro ant! left likewise. 1 cannot renumber that tho
Irsetae r-ir,'. -t./ particular c^aplaints against SS physicians. Thcro

•

. when iid y.u first bec-Ou an irente in any f tho concentration
cvjpn?

. Ont was in tho crop of or. ir-. near V . ...is io really tK
• : r it ry . r Czech Slovakia in the Surfotoittnnd.

Q. '.hen?


... Xr. S*-ptcr;.-.r, 1939.

. Hr. 1 r- !i ' you stay there ~s r.n innate?

«. I stays tho* f ri urtccn 1 -ys.

-. TK a wirt ctv ‘id y.u r i t >?

... I Q lv r.t to GestApa pris ns r court prisons, where tho
:al s.rvic. was carried ut by SS physicians.

.. rar. was the period of tinb th t y u stayS in that activity in
pris.r.s?

th t fcias already th r, .r.v-.il.t ir. Ge nanny and in the accupicd

5291


.. ril 1947 -W-9-2-PXF- Rarrow (Int. Honaltr)
urt I* . 1


_r. it.rios an one m us Lack ->f physicians. I went : > vh. prison of
i iclburr *t 2 ruenn.

". '.he'a?

Thnt was :utwucn D_cc=*>-r and Jernnry, 1S39.

Q. How Ixcc di'. you st y there?

A. Until the 15th of February.

S. Then v.iv.ro lid y-u go?

n. Then I wont to the Gestapo Pris on K&unitz-K In . That is in Bruenn.

Q, H» i rv Id y u stay there?

A. Until I was transfearod t.' the c-xin .f E. . That is, t»

beginning f Dcc.nb-r, 1941.

Q. Hw i n; Were you r.t Buch.nw.ai :?

«. I stayed in Buch.nwald fr-ati* 9th of Decuabor, 1941, until the
liberation, which was tbo 11th -f April, 1945. I »tnyw 1 an thcr fow wooks,
up t < the 2Gth of liay, 1945.

Q. Tt»n y.u woro there f.r • period f npproxlsntely a re than throe
yu-ro. Ic that correct? At Bucfconwali?

A. Yej, that is ri nt.

Q. Can you ostir.at© h * many pris ners were at Buchcnwnld?

«. Gener-11:'?

Q. •'bun you cn..o there . Y-p, gonorally?

... 1 already oai t odny.

C. (Interrupting) I ta •• ,* u Say It -.-in.

A. In Doeuflbor, 1941, I > stieatcl the aaount to be approximately six
th'Ucan' iaof tec.

. Tr.-nk y -u. N n, state f or th. Information f the Tribunal whether
'that number increased fr .atime to time while you were there aif! 'bout
Wvt the vproxiaato ninthly increase was, if you kn-*. Or quarterly
increase? Or sad-annual increase? Or yearly increase?

Jr. tthi y r f 1942 there wav a normal incr-a.se, which according to

y stlr. tu - me I -- now o> akin. J new additions into the carp, -and

: old like to s.-.y that the total increase ' by two thousand people. You

• • I c n't say exactly how many people lied in the coop r h:>» many


• 5295


1 iprii 1947 ---9-5-PKP- Barren (Int. Rzarixr)

C urt Uo. 1

ren adoitbed, but --o knew, t that tine, that there were approximately a
f t v!y eicht thousand there, fr - tbo kitchen.

C. Y u think th-n that sooc tine 'urir-; the year 1942, without taking
j r .t acc ent the transfers, r the- deaths, that there were appr-xirntcly
•i ht thousand ir.y-tes at Buchcnwold?

... Yes, ipproxiafiioly.

Q. Raw many wzuld y.u ostiarto were there in 1943 un:or the spjmj con-
tlitl r.e?

«. The yv.or 1943 was a turning , oint in cmcentrati >n camps. .*t that
tine the enspo wore transforroe to Libor camps. That expressed itself
in i earner that the Gestapo no roly capture-' the people as -no catches
■ roe an-', tr ii3ferr.:'' then ir.t t.b- ccqp.

Q. /in’, h.w nany -'urin, the year 1943 ■y u think were there?

*. Un'er Doctor Buvon I think there wore r.ppr xia'.toly fifteen thousand
tut tho number incrc.asW rcpi ly. Uasc transports cano t.< the c-cp from
Auschwitz, etc., tr.ansp rt after transport cane and went. Sanotifflbs
5,OCX) pu pie r. r.y left -he can?. There was nj su; ervioi n to bo
eX.rcice*, pe , lx nrrivetl an: people went. Tho car,-. -f Buchenwal' - tho
Ce-.t-r can?, house- t tix. nost - rnl 1 cm incluiiry tho little can? -
t .ie pis stios cjul! h-ucc a?;-roxinatcly forty thousand. The outer camp,

I think, -untocl to - nuch lar r number S persons. '..hon the American

Authorities liberate ’ the can*. anG wnntuil t find ut the nunbur -f
invites they f ur.-ut that there were eighty-onu thousand Goad an’ they
.:,tcd t.- kn w h;w many ;e.i?lo went a hr u.;h the cam? and the fiuro was
aonti rx.: r rather it was said that there were ab-ut a number .f me
hunir f rty th-ms-an -n, including the branches -f the camp.

.Ill t was the - whrt Git y.u bserve as to tl* renoral physical
e ni-.i.n f the pris rxrs at aocluiwni: when y u first cane there in tho
i iter art f 1941 n 'urir..* the year 1942?

n. I r. -.. --th er thr.t InpTuSsi r. very wo 11 . I renumber it in the year of
i;-l. I entered the c ap an’ I saw a number f elderly ruitleacn, and
‘ Czechs, wh ware in .a . siti;n t recoiv. packers f tw kilos.

R : ont-red tlr.ro the r-11 call was t'kW ?!•-«*- W- 2 saw ay


5295


„ rii 1947 - —9-4-PXF- Kn rrast (Int. Baaal^r)

-jrt . i

c r----- '-he first i=pr«-ssi n wasn't ted at * 11 . I saw blocks ;f the ol'
lit leal iriartee, costly artisans, wh. worked in tr.-- caspt Hy ispru3sirn
f t b. a r.snt aa at all. Very sc:>n I was relieved fr a attending rell

cr ll by Dr. H van. Ihen I sfcrtod to set blacks whore the inmates 1 okod

• •

v-ry badly. That especially appliu to the Polish b olcks. The blocks of
Jch va'c .fitnesses wore in auch better c »nditian. They were mostly workers
with the SS and ttereforo looked better. The oneral impression that 1
! taan't the w rat at -11 and I mntich that because I must openly
idrit that I -was surprised. Especially the- h\ political inmates explained
• so that the pace of the w ;rk .and the type f the w.rk when erecting tho
camp -f Buchjnml , which ;ri»inaUc in the 'A~r f 1937 -r 193P, was so

c cl n t stand t hysicolly

Q. ,v.t was th- (Tenoral physical coniiti n of the prisoners y;u saw
th.ro durinj th) )u'T3 19t3 and 19V. r.d until y ur Uborati n in April
1545, as Ova.ar.rod to th- #»n»rsl physical c.-rx'iti.n of Uhe prisiners whjra
7 u b sonv.'. r»h«-R y.u first cam t ftichtnwald?


5297


J;irt 1.

^p r li C—1-HD-Lesser-Ramaler.


'.then the camps were cnar.ged Into labor camps and the
z es were sent to work for Germany's war Industry, It
• r= emitted for tho ir.iatee to receive packages. Tr.ese
.r- nr-okfuea ip to the weight of 5 kilograms but it was
: lto ossible to negotiate with the 35 and rc.ieve that
??an r.e vler packages arrived. It oay have cost r little
. ;re aoney. for that reason all tho incites wr.o veceivea
pcckages from noae looked much better, liaturally, tne sit¬
uation of the roles was terrible, the situation of the
Russians, and also of the Crersar.s who r.-ceived no psekagsi.
Inn: especially applied to Ger.-ans who were not active In
lr. ;.ie acLslnlatr- 1 ion. They, of course, didn't look ns
veil. Only in the years 13-i-* *.nu 1M5, when packages arrived
ir3.i franco, and in this connection I novo to ay tn t tne
french nod Croos did soma or.orncus work; that also appll'.o
t c ItzerJand. Switzerland sent o. ckagoa to Germany of

I value of .or •'t least aaointln fc to 2 million p: ckagoa—

1 . net our- wnetner It w s 2 nil lor. francs or 2 million


p c.:*, -s. ihe packages, of cour e, ned decreased ir. size.

... , zc.zo tiu y or 1044 -*r.d now 1 on go caking of 95 percent
:. Vh- inmates. i:ioy looked terrible. Ar.oy were pointed
os It demonstrated by Or. Pleck. Siey Lived ir. terrible
c '.-1 Plena, 0 or 7 people wore sleeping or 2 beds. .‘o raeelvod

• tvlbla Infections, lmoctlona of t..e Intestines, ’e went
*•: : .cck PC, oskln B them to find out what the c:use of t.:le

•c :.lc vo3. 0 mostly feared ty. ...;s. -r.e sltuntlcn in^

It tie camp via beyond anyone's in ^ir.atior.. I wont to
- -crl.c t.:-j following to you: Tho /w.rlcan Coasrnder in

• d'r. 1 o.-ierud tr.nt 2,000 a.rmr. _en anu women come to

:.w.v„ ^ally to :00X ct it. Tne American s ldi-rs looked
; - '• c- too; they wore : ioa soldiers er.d they ..r.uersteod
Utuntlcn. Sit tc ..otlced tnat wnenev-r German men ■ na


— w ::.t t-.roug;: it tfiey preferred to throw themselves


Court 1

rt prli 1-—10-2-HJ-Lesser—iazuzler.

down on the O round In order not to have to look. Tnere
vforc heaps of dead v„ich we could not bury because we had
:.c facilities to do so. Later, after the dead we-re burled,
OiTcrn sen • nd wocen carte again. They did not want td ^o
into the clock. They erlea cr.d screened. They said they
-la not w-nt to u o Inside, they did not .-mow whot was
..at;per.In there, they anew of nothing. If one looks at
-lack's t n lr.tln u cne con only er.ilz- the extent of whr.t
the situation vs. One can otply sone nensurc if one
considers the reaction of the Gcraan nen >'na w-iten when
r.-.oy looked at the cuip. Ir. Jenu-ry, .-obru ry, torch nnd
n.:ril there were 5,CCO people aond lr. the era*. of 3uchen-
wrld.

h. Can you state wivt tile official crlorlc content
c C tne diet of the prisoners was when you -one there, not
t-’klne Into ■>ccount cny He- Cross p~ck- .iS that way Jv vc
c-ne Ir. or other typ-s of y c«ca L ts, wi.en you first cmr.o
*.; 3uchenwald t 1 ta span .ln b now of tne prisoners who
vore not uo.pltnl lnzv tos ur.d w*ien wo nave finlehcd this
ol.it, then i wont to pass on the nos ltnl \ not* tee.

«. n-.c amount of calories was often considered nnd
counted, urinly by the inaatoe. That olrerdy held tvue
t the tine o. Jr. coven, io. know that everythin^ In
-• rnr'.,y-w'-s done ov true.. If one went o the Older one
z: Id c int on oG calories cr r.llo, that Is altogether
:,CCG calories. T.vt, ..rwever, w e the order. Jr. aoven
£ .t ...3 Inspect d tfca kitchen witn us - nd in^ro we saw
t:.ot the kitc.'.or. for Inizates nad a nunber cf people eating
*-'.cre unofficially. So and lar.-tes w;.o had no business
tne re. at. lnaate In the nos ltnl did not receive sufficient
calorics to enable hia to live longer than 4 to 6 weeks.

1: .ndu - yreat dtc. s: uil ferer.ee v.'-iu received the upper


5290


Court 1 T

* rli l-St-KD-10-3-Le8ser-««Eatap.


layer of -ny food contained In a pot where acre fat vrs

c stained. In order tc e lve you eoae acre specific answer
-no adet r.ssuae that the anccr.t of calories e iven was very .

Considering not the center cr.cp of Suchonwald but
r trench, let us say the construction ccro -tora, where
cret v-s or.s were prcaucca, these wore subterranean
w-rns, or consider the notorious 5-3 '-here subtoi'rnnoan
v v. v»s also carried ut—the lnnrtua etur.uu fioo there
after r few weeks, low «nd egrir. ' nurse c-ce o* ok from
there r.d he arid there was no dlelnf ctlon there. e
oi.ed his. .vow c-au people disappeared rnd tr.v only answer
v «6 the conic did r.ot et sui.lclor.t food, the acdldne
was not sufficient, and peo-.le wore Just dlaappe-ring.

A 1 of this, bf c -ree, resulted In dlrrrhen. Block 00
aid .vet caku rny bacteriological din t nouea ~nd I went *.o
.enfira .-ro;.-ssor rl.c^’a stotoaont--tnio dlu’rr:ien v.na
,hv dlanuea v.tio. was seer, after the first world war,
v. lcn s :.eu •£ result or h..n c -r. In ot.,or words, ay

■ l- tort thj os*: r.t o: cniovles vrs not ifflclent.

: iw t.. t was over t*u- entire berloa of tiae w..lle
- •;jro t.ur., not t\.:n. Into account the c/.- t vS wnloh
.-lave cojc in t. Certain ir.ulvlaunle frou outside?

I spea&ino how oerol. of the official diet.

rt . The t:flclal ratio . Up u-.tll 19-.3 vao such that
re were no r.-l syoptoms of hunger. There v.v.s no

£

: _-r then, there was no nur« 6 er ttlnrrhoa. There ware
: cl-1 ayeptorts o. hanger edoar in the year 1943 which
- .o icilced on t:.e inoates but certain symptons were
.1 ait-d y t..e wearing of i-nossibla boots r.a ey the fact

long tine. In other

t;.e erica cf 1 -io was such that one could r.ot notice


5.500


Co-re 1.

«pril l--^-IQ-4~HD-Le£3jr-P-nan.ler.

a:.y particular symptoms c:' hanger with the exception of
sy.it tons In the stoscch and it started only in the year

♦ • \

*. . •

•

%. state for the benefit of the Tribunal the nature

j. the food received by t;.ose concentration camp inmates

d-rlr.u the year Tell us in particular what items

wo-Id receive for nr. ’ verr t c meal and the ltcss of

fo-d they woalu receive throughout the day.

n. In the horning we received r liquid vhlcn was

•

called by son- c tno Inmates substitute coffee- v.nd by
another p vt o: the ina u8, 6;uc. There w-a no vote taken
Viuther it .-.d s up or coffee, fr the food -e;.ot wo
f -nd out that ti.lo prouuct allowedly w- e prouucea from

4

•flour-, which In turn yne -_alned fr-m wood. One must any

tfc* t ever, though It y not n ve rv a any c lorlc v luc

* ifter •» cortr.in ceric- of tine or.e dr^nh It without

•vny s; -otons cccurrir. e tar result. Everything was oaten

:a 4 ovoryt . j drunk but there vna no calory value.

In duitl-r. to tir.pt product we had • piece of bread fron

l0"f o: tread wr.ioh hud 1-00 t raas. The daily ration

•

v 3, I think, nd - an not apookln.. about the Industrial

s jo : ioaer.ts ‘c:.l ti.os*. w,.o V-re not voiv.ln_ in Industry,

-.-t 6 portions of r loaf of bread weighing 15C0 grams.

a* noon tee a e t u-.s true. Tnc.ro v s sou. mod*

-i £ de roots. I cade from *^ric-ltur i country but

- :apcot eoy what kind of root tr. t wr6. In. fr.-r. #

came from the lonles called it rltabngnt. Tnis was

-'l.'.'.lrr to • oeet root Cat di- ..ct fcrvo as such nourishment

-• ie the normal beet root. Shan vs aonetiiaoa received

i-o.L- oi otc to a—s. called industrial pot-tos of r. very

t e—r ty c w..ich c-.r.tc-Ir. - much noiaon, starting free

• *

•• so sirt in cases dirrrhe.v-8 p evalent


5301


Court l

A:ril l-K-lO-5-KD-Lcsser-itf -.-1. r.


n-':;t t..c inaotts nftcr drln t Chat o tato soup. Mow cr.d
-in pieces of neat were floating Ir. Pilot soup but very
: .in : .re'ds of a«nt.


5302


I" ril -«7-: -S' ’cchan-Int: .—:ior 11-1
-rurt lie. 1


o ovcnlns wo j’.t tio noranlado, very snail quan-

f ...-nr. la do end onco a woo k no rocoivod c. -jso.
c av.r :i- Itial, tl.erc ras so:io oxcoptt-ns In ti e erso cf
1 11 lays when innattos rocoivod so-called por. soup and on
;!(. occasion cf ’ole koli.iays tl.oy rocoivod cno >iccc cf sr.l-
1 ecsoCitO.

r working in the i <lus tries in tho so-called A.W.

rkr, v:! ci ti.c v..r in ustrj in t! o ca p, or tin so vrork-
ir.- c t o Gustieff workr* r.Urscr r etl or innatsr, w! r work-
el in an ad. nic rr.tivc capacity, r coivod a aupplinor.ttnl
, Loaf of brer-J’.

Iln: and r.-nlii w«io in n t r» to buy sono thing frnn
tfco lnaatus 1 cantoon onco ccrtk, ^lr : r all loavoa of
tr o: wl lch a:.:cllodliko .-niu, but aft*.r o.ting It ono bad
r. a. ucic.l syjptc: is.

-! ..re ■«<■• i"o tie cucto'air: rations. Certainly tho yo r of
I aft r an air ttuck, tie cap inlrtr tion aont
:.oVi 70s to ti e iivir.t a r allowed pr.cka-oe tr. got tl rough
trio lrjiatcs, but with no oxcooti'n all these pr.ckr.gos
stolon. r cl the car p end all innates

6 : *-' n fp thou, tb.t ir rlso truo in ny enso too. i.oy
t r-rn ■at t: y received tho packager, but tl.u pnekogoo
t t- fcho Sd barracks and tier - ”oro err tod cut thoro by
'•'.r. --ll fckii jt_: V - r, ov

rcrlj. ytc its typo and it was sofa -uardod thoro.
: It - art fr.,;i ti .ro , wo lon't know. K a ro is an indicat-


c 5c t'..„ -l'ur.t :f cal rit r \.v gr


t tlat tine wu lest


» r

inistr tivo work, tljo lock-
t to t: cir work, but they uid not lavo suffic-
- ' r- inly ft. r t' ; cso four

-• ..’:r, wo again rocoivod . ckagos and tiislcoi quote


5303


I ..Til 47-'d-S -11-2- Soofcm-J-nt: junior
y urt He. 1


an o::r-.plo; ncuoly the caloric value of tie so official
c': i ;s war completely insufficient.

Durir " tl j ; r rtf 19-1*., wkatwas your observation of
*on-ral living cend ticr.r cf th.o innatoe at Bucfcanwald;
tt neon ncr those who ror.y havo lu.2 favorod conditions,

•; t sho gjncral prisoner wle had no articular professional
i r 3.xci. lized task to perform?

... -it I lava now described no roly concerned tie year
f 1944 an:' the year cf 1945. I think wo had 20,000 Russ¬
ians, :arbors cf nation v:hc could oat ov.r;,t Jin" and who
l/i r/ro power cf resistoneo than th.u r.iddlo or rcsccrr.
iunp* ans.

»*. : o begen. aft r rlx.t T. vo already doscribcd, certain

i

avitaminosis; nnnoly owollir t: o logo, ir.croas-

by Tu.odcr. cl -oo. o covld a do thoro that pocplo lost an
•.nor ’cus r.- .ount <f -i'cht, lawovor, cno c. uld notsoo tho
first t< as, namely, .Uarrl o. . T? at only happonod ir. tho
:• 194-1. Terrible housing conditions ccuo about in nfid-
t r to ti c .Vfflcuiti as cfnourisfcnent toward th.o ond cf tho
•inter f 1844 to 19 5 and a. largo nuribor cf bine too were
nly ’a usod in tents, tor.tr which, w.rc -.rely improvised
blech8. r ivc pocplo woro sleeping :n tyre bode. Tho nod-
ic. 1 supplies thcro tr ro ft sufficient far f at mount of
'•pic, nrr Wuro h -ionic facilities oufficiont.

: >r coodod to taho -.ocrurcs against lice in cur carp
to ar.vo oursolvos fre: a -r.; r typhus lr.fcctim.*Vcr tJ ..t
. a cc Qarsly in arl r tr Control fchO lico, vc roeded a f V
r. ' rl t'ir.k even a then sand innate r, wlc did no thine
-t rl Id f t!o in- ..tcs during -.cals :nd i. spcct thon
: to See if t! oy • d .ry lice or net. Ats nor.surp

n mly by the in., tcs, tho S£ and Ir. Schidlausky did
V -t t our using tl-se incatod for tl is lieu ccr.tr 1


5304


- *■ :ril 47-;:-Sl-U-S--wC•■-ai-Int: lor

Ccurt So. 1

r':, but ho Mil net help us either.

, I t can ycu say to the sonit:.ry conditions r.t tfco
o; t facilities ,-w ..t toiUt facilities, what stcol
Ultima, vl t lab ratcry facilities wero availablo ts-
u? - ycu unders :ond the ncncral inpert and scope cf r:y
tj'j stlun?

... Certainly. Up tc el e - -or of 19-14 tl*o laboratories
. pc su. ficiont, v. shine f acilities :?urc doour.to tee, t!oro
tt s brti which rrr.s nuito,-:. cqu .tc sr tl t over;: innate was
in * cflitlrn to 'oatho ":.oo a wool: and sene' in-mtos cculd ovon
t! tvflco i. woelt» Eero was a sl-owor ir. the can? SucV.on-
tc.1u rd id was woll o qul.pod and tloro vr.s an irrigation
ti sutlon which only fc ' re fault, nanoiy, that tho bonos
fr tho. corpses frea tin oroar.t ri-es v«.ro put thoro so that
ir. tie- ;-o r rf 19-.«. tj lr Irrigation Institution vns stoppo d
tho be 3 rf iho c rpsos. *Ait, up tl tho year
f it)enc can say that all s.nlt. ry institutions wero
qv.tt, incivUm* tl u -'olousinp. After tho year of 1944 it
. .1 : tc an ir. roasin;; extent.

a Mu yo. r rf 1945 r.v c uld • etoct, officially in tl o
ittlo c.-isp vhav thoy vero several 1000 innat^s, -no cculd
: no 1 <- n^v r f any senifcuv institutions. Boyw ro net

ti.n t tl: t, c: 0 tho lack of wator
id •- t rtirl. 3cf re tl ail* attacks tic caap lad a largo
r r rv t<- a so. Aft.r tie air .tracks, whatever v ter facil-
- -s L_r j \:_ro .;cr. ir; ra-vd and of to r ward 3 th.ro J*on»ltod
• rrific L-.ficicncy ir. tl . renitary instituti ns f tho car*.p

a* aid


5305


1 ii rll-.L-Jr-12-l-CcoSc (lilt Sailer)

:<irt I

. s st't.naf.t tc the affect that this litter facility

-rut -eh : i* ta2Jc«. ’ did not function nell .after a certain \r«! in
IW., eraust it xcaru cl'ggt^i u : : -Kith corses that rent into the crc-
itoriiK. .as it shts frer the corpses
Bones of cerises.

}. i -ftor the bodies hVbvcn turoc 1 and the bone ash ronovod?

. • had been tol th t the

cr vit'-riu.*. c: 1 ’ t destroy tn. aacunt a trysts ns a craiatcriur,

»ivuld.. Th-r.-fo.-_, .. t nly aslvsc uld .. C end blit -Is arts of t-

:rr.. , :>i sic in-i tea ~stly service-: the crOieatoriUD.
Iho SS t tfc-c fcl a i. not j rticicato. They t know i do

«it: th. so - r.wS, .a, they jut ti.?.-: 'riv* the 'rri iti.r. systwt rnd into
th. can,, f. . -• In th: aorri Jo :• i !,? L. r- ms a lar&o rnaunt
at dee ■ r. ire whore l sit t- £ - • n, tu! : reptotedij went to

. The s cond chi.:* - of staff

rf the c- Sturt'•■uvfo hr:r E-. 1 r 4 .v-.l-, tri.- t ’ every thin, t kc., Ms

-'. : showed oe her tho

r.ts re c ; tr. t ..’tcclvus r.nt int .3 ct. . r. thr tho canal system
ro at-: t!.. -'s. Dr. Scfeidlausky : s jrod that there tv ns no coal

>

ft ! thi.. c uld b don. e... c Id r e ,nisc th_ corpses chon

r. r , *. h. ‘ r. . t : r rathod b-j used, nruocly, ou-

. ' ■ ...

;• e r sea :--i-ri --as iv.n t ' -t t.;.t first tfcoy w re ,,ut
ir.t • i ih ‘ thd- they -r. few* ' ti- -ocrican authorities r. fow

■ i • r 1st r.

r. it' the or ntorii , r s«.s

‘ ' r c US BOChcni lid?

" -r_ -r - *irectiV. -h «.v_r im rr i in th. c~ < had

• • _

rr .

• . tes

• ♦

l - * r_?


5306


: ipr il-3 —J?—22-2-Ccv k Ir.t. In • :«-r)

C urt I

... ifc_ cart* index srstoo cf -.-1 ircrUs . as carried on by the in-

,r th selves. There were offices jf the hospital and cfficcs of t'.ie

ir.ictr-ti nhert *21 thw iirmtcs "-r- registered by the ihr.'tcs

salvos* All inns tea re re registered tJu.ro ifcc were either aiaittod,

*

r.l 'Ce' r ncro transferred cr »£: died* Naturally in tlu hospital
r-.s never cle-r at ut the c-uso • f -.‘oath* 2 very patient vh -‘ied in
th. h is-'ital vi t ivcn a cast history uhich . s c spiled by n clerk whe

tiont. Bo rrc-to iv? i jrcciscly ’hr.
infections -r.' sh"t dnt t tr.-.t patient had r tod. h.-thcr the dia^-
.s was <‘c\m nc influonsa or as accident *t.s cf ns interest at all,
but ov.rytiin rra \ rv. very .ticulcusly, an *.h_ case history was

jm -.e certainly never had any uviOonco ns t what
tii ir tenth* ..o nly kac • th they hod
>. I >dieVO ycru stater 1 this .nc. ei.r., but-, ill ycu please bo
e:..v! :> * stato n in n* i ns Dc. H-ven's official p oitiOn at th;
C-; BuchomoK?

A. Dr* H von when 1 entort ! the .* . *:•

elclan A ;u cmp.

]• th w-.s th firr.. hysicisn of the canp?

•. Th t - c Dr. Hov-n afterwards. Alluredly tho first c i physician
Lilith typhus, was treated sccawhor. outsido Buchanmld, n then
Dr. " v r. too': Ter hi: siti. ;•

Lrst physician, is that corroct?

los.

. or what ’ ct rs r

'- c ‘ -n ‘■n.r- un tr H vcn*s era -rr’?

... D. y_u .i.-’n SS?

J. too, I uan regular SS or chmacht an other Gcraan official
•"‘•ri-.r- r sar is r researchists, r. - f.kin into account c .nccn-
* r *- ~ . irentec thenselve 3 ?


530?


i;nr! L-K-.' K-12-lr-Cook (Scmlor •)

c"’.*nT i

Dr. Ko^en r rs the ccr? ?fcv3lcl-n.

Q I understand he w: s the cur.p ?hys'ci-n until the
li’jeretion. Thrnk you.

Z Yot until the liberation - until ho wra rrrcatcd.
r P . I'cver. tea errested in ITrrch 1945. Up to thrt time h p
■rs the first cr_*..p nhyaicirn. Then there vs mother pos¬
ition there c: lied "Stcndrrt physic; r". 1 ernnot tell
■■ou to whr.t extent the c:np physic It r. we a aubordim.to to
tho Strndrt Physlclm. For sonetlno SS phyaiclrna of the
S3 divisions WVQ there -.-ho hrd the'r or:, ''''••sic ir r.a. I
cor .'t krov- rh t the rclrtlor.ahln v s bctv.cn one SS ohys-
icU-n to mother. There t/cro two or thrv phyaiclrna lr. the
entire ccnp, th-t la, tvo 6o thr SS phyalclna, but no
ora then th-t.

n Then 1 unde rat nd th t ftcr Dr. Bovon'a rrroat. he
fine11 7 enu b:c'. to Bnchor.rld In aoro position or other?

; To, he didr.n cone In the c.p.city of : c mp phya-
icirn. He r.ercly or.t.-rcd tho c.r.o ia . visitor. Th* t r : s
shortly before It's llborrtlon. I think it r r.a three or
fvar rooks b.forc It - a liber* ted. He only entered tho
c:r_p r.a r phyricicn rt thrt tiro. Schidlsuaky vea tho flrat
? p ph”3lci *n, rnd there .vorc tro or three aubr.ltorn SS

nhyaiclirc lr. tho c.m with him.

0 Then la it your tortlr.or.y th..t : fter his . rrcat
Sr. Fovon hrd no offlclel position lr. 3uchcnv ;r .id ao frr rs
you know?

• ftor hie -rest, thrt is , tho beyInning of S*-ptcn-
b.r, 1945, Dr, Fovon r a irprioor.ed lr. th«. orison of*

"VI-, r, *r.d rs frr s I Icncr he h. d ro offlclrl nisslon
*ey longer lr. tho c. rn of Suchonwcld.

q Ut us divide rhe poriof of your rt.-y rt Buchonwrld
!r.Io T.vr-* rlods, the period nrior to tho tine thrt Dr.


53G6


i;prll-L r -.'JC-12-2e-Cook- (R c=;Ier)

court no i

Hover, left there, r.d the period subsequent to the time thr.t
v ; _ i c ft there, rnd I understand he left there crproxlnrfcely
Septoaber 1, 1043. Prior to September l3t, 1943, whom did
you ur dors tend wrs in'chtrgo, eanorcl chrrfe of ho..lth,r.nd
rrr.itrtior it Buchcnrrld?

; The hcr.lth rrd radical -service ?:• a directed by on
office in 3c rlin end c certrin st.-ff Officer, r doctor,
v;e put in eh rgo, his nr.se v:s Loll ire or Loci! in".

Ct 7/ho v s tho doctor cctui.lly f.t the c.-an who w. s In
ch.-r £ c of /cn rr.l hoclthmd s^nit-tlon? Wca It Dr. itovonl

\ Yes. :

q In other Vord|, na the chief rhyalclsn : t Buchon-
rrld, X am:cc, th. t he would be the rcsnonslblc officer
:r • eh rcc gonerr.ll? of the borlth of the prlaonora, the
a:nit -ry corditlor.s unde r which thoy lived, tho ccr.crrl
cordltior.a of tho food tnd !t*c nrop rrtion, so fir r.a tho
food v/rs 'nrniahod to him, etureod with tho rcanonslbllity
of PoopirsT-aor.c ccur to offici-1 check of those ln-rtos
-.•ho c-nt to the hoa«ltl for tro.tnont, eh r C od rlth
soao goner-1 ovcr-rll roaponslbillty of keeping some
etr.Wstlcs corcomlnf the. do-th r- to of Inst t«.s tnd the
c uses of dorth, la th t r.ot truu?

THL PRZ3IEEKT: The Tribum 1 vill now bo in

recess until one-thirty o'cl-ck.

(T he Court id.lour nod for th- noon recess)


5309


'jurt Uc. 1

1 Apr 4?-A.-lc-i-iE»2i?kiey (In*. -rcvn)


AJTH1.C0S StSSICS

(The hearing reconvened r.t 1530 hours, 1 ADril 1247.)

-HI hAlSKAL: rorsons in the courtrooa vill oleese find their ejets.
Tic Tribunal la egeir. in •••aim.

J». VEESLlt HO?- (P.esuaei)

I.WIU>:iOa (Continued)

BY THI IHISU3AL (JUTOI SI2HI10):

v Victor, do you of specific inatrneea cf puniohaent thi t
•vre noted out to concentrttion cm? inantes r.t Bucfaenvrld vhile you verc
titri, end if so, vfct vere their nrture?

A. Tou ore referring to puniehaento acted cut by the SS or. the
t«a?

A. Ir. the uerlod until this crocecc v: c ettpDoi, aost of the pcnnl-
*«re no foliovB. The earliest penalty vre that the or'ovr.cr vro cen-
itnnci to t. r nd oo anny etreieon. Thoeo orieonero had to cone to tho
S.npitrl vhors they vorc uTrained end then when thio oonrlty vre executed
*c SS doctor vro rlvryc orcoer.t. -hor. nrisoncrc v«ro coiled to tho goto
*-=■- of then did n.t c.rc b: ch. It '-ro crid thrt rnry trie .acre thrt
•'."c cillci to the gr tc did n.t coac brex and that a court hod .rdcrcd
t- . they be h. nged. Shii to-.lc pie ce pnrticulorly in the period vhen
ir.erv btPtingg t>ok olr.ct. Air jet ever;.- dry there voro executions or
0 m;ing 6 cf orisjners. Thrt happened noetly * n the ofternoor.o. Othor-
%lte -f o- other err-j panlshaent nor did v. aeo cay.

v vitr.ess -r ienov .f rny such occurrcncco rt Buehenvwld

*rl.r *.j Septerfcer 1, 1943”?

A. Icvord the end jf 1243 cr 1244 these bertings verc r nornrl
f®* -f ( -7cntB. end I ayeelf in the liter so-celled aovic r.ja srv hov
i -ric v . 6 in. The orisoner vrs Inid on this tnble end bceten.

‘ s -“- rc ff-f irredirte neighborhood virc elso toeten. I once e/«v
OS.By ri^Pcct zcr. -n this trblc. I never *cv rny htnginga. But in

- -- r -Y. (bj/crllcws vhich verc Cv-r.r the crenstordun.

^ 5510


Court So. 1

• a?" 47-A-l c-2 -HH>I-Slrkicy (let. Hrovr.)

Cm you recollect whether any Buch punishaents vero inflicted
during the peri-d of tine that Dr. Hoven was the official crap physician?

A. rrecisely at the tihe when Dr. Hover: v?e cean Physician these
tirtlcga '•ere the order of the dry, tut they vere elwcys done on the
:rdcre of the High Rapport Leader. I he beatings of which I epofcc yester¬
day, Basel}*, twenty-four strokes, had tc te approved by Scrlin, and for o
v«ek the SS carried out such pur.i5rrsr.ts without -serai«sion. So, on the
.ther hand, if you vur*. going to adrir.itter a penalty of acre than twenty-
four strokes, you had to have pcrniscion, tut if lees, then you did not
have to have pernlsslon. "hie hed nothing t. do with the crap phyoicinn
tut was thu crap ciniguaer.t. It wra the crap aanrgenent that ordered
such pur.iehaent.


1 “prii . 7-..-;y7-l-:--l-GnllaghGr-Int: Brown
Crurt Ho.l


. a? it nccosr ry for an authorizes! n tc bo 3 !von by a
SS physician rh: first fcxv.l inspected tho :tn's physical con¬
dition before sovoro punlch ant ;f tl . t sort could bo ednin-

•

’stored?

... A hu ron wore br v.jht t r. the hospital , in tho cffico,
sai'.l ti >. physician: cffico wl.oro tl oy o oxn inod. *V.is
formality was observed fer quito r.whilo bofero prisoners
»oro officially bor.ton# d-.oro wero r.lao r official boat¬
ings, .anil t: i 3 procedure with ifco tc.blo on wl icb boatings
r.ro carried cut ha to ’ ..vo sicl .n's approval bufero

it could bo dene*

r .. Approval h'j r;l • .?

A l;g SS dootcr vie was proaonfc ir. t!-g cffico of tho hos¬
pital —

0 ., -5 . v 1 LI tl at bo?

... (* ntinuiny ) -t ..lac lapponod with tho nodical non-
c ;.is clone ’. c.fficorn whe onaaiinod tloro porsons, bet • oot-
it vf.-.a f. J plyeicinn who oxx inod thou, ex... that a phy-
: also pro son t at tho punlshnont, rnd, as I said
yoatordey, ..s in tho c..sc f Pnllv! ri fr n Sro< on, pr. Ho-
von provu : for ns;. it: .

.. 2 . t ctx. y« u toll u:. about Died: <16; what was Slock -16?

In tl o juried wl or. ur. i-c von was tl ore, I novor onturod
t blcci:. Only later did I ontor Block 46. ^V.orc wero pris
• .-.ers there who r.t first core coll fed. ! oy v/oro ewulnod.

torts v; re cv.,. 6 . A hoir bleed pressure w..s talcon. 3v-
r; 11 .Inc r * s oxcnlncd about d oci. It cculd bo soon tint tl:o
■ r-r ncr 3 woro walking c r'un., and w.-ro plr.ying gaiaas f
: f rC and anctl.r, anil sc cr.. - on I cnco v how pris-
c wore tl or. treated ? f typhus. •'»o tho Dr. Din. c- 11 -


t ^lcclc -.6, - was to perf.r. :r. op.r.ti.'n on tl o kid-
r-j _ c . cc voriny to the kidney vd-lch was to bo cut


1-.Til •:7-..-S.—l:-2-C-:-llrx^r._r-Int: 3rctm
Ccurt Me. i


; cuy. ky? Ic is vail known ti t the kidnoy vhon not fun¬
ctioning pl’porly, «nji be rosttrjd to its fur.ctirr., if it is
so c; -or. ih.er- vc.s ti *. in tie listcry of surgery v;h-ro
tUs pre coduro tea curried rut only in uztrcno cr.scs, r.nd I
•joiiuve t!-„t this uotkccl f t: .tr.cn 6 h'.e not boor, used
fer the lust ton or fifteen yo:.rs in tlo lurgor aurgicnl
institutes, boenuso it w s not sucooasful ..a h:.d boon hoped,
out; a incc tl cro i/i.a r. :iisunders tending in Sleek *1G, thoso
with tyffl.ua 1.:. 1 if! fovor, nnd tie kidney, :.a un r rgc.n off-

ictod by typhus, vr.c .vied, iv.l -r, “'in3 wanted trrostoro

f those poraona* kidneys. I evon anid
tlr.t it vue ctrr.ct in s< u cc.aoa, r lv.tlcr vr.til sc no
yo,.ra c it v; s correct ti .< rf n. t is o?or tion, but in
tlu ouflo cf *uin v.itl- tjphus nl.c '...a very lew blcod pre¬
ssure, iid wj tl u 1 igj fover, tlis opor.-ti. n cruld net o
: wtl, bocnusu tlo :tn u«t\ld dio undo] tl o knifo. Dr*
bing 8‘owed .10 lttorrturc on acvornl cf tlcse lcidnuy epor-
ctiona, .but even on tlo griunde r thia liter, two io al.ow-
.1 tso, i co'. lei pr> Vv ucdlcr.lly thr.t in .r.y cr.ao of typhuo
•- o eporntion under ti no circr: atanooa ahculd rrc bo cr.rr-
1-. - ufc. ~ft_r s', win tl i right r.bcut tl. .t, Dr. Ding

r. 1 r.jor iscuas <1 such. e*por..tlono witt :~o .“uin. hr on tho
First rid -:i' there 1—1 been c;.aoa cf typhus, nd I know
-f c: sos hero vvl.oro thoy vvero rest cert, inly sick witl ty-
• Y u cruld tMa . la fry tie t< in chnrt,and

•k(i bl :. roue tic nstl :t :.ro cl •uv.cteriatic of tlo fjpYno) r.a
r • f rtl. in ti is eh rt.


. .oratuni yiu toany tint y u :: : not cctunlly enter
-k .5 until ftor w. ho von 1 loft 3ucl.onwcld?

. ‘-‘.3, of tl - t I a aurc.

• : :• t: e t- . . : loft Buci or.' • , tl

• • -
- sr.y, prior tc Soefconber 1, 1513, did-you 1 vo sr.y under

5313


: -?ril 4?-'-S 14-3-G~ llr.;;hcr-In t: 3rovm

Court No. 1

striding -which you i- J gained either b; actual observation,
cr actual knowledge, or tho ropvtatlos th. t 31oc!c 43 h.d
gained, as to tho r. fcuro-cf the things th*t v;cnt on thoro?

... It was goriorr.117 known in tl o cr.:p t' ..t in Block 46 o::-
porir~nts vrero Doing c: . ried ut cn prit nors, end ns I
sold yoatordc.y I discuss.ed t v ..-t quoaticn t. bout 3iocl: 46 on¬
ly cnee with Dr, ITovon, end vrr.e tcld b- bin tfcafc in 31. ok 46
Dr. -'ing •. .r lo’iXK e .c v; rh fer ~r. nrugewaky.

o, Did you un.crst.r.d ul ellor cr net tioro was any cffic-
I 1 coll.-.brr tic f any cind b.tvoon . r. “1 ns .nd Hovon
r.t tl...t tiro?

... I vv a novur present Sore, but I c.ax tost .;y observat¬
ion in tile fern, Dr. Hovon vr.a greatly interested in tho
; . (J dic;.l cd- iniettr ti :n f.lao ir. t’.o relations botvoon
do -risonera, A V.o hospital v:.o a 1 rgo cnc, end consequen¬
tly the first ci. p physicians li!:o Dr. Hpvon v/l*o ia tl o nod¬
ical dii-ocftcr of the I ppltr.l, it is unnorat ndr.blo 3o al uld
c nc-rn 11 self with tl c ao : inistr tivo rv'.ttora. Dr. Hr*vun
nov ;• d< Igod tie d in. cf liodicnl writ, nfl bo w ittonpt
tc lo. rn 5 ..et! in;.; surgically, but lo did nrt havo tho tine
fer tl .t. It was cl .t .ctvristic tl t wo prisenoro wore for-
*>!.’ .on to tront ..ciborc cf the SS. *h t, hewover, was \ ro-
xl-.ticn t*.. t v c- r t v-bsorvod. d.c sect nd staff fficor, St-
ur .cannfuj.ror 3annc.wr.ld foil sic!:. lie wi.e a .oiabor f tl o
. . oryslpolus, It was Interesting tl ..t

-t t!..t tii’.o 61...t tl’.o clinic in Jon. said tl ey could niffc ncc-
...to Sturubnnnfuokror 3nn6ow. fc .ld, bocuuso, I bqliovo, ti. t
-vor. • -ur.-r. civili r. cli .c 1 fc- vo special pcr-iiscicn
: it : rwribar cf tic SS. '■Von I was called onco to tho
; :. i . rider, that I should toll 11 1 rw soricus tl is di-
s. I S , -hror BonnownId

ver fifty ye .re eld, tl t I 1 d tokon X-ray picturos cf

5314


i ~_-ril -11 .yhcr-Int : Brrvm

(hurt Ho. 1


bin, end teid :.sc jrt: •. t fcla heart w.-.s ir. - rather

r *r cmditioR. i _-p:nlr cold the c : xclcr th t I be¬
lieve fclat Stmvzbrnnfuofercr 3annovald '.id c. littlo ’:cro

•

drinking than was seed for 1 i. re Id, rxd tl is ho rt ccndit-
i: r. and poaeibly livor conditi cculd suffico for a di-
aor.ro like or-/si poles tc .'o fetal. dho cc. vendor :f tho ce-
.j ashed no,"Is oqripnont and zudicino in tho crj.p sufflc-
lont for t! e handling of S t urcibamf uo hr or annoweld, t ho
or.-ic.vr.y tl at ho would ho trer.Cul in a clinic?" Ho said
tl .c he v o r.r bo sent t' -.n SS ! oyital in sturin'ia, 3or-
r., but tl .t t: ia IS hospital was a vory poor one. Con¬
sequently, lo v ul Cairo tho responsibility hirsolf, if
Dr. Hr von un’ortake c! c tr .a’., •• tl .t lo would

uao the yrie.nor .liysiclr.no in addition. I told tho ccnri-
. r. ...r, frankly, tl. t t: <.re v c r. ernoi '.orablo dangor and
. ..ft. r two 1 p ura I v o fotcfco by D. . ven, and v/o
wort t- soo tile Ctur: b. nr.fuchxor. o ueod tho ncdicinoa v/o
ir. t'. o cr p; t! is w r durin- tho first 1 alf rf 1942.
rro.at :r.t w. r o with inj- -ifcionn. o prep, rod everything
f r Dr. 1 von tr i o tho Injection. 3v.n in tl ia cr.ao Dr.

H van hold 1 i. .self back, end what r o thcro unploasunt to
a X 1 d t- ;ivc tho injocti r.a • c first in 1 ir prosonco,
a then i tor rn alone. Ir-:: this it can bo soon tl ..t Dr.
von o::co. t fer tochr.ical ::oasuros, did not cir.com hlnoclf
o:th this.


5315


A p r il c- 1-rlD-BioIs 1- Brow n.

Vent aid you underst' nd room 11 w; s, Jr. Horn?
rt . n 3 I said, roos 11 wn£ in those barracks whlcn we
ware ncttcllowed to enter, we three doctors signed n state¬
ment thr . we would not enter those barracks; there wr s 'the
rooa 11, rad, ns I have heard, and wft-t wrs the general
opinion In the cn.rp, vs that prisoners Were there on
ord-rs. Ihe prisoners, os I s y, were to be done avny
. Eh : vr the t en-rnl opir.i-r. 1:. tne coup,
vs toe re '*ny ieurl opinion in th- coup 'u to
vn t ris >r.ers or vfc t race of prison, re, or wh* t class
of '•risonere, wore to be eliain'tod in room 11?

rt . j r . hover* dlviaea the prisoners Into tno so-called
docent prisoners '.nd, on the oth*r .. nd, the others. Tnls
subdivision corresoonded with the opinion of the old
politic 1 prisoners L. tiw c'up, so tn tllvd the impression
tr. t Jr. --oven subdivided tne prisoners in accordance with
tr.e opinion of the old olltic-1 prisoners in the c ap.

1 zyaolf few tl-.ee nnd to tell .-.oven tn t n rrn w-ntwd to
05 o'.rated on, trfor. ne would any, whrt 6ort of un lo th t?
nd it wr ruffloient for ce to say. Ho is n docent prisoner,
aa in th t cres r.e wne t-ken into t..e noaoltnl nnd
o- wr-twl on.

if it should Happen that h wna not ir. th* t olnss
?:.* t one of Qu i.. whoa Jr. r.oven nr 1 confidence was
cl rslflJd s decent prisoner, wr.-t, then, would
j.c _e of ti* t \r.p suppose, for cxnsoie, you had told
Jr. aoven, t:ils is not .» decent urn, but ne Is one of the
tr jfcio _* kers. Whet si la -v tr.e oetcoao of that cose?

«. I w s not in s cr. osltion that 1 was obliged to
S', tir t r person w e not decent. 1 ‘nese, as for as I vne


2 . 0 .ri__ v..re sic/. e; : .lo,


Court 1

rtcril 1-A-15-2-H0-3Lois1-Srown.


end I -s cnyelclnn never -undo that eecdlvision. I eopnnalzed
that - thr t I ceionged tc the le^nl sr-nagecont of the ensp.

1 did not colon. to tnr t illegal annr. fc e3ent out v s n
doctor, nd other crlteri. were -aniie to o «nd lr. this
division between docent and nor.-deCwr.t.

*. But let J8 adou-u th- : tn-ro would bo people in
the lilo e r.l c:-Ep ndslnlstiwntlon who did not h-ve tno up¬
right, ethical -a:uct nd concept of tno situation thnt
y-.u hrd, -nd wno v-'Uld not n-sltcto to brond one of thoao

S

riaonera -.a boin- Indecent, l.t us.say; - nd that one cf

those prisoners oocnco ir. ill health, no w-a 60 clr self led

by r. ochb.r of tno Illegal ennso "d-ilnlatr-tlon aa being o

irjdbie . her, or ns boln L . • n indecent sort of fellow.

.’r. t w.olu be the outooao of th-.t ... r., and his trontoont,
ao fnr no *Cr. .-.oven, rnd the noapltol, •’nd the oedlcnl
facilities, * t the cn-pa wore c ncui*ncd.

.iGctly, tno prloor.era carried out the business of
tn^infc rioofiora Into tne hospital, r d it happened thnt
c n ..d-eo.;t prisoner W'S not tr-non into tr.e hospital. Of
c Jtvj, .-eh v tnln^ was not oresent for prisoners, »r.u t.ioee
;rls . era w.;o- tr.e ille.nl cr op n-.n• foment called not Uecont,
E.- i _• Id .-sterdny, I wra ngolnat this ilio.'l iaenM C eawnt;
t t t..v; said t -o a c nln rind n^nlr., wh. t can wo do with
t.-v. ‘ e'j le, v.e can't turn theft ov_r to the 33; consequently,

i*. .iwtious happened tn-t cuEitisea tne members of tno ill-
ant hilled such ■ . n. ; ern re--ember - wee
c po vcr.o w-6 r. oIcca lender, wnoc th- oolitlcnl
"r 1 j oners ooat to ~e th --cause of n crime. -n otn-r words,
•:-<i f te of :..e oO-c:>ll-d indecent orisoners w a th- =na.c
-otter whnt tr.elr race was,

5317


Coart: 1

r i 1 l-r.-16-5-r.3- 3 i ol6l~3rovR.

and evon if tncy were political risoncra tnoir frte was
certcinly unfortunate. They wont cr. tlie worst transports.

I hove one -are question, please. There were two
separate witnesses v..o too.-; tne witness stor.d, and one
testified to or... Incident, -r.d one to another, which I
irtall cooblne for the p-rpose of the question which I no
r.ov ob ut to pat tc j oa.

One of those witnesses ssla tro t r*. vl.-lted one of the
c .'.centr.'tlot. c'aps - * uor.’t recollect the nose of it rt
t;;is tine - rni that the inmates there stoned to be well
t"/.on c re of, that tr.e sanitation facilities, the nousing
facilities, CC- 11 'In. conditions, were t ood; ond that he
j.-w aooio of the locates there coaln t dawn tno onap streets
pl-yln h-rnonlca« rnd olr..,ln c< onga. «nd the other one
said t;vt i the concentration cncp ho inspected he foand
: for tne 1 ..cites wno n..d to u o to Hospitals for treat-
'.ur.t t..ere w:<s ci.anp gr.e -nd coffee for them.

Ji- you li vo any cnanprignc ana coffee for lr.ia.ites lr.
2 -onsnvrld, rnd v s It t.v -eneral thing for t. on to coiae
■ rci.lr.g dour, tne street ..l-yln^ the nvrconlca and sln L ln L
iif't Jor._sV

«. I certainly didn't .. ve any cnr.spagne, out 6ach

■*is 11.» or inspections of t_ cAtsps took _1 ce Very often -

Visitors vr .-0 were oro- L ..t tr.ore oy the enrarcht nd were
-- - t..r.:-a c h tne caap-rnd I cast confess thnt many visitors
- se» the crap, in its worst • ejects. They w: Iked.

- vn : crcp street ct f tine . ..e. t r.e worst work coamondoe
tslde t..e c.-op; and >n th« ensp street; during t
'.riel of inspection you sr.v prisoners vv.o rv d -dclnlstrvtlve
• of one sort or mother; In otner words, tne orlson-

‘.eve best off. T.._. tnon cr.ce to t:.e hospital, rnd
-went to tne kltcnen, rnd then" they went to n


Court 1

11 I-a- 15—:■-HD-5 ids i~3rc'.. n.


s:ocini bloc;'., end all of this was, of c-rso, order ranged,

-d c--Id consequently not have made n poor Impression.

7 nnt :r.o prisoners pi-yea tfleir aoutn organs - that must
ve been after hou2B, cf.ei’ wore :.o.rs. That co-id h- vo
-eon true, y«-a; out ir. the case of inis testimony that you
w ..st qaotea that those were not inn tea of the camp, and it
cannot bo claimed tn-t tir-t was anythin- line a normal state
3 f affairs. The visitors rv- '.ohre: cht of! leers vno case

:r.oro v-re r.ut llow.d to spun* to us, 'oat ir. their

•

ii.epectl n, If there were fifty visitors, they wore accosw-
; .-.led b. the c-mp m-nn B esont r.a the do, out n few of tnom
did 6 uccced ir. aa«cln,. r. few questions on tne sl-o, - nu they
s..-i WiWt.-.or t..la wr.a no*\-rl strict lr. the crop, or -n-
v,. thcr t..es. were norm 1 cmc.ltIona ->nd, of course, none
, 'vo nr. • r.av.or th t woild h vo tioped then off.

Ir. t la quite understandable. In 1039 a 1* r c e t rjup of
Jounr lists c no to the fort prison of opiolborg — the
Out horrible, terrible Gestapo prison in Czechoslovakia
— r.d you c n still reau today what good conditions
?r-v lied in th. t rlson because tr.uj aiur.’t see tne worst
tr. t y.*i 6 te eo seen there. ir.as, tr.eso visits and tne opin-
lma e .ppeBaeu by them w..o uia tne vleitln*. are of no value,
anyuoey wn- w.;a arlr./.ing ofti.mpagne w.-.s certainly not a

wrl :.>r. Tnrt tr.oy Were playing couth organs, that could
-- -isslble.

v. i.ow difficult would it nave beer, for a r.l-Ji rnnk-
•'* : leer, Qudie 1 officer or otherwise, of the \’cffen-
r t..e Yonrmr.cnt, to nave c ~ to 3acnenwald rnd to

ct-lly discovcrea the true conditions orevalling

I


Court I
April 1


=lclsl-3rovn.


n. IJeitner the .’ehroocht nor any S3 officer of the
troops, or even S3 3jchenwold officer who did not actually
oeloni- to the creep, co-id ..eve found that out at all. «ny •
visitor had to report to the co._unr.dcr, and someone wne a.,
appointed to accompany his. It Is quite possible, or rather,
It wdb quite impossible for anyone, even nr, S3 member, to
-r.tor the c. no without the permission of the camp commander,
or to move around freely within the crap. In ay experience
vhlch laatvd six y.ors, I think tant la comparatively out
of the question.


Ccr-rt I


1 Apr U7-.-. - 16-1 - U3 - femnr - (In*. Bravr.)

FT "HB PRESIDENTS

.. Witness, a ^ood deni .'f reference has been made to Room 11.
jr.at s,;s :he physical nature- of that room? .ias it a ward recti "or
an operating rooe?

fl . I assure that it nos a word room. It was certainly r.ot an
operating root. Liter, the roor. was rebuilt into a dining roan for
tbo nurses. “he oquiprx-nt thi.ro would seer, to indicate that it was
a normal -rard room.

4. Have you any idoa as to whrt was dono to the ca*p Inmates
fcho ' ore taken to Room 11?

a. .... « ric:ui lib,raters, tho rdlltarjr authorities, concornod
thcasolvos greatly with this qu-stion. This Rooo 11 was one of thoir
najor problems, and to get right to tho point wo fetched bearers of
corpses who wont to this rcoo, but this room was used ns a dining
rocr. for nurses fro- 19U3 on and, in tho r.cantire, tho bearers of
corpses "tie woro the cnly oner uho had entered tho room, hid disap¬
peared on transports, so we hod very littlo to toll and wo wanted to

Ipful to the Aabrio .n authorities but w« could not ascertain,
despite tho fact th it the ^ «_ric a author! tics ask^d .almost every
old prisoner about this matter and hoard: "Yes, room 11 was a death
rexr.." However, the aothod, tlio othods th.t »uro used there could
r. l'o -reertained and I was very anxious to help in this aattor ny-
elievo iven a r . r resontotiro of thu -v-iricin V.ar Department
-os th^ro and I really wanted to help out in this affair. <o did
Vjiything wo could to investigate thi3 matter and tried to find some

- net soru one who had hoard about it but sorw one who had
•ct-j ily boon th.ro - who had carried biers from the room. ’Jnfortu-
' t -ho people had disappeared. he wanted tofind physicians who
r .3 baen th«.re, but whor. tho basic question was aske-d: “tore you
* --- r not" tho answer -.is in the negative. Polish stretcher

r-» had done service ir. Soca 11 could xt be- found now after

iictration. Kany had disappeared on transports and names wore

5321


Court I

1 x~>r U7-A - lc~2 - LX - Sorrow (*nt. 3rom)


written down and we tried to look the- up. »e even applied to tho
.-.ussian authorities, a representative of whets ease, to Buchennld and
tho American Security Office lcokod into this matter, and since thes'e
B.ro Foies from eastern G: licia; namely, the area occupied by Russia,
wo speko »dth than, as I say, end cur delegate who was in uarsow
as r. delegate to a congress of freed prisoners else could not find
any of th--so Folish stretcher bearers who had been used in P.ooc 11.

3* What was the general reputation and report concerning this
Soon 11 boforo it was converted to a nurses' dining reerp?

«. Iho reputation was of tho worst.

Q» Just what do you t>.an by that?

n. It was a dcach room.

h. How long did it b-or th*1 roputaticn, if you know?

a. ’.ih t one experiences thcro one wants to forget quickly and
when tie reem was r^t^dolud as a dining roan, wvon as oarly as 19 Mj,
there w:.s no further talk about its previous reputation and prisoners
who got thura in 19uii and 19h5 perhaps h ;d not even hoard about this
reputation that Rom 11 hau.

Do you kno of any persons *hc wor« eliminated In Room 11
is the rosult cf any action t ken b> any physician - any camp phy¬
sician?

«i. I can nano no ne. I fas anco told about a homosexual German
Tit-r ahon I did not know personally, but I really can name no one.

Q. By whose order would any people be tnk-.n to Rem 11?

•*. 'iho sp.cific order - I havo already answ_red that indirectly
ir. ny classification of tho SS. It is certain tr.:t people wore
kill.d in tho comp and I an convinced that th.su aaasuras which
'irht be considered under the euthanasia - I ac sure that these w^re
•rdurs by t;ju highest SS authorities and ikstapo authorities. However
actually chose tho prisoners - I believe that that actually took
plxo in Buchan* ala,but who did it, that I do not kno%; and whon I
'-ard that in other camps the SS doctors paid a visit once a wook -


Court I


1 Apr li7-n - 16—3 - LJG - Xarrc* - (Ir.t. 3ro*r.)

4

for instar.ee, in Mauthausen, Auschwitz and other carps - whore tho
policy was that very ill prisoners were particularly selected fer
extermination - thon I oust saythat in this period ir. Buchenwald -
that is, freo Dweabcr, I9kl, on, that such an action x this, that
an S3 dec tor wont through tho hospital and picked out those to bo
exterminated, that did not happen in Buchonwald. Even if I didn't
visit the roots myself, I would have heard cf such a thing had it
happened and I con say that they wore net selected in that manner
ot that time* Now, before that period, there was a doctor by tho
name of, I believe, F.msolo, of whom it was said - this took placo
before tho period wuon Hovon was there - and it was said that he did
select tho prisoners who w«ro to bo oxtwrcln.tud.

Q» *<aa ho a deetjr?

a, Yos, ho was a ca p doctor and I believe ho was the chief c:uap
physician.

Q. Siho ad_inist-.rcd tholothnl dos-s or whatever was given to
cau3o dor.ths in Room 11? tiwro they adidnlstored by a physician?

a, L-t us assu- o that during this period - now, pluaso rooembar

this is an assumption ... Let us assur* that Dr. Hovon did that.

•

Now, who did away with tho30 prisoners after Dr. Hoven loft? For
instance, that Polish Consul whom I froquantly mentioned hero. At
that tico Dr. K^von had already loft. At that tint Dr. Schiedlownky
mast assuredly did not do it. I cur^d that up this morning that
the people who did this are unknown* Iher^ ware other SS doctors
there - othjr aLdicul. fficors there, but If ycu pieaso ....

Q. (Interrupting) I undorst-ird that you said ycu bad no infor¬
mation as to what particular person administered tho lethal ensures
- whatever they wore - but do you consider that they must have been
administered by a doctor?

I can't even say that. It as unclear to us in the camp
ju,t hot- this teak place, ihere w^ru, f couroe, rumors throughout
tho camp.


5323


C;urt I


1 ^pr U?-k - 16-ii - LJG - Karrcw (±nz. Frown)

Q. wat wore the runors?

A. cell, the ntwrs that the people were killed or the prisoners
also told various stories. They always assured that Block 56 was
perhaps not th.ro sir.ply for purposes of vaccine production and
that it was used for other purposes. teas worked thera.

It is possible that sotu if tho prisoners h;d chord.cal experiments
carried oat on thou but, in general, these- w-ru fantasy stories, and
regard!rg Foot: il th>.ro w-ro tales also, as I have said, Somo pooplo
dccusod Er. Hoven but, as I said, .-rho actually carried out the kill¬
ings in this - .rioi .hen - lys^lf was in thu dissection roou, and
this was a tie~ i*oa Dr. Hovon was not in the ooap, and Dr. Schied-
lcwsky, as chief physician, certainly did not do it.

Q. eh t Wur. tho othvr purposes 1 or which it was reported
that Block 50 was used besides tho production of vaccines’;

... iho only oth.r nr.tt.jr that can bo taken seriously was tho
natter if putting a corrosive on tho skin, but 1 don't know vthot to
think abcut this sholo business s-v.ll wounds were unimportant

ad fcrgo wounds we would fa no».*n about. Th .t was about all that
was heard about Block 50, but I would like to say that wo regularly
visited Block 50 because the ...in library w .13 there and wo doctors
-t in tho evenings and discussed fitters ^nd h-ard lectures. Those
wjr-. Dr. H.von-a r jra. n'l hysici-r.y could,fren all nations, enter
FI c> 50 and I never heard fr- the doct-.rs that feiey ftnti hoard any¬
thing different fr r the fact cf this vaccine production except
this -re. thing I rc_r.tior*.d.


: ipril-ee-JF-17-1-Icssvr (Ir.t. Ra-.l.r)

C.urt I

Q. If <.uth-R2sit, • r any si ail* r .rocesr wcs coploycd in Roca 11, ithc
ir j1 j have selected the subjects for that euthanasia — i physician or
KBftcne else? *“

"• Thrt I do n t knew, as I have already 3.'.id. Iicw wore the persons
chosen? cull, th- Tclitis .1 Gestap.* do,,arfcu.nt fcri 3 - V deal to r-o with
this, COrtcinly. Iter. can be n doiftt cf th." 1 ; anyone whe kn.ws the si¬
tuation in th. c~ . ust t*e c. nvinc.. of that, hither th, political dc-
p-.rtn.nt ck sal t’.ic ri» n js rh v.r us V : r cuthanrtslr., r whether
use thi il’-,'l -n~, .--nt eh. so &.. _ of th. indccont prisoners, that 1
caw.-t tell you*

3. The ire : th. » or ’ euthan ri- . ro-sttj. ores a physical condition
which is v.ry low, fres it n t?

... .eraon wh;a .no ah uld h_l.. " r>. end u hio suffcrlnj-s*

Lt Jfl soy th t r. inn is v^ry ro.ak; then an r ’inary injccti n of .vrhinc
iculc’ bo en.u^h t kill hi-;, iut I nev.r c Kern ysclf with euthanasia*

Q. m> understand y ur oaiti n .. th-t ii>joct, doctor Os it or
'! it n t ' Ci' -> n rvp rt -r rwr.r r matter cf talk ar urn th. coup
ur.vR a 11 w r used for the purpose of olioinjtioo, regardless of whether
subject .d-ht bo C: nailer el sick an unable t rec vor hoalth one!
tb.rof.-r r-bjuct within thu'^maj cf th. ter euthanasia?

■ .f th th t t.i so persons wore done away with*
: ry ria :.,rs ’olieVu* an' s..ck, of th. 1 ct th-t pricers ,erhr. .3 w,re
' ‘ Cent, r r.t 1- apt tr.at these irisenara r. .’csi._nated. a an t octnt

••• -y * i th thr uii euthanasia,

-*. h t truj t! 3 via I cam. trv. In th. interests f justice #1- r.ally
:n ui b cVi — u. n t. to s.ro . rvcisu but I - r rry t say th't I cannot

H

»*- a

.. In your testir ny this 1 min w r.: rr t tha f ad. fumiahod
the weight f th. hily all.vmcoS to,

* r » tta callric c ntent f a Jay*# all Banco .-f f -:d—an avora.e .oy«s
-xi * f *urir.. th- year i?h2?


ay .r.t ut t- y-u that the a-cunt

5325


1... ril-..-JI-17-^-L.sser (Int. P“' r)

C.urt I

cf the cclcricc* itself is n:t on essential . int in tnisc nnccti n. Just
•ike the cxr.'. lc of w people eh. eei^h tku saue, eh hive the snno blood
,n.s5ur_, xh have the ease physical caapasiticn oiV wh -in. .'.oina the
sco r;rk. One I then ni; 'ic ldthin the s..ace of 3 ice weeks, (.otting
2,003 c-.i.ri-s, \f\ eh are nr.rl, Twcvjsj th-r_ is : -othin wr r. insido
hi! b' iy. That c-r. Is nr! ur t s-; t r.t in the ye*rs rf 1912 or I9ii3 the
•5.unts f f recoiv- • r.r.- iv r less “.’.equate. However, in thu years

'J 19& -f-' Wh5j e-»* uv_n , rt «.f l?ii3, thea.i.unt cf f:.i* rocuivudwas
eiaplttely irva’cquato,

2 ur. ’erst ' j ur t.sti :ny t. that offset this rnins, doctor,

•ti U.d th c loric e ntents of a doy»o

nti n,

• *0° t: * «eMl n .f an insect! n f the kitchenwith Dr. H-v^n,

IT/ r-a-iina tk. ’lrwCtiv^s, w„ saw that 30 calorics wore a Honed 1 r oa.ch
Ikilc. :f (he wti ht f an ixnatce, th.ch aevunt-J t aL ut 2100 cileries,
h*. that Vis nly in th-. ry. In reality wo .t .-uch less, .it that tino
• K c ' l ’ tu the rati n ur.tan t 150D c~l rios but tint is ixroly
V. V r xi. 3 -.U 0 n at la tor, espoelally in th: years 19UU and 19!i5, hunger
•pt «f -C* .. a aront m<? then, I think, re hr un 'cr lpOC c l rius ,xr


- n v_ n lUrth-r quooti.no/ Has any Bofendant ai
rj st .ns t r roi;vur.! t tho witness c ncir. m thu cxnainatlen after


• ■ n n-in-ciiiof?


RE-DLt£C7—aX..!£D*AT ICY,


-• LECs


!• D .ct.r, *ft. ostablish-f' the f rati ns t be giv„n?

•u. These .'irectivos ^r- issu-* by ' .rlin. It was a general irec-
- “eiatin ir - Serliii.

'• i r th c was r_sensible fer thu n urishsent?

•>. ‘ t' . e'_:i 'ant ri v_n take rc-suj\.s in • r'’cr t iapr-cve the.

-nt hs f-r a S h. c.ul*, since that in itself ir’ n.t ixlcr. : rithin

53 «*


3


• .-.prll-iWF-17 -3-L--s s; r (Ir.t. Rrnlcr)


C'urt :


=is jurisdiction?

-v. It was very n.rsal, I think it w-s - - ter f the SS ct.rs.
t in Sn,. lane-, in France/“ar.later in Switzerland, visiting \_ar.y
gars pc anc untries, an-* I know that it t:-s always the .dadnistr-.tion
■ .s*. bliahed thu aa u:.t : r -• .

:.te physician nly exercises a c i.tr 1 —a quantitative am’qualitative
cr.tr 1. »’hat i3 h w »u t Dr. liven ir.t. the kitchen, '..heth-r Dr.
jiVL.n achieved it :r r.t, I cann-t say, but it was in- connection with
Ir. r!-vcns ins. ecti-.n—ty the way, ochi'lnuslcy never went into tho
kitchen— that the 3 c- cks -or- s.nt t the c ncentr-.tlon ca*np of Dachau
ihcrc it was •hid th t iron the rife , that if this Leut-reot, was

nner, anc 1 tho jxcr wer- . ropared bettor* The c-.ks
cvuj hack an-' r- rtod th't in tthc o*nccr.tr- , ti\n ca-ap of Dachau thoj
sw th-t the vo ct-ble rati n which rrs us-.. in the kitchen cculd ba
u:e in a better'..a; :r. that a third of that rati n was kc-pin,. back, mil—
liar it in a rav c r.r'iti n, nn' th-n at'-'in- it t th- c<- ked vegetables
w” toon let tin it all t> il f.r a oh rt tin-, which pr co J ur- alloj.odly

. th" r. ir u a-y, tho vitadne* This jv-toodaro rar.

: rri. > i ;r f Dr. v-iw ®e rt mrtoly v u c ul' r. t jud . tho

‘ffoct c*us . ur entire i-t lack- vit _»ins; but th- ihysiclanc in the
C-a, S.:r- catisfio that at L.art s aut tia wn; J . n- nr. J at least a littlo
ittuiti n was . iv_n t the icer \x~.nt f t. c f. sd.

3* Do 'S u kn : th it tn- Def-r. ant H v n a I u . lorn nt*! I no
frail f tlx. in. - tos—h.-vy . rk-r's r ii r.?

Yes, r. receive." such xu; lec-cntri r-ti n but I cinn t sajfvhothcr

• v hothor t ir. c nnection

-•a th- chan-.e ; th- c -p ir.t a labfcr cm ; and that this was nu in ardor


1 .. jil-iX-Jl— l?--i-Iossor (Int. fiehlor)

Court I

in the c: nccr.tr-td; a c--p f Buchorwrl-’ *.r«i sntiafiet ry?

Yes, y.-'i underst-i d ’ae correctly*

Q. Furt.~r.i:r-, it is correct that the defendant H-ven increased
the nunber of beds?

.i, Yo3» The 2CO bc-'s in the 2 barracks or. put there cn tho basis
f his roqicst r.nd by his r-'er. ilvui tho h.t, ital in the sc-csllod little
eanp c-ui ’ r.t be c nad'erod t hav. ; .-a r .ad hcs ritol, consi^orin;-. tho
ti ’a thht Vw?o th.ru; but of c ur;_, after th.se huju nuobcrs cntcr.d
that c in t\u years 1PU1{ cn 19l»S> they wore lie l.iv or sufficient.


Coort Sc. 1

1 Apr 47-A-ia-l-ic.i-Keelufo (let. Rosier)

e- Cris little ccn? iocs not interest ne as that v,-s started after
Tr. Haven's tine.

A. The little canp was -already built at the tine of Dr. Hover.; the
stiee wore there. I use the word ’sties". I cannot Inaging that this
fora of construction could ever be used for a hospital. It did not
even have any vindovs. I cannot conceive that it ves ivor intended for
koaan beings. I do not believe that Dr. Hover, asked for these sties to
t- built ec a hospital but they vor® built in his tino. Dr. Hovon only
worried about the proper hospital and vhethor the little crap or hospital
v: built in Dr. Hover. 1 s tine or liter does not nako such difference
since it vao furnished under the be6t possible circumstances. There vero
provisions there f,r '-arc v? tor end electric heating cr.d I know this was
dor.O on the basis of Dr. Eovon's reauest. '..her. this crap vno first used
•-» r branch cusp, ve still nannged, hut when later on enoroous ar.ounts
.! inaotot vero sent thsrc, who oil suffered with dlarrhoa, then of ecuroo
the facilities were inadoounte.

v . Is it correct that the lnsrovcovnts ir. the field of nodical
cere carried out by the defendant Hover, were dvr.o for the benefit of all
itsi tus?

A. Yus, all lcartec benefited by thee.

X. Is it furthumore correct that every patient or thet every in-
*".e v' o registered or resorted sick was admitted into the hospital?

a. “he cdnicsicn into the hospital,red I on now sneaking of Dr.
S-ven's ti-.c, was errried out by nurses. In the case of the refuoal to
-•it a patient, nnd I an sneaking of the tine when there were 15,000
te.*ie it the camp, the liaison nan .r the nediccl orderly concerned hin-
«'lf with the netter.

I told the- nodical -rderly that all patients were to be admitted

the hospital irrcgardless of whether they were decent innetes or
-Seine! Innotes. I told then to do that because of the danger of in-
Si'tioua disease. I said it night only 1 .k like- angina pectoris but it


ary be i r. infectious disease which nay endanger the entire conn,

5329


rcurt so. i

1 Apr 47-A-16-2-EEK-Heeken (1st. Easier)


;r a throat arsine can under circumstances near, c serious direace. All
the ianates had t3 be examined. It vac clear that I represented that
stint 3* viev end : listened to every innate's ccn-pleint. All innate®
itejped r.e and asked ny advice end now and tg-in I found that the nedical
:rderly, or the eldest in e block, did not so cart for ell Innatea but
that vrs only true of a very fev ca308.

v I nov couu to epeak of the Jewish transport which was discu3ced
during cross examination. I en epncjcirg of the transport during which
the Jew nrr.ed Cohn vne to be e«.nt ev^y. Vho ordered this trensoort?

A. I already told you the entire organisation was such that not
i»en tho camp administration could have ordered then. It met havo coce
frsc tho outsido; I on euro it cmc frea Berlin.

<v foe, nay I rupont tho following quciticn in order to reko every¬
thing cuito eleer -—•

HE. EAPJJf : Your Hon,r, tho subject cf tho Jewish transports vae
tr:u<-ht up in direct examination; the elutation of the particular innate
wnod August Cohn vt-s token uo then; I took it uo lator oxtenolvoly in
oy excnincti.n r.zA I don't ooo any roaoon for the continuation of exnai-
Mtion fbout thle Jewish tronsport horo.

7:1 PhlSIDE*.:”: If tho counsel is prootunding the question which
etceerns any of the actlvltloe of the defendant Hover, in connection with
•<vich transports, tho Question cay bo asked. Othorwise the aucstion le
>.>cti. cable.

-T 2. G AVI HI:

n. -as the activity of the defendant Kovcn, regarding that Jewish
•rcosp.rt, only ir. preventing the transoort of a oart of these Jews?

A. The transport w c s ordered in euch a manner that tho cornel
th-’ttele wore not used et all. f eople were included for the transport
the various details. They were taken from the hosuitel, and as I
1 :: tho Jews vho were to be transported away from the hosoitel

-cr. hidden t-xj und scc u corner.


.--r.d thic wrs don


by the defendant Eoven?

533 c


<• u


Court So. 1

: Apr 47-A^l8-3-lEK-Ktoban (Int. Hauler)


A. Sail, you cannot inrgine thet the inantes could tske such noacurcE
without the interference of Ur. Eovcn. These natters could not bu dio-
-ussed, it was ell kept very secret. It npy be thet ho knew about It
t'i I think he nust have known about it.

Durug your direct oxeninction‘you we.o jpeeking «brut the SS
^tributes of the defendant Eovcn. v«ro you see eking about hie unifornT
A . I ves sneaking about bis vr.lforn, about his having to oboy
directives, about the fact that orders ccoe fron Berlin to the canp. I
scant that Dr. Eovon had to -bey all .directives and orders.

How about -Or. Sloven's conscience! Vhat vns his Attitude in
regard to his conscience? I eeun his political conscience and I an not
Keeking nbcu. his activities, I an seething about hie political ouinion.

A. *1 have spoken t3 Dr. Hoven on frooc-ir.t occasion# and he crao to
.'or rooa when we wore discussing all sorts -f artters. On one occrtion
eGomim political xn^ato w n # in the roon who always loft the rooa rnthor
rtruptly, the re.-son b-irg that ho oaid, "I on preprrod t«- discuss all
ettoro with Dr. Hr/or. but not politics." Then ho :r 4e seno utterance
tfc'. effect that the political education cf IT. Hover, had not loft
tU f /r. cf rn uabryo --r = co ouch jttercaco.rnd if such ooliticnl oninion
v.s rlroi.dy t-rn, then it is already rn lnfcnt's political oninion.

Ih'.s ves the -pinion expressed by aoce political innr.to who wro c delo-
<at« ir. Rhine territ.ry.

v Is it CJrrect that Dr. Eovcn only ©emitted v« to instruct bin
f.r relatively short tir.o in the technique of oorforaing an operation?
a. Vhrt do you seen by that Question?

9

Techcioue on h v *.. oerf .r i .ser.-ti-ns. I aoi Peking you if ho
1 -Bt internet.

a. be had started with the oleacntary points of surgery. Ho started
- resist but on r. few jccecicns he w^s called away fron the operation
i V-in the mtter dr-nned n.ro -r less -n its own accord.

,. .uter he did r-t want you to instruct bin an;.- longer on the way
• ^rf. ruing jperr.ti ns, did his attitude toward you change in any way?

.5331


:»rt 2-. 1

; Apr 47-A-I8-4-5£K-Hcebaa (Int. Hanler)

a* Ho, no.

x . Ic it correct thet the defendant Hover, was rrrested by the
Its top o efter Soctenher 1943 Shi for that reason he could no longer be
fctivc cs en S$ phy*ieir>n?

A. I veo ashed whether he still exercised c certain influence in
the ca^p end 1 answered because I lenov the administration that he no
l.sgcr had Justification *o that. I cannot lnnglnc for it to be any
.tier vpy. H.y cen a can vfco ic lnsrisoned by the SS end io in oris:n
«xerci*e Jurisdiction in the comp?


April I---—-X-19—1-Cock (Lit. Raa-lcr)
Court Me. i


Th«j I an asking you is it correct that the defendant Hoven
is: m instate cf the Gestapo?

« •foil, I will answ.r it in the following way. He was a prison ojr
ir. Ifoiaar where instates f rca the ceap Buchcnwal J were used as con¬
struction workers and in various artisan fields; These prisoners
inferaod us that Dr. Koven wes in the police prison there. '.Aether
this was in effect a Gestapo prison cr a SS prison, I can't tell you,
rut we knot he was in prison there.

{ Furthermore, the rumors nv.ro discussed which wore circulated
Ir. the ewap. Ycu were in tho ctip fer scoctine, and could you,
therefore, answer the following question: Ar. there any rumors or
».re there nany false rutore circulating ir. such a c/oap, rumors that
uv net in accordance with tho truth?

A n'oll, it is a matter cf course, that wherever there aro
mssca of prisoners, that a number of rumors must circulate, for
inst-ncc, tc the effect that the Genarn innatce would be released
cr. the occasion of Hitler's birthday cr.1 things of that nature. On
‘.ho ether hand, there are other rumors, nraors which have something
•* dc with sacs psychology.

. Ycu further mentioned that ycu had to sign a chit saying
-t ;\-u were not allowed tc enter the rocn Mo. 11, do ycu knew who
presented this piocc cf paper to ycu?

A In crier tc clarify that natter, we had tc sign a piece uf
i *. .r that we were net allowed tc enter the barracks ALii , end in
*ris 'arrteka ,X 1 I there was r. reen li. ..gain we signed c piocc of
;\" .r th .*. W- were, net allowed tc enter thi3 V arracks. This piece
‘ paper rs typewritten and was jiv^n to sc by Capo Bussc. Three
■/sioians were Mentioned in this piece cf paper, Watersehck, Scila

toll. •

. G/.'.liK: Thank ycu. I have nc further questions.

• -• iT.ESlDE.T: Arc there any ether questions •. f this witness on
the defense counsel concerning the recent* examination?


5333


April i-A-5K-19-2-Ccck (In*. Ecaal r)
Ccurt lie. I


Has the Prosecution any further cress examination ir. connection
with the exaednation subsequent tc tcrainaticn?

ME. HfcRD?: I have no further questions.

THE PRESIDES!: The witness will t excused free, the stand.

The defendant., Mrurewaky may rcaunc the witness'stand.

The witness is rodnded he is still under oath.

Are tljcru any questions to be propounded to this witness by any
:f defenso counsel?

DE. WELTE: (Counsel for the defendant Hendlosor)

• #

3T DR. HELTE:

r . Professor Mru.^owaky in an affidavit which you nedc for
the defendant Her.dlcser, widch is document HA 17, end exhibit
Handles r Me. 5, you at.*ted the following:

a t

"Fundamentally and generally the nodieel aorvico of the U&ffan
35 wca not subordinate to the Chief cf the '..ehrjadjt Nodical Service
Thar: w-.s only c Halted supervision exercized by him which referred
tc the nodical service, cf the frontal treeps of the lfeffan SS during
their ccnrdttacnt with the ..ehrrvcht."

In the very some affidavit ycu state:

’’He official connection tc the Utdiccl Research Institute of
the ‘.rffen SS and the S3 generally did net exist. The institute
subordinate to no for tyj.hus and virus resccrch at 3uc:icnwald had
“thinr tc dc with the chief cf the Tiohraacht Uodical Service, or
•h. Amy Medical Inspectorate, and hod nc official connection to
It was neither subordinate to then, ncr was there a super-
v * : W luty wx-rdzod 'y the Chief cf the .chrr.acht Modi cal Service l 1

Is that correct?

• Tes, th.so statements are correct.

"cw I should like to clarify whether the statement made in
t ffi i-'vit also fields true- cf the Hygienic Institute of the
• 33 which was under your charge?


- 'fee, it referral tc all cf the Institutes cf the- naffer. SS

533 1 *


April i---LK-i9-3-Cc-k (ini. f-e=nlor)
Court He. 1


which w-.s subordinate to =x.

h although there was no supervision exercized by the Chief
cf the Wchrsacht Ucdical Service cr the 4nay Uodical Inspectorate,

I assume that certain points of contact existed, considering the
SS divisions which were committed at the frent, is that correct,
end what typo cf contacts were they?

.. This assumption is correct. The divisions and corps cf
tho '.ftffcn SS w-ro parts cf the exaaed forces ccasittcd tc tho
frent. The soldiers cf tho .raffen SS, therefore, hrd tc * o carod
fer in the hygienic and prophylactic field and hrd tc ccno up to
the requirements which affoctod the rest cf the araod forces.

They mainly referred tc protective vaccination, to dulousing
censures; to certain noesures of quarantine when returning frea
the front, «t cetera. Per these reasons it w.-s always necessary
that - representative of the nodical service kept in touch with
the operational heed office of the ..rcy Inspectorate.

. Ia it correct if I say th:t we wore concerned with
aiesticno cf nodical trcticti and nodical service?

«. Y-s, cnly fiesticns of th t nature.

, In ether words, these w.ro 'points cf contact which referred
a cccper tion. Tnerc was nc pvint of ccr.tact which wont
ej\nd that, which indicated a corporation cf the nodical service
nth the ether araod forces?

i. Ho, thet was net the ctso.

. In the t&n.j diar;. which was ncnticned here, the v .oi;l
tJT-hus v-ccir.r is repeatedly centicncd, which crijip-lly was used
i* tl.u CKH Institute at Krakow cr L^ er^:. I shculd.like tc clarify
'h ' in spite cf the use cf that *.cigl vaccine in I-lcck 46, this
C'” net fcr explained ly saying that there was a ccnnccticn between
-- r k 4fc and the- Institute at Krakow cf the CXW,that there was
“ rdr.ticnship as tc the furnishing cf the vaccine. I ask ycu
*• - 1 --- =e -.vhother there -xisted an official directive cf the SS

5335


April l--.-JK-19-l-Gcck (In-. foggier)
Court Ifa. 1


which settled generally the delivery cf vaccines?

.. Since 1$36 cr 1937 there tes en erder cf the Hcdical
Service of the Kaffen SS, one of the first orders in that field, .
which Uceat known tc n<j, to the effect that the units of the
'./affen SS did receive their nodical rtqui re enth cr dru^s cr
vaccines cnly free the central aodictl depot cf the Waffer. SS
which was in Borlin. A direct requisition free any fire: cr any
ether producer was prohibited. I rise knew en thofcaais cf what
the Chiof cf thrt nodical depot told no, that repeatedly aericus
difficulties occurred with array physicians who, fer seno reason
brought about by personal connections, ordered such nodicants
directly froa th. i Sn. wrlch produced thus, and that was prehibitod.

. Is it correct thr.t the ..tdfl vaccine in tho end cf Decco-
ter 19tl was considered ns tho boat and a.et approved typhus
vaccine at that tlax?

.. In Gerainy wo cnly had that vaccino available. Tho
ether products wore still in thuir early stages and didn't go
' oycr.d the laboratory stn.-o.


533o


1 ' rll-'- F-20-l-31rklcy{Rcrrl;r)

C.rUT !* n • 1

0 Did the Y.eigcl v ccine r cd ry further oxrain'fcion
s to its offtctivoncss ; t th: t period of time?

■ The effectiveness-of this v'ccinc r. s very well-
. . repented 6X<r.in. tlon wi s no longer n c-iss • r- .

Q in othor words* wherever thi aift«l v ccinc ppeir-
od. it w. a only used for the purpose of checkin'- the effec¬
tiveness of other v.ccincs by conp-rison?

• ,'t th t tiro when the first corv^rs tlon took r.l.co
bet. :on Gr. rit- r.d re, rentlon v s dc of our deair to
produce; nd it v? Iso rationed th t the, Jr. of our
production wra th t the i elfcl v. ccinc V t ken ? rx.a-
ur< for our intended rebievoaonti ’.e rut d to chi vo ra
such a 'hi rar* h d cblovod » irl. the i If l v.'ccinc; r.d
I th'refor r Banned th t in c s- of the 1 ter discussions
■r to »-h Ir.dividu 1 series of oxperiaonta In hich I did
not prrtlcip tc rd bout ihich I cr.nnot t.stify, tho
directive rra fiver, to Din- in th i forr. 1 v:r s It ys of
th» opinion th t tho -ifcl v. ccinc need h vc no oxraim t-
1 n but th t r thor Dine h d the intention or conp.rlnp
*-h oth:r v eel nee vith the effect 5 venvas of the V.eigol
V'ecinc.

If I understood you correctly, thv. procedure \tt 3
''•r.dled ir. such r nn«r th t ft or Dir.y h. d received
the order to e rr- out tho .xocri: nts 5r. Dlocl* *16 he 'p-
n ro chod tho Cuntr.'l 1-die 1 Depo* of tho 7: f^on 3S in or¬
der to pet fro:, th:r the oigel v ccinc- rhich h; nodded
.for -urp-'s. s of corn rlson. Th. t I vould sore h e use I
’ • • th t there r s : lrrys r.clf-1 v ccin: . v. il bl , 't
st during thet period of tire, 'n the ;*a r 1P4C.

. Prof. K ndlor r is .Try ftdic 1 Inspector oi- :s
-h f . f of the uchrcrcht }*cdlc> 1 Services, did h- hive rny
into thu reile 1 research system of the- Vffen S3?

v *


5337


L*srll-:- K-20-2-Blrklcr(Rrr- ior)

COURT NO. 1

I c n hero different;!: ting bctuccn official conr.ec ti ors which
do not exist.

neither c-id ho h. vo my insight.

Q Did you ever hr vo my discussions with Prof. Hcnd-
loscr?

Yes, I fchtn> tro discussion^ took pi co which ref¬
erred to general sc* cures concerning tbo rerr re-s of tho
B*. stern territories. V o roaocrch q uestior.3 rere dlccussod
t th.r t time. Nothing » r s-id rbout .n~ tyrhua s:ri<s of
experiments or njrbing like tb t.

Q K or did you sporl* (bout the experiments th. t were
conduct .d . f Buchcnv: Id?

' No, for the most «v rt I hid no knowledge of thorn.

I th.*r fore couldn't discuss then.

Q'Kov, you now th t tho prosecutor nr.int:in3 thrt
th, ^xperir.vnte in the conccr.tr. tior. ceiap of Buchonvrrld
cm be -xnl ined tec use of the nstlg tior. of the WChr-
rucht.'This tr.-s dor or. the occ cion of r conference, in
'hich you *11'-godly n. rtlcipr.tud - nd rhic is recorded in
Ding's Di ry in it3 first entry of tho 29th of December
941. I r .-eking -ou, is Prof. Fmdlosor, i n wh: tovor
crp city, mixed up Ir. ny t y in the sugg,-ationa, inten¬
tion, or execution of those c.ooriironts of Dr. Ding's in
Buohenrr Id?

I never he rd the nifio of Frof. F ndloecr in th.-t
correction. It is highly Ictrob fcle th t he p rtlcip ted
' r * rU,ia ffeir in -n. wry, for I know th t Grwitz mo n-
xiousl; c fegu. rdir.g his ov:n jurisdiction.

C :.3 you h v* lrctdy testified during cir.ct cxrnln-
*’ ion » it is cst-blishcd th t the order for th_ beginning
' *'.c execution of these experiments er mrtod from Mas-

• m

- :* hr-ugh Gr.-witz?


553S


l.'prll- -.'K-20-3-Bl'klev(Rrmlcr)

COURT KOI

y os.

Q You knor the entries In tho Ding PI: ry of the 29th
cf Dcccnbcr 19-11? “

Yes,

Q .A p.rticip.nts In this cor'cr-r.co. Prof. Hrndloocr
Dr. Conti, Prof. Reiter, Prof. Gilcorzeistor, rr.d you ro
sentionod. You ’ti.or thrt it sc-^ there thr.t it »:; 3 decid¬
ed to conduct cxperlucnta or huarn bcirro. in your direct
uc.-icip tlon, you discussed the question of the Din" Di;ry,
Us prob ti"c v.'luo; 'r.d I ahrll not revert to this *n'ln
In detril Put I do rmt to : sit you, is It correct if I
conclude on th. Ik sis of this cx.rzin tlon rnd your -nsrers
thrt the first ii ry or.try -»► the ?9th of Doeonbor 1941
nust of n-c salty h vo bc-n n Invention b; Dr. Ding?

‘ On the b . 1 ? of th« document submitted b- the nros-
ocuticn .~.d on the b sis of the document submitted by tho
defense counsel, tro knot r bout tho ro. 1 courso. of this
cor.forcnc . T hero vcror.'t rny sore prrtlcipmts there
thm In the docuw nta th: t *.e here t.vrllr.ble her. . T ho
conclusion Is th t neither r : ; cromluu hdd not, which
Ding Kontloned, nor thrt Din^ hlnaolf prrtlclprtod. How
he c.r.o to tvko th. t an try Is beyond a: lmrginr.tlon.

Q The orocacution starts thrt two confer-.nc. s h d
* ken pi. cc on th t d y, on- In the Reich flnlstry of the
Int.rior, th: fin 1 loc ‘ion of Sibber, : nd the other,

'•h r tlv peopl n-rtlclp. ted, ir. DIn^'3 Di ry r/rs on the

of the 29th of D-camber ,1941. sJh t I n & 'ny you
’s, Is It Impossible th't this . ctu. lly tool: pl. ee?

I don't think It Is orot: blc th t my second such
*r nee took ->l cc, for the slnplo reason thrt from the
' • rifl which Dr. Doanits hnd.it cm bo seen thrt or. the
-*>. of J- rwrry I w-s expected b- ck from Ki:-v, from the

5539


1 ;pril - *.- K-20-4-Binkley(Rrnalor>
COURT KOI


Dkrrino, to 3erlin. This is r distrr.cc* of rnoro thrn 1,200

kilorsstcrs. In otbar words, it tckcs sono tine, to get

brek by err, ospccirlly in the winter, considering the dif*

^ •
ficult siturtion. Th'roforc, it s highly Inprobrblc thrt

I rrs ir. Berlin on the 29*h of December 1941. I c.n sry

rith '•bsolut-. cortrinty th t or.u reek 1 -tcr I nce'or in r.y

llfo did pr rticipr tc In my confer.nco of th t n tur-:.. For

th t ro'son I do not b licvc th-t my second conference

h'd t'kea plrcc.

0 . Nov.*, Kith ref r.ncc t<5 the conf'rcncc in th; R< lch
Jflniatry of the Interior, wher vc, h:vo Bicbor’s filo
Inhibit 54 of the rros-cution rncl 'Iso ;our document a ,63,
62, reports of Bi*, derail tz : nd Dr. Z hn, you know thrt it
aryi In Bi.ber's file not'tion, ".r. uxpcri.-nontr 1 t'lrn v:rs
discussed vlth Dr. J'rugowaky With vhon did you discuss
th -1 experiment' 1 pirn?

This for expc.rlnc.nts w *s discussed with Dr.

Glides: ister, the h- d of the Robert Koch Institute, who
t the srr.c tlr. w: s the tyuhuc rdvisor in the Kinistry
of the Interior.

Q .hen this confcrtnfc took •'Ire- on the 2 9th of
D.cerrb-r, 1941, h cl this elm of .xp-rinonta 'lrordy been
discuss.d, or h d discussions of thrt ol*r lrordy been
concluded?

: Discussions h: d been concluded sou » ire c rlior
bee-use Dennitz r Ire dy hrd given re the first five hyn-
-"-d portions of th.. typh; s v ccincs for thrt purooso on
the 29th of DoCw.-.bcr, 1941. Therefore, the experiments
nur* h vo bcon discussed ruch crrlitr, 'bout the end of
fovenbor.

Q .ra Prof. H'r.dlosor, s Kv.dicr.1 2xa y Inspeetdr --
't th-t rir.e ther^ vr3.no Chief of the Vchmrcht !4_dic:l


1 -pril-. K-20-5-BI rxsalc r)

COURT KOI.


Service — or In his c o city -s the :.ray l^edlc'l Inspec¬
tor, p-rticlp' ting Ir. this ol r. for the experiment. In my
wry?'.

; Nc. Only two people were- represented, both fron the
civil!rn sector. These ;:erc the rdsinlatr.'tivc represon-
trtlvcs for the Interior Reich Zone rnd representrtlves
of the Gemma who v;r. to be sent to r.h< occupied Erstorn
terrltorl 3 In order to execute dnir.istrrtivo duties th ro.
Ir. other words, the ..ihrnrcht or the rrny h d nothin/* to cb
with th- t.

Q Did you discuss the •'It. for th: „xporir.ents elth
Prof. Hrndlosor, on of the r~orcsentrti'jcs, or his i f-on-
cies?

I don't rer: aber.

r v Hov la it th t you ; ere not p rticlp. tlnf- In thla
confer nee of th 2 9th of Dcccabor 1941?

/. ccordln.: to the Hat of r'rticlp-nta, It wrs only
't confer.‘nee bet’wen the Kin is try of the Interior rnd

the Industry. Since I neither belonged to the rinlstry
of the Interior nor wo r rue a bur of th- industry, thorc
vrs no ro son for a- to bw*invited.

Q Vlhvrc nr a Dine on the 29th 6f Decoaber, 1941?

Diny t th. t tlr.e b.lonc d to ry Institute . He h-d

tier, det H d to Glldcsdlttcr .- short tine e.-rll<r, th. t

Ir>, to the Robert I'och Institute, lr. order to tr in hlai-

self in typhus questions; r.d I think th't 't thrt tin®

"

" probrbl;* wrs on his Christa s re tlon.


53^1


i rtPrii-i.Sh-21-i-O .llu- her-Int. brown
Court No. 1.

3 Ho was nctivo in the nobert Koch Institute?

A Yes.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, how ouch longer will the
interrogation of this witness continue?

13i. HARDY: I .night soy nt this tiae that cuunsel
bos '-sKed the defendant iirugowsky if he attended the nee-
ting of 89 December 1941, and drugowsky has suid, no.
rt nd -Irugowsicy nas sola Dr. Din; did not ro to the ceet-
ir.;, and rbndlost-r was not ot the aoetin .3 because he did
sot know of tho meeting. Nov. ho asked hia about tho
other aoetin; of Doanitz, nnd the defendant docs not
*r.ow anythin- about that. I don't know what further
information ho is lookin; for, and I don't see any fur-
tii'r re .son for i»i—* to labor on this point.

DR. NELTE: I bvlieve 1 need not to explain to tho
Tribunal why I want to know ail of this. I na only con-
•-endin; tho na 3 urti^ns whioh wore a .do in the course of
tr.c autuission of evidence on the part of the cross-
wxriin-.tion of t.ic Prosecution. With regure to tho ty-
;hU 3 conference or. 29 December 19*1, it i 3 the most ia-
. rt ut question in tho complex of Kandloser's case,

V a 1 attach value to bring - preof or. that, to bring
; - ; r an the assertion of the Prosecution to the effect
t -.n .29 December 19-.1, that two conferences had token

ar. that day, that is not only ,_rror.cou3 but con
• -V- ined by n forced certification carried out by*

'* * • In tr.a t comiocti<.»n ay questions h.-.vo to be

broader tfcun would perhaps be expedient in
‘ --r :-.£c. I shall need perhaps another quarter of
*• - or at the most to ask questions of tiiis witness,
•■--fuesor .-rugov.sxy.

ri..hDY : Year honor, I sul-it that counsel's


- «pr31-Li..-2i-2-3i.ii^.2t^r-Inc. Brown
Court No. 1.

contentions arc right, that he is inking nn attempt to con¬
test the feet of the two conferences, he esiced the- wit¬
ness whether any otn^r conference, unci the witness said,

•

nc. Now he is attempting to arguo with the witness, ana
he is attempting to examine the witness .on that.

THE RESIDENT: The Tribunal will now recess until
9:30 tomorrow mornin^, and at thnt time tho Tribunal will
settle the pertinency of any question propounded by
counsel.

(The Tribunal recessed until 0930 hours, 2 «prii
1947)


53^3


/f«7

2 (Int.R- i-r)

C urt I

Official Transcript cf the „-.a_ric'n Ililitary
Tribuml I ir.tr- nr.ttor ;f United States
of ..-wrics, a ainat Earl 3r~n "t, ot al,
dcf«n.’ants, sit-in: at urr.'-.r , Germany, on
2 19U7, 0930, Justic-- Of -.3* pr u sidi*e.

• *_. „.SULt *urs na in t.». c.-irfc ro j rill . ic B -sc fin<l their scats.

The H n r-.ii., the Ju -s cf Kilitary Tril unnl 1.

>mt ry irfl un=l I:sn»in sesaLen. 0:: teve the Uni tod States
f „.-_ric* -n' this H n.rablo Tribunal.
ih.ro viU S- order in the c.urt rceu.

SID l r . ihrshnl, wUl ywnscartain that ah dof-nf-anta arc

ill . r ?~nt ir. c urt?

TVli ‘.VS 11: Sny it please y- ur r. r, rll tin. 'tof n-^nts 're
,r a.r.t ’.n toe oeurt.

. Tlx': The Secretary G-r-r 1 siU n- U for the rec.-rd the

irr.toncc of all iofon'nr.U in c rt. C uns.1 ~ny .r.cc--* with tlvo oxa-
: ih'.tl u f h- rltn-aa.

jaxH: -ruccsky - .bsutx'i
SX-niLTICTJ (C ntinuud)

BT D . ; iLTK (!>ufonse C.un*.l f r \.f. ml'nt i "nfloSi.r)i

.. -it woo, • h. last qiwstien I pA t y u yesterday was say *»«•"

. ,.-. s rv the 29th f D«OC : .r, 1'ul.

h. • s r.iv at tho Jy ienc Institute, but aiaultano.ualy hrJ boon otci-
r . . Koch Institute f r tlx- -.ur.cs- cf his trainingthere.

Is th*.t c rr-ct?

... Y-s.

}. J <:t eh • rtanew t cl rify • it e.cl' bavu txg-n sribl.

•i lh;pin • 3 ’lory thur- is on nary c 1 Mi- 2 ?th f Xccrb-r l?Ul crncor-
nin. . c jl.'r-ac in rr.ich 1 r .e:c r 'ion -es.r a_L. ( xc , ly p T '^ rtot ;.
lee r m t Wo.'r .activity • ..i :• • • Uu. 2-,tV. f 30Cestoor, 1?L1,

. Dr. - r 2? Tee. W in the

/

?• i:r. ' inistry . a-. Intari r?


53*1


f


2 . riI-:-J---I-2-Ki.T.n (lnt. RcrOar)


C urt I

I n't Inewthst exactly f-.r I easily c’i net kn w a>.ut that
-.nf.r n: . 1 .cn . , h *_v_r, that Dirr, ftftor Ms do tail to the rfebert
eh Institute, enintainad a relatively close, eentset with rrsfossor
5il . later. It is quite possible Uct C-ildo. lister trie* hiu tho contents
.1 :hct c iT.r-nco. It is possible that Die. , h.-cv-r, nixed up tho

told and ecco t a vr-n~ entry,
r. :r : i-’ent, in D.cic-nt KG-1321, ur. or *i.ure 3, it is said
that a c rj at the c. ufer :.c. Di-'o-r, vt th- c nfer-nco <f th- 2 9 th
'! Deco-*x>r, l'b'il, v-r.t t xl.. inst-Jto v f r ir/ccti u b iscases, t.o
Stebert E eh Ir,. i-tutc. I rant- t th t in this ccnr.ectx.n in

.r r rt.. ms. Ifcc prosocut r,

urln hla cr.ss-exnuinotion of Ir —’jss r *lsn Incur, cn , v.i lllii of the
Qwmn tr* .scri.t, .ut th- f .

I-.* rwlir/* ’ey it L. s- y vr H n.r, 2 \ Ject t this f r.i of
cr : '--y. V Pr. -fit.. Is r. v 2. in his case 'r is ho OXC-

r.i..r. Tr. ru_e..'sky?

. c uiit.l r c.-Cbjucl n vor-rulcd.

ri-Df. LT.i

1. Ala epua t; ms t »h*t interest tho S6 could have in that o,;r
y Ik vccein. re ufc t Jr footer handlesut I ae subnittln th t
cv:r. y u -ill to In 3 t.

a* Ut

cclrw. In -11 *;r . mat I ns •r. ‘t h W . s of

; r*.l ns *f th t v-.ccirv. r.ucn c. r-coivv. ir. in us try er ir- i the

. ' ir Si U*V« .. here at i: Ip. v'iy

ly. tho a- _ .a. ..lies

t 1 o 1 ’erics, .r hyric- .as, •- f n't lik to use weapons
n't k. I: r : rr- interest in finding out tho

-* th- r..Ti vaci, .

.

. - - . • interest. I

53^.5

—


2 ... ril-:>JI-I_3^c-rr;v (Int. _r)

Coi*rt I

-■ interest- , h 7r_v r, in y^ur ;»r. into rest. In lint y .u :!i--! on j ur
tr. i .aitir.tivo .

... It. -•’ox- t find, ut what thu value of vaccines was I. intended to
th-:- -,n - : j*,.- scale t. discover their v iuc. This research ha ! alroa-
v - -h st-re. in 'xccoocr an.: it.bocr-.- a./.-arunt fr r Dr. Penzit
sf teflon-- ;h : lr-"’y n the 22nd of D.c. Ar, l?Ll thnt is 3 days before
• ■' •' 1 ' received fit- l'.".;. ro ; rti nr f vaccines.

2. That no can sc- fr r. Dr. Xrr-.itz« r...rt. New, in Docunent SU,
Khich was su’uicuv. .*. t y.u. Dr. Zahn is s - kin r.Tj ut n largo scale
,x. -ri ent, whereas in Bi-bor's xy rt, -n ex; «.ri-acntnl lan is aonti noc!.

.x. ti- c men. a thor with th. eve th-R 2

Li loront n r .* •. . a-no thing*


2 April U7-:WvTD-2-l-Hoxsia (Int. Stealer)

Court Ko. 1

q In Dr, Zahn's report on Page 10U -chieh you submitted, which
is Document J'ragowsky 61:, it is stated Professor Gildo-fcister maintains
that 2700 portions of his vaccina had been used without any ill offocts
resulting. Profosaor Kuhne reported that in the months cf October and
Soveabor he used 3,COO portions of the vaccine cf the Behring Works i
without any failures having occurred. Do I understand you correctly if
I say that this plan for the cxporirwnt, or this largo-scalo experiment
na to bo carried out with typhus vaccines which had already been tested
out to ace/: considerable extent and had boon found to ba effcotive?

A That is correct. It is true that the first experiments had
Ircady started by tb. producers. It bocoaos apparent from tho various
3t\t r.?nts that Gen-an industry only sinco 19U1, that is tho year wo
>r specking about, concerned itself with the manufacture of vaccines
cf' that nature. The typhus period starts in tovonbor and Deconbor and
finds its peak in June. Thoroforo, up to Dceonbor wo couldn»t havo
practically gathered any experiences regarding that vaccine bocauso tho
Turied of epidemics was only Just r * the increased stage. One
-ould have to wait b-.-foro arriving at ary conclusion.

q Everyone who particijr.tod in that noting in thi Roichs'

"ini a try of tto Interior on 29 December 1911 and hoard what ns being
Slid r.nst assume that on- was concorncd rrix-h a plan for epidemiological
'xp ;rir. :nta on a large scalo intended by you . 1 th vaccinations against
typhus,

A !bthing vis could havo bean mentioned. That is tho customary
channel used up to that point,

q "fas there. W connection between your plan of oxperjeont and
«k cor erinonts as th y “ere carried out later at Buchunwald?

A to, not at all. This plan -sas raich older, at least four to
six r.-eks older,

Q Is it tree that this epidemiological experiment ras carried out
by yau completely independent of the experiments at Buchercrald?


I Aril L?-?~.13-2~2-F.oxsio ''r.t. 2--I t)
court :;o. i

A It v-.s started independently :jid was carried cut independently.

You kner: that or. th 5th af liiy, 19hi 9 that is Jjocmcont 10

7 . .iky, i.jtt'.r -..as Sent to Dr# Conti and Dr* Gra. itz nr.:'. Dr,

•

'ijnzk'-n urkl.r th.- heading, "i^stin.i’ of Vaccines," It van also 3 ert to

th Rob- rt Koch Institute and th, Arty Typhus Re-soarch Institute at

v rJ<cr, ^3 Kell as tho E-.hring forks You al30 sent this letter to

frafesser £«ror, ho was an 0 . K. K, official at Krakon. Lot r. at first

ask you, could tho recipient of this letter gain tho ir.prossion that ho

tfts hero concerned of necessity with the result cf tho axpcriner.tal plan

hicl; was discussed on th; 29th of r_-ccrb.r, 19!il?

h It can only be soon fron this letter thH th so vnocinos, that

war: Uncuasol, ..r nafcunlly tost,!. Thy roro tested on a relatively

si-all ancunt <>f persons, I think thirty or thirty-fiv. people. No ooro
=:-ild bo Strived fror. that lott er, There can bo no question of largo-
5cal. . porinents with th-.t vaccin., b causo thirty pi rsons cannot bo con-
d.<'.rot a 1 -ar- '.-seal .xp.rin nt# There was no question of ary artifioi.al
ini ctioj-a, Kor that vis Just tho reason Grnvitz ordorod raj to change
rir.’is original report, It coull rwt be derived free that.

’ I understand that# But you arc speaking about uxpurinrnts
b cause of on cpidcado?

•i There were innun,ruble cpidcrd.cs at that tl-.o#
n . At ary rat« Professor 2/or had to conclude, or rather not cor-
cludj that any . xp.rirents n,r.; being carried out at Buchorr.mld,

A Re oculin't conclude that in ary way* Thu recipient could only
cano to th. conclusion that the parser, nuntionod in the report had
‘ r ly conpcred a few vaccines .dth on. another* He took notico of that
Mv! that probably was .all,

Q This Lett x dated tho 5th cf liay, 19h<f, could give a third
forty tho ir.prossion as if Professor iyor wore scaling a vaccina-, the
-* :1 vaccine, for the purpose of its being tested* <os that the casoT


2 April ii7-:W.7S-2-3-Kaxsic (Int. SarOer)
Court "o. 1


A So, no, that was not tho case. I already said yesterday
rc was a gonoml directive to th_ effect that S. £. units and
agendas could only bo supplied by their ora radical depot in tho SS.

; On the basis of tto contents of this circular ana the result
•f this tost, could Prof sscr *£yar receive a hint to report anything
about that to the «rsy Medical Insp-ctorato?

I cannot say that* Sad I received any such lottor I cortainly
:uldn*t hnvo dorv. anything. I rrouli have i^rJy acknowledged tho
letter and then filed it army.

Q Lot us ossubo which ir.a not done that Prof jssor Sytr sent
this lottcr to tho .»my : Uoal Inspectoral , and 1 t us further assuno
tnat th 7 subrdtt.id that letter to Professor Handioser. 7/ith reference
t- H ir loser'a kr.- 1 izo of things in 'rich he didn't participate, I
ant to ask you tho following. Could ha concludo frer. this circular as
it is foraiiated that thcro was any possibility of any inporrdssiblo
jcporiBonto or. hur-an beings?

.v I alroody said that, that he couldn't do that, booauao
that ms tr* purpose of the circular.

1 Loo'.dnr at your lotti r dated th- 5th of 19^2, and looking
a th order of Oranitz, I ob Asking - his form of report, this

fern of c cxvouflnp d r-port, a result cf the orders for secrecy that
r ports wore t^ roach the cutsido of *hat nzs goir-g cn in S. S. camps
•r: cono-.-ntratior. crape?

.. Yes. .

: In Dr. Rudolf Ar ndt's st-t.ra.nt corroct that th ro was a
-dal order by Plar 1 ;r according to id oh the physicians active in *
•rr.a.r.traaior. co-ops were- cblirol to keep a strict secrecy tevards every
-:ir' arty, .jv_n inclu ing S. J. physici-ns who were not active in tho
r-c unti-atLoa canps ?

A That did not cnly r f .r to the physicians, but to every ccrber
t: staff of concentration c rops* Tids order already* originates from


5-49

.v_


2 April L7~ ^.TD-o-L-Hbxsi_ (Int. Baklcr)

Co-art :;o. 1

tdno prior to the -.-nr. I csy refer to Dr. Horri*s tcstinony here yester¬
day -.ho vary dearly stetod that over. x>e=bcrs of the S. S. and -faffon
3. 3# could not jntcr concentration canps. That was the reason. ►£$
tcstinony was correct. —

Q Do you know for what reason Professor Iyer and Dr. Scheldt went
to Buchjiwrald on the 8th of Yebruary, 19U3?

4 Yes, wo wore than concerned idth the pending corrdtrvsnt of
3. S. divisions in the Goman Africa Corps. Sxtenslvo prop.- rations were
tnde in th. radical field. I already t-stifi^d during ry dircot uxari-
nation that the protective vaccines against yoiler fov-.r played a
particular port th .r., This wr.s technically ocnowhat difficult sir.oc
the vaccina had to ba kept in a very ceded otito. That is naturally
vary difficult in a yarn clLoato.


Court :;o.i


• socclrl trrnaport vessel hrd tor. developed which
•. ra under lot pressure-. It ;.*s r-th:r difficult to h'r.dle
bee-use It could e.-sily be broken vher* not hrndlcd sk!lful-
ly. Ir. order to Instruct the phyaici r.s to vr.dle this cor.-
Mntr, Dr. Eyer v~ .'s in 3uchcr.rrid, cr.d Dr. Scheldt. Dr.
Scheldt s: Id th r ::-ny physicians won., th r h.: ins¬

tructed ir. thv, uso 02 ' th t vessel.

0, Whor Prof. Ey:r Instructed
Yvfl, Professor Syor V's Instructing the ohyalci ra
sbout th t toe! rique.

P In oth for , confirmin'; eh t Dr. B ern-rri

Sch: idt arid or. t J'-ncer at-rd?

.* Yoc, r think tfc.-t is correct.

P You rc':-rbcr th t continent of lice supposedly
rrlvcd t Buchi nwrld fro.- Kr-kor or r th-r t.o contine nts
of lice which r 1 * ter destroyed. In this connection I
•\r nt to -ok you only vhether you knov Dr. H* a?

Y^r, I know Dr. H"?.

r '.There did Dr. Y. a live? r/horc r-s he otlvc, ' nd
rh-t r r a the '•orition he. held?

Dr. H' a cno fron thu 3 chrine Works t Korburg,

Ye vr.a r joun- lecturer on hygiene r.d brctoriology *.i
’rrberg, r.d 1-tcr h ’roe r.o the h. -d of br-nch of the
Bchrir.g 7orka -t Urberg. This, of courao, v-s private In-
fuatry. It h-a nothin- to do vith the :rr:y. f-r s I know
the . rr.; v s producing • ccir.ca in T.-tberg, too, t ' l"b-
orstory of Professor r i“l. These t^-* g<rclc3, however, • rt
not Idontic.-l.

Q 7h« sub: iscior. of evidence fc-s 3ho r. :h * Prof-ssor
V.cigl tv-3 r tt: chad fro: the iCY I’-DIC. L I J'SF-C OHfiPE to the
Behring ..orks In order to tr- in oersem-i th r tftraporrrily.
he ter. hero only concerned to find out • ' th r th ao two


. - - (HcEsUr)

Cjurt '*o.l


• . Th t is to

s~vrhoth.r th. v,-fcr:r.- h’orhs t Lcribsrc ! d -n- officirl
corr.cc' "or 3 f! °:T Institute -• I nb

• ra frp r i iTJotr, t!. : • r: ttfo scr “*> iastlt-

rr. th .) : lr or r. catr; In ~lr • = dlrr* r -^rdlr,-

1 ricr.lT oi tuott or. ;* llov f-v r v ccir.. , 7 sHn;;

;*>u the fillovlr-: *? 1 * correct fch t . s r sent th sc
results • r.d prn.d the or to *>. Sch-ldt?

71 :* r-.lte f th Ictt? r r*  Cwivod. h* but

•3 f.-r -c I .-.bcr, I tr rs.-itteC the; to aui 1 r_rir. * *’.d.Jcrl

f.c-ot -./hi eh • r ctu* 11 ;* su'l!r the '• cctr. , *nd th t !r.-

ci. i. Dir.”. I -’or.'t. r« .rber h -in.- V d n; ^iccusalons w*
cost aoorclcnc rSfch Schr.idt -bout or n *or.. Ire of th^

.'c l Xrap«c*or-t- .

3.1. rJLT'J: ?hfc fcrinr.c to »nc! of qu<r Ilona
on bch 11 of th. D n * r t, K-bdloecr, *n»: I nor - oh tho
Triton 1 to n r::it -c to »st *vo questlor.a to tfc< Dtfan-
• rt on bch-ir of Profafter 3rT*t cJneo 1 v-nt to repres¬


ent r.r. r. rv • iuc.

* 1 *t ri'b-.ittlrT to ; *>u tho orj rir-tior eh rtr nrdc

b- ou core r.iir.f description of ifcc *-die-1 Service of th
.-. 7 ! you > • ; lr c! r l lonohl? of aubordinrtion of

•hr rst-Sv Dr. CrrMts, ' ' •


3r-rdt. Furthermore, 1 handed -o you th> deer


kthlch r. ro


of* r direr f. f bout *'.« position of th- ich Cozricsior.or
for Te 1th r.r: : died Survlcor d-lcd th- 2Sth of Jul; .

T * . 01 r; ; l h *'-r •: ot •'.c: .

).• for ; ouf


Q Ten't the


: r.*-fo


1


21 - ril-? - X-Zte- 'Xt*: 'R r)


Court "c,1

c cut ion Vo.3, r.Cd Document 681, Exhibit of th- rosccut-
ion 6, and Document HO-882, Exhibit of the Prosecution
7. Could you derive fro r. the decree of 1S42 th~t Dr.

Grnvits "r.d therewith according to your chart; the en¬
tire vortical Service of the SS ras subordinated to Prof¬
essor Marl Brandt? You find these questions of conpot-

r.r.co under paragraphs 8 and 6 of this dccx*co, doted the
*

yeor 1942,

This decree of 1942 appoints the CHIEF OF THE \R-
Hedleal Services, for the radical Servlcoa of tho ‘r-
ry, ”r.ffefr-SS end organisations attached to tho /.nny.

Thin professional subordination is found at the entry in
this chart. It vould h vc been noro corrcc' if tho line
hadn’t boor, drawn directly fron Dr. Brr.ndt to Dr. Gravits
but vould h-vc gone fr or. Professor Kandlosor to Dr. Genz-

kon only.

0. During the subniosior. of evidence and according
to your questions, it has bocone clear that this lino fron
Professor Handloscr to Oonzkcn only refers to tho oubor-
din-tion of tho .'affon-SS divisions -hich were conni*tod
at tho front,

Yos, it says 30 her - , on tho chart.

0 . ' hat I or. asking you is -hethor there v-nc a diroot,
relationship of oubordin-1ion Profoooor Brandt - Dr, Q»r-
itr.

I don’t think such a clear rcl"tionship of subor-
dir.'tion can be derived fron these charts, but I should
like to say in that connection that those eh rts v re
dra*-n up during tho later period of ny pro 1 in in' ry inter¬
rogations. These charts brought about a discussion "1th
tho interrogating officer, and re rc-lly "rranged th t tho
actual situation should be noted down on r"p°r. In th't
connection I thought it -as necessary to point out that
Provita n,vc" vould have received any order fron Profes¬
sor Fra net or I’andloser r.ovcr vould have accepted any

>353


E.'.pr'l-: :-;.::-o-4-Put ty( Rar-lcr)

Court ITo.l

such order because ho thought that he only had one chiof
rhich nas Hixzr-lor. Tor some re-.son thic f"ct vrr.s not not¬
ed do-'r. probably because this "s, 1 think, ray lust In* to
tcrroc'tior., and there rraa not sufficient time to do th~t.

Cl The second organization eh rt which you submitted
Is dr.tod tho let of September, 19-13. Professor Karl Brandt
•a position was established by tho docrcc of tho 5th of
Septembe r, 1943, thioh is mentioned by you and noted dorm
on the first box. On the second chart you can soo tho dir¬
ect relationship bet-eon Professor Karl Brandt and Gran¬
ite as Reich Physiclan-SS. Did the decree of 5 Soptorr.bo-
1943, chance anything In Professor Brandt’s relationship
to C-rauits?

The decree ahovs that Professor Brandt -oulrt cen*

it

trally deal vlth the tasks of tho entire Ucdical dnd Hyc-
onics 30rviccs and direct thon. Thi3 affected the SS to
tho extent th -1 our r. 'ioal auartcrx.notor had difficul¬
ties in cettinc Kcdivrl equipment directly from industry.
".'0 also uorc tied to nhatever the plcnipotontl' ry direc¬
ted as far as the supply waa concerned. It is pooslblo,
ho-uver, that this uaa only an accidental offect bccauno
the order was directed to industry, in tho first placo,
from which c, in turn, received our supplies. If tho
industry then c~ vc us on -V * limited amount of medical
cqulpraon* , that vas a very important ra tter for us.


Court 1

April 2-:u-4-l-H0-Blaitley-Rar^l6r.


Bo you mean to say that neither aft-r tr.e decree
of the 28th of July, 1942, nor after the decree of the 5th
cf September, 19^3, there was any relationship of conaand
between Prof. Karl 3rar.dC es the superior ar.d Dr. iiruvltz
a3 a subordinate? .father, th.it with the aecree of the 5th
of oecteaber, 1943, Prof. Brandt, had reoeived a task whioh
became necessary because cf the emergency situation,
accordln- to which ius had to Gteer, according to directives?
On the o: sis of Grerocn clllt ry phraseology, this does not
near, that he and to c ive any orders?

A. That la correct. If any line was drawn there,

It wo. Id hrva to bo a croker. lino - subordination lr.
t-c»..' leal matters.

Doesn't t..ls luck of naturinl restrict to the
csscntlrl y avdlcal affairs?

I don't know whether Prof. srandt w.uld nuvo
buwn Justified in c ivla 0 such directives to Gruvltz
directly. It was r.n indirect relationship which cant uj
a result of t..ia t s/. ne was O lvon.

%. When it says In thr t decree tnnt rrof. 3rundt
r.ao tr.e tr.S4 o: st^orin e accordir.-, to directives, it means
th. z on the Oi sis of directives of hitler ho w uld h vj
t take c<.rt?lr. nersurea, for each partlcul r case, tnj?t
ia no ir- r.o Individual oworc to act on his own initiative;
is tr. t right?

a. Yes, that is absolutely correct.


questions.


dr. .;£LT£: Then* you. I htve no further


£.Ca»'.IK-.?10K


-- :hE TRIfiv.-UL (JJJSS « £3x0*0):

5. Prof, .-ir.irowehy, in pns n*e t quec-ll-ns ;ro-
; .r.ded to


.


Court 1

A rll 2-1—“-2-r.O-Blaisey-Rat-ler.

yoi by Or. Selte, ou have onus so_ a cossent concerning
what: is -cent in tn. aeercos of 2S July 1942, 5 September
19-s3, and 25 «ugust 1244, bain* Prosecution Documents Ko-
030,-081, end -C62. 31- >u imve any part ir. fracing any

of decrees?

t'O, not In the least.

Ihen Tr a v..orc uc . o- derive your knowledge of
ti.e effect of these decrees, other than from the context
of tr.e decrees tr.c._ Ives?

1 r-aeab.r t.v-fl hod repeated conversations at
tnc: tl-.i with our ..adlcnl qur.rtev.tnster concerning various
questions. 2h« re wns n very close roll tlonshlp between us;
and va discussed vrrioea questions of an o:ficlc 1 nature.
For. t.iet re*sen, I know that he tr. c.-d the cause of
difficulties ir. getting the ncceS. ry nedlcol'equipment
at that ti.to, to tnis oivnlsationol onengo by virtue of
the Fuehrer order. Hint is vhnt I w r.t when, it wes an
indirect effect.

?ut you never did dlecuae the waning of these
decrees with hitler, Keit.l, Lao^ors, or eoranr.n?

a. ho, I never spoke to any of tr.ese at any time.
JL'jG£ ciSii.litO: fnen* you.

Ihl ?.i£jZj£,li‘ 2 : n vo tr.cre nay other questions to jo
propc aided to :..la witness by my of the defense counsel?
•>h. i£lhl F.nllZ: jr. Fritz, counsel for the defer.-

node.

iXrv.ii:UTIOH

-- jr. . frifz:

<».• Pcofeaarr, aid Jr. Jlag-ccnuler ever tell you

5>56 .


>r.rt ho h-d


Court 1
«ppil


•-hc -nu er.


relations of r. n;* /.ir.a to Prof. nose or whether he vaa in

nny correspondence rich nl-?

A. :.o, he didn't da that. After the objection raised
oy ?rof. Peso on the oceesior. of the u:~etin L of the cor.sult-
ir.-- physicians in the y-cr of 19*x3, na -^ed very ftr,n 0
to as in Ewa/.ir.H ebjut Prof. Ros--.

y .aldr.' t you tell -t- anything notv about that'/
a. ho vfio very excited after Prof, roe- node - is
objection, soaathlr^ tint no dlon't expect. *w repeatedly
mentioned titla lnoi--tf.it for- the next few ^aya. I ronoober
on* thing In particular. Ho anld'Xou o rob'bio re convinced
If ;; now th t I Mil no longer rur.it Prof. Ho so
into . concentration crap." I vra never quite clear ns
to f}W -*a cone tc oay that o.C'use ev-ry visitor to r. cen-
cor.trr ti:n o. ap nrd to tvedvo eer...xooicn fron v hl t ner
- 3 _r.c. or., not fro a nr. Jir.n. Today, novover, I thin/, that
.13 rr. ir. this field wna lon^r t;e*n I re: lleed ct thet
Ci..e.

It een co oe.-n fr - our oflfiver tr. t . cu wore
p^g.-nt durln B the necti:: s of coMultlns p.yslclnna in
13-*3?

a. i.a.

Jr. i)lns-achulcp .-V.n., hla well-known
l.cti-e. C: r, yru confirm tret Jr. )'.n Q in hi -nswer tc
rrof. .-ej.’a objection stated tn«*t tJu exocriaont-l
s..bj-ct3 ’wore cri.-iir'ls cenueune- to uenth?

a. ACCordirf_ to -y -cuory this le no*, the oitufclon
v. o. After rrof. Rose's objections, Jr. Jin t stooa up '-‘ nd
stntod, firstly, that tMr- v s no reason for any cxclte-
ncr.t since the experi^nts were carried out on cvlMnnls
wno had 'o.er. condemned ic uerth and


53>7


Coapt 1

~pril S-*-4-4-ffl>-31cklwy-rA-alcr.


who had been furnlsh.d by Hinder for this particular
purpose; secondly, tart the- entire affair was over and done
with anyway, ihon r-a f. r as I roaoeber, Prof. ochreib-.r
_ot up enJ confirmed wfcfft Jin t r~ d said, naacly, th: t the
experi.tvr.ts had ended, end that the legal questions had
ho or. decided by the highest police chief. Obviously he
woo only x-e;xrtin e vhrt i)in c had said. He couldn't r.nve
S- .hon cf ..is own hnowleugo. He furtr.wit.ore forbade that
this conv-rsrtior. snould be .corucd in the record.

x. Old Jr. -ln> ever tell you 07 did you find out
in ony other way thet tne 3ucareat vaccine tested in
5ucs.env.Tld v: g furnished by Prof, .Hose*

/v. . 0 , I didr . 1 1 hr.ow anything cbout thrt.

. x. J-rin e your activity :e the chief hygienist with
the Hjlchjarrt=33 ^r. drawltz, ai- ; ou ovt fee reports
by Jr. i^oae? Jia you *v«r sov any files w..ich were direct~d
to Prof. .-toso?

/». 'So, I nuv«r etw anything iifco that. I n«vor
r.o&rd tr.e .v :_e o: Prof. Hose _or.tlon;d ty drawltz.

x. -tv, anoth r subj.-ct ver; briefly. If I unilor-
otood yqu correctly, you stated during your iir.ct exocinn-
tton thrt ou .v a ~uen cr. isit.r:edlete r*oort by Prof,
schilling a:ncernin_ ..ie .t' inrin word nt jrcfcnu.

«. Yes, t:ic t is correct.

x. Iv v.o: vaa this r .ort ulrected and froE whoc
uli you r-ccive it?

ifcat v: s r s.v ndvrlt*. .-n report written or. very
abnormal size of p, per, half size. It vr-s written by u nd,
ir. ochllling's own handwriting; end it was addressed to
Holchafuehrcr-oo Hiculor. It said


5j'


;y—Ha— I~r.


Court 1
April 2-

ln its introduction: "Dear Holchsfuohror: X should liico
to t iVw .'ou the first intermediate report on ay experiments. 0
iwp. n lew p L -s followed where he 6pose of nia experiments
:nu his results, Xhero were about eiy.t or ten s uch pa b os
In that letter. It was written in largo letters. I received
tr.is letter through drawitz. Ho made the reaarfc that he
ecoiv.- th. t lett-r fro a r.isuler. Kinal-r wanted his
attitude about it. Ho naV-vd ae to voice ay opinion about
the contents of that letter.

’.'h t did you do with th-t report, Professor?


2

c --i .Mi :.


'-1't did you do vita th : report, rrofo e*r?

. 2 red It. r;.lo v-.s the first ti.-e I h * herrd about

Scl’.illln ir. ex-peri: eats, ad I knew so: o of Prtfes or Schilling's wor’:
fr literature which concerned r. siuil: r subject, ad I found out that
tuc old problem v s once eiorc rise! la title cnoo, r .ai th-it there was
ao <citiv_ roe-hit to be found ir. th .t report. I expressed th-.t
••i.’-i -a; .. Iicd. oinc< one vr.s obviously conccrued with rrtificial
Infect! or. Gtt-r.u b. in s, til t Orr.vrits would it a.y experiments of
that a turn.

Ir. th-1 c -jio y u .neat tills retort bny> to Or wits?

... Too.

.• I observe from your st -tomcat tit t tfaii handwritten report
Dr. Sc illlc,- w • r. t .1. eter : hod by P.eichonrzt-SS, but type¬
writ ton?

— ’ . no, I received tho ;ri clarl.

.• r.. :*. you. : h vo ao further queati ne.

3 Y I'.i, 11“ (Counsel f^r t.;e dof ortd r.t ?>p endic? 0 :

.. ?rof-a#or, c *uld ? >\pondick ivo you rosy orders <r directivon
>a basis .f ilia osition on C-r vita's st-ff, r c-uld ho, on his own
ititi live, de 1 vitl. you?

... lojjfoadicl: c uldn'l ire 'o -ay ordo.n. H- won n dc-o-rt-
...a.. 1 c-iei. Juct in I v s: vo v r bot.; ooordln ted *ithln the ir.y-tsi—
- .. »' i.-.'v.wa'e.tt ri,-.t I iosue any >r': 3 f . e.

.. id.» did Dr. Dr: -its unc f r -in cor cs -'n'or.c- b of ore 19 ’j>?

"o i.-i : secret x; , . lse So., erf eld. S-. ■ v s sitting ia his
r.tcrlo::, and she v: a r. lly Gr -ritt'c ri/it n-rd.

•

7r. a tner. any eh n after t... let of S-ptc.&cr 19S.3, —
per:-. t the effect eh Poppondick supervised t. -fie.- activity?

... Or. c v uld hr rdly say t- t. There v .o sly - c.. rutc of
55 cret".ries bee use one cocr~t-ry f.ll ill. I didn't observe tont
rOppondiefc exercised any influence on t- secr_t r; >e ctivity. I nn


cure .1: t is vr -a -.


2 - isi (: ---)

Court :* . 1.

.. •'r.oncvvr y u reportod t* official conferences to Grnvits, ’id
y>u dc.1 with Grc.vit* pars .i-liy, or ver- nay fchor persons prosont?

. .. 1* ; Reaomlly, ; v> s -lone vita Grr.vifcs, «uid I kr.ov that t..io
V.: Grr.vitz'B hublt in the ers- of other conferences. Only when ay pro-
fee 1 .v.l queati *<ns of -ay . rticul r hind were diacussod the c ..potent
-an ir.c shed to attend: fer inat nee, conc-rnin.: ray fiold of v xcineo
*.r ..-die 1 oquiy...r.t wh.r- the sea de-lin vith th : question vaa rl-
*ry° rchod to attend.

.. Iflwro v.e pippendici: native, no f r ns ••-u mv; vh* •, wr.o hio
--.ir. ctivity?

Hi :rir. ctivity T - not ir. t-.e.rt-ff of Grrwitx. Vut r.i
iwotixv: .v.yoici .. • t t: - Rco -ad Settlcnor.t e in 'fflce. Sals io r.
c ). 1 toly Aiff rent c:xy which even loc ly \* .o aeperntod fror.

Gr .vitr. *o ct.-ff.

’ h’ov far np xt were theee t‘* bfflcoa fr .. 'n- -onoth.r,
n pre::i.. toly?

... I or: 1 ’. »• y the cl o«ic 1 citunti r. there vna very differont,
v.ry hrd t :ot fro., on- point t - -not.ur; I think it t^ojc about thro>-
qu rtox-B of : n hour by tr in; one h:d to anfcc fr. quont change*.

. • o. 1, l.-t no pr.M on t • nnthor oh ytor. Did Popocndlclc
1 - rfc’.cip to in tee plnnr.iiv: r lendershi f t*>.uc oxpcrl; until in any

wry?

I a. ver hoard :• ."thin: ut th..t. It is ni.hiy improbable.

.. Did y u discuss fphus ex -rinents wit., i rt r.. ti: o?

... /Tat no ti -.

.. ? you lenov v — :.„r Tin* v s Ov .hr, : report p f Poppon.'.ick!

\ ' ; Ju roUOQbor the lecture .;iver. hy Dir. a *... cc-oior. of

the nooti&i -f t- c nr ’ltir, .."slci us ir. t.:. ye r l^Uj; vr.s Porpor^
’.ick proson; during ta t lecture?

, he v '.3 not there.

. "or, *..e p-rtici rats li ited to sue.; :a -xter.t tut ;^u w>uld


£ -h —~i isi

C>ur= . .


Urvo aoc. roppcaiick It: l ho he. a thorcT

... .’-or. w_re riout tvoaty-firc t t-.irt;* .vontlaTcn ther., and one

ciuld :vcrl ok thou t.t.- o, ally, .'•at of then I knew personally.

I to h;ad ever r» y u Din: 1 a *./ rk about 3utonoi -nil _

-ciM.., •■1th re.-rd to v-ich era ho found on ? .c 20 of tho

Oomra Scoununt r . 12. It le Docu_ont ro.- 582 . I ch -ul* like to point

out . \." .-.0'f .08 in t. . y.-nor. Or. nr.-o 12 ym fire erae nentioa

• 3 v.t there?? or oriixnts. If you look .t second p o c ;"u vlil find

. f^&aotc vhle.; v n •truck ut hut i* ctill le ihle, -here It says,

"Store eraoc no st teneate ia .r- t.r dot 11 about thio eyi .a: le."

0 *

Stic ic -hofstur_- 5 Mo.tror D ctir Tleckrai. on t.-a it ii for tyj*us.

. it • V’i-uT I. vl‘eh ot-rto t.v - . .'..or. it c ;-a

tH - ■ • ntc ..ni 1943 the cx?r.o: -a, the epidonlott

atrrt.d t- h. aantltnod: .V. furUor.trc I A'£•. lik. to point out to
; 'H . thirc ix oont-nc whur. It srys la c-r.scquenco of strict
.ir.ouiM. f qU routine la the cr.co of % mil.r >f I'.lo.neoo the <",v of
infect. ;; o ul b^ foua.'. tut.

•r. expert I wrott to : ck y u the folls^.-v r;jvBtion: fcxonovcr
^•ciclht tv.) h oxpjrloacoa la typhuo quest! no — ..ur.t hu cnie to
t.-.u e nc Malta that ho war here concerned with rtlflcli 1 infectl *110?
Staf.t lr ; :ur * lr.ltn bout tltr.C?

... Stic ir not . . lrd a. I skidd liks t sy the folio via,-; la
ih.t connection. Pur in • th- c -urao' >f the tri 1 the poo lMllty v 0 r.-
p- tcdly ::e:;t 1 ‘nod U. .t t..o IscuVvtl a period, r.the peri V. of
*... • OU.J.-CO f t..u infccti a until ta ry.r'to..o, h- . t' he cct1 cit¬
ed . j c:: -t ; Of It v .'3 also ;..r.ti r.^d here frequently titf -

tr ..it orta 0; 1m. tee w>.r e:Tried -ut, tnor. they wore -•••at fro.; o.-.o
ent-o. -r. Furth.r ... i*. vr.o :><lato£ out t.. t ia the 3r.Bturit

ini err- •• auaber f S. r as ».r. c-at iat > r. typhus area to work ihero,
v.t v-ccia- t__. ra.c oc'ple v_r. free of j ic ., r.A ir. -Oct c ccb

t.. '.ic-cov.ry )f ; louse >n taeir holy vs an event v..ich they


5oe2


2

C Xu : /


- , -5—31,1.1 (Sn-l-rJ

♦

r-—Acre . If. nt 1 :_r tl-o Ho;- foil ill vieh •.;-*» wj ceuli «cy
•••ith hi!: -o roc of pr/erjilit;- that t p rticulnr louse th t hrd
' .-c-il v j fee c-rricr of typhus. It it quite pes.iblw thrt i&-
t-a : via n • lice wore included in n tmn? ort uherc there wore poo-
:-lc lice. T.-Ab tranavert ueUaU;- too* .no dry. 2to priaonora
.-stored .. conp nr.-l v_re :oa .r;ll/ ie—iii-tely ioloused. .-tor sme tine
r feu* i:ui~.toa fell ill vita typhus. Ow c -ul*. a-.;- with c.-rt-.ir.ty tl-.-.t
the infuctloa mat hrxo tnleor. ,1c during th t tranaport thr.i p- rti-
culrr Any ooc.uao th.r c .ho r.'< typ2.ua ualoaa there r.r. lice. Jhar<>*
foi\., it ia quite pec ill. th- t buca oxect atr.toiwnt r.hout tfew incu-
batiap .r'.Ji onn be a- do is certain caw.. I- t *ca possible bccuoc
lr. :raj' conoentr»-ti a c . s ther. wna r. very ci^oo chechup or. lice, -o
it v.-.o ’.o;cribed by 3r. h* m yeat.r y.

S’.ia via n ; Iran.' of. . pinnae - c ntr'l of lice, vhicr. were
or'.croi, t;-. t n ‘one, a th o tic of ny su eat -a. Chit Ifethod *r.o
MV Initiated by t.u inn too hut riy c rried -<ut by then. I tfccroforo
<. . .o lr. nustj-r >f -.uc.; -be rv tivno which -Ivnys conc-rnct*.

c-i'.o-dco, or crsaca >f illnoaces where th- ir.cuh -f >a p-rltA c uld clr-
v-.-n h put :*ivn oxr-ctl- roc r' 1f ti e.

C there ure n> pr\coa;ea in this paper which c uld load nn
uirccjudicod export t c nc v e-t.. t nty rtifici 1 injcctfn had
t hen li-cot

... :• , lend’, not »*• t-^-. Z ar; th .t nay such p-a«V»s

•re there., I'rturiliy, •'her. ?ao re'.io c^oUt na lflott t eri ' 1 ':•
eb ut five >r oix deya, no ie aurpriaod; <nc vill •.oh moaolf, "How io
it poociblo v* eke sue.: or ct atr.tauata?" 2r-ry oag-criencod pr-yoici-ui
tattva th t there ia such hr.aic persihility.

.. ... tee cr.ee ->f the ;«?er ve Junt iiacueaof., -ro we concerned

’■ith the r-* ;rt f n ex-, ri.ver.t -« it w c r.'-iutr-i.-od hy tho


proaocuti - 2


2 April 47 -;.
Court I


-? jC- 5 - 1 —: loOban (let., Brwt)


.. !'o, it is a scientific papor; it is a zanmscript* it beers

the ietterhoel cf ny institute because Gy^witz vented ell young

physicians t publish their work under the protection of scientific

institutes. I n rtr.ny cases papers were published under tho heading

•

of r? institute, uhich fcouever I ocoivei fren different people and

this is one of therpapers. !!y only participate*was that I vent through

thar. and found out wothor tho papor was fit for publication. On that

occasi'r. on orro- n s discovered. y 0 u rood one papor whore you

coctlonod Oberstuxtcfuohrar 7ottor uhich was than a struck out. This

lino hed tc bo struck out, because this con did not dio of typhus

*

but is still alivj today. It wyj an error on Dir.G*s part, such papers
had to bo su..tittod to tho co.i^otont aodic -1 chiof for approval boforo
public tion.

2 ,^hin paper was not sont to Poppondick diroetly?

A !lo, I cn suro that that vaa not tho cuo. I sont this papor to
Crawltz eventually as the cccpotont chiof; that was after tho roorgu-
nization of the :.*iical serrico an! this wao certainly not sont to
Popiondick. OraWttS oust have a&TOOd to thatj .hothor Poppondlok
agreol or not Was »f little interest; the aoin loadorshlp was

GrowIts.

2 Thank you; I havo no further questions.

6

BV D". ' VT 3L, (Counsol for the Dofondant Gorikon.):

2 A fsvr v-ry eononl questions. If I ualorstood you correctly,
•luring your dlr-ct oxonination you stated that Orawitz, because of an
organizational difficulty, hoi only a profo6Slor.cl right to giro
Jlrootivos and no ordor to issuo ocr:-ands; your tostLttny litiitod itsolf
t; hie official iutios as to the ss (emotion, which was subordinated
to hLt?

A Vos, cso can only than spook -f a professional ri^ht for fain
to issuo livoctivos.


o h'iut was Grcvitz’ .military tasks coneaminr_ his clcso tasks, his
close staff and the institute -..kick wr*s irz.edlr.tcly subordiatod to hin?


5364


2 April 47 -::-F«C-e- 2 -«(X.:-vsa (Ir.t., 2r-.~J
C'-urt I


.1 Ho naturally was tho disciplina r y suporior of hi3 staff and of
tag institute, which -as ribordi^tod tc his bocauso ho wcs a r»rhor
of tho ;;afion 33 ; ho cue tho military superior.

^ y.rz tv:c oriaf questions cith roforonco to tho sulfonnlonido
ax/orlcontsj on tho basis of Orevltz* lino of issuing directives* in
tho professional flold could ho <3cuo any erdors for any strains to
bo issued to your institute without tho approval of Dr. Gonzkan?

A Tho right to Issue dlroctivos in professional sattors onablod
hin ta issuo professional cami'di rf ovory kind to ovory rao&bor of
tho medical sorrlco of tho 38; one could mention a .vt:bor of spoclul
oases.

$ Did you Inform Dr. Gesnkon abxit tho dolivory or tho strange
doll very to Savensbraocic?

A !to, tJat uas not pos.ilbio b.causo I did not knar about It.

} Ar.othor subjoct; among other thm_j you -..’o*-o eayirv. th. t ono
cf yc;ir collaborators by the rur.o of Dr. Uoton participated in tho
moating -..-it:. rofOrooco to tho cold qiuotlca in jhirnboi-g; was Dr.
Gonnkor. Inferred by you about tho result3 of tl.-.t rooting?


5365


. I sa f.uito sure tfcrt I ei- r_t infom Dr. Ganakui cb ut thc.t;

I loft't ra-,;-- ir Dr. : t-r. Jn£m.-£ faia, but it is not possible fxvn
lir.t I !c..'Dr. 1 t t Id no thrt Luftteffo cuosti.r.s u«r- 'iscussod
i:rir. 0 thr.t c nf.rence, uj-ich tn-xx X littl. ir. -r-s*. t. us tad uvuld
h .vo br i'ht nc r. cfcictl r.svlts.

. i> - fa: qu-oti ns r. -srtlj-.j- '-h- ty.*us -irx.rincr.ts :.t ouch-
r. rl r t Block H . .6'

... Dr. Gm/itx.

r.. T. viicu •' - h- sub rt*in: t- c cl-i-f f tkw .il cc of . r .Auction
in block 50 ?

• # ♦

... In t.ls 1-Sw he v j ouborvint. c ue.

. ‘ • a th r- cay d*. ff .rer.co ir. n. •; r . to tLx ir. hia .-ua.'.ticn of
sub ,r'irv ti.n?

. . The . r Cacti.r. .1 c- atrrtcd ux th 7 th of . u j.vnt , 19 /. 3 , tMeh
tiaa bcl v rv niseticn t the lictl s-ndco rad Dr.
G.r.s&n vo r- 11; nrt ecu domed.

. . ft. . th a.* of .. iffiat tbo picnic Institute rn no lonGjr
rub.r-'ir.'t.' t. hi*.?

... 7.3, thrt ia rljit.

. Di • raicntific f. rts .f Dr. Bin lir-ctl;- to Dr.
G-nskon?

... I r. cur- thrt th--.. r- rts u u ro n-v-r subtiittul to iruf-ssur
T nzkui by v. r by .y j r -r; t t it nly iJ.fr 3 thej-./_nt to no
th.yucrc Lueiift-ly ;c. into r. o:.y-.Vx. in ny uffic». snd it i

rittun vhwn the \n:C "G nnkai" vo iirittia.

. Cj th .t cv-r; . rSicl rti n .f ir. Goraken is vxclu-’od?

... In r»y .. ini r., ;\»s.

. It . -ntiorw ’ till Dr. Din* u s Giving r. lecture

b ut typhus vnccin.a r. th- n-ctin^ f c-nsultir. 0 . ~otin c ; lo thr.t
r: J'.t?

.. ‘f s,

. In ..Til of 1943 i -nf.riv.* Dr. Gen ken about th. intondod


(Int. i.rmler)


2 rll-:HWG-fr-2a-atcnta
Court Hg. 1 %

a^unt of viccir.cs tc be produced by the SS; is that ri;ht?

« Yes, that vt'.s done in the spring cf 1913 -
bid this infer—tier, have a special cause?

Yes, there nerc three causes. «t that time I was the ttyruiic
£x?-rt attached tc Dr. Gonskon and I h a to infena him about all im¬
portant natters in ny field as they applied to the «ray. Dr. Ding »ss
to held n lecture during thrt meeting cf the ccncultin. physicians be¬
cause of Dr. Credits* wish. He had prepared this lecture and sent it
tc Dr. Grudtt for his approval end Grewitz sent this manuscript tc mo
in order to leek through it «*nd it bore the sisnu contents, vhich I men¬
tioned, as that of Hoy 5 , 1912 . i.a br. Din;; ms later writin,; in a more
extensive fora, I think this cm be found ir. my Document !Jo. 10. This
•, is ry e-use for infcrain, Dr. Gomken about Dr. Ding's intention. He,
ns’nodical chi.f of tho -..affuj SS, had tc he informed rlcut the fact
that iW'w f the bftffcn SS «cs join:; U hr Id a locturo in that
circi-.

The second reesen tins that 1 vantod tc inform him .-bout the effect¬
iveness of ft met -v cincs, uhich was used fer the troeps.

Thirdly, I wanted tc tell hi a then he could expect th. first por¬
tions cf vaccines fer tho SS and tho eaounti ho oould «pcst por me nth.

1 h-d tc tell him that sc ho could gogo his future fer the vaccines
aoccrdin ly. That r.erc the three reaccnc why I reported tc Dr. Geniken


t the time


2 and 8-l-IC£Sor (ir.t. Ic-l.r)

Court I

y. Did 7 'iscuas the queati.a of th- furnishing -f prisoners in
-or t. ;eke cbficrvrticns wcciRat-d an:’ non-vaccinat-d tuojOc an-*

their r-- ;ti us?

A. Tbw c nfcxeacerith Drfcwskon m u:;treDoly brief. As far.es 1
r.^rv, urc struVinr, clcs- t. his d-sk. I told hii that the various
V'Cciii-3 Trn-cb I r-nti-ned t; his h- *. n -'i feront effect; 1 t 1 hin th t
Mu uff-ct varied -r to th-. lenw f th. te ,-mturc; an* R re-ucti-n of
fatalities n- I tel? his that rit-r h~ria vaccine'’ th- entire SS wo
could c ur.t .n s . ;r. t-ctiv- -If c. * r -lA a ldiura. On th" ccr.si r,

I sh wed hi* n few Charts which Oik . ‘ w t * t ttet tli»,

th- sr. ii eh rts which Din: n.?r- c h e ■- r > 1 tho *°

charts in order te explain th- ai-ottvuneS f the v-.cclncs t. hi.

y. Th- rt lity fi ur-a on - - t-. >r“ture fi.urea c:il o ’cri-

0

vod fr - these s’, rta, c.ul’n't fclwy?

... Yes. If I rocvober ccrrcctly, on th- ho-Zinc of th-ao charts
the inforv.ti n caa f ivon wtmt the day .f the infect! n was. Thin ontiro
c nfor.r.c- vae very brief and it is quite tosible that Dr. Genzk..n-who
was aly « scorned with tho n at in~rtaot inta which he ha to kn v—
it is quite ssibl- that he v-r) . kv ’ that. I bod n cause t. point
it ut t hi < articular since I wo n t r-. rtin* t hi: *> ut Dinp'a
f-ri-8 .f «x. -riiuRt3 but was niy r-> :tir. t . in about the protective
V’luo ,£ vri-us vaccines which he, -s saadlORl chief, had t. kn.w. Those
wore two c 1 ., 1 -t.ly ifl-rent . ints f vJ-nr.

THE ilLUSIDEhTj 2 su; est t tlv. aitiv.es th t qu-r-ti ns be fcnsKorod a
little Dcro briefly. Tho quart! n th ins r . wroO t th- witness—
the questi r. -f ro the. 1 st n-—? ul ho.ru u-n insw.-r-'* simly^y
"yes" or "no 0 which w ul hsv c -X-tylv anrsure-. it.

Th- Tribunal will n * !x» in r-coss.

(:. recess was vkon.)


2 April U7-! W.7D-9-1-Gallagter (In', von choen)

Court Iks. 1

7 - 7 . ’.JiSH AL: Trvs Tribunal is again in session.

7 *S FPESIDEISTi Counsel will pro coc-d.

BY Dk. IKSBLt

q Professor, in order to review your last ansr^r very briefly, it
was not so at that ti-e the days of the infection and the number of
dead were «xpre 3 sly discussed?

A Jto, they woro net.

0 . Then ccnsoquontly tho fact that artificial infection of
hinnn bcine 3 waa carried out vas not nontioned?

A 1 'iO, c irtoinly not.

q ;.nd i believo you did state that Dr. Conikcn was not to bo
infonwd of all details of the tests, or ho was to bo informed noray ns

to tho contonts of Dire's report?

* A Tho contonts of Ding's report, and the effectiveness of tho
vaccines thonsolvos, in that connection, of courso, the report was corn-
ploto, and I don't believo the nodical chief noodod to know any moro
than that.

0 undor those oontrol was the Dr EUor.beck Laboratory, which
ir. tho wint er of 19U3 was sot up in tho SS Hospital in Berlin?

A It was under tho Hyinc Institute of tho Vaffon-SS, thoroforo,
it was undor no.

DP. • EHKELi Than!: you. I have no further questions.

p , ISGEPBaRt Dr. '.Jjisgcrber for tho dofeniant Sicvcrs,

BY OR. .'KL-JO^BERi

q Profossor, in your direct ojcrxdnation you already tostifiod
that the doc tar in charge of tha health syrtc- in the concentration camp
Trr .3 Dr. lolling?

A Yes.

q :to»r on tho basis of cry conferences, or on the basis of any
other knowledge, can you tall us anything about this; that on the basis
of general orders in connection with the noasuras against opidord.es Fro-


2 April U7^WOD-9-2-Gallagher (7nt* von Schoen)

Court No* 1

tcotdvo vaccina lion was ordered for concentration gatzweiler camps in
fact, bocqusa at certain tines a typhus epidasic bad prevailed in this
concentration canp?

A Then was a general order to all chief doctors in camps that
when typhus appeared in concentration canp, all inmates of the concen¬
tration canp had to be vaccinated* I rryoclt had lulling issue this
order, and, therefore, I know from :rr own experience that this ordor
was actually issued*

q 7 ho necessary vaccine was not adequate, was not sufficiently
available! do you know whether Dr. Lolling tried to do anything about
this scarcity?

A xt is truo that for tho mry hundreds, thousands of people
thv.ro me not always irv.odiatoly at hand enough vaccine available* Thoro

0

was not typhus in ovory canp, thoro were only a few of then, but
gonorally tho largost ones, and frequently tho institute had notico
whon a vaccination was to bo corrlod out, and tho vaccino was not avail¬
able in larg, enough quantitios. It is possible that Lolling nado an
notivo .attempt to obtain vaedno from socowhare*

D!t. fSISOERBERi Thai* you* I have no further questions.

T~i PTSSTDal.Tt No furth >r questions by tho defense course!* Tho
Prcsocutior. nay cross oxardno*

c/s:»s L<--g::.T:r::

5Y:C?* V.SlWi

q Dr. Jlrugorsky, ir. your position as Chief of .ust 16 in tho SS
Fuohrungs—Kiuptant, that io, prior to tho reorganization in 1913, your
lrr.cdiat'jly 3upurlor -as Dr* Xarl Ocnskon, is that correct?

A Yos, that is corroct*

Q 2tow after the r<.organisation in 1?U3, you were no longer
subordinated to Dr. Gcnsken, but you fcoerno subordin-to to Dr. Grawitz,
is that right?

A Yes, that is correct*


2 April li7-^W.T!>.?-3-0-allaghor (Ir.t. -.-on Schoon)

Court ’to. 1

0 . iter in your position as Chief of iJit 16, and Oc-nskon, tho
:$rf*iano Institute of the affon-GS was under your control was it not?

A Yes, that is correct,

0 Dr. Ding was a eveubor of tho staff of the Kyeif no Instituto of
tho r affcn-SS, wasn't ho? ~

/. That is ccrr.ct, for a certain part of Ding's activity.

Q Hcv long was Ding connected with tho Hygiene Instituto of tho
7r.ffon-GS?

A Until the collapse.

Q Iter, I 388020 that you contend that tho Hygiene Instituto of
tho .’offoiXjS did not sot up th : xporiaental station at Puchcnvmld, is
that right?

A Vqs, that is corroct.

0 Did Dr. Qenskon set up an cxporir.ntal station at Buchornrald.

6

4 . Ifc, Dr. Grawitz,

Q Do you recall on Octcbur 2?, 19a6, 'hiring tho courso of an
interrogation when I askod you whether or not Dr. Gonxk&n had anything
to do rdth the sotting up of an instituto at Duchenwald, that you
replied that Dr. Go nek on was instrun-nV’l in foming tho Buchonwald
Institute, do you recall that?

A I certainly did not say it in that fom.

i <Tvo placod Dr. Ding in charge of tho oxporitc .-ntal station at
Buchonrald?

Growlts.

Q Did I h< ar you say that Heinrich Hlnalcr had something to do
with tho appointr. ; nt of Ding as Chief of the experimental station at
Buchonwald? . ^

A ios, that is tru.. Grnvitc had applied to Hianlor that Ding
should bo given this assignment.

Cl '!bo tcld Grawita about Ding?

a Ding r .as knewr. te Gr:?'ttz. I kno / that daring the first cam¬
paign in France Grawitz was with thj “oathho .d 1-1 vision, and Ding was


5371


2 April L7-?:-.TD-9-J.-Gilla S :'. r (Int. von Schocn)

Court !ia. 1

• • • •.«

Adjutant of tho divisional ioctor at that tin., and I also know that
Grantt* sent Ding to Graz in charge of a construction group in tho SS
‘loiicrJ. Sendaqr, which trained students. In other words, Grarritz knew

Ding.

A Dc you deny yea ov^r had given orders to Ding in his capacity
•as Chief cf the ■. xporirentol station at Buchorwald?

A I did not give hin any order.

q Do you dony that Ding ovor reported to you his capacity as
Ohiof of the experimental station at Buchorc.Tald?

A Reports frea Ding as to work going on, actually going through
in the Institut .

T TfTJ I call your attention to a few reports which havo boon
sot f rth h.ro in your evidence. One ran a docun-,nt No. 10-571, Proso-
cutdon's Exhibit No* 285* which is four.'' on papo lii of the Docuncnt
Book "o. 12, Your Honor, wherein Ding reports to you. ..nothor one is
Document No. J©-582, v/hich as you call it, "A Publication of tho Chiof
of I^phus Reaoarch acted on derivatives by Ding,’ 1 this heading at tho
top of this rojort or publication. Then you nay recall the follcvdng
words: "Fror. tho RFeTiuio Respited of .'r.ffon-SS Berlin, Chiof, SS
Obur Fuhra* , Cruso»t5ky. ,, :iaw in your owr. affidavit which is document No.
U23, Prosecution's Exhibit No* 282, found on page 7 of the Docuncnt
Bock No, I', you said the following!

■J obtained full kn-./lcdgo cf the position ind actlvitios of Dr.
:v.rl Gonzkon, and of th position and .fork of Dr, Edwin Ding, who was
Chiof of th- D-jpart-.ont for Spotted Fever and Virus Research at tho
H/piono Institute of the affen-SS at th- Buchtnwald Concentration Comp.
SuVaral ti-.-s I -ocoived r. ; port3 -a rhich charts were attached fron Dr.
Ding indicating results of the _q j-iaunts carried out there, and I re¬
ported on these natters to Dr. G^nzken on occasion which shall bo
described later." And then you go into detail about th sane report.

'’ v ' direct oxanimation you stated that you n-v,_r issu- d orders to


5372


2 April 1:7—(Ir.t. vor. Scboon)
Court ::o, 1


Ding, cr that Ding x*3ver got orders fren you, and as a ratter of foot,
you ,:o 3o far as to state you dcnt know whore Ding got his orders fron
That all being tho caso, why in the world did Ding subrdt his reports to
you?

A There ms a very dofinito reason for that, arising fron the
apodal structure of Grawit* office* I did state during the direct oxard—
nation that Orarits did not hove ary working staff, that was boforo tho
reorganisation, and several of ry documents showed that for that reason
he used r nbors of ofch-ir staffs, that fc gavo then special assignnents,
and I was one of those, and I have tostifiod that in this capacity I
had special title "Chief Hjwianiet," and 1 also said that this aotivity
was very slight, iincc Grawit* lad no working staff of his own, and as
ho was not thu rtyglonist, and not tha Baotoriologiet, then ho did not
know rwoassarlly .hat to do with Ding's various reports or orders, that
Ding was to sent tho reports through the jtygiano Institute. Sinco thoro
was corrospondonco anyhow booauso of th, production «f typhus vaccino,
that was tho reason*


5373


"P--- 2-M-BK-10-i-Kurr ow (Int. Ton Scr.oon)
Coart Ho. 1


• Then you do admit that you received reports perio¬
dically free Dr. Din’ concerning the exporScental activi¬
ties at the Buohonwald institute, don't you?

" Uo, I do not admit-that. Thct would not bo correct.

•

ivor. Ding says - or rather, even Ding does not soy in his
diary that ho reported regularly on all series of experi¬
ments . I believe that only in thecase of three or four
series dot 3 ho say that roports were sent to Berlin, and
I a:, not at all certain that nil of then wont to cy insti¬
tute. I myself rer.o^bor only the first report about the
first series in 19*U which I passed on to Grewltz and
which ho gave no back latsr to work on. I did not work
on those reports independently. They cono to ny office
with the nail and tno person working thero read then,
piokod then, out and sent the:: to Grawitz and then Grawitz
gave no instructions as to whether I was to do anything
about thor.. Thoro was 1.0 rogul :r report.

4 ••oil now, let no refresh your nonary a bit, Doctor.

I cull your nttontion to cn affidavit of your secretory,
v/hich is found in Ilrugowsky's doou::ent book Ho. 1, narked
Mrugovrsky Exhibit he. lb. On page 51, in paragraph 7,
your soorutary status thet: "Ding's reports about his
tests on prisoners want via the Hygiene Institute to
Grawitz." In addition to that, I cell your attention
to the toscicony of Dr. Kogon or. page 1155 of the record
whore ho 3 totes: "Dr. Ding, when he was not in Berlin,
personally used to v.fito reports to lirugowsky every threo
months." Pago 1157, "fuu correspondence was carried on
primarily with -rugowsky". Pcgo 1160, he states that
reports on experiments at -i6 were sent to lirugcwsky in
Berlin. On page 1163, Kogon stetod that "the instructions
for the execution of th- oxterimonts had cone from


..nril 2-'—5X-10-2-K jrc.; {Ir.t. Vo;. Schoon)

Court -vo. 1

'.Irugcwsky in Berlin." On page 1177, Kogon states that

"Dins triumphantly showed hie an order from Urugewsky", on

order fra: Urugowsky regarding Danish vaccine experiments.

On prgo 1195, concerning poison experiments, Ding said to

•

Kogon: "Kogon, do you sec any way to get me out of this
business? 1 nr. supposed to test a poison hero on Russian
prisoners of war. I must report on it immediately. It is
a direct order from teugowsky. I don't know how I can g<x
out of it." On page 1186, Kogon states that Dins had to
report.to Mrugowsky orally and not in writing. On page

0

1192, he status that "Doctor Jllonbock was directly sub¬
ordinated to Doctor Mrugowaky*' in connection with the
serum for typhus convalescence, and ho states, on page
1195 and following over to 1196 thut Kilcnbock took the
blocd frcri.tho inmates of small camps under idru30W8ky's
orders. -K*. sc t -s on pego 1202 thut in the lute summer
of 19-13, -rugowsky boo tho solo chief of Dr. Ding
and gavo all orders. They may have boon su:^ostod by
Din.: or other firms, but any experimentation was ordered
by Urugowsky. New, Kogon further gov.3 on to state on
page 12-11 that "~rugowsky occupied such an important
position that it appeared dangerous for Ding-Schuler
to r.o over ti. hand of his immediate sup;rior, Urugowsky,
i to h too auoh diroct c >t wit) Orawitz.”
Furthermore, Ko;;on strted, ;t which you smiled, that ho
almost wore his fir. ;.rs to the bone typing, your name
n those reports. And I als il your ntlan ogui«n
to an interrogation of 25 October 19-16, wherein I asked
you: Did Ding give you oricdicai reports on his

experiment3?" You answered: "Yos". I sola: " fc . How
jft-en?" Your answer: "I received his reports after hevin g
finished each export:-ont."


5375


-koril 2—k-H£—IO-3-Karrow (In-. Ton Schoan)

Court 2lo. 1

Dr. Ifrujowsky, in view of nil thid do you still
nointcin that you never issued any orders to Ding and that
you were not responsible for tho activities of tho typhus
and virus research station at tho Buohonvmld concentration
ennp?

-• First of *.ll, I should like- to 3ty that theso cro
not fact3. fhoso .ro .unroly assureptions. I nay renind ./•,
you that Kogon was csk-d about tli.se things repu.itodly
during the examination. For example, tho natter which ycu
aontloncd on... I don't know tho page - when Ding is
supposed to have shown hia an erd-r fron go with regard
to the Coponhegon Vaccine. H- said afterwards when ho was
ox.tr.ir.od by Dr. Fritz that the order was not in writing
but that Ding had told hi:, ho had rooeived ouch an order.
nd r;ay also point out that this business '.bout wearing -
his finguro to the bone docs not refer to the reports,
but to the long title which Dir.j always used in the head¬
ing. It is true that I told you last October that, in

A

.y opinion, Ding report-- frequently and reported on tho
various sories. .A that tine I had no knowledge of the
Ding Diary. Thi3 docunont was shotvn to us only after the
indictment and I ‘id not knew about all the .xporiuonts
which he had conducted r.d you will ronocbor that, at that
tine, wo spoke only of, I believe it was two series and
•.. t w :.3 series 1 ind • loridin experiments. «nd, as I
thought r.t that ti.-.,, those v;-r.. the only experiments which
Din., had conducted nr.; I told you that I hid Seen . report
cn t.i- first seri-s . I 3 .id, 1 :. :^y direct examination,

- spoke about tho cridir. question. I have net boon able
z. s-- that kc-or, ?-■ported fro:, his own knwolodgu as far
s Ky own orders w-r- cc.acorne.’. ««je:; he ..3 asked aftoy-
ward3, cr.i h- was asked at s_-v.r_l points, he .T;ays said


..pril 2-1 :-3K- 10 -i-Karrow (Int. Von Schdea)
Court Mo. 1


"Ding told :w sc”. Ding could toll hie anything. That
doesn't enke it true.

. My'll ,30 on, doctor. The prosecution ha 3 introduced
docunontary evidence which indicates that or. the 29th of
Duoeebor, 19-il, n seating was hold in the Hoich Ministry
of the Interior concerning the typhus problcn. Nov.-, you
nr.ir.t nin that sueh a aooting was not known to you, i 3
that correct?

« That is ccrr_ct, and I also say that I was not
present,

1 -oid new, you recall that in Document No. 1315,
which was Prosecution Exhibit 45 *, on page 2 , it stated
as follows: "The vaccine which is presently being produced
by the Behring ./orks fror. ehiokun oggs shall bo tested for
its effectiveness in oxpcritionts. For this purpose, Dr.
Dennits v.lllcontact Oborstur.-.baanfuohror Dr. ierugowsky."
lit of this . tLag, woro you contacted by Dr.

Door.itz?

No. In tho docuaont which I h.avo 3 ub;J.ttod as
coiling free. Dr. Doflnitz liiasc If the state of affpd.r 3 is
shown rathe* clearly. First, on the 6 th of January, I
•v.; : jot . ck fron Kithat is, frea tho Ukraine•

•Second, Dr. Dorvnitz says -juito clearly that I did not
contact bin bcoause it was nc longer necessary bo cause
wo lready had 0 .ntaot with c.-no another. On tho 22 nd of
Ducer.bjr I rcc .ived fir hundred acses of vaccine iron
hlr: fer use ur.! .r . ir. 3 t ministry, and, at the beginning
of January, 12 . 2 , I r.ceiv--* six hundred Joses. Tho
c rr • artonce In this btor is ir. ny docuncnt books.

Th n the 3-fcrin; ><crks r.-r ly expressed the wish that,
in the test which -Jili-n-ist-r I h a . ;ruod upon - tho
tv.st of the various vaccines, the vaccine g.roduc-d by the


«;ril 2-;.-5::-lC'-5-::--rr (ant. Vor. Screen)

Court Ho. 1

Behring '..'orlcs should also b- considered. Th-.t had not boon
planned in the beginning. This test w-3 to cover only
the vaccine produced by the Robert Koch In3tituto, pro¬
duced by Gild.-neisfeor, end now the Behring -forks naked
th- t their vaccine was nlso to be tested nnd I believe
that the documents also show that Gildor.uister did not
went this at first, apparently ho was afraid of sor:c
difficulty, -actually, however, I hod already established
contact with the Behring eorfca bocauso I neoded vaccino.

Therefor-, it was not nocossury for any further contact

* ^

botwooa D-rmltz nnd riysolf.

v Then it is p-rfuctly clear that in this r.ooting
in the Reich Ministry of tho Interior the intention was
ux pros so*. to tost tho offectivoncss of vccoines by oxperi-
nontation, wasn't it, froc: your knowlidGo of the docuconts/'?

„ There is not only your rtcouuont about this nattor,
but two other dooucento, and those thra. ioounants show tho
stnt of * ffairs quite clearly. .»L*;oat ev.ry word that
was 3pokon is reproduced there. It wes purely an industrial
discussion, and Giidor. ister aeroly nur.tionod tn t his
vaccino - or that I was to sec to it that his vaccino
was uu-d on 1 rgo 3c.le. The correspondence 1 tor with
th.. 3 Jhri&3 eorka shows what the intention w-s.

That persons, S-r.:ans who were to bo u3od in the Knst
as officials and who had to be v cci.a-.t-d should be
vaccinated wit:, thi - ^ - tost on huucn

bainss. If you no kind of oxporirionts on hunan

b-inas, ycu nr- right, -in it would not be true, if you

• jina’r experiments. Thorp is no connootion.


~ rii-.—ec-har.-Int. vdcScaoec

Co-art No. I.

Did you ever attend u meeting or. 29 December 1941
concerning this typhus problem?

A ho.

1 -Ou .State ttot no 3uch nesting took piece, as
stated in page 1 of Ding's diary; is timt correct?

A That is my conviction.

You further stated that if you did have a moetiiig
>ou would never have taken Ding along; is that correct?

A I cannot rexcaber taking Ding to any meeting at
which. I Vi h s present. If I was there I did not need any
; 1 always wont to meetings alone.

* Did you evci attond a meeting at any ti-ie on the
typnus problem in December on another note than the 29th?

A or. the typhus problem; of course there was a
great uoul of iiscussion at that time in various places.

a

You never uttondeu a meeting as outlined by
Ling or. mother date?

A .o, at this meeting of Conti, Aandloser and 1
or Ding. :.’o, I apparently was never in such a meeting
»• - '>ao never at any meeting With Conti end .inndloser.

'I Did you attend a meeting on December 29th or

•

thereabouts concerning the typhus problem at which
Sonreiber and Cildemeister wore present?

A I do r.ot utlieve so, as 1 have .lust settleu
in the last few days with cert inty in my mind on Dec¬
ember 27th I left Lerlin; during those days I could r.ot
.have been at ar.y.coeting ~s th^t was when I was on my
travel to rtucsin.

I You cni.vtd your ai:.d since lust November,
didn’t you Doctor? I v.ish to call to your attention
t hti --r. aaciianey ur.d I interrogated you on Novo-iuer 1,

-'-*4d ur.d v.e had previously interrogated you on 2oth of

Court .\g. i.

October and t;.s majority of the time v.as consumed in dis¬
cussing this meeting. In the course of this interrogation
on November 1 , 19*i6, Ar. -iclianey as iced you whether or
not t.iQ stated oy Ding in nis Diary concerning this con¬
ference was accurate and you said, "I repeater that meet¬
ing ind it occured to me that there v;es present Schreiter,
CHIeaoister, Ding and myself. It is possible that Rose
and he iter v.ere present too, but nandloser and Conti I
don't reaenbcr us being present. I think that the meet¬
ing took place in a room of Schreiber's in the Army .ied-
ical Inspectorate, not In the room .of hand loser."

Are you telling the truth nov., ur v.ere you telling
the truth then, Doctor?

n It is true that I made that statement, that f.uo
•od on uvy Knowledge of the situation ut the ti~*e. You
will remember thot you did not show me the diurj, you
meroly rend tnis entry to uo; an excerpt and ir. my direct
examination I nave stated, and 1 have just repeated it,
that ut that time there were suvorai discussions about
typhus. It was the most important medical problem in
Germany at the time and of course 1 rcpuatodly net the
same people at these footings. There urc nc- y peo-
Pin Germany who have a certain degree of knowledge
ibout typhus and it is so true, a: far as I remember,
that Hoi ..as present at one of these discussions. I
also attended .. quoting with Oildomcistor at that time,
but certainly never cn tuc- 29th of December and in the
second place never with the people mentioned in the
Ding entry. That is wrong for sure.

3 Dow, in view of this interrogation and tne
answer which you gave, which 1 assumed tvai’ truthful ut
that time, must I assume that since you nave s^en the


5 .' 0 •


2 April--eh n-Iut. vonAchoen
Qoirt --o.

documents end realise bow complicated the documents are,
your memory is becoming convenient end you say you did not
attend the meeting; either you did or you did not attend
the meeting. You stated that you did and there was
.Schreiber, Jildemeister, Ding and yourself and your Mem¬
ory is only refreshed by the entry in Ding's diary and
you immediately recalled such a meeting; did you ever
meet v.ith Schreiber, Gildeneister and Ding and discuss
tnis problem?

A It is true that I discussed typhus with these
people, yes.

1 ..hut aid you tftiK about?

A Glldeoeiator and 6chrci;ar you said; didn't you
or Ding?

< Gildomeistcr intt Schreiber.

A 1 talked to Gildcmeistor and ochroibur about the
problem of Increasing vaccine production. Gildcmoister's
point of vlev; was that the army procedure, tne i.eigl vac¬
cine was vary slow and cumbersome and could not bo in-
croarod tc the extent necessary nr.d I sirred his opinion
and I still do. On the other hand, Schreiber shared
Dyer's opinion that the'main thing was to develop one
procedure -.veil and on a large scale una when ono is in
the middle of production not to stop every thing aud
change everything for a now procedure; that was
Gildcmeistor's opinion.


C.-rt 1

2 -vr . IT -la - 1C' -ichan (Int. von Schcer.)


'.cu die net clscus : the testing of these vaccines?
a, as :' -T i£ Ding's errwriaants %ere concerned, *»e did not say
a tin la “ora.

i\v. did not discuss t.e testis* of vaccines at all at this
looting oith Sc hr- iter and tiildoaeistor?

- s, the necessity f itherin? experience -ith the various
v .c 1 )es soa discussed of course. v r&aind yo*. j Document of
Hcndloacr concerning Ochoijr<-t t'tco vfao nas the best typhu: ..: t -:"t
in iiro.«, .ho had do -it v.lth typhus all his lif-. In 19b3 ho said
all the vac.inos froci cliotajn o g\s are not * -11 kr.o-n enough in «hoir
effect a - tfc-r- was A coura- .wish v a tor d in; .r in 19lil -r.-n *.o
. r- • .v.in; f his . riod.

.. , \ the a - j corrs; 4Vca it says tt % this institute

was Set in J.twry of I il fol'owiiu teaso n-etings at the Vinletry
of th'i Interior and one aseting vith Sc.-j-eiber and Oilducdiator. Hcnr
o* • it -n tftht r.v.vi-.i ir<d Hi , • v s-t up such an institute if they
did not ittor.d such a eu U-. f d thoc about this jroblo^ of

ty. lus?

... t t . problcr of ty liras.

'A . mti, ..-.a • is S3 -r,. enfuchror

ucd both X ti-jc boltcr-d t -:h ixAairy of the Interior, . ay

I ,.oi.*.t mt a in t. t ssot hy i-:dae 'and b cteriolo-ists •-b t.;«.

p

ti iVifto : . prooi-c i f* :..3 -rS- t iiov rrnnt offices Were

gruatly ecncem-d ath it then.

: .W cls-vr I hu/e i cacu-3ei.t in K’ docuo.nt tov -r. -xc-rpt frgp tha
. . ole , ire cds *sur«s ,

. -ha ir at intar-ct of our • nt ind

•

.ell, tKJ■ do-; it ... - t did result during

t:»e ce-ursu f all to v :rlcus -.1 s. t-h A v a r. d ir. be .-her of
Ulii sad t... t hus disc- ssioas, if .-.t u's/.ot -r-.c upon tc ssj sri-


Court I

2 a r hi- - 11- 2a - I >J ..-itn ( A nt. von Scho.n)


u»n beings; to teat the valuo of these on husun bolngs, they
s-t u,> cuchoncald; why die oho .iffen SS r.scrt t-> th-_ 3uchunwald con¬
centration c uep if it >.as not dct-rtdr^>d before, hand that they would
axperirsent on hT.-a c.in*a; why cl', they r.ot go to th- ^ilitar;'

. t c.xkcy rj». ; t volunteers; why did they not 40 to your institute and

s •

•

• t va unt.-rs if they •. or.tea a cc p nihility tost?

... I understand diXfi 2 undorat Jidinf ,

they ara rwiOy v„ry c , piir xl, hut 1 naj roaind you th t in tho

mentions >u discussed this gr~ t length. Y'-'u iakod no

•

•

.ifcich oloc:. 2 r rue first, Oloc'.c U6,.-r*J I tojd you and it is
still rz Sjdnion t vtcolna production, -hieh w »s Inter

blook$ 0 , or . I t a thu ic*a which inurast&d us

In -ho .xffen SS and then team era. * 8~cond dovalofrnt fran a
•l! i-r.nt 3 t ..at is ir ar -tx ard Hia i_r and the conawjuonoo

of this c.cond .aspect •• s !«« oration .1 block Ii6; th t is v.t«r
block u 6 . -r.is s-coix* . . 7 .'. p ...t by-p-asaud th. first d v.. nt
bocpuoo Pin* bvCir- ill aiyi vns net flu to .ark f-.r m-ra than cix

•• '-’.cction could not b.^i: .

... I :..n't -x^u- the polat ay ftfrt *• v, d. t r. 1 nij»t any,
x f •; r«r. :jC, it x.ia f ur intcnti< n t > set up block 50 first and ur
sot it M the bottom Id cencantration c..\oj I aak ycu A th t boon
t. j pr corav M ; y rj 'd ..u ro*crt t: t - Bochtnoald cone .ntv tion camp
t 3'-t u,. e .ti : .* r v ccItv. :i it c.u’o h.av, b.^n dor- 'n .-.ny

ci y ur .3} n a it ir-chumi you pwcpj.. thought. it ijCco-

S.:r t .ri:--,t ..I tcou.ht y a ».*• those guinea pi go; tl.-.t is

y lu icr-1 Bwuu a::., a ct’r?

.. , •

In x-.r - *._:t a ru.ci.i~ r. « hcentr^tion cur;.o tn hu-;.n beings I
do n t n.wd * yuv in. r-alueti- n -a .ae ccncuiitr ti n cm. , tec r.any
vncoiivjs fr • t . w.»sci wns quite

.. differont c-nc, which I ..

.%t th« in. i.ag of the x th iu Ka t.-. o -ct--ri« 1 . ^i-*« in


C.'-rt I


2 ~;r U7-M - ll-3a - LJ 3 - 2*.-c3ien (vcn Sch-cn)

S3: . k t tho fa-ginning of the ccnpeign in the c^st th- duti.s in tha
riw I-; 1 hy-iono --nri -.pid^-.ic control suddenly rose enormously, iho
assist's'-s _r. bionic Institutes in Germany, r.hc had b-.cn drafted
inv the eofien S3, ms n very s-—li nu berj they w~ro rr, stly* very
y vir.^ s’ ft-.d aly seen tr-uninr in breb ri -1> •y. If «c nted to tr.ko
•’VvT such r. definite t:ek ~.s vaccina ^reduction, th .t is if wo v.r.tod
t c *-n industry, ■ _ ; . V . .xe.ri.nc-d sen.


2 April U7-”-. TD-12-l-Hiakic-y (Ir.t. too Schccn)
Court 36* 1


Tftero ccuid xi. get these =sr.? I knew that aaong the prisoners in
various concentration canps thara iroro foreign bacteriologists and quite
..oll*kna n .©pie. Dr. Born, for ocaanli, mentioned the Czech professor,
Thoaaschafc, Be is a professor at the Czech University, a very ~cU-4cnown
ran in Europe. There sur various other people uni or arrest.

At that tin., through Lolling I inquired of all the. concentration
canp doctors, and about ton to fifteen bacteriologist- r r portod. I
said to nyaolf, "If wo do not have nough bacteriologists now, then
there is tho possibility that those bacteriologists vrho have a groat
•leal of oxporl nco car. participate in this -.-ark*" I had another thought
In the back of cy bond, toe. In th,- first ^art of tha war the prisoners
who had previously studied oedicino wore not allowed to work as doctors,
Thiy wore employed ir. the stons qi nrrics an 1 so forth. That is a
terrible physical and rental offort for a non who is not used to such
work,

I.tri id in this way to give then an opportunity to work in their
own speciality again, not only as .doctors but in their om spooializod
fl lids 4 That coincided with oy own dosi r -.-accino produced,

.lthounh WO Ud not hav„ enough of our o»m Sr doctors for this purpose
and there ■•ns no opportunity to train people thoroughly enough,

■1 That's onou ;a or. that lir. . 'to, in your DoctiDant Hook

•* •

"mb or 1, Pr.ro 10U, -hich is "ru, wrsky Exhibit 19, the last paragraph
states t ''Or. request of 'inistcriolrat Dr, ittebar, it is also stipulated
that in a lar? .-scale axpottaent, agreed upon by tho Robert Koch
Institute nr.! th Hy r d riot of tt* JS, Dr, -'rugewoky, both aigl's
v .cdn. and the vaccine of the Behring • orks shall be included," hat
is this larr :-ecal _xr.erir.nt?

A That raf :re a hair, to the toe tin, of tho vaccine which is
awitioned ir. tho Pi.bjr document which you sufcdttod as a prosecution
xMtdt in connection with tho discussion between IKmitz and myself.
That's thi srn thing. It is call 1 largo-ccalo jxperiaent apparently
because it is a question of hundreds and thousands of vaccinations. One


2 April u7~~.~-12^-?lakl_y (Int. von Sehooa)

Court >fc. 1

of :v' documents — I believe it cores fro- Dr. ?-renits — shows tint as
.arlj* as S optonber, I boliovo it was, 19kl, wo informed th. Behring
Torks of our noed in respect to the Germans to be settled in the
2ns tem areas, whon I cstirrrtc-i at the tine at 20,000. That was really
a large—i3c~lo jxperi=intj and I think that that is what this word
refers toj not oxporlncnt but test.

Q 'all, sumin;; up this discussion of the co: , you do

siwost that you had rrotin-s or a nesting with Schroiber and Gildc-
rcistcr. Ho , was that rooting in the office of Schrcibcr in the .'.my
Medical Inspectorate?

.. Yes, that is correct. It mist have bocn oarlior. I renumber
that there was no 3no.? at thu tin ; and that would not have boun tho
easy in Dec saber. It cust have be-n in tho Into fall.

Q You exclude th possibility that :>r. Ding was thcroj is
that right?

.. ..t this discussion which is auntionod?

Q Too.

A Too, he certainly was not there.

■I However, you do .vtdt to this Tribunal that in answer to a
qu stion in in int rrc ation on »>vo=bcr 1st, 19h6, by .’lr. HcHanuy,

regarding th- statement b; Ding on Pago 1 of his diary, as to whether

*

or not it was accurate, you answered, "I ronetbor that r.octinr; and it
occurr t to - that th-.ro were present Schroibor, Gildcnuistor, Ding,
and nyu If. It is possible- that Rose and Roitar wore present, tcoj but
Bnndlosar aril Conti I ion't r.-jrber .as b.inj prasent. I think that the

race tin. t :ck .lace in a roon of Schreibor'o in the ..rry 35*-died Inspoeto-

■

rate," You a r±t that you said that in .an answer to a question that
x. HoHbncfy propounded to you on JSovoabor 1st, 19li6, do you not?

A It is tru- that I said thatj but I point out that it had boon
fiv years sir.c.« tho nooting and that ry r.uTry war not necessarily quite
&ccurato and that it is mich bett-a* to base one's opinion on tho docu-
rj. nts which sp-. :k quia - dearly.


2 ..prU (Ir.So von Schoon)

Court ::o B 1

3 Yr.\ t you havo stated hero that you never issued orders to
Dr. Ding regarding experimentation, i -.rish to call 7 cur attention to
Docunont >?urfaor '.<0-257 , hi eh Prosecution Exhibit IJanbar 283, on Faro
10 cf Doconont Eook :4mhcr 3£, wherein Dr. Ding states as follows*

This is an affidavit of Dr. Dlnb. "At the end of 1912 I took part in
•a conf-ranco of th 'Slitary Doctors* Academy in Berlin. Tho topic of
discussion vas the fatality of gas bum-senri on ounied. Jtow, Kilioi
and ’Jrugowiky gave r .ports of soldiers -.rho had soon gas cder.a sorun ir.
high qaantlti^s up to 1500 c. c. an hour aft- r.-arts out of corploto
r ocuppratior, "

DR. PI.-:: TEx ::r. Frost'mt, I object to tho uso of this .affi¬
davit by Dr, Din-. I object .4 to it vh;n it was subdttcd. Dr. Ding is
d ad. It is, thcrjforu, no lcngor possible to call cn hin fer cross
•ax"rii,:.ti:n. ritton tjtir.ony of dor.d . arsons nay nat bo usod in tho
L r ' is reason. I object to tho uso of this tostisjony.

F. K&RDYt I :on*t coriiont, your Honor. Tho docurjont has boor,
n fcdtto I into jvidonc .j and I fool that I con usu it in cross exanina-
tion,

TH?: !P v jID;PT: Tho objection is overruled. Tho docuncnt nay bo
use -pesos of cr-ss ex—Ination of the rdtn-jor.

1 I'll r.poot. In .rab3tanco this affidavit 3tatui that in 191,2
a confer r.oo was held in th military .V.. ical ..cado=y ir. Berlin. Those
pr 3 nt r. .3chr iber, ‘ river:.,ky t pin.; and apparently Kill an. Non, you
havo oubrdttod an affidavit of Kilim h to in which Kilian states that
such a ncotinj tank place. Do you r r^“b:r attending that rooting?

1 o •

Tho tc-ic of discussion was gas bum sonic, ran it not?

A Tos, that is ri ht.

0

Q Dr. Dina states in his affidavit: T’rugcxsky suspected

that th phenol content brought about the fatal results of tho ov.i.aK--
i-.tion of tho separate injections." .'as that true?


53-7


2 Ar.ril L7- 1-.. ID-12-L-Blukl;y (Int. -,*oa Schoen)
Court So* 1


A Yes*

0 , “in- go os on to say, 'In th. presence of the other

r.nta-im ruirwoky, co.iaandoi uo to tak par-, in th-- uthanasia with
ph.nol in a concentration co:. 1 scribo the result in detail,

jinoo neither I nor itruyorsJgr over saw a caso of death through phenol."

If I un. rstar.it corr-ctly, you ’.any that you over ccmondod Ding
to do such a thir. 'j is that correct?

A It ia very fortunate for r.c that Ding mdo this statement
in a In which he . 1 r.<e other perse r t this neoting.

Prof. Kilian, a ys quit cl arly in his iocuajnt that in hia \ rdsonoo
no such asoigroonta wuro nvmtionod. That fafbtba the statonont of Ding.

I hr.vo no noco-osity to io'so either, "a 1 arn .-.bout phenol deaths in
th . rh&*T£Oology at the Univeraityj and vu fail in th- oxeninatior. if
•vro don't knew about it,

'l ‘loll, in this regard, hov; would you dot.r~.inu the tolerance of
a sorur. containing phenol, unl.sa you .xp-.rln.ntod Tilth phenol or unloou
you xperi-. at.-I with th s-.rur? Isn't th.ru a probl cm tharu ahich should
have bjcr.-riv n consideration by th . nbers of tills n-wting?

A Too, that is true. 7h.ro ror. t o things to b considorodj first
tho s;rptc: j cf poisonin' th osulvos r-jr_ very wdl-kno -r. and -’id not
require my investigation. It ic known that loath frrn phonol and
images t? health car. occur, such as apj -re l hero -after tho uso of
gangrene SuTur.j an* it uas a qn.siion of figuring out how mich phor.ol
is oontdnod in LOO c. e. of nos gangrene sorun. For exosT&o* that is 2
c. c. of concerntr it'.J carbolic aci ’j and th. hx .an boly cannot stand that
without har . l.ir.- dm-e. In th • s. cond ;.'l~co th possibility was 'is—
cussed of trotin- this tiling one- nsro by oxperir. nts. Prof, Kili m speaks
about this in his 1 cur-nt. In th eonferonco he r: rtod that, I fcolievo,
four or fiv cf his associates, assistants at his clinic in hrcslau, had
inducted into their art-ri s a solution f ufc.-.nol and table salt, and then
all suffarod cjrtain ryv acres of phanol poisoning. Tho situation was
dcorol up by Th_r- vras .•» a.,*d for : arth.r uxperir mtaticn.


2 «r.m U7-4 fr*. -7T-1 ?-S-:lakl-y (int. von Scboen)

Court Ifo, 1

This exporisent had taken place before the neoting. Kilian
reported about it. I said to Ding* "Orientate yourself about phenol
pciscn as such it ray bccoao important in course of the war in eases of
largo dcsco of acre heir- given." I told hir. where literature was to
bo found at Jena. I saii that because I was responsible fer Ding Hi
training as n hygienist and a bacteriologist, I an responsible to tho
state for training ny assistants. At tho end of their specialized
training, I had to give a certificate that they had been properly
trained*

For that reason I tcok advantage of all tho opportunities
which arose by accident to dor^notrats to py assistants rather cenpli-
entjd questions in our field. For that reason I went to this raooting
vdth Ding. I ranted to ir.duco Mn to think about this question of
•angrcnc, and it is hotter tc d: this cn tho basis cf exp-ricnco rather
than cn the written <-r lers.

0 Cr.o last cpjostion, Dootcr. Ao n result of this noutinp, Dirg
thon returned to Buchonrald and killed poorly ""ith phenol injections.

You deny that y u ccrr.anded hir. to do that, and <k> you stato that Ding
id that on his cm initiative? 13 that your dofonso to Ding*3 state¬
ment?

A I certainly to !,ny that, yos. I had re thing whatever to do
'1 th it.

IIP. K. tY: I believe this is a *ood breaking point, ycur Honor.

THE FHSCDESTt Tho Tf 1 will be in recess until 130 oelock.


(A r cess was tek n until 1330 hours.)


(Int. vr, Icl.L.r.)


tq *7

2 rii-j.-za

C.urt llo. 1


. STzKiccx szssia;

(The heaxin. reconvened .-t 1330 hears, 2 ,.;:ril 1947).

Tv^ ILJiSH.X: Persons in the- Ccurtrccc will plar.se find their
ac^ts.

Ihc Tri'xuel is r-nitTin scasicn.

JaXHUf !WJGOi.SkY - .wsuraad
CR0SS-2XStL*.',.TICS - C -timed

BY ffi. H.JOY:

c t trier U tho Afternoon recess, :.cur, w., v«e:-o iacussin
the phene 1 prcllca. lic>. in this connection ii y_u -t :i.y ti. iu jr -
p°3b experiments tc he ccn uetCd -t .uch«.n l' c..nc-rain; the t 1 ,r-
enco cf serua cr sorr. cant-inin; phenal? Th t is, i-:. yea : r.; n
th-.t in 1942 or 1943 cr crjy ti e?

A N’c, no such ■u^ eaUen* were sa-fr ond they roro r..t noooss.-ry
hoccuso in Girr..*ny cv ry senn ccntrins phoncl. In the German a.rum
industry there is nc sorua produced without yhen 1. I .-a oj er.kin« cf
tho serr far therapeutic purposes, n.t vrecine*.

'• Thuri «<• nc, tine did you wVer prepese that -jcpurin.er.ts l»o cm-
Jacted tt determine the tcler.-nce cf sera containin' phenol, is th-t
what yea coy?

• llo, I never su • \.otod that.

..re y?u sure. Sector?-
.. Yes.

15-.. H.JSY: ..t this tine, Ycur acr, I ffor cur nt
; - .
d-.te! Lerlin, 24 ,.u act 1944, Subject: Service of oc^vriacnis, it has

reference file indexes, r. :‘.r-ase. t. the Giivf Hy iadst . the staff

0

I.eich . hysici.m S3 nd rcliteo, . rlin - ZchlenJtrf.


iiru-xwsky:

"I -JU die to infers ytu that the nvichofuS.r .^-SS ins


rpprov^l tedey the so-i^s of ocr

; /


orr«-ri-a^r.t 1 :


2 April- -DJG-13-2-L-ss_r (Ini. v.r. Schcin)
Court No, 1


1. specific thereby rith typhus

2. tolerance cf sera cor.tdnin' phenol.

"1 c^r;e that both series cf experiaents in the department
for typhus or.i virus research cf the Hyicnic Institute cf
the off._r.-SS in ■ dner-Cu chc r.weld shcull to carried cut,
end request that I be inferred cf the ccurse cf the findings,
perhaps threu'-h intomediory reports-"

:y crlor cf Gr.-»itz
Si ^nature is "’flCCL-J”

C. Ko* this states that the hoichsfu J.r r-SS Irs epprev.o a 3.ri-s
cf experiments prcpcsoJ by ycu an. the ex. e-riaents my Lo c--rri.S ,ut
in 5uchs.wnld. Ycu state I thrt y. a nev-r jfcjet.l ix. crL.cntr t-
determine the tclerar.ee cf Seri Cent: lain.* phenol. New I- ;-.u !?;-

tain, fleeter, that yv.u never initiated ny exj crir.-r.trti n t. ietumino
the tolerance cf sort containing phenol?

*. Yos. The connection here is lustthin quite liffercnt. l

shrll discuss feint 2 fir*. I hove nlr-ady ssi thrt in 0-ra.ny th-.re

-.Tero no s_rr without phenol. In cc-noctier. with this hencl question

ir. German scrur., I inf rjod Gr-witz alcut the liscussi r. vhich is l* cine

discussed here, at which Niliun rnd ScJ rei’- or w.ro present, -nl I tcld

fcin that the industry sh.ul-: try t produce sir- with.ut ihen.l, ns

t! o Fronch aorta industry bad bod .• i . ti . i knew tv t

•

su/cations to thrt effect had ..cn s-r.t t the industry, ’--t trot the
Ge-rarn scrua industry ho t refus.l, durir. the xt. r, v* .f. vco • rue!-
1 sic chon*c in its ;r lucti n ’ cc us-, it • -.o net ir. r citdcn t
t _in the* necessary spuds! . i

Granite that in scrua them;* f. r erdinor; lisersec — I : ~c tnialdr.
priorrily cf dipthoria,’ in wider. l:r :. .-nor. titles f -.^r. iti.: ;.t

-he tine in the therapy a oinrt dipthtria -ace it h ' Ir k- . ;ut, ! e-
crusa the hi-hip* ccnc-ntr t-f s-.raa . . r.c Icn _r •. iV o. in r.eccssry
quantities — I tcld hia that ir. such io.-jos r.. s d » tc! t see
‘ hether 1-r.a c od ht result fr:= phenol.


5591


C curt I


2 o.r 4?-- - lL-1 - LJC- - Or-Uigfcsr (Int vcn ochcen)

and I tel' hir. th.-t it could bs desirable to knew whether aorur. with-
-ut phenol v,uld definitely prevent such a shock and etc. I also re-
-i.'ser th.t this point t r had connection with the fact we had negotiated
with 3ehring uerks ter the prediction •-* serua frequently in 3iw.ll
quantities in erdar to use. then, and to c; ?_rc t-hcr. with oth :» sorun.

If I rovj.-h-r coiroctly this invo-vod ' \thori •. Surur, that is tho
serxa ^hich is used costly in Dcr-any. -a- c -p-risen -as t. bo r ade
of syapto '3 foll.ninp the c±dni strati r. of the usual diphbr.arin s .our;
containin phenol in the children r.v.nofr.* fr-s diwhtfc-rl., md
which w?5 tt b« a-on t< o s v,'t: a n-uH to,.- a* and the ayr.pt r<ia

following the udidnictr tier, f tfco 6jru.-.fr_cd fr pi.snol '.ore t
bo noted. "U3 was nh..t or S.t* ,

sorios of .x-. orients. 1 ii nt . int vt t\ t this .* r-tc-.' s.ri- s
of experi-o-nta in th*s caao c.nn t ruf .r tt irtifici .1 iniecti a, be¬
cause with diphtheria it is net :ssi'lo t .v.v. a hu -r. Kin artifi¬
cially inf-ctod with dipfctfc.rla aoru .

Q. D;ct.r,oftar r.-cuivir^ this c.ufir-r tlon -i /our porpoar-ls
to porfora oxperinonta as cutlir.^d In this lotUr, you Must f\avo
Issued orders in that rot\rd. N' to Vnws did you issue th:su rd-ra?

a. Ko, I di-i n t issue any rd r:, In ~ty pfnian this c ';Curns
.ictivitiot tf o:au civiiiaa h.s.o'tla; : r n th« lr :pn, and In
C' ncontr >ti C pfl • nt .

Jtist a aocoat, Doct r. But it i3 said in this latl :r t:
agrsos ti*.t those or rior.ts car. o- carriod ut in Co. rt -;:t 1
T/phua Vims iteaearch .f tho if "ionic Institute f the .off-a-S^ in

►

lfojj^r-°uchonwuld. Did you r di y- u not carry cut thus* -rii.onta
in aoichr-euchonwald? •

Bo.

4- I*.v_r issued my rdjrs t c-ny ait such axp-rinents tc Ding,
for instance?

a. I hr.vc air ady explained what this s ri..s *f ojg: ari-iants o-an.


It is p-ssiblo th t 1 suggested f r oxv.plo that he was t vnccin^ts

539£


Court I

2 «:r 1:7-., - 1-.-2 - LJG - Galla.;har (ir.t vcn fcbocn)

one child with ..ne rdnd f 3_rur. ind another c’rdlc with another serin.
Xr.it is possible; I don't rv-e.b-r about tn*.t. But to try -ut Sv-rtn
ccatcinirv- cb_r.nl on huson beinjs, thc.t I did rrt order.

Q. Than is a result of this letter .f Gravits to you pproving
year proposals, you took r.c acti:n, is thrt right?

>: . I «ny point ut that this h s n c nn.cti r. r.ith tho
Din.; affidavit, which “use bead*

Q. i oc not ns kin y-u that questi .. I>id / u r did ;■ c n t
as a result f this c.nfir *.ti.n £ > r .rows r'«r th t oxpert-
rsnts bo cirriod -ut as .utlinod ir. via liter? I aa n t irtartatod
in othor . f export: uitsti a t ~...r. . Dl 7 u r did > u

not carry iut or have carried out or. .ria-r.ts \c ui lined in this
letter?

a. I do n t kn t nythir^ -b-vt in_nt= which c iriod

out.

h. '£.u V.M us n ar.ct uxwdnuticn tint y u h 6 spoci ic ther¬
apy Tdth typhus enrriod out *.t r'ucr.jrr. '.Id, di- n't y u?

Y-s. i was rui'.rri i t. fxin* t» , r_rus con idnin pht-n 1 ,
and ns to Ho. 1 specific thcr«| - *h typhus, I eXplaiaod th t in vy

y a mt - t rupo;t

Ho, j 't aood t, j.' plain it -'join, i u ‘i j -t

of tnis caUiv.tl.n rjri pr p s-A p:v.s n r -rs in c n,li .nee «j.t.h
this It Ur t fluchorct l*.?

ft. :■ . It T. u a t cn r _r, but a S- KeBti n. I h TO S lid
in qy direst examination it was not a :»rie 3 of a:-erincntr in the
sense of artificial infection that *. uld ni»\c been senseless, becauso
'o had enough pconls sui forin- fr;r t/shus with whoo inis ih f,..ry
could be carried out. It is uef artun o? y so t.h^* in the Gerr.on
langu .^0 wo ls-j a *ord "experiment" not only in .rtificial infection
but also for to' s «C such c. nature, ad l a re call tner. ex Hiri-
r*sr.t.s, too.


535.*


. A ri - - -3-Gaila ra.-- vci -

Court io. i.


Q Then you only passed it along zs a suggestion ana net os

an order, is that what you wish to state?

A Just a suggestion to certain internists, that, in the case

of typhus, against it ve had r.o treatment, they should test this

n«n treat-rent, which in-a clinically similar instance parat -phua

•

11 n u had very good results; for that rauso:. I .ms of the o; Inion
would have Justified ir. trying it and of do 5-~« way in typhus.
Tnis suggestion, I believe, went to three airforant persons, -.ho
«cre into mists in the SS hospitals, -u.d a oellcvs they w*re in
Borlin, Prague, and sc-.u othar ospi’-nls, und it is quit. possible
■that I also onde such r. sut^aation to -ir/;, bucausc i know that 1
discusuod this cutter with assistant., out not • ith tin. pur-
pose of starting a series of oxperlaontu rith irtifici 1 infection.

Q lot's go on doc tor. C*i direct ox- .rim lion you said you
Knew nothing bout nigh alitudo uxporlrunts, is that rltfit?
a Thai is ri\ht, yos.

Q :r. addition ;,ru knuv net tiny . out haschar's Pjou rch vorJr
at all?

A .'o, I knew nothing nbout Imschor's koce-rch ..or; .

Q -‘O'* Doopwnt :’o. »>ch&i 7, rrhlch is Prosecution Exhibit llo.
12U, vhich is found on tn« last ,c of , oou-vmt Cook 3, tmro is
a not* by Siovcrs which states as follow* *Su : Cooperation
of K' .ienic Institute of the Xien-Si:. In refuronco to it,/ 1j tor
9 /2/hZf , s vurain -(r<..ids letter.) hew do you state that

oiovers orroii-.;ousl> * tcludod yovr na/& ir. this notation in connec¬
tion with the rosoare.t of the g -.stein r.Ur?

A los, in this Circcssion ’ r ~ • -r tnis discussion

*

3i jvors in jjy institute very well. It. was fortunate circuwf * sees

Q lot's not g.o into other iiscussione. id id-w

not discuss th* rosoarch field of 'ascr.-.-r* s v.iU, rd. to yoa c:
the gastrin water ir. cams of f.v.ai , stated ir. this i-c . -_r.'.r.


2 ApriI-B£H-l4-4-3nll2gh .r-Int. vi.r.Schocn
Court lio. 1.


A According tc whnt Sicvors has told ao here, he
es£od me wno within the iS nospitais, and medical inspec¬
torate of the S3, of the aedical office was competent for
such experiments, and he also said that this water was

actually us d later ^gainst freezing in the SS hospitals

•

in Vienne. Uf this specific point about the gastein wa¬
ter I don't remember. It could only. 1 o particularly
bric-f question, but v.o certainly did not discuss hnsener's
work of either nigh altitude exprrit nts, or cold ex¬
periments. on tiusc rrof.ssor Schr.alwr who is muntioned
here, has b-.en here since yesterday, euc ho will testify
as to what no discuss.d at this civc-ting,• mid he will
confirm want 1 h-vc said -hut we diu not 1iscun3 reuse..or's
research work.

Q Now you have said on direct examination >our ru-
presontativu or a member of yojr staff of the Institute
attended the Nuernberg meeting or. freezing, and he repor¬
ted to you about the meeting, is that right?

A Yus.


►


Court 1 ,

April 2 -«-i 5 -l-HD-fcoxaie-Vonacnoen.


nS ' -otter of fact you stoted in airect examina¬
tion to t you vialteu dccnau iteolf or that you wore unable
t. t ot into tr.e inner ccap, is that right?

A . I said to't in the spring of d243 I was in

Dachau -t n food mating. I vs not in the concentration

•

c'-p rnd I did not talk to any of tnese people. - " la0
sale, th t this meeting prob bly toc^ >1 ce "ft-r reechor
hrd fInlsneu the high : ltltud- n- c.ld experiments. «a
fr.r -b I roaecoor it v 6 in .r 7 , :.d -1= w.-ycri-ent ->r.ly

1 - a ted until April, but 1 vs r.ot q. ite eur- vh-tn-r too
seating mignt not nnve-bcon -t tow e.-.l of «:ril, hut in
nny o-ee, and this is cox.fira.d tr.e iffidrvlt of
it is certain that I hnd no opportunity to *‘ik -nyonw
who worked at this experiment* 1 station of R-eer.-r's
nnd no opportunity to enter the concentr tlon cnap, since
we were token out from ..ur.lcn '11 of us together, nd after
tr». cectln_ ve were all t- 4on t -ck to-,-t..wr.

q. v 0J . it 3 st^t - In direct exomla"tion that you
r.-wived knowledge fr-a Grnwltz of schilling 'a experiments
vita a-l-ria, tut Cut t yo- h u no opportunity to interfere
since you were still in the So-?uchrun^ehc upt'-at, io th t
right?

«. lea, that is rl c nt.

Kow, you «\re -wre, of course, th t oohlllln-
wor.. continued -r.til th- end of th. war, aren't you?

«. YoS, th"t Is tru-. I he rd of it mere.

%. Then oft.r you c-o?-e C-hl-f hygienist, tret iu
chief of Office 3 in Gr-witt office y u didn’t Ult.rf-re

with schilling's work either, -iu you?

I did net know ~t tnnt tl~ ta-t =:r.illin-.'s


w.ru s still - - in*; on.


5;-9S


Court I

April 2-A-ld—2-HD-.-;oxeie-V,r. 6chsen.

I con.testify quit. definitely and.r c.- th th~t outside of
tr.is Interred!• ry report, wr.ich I believe was in IS42, I
nov«-r r^d anytnlng cere to do with the whole cottar, and
w s quite astonished when 1 le*rr..d suddenly -ft.r tno
collapse that Scnlllln. hna continued the s-'l.-rl:.* ex:eri-
aer.t in d"Ohau until lS-:5.- This is ay exolrnrti r. for

•

tnrt. According to t..e records of ... trial at j-cre.u
Schilling : ppro-ch„d Hinder cy uu-.ddrtion-of Jo.nti, and
Crmwltz told no t the tUc tre t ... ..inself i. i no Influence
on these nr.tt.rs because the; h.*d teen order.- by r.luuler
person-lly. irnwit- i;rd not b.er. ir.c2-d.-d in the ...• ct.r,
and I believe t/i t Is rloo shown by tn. record of thu trial
t daohou. I was of the opinion that these ertt.-rs n..d _yr.o
directly fron Schilling, to -»r vltz. Ir.-t wre ay © inton
until the beginning of tr.is trial nor.. In any crco -
ncVvr ftrd anything core to do with it. 1 n«v.r • d ny-
t. ln« ab-ut It. I w- s never told r.nythln*. rb:?ut it, r— I
novor did anythin*,. I r..v, stops In tno matt r.

I w o convinced tr .-1 it h a lon,_ been finished.

• <ell now, r. c . rdln & the sulfonllrsld. experiments,
on direct uxncinntlon you didn't ueny tr. t the cultures caco
froa the hy^ir.e Institute t~ the bV.ffor. 56, did you?

«. Ko, that is not rl^nt. I only arid thrt it wns
oossiblo. Ih.rv Is :■ difference, isn't there? I .yaelf
.:r.ow notr.ir. t r.o out It. I we net in r.rlln :t t.irt tine.

*• Fischer a.-ys t.:rt the cultures c-te fro- the
bygino Institute to the ""ffer. ai, doesn't ho?

A. Yes.

i. You were chief of tirfc institute, weren't y.-u? #
a. Yea.

5C-9?


Court 1

«pril 2->i-15-i6-Hi)-*'=oxsic-Von Sci.ocn.

!.ov, r«u. rdlr._ the epidemic Jaunulce experiments
you suit. that you knew nothin,, about those experiments os
ros-r.t-a re, is that rl c ht?

«. I loomed of those experiments only through the
trial.

You novjr heard oT 1 ny proposals or n»-v.r talked
with anybody about e^erlxentrtion Ln thw fl-ld of hepatitis
epldomlcn, Is that rl tt ht?

it. ho. I never talked to or.,: . 0 , the t-Ir.-a which
are the subject of the trial, trrt is. Of a ursu, I have
desoussed th- diae-se ltseif, o-t nv"«r the nutation of
what la tne cause, and I r.ev:r < 1 I». ..y t. ir._ in t.: - connec¬
tion. I never t-.lked - bout thu experi-er.tntibn.

You n-ve talked to >utzclt .-bout :.ep- title, I

auopose?

n . I uor.'t Oellevo so. I know Jutzolt only visually,
r.d aside froo general medic/ 1 .ettin 0 - where there >_re
many hundred people I ;«-t him only one*. at c o.m ll r.eetln.^.
Th; t wo tn« second time wr.en I t Iked to Professor
riandloser. There w-s ?•. question of whether tne cr.olc.rn
danger no lon b wr _xlat_d. somethin, quite alfierer.t. .'o
did not dl3CJG8 Jaundice.

■*. I.ow, aid you «.ver S 1/. to sc..relt.r about ..e tltls?
/t. Certainly not, never.

■v. Hr.y work ulon^ the lines of neoatltls w a of
interest to you as a ienlst, w-sn't It?

/». Yes.

Row, wasn't achrelb.r, as I recall, plenipotentiary

.

for rese rch ln epidemics, ir. thv holch neeearen Ccunbll
for research on eoldemlcs, ln the


5590


Z: art 1

April 2-^-l^-i-HD-Hoxsiu-Voa Schocr..

Reich Rose rch Council?

Yes, ho wa6, but all the tine since he had held that
position, I bo lie vo that v a since 19-13, I hod hardly any¬
thin. to -o with ochrlcber, because our points of contact
•wore actually in the field of troop hygiene. When we net
each other wc always discussed now v:o could protect our
soldiers. That is purely business. 3ut it was no longer
necessary later because ho hod n successor In this office
as troop hygienist, and those ccr.v-rsatior.s were carried on
with that nan. Durln.. that tine I saw Schreibcr perhaps
twice, but wo r.-ver said a wor* about any exoorlaer.ts or
about natters concerning the .’vseirch Council.

Q. did dchreiber over show any interest ir. experiments
on human beings concerning hepatitis?

A. I don't know. I can't say anything about that. He
didn't soy.anything to ao about It. 1 can't renumber over
discussing the specific topic of Jaundice with hi::. .«'o

dlocuasod typhuo a great deni, typhoid fever, malaria, but
not Jnundlco. That was not n oubjoot for the hygienist but
for the Internist.

Then ho novor expressed nny desire to experiment on
human bolriga to you, Snrolber?

a. 13o, not to ne.

i. Did he over frankly request you to supply hln with
subjects to be used In experiments?

A. 1«0.

Q,. Tnoy you mnov nothing about any plans concerning
experimentation on human c_ir. c In the field of hepatitis?


n. Jio, I have no 1 -on about that.


Court i

aoril 2-«-I5-5-HD-Hox3ie-Vor. Scheon.


Doctor, I vrnt to give you rn opportunity to think
c aoiaont and to realize you are under oath here, end 1 want
to give you another opportunity to save yourself froa
perjury. Do you still state that you know nothing about
any plans or enterprise concerning experl cents on human
beings lr. the field of hepatitis?

«. I can only repeat that I knew nothin* about any
plans concerned with the things, vhi.h .^re tr.e cubj ct of
your trial.

hrtRDY: I now want to introd-ce Decent Ho. 1303,
wnlch is off*-r.d as Proeecution dxr.it it 4£7 for identifica¬
tion. Do the lr.terprjtv.rs- nave a copy.* -his le a letter
on the letterhead of Rolchphysioif.r. S3 er.d'rolioo, Chief
Hygienist, dated 29 Jfcnu ry 19.5, retarding c.r.sent for c
series of experiments, addressed to Reich physician S3 nd
Police, Berlin.

“Hnuptsturmfuohrer Professor Dr. Dreool, Director of the
Ky c icnlc Institute of the University of Ulpzlg taa
cultivated n Virus from peroons suffering from
Hepatitis and succeeded in transplanting it on animals.

••It is necessary to make oxp-rimontc on human boings in
order to determine the fret th: t t:.ls Virus lo indeed
the effective Virus Hepatitis epidemics. The
plenipoter.tlrry for research Council therefore nudr.scv^
r.lmsolf to me witn the request to carry out th- above
experiments.

°I a~ asking you to obtain outnorization from the
Rolchsfuhr«,r So to c rry cut the necessary experiments
on 20 suitable prison-rs vi.o :irv». nitherto novjr suffered
from Hepatitis Ecllemica, at the typhus-experimental
station of the concentration ccmp Buchenwald." Signed
Krugowsky.


5400


Court 1 r

Acril 2 -a- 1 5-5-H2-hoX3i«j-Von sc oen.

-v. „ov, Doctor, is that your sl-snr tare?

DR. FL2«IKS: .-ir. President, I object to'the submission
of this document. It has no dr to, and it nrs no Jcurno-i
nuntor. I snould like to see the origlnrl.


+


5401


2 April 1517 -A-Ii-l-PK?- Karros (Ir.t. vzn Sc:, or.)

Court 1

1£R HARDY: The original has a date on it. Your Honor.

(To Page) Will you kindly get tte original free the defendant?

Tlds document is an official Goraon document. Your Honor, certified in
the sane nenner as all others ttet have been introduced in evidence.
Obviously, the German nineograph doesn't have the date on it.

DR. FLEUIItiG: The original has a date. Yes, it was Just not copied.

THE {RESIDENT: What is the date?

UR. HARDY: 27 Janurry 1915, Your Horn,

BY UR. KaRDY:

Q. Now, Dr. Urugowaky, is thr.t your sign tux* on that document?

A. It is ny signature end 1 c:.n utt you -h: f il-ving about Hie deoumant.

Q. Just c r.octnt. Doctor, I asked y.u Jo «h t your signature? Yv.s?

A. Yes, it is ay signature.

Q. Now, tlx, Plenipotentiary for her*, rch in L: idunics in the Reich
Research Council was Schrei'xj, was it n-t?

A. YeS.

Q. Ho ndlroasod hineelf to you with tho request to carry out the above
exporioents, idd ho not, according to this letter?

A. Ho did net talk to oo about the natter. He Sent no r. lotter, and tho

contents are core or loss copiod h-re. I aay point cut that thio lotter

was written on tho 2Sth of January, 1915. Thi* inJicites thr.t it has

nothin to do with tho experiments wnich re tire subject f discussion

hero. Ttoy took place earlier. It has nothing to *i with the Haagon case

or tho Dohcan case. In this case’, twenty prisoners w«ru to oc use.!.

Dolmen u3Q'i uight. It was r.t tho tine when there wero quite definite

directives free: tho Reich Fuohror on tho assignment of prisoners. You know

that only tho Reich Criminal Police Office in Berlin could nako such

assignments, arv! this office was in charge :nly cf profcooional criminals.

It is true tint I wrote this letter "n mjggcsted this assignaunt, but in

January 1915 nothing was dene ab ut it. This 1-ttor has no connection with

any of tho experiments which :jx tb. subject of this trial. Above tho

address it says "Re: Censor* for a series of oxperiflunts". There is no

reference to any previous correspondence. If tr.-.t hod been the case it

54 G2


O M


A ril 1917 Karrow (Int. v.: Sc'r. o)

cirt •‘•o. 1


wouL: s.ay "Rjfcror.cc" and thon the r.usber ;f un earlier letter or something.
Q. h.t’e ua g or. . 1 :w, Doctor, to another subject.

Tier, ym in charge of the rationing of Zykion B gas to concentration
crops?

N.. It was issue ’ by th. Central 1 Depot of the liaffen-SS.

Q. II.Kj o'o you kr_w that in Ceraany the use .f Zykion B f-r the
purpose of c* tatting dangerous anircals or/' . ior.ts was generally prohibited
ao set forth in the Reichsgosetzblntt date 3 February 1919?

n. Yes, th t is true and because thoro'- .s this govomr-ontal ruling we,
in our disinfection school, had special aurtos f or the uso of highly
poisonous gasses for dolousing cl thing. There - a .• c ursc f.r isiafcctcra
and, in addition, these people :r . t

state certifier.to far ncis-r.. Prussic cl' c-u! ~ usee f.r ’ieinfaction
use only by state approved disinfect rs wh. .•£ '< special xr.aisslon :r rs
the state to work with this Zykl-n, 'n 1 th. disinfectors rho ft'. ' ti ls
poison certificate hid th. persissi n nd h : r.a previous training so
that they knew hm to uso the preparation. In nil the larger ct-s i> at
troop aanouvors places wc h=: armngeaonts f r -russic .ciJ doc-nta-Ai.ntion
an woll ns in the big pris-nor -f "nr eta s f the -ny. That uas t he nost
custoenry procedure In Gornnny.

Q. Nj", f course, there was a Gown regulation existing which pro¬
scribed in extra ordinary c .roa when th. ure f Zykl n --nd oirdl'r mterials
were pemitt-*. that tr.-fx p.ls-ns wore r 1 * ys tJ bu nixed with rn irritant
in order to warn husrn beings on" tj avoid danger, lias tht right?

A. If yuu nean the fallowing: Prussic icihas r. y'or r, .1 1 tst,
very little, and special tub stance war ir.tr. uce into the prussic aci
expounds sc that it c oulu be souile .. In this f rr. it was used, nr.’ ir. this
technical f-rn it is rot ctlle : .-rucric r.ci - that is : chonicl - ' ut
it is called Zykion B.

$. How, tftr.t special substance nixed with it, is that "Rcizst ff" or
'"'ornstoff". Is that right? S»3«ST0FP? Ir th t th- *or> y-u usev ?

A. l.'arr.stoff, yes,

Q. That can be tr* nslatc : as an irrit at?


54C.5


- April.
Court .. . 1


!—3-?KP- Karrs (Int. v:n Schsn)


A. It is to warn husen beings to witch put. "This is poison". Other¬
wise, -exe would simply breathe it ir. without selling it.

q. JAU run, this Zyklon 3 that you used ir. y-ur delousing prceraa.

Id th t havu this irritant a-ixod in it?

«.Yos; r.ly the official tin containers of a certain size *ero us. .

They wore elivered by the c:epotcnt Reich c -r-lttee; an*, it always
contained this l.'r.mstcff without which w^rk w uld Irv etn very dr-ngor*-
,uh, in spite of gas cr.eks.

Q. Now, was it necessary t. carefully 1. -1 th. can jS gas ao that it

would bo obvious th't this g-.s c r.afinesuch r. irrit-nt?

A. It was r.ot like a water r a gcOiling can, :«ut It -as r. very special

kind of tin cun which had a IBhcL fr-a tiv. fir= which had produce.', it
— •

with a c.l-rod uign. I n-.vur sow any other cans without this sign. Only

tho origianl cans fr-a tho firo woru as far ts I kn »..

Q. TToll now, do you kr. w whether or n.t the e ntainero in which tho

Zyklon 3 was Ir. .... In >tt»r wor-s, 1 y u knm whether the containers
with Zyklon 9 which wore sent to the c-ncontrati n waps for extermination
in gas chanbors centalnod th« Zyklon B r-ix-d with an iirtwnt? bo you
know that?

A, No, I c-nnot teU y-u anything *’• ut that. Until I vns arroetu! I

had hoard nothing of this type of use f prussic aci!, but hero I Irv,

•eon a docuaent fron t ho investigating Ju ‘go f the S3 - Dr. V rgon,

who investigated those things in the Cvr.c r.trati n ca. T o .and ho testifies

that for Auschwitz, prussic acid car.c fr.ra - certain firm in Hamburg -

Stolzonborg on! Company, n chcaical firm. I lidn’t kn.w that this fim

tr.d anything to ’o with the pr.ducti n :f prussic acid. 1 kn v. r.ly throo

•

firms which dii’ r. t include Stolzonberg an', he describes cr.se - :.nd
this is why I roraenber it - a cos, where • curtain prisoner sunt the cr.pfc>
cans tack t. the f^rm an’, ho also Sent back a full ne r a half full
which had not b oe.n used. That was, of c-urse, vc-y danger, os n
that is why I rcocabcr the satter. '..‘hether they contain-i irritant r
whether it was the Jirepcration Zyklon 3, I kn , an this :r- aration


was not issued by the Central lerical Depot


April 15t7 -A—16-4-rK?- K :rr (Int. \ -r. 3chx»)

Court ;ic. i

Q. i.cll n», this g-.s th t Dr. ”rgcn actions easing fr a Stolsenbcrg
ant! Coopeny, ne cent ions tint '.s being the gr 3 the* was used in the
extermination chrabcrs, is thet right?

n. YeS, 30 faC told CX.

Q. ’.fell rov, the gas that you used in defusing was obtained from
Teseha, Stabenow, Ocgesch and another fir.u, is that right?

•

A. Tin , rocedure was as fell.ws: In the 01’ Raich, tn:.t is not including
..uotria am' the Sudetonland end the ?r tectrat there were nly two
fima -f this kind. Ire Hamburg C a.v'.n.v, Tv. cfc an Stabon-w, nnd Herd an*
Linder in frankfurt. The Slbc divided the lulch int the istricta under
each of the so fires, and later there was x tl-or fir a ir. B-heedn • nd
thoro was - fire in Kolin. Fr-u i s. -ci 1 c , any tfccs-. receiver' their
instructions, ra for -.a I kn.r.. That <r,s tba Deutsche Cosellsch ft fuer
SdhMdlingshokcMiptung, which car e fr the ‘.orm c jptuy fr c n 'thing
pests and was abbreviated as "Dugeach". Tnis Do;rcsch w.-.s a i. ut nt f r
bull ling Zyklor. ch/v.’-ers for ol using cl thing and a s -cinl . rose ’uro
hn<! been icvolcp-d in Gcrttny. ... rvceiyj' the .-eralsol^n lr a 'hie
company and I nogo? with the hood f the c-piny, Dr. Peters. In
the lntor c urso ;f the war, tho air war tlininUe'. th> producing companies
gradually ar ' production suffcrc 2 and it boa zt route, ary t>c rrdinafcc
tho need and the caterir.la nv.'liable. F r this ur* ao, a sp^ci 1 c.ccdttoc
w-io Turned in th^ rteich Ministry «' r ., r - - unt r.' bar Product! n whore
jthor such corrdttces ils . cxiatod. The c.."irran f this c^orittoo was
Dr. Peters end this c.x-.ittc* n « ra.ti r. tix «russic acid to thu
individual consigners.

Q. trbll, 1 •' got tw the K»> in connect i r. lit I

tho gas that was used wt 'U any in the ..userwits c neentreti on c... -

this Zyklon 3 that you used in using «as nixed with in irritant. ..

1 ytu ncce .a the possibility thnt Zyklon . r uoc- by ."t ’ -n-w o*2
Defcsch was used in th: exUrainati r. cbvsbers ?i ^u.-chwit-.?

«. I dj r.ot believe so for ti>. f -11 win? rots «u. : ..its wnr very
1-trge crop which had twelve such -c.r.f- linati a chobtrt. lie; f
v Ittae of twelve cubic meters. Tlfcy «er%. ut- 2 ut feurtten } is -


5405


2 fcril 1%7 r- r - K rr « Int. vn: -

Court fi.. 1


day for that decontncinati-.n. One needs a large caoont f prussic ncid
f r such constant use, susnor and winter. Sear Auschwitz I had a hygiene
institute, and I h » froa the heal of tills insitiute wh-a I have c;vlied
f r as a witness, who is n_t here yet but he will .-stably ccaa and bo
-Ala to testiby ibout this - I learned that these chambers were really
in ^icration every ay, but I kn » that the rxe . for Zyklon was considerably
larger than the 'count available. 5v_n th*. entire anount assigned tc the
SS w.uld at have beer* sufficient to = aror .e n<-e : of Au&ctaitz a: *rv ,
but there were other c.neurxrs also. Trxn.f r., 1 Oer.si.'-.r it quit*,
inposaiblu th“t thee: quantities which w>-r v... .vnil.abl-. ' -r the C-ntral
Uudical De;> t for d-coataair. ti » ; ur -ros c.nL. h'Vo .n aicus< :
f^r other pur;i see. .*n’. ro ia an rr. r -.as r. ..njr I think it in; rsUle-
That Is Uc-.usu tho Contr-1 .ic-1 be.. t n.at then tar .ugh ’ho , *st
djet »r - tht to, through rae.'ical cr.-nr-l-, w!iL tbu c. r r r. thli^
to do w itn tneoo oct.-rr.in ti -n a:.tt*rs. I have learn. 1 :tor b.rc ih't
this ext^r-aination car.: f /.uachwits was n t • t „uschwitz , r .« r n vr.co
had n thing t> o with the rj. ical s.rvico f Auschwitz. It war n.nr
Auschwitz ami .a’, n a;,ocinl none but I ..<n't kn.» the name.


1-


Court I


CChM ' ,IW - » n Scfeor.)


n


~3 tiv. fjcrii Kanaka?

■““ - ■*«..—,«,

that a 3 y f r , h f ' * tU,Wti n c - PI I

7 r “ th ' " lc8 »»>ich I h ,v. s >i* T ,i n . •

*7 own knowL.d> 0t * ‘ 1 it XTca

Q * Y;U i-’. n t aur iy H ,,_

n *xtn - a ?

” c ' finitely n t.

«*-=. ,«»«, f * * vw
"I «• c«i«i4at ,f MMcWt . , "'* 2 * * i,; *

:‘.:r r- - —:

.

1.000,000'a-th,*. • 1,1 ,u ®t f ut

“ * u y - u wn turn tr p . „

»tu th. f . u ,f m , ^ —

—I;;:;;";-—

* —« X unc- ., " “ -ti-n

„ utn cJT •* ew ^««.^ ltect

extnninrti ~ C ” t " r ' h r 8n ~- u cfonin*. Xh -i- T

- ^ . ..

err^ •

«.r. rh. -, .,, t

• ' — •

is . _ ’» 'fi-t i«: 2 t I--

- r - require-* [„ - - “tonal

c . en«: htoi > »aatxr.

*'» c na> i *\

a ---
tn t, ~ r tau-n o. , •

—r- ia , in ^. a ;; Bi ..- £h - •—

54C7


'J


r ricks, .fc cr.rer.


2 A f ril-i-.J--17^c<-hcn (2r.t. 7 . Schjcf.)

Court I

tn-re fr the ri Lnal . -li'rh -rtiii-r/ c .. The . as cant fro- the
flrr - : ' - ?Stc i' tt, Intcrn-.ti nsl insecticide : spLt:'., Hariburg«
:-.t technic-1 r, t r..s,nt;iiv,s I this c npnny r_r. pres r.t ct the can;
t: carry u* the doainfccti r. cf the buil’ir s, wher,by they a r ,lni.’.

' capoWUy -ii iw-surca. ;f security ir. • r’er t prevent acci j*te»

"Zyclon ~ in c .ns for the ^Mia* cf h>x u bein r ir. ..ucchr.i'tz r*r

rdso later . r cur.- * c r.tlr.u us .. . .iy fr : T.seh 1- Sta*. 1.. > .

•

The cans b re l“bols which were i '-r.-.ic-.i id ; > th-- upt-cr cue oh \m t.

Li 'ccurur.t NI-032.

"In 19U2 and 1913 it hi. en»2 tin ?c=ch Sv.llr.tw c uld :i t nr.ko
'•alivori-c of *13 n ;as -ccves.. . j • a inrailreaf. rrar.r. rtn-

ti n. r r tfcr.t r.-s.n^ sent ur rr. -rucks * : sen t fetch the
r.ia ,urs_lvefl. o he * ,n inf rr.,c‘ th t ti.„ ; is.n .at was . r meet* by
the fin Teach U St-bln-w is. plants :;.r.r Djss u. > ur tn
by ss IX. pie. The trucks hr nn SS imalcr * i ’ a tactic-1 si ... c nsictinr
f a trier.;, lu . intin., upwards in m eh th, 1 ait Lai .f the r-siectivc
c rcontr-*,i r. cm;, i>. t;.is cau, the lot or "A" "~s cot. Z believe
th.t nly inai.’ora c ul 1 have Knewnth- th. a' n irhntifiec* c.ncontra-
tl n ca.qjs. Until th, or. of 19hl or b.;inr.in f 1912 the cv.> ir.na; uxmt
ha.'. or-'cTVt’ th .,aa 'ir-ctly froa Tosch l- Str.olnet . Fnn that tlru n
Dr. Mru -arsky, the '!o; uty f.r liy^cn, f.r the Retchsfuahror SS r-’or,-.’
iio f .r “11 SS «.r -.nirrtienr ir. • insv-i-.ti. ns» He r-.t alee rua;. nriilc
f r au;..lyin. eh, qu tco. Ir. t; s . - it*. *s pr. fcru t-skywh rdcrol
'’olivcrj* rf th- q>> ta nc de* th, -nnihil-ti.r. c-.. 31'<anu fr. i
Tesch an*' Stablnn,"

Di Dr. Hooss r or hie- _ r fr i . ? Dr. ruxwsky?

— :: » ’ r :: s v* hor : - .

8h ’ wn t- 1 — in July in an int_rr v. n • . 1 'eido-' this r.t th, tir*

' since, that ti.,- i have tri.’ t jr • , - .. ir.t : view. I h-vo s:i,m
5 c rv.cur.jnts end w-, have a f.r ir. jvs-rv_, .rhichrjll • ,* .ably Ic
sh rm Li t.Sw n-xt for ‘-.ys, they ij.r quie. e* arly rath rr. .. . .tiaW


2 April—A-J?-i?-3-^nar. (Ix;t. Yea Sr. on)

C_urt I

cr. the prussic acid qu-sti n an f.r what . ur r a sc- 'in.' *h't na-unts wo
received. The c .ctcnt pv .1^ have testified here thit such a c. mic¬
tion with prussic odd an Kith th; extomirati-n 'f hxraan b.inps did
not oxiste On rationad aatorial only these mounts were a listed and
approved by ccanittoes which could bo justified. The need v:as calculated
priuarily accordin t tiv. nuto-r -f (Zyklo.a iastr.llati ns), .that is
-’ec nto-iin- ti n chrr.bers, csj-ccially ft r cl ' iur. <hich cxiate in the
caups. Frrj cbscrvr.ti n an ?r.= inf r .ati i freo ether people I know
that wherev.r such charters existed they v..\. c xatantly Li operation
for th- usual purposes. If th: lee 1 .--.lo in any cue. took thco.. si.all
nlleted m untc f.r ether pur, :-s, I r.ar. * s*y n tr. it is s .oUiin;
f r which 1 v. n t res.-r.si-.lv. In any cri J con say quite ^finitely,
first, that I di n t •’iscuss this itatt-r with !. ecs and I ’id net
correspond with him cn the subject cr uty f his. Seem ly, that

neither I r any xt :or f -y - .ncy hr ' any such ffici-.l connection#
Third, that. I nyeolf learned -f th.s- extorjinati n coups nly after thu
oallapsu# In-s utterly aft nishud a' ui this.

As I tol* you '<irin the intorr. ati r., I me at ..uschwitt nee >r
twice in the oarlior y.aro and I had nevor cccn any ouch installnti ns
r anythin iilcn ai* ht t ive ris- t sua. ici n. I oan explain that :» vr
oauso l was only in thu esap itself, ' . >

s t t sb wo t. Sup Th

way I had n .u..»flod(,t rhits ev.r 1 thus. r.t rs.

■J. Ler us n « hack t th- ty.hua eX.-rinentsj if I and-ret 1' you
c rrectly fr y .ur cfonse c unsel, i* is y er c nt.nti r. that th- bine
Diary is a f-<kc an-' r. fr-u'; is that rl ht?

... Th Dir. Diary is r. •- a diaxy, hut ; r i an ur hich I cannrt

ln 'orrt : it was v ritur. y s -13-; .. t .s y c avicii a#

Q. Just a i ent, k«. will call i,t. e a to x; is it still y ur c.n-

tunti.r, tn t it is a fru’ in a f-.?

«. I c ntonc*. th-t this b Sc h as n value as • roc r!, it ..an .. t ko t


2 17-i;—Ifcchaa (Int. V n Sch cr.)

C urt I

rc ulr.rly and sac adly that it was written subsequently f r s . _ .ur;.
in this ares.r.t i it:.

Just a . ent, D etcr. Y u state:! in y ur -yonin. stufcouont that
thi Dir.^ Diiry was a fnu J j is that yur c ntonti.n?

Yos.

Can y-'u t.il rx* wha you think pcr.otmt- * this .1 fraud?

A. It is jy u;'ini.n that this frnu ' vac irzoittod in the c.ta, at

Buchcnrrali’..

Q. You den't ’ony trut Dir s si n.t r- r . r. . t.':. .a f two
diary; dc you?

A. "iru, *s siyiatur.. i. on it.


5410


2 ..prll-A-GJ-18-l-Blokley (lnt Von Schon)-
Ccurt 1

Q Just what portions of the diary cr r. tebock cr • hat-
ever you wish to call It dc you consider to be manufac¬
tured evidence?

For Instance, your defense counsel °nd yourself contest
pose Number 1, ?a^e Number 12. Just what portions of that
dlory do you consider to be B fraud’

A I would say thatifirst of '11 according tc the opi¬
nion of the twr wrltln- exoerts Paao I was Inserted later
Second, I believe It is Pn:c 13, which was a'.so inserted
Inter and has no connection with the handwriting or the si¬
gnature of the proceedin’ and followin' pn-jes. The whole
diary up to ab.ut Juno 1S43 w"s written all *t jr.e tine;
nearly tw . years were written i<r-n all at one; ••nd, of
course, one cannot o”ll that a diary.

. 'I Now then, you do admit for the most D"rt th"t the
diary lq correct '•nd aoouratc, don't you?

A I onn't coy anythin definite about that, for I
d-n't know the material; but I think that tomorrow wu will
have dofinlte Information nb ut th-t.

. THE TRIBUNAL ( JUDGE 3EBSING) : Where Is the Dla-
Diary in th« En-llsh Document Bock? I hava for to- ten Just
"t the moment.

HFi. HARDY: It starts '.a ?a-o 39 >f -n-llth Document
Beck Number 12, which Is Exibit Number 12. “h< loh Is Ex¬
hibit Number 23*>.

1 Now, let us have a natch In * c .r.tests, hyre,.Doctor

HR, HxRDY, I roquest Dr. Flcnnln* tu supuly Dr.
itru.:;owski with D<cuncnt B k Number 1 of Mru *oswkv Y r ur
Honor, if I nay "t this time B sk you Honors to bo'-r with
me and turn tc ?~re Number 39 ;f Document 1 ok Number 12,

•0411* - . *

m • •

* » •

* ’ * ' ' . ‘ • ’ l'-


»


2 Aprll-.A-GJ-18-2-31"kley-( int.7.r. Sbhcn)-
Ccurt 1.

-he English. That’s Prosecution D■. cuaent Seek N a aber 12,

And I also i8k you tc turn tc Pare 86 In the Uruaowskl Docu¬
ment 3ock NUnber 1, Pare 85.

'I Now Doctor, ycu hive the German Document Book. '

V culd you kindly turn to the entry which is Included un¬
der 6 January 1942 to 1 "February 1942, which is entitled

•

" Thnt la the Diary. Now, in the diary we hive thcrcOin the
followin’;

" Execution of vaccination for inaunlzatl n for spot¬
ted fever, uain* the f 11 owin’ vaccines:

"1 . Thirty one persons with YTci -ol vaccine from the in¬
testines of 11 e of the Institute for Spotted Fever and
Virus Research at tho Supreme Conn and of the Amy CKH,
Craoow.

'• 2 . Thirty five persons with vaoolno nadc by tho pro¬
cess'Cox, Glldcnoistor, «nd Huron.

"3. Thrlty-flvo nersor.o with vacolno Bchrln T-nornel,
one c.: - bloated tc 450 o.c. vaccine, mixture of 70 per cent
Rlokettsla I'.oosorl «nd 30 per oent Rlokottsla Prowetokl.

"4. Thirty - four persons with 3ehrin/-normal, Beh-
rlnj-stron.; (stark), cnc bleated to 230 t o."

Now, if you will turn to you Document 9-ok Number 1,
v/holh is on Parc 86 of tho Er.-llsh -rd is your Exhibit Num¬
ber 20, aru’owskl Document Number ;C, This L* thu report
which ms sent by you which r as lntr duced h..rc lr. eviden¬
ce by you, dated 5 i'ny 1942. Now, these entries in the diary
concern research S&rics Number ”>nd they w-jre ccmolted
on 19 April 1912; °ni the date :2 the rep rl sirred by ycu
lr 5 -ay 1942. Now, those dates coincide, dor.’t they*? I'es
_ -r no.

A The reprrt cf the 5th of Hay is the <*ne '’bout the

5412


2 April-A~G<T-l8-3-31aJeley-(Int. VonSchcn)-
Court 1.

typhue series 1, yes.

'i That's rizht.Now lr. that r'cort the text 6torts cut,
" -he tests of feur typhus vaccine node by us on hun^n
subjects at the Institution cf Reich H eolth Leader Dr. Conti
hid the following results." The you'list four vaccines. The
fcllorinr have b. er. tested; A, 5,C, and D, which °re ld?r.tl~
oil tc the four vaccines explained >,. the Din diary; are
they not, under the research 6crlcc K^ab'cr 1, Identical
lan’ua’o •’s well "s Identical vaccinei?

A Yes.

3 Now, lr. addition ir. states in th Din? Diary Nuabcr
5, tor. persons for control. Do you soc th"t, Doctor?

A Yes.

3 Now, It states under tho entry 19 nprll 1942, still
under research scries NU n ber 1, in the Din- ai-ry, " Five
d< aths, three under control, out of ten, oooerdin : to tho
Din? diary, is that ri-rht?

A Yes.

QThit's thirty ocr cent, isn't it, three cut cf t;o?

A No, five deaths fron:l-J5 people.

^ No, aprdon nc, there trere tun per. ns for " i. r ntrol
■roup; nut nf tho control troup th:\ e o. •:. < :'lc? Th'.<. : ‘s
thirty per cent tho control -r; :., -v, • Is Yi:it Vj.'ht

accord in* tc the Din- diary?

A I nlsundorsteod y u,

1 N iVr, ri i.l y; turn a:\io t> the CJhlo.ll which you


Covrt 'i. i


Offorod l:orc in evidence ns Hrc^rovaky Sxhioit rxior 20, which is= on
5 - 0-7 -f tlo Dr.-Mis.. uni'jr S-Ction II, ?.osalt6 £ tuo Sxporiaonta,

(*o) 5rv.vor.tlvc effect of t~o v ccia- s. "In t-.j c so of sick persons
opidoaic v-.o horo hot boon v-cela.t-f., the rvor.--.rc
durr.tion f fever his boon calculi tod to bo 1? *. ys. The not.-hollar,
a' iw nervous systo.. ■.cr«T'conaidorr.bly ffcctc. Che r.ort.Iit;- »-n
nrcua* 30 per cont.■

.t coincides vit.: the Din.: Dl ry, ; 3 .:'t it?

... Yoc, cwrt.’inly. ?.is ii r report _ rdr-r'a S<-"lee 1, t.'. c >c
*br. t I olvnys 0.1.. 3f ©curae they vox v^o.

It t..c r^ort it am toys :. r :o be '•f t..o Section 3 th t ore
poro^si died fro; 3 ohrla£n r £ n 4 >r.o ; )ri .. UoA free Behrinp-atron :
and it 'Ibo ot- tea in the diary th.t o.:o p roon Mod fro.. 3 o.V.*i:i.>-
norr.l r.nd or.o poraon died fror: Bchrin,?-etro;s, , orr-'t it?

Yet, th t's rl jit. The o .0 figure a h v. t r occur, Of c urao*
It ic report or. tr.e aorloa of oxpcrir.jr.to.

V " 5 h t'B ri,T.e. it'a obvlouo tfc t your report cint'.lr.o tl’.o

information in precisely t.;c a~;.u r.-nr.or ns it ic ‘nt-'lnod Jr. the
Mac*: Diary; lon't th t rt,jit?

... To?, th t 'a ri i.t.

.. rrur vaccines, tv* deaths; thirty pore \ * ' io 00 V. r>d
.-.-•up .Mod?

.h Yoc.

.. I ■ , re - rlo ropet. *. . • ■ • . - . '

Exhibit IVeib-r 20 . you it .0 t.;•. -\v -c. : •; '-re*--. .; to 3

••-a* -Jrnvitz casi r od yo . the .:: * * r .»■? :.i ;. »s :v ->rt

— Yos.

\ Ir. : rs.nr.vr t.i t vou .. e- . .1 nt.iV-.o. Is: ' t: t 1 iittlo
f --.t-itic. Doctor, in v'.cv of t no f ct t~-.t year .y ifl a t-. t

r -li reports wont tr-nun you before the;- rot t" ji r-nd rs is

3 ~"•ra onrlior ir. tnlo cross onr^ir.-ti'n, II r. ports v-'.ci- were ir.


!>*I4


2 .-^>5T5-13-20-21:^1 ey (*« SchOcn)

Court " . 1.

cvidonco core, tit wore euTuirtef. by Dir-,-; v.rc nd.’rcosoi to ;ru,-o\fsHy?
Ifov, I call your nttcr.ti a to t-.o f ct that on yur distribution Hot*,
on ? c ^ of 6 ho Z:. rliin this report ’.ctci p zfey 19^2. it is uldroco-
oi to ono Belch Lender, Br. Conti, 3 erlin, ?ior#y.rtonotrr.SBO. How did
you happoa f> scad it to Conti?

Conti c'uead it aa„tho docunoat shows.

.. Ucll, then you don't exclude ti:o ye a si iity now tfc t r. Coati
v .a t the 25 Doc^-bur 1542 ctafcror.ce eutliaod by pin.*, do you? :">u
-ro reporting: on the firot oxyorirtcav- 1 series conducted by Dir. %

35i t Coati v e present ct til* c -af.ro:xo on t.._- 29t*. of
December ia not true. ”ob*vo t.uro docu..„r.ti about t..ic dlacueol>n,
end-not no of i:-.j. a-a th t Conti w« tier.. It clw-yo Unto the
saao people but a vor Coati. Only Biob.r a-ye — it v r '.outlocB
co — t.u.t this ditcuasi -a v a acid at the ir.ati : tior. of Gv.ti; ivl
fr . this docunent wo aoo — j.i that ia t.'.u re-sea way .iy 'ofcr.so
cjuacol oubaittod tfcia .locuiwat — tart I did not inati *.to it.

.. JUot a rioaont. I»;. t licir. about tao conference t.; it you h

ia Schroibcr't office r.a outlined by Dir-* .,ni 1 Ittod by you no h vinr
boon there with Schroibor nnd Oildoaciator, Dir.*, and youroOlf in rs.
intorroc* tlon» r nd now H:4tia: it hero in • croan oxr-ulr.'.tion to bo
only Sclorcibcr. Cildouoiator, ind youraelf.

1Toy, why did you aoix’. this report to Coati, inr.oiwch at it v 3 t.lO
first oxporicont rl series of Dia,-? Ho w-s not C’ntl'o nuboriln to? *Jhy
y-a C'r.ti interested ia this?

... Boc-use Coati ir.Btif ~ tol t i« Berios -f expori-ujats. Lo>;: r.t
tao firnt ajator.ee of t.'.e c'.ocu.:jr.-.. It snyo on -*u. :crti t. of tao
2>ich lerdor D.*. Ooatl, th-t -0 is th_ rofr.or.olblo.

> , ji \ Din-* rt .tea t>; t Conti wr.s t /. aootdn * vh.r.in It h-
t.ca octablishod ti.f't the need existed to test the office;* »f r.r the
reciotrjico of tao hua c body to the spotted fever serur. extr-cted fror:
c;olha; since toste on rjiie/ls -re not of euffici. :l vnlue, tcr.ts


r>a5


2 -(?*r-lS- 3 r-- 3 l!iicy (von 3 c--oon)

C ---1; . . 1.

on Tn^-r be a. s nost bo carried out. i&xcttina this report to Conti
fito nrctty well into the »n. Diry. doosn*. it? * -~'ttor of fret,
it coinci'as, ftpoen't it, Doctor?

... If Din, trill:* -bout Wo conference on v.o 29th of Doccabcr 19^1
vo feu v to'ry fro.. Wo orfdonco th-t U» »tr.tc.xnt is untrue nnd thnt
Conti definitely » . not thcr.; but if Din s - i» t VAna :<bout »»o Mhor
confvronco, then, of cour.o, it nry be. Z fr»»t toov confer once*

Conti hold. I h vc no id*-.. I fc d no offici 1 rtl ti ns with hi a.

..t lcr.et cn the 29 th of Dee -her Conti v r. definitely not there: r.nd
Din;: ando n f-l*o ontry, probably or. the basis of Jainfon-ation. I
d>n ! t ka v t£.orc ho .rot tho.iaf


Court Bo. 1

2 Apr i?-A-lS-l-iSI-Gellepfcer (Ir.t. YonScfcoen)

Q. v.ii, now, going tack ts this resort jf 7our8, the second Person
that it io addressed to ic the Heicfc Physician SS end Police Gravitz,
Borlic, enc Gravitz recording to you assigned you the- task of writing
then. Why did ytu eddresc hi= as a subsidiary addressee?

A. Yes, that is the distributi n list, and every single letter that
vrs sent tut hod a notation for the infornatiwn of oth-.r oeo'le t*; re¬
ceive the letter and to have the inform;' i -f all vho hs* received
it, since this letter concerning Gravitz uzi • rily, of c.uroe, he ha.*, to
get a carbon coiy, tad I already t.ld you t-vt it is jy oui.tion that
those experiences - theco costly •xperiaeats - luti t. bo given to the
people who had official connections with *hu subject, end that Is -hy
there is such a long list -f six nvro-:.# to wfeua the letter ves »ent.

v D-et.r, this Ib froa the report .f one IT. Jon chl n Krugovoky.

Why did you oreerre it for the signature ,f Crawltz if ho racl.-ncJ you
the task of re-vriting Dlng'c r«o-rt eo he c.uld present it to othur
oo .piin e r.orc nroeontablc -leaner? Vhy did you write It over y ur
none and then address it to Gravitz, when y m cmld havo sent it to
Grr.wltt for his oi^uiture, md hrd hln address it to the ,rl,-in»l cd-
irecsec? Is that a fact of an exooricnce you could lose eight of,

1 -ctor?

A. That would have b«.on ouito possible.

I think bo.

A. That I had agreed with Gravitz with the work, thrt wan not bo.
Gravit* hed his associates si,pi rll the lottoro with P.cich Physician
SS and Police, end it was signed -AB" which uecr.s "by ordrr" (auf
Bcfehl), or else the office of the SS-Puchror io nenti nod, M in Ihlo
cast, and then it was written SS Chief Hygienist, and thrt ic only
eigned at one end, thi^eno without the notation “by .rdcr", nni then
:ne had to send a Cv?y to the Chief Hy.icnist for hie or 1 vet-files.

-v I won't l«bor on this uoint any further, d ctor. :.u will
notice on pege 69 this signature or. the p;.-e, i nd -a this docunent
there is no word there that stf.ee "by rd^r*. It is Just ci.-r.td "SS


5417


Cbersturmbar.r.futhrer", is that right?

A. 3o, Chat ia not right.

“hen this page is incorrect, is it7

A. It seys that "fc7 order". It just said signed *Ar\ igovsky".

-hat is signed ■Krugova'isy’’, act "by order*7

A. And it hzd and vat that because the heading is "SS Chief
Hygienist".

^ V;.y did you send e copy to Gcnzkec, your big chief?

A. Is this ease I was not writing etc- 1 letter as GenzWn's auberdi-
nrte but eB subordinate to Grawitr, and on sit behalf rs the heading
shows, and the Vaffen-SS which used to send ccine vtc, of courte,
auite interested, cad ia order to h-ve it ia :he record for researches.
That I ohould like to Buy that Grrvitr hiusclf ucr*'nelly Aid r.ct receive
thlfl letter, which ronaised ia the filet, A Office 16 until the end.

Q. Sow, P.ct.r, after these pc-ole received this letter or report
there, aix people rcciuvcd it, nnr.oly, Ccati, Grrwitz, OcMken, Glide-
aciotcr, Goyer at Krncov, cad Pe n altt at Xcrbur.:. After they rend this
report that two ac.ale hcA died, did you hrve cay roper cubs i'-r. there-

0

froQ?

A. I did not understand the Question.

v After th<.Bo peaylo received the reports, did they nrkc inouiry
as to these two deaths that arc uontiooed in thle roport?

A. So, and that was not necessory because it odd hero stnevhero
that the vaccina was used during on opidtaic, cad in page 67, undor 2-B,
it says in th- first paragraph, in the c' so of sich porsono during a
typhus opidouic etc., then et the beginning of the next or.rpgrnoh,
during sane epide-ic four groups if experimental subjects be voccin/ted.
That is rether a formulation and it vna r.uite or-brblc. Bure the uoonle
did not realize that this is an artificial infection. Th?t since the
death rate if thirty percent wes ouitc ucutl at that ti-e in opidenies;
Inter it was l^ver,. but ia the beginning it w r s thirty to fifty nercent.

... Of course, you do assume that rcutrl research series, one of
Ting’s, which is -ococra.ble to this rep rt, vrs uorforoed a artificial
infected persons f-r the control gr-’-i". n.r.’t you? According to lir-r’s
dirry?


5413


C.urt Sc. l

2 Apr 47-A-l3-5-iSi-vellc.jfce!- (I at. VosSchoen)


a. I sever denied that, end I have explained cerefully that i»t the
beginning -f this series vns the reason for ay objecting to Oravitz.

>%• Vrt it cua ternary for you, vhonevor you addressed c reoort tc u
srr. like Grtvitx, Belch rhysician SS and Police, you lied, end that this
v>s the result uf typhus epidemic, end when you put out these things
you vere lying t- then in your reports?

A. Sc.

x. Sjw, Doctor, in regard to this rep.rt on this, you have stated
on direct examination that y-u ern further jr« Justify it Inasmuch thot
Dr. Ktgon testified here in this courtre^s that the subject used ir. the
first tvo series of experiments vere v lunte.r*. Sow I an to correct
you on that point; that Dr. hegon stated no f.llcvc cn that raoetl'n:
"Selection of exterimental subjects v- o n-t the sa. c it difforeat tines,
end in the very first period the laantcs of the emm *xre called unen tc
volunteer. They vere told it vns a harmless nffr-ir and rt a boaefit
they v.uld get additional food. After o-e or tvo •x-'crincnts voro con¬
ducted, it tecr.Te lr.-noosiblo to f :ot any volur.tcors vhntccovor," and thon
continuing on to say you should oclcct tfco largor numbers. Eov Conti
neatlonsd -)no or tvo exoorisents, not one or tvo series of cxoorlacnts,
vherein over one hundred oocnle vere ueod. Kc did not cny "series", did
he?

A. Sc, it is exactly vhat I aeant. If you vill loJc at the diary
carefully, you vill sot on urge 1 prelininary exoeri:vnt "A" if discussed.
That v-uld be the first experiment acc^rdin,: to Conti, r*nd it shovr
that r.o one c-uld go tv the section, v r# not possible, it said, rad *. v en
there could'have been no suspicion whatever tccr.usc nothing d:r.c t the
oe-pie. The second series began on the n.xt day, on 6 January 19 - 2 ,

that is not preliminary test " 3 ", it vp.s the second, -hat beg-m «r. 10
icnuary, f-ur days Inter. The next experiment eori-.c Is series -no, of
the 145 people, it cen be by thecselvec, the sec-n. series, vhich y:u men¬
tioned, and cince they vere volunteers, that vrs the first time that

5419


Court So. 1

2 Aiir i-iH-i-Sail - ,;her (1st. ToaSehoen)


diarrhea occurred.

Q, Chen you say that Cost! Scant these 145 people used ir. the
research scries one vho volunteered, is that right? Is that ycurcon-
.tension of the Eogun testimony?

A. That is how I interpret Kofion's testimony, yes.

Veil, vt vill have to bring Dr. Kogon hack again. As you stated,
yesterdey that only since possible to experiment on volunteers, they
could not »;et cry aero, do you know anythin,- about that?

A. Ho, I would have to read it up.

v How, Doctor, let's past -a to page 42. Ding's dlery, which
would he in the German cosy 10 January 15*3, which is rather out of
-rdor, you will find it hr.s to do with yellow fever vaccine tests. 3cv,

Your Honor, do you have that, oege 42 ;f line's diary. How you stated
or. direct examination that these v*re tests of veccineo ar.d not ox^cri-
,or.*o. That is whet is mentioned here under the date of 10 January 19-3,

a

lc thet corroct?

A. Yes, it is n natter cf vaccine.

v Further you said on direct axon1nation, I eu, vested tho snno to
Grnvitz nnd that Grnvitz ordered it, didn't you?

A. *es.

v Woll, now, if that is c fact nerdy it is c harmless tost nnd
not experiments, that you stated, why did it hocone necessary to rosort
to tho Buchcnvnld Concentre ti-r. Ca.-o for this v.rk?

A. These tests c.uld have tcor. conducted on soldiers Just as woll.
Such tests actually were iade on thousands of soldiers. The;.' wiro n-t
redly experiments, only teste of the most harmless nature. In the nc-riod
of preparation for the ca_.pti.Ti in Africa, the training ceriod of the
solditxs vr s so full of physical effort thet they could not he put under
nedied observation for r everd days because it -would he i i^oosihlc because
A some of their training, “hat vrs technic a lly irroossible. Th-t vp.c
*. ht reason why the experiments v-erc conducted -n conccntra'l n e.-:-;c, and
accjrdin,^ to Ding's affidavit the subjects were volunteers, rnd tc i rc-


Court So. 1

2 Aor 47-A-!3-5-Ebii-Gallc her (1st. TonSch.en)


«trd they did cot have to vork for four veeks. That vee sot possible
with tho recruits, but that In e concentration caco it vas suite oonsible.


5421


2 April 47-A-?jC-20-I-:'or-io (1st., Vos Schccn)
C-'-art I


I was always of tho conviction that tfcara hai-=l<W3 things which nado
you a tcaporaturo of 37.5 dogroo3, just slightly cbovo nomol
tacporaturo, cco was enra doing tho pritonors a fever then anything
olso th:y didn't havo to work aai bocauao thoy r.ot bottor food.

'i Ding statoa horo in the diary as follows: "At tho 5oaring
Tories, !larburg/Lah?, Cohort Sock Institute, Borlin, at tho Instituto
of Virus ?.050or eh of tho Sunrorao Cartarid of -ho f lT ay in Craoow woro
ccmlsaioncd by tho Suprooo Corrend of tii Ar.y to lamufncturo yollmi
fovor Y".c.'inj3 for collaborators. Slnco live virus is balng
hnrdlod, for safety *3 sake fran each vtccin chaago a tost is to bo
porforsod on five porroan. It Isn't ha-:Jo!>r lanuago, is it?

A Tho longuoyo is rrorg.

^ Tail .now, rero thoso rattora of a . iito-O'it to "altor Schroibor,
lot ua aay, that la, if. his position ao plenipotentiary for opldodcr

and an chiof of the Todicol AauJxjy?

♦

.. I boliovj Schroibor obtained hit position only In 19-13. That
son in January, 19*». As for as I r-:«xAor ho obtained that poaltlon
in July or August or that yocr.

^ Than his poaltion ao consultant tr Tanilocor awl a* Ch.iof nf tho
ilitary Hodical Acr’ory, waro thoso ‘attars as alictud horo in tho
Dlrg diary -f any concom to Schroit r? It sta os horn thoy v-ro in
rocuipt of the SUprostv. CcssutnC of tho ;. r y in Crooev: and wan crcnlcslcnod
by tho 3uproto C-r?;-rd of th’o Amy at O.K.’!. -ftich -.reuld ba HandlOGor
end Schroibor, hishovor it .ay ba. T-r it Schroibor, I «sn ailing you?

A !io, it wasn't liko that at all. That was purely an SS nattor In
-.0 preparation fa P t'.o c -nittaint of trvopr. To what antor.t tho
ary, which hod already roiucod rush things in tho OAI.H. Institute
at Cmccv, to what oxtor.t the ..r-oy :iado airilar toats, I i n't Jenov*.

At loast as far a3 I rxD_?-.r I did net aor.t tho ropr-rt or. tho
teloranco to Dr. Schridt, an aseociato cf sclroieur, but I always
eonsidorod it a matt :r of auth anti city. To doctors :.o • >uld later

■-“”0 to work with tho attor t' -rof ro I d to bo trai.-od technically.

5122


2 April 47 -;_?;c-20_2_h~‘c (Ir.t., Yen Schoon)

C-urt I

$ "foil did you in your crGir.iz-.ticn have nay sort of n
uorking ngroosont with t:_ A=J7 for tosting of yolloa fovor vr.cciao,
thnt ir for tho

X I don't knot* •hat you notrn.

i YoU, did you hava any sjt t of nrrnnGo^o-'t vkoroby tho Ar:iy,
if thoy docidol thoy woro foia£ to uso n particular v ccina, vould
sond tt to ycu to tost it to ba suro that *. . v.aecino wrs in crdor
so that thoy could than iunoculnto thiir tr ain? i = t'.or words,
did you net r.s a testing cgancy f:r tho

A ?o- yollo;.' fovor? It is cooriblo t seosood, but

it is not 30 that cart of nil tho uroducti-t nu.bora -.ora to3toi
horo. Thoou worn -oroly tho fr ctlor.a .ich vdro lntor to bo usod
by tha Wnffon 3.5. Thoro ko-o ravornl dlvlri.ns. division >s
20,000 non ao that •jnr.a qulto n lot cf yn.celr i.

1 Vfhnt X nr. gottlrg at, Doctor, Ding any# ir. ’.is diary tho roculta
of tha yollot; furor vnocino tast3 nra tola sor.t to Dojortaont 16,
that is your dopnrtrxmt, in tha 33 yuohruncahnuptaat in duplicate,
one forward- d to tha ar.ufncturor nrJ or.o to tho Suprano Cccxmndor
of tho Amy, to JlaJ'r Dr. Schnidt, Ar.-y Hodical Inopootcrato. How,
tt : you hr.va acoo sort cf worfcins cgroo:>ont to tos y-ccinos for th.*

Amy?

X As fnr ns X rocnll or.o vns no .t to producor oc that ho would
to infoniod, nr.d tho sac d »-r for us.

1 Doctor, plooca answer ay quostion. Don't oz ii th-t o .*-ry.

Did you, fro;i y ur hr r.lodfo, 07 ur hero a vo~ dnfc otroauai.t v ith tho
Amy to tact vncoir.os for yollov fav.r at Puc'.j -.raid?

. k I told you it is quito possible thnt it vrjs iiccuir.-cd, that wo
rTOro Going to tost tho v-eel no s ir. tha forr. '.o h-va horo. Thnt is
Possible. But itny Ir-iin ngroccvht thnt ovary v-cciuo wno to To
tested, no, I know not hi zr. nb ut tint.

; Did you ovor talk t" Schroibar etc at that, did Schrcibor over
- 1 ' “ r m, Hrugowsky, "Can wo hnvo y u test all tkoso vncclnos for us ir.

. -r institute at 3ucharwold?" Did Schrcibor ask y u such a thing as That?

5423


2 April 4?-ii-?JC-20-3-5cxio (Ir.t., Von SchoenJ
COirt I


A I».

^ Did you ever talk to Schreiber about testii^ vaccines for the
Ar~.y at sucherwuld?

A It is possible that I once discussed the execution of these
v-ccines in Duckenwnld with Schreiber, but I cannot say definitely at
the oanent • —

^ Accorling to this Ding was testing t a for tha Ar.iy as the
reports were to be sent to the Artvy. How, uii those organ'.act Ions
contact Ding, Dr. Ding without roforring to you, is that ;rhat you
want -us to believo, that it is possitl that Din*, did this without
referring to you at all?

A Ho, it la r*y opinion, cr as far us I .-a * bor, I told Crawltz
that It woo nocessary to teat thoir technic 1 applicability. 1 said
that it would tx good if Ding could work or. it and learn aa-othing
about it, ana t' t sirs hon the .otter ca j up. 1 novor hoard of Ding's
negotiating with tho AT /• I don't think that ho had an opportunity
to.

!T. H/JOY: *.Iay It please your Honors, it :«cr bo nocossnry for
to uao another two or throe rdnutos to cor.ploto tho ton* of tills
aubjoct, and i ro^uost to bo allowed to eo ovortlr.o.

Wo 11 nosr, did Cildor oistur ovor talk to you abc*.t thono
probla^, yolla- fovor toating of vaccina? Do you know whstkor or
not CUdor-oistor—

.. I certainly savor tnlhod to CiIda .aidtor about it.

n Did you o^r hoar or do you ’nxra as a fast or did you ho-r it
at -ny confaranca or ‘id you rucaiv^ oorruspondanco to tha offoct tliat
Cildonolstar had porfor.-od oxporinonts on kunan beings to aatablloh
tha har Aossnoss of yollcv favor vacciaua, that is any rlac-, i:i hlo
Instituto on voluntoors, or lny particular phase of oxpori-xmts,
exclusive of concentration cv_ps in-atos?


2 April 47-_-7jC-20-3*€caio (int., Vcn Schoer.)

C<*irt I

L Ho.

'i Did you ever tell: to Schreiber about testing vaccines for the
ix'.y rit Buohenxuld?

A It Is possible that I once discussed the execution of these
v-ccine3 in 3uc’ or.-.-ild with Schreiber, but I cannot say definitely ut
the ncrant.

'I According to this Ding wna testing t a. for the An.y a3 the
reports were to be sent to the Axcy. Her..', ^11 these organizations
contact Ding, Dr. Ding without referring -c ;ou, la that what you
want -us to bellevo, that it is posslbl t .t Dint; did this without
referring to you at all?

A Mo, It la :.y opinion, r -v os for os I r«* ber, I told Crawltx
that It wao necessary to teat their technic 1 apalioabliity. I said
that It would to good if Ding could wort on It a:£ learn ecu thing
about It, and that wne ittor cane up. I never hoard of Ding's

negotiating Kith tho <pny. I don't think that ho had an opportunity
to.

:T. H/JOYi liny it plonsu your Honors, it rjff bo aocoasary for ;e
to uao anothor two or throo rilnutos to ocnploto tho ton: of this
subject, and i roquost to bo allowed to go ovortlr.o.

^ Wo11 now, did Oildo: oictor ovor talk to ypu about thoso
problu.j, yollai fovor to3ting of vaccina? Do you kne»* wlathor or
not Gi Ware is tor—

.. I certainly oovor talked to Cilia eist.r about it.

o Did you ovor hoar or do you ‘ no. as a fact or did you ho~r It
at t/ conforonco or did you rocoivo correspondor.ee to tho offoot that
Clldo:j3istur had por.*or xjd oxpori. outs on ku.-an beings to establish
the horulosecasa of yollow fover vacci/vjs, that is any placo, i:. hi3
inotituto or. voluntoors’, or lay particular phase of oxporL-onta, .
uxcluslvo of concor.trcticn crape in-atas?


5424


2 Arril 47-;-?«>?0-4-rOiio (Inti, Von Schoaa)

Court I

A ?fa, I only know that tie Hofcort £och I-stituto, that Gilda-oiBtor
was producing yollcw fovor vaccino sices fro:, .his entry in tho diary.

I din't toov.- about it. I had no very closo contact with Gildo:»iotor
htfsolf, and i didn't kn«x» that work io was doinj . Of courso, I know
that o ••’as working on virisos but which virus I lid not knew.

1 ./oil no-.:, did tho B-hring-T/orfco over son! any saiylo
bate ho s of yollo: fovor vaccino directly to ym?

A I don't b liovo eo. Tho packing rf ic Dr. Scheldt doooribod
with a long nock, i rwvor saw that nycolf . I r uld havo had to soo it,
wouldn't I? Tiorororo, I don't boliovo that tho vaccino was cont to
no. It was prob-bly sont directly.

'I Vo 11 now, fill t:.u Bohring-Vorko or Sc'=:i’.t or you supply Ding
and his doputy, Ho von, horo with those yell: fever vaccino# to teat
in his institute, you suppllol Ding Kith those v oolnos oo that ho
c aid tvjko thoso teota us outlined in his liar/, .loro they soct to
you and than forwardod to Ding, or wore they sent directly to Dine.,
or wo tfcoy forwarded tc tho inatituto in Cracc-.;, cr wore thoy
forwardod to tho Military Kodicrl Inspectorate?

How did ho got the:.?

A T>joro wore two pcaslbilitlos. Proc’xuably, as in othor casos,

IHrg wont to tho Hobart Koch Ir.stituto an', the Behring ~ rks,
personally wroto to thou or telophonod to tho. and ached then t* sor.d

r -nl iwch quantities, an', ho*probably got thic vaccino Of tho OJC.H.
through tho Control I’.oil cal D 0 pot of tho -aff^n SS, w".ioh in turn
probably got it fro:: tho r-ain nodical dopot of tho nmy.

*>. All right. Doctor, you state, that you didn't know of any
“orving ogrocKont with tho erry to te-t vaccines, io that right?

Think hard new.

A It i3 pcs3iblo that you c ell call thic a working egroo: *:t.

1 would not want to dory that categorically. It is qulto eossiblo
that wo discussod it, this testing.

^•26


v on Schoan)


2 April 47-.*.-?jG-2C-5-Hczio (Int.,

Court I

1 All right thoa, did you over a&rao with Schriobor that you
w uld taJco cero or the tooting for bin is your organization? Yos,
or - c » Doctor? You can answor that yos or no.

A In thin for:, no, but in another !~-rr. I agrooi with hin that
for our troops or divisions wo wore going to tost vaccina. *..'o woru
IntoroBtod la that. ?nr tho other vac cl no :f tho arey wo r '*& no
lr.toro3t and it Is that that was sufficiont f-r Ur. Schroibor, for if
thoso tosts woro all right tho assumption Co- bo :ado that tho rant
is all richt too.

'I Woll, Doctor, you ra?.o this ox-cinuti'.r. • ost difficult with
this inconvoniont memory you .‘avc. I ant t r.l.r.x: y u a doc a .-r.t now,
:io. 1305, which 'dll bo offorod for ido-.tifi jiion a3 i'rosocution’o
Exhibit HO. 469. Ifcw, this docu: jr.t is Jatoi 3 January 194;’,
flvo days before tho ontry in tho Ding diary >.* 10 January 194-'
ooncorninc yollo?r fovor vuocinj testa. The fart er ;:e go ul ng,
Doctor, th. fui-t'.-.oi* your prosu at ion or contention that tho diary
is a fraud Is bola*. robuttol, you will notico.


2 April-LcH-2I-LXarrbv/-Int. vonSc&oea
Court No. 1.

TLis letter is dated 5 January 1*43, to SS Standar-
tonfuhrer Dr. -irugovrsky, Director of the Hygienic Insti¬
tute of the 'i.affec SS:

"My dear Dr. Mrugowsky:

"'..'e have been informed by Oberstarzt Dr. Schreibcr
that every batch of yellow fever vaccine must be tested
on human beings before it is given to the Army. Since
we have to deliver 30,000 doses, of llow fever vaccine
to the Medical Inspectorate in Janur.r., , there will be a
series of batches during January, which are to be tested
on human beings. Oberstarzt Dr. Schrciber has told us
that in the future the tests on human beings will bo
made through your office, '..©’will therefore permit our¬
selves to send you, ot certain intervals, camples of
tho various batches. >.o request information as to whe¬
ther. wo ulso have to send the- future batches to Dr.
hovon at buchenv.ald.

K ..e suppose that ulso tho tests on human beings by
President Gildcmeistor occur in the main for t:io purpose
of establishing their h ralessnuss. Accordingly, it
3hould bo possiblo to lot us Know the- teat results 2
vit^Ks after tho samples have been received at tho lat¬
est.

" <o thank you very ouch in advance for your trouble
-ir.d re-main with

noil Hitler

1. 1. Farbuinindustrio A. G.

Dept. Bohring works ^..rburg."

Do you rcaomt-.r receiving that letter. Doctor?#

A Yos, I received that letter. On*, con under¬
stand the events only in connection with thu strategic
us ‘- °f the- divisions which .-.as intended thu time.

5427


2 rt priI-&BK-21-2-ft6rrou-Int; vonScnoen
Court I. j. i.

There is danger of yellow f- . r in C-_;itrui Africa.
Only those had to Le vaccinated who v.’oula advance into
this region. According to this operational plan those
were the two divisions of the naffen-SS which were r.v,ar
Tunis and v\;rc to ’idver.ee towards Dakar. They had to bo
vaccinated and equipped first. Therefore, in connection
with the preparation for this actio; it hud beer, discus¬
sed that the divisions of the SS were to be giver orc-
f.jr^nce and War -_o be equipped wit.. -11 n».ct ry things.
That is, clotning, food, vaccine tior.i , _tc. Ar this
letter shows, wc wore to receive the first batches of
production froa the bchriag .or .<t. YL* t 30,000 doses
would not have b«.on sufficient for our noods. * Tvo div¬
isions are 40,000 men and a few of these wore to be
tested for tolerance, etc. Tn: t was purely a uffcn-SD
matter.*

^ This document docs Indicate that your organiza¬
tion had a working agreement with the army, doesn't it?

To tost the vaccines?

A Ho, in- tnis general fora thut in not correct.

V That la not the question, Doctor. This docu¬
ment does indicate that Dr. Schrciber stated the tests
for yellow fever will be aa^e through your organization.
Doesn't it state that?

A Yc3, we were interested in those* which wore to
be* test l. That was an Jh interest. On tho Oth r h :.d,
v.e vitro used for the er.ay in connection with octr-i or
-ad Aodenw&ld. Thut exp...ins the mutter.

ih. iJxhD'i: This is a *ooi breaking poi it. Your *

1 fcavo still further cross ezaaihutlos tomorrov .

Trim .-fiESIDBKT: The Tribunal will be in r,cecc un¬
til 9:30 tomorrow morning.

(A r..cuss was taKcn until 0930 ..ours, 3 April -947)


3 A’-ril— -j;-l-l-Cc.fc (Int. V.n Schcen)


Court I


Official Tr~r.scri.-t ;f the ._:._ricin
Hiiitary Tribunal in th. aatt--r .« the
Unite'* St* tes f .o-rioci, . '-inst Karl Bran t,
ct -1-, cf-ndints, sittin at burn -r , G-rnnrp,
3 -;-ril, 19U7, C93C, Justico Beals Frocidin;.


Z'.IL -....SHAIj rors.ns in the c: >rt r:_-. rill please find their suits.
Ttw B mole, th. Jud.-es of MUit*ry Tribunal I.

a

I'iiit-ry "‘ri’junr.l I is r. w i.: scssi a. l-; * save- th. Unit- Status
f .w. jrica and this h .n-nblo Tribunal.

'ihwre rill be .rt'or In the c art r m.

TH : tV !'r. '/.rsh'l, n-.v- y.u sc-?teinc- that t.h- HttfondTjits

• •

are all fresont ir. c<urt?

TKS ’.‘.HSLXLt ;:*3 it rle-.se -r I n rs, all ‘efam’ints -r. pivaent
in the c ui’t.

TH3 rH'SIDL.T: The Stcr-tary-Oeii-y e. *1-1 n t. f r the r.ccr:’. t’w

m •

,rea nee f nil th- • fen ints> in c.urt.


Pof. ndnr.t rv .rsky - R-svrcd
CROSS EX.el'UT^Cj;

BY !R. IL-IDYs

Q* Dr. .’frucowskjp, after tho c.r.pi-tien : f the series of oxporicents,
Dr. Din . . \ r rt -*t th. aoOical c nforence at the .tilit-r. . ’.oay
in -riir. i;: -y, l?li 3 - Thie r„. .*t c ot-i the r-suits of his ox-
. riaor.tal rrrk. *t ?nff . iv.n tef r s-, _;•••.r, Scnrci -r, y r
r. • cta-rs. ::.B, c-n y u aarc specif ic-liy t-11 us vh urns inatten anco
at th do- ten.,?


ita


.it this sesrl n f to. thir * cc-tin of th- c nsultin.; 4 rryricians


ut thirty or twenty fiv. , _rs :iS . r.sent. They rero
the .iiry, s.*ac - -rs _-f the off on S£, th-t is tjx so
•h h* t ,VT^\n lectur-, - I iiov- there- -re a few university
r fosa rs, h w-ru a. t in unif.r;.


3 A.rii- -Ji— 1 - 2 -C. .k (Ir.t. 7 n 5cr. cn)

C urt I

3 . ir fuss.r oyer was there?

... fiyor v ,—.3 there to'', yes#
rtc. - Sclrelbor was thv.ro?

... Schrti cr var In charge of the costing.

3 . Ho vos th. chairaan of th. atetin^?

A» Ic3.

4 . .ini n.v it this cxvtin the nly tljin ililchwnr r'iscutsed vns
the work :f Dij^ at Buchensr.li?

A. Ko, it was quite an extensive r rv> Dr. re. *tvn»

rnc of -rny. It l-.ato ' f-rha.a z quarter of rn hvur. The r . rt f tho
aoctirv. r. riof excerpt fr.r Ws e.. cr.. I ; liev y u have subedited it
".3 q iY sedition r. cun.-nt. It ir a v.r^ ri-l s.c.ch.

4 . toll n w Din. t-lU+u vt tho .ectirenesr f th- four'Jiccinos
• •

,’i.ln't he?

... Din a. :« iVut the effective near f, I tolievc, it woo oix
. That U clearly sh.wn *;y th- re rt f tho .ectin : . 1 c-n't
toll y u oxr.c . fr ■ ry.

1 . , : * u v.r; ol* r the txjorincnti re in

c n’ucU ‘ r. rir.vra in th- .lucfcenralc 1 C nccntriti n Onp?

K , he •: n't s?y * v r • out that. fho lecture WM slvjilsr to
rt ri: ;: i revise-* n the $ hy 1942. It was n^t noccssarlly
.vi cat that there, ere ox.irin-nts n luma cin.s. That c uld boaon
nly fr.r. .r f sscr K sc's .bj-cti n.

3 . .cU, ceuldn't any intolU .nt d cl r oiltin in th. audlonco
have realize'’, h* thoy c irluctc * th s- .x. wrla-nts?

A. Nc, certainly n t.

3. .oil, bn * Rose happen to abject?

A. :: -r infora at> ut the natter. & had visit, ' auphonitt U hinsClfS
iio s d th r.uch - re in> rtant than the scri.s f experiutats in t!-.u
tclvo: r. hat Din ha t 1* hi.- a ut itgk.-s s acthui ,-lsc, *-• he

, 5430


3 rii- -JI-1-3-C k (I„t. Y,n Sch.cn)


C urt I

c-n^orativo dservati r. -f the patient in the sickbed

Q. .vll Sclir-ih-r knew a'.' ut it, didn't he? He c ul- have undors-
t? 'k ii. fiv : t';- aectin£.

A. I can't t~ll y u. -After R-sc ha:! s -ken .and after Dine had

• ,
answered briefly-, Schroibor c -_-cnted raar- r less to the effect that

the le. 1 oi-cti ns tr.r« r. t u. f r fiscuss: .n. That this qu.sti.n had

been sot -led Ly .very hljh t v-rira-nt auth r-'ios. Thrsc were r.t his

v: r's, but that was the sense- f his w.r 's, an! h- 1' n t want tlds

port of tho discuss!.n t: be put I wn in t._ r.c r-*. There was n

ubjtcti.-n, r.r.' it was n t rtccfdo!.

ii. Well n-w, deter, ti tl'y.n that R a had objected?

A. I was there myself. I heard it.

3. Yu hoard it?

'A. Yes.

Q. Da y u recall -n JMrcchcr 1, 19!i6, when cske*’ by J r, ISoHanoy
oyself abet- r^.r n t any nc ' J-cted at this .-^.tin,- in ay, 19U3, that
is, at the -k.tin at which Din. re rt. ‘ wn rtfs activities an- ex ; x,-
rL.er.tc, and y r.idj n fi- in" ?

A. T can't i vine that. IT * s- ' t'.i t I dJ 'n't und-rstanfl y ur
quest! n.

5. .ill riaht, I will call t. ;• ir a -e-nti n that a »'~y r tw roviuus
t that, nc ha' intern, ted Res- at r-no length, an.'ao asked you
■hotter -r not any n rbjccte whotte" r t any no was strenuously
so 1 t the w rk as utlinu b;. Dir an . u said n;b . dy salt! a word*

D y u rune _!x.r t h t?

•w. Yes, an that is quite true. h'oVody h- any bjocti n to the

■

. a r m eh Din ha: written, -ut hat was s. .--thin, else than t .u sjawch
•hich rx wer- ju3t talk in ah ut. Z u s»uldnt c nfusc that.


3 April U7— WTD-2-l-Lesser (Int. von Schocn)

Court No. 1

Q ' I ar. net ernfusod a bit. Doctor; you were very dear in that
interrogation and I have to introduce* it into evidence here in a few
diva, You rare vety doer in that interrogation that you did not know
:t any objections, <at ipast you stated that at that tire. Now who has
refreshed your nooory in the raeantinc, othc-r than professor Rosa?

A As far as tho neeting vas concerned, I always knew that
Profc3for Rose had objected, but you were j/st talking about a -paper
which Ding had written, I nsounod that o*-. oen.-ersation was about that,
and r.o objection was .ado to that 0

Q All right, Ycu know that Roso, acording t: the Dir." Diary,
had visited Buchenwali prior v> this acetin., that is. in about April
of 19h3 0 Tho coo ting was in nay. Pardon no, it was or '.'ay of 19li2
that ho nado his visits

A Yos, it was a year boforo 0

Q All right, now actually, according to what you havo told us
before, Roso talked to you about his visit to Buchonwald, didn't ho?

A ?to, I oannot renoabor it, I don't bdiovo so,

Q oil didn't you and Roso noro or loss agroe in a conversation,
or a conference* that tho Behring /orko vaccino wasn't any good and that
it was not to bo used any furthor?

A Tho Behring vaccino was not produced any noro boforo tho tino
of this coo ting, I believe that W 33 brought about by the Stato, by
Gildor.oistory I beliovo, who was tho conpetunt ran in tho 'Ministry of
tho Interior,

Q dl, now, doctor, regarding tho objoction of Rose at this
Bee ting in "ay of 19h3, after the objection., it becane obviousto all in
attendance that the work of Ling was on concentration catfp invitee at
Euchenrald, did it not?

A Yos, Ding stood up afterwards and nado an explanation. Ho
said that first of all these experiments wore carried out on criminals
who had been ojnde.-r.ed to death, ana secondly, he- said, that tho approval,


3 April !.7-:W.CS-2-2-Lossor (In' . von Schoen)

Court Ifc« 1

otc. had boon giver. by the highest government authority*, and it i3 possi¬
ble that ho mentioned the name of Jitrler but I an not certain about
that. In ry opinion this information was absolutely sufficient for
those oresanto Everyone knswthat for runy decades, in all countries of
the word, similar experiments had boen conducted on criminals- oondennod
to death. Why shouldn't it bo do no in Germany, too, and doubUoss tho
audionco relied on this information of Dir, s*

Q Well, after those objections., ar c after it had been explained
to overyono at the Booting that concontratwi canp inmates v/cre being
usod, did aryone make an attempt to stop further sxporirwntoticn at
Eucherrrald?

A I cannot say free ry own experience, ?Jo ono ca&o to no. But I
knew from ‘i*. Rose that a largo proportion of the audience talked to him
about tho quostion of por r ds ai bi l lty, Ko says that, too, in tho affi¬
davit which is in ry document book. .'bother any objection was nado to

•

any conpotont agency, to Granltz, or to Ding hirsolf, I do not know, but
it is possiblo that something was 3aid to Ding about it, booauso Ding
was quito exoitod for days aftoxvnrds.

d Well, than, no ono at that rooting interfered in tho wrk of
Ding or an do an attor.pt to stop it, so that on 27 August 19U3, ho
started another series of oxporinonts whoroin 53 of the jxjrsona sub¬
jected to tho exporlnants died. Is that it?

A I <So net know what you noon by "provent." If a perron is to
provent somethin; ho has to be in a position to do so. If I loam of
sono nurdor, say corrdtted by conobo<fc* in a different city, I do rot
approve tho nurd or, although Iaair.no position to prevent it, booauso
it has alroo^r boen. corral ttfci, and I cannot prevent farther narders. Tho
only thing I can do is to refrain from cc Tit ting nurdurs rysclf. !fot a
single porson ir. all this audience was in ary position to exert any in¬
fluence on tho course of events. Ploasc believe me that Hirrlur and
Cra-.fita would not have lot axyone interfere in thedr decisions. It Tfas
not so in Gornaiy that everycno could moke his o inion prevail. If any or.o


3 April hi—W.T~-2-3~Lcs3 er (Int. vor. Schoon)

Court No. 1

of the high responsible sen had side up his air.-:, ho did not deviate
frcei the orders which he had given. I have a great experience in this
field, end rather sad experience, with ay superior Grawitz.

0 . -oil, ko won*t discuss the authority of 1 'rugcwsky to inter¬
vene any further. It is obvious fron the ordors, frea the reports, from
the diary, fror. all this evidence hero, that !u-ugowsk:' could have inter¬
fered if ho so saw fit. 7o will go on. Spotted Fever Vaccine Experimental
Serios No. 8. This is on page... You still have the German document book
before you?

A ?fo.

q It will be on Pago 19 of Your Honors* Document Hook. This is
tho or.tr/ 0 '.'arch 19UU to 18 : torch 19Ui, portairdnr. to the experiments
with tho Copenhagen Vaccine. Do you have it doctor?

. A Yes.

Q The first or.try states;

"Sugg os ted by Colonel H.C. of tho air-corps. Prof, r.cso
(Oborst Arzt) tho vaccino *Xoponhagon» producod fror. oouso
liver by tho national sorun institute in Koponhagon, was
tested for its ccnpatibility on hunans."

}fcw do you knew anything about this suggestion by Professor

Roso7

A That thi3 vaccino series was carried out supposedly at tho
suggestion of I!r. Rose, I 3aw from the document here.

q Do ycu know whether or not this entry is correct?

A The fact that tho vaccine 3orios was carried out I should
considor true. I have no evidence to tho contrary.

q Did Rose 'ever approach you, to have you order Ding «fco carry out
those Qxporinonts, or to have ycu tako caro of tho natter?

A ?Jo« That would have had no purpose. I had no influence on
3 ing in this respect. I have told you repeatedly how tho situation really
was. You aro assuring something that was not the case.


3 April !i7— >^-.7D-2-ii-Lcaser (Int. von Schoon)
Court Ko. 1


suppose Rose actually did suggest experiments bo cor>*
ductod to determine the efficacy of this Copenhagen Vaccine — would
ha have ajproachod. Ding diroctly7

A !to, probably not. Notably ho would have contacted Grawitz,

Q He would never think of going directly to Hrugowsky, Chief of
tho Hygiono Institute of the Waffon-SS?

A If he had cone to re I would ha-j sent hin on to soneona else;

I would have said "Hy doar nan, that does net have anything to do rdth
noa"

Q Ho would not hevo cone .to tho nan who Hoven thought was tho

Chi of of Ding in Block U6, trfco Ding assusiad vas his Chief, who Kogan

• • 0

said ms chief, rho Kirchhoir.cr said ms th • chi of, ho you ovn witness.

Dr, Horn, said wastho chi of of Block U6'{ Hr. Res o, if ho wantod that
vaccino toe tod, would not go to tho nan that overybedy that wo have had
in this courtroon said was the chiof of Ding in his capacity as tho
chiof officor in chargo of Block Ixo — Roso would not go to you oithor,
would ho?

A Everything that has boon said horo wasnot said fron tho knowlodgo
of thoao persona, but if you investigate carefully you will always dis¬
cover oven in what Dr, Kogor. said or what Dr. Horn said, that it all goos
back to ono person, that i3, tho stntonontc of Hr. Dlngj and if you
question then carefully thoy all say "Dinr told no" or "I hoard from
Ding." An assertion which is false dees not becono trie by being re—

: oated a hundred tires. In ry opinion there is no proof what over fer
this assertion# It is not a faot, only an assertion,

Q '..'ell, now, doctor, it states hero ir. connection .. 1 th this
jeporinont of tho Copenhagen vaccine that 20 persons wore vaccinated
for innuniaation by intramuscular injections and 10 persons were cor.ton-
platod for control and comparison. Hot that naans 30 *•orsons woro to bo
used in the experiments, and of course on the next page ro 300 that 6
?■ diod as the result of tho experimental series. Hew, where were
these 30 persons obtained?


3 April li7-J^I3-2-5Losscr (Int. von Schoon)
Court :'<Om 1


A I cannot say in detail, certainly not fror. the Hygiene
Institute of the Y.affer.-SS, They were fron a concentration crap. ?fo
ruabor cf the «affen-SS had any influence on the organisation of these
csnps. It was a completely separate organisation.

0 "ell did you, Hrugowsky, ever write a letter requesting 30
inrntea to bo uaod, or 30 subjects to bo set aside for Danish vnccir.o
oxporiconts?

A I was not in a position to issue any orders in thi3 connoction.
Q I asked you did you over write a letter requesting tliat 30
prisoners bo set asido for uso in these ex.crir.snta?

A !fot that I k-vr Of..

■t Did you over receive a letter stating that tho 30 prisoners or

• • •

30 pooplo would bo sat aaid', say, for instar.co, frc.i the nan who ollo-

catod those people, S. S„- Oborgrupi'cnfu Jarer Oswald rohl?

A I certainly did not rocoivo any lottor fr:n rohl in this
conn;ction. I novor ccrrcopcndod with ?ohl 0


3 April-£i3K-3-i —ehan-Ir.t. vonSchoen
Court he. 1.

ft Did you receive a letter from anyone?

A If you mean that a report was sent out about this
natter, it is possible that it went through ray institute.

ft I ea not referring to a report; I a sic you clearly
and distinctly do you Know anything about the selection,
and allocation of these thirty people who wero subjected
to the spotted fever vaccine series No. 8, os outlined
in tho Ding Diary? You Know nothin' about that?

A I don’t remember anything etc. t that.

Q Let us refresh your memory a little bit, we will
introduce Document HO-llOQ, which will b<- offered for
identification as .^rosocution Sxhibit 470. Now, this
lottc-r is dated "Ornnionburg near merlin, 14 February
<1944. Secret. Subject of the Letter: Testing of u
Typhus Vaccine, itoferencu: Your letter acted 26 January
1944, tflriry No. 82/44 - ~r. Mru/Scnn." That is Dr.
Mrugowshy. Your letter of 26 January, 1944, this is tho
answer to it:

"To tho Reich Physician SS and Polioo Chief Hygienist."
You sent a copy of the letter to Gn.witz, The Reich
Physician SS and Police. Tho text of tho letter roads as
follows:

"Tho requested authorization for testing the protective
effect of a Danish vaccine on 30 inna tes has been given
by the SS Main Office Chiof, SS-Obergrupponfuthror and
General of tho tfaffen-SS Pohl; the experiment s must be
limited however, to gyisios.

"Thirty eppropria te gypsies will, therefore, be*
turned over to the Institute for Typhus Resee.roh at
luchcr.wald at an early date.'

Signed The- Chief of the tledical oorvico of SS
Lconomic administrative MainQffico ana Hoad of Office
Group D 111, SS Standartenfuehrcr Lolling.


5^37


3 _»pril 47-;>?jC-3-2*te30fcan (lot., 7on Scfcoon)

Genet I

Hew, you know nothin: about thoso thirty irsaxtos, or 30 poonlo,

30t a3ldo Tor this sxpori-ontal sorios, Doctor?

A :io t I did not soo this lotto?.

Q Pew, did they u3o tho gypsios, doctor?

A I don't !oou.

■> How ab.-ut this lottor; tho roforonco to your lottor of
26 Jar.uary, 1944.....?

D?.. JL2MDB: Mr. Proaidont, I objoct to tills Dccvr:oat. I should
llko first to soo tho original. Tho lottor is addros.tod to tho Holch
Physician S3 ord Police, Shiof Hygienist, th-t :rui: :>c ;:-.<ugcvs::y l but
at tho hotter, it soys copy war sent to Hr-gr:sky, SS-3tus.bannfuohror,
on 21 Jotruar/, 19Vi.

(Tho original doc leant is show: tc Dr. iirurowrfcy.)

Thank you, I bavo soon it.

3Y IP. H/i3DY:

-1 Hew, Doctor, do you know Mother or not tho so thirty gy>cios
•;oro used in this oxpori^ont?

A No, I don't know. Thlo was tho tix.o whon easier:-ont was uxdo
by tho Roichs criainol Polico Offico. This assifijr^nt of yricaiorc
fra tha your of 19-13 on he*! toon dono oxclusivoly by tho Hoicks
Criminal Pollco Offico, and for this purpose a ErlrAnalrat wont to
Buohonsrold, but as I know new tho ;>risonor3 noro not only token fra.i
Suohons.-ald but also fro:, vnri >as othor esn-ps for purposos of ox-
peri-onts, and I as3u :a that this wqs »rothin6 slrilar.

*\ In this GOnnaction, roforring again to tho lottor I just
oxhlbitod to you, I n: r.ot cloar or. wbotbor or net you cost a lottor
roiuo^ting thirty lnuatos os 26 Jcr.uexry 1944, ao stated ir. tho subjoct
roforonco Lore; did you, cr did y-u r.ot, sosd a lottor ro^-josting
authorization for testing tho prqtoctiTO offcct of tho Danish vacclso
bn tho thirty in-atoc to thj 3S lixin offico?


3 A?rll 47J*-3-3-iIoo!san (Int., "on So boon)

Court I

A I cannot ra^obor this rattor, it would bn tho first tino
that I would bare Cargatton such a thins, it hxs noror happonod
I-, tho ontira examination, thoroforo I considor it quito
1 ; .possible >

\ You raintain that whoa tho Roichs Criminal polico Offico .

took ooor tho allocation of i:- atoo to bn usod ir. oz;orL manta

0

that that was no concom of yours; that yea lid not knew

anything about it bocauso you woro not Dr. D<:-.:'a suporior in that

rospoct. Itvjso irvatos t!at woro taken -v.., -r allocated,

to Block 46, woro tkoy all pri30r.ars cor.iu:-'.oi to dooth?

A I don't knew. Tho out: ritioa v.o oasif.. d th«i nust

know, i navar ra/ any Jilos nr. thoso pocplo, but this xmoh is

certain that tlio notch* Crlrlnol Police Office was in chargo only

of or io Inals and tint is possibly tho so so throughout tho world.

0

'l loll, now, suppose tkoy docldod to sot asido prisoners to
to usod for oxporinonts; would they not notify you first, and
tivjn you would roloy your Infcrr-atim on to Dina, ond ho hod tho
authority tc a o or to in atr.bor of iaatoc?

A !fo»

*1 I havo another Docu.ont, Doctor.

T.2 Pa3SID2?"h Just a recant, oro tho Sor un csoios of
Presoout ion schibtt 470 available?

:T.. FJLPDY: Yos sir. Itow, I wish to inbrovco D_c. IJO 1169,

which i* offorod for.......

7!!Z FRS^IDSrT: I mvior stood shon yea road t Me Doc ir ont to
tho wltnoss that at tho oni tuoro vf.-.a a sa o vritton, thoso copios
•eye SS Standnrtnnfuohrar without any na» under it.

:ri. HAHDY: To3, Your Honor, on tho original you will find
‘no signature of Dine, Tit ton in his crigical hand writing.

Plcaso exhibit tho original to ths Tribunal.


3 drr'l 4?-i£-?JC-3-4-4IooJ»n (Int., 7cn Scfcoon)

Court I

fTho original or Doc. ID - 1188 is headed to tho Tribunal.)

TH3 rascnzr’: This apporontly contains tho signature of
Lolling.

'H. HARDY: Lolling is tho writer of tho lottor.

I'C PRHTUDST: That is thon tho signcturo ..issirg fret cur
files?

?T. HARDY: Yoc 3ir, you 7.111 coo Ding's signature dam in tho
loft Iw&nd cornor.

TH3 FR33ID2T: Horo i3 tho original.

BY :3. HARDY:

'l I r.cw wish to intraluco Djcu. or.t ID- 118 S as PJrosocutlon
Szhlbit -171 for identification.

Ttow tho first socti).*. f this doevrant in .-oat interesting,
Doctor. T-is is an onior of 27 Fobruary 194*4, socrot addros: od to
tho Chlof of tho Socurity Polico, signod >y Heinrich Hirsilor,
stating:

"I agroo that professional crL-iinals bo taken for o>;rori:vor.t3
with tho typhus vaccir.o. But only thoso -rcfossional cri inalo should
to chosor. who :avo sorvoi than tun yocrs in prison; that is not
• 1 th tor. crier conviction.: but with a total ponaity of to: yours.

"£S~5rupponfuohror ?^bo is-to sueorvlco tho disposal -f tho3o
ir.atos. i don’t win. th. physician to pick out inatos -without
:v ccur.tor-cor.trol." signed HI. rlor.

"hut is this business ab.ut choosing prisoners cc>ado.*r»d to

'-outh, Doctor?

A I was spooking of professional crlrlnUs.


3 April h?-?W,TD-A;-i-BlrJ<ley (Lit. von Scboen)
Court !to. 1


Q Oh, then the persons used in those axporicjnts at 3ucherr.vaid
were not condemned to death?

A I don’t knew, I don’t know the instructions which tho Roioh
Crininal Police Gffico had; and I don’t know the instructions which tho
coap of Suchoiwald had had for the selection before that. I never saw
then* I can only repeat what Grawitc and I&n- told no about tho natter.
They told no that tho people woro ocndcaiod to death,

Q Tfell, you woro aware of thi3 order hero signed by Hinder?

You roooivod it?

A ih a

Q This lott;r was ad-lrc3scd to you, to tho Director of tho
BygU-no Instituto of t!io ‘affon SS, SS Svandartcnfuchror ’h-jgov/sky.

I will road further. It is do tad 29 February 19Ui»

A Yes,

Q It says, "For inforration, to SS Stondart. nfuyhrer Dr. Din;;, at
Suchonwald- Joiner." Original to you, copy to Ding, I prosune. It statos
ao follows: ' Plea so t.Jcc notico of tho foro;oin., docisisn of tho RcAohs-
fuolirar-^3 concerning tho inquiry on oxpcrioantil subjects for tho tost-
ing of typhus vaccine. According to our 4i3cus3icn, Crininal Counsellor
Otto, official of Offico V, Roiohs I’.ain Security Offico, will arrivo in
Buch:nrdd Concentration Canp on I’arch 2nd, 19W:> with the apprcpriato
rat-arid. Ho and Dr, Din; i-ill pick cut tho subjects to bo oxporinentod
upon, according to tho Roich3fUjhrer’3 order, I suppose you hivo infomod
Ccnrado Dr. Ding b7 tdetypo a3 agroed upon (Signod) Kebo,"

Not*, Doctor, the 3ocor.d sentence of this letter states: "Aoccrding
ta our di3CU3sion, Crininal Ccun3elior Otto rill arrivo in Duchoitmld..."
You had .a discussion with Kobe, didn’t you, according to this lottcr?

A That’s true, yes; and I can toll you exactly what we talked

about.

Q Jist a accent. You had a discussion concerning the use of
^ororinontol subjects at tho Buchernmld Institute acccrdinr to this
-*tter.


3 A?ril U7^ W.ro-ii-2-Blakley (I3t. vo a Schocn)

Court ”o. 1

A The discussion was on quite a differ ant subject.

1 ',Te won't go into it. Doctorj wo won't go into it. The last
sentence states —

T:r. ?^SSI3S'«T: The Tdtness uay explain if he desires. Thy rritnoss
uay Bake an explanation if he wishes*

A Since the serin,; or about the banning of 19ldi I had boon in
contact vi th the Reich Crirdnal PolicoCffico and the Criminal Technical
Institute, tho head of which was Dr* Hoass because I had boon askod by
then to produc3 cortain diagnostic sera for coatoatling illegal butchering
and poachers; and there is a cortain procod xro for tostinc blood and
discovering what kind of nniml it cc os fron. i o wero supposed to do
this work for that iralituto, Hobo called ce to aoo hln one day to dis¬
cuss tho iTatter in which Kobo was particularly interostoi. That was tho

subjoct of our discussion* fhon I was about to lcavo, ho told no*

••By tho way, r noth or doctor was horo recontly* Hi3 nano was Dr 0

Ding. Ho cano to soo us about tho as.d 0 mont of prisoners; but thoro was

no ordor fron the Rolchsfuohror or. tho subjoct. However; I think that I

will recoivo such an ordor in the next few days. Then a Xrininalrat, a

Crirdml Counsellor frou office, till contact Din>" I told him that

that probably had sorettery to do idth senothinp for which ry chiof

Qravdta was rospor.siblo* Then Hebe said that ho had no personal contact

•

»dth Grawitz* I &>nt knew rrhy> of course Ho askod no to infom
Grauitz of tho natter. That was tho discussion I had -.1th Hoboj and it
is possible that I rucaivod tills lottor ^dch, according to our ayoo-
n-nt, vras sent on to Grawitz.,

o iJo\f, tho last sentence says, 'I suppose ycu have info me d
oc-xado Dr. Ding by-teletype a3 a: read upon." Did you do that?

A Yos, it i3 quite possible that I told hin that HtaaLa? had not
approved it arxi that th. natter still had to oo settled ir.d that
Grawits 1 office was to infom Bing of tho discussion. I “’self was ir. no
position to do so because I did ret havo a teletype r-.chine in ny office.


3 A~.rH U7-;'/-ATO-l-3-3lakIo7 (Int, von School)
Court }lo m 1


DR, FI£3:g:!Cs ?!r, President, I object to the submission of
this docuaont until I havo soon the original. Pros tho photos tatio
copy which has boon handed to a-?, I see that at the botton at tho loft
there is a notation, "Certified true copy 0 " That is signed by Ding,
Thorofore, this is obviously only a copy. This is not an original, Y7o
do not know what it was copied fror, It is not a docunont which cor.-
forrs with tho rulings of the Tribunal, - vo is no certification,

Thoro is no oath. So that in =y opinio:. v'r.Vj docunont cannot bo u3od a:;
ovidonoo,

HR, HARDTi lour Honor ; I won’t eovrcnl on the objection of
counsel inasmuch urlt is.iH 6Ubstantive; it isnit substantial hero,

1*11 Just pass tho docunont up for your perusal, That is tho original
dgrnturo of Ding on it,

• DR. FLC"!IN 0: If or.o can givo any si-nificanco to DIng*s signa¬
ture hare at alii Ding rarely certifies that this copy conforms to somo
original, so:*j other docurwnt which ho bad) but ho doos not certify that
ho roooivod tho original of this document, nor doos he certify that tho
original is in tho filo anywhere, Ho nordy cortifics the oorroctn.-ss of
tho copy,

JiR, HARTS* i This i3 a telctypo, your Honor, rocoivod on tho
teletype. It statos at tho top "Copy, teletype”) ar.d tho tolotyi>o is not
a lottur.

Eg. FLBlflttJ: ?to, but tho lower part is a lottor,

THE FRHSIBSVri Just abovo tho signature Ding appears cor tain
lottors, initials, Wet do they signify?

DR, FLEldJEi Tho lottors aoan "FUe-r clio Richtigkeit dor Abschrlft,
"F,T).R«D,A,," "for tbs correctnoos of the coiy," But that Joes not prove
■hero this document which was co;4od cane fron) whether it was a copy of
a copy or a copy of an orl Inal, or what it was,

151, HARD!t Tour Honor, I further submit in this connection that I
an only offering it for identification at this tine} and the formal

5U-3 •-


3 April U7-: W.7I—li-ii-ciaxley (Int. von Schoen)

Court Ifc® 1

objection can cone up rhon the prosecution has introduced the do cur. on t
fomollyo

TIE rHSSiDBtfTi Of course, counsel is correct in that atatonent.

It would still be subject to objection when fo rmll y offered, nhilo
under co=o circus tances the objection dpht be woll -taken, tho fdtnoss
has hi-sdf identified tho ctocunantj and it bell's the cortification of
the witness Ding. It is the opinion of t;.. Tribunal that the docunont
would bo r.drd.33ible, — I should have said -hit tho witness rocolloctod
tho substanco of tho docunont in connection ..ith the aubjoct rr.ttor ro-
forrod to in tho docunont.,

MR* HARD?i Your !I?nor ? aay I request so... instructions at tills
dno? During tho c our jo of our ontiro cross cocanination of tho defend¬
ants, wo tine and again cncountor objocticns of docuionts bein'! put to
defendants or witnesses; and tho admissibility of tho docunor.t is not
being ruled on at this tiro inasnuch as thoy aro only being narked for
identification and not fo molly-

low, by that I an inquisitive to find out whether or not it will
bo necossary Tor us to go through those long argunnts again whon wo
f:molly lntroduco oach docunont, ltow, if that is so, it will just bo a
repetitious affair on two different occasions,

TIE RES IDE'IT: That would depend on tho -articular dr cur stance*
of each caso and wither thj Tribunal has at tho tino it was offerod
for identification miod upon its actaisaibility or r.oU

TIE RIEUKAL (JUDGE SSBRI?B)i You sec, ir. Hardy, in regard to
tho fimt docunont, joncrally spoakin, tho objection urged by Dr,

Flu right bu weU-takonj but wo have hero a situation in which tho
dafandont hinsfelf, althcu.-h he daes not recollect having soerv tho letter
or having received th- letter, apparently recollects dearly tho trans¬
action delineated in tho lottor and has asked lcavo of tho Tribunal to
explain in detail tho various phases of tho transact! 'n. It would seen
that under thoso circunstancos tho forr.al objection to the effect that

5i-


3 April U7-WTS-i;-5-olakloy (Int. von Schoen)'
Court Ho« 1


the lnttor was not properly certified would bcccao irmtorial,

FT m. HARHIl

.0 Hot. Dr. Itrugowsky, I presuno that you recollect that tho wit—

non sea Kogon aai Xirchheincr — and I cannot recall whether Rounnhild

egrood — but tbeso witnesses stated that to their knowlodgo none of tho

experimental subjects at Bucharwald wore prisoners cor.d'.rned to doath.

How, this particular document that*3 just -eon introduced and is signed

by Hicrlor states that professional cri-r v-.j vfho had a total penalty

•

of ton years or rora should bj used for th i spertnnnts. New, to you
taking this into consider-.tion and having onto soon — or you should
havo aeon -- this order of Jfc -lor, dc ycu think that rondennod persons
wore used in thu oxporfnavts at BucheiwaldT

A In Gonsany at that tine Kin Ho r was tho Reich !'ini3tor of the
Intorior ar.d tho Chiof of tho Ooraan holico, Ho vros tho r.ost powerful
ran in Gorr.ony. If at that phaso of tho rar an order conus 1 ‘ron that nan
and ho nakos a decision, it is certainly not ny duty to express any
opinion on this erdor fron a highor authority. iy nrno io not Itirulorj
ry nano is not ovon Grcwits, I haa no opportunity of lnnuuncing HLtaxLor
directly, I wa3 nuch too for renovud fron hin.


3 April 1947 -L'-5-l-=K?- Gallagher (in--, vir. Schoen)
Court N;. 1


If HiBXUur issued an order he pro suable issued this order for certain

•

reasons, and . rcsuiiile can take the responsibility for it, I don't know,
but quite certainly I an not n-sponsible for what Hinnler doos.

r .. -11, now, Coctor, were you of the- opinion that professional
or Id r-ils *oro being used in tlx-so experiments, -and not criminals condemned
t_ dutth?

«. I kn -vi that ,rofcssional criminals rorc used. At least I was always

told so, and until 1941 it w:.s ny opinion tV t only .arsons c ondennod to

death wvro used. This letter, -f course*, ln'jc.»U>s cL-irly that th: t v:as

not th- case, hut that people were aorvly f..3i-rvl criminals. At that

time during the war such a decision ms nothing icvnu-1. It was during tho

air war at tbu tin., ant’ groat ngor t v.ry ero-n in Gerainy. „r.y

person who has had tho cx ..rienc^ itself can ur.Icrct-^.d wh* t th't weans.

The higher St'te authority doci us only «•-focsi;nal c rlninals with 1 np,

sentences are to bo used ; r a curtain pirporc, th-t was quite in *cc./rd

with the situation at the tlic. Especially sir.c*. an. thcr high lieich

agency was ir t was tho Belch Jri ir: 1 Police Office. I do not

know tho or-’-r of busiix-sa of tnis agency. I di • n-t bol ng to it, and I

tad no cl-so contact with the crininal police. If a criminal councillor

io aaoigned for uerx. particul-r purposes, thic f- ct had to *x sufficient

for re. I hnd to toliove that this was a special >ut will of tho State. A

crLair.il councillor in Germany io a nan in a rather high - >nition, and that

•

ia the thing what is due of ny other definite councillor in tho office,
h- is quite a hiph •ffici.-'l or,: r.>t su' or’lnhto in s-oo way.

Q. N w, ur. :'ru. -sky, we will to into the leal f poison bullet
experiments, or poison bullet executions. You stated that this puis n
tulLct ••ction was n>t nr. ergarL-A-nt but on executi .n?

A. It was not r.n experiment in tlx. sense :f medical experiments, but
as I ms told at tte tick it was the uce .f a special type if munition
in the execution. .

d. well, hew long have you been a acaber of th- exvcuti >n st: ff in
re ny? How is it you happened to U attending executions?

... I never belonged to any such society. I have already told you in dy

54U6


3 Aarii 1947 -1-5-2-Fa?- Go Hasher {Inti va S..

Cvurt H*. 1

direct examination hew this era,. about. It was to be determined whether
the u&- of these Russian Poison Ballets was the beginning .f a pais on
warfare against Germany. You will concede that that decision was of the
greatest significance to our country. If such p. thing is cone on a largo
scale, th en the old number of fi\x- wounded to -no dead is n: longer valid,
then wfct wu hud to expect at all is that the wounded would. die.' This
question, therefore, was of significance, which could hardly be greeter.

The fact tlr-t such bullets wore- used was vi us, jthurwise, n the question
of responsibility the Gosfcopo would not h-vo interested an’ it would
not have been in eyiat-r.ee, and the accur.iti r. would n.t have been there.

I br.vo told you that tiiie question was to ‘x investigated by means of this
execution. Cn the ouosti n f what p is r. »aa us. , that is, whether
the chemical ftnriysis which had shewn a verson was a coni 'in w uld be
c-nfirrao 1 by the chemical syapt «s. The question was whether it was a
pur.c poison, or whether it was mixed, *nd tho s-c r.d place 1 ter
consequence was *. solatia of th. quusti n whether a possibility A therapy
in such cn ux.Jury, aro such persons d-omed to i... This cuostion was to
tc by mo arousoc wither on execution was hr. rn! to bt carried ut in
any cnoo.

c.. These ..croons to be executed wore Russi n prisoners of war, woro
they?

... Certainly not. That is the first tiao I ever heard of that. I
Viikoe «... ,-M -' , UK.y - 4 -oie >•' »'•••

Q. Row was this execution with poison — was n->t this execution with
poison huller3 rather an -tr .ci^-us manner of killing a persn?

A. 1 have told you that the sight of these executed with poison
^ullets was one f the. ®J3t horrible experiences f ay life, and 1 can
that as a doctor who works with highly infectious diseases, I have
seen very cany people die. For as ccath itself is not horrible, but the
picture in this case xado this poiscr. warfare, which wc were afraid of,
look so terrible• That this experience was *t f the worse of ay lif-,
and on tho other head I aa directly convince-’, th t -v-rything r.as to be
jcw by a country in rd .r to prevent .such horrible method £ warfaro.


3 A.-ill l%7 -&-5-3-PKP- C- Higher (Ir.ti van Scr.-^n)
Court 1


3. Cull, these ter. that were executed did rot volunteer to bo
executed by use of poiscr. bailors, did they?

n. I don't hardly ossa-* so. I don't kn:w.

Q. 'ifcre they promised if they lived through the poison bullet test
that they w-uld be pardoned?

.v. I can not tell y:u. Ko tried to clear up the natter, and for core
than three onths we looked through thu files '.a' we can not find tron.

The files would have to show the details. I can assure jvu that wo aro
interested in it for the following reasons, interested in rally clearing
up things as they were, because I can bw cleared -nly by this evidence which
will sh:w exactly what hnppvne-.

Q. flow wh> fire ' the bullets?

... .,n Untersturn-fuehr-r w'c was n this staff f thu ecap coaanniant
of Sachsonhauson.

Q. In the testimony that I hear.” in this courtr n th't Dr. Ding stated
that no of the prisoners attacked Idrugowoky with a knife, <r s.oething?

A. Kogon stntod that, yes. I was quite interested ir. the UstLnrny.

It was tho firrt tine I ever heard *bout it. If 1 had boon attacked, I
probably would have noticed it. That is not true. I was n t attacked.

Q. !*-w will you turn to page 50 of Ding's Diary. The English copy is
pago 50, wnlch too tha entry "Spotted fever vaccine oxiwiriAcntal series

Under L7 July 1 ,U. t it would be r. page 50 of the English Dccu-aent
Bock, l'jcunent book Ko. 12. Do you have tlrt Dr. Urugwsky?

A . Ye 3 .

Q. It states: "The spotted fever vaccine "liuiaar" produce' by tho
lupirtaont Tor spotted fever and virus research of tho hygiene institute
-f the tfaffon-SS, -oiar-r, Buchun#oi:, was toste according t t orders for
lts compatibility on hunans." » m, tests for c ajctibility on hunans is
n>t tests in which the heimr virus is used, is that right, on people
"ho to artificually infected?

A. I don't understand yjurquestion.

Q. When you test vaccine for its c-cpatibiiity on huaan 1 -uiags, you did

5^g'

•

I


3 A-'-ril 1,1.7 -'J.-5-L-?YT- Gsllcgher (Int. v:o Schx>n)

C-urt No. 1

not first infect the personi&th typhus, di:‘. you; there- is r. artificial
infucti n actually given the person ;f typhus in connection with the tests
f r cocpatibality reason, is there?

• * T .

A.

•

Q. : >.ill y u turn t. the_next page, t!x. entry f 6 Septenbcr X‘,U* t
ind I str-.ng-ly note thrt Dr. Ding hM sfrteU this coapp.tibllily test
with vr.eeino, a nil then on 6 Soptcsb«r 1,4A he status that, "Thu 60
axperlflDntcl persona wer os injection of 1.10

cc spotted fever 'rvi ty; hus sick fresh bi * each int the right uj)>r
tra." How is n. t such r.cti-n r.s that rather irc.nsist-nt with tests far
ompr.tibility reasons?

It states nothing • • ut c npatibillty tests her.. It is possi U
that Ux translation i< r.,t c.cw tin- ugh right. Tno firut .'ragrnph states
it Is tester for its pr toctivc effect. Tir.t is r. t the sdj as
"c.npctibility."


Court So. 1

2 Apr 4 7 - K- 6 -- 1 -LHK-Coak (1st. Yon Schoen)


v -he English copy, the first paragraph, "The spotted fever vac¬
cine, Weiner, ves tested eccordixsg to orders for its ccroetitility on
hunans," Si you sec that?

A. Yes, that is in this translation. It states "orotcctive".

V. Well, r.ov, if you ore testing for its compatibility, if this
compatibility is e r.istrer.eletion, I vill ask the interpreters to check
that, chock the German document, please?

DRDPBKER: It soya "Schutswirkung", which is "protective effect".

h, Well, nov, that is e considerable difference, I would say, isn't
it, doctor? If you cro tostiag it far protective effect, then you vould
have to first give the consent epottod fever or typhus?

A. So, they ore first vaccinated end then infected.

I ecu. Veil nov, doctor, did you nt aipr tine over order Din r.
to experimentally determine hov infectious slight crtoc, cr hov infec¬
tious the M,ood of slight COSOS is, «-o ccr.narod with very heavy cases
if typhus?

A. Ho.

v Whet I a;; getting nt is in particular tho extinction of tho
protectively vaccinated persons to bo comperod with tho persons who
vero not vaccinated. Did you ov.rr order or cug.-ost that Din,: carry out
oxmerinonts of that nature?

A. Ding's vfcols work vns on thin cutsti-n. Ding did nothing else
in his excerinontal station than to eo.:onre the effects of cersor.c who
had been vaccinated vith the effects on these who had not been vaccinated
and I t -Id you this vns done on orders fr^r Kiinler and I have explained
in interrogations vbet cart I took ct the time.

v Well nov, thlfc entry -f 6 September 1944 is one where c^xty
excerir.entel persons vere infected vith blood after thtyhad been vaeei-
ted, and also twenty peonlc in the Control vere infected vith bl od.
Ih-as were oirs-r.s vho had n-t been vaccinated and cc e result he states
twenty-four deaths, five -f the people vho had booh -revi-uely vrccinated
a.no nineteen put into the control group. Did you ever su: est that such

5450


Court So. 1

2 A?r -,7-».-€-2-2k-Cook (1st. Ton Schoen)


c thing te dine in 3ucher.vald7

A. So, where it ley* eccordicg tc orders, that does not r.enn
-rdors frv. no, that goes lack to the teslc order froa Einr.ler vhich
eeys ell 6uch vaccines ere to tc tested.

v I now vish to introduce Document 1197, this ic So. 1197, which
will he offered for indentification as Prosecution Exhibit Ho. -172.

Sow this letter only reeds - Your Honors, 'o you have a cony? This
letter is dated 12 August 1944. This is a --crct r.encrandun - pardon
roe a aonent, Dr. Krugovtky, is that your «\;rrLu re on this letter?

A. Yes, I wrote the letter.

x. Thank you. This is dried the 12th of August 1944 on the sta¬
tionery of the Reich Phyolcirn SS and Police Chief Hygienist, secret
ucajrnadua for SS Sturr-.baanfuchrer Er. Ting:

."Wohlrad and Patz«r clnia that acoolt protectively vrcclartod con,
it is true, c r.trct tyuhus, but that those r-.ro not able t infect lice.
Tr *i thr.t they draw the conclusion that in eocbcttlng r.n er> ideale, if
folousing is n.t possible, it sufficcr tv undertake protective vaccina¬
tion with sLult/no-us seizure and isolution of ell tyohuo ortients.
hossr (Swiss Paper for Pathology end Prcteriol^-y. 4 , 19-1) - that is
itey 1941 - has on the other hrnd established thr.t this observotion
already r.ado by Voigl eleven years ago ic not duo to protective vaccina¬
tion tut rather V. the fact that ,nly severe cases -f typhus con infect
lice. Slight, os-ccieily eub-cliaicnl cates, though, cannot, Hvper con¬
cludes fr*a this that tyuhus erses running e light course cannot rcurc-
seat r virus reservoir in typhus fret perivde."

And n.w the lest paragraph:

To decide this*oueSticn I rcauest that it he cToerir.ontnMy deter-
ir.ed how infect! -Uf the blod jI slight cases is cr pared vith that f
h--->vy c.'.ses jf typhus. In particular the exf-r.ination of protectively
v; ccinr.ted persons is int«.rcstin,-: in cvaucrie-rn vith *.arsons not vacci-
nrtc'.'


Sow that is addressed to SS Stur: htnnfuchrer Er. Tin--, secret r.o~ 3-


Trurt So. 1

S Aar 47-H-6-S-H-IK-Cook (Int. Von Schoea)


A. I his nenorandun is a ncdel of fcov I issued such assignments

r * :y '.prtituto, It is ouite clear that I issued ay orders or gave ay

suggestions In writing end I j-caeaber this natter very veil, and the

«

p.sitioa of Vohlrnd and Patter that persons vho ftc vaccinated can be¬
come sick but rxe not infectious, if it hr? beer, true, would have hrd

•

enornous significance for the control of i. : epidemics. It v;,e, there¬
fore, of great interest to determine vfcct.. r that vae true or not.
Therefore, I wrote Din.: on 12 August 1S4-, v.ji he vr.c t. investigate
this oueation u it ic described here. An orrl explanation vr.s given
at the sene tine. Thu er.ol.nn* Ion vr.o ihat ho vc.s not to uao lice becr.uso
ho hoi no vry -f brooding lice. Jr-:, light and severe crocs of typhus
he van to take occo blood end inject it into guinea oi,-e. Thio method
vas obvious because ho drily Pvrforcod ouch infections for the purposo
of pr-ducing his vrccine. Thore vr.s r.orcly one variation tf the cuotorrry
procedure necessary. n o vne to determine *+.ieh >f the typhus patients
had previously been vaccinated. Choto would have been the light coses
frjc whom ho usually no dcubt did not take blood for Mo vrccine produc¬
tion. For infecting the ,Minor, pigs ho probably el vry s taok that frop
thu n^st serious cases in order to get r strong strain and cor.oc-uwntly
strong la unity. For this purpose he vr.s to deviate fron thio custon,
or.d n-v he vtis to tak- the blood frv.: s- .o of thu lighter ersos and Infect
the guinea pi. o fror. people vho had been vaccinated. I don’t kn-v vhat
charge you err. find in this natter against Y-u find nothing rbout
oxPcrl-.er.tE -n human beings and n.»t n v^rd pb ut such oroeriaontc vno
said. It vas purely laboratory instruction referring to Blocs 60, which
Vr.s *J be solved by Ms vork vith enlnale.

v. Ve will let the Tribunal decide that, d.ctor.

;£i. EaRDY: I have no further cuestl-ae. Your Honors.

IKE PRESIDES!: The Tribunal will bu in recces.

(« recess v-s taker..)

5*52


3‘Apiil-H-’.K-8-l-I,osscrCBrotTn)

COURT'NO. 1


THE MARSHAL: Pe rsons ir. the Courtroom will please find
their seats. The Tribunal is egair. in session.

THE PHBSUBHT: Has Defendant's counsel any rc-d irect
ox r r.ir.ntion of this witness?

redirect exa-tir-tion

■ •

BY DR. PLEtlUIOi

0.. The Prosecution showed you Do cure nt l.’o. HO-1198,
Prosecution Exhibit 466. This ic a letter from the Rcichs
Physician S5 and Police to you, :< jar.Ung specific ther¬
apy in the case of typhus and secondly the tolerance.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsol, boforc :*ou interrogate tho

witness about this dor.ur:cnt I dosiro to ask him a few
questions.


BY THE r RESIDE:’?:


0.. Vitness, you have the docur.ont before you, havo

you?

A. Vo, I do not.

(Document is handed to the witness.)

Q. In tho 4th line of the document I noto with rof-
oroncc to your lottcr of 15 August 1944, d iary numbers
324 and 326. hat does that noan — what does tho i-ord
"diary” mean?

... Grawits is here referring to a lottor vhich ho
rocolvod frois r;o in this natter, writton on 15 August
1944, and crrrics tho number 342 of try diary, th't is
to say, of tho letter filo of ny inctituto, and another
number, 236, ’’Secret." Apparently thoso arc two letters
that -oro rritten on tho saro day, one of then not secret,
T : o. 342, and the second was pit in tho secret filo as Ho.
236. That rould roan that tho first n ttcr, — flftnely .
tho spocific therapy in typhus to which thcro is refer¬
ence, and tho matter of tre tide *Jy?hus by intravenous
injections was not to be considered a protective vaccine

^55


3.\pril-:> AK-8-2-L csscr(Brom)
COURT !!0.1


and a ncthod of treatnont, — was not a secret natter.

Cl. Witness, I was interested in tho U3C of the
word "diary" • You say that r.eans letter file, is that
correct?

Yes, All lottors that re sent out orthH wo
roccivod, in othor rords, all our corrcspondnncc, was
filed away in specific letter fi?. s. That is tho noanins
of the word "d iary".

Q. I understands That is sufficient. Counsel nay
proceed.


April 3-1I-5K-9-l-lleefaan (In'. Brown)

Court; No. 1

BY DE. FLQrJNQ:

Q. in the document book und^r discus3ion, there is
mention of specific therapy in the case of typhus and of
the compatibility of phenol in serum; now the Prosecution
in the question of testing the oonpatability of phenol
serum has brought this into connection with Dr. Ding's
affidavit, Document No. 257, dated ’?0 July 1945, which is
in Document book 12, page 9 of the German text; in your
answer did you take into consideration the fact that Ding's
affidavit begins with the words:

"a 3 ordered I answer two questions literally:

1. Witnos3 at an Euthanasia with Phenol at Buchonwold.

At the ond of 1942 I took part at a conference in the

Military Doctors ..oadocy in Berlin."

•

Now, this nesting of which ho hero spoak3 took placo
in 1942, whorea3 the letter which wcs shown to you hero
13 dated 24 ..ugust, 1944; would you ploa3e make a statement
on that fact?

A These two matters of course aro not in any way
connected. I suid during ay cross examination that those
are tuo ontirely separate things, in the first placo it
was a 3erum for gas gangrene and in view of the time in
which it is occurring the doouaent of Professor Killian
in ny document book proves It. Here it is not serum for
gas gangrena but a purely technical discussion of serum in
general. That the serum should not have any uddition of
phenol was a developing work on the port of industries
and like all such work this particular quest.on was labell¬
ed "secret." That is the reference here and in ny re- -
collection these were serums against dyphteria, because
these dyphteria serums constituted the great majority
of all seru'* production in Germany.

5*55


.-.pril 3—:-5K-9-2-Meahan (Int. Brown)
Court No. 1


^ Thank you, that suffices; I simply wished to clear
up the fact that this Ding catter of 1942 had nothing to
dc with the other catter.

The prosecution further introduced the intercediary
report by Schilling, which Grawitz showed you and on which

you expressed your opinion; the prosecution said you wore

•

chief of office 3 under Grawitz; la. you in this capacity
cake any difficulties for Schilling - should like to ask
you were you in a position to cake a :? diff ioultics for
Schilling in his experiments or to interrupt the experiments?

« I would only have been in that .position if I hud
some authority over Schilling's experiments or Schilling
hicself. This was not the case as these experiments hod
.beer, going on 3ince tho year 1942 and had boon approved
by tho highest authority, nacoly by Himnlor himself. Those
matters were never handled by mo and lot mo say that tho
position of tho Chief Hygienist in the staff of the Reich
Physician S3 was that of an expert, a referat, without
his having any power to issue orders, with the exception
of those scientific arrangements which were im.odiutely
subordinated. For example, in my ouso, my own instituto.
la other words, I h-d no op.ortunit; of er.cercising any
3ound influence on Schilling.

1 ./hen tho oxporioents at Ravunsbrucok wore under
discussion, tho prosecution said that you wora ohief of
tho Hygienic Instituto from which tho cultures for the
sulfonamide experiments in Ravensbruook came thoreforo
you must have known of the delivery of those cultures;
would you make a statement on this?

.. 3oth frer. the interrogation of Gobhardt and from
my own direct testimony, it can be aeon that Grawitz him¬
self o'- 1 -he delivery of cultures. I, myself, was not

^56


*--pril 3-.:-5K-9sc---o,han (Int. 3rown)
Court !«o. 1


In Berlin at ail at that tino and consequently could neither
Interfere or find out anything about this natter. It was
not co that the delivery of cultures, so fur as those cul¬
tures word-to bo placed in regular German biological insti¬
tutes and as they wore not gems of a dangerous disease,
such as cholera or cancor. «s I said, tho delivery of those
cultures was not 3uch an oxcitir.g . r.t that the aenbor
of tho conpotent doportnent first d tho approval of
tho chief of the institute; that v.\ neither proscribed
nor was it custcnary in tho other large institutes.

. Lator on, I shell submit an official certificate

free, the Hobort Koch Institute, which oortifios to this.

The prosecution showed you a lot cor of yours to the Roichs

Physician SS n:id Police of 29 January 19-15, in which there

is a quoation of hepatitis experiments. You know Ding's

diary very well, .wftor tho dato of this lot cor, in other

words after 29 January 19-15, aro thoro in thi3 diary

any references to oxporiaonts with hepatitis?

/v Ding does not nentioa any such experiments in

his diary, nor have any of tho other numerous witnesses

you have hoard hero boon heard to mention it, nor do any

*

dcouaonts mention it, consequently I am persuaded that
no such experiments took place.

Ct Tho prosecution further mentioned tho use of
Cyclone B for tho mass extermination of human beings; I
3hould like to draw to your attention Gerstoin's affidavit
which the prosueption earlier showed you during tho
presentation of this evidence; I should like to ask
you: did you have anything to do with the natters which

Sorstoin Qontionod in this affidavit?

5-57


3 • -J?-LC-l-I>:r.iils (1:/:. Wn)


Cocrt I

A. I had nothing to do with those natters. That can clearly be
s-jn to tl;o ijcr3tein dccir&nt itself.

0. The Gorstei:. docurr-nt is ircsecution Exhibit h28.

The pror.cutior. further showed you document NO 1305, Exhibit No.

•

h6y. This concerns yellow f»vor vaccines, and here it is particularly
emphasized that yellow fever vaccines cent n l£vlng virus, lould you
please nakc a sv.Uu.nt or. this, a3 to whe'h.-r this living virus in the
yellow fevwr vic.ine is in ary y r.-:- r eo the hucan being's health?

A, iho situation is as folic s. Th-re is r.c virus diseaso
against which you c n conduct - vaccines with de rus. hhen

such things nru done at all—nad they have be-n dene since the middle
of tbo 16 th century—living gores have nlanys bet-n used vhlch, however,
have been attenuated in their toxicity for th.. hunn body in such a
way that they cannot cause disease in the hurun being. In this specific
case of yullcm fever, it was a question of a virus strain which is
extracted free .icu. iheru r- t*o -vain sorts of th s vaccim# In
tnis c-33 they arj roforrin- to the virus rhicr. is puss-d on fro mouse
to vjao in tho ouse's brain.

•»ith ouch a virus it is i posaibl. to infect a hu.mn being *ith
. disease. There is 3iaply a roact'.o.- ir. body tanporaturu which,
however,' has no connection w f synptons of yellow favor.

Consequently, this io not yellow fov^r arrf it is not possibl- to ir.duc..
serious synptoas frerj this virus extracted frer. -ice. It is a matter
entirely without danger. It is much loss dangerous than the suQ
vaccination which every child roc elves.

Q. I laado an object! oi to dccumt NC-1189, Exhibit U71m In
connection with that, the Tribunal said that you hao lready identified
c'-nt.nts of this docu.unt to the extent that there could be no ob¬
jection raised oeainst the doc-: _nt.

: Bhouli Ilk. tc ash y u this. year st-t.-..nts th t. you 7V.de

.. ay, when you said "I re - bor thu -tetter", wore yoi taking an

5U5S


3 ^pril—l£-2-3nniels (Int Brown)

°ourt I

attitude- towards this hobo brief; or were you adopting 2 c attitude, t hen
yoa arid th -t, on what you reoacbored fr jb that Conversation with
S-b«?

a. 1 no longer rocall&d-thia conversation with Kobo. H°wavar, this
decua-nt rounded of it immediately. Ihis ..as a vary brief conver¬
sation—

(Interposing) I aoMt want to fcn< .bcut the coovursati n with
Kobe, but I want to knew whether you roa.- r saving received this
letter, .a; do not k:. w it got into the hands cf rosocutlcn.

In other Words, do you rcanabor this letter, or is it true that
what your testi lory z-r.r.6 was tn t you dud net roacr.bcr the lettor
its-]f, but ds.ply re.ioiOored the contents of ti. i,* ;r?

A, I do not r er tba letter its.. • , n t n now, now the t I
h.v seen it. I r. bur only » short conv.rr .tion rith Nebu er. it.

D *.. “lid ill I have no furthor questions,

TH; tf’iSXD&iTs I have a further question tor the -dtnuss.

BY +.Z PP.SIDSKT:

Eoforring again to document :;o. NO-1196—have you that document
beforu you?

A. :;o, r. trosidont. Is that 118? or 98?

3. ihat is 11?5. That is th- lot tor fro- Gawits to you,

Xow i have it.

3> TTill you road th- lieu foiled nj: «robic nurb«r two?

A. C:.-r .tibility 'f sera containing phenol*

•«. Ir. th- English document before the Court th ord which is
n 'ransi-tod "caapatibility* is translated "tolerance’ 1 . Just what do
y-i no an? ••hat is the Tearing of ti>o O.r-.an .-crd which is sc translated?
A. "Toloranca" can be said, yes, h-t is r . -nt is this: For a
•" h - i~ sick with diphteria, to what extent can he tclcr-.te a serin
c ‘ ''lining phenol? The rat er of phenol is vary cireful.y r.related in
e.rr.nny by the State. S , he-.n_r another serua, . . . -


3 April-i -JF— 1 C-3-CarJ.ols (Int. Ercvrr.)

Court I

have phenol in it, can better be tolerated.

•HE P aSIDSK' : I urd-rstand. Ifcat is sufficient.

Counsel ^ay proceed,

I . ?.iOSSCHr^;~' (Per Df. halto, counsel for the Defendant Kandloser)—
BIi That did not coao three ry headphones.

DR. FROBSCffiUFXi I will repost.-

Since Dr. Fiend ng subsdttod to th. • r.a-.ss document ».*o. 1305,

Exhibit 189, ir. connection with the quest of yollot fever vaccine
put to the witness b. th- prosecution, re::* .r.ti nr. Dr. H. 1 U for the
defendant Handloser I should li*- to ask thr.c questions of the witness
lr. this connect! on s
BY DR. PROcSCHj'A : j

Q. Hrst question — Do you have the doeuaunt bofor you?
a. Mo, but I a-, familiar *ith it.

;• In tins cocun.nt it snys, in ^arc.jr-.ph 2 j "..a isaunc that
irjsidont GildcuuisW also V: tested this on huaan beings to discover
tha tolerance for it." D .3 not this -.urn that this ,s si-ply a testing
U find out whether the vaccine is harrful?

a. I said, in ny direct cxa- 1 nation, that this untiro question was
a purely technical onp. It wns not a quostlon as to whether or not
this vaccine had any protective valuo, becauso that qu-stion hid already
b -'“ °* il lion s of vaccinations ir. naticnr, ini wo had tho

•irus in our prctictivo vaccinations as th. other nations ha-.l in theirs.
. puroly technical qu-stion. Of th. tolerance for ,

th* rritnosa Bernhard Schu.tx said that it was pro tty difficult to

E&ntain a nomal ’.tur^ and that consequently the upplic -• ion of

0

this serum was sraethat di • . .

■ c * rc u sinr it, first of all, r._r_ in conrand of this technique;
seoi odly, whether th- va cine . s 3 till effective or net, in ther
• , whether there was any additional effect th t shculo b. feared,

- r Inst. . .c—, if th. to ; era tore rose.

’5e60


3 a, ri 1—.JI-1C-U-Dor-ieIs (Int. Brc-rc)

Court I

Ir * - 0 ' -pinion it cst anttcr of ccnsciontiousnas t tost , but
it rj r.ot a natter of basic inportance, boeause I do not knew, or I
h d never heard that any such vaccine had caused dosage tc thu husan
b-ing if, for instance, the'virus in the vaccine died.

4c "itn-ss, I vanted to know sonsthing else than whr.t you just said.
I wanted to know whether, froa paragraph 2. it can clearly b« sc-en that
thuso testa wore sirply carried on tc s.j :.th«r the vaccine jos dango-
rejs or not.

A* Yes, that can ba Seer. fra*, that par .gr .,h.

4. Then pie'.so toll no vh.t ,ou un.erstr.nd under the sign "OP num¬
ber".

a. That is a sign for the F.ohrin «crks and : my other Laboratories
that produco vaccines, and it esans o,>^r.-.tion mKb-r. Ibis designation
is only usod as long as t:»_ production or vacciro is still in the ru-
suarch sti.-, For instance, sc far as It is a question of vaccines heir*
Ir. the plant, you do r.ot.use tbo dosir: n "OP 1 , but you

spoak 03 ork nature, tho abbr.vi -.tion f.r which is "W.

Q» Hew cany 1 port-.*J ns are in cludod under such an OP nunbur?

a. That depends on the vaccine, ipflulo

aiono has 50 such portions of vaccine. 0* masher irxs'udoo

net si.-ply the irpulo thon bein worked with, but it is rdnply being
U9 -'* a t.odol for the whole nanufacturing seri-c.

4* Jfow thu last qu-scicn I havu to put to you;

In view o: this .! cu.»nt 1305, y.u, tnc.ts, h .*- llr-ridy stated
th. this as a special caso, na=oiy, a special military operat .n ir.

-i rica, in which, rcughly, forty thousand r>_n participated. Can /ou,
lT "~ tf * 13 social case, conclude t . • s a b39ic agreo^r.t between

<«affcr. 3S and thu .ury occcrdio: r which all vaccines runt through
Jno institute of the Joffan SS ana wore t.st. . ,

Tacr. .. raid?

5^1


S April 47-K-SV>ll-l-31nkloy-lRt: Yrcra
Court He. i

A. iv :ro can bo r,o question f t hat whatsoever. Iboro was
r. tor cine station In Go many, nanoly, rno do sign: tod by a

-ol.l c_V r on tlo jrt of tho Reich Ilinistor of the
Ir.torlor. a is w.-.a tho instltuco for Sxporlnonfcal Ihorapy,
wSioh carried jut tho State's testing f vaccinations.

DR. FROSSCKhiail!: No further q neat lens.

DR. Gj. LIK: Dr. Qa./lik for tho dc h>n ant hover.. I should
liko tc ask Dr. hr-ugor/sky r. fon quo.-i no rogc.rline Docunont
IJunbor 5.

~XA!T»..?IOR

BY DR. O/.TTDIKs

Q. ltnoas, you otlll ’. vo tfc.t C -ciiont bofcrc y'-u?

A. Y c a.

'hat did you kn^w a*o ut wit w. c to carry out thoro
Lnjoctlrno?

A. Dr. Ding was.

Q. hat can you say about why t! is vnccino was sent to
Dr. Hr, von?

j-. If I recollect ccrroctly, Dr, Ding did rot lir.vo ony
festal eddross of 11 s own. Kia research r tati-n and his
oxporinontal st, tion wero -In Lollin'; »s soctcr; and T there¬
fore assumed tlat In tho ca30 cf th.ls letter, tlo lottor-
1 ,ad for such natters wont te tho c ::p physici n of Such-
on wald,

°ld you evor discuss ti e carrying cut of t’, oao vaccin¬
ations with Dr. K von or havo ar.y negotiations :n this
“ttor at all with 11 :.?

i. Yen ncan in January 13-ih? -t that ti o I didn't know
-hat Dr. Keven existed. I only riot hin in Soptorbor.

DR, G.7. T-IK: he furth.cr quosti ns.

F:::;SIDY!:T: a re there :r.y - tier cuosti-ns cf tho


3 April yr-X-S -ll-2-31alcloy-Iafc: Drem
C'urfc No. 1


iitno33 on t c port of any deforce cour.col?

"it. H.'.HDY: If clofonso counsol hr.vo r.c furthor questions,
" hr.vo no furti. r qi* scions, ycur Honor.

D?.. FLSrnKG: I'J. Frcsidont, I ask permission to 3ub-
:.lt a f _vr dccunor.ts; but first lot no ro.-r.rk that tho ’wit¬
ness Diotsch I intcrrogr.toJ yoscrlr.y oven in rog-rding tho
points Uprn whiol an t od to inter:- . :.to hin apocificclly*

Ab ut tho channol of ml for B1 bo lows not! tag.

Consequently I don't thirlc it 1 r rl;;>t, since this "rug-
ewaky cr .30 hr.s nlrondy lasted ac leng, t( .,ut 1 i> in tl o
box as r. witnoss; but I ah .'.11 sl-.ply submit r.n r.ffi ’r.vit
fron hi: .

HR. HARDY: Kny it plor.ao your honor, fir;t of 11 I
cssuno new tl .tt tlo <lefon .cnt JlrugowaUyia oxr. .In. ti n ic
finished end , aocon&ly, In crnncction with tho v/ltnoor:

Otto Dlottscl ,l:o hes boentrrught to Numborg r.« r. dofonto
witnoss; and thoy hr.vo nc intonticn cf calling ’ In ' o.o to
tho witnoss stand. I roquost poredasien to rrognto
Diotsch cn boheif cf tl o prosecution if the Tribunal will
.How that. Ho is a prlc.-mor h ro in tho Nurnborg jail.

THE '-'RESIDENT: Do you »»an to ncko tho witnoss Diotsch
tie presooution witnoss, or dc y u dosiro to cross oxnnino
hi ir. conr.octi n wltl tho aff irtr.vit which Dr. Coining
has r.ontirnod?

"R. K..RDY: Ho, I no roly doeiro to intorrogdta 1 in f r
ir.vo3tigr.ticn purpesos In th.o rcr.ro : - r.n r that Dr. Flcr.-
rOng has.

THE PRESIDENT: Intcrrcgato hit*, ir. tho prison?

* ! .. HARDY; In cho prison , yos.

HE PRESIDaiT: Y r c, tl..t : ay to d-.no.

53


3 April—ll-lc-Els-cicy-Int. Brown
Zc+rt aO. 1.


-JE. rDwdKf: Thank you, sir.

TriE PRESIDENT: I understand, counsel, mat there
will bj r.o more questions to the defendant Srugowsky?

1... 3: No, that's true. I siaply want to

put in documents.

T;iE CitSSlDEMT: Tnc defendant is excused from ..is
stand and say resume nis place.

Dh. FLS2.1I..J: -:r. rresiacr.t, oyarding the question

of the witness Diotsch the prosccut irlas cor.oluded tne
presentation of it:; evidence-. The.--fore, i.. ay opinion,
it cannot call any lurti.ir prosecution witnesses but
could siaply cross examine him regarding the affidavit
I shall put in.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel for the prosecution did
ntft suggest at this tido that he intended to cell tho
witness Lietsch; he desired to interrogate niu in the
prison.

. FLS^JKG: I understood hi a to aeon that ho
v,anted to interrogate hia hero in court. Tr.en let me
submit Document Klrugowsfcy 42 on Pi.ge 2x0 of the Decuuont
i-ook, .s Document .krugowsKy i*o. 5~. I siaply draw all
those documents to your ttontior..

i;.E aREDIDE.;?: nat is toe number or t..is document
to which you are referring, couns-i?

Jn. rLE^-IER; Document 42, on Page 216, which 1 sut-
a:tted as Exhibit 56. Then it next document, Document
rugowsfcy 54 on ?t.gc 218.

TIE PRESIDENT: Just u moment, counsel, until* we
c r. enter this.

Dh. FePL-.IE.J: 2ruf,o*-.3Ky Document 34, a e .i ; ,
LCrugowsky Exhibit 59. kxugpusky Document 04 on Page 220
:c ..s Erugowsky Exhibit 60. ..ru ov.sk v Document 66 on


3 April-E5H-ll-2a-Bla*clc-y-Int. Brown
Court Ko. i.


Pugc. 225 I shall not put in. i^ay I as«c whether the Tri¬
bunal has Document Book Number 2? I have a document
: i:, ’lumber 2 , in which there arc extracts from liter-

•.* • : e.

THE KcnoIDEfTP: No, nave not that document too*;,.
Dr. Flemming. In that connection I don't have any not¬
ation concerning the offer of .'irugc.sxy Humber 11, Pages
90 and 91. Are we to understand * t tl.'-t will not bo
offered?

Drc. FLSLlilNG: I an not puttii-g t.ict ifl. Thu rea¬
son for which I intended to was removed.

»S. IhwtDY: Year honor, ir. connection with this
Docuntnt Booh Number 2, \-c havo hero some sixty-eight
p ges of extracts from the books that are on the prose-
cut iori table now which have just been turned over to us
for examination by dofui.se counsel. Now, these doctors
and scientists horo in this dock nro not accused of ex¬
perimentation on human beings as such; but, as wu the
prosecution ngroo that experimentation is necessary
and th< re urc accepted methods of medical investigation,
wo aro charging these defendants with crimes. These
crimes are mostly in connection with the use of non-
volunteers in their experiments, t:.c lack of care ond
skill in the course of their experimentation, and many
other such things which v.c might consider as boi.-ig
guilty of malpr-ctico. In addition, thero is j consi¬
derable difference between the _xtracts and information
\s outlined b: these doctors ana what is at issue in *
this case.

Now, this literature hero is different from the
tur«_ of the accused that v.v hav. examined ir. this
*ritunal in that the legitimate authors here o;>cnly state


3 April-t?u-U-3s-iJlslcloy-Ir.t. Drown
Court ho. 1.

that they have made experiments or. human beings and that
they coamitt-a no crime .s they had nothing to hide.

Th y v..re volunteers. But ilrugowsky on the stand ;dr.it-
t-d tr.it when they submitted a report of their experi¬
ments they falsified thC reports be cause they had some--

•

thin, to hide.

Nov; wo are going to try to-ci"vter up the recoru
with sixty-eight pages of scientific literature to prove
that oth..r experimentation has be-:, carried out; but
this experimentation, your x.or.or, has no connection what¬
soever with ..hit have charged !;„re. The proseoution

. •
dooms it immaterial, x.encc I do not wish to object to

each and every document as it is put ir.; but I wish the

Tribunal to consider this as a blanket objection to nil

the documents con* 1 Document Book 2.

DR. FLZ.UNG: -r. Resident, the prosecution has
charged the doctors hero of h ving curried out experiments
on human beings who had not experimented on human b» ings
who had not Volunteered for this experiment. Consequen¬
tly) in Locum*nt Jook Number 2 1 have not included ono
single experiment in which tm.ro is any mention in lit¬
erature of the fact that the experimental subjects were
volunteers, not even in those cases whore the total
description of the experiment proves that the voluntary
asp f th. ici nation was probably on ay assumed.

Tile experiments here described were carried out in port
on children, Lr. part in prisons, in part in mental ineti-
tut ions. I consider it neooftsnry *-o show tno Tribun®, to
•chut extent throughout the world such experiments re O'-r-
ried out on hum n beings who «io not volunteer for them,

La order to prove that the civilised attitjie is not con-
trary to such experimentation cad that no v. he re ithe


3 April-r£H-il-4a-Blafclcy-Int. Brown
Court :;o. i.


world "-re- such experiments considered criminal, because
otherwise the- Court would have to know of many objections
i- lit'-r.tur'. or in ncr.sptpcrs whore such experiments nrc
repudiated.


9&1


3 r'l-rH-12-l-Int.

C art . 1.


~r • J&-Galla !:»r


If tteso ’ currents prove that Lr. air st all nations of the
-•.rid such .‘Xp.-rin.nts or. r.rn-v lur.te^rs are carrier! cut withjut
^.cf! ns n th: part f the lie, then in ry opinion it
ins -n sufficiently prove' that such an unrertnkin; f experi¬
ments f such a nature as was enrrie’ . ut hv re in Gomany, are
-ven in r rr.al tines not tc * - r- r ' as original, an’ then in
a p-riot* ir. which a t tal rear is '..In; *.r. -it Vein. such a
juri ' 'urin which such -rx-ri-erts • -r oarriofl ut in Gelt *y,
an' that is n r'ers f th- h-rrt f .'fci Is in this case, fch-y
ware all i-ss t ’ re nr’;', as criiinnl.

.*r. th-r qu-sti n will ’.e a/tich Juj Tri unsl rust uxaidne'ls
viuth-r in the ex-cull n f th.Oe er. .rlrvnts any rve can 'o char-
- ' ultfc -r.ythin. • H'fjv_r, in ■ ; pini n Mi :wst <Uscrlnii
Sharply ’ otv—n the quest! r. arisir. n iv ’leal ..xi-.rin-r.ts to
clarify a qu-rti n— B n'lcal . , r 'urir. Vfirtlw tc

; r-sent e lilit.ary pr J 1j:x that n O-V luntOTJ : :.s, are th..y
* asically to bo pr v-', r ' raically to *- rupu'into’'. an'
characterise'! as criminals.

"'.erO is quite a ’iffor.nt question n the ’hur hnn ’, nnuily,
h • these oxporiiwrats , ■' th question, c-.n a

physician who carries ut such -:: : :_ri -n*.c n State r'ers n
jr: ns tdi .a th. State :nke avail*! 1~ t hi:i for th s. exp.ri-

•

T-Z .:CSXX:i7: *!: any f th-e- -xl.i’ its, particularly in
ru . -c'- *s ' Ho. 2, war a the latter jhase of the :
tv which . u just ruforr- .*

: t that

v-r- rev!c availab le ty the State?

r-S .T^sreyr: Yes, whether h-yr-ro na-N* availab le ty the
State, an’ the experl--.er.ts -:-ne tri-* irsunr.t t an r or f the
3‘aU.?

•x:. fE'arfi: Here art. inclu'-l -x>rin-nts .« : ris.r.-rs on


3 c/ril-T K-2?-2-Gallrc ber-In t . -

Z rt ’ .. 1.


•-hich th- physician c ul' n-t :av- cnrri. * nit if it vas th.Se pri-
s-;-r crl*iik?l3 ha' n t -.r. ar ailaV lu y tii- Statu. I weald
lit v r.ri the Tri’nnal f the ':cirv.rt su’ nltto\y . r f-ss.r
L.i rt 't n- -,r in. tju. nlaria e;rv.rin_nt on 800 prisun-rs. Hew-

cIm’ j” this *3cu.i.ct in this * cirvnt n -k
2. 7h, exiv.rin.ntc in part '.-re carri- * tut in rental institutions,
that is, in closed instituti.ns irt -.r.-deh physician ha’ ncc.sc
tc the patient nly if th_ cnromn-ntii ffieial in char o cf th-
instituti n pomitto'! it.

H.Ur'/x Ycur ’! r. r, I can s-- tint r. rio-nin an ' I a r-e
-no-hundred percent. /<* are not char in h-ru tint experin-nts a3
3uch oro illo al or cri-ir-ol. 7h-se extracts “re not ovi tencu cf
cri-inal exiv.rir.ntc. If t'-y • -r- .ttracio f crininal experiments,

they Villi’, n-t hi>'.u the fact-then th-y r ul' have hi "-;n

the fact that th-y coqv.ri-v.nt_ * on h'snn 'win s. Im'.’itiun hu
states to y u f usin pvrs ns in Ire ne asylu;-.. ,u ’ n't char e
. rif-ss. r I; so f ex; .rirvntin cn : - ;1~ in rv-r.tal institutes,
or.’ typhus r ups, it is perfectly 1- it inn to. ,'e are char in

bin with crininal expori'Vjntati . n on nen-volunteers, niv* tills not-

♦

-rial lies a’ silutoly n ‘x.ari .1 vliats -v.r n I'hat is ’cf' re this
~ri unal,

PR. FLH11KC: :*r. : r-sV . w . :• oo cut or Mid that the
char os aru nnly with the carry^n n f cririnol oxp-rinents. let
•o point cut that -xporirvrts can v crL-J ml nly either because
they aru carrio 1 cut n jxrs ns who ’> ne t v lunto-r, <t ’-cause
they an. carrle'* out in such a tray as tc * c state ! t • bo crininal,

~s an exp-rlrv-nt. an nhuraan -i.; a-r s- is n't criminal, an-' is
-.fhat if- '.-ant to pr ve ' y ruferrir. to -xp.rij-vr.tc that t k place

ut the v rl-’. Thun nly tbs qu-Sti n 'dll renain, »*ru f.uy
-xp.rin.nts carriud cut in such a v=y -r ratur. an’ the -ny in
which tiv-y were cnrri- ’ -ut, t 'a'x th-~ cririnai, an' that is ’’h;

: :cnt to put in these 'ccur-nts.


r-TT.


3 April-ii-DJG-12-ln-G: 11--her (Lit. Irena)
C urt Nc. 1


'« that they would egreo v.ith y.u that ordinarily speaking experiments
upen human beings per sc were nst criminal, th-t was ny understanding
r ahat It. Hardy said. Frevidoj, cf course, co Karl Brandt had stated
free the witness Lex, the witnesses were volunteers, and the results
t. LC exp-octal w-rc results vhich we-Id Le beneficial, and' the expected
results cr “nticip'-tod results wuld be knewn U the physician by virtue
ef the fr.ct that the fid:’ hed been exp3 n. 1 c i'rr rs possible a tc
exporin-nt-.tiens up-n cnimrls, end th;.t -he cmtuaplete • experimental
subjects w.ulJ bo given full infcmrtitn cancernin the nature cf tho
experiments, and the hej-ar .xp.ct-d, cr :i:rr/lly -xicctcxl tc be on¬
ce unt ere*. It nay be I in crr.r in y r-ccllecticn, but it seems
to me that is in csacnce tc whst Dr. Krrl Or r. Jt s-id fr.m the witness
3. "nd. New •!«. these extr cts ef scientific data, I sup? se taken fr.r.
becks, periodicals and scientific r -udical trentisos 1 disclose tho
state .r the ccn'.iti-.n f the huaan boixv; upon wh.m the experiments
wero being oonluctol. Th-t is t. say, d-ca it liacl-sc that they were
r were r. t voluntary su‘Jeets? Dees it disdeso th-t they wore inn-tea
of the institution, end we're rwdo available \y r'.er cf a governmental
'titherity with.ut h.-vin, ary eh ico in tho matter if whether they
w. uld cr wculd net be selected as experimental subjects?

DH. FLEld.’K: In few cf the cxj.eri.nu.t3 they or- experiments cn
persons condemned tc .loath, ns is the c-3c hero in tids c urt. In
ether eases they are exporinents cn children.

JUDGE SEDRI.7G: Is that made tc appear Ly the extrrets ffere i?

DH. FLUCLJC: They were children, yes.

lie. H.J.DY: Dr. 4 J. 0 x-r.dcr h-s • .cn re: !ir. ; this, end he can n.t find
such c- notation as it is stated by the defense ccunscl.^ It maybe wo
ni-ht pr. of read this document acre carefully.

JUDGE S.-JriING: I have been seaming then, and the •! cuccnts 1 have
scanned s; far dc n-t Jiccl.se the at-itus ef the ex.-ria-ntal subjects.

DH. FL&iJHG: I aa afraid that the translation was not c.rrtct. The


trrnslrtL n said "The ccnditicn." I said, ycu can m-an whether cr n-t

5^71


3 r-pri 1-- S-gjG-12-2c-Gcllc her (In*.. Tr wi)
C- irt j: . 1


th c\ were volunteers, didn't y-u?

JUDGE S2TKING: Precisely, yes.

D... FL2SOiCs It is .my cpinicn that persons in a ncntnl institution,
in prls n, *nd children ccn net be volunteers, end fer this reasrn I
•a cf the opinion that these experiments s. Y-r p.s they are onrriud cut
:n such p-rsens arc ell exactly ef the sene s rt r.s capcriaents here
under iiscussi .n nt tho rvmcnt.

JUDGE SiLr-L’E: ..re y:u ryreed U t. t stntcra-r.t cn behalf cf y ur
cliont that it is inp-ssi'lo f r - per: .. ineTC-rrtod in an ins:uic
asylum, r chil !rcn hospital, cr ether pullic i nstituti n t. jjivo n
vrli -1 consent t. experiment- ticn upon n , -rr.n?

Dr.. HLE-IUKJ: .. p-.rtv.n in r. acntel institution in raj' ;ini n c.uld
never -ivc his |er..Jjslcn f.r nn cr^-rLicr.t t lo carried ut .n hin,

’ ec'use he is n. t i- -icn t ’c rati r.-l ut tho v.h lo quest! n.

JUDGE SZEhlUGx I un!erstrn1 thrt perfectly, ut dc y.u c nfino
y.ur statement tc th't pcrticul-r individual whe '.ecauso . f racntrl
deficiency is incapable legally f c*vin._ c. nsent?

Dh. FLEH2M1: ffc, tut I am rubcittiny these documents and I want
tc sh w that everywhere ir. the wcrld nc cbjecti.n is raised by the
put lie r-c-'inst experiments c.f this s rt. The ex. orLicnt3 have boon
public, n. one objected tc them, and it ah.ws that attitude in the
whale we rid ic that experiments can - carried ut cn ouch pers. no
if scientific interest cakes it necessary. Tho pu’ lie then sees it
*lse ns ethically necessary, necessary fr:a tho ethical peint ef view
and has n. objection.

LSI. HjJiDY: Y-ur H.ner, the Pr-secuticn will stipulate that c.dperi-

..ntrticns thr.mh ut th- w.rli is pcradssiblo ;n vcluntary suVject,

*

and will sti ulatc that fact, but will n.t stipulate that exr-_rincnt-
ati.-ns is admissible . r p_rassi>-le an n.n-v-lunt-ers in any sccti.n.
f the w rli. In view ef th- fct that acst ; there Jrcu-...nt3 that
will be intr iuccd .-re f th*t r.-tur-, then I Oe. any r--s. n f. r

then t be put int evidence h-re.

5^72


3 npri 1-1T-DJC—1 2-3ir.rh-r-Int. £iw;
Ccurt 1


ZS.. r Lr .l ~1 .3j: T- the extent that experiments art carrioi rut
cn prisoners, it is everywhere in the we rid tho fret that th.so
ex; erf .-jits are carried-cut ptrsens whe -xcrcisc this will, but
this till is at limited fcgr the feet they yo ir. . risen they count t
jive ony v luntory c: nsent, en-' I aa^r a^ein I have n t in any Banner
in =y decuaent beck jiven p. sinjlc experiment there the subject was
vluntrry. In acst places where any li*. ."tur.., there is anti n.d
thnt exporinents wore carried ut cn s ;.j*. sc nany v;lunt«ora. Ktv
I den't include these eases in ay leek .. ere -ver that statement
was net nr.de, 1 assume- they were n.t v luntoers, end I h vc n t in¬
cluded these osq-crlnunta in sy document b. k.

TIE PfcESUSNT: The Tribunal wiD o rtc-jss rt 1:>0 .'cl ck
Mti will - -the djfforcnt \ orient: the . I tiao.

(Recess cf the Trflunrl until 1330 hours, 3 ..i*rll l.U)


3 April i !.7
C urt .. . 1


A-13-l-rEP- Lesser (Ir.t, v a Sch -r.)


fJT&zxQU s :; ss : oj :

(Th- bearing reconvened a'- 1330 h urs, 3 April l.i.7.)

THE MARSHAL: Persons in the Courtr jc - *111 pl-sso fin,: their scats.

The Tri'r.ur/1 is again in susri^n.

THE rS.ZSIDEI.7: Tho jrituml has vxrsir.v ’ 'ocuaents c-r.fir,-' in
l£rug-«aky Boak 2,.. f

DR. FLHfiGhG: Hay I make no cxplimtion first? It his 'anon brought

n ay nttonti n that apparently « the questia :f the voluntary nature of

the people in prisons 1 express^ nyself incorrectly. It is, f c ur-a,

passible th"t thoro is r. certain dejoe f voluntariness .n thu part f

people in prisons but in the case : ;n.rs .nt. who are s Unite' in

tluiir freed >f sowcunt when in , ris r. ac sust .issunc that in contrast

t- pc pie wh can aove freely it cannot he accuse.: thrt they are v luntears

if they . Inco thoosulvus t tho isjnsal »f so nts. It is

* salblu tli't .csplu ei voluntoor ir. win :i, r. a the irticle in LIFE

sh-na about thu SCO priooners sh volunteered f r aLirin exj^riaents.
s

TIE PRESIDE!T: The fribun 1 his cxoninel Krug nsky D-cuo,nt f<. V 2
in:, ns it ccurs to the Tri’.wmi tb-.t e n- f ’-he ther 'cfen'linta nirht
*fior siwilr '.ocuccnto in uvi~er.ee cf r th c <nclusi. ii f th trial,
that it tnuld be vlvic.iMu t. postpone Vfinite ruling up r. this
witter until tho Inst • foment has clw<. :lv case, .at which time, i:

: ouaents haw bnon jfferod, they <nn nil bo chattier. r.

If n. thor Ijcissents ire ffer*« it thit tin , th- Tri- inal sill Miin
c-nsi -r the off-r y c unsel f‘r Dofummt lira: esky f Bai r.tr -n hin
Book 2.

ISc. HARDY: In vies af tho Tribunal*o ruling, then,' shun i eusttnta
of this nature ire su'aittcU, will It b- ivc.seiry l r au .n ei-h -errion
tj render i fsnsil objection ,r, n cuoents f tnis nr-turu, c”n»-
r geervo >ur right to -bject until th- -n.’. T tho e apleti.n f -ich
\ ISO ?

THE Fa&DfcCT: Yes, thit w^uld he n such cunento '3 this,
publications, nhether in news ip.rs, r.^-ixines, r i: , whirr. ir
f^ru«: in -Vi »e nee an! which c rr.s-.i -. t these caa-nto a r.trir. in


iiW


5474


3 April 1,67 -.-.-13,- 2 -?XP- Lessor {It.;, v r Scr. _r.)

C-urt .. . 1

"rug.swsky Dscuaont Bark 2. Th.so dscoacnts sill all be emsidorod whon
the last defendant has rv_sto his cast an- sbjucti.ns r.y be rcsjrvcd
until that tine becaus*. the Tribunal will mt cansidor, frere this tine
r, -h- adnissisn -f evidence -f this nature.

UP.. KAhSY: Thank ycu, Yaut H;nJr.

TIE PRESIDE??: It is unlwrsta.d, of c,urre, for tho record, thr.t
this ruling preserves tho right of Defcn.ltnt 'drug ..sky to ffer this
t! cunent bn-k r.t scr.u inter tine.

Kl. FUOBONC: Then I fh-ull merely UK t ask t: roserve tho right,

Ur. President, far submitting n nuaUr f ifi vita and tUr dscunsonts
Inter, which have nt yet been tr{*wl"tw.’,

THE niSSZO&NT: You ea*.n, ,f course, *. cu -r.ts ,f similar r. turw x., those
c ntninod in y:ur Dccuncnt B k 2?

DP..FLE1CX&: No, d cu.-a.nto fi .'iffurent n turc,~ affi -.vits and
similar ovidoncc, such as in D cuaont E k 1.

THE PRESID.‘_\7: And you say thr.t th -rv Ixmrvnts nr«- n t rr» r<-:u’y
t ho pr-.sv.ntwd to the Tribunal, ia th-.t correct?

Dh. HBCilNO: Yoa, th-.t is right.

THE FPESXDEHT: It h-s n-t boon th; paUcy cf thw Tribunal t cl Sv tho
d r t .j ovidor.co which aay bo c-opotent evidence which aay ’a. -fforol,

.-At.ri L ovi lor Co, by thur defendants ns their bases r. hw.rl, ef-rc
th. Izat defendant has recto ! his cane. Tho Tri ur.-.l undorst*nde that tho
Sofdnrhnts are undur s - _ handicap in r.parir-: their ovi; once c;. tho matter
wlU ho acted upon an’ any defon’.ant will bo he r! l-of r. tho !efondants
have cl sod their case .and other evidence a y be ffereJ n’ trill r. t ' o
r-.jocted upon the ground thr.t it is ffered t late— I swan up-n tho
gr un! -I nc that tho evidence ic ffered t 1 to.

-JR. FLESatG: Then; t the - r..nt, I have n thir.j : rv t su^ait in
tr.w lirug-aioky c-so.

THE P:£SIDE!iT: I undo re tan.; then, counsel, that all the rcamants
- r.-.*incd ir. Dc«uacnt S-.k 1 ;r.d D caa-nt 3 k 1-A rhich y.u ’.csir. t ffer
t ny tine-, hr Vo rv-w been -ffer. ’?

oh. F Lr l gfflC ; Yes, they have ell boon fdere .

5i\l^


Court 1

£ Apr 47-Ar-14-l-SEM-Heehan (:-t. Ten Schoen £ Kurtr)


D?.. SZI2L (For the defealant Eerte Cfccrheuser): Before I Q8 k the
Tribunal to cfli the defendant Dr. Cberhcuser to the witness stand, I
should like to offer the affidavit of a witness whose elimination has
teen approved by the Tribunal. In view of the fact that this witness,
fiergarttha Mydin, who is in Berlin, has not ye* arrived, I shall first
offer an affidavit. It is possible that after the presur.trtion of evi¬
dence in the case of the defendant Gberheu-wr I shell be eblo to dis-ienco
with exanining this witness before the Tvl'jvorl.

THE.PSZSIDBST: Has the docucent bo-k l-.er. prepared fer the defer.-

a

dant Oberheuoer?

DH. SSIDL: nr. ^resident, the dccurents for the dofcr.dent Obcrhcusor
aro in the sene document book as for the dofondrnt Tr. Knrl Gobhnrdt,
which han already been offered. Other dccu-er.ts nro in Docu- ont Book 2,
which will be offered later. In view of the fret that the witness has
not yet arrived, I should like to read surely this one affidavit rut of
order. The affidavit reads as follows —

Th£ PR2SIDS2TC: Arc copies of this affidavit available for the Tri¬
bunal?

Z£. SSIDL: I beg your pardon, *'r. President, I rosuned that copies
had airoedy been given to the Tribunal, but I still have n fow transla¬
tions.

KB. HARDY: Your Honor, ns I understand it, apparently this is the
sane document book which has teen nut in for Ocbhrrdt, Fischer, and
Oburhcusor, end this lo m additional affidavit to that document book.

ES. SSIDL: Yes, that is correct.

SHE PRSSIDLST: That is :^y understanding.

IB.. SSIDL: The affidavit rends ns follows -

IKS PRS S TTgKY : Hh>t nuaber do you Design to this exhibit? •

HR. SSIDL: I shall give it the amber of Cberhcuser So. 1. I quote:

"I, Frcu Mergerctha Mydlc, resident et Berlin, 0 112, H.rtcrstrnssc
•'/ll, have had ny attention called to fact that I rate nycclf liable to
-uniehaent if I give e false affidavit. I declare on o-th that -v strte-


5476


"ourt Pc. l

c Apr -i7-A-l*«-2-ISi-f:ei.hcR (Int. Tor. Sc been i Furtr)


=ott is time end correct end thc.t it wns rj.de in order to be subnitted
a0 evidence to the Military Tribunal So. 1 et the Palace of Justice,
1'uornborg, Germany.

C- 13 January 1S,3 I ves for political reasons sent to tho venen's
concentration cerp Savcnsbruck. The reason for ajr detention in this

e

canp was the fact that I hed uttered insulting rcjr« about the wife
of Soichsfuehrer SS Eimlor.

"Already ten dry. after uy errivcl in the carp, vlx. on January 24,
1943, I fell seriously ill. I was taken to IhO side try of the cm
vhere the canp phyeicion, Pr. Eoswnthal, was to treat =o. Pr. Rosenthal,
however, did not concern hince.f with :.e and : ovo it cerely to the help
of other prisoners that Pr. Rosenthal did not, on account vf ry exceed¬
ingly poor general *ti tc of health and ay serious illness, hill -.e or
lighter, ay death after six days by an injection. He evidently doubted
ny rocovery.

"Aftor three weeks in the sick bay of tho cm I was taker, back to
ay blwck in r very poor state indeed.

"After eight daye I ageir. adult ted to the sick boy where Frl.

Tr. Gberheuser treated =e. She vua tho first to ascertain that I suf-
forod froa abdominal typhus. I further had erysipelas of the leg and
inguinal rupture and furthermore suffered from an inteneo itch. Frl. Pr.
Cborheusor gave r.e all conceivable c/n rad also saw to it that I
received a suitable diet, although I was only r skeleton end weighed 64
o-unds instead of 126 when I vr.s put uni-r her erre in the cick bay.

? rl- • Cberhcuser did a-t only see to it that I rccci*cd good fooi but
b:* giving Ce suitable Uedicmer.ta she- did everything that >r.r ir. her
0,, ' cr and that could helm no, in strong contrast to Pr. Rosenthal, who
did not concern hir.self with re at ell. *

■’-•rl. Pr. Cb-rheuscr hr.s used her influence for me and even renri-
••'nded the nurse vfco refused t. give r.e cy medicine, and then ordered
: ‘- r r ' ivt ne tho nrcscribed ri.diccr.ents cr.d also the corrosronding

r *4..^ . r


5477


Court Sc. 1

c Apr -;7- A -i ;-s-z:-:;-«cchen (Int. Voa Season & Sirtr)

"But ?rl. Dr. Gberheuser Sid cot only help ne by doing everything
within her power. I cen testify free =y own observation end fren the
reports of other fellow oriseners that she also tried to help other
patients who were really ill, end that she treated the side in n decent
and hur-cno sanner. Cae-aust, however, not overlook the feet here that
the prisoners contained neny acti-sociel elenents, nrostitutes, criminals
with repeated previous convictions, and -thur oursons who wrongly laid
clain to the enwnitios of tSu. sick bey M Ihv cost of the really cick.

"To oua up, I vieh, to stetw that Trl. Dr. Cbirhcusor, in opito of
difficult conditions «cd though she hircolf vao obvi usly bound by tho
Instructions of the cer.p physician, fcrs treated -jo yell during the nnny
conths of ny illness and that the did cpcrything tc rest re ny health.

In the stuio .lonncr oho tried to help the other net lento of tho sick buy
whenever sho could and I nsv r saw ttu.t she nlstr ontiont.

"* this statement voluntarily and I vent t j cnphoslre th /1

the attention of Frl. Dr. Gberhvucor's defense council vr.o drawn to no
by r. letter which I wrote hla of ay c,va accord on 16 January 1947.

3.rlln, 20 February 1947." Signed: •Korfcwotha .<ydlr nco Kuhn."

Then there follows the certificate -f tho notary. This docunmt,

as I have already sold, will be eiven the exhibit Obcrhcusor Ho. 1.

Hr. Freoidont, I ask the Tribunal to coll the defendant Dr. Kertn
Cberhouser to tho stand.

Tho F523H&ST: The defendant Herta Cbcrheusor vill take the stand.
HniiTA OrLRSLUSLR took tho stand and testified ps follows:

=Y TBS PPSSIZHIZ:

What is your arao?

A. Kt»rta Oberhouscr.

4

V 111 you repcet this oath after r.c I sverr by 09i, the Almighty
ar.4 Chniscient, that I vill 6ocak the pure truth end will withhold and
add nothing.

(The witness reseated the oeth.)

THS rELSIDZST: You nay cit down.


5473


c A",r 47-i-14-S-LB(-Meeltfa (1st. Ton S cheer. & Kurtz)


3IT-'- ZXMTSiSiat

BY IB. SEII7L:

When end where were yen born?

*• 1 '^’ E 15 Key 1S11 is Cologne on the Shine.

^ - he prosecution fees already submitted your affidavit in »rhich
you described your life briefly. This is Prosecution I;cu*-.cat So. 2?.

I ask you now to describe end to suopleuv.-.* .-our affidavit eoncorr.inr
your life nnd also your scientific .training.

A. I cone fron a Piddle close conceit*tlvc Chrietian fr-tily. Hy
father is an engineer. I stent =y youth in lucsaold.rf rnd attended
the Louisenschule, the city school in luesacldorf, fror. 1916 to 19?1.

I graduated fron this school.- Then after the inflation th»rc were finar.-
clpl difficulties for ny cermets and ! wen forced to flncnco ny otudicu
in otrt aysclf. 2 attested t; do so by giving lessons rnd by helolsg
i- doctor in his practice. Wy oro-clinlcal semesters I ctudiei rt Bonn
rnd fron the f ,urth scr.eotcr ! wo at the ohysiolwglcol institute under
Professor fcbUke. During y clinical icr.cotars I vrt In lueoocld .rf
pad I took the strts cMu3lrati«u there.

In n;/ affidavit I said that’! vco o ncr.bor of the SIW, the Xltlor
Youth »irls Organisation. This car.o about in the folloving >ay. ad a
soni-r nodifiol student ve wro celled unon to -.lace ourselves at the
diooosel of the BIX.; that is, vc v»,ro -rdtred bocrucc there ’-cru f o
fov fc:;ale d.ctoro in ruessoldorf. I f.und young girls there «ho hrd
been forced into this organization; they had too mch sports to do and
to uch service. The parent# had already ob.'octod to this. I tried
t. do oo ;c thing to t ilevirtc these conditions rnd we tsatined the girls
edlcnlly. Ve wre present at snort >.itirgs in order to avoid leaving
•he young girls to their young lo: dorr so thrt they would not Over-erort
the selves. This '-ps a purely ueiicnl activity rnd this vos^art of
the reason vhy 1 later beer... t early ne-.ber.

V- Vc-ll, efter y.u finished y:ur ctudie? and :ft.r y u finished
ur e-Tn: inrti.rc, vherc did you orcctice rs r diet r end vcre y u indc-


C47S


C' A-.r 47-*-li-5-IE::-i-:cehcc (Int. Von Schoen i Zurtz)


pendent in thet position?

A. I vas never independent during j^r ectivity. Jlrst I vert beck
to the Physiological Institute in Bonn under Professor Ibteke. I re¬
named there e rather short tine since I had to continue ny clinical
treining. Then I vent to the sedlcel clinic in Duesseldorf under Pro¬
fessor Sbent. I decided to“specialiso m skin disease* end study et
the sicin or derat-logical clinic. I vent to tho dcratologiool clinic
at Duesseldorf end conpleted 07 eoecitlixe Irriniag thero.

As I sold. I never worked indeoendeatiy. I had the Position of n
voluntary assistant there Shen there vero bopo financial difficulties
for ne and since =y father vea seriously ill for n long ti-.e I v,.t f-.- c -.«
to earn uy living =yeelf. There vas no possibility f, r ro at the ci'nlo
to receive a posit*, n under the budget and so I looked for an -or posi¬
tion. I vas offered a position that soc-.ed favorable to nc and I v«.nt
to Rcvonsbruck to the vouon's conp. That vas in Itoco .bur of 19-C.

Bocaufte being a v.^an, the difficulties there vero incrcr singly groat
for -.0 rnd I tried to change ny place of work. In Juno of 15- ? I
finally succeeded in that and then I ere e to the snnrt.riun of the Red
Cross under Professor Cothnrdt and worked there until the end of the
vur.


5480


1


.• S3 you wore a specialist ir. skin disc scs, and venereal
disc, sc s?

Yon.

”:v was it th t ir. 1 $W> yre went to tko conccr.tn ti-n cn.p
E. .vcnnbrucl:? Kv v s y.ur ttonti»c drawn to t ia?

— I;;: uo'ic-l Jodkr-d I ar.w *o» na&ou&cxronfc that a spocinllst

fir clrir. 'cd vcncre-.l diseases was wanted in wirier. >n tr-ir.ln, c :n,
t..c flannel 1 ros'ibilitics v r- rather f v r Ic, the c . v n near
3arli:i, n<*. I dcci'ci to w rk there.

.• S.c ft.'.rcrtiaoxcr.t in t.c .ic -1 pcri>ftlc."l referred ti r.

wi_a*s training c -.t». "avo y u in ?.- vr-nobruc : . a w. in’.encr.dont
doctor, nd '-..c-t wore ;\u- t ska thcr./.

... : In r/<t kr.iwr. >f t..«. c - ocf -re. I lc:mod *.f it nly t£'on

I r. 4 t..e nnnmace n oat in the jx^or. t t ti , t t.. v out 1
tl.jre We70 r.b*ut three t. uanr.t vx.»r. r.\ t/.o 1 r,r,sclo.. It J o »: ;io
v~.'o a u ltc orlorly. I was never iniorondor.t there. I v a under t.':„ i ry¬
ot ructl :r.a if t.:o root physician. Hovov.r. .-.o loft uo freodar. to u rk
ns • like in ry own specialty. 3ut suddenly I f usu :yaelf on ; ill-
t-r staff. I w~s not able t '.Just t this at firnt. It took wockn

until I I; • tec-v o used t it. T.:o nd.dr.istr tivo find diociollr.-r;-
...ttors 11 went t..nu r. ..i it-ry c.-nnol*. I vo utoi'.o of the i'i-
6 "-ry i.VT-ds.' tiln; I v s r.ot wonted her*: ~nd I wit-drew ti :.,v owr.
i>: ocirlizo;’. field. I h-d r.i help fr t..e Ser j» iruroca. I wtrkcd Only
witli ;..o prisoner nurses w.'.o help'd uc ia :y omr. us wirk. 7-oca
pric no* nurnea were c 1 .osed if ftoctoro, iniroos, ;.;vl rtuoi.tc. There
" fc r. J lca, Crocks, C-r. .:n • fir.-11;-. Huselrnc. Those workers
^ r. i -nod by orders. I. ft ho .r. • b- i.-r._:* •• -rl: 1 :. t. c:it 1 .

?-c; ;*.k cl: r,.v of taa or.bul vtory patients, nd I li- . the ir.-or.'ssi&n

•

e.icy llkvd vorkin,; witl: They saw the c:-.or..-us d-j,-cr f r

t..cir .oliticc l riamorc place there %rr.6 ».a on r ius :ur.t of
v*r.orc-.l diner.ccs. In t!j! M f : Susacldorf clinic r sever I- bo nnny
fr-c. c cca as ir. t -ia c-. j. 7't i:d.y venereal ir,e '.s*c, but If rldr.


1


S3 you wore r spccirlist ir. skin diseases, and venereal
disc..scs? .

Toe.

> wr.s it th t in 1°40 yvu wont to the concentration c am
a-.vcnojruck? How v s y.ur ttocti >r. firevr. to t is?

... Ir. ; ncdic-1 Joufnel I sr.w in nnnounocnont thnt n nrocirdist


t..c finane! 1 possibilities v re rr.thor f v.r.lc, the c .w s n.rr
Berlin, . iv". I dcci'ed to \r rk t.tero.

.. The idrertiacncRt ir. t..c ..cdlc’1 peri-dice! ref. rred to r.
wo ia'a traiain.: c ’faro y u in Rrrcr.cbruc : / 3 rx indeneniont
doctor, Jid \\ux were y ur t ska there.

... I h.r.->t known -f t..o c 7 before. I lcirnod of it :.ly whoa
I r_-d t..o nan >unce; teat in the pr$or. t th- t ti t ti;o end of l^i-O,
tl.jro were r.b'ut three th Aisr-n*. vo::.n -r-l the 1 pr-ssi-v. it a-'o or. .10
was"quite orderly. 1 ?>• r.ev«.r inlcjo:_ior.t there. I \t 0 undor t.:. i:~

0tractions of t.:e joot physician. However, no loft ..3 freedw: to v rJc
no l like in rqr own spoci Ity. But BUddonly I f und .yaelf on : 414 -
•- jt staff. 1 ir*a not nilo t AJuat t thin r.t first. It took woolen

until I k • bcco. c used t'- it. T..o nd-ialatr tivo aad disciplinary

•

.. .ttoro 11 wont t..rou h . i it.ry c.e-nj.ols. I vo utai'.o of the l*i-
^•vry organisation; I w .a not wanted hor v ; '.id I withdrew to sy owr.
opocirlizod fiolfi. I :. d BO'hulp fr t..o Scr u. nttrooa. I worked orly
with ...o prisoner nuroos who kaT,/Od no in :y onor as word. T-.oso
prisoner nuraoa von couponed of doctors, nuraeo, *.n’ rtudonta. There
vre poles, Crocl.s, G-r as. rad, finally, 2 nosinne. Thoeo vorkors

. i.. th .. a-it 1.

7 .. C-- ;» > eh- r,;e of tr.c onbulntory patients, - ad I Iv . the i;.pr. anion
- l hey liked working vitk ;x. They saw tr.c cr.or..*us d-n-cr f r *

1.. cir political -riaoners since there wr.o in cr. r us -- .art of
venereal diser.scs. In the bi f : Busucldorf clinic I never - v so nnny

* r - r '. ecsos ns in t is c".~. rot only vencro'l disersus, but Iso r'.dr.


3 -^Fi w ..“CEy-i5-&-3i'-lii (Von Schocn)
Court ro. 1.


dicer, ecs were vide spread. I mowed the nurses t.:e diagnosis .and dis¬
cussed therapy with thou. i$r relationship with thou was nn official
ono, but I always ualntainod a clinical tone with then. I believe it ia
caaiost to understand ay work if I briefly doscribo n vorkin dry. flic
patients vi re tre tod. ncdicines wore rfven, tho drossin :s wore liod,
ai patients where the diagnosis h-d not been cleared up I ,rv<j *v>point-
uents for the afternoon. _.t certain hours in the . .ornia. there w-.b
treatuont of syphilis casos. fc.is lasted until the 1 tc .:our? '.f tic
. ornin;;. ?hc rest of the uorning J spent \ ini tin; the wrda. I:. t o
afternoon service bo,:u\ at tv» thirty but usu-lly Z h- ’ ; ot-rt - ;•; y
sinco tho nuCber of patients t' 'be tr. • ted • to be oj i.. i • i i
1 W:c. rirot 1 could . t h-rilc .re ti.- n ui it;; ir nc
thon I looked t tho spoclal c n. o. do-liclng -.per tio. o • v o
'ut, ad 2 -lao looked at the now preparations ir. or or -v 1 <* •

trgion and to bo nblo to isoL-to t..c peoplo if noccn? Si r o. *

it i ■ rkii I ox cu d n od t to ci,-..ty propar ti ns ricroso • 1 •

Hero I iT-lr.od insight for the first ti.:o i:,t-> how ,:re-1 tho aunber of
■kin and venereal cases is in such ca p. J was lr. cont;at with t.io
of uy Eusnoldorf clinic in order to koop nysolf inforued or. t. iu.

He also advisod no so that I should introduce tho :v-nt offectivc
therapeutic ncthods hero, and he <lviood uc in cases o'.-lch occurred
during tho war especially • nd ich we had not te. wn beforo.

If I ur. .orotand y u correctly, y ur ctivlty. in othor words,
consistod of the tn.nt .cnt of people with skin diso.asv8 and voneroal
diseases?

... Yes; . nd then I tr. ted cv. ryir.o wr.o r.6kod no fir it.

* How, in 1940, vl.ca y m Joined t.ic enup, was to general cv.-
itior.E ther., and, “hove all, t.ie c nditior.o as re rds h;.ier.o?

m

t the beginning tlx cr-.j. h-d nb nit three t.. us"i.d wor e:;, -nd
ir.c irur.eer gmdunlly lacre sed iu t..c course of ti a. In ti.e bcviunln,-
tee ccup h d ab ut thro.- ti: ua-r.d wo.acn, nn the m b r n 'tally ir-
craxcd in the course of tiix. Ir. tho be.-iar-in it w r. I ni.-.t

sA'iv


Court


1 .


e-”, cr i sA n cla. Jheso wprostitutes end pw.-6on« uho hi f been con¬
victed provi UBljr. mere Here very few politic 1 prisoners at that
* ir -° ali^et at Jaws. Ia tnc course of ti-:c tfco nuiibors gradually
iacro oed; -.rd at re politic 1 prisoners, and nro foreigners, crate to
the c .aj and, of course, tho nusber of rida nr* venereal disoaso c sea
•.lao iacroraod gradually si th t the wirk hoc ;.c ,-ro ter ed ,:r« tor,
HO h'.d ti avoid control-a. Th, :r n,roseate of the fcocpit-l
w-ro tho no of a specialized practice. hc’Iclnoa, oiat.'UAt*, .ad
dross in. rs vere r v:\ilnb3a ir. - cqur.to cu ... tier.


54e3


3 April L7-A- -V-S-l—lsklcy (let. von Schoro ~
Court !:c. 1


Ikr..-, how -fid things proceed ir. subsequent y-.- .rs?

A As I have already described, the nurber of inaatas increased

-raduelly end th- number of otients .also increased* As I have already

s'! , they wore not only political prisoners but also criminals and very

many of tiicru I ras forced to keep a certain distance. This ras ordered

and it was also necessary. I tried to take a middle path here. I nevo

•

ussiatanco to everyone who asked no for it; .and I treated ever "one
equally; and I beUevo that the patients wro quito satisfied with the
Coro I gave thcn«

I vas. aided by the prisoner nurses. I ras on rood tor. s with
then. I had no help freer the Oerrnn nurses, Ih - hr .1 no interest in
qy specialty. Perhaps there was too nxcb • ox* in y deportment, They
proferrod to h.lp ry collar, uos; end they work .d In the 1'her:ter: 1 , in
the pbartv\cy, or in the cforatin • room. I had to rely on nya If ftr 11
ny groat incunt of work, ’{jr coUoftguos lived and acted according to
other principles- which wore foroi -n to rn>, .hich I did not know fr-n
the clirdc, and which I roj ctod*

I happened to bo told onco buforo I went on lunvo vhun I was
taking care of ny patients, "I eupposo you imagine that the hospital
can’t got along without you." I had to listen to this as a doctor ful¬
filling ry duty, whon tho patients noant everythin;- to ao. Tho nurses
and doctors wore an SS cliquo who '.-ore hostile to no. I was art wanted]
and I did not feel at ho-i. yon - th.::.

It was different wh n Prof. Oobhcrdt and Dr, Fischer cano to the
camp. Here .a iin I wco workim 1th the head of a clinic uni a clinic 1
assistant; and they recognized no as ward doctor. This v;.as tho clinical
cirdo to which I was aocustonod; and I look i to th a for h.lp cs a
womn and cs a doctor, and not to the . ooplu t hose f*> linrs t. ' actions
lid not corrosion!. In the :res-\aca cf Prof. Gobhardt m! ~r* -lecher tho
Cairo doctors tried to koop busy; but this caau to :i and In c soon
as the non fron ffohenUchon had left.

Q Did ycjr activity in the ca-t of Ravens!ruck b_-canj con •ral


tr you?


3 April U7-A- TD-l6*2-SlaJclay (Ir.t. von Scfaocn & Kurts)
Court !ib. 1


A I tss supposed fee fc.l wenen who wars ir. custody here; on
I was to protect the political prisoners :r:r. contarioc. For the sake
of tho patients I tried to stay In the creep and r.ot to escape for
selfish reasons. I was able to help individual patients. I could not
chnnea the cnr.p as a whole. I could not help anyone to bo released; and
I had no disciplinary authority. So I tried to hold out. Bat conditions
bocaro constantly worse; and it was no lor . >r possible t- :o on*

Medicine bogan to becono scarce so that nolle ! cor a bocar.e :»ro
difficult. Then thorc wore difficulties ir. ettin • cut for I wo* obli¬
gated to serve. I tid not knew be* to got oat* The only ehanco vas viicn
Profo Gebhardt canoj and I asked Idn for help.

0 At thj borirudn.’ of your, examination you described that in
1910 you went to Rnvonsbruck on tho basis cf an advertisonont in a
scientific periodical. Then, in othor 'or'.s, you went voluntarily?

A Yea.

• Q rut you also said vhon you nnsr.vrod uy last question that you
woro obligated to servo?

A Yes.

Q I concludo fron that that la tor on you could not leave tho
canp without having special ^mission first?

A After * short tine, perhaps thr.-o nonth3, I had be. n obligated
to sorvoj and I ms not able to got out any Ion r»

Q In 19 Jj 3 when you actually left tho ca .p. y u lid that beoauso
of Prof. Gobhardt, who holpod you '1th tho aithorities concerned?

A Yes.

Q Eoth Dr. Qobhardt -nd Frof, Fisc her talked ab'ut th; sick bay
before, the sick bay which was in the Rnvonsbruck Can; . Can you confirm
what they said?

A Yes. The hospital consisted of three barrages. One tho
clinic and two woro wards. The hospital was constantly b in eftl.ar, od as
th- nurbar of patients increased. Tho barracks hich '.as us ad as a dirdc


5485


3 April !7-tW.TD~l6-.3-cl2kle7 (Int, von Schocn 4 Kurtz)

Court Ifo, 1 •

for cut patients had a drbssing rosn, -a synocclc rical exanination reon,
and X-r ay root:, a laboratory, a phnroicy, and so forth. The wards had
single bods and s na il and large roons. The beds were -ade up with
sheets, Tho -tients wore riven uadorwoar 0 Tbs barracks had central
heating, ruraxln? hot and cold water, baths; and wo also had a stall -iiot
kitchen* There were prisoner‘barsos tokin caro of the patients, Poles,
Czechs, and so forth, as I said before,,

Q I now core to the sulfononido a orinonts which are ; art of
the piosQcutior.3 indictncnt. Those ojpcri: nts boran in tho* aimer of
19U2j and I on now askin: you low was it that you yourself cone into
contact with those oxporinor.ts, and rhat did you think at tho tino?

A .. short tino before the export, .er.ts boran, I was told by
the post physician — that was at that tiro Dr. Schilausky — that I
was to evacuate a few of ny roons, Hu lid not five no the reason
at that tirao. Shortly boforj tho expo risen ts boran, Prof, Cebhar it and
Dr. Fischer caro r.ith tho post physician and sorao other rentlcror., but
I cannot rerwnber who they wore anyroru* They inspoctod tho rcorj. Prof 0
Qobhordt told Eu that experiments w&ro to bo carried cut on wonon who
had boon condemned to doath, I was aatonishod; but ho said that those
experiments had boon ordered by a vary hi.;h authority; that tho Stato
had ordered it; and that everything was lugalt and that tho ; croons oon-
cornod who had boon conderro ! to doath would bo ,'ivon a chanco to bo
pardoned* Ho also stated that the experiments would not bu dnnr.orcus*
Aft-u* I had thoug ht it over and considered that they wore to bo
conducted by Prof. Gobhar It — whoa I Jed not known personally '.:ofore, it
is true, but who3o reputation I knew because of his bit; clinic — I said
tr njo! df, ’’If Prof. Gob hard t carries it out, it will probably bo ri,;ht, n

0 4

«nd, booidc 3 , -o was a chanco for tho -cnen of boin. -Virdonedi and,

’

finally, tho axp nts would not bo Janrcrcus.

0 loro y-u put into ccntqct with those exporfsur.to by ar. outward


factor; in other words, that is to say, by the- fact that tho patients
••ore housed in rocos near the operation theatre and th t these rers were


3 April 1;(Ir.t, vcn Scboen Sc Kurtz)
Court 2fc, 1


a part of your station?

A Yes, There was no connection ii th the- other stations at the
tiruj otherwise I irould probably have learned nothin,-: about it,

Q Were you present at any of the conferences which were hold
before the experiments began anong doctors who took part in the expert-
iwnts, or wore ycu present "at ary of the conferences connected vith
the experiments?

A !!o, I had to take care of ny da if os as the doctor in charge
of tho ward and nothing else*

Q So ycu did not hoar what tho object cf th-.-se c .afer-ncGO vero
which Dr, Gobhardt desc.ibod hero in this oeurt and which h_- hide*. vdth
Kinnlcr, Dr, Gravitz, and other peoplo?

A No,

1 Did ycu take part in selecting cxporinontrl subjects?

A No.

Q Eut you know that tho oxporLJor.tal cub Joe Is w c ro Polish
wonon sentenced to doath and who woro to be perdono! afterwards?

A Yos, I had no knowlodgo of tho legal situation; but I know
that tho wonon cane from a block which uas ospocially ruardod and tlwt
theso wonon wore suppled to bo condemned to doath because cf (Dpicnaf.o
or saietldng like that, Also, wo woro not allnrod to -o nut of tho
corn to work but had to ronoin in the carp, I also kr.es that they woro
to bo pordonod if they 3urviv l od tho experiment::, I absotvod or., ccsc*
whore a patient in a oulfonard.de 3erioc was actu-lly parJan< !. hoi! r
the others Wuro pardonod I do not knew,

Q In this ona case >hich you aro thinkir. of, w ul • you liko to
say that this exporin-jntol person was released?

A She wa3 par lone d and at the seno tine as her Gcriarizatdcn
released,

Q Eut you were not told what fom tho pardon slvuli take ir.

.-oners! and you thou ht that they culd not be execute -?


5487


3 A?ril Ii7-^ATD^L6-5-ELa}a^r (T nt -/or. Schoan & Kurts)

Ccurt Sc. 1

A - 63 .

Q 7!hor. the experiments started, did Prof. Gobhordt or another
doctor tell you chat were the problem of these experiments and how
the experiments should bo carried out in detail?

A !to.


5488


April 3 HK- 17 -l-Ga 1 iagber (Int. Von Schoen-Xurtz)

Court No. 1

i Did you yourself have any scientific interest or any
other interest in the carrying out of experiments which
cane up?

«. It was not in ny field of interest.

1 I or.ce again coco back to your position in the caap.
You were not independent, you told us before?

A No.

•i <iuite obviously you were undor the Post doctor, and
there was psrhap 3 a second cor.p doctor, is that correct?

4% Yes, I was under the Post physician, but ho left
me a greet doel of froodom in cy own field.

4 Now whet was your activity or. the a .Ifonumido
oxporir.onts?

A actually I was only at work as tho station doctor.

I had to 3 oo that tho putiont 3 would bo given their
•nodloin© regularly, and that they wore nursed. I was
prosont when the droo3ingu wore ohanged, end in general
I conduotod nyself according to whit Professor Dobhardt
had told no: "Nurse according to our directions and do
not worry about anything else", end I tried to do so.

Q How were tho operations prepared which booant
nocossary for tho ;xperir.unt3?

xvs I already sold, as ny duty as ward physician,

I received a list of tha patients fra tho Oucp administra¬
tion, and I oxuni nod then, cs is customary before any
operation in which un anesthetic is nooossitfy, I lsokod
at the skin, and examined the ho_rt and lungs. I also
saw to it that the patients w-ro bathed; that thoy weru
ohavod before thu operation; that the toapornfcure v.?s
checked, end that they wore, given morphiau fc-fero the
operation.

4 Did any experimental persons complain to you or

? !


548C


•oril 3 -.- 3 X- 17 - 2 -G:_ilcgh.r (Inc. Vcn ochoo-n-Kteta)
Court :io. 1


resist you?

« No, I ..d tho feeling that they wore satisfied with
rey troatewflt. I was working under e clinic chief, end all
the drugs, and so forth, necessary v «£3 brought froti H *hon-
lychcn. 0::o could roally work in tho clinic here.

1 Did you yourself carry out operations in connection
with experiments?

A No, I was a Domctologist.

-"i You never carried out any op r. cions yourself?

.* Ho.

i what were your t-.sks ..l't_r tn-, op ;rr.t3 e.is?

» i: ;y I 3k you to repeat your quuati,on.

4 what w as your task after the oper.cio:., :.u .t did

you do during th«. operation?'

« I hod no spcoiel task hero. Go ;tL\-s I cJ. .ini sc-red

0

tho anesthetic, and in general whon a patient w :s opor.td
upon I saw to It that tr.c next patient was given aneath sie.
This ulwoy3 hod to bo dono very quickly, sinoc t;.«- operation
was a very short one. Then 1 hulpod to apply a dressing,
or a pinstic cast, and souctinos I put on a lanp. Tho
nothod of tho operation was pointed out to r.o so that if
nooossary I would be obla to looser, tho dressing, and not to
got into tho area of tho wound. Of oour 3 '-, tho physicira
said I was r.c r jly an assistant.

1 what worn your activitl_s nftor tho operation?

.. I had to sco to it t.ict tho :;cuioin. was ad iniet rod
at tho proper tir.o, and I ..ad to act ccr fully c.- to

instructions of r>of ; s5or Gobfanrdt inu Doctor * iscii r. I
also checked the dressings for pressure and o . sti . I
supervised tho nursing, I Saw to it t.-... c„ 1 . . r in -a
proper position. I also watch-d ov r * ti. t cli..lc-lly
end I saw to it that the blood tests oi 1 aria t-:sc. w r


~pril 3—.-BK-17-3-Gallag:'.r (let. Voa 5cLote-l-lurtz)
C urt 2io. 1


taken. I :lso nsde ch-rts, and I was present when the
dressings wore checked. I had tho feeling that the patients
liked it if I was present whon the dressing was chcngod.

Did you work independently on those occasions, or
wore you here again dependent or. Professor Gobhardt and
Dr. Fischer's orders?

A I never worked independently. I always adhered
strictly to instructions of Profcs r J/ohirdt aid Dr.
Fischor.

How wore the woaon treated who in co lection with

the oxporinents srero housed in the sick b .y o cu r

.. They were in snail roods. Ehoy had s ! ..;i . . :*

With shoots, and thoy wore glr l thing.. • . » r

given batter food, find as I said at the o .ginrii g, y

wore cared for by prison-r nurses, ;:ostly Poles a:.! Zz cl. ;

and thoro was a night guard. The tr .otrunt was i clinic 1
one. They lacked nothing. It thoy neodud vit.ssins, tho
vltonins woro brought Trou Huhenlyohon. Whatever they
needed was brought.

t Thu witness ./lndzka 3 uid that wor.on operated c.a
wore treated only on the first days after tho operation,
and that afterwords they wore n-slcted. .<h .t would y u
like to say about that?

a Thoy wore undjr a constant ' .die i
rjyort3 were sent to lioh nlych-n. .'..on there vv r ay
ainor changt 3 in tho ca3u, a ruport v;a3 sunt to i.iyc: u,
and Pvofossor Gt.bhrrdt an -r. riser.. r c . I r . r
that it even vary,frequently happened oa ounir; . I for .y
part saw to it that fc!u. sru s and ... lici- c r ... ii.i.'t.r-
cd at tho proper tin .

dr lags, and I also had nursed; v- sic in ;■ ... a:- li t -•

S giver. Lit ravenously, I vl lr.lst red \C’S. If er.i --- .at


-•-oril 2-^-B:;-17-4-Sallasi'.cr (1st. Von Schoea-£-rtzl
Gv-crt No. i


Ionvo this for a nurse. The general care was under prisoner.
nurso3, pricerily Polish prisoners.

d .’hat do you know of the clinical progress in th'
various groups of -xporin-nts, and vrh.it can you say about
the deaths’?

- I can not judge the results in th individual coses.

I know only fren cuse3 frai -.ugu3t art .1 Ococb~r ti. ro
vroro no special dovilopacnts. Progress was like in tho c.;so
of an obscass. I Novonbor th- situation changed a little.

I was rather frightened. Professor ^ebhardt and i>r. Pisohor
L-incdi .toly stopped all th: uspurif—nts, and took a great
interest in the sick patients. X*oy woro operated on. Thoy
Wera given the necoss ry drugs. Thoy wor L’e.ohills d in
piaster casts. They were given blood gr:r.si*usioii3. They
wore given g..r.gorous 3orur.. -vorytfcing .ossiolc was done.

U,.fortunately, thoro were throe deaths, although those
people had bjon given exactly the SQTw treatment, r.J
everything possible h .d boon done for then, Infortun toly
thoy died. I was ocllod when thoy died. Haiti vv .3 not .


quick death. Diroctly following the operation were con¬
vulsions. In ny work r.t the sar.e time i ..ad uui-bor of
other seriously ill poti.nts, end Lt Is posslblo tJ. t sorto
of thea died.

i T.;o witness D.ido, who has boon hero bo for- this
court, unswured tho questions of the Prosecution by n ying
that you had been quite rj good doctor. I would liho now to
ask you, did you treat the witness D.,i:„ e-tter than any

other person? • ^

A N . I tro-tod thea. ail in the 3 u-u w ay, a id I 3 "-


help fir3t to tho person who needed it ao.-.t urgent
. You saw tho affidavit of tl. wituesu 1: rg
Mydln, which I read before, -re th st .t ;_nts by


r« te

th t


5492


~tril j-llcghcr (Int. Von Schoen-Xurtz)

Court No. 1


witness correct, and did you perhaps gave particularly
good trontment to that patient, preferring her to others?

« I can act ronccbor this person. Of course, I would
recognize her if I saw hor.

i But you gave r.o different treatment to her?

No, I treated all patients in the suae way.

; One witness said that you r.lt her in the face when

•

sho woke up fro:, her anesthesia, is that true? I would
like to add here that Professor Goe'.:..rdt ^xpr^ss^d his
opinion on the general question here: tlmt it i3 quite
a frequent thing for a patient to woke u,>, rnd h ve a
wrong inurossion, or for., a wrong L-pruasior.?

•i I certainly did not riistrent r.ny one, evd oertuinly
not any ono undor nn unesthosi .. But I hav . .Ire-.dy s. id
thGt I took groat puin on behalf of a pit lent, -nd th-.t

4

it is possiblo that whero a person had boej. oporutoe
upon, and was coning to again, that I {ushod h r low. r
Jaw and perhaps shook her for her to breathe. It is
a well known fact that o patient reaonbers that person
and misinterprets what i3 being don to the: .

<> Did Professor Gebh-rdt visit quite frequently in
oor.noction with the 3Ulfonncide experiments; was h. present
when the dressing was ohonged, ar.d the operations wore
carried out?

Yes.

. And what was your impression regarding his uttitud-
towards tiio experimental subj-cts?

.. I frequently saw Professor Gebhardt whoa dressings
wore changed. Ho was very conside r at , and
by tlv. cJic 1 ; . 2-id n t - - •

express pain, an anesthetic was iix.~di. tely .vi l.iist .r d
The face was covorcd. The wounds wars cnro^ully t ken caro


5433


Vo:: Sc:.o-r.-Kurts)


..pril 3-.-.-BK-17-6-S-1i"r„r (1st.
Court No. 1


of, and ho was vary careful about sterility. The patients
w.ro pushed to the dressing rood, that was the clinic stylo
to which I was used to in Duossoldcrf.

. Th~ operations thoosdvus were usually carri-d out
by Dr. Fischer, wore th*.y_r.ot?

— Yos.

'i How did ho treat the patient? Do.you know of any
ocaplnint on the part of the axp, ri:: .j.tul subject aofur
os the patient was concerned?

« I knew of no co- plaints or. the part of the uxperi-

ocntal huann persons ...ad h- was oc.,?idcrnte towards the

poti-j.nta, and I h-d the i .prossions th t it was v.ry

difficult for hit: for reasons of kuaanity to c rr; out

thoso exponents. I nev.r heard any cc .plaint :'r-,. tho

patient. He was always friendly, ilthough he lid not

talk to the patient Very nuch. Professor Cr w bhnrdt us

wo11 as Dr. Pisch-r afterwards were at-ontive on the poti;nt

They wore not ceroly operated upon, but they ;.vrj giv.n

proper attention until the healing was ccnpletj. If there

was .or.y dr.eor, Professor Oobhardt .nd Dr. Fischer c r.o

reguL riy, »<hon wo had those three deaths, and when 3ono

other pr.tlunt3 were seriously ill they .*

•

Then pcrhnp3 in D,cor.b..r th.ro ;*.r. thro. patients who
wero out of any danger, end I was given instructions of
whet further tre tnant they wore to lx. given, -’j.is w s
chronic sapor ;tion. I.went on lc.-.vo, and x turn 1 th.s
throo patients ov-r to the post phy 3 ici.n. La the opri';
of 1943 those patients wjro still und r j..ul:jit trj.ti,_nt.

I continued to tr-.et then, but there w e r* coosity to
ask for help fror. Hohonlychcn, -Ithaui. * a -:1c. h v
sc at any tin.. Thor- wjj r.o gon-ral illness i.d
t saperr ture.


54S4


'-pril 3--.-BK-17-6
Court llo. 1


C-'-.ll—:-r (Ir.t. Vor. Sch65::-Km tz)


of, and ho was v_ry careful about sterility. The patients
v^ro pushed to the dressing root:, that was the clinic stylo
to which I v « r 3 used to in Duossoldorf.

Th~ operations thooselv^s wore usually carried out
by Dr. Fischer, wore-they not?

*- Yos.

"i How did he treat the patient? Do you know of any
ocnplnint on the pert of the ox pari:: -ntal subj-ct 3of.\r
Q3 tho patient was concerned?

A I kn-.w of no cu.'plair.ts on the p rt of the oxceri-
ncntal hiuac.n persona aid. h- was oc.v;itfcr~.t.. towards tin,
patients, and I had th„ i .prossio.ns th t it w v.ry
difficult for hi:*, for reasons of huu-.aity to c rry out
those oxp irinonts. I nev.r h-'.rd any oa.pluint frtho
patient. He was always friendly, although he lid not
talk to the pat ion t Very nuch. Prof jesor Gobhurdt us
woll -s Dr. Fisoh-r afterwords were*at entive on the potlent.
They wero not norely operated upon, but they yjuro given
proper attention until tho healing was caiplutj. If thoru
was ->ny d meor, Professor Gobhurdt end Dr. Fischer o..r.o
r-jul rly. When we hr.d those throo deaths, t.nd when sono
other pntior.t3 w-.-r. seriously ill they
Then perhaps in Ducor.b-r th.ro w-r; three patient3 who
worn out of r.r.y d .ng.-r, end I wu3 givui instructions of
whr.t further trentnont they were to tx. given. This w s .
chrcsic sopor .tion. I-went on lc ivo, *.;;i x turn S then
tliroo patients ov^r to tho post physician. In tn. oprir.g
of 1943 those patents w.-ro still under aj/ottlunt tr.: .t:..nt.

I continued tc trust then, but thure was n ocssity to
-sk for holp fror. Hohonlyohun, ilthouch * a ulc. h v lone
so r.t any tine. There w .s r.c gar. ral ill..„ss - i.I
tcr.peruturc.


5494


Court Sc. I

3 Apr 47-A-18-l-aSX-Sl.Isi (Int. Vos Schoea)

* pril 1542 1 the patients once nore end there vu just a

very snail amount of supervision. end the oatienta were not suffering
,-reat pete any nore. I inferred Profess or Gebhardt of this. There was
09 0UMtlOa oi w furtfcer treatoent. baths, or nassage since this was
infectious seperetion aadjhe only treetnent thr.t could be given v, ;8
olntnect and dressing.

^ Dld you youp8elf hcve «bything to do with the scientific evalu¬
ation of these experiments?

A. So.

<i. Professor Gebhardt and ?r. IIsober said thr-t ,n 24 Hay 19--3
et the third nesting of the c-csulting sc cislirts doctors r*.ry> rtod or
these experiments; that is to so;.-, to the 2:ilit:-ry Doctors Aerdony m
Berlin. Vore you present at that tics©? Did you hear the retorts and
locturos?

A, So.

^ In tho course of this trial Dr. Stunofoggcr was .entionod fre¬
quently. Did you yourself know Dr. Stu ofegger?

a. Iran about October 1942 until the Soring of 19,3 he wio in
Ee. vo ns truck repeatedly.

k- Did you yourself have anything to do with IT. Stunpfcgger'c
experiments?

A. The experiments were Quite different frea the ©ulfoaitolde oxpcrl-
.:ontB. Tr. Stucoftggor cone alone. c« not with Professor Ocbhr.rdt
or Or. rlcchor. I, eB n vrrd doctor, had virtually nothing tc do with
those cxceri .ents. Pr. Stuapfeggor generally ar.de tho probations hin-
aeif; that is. ho oxrained the patients before tho accretion, or it nay
hrvo boon thrt I had exa-ined s >r.e of theu in the- Su-c.,r for the sulfonn-
niie expori-onts, but they were cot operated uoor.. I cennot raru-.ber
e.ractiy. I did not assist bin et the operati n. In the vrrd I did not
r.c vc ouch to do with these -meool© since they were in nlrstor carts and
^re able to get up very soon. «y duty vxs rtrcl” t; fee t . it ir. the
:irst ftv days whether there vss pressure or c r--ectl.n. and I rlso had


courti

2 At 4?-A-l8-2-£Bt-Bi-lsi Cat. Y.s Sckcec)


to edainister norphiua la the first fev days. There vr.s no teapercture
pad the ortiests fcerdly seeded aay help. They vere able to return to
:r« block very s on. The X-ray checks acd the rcnovol cf the olneter
casts Dr. Sturspfegger took over hiuself. I know nothing stout the
operation in detail. Dr. Pitcher and Pr.fearor Sobhardt I never saw
here. Dr. Sturpfegger wxked alcae.

^ 18 fcr M tho ®x^rin«atal subjects vere concerned vhlch Tr.

e

Stu'jpfeg^er used, wre they Polish voaen vi.. hod been sentenced t dcath7

A. Yes.

<v *nd it v.uld apacer thnft they vere also nf.ri.ncc7

A. : cs, at least es far ao I vas or e«at.

“ The vitnesf Hedzka Mid that you, as d-ct-r. in tho cpj.c, hrd
the possibility of savin* those.tlx vor.cn vfco, it is allowed, *tre Bhot>
Did you really hew that possibility, prided, ;f curse, thrt you fcrd
knovr. about all this?

A. I had nothin* to do vlth the r. rul: r X-ray c atr.l. ~ r . Stu- y
f » dp did, that and I did not lecrn nb.ut tho incident end i h: - a.

0

disciplinary authority.

Q. You never hoard anythin* about this vhclo rffrir?

A. I learned of it only hero.

And, tftor the trial here, you thought ell the uorsoas vho
■urvivod tho crocrizioatc wore really perd r.vd7

A. Y l8 ,

 VrrljU8 affidavit# it ie cleinci that in the ste er, Atn-urt
19<3, in the to-called shelter A the cep. ouerationt hrd been carried
.ut. Do you ka.v anythin* of such operations la the so-called ■Bunker"!

A. In June 19-3 I left the ce-u. I learned nothin* -fra eV.ut it.

I learned A It -nly here la the courtroom.

* Ir * thfc ct_ F * Sevens brock vere thcr-. ray. st.-rillzetl on croeri-
:en*.s carried cut, or did you ever hear anythin, cf or.ch rjncrlrentei

A. I kaov nothin* about arc/.

'* " v> yvu described tr the court yur ; etlvlty -r c d'.ct.r la


540 P


C.urt 3r. 1

3 A=r -.7-A-ie-c-ZEH-Biclsl (Int. V.' Schcen)


Savensbrucfc. You described this pctivithet you had to carry it cut
under difficult circumstance*, but previously you said yourself once,
in an affidavit - that is, thet in a few case* you gave injections in
ardor to shorten the suffering of certain oetients end in order tc make
death easier to t hem . Ev you recall that?

A. Yes.

I vill nov esl: y-u to describe to the court under 'hat circum¬
stances you administered this caring A death, easing of dying.

A. -his natter, vhich vns f -rnul; ted s horribly in ty off 1 davit,

I discucsed vhon I ''lb interr-gated in the British ce. - at Prdorborr.,

and I smoke of it voluntarily T/eelf. After I '■r.z ouecti r..d rb'u* the

sulfonsaldo orperlmcnts, I *rs rclecd t- steal: ebout general conditions

In the ennp and particularly ab.ut the hygienic conditions in the h*s~i-
I

tal. I tried to represent thing* as they were, «o I orocrioneid the:.

I had to point out -my things vhich cee-.ed to brd and inr dccum'.o.

•

I cxtrecoed .my criticism rr.d tnmositi.n rad I pointed ut the *ncclol
difficultly vhich confronted me, beccuru in contrast to all the SS
personnel I vac ouitc le-lntod, and in the beginning I tried in cases of
emergency to holm tho mrtionto vith the thought of tho suffering vomer,
vho verc mriooncr* and sick. I also ecid that at th/it tino - it vould
be in 1241 and tho beginning of 19-.2 - I still believed that for the
sake of these patients I could not ler.vc the earn for selfish rerowes
but that I v.uld fulfill my duty in o better manner if I stayed vith
these prtiontc ir. the eemo. “he interr .-nting officer then asked r.e
about otorilicetion measures ead the dep-rtetion A mris-ners. I voo
not able to give him any informetl ,r. -n thoc* subj. etc. IhJB he oooka
about the care vhich was given them rnd the medical measures in the erm-i
hospital. I described to him all the difficulties as far as ^ v C s able
to observe them, end I told about my grert vork, the -rent amount 'A
v rk in treating venereal diseases vhich endangered not only the cr'.oti-
tutes themselves but also the beet elements, the nc-litic'l ~r::onero, and
I t-Id them ab.ut my eff_rts r.:einst the insect meets and the resulting


5437


C'-urt 3c. 1

3 Apr 4?-A--lfl-4-£Bt-Biol§i (Int.Ycn Scfcocq)


•Icia diseases, and I also talked about ay work la the yards. I told
thon eb-ut tht size of the ward and ay =«gr worries in connection with
t 1 .-. vork here since it was iaroesible to send seriously ill OBtients to
6 kcepltal, sc that in the two year* there I ves et first able to treat
the cotienta jfcore and later only to nurse then; the nationts in the
final stages of .ne of the worst diseases o^einet which aedicinc is still
oovurless today - I aontioaei the cocwa fera ;f syohilis and cancer in
vcoen.


Ccurt 1

«cril 3-A-10-I-rJ3-.'-ic'jin-Vor. ocnoen s Kirtz.


Those diseases I considered so terrible because I fcnd
r.c c iportunlty to B ive any real assistance to t.ie c. tlonts
tfc *o fid because t:~ patients were so conoletely helpless
ir. tr.elr suffering. Tills will ; lvays remcin one of ay worst
ConovieS. Tnese cases were ouch core frequent ti.ore than In
tv. y other ..osoltal =nu I wes r.lone og Inst ril ti.ls fufler-
lng without being able to tarn to i< c..i-f chyeiciitn with
confidence onu I could not go to an! >ne .or ndvice.

For the final at ges of syonlli ’..ere w s no ..luicrl
cere, the jctlents who were u on&r: IV e -rf~rln^ froa n
coffiplicotio.i wit., their n.vvco a:v r.^r. ?n ;*t n-.-xnt for
their fora-r lives, They rs/.-d a. rcu- t dly to r.clp trie-
rnd to relwoao c.nea fros their :,rlng. The v;.tn
sufferific fr a rbdoxlncl c* nc.r in t.u fin 1 st~ 0 ea v*.ru
in n corno suffering. I a/.ou frequently whether they co-id
not ou Sent to c L. r t cr hospital, for the only rcaaiolw
tr.crapy, r die- treatment, but 1 v a tola thet this w o
-.iposalbio, Therefore, I hud to le-Vw tan wit., tr.u l'lsoner
□ursoa together vltu the r^st of the -5. ti.r.te.

a concur 1 d to .z lodorous secret! n8, v.-.lci: -vdo the
suffer* rig of the oationta .v,r. wors-. I w. a .auch i reseed
With the :r-Ir. -..nd t.As was increased by n robor-nce of the
disease itself, ivny.ef tr.e *> ti.r.C» 1- their physic 1 'nd
rental uistress ' s/.vd ue r.u le- ha with -e to u iVe t..e.a i.
lr.Joctior. to release fr - tr.e Ir = iffering.

At tnc oeginr.ir._ of ay or/. :-t .l- ver.3brueclt, in ll 41 r.d
tr.u begliuiin b of 1; 42, wnor. I s*' y ~ ur.g lector srw cl».rriy
f-r tr.e first tiuo now dlfflc.lt tr.u -udlc-'l profession is
nd v ich laces ~ s. s:r. vf re sec:: aifficult decisions,

I felt so clone c-c-.asu I n d no Id exdcrlwnc a -udlc. 1 person
he.ro t_ r.3K for .aviso * r.a I d h*d *t the ciir.ic ir.

Jus selforf. 1 hr vo bid aesovy of f leaves, so f uo i.-t


549S .


Court 1

rtpril 3-A-l3-2-hi^.aehan-Vc:: Schoen a Xirtr.

reacaber the nuaber of patients who wont throug h ay w.-.rd,
but 1 ho rscenber thet there wore err.y of tnea there, for
sura acre than ICO, bat there were only c few of them woo were
suf.'-jr'.ng unianglnnblo tnlr. 6 s ;.nd wno “lorded with at for
Eutbannsla. I r.-va already sold, this wns generally

patients in the final “Stages of syphilis or tn extended
cancer. Tne p tl.nts lay ther^ without rny possibility of
rid : nd w 1 ted for their painful dv.~.tif; They were r. Icture
of heart breaking alsury. I can still .:o-r t.xdr pie s
for help. In ay distress, I roseebered what .v s «ono In
n big clinic In suca cnaws, I rose-bared t:xt In a ..on
cnees, tne visa of the homeless sic/. person vva coxhlivd
with. I deddea or. sy own responsibility, - a uoctor, tc
rot in thw a se w. y md tn.r. I nsi.ud ty aedicnl auperior,
the cost h.iyslclrr. ma when i nrd r.le :jr:v.-l, I -..eat o oh
to the ale/, rooa, I stopped nil the drugo and tl.on Increased
the ura^s alleviating p. in. In n few coaoo, ;e*.v.aps foar
or five, I ant down by the beds of patients vr.o ... d asked
for r.elo and in the presence of t.io prisoner r.ur e I
I g-vo then "n intravenous injection so tnnt they would go
t ,o to slceo. I used Boryhlao and o zi.-.t Jr* I received fron
the cost oh;-sic Inn. In f_ur oi* five cases tr.o patients

wore suffering fr-— Into.stages of ? nllls or the 1. at
bt-fcOS cf : buoalr.nl cancer. These wooer, h: d described t:.»lr
suffering and their or Jr. to xe exactly nd they xeru e. r..cns,
who had expressly uaked a. to do this for thus. Ir. this
..opoleas situation, In view of the nopcleea suffering, I
ula thrt end I .xr.d to -«ct ns I ale.


?500


3 Aprll-A—DJj-Z^-l-aieJdcv (Int. vca Schecn L- Kurts)
Court . 1


.. Hero in this situation which is sc difficult f r 3t undor oath,
I car. repeat r*i: ut these few patients in 19li and 19 1 2 that this was
~.:rcly •' caso -f euthanasia which was necessary frvta a a-liccl point
of vi-w; r>n i the patients hai asked =c for it. They had be _n in ay
ward f:r r. Icny. tics. They hai aska* xe repeatedly tc relievo them
frea their suffering. They were «* - non tc wh u I cculd talk well in
Gorxnn; and I ta certain that they trcr«. Gs.rn.-n citizens. I adrsini-
stcrod euthenasia r.ft.r consultin'' t$* .... ic-l sujx-ricr, the pest
physician and r.cc'.-r.iin; t-. ty wn cadi-1 ,VI. .t; -:vl I id sc in
the presence cf the prison _r nurse at the ti I u ht it necessary
to act in tliia w-y.

toon in th. course cf tine I LcefSe a r_ an! f. r- ejp'sel tc the
caap personnel at thv end f 1942 w: 19 4j, In l.n :cr h»-’ re¬
formed euthnnesia. Sine- the nurv' er cf patients hal iner.aeod *e—
causo the nual-or -f irvo-tos .f th- c«=p had ii.cr.isud, J was net a.le

A

tc maintain the p-rs.n'-l ruiUticaskip with the in’ivi !ml patients
which 1 c.nsiSor a preroqolsita f r -ny SOticn of this kind. /»t the
sa-nc tine ny distrust of the cccp set-up Tew. I w-s n t r\ 1- tc
leave thu cap rinco I hr 1 tc sorve here. 1 tricrtl tc treat the skin
and vcnwrosl diseases and, in addition, to help in the th.rapy f
th internal clinic.

S. it carve cUut that I r.vc 'iJ in -nly - f.w c-e-s; . ut l-.ttr
«her. I Jid n t knew the patients well . -rs n-ily -n* n l.n -t had
cenfidcnco in the coup, I r;: 1 n*-r did s:.

Q 1 v* ittcnticn h-.s ocn drawn t a wr n trrnilc.ti . Ii I
understand y u ccrr.ctly, yvu wish t say et the ’a ivi'n. tirt
prostitutes »nd ether anti-s.ci-1 -lur.onts suffer-J five. syphilis?

•> Yes«

C Cut net the politic?! prisoners as such?

* :: •

and it v -s ay duty tc provtr.t c.nta d n.

. hitn-.ss, ccr.c.-mi:. t; is Count 1 f th- .r-.t • ioh which


5501


3 ..priI-..-DJG-2C-2-21':<lcy (In-, vcn SciK.n -7 Kurts)
C.:urt i!r. 1


y;u ••’.re, charred, I rust ask y u n v which - f the tiur defend-nts
did ycu kn.w at the U.i'-nin; cf sulfenraide -xpeidner.ts in the
suro.tr f 1942?

.. I knew neng cf thee.

; You did n t knew Pref. C-cVhar’t r Dr. Fischer? Y u .-.ut
Fr f. Fischer and Fr f. Gchhcrdt when they c'..«. t ._-.Vens' ruck f r
these ex. oriaents?

.. Yos. I b rely knci . I

personally only when ho crac t. inspect th r ...

Q New, ny final CpuStion. Ini.';; tant •‘.cclcr

t' Fr»f. Guitar t in K:h nlychcn. H • .. t s _ - it '.a' shrt

*ert y.ur tasks in the Kchcnlych.a inztitutj.

The lifficultieswhich 1 h'd Ir. U;_ c ncentrhti . c-.r * hrve
already lcscriU-t; -r»‘ I wes trying . . 1 c* f . r.

1 alsc 31! I asked Pref, Oe tar’.t an r. Fincher t he -u; n i 1
ccnfi Od in Dr. Fischer -r.: '.;k^.1 hin » talk t. . :• :. hr t ri.Ut i
it. hen he visited th c ;. , i r f. G*. r. r :t t-Jkc-’. t. an; c r.~

sidored that this was n.t the ri ht place for ne r*s r i>a .
it csbo •- et ‘.hat with the -1’ f ?rcf. G« hh i It an.I Dr. Fischer I
1 ft Vvnstnick nr.? rent u Hchcnlycftcn.

I rcrkel thero at nr. assistant -'.lcl r in the •. ...n'r r.I chlld-

: • *8 «

C'UOV ill Dusceldi rf at the 'ere. t 1 y cliidc 1 h d crfcuS In th
children's ward. In nJdititn t: ay activity

-lsc tc cr.ru f_r tho children f f.aailias f ‘ho . .ru. 1 f i! h. i-

lych-.n. ... , th f :

refused trnnsi rts n nd truxtt-i

rutiaaUr that I carried ut - sc-’ics drive -n .'. Si Cyciijp ti t
Pref. Gut hr r t • .

sufferin ' fraa sc-'i.s infc *thu clinic for tr • - la she'rt, I
hdpea every*here *heru heir ;.-s n-e-ie! vx! . : i ■ • 1 . tc iv>.

it.


5502


vcn Sch<. n


Kurts)


(Inl -


Dr.. SEIDL: :t. President, I have n. further questions at .this
point.

TIE r.-LSIi::::; The Tribunal will new le in recess until 9:^0
:*dcck next Tuesday =c.rnir.r.

(The Tribunal fdjeumed until i April 1947 ct 0930 heurs.)


5503


1 April 47-:;-?jc-l-l-7o3tor (Int., Von Scfcoen)
Court I


Official Transcript of the A=erican Military
Tribunal 1 in the nattor of the United States
of America, against Karl Brandt, ot al,
defendants, sitting at :*urnber;, Germany, on
8 April 1947, 0930, Justice Baals presiding.

BB lUHaiAL: Parsons in the court room will ploaso find
their seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal X.

Military Tribunal I is row ir. session. God save the United
States of America and this Honorable Tribunal.

There will bo order in the court roaa.

TH3 FR3SIDRT: Mr. Marshal, will you ascertain that the
defocdunts are all present in court?

1H2 lURSiAL: :!oy it please your Honor, all the dofendant3 aro
presont in the court.

1H2 PH3SDB1T: Tho Socrotory-Gonerol will noto for the record tho

t

prosoaco of all tho dofoniants in court.

m. :MTTA 033HAUS3? - Rosunod

B?S IREDS’:: Do any of tho dofonso ccuncol hevo any oxanination
of this witness? Tho wituoss is reslndod that sho in still undor
oath, counnol 2 ay procood.

DR. 'fSTSPHUBSS: (Counsol for thu Dofordont Siovors):

"r. Prosidont, I ask for approval for the Defendant Siovors to bo
absont free tho soasion this aftornoon. Lilro tl.o othor dofonso
counsol, I w Q n not ablo to talk to ?Z' client during tho last throo lays,
ar»l to concludo th proporationn for tho enso of =y clior.t, I nood sc=o
tino this aftornoon.

-Wifr-^snL'ir'T: On tho roqaost of cour.sol for tho Djfondant

• -» y T ' -. * •»

Siovors, UofoaSant Siovcrs rill b-n oreuood fr-r. atto-danco at tho

Tribunal this of tapr.oor. for t‘:o purpoeo of consulting rtth his counnol.

. %

Sinco thoro.nf-j no questions to bo propoundol of this wltnoss
by dofonso ccunsoi,’ the pro3ocution ray cr^rn aateA.no.


5 April 47-::-?J3-l-S-SkGtor (Int., "c~. GcJsooa)

Court I

epos- acfiTnascH

BY HR. HAfiDY:

o, >Usc Oborhousor, ’..ill you kindly tell tho Tribunal how
Professor Gobharlt banned to ask you to assist la tho sulfaUlosido
oxperlr.or.to?

A Professor Gobhartt did not ask no. During tfc-i fiiroct
oxooii nation i have olrorfy said that a fow lays boferu tho boginninfi
of tho oxporimnts tho pas; physician told so to cloar o fov: rcor-s
In ay ward. Ud not toil :jj tho reason at tho tiro. Than shortly
boforo tho beginning of tho oxperirant rrofoscor ho'.hard:, Dr. rischor,
tho post physician, an! porha's a fow other senilomn, cam bjj*.
lookod at tho took. P-efoesor Gobhardt did not lvo zo any asslgur-ont.
It “fas Just b-causo tho roces voro in ay ward.

'I H Ti :rac It - aftor the arrival of Professor Gobbaxd*. one

M

Dr. Ficohor It ;.v.s accessary that ianatos ba soloctod for uso ir. tho
oxrorlaontc. y.o war this soloction ro^mr; of lnaotoo to bo uood
outllr.od?

A I cannot giro you any lnfomution about that. T ;o wcoon woro
•ont to no by th_ car.? ailuinlatratloc, and than i orgained there, as
was dono boforoovory o.oration in ..hlch an anesthetic was usoi.

* Did you o7or actually soloct tho lrr-atos or vie tins yourself?

A I*o.

1 Do you Iqoj Uso Ylnkowslca, ono of tho Polish girls?

A ?».

1 That is r jli'j ‘-I-: -il-C-.'-G-il-A. Do you kr.ee. hor?

A "o, I car.'t roaonb r or.

’V You aay recall .'.at h’inkersko states In hor affidavit, #

"Dr. Oborhousor would soloct th. Ticti.-O fro a .on . :o yi-iaonars*?

A Yob, i roambqr that but ir. th, deettnent book the toEtinony
'Tlnkowska says that they wore put on lie:3 and ' _ cffico-rent
than to no. I ryGaif uevor ralactod anyone.


a April 47-i,:-?;c-i-3-?ostor (in';., Ton Schooc)

Cour' I

q After thus* ’■ora sost to you •■'as it socossary Tor you to
onerdno tr.oco pationts, or victirx, to dotorulno ohothor or not thoy
•:oro -ifficiortly baalthy to uadorgo tha 3ulfanilonido oxporinonta?

A that 13 not truo in that scnso. Thoy wore not to bo
ar.er-irei to dotomiso uhothor thoy xoro cacablo or undergoing tko

•

iTulfoncaido oxrorinar.ts, cut noroly as in tho oaso of any othor
o-orationa vhon on acoothotic is aocossary. 7or cusoo Kith woak
hoarts ani iu:^a an onosthctic cannot bo us*i. I did not knew vhat
tho conooquoncoa of tho fulfonoildo oxporlnonts night to.

q TT.iat oxo:ilnation did you giva tho:.? Did you giro than tho
ax ani nation such ac e-atod already in tho arid one o, .ooroly a luick look,
pass tfue os, on: say, a Hioy aro suitotl- for thin oxyorinor.t"?

A I cho 11 liko to point out that 1 did not uxojdno thee fra:
tho point of vio-. of whothor thoy rora aiit;blo for tho oxporieor.ta
bocauno i hal no iloa about that. I scroly orardned thoM to doto^iino
hothor thoy could bo ir.>n an anosthotlo or not. i looked at tholr
akin, liatvico to tUolr heart and also torttad th-ir lunjc, Juat as lc
dono boforo any othor ©.erotica i hou an or.octhotic is nocoasary.

y .Toll, flow, you did assist during tho operations and givo tho
anorthotlo to the vlotLor, diJ you r.ot?

A 3cr.otinoo I ylrtinistorod tho anu3‘hotio, but gonomlly, on I
cold during riy direct oxarination, tho oporationa woro vory brief atd
I aav: to it that ono pationt aftor tho othor war projarod for tho
operation.

q Toll, r.ov-, it -..-as your duty, was it not, to care for tho
patient aftor tho operation, that is, th- post-oporatJvo care?

A To o:5Q ~.oli :.j to do this. T-Jo ream roro in ay ward and then

a

tho pit 1 unto wore In is;* :fcrd too.

s 5 1 '• 11


550$


- AS* 11 47-::-?jc-!-4-ro3tor (Iat., Yon Schoon)

Court i

1 You recall that you statod in your affidavit, Hiss 0 borhou 3 or,
rorceraph that the oporatioaa voro porforeod b 7 Dr. Fritz yischor,
"oocujti-M£ 1 holpod oad assistod at the30 operations and had tho
duty to attend tho pationto after tho oporation." rc-.r, w g g it or
Koa it not your duty to caro for thoso pationts after tho operations?.

A I conriiorod it .uy duty, or.d I hopol that as a *or- g n I
•jould bo ablo to holp locauso 1 saw a cbanco for tho patients to bo
parionoi, cad I thought I would bo ab3o tc holp thar- r.s n wnan.


6 April - -S'.Y-2-1 Ioh lo y-Ir. : -a Schon
Covj?t JTo. 1


*.. Hor, did tie girls inquire of you for wh.,t rer.son
they were beinr r. opared for on operation?

"o, I did not i*8k thoa that. Prof. Gobhnrdt told no,

os I hcvo already sold on direct exunin, ticn, that t; is w;e

an ordor from a very high authority; tl t tie str.to h.-.d

ordered it; that It wee legal; that the experiments would

*

net :o dangerous; end tint tho:o no c Polish wonon who
vroro condo.nod to loot! . froy wore in the blech under tho
8 trie tost dlsclpllno, md they woro not r. llowod to lo;vo
~ cr. *p to work. ’ her. thoy c: no to r:o, fchoy novor offorod
my rosiatanco, so that I c : svmou ti t overyt’ ing was
lc ynl.

. How, is£ ' orhouaor, a you toll V oco girls boforo

tlioy wore opcn.tod on fcbrfc fchoy would v <o pardoned if
«

tholr cp^r.-Cion w..s succo.Tjful?

... Ho, I 1. i rot! ins to do with thr t.
r .. Hon, you to‘ow uh, .o • , :

KUtochol: aid '.las Poruakr, don't jpu?

“• ■ , 1 . • ?Or c“::C“ly,

" • fell, fcl oro v a cd th x< outlon

of the. so two girls bocauau they still } r.d mother X-ray
to bo fc; hen?

. I don't believe thrt it cerroct. 1 did not
. ® t vrs uorc by - .

Ho corductcd ‘is onporii-u 'to 1— so If, and hu ti-iralf trolc
fcho ;>1 «t.;r casts off. T. u ale

- If; hd I *scr nrtfcirj . ‘ ut it.


gone experiments , bud K


not?


1 - - : • n

Court i


. hew, rould it r.ct h_"c boor, ycvr duty tc ego to it
thet tho cortor.ccs of these girls be coaautod end that
tie c:::a ridnini stru.^rc and Gcbfcrrdt and Fischer stick to
ttoir ..rgair. and insist t! t tho oxccvtions bo cancelled?

In the :irst placo I Imcw i oti ir3 ..i ut it; mfl.fchon
X should alac li':o to to c cy tl ..t .r* posit’on nc.s th. t of

"b- 1r. , . ' v . voidlint. I

h..'l ro diacipli ority. I rae in opposition to fro

SS. I could rot riahos; r 1

t it. Tho only tiling that I could dc vr.a tc help tho
• •

. . --yonri t>. t 1 could dc no t: ir.g.

:• fall, v-ron't you iwia0 of fro feet tl oulfo-

nilanido oxporinonte .-suet have caused corridor, ble pain

to tho oxpjrinontal subject.-?

A. Ao they troro cc.rr. ,

fc Buffer greatly. Thoy riovor said 117thing tt that

r T?hcn being ttr r.feod by Prof. Qohhr rdt or by

. iochor; and I uyoolf nover 1 t ny difficulties. I

c.luaya bolicvoO th t tl oy appreciated ny cr o; and ir

bhoi w,\t tlo cl: nco tfcrt tloy rrold bo pardoned.

Doctor, f. ; o 'ir ;r or.II: around .."tor they
woro op.rated ci ppy tl it Dr,

•'irelor -.ar.tccl cn no a ?

• • , ; • - : . r ...--thing

.. exproiaod my

■: . t ::o . Un urcsr_: , . .

eIn ays Gi. 'f t kero re . .

• , it t:. fc tho ovontur.l 1

depression .-.igl.t 1- b. r c ured by tio.-c pc.r.r end by the
inability tc r i. rtic . ..r, t re -iris


c ntr 1 pro*. p?


yov tc op t 7-cur <yu.rti.on? I didn't

5. C9 •


I


£ -jM 47-:;-r--C-3--1:.S: - ;n Sehon
C.urt Ko. 1

undorsccnd ic.

"ldn't you ov-r cor.a-dcr, ->r. Oborhcusor, Chub
ovontur-Ilj those ^irls would aufror cxtrono nonti 1
daprcsci' n jocr.ueo .ft c . ..ins th..t ttoy onduiod during
tho courro f -he c* vrlr.onta .jwl boeduso c i tboir ir.ubility
to \r..lk m lufcer lii'o?

C crtc.ir.ly the; di' suffer spiritually; bub they did

before because tier woro cr.po< xocutod.

"d <0 Vv-iv living ir. uhc Meek ti e poeplo livocl uho

v;uro erndwunod to e.th; rjif. uhr. ti.it rpsr .tion they
• •

1 4 •• ch'.nco co bo p.rdonod; . a, nly ; aisr.ll

. .

.... C bvr.olo,

• , prococd ..r.y furw* or in thla crona-

o--‘i n Cion, i •. ish to rush. if i recollect fren your

, u at. bod th..fc it ia poaaiblo,
r bruo, tl. C a f Kuco 7 >: i: \r ox cutufl ft i
thoy ) endured tto e:: _:*x. flit;,; isn't t] ..t riyi t?

... I d n't knr-v. i car's a::: anything r.b ut 1

l e i\ tl t -.sly 1 „.c in Cl u c i rtr u:,

Y6u Jiuct l.- m tm tl ut tloeo per ticna « vo
\ -d lusting uffoct on tl oro victims cr.d w. uid practically
criopio a.u:.i?

, . 1 - w tl u bocause I *

I; - t; ueo CUBv-s vuro qi’ito f roign t~ .»o,

• ’ , ftr B» . f fcho girls v

. ■. I or . .• . t :

lichen. - ■ - ■

f oy si tv Id *>o c: lied i. • dis.Coly be t! c *:odsido £ tl. t
Mrl?

... -stuto of

o. 1th f tho pr-tionte, vljet ,r t: • r

5blO


3 - . .1 47- - - -4-?l:3:Xoy Ir.t: ' n £::.m

Court Ho. 1

whether there nor. any ninor ch.angos. 2 :c prst physician
ropcrtccL; end I v/r.s ur*3cr fciri. in tbf.t cr.sc he ropertod
l:r... li .;oly tr Kohonlichon; and H'l onlichon r s net far
-.way. r: on oitlor ?rcf. (?cbh rdt or Dr. “lecher cane, or
both of thon.

Hon, n her. w e tl o Inst the t: t you saw any of the
cap.-.rincr.tc.l evbjocts after tic eporat; r.e, apart fras
these when ye u am In this crvrtroon?

~ny I si: you to rep^.t the! question?

*fcon did you X..st see rj.y of t: o girls xi: had boon
subjected ta tl esc oxper! xnts at vcncbruch, tl or tl on
tho girls who wore l ore in tlis courtroon?

nnct r xcopt t r tS - .-no who W re.

£ho yet bed n shin dofoct; and I roaonbor tl: t I saw hor
lafit. ?. o ctl rs were .-c g ns hc.lod. In crcsc-ox:. in-
.tier. I lave already said that in a.ril I lrclccd at perhaps
throe or four, .ml tint nothing -.'‘Vo roa no cor firry or.ccnt
th.o applicr.ti n of intrant.

Q. Kow, frr how irr.y 'ter each oxpcri;:c^tr.l rporrti-n
did you h-.vo tho innat03 un or yrur cbo v rvatic n n

... Until they n„ro cnlcd.

“• -« • ‘ tl.o lr.toct fcxno rJtor tho onpor .1

cner ti. n ..t v/2 icl. ycu saw my cf thcro inn .too?

• , • f ' o : an n Xengor ablo to r-y tl *.t

individually; bi t ir. tho first upc they honied ver^
quickly, and tl.cn tho witnesses w*. : v:e snr . cro took a

littlo lrnger. I 1 _.vo alrc dy said tl .t in April low
perhaps three; and they r .. . A * nly oinfcjcnt.

-»nri 1 r> f v/I. t . err?

-. 1943.

• How, t co ;irls tl i, ' ’ w ro ir. this

5;ll


ccv.rtrr on, did ycu n-t?


coo


*- rii 47-::-s
art :'f. 1


.v. 1*0 S.

. & :o f tie;: wero still ill, w.ron't tLoy?

... T. v .e fin .,1 ccr.'.iticn n it id I c r. .-op rt
r. thins Koto bocr.uso I dorr^tclagiat.

. ’ cro tl ovo :.ry plr.ns ;.uo f r rogul r fell: \.--up *r
c.ftor Che cxp_rirx«nC..l p-r. 6i ns?

... ^ o r. flay ; c; ir. tlvt. It ia 1 Cor

m injfacti r., ..ftor r» infooti< us au\.uxv.ticn, Ci d
anything. Ho baths c-n >o givau, rad nc rs-sanga.

r .. -id you ever givo tl o "iris uny ’ rug c :diovo cl-c
pc.in zS tor thu.'o ..or.. 1 ;! r-.a ?


6 April
Cc u: ; I';. 1


v _


d r.


... :.s, "’..cy woro giver. Irugs rogulerly.

.. CV7 -.Vut tie cr.sc r liss B;.j, spelled B-r.-j, heroin
sto stc.CwS in her affidavit, "Qbc rh.ausor t-11 us horse If
tl t she ccv.l . givo us r. tiding fcc r.llcvi: to cur ;r.ir.s, ..o
ir. r: uld dolr.y tho he r.linr -f ur logs, 1 ’ do :->u roc 11.
tel linn hor that?

... t ir About f r jo: vs r .30 not?. Evoryono whe

h Cl pain v;r.a pi von r rhino. H \t ic c nfir:icd rope, todly

by tho tcatiurny of tho aaaofl. Perhaps in tkise r.so

t.o did nr t rant te givo ti ls . rticui r p tior.t t-r r.rr.ch
. •

rphinc «;c av i- pL iter proecurc, but 0 : orvico they
rorc :iv-n .orphino, and 1 1 1 strict • rdo: c frrn >0fosser
Gobharlt and Dr. Pi eel or n t c rpr.ro the • rshino.

• rr frrn Dr. Gabbardt to la

these ’ girls die?

A. Ur.

- u id you h. vc rr’.crc frrn ?r fee-, r.''jbhnr.lt tt ivo


»nly ...inicotfi treat. :ait?

• . . Ir. diroot oxa iinr.ti cold )

* .

Prefaseer C-ebDardt *.«rt Dr. r icc’. cr ucro c . ccrr.od abi-ut tho
<>r.tic. to, * rticul rly t bout t: o last group ir. which

• r : wore .-er ill. The dr :s

wor.. change , cub sequent . por. time utre >rf< r.v-d,
c’.r-.inr o r;.c :.rr n:-d *:• _:-o tic l..ys vr. re i:: -.bilisod ir.

- :: • : • m. •• 1 •: n, bl cl :r nsfusions

1 art cti tulnnt: , : .


.


tl


case cf uti.ru tl ..a© r-irir died iftcr s?


oxporitiunts, did . •?

*■ - _ : . . irocu oxanination

thic .. minrr, if t: ,v Ww . aly : J r clrx^ • ,

rise in U;,w. ■ , .•

' - • f ten r.

35*3


6 April 47-::-S -3-C- bvlcy-l at: V r civ; n
Crurt !.’c. i


71 sc! or r.nl Prrf ccrvr Goblvardt crux vcr to look aftor
’-Jo pr.tiontr.

.. 7c v Z c s it i’-vn t3:o v:. rtlvy Ur. ‘ischor vrr.a not
proeont vhon tkoco girls died?

“• r cmr.ct cay tl.o 1 ura cf dcc.tl: oxr.ctly my longer/
but Prr.focarr Gudterdt rnJ Di. Fir cl .r Lntl beer, tl.cro
bofero. 2Loy woro sc worried, and thoy lid everything
Initially os lolc.

"• Yet v.-..ru n t tVero whon tl j pr.bionte dioci?

• .1 w.a or.Uu'. 1 ,, but I err only wvy

• •

: aiblo vas 1 no. Per c^tor

otrengt] f tfchorrtb.ee < c crrduall; roduood. : is
hr.ppons c.s it Sous in tlx» clir.ic t -: If sraorno ’.lor in
tl o ollnio t: o ..ri physician is proeont. Sfcc proyioUa
troateiont raid overyt lng tl t K.r to be d' no is rdoroc*. by
tl.c Cl.iof T.yslcim.

;■ v, .t\: rx.ny po plo 1 . ;« u

oxperionco r.s r. doct;r pri. r tc tho '.o. th of thoao five rr

nix girls in fci.o o:rperiL»nt8?

*

- n« t‘ rononbor thx t there wore five or six
axporiwontcl oub’ . ‘ • .• . • tl-.roo; raid I

cr.n rr 1 ngor toil yru Low hr :iy . . ,•!. c i< ,

but I Jvi w.rkoil f r f or .. in clinic bof ro t: r.t,

,ri r t CI.ere <o..fc' r • o .. rocultt f rul £ j.ilurtL’o

oxporicontc 1 . v nuny po pic ' .. y< u l-ill*..: t. J »• - - lire
injocti ns in tl c ;'r.voncbn*o!: ccup?

I idn»t bill n:.yb l r .

• . -
dor.ths t pricr t- ti e .o tfri tkoec ;irls ;2 :-.a

uniorgeno tie ox. jrivert?

- J -

for suffering , .fiicner in their

5514


I; '•*.,£ ni .vi'


Apr : 1 -£-2-*I .1 y-Ir.t:

C.firtHc. 1


. '.Sit ui_ you inject intc tlo pr.tionts tc roliovo
CKvj:. fr a thoir sufformg?

"• I t.vo tl.ou ncrpldno, end then tho pest pi:- siclnn
p.-vc r:o r. -sixturo, I d.r. *t knew whet iterntninod oacr.ctly.

Q. 2 .o ::ixtvro c’ncr.inod" xeclino, didn't it?

... I cannot sr.y, Duriny cn intorre gr.fcic n tho intern -
gator sr.10 tc i:o "that w*.s cf ccurso gr.seline, th t was
custcnaxy,” end sc I was us! ol ir.tc tint. I don't !mov
uysolf oxacfcl- ui. t it s. I * .r gi-on it by tho pest
physician.

.. "oil, now, v u.o.-. tc toll .-c cl t ycu cculd net
dotor..slno vd otfcor cr :i t y. u w».ro inj-efcing -: c -ino intr
r. ..ere; ::; couldn't you c :oll it?

... I ffevo do oyringo t tlo / at physici.n nd ho put tho
llo.ui*. into it. I don't Jen r:.

d. Hm;, in ; v ur ..ffidr.vit ycu 3 t..to ..c fellows: !, It vs
— n< rarity at T. vonobruolt, tint .orsens wl;o wore r.lroc.'.y
r. r- ..c! in~ ho tl. wero 1:1 lie by injections. I nysolf have
.jivon fivo r si:: sue: Injections." New, fr tlo evor-
vh.cL ilr.* Vt; to;..onto f vitnossos ;.rl invostiavtims, it is
bvi «*o t: t ycu gc.vo ueny ro tlm that; :.ro you ready
nrv; hows, in;.e:.;ucl r.s ycu arc under octh, t adult tl at
yru cvliiinintcroh let'. ;.l injocti ns t / ro dm fivo cr
~i ;; persons in ti o n-vons’mrcl: Cencontrafc on Cun?

• A l 1 o •

•Ycu lluit it t- fivo r six, !c ycu, Doct r?

- • ! o) ctly. It -idl e hrvo b or.

only four r five.

n -» ifew In tho course . f • ur liroct e .in, ti n ycu r.vc
tie i:.proseion ycu voro c -ipathotic and holpful tc all tho
• tionts in tl o • . ruck Concontir.tim C;u:p: I tc

c..;i - cur attention ti the .affidavit rf ..lor. fics c:...


5^15


C A r.v:
C ■ rt r


^ 7 -I 1 1: Yci Sc


:7-&- -

V 1


v, lck Ie Decvsicnt He. 864 , which will bo f< ur.a in
D cu or t Br~k !!:. 10, rise found on pr-go 926 cf tho
Er.,s? btoiacri..5, wherein the nfflnnt S f-, C j -5 fellows:
‘It. the *oo."innii'.r of 1942 there tt.t ~n ell Corrmr. wcru.n
'£ r.bcuc 30 yo .lts ac ring 51c crccr. tricnglo cn her £:rr
in o or. sen go f t'c rovicr ; she r.ekod Dr. C usor
k r :• .0 pills, - C v; s ill nnC c ri; acnrcoly vo. Obor-
tiiusor : : l why sho mis ir. tho c:.r ; . . : - t

roply Oborluiusox* kiokod l r. 7to x n foil tr tho grcun
coring, Oborfccusor laughce • S* Id hor t ot up, nnd
vr v $ h • -v S cr nr -cine. I v .« in cho jv. 3 r. 0 nd
wibnoarod 6 ie. ' . isn't 6 .it r-.tl.or r. typicr.l lc if
hew y u tror.t.l tie - .tior.;r, *> cter?

I never . euiy sue! thJJ -. I hr.;, h f -r -c re f
training in t: - c inic oof^ro, x- I hrv 1 -.ole and
r*rr<'. c:::. ..,lcr frer; ;iy chief phreicirn, end 1 -lvr.ya
followofl ell- oxm.plo, nffeor :.y .> rirl rt vcncbn-ck
I wont tr vr.rcljr clinic. I trio' f r tl re*, qu rtorr
• be c:rngo rry p r. n. I :*.o net boli.ovo tbr.t
luring't! is tir.o I c old cJ ringo oit! or fr t*. 0 Jurm rr
i'r.:. tho nolio .1 . f via . . c ropu?)

r ’ 0,1 : ', h -vo \ .11 r.blo b n

aucl; r. v .y; r.r.1 I 1 r.vo r.lc sr.i tl :.t ti c 3f ;.t -r.horo
plocomt 6.-. c, • . . . : If X •

D 6 ; , ' io li; ••ny * 5- wr; . . • • • •• nly

vor- brief t’-.o el on I thought over: 61 ing v;..r in err*.or

»

• — s

• r.' i ndnr.gud hell • fr p c 70.. r .v : r.lf, end tl cn

X eric.' .. :.ir t t 0 tty Ire cl -_icc t; • . - '"-.red jtroll


Jocr.uso 1 i«.p bli t ie. r rv<


ore


r t *?lc 6r


lor.vo . I . si o 1 v

. H v.,: cotoh ,


S .T t 6 1


.


6; c j: y


9


w .--ttonti n tr tho


6 April 4 "-;:-S“- 3 - 5 - - lc;-Ir.-: ' r Selva
C urt rc. 1


rffi i.vlt cf Bc.j r\grir.. She c-rrcbcr .ted the tostinony cf
”is 3 Poiscckr. , wh rein eho str.tcd, : *I 1 r.vo soon Obor-
’rr. user bo'.t •«. threw w-::cr. cut rf tho sick b;.y thr.t
cr*:o tc t:.o sick br.y fer tror.tnent f r their logs V ich
1;.' g.tton br.'.l;* cut wlTio rerking during tho dr.y. &ho .did
net • ivo t!orj r.r.y truntnent." Cfclor /itnoasos testified to
grov.t length t? • t you hold aick call end usod tr sit r.t ti e
oxr_-lining table end kick tho wr;:on whon thoy filod by .nd
thoy rrouaod your diopl-rcuro ir. my rr.y. i’ov, in the
lntorrtgr.ti n by .•jor ZInnfc rf tho Jritieh. /my rf tho
Rhine, yew =t tod. thr.t during oicltcrll ycu h..d te look
r vcr 300 t: 400 ;.f.tionta, nd c! . t yeu ?..t cr. t: o
ining t.blo *./ ilo lookift.; rror the >.tionts, r.nd in the
o« urao cf thr.t Intorrc gr.tlcr, you r.d.'.od the frllrclnj .,
n In sitting thoro I : old t: o print >f ;*y fort c ~owh.-.t
atrotcl.O'.* fcrv:r.R* i;; rrlur te sue tho .. .tiorts b.ttcr in
t!cir or.tiroty; n dc : «• rucr.ll tr. Iking t.- Ir.Jrr T'nnt in
thr.t regard?


Court No. 1

April 8-4-i-K-ED-Futty-Von


ocnoen.


A. Yes, it was at -y first interrogation which was
carried out by Kiss Kari-Kory and sne forced me into this
statement which is not of any significance. I did not kick
anyone. I can only repeat that I had clinical training
behind me and I managed to get out of these terrible
surroundings ar.d I went beck to the clinic; and if I ruay
add this, I had worked for & long tiae in the children's
ward in Juaaeldorf ana when 1 cane to Kohenlychen I a t air.
took over the children's ward. And I can only emphasize
again and a^air. that I repudiate any such action ar.d that
I would not be capable cf nctir. 6 in this way. I treated
all ny patients in the Base way. As the witness, Tecnledo
said, I did not treat her badly.

Q. Now, Doctor, in ro e ord t this exoaination of
three to four undred patients during your sick calls,
lBn't it true that you told Kajor Kant as I hove stated
hero that you oat on the oxacinlng table and looked over
the patients as tr.oy come forward? Isn't that true?

A. Yes.

Veil, now, aidn't you also tell him that you held
the point of your foot somewhat stretched forward so that
you could got a px*eaectlve or see t:;e pntler.ts better in
their entirety?

A. I 8ho -Id like to say otherwiso It is customary
for the doctor to sit at a desk ar.d the pa tier, t to sit ct
some distance. Tr.is wr.s, of course, no*, possible, and the
patients cuou so close one after the other that one could
not sec tn« whole body, for that son it was not necessary
for me to do It with my foot, but the prisoner nuvses sew
to It that they came at certain intervals so that one could
see the whole body because it wr.s r specialist treatment.

-ell, now isn't an examining tab!- ends, to have


Court ll o. 1

April S—"•£—•5—2—HD—Putty—Von Schoen.

the patients sit or lie on and not the doctor?

A. First the patients who had scabies or soce other
xinor matters were treated, and then, as I said in my
direct examination, the patients where further clir.clal
examination was necessary, 1 gave them appointments for
the afternoon, and if I had to have n patient lie down,
then, of course, I did so.

Well, now, then we will go back to these experiments.
Doctor. In the course of these medical experiments did you
participate in the selection of tiio Inmates? You nay
answer these questions "yoo" or "no".

a. llo.

Did you examine the patients no a pre-examination
or a pre-operative examination?

.A. I have repeatedly said ir. my direct examination
ana again this corning that * looked at the patients who
we.ro sent to mo according to the lists. I tested their
akin, their hearts and their lungs as is done beforo any
operation wnore ur. anesthetic is required.

n. You assisted Dr. Fischer and Dr. Gebhardt during
the c urso of the operation?

A. I helped in applying a dressing on one occasion.

I have already spoken about that during my direct examina¬
tion and again this morning.

You wore present during mc6t of the examinations
or operations?

A. Yos.

You administered the 0 r.estr.e 3 la in mor.y cas*s, did

you not?

A. No always. I hove already described wi.at my
duties were, and the method of incision was called to my
attention so that in tne ca6c of pressure or congestion I


5519


Court Ko. i

April 8-M-4-3-HD-rutty-Von Schocn.


would be able to loosen the dressing so that I would not
touch the wound and cause any damage. The post physician
said I was sorely like a handyman. I vns not given any
special duties. I gave the customary assistance in an
operating roon. I turned or. the lamp and sometimes .-landed


the doctor something.

Q. You also attended the inmates after the operation?

A. Y u. Thr.t was my duty. At least I considered it
my duty.

Ci. You state to -our knowledge only three persons
died ns a result of these oxpericer.ta and not five or six
c.e otat d hero in the presentation of the Prosecution's
case lr. chief, is tnat right?

I can remember only three.

%. How many persons wore shot or executed after they
had been subjected to those experiments?

a. This coming I hr ve already said that I had no
idea about those shootings; that I hoard about then for tho
first time here in tho courtroom.

nr.d in your affidavit in connection with these
V. thal injections you admit, that you gave five or six
l*ithat injections, is that correct?

A. No.

%. Did you hear that?

A. I said no.

tv. Well, you gave injections and after such injec¬
tions tho persons died, did they not?

A. I said Just now, and I said during my direct
examination, thr.t Iw-s giving seller. 1 assistance to
suffering patients in agony.

ti. *11 right now, if I understand you correctly,


5520.


i


Court No. 1

April 8—K-4—4-KD-Fusty—von ocfaoen.


these were not in the category of mercy killings, were
tney? That is, euthanasia?

A. I heard about that only here in the courtroom,
.'ell, do you consider the cases wherein you
Injected persons ca being typical euthanasia cases as you
know euthinasla from this courtroom?

A. I can only say that I was giving medical aid to
suffering patients in agony.

And this medical aid resulted in death, did it
not? Did you hear that?

A. No.

■*. I said, "and this medical aid resulted in death,
did it not?"

a. As I said, tney were patients in agony.

Miss Obernauoor, were you ever awarded the Iron

Croos?

A. No.

What did you get? What Award?

■ A. If I remember correctly, It vne the War Merit
Medal, Kriegaverdlonst-Medaille.

And for what reason did you receive that modal?

A. I don't know.

•w. W-s it for your participation in the sulfanilamide
experiments?

A. Certainly not.

MR. HARDY: I heve no further questions, Your r.onor.

TH£ PRZ6IDZNT: Any further examination by Jounstfl for
Defendant?

DR. S£IDL: Dr. Seial for tat Defendant, Dr. K_rta
Oberhauser.

5521


Court No. 1

April c-M-4-5-HJ-?ut ty-von Schoen.

REDIRECT EXAMINATION

BY DR. 3ZIDL:

ic. Witness, the Prosecutor asked you whether you hnd
anything to uo with the"selection of the experimental •
subjects?

A. No.

G. I shall now show you an affidavit which was
submitted by the Prosecution ns Exhibit 226. It is an
affidavit of thu witness, Sofia Sokulska. I quote:

"During ay stny in Rnvcnsbruock two experimental
operations wore preforaed on mo. There were two other
attempts made to operate on me which I thwarted. On the
lot of August, 1942. I was told to report to the largo
sick bay rivier with nine other prison, rs by Helena Sella,
secretary to Mandol.■

I ask you does not tho statement of this Prosecution
witness snow very clearly that the experimental subjects
Were obviously Selected by the camp administration or by
the political dopartrxr.t or by some other even hlghor
authority, for OxOBplO, the Reich Security Main Office, tho
RShA, which passed on the list?

A. Yes, and I hrve repeatedly said during my direct
~xr.mlna.tion and this morning, too.

h. ,Tha Witness, Sofia Raj, said somethings very
similar, exhibit 227 of the Prosecution. She said tho
following, and I quote:

" Cn thl - ° r operation n list of ten names
including mine was read during- the corning roll call. Wo
• ~nt to tr.e office and naked supervisor Langenfold what
• of us. Sho said sne c.ii sot -mow, but snortly
^:'tcr we were thker. to the sic.; bay.

5:22


Court 1

«prll 8-H-4-6-HB-rutty-vor.Schoen.

I osk you did you yourself have onything to do with
the roll coll of prisoners?

A. No, nothing.

Would you agree“With me if I any that this atato-
n.-nt cgnin shows wry clearly that the selection of
experimental subjects was done by the cnap administration
or some other high authority?

A. Yes.

Did you have any files or. the prisoners In your

hospital?

A. Ko.

A. Then It would not have been possible for you from
the technic -1 point of view to select experimental subjects
since you did not know for what reason the prisoners were
in the crap? Is that truo?

A. Yoo.


5523


Court 1

April e~H~5-l-KD-3iolsi-vonSchon.


Was the preliminary examination which you preformed
on the orlaoncrs in any way different from the preliminary
examination given before any operation?

A. No.

iou had testified that you learned of the
experiments only when Prof. Gebhardt and Dr. Fischer had
alro .dy bdgun then?

A. Yes.

Q. You have also testified that according to Prof.
Gebhardt the exponents were not dnngerous; now, I ask
you: On the br.aia of the statements cade by Prof.

Gebhardt, did you have to assume that in connection with
those experiments the experimental subjects would suffer
any serious lasting consequences?

A. I could not Judge that. I could only assume if
Prof. Gebhardt said to oe that the experiments were not
dangerous, I believed hoa, because I was a dermatologist.

Q. Did you yourself have the impression that Prof.
Gebhardt and Dr. Fischer did everything In their power —

A. Yus, otherwise I would probably not have helped
them, and I would not hnv^ hud confidence lr. Prof. Gebhardt
and Dr. Fischer, and would have helped to change my Job.

It was the same clinical course, the same clinical treat¬
ment wnlch I knew from th. university clinic where I worked
for four years.

i. That is ^specially tru» of the so-called control
persona?

a. Yes.

They also were treated, end, if necessary, by
surgical n.ar.s?


552-


Court 1

April B-K-5-2-3D-3iols1-vonochon.

a. Yes.

'• Kow * aoBjttilng ulso, witness. Kero in the court¬
room you heard the prosecution expert witness ~rof.
Leibbrandt?

A. Yes.

Do you rcmecbcr his testimony?

A. Yes.

*rof. Leibbrandt in particular mode statements
about what circumstances, and what prerequisites, make It
permissible for n doctor to accord a outhonnaln to r. patient
who Is about to ale. Jo you remember that?

h. Yes.

*. Now, I raK y u: These patients to whoa you
accorded aid, wore tney people for whom one could say,
according to 1-rof. Leibbrandt, tact oven he would
consider eutnnnnola peraloaible?

A. Yes.

rnr r -® you can roc- 11 , they were ontlonts who
Wvru lncurnblo, who wore suffering fron orncer, rnu who
could not be „lven any help?

A. Yus, I hr vo described It in detail in my dlreot
examination; and, as 2 3-.Id, this was Toraulot.d in suoh
r horrible form In the affidavit.

■v. Is it in particular true that tnoso patients
rshed you to help true?

«. Yes. Under other circumstances I could never have

done any such thing.

x. The prosecutor h^s read the testimony of the
' iSnessea Flesezkn ar.d 5a j to you. They were not
-xfmined before this court but they signed affidavits.


Court 1

April S-K-5-3-H.D-5lc 1 s I-vor.ochon.

In one of these affidavits, l n that or Sofia 3aJ, It Is
said that you mistreated on eighty-year-old woman. Sow,

I ash you: lave there woman of any auoh a 6 e as eighty ln
this caap of nnvenstraoh?

A. Hot Choc I ..now of. Generally, we had younger
people, end I do not believe we had any eighty-year-old
woman. I don't believe we had any seventy-year-olae ln
the onmp. They were mostly younger people.

e. Setween statements or fleseska and BnJ on the
one nnnd, ana those of the-witness T.cnledo who was
examined before this Tribunal, there Is -n obvious
discrepancy, iou are of the oplnl,n that the witness

Tschledo Is nearer the truth than the other two witnesses,
la t)vt true?

*. I Should like to say that I treated oil patients
in the same way, that I gave nil p.- tlents the ,„mo treat,
nent. Where aid woe needed, I gave It. I noted ne I did
In the clinic, end I do not believe that ln this snort
time that I was In havens brace, wr.en I came from a clinic
rnd went h-.oh to a clinic again, that I coulu have changed
Oom my point or view, ne.a human being or a doctor.

-s. *nd you also resweber the contents of the
affidavit of the witness *./ytla, which we suboitted here
-fore your examination. Joes tr.ls witness give an
accurate picture of your warn in the slch toy, and of
your efforts to help the patients?

a- Yes. I aid everything i coula. I did vnntever
1 could to help the pctlenta.

rlr *' lll : < '» you Mere "skwU whether you w6ra ^iv^n

r - ; '’ Qr n:;ord> You •“■?. thet you were given the .or
••..rit .udnl.


Court 1

Aprii. 8-&-5-4-KD-3ioIsi-vor.Schon.

I ask you: Does this seen anything special, or Is ft not
a root that during the war In Sersany several slllion
people received this medal?

A. Yes: and at the moment I ccnr.ot remember whan I
got It. It is even possible th.-t I nod It before the
sulfonamide experiments, but 1 cannot remember exactly.

DH. SEIDL: Hr. President, I have no further questions
to put to this Witness.

TH£ FR£iIi)ENT : Wlcna88 * referred several times
to the 53 atmosphere In the camp. What did you mean by
that?

WITNESS; How it was la the oaap Itself I cannot
testify anything special because I lived quite Isolated.

I can speak only about the S3 doctors, the post pnyelclnn
under whom I was, under whose orders I was, -nd the Sermon
nurses. I can only sny that they were hostile to me. I
Lived and acted according to clinical principles, while
they looked at the people only when they felt like It. and
besides, the tone was such that no « womnn 1 often had to
blush. It was n circle Into which I did not fit, npd
In which I did not reel nt homo, nnd my activity was
limited almost exclusively to my dermatological work.

THE PRESIDENT: The matter to which you have Just
testified, then, was what you Intended to designate the
the 3S atmosphere In the c.-mp, is that correct?

WITNESS: Y ofl .

ThE PRESIDENT: Concerning these patients whom you
testified were suffering from Incurable cancers, what was
the injection that you administered Intended to produce¬
rs It to alleviate their suffering or to cause their .
denth?

WITNESS; To relieve their suffering.

-He PRESIDENT: Ir. what way?

'-T.'.iSS: These people were in agony.

THE PRESIDENT: Did I understand you to testify that

5527


Court 1

April 6-&-5-5—HD~3iolei—vpnSchon.

you did not ;:nov what was the contents of the injection
container which you us=d in treating these people?

WITNESS: There eight have been two or three injections
whon I knew what it waa., when it was norphluo, and then, ns
I said in my direct exanin-tion, I discussed it with the
post physician and then he gave no a preparation, and
there was prob bly aorphiua In that too, I don't know.

He gave it to no.

THE PRESIDENT: What was the result of the patient in
the administration of that,fluid?

HTNZSS: The samo -s any morpnlum. The patients go
to sloop.

THE PRESIDENT: Did the patient wake up, or did death

on6Uu?

4

WITNESS: Then they died.

THE PRESIDENT: Any further examination of this
witness concerning the natter being produced by tho
defendant's examination?

. HR. HARDY: I hove no further questions, Your honor.

DR. SEIDL: I have r.o furine'- questions, v c. Pacoldont.
THE F.nSSiDENT: Tncre being no further questions being
propounded to the witness, tho witness .any be excused from
the witness stand.

(Witness excused.)

DR. SEIDL: Hr. Preeider.t, the examination of the
defendant Korta Oberheusor concludes the submission of
evidence in this case. I should merely like to point-out
tnnt in the supplementary volume to the Document 3ook for
the defendant Gebaerdt there are documents which apply tc
the defendants Fiach-r and Obtrr.euser.


Court 1

April 8-K-5-6-KD-3iolsl-von8chon.

TH2 PRESIDENT: That is the Document Book which
haa not yet been submitted, is it counsel?

DR. S2IDL: Yes.

TH£ PRESIDENT:— It is understood that this Document
3ook may be presented to the Tribunal when it is ready for
presentation. That right vna reserved by the defendant
the other day. We understand, counsel, that the case
against defendant Oborheuser Is now closed for the present


5?29


8 - ril 1047-:>£-:-S-l-l Yra Schcn

Curt IF . X

DR. S33DL: c cr.co f r tl".c LcfonJ. S Oborkeuaor it:
conclii-lod for tba ti. c boin, but I should llko tr r.ud tl r.t
I el ell dispense ait: oxt^dnin^; tic wien.-as Ii.rgc.roto
Kytlft bci rc ci is -rTbunc.1 rir.co cl o riffi -vit cf tlis
witness !..£ boon liicfcod by cl v Tribunal ml tl o ?r socut-
ion : -.3 net bjoctod t tie .'fric.wit.

’• b 7: Very './oil, it is vn'.orst cd.

Tl o Dibun:.l will new c .11 tl o cr.o cry inst SVo Dofon'. r.t
nolr.ut pon'.ick.

(" r tl-o Jcfon'.rr.t P .porlicl:): r. 're 'er.fc
portc.ps, it - bo . r:i*’l. tc 1 c.v© tie rocoes new a
I cr. ettill v r.itin.-; f r :iy cocr.ut ry tc ut r. -rs.« t erno
intc tl o c-urt reen, e- porlr.pc it trull bo aaiblo to
1 -'o tl o rocosi ne w.

M.E• PP.23UET?: it is ny inconti. n siuuly to 1 evo your
first witnoe? ewern; ro -.u in ; fc( prceood with tl o
witness r by ro .in.: Ucvx.tr, c vr.aol?

. ' : 1: I ab'-uld lil o t cc.ll tbo Dcfonlnnt Pcppomlick

tt tie .* ;\n4 firre.

IJTSIDn'T: It vrra :y irto: tun alirply to cr.ll tl’o

• Y bin sworn end tbun rocoor.

DR. BOSEi: V^r; , :. rosidont.

T”E ^I£T: iio Defer, nt Ho 1 Ait ?r.r*on.lick '-ill tc.ko

tl atexd.

*

ae, c .k tlo atm' n: tostiflod

•a f lie ra:

BY J UL.GE SEBRIUG:

. . •. 1 -. r. '.o awe rn:

1 cue. r by G t . ad Cuniscionc , tl t I

r


5530


3 .--.-i’ll 47-"-S' -6-2-.! I u I -Mi - In t: Vn Schcn
C.urt I' . I


3 ~P>4r“ffDfr-8-l-Blakley (HUdcshoiaor J Tor. Sc-. ‘-or.)
Court I.


---HSK-L: 2w Tribunal is -sin in session.

D^.. ShIDL: Dr. Soldi, defease ctunsol for tho defendant Obor-
.lcueor. Yur Honor, t-:o dcfo a h a t Eortn Dborhousor Is 111 . Sac suffers
fr iafluonsa; ad shojtsha the per-dssi <n >f the Court n~t to h.vo
to c.ttcnd th_ boob* -as of the C»-rt tod;;-. .. report by tho prison
doctor will bo submitted to you.

— SSSSIDZ^T: Upon the request of counsel for defend- r.t Obei*-
heuscr, with tho underetendin,-; th t the rcco:noadetion by tho prison
doctor vill bj sub.'iittod, defca-Vmt bberhousur nay bo excused frou
further attendance boforo tho Tribunal today.

S3. SDIDL: ?..nnlc yr a , y-.ur honor.

r:':SlDD.T: Counsel ney proceed wit., the examination of tho

witness.

HSIiOT fOPFJBDICK (aocunod)

DI2SCT IX- XJ1.7X i:

3Y 0.2. 3(030 BOSS.:

.• Uh -1 Is your n/e.c, hr. pojy-cndickT
Hol:ut Jo; or-dicl:.

.. T-ion t.’. v-hero woro you bora?

... On tiie 6 th .f Jumn ry 1 S 02 r.t Hudo Is JlAonburr.

. bn t.:e 13 th of />ve..ber 196 you sub. It tod an ffldnvit
.:0-o72, ZXilblt for tho r’Bccutl a 3 O, 3a. ilea Dicu .at Boo* 1 , pa,*

54 .

.h Yea.

. In chic affidavit ;--u of tod yur personal 1 to, tho :.oot
ti^ort,-J.t nos. rlcueo r . your c rcor, your aAdlcnl carocr, your
Axlierl activities, end all ; ur other activities until tho*Buar:or,

1935*

-- I studied medicine fria 1521 to 1?26 in Goottir-;on. Kunich,
ad Berlin. Ir. 1926 I passed ay of to cxa. in ti n in Berlin. ..fter ny
j - ~ ' rut interne I was .t t.;e L"ospital for one year at Huohlroso


la the : rh Brnadoabur ;. hftcr that I wont to tho Univorslty Clinic of

5522


Z (:Uidosc$i=vi= * vQaSchacc)

Court lo. 1 .

Berlin! the first noiicM clinic of the (Smritcc, to toe tmined r.s c
spooled ist f’r neurological disuses. I v s there until 1932. the lr.ct
two ye.JG ns priT-.to assist-nt to Prof. His. ..t the soiio ti..o, froa
1931 on, in the orccinge and. 9ind.ys I v-.s working LB on odbulrnco
physician in 3erlin, th-Tis. in . nodicnl cor.sulti:.,: servlco for
Occidents and sudden c..sos of illness, which ic set up toy the city, in
tho ouot of Berlin.

In 1932 : was a specialist for int.m-1 diseases. in 1933 I *»-
c ju) Otoemrst. chief physician, .t tho Virchow -ospitnl. at tho
internrl secti >n. In t.;o foil of 1934 1 went to tho Kaiser vilholn
Institute, 3 orliD-ZX>hlo for onotics end hereditary diseases. to too
trined in her editor-/ and constitutional di son sen. ly tonchor was
F rof. Brits Ier.r. In the «un_r of 103s : wont no hereditary doctor
t* tho S 3 .

• !S:.n did y>u tooc\.c r. nonto-r of tho v sTy,? ?

... the to0.7inr.ir. of 1532.

~n wh t were the rontons which undo ynx entor the HSELP?

— «■'-ic crisis of 1930 -jvi 1931. j n ai fieldo incror.sin,-;

civoa toocc-.o appuroat in Ocrnnny. Unc..,loyn.nt v-.s incronsln,-; on-’
things voro toeco:4n- ccro radical in 11 fields, .s .. doctor nt tho
to -t tho priv;.to ward and ;leo r.s an atoul nco physician.

Hettun, snrzt. ir. the cast of 3urlin whora the verkors were concontrr.tod,
I hr:', an Opportunity to otooervu tho increr.sin.: social tension which wan
•'ovoJopiu:. «nd the radicalism and the ro .-.ainl »- vro icvolopi t.\ Tho
middle ol-.as -. rtieo v-re stodnia aloof. In cy v inion no solution of
-.he ur.;ont oocl 1 qu^st' -no cml<* toe expected fr :: -.hoa.

Ir. tho ot.-.cr hand, I considered it necwcsnr- th t overy i^uinn
-ein.- who thinks tooyond hlo own war* re. who thinks :f the volfaro of
t..c --ooplo s r. waole, rust decide .t such ti-co cn tho direction to too
t kc:: ir. the future. Co ..-unis:, proach-d dict--.tors.iip of tho proletariat,
*' *. is, one class of ;..e - jpuL-.ti n. I '.id .. fc rce with this, "hero-

^ S A _ 1 .» • J • —i'* K

:ir0 ‘ ; cL -' }S0 c 'ith another extreme direct' m ooich nut tho

55oe


* - - 3 c- 5 -> 3 iahloy (EUc o*.' 4 Ton?SchOe2)

Cnu-t i.

volierc of its own people in :nc foro^euad la its ;iro,;rc.., vhich
wasted t: rocst:. lish crier, vhich -tvs. tod t do r.w-; with unc.:ploy-
-^-r.t. Shoso wore the re-.sons why J Joined the P: rty.

> -'•i'’- you fc=c ..o o number of the SS?

In the r-A_ .cr of 1932.

> ««-t vna your ctivity in the SS?

... —f»«r r. few weeks : hoe lie doctor of • Surmbras: and ns such
11 -ttty t train the nodlecl non-c :iu nod officer*.

-• *" w - t office wore you ns doctor for horoditnry disensos?

... She office for Popul tlon Policy, ...t ?uor 3 evoolkorun,;s-
..ollolk, i u' Zr,-ocur.i’J-.e its-pf 1 e. ;c f the SS, the Ih-oio ual Siodlun-o
h‘..uptw:t, vhich in - '-out y^nr v trkor. into the SS. the hula a.cc
"«'• Scttlocmr.t Office.

.. .--id wiiot wns t..j ustlvlty in tne in R.c~ pad S-ttlo;-cnt
Office?

•- •;* '-ity ti-r- u s t^ post >r. .virrin.-o nr lie tiona by SS
(-. hero r. their fi;acoea.

.. ”e.-e th r. osl; . hycici as nr.', .-.odic-il non In tnln office?

... ’.*o, in v. ditl to n number of doctors thur. also v.re :ray

heo ilc v. - v. re not nodie 1 ::en and not ociontict!..

tvs the position if tho doctors in the Jain 3nco rad
Settlement Office?

. i T ..e position there wr.a Very tonoe. TS-.o doctors were coa-
nidored sped lists with binders who ostensibly did not hnvo cle \x

v; v ; too ouch ir.v lvod In their school medic ’ knowledge.
*^t:.t is your O- inion in the way -.f r ce hyrior.o?

te chcr ia 1935 wr.s lr dy aentionod Pref. "rite Lfcns.

I^ns hw’. unusually cUnr end critic.1 intolli once and male r .rent
i-r.os.i :: en ... In th; eieli if sC'lloi mec hy.lono ho on
. rir.ci lw rejected 11 c: . uls'.ry me- sums. vt.s frequently ntt’aked
: r t rc son, ;• rticularly by the SS yoo-le, s I wns .-.bio to


® --! t ~ ~ -5-0-—31 ’Jcluy (rcildcsl-ci-cr <L- 7->a sc.: »i)

C*urt . 1.

o« 5 _rvc i.: cl-.o ..lr. Hcco vs.l Settloaor.C Office. Xerarthclose, he
"xibliehod :J.o or.lni-.n8 in 1936 in hie vcllr-Ja*mn h.ak. I wn«
definitely & follover cf Prof. Lem; and I nlvnyo ro.v-.lnod so.


..prii 8-&I-3K-9-i-&-' :loy (Int. Von Schb«n cc Eildoshoiaor)

Court ho. 1

DH. aOi-rZ.': In this connection I offer DoOunont HFO l,

an affidavit by Professor ionz, whioh is Poppondick Exhibit

N'o. 1, which is on page 1 of tho Poounont Book for Holnot

Poppondick. In the first two paragraphs of this affidavit

Professor Lonz speaks about his own position La tho sphere

of c Cornon hereditary science. In ay opinion I think ho

is the only nan who Is allowed to locturo on this subject.

I will net read this locuraont. I will not road tho first

two paragraphs. In Paragraph 3 Professor Lonz speaks of

hi3 knowledge and acquaint mccship with Professor Poppen-

dick. I quote tho relevant suiitcnocs:

"I Lu-t Mr. Hclr.ut Poppondick in 1934; ho was then taking

an 8 :.ontho course ir. the Kr.is r .ilheli. Institute in Dahlou.
•

I also saw Mr. Pop pond ick frequently during the following

yoars; during tho war I hail only transitory Meetings with

hin. Once ho was .ay guest together with his wife.

"I 0 3;; to know end to os tec;: Mr. Poppondick os a

benevolent, objective, and Justly thinking non.

"Ho was neither r. fanatic nor an activist; his whole

nature was ::ore inclined toward .an inactive attitude.

• •

"I roncr.bcr that Mr. Poppondick frequently spoke very
Indignantly about HLanier, and that he certainly was not .an
unconditional follower of Hinalcr.

"I w :s therefore under the i&prussion that ho has ro-
nninod ny disciple La his professional opinions."

That is the.end of ay quotation. This affidavit was
signed and sworn to end certified. I would like to procood
now as to this.

i In the fretiowork of your activities in ycur Main

Hacc .and 3ottlet:-nt Office as a doctor, I w uli lik. to

'.3k another question; this *>ipppcn-nnt. of t‘ho.55, did

that; have anything to do with thu Hoiefcs Sippon-oot, as in

5536


-.pril e-M-BK-9-2-L'aloy (Int. Von Schoon x Hilfi cshoiner)

Court ilo. 1

the course of tlio evidence for the C. ;fondnnt Bloco was
mentioned?

*• thi3 Sippen-ant wag only for tho SB, for tho
ncab^rs of tho S3. This Ho lets Sippoa-nnt, as far ns I know,
was attached to tho Ministry of tho Interior, and had quito
different duties. There wa3 no connection.

4 The doctors of th- SS Siphon-ant, in the yonr 1939,
woro taken to tho orricc of tho Rcichs-.jrzt, is that
correct?

.. Yo3, th .t is correct.

I «nd why was that; why did that happen?

.. The reasons were that tho re woro repented difficulties

in connection with the activities of the doctors in tho
0

Sippen-ant. In 19.'.8 and 1939 nodical work was to be
divided up and tripled by having r.on-doctor3 assigned to
porforn the radical Juflgenont of carri 30 applications for
tho 33. Theso non-dcctor3 iv«r. to be trained for this
purpose, and in ord^r to teke away tho authority over
doctors in tho Sip.,en-cnt from r.on-nodio il non, it w .s
docidod to transfer all the doctors to tho staff of tho
Roichs-.a-zt.

4 Did you do military oxorcisos?

-• Y 03 , fro:; 1936 until 1939, four weeks overy year.

I did this in Berlin hospitals, s a doctor, in an internal
case.

* -»t the beginning of tho war were you r-crui£cd to

tho ..ray?

.. Yos, I was draft*,' on tho 27th of ..ugust 1939.

. -*nd whr.t active service did ycu have?

.. Fror: tho bog inning of tho /astern campaign until 1941,

I was with the nodical department of tho 18 th ~rny as a
doctor.

5637


S-- ! ’-3-<-9-2-::;lcy (I n t. Von Sc hoc n & Hildoshcicor)


^ «nd why wore you recruited in the year 1941 by tho
Rciohs-..rzt?

- In the opi:iion_of the loading non the war was
finished then, and nony doctors of the General So were re¬
claimed frav tho .erny by tho Rcic’is-.jzt So. I was to
rosuno ny activity in tho Nippon-ant of the Hair. Race and
Sottlonont Office.

^ During the following years did tou try to go back to
active sorvioo?

•• Yes, fro:; 1943 on repoatodly.

■v -*nci with whr.6 succ-ss?

.. Tho R-iohs-.Jzt SS prcc:i3ed no th..t I would be
assigned to the Front. The personnel office of tho Uodioal
Office of tho ./offen SS was given such an assignment. I
know that efforts wore uado to this effect, but ns far as
I know theso offorts wore always unsuccessful, bocauso I
had no experience in the Ec3t, neither .as .an officer in a
nodical company nor in the treatment of the diseases provnlont
in the East.

6 ..ftor your return from active service then you
bccano a member of tho Roichs-..rzt, and you worked in tho
Sippon-ant of tho Race and Settlement Office, did you not?

Yes, I worked in tho °ippcn-nmt again. I wurk-d for
the Rciohs-..rzt only for a certain number of hours.

'I Did cho Raichs-..rzt make use of your work for its
own work, .and for which work.

.. It occurred now rnd again the Roichs-..rzt gave no
miner assignments, and they wore generally unimportant things.
Host after. It was social welfare eases. It turned out that
in general I worked on complaints fren the public about
doctors and their activity which wore sent to the S3 nagazino

•Das Schwnrzo Korps," which were passed on to tho Reichs-.jzt.

5538


Court N~ ? ! : ’T i: ’ 9 "‘ I "" rl07 (InC ' Yon Schocn & Hildushoiixr)


They w.rc investigated by the. Reichs Chnnbor of Physicians,
and the answer was sent to the person who had written Sin
the conploiat. L ter th .r-. wore cany inquiries about
diseases and steps to be taken in cases of illness, and I
dealt with these or.ttors.

i But all of these inquiries which cane to you went
through tho Schwarzo Korps?

- Yos.

i *-nd When did you become tho loading physician of tho
Main Race nnd Sottlenent Office?

* k Probably in the sunccr of 1941.

■4 -nd what were your tasks as loading physician?

Primarily tho adjustment and coordination of personnel
between the Front and the Homeland, concerning the doctors
who workod in tho Sippen-ant. Bvery now doctors was to bo
3ont to the Front for a certain length of tine and tho
rosorvo doctors had to bo trained. There wero only a fow
doctors who had experience in the Mold of hor litory disoasos.
The training of th».su doctors was one of ny duties. ..iso I
had to supervise tho doctors and their work in the noin
welfare offico of tho So. The whole 3up s ;ly system of the
eaffen So in 1343 was under tho Main Race nr-d Settlement ».
Offico.

Is it correct i\ .t you went on with your work in
tho Sippen-ant?

.. Yes, 1 nysolf.continued to p u*forn the nodical work
there, and ab ut a hundred to a hundred and fifty applica¬
tions per cl ;y had to b_ do It with.

The oth.r leading physicians in the 3S, did they
h sccci .1 offices?

*• Mo, they had no secondary activity.

££39


-pril 8-iI-BK-9-5-i!nloy
Court No. 1


(Int. Vor. Sohoca Hiidcshoicor)


t /cur title wr.s Ob .r Fuehrer and your position cs
loading physician?

- ':cs, there wero also loading physicians who had the
rank of a general.

'4 Since when is Grnwitz rfoiohs-.urzt or war Roichs-^zt?

•* Froa 1936 an.

>i Did he hold any other offices?

.. Ko was also ccnoging president of the Goman Red
Cross.

'1 .‘ill you give a short roauao of the characteristics
and personality of the Reichs-Arzt SS Dr. Grawitz?

 Gr.awitz was an oncrgotic end unsottlod personality.
Ho talked a great deal, and that was his nothod when ho was

0

carrying on negotiations, si/.ply to talk the othor party
<loun. I experienced several tir.es that visitors said after¬
wards that they had not had .n opportunity to pro 3 ent their
business, booauso Grawitz had lone all the talking, and
thur. they wont away without having hnd success in anything.


55-0


April-*<-jJ-10-l-Putty(:llctsr.ttifl^r, -.an Sch r.)-
C -art 1-

H<- '-cohisiscd the ■ fficvr v.ry such. Hu attached great icp rtancc to
.'.i3 p.sitira a a Rcichsant. h_ desaadod aba luto bodiuncc. He was ge¬
nerally p llt_; that he c ale suddenly b.c:u_ very abrupt ani inc’-nsi-
dcrote. 1“ the case f p rs ns wh ha ' influence s w.whcre else he ao-
tel differently. H. like- n t nly aany * rds but bi : wrris and exag-
-ratl ns, and in general, he act.d -.s if ho .;cre a very inlfucntial
an I a very lap rtant nan.

In the c ursu cf tin., hewover ne had t get the inprcssi.n that
his pcsiti a particularly in c nncctl n with Hire i_r >is very uncertain.
Hicnler apparently ha- n.. c nfidenc. in hin. Gravritz's nh le bein and
V. rk turn,:! ar ur.i his off rts t . ;ct int I ave r with HinJr again. For
s at rear n Grants rust mv. been s-ri usly r w pr ached by liimlcr, and
nc n tied repeatedly that he en-...av red in eve O'think c nncctcd with
Hiaalcr cr the p.rsinal staff t act with painful car-iUlneo?;. He Th< u jht
that nly he hixaelf c uld take care . f things c that there w uld be
n difficulties with Kinaler, an.' r in all thin s which Were c nn.cW
with Kiural.r, he hieaclf t k car.. : thca with. :r- -.t carefulness. Ho

i n t 1 t any n, -lse sc, it. He no,
ubt, want„d t av.iJ any n. else, r-alizin the actual ccn'.iti-ns,
for. his p siti.n with B lt ol o r -t least urin. tho War was n.t very sur,,
but utwarlly he always trie t crcato the epp site iapressi n that as
Reich3arzt h~ hid a very fire -n : safe p siti n.

Dh. HO-iHH: In this c mudi n I subnit D cunent HPO-2, an
affidavit f Dr. Edw!in JUn , wh * a ac llibzrat r f Gnritz at the

. - • i: :> • •• -- 3 t 5 : th. D cuncnt B k. I

n ick Exhibit r. . 2 F r tin n nont I shall
nly read ? int. nunb.r 2. Ih- ther - ara r pha f this f*i lavit I
slnll re^d at - later point. in per rnph 2 I qurt-s
* *he • ,rs nr. .Lity f Dr. Gr.aritz:

• . dr wit* lid net f..l to >

safe in his p siti n in : tried t : rtify his p siti r. by sh wing hla-

sclf as - particularly uncrr.iiti.nal f.U f Himler. He was c rrcct

5S-.1


a c«.r-


- April -Af--- d- 1 C— 2 -Putty- ( K ildersh iccr, v n Sch r.)-
Ccurt 1-

in his guneral bebavicr, Qsiablb an! not free vanity. Hu Shewed
tain olcgancc. in ap ; . -.sranec and in his c nccrainrs that w.ru ar-und bin
U r ccruLiticnal rubaissi n t: Kinder is sh wn best by t!w f 11-wia rc-
cirSc: i was th.n fl T.u rep rted t. fiianlor n the c aplctiti n of
hia task cf taking ever the Red Cress with the following wrrdsr
" The ob-diont retriever brings back tho hare." Fr a ronarka Ilk. this
-n- and froa his attitude t,ward filmier, I gathered again and again
that he could net get ri: of 3 continicu* cnavring fear f:r the safety
: bis pcsitlcn. F r three reasons it seeas veij unlcrstandable frera a
hunan point f view that he kept in? rtant r secret natters t: hinsclf
or node then Rnvwn nly *c the p.rs ns directly crnccrnc.’. in order to
prevent such natt rs fr-n bcc.ain public unnecessarily and to prevent
:r .. 1. min; of thee unnocossarly .' 1

That is the end f oy «ju t~ti-n. This off avit -: 1 s has been
tr.rrm t , certifi. an 1 afflxtxd.

Q Hew did Crawlts deal with his bur in his ffice, witness?
A Trawltz he! thu nail breu-r.t ta-hin by his Secretary and,
generally, h. dictated the ri^ljes t her lmudiatvly; and in addition
’When he was present, he usually had quit, a largo nur.ber f visitors who
Q1 ' oppointBcnta. Thuy were anrv unco ’ by tho secretory or the adjutant,

* Oko a then l no. the ffice f
tr.e Rcichsart* there wore als nany visiters on Rod Cr:sr. business. One
caul; n-t keep the various natters Separate, but the doctors in charge
T the Jfain Offices, Hauptantcr, and the fficu chiefs n his staff he
generally reCeiVul al.ne.

Q H~w Ii the re organisation f the • ffice of the 'vichsartz
Irawitz c a. ab ut ir. 19 .’ 3 ?

A Grawitz wanu: t -xpm his ffice, n. d ubt in erder t. get
“• r. fiitt f-nndr.ticn f.r his r. it Li t tree Jain Of¬
fice, fii, tr

nt t v root -2 —

-*V Po.plv n it, an sc in abcut 19 bl, he called n a ioct r who had been

5 c-i 2 •


c «pri 1-^fGJ-10-3-Putty-(i nt. Kilzoshciccr, v n Sch n)-
C:ur* 1-

rcccrsaen... to hir. is having r.-anizatirnal capacities and str* at the
sa=k, tine had cxp.ricr.cc ot th* frnt and connections with the fr:nt.

Tr.at was Dr. ./ill.. He had intcn!.d lat*r t: have Dr. SUOc as chief-
f " 8taff : Officw :i th.se effrts of Grawits, h-w*ver,

were frustrated by the developments f thv r/ar. In 191x3 Grawitz ha:!
ta-t. very codest. This .diin Office was n-ver set up, and, consequent-
ly. Dr. Mile was sent back to the- fr nt. Fr .= 19hl to 191x3 he had hard¬
ly anything t 2 under Grawitz.

Q H'.w was the w ffic. of the "eichsartz organised altogether?

A I-* the fall of 10li3 a staff was set up for Jrawitz by th. flcichs-
fuehrer. Six ffic-s w.re created. I« encr.il, h.wcvc-r they ill not have
very large staffs. That was th* Chief clinician, as far as I known,
that was nly one person. 7h*n thcr. was the chief hy.-i.nist who had
nly a few assistants, th*n the Chief dentist who had one cr twr persons
working f r hie, then there was th* hi; cst .fficc actually, the nedl-
e.l quatenanster, the chiof pharaoc ist. His staff with the Roichsartz
he’ twclv* te fifteen peapl*. There w;s also an fficu for statistical
ovaluati a f cose hist rics. r h is fficc was worked utsld f Berlin,
i cannot aiy exactly h-w tuny people worked th.r , Finally thcr. waj
an office collet th* r *ra nal Office.

Q ,Tcrc 311 -«»■ ffic.s in the building .f the Roichsartz Of-

fice?

A No, asi te fr-.c •'rawitz, there was only the chief Juntist and
tl.* oelical qustm-.str ir. the sane bull ting.

Q In y ur pini r., w ul. the institxti n -f a Personal have been
n cessary?

“ •' * * his -'* c ?r ' C nplet-ly superfluous. I* view f th.

3 nail axsaeunt f aail which was r.coiv:, Grawitz zcul easily take care
f the fflce w rk r.inscif.

Q r r what reasons r- s an JTice like »*-if institute then and
iv*r. t you?


5 ?-=?


6 U-#<} J-lo-liPiitty-(int.HUdcshdnur, rcn Scbcn)-

Ooart 1-

A After the recr. anisatlcn, GraT-it; said that the XoichsAichrer
hai appmvod six -fficcs iriii iocluiin- a Pers-nal Office. Grawlu

ma ^ 1 ffici - 14 “• s3tJ »*t i was the leacin, physician

at the Sac. an scttlanont l»in "ice and I could net take an any iur-
t.aar Wspowitte activity, Resides, I would net have bccaintercstco!
in general ffice wrrtt. Put Grartts rcasurc. ce and said things would
retain as they were. He wauld c-ntinuc t: take care of the snail aaount
cf nail which was receive! by hinsalf with his secretary. I would net
have tc worry about anything. I would have plenty of tine to continue
=y work in th. liain Rac. and Settlencnt Offic e, but he wanted to keep
this Office, this Fers nal Offic., in order tc be able t: use it later.
3- that this p sitien, ccold net be taker, away fr.n hin .gain, he had
t ive the title to son...no. Actually n= Personal Office was ever set
up. There was no sign m the Rulliln.;; there was nc lett.rhead. There
was n stoop for the Pars nal Office, and I n.cr used th. title " Chief
r the Personal Office-, an: I never call., ays.lf an office chief.


- — JMl-l-Si . er - • h an)

C.urt I

... Did Gra.iitz sake y a ZttsprnSibl'. f r any work within the
office f r corrosy-udence and all activities f an oificar?

A. N-, In r- -ay, as I have olrcady said. H;t nly did ho
say so t a; tho beginning, but afterwards, in the. pr-SoncS :f the
oocretory So,-. orfold, re ften repeated that I did n t have t. worry abovt
anything, ho w.uld toko caro f th_ work all by himself, and Miss
Cbarhauser will bo nolo *-. c nfirr that,

h, i»hat did Grawitz say, that h. .ras t da z. st if tho work himself?

fosj I also sail h- was a very Industri us -an, ana he .nco
said t v- if ho .id n t have, tho wail, the c rr.spcrv once f tho Roiclis-
..rzt, then ho didn't kr. i what h c uld He felt superflu uo r.s
Roichc-uzt.

.'h .so sub r in* to was the adjutant and tho secretary tho

itoichs-.wTzt 2

... They woTb b, th ’irectly ur. or Qrnwitt.

old. /. lo.k at &'rrospcnduncoj id y u have tho possibility
to 1 . k at c rrosp ndonco?

... I ocnoti.os saw the ;pon ccrrospondenco, Occasi i ally,

Grawitz gavu co a lottor and, f c urso, I saw that,

Q. ..s chief .f the :ors nal ffico, thy was it n t part 'f y ur
n rk t have t 1. k at the Corrosp ndonco?

First of all, as I sai , it *03 the cust z f r the secretary
t sh.w tho -.ail t Orawit* .'irectly, ?nat was bof re 1943, and oftor
19U3, ir. the soc n place, Grawitz hat f .rbidt uh that the r.ail
addrussad t. hi- by r,a w sh ul be oponedj r v.il which was marked so-
cret, or winch was ir. any thcr . iy ; . roont.

Q, Ihoso letters which y.u esyfansiSe just n *, 1 J net o man
;• U as 1 u ha 1 socret re! or ran! s .fir r.s they -,r. : .:.t t r,ru*dt.7
F-rr rally?

?; , it w-nt ir.ctly a iKndtz, „r. .s f r the thor rail,

tho pored c . rosp n ^nco I saw only rarely,

5545 •


Sv ISO


5 JF-ll-2-31 Isi (Lit. Hildcshoinor/7 n Sch ;.n)

Court I

Did y got :rdors fr a Grawitz t. loal y urself with
f tfeo nail, fehu inc tdng nail?

Only tho letters 7ftich caao fr a the Sch»arte Xerps. They
noro generally Sv.nt to nu by nceei an:', tho secretary s rud then cut
and gavo thou to roe. Gr.awitz had strictly f rbidden so t: da anything
also independently.

3. Growlt*, therefore, f.rbado the secret rders by n t letting
anybody else pen th- lottox-s, is that c.rroct?

“• Yes, Wu all knew ab ut this r'.or an Grnwitz was always
referring t it. Eosidos, ho was vex-y fond f socrocy hinself.

3. .»s ovi.'.once, HP03, I.subrit tho literal text, as well as tho
HPO-Jj, tho excerpt fr ; the oxnainati n f General VolnA in the '.iilch
trial, b ut the exact ti. - when this rdor was ji'-'en. This socrot order
was monti-ned by tho defendant, was subrlttc: by tho defendant Restock.
Tho secret ordor, the docroo orior here c. rrosp rv’o t.- the text, and
was intrrducod in the International ilitary Tribunal .s Gestapo Exhibit
Ht. 25. Rogardins this fact, this noed net bo -irked as a F ppcndick
exhibit. I quote fr tho Axiaaont HPO-3, Exhibit 25 «

"!• *•’ N office, r. officer, ay a- inf. rood ab ut a oocrot

natter unless they ,.ust bo inf r-ed for roas us f duty. 2. Ho cffico
and n officer nay receive further i: f r.ati n n a secret mttcr than
is absolutely necessary T r the fulfil ^s-.t f their task. 3. »«. ffica
w ‘ n - ^ficer aay receive inf r.-ati n n a secret rrtttor r that part
f it which is necessary f.r thu.j t. kn n, c .rli-r than is absolutely
necessary f r the fulfilnunt cf their task. U. It is f rbi . on though¬
tless t: pass jt\, by .any general rder cf distributi n, any r-'nrs which
it is cf ecisive i-.p rtanco t- k«.-r secret."

I q:.U. fra HFO-fx .

BHF«. ..hut is tho tafco of that rd c r, tbe in to 1 -:ing
fr:- tho c y in the D .cuaent Bo k.

BR. aCEKii This rder in cy nilticn was subnitted by ny colleague

5546 •


o —JF—11—3—3-8i Isi (int, Hildesfceisjr/V: n Sheen)


Court X

Dr. liwrkol, r. the 15th : June 19U6. -ho error, wh_n it ca ^ -ut,

> ir Her. r, n 11 bec*js -vidont fr the r-'.-iw f the n.xt d jcunont,

I quote now fr - HPD-U, os foil 20 February 19U7, of the
Tribunal Ho* II against Ounorai riel orshal iiilch, ir rnlnf session,
page 1293* I eit ter. linos, ary I quote Dr. Bor,•’.fid's questi n:

z, £ you taww the s.-dll- : 'Basic Foehr • 1?

"... Yes, I In * it,

"1* Can y u t.11 when exactly this -ecrou was issued?

"... On 12 January 19 U 0 .

.so y u quite sur abut tills date?

"... Quite sur.."

I .jit urthor ol-ht linos*

"... Th j r ur was issued n 20 January 191.0. It was count f.r
one sp-cific case* Its c.nt»nts were acyr xir .t.ly as f £Lc*8i It
brike with tne . r-,.r view, ur f r .r vi.w ab ut .'cn.ral issuance ->i
.rdars. It ran if r r xi.jit.iy— That i. th. one f cy qu tail n

I .'-tit further fivo lines. I uu.tox

"I tu able t state th- cat*, a exactly because I was .i ; lisseJ
n thi3 Joy*"

J%. F-JUJY: '-y i* . .ease . ur K r. r, in wh t -.onnor es efonso
c unsel r . sj t. ir.tr 'uce this uxcorpt fr the roc r’l Military
Tribunal II, that ic, t e ilch cas-?

D?.. SCEH.r This .cu. ont os llr •. y th- bj-ct f an

exaain'-ti n in tlie ilch trial, ;h ch . st o ilt with at that tine and
sh Wed th t the r s vas issue:'.

THE rteSi )EMi This sh ui: bo pine. ir. s f rr by *h ch it
rocoivm’ -_s a cortlfiud cOfy bof r. :, r by s a

n-.th s : .c unsel f r the prcut- .n c ul check 1 ♦ <f ho dobras
it i"rr .p s r_- bject t it.

DF.. BCBHH: Certainly, ' ur H. r, I 3h.il th :t later.


*S. KoROYx *4y question, y.ur 3 nor, ic whether r n t defense

5547


5 -v--il-:> JF-U-h-Bi. Isi (l nt . Hll-oshui .r/ V.n 6c on)

C urt I

c unawl pr . t ir.tr 'uco this or., ire it an -rhibit mnfcor, cr
C-X.S hu int.ru: t r.-rO. put it in the Dccur^nt B. k f.r thv c nvonionco
-X the n-ibiur.l, thereby r^jucstir.. tfc- Tribunal t tak. judicial n.tico
cX the t-stia ny aut Xerth in the .ilch sve re?

DS. BCSE-li Y'~3j cert inly, I Bant t 5 .the latter. I want tr sub-
r^it it as a at to ..nt which-, ns ant’-j in the Hilch trial.

The. HiESITHKTi Then it ah oil bo br *i.;ht bof: re tho Tribunal

un-er certification by a. a cuth rity, and v.„ ay tnkv judicial n.tico

cf it.

Dd. 90EH::i Tea, certainly, i hhvo already oxprcaaoi, y.ur n r,
that I shall . g .

THE FhESiUSrTTi I n.tico that c haa hinaolf certified that

it is a truo c thw twstisu-ry bOf ro Tribunal II.

•

MUBJOffi 11 aa attcaptin otyraino, year Boner, la
whothor r n t he la t lvu it *r. exhibit nu r. it is t
nueeoaary t ,iv. it n exhibit mt-ber.

® 1 ua ^ ra ^ Gn d ocuaaol t . ho is n t frying it

as an oxhibit. Is that c.rroct, c unaul?

D?.. B.CEH^: Yus.


5548


6 rtprH-£8H-l£-l-aJurxL -Iat.
Court . i.


DR. 5GE..I: In c <nnecti r. with tno office order of
Growitz, I sub.uit the deciLeat, 11P0 5, which is .a af¬
fidavit by Dr. C rl Blu^enrcuter, Sunitaets-Zcu&ocistcr
(::cdic i ^uartorhcster) ,t u.o SS. It appears an page
9 cf the i cu-.ont book Foppendicfc, end I offer it us
Pcppondick Ixhicit 3. I quote fr . the contents of
this document:

"I, Dr. Curl 51u_.er.routcr, -t Gr:>o_itz in
Holstein, Landhuus Stor.i, lr to SS-Gruppenfuc-hror, lnvo
been advised that r. fisse affidavit ’..ill render ac
liable to punish..ent.

"I declare under oath 1 that ~y statement is
true end is given in order tc be suo..ittcd .» evidence
to Military Tribunal, . loco of Justice, Murnborg.

"I M-s chief >f office :.V (.cht-icc 1-paar-s-
ccutic'.l service) ir. the -coic-.L Office of tno o.ffon-
SS until 3i August 1943. Fr . then on, until the end
of the v/:.r, I vr.s ..edicr.1 quarter . .ster cf the 3S in
the jfflop f Dr. Grtwitz, Reich physician 3S. In the
preceding ye ra, I was ccoaniunully in the tffico of
the Reich phy3icl n r. official duty.

’I ... the ref ore :ble to give the following
statements -b-ut Or.-.vita's ffico ~nd the official
work there, bef re nd fu,r 1 Scptc-ber 1943.

"Fru. 1940 ti 1943, tno .fficc of the Reich
Physician was n t very extensive. I vr.s ;f the L--
prcssii n, th.t it pr. cticelly consisted nly ..f Dr.

Orr.v/itz himself, who person lly settled thu ffairs
submitted tu hi.: r to his office. :.o preferred -rrl
tr nsactions by discussions in his own office without
the presence ef a third person.

"Gr .witz's secretary worked in his outer

5519


3 Apr i I -x.BH-12-2-i£urth2 -I at.

Ccurt . i.


office. Fra_. 1541 jcwsrds I saw ^r. '..illc as well a 3
Grawitz's djutnat .r.ur.i Grhv/itz. Occasionally 1 saw
Lr. ropp^ndicic toe. I lenew that the 1 tter worked os
■ Physiol"a, in the Geneplcgical Office (Sippeuteot)

” nJ s a chief physician in the Haciel .nd Settlement
Main Office.

"I, ..ynelf, thought tnut the office of the
Reich Physician was superfluous during the war, nd
rlways expressed this opir.i.n. The .;cdic' 1 dep rt-
^.onts of the .. .in offices worked independently, ar.d
ns expedient f-r .. .r renuirw...nts. Fro.u this it fol-
lcv/c, tu t there v. a hardly ny work for Grawitz. i
always felt t:. -1 Ms efforts to interfere and to shew
the necessity lVr hie existence were Just as useless
s they wore disturbing.

"In 1941 I Ur.rncd that Grawitz intended to
pl-.oo his office >n a extensive f sting. Through
this he also hoped i f .ffice.

1 • ; - ‘ itz t k ?:•. :.illo on to hie staff in

1941 in order to uako hi . hie first c.n bor-utcr, v’xn
hi3 desires V.oru cc ...pliahtd.

"Cr 1 Septaubor 1943, Hi^alor ordered c sep-
r-ti^n f the st:ff f the Reich Physician SS ma
: lice. It ill not, n.wev r, .cot the hopes Grawitz

- Gr; wits had succeeded

' r th t f two useful • ..i -\t : -

Hive spheres cf w ri-o, ti.o p:. r;.ceutic service and the *
i-r.ic o rvice* Juoh ns 1 ..yself hnd struggled ag-
-...st the Incerp. ration into the office -f the r.eich
Physician. Through this, the office of the Reich Phy¬
sician received . certain right of existence. This

roly u ;;t ile-d --*ro w.rk for Grawitz, heWevor. On

5550


8 «?rii-EE::-li-3-„^rtr: -Inc.

Ceurt he. i.

ccceunt _f this development, ..ills resumed his activi¬
ty with the fighting units.

"Through Himmler's new organization nr. office

•

celled "Fers ml Office 1 hnd teen newly cst: blished
n.nong tilers. This office \ks nominally given to Pop-
pondick, in addition t. his ether activities in other
lopartaents. I lv.ays had the impression that the so-
cclled 'Person 1 Office,' being a superfluous C3tr.bli-
sho.cnt, w .a •>. mere ioaignrtion. For practically no-
thir.g changed in Or; witz's-off ice .dmlnistration in
ebeporiaon with the usual h uit3 up t. September 1943.

I was n-t v. -re that a new office had been
established, with Poppendick s director, which now
lo'.lt with the* correspondence -f tho «eich Physician,
i.s usual, only nis secretary was still working in
Grawitz's outer office. I recuived as before Jjcu-
..ents end nji instruct! ns dirootly frpa Grawitz, not
fr .. Poppondick. Documents with which I was to dual
were so ..irked by Sr witz in his own handwriting, not
by Pippcnilok. If I *r.d something to discuss with
the Reich Physician, I went .s before directly to
Crawltz.

'Such discussi ns nearly always t. k place
i;: private. On these cc sions ir witz frequ
used t band ver r . ircuss with mo those accumonts
fr... his . 11 with which 1 h d to deal, -r which c.n-
cerr.ed ..y special Sphere. .r wits usually t k such *
cuaents fr... p rtf lie in .-.Is priv t desk. I
:. ticr.d tat 5r.Y/itz v s • iv.rys very careful t^ cre-
s.rve the prescribed secrecy. :.e 'ts v^ry particular
1 settle secret .fitters personally .nd ur-lly, if

P-ssiblc, not in the presence of a third p_rs oh.

5551


9 Aprii-EBH-12-4-i«iartoi-Int.
C.urt i»^. i.


"Orders could only cu.se frto Gmwitz. ?~p-
pendick had no authority to give _:c or _y subordinates
rders cr instructions. Poppondick hac neither the
position nor the .authority of a chief of staff. I nl-

«

ec did not notice th-t Pcpp^ndick had any other pcv.ors
c-nferrcd upon hio. by Grwitz.

'On the contrary, I was -:orc of the impres¬
sion that Grnwitz even after 1 September 1943, set¬
tled .11 the cssenti :1 office matters hl.solf and
only oco.asi_r.ally gave incidental ca-oissions to
Poppondic/c.

"I was never ~w.re that the ncich Physician
35 held staff conferences for the purpeso of planning
experiments ;n hum.n Uings."

Then fallows tr.o signature .nu t.io certification
of BliL-.enruuter.

VR. ILatEY: iiny it please the Court, 1 have a
qu^sti n t. ask cf tho interpreting division, whether
or net whan Counsel refers te "personal cffico," he
intends "personal' ffice r "personnel" office. I
w ndcr if that is clo- r, whether tho w-rd is "per¬
se n 1 *’ ir "personnel. '

DR- BCElII: Quoting fr.-m .y statement in this
connect!.u, there can be n doubt fch t it was a matter
«-f .. chief _f tho pvrs nal ffice, and n^t personnel
office.

T.SE PntSlLrl.T: • C-unsvl, the t<-r~ "p rs-n .i ffics"
is a little —biguous. You -l.~ht offer same ex* - n -
ti-n s t just wh.t person 1 fficc is. ..c Uhdcr-
rid the t_r„ "p-_rs--r.nei as t :.-:ing in <. .pi y«.us; we
can 1.. sine wh t a person 1 .ffice ..ight be, but s.„.e

explanation might b^ helpful.

5552


C_urt . i.


Li-.. BCL.!!: Perhcps tho as-:o "personal office" or
the activity of tho -an ir. charge ef this office, acti¬
vity connects with the staff of this office. But I
would fir.i it._*ost usefui-to clarify this -latter later;
I would like to questi-n the Defendant in this -otter.
Regardins the translation, it sh-uld be without d^ufct
th-. t it is not the personnel chief but the chief cf
the person -1 office.

TIE PRESIDENT: C-unsel ;.:y offer n explanation
of tho ter., when convenient. -

In. bOL.11: In connection with tho questioning of
the Defendant, i would lirte- to clarify this netter.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel uny do 30 at his conven¬
ience .

The Tribunal will now be in recess until 1:30

o' ClwCK.

(Recess until 1330 hours, 8 «prii 1947)


5553


\


..prii B-:.-=K-13 * 14-1-Fcstjr (lat. Kildesfcoinor & Von Sohoon)
Court lio. 1


.jT-Hix.:: session

(Tr.« hearing rcconvcacd at 1330 hours, 8 ..pril 1947)

2'dZ 2LJSH.X: Tho Tribunal Is again in session.

&H2BJS ?0P?£HDICK - Rosuned
DIRECT ac.-UIW .TIOK - (Continued)

3Y DR. BOSffid:

1 I would like to rood now fra: tho docuu.nt which
ha3 .lrcndy bjen offored, H30E,-tho doclnrntion by Dr.

Jung, Part 1, which is also in connection with tho Grnwitz
Offico. I quoto:

Fror. ay own knowledge, I can statu the following:

1. workings of tho Graffiti office.

while I was working thoro, until 1940 (..pril), the
effioj was not particularly inportant and businoss th-ru
was of ;.inor inportanoo. In of foot, tho offico oxhaustod
itself in attempts at ro-oonstruotion work.

Frea the beginning of tho wr.r until I loft, I was
ilno3t -xolusivoly concerned with tho organization and
training in appropriate schools and courses of tho doctors
drafted for war s-rvico - I was very frequently outside
Berlin. (Idunich-Fr-iaann, St r a 1 sun I, -to.) Tho nonagonont
of tho office vr.3 roughly as follows:

Unless he dealt personally with tho mil, Crawltz
us-d tho 3.rvico3 of his secretary who sat in tho anto-
chcxibor, tn rocciv. and doal with tho carrospond-nco.

For 1 .portant or secret nail, Growitz used his own safe;
ho kept the kuy c .rofully and n.var ljt it out of his
sight. It was tho task of tho secr-t .ry to sort tho in¬
chin g nail, and important letters recognized as such
<5^K"^/>turn address, or socr-t let tors, especially when
nddr-3soc^tc Grewitz by nano, had S« b. handed to hit. un¬


opened. lie. one -Is- kr.uw about his current confer-aces
or special basks In th- offie-, because ho dealt with then
directly id private with the special advis-rs who car.o to

. jC 5554


..pril 8-..-BK-13 fc l-i-2-Fest-r (lot. Hildcshoinor & Von Schoer.)
C^urt Hr.. 1

report cr * a work on those natters. It. should bo added that
Srawitz -ns kept busy in his capacity r.s non aging president
of the Gordon Rod Cross and could find only littlo time to
work in his S3 offico, c.rt .inly dealt with nnr.y things
directly concerning the SS, ir. his othor office.

Dr. BOErli: ..t a later ti:. I shall aubr.lt another
affidavit by tho chief dentist in the office of the Reichfl-
arzt-SS, Dr. Plcsohke, and in tho interest of speeding up
tint tors, I shall not cross ox-'.Inc. this witness although
ho has arrived a few dr.y3 .go in Hurnberg.

BY DR! BOEHM:

v >'itn033, I viotld like to ask you new to answer tho
quo3ticn of tho Prosidont of tho Tribunal. ehnt difference
vms there botwoon tho chief of the personnel officu and
the ohlof of the person:-. 1 offico of tho Roichsarzt-SS
Orawitz? How do you explain the difforonoo botweon those
two offices in relation to your own position in the ol'fioo
of *r. Cr .witz?

.. The so-o .Hod person.. 1 office doubtless .’Joans an
office dealing with th. correspondence of the Rciohsorzt
would have gap.o through this office. Tho nano personal
offioo is unusual in rdnlstry cr military organizations.

I inncir.e that this word cer.es frer. Hirr.l.r hinsolf who
apparently liked new fomul*lions. It noons nothing but
an erdl.a.ry ffioo. .. pjrsonnol •ffic> iid not exist
under th Reichsarzt-33. There was the personnel nain
office, and in this personnel main office there was a branch
which de.lt v. 1th . — die 1 matters. It tj true t.Vt Grawitz
h .d a lids n nan in this ..air. office th .t w s the adjutant.
This establish d a conn .cti b.tweei. Gr witz and the
personnel r. ir. offic. .

. I think this atics* to be clarified. Did you give

5555

" * r m


-prii 13 « 14-3-Fostor (I.nt. Kild_shoie._? i* Von Schoen)

Court I«c . 1


signatures -.p rt fro;, the correspondence with the Schvmrzc
horns in your c .pr.clty -.3 chief cf th personal office of
the Reichs-rzt-33 Grawitz?

.. That had nothing to do with ::y work ns chief of the
personal office. 3-.foro 1343 and aftorwords, it hoppoaod on
various occasions that I signed - that ‘.103 vary rarely.

..nd it '.1:13 always Uttinportent things. It happened occasion¬
ally that Grawitz did not vinnt to sign sor.u letter and
assigned senoon. lose tc dc it, either the adjutant :r
..illu cr nysolf. It also happened in c very few c .scs that
GrawitJi dictated soeothing whioh was not finished when he
left. If it was r. natter of ninor L-.portsince, then ho
told the s-crwt.jy that he did not want to wdt for it,
that shu w 3 to get the signature fro;: :.o or froo scoc-ono
also Who was in the building.

. Did ysu s-ftwr lly roooive the order fron Grawitz
to oign without any special .uthority in spocific natters*/


H o.


i Pros your affidavit r.3 to the p rson it boooaes
evident that until the fall of 1944 you wore the losing
physiol n in the Raoo and Sottlenont Office. Did you
receive a suocos3cr in the fall of 1944V

.. Yes, that v/r.s Dr. b Roil. He hr.d worked in the
p.rce and Settlonur.t Officu c rlier. Origin- lly, Roil
vr 3 to bo roc .lie I frx. t 0 ar^y in '43. Ho had boon
drafted at the beginning of the war Just as I h. d fc-un. He
was t be recalled because I was to be given -an a3signii-nt


at tho front, but the arr.y ai l n -t rolc.se hi-i and the#
r-atte. -ragged _n Until the fall of 194-*; then 1ft was
released by th- r:.y and he wus given t..u title- I*. -ins


Physician
vf the Rz


in th- Rr.Ce and ci-ttlcincnt ...in Office. h-
- u;d outtlcnont -I la Office ..t the ti;.- did


h. .d
not


..pril 8-..-BK-13 1-1-4-Post or (Ir.t. Hill,3h-i:. r oc Von Schoon)

Court l.'c. 1

quit- epprev . Ho z- - for the first few months

-t ljr.st - I v: .s t. take cor- ef the business -£ the Race
and Sett 1-:..r.t LIzin Office.

. Dii you r_c,iv_ n front rssignncat after this, in
connection with this?

.. I wr,it-i for it fre:; on- itonth to the next, but
r.ppsrently the disorganizeion .'ini the sc.tc-rirg of the
S3 formations h d progressed 3a for thet nothing cane of
it. Moreover, th-re were Cifficulti-s which I rationed
boforo.

<i Under C.ur.t 1 you -r< accuse’. of consnir .cy. .«7ioa

of tho oc-dofendnnts di-’ you know?

.. 12 cf tho Suf-nd-uifc* 1 el - not know .t nil. By

nsoo I knew ft* >f-ssor Bloc-. By and by sight 1 kn-w
*

Professor K-rl Br.ndt, 4- fosjor H.nllos.r, Professor
Rcstook ind Dr. Fisohor, but I .lo not know whether those
peoplo kr.-vj r.e. I knuv. slightly Biavurs -lid Gobhnrdt
r.nJ Rudolf 3r jidt. ..r.d I knew only Dr. Gonzfcan end
Professor Uxrugowsky well, but officially I sew then only
rarely.

i Did you take port i:: tho sessions of the Consult¬
ing Physicians?

.. Y..s, X particip tod in the last two routings in
1943 and ’44.

„ In th-.-su confureucws i.’ you taka port by order
or -'s n deputy of Crnwitz?

.. ii. , nnl I nov*«r r-pert d tj Grcwitz, and I w-ul.l net

hnvo r.tt-ndcd tfc - ao-ting — l-- 5 unloss I h d :-a io efforts

r.ysoLf to attend it. I t-?k :dvr_-.t of this .s « g^od

opportunity t. k -j -ysolf inferaed of ourr nt d-v-lop -onts

ns -Hi internist, ns f-r .s I had time to list-.: t. tho

lecture3. Per that reason d usi:-i Gr»?it2 in l.'4o to give

5 >57


..pril 8-..-BK-13 ec 14^5-Fostor (Int. :iilesfc i.a-r v. V n Schocn)
Court Ho. 1


r.o a ticket. Ir. 19-i-i th-re was no ticket avail-blc far no
-ny noro. .ith the approval of Grnwitz I wont to Hohonlychcn
on ny own and tried to got accomodations there. I managed
to g-t billots :s.C I lostcncd to a few of the lectures.

I was net an ofi'ici el participant of the second nooting and
the listo which have been submitted show thi3. I uu listed
only on the billet list but not on the li3t of participants.

; Those lists, the Gcccnodnfcion li3ts and the
participant list3, are Ho. 619, Exhibit 236, o:. pages 96
and 1C6 of the German Document Book. Di! you talk to one
of the oo-dofondnnts who took part in these oenfomnoos
at one of thus.. oonferine os?

.. Ho, I didn't know any of then well enough at tho

tine.

You were only a li3twnor at these conferences but
not n participant in discussions, or consultations, or
decisions, or work?

Yes, I no rely listened to a few lectures, not
oven all of the lectures, only th~ ones in which I was
interested. Ooly tho specialists, who were interested,
participated in discussions .a:* femulation of decisions,
and I was not present because that 'id not interest no. Tho
people -who have oorcly listened to tho leoture loft before
the discussion.

. Were there current consultations in the office of
Grnwitz of tho lea-ing physicians of the 33 Iliin Offices'*

*• Yes, in 19-i2, perhaps, when Cr iwitz triel to jot

the nodical 3yston of the Ifcia Offices under his c ntr:l, ha

oallud tho doctors together about _v .ry month, but that was

a forced natter; gen-r liy sen report w s offered and t]ic

people concerned hardly had tine to appear, tie ref r , -nly

part of then w.r present as rul_, mi at first represent?.-

5556

• ♦


-.prii 8-..-3X-13 « 14 -6-Foster (Ink. Hildoshoinur oc Von Schoon}
Court Bo. 1


t ivos wore sont and 1 -tor the people concerned r canine cl away
altcg-th .r. .a:' uo after nil cut 6 or 7 r.octings those

r.octings stopped, ‘gain. No experiments on hur.cn beings or
anything like that were over discussed Qt those meetings.

- Th:so discussions, v;oro they c-.rri.u on at regular
intervals until the and?

*• Nc, it ln3tod only a fewnenths. I believe it was
ir. 19-12.

■

. The prosecution nukes you "-sponsible, especially for
the high-altitude experiments; in the tir.u of thus- experi¬
ments which is approx in .tely frer. M .rch 42 to .eigust 12,
w-re you then ohiof of to. j perse.ncl offic< of Gr^witz?

.. Ko.

\ “hat rotivity did you carry out during this time?

I was lar.iir.g physician in th; Hac- ::r.d .Settlement
Ur.ir. Of fie at th- tir.a, and I v»a3 working also in the
Sip anrj.t, thu gen- logical -ffico.

i During this time did you roc.iv an assignment of
work of duty -which was in connection with ao-cail-d experi¬
ments’ of rescuing ir. high altitudes?

.. No.

1 Did you knew of . visit of Grawitz tv Dachau in order
to inspect exporin ntal errengemonts of *^r. Hnscher, or did
you ov-n participate in such a visit?

.. I did not know about it and I lidnot participate.

<. Did er .*.;itz take y-u along cn such visits to cor.contra-
tion camps?

.. »ie, never.

i How often :i' you visit ceac .-ntrati a c t-.j-s —lto
what purpose?

I was in a concent rati ;n o: ' tv.ic , that was Dach.u.

The first tine was in 1936, rather 1935. Th-rc was si

5557


..pril 8-..-3K-13 « 14-7-Fost.r (Int; Hildoshoir.-r i Von Schoon)
Court Ho. 1

inspection for 33 officers. The Aorshops wore visited, the
kitchens, the brood factory. They all node a greet impression,
the prisoners wore well nourished. Of course I was curious
and look-1 :.t th-c. It medo th- impression of a modern
barracks. There was strict discipline but there was nothing
noticeable, at least as far as the tilings I saw at tho time
were concerned. Then I was in Dachau '.gain for a short
tine about in tho succor of 1941 for one tc two hours.

Grawitz had a specialist for tuberculosis whom h~ had
sont to tho hospital at Dachau tc exunin- tho X-ray
pictures cf the station of V n »oi hern. Some on- h .d said
that the dootor in eh' rg- had mixed up X-ray pictur-s -and
apparently Grawitz was afr .id that th Roichsfuehr-r might
hoar nbout this. Therefore this specialist for tuberculosis
was to chvok tho natter, and I was sent along.


3 .vpril-.v-JP-15-l-^l3klo>' (Int. Hilce-r.-iaer/ Von ~chccn)


Court I

I was in t'-.c X-ray res:: of th_- hoapittl; and •.?<. looked at tho X-ray
pictures. I did not ine-rfuro in ary vay. It ins in 19U1. I was woarinfc
tha uniforr o:' th_ »-octal SSj and I ms therefore treated -.s a civi¬
lian* -ho X-ray roerr was nodera. Everything  ’-S very clean. I fi awed
.t the t .,-rculosis sard which i s n_.rt door. /.« had to go past
it. The ■ atioata w.r- lying in single bods. Iho bods ;-rc not one
above the other* Tho patients looked lit:- tfcu patients in thu tuber¬
culosis nard in any hos. itr.lj and . di .::*t j„ anything -Is., -t
least I had r.c uni -.vorabL, ir.pr.ssion in air- r„c r _ct free th -so visits
of air.-, ifcich, I r/i-ait, tr.rw bri.f visits; nd I raa never In ,ny
«ther concohtratic c p.

3* Did ycr. have anyt in.. t do *. . *.h th. personal r-lr.tion of
R taanor botvjon th- transfer o; Ruschor to th. .. ;ff-n SS?

• !"o*

i. Did you wV-r vko art in a conl-n-nco which-as hold in tho
h-ichsluftf:.rtcinisteriur:, th. «ir jrdatry, bout experiments cf
Dr. laschur*

• h’o*

.. Dig you haro any knowludg. oi any kind of c-ir.‘ml high
altitua- y:. r ori»jnt3 at Dachau?

•». .’o, I learned of that h.ro.

Tou are forth rcoro charg.d by t.;o prosecution Kith co-ros-
ponsi'ollit; in fr-.sin.; «x,>.ri;.r..s avr'.r. th ti - e* th. i'i-n>:

, according to th. pros-cution.

• t har the title "Ch I f the • nal

Officj"?


<•. Her did it then cor-, about that ~u, .s th r.c or. s of
\ .i- stab-, took part in • iiccussxonbetween 3ra its

This ir Document 320, ;ros c’ t rn : t 103, English Bocuswnt 3cok 3,


page 115«


8 <v.prI-clakiey (Int. lIildoShe*ia_r Sc von Schoon)
Court I


1 did . en his conference from the beginning, ns a
rule GriBits talked alone tc .;.s vi i tors. I was called ir. Inter;
snd thur- was a special reason for a hat.

Did you as a rule t pert in these discussions, the dis¬
cussions which took pi c . ir -rasitz»s of.ice?

-*• Ho. ..3 I have rJricdj srio, in setter .1 ho tullcod alono to
his visitors; but a few ti as it he that ho c . someono in,
soma officer who happened to be in the building. That was connected
with his fears that ho a ;ht have difficulties r.ith Hiurler if he
noticed • -h- other side hr» so.-., inf-.nee rdth Hinal.r; aid if

tn-re w.ro difficulties in such c discussion, then ht-hvl th. secretary
c.ill sceoono in.

.ihy did >irr.vit* do that?

• »«>■*fr th- ex.-ri-r.ee that his “osition with Hiral-r

•

could be influoncad unfavorably by one-sided reports.

;ou kr.owr, '’ascher before?

“• "o, I did not a.- hin either before or after..

W* «hat was the course of th r discussion as to Gr.ritz after you
had b-en consulted?

.‘ • hadbaen c .lied in Qraslts instructed mu briefly. Ho

r. 1 th t this Was about Saschpr; that this man hod wporicnoi in the
field of 111 •{ Roiohsl r had tol iin to draw up

*» on cold for tha troops. Ir. the course -
while I * is pres r.t, • . .

was op osjd to a doctor worfcin; ir. -a_. dontly ir. the ..hnen-rb- ‘dthout
his hosing any knowledge of it; and he required of flascher that ho
should -at least inTcm hi-. 6u< ..asch.-.r r.fu?d to do r.< r tf,r
enurgdticr-lly; .ad ho clearly said aha- the -ic.a.n'uehr-r had -i- ..n
'• ' hu was dir-ct’y under the .<jichsfiuhr.r.

Then I sj-aoJX said * .at as doctors in th. Si f: . -nast had been iadopen-
dont up to 1939 but that then -*■, hx boon cut unc.r the xdchsarzt as

5562


3 a ?rii-..-JF-l5-3-eiikloy (Int. Hlldcshois*r '• von Schoon)

^curt I

it Tf s generally custcoary in tb - military that all medical natters

should go through the scr- chamois,

ih^r. Irsaits said h_ could net publish this iscscrandun unless

there vus o:ctj.asivo jxporigpec ~ith the troeps themselves in th© east,

«

It was the ccmpl&toly r.jv formulation of th* directives f<-r tho
uv.ifcr.ont of cold, completely different fro- .fc it had be on customary
up to then, That r.uoh for th- discussion. Later I did not hoar
anything ’.bout any .—r.or.andors or about Ssscher's further oxperioncos,

3* But you "ore sup-os.'- to havo found out at this discussion
what ax.—ri -jr.ts Itascher had iatdo?

•*. .jj fir os I vss personally concern-,d, nothing nua said nbout
oxpcrlx.ont -ftlch xr.schur hv: conduct* i,

D.~. ECHO.’: In accordance - lth those iscussions 1 herewith
oubqit a photo© ta tic copy of tho Document 1573-fS* p c- - to 9,
by tho docusont 157-5—FS those re not - in handwriting b/ Dr.
Poochdr, hich rufor to th- sine diaounsiens *hicn »cru ccntionocl in

Lnation, like ir. docusont 320 this is on page 36 of tho
Document Book, MFC, I offer it na Poppondick Exhibit nuObor L, In
order to * xpodit* natters 1 shall not road this document,

h. «h-. iapre:3ion lid ... chr - tic* on you in his

bohavior and his attltu ’.o ta ires Ir-.ritsf

«. The visitor • s a young doctor. Els con uct wis note¬
worthy. Koto© arrogant) treated Iranita lik- in equal, t

have had protection secemfhero.

<• Do yot r .ss.r ir. ta. .-.»nu . f.rriiu: t- .aschor of a

quotationt "Yes, ii t ^ asked fc-.* 5ta-; rt.nfu->.r,r Si.v.rs to co-c
to cy placo on v ri : :r cccasi si :■ r t > receive infers/. Wrort«^
.vftor all, .11 .. iica_ att-rs -r. \h us.*

... :.o I could net- have rai th -t i:. th .t for . I did not have
•iny ©aa-ertunity to cr.li Si-v-rr in to

55*3


sine- h* was not doctor


8 .-vpri 1-tk-JF-15-ti-B lukloy (In% ..ildesheirer Sc von Scaoon)

Court I

and belonged to quits a different agency. Besides, I do not recall
that before 19hL 1 over talked to Si overs. He will probably bo
able- to t^ll us about that when he is oxarined,

1. 3fcen was this discussion botwoen Saschor and Gr-awitz at
which you w.ro later consulted?

•i. That was in January 19143 shortly b-forc the cold exportnents
Were ccnpluted.

Did you uvor rocahro a report about these col riraents,
or did you have anything to do with Haschor after this discussion had
taker, placo?

•*. Ko, I did not learn of th„ cold oxperinents through a report
or in any other way.

2. Did the fteichsarzt roccivj an i.notation to the conferonco

of tho doctors in NUrrborg?

•

I ntfaolf know nothing about this* ..ccroding to the ovidonoo
which has beer, subedited here, no cno van present fron tho effieo of tho
Roichsarzt.

-i. Do you know the two SS participants Peterson and Nurtung?

, I know both of tho- slightly os SS doctors.

.<• Did those two not report to you -.bout this Booting or nako
any reworks about o-inlnal activitius?

A. Jto-, I saw those two only rarely and speko to tii. very little,
4, Did Murtung and fbterson re ort about this oc-ting to Grawitz?
... I know noth' r H : about that,

-he prosecution charges that you t-.aanded such uxp-risionts
with cold and drying as assistant - 1 * Qrartto.

Ih Vs out of tho -pse t o:. I h nothin-* to do wj fch ‘he
technical uattera in these discuss! ns. I s -r iy culled in os a
witness. Besides, no experiments wore stenH inoi while 1 was present.

It is truo th:< Grawitz caifcasixoe thext-nsiw^ e


. ricnco was


9 -\pr!JP-15—5-c lahley (Int# Hilioshoir^r von Schoen)

Court X

necessary, especially with the troops in the east, before this rot;
aethed of troateent could be introduced#

•it Did you '<r.orr that SS doctors and fountain troop doctors colla¬
borated on thoso questions?

“« :«o«r

s J id any orders exist as to this whicn went through your


hands?


3 t. ril-u-C~J-l6-l-?lakley-{int. Hil Lshdcer, v-n 5ch:n)-
c-urt 1 -

A 3c.

^ Di : y u kn r afc.nt Gr-witz hvrin; freezing experiments carriod
ut In his presence zr -.Is , perhaps, what riers he rive t. this effect?

.. H , I Jen w nothin? abeut that.

5 Her- y u iru charged by the pr'-secutitn with aalaria experi¬
ments which c- k place in dachau fr c 192x2 t. 192x5. »cre y-u at Dachau
at that tine?

A No.

Q .'he witness Viewer, sprite ab.ut written reports of Schil inr's
-hich sent t urarvitz. Di. ycu kn r. anythin.- ab ut this c rresprn ience
between Grawitz in: Scr.illin •?

A Only because in 1512, I think it was, I fr.nquuntly saw lit¬
ters svnt fr.n Cchilling to Gr wits; tut these 1-U .r: were airkod " P^r-
o-nal" an: were cp..ru ' by Grawitz bins-If.

Q During laUr years lid ycu n-tive anythin: nbr-ut the c-.rr-s-
r r.'tnce between -Grawitz am’. Schilling?

« . .\t least I i : net n-ticc it lot. r. It zust havo boen in

192:2 -.hn. I tv ticcd . f*w such letters.

Ci These letters, therefore, li : net ^ threurh ycu, so that in
this c rr..sp nlence- between Grawitz an I Schilling you had no kr.swlodso?

.. :i , these 1-ttors went lircctly t Grawitz pcrs:nally. Zvon
the secretary Ji d n t pen then.

C. Lid you knew Fref. Schill in ?

a I knew that rr f. Sc hi 11 i n w*s cne f the well-known s: .cia-

licts l r tr-picil diseases. I air knew that he was w.rkin atthi H.b.rt

Kveh i“stitut f r I-fecti us Diseases. I believe that in 19ix2, 2 once
saw him. at Trav-ltz': Office.

; Did y u speak u hin?

*

a Ji: ti In' t kn s ac.

Q Did y u havo anythin.- t ±'. with hin?

a No, I ha ' n thin.- t with his. I i r. t knew hin.

Q 7:r.at !i i y u knew cf Ccrillir.-'s activities in Dachau?

55vt


6 April-*-GJ-l6-2-3lakl ey-(int .Kildcshi imr, vcn Sch.n)-
C-urt 1

* I s;r_h w heard—I think it was ft* r. Srawiiinhinself—that
Schillin- ros carrying on special ir.vcsti._ati.n: concerning irr/.unity
in cal aria which he ha* be run in Italy and which he was centinuin.;; in
Gcnanny. It is ;:-ssible tnta Dachau .-as nonti.nc :.

Q Di y u kn.tr t&at Schilling infected tuaan bcir. s with cclaria?

* N...

Q Di! y-u n.t know then free the fact that Schillin; worked at
Dachau—ii -1 y u not hive *- knew fr.n this fact that ho infects i innatos?

A I had r\r. inrressi n of his special research. I an n.t a spe¬
cialists in ti;is field* an* I did n.t think cf it very nuen. I no
Schillin.- vr.c a fan.ua nan* -.a! it never .-ccur-d t. ac that what ho
vrs -'ring c. ul in any way be illegal.

^ Di * y u kn,w that -ravitz had b_.n with Schillin, at “achau
as bteemn evi ’one. fr:a the cunents in this trial?

, I noth r l.-.rne anythin a brut that, Drawltz occasionally
went n trigs presi ent of U.e He Cress. He vieltc i his provincial
f fie os r Red Cress fa spit Is. Ani I issuno that ha went there when
he was on such a trip.

Q Acc r !in t a copy af the ocuacnts subsdtted by the prtsc-
cuti n a lain Chile : F^o-tn.r nust have .7 rk* with Schilling. Did y u
kn-w a nan by that nine?

A I km pi*ootncr superficially. I knew that he wasa lecturer
r.t the 'Jniversity f Munich ani that he was a S3 dee tor. I j:n't rcacn-
Ker hat he lo ked like. I'a sure 1 •-•.•ul n-t rcc-. nis Ida .-1 saw bin
nee ..r twice in Grawits .ffic .

Q nt what occasion was this?

n Cnc i was calle. in t a iiscussien in 3r--ritz'a ffic cct-
tncr. r*is Iras the case f «rs. Dal - r ac , which
was discussed :n this occasion.

* fhat was it about this x.aan Its. Del Franc ?

« lira. Dd Franco Ivocate . n.-r cancer cur.. Jrawitz ha’ -t-
tainci a cue cf this free n-.r ml had h i it test. .. If I r-eaadvr
rightly, ic line am bisnuth kt. centalm - in this iru r. Than Jrnwitz


c .-.pril-^-3J-l6-3-.-l'ikluy( ir.t. Idldesheinsr, von Sci.in)-
Ccurt 1

sunt ce •- Frcf. ^1-r. He sros the- direct r f the Cancer Clinic at the
U n iv rsity Berlin in the Cfcaritee. I knew hin fr:n the tine when
I rkei at the Chari tee. I was t ask Prof. .>ulcr ab.-.ut his opinion
n tnir drag, whether there was .ny prospect of success. r r f. »uler
sai. t cc tr.it Jh: hinsclf had had no experience with it but he-knew
that in the o\rly histery cf the treatment of cancer 'oct'rs had tried
>.n roccncervlcd t.-is ’ru>;. Ho hinsclf wuld ccnJuct experiments at his
clinic with it -n patients rhe had been , riven u:» and who were suffering
fren cancers -n th surface, which were easily accessible. If I an cor¬
rectly infreeci, h never this was never dene because s;-n thereafter the
3 rlln clinico, inclu:in the clinic f Pr sf. Aulcr, vacuatc! their pa¬
tients ivny fr 3 Berlin.


S April-u-GJ- 16 -la-aiaklcy (int.gildeshoiaer von Schoen)

^ourt I

-.as this the er.d of this discussion?

“• :? 0 * unwits talked A-oufc other -;dical discoveries. He
stationed - number of cxasplus whore -vdicai advances were due to non-
sodical people end w.r. X'-ter accepted by dee ter;. Ho X30 pointed out

frequently about white pills - accident played a role in research.

He nontionod thu iiscovory of insulin by t«o young ^csrican doctors after
the torld utir. It had boen known for txonty v. irs what would cure dia¬
betes, what the cause n.as; but all .ittoccpts to obtain .n extract had
filled, I thou--h r.any :cll-kr.own scior.tists hud trie, tc obtain it|
apd now those two young .etericans who had coue back fror war had the
good fortune f discover on effective subst.ncc because they hnproned
to cwblnu tho . rep-or ingredients.

I beli-vo they toek the glands frer animals and put alcohol and
sop. acid or. itj and that ha poned to be the secret. Ibis prevented
the digortivu Juices frou dastroyin the insulin. Granitz discusood
t:v-.t at sivaj length. 3 a Mtabolisa report. Then he said that o.ao
should nc reject everything that is sug:estwd by laynun Just simply
boenus.. it cc ;-s fro a lryaon but one should test it with the nee os sc¬
ry critic 1 nttitu .0.

th a discussion Siovars was nt. Did you

Sievorn?

“• ”us, SieVers war there; bat i kroi hi' only slightly; anl osido
fror this uscus:• tn b. ieva I hin only once. Thun th r* w.r*,
the few ti. -j 3 - -1 kod to r.i. or. t e telephone when he called up our
office.

<• 5 h t lid too entry _ r. xh ch Si. trt , 16-

Kl, Exhibit for thu prcsxut?or. i„, pcx 3 h, pago la 2 cl the ^th of
Sept crib. ;• 191 :.: "Plootnur remains at 3 .r disposal*" .. par.ntly
that, was a te-lephono discus si cn.

a. I cannot s y what that mras exactly; but I do r.-,: bur that

556 ?


8 «pril-.i-G«M6-2a-Slakloy (l't. Eildashcir-jr •; von Schoen)

Court I

Slavers cailed =g tc tho telephone a few tires. Ha called up f»cn
his office—I boliovc it was ir. Southern Oornany—and wanted to talk
to jrv.it:, In th^sc cases ?r-.witz was hinsslf talking cn the Ul_phene
at the tiro. Irani tz used carry ar. very ler.g talephon* conversations.
Sicvors had boon waiting for sons tire on the telephone and m 3 afraid
that his convocation would bo interrupted. Then he had no called
to th- phono and ..shod whether I couldn't go ir. to Or witz's office and
ask hin nfcot Covers hatparve' to -nt to know. This oust havotoon
one such case.

4 * Cn the 23rd of Cctcfc.r 19Uu, on Pago 281, th» ^r.try, "By
tolophene >dv »f biological experiments with Plootnor.

first of all, as submission ;rcf. rrioso for discuss!on.” V.hr.t does
that .a .an?"


5570


6 Aprll-^-DJG-17 i IC-l-Malcy (Int. \ Screen A iiillesheiner)
Ccurfc I


.. Tfc't w*3 n. d.utt a sidl-r case he ’Is. crlled up and
wanted c t-D: u Gr-witz and then talked t. no. He wrs afraid
the tolephcne ccnnoctior. was t. he brrkcn. He used xc t: ~sk
Cr-witz. I:-icy I c-> n.t sry, f c.urse, what it was *1 ut.

4J D y u k:i:> that Li'l ical experiments were th.se . f
Pr-ferrcr Friese?

.. j: , I e-re.: t a* s v thft either. It is , ssiblc it ws pc-evin
reserreh.

’.ra this Ircfesa.T Iriese enly :n ; ectir. ex; -.ri.-cr.ta, did he
n t h".Ve anythin* t: lz *rith th. II—ouesti.n?

.» FrtftM r Friese, .-a - died at, I bolicvc, fr runs-

wic. -dc-1 Cdlu~o. H- wea in eentnet with Or . . .
n t kn-i hi-, .'til. 1 s* - .< hi*, perhaps „nco. I bjli.vc ho wm t
pass an pini.n cn this N-aubot-nco.

Q Did ;eu knew Frcfcsscr Frieso?

A ..a I said, I »•>« him perhaps -nee briefly in the effico I’
the Reich Phydcitui.

f, Di! y. a cthor..iao have *r.ythin t. dc with tldo ..rater, r
did y u receive any further kr. >lwd o rb at it?

nod tc b« crllod up^n briefly in such natters.

Q Theref ro, y. u 'id n t h’-v. loci with this mutter
particularly?

Kc .

' j vi cnc : ntri . Ln ih Diary -f

Sitvt-rs I su’.'.tit cs D orient ixhicit H?0 6, which is affiJ-vit
f -f-.Tl'r.t -i v v.rs, idl’d is n pa e 12 ef the lAca. 1 :-nt^

Beirut I •’•jndiek, -::1 I ::.r ties icu-.eat :is ? , .nJick iixhibit

H . 5* eccusu vf kn Mlodyo Vf the net x

it in crier t. speed u._ cs tters.

3 Ycu ?.ro char-ed with spucird res; r.sitili.y sul. hmilajhiio

experiments; bufere this ccnfcrenco -f c.nsultin ehysicirns in the

- 5571 •


8 April-A— DJG-L7 & 1^-2-^rlcy (Int. Vca Sc tana HU eaheiaer)
Court i.* . 1


y;er 19-13 ii-'i yiu have anything tc dc vrith sulphenilrisidu experi-
nonts, did j> u knew in rnywry c - such experiments c'rco the camnc-r
f which Gcfch:.rdt s-il they went tc Gr*witz?

.. He, 1 learned ncthinr cf thr.t.

."i Did ycu kr.cn before thr.t a lecture cn such ex.eria-ats had '
been intended :n thi3 crnfcrencc?

.. :ic, I learned thet ;nly ft the meeting itself, '3 ^>11 the
people present did.

c. ,.nu what iuprcsslcn »ii yu h:v. cf this 1 -c’ur. r ti.i- ••'per?
.. I knew Frefosser Ceohrrdt r.a er.e .f the i .rutin-* scientists

a

in the field -f sur;-ry. I had th- ivr.asi.n th-t t is v-r r.

ly scientific invoatig*ti n t clear up nn cssentl 1 war pr
I learned f let-ils only then. Thr.t la ins for fie I le rhuJ
then at ?11 here*

rj nut Gebhnr 't has cx; ressel thr.t these were cx: orir.or.ts tc be
carried ut .n ; .rs. ns rt.. wore sentenced t: death.

/. 1 to, ho said s..

Q hh-.t is y ur answer U this oueotl.n t. c rry -ut ex. orinents
n ,’ecplc sentenced tc death?

.. I come t pass Ju'^i-nt cn the rl^l.t u c-rry . ut such ex; eri-
aents. I *ai3t leave th't l larding sciuntiota end tho stato
r.Uthcritie-5, tut I cm in: i:.\ thr.t ir. tL-.vs f cx.ar~:r.cy, such cs
war times, if prebler.3 cm, t be s.lved ir. .uy th r r.~*., such ix. ,ri-

,

lerrl b.-xis f.r it.

Q Did ycu kru v the lefe.'K-'rr.t Frits Fisdror veil rju hel this
lecture rt this conference t.".e liittr;. ,.c-Iw^-?
i. , I h: ; Just seen him

Q Did y u knew th - fief-nurait Fiach r at the R-ic’. s-rzt?

it He •

Q Did Fischer talk tc ;.vu about th-sc experiment a idth>r before


cr -fter?


5372


e /.pril-^-DJG-17idG-3-lfcloy (Int. v-n Schcen L Hlldesheiaer)
Court He. 1


N- k

Q Did Fr fesscr GcbkarCt talk tc y:u about 3 ul,h;*nil-=dde
experiments at any tine?

.. N., FTcfcss:r Gebhardt lid net talk t nc- either.

Q .»nd alac n. t inter, aft.r the conference f consulting •
physicians in 1911?

. O' connection with Frefoaaer Oobhzrdt - -a nly - very
su, -rfici.'i ;no. He hardly kn-;r ao. JIc did r. t & eck U nc. I
was not en equal.

Q Did Grrv it 2 carry ut ex; vriaer.ts r.t Havensbruck a.t v.’hich
y:u ’ cccr . anie l hia?

I knot nothing about any such visits -f Granite tc Rnvons-
bruck. i.t least I U.-J net ace; . 15 , any hir.

» During the tine cf the ending ef those experiments cf sul-
ph-.nil-niJu did y.u boar then the title Chief . Y I r: irl Office?

: tie cf that in ifereh f 1943.

Q ’/cur nly kn-wlod^e .f eulphanilraido cxnw blunts, therefore,
if I any susnorizo, c n.s fr;r. tho lecture f Fischer at the nr..tin,:
ir. 1913, which ycu rttendo’., -s many ether pc-.lo *ii i?

Y cs.

Ci ..cc rdlnr tc tho indictment you arc charred with r>.s; vnaibility
fer see water -x. erl-.-nts; rid y:u know the err s; ndcncc bet«.cn
Grawitz and Hirr.-d.ur f Jun- r July 1911, ir. which «x^. ricentr are
mentioned carried cut cn gypsies raid :ther ina^tes, there rh.r^
they tl* ziade use cf sea water?

.. 1 , I learned of these letters nly her..

Cl Did ycu knex uqrthinr rb ut . c.rr«s, ndonco between U;c
authorities, shore it is charged ty the injictncnt -beet caking
drinkable all sen water?

a No.

Q Did you have anythin'- tc dc with the planning r carrying

cut cf such -xncrinents at all?

•5573


S ;.pril-«-DJG—17 cc 10-4-.L=lcy (Int. von Schcer, i Hildushcdner)
Court 1


«. Jfc, I did net.

Q In o letter frcn Siuv-.rs tc Grr.witz, !.’c, 122, Exhibit 137,
English Docuaont Book 5, . "-re 23, the adjutant cf Gr'.witz Is nen-
ticnod with whoa th- cr—defendant Bitt’olbe ck is supposed tc hrve
get in touch; did the adjutant tell you anythin about this n-.ttvr
at rll?


A ?! ., the adjutant lid net talk tc sfaout it.

Q Did you knew enc cf the parties in those expv.ric.enta -.f the
Luftwaffe who are crJw res. nsiblc ry the Prcsecuti.n fer . • rti-
cij. ti.n in thv.se <oe.*rlr.unts?

<■ !.’r, I knee nr no f then.

r , I any therefore in conclusion ask ycu, y u have n kntwlui-a
whrtover . f such oxyeri-ento :a hove been acr.ti n.l here, which tore
carried ut r. irn-t.3 rt u-ch-u in .r.ier t. ... ke <cr. -. -.ter drinkable'*


.

‘Q Y. u .-.re vise charged *s rticulnrly r-sjensiVio in Jaundice
e*x; erir. ntr; -lid ycu kntt cf ry ccnncctien between the Rcichnarzt
>ith ether ;.-ec , 1 j in crier U c;rry .ut ex},criav-nts on inaato for
r.o.’ rch in the ipidadc Jrur/ilce?

.. Be, I know r.cthir.r such nogeti tions.

. Di y u knew Dr. D hr.cn ah. eras :.enticnod ir. connection ■ ith
such ox; eriaents?

.. Be, 1 did not kn hia.

Q Dii y-u fcn a fnything shout tho transfer f cultur.s *f
hepatitis *«.ras?

A :i , I r. vor hv-ord anything rtoufc it.

Q Dii ycu knot* mythic: -h ut .xerlaents nsdc iraoitus f r
the research cn the epidemic jaundice?


.. i hinr rl ut experiments cn j.ris.nvrr,

Q Di 1 ycu kr..x anythin'* cf this, that . i«*ht aa\ tthc wore
sentenced tc death, criair.nl s, that these criminals were t infected
artificially?

5574


3 ril-^-DJG-17 4 l*-5-«alcy (Xnt. v.r. SChcvn Hildesfcciner)

Court No. 1

A He, I know nothing about that.

Q Did Gr r.dtr ever talk to ycu about these questions?

•> .. .

Q Ycu knv»: nc frets therefore frea which ycu can conclude that
such criminal experiments for res_-.rch of upidenic i cundico \cro
sr.de?

k Nc.

Q You arc furthcraoro ch>r'-cd os particularly responsible in
the elartnt .f sterilisation; lid you kn.w any cf the . -rs ns nhc
*icr« r.aiticned by the prcrecuU.n in conr.ecticn *ith steriiizr.ti n
exp< ri.r-.nt a?

.. Nc, I kr.ew » nc cf thus.

Q Did ycu knew Gerlwir?

<% Kc •

' -'! Did y^u kn.w Dr. IbddrusT

arac •Ifcddauo" in thi J uynnl.

C Did y u knew Dr. Koch?

.. No, I lid rut know Dr. Kcch.

Q hhc w".s Sch , per, ir. D extent ISO-OH, Hxr.ilit 1U, English
DCcur.- nt D .k 56, 6, in tl. nr.no Sclic'f<_r ms nentl.nad?

.. Sch p;.or was yarn- SS deter .... s vith the K-ichorrat
for . .'-■■ ... had fallen ill -.t the

.-r r : • • '

released frea the H- spited r.t Berlin he w“s n.t t : cn t. the
rrent directly. Me .-o t. be assigned t: ffico first fch . ho

: . . . t} Cflloe f

tho h'-ichscrzt tri-fly, 1 - he likewise h- I i. thinf t j .

i Scheppe-r ,.pli .-i t. thv F-rr nal Staff f HLmlcr tvi usly
after h- received k:i il-l-e cf 1. cu-.-nt NO-Cyc, •r.secuti.n -xhibit
143, Document -k 6, yarc 5, after he received i: ' l-dye f this
document; hew ccull this happen Ccnsilcrir.- th*t Gr'vitz Meyt accr.-t

such delicate- natters, and dealt with it hinself?

5575


5 April-A-DJG-17 '1- l?-6->ialcy (Int. v_n Schcca 1 Hildoshdaor)
Ccurt He. i


.. This ar.ttwr abcut sterilisation by drues which 1 si* here in
th- trl---l fer the first ti is an 'pen natter and ncthin? can be
c-cn fr. :: it -xcept th-t there is perhaps a no aethed cf sttriliz-
-.ti n cf :ce;lc wh . ed tc be sterilized. Hr* Schcppor .vt

this letter I a. net &vjh, perhaps he s-n it when the r-ijutpnt had it
cni t k an interest in it. He tust hr.v- hr.4 a personal friend in
the rurocnnl Staff t- when he turned. That is sca.tWnc quite un-
usurl, • nl *'.s actually forbidden.

r, Freer, the first letter :r Hire. : r tc Pehl, HO. 0>6, thick
is Prcsccuti n Exhibit .... it boc . lent tv t :•*!;! supposedly
wrs t: --t in t.uch with the hcichrrzt i» .r’.r t; carry ut uxperi-
Cents; fr th. evidence -'t ril !;tr. i. s-icas t r. .:.o eviS-nt -hat
?ohl had nr ctnn .cticn t.it*. Gravdtz, but that th- .tatter tvrtc only
dUoussod with hi*; by his 1 'i-. ■ assist nt, Dr. l llinp; did y u

'know this nan I. Hlnct?

.. I knu* hia subtly. I pfun •« hi::, -.t nr-'its* iffica

'

C -is Loll inf aye.'-k tc yu r.b.ut this r any oqrorlracnts in
c.nccr.trttien cosys?

.. » , 1 had r. c.natcti n :ith L:ilin : -.

Q Dil ycu knre nb_ut ex.-rir-nis in concentration cAays abcut
stcrllizztl.n with X-ray?

.. I knew nothin? about that.

Q Did y u knew Dr. Schunann?

- H., I lid net knew hie.


*


8 ..priI-LBH-I7-l -^loy-Int. vanSchoen, -liUoshoi .cr
Court i*c. 1.


x -3 ?r I'ossor dleuberg Known t_* you?

Y 031 I Knew rr.foss-r rilnuberg. 1° 19.41, ap-

pr-xi~ately. ni—J.cr ir. the cose -f a number -f S3

•..ivts ..ad fiances had erdereu treatment by ^refoss-r

£luUbGr£. They \.cr»- coses when these %—on were sterile,

•

:cc. riiris the opinion .f the 1-ct-rs. Ir. these cr.scs
the .vet-rs expressed ais&iviags..which were r«c_r.ei In
the opinion f the Sippena_t doctor, but nil cases where
there v:cro ..is rivir.js hod to be turncu -vor t- .ai-*-ler
f r his personal decision; ..nJ then in .bait six «r
eight cases hi—ilcr mgr.to -n the rec r:s, ’Treat.or.t by
Pr.-fess. r -Il'iubcrs, racnigshUeltcYhosu wo .en were
then sent to Professor ulnuber' :’.r treatment, but this
stappe! pretty s-.r. ..f ter 1»1 I he rd nu . re .beut
these c oos.

i *.U t Kind -f n ..ct.iwe was this which was used
by «*r. fees r nlaufccrg?

n It was • Kind ..f r.. r..vno injectiviio. It was a
sped 1 systv . which ho i...d dovcl pd.

i In u letter f hr. Gruwits to hi....ler bout
tree t-..ent f fu. ie sterility there wora number of
ether duOtors ..entianed, -r.i’ess r von *'r less, r

Ehrh re, £r:l'C3S~r -.chulze, an. forth; it* you Kr. v.

anything nbwt&t th t?

.. Yes, drawitz fc a vffici lly inf-r-uu the icnoe
nJ Settle..* at effica th t ir. the future in the are .e.cnt
-f sterile wives f 3S -enters these hours v/n v were
r.a—ed were t- be c lied ur nd there was a spcoi list
I r v' .on’s dise ses f.r ^ c. district f J r ny n ....

hh. .eJiDY: -ay it pleas- Your xi.-n^r, id’enso
counsel Just -tie r-fcreiicc. t. letter ;'r .. Jr.v»itz to
;;i..l,r regarding stoxlliz ti-.a. I w. uli lifcG t. be in-

5577


6 ^.prii-i.CH-17-2 1 .y-Ir.t. r_n3chcen, HilUssfcc-i.xr

Court 1.

- r-ed to v.h.t qc is referring tc. I h~vt n~ Knowledge
r ' r.y such letter.

T.H. r.vicIDEIiT: ill counsel inf cm the counsel for
the r.3ocuti-n -n* the Iribuntl t. wh t he- refers?

U- respease)

inc. TriOun-1 su.^ests tart c;u;:sel inf r.: the Iri -
bun'.l .an counsel for t..e Arosccuti-r. ..s to the Document
to wuich he refers?

0k. Loir-.:: Y-ur :i> n.r, 1 c t _etcr .i:.e t . t t

this point, but in the c-urs- -f ex..!., ti-n 1 ah: 11

present ni .. ito kn v.r. the letter.

THE n oIDrD.T: V • ry v.e 11.

iURDY: The or sbouti n sh ul li.-:e to know if
this letter is v ilnblo, h-.s it te«.n - ^-Secuti*r. ex¬
hibit • r.. t v/h t it r : ere. I b ve n. lie . s t wh» t i3
ref err*.

DR. I'dilL.: I s.: ii cxpl.in th t.

THE x’.'.ESIDr.I T: ill c-unsol r r>.ceed t.» enli..l;tcn
the Trilun- 1 nj counsel?

DR. DOF.::.: Yor.

* wh-.t else lo u kn.w -f xr. less.r Kluuborg?

- . W n- t!iin& else bout <?rtlcSS.r -1.U. ,r .

^ Lid >cu Know t.ut ny oth-.r steri-ir. .cKn ex¬
periments which v. , e-:e- sup. so. to li vt bce .1 c rri-C out in
ccnccntr tl.n c ..ps, r.„ vnich _f cri.lr. ^ n-.ture?

* {•->, I know n thing b;ut the .. If 1 Iv : he\r.
•Anythin*; b. ut sterilize ti~r. I v uli heve h .d ti tsu-o
it w s sterilization cc rii:.j; t tne v.lid 1 ws.

e This, . :t-.r 11 is v- iter v: ich ie Is t.' r.

ce-rt in extent with xrttc-rs concerning p pu_ ti ;r.s
it n t thet Or wit 2 c nsuitei y u i:. these p.pul ti.:. nl
r ci-.l .. tters?


££76


3 «pril-EBH-17-3\.-deoloy-Int. v nSch-cn, Hil leshci—cr
Court *. . 1.

.. Nd, I was n.t on Ivis.r of Grnwitz in this

sense. In the- first plo.ee Grnwitz ill n_t -coopt any

'--vice, rls not in this fieli. r.c hod his ov;a P'trti-

cul r iutes. w re-; ;or these wire . tters of the so-colled

tivt pjpul-.ti..a policy, things which were f_rcign

«

t ~e, tv-y whole training which I hod obtained fro-

rr fcsE.r -c.nz. In t:i< ic.ee ns Sott!c..cnt office I w..s

•

c-ncernbu -nly with the p.sitiv. —otters. S—ctL.os I
tried to present rr.fcsscr eo views t Or v.’itz, tut
I sevn S- ; vc t:. t up bee .use he s id th-t rr.fesc.r ^-eiiz
v. r c- .ic „ n .:.l refused te coopt his ideas. -e
never t .lkc ’. -b ut t.usc things.

Z Yu ro further clrr^oi with further r-sp nri-
bility in typhus uxp.ri-ehts»; y-u Xn~v; th t 3ucn-.uv.ill
in.utes wore info etui v it:, typ.ius b ccilus quite inten¬
tionally?

.. h- , th t vi-.s unkn v.n tr ,.c.

£ Did y.u kn-vv th t Di»-; w.s ctive in Suchcr.vr.i’?

.w Yes, I Knew th"t. I knew th t there vr s a Hy-
Iootitute in 3uc‘. id *.t which Ding v» s working.

<; ..aut y-u Sen » r Ding's ctlvity in Euchcn-

v-ild?

« i Jv n.t k.n v: .r.y . r t:.e l_t-ils f this v .rk,
but I U rnea -r.ee t.:.t he v. ,.r typnus s«.ru ,

r • v cciao (, Inst typnus, .ccurcing t- new process,
which quantitivuly i».d re. ter r.auits.

Did y^u knew Din^?

« Yes , - I .uit r.i . frequently in Berlin .t ue ef-
fincc, an! few ti .. s 1 t lkoi t hi briefly.

3 ..h.t did y u t Ik b. ut?

A I Iju' t r< _ber, uui.p rt nt things. Dish was :

cheerful pers n, an: vre xch n>i :redtinrs ... iscussu .1

££79


6 /.pril-EE>:-17—i: Icy-Int. v nSchoen, -il-eshc-i-er

C.urt 1. . I.

. rt:nt _ tters briefly. I sv; hi- inly when he vns
lc wins Cir v.itz. I .tt -i . in the hall,
q x£-v; ften w.s he with Srwitz?

.v 1 enn't sc.y cx ctiv. I myself s w hi: there
three r :'_ur ti.isw

q Dii Din.; n.t c ik t y.u ~.ut his typ.ius ex¬
periments?


8 A pril 47-A-SY7- II& E 0-1- ?u tfcy-Infc; "11' .sfcoiacr-V n Scfccon
Court He. 1


• H'U :j.k; ?. rt r. uC typhus V- Dii

• - - , is -rflibit; 28G, vi t! y-vr to-'

r .s tl o si^n.i-.uro :f tlis letter ac.ui?

••• . - r rop; rt. It YTT.S

• ; it tri* - ’ross

f tl.o r.-'.’j'oesou : »; fc>c cr 7 t; re vrul* Jt.vo hcer

signaturo, »•' ^ori-'.o* , , • , .

>rr!:u-l M noorot u . 2Ms v s t tio c.-.so. It *\ c quite

■ .

ntfsOrl- te !t Jv.v r . . ■, n *r tl r3 r

rgoncr « t * o: o cro n ’jocti -no tr tVo

. ,

St.-.VJ !r u ,.r .. jv'.r. one; .

• * i t .o '2)c; tJ •: r- cl* y .«■’

• . 5 li* n-t ro.-.cJ rui f.lr

••2; Ding rent it t >•: v.v; . v. ;• ,

l r.a scon it bof. roir-n/ j inco v o v.-.s M u r. cl lie's In tlis

n is instituto.

71-ori :rugowsL *7 n \& n fc-.fci n -.I t V o o »■• re n scientific


hjocti r.s tr

. u*‘

lie

tier. .n.'.

rent it r. b Or: wits

Or v.Tibs re ‘

it

r '

fc‘ on -

,

::o sr.yinr th.

t t;

o #

.,’or c iC

-’0 :>v'yl is! if. .. .1 T r!

.•Ut f. o at.-jv

<* n

.

H un tie

s . ' t: o c i ntor-


intoll i.'jonco re Lee Jn t! .. ; c.xr .tJ r:.l Xin 0 Vice r • c
«.ut 'n it t: -_n tic paper c ror.fc V.c* t- ru~. v;o!~;

-sso. it n tr Lir. .

i

• ,

re .1 those?

A. I roac it hero, « . - • • lofinltoX;

n-:t rcr. it boforo. I ca euro I r ry,

nc usually roe. s scientific articles in ul ich is n.-t

5£61


i


S ... vi-1 -19&20-2-=u~.ty-Int • Kil '.crheiriui*-” n Scl . cn

C- urt :7c. 1

_)rtrtictu..rl- intoruatod. I a:: net SfXci.lirt, I ! vc no

- f v a« X trr.8 not inturosted
. . t ' . v lur.to tl.v vri fitly,

‘'i 7 u ! v. t: ^ rr ..nont xSl r • sri^n/ont tc
rtr..p .11 scientific publicj.ti- nr?

-• Tc, r. . t in ccr.crr.I, ‘>ut it J-r., onod r: u Oi*r.v;itz gr.vo
pr.pora t co t. £tr.i>.

-ro *•< u r. :o . .r if r. a.;oci:.l C: f r t.,T’ ua

i.n\ virus rosonrch -.t: ich ~:.r un’.-r Si.v IcmorsM .-l* I>in-j?

• , f ray cue: c i-. < . : . t r.

• •

r-c 'tor • f my auc! c - i - , . ir. vi f :y < 'lofco

1 c!- ; qualifier.ticnc, i c. . - .

*>ufe n any auol. c iz'.i U .

In this c nnoctiv-n, c‘r t ..v c <•: f. r

’ ■ ii fo. 1 o r, -r..vCi ly c r. fi :.vit r

•Vo Do'fon snt 1 !r # - ’ , 1

’•*. i cl r n . * GO 17 f t: i - etc ,

fr u tl t. -V.o

r.'.tnoso, - -loci : y, n i.- ffi vit 448 ins —

ti'is ir SxklMt fr: hi r - fc r 1 , :vjir’i cunont
12 , — . t * u woro Oborjru. .enfu r.

tlr.t c rroct?

, .

rionti nine f • l:o.

3 r.lreh,raicy c -cfc .is ix.f.r ..tier, fr . 3i*£m rad ! j .use U.va
c nfusof. f. o nr_-o.

• : :.r .j

c nfDX’or.co rf c neultiiv* ..r, y vlysicirar ir. f.:o ycT.r

- , . r. -• .’0

tc k t bjoefci: n.

... We, I lid net hwr.r Ding, mf. I v;.s • - . nt r.t

ray lectures f Shu hygionc roctirn t =: uco : .otinrTs.

6£62


e .. ril 47-.-3 -19-2C-3-rutty-Int: ril’csl -inor-Yrn ffefcoon
C urt Kc. 1


~. The v-ltn^ss, lie pen, or. Id -.-yen r cl: c’ by the Defonso
ti t n rop rts r.ViuC typhus exp-rl. ^r.cs n. c subnittod
t<- F por.‘.ic!:, K is is in the English r-c rr*.s, prpo 1266 ,
G~rr:r.n rvctr’.e, 1253. I-c furtl*orr?crc cays r.t tlx

: :• sbeutim, -s 1253, English hr ok,

Gorarsi b k, 1307, tl r.t ho hr. 1 sort re, rts t Orawits,
cn.l ..pon’.ick roccr ccpy'cf thla ro-.rrt. ihorc is •
jrvyre .:xr.t p. rrontly hotroon thcco t-
*'r * t It. vo yen t- 3 r.y tc this?

... r c

•

r r re rts n tj 1 n sk * by -r.

rr , K ■ ‘ n c.naw re ’ tk- t nr ro* t : rt r~.a cont t<* :-.n,

I'ia see T..: c ntrr.Uctcry statement which fco :rv o "'••cut
hr.If r.n ur 1 t-.r I c n oxplr. n by tl:o questi n .aked by

. ; V- r ’ . thor re. rtr •.;cro

: t Jrr.vritz. Kc • r. :.ns’..oro"yoo", nd ,r ' ’ ly tho

ft* 80 cut ion rr wo. ‘ 1 :. •;: rrrr .r, r. *. ho kn. v ti I
)tl njj’ to Gr.sritc's at .ff, st tl t in r.nsv or t- tho
n-:;t qu. -tJ n -- m F on.’lck rocoi-c c r ,rj — 3 a
is now rod a yoa“« I comet imlorctnnl why rjthin r.
shrrt tino Y.z crul*. :.:.Vo fct.r 'iroctly erntrr. ictcry ntrto-
. newer tr tho first clou? oi r *; 1
I rocoi*T . ro.j rtc n tyl'.us , v o r:.3 "n-°.

: , roc sctfully vcquosto

Dvfonao. 1‘ ur.sol at so fc' o pr.-c nun c: n w; Scl: t’-cco

: ' ' ' .

T: C cunsol's roquost t< - >r.sr-nrMo. -ill
Crunaol frr tie Dofor. k-r.t frmisS GoursoI * j.tfc tJ o ->r.o
nunbers whor.. t! use st to.;ontr r.r.y be f ur^.?

DR. *10311! I 'i- tint .\lror. y, :.r.' it tj. s hero : * r

cf rocerd rr. ;-r. 0 c 1266 end t> « t'or. -.n rcc. r.. rn 1238, - n'.

in the rooxr-:iRr.si.'n by trs Frrsccuticn it its the -n[-li&

S£c5 .


B -orll 47-„-S -19&20^^-?utty-Int:!:ii:«-3!:win-r, Yen Schcn
C urt Nc . 1


reccrl, 1268 , r_* ti e Goreum nc ~r.r 1307. ~t this

opportunity I sh'ull like to cc:;o t: the letter m ’ to
• xr.tin it hero, r. i«.tt*.r vl ich I hnvo o.lr.rly raonticnoi
in c'nnect .cn vith IClr.uborg. It is ir. Gor::r.r. Ir cunont
E: i: 6, ^cuncnt :!9-214, pr.~c -18. -Vis is r. letter fren .
Gxvvritz tc I iralor which rof rs to Klr.ukur^.

3Y ..i:. ;:osu: ;

<1. In ccnnocti n with v/’r. -t 1..3 ':o-n c nil, I ; ull
tc t.ok you: i^il ycu hr.vo my ctmccti.nr.t r.llritli typhus
rosonrch cr ctl or 'iscr.Cw? which .o it sai’olc f. r ycu
tc roccynizo fcfcr.fc crliinnl o:: >ori: onts in those flolls hr/,
boon un.’o?

A. Me.

Ycu r.ro, furthornoro, c'.. r, -by tic Prosocuti-r. with
roaixnflibility in a:porluocta vith • ir- ns. ill ycu over
visit the conoontrc.tifn c:_*iy AxcbownLl ir. vrhiel o .»cr io' ts
rlfch pria nr Wore aUJ>p ; ec'ly .; , ac 'inr tr tl;
aor.boi jnta 1* tho witnoa , hr n, in Dcco::bor, 19v3, until
OctC G 19't'l?

r never ontorw' tl ; cfnoor.tr tirn coup
. ! n't in my way receive kncrlod rally

cr l:j i/rltiny: f tl.oeo o;:p~nl. cr.ta with. ■> irr.r?

... < , 1 rocolvdf i.< Imr vie’ • r thor;.

x 'urtlxr re. It tr.s f

rprcit.l o;c;crinont vc.c . v > o ••oich CrL 1 ? lico
Offico Hi to;>ton-jor, 19 *1, ir. - lie: five ors ns v/oro

suppcec ’1 tc r:.vc token ) x*t. 2 -?: v-ro oxpcrhtonts xti t:

•

r.ccnitln. Did you v myt' ut t; ir * ; f

I’rugc i/slcy tc tl u Cririnnl ?_e!:Icrl Inrtitvto, r i.*. ycu

hr. v; anythin- ut :xy tier letters? -I is le t Jar v c

cunontt nuriber 20'., socuticn -I hit IS;.

. . I mow tl inr utti is letter f y*s.

5£64


a -prll -lS&2C-5-?u-r'-:n : • : :: c* . i: r-V n Pel-' cr.

Court :r.. 1


§'

11 - n t coc any thur c> rr-s; n.'.onco a'vufc it.

r l. -.ocut r.ll ti le st^r ;*:u cnly rocoivo'. kncvlwC o
cSZor yrur rrivr.l ir. ‘.furnbory, li-'. you nrt?

. Yos.

-lc , you :-Tv. cl nr o*.’. with re srr ncibility in
ox.jori 3i =e vith incer.-lr-ry b bs. Di *. you ’n v; raiyS) >nc
r.b ut any w report or. Co Ir. 3uc* ortwal'. r. hurarr. ’seines ir.
vtf ich Incur U ry b r:br r re ueui?

A. ilo, I U1 n t.

•. A fco witr, r-, . '.Tn, - r 2 r.<ic-ccirn rpr-Jco f rn

ox. Crincntr.l war;'. * r ro r;: cl. 1 cfi'ico In t' c
c ffieo f CJ.u •‘Olche-- rst: In rHch cue} .onto v.ro

;>lc.r.no I r.nl r.pprcvoC?

• tu w f n« auota .• r.. • know w.’a.t lcln . 1 i f

f."rlf this ffl v;cul’ ! v ! . <;• . ... r ::J toly

•*1 irty-fiv 2 fcturs wile! r. f ;• t Grawits, ftrr.rifci n
*1 or x.S8«‘. m pv. rarnr.Uy.

C. In yrur opinion, witness, wlxt r..s this «x J irinontal
s-; 61. r. 5 in'^oipsir w! lch supv rr '.ly }.vl tl*o rufcVrrity
f r :: -ri: or.6r.fcl n in or nc.ntrr.t: n c:_;j*r wMch v.c
:sen fell no:', by Mr.yon?

... lc 1 c quite bvl uely . -

auction V, -r f r. vr:

initial rf Me n:: . *' La • •.

.

ecp ven oanolwas tic root r - -

’■f the CnIvorsity £ ^ . •. :• no f

h

tie beet-known 3.;ocir.lirfcr r :io l-"o3 p- ;rt v.o-*
EO&icinoa ir the ec-or.llo:* sulfcnruJ. lo cori-.o.

‘-1 r t Mil ven onnol : • /. fc] t' is oxycrinontr.l

str.ticn 5?


i-%


-


r yor.i-s r.s his clinic ; o I.

K65


r. ;Cir.l res.:,rcb


a ... ril 5■ -1%20-6-Pu tty-Int : Ell n Scfcon

C urt 2ic. 1

lc’Scrr.t r;, tr sc-er.ilo rocur.rcl: rccti.en v, n'. in tl cro
cho Ir.‘;cr t ri.c o curricf. n rosonrcl r. aulfrnrrrlf.os
in t. : is v> .-.s clinic,

r l. r.e ho in rny c- moot* or. with t’.o SS?

... -a for r.s I knew, to rccoiv^l fincncl 1 supprrt _r ::
tfco Wnffon-SS during the lest : r: . -f. c i*. ..s f: r Qo
icn is cncor . • ,

ic rp r in tl.o CS.

“• Dc itu know wl ircl. '.op. rt unit hr.a r.ny

ccnnoction with ccncor.tr..tier. c. m,,s?

. I .• coir-ctly, ' rocoiv«/’ ..ni:ir.lc ft* tho

• . ' . ’ . v >ry

difficult fee obtain during t’. o :.r; pri’i 'Jly ^fo.-ccr vm
* •

'•enrol cor roe penio*. w in.: :• ei •- 1: -.iono inctitnto n

'tHo rr.ttor, :j.' , 7 n pr V.!y r r tiic c rroe;>:n.*.onco .n.'
eawfclo lottor* “Roei.-rch Socti :• V u , • vt -'.iIn't
!tnc\- 'hat- it i/r.c, .-nfl ho rit r “Hcs. re! S. ctim"

Renen nun.rr.l V, unC fchar. :o t: v : t tl ; tf t • r.n
GXporii:o'ntr.l str.tirn rarx. :\n/ .r V f icl ! a. tr.l'rc * sc
Much hero.

1 • r. v; ;• f • n c nr.octc you

with tJ is office?

... 41c fur r.e - rocn 1 ,: nc*. sent 1. I ;• . i-ln., n
'joh.-.lf f Cr witz, n . I v-sco r. v r. j:. ,. 1'.- roquest

‘ such ) r. ilass

1 :.t

.

DR. 11 '.f?::: ; Deoursantt v : :-i: ir. Di ament Sc 3: : olnut ft jpon-
dick, .'..jo 5"., emteins H . c rrosn r - ixoornt fra this
i -r t- .r : Mt K( . 6.

Kojon writes in i ir *• > "Tro C3 it- fca” ; -u nijned r.s
roap r.sibla f r t: is Icj rt :,: t v ich -* c c-::por- orts


6 - ril ',7- -S*-19e-20-7-:utt;--Ir.t: : il .shuincr-Vrn Sci.ron
Ccurt He. 1


Y/oro currioO. cut.


566 ?


8 «pril-l£is-IWt20-i -xutty-Int. riiieeShci—or ,venScliC6n
Court St. I.


On the witness Stand Kcgcn iii net intvin this, and
v»h-t is yeur opinion?

« I car. only repc-.t ch t I was not responsible
for rest arch section V f Pr^fcss-r von Kennel nor for
any liegeh research section under the fl&icbsnrzt, that
Inino responsibility in th.se connections.

k *<ith tac exception of- your -ei-tion to the
supply »f expert lent 1 :.i.. Is, you h..J n.thing tv 1-

with this experiment 1 st ti ni, lid you?

« No, I c :nn t re .*., r nnything else.

• * ftlst n.t with incer.di ry bo.ob experiments?

ft lio.

Lu. uC_L.: oxpl ir.i.v, t..ls ucp. rt...e*nt V, in con-
necti-r. with this 1 sub it this iwcuvent which is an
fliJ. vit by Dr. ..L. i*., iu‘-8 :i Is., hx-9, •• hi eh is
an nfflu vit L> -rofose-r v u Kennel. Both f tiicso
doouuentn re on p «.2 '.n, jf tnt joou..eiit b*»vK
P-ppcndicK. I .-ffer then 8 PeppondioK Exhibits No.

7 nJ 9, :nd I w-uli 1 i(Ce t- re taeso i.cu.o;.t:i.
PoppoflUictc Ex hibit no. 7, 1 quote: —

...IV: it pi. • r Honor} P r:.:.

for interrupting. I h vc no objections t^ tr.csa two r-
fi:. vitr, but I wish t. request the Secret-.ry-5oncr .1 t
bring to court t u.rrcw the ri.;i:. 1 uxhiuits . f D.cu..ent
numbers NO-579, NO-532 ni NO-1300.

THE TLo Score t -.ry-O-.r.e r .1 will note the

request wf the C.unSwl r.r the x'r secuti.n.

-

T.aZ PhESIDLf.'T: The . ri-i.. 1 exhibits r tut original
uc cu_.cn ts?

*-v. rinhCY: The ri t in. i i. cu-ents,

TiiE PfthoIDS.T: T.-_ .ri,.i:; 1 .. cie.-its t c.urt t.-

££65


8 ~pril-£cr:-l »&2
Cv-UTL He. i.


-Ptttty-Iat. ;iiiuosi»ci_*cr, vonSch-en


-~rr-w .iCrnin^.-

DR. bJRiL.: I s.i 11 Zo\i read Exhibit Poppendick
•So. 7:

"I v. s n i-pi 'y;c r t tiic Sc he ring i.orks «. G. in

Boriin-Ch.rlottcnburg since the yc-r 1935 end v/ s :t the

•

s _e ti.-o c co-w.rKer of Profess-r ven iCennol who was r.t
that ti .e Seni-r Physician (Obur.rzt) ct the municipal
H.spit-.l wChv.ibing, Jur.ioh. Pr^fesser v.-n .ecnncl worked
-n sulf-rr.-lie research, end I worked un^r hi.. :.s .
chu-icnl c -v. rkor. -lexical science awes tv him the ro¬
se re U of tho suifcdiozolc ^r-up v.iusc ..ost cffioccivU3

compound \v,a Glotucii which w r, produced by tho Sobering

•

<.vrks.

"Prv... 1937 until 13i3 rruf«ss~r von uer.ncl woa dir¬
ector a tho University Clinic f~r Skin r.nd Vcnorohl
Distoses iA .viul nd after t.e_t in -eipzig in tho sn^.o
cap- city.

"tiu fir.-ily directed in Leipzig n ohc.uC-tho rape utic
dopr rt.ent c-iled Kesearch Dep rt-a.t V (a^t ho..-.n V but
"V ) which .7 .3 financially supported by tho SS. no wor¬
ked f -r ec .’no..ic indopondcnco from industry nu intended

• roso*:roh institute t^ bo tdcon _vor the t.ie state. he

•

r.i. tho :issur:cco .-f the SS ti*. t ho would re . in com¬
pletely l’rec and independent rose rch v._rkcr. me ocor-
dingiy lirectea his rose rch .epart .eat V — f. r Yen
kennel — n ..is own respnsi-ility. Ir. scientific 1 -
ters oven the hsich Phyaici a-SS nd Police Dr. ■■•..it.:
emuld sivo hi r.» .riers, nor did r.e d s .

"There is no . ubt t:. t the chief V the Cv.ro r.'1
office f t;.o it.ioh ri.ysici-n-S3 :ni ? iica, hel .at Pop pc n-
iick, v ;s net responsible l.r tae utivitics f t.-.is ro¬
se rch department V. I know t.. t ^ref ess-r 7~n A:r.r.vl

iic9


5 '.;-ril-£EH-19&20-3n-Putty-Int. riildeshci ...-dr, vonSchcen
Court Ko. 1 .

receive- eai-.x.Is f~r experiments, white -ice, for his
laboratory in i-cipzig rr... 3uchenv,-ld, ad that there
v;_s _n e-.cL ru,e oi correspondence regarding this. I
r<—c-.Ler . t-Ik with Pr icss-r von -»onnel in tno course
cf which we discussed the h.rmone- resenrer. of a D nish
SS physic! n. This d-ct..r who worked on the i_.pl. ntr.-
ticn „f hormone crystals ncv«j w rkel with Pr-foss-r v~n
iCcnnel *r his research dop'rt-.ent V.

"Tne research dcpirt-em f /r-lcss-r v. n .vcnocl

•

never ::s for -.3 I knew hud nything to do with experi¬
ments or. typhus .r.u incet.i.ry b :b 3 ; the s lo purpose
ef this Jop .:-t_.e:.t w.s research on sulfonamides .nd du¬
ring the last few ye rs f t:.c . r rucerrch on penicil¬
lin.

. 1 sn 11 13. ro:d Dcoti.ont Exhibit No. 9:

"I, .r fear r I>r. ~e . J oof v-n Acnnoi, b rn 9
..ugust 1997 in Munich, residence: b J xio -burg vor dir
.u.cho, dy_inesiu.xtr.ooe 14, u ve boon :<Svisod that 1
will be lie lie to punish, .out if I ...-.c f' loo ffid.r-
vit. 1 uDolaro unuer ith t.. t ..y at te..entc- re true
.r.‘ were ..tie in order t*. be su’o..ittwo is evidence t-
« Hit ry Tribunal I in ju.c 1 1 cc f Justice in hurnburg,
G^r . ny.

"..fter .. ri_ r I, 1 stu;itu ...uicir.e. having
finished ,.y specialized studies s specialist ,n shin
-nd vuioru-.L Ure ses, I coupled ,ysolf 'ixrendy at an
eorly d.t- with che * ther- peutic rese rch. Ir. 1 S 28 I
worked with Dr.'xclit f • ... Ber¬

lin, - n i:is, -old prep r ti r. S.1& n.l-B-oicisu.. In
1932 I received f r this • rk .y m rce _f doctor hhbil.
Ti.c beginning of .7 r ..search rh J iv r. *enn 1) dates
b ck t this ti c. -vt t.. t ti .e 1 ron.unc.i 11 >,rs-n 1

E£Sf


3 ^prii-E3H-lS&20-. -Ptttty-Iat. -iil-wSh-. i -or, voni-cpron

C-urt i.~. 1.

fim nci .1 p .rticip-ti-n in tne large-sc- le -*nuf-cturc

.f the .t-v:-n_c- preper-tier. by the fir- uf Severing,

r-thcr I contented -ystXf with a chemist end na -assistant
f w r .-y rest rch v. rK. *«y first chemist in ~y research dc-
j rt.;nt V was Dr. -dichatl, r. Jew, wh- was -erriee tc an
Englioh w-unn. In 1533 I helped hi.. to c-iirate tc hag-
i nd. - y next cholic 3 collaborator whs Dr. xCi uig.

In 1937 I boc'-.e erdinrry or -fesser nt the University ~f
A.iel ind direct r f the University aorjatolwgy clinic.

The invention .-r the oalfer... idc trlobuoid by .*i ..lg '.nS
ao •Antes bock to th.it ti c, the production of which by
the iiru of Securing has t.nly new been .utUwizod r.^in
by tho bngliph occupation authorities r r the Sobering
i lr~.

. "T^get.icr with Ki-.ij nd *uJcc there appoorod the
first CLcr . n -rK -n penicillin in the Clinical ..etKly
(..llniscuc ..-chenschrift) (lfc4B/i$43),. *ith the support
.f the fir., of ooherir..-,, the rest, rch dc-p rt-ent Vs Per-
n -nr.el h 1 :oMhll* ir.cre. s-.d gr«* tly. I had _iy -wn
rest* rch ccount V fjr tr.o -utu rizod research expendi¬
tures .

"Ir. 15-i3 I v.ns su aentd by letter u report tc tno
..die. 1 office jf the . ffen-SS. I wus -oked taerc t.
pi.ee ..-ys- if -t tho -Ie-'.s:.l f the . ffca-SS as consul¬
tant specif* list i r v n real diseases with etc-otherapy*
..fttr su.o •bjoctions n -y p rt, 1 finally : rece after I
hr.d been expressly -soured -f -0 .bs .lut civili..n inde¬
pendence. F r -y n >rk I v/*.s prx-issd fin .acl 1 nupfort
espcci- Uy in the f -r . cf c'.c.ic; Is.

SS91


Court S'— 1

6 JL-.r 47-A-21-l-I2C-kurthE Cat. TonSchoen & Fildeshtir.cr)

"Os 1 April 1942 I received a summons to tfcc University of Leipzi.*

cad could aove -.y Kiel research departaent there. By financial and

natoriol support froa the Veffcn-SS ve verc able to keep the clinic,

vfaich %cs heavily damaged ty boats, in a vork&ble condition. In 1943 I

received the h-.norcry rank of Sturutannfucfcrcr in the Vaffen-SS* in common

vith the other consultant physicians of ether troop unite. Seforo this

I hed no connection vith cny organisation of the SSDA?, apart fror. ay

.ontvrship froa 1933 on (vitheut efflca).

"ar excerpt fro the took 'The SS State' (Dor SS-Stort) toy £v*ea

Kogan, no veil ae his testimony tef.ro Military Tritunrl I regarding

the cxpcrU-.er.trl station in Lolpsig, has been submitted to no. and fron

ny ovr. kn.vledge I ern state the foil A-in, thereto:

■Ir. Leipzig there vr-e no experimental station Satan 'V'. There vrs

only r research department V (Vockunnel), vfcich had gone vith at fron
Munich via Kiel to Leinri.; cat vhich v 6 , fiaancinlly supported ty the
firm of Schorl:v ir. ros>ct >f inventions.

"Only in 19-.3 did this research deportment receive ccrti ir. financial
end notorial assistance from the Unffon SS ns veil. This rcoorreh dc-
oertment vns exclusively under ay -rders. it vas a purely civilian
univurclty institution. '.lot one sin.;lv v.rk-.r vos a member of tho SS.
ir. fact, I employed a Catholic nricst as y private secretary vh:n the
Gestapo intended to send t .> iuchenvrld, and an unlicensed hnlf-v’cvloh
vonon doctor vrs uy orivote assistant.

■The research department V (Vonkonnwl) vr.c exclusively concerned
vith. chor-.otherapeutic problems (sulfonamides, ncnicillin, lice novder,
etc.). All tho vorke of tfcl. research donert.cnt were rublished in of¬
ficial medical vecklies under the fceadin 'By the ' or kin.- Co-".unity of
the Leipzig, or Kiel, Ccrmat-1 j,“* Clinic, director: rr-feseor Vonkennel'.

"This department never had anythin: t- do «ith the hormone experi¬
ments ->f Ur. Yp.ernet, vith tyohus, -r vith CTooriJents concerning turns.

I personally only once heard of Tr. Vcernet, that he vrs in Berlin Booking

the cooperation of tfcc pharmaceutical industry. The er-irinonts mentioned

££52 • *.


Court So. 1

6 Aar 47-A-21-2-£Bi-Jcu7tha (1st. VonSchoon & Eildashcir.er)


is the too.: of Dr. Kogon pro entirely unknown to se.

"Viewed fros a sodical export's point of view, the inolantation of
synthetic horaones is the forr. of crystal# or tat let# into the abdcoinol
cover represents as internationally recognized nothod which ha# already
proved effective.

“Dr. Gravitz, the Eoich Physician SS end ?-lice, visited ny clinic
-sly once, after the heavy air raid ir. Decenter 19-.-:. I received freo
his no directives vhetsoovor is eciontific respects or is regard to
working nothode.

"Hr. Poppcsdich had nothing whatever to do with jy reoerreh dconrt-
sont, nor did ht ever try to interfere is tfceaeo or methods.

"The assertion oade ir. Dr. Ko^.n'e took th.-.t ?op-endick was
authorized to si.;n for the ox crisestel d«rcert*ont is entirely unfounded."

That is the end of =y ou-tetion. Tho affidavit is r.i.pied end cor-

4

tlfied, end therefore c-rr^ct.

7S PSS5IS2KS: The Tribunal has received fro-.: Captain Cherlco J.
Roskn, Hodleal Corps, e written stntcsost that the defendant Cbcrhcuoer
should to excused free attendance at this afternoon' e 01 on ion. This
h.-o tecs aocccpliohod and the certificate will be filed for the record.

(The Tribunal adj.urncd until P A-ril 1947 r.t 0950 hours.)


-1

Ciurt So. 1

6 *rr 4V-A-21-2-S3i-fcurthe (Int. VonSchoen & Hiid^shcinor)


in the book of Dr. Ko-~on ere entirely unknovc to ne.

"Viewed fron a nodical expert's point of viev, the inolar.tation of
synthetic hcracncB in the forn of crystals or tablets into the abdoninal
cover rcorc6er.t3 an internationally rec:£nizod nethod vhieh has already
proved effective.

Tr. Oravitt, the Hcich Physician SS end Police, visited :y clinic
only once, after the heavy air raid ir. Decanter 19-.4. ! received fre-a
b-ia no directives vheteoever in scientific resoccto or ir. rc^rrd to
voricirw; noth ids.

"Xr. Poppcndlck had nothing vhatever to do ritfc jy reoerreh deoart-
=«nt, nor did ho ever try to interfere in thenso or netheds.

"Iho oesertion nada in rr. Kog.n'c bock tha.t Pop on dick van
authorized to »i.;n for the ox crinontrl depur tner.t is entirely unfounded.'’

That lo the end of ry ouotatlon. The affidavit is signed and cor;

*

tified, end therefore correct.

Trj. PBXSI2LKT: Iho Tribunal has received fro*: Captain Cherlos J.

Kedict 1 1 Corps, a vritten statcaont that the defendant Cbcrhcunor
should bo excused fren attondor.ee at this oftomoon't oisclon. This
hr a boor, acc'xipllohcd and th» certificate viil be filed for iho record.

(The Tribunal ndj-urned until P Arrll 1947 nt 0920 hours.)


ii&e


ROLL
