# Elijah the Prophet (Mandaean)

*Extracted from archive.org PDF | 577 pages in source*

---

The Story of Creation in the Mandaean
Holv Book the Ginza Rba
Sabah Aldihisi
Submitted for the degree of Ph.D.
University College London
1

---PAGE BREAK---

UMI Number: U591390
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.
Dissertation Publishing
UMI U591390
Published by ProQuest LLC 2013. Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
ProQuest LLC
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

Abstract:
Sources of the research: The Mandaean holy books and scriptures in addition to old
Moslem writers and contemporary western scholars’ works.
The purpose of the research:
The research aims to translate the Mandaean Story of Creation, directly from
the Mandaean manuscript. Four other Ginza manuscripts from the Oriental and
India office at the British Library in London were used to compile a critical apparatus
of variants. Book three, or the Book of Creation, is the largest tractate of the
Mandaeans’ holy book the “Ginza Rba”. The Ginza names this tractate as raza usidra
qadmaia d-Suta haita qadmaita “The Mystery and the First Book of the First Living
Doctrine”. This tractate includes the cosmogony; the origin of the World of Light and
the World of Darkness, the rise of the First Great Life, the Second Life (Yosamin), the
Third Life (Abatur) and the Fourth Life (Ptahil); the Demiurge who created the
cosmos and Tibil (the earthly world). It also narrates the creation of the Mandaean
redeemer Manda d-Hiia (“Gnosis of Life”) and his descent to the Underworld and his
triumph against the forces of darkness. It narrates the creation of Adam and Eve and
the descent of the niSimta (soul) into the ‘tfdna (the human body). Tractate three also
includes an elaborate description of the demonic Ruha and her planetary sons and her
attempts to seduce Adam in order to entrap him in the world.
The research consists of three parts:
(1) The introduction: The Mandaeans and the Question of Their Origin, The
Mandaean system, The Main Characteristic Rituals of the Mandaeans, The
Mandaean manuscripts.
2

---PAGE BREAK---

(2) Analysis of the narrative: The First Account of the Story of Creation, The Second
Account of the Story of Creation, The Third account of the Story of Creation.
(3) The Transcription and Translation of the Manuscript.
3

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

Acknowledgments
With my deepest gratitude, I would like to thank everyone who has helped me
throughout every aspect of my research, and a special thanks to Wingate Scholarship
and their administrator Ms. Faith Clark for their encouragement and financial
support. I am especially indebted to Professor Mark Geller of the Hebrew and Jewish
Studies Dept at UCL, for his excellent guidance and support during my research.
I would also like to thank the Mandaean Priests Rabi Rafid al-Sabti (Holland),
Rabi Salwan Shakir (Sweden) and Yalupa Salim al-Kuhaili (Iran) for their much
appreciated help and advice, Dr. Abdul-Atheem al-Sabit (UK), Dr. Qais al-Sadi
(Germany), Mr. Carlos Gilbert (Australia), Mr Majid Arabi (Sweden), Mr. Sa‘ad
Dehays (U.S.A) and Mr Eli Timan (UK) for their valuable counsel and support. And
finally my family who has stood by me patiently and consistently supported my
efforts.
4

---PAGE BREAK---

Contents:
Abbreviations 10
The Mandaic Alphabet 12
§1 Introduction 14
§1.1 The Mandaeans and the Question of their Origin 15
§1.2 The Mandaean System 23
$1.3 Mandaism and Gnosticism 25
§1.3.1 General Parallels and Differences between
Gnosticism and Mandaeism 29
§1.4 The Main Characteristic Rituals of the Mandaeans 31
§1.4.1 Baptism ma$buta 31
§1.4.2 Ascent of the Soul masqita 35
§1.5 The Mandaean Calendar 37
§1.6 Mandaean Feasts 41
§1.6.1 The Five Days of Creation occayoj^o^
Parwanaiia (Panja) 41
§1.6.2 The New Year Dihba Rba 42
§1.6.3 The Little New Year
Dihba d-§islam Rba 44
§1.6.4 The Little Feast Dihba Hnina 44
§1.7 Curses and Incantations
fufata uqiriata 45
§1.8 The Mandaean Manuscripts 50
5

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

§i.Q The Ginza Rba (The Great Treasure) 52
§i.Q.i The Right Ginza 52
§i.Q.2 The Left Ginza 55
§X-io The Ginza used in this Research (GRS) 56
§1.11 The Mandaean Script 61
§1.12 Book III of the Ginza Rba 63
§1.13 The Mandaean Story of Creation 64
§1.14 The Main Features of Mandaic Poetry 67
§2. Analysis of the Narrative 71
§2.1 The First Account of the Theogonv 72
§2.1.1 Pira (the Fruit) 73
§2.1.2 Ayar (Ether) 77
§2.1.3 Maria (Intelligence, Vessel) 80
§2.1.4 Yardina (Jordan) c^ l±jol 88
§2.1.3 Skina (celestial dwelling) 93
Chart A 99
§2.2 The Second Account of the Theogonv 100
§2.2.1 Yura 102
§2.2.2 The Life »<■<—' Hiia 104
§2.2.3 The Second Life (Yosamin) Hiia Tiniania 107
§2.2.4 The Streams of Water Hapiqia Mia
112
6

---PAGE BREAK---

§2.2,5 The Third Life Abatur 115
§2 .2 .5.1 Abatur Rama 115
§2.2 .5.2 Abatur in the Incantations 119
§2.2.5.3 Abatur of the Scales 120
§2.2.5.4 Abatur Rasn uRast 123
§2.2,5.5 Abatur, the Symbol of Virility 126
§2.2.5.6 Abatur, the Heavenly Priest 127
§2.2.5.7 Abatur, the Divine Secretary 128
§2.2.6 The Fourth Life Ptahil 129
§2.2.6.! Ptahil: A Mandaean ‘Uthra or
Egyptian Demiurge? 129
§2.2.6.2 Ptahil: The Creator of the Material
World 133
§2.2.6.3 The Creation of Adam 137
Chart B
141
§2.2.7 Manda d-Hiia (Gnosis of Life) 142
§2.2.7.i The True Apostle of Light 142
§2.2.7.2 The Creation of Manda d-Hiia 144
§2.2.7.3 Manda d-Hiia: The Mandaean
Redeemer 146
§2.2.7.4 Manda d-Hiia and John the Baptist 148
§2.2.7.5 Manda d-Hiia the Warrior 149
7

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

§2.2.7.5.l Manda d-Hiia’s Weapons 149
§2.2.7.5.2 Manda d-Hiia restrains the
rebellious uhtras 149
52.2.7.5.3 Manda d-Hiia’s Encounter with
the Powers of Darkness 152
§2.2.7.5.4 Manda d-Hiia’s Battle with the
King of Darkness (‘Ur) 154
§2.2.7.5.5 Manda d-Hiia thwarts Ruha’s
plans to seduce Adam 156
52.2.7.6 The Life Praises Manda d-Hiia
for his Victory 158
52.2.7.8 Manda d-Hiia, the Conjugal Advisor 159
§2.3 The Third Account of the Theogonv 161
52.3.1 The King of Light 163
52.3.2 Ziwa uNhura Radiance and Light 166
52.3.3 ‘Sata Haita The Living Fire 169
52.3.4 The ‘Uhtras 170
52.3.5 Alma d-Nhura The World of Light 175
52.3.6 Alma d-Hsuka The World of Darkness 178
52.3.7 Malka d-Hsuka The King of Darkness (‘Ur) 181
52.3.8 The Army of the King of Darkness 185
52.3.Q Ruha the Queen of Darkness 186
52.3.Q.1 Ruha: The Mother of the Seven
8

---PAGE BREAK---

Planets and the Twelve Signs of
the Zodiac and the Five Planets 188
§2.3.9.2 Ruha the Seductress 189
§2.3.9.3 The End of Ruha 192
ChsrtJC 193
§3 The Text 194
M Translation and Notes 261
Bibliography 565
9

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

Abbreviations
AHW Akkadisches Handworterbuch
AJSL The American Journal of Semitic Languages and Literature
ARR Alma RiSaia Rba (tr. E. S. Drower, A Pair of Na^oraean Commentaries,
Leiden 1963)
ARZ Alma RiSaia Zuta (tr. E. S. Drower, A Pair of Na^oraean
Commentaries, Leiden 1963)
ATS The Thousand and Twelve Questions (tr. E. S. Drower, Berlin i960)
Jb Das Johannesbuch der Mandder (tr. M. Lidzbarski, Giessen 1915)
DY The Mandaean Manuscript DraSa d-Yahia “the Book of John”
BASOR Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research
BSOAS Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies
BSOS Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies
CP The Canonical Prayerbook of the Mandaeans (tr. E. S. Drower, Leiden
1959)
DA Diwan Abatur (tr. E. S. Drower, Vatican City 1950)
DJPA A Dictionary of Jewish Palestinian Aramaic (M. Sokoloff, Bar Ilan
University Press, 1990)
DM‘L The Scroll of Exalted Kingship (tr. J. J. Buckley, Connecticut 1993)
DM HZ Diwan Ma§buta d-H\bil-Ziwa (tr. E. S. Drower, Vatican City 1953)
GRL Ginza Rba Left
GRR Ginza Rba Right
HG The Harran Gawaita (tr. E. S. Drower, Vatican City 1953)
H R History of Religions
JAOS Journal of the American Oriental Society
JBL Journal of Biblical Literature
JD A Dictionary of the Targumim, the Talmid Babli and Yerushalmi, and
the Midrash Literature (M. Jastrow, New York 1996)
JEA Journal of Egyptian Archeology
JNES Journal of Near Eastern Studies
JR Journal of Religion
JRAS Journal of Royal Asiatic Society
10

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

JRCAS Journal of the Royal Central Asiatic Society
JSS Journal of Semitic Studies
MD A Mandaic Dictionary (E. S. Drower, R. Macuch, Oxford 1963)
MG Mandaische Grammataik (Noldke, Halle 1875)
MHZ Masbuta d-Hibil Ziwa [The Baptism of Hibil-Ziwa]
Mil The Mandaeans of Iraq and Iran (E. D. Drower, Oxford 1937)
OT Old Testament
Q The Mandaean Book Qalista
Q§R Qabin d-$i§lam Rba “the Marriage ceremony of the Great SiSlam”
SA The Secret Adam (tr. E. S. Drower, Oxfrod i960).
$QSR $arh d-Qabin d-SiSlam Rba “Explanatory Commentary on the
Marriage-Ceremony of the Great SiSlam”, (tr. E. S. Drower, Rome
1950)
TTSR 7>a$a d-Taga d-$islam Rba “The Coronation of the Great Sislam”, (tr.
E. S. Drower, Leiden 1962).
11

---PAGE BREAK---

The Mandaic Alphabet
abagada
£Qrm With vowels
Transliteration Pronoun-
Hebrew .Latin ciation
o
N a 2e, a, a
dd
ba ^ bi bu & 5b 2 b
b,p
I ga <1 gj JL gu I 5g g g, Y
d
da <■* di jj/ du d ad 7 d d, 8
- ha L-**' hi JLw hu Mj ah n h h
J wa <-> wi JU wu J aw w u, u
o,
1 °l za cl Zl ji zu 1 az T z z
*3
n h 1
A ta cA $
tu J u t
c ya J L yj JC yu C ay e, i, i
i
ka Sfr ki ku ak k
D k,X
J
la d H J lu J ai
•? 1 1
<x^( ma <-* mi mu
3m 0 m m
V na ni ■v nu an n n
V j
JO sa <-** si JUO su JO as s s
0
<
-
y i (e,i)
pa pi -SJ pu ap
D P P.f
vr aV*' §a S r §i -Sr §G vr a§ X § §
^ qa ^ qi jdd qu dd 3q P q q
ra n- jL±y ru dd 3r
7
r r
12

---PAGE BREAK---

o*> §a Si §u a§ § §
M ta M ti ■M tu ->( at n t t.0
7 d (a)d
73 kd kd
13

---PAGE BREAK---

§ l. Introduction
14

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

o*> §a Si §u a§ § §
M ta M ti ■M tu ->( at n t t.0
7 d (a)d
73 kd kd
13

---PAGE BREAK---

§ l. Introduction
14

---PAGE BREAK---

§ l. Introduction
§ 1.1 - Thy Mflnflaeans and the Question of their Origin:
In the hot and marshy areas along the Tigris and Euphrates in the
southern Mesopotamia and along the Karun River which flows through the
lowland of Iran (Khuzistan) and, like the Tigris and Euphrates, empties into
the Shaf-al-Arab and then into the Gulf, there dwells a small community of
Mandaiia, Mandaeans (“Gnostics”). Their Arab neighbors call them $ubba,
derived from (vis) “to immerse or submerge”, and refers to their frequent
baptism “ma§buta”.* The Qur’an mentions the al-$abiun in three sura
along with the Jews and Christians.2 The Moslem historians called them the
$abians 3 of the swamps (^JUxJi ajui*>) or al-Mughtasila (auwjuauji) “those who
wash” and they were numerous in the swamps and in the region of Dast-i
Maysan.4 Almas'udI tells of a §abian sect called Kimanyyun (jjijU£ii) which
* SA p. ix. Mani points out that he was living amongst the “Sabaios” which is clearly derived
form Aramaic sobai which means baptist (Gardner and Lieu, 2004: 65).
2 The Qur'an mentioned the §abians in three suras: baqarah no. 62, haj no. 15 and ma'ydah
no. 69
V) Joe LsOLo Jac) aJJL -±ity lyiuol *jl
& { 62}
But the Arabs wrongly translated “§b‘” yas as the Arabic ‘to convert’ instead of Aramaic
“§b‘” yax ‘to dye’ or “submerge”. Therefore, Arabic literature still wrongly calls them “those
who converted.”
3 Islamic historians referred to all pagans as “$abians,” whether Babylonians, Greek, Egyptians
or Romans.
Jy . L© yjyhujoy . JluuJLcyC yjyiykt .^SUaJI %X>Lo f&y .^illouJI yjyyjjS fy i t$)yA :^JLujJJLoJ( 4
yjb • j* £>**» JyM ob
\yAS y . sjyMMjit :*J Jt*i eJ^eJU y . v5 f-*Jy • *&yyc. I
X414 yja 1 994 ^ U u u u l i i i j |© foJouu J 'J*
15

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

was located between WasiJ and Basra. He also reported that the §abeans were
related to §abi bn MitSolah bn Idris or §abi bn Mari at the time of Abrahams.
Al-Nadim mentioned many baptist sects who were living in southern Iraq such
as: the “Dashtim”, the “Muhajirun”, the “KaSflun”, the “Mughtasilah”, the “al-
Haslh” (Elchasites) and “§abat al-Ba{a‘ih”.6 Macuch asserts that the
Mandaeans actually settled in southern Mesopotamia and had many names. In
Mesene (Maisan) especially they were called by their proper name
“Mandaeans and MaSkanaeans” and their script and dialect was called
maiSana’it “Messenian” i. e. “Mandaic”.7
The Mandaeans call themselves bhiri zidqa “the righteous elect” and
‘Na§oreans’ (na§uraiyi),8 i.e. “guardians” or “possessors” of secret rites and
knowledge “Na§iruta.”9 The Mandaean society, before the Moslem conquest of
Iraq, consisted of two classes: (a) the priestly clan or the Na§oreans; that is the
inner circle of the priests and their novices, and ft)) the laymen clan or the
“The Mughtasilah: These people are very numerous in the region of al-BaJa’ih, they are
[called] the $abat al- Bafa’ih. They observe ablution as a rite and wash everything which they
eat. Their head is known as al-Hasih [Elkesaites] and it is he who instituted their sect. They
assert that the two existences are male and female and that the herbs are from the likeness of
the male, whereas the parasite plants [al-uksuth] are from the likeness of the female, the trees
being veins (roots). They have seven [shameful is the right translation] sayings, taking the
form of fables. His [al-Hasih] disciple was named Sham‘un. They agreed with the Manicheans
about two elemental [principles], but later their sect became separate. Until this our day, some
of them venerate the stars.” (The Fihrist of al-Nadim, translated and edited by Dodge,
London, 1970: 811) Lady Drower asserts that the “Elkasaites were once closely related to
Na^oraeans” (SA, p. 97).
s Almas'ui, al-tanbih wa al-'isharf Brill, Leiden, (1894) pp. 161, 90-91.
6 Al-Nadim, the Fihirist, Budge, 1970: 809 ff.
7 Macuch R., “The Origin of the Mandaeans and their Script”, JSS, 16,1971 pp. 147-192, esp. p.
191-
8 Sometimes the heavy *§’ is written by none Mandaeans as ‘z’, Nazorenes. (SA p. ix) This term
was used by the Jews to designate Christians (Peters, 1972: 668).
’ Rudolph 1983: 343. Drower defines Na$iruta as “esoteric religion within a religion, a gnosis
within gnosis, and its heart is the interpretation which it attaches to sacramental acts” (SA p.
xv).
16---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

Mandaeans who form the greater number of the sect.10 Although they revered
John the Baptist and occasionally mention him in some prayers, their relation
to him is still problematic because they consider him “teacher” or “reformer”
and never the founder of their faith.11 In fact there is no mention of a founder
of Mandaeism in all their writings.12 After the Islamic invasion the priestly
school which was teaching the esoteric principles of the “Na§iruta” diminished
gradually and could no longer fight the new elements of transformation.
Eventually, the majority of the Mandaean population had to convert to Islam
due to persecution and a heavy poll tax.^
No one can determine the first appearance of the Mandaeans in
Mesopotamia, and the question of their origin is still one of the continuing
mysteries of Mandaeaen research. After nearly two centuries, this issue still
raises much controversy amongst scholars. Some, like Noldeke, Brandt and
Lidzbarski, assert a pre-Christian existence to the Mandaeans, others like
Pallis prefer a late dating, i. e. 6th century C.E.1* In fact, Lidzbarski envisaged
a Mandaic migration from the Transjordan towards Parthia in the first century
10 Cf. the Manichaean community which was divided into an inner circle of the elect (‘the
virginal’) and the greater number of hearers or catechumens (“the continent”) (Gardner and
Lieu, 2004: 23). Shaked stated, “Mandaean doctrine was restricted to people deemed to
possess a higher type of piety just as in Manichaeism and Mazdakite movement” (Shaked,
1994: 75)-
n Yamauchi, 1970: 80 ff.
12 In this respect Drower comments, “For the Mandaeans there was no founder to reverence,
no great prophet to single out as leader, no human saint upon whom to pinpoint
devotion.”(Drower, “Mandaen Polemic”, BSOAS, Vol. 25, (1962), pp. 438-448, esp. p. 438).
*3 Brandt writes: “The disintegration of the community after the Islamic invasion led, by means
of the compilation of the divergent tractates and traditions, to the present-day disorder in the
Mandaean religion. The “little college” of priests was dispersed throughout Mesopotamia and
could no longer overcome the disunion” (Brandt, 1889: 58 cited by Rudolph, HR, vol. 8,1969:
212).
*« Pallis believes that all Jewish names and ideas mentioned in the Mandaean writings are
derived from Islam (Pallis, 1926:118).
17---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

even before the destruction of the Jewish kingdom in 70 C.EJ5 Some Arab
historians dates the Mandaeans ($abeans) back to the very end of Babylonia,
such as al-Biruni (11th century) who wrote, “the $abiyun are the remnant of
the Jewish tribes who remained in the days of Cyrus and Artaxerxes. These
remaining tribes adopted a system mixed up of Magianism and Judaism like
that of the Samaritans in Syria.”16 Although the Mandaeans believe they are
bhiria zidqa “the chosen righteous ones”, they admit all nations generated
from the Jews: mix ama diahufaiia kulhun amamia ubabia minaihun npaq
“from the Jews all nations and sects came forth.”*7 In addition, the Mandaean
scroll “Haran Gawaita” states clearly that the Na§oraeans had indeed migrated
from “Jerusalem” to the \aura dMidai “the Median hills” under the protection
of the Parthian king “Artabanus”:18
“Haran Gawaita (The Inner Haran) received him and that city in
which there were Na§oraeans, because there was no road for the
Jewish rulers. Over them was King Ardban (Artabanus). And
sixty thousand Na§oraeans abandoned the Sign of the Seven
and entered the Median hills (fura dMidai), a place where they
were free from domination by all other races. And they built
*3 Lidzbarski, Ginza p. x. See also Rudolph, 1969: 213. Neusner believes that the Mandaeans
were subject to a kind of persecution in Hasmonean times, or during the war of 66-73 against
Rome (Neusner J., JAOS, 1975: 184-190, esp. p. 188).
16 Al-Bairuni, al-Athar al-Baqiyah, Leipzig, 1923: 206:
Jl I9JL09 ^ zi&Jbl Ca+4 Jl CuiUoJdiji (0^)9 ^ / o l j ^ OiOfflLJI Jol+mlll olflL? ja ^a)l jam olfLoll
.(oLiUL 0 0 ^ fijMig-pl)! ja Ljixu Jja Jl
•7 GRR, p. 30: 8. The text:
y 1 1^ occnJ 1 » » o c a*{o
,8 Rudolph points out that this migration was towards the north-west Iran between Harran
and Nisibis or Media during the period of the later Arsacids (ist or 2nd century C.E.) Rudolph,
1983: 364. Coxon points out that Ardashir I, who became king in the year CE 208, conquered
Mesene (Characene) and established the Sasanian suzerainty after a decisive battle against
Artabanus V in C.E. 224 (Coxon, JSS, 1970: 17).
18---PAGE BREAK---

cult-huts (bimandia) and abode in the Call came to their
end..”1*
The great difficulty in studying Mandaeism is one of chronology.
Despite the fact that much has been written about their origin and much
speculation, the Mandaeans are the only Gnostic group who call themselves
explicitly “Mandaeans” which equals the Greek “gnostikoi”. In fact they are the
only Gnostic sect which is still in existence. Other Gnostic groups in Egypt,
Syria and Palestine vanished, long ago. Many scholars believe that the
Mandaeans (Na§oreans), among other “heterodox groups,” who flourished in
the East were not native movements but rather “migrated there in the hope of
escaping the waves of repression that periodically swept the West.”20 It was in
Mesopotamia, in contact with the traditions and faiths of Persia, that these
Na§oreans adopted dualism and became Mandaeans “Gnostics”.21 Some
Mandaean hymns and writings (other than Haran Gawaita) verify their
exodus from the West and their arrival at Babylon in the East. The following
hymn speaks of a kind of reunion between those Na§orean immigrants (from
Jerusalem) and their kinfolks in Babylonia:
‘9 Drower, Haran Gawaita, 1953: 3. Drower’s translation, text collated:
y . U.. r I H&j o(j(ayaAW n I^ aj(coJaJL ...
yjif ya-ioJLdyo y t ...co-in I o c c tiJ > ,.>ocaI oc^Jo>(
y ■ j** ■ y ■ — I a ^a*< ^ 1^. y t y . ...a< ~ iaIa- t H caJUt^iJL a.-H idl y jJo j
yjcJa^oa-C. aide occ-a. a_L yjutfalj eOlyaifci/
20 Reeves, 1996: 46.
21 Beyer states, “Mandaic was adopted by Na§oraeans, a Gnostic/Baptist community, after they
had left Palestine (Jordan area) in the 1st century C.E. as a result of the hostility of
contemporary Judaism and had migrated at the latest in the middle of 2nd century C.E. via
northern Mesopotamia (Haran/Charrhae) to southern Babylonia (Mesene, Kuzistan)” (Cited
by Muller-Kessler Ch., ARAM, Vol. 16, 2004: 51).
19

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

From the home of the great community therein, I became the
healer for souls! I became a healer for souls who heals but takes
no fee. I set forth, came and reached the gates of Babylon. Of the
children of Babylon there were some who shut their doors on
seeing me: There were some who shut their doors. And there
were those who opened their doors. Those who shut their doors
hated Life and loved death and will be held back in the Abode of
Darkness. Those who opened their doors loved Life and hated
Death, they hated Death and loved Life. They will rise up in
purity and will behold the Place of Light.22
It seems that the Na§oraeans flourished in Babylonia under the
Parthian kingdom and dwelt, like the other Baptist and Gnostic sects (e.g.
Elchsaites and Manicheans) in central and southern Babylonia in towns such
as Kutha, Borsippa, Nippur3^ and Purat-Maysan.2* As soon as they settled
down they got acquainted with the magic and astrology of the Chaldeans and
the astrology of the Babylonians.25 Hence, they became the soothsayers and
“masters” of incantations in Mesopotamia, from whence originated “the most
22 CP pp. 142-43 (hymn No. 164). Drawers translation, text attested:
Sftio j(< 1 0 0 0 0 j(< > w cu(a4(+ L^J oooo y4<j
jfcte —« y >t *.+'•%.+' tX yj<.|c**.*£ o l^± ! o< 11VoJ a4 tio ay<_i(aj
+{• - ** aJUALi y ■ j OC<_w yjto^c'o^' 5 a ^ o ydo-w y-ut^ yJCoA'a^e'*_£ j(< I yjca^'o^'
mjLuH ^Iyj0 yjyj0 O jLkM j ...H y J L l C y y J & M OCLm yyJCLJ
»--y ocd£Jaj0 ojCl^oL^ ou> i
« Miiller-Kessler Ch., ARAM, 2004: 53.
** Forat-MiSan is situated in the neighborhood of Basra, the ancient dwelling place of the
Mandadaeans. Brandt points out that the Perate branch of the Ophite gnosis was founded by
Evxppcrrr|C or riepcmxoC whom the “Perates” obtained their name (Brandt, 1889: 192).
According to Lidzbarski, some Characenian coins were written in the Mandaic script. (Naveh,
“The Origin of the Mandaic Script”, BASOR, 1970: 33). Jewish communities also flourished
under the tolerant rule of the Achaemenids and Arsacids (SA, p. 99).
*» See Sfar MalwaSia “The Mandaean Book of the Zodiac”, translated by Drower, London
(1949)-
20---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

interesting magic formulas in Eastern Aramaic.”26 The Sasanians brought
their flourishing to an end when the Zoroastrian state under Shapur I (241-
272) began the persecution of “foreign” religions such as Christianity,
Judaism, Manichaeism and Gnosticism, and ordered the destruction of many
Mandaean temples.2? Kardir (late 3rd century C.E.),28 tells us in his inscription
at naqsh-i-Rustam how he initiated a religious persecution of great severity
throughout the Persian Empire against the other religions such as
Manicheans, Jews, kristyane Christians, na§oraye Na§oreans etc.29 This
inscription can be taken as a solid evidence of the existence of the Mandaeans
in Mesopotamia, along with other Baptist/Gnostic sects at that time in
Sasanian Iraq. In this respect Quispel writes: ‘The Mandaean problem has
become an open question again since Torgny Save Soderbergh has shown that
the Manichaean Psalms of Thomas were based upon extant Mandaean hymns,
thus proving that the Mandaean sect in Iraq must had a very long
prehistory. ”30
In the sixteenth century, the Mandaeans of Iraq and Iran came to the
attention of the Western world through the Jesuit missionaries, who
26 Muller-Kessler Ch., ARAM, Vol. 11 & 12, 1999-2000: 296. Theodore bar Khoni says, The
Dostai are called in Maisan Mandaeans, in Beth-Armaia Na§oraeans (Na§raia). (Cited by
Eisler, 1931: 616, from: Pognon, Inscr. Mandaites, p. 224 sq. ; W. Bousset, Hauptprobleme
der Gnosis, p. 383; E. Peterson, Z.N.T.W., xxvii. 1928: 65 n. 2, 95 n. 7).
*? Rudolph, 1983: 364-
28 Kartir is Moabadan-Moabad “the high priest” of the Magians who flourished under Shapur
I, Hormizd I, Bahram I, II, and III (Zaehner, 1955: 23-25).
** Zaehner, 1955: 24- Widengren, 1961:16-17. Shaked, 1994: 11 and n. 15.
3° He continues: “The curious expression “Lord of Greatness” in Mandaean writings has been
found in the Qumran Genesis Apocryphon. Moreover, I cannot explain the parallels between
the names of Mandaean divinities and those found in certain Hellenistic magical papyri unless
the Mandaeans have very old Western roots”, “Gnosticism and the New Testament”, Vigiliae
Christianae, vol. 19,1965: 79-
21---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

accompanied the Portuguese armada in the Indian Ocean and the Persian
Gulf, and came into contact with the Mandaeans in and about Basra and in
Khuzistan.3» The Jesuits thought that they discovered the “heretical Christians
of St. John,” but to the disappointment of the monks they could not convince
the Mandaeans, except for a few, to join the Christian faith. But they succeeded
in recruiting some of them as mercenaries and interpreters who sailed with the
Portuguese fleet to the Strait of Hormuz, Masqat, Goa, Ceylon and even to
Portugal itself.32 When the Portuguese witnessed the persecution of the
Mandaeans at the hands of the Moslems,33 the Portuguese reached an
agreement with the Pasha of Basra to move the Mandaeans to the Christian
lands, but the Pasha went back on his word and did not allow the Mandaeans
to leave and the exodus came to a halt.34
Conclusion:
According to the Mandaean manuscript “Haran Gawaita”35 and other
historical records, distinguished Semitic scholars, such as Lidsbarski,
contented that Mandaism (literature and cult) is influenced strongly by the
Old Testament and can only have originated in Jewish circles.36 We might,
3* Kraeling, 1929: 195.
3a Lupieri, 2002: 83 ff.
33 In 1637 all the Jews and Mandaeans of Persia were forced to convert to Islam (Lupieri,
2002:104).
34 Lupieri, 2002: 105.
35 Lady Drower is certain that: "Haran Gawaita” is an important manuscript and might
contribute to the solution of the problem of the origin of the Mandaeans (See Drower “Haran
Gawaita” (1953) p. viii).
36 Lidzbarski, 1915: xvi where he writes: “Ihre Terminologie in Lehre und Kultus ist so stark
durch das Alte Testament und das Hebrdische beeinflusst, wie man es sonst ausserhalb des
Judentums findet”. See also his similar views in Mandaische Liturgien 1920: xix and in Ginza,
1925: vi. Later, Lady Drower adopted the theoiy of a western origin of the Mandaeans in
heretical Jewish circles: “early Na^iruta, or Ur-Mandaismus to use the convenient German
22---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

therefore, conclude that the Na^oraeans were either a heterodox Jewish sect or
the followers of John the Baptist, who did not convert to Christianity, and they
fled to the east before the fall of Jerusalem in C.E. 70 because they were
persecuted by the Jews.37 Having first settled in northern Mesopotamia
(Haran),38 they moved to the Median hills of old Parthia and finally settled in
Babylon and southern Mesopotamia, where they still live. This migration
might explain the cultural influences of Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism
and the old Babylonian religion on the Mandaean writings.
§ 1.2 - The Mandaean System:
The Mandaeans believe in two universes: (i) An intangible universe
which is beyond our perception, and consists of two worlds: the World of Light
and the World of Darkness, (ii) The world of m§uni kuSfaw and the tangible
world of Tibil (earth). According to their belief, the Mana Rba “the Great
Mana” (Intelligence), who dominates the World of Light, issued Hiia
Qadmiia “the First Life” from the great yardina “Jordan” of Life. In turn, the
First Life submitted a request to himself and created a son of his own whom he
called Hiia Taniania “the Second Life” or “YoSamin”. The Second Life became
expression, was originally a sect which flourished in Judaea and Samaria then possibly in
Parthian-Jewish settlements and in Transjordania, and that it was a hybrid strongly
influenced by Magianism and Jewish Gnosticism” (Drower, “Mandaean Polemic”, BSOAS,
(1962) p. 448).
s7 The Mandaeans always define themselves as the followers of John the Baptist (Yahia
Yuhana) in Jerusalem (SA, p. vi). According to Josephus, John the Baptist had “an
astonishingly persuasive power over the Jewish populace” (Mead, 1924: 4).
3® For the Mandaean polemic toward Christians, see Drower “Mandaean Polemic”, BSOAS,
(1962) pp. 438-48, esp. pp. 439-440, which might allude to their reason for moving from
Haran.
39 mSuni kuS(a : the world of ideal counterparts. “It is a world of ideas, in which is found in the
double, the counterpart of everything in the material world” (See Drower, The Secret Adam,
i960: 39 ff.).
23---PAGE BREAK---

infatuated with the idea of creating a world of his own. He, therefore,
transferred his defecting tendency to his son Abatur “the Third Life”. Abatur
opened the gate of the World of Light, and as soon he gazed into the abyss (or:
darkness) Ptahil “the Fourth Life”, came into being. Ptahil, who received a
mandate from his father Abatur, descended to the black waters, consolidated
arqa “the earth” and created the material world. On the other hand, the Lord
of Darkness created a kingdom for himself with demonic beings of monsters,
dragons, evil spirits and most of all the “Seven” (planets), and the “Twelve”
(signs of the Zodiac) and their mother, the goddess of Darkness “Ruha”. As a
counter move, the World of Light created Manda d-Hiia “Gnosis of Life” 4° in
order to put an end to the defection of the uthras “beings of the World of
Light” and to conquer the evil forces of the World of Darkness.
Ptahil, with the assistance of Ruha and her entourage, tried to create
Adam but they could not succeed to make him stand on his feet. Therefore,
Ptahil went back to the World of Light and brought from his father the niSimta
“soul” and cast it into Adam’s body. Only then Adam stood on his feet and
became aware of his existence. The core of the Mandaean’s soteriology is the
deliverance of the niSimta “soul” from the perishable body. When death
occurs the soul leaves the body and begins a long journey through the
ma\aratia “watch-houses” or “purgatories” before reaching its final
destination; alma dnhura “the World of Light”.
«° Manda d-Hiia: Gnosis of Life and the Mandaean Redeemer (See below §2.3.2).
24

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

There are minor resemblances between the Mandaean story of creation
and the Babylonian one such as the creation of the savior and his fight against
the forces of evil. These resemblances led scholars, such as Brandt, to believe
that Mandaeism is an off-shoot of the late Babylonian religion; he even
assumed that Mandaeism was the centre from which the Ophite ** and similar
Gnostic system issued. «2 Lady Drower dedicated the introduction of her book
“Secret Adam” to the Na^oraeans and their exodus from Palestine, which she
dates to just after the destruction of the 2nd temple. She also discusses their
possible relationship with Jewish-Palestinian groups.43
§ i.a - Mandaism and Gnosticism:
In addition to the resemblances between Mandaeism and the
Babylonian religion, we find striking parallels between the Mandaic Gnostic
motifs and the motifs of the other Gnostic sects such as the Hermetists and
the Valentinians especially in the area of the redeemer and the ascent of the
soul.** Gnosticism, the most problematic of cults, is first clearly attested in the
second century C.E., but its exact origin is still of great controversy among
scholars.45 It gathered momentum in the following century and spread to
4* A Gnostic sect flourished in north Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, Syria, and Egypt during the
first century (Wilson, 1958:177(f)•
42 Pallis, 1926:151.
43 Drower, SA, p. xiv.
44 Jonas writes, “The celestial journey of the returning soul is indeed one of the most constant
common features in otherwise widely divergent systems, and its significance for the gnostic
mind is enhanced by the fact that it represents a belief not only essential in gnostic theory and
expectation, and expressive of the conception of man’s relation to the world, but of immediate
practical importance to the Gnostic believer, since the meaning of gnosis is to prepare for this
final event, and all its ethical, ritual, and technical instruction is meant to secure its successful
completion” (Jonas 1958:165).
45 Godwin, J., 1981: 84. Rudolph points out that “The beginning and end of Gnosis in late
antiquity cannot be pin-pointed exactly. It makes appearance at the beginning of the Christian
25---PAGE BREAK---

Egypt and to the Fertile Crescent.*6 Some contemporary scholars, such as
Quispel, believe that Gnosticism is neither the product of the Greek
philosophy nor “a fossilized survival of old Iranian or even Indian religious
concept.”*?
According to the Mandaean manuscript Haran Gawaita Mandaeism
“Na^oraeanism” struck roots in Mesopotamia when a tendency to relegate the
gods of the old religions and to adopt the Persian dualism at the dawn of the
first millennium when the country was under the Parthian-Sasanian
dominion.*8 Mandaeism and other baptist gnostic-type movements must have
been around much at that time.*? Some hypotheses say that the Na^oreans,
who settled in East Jordan, became under the persecution of both the Jews
and Christians, and for that reason they sought refuge in a friendlier
atmosphere of Parthia and Media hills and from there they moved down to
Babylon and southern Mesopotamia.5° Na^oreaanism preserved the old
Gnostic tenet that the world is created by foolish creator or demiurge, who
himself came into being as a result of an error and that the soul is a “spark”
from the World of Light has to be redeemed and sent back to its origin, along
era and disappears again at the latest in the 6th century, as far as the western manifestations
are concerned” (Rudolph, 1983: 367).
«6 Jonas, 1958: 91. For more about different Gnostic sects in Mesopotamia see Morony, 1984:
408 ff.
47 Quispel, “Gnosticism and the New Testament”, Vigliae Christianae, 1965: 73- Quispel also
noted: “It is rather a religion of its own, with its own phenomenological structure,
characterized by the mythical expression of Self-experience through the revelation of the
Word, or in other words, by an awareness of a tragic split within the Deity itself” (Ibid).
46 Haran Gawaita tells that the Na$oreans (Mandaeans) migrated from Jerusalem under the
Parthian king Artabanus III (?). (see Drower, Haran Gawaita, 1953: 3, n. 3).
«’ Shaked, 1994: 11.
s° SA, p. xi.
26---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

with many indications of syncretistic Judaism. Many distinguished scholars 5»
conclude that Na$oraeanism (Mandaeism) is a heretical Jewish sect and its
members are the “ultimate descendant of the Palestinian baptists of New
Testament times and the period immediately preceding.’^ The divorce
between this sect and official Judaism perhaps took place during the first and
the second centuries C.E.53 This defection of the Na^oraeans from Judaism is
documented in one of the rarest Mandaean passages which is connected with
the consecration of a priest:
And then he spoke and taught about the man who becomes a
priest on earth and who leaves lay life for priesthood, like the
soul which quits Judaism for Mandaeaism. For before it is
baptized an infant dwells in an abode of Judaism, and a
guardian-spirit of Light sits beside it Git: sits on its neck)
guarding it and awaiting its delivery from the snares of the
Jews.54
5‘ Such as: Rudolph 1983: 362, he also writes: “in the context of the Jewish wars of
independence and the growing consolidation of Judaism after the destruction of Jerusalem
(A.D. 70), its position in opposition evidently led to persecutions of the community and
ultimately to its emigration from the Jordan territory to the east.” (Ibid pp. 363-4),
Lidzbarski, Ginza, 1925: vi, Lidzbarski, Mandaisce Liturgien, 1920: xix, Lidzbarski, Das
Johannesbuch der Mandaer, 1915: xvi, Drower, SA, p. x ff., Deutsch, ARAM, 11-12 (1999-
2000), pp. 209-223, esp. 212. Reeves points out that: “Mandaism is a prominent Syro-
Mesopotamian Gnostic movement possessing discernible links with late antique Judaism”
(Reeves, 1996:143).
s2 Wilson, 1958:66-7, Yamauchi, 1973:121-2.
53 Rudolph, 1978: 4.
m AT§ II [358], p. 276. Drower’s translation, text collated:
j(a_L^o ojUJiLM&mjJ ajOa£ya4{ ±4*4{o fro|a... >
. u, . 1 ad£^oc<Jt Lul^<-*(o ojOcaXjaMJ aK iVCwQC 4St^ay*X
oclaJ-l.Mo ca oclajdtf >uL±i4a^>0 4e'o(oc JLte nH i
Drower states: “there is often a polemical interchange of (f) with (d) when scribes refer to
Jews. Here either could be meant, as the two letters frequently replace one another. (In Ginza
Rba Judaism is yahduta.) The polemical world-play on YHT and YHD is commented on by
Lidzbarski (ATS, p. 255 n. 8).
27---PAGE BREAK---

The following text is another significant clue which may suggest that
Mandaeism was a heterodox Jewish sect who chose to adopt Gnosticism
“Mandaeism”:
He said to them: “The first kuS^a (oath) is a precious ku§ta; it is
the promise made at baptism which takes the soul out of its
yahufuth (‘Judaism’) into Mandaeism.”55
The Mandaean tale of Miriai, the Jewish princess who left her religion
and joined the Mandaeans, also shows a possible connection between the
earliest Mandaeans and Jewish sectarians of the Second Temple periods6
Other Mandaean writings from the Ginza such as the eleventh book of the
Right Ginza “the Mystery book of Great Ano§ (Enosh)” and book twelve,
identifying the speaker as the “great Anos”, possess discernible links with the
antique Judaism.57
The evolution of Mandaeism was summed up by H. -M. Shenke in
three points: (1) originally the Mandaens were a heretical Jewish baptismal
55 AT§ II [198], p. 255. Drawer’s translation, text collated:
...BiVa gji jlw OLaMJJaAJ nAq*
o X j c o oj< iA 1 ...oc
s6 Zalcman, 1991: 421.
57 Reeves, 1996: 143. Concerning the history of the Mandaean textual corpus he stated: “If a
clear connection can be established between the Codex “apocalypse” passage and Mandaean
Enosh material, an important step would be taken toward an improved understanding of the
reiigio-historical relationship linking a number of Syrio-Mesopotamian religious
communities” (Ibid, pp. 143-4). Reeves also adds: “The amazingly close correspondence in
language between the Codex passage and the Mandaean texts is extraordinary, bolstering the
growing suspicion that they derive from a common textual corpus” (Ibid, p. 147). On the other
hand the Mandaeans accused the Jews of not observing the laws of impurity at all. (GRR, book
XI. See also Lidzbarski, Ginza, pp. 224-5 where Kiwan “Saturn” is the god of the Jews).
28

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

sect, one among many. (2) The Mandaeans then accepted a Gnostic view. (3)
This gnosis was finally institutionalized.58
We may outline the main parallel and different features of the
Mandaean Gnostic system and the general Gnostic system according to the
following table:
g 1.3.1 - General Parallels and Differences between Gnosticism and
Mandaeanism:
Gnosticism Mandaeanism
1. The Gnostic system is based upon 1. The Gnostic system of the Mandaeans
the dualistic opposition between the is based upon the opposition between the
transcendental world of the transcendental (nukraiia) world of Light
“fullness” {pleroma) embracing the embracing hiia rbia qadmaiia “the First
High God and the Aeons, his inferior Great Life” (or: the King of Light) and
emanations, on the one hand, and, the uthras, his inferior emanations, on
on the other, the “emptiness” the one hand, and, on the other, the
(kenoma), the planetary and world of Darkness, the Seven planets
terrestrial world inhabited by man. (sibiahia) and terrestrial world (tibil)
inhabited by man.
2. The kenoma came about because 2. The physical world came about
of some crisis in the pleroma, because of the crises caused by the
whereby the lowest of the Aeons on Second Life “YoSamin” and his sons the
the emanation scale, a female figure uthras when they decided to create a
s* Quoted from Yamauchi, 1973:122.
29

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

known variously as Wisdom (Sophia) world of their own without consulting
or Thought (Enonoia) lapsed out of the higher deity, the First Life. Abatur
the pleroma, and in her confusion (the Third Life) lapsed out of the world of
and dissatisfaction, she produced the Light, and in his confusion and
angel archons, generally seven in dissatisfaction, produced Ptahil (the
number, who created and then ruled Fourth Life). Ptahil created the world
the world. with the help of Ruha and her sons the
Seven planets who ruled the world.
3. The spark or spirit (pneuma) of 3. The soul ni&mta or mana which fell
the divine pleroma which fell into into man must be regained and
man must be regained and restored restored to its rightful place; the World
to its rightful place on high. of Light.
4. An Aeon (Jesus) is sent down to 4. The messenger Manda d-Hiia (Gnosis
redeem the innermost part of every of Life) or Enosh-Uthra is sent down to
man’s pneuma through suffering. lead the ni§imta (soul) to its final
destination through gnosis “knowledge”
and “awakening.”
5. Gnosticism is optimistic towards 5. Mandaeanism is optimistic towards
the destiny of man and pessimistic the destiny of the nisimta (soul) of man
towards the universe.59 and pessimistic towards the physical
world “Tibil”.
M Extracts from Peters, 1972: 648 ff.
30

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

§ 1.4 - The Main Characteristic Rituals of the Mandaeans:
“The great importance which the Mandaeans attribute to their
cult practices shows their special character even more clearly. It
is not “knowledge” alone that redeems but the cultic rites,
primarily baptism and the “mass for the dead”, are necessary for
salvation.”60
S i.i.i • < Masbuta (Baptism)
The central cultic rite of the Mandaeans is baptism or “immersion”
A* (ma§buta, pronounced ma§watta). It is the immersion in the fluid of
Life which gives the promise of eternal life to the nisimta “soul”.61 The rite of
baptism had the esoteric significance of an initiation into the mystery of
gnosis. To the Mandaean water is the medium which most fully expresses the
mystery of being, or of the Being which is semi personified as the ‘Great Life’,
and a river is the equivalent of the heavenly ‘Jordan’ flowing in the world of
light:62 Thus mia “water” originates in (Life) and conversely «<■<— hiia
“Life” originates in water. By performing baptism in the yardina “river” the
Mandaean enters a into laupa “union” with the World of Light. Thus, the
60 Rudolf, 1983: 360. He continues: “From this it may be deduced that here the gnostic
ideology was amalgamated with that of an older cultic community, a heretical Jewish
baptismal sect as is suggested by the water rites, and that thus an original Mandaean-
Na§orean system came into existence, probably already in pre-Christian times.”
61 Mil, p. 100.
62 Drower, Water into Wine, 1956: 229.
31

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

Mandaean is protected from the powers of death, purified from pollution and
defilement and also receives forgiveness for his transgression.^
In addition to the immersion in the running water, the full baptism
includes the sacrament of oil, bread, and water, the hand-grasp and kiss called
‘giving kuS^a’6* and the final blessing by laying the right hand of the priest on
the head of the baptized person. Besides the full baptism there are two lesser
water rites which are performed without priestly assistance:
1. riSama: prayers recited daily, with covered head, just before sunrise; after
evacuation of the bowels. At this stage no priest is needed.
2. fama&z: the second ablution is a triple complete immersion in the river, also
performed without ministration of a priest. It must be performed immediately
after any kind of pollution (coition, nocturnal pollution, touching an unclean
person) and after any serious defilement such as touching the body of a dead
person. It must be also performed by a woman after menstruation and after
child birth.65
Some scholars believe that certain roots of the Mandaean baptism is
related to the Jewish rule such the prohibition of baptism and other rites on
the Sabbath and on the mbatfal (inauspicious) days.66 But repeated baptism
was a common feature among the different gnositc sects of Babylonia such as
63 For the full details of the Mandaean baptism ma§buta see Segelberg, Ma$buta , Uppsala
(1958), Mil p. 100 ff., Buckley, 2002: 80 ff.
* ku$ta: (a) “good faith”, “rectitude”, “truth”, “sincerity”, “right”, “pact”, “troth”, “promise”, (b)
The act of placing the right hand in that of another person in token of and ratification of a
pact, oath or promise. This act is concluded by a kiss, each of the two persons kissing his own
right hand when the hand is released, (c) A being, a personification of truth and good faith
(ATS, p. 12).
*5 Mil, p.101.
66 Segelberg, 1958:176.
32

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

the Elchasaites who were attacked by Mani for their daily baths.6? The
Mandaean baptism is unique of its kind and did not come into being as a
reproduction of the Christian-Syrian, especially Ne§torian rite. “In fact it is
possible that certain characters go back to a pre-Christian period and have
their origin in the lustral and baptismal practice of unorthodox Judaism, i.e.
in the so-called baptismal sects (Ma§boteans, §ebueans, cf. §abeans).”68 Other
Gnostics such as the Ebionites and Hemerobaptists also performed repeated
baptism.6?
The pliability of the research in the field of Mandaeism is always
ambushed by the ambiguity of some terms and characters.?0 In baptism we are
faced with an indefinite personality of bihram rba “Bihram the Great” as we
read in the following baptismal formula:
“I have baptized myself with the baptism of Bahram the Great,
son of the Mighty Ones. My baptism shall protect me and attain
the end (or: be successful). The name of Life and the name of
Manda d-Hiia be pronounced on me.”?1
*7 For Mani’s confrontation with the baptists see Henrichs, 1973: 43. In respect of the ritual
immersion in Babylonia, Drower writes: “Ritual immersion was ancient indeed in Babylonia,
and during Iranian domination shrines had been built on the Tigris and Euphrates to the
water-goddess Anahita, who under her Semitic name Nanai or Nanaia is still invoked in
Mandaean exorcism books” (SA, pp. 104-5).
68 Foerster, 1974:132.
* Henrichs, 1973: 50.
to In the Mandaean marriage we come across SiSlam Rba who is the prototype of priest and
bridegroom.
7* CP, p. 21. The texts:
*±J0LJU oUdddsdd ±L4d oXdJd ...cA'aX ojUXL^oM X' ayo
coi*» ±4a . oll.waX aX^aXi^i. o oXLi^ j
33

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

Bihram, as it seems, is the core of the ritual, but he does not play any
significant role in the Mandaean mythology. It is obvious that Bihram is a
Persian name associated with some Persian kings,™ and with the Persian god
Bahram or Vahram.73 We have no evidence, whatsoever, to prove that the
Bihram mentioned at the Mandaean baptism is a human being who
established the sect, as implied by some. Others, like Segelberg, hypothesized
that when the Mandaens settled in the East during the Sassanian period they
replaced the name of Yohana “John the Baptist” with Bihram in order to
legitimize the new religion to the rulers of the country.™
In addition to the main baptism, which is performed in every religious
event including marriage, the Mandaeans perform a minor ablution (baptism)
to the dying person. After the priest performs risama “the minor ablution”,
the mortally ill person is dressed in his rasta (ritual dress), and a small myrtle
wreath is inserted in the little finger of his right hand and he is watched
carefully day and night so that he not die unclean. At the end of the riSama the
priest recites some prayers, while some members of the dying person’s family
bring water from the river. When death approaches, the dying person is
undressed and doused three times from head to foot. They lift him and place
t* Bihram I, Bihram, Birhram III and Bahram IV (Zaehner, 1955: 38 ff).
73 About this ambiguous figure, which is closely associated with the Mandaean baptism,
Drower writes: “His name is Iranian (Avestan VaSaBayna) and the Mandaean Bihram may be
the Persian genius of victory (New Persian Bahram < Middle Persian Varhran) . . The
presence of the banner at Mandaean baptism may be connected with Bihram’s banner of
victoiy” (SA p. 65). Vahram or Baharam (Verethraghna), the yazata “is the Persian god of the
planets and victory who was created by Ahura and became the great champion against
demons” (Boyce, 1975: 54. see also Zaehner, 1955: 220). Lupieri suggests that the Mandaeans
who lived in Characene since the second century must have chosen Bihram (the deity of
Maisan) as eponymous deity of their baptism (Lupieri, 2002:163 f.).
7« Segelberg, 1955: 57 ff. At any account this subject needs further research.
34---PAGE BREAK---

him on clean bedding facing the North Starts Then they cloth him in a new
rasta and wait for his niSimta (soul) to depart his body. ?6 in the past other
Gnostic sects such as the Valentinians and the Marconsians used to perform
this kind of baptism for their dying people.??
§ 1.4.2 - The Masiqta (Ascent of the Soul)
The Masiqta is the second major ceremony of the Mandaeans and it,
too, includes immersion in “Jordan” (river, running water), anointing with oil
and crowning with the myrtle wreath. It is the Na§oraean mass dedicated to
those who die “unclean” without the proper ceremony of the dead. The
Mandaean has to die clean wearing his white ceremonial outfit in order to join
his heavenly dmuta “image, counterpart”: “I go to meet my image and my
image comes to me: it caresses and embraces me as if I were returning from
captivity.”?8 The Mandaeans believe that a man who dies in a violent death
suffers long and painful delay in the mafaratia (watch-houses) before moving
into the next world. Therefore, a masiqta “ascension” ceremony has to be
performed three days after the death of the believer in order to assist niSimta
“the soul”, by furnishing it with a new body, with which it could enter the
75 Perhaps this is due to the old Mesopotamian influences, since the north is connected to high
lands “mountains”.
* Mil p. 178 ff.
77 Widengren, 1946:108.
78 GRL, p. 136: 1. The text:
eUk'c^ ayya— adrfyay ca^yaJo lojUMSj aydtft^ay ©c^yaJo
Cf. the “figure of light that comes to meet the dying” in the Coptic-Manichaean genealogy of
gods (Jonas, 1958:122).
35

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

World of Light.™ For the Mandaeans the fate of the niSimta is the main
concern, because pagra “the body” cannot rise to the world of Light and
eventually integrates back into the earth.80
The masiqta is a long ceremony, which requires the presence of, at
least, three priests: a ganzibra81 “head-priest”, a tarmida “priest” and a
Uganda “assistant”. The preparations for this ceremony start on Saturdays only
and the main ritual takes place on Sunday.82 The main ingredients of masiqta
“ascension” are the recitation of certain prayers from the Left Ginza, and a
sacramental meal. The meal includes unleaved bread, 83 different kind of fruit
and nuts, fish, and a tiny piece of sacrificed white dove-flesh (6a).84 There
must be fresh myrtle and a large bowl of water just filled from the yardina
“river”.85 The recitations are continued at fixed intervals until the end of the
forty-five days’ journey of the soul.86 There are at least nine major variants of
the Mandaean masiqta:
l. The Bukra: the first masiqta performed by a priest after ordination. 2. The
masiqta of newly-consecrated ganzabra. 3. The Dabahata or Jabahata:
79 On the third day a masiqta is performed for the dead and the seal of the grave is removed.
80 Drower, 1956: 234.
81 Ganzibra (Pai. Ganzubar, Pahl. gangapar, Mod. P. , Aram, loan-word ntiu
treasurer: the ecclesiastical rank above that of the tarmida (priest). (MD p. 77) Akk.
ganzabaru “treasurer” ( A Concise Dictionary of Akkadian, 2000: 90, see also Macuch, 196 5:
139).
82 Al-Sabti, Masiqta, 2004: 18.
83 The Manicheans share two rites with the Mandaeans: the purification of their food and the
ritual preparation of unleaved bread (faifira) (See Henrichs, 1973: 45)-
^ A ritual word for the dove sacrificed at the masiqta, and the sacred dove’s meat consumed
by the priests at the same (MD, p. 44).
85 Drower comments: “the symbolism of water, fruit, bread and fresh myrtle, are linked with
the idea of fertility and life triumphant over death.” (Drower, “The Mandaean New Year
Festival”, Man, Vo. 36 (Nov., 1936), pp. 185-188, esp. p. 188).
86 Rudolph, 1983: 362.
36---PAGE BREAK---

celebrated in the names of a male and female, and linked with the celebration
of a Dukrana Ihdaia rba zadiqa. 4. The masiqta of Shitil: celebrated for one
who dies not wearing a myrtle-wreath or otherwise improperly clad for death.
5. The masiqta of Zihrun Razia Kasia: celebrated for one who had died during
of the minor mbaftal days (inauspicious days on which all ritual is forbidden),
etc. 6. The masiqta of Adam: for one who has died on one of the major
mbaftal days, such as New Year’s Day. 7. The masiqta of Samandriil: for a
person who has died of burns, or has fallen from a tree or been drowned. 8.
The masiqta of kanat: for a woman who dies during pregnancy. 9. masiqta of
hai-Sum: for a person who died as a result of a snake bite. There are other
masiqta for a bride-groom who died during wedding ceremonies and for
moving the remains of a dead person.8?
While the masiqta is intended essentially for the dead, it is also applied
to living. A masiqta is performed in the ceremony of initiating a new priest.
The aSualia “novice for priesthood” dedicates a masiqta to his rabi “teacher”
and pronounces his name at a certain point in the ritual where the name of
officiating priest has to be indicated.
S i.s - The Mandaean Calendar
The Mandaeans have a lunar year, which is divided into twelve months
of thirty days each, with five intercalary days named Parwanaiia,88 which fall
Al-Sabti, Masiqta, Nijmegen (2004) pp. 13-14.
88 The word Parwanaiia (parwanaye) connected with the Parthian adverb parwan, “before or
after” (Mary Boyce, “A Word-list of Manichaean Middle Persian and Parthian”, Acta Iranica
9a. (Leiden, 1977), p. 72. n. 7, see also Burtea, “Sarh d-Paranaiia”, ARAM Vol. 16 (2004) p. 66).
37

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

between Sumbulta “Virgo”, the 8th month, and Qaina “Libra” (TiSrin), the 9th
month. The beginning of the “Panja” festival changes depending upon the
movements of lunar months in the year.8* The Mandaean calendar is a 365-
day calendar consisting of twelve 30-day months, with 5 epagomenals inserted
at the end of the 8th month. This compensation takes place during the
Parwanaiia (or: Panaja = five days) which is celebrated by the Mandaeans
during the five intercalary days between the end of the month Sumbulta (Ellul)
and the beginning of Qaina (TiSrin).9°
During the five days preceding, no religious ceremony except a funeral
may be performed, and no undertaking of importance should be begun, for
these are considered to be “days of darkness”.*1 They are followed by the five
intercalary days mentioned above, called “days of light”. Mandaeans are
forbidden to pray after sunset at other times of the year, but during the nights
of Parwanaiia darkness is considered non-existent, and praise and prayer flow
continually. Barriers between this world and the world of Light are down.
The Mandaeans believe that in the five days of the Parwanaiia (Panja)
five celestial beings of Light were created, and that consequently the doors of
the world of Light are open during these five days. The beings of light are:
The term Panja means the five Gatha days, also called Khamsat al-mustariqat, was used in
the Persian as well as in the Sistanian calendars during the 5th century (See Taqizadeh, “The
Old Iranian Calendar again”, BSOAS, Vol. 14, No. 3, (1952), pp. 603-611, esp. p. 608).
9° The old Iranian calendar (of 12 months of 30 days and 5 supplementary days) are still in use
in many districts of Kashan, Natanz, Maima, Javshagan, and the in the province of Yazd.
(Ibid, 610).
’»The Mandaeans think the five days preceding intercalary days particularly ominous, because
they are dedicated to the evil spirits of death and darkness.
38

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

Marad-Rabuta, Manda d-Hiia, Sislam-Rba, Adam-Shaq and Hibil-Ziwa.*2
Although this calendar could have been borrowed from the Zoroastrians at any
time in the early Middle Ages, further characteristics of the Mandaean
calendar suggest earlier origins that would pre-date the Middle Ages, the
Sassanians, and even Mandaeism itself. The twelve months of the Mandaean
year grouped and named according to four seasons (e.g. the first month of the
year is called awal sitwa, “first of the winter”) but also bear Babylonian
(Aramaic) names of months. The month Nisan designates the 3rd month of the
year, exactly as in the Sogdian calendar, but incongruously since Nisanu is the
1st month of the Babylonian year.
The twelve months of the Mandaean year are divided into four seasonal
divisions: Sitwa (winter), Abhar (spring), Gzfa (summer), and Paiz (autumn).
The months are also named according to the signs of the Zodiac: Daula
“Aquarius” (Sabat), Nuna “Pisces” (Adar), Ambra “Aries” (Nisan), Taura
“Taurus” (Ayar), §ilmia “Gemini” (Siwan), §ir{ana “Cancer” (Tammuz), Arya
“Leo” (Ab) Sumbulta “Virgo” (Ellul), Qaina “Libra” (Tisrin), Arqba “Scorpio”
(MaSrwan), Hafia “Sagittarius” (Kanun), Gadia “Capricon” (Jabit). Each year
is named after the day which it began, e.g. the Year of HabSaba, the Year of
Sunday; or Year of Raha^ia, Year of Friday. The Mandaean New Year is called
Dihba Rba.93 The Mandaeans count the 24 hours of a day and night as
beginning at dawn, i.e. Tuesday is followed by Tuesday night: “the night of
Tuesday” to an Arab, on the contrary, means the night preceding Tuesday.
9* ATS, pp. 116-7. Hibil-Ziwa: a messenger of the World of Light and the son of Manda d-Hiia.
’3 See Mil, pp. 84-5.
39

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

The Mandaean calendar has the additional incongruity of beginning the
year with the winter season, whereas the Persian-Zoroastrian New Year is
normally associated with the spring. The Persian-Zoroastrian New Year
coincided with early winter in the 1st century B.C.E., so the essential names of
Mandaean months may have been instituted in this period.^ The Mandaeans
are the only non-Iranian people who adopted the old Iranian calendar, along
with quite a number of other beliefs, of the later Sasanian period i.e., the time
of Khosrau the Great (sixth century) without the slightest change.95 But the
Mandaeans did not use the Persian names of the months and kept the Semitic
ones, as mentioned above.
The main purpose of the Mandaean calendar is to determine the
ominous and auspicious times. The Mandaeans believe in two kinds of
ominous (mbatfal) days: (l) Minor mbatfal “ominous”: on these days the
Mandaeans are not allowed to slaughter animals, but are allowed to eat meat
of slaughtered animals on the day before. (2) Major mbatfal “ominous”:
Slaughter of animals or eating meat is not allowed during these days; only
vegetarian food.*6
w This information is courtesy of Dr. S. Stem (oral communication).
95 Taqizadeh, BSOS, Vol. 9,1938: 605-7. The Mandaeans still call the New Year’s Day (dahba
rba) by the Persian name Nauruz Rba. He also writes: “There is, however, one small people
(he means the Mandaeans) with whom not only the old Iranian system of time reckoning
survives, but whose national calendar is now, strictly speaking, the only true continuance of
that once very widely used Mazdayasnian or Young-Avestan calendar” (Ibid, p. 605).
9* ‘niani book of the Mandaeans p. 163.
40

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

8i.6 - Mandaean Feasts
Si.6.1 - Parwanaiia (Panja)
As mentioned above, the most important of the Mandaean’s feasts is the
Parwanaiia97 (or: Panja) which is celebrated during the five intercalary days
between the end of the month Sumbulta (Ellul) and the beginning of Qaina
(TiSrin). Five days before the Panja, or the last five days of Sumbulta, are
considered major mbaft/ (ominous days), for they are dedicated to the five
lords of Darkness, but the period Panja is the happiest time of the whole year.
As noted above, the Mandaean year is divided into twelve months of thirty
days each and a month with five intercalary days. These five days are called
Parwanaiia and the Mandaeans believe that in the five days of the
Parwanaiia (Panja) five celestial beings of Light were created, and that
consequently the doors of the world of Light are open during these five days.
Those nfaqa “out of the body” (dead), are with their loved ones and
share in communion (laufa) with them ritual meals eaten in their names. The
five days of the Parwanaiia are called ham§a iuma dparuaniia dhinun
dukrana “the five days commemoration”.^ The perfected souls of ancestors
and spirits of life and light have special powers at this time to help the living.
Should a person have the food fortune to die during the sacred five days, he or
she will pass quickly through the purgatories (or: watch-houses) to the world
of light. On the last day of the feast, special ceremonies are performed by the
97 parwanaye is connected with modem Persian adverb parstadan and the
Parthian Jjj> parwan “forward, before” (Burtea, “Sarh d-Paruaniia”, ARAM, Vol. 16, 2004:
86).
98 ocH jc 0 4 ^
41

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

priests for those who, during the past year, died in a state of impurity, or not
wearing ritual garment. Sheep are slaughtered for lay feasting and charity, and
a small piece of sheep’s fat is placed on zidqa brika (Holy Oblation) tables.
Every man, woman and child should be baptized and all share in sacraments
which commemorate the dead.99
Sl.6. 2 - ^ Dihba Rba
Dihba Rba is the Mandaeans’ New Year festival, celebrated at the
beginning of Daula (Sabat), the first month of the Mandaean year. They also
use the Persian name Nauruz Rba for this festival. New Year’s Eve is called
KanSi uZahli “cleaning and lustration”. On this day sheep and chicken are
slaughtered, bread is baked and kept in the house, jars and pots are filled with
water enough for thirty-six hours. All day, till sunset (paina d-Dahba Rba),
the priests baptize the faithful. Thirty-six hours before the second day of
Daula (Sabat), i.e. the night before the New Year and the first of the New Year,
is called the Day-of-Lacking, during which period priests and laymen retire
into the house, where they must remain without going outside, no matter for
what purpose, and no religious ceremony can take place. The reason given for
these precautions against pollution is this: For the Mandaeans, the New Year
honors Mana Rba Kabira and how he completed his work of Creation. On this
day, the spirits of light gather together to embark on a twelve hour journey to
visit the Great Mana and show their appreciation towards him. Abatur closes
w Drower, Water into Wine, 1956: 37-8.
42

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

his door, Nidbai and Silmai forsake their posts as the guardians of running
waters; Hibil, Sitil, and Anu§ depart; the dwellers in M§unia Ku§{a (the
parallel pure world) with Adam Kasia (Secret Adam) at their head and their
guardian spirit Si§lam Rba (the dmuta of Hibil-Ziwa) all rise into the infinite
worlds of light. They travel by the “vehicles of Light” and this celestial journey
takes them twelve hours. They reach the realm of Light at the dawn of the New
Year and spend the next twelve hours praying and praising the Great Ones.
Their journey back covers the next night.
While the guardians are gone, the world is left defenseless and all
sources of nature, including trees and rives, become exposed to the forces of
evil and death. Therefore, the Mandaeans take extra measures to protect
themselves from pollution by staying at home praying and meditating for
thirty-six hours. On the third day of the feast (the second day of the new year)
the invisible guardians having returned, the vigil is over and there is a general
jubilation. The Mandaeans gather in the mandi “temple” to greet the ganzibra
“high-priest”, and listen to his portents for the year. Then they go to visit
Mandaean families that have recently lost a loved one to console them and
assure them that they are not alone in times of difficultly. Once this is done,
they feast and make merry.100
100 For more details on this feast see Drower, 1956: 34 ff.
43

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

§1,6,3 - The Dihba d- SiSlam Rba
or the Dihba d-§uSian
The Mandaeans also call this feast Nauruz Zu^a (Little New Year) which
takes place on the 6th day and the 7th of the first month. The night between
these two days is called “the night of power”101 and then, if a man is pious, the
gate of Abatur is opened for him in a vision and he obtains whatever he may
ask. However, if he is really pious he does not ask worldly favours but freedom
from sin and spiritual gifts, and the result is not immediately seen. The priests
visit the Mandaean families and hang on the door of every house a wreath of
willow and myrtle, which remains there till the next year and is thought to
protect the Mandaeans from evil. In return, the Mandaeans donate a small fee
to the priests.
§1.6.4, - The Dihba Hnina or Dihba Turma (the little
feast)
This feast takes place on the 18th of Taura (Ayar) and lasts for three
days. Baptism should take place and the dead be remembered by lofani or
ritual meals. Dihba Hnina celebrates the return of Hibil-Ziwa form the
underworlds to the worlds of light. It is a cheerful feast and commemorates
creation. Hibil-Ziwa’s marriage to Zahariel (the female spirit of the
underworld) results in the birth of Ptahil (the demiurge who created the
101 The Moslems celebrate a similar occasion on the night of the 27th of the fasting month
“Ramadan” which they call lailat elqadr “the Night of Power”. They believe the gate of
heavens open in this night and some of the believers’ wishes come true.
44

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

cosmos). On the first day of this feast they visit each other and have a special
breakfast together which consists of rice, yogurt and dates.
§ 1.7 - lutata uairiata Curses and Incantations
A large number of Mandaic magic bowls, lead and gold amulets were
found in Mesopotamia during the 19th and 20th century, and have reached the
Western world through archeologists and antique dealers. We cannot
determine a dating for this magic material but most scholars believe that they
belong to period between the 2nd and the 6th century C.E. The writings on the
terracotta magic bowls survived because they were written with a special kind
of “permanent” ink. The ink diuta is made, according to a secret recipe,
by the scribes themselves, who are often the priests.102 To the Mandaeans
writing is a sacred art and the letters of the alphabet represent the powers of
life and of light. Hence, Mandaeans look upon their alphabet as magical and
sacred. Writing is under the special protection of the planet Nabu103. Letters of
the alphabet, inscribed on twenty-four scraps of silver or gold, are placed
102 The following recipe was given to Drower by a Mandaean priest during her stay in Iraq:
“Mix glue with river water, let it melt, and then evaporated for six days. On the seventh,
pound it with powder charcoal in the portion of one mithqal (nearly 4.8 gm)of charcoal to 25
glue, for four or five days. Mix with water to a smooth paste, and after evaporation it will
form crystals. These, mixed with river-water (yardina) to from ink. The Asut Malka (a
prayer recited before all baptisms and ritual meals, and rites) should be read over it” (Mil p.
23).
*°3 Nbti or ‘Nbti in Mandaean (Babylonian Nabu ‘Mercury’). The Mandaeans, like the
Babylonians, consider him as the patron of writing and the god of wisdom (MD, p. 287, see
also Dally, 1989: 325)-
45

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

under the pillow of a person who desires heavenly guidance in some matter of
difficulty. 104
The bowls contain valuable information of mythical tales of Late
Antiquity including early forms of liturgy, mystical literature and Mandaean
textual material.1** They also reflect the Mandaean belief and creed.106 The
purpose of these magic bowls and rolls is to throw a protective spell against
enemies, capture demons, and repulse curses and avert evil eye, over the
clients for whom they were written. Incantations were of various kinds and
shapes; some were for health and others as love talismans. 1Q7 The Mandaeans
possessed a large collection of charms and magical prescriptions, and when
written down they formed a real “Book of Magic”. The most famous “magic”
book is Asfar MalwaSa (Book of the Zodiac) which deals with a system of
astrology based on the Signs of the Zodiac based on astrological literature of
the Babylonians.108
The magic roll is of two kinds. The larger is not easily carried on the
person. It is usually called a «—*** qmaha. The smaller, for which the
word zrazta is usual though not invariable, is written minutely on a long
strip of paper from 2 - 3 inches wide, tightly rolled and inserted into a small
gold or silver case so tat it may be suspended round the neck from a string or
chain. The astrological name of the person for whose protection the roll has
io« Mil, p. 240.
“>s Levene D., 2002: 7.
106 Segal, 2000: 25.
»°7 E. S. Drower, A Mandaean Book of Black Magic, JRAS (1941) P- *5-
108 Budge, 1930: 241.
46

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

been written recurs throughout together with invocations of the powers of
light and life for himself, his family, his possessions, and his trade. 1Q9
The Mandaeans, like the Babylonians, lived lives of fear because they
believed in the existence of myriads of fiends and devils which caused sickness
and death to themselves and damage to their material property.110 The
phantoms of ghosts of dead men were greatly feared in Babylonia, even more
so than among the Mandaeans. It was necessary for the living to offer food,
perform rituals, and recite incantations in order to propitiate potentially
vengeful ghosts, who were as often as not their relatives.111 The people clung to
the use of amulets and the art of incantations thrived in Mesopotamia. The
Mandaeans became the masters of this art, and the originators of the most
interesting magic formulas in Eastern Aramaic.112
The official Mandaean religion condemns the worship of the old
Babylonian planetary deities, even though popular magic has seen fit to invoke
their aid. The Seven (planets) and the Twelve (signs of the Zodiac), mentioned
in many of the holy writings, may be treated as allies and friends. PaSra d-
Sambra (a love charm) addressed to Libat (Dilbat, IStar) which begins frankly,
“In the name of Libat, mistress of gods and men”. Antagonistic references to
the planets and signs of the Zodiac also appear, sometimes in same
Mil, p. 26.
“° Budge, 1930: 241.
Yamauchi, 1967:27. “The Mandaic charms are closest in spirit to the old Babylonian
magical literature” (Montgomery, 1913:116).
“a Miiller-Kessler Ch., “Phraseology in Mandaic Incantations”, Aram Vol. 11 & 12 (1999-
2000) p.296. Montgomery writes “The Mandaic dialect is fully formed and has exercised its
influence, at least in spelling, upon the other two, the rabbinic and Syriac” (Montgomery,
1913: 104).
47

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

phylactery. “3 The planets are considered little better than demons since
actions swayed by emotion are harmful to the soul, and fault committed under
planetary influence must be expiated after death in the mafarata (s.
ma^arta ® r e a l m s equivalent to purgatories. The Mandaean view is
that after death the soul has to pass through a number of posts of stations,
mafarata, before it reaches the scales of judgement. Mafarafa serve as places
of purification for the soul proceeding towards the Realm of Light, and each is
in charge of a keeper or keepers.11*
Many of the divine figures and demons are mentioned in the Ginza are
invoked in the Mandaean incantations and amulets, such as: «<■<—* ‘the Life’,
o tt-a manda d-hiia ‘the gnosis of Life’, “Hibil”, ^®joc “Yawar”,
“the (Seven) Planets”, “YoSamin”, J<— “Ptahil”,
Gabriel, Sami§, y®-*^ “Kiwan” “Bel” -^®y “Nabu” or “Nbu”
“Nirig” or “Nergal” j(<-W “Lilith”, ©<-j^ “Dewis” “Idol-spirits” ®—^
“Ruha” “Stira” (IStar) “Venus-Libat” “Adonai” etc. These names
and more are also found in the other chapters of the Ginza and in the other
Mandaean texts.
In 1905 Mark Lidzbarski published a lead amulet which he dated about
400 C.E. It is considered the earliest of all Mandaic writings. The writing was
inscribed with a nail, and the letters are very small.ns The scroll would be
rolled up and worn in a container. Lady Drower believes that the lead strip was
“3 Mil, p. 26.
McCullough, 1967:17.
“5 Yamauchi, 1967: 6.
48

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

immersed in water and the water swallowed by the person to be cured or
exorcised.116 The following lines from Lidzbarski’s lead amulet invoke most of
the divine and demonic names mentioned above (notice the guttural y is
not dropped in the name of Manda d-Hiia):
I call and Mand‘a d-Hiia I ask for mercy. I say to him, “Do you, O
Mand'a d-Hiia, shatter this misfortune and drive away this
affliction from the threshold of Nukraya and the evil destroyers
from our village. And the Planets how evil they are - who arise in
a rage intending evil. . . . (lines 15 - 21) The pure YoSamin and
Abatur have strengthened it. Ptahil, who built the House, has
strengthened it. Sami§ (the sun) in his brilliance as strengthened
it. Bel (Jupiter). Nergal (Mars), and Kewan (Saturn) have
strengthened it. The Moon in its brightness has strengthened it.
Dilbat (Venus), and Dani§ have strengthened it. Nebo (Mercury),
his priest and worshipper, have strengthened it. The seven
Planets have strengthened it. Their twelve angels have
strengthened it. Their five leaders have strengthened it___” (lines
244 257)1,7
-
The first Mandaic bowl inscription was published by Pognon, the
French consul at Baghdad in 1892. The bowl came from Bismaya (Adab) south
of Nippur.118 The exterior is inscribed with: • • • “Bound .
. . of the crescent-spirit . . .” and the interior begins with: • • • “In the
1,6 Drower E. S., “A Mandaean Bibliography”, JRAS, 1953: 38.
“7 Yamauchi, 1967: pp. 234-255, text 22.
OK 4_C tmj
o ( _ w O c J k ' d-L o< ■ ■■ t i
mj(cJd Lkrn ±io+o ‘Hufamfc'oJ ot^H yO(o^JC . . . Q(-& o|t iMUt oc^codtf
^1^— &O + O O&UOJ &0+kO ±to+o &0 + 0
OtauocMjO &0+ 0 a4dj+ Uo+o ±to+o j{o^lLh
^auLhe ±4 0+0 O+M...) &O+O ^wCOs^ai^
1,8 Yamauchi, 1967: 4.
49

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

name...” the text ends with the typical Mandaean doxology: ot<—’ “And
Life is Victorious”. Almost every incantation and amulet begins with the
opening phrases:© <.<.— “in the name of the Great Life”, **+*=><>
ajtMA—» “May there be health, armament and sealing”, oh^ ju
“Averted and driven away are the curses”; a^aAil vi...lt<,
“Repulsed are all the curses and incantations”
Analyzing the Mandaean texts, one can find that the demonized
Mesopotamian deities, which are also mentioned in the later Mandaic text
corpus, prove without doubt that they were borrowed from a Late Parthian
cultural setting of Central Babylonia.“9 Therefore, Mandaean incantations are
essential to the study of the origin of this people. Rudolph believes that the
“Mandaic incantation corpus belongs to a sunken higher religion. . . . The
Mesopotamian and Iranian elements of the Mandaean texts and their
placement are of major importance when it comes to the question of the
Mandaeans’ homeland.”120
g 1.8 - The Mandaean Manuscripts.
It is assumed that the first Mandaean manuscript (Diwari) was brought
to Europe in 1652 by Carlo Leonelli who was known as Friar Ignatius of Jesus
while he was on a mission to Basra. In 1674 Francois de la Croix brought to
Paris the most important Mandaean manuscript, the Ginza. The French
Miiller-Kessler Ch., “The Mandaeans and the Question of their Origin”, ARAM Vol. 16
(2004) p. 55-
120 Ibid, p. 52. For the Mandaean existence in Nippur along with the Jews before the Islam
conquest of Mesopotamia see Montgomery, 1913:103.
50

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

ambassador at Constantinople sent other manuscripts in 1678. More
Mandaean manuscripts reached Europe successively.121
Many scholars studied and published Mandaean literature such as M.
Thavenot (1663) and M. Norberg (1781), who exerted a considerable effort in
laying the foundation of Mandaean textual study. Peterman (1867) made a
translation of the Ginza based on four Paris manuscripts and published it
under the name Sidra Rabba. Depending on this translation, W. Brandt
(1893) published a German translation of selected passages.122 In 1915 M.
Lidzbarski published the translation of dra§a d-yahia (The Book of John), the
Qolasta (liturgical collection) and the Ginza respectively.
Lidzbarski’s distinguished work was continued by E. S. Drower who
opened new horizons in the field of Mandaean research. She succeeded where
the others failed and her achievements in this field were remarkable. Her
dedication to Mandaism and her long stay in Iraq made her welcome among
the Mandaean community. She traveled to Iraq many times and on several
occasions visited their bit-manda (temple), in Liflafa - Qal’at §aleh, Maisan
province (southern Mesopotamia), and became acquainted with their
traditions and customs. She won the confidence of the Mandaeans and
obtained from them a complete collection of 56 Mandaean manuscripts. This
collection is known as “Drower Collection” and deposited in the Bodleian
Library in Oxford. 123 Lady Drower translated and published most of the
121 Pallis, 1933 p. 32. For more about Ignatius of Jesus see Lupieri, “Friar Ignatius of Jesus”,
ARAM Vol. 16, 2004: 25-46.
122 Pallis S. A., 1933: 38.
,23 Macuch R., 1965: XLIV.
51

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

collection, in addition to the Mandaic Dictionary which she compiled and
published with R. Macuch in 1963.
The oldest Mandaean manuscript in Europe (Marsh. 691) is kept in the
Bodleian library. It is a collection of prayers copied by the scribe Adam Zihrun,
son of Bihran Sitlan in the year 1529. This codex belonged to a certain Thomas
Marshal (1620 or 21- 1685), an English philologist, and was given to Bodleian
in 1689 or 1690 by his servant.12*
§ 1.0 - The Ginza Rba (The Great Treasure)
The Ginza is a big codex (more than 654 pages or 327 folios) consists of
two parts: the Right Ginza (GR) and the Left Ginza (GL) each part opposite the
other. The Ginza is divided into twenty-one chapters or tractates: eighteen
tractates belong to the right Ginza and three tractates to the left Ginza.
g 1.0.1 - The Right Ginza
The first two tractates of (GR 1 and GR 2) include moral teachings and
description and praise of the King of Light and his world. The third tractate
(GR 3) PP- 83- 148, 125 which is the largest in the Ginza, contains the Story of
Creation (the subject of this research). The fourth tractate (GR 4) pp. 148-157
is a brief description of Manda d-Hiia’s baptism in the heavenly Yardina
(Jordan) by Mar d-Rabuta (the Lord of Greatness) plus part of Hibil-Ziwa’s
descent to the underworld. The fifth tractate (GR 5) pp. 157-237 consists of five
«*4 Buckley J. J., 2005: 290.
ias Numeration is according to the copy of the Ginza (GRS) used in this research.
52

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

sections: (l) Hibil-Ziwa’s journey to the Realm of Darkness (or: the
underworld). (2) The gods and demons’ defeated by Manda d-Hiia. (3) The
souls’ ascension to the Ma^arata (purgatories). (4) Narration of John the
Baptist baptizing Manda d-Hiia in the living water of Jordan. (5) The ‘uthra
Salmai’s questioning by the heavenly figure Yatrun.
The sixth tractate (GR 6), pp. 237-248, is the journey of Dinanukt126
(“talking in accordance with religion”) to the upper worlds. The Seventh
tractate (GR 7) pp. 248-257 contains some of John the Baptist’s
commandments. The eight tractate (GR 8) pp.257-261 is a small tractate which
includes Manda d-Hiia’s warning the faithful against Ruha. Tractate nine (GR
9) pp. 261-283 includes two sections: (1) The first is called
qarqalta d-$uba kukbia “the overthrow of seven stars”, a polemic
chapter against other (false) religious sects. (2) The second section is ‘the
emanation of Mar d-Rabuta from the nifufta (semen?) of the heavenly
Jordan’. It also contains material related to creation. Tractate ten (GR 10) pp.
283-297 is a continuation of the creation story and is called ‘the Book of
Radiance that radiates in the pihta’. Tractate eleven (GR 11), pp. 297-325, is
called “the Book of Great Ano§” which deals with the conflict between the
126 Dinanukt is a legendary figure of the Ginza. Dinanukt is an old Persian word means
“talking in accordance with religion”. (MD p. 108) The legend says that din melek uthra (a
heavenly being) was sent to the wise priest Dinanukt, who wanted to know about where Life
is, and the nature of KuSfa. He fell into a trance and his soul traveled with din melek, in a
journey to the underworld (Siniawis) where he saw the melki (spirits) of darkness, and then
to the different layers of the World of Light. There the ground was like crystal, and there was
no darkness. Eventually, he returned to his body and told his people of what he saw in his
journey. (For more analysis of this Ginza figure see Widengren, 1950: 62 ff. See also “How
Dana Nuk Visited the Seventh Heaven” Mil, Ch. IX p. 300). (Cf. “the saintly reformer”,
Herzfeld, Archaeological History of Iran (1935) P-100).
53---PAGE BREAK---

World of Light and Ruha. It also mentions the faulty creation of the material
world by Ptahil.
Tractate twelve (GR 12), pp. 325-341, has seven sections. The first
section has the uthra AnoS as the speaker. Sections 2, 3, 4 and 5 are hymns
some of which are similar to the hymns of the Canonical Prayerbook of the
Mandaeans.12? Section 6 describes the World of Darkness and its king and
inhabitants. Section 7 is a kind of geography; it shows the directions of the
worlds and waters. Tractate thirteen (GR 13), pp. 341-349, is called “he Prayer
of the Tarmidia (Mandaean priests) to the Pious”.128 Tractate fourteen (GR
14)> PP- 352-362, is called “the Book of the Great Nbaf” which narrates the
emanation of Yawar, YoSamin (the second Life) and many other heavenly
beings. Tractate fifteen (GR 15), pp. 364-443, consists of twenty poetic sections
of the Redeemer speeches and blessings. Section 15 is Ptahil lamentation and
threat of waging a war. Section 16 narrates Manda d-Hiia’s visit to YoSamin
and his debate with him. Tractate 16 (GR 16), pp. 446-459, consists of 11
sections, also poetic. The first section speaks of Manda d-Hiia’s visit to the
world of the Second Life. The rest are speeches and exhortations of the
Redeemer.
Tractate seventeen (GR 17), pp. 462-469, consists of two poetic
sections: the first talks about the Great First Mana and the Great Occult Eggs
that existed before Mar d-Rabuta (The Lord of Greatness). The second part
ia? The hymn in section GR 12:4 is identical to CP hymn n. 214 p. 183.
»a8 Buckley believes that the first 13 tractates of the Ginza testify to a fully developed
Mandaean Gnosticism (Buckley, 2005: 22).
54

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

speaks about the oppression of the Seven (planets) and the Twelve (zodiacs)
against the niSmata (souls). Tractate twelve (GR 18), pp. 472-491, is a
chronology of the material world. It contains information about the three
catastrophes which befell the humans in three different epochs or
generations. 129 and many other historical events.
§ 1.Q.2 - The Left Ginza
This part of the Ginza is divided into three sections or tractates. The
first tractate (GRL I) pp. 46-89 consists of four sections. The first section tells
the story of Adam and his death, and how Adam’s son Sitil (Seth) volunteers to
die before his father. The second section is about Adam’s complaints about his
death and his lamentation. The third section is about Hawa’s (Eve) death. The
forth is a description of different mafaratia (watch-houses or purgatories)
which the soul has to go through before her final destination.
The second tractate (GRL III) pp. 46-89 consists of twenty-eight
sections of poetry. In this tractate the Great Mana speaks, beginning each
section with the formula: ‘I am a Mana of the Great Life.’ The last tractate of
the Ginza (GL 3) pp. 89-164 consists of 62 sections and deal with the niSimta
(soul) and her destiny. It also includes the lamentation of the mana
personifying the soul.
*29 For the comparison between these catastrophes and Sodom and Gomorrah see Stroumsa,
1984:110 ff.
55

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

§ l.io - The Ginza used in the Research (GRSD:
The copy of the Ginza (GRS) used in this work consists of 332 folios
(664 pages), and each page consits of 25 lines. It was written in Iran in the late
1990s under the supervision of the Mandaean Council of Ahwaz. The
headscribe of this Ginza is Rbai Ganzibra Mhatam Yuhana br Sarat (his Arabic
name: Shaikh Jabar the son of Tawoos), who is the head-priest of the
Mandaean community in Iran (he became a priest in 1948). The colophon at
the end of the left part of this Ginza (GRL p. 169) tells us that this copy was
written after consulting 5 other Ginzas. The scribes of these Ginzas are: Yahia
Ram Zihrun the son of the Rbai Zeki Zihrun, Ram Yuhana the son of Rbai
Ram, Zeki Zihrun the son of Ram Zihrun, Sam Yuhana the son of Rbai
Behram and Zihrun the son of Mudalal. A copy of Petermann’s Ginza was
consulted, which he copied during his vistit to southern Iraq in the 1840s from
4 Ginzas, as the colophon calls them (A, B, C, Ganzabra §alah Kuhaili
D ).l3<>
was at the head of the team which consisted of the following scribes and
scholars: Tarmida Talib Duraji, Tarmida Najah Kohaili, Yalufa Salem Kohaili,
Yalufa Jamal Duraji and Yalufa Falah Kuhaili. For the first time, in centuries,
three Mandaean women participated in this work: Mudalal the daughter of
Sarat and Simat and Sadia the daughters of MahnuS.
For this research four other Ginza manuscripts from the Oriental and
India Office at The British Library in London were collated to compile a critical
apparatus of variants. The first manuscript is under the title: “Liber Adami
>30 For more details on Heinrich Peterman (1801 - 76) and his visit to the Mandaean
community in Iraq see Buckley, 2005:129 ff.
56

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

Mendaice” No. Add 23,599 (henceforth BL 23599) and was presented by Sheik
Yahana Chief and High Priest of the Mandaean sect with his petition to her
Majesty the Queen, dated 10th December 1872, and forwarded to HM’s
Ambassador at Constantinople with dispatch No, 3 dated 29th Jan. 1873 from
Colonel Herbert, Consul General of Baghdad. The second manuscript bears
the title: “Liber Adami Mendaice” No. Add. 23,600 (henceforth: BL 23600).
This Ginza is the oldest one in the British Library (bought from Mrs. Taylor in
April i860) and consisting of 315 folios and the scribe is Adam Yuhana. The
third Ginza codex in the British Library is ‘Liber Adami Mendaice’ Add.
23,6oi(henceforth BL 23601) copied by Adam Yuhana, son of Sam. The third
Ginza codex is ‘Liber Adami Mandaice’ Add. 23,601 dated 1824, also copied by
Adam Yuhana, son of Sam. The forth manuscript is entitled: Sidra Rba
Mandaitic, Oriental 1236 (henceforth BLO 1236).
Due to many factors, the hand written Mandaean manuscripts are in
general tiresome and not easy to read, especially the manuscript (Add 23,599
= BL 23599 ) of the British Library. Some of these factors are:
1. Poor hand writing and careless copying led the scribes to make numerous
spelling mistakes in the manuscripts.
2. These mistakes accumulated through the ages and led to many differences
in readings.
3. The only method by which the scribe is allowed to edit a text is by placing
dots under the wrongly written word or sentence, because the Mandaeans
57

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

believe their writings are sacred and incorrect words or sentences cannot
be erased or crossed.
4. The Mandaean manuscripts have no paragraph indents or punctuation
marks.
5. Many words are hyphenated (especially at the end of the line) which causes
confusion to the reader.
6. Ambiguities in Mandaean script often cause uncertainty and confusion in
reading hand written Mandaean texts. The letters which cause such
confusion are: and (□); (-1 and (i); (i) and
* (p) ) * * * (3); (iw )
and (r); 0 (n ) and ); ^ ) and * (n) and * The
v- (n (p (3); v (l), v (3).
computer Mandaic font used in this work attempts to faithfully reproduce
the manuscript text, but at the same time compensates for the poor
handwriting and careless copying in the manuscripts.
The computerized Mandaic font reproduces original text while
correcting scribal errors to a great extent. Most previous scholars were obliged
to transliterate the Mandaean texts either into Hebrew or Roman characters.
A notable exception, and the first scholar who used a Mandaic typeface, was
the Frenchman H. Pognon, in his book 'Inscriptions Mandaites des Coupes de
Khouabir’, published in 1898. The computerized characters used in this work
are similar to Pognon’s. The present work also transliterates every line of the
text into Hebrew characters beneath the Mandaic in order to facilitate reading
for non-specialists. There are inevitable discrepancies between the present
version of the Ginza and the other four versions mentioned above. The
58

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

number shown on the margin of some of the pages of the translation
correspond to the beginning of the page in the original text.
The translator of the Mandaic texts encounters some difficulties such as:
1. The material of the Mandaean cosmogony, cosmology, theology and
soteriology is distributed among much Mandaean literature such as the
Ginza Rba, o<_wot*x DraSa d-Yahia (The Book of John),
Mandaean Hymns and Prayers; Ma§5ufa, * Masqita,
ocv«<v^.‘Eniania, etc), and among the different Diwans, such as Diwan
Abatur. Mandaean literature is written mostly in mystical way and many
religious concepts are considered sacred explanation of which are “reserved
for those considered able to understand and preserve the gnosis.”^
2. Most of the Mandaean priests abstain (by law) from discussing profound
religious matters with a Mandaean layman or a stranger. The holy
scriptures strongly advise Mandaean priests against revealing these
scriptures to strangers. For example the Alf Trisar Suialia (The Thousand
and Twelve Questions) commences with the following o±ie^\ zhara
“admonition”:
In the name of the Life. Laufa (union) and revival of life and a
forgiver of sins be there for me N ... by means of these good
Questions, hidden from (even) the eyes of the uthras and not
revealed except to such as guard them, and tell them to one in
a generation each to his son. For Hibil-Ziwa placed them in
his son’s right hand and said, ‘Take care, take care, take care,
‘3* SA p. xvi.
59

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

three hundred and sixty thousand times take care of these
Good Questions which Hibil-Ziwa asked of Nbaf the Great.”
The occa^i^a^ Na§oraeans (the priestly group of the Mandaeans) are keen
not to reveal the mysteries of the ajCl^Srav Na§iruta (priestly knowledge)
to their own laity, except to those elite of Mandaeans who dedicate
themselves Na§ii*uta and have proven themselves worthy in the line of
priesthood. The Na§oraeans guard their holy books and scrolls intimately.
Their mysteries are not imparted to the Mandaean laymen, no matter how
religious they are, fearing that these mysteries might be misinterpreted.1^
3. The neglect which the Mandaean literature suffered from, for more than
fourteen centuries, lead to many differences between the vernacular
Mandaean and the Classical Na§oraean Mandaean writings.^4 Most of the
Mandaean priests did not receive their priestly knowledge in religious
institutes. They usually obtain their priesthood knowledge and
apprenticeship from their fathers or from other elderly priests. They teach
the initiates reading, writing and the comprehension of Mandaean
language, in addition to the practice of the different rites (baptism,
communion, marriage etc.) meticulously.^5
ATS. P. 110. The Mandaean manuscript p. 2 text collated:
y/--.a/ «/ It . ...1 j 1 m.A».... ) a^JaJ o< oc<_w._C
- 1 0<JcJoL*{alj 0<_±iXx*eX-t y t ...ICLylO o<-±J(JL^> occocjo^ Ot-ldaA ocjocjjfk
oc^jJo yCj(c^j tkMj(oh( ..<<1 ‘A+m j ojc| ^lL(c+
ojc| JcA'ce Jcco^^X o<-±feui ocJoo^ ..»o| cajfa^oi^o ayO<uC o<_yji'c|
>33 SA p. xiv. Such reluctance to reveal secret knowledge, even to followers of the same
community goes back to ancient Mesopotamia. Colophons of cuneiform tablets often repeat
such warnings and admonitions. (Livingstone, Mystical and Mythological Explanatory
works of Assyrian and Babylonian Scholars, Oxford (1986) pp. 260 - 261).
*34 Macuch, 1965: LIX.
>35 For the consecration of the priest, or Tarmida see Mil p. i47ff.
60

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

The Ginza remains as the largest codex which the Mandaeans inherited
from their golden era when Gnosticism flourished amongst the civilization of
Babylon and Persia in the east and amongst the Greek and Roman empires in
the west. In addition to the liturgies, the Ginza contains the oldest Gnostic
(Mandaean) tradition. The Mandaean Gnostic library is equally as important
as Nag Hammadi Codices and the Dead Sea Scrolls and they deserve more
attention and examination from scholars of Semitic studies.^6
g l.ll - The Mandaean Script;
The Mandaic script belongs to the South Mesopotamian branch of
Aramaic besides the Syriac-Palmyrene branch in North Syria and the script of
Hatra in north Mesopotamia. *37 The Mandaeans call their alphabet abgada.
The twenty four letters are sacred and represent the powers of Life and Light.
They believe that their inscriptions are protected by Nbu (Babylonian Nabu)
“Mercury”, the god of writing and wisdom.^8 Some scholars, such as Macuch,
believe that there is a close relation between the Mandaic and the Elymaic
scripts. Others like Noldke and Lidzbarski suppose that Mandaic script is
related to the Nabafian.139 The Mandaic script is known to us either from the
Mandaean manuscripts or form amulets and incantations. Most of them were
*36 Rudolph, HR (Feb., 1969) pp. 210-235, esp. p.222.
*37 Naveh, 1982:132.
*3* Mil, p. 240. The old Iraqis believed that science was under the protection of the god Nabu
while the goddess Nasaba presided over the art of writing (Roux, 1966: 327).
*39 Naveh, 1970: 33.
61

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

probably composed during the Sasanian era and the early Islamic conquest of
Iraq, but the earliest known Mandaic text is a lead amulet from the first half of
the third century. *4°
No one can precisely determine when the Mandaeans manufactured
their script, but Naveh argues that the shapes of the letters suggest that the
Mandiac cursive script is a “straightforward evolution from E ly m a ic .Since
Mesene (Maisan) and Characene were neighbours of the kingdom of Elymais,
such assumption is strengthened. Many features of the Mandaic script
resemble both the Naba^aean and the Aramaic of Tang-i Sarvak and Elymaic,
such as the letters (°) a/e/, which is simplified from the Elymaic heart shape,
(*t) mem ( * ) bet, (-*) dalet, etc., but there is no resemblance between the
Mandaic(*0 (s) and the Elymaic shen. 142 Macuch noted, “the most
remarkable Mandaean ligatures in the Elymaean inscriptions are the relative
particle (^) d- and the conjunction (-$) kd which includes it.”1^
There remains the possibility that the Na^oreans had brought their own
script when they migrated to Southern Mesopotamia, sinces many Mandaean
hymns and prayers suggest such a migration. Macuch beleives that the
Mandaic script had developed in the second century C.E., since there are no
»4o Yamauchi, 1967: 2.
mi Naveh, 1970: 34.
‘42 Coxon, 1970: 20. He writes: “the Mandaic script is the nexus between the Naba(aean and
Tang-I Sarvak scripts, although Mandaic has a close formal similarity to Naba(aean” (For the
comparative script chart see Naveh, 1970: 35).
>43 Macuch, “The Origins of the Mandaeans and their Script”, JSS, 1971:187.
62

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

significant differences between the Mandaean script on the one hand and the
Elymaean and Charcenian on the other.M4
§ 1.12 - Book m of the Ginza Rba:
Book three, or the Book of Creation, is the largest tractate of the
Mandaeans’ holy book the ‘Ginza Rba’. The Ginza names this tractate as:
oco4t5a4/oJ aj(L*4Liia& a— ecaMJia^ a iiic a i VQZQ U sidVQ
qadmaia d-§uta haita qadmaita dhuat mn laqadmaia ‘The Mystery and the
First Book of the First Living Doctrine which was from aforetime (or: from the
very beginning)”, ms This tractate includes the cosmogony; the origin of the
world of light and the world of darkness, the rise of the First Great Life, the
Second Life (Yosamin), the Third Life (Abatur) and the Forth Life (Ptahil); the
demiurge who created the cosmos and Tibil (the earthly world). It also
narrates the creation of the Mandaean redeemer Manda d-Haiia (‘Gnosis of
Life’ or: ‘Knowledge-of-Life’) and his descent to the underworld and his
triumph against the creatures of darkness. It narrates the creation of Adam
and Eve and the descent of the niitimta (soul) into the ‘sfona (the human
body). Tractate III also includes an elaborate description of the demonic Ruha
and her planetary sons and her attempts to seduce Adam in order to entrap
him in the world.
‘44 Ibid, p. 190.
l«s Widengren believes that the Mesopotamian back ground of heavenly books preexistent
before creation and containing destinies is clear in the conception of the Book III of the Ginza
(Widengren, 1950:10, 74-75).
63

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

The “Mystery and the First Book of the First Living Doctrine” begins
with folio (p. and ends at folio (p. 6) in the copy of the Ginza
4 2 r 8 3 ) 74V 148:
used in this work.1*6 The language of is mostly poetic and written in classical
Mandaic. The text consists of prose sections and poetic sections. The text
2 2
begins with a prose section (pp. followed by a prolonged poetic
8 3 :1 5 - 8 7 : 21)
section (pp. A second, but smaller, prose section is found
8 7 : 21 - 119: 1).
nearly in the middle of the text (pp. followed by another poetic
1 19 :1 - 1 2 0 :1 1 )
section until the end of the text.
g 1.13 - The Mandaean Storv of Creation
Mesopotamia gave birth to many legends and myths such, as the epic of
Gilgamesh, Enuma Eli§, Ninurta, Ea and Inana. Out of the crucible of
Mesopotamia, the land of reeds and swamps comes forth the Mandaean story
of Creation. It is a unique piece of literature infused with Babylonian gods,
demons and biblical motifs. With the conquest of Babylon by the Persian
Empire BCE,1*? and the subsequence Greek invasion of Alexander the
5 3 9
Great in BCE,1*8 the Mandaean story of creation comes under the
3 3 2
influence of Persian dualism and Greek mythology.
It addresses hiia qadmaiia the Ancient Life, the afterlife, Dualism, and
cosmology. The language symbolic of Gnosticism is very poetical and is the
first complete account of creation from Mesopotamia. It contains ethical and
l«6 The Mandaeans conceived of hidden books in heaven existing before creation. (Ibid)
>47 George Roux, Ancient Iraq, (1964) p. 352.
‘48 Cantor N. F., Alexander the Great, (2005) p. 142.
64

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

religious principles that emerged during the period when Mesopotamians
demonised their gods. The Mandaean priests still recite the story of creation,
on the banks of the rivers, in the same manner as their ancestors the
Na§raeans used to do in the ancient times.
The Mandaean story of creation is the product of the beginning of the
Gnostic era when the Mandaean world was imprinted by the dualism

*[577 pages in source — text truncated at 100000 characters]*