GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA

archaeological  survey  op  INDIA


CENTRAL

ARCHEOLOGICAL

LIBRARY


ACCESSION  NO.,


CALL  No.  83L55jlSmilNJc.


D.G.A.  79


\


ORIENTAL  TEXTS  APPROVED
BUT  NOT  FINANCED  BY  THE  TRUSTEES
AND  SOLD

BY  MESSRS  LUZAC  & CO.

The  Safar-nama,  Rawshana’i-nama  and  Sa‘adat-nama  of
Nasir-i  Khusraw  (“Kaviani”  Press,  Berlin,  1923).  85.

The  Zadu  ’1-Musafirm  of  Nasir-i  Khusraw  (“Kaviani”  Press,
Berlin,  1923).  15^.

The  Wajh-i  Dm  of  Nasir-i  Khusraw  (“Kaviani”  Press,  Berlin,
1924).  4s.

The  Silsilatu  ’n-Nasab-i  Safawiyya  of  Shaykh  Husayn  ibn
Shaykh  Abdal-i  Zahidi  (“franshahr”  Press,  Berlin,  1343/
1924).  2S.


“ E.  J.  W.  GIBB  MEMORIAL  ”
SERIES


NEW  SERIES,  IV.  2


c.


THE  MATHNAWI

OF

JALALU’DDfN  RUM  I

EDITED  FROM  THE  OLDEST  MAXUSCRIPTS
AVAILABLE:  WITH  CRITICAL  XOTES.
TRAX'SLATIOX,  Sf  COMMENTARY

BY

REYNOLD  A.  NICHOLSON

LITT.D.,  LL.D.,  F.B.A.

Sir  Thomas  Adann's  Piofessor  of  Atahn  and  sometime
Lecturer  in  Persian  in  the  Vmiersity  oj  Camhnd‘^e

VOLUME  II

CONTAINING  THE  TILANSLATION
OF  THE  FIRST  & SECOND  BOOKS


PRINTED  BY  THE  CAMBRIDGE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS
FOR  THE  TRUSTEES  OF  THE  “E.  J.  W.  GIBB  MEMORIAL  '
AND  PUBLISHED  BY  MESSRS  LUZAC  S’  CO.

46  GREAT  RUSSELL  STREET,  LONDON,  W.C.

1926


CENTRAI.  ' ' \EOLOaiGf.>-

LIM  < ‘ • •/

Aoni-  ‘ 3-^4. *S3  . .......


Date.  ^

ObUlSo.  S^cSS


PRINTED  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN


THIS  VOLUME
IS  ONE  OF  A SERIES
PUBLISHED  BY  THE  TRUSTEES  OF
THE  “E.  J.  W.  GIBB  MEMORIAL”


The  funds  of  this  Memorial  are  derived  from  the  Interest  accruing
from  a Sum  of  money  given  by  the  late  MRS  GIBB  of  Glasgow,  to
perpetuate  the  Memory  of  her  beloved  Son

ELIAS  JOHN  WILKINSON  GIBB

and  to  promote  those  researches  into  the  History,  Literature,  Philosophy
and  Religion  of  the  Turks,  Persians  and  Arabs,  to  which,  from  his
Youth  uproar ds,  until  his  premature  and  deeply  lamented  Death  in  his
forty-fifth  year,  on  December  5,  1901,  his  life  was  devoted.


\;'j^


“ These  are  our  works,  these  works  our  souls  display;
Behold  our  works  when  we  hare  passed  away.”


* .jS  !»•?<-


8


“E.  J.  W.  GIBB  MEMORIAL”


ORIGINAL  TRUSTEES
[JANE  GIBB,  died  November  26,  1904],

[E.  G.  BROWNE,  5,  1926],

G.  LE  STRANGE,

[H.  F.  AMEDROZ,  died  March  17,  1917].
A.  G.  ELLIS,

R.  A.  NICHOLSON,

Sir  E.  DENISON  ROSS.


ADDITIONAL  TRUSTEES
IDA  W.  E.  OGILVY  GREGORY,  appointed  1905.
C.  A.  STOREY,  appointed  1926.

H.  A.  R.  GIBB,  appointed  1926.

CLERK  OF  THE  TRUST

W.  L.  RAYNES,

90,  REGENT  STREET,  C.\MBRIDGE.

PUBLISHER  FOR  THE  TRUSTEES
MESSRS  LUZAC  & CO.,

46,  GREAT  RUSSELL  STREET,  LONDON,  W.C.


“E.  J.  W.  GIBB  MEMORIAL”  PUBLICATIONS

OLD  SERIES.  (25  WORKS,  39  published  volumes.)

I.  Babur-nama  (Turki  text,  fac-simile),  ed.  Beveridge,
1 905 . Out  of  print.

11.  History  of  Tabaristan  of  Ibn  Isfandiyar,  abridged  transl.
Browne,  1905.  8^.

III,  1-5.  History  of  Rasiili  dynasty  of  Yaman  by  al-Khaz-
raji ; 1 , 2 transl.  of  Sir  James  Redhouse ; 1907-8,  -js.  each ;
3,  Annotations  by  the  same,  1908,  5^. ; 4,  5,  Arabic  text
ed.  Muhammad  ‘Asal,  1908-1913,  8s.  each.

IV.  Omayyads  and  ‘ Abbasids,  transl.  Margoliouth  from  the
Arabic  of  G.  Zaidan,  1907,  5s.  Out  of  print.

V.  Travels  of  Ibn  Jubayr,  Arabic  text,  ed.  de  Goeje,  1907,
los.  Out  of  print.

VI,  1,2,3,  5,6,  7.  Yaqiit’s  Diet,  of  learned  men

Arib),  Arabic  text,  ed.  Margoliouth,  1908-1926;  20s.,
I2S.,  los.,  155.,  155.,  15s.  respectively.  V0I.4  in  preparation.

VII,  I,  5,  6.  Tajaribu’l-Umam  of  Miskawayhi  (Arabic  text,
fac-simile),  ed.  le  Strange  and  others,  1909-1917,  js.
each  vol.

VIII.  Marzuban-nama  (Persian  text),  ed.  Mirza  Muhammad,
1909,12s.  Out  of  print.

IX.  Textes  Houroutis  (French  and  Persian),  by  Huart  and
Riza  Tevfiq,  1909,  los.

X.  Mu'jam,  an  old  Persian  system  of  prosody,  by  Shams-i-
Qays,  ed.  Mirza  Muhammad,  1909,  15s.  Out  of  print.

XI,  I,  2.  Chahar  Maqala;  i,  Persian  text,  ed.  and  annotated
by  Mirza  Muhammad,  1910.  12s.  Outof  print.  2,  English
transl.  and  notes  by  Browne,  1921,  15s.

XII.  Introduction  a I’Histoire  des  Mongols,  by  Blochet,
1910,  lOS.

XIII.  Diwan  of  Hassan  b.  Thabit  (Arabic  text), ed.Hirschfeld,
1910,  7s.  6d.

XIV,  I,  2.  Ta’rikh-i-Guzida  of  Hamdu’llah  Alustawfi;

1,  Persian  text,  fac-simile,  1911,  15s.  Out  of  print.

2,  Abridged  translation  and  Indices  by  Browne  and
Nicholson,  1913,  los.

XV.  Nuqtatu’l-Kaf  (History  of  the  Babis)  by  Mirza  Jani
(Persian  te.xt),  ed.  Browne,  1911,  12s.


XVI,  1,2,3-  Ta’rfkh-i-Jahan-gushay  of  Juwayni,  Persian  text,
ed.  Mi'rza  Muhammad;  i,  Mongols,  1913,  155.  Out  of
print.  2,  Khwarazmshahs,  1917,  15^.;  3,  Assassins,  in
preparation.

XVII.  Kashfu’l-Mahjub  (Sufi  doctrine),  transl.  Nicholson,

1911,  1 5r . Out  of  print.

XVIII,  2 (all  hitherto  published),  J^mi‘u’t-Tawarikh  of  Rashi-
du’d-Di'n  Fadlu’llah  (Persian  text),  ed.  and  annotated
by  Blochet,  1912,  155.

XIX.  Kitabu’l-Wulat  of  al-Kindi  (Arabic  text),  ed.  Guest,

1912,  155.

XX.  Kitabu’l-Ansab  of  as-Sam‘am'  (Arabic  text,  fac-simile),
1913,205.  Out  of  print.

XXI.  Diwans  of  ‘Amir  b.  at-Tufayl  and  ‘Abid  b.  al-Abras
(Arabic  text  and  transl.  by  Sir  Charles  J.  Lyall),  1913, 125.

XXII.  Kitabu’l-Luma‘  (Arabic  text),  ed.  Nicholson,  1914,  155.

XXIII,  I,  2.  Nuzhatu-’l-Qulub  of  Hamdu’llah  Mustawff;
1,  Persian  text,  ed.  le  Strange,  1915,  8s.;  2,  English
transl.  le  Strange,  1918,  85.

XXIV.  Shamsu’l-‘Ulum  of  Nashwan  al-Himyari,  extracts  from
the  Arabic  text  with  German  Introduction  and  Notes  by
‘Azfmu’d-Dm  Ahmad,  1916,  55.

[XXV.  Diwans  of  at-Tufayl  b.  ‘Awf  and  at-Tirimmah  b.
Hakim  (Arabic  text),  ed.  Krenkow,  in  the  Press.]

NEW  SERIES

I.  Fars-nama  of  Ibnu’l-Balkhi,  Persian  text,  ed.  le  Strange
and  Nicholson,  1921,  205.

II.  Rahatu’s-§udur  (History  of  Saljuqs)  of  ar-Rawandi,
Persian  text,  ed.  Aluhammad  Iqbal,  1921,  475.  6d.

III.  Indexes  to  Sir  C.  J.  Lyall’s  edition  of  the  Mufad-
daliyat,  compiled  by  A.  A.  Bevan,  1924,  425.

IV.  Mathnawi-i  Ma‘nawi  of  Jalalu’ddin  Rumi.  i,  Persian
text  of  the  First  and  Second  Books,  ed.  Nicholson,  1925,
205.;  2,  Translation  of  the  First  and  Second  Books,

1926,  205.

Mazandaran  and  Astarabad,  by  H.  L.  Rabino,  with
Maps  (in  the  Press).

Diwan  of  al-A‘sha,  Arabic  text  with  German  translation
by  R.  Geyer  (in  the  Press).


Jawami‘u-’1-Hikayat  of  ‘Awfi,  a critical  study  of  its
scope,  sources  and  value,  by  Xizamu’ddm  (in  the  Press).

Turkistan  at  the  time  of  the  Mongolian  Invasion,  by
W.  Barthold,  English  transl.,  revised  by  the  author,  aided
by  H.  A.  R.  Gibb  (in  the  Press).

Letters  of  Rashidu’d-Dm  Fadlu’llah,  abridged  English
transl.  by  Muhammad  Shafi",  followed  by  transl.  of
Tansiiq-nama  (on  Precious  stones)  by  the  late  Sir  A.
Houtum-Schindler  (in  preparation).

A History  of  Chemistry  in  Mediaeval  Islam,  by  E.  J.
Holmyard.


WORK  SUBSIDISED  BY  THE  TRUSTEES

Firdawsu-’l-Hikmat  of  ‘Ah'  ibn  Rabban  at-Tabari,  ed.
Muhammad  az-Zubayr  as-Siddi'qi  (in  the  Press).


INTRODUCTION


There  are  complete  translations  of  the  Maihnawi  in  Turkish
Arabic^,  and  Hindustani®,  but  only  the  first  two  of  the  six
Books  of  the  poem  have  hitherto  been  made  accessible  in
their  entirety  to  European  readers,  though  a number  of  extracts
from  Books  iii-vi  are  translated  in  E.  H.  Whinfield’s  useful
abridgment.  While  it  may  seem  surprising  that  a work  so  cele-
brated, and  one  which  reflects  (however  darkly  at  times)  so  much
of  the  highest  as  well  as  the  lowest  in  the  life  and  thought  of  the
Alohammedan  world  in  the  later  Middle  Ages,  should  still  remain
imperfectly  known  to  Western  students,  I think  that  this  gap  in  our
knowledge  can  at  least  be  excused.  Judged  by  modern  standards,
the  Mathnaid  is  a veiy-  long  poem:  it  contains  almost  as  many
verses  as  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey  together  and  about  twice  as  manv
as  the  Divina  Commedia\  and  these  comparisons  make  it  appear
shorter  than  it  actually  is,  since  every  verse  of  the  Mathnaid  has
twenty-two  syllables,  whereas  the  hexameter  may  vary^  from
thirteen  to  seventeen,  and  the  terza  rima,  like  the  Spenserian
stanza,  admits  only  ten  or  eleven  in  each  verse,  so  that  the  Math-
naid with  25,700  verses  is  in  reality  a far  more  extensive  work  than
the  Faerie  Oueene  with  33,500.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  easily
surpassed  in  length  by  several  Persian  poems;  and  the  fact  that
the  Shdhndma  has  been  translated  from  beginning  to  end  into
English,  French,  and  Italian  answers  the  question  asked  by
Georg  Rosen — “Who  would  care  to  devote  a considerable  part  of
his  lifetime  to  translating  thirty  or  forty  thousand  Persian  distichs
of  unequal  poetical  worth?  ” The  size  of  the  Mathnaid  is  not  the
chief  or  the  worst  obstacle  by  which  its  translator  is  confronted.
He  at  once  finds  himself  involved  in  the  fundamental  difficulty,
from  which  there  is  no  escape,  that  if  his  translation  is  faithful,  it
must  be  to  a large  extent  unintelligible,  and  that  if  he  tries  to  make
it  intelligible  throughout  he  must  often  substitute  for  the  exact
rendering  a free  and  copious  paraphrase  embodying  matter  which
properly  belongs  to  a commentary,  though  such  a method  cannot

^ In  prose,  by  Isma'il  Anqiravi  in  his  commentary  entitled  Fdtihu  ’l-abydt
(Bulaq,  A.H.  1251  and  Constantinople,  A.H.  1289).  A Turkish  verse-translation
iw  Sulayman  Nahlfi  accompanies  the  Persian  text  in  the  Bulaq  edition  of  the
Mathnawi  (a.h.  1268).  For  Nahiff  (ob.  A.H.  1151)  see  E.  J.  W.  Gibb,  History
of  Ottoman  Poetry,  vol.  iv,  pp.  78-85,  where  an  account  is  given  of  the  circum-
stances which  led  him  to  compose  his  version  of  the  Mathnaid.  Gibb’s  descrip-
tion of  it  as  “a  literal  and  line  for  line  rendering”  seems  to  me  to  require  much
qualification.

^ In  prose,  by  Yusuf  b.  Ahmad  al-MawlawI  in  his  commentary  entitled  al-
Manhaj  al-qaivi  (Cairo,  a.h.  1289).

“ I do  not  think  that  a complete  prose  translation  in  Hindustani  has  yet
appeared,  but  there  is  one  in  verse,  entitled  Pirdhan-i  Yiisufi,  by  Muhammad
Yiisuf ‘All  Shdh  (Lucknow,  1889;  Cawnpore,  1897).


XIV


INTRODUCTION


satisfy  any  one  who  wants  to  understand  the  text  and  know  what
sense  or  senses  it  is  capable  of  bearing.  Therefore  a complete
version  of  the  Mathnawi  means,  for  scientific  purposes,  a faithful
translation  supplemented  by  a full  commentary;  and  considering
the  scarcity  of  competent  Persian  scholars  in  Europe,  no  one  need
wonder  that  the  double  task  has  not  yet  been  accomplished.  The
most  important  European  translations  are  enumerated  in  the
following  list,  which  shows  incidentally  that  the  greater  part  of  the
work  already  done  stands  to  the  credit  of  this  country.

1.  Mesnewi  oder  Doppelverse  des  Scheich  Mewldnd  Dscheldl-ed-
din  Rumt,  aus  dem  Persischen  iibertragen  von  Georg  Rosen.
{Leipzig,  1849.)

Being  written  in  rhymed  verse,  this  excellent  version  of  about
a third  of  Book  i (w.  1-1371  in  my  edition)  does  not  preserve  the
literal  form  of  the  original,  but  as  a rule  the  meaning  is  given
correctly  even  where  misunderstanding  would  have  been  pardon-
able, while  the  explanatory'  notes  keep  the  reader  in  touch  with  the
mystical  background  of  the  poem.  The  translator  has  left  out  a
good  deal — and  in  verse-translations  of  Oriental  poetry  this  is  a
merit  rather  than  a fault.  His  book,  w'hich  was  reprinted  in  1913
with  an  introduction  by  his  son.  Dr  F.  Rosen,  should  help  to
quicken  the  growing  interest  of  Germany  in  Persian  literature.

2.  The  Mesnevi  of  Mevldnd  Jelalu'd-din  Muhammed  er-Rumi.
Book  the  First,  together  vdth  some  account  of  the  life  and  acts
of  the  Author,  of  his  ancestors,  and  of  his  descendants,  illus-
trated by  a selection  of  characteristic  anecdotes,  as  collected  by
tlmr  historian,  Mevldnd  Shemsu’d-dln  Ahmed  el-Efldki  el-
‘Arifl.  Translated  and  the  poetry  versified  by  James  W.  Red-
house.  {London,  1881.)

Sir  James  Redhouse’s  translation  of  Book  i is  much  less  accurate
than  Rosen’s.  Its  peculiarities  cause  us  to  speculate  why  this
eminent  Turkish  scholar,  who  was  not  quite  at  home  in  Persian
mysticism,  should  have  embarked  upon  a task  so  formidable;  or
how,  with  the  sagacity  to  perceive  and  the  candour  to  confess
his  lack  of  skill  in  versifying,  he  allowed  himself  to  be  misled  by^
the  idea  that  any  kind  of  verse  is  superior  to  prose  as  a medium  for
the  translation  of  poetry.  The  excerpts  from  Aflaki’s  Mandqibu
’l-Arifin,  though  legendary  in  character,  supply  valuable  informs
tion  concerning  the  poet  and  the  circle  of  Sufi's  in  which  he  live*

3.  Masnavi-i  Ma'navi,  the  Spiritual  Couplets  of  Mauldnd
J aidin' d-din  Muhammad  Rumi,  translated  and  abridged  by
E.  H.  Whinfield.  {Lofidon,  1887;  2nd  ed.,  1898.)

All  students  of  the  Mathnawi  owe  gratitude  to  Whinfield,  who
was  the  first  to  analyse  its  contents  and  illustrate  their  rich  quality
by  his  prose  translation  of  selected  passages  from  the  six  Books,


INTRODUCTION


XV


amounting  to  something  like  3500  verses  altogether.  His  wide  and
sympathetic  knowledge  of  Oriental  mysticism,  already  exhibited
in  the  notes  to  his  edition  and  translation  of  the  Giilshan-i  Rds
(1880),  makes  him  an  admirable  guide  through  the  mazes  of  the
Mathnawi,  and  in  general  his  work  deserves  the  high  esteem  which
it  enjoys.  I do  not  wish  to  criticise  it  in  detail  and  will  only
remark  that  the  apparent  simplicity  of  the  Persian  language  is  a
snare  for  translators :

^ 5 t a

4.  The  Masnavi  by  Jaldlti  d-dln  Rumi,  Book  II  translated  for  the
first  time  from  the  Persian  into  prose,  with  a Commentary,  by
C.  E.  Wilson.  {London,  1910.)

This  is  “a  plain  literal  prose  translation,”  based  on  sound  prin-
ciples and  carefully  executed.  Comparing  it  with  my  own  version
of  the  Second  Book,  I found  that  as  similar  methods  produce
similar  results  the  two  versions  often  agreed  almost  word  for  word,
and  that  where  they  differed,  the  point  at  issue  was  usually  one  for
discussion  rather  than  correction.  My  obligations  to  Professor
Wilson  are  not  confined  to  the  turns  of  phrase  which  I have
borrowed  from  him  now  and  then : every  translator,  and  particularly,
the  translator  of  such  a poem  as  the  Mathnazci,  must  feel  the
advantage  of  being  able  to  consult  the  work  of  a trustworthy
predecessor  who  has  gone  step  by  step  over  the  same  ground.

The  present  translation,  in  which  the  numeration  of  the  verses
corresponds  with  that  of  the  text  of  my  edition,  is  intended  primarily
as  an  aid  to  students  of  Persian ; it  is  therefore  as  exact  and  faithful
as  I can  make  it,  but  it  does  not  attempt  to  convey  the  inner  as
distinguished  from  the  outer  meaning:  that  is  to  say,  it  gives  the
literal  sense  of  the  words  translated  without  explaining  either  their
metaphorical  or  their  mystical  sense*.  While  these  latter  senses
have  sometimes  been  indicated  by  words  in  brackets^,  I have  on
the  whole  adhered  to  the  principle  that  translation  is  one  thing,
interpretation  another,  and  that  correct  interpretation  depends  on
correct  translation,  just  as  the  most  fertile  source  of  misinterpreta-
tion is  inability  or  neglect  to  translate  correctly.  It  follows  that  a
translation  thus  limited  in  scope  will  contain  a great  number  of
passages  which  do  not  explain  themselves  and  cannot  be  fully
u|^erstood  without  a commentary.  I should  have  preferred,  as

^ Some  day  I hope  to  try  in  a volume  of  selected  passages  whether  a
translator  of  the  Mathnazci  may  not  merit  the  praise  which  Jerome  bestowed
on  Hilary:  “quasi  captivos  sensus  in  suam  linguam  victoris  jure  transposuit.”

^ Frequently  too  the  terseness  of  the  original  demands  expansion  in  order  to
bring  out  even  the  literal  sense.  The  brackets  in  this  version  mark  off  what
belongs  to  a strict  rendering  of  the  original  text  from  what  has  been  added  for
the  purpose  of  explanation.  I have  not,  however,  been  so  pedantic  as  always  to
indicate  the  insertion  of  certain  auxiliary  parts  of  speech  which  an  English
translator  would  naturally  use,  though  they  are  omitted  in  the  Persian  text.


XVI


INTRODUCTION


a matter  of  practical  convenience,  to  include  the  commentary"  in
the  same  volume  as  the  translation,  but  on  the  other  hand  I saw
grave  objections  to  annotating  part  of  the  poem  before  the  whole
had  been  studied  and  translated.  “The  Mathnawi,”  it  has  been
said,  “is  easier  than  easy  to  the  ignorant,  but  harder  than  hard  to
the  wise  ; and  I confess  that  for  me  there  are  still  many  difficulties,
which  may  perhaps  be  removed  by  further  study  of  the  poem  itself,
of  works  historically  connected  with  it,  and  of  relevant  Persian  and
Arabic  literature.  The  Oriental  commentaries,  with  all  their
shortcomings,  give  much  help.  Amongst  those  used  in  preparing
this  translation  I have  profited  most  bv  the  Td/f/nt  (Turkish)

of  Ismd'il  Anqiravi  and  the  Sharh-i  ^lathnazd-yi  Maiddnd-yi
Rumi  (Persian)  of  Wall  Muhammad  Akbarabadi ; I have  also  con-
sulted the  Miikdshafdt-i  Radaici  (Persian)  of  Muhammad  Rida,  the
SJiayfi-i  Matiuiaui  (Persian)  of  Aluhammad  ‘Abdu  ’l-‘Ali,  who  is
better  known  bv  his  title  of  Bahru  ’l-‘Ulum,  al-Manhaj  al-qmd
(Arabic)  of  Yusuf  b.  Ahmad  al-Mawlawi,  and  for  Book  i the
Sharh-i  Mathnaui-yi  Sharif  (Turkish)  of  ‘Abidin  Pasha.

As  stated  in  the  Introduction  to  the  first  volume,  no  finality  is
claimed  for  this  edition.  Where  the  text  is  uncertain,  the  transla-
tion can  only  be  provisional ; but  even  where  we  feel  confidence  in
the  text,  cases  occur  in  which  every"  translator  of  the  Mathnazd  can
but  offer  the  rendering  that  seems  to  him  possible  or  probable,
and  take  comfort  in  the  reflection  that  est  qiiadam  prodire  terms  si
non  datur  ultra.  Some  passages,  I believe,  will  always  remain
mysterious,  since  the  key  to  them  has  been  lost:  one  knows
that  words  uttered  by  a great  spiritual  teacher  may  be  almost
meaningless  outside  the  group  of  his  intimate  friends  and  disciples,
or  may  become  so  by  lapse  of  time.  The  loose  and  rambling  structure
of  the  poem  leads  to  other  perplexities.  When  our  author  gives  no
sign  whether  he  is  speaking  in  his  own  person  or  by  the  voice  of
one  of  his  innumerable  puppets — celestial,  infernal,  human,  or
animal — who  talk  just  like  himself;  when  he  mingles  his  comments
with  their  discourse  and  glides  imperceptibly  from  the  narrative
into  the  exposition ; when  he  leaves  us  in  doubt  as  to  whom  he  is
addressing  or  what  he  is  describing — the  translator  is  driven  to
conjecture,  and  on  occasion  must  leap  in  the  dark.  Hence  a trans-
lation of  the  Mathnaid,  however  careful  it  may  be,  is  necessarily
tentative  in  some  respects  and  capable  of  being  improved,  though
the  process  takes  time.  The  corrections  which  I look  forward<to
publishing  at  a later  stage,  when  the  commentary  on  this  volume
appears,  are  likely  to  be  fewer,  but  also  more  important,  than  those
contained  in  the  long  list  of  textual  corrections  (vol.  I,  pp.  21-28),
three-fourths  of  which  any  reader  could  have  made  for  himself.

ubB  j->  (JjI  j jj


INTRODUCTION


XVll


Although  the  question  of  literary  form  does  not  enter  very
largely  into  a version  so  literal  as  this,  I have  attempted  to  pre-
serve the  idiomatic  flavour  of  the  original* — which  can  be  more
firmly  caught  and  retained  in  a prose  translation — and  also  its
variety  of  style,  ranging  from  a plain  semi-colloquial  manner  of
expression  to  a noble  and  elevated  diction  like  that  emploved  bv
the  author  in  his  mystical  odes.  On  certain  topics  he  is  too  out-
spoken for  our  taste  and  many  pages  are  disfigured  bv  anecdotes
worthy  of  an  Apuleius  or  Petronius  but  scarcelv  fit  to  be  trans-
lated into  the  language  of  these  writers.  To  omit  them,  however,
would  defeat  the  object  I have  in  view,  namely,  to  provide  a
complete  version  of  the  work  which,  notwithstanding  the  author's
passion  for  self-effacement,  reveals  the  breadth  and  depth  of  his
genius  most  adequately.  It  is  important,  for  our  comprehension  irf
him,  to  know  that  he  could  tell  ribald  stories  in  the  easv  tone  of  a
man  of  the  world,  and  that  the  contrast  often  drawn  between  him
and  Sa'di  takes  no  account  of  some  marked  features  which  the
authors  of  the  Mathnaivi  and  the  Gulistdn  possess  in  common.

I his  is  a translation  for  students  of  the  text,  but  1 venture
to  hope  that  it  may  attract  others  neither  acquainted  with
Persian  nor  specially  concerned  with  Sufism.  To  those  interested
in  the  history  of  religion,  morals,  and  culture,  in  fables  and  folk-
lore, in  divinity,  philosophy,  medicine,  astrology  and  other
branches  of  mediaeval  learning,  in  Eastern  poetrv  and  life  and
manners  and  human  nature,  the  Mathnani  should  not  be  a sealed
book,  even  if  it  cannot  always  be  an  open  one.

The  prose  headings  inserted  at  short  intervals  throughout  the
poem,  transliterated  words  with  the  exception  of  proper  names,
and  all  direct  quotations  from  the  Qur’an  except  such  as  occur  in
the  headings  are  printed  in  italics.  A few  foot-notes  have  been
added,  some  of  them  for  the  benefit  of  the  general  reader.

* It  may  be  said  that  this  aim  is  inconsistent  with  the  translator's  duty  to
write  his  own  language  idiomatically.  That  is  true,  and  no  compromise  will  unite
the  contraries,  but  I have  done  my  best  to  combine  them.

REYNOLD  A.  NICHOLSON

C-WIBRIDGE,

December  1925


POSTSCRIPT

It  would  not  be  fitting  that  this  volume,  the  first  to  appear  in  the
“E.  J.  W.  Gibb  Memorial”  Series  since  the  death  of  Professor
E.  G.  Browne,  should  leav'e  my  hands  without  giving  some  ex-
pression to  the  great  sorrow  felt  by  the  Trustees  at  the  loss  of  the
Scholar  who  presided  over  the  foundation  of  the  Trust,  took  the


INTRODUCTION


xviii

chief  part  in  organising  and  administering  it,  and  for  more  than
twenty  years  so  fully  enjoyed  the  confidence  and  affection  of  his
surviving  colleagues . Amongst  the  works  published  by  the  T rustees
or  now  in  course  of  publication  there  are  few  that  were  not  in-
spired, suggested,  supervised,  or  in  some  way  influenced  by  him;
and  his  colleagues  can  never  forget  how  much  they  have  owed  to
his  energ>',  enthusiasm,  and  experience — energy  sustained  by
patience,  enthusiasm  controlled  by  judgement,  experience  as  ready
to  acknowledge  any  mistake  of  his  own  as  to  excuse  it  in  others.
The  Trustees  hope  eventually  to  include  in  the  Series  yet  another
book  from  his  pen,  the  Catalogue,  which  he  has  left  almost
complete,  of  his  fine  collection  of  Arabic,  Persian,  and  Turkish
manuscripts.

R.  A.  X.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS


BOOK  I

PAGE

Preface  (in  prose) 3

Proem 5

The  King  and  the  Handmaiden

The  Greengrocer  and  the  Parrot 17-21

The  Jewish  King  whose  Vizier  contrived  a plot  against  the

Christians 21-41

The  Caliph  and  Layla 25

The  description  of  Mohammed  in  the  Gospel  ....  41

Another  Jewish  King  who  persecuted  the  Christians.  . 4^-5°

The  punishment  inflicted  on  a man  who  scoffed  at  Mohammed  4h
The  Wind  which  destroyed  the  people  of  ‘.^d  . . ■ 48

The  Lion  and  the  Beasts  of  chase

-A.zrael  and  the  man  who  took  refuge  with  Solomon  ...  54

Solomon  and  the  Hoopoe 67

The  Fall  of  Adam 69

The  Holy  War  against  the  Flesh 7^

The  Caliph  ‘Umar  and  the  .\mbassador 77“^5

How  Adam  acknowledged,  while  Iblis  denied,  responsibility  for

sin 81

“And  He  is  with  you,  wheresoever  ye  be” 83

“Let  him  who  desires  to  sit  with  God  sit  with  the  Sufis”  . 84

The  Merchant  and  the  Parrot  which  gave  him  a message  to  the

parrots  of  India 85-101

The  Spiritual  Birds  that  are  Divine  Intelligences  ...  87

Commentarv  on  a saying  of  Faridu’ddin  ‘.Mtar  ....  8S

The  respect  paid  to  Moses  by  Pharaoh’s  magicians  ...  89

Commentarv  on  a saying  of  Sana’i,  and  a Discourse  on  a

Tradition  of  the  Prophet  concerning  the  jealousy  of  God  . 96

The  harmfulness  of  being  honoured  by  the  people  . . . 10 1

“ Whatsoever  God  wills  cometh  to  pass  ” 102

The  Story  of  the  Harper 104-12 1

Explanation  of  a Tradition  of  the  Prophet  concerning  Divine

inspiration

A Story  of  ‘.i’isha  and  the  Prophet 109-112

Commentary  on  a verse  of  Sana’i no

“Take  advantage  of  the  coolness  of  the  spring  season ” . . in


XX


CONTENTS


PAGE

The  Moaning  Pillar 115

A miracle  performed  by  the  Prophet  in  the  presence  of  Abu  Jahl  1 17

The  Prodigal  for  whom  the  angels  pray 121

The  munificent  Caliph 122

The  Arab  of  the  Desert  and  his  wife 122-160

False  saints 123

The  power  of  Faith 124

Light  and  colour 129

Explanation  of  the  Tradition  that  women  prevail  over  the  wise

man,  while  the  ignorant  man  prevails  over  them  . . . 132

The  mystery  of  iNIoses  and  Pharaoh 133

“ He  has  lost  this  life  and  the  life  to  come  ” ....  135

The  prophet  Salih  and  the  people  of  Thamud  . . . . 137

The  barrier  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  . . . 140

What  is  meat  to  the  saint  is  poison  to  the  disciple  . . . 141

The  Divine  Bounty  and  those  who  beg  for  it  . . . . 149

The  two  kinds  of  “poor” 150

The  World’s  lovers 153

The  proverb,  “ If  you  commit  fornication,  commit  it  with  a free

woman,  and  if  you  steal,  steal  a pearl” 153

The  Grammarian  and  the  Boatman 155

The  Spiritual  Guide 160

The  Prophet’s  injunction  to  ‘All 161


The  man  of  Qazwin  who  wanted  to  have  a lion  tattooed  on  his
shoulder

The  wolf  and  the  fox  who  went  to  hunt  with  the  Lion  . . :

The  man  who  knocked  at  his  friend’s  door  and,  on  being  asked
who  he  was,  answered,  “’Tis  I”

Description  of  L’nification

Noah  as  the  God-man

W hy  the  Sufis  who  know  God  are  seated  in  front  of  kings

Joseph  and  the  guest-friend  who  could  find  no  suitable  gift  for
him  except  a mirror

Mohammed  and  the  scribe  who  wrote  down  the  Qur’anic
Revelations

Bab  am  son  of  Ba'ur

Hanit  and  Mariit

The  deaf  man  and  his  sick  neighbour

Iblis  the  originator  of  analogical  reasoning  applied  to  the  Word
of  God

Mystical  experiences  must  be  kept  hidden  from  the  vulgar

The  contention  between  the  Greek  and  Chinese  artists


167

168

170

171

172

176

179

181

183

185

186
189


CONTENTS


XXI


PAGE

The  Vision  of  Zayd 190-20 1

Luqman  and  his  fellow-servants 195

The  conflagration  in  Medina  in  the  days  of  the  Caliph  ‘Umar  201

‘Ali  and  the  infidel  who  spat  in  his  face  . . . 202-208,215

‘All  and  his  murderer 208-214

The  self-conceit  shown  by  Adam  towards  Iblis  . . . . 2 1 1

The  unworldliness  of  the  Prophet 214


BOOK  II


Preface  (in  prose)

Proem 222

The  Caliph  ‘Umar  and  the  man  who  thought  he  saw  the  new

moon

The  fool  who  entreated  Jesus  to  bring  some  bones  to  life  229,  245
The  Sufi  who  enjoined  the  servant  to  take  care  of  his  ass  -230

The  King  and  his  lost  falcon 238-

Shaykh  Ahmad  son  of  Khizruya  and  his  creditors  . . 241

The  answer  of  an  ascetic  who  was  warned  not  to  weep,  lest  he

should  become  blind

The  peasant  who  stroked  a lion  in  the  dark

The  Siifis  who  sold  the  traveller’s  ass 248-

The  greedy  insolvent 252-

Parable  for  those  w’ho  say  “ if  ”

The  man  who  killed  his  mother  because  he  suspected  her  of

adultery

The  King  and  his  two  slaves 265

The  King’s  retainers  who  envied  his  favourite  slave  275-279,  301

The  falcon  amongst  the  ow  Is 279

The  thirsty  man  who  threw  bricks  into  the  water

The  man  who  planted  a thornbush  in  the  road  and  delayed  to

uproot  it 284

Dhu  ’l-Xiin  and  the  friends  who  came  to  visit  him  in  the  mad-
house   292

The  sagacity  of  Luqman 296-

The  reverence  of  Bilqis  for  the  message  of  Solomon  w hich  was

brought  to  her  by  the  hoopoe

The  philosopher  who  showed  disbelief  in  the  Qur’an

Moses  and  the  shepherd 310-

The  Amir  and  the  sleeping  man  into  whose  mouth  a snake  had
crept


221

-227

227

-247

-238

-241

-244

244

247

-252

-259

259

261

-275

-303

-282

282

-292

296

301

303

305

317

418


xxn


CONTENTS


The  fool  who  trusted  the  bear
The  blind  beggar  who  said,  “I  have  two  blindnesses”
Moses  and  the  worshipper  of  the  golden  calf
Galen  and  the  madman


PAGE

320-326,  327-329,  331


323

326

329

330


The  cause  of  a bird’s  flying  and  feeding  with  a bird  that  is  not

of  its  own  kind

Mohammed’s  visit  to  the  sick  Companion  332,  335,  338-341,  348-355
The  gardener  who  separated  three  friends  in  order  to  chastise

them  singly 333

Bayazid  and  the  Shaykh  who  said,  “I  am  the  Ka'ba”  . -336-337

The  novice  who  built  a new  house 336

Dalqak  and  the  Sayyid-i  Ajall 342

The  Saint  who  rode  a cock-horse 342-348

The  dog  and  the  blind  mendicant 343

The  Police  Inspector  and  the  drunken  man  ....  345

Iblis  and  Mu'awiya 356-366

The  Cadi  who  wept  whilst  he  was  being  installed  . . . 363

The  bitter  grief  of  a man  who  missed  the  congregational  prayers  365

The  thief  who  escaped  because  his  accomplice  gave  a false
alarm


The  Hypocrites  and  the  Mosque  of  Opposition  .

The  true  believer’s  stray  camel

The  four  Indians  who  lost  their  prayers
The  Ghuzz  Turcomans  and  the  two  villagers  .

The  self-conceit  and  ingratitude  shown  by  the  worldly  towards

the  prophets  and  saints

The  old  man  who  complained  to  the  doctor

Jiihi  and  the  child

The  boy  who  was  afraid  of  an  effeminate  man  .

The  archer  and  the  horseman

The  Arab  of  the  desert  and  the  philosopher
The  miracles  of  Ibrahim  son  of  Adham
The  beginning  of  the  gnostic’s  illumination


366

367-371.  377

372-377

378


379

380

382

383
385

385

386

388,394
389-393

The  stranger  who  reviled  the  Shaykh 3^3,  3^^

The  man  who  declared  that  God  would  not  punish  his  sins,  and

Shu’ayb’s  answer  to  him

The  answer  of  the  Prophet  to  ‘A’isha,  who  said  that  he  per-
formed the  ritual  prayer  in  unclean  places  ....

The  mouse  and  the  camel

The  miracles  of  a dervish  who  was  accused  of  theft  .

The  garrulous,  greedy,  and  somnolent  Sufi,  and  his  reply  to
the  Shaykh  who  enjoined  him  to  observe  moderation


396

399

400
402


403


CONTENTS  XXlll

PAUE

The  nature  of  intuitive  knowledge 407

John  the  Baptist  and  Jesus 408

Mute  eloquence 410

The  search  for  the  Tree  of  Life 41 1

How  four  persons  quarrelled  about  grapes,  which  were  known

to  each  of  them  by  a different  name 413

How  Mohammed  established  unity  amongst  the  Ansar  . . 414

Solomon  and  the  birds 4 15-4 17

The  ducklings  that  were  fostered  by  a hen 417

The  miracles  wrought  by  an  ascetic  in  the  desert  . . . 418


■BO  01^  I


Lx  THE  Name  of  God  the  Compassionate,  the  Merciful.

This  is  the  Book  of  the  Mathnawi,  which  is  the  roots  of  the
roots  of  the  roots  of  the  (Alohammedan)  Religion  in  respect  of
(its)  unveiling  the  mysteries  of  attainment  (to  the  Truth)  and  of
certainty;  and  which  is  the  greatest  science  of  God  and  the
clearest  (religious)  way  of  God  and  the  most  manifest  evidence
of  God.

The  likeness  of  the  light  thereof  is  as  a niche  in  ichich  is  a
candle  shining  with  a radiance  brighter  than  the  dawn.  It  is
the  heart’s  Paradise,  having  fountains  and  boughs,  one  of  them
a fountain  called  Salsabil  amongst  the  travellers  on  this  Path;
and  in  the  view  of  the  possessors  of  (mystical)  stations  and
(Divine)  graces,  it  (the  Mathncnci)  is  best  as  a station  and  most
excellent  as  a [spiritual)  resting-place.  'Pherein  the  righteous  eat
and  drink,  and  thereby  the  (spiritually)  free  are  gladdened  and
rejoiced;  and  like  the  Nile  of  Egypt  it  is  a (pleasant)  drink  to
them  that  endure  patiently,  but  a grief  to  the  people  of  Pharaoh
and  the  unbelievers,  even  as  God  hath  said.  He  lets  many  he
misled  thereby  and  He  lets  many  be  guided  thereby.  It  is  the  cure
for  (sick)  breasts,  and  the  purge  of  sorrows,  and  the  expounder
of  the  Qur’an,  and  the  (source  of)  abundance  of  (Divine)  gifts,
and  the  (means  of)  cleansing  (sordid)  dispositions ; (written)  by
the  hands  of  noble  righteous  scribes  who  forbid  (with  the  words)
Sone  shall  touch  it  except  the  purified.  Falsehood  doth  not  ap-
proach it  either  from  before  or  behind,  since  God  observes  it  and
watches  over  it,  and  He  is  the  best  guardian  and  He  is  the  most
merciful  of  them  that  shoic  mercy.  And  it  hath  other  titles  of
honour  which  God  hath  bestowed  upon  it.

We  have  confined  ourselves  to  this  little  (that  has  been
mentioned),  for  the  little  is  an  inde.x  to  the  much,  and  a mouthful
(of  water)  is  an  index  to  the  (quality  of  the)  pool,  and  a handful
(of  wheat)  is  an  index  to  (serves  as  a sample  of  the  contents  of)
a great  threshing-floor  (granary).

Saith  the  feeble  slave  who  hath  need  of  the  mercv  of  God  most
High,  Muhammad  son  of  Muhammad  son  of  al-Husayn  of  (the
citv  of)  Balkh — may  God  accept  (this  offering)  from  him:  “I
have  exerted  myself  to  give  length  to  the  Poem  in  Rhymed
Couplets,  which  comprises  strange  tales  and  rare  sayings  and
excellent  discourses  and  precious  indications,  and  the  (religious)
path  of  the  ascetics  and  the  (spiritual)  garden  of  the  devotees —
(all  this  being)  brief  in  expression’  but  manifold  in  meaning —
at  the  request  of  my  master  and  stay  and  support,  (who  holds)
the  place  of  the  spirit  in  my  body,  and  (who  is)  the  treasure  of

^ Literallv,  ‘'short  in  respect  ot  the  constructions  (oj;  its  phraseolo^> )."


4


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

my  to-day  and  my  to-morrow,  namely,  the  Shaykh,  the  exempl'r
for  them,  that  know  God  and  the  leader  of  them  that  possess
right  guidance  and  certainty,  the  helper  of  humankind,  the
trusted  keeper  of  (their)  hearts  and  consciences,  the  charge
deposited  by  God  amongst  His  creatures,  and  His  choice  amongst
His  creation,  and  (the  object  of)  His  injunctions  to  His  Prophet
and  (of)  His  secrets  (imparted)  to  His  chosen  one,  the  key  of
the  treasuries  of  the  empyrean,  the  trustee  of  the  riches  stored
in  the  earth,  the  father  of  virtues,  the  Sword  (Husarn)  of  the
Truth  and  Religion,  Hasan  son  of  IMuhammad  son  of  al-Hasan,
generally  known  as  Ibn  Akhi  Turk,  the  .\bu  Yazid  of  the  time,
the  Junayd  of  the  age,  the  entirely  veracious  son  of  an  entirely
veracious  sire  and  grandsire^ — may  God  be  well-pleased  with
him  and  with  them! — a native  of  Urmiya,  tracing  his  descent
to  the  Shaykh  who  is  honoured  for  having  said,  ‘ In  the  evening
I was  a Kurd,  and  in  the  morning  I was  an  Arab.’  May  God
sanctify  his  soul  and  the  souls  of  his  successors  I How  goodlv
is  the  ancestor  and  how  goodly  the  successor  1

His  is  a lineage  upon  which  the  sun  hath  cast  its  mantle,  and
a renown  of  ancestry'  before  which  the  stars  have  dimmed  their
beams.  Their  (his  family’s)  courtyard  hath  ever  been  Fortune’s
cynosure  {qibla),  whither  turn  the  sons  of  the  (spiritual)  rulers,
and  Hope’s  Ka‘ba  which  is  circumambulated  by  deputations  of
the  suitors  for  bounty;  and  may  it  never  cease  to  be  thus,  so
long  as  a star  rises  and  an  orient  sun  appears  above  the  horizon,
to  the  end  that  it  may  be  a fastness  for  the  godly,  spiritual,
heavenly,  super-celestial,  illuminated  ones  who  possess  (mystical)
insight,  the  silent  ones  who  behold,  the  absent  ones  who  are
present,  the  kings  beneath  threadbare  garments,  the  nobles  of
the  nations,  the  owners  of  excellences,  the  luminaries  who
display  the  (Divine)  evidences.  .Amen,  O Lord  of  all  created
beings  1 And  this  is  a prayer  that  will  not  be  rejected,  for  it  is
a prayer  that  includes  (in  its  benefits)  all  classes  of  the  creation.
Glory  be  to  God,  the  Lord  of  all  created  beings,  and  God  bless
the  best  of  His  creatures,  Mohammed,  and  his  kin,  the  nobk ,
the  pure ! ”


‘ Literally,  “ a siddiq,  the  son  of  a siddiq  (who  was)  the  son  of  the  giddiq."


PROEM


:>


Ix  THE  Name  of  God  the  Merciful,  the  Compassionate.

Listen  to  the  reed  how  it  tells  a tale,  complaining  of  separa-
tions—

Saying,  “Ever  since  I was  parted  from  the  reed-bed,  my
lament  hath  caused  man  and  w'oman  to  moan.

I want  a bosom  torn  by  severance,  that  I may  unfold  (to  such
a one)  the  pain  of  love-desire.

Everv  one  who  is  left  far  from  his  source  wishes  back  the
time  when  he  was  united  with  it.

In  every  company  I uttered  my  wailful  notes,  I consorted  5
with  the  unhappy  and  with  them  that  rejoice.

Every  one  became  my  friend  from  his  own  opinion ; none
sought  out  my  secrets  from  within  me.

Aly  secret  is  not  far  from  my  plaint,  but  ear  and  eye  lack  the
light  (whereby  it  should  be  apprehended).

Body  is  not  veiled  from  soul,  nor  soul  from  body,  yet  none
is  permitted  to  see  the  soul.

This  noise  of  the  reed  is  fire,  it  is  not  wind : whoso  hath  not
this  fire,  may  he  be  naught!

’Tis  the  fire  of  Love  that  is  in  the  reed,  ’tis  the  fervour  of  10
Love  that  is  in  the  wine.

The  reed  is  the  comrade  of  every  one  who  has  been  parted
from  a friend;  its  strains  pierced  our  hearts L

Who  ever  saw  a poison  and  antidote  like  the  reed  ? Who  ever
saw  a sympathiser  and  a longing  lover  like  the  reed  ?

The  reed  tells  of  the  Way  full  of  blood  and  recounts  stories
of  the  passion  of  Majmin.

Only  to  the  senseless  is  this  sense  confided : the  tongue  hath
no  customer  save  the  ear.

In  our  woe  the  days  (of  life)  have  become  untimely : our  days  15
travel  hand  in  hand  with  burning  griefs.

If  our  day's  are  gone,  let  them  go! — ’tis  no  matter.  Do  Thou
remain,  for  none  is  holy  as  Thou  art!

Whoever  is  not  a fish  becomes  sated  with  His  water ; whoever
is  without  daily  bread  finds  the  day  long.

None  that  is  raw  understands  the  state  of  the  ripe ; therefore
my  words  must  be  brief.  Farewell!

O son,  burst  thv  chains  and  be  free!  How  long  wilt  thou  be
a bondsman  to-  silver  and  gold.'

If  thou  pour  the  sea  into  a pitcher,  how  much  will  it  hold.Mo
One  day’s  store.

The  pitcher,  the  eye  of  the  covetous,  never  becomes  full:
the  ovster-shell  is  not  filled  with  pearls  until  it  is  contented.

LiteralK  , “ rent  our  \eil5.”  - Literally,  “ (in)  the  bonds  of.”


6


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

He  (alone)  whose  garment  is  rent  by  a (mighty)  love  is  purged
of  covetousness  and  all  defect.

Hail,  O Love  that  bringest  us  good  gain — thou  that  art  the
physician  of  all  our  ills,

The  remedy  of  our  pride  and  vainglory,  our  Plato  and  our  Galen !

25  Through  Love  the  earthly  body  soared  to  the  skies:  the
mountain  began  to  dance  and  became  nimble.

Love  inspired  Mount  Sinai,  O lover,  (so  that)  Sinai  (was  made)
drunken  and  Moses  fell  in  a swoon.

Were  I joined  to  the  lip  of  one  in  accord  with  me,  I too,  like
the  reed,  would  tell  all  that  may  be  told;

(But)  whoever  is  parted  from  one  who  speaks  his  language
becomes  dumb,  though  he  hav^e  a hundred  songs.

When  the  rose  is  gone  and  the  garden  faded,  thou  wilt  hear
no  more  the  nightingale’s  story.

,30  The  Beloved  is  all  and  the  lover  (but)  a veil;  the  Beloved  is
living  and  the  lover  a dead  thing.

When  Love  hath  no  care  for  him,  he  is  left  as  a bird  without
wings.  Alas  for  him  then!

How  should  I have  consciousness  (of  aught)  before  or  be-
hind when  the  light  of  my  Beloved  is  not  before  me  and  behind }

Love  wills  that  this  Word  should  be  shown  forth;  if  the
mirror  does  not  reflect,  how  is  that?

Dost  thou  know  why  the  mirror  (of  thy  soul)  reflects  nothing:
Because  the  rust  is  not  cleared  from  its  face.

35  O my  friends,  hearken  to  this  tale:  in  truth  it  is  the  very
marrow  of  our  inward  state.

The  story  of  the  king’s  falling  in  love  with  a handmaiden
and  buying  her.

In  olden  time  there  was  a king  to  whom  belonged  the  power
temporal  and  also  the  power  spiritual.

It  chanced  that  one  day  he  rode  with  his  courtiers  to  the  chase.

On  the  king’s  highway  the  king  espied  a handmaiden : the
soul  of  the  king  was  enthralled  by  her.

Forasmuch  as  the  bird,  his  soul,  was  fluttering  in  its  cage,  he
gave  money  and  bought  the  handmaiden.

40  After  he  had  bought  her  and  won  to  his  desire,  by  Divine
destiny  she  sickened.

A certain  man  had  an  ass  but  no  pack-saddle : (as  soon  as)  he
got  a saddle,  the  wolf  carried  away  his  ass.

He  had  a pitcher,  but  no  water  could  be  obtained:  when  he
found  water,  the  pitcher  broke.

The  king  gathered  the  physicians  together  from  left  and  right
and  said  to  them,  “The  life  of  us  both  is  in  your  hands.

My  life  is  of  no  account,  (but)  she  is  the  life  of  my  life.  I am
in  pain  and  wounded ; she  is  my  remedy.


THE  KING  AND  THE  HANDMAIDEN


7


Whoever  heals  her  that  is  my  life  will  bear  away  with  him  mv  4 ^
treasure  and  pearls,  large  and  smalP.”

They  all  answered  him,  saying,  “We  will  hazard  our  lives -
and  summon  all  our  intelligence  and  put  it  into  the  common
stock.

Each  one  of  us  is  the  [Messiah  of  a world  (of  people) ; in  our
hands  is  a medicine  for  every  pain.”

In  their  arrogance  they  did  not  say,  “ If  God  will  ” ; therefore
God  showed  unto  them  the  weakness  of  Man.

I mean  (a  case  in  which)  omission  of  the  saving  clause  is  (due
to)  a hardness  of  heart;  not  the  mere  saying  of  these  words,  for
that  is  a superficial  circumstance.

How  many  a one  has  not  pronounced  the  saving  clause,  and
yet  his  soul  is  in  harmony  with  the  soul  of  it !

The  more  cures  and  remedies  they  applied,  the  more  did  the
illness  increase,  and  the  need  was  not  fulfilled.

The  sick  girF  became  (thin)  as  a hair,  (while)  the  eyes  of  the
king  flowed  with  tears  of  blood,  like  a river.

By  Divine  destiny,  oxymel  produced  bile,  and  oil  of  almonds
was  increasing  the  dryness.

From  (giving)  myrobalan  constipation  resulted,  relaxation
ceased;  and  water  fed  the  flames,  like  naphtha.

How  it  became  manifest  to  the  king  that  the  physicians  icere  unable

to  cure  the  handmaiden,  and  hoic  he  turned  his  face  towards

God  and  dreamed  of  a holy  man.

When  the  king  saw  the  powerlessness  of  those  physicians,  he
ran  bare-footed  to  the  mosque.

He  entered  the  mosque  and  advanced  to  the  mihrdb  (to  pray) :
the  prayer-carpet  was  bathed  in  the  king’s  tears.

On  coming  to  himself  out  of  the  flood  of  ecstasy  (fand)  he
opened  his  lips  in  goodly  praise  and  laud.

Saying,  “O  Thou  whose  least  gift  is  the  empire  of  the  world,
what  shall  I say,  inasmuch  as  Thou  knowest  the  hidden  thing?

O Thou  with  whom  we  always  take  refuge  in  our  need,  once
again  we  have  missed  the  way.

But  Thou  hast  said,  ‘Albeit  I know  thy  secret,  nevertheless  ho
declare  it  forthwith  in  thine  outward  act.’”

When  from  the  depths  of  his  soul  he  raised  a cry  (of  supplica-
tion), the  sea  of  Bounty  began  to  surge.

Slumber  overtook  him  in  the  midst  of  weeping ; he  dreamed
that  an  old  man  appeared

And  said,  “Good  tidings,  O king!  Thy  prayers  are  granted.

If  to-morrow  a stranger  come  for  thee,  he  is  from  me.

^ Or,  “my  pearls  and  coral.”

- I.e.  “we  will  exert  ourselves  to  the  utmost.”

“ Literally,  “that  slave-girl  from  sickness.”


8


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

When  he  comes,  he  is  the  skilled  physician:  deem  him
veracious,  for  he  is  trusty  and  true.

(,3  In  his  remedy  behold  absolute  magic,  in  his  temperament
behold  the  might  of  God ! ”

When  the  promised  hour  arrived  and  day  broke  and  the  sun,
(rising)  from  the  east,  began  to  burn  the  stars.

The  king  was  in  the  belvedere,  expecting  to  see  that  which
had  been  shown  mysteriously.

He  saw  a person  excellent  and  worshipful,  a sun  amidst  a
shadow.

Coming  from  afar,  like  the  new  moon  (in  slenderness  and
radiance) : he  was  non-existent,  though  existent  in  the  form  of
phantasy.

70  In  the  spirit  phantasy  is  as  naught,  (yet)  behold  a world
(turning)  on  a phantasy !

Their  peace  and  their  war  (turn)  on  a phantasy,  and  their
pride  and  their  shame  spring  from  a phantasy;

(But)  those  phantasies  which  ensnare  the  saints  are  the  re-
flexion of  the  fair  ones^  of  the  garden  of  God.

In  the  countenance  of  the  stranger-guest  was  appearing  that
phantasy  which  the  king  beheld  in  his  dream.

The  king  himself,  instead  of  the  chamberlains,  went  forward
to  meet  his  guest  from  the  Invisible.

75  Both  were  seamen  who  had  learned  to  swim,  the  souls  of
both  were  knit  together  without  sewing.

The  king  said,  “Thou  wert  my  Beloved  (in  reality),  not  she;
but  in  this  world  deed  issues  from  deed.

O thou  who  art  to  me  (as)  Mustafa  (Mohammed),  while  I am
like  unto  ‘Umar — I will  gird  my  loins  to  do  thee  servdce.”

Beseeching  the  Lord,  zcho  is  our  Helper,  to  help  us  to  observe  self-

control  in  all  circumstances,  and  explaining  the  harmful  and

pernicious  consequences  of  indiscipline.

Let  us  implore  God  to  help  us  to  self-control : one  who  lacks
self-control  is  deprived  of  the  grace  of  the  Lord.

The  undisciplined  man  does  not  maltreat  himself  alone,  but
he  sets  the  whole  world  on  fire.

So  A table  (of  food)  was  coming  down  from  heaven  without
headache  (trouble)  and  without  selling  and  buying,

(When)  some  oF  the  people  of  Moses  cried  disrespectfully,
“Where  is  garlic  and  lentils?”

(Straightway)  the  heavenly  bread  and  dishes  (of  food)  were
cut  off : there  remained  (for  all  of  them)  the  toil  of  sowing  and
(labouring  with)  mattock  and  scythe.

Again,  when  Jesus  made  intercession,  God  sent  food  and
bounty  (from  heaven)  on  trays,

* Literally,  “the  moon-faced  ones."


- Literally,  “amidst.”


THE  KING  AND  THE  HANDMAIDEN  9

But  once  more  the  insolent  fellows  omitted  to  show  respect
and,  like  beggars,  snatched  away  the  viands,

(Although)  Jesus  entreated  them,  saying,  “This  is  lasting  and  ^5
will  not  fail  from  off  the  earth.”

To  show  suspicion  and  greed  at  the  table  of  Majestv  is
ingratitude.

Because  of  those  impudent  wretches^  who  were  blinded  bv
greed,  that  gate  of  mercy  was  closed  upon  them.

On  account  of  withholding  the  poor-tax  no  rain-clouds  arise,
and  in  consequence  of  fornication  the  plague  spreads  in  al!
directions.

Whatever  befalls  thee  of  gloom  and  sorrow  is  the  result  of
irreverence  and  insolence  withal.

Any  one  behaving  with  irreverence  in  the  path  of  the  Friend  go
is  a brigand  who  robs  men,  and  he  is  no  man.

Through  discipline  this  Heaven  has  been  filled  with  light,
and  through  discipline  the  angels  became  immaculate  and  holy.

By  reason  of  irreverence  the  sun  was  eclipsed,  and  insolence
caused  an  ‘Aza^il-  to  be  turned  back  from  the  door.

The  meeting  of  the  king  with  the  divine  physician  whose
coming  had  been  announced  to  him  in  a dream.

He  (the  king)  opened  his  hands  and  clasped  him  to  his  breast
and  received  him,  like  love,  into  his  heart  and  soul.

And  began  to  kiss  his  hand  and  brow  and  inquire  concerning
his  home  and  journey.

(So)  with  many  a question  he  led  him  to  the  dais.  “.\t  last,”  ,15
said  he,  “I  have  found  a treasure  by  being  patient.”

He  said  (also),  “ O gift  from  God  and  defence  against  trouble,

(O  thou  who  art)  the  meaning  of  ‘ Patience  is  the  key  of  joy  ’ !

O thou  whose  countenance  is  the  answer  to  every  question,
by  thee  hard  knots  are  loosed  without  discussion.

Thou  interpretest  all  that  is  in  our  hearts,  thou  givest  a
helping  hand  to  every  one  whose  foot  is  in  the  mire.

Welcome,  O chosen  one,  O approved  one!  If  thou  vanish,
Djstinvwill  come  (upon  us)  and  the  wide  room  will  be  straitened.

Thoii  art  the  protector  of  the  people.  He  that  desires  (thee)  mo
not  hath  gone  to  perdition.  Xay,  verily,  if  he  do  not  refrain ....'”

Hoic  the  king  led  the  physician  to  the  bedside  of  the  sick  girl,
that  he  might  see  her  condition.

When  that  meeting  and  bounteous  (spiritual)  repast  was  over,
he  took  his  hand  and  conducted  him  to  the  harem.

He  rehearsed  the  tale  of  the  invalid  and  her  illness,  and  then
seated  him  beside  the  sick  (girl).

^ Literailv,  “ beggar-faced  one>.  * ~ The  name  borne  by  Iblis  before  his  fall.


lO  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

The  physician  observed  the  colour  of  her  face,  (felt)  her  pulse,
and  (inspected)  her  urine ; he  heard  both  the  symptoms  and  the
(secondary)  causes  of  her  malady.

He  said,  “None  of  the  remedies  which  they  have  applied
builds  up  (health):  they  (the  false  physicians)  have  wrought
destruction.

103  They  were  ignorant  of  the  inward  state.  I seek  refuge  with
God  from  that  which  thev  invent.”

He  saw  the  pain,  and  the  secret  became  open  to  him,  but  he
concealed  it  and  did  not  tell  the  king.

Her  pain  was  not  from  black  or  yellow  bile : the  smell  of  every
firewood  appears  from  the  smoke.

From  her  sore  grief  he  perceived  that  she  was  heart-sore;
well  in  body,  but  stricken  in  heart.

Being  in  love  is  made  manifest  bv  soreness  of  heart : there  is
no  sickness  like  heart-sickness.

110  The  lover’s  ailment  is  separate  from  all  other  ailments:  love
is  the  astrolabe  of  the  mysteries  of  God.

Whether  love  be  from  this  (earthly)  side  or  from  that
(heavenly)  side,  in  the  end  it  leads  us  yonder.

Whatsoever  I say  in  exposition  and  explanation  of  Love,  when
I come  to  Love  (itself)  I am  ashamed  of  that  (explanation).

Although  the  commentary  of  the  tongue  makes  (all)  clear,  yet
tongueless  love  is  clearer.

Whilst  the  pen  was  making  haste  in  writing,  it  split  upon
itself  as  soon  as  it  came  to  Love.

1 13  In  expounding  it  (Love),  the  intellect  lay  down  (helplessly)
like  an  ass  in  the  mire:  it  was  Love  (alone)  that  uttered  the
explanation  of  love  and  loverhood.

The  proof  of  the  sun  is  the  sun  (himself) : if  thou  require  the
proof,  do  not  avert  thy  face  from  him !

If  the  shadow  gives  an  indication  of  him,  the  sun  (himself)
gives  spiritual  light  eveiy  moment.

The  shadow,  like  chat  in  the  night-hours,  brings  sleep  to
thee ; when  the  sun  rises  the  moon  is  cloven  asunder.

There  is  nothing  in  the  world  so  wondrous  strange  as  the
sun,  (but)  the  Sun  of  the  spirit  is  everlasting:  it  hath  no  yester-
day.

120  Although  the  external  sun  is  unique,  still  it  is  possible  to
imagine  one  resembling  it;

The  spiritual  Sun,  which  is  beyond  the  aether,  hath  no  peer
in  the  mind  or  externally.

Where  is  room  in  the  imagination  for  His  essence,  that  the
like  of  Him  should  come  into  the  imagination?

When  news  arrived  of  the  face  of  Shamsu’ddin  (the  Sun  of
the  Religion),  the  sun  of  the  fourth  heaven  drew  in  its  head
(hid  itself  for  shame).


THE  KING  AND  THE  HANDMAIDEN


1 1

Since  his  name  has  come  (to  my  lips),  it  behoves  me  to  set
forth  some  hint  of  his  bounty.

At  this  moment  my  Soul^  has  plucked  my  skirt : he  has  caught
the  perfume  of  Joseph’s  vest.

(He  said):  “For  the  sake  of  our  years  of  companionship,
recount  one  of  those  sweet  ecstasies.

That  earth  and  heaven  may  laugh  (with  joy),  that  intellect
and  spirit  and  eye  may  increase  a hundredfold.”

(I  said):  “Do  not  lay  tasks  on  me,  for  I have  passed  awav
from  myself  ( fand) ; my  apprehensions  are  blunted  and  I know
not  how  to  praise.

Everything  that  is  said  by  one  who  has  not  returned  to  con-
sciousness, if  he  constrains  himself  or  boastfullv  exaggerates,  is
unseemly.

How  should  I — not  a vein  of  mine  is  sensible — describe  that  i
Friend  who  hath  no  peer?

The  description  of  this  severance  and  this  heart's  blood  do
thou  at  present  leave  over  till  another  time.”

He  said:  “Feed  me,  tor  I am  hungry',  and  make  haste,  for
Time  is  a cutting  sword.

The  Sufi  is  the  son  of  the  (present)  time,  O comrade:  it  is
not  the  rule  of  the  Way  to  say  ‘To-morrow.’

Art  not  thou  indeed  a Sufi,  then?  That  which  is  (in  hand)
is  reduced  to  naught  by  postponing  the  payment.”

I said  to  him : “ It  is  better  that  the  secret  of  the  Friend  should  i ',5
be  disguised : do  thou  hearken  (to  it  as  implied)  in  the  contents
of  the  tale.

It  is  better  that  the  lovers’  secret  should  be  told  in  the  talk
of  others.”

He  said:  “Tell  it  forth  openly  and  nakedly  and  without  un-
faithfulness : do  not  put  me  off,  O trifler !

Lift  the  veil  and  speak  nakedly,  for  I do  not  wear  a shirt
when  I sleep  with  the  Adored  One.”

I said:  “If  He  should  become  naked  in  (thy)  vision,  neither
wilt  thou  remain  nor  thy  bosom  nor  thy  waist.

Ask  thy  wish,  but  ask  with  measure:  a blade  of  straw  will  not  i tw
support  the  mountain.

If  the  Sun,  by  whom  this  world  is  illumined,  should  approach
a little  (nearer),  all  will  be  burned.

Do  not  seek  trouble  and  turmoil  and  bloodshed : say  no  more
concerning  the  Sun  of  Tabriz!”

This  (mystery)  hath  no  end:  tell  of  the  beginning.  Go,  relate
the  conclusion  of  this  tale.


^ Husamu'ddin.


12


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I


How  that  saint  demanded  of  the  king  to  be  alone  with  the
handmaiden  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  her  malady.

He  said:  “O  king,  make  the  house  empty;  send  away  both
kinsfolk  and  strangers.

145  Let  no  one  listen  in  the  entrance-halls,  that  I may  ask  certain
things  of  this  handmaiden.”

The  house  was  left  empty,  and  not  one  inhabitant  (remained) :
nobody  save  the  physician  and  that  sick  girl.

Very  gently  he  said  (to  her),  “Where  is  thy  native  town?
for  the  treatment  suitable  to  the  people  of  each  town  is  separate.

And  in  that  town  who  is  related  to  thee?  With  what  hast  thou
kinship  and  affinity?”

He  laid  his  hand  on  her  pulse  and  put  questions,  one  by  one,
about  the  injustice  of  Heaven.

150  When  a thorn  darts  into  any  one’s  foot,  he  sets  his  foot  upon
his  knee.

And  keeps  searching  for  its  head  with  the  point  of  a needle,  and
if  he  does  not  find  it,  he  keeps  moistening  it  (the  place)  with  his  lip .

A thorn  in  the  foot  is  so  hard  to  find : how  (then)  is  it  with  a
thorn  in  the  heart?  Answer  (that) !

If  every  base  fellow  had  seen  the  thorn  in  the  heart,  when
would  sorrows  gain  the  upper  hand  ovet  any  one?

Somebody  sticks  a thorn  under  a donkey’s  tail:  the  donkev
does  not  know  how  to  get  rid  of  it:  he  starts  jumping.

155  He  jumps,  and  the  thorn  strikes  more  firmly  (pierces  deeper) :
it  needs  an  intelligent  person  to  extract  a thorn.

In  order  to  get  rid  of  the  thorn,  the  donkey  from  irritation
and  pain  went  on  kicking  and  deahng  blows  in  a hundred  places,

(But)  that  thorn-removing  physician  was  an  expert:  putting
his  hand  on  one  spot  after  another,  he  tested  (it).

He  inquired  of  the  girl  concerning  her  friends,  by  wav  of
narrative.

And  she  disclosed  to  the  physician  (many)  circumstances
touching  her  home  and  (former)  masters  and  fellow- townsmen.

160  He  listened  to  her  stoiy  (while)  he  continued  to  observe  her
pulse  and  its  beating.

So  that  at  whosoever ’s  name  her  pulse  should  begin  to  throb,
(he  might  know  that)  that  person  is  the  object  of  her  soul’s
desire  in  the  world.

He  counted  up  the  friends  in  her  native  town;  then  he
mentioned  another  town  by  name.

He  said : ‘ hen  you  went  forth  from  your  own  town,  in  which
town  did  you  live  mostly?”

She  mentioned  the  name  of  a certain  town  and  from  that  too
she  passed  on  (to  speak  of  another,  and  meanwhile)  there  was
no  change  in  the  colour  of  her  face  or  in  her  pulse.


THE  KING  AND  THE  HANDMAIDEN  13

[Masters  and  towns,  one  by  one,  she  told  of,  and  about  ^
dwelling-place  and  bread  and  salt.

She  told  stories  of  many  a town  and  many  a house,  (and  still)
no  vein  of  her  quivered  nor  did  her  cheek  grow  pale.

Her  pulse  remained  in  its  normal  state,  unimpaired,  till  he
asked  about  Samarcand,  the  (city)  sweet  as  candy.

(Thereat)  her  pulse  jumped  and  her  face  went  red  and  pale
(by  turns),  for  she  had  been  parted  from  a man  of  Samarcand,
a goldsmith.

When  the  physician  found  out  this  secret  from  the  sick  (girl),
he  discerned  the  source  of  that  grief  and  woe.

He  said : “Which  is  his  quarter  in  passing  (through  the  town).^  ’’  iro
“ Sar-i  Pul  (Bridge-head),”  she  replied,  “and  Ghatafar  street.”

Said  he:  “I  know  what  your  illness  is  and  I will  at  once
display  the  arts  of  magic  in  delivering  you^.

Be  glad  and  care-free  and  have  no  fear,  for  I will  do  to  you
that  which  rain  does  to  the  meadow.

I will  be  anxious  for  you,  be  not  you  aruxious:  I am  kinder
to  you  than  a hundred  fathers.

Beware!  tell  not  this  secret  to  any  one,  not  though  the  king
should  make  much  inquiry  from  you.

When  your  heart  becomes  the  grave  of  your  secret,  that  desire  - 75
of  yours  will  be  gained  more  quickly.”

The  Prophet  said  that  any  one  who  hides  his  inmost  thought
will  soon  attain  to  the  object  of  his  desire^.

When  seeds  are  hidden  in  the  earth,  their  inward  secret  be-
comes the  verdure  of  the  garden.

If  gold  and  silver  were  not  hidden,  how  would  they  get
nourishment  (grow  and  ripen)  in  the  mine?

The  promises  and  soothing  words  of  the  physician  made  the
sick  (girl)  safe  (free)  from  fear.

There  are  true  promises,  grateful  to  the  heart;  there  are  false  i-'o
promises,  fraught  with  disquietude.

The  promise  of  the  noble  is  current  (sterling)  coin ; the  pro-
mise of  the  unworthy  becomes  anguish  of  soul.

Hozc  the  saint,  having  discozei'ed  the  {cause  of)  the  illness,
laid  it  before  the  king.

Then  he  arose  and  went  to  see  the  king  and  acquainted  him
with  a portion  of  that  matter.

“ The  (best)  plan,”  said  he,  “is  that  we  should  bring  the  man
here  for  the  sake  of  (curing)  this  malady.

Summon  the  goldsmith  from  that  far  country;  beguile  him
with  gold  and  robes  of  honour.”

' I.e.  “ I will  perform  miracles  on  your  behalf.”

Literally,  “will  soon  be  wedded  to  the  object  of  his  desire.”


H


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I


How  the  king  sent  messengers  to  Samarcand  to  fetch  the
goldsmith.

1S5  The  king  sent  thither  one  or  two  messengers,  clever  men  and
competent  and  very  just.

To  Samarcand  came  the  two  messengers  for  the  goldsmith
debonair  and  wanton^.

Saying,  “O  fine  master,  perfect  in  knowledge,  thou  whose
quality  (of  perfection  in  thy  craft)  is  famous  in  (all)  the  lands,

Lo,  such-and-such  a king  hath  chosen  thee  for  (thv  skill  in)
the  goldsmith’s  craft,  because  thou  art  eminent.

Look  now,  receive  this  robe  of  honour  and  gold  and  silver ;
when  thou  comest  (to  the  king),  thou  wilt  be  a favourite  and
boon-companion.”

190  The  man  saw  the  much  wealth  and  the  man}'  robes : he  was
beguiled,  he  parted  from  his  town  and  children.

Blithely  the  man  came  into  the  road,  unaware  that  the  king
had  formed  a design  against  his  life.

He  mounted  an  Arab  horse  and  sped  on  joyously:  (what
really  was)  the  price  of  his  blood  he  deemed  a robe  of  honour.

O (fool),  who  with  a hundred  consents  thyself  with  thine
own  foot  didst  enter  on  the  journey  to  the  fated  ill !

In  his  fancy  (were  dreams  of)  riches,  power,  and  lordship.
Said  ‘Azrahl  (the  .\ngel  of  Death),  “Go  (thy  way).  Yes,  thou
wilt  get  (them) ! ”

195  When  the  stranger  arrived  (and  turned)  from  the  road,  the
physician  brought  him  into  the  presence  of  the  king.

Proudly  and  delicately  they  conducted  him  to  the  king  of
kings,  that  he  might  burn  (like  a moth)  on  that  candle  of  Tiraz.

The  king  beheld  him,  showed  great  regard  (for  him),  and
entrusted  to  him  the  treasure-house  (full)  of  gold.

Then  the  physician  said  to  him:  “O  mighty  Sultan,  give  the
handmaiden  to  this  lord.

In  order  that  the  handmaiden  may  be  happy  in  union  with
him,  and  that  the  water  of  union  with  him  may  put  out  the  fire
(of  passion).”

200  The  king  bestowed  on  him  that  moon-faced  one  and  wedded
those  twain  (who  were)  craving  (each  other’s)  company.

During  the  space  of  six  months  they  were  satisfying  their
desire,  till  the  girl  was  wholly  restored  to  health.

Thereafter  he  prepared  for  him  a potion,  so  that  when  he
drank  it  he  began  to  dwindle  away  before  her.

When  because  of  sickness  his  beauty  remained  not,  the  soul
of  the  girl  remained  not  in  his  pestilence  (deadly  toils).

^ Literally,  “one  who  exceeds  the  due  measure”  or  “one  who  hnsiVs
himself  with  vain  things.”


THE  KING  AND  THE  HANDMAIDEN


15


Since  he  became  ugly  and  ill-favoured  and  sallow-cheeked,
little  b}'  little  he  became  cold  (irksome  and  unpleasing)  in  her
heart.

Those  loves  which  are  for  the  sake  of  a colour  (outward  -
beauty)  are  not  love:  in  the  end  they  are  a disgrace.

Would  that  he  too  had  been  disgrace  (cfeformity)  altogether,
so  that  that  evil  judgement  might  not  have  come  to  pass  upon
him!

Blood  ran  from  his  eye  (that  flowed  with  tears)  like  a river;
his  (handsome)  face  became  the  enemy  of  his  life.

The  peacock’s  plumage  is  its  enemy:  O many  the  king  who
hath  been  slain  by  his  magnificence!

He  said,  “ I am  the  muskdeer  on  account  of  whose  gland  that
hunter  shed  mv  pure  (innocent)  blood.

Oh,  I am  the  fox  of  the  field  whose  head  they  (the  hunters  ^
springing  forth)  from  the  covert  cut  off  for  the  sake  of  the  fur.

Oh,  I am  the  elephant  whose  blood  was  shed  by  the  blow  of
the  mahout  for  the  sake  of  the  bone  (ivory).

He  who  hath  slain  me  for  that  which  is  other  than  H,
does  not  he  know  that  my  blood  sleepeth  not  (will  not  rest
unavenged) ?

To-day  it  lies  on  me  and  to-morrow  it  lies  on  him : when  does
the  blood  of  one  such  as  I am  go  to  waste  like  this?

Although  the  wall  casts  a long  shadow,  (yet  at  last)  the  shadow
turns  back  again  towards  it.

This  world  is  the  mountain,  and  our  action  the  shout:  the -
echo  of  the  shouts  comes  (back)  to  us.”

He  said  this  and  at  the  (same)  moment  went  under  the  earth
(gave  up  the  ghost).  The  handmaiden  was  purged  of  pain  and
love,

Because  love  of  the  dead  is  not  enduring,  because  the  dead
one  is  never  coming  (back)  to  us;

(But)  love  of  the  living  is  every  moment  fresher  than  a bud  in
the  spirit  and  in  the  sight.

Choose  the  love  of  that  Living  One  who  is  everlasting,  who
gives  thee  to  drink  of  the  wine  that  increases  life.

Choose  the  love  of  Him  from  whose  love  all  the  prophets  -
gained  power  and  glor\'.

Do  not  sav,  “We  have  no  admission  to  that  King.”  Dealings
with  the  generous  are  not  difficult.

* I c.  " on  account  of  m>  beauty,  which  is  not  my  real  self.  "


i6


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I


Setting  forth  how  the  slaying  and  poisoning  of  the  goldsmith  zvas

{prompted)  by  Divine  suggestion,  not  by  sensual  desire  and

wicked  meditation.

The  slaying  of  this  man  by  the  hand  of  the  physician  was  not
(done)  on  account  of  hope  or  fear.

He  did  not  slay  him  to  humour  the  king,  (he  did  not  slay
him)  until  the  Divine  command  and  inspiration  came.

As  for  the  boy  whose  throat  was  cut  by  Khadir,  the  vnilgar
do  not  comprehend  the  mystery  thereof.

225  He  that  receives  from  God  inspiration  and  answer  (to  his
prayer),  whatsoever  he  may  command  is  the  essence  of  right.

If  one  who  bestows  (spiritual)  life  should  slay,  it  is  allowable :
he  is  the  (Divine)  vicegerent,  and  his  hand  is  the  hand  of  God.

Like  Ismahl  (Ishmael),  lay  your  head  before  him;  gladly  and
laughingly  give  up  your  soul  before  his  dagger.

In  order  that  your  soul  may  remain  laughing  unto  eternity,
like  the  pure  soul  of  Ahmad  (IMohammed)  with  the  One  (God).

Lovers  drain  the  cup  of  joy  at  the  moment  when  the  fair  ones
slay  them  with  their  own  hand.

230  The  king  did  not  commit  that  bloodshed  because  of  lust:
cease  from  thinking  evil  and  disputing.

You  thought  that  he  committed  a foul  crime,  (but)  in  (the
state  of)  purity  how  should  the  sublimation  leave  (any)  alloy
(behind).?

The  purpose  of  this  (severe)  discipline  and  this  rough  treat-
ment is  that  the  furnace  may  extract  the  dross  from  the  silver.

The  testing  of  good  and  bad  is  in  order  that  the  gold  may
boil  and  bring  the  scum  to  the  top.

If  his  act  were  not  the  inspiration  of  God,  he  would  have
been  a dog  that  rends  (its  prey),  not  a king.

235  He  was  unstained  by  lust  and  covetousness  and  passion:
(what)  he  did  (was)  good,  but  good  that  wore  the  aspect  of  evil.

If  Khadir  stove  the  boat  in  the  sea,  (yet)  in  Khadir’s  staving
there  are  a hundred  rightnesses.

The  imagination  of  Moses,  notwithstanding  his  (spiritual)
illumination  and  excellence,  was  screened  from  (the  compre-
hension of)  that  (act  of  Khadir).  Do  not  thou  fly  without  wings !

That  (deed  of  the  king)  is  a red  rose  (worthy  of  praise);  do
not  call  it  blood  (murder).  He  is  intoxicated  with  Reason;  do
not  call  him  a madman.

Had  it  been  his  desire  to  shed  the  blood  of  a Moslem,  I am
an  inlidel  if  I would  have  mentioned  his  name  (with  praise).

240  The  highest  heaven  trembles  at  praise  of  the  wicked,  and
by  praise  of  him  the  devout  man  is  moved  to  think  evil.

He  was  a king  and  a very  heedful  king ; he  was  elect  and  the
elect  (favourite)  of  God.


THE  GREENGROCER  AND  THE  PARROT  17

One  who  is  slain  by  a king  like  this,  he  (the  king)  leads  him
to  fortune  and  to  the  best  (most  honourable)  estate.

Unless  he  (the  king)  had  seen  advantage  to  him  (the  gold-
smith) in  doing  violence  to  him,  how  should  that  absolute
Mercy  have  sought  to  do  violence.^

The  child  trembles  at  the  barber’s  scalpel  (but)  the  fond
mother  is  happy  in  that  pain  (of  her  child).

He  takes  half  a life  and  gives  a hundred  lives  (in  exchange);  ’45
he  gives  that  which  enters  not  into  your  imagination.

You  are  judging  (his  actions)  from  (the  analogy  of)  vourself,
but  you  have  fallen  far,  far  (away  from  the  truth).  Consider
well !

The  story  of  the  greengrocer  and  the  parrot  and  the  parrot’s
spilling  the  oil  in  the  shop.

There  was  a greengrocer  who  had  a parrot,  a sweet-voiced
green  talking  parrot.

(Perched)  on  the  bench,  it  would  watch  over  the  shop  (in
the  owner’s  absence)  and  talk  finely  to  all  the  traders.

In  addressing  human  beings  it  would  speak  (like  them);  it
was  (also)  skilled  in  the  song  of  parrots.

(Once)  it  sprang  from  the  bench  and  flew  away;  it  spilled  -
the  bottles  of  rose-oil.

Its  master  came  from  the  direction  of  his  house  and  seated
himself  on  the  bench  at  his  ease  as  a merchant  does.

(Then)  he  saw  the  bench  was  full  of  oil  and  his  clothes  greasy ;
he  smote  the  parrot  on  the  head : it  was  made  bald  by  the  blow.

For  some  few  days  it  refrained  from  speech;  the  greengrocer,
in  repentance,  heaved  deep  sighs.

Tearing  his  beard  and  saying,  “Alas ! the  sun  of  my  prosperity
has  gone  under  the  clouds.

Would  that  my  hand  had  been  broken  (powerless)  at  that
moment ! How  (ever)  did  I strike  (such  a blow)  on  the  head  of
that  sweet-tongued  one.?  ’’

He  was  giving  presents  to  ever}'  dervish,  that  he  might  get
back  the  speech  of  his  bird.

After  three  days  and  three  nights,  he  was  seated  on  the  bench,
distraught  and  sorrowful,  like  a man  in  despair.

Showing  the  bird  every  sort  of  marred  (in  the  hope)  that
maybe  it  would  begin  to  speak.

Aleanwhile  a bare-headed  dervish,  clad  in  a jaiclaq  (coarse
woollen  frock),  passed  by,  with  a head  hairless  as  the  outside
of  bowl  and  basin.

Thereupon  the  parrot  began  to  talk,  screeched  at  the  dervish  260
and  said,  “ Hey,  fellow !

How  were  you  mixed  up  with  the  bald,  O baldpate?  Did  you,
then,  spill  oil  from  the  bottle.?’’


N M


l8  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

The  bystanders  laughed  at  the  parrot’s  inference,  because  it
deemed  the  wearer  of  the  frock  to  be  like  itself.

Do  not  measure  the  actions  of  holy  men  by  (the  analogy  of)
yourself,  though  sher  (lion)  and  shir  (milk)  are  similar  in
writing.

On  this  account  the  whole  world  is  gone  astray : scarcely  any
one  is  cognisant  of  God’s  AbddI  (Substitutes)^.

263  They  set  up  (a  claim  of)  equality  with  the  prophets;  they
supposed  the  saints  to  be  like  themselves.

“Behold,”  they  said,  “we  are  men,  they  are  men;  both  we
and  they  are  in  bondage  to  sleep  and  food.”

In  (their)  blindness  they  did  not  perceive  that  there  is  an
infinite  difference  between  (them).

Both  species  of  zanbiir  ate  and  drank  from  the  (same)  place,
but  from  that  one  (the  hornet)  came  a sting,  and  from  this
other  (the  bee)  honey.

Both  species  of  deer  ate  grass  and  drank  water : from  this  one
came  dung,  and  from  that  one  pure  musk.

270  Both  reeds  drank  from  the  same  water-source,  (but)  this  one
is  empty  and  that  one  (full  of)  sugar.

Consider  hundreds  of  thousands  of  such  likenesses  and  observe
that  the  distance  between  the  two  is  (as  great  as)  a seventy  years’
journey.

This  one  eats,  and  filth  is  discharged  from  him ; that  one  eats,
and  becomes  entirely  the  light  of  God.

This  one  eats,  (and  of  him)  is  born  nothing  but  avarice  and
envy;  that  one  eats,  (and  of  him)  is  born  nothing  but  love  of
the  One  (God).

This  one  is  good  (fertile)  soil  and  that  one  brackish  and  bad ;
this  one  is  a fair  angel  and  that  one  a devil  and  wild  beast.

275  If  both  resemble  each  other  in  aspect,  it  may  well  be  (so):
bitter  water  and  sweet  water  have  (the  same)  clearness.

Who  knows  (the  difference)  except  a man  possessed  of
(spiritual)  taste?  Find  (him):  he  knows  the  sweet  w'ater  from
the  brine.

Comparing  magic  with  (prophetic)  miracle,  he  (the  ignorant
one)  fancies  that  both  are  founded  on  deceit.

The  magicians  (in  the  time)  of  Moses,  for  contention’s  sake,
lifted  up  (in  their  hands)  a rod  like  his,

(But)  between  this  rod  and  that  rod  there  is  a vast  difference ;
from  this  action  (magic)  to  that  action  (miracle)  is  a great  way.

2S0  This  action  is  followed  by  the  curse  of  God,  (while)  that
action  receives  in  payment  the  mercy  (blessing)  of  God.

The  infidels  in  contending  (for  equality  with  the  prophets  and
saints)  have  the  nature  of  an  ape : the  (evil)  nature  is  a canker
within  the  breast.

‘ The  saints  ne.xt  in  rank  to  the  Qutb,  who  is  the  headof  thespintual  hierarchy.


THE  GREENGROCER  AND  THE  PARROT  19

Whatever  a man  does,  the  ape  at  every  moment  does  the
same  thing  that  he  sees  done  by  the  man.

He  thinks,  “ I have  acted  like  him  ” : how  should  that  quarrel-
some-looking  one  know  the  difference?

This  one  (the  holy  man)  acts  by  the  command  (of  God),  and
he  (the  apish  imitator)  for  the  sake  of  quarrelling  (rivalry).  Pour
dust  on  the  heads  of  those  who  have  quarrelsome  faces !

That  (religious)  hypocrite  joins  inritual  prayer  with  the  (sincere)  285
conformist  (only)  for  quarrelling ’s  sake,  not  for  supplication.

In  prayer  and  fasting  and  pilgrimage  and  alms-giving  the  true
believers  are  (engaged)  with  the  hypocrite  in  (what  brings)
victory  and  defeat.

Victory  in  the  end  is  to  the  true  believers ; upon  the  hypocrite
(falls)  defeat  in  the  state  hereafter.

Although  both  are  intent  on  one  game,  in  relation  to  each
other  they  are  (as  far  apart  as)  the  man  of  Alerv  and  the  man  of
Ray\'.

Each  one  goes  to  his  (proper)  abiding-place;  each  one  fares
according  to  his  name.

If  he  be  called  a true  believer,  his  soul  rejoices ; and  if  you  ’go
say  “hypocrite,”  he  becomes  filled  with  fire  (rage).

His  (the  true  believer’s)  name  is  loved  on  account  of  its
essence  (which  is  true  faith);  this  one’s  (the  hypocrite’s)  name
is  loathed  on  account  of  its  pestilent  qualities.

(The  four  letters)  mini  and  icdzc  and  mim  and  niin  do  not
confer  honour:  the  word  mumin  (true  believer)  is  only  for  the
sake  of  denotation.

If  you  call  him  (the  true  believer)  hypocrite,  this  vile  name
is  stinging  (him)  within  like  a scorpion.

If  this  name  is  not  derived  from  Hell,  then  why  is  there  the
taste  of  Hell  in  it?

The  foulness  of  that  ill  name  is  not  from  the  letters ; the  295
bitterness  of  that  sea-water  is  not  from  the  vessel  (containing

it)-

The  letters  are  the  vessel : therein  the  meaning  is  (contained)
like  water;  (but)  the  sea  of  the  meaning  is  (with  God) — mth
Him  is  the  Urnmu  ’l-Kitdb.

In  this  world  the  bitter  sea  and  the  sweet  sea  (are  divided) —
between  them  is  a barrier  which  they  do  not  seek  to  cross.

Know  that  both  these  flow  from  one  origin.  Pass  on  from
them  both,  go  (all  the  way)  to  their  origin!

Without  the  touchstone  you  will  never  know  in  the  assay
adulterated  gold  and  fine  gold  by  (using  your  own)  judgemerit.

Any  one  in  whose  soul  God  shall  put  the  touchstone,  he  will  300
distinguish  certainty  from  doubt.

A piece  of  rubbish  jumps  into  the  mouth  of  a living  man,  and
only  when  he  ejects  it  is  he  at  ease.


20  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

When,  amongst  thousands  of  morsels  (of  food),  one  little
piece  of  rubbish  entered  (his  mouth),  the  living  man’s  sense
(of  touch  or  taste)  tracked  it  down.

The  worldly  sense  is  the  ladder  to  this  world;  the  religious
sense  is  the  ladder  to  Heaven.

Seek  ye  the  well-being  of  the  former  sense  from  the  physician ;
beg  ye  the  well-being  of  the  latter  sense  from  the  Beloved.

305  The  health  of  the  former  arises  from  the  flourishing  state  of
the  body;  the  health  of  the  latter  arises  from  the  ruin  of  the
body.

The  spiritual  way  ruins  the  body  and,  after  having  ruined  it,
restores  it  to  prosperity:

Ruined  the  house  for  the  sake  of  the  golden  treasure,  and
with  that  same  treasure  builds  it  better  (than  before);

Cut  off  the  water  and  cleansed  the  river-bed,  then  caused
drinking-water  to  flow  in  the  river-bed;

Cleft  the  skin  and  drew  out  the  iron  point  (of  the  arrow  or
spear) — then  fresh  skin  grew  over  it  (the  wound) ;

310  Rased  the  fortress  and  took  it  from  the  infidel,  then  reared
thereon  a hundred  towers  and  ramparts.

Who  shall  describe  the  action  of  Him  who  hath  no  like?  This
that  I have  said  (is  only  what  the  present)  necessity  is  affording.

Sometimes  it  (the  action  of  God)  appears  like  this  and  some-
times the  contrary  of  this:  the  work  of  religion  is  naught  but
bewilderment.

(I  mean)  not  one  bewildered  in  such  wise  that  his  back  is
(turned)  towards  Him;  nay,  but  one  bewildered  (with  ecstasy)
like  this  and  drovraed  (in  God)  and  intoxicated  with  the
Beloved.

The  face  of  the  one  is  set  towards  the  Beloved,  (while)  the
face  of  the  other  is  just  his  own  face  (he  is  facing  himself).

315  Look  long  on  the  face  of  every  one,  keep  watch  attentively:
it  may  be  that  by  doing  service  (to  Sufis)  you  will  come  to
know  the  face  (of  the  true  saint).

Since  there  is  many  a devil  who  hath  the  face  of  Adam,  it  is
not  Avell  to  give  your  hand  to  every  hand.

Because  the  fowler  produces  a whistling  sound  in  order  to
decoy  the  bird^,

(So  that)  the  bird  may  hear  the  note  of  its  congener  and
come  down  from  the  air  and  find  trap  and  knife-point.

The  vile  man  will  steal  the  language  of  dervishes,  that  he  may
thereby  chant  a spell  over  (fascinate  and  deceive)  one  who  is
simple.

320  The  work  of  (holy)  men  is  (as)  light  and  heat ; the  work  of
vile  men  is  trickery  and  shamelessness.

^ Literally,  “in  order  that  the  birdcatcher  may  decoy.”


I


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  21

They  make  a woollen  lion  for  the  purpose  of  begging;  they
give  the  title  of  Ahmad  (Mohammed)  to  Bii  Alusaylim;

(But)  to  Bu  Musaylim  remained  the  title  of  Kadhdhdb  (Liar),
to  Alohammed  remained  (the  title  of)  UIii  ’l-albdb  (Endowed
with  understanding).

The  wine  of  God,  its  seal  (last  result)  is  pure  musk,  (but)  as
for  (the  other)  wine,  its  seal  is  stench  and  torment.

Story  of  the  Jetcish  king  who  for  bigotry’s  sake  used  to
slay  the  Christians.

Amongst  the  Jews  there  was  a king  who  wrought  oppression,
an  enemy  of  Jesus  and  a destroyer  of  Christians.

’Twas  the  epoch  of  Jesus  and  the  turn  was  his* : he  was  the  3
soul  of  Moses,  and  Moses  the  soul  of  him;

(But)  the  squint-eyed  (double-seeing)  king  separated  in  the
way  of  God  those  two  Divine  (prophets)  who  were  (really)  in
accord  (with  each  other).

The  master  said  to  a squint-eyed  (pupil),  “Come  on;  go,
fetch  that  bottle  out  of  the  room.”

Said  the  squint-eyed  one;  “Which  of  the  two  bottles  shall
I bring  to  you.?  Explain  fully.”

“There  are  not  two  bottles,”  replied  the  master;  “go,  leave
off  squinting  and  do  not  be  seeing  more  (than  one).”

“O  master,”  said  he,  “don’t  chide  me.”  Said  the  master,  3
“Smash  one  of  those  two.”

The  bottle  was  one,  though  in  his  eyes  it  seemed  two;  when
he  broke  the  bottle,  there  was  no  other.

When  one  was  broken,  both  vanished  from  sight:  a man  is
made  squint-eyed  by  (evil)  propensity  and  anger.

Anger  and  lust  make  a man  squint-eyed,  they  change  the
spirit  (so  that  it  departs)  from  rectitude.

When  self-interest  appears,  virtue  becomes  hidden : a hundred
veils  rise  from  the  heart  to  the  eye.

When  the  cadi  lets  bribery  gain  hold  of  his  heart,  how  should  3
he  know  the  wronger  from  the  wretched  victim  of  wrong?

The  king,  from  Jewish  rancour,  became  so  squint-eyed  that  (we
cry),  “Mercy,  O Lord,  mercy  (save  us  from  such  an  affliction) ! ”

He  slew  fiundreds  of  thousands  of  wronged  (innocent)  be-
lievers, saying,  “I  am  the  protection  and  support  of  the  religion
of  Moses.”

Hotc  the  vizier  instructed  the  king  to  plot.

He  had  a vizier,  a miscreant  and  ogler  (deceiver),  who  by
reason  of  (his  exceeding)  guile  would  tie  knots  on  water.

“The  Christians,”  said  he,  “seek  to  save  their  lives;  they
hide  their  religion  from  the  king.

^ I.e.  it  was  his  turn  to  appear  as  a prophet.


22


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

340  Slay  them  not,  for  slaying  (them)  is  useless : religion  hath  no
smell,  it  is  not  musk  and  aloes-wood.

The  secret  is  concealed  in  a hundred  coverings : its  outward
form  is  (in  agreement)  with  thee,  resembling  thee,  (but)  the
inward  (reality)  is  (in)  disagreement.”

The  king  said  to  him:  “Tell  (me),  then,  what  is  the  (best)
plan?  What  is  the  remedy  against  that  deceit  and  imposture? —

So  that  there  may  not  remain  a single  Christian  in  the  world,
neither  one  whose  religion  is  manifest  nor  one  who  is  con-
cealed.”

“O  king,”  said  he,  “cut  off  my  ears  and  hands,  rip  my  nose
by  bitter  (cruel)  decree ;

343  Then  bring  me  under  the  gallows,  that  an  intercessor  may
plead  for  me.

Do  this  deed  in  the  place  for  (public)  proclamation,  on  a
highway  where  roads  run  in  four  directions.

Then  banish  me  from  thy  presence  to  a distant  land,  that  I
may  cast  mischief  and  confusion  amongst  them.


Hozv  the  vizier  brought  the  Christians  into  doubt
and  perplexity.

Then  I will  say  (to  them),  ‘ I am  secretly  a Christian.  O God
w'ho  knowest  (all)  things  hidden.  Thou  knowest  me.

The  king  was  informed  of  my  (Christian)  faith  and  from
bigotry  sought  to  take  my  life.

350  I wished  to  hide  my  religion  from  the  king  and  profess  his
religion,

(But)  the  king  got  a scent  of  my  inmost  beliefs,  and  my
w'ords  were  suspected  (when  I stood)  before  the  king.

He  said,  “ Your  words  are  like  a needle  in  bread  (specious  but
pernicious);  there  is  a window  between  my  heart  and  yours.

Through  that  window  I have  seen  your  (real)  state:  I see
your  state  and  will  not  heed  your  words.”

Had  not  the  spirit  of  Jesus  been  my  aid,  he  would  in  Jewish
fashion  have  torn  me  to  pieces.

355  For  Jesus’  sake  I would  yield  my  life  and  give  my  head  and
lay  on  myself  (confess)  myriads  of  obligations  to  him.

I do  not  grudge  Jesus  my  life,  but  full  well  am  I versed  in
the  knowledge  of  his  religion^.

Grief  was  coming  over  me  (it  seemed  to  me  a pity)  that  that
holy  religion  should  perish  amongst  those  who  are  ignorant
(of  it).

Thanks  be  to  God  and  to  Jesus  that  I have  become  a guide
to  the  true  faith.


* In  this  way  he  excuses  himself  for  not  having  died  a marty  r’s  death.


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  23

I have  escaped  from  Jews  and  Judaism  so  (entirely)  that  I
have  bound  my  waist  with  a (Christian)  girdle.

The  (present)  epoch  is  the  epoch  of  Jesus.  O men,  hearken  55°
with  your  souls  unto  the  mysteries  of  his  religion!’”

The  king  did  to  him  that  deed  (mutilation)  which  he  had
proposed:  the  people  remained  in  amazement  at  his  deed.

He  (the  king)  drove  him  away  to  the  Christians.  After  that,
he  (the  vizier)  began  to  proselytise.

How  the  Christians  let  themselves  be  duped  by  the  vizier.

Alyriads  of  Christian  men  gathered  round  him,  little  by  little,
in  his  abode,

(While)  he  secretly  expounded  to  them  the  mysteries  of
Gospel  and  girdle  and  prayer.

Outwardly  he  was  a preacher  of  (religious)  ordinances,  but  .q-
inwardly  he  was  (as)  the  whistle  and  snare  (of  the  fowler).

On  this  account^  some  Companions  (of  Mohammed)  begged
of  the  Prophet  (that  he  would  acquaint  them  with)  the  deceit-
fulness of  the  ghoul-like  soul-.

Saying,  “What  of  hidden  selfish  interests  does  it  mingle  in
acts  of  worship  and  in  pure  spiritual  deyotion?”

They  were  not  seeking  from  him  excellence  of  piety;  the\-
were  not  inquiring  where  lay  the  outward  defect.

Hair  by  hair,  speck  by  speck,  they  were  recognising  the  de-
ceitfulness of  the  fleshly  soul  as  (plainly  as  the  difference  of)
the  rose  from  parsley.

Even  the  hair-splitters  (the  most  scrupulous)  of  the  Com-
panions  used  to  become  distraught  in  spirit  at  the  (Prophet’s)
admonition  to  them  (the  inquirers).

Hozv  the  Christians  folloiced  the  vizier.

The  Christians  all  gave  their  hearts  to  him:  what  (how  great),
indeed,  is  the  strength  of  the  (blind)  conformity  of  the  vulgar!

They  planted  love  of  him  within  their  breasts,  they  were
regarding  him  as  the  vicar  of  Jesus.

He  inwardly  (in  reality)  was  t’ne  accursed  one-eyed  .Antichrist.

O God,  do  Thou  (hear  and)  answer  the  cry  (of  those  in  trouble)

— what  a good  helper  art  Thou !

O God,  there  are  myriads  of  snares  and  baits,  and  we  are  as
greedy  foodless  "birds.

From  moment  to  moment  we  are  caught  in  a fresh  snare,  375
though  we  become,  each  one,  (like)  a falcon  or  a Sirnurgh.

Everv  moment  Thou  art  delivering  us,  and  again  we  are
going  to  a snare,  O Thou  who  art  without  want!

^ Because  it  is  hard  to  distinguish  truth  from  falsehood.

- The  appetitive  soul,  "the  flesh.”


24  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

We  are  putting  corn  in  this  barn,  (and  then)  we  are  losing  the
corn  that  has  been  garnered.

(Why),  after  all,  do  not  we  consider  with  intelligent  mind
that  this  damage  to  the  corn  arises  from  the  deceitfulness  of
the  mouse?

Since  the  mouse  has  made  a hole  in  our  barn,  and  our  barn
has  been  ravaged  by  its  guile,

3SU  O soul,  in  the  first  place  avert  the  mischief  of  the  mouse,
and  then  show  fervour  (zeal)  in  garnering  the  corn.

Hear  (one)  of  the  saydngs  related  from  the  Chiefest  of  the
Chief  (the  Prophet) : “No  prayer  is  complete  without  ‘ presence  ’
(concentration  of  the  mind  on  God).”

If  there  is  no  thievish  mouse  in  our  barn,  where  is  the  corn
of  forty  years’  works  (of  devotion)?

Why  is  the  daily'  sincerity  (of  our  devotions)  not  being  stored,
bit  by  bit,  in  this  barn  of  ours?

Many  a star  (spark)  of  fire  shot  forth  from  the  iron  (of  good
works),  and  that  burning  heart  received  (it)  and  drew  (it)  in;

385  But  in  the  darkness  a hidden  thief  is  laying  his  finger  upon
the  stars.

Extinguishing  the  stars  one  by  one,  that  no  lamp  may  shine
from  the  (spiritual)  sky.

Though  there  be  thousands  of  snares  at  our  feet,  when  Thou
art  with  us  there  is  not  any  trouble.

Every  night  Thou  freest  the  spirits  from  the  body’s  snare,
and  dost  erase  (the  impressions  on)  the  tablets  (of  the  mind).

The  spirits  are  set  free  every  night  from  this  cage,  (they  are)
done  with  ordinance  and  talk  and  tale.

390  At  night  prisoners  are  unconscious  of  their  prison,  at  night
governors  are  unconscious  of  their  power.

There  is  no  sorrow,  no  thought  of  gain  or  loss,  no  fancy  of  this
person  or  that  person.

This  is  the  state  of  the  'drif  (gnostic),  even  without  sleep:
God  said,  {Thou  wouldst  deem  them  azvake)  whilst  they  slept.
Shy  not  at  this^.

He  is  asleep,  day  and  night,  to  the  affairs  of  the  world,  like
a pen  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord’s  control.

One  who  sees  not  the  hand  in  the  writing  thinks  (that)  the
act  (of  writing  proceeds)  from  the  pen  by  means  of  movement.

395  He  (God)  hath  shown  forth  some  part  of  this  state  of  the
‘drif,  (inasmuch  as)  the  vulgar  too  are  carried  off  (overtaken)
by  sleep  of  the  senses.

Their  souls  are  gone  into  the  desert  that  is  without  descrip-
tion ; their  spirits  and  bodies  are  at  rest ;

And  with  a whistle  thou  leadest  them  back  to  the  snare,
leadest  them  all  (back)  to  justice  and  to  the  judge.

' I.e.  “do  not  deny  this  or  disbelieve  in  it.”


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  25

Like  Israffl  (Seraphiel),  He  (God)  who  causes  the  dawn  to
break  brings  them  all  from  those  lands  (of  spirit)  into  (the
world  of)  form.

He  embodies  the  spirits  divested  (of  body),  He  makes  each
body  pregnant  (laden)  again  (with  actions  and  works).

He  makes  the  steed  of  the  souls  bare  of  saddle : this  is  the  4'“
inner  meaning  of  “Sleep  is  the  brother  of  Death”;

But  in  order  that  they  may  return  in  the  daytime,  He  puts
a long  tether  on  its  leg,

So  that  in  the  daytime  He  may  lead  it  back  from  that  meadow
and  bring  it  from  the  pasture  (to  go)  under  the  load.

Would  that  He  had  guarded  this  spirit  as  the  Men  of  the
Cave  or  as  the  Ark  of  Xoah,

That  this  mind  and  eye  and  ear  might  be  delivered  from  the
Flood  of  wakefulness  and  consciousness!

Oh,  in  the  world  there  is  many  a Man  of  the  Cave  beside  405
you,  before  you,  at  this  time:

The  Cave  is  with  him,  the  Friend  is  in  converse  with  him;
but  your  eyes  and  ears  are  sealed,  (so)  what  does  it  avail. ^


Story  of  the  Caliph's  seeing  Layla.

The  Caliph  said  to  Layla:  “Art  thou  she  by  whom  Majnun
was  distracted  and  led  astray.^

Thou  art  not  superior  to  other  fair  ones.”  “Be  silent,”  she
replied,  “since  thou  art  not  Majnun.”

\\’hosoever  is  awake  (to  the  material  world)  is  the  more  asleep
(to  the  spiritual  world);  his  wakefulness  is  worse  than  his  sleep.

When  our  soul  is  not  awake  to  God,  wakefulness  is  like  clos-  410
ing  our  doors  (to  Divine  influences).

All  day  long,  from  the  buffets  of  phantasy  and  from  (thoughts
of)  loss  and  gain  and  from  fear  of  decline.

There  remains  to  it  (the  soul)  neither  joy  nor  grace  and  glory
nor  way  of  journeying  to  Heaven.

The  one  asleep  (to  spiritual  things)  is  he  who  hath  hope  of
every  vain  fancy  and  holds  parley  with  it.

Diabolum  per  somnum  videt  tanquam  virginem  caelestem,
deinde  propter  libidinem  effundit  cum  diabolo  aquam  (seminis).

Postquam  semen  generationis  in  terram  salsuginosam  infudit,  ^15
ipse  ad  se  rediit,  fugit  ab  eo  ilia  imago.

Hinc  percipit  languorem  capitis  et  (videt)  corpus  pollutum.
Proh  dolor  ob  illud  simulacrum  visum  (sed  revera)  non  visum !

The  bird  is  flying  on  high,  and  its  shadow  is  speeding  on  the
earth,  flying  like  a bird  :

Some  fool  begins  to  chase  the  shadow,  running  (after  it)  so
far  that  he  becomes  powerless  (exhausted),


26  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Not  knowing  that  it  is  the  reflexion  of  that  bird  in  the  air,
not  knowing  where  is  the  origin  of  the  shadow.

420  He  shoots  arrows  at  the  shadow;  his  quiver  is  emptied  in
seeking  (to  shoot  it) :

The  quiver  of  his  life  became  empty : his  life  passed  in  running
hotly  in  chase  of  the  shadow.

(But)  when  the  shadow  of  God  is  his  nurse,  it  delivers  him
from  (ever\’)  phantom  and  shadow.

The  shadow  of  God  is  that  serv’ant  of  God  who  is  dead  to
this  world  and  living  through  God.

Lay  hold  of  his  skirt  most  quickly  without  misgiving,  that
you  may  be  saved  in  the  skirt  (end)  of  the  last  days  (of  the
world).

+25  (The  shadow  mentioned  in  the  words)  Hozv  He  {God)  ex-
tended the  shadow  is  the  form  of  the  saints,  which  guides  to
the  light  of  the  Divine  Sun.

Do  not  go  in  this  valley  without  this  guide;  say,  like  Khalil
(Abraham),  “/  love  not  them  that  set.”

Go,  from  the  shadow  gain  a sun : pluck  the  skirt  of  the
(spiritual)  king,  Shams-i  Tabrizi  (the  Sun  of  Tabriz)!

If  you  do  not  know  the  way  to  this  feast  and  bridal,  ask  of
Ziya’u  ’1-Haqq  (the  Radiance  of  God)  Husamu’ddin.

And  if  on  the  way  envy  seize  you  by  the  throat,  it  belongs
to  (is  characteristic  of)  Iblis  to  go  beyond  bounds  in  envy;

430  For  he  because  of  env\'  hath  disdain  for  Adam,  and  because
of  envy  is  at  war  with  felicity.

In  the  Way  there  is  no  harder  pass  than  this.  Oh,  fortunate
he  who  is  not  companioned  by  envy!

This  body,  you  must  know,  is  the  house  of  emy,  for  the
household  are  tainted  with  en\y.

If  the  body  is  the  house  of  emy,  yet  God  made  that  body
very  pure.

(The  text)  Cleanse  My  house,  ye  ticain,  is  the  explanation  of
(such)  purity:  it  (the  purified  heart)  is  a treasure  of  (Divine)
light,  though  its  talisman  is  of  earth.

435  When  you  practise  deceit  and  emy  against  one  who  is  without
envy,  from  that  emy  black  stains  arise  in  your  heart.

Become  (as)  dust  under  the  feet  of  the  men  of  God;  throw
dust  on  the  head  of  envy,  even  as  we  do.


Explanation  of  the  envy  of  the  vizier.

That  petty  vizier  had  his  origin  from  envy,  so  that  for  vanity
he  gave  to  the  wind  (sacrificed)  his  ears  and  nose.

In  the  hope  that  by  the  sting  of  envy  his  venom  might  enter
the  souls  of  the  poor  (Christians).


I


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  27

Any  one  who  from  env}'  mutilates  his  nose  makes  himself  with-
out ear  and  without  nose  (unable  to  apprehend  spiritual  things).

The  nose  is  that  wTich  catches  a scent,  and  which  the  scent  +4'>
leads  towards  an  abode  (of  spiritual  truth).

Whoever  hath  no  scent  is  without  a nose ; the  scent  (referred
to)  is  that  scent  which  is  religious.

When  he  has  caught  a scent  and  given  no  thanks  for  it,
(that)  ingratitude  comes  and  devours  his  nose  (deprives  him
of  the  organ  of  spiritual  perception).

Give  thanks  (to  God)  and  be  a slave  to  those  who  give  thanks :
be  in  their  presence  (as  one)  dead,  be  steadfast.

Do  not,  like  the  vizier,  make  brigandage  your  stock-in-trade;
do  not  turn  the  people  away  from  the  ritual  prayer.

The  miscreant  vizier  had  become  (in  appearance)  a true  re-  445
ligious  counsellor,  (but)  he  had  craftilv  put  garlic  in  the  almond
cake.

Houc  the  sagacious  among  the  Christians  perceived  the
guile  of  the  vizier.

Whoever  was  possessed  of  (spiritual ) discernment  w'as  feeling  a
sweet  savour  in  his  words  and,  joined  therewith,  bitterness.

He  (the  vizier)  was  saying  line  things  mi.xed  (with  foul) : he
had  poured  some  poison  into  the  sugared  julep.

The  outward  sense  of  it  was  saying,  “ Be  diligent  in  the  Way,”
but  in  effect  it  was  saying  to  the  soul.  “Be  slack.”

If  the  surface  of  silver  is  white  and  new,  (yet)  the  hands  and
dress  are  blackened  by  it.

xA.1  though  fire  is  red-faced  (bright  and  glorious)  with  sparks,  450
look  at  the  black  behaviour  (displayed)  in  its  action.

If  the  lightning  appears  luminous  to  the  eye^  (yet)  front  its
distinctive  property  it  is  the  robber  of  sight  (it  strikes  men  blind).

(As  for)  any  (Christian)  who  was  not  war}-  and  possessed  of
discernment,  the  words  of  him  (the  vizier)  were  (as)  a collar
on  his  neck.

During  six  years,  in  separation  from  the  king,  the  vizier
became  a refuge  for  the  followers  of  Jesus.

To  him  the  people  wholly  surrendered  their  religion  and
their  hearts:  at  his  command  and  decree  they  were  ready  to  die.

Hoic  the  king  sent  messages  in  secret  to  the  vizier.

Messages  (passed)  between  the  king  and  him : the  king  had  435
words  of  comfort  from  him^  in  secret.

The  king  wTote  to  him,  saying,  “O  my  fortunate  one,  the
time  is  come:  quicklv  set  my  mind  at  ease.”

He  replied : “ Behold,  O king,  I am  preparing  to  cast  disorders
into  the  religion  of  Jesus.”

1 Literallv,  “through  him  the  king  had  comforts."


28


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I


Explanation  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  Christians.

The  people  of  Jesus  had  twelve  amirs  as  rulers  in  authority
over  them.

Each  party  followed  one  amir  and  had  become  devoted  to  its
own  amir  from  desire  (of  worldly  gain).

460  These  twelve  amirs  and  their  followers  became  the  slaves  of
that  vizier  of  evil  sign.

They  all  put  trust  in  his  words,  they  all  took  his  procedure
as  a pattern.

Each  amir  would  have  given  up  his  life  in  his  presence  at
the  time  and  hour  (on  the  spot),  if  he  (the  vizier)  had  bidden
him  die.

How  the  vizier  confused  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel.

He  prepared  a scroll  in  the  name  of  (addressed  to)  each  one,
the  (written)  form  of  each  scroll  (of)  a different  tenor.

The  ordinances  of  each  (of)  a diverse  kind,  this  contradicting
that  from  the  end  to  the  beginning.

465  In  one  he  made  the  path  of  asceticism  and  hunger  to  be  the
basis  of  repentance  and  the  condition  (necessary)  for  conversion.

In  one  he  said:  “Asceticism  profits  naught:  in  this  Way  there
is  no  place  (means)  of  deliverance  but  generosity.”

In  one  he  said:  “Your  hunger  and  generosity  are  (imply)
association  on  your  part  (of  other  objects)  with  (Him  who  is)
the  object  of  your  worship.

Excepting  trust  (in  God)  and  complete  resignation  in  sorrow
and  joy,  all  is  a deceit  and  snare.”

In  one  he  said:  “It  is  incumbent  (on  you)  to  serve  (God)^;
else  the  thought  of  putting  trust  (in  Him)  is  (a  cause  of)  sus-
picion.”

470  In  one  he  said:  “There  are  (Divine)  commands  and  prohi-
bitions, (but  they)  are  not  for  practice  (observance) : they  are
(only)  to  show  our  weakness  (inability  to  fulfil  them).

So  that  we  may  behold  our  weakness  therein  and  at  that
time  recognise  the  power  of  God.”

In  one  he  said : “ Do  not  regard  your  weakness : that  weakness
is  an  act  of  ingratitude.  Beware!

Regard  your  power,  for  this  power  is  from  Him:  know  that
your  power  is  the  gift  of  Him  who  is  Hii  (the  Absolute  God).”

In  one  he  said:  “Leave  both  these  (qualities)  behind:  what-
soever is  contained  in  sight  (regard  for  other  than  God)  is  an
idol  (something  which  involves  dualism).”

473  In  one  he  said:  “Do  not  put  out  this  candle  (of  sight),  for
this  sight  is  as  a candle  (lighting  the  way)  to  (interior)  concen-
tration.

‘ I.e.  “to  perform  the  outward  acts  of  worship.”


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  29

When  you  relinquish  sight  and  phantasy  (too  soon),  you  will
have  put  out  the  candle  of  union  at  midnight.”

In  one  he  said:  “Put  it  out^ — have  no  fear — that  you  may
see  myriads  of  sights  in  exchange;

For  by  putting  it  out  the  candle  of  the  spirit  is  increased:
by  your  self-denial  your  Layla  (beloved)  becomes  your  Majmin
(lover).

If  any  one  abandons  the  world  by  his  own  (act  of)  renuncia-
tion, the  world  comes  to  him  (with  homage)  more  and  more.”

In  one  he  said:  “That  which  God  hath  given  you  He  made  4^0
sweet  to  you  in  (at  the  time  of)  bringing  it  into  existence.

He  made  it  easy  (blessed)  to  you,  and  do  you  take  it  gladly:
do  not  throw  yourself  into  anguish.”

In  one  he  said:  “Let  go  all  that  belongs  to  self,  for  it  is
wrong  and  bad  to  comply  with  your  nature.”

(Many)  different  roads  have  become  easy  (to  follow):  every
one’s  religion  has  become  (to  him)  as  (dear)  as  life.

If  God’s  making  (religion)  easy  were  the  (right)  road,  everv
Jew  and  Zoroastrian  would  have  knowledge  of  Him.

In  one  he  said:  “That  (alone)  is  made  easy  (blessed)  that  4'?
(nothing  but)  spiritual  food  should  be  the  life  of  the  heart.”

When  the  enjoyments  of  the  (sensual)  nature  are  past,  like
brackish  soil  they  raise  no  produce  and  crop.

The  produce  thereof  is  naught  but  penitence ; the  sale  thereof
yields  only  loss,  nothing  more.

That  is  not  “easy”  in  the  end;  its  (true)  name  ultimatelv
is  “hard.”

Distinguish  the  hard  from  the  easy:  consider  (what  is)  the
goodliness  of  this  and  that  in  the  end.

In  one  he  said:  “Seek  a master  (teacher):  you  will  not  find  490
foresight  as  to  the  end  among  the  qualities  derived  from
ancestors.”

Every  sort  of  religious  sect  foresaw  the  end  (according  to
their  own  surmise):  of  necessity  they  fell  captive  to  error.

To  foresee  the  end  is  not  (as  simple  as)  a hand-loom;  other-
wise, how  would  there  have  been  difference  in  religions.?

In  one  he  said:  “ You  are  the  master,  because  you  know  the
master.

Be  a man  and  be  not  subject  to  men.  Go,  take  your  own
head  (choose  your  own  way),  and  be  not  one  whose  head  is  turn-
ing (bewildered  in  search  of  a guide).”

In  one  he  said:  “All  this  (multiplicity)  is  one:  whoever  sees  495
two  is  a squint-eyed  manikin.”

In  one  he  said:  “How  should  a hundred  be  one.?  He  who
thinks  this  is  surely  mad.”

^ / e “extinguish  the  sight  which  regards  ‘other,’  see  nothing  but
God.”  ‘


3°


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

The  doctrines,  every  one,  are  contrary  to  each  other:  how
should  they  be  one?  Are  poison  and  sugar  one?

Until  you  pass  beyond  (the  difference  of)  poison  and  sugar,
how  will  you  catch  a scent  of  unity  and  oneness  ?

Twelve  books  of  this  style  and  fashion  were  drawn  up  in
writing  by  that  enemy  to  the  religion  of  Jesus.

Showing  how  this  difference  lies  in  the  form  of  the  doctrine,
not  in  the  real  nature  of  the  Way.

500  He  had  no  scent  (perception)  of  the  unicolority  of  Jesus,  nor
had  he  a disposition  from  (imbued  with)  the  tincture  of  the
dyeing-vat  of  Jesus.

From  that  pure  vat  a garment  of  a hundred  colours  would
become  as  simple  and  one-coloured  as  light.

(This)  is  not  the  unicolority  from  which  weariness  ensues;
nay,  it  is  (a  case)  like  (that  of)  fishes  and  clear  water:

Although  there  are  thousands  of  colours  on  dry  land,  (yet)
fishes  are  at  war  with  dryness.

Who  is  the  fish  and  what  is  the  sea  in  (my)  simile,  that  the
King  Almighty  and  Glorious  should  resemble  them?

505  In  (the  world  of)  existence  myriads  of  seas  and  fishes  prostrate
themselves  in  adoration  before  that  Munificence  and  Bounty.

How  many  a rain  of  largesse  hath  rained,  so  that  the  sea
was  made  thereby  to  scatter  pearls !

How  many  a sun  of  generosity  hath  shone,  so  that  cloud  and
sea  learned  to  be  bountiful !

The  sunbeams  of  Wisdom  struck  on  soil  and  clay,  so  that
the  earth  became  receptive  of  the  seed.

The  soil  is  faithful  to  its  trust,  and  whatever  you  have  sown
in  it,  you  carry  away  the  (equivalent  in)  kind  thereof  without
fraud  (on  the  part  of  the  soil).

510  It  has  derived  this  faithfulness  from  that  (Divine)  faithfulness,
inasmuch  as  the  sun  of  Justice  has  shone  upon  it.

Until  springtide  brings  the  token  of  God,  the  soil  does  not
reveal  its  secrets.

The  Bounteous  One  who  gave  to  an  inanimate  thing  these
informations  and  this  faithfulness  and  this  righteousness.

His  grace  makes  an  inanimate  thing  informed,  (while)  His
wrath  makes  blind  the  men  of  understanding.

Soul  and  heart  cannot  endure  that  ferment:  to  whom  shall
I speak?  There  is  not  in  the  world  a single  ear  (capable  of
apprehension).

515  Wherever  there  was  an  ear,  through  Him  it  became  an  eye;
wherever  there  was  a stone,  through  Him  it  became  a jasper.

He  is  an  alchemist — ^what  is  alchemy  (compared  with  His
action)?  He  is  a giver  of  miracles  (to  prophets) — ^what  is  magic
(compared  with  these  miracles)?


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  31

This  uttering  of  praise  (to  Him)  is  (really)  the  omission  of
praise  on  my  part,  for  this  (praise)  is  a proof  of  (my)  being,
and  being  is  a sin.

It  behoves  (us)  to  be  not-being  in  the  presence  of  His  Being:
in  His  presence  what  is  (our)  being?  Blind  and  blue.

Were  it  not  blind  it  w'ould  have  been  melted  (consumed)  by
Him:  it  would  have  known  the  heat  of  (the  Divine)  sun;

And  w'ere  it  not  blue  from  mourning,  how  would  this  region  5-0
(of  phenomenal  existence)  have  (remained)  frozen  like  ice?

Setting  forth  hoiv  the  vizier  incurred  perdition  (by  engaging)
in  this  plot.

The  vizier  was  ignorant  and  heedless,  like  the  (Jewish)  king:
he  was  wrestling  with  the  eternal  and  inevitable.

With  a God  so  mighty  that  in  a moment  He  causes  a hundred
worlds  like  ours  to  come  into  existence  from  non-existence:

A hundred  worlds  like  ours  He  displays  to  the  sight,  when
He  makes  your  eye  seeing  by  (the  light  of)  Himself.

If  the  world  appears  to  you  vast  and  bottomless,  know  that
to  Omnipotence  it  is  not  (so  much  as)  an  atom.

This  world,  indeed,  is  the  prison  of  your  souls:  oh,  go  in  5.25
yonder  direction,  for  there  lies  your  open  country.

This  world  is  finite,  and  truly  that  (other)  is  infinite : image
and  form  are  a barrier  to  that  Reality.

The  myriads  of  Pharaoh’s  lances  were  shattered  by  (the  hand
of)  Aloses  (armed)  with  a single  staff.

hlyriads  were  the  therapeutic  arts  of  Galen:  before  Jesus
and  his  (life-giving)  breath  they  were  a laughing-stock.

Myriads  were  the  books  of  (pre-Islamic)  poems : at  the  word
of  an  illiterate  (prophet)  they  were  (put  to)  shame.

(Confronted)  with  such  an  all-conquering  Lord,  how  should  530
any  one  not  die  (to  self),  unless  he  be  a vile  wretch?

Alany  a mind  (strong  and  firm)  as  a mountain  did  He  uproot;
the  cunning  bird  He  hung  up  by  its  two  feet.

To  sharpen  the  intelligence  and  wits  is  not  the  (right)  way:
none  but  the  broken  (in  spirit)  wins  the  favour  of  the  King.

Oh,  many  the  amassers  of  treasure,  digging  holes  (in  search
of  treasure),  who  became  an  ox’s  beard  (dupe)  to  that  vain
schemer  (the  vizier) !

Who  is  the  ox  that  you  should  become  his  beard?  What  is
earth  that  you  should  become  its  stubble^?

When  a woman  became  pale-faced  (ashamed)  of  (her)  wicked-  535
ness,  God  metamorphosed  her  and  made  her  Zuhra  (the  planet
Venus).

To  make  a woman  Zuhra  was  metamorphosis : what  (then)  is
it  to  become  earth  and  clay,  O contumacious  one?

1 Literally.  “ dry  herbage.”


32


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

Your  spirit  was  bearing  you  towards  the  highest  sphere  (of
heaven) : you  went  towards  the  water  and  the  clay  amongst  the
lowest  (of  the  low).

By  this  fall  you  metamorphosed  yourself  from  that  (state  of)
existence  which  was  the  emy  of  the  (spiritual)  intelligences.

Consider,  then,  how  is  (what  is  the  character  of)  this  meta-
morphosis : compared  with  that  metamorphosis  (of  the  woman)
this  (which  you  have  suffered)  is  exceedingly  vile.

540  You  urged  the  steed  of  ambition  towards  the  stars:  you  did
not  acknowledge  Adam  who  was  worshipped  (by  the  angels).

After  all,  you  are  a son  of  Adam.  O degenerate!  how  long
will  you  regard  lowness  as  nobility?

How  long  will  you  say,  “ I will  conquer  a whole  world,  I will
make  this  world  full  of  myself”?

If  the  world  should  be  filled  with  snow  from  end  to  end,  the
glow  of  the  sun  would  melt  it  with  a single  look.

God  by  a single  spark  (of  His  mercy)  maketh  naught  his
(the  vizier’s)  burden  (of  sin)  and  (the  burden)  of  a hundred
viziers  and  a hundred  thousand.

545  He  maketh  the  essence  of  that  (false)  imagination  to  be
wisdom;  He  maketh  the  essence  of  that  poisoned  water  to  be
a (wholesome)  drink.

That  which  raises  doubt  He  turneth  into  certainty;  He
maketh  lovingkindnesses  grow  from  the  causes  of  hatred.

He  cherisheth  Abraham  in  the  fire;  He  turneth  fear  into
security  of  spirit.

By  His  burning  (destroying)  of  secondary  causes  I am  dis-
traught ; in  (my)  fancies  of  Him  I am  like  a sophist  (sceptic  or
agnostic).

How  the  vizier  started  another  plan  to  mislead  the
{Christian)  folk.

The  vizier  formed  in  his  mind  another  plan:  he  abandoned
preaching  and  sat  alone  in  seclusion.

5.io  He  inspired  ardour  in  his  disciples  from  (their)  longing  (to
see  him);  he  remained  in  seclusion  forty  or  fifty  days.

The  people  became  mad  from  longing  for  him  and  on
account  of  being  separated  from  his  (spiritual)  feeling  and  dis-
course and  intuition.

They  were  making  supplication  and  lament,  while  he  in
solitude  was  bent  double  by  austerities.

They  said,  “Without  thee  we  have  no  light:  how  (what)  is
the  state  of  a blind  man  without  a leader?

By  way  of  showing  favour  (to  us)  and  for  God’s  sake,  do  not
keep  us  parted  from  thee  any  longer.

555  We  are  as  children  and  thou  art  our  nurse:  do  thou  spread
over  us  that  shadow  (of  thy  protection).”


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  33

He  said,  “My  soul  is  not  far  from  them  that  love  (me),  but
there  is  no  permission  to  come  forth.”

Those  amirs  came  for  intercession,  and  the  disciples  came
in  reproach,

Saying,  “O  noble  sir,  what  a misfortune  is  this  for  us!
Without  thee  we  are  left  orphaned  (deprived)  of  our  hearts  and
our  religion.

Thou  art  making  a pretence  while  we  in  grief  are  heaving
cold  (fruitless)  sighs  from  the  burning  heat  of  our  hearts.

We  have  become  accustomed  to  thy  sweet  discourse,  we  have  s'lo
drunk  of  the  milk  of  thy  wisdom.

Allah!  Allah!  do  not  thou  (O  vizier)  treat  us  with  such
cruelty:  show  kindness  to-day,  do  not  (put  off  till)  to-morrow.

Does  thy  heart  give  to  thee  (consent)  that  these  who  have
lost  their  hearts  (to  thee)  should  at  last,  being  without  thee,
become  (numbered)  amongst  them  that  have  nothing  left.?

They  all  are  writhing  like  fishes  on  dry  land:  let  loose  the
water,  remove  the  dam  from  the  stream.

O thou  like  whom  there  is  none  in  the  world,  for  God’s  sake,
for  God’s  sake,  come  to  the  aid  of  thy  people!”

Hoic  the  vister  refused  the  request  of  the  disciples.

He  said:  “Beware,  O ye  enslaved  by  words  and  talk,  ye  who  51^
seek  admonition  (consisting)  of  the  speech  of  the  tongue  and
(the  hearing)  of  the  ear.

Put  cotton-wool  in  the  ear  of  the  low  (physical)  sense,  take
off  the  bandage  of  (that)  sense  from  your  eyes !

The  ear  of  the  head  is  the  cotton-wool  of  the  ear  of  the
conscience:  until  the  former  becomes  deaf,  that  inward  (ear)
is  deaf.

Become  without  sense  and  without  ear  and  without  thought,
that  ve  may  hear  the  call  (of  God  to  the  soul),  ‘ Return!’”

So  long  as  thou  art  (engaged)  in  the  conversation  of  wake-
fulness, how  wilt  thou  catch  any  scent  of  the  conversation  of
sleep .?

Our  speech  and  action  is  the  exterior  journey:  the  interior  57U
journey  is  above  the  sky.

The’ (physical)  sense  saw  (only)  drv'ness,  because  it  was  born
of  dryness  (earth):  the  Jesus  of  the  spirit  set  foot  on  the  sea.

The  journey  of  the  dry  body  befell  on  dr\-  land,  (but)  the
journey  of  the’ spirit  set  foot  (took  place)  in  the  heart  of  the  sea.

Since  thy  life  has  passed  in  travelling  on  land,  now  mountain,
now  river,  now  desert.

Whence  wilt  thou  gain  the  Water  of  Life?  Where  wilt  thou
cleave  the  waves  of  the  Sea?

The  waves  of  earth  are  our  imagination  and  understanding---


N .M


34  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

and  thought ; the  waves  of  water  are  (mystical)  self-effacement
and  intoxication  and  death  {fond).

Whilst  thou  art  in  this  (sensual)  intoxication,  thou  art  far
from  that  (mystical)  intoxication ; whilst  thou  art  drunken  with
this,  thou  art  blind  to  that  cup.

Outward  speech  and  talk  is  as  dust ; do  thou  for  a time  make
a habit  of  silence.  Take  heed !

How  the  disciples  repeated  their  request  that  he  should
interrupt  his  seclusion.

They  all  said;  “O  sage  who  seekest  a crevice  (means  of
evasion),  say  not  to  us  this  (word  of)  guile  and  harshness.

Lay  on  the  beast  a burden  in  proportion  to  its  endurance,
lay  on  the  weak  a task  in  proportion  to  their  strength.

580  The  bait  for  every  bird  is  according  to  its  (the  bird’s)  measure
(capacity-) ; how  should  a fig  be  the  food  (lure)  for  every  bird  ?

If  you  give  a babe  bread  instead  of  milk,  take  it  (for  granted)
that  the  poor  babe  will  die  of  the  bread ;

(Yet)  afterwards,  when  it  grows  teeth,  that  babe  will  of  its
own  accord  ask  for  bread.

WTien  an  unfledged  bird  begins  to  fly,  it  becomes  a mouthful
for  any  rapacious  cat;

(But)  when  it  grows  wings,  it  will  fly  of  itself  without  trouble
and  without  whistling  (prompting),  good  or  bad.

585  Thy  speech  makes  the  Devil  silent,  thy  words  make  our  ears
(full  of)  intelligence.

Our  ears  are  (full  of)  intelligence  when  thou  art  speaking;
our  diy'  land  is  a river  when  thou  art  the  ocean.

With  thee,  earth  is  better  to  us  than  heaven,  O thou  by
whom  (the  world  from)  Arcturus  to  the  Fish  is  illumined !

Without  thee,  darkness  is  over  heaven  for  us,  (but)  com-
pared with  thee,  O Moon,  who  is  this  heaven  at  all.!*

The  heavens  have  the  form  of  sublimity,  (but)  the  essence
of  sublimity  belongs  to  the  pure  spirit.

390  The  form  of  sublimityis  for  bodies ; beside  the  essence  (reality)

bodies  are  (mere)  names.”

The  refusal  of  the  vizier  to  interrupt  his  seclusion.

He  said:  “Cut  short  your  arguments,  let  my  advice  make  its
way  into  your  souls  and  hearts.

If  I am  trustworthy,  the  trustworthy  is  not  doubted,  even
though  I should  call  heaven  earth.

If  I am  (endowed  with)  perfection,  why  (this)  disbelief  in
my  perfection?  and  if  I am  not  (perfect),  why  this  molestation
and  annoyance?

I will  not  go  forth  from  this  seclusion,  because  I am  occupied
with  inward  experiences.”


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  35


How  the  disciples  raised  objections  against  the  vizier’s
secluding  himself.

They  all  said:  “O  vizier,  it  is  not  disbelief;  our  words  are  595
not  as  the  words  of  strangers.

The  tears  of  our  eyes  are  running  because  of  our  separation
from  thee ; sigh  after  sigh  is  going  (up)  from  the  midst  of  our
souls.

A babe  does  not  contend  with  its  nurse,  but  it  weeps,  although
it  knows  neither  evil  nor  good.

We  are  as  the  harp  and  thou  art  striking  (it  with)  the  plectrum
(playing  on  it):  the  lamentation  is  not  from  us,  it  is  thou  that
art  making  lamentation.

We  are  as  the  flute,  and  the  music  in  us  is  from  thee;  we  are
as  the  mountain,  and  the  echo  in  us  is  from  thee.

We  are  as  pieces  of  chess  (engaged)  in  victory  and  defeat ; our  600
victory  and  defeat  is  from  thee,  O thou  whose  qualities  are  comely !

Who  are  we,  O thou  soul  of  our  souls,  that  we  should  remain
in  being  beside  thee?

We  and  our  existences  are  (really)  non-existences:  thou  art
the  absolute  Being  which  manifests  the  perishable  (causes
phenomena  to  appear).

We  all  are  lions,  but  lions  on  a banner:  because  of  the  wind
they  are  rushing  onward  from  moment  to  moment.

Their  onward  rush  is  visible,  and  the  wind  is  unseen;  may
that  which  is  unseen  not  fail  from  us !

Our  wind  (that  whereby  we  are  moved)  and  our  being  are  of  605
thy  gift ; our  whole  existence  is  from  thy  bringing  (us)  into  being.

Thou  didst  show  the  delightfulness  of  Being  unto  not-being,
(after)  thou  hadst  caused  not-being  to  fall  in  love  with  thee.

Take  not  away  the  delightfulness  of  thy  bounty ; take  not  away
thy  dessert  and  wine  and  wine-cup !

And  if  thou  take  it  away,  who  is  there  that  will  make  inquiry?
How  should  the  picture  strive  with  the  painter?

Do  not  look  on  us,  do  not  fix  thy  gaze  on  us ; look  on  thine
own  kindness  and  generosity'.

We  were  not,  and  there  was  no  demand  on  our  part,  (yet)  610
thy  grace  was  hearkening  to  our  unspoken  prayer  (and  calling
us  into  existence).”

Before  the  painter  and  the  brush  the  picture  is  helpless  and
bound  like  a child  in  the  womb.

Before  Omnipotence  all  the  people  of  the  (Divine)  court  of
audience  (the  world)  are  as  helpless  as  the  (embroiderer’s)
fabric  before  the  needle.

Now  He  makes  the  picture  thereon  (one  of)  the  Devil,  now  (of)
Adam ; now  He  makes  the  picture  thereon  (one  of)  joy,  now  (one
of)  grief.


3-2


36  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

There  is  no  power  (to  any  one)  that  he  should  move  a hand
in  defence;  no  (right  of)  speech,  that  he  should  utter  a word
concerning  injury  or  benefit.

615  Recite  from  the  Qur’an  the  interpretation  of  {i.e.  a text  which
interprets)  the  (preceding)  verse:  God  said,  Thou  didst  not
throw  when  thou  threwest.

If  we  let  fly  an  arrow,  that  (action)  is  not  from  us:  we  are
(only)  the  bow,  and  the  shooter  of  the  arrow  is  God.

This  is  not  jabr  (compulsion) ; it  is  the  meaning  of  jabbdri
(almightiness) : the  mention  of  almightiness  is  for  the  sake  of
(inspiring  us  with)  humility.

Our  humility  is  evidence  of  necessity,  (but)  our  sense  of
guilt  is  evidence  of  freewill.

If  there  were  not  freewill,  w'hat  is  this  shame?  And  what  is
this  sorrow  and  guilty  confusion  and  abashment?

620  Why  is  there  chiding  between  masters  and  pupils  ? Why  is
the  mind  changing  (so  as  to  depart)  from  plans  (already  formed)  ?

And  if  you  say  that  he  (the  assertor  of  freewill)  takes  no  heed
of  His  (God’s)  compulsion,  (and  that)  God’s  moon  has  become
hidden  in  His  cloud.

There  is  a good  answer  to  this;  if  you  hearken,  you  will  re-
linquish unbelief  and  incline  towards  the  (true)  religion.

Remorse  and  humility  occur  at  the  time  of  illness:  the  time
of  illness  is  wholly  w'akefulness  (of  conscience).

At  the  time  when  you  are  becoming  ill,  you  pray  God  to
forgive  your  trespass ;

625  The  foulness  of  your  sin  is  shown  to  you,  you  resolve  to
come  back  to  the  (right)  way ;

You  make  promises  and  vow's  that  henceforth  your  chosen
course  (of  action)  will  be  nothing  but  obedience  (to  God) :

Therefore  it  has  become  certain  that  illness  gives  to  you  con-
science and  wakefulness.

Note,  then,  this  principle,  O thou  that  seekest  the  principle;
every  one  who  suffers  pain  has  caught  the  scent  (thereof) :

The  more  wakeful  any  one  is,  the  more  full  of  suffering  he
is;  the  more  aware  (of  God)  he  is,  the  paler  he  is  in  coun-
tenance.

630  If  you  are  aware  of  His  jabr  (compulsion),  wffere  is  your
humility?  Where  is  your  feeling  of  (being  loaded  with)  the
chain  of  His  jabbdri  (almightiness)  ?

How  should  one  make  merry  who  is  bound  in  chains?  When
does  the  captive  in  prison  behave  like  the  man  who  is  free?

And  if  you  consider  that  your  foot  is  shackled  (and  that)  the
king’s  officers  are  sitting  (as  custodians)  over  you,

Then  do  not  act  like  an  officer  (tyrannously)  towards  the
helpless,  inasmuch  as  that  is  not  the  nature  and  habit  of  a
helpless  man.


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  37

Since  you  do  not  feel  His  compulsion,  do  not  say  (that  you
are  compelled);  and  if  you  feel  it,  where  is  the  sign  of  your
feeling?

In  every  act  for  which  you  have  inclination,  you  are  clearly  635
conscious  of  your  power  (to  perform  it),

(But)  in  every  act  for  which  you  have  no  inclination  and
desire,  in  regard  to  that  (act)  you  have  become  a necessitarian,
saying,  “This  is  from  God.”

The  prophets  are  necessitarians  in  regard  to  the  works  of
this  world,  (while)  the  infidels  are  necessitarians  in  regard  to
the  works  of  the  next  world.

To  the  prophets  the  works  of  the  ne.xt  world  are  (a  matter
of)  freewill ; to  the  foolish  the  works  of  this  world  are  (a  matter
of)  freewill.

Because  every  bird  flies  to  its  own  congener;  it  (follows)
behind,  and  its  spirit  (goes)  before,  (leading  it  on).

Inasmuch  as  the  infidels  were  congeners  of  Sijjai  (Hell),  they  640
were  well-disposed  to  the  prison  {sijn)  of  this  world.

Inasmuch  as  the  prophets  were  congeners  of  'Illiyyin  (Heaven),
they  went  towards  the  ‘‘llliyyin  of  spirit  and  heart.

This  discourse  hath  no  end,  but  let  us  (now)  relate  the  story
to  its  completion.

How  the  vizier  made  the  disciples  lose  hope  of  his
abandoning  seclusion.

The  vizier  cried  out  from  within,  “O  disciples,  be  this  made
known  to  you  from  me.

That  Jesus  hath  given  me  a such-like  message:  ‘ Be  separated
from  all  friends  and  kinsfolk.

Set  thy  face  to  the  wall,  sit  alone,  and  choose  to  be  secluded  645
even  from  thine  owm  existence.’

After  this  there  is  no  permission  (for  me)  to  speak ; after  this
I have  nothing  to  do  with  talk.

Farewell,  O friends!  I am  dead:  I have  carried  my  belongings
up  to  the  Fourth  Heaven,

In  order  that  beneath  the  fiery  sphere  I may  not  burn  like
firewood  in  woe  and  perdition,

(But)  henceforth  may  sit  beside  Jesus  at  the  top  of  the  Fourth
Heaven.”

How  the  vizier  appointed  each  one  of  the  amirs  separately
as  his  successor.

And  then  he  summoned  those  amirs  one  by  one  and  con-  650
versed  with  each  (of  them)  alone.

He  said  to  each  one,  “In  the  religion  of  Jesus  thou  art  the
vicar  of  God  and  my  khalifa  (vicegerent).


38  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

And  those  other  amirs  are  thy  followers:  Jesus  hath  made
all  of  them  thy  assistants.

Any  amir  who  lifts  his  neck  (in  rebellion),  seize  him  and
either  kill  him  or  hold  him  captive ;

But  do  not  declare  this  whilst  I am  alive:  do  not  seek  this
supreme  authority  until  I am  dead.

655  Until  I am  dead,  do  not  reveal  this:  do  not  lay  claim  to
sovereignty  and  dominion.

Here  is  this  scroll  and  the  ordinances  of  the  Messiah:  recite
them  distinctly,  one  by  one,  to  his  people.”

Thus  he  spoke  to  each  amir  separately,  (saying),  “There  is
no  vicar  in  the  religion  of  God  except  thee.”

He  honoured  each,  one  by  one,  (in  this  way):  whatever  he
said  to  that  (amir)  he  also  said  to  this.

To  each  he  gave  one  scroll:  every  one  was  purposely  the
contrary  of  the  other.

660  All  the  scrolls  were  different,  like  the  forms  of  the  letters  (of
the  alphabet)  from  yd  to  alif.

The  rule  (laid  down)  in  this  scroll  was  contrary  to  the  rule
in  that:  we  have  already  explained  (the  nature  of)  this  con-
tradiction.

How  the  vizier  killed  himself  in  seclusion.

After  that,  he  shut  the  door  for  other  forty  days  (and  then)
killed  himself  and  escaped  from  his  existence.

When  the  people  learned  of  his  death,  there  came  to  pass  at
his  grave  the  scene  of  the  Resurrection^.

So  great  a multitude  gathered  at  his  grave,  tearing  their  hair,
rending  their  garments  in  wdld  grief  for  him,

665  That  only  God  can  reckon  the  number  of  them — Arabs  and
Turks  and  Greeks  and  Kurds.

They  put  his  (grave’s)  earth  on  their  heads;  they  deemed
anguish  for  him  to  be  the  remedy  for  themselves.

During  a month  those  multitudes  over  his  grave  made  a
way  for  blood  from  their  eyes  (shed  tears  of  anguish).

How  the  people  of  Jesus — on  him  be  peace! — asked  the  amirs,

“ Which  one  of  you  is  the  successor?"

After  a month  the  people  said,  “O  chiefs,  which  of  (the)
amirs  is  designated  in  his  place.

That  we  may  acknowledge  him  as  our  religious  leader  instead
of  him  (the  vizier),  and  give  our  hands  and  skirts  into  his  hand?

670  Since  the  sun  is  gone  and  has  branded  us  (left  the  brand  of
sorrow  in  our  hearts),  is  not  a lamp  the  (only)  resource  in  his
stead?

* I.e.  a scene  of  tumultuous  grief  and  lamentation.


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  39

Since  union  with  the  beloved  has  vanished  from  before  our
eyes,  we  must  needs  have  a vicar  as  a memorial  of  him  {i.e.
one  who  will  recall  him  to  our  memory).

Since  the  rose  is  past  and  the  garden  ravaged,  from  whom
shall  we  get  the  perfume  of  the  rose?  From  rosewater.”

Inasmuch  as  God  comes  not  into  sight,  these  prophets  are
the  vicars  of  God.

Nay,  I have  said  (this)  wrongly;  for  if  you  suppose  that  the
vicar  and  He  who  is  represented  by  the  vicar  are  two,  it  (such
a thought)  is  bad,  not  good.

Nay;  they  are  two  so  long  as  you  are  a worshipper  of  form,  675
(but)  they  have  become  one  to  him  who  has  escaped  from
(consciousness  of)  form.

When  you  look  at  the  form,  your  eye  is  two;  look  at  its  (the
eye’s)  light,  which  grew  from  the  eye.

’Tis  impossible  to  distinguish  the  light  of  the  two  eyes,  when
a man  has  cast  his  look  upon  their  light.

If  ten  lamps  are  present  in  (one)  place,  each  differs  in  form
from  another :

To  distinguish  without  any  doubt  the  light  of  each,  when
you  turn  your  face  towards  their  light,  is  impossible.

If  you  count  a hundred  apples  or  a hundred  quinces,  they  .'.so
do  not  remain  a hundred  (but)  become  one,  when  you  crush
them  (together).

In  things  spiritual  there  is  no  division  and  no  numbers;  in
things  spiritual  there  is  no  partition  and  no  individuals.

Sweet  is  the  oneness  of  the  Friend  with  His  friends:  catch
(and  cling  to)  the  foot  of  spirit.  Form  is  headstrong^.

Make  headstrong  form  waste  away  with  tribulation,  that  be-
neath it  you  may  descry  unity,  like  a (buried)  treasure;

And  if  you  waste  it  not  away.  His  favours  will  waste  it — oh,
my  heart  is  His  vassal.

He  even  showeth  Himself  to  (our)  hearts.  He  seweth  the  685
tattered  frock  of  the  dervish  -.

Simple  were  we  and  all  one  substance;  we  were  all  without
head  and  without  foot  yonder.

We  were  one  substance,  like  the  Sun ; we  were  knotless  and
pure,  like  water.

When  that  goodly  Light  took  form,  it  became  (many  in)
number  like  the  shadows  of  a battlement.

Rase  ye  the  battlement  with  the  manjaniq  (mangonel),  that
difference  may  vanish  from  amidst  this  company  (of  shadows).

I would  have  explained  this  (matter)  with  (eager)  contention,  690
but  I fear  lest  some  (weak)  mind  may  stumble.

The  points  (involved  in  it)  are  sharp  as  a sword  of  steel ; if  you
have  not  the  shield(of  capacity  to  understand),  turn  back  and  flee !

^ opposed  to  spiritual  unit\'.  ~ He  unites  the  mystic  with  Himself.


40  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

Do  not  come  without  shield  against  this  adamant  (keen  blade),
for  the  sword  is  not  ashamed  of  cutting.

For  this  cause  I have  put  the  sword  in  sheath,  that  none  who
misreads  may  read  contrariwise  (in  a sense  contrary  to  the  true
meaning  of  my  words).

We  come  (now)  to  complete  the  tale  and  (speak)  of  the
loyalty  of  the  multitude  of  the  righteous,

695  Who  rose  up  after  (the  death  of)  this  leader,  demanding  a
vicar  in  his  place.

The  quarrel  of  the  amirs  concerning  the  succession.

One  of  those  amirs  advanced  and  went  before  that  loyal-
minded  people.

“Behold,”  said  he,  “I  am  that  man’s  vicar:  I am  the  vicar
of  Jesus  at  the  present  time.

Look,  this  scroll  is  my  proof  that  after  him  the  vicarate
belongs  to  me.”

Another  amir  came  forth  from  ambush:  his  pretension  re-
garding the  vicegerency  was  the  same ;

700  He  too  produced  a scroll  from  under  his  arm,  so  that  in
both  (amirs)  there  arose  the  Jewish  anger.

The  rest  of  the  amirs,  one  after  another,  drawing  swords  of
keen  mettle.

Each  with  a sword  and  a scroll  in  his  hand,  fell  to  combat
like  raging  elephants.

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  Christians  were  slain,  so  that  there
were  mounds  of  severed  heads;

Blood  flowed,  on  left  and  right,  like  a torrent ; mountains  of
this  dust  (of  battle)  rose  in  the  air.

705  The  seeds  of  dissension  which  he  (the  vizier)  had  sown  had
become  a calamity  (cause  of  destruction)  to  their  heads.

The  walnuts  (bodies)  were  broken,  and  those  which  had  the
kernel  had,  after  being  slain,  a spirit  pure  and  fair.

Slaughter  and  death  which  befalls  the  bodily  frame  is  like
breaking  pomegranates  and  apples :

That  which  is  sweet  becomes  pomegranate-syrup,  and  that
which  is  rotten  is  naught  but  noise :

That  which  has  reality  is  made  manifest  (after  death),  and
that  which  is  rotten  is  put  to  shame.

710  Go,  strive  after  reality,  O worshipper  of  form,  inasmuch  as
reality  is  the  wing  on  form’s  body.

Consort  with  the  followers  of  reality,  that  you  may  both  win
the  gift  and  be  generous  (in  giving  yourself  up  to  God).

Beyond  dispute,  in  this  body  the  spirit  devoid  of  reality  is
even  as  a wooden  sword  in  the  sheath :

Whilst  it  remains  in  the  sheath,  it  is  (apparently)  valuable.


THE  JEWISH  KING  AND  THE  CHRISTIANS  41

(but)  when  it  has  come  forth  it  is  an  implement  (only  fit)  for
burning.

Do  not  take  a wooden  sword  into  the  battle!  First  see
(whether  your  sword  is  a real  one),  in  order  that  your  plight
may  not  be  wretched.

If  it  is  made  of  wood,  go,  seek  another;  and  if  it  is  adamant,  71=;
march  forward  joyously.

The  sword  (of  reality)  is  in  the  armoury  of  the  saints : to  see
(and  associate  with)  them  is  for  you  (as  precious  as)  the  Elixir.

All  the  wise  have  said  this  same  thing:  the  wise  man^  is
a (Divine)  mercy  to  created  beings.

If  you  would  buy  a pomegranate,  buy  (it  when  it  is)  laughing
(having  its  rind  cleft  open),  so  that  its  laughter  (openness)  may
give  information  as  to  its  seeds.

Oh,  blessed  is  its  laughter,  for  through  its  mouth  it  shows
the  heart,  like  a pearl  from  the  casket  of  the  spirit.

Unblest  was  the  laughter  (openness)  of  the  red  anemone,  izo
from  whose  mouth  appeared  the  blackness  of  its  heart.

The  laughing  pomegranate  makes  the  garden  laughing  (gay
and  blooming) ; companionship  with  (holy)  men  makes  you  one
of  the  (holy)  men.

Though  you  be  rock  or  marble,  you  will  become  a jewel  when
you  reach  the  man  of  heart  (the  saint).

Plant  the  love  of  the  holy  ones  within  your  spirit;  do  not
give  your  heart  (to  aught)  save  to  the  love  of  them  whose
hearts  are  glad.

Go  not  to  the  neighbourhood  of  despair:  there  are  hopes.

Go  not  in  the  direction  of  darkness : there  are  suns.

The  heart  leads  you  into  the  neighbourhood  of  the  men  of  725
heart  (the  saints);  the  body  leads  you  into  the  prison  of  water
and  earth.

Oh,  give  your  heart  food  from  (conversation  with)  one  who
is  in  accord  with  it;  go,  seek  (spiritual)  advancement  from  one
who  is  advanced.


tioic  honour  was  paid  to  the  description  of  Mustafa  (Mohammed),
on  whom  be  peace,  which  was  mentioned  in  the  Gospel.

The  name  of  Alustafa  was  in  the  Gospel — (Mustafa)  the
chief  of  the  prophets,  the  sea  of  purit}'.

There  was  mention  of  his  (e.xternal)  characteristics  and  ap-
pearance; there  was  mention  of  his  w'arring  and  fasting  and
eating.

A party  among  the  Christians,  for  the  sake  of  the  Divine
reward,  whenever  (in  reading  the  Gospel)  they  came  to  that
name  and  discourse,

^ I.e.  the  prophet  or  saint  who  knows  God.


42  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

730  Would  bestow  kisses  on  that  noble  name  and  stoop  their  faces
towards  that  beauteous  description.

In  this  tribulation  of  which  we  have  told,  that  party  were
secure  from  tribulation  and  dread,

Secure  from  the  mischief  of  the  amirs  and  the  vizier,  seeking
refuge  in  the  protection  of  the  Name  of  Ahmad  (Mohammed).

Their  offspring  also  multiplied:  the  Light  of  Ahmad  aided
and  befriended  them.

And  the  other  party  among  the  Christians  (who)  were  holding
the  Name  of  Ahmad  in  contempt,

735  They  became  contemptible  and  despised  through  dissensions
caused  by  the  evil-counselling  and  evil-plotting  vizier;

Moreover,  their  religion  and  their  law  became  corrupted  in
consequence  of  the  scrolls  which  set  forth  all  perversely.

The  Name  of  Ahmad  gives  such  help  as  this,  so  that  (one
may  judge)  how  his  Light  keeps  guard  (over  his  followers).

Since  the  Name  of  Ahmad  became  (to  the  Christians)  an
impregnable  fortress,  what  then  must  be  the  Essence  of  that
trusted  Spirit?

The  story  of  another  Jewish  king  who  endeavoured
to  destroy  the  religion  of  Jesus.

After  this  irremediable  bloodshed  which  befell  through  the
affliction  (brought  upon  the  Christians)  by  the  vizier,

74U  Another  king,  of  the  progeny  of  that  Jew,  addressed  himself
to  the  destruction  of  the  people  of  Jesus.

If  you  desire  information  about  this  second  outbreak,  read
the  chapter  of  the  Qur’an  (beginning) : By  Heaven  which  hath
the  {zodiacal)  signs.

This  second  king  set  foot  in  the  evil  way  that  was  originated
by  the  former  king.

Whosoever  establishes  an  evil  way  (practice),  towards  him
goes  malediction  every  hour.

The  righteous  departed  and  their  ways  remained,  and  from
the  vile  there  remained  (nothing  but)  injustice  and  execrations.
7+5  Until  the  Resurrection,  the  face  of  every  congener  of  those
wcked  men  who  comes  into  existence  is  turned  towards  that
one  (who  belongs  to  his  own  kind).

Vein  by  vein  ^ is  this  Sweetwater  and  bitter  water,  flowing  in
(God’s)  creatures  until  the  blast  of  the  trumpet  (at  the  Resur-
rection).

To  the  righteous  is  the  inheritance  of  the  sweet  water.  What
is  that  inheritance?  We  have  caused  {those  of  Our  servants  whom
We  have  chosen)  to  inherit  the  Book.

If  you  will  consider,  the  supplications  of  the  seekers  (of  God)
are  rays  (proceeding)  from  the  substance  of  prophethood.

^ I.e.  separate  and  never  mingling  with  each  other.


ANOTHER  JEWISH  KING  43

The  rays  are  circling  with  the  substances  (whence  they  spring) :
the  ray  goes  (ultimately)  in  the  direction  where  that  (substance)  is.

The  window-gleam  runs  round  the  house,  because  the  sun  rs '
goes  from  sign  to  sign  of  the  zodiac.

Any  one  who  has  affinity  with  a star  (planet)  has  a concur-
rence (of  qualities)  with  his  star.

If  his  ascendant  star  be  Venus,  his  whole  inclination  and  love
and  desire  is  for  joy;

And  if  he  be  one  born  under  Mars,  one  w'hose  nature  is  to
shed  blood,  he  seeks  war  and  malignity  and  enmity.

Beyond  the  (material)  stars  are  stars  in  which  is  no  conflagra-
tion or  sinister  aspect,

(Stars)  moving  in  other  heavens,  not  these  seven  heavens  735
known  to  all,

(Stars)  immanent  in  the  radiance  of  the  light  of  God,  neither
joined  to  each  other  nor  separate  from  each  other.

When  any  one’s  ascendant  (fortune)  is  (from)  those  stars,  his
soul  burns  the  infldels  in  driving  (them)  off.

His  anger  is  not  (like)  the  anger  of  the  man  born  under  Mars
- — perverse^,  and  of  such  nature  that  it  is  (now)  dominant  and
(now)  dominated.

The  dominant  light  (of  the  saints)  is  secure  from  defect  and
dimness  between  the  two  fingers  of  the  Light  of  God.

God  hath  scattered  that  light  over  (all)  spirits,  (but  only)  the  760
fortunate  have  held  up  their  skirts  (to  receive  it) ;

And  he  (that  is  fortunate),  having  gained  that  strown  largesse
of  light,  has  turned  his  face  away  from  all  except  God.

Whosoever  has  lacked  (such)  a skirt  of  love  is  left  without  share
in  that  strown  largesse  of  light.

The  faces  of  particulars  are  set  towards  the  universal:
nightingales  play  the  game  of  love  with  the  rose.

The  ox  has  his  colour  outside,  but  in  the  case  of  a man  seek
the  red  and  yellow  hues  within.

The  good  colours  are  from  the  vat  of  purity ; the  colour  of  705
the  wicked  is  from  the  black  water  of  iniquity'.

The  baptism  of  God  is  the  name  of  that  subtle  colour;  the  curse
of  God  is  the  smell  of  that  gross  colour.

That  which  is  of  the  sea  is  going  to  the  sea:  it  is  going  to
the  same  place  whence  it  came —

From  the  mountain-top  the  swift-rushing  torrents,  and  from
our  body  the  soul  whose  motion  is  mingled  with  love.

^ Literally,  “with  face  inverted,”  i.e.  directed  towards  base  ends.


44


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I


How  the  Jewish  king  made  afire  and  placed  an  idol  beside  it,  saying,
“ Whoever  bows  down  to  this  idol  shall  escape  the  fire.”

Now  see  what  a plan  this  currish  Jew  contrived!  He  set  up
an  idol  beside  the  fire,

7/0  Saying,  “He  that  bows  down  to  this  idol  is  saved,  and  if  he
bow  not,  he  shall  sit  in  the  heart  of  the  fire.”

Inasmuch  as  he  did  not  give  due  punishment  to  this  idol  of
selfi,  from  the  idol  of  his  self  the  other  idol  was  born.

The  idol  of  your  self  is  the  mother  of  (all)  idols,  because  that
(material)  idol  is  (only)  a snake,  while  this  (spiritual)  idol  is  a
dragon.

The  self  is  (as)  iron  and  stone  (whence  fire  is  produced),
while  the  (material)  idol  is  (as)  the  sparks:  those  sparks  are
quieted  (quenched)  by  water.

(But)  how  should  the  stone  and  iron  be  allayed  by  water.?
How  should  a man,  having  these  twain,  be  secure?

773  The  idol  is  the  black  water  in  a jug ; the  self  is  a fountain  for
the  black  water.

That  sculptured  idol  is  like  the  black  torrent ; the  idol-making
self  is  a fountain  full  of  water  for  it.

A single  piece  of  stone  will  break  a hundred  pitchers,  but
the  fountain  is  jetting  forth  water  incessantly.

’Tis  easy  to  break  an  idol,  very  easy;  to  regard  the  self  as
easy  (to  subdue)  is  folly,  folly.

6 son,  if  you  seek  (to  know)  the  form  of  the  self,  read  the
story  of  Hell  with  its  seven  gates.

780  Every  moment  (there  proceeds  from  the  self)  an  act  of  deceit,
and  in  every  one  of  those  deceits  a hundred  Pharaohs  are
drowned  together  with  their  folio w’ers.

Flee  to  the  God  of  Moses  and  to  Moses,  do  not  from
Pharaoh’s  quality  (rebellious  insolence)  spill  the  water  of  the
Faith.

Lay  your  hand  on  (cleave  to)  the  One  (God)  and  Ahmad
(Mohammed) ! O brother,  escape  from  the  Bu  Jahl  of  the  body  I

How  a child  began  to  speak  amidst  the  fire  and  urged  the
people  to  throw  themselves  into  the  fire.

That  Jew  brought  to  that  idol  a w’oman  with  her  child,  and
the  fire  w’as  blazing.

He  took  the  child  from  her  and  cast  it  into  the  fire:  the
woman  was  affrighted  and  withdrew  her  heart  from  (abandoned)
her  faith.

7S5  She  was  about  to  bow'  down  before  the  idol  (when)  the  child
cried,  “Verily,  I am  not  dead.

‘ Nafs,  the  appetitive  soul,  “the  flesh.”


ANOTHER  JEWISH  KING  45

Come  in,  O mother:  I am  happy  here,  although  in  appear-
ance I am  amidst  the  fire.

The  fire  is  a spell  that  binds  the  eye  for  the  sake  of  screening
(the  truth);  this  is  (in  reality)  a Divine  mercy  which  has
raised  its  head  from  the  collar  (has  been  manifested  from  the
Unseen).

Come  in,  mother,  and  see  the  evidence  of  God,  that  thou
mayst  behold  the  delight  of  God’s  elect.

Come  in,  and  see  water  that  has  the  semblance  of  fire ; (come
away)  from  a world  which  is  (really)  fire  and  (only)  has  the
semblance  of  water.

Come  in,  and  see  the  mysteries  of  Abraham,  who  in  the  fire  79°
found  cypress  and  jessamine.

I was  seeing  death  at  the  time  of  birth  from  thee : sore  was
my  dread  of  falling  from  thee ;

(But)  when  I was  born,  I escaped  from  the  narrow  prison
(of  the  womb)  into  a world  of  pleasant  air  and  beautiful
colour.

Now  I deem  the  (earthly)  w'orld  to  be  like  the  womb,  since
in  this  fire  I have  seen  such  rest :

In  this  fire  I havd  seen  a world  w'herein  every  atom  possesses
the  (life-giving)  breath  of  Jesus.

Lo,  (it  is)  a world  apparently  non-existent  (but)  essentially  795
existent,  while  that  (other)  world  is  apparently  existent  (but)
has  no  permanence.

Come  in,  mother,  (I  beseech  thee)  by  the  right  of  mother-
hood : see  this  fire,  how  it  hath  no  fieriness.

Come  in,  mother,  for  felicity  is  come;  come  in,  mother,  do
not  let  fortune  slip  from  thy  hand.

Thou  hast  seen  the  power  of  that  (Jewish)  cur:  come  in,  that
thou  mayst  see  the  power  of  God’s  grace.

’Tis  (only)  out  of  pity  that  I am  drawing  thy  feet  (hither),  for
indeed  such  is  my  rapture  that  I have  no  care  for  thee.

Come  in  and  call  the  others  also,  for  the  King  has  spread  a soo
(festal)  table  within  the  fire.

O true  believers,  come  in,  all  of  you:  except  this  sweetness
i^adhbi)  all  is  torment  {‘adhdb).

Oh,  come  in,  all  of  you,  like  moths;  (come)  into  this  fortune
which  hath  a hundred  springtimes.”

(Thus)  he  was  crying  amidst  that  multitude : the  souls  of  the
people  were  filled  with  aw'e.

After  that,  the  folk,  men  and  women  (alike),  cast  themselves
unwittingly^  into  the  fire —

Without  custodian,  without  being  dragged,  for  love  of  the  Su5
Friend,  because  from  Him  is  the  sweetening  of  every  bitter-
ness—


1 Literally,  “ beside  themselves.”


46  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Until  it  came  to  pass  that  the  (king’s)  myrmidons  were
holding  back  the  people,  saying,  “ Do  not  enter  the  fire ! ”

The  Jew  became  black-faced  (covered  with  shame)  and  dis-
mayed; he  became  sorry  and  sick  at  heart.

Because  the  people  grew  more  loving  (ardent)  in  their  Faith
and  more  firm  in  mortification  (fand)  of  the  body.

Thanks  (be  to  God),  the  Devil’s  plot  caught  him  in  its  toils;
thanks  (be  to  God),  the  Devil  saw  himself  disgraced^.

lo  That  which  he  was  rubbing  (the  shame  he  was  inflicting)  on
the  faces  of  those  persons  (the  Christians)  was  all  accumulated
on  the  visage  of  that  vile  wretch.

He  who  was  busy  rending  the  garment  (honour  and  integrity)
of  the  people — his  own  (garment)  was  rent,  (while)  they  were
unhurt.

How  the  7twuth  remained  awry  of  a man  who  pronounced
the  name  of  Mohammed,  on  whom  be  peace,  derisively.

He  made  his  mouth  wry  and  called  the  name  of  Ahmad
(Mohammed)  in  derision : his  mouth  remained  awry.

He  came  back,  saying,  “Pardon  me,  O Mohammed,  O thou
to  whom  belong  the  (Divine)  gifts  of  esoteric  knowledge.

In  my  folly  I was  ridiculing  thee,  (but)  I myself  was  related
to  ridicule  and  deserving  it.”

15  When  God  wishes  to  rend  the  veil  of  any  one  (expose  him
to  shame).  He  turns  his  inclination  towards  reviling  holy  men.

When  God  wishes  to  hide  the  blame  of  any  one,  he  (that
person)  does  not  breathe  a word  of  blame  against  the  blame-
worthy.

When  God  wishes  to  help  us.  He  turns  our  inclination  to-
wards humble  lament.

Oh,  happy  the  eye  that  is  weeping  for  His  sake ! Oh,  fortunate
the  heart  that  is  seared-  for  His  sake !

The  end  of  every  weeping  is  laughter  at  last;  the  man  who
foresees  the  end  is  a blessed  servant  (of  God).

20  Wherever  is  flowing  water,  there  is  greenery:  wherever  are
running  tears,  (the  Divine)  mercy  is  shown.

Be  moaning  and  moist-eyed  like  the  water-wheel,  that  green
herbs  may  spring  up  from  the  courtyard  of  your  soul.

If  you  desire  tears,  have  mercy  on  one  who  sheds  tears;  if
you  desire  mercy,  show  mercy  to  the  weak.

How  the  fire  reproached  the  Jewish  king.

The  king  turned  his  face  to  the  fire,  saying,  “O  fierce-
tempered  one,  where  is  thy  world-consuming  natural  dis-
position?

How  art  thou  not  burning?  What  has  become  of  thy  specific
^ Literally,  “black-faced.”  * Literally,  “roasted.”


ANOTHER  JEWISH  KING  47

property?  Or  has  thy  intention  changed  because  of  our
fortune?^

Thou  hast  no  pity  (even)  on  the  fire-worshipper:  how  (then)  sjj
has  he  been  saved  who  does  not  worship  thee?

Never,  O fire,  art  thou  patient:  how  burnest  thou  not?  What
is  it?  Hast  thou  not  the  power?

Is  this  a spell,  I wonder,  that  binds  the  eye  or  the  mind?
How  does  the  lofty  pyre  not  burn?

Has  some  one  bewitched  thee?  Or  is  it  magic,  or  is  thy
unnatural  behaviour^  from  our  fortune?”

The  fire  said:  “I  am  the  same,  I am  fire:  come  in,  that  thou
mayst  feel  my  heat.

hly  nature  and  element  have  not  changed:  I am  the  sword  of  5,50
God  and  by  (His)  leave  I cut.

The  Turcoman  dogs  fawn  at  the  tent-door  before  the  guest.

But  if  any  one  having  the  face  of  a stranger  pass  by  the  tent,
he  will  see  the  dogs  rushing  at  him  like  lions.

I am  not  less  than  a dog  in  devotion,  nor  is  God  less  than  a
Turcoman  in  life  (living  power).”

If  the  fire  of  your  nature  make  you  suffer  pain,  it  burns  by
command  of  the  Lord  of  religion ;

If  the  fire  of  your  nature  give  you  joy,  (that  is  because)  the  S35
Lord  of  religion  puts  joy  therein.

When  you  feel  pain,  ask  pardon  of  God:  pain,  by  command
of  the  Creator,  is  efficacious.

When  He  pleases,  pain  itself  becomes  joy;  bondage®  itself
becomes  freedom.

Air  and  earth  and  water  and  fire  are  (His)  slaves:  with  you
and  me  they  are  dead,  but  with  God  they  are  alive.

Before  God,  fire  is  always  standing  (ready  to  do  His  behest),
writhing  continually  day  and  night,  like  a lover.

If  you  strike  stone  on  iron,  it  (the  fire)  leaps  out:  ’tis  by  840
God’s  command  that  it  puts  forth  its  foot.

Do  not  strike  together  the  iron  and  stone  of  injustice,  for
these  two  generate  like  man  and  woman.

The  stone  and  the  iron  are  indeed  causes,  but  look  higher,

O good  man !

For  this  (external)  cause  was  produced  by  that  (spiritual)
cause : when  did  a cause  ever  proceed  from  itself  without  a cause?

And  those  causes  which  guide  the  prophets  on  their  way  are
higher  than  these  (external)  causes.

That  (spiritual)  cause  makes  this  (external)  cause  operative ; S45
sometimes,  again,  it  makes  it  fruitless  and  ineffectual.

(Ordinar}')  minds  are  familiar  with  this  (external)  cause,  but
the  prophets  are  familiar  with  those  (spiritual)  causes.

^ I.e.  because  Fate  has  so  ordained.

“ Literally,  “the  contrariety  to  thy  nature.”  ^ Literally,  “the  fetter.”


48  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

What  is  (the  meaning  of)  this  (word)  “cause”  (sabab)  in
Arabic?  Say:  “cord”  (rasan).  This  cord  came  into  this  well
(the  world)  by  (Divine)  artifice.

The  revolution  of  the  water-wheel  causes  the  cord  (to  move) ,
(but)  not  to  see  the  mover  of  the  water-wheel  is  an  error.

Beware,  beware!  Do  not  regard  these  cords  of  causation  in
the  world  as  (deriving  their  movement)  from  the  giddy  wheel
(of  heaven),

850  Lest  you  remain  empty  and  giddy  like  the  (celestial)  wheel,
lest  through  brainlessness  you  burn  like  markh  wood.

By  the  command  of  God  air  becomes  fire : both  are  drunken
with  the  wine  of  God.

O son,  when  you  open  your  eyes  you  will  see  that  from  God
too  are  the  water  of  clemency  and  the  fire  of  anger.

Had  not  the  soul  of  the  wind  been  informed  by  God,  how
would  it  have  distinguished  (the  believers  and  unbelievers)
amongst  the  people  of  ‘Ad?


The  story  of  the  wind  which  destroyed  the  people  of  'Ad  in  the
time  of  {the  prophet)  Hud,  on  whom  be  peace.

Hiid  drew  a line  round  the  believers : the  wind  would  become
soft  (subside)  when  it  reached  that  place,

85 5 (Although)  it  was  dashing  to  pieces  in  the  air  all  who  were
outside  of  the  line.

Likewise  Shayban  the  shepherd  used  to  draw  a visible  line
round  his  flock

Whenever  he  went  to  the  Friday  service  at  prayer-time,  in
order  that  the  wolf  might  not  raid  and  ravage  there :

No  wolf  would  go  into  that  (circle),  nor  would  any  sheep
stray  beyond  that  mark ;

The  wind  of  the  wolf’s  and  sheeps’  concupiscence  was  barred
because  of  (by)  the  circle  of  the  man  of  God.
boo  Even  so,  to  those  who  know  God  {'drifdn)  the  wind  of  Death
is  soft  and  pleasant  as  the  breeze  (that  wafts  the  scent)  of  (loved)
ones  like  Joseph.

The  fire  did  not  set  its  teeth  in  Abraham : how  should  it  bite
him,  since  he  is  the  chosen  of  God?

The  religious  were  not  afflicted  by  the  fire  of  lust  which  bore
all  the  rest  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  earth.

The  waves  of  the  sea,  when  they  charged  on  by  God’s  com-
mand, discriminated  the  people  of  Moses  from  the  Egyptians.

The  earth,  when  the  (Divine)  command  came,  drew  Qariin
(Korah)  with  his  gold  and  throne  into  its  lowest  depth.

865  The  water  and  clay,  when  it  fed  on  the  breath  of  Jesus,
spread  wings  and  pinions,  became  a bird,  and  flew.

Your  glorification  (of  God)  is  an  exhalation  from  the  water


ANOTHER  JEWISH  KING  49

and  clay  (of  your  body) : it  became  a bird  of  Paradise  through
the  breathing  (into  it)  of  your  heart’s  sincerity.

Mount  Sinai,  from  (seeing)  the  radiance  of  Moses,  began  to
dance,  became  a perfect  Sufi,  and  was  freed  from  blemish.

What  wonder  if  the  mountain  became  a venerable  Siifi.^  The
body  of  Moses  also  was  (formed)  from  a piece  of  clay.


How  the  Jewish  king  scojfed  and  denied  and  would  not  accept
the  counsel  of  his  intimates.

The  king  of  the  Jews  beheld  these  marvellous  things,  (but)
he  had  naught  (to  say)  except  mockery  and  denial.

His  counsellors  said,  “Do  not  let  (this  injustice)  go  beyond  S70
bounds,  do  not  drive  the  steed  of  obstinacy  so  far.  ’

He  handcuffed  the  counsellors  and  confined  them,  he  com-
mitted one  injustice  after  another^.

When  the  matter  reached  this  pass,  a shout  came — “Hold
thy  foot  (stop),  O cur!  for  Our  vengeance  is  come.”

After  that,  the  fire  blazed  up  forty  ells  high,  became  a ring,
and  consumed  those  Jews.

From  fire  was  their  origin  in  the  beginning:  they  went  (back)
to  their  origin  in  the  end.

That  company  were  born  of  fire:  the  way  of  particulars  is  ii;5
towards  the  universal.

They  were  only  a fire  to  consume  the  true  believers:  their
fire  consumed  itself  like  rubbish.

He  tvhose  mother  is  Hdwiya  (Hell-fire) — Hdwiya  shall  become
his  cell  (abode).

The  mother  of  the  child  is  (always)  seeking  it:  the  funda-
mentals pursue  the  derivatives.

If  water  is  imprisoned  in  a tank,  the  wind  sucks  it  up,  for  it
(the  wind)  belongs  to  the  original  (source) :

It  sets  it  free,  it  wafts  it  away  to  its  source,  little  by  little,  so  sso
that  you  do  not  see  its  wafting ;

And  our  souls  likewise  this  breath  (of  ours ) steals  away,  little
by  little,  from  the  prison  of  the  world.

The  perfumes  of  our  (good)  words  ascend  even  unto  Him,
ascending  from  us  whither  God  knoweth.

Our  breaths  soar  up  with  the  choice  (words),  as  a gift  from
us,  to  the  abode  of  everlastingness;

Then  comes  to  us  the  recompense  of  our  speech,  a double
(recompense)  thereof,  as  a mercy  from  (God)  the  Glorious ;

Then  He  causes  us  to  repair  to  (makes  us  utter)  good  words  8S5
like  those  (already  uttered),  that  His  servant  may  obtain  (some-
thing more)  of  what  he  has  obtained.

Thus  do  they  (our  good  words)  ascend  while  it  (the  Divine
1 Literally,  “he  made  injustice  (to  be)  hnk  on  link,  i.e.  continuous.”

4


N M


50  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

mercy)  descends  continually : mayst  thou  never  cease  to  keep
up  that  (ascent  and  descent) !

Let  us  speak  Persian^:  the  meaning  is  that  this  attraction
(by  which  God  draws  the  soul  towards  Himself)  comes  from
the  same  quarter  whence  came  that  savour  (spiritual  delight
experienced  in  and  after  prayer).

The  eyes  of  every  set  of  people  remain  (turned)  in  the  direc-
tion where  one  day  they  satisfied  a (longing  for)  delight.

The  delight  of  (eveiy)  kind  is  certainly  in  its  own  kind  (con-
gener): the  delight  of  the  part,  observe,  is  in  its  whole;

S90  Or  else,  that  (part)  is  surely  capable  of  (attachment  to)  a
(different)  kind  and,  when  it  has  attached  itself  thereto,  be-
comes homogeneous  with  it.

As  (for  instance)  water  and  bread,  which  were  not  our  con-
geners, became  homogeneous  with  us  and  increased  within  us
(added  to  our  bulk  and  strength).

Water  and  bread  have  not  the  appearance  of  being  our  con-
geners, (but)  from  consideration  of  the  end  (final  result)  deem
them  to  be  homogeneous  (with  us).

And  if  our  delight  is  (derived)  from  something  not  homo-
geneous, that  (thing)  will  surely  resemble  the  congener.

That  which  (only)  bears  a resemblance  is  a loan:  a loan  is
impermanent  in  the  end.

893  Although  the  bird  is  delighted  by  (the  fowler’s)  whistle,  it
takes  fright  when  it  (sees  him  and)  does  not  find  its  own  con-
gener.

Although  the  thirsty  man  is  delighted  by  the  mirage,  he  runs
away  when  he  comes  up  to  it,  and  seeks  for  water.

Although  the  insolvent  are  pleased  with  base  gold,  yet  that
(gold)  is  put  to  shame  in  the  mint.

(Take  heed)  lest  gildedness  (imposture)  cast  you  out  of  the
(right)  way,  lest  false  imagination  cast  you  into  the  well.

Seek  the  story  (illustrating  this)  from  (the  book  of)  Kalila
(and  Dimna),  and  search  out  the  moral  (contained)  in  the  story.

Setting  forth  how  the  beasts  of  chase  told  the  lion  to  trust
in  God  and  cease  from  exerting  himself.

goo  A number  of  beasts  of  chase  in  a pleasant  valley  were  harassed
by  a lion.

Inasmuch  as  the  lion  was  (springing)  from  ambush  and  carry-
ing them  away,  that  pasturage  had  become  unpleasant  to  them  all.

They  made  a plot:  they  came  to  the  lion,  saying,  “We  will
keep  thee  full-fed  by  means  of  a (fixed)  allowance.

Do  not  go  after  any  prey  beyond  thy  allowance,  in  order  that
this  grass  may  not  become  bitter  to  us.”

^ The  five  preceding  verses  are  in  Arabic.


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS


51


How  the  lion  answered  the  beasts  and  explained  the
advantage  of  exertion.

“Yes,”  said  he,  “if  I see  (find)  good  faith  (on  your  part),
not  fraud,  for  often  have  I seen  (suffered)  frauds  from  Zayd
and  Bakr^.

I am  done  to  death  by  the  cunning  and  fraud  of  men,  I am  905
bitten  by  the  sting  of  (human)  snake  and  scorpion ;

(But)  worse  than  all  men  in  fraud  and  spite  is  the  man  of
the  flesh  (nafs)  lying  in  wait  within  me.

My  ear  heard  ‘The  believer  is  not  bitten  (twice),’  and
adopted  (this)  saying  of  the  Prophet  with  heart  and  soul.”

How  the  beasts  asserted  the  superiority  of  trust  in  God  to
exertion  and  acquisition.

They  all  said:  “O  knowing  sage,  let  precaution  alone:  it  is
of  no  avail  against  the  Divine  decree.

In  precaution  is  the  embroilment  of  broil  and  woe:  go,  put
thy  trust  in  God : trust  in  God  is  better.

Do  not  grapple  with  Destiny,  O fierce  and  furious  one,  lest  910
Destiny  also  pick  a quarrel  with  thee.

One  must  be  dead  in  presence  of  the  decree  of  God,  so  that
no  blow  may  come  from  the  Lord  of  the  daybreak.”

How  the  lion  upheld  the  superiority  of  exertion  and  acquisition
to  trust  in  God  and  resignation.

“Yes,”  he  said;  “(but)  if  trust  in  God  is  the  (true)  guide,
(yet  use  of)  the  means  too  is  the  Prophet’s  rule  (Sunna).

The  Prophet  said  with  a loud  voice,  ‘While  trusting  in  God
bind  the  knee  of  thy  camel.’

Hearken  to  the  signification  of  ‘The  earner  (worker)  is  be-
loved of  God’:  through  trusting  in  God  do  not  become  neg-
lectful as  to  the  (ways  and)  means.”

How  the  beasts  preferred  trust  in  God  to  exertion.

The  party  (of  beasts)  answered  him,  saying,  “Regard  acqui-  915
sition  (work),  arising  from  the  infirmity  of  (God's)  creatures,
as  a mouthful  of  deceit  proportionate  to  the  size  of  the  gullet.

There  is  no  work  better  than  trust  in  God:  what,  indeed,  is
dearer  (to  God)  than  resignation?

Often  do  they  flee  from  affliction  (only)  to  (fall  into)  affliction;
often  do  they  recoil  from  the  snake  (only)  to  (meet  with)  the
dragon.

^ Zayd  and  Bakr  are  typical  names  of  men  in  Arabic.


52  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Man  devised  (something),  and  his  device  was  a snare  (wherein
he  was  trapped) : that  which  he  thought  to  be  life  was  (actually)
the  drainer  of  his  blood  (his  destroyer).

He  locked  the  door  while  the  foe  was  in  the  house;  the  plot
of  Pharaoh  was  a story  of  this  sort.

920  ■ That  vengeful  man  slew  hundreds  of  thousands  of  babes,
while  the  one  he  was  searching  after  was  in  his  (Pharaoh’s)  house.

Since  in  our  eyesight  (foresight)  there  is  much  defect,  go,  let
your  own  sight  pass  away  (fand)  in  the  sight  of  the  Friend  (God).

His  sight  for  ours — what  a goodly  recompense ! In  His  sight
you  will  find  the  whole  object  of  your  desire.

So  long  as  the  child  could  neither  grasp  (exert  strength)  nor
run,  he  had  nothing  to  ride  on  but  his  father’s  neck;

When  he  became  a busybody  and  plied  hand  and  foot  (exerted
himself),  he  fell  into  trouble  and  wretchedness^.

925  The  spirits  of  created  beings,  before  (the  creation  of)  hand
and  foot,  by  reason  of  their  faithfulness  W'ere  flying  in  (the
realm  of)  purity ;

When  they  were  constrained  by  the  (Divine)  command.  Get
ye  down,  they  became  engaoled  in  anger  and  covetousness  and
contentment.

We  are  the  family  of  the  Lord  and  craving  after  milk  (like
infants) : he  (the  Prophet)  said,  ‘ The  people  are  God’s  family.’

He  who  gives  rain  from  heaven  is  also  able,  from  His  mercy,
to  give  us  bread.”

How  the  lion  again  pronounced  exertion  to  he  superior
to  trust  in  God.

“Yes,”  said  the  lion;  “but  the  Lord  of  His  servants  set  a
ladder  before  our  feet.

930  Step  by  step  must  we  climb  towards  the  roof : to  be  a necessi-
tarian here  is  (to  indulge  in)  foolish  hopes.

You  have  feet : why  do  you  make  yourself  out  to  be  lame?  you
have  hands : why  do  you  conceal  the  fingers  (whereby  you  grasp)  ?

When  the  master  put  a spade  in  the  slave’s  hand,  his  object
was  made  known  to  him  (the  slave)  without  (a  word  falling  from
his)  tongue.

Hand  and  spade  alike  are  His  (God’s)  implicit  signs;  (our
powers  of)  thinking  upon  the  end  are  His  explicit  declarations.

When  you  take  His  signs  to  heart,  you  will  devote  your  life
to  fulfilling  that  indication  (of  His  will).

93;  He  will  give  you  many  hints  (for  the  understanding)  of
mysteries.  He  wall  remove  the  burden  from  you  and  give  you
(spiritual)  authority.

Do  you  bear  (His  burden)?  He  w'ill  cause  you  to  be  borne

^ The  words  rendered  by  “wretchedness”  are  kiir  ii  kabiid,  “blind  and
blue.”


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS  53

(aloft).  Do  you  receive  (His  commands)?  He  will  cause  you
to  be  received  (into  His  favour).

If  you  accept  His  command,  you  will  become  the  spokesman
(thereof);  if  you  seek  union  (with  Him),  thereafter  you  will
become  united.

Freewill  is  the  endeavour  to  thank  (God)  for  His  beneficence :
your  necessitarianism  is  the  denial  of  that  beneficence.

Thanksgiving  for  the  power  (of  acting  freely)  increases  your
power ; necessitarianism  takes  the  (Divine)  gift  (of  freewill)  out
of  your  hand.

\Tur  necessitarianism  is  (like)  sleeping  on  the  road : do  not  940
sleep ! Sleep  not,  until  you  see  the  gate  and  the  threshold !

Beware!  do  not  sleep,  O inconsiderate  necessitarian,  save
underneath  that  fruit-laden  tree.

So  that  every  moment  the  wind  may  shake  the  boughs  and
shower  upon  the  sleeper  (spiritual)  dessert  and  provision  for
the  journey.

Necessitarianism  is  to  sleep  amidst  highwaymen:  how  should
the  untimely  bird  receive  quarter?

And  if  you  turn  up  your  nose  at  His  signs,  you  deem
(yourself)  a man,  but  when  you  consider  (more  deeply),  you
are  (only)  a woman.

This  measure  of  understanding  which  you  possess  is  lost : 945
a head  from  which  the  understanding  is  severed  becomes  a
tail.

Because  ingratitude  is  wickedness  and  disgrace  and  brings
the  ingrate  to  the  bottom  of  Hell-fire.

If  you  are  putting  trust  in  God,  put  trust  (in  Him)  as  regards
(your)  work:  sow  (the  seed),  then  rely  upon  the  Almighty.”


How  the  beasts  once  more  asserted  the  superiority  of  trust
in  God  to  exertion.

They  all  lifted  up  their  voices  (to  dispute)  with  him,  saying,
“Those  covetous  ones  who  sowed  (the  seed  of)  means

Myriads  on  myriads  of  men  and  women — why,  then,  did
they  remain  deprived  of  fortune?

From  the  beginning  of  the  world  myriads  of  generations  have  950
opened  a hundred  mouths,  like  dragons:

Those  clever  people  devised  plots  (of  such  power)  that  the
mountain  thereby  was  torn  up  from  its  foundation.

The  Glorious  (God)  described  their  plots  (when  He  said):
{though  their  guile  be  such)  that  the  tops  of  the  mountains  might
be  moved  thereby.

(But)  e.xcept  the  portion  which  came  to  pass  (was  predestined)

'■  I.e.  had  recourse  to  exertion  as  a means  of  attaining  to  their  desire.


54  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

in  eternity,  nothing  showed  its  face  (accrued  to  them)  from
their  scheming’-  and  doing.

They  all  fell  from  (failed  in)  plan  and  act:  the  acts  and
decrees  of  the  IVIaker  remained.

955  O illustrious  one,  do  not  regard  work  as  aught  but  a name!
O cunning  one,  think  not  that  exertion  is  aught  but  a vain
fancy ! ”

How  ^AzrdUl  (Azrael)  looked  at  a certain  man,  and  how  that  man
fled  to  the  palace  of  Solomon;  and  setting  forth  the  superiority
of  trust  in  God  to  exertion  and  the  uselessness  of  the  latter.

One  forenoon  a freeborn  (noble)  man  arrived  and  ran  into
Solomon’s  hall  of  justice.

His  countenance  pale  with  anguish  and  both  lips  blue.  Then
Solomon  said,  “ Good  sir,  what  is  the  matter?  ”

He  replied,  “Azrael  cast  on  me  such  a look,  so  full  of  wrath
and  hate.”

“Come,”  said  the  king,  “what  (boon)  do  you  desire  now?
Ask  (it)!”  “O  protector  of  my  life,”  said  he,  “command  the
wind

960  To  bear  me  from  here  to  India.  Maybe,  when  thy  slave  is
come  thither  he  will  save  his  life.”

Lo,  the  people  are  fleeing  from  poverty:  hence  are  they  a
mouthful  for  (a  prey  to)  covetousness  and  expectation.

The  fear  of  poverty  is  like  that  (man’s)  terror:  know  thou
that  covetousness  and  striving  are  (like)  India  (in  this  tale).

He  (Solomon)  commanded  the  wind  to  bear  him  quickly  over
the  water  to  the  uttermost  part  of  India.

Next  day,  at  the  time  of  conference  and  meeting,  Solomon
said  to  Azrael :

965  “Didst  thou  look  with  anger  on  that  Moslem  in  order  that
he  might  wander  (as  an  exile)  far  from  his  home?  ”

Azrael  said,  “When  did  I look  (on  him)  angrily?  I saw  him
as  I passed  by,  (and  looked  at  him)  in  astonishment.

For  God  had  commanded  me,  saying,  ‘Hark,  to-day  do  thou
take  his  spirit  in  India.’

From  wonder  I said  (to  myself),  ‘(Even)  if  he  has  a hundred
wings,  ’tis  a far  journey  for  him  to  be  in  India  (to-day).’”

In  like  manner  judge  of  all  the  affairs  of  this  world  and  open
your  eye  and  see !

970  From  whom  shall  we  flee?  From  ourselves?  Oh,  absurdity!
From  whom  shall  we  take  (ourselves)  away?  From  God?  Oh,
crime!


’ Reading  Jlkw  for


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS


55


How  the  lion  again  declared  exertion  to  be  superior  to  trust
in  God  and  expounded  the  advantages  of  exertion.

“Yes,”  said  the  lion;  “but  at  the  same  time  consider  the
exertions  of  the  prophets  and  the  true  believ^ers.

God,  exalted  is  He,  prospered  their  exertion  and  what  they
suffered  of  oppression  and  heat  and  cold.

Their  plans  were  excellent  in  all  circumstances:  eveixThing
done  by  a goodly  man  is  goodly.

Their  snares  caught  the  Heavenly  bird,  all  their  deficiencies
turned  to  increment.”

0 master,  exert  thyself  so  long  as  thou  canst  in  (following)  975
the  way  of  the  prophets  and  saints !

Endeavour  is  not  a struggle  with  Destiny,  because  Destiny
itself  has  laid  this  (endeavour)  upon  us.

1 am  an  infidel  if  any  one  has  suffered  loss  a single  moment
(while  walking)  in  the  way  of  faith  and  obedience.

Your  head  is  not  broken:  do  not  bandage  this  head.  Exert
yourself  (in  doing  good  works)  for  a day  or  two  {i.e.  during
this  brief  life),  and  laugh  unto  everlasting!

An  evil  resort  sought  he  that  sought  this  world ; a good  state
sought  he  that  sought  the  world  to  come.

Plots  for  gaining  (the  things  of)  this  world  are  worthless,  9, so
(but)  plots  for  renouncing  this  world  are  inspired  (by  God).

The  (right)  plot  is  that  he  (the  prisoner)  digs  a hole  in  his
prison  (in  order  to  escape) ; if  he  blocks  up  the  hole,  that  is  a
foolish  plot.

This  world  is  the  prison,  and  we  are  the  prisoners:  dig  a
hole  in  the  prison  and  let  yourself  out  I

What  is  this  world?  To  be  forgetful  of  God;  it  is  not  mer-
chandise and  silver  and  weighing-scales  and  women.

As  regards  the  wealth  that  you  carry  for  religion’s  sake,  “How
good  is  righteous  wealth  (for  the  righteous  man)!”  as  the
Prophet  recited.

Water  in  the  boat  is  the  ruin  of  the  boat,  (but)  water  under-  985
neath  the  boat  is  a support.

Since  he  cast  out  from  his  heart  (the  desire  for)  wealth  and
possessions,  on  that  account  Solomon  did  not  call  himself  (by
any  name)  but  “ poor.”

The  stoppered  jar,  (though)  in  rough  water,  floated  on  the
water  because  of  its  wind-filled  (empty)  heart.

When  the  wind  of  poverty  is  within  (any  one),  he  rests  at
peace  on  the  surface  of  the  water  of  the  world;

Although  the  whole  of  this  world  is  his  kingdom,  in  the  eye
of  his  heart  the  kingdom  is  nothing.

Therefore  stopper  and  seal  the  mouth  of  your  heart,  and  fill  qgo
it  from  the  inward  ventilator.


56  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Exertion  is  a reality,  and  medicine  and  disease  are  realities:
the  sceptic  in  his  denial  of  exertion  practised  (and  thereby
affirmed)  exertion.

How  the  superiority  of  exertion  to  trust  in  God
was  established .

The  lion  gave  many  proofs  in  this  style,  so  that  those  necessi-
tarians became  tired  of  answering  (him).

Fox  and  deer  and  hare  and  jackal  abandoned  (the  doctrine  of)
necessity  and  (ceased  from)  disputation.

They  made  covenants  with  the  furious  lion,  (ensuring)  that
he  should  incur  no  loss  in  this  bargain,

995  (That)  the  daily  ration  should  come  to  him  without  trouble,
and  that  he  should  not  need  to  make  a further  demand.

Day  by  dav  the  one  on  whom  the  lot  fell  would  run  to  the
lion  as  (swiftly  as)  a cheetah.

When  this  cup  (of  death)  came  round  to  the  hare,  the  hare
cried  out,  “Why,  how  long  (are  we  to  endure  this)  injustice?”

How  the  beasts  of  chase  blamed  the  hare  for  his  delay
in  going  to  the  lion.

The  company  (of  beasts)  said  to  him:  “All  this  time  we  have
sacrificed  our  lives  in  troth  and  loyalty.

Do  not  thou  seek  to  give  us  a bad  name,  O rebellious  one!
Lest  the  lion  be  aggrieved,  go,  go!  Quick!  Quick!”

How  the  hare  answered  the  beasts.

1000  “ O friends,”  said  he,  “grant  me  a respite,  that  by  my  cunning

ye  may  escape  from  calamity.

That  by  my  cunning  your  lives  may  be  saved  and  this
(safety)  remain  as  a heritage  to  your  children.”

Every  prophet  amidst  the  peoples  used  to  call  them  after
this  manner  to  a place  of  deliverance,

For  he  had  seen  from  Heaven  the  way  of  escape,  (though)  in
( their)  sight  he  was  contracted  (despicable)  like  the  pupil  of  the  eye.

Men  regarded  him  as  small  like  the  pupil:  none  attained  to
(understanding  of)  the  (real)  greatness  (worth)  of  the  pupil.

How  the  beasts  objected  to  the  proposal  of  the  hare.

1005  The  company  (of  beasts)  said  to  him:  “O  donkey,  listen
(to  us) ! Keep  thyself  within  the  measure  of  a hare !

Eh,  what  brag  is  this — (an  idea)  which  thy  betters  never
brought  into  their  minds?

Thou  art  self-conceited,  or  Destiny  is  pursuing  us ; else,  how
is  this  speech  suitable  to  one  like  thee?”


t


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS


57


How  the  hare  again  answered  the  beasts.

He  said;  “O  friends,  God  gave  me  inspiration:  to  a weakling
there  came  a strong  judgement  (wise  counsel).’'

That  which  God  taught  to  the  bees  is  not  (belonging)  to  the
lion  and  the  wild  ass.

It  (the  bee)  makes  houses  of  juicy  hakcd  (sweetmeat):  God
opened  to  it  the  door  of  that  knowledge;

That  which  God  taught  to  the  silkworm — does  an}-  elephant
know  such  a device?

Adam,  created  of  earth,  learned  knowledge  from  God:  (his)
knowledge  shot  beams  up  to  the  Seventh  Heaven.

He  (Adam)  broke  the  name  and  fame  (pride)  of  the  angels,
to  the  confusion  of  that  one  who  is  in  doubt  concerning  God.

He  (God)  made  the  ascetic  of  so  many  thousand  years  (Iblis)
a muzzle  for  that  young  calf  (Adam),

That  he  (Adam)  might  not  be  able  to  drink  the  milk  of  i-Jii
knowledge  of  religion,  and  that  he  might  not  roam  around  that
lofty  castle.

The  sciences  of  the  followers  of  (external)  sense  became  a
muzzle,  so  that  he  (the  believer  in  sense-perception)  might  not
receive  milk  from  that  sublime  knowledge.

(But)  into  the  blood-drop  (core)  of  the  heart  there  fell  a
jewel  which  He  (God)  gave  not  to  the  seas  and  skies.

How  long  (this  regard  for)  form?  After  all,  O form-wor-
shipper, has  thy  reality-lacking  soul  not  (yet)  escaped  from  form  ?

If  a human  being  were  a man  in  virtue  of  form,  Ahmad
(Mohammed)  and  Bu  Jahl  would  be  just  the  same.

The  painting  on  the  wall  is  like  Adam:  see  from  the  (pictured)  i'>^o
form  what  thing  in  it  is  wanting.

The  spirit  is  wanting  in  that  resplendent  form:  go,  seek  that
jewel  rarely  found !

The  heads  of  all  the  lions  in  the  world  were  laid  low  when
They  (God)  gave  a hand  to  (bestowed  favour  on)  the  dog  of
the  Companions  (of  the  Cave).

What  loss  does  it  suffer  from  that  abhorred  shape,  inasmuch
as  its  spirit  was  plunged  in  the  ocean  of  light?

’Tis  not  in  pens  to  describe  (the  outward)  form^:  (what  is
written)  in  letters  is  (qualities  like)  “learned”  and  “just”:

(And  qualities  like)  “ learned  ” and  “just  ” are  only  the  spiritual
essence  which  thou  wilt  not  find  in  (any)  place  or  in  front  or
behind.

The  sun  of  the  spirit  strikes  (with  its  beams)  on  the  body
from  the  quarter  where  (the  relation  of)  place  does  not  exist:
it  (that  sun)  is  not  contained  in  the  sky.

'■  I.e.  “it  is  not  the  external  features  of  a man  that  are  praised  in  com-
plimentary letters  addressed  to  him.”


58


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I


An  account  of  the  knowledge  of  the  hare  and  an  explanation  of  the
excellence  and  advantages  of  knowledge.

This  topic  hath  no  end.  Give  heed!  Listen  to  the  story  of
the  hare.

Sell  your  asinine  (corporeal)  ear  and  buy  another  ear,  for  the
asinine  ear  will  not  apprehend  this  discourse.

Go,  behold  the  foxy  tricks  played  by  the  hare;  behold  how
the  hare  made  a plot  to  catch  the  lion.

1030  Knowledge  is  the  seal  of  the  kingdom  of  Solomon : the  whole
world  is  form,  and  knowledge  is  the  spirit.

Because  of  this  virtue,  the  creatures  of  the  seas  and  those  of
mountain  and  plain  are  helpless  before  man.

Of  him  the  pard  and  lion  are  afraid,  like  the  mouse;  from
him  the  crocodile  of  the  great  river  is  in  pallor  and  agitation.

From  him  peri  and  demon  took  to  the  shores  (sought  refuge) :
each  took  abode  in  some  hiding-place.

Alan  hath  many  a secret  enemy : the  cautious  man  is  a wise
one.

1035  (There  are)  hidden  creatures,  evil  and  good : at  every'  instant
their  blows  are  striking  on  the  heart.

If  you  go  into  the  river  to  wash  yourself,  a thorn  in  the  water
inflicts  a hurt  upon  you.

Although  the  thorn  is  hidden  low  in  the  water,  you  know  it
is  there,  since  it  is  pricking  you.

The  pricks  of  (angelic)  inspirations  and  (satanic)  temptations
are  from  thousands  of  beings,  not  (only)  from  one.

Wait  (patiently)  for  your  (bodily)  senses  to  be  transmuted,
so  that  you  may  see  them  (the  hidden  beings),  and  the  difficulty
may  be  solved,

1040  So  that  (you  may  see)  whose  w'ords  you  have  rejected  and
whom  you  have  made  your  captain.


How  the  beasts  requested  the  hare  to  tell  the
secret  of  his  thought.

Afterwards  they  said,  “O  nimble  hare,  communicate  what  is
in  thy  apprehension.

O thou  who  hast  grappled  with  a lion,  declare  the  plan  which
thou  hast  thought  of.

Counsel  gives  perception  and  understanding:  the  mind  is
helped  by  (other)  minds.

The  Prophet  said,  ‘O  adviser,  take  counsel  (with  the  trust-
worthy), for  he  whose  counsel  is  sought  is  trusted.’”


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS


59


How  the  hare  zcithheld  the  secret  from  them.

He  said,  “ One  ought  not  to  say  forth  every  secret : sometimes  1045
the  even  number  turns  out  to  be  odd,  and  sometimes  the  odd
number  to  be  even.”

If  from  guilelessness  you  breathe  words  to  a mirror,  the
mirror  at  once  becomes  dim  to  us.

Do  not  move  your  lip  in  explanation  of  these  three  things,
(namely)  concerning  your  departure  and  your  gold  and  your
religion ;

For  to  these  three  there  is  many  an  adversary'  and  foe  standing
in  wait  for  you  when  he  knows  (about  any  of  them).

And  if  you  tell  (only)  one  or  nvo  (a  few  people),  farewell  (to
your  secret):  every  secret  that  goes  beyond  the  twain  (w’ho
share  it)  is  published  abroad.

If  you  tie  tw^o  or  three  birds  together,  they  wall  remain  on  1050
the  ground,  imprisoned  by  grief;

(But  in  truth)  they  hold  a consultation  well-disguised  and
mingled,  in  its  (apparent)  significance,  with  that  which  casts
error  (into  the  mind  of  any  one  who  observes  them).

(Similarly)  the  Prophet  used  to  take  counsel,  (speaking)  crt'pti-
cally,  and  they  (his  companions)  w'ould  answer  him  and  (would
be)  without  knowledge  (of  his  real  meaning).

He  would  speak  his  opinion  in  a covert  parable^,  in  order  that
the  adversary  might  not  know  foot  from  head.

He  (the  Prophet)  would  receive  his  answer  from  him  (the
adversary),  while  the  other  would  not  catch  the  smell  (drift)
of  his  question.

The  story  of  the  hare's  stratagem.

He  delayed  awhile  in  going,  then  he  went  before  the  lion  1055
who  rends  (his  prey)  with  claws.

Because  he  tarried  late  in  going,  the  lion  was  tearing  up  the
earth  and  roaring.

“I  said,”  cried  the  lion,  “that  the  promise  of  those  vile  ones
would  be  vain — vain  and  frail  and  unfulfilled.

Their  palaver  has  duped  me-:  how  long  will  this  Time  de-
ceive me,  how  long?  ”

The  prince  that  hath  no  strength  in  his  beard®  is  left  sorely
in  the  lurch  when  bv  reason  of  his  folly  he  looks  neither  back-
wards nor  fonvards.

The  road  is  smooth,  and  under  it  are  pitfalls:  amidst  the  I'Co
names  there  is  a dearth  of  meaning.


^ Literally,  “wrapped  in  a parable.”

■ Literally,  “has  thrown  me  from  the  ass.”
® I.e.  foolish.


6o  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Words  and  names  are  like  pitfalls:  the  sweet  (flattering)  word
is  the  sand  for  (the  sand  that  sucks  up)  the  water  of  our  life.

The  one  sand  whence  water  gushes  is  seldom  to  be  found:
go,  seek  it.

He  that  searches  after  wisdom  becomes  a fountain  of  wisdom ;
he  becomes  independent  of  acquisition  and  (w'ays  and)  means.

The  guarding  tablet^  becomes  a Guarded  Tablet  - ; his  under-
standing becomes  enriched  by  the  Spirit.

1065  When  a man’s  understanding  has  been  his  teacher,  after  this
the  understanding  becomes  his  pupil.

The  understanding  says,  like  Gabriel,  “O  Ahmad  (Mo-
hammed), if  I take  one  (more)  step,  it  will  burn  me;

Do  thou  leave  me,  henceforth  advance  (alone):  this  is  my
limit,  O sultan  of  the  soul ! ”

^^’hoever,  through  heedlessness,  remains  without  thanks-
giving and  patience  (self-control),  knows  (no  resource)  but  this,
that  he  should  follow  in  the  heels  of  necessity  (jabr).

Any  one  who  pleads  necessity  (as  an  excuse)  feigns  himself  to  be
ill,  with  the  result  that  the  (feigned)  illness  brings  him  to  the  grave.

1070  The  Prophet  said,  “Illness  (assumed)  in  jest  brings  (real)
disease,  so  that  he  (the  jester)  dies  like  a lamp.”

What  is  (the  meaning  of)  jabr}  To  bind  up  a broken  (limb)
or  tie  a severed  vein.

Inasmuch  as  you  have  not  broken  your  foot  in  this  path,
w'hom  are  you  mocking?  Why  have  you  bandaged  your  foot?

But  as  for  him  who  broke  his  foot  in  the  path  of  exertion,
Buraq  came  up  to  him,  and  he  mounted  (and  rode).

He  was  a bearer  of  the  (true)  religion,  and  he  became  one
who  is  borne;  he  was  an  accepter  of  the  (Divine)  command,
and  he  became  accepted.

1075  Until  now,  he  was  receiving  commands  from  the  King;
henceforth  he  delivers  the  (King’s)  .commands  to  the  people.

Until  now,  the  stars  were  influencing  him;  henceforth  he  is
the  ruler  of  the  stars.

If  (on  this  account)  perplexity  arise  in  thy  sight  (mind),  then
thou  wilt  have  doubts  concerning  The  moon  ivas  cloven  asunder.

Refresh  thy  faith,  (but)  not  with  talk  of  the  tongue,  O thou
who  hast  secretly  refreshed  thy  (evil)  desire.

So  long  as  desire  is  fresh,  faith  is  not  fresh,  for  ’tis  this
desire  that  locks  (against  thee)  that  gate.

loSo  Thou  hast  interpreted  (and  altered  the  meaning  of)  the  virgin
(uncorrupted)  Word:  interpret  (alter)  thyself,  not  the  (Divine)
Book.

Thou  interpretest  the  Qur’an  according  to  thy  desire:  by
thee  the  sublime  meaning  is  degraded  and  perverted.

^ His  heart,  which  guards  and  preser\’es  the  lessons  of  wisdom.

" I.e.  an  inviolable  source  of  Divine  knowledge.


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS


6l


The  baseness  of  the  foul  interpretation  given  by  the  fly.

The  fly  was  lifting  up  his  head,  like  a pilot,  on  a blade  of
straw  and  (a  pool  of)  ass’s  urine.

“I  have  called  (them)  sea  and  ship,”  said  he;  “I  have  been
pondering  over  that  (interpretation)  for  a long  while.

Look ! here  is  this  sea  and  this  ship,  and  I am  the  pilot  and
skilled  (in  navigation)  and  judicious.”

He  was  propelling  the  raft  on  the  “sea  ” : that  (small)  quantity  10S5
appeared  to  him  illimitable.

That  urine  was  boundless  in  relation  to  him : where  was  the
vision  that  should  see  it  truly?

His  world  extends  (just)  as  far  as  his  sight  reaches;  his  eye
is  so  big,  his  “sea”  is  big  in  the  same  proportion.

So  with  the  false  interpreter  (of  the  Qur’an) : like  the  flv,  his
imagination  is  (foul  as)  ass’s  urine  and  his  conception  (worthless
as)  a straw.

If  the  fly  leave  off  interpreting  by  (following  his  own)  opinion.
Fortune  will  turn  that  fly  into  a humdy.

One  who  possesses  this  (Divine)  indication  (of  the  true  10 10
meaning)  is  not  a fly : his  spirit  is  not  analogous  to  his  (outward)
form.


How  the  lion  roared  wrathfully  because  the  hare
was  late  in  corning.

As  (for  example)  the  hare  who  struck  against  the  lion:  how
was  his  spirit  analogous  to  his  stature?

The  lion  from  fury  and  rage  was  saying,  “By  means  of  my
ear  the  enemy  has  bound  up  my  eyeh

The  tricks  of  the  necessitarians  have  bound  me  (in  captivity) ;
their  wooden  sword  has  wounded  my  body.

After  this  I will  not  hearken  to  their  palaver : all  that  is  (only
meant  to  deceive,  like)  the  cry  of  demons  and  ghouls.

O my  heart,  tear  them  to  pieces,  do  not  lag;  rend  their  skins,  ikos
for  thev  have  naught  but  skin.”

What  is  skin?  Specious  words,  like  ripples  on  water  which
have  no  continuance.

Know  that  these  words  are  as  the  skin  (rind),  and  the  meaning
is  (as)  the  kernel ; these  words  are  as  the  form,  and  the  meaning
is  like  the  spirit.

The  skin  hides  the  defect  of  the  bad  kernel;  it  (also)  hides
jealously  the  secrets  of  the  good  kernel.

When  the  pen  is  of  wind  and  the  scroll  of  water,  whatever
you  write  perishes  speedily;

It  is  written  on  water:  if  you  seek  constancy  from  it,  you  will  iko
return  biting  your  hands  (in  disappointment).

^ I.e.  “ I have  let  myself  be  blinded  by  listening  to  the  beasts.”


62


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

The  wind  in  men  is  vanity  and  desire ; when  you  have  aban-
doned vanity  , (then)  is  (the  time  for)  the  message  from  Him  (God) .

Sweet  are  the  messages  of  the  Maker,  for  it  (that  message)
from  head  to  foot  (from  first  to  last)  is  enduring.

The  khutbas^  for  kings  change  (and  pass),  and  their  empire;
(all  will  pass)  except  the  empire  and  khutbas  (insignia)  of  the
prophets.

Because  the  pomp  of  kings  is  from  (earthly)  vanity,  (while)
the  glorious  privilege  of  the  prophets  is  from  (Divine)  Majesty.

105  The  names  of  kings  are  removed  from  the  dirhems,  (but)
the  name  of  Ahmad  (Mohammed)  is  stamped  on  them  for  ever.

The  name  of  Ahmad  is  the  name  of  all  the  prophets:  when
the  hundred  comes  (is  counted),  ninety  is  with  us  as  welH.

Further  setting  forth  the  stratagem  of  the  hare.

The  hare  made  much  delay  in  going ; he  rehearsed  to  himself
the  tricks  (which  he  was  about  to  play).

After  long  delay  he  came  on  (took)  the  road,  that  he  might
say  one  or  Uv'o  secrets  into  the  ear  of  the  lion.

Think,  what  worlds  are  in  commerce  with  Reason!  How
wide  is  this  ocean  of  Reason  1

no  In  this  sweet  ocean  our  forms  are  moving  fast,  like  cups  on
the  surface  of  water :

Until  they  become  full,  (they  float)  like  bowls  on  the  top  of
the  sea,  (but)  when  the  bowl  is  filled  it  sinks  therein.

Reason  is  hidden,  and  (only)  a world  (of  phenomena)  is
visible : our  forms  are  the  waves  or  a spray  of  it  (of  that  hidden
ocean).

Whatsoever  (thing)  the  form  makes  (uses  as)  a means  of
approach  to  It  (to  Reason),  by  that  (same)  means  the  ocean
(of  Reason)  casts  it  (the  form)  far  away.

So  long  as  the  heart  does  not  see  the  Giver  of  (its)  conscience,
so  long  as  the  arrow  does  not  see  the  far-shooting  Archer®,

1 15  He  (who  is  thus  blind)  thinks  his  horse  is  lost,  though  (all
the  while)  he  is  obstinately  speeding  his  horse  on  the  road.

That  fine  fellow  thinks  his  horse  is  lost,  while  his  horse  is
sweeping  him  onward  like  the  wind.

In  lamentation  and  inquiry  that  scatterbrain  (runs)  from  door
to  door  in  every  direction,  asking  and  searching :

“Where  and  who  is  he  that  stole  my  horse?”  What  is  this
(animal)  under  thy  thigh,  O master?

“Yes,  this  is  the  horse,  but  where  is  the  horse?  ” O dexterous
rider  in  search  of  thy  horse,  come  to  thyself  I

^ The  khutba  is  a prayer  for  the  Prophet  and  the  reigning  sovereign,
which  forms  part  of  the  public  worship  of  Moslems.

- Mohammed,  being  the  last  of  the  prophets,  includes  them  all,  as  the
final  sum  includes  all  the  units  of  which  it  is  composed.  ^ Cf.  v.  1143.


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS


63

The  Spirit  is  lost  (to  view)  because  of  its  being  so  manifest  1120
and  near:  how,  having  thy  belly  full  of  water,  art  thou  dry-
lipped like  a jar?

How  wilt  thou  see  red  and  green  and  russet,  unless  before
(seeing)  these  three  (colours)  thou  see  the  light?

But  since  thy  mind  was  lost  (absorbed)  in  (perception  of)  the
colour,  those  colours  became  to  thee  a veil  from  (debarred  thee
from  contemplating)  the  light.

Inasmuch  as  at  night  those  colours  were  hidden,  thou  sawest
that  thy  vision  of -the  colour  was  (derived)  from  the  light.

There  is  no  vision  of  colour  without  the  external  light ; ev'en
so  it  is  with  the  colour  of  inward  phantasy.

This  outward  (light)  is  (derived)  from  the  sun  and  from  1125
Suha^,  while  the  inward  (light)  is  from  the  reflexion  of  the
beams  of  (Divine)  Glory.

The  light  which  gives  light  to  the  eve  is  in  truth  the  light  of
the  heart : the  light  of  the  eye  is  produced  bv  the  light  of  hearts.

Again,  the  light  which  gives  light  to  the  heart  is  the  Light
of  God,  which  is  pure  and  separate  from  the  light  of  intellect
and  sense.

At  night  there  was  no  light:  thou  didst  not  see  the  colour;
then  it  (the  light)  was  made  manifest  by  the  opposite  of  light
(by  darkness).

(First)  comes  the  seeing  of  light,  then  the  seeing  of  colour;
and  this  thou  knowest  immediately  by  the  opposite  of  light
(darkness).

God  created  pain  and  sorrow  for  the  purpose  that  happiness  1130
might  be  made  manifest  by  means  of  this  opposite.

Hidden  things,  then,  are  manifested  by  means  of  their
opposite ; since  God  hath  no  opposite.  He  is  hidden ;

For  the  sight  fell  (first)  on  the  light,  then  on  the  colour:  op-
posite is  made  manifest  by  opposite,  like  Greeks  and  Ethiopians.

Therefore  thou  knewest  light  by  its  opposite : opposite  reveals
opposite  in  (the  process  of)  coming  forth.

The  Light  of  God  hath  no  opposite  in  (all)  existence,  that  by
means  of  that  opposite  it  should  be  possible  to  make  Him
manifest :

Necessarily  (therefore)  our  eyes  do  not  perceive  Him,  though  1135
He  perceives  (us) : see  this  (fact)  from  (the  case  of)  Moses  and
the  mountain  (Sinai).

Know  that  form  springs  from  spirit  (reality)  as  the  lion  from
the  jungle,  or  as  voice  and  speech  from  thought.

This  speech  and  voice  arose  from  thought;  thou  knowest  not
where  is  the  sea  of  thought,

But  since  thou  hast  seen  that  the  waves  of  speech  are  fair,
thou  knowest  that  their  sea  also  is  noble.

^ A small  star.


64  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

When  the  waves  of  thought  sped  on  from  (the  sea  of)  Wisdom,
it  (Wisdom)  made  (for  them)  the  form  of  speech  and  voice.

40  The  form  was  born  of  the  W'ord  and  died  again,  the  wave
drew  itself  back  into  the  sea.

The  form  came  forth  from  Formlessness  and  went  back
(thither),  for  Verily  unto  Him  are  zve  returning.

Every  instant,  then,  thou  art  dying  and  returning:  Mustafa
declared  that  this  world  is  (but)  a moment.

Our  thought  is  an  arrow  (shot)  from  Him  (Hu)  into  the  air
(hau'd):  how  should  it  stay  in  the  air?  It- comes  (back)  to
God.

Every  moment  the  world  is  renewed,  and  we  are  unaware  of
its  being  renewed  whilst  it  remains  (the  same  in  appearance).

45  Life  is  ever  arriving  anew',  like  the  stream,  though  in  the  body
it  has  the  semblance  of  continuity.

Erom  its  swiftness  it  appears  continuous,  like  the  spark  which
thou  whirlest  rapidly  with  thy  hand.

If  thou  whirl  a firebrand  w'ith  dexterity,  it  appears  to  the
sight  as  a very  long  (line  of)  fire.

The  swift  motion  produced  by  the  action  of  God  presents
this  length  of  duration  (Time)  as  (a  phenomenon  arising)  from
the  rapidity  of  Divine  action.

Even  if  the  seeker  of  this  mystery  is  an  exceedingly  learned
man,  (say  to  him),  “Lo,  Husamu’ddin,  who  is  a sublime  book
(where  you  will  find  the  mystery  revealed).”


The  hare’s  coming  to  the  lion  and  the  lion's  anger  with  him.

50  The  lion,  incensed  and  wrathful  and  frantic,  saw  the  hare
coming  from  afar,

Running  undismayed  and  confidently,  looking  angry  and
fierce  and  fell  and  sour.

For  by  coming  humbly  (he  thought)  suspicion  would  be
(excited),  while  by  boldness  every  cause  of  doubt  would  be
removed.

When  he  came  further  on,  near  to  the  “shoe-row^,”  the  lion
shouted — “Fla,  villain!

I who  have  torn  oxen  limb  from  limb,  I who  have  rubbed
the  ear  of  (chastised  and  vanquished)  the  ferocious  elephant —
55  Who  (w'hat)  is  a half-witted  (feeble)  hare,  that  he  should  thus
throw  on  the  ground  (disregard)  my  behest?  ”

Abandon  the  hare’s  slumber  and  heedlessness  I Give  ear,
O donkey,  to  the  roaring  of  this  lion  1

^ The  place  near  the  door,  where  visitors  take  off  their  shoes  before
advancing  to  the  dais  at  the  upper  end  .of  the  room.

This  verse  is  an  admonition  addressed  to  the  reader.


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS  65

The  hare’s  apology.

“Mercy!”  cried  the  hare,  “I  have  an  excuse,  if  thy  Lord-
ship’s pardon  come  to  my  aid^.”

“What  excuse?  ” said  he.  “Oh,  the  shortsightedness  of  fools !

Is  this  the  time  for  them  to  come  into  the  presence  of  kings  ?

Thou  art  an  untimely  bird;  thy  head  must  be  cut  off.  One-
ought  not  to  hear  the  excuse  of  a fool.

The  fool’s  excuse  is  worse  than  his  crime;  the  excuse  of  the  1160
ignorant  is  the  poison  that  kills  wisdom.

Thy  excuse,  O hare,  is  devoid  of  wisdom:  what  hare-  am  I
that  thou  shouldst  put  it  in  my  ear?”

“ O king,”  he  replied,  “account  a worthless  one  to  be  worthy :
hearken  to  the  excuse  of  one  who  has  suffered  oppression.

In  particular,  as  an  alms  (thank-offering)  for  thy  high  estate,
do  not  drive  out  of  thy  way  one  whose  way  is  lost.

The  ocean,  which  gives  some  water  to  every  stream,  lays  on
its  head  and  face  (surface)  every  piece  of  rubbish.

By  this  bount}-  the  sea  will  not  become  less:  the  sea  is  neither  h'A
increased  nor  diminished  by  its  bounty.”

The  lion  said,  “I  will  bestow  bounty  in  its  (proper)  place,

I will  cut  every  one’s  clothes  according  to  his  stature.”

“Listen,”  cried  the  hare,  “if  I am  not  a fit  object  for  (thy)
grace,  I lay  my  head  before  the  dragon  of  (thy)  violence®.

At  breakfast-time  I set  out  on  the  way,  I came  towards  the
king  with  my  comrade.

That  party  (of  beasts)  had  appointed,  for  thy  sake,  another
hare  to  go  along  with  me  as  consort  and  companion.

On  the  road  a lion  attacked  thy  humble  slave,  attacked  both  ht'j
the  companions  in  travel  who  were  coming  (to  thee).

I said  to  him,  ‘ ^^’e  are  the  slaves  of  the  King  of  kings,  the
lowly  fellow-ser\'ants  of  that  (e.xalted)  court.’

He  said,  ‘The  King  of  kings!  Who  is  he?  Be  ashamed!  Do
not  make  mention  of  every  base  loon  in  my  presence.

Both  thee  and  thy  king  I will  tear  to  pieces,  if  thou  and  thy
friend  turn  back  from  my  door.’

I said  to  him,  ‘ Let  me  behold  once  more  the  face  of  the  king
and  bear  the  news  of  thee  (to  him).’

He  said,  ‘Place  thy  comrade  with  me  (in  my  keeping)  as  a iws
pledge;  othenvise,  thou  art  a sacrifice  (thy  life  is  forfeit)  ac-
cording to  my  law.’

We  entreated  him  much ; it  was  no  use.  He  seized  my  friend
and  left  me  to  go  alone.

* Literally,  “give  me  a (helping)  hand,”  i.e.  “if  thou  wilt  pardon  my
presumption  and  permit  me  to  excuse  myself,  I will  do  so.

- I.e.  “ass.”  The  Persian  word  for  hare  is  khargiish  = ass-eared.

3 I.e.  “ I surrender  myself  to  thy  vengeance.”


.X  M


5


66


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

My  friend,  from  his  plumpness,  made  three  of  me  both  in
comeliness  and  beauty  and  (size  of)  body.

Henceforth  this  road  is  barred  by  that  lion : the  thread  of  our
covenants  is  broken.

Cut  off  (abandon)  hope  of  the  allowance  henceforth;  I am
telling  thee  the  truth,  and  truth  is  bitter.

1 1 So  If  thou  want  the  allowance,  clear  the  way!  hey,  come  on

and  repel  that  irreverent  one!”


How  the  lion  answered  the  hare  and  set  off  with  him.

“ Come  on  in  God’s  name,”  said  he,  “ let  me  see  where  he  is !
Go  thou  in  front,  if  thou  art  speaking  truth.

That  I may  give  him  and  a hundred  like  him  the  punishment
they  deserve,  or  if  this  is  a lie,  that  I may  give  thy  deserts  to
thee.”

The  hare  set  out  on  the  way,  (going)  in  front  like  a guide,
that  he  might  lead  him  towards  his  snare.

Towards  the  well  which  he  had  designated:  he  had  made
the  deep  well  a snare  for  his  (the  lion’s)  life.

1185  (Thus)  were  these  twain  going  till  (they  arrived)  near  the  well.
Look  you,  (this  was)  a hare  (deceitful)  as  a (pool  of)  water
(hidden)  under  straw.

The  water  bears  a blade  of  straw  (down)  to  the  plain:  how,
I wonder,  will  the  straw  bear  away  a mountain?

The  snare  of  his  (the  hare’s)  guile  was  a noose  for  the  lion :
a marvellous  hare  (he),  who  was  carrying  off  a lion  (as  his  prey) !

A Moses  draws  Pharaoh,  with  his  army  and  mighty  host,
into  the  river  Nile;

A single  gnat  with  half  a wing  cleaves  intrepidly  the  suture
of  Nimrod’s  skull.

1190  Behold  the  state  of  him  who  hearkened  to  the  words  of  his
enemy,  and  the  retribution  of  him  who  became  the  friend  of
the  envious  one —

The  state  of  a Pharaoh  who  hearkened  to  Haman,  and  the
state  of  a Nimrod  who  hearkened  to  Satan.

Albeit  the  enemy  speak  to  thee  in  friendly  wise,  know  (his
words  to  be)  the  snare,  though  he  speak  to  thee  of  the  grain
(bait).

If  he  give  thee  some  candy,  regard  it  as  poison;  if  he  do  a
kindness  to  thy  body,  regard  it  as  cruelty.

When  the  (Divine)  destiny  comes  to  pass,  you  see  naught  but
the  skin  (outward  appearance) : you  do  not  distinguish  enemies
from  friends.

1195  Since  the  case  is  thus,  begin  humble  supplication;  set  about
lamenting  and  glorifying  (God)  and  fasting.

Lament  continually,  crying,  “ O Thou  who  well  knowest  the


f


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS  67

hidden  things,  do  not  crush  us  beneath  the  stone  of  evil
contrivance.

O Creator  of  the  lion,  if  we  have  wrought  currishness,  do
not  set  the  lion  (to  spring)  on  us  from  this  covert.

Do  not  give  to  sweet  water  the  form  of  fire,  do  not  put  upon
fire  the  form  of  water.

When  Thou  makest  (us)  drunken  with  the  wine  of  Thy
wrath.  Thou  givest  to  things  non-existent  the  form  of  existence.”

What  is  (this)  drunkenness?  That  which  binds  (prevents)  1200
the  eye  from  (true)  eyesight,  so  that  a (common)  stone  appears
a jewel,  and  wool  (pashtn)  a jasper  (yashm).

What  is  (this)  drunkenness?  The  perversion  of  the  senses,
the  change  of  tamarisk-wood  into  sandal-wood  in  the  (per-
verted) sight.


Story  of  the  hoopoe  and  Solomon,  shozcing  that  ichen  the
Divine  destiny  comes  to  pass,  clear  eyes  are  sealed.

When  the  tent-pavilion  was  pitched  for  Solomon,  the  birds
came  before  him  to  pay  obeisance.

They  found  (him)  speaking  the  same  tongue  (as  themselves)
and  familiar  with  them : one  by  one  they  sped  with  (eager)  soul
into  his  presence.

All  the  birds,  having  ceased  from  twittering,  (in  converse)
with  Solomon  became  more  distinct  (spoke  more  articulately)
than  your  own  brother.

To  speak  the  same  tongue  is  a kinship  and  affinity:  a man,  1205
(when  he  is)  with  those  in  whom  he  cannot  confide,  is  like  a
prisoner  in  chains.

Oh,  many  are  the  Indians  and  Turks  that  speak  the  same
tongue;  oh,  many  the  pair  of  Turks  that  are  as  strangers  (to
each  other).

Therefore  the  tongue  of  mutual  understanding  is  different
indeed : to  be  one  in  heart  is  better  than  to  be  one  in  tongue.

Without  speech  and  without  sign  or  scroll,  hundreds  of
thousands  of  interpreters  arise  from  the  heart.

The  birds,  all  and  each,  their  secrets  of  skill  and  knowledge
and  practice

Were  revealing,  one  by  one,  to  Solomon,  and  were  praising  1210
themselves  by  way  of  submitting  a request  (for  his  considera-
tion).

Not  from  pride  and  self-conceit,  (but)  in  order  that  he  might
give  them  access  to  him^.

When  a captive  wants  a lord  (to  buy  him  as  a slave),  he
offers  a preface  (summary  account)  of  his  talent ;

'■  l.e.  grant  them  the  privilege  of  being  freely  admitted  to  his  presence.


5-2


68  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

(But)  when  he  is  ashamed  (disgusted)  at  his  buying  him,  he
makes  himself  out  to  be  sick  and  palsied  and  deaf  and  lame.

The  turn  came  for  the  hoopoe  and  his  craft  and  the  explana-
tion of  his  skill  and  thoughtfulness.

1215  _ “O  king,”  said  he,  “I  will  declare  (only)  one  talent,  which
is  an  inferior  one;  ’tis  better  to  speak  briefly.”

“Tell  on,”  said  Solomon;  “let  me  hear  what  talent  that  is.”
The  hoopoe  said,  “At  the  time  when  I am  at  the  zenith,

I gaze  from  the  zenith  with  the  eye  of  certainty  and  I see  the
water  at  the  bottom  of  the  earth.

So  that  (I  know)  W'here  it  is  and  what  is  its  depth ; wTat  its
colour  is,  whence  it  gushes  forth — from  clay  or  from  rock.

O Solomon,  for  the  sake  of  thine  army’s  camping-place  keep
this  wise  one  (beside  thee)  on  thy  expeditions.”

1220  Then  said  Solomon,  “O  good  companion  in  waterless  far-
stretching  wastes ! ”


How  the  crow  impugned  the  claim  of  the  hoopoe.

When  the  crow  heard  (this),  from  envy  he  came  and  said  to
Solomon,  “He  has  spoken  false  and  ill.

It  is  not  respectful  to  speak  in  the  king’s  presence,  in  par-
ticular (to  utter)  lying  and  absurd  self-praise.

If  he  had  always  had  this  (keen)  sight,  how  would  not  he
have  seen  the  snare  beneath  a handful  of  earth?

How  would  he  have  been  caught  in  the  snare?  How'  would
he  have  gone  into  the  cage  wrilly-nilly?  ”

1225  Then  Solomon  said:  “O  hoopoe,  is  it  right  that  these  dregs
have  risen  from  thee  at  the  first  cup  ?

0 thou  who  hast  drunk  buttermilk,  how  dost  thou  pretend
intoxication  and  brag  in  my  presence  and  tell  lies  besides?”

The  hoopoe's  answer  to  the  attack  of  the  crow.

He  said,  “ O king,  for  God’s  sake  do  not  listen  to  the  enemv’s
words  against  me,  bare  beggar  as  I am.

If  this  wTich  I claim  is  not  (true),  I lay  my  head  (before
thee) : sever  this  neck  of  mine.

The  crow,  who  disbelieves  in  the  (absolute)  authority  of  the
Divine  destiny,  is  an  infidel,  though  he  have  thousands  of
wits.

1230  Whilst  there  is  in  you  a single  k (derived)  from  the  kdfirdn
(infidels),  you  are  the  seat  of  stench  and  lust,  velut  rima  femoris.

1 see  the  snare  (when  I am)  in  the  air,  if  the  Divine  destiny
do  not  muffle  the  eye  of  my  intelligence.

When  the  Divine  destiny  comes,  wisdom  goes  to  sleep,  the
moon  becomes  black,  the  sun  is  stopped  (from  shining)


SOLOMON  AND  THE  HOOPOE


69

How  is  this  disposal  (of  things)  by  the  Divine  destiny  (to  be
called)  singular?^  Know  that  it  is  by  the  Divine  destiny  that  he
(the  infidel)  disbelieves  in  the  Divine  destiny.

The  story  of  Adam,  on  zchom  be  peace,  and  how  the  Divine  destiny

sealed  up  his  sight  so  that  he  failed  to  observe  the  plain  meaning

of  the  prohibition  and  to  refrain  from  interpreting  it.

The  father  of  mankind,  who  is  the  lord  of  He  {God)  taught
{Adam)  the  Names,  hath  hundreds  of  thousands  of  sciences  in
every  vein.

To  his  soul  accrued  (knowledge  of)  the  name  of  ev^ery  thing,  1235
even  as  that  thing  exists  (in  its  real  nature)  unto  the  end  (of  the
world).

No  title  that  he  gave  became  changed:  that  one  whom  he
called  ‘brisk’  did  not  become  ‘lazy.’

Whoso  is  (to  be)  a believer  at  the  last,  he  saw  at  the  first;
whoso  is  (to  be)  an  infidel  at  the  last,  to  him  it  became  manifest.

Do  thou  hear  the  name  of  every  thing  from  the  knower:
hear  the  inmost  meaning  of  the  mystery  of  He  taught  the  Names.

With  us,  the  name  of  even'  thing  is  its  outward  (appearance) ;
with  the  Creator,  the  name  of  every  thing  is  its  inward  (reality).

In  the  eyes  of  Moses  the  name  of  his  rod  was  ‘staff’;  in  the  1240
eyes  of  the  Creator  its  name  was  ‘dragon.’

Here  the  name  of  ‘Umar  was  ‘idolater,’  but  in  Alast-  his
name  was  ‘believer.’

That  of  which  the  name,  with  us,  was  ‘seed’  was,  in  the
sight  of  God,  thou  who  art  at  this  moment  beside  me.

This  ‘seed’  was  a form  (idea)  in  non-existence  (potentiality),
existent  with  God,  neither  more  nor  less  (than  the  form  in
which  it  appeared  externally).

In  brief,  that  which  is  our  end  is  really  our  name  with  God.

He  bestows  on  a man  a name  according  to  his  final  state,  not  1245
according  to  that  (state)  to  which  He  gives  the  name  of  ‘a  loan.’

Inasmuch  as  the  eye  of  Adam  saw  by  means  of  the  Pure
Light,  the  soul  and  inmost  sense  of  the  names  became  evident
to  him.

Since  the  angels  perceived  in  him  the  rays  of  God,  they  fell
in  worship  and  hastened  to  do  homage.

The  Adam  like  this  whose  name  I am  celebrating,  if  I praise
(him)  till  the  Resurrection,  I fall  short  (of  what  is  due).

All  this  he  knew;  (yet)  when  the  Divine  destiny  came,  he  was
at  fault  in  the  knowledge  of  a single  prohibition,

Wondering  whether  the  prohibition  was  for  the  purpose  of  1250
making  unlawful  (the  thing  prohibited),  or  whether  it  admitted
of  an  interpretation  and  was  a cause  of  perplexity.

^ I.e.  “How  is  it  strange  that  I should  have  been  deceived?”

" I .e.  in  the  world  of  pre-existence.


70  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

When  (the  view  that  it  admitted  of)  interpretation  prevailed
in  his  mind,  his  nature  hastened  in  bewilderment  towards  the
wheat^.

When  the  thorn  went  into  the  foot  of  the  gardener  (Adam),
the  thief  (Satan)  found  an  opportunity  and  quickly  carried  off
the  goods.

As  soon  as  he  escaped  from  bewilderment,  he  returned  into
the  (right)  road;  (then)  he  saw  that  the  thief  had  carried  off
the  wares  from  the  shop.

He  cried,  ‘O  Lord,  we  have  done  wrong,'  and  ‘Alas,’  that  is
to  say,  ‘darkness  came  and  the  way  was  lost.’

1^55  This  Divine  destiny  is  a cloud  that  covers  the  sun : thereby
lions  and  dragons  become  as  mice.

If  I (the  hoopoe)  do  not  see  a snare  in  the  hour  of  Divine
ordainment,  ’tis  not  I alone  who  am  ignorant  in  the  course  of
Divine  ordainment.”

Oh,  happy  he  that  clave  to  righteousness,  he  (that)  let  (his
own)  strength  go  and  took  to  supplication !

If  the  Divine  destiny  shrouds  thee  in  black  like  night,  yet  the
Divine  destiny  will  take  thy  hand  (and  guide  thee)  at  the  last.

If  the  Divine  destiny  a hundred  times  attempts  thy  life,  yet
the  Divine  destiny  gives  thee  life  and  heals  thee.

1260  This  Divine  destiny,  if  a hundred  times  it  waylays  thee,
(nevertheless)  pitches  thy  tent  on  the  top  of  Heaven.

Know  that  this  is  from  the  lovingkindness  (of  God),  that  He
terrifies  thee  in  order  that  He  may  establish  thee  in  the  kingdom
of  security.

This  subject  hath  no  end.  ’Tis  late^.  Hearken  (now)  to  the
story  of  the  hare  and  the  lion.

How  the  hare  drew  back  from  the  lion  when  he
approached  the  well.

When  the  lion  came  near  the  well,  he  saw  that  the  hare  lagged
on  the  way  and  stepped  back.

He  said,  “Why  have  you  stepped  back?  Do  not  step  back,
come  on ! ”

1263  The  hare  said,  “Where  is  my  (power  to  move  a)  foot?  for
(both)  hand  and  foot  are  gone.  My  soul  trembles  and  my
heart  (courage)  has  fled.

Seest  thou  not  the  colour  of  my  face  (pale)  as  gold?  My
colour  indeed  is  giving  knowledge  of  my  inward  state.

Since  God  has  called  the  (external)  sign  (aspect)  informative,
the  eye  of  the  gnostic  has  remained  turned  towards  the  sign.

Colour  and  scent  are  significant  like  a bell:  the  neigh  of  a
horse  makes  (one)  acquainted  with  the  horse.

The  sound  made  by  any  thing  conveys  knowledge  of  it,  so

^ I.e.  the  forbidden  fruit.  J ‘2  I.e.  “there  has  been  a long  digression.”


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS  71

that  you  may  distinguish  the  bray  of  an  ass  from  the  creak
of  a door.

Touching  the  discrimination  of  persons  (one  from  another),  i-;o
the  Prophet  said,  ‘ A man  is  hidden  when  his  tongue  is  folded  up.’

The  colour  of  the  face  indicates  the  state  of  the  heart : have
pity  on  me,  implant  love  of  me  in  thy  heart.

A red  complexion  has  the  sound  of  (declares  and  expresses)
thankfulness  (satisfaction);  the  sound  (signification)  of  a pale
complexion  is  patience  and  unthankfulness.

There  has  come  upon  me  that  which  took  away  hand  and
foot,  took  away  colour  of  face  and  strength  and  (every  outward)
mark;

That  which  shatters  every  thing  it  comes  upon,  tears  up
every  tree  from  root  and  bottom;

There  has  come  upon  me  that  by  which  man  and  animal,  1275
mineral  and  plant  have  been  checkmated.

These  indeed  are  (only)  parts,  (but)  wholes  (too)  are  by  him
(Doom)  made  yellow  in  hue  and  corrupt  in  odour.

So  that  the  world  is  now  patient,  now  thankful;  the  garden
now  puts  on  a robe  (of  verdure)  and  again  is  bare.

The  sun,  which  rises  fire-coloured,  at  another  hour  sinks
headlong.

Stars  shining  in  the  four  quarters  (of  the  sky)  are,  from  time
to  time,  afflicted  with  (consumed  by)  burning.

The  moon,  which  excels  the  stars  in  beauty,  becomes  like  a i::8o
phantom  from  the  malady  of  a hectic  fever.

This  earth,  quiet  and  controlled,  is  thrown  by  earthquakes
into  feverish  tremors.

Oh,  from  this  inherited  woe  many  a mountain  in  the  world
has  become  tiny  fragments  and  (grains  of)  sand.

This  air  is  conjoined  with  the  (vital)  spirit,  (but)  when  the
Divine  destiny  comes,  it  turns  foul  and  stinking.

The  sweet  water  that  was  a sister  (congenial)  to  the  spirit,
(after  standing)  in  a pool,  became  yellow  and  bitter  and  turbid.

The  fire  that  has  wind  in  its  moustache* — a single  puff  of  1285
wind  calls  death  upon  it.

The  state  of  the  sea  (is  such  that)  from  its  agitation  and  com-
motion (you  may)  perceive  the  changes  of  its  mind.

The  whirling  heaven,  which  is  (ever  engaged)  in  seeking  and
searching — its  state  is  like  the  state  of  its  children;

Now  nadir,  now  middle,  now  zenith:  therein  are  host  on
host  of  stars  fortunate  and  unlucky.

From  thyself,  O part  made  up  of  wholes,  apprehend  the  state
of  every  simple  (uncompounded)  thing.

Inasmuch  as  wholes  suffer  grief  and  pain,  how  should  their  1290
part  not  be  pale-faced  (sick  and  subject  to  decay)?

* I.e.  “ that  is  puffed  up  with  pride.”


72


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Especially  a part  which  is  composed  of  contraries — of  water
and  earth  and  fire  and  air.

It  is  no  wonder  that  the  sheep  recoiled  from  the  wolf ; the  wonder
is  that  this  sheep  set  its  heart  on  (became  friendly  with)  the  wolf.

Life  is  the  peace  (harmony)  of  contraries;  death  is  the  fact
that  war  arose  between  them.

The  grace  of  God  has  given  amity  to  this  lion  and  wild-ass —
these  two  far  distant  contraries.

Since  the  world  is  sick  and  a prisoner,  what  wonder  if  the
sick  one  is  passing  away?”

From  this  point  of  view  he  (the  hare)  recited  counsels  to  the
lion.  ‘‘  I have  lagged  behind,”  said  he,  “because  of  these  bonds.”


How  the  lion  asked  the  reason  of  the  hare's  drawing  back.

The  lion  said  to  him,  “Amongst  (all)  the  causes  of  your
malady  tell  (me)  the  special  cause,  for  this  is  my  object.”

“That  lion,”  he  said,  “lives  in  this  well:  within  this  fortress
he  is  safe  from  harms.”

Every  one  who  is  wise  chose  the  bottom  of  the  well  (to  live
in),  because  spiritual  joys  are  (to  be  attained  only)  in  solitude,
loo  The  darkness  of  the  well  is  better  than  the  dark  shades  of
the  w'orld : he  that  followed  at  the  heels  of  the  world  never  saved
his  head.

“Come  on,”  said  the  lion;  “my  blow  subdues  him:  see  thou
whether  that  lion  is  in  the  well  at  present.”

The  hare  answered,  “I  am  consumed  with  (dread  of)  that
fieriness  (wrath) : perhaps  thou  wilt  take  me  beside  thee,

That  with  thy  support,  O mine  of  generosity,  I may  open
my  eyes  and  look  into  the  well.”

How  the  lion  looked  into  the  well  and  sazv  the  reflexion  of
himself  and  the  hare  in  the  water.

When  the  lion  took  him  to  his  side,  under  the  lion’s  pro-
tection he  began  to  run  tow'ards  the  well.

305  As  soon  as  they  looked  at  the  water  in  the  well,  there  shone
forth  in  the  water  the  light  (reflected)  from  the  lion  and  him
(the  hare).

The  lion  saw  his  own  reflexion:  from  the  water  shone  the
image  of  a lion  with  a plump  hare  at  his  side.

When  he  beheld  his  adversary  in  the  water,  he  left  him  (the
hare)  and  sprang  into  the  well.

He  fell  into  the  well  which  he  had  dug,  because  his  iniquity
was  coming  (back)  on  his  own  head.

The  iniquity  of  evil-doers  became  (for  them)  a dark  well : so
have  said  all  the  wise.


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS


73

The  more  iniquitous  one  is,  the  more  frightful  is  his  well:  i
(Divine)  Justice  has  ordained  worse  (punishment)  forworse  (sin).

O you  who  from  iniquity  are  digging  a well  (for  others),  you
are  making  a snare  for  yourself.

Do  not  weave  (a  cocoon)  round  yourself,  like  the  silkworm.
You  are  digging  a well  for  yourself  (to  fall  in) : dig  with  modera-
tion (not  too  deep).

Deem  not  the  weak  to  be  without  a champion:  recite  from
the  Qur’an  (the  words).  When  the  help  of  God  shall  come.

If  you  are  an  elephant  and  vour  foe  fled  from  you,  lo,  the
retribution  came  upon  you,  birds  in  flocks.

If  any  poor  man  on  the  earth  beg  for  mercy,  a loud  tumult  i
falls  on  (arises  among)  the  Host  of  Heaven.

If  you  bite  him  with  your  teeth  and  make  him  bleed,  tooth-
ache will  attack  you — how  will  you  do  (then)?

The  lion  saw  himself  in  the  well,  and  in  his  fury  he  did  not
know  himself  at  that  moment  from  the  enemy.

He  regarded  his  own  reflexion  as  his  enemy : necessarily  he
drew  a sword  against  himself.

Oh,  many  an  iniquity  that  you  see  in  others  is  your  own
nature  (reflected)  in  them,  O reader!

In  them  shone  forth  all  that  you  are  in  your  hypocrisy  and  i
iniquity  and  insolence.

You  are  that  (evil-doer),  and  you  are  striking  those  blows  at
yourself : ’tis  yourself  you  are  cursing  at  that  moment.

You  do  not  see  clearly  the  evil  in  yourself,  else  you  would
hate  yourself  with  (all)  your  soul.

You  are  assaulting  yourself,  O simpleton,  like  the  lion  who
made  a rush  at  himself.

When  you  reach  the  bottom  of  your  own  nature,  then  you
will  know  that  that  vileness  was  from  yourself.

At  the  bottom  (of  the  well)  it  became  manifest  to  the  lion  that  i
he  who  seemed  to  him  to  be  another  was  (really)  his  own  image.

Whoever  tears  out  the  teeth  of  a poor  wretch  is  doing  what
the  falsely-seeing  lion  did.

O you  who  see  the  bad  reflexion  on  the  face  of  your  uncle,
it  is  not  your  uncle  that  is  bad,  it  is  you : do  not  run  away  from
yourself !

The  Faithful  are  mirrors  to  one  another:  this  saying  is  related
from  the  Prophet.

You  held  a blue  glass  before  your  eye:  for  that  reason  the
world  seemed  to  you  to  be  blue.

Unless  vou  are  blind,  know  that  this  blueness  comes  from  i
yourself:  speak  ill  of  yourself,  speak  no  more  ill  of  any  one  (else).

If  the  true  believer  was  not  seeing  by  the  Light  of  God,  how
did  things  unseen  appear  naked  (plainly  revealed)  to  the  true
believer?


74  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Inasmuch  as  you  were  seeing  by  the  Fire  of  God,  you  did
not  discern  the  difference  between  good  and  evil.

Little  by  little  throw  water  on  the  fire,  that  your  fire  may
become  light,  O man  of  sorrow!

Throw  Thou,  O Lord,  the  purifying  water,  that  this  world-
fire  may  become  wholly  light.

1335  All  the  water  of  the  sea  is  under  Thy  command;  water  and
fire,  O Lord,  are  Thine.

If  Thou  wiliest,  fire  becomes  sweet  water;  and  if  Thou  wiliest
not,  even  water  becomes  fire.

This  search  (aspiration)  in  us  is  also  brought  into  existence
by  Thee;  deliverance  from  iniquity  is  Thy  gift,  O Lord.

Without  (our)  seeking  Thou  hast  given  us  this  search.  Thou
hast  given  (us)  gifts  without  number  and  (without)  end.


How  the  hare  brought  to  the  beasts  of  chase  the  news  that
the  lion  had  fallen  into  the  well.

When  the  hare  was  gladdened  by  deliverance  (from  the  lion),
he  began  to  run  towards  the  beasts  until  (he  came  to)  the  desert.

1340  Having  seen  the  lion  miserably  slain  in  the  well,  he  was
skipping  joyously  all  the  way  to  the  meadow.

Clapping  his  hands  because  he  had  escaped  from  the  hand
of  Death ; fresh  and  dancing  in  the  air,  like  bough  and  leaf.

Bough  and  leaf  were  set  free  from  the  prison  of  earth,  lifted
their  heads,  and  became  comrades  of  the  wind;

The  leaves,  when  they  had  burst  (forth  from)  the  bough,
made  haste  to  reach  the  top  of  the  tree ;

With  the  tongue  of  {seed  that  put  forth)  its  sprouts  each  fruit
and  tree  severally  is  singing  thanks  to  God,

1345  Saying,  “The  Bounteous  Giver  nourished  our  root  until  the
tree  grew  big  and  stood  upright.’^

(Even  so)  the  spirits  bound  in  clay,  when  they  escape  glad
at  heart  from  their  (prisons  of)  clay.

Begin  to  dance  in  the  air  of  Divine  Love  and  become  flawless
like  the  full  moon’s  orb.

Their  bodies  dancing,  and  their  souls — nay,  do  not  ask  (how
their  souls  fare) ; and  those  things  from  which  comes  the  soul’s
delight- — nay,  do  not  ask  (of  those  things)  I

The  hare  lodged  the  lion  in  prison.  Shame  on  a lion  who
was  discomfited  by  a hare  I

1350  He  is  in  such  a disgrace,  and  still — this  is  a wonder — he
would  fain  be  addressed  by  the  title  of  Fakhr-i  Din^.

O thou  lion  that  liest  at  the  bottom  of  this  lonely  well,  thy
hare-like  soul  (nafs)  has  shed  and  drunk  thy  blood ;


^ “Pride  of  the  Reiicfion  (of  Islam).”


THE  LION  AND  THE  BEASTS  75

Thy  hare-soul  is  feeding  in  the  desert,  (whilst)  thou  art  (lying)
at  the  bottom  of  this  well  of  “How?”  and  “Why?”

That  lion-catcher  (the  hare)  ran  towards  the  beasts,  crying,
“Rejoice,  O people,  since  the  announcer  of  joy  is  come.

Glad  news ! Glad  news,  O company  of  meny-makers ! That
hell-hound  has  gone  back  to  Hell.

Glad  news ! Glad  news ! The  enemy  of  your  liv'es — his  teeth  1355
have  been  torn  out  by  the  vengeance  of  his  Creator.

He  who  smote  many  heads  with  his  claws — him  too  the
broom  of  Death  has  swept  awa}"  like  rubbish.”

How  the  beasts  gathered  round  the  hare  and  spoke
in  praise  of  him.

Then  all  the  wild  beasts  assembled,  jovous  and  laughing
gleefully  in  rapture  and  excitement.

They  formed  a ring,  he  (the  hare)  in  the  midst  like  a candle:
all  the  animals  of  the  desert  bowed  (in  homage)  to  him.

“Art  thou  a heavenly  angel  or  a peri?  No,  thou  art  the
Azrael  of  fierce  lions.

Whatever  thou  art,  our  souls  are  offered  in  sacrifice  to  thee.  1360
Thou  hast  prevailed.  Health  to  thy  hand  and  arm !

God  turned  this  water  into  thy  stream.  Blessing  on  thy
hand  and  arm !

Explain  how  thou  didst  meditate  tvith  guile,  and  how  thou
didst  guilefully  wipe  out  that  ruffian.

Explain,  in  order  that  the  tale  may  be  the  means  of  curing
(our  malady);  explain,  that  it  may  be  a salve  for  our  souls.

Explain!  for  in  consequence  of  the  iniquity  of  that  tyrant
our  souls  have  myriads  of  wounds.”

“O  Sirs,”  said  he,  “it  was  (by)  God’s  aid;  else,  who  in  the  1365
world  is  a hare  (who  am  I,  that  I should  have  been  able  to
do  this)?

He  (God)  bestowed  power  on  me  and  gave  light  to  my  heart:
the  fight  in  my  heart  gave  strength  to  hand  and  foot.”

From  God  come  preferments  (to  high  position),  from  God
also  come  changes  (which  bring  one  to  low  estate).

God  in  (due)  course  and  turn  is  ever  displaying  this  (Divine)
aid  to  doubters  and  seers  (alike).

Take  heed!  Do  not  exult  in  a kingdom  bestowed  in  turns
(passing  from  one  to  another).  O thou  who  art  the  bondsman
of  Vicissitude,  do  not  act  as  though  thou  wert  free !

(But)  those  for  whom  is  prepared  a kingdom  beyond  Vicissi-  13-0
tude,  for  them  the  drums  (of  sovereignty)  are  beaten  beyond
the  Seven  Planets.

Beyond  Vicissitude  are  the  kings  everlasting : their  spirits  are
circling  with  the  Cupbearer  perpetually.


76  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

If  thou  wilt  renounce  this  drinking  (of  worldly  pleasures)  for
a day  or  two  (for  thy  brief  lifetime),  thou  wilt  dip  thy  mouth
in  the  drink  of  Paradise.


Commentary  on  {the  Tradition)  “ We  have  returned  from  the
lesser  Jihad  to  the  greater  Jihad.”

0 kings,  we  have  slain  the  outward  enem.y,  (but)  there  re-
mains within  (us)  a worse  enemy  than  he.

To  slay  this  (enemy)  is  not  the  work  of  reason  and  intelli-
gence: the  inward  lion  is  not  subdued  by  the  hare.

1375  This  carnal  self  {nafs)  is  Hell,  and  Hell  is  a dragon  (the  fire
of)  which  is  not  diminished  by  oceans  (of  water).

It  would  drink  up  the  Seven  Seas,  and  still  the  blazing  of
that  consumer  of  all  creatures  would  not  become  less.

Stones  and  stony-hearted  infidels  enter  it,  miserable  and
shamefaced,

(But)  still  it  is  not  appeased  by  all  this  food,  until  there  comes
to  it  from  God  this  call —

“Art  thou  filled,  art  thou  filled?”  It  says,  “Not  yet;  lo,  here
is  the  fire,  here  is  the  glow,  here  is  the  burning!”

1380  It  made  a mouthful  of  and  swallowed  a whole  world,  its
belly  cr}’ing  aloud,  ” Is  there  any  more?”

God,  from  (the  realm)  where  place  is  not,  sets  His  foot  on  it:
then  it  subsides  at  (the  command)  Be,  and  it  was.

Inasmuch  as  this  self  of  ours  is  a part  of  Hell,  and  all  parts
have  the  nature  of  the  w'hole.

To  God  (alone)  belongs  this  foot  (power)  to  kill  it : who,  indeed,
but  God  should  draw  its  bow  (vanquish  it)  ?

Only  the  straight  arrow  is  put  on  the  bow,  (but)  this  bow
(of  the  self)  has  (its)  arrows  bent  back  and  crooked.

13S5  Be  straight,  hke  an  arrow,  and  escape  from  the  bow,  for
without  doubt  every  straight  (arrow)  will  fly  from  the  bow  (to
its  mark).

When  I turned  back  from  the  outer  warfare,  I set  my  face
towards  the  inner  warfare.

We  have  returned  from  the  lesser  Jihad,  we  are  engaged
along  with  the  Prophet  in  the  greater  Jihad.

1 pray  God  to  grant  me  strength  and  aid  and  (the  right  of)
boasting^,  that  I may  root  up  with  a needle^  this  mountain
of  Qaf.

Deem  of  small  account  the  lion  (champion)  w'ho  breaks  the
ranks  (of  the  enemy) : the  (true)  lion  is  he  that  breaks  (conquers)
himself.

^ I.e.  the  success  which  would  entitle  me  to  boast  of  having  conquered
my  “self.”

^ I.e.  slowly  and  painfully.


‘UMAR  AND  THE  AMBASSADOR


77


Hoiv  the  ambassador  of  Rum  came  to  the  Commander  of  the

Faithful,  ‘ Umar,  may  God  be  well-pleased  with  him,  and  icit-

nessed  the  gifts  of  grace  with  which  ‘ Umar,  may  God  be  zvell-

pleased  with  him,  zcas  endozced.

To  ‘Umar  in  Medina  there  came  through  the  wide  desert  an  139°
ambassador  from  the  Emperor  of  Riim.

He  said,  “ O ye  attendants,  where  is  the  palace  of  the  Caliph,
that  I may  take  thither  my  horse  and  baggage?”

The  folk  said  to  him,  “He  has  no  palace:  ‘Umar’s  (only)
palace  is  an  illumined  spirit.

Though  he  has  a (great)  renown  from  being  Commander  (of
the  Faithful),  he  has  (no  dwelling  except)  a hut,  like  the  poor.

O brother,  how  wilt  thou  behold  his  palace,  when  hair  has
grown  in  the  eye  of  thy  heart?

Purge  thy  heart’s  eye  of  hair  and  defect,  and  then  hope  to  1395
behold  his  palace.

Whoever  hath  a spirit  purged  of  (sensual)  desires  will  at  once
behold  the  Presence  and  the  Holy  Porch.

When  Mohammed  was  purged  of  this  fire  and  smoke  (of
human  passions),  wheresoever  he  turned  his  face,  was  the  Face
of  Allah.

Inasmuch  as  thou  art  a friend  to  the  evil  suggestions  of  the
malign  one  (Satan),  how  wilt  thou  know  (the  true  meaning  of)
There  is  the  Face  of  Allah':

Every  one  in  whose  breast  the  gate  is  opened  will  behold
from  every  city  the  sun  (shining).

God  is  manifest  amongst  others  as  the  moon  amidst  the  stars,

Lay  two  finger-ends  on  thy  two  eyes,  and  wilt  thou  see  aught
of  the  world?  Deal  justly  (confess  that  thou  wilt  see  nothing).

If  thou  dost  not  see  this  world,  (yet)  it  is  not  non-e.xistent ;
the  fault  lies  not  save  in  the  finger  of  thy  evil  self.

Come,  lift  the  finger  from  thine  eye,  and  then  behold  what-
soever thou  wishest.

To  Noah  his  people  said,  ‘Where  is  the  Divine  recompense?  ’

He  said,  ‘On  the  other  side  of  they  cover  themselves  zcith  their
garments.

Ye  have  wrapped  your  faces  and  heads  in  your  clothes:  of  1405
necessity  ye  have  eyes  and  see  not.’

Man  is  eye,  and  (all)  the  rest  is  (worthless)  skin:  the  sight  of
that  (eve)  is  (consists  in)  seeing  the  Beloved.

When  there  is  not  sight  of  the  Beloved,  it  (the  eye)  is  better
blind;  the  beloved  who  is  not  everlasting  is  better  afar  (away
and  out  of  sight).”

When  the  ambassador  of  Rum  admitted  these  fresh  (spiritual)
words  into  his  hearing  (gave  ear  to  them),  he  became  more
full  of  longing.


78  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

He  fixed  his  eye  on  seeking  ‘Umar,  he  let  his  baggage  and
horse  be  lost.

1410  He  was  going  in  every  direction  after  that  man  of  (great)
accomplishment,  inquiring  madly  for  him.

Saying,  “Can  there  be  in  the  world  such  a man,  and  he  be
hid,  like  the  spirit,  from  the  world?  ”

He  sought  him,  that  he  might  be  as  a slave  to  him:  inevitably
the  seeker  is  a finder.

An  Arab  woman  of  the  desert  saw  that  he  was  a stranger-
guest.  “Look,”  said  she,  “there  is  ‘Umar  under  that  palm.

There  he  is  under  the  palm-tree,  apart  from  the  people:
behold  the  Shadow  of  God  asleep  in  the  shade!”

How  the  ambassador  of  Rum  found  the  Commander  of  the

Faithful,  'Umar,  may  God  be  well-pleased  with  him,  sleeping

under  the  palm-tree.

1415  He  came  thither  and  stood  afar  off;  he  saw  ‘L^mar  and  fell
a-trembling.

An  awe  came  upon  the  ambassador  from  that  slumbering
man;  a sweet  ecstasy  lodged  in  his  soul.

Love  and  awe  are  contrary  to  each  other:  he  saw  these  two
contraries  united  in  his  heart^.

He  said  to  himself : “ I have  seen  (many)  kings,  I have  been
great  (in  esteem)  and  chosen  (for  honour)  in  the  presence  of
sultans :

I had  no  awe  or  dread  of  kings,  (but)  awe  of  this  man  has
robbed  me  of  my  wits.

1420  I have  gone  into  a jungle  of  lions  and  leopards,  and  my  face
did  not  change  colour  because  of  them;

Often  where  the  ranks  are  arrayed  on  the  field  of  battle  have
I become  (fierce)  as  a lion  at  the  time  when  the  affair  is  grievous
(desperate) ;

Many  a heavy  blow  have  I suffered  and  inflicted,  I have  been
stouter  in  heart  than  (all)  the  others.

This  man  is  asleep  on  the  earth,  unarmed,  (and  yet)  1 am
trembling  in  my  seven  limbs  (my  whole  body) : what  is  this  ?

This  is  awe  of  God,  it  is  not  from  created  beings,  it  is  not
awe  of  this  man  who  wears  the  frock  of  a dervish.

1425  Whoever  is  afraid  of  God  and  has  chosen  fear  of  God  (as
his  religion),  the  Jinn  and  mankind  and  every  one  who  sees
(him)  are  afraid  of  him.”

Thus  meditating,  he  folded  his  hands  reverently.  After  a
while  ‘Umar  sprang  up  from  sleep.


* Literally,  “ liver.”


‘UMAR  AND  THE  AMBASSADOR


79


How  the  ambassador  of  Rum  saluted  the  Commander  of  the
Faithfid,  may  God  be  well-pleased  with  him.

He  did  homage  to  ‘Umar  and  salaamed:  the  Prophet  said,
“(First)  the  salaam,  then  the  talk.”

Then  he  (‘Umar)  said,  “To  thee  (greeting),”  called  him  (to
come)  forward,  reassured  him,  and  bade  him  sit  down  by
his  side.

Fear  ye  not  is  the  hospitality  offered  to  those  who  fear : that
is  proper  (entertainment)  for  one  who  is  afraid.

When  any  one  is  afraid,  they  make  him  (feel)  secure;  they  1430
soothe  (his)  fearful  heart.

How  should  you  say  “Fear  not”  to  one  who  has  no  fear?
Why  give  lessons  (to  him)?  He  needs  no  lessons.

He  (‘Umar)  made  that  disturbed  mind  (be)  of  good  cheer
and  made  his  desolate  heart  (be)  flourishing  (happy).

Afterwards  he  addressed  to  him  subtle  discourses  and  (spoke)
of  the  holy  attributes  of  God — how  good  a Friend  is  He! —

And  of  the  lovingkindnesses  of  God  to  the  Abddl  (saints),
in  order  that  he  (the  ambassador)  might  know  (the  meaning  of)
maqdm  (permanent  station)  and  hdl  (passing  state).

The  hdl  is  like  the  unveiling  of  that  beauteous  bride,  while  1435
the  maqdm  is  the  (king’s)  being  alone  with  the  bride.

The  unveiling  is  witnessed  by  the  king  and  by  others  as  well,
(but)  at  the  time  of  being  alone  (with  the  bride)  there  is  no  one
except  the  mighty  king.

The  bride  unveils  before  commons  and  nobles  (alike) ; in  the
bridal  chamber  the  king  is  (alone)  with  the  bride.

There  is  many  a one  of  the  Sufis  who  enjoys  hdl,  (but)  he
that  has  attained  to  maqdm  is  rare  amongst  them.

He  (‘Umar)  reminded  him  of  the  stages  traversed  by  the  soul,
and  he  reminded  him  of  the  journeys  of  the  spirit.

And  of  the  Time  which  has  (ever)  been  void  of  time,  and  of  1440
the  Station  of  Holiness  which  has  (ever)  been  majestical.

And  of  the  atmosphere  wherein  the  Simurgh  of  the  spirit,
before  this  (material  life),  has  flown  and  experienced  (the  bounty
of  Divine)  grace

Every  single  flight  thereof  (being)  greater  than  the  horizons
(of  this  world)  and  greater  than  the  hope  and  greed  of  the  longing
lover.

When  ‘Umar  found  the  stranger  in  appearance  a friend  (in
reality),  he  found  (that)  his  soul  (was)  seeking  (to  learn)  the
(Divine)  mysteries.

The  Shaykh  (‘Umar)  was  adept  and  the  disciple  (the  am-
bassador) eager;  the  man  (rider)  was  quick  (dexterous)  and  the
beast  belonged  to  the  royal  court  (was  nobly  bred  and  docile).

^ Literally,  “has  seen  flight  and  (Divine)  bounty.”


So


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

1445  That  spiritual  guide  (‘Umar)  perceived  that  he  (the  am-
bassador) possessed  (the  capacity  for  receiving)  guidance:  he
sowed  the  good  seed  in  the  good  soil.


How  the  ambassador  of  Rum  questioned  the  Commander  of
the  Faithful,  may  God  be  well-pleased  with  him.

The  man  said  to  him,  “O  Commander  of  the  Faithful,  how
did  the  spirit  come  to  the  earth  from  above?

How  did  the  infinite  bird  go  into  the  cage?”  He  replied,
“ God  recited  spells  and  incantations  over  the  spirit.

"When  He  recites  spells  over  the  non-existences  which  have
no  eye  or  ear,  they  begin  to  stir.

Because  of  His  spells  the  non-existences  at  that  ver\'  moment
are  dancing  joyously  into  existence.

1450  When,  again.  He  recited  a spell  over  the  existent,  at  His
word  the  existent  marched  (back)  post-haste  into  non-existence.

He  spake  into  the  ear  of  the  rose  and  made  it  laughing
(blooming);  He  spake  to  the  stone  and  made  it  a cornelian  of
the  mine.

He  spake  to  the  body  a sign  (message),  so  that  it  became
spirit ; He  spake  to  the  sun,  so  that  it  became  radiant.

Again  He  puts  into  its  ear  a fearful  saying,  and  upon  the  face
of  the  sun  fall  a hundred  eclipses.

Consider  what  that  Speaker  chanted  into  the  ear  of  the  cloud,
so  that  it  poured  tears  from  its  eye,  like  a waterskin.

1455  Consider  what  God  has  chanted  into  the  ear  of  the  earth,  so
that  it  became  regardful  and  has  (ever  since)  remained  silent.”

Whosoever  in  perplexity  is  sorely  troubled,  God  has  spoken
the  riddle  into  his  ear,

That  He  may  imprison  him  in  two  (doubtful)  thoughts,
(namely),  “Shall  I do  what  He  told  (me)  or  the  contrary
thereof?  ”

From  (the  decree  of)  God  also,  one  side  obtains  the  prepon-
derance, and  from  that  (Divine)  quarter  he  chooses  one  of  the
t\vo  (alternatives).

If  thou  wouldst  not  have  the  mind  of  thy  spirit  in  (a  state  of)
perplexity,  do  not  stuff  this  cotton-wool  into  thy  spiritual  ear,
1460  So  that  thou  mayst  understand  those  riddles  of  His,  so  that
thou  mayst  apprehend  (both)  the  secret  sign  and  the  open.

Then  the  spiritual  ear  becomes  the  place  where  wahy  (in-
spiration) descends.  What  is  wahy}  A speech  hidden  from
sense-perception .

The  spiritual  ear  and  eye  are  other  than  this  sense-perception,
the  ear  of  (discursive)  reason  and  the  ear  of  opinion  are  destitute
of  this  (inspiration).

The  word  “compulsion”  {jabr)  made  me  impatient  (uncon-


‘UMAR  AND  THE  AMBASSADOR  8l

trollable)  for  love’s  sake,  while  it  confined  in  (the  prison  of)
compulsion  him  who  is  not  a lover.

This  is  union  with  God,  and  it  is  not  compulsion : this  is  the
shining  forth  of  the  moon,  this  is  not  a cloud.

And  if  this  be  compulsion,  it  is  not  the  compulsion  of  (suffered  1 + ''
by)  the  vulgar:  it  is  not  the  compulsion  of  (exerted  by)  the  evil-
commanding  self-willed  (soul).

O son,  (only)  they  know  (the  real  meaning  of)  compulsion
in  whose  hearts  God  has  opened  the  sight  (of  the  spiritual  eye).

To  them  the  unseen  things  of  the  future  became  manifest;
to  them  recollection  of  the  past  became  naught.

Their  freewill  and  compulsion  is  different  (from  that  of
ordinary'  men):  in  oyster-shells  drops  (of  rain)  are  pearls.

Outside  (of  the  shell)  it  is  a drop  of  water,  small  or  great,
(but)  within  the  shell  it  is  a small  or  big  pearl.

Those  persons  have  the  nature  of  the  muskdeer’s  gland:  ifo
externally  thev  are  (as)  blood,  while  within  them  is  the  fragrance
of  musk.

Do  not  say,  “This  substance  externally  is  blood:  how  should
it  become  a musky  perfume  when  it  goes  into  the  gland?”

Do  not  say,  “This  copper  e.xternally  was  despicable:  how
should  it  assume  nobility  in  the  heart  (midst)  of  the  elixir?”

In  thee  (the  matter  of)  freewill  and  compulsion  was  a (mere)
fancy,  (but)  when  it  went  into  them  it  became  the  light  of  (Divine)
jMajesty\

When  bread  is  (wrapped)  in  the  tablecloth  it  is  the  inanimate
thing  (so-called),  (but)  in  the  human  body  it  becomes  the  glad
spirit  (of  life).

It  does  not  become  transmuted  in  the  heart  of  (within)  the  table-  14-j
cloth:  the  (animal)  soul  transmutes  it  with  (the  water  of)  Salsabil.

O thou  who  readest  aright,  such  is  the  power  of  the  soul:
what,  then,  must  be  the  power  of  that  Soul  of  soul?

The  piece  of  flesh  which  is  j\Ian,  endowed  with  intelligence
and  soul,  cleaves  mountain  and  sea  and  mine.

The  strength  of  the  mountain-riving  soul  is  (shown  in)  the
splitting  of  rocks;  the  strength  of  the  Soul  of  soul  in  the  moon
teas  split  asunder.

If  the  heart  should  open  the  lid  of  the  wallet  of  (this)  mystery,
the  soul  would  rush  (in  rapture)  towards  the  highest  heaven.

How  Adam  imputed  that  fault  {which  he  had  committed)  to  himself,

saying,  “ O Lord,  we  have  done  wrong,”  and  hozc  ihlis  imputed

his  own  sin  to  God,  saying,  “Because  Thou  hast  seduced  me.”

Consider  both  our  action  and  the  action  of  God.  Regard  our
action  as  existent.  This  is  manifest.

If  the  action  of  created  beings  be  not  in  the  midst  (ob^'iously
existent),  then  say  not  to  any  one,  “Why  have  you  acted  thus?  ”

6


X M


82


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

The  creative  act  of  God  brings  our  actions  into  existence:
our  actions  are  the  effects  of  the  creative  act  of  God.

A rational  being  perceives  either  the  letter  (the  outer  sign)
or  the  (inner)  purpose  (the  spirit) : how  should  he  comprehend
two  accidents  at  once?

If  he  goes  (turns  his  mind)  to  the  spirit,  he  becomes  un-
heedful of  the  letter:  no  eye  sees  forward  and  backward  at  the
same  moment.

i4'^5  At  the  time  when  you  look  in  front,  how  at  the  same  time
can  you  look  behind  you?  Recognise  this.

Inasmuch  as  the  soul  does  not  comprehend  (both)  the  letter
and  the  spirit,  how  should  the  soul  be  the  creator  of  them
both?

O son,  (only)  God  comprehends  both:  the  (one)  action  does
not  hinder  Him  from  the  other  action.

Satan  said  Because  Thou  hast  seduced  me:  the  vile  Devil  con-
cealed his  own  act.

Adam  said  IVe  have  done  zcrong  unto  ourselves-,  he  was  not,
like  us,  unheedful  of  the  action  of  God.

1490  From  respect  he  concealed  it  (the  action  of  God)  in  (regard
to)  the  sin:  by  casting  the  sin  upon  himself  he  ate  fruit  (was
blessed).

After  his  repentance.  He  (God)  said  to  him,  “O  Adam,  did
not  I create  in  thee  that  sin  and  (those)  tribulations?

Was  it  not  jMy  foreordainment  and  destiny?  How  didst  thou
conceal  that  at  the  time  of  excusing  thyself?  ”

He  (Adam)  said,  “I  was  afraid,  (so)  I did  not  let  respect  go
(did  not  fail  to  observe  due  respect).”  He  (God)  said,  “ I too
have  observed  it  towards  thee.”

Whoever  brings  reverence  gets  reverence  (in  return) : whoever
brings  sugar  eats  almond-cake.

1495  For  whom  are  the  good  zcomenl  For  the  good  men.  Treat  thy
friend  with  honour;  offend  (him)  and  see  (what  will  happen).

O heart,  bring  (forward)  a parable  for  the  sake  of  (illustrating)
a difference,  that  thou  mayst  know  (what  distinguishes)  com-
pulsion from  freewill.

(Take  the  case  of)  a hand  that  is  shaking  from  (morbid  or
involuntary)  tremor  and  (the  case  of)  a person  whose  hand  you
cause  to  shake  (by  knocking  it  away)  from  its  place.

Know  that  both  (these)  movements  are  created  by  God,  but
it  is  impossible  to  compare  the  latter  wdth  the  former.

You  are  sorry  for  having  caused  it  (his  hand)  to  shake:  how
is  the  man  afflicted  with  (a  morbid)  tremor  not  sorry?

1500  This  is  the  intellectual  quest.  What  is  (the  use  of  such  a)
quest,  O ingenious  one?  That  perchance  (by  its  means)  a man
of  weak  understanding  may  find  his  w'ay  to  that  place  (gain
some  idea  of  the  truth).


‘UMAR  AND  THE  AMBASSADOR  83

(Yet)  the  intellectual  quest,  though  it  be  (fine  as)  pearls  and
coral,  is  other  than  the  spiritual  quest.

The  spiritual  quest  is  on  another  plane;  the  spiritual  wine
has  another  consistency.

At  the  time  when  the  intellectual  quest  was  in  keeping  (with
the  circumstances),  this  ‘Umar  was  intimate  with  Bu  ’1-Hakam,

(But)  when  ‘Umar  went  away  from  intellect  towards  spirit,

Bu  ’1-Hakam  became  Bu  Jahl  (the  father  of  ignorance)  in
searching  into  that  (subject).

He  is  perfect  on  the  side  of  sense-perception  and  under-  150,^
standing,  though  indeed  he  is  ignorant  in  regard  to  the  spirit.

Know  that  the  quest  of  the  intellect  and  the  senses  is  (con-
cerned with)  effects  or  secondary  causes.  The  spiritual  quest
is  either  \\onder  or  the  father  of  wonder  (either  wonderful  or
beyond  wonder).

The  illumination  of  the  spirit  comes:  (then)  there  remains
not,  O thou  who  seekest  illumination,  conclusion  and  premise
or  that  which  contradicts  (a  statement)  (or)  that  which  renders
(its  acceptance)  necessary.

Because  the  seer  on  whom  His  (God’s)  Light  is  dawning  is
quite  independent  of  the  (logical)  proof  which  resembles  a
(blind  man’s)  staff.

Commentary  on  “And  He  is  with  you  wheresoever  ye  be.’’

Once  more  we  come  back  to  the  tale:  when,  indeed,  did  we
go  forth  from  the  tale?

If  we  come  to  ignorance,  that  is  His  prison,  and  if  we  come  1510
to  knowledge,  that  is  His  palace;

And  if  we  come  to  sleep,  we  are  His  into.xicated  ones;  and  if
to  wakefulness,  we  are  in  His  hands;

And  if  we  weep,  we  are  a cloud  laden  with  the  bounty  dis-
pensed by  Him;  and  if  we  laugh,  at  that  time  we  are  His
lightning;

And  if  (we  come)  to  wrath  and  war,  ’tis  the  refle.xion  of  His
IMight;  and  if  to  peace  and  forgiveness,  ’tis  the  refle.xion  of
His  Love.

Who  are  we?  In  this  tangled  (complex)  world  what  (thing
other  than  He)  indeed  hath  He  (who  is  single)  like  aiift  Nothing,
nothing.

Hozv  the  ambassador  asked  ‘ Umar,  may  God  be  well-pleased  ivith

him,  concerning  the  cause  of  the  tribulation  suffered  by  spirits

in  these  bodies  of  clay.

He  said,  “O  ‘Umar,  what  was  the  wisdom  and  mystery  of  1515
imprisoning  that  pure  one  (the  spirit)  in  this  dirty  place?

The  pure  water  has  become  hidden  in  mud : the  pure  spirit
has  become  bound  in  bodies.”


84  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

He  (‘Umar)  said,  “Thou  art  making  a profound  inquiry",
thou  art  confining  a meaning  in  a word.

Thou  hast  imprisoned  the  free  (unconditioned)  meaning,
thou  hast  bound  the  wind  in  a word.

This  thou  hast  done  for  a benefit  (good  purpose),  O thou
who  thyself  art  blind^  to  the  benefit  (good  purpose)  of  God.

1520  He  from  whom  (even,')  benefit  was  born,  how  should  He  not
see  that  which  was  seen  b\"  us  ?

There  are  myriads  of  benefits,  and  every  myriad  is  (but)  a
few  beside  that  one^.

The  breath  of  thy  speech,  which  is  a part  of  the  parts  (bodily
members),  became  beneficial;  why  (then)  is  the  whole  of  the
whole  (the  universal  connexion  of  spirit  and  body)  devoid  (of
benefit)  ?

Thou  who  art  a part — thy  act  (of  speaking)  is  beneficial:
why  (then)  dost  thou  lift  thy  hand  to  assail  the  whole?

If  there  is  no  benefit  in  speech,  do  not  speak;  and  if  there  is,
leave  off  making  objections,  and  endeavour  to  give  thanks.”

15-5  Thanksgi\ing  to  God  is  a collar  on  every  neck  (every  one’s
duty);  it  is  not  (thanksgiving)  to  dispute  and  make  one’s  face
look  sour.

If  thanksgiving  is  only  to  look  sour,  then  there  is  no  thanks-
giver  like  vinegar.

If  vinegar  wants  (to  find)  the  way  to  the  liver,  let  it  become
oxymel  by  (being  mixed  with)  sugar.

The  meaning  in  poetry  has  no  sureness  of  direction : it  is  like
the  sling,  it  is  not  under  control.

On  the  inner  sense  of  " Let  him  who  desires  to  sit  with  God
sit  with  the  Sufis.”

The  ambassador  became  beside  himself  from  these  one  or
two  cups  (of  spiritual  discourse) : neither  embassage  nor  message
remained  in  his  memory.

1530  He  became  distraught  at  the  power  of  God.  The  ambassador
arrived  at  this  place  (state)  and  became  a king.

When  the  torrent  reached  the  sea,  it  became  the  sea;  when
the  seed  reached  the  cornland,  it  became  the  crop  of  corn.

When  the  bread  attained  to  connexion  with  the  animal  (man),
the  dead  bread  became  living  and  endowed  with  knowledge.

When  the  wax  and  firewood  were  devoted  to  the  fire,  their
dark  essence  became  (filled  with)  light.

When  the  (powdered)  stone  of  antimony  went  into  the  eyes,
it  turned  to  sight  and  there  became  a scout  (one  who  observes
the  enemy  from  some  point  of  vantage).

* Literally,  “ in  a veil.”

^ The  confinement  of  the  spirit  in  the  body.


‘UMAR  AND  THE  AMBASSADOR  85

Oh,  happy  is  the  man  who  was  freed  from  himself  and  united  15
with  the  existence  of  a living  one !

Alas  for  the  living  one  who  consorted  with  the  dead ! He
became  dead,  and  life  sped  away  from  him.

When  you  have  fled  (for  refuge)  to  the  Qur’an  of  God,  you
have  mingled  with  the  spirit  of  the  prophets.

The  Qur’an  is  (a  description  of)  the  states  of  the  prophets,
(who  are)  the  fishes  of  the  holy  sea  of  (Divine)  Alajesty.

And  if  you  read  and  do  not  accept  (take  to  heart)  the  Qur’an,
suppose  vou  have  seen  the  prophets  and  saints  (what  will  that
avail  you  ?) ;

But  if  you  are  accepting  (the  Qur’an),  when  you  read  the  15+0
stories  (of  the  prophets),  the  bird,  your  soul,  will  be  distressed
in  its  cage.

The  bird  that  is  a prisoner  in  a cage,  (if  it)  is  not  seeking  to
escape,  ’tis  from  ignorance.

The  spirits  which  have  escaped  from  their  cages  are  the
prophets,  (those)  worthy  guides.

From  without  comes  their  voice,  (telling)  of  religion,  (and
crying),  “This,  this  is  the  way  of  escape  for  thee.

By  this  we  escaped  from  this  narrow  cage : there  is  no  means
of  escape  from  this  cage  but  this  way,

(That)  thou  shouldst  make  thyself  ill,  exceedingly  wretched,  15  ts
in  order  that  thou  mayst  be  let  out  from  (the  cage  of)  repu-
tation.”

Worldly  reputation  is  a strong  chain:  in  the  Way  how  is  this
less  than  a chain  of  iron?

The  story  of  the  merchant  to  v:hom  the  parrot  gave  a message  for

the  parrots  of  India  on  the  occasion  of  his  going  {thither)  to

trade.

There  was  a merchant,  and  he  had  a parrot  imprisoned  in  a
cage,  a pretty  parrot.

\Vhen  the  merchant  made  ready  for  travel  and  was  about  to
depart  to  India,

Because  of  his  generosity  he  said  to  each  male  slave  and  each
handmaid,  “What  shall  I bring  (home)  for  you?  Tell  (me)
quickly.”

Each  one  asked  him  for  some  object  of  desire : that  good  man  1550
gave  his  promise  to  them  all.

He  said  to  the  parrot,  “What  present  would  you  like  me  to
bring  for  you  from  the  land  of  India?”

The  parrot  said,  “When  thou  seest  the  parrots  there,  explain
my  plight  (and  say),

‘Such  and  such  a parrot,  who  is  longing  for  you,  is  in  my
prison  by  the  destiny  of  Heaven.


%


86


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

She  salutes  you  and  asks  for  justice  and  desires  (to  learn)
from  you  the  means  and  way  of  being  rightly  guided.

1555  She  says,  “ Is  it  meet  that  I in  yearning  (after  you)  should
give  up  the  ghost  and  die  here  in  separation?

Is  this  right — (that)  I (should  be)  in  grievous  bondage,  while
ye  are  now  on  green  plants,  now  on  trees?

The  faith  kept  by  friends,  is  it  like  this? — I in  this  prison
and  ve  in  the  rose-garden.

0 ye  noble  ones,  call  to  mind  this  piteous  bird,  (and  drink
in  memmry  of  me)  a morning- draught  amongst  the  meadows !

Happy  it  is  for  a friend  to  be  remembered  by  friends,  in  par-
ticular when  that  (beloved)  is  Layla  and  this  (lover)  Alajnun.

1560  O ye  who  consort  with  your  charming  and  adored  one,  am
I to  be  drinking  cups  filled  with  my  own  blood?

(O  thou  who  art  my  beloved),  quaff  one  cup  of  wine  in
memory  of  me,  if  thou  desirest  to  do  me  justice.

Or  (at  least),  when  thou  hast  drunk,  spill  one  draught  on  the
earth  in  memory  of  this  fallen  one  who  sifts  dust.

Oh,  where,  I wonder,  is  that  covenant  and  oath?  Where  are
the  promises  of  that  lip  like  candy?

If  thy  having  forsaken  thy  slave  is  because  of  (his)  ill  service
(to  thee) — when  thou  doest  ill  to  the  ill-doer,  then  what  is  the
difference  (between  master  and  slave)?

1565  Oh,  the  ill  thou  doest  in  wrath  and  quarrel  is  more  delightful
than  music  and  the  sound  of  the  harp.

Oh,  thy  cruelty  is  better  than  felicity,  and  thy  vengeance
dearer  than  life.

This  is  thy  fire : how  (what)  must  be  thy  light ! This  is  (thy)
mourning,  so  how  (what)  indeed  must  be  thy  festival !

In  respect  of  the  sweetnesses  which  thy  cruelty  hath,  and  in
respect  of  thy  beauty,  no  one  gets  to  the  bottom  of  thee^.

1 complain,  and  (yet)  I fear  lest  he  believe  me  and  from
kindness  make  that  cruelty  less.

IJ70  I am  exceedingly  enamoured  of  his  violence  and  his  gentle-
ness: 'tis  marvellous  (that)  I (am)  in  love  with  both  these
contraries.

By  God,  if  (I  escape)  from  this  thorn  (of  sorrow^)  and  enter
the  garden  (of  joy),  because  of  this  I shall  begin  to  moan  like
the  nightingale.

This  is  a wondrous  nightingale  that  opens  his  mouth  to  eat
thorns  and  roses  together.

What  nightingale  is  this?  (Nay),  ’tis  a fieiy  monster;  because
of  (his)  love  all  unsweet  things  are  sweetness  to  him.

He  is  a lover  of  the  Universal,  and  he  himself  is  the  Universal :
he  is  in  love  with  himself  and  seeking  his  otvn  love.”  ’ ”


* I.e.  thy  sweetness  and  beauty  is  unfathomable.


f


THE  MERCHANT  AND  THE  PARROT  87

Description  of  the  wings  of  the  birds  that  are  Divine
Intelligences .

Such-like  is  the  tale  of  the  parrot  which  is  the  soul : where  is  i
that  one  who  is  the  confidant  of  (the  spiritual)  birds?

Where  is  a bird,  weak  and  innocent,  and  within  him  Solomon
with  (all)  his  host?

When  he  moans  bitterly,  without  thanksgiving  or  complaint,
a noise  of  tumult  falls  on  (arises  in)  the  Seven  Spheres  (of
Heaven).

At  ever}'  moment  (there  come)  to  him  from  God  a hundred
missives,  a hundred  couriers;  from  him  one  (crv'  of)  “O  mv
Lord!”  and  from  God  a hundred  (cries  of)  " Labbayka"
(“Here  am  I”).

In  the  sight  of  God  his  backsliding  is  better  than  obedience ;
beside  his  infidelity  all  faiths  are  tattered  (worthless).

Every  moment  he  hath  an  ascension  (to  God)  peculiar  to  him-  i
self;  He  (God)  lays  upon  his  crown  a hundred  peculiar  crowns.

His  form  is  on  earth  and  his  spirit  in  “no-place,”  a “no-
place” beyond  the  imagination  of  travellers  (on  the  mystic
Way) :

Not  such  a “no-place”  that  it  should  come  into  thy  under-
standing (or  that)  a fancy  about  it  should  be  born  in  thee  every
moment ;

Nay,  place  and  “no-place”  are  in  his  control,  just  as  the
four  (Paradisal)  rivers  are  in  the  control  of  one  who  dwells  in
Paradise.

Cut  short  the  explanation  of  this  and  avert  thy  face  from  it ;
do  not  breathe  a word  (more) — and  God  knows  best  what  is
right.

W'e  return  from  this  (matter),  O friends,  to  the  bird  and  the  >
merchant  and  India.

The  merchant  accepted  this  message  (and  promised)  that  he
would  convey  the  greeting  from  her  (the  parrot)  to  her  con-
geners.

Hoic  the  merchant  saw  the  parrots  of  India  in  the  plain  and
delivered  the  parrot's  message.

When  he  reached  the  farthest  bounds  of  India,  he  saw  a
number  of  parrots  in  the  plain.

He  halted  his  beast;  then  he  gave  voice,  delivered  the  greeting
and  (discharged)  the  trust.

One  of  those  parrots  trembled  e.xceedingly,  fell,  and  died,
and  its  breath  stopped.

The  merchant  repented  of  having  told  the  news,  and  said,  i
“I  have  gone  about  to  destroy  the  creature.


88


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

This  one,  surely,  is  kin  to  that  little  parrot  (of  mine):  they
must  have  been  two  bodies  and  one  spirit.

Why  did  I do  this?  Why  did  I give  the  message?  I have
consumed  the  poor  creature  by  tbis  raw  (foolish)  speech.”

This  tongue  is  like  stone  and  is  also  fire-like,  and  that  which
springs  from  the  tongue  is  like  fire.

Do  not  vainly  strike  stone  and  iron  against  each  other,  now
for  the  sake  of  relating  (a  story),  now  for  the  sake  of  boasting,
1595  Because  it  is  dark,  and  on  every'  side  are  fields  of  cotton:
how  should  sparks  be  amongst  cotton?

Iniquitous  are  those  persons  who  shut  their  eyes  and  by  sucb
(vain)  words  set  a whole  world  ablaze.

A single  word  lays  waste  a (whole)  world,  turns  dead  foxes
into  lions.

Spirits  in  their  original  nature  have  the  (life-giving)  breath
of  Jesus,  (but  while  they  remain  embodied)  one  breath  of  it
(the  spirit)  is  a wound,  and  the  other  a plaster.

If  the  (bodily)  screen  were  removed  from  the  spirits,  the
speech  of  ev'ery  spirit  would  be  like  (the  breath  of)  the  Messiah.
1600  If  you  wish  to  utter  words  like  sugar,  refrain  from  concu-
piscence and  do  not  eat  this  sweetmeat  (the  desires  of  the  flesh).

Self-control  is  the  thing  desired  by  the  intelligent ; sweetmeat
is  what  children  long  for.

Whoever  practises  self-control  ascends  to  Heaven,  whoever
eats  sweetmeat  falls  farther  behind.

Commentary  on  the  saying  of  FaridiCddin  ‘Attar,  may  God

sanctify  his  spirit — -

“ Thou  art  a sensualist:  O heedless  one,  drink  blood  {mortify

thyself)  amidst  the  dust  {of  thy  bodily  existence).

For  if  the  spiritualist  drink  a poison,  it  zvill  be  {to  him  as)  an

antidote.’'

It  does  not  harm  the  spiritualist  (saint)  though  he  drink
deadly  poison  for  all  to  see.

Because  he  has  attained  to  (spiritual)  health  and  has  been
set  free  from  (the  need  for)  abstinence,  (while)  the  poor  seeker
(of  God)  is  (still)  in  the  (state  of)  fever.

1605  The  Prophet  said,  “O  bold  seeker,  beware!  Do  not  contend
with  anv  one  who  is  sought.”

In  thee  is  a Nimrod:  do  not  go  into  the  fire.  If  thou  wish  to
go  in,  first  become  Abraham!

When  thou  art  neither  a swimmer  nor  a seaman,  do  not  cast
thyself  (into  the  sea)  from  a (feeling  of)  self-conceit.

He  (the  saint)  fetches  pearls  from  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  from
losses  he  brings  gain  to  the  surface.

If  a perfect  man  (saint)  take  earth,  it  becomes  gold;  if  an
imperfect  one  has  carried  away  gold,  it  becomes  ashes.


THE  MERCHANT  AND  THE  PARROT  89

Since  that  righteous  man  is  accepted  of  God,  his  hand  in  nUo
(all)  things  is  the  hand  of  God.

The  hand  of  the  imperfect  man  is  the  hand  of  Devil  and
demon,  because  he  is  in  the  trap  of  imposition  and  guile.

If  ignorance  come  to  him  (the  perfect  man),  it  becomes
knowledge,  (but)  the  knowledge  that  goes  into  the  imperfect
man  becomes  ignorance.

Whatever  an  ill  man  takes  becomes  illness,  (but)  if  a perfect
man  takes  infidelity,  it  becomes  religion.

O thou  who,  being  on  foot,  hast  contended  with  a horseman,
thou  wilt  not  save  thy  head.  Now  hold  thy  foot  (desist) !


How  the  magicians  paid  respect  to  Moses,  on  whom  be  peace,

saying,  “ What  dost  thou  command?  Wilt  thou  cast  down  thy

rod  first,  or  shall  we?  ”

The  magicians  in  the  time  of  the  accursed  Pharaoh,  when  1(315
they  contended  with  Moses  in  enmity.

Yet  gave  Aloses  the  precedence — the  magicians  held  him  in
honour —

Because  they  said  to  him,  “’Tis  for  thee  to  command:  (if)
thou  wishest  to  be  the  first,  do  thou  cast  down  thy  rod  first
(of  all).”

“Nay,”  said  he,  “first  do  ye,  O magicians,  cast  down  those
tricks  (objects  of  enchantment)  into  the  middle  (where  all  can
see  them).”

This  amount  of  respect  purchased  their  (belief  in)  (the  true)
religion,  so  that  it  (the  true  belief)  cut  off  the  hands  and  feet
of  their  contention  (prevented  them  from  disputing  further  with
JMoses).

When  the  magicians  acknowledged  his  (Moses’)  right,  they  lO’o
sacrificed  their  hands  and  feet  (as  a penance)  for  the  sin  of  that
(contention).

To  the  perfect  man  (every)  mouthful  (of  food)  and  (even,-)
saying  is  lawful.  Thou  art  not  perfect:  do  not  eat,  be  mute.

Inasmuch  as  thou  art  an  ear  and  he  a tongue,  not  thy  con-
gener: God  said  to  the  ears,  “Be  silent."

When  the  sucking  babe  is  born,  at  first  it  keeps  silence  for
a while,  it  is  all  ear.

For  a while  it  must  close  its  lips  (and  refrain)  from  speech,
until  it  learns  to  speak ;

And  if  it  is  not  (silent  like)  an  ear  but  makes  babbling  sounds,  k.jj
it  makes  itself  the  dumbest  creature  in  the  world.

He  that  is  deaf  by  nature,  he  that  had  no  ear  at  the  beginning,
is  dumb:  how  should  he  burst  into  speech?

Since,  in  order  to  speak,  one  must  first  hear,  do  thou  come
to  speech  by  the  way  of  hearing.


90  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Enter  ye  the  houses  by  their  doors,  and  seek  ye  the  ends  in
their  causes.

There  is  no  speech  independent  of  the  way  of  hearing  except
the  speech  of  the  Creator  who  is  without  want.

1630  He  is  the  Originator,  He  follows  no  master;  He  is  the  support
of  all  things,  He  hath  no  support,

(While)  the  rest,  (engaged)  in  handicrafts  and  talk,  follow  a
master  and  have  need  of  a pattern.

If  thou  art  not  alien  to  (unfit  to  hear)  this  discourse,  assume
the  frock  of  a dervdsh  and  (take  to  shedding)  tears  in  some
deserted  place,

Because  Adam  by  means  of  tears  escaped  from  that  reproof;
moist  tears  are  the  breath  (speech)  of  the  penitent.

For  weeping’s  sake  Adam  came  (down)  to  the  earth,  that  he
might  be  weeping  and  moaning  and  sorrowful.

1635  Adam,  (cast  out)  from  Paradise  and  from  above  the  Seven
(Heavens),  went  to  the  “shoe-row”^  for  the  purpose  of  ex-
cusing himself.

If  thou  art  from  the  back  of  Adam  and  from  his  loins,  be
constant  in  seeking  (forgiveness)  amongst  his  company.

Prepare  a dessert  of  heart-fire  (burning  grief)  and  eye-water
(tears):  the  garden  is  made  open  (blooming)  by  cloud  and  sun.

What  dost  thou  know  of  the  taste  of  the  water  of  the  eyes?
Thou  art  a lover  of  bread,  like  the  blind  (beggars).

If  thou  make  this  wallet  empty  of  bread,  thou  wilt  make  it
full  of  glorious  jewels.

1640  Wean  the  babe,  thy  soul,  from  the  Devil’s  milk,  and  after
that  make  it  consort  with  the  Angel.

Whilst  thou  art  dark  and  vexed  and  gloomy,  know  that  thou
art  sucking  from  the  same  breast  as  the  accursed  Devil.

The  mouthful  that  gave  increase  of  light  and  perfection  is
obtained  from  lawful  earnings.

The  oil  that  comes  and  quenches  our  lamp — when  it  quenches
a lamp,  call  it  water.

From  the  lawful  morsel  are  born  knowledge  and  wisdom;
from  the  lawful  morsel  come  love  and  tenderness.

1645  When  from  a morsel  thou  seest  (arise)  emy  and  guile,  (and
when)  ignorance  and  heedlessness  are  born  (of  it),  know  that
it  is  unlawful.

Wilt  thou  sow  wheat  and  will  it  produce  barley?  Hast  thou
seen  a mare  bring  forth  an  ass’s  colt?

The  morsel  is  seed,  and  thoughts  are  its  fruit;  the  morsel
is  the  sea,  and  thoughts  are  its  pearls.

From  the  lawful  morsel  in  the  mouth  is  born  the  inclination
to  serve  (God)  and  the  resolve  to  go  to  yonder  world.

^ See  p.  64,  note  i.  The  meaning  is  that  he  stood  in  the  place  of  re-
pentance.


THE  MERCHANT  AND  THE  PARROT


91


How  the  merchant  related  to  the  parrot  what  he  had  witnessed
on  the  part  of  the  parrots  of  India.

The  merchant  finished  his  trading  and  returned  home  glad  at
heart.

He  brought  a present  for  everj'  male  slave,  he  gave  a token  1050
to  every  slave-girl.

“Where  is  my  present?”  asked  the  parrot.  “Relate  what
thou  hast  said  and  seen.”

“Nay,”  said  he,  “indeed  I am  repenting  of  that  (which  I
said),  gnawing  my  hand  and  biting  mv  fingers  fin  remorse).

Why,  from  ignorance  and  folly,  did  I idly  bear  (such)  an
inconsiderate  message?”

“O  master,”  said  the  parrot,  “what  is  thy  repentance  for?
What  is  it  that  causes  this  anger  and  grief?  ”

“I  told  thy  complaints,”  said  he,  “to  a company  of  parrots  1055
resembling  thee.

One  parrot  got  scent  of  (understood)  thy  pain:  her  heart
broke^,  and  she  trembled  and  died.

I became  sorry',  (thinking)  ‘why  did  I say  this?’  but  what
was  the  use  of  repenting  after  I had  said  it?”

Know  that  a word  which  suddenly  shot  from  the  tongue  is
like  an  arrow  shot  from  the  bow.

O son,  that  arrow  does  not  turn  back  on  its  way:  you  must
dam  a torrent  at  the  source.

When  it  left  the  source  behind,  it  swept  over  a world  (of  1660
country-):  if  it  lays  waste  the  world,  ’tis  no  wonder.

There  is  an  unseen  bringing  forth  of  effects  to  (our)  action,  and
the  results  born  of  it  are  not  in  the  control  of  (human)  creatures :

Those  results  are  all  created  by  God  without  any  partner,
though  they  are  imputed  to  us.

Zayd  let  fly  an  arrow  in  the  direction  of  ‘Amr:  his  arrow
gripped  ‘Amr  like  a leopard.

During  a long  time,  a (whole)  year,  it  was  producing  pain:
pains  are  created  by  God,  not  by  man.

If  Zavd  who  shot  (the  arrow)  died  of  fright  at  the  moment  1O65
(when  ‘Amr  was  wounded),  (nevertheless)  pains  are  continually
being  produced  there  (in  ‘Amr’s  body)  until  (‘Amr’s)  death.

Inasmuch  as  he  (‘Amr)  died  from  the  results  of  the  hurt
(inflicted  on  him),  for  this  cause  call  Zayd,  who  shot  (the  arrow),
the  murderer.

Impute  those  pains  to  him,  though  all  of  them  are  the  work
of  the  Creator.

So  with  sowing  and  breathing  (speaking)  and  (laying)  snares
and  sexual  intercourse:  the  results  of  those  (actions)  are  amen-
able to  (determined  by  the  will  of)  God.

^ I.iterally,  "her  gall-bladder  burst.’’


92


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

The  saints  possess  power  (derived)  from  God ; they  turn  back
from  its  course  the  arrow  that  has  sped.

6;o  When  the  saint  repents,  he  closes  the  doors  of  the  results
(shuts  off  the  results)  from  the  cause^  by  that  hand  (power)  of
the  Lord.

Through  the  opening  of  the  door  (of  Divine  grace),  he  makes
unsaid  what  has  been  said,  so  that  neither  spit  nor  roast-meat
is  burnt  thereby^.

He  wipes  out  the  saying  from  all  the  minds  that  heard  it,
and  makes  it  imperceptible.

O sire,  if  thou  must  needs  have  demonstration  and  proof  (of
this),  recite  “[Whatever)  verse  (JVe  cancel)  or  cause  to  be  for-
gotten.”

Read  the  verse  “ They  made  you  forget  My  warning  ” : acknow-
ledge their  (the  saints’)  power  to  put  forgetfulness  (in  men’s
hearts).

6,-5  Since  they  are  able  to  make  (you)  remember  and  forget,  they
are  mighty  over  all  the  hearts  of  (God’s)  creatures.

When  he  (the  saint)  has  blocked  the  road  of  (your)  mental
perception  by  means  of  forgetfulness,  it  is  impossible  (for  you)
to  act,  even  if  there  be  virtue  (in  you).

Think  ye  those  exalted  ones  are  a laughing-stock?  Recite
from  the  Qur’an  as  far  as  (the  words)  “ They  made  you  forget.”

He  that  owns  a village  is  king  over  bodies;  he  that  owns  a
heart'’  is  king  over  your  hearts.

Without  any  doubt,  action  (practice)  is  a branch  of  (sub-
ordinate to)  seeing  (theory)^:  therefore  Man  is  nothing  but
“the  little  man’’  (the  pupil  of  the  eye).

6S0  I dare  not  expound  the  whole  of  this  (subject):  hindrance
thereto  is  coming  from  those  who  are  at  the  centre.

Inasmuch  as  the  forgetfulness  and  recollection  of  (God’s)
creatures  are  with  him  (depend  on  the  perfect  saint),  and  he
comes  at  their  call  for  help.

Every  night  that  glorious  one  is  emptying  from  their  hearts
hundreds  of  thousands  of  good  and  evil  (thoughts),

(While)  in  the  daytime  he  is  filling  their  hearts  therewith —
he  is  filling  those  oyster-shells  with  pearls.

By  (Divine)  guidance  (after  sleep  is  past)  all  those  thoughts
of  former  things  recognise  the  spirits  (to  which  they  were
attached).

6S5  Your  handicraft  and  skill  com_e  (back)  to  you,  that  they  may
open  to  you  the  door  of  (ways  and)  means.

The  goldsmith’s  craft  did  not  go  to  the  ironsmith;  the  dis-

’ l.e.  he  renders  the  cause  inoperative.

- l.e.  so  that  no  harm  is  done.

^ l.e.  the  saint.

l.e.  the  miraculous  actions  of  the  saints  depend  on  mystical  knowledge
and  insight.


THE  MERCHANT  AND  THE  PARROT  93

position  of  the  good-natured  man  did  not  go  to  the  disagreeable
one.

On  the  day  of  Resurrection  the  handicrafts  and  dispositions
will  come,  like  articles  of  property,  to  the  claimant  (owner).

After  sleep  also,  the  handicrafts  and  dispositions  come  back
in  haste  to  him  that  claims  them  as  his.

At  the  hour  of  dawn  the  handicrafts  and  thoughts  went  to
the  same  place  where  that  good  and  evil  (formerly)  were.

Like  carrier  pigeons,  they  bring  things  useful  (to  know)  from  1690
(other)  cities  to  their  own  city.


Hov)  the  parrot  heard  zvhat  those  parrots  had  done,  and  died  in
the  cage,  and  hozv  the  merchant  made  lament  for  her.

When  the  bird  heard  what  that  (other)  parrot  had  done,  she
trembled  exceedingly,  fell,  and  became  cold.

The  merchant,  seeing  her  thus  fallen,  sprang  up  and  dashed
his  cap  on  the  ground.

When  he  saw  her  in  this  guise  and  in  this  state,  the  merchant
sprang  forward  and  tore  the  breast  of  his  garment.

He  said,  “O  beautiful  parrot  with  thy  sweet  cr}',  what  is
this  that  has  happened  to  thee?  Why  hast  thou  become  like
this  ?

Oh,  alas  for  my  sweet-voiced  bird!  Oh,  alas  for  my  bosom-  1695
friend  and  confidant !

Oh,  alas  for  my  melodious  bird,  the  wine  of  my  spirit  and
my  garden  and  my  sweet  basil !

Had  Solomon  possessed  a bird  like  this,  how  indeed  should
he  have  become  occupied  with  those  (other)  birds?

Oh,  alas  for  the  bird  which  I gained  cheaply,  and  (so)  soon
turned  my  face  away  from  her  countenance  I

O tongue,  thou  art  a great  damage  to  me,  (but)  since  thou
art  speaking,  what  should  I sav  to  thee?

O tongue,  thou  art  both  the  fire  and  the  stack:  how  long  wilt  1700
thou  dart  this  fire  upon  this  stack?

Secretly  my  soul  is  groaning  because  of  thee,  although  it  is
doing  whatsoever  thou  biddest  it.

O tongue,  thou  art  a treasure  without  end.  O tongue,  thou
art  also  a disease  without  remedy.

Thou  art  at  once  a whistle  and  decoy  for  birds,  and  a com-
forter in  the  desolation  of  absence  (from  the  Beloved).

How  long  wilt  thou  grant  me  mercy,  O merciless  one,  O thou
who  hast  drawn  the  bow  to  take  vengeance  on  me?

Lo,  thou  hast  made  my  bird  fly  away.  Do  not  browse  (any  1705
more)  in  the  pasture  of  injustice!

Either  answer  me  or  give  redress  or  mention  to  me  (what
will  be)  the  means  of  (producing)  joy.


94  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

Oh,  alas  for  my  darkness-consuming  dawn!  Oh,  alas  for  my
day-enkindling  light  I

Oh,  alas  for  my  bird  of  goodly  flight,  that  has  flown  from
my  end  (my  last  state)  to  my  beginning  (my  first  state).

The  ignorant  man  is  in  love  with  pain  unto  everlasting.  Arise
and  read  (in  the  Qur’an)  1 su-ear^  as  far  as  (the  words)  in  trouble.
i;io  With  thy  face  I was  free  from  trouble,  and  in  thy  river  I was
unsoiled  by  froth.

These  cries  of  ‘ Alas  ’ are  (caused  by)  the  phantasy  (idea)  of
seeing  (the  Beloved)  and  (by)  separation  from  my  present
e.xistence.

’Twas  the  jealousy  of  God,  and  there  is  no  device  against
God ; where  is  a heart  that  is  not  (shattered)  in  a hundred  pieces
by  God’s  love?

The  jealousy  (of  God)  is  this,  that  He  is  other  than  all  things,
that  He  is  beyond  explanation  and  the  noise  of  words.

Oh,  alas!  Would  that  my  tears  were  an  ocean,  that  they
might  be  strewn  as  an  offering  to  the  fair  charmer!
i;i5  My  parrot,  my  clever-headed  bird,  the  interpreter  of  my
thought  and  inmost  consciousness.

She  has  told  me  from  the  first,  that  I might  remember  it,
whatsoever  should  come  to  me  as  my  allotted  portion  of  right
and  wrong.”

The  parrot  whose  voice  comes  from  (Divine)  inspiration  and
whose  beginning  was  before  the  beginning  of  existence —

That  parrot  is  hidden  within  thee:  thou  hast  seen  the  re-
flexion of  her  upon  this  and  that  (the  things  of  the  phenomenal
world).

She  takes  away  thy  joy,  and  because  of  her  thou  art  rejoicing :
thou  receivest  injury  from  her  as  though  it  were  justice.

1720  O thou  who  wert  burning  the  soul  for  the  body’s  sake,  thou
hast  burned  (destroyed)  the  soul  and  illumined  (delighted)  the
body.

I am  burning  (with  love  of  God) : does  any  one  want  tinder,
let  him  set  his  rubbish  ablaze  with  fire  from  me.

Inasmuch  as  tinder  is  combustible,  take  tinder  that  catches
fire  (readily).

O alas,  O alas,  O alas  that  such  a moon  became  hidden  under
the  clouds !

How  should  I utter  a word  ? — for  the  fire  in  my  heart  is  grown
fierce,  the  lion  of  separation  (from  the  Beloved)  has  become
raging  and  blood-shedding.

1-33  One  that  even  when  sober  is  violent  and  furious,  how  will  it
be  when  he  takes  the  wine-cup  in  his  hand?

The  furious  Lion  who  is  beyond  description  is  too  great  for
(cannot  be  contained  in)  the  wide  expanse  of  the  meadow.

^ Literally,  “imearnot.”  See  Wright ’s . -irafar  Graww«r,  3rd  ed.,vol.ii,p.  305.


THE  MERCHANT  AND  THE  PARROT  95

I am  thinking  of  rhymes,  and  mv  Sweetheart  says  to  me,

“ Do  not  think  of  aught  except  vision  of  j\Ie.

Sit  at  thy  ease.  My  rhyme-meditating  (friend) : in  My
presence  thou  art  rhymed  with  (attached  to)  felicity.

What  are  words  that  thou  shouldst  think  of  them?  ^\'hat  are
words?  Thorns  in  the  hedge  of  the  vineyard.

I will  throw  word  and  sound  and  speech  into  confusion,  that  i
without  these  three  I may  converse  with  thee.

That  word  which  I kept  hidden  from  Adam  I will  speak  to
thee,  O (thou  who  art  the)  consciousness  of  the  world.

(I  will  tell  to  thee)  that  word  which  I did  not  communicate
to  Abraham,  and  that  pain  (love)  which  Gabriel  does  not  know.”

That  word  of  which  the  Alessiah  (Jesus)  breathed  not  a word
God,  from  jealousy,  did  not  utter  even  without  tnd.

What  is  md  in  language?  Positive  and  negative^  I am  not
positive,  I am  selfless  and  negated.

I found  (true)  individuality  in  non-individualitv : therefore  I i
wove  (my)  individuality  into  non-individuality.

All  kings  are  enslaved  to  their  slaves,  all  people  are  dead
(ready  to  die)  for  one  who  dies  for  them.

All  kings  are  prostrate  before  one  who  is  prostrate  before
them,  all  people  are  intoxicated  with  (love  for)  one  who  is
intoxicated  with  them.

The  fowler  becomes  a prey  to  the  birds  in  order  that  of  a
sudden  he  may  make  them  his  prey.

The  hearts  of  heart-ravishers  are  captivated  by  those  who  have
lost  their  hearts  (to  them) : all  loved  ones  are  the  prey  of  (their)
lovers.

Whomsoever  thou  didst  deem  to  be  a lover,  regard  (him)  as  i
the  loved  one,  for  relatively  he  is  both  this  and  that.

If  they  that  are  thirsty  seek  w'ater  from  the  world,  (yet)  water
too  seeks  in  the  world  them  that  are  thirsty'.

Inasmuch  as  He  is  (thy)  lover,  do  thou  be  silent:  as  He  is
pulling  thine  ear,  be  thou  (all)  ear.

Dam  the  torrent  (of  ecstasy)  when  it  runs  in  flood;  else  it
will  work  shame  and  ruin.

What  care  I though  ruin  be  (wrought)?  Under  the  ruin  there
is  a royal  treasure.

He  that  is  drowned  in  God  wishes  to  be  more  dnuvned,  (while)  i
his  spirit  (is  tossed)  up  and  down  like  the  wav'^es  of  the  sea,

(Asking),  ‘‘Is  the  bottom  of  the  sea  more  delightful,  or  the
top?  Is  His  (the  Beloved’s)  arrow  more  fascinating,  or  the
shield?  ”

O heart,  thou  art  torn  asunder  by  evil  suggestion  if  thou
recognise  any  difference  between  joy  and  woe.

Although  the  object  of  thy  desire  has  the  taste  of  sugar,  is

^ Literally,  ''affirmation  and  nei;ation.’


96  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

not  absence  ot  any  object  of  desire  (in  thee)  the  object  of  the
Beloved’s  desire?

Every  star  of  His  is  the  blood-price  of  a hundred  new  moons :
it  is  lawful  for  Him  to  shed  the  blood  of  the  (whole)  world.

50  We  gained  the  price  and  the  blood-price:  we  hastened  to
gamble  our  soul  away.

Oh,  the  life  of  lovers  consists  in  death : thou  wilt  not  win  the
(Beloved’s)  heart  except  in  losing  thine  own.

I sought  (to  win)  His  heart  with  a hundred  airs  and  graces,
(but)  He  made  excuses  to  me  (put  me  off)  in  disdain.

I said,  “After  all,  this  mind  and  soul  (of  mine)  are  drowned
in  Thee.”  “Begone,”  said  He,  “begone!  Do  not  chant  these
spells  over  Me  (do  not  seek  thus  to  beguile  Me).

Do  not  I know  what  thought  thou  hast  conceived?  O thou
who  hast  seen  double,  how  hast  thou  regarded  the  Beloved?

55  O gross-spirited  one,  thou  hast  held  Me  in  light  esteem,
because  thou  hast  bought  Me  veiy-  cheaply.

He  that  buys  cheaply  gives  cheaply : a child  will  give  a pearl
for  a loaf  of  bread.”

I am  drowned  in  a love  (so  deep)  that  therein  are  drowned
the  first  loves  and  the  last.

I have  told  it  summarily,  I have  not  explained  it  (at  length),
otherwise  both  (thy)  perceptions  and  (my)  tongue  would  be
consumed.

When  I speak  of  “Up,”  ’tis  the  lip  (shore)  of  the  Sea;  when  I
say  “not,”  the  intended  meaning  is  “except.”

6.J  By  reason  of  (inward)  sweetness  I sit  with  sour  face:  from
fullness  of  speech  I am  silent.

That  in  the  mask  of  sour-facedness  my  sweetness  may  be
kept  hidden  from  the  two  worlds.

In  order  that  this  subject  ma}-  not  come  to  even,-  ear,  I am
telling  (only)  one  out  of  a hundred  esoteric  mysteries.

Commentary  on  the  saying  of  the  Hakim  (Sanai):

“Any  thing  that  causes  thee  to  be  left  behind  on  the  Way,  ichat
matter  whether  it  be  infidelity  or  faith?

Any  form  that  causes  thee  to  fall  far  from  the  Beloved,  what
matter  whether  it  be  ugly  or  beautiful?" —
and  {a  discourse)  on  the  meaning  of  the  words  of  the  Prophet,  on
whom  be  peace:  “Verily,  Sa‘d  is  jealous,  and  I am  more  jealous
than  Sa‘d,  and  Allah  is  more  jealous  than  I;  and  because  of  His
jealousy  He  hath  forbidden  foul  actions  both  outward  and
inward."

The  whole  world  became  jealous  because  God  is  superior  to
all  the  world  in  jealousy.

He  is  like  the  spirit,  and  the  world  is  like  the  body : the  body
receives  from  the  spirit  (both)  good  and  evil.


THE  MERCHANT  AND  THE  PARROT  97

Any  one  whose  prayer-niche  is  turned  to  the  (mystical)  reve-  1765
lation,  do  thou  regard  his  going  (back)  to  (the  traditional)  faith
as  shameful.

Any  one  who  has  become  Master  of  the  robes  to  the  King,
it  is  loss  for  him  to  traffic  on  the  King’s  behalf.

Any  one  who  becomes  the  intimate  friend  of  the  Sultan,  it  is
an  injury  and  swindle  (for  him)  to  wait  at  his  door.

When  (the  privilege  of)  kissing  the  (King’s)  hand  has  been
bestowed  on  him  by  the  King,  it  is  a sin  if  he  prefers  to  kiss
the  (King’s)  foot.

Although  to  lay  the  head  on  the  (King’s)  foot  is  an  act  of
obeisance,  (yet)  compared  with  the  former  act  of  obeisance  it
is  a fault  and  backsliding.

The  King  is  jealous  of  any  one  who,  after  having  seen  the  1770
face,  prefers  the  (mere)  scent.

To  speak  in  parables,  God’s  jealousy  is  the  wheat,  (while)
men’s  jealousy  is  the  straw  in  the  stack.

Know  that  the  root  of  (all)  jealousies  is  in  God:  those  of
mankind  are  an  offshoot  from  God,  without  resemblance  (being
implied).

I will  leave  the  explanation  of  this  and  will  begin  to  complain
of  the  cruelty  of  that  fickle  Beauty.

I wail  because  wailings  are  pleasant  to  Him : He  wants  from
the  two  worlds  wailing  and  grief.

How  should  I not  wail  bitterly  on  account  of  His  de-  1775
ceit,  since  I am  not  in  the  circle  of  those  intoxicated  with
Him?

How  should  I not  mourn,  like  night,  without  His  day  and
without  the  favour  of  His  day-illuming  countenance?

His  unsweetness  is  sweet  in  my  soul:  may  my  soul  be  sacri-
ficed to  the  Beloved  who  grieves  my  heart !

I am  in  love  with  my  grief  and  pain  for  the  sake  of  pleasing
my  peerless  King.

I make  the  dust  of  sorrow  a salve  for  mine  eye,  that  the  two
seas  of  mine  eyes  may  be  filled  with  pearls.

The  tears  which  people  shed  for  His  sake  are  pearls — and  17^0
people  think  they  are  tears.

I am  complaining  of  the  Soul  of  the  soul,  (but  in  truth)  I am
not  complaining : I am  (only)  relating.

My  heart  is  saying,  “I  am  tormented  by  Him,”  and  I have
(long)  been  laughing  at  its  poor  pretence.

Do  (me)  right,  O glory'  of  the  righteous,  O Thou  who  art  the
dais,  and  I the  threshold  of  Thy  door!

Where  are  threshold  and  dais  in  reality?  In  the  quarter  where
our  Beloved  is,  where  are  “we”  and  “I”?

O Thou  whose  soul  is  free  from  “we  ” and  “ I,”  O Thou  who  17S5
art  the  subtle  essence  of  the  spirit  in  man  and  woman,


N M


7


98  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

When  man  and  woman  become  one,  Thou  art  that  One;
when  the  units  are  wiped  out,  lo.  Thou  art  that  (Unity).

Thou  didst  contrive  this  “I”  and  “we”  in  order  that  Thou
mightst  play  the  game^  of  worship  with  Thyself,

That  all  “Ts”  and  “thou’s”  should  become  one  soul  and
at  last  should  be  submerged  in  the  Beloved.

All  this  is  (true),  and  do  Thou  come,  O (Lord  of  the)  Creative
Word-,  O Thou  who  transcendest  “Come”  and  (all)  speech!

1790  The  body  can  see  Thee  (only)  in  bodily  fashion:  it  fancies
(pictures  to  itself)  Thy  sadness  or  laughter.

Do  not  say  that  the  heart  that  is  bound  (conditioned)  by
(such  bodily  attributes  as)  sadness  and  laughter  is  worthy  of
seeing  Thee  (as  Thou  really  art).

He  who  is  bound  by  sadness  and  laughter  is  living  by  means
of  these  two  borrowed  (transient  and  unreal)  things.

In  the  verdant  garden  of  Love,  which  is  without  end,  there
are  many  fruits  besides  sorrow  and  joy.

Love  is  higher  than  these  two  states  of  feeling : without  spring
and  without  autumn  it  is  (ever)  green  and  fresh.

1795  Pay  the  tithe  on  Thy  fair  face,  O Beauteous  One:  relate  the
story  of  the  soul  that  is  rent  in  pieces.

For  by  the  coquetry  of  a glance  One  who  is  given  to  glancing
amorously  has  branded  my  heart  anew.

I absolved  Him  if  He  shed  my  blood:  I was  saying,  “It  is
lawful  (I  absolve  Thee),”  and  He  was  fleeing  (from  me).

Since  Thou  art  fleeing  from  the  lament  of  those  who  are  (as)
dust,  why  pourest  Thou  sorrow  on  the  hearts  of  the  sorrowful?

O Thou,  whom  every  dawn  that  shone  from  the  East  found
overflowing  (with  abundant  grace)  like  the  bright  fountain  (of
the  sun),

iSoo  How  didst  Thou  give  (nothing  but)  evasion  to  Thy  frenzied
lover,  O Thou  the  sugar  of  whose  lips  hath  no  price?

O Thou  who  art  a new  soul  to  the  old  world,  hear  the  cry
(that  comes)  from  my  body  (which  is)  without  soul  and  heart.

Leave  the  tale  of  the  Rose!  For  God’s  sake  set  forth  the  tale
of  the  Nightingale  that  is  parted  from  the  Rose  1

Our  emotion  is  not  caused  by  grief  and  joyq  our  consciousness
is  not  related  to  fancy  and  imagination.

There  is  another  state  (of  consciousness),  which  is  rare:  do
not  thou  disbelieve,  for  God  is  very  mighty.

1S05  Do  not  judge  from  the  (normal)  state  of  man,  do  not  abide
in  wrong-doing  and  in  well-doing.

Wrong-doing  and  well-doing,  grief  and  joy,  are  things  that


^ Literally,  nard,  a kind  of  backgammon .

- Literally,  “ The  Command  (which  is)  ‘Be!’”  Another  reading  is

J '0

Thou  who  givest  the  Command.”


THE  MERCHANT  AND  THE  PARROT  99

come  into  existence;  those  who  come  into  existence  die:  God
is  their  heir.

’Tis  dawn.  O Thou  who  art  the  support  and  refuge  of  the
dawn,  ask  pardon  (for  me)  of  my  Lord  Husamu’ddin !

Thou  art  He  who  asketh  pardon  of  the  Unwersal  Alind  and
Soul , Thou  art  the  Soul  of  the  soul  and  the  Splendour  of  the  coral .

The  light  of  dawn  has  shone  forth,  and  from  Thy  light  we
are  engaged  in  drinking  the  morning-drink  with  the  wine  of
Thy  Alansiir^.

Inasmuch  as  Thy  gift  keeps  me  thus  (enravished),  who  (what)  iSiu
is  (other)  wine  that  it  should  bring  me  rapture?

Wine  in  ferment  is  a beggar  suing  for  our  ferment ; Heaven
in  revolution  is  a beggar  suing  for  our  consciousness.

Wine  became  intoxicated  with  us,  not  we  with  it;  the  body
came  into  being  from  us,  not  we  from  it.

We  are  as  bees,  and  bodies  are  as  wax  (honeycomb):  w'e  have
made  the  body,  cell  by  cell,  like  wax.


Reverting  to  the  tale  of  the  merchant  icho  vcent  to  trade
(in  India).

This  (discourse)  is  very  long.  Tell  the  story  of  the  merchant,
that  we  may  see  w'hat  happened  to  that  good  man.

The  merchant  in  fire  (burning  grief)  and  anguish  and  yearning  1S15
was  uttering  a hundred  distracted  phrases  like  this,

Now  self-contradiction,  now  disdain,  now  supplication,  now
passion  for  reality,  now  metaphor  (unreality).

The  drowning  man  suffers  an  agony  of  soul  and  clutches  at
every  straw.

For  fear  of  (losing)  his  head  (life),  he  flings  about  (both)
hand  and  foot  to  see  whether  any  one  will  take  his  hand  (help
him)  in  peril.

The  Friend  loves  this  agitation:  it  is  better  to  struggle  vainly
than  to  lie  still.

He  who  is  the  King  (of  all)  is  not  idle,  (though)  complaint  is^o
from  Him  would  be  a marvel,  for  He  is  not  ill.

For  this  reason  said  the  Merciful  (God),  O son,  ''Every  day
He  is  {busy)  in  an  affair,”  O son.

In  this  W av  be  thou  ever  scraping  and  scratching  (exerting
thyself  to  the  utmost) : until  thy  last  breath  do  not  be  unoccupied
for  a moment.

So  that  thy  last  breath  may  be  a last  breath  in  which  the
(Divine)  favour  is  thy  bosom-friend.

Whatsoever  the  soul  which  is  in  man  and  woman  strives  to
do,  the  ear  and  eye  of  the  soul’s  King  are  at  the  window.

^ I.e.  Hallaj,  who  said  “Ana  'l-Haqq."


lOO


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I


How  the  merchant  cast  the  parrot  out  of  the  cage  and  how
the  dead  parrot  flew  away.

1825  After  that,  he  cast  her  out  of  the  cage.  The  little  parrot  flew
to  a lofty  bough.

The  dead  parrot  made  such  a (swift)  flight  as  when  the
orient  sun  rushed  onward.

The  merchant  was  amazed  at  the  action  of  the  bird : without
understanding  he  suddenly  beheld  the  mysteries  of  the  bird.

He  lifted  up  his  face  and  said,  “ O nightingale,  give  us  profit
(instruction)  by  explaining  thy  case.

What  did  she  (the  parrot)  do  there  (in  India),  that  thou  didst
learn,  devise  a trick,  and  burn  us  (with  grief)”?

1830  The  parrot  said,  “She  by  her  act  counselled  me — ‘Abandon
thy  charm  of  voice  and  thy  affection  (for  thy  master),

Because  thy  voice  has  brought  thee  into  bondage’:  she
feigned  herself  dead  for  the  sake  of  (giving  me)  this  counsel,

Meaning  (to  say),  ‘O  thou  who  hast  become  a singer  to  high
and  low,  become  dead  like  me,  that  thou  mayst  gain  release.’  ”

If  you  are  a grain,  the  little  birds  will  peck  you  up;  if  you
are  a bud,  the  children  will  pluck  you  off.

Hide  the  grain  (bait),  become  wholly  a snare;  hide  the  bud,
become  the  grass  on  the  roof.

1835  Any  one  who  offers  his  beauty  to  auction,  a hundred  evil  fates
set  out  towards  him  (and  overtake  him).

Plots  and  angers  and  envies  pour  upon  his  head,  like  water
from  waterskins.

Foes  tear  him  to  pieces  from  jealousy;  even  friends  take
his  lifetime  away.

He  that  was  heedless  of  the  sowing  and  the  springtide,  how
should  he  know  the  value  of  this  lifetime?

You  must  flee  to  the  shelter  of  God’s  grace,  who  shed
thousandfold  grace  upon  (our)  spirits,

1840  That  you  may  find  a shelter.  Then  how  (will  you  lack)  shelter  ?
Water  and  fire  will  become  your  army.

Did  not  the  sea  become  a friend  to  Noah  and  Moses?  Did  it
not  become  overbearing  in  vengeance  against  their  enemies?

Was  not  the  fire  a fortress  for  Abr^am,  so  that  it  raised
smoke  (sighs  of  despair)  from  the  heart  of  Nimrod?

Did  not  the  mountain  call  Yahya  (John  the  Baptist)  to  itself
and  drive  off  his  pursuers  with  blows  of  stone  ?

“ O Yahya,”  it  said,  “come,  take  refuge  in  me,  that  I may  be
thy  shelter  from  the  sharp  sword.”


THE  MERCHANT  AND  THE  PARROT


lOI


How  the  parrot  bade  farewell  to  the  merchant  and  flew  away.

The  parrot  gave  him  one  or  tw'o  counsels  full  of  (spiritual)  1S45
savour  and  after  that  bade  him  the  farewell  of  parting.

The  merchant  said  to  her,  “ Go,  God  protect  thee ! Just  now
thou  hast  shown  to  me  a new  Way.”

Said  the  merchant  to  himself,  “This  is  the  counsel  for  me;

I will  take  her  Way,  for  this  Way  is  shining  with  light.

How  should  my  soul  be  meaner  than  the  parrot?  The  soul
ought  to  follow  a good  track  like  this.”


The  harmfulness  of  being  honoured  by  the  people  and  of
becoming  conspicuous.

The  body  is  cage-like : the  body,  amidst  the  cajoleries  of  those
who  come  in  and  go  out,  became  a thorn  to  the  soul.

This  one  says  to  him,  “I  will  be  thy  confidant,”  and  that  i8;o
one  says,  “Nay,  I am  thy  partner.”

This  one  says  to  him,  “There  is  none  in  existence  like  thee
for  beauty  and  eminence  and  for  kindness  and  liberality.”

That  one  says  to  him,  “Both  the  worlds  are  thine,  all  our
souls  are  thy  soul’s  parasites.”

When  he  sees  the  people  intoxicated  with  (desire  for)  him,
because  of  arrogance  he  loses  self-control.

He  does  not  know  that  the  Devil  has  cast  thousands  like  him
into  the  water  of  the  river  (of  destruction).

The  world’s  flatter}-  and  hypocrisy  is  a sweet  morsel:  eat  less  1S55
of  it  (eat  it  not),  for  it  is  a morsel  full  of  fire.

Its  fire  is  hidden  and  its  taste  is  manifest : its  smoke  becomes
visible  in  the  end.

Do  not  say,  “How  should  I swallow  that  praise?  He  is
speaking  from  desire  (for  reward):  I am  on  his  track  (and  see
quite  well  what  he  is  after).”

If  your  belauder  should  satirise  you  in  public,  your  heart
would  burn  for  (many)  days  on  account  of  those  scorches  (of
vituperation).

Although  you  know  that  he  (only)  said  it  in  disappointment
because  the  hopes  he  had  of  you  brought  him  no  gain,

(Yet)  the  effect  thereof  is  remaining  within  you.  The  same  iS6o
experience  happens  to  you  in  the  case  of  praise.

The  effect  of  that  too  lasts  for  many  days  and  becomes  a
source  of  arrogance  and  deception  of  the  soul.

But  it  does  not  show  itself,  because  praise  is  sweet;  (in  the
case  of  blame)  the  evil  shows  itself,  because  blame  is  bitter.

It  (blame)  is  like  (bitter)  decoctions  and  pills  which  you
swallow  and  for  a long  time  you  are  in  disturbance  and  pain.


102  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Whereas,  if  you  eat  halu'd  (sweetmeat),  its  taste  is  momentary :
this  effect,  like  the  other,  is  not  enduring  for  ever.

1865  Since  it  does  not  endure  (perceptibly),  it  endures  imper-
ceptibly: recognise  every  opposite  by  means  of  its  opposite.

When  the  effect  of  sugar  endures  (remains  latent),  after  a
while  it  produces  boils  that  call  for  the  lancet.

Pharaoh  was  made  (what  he  was)  by  abundance  of  praises:
be  lowly  of  spirit  through  meekness,  do  not  domineer.

So  far  as  you  can,  become  a slave,  do  not  be  a monarch.
Suffer  blows:  become  like  the  ball,  do  not  be  the  bat.

Otherwise,  when  this  elegance  and  beauty  remains  with  you
no  more,  you  will  be  loathed  by  those  companions.

1S70  The  set  of  people  who  used  to  flatter  you  deceitfully,  when
they  behold  you  will  call  you  a devil.

When  they  see  you  at  their  doors,  they  all  will  cry,  “A  dead
man  has  risen  from  his  grave.”

(You  will  be)  like  the  beardless  youth  whom  they  address  as
“Lord”  that  by  this  hypocrisy  they  may  make  him  infamous.

As  soon  as  he  has  grown  a beard  in  infamy,  the  Devil  is
ashamed  to  search  after  him.

The  Devil  approaches  Man  for  the  sake  of  wickedness:  he
does  not  approach  you  because  you  are  worse  than  the  Devil.

1875  So  long  as  you  were  a man  the  Devil  was  running  at  your
heels  and  bidding  you  taste  (his)  w'ine.

Since  vou  have  become  confirmed  in  deviliy,  the  Devil  is
fleeing  from  you,  O good-for-nothing!

At  that  (former)  time  they  clung  to  your  skirt:  when  you
became  like  this  they  all  fled.

Explanation  of  {the  Tradition)  “ Whatsoever  God  zvills
Cometh  to  pass.”

We  have  spoken  all  these  words,  but  in  preparing  ourselves
(for  the  journey  before  us)  we  are  naught,  naught  without  the
favours  of  God.

Without  the  favours  of  God  and  God’s  elect  ones,  angel
though  he  be,  his  page  is  black.

isso  O God,  O Thou  whose  bounty-  fulfils  (every)  need,  it  is  not
allowable  to  mention  any  one  beside  Thee.

This  amount  of  guidance  Thou  hast  bestowed  (upon  us) ; till
this  (present  time)  Thou  hast  covered  up  many  a fault  of  ours.

Cause  the  drop  of  knowledge  which  Thou  gavest  (us)  hereto-
fore to  become  united  with  Thy  seas.

In  my  soul  there  is  a drop  of  knowledge:  deliver  it  from
sensuality  and  from  the  body’s  clay,

Before  these  clays  drink  it  up,  before  these  winds  sweep  it
away,


THE  ALMIGHTINESS  OF  GOD


103

Although,  when  they  sweep  it  away.  Thou  art  able  to  take  it  i
back  from  them  and  redeem  it.

The  drop  that  vanished  in  the  air  or  was  spilled  (on  the
earth) — when  did  it  flee  (escape)  from  the  storehouse  of  Thy
omnipotence  ?

If  it  enter  into  non-existence  or  a hundred  non-existences,  it
will  make  a foot  of  its  head  (will  return  in  headlong  haste)  when
Thou  callest  it.

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  opposites  are  killing  their  oppo-
sites: Thy  decree  is  drawing  them  forth  again  (from  non-
existence).

There  is  caravan  on  caravan,  O Lord,  (speeding)  continuallv
from  non-existence  towards  existence.

In  particular,  every  night  all  thoughts  and  understandings  i
become  naught,  plunged  in  the  deep  Sea;

Again  at  the  time  of  dawn  those  Divine  ones  lift  up  their
heads  from  the  Sea,  like  fishes.

In  autumn  the  myriads  of  boughs  and  leaves  go  in  rout  into
the  sea  of  Death,

(While)  in  the  garden  the  crow  clothed  in  black  like  a mourner
makes  lament  over  the  (withered)  greenery'.

Again  from  the  Lord  of  the  land^  comes  the  edict  (saying)  to
Non-existence,  “Give  back  what  thou  hast  devoured!

Give  up,  O black  Death,  what  thou  hast  devoured  of  plants  i
and  healing  herbs  and  leaves  and  grass ! ”

O brother,  collect  thy  wits  for  an  instant  (and  think):  from
moment  to  moment  (incessantly)  there  is  autumn  and  spring
within  thee.

Behold  the  garden  of  the  heart,  green  and  moist  and  fresh,
full  of  rosebuds  and  cypresses  and  jasmines ;

Boughs  hidden  by  the  multitude  .of  leaves,  vast  plain  and
high  pahce  hidden  by  the  multitude  of  flowers.

These  words,  which  are  from  Universal  Reason,  are  the  scent
of  those  flowers  and  cypresses  and  hyacinths.

Didst  thou  (ever)  smell  the  scent  ot  a rose  where  no  rose  was  ? i
Didst  thou  (ever)  see  the  foaming  of  wine  where  no  wine  was?

The  scent  is  thy  guide  and  conducts  thee  on  thy  way : it  will
bring  thee  to  Eden  and  Kawthar.

The  scent  is  a remedy  for  the  (sightless)  eye;  (it  is)  light-
making: the  eve  of  Jacob  was  opened  by  a scent.

The  foul  scent  darkens  the  eye,  the  scent  of  Joseph  succours
the  eye.

Thou  who  art  not  a Joseph,  be  a Jacob:  be  (familiar),  like
him,  with  weeping  and  sore  distress.

Hearken  to  this  counsel  from  the  Sage  of  Ghazna-,  that  thou  ;
mayst  feel  freshness  in  thy  old  body :

' Literally,  “the  headman  of  the  village.”


- Sana'i.


104  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

“Disdain  needs  a face  like  the  rose;  when  thou  hast  not
(such  a face),  do  not  indulge  in^  ill-temper.

Ugly  is  disdain  in  an  uncomely  face,  grievous  is  eye-ache  in
an  unseeing  eye.”

In  the  presence  of  Joseph  do  not  give  thyself  airs  and  behave
like  a beauty:  offer  nothing  but  the  supplication  and  sighs  of
Jacob.

The  meaning  of  dying  fas  conveyed)  by  the  parrot  was
supplication  (self-abasement) : make  thyself  dead  in  supplication
and  poverty  (of  spirit),

1910  That  the  breath  of  Jesus  may  revive  thee  and  make  thee
fair  and  blessed  as  itself.

How  should  a rock  be  covered  with  verdure  by  the  Spring?
Become  earth,  that  thou  mayst  grow  flowers  of  many  a hue.

Years  hast  thou  been  a heart-jagging  rock:  once,  for  the  sake
of  experiment,  be  earth !

The  story  of  the  old  harper  who  in  the  time  of  ‘ Umar,  may  God  be
well-pleased  with  him,  on  a day  when  he  was  starving  played
the  harp  for  God's  sake  in  the  graveyard.

Hast  thou  heard  that  in  the  time  of  ‘Umar  there  was  a harper,
a fine  and  glorious  minstrel?

The  nightingale  would  be  made  beside  herself  by  his  voice:
by  his  beautiful  voice  one  rapture  would  be  turned  into  a
hundred.

1915  His  breath  was  an  ornament  to  assembly  and  congregation,
and  at  his  song  the  dead  would  arise.

(He  was)  like  Israfil  (Seraphiel),  whose  voice  will  cunningly
bring  the  souls  of  the  dead  into  their  bodies.

Or  he  was  (like)  an  accompanist^  to  Israfil,  for  his  music  would
make  the  elephant  grow  wings.

One  day  Israfil  will  make  a shrill  sound  and  will  give  life  to
him  that  has  been  rotten  for  a hundred  years.

The  prophets  also  have  (spiritual)  notes  within,  whence  there
comes  life  beyond  price  to  them  that  seek  (God).

19-0  The  sensual  ear  does  not  hear  those  notes,  for  the  sensual  ear
is  defiled  by  iniquities.

The  note  of  the  peri®  is  not  heard  by  man,  for  he  is  unable
to  apprehend  the  mysteries  of  the  peris,

Although  the  note  of  the  peri  too  belongs  to  this  world.  The
note  of  the  heart  is  higher  than  both  breaths  (notes)

For  peri  and  man  (alike)  are  prisoners:  both  are  (captive)  in
the  prison  of  this  ignorance.

1 Literally,  “do  not  roam  round.”

- Literally,  "accompanists.”  Cf.  Book  III,  1473.

^ I.e.  one  of  the  Jinn.

^ I.e.  the  note  (voice)  of  man  and  the  note  of  the  peri.


THE  STORY  OF  THE  HARPER  105

Recite  O community  of  Jinn  {and  men)  in  the  Siiratu  1’-
Rahman;  recognise  (the  meaning  of)  if  ye  be  able  to  pass  forth.

The  inward  notes  of  the  saints  say,  at  first,  “O  ye  particles  i .
of  Id  (not  = not-being),

Take  heed,  lift  up  your  heads  from  the  Id  of  negation,  put
forth  your  heads  from  this  fancy  and  vain  imagining.

O ye  who  all  are  rotten  in  (the  world  of)  generation  and  cor-
ruption, your  everlasting  soul  neither  grew  nor  came  to  birth.”

If  I tell  (even)  a tittle  of  those  (saintly)  notes,  the  souls  will
lift  up  their  heads  from  the  tombs.

Put  thine  ear  close,  for  that  (melody)  is  not  far  off,  but  ’tis
not  permitted  to  convey  it  to  thee.

Hark!  for  the  saints  are  the  Israfils  of  the  (present)  time;  iq
from  them  to  the  dead  comes  life  and  freshness.

At  their  voice  the  dead  souls  in  the  body’s  grave  start  up  in
their  winding-sheets.

He  (that  is  thus  awakened)  says,  “This  voice  is  separate  from
(all  other)  voices : to  quicken  (the  dead)  is  the  work  of  the  voice
of  God.

We  (had)  died  and  were  entirely  decayed:  the  call  of  God
came;  we  all  arose.”

The  call  of  God,  (whether  it  be)  veiled  or  unveiled,  bestows
that  which  He  bestowed  on  Wary  from  His  bosom.

O ye  who  are  rotten  with  death  (in  your  hearts)  underneath  ly
the  skin,  return  from  non-e.xistence  at  the  voice  of  the  Friend!

Absolutely,  indeed,  that  voice  is  from  the  King  (God),  though
it  be  from  the  larynx  of  God’s  serv'ant.

He  (God)  has  said  to  him  (the  saint),  “ I am  thy  tongue  and
eye;  I am  thy  senses  and  I am  thy  good  pleasure  and  thy  wrath.

Go,  for  thou  art  (he  of  whom  God  saith),  ‘By  Me  he  hears
and  by  Me  he  sees  ’ : thou  art  the  (Divine)  consciousness  (itself) ;
what  is  the  occasion  (propriety)  of  (saying),  ‘Thou  art  the
possessor  of  the  (Divine)  consciousness’?

Since  thou  hast  become,  through  bewilderment,  ‘He  that
belongs  to  God,’  I am  thine,  for  ‘God  shall  belong  to  him.’

Sometimes  I say  to  thee,  “’Tis  thou,’  sometimes,  ‘’Tis  I’:
whatever  I say,  I am  the  Sun  illuminating  (all).

Wheresoever  I shine  forth  from  the  lamp-niche  of  a breath
(Divine  word),  there  the  difficulties  of  a (whole)  world  are
resolved.

The  darkness  which  the  (earthly)  sun  did  not  remove,
through  Aly  breath  that  darkness  becomes  like  bright  morning.”

To  an  Adam  He  in  His  own  person  showed  the  (Divine)
Names;  to  the  rest  He  was  revealing  the  Names  by  means  of
Adam.

Do  thou  receive  His  light  either  from  Adam  or  from  Himself :
take  the  wine  either  from  the  jar  or  from  the  gourd  (cup).


I06  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

1945  For  this  gourd  is  very  closely  connected  with  the  jar:  the
blessed  gourd  is  not  rejoiced  (by  the  same  causes)  as  thou
art.

Mustafa  (Mohammed)  said,  “Happy  he  that  has  seen  me
and  he  that  looks  at  him  that  saw  my  face.”

When  a lamp  has  derived  (its)  light  from  a candle,  every  one
that  sees  it  (the  lamp)  certainly  sees  the  candle.

If  transmission  (of  the  light)  occurs  in  this  way  till  a hundred
lamps  (are  lighted),  the  seeing  of  the  last  (lamp)  becomes  a
meeting  with  the  original  (light)^^.

Either  take  with  (all)  thy  soul  from  the  hindmost  light — there
is  no  difference — or  from  the  candelabrum.

1950  Either  behold  the  light  (of  God)  from  the  lamp  of  the  last
(saints),  or  behold  His  light  from  the  candle  of  those  w'ho  have
gone  before.


Explanation  of  the  Tradition,  “ Verily,  your  Lord  hath,  during

the  days  of  your  time,  certain  breathings:  oh,  address  vour-

selves  to  {receive)  themT

The  Prophet  said,  “ In  these  days  the  breathings  of  God
prevail ;

Keep  ear  and  mind  (attentive)  to  these  (spiritual)  influences,
catch  up  such-like  breathings.”

The  (Divine)  breathing  came,  beheld  you,  and  departed:  it
gave  life  to  whom  it  would,  and  departed.

Another  breathing  has  arrived.  Be  thou  heedful,  that  thou
mat'St  not  miss  this  one  too,  O comrade.

1955  The  soul  of  fire  gained  therefrom  an  extinguisher  of  (its)  fire,
the  dead  soul  felt  within  itself  a movement  (of  life).

This  is  the  freshness  and  movement  of  the  Tuba-tree,  this  is
not  like  the  movements  of  animals.

If  it  fall  on  earth  and  heaven,  their  galls  will  turn  to  water
at  once  (they  will  be  consumed  with  terror).

Truly,  from  fear  of  this  infinite  breath  (they  were  filled  with
dismay):  recite  (the  words  of  the  Qur’an)  hut  they  refused  to
bear  it  (the  trust  offered  to  them).

Else,  how  should  (the  words)  they  shrank  from  it  have  been
(in  the  Qur’an),  unless  from  fear  of  it  the  heart  of  the  mountain
had  become  blood?

i960  Yesternight  this  (breath)  presented  itself  (to  me)  in  a different
guise  (but)  some  morsels  (of  food)  came  in  and  barred  the  wav.

For  a morsel’s  sake  a Luqman  has  become  (held  in  custody
as)  a pledge : ’tis  the  time  for  Luqman : begone,  O morsel !

^ I.e.  the  eye  sees  the  light  of  the  last  lamp,  but  what  really  meets  the
eye  is  the  light  of  the  candle.


DIVINE  INSPIRATIONS  107

These  pricks  (of  the  flesh)  for  the  sake  of  a morsel ! Pluck  ye
forth  the  thorn  from  the  sole  of  Luqman.

In  his  sole  there  is  (really)  no  thorn  or  even  the  shadow  of  it,
but  because  of  concupiscence  ye  have  not  that  discernment.

Know  that  the  thorn  is  that  which  thou,  because  thou  art
very  greedy  and  verj'  blind,  hast  deemed  to  be  a date.

Inasmuch  as  Luqman’s  spirit  is  the  rose-garden  of  God,  why  i 115
is  the  foot  of  his  spirit  wounded  by  a thorn?

This  thorn-eating  existence  is  (like)  a camel,  and  upon  this
camel  one  born  of  Mustafa  (Alohammed)  is  mounted.

O camel,  on  thv  back  is  a bale  of  roses,  from  the  perfume
of  which  a hundred  roseries  grew  within  thee.

Thy  inclination  is  towards  thorn-bushes  and  sand : I wonder
what  roses  thou  wilt  gather  from  worthless  thorns.

O thou  who  in  this  search  hast  roamed  from  one  quarter
to  another,  how  long  wilt  thou  say,  “Where,  where  is  this  rose-
garden?  ”

Until  thou  extract  this  thorn  in  thv  foot,  thine  eye  is  dark  ivr'>
(blind) : how  wilt  thou  go  about  ?

Alan,  who  is  not  contained  in  the  world,  becomes  hidden  in
the  point  of  a thorn !

Alustafa  (Alohammed)  came  (into  the  world)  to  make  har-
mony: (he  would  say)  “Speak  to  me,  O Humayra,  speak!”

O Humayra,  put  the  horse-shoe  in  the  fire,  that  by  means  of
thy  horse-shoe  this  mountain  may  become  (glowing  with  love,
like)  rubies.

This  “Humayra”  is  a feminine  word,  and  the  Arabs  call  the
(word  for)  “spirit”  feminine;

But  there  is  no  fear  (harm)  to  the  Spirit  from  being  feminine:
the  Spirit  has  no  association  (nothing  in  common)  with  man
and  woman.

It  is  higher  than  feminine  and  masculine:  this  is  not  that
spirit  which  is  composed  of  dryness  and  moisture.

This  is  not  that  spirit  which  is  increased  by  (eating)  bread,
or  which  is  sometimes  like  this  and  sometimes  like  that.

It  is  a doer  of  (what  is)  sweet,  and  (it  is)  sweet,  and  the
essence  of  sweetness.  Without  (inward)  sweetness  there  is  no
sweetness,  O taker  of  bribes^  I

When  thou  art  (made!  sweet  by  sugar,  it  may  be  that  at  some
time  that  sugar  will  vanish  from  thee ;

(But)  when  thou  becomest  sugar  from  abundance  of  faithful-  i.„nj
ness,  then  how  should  sugar  be  parted  from  sugar?

When  the  lover  (of  God)  is  fed  from  (within)  himself  with
pure  wine,  there  reason  will  remain  lost  and  companion  less.

Partial  (discursive)  reason  is  a denier  of  Love,  though  it  may
give  out  that  it  is  a confidant.

' The“  taker  of  bribes”  is  he  who  takes  pleasure  in  anything  other  than  God


io8  MATHNAwf,  BOOK  I

It  is  clever  and  knowing,  but  it  is  not  naught  (devoid  of  self-
existence) ; until  the  angel  has  become  naught,  he  is  an  Ahriman
(Devil).

It  (partial  reason)  is  our  friend  in  word  and  deed,  (but)  when
you  come  to  the  case  of  imvard  feeling  (ecstasy),  it  is  naught
(of  no  account).

1985  It  is  naught  because  it  did  not  (pass  away)  from  existence
and  become  non-existent:  since  it  did  not  become  naught
willingly,  (it  must  become  naught  nevertheless,  for)  there  is
many  a one  (who  became  naught,  i.e.  died)  unwillingly.

The  Spirit  is  perfection  and  its  call  is  perfection:  hlustafa
(Mohammed)  used  to  say,  “Refresh  us,  O Bilal!

0 Bilal,  lift  up  thy  mellifluous  voice  (drawn)  from  that  breath
which  I breathed  into  thy  heart.

From  that  breath  by  which  Adam  was  dumbfounded  and
the  wits  of  the  people  of  Heaven  were  made  witless.”

Mustafa  became  beside  himself  at  that  beautiful  voice:  his
prayer  escaped  him  (was  left  unperformed)  on  the  night  of  the
ta‘ris^.

1990  He  did  not  raise  his  head  from  that  blessed  sleep  until  the
(time  of  the)  dawn-prayer  had  advanced  to  (the  time  of)
forenoon.

On  the  night  of  the  tdris  his  holy  spirit  gained  (the  privilege
of)  kissing  hands  in  the  presence  of  the  Bride.

Love  and  the  Spirit  are,  both  of  them,  hidden  and  veiled:
if  I have  called  Him  (God)  the  Bride,  do  not  find  fault.

1 would  have  been  silent  from  (fear  of)  the  Beloved’s  dis-
pleasure, if  He  had  granted  me  a respite  for  one  moment

But  He  keeps  saying,  “ Say  on  1 Come,  ’tis  no  fault,  ’tis  but
the  requirement  of  the  (Divine)  destiny  in  the  World  Unseen.”

1995  The  fault  is  (in  him)  w'ho  sees  nothing  but  fault:  how  should
the  Pure  Spirit  of  the  Invisible  see  fault?

Fault  arises  (only)  in  relation  to  the  ignorant  creature,  not
in  relation  to  the  Lord  of  favour  (clemency).

Infidelity,  too,  is  wisdom  in  relation  to  the  Creator,  (but)
when  you  impute  it  to  us,  infidelity  is  a noxious  thing.

And  if  there  be  one  fault  together  with  a hundred  advantages
(excellences),  it  resembles  the  wood  (woody  stalk)  in  the
sugarcane.

Both  (sugar  and  stalk)  alike  are  put  into  the  scales,  because
they  both  are  sweet  like  body  and  soul.

2000  Not  idly,  therefore,  the  great  (mystics)  said  this:  “The  body
of  the  holy  ones  (the  saints)  is  essentially  pure  as  (their)  spirit.”

Their  speech  and  soul  and  form,  all  (this)  is  absolute  spirit
without  (external)  trace.

^ This  word  is  used  of  travellers  who  halt  for  repose  in  the  latter  part
of  the  night.


‘a’isha  and  the  prophet  109

The  spirit  that  regards  them  with  enmity  is  a mere  body;
like  the  plus  in  (the  game  called)  nard,  it  is  a mere  name.

That  one  (the  body  of  the  enemy  of  the  saints)  went  into  the
earth  (grave)  and  became  earth  entirely;  this  (holy  body)  went
into  the  salt  and  became  entirely  pure —

The  (spiritual)  salt  through  which  Alohammed  is  more  refined
(than  all  others) : he  is  more  eloquent  than  that  salt-seasoned
(elegantly  expressed)  Hadith.

This  salt  is  surviving  in  his  heritage : those  heirs  of  his  are  2005
with  thee.  Seek  them !

He  (the  spiritual  heir  of  Mohammed)  is  seated  in  front  of
thee,  (ljut)  where  indeed  is  thy  “front”?  He  is  before  thee,
(but)  W'here  is  the  soul  that  thinks  “before”?

If  thou  fancy  thou  hast  a “before”  and  “behind,”  thou  art
tied  to  body  and  deprived  of  spirit.

“Below”  and  “above,”  “before”  and  “behind”  are  attri-
butes of  the  body:  the  essence  of  the  bright  spirit  is  without
direction  (not  limited  by  relations  of  place).

Open  thy  (inward)  vision  with  the  pure  light  of  the  King.
Beware  of  fancying,  like  one  who  is  short-sighted.

That  thou  art  only  this  very  (body  living)  in  grief  and  joy.  2010
O (thou  who  art  really)  non-existence,  where  (are)  “before”
and  “behind”  (appertaining)  to  non-existence?

’Tis  a day  of  rain : journey  on  till  night — not  (sped)  by  this
(earthly)  rain  but  by  the  rain  of  the  Lord.

The  story  of  ^ A’isha,  may  God  be  well-pleased  with  her,  how  she
asked  Mustafa  {Mohammed),  on  whom  be  peace,  saying,  “It
rained  to-day:  since  thou  wentest  to  the  graveyard,  how  is  it
that  thy  clothes  are  not  wet?”

One  day  Mustyfa  went  to  the  graveyard:  he  went  with  the
bier  of  a man  (who  was  one)  of  his  friends.

He  made  the  earth  so  that  it  filled  his  grave:  he  quickened
his  seed  under  the  earth.

These  trees  are  like  the  interred  ones:  they  have  lifted  up
their  hands  from  the  earth.

They  are  making  a hundred  signs  to  the  people  and  speaking  2015
plainly  to  him  that  hath  ears  (to  hear).

With  green  tongue  and  with  long  hand  (fingers)  they  are
telling  secrets  from  the  earth’s  conscience  (inmost  heart).

(Sunk  in  earth)  like  ducks  that  have  plunged  their  heads  in
water,  thev  have  become  (gay  as)  peacocks,  though  (in  winter)
they  were  (dark  and  bare)  as  crows.

If  during  the  winter  He  imprisoned  them  (in  ice  and  snow),

God  made  those  “crows”  “peacocks”  (in  spring).

Although  He  put  them  to  death  in  winter.  He  revived  them
by  means  of  spring  and  gave  (them)  leaves.


I lO


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

2020  The  sceptics  say,  “This  (creation),  surely,  is  eternal:  why
should  we  fix  it  on  a beneficent  Lord?  ”

God,  in  despite  of  them,  caused  (spiritual)  gardens  and  plots
of  sweet  flowers  to  grow  in  the  hearts  of  His  friends.

Every  rose  that  is  sweet-scented  within,  that  rose  is  telling
of  the  secrets  of  the  Universal.

Their  scent,  to  the  confusion  of  the  sceptics,  is  going  round
the  world,  rending  the  veil  (of  doubt  and  disbelief).

The  sceptics,  (shrinking)  from  the  scent  of  the  rose  like  a
beetle,  or  like  a delicate  (sensitive)  brain  at  the  noise  of  the  drum,

202J  Feign  themselves  to  be  occupied  and  absorbed,  and  with-
draw their  eyes  from  the  flash  and  the  lightning.

They  withdraw  their  eyes,  but  no  eye  is  there;  the  eye  is
that  which  sees  a place  of  safety.

When  the  Prophet  returned  from  the  graveyard,  he  went  to
the  Siddiqa^  and  confided  (in  her).

As  soon  as  the  eye  of  the  Siddiqa  fell  upon  his  countenance,
she  advanced  and  began  to  lay  her  hand  on  him,

On  his  turban  and  his  face  and  his  hair,  on  his  collar  and
chest  and  arm.

2030  Said  the  Prophet,  “What  art  thou  seeking  so  hastily? ” She
replied,  “To-day  rain  fell  from  the  clouds:

I am  searching  thy  garments  in  quest  (of  moisture),  I do  not
feel  them  wet  with  the  rain.  Oh,  how  wonderful ! ”

The  Prophet  said,  “What  wrap  hast  thou  thrown  over  thy
head?”  Said  she,  “I  made  that  ridd  (plaid)  of  thine  (serve  as)
a head-covering.”

He  said,  “O  pure-bosomed  one,  that  is  why  God  revealed
to  thy  pure  eye  the  rain  of  the  Unseen.

That  rain  is  not  from  your  clouds : there  are  other  clouds  and
another  sky.”

Commentary  on  the  Terse  of  Hakim  {Sand’i):

“ In  the  realm  of  the  soul  are  skies  lording  over  the  sky  of  this  world.
In  the  Way  of  the  spirit  there  are  lowlands  and  highlands,  there

are  lofty  mountains  and  seas.”

2035  The  Unseen  World  has  other  clouds  and  water  (than  ours),
it  has  another  sky  and  sun.

That  is  not  discerned  save  by  the  elect;  the  rest  are  in  doubt
as  to  a nezv  creation.

There  is  rain  for  the  sake  of  nurture ; there  is  (also)  rain  for
the  sake  of  decay.

Mar\ellous  is  the  benefit  of  the  rain  of  springtime,  (but)  to
the  garden  the  autumnal  rain  is  like  a (consuming)  fever.

^ “The  exceedingly  veracious  woman,"  a name  given  to  ‘A'lsha.


‘a’isha  and  the  prophet


III


That  vernal  (rain)  makes  it  tenderly  nurtured  (flourishing),
while  this  autumnal  (rain)  makes  it  sickly  and  wan.

Similarly  know  that  cold  and  wind  and  sun  are  at  variance  j m
(produce  various  effects) ; and  find  the  clue.

Even  so  in  the  E^nseen  World  there  are  these  different  sorts,
(consisting)  in  loss  and  gain  and  in  profit  and  defraudment
(damage).

This  breath  of  the  Ahddl  (saints)  is  from  that  (spiritual)
springtide : from  it  there  grows  a green  garden  in  heart  and  soul.

From  their  breaths  there  comes  (is  produced)  in  him  who  is
fortunate  the  (same)  effect  (as  that)  of  the  spring  rain  on  the  tree.

If  there  be  in  the  place  a dry  tree,  do  not  deem  its  defect  to
be  due  to  the  life-quickening  wind.

The  wind  did  its  own  work  and  blew  on:  he  that  had  a soul  -'04
chose  it  in  preference  to  his  soul.


On  the  meaning  of  the  Tradition,  “ Take  advantage  of  the
coolness  of  the  spring  season,  etcT

The  Prophet  said,  “Give  heed,  my  friends!  Do  not  cover
your  bodies  from  the  cold  of  spring.

For  it  does  to  your  spirits  the  same  thing  that  spring  does
to  the  trees ;

But  flee  from  the  cold  of  autumn,  for  it  does  what  autumn
did  to  the  garden  and  the  vines.”

The  traditionists  have  referred  this  (saying)  to  the  outward
(sense),  and  have  been  content  with  that  same  (outward)  form.

That  class  (of  people)  were  ignorant  of  the  spirit : they  saw  405
the  mountain,  they  did  not  see  the  mine  in  the  mountain.

In  the  sight  of  God  that  “autumn”  is  the  flesh  [nafs)  and
(its)  desires : the  reason  and  the  spirit  are  the  essence  of  spring
and  are  everlasting  life.

Thou  hast  a partial  reason  hidden  (within  thee) : (now)  in  this
world  seek  one  whose  reason  is  perfect.

Through  his  whole  thy  part  is  made  whole  (and  perfect):
Universal  Reason  is  like  a shackle  on  the  neck  of  the  flesh.

Therefore,  according  to  the  (right)  interpretation,  it  (the
meaning)  is  this,  that  the  holy  breaths  are  like  spring  and  the
life  of  leaf  and  vine.

The  sayings  of  the  saints,  whether  soft  or  rough,  do  not  thou  J05
cover  thy  body  (against  them),  for  they  are  the  support  of  thy
religion.

Whether  he  (the  saint)  speak  hot  or  cold,  receive  (his  words)
with  joy:  thereby  thou  wilt  escape  from  the  hot  and  cold
(of  Nature)  and  from  Hell-fire.

His  “hot”  and  “cold”  is  life’s  new  season  of  spring,  the
source  of  sincerity  and  faith  and  service.


II2  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Inasmuch  as  the  garden  of  the  spirits  is  living  through  him,
and  the  sea  of  (his)  heart  is  filled  with  these  pearls,

Thousands  of  griefs  lie  (heavy)  on  a wise  man’s  heart,  if  from
the  garden  of  his  heart  (even)  a toothpick  fail  (be  missing)^.

How  the  Siddtqa  (‘A'isha),  may  God  be  well-pleased  with  her,

asked  Mustafa  {Mohammed),  God  bless  him  and  give  him  peace,

saying,  “ What  was  the  inner  meaning  of  to-day’s  rain?”

060  The  Siddiqa  said,  “O  (thou  who  art  the)  cream  of  existence,
what  was  the  (true)  reason  of  to-day’s  rain?

Was  it  (one)  of  the  rains  of  mercy,  or  (was  it)  for  the  sake
of  menace  and  the  justice  of  (Divine)  iVIajesty?

Was  it  from  the  favour  of  the  vernal  attributes,  or  from  a
baneful  autumnal  attribute?”

He  said,  “This  (rain)  was  for  the  purpose  of  allaying  the
grief  that  is  upon  the  race  of  Adam  in  calamity.

If  man  were  to  remain  in  that  fire  (of  grief),  much  ruin  and
loss  would  befall.

065  This  world  would  at  once  become  desolate : (all)  selfish  desires
would  go  forth  from  men.”

Forgetfulness  (of  God),  O beloved,  is  the  pillar  (prop)  of  this
world:  (spiritual)  intelligence  is  a bane  to  this  world.

Intelligence  belongs  to  that  (other)  world,  and  when  it
prevails,  this  world  is  overthrown.

Intelligence  is  the  sun  and  cupidity  the  ice;  intelligence  is
the  water  and  this  world  the  dirt.

A little  trickle  (of  intelligence)  is  coming  from  yonder  world,
that  cupidity  and  envy  may  not  roar  (too  loudly)  in  this  world.

o;o  If  the  trickle  from  the  Unseen  should  become  greater,  in  this
world  neither  virtue  nor  vice  will  be  left.

This  (topic)  has  no  bound.  Go  to  the  starting-point,  go  back
to  the  tale  of  the  minstrel.

The  remainder  of  the  story  of  the  old  harper  and  the  explanation
of  its  issue  [moral).

That  minstrel  by  whom  the  world  was  filled  with  rapture,
from  whose  voice  wondrous  phantasies  grew  (arose  in  the  minds
of  those  who  heard  him).

At  whose  song  the  bird  of  the  soul  would  take  wing,  and  at
whose  note  the  mind  of  the  spirit  would  be  distraught —

When  time  passed  and  he  grew  old,  from  weakness  the  falcon,
his  soul,  became  a catcher  of  gnats.

^ I.e.  the  wise  man  feels  bitter  remorse  if  he  neglects  the  least  oppor-
tunity of  enriching  himself  with  the  spiritual  blessings  dispensed  by  the
saints.


THE  STORY  OF  THE  HARPER  I13

His  back  became  bent  like  the  back  of  a wine-jar,  the  brows  2075
over  his  eyes  like  a crupper-strap.

His  charming  soul-refreshing  voice  became  ugly  and  worth
nothing  to  any  one.

The  tone  that  had  (once)  been  the  envy  of  Zuhra  (Venus)
was  now  like  the  bray  of  an  old  donkey.

Truly,  what  fair  thing  is  there  that  did  not  become  foul,  or
what  roof  that  did  not  become  a carpet? —

Except  the  voices  of  holy  men  in  their  breasts,  from  the
repercussion  of  whose  breath  is  the  blast  of  the  trumpet  (of
Resurrection).

(Theirs  is)  the  heart  by  which  (all)  hearts  are  made  drunken,  20S0
(theirs  is)  the  non-existence  whereby  these  existences  of  ours
are  made  existent.

He  (the  saint)  is  the  amber  (magnet)  of  (all)  thought  and  of
ever}"  voice;  he  is  the  (inward)  delight  of  revelation  and  in-
spiration and  (Divine)  mystery.

When  the  minstrel  grew  older  and  feeble,  through  not  earning
(anything)  he  became  indebted  for  a single  loaf  of  bread.

He  said,  “Thou  hast  given  me  long  life  and  respite:  O God,
Thou  hast  bestowed  (many)  favours  on  a vile  wretch.

For  seventy  years  I have  been  committing  sin,  (yet)  not  for
one  day  hast  Thou  withheld  Thy  bounty  from  me.

I (can)  earn  nothing:  to-day  I am  Thy  guest,  I will  play  the
harp  for  Thee,  I am  Thine.”

He  took  up  his  harp  and  went  in  search  of  God  to  the  grave-
yard of  Medina,  crying  “Alas!”

He  said,  “I  crave  of  God  the  price  of  silk  (for  harpstrings),
for  He  in  His  kindness  accepts  adulterated  coin.”

He  played  the  harp  a long  while  and  (then),  weeping,  laid  his
head  down : he  made  the  harp  his  pillow  and  dropped  on  a tomb.

Sleep  overtook  him:  the  bird,  his  soul,  escaped  from  cap-
tivity, it  let  harp  and  harper  go  and  darted  away.

It  became  freed  from  the  body  and  the  pain  of  this  world  in  2090
the  simple  (purely  spiritual)  world  and  the  vast  region  of  the  soul.

There  his  soul  was  singing  what  had  befallen  (it),  saying,

“ If  they  would  but  let  me  stay  here.

Happy  would  be  my  soul  in  this  garden  and  springtide,  drunken
with  this  (far-stretching)  plain  and  mystic  anemone-field.

Without  head  or  foot  I would  be  journeying,  without  lip  or
tooth  I would  be  eating  sugar.

With  a memory  and  thought  free  from  brain-sickness,  I would
frolic  with  the  dwellers  in  Heaven.

With  eye  shut  I would  be  seeing  a (whole)  world,  without  a 2095
hand  I would  be  gathering  roses  and  basil.”

The  water-bird  (his  soul)  was  plunged  in  a sea  of  honey —
the  fountain  of  Job,  to  drink  and  wash  in.


N M


8


II4  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Whereby  Job,  from  his  feet  to  the  crown  of  his  head,  was
purged  of  afflictions  (and  made  pure)  like  the  light  of  the
sunrise.

If  the  Mathnawi  were  as  the  sky  in  magnitude,  not  half  the
portion  of  this  (mystery)  would  find  room  in  it,

For  the  exceeding  broad  earth  and  sky  (of  the  material  world)
caused  my  heart,  from  (their)  narrowness  (in  comparison  with
the  spiritual  universe),  to  be  rent  in  pieces;

2100  And  this  world  that  was  revealed  to  me  in  this  dream  (of
the  minstrel)  has  spread  wide  my  wings  and  pinions  because
of  (its  vast)  expansion.

If  this  world  and  the  w'ay  to  it  were  manifest,  no  one  would
remain  there  (in  the  material  world)  for  a single  moment.

The  (Divine)  command  was  coming  (to  the  minstrel) — “Nay,
be  not  covetous;  inasmuch  as  the  thorn  is  out  of  thy  foot,
depart” —

(Whilst)  his  soul  was  lingering  there  in  the  spacious  demesne
of  His  (God’s)  mercy  and  beneficence.

How  the  heavenly  voice  spoke  to  ‘Untar,  may  God  be  well-pleased
with  him,  while  he  was  asleep,  saying,  “Give  a certain  sum  of
gold  from  the  public  treasury  to  the  man  who  is  sleeping  in  the
graveyard."

Then  God  sent  such  a drowsiness  upon  ‘Umar  that  he  was
unable  to  keep  himself  from  slumber.

2105  He  fell  into  amazement  saying,  “This  is  (a  thing)  unknown.
This  has  fallen  from  the  Unseen,  ’cis  not  without  purpose.”

He  laid  his  head  down,  and  slumber  overtook  him.  He
dreamed  that  a voice  came  to  him  from  God : his  spirit  heard
That  voice  which  is  the  origin  of  every  cry  and  sound : that
indeed  is  the  (only)  voice,  and  the  rest  are  echoes.

Turcoman  and  Kurd  and  Persian-speaking  man  and  Arab
have  understood  that  voice  without  (help  of)  ear  or  lip.

Ay,  (but)  what  of  Turcomans,  Persians,  and  Ethiopians?
(Even)  wood  and  stone  have  understood  that  voice.

2110  Every  moment  there  is  coming  from  Him  (the  call),  “Am  not
I {your  Lord)?"  and  substance  and  accidents  are  becoming
existent.

If  (the  answ'er)  “ Yea"  is  not  coming  from  them,  yet  their
coming  from  non-existence  (into  existence)  is  (equivalent  to)
i ea.

Listen  to  a goodly  tale  in  explanation  of  what  I have  said
concerning  the  friendliness  (awareness)  of  stone  and  w'ood.


THE  MOANING  PILLAR


115


How  the  moaning  pillar  complained  when  they  made  a pulpit  for
the  Prophet,  on  whom  be  peace — -for  the  multitude  had  become
great,  and  said,  “ We  do  not  see  thy  blessed  face  when  thou
art  exhorting  us" — and  how  the  Prophet  and  his  Companions
heard  that  complaint,  and  how  Mustafa  conversed  with  the
pillar  in  clear  language.

The  moaning  pillar  was  complaining  of  (its)  separation  from
the  Prophet,  just  as  rational  beings  (might  do).

The  Prophet  said,  “ O pillar,  what  dost  thou  want?  ” It  said,
“My  soul  is  turned  to  blood  because  of  parting  from  thee.

I was  thy  support:  (now)  thou  hast  run  away  from  me:  thou  2115
hast  devised  a place  to  lean  against  upon  the  pulpit.”

“Dost  thou  desire,”  said  he,  “to  be  made  a date-palm,  (so
that)  the  people  of  the  East  and  the  West  shall  gather  fruit
from  thee?

Or  that  He  (God)  should  make  thee  a cypress  in  yonder
world,  so  that  thou  'wilt  remain  everlastingly  fresh  and  flour-
ishing? ”

It  replied,  “ I desire  that  w^hereof  the  life  is  enduring  for
ever.”  Hearken,  O heedless  one!  Be  not  thou  less  than  a
piece  of  wood !

He  (the  Prophet)  buried  that  pillar  in  the  earth,  that  it  may
be  raised  from  the  dead,  like  mankind,  on  the  day  of  Resur-
rection,

That  (hence)  thou  mayst  know  that  every  one  whom  God  212°
has  called  (to  Himself)  remains  disengaged  from  all  the  work  of
this  world.

Whosoever  hath  his  work  and  business  from  God,  gains
admission  there  and  goes  forth  from  (abandons  worldly)  tvork.

He  that  hath  no  gift  (portion)  of  spiritual  mysteries,  how
should  he  believe  in  the  complaining  of  inanimate  things?

He  says  “Yes,”  not  from  his  heart  (but)  for  agreement’s  sake,
lest  people  should  say  that  he  is  a hypocrite  (in  his  religion).

Unless  there  were  knowers  of  the  (Divine)  command  “Bel”,
this  doctrine  (that  inanimate  things  are  capable  of  speech)  would
have  been  rejected  in  the  world.

Myriads  of  conformists  and  legalists*  are  cast  into  the  abyss  21^5
(of  destruction)  by  a single  taint  (of  doubt).

For  their  conformity  and  their  drawing  evidence  from  logical
proofs  and  all  their  wings  and  wing-feathers  (every  means  which
they  employ  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  truth)  depend  on  opinion.

The  vile  Devil  raises  a doubt  (in  their  minds):  all  these  blind
ones  fall  in  headlong.

The  leg  of  the  sj  llogisers  is  of  w'ood : a wooden  leg  is  very
infirm.


^ Literally,  "followers  of  signs  (external  evidences).”


8-2


n6  MATHNAWi,  BOOK  I

Unlike  the  Qutb  (supreme  saint)  of  the  age,  the  possessor  of
(spiritual)  vision,  by  whose  steadfastness  the  mountain  is  made
giddy-headed  (amazed).

130  The  blind  man’s  leg  is  a staff,  a staff,  so  that  he  may  not  fall
headlong  on  the  pebbles.

The  cavalier  that  became  (the  cause  of)  victory  for  the  army,
who  is  he  for  (the  army  of)  the  religious?  One  possessed  of
(spiritual)  sight.

If,  with  (the  aid  of)  a staff,  the  blind  have  seen  their  way,
(yet  only)  under  the  protection  of  (other)  people  are  they  clear-
sighted.

Were  there  no  men  of  vision  and  (spiritual)  kings,  all  the
blind  in  the  world  would  be  dead.

From  the  blind  comes  neither  sowing  nor  reaping  nor  culti-
vation nor  tradings  and  profit.

133  If  He  (God)  did  not  bestow  mercy  and  grace  upon  you,  the
wood  of  your  logical  deduction  would  break.

What  is  this  staff?  Inferences  and  (logical)  demonstration.
Who  gave  them  (the  blind)  that  staff?  The  all-seeing  and  almighty
One.

Since  the  staff  has  become  a weapon  of  quarrel  and  attack,
break  that  staff  to  pieces,  O blind  man!

He  gave  you  the  staff  that  ye  might  approach  (Him):  with
that  staff  ye  struck  even  at  Him  in  your  anger.

O company  of  the  blind,  what  are  ye  doing?  Bring  the  seer
between  (you  and  God)^ !

140  Lay  hold  of  His  skirt  who  gave  thee  the  staff : consider  what
(dreadful)  things  Adam  suffered  from  disobedience.

Consider  the  miracles  of  Moses  and  Ahmad  (Mohammed),
how  the  staff  became  a serpent  and  the  pillar  was  endowed
with  knowledge.

From  the  staff  (came)  a serpent  and  from  the  pillar  a moaning :
they  (the  staff  and  the  pillar)  are  beating  (the  drums  of  honour)
five  times  daily  for  the  sake  of  the  Religion^.

Unless  this  savour  (perception  of  spiritual  truths)  were  non-
intellectual, how  should  all  these  miracles  have  been  necessary?

Whatever  is  intelligible,  the  intellect  is  swallowing  (receiving)
it  without  the  evidence  of  miracles  and  without  contention.

145  This  virgin  (untrodden)  Way  deem  unintelligible,  deem  (it)
accepted  in  the  heart  of  everj'  fortunate  (elect)  one.

As  in  fear  of  Adam  devil  and  wild  beast  fled  to  the  islands,
from  envy,

So  in  fear  of  the  miracles  of  the  prophets  have  the  sceptics
slunk  away  under  the  grass,

^ I.e.  “seek  access  to  God  by  means  of  the  seer.”

^ I.e.  these  miracles  are  a perpetual  proclamation  of  the  sovereignty  of
the  true  Religion.


MOHAMMED  AND  ABl}  JAHL  I17

That  they  may  live  in  hypocrisy  with  the  reputation  of  being
Aloslems,  and  that  you  may  not  know  who  they  are.

Like  counterfeiters,  they  smear  the  base  coin  with  silver  and
(inscribe  on  it)  the  name  of  the  King.

The  outward  form  of  their  words  is  profession  of  the  Divine  2150
Unity  and  the  religion  (of  Islam):  the  inward  meaning  thereof
is  like  darnel  (?)  seed  in  bread.

The  philosopher  has  not  the  stomach^  (courage)  to  breathe
a word:  if  he  utter  a word,  the  true  Religion  will  confound
him.

His  hand  and  foot  are  inanimate,  and  whatever  his  spirit  says
(commands),  those  two  are  under  its  control.

Albeit  they  (the  sceptics)  propound  (reasons  for)  suspicion
with  their  tongues,  their  hands  and  feet  give  testimony  (against
them).

Haw  the  Prophet,  on  whom  be  peace,  manifested  a miracle  by
the  speaking  of  the  gravel  in  the  hand  of  Abujahl — God’s  curse
on  him  1 — and  by  the  gravel’s  bearing  witness  to  the  truth  of
Mohammed,  on  whom  be  God’s  blessing  and  peace.

There  were  some  pebbles  in  the  hand  of  Bii  Jahl:  “O
Ahmad,”  said  he,  “tell  quickly  what  this  is.

If  thou  art  the  Messenger  (of  God),  what  is  hidden  in  my  fist?  2155
(Speak),  since  thou  hast  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  Heaven.”

He  said,  “ How  dost  thou  wish  (me  to  do)?  Shall  I say  what
those  (hidden)  things  are,  or  shall  they  declare  that  I am
truthful  and  right?”

Bii  Jahl  said,  “This  second  (thing)  is  more  extraordinary.”
“Yes,”  said  the  Prophet,  “(but)  God  hath  greater  power  than
that.”

Without  delay,  from  the  middle  of  his  (closed)  fist  ever}'
pebble  began  to  pronounce  the  (Moslem’s)  profession  of  faith.

Each  said,  “ There  is  no  god”  and  (each)  said,  '’except  Allah”',
(each)  threaded  the  pearl  of  “Ahmad  is  the  Messenger  of  Allah.”

When  Bu  Jahl  heard  this  from  the  pebbles,  in  his  anger  he  zi(jo
dashed  those  pebbles  on  the  ground.

The  rest  of  the  story  of  the  minstrel,  and  how  the  Commander  of
the  Faithful,  'Umar,  may  God  be  well-pleased  with  him,  con-
veyed to  him  the  message  spoken  by  the  heavenly  voice.

Turn  back  and  hear  the  plight  of  the  minstrel,  for  the
minstrel  had  (now)  become  desperate  from  waiting  (so  long).

The  voice  (of  God)  came  to  ‘Umar,  saying,  “O  ‘Umar,
redeem  Our  servant  from  want.

‘ Literally.  “ the  gall-bladder.”


Il8  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

We  have  a servant,  a favourite  and  highly  esteemed  one;
take  the  trouble  to  go  on  foot  to  the  graveyard.

O ‘Umar,  spring  up  and  put  in  thy  hand  full  seven  hundred
dinars  from  the  public  treasury.

2165  Carry  them  to  him  (and  say),  ‘O  thou  who  art  Our  choice,
accept  this  sum  nowand  excuse  (Us  for  offering  such  a small  gift).

Spend  this  amount  on  the  price  (purchase)  of  silk:  when  it
is  spent,  come  here  (again).’  ”

Then  ‘Umar  in  awe  of  that  voice  sprang  up  that  he  might
gird  his  loins  for  this  service.

‘Umar  set  his  face  towards  the  graveyard  with  the  purse
under  his  arm,  running  in  search  (of  God’s  favourite).

Long  did  he  run  round  about  tbe  graveyard:  no  one  was
there  but  that  poor  old  man.

2170  He  said,  “This  is  not  he,’’  and  ran  once  more.  He  became
tired  out  and  saw  none  but  the  old  man.

He  said,  “God  said,  ‘We  have  a servant:  he  is  a pure  and
worthy  and  blessed  one.’

How  should  an  old  harper  be  the  chosen  of  God?  O Hidden
Mystery,  how  excellent,  how  excellent  art  Thou ! ”

Once  again  he  wandered  about  the  graveyard,  like  the  hunting
lion  about  the  desert.

When  it  became  certain  to  him  that  none  was  there  except
the  old  man,  he  said,  “ Many  an  illumined  heart  is  (to  be  found)
in  darkness.”

2175  He  came  and  sat  down  there  (beside  him)  with  a hundred
marks  of  respect.  ‘ Umar  happened  to  sneeze,  and  the  old  man
sprang  to  his  feet.

He  saw  ‘Umar  and  stood  fixed  in  amazement:  he  resolved  to
go  and  began  to  tremble  (with  fear).

He  said  within  himself,  “O  God,  help,  I beseech  thee!  The
Inspector  has  fallen  upon  a poor  old  harper.”

When  ‘Umar  looked  on  the  old  man’s  countenance,  he  saw
him  ashamed  and  pale.

Then  ‘Umar  said  to  him,  “ Fear  not,  do  not  flee  from  me,  for
I have  brought  thee  glad  tidings  from  God.

21.-0  How  often  has  God  praised  thy  disposition,  so  that  He  has
made  ‘Umar  in  love  with  thy  face!

Sit  down  beside  me  and  do  not  make  separation  (between  us),
that  I may  say  into  thine  ear  the  secret  (message)  from  (the
Divine)  favour.

God  sends  thee  greeting  and  asks  thee  how  thou  farest  in
thy  distress  and  boundless  sorrows.

Lo,  here  are  some  pieces  of  gold  to  pay  for  silk.  Spend  them
and  come  back  to  this  place.”

The  old  man  heard  this,  trembling  all  over  and  biting  his
hand  and  tearing  his  garment.


THE  STORY  OF  THE  HARPER  119

Crying,  “O  God  who  hast  no  like!”  inasmuch  as  the  poor  2185
old  man  was  melted^  with  shame.

After  he  had  wept  long  and  his  grief  had  gone  beyond  (all)
bounds,  he  dashed  his  harp  on  the  earth  and  broke  it  to  bits.

He  said,  “O  thou  (harp)  that  hast  been  to  me  a curtain
(debarring  me)  from  God,  O thou  (that  hast  been)  to  me  a
brigand  (cutting  me  off)  from  the  King’s  highway,

0 thou  that  hast  drunk  my  blood  for  seventy  years,  O thou
because  of  whom  my  face  is  black  (disgraced)  before  (the
Divine)  perfection!

Have  mercy,  O bounteous  God  who  keepest  faith,  on  a life
passed  in  iniquity !

God  gave  (me)  a life,  the  value  of  every  single  day  whereof  2190
none  knoweth  except  Him.

1 have  spent  my  life,  breath  by  breath:  I have  breathed  it  all
away  in  treble  and  bass.

Ah  me,  that  in  minding  the  (musical)  mode  and  rhythm  of  ‘ Iraq
the  bitter  moment  of  parting  (from  this  world)  went  out  of
my  mind  (was  forgotten).

Alas  that  from  the  liquid  freshness  of  the  minor  zirafgand
the  seed  sown  in  my  heart  dried  up,  and  my  heart  died.

Alas  that  from  (my  preoccupation  with)  the  sound  of  these
four-and-twenty  (melodies)  the  caravan  passed  and  the  day  grew
late.’

0 God,  help  (me)  against  this  (self  of  mine)  that  is  seeking  2195
help  (from  Thee) : I seek  justice  (redress)  from  no  one  (else,
but  only)  from  this  justice-seeking  (self).

1 shall  not  get  justice  for  myself  from  any  one  except,  surely,
from  Him  who  is  nearer  to  me  than  I ;

For  this  “I-hood”  comes  to  me  from  Him  moment  by
moment:  therefore  when  this  has  failed  me,  I see  (only)  Him,

As  (when  you  are  with)  one  who  is  counting  out  gold  to  you ,
you  keep  your  gaze  (directed)  towards  him,  not  towards  your-
self.

How  'Umar,  may  God  be  well-pleased  with  him,  bade  him  {the
harper)  turn  his  gaze  from  the  stage  of  weeping,  zvhich  is  {self-)
existence,  to  the  stage  of  absorption  {in  God),  zvhich  is  non-
existence {of  self).

Then  ‘Umar  said  to  him,  “This  wailing  of  thine  is  also  (one
of)  the  marks  of  thy  sobriety  (self-consciousness).

The  way  of  him  that  has  passed  away  (from  self-conscious-  2200
ness)  is  another  way,  because  sobriety  is  another  sin.

Sobriety  exists  (arises)  from  recollection  of  what  is  past:  past
and  future  are  to  thee  a curtain  (separating  thee)  from  God.

^ Literally,  “ became  water/*


120


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Cast  fire  on  them  both:  how  long,  because  of  these  twain,
wilt  thou  be  full  of  knots  (joints)  like  a reed?

Whilst  the  reed  is  knotted,  it  is  not  a sharer  of  secrets:  it  is
not  the  companion  of  the  (flute-player’s)  lip  and  voice.

When  thou  art  (engaged)  in  going  about  (seeking  God)  thou
art  indeed  wrapped  in  (thy)  going  about  ^ : when  thou  hast  come
home,  thou  art  still  with  thyself  (self-conscious).

05  O thou  whose  knowledge  is  without  knowledge  of  the  Giver
of  knowledge,  thy  repentance  is  worse  than  thy  sin.

O thou  that  seekest  to  repent  of  a state  that  is  past,  say,  when
wilt  thou  repent  of  this  repentance?

At  one  time  thou  turnest  to  the  (low)  sound  of  the  treble,
at  another  thou  dost  kiss  (art  in  love  with)  weeping  and  wailing.”

When  Faniq  (‘Umar)  became  a reflector  of  mysteries,  the  old
man’s  heart  was  awakened  from  within.

He  became  without  weeping  or  laughter,  like  the  soul:  his
(animal)  soul  departed  and  the  other  soul  came  to  life.

10  In  that  hour  such  a bewilderment  arose  within  him  that  he
went  forth  from  earth  and  heaven —

A seeking  and  searching  beyond  (all)  seeking  and  search:
I know  not  (how  to  describe  it);  tif)  you  know,  tell!

Words  and  feelings  beyond  (all)  feelings  and  words — he  had
become  drowned  in  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  of  majesty.

Drowned,  not  in  such  wise  that  there  should  be  for  him  any
deliverance,  or  that  any  one  should  know  him  except  the
(Divine)  Ocean.

Partial  reason  would  not  be  telling  of  (the  mysteries  of)  the
Universal  (Reason),  if  there  were  not  demand  after  demand
(perpetual  Divine  impulses  necessitating  the  manifestation  of
these  mysteries).

15  Since  demand  after  demand  is  arriving,  the  waves  of  that
Sea  (Universal  Reason)  reach  this  place  (the  world  of  partial
reason).

Now  that  the  story  of  the  old  man’s  (spiritual)  experiences
has  come  to  this  point,  the  old  man  and  his  experiences  have
withdrawn  behind  the  veil.

The  old  man  has  shaken  his  skirt  free  from  talk  and  speech :
half  of  the  tale  has  remained  in  our  mouth  (has  not  been
told).

It  behoves  (us),  for  the  sake  of  procuring  (such)  delight  and
enjoyment,  to  gamble  away  (sacrifice)  hundreds  of  thousands  of
souls  (lives).

In  chase  of  the  spiritual  forest  be  (as)  a falcon,  be  one  who
gambles  his  soul  (life)  away,  like  the  sun  of  this  world.

20  The  lofty  sun  is  life-diffusing:  every  moment  it  becomes
empty  and  is  filled.

* I.e.  “thou  art  absorbed  in  thy  search,  not  in  God.’’


THE  STORY  OF  THE  HARPER


I2I


O Sun  of  Reality,  diffuse  spiritual  life,  show  forth  newness  to
this  old  world !

Soul  and  spirit  are  coming  from  the  Unseen  into  human
existence,  like  running  water.

Co?nmentary  on  the  prayer  of  the  two  angels  who  daily  make
proclamation  in  every  market,  saying,  “O  God,  bestow  on  every
prodigal  some  boon  in  exchange!  O God,  bestow  on  every
niggard  some  bane  {in  return)^’;  and  an  explanation  that  the
prodigal  is  he  that  strives  earnestly  in  the  Way  of  God,  not  he
that  squanders  his  wealth  in  the  way  of  sensuality.

The  Prophet  said,  “For  admonishment’s  sake  two  angels  are
always  making  goodly  proclamation.

Saying,  ‘O  God,  keep  the  prodigals  fully  satisfied,  give
hundred-thousandfold  recompense  for  every  dirhem  that  they
spend.

O God,  do  not  give  the  niggards  in  this  world  anything  but  ^
loss  upon  loss ! ’ ”

Oh,  (there  is)  many  an  act  of  niggardliness  that  is  better
than  prodigality ; do  not  bestow  what  belongs  to  God  except  by
the  command  of  God,

That  thou  mayst  gain  infinite  treasure  in  return,  and  that
thou  mayst  not  be  numbered  among  the  infidels

Who  were  offering  camels  in  sacrifice  in  order  that  their
swords  might  prevail  against  Mustafa.

Endeavour  to  find  out  the  command  of  God  from  one  who
is  united  (with  God) : not  every  heart  understands  the  command
of  God,

As  (for  example)  the  slave,  the  enemy  (of  God),  who  did  2
justice  (in  his  own  opinion,  and)  bestowed  what  belonged  to
the  King  upon  those  who  rebelled  against  Him —

In  the  Qur’an  there  is  warning  to  the  heedless  that  all  their
spendings  are  a (cause  of)  bitter  grief  to  them — •

What  increase  does  the  equity  and  justice  of  this  enemy
produce  in  the  sight  of  the  King?  Banishment  and  a black
countenance  (disgrace).

The  chiefs  of  iSIecca  (when)  at  war  with  the  Prophet  offered
sacrifice  in  hope  of  (Divine)  favour.

On  this  account  the  true  believer  is  saying  in  his  prayer,  from
Lead  {us)  in  the  right  path!"

It  beseems  the  generous  man  thus  to  give  money,  (but)  verily  j
the  generositv  of  the  lover  is  the  surrender  of  his  soul  (life).

If  you  give  bread  for  God’s  sake,  you  will  be  given  bread  (in
return) ; if  you  give  your  life  for  God’s  sake,  you  will  be  given
life  (in  return).

If  the  leaves  of  this  plane-tree  drop  off,  the  Creator  will
bestow  on  it  the  provision  of  leaflessness  (spiritual  poverty).


122


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

If  because  of  your  liberality  no  wealth  remains  in  your  hand,
how  should  the  bounty  of  God  let  you  be  down-trodden?

When  any  one  sows,  his  barn  becomes  empty  (of  seed),  but
there  is  goodliness  in  his  cornfield ;

2240  And,  if  he  leaves  it  (the  seed)  in  the  barn  and  saves  it  up,
weevils  and  mice  and  calamities  (of  time  and  decay)  devour  it.

This  world  is  negation  (of  reality):  seek  (reality)  in  affirma-
tion (of  God).  Your  form  (body)  is  void  (of  reality):  seek  in
your  essence.

Bring  the  briny  bitter  (animal)  soul  to  the  sword:  buy  the
(heavenly)  soul  that  is  like  a great  sweet  river.

And  if  you  cannot  become  (one  of  the  frequenters)  of  this
threshold  "(sublime  court),  at  least  hear  from  me  the  following
tale.


The  story  of  the  Caliph  who  in  his  time  surpassed  Hdtim  of  Tayyi'
in  generosity  and  had  no  rival.

In  former  days  there  was  a Caliph  who  made  Hatim  the
slave  of  his  liberality.

2245  He  had  raised  high  the  banner  of  munificence  and  largesse,
he  had  removed  poverty  and  want  from  the  world.

He  was  a sea  of  pearls,  pure  bounty:  his  largesse  reached
from  Qaf  to  Qaf.

In  this  world  of  dust  he  was  the  cloud  and  the  rain : he  was
the  centre  wherein  the  bounty  of  the  Giver  of  all  displayed  itself.

His  gifts  caused  sea  and  mine  to  quake  (tremble  with  shame) :
caravan  on  caravan  (were  hastening)  towards  his  liberality.

His  gate  and  portal  was  the  point  to  which  Need  turned:  the
fame  of  his  munificence  had  gone  (far  and  wide)  into  the  world.

2250  Persians  and  Greeks,  Turcomans  and  Arabs,  were  lost  in
amazement  at  his  liberality  and  generosity.

He  was  the  Water  of  Life  and  the  Ocean  of  Bounty:  by  him
both  Arabs  and  foreigners  were  revived.


Story  of  the  poor  Arab  of  the  desert  and  his  wife’s  altercation
with  him  because  of  {their)  penury  and  poverty.

One  night  a Bedouin  woman  said  to  her  husband — and  she
carried  (her)  talk  beyond  bounds — •

“We  are  suffering  all  this  poverty  and  hardship : all  the  world
are  (living)  in  happiness,  we  (alone)  are  unhappy.

We  have  no  bread,  our  (only)  condiment  is  anguish  and  envy :
we  have  no  jug,  our  (only)  water  is  the  tears  (that  flow)  from
our  eyes.

2255  Our  garment  by  day  is  the  burning  sunshine;  at  night  our
bed  and  coverlet  is  (made)  of  the  moonbeams.


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE  123

We  fancy  the  disk  of  the  moon  is  a disk  (round  cake)  of  bread
and  lift  up  our  hands  towards  the  sky.

The  (poorest  of  the)  poor  feel  shame  at  our  poverty:  day  is
turned  to  night  (darkened)  hy  our  anxiety  about  our  daily
portion  (of  food).

Kinsfolk  and  strangers  have  come  to  flee  from  us  in  like
fashion  as  Samin'  from  men.

If  I beg  a handful  of  lentils  from  some  one,  he  says  to  me,
‘Be  silent,  O death  and  plague!’

The  Arabs  take  pride  in  fighting  and  giving:  thou  amongst
the  Arabs  art  like  a fault  in  writing.

What  fighting  (can  we  do)?  We  are  killed  without  fighting,
we  are  made  giddy  (utterly  distracted)  by  the  sword  of  want.

What  gifts  (can  we  make)?  We  are  continually  in  beggary,
we  are  slitting  the  vein  of  (slaughtering)  the  gnat  in  the  air.

If  any  guest  arrive,  if  I am  I (as  sure  as  I am  living)  I will
go  for  his  tattered  cloak  when  he  falls  asleep  at  night.


How  disciples  {novices  in  Sufism)  are  beguiled  in  their  need  by  false
impostors  and  imagine  them  to  be  Shaykhs  and  venerable  per-
sonages and  (saints)  united  (with  God),  and  do  not  knozv  the
difference  between  fact  (naqd)  and  fiction  (naql)  and  between
what  is  tied  on  (artificially)  and  what  has  grown  up  (naturally).

For  this  reason  the  wise  have  said  with  knowledge,  ‘One
must  become  the  guest  of  those  who  confer  benefits.’

Thou  art  the  disciple  and  guest  of  one  who,  from  his  vileness,
robs  thee  of  all  thou  hast.

He  is  not  strong : how  should  he  make  thee  strong  ? He  does
not  give  light,  (nay)  he  makes  thee  dark.

Since  he  had  no  light  (in  himself),  how  in  association  (with
him)  should  others  obtain  light  from  him?

(He  is)  like  the  half-blind  healer  of  eyes : what  should  he  put
in  (people’s)  eyes  except  wool?

Such  is  our  state  in  poverty  and  affliction:  may  no  guest  be
beguiled  by  us  1

If  thou  hast  never  seen  a ten  years’  famine  in  (visible)  forms,
open  thine  eyes  and  look  at  us.

Our  outward  appearance  is  like  the  inward  reality  of  the
impostor:  darkness  in  his  heart,  his  tongue  flashy  (plausible).

He  has  no  scent  or  trace  of  God,  (but)  his  pretension  is
greater  than  (that  of)  Seth  and  the  Father  of  mankind  (Adam).

The  Devil  (is  so  ashamed  of  him  that  he)  has  not  shown  to
him  even  his  portrait,  (yet)  he  (the  impostor)  is  saying,  ‘We
are  of  the  Abddl^  and  are  more  (we  are  superior  even  to  them).’


^ See  p.  18,  note  i.


124  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

He  has  stolen  many  an  expression  used  by  dervishes,  in  order
that  he  himself  may  be  thought  to  be  a (holy)  personage.

75  In  his  talk  he  cavils  at  Bayazid,  (although)  Yazid  would  be
ashamed  of  his  existence.

(He  is)  without  (any)  portion  of  the  bread  and  viands  of
Heaven : God  did  not  throw  a single  bone  to  him.

He  has  proclaimed,  ‘I  have  laid  out  the  dishes,  I am  the
Vicar  of  God,  I am  the  son  of  the  (spiritual)  Khalifa:

Welcome  (to  the  feast),  O simple-hearted  ones,  tormented
(with  hunger),  that  from  my  bounteous  table  ye  may  eat  your
fill  ’ — of  nothing.

Some  persons,  (relying)  on  the  promise  of  ‘To-morrow,’  have
wandered  for  years  around  that  door,  (but)  ‘To-morrow’  never
comes.

So  It  needs  a long  time  for  the  inmost  conscience  of  a man  to
become  evident,  more  and  less  (both  in  great  and  small  matters),
(So  that  we  may  know  whether)  beneath  the  wall  of  his  body
there  is  treasure,  or  whether  there  is  the  house  of  snake  and
ant  and  dragon.

When  it  became  clear  that  he  was  naught  (worthless),  (by
that  time)  the  life  of  the  seeker  (disciple)  had  passed:  what  use
(was)  the  knowledge  (to  him)?

Explaining  how  it  may  happen,  {though)  rarely,  that  a disciple
sincerely  puts  his  faith  in  a false  impostor  {and  believes)  that  he
is  a {holy)  personage,  and  by  means  of  this  faith  attains  unto  a
{spiritual)  degree  which  his  Shaykh  has  never  {even)  dreamed  of,
and  {then)  fire  and  water  do  him  no  hurt,  though  they  hurt  his
Shaykh;  but  this  occurs  very  seldom.

But  exceptionally  comes  (the  case  of)  a disciple  to  whom,
because  of  his  (spiritual)  illumination,  that  falsehood  (of  the
impostor)  is  beneficial.

He,  by  his  goodly  purpose,  attains  unto  a (high)  degree,
although  he  fancied  (the  impostor  to  be)  soul,  and  that  (soul)
proved  to  be  (only)  body.

85  (It  is)  like  trying  to  find  the  qibla  in  the  heart  (depth)  of  night :
the  qibla  is  not  (found),  but  his  (the  seeker’s)  prayer  is  valid.

The  impostor  has  a dearth  of  soul  within,  but  we  have  a
dearth  of  bread  without.

Why  should  we  conceal  (our  poverty)  like  the  impostor  and
suffer  agony  for  the  sake  of  false  reputation?”


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE


125


How  the  Bedouin  bade  his  wife  be  patient  and  declared  to  her
the  excellence  of  patience  and  poverty .

Her  husband  said  to  her,  “How  long  wilt  thou  seek  income
and  seed-produce?  What  indeed  is  left  of  (our)  life?  Most
(of  it)  is  past.

The  sensible  man  does  not  look  at  increase  or  deficiency,  be-
cause both  (these)  will  pass  by  like  a torrent.

Whether  it  (life)  be  pure  (clear  and  untroubled)  or  whether  2290
it  be  a turbid  flood,  do  not  speak  of  it,  since  it  is  not  enduring
for  a moment.

In  this  world  thousands  of  animals  are  living  happily,  without
up  and  down  (anxiety).

The  dove  on  the  tree  is  uttering  thanks  to  God,  though  her
food  for  the  night  is  not  (yet)  ready.

The  nightingale  is  singing  glory'  to  God  (and  saying),  ‘I  rely
on  Thee  for  my  daily  bread,  O Thou  who  answerest  (prayer).’

The  falcon  has  made  the  king’s  hand  his  joy  (the  place  in
which  he  takes  delight),  and  has  given  up  hope  of  (has  become
indifferent  to)  all  carrion.

Similarly  you  may  take  (every  animal)  from  the  gnat  to  the  2295
elephant : they  all  have  become  God’s  family  (dependent  on  Him
for  their  nourishment),  and  what  an  excellent  nourisher  is  God !

All  these  griefs  that  are  within  our  breasts  arise  from  the
vapour  and  dust  of  our  existence  and  wind  (vain  desire).

These  uprooting  griefs  are  as  a scythe  to  us : (to  think  that)
this  is  such  and  such  or  that  that  is  such  and  such  is  a tempta-
tion (of  the  Devil)  to  us^.

Know  that  every  pain  is  a piece  of  Death:  expel  (that)  part
of  Death  from  thee,  if  there  be  a means  (of  doing  so).

When  thou  canst  not  flee  from  the  part  of  Death,  know  that
the  whole  of  it  will  be  poured  upon  thy  head.

If  the  part  of  Death  has  become  sweet  to  thee,  know  that  2300
God  will  make  the  whole  sweet.

Pains  are  coming  from  Death  as  (his)  messengers:  do  not
avert  thy  face  from  his  messenger,  O foolish  one !

Whoever  lives  sweetly  (pleasantly)  dies  bitterly  (painfully):
whoever  serves  his  body  does  not  save  his  soul.

Sheep  are  driven  from  the  plains  (to  the  town) : the  fatter  they
are,  the  quicker  they  are  killed.

The  night  is  past  and  dawn  is  come.  O my  soul,  how  long
wilt  thou  take  up  (again)  the  tale  of  gold  from  the  beginning^?

Thou  wert  young  (once),  and  (then)  thou  wert  more  con-  2305
tented:  (now)  thou  hast  become  a seeker  of  gold,  (but)  at  first
thou  wert  gold  indeed  (precious  and  perfect).

' I.e.  “we  ought  not  to  complain  of  our  lot  but  put  our  trust  in  God.’’

■ I.e.  “ how  long  will  you  begin  again  and  again  to  talk  about  money.’  ’’


126


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

Thou  wert  a fruitful  vine : how  hast  thou  become  unsaleable
(worthless)?  How  hast  thou  become  rotten  when  thy  fruit  is
ripening?

Thy  fruit  ought  to  become  sweeter  and  not  move  farther
backwards  like  rope-makers^.

Thou  art  my  wife : the  wife  must  be  of  the  same  quality  (as
the  husband)  in  order  that  things  may  go  rightly.

The  married  pair  must  match  one  another : look  at  a pair  of
shoes  or  boots.

2310  If  one  of  the  shoes  is  too  tight  for  the  foot,  the  pair  of  them
is  of  no  use  to  thee.

Hast  thou  ever  seen  one  leaf  of  a (folding)  door  small  and
the  other  large,  or  a wolf  mated  with  the  lion  of  the  jungle?

A pair  of  sacks  on  a camel  do  not  balance  properly  when  one
is  small  and  the  other  of  full  size.

I march  with  stout  heart  towards  contentment : why  art  thou
betaking  thyself  to  revilement?  ”

In  this  fashion  the  contented  man,  moved  by  sincerity  and
ardour,  was  talking  to  his  wife  till  daybreak.

How  the  wife  counselled  her  husband,  saying,  “Don’t  talk  any
more  about  thy  merit  and  {spiritual)  rank — ‘why  say  ye  that
which  ye  do  not?  ’ — for  although  these  words  are  true,  yet  thou
hast  not  attained  to  the  degree  of  trust  in  God,  and  to  speak  thus
above  thy  station  and  devotional  practice  is  harmful  and  ‘ ex-
ceedingly hateful  in  the  sight  of  God.’”

2315  The  wife  cried  out  at  him,  saying,  ‘‘0  thou  who  makest
reputation  thy  religion,  I will  not  swallow  thy  spells  (deceiving
speeches)  any  more.

Don’t  talk  nonsense  in  thy  presumption  and  pretension : be-
gone, don’t  speak  from  pride  and  arrogance.

How  long  (wilt  thou  utter)  pompous  and  artificial  phrases?
Look  at  thine  own  acts  and  feelings  and  be  ashamed !

Pride  is  ugly,  and  in  beggars  (all  the)  more  ugly:  (it  is  like)
wet  clothes  after  a cold  snowy  day-.

How  long  (this)  pretension  and  palaver  and  bluster®,  O thou
whose  house  is  (frail)  as  the  house  of  the  spider?

2320  When  hast  thou  illumined  thy  soul  by  contentment?  Of  con-
tentment thou  hast  learned  (only)  the  name.

The  Prophet  said, ‘What  is  contentment?  A treasure.’  Thou
canst  not  distinguish  the  gain  from  the  pain.

This  contentment  is  the  soul’s  treasure:  do  not  thou  boast
(of  possessing  it),  O (thou  who  art)  grief  and  pain  to  my  soul.

^ I.e.  retrogress  and  deteriorate.

^ Literally,  “The  day  cold  and  snow — and  then  the  clothes  wet!”

® Literally,  “wind  of  the  moustache.”


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE  127

Don’t  call  me  thy  mate,  don’t  flap  so  muchh  I am  the  mate
of  justice,  I am  not  the  mate  of  fraud.

How  art  thou  walking  (consorting)  with  amir  and  bey,  when
thou  art  slitting  the  veins  of  (killing  for  food)  the  locust  in
the  air?

Thou  art  contending  with  dogs  for  the  sake  of  a bone,  thou
art  wailing  like  an  empty-bellied  reed-pipe.

Don’t  look  at  me  dully  (coldly)  with  contempt,  lest  I tell
(others)  what  is  in  thy  veins  (disclose  thy  hidden  faults).

Thou  hast  deemed  thy  understanding  superior  to  mine,  (but)
how  hast  thou  (truly)  seen  me,  who  am  deficient  in  under-
standing?

Don’t  spring  upon  me  like  a reckless  wolf!  Oh,  better  be
without  understanding  (mad)  than  (suffer)  the  disgrace  of
(having)  thy  understanding.

Since  thy  understanding  is  a shackle  for  mankind,  it  is  not
understanding:  it  is  a snake  and  scorpion.

May  God  be  the  enemy  of  thy  iniquity  and  deceit ! May  the  ::33o
deceitfulness  of  thy  understanding  fall  short  of  (fail  to  injure)  us  1

Thou  art  both  the  snake  and  the  charmer — oh,  wonderful!
Thou  art  (both)  the  snake-catcher  and  the  snake,  O thou  dis-
grace to  the  Arabs !

If  the  crow  knew  its  ugliness,  from  grief  and  sorrow  it  would
melt  like  snow.

The  charmer  chants  (a  spell)  as  an  enemy  (does);  he  is
(casting)  a spell  upon  the  snake  and  the  snake  is  (casting)  a
spell  upon  him.

If  his  trap  were  not  (devised  by  him  as)  a spell  for  the  snake
(a  means  of  catching  it),  how  would  he  become  a prey  to  the
snake’s  spell?

The  charmer,  from  greed  and  (desire  of)  getting  and  making  ^335
(money),  is  not  conscious  of  the  snake’s  spell  at  the  time.

The'  snake  says,  ‘O  charmer,  beware,  beware!  Thou  hast
beheld  thine  own  spell  (and  its  effect  upon  me):  now  behold
mine !

Thou  beguilest  me  with  the  Name  of  God  in  order  that  thou
mayst  expose  me  to  shame  and  confusion.

The  Name  of  God  enthralled  me,  not  thy  contrivance:  thou
madest  the  Name  of  God  a trap:  woe  to  thee!

The  Name  of  God  will  take  vengeance  from  thee  on  my
behalf:  I commit  my  soul  and  body  to  the  Name  of  God.

Either  it  will  sever  the  vein  of  thy  life  by  my  stroke,  or  it  2340
will  bring  thee  into  a prison  as  (it  has  brought)  me.’”

Rough  speeches  of  this  sort,  (whole)  volumes,  the  woman
recited  to  her  youthful  husband.


I.e.  “don’t  make  such  a show  of  affection.’


128


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I


How  the  man  counselled  his  wife,  saying,  “Do  not  look  with
contempt  on  the  poor,  but  regard  the  work  of  God  as  perfect,
and  do  not  let  thy  vain  thought  and  opinion  of  thine  own  penury
cause  thee  to  sneer  at  poverty  and  revile  the  poor.’'

“O  woman,”  said  he,  “art  thou  a woman  or  the  father  of
sorrow?  Poverty  is  (my)  pride,  and  do  not  thou  beat  me  on
the  head  (lash  me  with  thy  reproaches).

Wealth  and  gold  are  as  a cap  to  the  head:  ’tis  the  bald  man
that  makes  a shelter  of  his  cap,

(But)  he  that  has  curly  and  beautiful  locks  is  happier  when
his  cap  is  gone.

345  The  man  of  God  (the  saint)  resembles  the  eye : therefore  (his)
sight  is  better  bare  (unveiled)  than  covered.

When  a slave-dealer  offers  (slaves)  for  sale,  he  removes  from
the  (sound)  slave  the  garment  that  hides  defects.

But  if  there  be  any  defect,  how  should  he  strip  (the  slave)?
Nay,  he  tricks  him  (the  purchaser)  by  means  of  the  garment.

‘This  one,’  says  he,  ‘is  ashamed  of  good  and  evil:  stripping
him  would  cause  him  to  run  away  from  thee.’

The  (rich)  merchant  is  plunged  in  vice  up  to  the  ears,  (but)
the  merchant  has  money,  and  his  money  covers  his  vice,

350  For  because  of  cupidity  none  that  is  covetous  sees  his  vice:
feelings  of  cupidity  are  a bond  uniting  (men’s)  hearts ;

And  if  a beggar  speak  a word  like  the  (pure)  gold  of  the  mine,
his  wares  will  not  find  the  way  to  the  shop.

The  affair  of  (spiritual)  poverty  is  beyond  thy  apprehension:
do  not  look  on  poverty  with  contempt.

Because  dervishes  are  beyond  property  and  wealth:  they
possess  an  abundant  portion  from  the  Almighty.

The  High  God  is  just,  and  how  should  the  just  behave
tyrannously  to  the  dispirited  (poor  and  weak)?

355  (How  should  they)  give  fortune  and  goods  to  that  one,  while
they  put  this  one  on  the  fire?

The  fire  burns  him  because  he  hath  this  (evil)  thought  about
the  Lord  who  created  both  worlds.

Is  (the  saying)  ‘Poverty  is  my  pride’  vain  and  false?  No;
’tis  thousands  of  hidden  glories  and  disdains.

Thou  in  anger  hast  poured  nicknames  on  me:  thou  hast
called  me  a catcher  (deceiver)  of  friends  and  a catcher  of  snakes.

If  I catch  the  snake,  I extract  its  fangs  in  order  that  I may
save  it  from  having  its  head  crushed.

360  Because  those  fangs  are  an  enemy  to  its  life,  I am  making
the  enemy  a friend  by  means  of  this  skill.

Never  do  I chant  my  spell  from  (motives  of)  cupidity:  I have
turned  this  cupidity  upside  down  (I  have  entirely  vanquished


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE  129

God  forbid ! I desire  nothing  from  created  beings : through
contentment  there  is  a (whole)  world  within  my  heart.

Thou,  (sitting)  on  the  top  of  the  pear-tree^,  seest  (things)  like
that:  come  dowm  from  it,  that  the  (evil)  thought  may  not  con-
tinue.

When  thou  turnest  round  and  round  and  becomest  giddy,
thou  seest  the  house  turning  round,  and  ’tis  thou  (thyself)  art
that  (revolving  object).

Explaining  how  every  one’s  movement  {action)  proceeds  from  the
place  where  he  is,  {so  that)  he  sees  every  one  {else)  from  the  circle
of  his  own  self -existence : a blue  glass  shows  the  sun  as  blue,
a red  glass  as  red,  {but)  when  the  glass  escapes  from  {the  sphere
of)  colour,  it  becomes  white,  {and  then)  it  is  more  truthfid  than
all  other  glasses  and  is  the  Imam  {exemplar  to  them  all).

Abii  Jahl  saw  Ahmad  (Mohammed)  and  said,  ‘’Tis  an  ugly  -365
figure  that  has  sprung  from  the  sons  of  Hashim ! ’

Ahmad  said  to  him,  ‘Thou  art  right,  thou  hast  spoken  truth,
although  thou  art  impertinent.’

The  Siddiq  (Abu  Bakr)  saw  him  and  said,  ‘O  Sun,  thou  art
neither  of  East  nor  of  West:  shine  beauteously ! ’

Ahmad  said,  ‘Thou  hast  spoken  the  truth,  O dear  friend,

O thou  that  hast  escaped  from  this  world  of  nothingness.’

They  that  were  present  said,  ‘O  king,  why  didst  thou
call  both  of  them  truth-tellers  when  they  contradicted  each
other?  ’

He  replied,  ‘I  am  a mirror  polished  by  the  (Divine)  hand:
Turcoman  and  Indian  behold  in  me  that  which  exists  (in  them-
selves).’

O wife,  if  thou  deemest  me  very  covetous,  rise  above  this
womanish  care  (for  worldly  things).

This  (state  of  mine)  resembles  cupidity  and  (in  reality)  it  is
a (Divine)  mercy:  where  that  (spiritual)  blessing  is,  where  is
cupidity?

iVIake  trial  of  poverty  for  a day  or  two,  that  thou  mayst  see
(find)  in  poverty  double  riches.

Have  patience  with  poverty  and  abandon  this  disgust,  be-
cause in  poverty  there  is  the  light  of  the  Lord  of  glon,x

Do  not  look  sour-,  and  (thou  wilt)  see  thousands  of  souls
plunged,  through  contentment,  in  an  ocean  of  honey.

Behold  hundreds  of  thousands  of  bitterly  suffering  souls
steeped  in  rose-syrup,  like  the  rose.

Oh,  alas,  would  that  thou  hadst  comprehension,  so  that  the
unfolded  tale  of  my  heart  might  be  shown  forth  to  thee  from
my  soul.

^ Alluding  to  a story  told  in  Book  IV,  3548  foil.

^ Literally,  "do  not  sell  vinegar.”

X M 9


130  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

This  discourse  is  milk  in  the  teat  of  the  soul : it  will  not  flow
well  without  some  one  to  suck  (the  teat).

When  the  hearer  has  become  Airsty  and  craving,  the  preacher,
(even)  if  he  be  (as  good  as)  dead,  becomes  eloquent.

3 So  When  the  hearer  is  fresh  and  without  fatigue  (not  bored),  the
dumb  and  mute  will  find  a hundred  tongues  to  speak  withal.

When  a stranger  comes  in  at  my  door,  the  women  of  the
harem  hide  themselves  in  the  veil.

But  if  a harmless  relative  should  come  in,  those  covered  ones
will  lift  up  their  face-veils.

Everj'thing  that  is  made  beautiful  and  fair  and  lovely  is  made
(so)  for  the  eye  of  him  that  sees.

How  should  the  sound  of  melody  and  treble  and  bass  be
(made)  for  the  insentient  ear  of  one  who  is  deaf?

35j  Not  in  vain  did  God  make  musk  fragrant;  He  made  it  (so)
for  the  sense  (of  smell).  He  did  not  make  it  for  one  whose
nostrils  are  stopped  (by  disease).

God  hath  fashioned  the  earth  and  the  sky.  He  hath  raised  in
the  midst  much  fire  and  light.

(He  made)  this  earth  for  those  (created)  of  clay,  (He  made)
heaven  to  be  the  abode  of  the  celestials.

The  low  (base)  man  is  the  enemy  of  what  is  high:  the  pur-
chaser (seeker)  of  each  place  (Heaven  or  Hell)  is  manifest  (made
known  by  his  actions).

O chaste  woman,  hast  thou  ever  risen  up  and  decked  thyself
for  the  sake  of  him  that  is  blind?

390  If  I should  fill  the  world  with  hidden  pearls  (of  wisdom),
how  should  I fare  (what  good  would  it  do  me),  since  they  are
not  thy  portion  (since  thou  art  unfit  to  receive  them)?

O wife,  take  leave  of  quarrelling  and  waylaying,  and  if  thou
wilt  not,  (then)  take  leave  of  me !

What  room  have  I for  quarrelling  with  the  good  or  the  bad?
— for  this  heart  of  mine  is  recoiling  (even)  from  acts  of  peace.

If  thou  keep  silence,  (’tis  well),  and  if  not,  I will  so  do  that
at  this  very  moment  I will  leave  my  house  and  home.”

How  the  zoife  paid  regard  to  her  husband  and  begged  God  to
forgive  her  for  what  she  had  said.

When  the  wife  saw  that  he  w'as  fierce  and  unmanageable,  she
began  to  weep : tears  in  sooth  are  a woman’s  lure.

395  She  said,  “When  did  I imagine  such  (words)  from  thee?
I hoped  of  thee  something  different.”

The  wife  approached  by  the  way  of  self-naughting  (self-
abasement).  “I  am  thy  dust,”  said  she,  “not  (worthy  to  be)
thy  lady- wife.

Body  and  soul  and  all  I am  is  thine : the  entire  authority  and
command  belongs  to  thee.


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE  131

If  because  of  poverty  my  heart  has  lost  patience^,  it  is  not
for  my  own  sake,  but  for  thine.

Thou  hast  been  my  remedy  in  afflictions : I am  unwilling  that
thou  shouldst  be  penniless.

On  my  soul  and  conscience,  this  is  not  for  my  own  sake : this  - 1 > >
wailing  and  moaning  is  on  account  of  thee.

(I  swear)  by  God  that  at  every  moment  my  self  would  fain
die  for  thy  self  before  thee.

Would  that  thy  soul,  to  which  my  soul  is  devoted,  were  aware
of  my  soul’s  inmost  thoughts !

Inasmuch  as  thou  hast  such  (an  ill)  opinion  of  me,  I am  grown
weary  both  of  soul  and  of  body.

I cast  earth  on  (renounce)  silver  and  gold,  since  thou  be-
havest  thus  to  me,  O comfort  of  my  soul.

Thou  who  dwellest  in  my  soul  and  heart,  wilt  thou  declare  2405
thyself  to  be  quit  of  me  for  this  (small)  amount  (of  offence)?

Be  quit  (then)!  for  thou  hast  the  power,  (but)  oh,  my  soul
pleads  against  thy  making  this  declaration.

Remember  the  time  when  I was  (beautiful)  as  the  idol,  and
thou  ("adoring)  as  the  idolater.

Thy  slave  has  kindled  her  heart  (in  eagerness)  to  comply
with  thee:  whatever  thou  callest  ‘cooked,’  she  says  it  is
‘burnt^.’

Whatever  thou  mayst  cook  me  with,  I am  thy  spinach®:
whether  (thou  art)  sour  broth  (to  me)  or  sweet,  thou  art  worthy
(of  my  affection).

I uttered  infidelity  (blasphemy):  lo,  I have  returned  to  the  4410
true  faith,  I am  come  (to  submit)  with  all  my  soul  to  thy
command.

I did  not  know  thy  kingly  nature,  I rudely  urged  my  beast
(intruded)  before  thee.

Since  I have  made  (for  myself)  a lamp  of  thy  forgiveness,  I
repent,  I cast  away  (abandon)  opposition.

I am  laying  before  thee  sword  and  winding-sheet:  I am
bending  my  neck  towards  thee : smite !

Thou  art  talking  of  bitter  separation  (from  me) : do  whatever
thou  wilt,  but  do  not  this.

Thy  conscience  within  thee  is  a pleader  on  my  behalf,  it  is  4415
a perpetual  intercessor  with  thee  in  my  absence.

What  pleads  within  thee  for  me  is  thy  (noble)  nature;  from
reliance  on  it  my  heart  sought  (to)  sin  (against  thee).

Have  mercy,  unbeknown  to  thyself  (without  any  self-conceit),

O angry  one,  O thou  whose  nature  is  better  than  a hundred
maunds  of  honey.”

^ Literally,  “sprang  away  from  patience.”

- I.e.  “she  outdoes  you  in  ardour.”

^ I.e.  “it  matters  not  how  you  treat  me:  I am  devotedly  attached  to  you.”


9-2


132  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

In  this  fashion  was  she  speaking  graciously  and  winningly:
meanwhile  a (fit  of)  weeping  came  upon  her.

When  the  tears  and  sobs  passed  beyond  bounds — from  her
who  was  fascinating  even  without  tears —

There  appeared  from  that  rain  a lightning-flash  (that)  shot  a
spark  of  fire  into  the  heart  of  the  lonely  man.

She  by  whose  beauteous  face  man  was  enslaved,  how  will  it
be  when  she  begins  to  play  the  (humble)  slave?

She  at  whose  haughtiness  thy  heart  is  trembling,  how  wilt
thou  fare  when  she  falls  a-w'eeping  before  thee?

She  from  whose  disdain  thy  heart  and  soul  are  bleeding,  how
will  it  be  when  she  turns  to  entreaty  ?

She  in  whose  tyranny  and  cruelty  we  are  snared,  what  plea
shall  we  have  when  she  rises  to  plead?

{The  love  of  desired  things,  women,  etc.)  is  decked  out  for  men
(made  attractive  to  them) : God  has  arranged  it ; how'  can  they
escape  from  what  God  has  arranged?

Inasmuch  as  He  created  her  (the  w'oman)  that  he  (Adam)
might  take  comfort  in  her,  how  can  Adam  be  parted  from
Eve?

Though  he  (the  husband)  be  Rustam  son  of  Zal  and  greater
than  Hamza  (in  valour),  as  regards  authority  he  is  his  old
woman’s  (his  wife’s)  captive.

He  (the  Prophet),  to  whose  words  the  (whole)  world  was
enslaved  (obedient),  used  to  cry,  “Speak  to  me,  O Humayra!”

The  water  prevailed  over  (extinguished)  the  fire  by  its  dread
onset,  (but)  the  fire  makes  it  seethe  when  it  (the  water)  is  screened
(hidden  in  the  cauldron).

When  a cauldron  comes  between  (them),  0 king^,  it  (the  fire)
annihilates  the  water  and  converts  it  into  air.

If  outwardly  thou  art  dominating  thy  wife,  like  the  (fire-
quenching) water,  (yet)  inwardly  thou  art  dominated  and  art
seeking  (the  love  of)  thy  wife.

This  is  characteristic  of  Man  (alone) : to  the  (other)  animals
love  is  wanting,  and  that  (want  of  love)  arises  from  (their)
inferiority  (to  Man).

Explanation  of  the  Tradition,  “ Verily,  they  {women)  prevail  over
the  wise  man,  and  the  ignorant  man  prevails  over  them.”

The  Prophet  said  that  woman  prevails  exceedingly  over  the
wise  and  intelligent,

(While),  on  the  other  hand,  ignorant  men  prevail  over  woman,
for  in  them  the  fierceness  of  the  animal  is  imprisoned.

They  lack  tenderness,  kindness,  and  affection,  because
animality  predominates  over  their  (human)  nature.

* The  reader  is  addressed.


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE  133

Love  and  tenderness  are  human  qualities,  anger  and  lust  are
animal  qualities.

She  (woinan)  is  a ray  of  God,  she  is  not  that  (earthly)  beloved :
she  is  creative,  you  might  say  she  is  not  created.

How  the  man  yielded  to  his  wife's  request  that  he  should  seek  the
means  of  livelihood,  and  regarded  her  opposition  (to  him)  as  a
Divine  indication.  (Verse):

To  the  mind  of  every  knowing  man  it  is  a fact  that  with  the  re-
volving object  there  is  one  that  causes  it  to  revolve.

The  man  became  as  sorr^-  for  that  speech  (of  his)  as  at  the
hour  of  death  a tyrannical  officer  (is  sorrv)  for  his  tvrannv.

He  said,  “How  did  I become  the  adversary  of  (her  who  is)
the  life  of  my  soul.?  How  did  I bestow  kicks  on  the  head  of
my  soul?  ”

When  the  (Divine)  destiny  comes,  it  muffles  the  sight,  so  that  3+40
our  intellect  cannot  distinguish  foot  from  head.

As  soon  as  the  destiny  is  past,  it  (the  intellect)  devours  itself
(with  grief):  rending  the  veil  (without  regard  for  appearances),
it  tears  its  bosom.

The  man  said,  “O  wife,  I am  repenting:  if  I have  been  an
infidel,  I will  (now)  become  a Moslem.

I am  a sinner  against  thee : have  mercy,  do  not  dig  me  up  all
at  once  from  root  and  foundation  (do  not  bring  me  to  utter
ruin).”

If  the  old  infidel  is  repenting,  he  becomes  a Moslem  when
he  pleads  for  pardon.

He  (God)  is  the  merciful  and  bountiful  Lord:  both  existence  2445
and  non-existence  are  in  love  with  Him.

(Both)  infidelity  and  faith  are  lovers  of  that  Majesty,  both
copper  and  silver  are  slaves  to  that  Elixir.

Explaining  that  both  Moses  and  Pharaoh  are  subject  to  the  Divine
Will,  like  antidote  and  poison  and  darkness  and  light,  and  how
Pharaoh  conversed  in  solitude  zvith  God,  praying  that  He  zcould
not  destroy  his  (good)  reputation.

Moses  and  Pharaoh  were  ser\'ants  (worshippers)  of  Reality,
(though)  outwardly  the  former  keeps  the  way  (is  rightly  guided),
while  the  latter  has  lost  the  way.

In  the  datyime  [Moses  was  making  lament  (supplication)  to
God:  at  midnight  Pharaoh  would  begin  to  weep,

Saying,  “O  God,  what  shackle  is  this  on  my  neck?  Were  it
not  for  the  shackle,  who  would  say  ‘I  am  I ’?

By  that  (will)  whereby  Thou  hast  made  Moses  to  be  illumined,  4450
by  that  (same  will)  Thou  hast  made  me  to  be  darkened ;


134  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

By  that  whereby  Thou  hast  made  ]Moses’  face  like  the  moon
Thou  hast  made  the  moon  of  my  soul  to  be  black-faced
(eclipsed).

My  star  was  not  better  than  a moon  (so  that  it  should  be  exempt
from  eclipse):  since  it  has  suffered  eclipse,  what  help  have  I?

If  they  beat  drums  in  my  honour  (proclaiming  me)  as  Lord
and  Sultan,  (’tis  like  as  when)  the  moon  is  eclipsed  and  the
people  beat  bowls  (of  metal).

They  beat  those  bowls  and  raise  a clamour:  they  put  the
moon  to  shame  by  their  blows.

.2455  I,  who  am  Pharaoh,  oh,  woe  is  me  because  of  (what  is  being
done  by)  the  people:  my  (title  of)  ‘My  supreme  Lord’  is  (like)
the  blows  on  the  bowl  (since  it  proclaims  my  eclipse).

We  (Moses  and  I)  are  fellow-servants  (to  Thee),  but  Thy
axe  is  cleaving  the  sappy  boughs  in  Thy  forest ;

Then  it  makes  one  bough  to  be  firmly  planted,  another  bough
to  be  left  uncared  for.

The  bough  has  no  pow'er  against  the  axe : no  bough  escaped
from  the  power  of  the  axe.

(I  entreat  Thee)  by  the  truth  of  the  might  which  belongs  to
Thy  axe,  do  Thou  graciously  make  these  crooked  (perverse)
actions  (of  ours)  straight  (righteous).”

2460  Once  more  Pharaoh  said  to  himself,  “Oh,  wonderful!  Am
not  I (occupied)  the  whole  night  in  (crying)  ‘ O our  Lord  ’ ?

In  secret  I am  growing  humble  and  harmonious:  when  I
reach  Moses,  how  am  I becoming  (so  different)?

The  colour  (gilt)  of  base  gold  is  (laid  on)  in  ten  coats : how  is
it  becoming  black- faced  in  the  presence  of  the  fire  ?

Is  it  not  (true)  that  my  heart  (spirit)  and  body  are  under  His
control,  (so  that)  at  one  moment  He  makes  me  a kernel,  at
another  moment  a rind?

When  He  bids  me  be  a cornfield,  I become  green;  when  He
bids  me  be  ugly,  I become  yellow.

2463  At  one  moment  He  makes  me  a moon,  at  another  black.”
How,  indeed,  is  the  action  of  God  other  than  this?

Before  the  (blows  of  the)  bat  of  His  decree,  “Be,  and  it  was,”
we  are  running  (like  balls)  in  Space  and  beyond^.

Since  colourlessness  (pure  Unity)  became  the  captive  of
colour  (manifestation  in  the  phenomenal  world),  a Moses  came
into  conflict  with  a Moses.

When  you  attain  unto  the  colourlessness  which  you  (originally)
possessed,  Moses  and  Pharaoh  are  at  peace  (with  each  other).

If  it  occurs  to  you  to  ask  questions  about  this  mystery,  (I  reply),
how  should  (the  world  of)  colour  be  devoid  of  contradiction?

2470  The  marvel  is  that  this  colour  arose  from  that  which  is  colour-
less : how  did  colour  arise  to  war  with  the  colourless?

* Literally,  “in  space  and  non-space.”


MOSES  AND  PHARAOH  135

Inasmuch  as  oil  has  been  formed  (by  God)  from  water,  why
have  oil  and  water  become  opposites?

Since  the  rose  springs  from  the  thorn,  and  the  thorn  from
the  rose,  why  are  both  of  them  at  war  and  (engaged)  in  re-
crimination ?

Or  is  this  not  (really)  war?  Is  it  for  (the  Divine)  purpose,
(and  is  it)  an  artifice,  like  the  bickering  of  those  who  sell  asses?

Or  is  it  neither  this  nor  that?  Is  it  bewilderment?  The
treasure  must  be  sought  and  this  (bewilderment)  is  the  ruin
(where  it  is  hidden).

That  which  you  imagine  to  be  the  treasure — through  that  2475
vain  imagination  you  are  losing  the  treasure.

Know'  that  fancies  and  opinions  are  like  the  state  of  cultiva-
tion: treasure  is  not  (to  be  found)  in  cultivated  spots.

In  the  state  of  cultivation  there  is  existence  and  strife  (con-
trariety): the  non-existent  is  ashamed  of  (all)  existent  things.

It  is  not  the  case  that  the  existent  implored  help  against
(sought  to  escape  from)  non-existence;  nay,  (’twas)  the  non-
existent (that)  repelled  the  existent.

Do  not  say,  “I  am  fleeing  from  the  non-existent”;  nay,  it  is
fleeing  from  you.  Stop ! (Do  not  fancy  yourself  to  be  fleeing,)
Outwardly  it  is  calling  you  tow'ards  itself,  but  inwardly  it  is  24S0
driving  you  away  w'ith  the  cudgel  of  rejection.

O man  of  sound  heart  (mind),  ’tis  (a  case  of)  reversed  shoes^ :
know  that  the  rebelliousness  of  Pharaoh  was  (really)  from
(caused  by)  Moses-.

The  reason  why  the  unblest  are  disappointed  of  both  worlds,
{according  to  the  text)  “he  has  lost  this  life  and  the  life  to
come.”

The  wretched  philosopher  being  firmly  convinced  that  the  sky
is  an  egg  and  the  earth  like  its  yolk.

Some  one  asked  him  how'  this  earth  remains,  in  the  midst  of
this  surrounding  expanse  of  sky.

Suspended  in  the  air  like  a lamp,  moving  neither  to  the
bottom  nor  to  the  top.

The  philosopher  said  to  him,  “ It  remains  in  the  air  because  44S5
of  the  attraction  exerted  by  the  sky  from  (all)  six  directions.

(The  sky  is)  like  a vault  moulded  (made)  of  lodestone:  (the
earth  like)  a suspended  piece  of  iron  remains  in  the  middle.”

Said  the  other,  “How  should  the  pure  sky  draw'  the  dark
earth  to  itself?

Nay,  it  is  repelling  it  (the  earth)  from  (all)  six  directions:

^ I.e.  a case  in  which  the  appearance  is  contrary  to  the  reality.

“ I.e.  it  was  the  effect  of  the  inward  repudiation  of  Pharaoh  by  Moses,
who  was  his  opposite.


i


136  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

hence  it  (the  earth)  remains  (suspended)  amidst  the  violent
winds  (currents).”

(Similarly),  then,  because  of  the  repulsion  exerted  by  the
hearts  of  the  perfect  (saints),  the  spirits  of  Pharaohs  remain  in
perdition.

2490  Therefore,  through  being  rejected  by  this  world  and  by  that
world,  these  lost  ones  have  been  left  without  either  this  or  that.

If  you  turn  away  your  head  from  the  (holy)  servants  of  the
Almighty,  know  that  they  are  disgusted  by  your  existence.

They  possess  the  amber:  when  they  display  it,  they  make  the
straw  of  your  existence  frenzied  (with  desire  for  it).

When  they  conceal  their  amber,  they  quickly  make  your  sub-
mission (to  God)  rebellion  (against  Him).

That  (position  which  you  hold  in  relation  to  them)  is  like
the  stage  of  animality,  which  is  captive  and  subject  to  (the
stage  of)  humanity.

2493  Know  that  the  stage  of  humanity  is  subject  to  the  power  of
the  saints  as  the  animal  (is  subject  to  man),  O master.

Ahmad  (Mohammed)  in  righteousness  called  (the  people  of)  the
whole  world  his  servants : read  (the  text),  “ Say,  O My  servants.”

Your  intellect  is  like  the  camel-driver,  and  you  are  the  camel :
it  drives  you  in  every  direction  under  its  bitter  control^.

The  saints  are  the  intellect  of  intellect,  and  (all)  intellects  (from
the  beginning)  to  the  end  are  (under  their  control)  like  camels.

Come  now,  look  upon  them  with  (profound)  consideration:
there  is  (but)  one  guide,  and  a hundred  thousand  souls  (fol-
lowing him).

2500  What  is  the  guide  and  what  the  camel-driver?  Get  thee  an
eye  that  may  behold  the  Sun !

Lo,  the  world  has  been  left  nailed  fast  in  night,  (while)  day
is  waiting  expectantly,  depending  on  the  sun.

Here  is  a sun  hidden  in  a mote,  a fierce  lion  in  the  fleece  of
a lamb.

Here  is  an  ocean  hidden  beneath  straw:  beware,  do  not
step  on  this  straw  with  hesitancy.

(But)  a feeling  of  hesitancy  and  doubt  in  the  heart  (of  the
foolish)  is  a Divine  mercy  in  regard  to  the  (spiritual)  guide.

2505  Every  prophet  came  alone  into  this  world:  he  was  alone,  and
(yet)  he  had  a hundred  unseen  worlds  within  him.

By  his  power  he  enchanted  the  macrocosm  (universe),  he
enfolded  himself  in  a very  small  frame-.

The  foolish  deemed  him  to  be  lonely  and  weak:  how  is  he
weak  who  has  become  the  King’s  companion?

The  foolish  said,  “He  is  a man,  nothing  more”:  woe  to  him
that  recks  not  of  the  end !


* I.e.  “a  control  which  you  cannot  avoid,  whether  you  like  it  or  not.”
“ I.e,  in  the  body  of  man,  who  is  the  microcosm.


SALIH  AND  THE  PEOPLE  OF  THAMUD  137

How  the  eyes  of  {external)  sense  regarded  Salih  and  his  she-camel
as  despicable  and  without  a champion;  (for)  when  God  is  about
to  destroy  an  army  He  makes  their  adversaries  appear  despicable
and  few  in  their  sight,  even  though  the  adversary  be  superior  in
strength:  “and  He  was  making  you  few  in  their  eyes,  that
God  might  bring  to  pass  a thing  that  was  to  be  done.”

The  she-camel  of  Salih  was  in  (outward)  form  a camel : that
bitter  (graceless)  tribe  hamstrung  (and  slaughtered)  her  in  their
folly.

When  they  became  her  foes  on  account  of  the  water  (which  -
she  shared  with  them),  they  were  blind  to  bread  and  blind  to
water  (ungrateful  for  the  blessings  of  God).

God’s  she-camel  drank  water  from  brook  and  cloud:  they
(really)  withheld  God’s  water  from  God.

The  she-camel  of  Salih  became,  like  the  bodies  of  righteous
men,  an  ambush  for  the  destruction  of  the  wicked,

That  (you  may  see)  what  (the  Divine  command).  Let  God’s
she-camel  have  her  portion  of  water,  wrought  against  that  people,
through  the  ordainment  of  death  and  woe.

The  vengeance,  which  is  God’s  minister,  demanded  from
them  an  entire  town  as  the  blood-price  of  a single  camel.

His  (the  prophet’s  or  saint’s)  spirit  is  like  Salih,  and  his  body  -
is  the  she-camel:  the  spirit  is  in  union  (with  God),  the  body
in  want  (distress).

The  Salih-spirit  is  not  susceptible  to  afflictions:  the  blows
fall  on  the  camel  (body),  not  on  the  essence  (spirit).

No  one  gains  victory  over  their  (the  saints’)  hearts:  harm
comes  (only)  to  the  oyster-shell,  not  to  the  pearl.

The  Salih-spirit  is  not  capable  of  being  hurt:  the  light  of
God  is  not  subject  to  infidels.

The  Soul  (God)  attached  to  it  (the  spirit)  the  earthly  body,
that  they  (the  infidels)  might  hurt  (it)  and  suffer  tribulation.
Not  knowing  that  to  hurt  this  (body)  is  to  hurt  (offend)  Him : -
the  water  in  this  jar  is  joined  with  the  water  in  the  river.

God  connected  (the  spirit)  with  a body,  in  order  that  he  (the
prophet  or  saint)  might  become  a refuge  for  the  whole  world.

Be  a slave  to  the  camel,  which  is  the  saint’s  body,  that  you
may  become  the  fellow-servant  of  the  Salih-spirit^.

Salih  said  (to  the  people  of  Thamudj,  “ Inasmuch  as  ye  have
shown  this  env\',  after  three  days  the  punishment  will  arrive
from  God.

After  three  more  days  there  will  come  from  the  Taker  of  life
a calamity  that  hath  three  signs.

The  colour  of  all  your  faces  will  be  changed,  (they  will  be  of)  ^
colours  different  to  look  at.

^ I.e.  join  the  saint’s  spirit  in  worship  of  God.


138  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

On  the  first  day  your  faces  will  be  like  saffron,  on  the  second
your  faces  will  be  red  like  arghawdn  (flowers  of  the  Judas-tree).

On  the  third,  all  your  faces  will  become  black:  after  that,  the
vengeance  of  God  will  arrive.

If  ye  desire  from  me  the  sign  of  this  threatened  chastisement,
the  she-camel’s  foal  has  run  towards  the  mountains :

If  ye  can  catch  him,  there  is  help  (for  you) ; else  the  bird  of
hope  hath  surely  escaped  from  the  snare.”

2530  None  was  able  to  overtake  the  foal : he  went  into  the  moun-
tains and  vanished.

Salih  said,  “Ye  see,  the  (Divine)  destiny  has  been  ratified  and
has  beheaded  the  phantom  of  your  hope.”

What  is  the  she-camel’s  foal?  His  (the  saint’s)  heart,  w'hich
ye  may  bring  back  to  its  place  (win  again)  by  means  of  well-
doing and  piety.

If  his  heart  comes  back  (is  reconciled),  ye  are  saved  from
that  (Divine  punishment) ; otherwise  ye  are  despairing  and  biting
your  fore-arms  (in  remorse).

When  they  heard  this  dark  threat,  they  cast  down  their  eyes
and  waited  for  it  (to  be  fulfilled).

2533  On  the  first  day  they  saw  their  faces  yellow:  from  despair
they  were  sighing  heavily.

On  the  second  day  the  faces  of  all  became  red : the  time  for
hope  and  repentance  was  (irretrievably)  lost.

On  the  third  day  all  their  faces  became  black : the  prediction
of  Salih  came  true  without  (possibility  of)  dispute.

When  they  all  were  cast  away  (and  plunged)  in  despair,  they
fell  on  their  knees,  like  (crouching)  birds.

Gabriel,  the  trusted  (angel),  brought  in  the  Qur’an  the
description  of  this  kneeling,  (which  is  described  by  the  word)
jdthimm.

2540  Do  thou  kneel  at  the  time  when  they  (the  saints)  are  teaching
thee  and  bidding  thee  dread  such  a kneeling  as  this.

They  (the  people  of  Thamud)  were  waiting  for  the  stroke  of
vengeance:  the  vengeance  came  and  annihilated  this  town.

Salih  went  from  his  solitude  to  the  town:  he  beheld  the
town  amidst  (wrapt  in)  smoke  and  heat.

He  heard  (the  sound  of)  wailing  from  their  limbs : the  lamenta-
tion was  plain  (to  hear),  those  who  uttered  it  (were)  invisible.

He  heard  wailings  from  their  bones : tears  of  blood  (poured)
from  their  spirits,  like  hailstones.

2543  Salih  heard  that  and  set  to  weeping:  he  began  to  lament  for
them  that  made  lamentation.

He  said,  “O  people  that  lived  in  vanity,  and  on  account  of
you  I wept  before  God !

God  said  (to  me),  ‘Have  patience  with  their  iniquity:  give
them  counsel,  not  much  remains  of  their  (allotted)  period.’


SALIH  AND  THE  PEOPLE  OF  THAMUD  139

I said,  ‘ Counsel  is  barred  by  ill-treatment : the  milk  of  counsel
gushes  forth  from  love  and  joy.

]\Iuch  ill-treatment  have  they  bestowed  on  me,  (so  that)  the
milk  of  counsel  is  curdled  in  my  veins.’

God  said  to  me,  ‘ I will  give  thee  a boon,  I will  lay  a plaster  -.^50
on  those  wounds  (of  thine).’

God  made  my  heart  clear  as  the  sky,  He  swept  your  op-
pression out  of  my  mind.

I went  (back)  once  more  to  admonition,  I spake  parables  and
words  (sweet)  as  sugar,

I produced  fresh  milk  from  the  sugar,  I mingled  milk  and
honey  with  my  words.

In  you  those  words  became  like  poison,  because  ye  were
filled  with  poison  from  the  root  and  foundation.

How  should  I be  grieved  that  grief  is  overthrown?  Ye  were  ::555
grief  (to  me),  O obstinate  people.

Does  any  one  lament  the  death  of  grief?  Does  any  one  tear
out  his  hair  when  the  sore  on  his  head  is  removed?  ”

(Then)  he  turned  to  himself  and  said,  “O  mourner,  those
folk  are  not  worth  thy  mourning.”

Recite  correctly — do  not  regard  my  misquotation — (the
words  in  the  Qur’an)  “Say,  htnv  shall  I be  grieved  for  an  tinjust
people''-?  "

Again  he  felt  a weeping  in  his  eye  and  heart:  an  uncaused
(involuntary)  compassion  shone  forth  in  him.

He  was  raining  drops  of  water  (shedding  tears) — and  he  2560
had  become  distraught — an  uncaused  drop  from  the  Ocean  of
Bounty.

His  intellect  was  saying,  “Wherefore  is  this  weeping?  Ought
one  to  weep  for  such  scoffers?

Tell  me,  what  art  thou  weeping  for?  For  their  fraud?  For
the  host  of  their  ill-shod  (miserable)  hatreds?

For  their  murky  hearts  full  of  rust?  For  their  venomous
snake-like  tongues?

For  their  ^a^^aV-like  breath  and  teeth?  For  their  mouths  and
eyes  teeming  with  scorpions?

For  their  wrangling  and  sneering  and  scoffing?  Give  thanks,  2565
since  God  has  imprisoned  (restrained)  them.

Their  hands  are  perverse,  their  feet  perverse,  their  eyes
perverse,  their  love  perverse,  their  peace  pers^erse,  their  anger
perverse.”

For  the  sake  of  blind  conformity  and  (for  the  sake  of  fol-
lowing) the  standards  of  tradition,  they  set  their  feet  (trampled)
on  the  camels  of  Reason,  the  venerable  guide.

They  were  not  eager  for  a guide  (pir-khar):  they  all  had

^ This  verse,  which  interrupts  the  sttny,  is  addressed  to  the  reader.  The
Qur’anic  text  has  been  altered  for  metrical  and  other  reasons.


140  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

become  (like)  an  old  donkey  {pir  khar)  from  paying  hypocritical
observance  to  each  other’s  eyes  and  ears.

God  brought  the  (devout)  worshippers  from  Paradise  that
He  might  show  unto  them  the  nurslings  of  Hell-fire.

On  the  meaning  of  “He  let  the  two  seas  go  to  meet  one  another :

between  them  is  a barrier  which  they  do  not  seek  (to  cross).”

257U  Behold  the  people  of  (destined  for)  the  Fire  and  those  of
Paradise  dwelling  in  the  same  shop,  (yet)  between  them  is  a
barrier  which  they  do  not  seek  to  cross.

He  hath  mixed  the  people  of  the  Fire  and  the  people  of  the
Light:  between  them  He  hath  reared  the  mountain  of  Qaf.

He  hath  mixed  (them)  like  earth  and  gold  in  the  mine:  be-
tween them  are  a hundred  deserts  and  caravanserays.

(They  are)  mixed  even  as  pearls  and  jet  beads  in  the  necklace,
(soon  to  be  parted)  like  guests  of  a single  night.

One  half  of  the  sea  is  sweet  like  sugar:  the  taste  sweet,  the
colour  bright  as  the  moon.

2575  The  other  half  is  bitter  as  snake’s  venom:  the  taste  bitter  and
the  colour  dark  as  pitch.

Both  (halves)  dash  against  one  another,  from  beneath  and
from  the  top,  wave  on  wave  like  the  water  of  the  sea.

The  appearance  of  collision,  (arising)  from  the  narrow  body,
is  (due  to)  the  spirits’  being  intermingled  in  peace  or  war.

The  waves  of  peace  dash  against  each  other  and  root  up
hatreds  from  (men’s)  breasts.

In  other  form  do  the  waves  of  war  turn  (men’s)  loves  upside
down  (confound  and  destroy  them).

2580  Love  is  dratving  the  bitter  ones  to  the  sweet,  because  the
foundation  of  (all)  loves  is  righteousness.

Wrath  is  carrying  away  the  sweet  one  to  bitterness : how  should
the  bitter  sort  with  (be  suited  to)  the  sweet?

The  bitter  and  the  sweet  are  not  visible  to  this  (ocular)  sight,
(but)  they  can  be  seen  through  the  window  of  the  latter  end.

The  eye  that  sees  the  end  {dkhir)  can  see  truly ; the  eye  that
sees  (only)  the  stable  (akhiir)  is  delusion  and  error.

Oh,  many  the  one  that  is  sweet  as  sugar,  but  poison  is  con-
cealed in  the  sugar.

25S5  He  that  is  more  sagacious  (than  the  rest)  will  know  it  by  the
smell ; another  (only)  when  it  touches  his  lips  and  teeth :

Then  his  lips  will  reject  it  before  (it  reaches)  his  throat,
although  the  Devil  is  shouting,  “Eat  ye!”

And  to  another  it  will  declare  (itself)  in  his  throat,  while  to
another  it  will  unmask  in  his  body;

And  to  another  it  will  give  burning  pain  in  evacuation:  its
outgoing  will  give  him  instruction  as  to  its  incoming  (will  show
him  what  he  has  swallowed) ;


THE  RIGHTEOUS  AND  THE  WICKED  141

And  to  another  (it  will  become  manifest)  after  days  and
months;  and  to  another  after  death,  from  the  depth  of  the
grave;

And  if  he  be  given  a respite  in  the  depth  of  the  grave,  (then)  ::59'>
it  will  inevitably  become  manifest  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection.

Every  piece  of  candy  and  sugar  (desirable  thing)  in  the  world
manifestly  has  a period  granted  to  it  from  the  revolution  of  Time.

Years  are  needed  in  order  that  the  ruby  in  (exposed  to  the
rays  of)  the  sun  may  obtain  (the  perfect)  tint  and  splendour  and
brilliance.

Vegetables,  again,  reach  maturity  in  two  months,  while  the
red  rose  comes  to  perfection  in  a year.

For  this  reason  the  Almighty  and  Glorious  God  in  the  Suratu
’l-An'dm  has  made  mention  of  an  appointed  term  [ajal).

You  have  heard  this  (discourse):  may  the  whole  of  you,  hair  2595
by  hair,  be  an  ear  (to  receive  it)!  ’Tis  the  Water  of  Life:  (if)
you  have  drunk,  may  it  do  you  good!

Call  it  the  Water  of  Life,  call  it  not  a discourse:  behold  the
new  spirit  in  the  body  of  the  old  letter !

(Now),  my  friend,  hearken  to  another  saying  (which  is),  like
the  soul,  very  clear  (to  mystics)  and  abstruse  (to  the  rest):

In  a certain  place  (spiritual  degree),  through  Divine  disposi-
tions even  this  poison  and  snake  (worldliness  and  sensuality)  is
(rendered)  digestible.

In  one  place  (it  is)  poison  and  in  one  place  medicine,  in  one
place  infidelity  and  in  one  place  approved.

Although  there  it  is  injurious  to  the  soul,  when  it  arrives  here  2600
it  becomes  a remedy.

In  the  young  grape  {ghura)  the  juice  is  sour,  but  it  is  sweet
and  good  when  the  ghura  comes  to  be  an  angiir  (ripe  grape).

Again  in  the  wine-jar  it  becomes  bitter  and  unlawful,  (but)
in  the  state  (form)  of  vinegar  how  excellent  it  is  as  a seasoning !

Concerning  the  impropriety  of  the  disciple's  (murid)  presuming  to
do  the  same  things  as  are  done  by  the  saint  (wali),  inasmuch  as
sweetmeat  does  no  harm  to  the  physician,  but  is  harmful  to  the
sick,  and  frost  and  snow  do  no  harm  to  the  ripe  grape,  but  are
injurious  to  the  young  fruit;  for  he  {the  disciple)  is  {still)  on  the
way,  for  he  has  not  {yet)  become  {the  saint  to  ichom  are  applicable
the  words  in  the  Qur’an):  “That  God  may  forgive  thee  thy
former  and  latter  sins.”

If  the  saint  drinks  a poison  it  becomes  an  antidote,  but  if  the
seeker  (disciple)  drinks  it,  his  mind  is  darkened.

From  Solomon  have  come  the  words,  “O  Lord,  give  me
{a  kingdom  that  it  behoves  not  any  one  after  me  to  obtain),”  that
is,  “ do  not  give  this  kingdom  and  power  to  any  but  me.


142


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

2605  Do  not  bestow  this  grace  and  bounty  on  any  but  me.”  This
looks  like  envy,  but  it  was  not  that  (in  reality).

Read  with  your  soul  the  mystery  of  “it  behoves  not,”  do  not
deem  the  inward  meaning  of  “after  me”  (to  be  derived)  from
his  (Solomon’s)  avarice.

Nay,  but  in  sovereignty  he  saw  a hundred  dangers;  the
kingdom  of  this  world  was  (has  ever  been),  hair  by  hair  (in
every  respect),  fear  for  one’s  head.

Fear  for  head  with  fear  for  heart  with  fear  for  religion —
there  is  no  trial  for  us  like  this.

Therefore  one  must  needs  possess  the  high  aspiration  of  a
Solomon  in  order  to  escape  from  these  myriads  of  colours  and
perfumes  (enticing  vanities).

2610  Even  with  such  (great)  strength  (of  spirit)  as  he  had,  the
waves  of  that  (worldly)  kingdom  were  stifling  his  breath  (choking
him).

Since  dust  settled  on  him  from  this  sorrow^,  he  had  com-
passion for  all  the  kings  of  the  world.

Hence  he  interceded  (with  God  on  their  behalf)  and  said,
“Give  this  kingdom  (to  them)  with  (accompanied  by)  the
(spiritual)  perfection  which  Thou  hast  given  to  me.

To  whomsoever  Thou  wilt  give  (it),  and  (on  whomsoever)
Thou  wilt  confer  that  bounty,  he  (that  person)  is  Solomon,  and
I also  am  he.

He  is  not we,’ he  is  with  me.  What  of ‘with  me,’  indeed?
I am  without  rival.”

2615  ’Tis  my  duty  to  explain  this,  but  (now)  I will  return  to  the
story  of  the  man  and  wife.


The  moral  of  the  altercation  of  the  Arab  and  his  wife.


The  heart  of  one  who  is  sincere^  is  seeking  (to  find)  a moral®
for  the  altercation  of  the  man  and  wife.

The  altercation  of  the  man  and  wife  has  been  related  (as  a
story);  know  that  it  is  a parable  of  your  own  flesh  {nafs)  and
reason.

This  man  and  wife,  which  are  the  flesh  and  the  reason,  are
very  necessary  for  (the  manifestation  of)  good  and  evil;

And  this  necessary  pair  in  this  house  of  earth  are  (engaged)
in  strife  and  altercation  day  and  night.

2620  The  wife  is  craving  requisites  for  the  household,  that  is  to
say,  reputation  and  bread  and  viands  and  rank.

Like  the  wife,  the  flesh,  in  order  to  contrive  the  means  (of


^ I.e.  he  was  sorry  and  ashamed  that  love  of  the  world  made  him  for-
getful of  God.


■ Read


’ Read


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE  143

gratifying  its  desires),  is  at  one  time  seeking  (having  recourse  to)
humility  and  at  another  time  to  domination.

The  reason  is  really  unconscious  of  these  (worldly)  thoughts :
in  its  brain  is  nothing  but  love  of  God.

Although  the  inner  meaning  of  the  tale  is  this  bait  and  trap^,
listen  now  to  the  outward  form  of  the  tale  in  its  entirety.

If  the  spiritual  explanation  were  sufficient,  the  creation  of  the
world  would  have  been  vain  and  idle.

If  love  were  (only  spiritual)  thought  and  reality,  the  form  of  ’6’5
your  fasting  and  prayer  would  be  non-existent.

The  gifts  of  lovers  to  one  another  are,  in  respect  of  love,
naught  but  forms ;

(But  the  purpose  is)  that  the  gifts  may  have  borne  testimony
to  feelings  of  love  which  are  concealed  in  secrecy.

Because  outward  acts  of  kindness  bear  witness  to  feelings  of
love  in  the  heart,  O dear  friend.

Your  witness  is  sometimes  true,  sometimes  false,  sometimes
drunken  with  wine,  sometimes  with  sour  curds.

He  that  has  drunk  sour  curds  makes  a show  of  intoxication,  2630
shouts  ecstatically,  and  behaves  like  one  whose  head  is  heavy
(with  the  fumes  of  wine) ;

That  hypocrite  is  (assiduous)  in  fasting  and  praying,  in  order
that  it  may  be  supposed  that  he  is  drunken  with  devotion
(to  God).

In  short,  external  acts  are  different  (from  internal  feelings),
(and  their  purpose  is)  to  indicate  that  which  is  hidden.

O Lord,  grant  us  according  to  our  desire  such  discernment
that  we  may  know  the  false  indication  from  the  true.

Do  you  know  how  the  sense-perception  becomes  discerning?

In  this  way,  that  the  sense-perception  should  be  seeing  by  the
light  of  God.

And  if  there  be  no  effect  (outward  sign),  the  cause  too  makes  2633
manifest  (that  which  is  hidden),  as  (for  example)  kinship  gives
information  concerning  love  (enables  you  to  infer  the  presence
of  love).

When  the  light  of  God  comes  into  the  sensorium  (and  be-
comes the  medium  of  perception),  you  will  not  be  a slave  to
effect  or  cause —

So  that  Love  will  throw  a spark  within,  wax  mighty,  and
make  (the  illumined  one)  independent  of  effect.

He  has  no  need  for  the  signs  of  love,  since  Love  has  shot  its
radiance  over  the  sky  (of  his  heart).

There  are  detailed  explanations  (which  I could  give)  in  order
to  complete  this  subject ; but  seek  them  (for  yourself),  and  (now)
farewell.

And  as  for  him  that  perceived  the  inner  meaning  in  this  2.340

'■  I.e.  the  temptation  of  the  reason  by  the  flesh.


144  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

outw'ard  form,  the  form  is  (both)  near  to  the  meaning  and  far
(from  it).

In  regard  to  indication,  they  (the  meaning  and  the  form)  are
like  the  sap  and  the  tree;  (but)  when  you  turn  to  the  quiddity,
they  are  very  far  (removed  from  each  other).

(Let  me)  take  leave  of  quiddities  and  essential  properties,  and
relate  what  happened  to  those  twain  with  faces  like  the  moon.

How  the  Arab  set  his  heart  on  {complying  with)  his  beloved’s  request

and  swore  that  in  thus  submitting  {to  her)  he  had  no  {idea  of)

trickery  and  making  trial  {of  her).

The  man  said,  “Now  I have  ceased  to  oppose  (thee):  thou
hast  authority  (to  do  what  thou  wilt) : draw  the  sword  from  the
sheath.

Whatsoever  thou  biddest  me  do,  I will  obey:  I will  not  con-
sider the  bad  or  good  result  of  it.

2O4-  I will  become  non-existent  in  thy  existence,  because  I am
thy  lover:  love  makes  blind  and  deaf.”

The  wife  said,  “Oh,  I wonder  if  thou  art  (really)  my  friend,
or  whether  thou  art  (bent  on)  discovering  my  secret  by  trickery  ? ”

He  said,  “(No),  by  God  who  knows  the  thought  most  deeply
hid,  who  out  of  dust  created  Adam  pure  (chosen  above  all).

Who,  in  the  body  three  cubits  long  which  He  gave  him,  dis-
played everything  that  was  contained  in  the  tablets  (of  destiny)
and  the  (world  of)  spirits.

Through  his  He  {God)  taught  him  {Adam)  the  Names  (through
his  God-given  knowledge)  he  at  the  very  first  gave  instruction
(to  the  angels)  concerning  everything  that  shall  come  to  pass
unto  everlasting,

2650  So  that  the  angels  became  beside  themselves  (in  amazement)
at  his  teaching,  and  gained  from  his  glorification  (of  God)  a
hohness  other  (than  they  possessed  before).

The  revelation  that  appeared  to  them  from  Adam  was  not
(contained)  in  the  amphtude  of  their  heavens.

In  comparison  with  the  spaciousness  of  the  range  of  that
pure  spirit  (Adam),  the  expanse  of  the  seven  heavens  became
narrow.

The  Prophet  said  that  God  has  said,  ‘ I am  not  contained  in
the  jar  of  ‘ ‘high  ” and  “ low  ” (spatial  dimensions) ;

I am  not  contained  in  earth  or  heaven  or  even  in  the  em-
pyrean-know this  for  certain,  O noble  one ;

2055  (But)  I am  contained  in  the  true  beUever’s  heart:  oh,  how
wonderful ! If  thou  seekest  Me,  search  in  those  hearts.’

He  (God)  said  (also),  ‘Enter  among  My  servants,  thou  wilt
meet  with  a Paradise  (consisting)  of  vision  of  Me,  O God-
fearing one.’


<


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE  145

The  empyrean,  notwithstanding  its  wide  (far-extending)  light,
when  it  beheld  that  (spirit  of  Adam),  was  confounded

Truly,  the  magnitude  of  the  empyrean  is  very  great,  but  who
(what)  is  form  when  reality  has  arrived?

Then  the  angels  were  saying  (to  Adam),  ‘Before  this  (time)
we  had  a friendship  (with  thee)  on  the  dust  of  the  earth.

On  the  earth  we  were  sowing  the  seed  of  service  (worship):
we  were  marvelling  at  that  connexion,

Marvelling  what  connexion  we  had  with  that  dust,  inasmuch
as  our  nature  is  of  heaven.

(We  said).  Why  (this)  friendship  in  us,  who  are  light,  with
darkness?  How  can  light  live  with  darkness?

O Adam,  that  friendship  was  owing  to  the  scent  of  thee,
because  earth  was  the  woof  and  warp  of  thy  body.

From  this  place  (the  earth)  thy  earthly  body  was  woven,  in
this  place  thy  pure  light  was  found.

This  (light)  that  our  souls  have  obtained  from  thy  spirit  shone  j-,63
erstwhile  from  the  dust.

We  were  in  the  earth,  and  heedless  of  the  earth,  heedless  of
the  treasure  that  lay  buried  there.

When  He  (God)  bade  us  journey  from  that  place  of  abode
our  palates  were  soured  (we  were  bitterly  erieved)  by  the  change.

So  that  we  were  arguing  (and  saying),  ‘ O God,  who  will  come
in  our  stead?

Wilt  Thou  sell  the  splendour  of  the  praise  with  which  we
glorify  and  magnify  Thee  for  babble  and  palaver  ? ’

The  decree  of  God  spread  for  us  the  carpet  (of  indulgence),  -uy,..
(and  He  said),  ‘ Speak  ye,  in  the  way  of  boldness
(And)  without  fear,  whatever  comes  upon  your  tongues,  like
only  children  - with  their  father ;

For  what  if  these  words  (of  yours)  are  unseemly?  Mv  mercy
likewise  is  prior  (superior)  to  Aly  wrath.

In  order  to  manifest  this  priority,  O angel,  I will  put  in  thee
incitement  to  perplexity  and  doubt.

That  thou  mayst  speak  and  I not  take  offence  at  thee,  (so
that)  none  who  denies  My  clemency  may  dare  to  utter  a
word.

Within  Aly  (infinite)  clemency  (the  clemencies  of)  a hundred  26T5
fathers  and  a hundred  mothers  at  ever)'  moment  are  born  and
vanish .

Their  clemency  is  (but)  the  foam  of  the  sea  of  My  clemency :
the  foam  comes  and  goes,  but  the  sea  is  (always)  there.’  ’

What  indeed  shall  I say?  Compared  with  that  pearl  (Divine
clemency)  this  oyster-shell  (human  clemency)  is  naught  but  the
foam  of  the  foam  of  the  foam  of  foam.

^ Literally,  “went  from  its  place.*’

“ I.e.  like  an  only  child,  who  is  loved  beyond  measure.


N M


10


146  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

By  the  truth  of  that  foam^,  by  the  truth  of  that  pure  sea,
(I  swear)  that  these  words  (of  mine)  are  not  (meant  to  make)
trial  of  thee  and  are  not  vain.

They  are  from  (inspired  by)  love  and  sincerity  and  humble-
ness, (I  swear)  by  the  truth  of  that  One  to  whom  I turn.

26S0  If  this  affection  (which  I am  showing)  seems  to  thee  a trial,
do  thou  for  one  moment  put  the  (supposed)  trial  (of  thee)  to
the  test-.

Do  not  hide  thy  secret  (but  reveal  it),  in  order  that  mine  may
be  revealed:  command  anything  that  I am  able  to  do.

Do  not  hide  thy  heart  (but  reveal  it),  in  order  that  mine  may
be  revealed  and  that  I may  accept  whatever  I am  capable  of
(performing).

How  shall  I do?  What  remedy  is  in  my  power?  Look  what
a plight  my  soul  is  in.”

How  the  wife  specified  to  her  husband  the  way  to  earn  daily
bread  and  how  he  accepted  {her  proposal).

The  wife  said,  “A  sun  has  shone  forth,  a (whole)  world  has
received  light  from  him —

26S5  The  Vicar  of  the  Merciful  (God),  the  Khalifa  of  the  Creator:
through  him  the  city  of  Baghdad  is  (gay  and  happy)  as  the
season  of  spring.

If  thou  gain  access  to  that  King,  thou  wilt  become  a king:
how  long  wilt  thou  go  after  every  (kind  of)  misfortune?”

Companionship  with  the  fortunate  is  like  the  Elixir : indeed,
how  is  an  Elixir  like  (to  be  compared  with)  their  looks  (of
favour)  ?

The  eye  of  Ahmad  (Mohammed)  W'as  cast  upon  an  Abii  Bakr :
he  by  a single  act  of  faith  became  a Siddiq.

Said  the  husband,  “ How  should  I go  to  meet  the  King?  How
should  I go  to  him  without  a pretext?

2690  I must  have  some  reference  or  device : is  any  handicraft  right
(possible)  without  tools?

As  (to  mention  a similar  case)  the  famous  Majniin,  when  he
heard  from  some  one  that  Layla  was  a little  unwell.

Cried,  ‘Ah,  how  shall  I go  (to  her)  without  a pretext?  And
if  I fail  to  visit  her  when  she  is  ill,  how  (wretched)  shall  I be!

Would  that  I ^vere  a skilled  physician!  I would  have  gone
on  foot  to  Layla  first  of  all  (before  any  one  else).’

God  said  to  us,  ‘Say,  Come  ye ^ in  order  to  signify  to  us  the
(means  of)  vanquishing  our  feeling  of  shame.

2695  If  bats  had  sight  and  means  (ability  to  bear  the  sunshine),
they  would  fly  about  and  enjoy  themselves  by  day.”

^ Here  the  .Arab  begins  once  more  to  plead  with  his  wife.

^ l.e.  “try  by  experiment  whether  your  suspicions  are  just.”


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE


147

The  wife  said,  “When  the  gracious  King  goes  into  the  field
(mayddny- , the  essence  of  every  lack  of  means  (inability)  be-
comes a means  (ability),

Because  the  means  (ability)  is  (involves)  pretension  and  self-
existence: the  (pith  of  the)  matter  lies  in  lack  of  means  (in-
ability) and  non-existence.”

“ How,”  said  he,  “should  I do  business  without  means,  unless
I make  it  manifest  that  I (really)  have  no  means.?

Therefore  I must  needs  have  attestation  of  my  want  of  means,
that  he  (the  King)  may  pity  me  in  want.

Do  thou  produce  some  attestation  besides  talk  and  show,  so
that  the  beauteous  King  may  take  pity.

For  the  testimony  that  consisted  of  talk  and  show  w'as  (ever)
invalidated  before  that  Supreme  Judge.

He  requires  truth  (veracity)  as  witness  to  his  (the  indigent
man’s)  state,  so  that  his  (inner)  light  shall  shine  forth  (and  pro-
claim his  indigence)  without  any  words  of  his.”


Hozc  the  Arab  carried  a jug  of  rain-water  from  the  midst  of  the
desert  as  a gift  to  the  Commander  of  the  Faithful  at  Baghdad,
in  the  belief  that  in  that  town  also  there  was  a scarcity  of  water.

The  wife  said,  “When  people  with  all  their  might  (endeavour
to)  rise  up  entirely  purged  of  self-existence — that  is  veracity.

We  have  the  rain-w^ater  in  the  jug:  ’tis  thy  property  and  capital
and  means.

Take  this  jug  of  water  and  depart,  make  it  a gift  and  go  into
the  presence  of  the  King  of  kings.

Say,  ‘We  have  no  means  except  this:  in  the  desert  there  is
nothing  better  than  this  water,’

If  his  treasury  is  full  of  gold  and  jewels,  (yet)  he  does  not  get
water  like  this:  ’tis  rare,”

What  is  that  jug?  Our  confined  body:  within  it  is  the  briny
water  of  our  senses.

O Lord,  accept  this  jar  and  jug  of  mine  by  the  grace  of  “ God
hath  purchased  [from  the  believers  their  lives  and  wealth  in  return
for  Paradise).”

(’Tis)  a jug  with  five  spouts,  the  five  senses : keep  this  water
pure  (and  safe)  from  every  filth.

That  there  may  be  from  this  jug  a passage  to  the  sea,  and  that
my  jug  may  assume  the  nature  of  the  sea.

So  that  when  you  carry  it  as  a gift  to  the  King,  the  King  may
find  it  pure  and  be  its  purchaser;

(And)  after  that,  its  water  will  become  without  end : a hundred
worlds  will  be  filled  from  my  jug.

Stop  up  its  spouts  and  keep  it  filled  (with  water)  from  the  jar
(of  Reality):  God  said,  ” Close  your  eyes  to  vain  desire.”

^ I.€.  displays  himself.


I


148  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

5 His  (the  husband’s)  beard  was  full  of  wind  (he  was  puffed
up  with  pride):  “Who  (thought  he)  has  such  a gift  as  this?
This,  truly,  is  worthy  of  a King  like  him.”

The  wife  did  not  know  that  in  that  place  (Baghdad)  on  the
thoroughfare  there  is  the  great  stream  (of  water)  sweet  as  sugar.

Flowing  like  a sea  through  the  city,  full  of  boats  and  fishing-
nets.

Go  to  the  Sultan  and  behold  this  pomp  and  state!  Behold
the  senses  of  {those  for  whom  God  hath  prepared  gardens)
beneath  which  the  rivers  flow  I

Our  senses  and  perceptions,  such  as  they  are,  are  (but)  a
single  drop  in  those  rivers.

How  the  Arab's  wife  sewed  the  jug  of  rain-water  in  a felt  cloth

and  put  a seal  on  it  because  of  the  Arab’s  utter  conviction  {that

it  was  a precious  gift  for  the  King).

0 “Yes,”  said  the  husband,  “stop  up  the  mouth  of  the  jug.
Take  care,  for  this  is  a gift  that  will  bring  us  profit.

Sew  this  jug  in  felt,  that  the  King  may  break  his  fast  with
our  gift.

For  there  is  no  (water)  like  this  in  all  the  world:  no  (other)
water  is  so  pure  as  this.”

(This  he  said)  because  they  (people  like  him)  are  always  full
of  infirmity  and  half-blind  from  (drinking)  bitter  and  briny
waters.

The  bird  whose  dwelling-place  is  the  briny  water,  how  should
it  know  where  to  find  in  it  the  clear  (and  sweet)  water?

5 O thou  whose  abode  is  in  the  briny  spring,  how  shouldst
thou  know  the  Shatt  and  the  Jayhun  and  the  Euphrates?

O thou  who  hast  not  escaped  from  this  fleeting  caravanseray
(the  material  world),  how  shouldst  thou  know  (the  meaning  of)
“self-extinction”  and  (mystical)  “intoxication”  and  “expan-
sion ” ?

And  if  thou  knowest,  ’tis  (by  rote,  like  the  knowledge)  handed
down  to  thee  from  father  and  grandfather : to  thee  these  names
are  like  abjad^.

How  plain  and  evident  to  all  children  are  abjad  and  hawwaz
and  (yet)  the  real  meaning  is  far  away  (hard  to  reach).

Then  the  Arab  man  took  up  the  jug  and  set  out  to  journey,
carrying  it  along  (with  him)  day  and  night.

o He  was  trembling  for  the  jug,  in  fear  of  Fortune’s  mischiefs:
all  the  same,  he  conveyed  it  from  the  desert  to  the  city  (Baghdad).

His  wife  unrolled  the  prayer-rug  in  supplication ; she  made
(the  words)  Rabbi  sallim  (Save,  O Lord)  her  litany  in  prayer,

' I.e.  like  the  alphabet.  Abjad  is-a  mnemonic  word  composed  of  the
.■Arabic  letters  equivalent  to  ABJD.

^ A similar  word  consisting  of  the  Arabic  letters  equivalent  to  HWZ.


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE  149

Crying,  “Keep  our  water  safe  from  scoundrels!  O Lord,  let
that  pearl  arrive  at  that  sea !

Although  my  husband  is  shrewd  and  artful,  yet  the  pearl  has
thousands  of  enemies.

Pearl  indeed^!  ’Tis  the  water  of  Kawthar:  ’tis  a drop  of  this
that  is  the  origin  of  the  pearl.”

Through  the  prayers  and  lamentation  of  the  wife,  and  .:r35
through  the  husband’s  anxiety  and  his  patience  under  the  heavy
burden.

He  bore  it  without  delay,  safe  from  robbers  and  unhurt  by
stones,  to  the  seat  of  the  Caliphate  (the  Caliph’s  palace).

He  saw  a bountiful  Court,  (where)  the  needy  had  spread
their  nets ;

Everywhere,  moment  by  moment,  some  petitioner  gained  (and
carried  away)  from  that  Court  a donation  and  robe  of  honour :

’Twas  like  sun  and  rain,  nay,  like  Paradise,  for  infidel  and
true  believer  and  good  folk  and  Ijad.

Pie  beheld  some  people  arrayed  (w'ith  favour)  in  the  sight  27^^)
(of  the  Caliph),  and  others  w'ho  had  risen  to  their  feet  (and
were)  waiting  (to  receive  his  commands).

High  and  low,  from  Solomon  to  the  ant,  they  (all)  had  be-
come quickened  with  life,  like  the  world  at  the  blast  of  the
trumpet  (on  the  Day  of  Resurrection).

The  followers  of  Form  were  woven  (entangled)  in  pearls,  the
followers  of  Reality  had  found  the  Sea  of  Reality.

Those  without  aspiration — how  aspiring  had  they  become!
and  those  of  high  aspiration — to  what  felicity  had  they  attained !

Showing  that,  as  the  beggar  is  in  love  with  bounty  and  in  love  with
the  bountiful  giver,  so  the  bounty  of  the  bountiful  giver  is  in  love  '
with  the  beggar:  if  the  beggar  have  the  greater  patience,  the
bountiful  giver  will  come  to  his  door;  and  if  the  bountiful  giver
have  the  greater  patience,  the  beggar  will  come  to  his  door;  but
the  beggar’s  patience  is  a virtue  in  the  beggar,  while  the  patience
of  the  bountiful  giver  is  in  him  a defect.

A loud  call  was  coming  (to  his  ears):  “Come,  O seeker!
Bounty  is  in  need  of  beggars : (it  is  needy)  like  a beggar.

Bounty  is  seeking  the  beggars  and  the  poor,  just  as  fair  ones  2745
who  seek  a clear  mirror.

The  face  of  the  fair  is  made  beautiful  by  the  mirror,  the  face
of  Beneficence  is  made  visible  by  the  beggar.

Therefore  on  this  account  God  said  in  the  Siira  Wa’d-Duhd,

“O  Mohammed,  do  not  shout  at  (and  drive  away)  the  beggar.”


^ Literally,  “\\hat  indeed  is  the  (ordinar>')  pearl  (compared  with  this
‘pearl’  of  ours)?”  Pearls  were  supposed  to  be  rain-drops  caught  by  the
oyster-shell.


*


150  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Inasmuch  as  the  beggar  is  the  mirror  of  Bounty,  take  care !
Breath  is  hurtful  to  the  face  of  the  mirror.

In  the  one  case,  his  (the  giver’s)  bounty  makes  the  beggar
manifest  (causes  him  to  beg),  while  in  the  other  case  he  (the
giver),  (without  being  asked),  bestows  on  the  beggars  more
(than  they  need).

50  Beggars,  then,  are  the  mirror  of  God’s  bounty,  and  they  that
are  with  God  are  (united  with)  the  Absolute  Bounty ;

And  every  one  except  those  two  (types  of  beggar)  is  truly  a
dead  man:  he  is  not  at  this  door  (the  Divine  Court),  he  is
(lifeless  as)  a picture  (embroidered)  on  a curtain.


The  difference  between  one  that  is  poor  for  (desirous  of)  God  and

thirsting  for  Him  and  one  that  is  poor  of  (destitute  of)  God  and

thirsting  for  what  is  other  than  He.

He  (that  seeks  other  than  God)  is  the  (mere)  picture  of  a
dervish,  he  is  not  worthy  of  bread  (Divine  bounty):  do  not
throw  bread  to  the  picture  of  a dog !

He  wants  a morsel  of  food,  he  does  not  want  God:  do  not
set  dishes  before  a lifeless  picture !

The  dervish  that  wants  bread  is  a land-fish:  (he  has)  the
form  of  a fish,  but  (he  is)  fleeing  from  the  sea.

55  He  is  a domestic  fowl,  not  the  Simurgh  of  the  air : he  swallows
sweet  morsels  (of  food),  he  does  not  eat  from  God.

He  loves  God  for  the  sake  of  gain : his  soul  is  not  in  love  with
(God’s)  excellence  and  beauty'.

If  he  conceives  that  he  is  in  love  with  the  Essence  (of  God),
conception  of  the  (Divine)  names  and  attributes  is  not  the
Essence.

Conception  is  begotten  of  qualities  and  definition:  God  is
not  begotten,  He  is  lam  yulad.

How  should  he  that  is  in  love  with  his  own  imagination  and
conception  be  one  of  them  that  love  the  Lord  of  bounties  ?

60  If  the  lover  of  that  (false)  conception  be  sincere,  that  metaphor
(unreal  judgement)  will  lead  him  to  the  reality.

The  exposition  of  this  saying  demands  a commentary,  but  I
am  afraid  of  senile  (feeble)  minds.

Senile  and  short-sighted  minds  bring  a hundred  evil  fancies
into  their  thoughts.

Not  eveiy'  one  is  able  to  hear  rightly:  the  fig  is  not  a morsel
for  every  little  bird.

Especially  a bird  that  is  dead,  putrid;  a blind,  eyeless  (fellow)
filled  with  vain  fancy.

65  To  the  picture  of  a fish  what  is  the  difference  between  sea
and  land?  To  the  colour  of  a Hindoo  what  is  the  difference
between  soap  and  black  vitriol?


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE


151

If  you  depict  the  portrait  on  the  paper  as  sorrowful,  it  has
no  lesson  (learns  nothing)  of  sorrow  or  joy.

Its  appearance  is  sorrowful,  but  it  is  free  from  that  (sorrow) ;
(or)  its  appearance  is  smiling,  but  it  has  no  (inward)  impression
of  that  (joy).

And  this  (worldly)  sorrow  and  joy  which  are  delineated  in
the  heart  are  naught  but  a picture  in  comparison  with  that
(spiritual)  joy  and  sorrow.

The  picture’s  smiling  appearance  is  for  your  sake,  in  order
that  by  means  of  that  picture  the  reality  may  be  established
(rightly  understood  by  you).

The  pictures  (phenomena)  which  are  in  these  hot  baths  (the  ::
world),  (when  viewed)  from  outside  the  undressing-room  (of
self-abandonment),  are  like  clothes.

So  long  as  you  are  outside,  you  see  only  the  clothes
(phenomena);  put  off  your  clothes  and  enter  (the  bath  of
reality),  O kindred  spirit.

Because,  uith  your  clothes,  there  is  no  way  (of  getting)  inside :
the  body  is  ignorant  of  the  soul,  the  clothes  (are  ignorant)  of
the  body.

Hov)  the  Caliph's  officers  and  chamberlains  came  forward  to
pay  their  respects  to  the  Bedouin  and  to  receive  his  gift.

When  the  Bedouin  arrived  from  the  remote  desert  to  the
gate  of  the  Caliph’s  palace.

The  court  officers  went  to  meet  the  Bedouin : they  sprinkled
much  rose-water  of  graciousness  on  his  bosom.

Without  speech  (on  his  part)  they  perceived  what  he  wanted : j
it  was  their  practice  to  give  before  being  asked.

Then  they  said  to  him,  “O  chief  of  the  Arabs,  whence  dost
thou  come?  How  art  thou  after  the  journey  and  fatigue?  ”

He  said,  “I  am  a chief,  if  ye  give  me  any  countenance
(favour);  I am  without  means  (of  winning  respect)  when  ye
put  me  behind  your  backs.

O ye  in  whose  faces  are  the  marks  of  eminence,  O ye  whose
splendour  is  more  pleasing  than  the  gold  of  Ja‘far,

O ye,  one  sight  of  whom  is  (worth  many)  sights,  O ye  at  the
sight  of  whom  pieces  of  gold  are  scattered  (as  largesse),

0 ye,  all  of  whom  have  become  seeing  by  the  light  of  God,  ^
who  have  come  from  God  for  the  sake  of  munificence.

That  ve  mav  cast  the  elixir  of  your  looks  upon  the  copper  of
human  individuals^,

1 am  a stranger ; I have  come  from  the  desert : I have  come  in
hope  of  (gaining)  the  grace  of  the  Sultan.

^ I.e.  “in  order  that  you  may  transmute  the  base  metal  of  human  nature
and  endue  it  with  Divine  qualities.”


152  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

The  scent  of  his  grace  covered  (took  entire  possession  of)  the
deserts:  even  the  grains  of  sand  were  ensouled  (thereby).

I came  all  the  w^ay  to  this  place  for  the  sake  of  dinars:
as  soon  as  I arrived,  I became  drunken  with  sight  (contem-
plation).”

::7S5  A person  ran  to  the  baker  for  bread : on  seeing  the  beauty  of
the  baker,  he  gave  up  the  ghost.

A certain  man  w-ent  to  the  rose-garden  to  take  his  pleasure,
and  found  it  in  the  beauty  of  the  gardener^,

Like  the  desert  Arab  who  drew  water  from  the  well  and
tasted  the  Water  of  Life  from  the  (lovely)  face  of  Joseph-.

Moses  went  to  fetch  fire:  he  beheld  such  a Fire  (the  Burning
Bush)  that  he  escaped  from  (searching  after)  fire.

Jesus  sprang  up,  to  escape  from  his  enemies:  that  spring
carried  him  to  the  Fourth  Heaven.

z7<,o  The  ear  of  w'heat®  became  a trap  for  Adam,  so  that  his
existence  became  the  wheat-ear  (seed  and  origin)  of  mankind.

The  falcon  comes  to  the  snare  for  food : it  finds  the  fore-arm
(wrist)  of  the  King  and  fortune  and  glory.

The  child  w'ent  to  school  to  acquire  knowledge,  in  hope  of
(getting)  its  father’s  pretty  bird  (as  a prize) ;

Then,  by  (going  to)  school,  that  child  rose  to  the  top,  paid
monthly  fees  (to  his  teacher),  and  became  perfect^  (in  know-
ledge).

‘Abbas  had  come  to  w'ar  for  vengeance’  sake,  for  the  purpose
of  subduing  Ahmad  (Mohammed)  and  opposing  the  (true)
religion :

2795  He  and  his  descendants  in  the  Caliphate  became  a back  and
front  (complete  support)  to  the  (true)  religion  until  the  Resur-
rection.

“ I came  to  this  court  in  quest  of  w'ealth : as  soon  as  I entered
the  portico  I became  (a  spiritual)  chief®.

I brought  water  as  a gift  for  the  sake  of  (getting)  bread : hope
of  bread  led  me  to  the  highest  place  in  Paradise.

Bread  drove  an  Adam  forth  from  Paradise : bread  caused  me
to  mix  (made  me  consort)  with  those  wLo  belong  to  Paradise.

I have  been  freed,  like  the  angels,  from  water  and  bread
(materiality):  without  (any  worldly)  object  of  desire  I move
round  this  court,  like  the  (revolving)  sphere  of  heaven.”

2So.)  Nothing  in  the  world  is  without  object  (disinterested)  in  its
movement  (activity')  except  the  bodies  and  the  souls  of  (God’s)
lovers.

‘ Literally,  “the  beauty  of  the  gardener  (not  the  charm  of  the  garden)
turned  out  to  be  his  recreation.”

- Joseph  is  said  to  have  escaped  from  the  well  by  clinging  to  a bucket.

^ I e.  the  forbidden  fruit.

* Literally,  “a  full  moon.”

^ Literally,  “ I became  the  seat  of  honour.”


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE


153


Showing  that  the  lover  of  this  world  is  like  the  lover  of  a wall  on
which  the  sunbeams  strike,  who  makes  no  effort  and  exertion  to
perceive  that  the  radiance  and  splendour  do  not  proceed  from
the  wall,  hut  from  the  orb  of  the  sun  in  the  Fourth  Heaven;
consequently  he  sets  his  whole  heart  on  the  wall,  and  when  the
sunbeams  rejoin  the  sun  (at  sunset),  he  is  left  for  ever  in  despair:
“and  a bar  is  placed  between  thena  and  that  which  they
desire.”

The  lovers  of  the  Whole  are  not  those  who  love  the  part:
he  that  longed  for  the  part  failed  to  attain  unto  the  Whole.

When  a part  falls  in  love  with  a part,  the  object  of  its  love
soon  goes  (returns)  to  its  own  w'hole.

He  (the  lover  of  the  particular)  became  the  laughing-stock
of  another’s  slave:  he  became  (like  a man  who  was)  drowning
and  clung  to  some  one  weak  (and  powerless  to  help  him).

He  (the  loved  slave)  possesses  no  authority,  that  he  should  care
for  him:  shall  he  do  his  own  master’s  business  or  his  (the
lover’s)!?


The  Arabic  proverb,  ” If  you  commit  fornication,  commit  it  zcith
a free  woman,  and  if  you  steal,  steal  a pearl.”

Hence  (the  saying),  “ Commit  fornication  with  a free  woman,”  2S05
became  proverbial;  (and  the  words)  “steal  a pearl”  were  trans-
ferred (metaphorically)  to  this  (meaning).

The  slave  (the  loved  one)  went  away  to  his  master:  he  (the
lover)  was  left  in  misery.  The  scent  of  the  rose  went  (back)  to
the  rose:  he  W'as  left  with  the  thorn.

He  was  left  far  from  the  object  of  his  desire — his  labour  lost,
his  toil  useless,  his  foot  w'ounded.

Like  the  hunter  who  catches  a shadow — how  should  the
shadow  become  his  property?

The  man  has  grasped  tightly  the  shadow  of  a bird,  (while)
the  bird  on  the  branch  of  the  tree  is  fallen  into  amazement,

(Thinking),  “I  wonder  who  this  crack-brained  fellow  is  ^'^10
laughing  at?  Here's  folly  for  you,  here’s  a rotten  cause-^!”

And  if  you  say  that  the  part  is  connected  with  the  whole,
(then)  eat  thorns:  the  thorn  is  connected  with  the  rose.

Except  from  one  point  of  view®,  it  (the  part)  is  not  connected
with  the  whole:  othei^vise,  indeed,  the  mission  of  the  prophets
would  be  vain,

’ I.e.  "he  must  do  his  master’s  business  and  not  concern  himself  with
the  lover’s.”

- I.e.  a cause  that  cannot  lead  to  any  (rood  result.

® Reading  J..^.


154  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Inasmuch  as  the  prophets  are  (sent)  in  order  to  connect  (the
part  with  the  whole):  how,  then,  should  they  (the  prophets)
connect  them  when  they  are  (already)  one  body?

This  discourse  hath  no  end.  O lad,  the  day  is  late : conclude
the  tale.

How  the  Arab  delivered  the  gift,  that  is,  the  jug  to  the
Caliph's  servants.

2S15  He  presented  the  jug  of  water,  he  sowed  the  seed  of  homage
in  that  (exalted)  court.

“Bear  this  gift,”  said  he,  “to  the  Sultan,  redeem  the  King’s
suitor  from  indigence.

’Tis  sweet  water  and  a new  green  jug — some  of  the  rain-
water that  collected  in  the  ditch.”

The  officials  smiled  at  that,  but  they  accepted  it  (the  jug)  as
(though  it  were  precious  as)  life.

Because  the  graciousness  of  the  good  and  wise  King  had
made  a mark  (impressed  itself)  on  all  the  courtiers.

2820  The  disposition  of  kings  settles  (becomes  implanted)  in  their
subjects:  the  green  sky^  makes  the  earth  verdant.

Regard  the  king  as  a reservoir  with  pipes  in  every  direction,
and  water  running  from  all  (the  pipes)  like  hoppers  (in  a mill).

When  the  water  in  all  (the  pipes)  is  from  a pure  reservoir,
every  single  one  gives  sweet  water,  pleasant  to  taste;

But  if  the  water  in  the  reservoir  is  brackish  and  dirty,  every
pipe  brings  the  same  to  view.

Because  every  pipe  is  connected  with  the  reservoir.  Dive,
dive  into  (ponder  deeply)  the  meaning  of  these  words.

2825  (Consider)  how  the  imperial  grace  of  the  homeless  Spirit  ^
has  produced  effects  on  the  whole  body ;

How  the  grace  of  Reason,  which  is  of  goodly  nature,  of  goodly
lineage,  brings  the  entire  body  into  discipline;

How  Love,  saucy,  uncontrolled,  and  restless,  throws  the
whole  body  into  madness.

The  purity  of  the  water  of  the  Sea  that  is  like  Kawthar  (is
such  that)  all  its  pebbles  are  pearls  and  gems.

For  whatever  science  the  master  is  renowned,  the  souls  of
his  pupils  become  endued  with  the  same.

2S30  With  the  master-theologian  the  quick  and  industrious  pupil
reads  (scholastic)  theology.

With  the  master-jurist  the  student  of  jurisprudence  reads
jurisprudence,  when  he  (the  teacher)  expounds  it,  not  theolog}-.

Then  the  master  who  is  a grammarian — the  soul  of  his  pupil
becomes  imbued  by  him  with  grammar.

Again,  the  master  who  is  absorbed  in  the  Way  (of  Sufism)—

* Equivalent  to  our  “blue  sky.”

- I.e.  the  spirit,  which  has  no  spatial  relations.


THE  GRAMMARIAN  AND  THE  BOATMAN  155

because  of  him  the  soul  of  his  pupil  is  absorbed  in  the  King
(God).

Of  all  these  various  kinds  of  knowledge,  on  the  day  of  death
the  (best)  equipment  and  provision  for  the  road  is  the  know-
ledge of  (spiritual)  poverty.

The  story  of  what  passed  between  the  grammarian
and  the  boatman.

A certain  grammarian  embarked  in  a boat.  That  self-con-  ’335
ceited  person  turned  to  the  boatman

And  said,  “Have  you  ever  studied  grammar?”  “No,”  he
replied.  The  other  said,  “Half  your  life  is  gone  to  naught.”

The  boatman  became  heart-broken  with  grief,  but  at  the
time  he  refrained  from  answering.

The  wind  cast  the  boat  into  a whirlpool : the  boatman  spoke
loud  (shouted)  to  the  grammarian,

“Tell  me,  do  you  know  how  to  swim?”  “No,”  said  he,

“O  fair-spoken^  good-looking  man!”

“O  grammarian,”  said  he,  “your  whole  life  is  naught,  be-  3S40
cause  the  boat  is  sinking  in  these  whirlpools.”

Know  that  here  mahw  (self-effacement)  is  needed,  not  nahw
(grammar) : if  you  are  mahw  (dead  to  self),  plunge  into  the  sea
without  peril.

The  water  of  the  sea  places  the  dead  one  on  its  head  (causes
him  to  float  on  the  surface) ; but  if  he  be  living,  how  shall  he
escape  from  the  sea?

Inasmuch  as  you  have  died  to  the  attributes  of  the  flesh,  the
Sea  of  (Divine)  consciousness  tvill  place  you  on  the  crown  of  its
head  (will  raise  you  to  honour).

(But)  O thou  who  hast  called  the  people  asses,  at  this  time
thou  art  left  (floundering),  like  an  ass,  upon  this  ice.

If  in  the  world  thou  art  the  most  learned  scholar  of  the  time,  4S45
behold  the  passing-away  of  this  world  and  this  time !

We  have  stitched  in  (inserted)  the  (stor\'  of  the)  grammarian,
that  we  might  teach  you  the  grammar  (nahw)  of  self-effacement
(mahw).

In  self-loss-,  O venerated  friend,  thou  wilt  find  the  jurispru-
dence of  jurisprudence,  the  grammar  of  grammar,  and  the
accidence  of  accidence'’.

That  jug  of  water  is  (an  emblem  of)  our  different  sorts  of
knowledge,  and  the  Caliph  is  the  Tigris  of  God’s  knowledge.

We  are  carrying  jugs  full  (of  water)  to  the  Tigris:  if  we  do
not  know  ourselves  to  be  asses,  asses  we  are.

^ Literally,  " answering  pleasantly.”

- Literally,  “in  becoming  less.”

^ I.e.  the  cream  and  essence  of  these  sciences.


IS6  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

2S30  After  all,  the  Bedouin  was  excusable,  for  he  was  ignorant  of
the  Tigris  and  of  the  (great)  river.

If  he  had  been  acquainted  with  the  Tigris,  as  we  are,  he
would  not  have  carried  that  jug  from  place  to  place ;

Nay,  had  he  been  aware  of  the  Tigris,  he  would  have  dashed
that  jug  against  a stone.


How  the  Caliph  accepted  the  gift  and  bestowed  largesse,  notwith-
standing that  he  teas  entirely  without  need  of  the  gift  {the  water)
and  the  jug.

When  the  Caliph  saw  (the  gift)  and  heard  his  story,  he  filled
the  jug  with  gold  and  added  (other  presents).

He  delivered  the  Arab  from  penury,  he  bestowed  donations
and  special  robes  of  honour,

2S53  Saying,  “Give  into  his  hand  this  jug  full  of  gold.  When  he
returns  (home),  take  him  to  the  Tigris.

He  has  come  (hither)  by  way  of  the  desert  and  by  travelling
(on  land) ; it  will  be  nearer  for  him  (to  return)  by  water.”

When  he  (the  Arab)  embarked  in  the  boat  and  beheld  the
Tigris,  he  was  prostrating  himself  in  shame  and  bowing  (his
head),  ^ ^

Saying,  “Oh,  wonderful  is  the  kindness  of  that  bounteous
King,  and  ’tis  (even)  more  wonderful  that  he  took  that  water.

How  did  that  Sea  of  munificence  so  quickly  accept  from  me
such  spurious  coin  as  this?”

2S60  Know,  O son,  that  everything  in  the  universe  is  a jug  which
is  (filled)  to  the  brim  with  wisdom  and  beauty.

It  (everything  in  the  universe)  is  a drop  of  the  Tigris  of  His
beauty,  which  (beauty)  because  of  its  fullness  is  not  contained
under  the  skin  (that  should  enclose  it).

’Twas  a hidden  treasure;  because  of  its  fullness  it  burst  forth
and  made  the  earth  more  shining  than  the  heavens.

’Twas  a hidden  treasure:  because  of  its  fullness  it  surged  up
and  made  the  earth  (like)  a sultan  robed  in  satin.

And  if  he  (the  Arab)  had  seen  a branch  of  the  Divine  Tigris,
he  would  have  destroyed  that  jug,  destroyed  it.

2S65  They  that  saw  it  are  always  beside  themselves : like  one  beside
himself,  they  hurled  a stone  at  the  jug  (of  their  self-exist-
ence).

O thou  who  from  jealousy  hast  hurled  a stone  at  the  jug
while  the  jug  has  (only)  become  more  perfect  through  being
shattered,  °

The  jar  is  shattered,  (but)  the  water  is  not  spilled  from  it :
from  this  shattering  have  arisen  a hundred  soundnesses.

Every  piece  of  the  jar  is  in  dance  and  ecstasy,  (though)  to  the
partial  (discursive)  reason  this  seems  absurd.


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE  157

In  this  state  (of  ecstasy)  neither  the  jug  is  manifest  nor  the
water.  Consider  well,  and  God  knoweth  best  what  is  right.

When  you  knock  at  the  door  of  Reality,  it  will  be  opened  to  ::S;o
you : beat  the  pinion  of  thought,  in  order  that  you  may  be  made
a king-falcon.

The  pinion  of  your  thought  has  become  mud-stained  and
heavy  because  you  are  a clay-eater:  clay  has  become  to  you  as
bread.

Bread  and  meat  are  (originally)  clay:  eat  little  thereof,  that
you  may  not  remain  in  the  earth,  like  clay.

When  you  become  hungry,  you  become  a dog:  you  become
fierce  and  ill-tempered  and  ill-natured.

When  you  have  eaten  your  fill,  you  have  become  a carcase:
vou  have  become  devoid  of  understanding  and  without  feet
(inert),  like  a wall.

So  at  one  time  you  are  a carcase  and  at  another  time  a dog:  2S75
how  will  you  run  well  in  the  road  of  the  lions  (follow  the  saints)?

Know  that  your  only  means  of  hunting  is  the  dog  (the  animal
soul) : throw  bones  to  the  dog  but  seldom.

Because  when  the  dog  has  eaten  its  fill,  it  becomes  rebellious :
how  should  it  run  to  the  goodly  chase  and  hunt?

Want  of  food  was  leading  the  Arab  to  that  (exalted)  court,
and  (there)  he  found  his  fortune.

We  have  related  in  the  (foregoing)  story  the  kindness  shown
by  the  King  to  that  needy  one  who  had  no  refuge.

Whatsoever  the  man  in  love  (with  God)  speaks,  the  scent  of  jSso
Love  is  springing  from  his  mouth  into  the  abode  of  Love.

If  he  speak  (formal)  theology,  it  all  turns  to  (spiritual)  povertv :
the  scent  of  poverty  comes  from  that  man  of  sweet  and  beguiling
discourse.

And  if  he  speak  infidelity,  it  has  the  scent  of  (the  true)  re-
ligion, and  if  he  speak  doubtfully,  his  doubt  turns  to  certainty.

The  pers'erse  froth  that  has  risen  from  a sea  of  sincerity —
that  turbid  (froth)  has  been  set  out  by  the  pure  source.

Know  that  its  froth  is  pure  and  worthy : know  that  it  is  like
revilement  from  the  lips  of  the  beloved.

Whose  unsought  reproaches  have  become  sweet  (to  the  lover)  ’'^5
for  the  sake  of  her  cheek  which  he  desires.

If  he  (the  lover  of  God)  speak  falsehood,  it  seems  (like)  the
truth.  O (fine)  falsehood  that  would  adorn  (even)  the  truth!

If  you  cook  (a  confection)  of  sugar  in  the  form  of  a loaf  of
bread,  it  will  taste  of  candy,  not  of  bread,  while  you  are
sucking  it.

If  a true  believer  find  a golden  idol,  how  should  he  leave  it
(there)  for  the  sake  of  a worshipper?

Nay,  he  will  take  it  and  cast  it  into  the  fire:  he  will  break
(destroy)  its  borrowed  (unreal)  form,


158  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

2890  In  order  that  the  idol-shape  may  not  remain  on  the  gold,
because  Form  hinders  and  waylays  (those  who  seek  Reality).

The  essence  of  its  gold  is  the  essence  of  Lordship  (Divinity) ;
the  idol-stamp  on  the  sterling  gold  is  borrowed  (unreal).

Do  not  bum  a blanket  on  account  of  a flea,  and  do  not  let
the  day  go  (to  waste)  on  account  of  every  gnat’s  headache^.

You  are  an  idol- worshipper  when  you  remain  in  (bondage
to)  forms : leave  its  (the  idol’s)  form  and  look  at  the  reality.

If  you  are  a man  (bound)  for  the  Pilgrimage,  seek  a pilgrim
(as  your)  companion,  whether  he  be  a Hindoo  or  a Turcoman
or  an  Arab.

2895  Do  not  look  at  his  figure  and  colour,  look  at  his  purpose  and
intention.

If  he  is  black,  (yet)  he  is  in  accord  with  you : call  him  white,
for  (spiritually)  his  complexion  is  the  same  as  yours.

This  story  has  been  told  up  and  down  (confusedly),  like  the
doings  of  lovers,  without  foot  (end)  or  head  (beginning).

It  hath  no  head,  inasmuch  as  it  existed  before  eternity;  it
hath  no  foot;  it  has  (always)  been  akin  to  everlastingness.

Nay,  it  is  like  water:  every  drop  thereof  is  both  head  and  foot,
and  at  the  same  time  without  both.

2900  This  is  not  a story,  mark  you ! God  forbid ! This  is  the  ready
money  (presentation,  here  and  now)  of  my  state  and  yours.
Consider  (it)  well.

Because  the  Siifi  is  grand  and  glorious  (in  his  spiritual  vision) :
whatever  is  past  is  not  remembered  (does  not  enter  his  mind).

We  are  both  the  Arab  and  the  jug  and  the  King;  we  are  all:
he  that  has  been  turned  away  from  it  {the  Truth)  shall  be  turned
away.

Know  that  the  husband  is  Reason,  and  the  wife  is  greed  and
cupidity:  these  twain  are  dark  and  deniers  (of  Reason);  Reason
is  the  (bright)  candle.

Now  hear  the  origin  of  their  denial,  whence  it  arose : (it  arose)
from  the  fact  that  the  W’hole  hath  various  parts.

2905  The  parts  of  the  Whole  are  not  parts  in  relation  to  the  W’hole
— (they  are)  not  like  the  scent  of  the  rose,  which  is  a part  of
the  rose.

The  beauty  of  (all)  green  herbs  is  a part  of  the  Rose’s  beautv%
the  coo  of  the  turtle-dove  is  a part  of  that  Nightingale.

If  I become  occupied  with  a difficulty  (difficult  question)  and
the  answer  (explanation),  how  shall  I be  able  to  give  water  to
the  thirsty?

If  you  are  wholly  perplexed  and  in  straits,  have  patience:
patience  is  the  key  to  joy  '^.

^ /.c.  “ every  trivia  vexation/*

- Faraj  is  properly  the  feeling  of  relief  produced  by  the  removal  of  pain
or  anxiety.


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  HIS  WIFE


159

Abstain  from  (distracting)  thoughts,  abstain:  thought  is  (like)
the  lion  and  the  wild  ass,  and  (men’s)  hearts  are  the  thickets
(which  they  haunt).

Acts  of  abstinence  are  superior  to  medicines,  because  scratch-  ::oio
ing  is  an  increase  (aggravation)  of  the  itch.

Assuredly  abstinence  is  the  first  principle  of  medicine : abstain,
and  behold  the  strength  of  the  spirit.

Receive  these  words,  like  the  (open)  ear,  that  I may  make
for  you  an  earring  of  gold;

(Then)  you  will  become  a ring  in  the  ear  of  (devoted  to)  the  Moon
that  works  in  gold,  you  will  ascend  to  the  moon  and  the  Pleiades.

First,  hear  (and  learn)  that  the  diverse  created  beings  are
spiritually  different,  from  yd  (Y)  to  alif  (A).

Amongst  the  various  letters  there  is  a confusion  and  un-
certainty,  though  from  one  point  of  view  they  are  (all)  one  from
head  (beginning)  to  foot  (end).

From  one  aspect  they  are  opposites,  and  from  one  aspect
they  are  unified;  from  one  aspect  they  are  jest,  and  from  one
aspect  they  are  earnest.

Therefore  the  Resurrection  is  the  day  of  the  supreme  in-
spection: inspection  is  desired  by  him  (only)  who  is  glorious
and  splendid.

Whoever  is  like  a fraudulent  Hindoo*,  for  him  the  day  of
inspection  is  the  time  of  exposure.

Inasmuch  as  he  hath  not  a face  like  the  sun,  he  desires  nothing
but  night  (to  cover  him)  like  a veil.

Since  his  thorn  hath  not  a single  rose-leaf.  Spring  is  the  1020
enemy  of  his  conscience.

While  to  one  that  is  roses  and  lilies  from  head  to  foot  Spring
is  (welcome  as)  a pair  of  bright  eyes.

The  unspiritual  thorn  wishes  for  autumn,  for  autumn,  in
order  that  it  may  jostle  with  (contend  as  a rival  with)  the
rose-garden.

And  that  it  (autumn)  may  hide  the  beauty  of  that  (the  rose)
and  the  shame  of  this  (the  thorn),  so  that  you  may  not  see  the
colour  of  that  and  the  colour  of  this.

Therefore  autumn  is  its  (the  thorn’s)  Spring  and  life,  (for
then)  the  (worthless)  stone  and  the  pure  rubv  appear  one.

The  Gardener  knows  that  (difference)  even  in  autumn,  but
the  One’s  sight  is  better  than  the  world’s  sight.

Truly  that  One  Person  is  (essentially)  the  (whole)  world:  he
is  unaware  of  evil  (does  not  know  evil  as  such).  The  stars,
every'  one,  are  all  part  of  the  iMoon.

Therefore  every'  fair  form  and  shape  (in  the  world)  is  crying,
“Good  news!  good  news!  Lo,  here  comes  the  Spring.”

* Literally,  “a  Hindoo  who  does  bad  trade,"  i.e.  a reprobate  whose
•dealings  with  God  result  in  his  perdition.


»


l6o  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

So  long  as  the  blossom  is  shining  like  a coat  of  mail,  how
should  the  fruits  display  their  knobs?

When  the  blossom  is  shed,  the  fruit  comes  to  a head:  when
the  body  is  shattered,  the  spirit  lifts  up  its  head.

930  The  fruit  is  the  reality,  the  blossom  is  its  form;  the  blossom
is  the  good  news,  the  fruit  is  the  bounty  (given  as  a reward)
for  it.

When  the  blossom  was  shed,  the  fruit  became  visible:  when
that  diminished  this  began  to  increase.

How  should  bread  give  strength  until  it  is  broken?  How
should  uncrushed  clusters  (of  grapes)  yield  wine?

Unless  myrobalan  is  pounded  up  with  medicines,  how  should
the  medicines  by  themselves  become  health-increasing  (act  as
tonics)  ?

Concerning  the  qualities  of  the  Pir  {^Spiritual  Guide)  and
{the  duty  of)  obedience  to  him.

O Splendour  of  the  Truth,  Husamu’ddin,  take  one  or  two
sheets  of  paper  and  add  (them  to  the  poem)  in  description  of
the  Pir.

935  Although  thy  slender  body  hath  no  strength,  yet  without  the
sun  (of  thy  spirit)  we  have  no  light.

Although  thou  hast  become  the  lighted  wick  and  the  glass
(lamp)i,  yet  thou  art  the  heart’s  leader  (the  Spiritual  Guide):
thou  art  the  end  of  the  thread  (which  serves  as  a clue).

Inasmuch  as  the  end  of  the  thread  is  in  thy  hand  and  will,
the  beads  (of  spiritual  knowledge)  on  the  heart’s  necklace  are
(derived)  from  thy  bount\'.

Write  down  what  appertains  to  the  Pir  (Guide)  who  knows
the  Way: — Choose  the  Pir  and  regard  him  as  the  essence  of
the  Way.

The  Pir  is  (like)  summer,  and  (other)  people  are  (like)  the
autumn  month;  (other)  people  are  like  night,  and  the  Pir  is
the  moon.

940  I have  bestowed  on  (my)  young  Fortune  (Husamu’ddin)  the
name  of  Pir  (old),  because  he  is  (made)  old  by  the  Truth,  not
(made)  old  by  Time.

So  old  is  he  that  he  hath  no  beginning;  there  is  no  rival  to
such  a unique  Pearl.

Verily,  old  wine  grows  more  potent;  verily,  old  gold  is  more
highly  prized.

Choose  a Pir,  for  without  a Pir  this  journey  is  exceeding  full
of  woe  and  affright  and  danger.

Without  an  escort  you  are  bewildered  (even)  on  a road  you
have  travelled  many  times  (before) :

* I.e.  “ although  thou  hast  attained  to  the  uttermost  degree  of  illumina-
tion." Cf.  Qur’an,  x.xiv,  35.


THE  SPIRITUAL  GUIDE


l6l


Do  not,  then,  travel  alone  on  a Way  that  you  have  not  seen  2045
at  all,  do  not  turn  your  head  away  from  the  Guide.

Fool,  if  his  shadow  (protection)  be  not  ov'er  you,  then  the  cry
of  the  ghoul  will  keep  vou  (wandering  about)  with  your  head
in  a whirl.

The  ghoul  will  (entice  you)  from  the  Way  (and)  cast  you  into
destruction : there  have  been  in  this  Way  many  craftier  than
vou  (who  have  perished  miserablv).

Hear  (learn)  from  the  Qur’an  the  perdition  of  the  wayfarers,
what  the  evil-souled  Iblis  did  unto  them:

He  carried  them  far — a journey  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of
years — from  the  Highway,  and  made  them  backsliders  and
naked  (devoid  of  good  works).

Behold  their  bones  and  their  hair!  Take  warning,  and  drive  2950
not  your  ass  towards  them !

Seize  the  neck  of  your  ass  (the  flesh)  and  lead  him  towards
the  Way,  towards  the  good  keepers  and  knowers  of  tlie  ^^’ay.

Beware ! do  not  let  your  ass  go,  and  do  not  remove  your  hand
from  him,  because  his  love  is  for  the  place  where  green  herbs
are  plentiful.

If  you  carelessly  leave  him  free  for  one  moment,  he  will  go
(many)  leagues  in  the  direction  of  the  herbage.

The  ass  is  an  enemy  to  the  Way,  (he  is)  madly  in  love  with
fodder:  oh,  many  is  the  attendant  on  him  that  he  has  brought
to  ruin !

If  you  know  not  the  Way,  whatsoever  the  ass  desires,  do  the  2 ,:5
contrary'  thereof:  that,  surely,  will  be  the  right  Way.

(The  Prophet  said),  “ Consult  them  (women),  and  then  oppose
(them  in  what  they  advise):  he  that  disobeys  them  not  will  be
ruined.”

Be  not  a friend  to  (sensual)  passion  and  desire,  since  it  leads
you  astray  from  the  Way  of  God.

Nothing  in  the  world  will  break  (mortih  ) this  passion  like
the  shadow  (protection)  of  fellow-travellers.

How  the  Prophet,  on  whom  be  peace,  enjoined  ‘AH — may  God
make  his  person  honoured — saying,  “ When  every  one  seeks  to
draw  nigh  to  God  by  means  of  some  kind  of  devotional  act,  do
thou  seek  the  favour  of  God  by  associating  leith  His  wise  and
chosen  servant,  that  thou  mayst  be  the  first  of  all  to  arrive  {to
gain  access  to  Hun).”

The  Prophet  said  to  ‘Ali,  “O  ‘Ali,  thou  art  the  Lion  of  God,
thou  art  a courageous  knight.

But  do  not  even  relv  upon  thy  lion-heartedness:  come  into  2960
the  shade  of  the  palm-tree  of  hope.

Come  into  the  shade  (protection)  of  the  Sage  whom  no  con-
veyer can  carry  off  from  the  Way.


N M


II


i62  mathnawi,  book  I

His  shadow  on  the  earth  is  like  Mount  Qaf,  his  spirit  is  (like)
the  Simurgh  that  circles  (soars)  exceedingly  high.

If  I should  tell  of  his  qualities  until  the  Resurrection,  do  not
seek  (expect)  any  conclusion  and  end  to  them.

The  (Divine)  Sun  has  veiled  Himself  in  Alan:  apprehend
(this  mystery),  and  God  knows  best  what  is  right.

2965  O ‘All,  above  all  devotional  acts  in  the  Way  (of  God)  do  thou
choose  the  shadow  (protection)  of  the  servant  of  God.

Every  one  took  refuge  in  some  act  of  devotion  and  discovered
for  themselves  some  means  of  deliverance.

Go  thou,  take  refuge  in  the  shadow  of  the  Sage,  that  thou
mayst  escape  from  the  Enemy  that  opposes  (thee)  in  secret.

Of  all  acts  of  devotion  this  is  the  best  for  thee:  (thereby)  thou
wilt  gain  precedence  over  every  one  that  has  outstripped  (the
rest).”

When  the  Pir  has  accepted  thee,  take  heed,  surrender  thyself
(to  him) : go,  like  Aloses,  under  the  authority  of  Khizr.

2970  Bear  patiently  whatever  is  done  by  a Khizr  who  is  without
hypocrisy,  in  order  that  Khizr  may  not  say,  “Begone,  this  is
{our)  parting."

Though  he  stave  in  the  boat,  do  not  speak  a word ; though  he
kill  a child,  do  not  tear  thy  hair.

God  has  declared  that  his  (the  Pir’s)  hand  is  as  His  own,
since  He  gave  out  (the  words)  the  Hand  of  God  is  above  their
hands.

The  Hand  of  God  causes  him  (the  child)  to  die  and  (then)
brings  him  to  life.  What  of  life?  He  makes  him  a spirit  ever-
lasting.

If  any  one,  by  rare  exception,  traversed  this  Way  alone
(without  a Pir),  he  arrived  (at  his  goal)  through  the  help  (and
favour)  of  the  hearts  of  the  Pirs.

2975  The  hand  of  the  Pir  is  not  withdrawn  from  the  absent  (those
who  are  not  under  his  authority):  his  hand  is  naught  but  the
grasp  of  God.

Inasmuch  as  they  give  such  a robe  of  honour  to  the  absent,
(what  must  they  give  their  disciples?) : undoubtedly  the  present
are  better  than  the  absent.

Since  they  are  bestowing  (spiritual)  food  on  the  absent,  see
what  bounties  they  must  lay  before  one  who  is  present.

Where  is  one  that  ^rds  himself  (for  service)  before  them  to
{i.e.  how  far  superior  is  he  to)  one  that  is  outside  the  door?

When  thou  hast  chosen  thy  Pir,  be  not  faint-hearted,  be  not
weak  as  water  and  crumbly  as  earth.

2980  If  thou  art  enraged  by  every  blow,  then  how  wilt  thou  be-
come a (clear)  mirror  without  being  polished?


THE  MAN  OF  QAZWIN


163


H ow  the  man  of  Qazwin  zcas  tattooing  the  figure  of  a lion  in  blue

on  his  shoulders,  and  {then)  repenting  because  of  the  {pain  of

the)  needle-pricks .

Hear  from  the  narrator  this  storj'  about  the  way  and  custom
of  the  people  of  Qazwin.

They  tattoo  themselves  in  blue  with  the  point  of  a
needle  on  body  and  hand  and  shoulders,  so  as  to  suffer  no
injury.

A certain  man  of  Qazwin  went  to  a barber  and  said,  “Tattoo
me  (and)  do  it  charmingly  (artistically).”

“O  valiant  sir,”  said  he,  “what  figure  shall  I tattoo?”  He
answered,  “Prick  in  the  figure  of  a furious  lion.

Leo  is  my  ascendant:  tattoo  the  form  of  a lion.  Exert  your-  29S5
self,  prick  in  plenty  of  the  blue  dve.”

“On  what  place,”  he  asked,  “shall  I tattoo  you?”  Said  he,
“Prick  the  design  of  the  beauU'^  on  my  shoulder-blade.”

As  soon  as  he  began  to  stick  in  the  needle,  the  pain  of  it
settled  in  the  shoulder.

And  the  hero  fell  a-moaning — “O  illustrious  one,  vou  have
killed  me : what  figure  are  you  tattooing?  ”

“Why,”  said  he,  “you  bade  me  do  a lion.”  “What  limb  (of
the  lion),”  asked  the  other,  “did  you  begin  with?”

“I  have  begun  at  the  tail,”  said  he.  “O  my  dear  friend'^”  2990
he  cried,  “leave  out  the  tail!

My  breath  is  stopped  by  the  lion’s  tail  and  rump : his  rump
has  tightly  closed  (choked)  my  windpipe.

Let  the  lion  be  without  a tail,  O lion-maker,  for  my  heart
is  faint  from  the  blows  of  the  prong  (the  tattooer’s  needle).”

That  person  commenced  to  prick  in  (the  blue)  on  another
part  (of  the  man’s  shoulder)  without  fear,  without  favour,
without  mercy.

He  yelled — “Which  of  his  members  is  this?”  “This  is  his
ear,  my  good  man,”  the  barber  replied.

“O  Doctor,”  said  he,  “let  him  have  no  ears:  omit  the  ears  29,5
and  cut  the  frock  short.”

The  barber  began  to  insert  (his  needle)  in  another  part:  once
more  the  man  of  Qazwin  set  out  to  wail.

Saying,  “ WTat  is  the  member  (you  are  pricking  in)  now  on
this  third  spot?  ” He  replied,  “ This  is  the  lion’s  belly,  my  dear
sir.”

“Let  the  lion  have  no  belly,”  said  he:  “what  need  of  a belly
for  the  picture  that  is  (already)  sated*?”

The  barber  became  distraught  and  remained  in  great  be-

' Literally,  “ idol.”

■ Literally,  “O  my  two  eyes.”

’ I.e.  “it  has  already  imbibed  as  much  of  the  blue  dye  as  I can  bear.”


164  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

wilderment ; he  stood  for  a long  time  with  his  fingers  in  his
teeth ;

3000  Then  the  master  flung  the  needle  to  the  ground  and  said,
“ Has  this  happened  to  any  one  in  the  world?

Who  (ever)  saw  a lion  without  tail  and  head  and  belly?  God
himself  did  not  create  a lion  like  this.”

O brother,  endure  the  pain  of  the  lancet,  that  you  may  escape
from  the  poison  of  your  miscreant  self  (nafs),

For  sky  and  sun  and  moon  bow  in  worship  to  the  people  who
have  escaped  from  self-existence.

Any  one  in  whose  body  the  miscreant  self  has  died,  sun  and
cloud  obey  his  command.

3005  Since  his  heart  has  learned  to  light  the  candle  (of  spiritual
knowledge  and  love),  the  sun  cannot  burn  him.

God  hath  made  mention  of  the  rising  sun  as  turning  aside —
like  that^ — from  their  cave.

The  thorn  becomes  entirely  beautiful,  like  the  rose,  in  the
sight  of  the  particular  that  is  going  towards  the  Universal.

What  is  (the  meaning  of)  to  exalt  and  glorify  God?  To  deem
vourself  despicable  and  (worthless)  as  dust.

What  is  (the  meaning  of)  to  learn  the  knowledge  of  God’s
unity?  To  consume  yourself  in  the  presence  of  the  One.

3010  If  you  wish  to  shine  like  day,  burn  up  your  night-like  self-
existence.

Melt  away  your  existence,  as  copper  (melts  away)  in  the
elixir,  in  the  being  of  Him  who  fosters  (and  sustains)  existence.

You  have  fastened  both  your  hands  tight  on  (are  determined
not  to  give  up)  “ I ” and  “ we  ” : all  this  (spiritual)  ruin  is  caused
by  dualism-.

How  the  wolf  and  fox  went  to  hunt  in  attendance  on  the  lion.

A lion,  wolf,  and  fox  had  gone  to  hunt  in  the  mountains  in
quest  (of  food).

That  by  supporting  each  other  they  might  tie  fast  the  bonds
and  fetters  (of  captivity)  on  the  hunted  animals,

3015  And  all  three  together  might  seize  much  and  great  quarry-
in  that  deep  wilderness.

Although  the  fierce  lion  was  ashamed  of  them  (the  wolf  and
fox),  yet  he  did  them  honour  and  gave  them  his  company  on
the  way.

To  a king  like  this  the  (escort  of)  soldiers  are  an  annoyance,
but  he  accompanied  them : a united  party  is  a mercy  (from  God).

A moon  like  this  is  disgraced  by  the  stars : it  is  amongst  the
stars  for  generosity’s  sake.

’■  I.e.  “towards  the  right  hand,”  as  is  stated  in  Qur’an,  xvni,  i6.

2 Literally,  “ by  two  existents.”


THE  LION,  THE  WOLF,  AND  THE  FOX  165

The  (Divine)  command.  Consult  them,  came  to  the  Prophet,
though  no  counsel  is  to  be  compared  with  his  own.

In  the  scales  barley  has  become  the  companion  of  gold^,  3020
(but  that  is)  not  because  barley  has  become  a substance  like
gold.

The  spirit  has  now  become  the  body’s  fellow-traveller:  the
dog  has  become  for  a time  the  guardian  of  the  palace-gate.

When  this  party  (the  wolf  and  fox)  went  to  the  mountains  at
the  stirrup  (side)  of  the  lion  majestic  and  grand,

They  found  a mountain-ox  and  goat  and  fat  hare,  and  their
business  went  forward  (prosperous!}').

Whoever  is  on  the  heels  of  him  that  is  a lion  in  combat,
roast-meat  does  not  fail  him  by  day  or  by  night.

When  they  brought  them  (the  animals  which  they  had  caught)  30 ’5
from  the  mountains  to  the  jungle,  killed  and  wounded  and
dragging  along  in  (streams  of)  blood.

The  wolf  and  fox  hoped  that  a division  (of  the  prey)  would
be  made  according  to  the  justice  of  emperors.

The  reflexion  of  the  hope  of  both  of  them  struck  the  lion:
the  lion  knew  (what  was)  the  ground  for  those  hopes.

-\ny  one  that  is  the  lion  and  prince  of  (spiritual)  mysteries,
he  will  know  all  that  the  conscience  thinks.

Beware ! Guard  thyself,  O heart  disposed  to  thinking,  from
any  evil  thought  in  his  presence.

He  knows  and  keeps  riding  on  - silently : he  smiles  in  thy  face
in  order  to  mask  (his  feelings).

When  the  lion  perceived  their  bad  ideas,  he  did  not  declare
(his  knowledge),  and  paid  (courteous)  regard  (to  them)  at  the
time.

But  he  said  to  himself,  “ I will  show  you  what  (chastisement)
ve  deserve,  O beggarly  villains!

Was  my  judgement  not  enough  for  you?  Is  this  your  opinion
of  my  bounty,

0 ve  whose  understanding  and  judgement  are  (derived)  from
my  judgement  and  from  my  world-adorning  gifts  ?

What  else  (but  good)  should  the  picture  think  of  the  painter,  3035
since  he  bestowed  thought  and  knowledge  upon  it?

Had  ye  such  a vile  opinion  of  me,  O ye  who  are  a scandal  to
the  world?

1 will  strike  off  the  hypocritical  heads  of  them  that  think  ill
of  God.

I will  deliver  the  Sphere  (of  Time)  from  your  disgrace,  so
that  this  tale  shall  remain  in  the  world  (as  a warning).”

While  thus  meditating,  the  lion  continued  to  smile  visibly:
do  not  trust  the  smiles  of  the  lion !

^ I.e.  both  are  weighed.

“ Literally,  ’‘driving  his  ass.”


»


i66


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

3040  Worldly  wealth  is  (like)  the  smiles  of  God:  it  has  made  us
drunken  and  vainglorious  and  threadbare  (deprived  of  the  means
of  salvation).

Poverty  and  distress  are  better  for  thee,  O lord,  for  (then)
that  smile  will  remove  its  lure.


How  the  lion  made  trial  of  the  wolf  and  said,  Come  forward,

O wolf,  and  divide  the  prey  amongst  us.”

The  lion  said,  “O  wolf,  divide  this  (prey):  O old  wolf,  make
justice  new  (give  it  new  life  by  thy  example).

Be  my  deputy  in  the  office  of  distributor,  that  it  may  be  seen
of  what  substance  thou  art.”

“O  King,”  said  he,  “the  wild  ox  is  thy  share:  he  is  big,  and
thou  art  big  and  strong  and  active.

3043  The  goat  is  mine,  for  the  goat  is  middle  and  intermediate;
do  thou,  O fox,  receive  the  hare,  and  no  mistake!”

The  lion  said,  “O  wolf,  how  hast  thou  spoken?  Say!  When
I am  here,  dost  thou  speak  of  ‘I’  and  ‘thou’?

Truly,  what  a cur  the  wolf  must  be,  that  he  regarded  himself
in  the  presence  of  a lion  like  me  who  am  peerless  and  unrivalled ! ”

(Then)  he  said,  “ Come  forward,  O thou  self-esteeming  ass ! ”
He  approached  him,  the  lion  seized  him  with  his  claws  and
rent  him.

Inasmuch  as  he  (the  lion)  did  not  see  in  him  the  kernel  of
right  conduct,  he  tore  the  skin  off  his  head  as  a punishment.

3050  He  said,  “Since  the  sight  of  me  did  not  transport ^ thee  out
of  thyself,  a spirit  like  this  (thine)  must  needs  die  miserably.

Since  thou  wert  not  passing  away  (from  thyself)  in  my
presence,  ’trvas  an  act  of  grace  to  smite  thy  neck  (behead  thee).”

Everything  is  perishing  except  His  face : unless  thou  art  in  His
face  (essence),  do  not  seek  to  exist.

When  any  one  has  passed  away  (from  himself)  in  my  face
(essence),  (the  words)  everything  is  perishing  are  not  applicable
(to  him).

Because  he  is  in  except,  he  has  transcended  not  (nonentity) :
whosoever  is  in  except  has  not  passed  away  (perished).

3055  Whosoever  is  uttering  ‘ I ’ and  ‘we  ’ at  the  door  (of  the  Divine
Court),  he  is  turned  back  from  the  door  and  is  continuing  in
not  (nonentity).

C f


' Read


THE  FRIEND  WHO  SAID  “l”  167

The  story  of  the  person  who  knocked  at  a friend’s  door:  his  friend
from  within  asked  who  he  was:  he  said,  “ ’Tis  I,”  and  the  friend
answered,  “ Since  thou  art  thou,  I will  not  open  the  door:  1 know
not  any  friend  that  is  ‘I.’”

A certain  man  came  and  knocked  at  a friend’s  door:  his
friend  asked  him.,  “Who  art  thou,  O trusty  one? ’’

He  answered ,“  I . ” The  friend  said ,“  Begone , ’tis  not  the  time  (for
thee  to  come  in) : at  a table  like  this  there  is  no  place  for  the  raw.”

Save  the  fire  of  absence  and  separation,  who  (what)  will  cook
the  raw  one?  Who  (what)  will  deliver  him  from  hypocrisy?

The  wretched  man  went  away,  and  for  a year  in  travel  (and)
in  separation  from  his  friend  he  was  burned  with  sparks  of  fire.

That  burned  one  was  cooked:  then  he  returned  and  again  3060
paced  to  and  fro  beside  the  house  of  his  comrade.

He  knocked  at  the  door  with  a hundred  fears  and  respects,
lest  any  disrespectful  word  might  escape  from  his  lips.

His  friend  called  to  him,  “ Who  is  at  the  door?  ” He  answered,

“ ’Tis  thou  art  at  the  door,  O charmer  of  hearts.”

“Now,”  said  the  friend,  “ since  thou  art  I,  come  in,  O myself :
there  is  not  room  in  the  house  for  two  Ts.

The  double  end  of  thread  is  not  for  the  needle : inasmuch  as
thou  art  single,  come  into  this  needle.”

’Tis  the  thread  that  is  connected  with  the  needle:  the  eye  of  3065
the  needle  is  not  suitable  for  the  camel.

How  should  the  existence  (body)  of  the  camel  be  fined  down
save  by  the  shears  of  ascetic  exercises  and  works?

For  that,  O reader,  the  hand  (power)  of  God  is  necessary,  for
it  is  the  Be,  and  it  zcas  (bringer  into  existence)  of  everc  (seem-
ingly) impossible  thing.

By  His  hand  every  impossible  thing  is  made  possible;  by
fear  of  Him  everv  unruly  one  is  made  quiet.

What  of  the  man  blind  from  birth  and  the  leper?  Even  the
dead  is  made  living  by  the  spell  of  the  Almighty,

And  that  non-existence  which  is  more  dead  than  the  dead — • ,0-0
non-existence  is  compelled  (to  obey)  when  He  calls  it  into  being.

Recite  (the  text),  Every  day  He  is  [engaged)  in  some  affair:  do
not  deem  Him  idle  and  inactive.

His  least  act,  ever\"  day,  is  that  He  despatches  three  armies  :

One  army  from  the  loins  (of  the  fathers)  towards  the  mothers,
in  order  that  the  plant  may  grow  in  the  womb ;

One  army  from  the  wombs  to  the  Earth,  that  the  world  may
be  filled  with  male  and  female ;

One  army  from  the  Earth  (to  what  is)  bevond  death,  that  3 ';5
ever}"  one  may  behold  the  beauty  of  (good)  works.

This  discourse  hath  no  end.  Come,  hasten  (back)  to  those
two  sincere  and  devoted  friends.


MATHNAwf,  BOOK  I


1 68


Descriptic^of  Unification.

His  friend  said  to  him,  “C^e  in,  O thou  who  art  entirely
myself,  not  different  like  the  rose  and  thorn  in  the  garden.”

The  thread  has  become  single.  Do  not  now  fall  into  error
if  thou  seest  that  the  letters  K and  N are  two^.’

K and  N are  pulling  like  a noose,  that  they  may  draw  non-
existence into  great  affairs.

30S0  Hence  the  noose  must  be  double  in  (the  world  of)  forms,
though  those  two  (letters)  are  single  in  effect.

Whether  the  feet  be  two  or  four,  they  traverse  one  road,  like
the  double  shears  (which)  makes  (but)  one  cut.

Look  at  those  two  fellow- washermen : there  is  apparently  a
difference  between  that  one  and  this :

The  one  has  thrown  the  cotton  garments  into  the  water,
while  the  other  partner  is  dr\'ing  them.

Again  the  former  makes  the  dry  clothes  w'et:  ’tis  as  though
he  were  spitefully  thwarting  his  opposite ;

3085  Yet  these  two  opposites,  who  seem  to  be  at  strife,  are  of  one
mind  and  acting  together  in  agreement.

Every  prophet  and  every  saint  hath  a way  (of  religious
doctrine  and  practice),  but  it  leads  to  God:  all  (the  ways)  are
(really)  one.

When  slumber  (heedlessness)  overtook  the  concentration
(attention)  of  the  listener,  the  water  carried  the  millstones
away.

The  course  of  this  water  is  above  the  mill : its  going  into  the
mill  is  for  your  sakes.

Since  ye  had  no  further  need  of  the  mill,  he  (the  prophet  or
saint)  made  the  water  flow  back  into  the  original  stream.

3090  The  rational  spirit  (the  Logos)  is  (coming)  to  the  mouth  for
the  purpose  of  teaching:  else  (it  would  not  come,  for)  truly  that
speech  hath  a channel  apart:

It  is  moving  without  noise  and  without  repetitions  (of  sound)
to  the  rose-gardens  beneath  which  are  the  rivers.

O God,  do  Thou  reveal  to  the  soul  that  place  where  speech
is  growing  without  letters.

That  the  pure  soul  may  make  of  its  head  a foot  (fly  headlong)
towards  the  far-stretching  expanse  of  non-existence —

An  expanse  very  ample  and  spacious;  and  from  it  this
phantasy  and  being  (of  ours)  is  fed.

3095  (The  realm  of)  phantasies  is  narrower  than  non-existence
(potential  existence):  on  that  account  phantasy  is  the  cause  of
pain.

(The  realm  of  actual)  existence,  again,  was  (ever)  narrower

* The  letters  K and  X,  when  united  make  up  the  Creative  Word  A'hA’,
“Be.”


THE  UNITY  OF  BEING  169

than  (the  realm  of)  phantasy:  hence  in  it  moons  become  like
the  moon  that  has  waned.

Again,  the  existence  of  the  world  of  sense  and  colour  is
narrower  (than  this),  for  ’tis  a narrow  prison.

The  cause  of  narrowness  is  composition  (compoundness)  and
number  (plurality  ) : the  senses  are  moving  towards  composition.

Know  that  the  world  of  Unification  lies  beyond  sense : if  you
want  Unity,  march  in  that  direction.

The  (Divine)  Command  KuA-  (Be)  was  a single  act,  and  the  3100
(two  letters)  N and  K occurred  (only)  in  speech,  while  the
(inward)  meaning  was  pure  (uncompounded).

This  discourse  hath  no  end.  Return,  that  (we  may  see)  what
happened  to  the  wolf  in  combat  (with  the  lion).

How  the  lion  punished  the  wolf  who  had  shoicn  disrespect
in  dividing  {the  prey).

That  haughty  one  tore  off  the  head  of  the  wolf,  in  order  that
two-headedness  (dualism)  and  distinction  might  not  remain  (in
being).

’Tis  (the  meaning  of)  So  we  took  vengeance  on  them,  O old
wolf,  inasmuch  as  thou  wert  not  dead  in  the  presence  of  the
Amir.

After  that,  the  lion  turned  to  the  fox  and  said,  “Divide  it
(the  prey)  for  breakfast.”

He  bowed  low  and  said,  “This  fat  o.x  will  be  thy  food  at  3103
breakfast,  O excellent  King,

And  this  goat  will  be  a portion  reserved  for  the  victorious
King  at  midday.

And  the  hare  too  for  supper — (to  be)  the  repast  at  nightfall
of  the  gracious  and  bountiful  King.”

Said  the  lion,  “O  fox,  thou  hast  made  justice  shine  forth:
from  whom  didst  thou  learn  to  divide  in  such  a manner?

Whence  didst  thou  learn  this,  O eminent  one?”  “O  King  of
the  world,”  he  replied,  “ (I  learned  it)  from  the  fate  of  the  wolf.”

The  lion  said,  “Inasmuch  as  thou  hast  become  pledged  to  31  m
love  of  me,  pick  up  all  the  three  (animals),  and  take  (them)
and  depart.

0 fox,  since  thou  hast  become  entirely  mine,  how  should  I
hurt  thee  when  thou  hast  become  mvself?

1 am  thine,  and  all  the  beasts  of  chase  are  thine:  set  thy  foot
on  the  Seventh  Heaven  and  mount  (beyond) !

Since  thou  hast  taken  warning  from  (the  fate  of)  the  vile  wolf,
thou  art  not  a fox:  thou  art  my  own  lion.

The  wise  man  is  he  that  in  (the  hour  of)  the  shunned  tribu-
lation^ takes  warning  from  the  death  of  his  friends.”

^ Literally,  “the  trial  or  calamity  against  which  precautions  are  taken


lyo  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

115  The  fox  said  (to  himself),  “A  hundred  thanks  to  the  lion  for
having  called  me  up  after  that  wolf.

If  he  had  bidden  me  first,  saying,  ‘ Do  thou  divide  this,’  who
would  have  escaped  from  him  with  his  life?”

Thanks  be  to  Him  (God),  then,  that  He  caused  us  to  appear
(be  born)  in  the  world  after  those  of  old.

So  that  we  heard  of  the  chastisements  which  God  inflicted
upon  the  past  generations  in  the  preceding  time.

That  we,  like  the  fox,  may  keep  better  watch  over  ourselves
from  (considering)  the  fate  of  those  ancient  wolves.

120  On  this  account  he  that  is  God’s  prophet  and  veracious  in
explanation  called  us  “ a people  on  which  God  has  taken  mercy.”

Behold  with  clear  vision  the  bones  and  fur  of  those  wolves,
and  take  warning,  O mighty  ones!

The  wise  man  will  put  off  from  his  head  (lay  aside)  this  self-
existence and  wind  (of  vanity),  since  he  heard  (what  w^as)  the
end  of  the  Pharaohs  and  ‘Ad;

And  if  he  do  not  put  it  off,  others  will  take  warning  from
w'hat  befell  him  in  consequence  of  his  being  misguided.


How  Noah,  on  whom  be  peace,  threatened  his  people,  saying,  “Do
not  struggle  with  me,  for  I am  {only)  a veil:  ye  are  really
struggling  with  God  {who  is)  within  this  {veil),  O God-forsaken
men!  ”

Noah  said,  ‘‘  O ye  headstrong  ones,  I am  not  I : I am  dead  to
the  (animal)  soul,  I am  living  through  the  Soul  of  souls.

12;  Inasmuch  as  I am  dead  to  the  senses  of  the  father  of  mankind
(human  sense-perceptions),  God  has  become  my  hearing  and
perception  and  sight.

Since  I am  not  I,  this  breath  (of  mine)  is  from  Him:  in  the
presence  of  this  breath  if  any  one  breathes  (a  word)  he  is  an
infidel.”

In  the  form  of  this  fox  there  is  the  lion:  ’tis  not  fitting  to
advance  boldly  towards  this  fo.x.

Unless  thou  believe  in  him  from  his  exterior  aspect  (accept
him  in  the  form  in  which  he  appears),  thou  wilt  not  hear  from
him  the  lions’  roar.

If  Noah  had  not  been  the  Eternal  Lion,  w'hy  should  he  have
cast  a whole  world  into  confusion?

130  He  was  hundreds  of  thousands  of  lions  in  a single  body;  he
was  like  fire,  and  the  world  (like)  a stack.

Forasmuch  as  the  stack  neglected  (to  pay)  the  tithe  due  to
him,  he  launched  such  a flame  against  that  stack.

Whosoever  in  the  presence  of  this  hidden  Lion  opens  his
mouth  disrespectfully,  like  the  wolf.


NOAH  AS  THE  GOD-MAN


171

That  Lion  will  tear  him  to  pieces,  as  (he  tore)  the  wolf,  and
will  recite  to  him  (the  text)  So  ice  took  vengeance  upon  them.

He  will  suffer  blows,  like  the  wolf,  from  the  Lion’s  paw:
foolish  is  he  that  waxed  bold  in  the  presence  of  the  Lion.

Would  that  those  blows  fell  upon  the  body,  so  that  it  might  3135
be  that  (the  sinner’s)  faith  and  heart  would  be  safe !

My  power  is  broken  (fails  me)  on  reaching  this  point:  how
can  I declare  this  myster\'?

Make  little  of  your  bellies,  like  that  fox:  do  not  play  fox’s
tricks  in  His  presence.

Lay  the  whole  of  vour  “we”  and  “I”  before  Him:  the  king-
dom is  His  kingdom:  give  the  kingdom  to  Him.

When  ye  become  poor  (selfless)  in  the  right  Way,  verily  the
Lion  and  the  Lion’s  prey  are  yours.

Because  He  is  holy,  and  Glon,'  is  His  attribute:  He  hath  no  3140
need  of  good  things  and  kernel  or  rind.

Every  prize  and  every  gift  of  grace  that  exists  is  for  the  sake
of  the  servants  of  that  King  (God).

The  King  hath  no  desire  (for  anything):  He  hath  made  all
this  empire  for  His  creatures.  Happy  is  he  that  knew!

Of  what  use  should  the  possession  of  empires  be  to  Him  who
created  (all)  empire  and  the  two  worlds :

In  the  presence  of  His  Glory  keep  close  watch  over  your
hearts,  lest  ye  be  put  to  shame  by  thinking  evil.

For  He  sees  conscience  and  thought  and  quest  (desire)  as  ;u5
(plainly)  as  a thread  of  hair  in  pure  milk.

He  whose  clear  breast  has  become  devoid  of  (any)  image  (im-
pression) has  become  a mirror  for  the  impressions  of  the  Invisible.

He  becomes  intuitively  and  undoubtingly  aware  of  our
inmost  thought,  because  the  true  believer  is  the  mirror  of  the
true  believer.

When  he  rubs  our  (spiritual)  poverty*  on  the  touchstone,  then
he  knows  the  difference  between  faith  and  doubt.

When  his  soul  becomes  the  touchstone  of  the  coin,  then  he  will
see  (distinguish)  the  (true)  heart  and  the  false  money  (of  hvpocrisv) .

Hoic  kings  seat  in  front  of  them  the  Siifis  icho  know  God,  in  order
that  their  eyes  may  be  illumined  by  (seeing)  them.

Such  is  the  custom  of  kings:  vou  will  have  heard  of  this,  if  315'^
you  remember.

The  paladins  stand  on  their  left  hand,  because  the  heart  (the
seat  of  courage)  is  fixed  on  the  left  side  (of  the  body).

On  the  right  hand  are  the  chancellor  and  the  secretaries,
because  the  science  of  writing  and  book-keeping  belongs  (in
practice)  to  this  hand.

^ Cf.  V.  3139.  But  tjLc  ^ ft  V-  “our  coin,”  is  perhaps  the  better  readini^.


i


»


172  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

They  give  the  Siifis  the  place  in  front  of  their  countenance,
for  they  (the  Sufis)  are  a mirror  for  the  soul,  and  better  than
a mirror,

(Since)  they  have  polished  their  breasts  (hearts)  in  com-
memoration (of  God)  and  meditation,  that  the  heart’s  mirror
may  receive  the  virgin  (original)  image.

3155  Whoever  is  born  beautiful  from  the  loins  of  Creation,  a
mirror  must  be  placed  before  him.

The  beauteous  face  is  in  love  with  the  mirror : it  (such  a face)
is  a polisher  of  the  soul  and  (a  kindler)  of  the  fear  of  God  in
(men’s)  hearts.


How  the  guest  came  to  Joseph,  on  whom  he  peace,  and  how  Joseph
demanded  of  him  a gift  and  present  on  his  return  from  abroad.

The  loving  friend  came  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  and
became  the  guest  of  Joseph  the  truthful.

For  they  had  been  well  acquainted  in  childhood,  reclining
(together)  on  the  sofa  of  acquaintance.

He  spoke  to  him  (Joseph)  of  the  injustice  and  envy  of  his
brethren:  Joseph  said,  “That  was  (like)  a chain,  and  I was
the  lion.

3160  The  lion  is  not  disgraced  by  the  chain:  I do  not  complain
of  God’s  destiny.

If  the  lion  had  a chain  on  his  neck,  (yet)  he  was  prince  over
all  the  chain-makers.’’

He  asked,  “How  wert  thou  in  regard  to  the  prison  and  the
well?  ’’  “ Like  the  moon,’’  said  Joseph,  “in  the  interlunar  period
(when  she  is)  on  the  wane.”

If  in  that  period  the  new  moon  is  bent  double,  does  not  she
at  last  become  the  full  moon  in  the  sky?

Though  the  seed-pearl  is  pounded  in  the  mortar,  it  becomes
the  light  of  eye  and  heart  and  looks  aloft.

3165  They  cast  a grain  of  wheat  under  earth,  then  from  its  earth
they  raised  up  ears  of  corn ;

Once  more  they  crushed  it  with  the  mill : its  value  increased
and  it  became  soul-invigorating  bread ;

Again  they  crushed  the  bread  under  their  teeth : it  became
the  mind  and  spirit  and  understanding  of  one  endowed  with
reason ;

Again,  when  that  spirit  became  lost  in  Love,  it  became  (as
that  which)  rejoiceth  the  sowers  after  the  sowing.

This  discourse  hath  no  end.  Come  back,  that  we  may  see
what  that  good  man  said  to  Joseph.

3170  After  he  (Joseph)  had  told  him  his  story,  he  (Joseph)  said,
“Now,  O so-and-so,  what  traveller’s  gift  hast  thou  broueht
forme?”


JOSEPH  AND  THE  MIRROR  173

To  come  empty-handed  to  the  door  of  friends  is  like  going
without  wheat  to  the  mill.

God,  exalted  is  He,  will  say  to  the  people  at  the  gathering  (for
Judgement),  “Where  is  your  present  for  the  Day  of  Resurrection?

Ye  have  come  to  Us  and  alone  without  provision,  just  in  the
same  guise  as  We  created  you.

Hark,  what  have  ye  brought  as  an  offering — a gift  on  home-
coming for  the  Day  when  ye  rise  from  the  dead?

Or  had  ye  no  hope  of  returning?  Did  the  promise  of  (meeting  3175
We)  to-day  seem  vain  to  you?”

Dost  thou  (O  reader)  disbelieve  in  the  promise  of  being
His  guest  ? ^ Then  from  the  kitchen  (of  His  bounty)  thou  wilt
get  (only)  dust  and  ashes.

And  if  thou  art  not  disbelieving,  how  with  such  empty  hands
art  thou  setting  foot  in  the  Court  of  that  Friend?

Refrain  thyself  a little  from  sleep  and  food:  bring  the  gift
for  thy  meeting  with  Him.

Become  scant  of  sleep  (like  them  that)  were  slumbering  (but  a
small  part  of  the  night);  in  the  hours  of  dazm  be  of  (those  zcho)
were  asking  pardon  of  God.

Stir  a little,  like  the  embr}’0,  in  order  that  thou  mayst  be  ^
given  the  senses  which  behold  the  Light,

And  (then)  thou  art  outside  of  this  womb-like  world:  thou
goest  from  the  earth  into  a wide  expanse.

Know  that  the  saying,  “God’s  earth  is  wide,”  refers  to  that
ample  region  into  which  the  saints  have  entered.

The  heart  is  not  oppressed  by  that  spacious  expanse:  there
the  fresh  boughs  of  the  palm-tree  do  not  become  dry.

At  present  thou  art  bearing  (the  burden  of)  thy  senses : thou
art  becoming  weary  and  exhausted  and  (ready  to  fall)  headlong.

Since,  at  the  time  of  sleep,  thou  art  borne  (on  high),  and  art  31=5
not  bearing  (the  burden),  thy  fatigue  is  gone  and  thou  art  free
from  pain  and  anguish.

Regard  the  time  of  sleep  as  a (mere)  taste  (sample)  in  com-
parison with  the  state  in  which  the  saints  are  borne  (on  high).

The  saints  are  (like)  the  Men  of  the  Cave,  O obstinate  one:
they  are  asleep  (even)  in  rising  up  and  turning  to  and  fro.

He  (God)  is  drawing  them,  without  their  taking  trouble  to
act,  without  consciousness  (on  their  part),  to  the  right  hand  and
to  the  left.

What  is  that  right  hand'  Good  deeds.  What  is  that  left  hand':

The  affairs  of  the  body.

These  two  (kinds  of)  actions  proceed  from  the  saints,  (while)  3190
they  are  unconscious  of  them  both,  like  the  echo :

If  the  echo  causes  thee  to  hear  good  and  evil,  the  mountain
itself  is  unconscious  of  either.

* Reading


174


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I


How  the  guest  said  to  Joseph,  “/  have  brought  thee  the  gift  of  a

mirror,  so  that  whenever  thou  lookest  in  it  thou  wilt  see  thine

own  fair  face  and  remember  me”

Joseph  said,  “Come,  produce  the  gift.”  He  (the  guest),  on
account  of  shame  (confusion)  at  this  demand,  sobbed  aloud.

“How  many  a gift,”  said  he,  “did  I seek  for  thee!  No
(worthy)  gift  came  into  my  sight.

How  should  I bring  a grain  (of  gold)  to  the  mine?  How
should  I bring  a drop  (of  water)  to  the  (Sea  of)  ‘Uman?

3195  I shall  (only)  bring  cumin  to  Kirman,  if  I bring  my  heart
and  soul  (as  a gift)  to  thee.

There  is  no  seed  that  is  not  in  this  barn,  except  thy  beauty
which  hath  no  equal.

I deemed  it  fitting  that  I should  bring  to  thee  a mirror  like
the  (inward)  light  of  a (pure)  breast.

That  thou  mayst  behold  thy  beauteous  face  therein,  O thou
who,  like  the  sun,  art  the  candle  of  heaven.

I have  brought  thee  a mirror,  O light  (of  mine  eyes),  so  that
when  thou  seest  thy  face  thou  mayst  think  of  me.”

3200  He  drew  forth  the  mirror  from  beneath  his  arm:  the  fair
one’s  business  is  with  a mirror.

What  is  the  mirror  of  Being?  Not-being.  Bring  not-being
(as  your  gift),  if  you  are  not  a fool.

Being  can  be  seen  (only)  in  not-being:  the  rich  bestow
(exhibit)  generosity  on  the  poor.

The  clear  mirror  of  bread  is  truly  the  hungry  man;  tinder,
likewise,  is  the  mirror  of  that  (the  stick  or  flint)  from  which
fire  is  struck.

Not-being  and  defect,  wherever  they  arise  (appear),  are  the
mirror  which  displays  the  excellence  of  all  crafts.

3205  When  a garment  is  neat  and  well-stitched,  how  should  it
enable  the  tailor  to  exhibit  his  skilP?

Trunks  of  trees  must  be  unhewn  in  order  that  the  woodcutter
may  fashion  the  stem  or  the  branches  (and  thus  exercise  his
craft).

The  doctor  who  sets  broken  bones  goes  to  the  place  where
the  person  with  the  fractured  leg  is.

How  shall  the  excellence  of  the  art  of  medicine  be  made
manifest  when  there  is  no  emaciated  invalid?

How  shall  the  (power  of  the)  Elixir  be  shown  if  the  vileness
and  baseness  of  coppers  is  not  notorious?

3210  Defects  are  the  mirror  of  the  quality  of  perfection,  and  that
vileness  is  the  mirror  of  power  and  glory.

Because  (every)  contrary  is  certainly  made  evident  by  its


^ Literally,  “ how  should  it  be  a place  for  the  tailor  to  display  his  skill  in?  ”


JOSEPH  AND  THE  MIRROR  175

contrary;  because  honey  is  perceived  (to  be  sweet  by  contrast)
with  vinegar.

Whoever  has  seen  and  recognised  his  own  deficiency  has
ridden  post-haste^  (made  rapid  progress)  in  perfecting  himself.

The  reason  why  he  (any  one)  is  not  flying  towards  the  Lord
of  glory  is  that  he  supposes  himself  to  be  perfect.

There  is  no  worse  malady  in  your  soul,  O haughty  one,  than
the  conceit  of  perfection.

Much  blood  must  flow  from  your  heart  and  eye,  that  self-  3’
complacency  may  go  out  of  you.

The  fault  of  Iblis  lay  in  thinking  “lam  better  (than  Adam),”
and  this  disease  is  in  the  soul  of  every  (human)  creature.

Though  he  regard  himself  as  very  broken  (in  spirit),  know
that  it  is  (a  case  of)  clear  n ater  (on  the  surface)  and  dung  under
the  stream.

When  he  (the  Devil)  stirs  you  in  trial,  immediately  the  water
becomes  dung-coloured.

There  is  dung  in  the  bed  of  the  stream,  my  man,  though  to
you  the  stream  appears  pure.

’Tis  the  Pir  full  of  wisdom,  well-acquainted  with  the  Way,  32
that  digs  a channel  for  (draining  off)  the  streams  of  the  flesh
and  the  body.

Can  the  water  of  the  (polluted)  stream  clear  out  the  dung?
Can  man’s  knowledge  sweep  away  the  ignorance  of  his  sensual
self?

How  shall  the  sword  fashion  its  own  hilt?  Go,  entrust  (the
cure  of)  this  wound  to  a surgeon.

Flies  gather  on  every  wound,  so  that  no  one  sees  the  foulness
of  his  wound.

Those  flies  are  your  (evil)  thoughts  and  your  (love  of)  pos-
sessions: your  wound  is  the  darkness  of  your  (spiritual)  states;

And  if  the  Pir  lays  a plaster  on  your  wound,  at  once  the  pain  32
and  lamentation  are  stilled,

So  that  you  fancy  it  (the  wound)  is  healed,  (whereas  in  reality)
the  (healing)  ray  of  the  plaster  has  shone  upon  the  (wounded)
spot.

Beware ! Do  not  (scornfully)  turn  your  head  away  from  the
plaster,  O you  who  are  wounded  in  the  back,  but  recognise
that  that  (healing  of  the  wound)  proceeds  from  the  ray : do  not
regard  it  as  (proceeding)  from  your  own  constitution.


^ Literally,  “has  galloped  with  two  horses.”


176


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I


How  the  writer  of  the  (Our’dnic)  Revelation  fell  into  apostasy
because  {when)  the  ray  of  the  Revelation  shot  upon  him,  he
recited  the  {revealed)  verse  before  the  Prophet,  on  whom  be  peace,
{had  dictated  it  to  him);  then  he  said,  “ So  1 too  am  one  upon
whom  Revelation  has  descended.”

Before  (the  time  of)  ‘Uthman  there  was  a scribe  who  used
to  be  diligent  in  writing  down  the  Revelation.

Whenever  the  Prophet  dictated  the  Revelation,  he  would
write  out  the  same  (portion)  on  the  leaf.

3-30  The  beams  of  that  Revelation  would  shine  upon  him,  and
he  would  find  Wisdom  within  him.

The  substance  of  that  Wisdom  was  dictated  by  the  Prophet :
by  this  (small)  amount  (of  reflected  Wisdom)  that  meddling
fool  was  led  astray.

Thinking,  “I  have  in  my  conscience  the  Truth  of  that  which
the  illumined  Prophet  is  saying.”

The  ray  of  his  thought  struck  the  Prophet : the  wrath  of  God
descended  on  his  (the  scribe’s)  soul.

He  abandoned  both  his  work  as  a scribe  and  the  Religion
(Islam) : he  became  the  malignant  foe  of  Mustafa  (Mohammed)
and  the  Religion.

3’35  Mustafa  said,  “O  obstinate  miscreant,  if  the  Light  was  from
thee,  how  shouldst  thou  have  become  black  (with  sin)?

If  thou  hadst  been  the  Divine  fountain  (whence  the  Revelation
issued),  thou  w'ouldst  not  have  let  out  such  black  water  as  this.”

Lest  his  reputation  should  be  ruined  in  the  sight  of  all  and
sundryS  this  (pride)  kept  his  mouth  shut.

His  (a  sinner’s)  heart  is  being  darkened,  hence  he  is  unable
to  repent:  this  is  wonderful.

He  (the  scribe)  was  crying  “Alas,”  but  “Alas”  was  of  no
use  to  him  when  the  sword  came  on  and  took  off  his  head.

3240  God  has  made  reputation  (to  be  like)  a hundred  maunds’
weight  of  iron:  oh,  many  a one  is  bound  in  the  unseen  chain!

Pride  and  infidelity  have  barred  that  Way  (of  repentance)  in
such  wise  that  he  (the  sinner)  cannot  utter  a sigh.

He  (God)  said,  “{IVe  have  put  on  their  necks)  shackles  {chin-
high),  and  thereby  they  are  forced  to  lift  up  their  heads”:  those
shackles  are  not  (put)  on  us  from  outside.

“ {And  fVe  have  put)  behind  them  a barrier,  and  We  have  made
a covering  {of  darkness)  over  them”:  the  uncle  (old  sinner)  is
not  seeing  the  barrier  in  front  (of  him)  and  behind.

The  barrier  that  arose  has  the  appearance  of  open  country  - :
he  does  not  know"  that  it  is  the  barrier  of  the  Divine  destiny.

^ Literally,  “in  the  sight  of  this  one  and  that  one.”

“ Literally,  “ the  desert  ” or  “the  wide  plain  ” ; i.e.  the  barrier  is  invisible
to  the  sensual  eye.


THE  PROPHET  AND  THE  SCRIBE  177

Your  (earthly)  beloved  is  a barrier  to  the  face  of  the  (Divine)
Beloved : your  (worldly)  guide  is  a barrier  to  the  words  of  the
(true  spiritual)  guide.

Oh,  many  are  the  infidels  that  have  a passionate  longing  for
the  Religion  (Islam) : his  (such  a one’s)  chain  (stumbling-block)
is  reputation  and  pride  and  that  and  this  (object  of  desire).

The  chain  is  hidden,  but  ’tis  worse  than  iron ; the  iron  chain
is  cloven  by  the  axe.

The  iron  chain  can  be  removed:  none  knows  how  to  cure
the  invisible  chain.

If  a man  is  stung  by  a wasp,  he  extracts  the  wasp’s  sting
from  his  body.

But  since  the  stinging  wound  is  from  (inflicted  by)  vour  self-
existence, the  pain  continues  with  violence  and  the  anguish  is
not  relieved.

The  (full)  explanation  of  this  (matter)  is  springing  forth
(seeking  to  escape)  from  my  breast,  but  I am  afraid  it  may  give
(you  cause  to)  despair.

Nay,  do  not  despair:  make  yourself  cheerful,  call  for  help  to
Him  who  comes  at  the  call.

Saying,  “Forgive  us,  O Thou  who  lovest  to  forgive,  O Thou
who  hast  a medicine  for  the  old  gangrenous  disease ! ’’

The  reflexion  of  Wisdom  led  astray  that  miserable  one  (the
Prophet’s  scribe);  be  not  self-conceited,  lest  it  (your  self-
conceit)  raise  up  the  dust  from  you  (utterly  destroy  you).

0 brother.  Wisdom  is  flowing  in  upon  you;  it  comes  from
the  Abddl'-,  and  in  you  it  is  (only)  a borrowed  thing.

Although  the  house  (your  heart)  has  found  a light  within
it,  that  (light)  has  shone  forth  from  a light-giving  neighbour.

Render  thanks,  be  not  beguiled  by  vanity,  do  not  turn  up
your  nose  (in  disdain)-,  hearken  attentively,  and  do  not  show
any  self-conceit.

’Tis  a hundred  pities  and  griefs  that  this  borrowed  (unreal)
state  (of  self-assertion)  has  put  the  religious  communities  far
from  religious  communion.

1 am  the  (devoted)  slave  of  him  who  does  not  regard  himself  in
ever}"  caravanseray  (at  every  stage  in  his  spiritual  progress)  as
having  attained  to  (the  privilege  of  sitting  at)  the  table  (of  union
with  God).

Many  is  the  caravanseray  that  must  be  quitted,  in  order  that
one  day  the  man  may  reach  home.

Though  the  iron  has  become  red,  it  is  not  red  (by  nature):
it  (the  redness)  is  a ray  borrowed  from  something  that  strikes  fire.

If  the  window  or  the  house  is  full  of  fight,  do  not  deem  aught
luminous  except  the  sun.

^ See  p.  iS,  note.

“ Literally,  “do  not  make  a nose.”


N M


lyS  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Every  door  and  wall  says,  “I  am  luminous:  I do  not  hold
the  rays  of  another,  I (myself)  am  this  (light).”

Then  the  sun  says,  “ O thou  who  art  not  right  (in  thy  belief),
when  I set  ’twill  become  evident  (thou  wilt  see  what  the
truth  is).”

3265  The  plants  say,  “We  are  green  of  ourselves,  we  are  gay  and
smiling  (blooming)  and  we  are  tall  (by  nature).”

The  season  of  summer  says  (to  them),  “O  peoples,  behold
yourselves  when  I depart ! ”

The  body  is  boasting  of  its  beauty  and  comeliness,  (while)
the  spirit,  having  concealed  its  glory  and  pinions  and  plumes,

Says  to  it,  “O  dunghill,  who  art  thou?  Through  my  beams
thou  hast  come  to  life  for  a day  or  two.

Thy  coquetry  and  prideful  airs  are  not  contained  in  the
world  (go  beyond  all  bounds),  (but)  wait  till  I spring  up  (and
escape)  from  thee !

3270  They  whose  love  warmed  thee  will  dig  a grave  for  thee,  they
will  make  thee  a morsel  for  ants  and  reptiles.

That  one  who  many  a time  in  thy  presence  was  dying  (with
desire  for  thee)  will  hold  his  nose  at  thy  stench.”

The  beams  of  the  spirit  are  speech  and  eye  and  ear:  the
beam  (effect)  of  fire  is  the  bubbling  in  the  water.

As  the  beam  of  the  spirit  falls  on  the  body,  so  fall  the  beams
of  the  Abddl  on  my  soul.

When  the  Soul  of  the  soul  withdraws  from  the  soul,  the  soul
becomes  even  as  the  soulless  (lifeless)  body.  Know  (this  for
sure) !

3275  For  that  reason  I am  laying  my  head  (humbly)  on  the  earth,
so  that  she  (the  earth)  may  be  my  witness  on  the  Day  of  Judge-
ment.

On  the  Day  of  Judgement,  when  she  shall  be  made  to  quake
mightily,  this  earth  will  bear  witness  to  all  that  passed  (in  and
from  us) ;

For  she  will  plainly  declare  what  she  knows:  earth  and  rocks
wall  begin  to  speak.

The  philosopher,  in  his  (vain)  thought  and  opinion,  becomes
disbelieving : bid  him  go  and  dash  his  head  against  this  w'all !

The  speech  of  water,  the  speech  of  earth,  and  the  speech  of
mud  are  apprehended  by  the  senses  of  them  that  have  hearts
(the  mystics).

32S0  The  philosopher  who  disbelieves  in  the  moaning  pillar^  is  a
stranger  to  the  senses  of  the  saints.

He  says  that  the  beam  (influence)  of  melancholia  brings  many
phantasies  into  people’s  minds.

Nay,  but  the  reflexion  of  his  wickedness  and  infidelity  cast
this  idle  fancy  of  scepticism  upon  him.

^ See  p.  1 15.


THE  PROPHET  AND  THE  SCRIBE  179

The  philosopher  comes  to  deny  the  existence  of  the  Devil,
and  at  the  same  time  he  is  possessed  by  a devil.

If  thou  hast  not  seen  the  Devil,  behold  thyself;  without
diabolic  possession  there  is  no  blueness  in  the  forehead.

Whosoever  hath  doubt  and  perplexity  in  his  heart,  he  in  this  3-'^5
world  is  a secret  philosopher.

He  is  professing  firm  belief,  but  some  time  or  other  that
philosophical  vein  will  blacken  his  face  (bring  him  to  shame).

Take  care,  O ye  Faithful!  for  that  (vein)  is  in  you:  in  you
is  many  an  infinite  world.

In  thee  are  all  the  two-and-seventy  sects : woe  (to  thee)  if
one  day  they  gain  the  upper  hand  over  thee.

From  fear  of  this,  every  one  who  has  the  fortune  (harg)  of
(holding)  this  Faith  (Islam)  is  trembling  like  a leaf  (barg).

Thou  hast  laughed  at  Ibli's  and  the  dev'ils  because  thou  hast  3290
regarded  thyself  as  a good  man.

When  the  soul  shall  turn  its  coat  inside  out  (and  be  revealed
as  it  really  is),  how  many  a “Woe  is  me”  will  it  e.xtort  from
the  followers  of  the  (Mohammedan)  Religion !

On  the  counter  (of  the  shop)  everjuhing  (even*'  gilded  coin)
that  looks  like  gold  is  smiling,  because  the  touchstone  is  out  of
sight.

O Coverer  (of  faults),  do  not  lift  up  the  veil  from  us,  be  a
protector  to  us  in  our  test  (on  the  Day  of  Judgement).

At  night  the  false  coin  jostles  (in  rivalry)  with  the  gold : the
gold  is  waiting  for  day.

With  the  tongue  of  its  (inward)  state  the  gold  says^,  “Wait,  3.:95
O tinselled  one,  till  day  rises  clear.”

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  years  the  accursed  Iblis  was  a
saint  and  the  prince  of  true  believers;

On  account  of  the  pride  w^hich  he  had,  he  grappled  with
Adam  and  was  put  to  shame,  like  dung  at  morningtide.

How  Bar  am  son  of  Bd'  ur  prayed  {to  God),  saying,  “Cause  Moses

and  his  people  to  turn  back,  without  having  gained  their  desire,

from  this  city  which  they  have  besieged.”

To  Bal'am  son  of  Ba‘ur  the  people  of  the  world  became
subject,  (for  he  was)  like  unto  the  Jesus  of  the  time.

They  Ijowed  (worshipfully)  to  none  but  him:  his  spell  was
(giving)  health  to  the  sick.

From  pride  and  (conceit  of)  perfection  he  grappled  with
Aloses:  his  plight  became  such  as  thou  hast  heard.

Even  so  tnere  have  been  in  the  world,  manitest  or  hidden,  a
hundred  thousand  like  Iblis  and  Bal'am.

God  caused  these  twain  to  be  notorious,  that  these  twain
might  bear  witness  against  the  rest.

^ I.e.  “the  gold,  without  words,  seems  to  say.“


»


l8o  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

These  two  thieves  He  hanged  on  a high  gallows  (to  be  a
warning  to  all);  else  there  were  many  (other)  thieves  in  (the
pale  of)  His  vengeance.

These  twain  He  dragged  by  their  forelocks  to  the  city  (for
slaughter) ; (but)  ’tis  impossible  to  number  (all)  the  victims  of
His  wrath.

3305  You  are  a favourite  (of  God),  but  within  your  (due)  bounds.
(Fear)  God,  (fear)  God,  do  not  set  foot  beyond  (those)  bounds.

If  you  combat  with  one  who  is  a greater  favourite  than
yourself,  ’twill  bring  you  down  to  the  lowest  depth  of  the
seventh  earth.

For  what  purpose  is  the  tale  of  ‘Ad  and  Thamud?  That  you
may  know  that  the  prophets  have  disdain  (for  the  wicked).

These  signs — the  (earth’s)  swallowing  up  (sinners) , the  hurling
of  stones  (upon  them),  and  the  thunderbolts — ^were  evidence  of
the  might  of  the  Rational  Soul.

Kill  all  animals  for  the  sake  of  man , kill  all  mankind  for  the
sake  of  Reason.

3U0  What  is  Reason?  The  Universal  Intelligence  of  the  man
(prophet  or  saint)  endowed  with  reason.  Partial  reason  is
reason  (too),  but  it  is  infirm.

All  the  animals  that  are  wild  (unfriendly)  to  man  are  inferior
to  the  human  animal.

Their  blood  is  free’  to  mankind,  since  they  have  not  become
capable  of  human  actions.

The  honour  of  the  wild  animals  is  fallen  (has  come  to  be  of
no  account)  because  they  have  grown  hostile  to  man.

What  honour,  then,  will  be  thine,  O marv'cl  (of  folly),  since
thou  hast  become  {like)  timorous  wild  asses-:

3315  Because  of  his  usefulness,  the  (domesticated)  ass  ought  not
to  be  killed;  (but)  when  he  turns  wild,  his  blood  becomes
lawful.

Although  the  ass  had  no  knowledge  to  restrain  him  (from
becoming  wild),  the  Loving  One  is  not  excusing  him  at  all.

How,  then,  shall  man  be  excused,  O noble  friend,  when  he
has  become  wild  (refractor}'  and  hostile)  to  that  Word  (the
voice  of  Reason)?

Of  necessity  permission  was  given  to  shed  the  blood  of  the
infidels,  like  (that  of)  a wild  beast  before  the  arrows  and  lances.

All  their  wives  and  children  are  free  spoil,  because  they  are
wildly  averse  to  the  august  Reason.

3320  Once  more,  a reason  that  flees  from  the  Reason  of  reason
(Universal  Reason)  is  transported  from  rationality  to  (the  grade
of)  the  animals.

^ Literally,  “in  the  way  (of  God),”  i.e.  their  slaughter  is  a religious  act
which  God  has  sanctioned  and  approved.

* I.e.  “since  thou  hast  turned  away  from  the  prophets  and  saints.”


HARUT  AND  MARTJT


i8r


How  Hdrut  and  Mdrut  relied  upon  their  immaculateness  and

desired  to  mix  with  the  people  of  this  world  and  fell  into  tempta-
tion.

As  (for  example),  because  of  their  arrogance,  the  celebrated
Hariit  and  IMarut  were  smitten  by  the  poisoned  arrow  (of
Divine  wrath).

They  had  confidence  in  their  holiness,  (but)  what  (use)  is  it
for  the  buffalo  to  have  confidence  in  the  lion?

Though  he  make  a hundred  shifts  (to  defend  himself)  with
his  horn,  the  fierce  lion  will  tear  him  to  pieces  limb  by  limb.

(Even)  if  he  become  as  full  of  horns  (prickles)  as  a hedgehog,
the  buffalo  will  inevitably  be  killed  by  the  lion.

(But)  though  the  Sarsar  wind  uproots  many  trees,  it  makes  33
every  blade  of  grass  glisten  with  beauty.

That  violent  wind  had  pit\'  on  the  weakness  of  the  grass : do
not  thou,  O heart,  brag  vainly  of  thy  strength.

How  should  the  axe  be  afraid  of  the  thickness  of  the  branches  ?

It  cuts  them  to  pieces.

But  it  does  not  beat  itself  against  a leaf,  it  does  not  beat  its
edge  except  against  an  edge  (something  hard  and  solid  like
itself).

What  does  the  flame  care  for  the  great  quantity  of  firewood?
How  should  the  butcher  flee  in  terror  from  the  multitude  of
sheep?

What  is  form  in  the  presence  of  (in  comparison  with)  reality?  33
Very  feeble.  ’Tis  the  reality  of  the  sky  that  keeps  it  upside
down  (like  an  inverted  cup).

Judge  by  the  analog}'  of  the  celestial  wheel;  from  whom  does
its  motion  proceed?  From  directive  Reason.

The  motion  of  this  shield-like  body  is  (derived)  from  the
veiled  spirit,  O son.

The  motion  of  this  wind  is  from  its  reality,  like  the  wheel
that  is  captive  to  the  water  of  the  stream.

The  ebb  and  flow  and  incoming  and  outgoing  of  this  breath
— from  whom  does  it  proceed  but  from  the  spirit  that  is  filled
with  desire?

Now  it  (the  spirit)  makes  it  (the  breath)  jim,  now  hd  and  ddl\  ;3
now  it  makes  it  peace,  now  strife.

Even  so  our  God  had  made  this  (Sarsar)  wind  like  a (raging)
dragon  against  ‘Ad.

Again,  He  had  also  made  that  wind  (to  be)  peace  and  regard-
fulness and  safete  for  the  true  believers.

“The  Reality  is  Allah,”  said  the  Shaykh  of  the  (Moham-
medan) Religion,  (who  is)  the  sea  of  the  spiritual  realities  of
the  Lord  of  created  beings.


i82  mathnawi,  book  I

All  the  tiers  of  earth  and  heaven  are  (but)  as  straws  in  that
flowing  sea.

3340  The  rushing  and  tossing  of  the  straws  in  the  water  is  pro-
duced by  the  water  when  it  is  agitated.

When  it  (the  sea  of  Reality)  wishes  to  make  them  (the  straws)
cease  from  struggling,  it  casts  the  straws  toward  the  shore.

When  it  draw's  them  from  the  shore  into  the  surge  it  does
with  them  that  which  the  Sarsar  (wind)  does  with  the  grass.

This  topic  is  endless.  Speed  back,  O youth,  to  (the  story  of)
Hanit  and  iXIanit.


The  rest  of  the  story  of  Hdrut  and  Mdrut,  and  how  an  exemplary

punishment  was  inflicted  on  them,  even  in  this  world,  in  the  pit

of  Babylon.

Inasmuch  as  the  sin  and  wickedness  of  the  people  of  the
world  w'as  becoming  clearly  visible  to  them  both  from  the
latticed  wdndow  (of  Heaven),

3345  They  began  to  gnaw  their  hands  in  wrath,  but  had  no  eyes
for  their  own  fault.

The  ugly  man  saw  himself  in  the  mirror:  he  turned  his  face
aw’ay  from  that  (spectacle)  and  w'as  enraged.

When  the  self-conceited  person  has  seen  any  one  commit  a
sin,  there  appears  in  him  a fire  (derived)  from  Hell.

He  calls  that  (hellish)  pride  defence  of  the  Religion:  he
regards  not  the  soul  of  arrogance  in  himself.

Defence  of  the  Religion  has  a different  character,  for  from
that  (religious)  fire  a (whole)  world  is  green  (verdant  and
flourishing).

3350  God  said  to  them,  “If  ye  are  enlightened^,  (nevertheless)
look  not  (with  scorn)  upon  the  doers  of  black  deeds  who  have
been  made  forgetful  (of  God).

Render  thanks,  O Host  (of  Heaven)  and  Ser\'ants  (of  God)!
Ye  are  freed  from  lust  and  sexual  intercourse.

If  I impose  that  kind  of  nature  on  you.  Heaven  will  accept
you  no  more.

The  preservation  (from  sin)  which  ye  have  in  vour  bodies  is
from  the  reflexion  of  My  preserves tion  and  care  (of  you).

Oh,  beware!  Regard  that  as  (coming)  from  Me,  not  from
yourselves,  lest  the  accursed  Devil  prevail  against  you.”

333.3  As  (for  example)  the  writer  of  the  Revelation  given  to  the
Prophet  deemed  the  Wisdom  and  the  Original  Light  (to  be
residing)  in  himself.

He  W'as  reckoning  himself  a fellow-songster  of  the  Birds  of
God,  (whereas)  that  (which  proceeded  from  him)  was  (only)  a
whistle  resembling  an  echo.

^ Literally,  “polishers.”


THE  DEAF  MAN  AND  THE  INVALID


183

If  you  become  an  exponent  (imitator)  of  the  song  of  birds,
how  will  you  become  acquainted  with  the  (real)  meaning  of
the  bird?

If  you  learn  the  note  of  a nightingale,  how  will  you  know
what  (feelings)  it  has  towards  a rose?

Or  if  you  do  know,  ’twill  be  from  analogy  and  surmise,  like
the  conjectures  formed  by  deaf  people  from  those  who  move
their  lips.

How  the  deaf  man  went  to  visit  his  sick  neighbour.

One  possessed  of  much  wealth  said  to  a deaf  man,  “A
neighbour  of  thine  is  fallen  ill.”

The  deaf  man  said  to  himself,  “Being  hard  of  hearing,  what
shall  I understand  of  the  words  spoken  by  that  youth? —

Especially  (as)  he  is  ill  and  his  voice  is  weak;  but  I must  go
thither,  there’s  no  escape.

When  I see  his  lips  moving,  I will  form  a conjecture  as  to
that  (movement)  from  myself.

when  I say,  ‘How  are  you,  O my  suffering  (friend)? ’ he  will
reply,  ‘I  am  fine’  or  ‘I  am  pretty  well.’

I will  say,  ‘Thanks  (to  God)!  What  posset  have  you  had  to  3
drink?  ’ He  will  reply,  ‘ Some  sherbet’  or  ‘ a decoction  of  kidney-
beans.’

(Then)  I will  say,  ‘ May  you  enjoy  health  I Who  is  the  doctor
attending  you?’  He  will  answer,  ‘So-and-so.’

‘He  is  one  who  brings  great  luck  with  him\’  I will  remark;
‘since  he  has  come,  things  will  go  well  for  you.

I have  experienced  (the  luck  of)  his  foot:  wherever  he  goes,
the  desired  object  is  attained.’  ”

The  good  man  made  ready  these  conjectural  answers,  and
went  to  see  the  invalid.

“How  are  you?”  he  asked.  “I  am  at  the  point  of  death,  ’ 3
said  he.  “Thanks  (to  God)!”  cried  the  deaf  man.  At  this,  the
patient  became  resentful  and  indignant.

Saying  (to  himself),  “What  (cause  for)  thanksgiving  is  this?
He  has  been  my  enemy.” — The  deaf  man  made  a conjecture,
and  (as  now  appears)  it  has  turned  out  to  be  wrong.

After  that,  he  asked  him  what  he  had  drunk.  “Poison,”  said
he.  “Alay  it  do  you  good  and  give  you  health!”  said  the  deaf
man.  His  (the  invalid’s)  wrath  increased.

Then  he  inquired,  “Which  of  the  doctors  is  it  that  is  coming
to  attend  you?  ”

He  replied,  “Azrael  (the  Angel  of  Death)  is  coming.  Get
you  gone!”  “His  foot  (arrival),”  said  the  deaf  man,  “is  very
blessed:  be  glad!”

^ Literally,  “one  whose  foot  is  very  blest.”


184  MATHNAWi,  BOOK  I

3375  The  deaf  man  went  forth.  He  said  gaily,  “Thanks  (to  God)
for  that!  Now  I will  take  leave.”

The  invalid  said,  “This  is  my  mortal  foe:  I did  not  know  he
was  (such)  a mine  of  iniquity.”

The  mind  of  the  invalid  was  seeking  a hundred  abusive  terms,
that  he  might  send  him  a message  (filled  with  abuse)  of  every
description.

As,  when  any  one  has  eaten  bad  (indigestible)  food,  it  is
turning  his  heart  (stomach)  until  he  vomits.

Suppression  of  anger  is  (like)  this:  do  not  vomit  it,  so  that
you  may  gain  sweet  words  in  recompense.

33S0  Since  he  had  no  patience,  he  was  tormented.  “Where,”  he
cried,  “is  this  cur,  this  infamous  cuckold.

That  I may  pour  upon  him  what  he  said  (make  a retort  in
his  own  style)? — for  at  that  time  the  lion  of  my  thought  was
asleep  (I  was  too  weak  to  contend  with  him).

Inasmuch  as  visiting  the  sick  is  for  the  purpose  of  (giving
them)  tranquillity,  this  is  not  a visit  to  the  sick:  it  is  the  satis-
faction of  an  enemy’s  wish.

(His  motive  was)  that  he  should  see  his  enemy  enfeebled
and  that  his  wicked  heart  should  be  at  peace.”

Many  are  they  that  do  works  of  devotion  and  set  their  hearts
on  being  approved  and  rewarded  for  the  same.

53S5  ’Tis  in  truth  a lurking  sin:  that  which  he  (the  pietist)  thinks
pure  is  (really)  foul.

As  (in  the  case  of)  the  deaf  man,  who  fancied  that  he  did  a
kindness,  but  it  had  the  opposite  result.

He  sits  down  well-pleased,  saying,  “I  have  paid  my  respects,
I have  performed  what  was  due  to  my  neighbour”;

(But)  he  has  (only)  kindled  a fire  (of  resentment)  against
himself  in  the  invalid’s  heart  and  burned  himself.

Beware,  then,  of  the  fire  that  ye  have  kindled : verily  ye  have
increased  in  sin.

33  ,0  The  Prophet  said  to  our  desert  Arab,  “ Pray^,  for  indeed  thou
hast  not  prayed  (aright),  my  man.”

As  a means  of  preventing  these  dangers,  “Guide  us”  comes-
in  every-  (ritual)  prayer.

That  is  to  say,  “O  God,  do  not  mingle  my  prayer  with  the
prayer  of  the  erring  and  the  hypocrites.”

By  the  analogical  reasoning  which  the  deaf  man  adopted  a
ten  y ears’  friendship  was  made  vain.

Especially,  O master,  (you  must  avoid)  the  analogy  drawn  by
the  low  senses  in  regard  to  the  Revelation  which  is  illimitable.

,303  If  your  sensuous  ear  is  fit  for  (understanding)  the  letter  (of
the  Revelation),  know  that  your  ear  that  receives  the  occult^
(meaning)  is  deaf.

^ I.e.  “perform  the  ritual  prayer."  - Read


THE  DANGERS  OF  ANALOGY


185


The  first  to  bring  analogical  reasoning  to  bear  against  the
Revealed  Text  was  Iblis.

The  first  person  who  produced  these  paltry  analogies  in  the
presence  of  the  Lights  of  God^  was  Iblis.

He  said,  “Beyond  doubt  fire  is  superior  to  earth;  I am  of
fire,  and  he  (Adam)  is  of  dingy  earth.

Let  us,  then,  judge  by  comparing  the  secondary  with  its
principal : he  is  of  darkness,  I of  radiant  light.”

God  said,  “Nay,  but  on  the  contraiy  there  shall  be  no  re-
lationships: asceticism  and  piety  shall  be  the  (sole)  avenue-  to
pre-eminence.”

This  is  not  the  heritage  of  the  fleeting  world,  so  that  340^
thou  shouldst  gain  it  by  ties  of  relationship;  ’tis  a spiritual
(heritage).

Nav,  these  things  are  the  heritage  of  the  prophets;  the  in-
heritors of  these  are  the  spirits  of  the  devout.

The  son  of  Bii  Jahl  became  a true  believer  for  all  to  see;
the  son  of  Noah  became  one  of  those  who  lost  the  way.

“The  child  of  earth  (Adam)  became  illumined  like  the  moon ;
thou  art  the  child  of  fire ; get  thee  gone  with  thy  face  black  (in
disgrace) ! ” '

The  wise  man  has  made  (use  of)  such  reasonings  and  investi-
gation on  a cloudy  day  or  at  night  for  the  sake  of  (finding)  the
qibla ;

But  with  the  sun  and  with  the  Ka‘ba  before  your  face,  do  34''5
not  seek  to  reason  and  investigate  in  this  manner.

Do  not  pretend  that  you  cannot  see  the  Ka‘ba,  do  not  avert
your  face  from  it  because  you  have  reasoned  (that  it  is  not  to
be  seen).  God  knows  best  what  is  right.

When  you  hear  a pipe  from  the  Bird  of  God,  you  commit  its
outward  (meaning)  to  memory^  like  a lesson.

And  then  from  yourself  (out  of  your  own  head)  you  make
some  analogies ; you  make  (what  is)  mere  fancy  into  a (thing  of)
substance  (reality).

The  Abddl  have  certain  mystical  e.xpressions  of  which  the
doctrines  (of  external  religion)  are  ignorant.

You  have  learned  the  birds’  language  by  the  sound  (alone),  ',4:''
you  have  kindled  (invented)  a hundred  analogies  and  a hundred
caprices.

The  hearts  (of  the  saints)  are  wounded  bv  vou,  as  the  invalid
(was  hurt  by  the  deaf  man),  (while)  the  deaf  man  became
intoxicated  (overjoved)  with  the  vain  notion  of  success.

^ I.e.  the  Word  of  God.

“ Literally,  “ the  mihrdb  or  niche  (of  a mosque),”  which  shows  the  direction
that  the  Moslem  must  face  in  prayer.


l86  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

The  writer  of  the  Revelation,  from  (hearing)  the  Bird’s  voice,
supposed  that  he  was  the  Bird’s  equal :

The  Bird  flapped  a wing  and  blinded  him:  lo,  it  plunged  him
in  the  abyss  of  death  and  bale.

“Beware!  do  not  ye  also^,  (beguiled)  by  a reflexion  or  an
opinion,  fall  from  the  dignities  of  Heaven!

3415  Although  ye  are  Harut  and  Mariit  and  superior  to  all  (the
angels)  on  the  terrace  of  IVe  are  they  that  stand  in  ranks,

(Yet)  take  mercy  on  the  wickednesses  of  the  wicked;  do  not
cleave  to  egoism  and  self-conceit.

Beware,  lest  (the  Divine)  jealousy  come  from  ambush  and
ye  fall  headlong  to  the  bottom  of  the  earth.”

They  both  said,  “O  God,  Thine  is  the  command:  without
Thy  security  (protection)  where  indeed  is  any  security?”

They  were  saying  that,  but  their  hearts  were  throbbing  (with
desire) — “How  should  evil  come  from  us?  Good  servants  (of
God)  are  we!”

3430  The  prick  of  desire  in  the  two  angels  did  not  leave  (them)
until  it  sowed  the  seed  of  self-conceit.

Then  they  were  saying,  “O  ye  that  are  composed  of  the
(four)  elements  (and  are)  unacquainted  with  the  purity  of  the
spiritual  beings.

We  will  draw  curtains  (of  light)  over  this  (terrestrial)  sky,
we  will  come  to  earth  and  set  up  the  canopy.

We  will  deal  justice  and  perform  worship  and  every  night  we
will  fly  up  again  to  Heaven,

That  we  may  become  the  wonder  of  the  world,  that  we  may
establish  safety  and  security  on  the  earth.”

3445  The  analogy  betw'een  the  state  of  Heaven  and  (that  of)  the
earth  is  inexact:  it  has  a concealed  difference.

Explaining  that  one  must  keep  one’s  own  [spiritual)  state  and
[mystical)  intoxication  hidden  from  the  ignorant.

Hearken  to  the  words  of  the  Sage  (Hakim)  who  lived  in
seclusion-,  “Lay  thy  head  in  the  same  place  w'here  thou  hast
drunk  the  wine.”

When  the  drunken  man  has  gone  astray  from  a tavern,  he
becomes  the  children’s  laughing-stock  and  plaything.

Whatever  way  he  goes^,  he  is  falling  in  the  mud,  (now)  on
this  side  and  (now)  on  that  side,  and  every  fool  is  laughing  at  him.

He  (goes  on)  like  this,  while  the  children  at  his  heels  are
without  knowledge  of  his  intoxication  and  the  taste  of  his  wine.

343Q  All  mankind  are  children  except  him  that  is  intoxicated  with

^ Here  God  is  addressing  Harut  and  Alarut.

- Literally,  “the  Sage  of  a purdah/*  The  poet  Sana’!  is  meant.

^ Literally,  “ on  every  road.”


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  RESERVE  187

God;  none  is  grown-up  except  him  that  i?  freed  from  sensual
desire.

He  (God)  said,  “This  world  is  a play  and  pastime,  and  ye
are  children”;  and  God  speaks  truth.

If  you  have  not  gone  forth  from  (taken  leave  of)  play,  you
are  a child:  without  purity  of  spirit  how  will  you  be  fully  in-
telligent (like  an  adult)?

Know,  O youth,  that  the  lust  in  which  men  are  indulging
here  (in  this  w'orld)  is  like  the  sexual  intercourse  of  children.

What  is  the  child’s  sexual  intercourse?  An  idle  play,  com-
pared with  the  sexual  intercourse  of  a Rustam  and  a brave
champion  of  Islam.

The  wars  of  mankind  are  like  children’s  fights — all  meaning-  3435
less,  pithless,  and  contemptible.

All  their  fights  are  (fought)  with  wooden  swords,  all  their
purposes  are  (centred)  in  futility;

They  all  are  riding  on  a reed-cane  (hobby-horse),  saying,
“This  is  our  Buraq^  or  mule  that  goes  like  Duldul'^.”

They  are  (really)  carrying  (their  hobby-horses),  but  in  their
folly  they  have  raised  themselves  on  high:  they  have  fancied
themselves  to  be  riders  carried  along  the  road.

Wait  till  the  day  when  those  who  are  borne  aloft  by  God  shall
pass,  galloping,  beyond  the  nine  tiers  (of  Heaven)!

“ The  spirit  and  the  angels  shall  ascend  to  Him”:  at  the  ascen-  ,440
sion  of  the  spirit  Heaven  shall  tremble.

Like  children,  ye  all  are  riding  on  your  skirts:  ye  have  taken
hold  of  the  corner  of  your  skirt  (to  serve)  as  a horse.

From  God  came  (the  text),  “ Verily,  opinion  doth  not  enable
{you)  to  dispense  {with  the  Truth)”:  when  did  the  steed  of
opinion  run  (mount)  to  the  Heavens?

While  preferring  (in  case  of  doubt)  the  stronger  of  the  two
(alternative)  opinions,  do  not  doubt  whether  you  see  the  sun
when  it  is  shining!

At  that  time  (when  the  spirit  returns  to  God)  behold  your
steeds!  Ye  have  made  a steed  of  your  own  foot.

Come,  recognise  that  your  imagination  and  reflection  and  ,135
sense-perception  and  apprehension  are  like  the  reed-cane  on
which  children  ride.

The  sciences  of  the  mystics®  bear  them  (aloft);  the  sciences
of  sensual  men*  are  burdens  to  them.

When  knowledge  strikes  on  the  heart  (is  acquired  through
mystical  experience),  it  becomes  a helper  {ydri)\  when  know-
ledge strikes  on  the  body  (is  acquired  through  the  senses),  it
becomes  a burden  {bdrt).

* The  animal  ridden  by  the  Prophet  when  he  ascended  to  Heaven.

^ A mule  belonging  to  the  Prophet.  ’ Literally,  “ the  men  of  heart  ’

* Literally,  “ the  men  of  body.”


i88


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

God  hath  said,  “{Like  an  ass)  laden  -with  his  hooks” : burden-
some is  the  knowledge  that  is  not  from  Himself.

The  knowledge  that  is  not  immediately  from  Himself  does
not  endure,  (it  is)  like  the  tirewoman’s  paint.

3+50  But  when  you  carry  this  burden  well,  the  burden  will  be
removed  and  you  wall  be  given  (spiritual)  joy.

Beware ! Do  not  carry  this  burden  of  knowledge  for  the  sake
of  selfish  desire  (but  mortify  yourself),  so  that  you  may  ride  on
the  smooth-paced  steed  of  knowdedge,

So  that  you  may  mount  the  smooth-paced  steed  of  know-
ledge, (and  that)  afterwards  the  burden  may  fall  from  your
shoulder.

How  wilt  thou  be  freed  from  selfish  desires  without  the  cup
of  Hu  (Him),  O thou  who  hast  become  content  with  no  more
oi  Hu  than  the  name  of  Hu}

From  attribute  and  name  what  comes  to  birth?  Phantasy;
and  that  phantasy  shows  the  way  to  union  with  Him.

3J55  Hast  thou  ever  seen  a subject  that  shows  without  (the  exist-
ence of)  an  object  that  is  shown:  unless  there  is  the  road,  there
can  never  be  the  ghoul  (which  entices  travellers  to  stray  from
the  road).

Hast  thou  ever  seen  a name  without  the  reality  (denoted  by
the  name)  ? Or  hast  thou  plucked  a rose  {gul)  from  the  (letters)
gdf  and  Idm  of  (the  word)  gul}

Thou  hast  pronounced  the  name;  go,  seek  the  thing  named.
Know  that  the  moon  is  on  high,  not  in  the  water  of  the  stream.

If  thou  wouldst  pass  beyond  name  and  letter,  oh,  make
thyself  wholly  purged  of  self.

Like  (polished)  iron,  lose  the  ferruginous  colour;  become  in
thy  ascetic  discipline  (like)  a mirror  without  rust.

3460  Make  thyself  pure  from  the  attributes  of  self,  that  thou  mayst
behold  thine  owm  pure  untarnished  essence.

And  behold  within  thy  heart  (all)  the  sciences  of  the  prophets,
without  book  and  without  preceptor  and  master.

The  Prophet  said,  “Amongst  my  people  are  some  who  are
one  w ith  me  in  nature  and  aspiration :

Their  spirits  behold  me  by  the  same  light  by  wKich  I am
beholding  them.’’

Without  the  two  Sahihs^  and  Traditions  and  Traditionists;
nay,  (they  behold  him)  in  the  place  where  they  drink  the  Water
of  Life.

3465  Know  the  secret  of  “In  the  evening  I was  a Kurd’’;  read
the  mystery  of  “In  the  morning  I was  an  Arab.’’

And  if  you  desire  a parable  of  the  hidden  knowledge,  relate
the  stoiy'  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Chinese.

^ The  title  Sahih  is  given  to  two  works,  by  Bukhari  and  iVIuslim,  which
contain  well-authenticated  Traditions  of  the  Prophet.


THE  GREEK  AND  CHINESE  ARTISTS  189


The  story  of  the  contention  between  the  Greeks  and  the  Chinese
in  the  art  of  painting  and  picturing.

The  Chinese  said,  “We  are  the  better  artists  the  Greeks
said,  “ The  (superiority  in)  power  and  excellence  belongs  to  us.”

“I  will  put  you  to  the  test  in  this  matter,”  said  the  Sultan,
“(and  see)  which  of  you  are  approved  in  your  claim.”

The  Chinese  and  the  Greeks  began  to  debate:  the  Greeks
retired  from  the  debate.

(Then)  the  Chinese  said,  “Hand  over  to  us  a particular  room,  3470
and  (let  there  be)  one  for  you  (as  well).”

There  were  two  rooms  with  door  facing  door;  the  Chinese
took  one,  the  Greeks  the  other.

The  Chinese  requested  the  King  to  give  them  a hundred
colours:  the  King  opened  his  treasure  that  thev  might  receive
that  (which  they  sought).

Ever}'  morning,  by  (his)  bounty,  the  colours  were  dispensed
from  the  treasury  to  the  Chinese.

The  Greeks  said,  “No  tints  and  colours  are  proper  for  our
work,  (nothing  is  needed)  except  to  remove  the  rust.”

They  shut  the  door  and  went  on  burnishing : they  became  3475
clear  and  pure  like  the  sky.

There  is  a way  from  many-colouredness  to  colourlessness;
colour  is  like  the  clouds,  and  colourlessness  is  a moon.

Whatsoever  light  and  splendour  you  see  in  the  clouds,  know
that  it  comes  from  the  stars  and  the  moon  and  the  sun.

When  the  Chinese  had  finished  their  work,  they  were  beating
drums  for  joy.

The  King  entered  and  saw  the  pictures  there;  that  (sight),
as  he  encountered  it,  was  robbing  him  of  his  wits.

After  that,  he  came  towards  the  Greeks : they  removed  the  34^0
intervening  curtain.

The  reflexion  of  those  (Chinese)  pictures  and  works  (of  art)
struck  upon  these  walls  which  had  been  made  pure  (from  stain).

All  that  he  had  seen  there  (in  the  Chinese  room)  seemed
more  beautiful  here:  ’twas  snatching  the  eye  from  the  socket.

The  Greeks,  O father,  are  the  Sufis:  (they  are)  without
(independent  of)  study  and  books  and  erudition,

But  they  have  burnished  their  breasts  (and  made  them)  pure
from  greed  and  cupidity  and  avarice  and  hatreds.

That  purity  of  the  mirror  is,  beyond  doubt,  the  heart  which  34S5
receives  images  innumerable.

That  Aloses  (the  perfect  saint)  holds  in  his  bosom  the  formless
infinite  form  of  the  Unseen  (reflected)  from  the  mirror  of  his
heart.

Although  that  form  is  not  contained  in  Heaven,  nor  in  the


190  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

empyrean  nor  in  the  sphere  of  the  stars,  nor  (in  the  earth  which
rests)  on  the  Fish,

Because  (all)  those  are  bounded  and  numbered — (yet  is  it
contained  in  the  heart) : know  that  the  mirror  of  the  heart  hath
no  bound.

Here  the  understanding  becomes  silent  or  (else)  it  leads  into
error,  because  the  heart  is  with  Him  (God),  or  indeed  the  heart
is  He.

3490  The  reflexion  of  every  image  shines  unto  everlasting  from  the
heart  alone,  both  with  plurality  and  without.

Unto  everlasting  every  new  image  that  falls  on  it  (the  heart)
is  appearing  therein  without  any  imperfection.

They  that  burnish  (their  hearts)  have  escaped  from  (mere)
scent  and  colour : they  behold  Beauty  at  every  moment  without
tarrying.

They  have  relinquished  the  form  and  husk  of  knowledge,
they  have  raised  the  banner  of  the  eye  of  certainty^.

Thought  is  gone,  and  they  have  gained  light;  they  have
gained  the  throat  (core  and  essence)  and  the  sea  (ultimate  source)
of  gnosis.

3493  Death,  of  which  all  these  (others)  are  sore  afraid,  this  people
(the  perfect  Sufis)  are  holding  in  derision.

None  gains  the  victory  over  their  hearts:  the  hurt  falls  on
the  oyster-shell,  not  on  the  pearl.

Though  they  have  let  go  grammar  (ndhw)  and  jurisprudence
(fiqh),  yet  they  have  taken  up  (instead)  mystical  self-effacement
\mahw)  and  spiritual  poverty  (faqr).

Ever  since  the  forms  of  the  Eight  Paradises  have  shone  forth,
they  have  found  the  tablets  of  their  (the  Sufis’)  hearts  receptive.

(They  receive)  a hundred  impressions  from  the  empyrean  and
the  starry  sphere  and  the  void:  what  impressions?  Nay,  ’tis  the
very  sight  of  God.


Hozv  the  Prophet,  on  whom  be  peace,  asked  Zayd,  “Hozv  art  thou
to-day  and  in  what  state  hast  thou  risen? and  how  Zayd
answered  him,  saying,  “ This  morning  I am  a true  believer,  O
Messenger  of  Allah."

3500  One  morning  the  Prophet  said  to  Zayd,  “How  art  thou  this
morning,  O sincere  Companion?”

He  replied,  “(This  morning  I am)  a faithful  servant  of  God.”
Again  he  (the  Prophet)  said  to  him,  “Where  is  thy  token  from
the  garden  of  Faith,  if  it  has  bloomed?  ”

He  said,  “ I have  been  athirst  in  the  daytime,  at  night  I have
not  slept  because  of  love  and  burning  griefs.


^ l.e,  mvstical  intuition.


THE  VISION  OF  ZAYD  191

So  that  I passed  through  (and  beyond)  day  and  night,  as  the
point  of  the  spear  passes  through  the  shield;

For  beyond  (the  realm  of  contraries)  nativity  and  continued
growth  are  one:  hundreds  of  thousands  of  years  are  the  same
as  a single  hour.

Everlastingness  and  eternity  are  unified  (yonder) : the  under-  3505
standing  hath  no  way  thither  by  means  of  inquiry.”

The  Prophet  said,  “Where  is  the  traveller’s  gift  (that  thou
hast  brought  home)  from  this  journey?  Produce  it.  Where  is
the  token  of  sincerity  (that  thou  hast  brought)  from  von  fair
land?”

Zayd  said,  “When  (other)  people  see  the  sky,  I behold  the
Empyrean  with  those  who  dwell  there.

The  Eight  Paradises  and  the  Seven  Hells  are  as  visible  to
me  as  the  idol  to  the  idolater.

I am  distinguishing  the  people  (here),  one  by  one,  like  wheat
from  barley  in  the  mill.

So  that  who  is  for  Paradise  and  who  shall  be  a stranger  (to  35 1"
Paradise)  is  as  clear  to  me  as  (the  difference  between)  snake
and  fish.”

The  day  of  birth  for  Anatolians  and  Ethiopians  and  every'
race  (of  mankind)  is  the  Day  when  faces  shall  become  white  or
black}.

Before  this  (birth),  however  sinful  the  spirit  was,  it  was  in
the  womb  (of  the  body)  and  was  hidden  from  the  people.

The  damned  are  they  that  are  damned  in  the  mother’s  womb :
all  of  them  are  known  by  the  marks  of  God.

The  body,  like  a mother,  is  big  with  the  spirit-child : death
is  the  pangs  and  throes  of  birth.

All  the  spirits  that  have  passed  over  (to  the  next  life)  are  3515
waiting  to  see  in  what  state  that  proud  spirit  shall  be  born.

The  Ethiopians  (the  damned  spirits)  say,  “ It  belongs  to  us  ” ;
the  Anatolians  (the  blessed  spirits)  say%  “Nay,  it  is  comely.”

As  soon  as  it  is  born  into  the  world  of  spirit  and  (Divine)
grace,  there  is  no  further  difference  (of  opinion)  between  the
whites  (the  blessed)  and  the  blacks  (the  damned).

If  it  is  an  Ethiopian  (a  damned  spirit),  the  Ethiopians  carry'
it  off;  and  if  it  is  an  Anatolian  (a  blessed  spirit),  the  Anatolians
lead  it  away.

Until  it  is  born  (into  the  next  life),  it  is  a riddle  for  (all)  the
world:  few  are  they  that  know  (the  destiny  of)  the  unborn.

Such  a one  surely  is  seeing  by  the  light  of  God,  for  he  has  .5::"
the  way  (the  means  of  knowing  what  is  hidden)  within  the  skin.

Principium  aquae  seminis  candidum  est  et  pulchrum,  but  the
reflexion  of  the  spirit,  (whether  the  spirit  be)  Anatolian  or
Ethiopian,

^ The  Day  of  Resurrection.


192  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

Is  giving  colour  (glory)  to  those  (the  Anatolians)  who  are
most  excellent  in  their  (original)  constitution,  (while)  it  is
bearing  this  (other)  half  (i.e.  the  Ethiopians)  down  to  the
lowest  depth.

This  discourse  hath  no  end.  Hasten  back,  that  we  may  not
be  left  behind  by  the  caravan’s  file  of  camels.

On  the  Day  when  faces  shall  become  white  or  black,  by  whom
shall  reverence  still  be  paid  to  Turk  and  Hindoo  (alike)?

35:;5  In  the  womb  (of  this  world)  Hindoo  and  Turk  are  not  dis-
tinguishable, (but)  when  each  is  born  (into  the  next  world)  he
(the  seer)  sees  that  each  is  miserable  or  glorious  (according  to
his  spiritual  nature).

“I  am  seeing  them  all  plainly,  as  (they  shall  be)  on  the  Day
of  Resurrection,  like  (multitudes  of)  people,  men  and  women.

Hark,  shall  I tell  or  shall  I stop  my  breath  (keep  silence)?”
Mustafa  (Mohammed)  bit  his  (Zayd’s)  lip,  as  though  to  say,
“ Enough ! ”

“O  Messenger  of  Allah,  shall  I tell  the  mystery  of  the
Gathering  (on  the  Day  of  Judgement),  shall  I make  the
Resurrection  manifest  in  the  world  to-day?

Let  me  be,  that  I may  rend  the  curtains  asunder,  that  my
(spiritual)  substance  may  shine  forth  like  a sun ;

3330  That  the  sun  may  be  eclipsed  by  me,  that  I may  show  (the
difference  between)  the  (fruitful)  date-palm  and  the  (barren)
willow.

I will  show  forth  the  mysterj’  of  Resurrection,  the  sterling
coin  and  the  coin  mixed  with  alloy.

The  people  of  the  left^  with  their  hands  cut  off ; I will  show
forth  the  colour  of  infidelity  and  the  colour  of  the  (Prophet’s)  folk.

I will  lay  bare  the  seven  rifts  (sins)  of  hypocrisy  in  the  light
of  the  moon  that  suffers  no  eclipse  or  waning.

I will  display  the  woollen  frocks  of  the  damned,  I will  cause
the  drums  and  kettle-drums  of  the  prophets  to  be  heard.

3535  Hell  and  the  Gardens  (of  Paradise)  and  the  intermediate  state
I will  bring  clearly  before  the  eyes  of  the  infidels.

I will  display  the  pond  of  Kawthar  heaving  (with  waves),
which  dashes  water  on  their  (the  blessed  ones’)  faces,  (while)
its  sound  (rings)  in  their  ears ;

And  those  who  are  rurming  athirst  round  Kawthar  I will
name  one  by  one  (and  tell)  who  they  are :

Their  shoulders  are  rubbing  against  my  shoulder,  their  cries
are  piercing  my  ears.

Before  my  eyes  the  people  of  Paradise,  from  free  choice,
clasp  each  other  to  their  bosoms,

3540  Visiting  one  another’s  high  places  of  honour  and  snatching
kisses  from  the  lips  (of  the  houris).

* The  damned.


THE  VISION  OF  ZAYD


193

This  ear  of  mine  has  become  deafened  by  the  cries  of  ‘Alas,
Alas!’  (uttered)  by  the  vile  wretches  (in  Hell)  and  by  the
screams  of  ‘ O sorrow  I ’

These  are  (only)  hints.  I would  speak  from  the  depth  (of
my  knowledge),  but  I fear  to  offend  the  Messenger  (of  Allah).”

He  was  speaking  in  this  wise,  intoxicated  and  distraught : the
Prophet  twitched  his  collar

And  said,”  Beware!  Draw  (rein),  for  thy  horse  has  become  hot.
(When)  the  reflexion  of  God  is  not  ashamed  {to  speak  the  truth)
strikes  (on  the  heart),  shame  is  gone.

Thy  mirror  has  shot  out  of  the  case:  how  shall  mirror  and
balance  speak  falsehood?

How  shall  mirror  and  balance  stop  their  breath  (suppress  the
truth)  for  fear  of  hurting  and  shaming  any  one?

Mirror  and  balance  are  noble  touchstones : if  thou  do  ser\-ice
(sue)  to  them  for  two  hundred  years.

Saying,  ‘ Conceal  the  truth  for  my  sake,  display  the  surplus
and  do  not  display  the  deficiency,’

They  will  say  to  thee,  ‘ Do  not  laugh  at  thy  beard  and  mous-
tache: mirror  and  balance,  and  then  deceit  and  trickery'

Since  God  has  raised  us  up  in  order  that  by  means  of  us  it
may  be  possible  to  know  the  truth.

If  this  do  not  happen  (if  we  fail  to  display  the  truth),  what
worth  have  we,  O young  man?  How  shall  we  become  a standard
for  the  face  of  the  fair?’

But  (said  the  Prophet)  slip  the  mirror  (back)  into  the  cloth,
if  (Divine)  illumination  has  made  thy  breast  a Sinai.”

He  (Zayd)  said,  “Why,  shall  the  Sun  of  the  Truth  and  the
Sun  of  Eternity  be  contained  any  wise  under  the  armpit?

It  bursts  asunder  both  armpit  (baghal)  and  imposture  (daghal) ;
in  its  presence  neither  madness  nor  (soundness  of)  under-
standing remains.”

He  (the  Prophet)  said,  “When  thou  layest  one  finger  on  an
eye,  thou  seest  the  world  empty  of  the  sun.

One  finger-tip  becomes  a veil  over  the  moon — and  this  is  a
symbol  of  God’s  covering —

So  that  the  (whole)  world  may  be  covered  (hidden  from  view)
by  a single  point,  and  the  sun  be  eclipsed  by  a splinter.”

Close  thy  lips  and  gaze  on  the  depth  of  the  sea  (within  thee) :
God  made  the  sea  subject  to  man.

Even  as  the  fountains  of  Salsabil  and  Zanjabil  are  under  the
control  of  the  exalted  ones  of  Paradise.

The  four  rivers  of  Paradise  are  under  our  control ; this  is  not
(by)  our  might,  ’tis  (by)  the  command  of  God :

We  keep  them  flowing  wheresoever  we  will,  like  magic  (which
takes  its  course)  according  to  the  desire  of  the  magicians,

* I.e.  “The  idea  that  mirror  and  balance  should  deceive  is  absurd.”


194  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

Just  as  these  two  flowing  eye-fountains  (the  two  eyes)  are
under  the  control  of  the  heart  and  subject  to  the  command  of
the  spirit.

If  it  (the  heart)  will,  they  turn  towards  poison  and  the  snake,
and  if  it  will,  they  turn  to  (edifying)  consideration.

If  it  will,  they  turn  to  sensuous  things,  and  if  it  will,  they
turn  to  things  clothed  (in  the  forms  of  thought  and  phantasy).

565  If  it  will,  they  advance  towards  universals,  and  if  it  will,  they
remain  turned  towards  particulars.

Similarly  all  the  five  senses  are  passing  (in  movement)  ac-
cording to  the  will  and  command  of  the  heart,  like  the  spool
(in  the  hand  of  a weaver).

All  the  five  senses  are  moving  and  trailing  their  skirts  (sweep-
ing along)  in  whatever  direction  the  heart  indicates  to  them.

Hand  and  foot  are  plainly  under  command  of  the  heart,  like
the  staff  in  the  hand  of  Moses.

If  the  heart  will,  at  once  the  foot  begins  to  dance,  or  flees
from  defect  towards  increase.

570  If  the  heart  will,  the  hand  comes  to  terms  with  the  fingers
to  write  a book.

The  hand  remains  in  (the  grasp  of)  a hidden  hand:  it  (the
hidden  hand)  within  has  set  the  body  outside  (as  its  instrument).

If  it  (the  hidden  hand)  will,  it  (the  external  hand)  becomes  a
snake  to  the  enemy ; and  if  it  will,  it  becomes  ahelper  to  the  friend ;

And  if  it  \vill,  a spoon  in  food ; and  if  it  will,  a mace  weighing
ten  maunds.

I wonder  what  the  heart  is  saying  to  them  (the  members  of
the  body).  ’Tis  a marvellous  connexion,  a marvellous  hidden  link.

575  Surely  the  heart  has  gotten  the  seal  of  Solomon,  so  that  it
has  pulled  the  reins  of  (exerted  control  over)  the  five  senses.

Five  external  senses  are  easy  for  it  to  manage,  five  internal
senses  (faculties)  are  under  its  command.

There  are  ten  senses  and  seven  limbs  (of  the  body)  et  cetera :
count  over  (to  yourself)  what  is  not  mentioned  (here).

O heart,  since  thou  art  a Solomon  in  empire,  cast  thy  seal-
ring (powerful  spell)  upon  peri  and  demon.

If  in  this  kingdom  thou  art  free  from  deceit,  the  three  demons
will  not  take  the  seal  out  of  thy  hand ;

580  After  that,  thy  name  will  conquer  the  world;  the  two  worlds
(wiU  be)  ruled  by  thee  like  thy  body.

And  if  the  demon  take  the  seal  off  thy  hand,  thy  kingdom  is
past,  thy  fortune  is  dead;

After  that,  O servants  (of  God),  “O  sorrow!”  is  your  in-
evitable doom  till  the  day  when  ye  are  gathered  together  (for
Judgement).

And  if  thou  art  denying  thy  deceit,  how  wilt  thou  save  thy
soul  from  the  scales  and  the  mirror?


LUQMAN  AND  HIS  FELLOW-SERVANTS  195

Hov)  suspicion  was  thrown  upon  Luqmdn  by  the  slaves  and  fellow -

servants  who  said  that  he  had  eaten  the  fresh  fruit  which  they

were  bringing  (to  their  master).

In  the  eyes  of  his  master,  amongst  (in  comparison  with)  the
(other)  slaves,  Luqman  was  despicable  on  account  of  his  body
(outward  aspect).

He  (the  master)  used  to  send  the  slaves  to  the  garden,  that  .s'i
fruit  might  come  (be  brought  to  him)  for  his  pleasure.

Amongst  the  slaves  Luqman  was  (despised)  like  a parasite;

(he  was)  full  of  (spiritual)  ideas,  dark-complexioned  as  night.

Those  slaves,  being  impelled  by  greed,  ate  the  whole  of  the
fruit  with  enjoyment.

And  told  their  master  that  Luqman  had  eaten  it,  (whereupon)
the  master  became  bitter  and  sorely  displeased  with  Luqman.

When  Luqman  inquired  (and  ascertained)  the  cause  (of  this),
he  opened  his  lips  to  reproach  his  master.

“O  sire,”  said  Luqman,  “an  unfaithful  servant  is  not  ap-
proved  in  the  sight  of  God.

Put  us  all  to  the  test,  O noble  sir:  give  us  our  fill  of  hot
water  (to  drink).

And  afterwards  make  us  run  into  a great  plain,  thou  being
mounted  and  we  on  foot.

Then  behold  the  evil-doer,  (behold)  the  things  that  are  done
by  Him  who  revealeth  mysteries!”

The  master  gave  the  servants  hot  water  to  drink,  and  they
drank  it  in  fear  (of  him).

Afterwards  he  was  driving  them  into  the  plains,  and  they  -5,, 5
were  running  amidst  the  cornfields.

From  distress  they  began  to  vomit:  the  (hot)  water  was
bringing  up  the  fruit  from  them.

When  Luqman  began  to  vomit  from  his  navel  (belly),  there
was  coming  up  from  within  him  (only)  the  pure  water.

Inasmuch  as  Luqman’s  wisdom  can  show  forth  this,  then
what  must  be  the  wisdom  of  the  Lord  of  existence  I

On  the  day  when  all  the  inmost  thoughts  shall  be  searched  out,
there  will  appear  from  you  something  latent,  (the  appearance
of)  which  is  not  desired.

When  they  shall  be  given  hot  water  to  drink,  all  the  veils  will  ;6  > ,
be  cut  asunder  (torn  off)  from  that  which  is  abhorred.

The  fire  (of  Hell)  is  made  the  torment  of  the  infidels  because
fire  is  the  (proper)  test  for  stones.

How  oft,  how  oft,  have  we  spoken  gently  to  our  stony  hearts,
and  they  would  not  accept  the  counsel !

For  a bad  wound  the  vein  gets  (requires)  a bad  (severe)
remedy:  the  teeth  of  the  dog  are  suitable  for  the  donkey’s
head.


196  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

The  wicked  women  to  the  wicked  men  is  wisdom;  the  ugly  is
the  mate  and  fitting  (consort)  for  the  ugly.

3605  Whatever,  then,  you  wish  to  mate  with,  go,  become  ab-
sorbed in  the  loved  (object),  and  assume  its  shape  and  qualities.

If  you  wish  for  the  light,  make  yourself  ready  to  receive  the
light;  if  you  wish  to  be  far  (from  God),  become  self-conceited
and  far ;

And  if  you  wish  (to  find)  a way  out  of  this  ruined  prison,  do
not  turn  your  head  away  from  the  Beloved,  but  bow  in  worship
and  draw  nigh.


The  remainder  of  the  story  of  Zayd  {and  zvhat  he  said)  in
answer  to  the  Prophet,  on  whom  be  peace.

This  discourse  hath  no  end.  “Arise,  O Zayd,  and  tie  a shackle
on  the  Buraq  (steed)  of  thy  rational  spirit.

Since  the  rational  spirit  exposes  faults,  it  is  rending  the
curtains  of  concealment.

3610  Concealment  is  desired  by  God  for  awhile.  Drive  away  this
drummer,  bar  the  road !

Do  not  gallop,  draw  rein,  ’tis  better  it  (thy  spirit)  should  be
veiled;  ’tis  better  that  every  one  should  be  gladdened  by  his
own  fancy.

God  is  wishing  that  even  His  despairing  ones  should  not
avert  their  faces  (refrain)  from  this  worship  (of  Him).

Even  on  the  ground  of  a hope  they  become  ennobled:  for  a
few  days  (a  short  time)  they  are  running  at  its  stirrup  (following
Divine  worship).

He  wishes  that  that  mercy  should  shine  upon  all,  on  the  evil
and  the  good,  because  of  the  universality  of  His  mercy.

3615  God  is  wishing  that  every"  prince  and  captive  should  be
hopeful  and  fearful  and  afraid.

This  hope  and  fear  are  in  the  veil  (separating  the  seen  from
the  unseen),  that  they  may  be  fostered  behind  this  veil.

When  thou  hast  rent  the  veil,  where  are  fear  and  hope  ? Might
and  majesty  and  (the  power  to  inflict)  probation  belong  to  the
unseen.”

A young  man  on  the  bank  of  a river  thought  (to  himself),
“Our  fisherman  (here)  is  Solomon.

(But)  if  this  is  he,  why  is  he  alone  and  disguised?  And  if  not,
why  has  he  the  aspect  of  Solomon?”

3620  Thus  thinking,  he  remained  in  two  minds  until  Solomon
(once  more)  became  king  and  absolute  ruler.

The  demon  departed  and  fled  from  his  (Solomon’s)  kingdom
and  throne:  the  sword  of  his  fortune  shed  that  devil’s  blood.

He  put  the  ring  upon  his  finger,  the  hosts  of  demons  and
peris  assembled.


THE  VISION  OF  ZAYD  197

The  men  came  to  look,  amongst  them  he  who  had  the  fancy
(that  the  fisherman  was  Solomon  in  disguise).

When  he  opened  his  (Solomon’s)  hand  and  saw  the  ring,  his
pondering  and  seeking  (to  decide  rightly)  vanished  all  at  once.

Anxiety  occurs  (only)  at  the  time  when  that  (object  of  desire)  1
is  hidden : this  searching  is  after  the  unseen.

Whilst  he  was  absent,  fancy  waxed  strong  in  his  breast:  as
soon  as  he  was  present,  his  fancy  departed.

If  the  radiant  sky  is  not  without  rain,  neither  is  the  dark
earth  without  vegetation.

(God  said),  “ I want  (what  is  signified  by  the  words)  they
believe  in  the  unseen:  on  that  account  I have  shut  the  window
of  the  fleeting  world.

If  I open  its  window  as  on  the  day  of  the  (last)  trump,  how
should  I say,  ‘Dost  thou  see  any  clefts  therein?'”

In  order  that  in  this  darkness  thev  may  make  endeavours  (to
find  the  way),  they  are  turning,  everyone,  their  faces  in  some
direction.

For  awhile  things  are  reversed:  the  thief  brings  the  magis-
trate to  the  gallows.

So  that  many  a sultan  and  man  of  lofty  spirit  becomes  the
slave  of  his  own  slave  for  awhile.

Service  (performed)  in  absence  (through  faith  in  the  unseen)
is  fair  and  comely ; when  servdce  is  demanded  (by  God  from  us),
’tis  pleasing  (to  Him)  that  the  absent  should  be  remembered
(that  we  should  remember  to  perform  what  is  due  to  Him,
though  He  is  unseen).

Where  (in  what  position)  is  one  that  praises  the  king  in  his
presence,  compared  with  one  that  is  shamefaced  in  absence
(from  him)?

The  governor  of  a fortress  who,  on  the  border  of  the  kingdom,  v
far  from  the  sultan  and  the  shadow  (protection)  of  the  sultanate.

Guards  the  fortress  from  enemies  and  will  not  sell  it  for
boundless  riches.

Who,  though  absent  from  the  king  on  the  outskirt  of  the
frontiers,  keeps  faith  (with  him)  like  one  who  is  present —

He  in  the  king’s  sight  is  better  than  the  rest  w ho  are  serving
in  his  presence  and  ready  to  devote  their  lives.

Therefore  half  an  atom  of  regard  to  one’s  duty  in  absence  is
better  than  a hundred-thousandfold  observance  thereof  in
presence.

Obedience  (to  God)  and  faith  are  praiseworthy  now;  after
death,  when  all  is  plainly  shown,  they  will  be  spurned.

“Inasmuch  as  the  unseen  and  the  absent  and  the  veil  are
better,  close  thy  mouth:  ’tis  better  for  us  to  be  silent.

O brother,  refrain^  from  speech:  God  himself  will  make

^ Literally,  “withhold  thy  hand.”


198  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

manifest  the  knowledge  that  is  with  Him  (in  His  posses-
sion).

Witness  enough  for  the  sun  is  its  face:  what  thing  is  the
greatest  witness  (of  all)?  God.”

“Nay,  speak  I will,  since  both  God  and  the  angels  and  the
men  of  learning  are  allied  in  setting  forth  (this  truth).

645  God  and  the  angels  and  those  learned  in  the  sciences  (of
divinity)  bear  witness  that  there  is  no  Lord  except  Him  who
endureth  for  ever.”

Since  God  hath  given  testimony,  who  are  the  angels,  that
they  should  be  associated  in  the  testimony?

(They  are  associated)  because  unsound  (weak)  eyes  and
hearts  cannot  support  the  radiance  and  (clear)  testimony  of
the  Sun,

Like  a bat,  which  cannot  bear  the  glow  of  the  sun  and
abandons  hope.

Know,  then,  that  the  angels,  as  we  also,  are  helpers  (co-
witnesses)— displayers  of  the  sun  in  heaven —

650  Who  say,  “We  have  derived  (our)  light  from  a Sun,  we  have
shone  upon  the  weak,  like  vicegerents  (of  a mighty"  King).”

(Whether  they  be  like)  the  new  moon  or  the  moon  seven  days
old  or  the  full  moon,  every  angel  has  his  (particular)  rank  in
respect  of  light  and  (spiritual)  worth.

Every  angel,  according  to  their  (different)  degrees,  has  (a
portion  of)  that  radiance,  consisting  of  three  or  four  (pairs  of)
luminous  wings.

Just  as  the  wings  of  human  intellects,  amongst  which  there
is  great  difference  (in  quality).

Hence  the  associate  of  every  human  being  in  good  and  evil
is  that  angel  whose  dignity  is  corresponding  to  his  or  hers.

655  The  stars  shine,  for  the  sake  of  guidance,  upon  the  dim-
sighted  man  who  cannot  bear  even  (the  light  of)  the  moon.

Hov!  the  Prophet,  on  whom  be  peace,  said  to  Zayd,  "'Do  not  tell

this  mystery  more  plainly  than  this,  and  take  care  to  comply

(zcith  the  religions  law).”

The  Prophet  said,  “My  Companions  are  (like)  the  stars,  a
candle  to  travellers  (on  the  W"ay),  and  meteors  to  be  cast  at  the
devils.”

If  every  one  had  the  eye  and  the  strength  to  receive  light
from  the  sun  of  heaven.

No  moon  and  stars  would  be  needed  to  serve  as  witnesses  to
(the  existence  of)  a sun.

The  Moon  (the  Prophet)  is  saying  to  earth  and  cloud  and
shadow,  “I  am  a man,  I am  one  like  you,  {but)  it  is  revealed  to
me  {that  your  God  is  one  God).


THE  VISION  OF  ZAYD


199

Like  you,  I was  dark  in  my  nature:  the  Sun’s  revelation  gave  3660
me  such  a light  as  this.

I have  a certain  darkness  in  comparison  with  the  (spiritual)
suns,  (but)  I have  light  for  the  darknesses  of  (human)  souls.

I am  faint  (less  bright  than  the  Sun)  in  order  that  thou  mayst
be  able  to  bear  (my  beams),  for  thou  art  not  the  man  for  (a  man
who  can  bear)  the  most  radiant  Sun.

I was  woven  (mingled)  together,  like  honey  and  vinegar,  that
I might  find  the  way  to  (cure)  sickness  of  heart^.

Since  thou  hast  recovered  from  thine  illness,  O thou  (that
wert)  in  thrall  (to  it),  leave  the  vinegar  and  continue  to  eat  the
honey.”

(If)  the  throne  of  the  heart  has  become  restored  to  soundness  3665
and  purged  of  sensuality,  thereon  the  Merciful  God  is  seated  on
His  Throne.

After  this,  God  controls  the  heart  without  intermediary,  since
the  heart  has  attained  to  this  relation  (with  Him).

This  discourse  hath  no  end.  Where  is  Zavd,  that  I may
counsel  him  not  to  seek  notoriety?

The  (author’s)  return  to  the  story  of  Zayd.

You  will  not  find  Zayd  now,  for  he  has  fled:  he  has  darted
away  from  the  shoe-row  and  dropped  his  shoes.

Who  are  you  (that  you  should  hope  to  find  him)?  Zayd
cannot  even  find  himself,  (he  has  vanished)  like  the  star  on
which  the  sun  shone.

You  will  find  neither  mark  nor  trace  of  him,  you  will  not  find  3670
a straw  (star)  in  the  straw-strewn  Way  (the  ?klilky  Way).

Our  senses  and  finite  speech  (reason)  are  obliterated  in  the
knowledge  and  wisdom  of  our  (Divine)  King.

Their  (the  God-intoxicated  mystics’)  senses  and  under-
standings within  (them)  are  (tossed),  wave  on  wave,  in  (the
sea  of)  they  are  assembled  before  Us.

When  night  comes,  ’tis  again  the  time  of  (bearing)  the  burden :
the  stars,  which  had  become  hidden,  go  (again)  to  work.

God  gives  back  to  the  senseless  ones  their  (lost)  senses : (they
return  to  consciousness)  troop  after  troop,  with  rings  (of  mystic
knowledge)  in  their  ears.

Dancing,  waving  their  hands  in  praise  (of  God),  triumphing  3675
(and  crying),  “O  Lord,  Thou  hast  brought  us  to  life.”

Those  crumbled  skins  and  bones  have  become  (like)  horsemen
and  have  raised  the  dust  :

At  Resurrection  both  the  thankful  and  the  ungrateful  rush
along  from  non-existence  towards  existence.

Why  do  you  turn  away  your  head  and  pretend  not  to  see?

' Literally,  “ liver.”


200  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Did  you  not  turn  away  your  head  at  first,  (when  you  were)  in
non-existence  (and  disbelieved  that  you  would  ever  come  into
existence)?

You  had  planted  your  foot  (firmly)  in  non-existence,  saying,
“Who  will  uproot  me  from  my  place?”

3680  Are  not  you  beholding  the  action  of  your  Lord^,  who  dragged
you  (into  existence)  by  the  forelock.

Until  He  drew  you  into  (all)  these  various  states  (of  being),
which  were  not  in  your  thought  or  fancy?

That  non-existence  is  always  His  slave:  work  (in  His  service),
O demon ! Solomon  is  living.

The  demon  is  making  large  bowls  like  watering-troughs:  he
dare  not  say  a word  in  refusal  or  in  retort.

Look  at  yourself,  how  you  are  trembling  with  fear  (of  non-
existence) : know  that  non-existence  also  is  constantly  trembling
(lest  God  should  bring  it  into  existence).

3683  And  if  you  are  grasping  at  (worldly)  dignities,  ’tis  from  fear
too  that  you  are  suffering  agony  of  spirit.

Except  love  of  the  most  beauteous  God  everything,  though
(outwardly)  it  is  (pleasant  like)  eating  sugar,  is  (in  truth)  agony
of  spirit.

What  is  agony  of  spirit?  To  advance  towards  death  and  not
grasp  the  Water  of  Life.

People  fix  both  their  eyes  on  earth  and  death:  they  have  a
hundred  doubts  concerning  the  Water  of  Life.

Strive  that  the  hundred  doubts  may  become  ninety  (may
decrease):  go  (towards  God)  in  the  night  (of  this  world),  for  if
you  slumber,  the  night  will  go  (from  you).

3690  In  the  dark  night  seek  that  (shining)  Day : put  in  front  (follow)
the  darkness-consuming  Reason.

In  the  evil-coloured  night  there  is  much  good : the  Water  of
Life  is  the  mate  of  darkness.

How  is  it  possible  to  lift  up  the  head  from  slumber,  whilst
you  are  sowing  a hundred  such  seeds  of  slothfulness?

Dead  (heav\')  slumber  and  dead  (unlawful)  food  became
friends-:  the  merchant  fell  asleep  and  the  night-thief  got  to
work.

Do  you  not  know  who  your  enemies  are?  Those  made  of
fire®  are  enemies  to  the  existence  of  those  made  of  earth^.

3695  Fire  is  the  enemy  of  water  and  its  children,  even  as  water  is
an  enemy  to  the  life  of  fire.

Water  kills  fire  because  it  is  the  enemy  and  foe  of  the  children
of  water.

^ Literally,  “the  Divine  action  in  regard  to  you.”

^ I.e.  spiritual  lethargy-  is  closely  allied  with  sin.

® The  devils.

* Mankind.


‘UMAR  IN  THE  BURNING  CITY  201

To  proceed^,  this  fire  is  the  fire  of  lust,  wherein  is  the  root
of  sin  and  error.

The  external  fire  may  be  quenched  by  some  water,  (but)  the
fire  of  lust  is  bringing  (you)  to  Hell.

The  fire  of  lust  is  not  allayed  by  water,  because  it  has  the
(insatiable)  nature  of  Hell  in  respect  of  (inflicting)  torment.

What  is  the  remedy  for  the  fire  of  lust?  The  light  of  the
Religion:  your  (the  Moslems’)  light  is  the  (means  of)  extin-
guishing the  fire  of  the  infidels.

What  kills  this  fire?  The  Light  of  God.  Make  the  light  of
Abraham  your  teacher,

That  this  body  of  yours,  which  resembles  wood  (faggots),
may  be  delivered  from  the  fire  of  the  Ximrod-like  flesh  (nafs).

Fiery  lust  is  not  diminished  by  indulging  it : it  is  diminished,
without  any  escape  (inevitably),  by  leaving  it  (ungratified).

So  long  as  thou  art  laying  faggots  on  a fire,  how  will  the  fire
be  extinguished  by  a carrier  of  faggots-?

When  thou  withholdest  the  faggots,  the  fire  dies  out,  beeause
fear  of  God  carries  (as  it  were)  water  to  the  fire.

How  should  the  fire  blacken  the  beauteous  face  (of  a soul)
which  lays  (on  itself)  rose-colour  (derived)  from  the  fear  of
God  that  is  in  (men’s)  hearts?

Hozv  a conflagration  occurred  in  the  city  {Medina)  in  the  days
of ‘Umar,  may  God  be  well-pleased  with  him.

A conflagration  occurred  in  the  time  of  ‘Umar:  it  was  de-
vouring stones  as  though  they  were  dry  wood.

It  fell  upon  buildings  and  houses,  until  (at  last)  it  darted  at
the  wings  and  nests  of  birds.

Half  the  city  caught  fire  from  the  flames:  water  was  afraid
of  it  (the  fire)  and  amazed.

Some  intelligent  persons  were  throwing  skins  of  water  and
vinegar  on  the  fire,

(But)  out  of  spite  (obstinacy)  the  fire  was  increasing:  aid  was
coming  to  it  from  One  who  is  infinite^.

The  people  came  in  haste  to  ‘Umar,  saying,  “Our  fire  will
not  be  quenched  at  all  by  water.”

He  said,  “That  fire  is  one  of  God’s  signs:  ’tis  a flame  from
the  fire  of  your  wickedness.

Discard  water  and  deal  out  bread  (in  charity),  discard  avarice
if  ve  are  my  people  (followers).”

The  folk  said  to  him,  “We  have  opened  our  doors,  we  have
been  bountiful  and  devoted  to  generosit}  .”

' Literally,  “ after  that.”

- Or,  with  incorrect  rhyme,  “by  carrying  fagttots.”

^ Or,  with  incorrect  rhyme,  “from  (the  realm  of)  infinity.”


202  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

He  replied,  “Ye  have  given  bread  by  rule  and  habit,  ye  have
not  opened  your  hands  for  the  sake  of  God —

(Only)  for  glor^-  and  for  ostentation  and  for  pride,  not  be-
cause of  fear  and  piety  and  supplication.”

Wealth  is  seed,  and  do  not  lay  it  in  every  salty  ground:  do
not  put  a sword  in  the  hand  of  every  highwayman.

Distinguish  the  friends  of  the  Religion  {ahl-i  Dm)  from  the
enemies  of  God  (ahl-i  kin):  seek  the  man  that  sits  with  God,
and  sit  with  him.

37-:o  Every  one  shows  favour  to  his  own  folk : the  fool  (who  shows
favour  to  the  foolish)  thinks  he  has  really  done  (good  and  religious)
work.

How  an  enemy  spat  in  the  face  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  ‘AU,

may  God  honour  his  person,  and  how  ‘AU  dropped  the  sword

from  his  hand.

Learn  how  to  act  sincerely^  from  ‘All : know  that  the  Lion  of
God  (‘All)  was  purged  of  (all)  deceit.

In  fighting  against  the  infidels  he  got  the  upper  hand  of  (van-
quished) a certain  knight,  and  quickly  drew  a sword  and  made
haste  (to  slay  him).

He  spat  on  the  face  of  ‘Ah',  the  pride  of  every  prophet  and
every  saint ;

He  spat  on  the  countenance  before  which  the  face  of  the
moon  bows  low  in  the  place  of  worship.

3725  ‘AH  at  once  threw  his  sword  away  and  relaxed  (his  efforts)  in
fighting  him.

That  champion  was  astounded  by  this  act  and  by  his  showing
forgiveness  and  mercy  without  occasion.

He  said,  “You  lifted  your  keen  sword  against  me:  why  have
you  flung  it  aside  and  spared  me?

What  did  you  see  that  was  better  than  combat  with  me,  so
that  you  have  become  slack  in  hunting  me  dowm?

What  did  you  see,  so  that  such  anger  as  yours  abated,  and  so
that  such  a lightning  flashed  and  (then)  recoiled?

373U  What  did  you  see,  that  from  seeing  (only)  the  reflexion
thereof  a flame  appeared  in  my  heart  and  soul  ?

What  did  you  see,  beyond  (material)  existence  and  space,
that  was  better  than  life? — and  (so)  you  gave  me  life.

In  bravery  you  are  the  Lion  of  the  Lord : in  generosity  who
indeed  knows  who  (what)  you  are?

In  generosity  you  are  (like)  Moses’  cloud  in  the  desert,
whence  came  the  dishes  of  food  and  bread  incomparable.”

The  clouds  give  wheat  which  man  with  toil  makes  cooked
(easy  to  digest)  and  sweet  as  honey.

3735  (But)  Moses’  cloud  spread  the  wings  of  mercy  and  gave

^ I.e.  to  act  for  God’s  sake  alone,  without  any  regard  to  self-interest.


‘ali  and  the  infidel  knight  203

cooked  and  sweet  food  that  was  (ready  to  be  eaten)  without
trouble.

For  the  sake  of  those  (beggars)  who  partook  of  its  bounty,
its  (the  cloud’s)  mercy  raised  a banner  (displayed  itself)  in  the
world.

During  forty  years  that  ration  and  largesse  did  not  fail  the
hopeful  people  (of  Israel)  for  a single  day,

Until  they  too,  because  of  their  vileness,  arose  and  demanded
leeks  and  green  herbs  and  lettuce.

O people  of  Ahmad  (Mohammed),  who  are  of  the  noble,  (for
you)  that  food  is  continuing  till  the  Resurrection.

When  (the  Prophet’s  saying),  “I  pass  the  night  with  my  3740
Lord,”  was  uttered,  (the  words)  “He  gives  (me)  food”  and
“He  gives  (me)  drink”  referred  metaphorically  to  (spiritual)
food  (and  drink).

Accept  this  (saying)  without  any  (peiA'erse)  interpretation,  that
it  may  come  into  your  throat  (as  agreeably)  as  honev  and  milk.

Because  interpretation  (alteration  of  the  meaning)  is  a re-
jection of  the  gift,  since  he  (the  interpreter)  regards  that  real
(original)  meaning  as  faulty.

The  view  that  it  is  faulty  arises  from  the  weakness  of  his
understanding:  Universal  Reason  is  the  kernel,  and  our  reason
is  like  the  rind.

Alter  yourself,  not  the  Traditions  (of  the  Prophet):  abuse
your  (dull)  brain,  not  the  rose-garden  (the  true  sense  which
you  cannot  apprehend).

“O  ‘AH,  thou  who  art  all  mind  and  eye,  relate  a little  of  that  3745
which  thou  hast  seen !

The  sword  of  thy  forbearance  hath  rent  my  soul,  the  water
of  thy  knowledge  hath  purified  my  earth.

Tell  it  forth!  I know  that  these  are  His  (God’s)  mysteries,
because  ’tis  His  work  (way)  to  kill  without  sword.

He  that  works  without  tools  and  without  limbs.  He  that
bestows  these  profitable  gifts.

Causes  the  intelligence  to  taste  myriads  of  wines  in  such  wise
that  eyes  and  ears  are  unaware.

Tell  it  forth,  O falcon  of  the  empyrean  that  findest  goodly  3750
prey,  that  (I  may  know)  what  thou  hast  seen  at  this  time  from
the  Maker.

Thine  eve  has  learned  to  perceive  the  Unseen,  (while)  the
eves  of  bystanders  are  sealed.”

One  man  is  beholding  a moon  plainly,  while  another  sees  the
world  dark.

And  another  beholds  three  moons  together.  These  three
persons  (beholders)  are  seated  in  one  place,  yea  (verily).

The  eyes  of  all  three  are  open,  and  the  ears  of  all  three  are  sharp
(attentive);  (they  are)  fastened  on  thee  and  in  flight  from  me.


204  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

3755  Is  this  an  enchantment  of  the  eye?  (Or)  is  it  a marvellous
hidden  grace?  On  thee  is  the  form  of  the  wolf,  and  on  me  is
the  quality  (beauty)  of  Joseph.

If  the  worlds  are  eighteen  thousand  and  more,  these  eighteen
(thousand)  are  not  subject  (accessible)  to  every  eye.

“Reveal  the  mystery,  O ‘AH,  thou  who  art  approved  (by
God),  O thou  who  art  good  fate  after  evil  fate.

Either  do  thou  declare  that  which  thy  reason  hath  found,  or
I will  tell  that  which  hath  shone  forth  on  me.

From  thee  it  shone  forth  on  me:  how  shouldst  thou  hide  it?
Without  tongue  thou  art  darting  rays  of  light,  like  the  moon.

3760  But  if  the  moon’s  orb  come  to  speech,  it  more  quickly  leads
the  night-travellers  into  the  (right)  way.

They  become  safe  from  error  and  heedlessness : the  voice  of
the  moon  prevails  over  the  voice  of  the  ghoul.

Inasmuch  as  the  moon  (even)  without  speech  is  showing  the
way,  when  it  speaks  it  becomes  light  upon  light.

Since  thou  art  the  gate  of  the  city  of  Knowledge,  since  thou
art  the  beams  of  the  sun  of  Clemency,

Be  open,  O Gate,  to  him  that  seeks  the  gate,  so  that  by  means
of  thee  the  husks  may  reach  the  core.

37f)5  Be  open  unto  everlasting,  O Gate  of  Mercy,  O Entrance-hall
to  None  is  like  unto  Him.”

Every  air  and  mote  is  indeed  a place  for  vision  (of  God),
(but  so  long  as  it  is)  unopened,  who  says  “Yonder  is  a door”?

Unless  the  Watcher  open  a door,  this  idea  never  stirs  within.

When  a door  is  opened,  he  (on  whom  this  idea  has  dawned)
becomes  amazed,  grows  wings,  and  begins  to  fly  on  (the  wings
of)  the  idea.

A careless  man  suddenly  found  the  treasure  in  the  ruin : after
that,  he  was  hastening  to  (search  in)  every  ruin.

377>j  Till  you  gain  the  pearl  from  one  dervish,  how  should  you
seek  the  pearl  from  another  dervish?

Though  opinion  run  with  its  own  feet  for  (many)  vears,  it
will  not  pass  beyond  the  cleft  of  its  own  nostrils.

Say,  are  you  seeing  aught  e.xcept  your  nose?  Say,  how  will
you  see  if  you  turn  up  your  nose  (in  self-conceit)  ?

How  that  infidel  asked  ‘AU,  may  God  honour  his  person,  saying,

“ Since  thou  wert  victorious  over  such  a fnan  as  I am,  hoio  didst

thou  drop  the  sword  from  thy  hand?  ”

He  said,  “Speak,  O Prince  of  the  Faithful,  that  my  soul  may
stir  within  my  body,  like  the  embr\'o.”

How  hath  the  embryo  the  means  (of  stirring)  during  the
period  when  it  is  ruled  (by  the  stars)?  It  comes  (turns)  from
the  stars  towards  the  sun.


‘ali  and  the  infidel  knight  205

When  the  time  comes  for  the  embryo  to  receive  the  (vital)
spirit,  at  that  time  the  sun  becomes  its  helper.

This  embryo  is  brought  into  movement  by  the  sun,  for  the
sun  is  quickly  endowing  it  with  spirit.

From  the  other  stars  this  embryo  received  only  an  impression,
until  the  sun  shone  upon  it.

By  which  way  did  it  become  connected  in  the  womb  with
the  beauteous  sun?

By  the  hidden  way  that  is  remote  from  our  sense-perception.
The  sun  in  heaven  hath  many  ways :

The  way  whereby  gold  receives  nourishment,  and  the  way
\vhereby  the  (common)  stone  is  made  a jacinth.

And  the  way  whereby  it  makes  the  ruby  red,  and  the  way
whereby  it  gives  the  lightning-flash  to  the  (iron)  horse-shoe.

And  the  way  whereby  it  ripens  the  fruit,  and  the  way  whereby
it  gives  heart  to  one  distraught  (with  fear).

“Say  it  forth,  O falcon  with  shining  wings  who  hast  learned
(to  be  familiar)  with  the  King  and  with  his  fore-arm.

Say  it  forth,  O royal  falcon  that  dost  catch  the  ‘Anqa,  O thou
that  dost  vanquish  an  army  by  thyself,  not  with  (the  aid  of)
an  army.

Thou  alone  art  the  (whole)  community,  thou  art  one  and  a
hundred  thousand.  Say  it  forth,  O thou  to  whose  falcon  thy
slave  has  fallen  a prey.

Wherefore  this  mercy  in  the  place  of  vengeance  ? Whose  way
is  it  to  give  the  hand  to  a dragon?”

How  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  made  answer  {and  explained)  what

was  the  reason  of  his  dropping  the  sword  from  his  hand  on  that

occasion.

He  said,  “ I am  wielding  the  sword  for  God’s  sake,  I am  the
servant  of  God,  I am  not  under  the  command  of  the  body.

I am  the  Lion  of  God,  I am  not  the  lion  of  passion : my
deed  bears  witness  to  my  religion.

In  war  I am  (manifesting  the  truth  of)  thou  didst  not  throic
when  thou  threwest:  I am  (but)  as  the  sword,  and  the  wielder  is
the  (Divine)  Sun.

I have  removed  the  baggage  of  self  out  of  the  way,  I have
deemed  (what  is)  other  than  God  to  be  non-existence.

I am  a shadow,  the  Sun  is  my  lord;  I am  the  chamberlain,
I am  not  the  curtain  (which  prevents  approach)  to  Him.

I am  filled  with  the  pearls  of  union,  like  a (jewelled)  sword :
in  battle  I make  (men)  living,  not  slain.

Blood  does  not  cover  the  sheen  of  my  sword : how  should  the
wind  sweep  away  my  clouds  ?

I am  not  a straw,  I am  a mountain  of  forbearance  and  patience
and  justice : how'  should  the  fierce  wind  carr)'  off  the  mountain  ? ”


2o6  MATHNAwf,  BOOK  I

3795  That  which  is  removed  from  its  place  by  a wind  is  rubbish,
for  indeed  the  contrary  winds  are  many.

The  wind  of  anger  and  the  wind  of  lust  and  the  wind  of
greed  swept  away  him  that  performed  not  the  (ritual)  prayers.

“I  am  a mountain,  and  my  being  is  His  building;  and  if  I
become  like  a straw,  my  wind  (the  wind  that  moves  me)  is
His  wind.

IMy  longing  is  not  stirred  save  by  His  wind;  my  captain  is
naught  but  love  of  the  One.

Anger  is  king  over  kings,  and  to  me  it  is  a slave:  even  anger
I have  bound  under  the  bridle.

3800  The  sw'ord  of  my  forbearance  hath  smitten  the  neck  of  my
anger;  the  anger  of  God  hath  come  on  me  like  mercy.

I am  plunged  in  light  although  my  roof  is  ruined;  I have
become  a garden  although  I am  (styled)  Bvi  Turab  (the  father
of  dust).

Since  (the  thought  of  something)  other  than  God  has  inter-
vened, it  behoves  (me)  to  sheathe  my  sword.

That  my  name  may  be  he  loves  for  God’s  sake,  that  my  desire
may  be  he  hates  for  God’s  sake.

That  my  generosity  may  be  he  gives  for  God’s  sake,  that  my
being  may  be  he  withholds  for  God’s  sake.

3805  My  stinginess  is  for  God’s  sake,  my  bounty  is  for  God’s  sake
alone:  I belong  entirely  to  God,  I do  not  belong  to  any  one
(else) ;

And  that  which  I am  doing  for  God’s  sake  is  not  (done  in)
conformity,  it  is  not  fancy  and  opinion,  it  is  naught  but  intuition.

I have  been  freed  from  effort  and  search,  I have  tied  my
sleeve  to  the  skirt  of  God.

If  I am  flying,  I behold  the  place  to  which  I soar;  and  if  I
am  circling,  I behold  the  axis  on  which  I revolve ;

And  if  I am  dragging  a burden,  I know  whither:  I am  the
moon,  and  the  Sun  is  in  front  of  me  as  the  guide.”

3810  There  is  no  means  (possibility)  of  communicating  more  than
this  to  the  people : in  the  river  there  is  no  room  for  the  Sea.

I speak  low  according  to  the  measure  of  (their)  understand-
ings : ’tis  no  fault,  this  is  the  practice  of  the  Prophet.

“ I am  free  from  self-interest : hear  the  testimony  of  a freeman,
for  the  testimony  of  slaves  is  not  worth  two  barleycorns.”

In  the  religious  law  the  testimony  of  a slave  has  no  value  at
(the  time  of)  litigation  and  judgement.

(Even)  if  thousands  of  slaves  bear  witness  on  thy  behalf,  the
law  does  not  accept  their  testimony  as  worth  a straw.

3815  In  God’s  sight  the  slave  of  lust  is  worse  than  menials  and
slaves  brought  into  servitude.

For  the  latter  becomes  free  at  a single  word  from  his  master,
while  the  former  lives  sweet  but  dies  sour  and  bitter.


‘ali  and  the  infidel  knight


207


The  slave  of  lust  hath  no  (means  of)  release  at  all  except
through  the  grace  of  God  and  His  special  favour.

He  has  fallen  into  a pit  that  has  no  bottom,  and  that  is  his
(owTi)  sin:  it  is  not  (Divine)  compulsion  and  injustice.

He  has  cast  himself  into  such  a pit  that  I find  no  rope  capable
of  (reaching)  its  bottom.

I will  make  an  end.  If  this  discourse  go  further,  not  only
hearts  but  rocks  will  bleed

(If)  these  hearts-  hav'e  not  bled,  ’tis  not  because  of  (their)
hardness,  ’tis  (because  of)  perplexity  and  preoccupation  and
ill-fatedness.

They  will  bleed  one  day  when  blood  is  no  use  to  them;  do
thou  bleed  at  a time  when  (thy)  blood  is  not  rejected.

Inasmuch  as  the  testimony  of  slaves  is  not  accepted,  the
approved  witness  is  he  that  is  not  the  slave  of  the  ghoul  (of
sensuality).

(The  words)  We  hare  sent  thee  as  a zcitness  came  in  the
Warning  (the  Qur’an),  because  he  (the  Prophet)  was  entire! v
free®  from  (creaturelv)  existence.

“Since  I am  free,  how  should  anger  bind  me?  Nothing  is
here  but  Divine  qualities.  Come  in!

Come  in,  for  the  grace  of  God  hath  made  thee  free,  because
His  mercy  had  the  precedence  over  His  wrath.

Come  in  now,  for  thou  hast  escaped  from  the  peril:  thou
wert  a (common)  stone,  the  Elixir  hath  made  thee  a jewel.

Thou  hast  been  delivered  from  unbelief  and  its  thorn-
thicket;  blossom  like  a rose  in  the  cvpress-garden  of  Hii
(God).

Thou  art  I and  I am  thou,  O illustrious  one : thou  wert  ‘.\h' —
how  should  I kill  ‘All  ?

Thou  hast  committed  a sin  better  than  any  act  of  piety,  thou
hast  traversed  Heaven  in  a single  moment.’’

Very'  fortunate  (was)  the  sin  which  the  man  committed:  do
not  rose-leaves  spring  from  a thorn?

Was  not  the  sin  of  ‘Umar  and  his  attempt  on  (the  life  of)  the
Prophet  leading  him  to  the  gate  of  acceptance?

Was  not  Pharaoh  because  of  the  magic  of  the  magicians
drawing  them  (to  himself),  and  did  not  (spiritual)  fortune  come
to  their  aid?

Had  it  not  been  for  their  magic  and  denial  (of  Moses),  who
would  have  brought  them  to  rebellious  Pharaoh  ?

How  would  they  have  seen  the  rod  and  the  miracles?  Dis-
obedience (to  God)  became  obedience,  O disobedient  people

* Literally,  ‘‘what  ot  the  liver."  for  the  hard  rock  will  become  blood,”

^ Literally,  “ livers.”

^ Literally,  ‘‘free,  the  son  of  the  free.”

* I.e  the  sin  of  the  macicians  ultimately  led  them  to  faith  in  God.


2o8


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

God  hath  smitten  the  neck  of  despair,  inasmuch  as  sin  and
disobedience  have  become  obedience.

Since  He  changes  evil  acts  (into  good),  He  makes  it  (the
disobedience)  an  act  of  obedience  in  despite  of  slanderers  (devils).

By  this  (mercy  of  God)  the  stoned  (accursed)  Devil  is  driven
away  and  bursts  with  envy  and  is  cloven  asunder.

He  strives  to  foster  a sin  (in  us)  and  by  means  of  that  sin
bring  us  into  a pit ;

1840  When  he  sees  that  the  sin  has  become  an  act  of  obedience
(to  God),  there  comes  round  for  him  an  unblest  hour.

“Come  in!  I open  the  door  to  thee.  Thou  spattest  (on  me)
and  I give  thee  a present.

Such  things  I am  giving  to  the  doer  of  iniquity:  (thou  seest)
in  what  fashion  I lay  my  head  before  the  left  foot^.

WTat  then  do  I bestow  on  the  doer  of  righteousness?  Know
thou,  (I  bestow)  treasures  and  kingdoms  everlasting.

How  the  Prophet,  on  whom  be  peace,  said  in  the  ear  of  the  stirrup-

holder  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful  i^Ali),  may  God  honour  his

person,  “/  tell  thee,  ^ AU  will  be  slain  by  thy  hand!'

I am  such  a man  that  the  honey  of  my  kindness  did  not
become  poison  in  wrath  (even)  against  my  murderer.

^845  The  Prophet  said  in  the  ear  of  my  servant  that  one  day  he
would  sever  this  head  of  mine  from  my  neck.

The  Prophet  by  (Divine)  inspiration  informed  my  friend  that
in  the  end  my  destruction  would  be  (wrought)  by  his  hand.

He  (my  friend)  says,  ‘ Kill  me  first,  in  order  that  this  hateful
crime  may  not  proceed  from  me.’

I say,  ‘Since  my  death  is  (to  come)  from  thee,  how  can  I
seek  to  evade  the  destiny  (of  God)  ? ’

He  falls  before  me,  saying,  ‘O  generous  man,  for  God’s  sake
cleave  me  in  twain,

3850  That  this  evil  end  may  not  come  upon  me,  and  that  my  soul
may  not  burn  (with  grief)  for  (thee  who  art)  its  (very)  life.’

I say,  ‘ Go ; the  Pen  (of  Divine  ordainment)  is  dry’^ ; by  that
Pen  many  a (lofty)  landmark®  is  overthrown.

There  is  no  hatred  of  thee  in  my  soul,  because  I do  not
regard  this  (act)  as  (proceeding)  from  thee.

Thou  art  God’s  instrument,  God’s  hand  is  the  (real)  agent:
how  should  I assail  and  oppose  God’s  instrument?’”

He  (the  knight)  said,  “ For  what  reason,  then,  is  retaliation
(sanctioned)?”  “’Tis  from  God,  too,”  said  ‘Ali,  “and  that  is  a
hidden  mystery.

' l.e.  “ I expose  myself  to  contumely  from  the  wicked.”

^ l.e.  the  Divine  decree  is  written  and  unalterably  fixed.

® Or,  “many  a man  of  mark.”


‘ali  and  his  murderer


209

If  He  takes  offence  at  His  own  act,  (yet)  He  causes  gardens  jSj5
(of  good)  to  grow  from  that  taking  offence.

It  beseems  Him  to  take  offence  at  His  own  act,  inasmuch  as
in  vengeance  and  mercy  He  is  One.

In  this  city  of  phenomena  He  is  the  Prince ; in  (all)  the  realms
(of  the  world)  He  is  the  Ruler.

If  He  breaks  His  own  instrument.  He  mends  that  which  has
become  broken.”

Recognise,  O noble  sir,  the  indication  of  (the  text),  [Whatever)
verse  We  shall  cancel  or  cause  to  be  forgotten,  followed  by  We  shall
bring  a better.

Every  (religious)  law  that  He  (God)  has  cancelled — He  has  -.'ao
taken  away  grass  and  brought  roses  in  exchange.

Night  cancels  the  business  of  day:  behold  an  inanimateness
(inertia)  that  enlightens  the  intellect!

Again,  night  is  cancelled  by  the  light  of  day,  so  that  the
inanimateness  is  consumed  by  that  fire-kindling  one.

.'Hthough  that  sleep  and  rest  are  darkness,  is  not  the  Water
of  Life  within  the  darkness?

Did  not  minds  become  refreshed  in  that  darkness?  Did  not
a pause  (in  recitation)  become  the  source  of  (increased  beauty
in)  the  voice?

For  contraries  are  manifested  by  means  of  contraries:  in  the  ',56=;
black  core  (of  the  heart)  He  (God)  created  the  everlasting  light
(of  love).

The  wars  of  the  Prophet  became  the  pivot  (determining  cause)
of  peace : the  peace  of  this  latter  age  was  (produced)  from  those
wars.

That  heart-ravisher  cut  off  hundreds  of  thousands  of  heads,
in  order  that  the  heads  of  the  (w'hole)  world’s  people  might  win
security.

The  gardener  lops  the  harmful  bough,  in  order  that  the  date-
palm  may  gain  (tallness  of)  stature  and  goodness.

The  expert  (gardener)  digs  up  the  weeds  from  the  garden,  in
order  that  his  garden  and  fruit  may  look  flourishing.

The  physician  extracts  bad  teeth,  in  order  that  the  beloved  3870
(patient)  may  be  saved  from  pain  and  sickness.

Many  advantages  are  (concealed)  within  defects : for  martyrs
there  is  life  in  death.

When  the  (martyr’s)  throat  has  been  cut  that  swallowed
the  daily  bread,  (the  spiritual  blessings  imphed  in  the  text)
receiving  the  [Divine)  bounty,  rejoicing,  shall  be  delicious  (to
him).

When  the  throat  of  an  animal  is  cut  duly  (in  the  manner
prescribed  by  law),  there  grows  (from  it)  the  throat  of  man*,
and  its  excellence  is  increased  (thereby).

^ Because  the  slaughtered  animal  is  eaten  and  assimilated  by  man.

14


NU


210  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

When  a (martyred)  man’s  throat  is  cut,  come,  consider  what
the  result  will  be!  Judge  of  this  (case)  by  the  analogy  of  that
(case).

i875  A third  throat  will  be  born,  and  care  of  it  will  be  (taken  by)
the  sherbet  of  God  and  His  lights.

The  throat  that  has  been  cut  drinks  (the  Divine)  sherbet,
but  (only)  the  throat  that  has  been  delivered  from  Nay  and
has  died  in  Yea.

Make  an  end,  O pusillanimous  short-fingered  (infirm)  one!
How  long  will  the  life  of  thy  spirit  be  (sustained)  by  bread?

Like  the  willow,  thou  hast  no  fruit,  because  thou  hast  lost
thine  honour  for  the  sake  of  white  bread.

If  the  sensual  soul  cannot  refrain  from  this  bread,  take  the
elixir  and  turn  thy  copper  into  gold.

3S5o  Wouldst  thou  wash  thy  garment  (clean),  O so-and-so,  do  not
avert  thy  face  from  the  bleachers’  quarter.

Although  the  bread  has  broken  thy  fast,  cling  to  Him  that
binds  what  is  broken,  and  ascend !

Inasmuch  as  His  hand  binds  what  is  broken,  it  follows  that
His  breaking  is  assuredly  mending.

If  thou  break  it.  He  will  say  to  thee,  “Come,  make  it  whole
(again)”;  and  thou  hast  neither  hand  nor  foot  (thou  art
helpless).

Therefore  He  (alone)  has  the  right  to  break,  for  He  (alone)
can  mend  what  has  been  broken.

3885  He  that  knows  how  to  sew  (together)  knows  how  to  tear
(asunder) ; whatsoever  He  sells.  He  buys  (something)  better  (in
exchange).

He  lays  the  house  in  ruins,  upside  down ; then  in  one  moment
He  makes  it  more  habitable  (than  it  was  before).

If  He  sever  one  head  from  the  body.  He  at  once  raises  up
hundreds  of  thousands  of  heads  (for  the  beheaded  person).

If  He  had  not  ordained  a retaliation  upon  the  guilty,  or  if
He  had  not  said,  “In  retaliation  there  is  {for  you)  a life"

Who  would  have  the  stomach  (would  dare)  of  himself  (on
his  own  responsibility^)  to  wield  (draw)  a sword  against  him  that
is  a thrall  to  the  decree  of  God? —

3850  Because  every  one  whose  eyes  He  (God)  hath  opened  would
know  that  the  slayer  was  constrained  (to  slav)  by  (Divine)
predestination.

Any  one  on  whom  that  predestination  became  a collar  (any
one  subjected  to  it)  would  strike  a sword-blow  even  at  the  head
of  his  (own)  child.

Go,  fear  (God)  and  do  not  rail  at  the  wicked;  know  thine
own  impotence  before  the  snare  of  the  (Divine)  decree.


THE  SELF-CONCEIT  OF  ADAM


21  I


How  Adam,  on  whom  be  peace,  marvelled  at  the  perdition
of  Iblis  and  showed  vanity.

One  day  Adam  looked  with  contempt  and  scorn  on  Iblis
who  is  damned.

He  behaved  with  self-conceit  and  became  self-approving ; he
laughed  at  the  plight  of  accursed  Iblis.

The  jealousy  of  God  cried  out  (against  him) — “O  chosen  one,  .'15
thou  art  ignorant  of  the  hidden  mysteries  (of  His  providence).

If  He  should  turn  the  fur  inside  out*,  He  would  tear  up  from
root  and  bottom  (even)  the  (firmest)  mountain  (of  faith) ;

At  that  instant  He  would  rend  the  veil  of  (put  to  shame)  a
hundred  Adams  and  bring  (to  light)  a hundred  Devils  newlv
converted  to  Islam.”

Adam  said,  “I  repent  of  this  look;  I will  not  think  so  dis-
respectfully again.”

O Help  of  them  that  call  for  help,  lead  us  (aright) ! There  is
no  (cause  for)  pride  in  knowledge  or  riches.

Do  not  let  a heart  stray  that  Thou  hast  guided  by  Thy  grace,  .^noo
and  avert  the  evil  which  the  Pen  has  written.

Let  the  evil  of  Thy  ordainment  pass  from  our  souls:  do
not  cut  us  off  from  those  who  are  well-pleased^  (with  Thee).

There  is  naught  more  bitter  than  separation  from  Thee:
without  Thy  protection  there  is  naught  but  perplexity.

Our  (worldly)  goods  waylay  (and  plunder)  our  (spiritual)
goods:  our  bodies  tear  the  garment  (of  spirituality)  from  our
souls.

Inasmuch  as  (the  evil  wrought  by)  our  hand  devours  (the
good  towards  which  we  move)  our  foot,  how  shall  any  one  save
his  soul  without  Thy  security?

And  (even)  if  (unaided)  he  save  his  soul  from  these  awful  3905
dangers,  he  will  (only)  have  saved  a stock  of  misfortune  and  fear.

Because  the  soul,  when  it  is  not  united  with  the  Belov'ed,  is
blind  and  blue  (miserable)  with  itself  for  ever.

When  Thou  wilt  not  give  him  admission  (to  Thy  presence)

— even  suppose  he  has  saved  his  soul,  regard  as  dead  the  soul
that  would  live  without  Thee.

If  Thou  art  upbraiding  Thy  slaves,  that  is  suitable  to  Thee,

O Thou  whose  even,-  wish  is  fulfilled.

And  if  Thou  say  that  the  sun  and  moon  are  scum,  and  if  Thou
say  that  the  (straight)  stature  of  the  cypress  is  (bent)  double.

And  if  Thou  call  the  empyrean  and  the  sky  contemptible,  and  . uo
if  Thou  say  that  the  mine  and  the  sea  are  poor —

^ I.e.  “if  God  were  to  manifest  His  wrath  instead  of  His  mercy  or  His
mercy  instead  of  His  wrath.”

“ Literally,  “the  brethren  of  acquiescence.”


14-2


212


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  I

That  is  proper  in  reference  to  Thy  perfection : Thine  is  the
power  of  perfecting  (all)  mortalities,

For  Thou  art  holy  (and  free)  from  danger  and  from  non-
existence: Thou  art  He  that  brings  the  non-existent  ones  into
being  and  endows  (them  with  existence).

He  that  made  to  grow  can  burn  (destroy),  because  when  He
has  torn,  He  can  sew  (mend).

Every  autumn  He  burns  (withers)  the  garden;  (then)  He
makes  to  grow  again  the  rose  that  dyes  (the  garden)^,

3915  Saying,  ‘ ‘ O thou  who  wert  withered,  come  forth,  be  fresh,  once

more  be  fair  and  of  fair  renown!”

The  eye  of  the  narcissus  became  blind:  He  restored  it;  the
throat  of  the  reed  w'as  cut:  He  himself  fostered  if^  again  (and
revived  it).

Since  we  are  made  (by  God)  and  are  not  makers,  we  are  not
(entitled  to  be  anything)  but  humble  and  content.

We  all  are  of  the  flesh  and  busy  with  fleshliness : if  Thou  call
us  not  (to  Thyself),  we  all  are  Ahrimans  (Devils).

(If)  we  have  been  delivered  from  Ahriman,  (it  is  only)  be-
cause Thou  hast  redeemed  our  souls  from  blindness.

3920  Thou  art  the  Guide  of  every  one  that  hath  life : who  (of  what
account)  is  the  blind  man  without  staff  and  guide?

Excepting  Thee  (alone),  whatsoever  is  sweet  or  unsweet  is
man-destroying®  and  the  essence  of  fire.

Any  one  to  whom  fire  is  a refuge  and  support  becomes  both
a Magian  and  a Zoroaster.

Everything  except  Allah  is  vain : verily  the  grace  of  Allah  is
a cloud  pouring  abundantly  and  continually.

Returning  to  the  story  of  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  ''Ali — may

God  honour  his  person! — and  how  generously  he  behaved  to

his  murderer.

Go  back  to  ‘Ali  and  his  murderer,  and  the  kindness  he  showed
to  the  murderer,  and  his  superiority  (moral  and  spiritual  ex-
cellence).

3925  He  said,  ‘‘Day  and  night  I see  the  murderer  with  my  eyes,
(but)  I have  no  anger  against  him.

Because  death  has  become  sweet  as  manna  to  me : my  death
has  laid  fast  hold  of  resurrection^.”

The  death  of  deathlessness  is  lawful  to  us,  the  provision  of
unprovidedness  is  a bounty  to  us.

’Tis  death  outwardly  but  life  inwardly;  apparently  ’tis  a

* I.e.  “fills  the  garden  with  colour.”

^ Or,  “played  on  it  (and  breathed  life  into  it),”  i.e.  He  cut  the  reed
and  made  it  a flute.

® Literally,  “man-burning.”

* I.e.  “my  death  holds  and  possesses  (as  its  real  nature)  resurrection.”


‘ali  and  his  murderer  213

cutting-ofF  (decease)  in  secret  fin  reality)  ’tis  permanence  (life
without  end).

To  the  embryo  in  the  womb  birth  is  a going  (to  another  state
of  existence):  in  the  world  it  (the  embryo)  blossoms  anew-.

“ Since  I have  intense  love  and  longing  for  death,  the  prohi-  3930
bition  do  not  cast  yourselves  {into  destruction)  is  (meant)  for  me,

Because  (only)  the  sweet  berry  is  prohibited ; (for)  how  should
it  become  necessary  to  prohibit  the  sour  one?

The  berry  that  has  a sour  kernel  and  rind — its  very  sourness
and  disagreeableness  are  (serve  as)  a prohibition  of  it.

To  me  the  berry  of  dying  has  become  sweet:  (the  text)  nay,
they  are  living  has  come  (from  God)  on  my  account.

Slay  me,  my  trusty  friends,  slay  me,  vile  as  I am:  verily,  in
my  being  slain  is  my  life  for  evermore.

Verily,  in  my  death  is  my  life,  O youth — how  long  shall  1 3935
be  parted  from  my  home?  Until  when?

If  there  were  not  in  my  staying  (in  this  world)  my  separation
(from  God),  He  would  not  have  said,  ‘ Verily,  we  are  returning
to  Him.’”

The  returning  one  is  he  that  comes  back  to  his  (native)  city,
and  (fleeing)  from  the  revolution  of  Time  approaches  the  Unity.


How  the  stirrup-holder  of  'Ali,  may  God  honour  his  person,  came

{to  him),  saying,  “For  God’s  sake,  kill  me  and  deliver  me  from

this  doom.”

“ He  came  back,  saying,  ‘ O ‘Ali,  kill  me  quickly,  that  I may  not
see  that  bitter  moment  and  hour.

Shed  my  blood,  I make  it  lawful  to  thee,  so  that  my  eye  may
not  behold  that  resurrection

I said,  ‘ If  ever}'  atom  should  become  a murderer  and,  dagger  19 4 "
in  hand,  go  to  attack  thee.

None  (of  them)  could  cut  from  thee  the  tip  of  a single  hair,
since  the  Pen  has  written  against  thee  such  a line  (of  doom).

But  do  not  grieve : I am  intercessor  for  thee : I am  the  spirit’s
master,  I am  not  the  body’s  slave.

This  body  hath  no  value  in  my  sight : without  my  body  I am
the  noble  (in  spirit),  the  son  of  the  noble.

Dagger  and  sword  have  become  my  sweet  basil:  my  death
has  become  my  banquet  and  narcissus-plot.’”

He  that  hamstrings  (mortifies)  his  body  in  this  fashion,  how  3945
should  he  covet  the  Princedom  and  the  Caliphate?

‘ Literally,  “its  outward  (aspect)  is  cut  short.’’

^ And,  by  the  same  analogy,  death  opens  a new  world  to  the  spirit.

’ I.e.  “ do  not  let  me  be  raised  from  the  dead  with  this  crime  to  answer
for.’’


214  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Outwardly  he  strives  after  power  and  authority,  (but  only)
that  he  may  show  to  princes  the  (right)  way  and  judgement ;

That  he  may  give  another  spirit  to  the  Princedom;  that  he
may  give  fruit  to  the  palm-tree  of  the  Caliphate.


Explaining  that  the  motive  of  the  Prophet,  on  whom  be  peace,  in
seeking  to  conquer  Mecca  and  other  [places)  than  Mecca  was  not
love  of  worldly  dominion,  inasmuch  as  he  has  said  “ This  world
is  a carcase,”  but  that  on  the  contrary  it  was  by  the  command
[of  God).

Likewise  the  Prophet’s  struggle  to  conquer  Mecca — how  can
he  be  suspected  of  (being  inspired  by)  love  of  this  world?

He  who  on  the  day  of  trial  shut  his  eyes  and  heart  to  the
treasury  of  the  Seven  Heavens,

3950  (When)  the  horizons  of  all  the  Seven  Heavens  were  full  of
houris  and  genies  (who  had  come)  to  gaze  upon  him,

Having  arrayed  themselves  for  his  sake — how  indeed  should
he  care  for  anything  except  the  Beloved?

He  had  become  so  filled  with  magnification  of  God,  that  even
those  nearest  to  God  would  find  no  way  (of  intruding)  there.

“In  Us  (in  Our  unity)  is  no  room  for  a prophet  sent  as  an
apostle,  nor  yet  for  the  Angels  or  the  Spirit.  Do  ye,  therefore,
understand ! ”

He  (also)  said,  “We  are  md  zdgh  (that  is.  Our  eye  did  not  rove),
we  are  not  (looking  for  carrion)  like  crows  [zdgh)-.  We  are
intoxicated  with  (enraptured  by)  the  Dyer,  we  are  not  in-
toxicated with  the  garden  (of  flowers  with  their  many  dyes).”

3955  Inasmuch  as  to  the  eye  of  the  Prophet  the  treasuries  of  the
celestial  spheres  and  intelligences  seemed  (worthless)  as  a straw,
What,  then,  would  Mecca  and  Syria  and  ‘Iraq  be  (worth  to
him),  that  he  should  show  fight  and  longing  (to  gain  possession
of  them)?

That  thought  and  opinion  (of  his  motive)  is  the  hypocrite’s,
who  judges  (the  Prophet)  from  the  analogy  of  his  own  wicked
soul.

When  you  make  yellow  glass  a veil  (between  your  eyes  and
the  sun),  you  see  all  the  sunlight  yellow.

Break  those  blue  and  yellow  glasses,  in  order  that  you  may
know  (distinguish)  the  dust  and  the  man  (who  is  concealed
by  it).

3960  The  dust  (of  the  body)  has  lifted  up  its  head  (risen)  around
the  (spiritual)  horseman;  you  have  fancied  the  dust  to  be  the
man  of  God.

Iblfs  saw  (only)  the  dust,  and  said,  “How  should  this  off-
spring of  clay  (Adam)  be  superior  to  me  of  the  fiery  brow?”


THE  UNWORLDLINESS  OF  THE  PROPHET  215

So  long  as  thou  art  regarding  the  holy  (prophets  and  saints)
as  men,  know  that  that  view  is  an  inheritance  from  Iblis.

If  thou  art  not  the  child  of  Ibli's,  O contumacious  one,  then
how  has  the  inheritance  of  that  cur  come  to  thee?

“ I am  not  a cur,  I am  the  Lion  of  God,  a worshipper  of  God :
the  lion  of  God  is  he  that  has  escaped  from  (phenomenal)
form.

The  lion  of  this  world  seeks  a prey  and  provision;  the  lion
of  the  Lord  seeks  freedom  and  death.

Inasmuch  as  in  death  he  sees  a hundred  existences,  like  the
moth  he  burns  away  (his  own)  existence.”

Desire  for  death  became  the  badge^  of  the  sincere,  for  this
word  (declaration)  was  (made)  a test  for  the  Jews.

He  (God)  said  in  the  Qur'an,  “O  people  of  the  Jews,  death
is  treasure  and  gain  to  the  sincere.

Even  as  there  is  desire  for  profit  (in  the  hearts  of  the  worldly),
the  desire  to  win  death  is  better  than  that  (in  the  eyes  of  the
sincere).

O Jews,  for  the  sake  of  (being  held  in)  honour  by  men  of  3970
worth,  let  this  wish  be  uttered  on  your  tongues.”

Not  a single  Jew  had  so  much  courage  (as  to  respond),  when
Mohammed  raised  this  banner  (gave  this  challenge).

He  said,  “If  they  should  utter  this  on  their  tongues,  truly
not  one  Jew  would  be  left  in  the  world.”

Then  the  Jews  brought  the  property  (tribute  in  kind)  and
land-tax,  saying,  “Do  not  put  us  to  shame,  O Lamp  (of  the
world).”

“There  is  no  end  in  sight  to  this  discourse:  give  me  thy
hand'^,  since  thine  eye  hath  seen  the  Friend.”


How  the  Prince  of  the  Faithful,  'Alt — may  God  honour  his  person  !

— said  to  his  antagonist,  “ When  thou  didst  spit  in  my  face,

my  fleshly  self  was  aroused  and  I could  no  longer  act  with  entire

sincerity  {towards  GodY:  that  hindered  me  from  slaying  thee."

The  Prince  of  the  Faithful  said  to  that  youth,  “In  the  hour  >975
of  battle,  O knight.

When  thou  didst  spit  in  my  face,  mv  fleshly  self  was  aroused
and  my  (good)  disposition  was  corrupted.

Half  (of  my  fighting)  came  to  be  for  God’s  sake,  and  half
(for)  idle  passion : in  God’s  affair  partnership^  is  not  allowable.

Thou  art  limned  by  the  hand  of  the  Lord:  thou  art  God’s
(work),  thou  art  not  made  by  me.

’ Literally,  “ collar.”

- These  words  are  addressed  by  ‘All  to  the  infidel  knight.

^ Literally,  “acting  sincerely  (towards  God)  was  no  more.”

^ I.e.  to  associate  the  worship  and  service  of  God  with  any  other  object.


2i6


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  I

Break  God’s  image,  (but  only)  by  God’s  command;  cast
(a  stone)  at  the  Beloved’s  glass,  (but  only)  the  Beloved’s
stone.”

39S0  The  fire-worshipper  heard  this,  and  a light  appeared  in  his
heart,  so  that  he  cut  a girdle^.

He  said,  “I  was  sowing  the  seed  of  wrong:  I fancied  thee
(to  be)  otherwise  (than  thou  art).

Thou  hast  (really)  been  the  balance  (endued)  with  the  (just)
nature  of  the  One  (God);  nay,  thou  hast  been  the  tongue  of
every  balance.

Thou  hast  been  my  race  and  stock  and  kin,  thou  hast  been
the  radiance  of  the  candle  of  my  religion.

I am  the  (devoted)  slave  of  that  eye-seeking  Lamp  from
which  thy  lamp  received  splendour.

39^5  I am  the  slave  of  the  billow'  of  that  Sea  of  Light  which  brings
a pearl  like  this  into  view.

Offer  me  the  profession  of  the  (Moslem)  Faith,  for  I regard
thee  as  the  exalted  one  of  the  time.”

Near  fifty  persons  of  his  kindred  and  tribe  lovingly  turned
their  faces  towards  the  Religion  (of  Islam).

By  the  sword  of  clemency  he  (‘All)  redeemed  so  many  throats
of  such  a multitude  from  the  sword.

The  sword  of  clemency  is  sharper  than  the  sword  of  iron;
nay,  it  is  more  productive  of  victory  than  a hundred  armies.

3990  Oh,  alas,  two  mouthfuls  were  eaten,  and  thereby  the  ferment
of  thought  was  frozen  up.

A grain  of  wheat  eclipsed  the  sun  of  Adam,  as  the  descending
node  is  (the  cause  of)  eclipse  to  the  brilliance  of  the  full-
moon.

Behold  the  beauty  of  the  heart,  how  its  moon  scatters  the
Pleiades  (how  its  light  is  broken  and  disordered)  by  a single
handful  of  clay.

When  the  bread  was  spirit,  it  was  beneficial ; since  it  became
form,  it  rouses  disbelief.

As  (for  example)  the  green  thistles  which  a camel  eats,  and
gains  from  eating  them  a hundred  benefits  and  pleasures :

3995  When  the  camel  from  the  desert  eats  those  same  thistles,
after  their  greenness  is  gone  and  they  have  become  dry.

They  rend  his  palate  and  cheek — oh,  alas  that  such  a nourish-
ing rose  became  a sword !

When  the  bread  was  spirit,  it  was  (like)  the  green  thistles;
since  it  became  form,  it  is  now'  dry  and  gross.

According  as  thou  hadst  formerly  been  in  the  habit  of  eating
it,  O gracious  being.

In  the  same  hope  thou  (still)  art  eating  this  dry  stuff,  after  the
spirit  has  become  mingled  with  clay.

* I.e.  the  sacred  thread  (kushti)  which  Zoroastrians  wear  on  their  waists.


‘ali  and  the  infidel  knight  217

It  has  become  mixed  with  earth  and  dr}-  and  flesh-cutting:
abstain  now  from  that  herbage,  O camel !

The  words  are  coming  (forth)  very  earth-soiled;  the  water
has  become  turbid;  stop  up  the  mouth  of  the  well,

That  God  may  again  make  it  pure  and  sweet,  that  He  who
made  it  turbid  may  likewise  make  it  pure.

Patience  brings  the  object  of  desire,  not  haste.  Have
patience — and  God  knoweth  best  what  is  right.


‘BO  01^  II


In  the  Name  of  God  the  Merciful  the  Compassionate


Touching  this  Second  Book  (of  the  Mathnaiai),  part  of  the
reason  of  its  postponement  is  (here)  set  forth,  namely,  that  if
all  the  Divine  Wisdom  (shown  in  any  particular  act)  be  made
known  to  His  slave,  the  slave  (absorbed)  in  (contemplation  of)
the  benefits  of  that  act  will  be  left  without  the  power  to  perform
it;  and  the  infinite  Wisdom  of  God  will  destroy  his  under-
standing, (so  that)  he  will  not  engage  in  that  act.  Therefore  the
High  God  makes  a small  portion  of  that  infinite  Wisdom  (to
be  as)  a toggle  in  his  nose  and  leads  him  towards  that  act ; for
if  He  give  him  no  information  about  those  benefits,  he  will  not
move  at  all,  inasmuch  as  the  motive  (of  human  actions)  arises
from  advantages  to  ourselves  or  others',  for  the  sake  of  which
we  act  accordingly;  while  (on  the  other  hand),  if  He  should
pour  down  upon  him  the  (whole)  wisdom  of  that  (act),  he  will
also  be  unable  to  move ; just  as  a camel  will  not  go  (forward)
unless  there  be  a toggle  in  his  nose,  and  if  the  toggle  be  (too)
big  he  will  likewise  lie  down  (and  refuse  to  go  on).  And  there
is  nothing  hut  We  have  the  storehouses  thereof,  and  We  do  not  send
it  dozen  but  in  a certain  measure.  Without  water,  earth  does  not
become  a brick,  nor  (again)  does  it  become  a brick  when  there
is  (too)  much  water.  And  the  heaven.  He  raised  it  and  set  up
the  scales.  He  giveth  every  thing  by  the  scale,  not  without
calculation  and  balance,  save  (only)  to  those  who  have  been
transmuted  from  the  creaturely  state  of  existence  and  have
become  (like  those  described  in  the  text)  And  He  bestoweth  on
zohom  He  pleaseth  zcithout  calculation,  albeit  whoso  hath  not
tasted  (experienced)  doth  not  know.

Some  one  asked,  “What  is  love?”  I answered,  “Thou  wilt
know  when  thou  becomest  (lost  in)  me.”

Love  is  uncalculated  affection.  For  that  reason  it  has  been
said  to  be  in  reality  the  attribute  of  God  and  unreal  in  relation
to  (man  who  is)  His  slave.  He  {God)  loveth  them  {yuhibbuhum)
is  the  entire  sum.  Which  (of  them)  is  (really  the  subject  of  the
word  yuhibbunahti)  they  love  Him?


' Literally,  “ to  human  beings.”


222


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II


In  the  Name  of  God  the  Merciful  the  Compassionate

This  Mathnawi  has  been  delayed  for  a while ; an  interval  was
needed  in  order  that  the  blood  might  turn  to  milk.

Blood  does  not  become  sweet  milk  until  thy  fortune  gives
birth  to  a new  babe.  Hearken  well  (to  my  words).

When  the  Light  of  God,  Husamu’ddin,  drew  the  reins  (of
his  spirit)  back  from  the  zenith  of  Heaven —

(For)  after  he  had  gone  in  the  ascension  to  (spiritual)  realities,
without  his  (life-giving)  springtide  the  buds  (of  mystic  know-
ledge) were  unburst  (in  my  heart) —

“5  When  (I  say)  he  returned  from  the  Sea  towards  the  shore,
the  lyre  of  the  poesy  of  the  Mathnawi  became  attuned  (again).

The  Mathnawi,  which  was  the  burnisher  (purifier)  of  spirits
— his  return  was  the  day  of  (my)  seeking  (an  auspicious)  com-
mencement (for  it).

The  date  of  beginning^  this  gainful  (spiritual)  traffic^  was  in
the  year  six  hundred  and  sixty-two.

A nightingale  w'ent  hence  and  returned:  it  became  a falcon
for  hunting  these  spiritual  truths.

May  this  falcon’s  resting-place  be  the  fore-arm  of  the  King !
May  this  gate  (to  the  Truth)  be  open  to  (all)  the  people  unto
everlasting !

10  The  bane  of  this  gate  is  sensuality  and  lust ; else,  draught  on
draught  (of  spiritual  knowledge)  is  (to  be  found)  here.

Gullet  and  mouth  are  the  eye-bandage  (which  makes  you  blind)
to  yonder  world:  close  this  mouth,  that  you  may  see  (it)  plain.

O mouth,  verily  thou  art  the  mouth  of  Hell;  and,  O world,
thou  art  like  the  intermediate  state’.

The  everlasting  light  is  beside  this  low  world,  the  pure  milk
is  beside  rivers  of  blood.

When  you  take  one  step  in  it  (the  world)  without  precaution,
your  milk  will  be  turned  to  blood  through  commixture.

15  Adam  took  one  step  in  sensual  pleasure:  separation  from  his
high  place  in  Paradise  became  a collar  on  the  neck  of  his
(fleshly)  soul.

The  angels  were  fleeing  from  him  as  from  a devil : how  many
tears  did  he  shed  for  the  sake  of  a single  loaf!

Although  the  sin  which  he  had  compassed  was  (but)  a hair,
yet  that  hair  had  grown  in  his  eyes.

Adam  was  the  eye  of  the  Eternal  Light:  a hair  in  the  eye  is
a great  mountain.

* Literally,  “the  rising-point  of  the  date  (of  composition).”

“ Literally,  “this  trading  and  profit.”

^ The  spirit  came  from  God  and  will  return  to  God.  The  present  life  is
its  “intermediate  state.”


THE  FRIEND  OF  GOD


223


If  Adam  had  taken  counsel  in  that  (matter),  he  would  not
have  uttered  excuses  in  penitence,

Because  when  one  intellect  is  joined  with  another  intellect,  it
prevents  evil  action  and  evil  speech ;

(But)  when  the  fleshly  soul  is  associated  with  another  fleshly
soul,  the  partial  (individual)  intellect  becomes  idle  and  useless.

When  because  of  loneliness  you  fall  into  despair,  you  become
(bright  as)  a sun  (if  you  go)  under  the  shadow  (protection)  of
the  friend.

Go,  seek  at  once  the  friend  of  God:  when  you  have  done  so,
God  is  your  friend.

He  who  has  fixed  his  gaze  upon  seclusion  (and  made  it  his
object),  after  all  ’tis  from  the  friend  (of  God)  that  he  has
learned  that  (lesson).

One  must  seclude  one’s  self  from  strangers,  (but)  not  from
the  friend : the  fur-coat  is  for  winter,  not  for  spring.

(If)  the  intellect  is  paired  with  another  intellect,  light  increases
and  the  way  becomes  plain ;

(But  if)  the  fleshly  soul  makes  merry’^  with  another  fleshiv
soul,  darkness  increases,  the  way  becomes  hidden.

The  friend  is  thine  eye,  O huntsman:  keep  him  pure  from
(unsoiled  by)  sticks  and  straws.

Beware!  Do  not  make  a dust  with  thy  tongue’s  broom,  do
not  make  a present  of  rubbish  to  thine  eye.

Since  the  true  believer  is  a mirror  for  the  true  believer,  his
face  is  safe  from  defilement^.

The  friend  is  a mirror  for  the  soul  in  sorrow : breathe  not  on
the  face  of  the  mirror,  O my  soul !

Lest  it  cover  its  face  on  account  of  thy  breath,  thou  must
swallow  (suppress)  thy  breath  at  every  moment.

Art  thou  less  than  earth.’  When  a plot  of  earth  finds  a friend,
that  is,  a springtide,  it  finds  (gains)  a hundred  thousand  flowers.

The  tree  that  is  united  with  a friend,  that  is,  the  sweet  air
(of  spring),  blossoms  from  head  to  foot;

In  autumn,  when  it  sees  (meets  with)  a repugnant  com-
panion, it  withdraws  its  face  and  head  under  the  coverlet

And  says,  “A  bad  comrade  is  (the  means  of)  stirring  up
trouble:  since  he  has  come,  my  (best)  course  is  to  sleep.

Therefore  I will  sleep,  I will  be  (like)  one  of  the  Men  of  the
Cave  (the  Seven  Sleepers):  that  prisoner  of  woe  (that  sorely
distressed  one)  is  better  than  Decianus.”

Their  time  of  waking  was  expended  by  (was  at  the  disposal  of)
Decianus;  their  sleep  was  the  capital  (fundamental  source)  of
their  renown.


* Literally,  “becomes  laughing,”  i.e.  friendly  and  familiar.

^ I.e.  he,  being  entirely  pure,  reflects  thy  spiritual  state  and  shows  thee
what  thou  really  art.


224  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

Sleep,  when  it  is  accompanied  by  wisdom,  is  (spiritual)
wakefulness;  (but)  alas  for  the  man  awake  who  consorts  with
the  ignorant !

40  When  the  crows  pitch  their  tents  on  Bahman  (January),  the
nightingales  hide  themselves  and  are  mute,

Because  the  nightingale  is  silent  without  the  rose-garden : the
absence  of  the  sun  kills  (the  nightingale’s)  wakefulness.

O sun,  thou  takest  leave  of  this  rose-garden  (the  earth)  in
order  to  illumine  (the  region)  below  the  earth ;

(But)  the  Sun  of  Divine  knowledge  has  no  motion : its  place
of  rising  is  naught  but  the  spirit  and  the  intellect ;

Especially  the  perfect  Sun  which  is  of  yonder  (world  of
Reality) : day  and  night  its  action  is  (giving)  illumination.

45  If  thou  art  an  Alexander,  come  to  the  Sun’s  rising-place;
after  that,  wheresoever  thou  goest,  thou  art  possessed  of  goodly
splendour.

After  that,  wheresoever  thou  goest,  ’Uvill  become  the  place
of  sunrise:  (all)  the  places  of  sunrise  will  be  in  love  with  thy
place  of  sunset.

Thy  bat-like  senses  are  running  towards  the  sunset;  thy
pearl-scattering  senses  are  faring  towards  the  sunrise.

The  way  of  (physical)  sense-perception  is  the  way  of  asses,
O rider : have  shame,  O thou  that  art  josthng  (vying)  with  asses !

Besides  these  five  (physical)  senses  there  are  five  (spiritual)
senses:  those  (latter)  are  like  red  gold,  while  these  (physical)
senses  are  like  copper.

50  In  the  bazaar  where  they  (the  buyers)  are  expert,  how  should
they  buy  the  copper  sense  like  (as  though  it  were)  the  sense
of  gold?

The  bodily  sense  is  eating  the  food  of  darkness ; the  spiritual
sense  is  feeding  from  a Sun.

O thou  that  hast  borne  the  baggage  of  thy  senses  to  the
Unseen,  put  forth  thy  hand,  like  Moses,  from  thy  bosom.

O thou  whose  attributes  are  (those  of)  the  Sun  of  Divine
knowledge,  while  the  sun  in  heaven  is  confined  to  a single
attribute.

Now  thou  becomest  the  Sun,  and  now  the  Sea;  now  the
mountain  of  Qaf,  and  now  the  ‘Anqa.

55  In  thine  essence  thou  art  neither  this  nor  that,  O thou  that
art  greater  than  (all)  imaginations  and  more  than  (all)  more !

The  Spirit  is  associated  (endued)  with  knowledge  and  reason :
what  has  the  Spirit  to  do  with  Arabic  and  Turkish?

Both  the  muwahhid  (who  asserts  the  transcendence  of  God)
and  the  mushabbih  (who  asserts  His  immanence)  are  bewildered
by  thee,  O thou  who,  being  without  image  (external  appearance),
art  (appearing)  in  so  many  forms.

Sometimes  the  muwahhad  (God  regarded  as  the  only  real  Being)


THE  FRIEND  OF  GOD


225

is  destroying  the  mushabbih  (who  asserts  that  God  is  immanent  in
forms) ; sometimes  (these)  forms  are  waylaying  the  mmoahhid  (so
that  he  cannot  gain  access  to  God  w'ho  transcends  all  forms).

Sometimes  Abu  ’1-Hasan  in  drunkenness  (ecstasy)  says  to
thee,  “O  thou  whose  teeth  are  small  (whose  years  are  few),

O thou  whose  body  is  tender ! ”

Sometimes  he  is  laying  waste  (ruining  and  defacing)  his  own  60
image : he  is  destroying  (it)  in  order  to  assert  the  transcendence
of  the  Beloved  (God).

The  doctrine  held  by  the  eye  of  sense  is  Mu‘tazilism,  whereas
the  eye  of  Reason  is  Sunnite  (orthodox)  in  respect  of  (its)  union
(vision  of  God).

Those  in  thrall  to  sense-perception  are  Mu'tazilites,  (though)
from  misguidedness  they  represent  themselves  as  Sunnites.

Any  one  who  remains  in  (bondage  to)  sense-perception  is  a
Alu'tazilite ; though  he  may  say  he  is  a Sunnite,  ’tis  from
ignorance.

Any  one  who  has  escaped  from  (the  bondage  of)  sense-
perception  is  a Sunnite:  the  man  endowed  with  (spiritual)
vision  is  the  eye  of  sweet-paced  (harmonious)  Reason.

If  the  animal  sense  could  see  the  King  (God),  then  the  ox  05
and  the  ass  would  behold  Allah.

If,  besides  the  animal  sense,  thou  hadst  not  another  sense
outside  of  (unconditioned  by)  the  desire  of  the  flesh.

Then  how  should  the  sons  of  Adam  have  been  honoured?
How  by  means  of  the  common  sense^  should  they  have  become
privileged  (to  know  these  mysteries)?

Your  calling  (God)  “formless”  (transcending  forms)  or
“formed”  (immanent  in  forms)  is  vain,  without  your  liberation
from  form  (unless  you  yourself  are  freed  from  sense-perception).

(Whether  God  is)  “formless”  or  “formed,”  He  is  with  him
that  is  all  kernel  and  has  gone  forth  from  the  husk.

If  you  are  blind,  ’tu  no  crime  in  the  blind',  (but)  if  not,  go  70
(persevere  in  purifying  yourself),  for  patience  is  the  key  to
success.

The  medicine  of  patience  wll  bum  the  veils  over  your  eye
and  will  also  effect  the  opening  of  your  breast  (to  Divine  know-
ledge).

when  the  mirror  of  your  heart  becomes  clear  and  pure,  you
will  behold  images  (wluch  are)  outside  of  (the  world  of)  water
and  earth.

You  will  behold  both  the  image  and  the  image-Maker,  both
the  carpet  of  (spiritual)  empire  and  the  carpet- Spreader.

The  phantom  (seen  in  mystical  vision)  of  my  Friend  seemed
(to  me)  like  Khalil  (Abraham) — its  form  an  idol,  its  reality  a
breaker  of  idols.

* I.e.  the  senses  which  Man  has  in  common  with  other  animals.


N M


15


226


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

75  Thanks  be  to  God  that  when  he  appeared,  my  spirit  beheld
in  his  phantom  its  own  phantom  (reflected  image).

The  dust  of  thy  threshold  was  bewitching  my  heart:  dust
(woe)  on  him  that  was  patient  without  thy  dust !

I said,  “If  I am  beautiful,  I shall  receive  this  (dust  of  Divine
grace  and  love)  from  him ; and  if  not,  he  has  indeed  laughed  at
ugly  me.

The  (best)  plan  is  this,  that  I look  at  myself  (to  see  whether
I am  worthy  of  him);  otherwise  (if  I am  not  worthy),  he  will
laugh  at  me : how  shall  I buy  (gain  his  love)?  ”

He  is  beautiful  and  a lover  of  beauty:  how  should  a fresh
young  man  choose  a decrepit  old  woman  ?

So  The  Beautiful  attracts  the  beautiful^  (to  itself) : know  this  (for
sure).  Recite  thereon  (the  text)  the  good  women  for  the  good  men.

In  this  world  everything  attracts  something:  the  hot  draws
the  hot  (to  itself)  and  the  cold  the  cold.

The  worthless  sort  attract  the  w'orthless ; the  lasting  (those  of
lasting  worth)  are  rejoiced  by  the  lasting.

Those  of  the  Fire  attract  those  of  the  Fire,  those  of  the  Light
seek  those  of  the  Light.

When  you  shut  your  eye,  you  felt  uncomfortable  - : how  could
the  light  of  the  eye  do  without  the  light  of  the  window?

S5  Your  disconafort  w'as  (caused  by)  the  light  in  your  eye  straining

to  be  joined  speedily  with  the  daylight.  '

If  you  feel  distress  (within)  while  your  eyes  are  unclosed,
know  that  you  have  shut  the  eye  of  your  heart,  (and)  open  it.

Recognise  that  that  (distress)  is  the  craving  of  the  eyes  of
your  heart  which  is  seeking  the  immeasurable  Light.

Inasmuch  as  separation  from  those  two  impermanent  lights
brought  you  discomfort,  (so  that)  you  opened  your  eyes.

Separation,  then,  from  those  two  steadfast  (everlasting)  lights
will  bring  you  discomfort : guard  them  (well) !

90  Since  He  is  calling  me,  I will  look  to  see  whether  I am  worthy
to  be  drawn  (to  Him)  or  whether  I am  ill-favoured.

If  a charming  person  makes  an  ugly  one  (follow)  at  his  heels,
’tis  (but)  a mockery  that  he  makes  of  him.

How,  I wonder,  shall  I behold  my  own  face,  so  as  to  see
what  complexion  I have  and  whether  I am  like  day  or  like  night?

For  a long  while  I w'as  seeking  the  image  of  my  soul,  (but)
my  image  was  not  displayed  (reflected)  by  any  one.

“After  all,”  I said,  “what  is  a mirror  for?  (The  use  of  it  is
this),  that  every  one  may  know'  what  and  who  he  is.”

^5  The  mirror  of  iron  is  (only)  for  husks  (external  forms);  the
mirror  that  shows  the  aspect  of  the  heart  is  of  great  price.

The  soul’s  mirror  is  naught  but  the  face  of  the  friend,  the

‘ Literally,  “beauty”  or  “a  beautiful  one.”

^ Literally,  “discomfort  overtook  you.”


THE  FRIEND  OF  GOD  227

face  of  that  friend  who  is  of  yonder  country  (the  spiritual
land).

I said,  “O  heart,  seek  the  Universal  Alirror,  go  to  the  Sea;
the  business  will  not  succeed  (be  successfully  accomplished)  by
means  of  the  river.”

In  this  quest  thy  slave  (at  last)  arrived  at  thy  dwelling-place,
(as)  the  pains  (of  childbirth)  drew  Mary  to  the  palm-tree.

When  thine  eye  became  an  eye  for  my  heart,  my  blind  heart
went  and  became  drowned  in  vision.

I saw  that  thou  art  the  Universal  Alirror  unto  everlasting;
I saw  my  own  image  in  thine  eye.

I said,  “At  last  I have  found  myself;  in  his  eyes  I have  found
the  shining  Way.”

Aly  false  instinct  said,  “Beware!  That  (image)  is  (only)  thy
phantom:  distinguish  thy  essence  from  thy  phantom”;

(But)  my  image  gave  voice  (spoke)  from  thine  eve  (and  said),
“I  am  thou  and  thou  art  I in  (perfect)  oneness;

For  how  should  a phantom  find  the  way  into  this  illumined
eye  which  never  ceases  from  (contemplating)  the  (Divine)
realities?  ”

(Thou  saidst),  “If  you  behold  your  image  in  the  eyes  of  any
other  than  me,  know  that  ’tis  a phantom  and  reprobate.

Because  he  (every  one  except  me)  is  applying  (to  his  eye)  the
collyrium  of  non-e.xistence  (unreality)  and  is  imbibing  the  wine
of  Satan’s  illusion-making.

Their  eye  is  the  home  of  phantasy  and  non-existence :
necessarily  it  sees  as  existent  the  things  which  are  non-existent ;

(But)  since  my  eye  saw  (got)  collyrium  from  the  Glorious
(God),  it  is  the  home  of  (real)  existence,  not  the  home  of
phantasy.”

So  long  as  a single  hair  of  you  is  before  your  eye,  in  your
phantasy  a pearl  will  be  as  jasper.

You  will  know  jasper  from  pearls  (only)  at  the  time  when
you  pass  away  from  (abandon)  your  phantasy  entirely.

O connoisseur  of  pearls,  listen  to  a story,  that  you  may  dis-
tinguish actual  seeing  from  (mere)  inference.


How  in  the  time  of  ‘ L mar,  may  God  be  well- pleased  icith  him,  a
certain  person  imagined  that  what  he  saw  was  the  new  moon.

The  Fasting-month  (Ramadan)  came  round  in  ‘Umar’s  time.
Some  people  ran  to  the  top  of  a hill.

In  order  to  take  (the  appearance  of)  the  new  moon  as  a good
omen,  and  one  of  them  said,  “Look,  O ‘Umar,  here  is  the  new
moon!  ”

As  ‘Umar  did  not  see  the  moon  in  the  sky,  he  said,  “This
moon  has  risen  from  thy  phantasy.


I


228


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

115  Otherwise,  (since)  I am  a better  seer  of  the  heavens  (than
thou),  how  is  it  that  I do  not  see  the  pure  crescent?

Wet  thy  hand,”  said  he,  “and  rub  it  on  thine  eyebrow,  and
then  look  up  towards  the  new  moon.”

When  he  wetted  his  eyebrow,  he  did  not  see  the  moon.
“O  King,”  he  said,  “there  is  no  moon;  it  has  disappeared.”

“Yes,”  said  ‘Umar,  “the  hair  of  thine  eyebrow  had  become
(curved)  like  a bow  and  shot  at  thee  an  arrow  of  opinion.”

When  one  hair  became  crooked,  it  waylaid  him  (hindered
him  from  seeing  truly),  so  that,  making  a false  claim,  he  boasted
to  have  seen  the  moon.

120  Inasmuch  as  a crooked  hair  veils  the  sky,  how  will  it  be  when
all  your  members  are  crooked?

Straighten  your  members  by  (the  help  of)  the  straight  (the
righteous).  O you  who  (would)  go  straight,  turn  not  your  head
aside  from  that  threshold  (where  the  righteous  dwell).

Balance  makes  balance  correct;  balance  also  makes  balance
defective^.

Whoever  weighs  the  same  (adopts  the  same  standard)  as  the
unrighteous  falls  into  deficiency,  and  his  understanding  becomes
dazed.

Go,  be  hard  on  the  infidels,  sprinkle  dust  on  (renounce)
fondness  for  the  strangers.

125  Be  as  a sword  upon  the  heads  of  the  strangers:  come,  do  not
play  foxy  tricks,  be  a lion.

In  order  that  the  friends  (of  God),  moved  by  (righteous)
jealousy,  may  not  break  with  you,  because  those  thorns  (the
wicked)  are  the  enemies  of  this  rose  (the  friend  of  God).

Set  fire  to  the  wolves  as  (to)  rue-seed,  because  those  wolves
are  the  enemies  of  Joseph.

Iblis  calls  you  “father’s  soul”  (darling  son) — beware  (of
him)!  The  accursed  Devil  (does  that)  in  order  that  he  may
beguile  you  with  (vain)  words.

He  practised  the  like  imposture  on  your  father:  this  black-
faced one  checkmated  an  Adam.

130  This  crow  is  busy  on  the  chessboard;  look  not  you  upon  his
game  with  an  eye  that  is  half-asleep.

Because  he  knows  many  formidable  moves  which  will  stick
in  your  throat  like  a straw.

His  straw  will  stay  in  your  throat  for  years.  What  is  that
straw?  Love  of  rank  and  wealth.

Wealth  is  the  straw,  since  in  your  throat,  O infirm  one,  it  is
an  obstacle  (barrier)  to  the  Water  of  Life.

If  an  artful  enemy  carry  off  your  wealth,  a robber  will  have
carried  off  a robber.

* I.e.  a true  standard  corrects  a false  one,  and  a false  standard  corrupts
a true  one.


THE  MAN  WHO  THOUGHT  HE  SAW  THE  MOON  229


Hozv  a snake-catcher  stole  a snake  from  another  snake-catcher .

A petty  thief  carried  off  a snake  from  a snake-catcher  and  in  135
his  folly  was  accounting  it  a prize.

The  snake-catcher  escaped  from  the  snake’s  bite;  the  man
who  had  robbed  him  was  miserably  killed  by  the  snake.

The  snake-catcher  saw  him  (dead);  then  he  recognised  him
and  said,  “Aly  snake  has  emptied  him  of  life.

My  soul  was  desiring  of  Him  (God)  in  prayer  that  I might
find  him  and  take  the  snake  from  him.

Thanks  to  God  that  that  prayer  was  rejected : I thought  ’twas
loss,  but  it  has  turned  out  to  be  gain.”

IVIany  are  the  prayers  which  are  loss  and  destruction,  and  i+o
from  kindness  the  Holy  God  is  not  hearing  them.


How  the  companion  of  Jesus,  on  whom  be  peace,  entreated
Jesus,  on  whom  be  peace,  to  give  life  to  the  bones.

A certain  foolish  person  accompanied  Jesus  (on  his  way).

He  espied  some  bones  in  a deep-dug  hole.

He  said,  “O  companion,  (teach  me)  that  exalted  Name  by
which  thou  makest  the  dead  to  live ;

Teach  (it)  me,  that  I may  do  good  and  by  means  of  it  endow
the  bones  with  life.”

Jesus  said,  “Be  silent,  for  that  is  not  thy  work:  ’tis  not  meet
for  thy  breath  and  speech.

For  it  wants  breath  purer  than  rain  and  more  piercing  in  145
action  than  the  angels.

(Many)  lifetimes  were  needed  that  the  breath  might  be
purified,  so  that  he  (its  owner)  was  entrusted  with  the  treasury
of  the  Heavens.

(Suppose  that)  thou  hast  grasped  this  rod  firmly  in  thy  hand :
whence  will  accrue  to  thy  hand  the  cunning  of  Moses?  ”

He  said,  “If  I am  not  one  to  pronounce  (such  sacred)
mysteries,  do  thou  pronounce  the  Name  over  the  bones.”

Jesus  cried,  “O  Lord,  what  are  these  hidden  purposes  (of
Thine)?  What  is  (the  meaning  of)  this  fool’s  inclination  (to
engage)  in  this  fruitless  work?

How  has  this  sick  man  no  care  for  himself?  How  has  this  155
corpse  no  care  for  (spiritual)  life?

He  has  left  (uncared  for)  his  own  dead  (soul)  and  seeks  to
mend  (revive)  the  dead  (bones)  of  a stranger.”

God  (answered  and)  said,  “ The  backslider  seeks  backsliding^ :
the  thistle  that  has  grovm  (in  him)  is  the  retribution  for  (conse-
quence of)  his  sowing.”


^ I.e.  “those  who  are  doomed  to  perdition  seek  their  own  perdition.”


230  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

He  that  sows  the  seed  of  thistles  in  the  world,  be  warned  not
to  look  for  him  in  the  rose-garden.

If  he  take  a rose  in  his  hand,  it  becomes  a thistle;  and  if  he
go  to  a friend,  he  (the  friend)  becomes  a snake.

55  The  damned  wretch  is  an  elixir  which  transmutes  into  poison
and  snakes;  (his  elixir  is)  contrary  to  the  elixir  of  the  God-
fearing man.

Hmc  the  Sufi  enjoined  the  servant  to  take  care  of  his  beast
and  how  the  servant  said,  “La  hawL.”

A Siifi  was  wandering  round  the  world  till  one  night  he
became  a guest  at  a monastery'  (for  Sufis).

He  had  ^ beast  (ass) : he  tied  it  in  the  stable,  (while)  he
(himself)  sat  at  the  top  of  the  dais  with  his  friends.

Then  he  engaged  with  his  friends  in  (mystical)  meditation:
the  presence  of  the  friend  (of  God)  is  a book,  (and)  more.

The  Sufi’s  book  is  not  (composed  of)  ink  and  letters:  it  is
naught  but  a heart  white  as  snow.

60  The  scholar’s  provision  is  (consists  of)  pen-marks  (written
letters  and  words).  What  is  the  Sufi’s  provision?  Footmarks.

He  (the  Sufi)  stalks  the  game,  like  a hunter:  he  sees  the
musk-deer’s  track  and  follows  the  footprints.

For  some  while  the  track  of  the  deer  is  (the)  proper  (clue)
for  him,  (but)  afterwards  ’tis  the  navel  (musk-gland)  of  the
deer  that  is  his  guide.

When  he  has  given  thanks  for  (having  been  favoured  with
knowledge  of)  the  track  and  has  traversed  the  way,  of  necessity
by  means  of  that  track  he  arrives  at  a goaH.

To  go  one  stage  (guided)  by  the  scent  of  the  musk-gland  is
better  than  a hundred  stages  of  (following)  the  track  and
roaming  about.

65  The  heart  that  is  the  rising-place  of  the  moonbeams  (of
Divine  light)  is  the  opening  of  the  doors  (of  Reality)  for  the
gnostic.

To  you  it  is  a wall,  to  them  it  is  a door;  to  you  a stone,  to
(those)  venerated  ones  a pearl.

What  you  see  plainly  in  the  mirror — the  Pir  sees  more  than
that  in  the  brick.

The  Firs  are  they  whose  spirits,  before  this  world  existed,
were  in  the  Sea  of  (Divine)  bounty.

Before  (the  creation  of)  this  body  they  passed  (many)  life-
times ; before  the  sowing  they  took  iip  (harvested)  the  wheat.

70  They  have  received  the  spirit  before  (the  creation  of)  the
form ; they  have  bored  the  pearls  before  (the  creation  of)  the  sea.

^ Equivalent  to  “ Good  gracious ! ”

- Literally,  “an  object  of  desire.”


THE  SiJfI  and  the  UNFAITHFUL  SERVANT  231

(Whilst)  consultation  was  going  on  as  to  bringing  mankind  into
existence,  their  spirits  were  in  the  Sea  of  (Divine)  Omnipotence
up  to  the  throat.

When  the  angels  were  opposing  that  (creation  of  man),  they
(the  Pits)  were  secretly  clapping  their  hands  (in  derision)  at  the
angels.

He  (the  Pir)  was  made  acquainted  with  the  (material)  form
of  every  existent  being,  before  this  Universal  Soul  became
fettered  (by  materiality).

Before  the  (creation  of  the)  heavens  they  have  seen  Saturn,
before  the  (existence  of)  seeds  they  have  seen  the  bread.

Without  brain  and  mind  they  were  full  of  thought,  without  175
army  and  battle  they  gained  victory.

That  immediate  intuition  (intuitive  knowledge)  in  relation  to
them  is  thought;  else,  indeed,  in  relation  to  those  who  are  far
(from  God)  it  is  vision.

Thought  is  of  the  past  and  future;  when  it  is  emancipated
from  these  two,  the  difficulty  is  solved.

The  spirit  has  beheld  the  wine  in  the  grape,  the  spirit  has
beheld  thing  (entity)  in  nothing  (nonentity);

It  has  beheld  every  conditioned  thing  as  unconditioned,  it
has  beheld  the  genuine  coin  and  the  alloyed  before  (the  ex-
istence of)  the  mine ;

Before  the  creation  of  grapes  it  has  quaffed  wines  and  sho%vn  180
the  excitements  (of  intoxication).

In  hot  July  they  (the  Pfrs)  see  December;  in  the  sunbeams
they  see  the  shade.

In  the  heart  of  the  grape  thev  have  seen  the  wine ; in  absolute
fund  (privation  of  objectivity)  they  have  seen  the  object.

The  sky  is  draining  draughts  from  their  circling  cup,  the
sun  is  clad  in  cloth  of  gold  by  their  bounty.

When  you  see  two  of  them  met  together  as  friends,  they  are
one,  and  at  the  same  time  (they  are)  six  hundred  thousand.

Their  numbers  are  in  the  likeness  of  waves:  the  wind  will  185
have  brought  them  into  number  (into  plurality  from  unity).

The  Sun,  which  is  the  spirits,  became  separated  (broken  into
rays)  in  the  windows,  which  are  bodies.

When  you  gaze  on  the  Sun’s  disk,  it  is  itself  one,  but  he  that
is  screened  by  (his  perception  of)  the  bodies  is  in  some  doubt.

Separation  (plurality)  is  in  the  animal  spirit ; the  human  spirit
is  one  essence.

Inasmuch  as  God  sprinkled  His  light  upon  them  [mankind),
(they  are  essentially  one) : His  light  never  becomes  separated  (in
reality).

O my  comrade  on  the  way,  dismiss  thv  weariness  for  a up
moment,  that  I may  describe  a single  mole  (grain)  of  that
Beauty.


232  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

The  beauty  of  His  state  cannot  be  set  forth:  what  are  both
the  worlds  (temporal  and  spiritual)?  The  reflexion  of  His  mole.

When  I breathe  a word  concerning  His  beauteous  mole,  my
speech  would  fain  burst  my  body.

Like  an  ant,  I am  so  happy  in  this  granary  that  I am  dragging
a burden  too  great  for  me.

How  the  explanation  of  the  {inner)  meaning  of  the  tale  was  stopped

because  of  the  hearer's  desire  to  hear  the  superficial  form  of  it.

When  will  He  who  is  envied  by  Light  allow  me  to  tell  that
which  is  obligatory  and  ought  to  be  told?

195  The  sea  casts  foam  in  front  (of  it)  and  makes  a barrier:  it
draws  back  and  after  drawing  back  flows  in  (again).

Hear  what  has  interfered  (hindered  my  exposition)  at  the
present  time:  methinks  the  hearer’s  mind  has  wandered  else-
where.

His  thoughts  have  turned  to  the  Sufi  guest:  he  is  sunk  up
to  the  neck  (wholly  absorbed)  in  that  business^.

(Therefore)  it  behoves  me  to  go  back  from  this  discourse  to
that  stoiy'  in  order  to  describe  what  happened  (to  him).

O dear  friend,  do  not  fancy  the  Siifi  is  the  (external)  form
(which  you  behold):  how  long,  like  children,  (will  you  be
content)  with  walnuts  and  raisins?

200  Our  body  is  (as)  walnuts  and  raisins,  O son;  if  you  are  a man,
relinquish  these  two  things;

And  (even)  if  you  do  not  relinquish  them  (by  your  own  act),
the  grace  of  God  will  enable  you  to  pass  beyond  the  nine  tiers
(of  Heaven).

Now  listen  to  the  outward  form  of  the  tale,  but  take  heed  to
separate  the  grain  from  the  chaff.

How  the  people  of  the  caravan  supposed  the  Sufi's  beast  was  ill.

WLen  at  last  (the  meditation  of)  that  circle  of  Sufis  who  were
seeking  (spiritual)  profit  came  to  an  end  (culminated)  in  ecstasy
and  enthusiasm.

They  brought  dishes  of  food  for  the  guest,  and  he  then  be-
thought him  of  his  beast.

205  He  said  to  the  famulus  (the  servant  of  the  Sufis),  “ Go  into  the
stable  and  make  the  straw  and  barley  all  right  for  the  animal.”

“Good  gracious’!”  he  replied,  “why  this  saying  overmuch?
These  things  have  been  my  care  since  long  ago.”

The  Sufi  said,  “First  wet  his  barley,  for  ’tis  an  old  ass,  and
his  teeth  are  shaky.”

* Or  “passion  (to  hear  the  story).”

“ Ld  hazel,  lit.  “there  is  no  power  (except  in  God).”


THE  SIJFI  AND  THE  UNFAITHFUL  SERVANT  233

“Good  gracious!”  said  he,  “why  are  you  telling  (me)  this,
Sir?  They  are  taught  by  me  (to  make)  these  arrangements.”

The  Sufi  said,  “First  of  all  take  off^  his  saddle  and  (then)  put
the  salve  of  manbal  on  his  sore  back.”

“ Good  gracious ! ” exclaimed  the  servant.  “ Why,  O purveyor  210
of  wisdom,  I have  had  a thousand  guests  of  your  sort.

And  all  have  departed  from  us  well-pleased:  the  guest  is
(dear  to  us  as)  our  life  and  our  kinsman.”

The  Sufi  said,  “Give  him  water,  but  (let  it  be)  luke-
warm.” “Good  gracious!”  cried  the  other,  “I  am  ashamed
of  you.”

The  Siifi  said,  “Put  (only)  a little  straw  in  his  barley.”
“Good  gracious!  Cut  short  this  speech,”  he  replied.

The  Sufi  said,  “Sweep  his  place  (clear)  of  stones  and  dung,
and  if  it  is  wet,  sprinkle  dry  earth  on  it.”

“Good  gracious!”  cried  he,  “implore  God’s  grace-,  O 215
father,  and  say  little  (give  few  instructions)  to  a messenger  who
knows  his  business.”

The  Siifi  said,  “Take  the  comb  and  curry  the  ass’s  back.”
“Good  gracious!  do  have  some  shame,  O father,”  said  he.

• The  servant  said  this  and  briskly  girded  up  his  loins.  “I  go,”

said  he;  “first  I will  fetch  the  straw  and  barley.”

Off  he  went  and  never  thought  of  the  stable  at  all : he  gave
that  Siifi  (a  pretence  like)  the  sleep  of  the  hare®.

The  servant  went  off  to  (join)  some  rascals  and  made  a
mockery  of  the  Siifi’s  admonition.

The  Siifi  was  fatigued  by  his  journey  and  stretched  his  limbs  220
(lay  down  to  sleep) : with  his  eyes  closed  he  was  dreaming

That  his  ass  was  left  (helpless)  in  the  clutch  of  a wolf,  (which)
was  tearing  pieces  (of  flesh)  from  its  back  and  thighs .

“Good  gracious!”  he  exclaimed,  “what  sort  of  melancholy
(madness)  is  this?  Oh,  where  is  that  kindly  servant?  ”

Again  he  would  see  his  ass  going  along  the  road  and  falling
now  into  a well  and  now  into  a ditch.

He  was  dreaming  various  unpleasant  dreams ; he  was  reciting
the  Fdtiha  and  the  Qdri‘a.

He  said  (to  himself),  “What  can  be  done  to  help  ? Aly  friends  225
have  hurried  out:  they  have  departed  and  made  all  the  doors
fast.”

Again  he  would  say,  “Oh,  I wonder — that  wretched  servant!
Did  not  he  partake  of  bread  and  salt  with  us?

I showed  him  nothing  but  courtesy  and  mildness : why  should
he  on  the  contrary  show  hatred  towards  me?

) Literally,  “put  down  (aside).”

- Literally,  “say  Ld  hawl.”

’ l.e.  he  caused  him  to  believe  in  his  vigilance,  while  he  was  really
negligent.


234  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Every  enmity  must  rest  on  some  cause;  otherwise,  our
common  humanity^  would  dictate  faithfulness  (in  friendship).”

Then  he  would  say  again,  “When  had  Adam,  the  kind  and
generous,  done  an  injury  to  Iblis?

230  What  was  done  by  man  to  snake  and  scorpion  that  they  wish
(to  inflict)  death  and  pain  upon  him?

To  rend  is  the  instinct  of  the  wolf:  after  all,  this  envy  is
conspicuous  in  mankind.”

Again  he  would  say,  “It  is  wrong  thus  to  think  evil:  why
have  I such  thoughts  against  my  brother?”

Then  he  would  say,  “Prudence  consists  in  your  thinking  evil:
how  shall  he  that  thinks  no  evil  remain  unhurt?”

The  Sufi  was  in  (this)  anxiety,  and  (meanwhile)  the  ass  was  in
such  a plight  that — may  it  befall  our  enemies- !

255  That  poor  ass  was  amidst  earth  and  stones,  with  his  saddle
crooked  and  his  halter  torn.

Killed  (exhausted)  by  the  journey,  without  fodder  all  the
night  long,  now  at  the  last  gasp  and  now  perishing.

All  night  the  ass  was  repeating,  “ O God,  I give  up  the  barley ;
(but  am  I to  have)  less  than  one  handful  of  straw?”

With  mute  eloquence  he  was  saying,  “O  Shaykhs,  (have)
some  pity,  for  I am  consumed  (with  anguish)  because  of  this
raw  impudent  rogue.”

What  that  ass  suffered  of  pain  and  torment,  the  land-bird
suffers  (the  same)  in  a flood  of  water.

240  Then  (all)  that  night  till  dawn  the  wretched  ass,  from  ex-
ceeding hunger,  rolled  on  his  side.

Day  rose.  The  servant  came  at  mom  and  quickly  looked  for
the  saddle  and  laid  it  on  the  ass’s  back.

After  the  fashion  of  ass-dealers  he  gave  him  two  or  three  blows
(with  a goad) : he  did  to  the  ass  what  is  befitting  from  such  a cur
(as  he  was).

The  sharpness  of  the  sting  set  the  ass  jumping ; where  is  the
tongue  (has  an  ass  such  a tongue)  that  he  may  describe  his  own
state  (feelings)?

When  the  Siifi  mounted  and  got  going,  he  (the  ass)  began  to
fall  on  his  face  eveiy'  time,

245  (And)  every  time  the  people  (the  travellers)  lifted  him  up :
they  all  thought  he  was  ill.

One  would  twist  his  ears  hard,  while  another  sought  for  the
(lacerated)  part  under  his  palate.

And  another  searched  for  the  stone  in  his  shoe,  and  another
looked  at  the  dirt  in  his  eye.

Also  they  were  saying,*  * O Shaykh,  what  is  the  cause  of  this  ? Were
not  you  saying  yesterday,  ‘ Thanks  (to  God),  this  ass  is  strong’?  ”

^ Literally,  “our  bein^  conveners.’*

Literally,  “may  it  be  the  retribution  of  enemies!”


THE  SUFI  AND  THE  UNFAITHFUL  SERVANT  235

He  replied,  “The  ass  that  ate  Ld  hazvl^  during  the  night
cannot  get  along  except  in  this  manner.

Inasmuch  as  the  ass’s  food  by  night  was  Ld  hawl,  he  was  250
glorifying  God  by  night  and  (is  engaged)  in  prostrating  himself
by  day.”

Most  people  are  man-eaters:  put  no  trust-  in  their  saying,
“Peace  to  you.”

The'hearts  of  all  are  the  Devil’s  house:  do  not  accept  (listen
to)  the  palaver  of  devilish  men.

He  that  swallows  Ld  hazvl  from  the  breath  (mouth)  of  the
Devil,  like  that  ass  falls  headlong  in  the  fight.

Whoever  swallows  the  Devil’s  imposture  in  this  world  and
(swallows)  veneration  and  deceit  from  the  foe  that  has  the  face
(semblance)  of  a friend.

In  the  Way  of  Islam  and  on  the  bridge  Sirat  he  will  fall  upon  255
his  head  from  giddiness,  like  that  ass.

Beware!  Do  not  hearken  to  the  blandishments  of  the  bad
friend:  espy  the  snare,  do  not  walk  securely  on  the  earth.

See  the  hundred  thousand  devils  who  utter  Ld  hazvl ! O Adam,
in  the  serpent  behold  Iblis  1

He  gives  (you)  vain  words,  he  says  to  you,  “O  my  soul  and
beloved,”  that  he  may  strip  the  skin  off  his  beloved,  like  a
butcher.

He  gives  vain  words  that  he  may  strip  off  your  skin : woe  to
him  that  tastes  opium  from  (the  mouth  of)  enemies.

He  lays  his  head  at  your  feet  (in  flattery)  and  butcher-like  260
gives  (you)  vain  (wheedling)  words,  that  he  may  shed  your
blood  miserably.

Like  a lion,  hunt  your  prey  yourself : leave  (pay  no  heed  to)
the  blandishment  of  stranger  or  kinsman.

Know  that  the  regard  of  the  base  is  like  that  servant;  ’tis
better  to  have  nobody  (as  your  friend)  than  (to  accept)  the
flattery  of  nohodies  (worthless  people).

Do  not  make  your  home  in  (other)  men’s  land : do  your  own
work,  don’t  do  the  work  of  a stranger.

Who  is  the  stranger?  Your  earthen  body,  for  the  sake  of
which  is  (all)  your  sorrow.

So  long  as  you  are  giving  your  body  greasy  (rich)  and  sweet  265
(food),  you  will  not  see  fatness  in  your  (spiritual)  essence.

If  the  body  be  set  in  the  midst  of  musk,  (yet)  on  the  day  of
death  its  stench  will  become  manifest.

Do  not  put  musk  on  your  body,  rub  it  on  your  heart.  What
is  musk?  The  holy  name  of  the  Glorious  (God).

The  hypocrite  puts  musk  on  his  body  and  puts  his  spirit  at
the  bottom  of  the  ash-pit.

' I.e.  “implored  God  to  help  him.”

^ Literally,  “ do  not  seek  safety.”


236  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

On  his  tongue  the  name  of  God,  and  in  his  soul  stenches
(arising)  from  his  infidel  thought.

270  In  relation  to  him  praise  of  God  is  (like)  the  herbage  of  the
ash-pit:  it  is  roses  and  lilies  (growing)  upon  a dunghill.

Those  plants  are  certainly  there  on  loan  (and  belong  to  some-
where else) ; the  proper  place  for  those  flowers  is  the  symposium
and  (the  scene  of)  festivity.

■ The  good  women  come  to  the  good  men ; there  is  (also  the  text)
to  the  wicked  men  the  wicked  women.  Mark!

Do  not  bear  malice:  they  that  are  led  astray  by  malice,  their
graves  are  placed  beside  the  malicious.

The  origin  of  malice  is  Hell,  and  your  malice  is  a part  of  that
whole  and  is  the  enemy  of  your  religion.

275  Since  you  are  a part  of  Hell,  take  care ! The  part  gravitates
towards  its  whole.

He  that  is  bitter  will  assuredly  be  attached  to  those  who  are
bitter : how  should  vain  breath  (false  words)  be  joined  with  the
truth?

O brother,  you  are  that  same  thought  (of  yours) ; as  for  the
rest  (of  you),  you  are  (only)  bone  and  fibre.

If  your  thought  is  a rose,  you  are  a rose-garden ; and  if  it  is
a thorn,  you  are  fuel  for  the  bath-stove.

If  you  are  rose-water,  you  are  sprinkled  on  head  and  bosom;
and  if  you  are  (stinking)  like  urine,  you  are  cast  out.

280  Look  at  the  trays  in  front  of  druggists — each  kind  put  beside
its  own  kind.

Things  of  each  sort  mixed  with  things  of  the  same  sort,  and
a certain  elegance  produced  by  this  homogeneity ;

If  his  (the  druggist’s)  aloes-wood  and  sugar  get  mixed,  he
picks  them  out  from  each  other,  piece  by  piece.

The  trays  were  broken  and  the  souls  were  spilled:  good  and
evil  ones  were  mingled  with  each  other.

God  sent  the  prophets  with  scrolls  (of  Revelation),  that  He
might  pick  out  (and  sort)  these  grains  on  the  dish.

285  Before  this^  we  were  one  community,  none  knew  whether  we
were  good  or  bad.

False  coin  and  fine  (both)  were  current  in  the  world,  since
all  was  night,  and  we  were  as  night-travellers.

Until  the  sun  of  the  prophets  rose  and  said,  “ Begone,  O alloy !
Come,  O thou  that  art  pure!”

The  eye  can  distinguish  colours,  the  eye  knows  ruby  and
(common)  stone.

The  eye  knows  the  jewel  and  the  rubbish;  hence  bits  of
rubbish  sting  the  eye.

290  These  vile  counterfeiters  are  enemies  of  day,  those  pieces  of
gold  from  the  mine  are  lovers  of  day,

‘ I.e.  before  the  prophets  were  sent.


THE  SUFI  AND  THE  UNFAITHFUL  SERVANT  237

Because  day  is  the  mirror  that  makes  it  (the  fine  gold)  known,
so  that  the  ashrafi  (the  coin  of  sterling  gold)  may  see  (receive)
its  (day’s)  gift  of  honour.

Hence  God  bestowed  the  title  of  “ Day”  on  the  Resurrection,
(for)  day  displays  the  beauty  of  red  and  yellow.

In  reality,  then,  day  is  the  inmost  consciousness  of  the  saints,
(though)  beside  their  moon  day  is  (dim)  as  shadows.

Know  that  day  is  the  reflexion  of  the  mystery  (the  illumined
consciousness)  of  the  man  of  God,  while  eye-sealing  night  is
the  reflexion  of  his  occultation^.

For  that  reason  God  said,  By  the  morn:  by  the  morn  is  (refers  295
to)  the  fight  of  the  hidden  mind  of  Mustafa  (Mohammed).

The  other  view,  that  the  Beloved  (God)  meant  this  morn
(in  the  literal  sense),  is  (held)  just  for  the  reason  that  this  too
is  the  reflexion  of  him ;

Else  it  is  wrong  to  swear  by  a transient  thing : how  indeed  is
transiency  proper  to  the  speech  of  God?

That  Friend  (Abraham)  said,  “/  love  not  them  that  set” : how
should  the  glorious  Lord  mean  transiency  by  this  (oath)?

Again,  and  by  the  night  is  (refers  to)  his  occultation  and  his
earthen  rust-dark  body.

When  his  sun  rose  from  that  sky,  it  said  to  the  night  of  the  300
body,  “Lo,  He  hath  not  forsaken  thee.”

Union  was  made  manifest  out  of  the  essence  of  affliction:
that  sweetness  (of  union)  was  expressed  by  (the  words)  He  hath
not  hated  {thee).

In  fadt,  every  expression  is  the  symbol  of  a state:  the  state
is  as  a hand,  while  the  expression  is  a tool.

The  goldsmith’s  tool  in  the  hand  of  a shoemaker  is  like  a
seed  sown  in  sand ;

And  the  cobbler’s  tool  (put)  before  the  husbandman  is  (as)
straw  before  a dog  (or)  bones  before  an  ass.

“I  am  God”  on  the  lips  of  Mansur^  was  the  fight  (of  truth);  305
“ I am  Allah”  on  the  lips  of  Pharaoh  was  a fie.

In  the  hand  of  IVIoses  the  rod  became  a witness  (to  the  truth) ;
in  the  hand  of  the  magician  the  rod  became  (worthless  as)  motes
in  the  air.

On  this  account  Jesus  did  not  teach  his  fellow-traveller  that
Name  of  the  Lord,

For  he  would  not  know  (its  proper  use)  and  would  attribute
imperfection  to  the  tool  (which  he  misused).  Strike  stone  on
clay,  and  how  should  fire  leap  forth?

Hand  and  tool  are  as  stone  and  iron;  there  must  be  a pair:
(the  existence  of)  a pair  is  the  condition  (necessary)  for  bringing
to  birth.

’ I.e.  the  state  in  which  the  saint’s  consciousness  is  not  illumined  by  God.

Hallaj.


238  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

310  The  One  is  He  who  hath  no  consort  and  no  tool;  in  number
there  is  doubt,  and  that  One  is  beyond  doubt.

Those  who  say  “two”  or  “three”  or  more  than  these
(numbers)  are  certainly  agreed  in  (affirming  the  existence  of)  One.

When  squinting  has  been  put  aside  (so  that  they  see  correctly),
they  become  alike : the  assertors  of  two  or  three  become  assertors
of  Unity.

If  you  are  a ball^  in  His  polo-field,  keep  spinning  round  from
(the  blows  of)  His  polo-stick.

The  ball  becomes  right  and  flawless  (only)  at  the  time  when
it  is  made  to  dance  by  the  stroke  of  the  King's  hand.

315  Give  ear  heedfully  to  these  (sayings),  O squinting  one:  apply
the  eye-salve  by  way  of  the  ear.

Holy  words,  then,  do  not  abide  in  blind  hearts,  (but)  go  to
the  Light  whence  they  came.

While  the  (guileful)  spell  of  the  Devil  goes  into  crooked
(perveise)  hearts  as  a crooked  shoe  on  to  a crooked  foot.

Though  you  may  learn  Wisdom  by  rote,  it  becomes  quit  of
you  when  you  are  unworthy  (to  receive  it) ;

And  though  you  write  it  and  note  it  (down),  and  though  you
brag  (about  it)  and  expound  it,

320  It  withdraws  its  face  from  you,  O disputatious  one:  it  snaps
its  bonds  and  (takes)  flight  from  you.

(But)  if  you  read  not  and  it  sees  your  ardour  (of  love),  Know-
ledge will  be  a bird  docile  (and  obedient)  to  your  hand.

It  does  not  abide  with  ever}"  unskilled  tiro:  (it  is)  like  a
peacock  (which  does  not  stay)  in  the  house  of  a peasant.

How  the  King  found  his  falcon  in  the  house  of  a
decrepit  old  woman.

It  is  not  like  the  falcon  that  fled  from  the  King  to  the  old
crone  who  was  sifting  flour

That  she  rnight  cook  tutmdj  for  her  children.  (When)  she
saw  the  beautiful  well-born  falcon,

325  She  tied  its  little  foot  and  clipped  its  wings ; she  cut  its  talons
and  fed  it  with  straw.

“Unworthy  folk,”  said  she,  “have  not  kept  thee  in  (good)
trim : thy  wings  are  overgrown  and  thy  talons  have  become  long.

Every  unworthy  one’s  hand  makes  thee  ill:  come  to  thy
mother  that  she  may  take  care  of  thee.”

Know,  O friend,  that  such  is  the  affection  of  the  fool : the  fool
ever  walks  crookedly  on  the  way.

The  King’s  day  became  late  (far-spent)  in  searching  (for  the
falcon) : he  went  (at  last)  to  the  old  woman  and  the  tent  (where
she  lived).

‘ The  words  translated  “if  you  are  a ball”  may  also  signify  “if  you  are
an  assertor  of  Unity.  ^


THE  KING  AND  THE  FALCON  239

Suddenly  he  espied  the  falcon  amidst  smoke  and  dust:  the  330
King  wept  sorely  over  it  and  made  lament.

He  said,  “Albeit  this  is  the  retribution  for  thy  deed,  in  that
thou  art  not  firm  in  keeping  faith  with  me,

(Yet)  how  shouldst  thou  make  Hell  thy  abode  after  Paradise,
heedless  of  (the  text)  the  people  of  the  Fire  {and  those  of  Paradise)
are  not  equaP.

This  is  the  fitting  reward  for  one  that  unconscionably  flees
from  the  King  who  knows  (him)  well  to  the  house  of  an  old  hag.”

(Meanwhile)  the  falcon  was  rubbing  its  wings  against  the
King’s  hand:  without  tongue  it  was  saying,  “I  have  sinned.”

Where  then  should  the  vile  (sinner)  plead  piteously,  where  335
should  he  moan,  if  Thou  wilt  accept  naught  but  good,  O
bountiful  (King)?

The  King’s  grace  makes  the  soul  sin-seeking,  because  the
King  makes  every  foul  thing  fair.

Go,  do  not  commit  foulness,  for  (even)  our  fair  deeds  appear
foul  in  the  sight  of  our  beauteous  (Loved  One).

You  deemed  your  service  worthy:  thereby  you  raised  the
banner  of  sin.

Forasmuch  as  praise  and  prayer  were  vouchsafed  to  you,
through  making  that  prayer  your  heart  became  vainglorious.

You  regarded  yourself  as  speaking  (confidentially)  with  God.  340
Oh,  (there  is)  many  a one  that  becomes  separated  (from  God)
by  this  opinion.

Although  the  King  sit  with  you  on  the  ground,  know  yourself
and  sit  better  (with  more  decorum  and  reverence).

The  falcon  said,  “O  King,  I am  penitent,  I am  converted,

I am  embracing  Islam  anew.

He  whom  Thou  makest  drunken  and  pot-valiant^ — if  from
drunkenness  he  walk  crookedly,  do  Thou  accept  his  excuse.

Though  my  talons  are  gone,  when  thou  art  mine  I tear  off  the
forelock  of  the  sun ;

And  though  my  wings  are  gone,  when  Thou  art  kind  to  345
me  the  heavenly  sphere  lessens  its  play  (slackens  the  speed  of
its  revolution  in  amazement)  at  my  play  (swift  and  sportive
flight).

If  Thou  bestow  a belt  on  me,  I will  uproot  the  mountain ; if
Thou  give  me  a pen,  I will  break  the  banners-.

After  all,  my  body  is  not  inferior  to  (that  of)  a gnat:  with  my
wings  I confound  the  kingdom  of  Nimrod.

Suppose  me  to  be  (as)  the  flocks  of  (small)  birds®  in  weakness,
suppose  every  one  of  my  enemies  to  be  as  the  elephant^,

^ Literally,  "lion-catching. ”

- I.e.  the  lances  to  which  flags  are  attached.

^ Referring  to  Qur’an,  cv,  3.

*■  Qur’an  cv,  i.


240  MATHNAWi,  BOOK  II

(Yet  if)  I cast  a baked  (clay)  pellet  the  size  of  a hazel-nut,  my
pellet  in  its  effect  is  like  (equal  to)  a hundred  mangonels
(ballistas).”

350  Moses  came  to  battle  with  his  one  rod  and  made  an  onset
against  Pharaoh  and  (all)  his  swords.

Every  Prophet  who  by  himself  has  knocked  at  that  door  (and
besought  God  to  help  him)  has  alone  (single-handed)  fought
(victoriously)  against  the  whole  world.

When  Noah  begged  of  Him  (God)  a sword,  through  Him  (at
His  command)  the  waves  of  the  Flood  became  of  sword-like
temper.

0 Ahmad  (Mohammed),  who  (what)  indeed  are  the  armies
of  the  earth?  Behold  the  moon  in  heaven  (and)  split  her  brow^.

In  order  that  the  ignorant  astronomer^  may  know  that  this
cycle  is  thy  cycle,  not  the  cycle  of  the  moon.

355  It  is  thy  cycle,  because  (even)  Moses,  he  who  spoke  (with
God),  was  constantly  yearning  after  this  cycle  of  thine.

When  Moses  beheld  the  splendour  of  thy  cycle,  in  which  the
dawn  of  Revelation  was  arising.

He  said,  “O  Lord,  what  cycle  of  mercy  is  that?  It  is  beyond
mercy:  there  (in  that  cycle)  is  vision  (of  Thee).

Plunge  Thy  Moses  in  the  seas  (of  Time)  and  bring  him  up
(to  the  surface)  from  the  midst  of  the  cycle  of  Ahmad  (Moham-
med).”

God  said,  “O  Moses,  on  that  account®  I have  shown  (it)  to
thee;  on  that  account  I have  opened  to  thee  the  way  to  that
(spiritual)  communion  (with  Mohammed),

360  Because  in  this  (present)  cycle,  O Kalfm^,  thou  art  far  from
that  (cycle  of  Mohammed  and  canst  not  attain  to  it) : draw  back
thy  foot,  for  this  blanket  is  (too)  long  (for  thee).

1 am  kind,  I show  My  servant  bread  in  order  that  desire  (for
it)  may  cause  that  living  one  to  weep.

A mother  rubs  the  nose  of  her  babe,  that  it  may  wake  and
seek  some  food —

For  it  may  have  fallen  asleep  hungry  unawares;  and  (on
waking)  it  prods  her  two  breasts  for  the  sake  of  (getting)
milk.

I was  a treasure,  a hidden  mercy,  so  I sent  forth  a rightly
guided  Imam.”

365  Every  (Divine)  grace  that  you  are  seeking  with  (all)  your  soul.
He  showed  it  to  you  that  you  might  desire  it.

How  many  idols  did  Ahmad  (Mohammed)  break  in  the  world,
that  the  (religious)  communities  might  cry  “O  Lord”!

' Referring  to  Qur’an,  liv,  i .

- Literally,  “ (the  observer  oQ  the  stars  which  bring  good  or  bad  luck.”

’ I.e.  “in  order  that  the  sight  of  it  may  cause  thee  to  desire  it  (spiritually),
though  it  is  out  of  thy  reach  (temporally).”  ' ’

* Interlocutor.  Moses  is  so  called,  because  he  conversed  with  God.


THE  KING  AND  THE  FALCON  241

Had  it  not  been  for  the  efforts  of  Ahmad,  you  also,  like  your
ancestors,  would  be  worshipping  idols.

This  head  of  yours  has  been  delivered  from  bowing  to  idols,
in  order  that  you  may  acknowledge  his  rightful  claim  upon  the
(gratitude  of  the  religious)  communities.

If  you  speak,  speak  thanks  for  this  deliverance,  that  he  may
also  deliver  you  from  the  idol  within.

Since  he  has  delivered  your  head  from  idols,  do  you  deliver  370
your  heart  also  by  means  of  that  strength  (which  you  have  gained
from  him).

You  have  neglected^  to  give  thanks  for  the  Religion  because
you  got  it  for  nothing  as  an  inheritance  from  your  father.

How  should  a man  who  inherits  know  the  value  of  wealth?

A Rustam  tore  his  soul  (suffered  agonies  in  acquiring  it),
(whereas)  Zal  got  it  cost-free.

“When  I cause  (any  one)  to  weep.  My  mercy  is  aroused:  that
wailer  drinks  of  (enjoys)  My  bounty.

If  I do  not  wish  to  give,  (then)  indeed  I do  not  show  him  (the
desired  gift),  (but)  when  I have  closed  (contracted)  his  heart
(with  grief),  I open  (expand)  it  (with  joy).

My  mercy  is  dependent  on  that  goodly  weeping:  when  he  375
weeps,  waves  rise  from  the  sea  of  (My)  mercy.”

How  by  Divine  inspiration  Shaykh  Ahmad  son  of  Khizruya,
may  God  sanctify  his  revered  spirit,  bought  halwd
(sweetmeat)  for  his  creditors.

There  was  a Shaykh  who  was  continually  in  debt  because  of
the  generosity  which  that  illustrious  one  had  (in  his  nature).

He  used  to  make  myriads  of  debts  (by  borrowing)  from  the
great,  and  spend  (all  the  money)  upon  the  poor  (dervishes)  of
the  world.

He  had  also  built  a monastery  (for  Siifis)  by  (running  into)
debt;  he  had  devoted  life  and  wealth  and  monastery  (to  God).

God  was  paying  his  debts  from  every  quarter:  God  made
flour  out  of  sand  for  the  Friend’s  (Abraham’s)  sake.

The  prophet  said  that  two  angels  are  (always)  praying  here  3S0
in  the  markets,  (saying),

“O  God,  do  Thou  give  the  prodigal  a boon  in  return,  and
O God  do  Thou  give  the  miserly  a bane  (in  return).”

Especially  (does  this  apply  to)  the  prodigal  who  has  freely  spent
his  soul  (life)  and  made  his  throat  a sacrifice  to  the  Creator.

He  offers  his  throat,  like  Isma’fl  (Ishmael) : the  knife  cannot
do  anything  to  (hurt)  his  throat.

On  this  account,  then,  the  martyrs  are  living  in  joy:  do  not,
infidel-like,  look  at  the  body  (alone),

^ Literally,  “turned  your  head  aside.”

N M 16


242  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

385  Since  God  hath  given  them  in  return  the  spirit  of  everlasting-
ness— a spirit  safe  from  grief  and  pain  and  misery.

The  debtor  Shaykh  acted  in  this  fashion  for  years,  taking
and  giving  like  a steward.

He  was  sowing  seeds  till  the  day  of  death,  that  on  the  day  of
death  he  might  be  a most  glorious  prince.

When  the  Shaykh ’s  life  reached  its  end  and  he  saw  in  his
(bodily)  existence  the  signs  of  death.

The  creditors  were  seated  together  around  him,  (while)  the
Shaykh  was  gently  melting  on  himself,  like  a candle.

390  The  creditors  had  become  despairing  and  sour-faced:  the
pain  in  (their)  hearts  was  accompanied  by  pain  in  (their)  lungs  1.

“Look  at  these  evil-thinking  men,”  said  the  Shaykh.  “Hath
not  God  four  hundred  gold  dinars?”

A boy  outside  shouted  “ HalwdV’  and  bragged  of  (the
excellence  of)  the  halwd  in  hope  of  (getting)  some  ddngs-.

The  Shaykh  with  (a  nod  of)  his  head  directed  the  famulus
to  go  and  buy  the  whole  of  the  halwd,

(Saying  to  himself),  “so  that  the  creditors,  when  they  eat  the
halwd,  for  a (short)  while  may  not  look  bitterly  on  me.”

305  The  famulus  at  once  went  out  through  the  doorway  to  buy
with  gold  the  halwd  entire.

He  said  to  the  boy,  “How  much  is  the  halwd  in  the  lump?  ”
The  boy  said,  “Half  a dinar  and  some  small  change.”

“Nay,”  he  replied;  “don’t  ask  too  much  from  Sufis:  I will
give  you  half  a dinar.  Say  no  more.”

The  boy  put  the  tray  before  the  Shaykh.  Behold  (now)  the
mysterious  secret  thoughts  of  the  Shayldi !

He  made  a sign  to  the  creditors  (as  though  to  say),  “Look,
this  gift  (of  sweetmeat)  is  a present  (to  you) : eat  this  gladly,  it  is
lawful  (food).”

400  When  the  tray  was  emptied,  the  boy  took  it  and  said,  “ Give
me  the  gold,  O Sage.”

The  Shaykh  said,  “From  where  shall  I get  the  money?  I am
in  debt  and  going  towards  non-existence.”

The  boy  in  (his)  grief  dashed  the  tray  upon  the  ground;  he
raised  (his  voice  in)  lamentation  and  weeping  and  moaning.

The  boy  was  weeping  with  loud  sobs  because  of  the  swindle,
(and  crying),  “Would  that  both  my  legs  had  been  broken  (ere
I came  hither) !

W ould  that  I had  loitered  round  the  bath-stove  and  had  not
passed  by  the  door  of  this  monastery !

405  Lickspittle  gluttonous®  Sufis,  dogs  at  heart  and  washing  their
faces  like  cats ! ”

‘ I.e.  their  anguish  of  mind  caused  them  to  breathe  hard  and  painfully.

- The  dang  is  the  sixth  part  of  a dirhem.

^ Literally,  “seeking  (dainty)  morsels.”


THE  SHAYKH  AND  THE  CONFECTIONER’S  BOY  243

At  the  boy’s  clamour  all  and  sundry^  gathered  there  and
crowded  round  the  boy.

He  came  to  the  Shaykh  and  said,  “O  cruel  Shaykh,  know
for  sure  that  my  master  will  kill  me  (with  blows).

If  I go  (back)  to  him  empty-handed,  he  will  kill  me : wilt  thou
give  (him)  leave  (to  do  that)?”

And  those  creditors  too  turned  to  the  Shaykh  with  disbelief
and  denial,  saying,  “What  game  was  this?

Thou  hast  devoured  our  property  and  art  carrying  off  thy  41°
iniquities  (to  the  next  world):  for  what  reason  was  this  other
injustice  (put)  on  the  top  (of  all  the  rest)  ? ”

Till  afternoon  prayers  the  boy  wept;  the  Shaykh  closed  his
eyes  and  did  not  look  at  him.

The  Shakyh,  unconcerned  with  abuse  and  opposition,  had
withdrawn  his  moon-like  face  under  the  coverlet.

Pleased  with  eternity,  pleased  with  death,  joyous,  unconcerned
with  revilement  and  the  talk  of  high  or  low.

He  in  whose  face  the  Beloved  smiles  sweetly-,  what  harm  can
befall  him  from  the  sour  looks  of  (other)  people?

He  on  whose  eye  the  Beloved  bestows  a kiss,  how  should  he  415
grieve  at  Heaven  and  its  anger?

On  a moonlight  night  what  cares  the  moon  in  (the  mansion
of)  Simak  for  dogs  and  their  barking?

The  dog  is  performing  his  task ; the  moon  is  smoothly  fulfilling
her  task  by  means  of  her  (bright)  countenance.

Every  one  is  executing  his  little  business : water  does  not  lose
purity  because  of  a bit  of  weed  (rubbish).

The  weeds  float  weedily  (contemptibly)  on  the  surface  of  the
water:  the  pure  water  flows  on  undisturbed.

Mustafd  (Mohammed)  splits  the  moon  at  midnight;  Abii  420
Lahab  from  hatred  talks  drivel®.

The  Messiah  (Jesus)  brings  the  dead  to  life,  and  the  Jew  tears
his  moustache  in  wrath.

Does  the  dog’s  bark  ever  reach  the  moon’s  ear,  especially
that  Moon  who  is  the  chosen  of  God?

The  king  drinks  wine  on  the  bank  of  the  stream  till  dawn,
and  in  listening  to  the  music  is  unaware  of  the  croaking  of  the
frogs.

The  division  of  (the  money  due  to)  the  boy  (amongst  the
creditors)  would  have  been  (only)  a few  ddngs  (for  each  to  pay) ;
(but)  the  Shaykh ’s  (spiritual)  influence  stopped  that  generosity.

So  that  no  one  should  give  the  boy  anything : the  power  of  425
the  Pirs  is  even  greater  than  this.

(When)  it  was  (time  for)  afternoon  prayers,  a servant  came
with  a tray  in  his  hand  from  one  like  Hatim,

Literally,  “good  and  bad.”  - Literally,  “like  candy.”

® Literally,  “chews  thistles.”


16-J


244  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

A man  of  property  and  condition : he  sent  it  as  a present  to
the  Pir  (Shaykh),  for  he  knew  about  him.

(There  were)  four  hundred  dinars,  and  in  a corner  of  the  tray
another  half-dinar  in  a piece  of  paper.

The  servant  advanced  and  did  honour  to  the  Shaykh,  and
laid  the  tray  before  the  peerless  Shaykh.

430  When  he  (the  Shaykh)  uncovered  the  face  of  the  tray,  the
people  beheld  the  miracle  (manifested)  from  him.

Immediately  cries  of  sorrow  and  lamentation  arose  from  all
— “O  head  of  the  Shaykhs  and  (spiritual)  kings,  what  was  (the
meaning  of)  this?

What  secret  is  this?  Once  more,  what  sovereignty  is  this,  O
lord  of  the  lords  of  mystery?

We  knew  not.  Pardon  us.  Very  deranged  were  the  words
that  went  out  from  us.

We  who  blindly  brandish  staffs  cannot  help  breaking  lamps.

435  We,  like  deaf  men,  without  having  heard  a single  thing  spoken
(to  us),  are  answering  idly  from  our  own  surmise.

We  have  not  taken  warning  from  Moses,  who  was  made
shamefaced^  by  disbelief  in  a Khizr,

Notwithstanding  (that  he  had)  an  eye  that  sped  aloft,  and
the  light  of  his  eye  was  piercing  heaven.

O Closes  (of  this  age),  through  foolishness  the  eye  of  a mill-
mouse  has  fanatically  set  itself  against  thine  eye.”

The  Shaykh  said,  “I  forgive  all  that  talk  and  palaver:  it  is
lawful  to  you^.

440  The  secret  of  this  (matter)  was  that  I besought  God:  con-
sequently He  showed  me  the  right  way.

And  said,  ‘Though  that  dinar  is  little,  yet  (the  payment  of)
it  is  dependent  on  the  boy’s  outcry.

Until  the  Aa/w;d-selling  boy  weeps,  the  sea  of  (My)  mercy  is
not  aroused’.”

O brother,  the  child  (boy)  is  the  child  (pupil)  of  your  eye:
know  surely  that  (the  gaining  of)  your  desire  is  dependent  on
(tears  of)  distress.

If  you  wish  that  that  robe  of  honour  (which  you  desire)
should  come  (to  you),  then  make  the  child  (pupil)  of  your  eye
weep  over  your  body.

How  a certain  person  frightened  an  ascetic,  saying,

“ Weep  little,  lest  thou  become  blind."

445  A comrade  in  the  work  (of  religion)  said  to  an  ascetic,  ‘‘Weep
little,  lest  thine  eye  come  to  harm.”

The  ascetic  said,  ‘‘The  case  is  not  outside  of  (admits  only)

^ Literally,  “yellow-faced.”

= I.e.  “I  acquit  you  of  responsibility  for  it.”


THE  SHAYKH  AND  THE  CONFECTIONER’S  BOY  245

two  (alternatives):  the  eye  will  see,  or  it  will  not  see,  that
(Divine)  Beauty.

If  it  see  the  Light  of  God,  what  is  there  to  grieve  about?
How  little  are  two  eyes  (to  him  that  is)  in  union  with  God !

And  if  it  shall  not  see  God,  let  it  go ! Let  such  a miserable  eye
become  blind ! ”

Do  not  grieve  for  your  eye  when  that  Jesus  is  yours;  do  not
go  to  the  left  (but  to  the  right),  that  he  may  give  you  two  right
(sound)  eyes.

The  Jesus  of  your  spirit  is  present  with  you : beg  aid  from  45°
him,  for  he  is  a goodly  aider;

But  do  not  every  moment  lay  on  the  heart  of  (that)  Jesus  the
unprofitable  work  of  (providing  for)  a body  full  of  bones,

Like  the  fool  whom  we  mentioned  in  the  story  for  the  sake
of  the  righteous.

Seek  not  you  from  your  Jesus  the  life  of  the  body,  ask  not
from  your  hloses  the  wish  of  a Pharaoh.

Burden  not  your  heart  with  thoughts  of  livelihood ; livelihood
will  not  fail:  be  (constant  in  attendance)  at  the  (Divine)
Court.

This  body  is  a tent  for  the  spirit,  or  like  an  ark  for  Noah.  455

When  the  Turcoman  is  there,  he  wdll  find  a tent,  especially
when  he  is  one  held  in  honour  at  the  Court  (of  God).

Conclusion  of  the  story  of  the  coming  to  life  of  the  bones  at  the
prayer  of  Jesus,  on  whom  be  peace!

Jesus  pronounced  the  Name  of  God  over  the  bones  on  account
of  the  young  man’s  entreaty.

For  the  sake  of  that  foolish  man  the  decree  of  God  gave  life
to  the  form  which  those  bones  had  possessed.

A black  lion  sprang  forth,  smote  once  with  its  paw,  and
destroyed  his  (bodily)  image.

It  tore  up  his  skull : his  brain  was  scattered  on  the  spot — the  460
brain  (kernel)  of  a nut,  for  in  him  was  no  brain.

If  he  had  had  a brain,  his  being  broken  to  pieces  would  have
been  no  injury  at  all  except  to  his  body.

Jesus  said  (to  the  lion),  “How  did  you  maul  him  so  quickly?  ’’

The  lion  said,  “ Because  thou  w'ert  troubled  by  him.”

Jesus  asked,  “How"  did  not  you  drink  the  man’s  blood?’’

“In  the  (Divine)  dispensation  ’twas  not  granted  to  me  to  drink
(it),’’  replied  the  lion.

Oh,  many  a one  that  like  that  raging  lion  has  departed  from
the  world  without  having  eaten  his  prey !

His  (ordained)  portion  is  not  (even)  a straw,  while  his  greed  465
is  as  (great  as)  a mountain;  he  hath  no  means  (of  sati  jying  his
desires),  though  he  has  gotten  the  (material)  means.


246  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

O Thou  who  hast  made  it  easy  for  us  to  do  unrewarded  and
fruitless  labour  in  the  world,  deliver  us !

To  us  it  seems  a (tempting)  bait  and  ’tis  (really)  a hook : show
it  to  us  even  as  it  is.

The  lion  said,  “O  Messiah,  (my  killing)  this  prey  was  merely
for  the  purpose  that  warning  might  be  taken  (by  others).

Had  there  (still)  been  for  me  in  the  world  an  allotted  portion
(of  food),  what  business  indeed  should  I have  had  with  the
dead?”i

470  This  is  the  punishment  deserved  by  him  that  finds  pure
water,  and  like  an  ass  stales  impertinently  in  the  stream.

If  the  ass  know  the  value  of  that  stream,  instead  of  his  foot
he  will  put  his  head  in  it.

He  (the  fool)  finds  a prophet  like  that,  a lord  of  the  (life-
giving)  Water,  a cherisher  of  life :

How  does  not  he  die  before  him,  saying  “O  lord  of  the
Water,  make  me  living  by  the  command  ‘ Be ’?  ”

Take  heed!  do  not  wish  your  currish  (fleshly)  soul  alive,  for
it  is  the  enemy  of  your  spirit  since  long  ago.

475  Dust  be  on  the  head  of  the  bones  that  hinder  this  cur  from
hunting  the  spirit^!

(If)  you  are  not  a cur,  how  are  you  in  love  with  bones?  Why
are  you  in  love  with  blood,  like  a leech?

What  (sort  of)  eye  is  that  that  hath  no  sight,  and  gets  nothing
but  disgrace  from  the  tests  (to  which  it  is  put)  ?

Opinions  are  sometimes  erroneous,  (but)  what  (sort  of)
opinion  is  this  that  is  blind  to  the  (right)  road  ?

O eye,  thou  makest  lament  for  others : sit  down  awhile  and
weep  for  thyself!

4S0  The  bough  is  made  green  and  fresh  by  the  weeping  cloud,
for  the  (same)  reason  that  the  candle  is  made  brighter  by  (its)
weeping.

Wheresoever  people  are  lamenting,  sit  you  there  (and  lament),
because  you  have  a better  right  to  moan  (than  they  have).

Inasmuch  as  they  are  (concerned)  with  parting  from  that
which  passes  away,  and  are  forgetful  of  the  ruby  of  everlasting-
ness that  belongs  to  the  mine  (of  Reality) ;

Inasmuch  as  the  stamp  of  blind  imitation  is  (as)  a lock  upon
the  heart; — go,  scrape  off  (dissolve)  its  lock  with  tears — ;

Inasmuch  as  imitation  is  the  bane  of  every  good  quality:
imitation  is  (but)  a straw,  (even)  if  it  is  a mighty  mountain.

4.1J  If  a blind  man  is  big  and  choleric,  deem  him  (only)  a piece  of
flesh,  since  he  has  no  eye  (eye-sight).

Though  he  (the  blind  imitator)  speak  words  finer  than  a hair,
his  heart  has  no  knowledge  of  those  words.

' I.e.  “how  should  I have  died?  ”

® I.e.  from  seeking  to  become  spiritualised.


THE  fool’s  prayer  GRANTED  BY  JESUS  247

He  has  a certain  intoxication  from  his  own  words,  but  there
is  a good  way  (distance)  between  him  and  the  Wine.

He  is  like  a river-bed ; it  does  not  drink  any  water ; the  water
passes  through  it  to  the  water-drinkers.

The  water  does  not  settle  in  the  river-bed  because  the  river-
bed is  not  thirsty  and  water- drinking.

Like  a reed-flute,  he  makes  a piteous  lament,  but  he  (only)  490
seeks  a purchaser  (admirer).

The  imitator  in  his  discourse  is  (like)  a professional  mourner :
that  wicked  man  has  no  motive  except  cupidity.

The  professional  mourner  utters  burning  words  (of  grief),  but
where  is  the  glow  of  heart  (heartfelt  sorrow)  and  the  rent  skirt?

Between  the  true  knower  and  the  blind  imitator  there  are
(great)  differences,  for  the  former  is  like  David,  while  the  other
is  (but)  an  echo.

The  source  of  the  former’s  words  is  a glow  (of  feeling),
whereas  the  imitator  is  one  w'ho  learns  old  things  (by  rote).

Beware ! be  not  duped  by  those  sorrowful  words ; the  ox  495
bears  the  load,  but  it  is  the  cart  that  moans  (creaks)^.

Even  the  imitator  is  not  disappointed  of  the  (Divine)  recom-
pense : the  professional  mourner  gets  his  wages  at  the  (time  of)
reckoning.

(Both)  infidel  and  true  believer  say  “God,”  but  there  is  a
good  difference  between  the  two.

The  beggar  says  “God”  for  the  sake  of  bread;  the  devout
man  says  “God”  from  his  very  soul.

If  the  beggar  distinguished  (God  as  He  really  is)  from  his
own  saying  (the  name  of  God),  neither  less  nor  more  would
remain  before  his  eye^.

For  years  that  bread-seeker  says  “God”;  like  the  ass,  he  500
carries  the  Qur’an  for  the  sake  of  (being  fed  with)  straw.

Had  the  word  on  his  lips  shone  forth  in  his  heart,  his  body
would  have  been  shivered  to  atoms.

In  sorcery  the  name  of  a demon  finds  the  way  (to  success) ;
you  are  earning  a petty  coin  by  means  of  the  Name  of  God.

How  a peasant  stroked  a lion  in  the  dark,  because  he
thought  it  was  his  ox.

A peasant  tied  an  ox  in  the  stable : a lion  ate  his  ox  and  sat  in
its  place.

The  peasant  went  into  the  stable  to  (see)  the  ox:  the  man,
groping  into  corners,  was  seeking  the  ox  at  night.

He  w'as  rubbing  his  hand  on  the  limbs  of  the  lion,  back  and  505
side,  now  above,  now  below.

^ Literally,  “the  load  is  on  the  ox  and  the  moaning  on  the  cart.”

^ I.e.  he  would  lose  all  consciousness  of  self-interest.


248  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

The  lion  said,  “If  the  light  were  to  become  greater,  his  gall-
bladder would  burst  and  his  heart  would  turn  to  blood.

He  is  stroking  me  like  this  so  boldly  because  in  this  (dark)
night  he  thinks  I am  the  ox.”

God  is  saying,  “O  blind  dupe,  did  not  Tur  (Sinai)  fall  in
pieces  at  My  Name?

For  if  We  had  sent  down  (revealed)  a Book  to  the  mountain,
it  would  have  been  riven  asunder,  then  cut  to  pieces,  and  then
it  would  have  departed  (disappeared).

510  If  Mount  Uhud  had  been  acquainted  with  Me,  blood  would
have  gushed  in  jets  from  the  mountain.”

You  have  heard  this  from  your  father  and  mother;  in  con-
sequence you  have  embraced  it  thoughtlessly.

If  you  become  acquainted  with  Him  without  blind  imitation,
by  (His)  grace  you  will  become  immaterial,  like  a voice  from
Heaven.

Hear  this  (following)  story  as  a deterrent,  in  order  that  you
may  know  the  banefulness  of  blind  imitation.


How  the  Sufis  sold  the  traveller's  beast  {to  pay)  for
the  [expenses  of  the)  mystic  dance.

A Sufi,  after  journeying,  arrived  at  a monastery  (for  Sufis) ;
he  took  his  mount  and  led  it  to  the  stable.

515  With  his  own  hand  he  gave  it  a little  water  and  some  fodder:
(he  was)  not  such  a Siifi  as  the  one  we  told  of  before.

He  took  precaution  for  it  against  neglect  and  craziness,  (but)
when  the  (Divine)  destiny  comes  to  pass,  of  what  avail  is  pre-
caution ?

The  Sufis  were  destitute  and  poor : povert}'  almost  comprises
an  infidelity  that  brings  (the  soul)  to  perdition.

O thou  rich  man  who  art  full  fed,  beware  of  laughing  at  the
unrighteousness  of  the  suffering  poor.

On  account  of  their  destitution  that  Sufi  flock,  all  of  them,
adopted  (the  expedient  of)  selling  the  ass,

520  Saying,  “(In  case)  of  necessity  a carcase  is  lawful  (food);
(there  is)  many  a vicious  act  that  necessity  made  a virtuous
one.”

They  instantly  sold  the  little  ass ; they  fetched  dainty  viands
and  lit  candles.

Jubilation  arose  in  the  monastery:  (they  cried),  “To-night
there  are  dainties  and  music  and  dancing  and  voracity.

How  much  (more)  of  this  (carrying  the)  wallet  and  this
beggary?  How  much  (more)  of  this  patience  and  of  this
three-day  fasting?


* Literally,  “without  trace  (of  self-existence).”


THE  SUFIS  WHO  SOLD  THE  TRAVELLER’S  ASS  249

We  also  are  of  (God’s)  creatures,  we  have  soul.  Good  luck
(is  ours)  to-night;  we  have  the  guest  (to  entertain).”

Thereby  they  were  sowing  the  seed  of  falsehood,  for  thev  525
deemed  soul  that  which  is  not  soul.

And  the  traveller,  too,  was  tired  by  the  long  journey  and
(gladly)  saw  that  favour  and  fondness  (with  which  they  regarded
him).

The  Sufis,  one  by  one,  caressed  him:  they  were  playing  the
game  of  (bestowing)  pleasant  attentions  (on  him).

When  he  saw  their  affection  towards  him,  he  said,  “ If  I don’t
make  merry  to-night,  when  (shall  I do  so)?”

They  ate  the  viands  and  began ^ the  samcL  (musical  dance);
the  monastery  was  filled  with  smoke  and  dust  up  to  the  roof —

The  smoke  of  the  kitchen,  the  dust  of  (raised  by)  beating  the  530
feet  (dancing),  the  tumult  of  soul  (caused)  by  longing  and
ecstasy.

Now,  waving  their  hands,  they  would  beat  (the  ground  with)
their  feet;  now,  in  (religious)  prostration,  they  would  sweep  the
dais  (with  their  foreheads).

(Only)  after  long  (waiting)  does  the  Sufi  gain  his  desire  (the
satisfaction  of  his  appetite)  from  Fortune;  for  that  reason  the
Sufi  is  a great  eater ;

Except,  to  be  sure,  the  Siifi  who  has  eaten  his  fill  of  the  Light
of  God : he  is  free  from  the  shame  of  beggary ;

(But)  of  these  Sufis  there  are  (only)  a few  among  thousands ;
the  rest  are  living  in  (under  the  protection  of)  his  (the  perfect
Sufi’s  spiritual)  empire.

When  the  samd  had  come  (run  its  course)  from  beginning  to  535
end,  the  minstrel  struck  up  a heavy  (deep-sounding)  strain.

He  commenced  (to  sing),  “The  ass  is  gone,  and  the  ass  is
gone  ” ; he  made  the  whole  (company)  sharers  in  this  en-
thusiasm.

From  this  enthusiasm  (they  continued)  beating  their  feet
(dancing)  till  dawn,  clapping  their  hands  (and  singing),  “The
ass  is  gone,  the  ass  is  gone,  O son! ”

By  way  of  imitation  that  Siifi  began  (to  sing)  in  (tones  of)
impassioned  feeling  this  same  (phrase),  “The  ass  is  gone.”

When  the  pleasure  and  excitement  and  music  and  dancing
were  over,  day  dawned  and  they  all  said,  “Farewell!”

The  monastery  was  deserted,  and  the  Siifi  remained  (alone) : 540
that  traveller  set  about  shaking  the  dust  from  his  baggage.

He  brought  out  the  baggage  from  his  cell,  in  order  that  he
might  tie  it  on  the  ass,  (for  he  was)  desirous  of  (finding)  people
to  travel  with.


^ This  archaic  construction  occurs  se\eral  times  in  the

^lathnaivi.


250  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

He  was  hurrying  that  he  might  overtake  his  fellow-travellers ;
he  went  into  the  stable  but  did  not  find  the  ass.

He  said,  “ The  servant  has  taken  it  (the  ass)  to  water,  because
it  drank  little  water  last  night.”

The  servant  came,  and  the  Sufi  said  to  him,  “Where  is  the
ass?”  “Look  at  your  beard, replied  the  servant,  and  a
quarrel  arose.

515  He  (the  Sufi)  said,  “I  have  entrusted  the  ass  to  you,  I have
put  you  in  charge  of  the  ass.

Discuss  (the  matter)  with  propriety,  don’t  argue:  deliver
back  to  me  what  I delivered  to  you.

I demand  from  you  what  I gave  to  you:  return  that  which
I sent  to  you.

The  Prophet  said  that  whatever  your  hand  has  taken  must  in
the  end  be  restored  (to  its  owner).

And  if  you,  from  insolence,  are  not  content  with  this,  look
here,  let  us  (go)  to  the  house  of  the  Cadi  of  (our)  religion.”

550  The  servant  said,  “ I was  overpowered : the  Sufis  rushed  (on
me),  and  I was  in  fear  for  my  life.

Do  you  throw'  a liver  with  the  parts  next  it  amongst  cats,  and
(then)  seek  the  trace  of  it?

One  cake  of  bread  amongst  a hundred  hungry  people,  one
wasted  (starved)  cat  before  a hundred  dogs?”

“I  suppose,”  said  the  Sufi,  “that  they  took  it  (the  ass)  from
you  by  violence,  (and  thereby)  aimed  at  the  life  of  wretched  me;

(And  seeing  this)  you  would  not  come  and  say  to  me,  ‘ They
are  taking  away  your  ass,  O poor  man ! ’

555  So  that  I might  buy  back  the  ass  from  (the  purchaser)
whoever  he  is,  or  else  they  might  divide  my  money  (amongst
themselves  and  return  the  ass  to  me).

There  were  a hundred  w'ays  of  mending  (the  injury)  when
they  (the  Sufis)  were  present,  (but)  now  each  one  is  gone  to  a
(different)  clime.

Whom  should  I seize?  Whom  should  I take  to  the  Cadi?  ’Tis
from  you  in  sooth  that  this  judgement  has  come  upon  me.

How'  wouldn’t  you  come  and  say  (to  me),  ‘O  stranger,  such
a terrible  outrage  has  occurred’?  ”

“By  God,”  said  he,  “I  came  several  times  to  inform  you  of
these  doings,

560  (But)  you  were  always  saying,  ‘The  ass  is  gone,  O son,’  with
more  gusto  than  all  (the  others)  who  said  it.

(So)  I was  (always)  going  back,  (thinking),  ‘He  himself  is
aware ; he  is  satisfied  with  this  (Divine)  judgement : he  is  a man
that  knows  (God)’.”

The  Sufi  said,  “They  all  w'ere  saying  (it)  merrily,  (so)  I also
took  delight  in  saying  it.

‘ I.e.  “recollect  how  old  you  are  (and  don’t  ask  such  a foolish  question).’’


THE  SIJFIS  WHO  SOLD  THE  TRAVELLER’S  ASS  251

Blind  imitation  of  them  has  brought  me  to  ruin ; two  hundred
curses  be  on  that  imitation !

Especially  (on)  imitation  of  such  good-for-nothing  rascals —
the  wrath  of  Abraham  be  on  them  that  sink !

The  delight  of  that  company  (of  Sufis)  was  casting  a re-  565
flexion,  and  this  heart  of  mine  was  becoming  delighted  by  that
reflexion.”

The  reflexion  (cast)  from  goodly  friends  is  necessary'  until
you  become,  without  (the  aid  of  any)  reflexion,  a drawer  of
water  from  the  Sea.

Know  that  the  reflexion  first  cast  is  (only)  imitation,  (but)
when  it  has  become  successive  (continually  recurrent)  it  turns
into  (direct)  realisation  (of  the  truth).

Until  it  has  become  realisation,  do  not  part  from  the  friends
(by  whom  you  are  guided) ; do  not  break  away  from  the  shell :
the  rain-drop  has  not  (yet)  become  a pearl.

If  you  wish  eye  and  understanding  and  hearing  to  be  pure,
tear  in  pieces  the  curtains  of  selfish  desire.

Because  the  Sufi’s  imitation,  (which  arose)  from  desire,  57°
debarred  his  understanding  from  the  light  and  radiance.

Desire  for  the  viands  and  desire  for  that  delight  (shown  by
the  Sufis)  and  for  the  samd  hindered  his  understanding  from
(gaining)  knowledge  (of  what  had  happened).

If  desire  were  to  arise  in  the  mirror,  that  mirror  would
be  like  us  in  (respect  of)  hypocrisy.

If  the  balance  had  desire  for  riches,  how  would  the  balance
give  a true  description  of  the  case?

Every  prophet  has  said  in  sincerity  to  his  people,  “I  ask  not
from  you  the  wages  for  my  message.

I am  (only)  a guide ; God  is  your  purchaser : God  has  appointed  575
me  to  act  as  broker  on  both  sides.

What  are  the  wages  for  my  work?  The  sight  of  the  Friend
(God),  even  though  Abu  Bakr  give  me  forty  thousand  (dirhems).

hly  wages  are  not  his  forty  thousand  (dirhems) : how  should
glass  beads  be  like  the  pearls  of  Aden?  ”

I will  tell  you  a story:  listen  to  it  attentively,  that  you  may
know  that  selfish  desire  is  a plug  in  the  ear.

Whosoever  hath  (such)  desire  becomes  a stammerer  (morally
confused) ; with  desire  (present),  how  should  the  (spiritual)  eye
and  the  heart  become  bright?

The  fancy  of  power  and  wealth  before  his  eye  is  just  as  a hair  580
in  the  eye.

Except,  to  be  sure,  (in  the  case  of)  the  intoxicated  (saint)
who  is  filled  with  God:  though  you  give  (him)  treasures  (vast
riches),  he  is  free;

(For)  when  any  one  enjoys  vision  (of  God),  this  world  becomes
carrion  in  his  eyes.


252  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

But  that  Siifi  was  far  removed  from  (spiritual)  intoxication;
consequently  he  was  night-blind  (purblind)  in  (his)  greed.

The  man  dazed  by  greed  may  hear  a hundred  stories,  (but)
not  a single  point  comes  into  the  ear  of  greed.


How  the  criers  of  the  Cadi  advertised  an  insolvent  round  the  town.

5S5  There  was  an  insolvent  person  without  house  or  home,  who
remained  in  prison  and  pitiless  bondage.

He  would  unconscionably  eat  the  rations  of  the  prisoners ; on
account  of  (his)  appetite  he  was  (a  burden)  like  IVIount  Qaf  on
the  hearts  of  the  people  (in  the  gaol).

No  one  had  the  pluck  to  eat  a mouthful  of  bread,  because  that
snatcher  of  portions  would  carry  off  his  entire  meaF.

Any  one  who  is  far  from  the  feast  of  the  Merciful  (God)  has
the  eye  of  a (low)  beggar,  though  he  be  a sultan.

He  (the  insolvent)  had  trodden  virtue  underfoot;  the  prison
had  become  a hell  on  account  of  that  robber  of  bread.

590  If  you  flee  in  hope  of  some  relief,  on  that  side  also  a calamity
comes  to  meet  you.

No  corner  is  without  wild  beasts;  there  is  no  rest  but  in  the
place  where  you  are  alone  with  God.

The  corner  (narrow  cell)  of  this  world’s  inevitable  prison  is
not  exempt  from  the  charges  for  visitors  and  (the  cost  of)  house-
warming.

By  God,  if  you  go  into  a mouse-hole,  you  will  be  afflicted  by
some  one  who  has  the  claws  of  a cat.

Man  has  fatness  from  (thrives  on)  fancy,  if  his  fancies  are
beautiful ;

595  And  if  his  fancies  show  anything  unlovely  he  melts  away  as
wax  (is  melted)  by  a fire.

If  amidst  snakes  and  scorpions  God  keep  you  with  the  fancies
of  them  that  are  (spiritually)  fair.

The  snakes  and  scorpions  will  be  friendly  to  you,  because
that  fancy  is  the  elixir  which  transmutes  your  copper  (into
gold).

Patience  is  sweetened  by  fair  fancy,  since  (in  that  case)  the
fancies  of  relief  (from  pain)  have  come  before  (the  mind).

That  relief  comes  into  the  heart  from  faith : weakness  of  faith
is  despair  and  torment.

600  Patience  gains  a crown  from  faith : where  one  hath  no  patience,
he  hath  no  faith.

The  Prophet  said,  “God  has  not  given  faith  to  any  one  in
whose  nature  there  is  no  patience.”

* Literally.  “ would  carry  off  his  ox.”  The  greedv  insolvent  is  compared  to
a lion.


THE  GREEDY  INSOLVENT  253

That  same  one  (who)  in  your  eyes  is  like  a snake  is  a picture
(of  beauty)  in  the  eyes  of  another.

Because  in  your  eyes  is  the  fancy  of  his  being  an  infidel,  while
in  the  eyes  of  his  friend  is  the  fancy  of  his  being  a (true)  believer ;

For  both  the  effects  (belief  and  unbelief)  exist  in  this  one
person : now  he  is  a fish  and  now  a hook.

Half  of  him  is  believer,  half  of  him  infidel ; half  of  him  605
cupidity,  half  of  him  patience  (and  abstinence).

Your  God  has  said,  “(Some)  of  you  (are)  believing’’  \ (and)
again,  “(Some)  of  you  (are)  unbelieving”  (as)  an  old  fire-wor-
shipper.

(He  is)  like  an  ox,  his  left  half  black,  the  other  half  white  as
the  moon.

Whoever  sees  the  former  half  spurns  (him) ; whoever  sees  the
latter  half  seeks  (after  him).

Joseph  was  Hke  a beast  of  burden  in  the  eyes  of  his  brethren ;
at  the  same  time  in  the  eyes  of  a Jacob  he  was  like  a houri.

Through  evil  fancy  the  (bodily)  derivative  eye  and  the  original  610
unseen  eye  (of  the  mind)  regarded  him  (Joseph)  as  ugly.

Know  that  the  outward  eye  is  the  shadow  of  that  (inward)
eye:  whatever  that  (inward)  eye  may  see,  this  (outward)  eye
turns  to  that  (eye).

You  are  of  where^,  (but)  your  origin  is  in  Nowhere^:  shut  up
this  shop  and  open  that  shop.

Do  not  flee  to  the  (world  of  the)  six  directions,  because  in
directions  there  is  the  shashdara^,  and  the  shashdara  is  mate,
mate.

Hozo  the  prisoners  laid  a complaint  of  the  insolvent’s  high-
handedness before  the  agent  of  the  Cadi.

The  prisoners  came  to  complain  to  the  Cadi’s  agent,  (who
was)  possessed  of  discernment.

Saying,  “Take  now  our  salutations  to  the  Cadi  and  relate  615
(to  him)  the  sufferings  inflicted  on  us  by  this  vile  man ;

For  he  has  remained  in  this  prison  continuously,  and  he  is  an
idle  gad-about,  a lickspittle,  and  a nuisance.

Like  a fly,  he  impudently  appears  at  every  meal  without
invitation  and  without  salaam.

To  him  the  food  of  sixty  persons  is  nothing ; he  feigns  himself
deaf  if  you  say  to  him,  ‘ Enough ! ’

No  morsel  reaches  the  (ordinary)  man  in  prison,  or  if  by
means  of  a hundred  contrivances  he  discover  some  food.

That  hell-throat  at  once  comes  forward  (with)  this  (as)  his  620
argument,  that  God  has  said,  ^ Eat  ye’

* Literally,  “place.”  - Literally,  “ not-place.”

® certain  disastrous  position  in  the  game  of  nard.


254  MATHNAWi,  BOOK  II

Justice,  justice  against  such  a three  years’  famine ! May  the
shadow  of  our  lord  endure  for  ever !

Either  let  this  buffalo  go  from  prison,  or  make  him  a regular
allowance  of  food  from  a trust-fund.

0 thou  by  whom  both  males  and  females  are  (made)  happy,
do  justice!  Thy  help  is  invoked  and  besought.”

The  courteous  agent  went  to  the  Cadi  and  related  the  com-
plaint to  him  point  by  point.

625  The  Cadi  called  him  (the  insolvent)  from  the  prison  into  his
presence,  and  (then)  inquired  (about  him)  from  his  own  officers.

All  the  complaints  which  that  flock  (of  prisoners)  had  set
forth  were  proved  to  the  Cadi.

The  Cadi  said  (to  him),  “ Get  up  and  depart  from  this  prison :
go  to  the  house  which  is  your  inherited  property.”

He  replied,  “My  house  and  home  consist  in  thy  beneficence ;
as  (in  the  case  of)  an  infidel,  thy  prison  is  my  Paradise.

If  thou  wilt  drive  me  from  the  prison  and  turn  me  out^,  verily
I shall  die  of  destitution  and  beggary.”

6jo  (He  pleaded)  like  the  Devil,  who  was  saying,  “O  Preserver,
O my  Lord,  grant  me  a respite  till  the  day  of  Resurrection ;

For  I am  happy  (to  be)  in  the  prison  of  this  world,  in  order
that  I may  be  slaying  the  children  of  mine  enemy,

(And),  if  any  one  have  some  food  of  faith  and  a single  loaf  as
provision  for  the  journey  (to  the  life  hereafter),

1 may  seize  it,  now  by  plot  and  now  by  guile,  so  that  in  re-
pentance they  may  raise  an  outcry  (of  lamentation) ;

(And  in  order  that)  sometimes  I may  threaten  them  with
poverty,  sometimes  bind  their  eyes  with  (the  spell  of)  tress  and
mole.”

635  In  this  prison  (the  world)  the  food  of  faith  is  scarce,  and  that
which  exists  is  in  (danger  of  being  caught  in)  the  noose  (of
destruction)  through  the  attack  of  this  cur.

(If)  from  prayer  and  fasting  and  a hundred  helplessnesses
(utter  self-abnegations)  the  food  of  spiritual  feeling  come  (to
any  one),  he  (the  Devil)  at  once  carries  it  off.

I seek  refuge  with  God  from  His  Satan:  we  have  perished,
alas,  through  his  overweening  disobedience.

He  is  (but)  one  cur,  and  he  goes  into  thousands  (of  people) :
into  whomsoever  he  goes,  he  (that  person)  becomes  he  (Satan).

Whoever  makes  you  cold  (damps  your  spiritual  ardour)  know
that  he  (Satan)  is  in  him : the  Devil  has  become  hidden  beneath
his  skin.

640  When  he  finds  no  (bodily)  form,  he  comes  into  (your)  fancy,
in  order  that  that  fancy  may  lead  you  into  woe :

Now  the  fancy  of  recreation,  now  of  the  shop ; now  the  fancy
of  knowledge,  and  now  of  house  and  home.

1 Literally,  “drive  me  with  repulsion.’’


THE  GREEDY  INSOLVENT


255


Beware!  say  at  once  “God  help  me!”  again  and  again’^,  not
with  tongue  alone  hut  from  your  very  soul.

The  Cadi  said,  “ Show  plainly  that  you  are  insolvent.”  “ Here
are  the  prisoners,”  he  replied,  “as  thy  witnesses.”

“They,”  said  the  Cadi,  “are  suspect,  because  they  are  fleeing
from  you  and  weeping  blood  (on  account  of  your  ill-treatment
of  them) ;

Also,  they  are  suing  to  be  delivered  from  you : by  reason  of  ■^+5
this  self-interest  the  testimony  they  give  is  worthless.”

All  the  people  belonging  to  the  court  of  justice  said,  “We
bear  witness  both  to  his  insolvency  and  to  his  (moral)  de-
generacy.”

Every  one  whom  the  Cadi  questioned  about  his  condition
said,  “My  lord,  wash  thy  hands  of  this  insolvent.”

The  Cadi  said,  “ Alarch  him  round  the  city  for  all  to  see,  (and
cry),  ‘This  man  is  an  insolvent  and  a great  rogue.’

Make  proclamations  concerning  him,  street  by  street;  beat
the  drum  (as  an  advertisement)  of  his  insolvency  everywhere
in  open  view.

Let  no  one  sell  to  him  on  credit,  let  no  one  lend  him  a "jo
farthing.

Whosoever  may  bring  here  a claim  against  him  for  fraud,  I
will  not  put  him  in  prison  any  more.

His  insolvency  has  been  proven  to  me : he  has  nothing  in  his
possession,  (neither)  money  nor  goods.”

Man  is  in  the  prison  of  this  world  in  order  that  peradventure
his  insolvency  may  be  proven.

Our  God  has  also  proclaimed  in  our  Qur’an  the  insolvency  of
Iblis,

Saying,  “He  is  a swindler  and  insolvent  and  liar-:  do  not  655
make  any  partnership  or  (play  any)  game  with  him.”

And  if  you  do  so  (and)  bring  (vain)  pretexts  to  him®,  he  is
insolvent:  how  will  you  get  profit  from  him?

When  the  trouble  started^,  they  brought  on  the  scene  the
camel  of  a Kurd  who  sold  firewood.

The  helpless  Kurd  made  a great  outcry ; he  also  gladdened  the
officer  (appointed  to  seize  the  camel)  with  (the  gift  of)  a dang ;

(But)  they  took  away  his  camel  from  the  time  of  forenoon
until  nightfall,  and  his  lamentation  was  of  no  use.

Upon  the  camel  sat  that  sore  famine  (the  insolvent),  while  the  660
owner  of  the  camel  was  running  at  its  heels.

^ Literally,  “say  many  times  (the  litany  which  begins  with  the  words)

Ld  haivl.”

“ Literally,  “one  whose  words  are  evil.”

“ I.e.  “if  you  become  his  partner  and  then  plead  with  him  to  save  you
from  the  consequences  of  your  folly.”

* Literally,  “was  kindled.”  The  “trouble”  refers  to  the  business  of
parading  the  insolvent.


256  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

They  sped  from  quarter  to  quarter  and  from  street  to  street,
till  the  whole  town  knew  him  by  sight.

Before  every  bath  and  market-place  all  the  people  gazed  on
his  (features  and)  figure.

(There  were)  ten  loud-voiced  criers,  Turks  and  Kurds  and
Anatolians  and  Arabs,  (proclaiming),

“This  man  is  insolvent  and  has  nothing:  let  no  one  lend  him
a single  brass  farthing;

665  He  does  not  possess  a single  mite,  patent  or  latent:  he  is  a
bankrupt,  a piece  of  falsehood^,  a cunning  knave,  an  oil-bag^.

Beware  and  beware!  Have  no  dealings  with  him;  when  he
brings  the  ox  (to  sell),  make  fast  the  knot.

And  if  ye  bring  this  decayed  fellow  to  judgement,  I will  not
put  a corpse  in  prison.

He  is  fair-spoken  and  his  throat  is  very  wide®;  (he  is  clad)
with  a new  inner  garment  (of  plausibility)  and  a tattered  outer
garment.

If  he  puts  on  that  (inner)  garment  for  the  purpose  of  deceiving,
it  is  borrowed  in  order  that  he  may  beguile  the  common  folk.”

670  Know,  O simple  man,  that  words  of  wisdom  on  the  tongue  of
the  unwise  are  (as)  borrowed  robes.

Although  a thief  has  put  on  a (fine)  robe,  how  should  he  whose
hand  is  cut  off ^ take  your  hand  (lend  you  a helping  hand)  ?

When  at  nightfall  he  (the  insolvent)  came  down  from  the
camel,  the  Kurd  said  to  him,  “My  abode  is  far  (from  here)  and
a long  way  off.

You  have  ridden  on  my  camel  since  early  morning:  I (will)
let  the  barley  go,  (but  I will  not  take)  less  than  the  cost  of  (some)
straw.”

“Why,  then,”  he  rejoined,  “have  we  been  going  round  (the
city)  until  now?  Where  are  your  wits ? Is  nobody  at  home?

675  The  (sound  of  the)  drum  (giving  notice)  of  my  insolvency
reached  the  Seventh  Heaven,  and  you  have  not  heard  the  bad
news!

Y’our  ear  has  been  filled  with  foolish  hope ; (such)  hope,  then,
makes  (one)  deaf  (and)  blind,  my  lad.”

Even  clods  and  stones  heard  this  advertisement — “he  is
insolvent,  he  is  insolvent,  this  scoundrel.”

They  (the  criers)  said  it  till  nightfall,  and  it  made  no  impres-
sion on  the  owner  of  the  camel,  because  he  was  full  of  (idle)
hope,  full.

God’s  seal  lies  upon  the  hearing  and  sight:  within  the  veils
is  many  a form  and  many  a sound.

* Literally,  “false  coin.”

^ J.e.  smooth-tongued  and  deceitful,  “ a windbag.”

® I.e.  he  pours  forth  fine  words  in  abundance.

* The  usual  penalty  for  theft.


THE  GREEDY  INSOLVENT  257

He  communicates  to  the  eye  that  which  He  wills  of  beauty  eso
and  of  perfection  and  of  amorous  looks ;

And  He  communicates  to  the  ear  that  which  He  wills  of  music
and  glad  tidings  and  cries  (of  rapture).

The  world  is  full  of  remedies,  but  you  have  no  remedy  till
God  opens  a window  for  you.

Though  you  are  unaware  of  that  (remedy)  just  now,  God  will
make  it  plain  in  the  hour  of  need.

The  Prophet  said  that  the  glorious  God  has  created  a remedy
for  every  pain ;

But  of  that  remedy  for  your  pain  you  will  not  see  (even)  the  DS5
colour  or  scent  without  His  command.

Come,  O you  that  seek  the  remedy,  set  your  eye  on  non-
spatiality^,  as  the  eye  of  one  (about  to  be)  killed  (turns)  towards
the  spirit.

This  (spatial)  world  has  been  produced  from  that  which  is
without  spatial  relations,  for  the  world  has  received  (the  relation
of)  place  ^ from  placelessness.

Turn  back  from  existence  towards  non-existence,  (if)  you
seek  the  Lord  and  belong  to  the  Lord.

This  non-existence  is  the  place  of  income ; do  not  flee  from
it;  this  existence  of  more  and  less  is  the  place  of  expenditure.

Since  God’s  workshop  is  non-existence,  outside  of  the  work-  6-jo
shop  there  is  (only)  worthlessness.

Put  into  our  heart  subtle  words  which  may  move  Thee  to
mercy,  O Gracious  One!

From  Thee  (come)  both  the  prayer  and  the  answer ; from  Thee
safety,  from  Thee  also  dread.

If  we  have  spoken  faultily,  do  Thou  correct  it : Thou  art  the
Corrector,  O Thou  (who  art  the)  Sultan  of  speech.

Thou  hast  the  alchemy  whereby  Thou  mayst  transmute  it,
and  though  it  be  a river  of  blood,  mayst  make  it  a Nile.

Such  alchemical  operations  are  Thy  work,  such  elixirs  are  Thy  oj5
secrets.

Thou  didst  beat  water  and  earth  together:  from  water  and
clay  Thou  didst  mould  the  body  of  Adam.

Thou  gavest  him  (Man)  lineage  and  wife  and  uncles,  maternal
and  paternal,  with  a thousand  thoughts  and  joys  and  griefs.

Again,  to  some  Thou  hast  given  deliverance;  Thou  hast
parted  them  from  this  grief  and  joy ;

Thou  hast  borne  them  away  from  kindred  and  relatives  and
(their  own)  nature.  Thou  hast  made  every  fair  thing  foul  in  his
(such  a one’s)  eyes.

He  spurns  all  that  is  perceived  by  the  senses,  and  leans  for  700
support  on  that  which  is  invisible.

^ I.e,  the  Divine  consciousness  which  transcends  space.

2 Literally,  “has  become  place.”


N M


17


258  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

His  love  is  manifest  and  his  Beloved  is  hidden:  the  Friend  is
outside  (of  the  world),  (but)  His  fascination  is  in  the  w'orld.

Give  up  this  (belief )i.  Loves  (felt)  for  what  is  endued  with
form  have  not  as  their  object  the  (outward)  form  or  the  lady’s
face.

That  which  is  the  object  of  love  is  not  the  form,  whether  it  be
love  for  (the  things  of)  this  w-orld  or  yonder  w'orld.

That  which  you  have  come  to  love  for  its  form — why  have
you  abandoned  it  after  the  spirit  has  fled?

705  Its  form  is  still  there:  whence  (then)  this  satiety  (disgust)?
O lover,  inquire  who  your  beloved  (really)  is.

If  the  beloved  is  that  which  the  senses  perceive,  every  one
that  has  senses  would  be  in  love  (with  it).

Inasmuch  as  constancy  is  increased  by  that  (spiritual)  love,
how  is  constancy  altered  (impaired)  by  the  (decay  of  the  material)
form?

The  sunbeam  shone  upon  the  wall:  the  wall  received  a
borrowed  splendour.

Why  set  your  heart  on  a piece  of  turf,  O simple  man?  Seek
out  the  source  which  shines  perpetually.

710  You  who  are  in  love  with  your  intellect,  deeming  yourself
superior  to  worshippers  of  form.

That  (intellect)  is  a beam  of  (Universal)  Intellect  (cast)  on  your
sense-perception;  regard  it  as  borrowed  gold  on  your  copper.

Beauty  in  humankind  is  like  gilding;  else,  how  did  your
sweetheart  become  (as  ugly  as)  an  old  ass  ?

She  was  like  an  angel,  she  became  like  a demon,  for  that
loveliness  in  her  was  a borrowed  (transient)  thing.

Little  by  little  He  (God)  takes  away  that  beauty:  little  by
little  the  sapling  withers.

715  Go,  recite  (the  text)  to  zvhoniso  We  grant  length  of  days,  him
We  cause  to  decline.  Seek  the  heart  (spirit),  set  not  thy  heart  on
bones ;

For  that  beauty  of  the  heart  is  the  lasting  beauty:  its  lips  give
' to  drink  of  the  Water  of  Life.

Truly  it  is  both  the  water  and  the  giver  of  drink  and  the
drunken:  all  three  become  one  when  your  talisman  is  shattered.

That  oneness  you  cannot  know  by  reasoning.  Do  service  (to
God)  and  refrain  from  foolish  gabble,  O undisceming  man !

Your  reality^  is  the  form  and  that  which  is  borrowed:  you
rejoice  in  what  is  relative  and  (secondary  like)  rhyme.

720  Reality  is  that  which  seizes  (enraptures)  you  and  makes  you
independent  of  form.

Reality  is  not  that  which  makes  blind  and  deaf  and  causes  a
man  to  be  more  in  love  with  form.

The  portion  of  the  blind  is  the  fancy  that  increases  pain ; the

' I.e.  the  belief  in  phenomena.


THE  NATURE  OF  TRUE  LOVE  259

share  of  the  (spiritual)  eye  is  these  fancies  (ideas)  of  dying  to
self  (fand).

The  blind  are  a mine  (full)  of  the  letter  of  the  Qur’an:  they
do  not  see  the  ass,  and  (only)  cling  to  the  pack-saddle.

Since  you  have  sight,  go  after  the  ass  which  has  jumped  (away
from  you):  how  long  (will  you  persist  in)  stitching  the  saddle,

O saddle-worshipper?

When  the  ass  is  there,  the  saddle  will  certainly  be  yours : bread  7^:5
does  not  fail  when  you  have  the  (vital)  spirit.

(On)  the  back  of  the  ass  is  shop  and  wealth  and  gain ; the  pearl
of  your  heart  is  the  stock  (which  provides  wealth)  for  a hundred
bodies.

Mount  the  ass  bare-backed,  O busybody : did  not  the  Prophet
ride  the  ass  bare-backed?

The  Prophet  rode  (his  beast)  bare-backed;  and  the  Prophet,
it  is  said,  journeyed  on  foot.

The  ass,  your  fleshly  soul,  has  gone  off;  tie  it  to  a peg.  How
long  will  it  run  away  from  work  and  burden,  how  long?

It  must  bear  the  burden  of  patience  and  thanksgiving,  whether  730
for  a hundred  years  or  for  thirty  or  twenty.

None  that  is  laden  supported  another’s  load;  none  reaped
until  he  sowed  something.

’Tis  a raw  (absurd)  hope ; eat  not  what  is  raw,  O son : eating
raw  brings  illness  to  men.

(Do  not  say  to  yourself),  “So-and-so  suddenly  found  a trea-
sure; I would  like  the  same:  neither  w'ork  nor  shop  (for  me)!”

That  (discovery  of  treasure)  is  Fortune’s  doing  (a  piece  of
luck),  and  moreover  it  is  rare:  one  must  earn  a living  so  long  as
the  body  is  able.

How  does  earning  a livelihood  prevent  the  (discovery  of)  735
treasure?  Do  not  retire  from  work:  that  (treasure),  indeed,  is
(following)  behind  (the  work).

See  that  you  are  not  made  captive  by  “if,”  saying,  “If  I had
done  this  or  the  other  (thing),”

For  the  sincere  Prophet  forbade  (people)  to  say  “if,”  and
said,  “That  is  from  hypocrisy”;

For  the  hypocrite  died  in  saying  “if,”  and  from  saying  “if”
he  won  nothing  but  remorse.


Parable.

A certain  stranger  was  hastily  seeking  a house : a friend  took
him  to  a house  in  ruins.

He  said  (to  the  stranger),  “If  this  (house)  had  a roof,  it  would  740
be  a home  for  you  beside  me.

Your  family  too  would  be  comfortable,  if  it  had  another  room


26o


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

“Yes,”  said  he,  “it  is  nice  (to  be)  beside  friends,  but  my  dear
soul,  one  cannot  lodge  in  ‘if’.”

All  the  world  are  seekers  of  happiness,  and  on  account  of  a
false  happiness  they  are  in  the  fire.

Old  and  young^  have  become  gold-seekers,  but  the  common
eye  does  not  distinguish  alloy  from  gold.

745  The  pure  (gold)  shot  a beam  on  the  alloy:  see  that  you
choose  not  the  gold  on  the  ground  of  (mere)  opinion,  without
a touchstone.

If  you  have  a touchstone,  choose ; otherwise,  go,  devote  your-
self to^  him  that  knows  (the  difference).

Either  you  must  have  a touchstone  within  your  own  soul,  or
if  you  know  not  the  Way,  do  not  go  forward  alone.

The  cry  of  the  ghouls  is  the  cry  of  an  acquaintance — an
acquaintance  who  would  lure  you  to  perdition.

She  (the  ghoul)  keeps  on  crying,  “Hark,  O caravan  people!
Come  towards  me,  here  is  the  track  and  the  landmarks.”

750  The  ghoul  mentions  the  name  of  each,  saying  “ O so-and-so,”
in  order  that  she  may  make  that  personage  one  of  those  who  sink.

When  he  reaches  the  spot,  he  sees  wolves  and  lions,  his  life
lost,  the  road  far  off,  and  the  day  late.

Prithee  say,  what  is  the  ghoul’s  cry  like?  (It  is)  “I  desire
riches,  I desire  position  and  renown.”

Prevent  these  voices  from  (entering)  your  heart,  so  that
(spiritual)  mysteries  may  be  revealed.

Repeat  (in  prayer)  the  name  of  God,  drown®  the  cry  of  the
ghouls,  close  your  narcissus-eye  to  this  vulture.

-55  Know  the  difference  betw'een  the  false  dawn  and  the  true,
distinguish  the  colour  of  the  wine  from  the  colour  of  the  cup.

That,  perchance,  from  the  eyes  which  see  the  seven  colours
patience  and  waiting  may  produce  a (spiritual)  eye,

(With  which)  you  may  behold  colours  other  than  these,  and
may  behold  pearls  instead  of  stones.

What  pearl?  Nay,  you  will  become  an  ocean,  you  will  become
a sun  traversing  the  sky.

The  Worker  is  hidden  in  the  workshop:  go  you  and  in  the
workshop  see  Him  plain.

760  Inasmuch  as  the  work  has  woven  a veil  over  the  Worker,  you
cannot  see  Him  outside  of  that  work.

Since  the  workshop  is  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Worker,  he  that
is  outside  is  unaware  of  Him.

Come,  then,  into  the  workshop,  that  is  to  say,  non-existence,
that  you  may  see  the  work  and  the  Worker  together.

As  the  workshop  is  the  place  of  clairvoyance,  then  outside  of
the  workshop  there  is  (only)  blindfoldness.

^ Literally,  “raw.”

Literally,  “put  yourself  in  pawn  to.”  3 Literally  “bum.”


THE  QUEST  FOR  REALITY  261

The  rebellious  Pharaoh  kept  his  face  towards  existence,
consequently  he  was  blind  to  His  (God’s)  workshop.

Consequently  he  was  wishing  to  alter  the  (Divine)  pre-  765
destination,  that  he  might  turn  back  the  (Divine)  destiny  from
his  door.

Truly  the  (Divine)  destiny  evety  moment  was  laughing
derisively  under  its  lip  at  the  moustache  (arrogance)  of  that
cunning  plotter.

He  killed  hundreds  of  thousands  of  innocent  babes,  in  order
that  the  ordainment  and  predestination  of  God  might  be  averted.

In  order  that  the  prophet  Moses  might  not  come  forth,  he
laid  on  his  neck  (made  himself  responsible  for)  thousands  of
iniquities  and  murders.

He  wrought  all  that  bloodshed,  and  (yet)  Moses  was  born  and
was  made  ready  for  his  chastisement.

Had  he  seen  the  workshop  of  the  Everlasting  (God),  he  would  770
have  ceased  to  move  hand  or  foot^  in  plotting.

Moses  (lay)  safe'^  within  his  (Pharaoh’s)  house,  while  outside
he  was  killing  the  infants  in  vain,

Even  as  the  sensual  man  who  pampers  his  body  and  suspects
some  one  else  of  a bitter  hatred  (against  him).

Saying,  “This  one  is  a foe,  and  that  one  is  envious  and  an
enemy,”  (though)  in  truth  his  envier  and  enemy  is  that  body
(of  his).

He  is  like  Pharaoh,  and  his  body  is  his  Moses:  he  keeps
running  (to  and  fro)  outside,  asking,  “Where  is  my  enemy?”

His  fleshly  soul  (is)  luxuriating  in  the  house,  which  is  his  body,  775
(while)  he  gnaws  his  hand  in  rancour  against  some  one  else.

How  men  blamed  a person  who  killed  his  mother  because  he
suspected  her  {of  adultery).

A certain  man  killed  his  mother  in  wrath,  with  blows  of  a
dagger  and  also  with  blows  of  his  fist.

Some  one  said  to  him,  “ From  evil  nature  you  have  not  borne
in  mind  what  is  due  to  motherhood.

Hey,  tell  (me)  why  you  killed  your  mother.  What  did  she
do?  Pray,  tell  (me),  O foul  villain!”*

He  said,  “She  did  a deed  that  is  a disgrace  to  her;  I killed
her  because  that  earth  (her  grave)  is  her  coverer  (hides  her
shame).”

The  other  said,  “O  honoured  sir,  kill  that  one  (who  w'as  her  7S0
partner  in  guilt).”  “Then,”  he  replied,  “I  should  kill  a man
every'  day.

' Literally,  “his  hand  and  foot  would  have  become  dry  (paralysed).”

^ Literally,  “preserved  from  harm  (by  God).”

’ Literally,  “O  man  of  wicked  disposition.”


262


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

I killed  her,  I was  saved  from  shedding  the  blood  of  a multi-
tude: ’tis  better  that  I cut  her  throat  than  the  throats  of  (so
many)  people.”

That  mother  of  bad  character,  whose  wickedness  is  in  every
quarter,  is  your  fleshly  soul.

Come,  kill  it,  for  on  account  of  that  vile  (creature)  you  are
every  moment  assailing  one  who  is  venerable.

Through  it  this  fair  world  is  narrow  (distressful)  to  you,  for
its  sake  (you  are  at)  war  with  God  and  man.

785  (If)  you  have  killed  the  fleshly  soul,  you  are  delivered  from
(the  necessity  of)  excusing  yourself : nobody  in  the  world  remains
your  enemy.

If  any  one  should  raise  a difficulty  about  my  words  in  regard
to^  the  prophets  and  saints,

(And  should  say),  “Had  not  the  prophets  a killed  (mortified)
fleshly  soul?  ^^hy,  then,  had  they  enemies  and  enviers?” —

Give  ear,  O seeker  of  truth,  and  hear  the  answer  to  this
difficulty  (born)  of  doubt.

Those  unbelievers  were  (really)  enemies  to  themselves : they
were  striking  at  themselves  such  blows  (as  they  struck).

7yo  An  enemy  is  one  who  attempts  (another’s)  life;  he  that  is
himself  destroying  his  own  life  is  not  an  enemy  (to  others).

The  little  bat  is  not  an  enemy  to  the  sun : it  is  an  enemy  to
itself  in  the  veil  (of  its  own  blindness).

The  glow  of  the  sun  kills  it;  how  should  the  sun  ever  suffer
annoyance  from  it?

An  enemy  is  one  from  whom  torment  proceeds,  (one  who)
hinders  the  ruby  from  (receiving  the  rays  of)  the  sun.

All  the  infidels  hinder  themselves  from  (receiving)  the  rays
of  the  prophets’  (spiritual)  jewel.

795  How  should  (unbeheving)  people  veil  the  eyes  of  that  peerless
one  (the  prophet  or  saint)?  The  people  have  (only)  blinded  and
distorted  their  own  eyes.

(They  are)  like  the  Indian  slave  who  bears  a grudge  and  kills
himself  to  spite  his  master :

He  falls  headlong  from  the  roof  of  the  house  (in  the  hope)
that  he  may  have  done  some  harm  to  his  master.

If  the  sick  man  become  an  enemy  to  the  physician,  or  if  the
boy  show  hostility  to  the  teacher,

In  truth  they  act  as  brigands  against  themselves : they  them-
selves waylay  their  own  mind  and  spirit.

000  If  a fuller  take  offence  at  the  sun,  if  a fish  is  taking  offence  at
the  water.

Just  once  consider  whom  that  (anger)  injures,  and  whose  star
is  eclipsed-  by  it  in  the  end.

* I.e.  “As  regards  their  being  applicable  to.”

* Literally,  “who  is  black-starred.”


THE  MORTIFICATION  OF  THE  FLESHLY  SOUL  263

If  God  create  you  with  ugly  features,  take  care  lest  you
become  both  ugly-featured  and  ugly-natured ;

And  if  your  shoes  are  ripped,  do  not  go  into  stony  ground ;
and  if  you  have  two  spikes,  don’t  become  four-spiked'^.

You  are  envious,  saying,  “I  am  inferior  to  so-and-so:  he  (by
his  superior  position)  is  increasing  my  inferiority  in  fortune.”

(But)  indeed  envj’  is  another  defect  and  fault;  nay,  it  is  worse  '05
than  all  inferiorities.

That  Devil  (Satan),  through  the  shame  and  disgrace  of
inferiority  (to  Adam),  cast  himself  into  a hundred  damna-
tions^.

Because  of  envy,  he  wished  to  be  at  the  top.  x\t  the  top,
forsooth!  Nay,  (he  wished)  to  be  a blood-shedder.

Abu  Jahl  was  put  to  shame  by  Mohammed,  and  because  of
env}'^  was  raising  himself  to  the  top.

His  name  was  Abu  ’1-Hakam,  and  he  became  Abii  JahH:  oh,
many  a worthy  has  become  unworthy  because  of  env\'.

I have  not  seen  in  the  world  of  search  and  seeking  (trial  and  Sio
probation)  any  worthiness  better  than  a good  disposition.

God  made  the  prophets  the  medium  (between  Him  and  His
creatures)  in  order  that  feelings  of  envy  should  be  displayed  in
the  agitation  (produced  by  something  that  rankles  in  the  mind).

Inasmuch  as  no  one  was  disgraced  by  (inferiority  to)  God,
no  one  was  (ever)  envious  of  God ;

(But)  the  person  whom  he  deemed  like  himself — he  would
bear  envy  against  him  for  that  reason.

(Now),  as  the  grandeur  of  the  Prophet  has  become  established,
none  feels  envy  (of  him),  since  he  is  accepted  (by  all  the  Faith-
ful) ;

Therefore  in  every  epoch  (after  Mohammed)  a saint  arises  S15
(to  act  as  his  vicegerent):  the  probation  (of  the  people)  lasts
until  the  Resurrection.

Whosoever  has  a good  disposition  is  saved;  whosoever  is  of
frail  heart^  is  broken.

That  saint,  then,  is  the  living  Imam  w'ho  arises  (in  every-  age),
whether  he  be  a descendant  of  ‘Umar  or  of  ‘Ali.

He  is  the  Mahdi  (the  God-guided  one)  and  the  Hddi  (the
Guide),  O seeker  of  the  (right)  way:  he  is  both  hidden  (from
you)  and  seated  before  your  face.

He  is  as  the  Light  (of  Mohammed),  and  (Universal)  Reason
is  his  Gabriel;  the  saint  that  is  lesser  than  he  is  his  lamp  (and
receives  illumination  from  him).

* I.e.  “if  you  are  being  tortured  with  a two-spiked  collar,  do  not  put  on
one  with  four  spikes.”

^ Literally,  “deprivation  (of  spiritual  blessings).”

^ Abu  ’1-Hakam  means  “ Father  of  the  (wise)  judge.”  The  nickname,  .^bu
Jahl,  means  “ Father  of  ignorance.”

* Literally,  “glass-hearted,”  i.e.  weak  and  vicious.


264  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

820  That  (saint)  who  is  lesser  than  this  lamp  is  our  lamp-niche :
the  Light  has  gradations  in  degree,

Because  the  Light  of  God  has  seven  hundred  veils:  regard
the  veils  of  the  Light  as  so  many  tiers.

Behind  each  veil  a certain  class  (of  saints)  has  its  place  of
abode : these  veils  of  theirs  are  (in  ascending  order),  rank  by  rank,
up  to  the  Imam.

Those  in  the  last  (lowest)  rank,  through  their  weakness,  (are
such  that)  their  eyes  cannot  endure  the  light  in  front  (of
them) ;

And  that  front  rank,  from  weakness  of  sight,  cannot  support
the  light  that  is  more  advanced.

825  The  light  that  is  the  life  of  the  first  (highest  rank)  is  heartache
and  tribulation  to  this  squinter;

(But)  the  squintnesses,  little  by  little,  grow  less,  and  when  he
passes  beyond  the  seven  hundred  (veils),  he  becomes  the  Sea.

The  fire  that  does  good  to  iron  or  gold — how  is  it  good  for
fresh  quinces  and  apples?

The  apple  and  quince  have  (only)  a slight  crudity:  unlike
iron,  they  want  a gentle  heat;

But  those  flames  are  (too)  gentle  for  the  iron,  for  it  is  (eagerly)
drawing  to  (itself)  the  heat  of  that  (fiery)  dragon.

8.-,o  That  iron  is  the  der\dsh  who  bears  hardship  (self-mortifica-
tion) : under  the  hammer  and  the  fire  he  is  red  and  happy.

He  is  the  chamberlain  of  the  fire  (and)  in  immediate  touch
(with  it) : he  goes  into  the  heart  of  the  fire  without  (any)  link
(between  the  fire  and  him).

Without  some  screen,  water  and  water’s  children  get  no
cooking  or  conversation  from  the  fire.

The  medium  is  a pot  or  a pan — as  (the  medium)  for  the  foot
in  walking  (is)  a sock  (shoe) —

Or  a space  between,  so  that  the  air  becomes  burning  hot  and
brings  (the  fire)  to  the  water.

835  The  dervish,  then,  is  he  that  has  no  intermediary:  the  flames
have  (direct)  connexion  with  his  being.

Therefore  he  is  the  heart  of  the  world,  because  by  means  of
this  heart  the  body  attains  to  (its  proper)  art  (function).

(If)  the  heart  be  not  there,  how  can  the  body  talk  and  speak?
(If)  the  heart  seek  not,  how  can  the  body  seek  and  search?

Therefore  the  theatre  of  the  (Divine)  rays  is  that  iron ; there-
fore the  theatre  of  God  is  the  heart,  not  the  body.

Again,  these  partial  (individual)  hearts  are  ^ the  body  in
relation  to  the  heart  of  the  man  of  heart  (the  perfect  saint),
which  is  the  original  source.

840  This  argument  wants  much  illustration  and  exposition,  but
I fear  lest  the  opinion  of  the  vulgar  should  stumble  (and  fall
into  error).


THE  ILLUMINATION  OF  THE  SAINTS  265

(And)  lest  my  goodness  should  be  turned  (by  them)  to
badness ; — even  this  that  I have  spoken  was  (from)  naught  but
selflessness^.

The  crooked  shoe  is  better  for  the  crooked  foot;  the  beggar’s
power  reaches  only  as  far  as  the  door-.

How  the  King  made  trial  of  the  two  slaves  whom  he  had
recently  purchased.

A King  bought  two  slaves  cheap,  and  conversed  with  one  of
the  twain.

He  found  him  quick-witted  and  answering  sweetly:  what
issues  from  the  sugar-lip?  Sugar- water.

Alan  is  concealed  underneath  his  tongue:  this  tongue  is  the
curtain  over  the  gate  of  the  soul.

When  a gust  of  wind  has  rolled  up  the  curtain,  the  secret  of
the  interior  of  the  house  is  disclosed  to  us,

(And  we  see)  whether  in  that  house  there  are  pearls  or  (grains
of)  wheat,  a treasure  of  gold  or  whether  all  is  snakes  and
scorpions ;

Or  whether  a treasure  is  there  and  a serpent  beside  it,  since
a treasure  of  gold  is  not  without  some  one  to  keep  watch.

Without  premeditation  he  (that  slave)  would  speak  in  such
wise  as  others  after  five  hundred  premeditations.

You  would  have  said  that  in  his  inward  part  there  was  a sea,
and  that  the  whole  sea  was  pearls  of  eloquence,

(And  that)  the  light  that  shone  from  every  pearl  became  a
criterion  for  distinguishing  between  truth  and  falsehood.

(So)  would  the  light  of  the  Criterion  (Universal  Reason),  (if  it
shone  into  our  hearts),  distinguish  for  us  truth  and  falsehood  and
separate  them  mote  by  mote ;

The  light  of  the  (Divine)  Pearl  would  become  the  light  of
our  eyes:  both  the  question  and  the  answer  would  be  (would
come)  from  us.

(But)  you  have  made  your  eves  awr\'  and  seen  the  moon’s
disk  double:  this  gazing  in  perplexity  is  like  the  question.

Make  your  eyes  straight  in  the  moonshine,  so  that  you  may
see  the  moon  as  one.  Lo,  (that  is)  the  answer.

Tell  your  thought  not  to  see  awry'  and  to  look  well  (rightly)  :
that  thought  is  the  radiance  of  that  Pearl.

Whenever  an  answer  comes  to  the  heart  through  the  ear,  the
eye  says,  “Hear  it  from  me;  let  that  (answer  given  through  the
ear)  alone ! ”

The  ear  is  a go-between,  while  the  eve  is  possessed  of  union

^ I.e.  spoken  under  the  influence  of  ecstasy.

- Literally,  “the  beggar  has  power  over  the  door  (only),”  i.e.  he  cannot
penetrate  to  the  interior  of  the  house.


266


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

(immediate  vision);  the  eye  has  direct  experience  (of  reality),
while  the  ear  has  (only)  words  (doctrine).

In  the  ear’s  hearing  there  is  a transformation  of  qualities;
in  the  eyes’  seeing  there  is  a transformation  of  essence.

860  If  your  knowledge  of  fire  has  been  turned  to  certainty  by
words  (alone),  seek  to  be  cooked  (by  the  fire  itself),  and  do  not
abide  in  the  certainty  (of  knowledge  derived  from  others).

There  is  no  intuitive  (actual)  certainty  until  you  burn;  (if)
you  desire  this  certainty,  sit  down  in  the  fire.

When  the  ear  is  penetrating,  it  becomes  an  eye;  otherwise,
the  word  (of  God)  becomes  entangled  in  the  ear  (and  does  not
reach  the  heart).

This  discourse  hath  no  end.  Turn  back,  that  (we  may  see)
what  the  King  did  to  those  slaves  of  his.


Hmv  the  King  sent  azvay  one  of  the  tico  slaves  and  interrogated

the  other.

When  he  saw  that  that  laddie^  was  possessed  of  keen  intelli-
gence, he  made  a sign  to  the  other  to  come  (to  him).

865  (If)  I have  called  him  by  (a  word  which  has)  the  suffix  of  pity
(tenderness)^,  ’tis  not  to  belittle  him:  if  a grandfather  say  “my
sonny,’’  it  is  not  (in)  contempt.

When  the  second  (slave)  came  before  the  King,  he  had  a
stinking  mouth  and  black  teeth.

Although  the  King  was  displeased  by  his  speech®,  still  he  made
some  inquiry  concerning  his  hidden  thoughts.

He  said,  “With  this  aspect  and  this  stinking  mouth,  sit  at  a
distance,  but  do  not  move  too  far  off* —

For  (hitherto)  you  have  been  (with  regard  to  me  in  the  posi-
tion of)  a writer  of  letters  and  notes;  you  have  not  been  a
companion  and  friend  and  comrade —

870  That  we  may  treat  (and  cure)  that  mouth  of  yours;  you  are
(now)  the  beloved  (patient),  and  we  are  the  skilful  physician.

’Tis  not  fitting  to  burn  a new  blanket  on  account  of  one  flea;
(nor  would  it  become  me)  to  shut  my  eyes  to  (turn  my  back  on)
you  (because  of  superficial  faults).

Notwithstanding  all  (this),  sit  down  and  talk  on  a few  topics®,
that  I may  well  see  the  form  of  your  mind.”

Then  he  sent  that  keen-witted  one  away  to  do  (his  behest) :
(he  sent  him)  to  a bath-house,  saying,  “Go,  scrub  yourself.”

‘ Literally,  “little  slave”  {ghuidmak).

“ Literally,  “ the  kdj  of  pity,”  the  diminutive  suffix  aky  used  to  express
affection.

® I.e.  because  of  his  foul  breath.

* Literally,  “ more  to  that  side.”

® Literally,  “tell  two  or  three  stories.”


THE  KING  AND  HIS  TWO  SLAVES  267

And  to  this  other  one  he  said,  “Good!  you  are  a clever  lad;
in  truth  you  are  a hundred  slaves,  not  one.

You  are  not  such  as  your  fellow-servant  declared;  that  envious  »75
one  would  (fain)  have  made  me  cold  to  (disgusted  with)  you,

(For)  he  said  that  you  are^  thievish  and  dishonest  and  ill-
behaved,  immoral  and  infamous  and  so  forth.”

The  slave  said,  “He  (my  fellow-servant)  has  always  been
veracious;  I have  not  seen  any  one  so  truthful  as  he  is.

Veracity  is  inborn  in  his  nature;  whatever  he  says,  I do  not
say  it  is  void  (of  truth).

I deem  not  that  good-minded  one  malicious:  I (rather)
suspect  my  own  person.

Maybe,  he  sees  in  me  faults  I do  not  see  in  myself,  O King.”  sso

Any  one  who  saw  his  own  faults  before  (seeing  those  of  others)

— how  indeed  should  he  be  unconcerned  with  correcting  himself?

These  people  (of  the  world)  take  no  heed  of  themselves,  O
father : consequently  they  blame  one  another.

O idolater  (dualist),  (if)  I do  not  behold  my  own  face  (reality),

I behold  thy  face  and  thou  beholdest  mine.

He  that  beholds  his  own  face  (reality) — his  light  is  greater
than  the  light  of  the  creatures  (of  God).

Though  he  die,  his  sight  is  everlasting,  because  his  sight  is  SS5
the  sight  of  the  Creator.

That  light  by  which  he  sensibly  beholds  his  own  face  (reality)
before  him,  is  not  the  light  of  sense.

The  King  said,  “Now  tell  his  (your  fellow-servant’s)  faults,
just  as  he  spoke  of  yours.

That  I may  know  whether  you  are  solicitous  for  me  and  a
(good)  house-steward  of  my  property  and  business.”

He  replied,  “O  King,  I will  tell  his  faults,  though  he  is  to  me
a pleasing  fellow-servant.

His  faults  are  affection  and  loyalty  and  humanity;  his  faults  s.-o
are  sincerity  and  keen-wittedness  and  cordial  comradeship.

His  least  fault  is  generosity  and  bounty — the  generosity  that
even  gives  up  life.”

God  has  brought  to  view  myriads  of  lives  (in  return  for  the
life  given  up) : what  generosity  would  there  be  (in  him)  that  saw
not  those?

And  if  he  saw  them,  how  should  he  grudge  his  life?  How
should  he  become  so  grieved  for  the  sake  of  one  life?

On  the  river-bank,  water  is  grudged  by  him  (alone)  that  is
blind  to  the  stream  of  water.

The  Prophet  said,  “Whosoever  knows  for  sure  his  recompense  S95
on  the  day  of  Resurrection —

That  his  compensation  will  be  ten  for  one — at  every  moment
a different  (act  of)  munificence  will  issue  from  him.”

* Literally,  “he  is.”


268


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

xAll  munificence  is  from  seeing  compensations;  therefore
seeing  the  compensation  is  opposed  to  fearing  (and  shrinking
from  the  act  of  munificence).

Miserliness  consists  in  not  seeing  compensations : the  prospect
of  pearls  keeps  the  diver  glad.

Hence  no  one  in  the  world  is  miserly,  since  no  one  hazards
anything  without  (seeing)  what  is  to  be  received  in  exchange.

900  Generosity,  then,  comes  from  the  eye,  not  from  the  hand:
’tis  seeing  that  matters;  none  but  the  seer  is  saved.

“Another  fault  (of  his  is)  that  he  is  not  self-conceited;  he  is
anxious  to  find  fault  with  his  self-existence.

He  has  (always)  been  one  who  speaks  in  blame  of  himself  and
seeks  to  blame  himself ; he  has  (always)  been  good  (kind)  to  all
and  bad  (unkind)  to  himself.”

The  King  said,  “Do  not  show  (such)  eagerness  in  praising
your  friend,  do  not  introduce  praise  of  yourself  in  the  mask  of
(your)  praise  of  him ;

Because  I will  bring  him  to  the  test,  and  shame  will  befall
you  in  the  upshot.”


How  the  slave,  from  the  purity  of  his  thought,  swore  to  the
truth  and  loyalty  of  his  friend.

905  He  said,  “ Nay,  by  Allah,  and  by  the  great  God,  the  possessor
of  kingdom,  and  by  the  Merciful  and  Compassionate  One;

By  the  God  who  sent  the  prophets,  not  in  (His)  need  (of  them),
but  in  grace  and  majesty ;

By  the  Lord  who  from  the  lowly  earth  created  (those)
glorious  princely  riders^,

(And)  purified  them  from  the  temperament  of  earthly  beings,
and  caused  them  to  outrun  the  celestials ;

(By  Him)  who  took  up  from  the  Fire  and  fashioned  into  pure
Light — and  then  it  outstripped  all  (the  other)  lights —
gio  That  splendour  of  lightning  which  shone  over  the  spirits,
so  that  Adam  gained  from  that  Light  (his)  knowledge  (of
God).

The  hand  of  Seth  gathered  that  which  grew  from  Adam:
therefore  Adam,  when  he  saw  that  (Light  in  him),  made  him
his  vicar.

Since  Noah  had  enjoyment  of  that  Jewel,  he  showered  pearls
(of  Divine  wisdom)  in  the  air  of  the  Sea  of  Soul.

From  (possession  of)  that  mighty  radiance  the  spirit  of
Abraham  went  fearlessly  into  the  flames  of  the  fire.

When  Ismah'l  (Ishmael)  fell  into  the  stream  thereof,  he  laid
his  head  before  his  (Abraham’s)  flashing  knife.


* I.e.  riders  of  supreme  dexterity.


THE  KING  AND  HIS  TWO  SLAVES  269

The  soul  of  David  was  heated  by  its  rays : iron  became  soft  915
in  his  hand-loom^.

When  Solomon  was  suckled  on  (the  milk  of)  union  with  it,
the  demon  became  a thrall  to  his  command  and  obedient.

When  Jacob  bowed  his  head  (in  submission)  to  the  (Divine)
destiny,  it  (the  Light)  illumined  (gladdened)  his  eye  with  the
scent  of  his  (lost)  son.

When  the  moon-faced  Joseph  beheld  that  Sun,  he  became  so
wide-awake  (wise)  in  the  interpretation  of  dreams.

When  the  rod  drank  water  (was  imbued  with  the  influence  of
the  Light)  from  the  hand  of  Moses,  it  made  one  mouthful  of
Pharaoh’s  empire.

When  Jesus,  the  son  of  Mary,  found  its  ladder,  he  sped  to  the
topmost  height  of  the  Fourth  Dome  (of  Heaven).

When  Mohammed  gained  that  Kingdom  and  Felicity,  he  in  a
moment  clave  the  disk  of  the  moon  in  two  halves.

When  Abii  Bakr  became  a signal  example  of  (God's)  favour,
he  became  the  Companion  of  such  a King  (as  Mohammed)  and
(received  the  name)  Siddiq^.

When  ‘Umar  became  distraught  with  that  Beloved,  he
became  a Fdruq  (discerner)®,  like  the  heart,  between  truth  and
falsehood.

When  ‘Uthman  became  the  fountain  of  that  clear  (Essence),
he  was  light  overflowing  and  became  Dhu  ’l-Nurayn  (Lord  of
the  Two  Lights)'*.

When  at  (the  sight  of)  its  countenance  Murtaza  (‘Ali)  began  9:15
to  scatter  pearls  (of  spiritual  truth),  he  became  the  Lion  of  God
in  the  pasture  of  the  soul.

When  Junayd  received  that  support  (which  he  received)
from  its  army,  his  maqdmdt  (stages  of  progress  in  the  mystical
life)  became  innumerable.

Bayazid  saw  the  way  into  its  superabundance,  and  heard
from  God  (heard  God  bestow  upon  him)  the  name,  “Pole  of
the  Gnostics.’’

When  Karkhi  became  the  guard  of  its  city,  he  became  the
vicar  of  (Divine)  love  and  inspired  by  the  Divine  breath .

The  son  of  Adham  joyously  rode  his  steed  towards  it,  and
became  the  supreme  sovereign  of  justice.

And  that  (famous)  Shaqiq  by  cleaving  (traversing)  that  vener-  .^30
able  Way  became  a sun  of  (clear)  judgement  and  keen-sighted.

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  hidden  (spiritual)  kings  are  holding
their  heads  high  (in  the  region)  beyond  this  world ;

^ For  dastbdf  cf.  i.  492  and  u.  2651,  and  for  the  metaphor  Ka‘b  b.  Zuhayr
in  Noldeke’s  Delectus,  p.  144,  v.  55.  God  taught  David  the  art  of  making
coats  of  mail  (Qur’an,  xxi,  80).

^ I.e.  “exceedingly  veracious.”

^ Faruq  was  a title  given  to  ‘Umar.

‘ He  was  so  named  because  he  had  married  two  daughters  of  the  Prophet.


270  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

Because  of  God’s  jealousy  their  names  remained  hidden;
eveiy  beggar  did  not  pronounce  their  names.

By  the  truth  of  that  Light  and  by  the  truth  of  those  illumined
ones  who  are  as  fishes  in  that  Sea —

’Tis  not  fitting  if  I call  it  the  Sea  of  the  Soul  and  the  Soul  of
the  Sea : I am  seeking  a new  name  for  it ; —

935  By  the  truth  of  that  That  from  which  this  and  that  are
(derived),  and  in  relation  to  which  (all)  kernels  are  as  rinds,

(I  swear)  that  the  (good)  qualities  of  my  fellow-servant  and
friend  exceed  my  description  (of  them)  a hundredfold.

That  which  I know  of  the  (spiritual)  endowments  of  that
comrade  (of  mine)  would  not  be  believed  by  thee:  what  shall
I say,  O noble  (king)?”

The  King  said,  “Now  speak  of  your  own  (case);  how  long
will  you  speak  of  what  concerns  this  or  that  one?

What  do  you  possess  and  what  have  you  gained?  What
pearls  have  you  fetched  from  the  bottom  of  the  Sea?

940  On  the  day  of  death  this  sense-perception  of  yours  will
vanish:  have  you  the  spiritual  light  that  should  be  the  com-
panion of  your  heart?

When  dust  shall  fill  these  eyes  in  the  tomb,  have  you  that
which  will  make  the  grave  bright?

At  the  time  when  your  hands  and  feet  shall  be  torn  in  shreds,
have  you  wings  and  plumes  that  your  spirit  may  fly  aloft?

At  the  time  when  this  animal  soul  is  no  more,  it  behoves  you
to  set  the  everlasting  spirit  in  its  place.

The  stipulation  of  (implied  in)  he  that  comes  with  good  {shall
be  rewarded  tenfold)  does  not  consist  in  doing  (good) ; it  consists
in  bringing  this  good  to  the  presence  of  God.

945  You  have  a substance  (essence)  human  or  asinine  (bestial):
(bring  that  to  God) : how  can  you  bring  (to  Him)  these  accidents
(of  word  or  deed)  which  have  passed  away?

As  regards  these  accidents  of  prayer  and  fasting — since  (that
which)  does  not  endure  for  two  moments  becomes  naught —

’Tis  impossible  to  carrj'  over  the  accidents  (into  another  state) ;
but  they  (may)  take  away  diseases  (defects)  from  the  substance.

So  that  the  substance  becomes  changed  by  means  of  this
accident,  as  when  disease  is  removed  by  abstinence.

By  exertion  abstinence,  (which  is)  the  accident,  becomes  the
substance : through  abstinence  the  acrid  mouth  becomes  (sweet
as)  honey.

950  Land,  through  sowing,  is  turned  into  ears  of  corn;  remedies
for  the  hair  turn  the  hair  into  chains  (make  it  long  and  curly).

Conjugal  intercourse  was  the  accident;  it  passed  away,  and
the  substance,  (which  is)  the  child,  was  produced  from  us.

The  mating  of  horse  or  camel  is  the  accident;  the  object  is
the  birth  of  the  colt,  (which  is)  the  substance.


THE  KING  AND  HIS  TWO  SLAVES  271

Similarly,  the  planting  of  the  garden  is  the  accident;  the
produce  of  the  garden  became  the  substance — behold  the  object
(for  which  the  garden  was  planted) !

Regard,  also,  the  practice  of  alchemy  as  the  accident;  if  a
substance  is  produced  by  that  alchemy,  bring  (it  into  view).

Burnishing  is  the  accident,  O prince;  from  this  accident  is  955
born  the  substance,  purity.

Do  not  say,  then,  ‘I  have  done  deeds’;  show  the  income
(fruit)  of  those  accidents,  do  not  evade  (my  request).

This  attribution  of  qualities  is  (only)  an  accident.  Be  silent;
do  not  kill  for  sacrifice  the  goat’s  shadow!”

The  slave  said,  “ O King,  the  mind  cannot  but  despair^  if  you
say  that  accidents  are  not  carried  over.

O King,  there  is  nothing  but  despair  for  the  ser\'ant  (of  God),
if  the  accident  that  has  gone  is  not  coming  back.

If  there  were  no  carrying  ov'er  and  resurrection  of  accidents,
action  would  be  vain  and  words  (mere)  babble.

These  accidents  are  carried  over  in  another  guise : the
resurrection  of  everything  mortal  is  another  (mode  of)  existence.

The  carrying  over  of  everything  is  just  as  befits  if^ : what  befits
the  herd  is  its  drover.

At  the  time  of  the  Resurrection  every  accident  has  a (particular)
form,  and  the  form  of  every  accident  has  a turn  (of  appearing
before  God).

Look  on  thyself.  Wert  not  thou  an  accident — the  movement
of  copulation,  and  copulation  with  a purpose?

Look  on  houses  and  edifices:  they  were  as  tales  in  the  (mind  y^5
of)  the  architect.

Such-and-such  a house,  which  seemed  to  us  beautiful,  of
which  the  hall,  roof,  and  door  were  well-proportioned—

(’Twas)  the  accident  (design)  and  ideas  (proceeding)  from  the
architect  (that)  brought  the  tools  and  pillars  (into  e.xistence)
from  (their  respective)  handicrafts.

What  but  some  fancy  and  accident  and  idea  is  the  origin  and
source  of  every  handicraft?

Look  disinterestedly  on  all  the  (various)  parts  of  the  world:
they  are  not  the  result  of  (anything)  e.xcept  accident.

The  beginning,  which  is  thought,  comes  to  an  end  in  action ; 970
know  that  in  such  wise  was  the  construction  of  the  world  in
eternity.

The  fruits  are  first  in  the  mind’s  thought,  (but  only)  at  the
last  do  they  become  manifest  actually :

When  you  have  done  work  (and)  planted  the  tree — at  the  end
(when  the  fruit  appears)  you  read  the  first  words.

‘ Literally,  “it  is  not  without  despair  of  the  understanding.”

( I.e.  everything  is  carried  over  into  the  form  of  existence  that  is  suitable
to  its  nature.


272


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Although  its  boughs,  leaves,  and  roots  are  first,  (yet)  all  those
are  sent  for  the  sake  of  the  fruit.

Hence  that  hidden  Thought  which  was  the  brain  (core)  of
those  (nine)  heavens  was  in  the  end  the  lord  of  lawldh}.

975  This  discussion  and  talk  are  (involve)  the  carrying  over  of
accidents;  this  lion  and  jackal  are  (examples  of)  the  carrying
over  of  accidents.

Indeed,  all  created  beings  were  accidents  (once),  so  that  in
this  sense  (the  text)  was  revealed — Did  there  not  come. . . ?

Whence  arise  those  accidents?  From  ideas.  And  whence
arise  these  ideas?  From  thoughts.

This  world  is  one  thought  (emanating)  from  the  Universal
Intellect:  the  Intellect  is  like  a king,  and  the  ideas  (are  his)
envoys.

The  first  world  is  the  world  of  probation;  the  second  world
is  the  (world  of)  recompense  for  this  and  that.

990  Thy  servant,  O King,  commits  a sin:  that  accident  becomes
(a  substance,  namely)  chains  and  prison.

When  thy  slave  performed  goodly  service,  did  not  that
accident  become  a robe  of  honour  in  the  battle  (between  the
flesh  and  the  spirit)?

This  accident  with  the  substance  (belonging  to  it)  is  egg  and
bird:  this  is  produced  by  that,  and  that  by  this,  in  succes-
sion.”

The  King  said,  “Take  the  meaning  (to  be)  so:  (why  then)
have  these  accidents  of  yours  not  produced  any  substance?”

“ (Divine)  Wisdom,”  replied  the  slave,  “has  kept  it  concealed,
in  order  that  this  world  of  good  and  evil  may  be  a mystery,

955  Because,  if  the  (substantial)  forms  of  thought  were  to  become
manifest,  infidel  and  believer  (alike)  would  speak  naught  but
praise  (of  God).

Then,  were  this  clearly  seen,  O King,  not  hidden,  and  were
the  mark  of  religion  or  infidelity  (visible)  on  the  forehead.

How  would  there  be  idol  and  idolater  in  this  world?  How
would  any  one  have  the  stomach^  to  mock  (at  holy  things)?

Then  this  world  of  ours  would  be  (like)  the  Resurrection:
who  commits  sin  and  wrong  at  the  Resurrection?”

The  King  said,  “God  has  veiled  the  retribution  of  evil,  but
(only)  from  the  vulgar,  not  from  His  own  elect.

900  If  I entrap  one  Amir,  I keep  it  hidden  from  the  (other)
Amirs,  (but)  not  from  the  Vizier.

God,  then,  has  shown  to  me  the  retribution  of  work  and
myriads  of  the  (substantial)  forms  of  actions.

* l.e.  the  Prophet  Mohammed  regarded  as  the  final  cause  of  the  Creation.
Lauldk  (“but  for  thee”)  refers  to  God’s  words,  “But  for  thee  I should  not
have  created  the  heavens/*

^ Literally,  “gall-bladder/*


THE  KING  AND  HIS  TWO  SLAVES  273

Give  a sign  (outwardly),  for  I know  all:  the  cloud  does  not
veil  the  moon  from  me.”

The  slave  said,  “Then  what  is  the  object  of  my  speaking,  since
thou  knowest  what  is  (the  real  nature  of)  that  which  has  been.^  ”

The  King  said,  “The  wisdom  (of  God)  in  making  the  world
manifest  (was)  that  the  (thing)  known  should  come  forth  (to  be
seen)  plainly.

Until  He  made  visible  that  which  He  knew.  He  did  not  lay  905
upon  the  world  the  pain  of  parturition  and  the  throes  (thereof) .

You  cannot  sit  inactive  for  one  moment:  (you  cannot  rest)
till  some  badness  or  goodness  has  issued  from  you.

These  demands  (cravings)  for  action  were  appointed  in  order
that  vour  inward  consciousness  should  come  clearly  into  (out-
ward) view.

How,  then,  should  the  reel,  which  is  the  body,  become  still,
when  the  thread’s  end,  which  is  the  mind,  is  pulling  it?

The  sign  of  that  pulling  is  your  anguish : to  be  inactive  is  to
you  like  the  death-agony.

This  world  and  that  world  are  for  ever  giving  birth:  every  1000
cause  is  a mother,  the  effect  is  born  (from  it  as)  a child.

When  the  effect  was  born,  that  too  became  a cause,  so  that  it
might  give  birth  to  wondrous  effects.

These  causes  are  generation  on  generation,  but  it  needs  a
very  well  illumined  eye  (to  see  all  the  links  in  their  chain).”

The  King,  in  conversation  with  him,  arrived  at  this  point,
that  he  saw  from  him  a sign  (which  was)  not  apparent.

If  that  searching  King  saw  (such  a sign),  ’tis  not  strange;  but
we  are  not  permitted  to  mention  it.

When  that  (other)  slave  came  from  the  warm  bath,  that  King  1005
and  lofty  personage  called  him  to  his  presence,

(And)  said,  “Health  (to  you)!  Lasting  happiness  be  yours
You  are  very  fine  and  elegant  and  good-looking.

Oh,  alas!  If  there  were  not  in  you  that  which  so-and-so  says
about  you,

Whoever  beheld  your  face  would  become  glad;  the  sight  of
you  w'ould  be  worth  the  empire  of  the  world.”

He  said,  “O  King,  utter  some  hint  of  what  that  miscreant-
said  about  me.  ”

The  King  said,  “In  the  first  place  he  described  you  as  double-  1010
faced,  saying  that  you  are  ostensibly  a remedy  (but)  secretly  a
disease.”

When  he  heard  from  the  King  the  malice  of  his  companion,
at  once  the  sea  of  his  anger  surged  up.

That  slave  foamed  and  reddened,  so  that  the  billows  of  his
vituperation  e.xceeded  (all)  bounds.

' Or  possibly,  “May  (the  wish)  ‘lasting  happiness’  come  true  for  you ! ’’

- Literally,  “he  whose  religion  is  corrupt.”

N M iS


1013


1020


io’5


lo  ;o


274  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

He  said,  “ From  the  first  moment  that  he  was  associated  with
me,  he  was  a great  eater  of  dung^,  like  a dog  in  (time  of)
famine.”

As  he  satirised  him  moment  after  moment  (continuously),
like  a bell,  the  King  put  his  hand  on  his  (the  slave's)  lips,  saying,
“Enough ! ”

He  said,  “I  know  you  from  him  by  that  (which  you  have
spoken) : in  you  the  spirit  is  foul,  and  in  your  companion  (only)
the  mouth.

Therefore  do  you  sit  far  off,  O foul-spirited  one,  that  he  may
be  the  commander  and  you  under  his  command.”

It  is  (said)  in  the  Hadith  (Traditions  of  the  Prophet) : “Know,
sire,  that  glorification  (of  God)  from  hypocrisy  is  like  the  verdure
on  a midden.”

Know,  then,  that  a fair  and  goodly  form  with  bad  qualities
(within)  is  not  worth  a farthing;

And  though  the  form  be  despicable  and  unpleasing,  (yet)
when  his  (that  person’s)  disposition  is  good,  die  at  his  feet!

Know  that  the  outward  form  passes  away,  (but)  the  world  of
reality  remains  for  ever.

How  long  will  you  play  at  loving  the  shape  of  the  jug?  Leave
the  shape  of  the  jug;  go,  seek  the  water.

You  have  seen  its  (outward)  form,  you  are  unaware  of  the
reality;  pick  out  from  the  shell  a pearl,  if  you  are  wise.

These  shells  of  bodies  in  the  world,  though  they  all  are  living
by  (grace  of)  the  Sea  of  Soul—

Yet  there  is  not  a pearl  in  every  shell : open  your  eyes  and  look
into  the  heart  of  each  one,

And  pick  out  what  that  one  has  and  what  this,  because  that
costly  pearl  is  seldom  found.

If  you  go  (turn  your  attention)  to  the  form,  by  external
appearance  a mountain  is  a hundred-  times  as  much  as  a ruby
in  bigness;

Also,  in  respect  of  form,  your  hands  and  feet  and  hair  are  a
hundred  times  as  much  as  the  contour  of  the  eye ;

But  this  (fact)  is  not  hidden  from  you,  that  the  two  eyes  are
the  choicest  of  all  (your)  members.

By  one  thought  that  comes  into  the  mind  a hundred  worlds
are  overturned  in  a single  moment.

If  the  body  of  the  Sultan  is,  in  form  (appearance),  one  (only),
(yet)  hundreds  of  thousands  of  soldiers  run  behind  (it).

Again,  the  figure  and  form  of  the  excellent  King  are  ruled  by
one  invisible  thought.

Behold  people  without  end  who,  moved  by  one  thought,
have  gone  over  the  earth  like  a flood ;

^ I.e.  “ very  scurrilous.’’

" “Hundred,”  of  course,  is  not  to  be  taken  in  its  strict  numerical  sense.


THE  KING  AND  HIS  TWO  SLAVES  275

Small  is  that  thought  in  the  people’s  eyes,  but  like  a flood  it
swallowed  and  swept  away  the  world.

So,  when  you  see  that  from  a thought  every  craft  in  the  world
(arises  and)  subsists —

(That)  houses  and  palaces  and  cities,  mountains  and  plains  10  ,5
and  rivers.

Earth  and  ocean  as  well  as  sun  and  sky,  are  living  (derive  their
life)  from  it  as  fishes  from  the  sea —

Then  why  in  your  foolishness,  O blind  one,  does  the  body
seem  to  vou  a Solomon,  and  thought  (only)  as  an  ant.^

To  your  eye  the  mountain  appears  great:  (to  you)  thought  is
like  a mouse,  and  the  mountain  (like)  a wolf.

The  (material)  world  in  your  eyes  is  awful  and  sublime:  you
tremble  and  are  frightened  at  the  clouds  and  the  thunder  and
the  sky.

While  in  regard  to  the  world  of  thought,  O less  (lower)  than  1040
the  ass,  you  are  secure  and  indifferent  as  a witless  stone,

Because  you  are  a (mere)  shape  and  have  no  portion  of  in-
telligence; you  are  not  of  human  nature,  you  are  an  ass’s  colt.

From  ignorance  you  deem  the  shadow  to  be  the  substance :
hence  to  you  the  substance  has  become  a plaything  and  of  slight
account.

Wait  till  the  Day  when  that  thought  and  phantasy  unfolds  its
wings  and  pinions  without  any  veil  (encumbrance).

You  will  see  that  the  mountains  have  become  like  soft  wool,

(and  that)  this  Earth  of  hot  and  cold  has  become  naught;

You  will  see  neither  the  sky  nor  the  stars  nor  (any)  e.vistence  1045
but  God,  the  One,  the  Living,  the  Loving.

Here  is  a tale,  (be  it)  true  or  false,  to  illustrate  (these)  truths.

Hoic  the  (King’s)  retainers  envied  the  favourite  slave.

A King  had,  of  his  grace,  preferred  a certain  slave  above  all  his
retinue.

His  allowance  was  the  stipend  of  forty  Amirs;  a hundred
Viziers  would  not  see  (receive)  a tenth  of  its  amount.

Through  the  perfection  of  (his)  natal  star  and  prosperity  and  for-
tune hewas  an  Ayaz,  while  theKingwas  the  Mahmud  of  the  time.

His  spirit  in  its  origin,  before  (the  creation  of)  this  body,  was  to^  -
near-related  and  akin  to  the  King’s  spirit.

(Only)  that  matters  which  has  existed  before  the  body ; leave
(behind  you)  these  things  which  have  newly  sprung  into  being.

That  which  matters  belongs  to  the  knower  (of  God),  for  he
is  not  squinting:  his  eye  is  (fixed)  upon  the  things  first  sown.

That  which  was  sown  as  wheat  (good)  or  as  barley  (relatively
evil) — dav  and  night  his  eye  is  fastened  on  that  place^  (where  it
was  sown).

‘ Literally,  “(deposited  as)  a pledge  in  that  place.”


lS-2


276  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Night  gave  birth  to  nothing  but  what  she  was  pregnant  withal :
designs  and  plots  are  wind,  (empty)  wind.

1055  How  should  he  please  his  heart  with  fair  designs  who  sees  the
design  of  God  (prevailing)  over  them?

He  (who  trusts  in  his  own  devices)  is  laying  a snare  within
the  snare  (of  God) : by  your  life,  neither  this  (snare)  will  escape
(destruction)  nor  will  that  (man).

Though  (in  the  meanwhile)  a hundred  herbs  grow  and  fade,
there  will  grow  up  at  last  that  which  God  has  sown.

He  (the  cunning  man)  sowed  new  seed  over  the  first  seed;
(but)  this  second  (seed)  is  passing  away,  and  (only)  the  first  is
sound  (and  enduring).

The  first  seed  is  perfect  and  choice ; the  second  seed  is  corrupt
and  rotten.

1000  Cast  away  this  contrivance  of  yours  before  the  Beloved —
though  your  contrivance  indeed  is  of  His  contriving.

That  which  God  has  raised  (and  that  alone)  has  use : what  He
has  at  first  sown  at  last  grows.

Whatever  you  sow,  sow  for  His  sake,  inasmuch  as  you  are
the  Beloved’s  captive,  O lover.

Do  not  hang  about  the  thievish  fleshly  soul  and  its  work:
whatsoever  is  not  God’s  work  is  naught,  naught.

(Sow  the  good  seed)  ere  the  Day  of  Resurrection  shall  appear
and  the  night-thief  be  shamed  before  Him  whose  is  the  Kingdom,

1065  With  the  goods  stolen  by  his  contrivance  and  craft  (still)
remaining  on  his  neck  at  the  Day  of  Judgement.

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  minds  may  jump  together  (conspire)
to  lay  a snare  other  than  His  snare ;

(But)  they  only  find  their  snare  more  grievous  (to  themselves),
(for)  how  can  straws  show  any  power  (of  resistance)  against  the
wind  ?

If  you  say,  “What  was  the  profit  of  (our  created)  being?”  (I
reply),  “There  is  profit  in  your  question,  O contumacious
one.

If  this  question  of  yours  has  no  profit,  why  should  I listen  to
it  in  vain  and  fruitlessly?

io;o  And  if  there  are  many  profits  in  your  question,  then  why,
pray,  is  the  world  unprofitable?

And  (again),  if  from  one  standpoint  the  world  is  unprofitable,
from  other  standpoints  it  is  advantageous.

If  your  profit  is  no  profit  to  me,  (yet)  since  it  is  a profit  to
you,  do  not  withdraw  from  it.”

The  beauU-  of  Joseph  profited  a (whole)  world  (of  people),
though  to  his  brethren  it  was  a vain  superfluity.

The  melodies  of  David  were  so  dear  (to  the  faithful),  but  to  the
interdicted  (unbeliever)  they  were  (no  more  than)  the  noise  of
wood.


THE  ENVIOUS  RETAINERS


277

The  water  of  the  Nile  was  superior  to  the  Water  of  Life,  but  1075
to  the  interdicted  and  unbelieving  it  was  blood.

To  the  true  believer  martyrdom  is  life;  to  the  hypocrite  it  is
death  and  corruption.

Tell  (me),  what  single  blessing  is  there  in  the  world,  from
which  some  group  of  people  is  not  excluded?

What  profit  have  the  ox  and  the  ass  in  sugar?  Every  soul  has
a different  food ;

But  if  that  food  is  accidental  to  it  (and  not  according  to  its
real  nature),  then  admonition  is  the  (proper)  correction  for  it.

As  (in  the  case  of)  one  who  from  disease  has  become  fond  of  loSo
(eating)  clay — though  he  may  suppose  that  that  (clay)  is  indeed
his  (natural)  food.

He  has  (in  reality)  forgotten  his  original  food  and  has  betaken
himselfi  to  the  food  of  disease.

Having  given  up  honey,  he  has  eaten  poison ; he  has  made  the
food  of  disease  (to  be  his  nourishment)  as  (though  it  were)  fat.

Man’s  original  food  is  the  Light  of  God ; animal  food  is  im-
proper for  him ;

But,  in  consequence  of  disease,  his  mind  has  fallen  into  this
(delusion),  that  day  and  night  he  should  eat  of  this  water  and  clay.

(He  is)  pale-faced,  weak-footed,  faint-hearted — where  is  the  loSj
food  of  by  Heaven  which  hath  (starry)  tracks}

That  is  the  food  of  the  chosen  ones  of  the  (Divine)  sovereignty ;
the  eating  thereof  is  (done)  without  throat  or  instrument.

The  food  of  the  (spiritual)  sun  is  (derived)  from  the  light  of
the  (celestial)  Throne;  (the  food  that  belongs)  to  the  envious
and  devilish  is  (derived)  from  the  smoke  of  the  (terrestrial)
carpet.

God  said  concerning  the  martvrs,  they  are  (alive  with  their
Lord)  receiving  sustenance.  For  that  food  there  was  neither
mouth  nor  dish.

The  heart  is  eating  a (particular)  food  from  every  single
companion;  the  heart  is  getting  a (particular)  excellence  from
every  single  (piece  of)  knowledge.

Eveiy^  human  being’s  (outer)  form  is  like  a cup;  (only)  the  io-,o
(spiritual)  eye  is  a percipient  of  his  (or  her)  reality.

You  eat  (receive)  something  from  meeting  with  any  one,  and
you  carry  away  something  from  conjunction  with  any  associate.

When  planet  comes  into  conjunction  with  planet,  the  effect
appropriate  to  them  both  is  assuredlv  produced.

As  (for  example)  the  conjunction  of  man  and  woman  brings
to  birth  the  human  being,  and  (as)  sparks  arise  from  the  con-
junction of  stone  and  iron ;

And  (as)  from  the  conjunction  of  earth  with  rains  (there  are
produced)  fruits  and  greenery  and  sweet  herbs ;

^ Literally,  “has  turned  his  face.’*


278  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

1095  And  (as)  from  the  conjunction  of  green  things  (plants  and
verdant  spots)  with  man  (there  is  produced)  joy  of  heart  and
carelessness  and  happiness ;

And  (as)  from  the  conjunction  of  happiness  with  our  souls
are  born  our  goodness  and  beneficence.

Our  bodies  become  capable  of  eating  and  drinking  when  our
desire  for  recreation  (in  the  open  air)  is  satisfied.

Redness  of  countenance  is  (derived)  from  the  conjunction  of
blood  (with  the  face);  blood  is  (derived)  from  the  beautiful
rose-coloured  sun.

Redness  is  the  best  of  (all)  colours,  and  that  is  (born)  of  the
sun  and  is  arriving  (to  us)  from  it.

1100  Everv  land  that  has  been  conjoined  with  Saturn  has  become
nitrous  and  is  not  the  place  for  sowing.

Through  concurrence  power  comes  into  action^,  as  (in  the
case  of)  the  conjunction  of  the  Devil  with  hypocrites.

These  spiritual  truths  without  (possessing)  any  (worldly)
pomp  and  grandeur,  have  pomp  and  grandeur  from  tbe  Ninth
Heaven.

The  pomp  and  grandeur  belonging  to  (the  world  of)  creation
is  a borrowed  (adventitious)  thing;  the  pomp  and  grandeur
belonging  to  the  (world  of)  Command^  is  an  essential  thing.

For  the  sake  of  (earthly)  pomp  and  grandeur  they  endure
abasement ; in  the  hope  of  glory  they  are  happy  in  (their)  abase-
ment.

1105  In  the  hope  of  a ten  days’  (transient)  glory  (full)  of  annoyance,
they  have  made  their  necks,  from  anxiety,  (thin)  as  a spindle.

How  do  not  they  come  to  this  place  where  I am  ? — for  in  this
(spiritual)  glory  I am  the  shining  Sun.

The  rising-place  of  the  sun  is  the  pitch-coloured  tower  (of
heaven),  (but)  my  Sun  is  beyond  (all)  rising-places.

His  “rising-place”  (is  only)  in  relation  to  His  motes:  His
essence  neither  rose  nor  set.

I who  am  left  behind  (surpassed  in  eminence)  by  His  motes
am  (nevertheless)  in  both  worlds  a sun  without  shadow.

mo  Still,  I am  revolving  round  the  Sun — ’tis  wonderful ; the  cause
of  this  is  the  majesty  of  the  Sun.

The  Sun  is  acquainted  with  (all  secondarj^)  causes;  at  the
same  time  the  cord  of  (all  secondaixd  causes  is  severed  from
Him®.

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  times  have  I cut  off  (abandoned)
hope — of  whom?  Of  the  Sun?  Do  vou  believe  this ?

Do  not  believe  of  me  that  I can  endure  to  be  without  the  Sun,
or  the  fish  to  be  without  water;

* /.«.  what  is  potential  becomes  actual.

" The  supersensible  world.

* I.e.  He  is  independent  of  them.


THE  ENVIOUS  RETAINERS  279

And  if  I become  despairing,  my  despair  is  the  objective  mani-
festation of  the  Sun’s  work,  O goodly  (friend).

How  should  the  objective  manifestation  of  the  work  be  cut  off  1115
from  the  very  self  of  the  Worker?  How  should  any  object  of
(contingent)  being  pasture  on  (derive  existence  from)  aught
but  (Absolute)  Being?

All  (contingent)  beings  pasture  on  this  Meadow  , whether
they  be  Buraq  or  Arab  horses  or  even  asses ;

And  he  that  has  not  regarded  (all)  becomings  (movements
and  changes)  as  (proceeding)  from  that  Sea,  at  ever}"  instant
turns  his  face  towards  a new  point  of  orientation.

He  has  drunk  salt  water  from  the  sweet  Sea,  so  that  the  salt
water  has  made  him  blind.

The  Sea  is  saying,  “Drink  of  my  water  with  the  right  hand,

O blind  one,  that  thou  mayst  gain  sight.’’

Here  “the  right  hand”  is  right  opinion,  which  knows  con-  ii;o
cerning  (both)  good  and  evil  whence  they  are.

O lance,  there  is  a Lancer*,  so  that  sometimes  thou  becomest
straight,  sometimes  (bent)  double.

Through  love  of  Shams-i  Din  (the  Sun  of  the  Religion)  I am
without  claw"S  (powerless) ; else  would  not  I make  this  blind  one
see?

Hark,  0 Light  of  the  Truth,  Husamu’ddin,  do  thou  speedily
heal  him,  to  the  confusion  of  the  eye  of  the  envious;

(Heal  him  wdth)  the  quick-acting  tutty  of  majesty,  the  dark-
ness-killing remedy  of  the  recalcitrant.

Which,  if  it  strike  on  the  eye  of  the  blind  man,  will  dispel  1125
from  him  a hundred  years’  darkness.

Heal  all  the  blind  ones  except  the  envious  man  who  from
envy  is  bringing  denial  against  thee.

To  thy  envier,  though  it  be  I,  do  not  give  life,  (but  let  me
alone)  so  that  I may  be  suffering  the  agony  of  (spiritual)  death
even  as  he  is.

(I  mean)  him  that  is  envious  of  the  Sun  and  him  that  is
fretting  at  the  existence  of  the  Sun.

Look  you,  this  is  the  incurable  disease  w’hich  he  has,  alas;
look  you,  this  is  one  fallen  for  ever  to  the  bottom  of  the  pit.

What  he  wants  is  the  extinction  of  the  Sun  of  eternity.  Tell  1130
(me),  how  should  this  desire  of  his  come  to  pass?

The  falcon  (seeker  of  God)  is  he  that  comes  back  to  the  King ;
he  that  has  lost  the  way  is  the  blind  falcon.

It  lost  the  way  and  fell  into  the  wilderness;  then  in  the  wilder-
ness it  fell  amongst-  owls.

It  (the  falcon)  is  wholly  light  (derived)  from  the  Light  of
(Divine)  approval,  but  the  marshal,  Fate^,  blinded  it.

^ Literally,  “one  who  turns  or  wields  the  lance.”

‘ Literally,  “beside.”  ® Literally,  “the  (Divine)  destiny.”


28o


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

He  threw  dust  in  its  eyes  and  took  it  (far)  away  from  the
(right)  road ; he  left  it  amidst  owls  and  (in)  the  wilderness.

1135  To  crown  all^,  the  owls  attack  it  and  tear  its  lovely  wing-
feathers  and  plumes.

A clamour  arose  amongst  the  owls — “Ha!  the  falcon  has
come  to  seize  our  dwelling-place.”

(’Twas)  as  (when)  the  street-dogs,  wrathful  and  terrifying,
have  fallen  upon  the  frock  of  a (dervish)  stranger.

“How  am  I fit,”  says  the  falcon,  “for  (consorting  with)  owls?
I give  up  to  the  owls  a hundred  wildernesses  like  this.

I do  not  wish  to  stay  here,  I am  going,  I will  return  to  the
King  of  kings.

1140  Do  not  kill  yourselves  (with  agitation),  O owls,  for  I am  not
settling  (here) ; I am  going  home.

This  ruin  is  a thriving  abode  in  your  eyes;  for  me,  however,
the  King’s  fore-arm  is  the  place  whither  one  returns.”

The  owl  (that  was  warning  the  others)  said,  “The  falcon  is
plotting  to  uproot  you  from  house  and  home.

He  will  seize  our  houses  bv  cunning,  he  will  tear  us  out  of
our  nests  by  (his)  hypocrisy.

This  devotee  of  guile  pretends  to  be  perfectly  satisfied  (with
what  he  has);  by  God,  he  is  worse  than  all  the  greedy  together.

1145  From  greediness  he  eats  clay  as  (if  it  were)  date-syrup:
O friends,  do  not  entrust  the  sheep’s  tail  to  the  bear.

He  is  boasting  of  the  King  and  the  King’s  hand,  in  order  that
he  may  lead  us  astray*,  simple-minded  as  we  are.

How,  indeed,  should  a petty  bird  be  the  congener  of  the  King?
Do  not  listen  to  him,  if  you  have  (even)  a little  understanding.

Is  he  the  King’s  or  the  Vizier’s  congener?  Is  garlic  at  all
suitable  to  sweetmeat  made  with  walnut  kernels  ?

(As  for)  his  saying,  from  deceit  and  feint  and  artifice,  ‘The
King  with  his  retinue  is  searching  after  me,’

1150  Here’s  an  absurd®  mad  fancy  for  vou,  here’s  a vain  boast  and
a snare  to  catch  blockheads  I

Any  one  who  believes  this — ’tis  because  of  (his)  foolishness :
how  is  a slender  little  bird  fit  for  (friendship  with)  royalty?

If  the  smallest  owl  should  strike  at  his  brain,  where  is  succour
for  him  from  the  King?  ”

The  falcon  said,  “If  a single  feather  of  mine  be  broken,  the
King  of  kings  will  uproot  the  (whole)  owle^\^

What  is  an  owl?  Even  if  a falcon  vex  my  heart  and  maltreat
me,

1155  The  King  will  heap  up  in  every  lowland  and  highland  hundreds
of  thousands  of  stacks  of  falcons’  heads.

' Literally,  “any  small  thing  put  on  the  top  of  a load,”  “a  last  straw.”

- Literally,  “take  us  from  the  (right)  road.”

^ Literally,  “unacceptable.”


THE  FALCON  AMONGST  THE  OWLS


281


His  favours  keep  watch  over  me;  wherever  I go,  the  King  is
(following)  behind.

The  phantasy  of  me  is  abiding  in  the  King’s  heart : sick
(would  be)  the  King’s  heart  without  the  phantasy  of  me.

When  the  King  bids  me  fly  in  His  Wav  I fly  up  to  the  heart’s
zenith,  like  His  beams.

I fly  as  a moon  and  sun,  I rend  the  curtains  of  the  skies.

The  light  of  intellects  is  from  my  thought;  the  bursting  forth  n-io
of  heaven  (into  existence)  is  from  my  original  nature.

I am  a falcon,  and  (yet)  the  hiimd  becomes  lost  in  amaze-
ment at  me:  who  is  an  owl,  that  it  should  know  my  secret?

For  my  sake  the  King  bethought  him  of  the  prison  (this  world),
and  set  free  hundreds  of  thousands  of  those  in  bondage.

He  made  me  familiar  with  the  owls  for  a moment,  and  by
means  of  my  breath  (words)  he  made  the  owls  (to  be)  falcons.

Oh,  happy  (is)  the  owl  that  in  my  (soaring)  flight  (towards
God)  had  the  good  fortune  to  apprehend^  my  myster}'.

Cling  to  me,  that  ye  may  become  exultant  (enjoying  bliss),  uto
(and  that)  ye  may  become  royal  falcons,  although  ye  are  owls.

He  that  is  dear  to  such  a King — wheresoever  he  light,  why
should  he  be  a stranger?

Any  one  for  whose  pain  the  King  is  the  remedy — though  he
wail  like  the  reed  (flute),  he  is  not  without  plenty.

I am  the  owner  of  the  (spiritual)  kingdom,  I am  not  a lick-
spittle ; the  King  is  beating  the  falcon-drum  for  me  from  the
shore^.

Aly  falcon-drum  is  the  call,  'Return!’  God  is  my  witness  in
despite  of  adversary.

I am  not  a congener  of  the  King  of  kings — far  be  it  from  n-o
Him! — but  I have  light  from  Him  in  (His)  self-manifestation.

Homogeneity  is  not  in  respect  of  form  and  essence:  water
becomes  homogeneous  with  earth  in  the  plant.

Wind  (air)  becomes  homogeneous  with  fire  in  consistency ; wine
at  last®  becomes  homogeneous  with  the  constitution  (of  the  body) .

Since  my  genus  is  not  the  genus  of  my  King,  my  ego  has  passed
away  (fand)  for  the  sake  of  His  ego.

Inasmuch  as  my  ego  passed  away.  He  remained  alone : I roll
at  the  feet  of  His  horse,  like  dust.

The  (individual)  soul  (self)  became  dust,  and  the  (only)  signs  1175
of  it  are  the  mark  of  His  feet  on  its  dust.

Become  dust  at  His  feet  for  the  sake  of  this  mark,  in  order
that  you  may  become  the  crown  on  the  head  of  the  lofty.

Let  not  mv  form  beguile  vou:  partake  of  my  dessert  before
my  departure.”

'■  Literally,  “from  good  fortune  apprehended.”

^ Literally,  “from  the  farther  side,”  J.e.  from  the  world  beyond.

“ I.e.  after  it  has  been  digested  and  assimilated.


282  MATHNAWl',  BOOK  II

Oh,  (there  is)  many  a one  whom  the  form  waylaid:  he  aimed
at  the  form  (of  the  holy  man)  and  (in  reality)  struck  at  God.

After  all,  this  soul  is  joined  to  the  body,  (but)  has  this  soul
any  likeness  to  the  body?

ii  'o  The  sparkle  of  the  eye’s  light  is  paired  with  the  fat^ ; the  light
of  the  heart  is  hidden  in  a drop  of  blood ;

Joy  (has  its  seat)  in  the  kidneys,  grief  in  the  liver;  intellect,
(bright)  as  a candle,  inside  the  brain  in  the  head.

These  connexions  are  not  without  a how'  and  a why,  (but)  as
regards  knowledge  of  the  why  (our)  minds  are  impotent.

The  Universal  Soul  came  into  contact  with  the  partial  (in-
dividual) soul,  and  the  (latter)  soul  received  from  it  a pearl  and
put  it  into  its  bosom.

Through  that  touch  on  its  bosom  the  (individual)  soul
became  pregnant,  like  Mary,  with  a heart-beguiling  Messiah,

II ''5  Not  the  Messiah  who  is  (a  traveller)  on  land  and  water,  (but)
the  Messiah  who  is  beyond  (the  limitation  of)  measuring  (space).

So  when  the  soul  has  been  impregnated  by  the  Soul  of  soul,
bv  such  a soul  the  world  is  impregnated.

Then  the  world  gives  birth  to  another  world,  and  displays  to
this  congregated  people  a place  of  congregation  (for  the  realities
which  are  raised  to  life).

Though  I should  speak  and  recount  till  the  Resurrection,
I lack  the  power  to  describe  this  (spiritual)  resurrection.

These  sayings  (of  mine),  indeed,  are  really  an  “O  Lord”
(a  prayer  addressed  to  God);  the  words  are  the  lure  for  the
breath  of  a sweet-lipped  One^.

II', 0 How,  then,  should  he  (that  seeks  the  answer)  fail  (to  pray)?
How  should  he  be  silent,  inasmuch  as  “Here  am  I ” is  (always)
coming  in  response  to  his  “O  Lord”?

It  is  a “Here  am  I ” that  you  cannot  hear,  but  can  taste  (feel
and  enjoy)  from  head  to  foot®.

Hmv  the  thirsty  man  threw  bricks  from  the  top  of  the  wall
into  the  stream  of  zcater.

On  the  bank  of  the  stream  there  was  a high  wall,  and  on  the
top  of  the  wall  a sorrowful  thirsty  man.

The  wall  hindered  him  from  (reaching)  the  water;  he  was  in
distress  for  the  water,  like  a fish.

Suddenly  he  threw  a brick  into  the  water:  the  noise  of  the
water  came  to  his  ear  like  spoken  words,

1 1, 5 Like  words  spoken  by  a sweet  and  delicious  friend:  the  noise

of  the  water  made  him  drunken  as  (though  it  were)  wine.

' I.e.  the  white  of  the  eye.

" I.e.  they  seek  to  capture  the  Divine  answer  to  prayer.

® I.e.  it  is  a mystical  experience  absorbing  every  sense  and  faculu*.


THE  THIRSTY  MAN  WHO  THREW  BRICKS  283

From  the  pleasure  of  (hearing)  the  noise  of  the  water,  that
sorely  tried  man  began  to  hurl  and  tear  off  bricks  from  that
place.

The  water  was  making  a noise,  that  is  to  say,  (it  was  crying),
“Hey,  what  is  the  advantage  to  you  of  this  hurling  a brick  at
me?  ”

The  thirsty  man  said,  “ O water,  I have  two  advantages ; I will
nowise  refrain  from  this  work.

The  first  advantage  is  (my)  hearing  the  noise  of  the  water,
which  to  thirsty  men  is  (melodious)  as  a rebeck.

The  noise  thereof  has  become  (to  me)  like  the  noise  of  (the  1
trumpet  of)  Israfil:  bv  this  (noise)  life  has  been  transferred
(restored)  to  one  (that  was)  dead ;

Or  (it  is)  like  the  noise  of  thunder  in  days  of  spring — from  it
(the  thunder)  the  garden  obtains  so  many  (lovely)  ornaments ;

Or  like  the  davs  of  alms  to  a poor  man,  or  like  the  message  of
deliverance  to  a prisoner.

’Tis  like  the  breath  of  the  Merciful  (God)  which,  without
mouth,  comes  to  Mohammed  from  Yemen;

Or  ’tis  like  the  scent  of  Ahmad  (Mohammed),  the  Apostle
(of  God),  which  in  intercession  comes  to  the  sinner;

Or  like  the  scent  of  beauteous,  graceful  Joseph,  (which)  i
strikes  upon  the  soul  of  lean  Jacob.

The  other  advantage  is  that,  (with)  every  brick  I tear  off  this
(wall),  I come  (nearer)  to  running  water.

Since  by  diminution  of  the  bricks  the  high  wall  becomes  lower
every  time  that  one  is  removed^.

The  lowness  (destruction)  of  the  wall  becomes  a means  of
access  (to  the  water) ; separation  from  it  is  the  remedy  bringing
about  a union  (with  the  water).’’

The  tearing  away  of  the  adhesive  (firmly  joined)  bricks  is
(analogous  to)  prostration  (in  prayer):  (it  is)  the  cause  of  near-
ness (to  God),  for  (God  has  said),  ‘ And prostrate  thyself  and  drazc
near  {to  Me).’

So  long  as  this  wall  is  high-necked  (lofty  and  proud),  it  is  an  i
obstacle  to  this  bowing  of  the  head  (in  prayer).

’Tis  impossible  to  perform  the  prostration  on  the  Water  ot
Life,  until  I gain  deliverance  from  this  earthly  body.

The  more  thirsty  anv  one  on  the  top  of  the  wall  is,  the  more
quickly  does  he  tear  off  the  bricks  and  turfs.

The  more  anv  one  is  in  love  wfith  the  noise  of  the  water,  the
bigger  clods  does  he  tear  away  from  the  barrier.

He,  at  the  noise  of  the  water,  is  filled  with  wine  (ecstasy)  up
to  the  neck,  (while)  the  stranger  (to  love)  hears  nothing  but  the
sound  of  the  splash.


Literally,  “every  time  that  he  (the  dilapidator)  tore  off  (a  brick).”


284  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

1215  Oh,  blest  is  he  that  deems  his  early  days  an  opportunity  to
be  seized,  and  pays  his  debt —

In  the  days  when  he  has  the  power,  (when)  he  has  health  and
strength  of  heart  and  vigour.

And  (when)  that  season  of  youth,  like  a garden  green  and
fresh,  is  bringing  (to  ripeness)  produce  and  fruit  without  any
stint ;

(When)  the  fountains  of  strength  and  lust  (are)  flowing,  (so
that)  thereby  the  soil  of  the  body  is  made  verdant ;

(When  he  is  still  like)  a well-kept  house,  with  its  roof  very
lofty,  its  sides  (walls)  symmetrical,  without  buttressing^  and
clamps —

1220  Ere  the  days  of  eld  arrive  and  bind  your  neck  with  a halter  of
palm-fibres ;

(Ere)  the  soil  becomes  nitrous  (barren),  crumbling,  and  poor
— never  did  good  herbage  grow  from  nitrous  soil ;

(When)  the  water  of  strength  and  the  water  of  lust  (is)  cut  off,
and  he  has  no  profit  from  himself  or  others :

The  eyebrows  fallen  down  like  a crupper-strap;  the  eyes
grown  moist  and  dim;

The  face,  from  wrinkling,  like  the  back  of  a lizard;  speech
and  taste  and  teeth  gone  out  of  use ;

1223  The  day  late,  the  ass  lame,  and  the  way  long ; the  shop  ruined
and  the  business  in  disorder^;

The  roots  of  bad  habit  firmly  set,  and  the  power  to  tear  them
up  decreased.

How  the  Governor  commanded  a certain  man,  saying,

"Root  up  the  thornbush  which  you  have  planted  on  the  road."

As  (for  example)  that  callous  fair-spoken  person  planted  a
thornbush  in  the  middle  of  the  road.

The  wayfarers  reproached  him  and  oftentimes  told  him  to
dig  it  up : he  dug  it  not  up.

Every  moment  the  thornbush  was  growing  bigger : the  people’s
feet  were  streaming  with®  blood  from  its  pricks.

1230  The  people’s  clothes  were  being  rent  by  the  thorns ; the  feet
of  the  poor  were  being  wounded  pitiably.

When  the  Governor  said  to  him  with  earnestness,  “Dig  this
up,’’  he  replied,  “Yes,  I will  dig  it  up  some  day.”

For  a long  while  he  promised  (to  dig  it  up)  to-morrow  and
to-morrow;  (meantime)  his  thornbush  became  robust  in  con-
stitution.


' Literally,  the  “ mixture  ” (contaminatio)  caused  by  the  necessity  of
repairing  and  supporting  the  original  framework.

^ Literally,  “gone  out  of  order.”

* Literally,  “full  of.”


THE  MAN  WHO  LET  HIS  THORNBUSH  GROW  285

One  day  the  Governor  said  to  him,  “O  false  promiser,  go
forward  with  my  affair,  do  not  creep  back.”

He  replied,  “O  uncle,  the  days  are  between  usL”  “Make
haste,”  said  he,  “do  not  put  off  payment  of  my  debt.”

You  who  say  “To-morrow,”  be  aware  of  this,  that  with  ever\  12:, 5
day'  that  time  is  coming  (and  going).

That  evil  tree  is  growing  younger,  while  this  digger  is  waxing
old  and  sorely  distressed.

The  thornbush  (is)  in  (process  of  gaining)  strength  and  (in)
ascent;  its  digger  (is)  in  (process  of)  aging  and  decline.

The  thornbush  every  day  and  every'  moment  is  green  and
fresh;  its  digger  is  every  dav  more  sickly  and  withered.

It  is  growing  younger,  you  older:  be  quick  and  do  not  waste
your  time !

Know  that  every  single  bad  habit  of  yours  is  a thornbush : 1240
many  a time,  after  all,  have  its  thorns  pierced  your  foot.

Many  a time  have  y'ou  been  wounded  by  your  own  (evil)
habits — you  have  no  sense,  you  are  very  senseless.

If  to  the  wounding  of  other  persons,  which  comes  to  pass
from  your  evil  nature.

You  are  indifferent,  at  any  rate  you  are  not  (indifferent)  to
your  own  wounds : you  are  the  torment  of  yourself  and  of  every
stranger.

Either  take  up  the  axe  and  strike  like  a man — like  ‘Ah',  destroy
this  gate  of  Khaybar —

Or  unite  these  thorns  with  the  rosebush:  unite  the  light  of  1245
the  friend  (of  God)  with  the  (sensual)  fire.

In  order  that  his  light  may  extinguish  your  fire,  (and  that)
union  with  him  may  make  your  thorns  roses.

You  are  like  Hell,  he  is  a true. believer : the  e.xtinction  of  the
fire  (of  Hell)  by  means  of  a true  believer  is  possible.

Mustafa  (Mohammed)  said  concerning  the  speech  of  Hell,  that
on  account  of  fear  it  begins  humbly  to  entreat  the  true  believer.

And  says  to  him,  “ Pass  quickly  away  from  me,  O king : hark,
for  thv  light  has  taken  away  the  burning  of  my  fire.”

Therefore  the  true  believer’s  light  is  the  death  of  the  fire,  12,0
because  without  an  opposite  the  removal  of  the  (other)  opposite
is  impossible.

On  the  Day  of  Justice  (Judgement)  the  fire  will  be  the
opponent  of  the  light,  since  the  former  was  aroused  by  (God’s)
wrath,  the  latter  by  (His)  grace.

If  vou  are  wishing  to  remove  the  evil  of  the  fire,  direct  the
water  of  (Divine)  mercy  against  the  heart  of  the  fire.

The  true  believer  is  the  fountain  of  that  water  of  mercy : the
pure  spirit  of  the  well-doer  is  the  Water  of  Life.

^ I.e.  “there  is  still  some  time  before  the  account  between  us  need  be
setded.”


286


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Hence  your  fleshly  soul  is  fleeing  from  him,  because  you  are
of  fire,  (while)  he  (is)  the  water  of  the  stream.

1255  Fire  becomes  fleeing  from  water  for  the  reason  that  its  fire
(flame  and  heat)  is  ruined  by  water.

Your  sense  and  thought  are  wholly  of  the  fire;  the  sense  of
the  Shaykh  (spiritual  guide)  and  his  thought  are  the  beauteous
Light.

W hen  the  water  of  his  light  trickles  on  the  fire,  chak  chak  (a
gnashing  sound)  rises  from  the  fire,  and  it  leaps  up  (in  fury).

W hen  it  makes  (the  sound)  chak  chak,  say  you  to  it,  “ Death
and  woe  (to  thee),”  in  order  that  this  hell,  (which  is)  your
fleshly  soul,  may  become  cold  (quenched).

So  that  it  may  not  burn  your  rose-garden,  so  that  it  may  not
burn  your  justice  and  well-doing.

12S0  After  that,  anything  that  you  sow  will  yield  fruit  (or  flowers) ;
it  will  yield  anemones  and  wild  roses  and  thyme.

Once  more  we  are  going  wide  of  the  straight  way : turn  back,
O master — where  is  our  way?

W’e  were  (engaged)  in  showing,  O envious  one,  that  your  ass
is  lame  and  the  place  of  alighting  (journey’s  end)  far  off,  (so  you
must  be)  quick.

The  year  has  turned  late;  it  is  not  sowing-time,  (and  you  have
produced)  nothing  except  black  shame^  and  foul  deeds.

The  worm  has  entered  the  root  of  the  body’s  tree ; it  must  be
dug  up  and  put  in  the  fire.

1263  Hark  and  hark  (again),  O wayfarer!  ’Tis  late,  life’s  sun  is
gone  towards  the  pit  (is  about  to  set).

(During)  these  (one  or)  two  brief  days  when  you  have  (some)
strength,  (be)  quick,  flap  your  wings  generously-.

Devote  this  (small)  amount  of  seed  that  you  have  remaining,
in  order  that  long  life  may  grow  from  these  (one  or)  tw'O
moments.

W'hilst  this  jewelled  lamp  is  not  (yet)  extinguished,  see  you
trim  its  wick  and  (supply  it  with)  oil  immediately.

Beware!  Do  not  say  “To-morrow” — for  (many)  to-morrows
have  passed.  Let  not  the  days  of  sowing  pass  awav  alto-
gether.

1270  Listen  to  my  admonition  that  the  bodv  is  a strong  bond:  put
off  the  old,  if  you  have  desire  for  newness.

Shut  the  lips  and  open  the  palm  filled  wdth  gold:  leave  off
being  a miser  with  the  body,  exhibit  munificence.

Munificence  is  the  abandonment  of  lusts  and  pleasures ; no
one  who  is  sunken  in  lust  rises  up  (again).

This  munificence  is  a branch  of  the  cvpress  of  Paradise : woe
to  him  that  lets  such  a branch  go  from  his  hand !

^ Literally,  “blackness  of  face.”

* I.e.  exert  yourself  unsparingly  in  doing  good  works.


THE  EVILS  OF  PROCRASTINATION  287

This  abandonment  of  sensuality  is  the  firmest  handle : this
branch  draws  the  spirit  up  to  Heaven.

(So  act)  that  the  branch  of  munificence,  O righteous  man’.  1J-5
drawing  you  aloft  may  bear  you  to  its  origin.

You  are  Joseph  (full)  of  beauty,  and  this  world  is  as  the  well,
and  this  rope  (to  draw  you  forth)  is  patience  with  (submission
to)  the  command  of  God.

O Joseph,  the  rope  is  come;  put  your  two  hands  upon  it.

Do  not  neglect  the  rope,  (for)  it  has  grown  late.

Praise  be  to  God,  that  this  rope  has  been  dangled,  (and  that)
grace  and  mercv  have  been  blended  together.

So  that  vou  may  behold  the  world  ot  the  new  spirit,  a world
very  manifest,  (though)  invisible.

This  (phenomenal)  world  of  non-existence  has  become  like  u'o
(real)  existence,  while  that  world  of  (real)  existence  has  become
very  hidden.

The  dust  is  on  the  wind:  it  is  playing,  it  is  making  a false
show  and  forming  a veil.

This,  which  is  busy  (in  appearance),  is  (really)  idle  and
(superficial,  like)  a husk;  and  that  which  is  hidden  is  its  core
and  origin.

The  dust  is  as  a tool  in  the  hand  of  the  wind : deem  the  wind
high  and  of  high  descent.

The  gaze  of  the  eye  of  dust  falls  on  the  dust ; an  eye  that  sees
the  wind  is  of  another  sort.

A horse  knows  a horse,  because  it  (one  horse)  is  associated  I’So
(homogeneous  with  other  horses) ; likewise  (only)  a rider  knows
the  things  appertaining  to  a rider.

The  sensuous  eye  is  the  horse,  and  the  Light  of  God  is  the
rider:  without  the  rider  the  horse  itself  is  useless.

Therefore  train  the  horse  (so  as  to  cure  it)  of  bad  habits ; else
the  horse  will  be  rejected  before  the  King.

The  horse’s  eye  finds  the  wav  from  the  King's  eye:  without
the  King's  eye  its  eye  is  in  desperate  plight.

The  eve  of  horses,  whithersoever  vou  call  it  except  to  grass
and  pasture,  says,  “Nay,  why  (should  we  go)?”

The  Light  of  God  mounts  (as  a rider)  on  the  sensuous  eye,  ij;,o
and  then  the  soul  yearns  after  God.

How  should  the  riderless  horse  know  the  marks  of  the  road?

The  King  is  needed  (to  ride  it)  in  order  that  it  may  know  the
King’s  road.

Go  towards  a sense  on  which  the  Light  is  riding : that  Light
is  a good  companion  for  the  sense.

The  Light  of  God  is  an  ornament  to  the  light  of  sense:  this
is  the  meaning  of  light  upon  light.


^ Literally,  “O  man  of  good  religion.”


288


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

The  light  of  sense  draws  (a  man)  towards  earth ; the  Light  of
God  bears  him  aloft,

lays  Because  sensible  things  are  a lower  world : the  Light  of  God
is  (as)  the  sea,  and  the  sense  as  a dew-drop.

But  that  which  rides  on  it  (on  the  sense)  is  not  manifested
save  by  good  effects  and  words.

The  sensuous  light,  which  is  gross  and  heavy,  is  hidden  in
the  black  of  the  eyes.

Inasmuch  as  you  are  not  seeing  the  light  of  sense  with  (your)
eye,  how  should  you  see  the  light  of  that  religious  one  (the  saint)
with  (your)  eye?

The  light  of  sense  is  hidden  notwithstanding  this  grossness :
how  (then)  should  not  that  radiance  be  hidden  which  is  pure
(and  subtle)?

1300  This  world,  like  straws  in  the  hand  (sway)  of  the  wind,  (which
is)  the  (world)  unseen,  has  adopted  helplessness  as  its  (only)
resource  and  the  dispensation  of  the  Lfnseen

Makes  it  now  lofty,  now  low ; makes  it  now  sound  (and  whole),
now  broken;

Now  carries  it  to  the  right,  now  to  the  left;  now  makes  it
roses,  now  thorns.

See  (how)  the  Hand  (is)  hidden,  while  the  pen  is  writing;  the
horse  careering,  while  the  Rider  is  invisible.

See  the  arrow  flying,  and  the  Bow  not  in  sight ; the  (individual)
souls  manifest,  and  the  Soul  of  souls  hidden.

1305  Do  not  break  the  arrow,  for  it  is  the  arrow  of  a King ; it  is  not
shot  at  long  range  (at  random),  it  is  from  the  thumb-stall  of
One  who  knows  (how  to  hit  the  target).

God  said,  '‘Thou  didst  not  throw  when  thou  threioest” : the
action  of  God  has  precedence  over  (our)  actions.

Break  your  own  anger,  do  not  break  the  arrow:  the  eye  of
your  anger  reckons  milk  (to  be)  blood.

Give  the  arrow  a kiss  and  bring  it  to  the  King — the  blood-
stained arrow,  wet  with  your  blood.

That  which  is  seen  is  helpless  and  confined  and  feeble ; and
that  w'hich  is  unseen  is  so  fierce  and  uncontrollable.

1310  We  are  the  (hunted)  prey:  to  whom  belongs  such  a (fearful)
snare?  We  are  the  ball  (for  the  blows)  of  the  polo-bat — and
where  is  the  Batsman?

He  tears.  He  sews : where  is  this  Tailor?  He  blows.  He  burns :
where  is  this  Fire-kindler^?

At  one  hour  He  makes  the  true  saint  an  unbeliever ; at  another
hour  He  makes  the  (impious)  deist  an  (orthodox)  ascetic ;

For  the  mukhlis  (sincere  worshipper)  is  in  danger  of  the  snare
until  he  becomes  entirely  purged  of  self,

^ Literally,  “trade’*  or  “practice.**

2 Literally,  “one  who  throws  naphtha.”


THE  LIGHT  OF  GOD  289

Because  he  is  (still)  on  the  Way,  and  the  brigands  are  number-
less; (only)  he  escapes  who  is  under  God’s  safeguard.

(If)  he  has  not  become  (selfless,  like)  a pure  mirror,  he  is  (no
more  than)  mukhlis:  (if)  he  has  not  caught  the  bird,  he  is  (still)
hunting ;

(But)  when  the  mukhlis  has  become  mnkhlas^,  he  is  delivered;
he  has  reached  the  place  of  safety  and  has  won  the  victory.

No  mirror  (ever)  became  iron  again ; no  bread  (ever)  became
the  wheat  in  the  stack.

No  full-grown  grape  (ever)  became  a young  grape;  no  mature
fruit  (ever)  became  premature  fruit.

Become  mature  and  be  far  from  (the  possibility  of)  change
for  the  worse;  go,  become  the  Light,  like  Burhan-i  i\Iu-
haqqiq.

When  you  have  escaped  from  self,  you  have  become  wholly  1320
the  proof  (of  God) ; when  the  slave  (in  vou)  has  become  naught,
you  have  become  the  King.

[And  if  you  wish  to  behold  (this  mystery)  plainly,  Salahu’ddin
has  shown  it  forth ; he  has  made  the  eyes  to  see  and  has  opened
(them).

From  his  eyes  and  mien  every  eye  that  hath  the  Light  of
Hu  (God)  has  discerned  (mystical)  poverty.

The  Shaykh  (Salahu’ddm)  is  one  who,  like  God,  acts  without
instrument,  giving  lessons  to  his  disciples  without  anything
said.]^

In  his  hand  the  heart  is  submissive  like  soft  wax;  his  seal
makes  (the  impression)  now  (of)  shame,  now  (of)  fame.

The  seal  impressed  on  his  wax  is  telling  of  the  seal-ring ; of  1325
whom,  again,  does  the  device  tell,  (which  is)  graven  on  the  stone
of  the  ring?

It  tells  of  the  thought  of  the  Goldsmith — (all  this)  is  a chain,
every  link  (inserted)  in  another.

Whose  voice  is  this  echo  in  the  mountains  of  (our)  hearts?
Sometimes  this  mountain  is  full  of  the  voice,  sometimes  it  is
empty.

Wheresoever  he  is,  he  is  the  Sage,  the  Master — may  his
voice  not  forsake®  this  mountain !

There  is  a mountain  that  (only)  doubles  the  voice;  there  is
a mountain  that  makes  it  hundredfold.

At  that  voice  and  speech  the  mountain  lets  gush  forth  hundreds  1330
of  thousands  of  springs  of  clear  water.

' The  mukhlis  is  he  who  worships  devotedly,  but  regards  his  devotion  as
his  own,  while  the  mtikhlas,  whom  God  has  purged  of  self,  attributes  all  his
actions  to  God.

- Vv.  1321-23  are  omitted  in  the  two  oldest  MSS.  As  they  refer  to
Salahu’ddin  Zarkiib  (the  Goldbeater),  their  insertion  here  was  probably
suggested  by  a misinterpretation  of  v.  1326.

® Literally,  “not  be  quit  of.”


s M


290  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Inasmuch  as  that  grace  emanates  (even)  from  the  mountain,
the  waters  in  the  springs  become  blood.

’Twas  on  account  of  that  monarch  of  auspicious  gait^  that
Mount  Sinai  was  (turned  to)  rubies  from  end  to  end.

(All)  the  parts  of  the  mountain  received  life  and  intelligence —
after  all,  are  we  inferior  to  stone,  O people?

Neither  is  there  gushing  from  the  soul  a single  spring,  nor  is
the  body  becoming  one  of  those  clad  in  green ;

1335  Neither  is  there  in  it  the  echo  of  the  cry  of  longing,  nor  the
puriU’  (born)  of  the  draught  of  (wine  bestowed  by)  the  Cup-
bearer.

Where  is  (so  great)  zeal,  that  they  should  entirely  dig  up  such
a mountain  as  this  with  axe  and  with  pick? —

(In  the  hope  that)  maybe  a Moon  will  shine  upon  its  particles,
(that)  maybe  the  radiance  of  the  Aloon  will  find  a way  into  it.

Inasmuch  as  the  (temporal)  Resurrection  shall  dig  up  the
mountains,  how  shall  it  cast  the  shadow  (of  protection)  over  us?

How  is  this  (spiritual)  Resurrection  inferior  to  that  (temporal)
Resurrection?  That  (temporal)  Resurrection  is  the  wound,  and
this  (spiritual)  Resurrection  is  as  the  plaster.

1340  Every  one  that  has  seen  (experienced)  this  plaster  is  safe  from
the  wound : every  evil  one  that  has  seen  this  good  is  a well-doer.

Oh,  happy  is  the  ugly  one  to  whom  the  beauteous  one  has
become  a companion ; alas  for  one  of  rosy  countenance  with
whom  autumn  has  consorted!

When  lifeless  bread  is  companioned  with  life,  the  bread
becomes  living  and  is  turned  into  the  substance  of  that  (life).

Dark  faggots  become  the  companions  of  fire:  the  darkness
departed,  and  all  was  turned  into  light.

When  the  dead  ass  fell  into  the  salt-mine,  it  put  aside  asininity
and  mortality.

1345  The  baptism  of  Allah  is  the  dyeing-vat  of  Hu  (the  Absolute
God) : therein  (all)  piebald  things  become  of  one  colour.

When  he  (the  mystic)  falls  into  the  vat,  and  vou  say  to  him,
“Arise,”  he  says  in  rapture,  “lam  the  vat:  do  not  blame  (me).”

That  “I  am  the  vat”  is  the  (same  as)  saying  “I  am  God”:
he  has  the  colour  of  the  fire,  albeit  he  is  iron.

The  colour  of  the  iron  is  naughted  in  the  colour  of  the  fire :
it  (the  iron)  boasts  of  (its)  fieriness,  though  (actuallv)  it  is  like
one  who  keeps  silence.

When  it  has  become  like  gold  of  the  mine  in  redness,  then
without  tongue  its  boast  is  “ I am  the  fire.”

1350  It  has  become  glorified  by  the  colour  and  nature  of  the  fire:
it  says,  “I  am  the  fire,  I am  the  fire.

I am  the  fire;  if  thou  have  doubt  and  suspicion,  make  trial,
put  thy  hand  upon  me.


‘ Moses.


THE  UNITIVE  STATE  291

I am  the  fire;  if  it  seem  dubious  to  thee,  lav  thy  face  upon
my  face  for  one  moment.”

When  Wan  receives  light  from  God,  he  is  worshipped  by
the  angels  because  of  his  being  chosen  (by  God).

Also,  (he  is)  worshipped  by  that  one  whose  spirit,  like  the
angel,  has  been  freed  from  contumacv  and  doubt.

What  fire?  What  iron?  Close  vour  lips;  do  not  laugh  at  the  i
beard  of  the  assimilator’s  simile^.

Do  not  set  foot  in  the  Sea-,  speak  not  of  It;  on  the  shore  of
the  Sea  keep  silence,  biting  your  lips  (in  amazement).

Though  (one  equal  to)  a hundred  like  me  would  not  have  the
strength  to  bear  the  Sea,  yet  I cannot  refrain  from  the  drowning
waters  of  the  Sea.

May  my  soul  and  mind  be  a sacrifice  to  the  Sea : this  Sea  has
paid  the  blood-price  of  mind  and  soul.

I will  march  in  It  as  long  as  my  feet  move;  when  feet  remain
not,  I am  (plunged)  in  It,  like  ducks.

An  unrespectful  person  present  is  better  than  one  absent;  13
though  the  ring  be  crooked,  is  it  not  on  the  door?

O defiled  in  body,  frequent®  the  tank;  outside  of  the  tank,
how  shall  a man  be  cleansed?

The  pure  one  who  has  been  banished  from  the  tank  becomes
far  also  from  his  purity.

The  purity  of  this  tank  is  infinite;  the  purity  of  bodies  is  of
little  weight,

Because  the  heart  (though  it)  is  a tank,  yet  in  ambush  (out  of
sight)  it  has  a hidden  channel  to  the  Sea.

Your  finite  purity  wants  reinforcement;  otherwise,  number  is  13
diminished  in  (the  course  of)  expenditure.

The  water  said  to  the  defiled  one,  “Hasten  (to  come)  into
me.”  The  defiled  one  said,  “I  feel  shame  before  the  water.”

Said  the  water,  “Without  me  how  shall  this  shame  go?
Without  me  how  shall  this  defilement  be  removed?  ”

Every  defiled  one  who  hides  from  the  water  is  (an  e.xample  of
the  saying  that)  “ Shame  hinders  Faith.”

The  heart  is  muddied  by  the  steps  of  the  body’s  tank;  the
body  is  cleansed  by  the  water  of  the  heart’s  tanks.

Haunt  the  steps  of  the  heart’s  tank,  O son;  take  heed  and  13
always  beware  of  the  steps  of  the  body’s  tank.

The  sea  of  the  body  is  dashing  against  the  sea  of  the  heart,
(but)  between  them  is  a barrier  ‘ichidt  they  shall  not  cross.

Whether  you  be  straight  (righteous)  or  crooked,  always  creep
forwards  to  Him;  do  not  creep  backwards.

' J.e.  do  not  mock  the  comparison  by  suggesting  that  it  corresponds  with
the  reality.

- I.e.  leave  the  Sea  of  Divine  Unity  untouched  and  unprofaned  by  your
comparisons.

Literally,  " move  round  about.”


19-2


292  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

If  in  the  presence  of  kings  there  be  danger  to  life,  yet  they
that  aspire  cannot  refrain  from  (presence  with)  Him.

Since  the  King  is  sweeter  than  sugar,  ’tis  better  that  life
should  go  (as  a sacrifice)  to  (that)  sweetness.

,75  O blamer  (of  lovers),  safety  be  thine!  O seeker  of  safety,
thou  art  infirm^.

Aly  soul  is  a furnace : it  is  happy  with  the  fire : ’tis  enough  for
the  furnace  that  it  is  the  fire’s  house.

For  Love,  as  (for)  the  furnace,  there  is  something  to  be
burned^:  any  one  that  is  blind  to  this  is  not  a furnace.

When  the  provision  of  unprovidedness  has  become  your
provision,  you  have  gained  life  everlasting,  and  death  is  gone.

When  the  pain  (of  love)  has  begun  to  increase  your  (spiritual)
joy,  roses  and  lilies  have  taken  possession  of  the  garden  of  your
soul.

v5o  That  which  is  the  dread  of  others  is  your  safetv  (safeguard) :
the  duck  is  (made)  strong  by  the  river,  the  domestic  fowl  weak.

Once  more  have  I become  mad,  O Physician!  Once  more
have  I become  frenzied,  O Beloved!

The  rings  (links)  of  Thy  chain  are  multiform;  every  single
ring  gives  a different  madness.

The  gift  of  every  ring  is  (consists  in)  different  forms : there-
fore I have  a different  madness  at  every  moment.

So  “Madness  is  of  different  forms” — this  has  become  a
proverb ; especially  (is  it  true)  as  regards  the  chain  of  this  most
glorious  Prince.

3‘'5  Such  a madness  has  broken  the  bonds  (of  my  reason)  that  all
madmen  would  give  me  admonition.

How  friends  came  to  the  madhouse  for  Dhu  ’l-Nun — may
God  sanctify  his  honoured  spirit!

It  so  happened  to  Dhu  ’1-Nun  the  Egyptian  that  a new
agitation  and  madness  was  born  within  him.

His  agitation  became  so  great  that  salt  (bitterness)  from  it
was  reaching  (all)  hearts  up  to  above  the  sky.

Beware,  O (thou  of)  salty  soil,  do  not  put  thy  agitation  beside
(in  comparison  with)  the  agitation  of  the  holy  lords  (saints).

The  people  could  not  endure  his  madness:  his  fire  was
carrying  off  their  beards®.

-v.o  When  (that)  fire  fell  on  the  beards  of  the  vulgar,  they  bound
him  and  put  him  in  a prison.

There  is  no  possibility-  of  pulling  back  this  rein,  though  the
vulgar  be  distressed  by  this  way^.

* Literally,  “having  weak  stays  or  handles.”

“ I.e.  the  dross  of  sensual  qualities.

’ I.e.  in  his  ecstasy  he  had  no  regard  for  their  formal  religion.

* I.e.  the  way  of  mystical  transport  and  ecstasy.


DHU  ’L-NUN  and  his  FRIENDS  293

These  (spiritual)  kings  have  seen  (themselves  in)  danger  of
their  liv^es  from  the  vulgar;  for  this  multitude  are  blind,  and
the  kings  (are)  without  (a  visible)  mark.

When  authority  is  in  the  hands  of  profligates,  (a)  Dhu  ’1-Nun
is  inevitably  in  prison.

The  great  king  rides  alone ! Such  a unique  pearl  in  the  hands
of  children !

What  pearl?  (Nay),  the  Sea  hidden  in  a drop,  a Sun  concealed  i:,j5
in  a mote.

A Sun  showed  itself  as  a mote,  and  little  by  little  uncovered
its  face.

All  motes  vanished  in  it ; the  (whole)  world  became  intoxicated
by  it  and  (then)  became  sober.

When  the  pen  (of  authority)  is  in  the  hand  of  a traitor,  un-
questionably Mansur^  is  on  a gibbet.

When  this  affair  (dominion)  belongs  to  the  foolish,  the
necessan.'  consequence  is  (that)  they  kill  the  prophets.

Through  folly  the  people  who  had  lost  the  (right)  way  said  1400
to  the  prophets,  “Lo,  we  augur  ill  from  you.”

See  the  ignorance  of  the  Christian  appealing  for  protection
to  the  Lord  who  was  suspended  (on  the  Cross) !

Since, according  to  his  (the  Christian’s)  belief,He  was  crucified
by  the  Jews,  how  then  can  He  protect  him?

Inasmuch  as  the  heart  of  that  King  (Jesus)  bleeds  on  account
of  them  (the  Christians),  how  should  there  be  (for  them)  the
inviolable  defence  of  whilst  thou  art  amongst  them  ?

To  the  pure  gold  and  to  the  goldsmith  the  danger  from  the
false  counterfeiter  is  greater  (than  from  any  one  else).

Josephs  are  concealed  on  account  of  the  jealousy  of  the  ugly, for  1405
because  of  enemies  the  beautiful  live  in  the  fire  (of  tribulation).

Josephs  are  in  the  pit  through  the  guile  of  (their)  brethren,
who  from  envy  give  Joseph  to  the  wolves.

What  happened  to  Joseph  of  Egypt  on  account  of  envy?  This
enxy  is  a big  wolf  in  covert.

Of  necessity,  kind  Jacob  always  had  fear  and  dread  for
Joseph  because  of  this  wolf.

The  outward  (visible)  wolf,  indeed,  did  not  prowl  about
(approach)  Joseph ; (but)  this  en\-y  has  actually  surpassed  wolves
(in  malignitv).

This  wolf  dealt  its  wound,  and  by  way  of  specious  excuse  1410
came  (the  words),  ” Lo,  we  w'ent  to  compete  zeith  one  another.”

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  wolves  have  not  this  cunning;
(but)  this  wolf  will  at  last  be  put  to  shame — stop  (and  see) ! —

Because  on  the  Day  of  Bale  the  envious  will  without  doubt
be  (raised  from  the  dead  and)  brought  together  (to  Judgement)
in  the  shape  of  wolves.


* Hallaj.


294  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

The  resurrection  of  the  greedy  vile  eater  of  carrion  (unlawful
food)  will  be  in  the  shape  of  a hog  on  the  Day  of  Reckoning.

Adulteris  (erit)  foetor  membri  latentis;  wine-drinkers  will
have  stinking  mouths.

1415  The  hidden  stench  that  was  reaching  (only)  to  (people’s)
hearts  will  become  sensible  and  manifest  at  the  Resurrection.

The  being  of  Alan  is  a jungle:  be  on  your  guard  against  this
being,  if  you  are  of  that  (Divine)  Breath.

In  our  being  there  are  thousands  of  wolves  and  hogs ; (there
is)  goodly  and  ungoodly  and  fair  and  foul.

To  the  disposition  that  is  preponderant  belongs  the  decision
(as  to  what  you  are) : when  the  gold  is  more  than  the  copper,  it
(the  mixture)  is  gold.

The  manner  of  acting  that  preponderates  in  your  nature — in
that  same  form  you  must  needs  rise  (from  the  dead).

14-0  At  one  hour  a wolf  enters  into  Man,  at  another  hour  a moon-
like beauty  with  the  face  of  Joseph.

Good  and  hateful  qualities  pass  from  bosoms  into  bosoms  by
a hidden  way ;

Nay,  indeed,  wisdom  and  knowledge  and  excellence  pass
from  Man  into  the  ox  and  the  ass.

The  stumbling  (restive)  horse  becomes  smooth-paced  and
docile;  the  bear  dances,  the  goat  also  salaams.

Volition  has  passed  from  human  beings  into  the  dog,  so  that
he  has  become  a shepherd  or  a hunter  or  a guardian  (of  the
house).

1445  Into  the  dog  of  the  Companions  (of  the  Cave)  there  passed
from  those  Sleepers  a (moral)  disposition,  so  that  he  had  become
a seeker  of  God.

At  every  moment  a (different)  species  bursts  up  in  the  breast:
now  a devil,  and  now  an  angel,  now  wild  beasts.

From  that  marvellous  Jungle  with  which  every  lion  is
acquainted,  there  is  a hidden  way  to  the  breasts  which  ensnare
(the  spiritual  prey)h

O you  who  are  less  than  a dog,  steal  the  spiritual  pearl  from
within — from  within  (the  breasts  of)  them  that  know  God.

As  you  (must)  steal,  at  any  rate  (let  it  be)  that  lovely  pearl;
as  you  are  going  to  bear  a burden,  at  any  rate  (let  it  be)  a noble
one.


How  the  disciples  understood  that  Dhu  ’l-Nun  had  not
become  mad,  {but)  had  acted  with  intention.

14^,0  The  friends  went  to  the  prison  (to  inquire)  about  the  story  of
Dhu  ’1-Nun,  and  expressed  an  opinion  concerning  it.

Saying,  “Perchance  he  does  this  purposely,  or  there  is  some
* Literally,  “to  the  snare  of  the  breasts.”


DHU  ’L-NUN  and  his  FRIENDS  295

(deep)  wisdom  (in  it):  he  is  an  exemplar^  and  a shining  light’
in  this  religion.

Far,  far  be  it  from  his  sea-like  (profound)  intelligence  that
madness  should  prompt  him  to  folly !

God  forbid,  in  view  of  the  perfection  of  his  (spiritual)  attain-
ments, that  the  cloud  of  sickness  should  cover  his  moon !

He  has  gone  into  the  house  (and  taken  refuge)  from  the
wickedness  of  the  vulgar:  he  has  become  mad  on  account  of
the  infamy  of  the  sane.

From  (feeling)  the  disgrace  of  the  dull  body-serving  intellect,  m
he  has  purposely  gone  and  become  mad.

Saying,  ‘ Bind  me  fast  and  with  the  taiH  of  a cow  smite  me
on  head  and  back,  and  do  not  dispute  this  (matter),

That  from  the  stroke  of  the  part  (of  the  cow)  I may  gain  life,
as  the  murdered  man  (gained  life)  from  the  cow  of  Moses,

O trusty  ones;

That  I may  be  made  happy  by  the  stroke  of  a part  of  the  cow ;
(that  I may)  become  well  (whole),  like  the  murdered  man  (by
means)  of  the  cow  of  Moses’.”

The  murdered  man  was  revived  by  the  stroke  of  the  cow’s
tail:  he  became  pure  gold  (in  spirit),  even  as  copper  (is  trans-
muted) by  the  elixir.

The  murdered  man  sprang  up  and  told  the  secrets : he  1 1
revealed  that  bloodthirsty  gang.

He  said  plainly,  “I  was  killed  by  these  people  who  are  now
disturbed  (with  anger)  in  contending  against  me.”

When  this  gross  body  is  killed,  the  essence  that  knows
(spiritual)  secrets  is  brought  to  life.

Its  spirit  beholds  Paradise  and  Hell-fire  and  discerns  all  the
mysteries.

It  reveals  the  devilish  murderers,  it  reveals  the  snare  of  deceit
and  guile.

To  kill  the  cow  (the  fleshly  soul)  is  the  stipulation  of  (imposed  144
by)  the  (Sufi)  Path,  in  order  that  the  spirit  may  be  restored  to
consciousness  by  the  stroke  of  her  tail.

Kill  most  quickly  the  cow,  your  fleshly  soul,  so  that  the  hidden
spirit  may  become  alive  and  conscious.

Resumption  of  the  story  of  Dhii  ’l-Niin,  may  God  sanctify  his  spirit!

When  those  persons  arrived  near  him,  he  shouted,  “Hey,
who  are  ye?  Take  care ! ”

They  said  respectfully,  “We  are  some  of  thy  friends:  we
have  come  hither  in  devotion  to  ask  after  thee.


* Literally,  “one  to  whom  all  turn.”
- Literally,  “a  sign  or  evidence.”

^ Literally,  “ instrument.”


296  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

How  art  thou,  O Sea  of  manifold  intelligence?  What  aspersion
on  thy  intelligence  is  this  (alleged)  madness?

1430  How  should  the  smoke  of  the  bath-stove  attain  unto  the  Sun?
How'  should  the  ‘Anqa  be  crushed  by  the  crow  ?

Do  not  withhold  (the  truth)  from  us : explain  this  matter ; we
are  lovers  (of  thee) : do  not  behave  to  us  in  this  fashion.

One  ought  not  to  drive  lovers  away  or  dupe  them  by  mask
and  false  pretence.

Communicate  the  secret,  O King:  do  not  hide^  thy  face  in
the  cloud,  O Moon!

We  are  loving  and  true  and  with  wounded  (bleeding)  hearts:
in  the  two  worlds  we  have  fixed  our  hearts  on  thee  (alone).”

1455  He  began  (to  use)  foul  words  and  bad  names  recklessly:  he
spoke  gibberish^  like  madmen.

He  jumped  up  and  let  fly  stones  and  sticks;  the  whole  party
fled  for  fear  of  blows.

He  laughed  loudly  and  tossed  his  head  (in  scorn).  “Look,”
said  he,  “at  the  vain  bluster®  of  these  friends!

See  the  friends!  Where  is  the  sign  of  (true)  friends?  To
(true)  friends  pain  is  as  (dear  as)  life.”

How  should  a friend  turn  aside  from  the  pain  inflicted  by
his  friend?  Pain  is  the  kernel,  and  friendship  is  (only)  as  the
husk  to  it.

1400  Has  not  joy  in  tribulation  and  calamity  and  suffering  become
the  sign  of  (true)  friendship?

A friend  is  like  gold,  tribulation  is  like  the  fire : the  pure  gold
is  glad  in  the  heart  of  the  fire.


How  Luqmdn’s  master  tested  his  sagacity.

(Was  it)  not  (the  case)  that  (this  happened)  to  Luqman,  who
was  a pure  (unselfish)  slave,  and  day  and  night  w'as  brisk  in
service?

His  master  used  to  prefer  him  (to  all  others)  in  the  work  (of
service)  and  deem  him  better  than  his  own  sons.

Because  Luqman,  though  he  w^as  slave-born,  was  the  master
(of  himself)  and  was  free  from  sensual  desire.

1465  A certain  king  said  to  the  Shaykh  (spiritual  Director)  in
conversation,  “Ask  me  to  bestow'  some  bounty  upon  thee.”

He  answ'ered,  “O  King,  are  not  you  ashamed  to  say  such  a
thing  to  me?  Come  higher!

I have  two  slaves,  and  they  are  vile,  and  those  tw'o  are  rulers
and  lords  over  you.”

* Literally,  “put  covertly.”

‘ Literally,  “(the  letters)  ze  and  gdf."

* Literally,  “the  wind  of  the  beard.”


THE  SAGACITY  OF  LUQMAN  297

Said  the  King,  “What  are  those  two?  That  is  a mistake.’’  He
replied,  “The  one  is  anger  and  the  other  is  lust.”

Regard  as  a king  him  that  is  unconcerned  with  kingship,  him
whose  light  shines  forth  without  moon  or  sun.

(Only)  that  one  whose  essence  is  the  treasury  (of  spiritual  uro
truths)  possesses  the  treasury : (only)  he  that  is  an  enemy  to  (his
own)  e.xistence  possesses  (real)  existence.

Luqman’s  master  (was)  like  a master  outwardly;  in  reality
his  (Luqman’s)  master  (was)  Luqman’s  slave^.

In  the  topsy-turv-y  world  there  is  many  a one  of  this  (kind) :
a pearl  is  less  than  a straw  in  their  sight.

Every  desert  has  been  named  niafdza  (place  of  safety) : a name
and  specious  form  has  ensnared  their  understanding.

In  the  case  of  one  class  of  people,  the  dress  makes  (a  man)
known : (if  he  is  dressed)  in  a qabd,  they  say  that  he  belongs  to
the  vulgar.

In  the  case  of  one  class  of  people  (the  distinguishing  mark  is)  urs
the  hypocritical  appearance  of  asceticism ; (but)  light  is  needed ,
that  (any  one)  may  be  a spy  on  asceticism  (and  detect  its  true
character).

Light  is  needed,  (a  light)  purged  of  cant  and  noxiousness,
that  he  may  know  a man  without  (the  evidence  of)  deed  or  word.

And  enter  into  his  heart  by  way  of  the  intellect,  and  behold
his  real  state  and  not  be  confined  to  tradition-.

The  chosen  servants  of  (God)  the  Knower  of  things  unseen
are,  in  the  spiritual  world,  the  spies  on  hearts.

He  (such  a one)  enters  within  the  heart  like  a fancy;  the
mystery  of  the  (real)  state  is  unveiled  to  him.

In  the  body  of  the  sparrow  what  power  and  faculty  is  there  n'o
that  is  hidden  from  the  intellect  of  the  falcon  ?

He  who  has  become  acquainted  with  the  secrets  of  Hu  (God),
what  to  him  is  the  secret  (inmost  consciousness)  of  created
beings  ?

He  whose  walk  is  on  the  spheres,  how  should  it  be  hard  for
him  to  walk  on  the  earth?

Since  iron  became  wa.x  in  the  hand  of  David,  what  should
wax  be  in  his  hand,  O man  of  iniquity?

Luqman  was  a slave  in  appearance,  a master  (in  realiu):
servitude  was  (only)  a frontispiece^  on  his  outside.

When  the  master  goes  to  a place  where  he  is  not  known*,  he  14^3
puts  (his  own)  clothes  on  his  slave.

He  (himself)  puts  on  the  slave’s  clothes  and  makes  his  slave
the  leader.

^ Or,  “he  %vas  a slave,  (and)  Luqman  was  his  master.”

- I.e.  derived,  as  opposed  to  immediate,  knowledge.

^ Literally,  “ a coloured  title-page  and  preface  ” ; i.e.  his  external  aspect  was
that  of  a slave,  in  contrast  with  what  lay  underneath.

■*  And  where  he  does  not  wish  to  be  recognised.


298  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

He  goes  behind  him  on  the  road,  as  slaves  do,  lest  any  one
should  recognise  him  (as  the  master).

“O  slave,”  says  he,  “go  you  and  sit  in  the  place  of  honour:
I will  take  (your)  shoes,  like  the  meanest  slave.

Treat  (me)  roughly  and  revile  me ; do  not  bestow  any  respect
on  me.

1490  I hold  neglect  of  service  to  be  your  (proper)  service,  since  I
have  sown  the  seed  of  contrivance  by  dwelling  in  a foreign  land^ .”

Masters  have  performed  these  slavish  offices  in  order  that  it
might  be  thought  that  they  were  slaves.

They  saw  their  fill  of  masterdom  and  were  sated  (with  it) :
(hence)  they  have  made  ready  for  (doing)  the  work  (of  slaves).

On  the  contrary,  these  slaves  of  sensuality  have  represented
themselves  as  masters  of  intellect  and  spirit.

From  the  master  (the  spiritual  man)  comes  the  practice  of
self-abasement ; from  the  slave  (the  sensual  man)  comes  naught
but  slavishness.

1495  So  topsy-turv'y,  then,  are  the  arrangements  between  that
world  and  this  world.  Know  this  (for  sure).

Luqman’s  master  was  aware  of  this  hidden  state  (of  Luqman) ;
he  had  seen  signs  (thereof)  in  him.

That  traveller  (Luqman’s  master)  knew  the  secret,  (but)
quietly  pursued  his  way-  for  the  sake  of  the  good  (which  he  had
in  view).

He  would  have  set  him  free  at  the  first,  but  he  sought  to
content  (comply  with  the  wish  of)  Luqman,

Because  it  was  Luqman’s  desire  (to  remain  a slave),  in  order
that  none  might  know  the  secret  of  that  brave®  and  generous
youth.

1500  What  wonder  (is  it)  that  you  should  hide  your  secret  from  the
evil  (one)?  The  wonder  is  this,  that  you  should  hide  the  secret
from  yourself.

Hide  your  work  from  your  own  eyes,  that  your  work  may  be
safe  from  the  evil  eye.

Yield  yourself  up  to  the  snare  of  the  (Divine)  reward,  and
then,  (being)  beside  yourself,  steal  something  from  yourself.

They  give  opium  to  the  wounded  man,  in  order  that  they
may  extract  the  point  (of  a spear  or  arrow)  from  his  body.

At  the  hour  of  death  he  is  torn  with  pain;  he  becomes  pre-
occupied with  that,  and  (meanwhile)  his  spirit  (life)  is  taken  away.

1503  Inasmuch  as,  to  whatsoever  thought  you  give  up  your  mind,
something  will  secretly  be  taken  away  from  you,

(And  inasmuch  as)  whatsoever  you  may  cogitate  and
(whatsoever)  acquisition  you  may  make,  the  thief  will  enter
from  the  side  where  you  feel  safe,

’ I.e.  “ since  I have  gone  abroad  for  the  sake  of  carrying  out  a secret  design.”

* Literally,  “ drove  his  ass.”  3 Literally,  “that  lion.”


THE  SAGACITY  OF  LUQMAN  299

Become  occupied,  therefore,  with  that  which  is  better,  in
order  that  the  thief  may  take  away  from  you  something  that  is
less  (in  worth).

When  the  trader’s  bales  fall  into  the  water,  he  lays  his  hands
upon  the  better  merchandise.

Since  something  will  (certainly)  be  lost  in  the  water,  take
leave  of  the  less  (worse)  and  gain  (possession  of)  the  better.


Hptv  the  excellence  and  sagacity  of  Lttqmdn  became  manifest
to  those  who  made  trial  {of  him).

Whatever  food  they  brought  to  him  (Luqman’s  master),  he  1510
would  send  some  one  to  Luqman  after  (receiving  it).

That  Luqman  might  put  his  hand  to  (partake  of)  it,  on  purpose
that  the  master  might  eat  his  (Luqman’s)  leavings.

He  would  eat  his  remnants  and  be  enraptured  * ; any  food
that  he  (Luqman)  did  not  taste,  he  (the  master)  would  throw
away ;

Or  if  he  ate  (of  it),  (’twould  be)  without  heart  and  without
appetite:  this  is  (the  sign  of)  an  affinity  without  end.

They  had  brought  a melon  as  a present.  “Go,”  said  he,
“call  (hither)  my  son,  Luqman.”

When  he  cut  it  and  gave  him  a slice,  he  ate  it  as  if  it  were  sugar  1515
and  honey.

On  account  of  the  pleasure  with  which  he  ate  (it),  he  gave
him  a second  (slice),  (and  went  on)  till  the  slices  (given  him)
reached  the  seventeenth.

One  slice  remained.  He  said,  “I  will  eat  this  (myself),  so
that  I may  see  what  a sweet  melon  this  is.

He  (Luqman)  eats  it  with  such  pleasure  that  from  his  delight
(all)  natures  have  become  eager  and  craving  the  morsel.”

As  soon  as  he  (the  master)  ate  it,  by  its  sourness  there  was
kindled  fire  (which)  blistered  his  tongue  and  burnt  his  throat.

He  became  beside  himself  for  awhile  on  account  of  its  sour-  is.’o
ness;  after  that,  he  said  to  him,  “O  (you  who  are)  soul  and
world.

How  did  you  make  all  this  poison  an  antidote  ? How  did  you
deem  this  cruelty  to  be  kindness?

What  patience  is  this?  For  what  reason  is  this  great  fortitude?

Or,  perchance,  in  your  opinion  this  life  of  yours  is  an  enemy
(which  you  would  fain  destroy).

Why  did  not  you  cunningly  bring  (forward)  a plea,  saying,

‘I  have  an  excuse  (for  declining  to  eat):  desist  for  a while’.”

Luqman  said,  “From  thy  munificent  hand  I have  eaten  so
much  that  I am  (bent)  double  with  shame.

^ Literally,  “he  would  raise  (a  feeling  of)  enthusiasm/’


300  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

1525  I was  ashamed  not  to  eat  one  bitter  thing  from  thy  hand,  O
thou  who  art  possessed  of  knowledge.

Since  all  parts  of  me  have  grown  from  thy  bounty  and  are
plunged  in  thy  bait  and  snare —

If  I make  outcry  and  complaint  because  of  one  bitter  thing,
may  the  dust  of  a hundred  roads  be  on  (all)  parts  of  me !

It  (the  melon)  had  the  enjoyment  of  thy  sugar-bestowing
hand:  how  could  it  (such  enjoyment)  leave  any  bitterness  in
this  melon  ? ”

By  love  bitter  things  become  sw'eet ; by  love  pieces  of  copper
become  golden ;

1530  By  love  dregs  become  clear;  by  love  pains  become  healing;

By  love  the  dead  is  made  living ; by  love  the  king  is  made  a slave .

This  love,  moreover,  is  the  result  of  knowledge : who  (ever)
sat  in  foolishness^  on  such  a throne?

On  what  occasion  did  deficient  knowledge  give  birth  to  this
love?  Deficient  (knowledge)  gives  birth  to  love,  but  (only  love)
for  that  which  is  (really)  lifeless.

When  it  sees  in  a lifeless  being  the  colour  (appearance)  of
a desired  one,  (’tis  as  though)  it  heard  the  voice  of  a beloved
in  a whistle.

1535  Deficient  knowledge  cannot  discriminate:  of  necessity  it
deems  the  lightning  to  be  the  sun.

When  the  Prophet  called  the  “deficient”  (man)  accursed,
(his  meaning)  as  interpreted  was  “ deficiency  of  mind,”

Because  one  whose  body  is  deficient  is  the  object  of  (Divine)
mercy:  cursing  and  repulse  (directed)  against  the  object  of
(Divine)  mercy  are  improper.

’Tis  deficiency  of  mind  that  is  the  bad  disease:  it  is  the  cause
of  (God’s)  curse  and  merits  banishment  (from  His  presence).

Forasmuch  as  the  perfecting  of  minds  is  not  remote  (im-
possible), but  the  perfecting  of  the  body  is  not  within  our  power.

1540  The  miscreance  and  Pharaoh-like  pride  of  every  infidel  who
is  far  (from  God)  have  all  been  produced  by  deficiency  of  mind.

Relief  for  bodily  deficiency  has  come  in  the  (words  of  the)
Qur’an — it  is  no  crime  in  the  blind  man.

Lightning  is  transient  and  ver}-  faithless:  without  clearness
(of  mind)  you  will  not  know  the  transient  from  the  permanent.

The  lightning  laughs : say,  at  whom  is  it  laughing?  At  him  that
sets  his  heart  upon  its  light.

The  lights  of  the  sky  are  hamstrung  (feeble  and  imperfect) :
how  are  they  like  (that  Light  which  is)  neither  of  the  east  nor
of  the  west?

'543  Regard  the  lightning  as  (what)  taketh  away  the  sight]  regard

^ o ^

* Reading  retained,  translate:  “When  did  he  the

fool)  in  his  vanity  sit  on  such  a throne?”


THE  SAGACITY  OF  LUQMAn  301

the  everlasting  Light  as  entirely  Helpers^  (to  the  attainment  of
vision).

To  ride  (your)  horse  upon  the  foam  of  the  sea,  to  read  a letter
in  a flash  of  lightning,

Is,  to  fail,  because  of  covetousness,  to  see  the  end;  it  is,  to
laugh  at  vour  own  mind  and  intellect.

Intellect,  by  its  proper  nature,  is  a seer  of  the  end  (conse-
quence) ; ’tis  the  fleshly  soul  that  does  not  see  the  end.

The  intellect  that  is  vanquished  by  the  flesh  becomes  the
flesh  : Jupiter  is  checkmated  by  Saturn  and  becomes  inauspicious.

Still,  turn  this  gaze  (of  yours)  upon  this  inauspiciousness,  look  1550
on  that  One  who  made  you  ill-starred.

The  gaze  (of  him)  that  surveys  this  ebb  and  flow  pierces  from
the  inauspicious  influence  to  the  auspicious.

He  (God)  continually  turns  you  from  one  state  (of  feeling)  to
another,  manifesting  opposite  by  means  of  opposite  in  the
change.

For  the  purpose  that  fear  of  the  left  hand  side  may  bring  to
birth  in  you  the  delight  of  “the  (blessed)  men  are  led  to  hope
for  the  right  hand  side,”

So  that  you  may  have  two  wings  (fear  and  hope) ; for  the  bird
that  has  (only)  one  wing  is  unable  to  fly,  O excellent  (reader).

(O  God),  either  let  me  not  come  to  speech  (at  all),  or  give  me  1555
leave  to  tell  (the  whole)  to  the  end.

But  if  Thou  wiliest  neither  this  nor  that,  ’tis  Thine  to  com-
mand: how  should  any  one  know  what  Thou  intendest^?

One  must  needs  have  the  spirit  of  Abraham  to  see  in  the  fire
Paradise  and  its  palaces  by  the  light  (of  mystic  knowledge) ;

And  mount  step  by  step  above  the  moon  and  the  sun,  lest  he
remain  like  the  door-ring  fastened  on  the  door;

And,  like  the  Friend^,  pass  beyond  the  Seventh  Heaven,
saying,  “/  love  not  them  that  set.”

This  bodily  world  is  deceptive,  save  to  him  that  has  escaped  15O0
from  lust.

Conclusion  of  {the  story)  how  the  {other)  retainers  envied
the  King's  favourite  slave.

The  story  of  the  King  and  the  amirs  and  their  envy  of  the
favourite  slave  and  lord  of  wisdom

Has  been  left  far  (behind)  on  account  of  the  powerful  attrac-
tion of  the  discourse.  (Now)  we  must  turn  back  and  conclude  it.

The  happy  and  fortunate  gardener  of  the  (Divine)  kingdom —
how  should  not  he  know  one  tree  from  another?

* “ Helpers  ” (Ansar)  is  the  name  given  to  the  people  of  Medina  who
assisted  Mohammed  after  he  had  quitted  Mecca.

* Literally,  “where  is  Thy  destination.”

^ Abraham.


302  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

The  tree  that  is  bitter  and  reprobate,  and  the  tree  whose  one
is  (as)  seven  hundred  (of  the  other) —

1565  How,  in  rearing  (them),  should  he  deem  (them)  equal,  when
he  beholds  them  with  the  eye  (that  is  conscious)  of  the  end,

(And  knows)  what  (different)  fruit  those  trees  will  ultimately
bear,  though  at  this  moment  they  are  alike  in  appearance^?

The  Shavkh  who  has  become  seeing  by  the  light  of  God  has
become  acquainted  with  the  end  and  the  beginning.

He  has  shut  for  God’s  sake  the  eye  that  sees  the  stable  (the
world) ; he  has  opened,  in  priority,  the  eye  that  sees  the  end.

Those  envious  ones  were  bad  trees;  they  were  ill-fortuned
ones  of  bitter  stock.

1570  They  were  boiling  and  foaming  with  envy,  and  were  starting
plots  in  secret.

That  they  might  behead  the  favourite  slave  and  tear  up  his
root  from  the  world;

(But)  how  should  he  perish,  since  the  King  was  his  soul,  and
his  root  was  under  the  protection  of  God?

The  King  had  become  aware  of  those  secret  thoughts,  (but)
like  Bii  Bakr-i  Rababi  he  kept  silence.

In  (viewing)  the  spectacle  of  the  hearts  of  (those)  evil-
natured  ones  he  was  clapping  his  hands  (derisively)  at  those
potters  (schemers).

1575  Some  cunning  people  devise  stratagems  to  get  the  King  into
a beer-jug^;

(But)  a King  (so)  exceedingly  grand  and  illimitable — how
should  He  be  contained  in  a beer-jug,  O asses?

They  knitted  a net  for  the  King;  (yet)  after  all,  they  (had)
learned  this  contrivance  from  Him.

Ill-starred  is  the  pupil  that  begins  rivalry-  with  his  master
and  comes  forward  (to  contend  with  him).

With  what  master?  The  master  of  the  world,  to  whom  the
manifest  and  the  occult  are  alike ;

15  >0  Whose  eyes  have  become  seeing  by  the  light  of  God  and  have

rent  the  veils  of  ignorance.

(Making)  a veil  of  (his)  heart,  (which  is  as)  full  of  holes  as  an
old  blanket,  he  (the  disciple)  puts  it  on  in  the  presence  of  that  Sage .

The  veil  laughs  at  him  with  a hundred  mouths,  every  mouth
having  become  a slit  (open)  to  that  (master).®

The  master  says  to  the  disciple,  “O  you  who  are  less  than  a
dog,  have  you  no  faithfulness  to  me?

Even  suppose  I am  not  a master  and  an  iron-breaker^,  suppose
I am  a disciple  like  yourself  and  blind  of  heart,

' Literally,  “alike  in  the  sight.”  ^ I.e.  “to  entrap  and  deceive  him.”

’ Possibly  the  true  reading  is  , “(velut;  rima  in  femore”  (of.

I.  1230) ; i.e.  ever>-  mouth  exposes  the  disciple’s  folly  and  puts  him  to  shame.

* I.e.  “one  endowed  with  great  spiritual  power.”


THE  ENVIOUS  RETAINERS  303

Have  not  you  help  in  spirit  and  mind  from  me?  Without  me  15'?
no  water  is  set  flowing  for  you.

Therefore  my  heart  is  the  factory  of  your  fortune : why  would
you  break  this  factory,  O unrighteous  one?”

You  may  say  that  you  kindle  the  flame^  (of  rivalry)  against
him  in  secret  (not  openly) ; but  is  there  not  a window  between
heart  and  heart?

After  all,  he  sees  your  thought  through  the  window;  your
heart  gives  testimony  as  to  what  you  are  meditating.

Suppose  that,  from  kindness,  he  does  not  rebuke  you  to  your
face,  (and  that)  whatever  you  sav,  he  smiles  and  says  “Yes” —

He  does  not  smile  from  pleasure  at  your  stroking  (flattering  iv  j
him);  he  smiles  at  that  (concealed)  thought  of  yours.

So  a deceit  is  paid  with  a deceit;  strike  with  a cup,  (and  you)
get  struck  with  a jug — serve  you  right!

Were  his  smile  at  you  one  of  approval,  hundreds  of  thousands
of  flowers  would  blossom  for  you.

When  his  heart  works  (for  you)  in  approval,  deem  it  (to  be)
a sun  entering  Aries,

Because  of  whom^  both  the  day  and  the  spring  smile,  and
blossoms  and  green  fields  are  mingled  together.

And  myriads  of  nightingales  and  ringdoves  pour  their  song  15 ,5
into  the  unplenished  world.

When  you  see  the  leaves  of  your  spirit  yellow  and  black,  how
know  you  not  the  anger  of  the  King?

The  King’s  sun,  in  the  (zodiacal)  sign  of  reproach,  makes  faces
black  as  a piece  of  roasted  meat.

Our  souls  are  leaves  for  that  Mercury  (to  write  on) ; that  white
and  black  (writing)  is  our  standard  (criterion).

Again,  he  writes  a patent  in  red  and  green,  that  (our)  spirits
may  be  delivered  from  melancholy  and  despair.

Red  and  green  are  Spring’s  cancellation  (of  winter) ; in  regard  n oo
(to  their  significance  they  are)  like  the  (coloured)  lines  of  the
rainbow.


How  reverence  for  the  message  of  Solomon,  on  whom  be  peace,  was
reflected  in  the  heart  of  Bilqis  from  the  despicable  form  of  the  hoopoe.

Hundredfold  mercy  be  on  that  Bilqfs  to  whom  God  gave  the
intellect  of  a hundred  men  I

A hoopoe  brought  the  letter  with  the  (royal)  sign-manual
from  Solomon — a few  eloquent  words.

(When)  she  read  those  pregnant  sayings,  she  did  not  look
with  contempt  on  the  messenger.


^ Literally,  “strike  the  fire-stick/'
^ Literally,  “from  it.”


304  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

Her  eye  saw  him  as  a hoopoe,  (but)  her  spirit  saw  him  as  the
‘Anqa;  her  senses  saw  him  as  a fleck  of  foam,  (but)  her  heart
saw  him  as  the  sea.

1605  Because  of  these  two-coloured  (diverse)  talismans  (appear-
ance and  reality)  the  intellect  is  at  war  with  the  senses,  as
Mohammed  with  the  likes  of  Abii  Jahl.

The  infidels  regarded  Ahmad  (Mohammed)  as  (only)  a man,
since  they  did  not  see  in  him  (the  Prophetic  nature  which  was
manifested  by  the  miracle)  the  moon  was  cleft  asunder.

Throw  dust  on  your  sense-perceiving  eye:  the  sensuous  eve
is  the  enemy  of  intellect  and  religion.

God  has  called  the  sensuous  eye  blind ; He  has  said  that  it  is
an  idolater  and  our  foe.

Because  it  saw  the  foam  and  not  the  sea,  because  it  saw  the
present  and  not  to-morrow.

1610  The  master  of  to-morrow  and  of  the  present  (is)  before  it;
(yet)  of  a (whole)  treasure  it  sees  not  (even)  a groat^.

(If)  a mote  bring  a message  from  yonder  Sun,  the  sun  would
become  a slave  to  that  mote.

The  drop  that  has  become  an  envoy  from  the  Sea  of  Unity —
the  seven  seas  would  be  captive  to  that  drop.

If  a handful  of  earth  become  His  courier.  His  heavens  will
lay  their  heads  (in  homage)  before  His  earth.

When  the  earth  of  Adam  became  God’s  courier,  God’s  angels
laid  their  heads  (in  worship)  before  His  earth,

1615  Wherefore  (was  it),  pray,  that  heaven  was  rent  asunder  1
Because  of  one  (spiritual)  eye  that  an  earthly  creature  opened.

Earth,  from  its  grossness,  settles  beneath  water;  (but)  see
how  earth  has  sped  beyond  the  empyrean !

Know,  then,  that  the  subtlety  (of  water)  is  not  (derived)  from
the  water : ’tis  only  the  gift  of  the  Bounteous  Originator.

If  He  make  air  and  fire  low  (in  place),  and  if  He  let  the  thorn
surpass  the  rose.

He  is  the  Ruler  and  (the  One  who  said)  God  doeth  what  He
willeth : from  the  very  self  of  pain  He  raises  the  remedy.
i6::o  If  He  make  air  and  fire  low  (in  place),  and  make  (them
assume  the  qualities  of)  darkness  and  grossness  and  heaviness.

And  if  He  make  earth  and  water  high  (in  place),  and  make
the  path  of  heaven  (to  be)  traversed  by  foot —

Then  it  has  become  certain  that  Thou  exaltest  whomso  Thou
wilt:  He  (God)  said  to  an  earthly  creature,  “ Unfold  thy  wings.”

To  the  creature  of  fire  He  said,  “Go,  become  Iblis:  begone
under  the  Seventh  Earth  with  (thy)  imposture !

O earthly  Adam,  go  thou  above  (the  star)  Suha;  O fiery  Iblis,
go  to  (the  bottom  of)  the  Earth.


^ Literally,  “a  tarn  (equivalent  to  two  or  four  barley-corns).”


HOW  BILQIS  RECEIVED  SOLOMON’s  MESSAGE  305

I am  not  the  four  temperaments  or  the  first  cause,  I am  ever  1625
remaining  in  (absolute)  control.

My  action  is  uncaused  and  upright  (independent) : I have  (the
power  of)  pre-determination,  (I  have)  no  cause,  O infirm  one.

I alter  My  custom  at  the  time  (I  choose) : at  the  time  (I  will)

I lay  the  dust  (that  rises)  in  front.

I say  to  the  sea,  ‘ Hark,  be  full  of  fire ! ’ I say  to  the  fire,  ‘ Go,
be  a rose-garden ! ’

I say  to  the  mountain,  ‘Be  light  as  wool!’  I say  to  heaven,

‘ Be  rent  asunder  before  the  eye ! ’

I say,  ‘ O sun,  be  joined  to  the  moon ! ’ I make  them  both  like  1650
two  black  clouds.

We  make  dry  the  fountain  of  the  sun ; by  Our  art  We  turn  into
musk  the  fountain  of  blood.”

Sun  and  moon  (shall  be)  like  two  black  oxen ; God  will  fasten
a yoke  upon  their  necks.


How  a philosopher  showed  disbelief  at  the  recitation  of  {the  text),

“if  your  water  shall  have  sunk  into  the  ground.”

A teacher  of  Qur’an-recitation  was  reading  from  the  page  of
the  Book,  “{if)  your  water  {shall  have)  sunk  into  the  ground-.
(that  is,  if)  I stop  the  water  from  (reaching)  the  spring.

And  hide  the  water  in  the  depths,  and  make  the  springs  dry
and  a place  of  drought,

Who  shall  bring  the  water  to  the  spring  again  except  Me  who  1635
have  no  like,  the  Gracious,  the  Glorious?”

A contemptible  philosopher  and  logician  was  passing  beside
the  school  at  that  moment.

When  he  heard  the  verse  (of  the  Qur’an),  he  said  in  dis-
approval, “We  bring  the  water  (back)  with  a mattock;

With  strokes  of  the  spade  and  (with)  the  sharpness  of  the  axe
we  bring  the  water  up  from  below.”

At  night  he  fell  asleep  and  saw  (in  dream)  a lion-hearted  man
(who)  gave  (him)  a blow  on  the  face  and  blinded  both  his  eyes.

And  said,  “ O wretch,  if  you  are  speaking  the  truth,  bring  up  1640
some  light  with  an  axe  from  these  two  springs  of  vision.”

At  (dawn  of)  day  he  jumped  up  and  found  (he  had)  two  blind
eyes:  from  both  his  eyes  the  overflowing  light  had  vanished.

If  he  had  moaned  and  asked  pardon  (of  God),  the  departed
light  would  have  appeared  (again)  through  (God’s)  kindness;

But  (the  power  of)  asking  pardon,  also,  is  not  in  (our)  hands  :
the  savour  of  repentance  is  not  the  dessert  of  every  inebriate.

The  wickedness  of  (his)  actions  and  the  disastrousness  of
(his)  denial  (of  the  Truth)  had  barred  the  way  of  repentance  to
his  heart.


K M


20


3o6  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

1645  His  heart  became  in  hardness  as  the  face  of  a rock : how  should

repentance  cleave  it  for  sowing?

Where  is  one  like  Shu'ayb,  that  by  prayer  he  may  make  the
mountain  earth  (fit)  for  sowing?

Through  the  supplication  and  (firm)  belief  of  that  Friend
(Abraham)  the  thing  that  was  hard  and  impossible  became
possible.

Or,  (to  give  another  example),  through  the  Muqawqis’
begging  the  Prophet  a stony  ground  became  a goodly^  cornfield.

So,  contrariwise,  a man’s  disbelief  turns  gold  into  copper  and
peace  into  war.

1650  This  falseness  draws  after  it^  an  evil  transformation;  it  turns
ground  capable  (of  tillage)  into  stones  and  pebbles.

Nor  is  it  granted  to  every  heart  to  fall  down  in  prayer:  the
wages  of  (Divine)  mercy  are  not  the  (allotted)  portion  of  every
hireling.

Beware!  Do  not  commit  crime  and  sin  in  reliance  on  (the
thought),  “ I will  repent  and  come  to  (take)  refuge  (with  God).”

For  (true)  repentance,  there  must  needs  be  a glow  (of  inward
feeling)  and  a flood  (of  tears):  (such)  lightning  and  clouds  are
the  condition  indispensable  to  repentance.

There  must  needs  be  fire  and  water  (rain)  for  the  fruit:
clouds  and  lightning  are  necessary  for  this  accomplishment.

1655  Until  there  is  the  lightning  of  the  heart  and  the  rain-clouds
of  the  two  eyes,  how  shall  the  fire  of  (Divine)  menace  and  wrath
be  allayed?

How  shall  the  herbage  grow,  (the  herbage)  of  the  delight  of
union  (with  God)  ? How  shall  the  fountains  of  clear  water  gush
forth?

How  shall  the  rose-beds  tell  their  secret  to  the  garden?  How
shall  the  violet  make  an  engagement  with  the  jasmine?

How  shall  a plane-tree  open  its  hands  (spread  its  leaves)  in
prayer?  How  shall  any  tree  toss  its  head  in  the  air  (of  love-
desire)  ?

How  shall  the  blossoms  begin  to  shake  out  their  sleeves  full
of  largesse  in  the  days  of  Spring?

1660  How  shall  the  cheeks  of  the  anemone  flame  like  blood?  How
shall  the  rose  bring  gold  out  of  its  purse?

How  shall  the  nightingale  come  and  smell  the  rose?  How
shall  the  dove  say  “coo,  coo®,”  as  one  that  seeks?

How  shall  the  stork  utter  with  (all)  its  soul  the  cry  lak,  lak}
What  is  (the  meaning  oi)  lak}  (It  means)  “ Thine^  is  the  kingdom,
O Thou  whose  help  is  invoked.”

^ Literally,  “with  capital  qualities,”

- Literally,  “becomes  the  amber  attracting,”  i.e.  “becomes  the  means  of
producing.”

^ Kti,  ku  in  Persian  means  “where,  where?  ”

^ This  is  the  meaning  of  lak  in  Arabic.


THE  STUBBORN  PHILOSOPHER  307

How  shall  the  earth  show  forth  the  secrets  of  its  inmost
mind?  How  shall  the  garden  become  radiant  as  the  sky?

Whence  have  they  fetched  those  garments  (fair  qualities)?
(They  have  derived)  all  of  them  from  One  who  is  Bounteous
and  Merciful.

Those  graces  are  the  signs  of  a Witness^:  they  are  the  foot-  u-i.s
prints  of  a man  devoted  to  (God’s)  ser\’ice.

(None  but)  that  person  that  has  seen  the  King  is  gladdened
by  the  sign ; when  one  has  not  seen  Him,  there  is  no  recognition.

The  spirit  of  that  one  who  at  the  time  of  Am  not  I {your
Lord)}  saw  his  Lord  and  became  beside  himself  and  intoxicated —

He  (that  spirit)  knows  the  scent  of  the  wine  because  he  drank
it  (before) ; when  he  has  not  drunk  it,  he  cannot  scent  it.

For  Wisdom  is  like  a stray  camel : like  a go-between,  it  guides
(those  who  find  and  recognise  it)  to  (the  presence  of)  kings.

You  behold  in  dream  a person  of  pleasing  countenance,  who  1670
gives  you  a promise  and  a sign

That  your  desire  will  come  to  pass;  here  is  the  sign — such
and  such  a person  will  meet  you  to-morrow.

One  sign  is  that  he  will  be  riding;  one  sign  is  that  he  will  clasp
you  to  his  breast ;

One  sign  is  that  he  will  smile  before  you ; one  sign  is  that  he
will  fold  his  hands  in  your  presence ;

One  sign  is  that  when  the  morrow  comes  you  will  not  tell  this
dream  to  any  one,  though  you  would  fain  do  so^.

Concerning  that  (last-mentioned)  sign.  He  (God)  said  to  the  11.75
father  of  Yahya  (John  the  Baptist),  “Thou  shalt  not  begin  to
speak  at  all  till  three  days  (have  passed).

For  three  nights  keep  silence  as  to  thy  good  and  ill®:  this  will
be  the  sign  that  Yahya  will  come  (be  born)  to  thee.

During  three  days  do  not  breathe  a word^,  for  this  silence  is
the  sign  of  (the  fulfilment)  of  thy  purpose.

Beware ! do  not  thou  speak  of®  this  sign,  and  keep  this  matter
hidden  in  thy  heart.”

He  (the  person  dreamed  of)  will  sweetly®  tell  these  signs  to
him  (the  dreamer).  What  are  these  signs  (alone)?  (He  will  tell
him)  a hundred  signs  besides.

This  (which  follows)  is  the  sign  that  you  will  gain  from  God  ir.^o
the  (spiritual)  kingdom  and  power  that  you  are  seeking — -

That  you  weep  continually  in  the  long  nights,  and  that  you
are  always  ardent  in  supplication  at  the  hour  of  dawn ;

That,  in  the  absence  of  that  (which  you  seek),  your  day  has
become  dark;  (that)  your  neck  has  become  thin  as  a spindle;

‘ I.e.  a saint  who  is  the  representative  of  God.

■ Literaliy,  “you  will  not  from  desire  tell  this  dream.”

“ I.e.  “all  that  happens  to  thee.”

* Literally,  “do  not  breathe  in  speaking.”

‘ Literally,  “ bring  to  speech.”  * Literally,  “like  sugar.”


20-2


3o8  MATHNAWI,  book  II

And  what  you  have  given  in  alms  (is)  all  that  you  possess,
(so  that)  your  belongings  (are  entirely  bestowed  in  charity)  like
the  alms  of  those  who  gamble  all  away^ ;

(That)  you  have  given  up  your  belongings  and  sleep  and  the
(healthy)  colour  of  your  face,  and  sacrificed  your  head  (life)  and
become  as  (thin  as)  a hair;

1655  (That)  vou  have  sat — how  often ! — in  the  fire,  like  aloes-wood ;
that  you  have  gone — how  often! — to  meet  the  sword,  like  a
helmet.

A hundred  thousand  such  acts  of  helplessness  are  habitual
to  lovers  (of  God),  and  (their  number)  cannot  be  reckoned.

After  you  have  had  this  dream  at  night,  the  day  breaks;
through  hope  thereof^  your  day  becomes  triumphant.

You  have  turned  your  eye  to  left  and  right,  (wondering)  where
is  that  sign  and  those  tokens.

You  are  trembling  like  a leaf  (and  saying),  “Alas,  if  the  day
depart  and  the  sign  come  not  to  pass ! ”

i6r(0  You  are  running  in  street  and  market  and  into  houses,  like
one  that  should  lose  a calf.

(Somebody  asks),  “Is  it  good  (news).  Sir?  Why  are  you
running  to  and  fro?  Who  belonging  to  you  is  it  that  you  have
lost  here? ”

“It  is  good  (news),”  you  tell  him,  “but  none  may  know  my
good  (news)  except  myself.

If  I tell  it,  lo,  my  sign  is  missed,  and  when  the  sign  is  missed,
the  hour  of  death  is  come.”

You  peer  into  the  face  of  every  rider : he  says  to  you,  “ Do  not
look  at  me  like  a madman.”

1695  You  say  to  him,  “ I have  lost  a friend ; I have  set  out®  to  seek
him.

May  thy  fortune  be  lasting,  O rider!  Have  pity  on  lovers
and  excuse  (them).”

When  you  have  made  search  (and  your)  looking  has  been  in
earnest — earnest  endeavour  does  not  fail : so  the  Tradition  has
come  down  (from  the  Prophet) —

Suddenly  comes  a blessed  rider;  then  he  clasps  you  very
closely  to  his  breast.

You  become  senseless  and  fall  to  vaunting  (ecstatically);  the
ignorant  (uninitiated)  man  says,  “Here  is  fraud  and  hypocrisy.”

I ;c.o  How  does  he  see  what  this  enthusiasm  in  him  (the  emaptured
person)  is?  He  knows  not  (who  it  is)  with  whom  that  is  the  sign
of  union.

This  sign  concerns  (only)  him  that  has  seen  (before):  how
should  the  sign  appear  to  the  other  one?

'■  I.e.  the  Sufis  who  sacrifice  everything  for  God’s  sake.

“ I.e.  of  seeing  the  signs  announced  in  the  dream .

’ Literally,  “ I have  set  my  face.”


THE  SIGNS  GIVEN  TO  SEEKERS  309

Every  moment  that  a sign  was  coming  from  Him,  a (new)
spirit  was  coming  into  that  person’s  spirit.

Water  has  reached  the  helpless  fish.  These  signs  are  (those
mentioned  in  the  text)  those  are  the  signs  of  the  Book.

Hence  the  signs  which  are  in  the  prophets  are  peculiar  to
(known  exclusively  by)  him  who  is  a friend  (knower  and  lover
of  God).

This  discourse  remains  imperfect  and  unsettled;  I have  no  1705
heart  (understanding),  I am  out  of  my  mind^^:  excuse  me.

How  can  any  one  number  the  motes,  especially  that  one
whose  understanding  has  been  transported  by  Love?

Shall  I number  the  leaves  of  the  garden?  Shall  I number  the
cries  of  the  partridge  and  the  crow?

They  come  not  into  computation,  but  I enumerate  them  for
the  guidance  of  him  that  is  put  to  trial.

The  sinister  influence  of  Saturn  and  the  auspicious  influ-
ence of  Jupiter  come  not  into  computation,  though  you  may
enumerate ;

But  still,  some  of  these  two  (diverse)  effects  must  be  ex-  17 to
plained — that  is,  the  benefit  and  injury  (which  they  involve) —

In  order  that  some  little  part  of  the  effects  of  the  (Divine)
decree  may  be  made  known  to  the  good-fortuned  and  the
ill-starred.

He  whose  ascendant  (ruling  planet)  is  Jupiter  will  be  rejoiced
by  vivacity  (of  disposition)  and  eminence;

And  it  will  be  necessary  for  him  whose  ascendant  is  Saturn
to  take  precautions  against  every  (kind  of)  mischief  in  his  affairs.

If  I should  speak  to  one  whose  (ruling)  planet  is  Saturn  of  his
(Saturn’s)  fire,  it  (my  discourse)  would  burn  (torment)  that
hapless  man.

Our  King  (God)  has  given  permission,  (saying),  “ Commem-  1711
orate  Allah'" He  saw  us  in  the  fire  and  gave  us  light.

He  has  said,  “Although  I far  transcend'^  your  commemora-
tion (of  Me),  (and  although)  the  pictorial  ideas  (of  human
speech)  are  not  suitable  to  Me,

Yet  he  that  is  intoxicated  with  (pictorial)  imagination  and
fancy  will  never  apprehend  My  essence  without  (the  help  of)
similitude.’’

Bodily  commemoration*  is  an  imperfect  fancy;  the  Kingly
attributes  are  remote  from  those  (forms  of  speech).

If  any  one  say  of  a king,  “He  is  not  a weaver,”  what  praise
is  this?  He  (that  person)  is  surely  ignorant.

' Literally,  “ I am  without  heart  (mind).”

‘ Literally,  ” I am  exempt  from.”

^ I.e.  praise  and  prayer  uttered  by  the  tongue.


310


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II


How  Moses,  on  whom  be  peace,  took  offence  at  the  prayer
of  the  shepherd.

Moses  saw  a shepherd  on  the  way,  who  was  saying,  “O  God
who  choosest  (whom  Thou  wilt).

Where  art  Thou,  that  I may  become  Thy  sen^ant  and  sew
Thy  shoes  and  comb  Thy  head?

That  I may  wash  Thy  clothes  and  kill  Thy  lice  and  bring
milk  to  Thee,  O worshipful  One;

That  I may  kiss  Thy  little  hand  and  rub  Thy  little  foot,  (and
when)  bedtime  comes  I may  sweep  Thy  little  room,

O Thou  to  whom  all  my  goats  be  a sacrifice,  O Thou  in
remembrance  of  whom  are  my  cries  of  ay  and  ah ! ”

The  shepherd  was  speaking  foolish  words  in  this  wise.  IMoses
said,  “Man,  to  whom  is  this  (addressed)?”

He  answered,  “To  that  One  who  created  us;  by  whom  this
earth  and  sky  were  brought  to  sight.”

“Hark!”  said  Moses,  “you  have  become  very  backsliding
(depraved);  indeed  you  have  not  become  a Moslem,  you  have
become  an  infidel.

What  babble  is  this?  what  blasphemy  and  raving?  Stuff
some  cotton  into  your  mouth !

The  stench  of  your  blasphemy  has  made  the  (whole)  world
stinking:  your  blasphemy  has  turned  the  silk  robe  of  religion
into  rags.

Shoes  and  socks  are  fitting  for  you,  (but)  how  are  such
things  right  for  (One  who  is)  a Sun?

If  you  do  not  stop  your  throat  from  (uttering)  these  words,
a fire  will  come  and  burn  up  the  people.

If  a fire  has  not  come,  (then)  what  is  this  smoke?  Why  has
your  soul  become  black  and  your  spirit  rejected  (by  God)?

If  you  know  that  God  is  the  Judge,  how  is  it  right  for  you  (to
indulge  in)  this  doting  talk  and  familiarity?

Truly,  the  friendship  of  a witless  man  is  enmity:  the  high
God  is  not  in  want  of  suchlike  service.

5 To  whom  are  you  saying  this?  To  your  paternal  and  maternal
uncles?  Are  the  body  and  (its)  needs  among  the  attributes  of
the  Lord  of  glory?

(Only)  he  that  is  waxing  and  grow'ing  drinks  milk : (only)  he
that  has  need  of  feet  puts  on  shoes.

And  if  these  words  (of  yours)  are  (meant)  for  His  servant,
of  whom  God  said,  ‘He  is  I and  I myself  am  he’;

(For  him)  of  whom  He  (God)  said,  ‘Verily,  I was  sick  and
thou  didst  not  visit  Me,’  (that  is),  ‘I  became  ill,  not  he  (the
sick  man)  alone’;

(For  him)  who  has  become  seeing  by  Me  and  hearing  by  Me —


MOSES  AND  THE  SHEPHERD


311

this  (talk  of  yours)  is  foolish  nonsense  even  in  regard  to  that
servant.

To  speak  irreverently  to  one  chosen  of  God  causes  the  heart
(spirit)  to  perish  and  keeps  the  page  (record)  black.

If  you  should  call  a man  ‘Fatima’ — though  men  and  women
are  all  of  one  kind —

He  will  seek  to  murder  you,  so  far  as  it  is  possible  (for  him),
albeit  he  is  good-natured  and  forbearing  and  quiet.

(The  name)  Fatima  is  (a  term  of)  praise  in  regard  to  women,
(but)  if  you  address  it  to  a man,  ’tis  (like)  the  blow  of  a spear-
head.

Hand  and  foot  are  (terms  of)  praise  in  relation  to  us;  in
relation  to  the  holiness  of  God  they  are  pollution.

(The  words)  He  begat  not.  He  was  not  begotten  are  appropriate
to  Him:  He  is  the  Creator  of  begetter  and  begotten.

Birth  is  the  attribute  of  everything  that  is  (a)  body ; whatever
is  born  is  on  this  side  of  the  river.

Because  it  is  of  (the  world  of)  becoming  and  decay  and  (is)
contemptible:  it  is  originated  and  certainly  requires  an  Origi-
nator.”

He  (the  shepherd)  said,  ‘‘0  jMoses,  thou  hast  closed  my
mouth  and  thou  hast  burned  my  soul  with  repentance.”

He  rent  his  garment  and  heaved  a sigh,  and  hastily  turned
his  head  towards  the  desert  and  went  (his  way).


1740


I'tS


How  the  high  God  rebuked  Moses,  on  whom  be  peace,  on
account  of  the  shepherd.

A revelation  came  to  Moses  from  God — ‘‘Thou  hast  parted  1750
My  servant  from  Me.

Didst  thou  come  (as  a prophet)  to  unite,  or  didst  thou  come
to  sever?

So  far  as  thou  canst,  do  not  set  foot  in  separation:  of  (all)
things  the  most  hateful  to  Ale  is  divorce.

I have  bestowed  on  every  one  a (special)  w^ay  of  acting : I have
given  to  every  one  a (peculiar)  form  of  expression.

In  regard  to  him  it  is  (worthy  of)  praise,  and  in  regard  to  thee
it  is  (worthy  of)  blame:  in  regard  to  him  honey,  and  in  regard
to  thee  poison.

I am  independent  of  all  purity  and  impurity,  of  all  slothful-  1755
ness  and  alacrity  (in  worshipping  Me).

I did  not  ordain  (Divine  worship)  that  I might  make  any  profit ;
nay,  but  that  I might  do  a kindness  to  (My)  servants.

In  the  Hindoos  the  idiom^  of  Hind  (India)  is  praiseworthy;
in  the  Sindians  the  idiom  of  Sind  is  praiseworthy.

^ I.e.  the  local  and  traditional  forms  of  speech  used  in  the  practice  of
religion.


312  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

I am  not  sanctified  by  their  glorification  (of  Me);  ’tis  they
that  become  sanctified  and  pearl-scattering  (pure  and  radiant).

I look  not  at  the  tongue  and  the  speech ; I look  at  the  inward
(spirit)  and  the  state  (of  feeling).

1760  I gaze  into  the  heart  (to  see)  whether  it  be  lowly,  though  the
words  uttered  be  not  lowly,

Because  the  heart  is  the  substance,  speech  (only)  the  accident ;
so  the  accident  is  subservient,  the  substance  is  the  (real)  object.

How  much  (more)  of  these  phrases  and  conceptions  and
metaphors?  I want  burning,  burning:  become  friendly  with
that  burning!

Light  up  a fire  of  love  in  thy  soul,  burn  thought  and  expression
entirely  (away)  1

O Moses,  they  that  know  the  conventions  are  of  one  sort,
they  whose  souls  and  spirits  burn  are  of  another  sort.”

1763  To  lovers  there  is  a burning  (which  consumes  them)  at  every
moment : tax  and  tithe  are  not  (imposed)  on  a ruined  village.

If  he  (the  lover)  speak  faultily,  do  not  call  him  faulty ; and  if
he  be  bathed  in  blood,  do  not  wash  (those  who  are)  martyrs.

For  martyrs,  blood  is  better  than  water:  this  fault  (committed
by  him)  is  better  than  a hundred  right  actions  (of  another).

Within  the  Ka'ba  the  rule  of  the  qibla  does  not  exist:  what
matter  if  the  diver  has  no  snow-shoes?

Do  not  seek  guidance  from  the  drunken : why  dost  thou  order
those  whose  garments  are  rent  in  pieces  to  mend  them?

1770  The  religion  of  Love  is  apart  from  all  religions:  for  lovers,
the  (only)  religion  and  creed  is — God.

If  the  ruby  have  not  a seal  (graven  on  it),  ’tis  no  harm:  Love
in  the  sea  of  sorrow  is  not  sorrowful.


How  the  {Divine)  revelation  came  to  Moses,  on  whom  be
peace,  excusing  that  shepherd.

After  that,  God  hid  in  the  inmost  heart  of  Moses  mysteries
which  cannot  be  spoken.

Words  were  poured  upon  his  heart:  vision  and  speech  were
mingled  together.

How  oft  did  he  become  beside  himself  and  how  oft  return
to  himself  I . How  oft  did  he  fly  from  eternity  to  everlastingness !

1773  If  I should  unfold  (his  tale)  after  this,  ’tis  foolishness  (in  me),
because  the  explanation  of  this  is  beyond  (our)  understanding;

And  if  I should  speak  (thereof),  ’twould  root  up  (men’s)
minds;  and  if  I should  write  (thereof),  ’twould  shatter  many
pens.

When  Moses  heard  these  reproaches  from  God,  he  ran  into
the  desert  in  quest  of  the  shepherd.


MOSES  AND  THE  SHEPHERD  313

He  pushed  on  over  the  footprints  of  the  bewildered  man,  he
scattered  dust  from  the  skirt  of  the  desert^.

The  footstep  of  a man  distraught  is,  in  truth,  distinct  from
the  footsteps  of  others;

(At)  one  step,  (he  moves)  like  the  rook  (straight)  from  top  to  r
bottom  (of  the  chessboard) ; (at)  one  step  he  goes  crossways,  like
the  bishop ;

Now  lifting  his  crest  like  a wave;  now  going  on  his  belly  like
a fish;

Now  writing  (a  description  of)  his  state  on  some  dust,  like  a
geomancer  who  takes  an  omen  by  drawing  lines  (on  earth  or
sand).

At  last  he  (Moses)  overtook  and  beheld  him;  the  giver  of
glad  news  said,  “Permission  has  come  (from  God).

Do  not  seek  any  rules  or  method  (of  worship) ; say  whatsoever
your  distressful  heart  desires.

Your  blasphemy  is  (the  true)  religion,  and  your  religion  is  i
the  light  of  the  spirit : you  are  saved,  and  through  you  a (whole)
world  is  in  salvation.

0 you  who  are  made  secure  by  God  doeth  tchatso  He  viilleth,
go,  loose  your  tongue  without  regard  (for  what  you  say).”

He  said,  “O  Moses,  I have  passed  beyond  that:  I am  now
bathed  in  (my)  heart’s  blood.

1 have  passed  beyond  the  Lote-tree  of  the  farthest  bourn,  I
have  gone  a hundred  thousand  years’  journey  on  the  other  side.

Thou  didst  ply  the  lash,  and  my  horse  shied,  made  a bound,
and  passed  beyond  the  sky.

May  the  Divine  Nature  be  intimate  with  my  human  nature — i
blessings  be  on  thy  hand  and  on  thine  arm !

Now  my  state  is  beyond  telling:  this  which  I am  telling  is  not
my  (real)  state.”

You  behold  the  image  which  is  in  a mirror : it  is  your  (own)
image,  it  is  not  the  image  of  the  mirror.

The  breath  which  the  flute-player  puts  into  the  flute — does
it  belong  to  the  flute?  No,  it  belongs  to  the  man  (the  flute-
player).

Take  good  heed!  Whether  you  speak  praise  (of  God)  or
thanksgiving,  know  that  it  is  even  as  the  unseemly  (words)  of
that  shepherd.

Though  your  praise  is  better  in  comparison  with  that,  yet  in  r
relation  to  God  it  too  is  maimed  (feeble).

How  often  will  you  say,  when  the  lid  has  been  raised-,  “This
was  not  what  they  were  thinking  (it  was)  I ”

This  acceptance  (by  God)  of  your  praise  is  from  (His)  mercy ;
it  is  an  indulgence  (which  He  grants),  like  (the  indulgence

^ l.e.  he  made  great  haste.

2 l.e.  when  you  shall  see  things  as  they  really  are.


314  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

granted  in  the  case  of)  the  prayers  of  a woman  suffering  from
menorrhagia.

Her  prayers  are  stained  w'ith  blood^;  your  praise  is  stained
with  assimilation  and  qualification.

Blood  is  foul,  and  (yet)  it  goes  (is  washed  away)  by  a (little)
water;  but  the  inward  part  (the  inner  man)  hath  impurities

1800  Which  fail  not  (are  not  removed)  from  the  interior  (the  heart)
of  the  man  of  works  except  by  the  water  of  the  grace  of  the
Maker.

Would  that  in  your  bowing  low  in  prayer  you  would  turn
your  face  (to  attentive  consideration)  and  apprehend  the  meaning
of  “ Glory  to  my  Lord ! ”

Saying,  “Oh,  my  prostration  (in  prayer),  like  my  existence,
is  unworthy  (of  Thee);  do  Thou  give  good  in  return  for  evil!”

This  earth  has  the  mark  of  God’s  clemency,  in  that  it  got
filth  and  gave  flowers  as  the  produce ;

In  that  it  covers  our  pollutions,  (and  that)  buds  grow  up  from
it  in  exchange.

1805  Therefore,  when  the  infidel  saw  that  in  giving  and  lavishing
he  was  meaner  and  unwealthier  than  the  earth,

(That)  flowers  and  fruit  did  not  grow  from  his  being,  (and
that)  he  sought  (and  achieved)  nothing  but  the  corruption  of
all  purities.

He  said,  “I  have  gone  backwards  in  (my)  course.  Alas!
would  that  I had  (still)  been  earth !

Would  that  I had  not  chosen  to  travel  away  from  earthiness,
(and  that)  like  a clod  of  earth  I had  gathered  some  grain !

When  I travelled,  the  Way  tried  me : what  was  the  present  I
brought  (home)  from  this  travelling?”

1810  ’Tis  from  all  that  propensity  of  his  towards  earth  that  he
sees  before  him  no  profit  in  the  journey.

His  turning  his  face  back  is  that  greed  and  cupidity  (of  his) ;
his  turning  his  face  to  the  Way  is  sincerity  and  supplication.

Every  herb  that  has  a propensity  for  (moving)  upwards  is  in
(the  state  of)  increase  and  life  and  growth ;

When  it  has  turned  its  head  towards  the  earth,  (it  is)  in  (the
state  of)  decrease  and  dryness  and  failure  and  disappointment.

When  the  propensity  of  your  spirit  is  upwards,  (you  are)  in
(the  state  of)  increase,  and  that  (lofty)  place  is  the  place  to  which
you  will  return ;

1815  But  if  you  are  upside  down,  (with)  your  head  towards  the
earth,  (then)  you  are  one  that  sinks:  God  loves  not  them  that
sink.


* Literally,  “with  her  prayers  blood  is  mixed  so  as  to  stain  them.”


MOSES  AND  THE  SHEPHERD


315


How  Moses,  on  whom  be  peace,  asked  the  high  God  {to
explain)  the  secret  of  the  predominance  of  the  unjust.

Moses  said,  “O  Bounteous  Disposer,  O Thou  whom  to  com-
memorate for  one  moment  is  (worth)  a long  life,

I have  seen  the  crooked , misshapen  image  in  (the  mould  of)  water
and  clay,  and  like  the  angels,  my  heart  has  raised  an  objection,

As  to  what  is  the  purpose  of  making  an  image  and  casting
therein  the  seed  of  corruption.

To  kindle  the  fire  of  iniquity  and  corruption;  to  burn  the
mosque  and  those  who  bend  low  in  prayer;

To  set  boiling  the  .source  of  bloody  tears*  for  the  sake  of
(receiving)  humble  entreaties  (from  the  suffering  and  oppressed)—

I know  for  certain  that  it  is  the  essence  of  wisdom  (on  Thy
part),  but  my  aim  is  (to  know  this  by)  actual  seeing  and  vision.

That  certainty  (of  mine)  says  to  me,  ‘keep  silence’;  the
craving  for  vision  says  to  me,  ‘Make  a stir  (and  outcry).’

Thou  hast  shown  Thy  secret  to  the  angels,  (namely)  that
such  honey  as  this  is  worth  the  sting.

Thou  hast  displayed  the  Light  of  Adam  manifestly  to  the
angels,  (so  that  all)  the  difficulties  were  explained.

Thy  Resurrection  declares  what  is  the  secret  of  death:  the  is
fruits  declare  what  is  the  secret  of  the  leaves.”

The  secret  of  blood  and  seed  is  the  excellence  of  Man ; after
all,  inferiority  is  antecedent  to  every  superiority.

The  ignorant  (child)  first  washes  the  tablet,  then  he  writes
the  letters  upon  it.

(So)  He  (God)  turns  the  heart  into  blood  and  abject  tears,
then  He  writes  the  (spiritual)  mysteries  upon  it.

At  the  time  of  washing  the  tablet  (hf  the  heart)  one  must
recognise  that  it  will  be  made  into  a bqok  (of  mysteries).

When  they  lay  the  foundation  of  a house  (to  rebuild  it),  they
dig  up  the  first  foundation.

(Also),  people  first  fetch  up  clay  from  the  depths  of  the  earth
in  order  that  at  last  you  may  draw  up  flowing  water.

Children  weep  piteously  at  cupping,  for  they  know  not  the
secret  of  the  matter;

(But)  a man,  in  sooth,  gives  the  cupper  gold  and  fondles  the
blood-drinking  lancet.

The  porter  runs  to  the  heavy  load : he  snatches  the  load  from
others.

Behold  the  struggle  of  the  porters  for  the  load!  Such  is  the  is
endeavour  of  him  that  sees  (the  truth  of)  things.

Inasmuch  as  burdens  are  the  foundation  of  ease,  and  bitter
things,  too,  are  the  forerunners  of  enjoyment.

^ Literally,  “blood-stained  and  yellow  water.”  The  words  may  also  be
rendered,  “serum  and  pus,”  i.e.  festering  wounds.


3i6  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

Paradise  is  compassed  about  with  the  things  we  dislike  (to
do) ; the  fires  (of  Hell)  are  compassed  about  with  our  lusts.

The  seed  (source)  of  the  substance  of  your  fire  (of  torment)
is  the  fresh  bough  (of  lust) ; (but)  he  that  is  burned  by  the  fire
(of  renunciation)  is  the  comrade  of  Kawthar^.

Whosoever  is  the  comrade  of  affliction  in  prison — that  is  the
retribution  for  a mouthful  (of  unlawful  food)  and  a lust.

1S40  Whosoever  is  the  comrade  of  a high  fortune  in  a palace —
that  is  the  reward  for  some  battle-field  and  sore  trial.

Whomsoever  you  have  seen  unrivalled  in  (his  store  of)  gold
and  silver — know  that  he  has  been  patient  in  earning.

When  the  (spiritual)  eye  has  become  piercing,  he  (the  owner)
sees  without  causes.  You  who  are  in  (the  bondage  of)  sense-
perception,  pay  you  heed  to  causes!

He  whose  spirit  is  beyond  (the  world  of)  natural  properties —
to  him  belongs  the  position  of  power  to  rive  (the  chain  of)
causes.

The  (spiritual)  eye  regards  the  fountain  of  the  miracles  of  the
prophets  as  (being)  without  cause,  not  as  (arising)  from  water
and  herbage  2.

1845  These  causes  are  (linked  together)  like  the  physician  and  the
sick ; these  causes  are  like  the  lamp  and  the  wick.

Twist  a new  wick  for  your  night-lamp,  (but)  know  that  the
lamp  of  the  sun  transcends  these  things.

Go  you  and  make  plaster  for  the  roof  of  your  house,  (but)
know  that  the  roof  of  the  sky  is  undefiled  by  plaster.

Alas  that,  after  our  Sweetheart  had  burned  (utterly  destroyed)
our  pain,  the  night-time  of  being  alone  (with  Him)  passed  away
and  became  day  1

Except  at  night  there  is  no  unveiling  of  the  moon;  except
through  heartache  do  not  seek  your  heart’s  desire.

1850  Forsaking  Jesus,  you  have  fostered  the  ass:  of  necessity,  like
the  ass,  you  are  outside  of  the  curtain.

Knowledge  and  gnosis  are  the  fortune  of  Jesus;  they  are  not
the  fortune  of  the  ass,  O you  asinine  one !

You  listen  to  the  moaning  of  the  ass,  and  pity  comes  over  you ;
then  you  know  not  (that)  the  ass  commands  you  to  be  asinine.

Have  pity  on  Jesus  and  have  no  pity  on  the  ass : do  not  make
the  (carnal)  nature  lord  over  your  intellect.

Let  the  (carnal)  nature  weep  sore  and  bitterly;  do  you  take
from  it  and  pay  the  debt  of  the  (rational)  soul.

1855  For  years  you  have  been  the  ass’s  slave.  It  is  enough,  for  the
ass’s  slave  is  behind  (even)  the  ass.

The  thing  meant  by  (the  Prophet’s  words)  “put  them  (the
women)  behind  ” is  your  fleshly  soul ; for  it  must  be  last,  and  your
intellect  (must  be)  first.

' A river  in  Paradise.


I.e.  not  dependent  on  material  causes.


THE  SECRET  OF  PAIN  AND  TRIBULATION  317

This  base  intellect  has  become  of  the  same  temperament  as
the  ass : its  (only)  thought  is  how  it  shall  get  hold  of  fodder.

The  ass  of  Jesus  took  (to  itself)  the  temperament  of  the
(rational)  spirit:  it  took  its  abode  in  the  place  of  the  intelligent,

Because  (in  Jesus)  intellect  was  ruling,  and  the  ass  (was)  weak
— the  ass  is  made  lean  by  a strong  rider —

While  from  the  weakness  of  your  intellect,  O you  who  have  I'f.o
(no  more  than)  the  value  of  an  ass,  this  worn-out  ass  has  become
a dragon.

If  through  Jesus  (the  spiritual  guide)  you  have  become  heart-
sick, (yet)  health  too  comes  from  him;  do  not  leave  him.

How  art  thou  as  to  affliction,  O thou  Jesus  who  hast  the
(healing)  breath  of  Jesus?  for  there  never  w'as  in  the  world  a
treasure  without  a snake.

How  art  thou,  O Jesus,  at  the  sight  of  the  Jews?  How'  art
thou,  O Joseph,  in  respect  of  the  envious  plotter?

Night  and  day  for  the  sake  of  this  foolish  people  thou,  like
night  and  day,  art  a replenisher  of  life.

Alas  for  those  bilious  ones  who  are  without  excellence ! What  1S65
excellence  is  born  from  bile?  Headache.

Do  thou  the  same  thing  that  the  sun  of  the  east  does  with
(our)  hypocrisy  and  craft  and  thieving  and  dissimulation.

Thou  art  honey,  we  are  vinegar  in  (the  affairs  of)  this  world
and  in  religion;  the  (means  of)  removing  this  bile  is  oxymel.

We  folk  who  suffer  from  colic  have  added  more  and  more
vinegar;  do  thou  add  more  and  more  honey,  withhold  not  thy
bounty.

This  was  meet  in  us;  such  (acts  naturally)  issued  from  us:
what  is  increased  by  sand  in  the  eye?  Blindness.

(But)  ’tis  meet  in  thee,  O precious  collyrium,  that  every  ly-o
nothing  should  gain  from  thee  something.

Thy  heart  is  roasted  by  the  fire  of  these  unrighteous  men,
(yet)  all  thy  appeal  (to  God)  has  been,  “ Guide  my  people ! ”

Thou  art  a mine  of  aloes-wood : if  they  set  thee  afire,  they  will
fill  this  world  with  otto  of  roses  and  sweet  basil.

Thou  art  not  that  aloes-wood  that  is  minished  by  the  fire:
thou  art  not  that  spirit  that  is  made  captive  by  grief.

Aloes-wood  burns,  (but)  the  mine  of  aloes-wood  is  far  from
burning:  how  should  the  wind  (of  evil  words)  assail  the  source
of  (spiritual)  light?

Oh,  ’tis  from  thee  the  heavens  have  (their)  purity;  oh,  thy  is,-5
unkindness  is  better  than  kindness.

Because  if  an  unkindness  come  from  the  wise  it  is  better  than
the  kindness  of  the  ignorant.

The  Prophet  said,  “Enmity  (proceeding)  from  wisdom  is
better  than  the  love  that  comes  from  a fool.”


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II


318


How  an  Amir  harassed  a sleeping  man  into  whose  mouth  a
snake  had  gone.

A wise  man  was  riding  along  (at  the  moment  when)  a snake
was  going  into  the  mouth  of  a man  asleep.

The  rider  saw  that,  and  was  hurrying  to  scare  away  the  snake,
(but)  he  got  no  chance  (of  doing  so).

i5So  Since  he  had  an  abundant  supply  of  intelligence,  he  struck
the  sleeper  several  powerful  blows  with  a mace.

The  strokes  of  the  hard  mace  drove  him  in  flight  from  him
(the  rider)  to  beneath  a tree.

There  were  many  rotten  apples  which  had  dropped  (from  the
tree):  he  said,  “Eat  of  these,  O you  in  the  grip  of  pain!”

He  gave  the  man  so  many  apples  to  eat  that  they  w^ere  falling
out  of  his  mouth  again.

He  was  crying,  “O  Amir,  pray,  why  have  you  set  on  me.?
What  have  I done  to  you?

issj  If  you  have  an  inveterate  and  mortal  feud  with  me^,  strike
with  your  sword  and  shed  my  blood  at  once.

Ill-omened  (w'as)  the  hour  I came  into  your  sight:  oh,  happv
he^  that  never  saw  your  face !

Without  guilt,  without  sin,  without  (having  done)  anything
great  or  small^ — (even)  the  heretics  hold  not  such  oppression
allowable.

Blood  gushes  from  my  mouth  together  with  (my)  words.
O God,  I beseech  Thee,  give  him  the  retribution  (which  he
deserves) ! ”

Every  instant  he  was  uttering  a new  curse,  (while)  he  (the
rider)  kept  beating  him  and  saying,  “Run  in  this  plain.”

1S90  Blows  of  the  mace,  and  the  rider  (swift)  as  the  windl  He
(therefore)  went  on  running  and  (now  and)  again  falling  on  his
face.

He  was  full-fed  and  sleepy  and  fatigued:  his  feet  and  face
became  (covered  with)  a hundred  thousand  wounds.

Till  nightfall  he  (the  rider)  drove  (him)  to  and  fro^,  until
vomiting  caused  by  bile  overtook  him.

All  the  things  he  had  eaten,  bad  or  good,  came  up  from  him :
the  snake  shot  forth  from  him  along  with  what  he  had  eaten.

When  he  saw  the  snake  outside  of  him,  he  fell  on  his  knees
before  that  beneficent  man.

iS95  As  soon  as  he  saw  the  horror  of  that  black,  ugly,  big  snake,
those  griefs  departed  from  him.


J Literally,  “ if  you  have  from  the  beginning  a quarrel  with  my  soul  (life).
- Literally,  “happiness  to  him.”

^ Literally,  “without  more  or  less.”

* Literally,  “drew  him  in  and  let  him  out.”


THE  MAN  WHO  SWALLOWED  A SNAKE  319

“Truly,”  said  he,  “you  are  the  Gabriel  of  (Divine)  mercy,
or  you  are  God,  for  you  are  the  lord  of  bounty.

Oh,  blest  (is)  the  hour  that  you  saw  me:  I was  dead,  you  have
given  me  new  life.

You  (were)  seeking  me  like  mothers  (in  search  of  their
children) ; I (was)  fleeing  from  you  like  asses.

The  ass  flees  from  his  master  because  of  asininity ; his  owner
(runs)  after  (him)  because  of  good-nature.

He  seeks  him,  not  on  account  of  profit  or  loss,  but  in  order  i joo
that  a wolf  or  (other)  wild  beast  may  not  tear  him.

Oh,  happy  he  that  espies  your  face  or  suddenly  lights  upon
your  abode.

O you  whom  the  pure  spirit  hath  praised,  how  many  foolish
and  idle  words  have  I spoken  to  vou !

0 lord  and  emperor  and  amir,  I spoke  not,  my  folly  spoke:
do  not  punish  that  (offence).

If  I had  known  a tittle  of  this  matter,  how  could  I have  spoken
foolish  words?

1 should  have  spoken  much  praise  of  you,  O man  of  good  i jos
qualities,  if  you  had  given  me  a single  hint  as  to  the  (actual)  case ;

But  you,  keeping  silence,  showed  perturbation  and  silently
continued  to  beat  me  on  the  head.

My  head  became  dizzy,  the  wits  flew  out  of  my  head —
especially  as  this  head  has  (but)  little  brain.

Pardon,  O man  of  goodly  countenance  and  goodly  behaviour:
let  pass  that  which  I said  in  frenzy.”

He  answered,  “If  I had  uttered  a hint  of  it,  your  gall  would
instantly  have  turned  to  water.

Had  I told  you  the  qualities  of  the  snake,  terror  would  have  19-0
made  you  give  up  the  ghost^.”

Mustafa  (Mohammed)  said,  ‘If  I should  tell  aright  the
description  of  the  enemy  which  is  in  your  souls,

The  gall-bladders  even  of  courageous  men  would  burst:  he
(such  a one)  would  neither  go  his  way  nor  care  for  any  work.

Neither  would  there  remain  to  his  heart  endurance  in  suppli-
cation, nor  to  his  body  strength  for  fasting  and  (ritual)  prayer.

He  would  become  (good  for)  nothing  as  a mouse  before  a
cat ; he  would  be  distraught  as  a lamb  before  a wolf.

No  power  to  plan  or  move  would  remain  in  him:  therefore  l us
I tend  you  without  speaking.

I am  mute,  like  Bii  Bakr-i  Rababi;  I handle  the  iron,  like
David,

So  that  by  my  hand  the  (seemingly)  impossible  is  brought  to
pass^,  and  wings  are  restored  to  the  bird  whose  plumes  were
torn  away.

^ Literally,  “would  have  fetched  up  the  breath  from  your  soul.’^

“ Literally,  “becomes  a state  (of  actuality)/*


320  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Since  there  is  (the  text)  the  hand  of  God  is  above  their  hands,
the  One  (God)  has  declared  our  hand  to  be  His  hand.

Therefore  mine  is  surely  a long  hand  that  has  passed  beyond
the  Seventh  Heaven.

1920  My  hand  showed  (its)  cunning  upon  the  sky:  O teacher  of
the  Qur’an,  recite  the  moon  hath  been  cleft  asunder.’

This  characteristic^,  moreover,  is  on  account  of  the  weakness
of  (men’s)  understandings:  how  is  it  possible  to  explain  the
(Divine)  omnipotence  to  the  weak?

You  will  surely  know  when  you  lift  your  head  from  (this
sensuous)  sleep.  ’Tis  the  end  (of  my  discourse),  and  God  knows
best  what  is  right.

“(If  I had  told  you  about  the  snake),  you  would  not  have
been  able  to  eat,  nor  would  you  have  been  capable  of  vomiting
or  cared  (to  do  so)^.

I heard  (your)  abuse  and  went  on  with  my  work®;  I kept
repeating  under  my  lip  (breath),  ‘O  Lord,  make  (it)  easy! ’

1925  I had  not  permission  to  speak  of  the  cause,  and  I had  not
power  to  abandon  you.

From  the  grief  in  my  heart  I was  saying  continually,  ‘ Guide
my  people;  verily,  they  know  not’.”

The  man  that  had  been  delivered  from  woe  was  falling  on
his  knees  and  saying,  “ O (thou  who  art)  my  bliss,  O my  fortune
and  treasure,

Thou  wilt  get  rewards  from  God,  O noble  one;  this  weakling
has  not  the  power  to  thank  thee.

God  will  say  thanks  to  thee,  O leader ; I have  not  the  lips  and
the  chin  and  the  voice  for  that.”

1930  Of  this  fashion  is  the  enmity  of  the  wise:  their  poison  is
gladness  to  the  soul.

The  friendship  of  the  fool  is  woe  and  perdition : hear  this  tale
as  a parable.

On  putting  trust  in  the  fawningness  and  good  faith  of  the  bear.

A dragon  was  pulling  a bear  (into  its  jaws) ; a valiant  man
went  and  succoured  it.

The  valiant  (holy)  men  are  a help  in  the  world  when  the  w'ail
of  the  oppressed  reaches  (them).

From  every  quarter  they  hear  the  cry  of  the  oppressed  and
run  in  that  direction,  like  the  mercy  of  God.

193;  Those  buttresses  for  the  breaches  of  the  world,  those  physi-
cians for  hidden  maladies.

Are  pure  love  and  justice  and  mercy;  even  as  God,  they  are
flawless  (incorruptible)  and  unbribed.

’ Silence.

^ Literally,  “nor  would  you  have  had  the  way  (means)  or  care  to  vomit.”

® Literally,  “ I was  driving  my  ass  along.”


THE  FOOL  WHO  TRUSTED  THE  BEAR


321

(If  you  ask  one  of  them),  “Why  dost  thou  give  him  this  aid
all  at  once?  ” he  says,  “ On  account  of  his  grief  and  helplessness.”

Lovingkindness  is  fallen  a prey  to  the  valiant  (holv)  man,  (for)
medicine  seeks  naught  in  the  world  but  the  pain  (which  it  should
cure).

Wherever  a pain  is,  the  remedy  goes  there:  wherever  a
lowland  is,  the  water  runs  there.

If  thou  want  the  water  of  mercy,  go,  become  lowly,  and  then  1940
drink  the  wine  of  mercy  and  become  drunken.

Mercy  upon  mercy  comes  (and  rises  like  a flood)  up  to  the
head;  do  not  thou  come  down  to  (and  dwell  upon)  a single
mercy,  O son!

Bring  the  sky  under  thy  feet,  O brave  one  I Hear  from  above
the  firmament  the  noise  of  the  (celestial)  music !

Put  out  of  thine  ear  the  cotton  of  evil  suggestion,  that  the
cries  from  heaven  may  come  into  thine  ear.

Purge  thy  two  eyes  from  the  hair  of  defect,  that  thou  mayst
behold  the  garden  and  cypress-plot  of  the  world  unseen.

Eject  the  phlegm  from  thy  brain  and  nose,  that  the  wind  of  1945
God  may  come  into  the  centres  of  thy  (spiritual)  sense  of  smell.

Do  not  leave  (in  thyself)  any  trace  of  fever  and  bile,  that  thou
mayst  get  from  the  world  the  taste  of  sugar.

Remedium  virilitatis  adhibe  neu  virilitate  carens  cucurreris,
that  a hundred  kinds  of  fair  ones  may  come  forth.

Tear  the  fetter,  which  is  the  body,  from  the  foot  of  thy  soul,
so  that  it  may  race  round  the  arena.

Take  off  the  shackle  of  avarice  from  thy  hands  and  neck:
seize  (and  enjoy)  a new  fortune  in  the  old  heaven.

And  if  thou  art  unable  (to  do  that),  fly  to  the  Ka‘ba  of  (Divine)  1950
grace : lay  thy  helplessness  before  the  Helper.

Lamentation  and  weeping  are  a mighty  stock-in-trade  (re-
source) ; the  Universal  IMercy  is  the  mightiest  nurse  (to  comfort
and  cherish).

The  nurse  and  mother  seeks  a pretext  (for  giving  relief):

(she  waits  to  see)  when  her  child  will  begin  to  weep.

He  (God)  created  the  child,  (namely)  your  wants,  in  order  that
it  might  moan  and  that  milk  might  (then)  be  produced  for  it.

He  said,  “ Call  ye  upon  Godt  ” Refrain  not  thou  from  lamen-
tation, in  order  that  the  milk  of  His  lovingkindnesses  may
flow.

The  howling  of  the  wind  and  the  pouring  forth  of  (rain  like)  1955
milk  from  the  cloud  are  for  care  of  us:  (have)  patience  one
moment !

Hast  not  thou  heard  (the  text)  ‘ ‘ in  the  sky  is  your  daily  bread  ’ ’ ?
Wherefore  hast  thou  stuck  to  this  low  place?

Deem  thy  fear  and  despair  to  be  the  voice  of  the  ghoul
drawing  thine  ear  (down)  to  the  abyss  of  degradation.


N M


21


322  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

Every  call  that  draws  thee  upward — know  that  that  call  has
come  from  on  high.

Every  call  that  excites  cupidity  in  thee — know  that  it  is  the
howl  of  the  wolf  which  tears  men  (to  pieces).

i960  This  (afore-mentioned)  height  is  not  (high)  in  respect  of
position;  these  “heights”  are  towards  (refer  to)  mind  and
spirit.

Every  cause  is  higher  than  the  effect : the  stone  and  iron  (from
which  fire  is  struck)  are  superior  to  the  sparks.

Such  and  such  a person  is  (really)  seated  above  that  one  who
lifts  up  his  head  so  haughtily,  though  in  appearance  he  is  seated
beside  him.

The  superiority  of  that  (person’s)  place  is  in  respect  of  (his
spiritual)  nobility;  the  place  (that  is)  far  from  the  (spiritual)
seat  of  honour  is  held  in  slight  regard.

Forasmuch  as  the  stone  and  iron  are  prior  in  action,  the
superiority  of  these  twain  is  proper;

1965  But  those  sparks,  in  respect  of  their  being  the  final  cause^,
are  from  this  point  of  view  far  in  front  of  (superior  to)  the  iron
and  stone.

The  stone  and  iron  are  first,  and  the  sparks  last;  but  these
twain  are  the  body,  and  the  sparks  are  the  soul.

If  those  sparks  are  posterior  in  time,  (yet)  in  quality  they  are
higher  than  the  stone  and  iron.

The  bough  is  prior  to  the  fruit  in  time,  (but)  it  (the  fruit)  is
superior  to  the  bough  in  e.xcellence.

Since  the  fruit  is  the  final  cause  of  the  tree,  it  follows  that  the
fruit  is  (really)  first,  the  tree  last.

1970  When  the  bear  cried  out  for  help  against  the  dragon,  a valiant
man  rescued  it  from  the  (dragon’s)  claws.

Cunning  and  courage  gave  support  to  each  other:  by  this
strength  he  slew  the  dragon.

The  dragon  has  strength,  (but)  it  has  not  cunning;  again,
there  is  a cunning  above  your  cunning.

When  you  have  regarded  your  own  cunning,  go  back  (and
see)  whence  it  came:  go  to  the  origin.

Whatever  is  below  has  come  from  above:  come  on,  turn  your
eye  towards  the  height.

1975  Looking  aloft  gives  light,  though  at  first  it  produces  dazzle-
ment  as  a trial.

Accustom  your  eye  to  the  light ; if  you  are  not  a bat,  look  in
that  direction.

Vision  of  the  end  is  the  sign  of  your  (having  the)  light;  the
lust  of  the  moment  is  in  truth  your  (dark)  grave.

The  man  with  vision  of  the  end,  who  has  seen  a hundred
artifices,  is  not  like  him  that  has  (only)  heard  of  one  artifice,

^ Literally,  “the  object  aimed  at.**


THE  FOOL  WHO  TRUSTED  THE  BEAR  323

(And  who)  has  been  so  befooled  by  that  one  artifice  that  in
his  pride  he  has  become  alienated  from  the  masters.

Like  Samiri,  when  he  has  seen  in  himself  that  (little)  skill,  i .so
through  pride  he  has  rebelled  against  (a)  Moses.

He  has  learned  that  skill  from  (a)  Moses  and  (then)  closed  his
eyes  to  his  teacher.

Moses,  of  course,  exhibited  another  artifice,  so  that  it  swept
away  (both)  that  artifice  (of  Samiri)  and  his  life.

Oh,  many  is  the  knowledge  (talent)  that  runs  in  the  head  (and
urges)  that  he  (the  owner)  should  become  eminent — in  truth,
through  that  (knowledge)  his  head  goes  (he  loses  his  life).

If  you  wish  not  your  head  to  be  lost,  be  (lowly  as)  a foot ; be
under  the  protection  of  the  Qutb  who  is  possessed  of  discern-
ment.

Though  you  be  a king,  deem  not  yourself  above  him : though  19^5
you  be  honey,  gather  naught  but  his  sugar-cane.

Your  thought  is  the  outward  form,  and  his  thought  is  the
soul : your  coin  is  false,  and  his  coin  is  (pure  as)  the  mine.

You  are  (really)  he:  seek  yourself  in  his  “he”  (personality).

Say  coo,  coo^:  become  a dove  (flying)  towards  him.

And  if  you  are  unwilling  to  serve  the  (holy)  men  of  (human)
kind,  you  are  in  the  dragon’s  mouth,  like  the  bear.

It  may  be  that  a Master  will  deliver  you  and  pull  you  out  of
danger.

As  you  have  no  strength,  keep  making  a lamentation;  since  1910
you  are  blind,  take  care,  do  not  turn  your  head  away  from  him
that  sees  the  road.

You  are  less  (worse)  than  the  bear,  (for)  you  are  not  wailing
at  the  pain.  The  bear  was  freed  from  pain  when  it  made  an
outcry.

O God,  make  our  stony  hearts  (soft  as)  wax;  make  our  wailing
sweet  (to  Thee)  and  an  object  of  (Thy)  mercy !


How  a sightless  beggar  said,  “/  have  two  blindnesses.”

There  was  a blind  man  who  used  to  say,  “Pity!  I have  two
blindnesses,  O people  of  the  time.

Therefore,  hark  ye,  show  unto  me  twice  as  much  compassion,
since  I have  two  blindnesses,  and  I (live)  between  (them.)”

(Somebody)  said,  “We  see  one  blindness  of  yours:  what  may  igw
the  other  blindness  be?  Explain.”

He  answered,  “I  have  an  ugly  voice  and  unpleasing  tones:
ugliness  of  voice  and  blindness  are  double  (blindness).

My  ugly  cry  becomes  the  source  of  annoyance : the  people’s
love  is  lessened  by  my  cry.

* Ku  ku,  the  cry  of  the  dove,  also  means  “where?  where?”


_-ooo


2005


2010


324  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Whithersoever  my  ugly  voice  goes,  it  becomes  the  source  of
anger  and  annoyance  and  hatred.

Double  your  compassion  for  (these)  two  blindnesses;  make
room  (in  your  hearts)  for  one  who  gets  so  little  room^.”

The  ugliness  of  (his)  voice  was  diminished  by  this  plaint:
the  people  became  of  one  mind  in  (showing)  compassion  for
him.

When  he  had  told  the  secret  (and  explained  his  meaning),  his
voice  was  made  beautiful  by  the  graciousness  of  the  voice  of  his
heart ;

But  that  one  whose  heart’s  voice  also  is  bad — (for  him)  those
three  blindnesses  are  banishment  everlasting  (from  the  favour  of
God);

Yet  it  may  be  that  the  bounteous  (saints),  who  give  without
cause,  will  lay  a hand  (of  blessing)  upon  his  ugly  head.

Since  his  (the  blind  beggar’s)  voice  became  sweet  and
pitiable^,  the  hearts  of  the  stony-hearted  were  made  (soft)  as
wax  thereby.

Inasmuch  as  the  infidel’s  lament  is  ugly  and  (like)  braying,
for  that  (reason)  it  meets  with  no  (favourable)  response®.

“ Be  silent”  has  come  down  (has  been  revealed  in  the  Qur’an)
against  the  ugly-voiced  (infidel),  for  he  was  drunken  with  the
people’s  blood,  like  a dog.

Inasmuch  as  the  lament  of  the  bear  attracts  compassion,
(while)  your  lament  is  not  like  this,  (but)  is  unpleasing,

Know  that  you  have  behaved  with  wolfishness  to  (a)  Joseph,
or  have  drunk  of  the  blood  of  an  innocent.

Repent,  and  empty  yourself  of  what  you  have  drunk;  and  if
your  wound  is  old  (and  unhealed),  go,  cauterise  (it).


Continuation^  of  the  story  of  the  bear  and  of  the  fool  who
had  put  trust  in  its  good  faith.

The  bear,  too,  when  it  was  delivered  from  the  dragon  and
received  such  kindness  from  that  brave  man —

Like  the  dog  of  the  Alen  of  the  Cave,  that  poor  bear  became
an  attendant  at  the  heels  of  him  that  bore  the  burden  (of  the
fight  with  the  dragon).

That  Moslem,  from  fatigue,  laid  down  his  head  (to  rest);  the
bear,  from  devotion  (to  him),  became  (his)  guard.

A certain  man  passed  by  and  said  to  him,  ‘ ‘ What  has  happened  ?
O brother,  who  is  this  bear  (in  relation)  to  you?  ”


^ Literally,  “cause  one  who  is  so  uncontained  (in  your  hearts)  to  be  con-
tained (in  them).”

^ Literally,  “wronged,”  and  hence  apt  to  excite  compassion.

^ Literally,  “it  does  not  become  the  companion  of  acceptance.”

*■  Literally,  “completion”;  but  see  the  section  beginning  with  v.  2124.


THE  FOOL  WHO  TRUSTED  THE  BEAR  325

He  recounted  the  adventure,  and  the  story  of  the  dragon.

The  other  said,  “ Do  not  set  your  heart  on  a bear,  O fool !

The  friendship  of  a fool  is  worse  than  (his)  enmity:  it  (the  ^015
bear)  ought  to  be  driven  aw'ay  by  every  means  you  know.”

He  (the  man  with  the  bear)  said  (to  himself),  “By  God,  he
has  said  this  from  envy';  otherwise,”  (he  said  aloud),  “why  do
ymu  look  at  the  bearishness  (of  the  bear)?  Behold  this  affection
(which  it  has  for  me) ! ”

“The  affection  of  fools,”  said  the  other,  “is  beguiling;  this
envy  of  mine  is  better  than  its  (the  bear’s)  affection.

Hey,  come  with  me  and  drive  away  this  bear:  do  not  choose
the  bear  (as  your  friend),  do  not  forsake  one  of  your  own  kind ! ”

“Go,  go,”  said  he,  “mind  your  own  business,  O envious
man! ” Said  the  other,  “This  was  my  business,  and  it  was  not
your  fortune  (to  follow  my  advice)^.

I am  not  less  than  a bear,  O noble  sir:  abandon  it,  in  order  2o;o
that  I may  be  your  comrade.

My  heart  is  trembling  with  anxiety  for  you:  do  not  go  into
a forest  with  a bear  like  this.

This  heart  of  mine  has  never  trembled  in  vain;  this  is  the
Light  of  God,  not  pretence  or  idle  brag.

I am  the  true  believer  who  has  become  seeing  by  the  Light  of
God.  Beware  and  beware  I Flee  from  this  fire-temple ! ”

He  said  all  this,  and  it  entered  not  his  ear:  suspicion  is  a thick
barrier  to  a man.

He  took  his  hand,  and  he  (the  man  with  the  bear)  withdrew  ::o:5
his  hand  from  him.  The  other  said,  “I  will  go,  since  you  are
not  a well-guided  friend.”

“Go,”  cried  he;  “be  not  troubledfor  me;  don’t  carve  (retail)
so  much  wisdom,  O meddlesome  one  I ”

He  answered  him,  (saying),  “I  am  not  your  enemy:  it  would
be  a kindness  if  you  would  come  after  me.”

“I  am  sleepy,”  said  he;  “let  me  alone,  go!”  He  replied,
“Pray,  give  in  to  your  friend.

So  that  you  may  sleep  under  the  safeguard  of  a sage,  under
the  protection  of  one  loved  (by  God),  a man  of  heart  (spiritual
insight).”

The  man  was  thrown  by  his  (the  other’s)  earnestness  into  a ;o;o
(groundless)  fancy:  he  became  angry  and  quickly  averted  his
face.

Thinking,  “Mayhap  this  man  has  come  to  attack  me — he  is
a murderer ; or  he  has  hope  (of  gain) — he  is  a beggar  and  a tout ;

Or  he  has  wagered  with  his  friends  that  he  will  make  me
afraid  of  this  companion.”

From  the  wickedness  of  his  heart,  not  (even)  one  good  surmise
came  into  his  thoughts  at  all.

' Literally,  “it  was  not  your  fore-ordained  portion  (_rizq).”


326  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

His  good  opinions  were  wholly  for  the  bear:  to  be  sure,  he
was  of  the  same  kind  as  the  bear.

2035  Through  currishness,  he  suspected  a sage  and  deemed  a bear
affectionate  and  just.


How  Moses,  on  whom  be  peace,  said  to  one  who  worshipped  the

[golden)  calf,  “ Where  is  [what  has  become  of)  thy  vain

scepticism  and  precaution^}”

jMoses  said  to  one  drunken  with  (deluding)  fancy,  “O  thou
who  thinkest  evil  because  of  (thy)  unblessedness  and  perdition.

Thou  hast  had  a hundred  suspicions  concerning  my  prophet-
hood,  notwithstanding  these  proofs  and  this  noble  nature
(which  I have  shown).

Thou  hast  seen  from  me  hundreds  of  thousands  of  miracles,
(and  all  the  time)  a hundred  fancies  and  doubts  and  (vain)
opinions  were  growing  in  thee.

Thou  wert  sorely  pressed  by  fancy  and  devilish  suggestion,
thou  wert  sneering  at  my  prophethood.

^°40  I raised  up  dust  from  the  sea'^  before  your  eyes,  so  that  ye
might  be  delivered  from  the  wickedness  of  the  people  of
Pharaoh.

During  forty  years  the  platter  and  tray  (of  food)  came  (to
you)  from  heaven,  and  at  my  prayer  the  river  ran  from  a rock.

These  (miracles)  and  a hundred  times  as  many,  and  all  these
diverse®  (evidences),  did  not  make  that  vain  imagination  fade
away  from  thee,  O cold  (hard-hearted)  man !

Through  sorcery  a calf  lowed;  (then)  thou  didst  fall  to
worship,  saying,  ‘Thou  art  my  God.’

(Then)  those  imaginations  were  swept  away  (as)  by  a flood,
and  thy  silly  shrewdness  went  to  sleep.

2045  How  wert  not  thou  suspicious  in  regard  to  him  (Samiri)?
Why  didst  thou  lay  thy  head  (on  the  ground)  like  that,  O ugly
one?

How  did  no  idea  come  to  thee  of  his  imposition  and  of  the
corruptness  of  his  fool-catching  magic?

Who,  indeed,  is  a Samiri,  O ye  curs,  that  he  should  hew  up
a God^  in  the  world?

How  didst  thou  become  of  one  mind  (with  him)  as  to  this
imposture  of  his,  and  become  devoid  of  all  perplexities?

Is  a cow  (calf)  worthy  to  be  deified  on  (the  strength  of)  a

^ /.e.  “You  regarded  me  as  a false  prophet  and  obstinately  refused  to
believe  in  God:  why  are  you  now  so  credulous  as  to  worship  an  idol?”

- I.e.  “ I caused  the  sea  to  vanish.”

® Literally,  “hot  and  cold,”

* I.e.  set  up  a graven  image  as  God.


THE  WORSHIPPER  OF  THE  GOLDEN  CALF  327

vain  boast,  (while  there  are)  a hundred  disputes  as  to  the
prophetic  mission  of  one  like  me?

Through  asinine  dullness  thou  didst  cast  thyself  down  in  2050
worship  before  a cow  (calf);  thy  understanding  fell  a prey  to
Samiri’s  magic.

Thou  didst  steal  thine  eye  away  from  the  Light  of  the
Glorious  (God) : here  is  plenteous  folly  for  thee  and  the  essence
of  perdition !

Fie  upon  such  an  understanding  and  (faculty  of)  choice  as
thou  hast!  ’Twere  fitting  to  kill  a mine  of  folly  like  thee.

The  golden  calf  uttered  a cr\';  prithee,  what  did  it  say,  that
all  this  desire  (for  it)  blossomed  in  the  fools?

Ye  have  seen  from  me  many  a thing  more  wonderful  than
that,  but  how  should  every  rascal  accept  God?”

What  carries  awav  (enraptures)  worthless  folk?  Worthless-  2055
ness.  What  pleases  futile  folk?  Futility,

Because  every  kind  is  carried  away  (enraptured)  by  its  own
kind:  how  should  the  ox  turn  its  face  towards  the  fierce  lion?

How  should  the  wolf  bear  love  for  Joseph,  unless,  perchance,
through  cunning,  in  order  to  devour  him?

When  it  is  delivered  from  wolfishness,  it  will  become  familiar
(with  him) ; like  the  dog  of  the  Cave,  it  will  become  one  of  the
sons  of  Adam.

When  Abu  Bakr  smelt  (made  his  first  acquaintance  with)
Mohammed,  he  said,  “This  is  not  a face  that  lies;”

(But)  since  Bii  Jahl  was  not  of  those  in  sympathy  (with  20  -0
Mohammed),  he  saw  a hundred  cleavings  of  the  moon^,  and
believed  not.

The  sorrowful  (lover  of  God),  whose  bowl  has  fallen  from
the  rooT — we  (would)  hide  the  Truth  from  him,  (but)  it  does
not  become  hid ;

While  he  that  is  ignorant  (of  God)  and  a stranger  to  His
sorrow  (love) — how  often  has  it  been  shown,  and  he  has  not
seen  it  1

The  mirror  of  the  heart  must  be  clear,  in  order  that  you  may
know  therein  the  ugly  form  from  the  beautiful.

How  the  man  of  sincere  counsel,  after  having  done  his  utmost  in

{the  way  of)  admonition,  took  leave  of  him  who  was  deluded  by

{his  confidence  in)  the  bear.

That  Moslem  left  the  foolish  man  and  quickly,  saying  La  hawl
under  his  lip  (breath),  went  back  (to  his  abode).

He  said,  “Inasmuch  as  from  my  earnestness  in  admonition  2065

‘ I.e.  a hundred  miracles  like  the  famous  miracle  of  the  cleaving  of  the
moon.

- I.e.  “who  has  fallen  into  ecstasy.”


328  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

and  from  (my)  disputing  (with  him),  (the  only  result  is  that)
vain  fancies  are  being  born  in  his  mind  more  (and  more),

Therefore  the  road  of  admonition  and  counsel  has  become
barred:  the  command,  ‘ Turn  aside  from  them,’  has  arrived.”

When  your  remedy  increases  the  disease,  then  (leave  him
who  will  not  be  cured,  and)  tell  your  story  to  one  that  seeks  (to
hear  the  Truth).  Read  (the  chapter  of  the  Qur’an,  which  begins
with  the  word)  ‘Abasa  (he  frowned) :

“As  the  blind  man  has  come  seeking  the  Truth^,  ’tis  not  meet
to  wound  his  breast  (by  turning  aside  from  him)  on  account  of
his  poverty.

Thou  (Mohammed)  art  eager  for  the  great  ones  to  take  the
right  way,  in  order  that  the  common  folk  may  learn  from  the
rulers.

2070  O Ahmad  (Mohammed),  thou  hast  seen  that  a company  of
princes  have  become  ready  to  listen  (to  thee),  and  thou  art
pleased  (with  the  hope)  that,  maybe.

These  chieftains  will  become  good  friends  of  the  Religion
(Islam),  (for)  they  are  lords  over  the  Arabs  and  the  Abyssinians,

(And  that)  the  fame  of  this  will  pass  beyond  Basra  and  Tabiik,
since  ‘people  follow  the  religion  of  their  kings.’

For  this  cause  thou  hast  averted  thy  face  from  the  blind  man
that  was  led  into  the  right  way,  and  hast  become  vexed.

Saying  (to  him),  ‘This  gathering  (of  strangers)  seldom  falls
out  so  opportunely,  (whereas)  you  are  one  of  my  friends,  and
your  time  is  ample.

2075  You  are  urgent  with  me  at  an  inconvenient  time.  I give  you
this  admonition,  (but)  not  in  anger  and  strife.’

O Ahmad,  in  the  sight  of  God  this  one  blind  man  is  better
than  a hundred  emperors  and  a hundred  viziers.

Take  heed,  remember  (the  adage),  ‘ Alen  are  mines  ’ : one  mine
mav  be  more  than  a hundred  thousand.

The  mine  of  lurking  ruby  and  cornelian  is  better  than  myriads
of  mines  of  copper.

O Ahmad,  here  riches  have  no  use;  a breast  is  wanted,  full
of  love  and  pain  and  sighs.

2oSo  The  blind  man  of  enlightened  heart  is  come ; do  not  shut  the
door;  give  him  counsel,  for  counsel  is  his  right.

If  two  or  three  fools  have  disbelieved  in  thee,  how  shouldst
thou  be  soured  when  thou  art  a mine  of  candy?

If  two  or  three  fools  impute  falsehood  to  thee,  God  is  giving
testimony  on  thy  behalf.”

He  (iVIohammed)  said,  “I  am  unconcerned  with  the
acknowledgment  of  the  world;  what  care  (for  the  w'orld)  hath
he  whose  witness  is  God?


^ Verses  2068-2082  are  a free  paraphrase  of  Qur’an,  lxxx.  i-io.


MOHAMMED  AND  THE  BLIND  MAN  329

If  a bat  receives  anything  agreeable  (to  it)  from  a sun,  ’tis  a
proof  that  that  (sun)  is  not  the  (real)  sun.

The  disgust  of  the  wretched  bats  is  a proof  that  I am  the  -0S5
shining  glorious  sun.

If  the  beetle  feels  a desire  for  some  (particular)  rose-water,
that  constitutes  a proof  of  its  not  being  rose-water.

If  any  false  coin  is  eager  for  the  touchstone,  uncertainty  and
doubt  enter  into  (the  fact  of)  its  being  a touchstone.

The  thief  wants  night,  not  day — mark  this ! I am  not  night,

I am  day,  for  I shine  throughout  the  world.

I am  discerning,  I am  exceedingly  discriminating  and  sieve-
like, so  that  the  chaff  finds  no  passage  through  me.

I make  the  flour  distinct  from  the  bran,  in  order  to  show  that  :;o^o
this  is  the  (external)  forms,  and  that  the  (inward)  souls  (essences).

I am  as  the  scales  of  God  in  the  world ; I reveal  (the  difference
of)  every  light  thing  from  the  hea\'}'.

A calf  deems  the  cow  God ; the  ass  (deems  God)  one  who  is
fond  (of  it)  and  that  which  accords  with  its  desires^.

I am  not  a cow,  that  the  calf  should  be  fond  of  me ; I am  not
thistles,  that  a camel  should  browse  on  me.

He  (the  unbeliever)  supposes  that  he  has  done  me  an  injurj' ;
nay,  he  has  wiped  away  the  dust  from  my  mirror."


Hotu  the  madman  sought  to  ingratiate  himself  icith  Jdlinus
{Galen),  and  houc  Jdlinus  was  afraid.

Jalmus  said  to  his  companions,  “ Let  (one  of  you)  give  me  ::o.j5
such-and-such  a medicine.”

Then  said  that  person  to  him,  “O  master  of  (many)  sciences,
this  medicine  is  sought  (as  a cure)  for  madness.

Far  be  this  from  thy  intellect!  Say  no  more  (about  it).”  He
replied,  “A  madman  turned  his  face  to  me.

Looked  pleasantly  on  my  face  for  a while,  made  little  eyes  at
me,  and  plucked  my  sleeve.

Had  there  not  been  in  me  congeniality  with  him,  how  would
that  ill-favoured  man  have  turned  his  face  towards  me?

Had  he  not  seen  (in  me)  one  of  his  own  kind,  how  should  he  2100
have  approached?  How  should  he  have  thrown  himself  upon
(attached  himself  to)  one  of  another  kind?”

When  two  persons  come  into  touch  with  each  other,  without
any  doubt  there  is  something  in  common  between  them.

How  should  a bird  fly  except  with  its  own  kind  ? The  society
of  the  uncongenial  is  the  grave  and  the  tomb.


‘ Literally,  “suitable  goods.”


330


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II


The  cause  of  a bird’s  flying  and  feeding  with  a bird  that  is
not  of  its  own  kind.

Said  a certain  sage,  “ I saw  a crow  running  about  with  a stork.

I marvelled  long^,  and  I investigated  their  case,  in  order  that
I might  find  the  clue  (as  to)  what  it  was  that  they  had  in  common^.

105  When,  amazed  and  bewildered,  I approached  them,  (then)
indeed  I saw  that  both  of  them  were  lame.”

In  particular,  (how  should)  a royal  falcon,  which  is  of  the
highest  heaven,  (consort)  with  an  owl,  which  is  of  the  low  earth?

That  one  is  the  sun  of  Tlliyyiin,  while  the  other  is  a bat  which
belongs  to  Sijji'n.

That  one  is  a luminary,  free  from  every  defect,  while  this
(other)  one  is  a blind  man  begging  at  every  door.

That  one  is  a moon  that  strikes  (its  beams)  upon  tbe  Pleiades,
while  this  (other)  one  is  a worm  that  cleaves  to  dung.

110  That  one  has  the  face  of  a Joseph,  the  breath  of  a Jesus,  while
this  (other)  one  is  a wolf  or  an  ass  with  a bell.

That  one  has  flown  to  Spacelessness,  while  this  (other)  one
is  in  the  straw-barn,  like  the  dogs.

With  the  tongue  of  (unspoken)  meaning  the  rose  is  saying  to
the  beetle  this — “O  stinking  (creature)*.

If  thou  art  fleeing  from  the  rose-bed,  doubtless  that  aversion
(shown  by  thee)  is  (a  sign  of)  the  perfection  of  the  rose-garden.

My  jealousy  (sense  of  dignity)  smites  thee  on  the  head  with  a
baton,  (warning  thee  to)  keep  far  away  from  here,  O vile  one;

1 15  For  if,  base  wretch,  thou  shouldst  mLx  with  me,  it  will  be
thought  that  thou  art  of  my  stock^.

For  nightingales  the  garden  is  the  proper  place;  for  the
beetle  the  best  home  is  in  ordure.”

Since  God  has  kept  me  pure  from  filth,  how  were  it  seemly
to  appoint  a foul  one  for  (companionship  with)  me?

I had  (in  me)  a vein  of  them  (of  their  nature).  He  (God)  cut
it  out:  how  (then)  will  he  with  the  vein  of  evil  attain  unto  me?

One  mark  of  Adam  from  eternity  was  this,  that  the  angels
should  lay  their  heads  (on  the  ground)  before  him,  because  it
was  his  place  (proper  to  his  dignity).

120  pother  mark  was  that  Iblis,  saying,  “I  am  the  king  and
chief,”  should  not  lay  down  his  head  before  him

But  if  Iblis  too  had  become  a worshipper  (of  Adam),  he  (Adam)
would  not  have  been  Adam ; he  would  have  been  another.

At  once  the  worship  of  every  angel  is  the  test®  of  him,  and
the  denial  (of  him)  by  that  enemy  (Iblis)  is  the  proof  of  him.


* Literally,  “ I remained  in  astonishment.”

■ Literally,  “what  (was)  the  common  quantity.”

’ Literally,  “with  stinking  armpits.”  1 Literally,  “of  my  mine.”

‘ Literally,  “the  balance  (in  which  he  is  wxighed).”


SPIRITUAL  AFFINITY


331

At  once  the  acknowledgment  (made)  by  the  angels  is  witness
for  him,  and  the  disbelief  of  that  petty  cur  (Iblis)  is  witness  for
him.


Conclusion  of  the  {story  concerning  the)  trust  of  that  deluded
man  in  the  fawningness  of  the  bear.

The  man  fell  asleep,  and  the  bear  kept  driving  the  flies  away,
but  in  spite  of  him  they  soon  came  back  again.

Several  times  he  drove  them  from  the  youth’s  face,  but  soon  .;i25
they  came  hurrying  back  once  more.

The  bear  was  enraged  with  the  flies  and  went  off.  He  picked
up  a very  big  stone  from  the  mountain-side.

He  fetched  the  stone,  and  saw  the  flies  again  settled  comfort-
ablyi^  on  the  face  of  the  sleeper.

He  took  up  that  millstone  and  struck  at  the  flies,  in  order  that
they  might  retire.

The  stone  made  powder-  of  the  sleeping  man’s  face,  and
published  to  the  whole  world  this  adage — .

“The  love  of  a fool  is  for  sure  the  love  of  a bear:  his  hate  is  2130
love  and  his  love  is  hate.”

His  promise  is  infirm  and  corrupt  and  feeble ; his  word  stout
and  his  performance  lean.

Do  not  believe  him,  even  if  he  take  an  oath:  the  man  whose
speech  is  false  will  break  his  oath.

Inasmuch  as,  without  the  oath,  his  word  was  a lie,  do  not  be
entrapped®  by  his  deceit  and  oath.

His  fleshly  soul  is  in  command,  and  his  intellect  captive;  even
suppose  that  he  has  sworn  on  a hundred  thousand  Qur’ans,

(Yet),  since  without  (taking)  an  oath  he  will  break  his  pact — 2135
if  he  take  an  oath,  he  will  break  that  too;

Because  the  fleshly  soul  becomes  (all)  the  more  infuriated  by
your  binding  it  with  a heavy  oath.

When  a captive^  puts  bonds  upon  a governor®,  the  governor
will  burst  them  and  leap  out ;

He  will  bang  those  bonds  on  his  (the  captive’s)  head  in  wrath,
dashing  the  oath  in  his  face.

Wash  your  hands  (give  up  hope)  of  his  (obeying  the  Divine
command),  “ Fulfil  your  promises”',  do  not  say  to  him,  ” Keep
your  oaths.”

But  he  that  knows  to  whom  he  (really)  makes  the  promise  will  2140
make  his  body  (thin)  as  a thread  and  wind  (himself)  about  Him.


* Literally,  “having  taken  a place  of  comfort.”
- Literally,  “poppy-seeds.”

^ Literally,  “do  not  fall  into  buttermilk.”

* The  intellect.

® The  fleshly  soul.


332


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II


How  Mustafa  {Mohammed),  on  whom  be  peace,  went  to  visit  the  sick
Companion;  and  an  exposition  of  the  profit  of  visiting  the  sick.

A notable  amongst  the  Companions  (of  Mohammed)  fell  ill,
and  in  that  illness  of  his  became  (thin)  as  a thread.

Mustafa  went  to  visit  him,  since  his  (Mustafa’s)  nature  was
all  kindness  and  generosity.

There  is  profit  in  your  visiting  the  sick : the  profit  thereof  is
returning  to  you  again.

The  first  profit  is  that  the  sick  person  may  perchance  be  a
Qutb  and  a glorious  (spiritual)  king;

2145  And  if  he  be  not  a Qutb,  he  may  be  a friend  of  the  (Sufi)  Way ;

if  he  be  not  the  king,  he  may  be  the  cavalier  of  the  host.

Deem  it,  then,  incumbent  (on  you)  to  attach  yourselves  to
the  friends  of  the  Way,  whosoever  it  may  be,  and  whether  (he
be)  footman  or  rider.

And  if  he  be  a foe  (to  you),  still  this  kindness  is  good,  for  by
kindness  many  a foe  hath  been  made  a friend ;

And  though  he  do  not  become  a friend,  his  enmity  is  lessened,
because  kindness  becomes  the  balm  for  enmity.

There  are  many  profits  besides  these,  but  I am  afraid  of  being
tedious,  good  friend.

2130  The  gist  (of  the  matter)  is  this:  be  the  friend  of  the  whole
community  (of  Siiffs) : like  the  idol-maker,  carve  a friend  out  of
the  stone.

Because  the  throng  and  multitude  of  a caravan  will  break  the
backs  and  spears  of  the  highwaymen.

Inasmuch  as  you  have  not  the  heart’s  two  eyes,  O contu-
macious man,  so  that  you  cannot  distinguish  firewood  from
aloes- wood,

(You  may  despair  of  finding  the  true  friend  of  God;  but)
since  there  exists  a treasure  in  the  world,  do  not  grieve:  deem
no  ruined  place  empty  of  treasure.

Betake  yourself  to  every  dervish  at  random,  and  when  you
find  the  mark  (of  the  true  saint),  frequent  (him)  assiduously.

2153  As  the  inward-seeing  eye  was  not  (granted)  to  you,  think
always  (that)  the  treasure  (may  be)  in  everybody.

How  the  high  God  revealed  to  Moses,  on  whom  be  peace,  {the
words),  “ Wherefore  didst  not  thou  visit  Me  in  sickness?”

To  Moses  there  came  from  God  this  reproach:  “ O thou  who
hast  seen  the  rising  of  the  moon  from  thy  bosom.

Thou  whom  I have  illumined  with  the  Divine  Light ! I am
God,  I fell  sick,  thou  earnest  not.”

Moses  said,  ‘ ‘ O Thou  transcendent  in  Thy  glory.  Thou  art  clear
of  loss  (defect).  What  mystery  is  this?  Explain  this,  O Lord!”


MOHAMMED  AND  THE  SICK  COMPANION  333

God  said  unto  him  again,  “Wherefore  in  Aly  sickness  didst
not  thou  kindly  ask  after  Me?”

He  answered,  “O  Lord,  Thou  hast  no  imperfection.  (Mv)  2100
understanding  is  lost;  unfold  (the  meaning  of)  these  words.”

God  said,  “Yea;  a favourite  and  chosen  slave  (of  Mine)  fell
sick.  I am  he.  Consider  well !

His  excusability  (infirmity)  is  My  excusability,  his  sickness  is
Aly  sickness.”

Whoever  wishes  to  sit  wdth  God,  let  him  sit  in  the  presence
of  the  saints.

If  you  are  broken  off  (divided)  from  the  presence  of  the
saints,  you  are  in  perdition,  because  you  are  a part  without  the
whole.

Whomsoever  the  Devil  cuts  off  from  the  noble  (saints),  he  2165
finds  him  without  any  one  (to  help  him),  and  he  devours  his
head.

To  go  for  one  moment  a single  span  apart  from  the
community'  (of  saints)  is  (a  result  of)  the  Devil’s  guile.  Hearken,
and  know  (it)  welL.

How  the  gardener  isolated  the  Sufi,  the  jurist,  and  the
descendant  of  ‘AH  from  one  another.

A gardener,  when  he  looked  into  the  orchard,  saw  three  men
in  his  orchard,  as  (though  they  were)  thieves:

A jurist  and  a Sharif  and  a Sufi:  each  one  an  impudent,
knavish  and  perfidious  rogue.

He  said,  “I  have  a hundred  arguments  against  these  fellows,
but  they  are  united,  and  a united  party  is  (a  source  of)  strength.

I cannot  cope  singly  with  three  persons,  so  first  I will  sunder  2170
them  from  one  another.

I will  isolate  each  one  from  the  others,  and  when  each  is  alone,

I will  tear  out  his  moustache.”

He  employed  a ruse  and  got  the  Stiff  away,  that  he  might
poison^  (the  minds  of)  his  friends  against  him.

He  said  to  the  Stiff,  “ Go  to  the  house  and  fetch  a rug  for
these  companions  (of  yours).”

(As  soon  as)  the  Stiff  departed,  he  (the  gardener)  said  in
private  to  the  two  friends,  “Thou  art  a jurist,  and  this  (other)
is  a renowned  Sharif.

’Tis  according  to  thy  legal  decision  that  we  eat  a loaf  (of  21-5
bread) ; ’tis  by  the  wings  of  thy  knowledge  that  we  fly.

And  this  other  is  our  prince  and  sovereign:  he  is  a Sayyid,
he  is  of  the  House  of  Mustafa  (Alohammed).

* Reading  with  A.  D.  Bui.  S Cf.  the  Introduction  to

Vol.  I.  p.  9,  note  I,  where  the  number  of  the  verse  (T  I T “ ) has  been  acci-
dentally omitted.  * Literally,  “corrupt.”


334  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Who  is  this  gluttonous  vile  Siifi,  that  he  should  associate
with  kings  like  you?

When  he  comes  (back),  drive  him  away^  and  take  possession
of  ^ my  orchard  and  field  for  a week.

What  is  (it  to  offer  you)  my  orchard?  My  life  is  yours,  O ye
who  have  (always)  been  (as  dear  to  me)  as  my  right  eye.”

2 1 So  He  made  evil  suggestions  and  beguiled  them.  Ah,  one  must

not  patiently  suffer  the  loss  of  friends.

When  they  had  turned  the  Sufi  away  and  he  was  gone,  the
enemy  went  after  him  with  a stout  cudgel.

“O  dog,”  he  cried,  “is  it  Sufism^  that  of  a sudden  you  come
into  my  orchard  in  spite  (of  me)?

Did  Junayd  or  Bayazid  direct  you  to  behave  in  this  way?
From  what  Shaykh  and  Pir  did  this  (instruction)  reach  you?”

He  beat  the  Sufi  when  he  found  him  alone;  he  half  killed
him  and  cracked  his  head.

2185  Said  the  Sufi,  “Mine  is  over,  but  O comrades,  take  good
care  of  yourselves!

Ye  regarded  me  as  an  alien.  Look  out!  I am  not  more  alien
than  this  scoundrel.

That  (cup)  which  I have  drunk  must  be  drunk  by  you,  and
such  a draught  as  this  is  the  due  of  every  cad.”

This  world  is  (like)  the  mountain,  and  (all)  thy  words  come
back  to  thee  from  the  echo.

After  the  gardener  had  finished  with  the  Siifi,  he  invented  a
pretext  of  the  same  kind  as  the  former,

2190  Saying,  “O  my  Sharif,  go  to  the  house,  for  I have  baked
(some)  thin  cakes  of  bread  for  breakfast.

At  the  house-door  tell  Qaymaz  to  fetch  those  cakes  and  the
goose.”

Having  sent  him  off,  he  said  (to  the  other),  “O  keen-sighted
one,  thou  art  a jurist;  this  is  manifest  and  sure.

(But)  he  (thy  friend)  a Sharif!  ’Tis  an  absurd  claim  he  is
making.  Who  knows  who  committed  adultery  with  his  mother?

Will  ye  set  your  hearts  (rely)  on  woman  and  the  deeds  of
woman?  (Will  ye  acknowledge  her  to  be  of)  weak  mind,  and
then  (put)  trust  (in  her)?

2195  He  has  tacked  himself  on  to  ‘Ali  and  to  the  Prophet — and
there  is  many  a fool  in  the  w'orld  (who  will  believe  him).”

Whoever  is  (born)  of  adultery  and  (is  one)  of  the  adulterous
will  think  this  concerning  the  men  of  God.

Any  one  whose  head  is  made  giddy  by  (his  own)  gyrations
sees  the  house  turning  round  like  himself.

What  that  vain  talker,  the  gardener,  said  was  (indicative  of)

‘ Literally,  “make  cotton  of  him,”  “comb  him  out.”

2 Literally,  “strike  upon,”  “lay  (hands)  on.”

® Read


THE  GARDENER  AND  THE  THREE  FRIENDS  335

his  (own)  condition ; (it  was)  far  from  (being  applicable  to)  the
descendants  of  the  Prophet.

If  he  had  not  been  the  issue  of  apostates,  how  should  he  have
spoken  thus  as  regards  (the  Prophet’s)  House?

He  used  spells  (guileful  words),  and  the  jurist  hearkened  to  ::^’oo
them.  (Then)  that  insolent  bully  w-ent  after  him  (the  Sharif).

He  said,  “O  ass,  who  invited  you  into  this  orchard?  Has
robbery  been  left  to  you  as  an  inheritance  by  the  Prophet?

The  lion’s  cub  resembles  him  (the  lion):  in  what  do  you
resemble  the  Prophet?  Tell  (me  that)!”

The  man  (the  gardener)  who  had  sought  refuge  (in  craft)  did
to  the  Sharif  that  which  a Kharijite  would  do  to  the  Family  of
Yd-sin  (Mohammed).

(I  marvel)  what  hatred  devils  and  ghouls  like  Yazid  and
Shimr  always  have  towards  the  Prophet’s  Family.

The  Sharif  was  devastated  by  the  blows  of  that  ruffian.  He  2^05
said  to  the  jurist,  “ I have  jumped  out  of  the  water.

Do  thou  stand  fast,  now  that  thou  art  left  alone  and  deprived
(of  our  support).  Be  as  a drum,  suffer  blows  on  the  belly!

If  I am  not  a Sharif  and  worthy  (of  thee)  and  a (true)  bosom-
friend,  (at  any  rate)  I am  no  worse  for  thee  than  such  a ruffian
as  this.”

He  (the  gardener)  finished  with  him  (the  Sharif),  and  came
up,  saying,  “O  jurist,  what  (sort  of)  jurist  are  you,  O you
disgrace  to  every  fool?

Is  it  your  legal  opinion,  O convicted  thief  \ that  you  may
come  (into  my  orchard)  without  asking  leave-?

Have  you  read  such  a license  in  the  Wasit,  or  has  this  question  2210
been  (so  decided)  in  the  Muhit}"

“You  are  right,”  he  replied;  “beat  (me);  you  have  got  the
upper  hand.  This  is  the  fit  penalty  for  him  that  parts  from
friends.”


Returning  to  the  story  of  the  sick  man  and  the  visit  paid  {to  him)  by
the  Prophet,  God  bless  him  and  grant  him  peace!

This  visiting  of  the  sick  is  for  the  sake  of  this  (spiritual)
attachment®,  and  this  attachment  is  pregnant  with  a hundred
lovingkindnesses .

The  peerless  Prophet  went  to  visit  the  sick  man ; he  found  that
Companion  at  the  last  gasp.

When  you  become  far  from  the  presence  of  the  saints,  you
have  in  reality  become  far  from  God.

Inasmuch  as  the  result  of  parting  from  fellow-travellers  is  2215


^ Literally,  “one  whose  hand  has  been  cut  off.’’

“ Literally,  “without  saying,  ‘Is  it  the  command.-  ’ "
“ See  V.  2145.


336  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

sorrow,  how  is  separation  from  the  countenance  of  the  kings
(saints)  less  (grievous)  than  that?

Hasten  every  moment  to  seek  the  shadow  (protection)  of
(those)  kings,  that  by  means  of  that  shadow  you  may  become
superior  to  the  sun.

If  you  have  a journey  (to  make),  go  with  this  intention;  and
if  it  be  (that  you  stay)  at  home,  neglect  not  this.


How  a certain  Shaykh  said  to  Bdyazid,  “I  am  the  Ka‘ba:
perform  a circumambulation  round  me.'’

Bayazid,  the  Shaykh  of  the  community,  was  hurrying  to
Mecca  for  the  greater  pilgrimage  fhajj)  and  the  lesser  (^umrd).

In  every  city  to  which  he  went  he  would  at  first  make  search
after  the  venerable  (saints).

JO  He  would  roam  about,  asking,  “Who  is  there  in  the  city  that
is  relying  on^  (spiritual)  insight?”

God  has  said,  “Whithersoever  thou  goest  in  thy  travels,  thou
must  first  seek  after  a (holy)  man.”

Go  in  quest  of  a treasure,  for  (worldly)  profit  and  loss  come
second:  regard  them  as  the  branch  (not  as  the  root).

Whoever  sows  is  in  quest  of  wheat;  the  chaff  comes  to  him
indeed,  (but  only)  secondarily.

If  you  sow  chaff,  no  wheat  will  come  up : seek  a man,  seek  a
man,  a man!

J5  When  it  is  the  season  of  pilgrimage,  go  in  quest  of  the  Ka‘ba ;
when  you  have  gone  (with  that  purpose),  Mecca  also  will  be  seen.

In  the  Mi‘rdj  (Ascension  of  the  Prophet)  the  quest  was  (for)
vision  of  the  Beloved ; ’twas  but  secondarily  that  the  empyrean
and  the  angels  were  also  shown.


Story.

A novice  one  day  built  a new  house ; the  Pir  came  (and)  saw
his  house.

The  Shaykh  said  to  his  new  disciple — he  put  to  the  test  him
that  had  good  thoughts —

“Wherefore  hast  thou  made  a window,  O comrade?”  Said
he,  “ In  order  that  light  may  come  in  by  this  way.”

30  He  (the  Shaykh)  said,  “That  is  (only)  the  branch  (secondary
object);  (thy)  want  (desire)  must  be  this,  (namely)  that  through
this  channel  thou  mayst  hear  the  call  to  prayer.”

Bayazid,  on  his  journey  (to  the  Ka'ba),  sought  much  to  find
some  one  that  was  the  Khizr  of  his  time.

He  espied  an  old  man  with  a stature  (bent)  like  the  new  moon ;
he  saw  in  him  the  majesty  and  (lofty)  speech  of  (holy)  men;

1 Literally,  “supporting  himself  on  the  pillars  of.”


BAYAZID  AND  THE  SHAYKH  337

His  eyes  sightless,  and  his  heart  (illumined)  as  the  sun:  like
an  elephant  dreaming  of  Hindustan.

With  closed  eyes,  asleep,  he  beholds  a hundred  delights;
when  he  opens  (his  eyes),  he  sees  not  those  (delights) — oh,
(’tis)  wonderful!

Many  a wonder  is  made  manifest  in  sleep : in  sleep  the  heart  2235
becomes  a window.

One  that  is  awake  and  dreams  fair  dreams,  he  is  the  knower
(of  God) : smear  your  eyes  with^  his  dust.

He  (Bayazid)  sat  down  before  him  and  asked  about  his
condition;  he  found  him  to  be  a dervish  and  also  a family  man.

He  (the  old  man)  said,  “Whither  art  thou  bound,  O Bayazid?

To  what  place  wouldst  thou  take  the  baggage  of  travel  in  a
strange  land?”

Bayazid  answered,  “I  start  for  the  Ka‘ba  at  daybreak.”
“Eh,”  cried  the  other,  “what  hast  thou  as  provisions  for  the
road?”

“I  have  two  hundred  silver  dirhems,”  said  he;  “look,  (they  2240
are)  tied  fast  in  the  comer  of  my  cloak.”

He  said,  “Make  a circuit  round  me  seven  times,  and  reckon
this  (to  be)  better  than  the  circumambulation  (of  the  Ka‘ba)  in
the  pilgrimage ;

And  lay  those  dirhems  before  me,  O generous  one.  Know'
that  thou  hast  made  the  greater  pilgrimage  and  that  thy  desire
has  been  achieved ;

(That)  thou  hast  (also)  performed  the  lesser  pilgrimage  and
gained  the  life  everlasting;  (that)  thou  hast  become  pure  {sdf)
and  sped  up  (the  Hill  of)  Purity  {Safa).

By  the  truth  of  the  Tmth  (God)  whom  thy  soul  hath  seen,

(I  swear)  that  He  hath  chosen  me  above  His  House.

Albeit  the  Ka‘ba  is  the  House  of  His  religious  service,  my  2245
form  too,  in  which  I was  created,  is  the  House  of  His  inmost
consciousness.

Never  since  God  made  the  Ka‘ba  hath  He  gone  into  it,  and
none  but  the  Living  (God)  hath  ever  gone  into  this  House  (of
mine).

When  thou  hast  seen  me,  thou  hast  seen  God:  thou  hast
circled  round  the  Ka‘ba  of  Sincerity.

To  serve  me  is  to  obey  and  glorify  God:  beware  thou  think
not  that  God  is  separate  from  me.

Open  thine  eyes  well  and  look  on  me,  that  thou  mayst  behold
the  Light  of  God  in  man.”

Bayazid  gave  heed  to  those  mystic  sayings,  and  put  them  in  ^250
his  ear  as  a golden  ring.

Through  him  (the  old  man),  Bayazid  came  into  an  increase
(of  spiritual  endowment) : the  adept  at  last  attained  unto  the  end.

^ Literally,  “draw  into  your  eyes.”


N >i


338


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II


How  the  Prophet — God  bless  and  save  him! — perceived  that  the
cause  of  that  person  s sickness  was  irreverence  in  prayer.

When  the  Prophet  saw  the  sick  man,  he  dealt  sweetly  and
tenderly  with  that  familiar  friend

He  became  alive  when  he  saw  the  Prophet:  you  might  say,
that  moment  created  him.

He  said,  “Sickness  has  given  me  this  good  fortune,  that  this
Sultan  has  come  to  my  side  at  morn,

55  So  that  health  and  well-being  have  accrued  to  me  from  the
arrival  of  this  King  who  is  without  retinue.

O happy  pain  and  sickness  and  fever ! O blessed  anguish  and
wakefulness  in  the  night!

Lo,  in  (my)  old  age  God  of  His  grace  and  bounty  hath
bestowed  on  me  such  a sickness  and  malady  1

He  too  hath  given  me  pain  in  the  back,  so  that  every  midnight
I cannot  help  springing  up  quickly  from  sleep.

In  order  that  I may  not  slumber  all  night  like  a buffalo,  God
of  His  grace  hath  given  me  pains.

6o  Through  this  infirmity  the  mercy  of  Kings  has  been  aroused,
and  Hell’s  threatening  of  me  has  been  silenced.”

Pain  is  a treasure,  for  there  are  mercies  in  it:  the  kernel
becomes  fresh  when  you  scrape  off  the  rind.

O brother,  (to  dwell  in)  a dark  and  cold  place,  to  endure
patiently  sorrow  and  weakness  and  pain.

Is  the  Fountain  of  Life  and  the  cup  of  (spiritual)  intoxication,
for  those  heights  are  all  in  lowliness.

That  Spring  is  implied  in  autumn,  and  that  autumn  is
(fulfilled)  in  the  Spring : do  not  flee  from  it.

65  Be  a fellow-traveller  with  grief,  agree  with  desolation,  seek
long  (lasting)  life  in  thy  death  (to  self).

Do  not  listen  to  what  thy  fleshly  soul  says,  that  this  place  (of
self- mortification)  is  bad,  inasmuch  as  her  doings  are  contrary
(to  thy  spiritual  advancement).

Do  thou  oppose  her,  for  such  (is  the)  injunction  (that)  has
come  from  the  prophets  in  the  world.

It  becomes  necessary  to  take  counsel  concerning  things  to  be
done,  so  that  there  may  not  be  repentance  in  the  end.

The  community  said,  “With  whom  shall  we  take  counsel?”
The  prophets  answered,  “With  intellect,  (which  is)  the  Imam
(leader).”

;o  He  (the  questioner)  said,  “ (But)  if  a child  should  come  in,  or
a woman  who  has  no  judgement  or  clear  understanding.”

“Take  counsel  with  her,”  said  he  (the  prophet),  “and  do
the  contrary  of  what  she  bids  (thee),  and  go  thy  way.”

* Literally,  “the  friend  of  the  Cave.”


MOHAMMED  AND  THE  SICK  COMPANION  339

Know  that  your  fleshly  soul  is  woman  and  worse  than  woman,
because  woman  is  a part  (of  evil),  but  your  fleshly  soul  is  evil
entire.

If  you  take  counsel  with  your  fleshly  soul,  oppose  that  vile
one  (in)  whatsoever  she  may  say.

If  she  bid  you  pray  and  fast — the  fleshly  soul  is  a great
plotter,  she  will  bring  some  plot  against  you  to  birth.

(When  you  take)  counsel  with  your  fleshly  soul  concerning
(your)  actions — ^v'hatsoever  she  tells  (you  to  do),  the  reverse
of  that  is  perfectly  right.

(If)  you  cannot  cope  with  her  and  her  contumacy,  go  to  a
friend  and  mix  with  him.

Mind  gains  strength  from  another  mind;  the  sugar-cane  is
made  perfect  by  the  sugar-cane.

I have  seen  (wondrous)  things  (arising)  from  the  deceitfulness
of  the  fleshly  soul,  for  by  her  magic  she  takes  away  the  faculties
of  discernment.

She  will  proffer  afresh  to  you  promises  that  she  has  broken
thousands  of  times.

If  your  life  be  prolonged ^ even  for  a hundred  years,  she  will
lay  before  you  a new  pretext  every  day.

She  utters  cold  (vain)  promises  (as  though)  warm  (from
the  heart);  (she  is)  a witch,  she  ties  up  the  manhood  of  a
man.

O (thou  who  art  the)  radiance  of  God,  Husamu’ddin,  come!
for  without  thee  no  herbs  will  grow  from  the  brackish  soil.

A curtain  has  been  let  down  from  heaven  because  ot  the
curse  of  one  whose  heart  is  sorely  vexed.

This  destiny  only  the  (Divine)  destiny  can  cure:  the  under-
standing of  His  creatures  is  stunned  at  His  destiny,  stunned.

The  black  serpent  that  was  (as)  a worm  fallen  on  the  road
has  become  a dragon;

(But)  in  thy  hand,  O thou  with  (love  for)  whom  the  soul  of
Moses  is  intoxicated,  the  dragon  or  serpent  became  (as)  the  rod
(in  the  hand  of  Moses).

God  gave  thee  command,  saying,  “ Take  it;  fear  not,  so  that
the  dragon  may  become  a rod  in  thy  hand.”

Hark,  show  the  white  hand,  O King:  out  of  the  black  nights
reveal  a new  dawn !

A hell  hath  blazed  forth ; breathe  (thy)  enchantment  over  it,
O thou  whose  breath  is  more  (excellent)  than  the  breath  of  the
sea.

She  (the  fleshly  soul)  is  the  guileful  sea  that  shows  (but)  a
(little)  foam ; she  is  the  hell  that  from  guile  shows  (but)  a (little)
heat.

She  appears  exiguous  in  your  eyes,  to  the  end  that  you  may

1 Literally,  “ grant  a respite.”


340  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

regard  her  as  feeble  and  that  your  wrath  may  be  stirred  (against
her) ;

Even  as  there  was  a dense  host  (of  infidels),  (but)  to  the
Prophet’s  eye  it  seemed  small,

So  that  the  Prophet  set  upon  them  without  (fear  of)  the  danger ;
but  if  he  had  deemed  (them)  more  (in  number),  he  would  have
acted  cautiously  in  that  (affair).

That  was  the  Divine  favour,  and  thou  wert  worthy  of  it,  O
Ahmad  (Mohammed);  else,  thou  wouldst  have  become  faint-
hearted.

2295  God  caused  the  outw'ard  and  inward  warfare  to  seem  little
to  him  and  his  Companions,

In  order  that  He  might  make  it  easy  for  him  to  gain  ease
(success),  and  that  he  might  not  turn  away  his  face  from
difficulty.

For  him,  (God’s)  causing  (the  warfare)  to  seem  little  was
victory,  since  God  was  his  friend  and  taught  him  the  way.

(But)  he  that  hath  not  God  for  his  victorious  support,  alas
if  the  fierce  lion  seem  to  him  a cat.

Alas  if  from  afar  he  see  a hundred  as  one,  so  that  in  vain
confidence  he  enters  on  the  fray.

2300  He  (God)  causes  a Prophet’s  sword  to  seem  a dart  and  makes
the  fierce  lion  appear  as  a cat,

To  the  end  that  the  fool  may  fall  boldly  to  fighting,  and  that
He  may  catch  them  by  this  device ;

(And  besides  He  is  acting  thus),  in  order  that  those  dolts  may
have  come  towards  the  fire-temple  by  means  of  their  own  feet
(by  their  own  free  will).

He  is  showing  (what  seems  to  you)  a blade  of  straw,  in  order
that  you  may  quickly  give  a puff  so  as  to  make  it  vanish  out  of
existence.

Beware!  for  that  straw  has  uprooted  mountains:  through  it
the  world  is  weeping,  while  it  (the  straw)  is  in  laughter.

2305  He  makes  this  river-water  seem  (only)  up  to  the  ankle,  (but)
a hundred  such  as  ‘Aj  son  of  ‘Anaq  have  been  drowned
therein.

He  makes  the  wave  of  blood  seem  to  him  a mound  of  musk :
He  makes  the  bottom  of  the  sea  seem  dry  land.

Blind  Pharaoh  deemed  that  sea  dry,  so  that  in  (the  pride  of
his)  manhood  and  strength  he  drave  into  it.

When  he  enters  (it),  he  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea : how  should
the  eye  of  Pharaoh  be  seeing?

The  eye  is  made  seeing  by  meeting  with  God:  how  should
God  become  the  confidant  of  every  fool?

2310  He  (the  fool)  sees  (what  he  thinks  is)  candy:  it  is,  in  sooth,
deadly  poison;  he  sees  (what  he  thinks  is)  the  road;  it  is,  in
sooth,  the  cry  of  the  ghoul  (luring  him  to  destruction).


THE  DEVICES  OF  GOD  341

O sky,  in  the  tribulation  of  (these)  latter  days  thou  art
revolving  swiftly;  pray,  give  (us)  time  (respite  and  relief).

Thou  art  a keen  dagger  to  assail  us ; thou  art  a poisoned  lancet
to  bleed  us.

O sky,  learn  mercy  from  the  Mercy  of  God:  do  not,  like  a
snake,  inflict  wounds  on  the  hearts  of  ants.

By  the  truth  of  Him  who  hath  set  the  wheel  of  thy  sphere
turning  above  this  (earthly)  abode,

(We  beseech  thee  to)  revolve  in  another  wise  and  show  mercy,  ^315
ere  thou  uproot  us.

(We  beseech  thee  by)  the  truth  of  thy  having  fostered  us  at
first,  so  that  our  (young)  shoot  grew  up  from  (the  nurture  given
by)  water  and  earth;

By  the  truth  of  that  King  who  created  thee  pure  and  displayed
so  many  cressets  in  thee.

Who  hath  kept  thee  so  flourishing  and  lasting  that  the
materialist  hath  thought  thee  (existent)  from  eternity.

Thanks  (to  God),  we  have  come  to  know  thy  beginning:  the
prophets  have  told  that  secret  of  thine.

A man  knows  that  a house  is  made  (at  some  time  or  other);  z^zo
the  spider  which  plays  idly  in  it  (knows)  not  (this).

How  should  the  gnat  know  of  what  date  this  garden  is? — for
’twas  born  in  spring,  and  its  death  is  in  the  (following)  winter.

The  worm  that  is  born  miserably  in  (dry)  wood — how  should
it  know  the  wood  at  the  time  when  it  was  a (sappy)  shoot?

And  if  the  worm  should  know  (this),  it  would  be  intellect  in
its  essential  substance;  the  worm  would  be  (only)  its  (outward)
form.

Intellect  shows  itself  (in  many)  guises,  (but)  like  the  Jinn  is
leagues  removed  from  them  (in  its  real  nature).

It  is  above  the  angels — what  occasion  is  there  for  (comparing  .’3^3
it  with)  the  Jinn?  (But)  you  have  the  wings  of  a gnat,  you  are
flying  downwards.

Although  your  intellect  is  flying  upward,  the  bird  of  your
conventional  notions  is  feeding  below.

Conventional  knowledge  is  the  bane  of  our  souls;  it  is  a
borrowed  thing,  but  we  rest  (at  ease  in  the  belief)  that  it  is  ours.

It  behoves  us  to  become  ignorant  of  this  (worldly)  wisdom;
(rather)  must  we  clutch  at  madness.

Always  flee  from  whatever  you  deem  profitable  to  your  (lower)
self:  drink  poison  and  spill  the  water  of  life.

Revile  any  one  that  praises  you:  lend  (both)  interest  and  23,0
capital  to  the  destitute.

Let  safety  go,  and  dwell  in  the  place  of  fear  (danger) : leave
reputation  behind  and  be  disgraced  and  notorious.

I have  tried  far-thinking  (provident)  intellect;  henceforth  I
will  make  myself  mad.


342


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II


How  Dalqak  excused  himself  to  the  Sayytd-i  Ajall  {who  asked
him)  why  he  had  married  a harlot.

One  night  the  Sayyid-i  Ajall  said  to  Dalqak,  “You  have
married  a harlot  in  haste.

You  ought  to  have  disclosed  this  (matter)  to  me,  so  that  we
might  have  made  a chaste  (woman)  your  wife.”

2335  Dalqak  replied,  “I  have  (already)  married  nine  chaste  and
virtuous  women:  they  became  harlots,  and  I wasted  away  with
grief.

I married  this  harlot  without  (previous)  acquaintance  (w'ith
her),  in  order  to  see  how  this  one  (also)  w'ould  turn  out  in  the
end.

Often  have  I tried  (sound)  intelligence;  henceforth  I will
seek  a nursery  for  insanity.”


How  an  inquirer  managed  to  draw  into  conversation  an
eminent  {saintly)  man  who  had  feigned  to  be  mad.

A certain  man  was  saying,  “I  want  some  one  of  intelligence,
(that)  I may  consult  him  about  a difficulty.”

One  said  to  him,  “In  our  city  there  is  nobody  of  intelligence
except  yonder  man  who  appears  to  be  mad.

2340  Look,  there  is  (one  named)  so-and-so:  mounted  on  a cane,
he  rides  (it  as  a cock-horse)  amongst  the  children.

He  is  possessed  of  judgement  and  (keen  as)  a spark  of  fire ;
he  is  as  the  sky  in  dignity,  and  as  the  stars  in  high  estate.

His  glory  has  become  the  (rational)  soul  of  the  Cherubim;
he  has  become  concealed  in  this  (feigned)  madness.”

But  you  must  not  account  every  madman  a (rational)  soul:
do  not,  like  Samiri,  lay  down  your  head  (in  w'orship)  to  a calf.

When  a manifest  saint  has  declared  unto  you  hundreds  of
thousands  of  unseen  things  and  hidden  mysteries,

2343  And  you  have  not  had  the  (proper)  understanding  and
knowledge,  (so  that)  you  have  not  distinguished  dung  from
aloes-wood —

Howq  when  the  saint  has  made  for  himself  a veil  of  madness,
will  you  recognise  him,  O blind  one?

If  your  eye  of  intuitive  certainty  is  open,  behold  a (spiritual)
captain  under  every  stone.

To  the  eye  that  is  open  and  (as)  a guide,  every  dervish-cloak
hath  a Moses  in  its  embrace.

’Tis  only  the  saint  (himself)  that  makes  the  saint  knowm  and
makes  fortunate  whomsoever  he  will.

2350  No  one  can  recognise  him  by  means  of  wdsdom  when  he  has
feigned  to  be  mad.


THE  SAINT  WHO  RODE  A COCK-HORSE


343

When  a seeing  thief  steals  from  a blind  man,  can  he  at  all
detect  (the  identity  of)  the  thief  (who  is)  in  the  act  of  passing?

The  blind  man  does  not  know  who  it  was  that  robljed  him,
even  though  the  wicked  thief  may  knock  against  him.

When  a dog  bites  a blind  ragged  mendicant,  how  should  he
recognise  that  ferocious  dog?


How  the  dog  attacked  the  mendicant  who  was  blind.

A dog  was  attacking,  as  (though  it  were)  a warlike  lion,  a
blind  mendicant  in  a certain  street.

The  dog  rushes  angrily  at  dervishes;  the  moon  smears  her
eyes  with  dust  of  (the  feet  of)  dervishes.

The  blind  man  was  made  helpless  by  the  dog’s  barking  and
by  (his)  fear  of  the  dog;  the  blind  man  began  to  pay  honour  to
the  dog,

Saying,  “ O prince  of  the  chase,  and  O lion  of  the  hunt,  thine
is  the  (upper)  hand:  refrain  thy  hand  from  me!” —

For,  (moved)  by  necessity,  that  (renowned)  philosopher  paid
honour  to  (one  vile  as)  the  tail  of  an  ass,  and  gave  him  the  title
of  “noble.”

He  (the  blind  man)  too,  of  necessity,  said,  “O  lion,  what
(good)  will  come  to  thee  from  such  a meagre  prey  as  I am?

Thy  friends  are  catching  onagers  in  the  desert;  thou  art
catching  a blind  man  in  the  street:  this  is  bad.

Thy  friends  seek  onagers  by  hunting  (them) ; thou  in  (mere)
malice  seekest  a blind  man  in  the  street.”

The  knowing  dog  has  made  the  onager  his  prey,  while  this
■worthless  dog  has  attacked  a blind  man.

When  the  dog  has  learned  the  knowledge  (imparted  to  him),
he  has  escaped  from  error:  he  hunts  lawful  prey  in  the
jungles.

When  the  dog  has  become  knowing  {‘dlim),  he  marches
briskly;  when  the  dog  has  become  a knower  of  God  {‘drif),  he
becomes  (as)  the  Men  of  the  Cave.

The  dog  has  come  to  know  who  is  the  Master  of  the  hunt.
O God,  what  is  that  knowing  light?

(If)  the  blind  man  knows  it  not,  ’tis  not  from  (his)  having
no  eye  (to  see) ; nay,  ’tis  because  he  is  drunken  with  ignorance.

Truly,  the  blind  man  is  not  more  eyeless  than  the  earth;  and
this  earth,  by  the  grace  of  God,  has  become  a seer  of  (God’s)
enemies.

It  saw  the  Light  of  Moses  and  showed  kindness  to  Moses;
(but)  Qarun  it  engulfed,  (for)  it  knew  Qanin.

It  quaked  for  the  destruction  of  every  false  pretender:  it
understood  (the  words  that  came)  from  God,  “ O earth,  swallow
{thy  water) I ”


344  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

2370  Earth  and  water  and  air  and  sparking  fire  are  unacquainted
with  us,  but  acquainted  with  God.

Contrariwise,  we  are  aware  of  (things)  other  than  God,  (but)
unaware  (heedless)  of  God  and  of  so  many  warners  (prophets).

As  a necessary  consequence,  they  (the  elements)  all  shrank
from  {accepting)  it  (the  trust  offered  to  them) : (the  edge  of)  their
impulse  to  partake  of  life  w'as  blunted.

They  said,  “We  all  are  averse  to  this  life,  (namely),  that  one
should  be  living  in  relation  to  created  beings  and  dead  in  rela-
tion to  God.”

When  he  (any  one)  remains  away  from  created  beings,  he  is
orphaned  (single):  for  intimacy  with  God,  the  heart  must  be
free  (from  relations  with  aught  besides).

2375  When  a thief  steals  some  article  of  property  from  a blind
man,  the  blind  man  is  blindly  lamenting.

Until  the  thief  say  to  him,  “ ’Tis  I that  stole  from  thee,  for
I am  an  artful  thief,”

How  should  the  blind  man  know  his  thief,  since  he  hath  not
the  eye’s  light  and  that  radiance  (of  vision)?

when  he  (the  thief)  speaks  (and  confesses),  at  once  take  tight
hold  of  him,  that  he  may  tell  the  marks  (descriptive)  of  the
(stolen)  goods.

The  Greater  Jihad  (Holy  War),  then,  consists  in  squeezing
(him)  to  the  dregs,  in  order  that  he  may  tell  what  he  has  stolen
and  what  he  has  carried  off.

2380  First,  he  has  stolen  your  eye-salve;  when  you  take  it  (from
him),  you  will  regain  (your)  insight.

The  goods  of  wisdom,  which  have  been  lost  by  (your)  heart,
are  certainly  to  be  found  with  the  man  of  heart  (the  saint).

The  blind  of  heart,  notwithstanding  (his  possession  of)  life
and  hearing  and  sight,  is  never  knowing  the  devilish  thief  by
the  traces  (which  he  leaves).

Seek  (that  knowledge)  from  the  man  of  heart;  do  not  seek
it  from  the  inanimate,  for  (all  other)  people  are  inanimate
beside  (in  comparison  with)  him.

The  seeker  of  counsel  approached  him  (the  saint  who  was
feigning  madness),  saying,  “O  father  who  hast  become  (as)  a
child,  tell  (me)  a secret.”

23S5  He  answered,  “Begone  from  this  door-ring,  for  this  door  is
not  open.  Turn  back;  to-day  is  not  the  day  for  secrets.

If  the  spatial  had  (any)  access  to  the  non-spatial,  I should  be
(seated)  on  the  bench,  (giving  instruction)  like  the  Shaykhs
(spiritual  directors).”


THE  POLICE  INSPECTOR  AND  THE  DRUNKARD  345

How  the  Police  Inspector  summoned  the  man  who  had  fallen
dead-drunk  {on  the  ground)  to  {go  to)  prison.

The  Inspector  came  at  midnight  to  a certain  place : he  saw  a
man  lying  at  the  bottom  of  a wall.

He  cried,  “Hey,  you  are  drunk:  tell  (me),  what  have  you
been  drinking?  ” Said  the  man,  “ I have  drunk  of  this  which  is
in  the  jar.”

“Pray,”  said  he,  “explain  what  is  in  the  jar.”  He  replied,
“Some  of  what  I have  drunk.”  “(But),”  said  the  Inspector,
“this  is  hidden  (from  sight).”

He  asked  (again),  “What  is  it  that  you  have  drunk?”  He
rejoined,  “That  which  is  hidden  in  the  jar.”

These  questions  and  answers  were  becoming  a (vicious)
circle.  The  Inspector  was  left  (stuck)  in  the  mud,  like  an  ass.

The  Inspector  said  to  him,  “Come  now,  sav  ‘Ah’”;  (but)
the  drunken  man,  at  the  moment  of  utterance,  said  “Hu,  Hii.”

“I  told  you  to  say  ‘Ah’,”  said  he;  “you  are  saying  ‘Hii’.”
“(Because)  I am  glad,”  he  replied,  “while  you  are  bent  with
grief.

‘Ah’  is  (uttered)  on  account  of  pain  and  grief  and  injustice;
the  ‘Hii,  Hii’  of  the  wine-drinkers  is  from  joy.”

The  Inspector  said,  “I  know  nothing  about  this.  Get  up.c  j?
get  up!  Don’t  retail  mystic  lore,  and  leave  off  this  wrangling.”

“Go  away,”  said  the  man;  “what  have  you  to  do  with  me? ”
“You  are  drunk,”  the  Inspector  said.  “Get  up  and  come  to
prison.”

Said  the  drunken  man,  “O  Inspector,  let  me  alone  and  go
away.  How  is  it  possible  to  carry'  off  pledges  from  one  that  is
naked?

If  indeed  I had  had  the  power  to  walk,  I should  have  gone  to
my  house — and  (then)  how  would  this  (affair  between  us)  have
occurred?

Were  I (still)  possessed  of  understanding  and  of  contingent
(unreal)  existence,  I should  be  on  the  bench,  (giving  instruction)
like  the  Shaykhs.”

How  the  inquirer,  for  the  second  time,  drew  that  eminent  {saint)

into  conversation,  in  order  that  his  condition  might  be  made

better  known  {to  the  inquirer).

That  seeker  said,  “O  thou  mounted  on  the  cane,  pray,  ride  2400
thy  horse  this  way  for  one  moment.”

He  rode  towards  him,  crydng,  “ Hark,  say  as  quick  as  you  can
(what  you  want),  for  my  horse  is  very  restive  and  fierce-tempered.

Be  quick,  lest  he  kick  you:  explain  clearly  what  you  are
asking  about.”


346  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

He  (the  inquirer)  saw  no  opportunity  to  tell  his  heart’s  secret :
he  at  once  made  an  evasion  and  drew  him  into  jesting  talk.

He  said,  “I  wish  to  marry  a woman  in  this  street:  who  is
suitable  for  one  like  me?”

2405  “There  are  three  kinds  of  women  in  the  world,”  said  he:
“two  of  those  are  a sorrow,  and  one  is  the  soul’s  treasure.

The  first,  when  you  marry  her,  is  wholly  yours;  and  the
second  is  half  yours  and  half  separate  (from  you) ;

And  the  third,  know  she  is  not  yours  at  all.  You  have  heard
this.  Away  (with  you)! — I start  in  a trice —

Lest  my  horse  let  fly  a kick  at  you,  so  that  you  fall  and  never
rise  up  (again).”

The  Shaykh  rode  off  amongst  the  children,  (but)  the  young
man  shouted  to  him  once  more,

2410  “Come,  prithee  declare  the  exposition  of  this.  Thou  hast
said  that  these  women  are  of  three  kinds : pick  (them)  out.”

He  rode  towards  him  and  said  to  him,  “The  virgin  of  your
choice  will  be  wholly  yours,  and  you  will  gain  freedom  from
sorrow ;

And  she  that  is  half  yours  is  the  (childless)  widow;  and  she
that  is  nothing  (to  you)  is  the  married  woman  with  a child:

When  she  has  a child  by  her  first  husband,  her  love  and
whole  heart  will  go  there.

(Now)  get  away,  lest  my  horse  launch  a kick,  and  the  hoof  of
my  restive  horse  land  upon  you.”

2415  The  Shaykh  gave  a loud  cry  of  jubilation  and  rode  back:  he
again  called  the  children  to  him.

That  inquirer  shouted  to  him  once  more,  “Come  (hither),
I have  one  question  left,  O sovereign  king.”

He  rode  back  in  this  direction.  “Say  what  it  is,”  he  cried,
“as  quick  as  you  can,  for  yonder  child  has  enraptured  my
heart^.”

Said  the  other,  “O  king,  with  such  intelligence  and  erudition
(as  thou  hast),  what  dissimulation  is  this?  What  acting  is  this?
Oh,  ’tis  a marvel  I

Thou  transcendest  the  Universal  Intellect  in  (thy  power  of)
elucidation.  Thou  art  a sun:  how  art  thou  hid  in  madness?”

2420  He  replied,  “These  rascals  are  proposing  to  make  me  Cadi
in  this  their  city.

I raised  objections,  (but)  they  said  to  me,  ‘Nay,  there  is  none
so  learned  and  accomplished  as  thou.

Whilst  thou  art  in  existence,  it  is  unlawful  and  wicked  that
any  one  inferior  to  thee  should  cite  Prophetic  Traditions  in  the
office  of  Cadi.

Permission  is  not  (given)  in  the  Law,  that  we  should  appoint
one  less  than  thee  as  (our)  prince  and  leader.’

* Literally,  “has  carried  off  my  polo-ball  from  the  field.”


THE  SAINT  WHO  RODE  A COCK-HORSE  347

By  this  necessity  I was  made  distraught  and  mad  (in  appear-
ance), but  inwardly  I am  just  the  same  as  I was.

My  intelligence  is  the  (hidden)  treasure,  and  I am  the  ruin  24.’3
(w'hich  covers  it);  if  I display’  the  treasure,  (then)  I am  mad
(indeed).

The  (real)  madman  is  he  that  has  not  gone  mad,  he  that  has
seen  this  night-patrol  and  has  not  gone  home.

My  knowdedge  is  substantial,  not  accidental;  and  this  precious
(thing)  is  not  for  (the  purpose  of  gaining)  every  (worldly)
interest.

I am  a mine  of  candy,  I am  a plantation  of  sugar-canes:  it  is
growing  from  me,  and  at  the  same  time  I am  eating  (of  it).

Knowledge  is  conventional  and  acquired  (not  real),  when  he
(its  owner)  laments  because  the  hearer  is  averse  to  (hearing)  it.

Since  it  is  (learned)  as  a bait  (for  popularity),  not  for  the  sake  24:0
of  (spiritual)  enlightenment,  he  (the  seeker  of  religious  know-
ledge) is  just  as  (bad)  as  the  seeker  of  vile  worldly  knowledge;

(For)  he  is  seeking  knowledge  on  account  of  the  vulgar  and
the  noble,  not  in  order  that  he  mav  win  release  from  this
world.

Like  a mouse,  he  has  burrowed  in  every  direction,  since  the
light  drove  him  (back)  from  the  door  (the  entrance  to  the  hole)
and  said,  ‘Away!’

Inasmuch  as  he  had  no  way  (of  getting  out)  to  the  open
country  and  the  light,  he  continued  to  make  (such)  an  exertion
even  in  that  darkness.

If  God  give  him  wings,  the  wings  of  Wisdom,  he  will  escape
from  mousiness  and  will  fly  like  the  birds ;

But  if  he  seek  not  wings,  he  will  remain  underground  with  2435
no  hope  of  traversing  the  path  to  Simak^.

Dialectic  knowledge,  which  is  soulless,  is  in  love  with  (eager
for)  the  countenance  of  customers ;

(But)  though  it  is  robust  at  the  time  of  disputation,  it  is  dead
and  gone  when  it  has  no  customer.

My  purchaser  is  God : He  is  drawing  me  aloft,  for  God  hath
purchased.

My  bloodwit  (the  reward  of  my  self-sacrifice)  is  the  beauty  of
the  Glorious  One : I enjoy  my  bloodwit  (as)  lawful  earnings.

Abandon  these  insolvent  customers : what  purchase  can  be  2440
made  bv  a handful  of  (worthless)  clay?

Do  not  eat  clay,  do  not  buy  clay,  do  not  seek  clay,  because
the  eater  of  clay  is  always  pale-faced.

Eat  your  heart  (in  love  of  God),  that  you  may  be  young
always,  (and  that)  your  visage  (may  be  rosy)  with  Divine  illu-
mination, like  the  arghazcdn.”

O Lord,  this  gift  is  not  (within)  the  compass  of  our  work
* The  name  of  a star.


348  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

(achievement) : verily,  (the  gift  of)  Thy  grace  is  (not  according
to  our  work,  hut)  according  to  Thy  mysterious  grace.

Take  our  hands  (help  us);  buy  (redeem)  us  from  our  hands
(self-existence);  lift  the  veil  (between  Thee  and  us),  and  do  not
tear  our  veil  (do  not  expose  us  to  shame).

2445  Redeem  us  from  this  filthy  self  {nafs) : its  knife  has  reached
our  bones.

Who  will  loose  these  strong  chains  from  helpless  ones  like  us,
O king  uncrowned  and  unthroned?

Who  except  (Thee  in)  Thy  bounty,  O Loving  One,  can  loose
such  a heavy  lock?

Let  us  turn  our  heads  from  ourselves  towards  Thee,  inasmuch
as  Thou  art  nigher  unto  us  than  we  (unto  ourselves).

Even  this  prayer  is  Thy  gift  and  lesson  (to  us) ; else,  wherefore
has  a rose-bed  grown  in  an  ash-pit?

2450  Save  through  Thy  munificence,  ’tis  impossible  to  convey
understanding  and  reason  into  the  midst  of  blood  and  entrails.

This  flowing  light  (proceeds)  from  two  pieces  of  fat  (the  two
eyeballs) : their  waves  of  light  reach  up  to  the  sky.

The  piece  of  flesh  which  is  the  tongue — from  it  the  flood  of
Wisdom  is  flowing,  like  a stream.

Towards  a cavity,  whereof  the  name  is  “ears,”  up  to  the
orchard  of  the  (rational)  soul,  whereof  the  fruit  is  intellections.

Its  main  course  is  the  highway  of  the  orchard  of  souls;  the
orchards  and  gardens  of  the  world  are  its  branches.

2455  That,  that,  is  the  source  and  fountainhead  of  joy:  quick,
recite  (the  text),  {gardens)  beneath  which  flow  the  rivers.


Conclusion  of  the  admonishment  given  by  the  Prophet,  God
bless  and  save  him,  to  the  sick  man.

The  Prophet  said  to  the  sick  man,  when  he  visited  (his)
suffering  friend,

“Maybe  you  have  made  a prayer  of  some  (peculiar)  sort,  and
from  ignorance  have  (as  it  were)  eaten  some  poisoned  food.

Bring  to  mind  what  (sort  of)  a prayer  you  said  when  you  were
being  vexed  by  the  guile  of  the  fleshly  soul.”

He  answered,  “I  do  not  remember;  but  direct  a (spiritual)
influence  towards  me,  and  it  (the  prayer)  will  come  to  my
memory  in  a moment.”

2460  Through  the  light-giving  presence  of  Mustafa  (Mohammed),
that  prayer  came  into  his  mind ;

(From)  the  aspiration  of  the  Prophet  who  dwells  in  light
there  came  into  his  mind  that  which  had  been  lost ;

Through  the  window  which  is  between  heart  and  heart
flashed  the  light  that  separates  truth  and  falsehood.


MOHAMMED  AND  THE  SICK  COMPANION  349

He  said,  “Look  now,  I have  remembered,  O Prophet,  the  •
prayer  which  I,  impertinent  fool,  spoke.

When  I was  being  caught  in  (the  toils  of)  sin,  and  drowning
(therein)  was  clutching  at  straws —

(Whilst)  there  was  coming  from  thee  to  sinners  a threat  and  ^-t'o
menace  of  punishment  exceedingly  severe —

(And)  I was  becoming  agitated,  and  there  was  no  help  (for
me),  (since)  there  were  chains  made  fast  and  a lock  not  (to  be)
opened :

Neither  room  for  patience  nor  means  of  flight,  neither  hope
of  repenting  nor  opportunity  for  rebelling —

I,  like  Harut  and  jMarut,  was  ciydng  in  sorrow,  ‘Alas!’  and
saying,  ‘ O my  Creator  I

Because  of  the  dangers  (of  the  Last  Judgement)  Harut  and
Mariit  openly  chose  the  pit  of  Babylon,

So  that  they  might  suffer  here  (in  this  world)  the  punishment  2470
of  the  world  to  come ; and  they  are  cunning  and  intelligent  and
magician-like.

They  acted  well,  and  ’twas  fitly  done:  the  pain  of  smoke  is
lighter  than  (that  of)  fire.

The  pain  of  that  (future)  world  is  beyond  description;  light
is  the  pain  of  this  world  beside  it.

Oh,  happy  he  that  wages  a holy  war  (of  self-mortification),  and
puts  a restraint  upon  the  body  and  deals  justice  (against  it).

And,  in  order  that  he  may  be  delivered  from  the  pain  of  that
world,  lays  upon  himself  this  pain  of  serving  God.

“I  was  saying,  ‘O  Lord,  quickly  inflict  on  me  in  this  world  24-5
that  punishment.

So  that  I may  have  exemption  (from  it)  in  yonder  world.’
About  such-like  a request  was  I knocking  at  the  door^.

(Thereupon)  such  a (painful)  sickness  as  this  appeared  in  me :
through  pain  my  soul  was  deprived  of  rest.

I have  been  left  without  power  to  perform  my  dhikr  (com-
memoration of  God)  and  litanies:  I have  become  unconscious
of  myself  and  of  (all)  good  and  ill.

If  I had  not  now  beheld  thy  face,  O thou  whose  scent  is
fortunate  and  blessed,

I should  have  passed  altogether  from  the  bondage  (of  this  24'’°
life).  Thou  in  kingly  fashion  hast  bestowed  on  me  this  sympathy.”

Said  the  Prophet,  “Hey!  do  not  offer  this  prayer  again:  do
not  dig  yourself  up  from  root  and  base.

What  strength  have  you,  O wretched  ant,  to  endure  that  He
should  lay  on  you  such  a lofty  mountain?”

He  answ^ered,  “O  Sultan,  I repent  (and  vow)  that  in  no  wdse
will  I (henceforth)  brag  recklessly.

This  world  is  the  Desert  (of  the  Israelites),  and  thou  art
* I.e.  "such  was  the  petition  I made  to  God.”


350  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

Moses,  and  we  because  of  (our)  sin  remain  in  the  Desert  in
tribulation.

24S5  We  are  wayfaring  for  years,  and  at  the  end  we  are  still  held
captive  in  the  first  stage  (of  the  journey).

If  the  heart  of  IMoses  were  pleased  with  us,  there  would  be
shown  (to  us)  the  way  through  the  Desert  and  the  (farthest)
border  (thereof) ;

And  if  he  were  wholly  disgusted  with  us,  how  by  any  means
would  trays  of  food  come  to  us  from  heaven?

How  would  springs  gush  from  a rock,  (and  how)  would  there
be  security  for  our  lives  in  the  desert?

Nay,  truly,  fire  would  come  instead  of  trays:  flames  would
beat  upon  us  in  this  abode.

2490  Forasmuch  as  Moses  has  become  of  two  minds  concerning
us,  he  is  sometimes  our  enemy  and  sometimes  our  friend.

His  anger  sets  fire  to  our  goods;  his  clemency  becomes  a
shield  against  affliction.

When  (how)  may  it  be  that  anger  shall  again  become  clemency  ?
This  is  not  extraordinary  (as  proceeding)  from  thy  grace,  O
venerable  one.

To  praise  any  one  present  is  (a  cause  of)  embarrassment;  on
this  account  I am  purposely  using  the  name  of  Moses,  like  this.

Otherwise,  how  should  Moses  deem  it  right  that  I make
mention  of  anybody  before  thee?

2495  Our  covenant  hath  been  broken  hundreds  and  thousands  of
times;  Thy  covenant,  like  a mountain,  stands  firm  and  stable.

Our  covenant  is  straw  and  subject  to  every  wind  (of  passion) ;
Thy  covenant  is  a mountain,  and  even  more  than  a hundred
mountains.

By  the  truth  of  that  power  (which  is  Thine),  have  some  mercy
upon  our  mutability,  O Ruler  of  (all)  mutations !

We  have  seen  ourselves  (as  we  really  are)  and  our  shame.  Put
us  not  to  further  trial,  O King,

So  that  (by  sparing  us)  Thou  wilt  have  concealed  other
disgraces^,  O Bounteous  One  whose  help  we  implore!

2500  Thou  art  infinite  in  beauty  and  perfection;  we  are  infinite
in  wrongness  and  error.

Direct  Thy  infinity,  O Bounteous  One,  upon  the  infinite
wrongness  of  a handful  of  vile  wretches  (such  as  we  are).

Oh,  come,  for  of  our  cloth-piece  (only)  a single  thread  remains :
we  were  a city,  and  (only)  a single  wall  remains.

(Save)  the  remnant,  (save)  the  remnant,  O Sovereign,  that
the  soul  of  the  Devil  may  not  rejoice  entirely —

Not  for  our  sakes,  (but)  for  the  sake  of  the  primal  grace
through  which  Thou  didst  seek  out  them  that  had  lost  the
way.

^ I.e.  other  acts  of  ours  which  would  expose  us  to  disgrace.


MOHAMMED  AND  THE  SICK  COMPANION  351

As  Thou  hast  shown  Thy  power,  (so  now)  show  Thy  mercy,  2505
O Thou  who  hast  implanted  feelings  of  mercy  in  flesh  and  fat.

If  this  prayer  increase  Thy  wrath,  do  Thou  teach  (us)  to  pray,

O Lord,

Even  as,  (when)  Adam  fell  from  Paradise,  Thou  gavest  him
(leave)  to  turn  (in  penitence)  toward  Thee,  so  that  he  escaped
from  the  ugly  Devil.”

Who  is  the  Devil  that  he  should  surpass  Adam  and  win  the
game  from  him  on  such  a board?

In  truth,  it  all  turned  out  to  Adam’s  advantage:  that  guile
became  a curse  to  the  envious  one.

He  (the  Devil)  saw  one  game,  (but)  he  did  not  see  two  hundred  2510
games  (which  he  should  lose) : therefore  he  cut  down  the  supports
of  his  own  house.

He  set  fire  by  night  to  the  cornfield  of  others;  (meanwhile)
the  wind  (was)  carrying  the  fire  into  his  own  field.

The  (Divine)  curse  was  a blind  to  the  Devil,  so  that  he
regarded  that  trickery  (of  his)  as  harm  to  (his)  enemy.

The  (Divine)  curse  is  that  which  makes  him  (any  one)  see
falsely,  and  makes  him  envious,  self-conceited,  and  malicious.

To  the  end  that  he  may  not  know  that  whoever  does  evil,  it
(that  evil)  will  at  last  come  back  and  smite  him.

He  sees  all  the  master-moves  invertedly:  (hence)  they  result  2515
in  check-mate  to  him  and  (in)  failure  and  defeat.

(The  curse  blinds  him),  because,  if  he  regard  himself  as
naught,  (if)  he  regard  the  wound  (his  moral  and  spiritual  blind-
ness) as  deadly  and  festering,

Pain  will  arise  from  such  looking  within,  and  the  pain  will
bring  him  out  from  the  veil  (of  self-conceit).

Until  mothers  are  overtaken  by  the  pains  of  childbirth,  the
child  finds  no  way  to  he  born.

This  (God-given)  trust  is  in  the  heart,  and  the  heart  is
pregnant  (with  it) : these  counsels  (of  the  prophets  and  saints)
are  like  the  midwife.

The  midwife  may  say  that  the  woman  has  no  pain;  (but)  pain  2520
is  necessary',  pain  is  (makes)  a way  for  the  child  (to  be  born).

He  that  is  without  pain  is  a brigand,  because  to  be  without
pain  is  to  say  “I  am  God.”

To  say  that  “I”  out  of  the  (proper)  time  is  a curse  (to  the
speaker) ; to  say  that  “ I”  at  the  (proper)  time  is  a mercy  (from
God).

The  “I”  of  Mansur  (Hallaj)  certainly  became  a mercy;  the
“ I ” of  Pharaoh  became  a curse.  Mark  (this) !

Consequently,  it  is  incumbent  (on  us)  to  behead  every
untimely  bird  (every  cock  that  crows  too  soon),  in  order  to  give
notice  (warning)^.

* I.e.we  must  die  to  self  in  order  that  we  may  show  to  others  the  evils  of  egoism.


352  MATHNAWi,  BOOK  II

2525  What  is  “beheading”?  Killing  the  fleshly  soul  in  the  holy
(spiritual)  war,  and  renouncing  self,

Just  as  you  would  extract  the  scorpion’s  sting  in  order  that  it
might  be  saved  from  being  killed,

(Or)  pull  out  the  venomous  fang  of  a snake,  in  order  that  the
snake  might  escape  from  the  calamity  of  being  stoned  (to  death).

Nothing  will  slay  the  fleshly  soul  except  the  shadow  (protec-
tion) of  the  Pir : grasp  tightly  the  skirt  of  that  slayer  of  the  flesh.

When  you  grasp  (it)  tightly,  that  is  (done  by)  the  aid  of  Him
(God):  whatever  strength  comes  into  you  is  (the  effect  of)  His
drawing  (you  towards  Him).

23  ,0  Know  that  true  is  (the  text)  thou  didst  not  throw  when  thou
threwest : whatsoever  the  soul  soweth  is  from  the  Soul  of  the  soul.

He  is  the  One  that  takes  the  hand  (to  help),  and  (He  is)
hurden-bearing  (long-suffering):  have  hope,  from  moment  to
moment,  of  (receiving)  that  breath  (of  inspiration)  from  Him.

’Tis  no  harm  if  you  have  remained  long  without  Him : you
have  read  that  He  is  long  in  gripping  (sinners),  (though)  gripping
(them)  tight.

His  Mercy  is  long  in  gripping,  (but)  grips  tight : His  Presence
does  not  keep  you  absent  (from  Him)  for  one  moment.

If  you  desire  the  explanation  of  this  union  and  friendship,
read  thoughtfully  (the  Siira)  Wa’l-Duhd  (By  the  Morn).

2535  And  if  you  say  that  evils  too  are  from  Him,  (that  is  true),  but
how  is  it  a defect  in  His  grace?

(His)  bestowing  this  evil  is  even  His  perfection : I will  tell  you
a parable  (in  illustration),  O respected  one.

A painter  made  two  kinds  of  pictures — beautiful  pictures  and
pictures  devoid  of  beauty.

He  painted  Joseph  and  fair-formed  houris,  he  painted  ugly
afreets  and  devils.

Both  kinds  of  pictures  are  (evidence  of)  his  mastery:  those
(ugly  ones)  are  not  (evidence  of)  his  ugliness ; they  are  (evidence
of)  his  bounty.

2530  He  makes  the  ugly  of  extreme  ugliness — it  is  invested  with  all
(possible)  uglinesses — ^

In  order  that  the  perfection  of  his  skill  may  be  displayed,  (and
that)  the  denier  of  his  mastery  may  be  put  to  shame.

And  if  he  cannot  make  the  ugly,  he  is  deficient  (in  skill):
hence  He  (God)  is  the  Creator  of  (both)  the  infidel  and  the  sincere
(faithful).

From  this  point  of  view,  then,  (both)  infidelity  and  faith  are
bearing  witness  (to  Him):  both  are  bowing  down  in  worship
before  His  Lordliness.

But  know  that  the  faithful  (believer)  bows  down  willingly,
because  he  is  seeking  (God’s)  pleasure  and  aiming  (at  that).

^ Literally,  “all  uglinesses  surround  it.”


WHY  GOD  CREATES  GOOD  AND  EVIL  353

The  infidel  too  is  a worshipper  of  God,  (though)  unwillingly ; 2545
but  his  aim  is  (directed  towards)  another  object  of  desire.

(It  is  true  that)  he  keeps  the  King’s  fortress  in  good  repair;
but  he  is  claiming  to  be  in  command.

He  has  become  a rebel,  to  the  intent  that  it  may  be  his  domain ;
(but)  verily,  in  the  end  the  fortress  comes  to  be  the  King’s.

The  faithful  believer  keeps  that  fortress  in  good  repair  for
the  sake  of  the  King,  not  for  place  (and  power).

The  ugly  one  (the  infidel)  says,  “O  King  who  createst  the
ugly.  Thou  art  able  for  (able  to  create)  the  beautiful  as  well  as
the  despicable  (and)  ugly.”

The  beautiful  one  (the  faithful  believer)  says,  “O  King  of  2550
beauty  and  comeliness.  Thou  hast  made  me  free  from  defects.”


How  the  Prophet,  God  bless  and  save  him,  gave  injunctions
to  the  sick  man  and  taught  him  to  pray.

The  Prophet  said  to  the  sick  man;  “Say  thus: — ‘O  Thou
that  makest  easy  that  which  is  hard.

Give  good  unto  us  in  our  present  abode,  and  give  good  unto
us  in  our  future  abode !

Make  the  way  agreeable  to  us  as  a garden:  Thou  indeed,  O
Glorious  One,  art  our  goal.’”

At  the  Gathering  (for  Judgement)  the  true  believers  will  say,

“O  angel,  is  it  not  (the  case)  that  Hell  is  the  common  road,

(And  that)  true  believer  and  infidel  (alike)  pass  by  it?  We  2555
saw  no  smoke  or  fire  in  this  road  (which  we  have  traversed).

Lo,  here  is  Paradise  and  the  Court  of  safety:  where,  then,  was
that  vile  place  of  passage?”

Then  the  angel  will  say,  “The  garden  of  greenery’  which  ye
saw  in  a certain  spot  as  ye  passed —

That  was  Hell  and  the  terrible  place  of  chastisement,  (but)
unto  you  it  became  gardens  and  pleasaunces  and  trees.

Inasmuch  as  with  this  soul  of  hellish  nature,  (this)  miscreant
fiery  one  that  seeks  (to  lead  you  into)  temptation.

Ye  have  striven  (oft),  and  it  hath  become  full  of  purity,  and  25^.0
ye  have  quenched  the  fire  (thereof)  for  God’s  sake ;

(Inasmuch  as)  the  fire  of  lust,  which  was  flaming,  hath  become
the  verdure  of  piety  and  the  light  of  guidance  (unto  the  true
faith) ;

(Inasmuch  as)  at  once  the  fire  of  anger  in  you  hath  turned
to  forbearance,  and  the  darkness  of  ignorance  in  you  hath  turned
to  knowledge ;

(Inasmuch  as)  the  fire  of  greed  in  you  hath  turned  to  un-
selfishness, and  that  envy  (which)  was  like  thorns  hath  turned  to
roses ;


N M


j>


354  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Inasmuch  as  ye  formerly  extinguished  all  these  fires  of  your
own  for  God’s  sake;

And  made  the  fiery  soul  like  an  orchard  and  cast  in  it  the
seed  of  fealty,

(Whilst)  therein  the  nightingales  of  commemoration  and
glorification  of  God  (were)  singing  sweetly  in  the  garden  by  the
river-side ;

(Inasmuch  as)  ye  have  answered  the  call  of  God  and  have
brought  water  into  the  blazing  hell  of  your  soul —

Our  Hell  also  in  regard  to  you  hath  become  greenery  and
roses  and  plenty  and  riches.”

W^hat  is  the  requital  for  well-doing,  O son?  Kindness  and
well-doing  and  valued  recompense.

“Did  not  ye  say,  ‘We  are  devoted  (to  God):  we  are  passing
away  before  the  attributes  of  Everlastingness?

We,  whether  we  be  cunning  (sane)  or  mad,  are  intoxicated
with  that  Cupbearer  and  that  cup.

We  lay  our  heads  (submissively)  upon  His  writ  and  mandate :
we  give  our  sw'eet  lives  in  pawn  (to  Him).

So  long  as  the  thought  of  the  Friend  is  in  our  inmost
hearts,  (all)  our  work  is  to  serve  (Him)  and  yield  up  our
lives.’”

Wheresoever  the  candle  of  tribulation  hath  been  lighted,
hundreds  of  thousands  of  loving  souls  are  burnt.

Those  lovers  that  are  within  the  house  (and  nigh  unto  Him)
are  (as)  moths  to  the  candle  of  the  face  of  the  Friend.

O heart,  go  where  they  are  bright^  toward  thee  and  are  as  a
coat  of  mail  to  thee  against  afflictions.

And  give  thee  a place  within  their  souls,  that  they  may  fill
thee  with  wine,  like  a cup.

Take  thy  abode  within  their  souls:  O radiant  full- moon,
make  thy  home  in  the  sky !

Like  Mercury,  they  will  open  the  book  of  the  heart,  that  they
may  reveal  mysteries  unto  thee.

Stay  beside  thy  kinsfolk — how  art  thou  roaming  abroad?
Cleave  to  the  perfect  Moon  if  thou  art  a piece  of  the  moon.

What  is  the  (cause  of  the)  part’s  keeping  aloof  from  its  whole?
What  is  (the  cause  of)  all  this  mixture  with  (that  which  is)
diverse  ?

Behold  how  the  genus  hath  become  species  in  the  process  (of
differentiation):  behold  how  the  unseen  things  have  become
visible  in  emanation.

So  long  as  thou  wouldst  fain  be  wheedled^  like  a woman,
O man  without  wisdom,  (thou  wilt  remain  imperfect):  how-
wilt  thou  be  helped  by  lies  and  wheedling?

^ I.e.  unveiled  and  sincere.

- Literally,  “thou  art  a buyer  of  blandishment.”


THE  LOVERS  OF  GOD


355

Thou  art  taking  flattery  and  sweet  words  and  cajolement  and
putting  them  like  gold  in  thy  bosom.

For  thee  the  revilings  and  blows  of  the  (spiritual)  kings  would  ^535
be  better  than  the  praise  of  the  unrighteous’^.

Swallow  the  slaps  of  the  (spiritual)  kings,  do  not  swallow  the
honey  of  the  rabble,  to  the  end  that  through  the  fortune  of
(those)  personages  thou  mayst  (thyself)  become  a personage;

Because  from  them  come  felicity  and  robes  of  honour ; under
the  shelter  of  the  spirit,  body  becomes  soul.

Wherever  thou  seest  one  (that  is)  naked  and  destitute,  know
that  he  hath  fled  from  the  (spiritual)  master,

In  order  that  he  may  become  such  as  his  heart  desires — that
blind,  wicked,  worthless  heart  of  him.

If  he  had  become  such  as  his  master  desired,  he  would  have  ’390
graced  himself  and  his  kindred.

Whoever  in  the  world  flees  from  his  master  is  fleeing  from
felicity.  Know  this  (for  sure) !

Thou  hast  learned  a trade  to  earn  a livelihood  for  the  body:
(now)  set  thy  hand  to  a religious  (spiritual)  trade.

In  this  world  thou  hast  become  clothed  and  rich : when  thou
comest  forth  from  here,  how  wilt  thou  do?

Learn  such  a trade  that  hereafter  the  earning  of  God’s
forgiveness  may  come  in  as  revenue  (to  thee).

Yonder  world  is  a city  full  of  trafficking  and  earning:  think  2595
not  that  the  earnings  here  (in  this  world)  are  a sufficiency.

The  high  God  hath  said  that  beside  those  (the  next  world’s)
earnings  these  earnings  in  the  (present)  world  are  (but)  children’s
play—

As  a child  that  embraces  another  child  modo  coitum  facientis
contactum  facit ;

(Or  as)  children  at  play  set  up  a shop,  (but)  it  is  of  no  use  (to
them)  except  as  a pastime.

Night  falls,  and  he  (the  child  w'ho  acted  as  shopkeeper)  comes
home  hungry:  the  (other)  children  are  gone,  and  he  is  left  alone.

This  world  is  a playground,  and  death  is  the  night:  thou  2600
returnest  with  an  empty  purse,  tired  out.

The  earnings  of  religion  are  love  and  inward  rapture —
capacity  to  receive  the  Light  of  God,  O thou  obstinate  one !

This  vile  fleshly  soul  desires  thee  to  earn  that  which  passeth
away : how  long  wilt  thou  earn  what  is  vile?  Let  it  go ! Enough !

If  the  vile  fleshly  soul  desire  thee  to  earn  what  is  noble,  there
is  some  trick  and  plot  behind  it.

^ Literally,  “them  that  have  lost  the  way.”


23-2


356


MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II


How  Iblis  awakened  Mu‘dwiya — may  God  he  well-pleased
with  him! — saying,  “Arise,  it  is  time  for  prayer.”

’Tis  related  in  Tradition  that  Mu‘awiya  was  asleep  in  a nook
of  the  palace.

2fo5  The  palace-door  was  fastened  from  the  inside,  for  he  was
fatigued  by  people’s  visits.

Suddenly  he  was  awakened  by  a man,  (but)  when  he  opened
his  eyes  the  man  vanished.

He  said  (to  himself),  “No  one  had  entrance  to  the  palace:
who  is  he  that  has  shown  such  impudence  and  boldness?  ”

Then  he  went  round  and  searched  in  order  to  find  the  trace
of  that  one  who  had  become  hidden  (from  sight).

Behind  the  door  he  espied  a luckless  man  who  was  hiding  his
face  in  the  door  and  the  curtain.

2010  “Hey,”  he  cried,  “who  are  you?  What  is  your  name?  ” “(To
speak)  plainly,”  said  he,  “my  name  is  Iblis  the  damned.”

He  (Mu'awiya)  asked,  “Why  did  you  take  pains  to  awaken
me^?  Tell  the  truth,  don’t  tell  me  what  is  reverse  and  contrary
(to  the  fact) 2.”

How  Iblis  gave  Mu‘ dwiya,  may  God  be  well-pleased  with  him,

a falP,  and  practised  dissimulation  and  pretence,  and  how

Mu'dwiya  answered  him.

He  said,  “The  time  for  prayer  is  (all  but)  come  to  an  end : you
must  run  quickly  to  the  mosque.

Mustafa  (Mohammed)  said,  boring  the  pearl  of  the  idea,

‘ Make  haste  to  perform  your  devotions  before  the  time  is  past.’  ”

He  (Mu’awiya)  said,  “Nay,  nay;  ’tis  not  thy  purpose  to  be
my  guide  unto  any  good.

2615  (If)  a thief  come  secretly  into  my  dwelling-place  and  say  to
me,  ‘I  am  keeping  watch,’

How  shall  I believe  that  thief?  How  should  a thief  know  the
recompense  and  reward  for  good  works?”

How  Iblis  again  made  answer  to  Mu‘dwiya.

He  said,  “At  first  I was  an  angel:  I traversed  the  way  of
obedience  (to  God)  with  (all  my)  soul.

I was  the  confidant  of  them  that  follow  the  path  (of  devotion) :
I was  familiar  with  them  that  dwell  by  the  Throne  of  God.

How  should  (one’s)  first  calling  go  out  of  (one’s)  mind?  How
should  (one’s)  first  love  go  forth  from  (one’s)  heart?


^ Literally,  “why  did  you  awaken  me  with  earnestness?”

^ Literally,  “do  not  tell  me  reversely  and  contrariwise.”
f Literally,  “threw  M.  from  his  ass,”  i.e.  sought  to  mislead  him  and  cast
him  into  error.


IBLIS  AND  MU‘AwIYA  357

If  in  travel  you  see  Anatolia  or  Khutan,  how  should  love  of  :6zo
your  own  country  go  from  your  heart?

I too  have  been  one  of  those  drunken  with  this  wine : I have
been  a lover  at  His  court.

They  cut  my  navel  in  (predestined  me  from  birth  to)  love  of
Him : they  sowed  love  of  Him  in  my  heart.

I have  seen  good  days  from  Fortune:  I have  drunk  the  water
of  (Divine)  Mercy  in  (my)  spring-time.

Was  it  not  the  hand  of  His  bounty  that  sowed  me?  Was  it
not  He  that  raised  me  up  from  non-existence?

Oh,  many  is  the  time  I have  received  kindness  from  Him  and  ^623
walked  in  the  rose-garden  of  (His)  approval.

He  would  lay  the  hand  of  mercy  on  my  head,  He  would  open
(let  flow’)  from  me  the  fountains  of  grace.

Who  found  milk  for  me  in  the  season  of  my  infancy?  Who
rocked  my  cradle?  He.

From  whom  did  I drink  milk  other  than  His  milk?  Who
nourished  me  except  His  providence?

The  disposition  which  has  entered  with  the  milk  into  (their)
being — how  can  it  be  discharged  (expelled)  from  folk?

If  the  Sea  of  Bounty  has  given  (me)  a rebuke,  (yet)  how  have  2530
the  doors  of  Bounty  been  shut?

Giving  and  grace  and  favour  are  the  fundamental  substance
of  His  coin:  w'rath  is  (only)  as  a speck  of  alloy  on  it.

He  made  the  world  for  kindness’  sake:  His  sun  caressed  the
motes  (in  its  beams).

If  separation  (from  Him)  is  big  with  His  wrath,  ’tis  for  the
sake  of  knowing  the  worth  of  union  with  Him,

So  that  separation  from  Him  may  give  the  soul  chastisement,
(and  that)  the  soul  may  know  the  value  of  the  days  of  union.

The  Prophet  has  declared  that  God  said,  ‘]VIy  purpose  in  2635
creating  was  to  do  good :

I created  to  the  intent  that  they  (My  creatures)  might  draw’
some  gain  from  Me,  and  that  they  might  smear  their  hands
with  My  honey ;

Not  to  the  end  that  I might  draw’  some  gain  (from  them),
and  that  I might  tear  off  a coat  from  one  (who  is)  naked.’

During  the  short  while  since  He  drove  me  from  His  presence,
mine  eye  hath  remained  (fixed)  upon  His  beauteous  face ;

(And  my  thought  has  always  been),  ‘Such  wrath  from  such
a face ! Oh,  wonderful ! ’ (whereas)  every  one  (else)  has  become
occupied  with  (considering)  the  (secondary)  cause  (His  wrath).

I do  not  look  at  the  cause  (His  wrath),  which  is  temporal,  2540
inasmuch  as  the  temporal  (only)  produces  something  temporal
(like  itself).

I am  regarding  (His  eternally)  precedent  mercy:  whatsoever
is  temporal  I rend  in  twain.


358  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Grant  that  my  declining  to  worship  (Adam)  was  from  envy;
(yet)  that  envy  arises  from  love  (of  God),  not  from  denial  (of
obedience  to  His  command).

’Tis  certain,  all  enAry  arises  from  love,  (for  fear)  lest  another
become  the  companion  of  the  beloved.

Brooding  jealousy  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  love,  just
as  saying  ‘Live  long!’  must  follow  the  sneeze^.

2645  Since  there  was  no  play  but  this  on  His  board^,  and  He  said,
‘Play,’  AA'hat  more  can  I do?

I played  the  one  play  (move)  that  there  was,  and  cast  myself
into  woe.

Even  in  woe  I am  tasting  His  delights:  I am  mated  by  Him,
mated  by  Him,  mated  by  Him  1

How  shall  any  one,  O noble  sir,  in  (this  world  of)  six  direc-
tions deliver  himself  from  the  shashdara  (the  place  with  six
doors)  ?

How  shall  the  part  of  the  six  escape  from  the  whole  of  the
six,  especially  when  the  Unconditioned  sets  it  wrong?

2650  Whoever  is  in  the  six  is  in  the  fire ; (only)  He  that  is  the  creator
of  the  six  will  deliver  him.

Truly,  whether  it  be  infidelity  or  faith  in  Him  (to  which  he
is  predestined),  he  is  the  hand-loom  (instrument)  of  the  Lord
and  belongs  to  Him.”

How  Mu‘dwiya  again  exposed  the  deceitfulness  of  Iblis.

The  Ami'r  said  to  him,  “ These  things  are  true,  but  your  share
in  these  things  is  wanting.

You  have  waylaid  hundreds  of  thousands  like  me;  you  have
made  a hole  and  have  come  into  the  treasure-house.

You  are  fire  and  naphtha : you  burn,  you  cannot  help  it®.  Who
is  there  whose  raiment  is  not  torn  to  pieces  by  your  hand?

2655  Inasmuch  as  it  is  your  nature,  O fire,  to  be  a cause  of  burning,
there  is  no  help  but  you  must  burn  something.

This  is  God’s  curse  (on  you),  that  He  makes  you  burn  (things)
and  makes  you  the  master  of  all  thieves.

You  have  spoken  with  God  and  heard  (Him  speak)  face  to
face : what  should  I be  (able  to  do)  before  your  deceit,  O enemy?

Your  stock  of  knowledge  is  like  the  sound  of  (the  fowler’s)
whistle : it  is  the  cry  of  birds,  but  it  is  bird-ensnaring.

That  (whistle)  has  waylaid  myriads  of  birds,  the  bird  (in  each
case)  being  duped  (by  the  fancy)  that  a friend  is  come.

2660  When  it  hears  in  the  air  the  sound  of  the  whistle,  it  comes
(down)  from  the  air  and  is  made  captive  here.

J Literally,  “is  the  condition  of  the  obligation  imposed  bv  sneezing.”

■ The  board  used  in  the  game  of  nard.

^ Literally,  “(if)  you  do  not  bum,  there  is  no  help.”


IBLIS  AND  MU'aWIYA


359

Through  your  deceit  the  people  of  Noah  are  in  lamentation :
they  have  hearts  charred  and  bosoms  (torn)  to  shreds.

You  gave  ‘Ad  in  this  world  to  the  wind  (of  destruction) : you
cast  (them)  into  torment  and  sorrows.

Through  you  was  the  stoning  of  the  people  of  Lot:  through
you  were  they  sunk  in  the  black  rain-water.

Through  you  was  the  brain  of  Nimrod  crumbled,  O you  that
have  raised  thousands  of  turmoils !

Through  you  the  intelligence  of  Pharaoh,  the  acute  and  sage,  ’665
became  blinded,  (so  that)  he  found  no  understanding.

Through  you  also  Bii  Lahab  became  an  unworthy  one;
through  you  also  Bu  ’1-Hakam  became  a Bii  Jahl.

O you  that  on  this  chessboard,  for  the  sake  of  remembrance^,
have  checkmated  hundreds  of  thousands  of  masters,

0 you  by  whose  difficult  attacking  moves  (our)  hearts  have
been  burned  and  your  (own)  heart  has  been  blackened.

You  are  the  sea  of  cunning,  (and  all)  the  creatures  (are  but)
a drop : you  are  like  a mountain  and  (we)  simple  ones  (are  but)
a mote.

Who  shall  escape  from  your  cunning,  O adversary.?  We  are  1:670
drowned  in  the  flood,  except  them  that  are  protected  (by  God).

By  you  many  a fortunate  star  has  been  burned : by  you  many
an  army  and  host  have  been  scattered.”

Hozo  Iblts  again  replied  to  Mu' dwiy a.

Iblis  said  to  him,  “Unravel  this  knot  (and  apprehend  the
matter) : I am  the  touchstone  for  the  false  coin  and  the  true.

God  hath  made  me  the  test  of  lion  and  cur,  God  hath  made
me  the  test  of  genuine  coin  and  counterfeit.

When  have  I blackened  the  false  coin’s  face?  I am  the
money-changer : I have  (only)  valued  it.

To  the  good  I act  as  guide,  the  dry  branches  I rip  off.  2675

1 lay  these  (different)  sorts  of  fodder  (before  people) — for
what  purpose?  In  order  that  it  may  be  seen  of  what  kind^  the
animal  is.

When  a wolf  bears  ^ young  to  an  antelope,  and  there  is  some
doubt  whether  it  (the  young  one)  has  the  nature  of  wolf  or
antelope.

Drop  you  grass  and  bones  in  front  of  it  (and  see)  to  which
side  it  quickly  steps.

If  it  comes  towards  the  bones,  it  is  canine ; and  if  it  craves  the
grass,  it  is  assuredly  of  the  antelope  race.

A wrath  and  a mercy  were  wedded  to  one  another:  from  2680
these  twain  was  born  the  world  of  good  and  evil.

^ I.e.  “ as  a memorial  (of  your  skill).”

2 Literally,  “ whose  congener.”  ^ Or  “begets.’


360  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Offer  grass  and  bones,  offer  the  food  of  the  flesh  and  the  food
of  the  spirit.

If  he  seek  the  food  of  the  flesh,  he  is  bobtailed  (worthless),
and  if  he  desire  the  food  of  the  spirit,  he  is  a (spiritual)
chief.

If  he  serve  the  body,  he  is  an  ass ; and  if  he  go  into  the  sea  of
the  spirit,  he  will  find  pearls.

Although  these  tw'ain — good  and  evil — are  different,  yet
these  twain  are  (engaged)  in  one  work.

26S5  The  prophets  offer  devotions,  the  enemies  (of  God)  offer
lusts.

How  should  I make  the  good  man  bad?  I am  not  God.  I am
(only)  a prompter,  I am  not  their  creator.

(How)  should  I make  the  fair  foul?  I am  not  the  Lord.  I am
(only)  a mirror  for  the  foul  and  the  fair.

The  Hindoo  burnt  a mirror  in  vexation,  saying,  ‘ This  (mirror)
causes  a man  to  look  black-faced.’

He  (God)  hath  made  me  an  informer  and  truth-teller,  that
I may  tell  where  the  ugly  one  is  and  where  the  beautiful.

2690  I am  a witness:  how  is  prison  (the  right  place)  for  a witness?
I do  not  deserve  (to  go  to)  prison,  God  is  the  witness  (to  my
innocence).

Wherever  I see  a fruitful  sapling,  I foster  (it)  diligently  like
a nurse.

Wherever  I see  a sour  and  dry  tree,  I cut  it  down,  in  order
that  the  musk  may  be  delivered  (separated)  from  the  dung.

The  dry  (tree)  says  to  the  gardener,  ‘O  young  man,  why  do
you  cut  off  my  head  without  fault  (on  my  part)?  ’

The  gardener  says,  ‘Be  silent,  O evil-natured  one!  Is  not
thy  dryness  sin  enough  in  thee?’

2695  The  dry  (tree)  says,  ‘I  am  straight,  I am  not  crooked:  whv
are  you  houghing  me  (who  am)  without  guilt?  ’

The  gardener  says,  ‘ Hadst  thou  been  blest,  would  that  thou
wert  crooked  (if  only)  thou  wert  moist  (full  of  sap).

Thou  wouldst  have  drawn  (into  thyself)  the  Water  of  Life :
thou  wouldst  have  been  steeped  in  the  Water  of  Life.

Thy  seed  and  thy  root  were  bad,  and  thou  hast  not  been
joined  to  a good  tree.

If  the^our  branch  be  joined  to  a sweet  one,  that  sweetness
will  striifc  (impress  itself)  on  its  nature.’  ”


How  Mu'dwiya  dealt  sternly  with  Iblis.

2700  Said  the  Amu",  O brigand,  do  not  argue:  there  is  no  way
for  you  (to  penetrate)  into  me,  (so)  do  not  seek  the  way.

You  are  a brigand,  and  I am  a stranger  and  merchant:  how
should  I purchase  any  garments  that  you  may  bring?


IBLIS  AND  MU‘aWIYA  361

Do  not  prowl  about  my  property,  infidel  as  you  are : you  are
not  one  to  buy  the  property  of  anybody.

The  brigand  is  not  a buyer  for  (from)  any  person,  and  if  he
seem  to  be  a buyer,  ’tis  (only  his)  deceit  and  artfulness.

I wonder  what  this  envier  has  in  his  gourd ! O God,  help  us
against  this  enemy!

If  he  pronounce  one  more  screed  (of  his  spells)  over  me,  this  2-05
brigand  will  rob  me  of  the  mantle  (of  my  faith).

How  Mu'dwiya  complained  of  Iblis  to  the  most  high  God
and  besought  His  aid.

0 God,  this  talk  of  his  is  like  smoke:  take  my  hand  (and  help
me),  or  else  my  raiment  is  blackened.

1 cannot  prevail  in  argument  with  Iblis,  for  he  leads  every
one,  noble  and  base  (alike),  into  temptation.

Adam,  who  is  the  lord  of  He  taught  {him)  the  Names,  is  power-
less before  the  lightning-like  onset  of  this  cur.

He  cast  him  from  Paradise  upon  the  face  of  the  earth:  he
(Adam)  fell  from  Simak^  into  his  net,  like  a fish,

Crying  in  lamentation,  ‘ Verily,  we  have  wronged  {ourselves).’  2710
There  is  no  bound  to  his  (Satan’s)  guile  and  imposture.

In  his  every  saying  there  is  mischief:  myriads  of  enchant-
ments are  concealed  in  his  mind.

He  unmans^  men  in  a moment:  he  kindles  vain  desire  in
man  and  woman.

O Iblis,  you  that  consume  the  people  and  seek  to  tempt  them
(to  their  ruin),  on  what  ground  did  vou  awaken  me?  Tell  the
truth!”

How  Iblis  once  more  exhibited  his  deceit.

He  said,  “No  man  that  thinks  evil  (is  suspicious)  would
hearken  to  the  truth  notwithstanding  a hundred  signs  (that
pointed  it  out).

Every  mind  that  has  conceived  fancies  (suspicions) — when  2715
you  bring  forward  proof,  its  fancy  is  increased.

When  (sound  and  true)  words  enter  it,  they  become  a disease
(they  are  corrupted  and  falsified):  the  holy  warrior’s  sword
becomes  a tool  for  the  thief.

Therefore  the  answer  to  him  is  silence  and  rest:  to  talk  with
a fool  is  madness.

Why  do  you  complain  to  God  of  me,  O simpleton  ? Complain
of  the  wickedness  of  that  vile  fleshly  soul.

You  eat  halwa  (sweetmeat),  (then)  boils  break  out  in  you,
fever  lays  hold  of  you,  your  health  is  disordered.

^ I.e.  from  high  estate.

^ Literally,  “ties  up  the  manhood  of.”


362  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

2720  You  curse  Ibli's,  guiltless  (though  he  is).  How  do  you  not
see  (that)  that  deception  (proceeds)  from  yourself.?

It  is  not  (the  fault)  of  Iblis,  it  is  (the  fault)  of  yourself,  O
misguided  one,  that  you  are  running  like  a fox  towards  the  sheep’s
fat  tail.

When  you  see  the  fat  tails  in  the  green  field,  ’tis  a snare.  Why
are  you  ignorant  of  this?

You  are  ignorant  because  desire  for  the  fat  tail  has  made  you
far  from  knowledge  and  has  blinded  your  (spiritual)  eye  and
intelligence.

Your  love  of  (sensual)  things  makes  you  blind  and  deaf;  your
black  fleshly  soul  is  the  culprit:  do  not  quarrel  (with  others).

2725  Do  not  put  the  guilt  on  me,  do  not  see  upside  down.  I am
averse  to  evil  and  greed  and  enmity.

I did  an  evil  deed  and  am  still  repenting ; I am  waiting  that
my  night  may  turn  to  day.

I have  become  suspect  amongst  mankind:  every  man  and
woman  lay  their  (evil)  actions  on  me  (at  my  door).

The  helpless  wolf,  though  he  is  hungry,  is  suspected  of  being
in  luxury h

When,  because  of  feebleness,  he  cannot  go  his  way,  people
say  it  is  indigestion  (arising)  from  gross  (rich  and  heavy)  food.”

How  Mu'dwiya  once  more  pressed  Iblis  hard.

2730  He  said,  ‘‘Nothing  but  the  truth  will  save  you:  justice  is
calling  you  to  (speak)  the  truth.

Tell  the  truth,  so  that  you  may  be  delivered  from  my  hand:
cunning  will  not  lay  the  dust  of  my  war  (will  not  induce  me  to
leave  you  in  peace).”

He  (Iblis)  said,  ‘‘How  do  you  know  (the  difference  between)
falsehood  and  truth,  O thinker  of  vain  fancies,  (you  that  are)
filled  with  (idle)  thoughts  (about  me)?”

He  answered,  ‘‘The  Prophet  has  given  an  indication:  he  has
laid  down  the  touchstone  (criterion)  for  (distinguishing)  the
base  coin  and  the  good.

He  has  said,  ‘ Falsehood'^  is  (the  cause  of)  disquiet  in  (men’s)
hearts’;  he  has  said,  ‘Truth  is  (the  cause  of)  a joyous  tran-
quillity.’

2735  The  (troubled)  heart  is  not  comforted  by  lying  words : water
and  oil  kindle  no  light.

(Only)  in  truthful  speech  is  there  comfort  for  the  heart:
truths  are  the  bait  that  entraps  the  heart®.

' Literally,  “magnificence,”  “splendid  condition.”

- Read

^ Literally,  “ the  grain  of  the  snare  of  the  heart.”


IBLI'S  AND  MU‘aWIYA  363

Sick,  surely,  and  ill-savoured^  is  the  heart  that  knows  not
(cannot  distinguish)  the  taste  of  this  and  that.

When  the  heart  becomes  whole  (is  healed)  of  pain  and  disease,
it  will  recognise  the  flavour  of  falsehood  and  truth.

When  Adam’s  greed  for  the  wheat^  waxed  great,  it  robbed
Adam’s  heart  of  health.

Then  he  gave  ear  to  your  lies  and  enticements;  he  was  ^740
befooled  and  drank  the  killing  poison.

At  that  moment  he  knew  not  scorpion  {kazhdim)  from  wheat
{gandum) : discernment  flies  from  one  that  is  drunken  with  vain
desire.

The  people  are  drunken  with  cupidity  and  desire ; hence  they
are  accepting  your  cheatery.

Whoever  has  rid  his  nature  of  vain  desire  has  (thereby)  made
his  (spiritual)  eye  familiar  with  the  secret.

How  a cadi  complained  of  the  calamity  of  {holding)  the
office  of  cadi,  and  how  his  deputy  answered  him.

They  installed  a cadi,  (and  meanwhile)  he  w'ept.  The  deputy
said,  ‘O  cadi,  what  are  you  weeping  for?

This  is  not  the  time  for  you  to  weep  and  lament : it  is  the  time  2745
for  you  to  rejoice  and  receive  felicitations.’

‘Ah,’  said  he,  ‘how  shall  a man  without  insight  pronounce
judgement — an  ignorant  man  (decide)  between  two  who  know?

Those  two  adversaries  are  acquainted  with  their  own  case:
what  should  the  poor  cadi  know  of  those  two  tangles?

He  is  ignorant  and  unaware  of  their  (real)  state : how  should
he  proceed  (to  give  judgement)  concerning  their  lives  and
property?  ’

He  (the  deputy)  said,  ‘The  litigants  know  (the  truth  of  their
case)  and  (nevertheless)  are  unsound  (prejudiced);  you  are
ignorant  (of  the  facts),  but  you  are  the  luminary  of  the  whole
body  (of  Moslems),

Because  you  have  no  prejudice  to  interfere  (with  your  dis-  2750
cernment),  and  that  freedom  (from  prejudice)  is  light  to  the
eyes;

While  those  two  who  know  are  blinded  by  their  self-interest :
prejudice  has  put  their  knowledge  into  the  grave.

Unprejudicedness  makes  ignorance  w'ise;  prejudice  makes
knowledge  perverse  and  iniquitous.

So  long  as  you  accept  no  bribe,  you  are  seeing ; when  you  act
covetously,  you  are  blind  and  enslaved.’

I have  turned  my  nature  away  from  vain  desire:  1 have  not
eaten  delicious  morsels.

My  heart,  which  tastes  (and  distinguishes),  has  become  2755
bright  (like  a clear  mirror):  it  really  knows  truth  from  falsehood.

* Literally,  “ill-mouthed.”  ^ l.e.  the  forbidden  fruit.


sH


MATHNAwf,  BOOK  II


How  Mu‘ dwiya—may  God  be  well-pleased  with  himl —
induced  Iblis  to  confess.

Why  did  you  awaken  me?  You  are  the  enemy  of  wakefulness,
O trickster.

You  are  like  poppy-seeds:  you  put  every  one  to  sleep.  You
are  like  wine : you  take  away  understanding  and  knowledge.

I have  impaled  you.  Come,  tell  the  truth.  I know  what  is
true : do  not  seek  evasions.

I expect  from  every  person  (only)  that  of  which  by  nature
and  disposition  he  is  the  owner.

2760  I do  not  look  for  any  sugar  from  vinegar;  I do  not  take  the
catamite  for  a soldier.

I do  not,  like  (idolatrous)  infidels,  seek  (expect)  from  an  idol
that  it  should  be  God  or  even  a sign  from  God.

I do  not  seek  the  smell  of  musk  from  dung ; I do  not  seek  dry
bricks  in  river-water.

From  Satan,  who  is  other  (than  good),  I do  not  look  for  this —
that  he  should  awaken  me  with  good  (intent).”

How  Iblis  told  truly  his  hidden  thought  to  Mu'dwiya — may
God  be  well-pleased  with  him!

Iblis  spoke  many  words  of  deceit  and  treachery,  (but)  the
Amir  hearkened  not  to  him  and  strove  (against  him)  and  showed
fortitude.

2765  (At  length),  with  the  bitterest  pangs^  he  (Iblis)  said : “ O such-
and-such,  know  that  I awakened  you  for  the  purpose

That  you  might  join  the  congregation  (of  Moslems)  in  praying
after  the  Prophet  of  high  estate.

If  the  time  of  prayers  had  passed,  this  world  would  have
become  dark  to  you  and  without  a gleam  of  light ;

(And  then)  from  disappointment  and  grief  tears  would  have
flowed  from  your  two  eyes  in  the  fashion  of  (w'ater  from)  water-
skins,

(Because)  every  one  has  delight  in  some  act  of  devotion  and
consequently  cannot  bear  to  miss  it  (even)  for  a short  while.

2770  That  disappointment  and  grief  would  have  been  (as)  a
hundred  prayers:  what  is  (ritual)  prayer  in  comparison  with
the  (spiritual)  glow  of  humble  supplication?”

' Literally,  “from  the  roots  of  the  teeth,  i.e.  with  the  utmost  reluctance.”


IBLIS  AND  MU'aWIYA  365

The  excellence  of  the  remorse  felt  by  one  who  was  sincere  (in  his
devotion)  for  having  missed  the  congregational  prayers .

A certain  man  was  going  into  the  mosque  (when)  the  people
were  coming  out  of  the  mosque.

He  began  to  ask  (one  of  them),  saying,  “What  ails  the  con-
gregation that  they  are  coming  out  of  the  mosque  (so)  soon?  ”

That  person  said  to  him,  “The  Prophet  has  prayed  with  the
congregation  and  finished  (his)  communion.

How  art  thou  going  in,  O foolish  man,  when  the  Prophet  has
given  the  blessing?”

He  cried,  “Ah!”  and  smoke  issued  from  that  (burning)  sigh:  27-5
his  sigh  was  giving  forth  the  smell  of  blood  from  his  heart.

One  of  the  congregation  said,  “Give  me  this  sigh,  and  my
prayers  are  thine.”

He  answered,  “I  give  the  sigh  and  accept  the  prayers.”  He
(the  other)  took  that  sigh  with  a hundred  yearnings  (towards
God).

At  night,  whilst  (he  was)  asleep,  a Voice  said  to  him,  “Thou
hast  bought  the  Water  of  Life  and  salvation.

In  honour  of  this  choice  and  this  appropriation  the  prayers
of  all  the  people  have  been  accepted.”

Conclusion  of  the  confession  made  by  Iblis  to  Mu‘dwiya
of  his  deceit.

Then  ‘AzazfP  said  to  him,  “O  noble  Amir,  I must  lay  my  2;So
deceit  before  (you).

If  you  had  missed  the  prayers,  you  would  then  from  heartache
have  uttered  sighs  and  lamentations.

And  that  regret  and  that  lamentation  and  that  (sorrowful)
yearning  would  have  exceeded  (in  value)  two  hundred  litanies
and  prayers.

I aw^ened  you  in  fear  lest  such  a sigh  might  burn  the  veil
(of  formality).

In  order  that  such  a sigh  should  not  be  yours ; in  order  that
you  should  not  have  any  way  to  it.

I am  envious : from  envy  I acted  thus.  I am  the  enemy : my  2.-85
(proper)  work  is  deceit  and  malice.”

He  (Mu'awiya)  said,  “Now  you  have  told  the  truth,  you  are
veracious.  This  (deceit)  comes  (naturallv)  from  vou : to  this  you
are  adapted.

You  are  a spider,  you  have  flies  as  your  prey;  O cur,  I am  not
a fly,  (so)  do  not  worry.

I am  a white  falcon : the  King  hunts  me.  How  should  a spider
weave  his  web  about  me?

^ The  name  of  Iblis  before  his  fall.


366  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Go  now,  continue  to  catch  flies  as  far  as  you  can : invite  the
flies  to  (partake  of)  some  buttermilk;

2790  And  if  you  call  (them)  to  honey,  that  too  will  certainly  be  lies
and  buttermilk  (fraud).

You  awakened  me,  (but)  it  (that  awakenment)  was  (really)
slumber:  you  showed  (me)  a ship,  (but)  that  was  (really)  a
whirlpool.

You  were  calling  me  to  good  for  the  purpose  that  you  might
drive  me  away  from  the  better  good.”

How  a thief  escaped  because  some  one  gave  the  alarm  to  the  master
of  the  house,  who  had  nearly  overtaken  and  caught  the  thief.

This  (behaviour  of  Ibh's)  is  like  that  (which  is  told  in  the
following  story),  how  a certain  man  saw  a thief  in  the  house
and  ran  after  him.

He  ran  after  him  (the  length  of)  two  or  three  fields,  till  the
fatigue  threw  him  into  a sweat.

2/95  At  the  moment  when,  rushing  on,  he  had  come  so  near  to
him  that  he  might  spring  upon  him  and  seize  him.

The  second  thief  cried  out  to  him,  “ Come,  that  you  may  see
these  signs  of  calamity.

Be  quick  and  turn  back,  O man  of  (prompt)  action,  that  you
may  see  (how)  very  pitiable  (is)  the  state  of  things  here.”

He  (the  householder)  said  (to  himself),  “Maybe  a thief  is
yonder:  if  I do  not  return  at  once,  this  (fate)  will  befall  me.

He  may  lay  hands  upon  my  wife  and  child,  (and  in  that  case)
how  would  it  profit  me  to  bind  this  thief  (whom  I am  pursuing) }

2S00  This  Moslem  is  calling  me  in  kindness:  unless  I return
quickly,  evil  will  come  to  me.”

In  (confident)  hope  of  the  compassion  of  that  well-disposed
(friend),  he  left  the  thief  and  again  set  off  (in  another  direction).

“O  good  friend,”  said  he,  “what  is  the  matter.?  By  whose
hand  (violence)  is  this  lamentation  and  outcry  of  yours  (caused) .?  ’ ’

“Look  here,”  said  (the  other).  “See  the  thief’s  footprints!
The  pimping^  thief  has  gone  this  way.

Look  at  the  cuckold  thief’s  footprints  1 Follow  him  by  means
of  these  marks  and  traces.”

2805  He  answered,  “ O fool,  what  are  you  telling  me.?  Why,  I had
(as  good  as)  caught  him,

(But)  at  your  cry  I let  the  thief  go.  I deemed  you,  ass  (as  you
are),  a (reasonable)  man.

What  silly  gabble  and  nonsense  is  this,  O fellow?  I (had)
found  the  reality:  what  (use  to  me)  is  the  clue?”

He  replied,  “I  am  giving  you  a clue  to  the  real  (thing).  This
is  the  clue;  I am  acquainted  with  the  reality.”

1 Literally,  “cujus  uxor  pro  mercede  (conducitur).”


THE  ACCOMPLICE  WHO  GAVE  A FALSE  ALARM  367

He  (the  householder)  said,  “You  are  an  artful  knave  or  else
you  are  a fool ; nay,  you  are  a thief  and  cognisant  of  this  affair.

I was  (on  the  point  of)  dragging  my  adversary'  along,  (when)
you  let  him  escape,  saying  (to  me),  ‘Here  are  (his)  traces.’”

You  speak  of  (external)  relations,  (but)  I transcend  (all)
relations.  In  union  (with  God)  where  are  signs  or  evidences?

The  man  that  is  debarred  (from  the  Essence)  sees  the  (Divine)
action  (as  proceeding)  from  the  Attributes : he  that  has  lost  the
Essence  is  in  (confined  to)  the  Attributes.

Inasmuch  as  those  united  (with  God)  are  absorbed  in  the
Essence,  O son,  how  should  they  look  upon  His  Attributes?

When  your  head  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  river,  how  will  your
eye  fall  on  the  colour  of  the  water?

And  if  you  come  back  from  the  bottom  to  the  colour  of  the
water,  then  you  have  received  a coarse  woollen  garment  and
given  (fine)  fur^  (in  exchange).

The  piety  of  the  vulgar  is  sin  in  the  elect ; the  unitive  state  of
the  vulgar  is  a veil  in  the  elect-.

If  the  king  make  a vizier  a police  inspector,  the  king  is  his
enemy,  he  is  not  his  friend.

Also,  that  vizier  will  have  committed  some  offence : necessarily
change  (for  the  worse)  is  not  (does  not  occur)  without  cause.

He  that  has  been  a police  inspector  from  the  first — to  him  that
(office)  has  been  fortune  and  livelihood  from  the  beginning ;

But  he  that  was  first  the  king’s  vizier — evil-doing  is  the  cause
of  making  him  a police  inspector.

When  the  King  has  called  you  from  the  threshold  into  His
presence,  and  again  has  driven  you  back  to  the  threshold,

Know  for  sure  that  you  have  committed  a sin  and  in  folly
have  brought  forward  (pleaded)  compulsion  (as  the  cause),

Saying,  “This  was  my  (predestined)  portion  and  lot.”  (But)
then,  why  was  that  good  luck  in  your  hands  yesterday?

Through  folly  you  yourself  have  cut  off  your  lot.  The  worthy
man  augments  his  lot.

The  story  of  the  Hypocrites  and  their  building  the  Mosque
of  Opposition.

It  is  fit  if  you  will  hearken  to  another  parable  concerning
perversity  (taken)  from  the  narrative  in  the  Qur’an.

The  Hypocrites  played  against  the  Prophet  (just)  such  a
crooked  game  at  odd  and  even®  (as  was  played  by  Iblis  against
Mu'awiya),

^ Literally,  “hair.”

^ I.e.  in  their  case  it  would  be  a state  of  separation  from  God.

® A passage  in  Book  V,  where  this  phrase  occurs,  would  seem  to  indicate
that  the  meaning  is  “at  everj'  point.”


368  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

Saying,  “ Let  us  build  a mosque  for  the  glory  of  the  Moham-
medan religion  ” ; and  that  was  (really)  apostasy  (on  their  part).

Such  a crooked  game  were  they  playing : they  built  a mosque
other  than  his  mosque.

They  constructed  (well)  its  floor  and  roof  and  dome,  but  they
desired  to  disunite  the  (Moslem)  community.

2h3o  They  came  to  the  Prophet  with  (guileful)  entreaty:  they  knelt
as  camels  before  him.

Saying,  “O  Messenger  of  God,  wilt  thou  for  kindness’  sake
give  thyself  the  trouble ^ (to  walk)  to  that  mosque.

To  the  end  that  it  may  be  made  blessed  by  thy  approach —
may  thy  days  flourish  until  the  Resurrection !

It  is  a mosque  for  muddy  and  cloudy  days,  a mosque  for
days  of  sore  distress  in  times  of  poverty.

That  a (poor)  stranger  may  get  charity  and  room  (to  shelter)
there,  and  that  this  house  of  service  may  be  frequented,

2S35  So  that  the  rites  of  the  Religion  may  be  multiplied  and
abound ; because  a bitter  plight  is  sweetened  (by  being  shared)
with  friends.

Honour  that  place  (by  thy  presence)  for  a short  while:
declare  us  to  be  sincere,  and  give  a good  account  of  us.

Show  favour  to  the  mosque  and  its  founders.  Thou  art  the
moon,  we  are  the  night:  comply  with  us  for  a moment.

In  order  that  by  thy  beauty  night  may  be  made  like  day,  O
thou  whose  beauty  is  a night-illumining  sun.”

Alas!  would  that  those  words  had  been  from  the  heart,  so
that  the  desire  of  those  folk  might  have  been  accomplished  1
2840  Courtesy  that  comes  to  the  tongue  without  (sincerity  of)
heart  and  soul  is  like  herbs  on  the  ash-heap,  O friends.

Look  at  them  from  afar  and  pass  on : they  are  not  fit  for  eating
or  smelling,  O son.

Do  not,  indeed,  go  (incline)  towards  the  courtesy  of  the
faithless,  for  it  is  a ruined  bridge:  heed  well  (my  warning).

If  a fool  set  foot  on  it,  the  bridge  will  break,  and  will  shatter
that  foot  of  his.

Wherever  an  army  is  routed,  it  is  because  of  two  or  three
effeminate  weaklings.

2845  He  (the  poltroon)  comes  armed  into  the  battle-line,  like  a
man : they  (the  soldiers)  put  their  trust  in  him^,  saying,  “Here’s
the  Comrade  of  the  Cave®.”

He  turns  his  face  (in  flight)  when  he  sees  wounds : his  going
breaks  your  back^.

This  (topic)  is  long  and  is  expanding,  and  that  which  is  aimed
at  is  becoming  hidden  (from  sight).

^ Literally,  “trouble  thy  feet.”  ® Literally,  “set  their  hearts  on  him.”

* I.e.  Abu  Bakr,  the  trusted  friend  of  the  Prophet.

* I.e.  deals  a fatal  blow  to  your  hopes  of  victory.


THE  MOSQUE  OF  OPPOSITION


369


How  the  Hypocrites  cajoled  the  Prophet — God  bless  and  save

him! — that  they  might  take  him  to  the  Mosque  of  Opposition.

They  chanted  spells  over  (spoke  deceitful  words  to)  the
jVlessenger  of  God : they  were  driving  (hard)  the  steed  of  cunning
and  craft.

The  kind  and  compassionate  iMessenger  proflFered  (in  reply)
nothing  but  smiles,  nothing  but  “Yes.”

He  expressed  (his)  thanks  to  that  company  (deputation) : he  2=50
gladdened  the  envoys  in  (by)  assent.

Their  deceit  was  apparent  to  him,  point  by  point,  in  the  same
way  as  hairs  in  milk.

That  courteous  one  feigned  not  to  see  the  hairs ; that  polite
one  said  “Bravo!”  to  the  milk.

Myriad  hairs  of  deceit  and  fraud  (he  beheld),  and  at  that  time
he  closed  his  eyes  to  it  all.

That  ocean  of  bounty  spoke  truly  (when  he  said),  “I  am
kinder  unto  you  than  you  (yourselves  are).

I am  seated  at  the  edge  of  a fire  with  an  exceedingly  unpleasant  2S55
blaze  and  flame ;

Ye  are  hastening  towards  it  like  moths,  (while)  both  my
hands  have  become  moth-flaps  (to  beat  you  off).”

When  the  Prophet  had  resolved  to  set  out  (to  the  Mosque),
the  jealousy  of  God  cried,  “Do  not  hearken  to  the  ghouP !

For  these  wicked  men  have  used  deceit  and  cunning:  what
they  have  put  forward  is  entirely  the  reverse  (of  the  truth).

Their  intent  was  nothing  but  (to  bring)  black  shame  (upon
thee) : when  have  Christians  or  Jews  sought  the  welfare  of  the
(true)  Religion?

They  (the  Hypocrites)  have  built  a mosque  upon  Hell’s  2S60
bridge:  they  have  played  the  game  of  trickery  with  God.

Their  aim  is  to  cause  disunion  amongst  the  Companions  of
the  Prophet ; how  should  any  vain  fool  understand  the  grace  of
God?

(They  have  built  the  Mosque)  in  order  that  they  may  fetch
hither  a Jew  from  Syria,  with  whose  preaching  the  Jews  are
intoxicated.”

The  Prophet  said  (to  the  Hypocrites),  “Yes  (I  will  do  as  ye
wish),  but  (just  now)  we  are  intending  to  march  and  starting  on
a campaign.

As  soon  as  I return  from  this  expedition,  I will  then  set  out
to  that  Mosque  at  once.”

He  (thus)  put  them  off  and  hurried  to  the  field  of  war : he  2S65
played  a game  of  trickery  with  the  tricksters.

When  he  came  back  from  the  campaign,  they  returned  and
sought  (the  fulfilment  of)  that  past  promise.

^ I.e.  “do  not  listen  to  the  voice  of  temptation.”


N u


24


370  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

God  said  to  him,  “O  Prophet,  proclaim  the  treachery  (with
which  they  have  acted),  and  if  war  be  (the  consequence),  sav,
‘Let  it  be!’”

He  (the  Prophet)  said,  “O  false  people,  be  silent!  Hush,  lest
I tell  your  secret  thoughts.”

When  he  had  declared  (to  them)  a few  indications  of  their
inmost  thoughts,  they  were  in  evil  plight^.

2S70  Thereupon  the  envoys  turned  back  from  him  crying,  “God
forfend ! God  forfend ! ”

Ever}'  Hypocrite,  by  way  of  fraud,  brought  a Qur’an  under
his  arm  to  the  Prophet,

In  order  to  take  oaths — for  oaths  are  a shield ; (this  they  did)
because  (taking)  oaths  is  a custom  followed  by  the  w'icked.

Since  the  wicked  man  does  not  keep  faith  in  (matters  of)
religion,  he  will  break  (his)  oath  at  any  time.

The  righteous  have  no  need  of  (taking)  oath,  because  they
have  two  clear  (discerning)  eyes.

2875  Breach  of  compacts  and  covenants  is  (the  result)  of  stupidity ;
keeping  of  oaths  and  faithfulness  (to  one’s  word)  is  the  practice
of  him  that  fears  God.

Said  the  Prophet,  “Shall  I take  your  oaths  as  true,  or  the
oath  of  God?”

Again  those  people,  the  Qur’an  in  their  hands  and  the  seal  of
fasting  on  their  lips,  swore  another  oath.

Saying,  “By  the  truth  of  this  holy  and  true  Word  (we  swear)
that  the  building  of  the  Mosque  is  for  God’s  sake.

In  that  place  there  is  no  contrivance  of  deceit : in  that  place
there  is  (only)  commemoration  (of  God)  and  sincerity  and  calling
unto  the  Lord.”

2S80  The  Prophet  answered,  “The  voice  of  God  is  coming  into
my  ear  like  an  echo.

God  hath  put  a seal  upon  your  ears,  so  that  they  make  not
haste  to  (hear)  the  voice  of  God.

Lo,  the  voice  of  God  is  coming  to  me  distinctly:  it  is  filtered
clear  for  me,  like  the  pure  (liquor)  from  the  dregs  ” —

Even  as  Moses  from  the  direction  of  the  Bush  heard  the  voice
of  God  saying,  “O  thou  of  blessed  fortune!”

From  the  Bush  he  was  hearing  (the  words),  “Lo,  lam  Allah,”
and  together  with  the  words  there  appeared  (Divine)  lights.

2885  Inasmuch  as  they  (the  Hypocrites)  were  left  in  the  lurch  by
the  light  of  (Divine)  inspiration,  they  once  more  began  to  recite
oaths  anew.

Since  God  calls  an  oath  a shield,  how  should  the  quarreller
lay  down  the  shield  from  his  hand?

Again  the  Prophet,  giving  (them)  the  lie  direct,  said  to  them
in  plain  terms,  “Ye  have  lied.”

^ Literally,  “their  affair  became  bad."


THE  MOSQUE  OF  OPPOSITION  371

How  one  of  the  Companions — -may  God  he  well-pleased  with
them! — thought  {to  himself ) disapprovingly,  “ Why  does  not
the  Prophet — God  bless  and  save  him! — throw  a veil  {over  their
hypocrisy)?”

(Their  request  was  ignominiously  refused),  so  that  one  of  the
Prophet’s  Companions  conceived  in  his  heart  dislike^  of  that
recoilment,

Thinking,  “Grey-haired  and  venerable  old  men  like  these —
this  Prophet  is  putting  them  to  shame.

Where  is  generosity?  Where  cloaking  (of  sins)?  Where
modesty  (respect  for  the  feelings  of  others)  ? The  prophets  cover
up  hundreds  of  thousands  of  faults.”

Quickly,  again,  in  his  heart  he  asked  pardon  of  God,  lest  he
should  be  disgraced^  for  objecting  (to  the  Prophet’s  behaviour).

The  turpitude®  of  befriending  the  Hypocrites  made  the  true
believer  wicked  and  rebellious  like  them.

Again  he  was  crying  in  supplication,  “O  Thou  who  knowest
the  inmost  consciousness,  do  not  leave  me  persisting  in  unbelief!

My  heart  is  not  in  my  control,  as  (my)  eyesight  (is);  else  I
would  at  this  moment  burn  my  heart  in  anger.”

(Whilst  he  was)  in  this  thought,  slumber  seized  him.  To  him
(dreaming),  their  mosque  seemed  full  of  dung:

A corrupted  place,  its  stones  (steeped)  in  filth : from  the  stones
floated  up  black  smoke.

The  smoke  went  into  his  throat  and  made  it  smart:  terrified^
by  the  bitter  smoke,  he  sprang  from  sleep.

Forthwith  he  fell  on  his  face  and  wept,  saying,  “O  God,
these  things  are  the  sign  of  (their)  disbelief.

Wrath  (against  them)  is  better,  O God,  than  such  forbearance
(as  mine),  which  separates  me  from  the  light  of  Faith.”

If  you  scrutinise  the  labour  of  them  that  follow  falsehood,
(you  will  see  that)  it  is  stinking,  coat  upon  coat,  like  an  onion-—
Every  one  (of  their  efforts)  more  pithless  than  another,
(while),  in  the  case  of  the  sincere,  (every  effort)  is  more  excellent
than  the  other.

Those  folk  (the  Hypocrites)  tied  a hundred  belts  on  their
mantles®  in  order  to  destroy  the  Mosque  of  the  people  of
Quba —

Even  as  the  Lords  of  the  Elephant  (who  abode)  in  Abyssinia
made  a Ka‘ba,  (but)  God  set  it  afire;

(And  then)  they  (the  Abyssinians)  made  an  attempt  on  the

* Literally,  “disapproval  came  into  his  heart.”

- Literally,  “ become  pale-faced.”

^ Literally,  “ inauspiciousness.”

* Literally,  “from  terror  of.”

^ I.e.  “girt  themselves  up  with  the  utmost  zeal."


zioo


= ^95


2'lOO


372  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Ka'ba  in  revenge:  read  from  the  Word  (of  God)  how  they
fared !

2905  The  reprobates^  of  the  Religion  have  indeed  no  equipment
but  cunning  and  deceit  and  contentiousness.

Every  Companion  saw  plainly  (in  sleep)  some  vision  of  that
Alosque,  so  that  the  secret  (purpose)  of  it  became  to  them
certain  knowledge.

If  I should  relate  the  visions,  one  by  one,  then  the  purity  (of
the  Companions)  would  become  certain  to  them  that  doubt;

But  I am  afraid  of  revealing  their  mystery : they  are  the  dis-
dainful loved  ones  (of  God),  and  disdain  beseems  them.

They  have  received  the  (religious)  Law  (directly  from  God)
without  mechanical  imitation  (of  others) : they  have  taken  that
(unadulterated)  coin  without  (applying)  the  touchstone.

29JO  The  Wisdom  of  the  Qur’an  is  like  the  true  believer’s  stray
camel:  every  one  has  certain  (intuitive)  knowledge  of  his  own
stray.


Story  of  the  person  who  was  seeking  after  his  stray  camel
and  inquiring  about  it.

(If)  you  have  lost  a camel  and  sought  it  busily,  how  should
you  not  know,  when  you  find  it,  that  it  is  yours?

What  is  the  stray?  You  have  lost  a she-camel:  (she  has)  fled
from  your  herd  into  a veil  (of  concealment).

The  caravaneers  have  begun  to  load,  (but)  your  camel  is  lost
(and  has  disappeared)  from  the  midst  (of  the  caravan).

You  are  running  to  and  fro  with  parched  lips;  the  caravan
is  (now)  far  away,  and  night  is  near.

2915  Your  baggage  is  left  on  the  ground,  (lying)  on  the  road  of
peril,  (whilst)  you  are  running  about  in  search  of  the  camel.

Crying,  “O  Moslems,  who  has  seen  a camel  which  this
morning  escaped  from  a stable?

Whoever  will  tell  (me)  a clue  to  my  camel,  I will  give  so  many
dirhems  as  a reward  (for  the  information).”

You  are  requesting  clues  from  every  one:  every  rascal  is
making  a mock  of  you  on  this  account.

Saying,  “We  saw  a camel  going  in  this  direction,  a reddish
camel  (going)  towards  yonder  pasturage.”

29:0  One  (of  them)  says,  “It  was  crop-eared,”  and  another  says,
“Its  saddle-cloth  was  embroidered.”

One  says,  “The  camel  had  (only)  one  eye,”  and  another  says,
“It  (was  suffering)  from  mange  (and)  had  no  hair.”

For  the  sake  of  the  reward  every  rascal,  (speaking)  at  random,
sets  forth  a hundred  clues.


* Literally,  “the  black-faced  ones.'


THE  TRUE  believer’s  STRAY  CAMEL  373


On  being  perplexed  amidst  discordant  doctrines  and  finding
(a  means  of)  escape  and  deliverance .

(This  is)  even  as  in  the  matter  of  knowledge  (of  God)  every
one  describes  (differently)  the  Unseen  Object  of  description.

The  philosopher  gives  an  explanation  of  another  (a  particular)
kind ; a scholastic  theologian  invalidates  his  statement ;

And  some  one  else  jeers  at  both  of  them,  while  another  ^925
hypocritically  tires  himself  to  death  (trying  to  prove  that  he
has  real  knowledge  of  God).

Each  one  (of  them)  gives  these  indications  of  the  Way,  in  order
that  it  may  be  supposed  that  they  belong  to  that  Village.

Know  the  truth  to  be  this,  (that)  all  these  (various  persons)
are  not  in  the  right ; nor  (again)  are  this  herd  entirely  astray.

Because  nothing  false  is  shown  without  the  True  : the  fool
bought  (desired)  spurious  coin  in  the  hope  of  (its  being)  gold.

If  there  were  no  current  (genuine)  coin  in  the  world,  how
would  it  be  possible  to  issue  false  coins?

Unless  there  be  truth,  how  should  there  be  falsehood?  That  2930
falsehood  receives  brilliance  (prestige  and  reputation)  from
truth.

They  buy  (desire)  the  wrong  in  hope  of  (its  being)  the  right :

(if)  poison  go  into  a piece  of  sugar,  then  (and  then  only)  they
eat  (poison).

If  there  be  no  savoury^  wheat,  what  shall  he  get  who  sells
barley,  pretending  that  it  is  wheat?

Do  not  say,  then,  that  all  these  utterances  are  false:  the  false
(pretenders)  are  a snare  to  the  heart  on  the  ground  of  (because
they  give)  hope  of  truth  2.

Do  not  say,  then,  that  all  (this)  is  phantasy  and  error : without
truth  phantasy  exists  not  in  the  world.

Truth  is  the  Night  of  Power  (which  is)  hidden  amidst  the  2935
(other)  nights  in  order  that  the  soul  may  make  trial  of  every
night.

Not  all  nights  are  (the  Night  of)  Power,  O youth,  nor  are  all
nights  void  of  that  (Night).

Amongst  the  wearers  of  the  dervish-cloak  there  is  one  (true)
dervish:  make  trial,  and  accept  him  that  is  true.

Where  is  the  sagacious  and  discerning  believer,  that  he  may
distinguish  effeminate  wretches  from  men?

If  there  be  no  faulty  things  in  the  world,  all  fools  would  be
(shrewd)  merchants.

Then  it  would  be  very  easy  to  know  (the  value  of)  goods ; 2940

* Literally,  “pleasant  to  taste  and  eat.”

“ I.e.  they  win  the  heart  because  it  is  hoped  or  believed  that  they  are  not
false,  but  true.


374  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

when  there  is  no  defect,  what  (is  the  difference  between)  the
incompetent  and  the  competent  (appraiser)?

And  if  everything  is  faulty,  knowledge  is  of  no  advantage:
since  everything  here  is  (common)  wood,  aloes-wood  is  not
(to  be  found).

He  that  says,  “All  are  true” — ’tis  folly  (on  his  part);  and  he
that  says,  “All  are  false” — he  is  damned.

Those  who  trade  with  the  prophets  have  gained  (thereby);
those  who  trade  with  colour  and  scent  (worldly  vanities)  are
blind  and  blue  (miserable).

The  snake  {mar)  appears  in  the  eye  as  riches  {mdl) : rub  both
your  eyes  well !

2945  Do  not  consider  the  happiness  of  this  (worldly)  traffic  and
profit:  consider  the  perdition  of  Pharaoh  and  Thamud.


On  makifig  trial  of  everything,  so  that  the  good  and  evil
which  are  in  it  may  be  brought  to  view.

The  sky,  w'hich  is  beautiful  and  glorious — God  saith,  Then
turn  thy  gaze  again  (towards  it).

As  regards  this  roof  of  light,  be  not  content  with  one  look :
look  (many)  times,  see.  Are  there  any  flaws?

Since  He  hath  told  you  to  look  ofttimes  at  this  goodly  roof,
as  a man  seeking  faults.

You  may  know,  then,  how  much  seeing  and  discerning  the
dark  earth  needs,  to  gain  approval.

2950  In  order  that  we  may  strain  the  pure  (folk)  from  the  dregs,
how  much  tribulation  must  our  minds  endure !

The  trials  of  winter  and  autumn,  the  heat  of  summer,  spring
like  the  spirit  (of  life).

Winds  and  clouds  and  lightnings — (all  these  are  to  the  end)
that  (such)  happenings  may  bring  distinctions  into  view ;

(To  the  end)  that  dust-coloured  (dusky)  earth  may  bring
forth  all  that  it  holds  in  its  bosom,  (whether)  ruby  or  stone.

Whatsoever  this  dark  earth  has  stolen  from  the  Treasury  of
God  and  the  Sea  of  Bounty —

2955  Providence,  the  (Divine)  governor,  says,  “Tell  the  truth!
Declare  what  thou  hast  carried  off,  hair  by  hair.”

The  thief,  that  is,  the  earth,  says,  “Nothing,  nothing!”  The
Governor  (then)  puts  it  to  the  torture.

Sometimes  the  Governor  speaks  to  it  with  kindness  (sweet)
as  sugar;  sometimes  he  hangs  it  up  (in  the  air),  and  does  his
worst^.

In  order  that,  between  force  and  favour,  those  concealed
things  may  be  brought  to  sight  through  the  fire  of  fear  and
hope.

^ Literally,  “whatever  is  worst.’’


THE  TRUE  believer’s  STRAY  CAMEL  375

Spring  is  the  kindness  of  the  Almighty  Governor,  and
Autumn  is  God’s  intimidation  and  menace,

And  Winter  is  the  allegorical  crucifixion,  to  the  end  that  thou,  2960
O hidden  thief,  mayst  he  exposed.

Then  (again),  he  that  wages  the  (spiritual)  warfare  has  at  one
time  (joyous)  expansion  of  heart,  at  another  time  (grievous)
oppression  and  pain  and  torment^.

Because  this  w^ater  and  clay,  which  is  (the  stuff  of)  our  bodies,
is  the  denier  (enemy)  and  thief  of  the  light  of  (our)  souls.

The  High  God  lays  upon  our  body,  O man  of  fortitude^,  heat
and  cold  and  grief  and  pain.

Fear  and  hunger  and  impairment  of  wealth  and  body — all  for
the  sake  of  the  soul’s  coin  being  brought  into  sight  (and  use).

These  threats  and  promises  He  hath  sent  forth  on  account  of  2 565
this  good  and  evil  which  He  hath  mingled.

Inasmuch  as  truth  and  falsehood  have  been  mingled®,  and
the  good  and  bad  coin  have  been  poured^  into  the  travelling-
bag®.

Therefore  they  need  a picked  touchstone,  one  that  has  under-
gone (many)  tests  in  (assaying)  realities.

So  that  it  may  become  a criterion  for  these  impostures;  so
that  it  may  be  a standard  for  these  acts  of  providence.

Give  him  milk,  O mother  of  Moses,  and  cast  him  into  the
water:  be  not  afraid  of  (putting  him  to)  the  trial.

Whoever  drank  that  milk  on  the  Day  of  Alast^  distinguishes  2970
the  milk  (in  this  world),  even  as  Moses  (distinguished  and  knew
his  mother’s  milk).

If  thou  wishest  fondly  for  thy  child’s  discrimination  (and
recognition),  suckle  (him)  now,  O mother  of  Moses,

That  he  may  know  the  taste  of  his  mother’s  milk,  and  that
his  head  may  not  sink  to  (desire  and  accept  the  milk  of)  a bad
nurse.


Explaining  the  moral  of  the  story  of  the  person  seeking
(the  lost)  camel.

You  have  lost  a camel,  O trusty  (friend),  and  every  one  is
giving  you  a clue  to  the  camel.

You  know  not  where  the  camel  is,  but  you  know  that  these
clues  are  wrong.

And  he  that  has  not  lost  a camel — he  (too)  in  contention  2973
seeks  a camel,  just  like  him  who  has  (really)  lost  it,

* “ Torment  ” is  used  to  translate  ghishsh  u ghill,  literally,  “ latent  spite  and
rancour,”  (or  “insincerity  and  dissimulation”),  which  torment  the  heart.

- Literally,  “lion-man.”  ^ Lj^erally,  “ they  have  mingled.”

‘ Literally,  “they  have  poured.”  . , , j j ..

^ Hurumddn,  literally,  “receptacle  for  things  which  are  jealously  guarded.

« The  Primi  Covenant  in  the  state  of  pre-existence.


»


♦


376  MATHNAWr,  BOOK  II

Saying,  “Yes;  I too  have  lost  a camel:  I have  brought  a
reward  for  any  one  who  may  find  it.”

(He  says  this)  that  he  may  take  a partner’s  share  with  you  in
the  camel:  he  plays  this  trick  because  of  coveting  the  camel.

If  you  say  to  any  one,  “ That  clue  was  false,”  he  (the  pretender) ,
in  imitation  of  you,  says  the  same.

He  does  not  know  wrong  clues  from  right,  but  your  words
are  a cue^  to  that  imitator.

29S0  When  they  mention  right  and  likely  clues,  then  comes  to  you
the  certainty  in  which  there  is  no  doubt.

That  (clue)  becomes  balm-  to  your  sick  soul;  it  becomes
(brings)  colour  to  your  face  and  health  and  strength  to  you.

Your  eye  becomes  bright,  your  foot  nimble®;  your  body
becomes  (the  vital)  soul,  and  your  (vital)  soul  (the  rational)
spirit.

Then  you  will  say,  “O  trusted  (friend),  you  have  spoken  the
truth:  these  clues  are  a clear  deliverance  (communication  and
message).

Therein  are  (manifest)  signs,  sure  informations,  (distinct)
evidences:  this  is  a title-deed  and  an  ordainment  of  salvation.”

29S5  When  he  has  given  this  clue,  you  will  say,  “ Go  before  (me) !
It  is  time  for  (setting  out  on)  the  enterprise : be  thou  the  leader !

I will  follow  thee,  O truth-teller:  thou  hast  got  scent  of  my
camel : show  (me)  where  (it  is).”

(But)  to  that  person  who  is  not  the  owner  of  a camel,  and
who  is  (engaged)  in  this  quest  of  the  camel  for  contention’s
sake —

His  certainty  is  not  increased  by  this  right  clue,  save  through
reflexion  from  the  true  camel-seeker.

From  his  (the  latter’s)  earnestness  and  ardour  he  (the  imi-
tator) gets  a scent  (inkling)  that  these  wild  outcries  of  his  are
not  (mere)  babble.

2990  He  (the  imitator)  had  no  just  claim  to  this  camel,  but  he  too
has  lost  a camel ; yes,  (he  has).

Desire  for  another’s  camel  has  become  a veil  to  him,  (so  that)
he  has  forgotten  what  he  (himself)  has  lost.

Wherever  he  (the  owner)  runs,  this  one  (the  imitator)  runs:
from  cupidity,  he  becomes  a partner  in  the  owner’s  pain.

When  a liar  sets  out  (to  journey)  with  a truthful  man,  his
falsehood  turns  to  truth  of  a sudden.

In  the  desert  whither  that  camel  had  hastened,  the  other  one
(the  imitator)  also  found  his  own  camel.

2995  As  soon  as  he  saw  it,  he  remembered  his  owm,  and  ceased  to
covet  the  camels  of  friend  and  kinsman.

That  imitator  became  a true  searcher  when  he  saw  his  camel
browsing  there.

^ Literally,  “staff.”  ‘ Literally,  “remedy.”  ’ Literally,  “running.”


THE  TRUE  believer’s  STRAY  CAMEL  377

(Only)  at  that  moment  did  he  become  a seeker  of  the  camel :
he  was  never  (truly)  seeking  it  till  he  saw  it  in  the  desert.

After  that,  he  began  to  go  alone:  he  opened  his  eyes  (and
went)  towards  his  own  camel.

The  sincere  one  said,  “You  have  left  me,  (although)  till  now
you  were  paying  regard  to  me.”

He  replied,  “Hitherto  I have  been  an  idle  scoffer  and,  from  3003
cupidity,  have  been  (engaged)  in  flattering  (thee) ;

(But)  now,  when  corporeally  I have  become  parted  from  thee
in  the  search,  I have  become  sympathetic  with  thee  (in  spirit).

I was  stealing  the  camel’s  description  from  thee;  (but  when)
my  spirit  saw  its  own  camel,  it  had  its  eye  filled  (with  seeing).

Till  I found  it,  I was  not  seeking  it;  now  the  copper  is  over-
come, the  gold  overpowers  it.

Aly  evil  deeds  have  become  pious  acts  entirely — thanks  (to
God) ! Jest  is  vanished  and  earnest  is  realised — thanks  (to  God) !

Since  my  evil  deeds  have  become  the  means  of  (my)  attaining  3005
unto  God,  do  not,  then,  throw  any  blame  on  my  evil  deeds.

Thee  thy  sincerity  had  made  a seeker;  for  me,  toil  and  search
opened  (the  way  to)  a sincere  feeling.

Thy  sincerity  led  thee  to  seek ; my  seeking  led  me  to  a feeling
of  sincerity.

I was  sowing  the  seed  of  fortune  in  the  earth,  (though)  I
fancied  it  was  labour  without  wages  and  hire.

’Twas  not  labour  without  hire;  ’twas  an  excellent  earning:

(for)  every  grain  that  I sowed,  a hundred  grew.

The  thief  went  underhand  (by  stealth)  to  a certain  house:  3010
when  he  entered,  he  saw  that  it  was  his  own  house.”

Be  hot,  O cold  one,  that  heat  may  come : put  up  with  rough-
ness, that  ease  may  come.

That  (subject  of  my  discourse)  is  not  two  camels;  it  is  a
single  camel.  Verbal  expression  is  confined,  the  meaning  (to
be  expressed)  is  very  full.

The  expression  always  fails  to  reach  the  meaning;  hence  the
Prophet  said,  “(Whoso  knows  God),  his  tongue  falters.”

Speech  is  (like)  an  astrolabe  in  (its)  reckoning:  how  much
does  it  know  of  the  sky  and  the  sun? —

Especially,  of  that  Sky  whereof  this  heaven  is  (no  more  than)  ,015
a blade  of  straw ; (that  Sky)  of  whose  Sun  the  (terrestrial)  sun  is
(but)  a mote?

Showing  that  there  is  in  every  soul  the  mischief  of  the
Mosque  of  Opposition.

When  it  appeared  that  that  was  not  a mosque,  (but)  was  a
house  of  intrigue  and  a trap  laid  by  the  Jews,

The  Prophet  then  gave  the  command  (and  said),  “ Rase  it  and
make  it  a dumping-place  for  rubbish  and  ashes.”


378  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

The  founder  of  thfe  Mosque  was  false,  like  the  Mosque
(itself):  ’tis  not  munificence  if  you  sprinkle  grain  upon  a snare.

The  meat  that  catches  the  fish  on  the  hook — such  a morsel  is
neither  bounty  nor  generosity.

The  Mosque  of  the  people  of  Quba,  which  was  inanimate —
he  (the  Prophet)  did  not  admit  to  (equality  with)  it  that  which
was  not  its  equal.

(Even)  in  the  case  of  lifeless  things  such  a wrong  did  not
come  to  pass : the  lord  of  justice  (Mohammed)  set  fire  to  that
unequal  (and  incongruous  Mosque).

Therefore  (a  fortiori)  in  the  case  of  the  (human)  essences,
which  are  the  foundation  of  all  fundamentals,  know  that  there
(too)  there  are  differences  and  divisions.

Neither  is  his  (one  man’s)  life  like  his  (another  man’s)  life,
nor  is  his  death  like  his  death.

Never  deem  his  (this  one’s)  grave  like  his  (that  one’s)  grave.
How  indeed  shall  I describe  the  difference  (between  them)  in
that  (other)  world?

Put  thy  work  to  the  touchstone,  O man  of  work,  lest  thou
build  the  Mosque  of  the  Opposers.

Oft  hast  thou  mocked  at  those  Mosque-makers;  (but)  when
thou  considerest  (carefully),  thou  thyself  hast  been  one  of  them.

Story  of  the  Indian  who  quarrelled  with  his  friend  over  a certain

action  and  was  not  aware  that  he  too  was  afflicted  with  {guilty

of)  it.

Four  Indians  went  into  a mosque:  they  bowed  their  heads
and  prostrated  themselves  for  worship’s  sake.

Each  one  performed  the  takbir  (following)  upon  a niyyat,  and
began  to  pray  with  lowliness  and  contrition.

(When)  the  muezzin  came,  from  one  of  them  fell  a remark^ —
“O  muezzin,  have  you  g^ven  the  call  to  prayers?  Is  it  time?”

) The  second  Indian  said  on  the  spur  of  the  moment^,  “Hey,
you  have  spoken,  and  (so)  your  prayer  is  null.”

The  third  one  said  to  the  second,  “O  uncle,  why  do  you  rail
at  him?  Tell  yourself  (how  to  behave).”

Said  the  fourth,  “Praise  be  to  God  that  I have  not  fallen  into
the  pit  (of  error),  like  those  three  persons.”

Hence  the  prayers  of  all  the  four  were  marred ; and  the  fault-
finders went  astray  more  (than  he  who  made  the  original
mistake).

Oh,  happy  the  soul  that  saw  its  own  fault,  and  if  any  one
told  (found)  a fault,  wished  eagerly  (to  take)  that  (fault)  upon
itself ! —

^ Literally,  “an  utterance  escaped.”

“ Literally,  “from  the  need  (which  he  felt  of  expressing  his  feelings).”


THE  FOUR  INDIANS


379

Because  half  of  him  (every  man)  has  always  belonged  to  the  3035
realm  of  faults^,  and  the  other  half  of  him  to  the  realm  of  the
Unseen.

Since  you  have  ten  sores  on  your  head,  you  must  apply  the
plaster  to  yourself.

Finding  fault  with  the  sore  (in  yourself)  is  the  (right)  remedy
for  him  (who  is  at  fault) ; when  he  has  become  broken  (contrite),
it  is  (then)  the  (proper)  occasion  for  (obeying  the  Prophet’s
injunction),  “Have  pity.”

(Even)  if  you  have  not  the  same  fault,  be  not  secure ; maybe,
that  fault  will  afterwards  become  notorious  in  vou.

You  have  not  heard  from  God  (the  comforting  words)  Do
not  fear : why,  then,  have  you  deemed  yourself  secure  and  happy  ?

For  years  Iblis  lived  in  good  renown;  (afterwards)  he  was  3040
disgraced:  mark  what  is  (the  meaning  of)  his  name.

His  eminence  was  famed  throughout  the  (celestial)  world;
(then)  his  fame  turned  to  infamy ^ — oh,  alas  for  him !

Do  not  seek  fame  till  you  are  secure : wash  your  face  of  fear,
then  show  your  face.

Until  your  (own)  beard  grows,  my  good  man,  do  not  jeer  at
another  whose  chin  is  smooth.

Consider  this,  that  his  (Satan’s)  soul  was  tried  (by  the  wrath
of  God),  so  that  he  is  fallen  in  (sunk  in  perdition);  and  (in  his
fall)  he  became  a warning  to  you.

You  did  not  fall,  so  that  you  should  be  a warning  to  him.  He  3045
drank  the  poison : eat  you  his  sugar !

How  the  Ghuzz  set  about  killing  one  man  in  order  that
another  might  be  terrorised.

Those  blood-shedding  (murderous)  Ghuzz  Turcomans  came,
and  entered  a village  (on  a raid)  for  plunder.

They  found  two  of  the  notables  of  that  village,  and  made
(ready  in)  haste  to  put  one  (of  the  two)  to  death.

They  tied  his  hands  in  order  to  sacrifice  (kill)  him.  He  said,

“O  princes  and  high  pillars  (of  the  empire).

For  what  reason  are  ye  seeking  to  slay  me?  Wherefore,  pray,
are  ye  thirsting  after  my  blood?

What  is  the  wisdom,  what  is  the  object,  in  killing  me,  when  3050
I am  so  poor  and  bare-bodied  ? ”

He  (one  of  the  Ghuzz)  replied,  “To  strike  awe  into  this
friend  of  yours,  so  that  he  may  be  afraid  and  produce  (his)  gold.”

He  (the  man)  said,  “Why,  he  is  poorer  than  I.”  “He  has
done  it  (made  himself  out  to  be  poor)  on  purpose,”  replied  the
other;  “he  has  gold.”


^ I.e.  the  world  of  evil.

^ Literally,  “was  reversed.”


380  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

He  (the  man)  said,  “Since  it  is  (a  matter  of)  opinion,  we
are  both  the  same:  we  are  (equally)  exposed  to^  (mere)  proba-
bility and  doubt.

Kill  him  first,  O princes,  in  order  that  I may  be  afraid  and
point  out  the  way  to  the  gold.”

3055  See,  then,  the  lovingkindnesses  of  God,  in  that  we  have  come
(into  the  world)  in  the  latter  days,  at  the  very  end.

The  last  epoch  is  in  front  of  the  (other)  epochs : in  the  Tradi-
tions of  the  Prophet  is  (the  saying) — “(We  are)  the  last  (in
time),  the  foremost  (in  excellence).”

In  order  that  the  destruction  of  the  people  of  Noah  and  the
people  of  Hiid  might  display  to  our  souls  the  proclaimer^  of
(Divine)  Mercy  (who  calls  us  to  repentance).

He  (God)  slew  them,  that  we  might  fear  Him ; and  if  indeed
He  had  done  contrariwise,  alas  for  thee!

Explaining  the  state  of  those  who  are  self-conceited  and  unthankful

for  the  blessing  of  the  existence  of  the  prophets  and  saints — peace

be  unto  them!

Whosoever  of  them  (the  proclaimers  of  Divine  Mercy)  has
spoken  of  fault  and  sin,  and  of  a heart  like  stone,  and  of  a black
soul;

3060  And  of  holding  light  His  commands,  and  of  being  free  from
care  for  His  To-morrow®;

And  of  being,  like  women,  enslaved  to  the  fleshly  soul  by
passion  and  by  love  of  this  vile  world ;

And  of  fleeing  from  the  pungent  sayings  of  sincere  coun-
sellors, and  of  shrinking  from  the  countenance  of  the  righteous ;

(And  of)  estrangement  from  the  spirit  and  spiritual  folk,  (and
of)  fraud  and  fox-like  behaviour  towards  the  (spiritual)  kings ;

(And  of)  thinking  the  fully  satisfied  (saints)  to  be  (greedy)
beggars,  (and  of)  secretly  regarding  them  with  enmity  (arising)
from  envy —

3065  If  he  (such  a saintly  man  as  has  been  described)  accept  any-
thing, you  say  he  is  a beggar;  and  if  not,  you  say  it  is  (from)
hypocrisy  and  deceit  and  guile.

If  he  mix  (in  society),  you  say  he  is  covetous;  and  if  not,  you
say  he  is  excessively  given  to  pride ;

Or  you  hypocritically  excuse  yourself,  saying,  “I  am  held
back  (by  what  I have  to  do)  in  maintaining  my  wife  and
children.

Neither  have  I leisure  to  scratch  my  head,  nor  have  I leisure
to  cultivate  religion.


^ Literally,  “in  the  position  of.”

I.e.  the  prophet.

^ The  Day  of  Judgement.


THE  SCORNERS  OF  HOLY  MEN  381

O so-and-so,  remember  me  in  thy  benedictions^,  that  in  the
end  I may  become  one  of  the  saints.”

These  words  he  does  not  even  speak  from  (true)  passion  and  ;o;o
ardour;  (’tis  as  though)  a drowsy  man  muttered  some  idle  talk
and  went  to  sleep  again.

(He  says),  “I  cannot  help  feeding  my  family;  I strain  every
nerve  to  earn-  a lawful  livelihood.”

How  lawful,  O thou  that  hast  become  one  of  the  lost?  I
deem  nothing  lawful  but  (to  shed)  thy  blood.

He  can  do  without  God,  but  not  without  food;  he  can  do
without  the  Religion,  but  not  without  the  idols.

O thou  that  canst  not  refrain  thy  self  from  this  vile  world,
how  canst  thou  refrain  thyself  from  Him  who  spread  the  earth
as  a carpetP

O thou  that  canst  not  refrain  thyself  from  delight  and  luxury',  3075
how  canst  thou  refrain  thyself  from  the  Bountiful  God?

O thou  that  canst  not  refrain  thyself  from  aught  pure  or  foul,
how  canst  thou  refrain  thyself  from  Him  who  created  this?

Where  is  (one  like)  the  Friend  (of  God)'*,  who  came  forth
from  the  cave  (of  idolatry),  and  said,  “ This  ts  my  Lord  (as  ye
assert).  Take  heed!  Where  is  the  Maker  (of  all)?” —

(One  who  shall  say),  “I  will  not  look  at  the  two  worlds  until
I see  to  whom  these  two  assembly-places  (really)  belong.

If  I eat  bread  without  the  view  of  God’s  attributes,  it  will
stick  in  my  throat.”

How  should  a morsel  digest  without  the  sight  of  Him,  without  30S0
the  view  of  His  roses  and  rose-garden?

Save  in  hope  of  God,  who  but  an  ox  or  ass  would  for  one
moment  drink  from  this  pond?

(Who  but)  he  that  was  like  the  cattle,  nay,  more  lost  ? — though
(indeed)  that  stinkard  is  full  of  cunning.

His  cunning  went  headlong  (to  ruin),  and  he  went  headlong ;
he  passed  a little  while,  and  his  day  set.

His  brain  became  dull,  his  mind  doting : his  life  is  gone — and
like  (the  letter)  alif  he  hath  nothing.

(As  for)  his  saying,  “I  am  thinking  about  it” — that  too  is  50S5
only  (part)  of  the  deceit  of  the  fleshly  soul ;

And  (as  for)  his  saying,  “He  (God)  is  forgiving  and  merciful ”

— that  is  naught  but  a trick  of  the  villainous  flesh.

O thou  that  art  dead  with  anxiet}'  because  thy  hands  are  empty
of  bread,  what  is  this  fear,  since  He  is  forgiving  and  merciful?

^ Literally,  “will-power.”

- Literally,  “from  the  roots  of  my  teeth  I earn.  , ..

^ Literally,  “from  Excellent  are  They  that  made  (it)  smooth!  (Cjur  an,

LI,  48).

* Abraham.


382


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II


How  an  old  man  complained  of  his  ailments  to  a doctor,  and
how  the  doctor  answered  him.

An  old  man  said  to  a doctor,  “ I am  in  torment  because  of  my
brain.”

The  doctor  replied,  “That  weakness  of  brain  is  from  age.”
Said  the  old  man,  “There  are  spots  of  darkness  on  my  eyes.”

3090  “ It  is  from  age,  O ancient  Shaykh,”  said  the  doctor.  “Awful

pain  comes  in  my  back,”  said  he.

“It  is  from  age,  O emaciated  Shaykh”  said  the  doctor.
“Whatever  I eat,”  said  he,  “is  not  digested.”

The  doctor  replied,  “W’eakness  of  stomach  also  is  (the  result)
of  age.”  Said  he,  “When  I breathe,  respiration  is  hard  for  me.”

“Yes,”  he  said,  “it  is  asthma^;  when  old  age  arrives,  two
hundred  diseases  come  on.”

“O  fool,”  he  exclaimed,  “you  have  stuck  at  this^:  this  is  all
that  you  have  learned  of  medicine.

3095  O crack-brained  man,  your  intellect  has  not  given  you  this
knowledge,  that  God  hath  appointed  a remedy  for  every  pain.

You,  stupid  ass,  from  poorness  of  ability  have  remained
(fallen)  on  the  ground  for  want  of  a sufficient  foothold,”

Then  the  doctor  said  to  him,  “O  sexagenarian,  this  anger
and  this  choler  are  also  from  old  age.

Since  all  the  functions  and  parts  (of  your  body)  are  atrophied,
your  self-control  and  patience  have  become  weak.”

He  (an  old  man)  cannot  endure  two  words,  he  cries  out
thereat;  he  cannot  retain  one  draught,  he  vomits  (it) —

3100  Except,  to  be  sure,  the  Ancient  (Pir)  that  is  drunken  with
God,  and  in  whose  inward  being  there  is  “a  goodly  life®.”

Outwardly  he  is  old,  but  within  he  is  young.  What  thing,
verily,  is  he.?  He  is  the  saint  and  the  prophet.

If  they  are  not  manifest  to  the  good  and  the  evil  (alike),  what
is  this  envy  which  the  worthless  bear  against  them?

And  if  they  do  not  know  them  with  certain  knowledge,  what
is  this  hatred  and  hatching  of  plots  and  enmity?

And  (again),  if  they  know  of  the  Resurrection  and  rising  from
the  dead,  how  should  they  dash  themselves  against  a sharp
sword?

3105  He  (the  prophet  or  saint)  smiles  upon  you,  (but)  do  not  deem
him  to  be  such  (as  he  appears):  in  his  inward  consciousness
are  hidden  a hundred  Resurrections.

Hell  and  Paradise  are  entirely  parts  of  him : he  is  beyond  any
thought  that  you  may  conceive  (of  him).

* Literally,  “stoppage  of  breath.”

* Literally,  “ you  have  sewn  (every  stitch)  on  this  (one  spot),”  or  “ you  have
fixed  (all  your  answers)  on  this  (single  point).”

“ Cf.  Qur’dn,  xvi,  99.


THE  OLD  MAN  AND  THE  DOCTOR  383

All  that  you  may  think  of  is  liable  to  pass  away ; he  that  comes
not  into  thought  is  God.

Wherefore  (then  do  they  behave  with)  presumption  at  the
door  of  this  house,  if  they  know  who  is  within  the  house?

Fools  venerate  the  mosque  and  endeavour  to  destroy  them
that  have  the  heart  (in  which  God  dwells).

That  (mosque)  is  phenomenal,  this  (heart)  is  real,  O asses!  The  3 no
(true)  mosque  is  naught  but  the  hearts  of  the  (spiritual)  captains.

The  mosque  that  is  the  inward  (consciousness)  of  the  saints  is
the  place  of  worship  for  all : God  is  there.

Until  the  heart  of  the  man  of  God  was  grieved,  nev'er  did
God  put  any  generation  to  shame.

They  were  going  to  make  war  on  the  prophets : they  saw  the
body  (of  the  prophet),  they  supposed  he  was  a man.

In  thee  are  the  moral  natures  of  those  peoples  of  yore:  how
art  not  thou  afraid  lest  thou  be  the  same  (as  they)?^

Forasmuch  as  all  those  marks  are  in  thee,  and  thou  art  (one)  3115
of  them,  how  wilt  thou  be  saved?

The  story  of  Juki  and  the  child  who  cried  lamentably  beside
his  father's  bier.

A child  was  crying  bitterly  and  beating  his  head  beside  his
father’s  coffin.

Saying,  “Why,  father,  where  are  they  taking  you  to  press
you  tight  under  some  earth?

They  are  taking  you  to  a narrow  and  noisome  house ; there  is
no  carpet  in  it,  nor  any  mat ;

No  lamp  at  night  and  no  bread  by  day;  neither  smell  nor
sign  of  food  is  there.

No  door  in  good  repair,  no  way  to  the  roof ; not  one  neighbour  u.’o
to  be  (your)  refuge.

Your  body,  which  was  a place  for  the  people’s  kisses — how
should  it  go  into  a blind  and  murky  house? —

A pitiless  house  and  narrow  room,  where  neither  (your)  face
will  be  lasting  nor  (your)  colour.”

In  this  manner  was  he  enumerating  the  qualities  of  the  house,
whilst  he  wrung  tears  of  blood  from  his  two  eyes.

Juhi  said  to  his  father,  “O  worthy  (sir),  by  God  they  are
taking  this  (corpse)  to  our  house.”

The  father  said  to  Juhi,  “Don’t  be  a fool!”  “O  papa,”  said  3i.’5
he,  “hear  the  marks  (of  identity).

These  marks  which  he  mentioned  one  by  one — our  house
has  them  (all),  without  uncertainty  or  doubt.

(It  has)  neither  mat  nor  lamp  nor  food ; neither  its  door  is  in
good  repair,  nor  its  court  nor  its  roof.”

^ I.e.  “lest  the  same  fate  befall  thee.”


384  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

In  this  wise  the  disobedient  have  a hundred  marks  upon
themselves,  but  how  should  they  see  them?

The  house,  namely,  the  heart  that  remains  unlighted  by  the
beams  of  the  sun  of  (Divine)  Majesty,

3130  Is  narrow  and  dark  as  the  souls  of  Jews,  (being)  destitute  of
(spiritual)  savour  of  the  loving  King.

Neither  has  the  radiance  of  the  Sun  shone  into  that  heart,
nor  is  there  (in  it  any)  spaciousness^  or  opening  of  the  door.

The  tomb  is  better  for  thee  than  a heart  like  this.  Come  now,
arise  from  the  tomb  which  is  thy  heart !

Thou  art  living  and  born  of  the  living.  O gay  and  winsome
one,  art  not  thou  choked  by  this  narrow  tomb?

Thou  art  the  Joseph  of  the  time  and  the  sun  of  heaven ; arise
from  this  pit  and  prison,  and  show  thy  face !

3135  Thy  Jonah  has  been  cooked^  in  the  fish’s  belly:  for  his
deliverance  there  is  no  means  but®  glorification  of  God.

If  he  had  not  glorified  (God),  the  fish’s  belly  would  have
been  his  gaol  and  prison  until  they  shall  be  raised  {from  the  dead).

Through  glorification  he  escaped  from  the  body  of  the  fish.
What  is  glorification?  The  sign  (and  token)  of  the  Day  of  Alast*.

If  thou  hast  forgotten  that  glorification  (rendered  to  God)
by  thy  spirit,  hearken  to  the  glorifications  of  (uttered  by)  those
Fishes  (the  prophets  and  saints).

Whosoever  hath  seen  God  is  of  God : whosoever  hath  seen
that  Sea  is  that  Fish.

3140  This  world  is  a sea,  and  the  body  a fish,  and  the  spirit  is  the
Jonah  debarred  from  the  light  of  the  dawn®.

If  it  be  a glorifier  (of  God),  if  is  delivered  from  the  fish ;
otherwise,  it  becomes  digested  therein  and  vanishes.

The  spiritual  Fishes  abound  in  this  sea  (the  world),  (but)
thou  seest  them  not,  (though)  they  are  flying  around  thee.

Those  Fishes  are  darting  at®  thee:  open  thine  eye,  that  thou
mayst  see  them  clearly.

If  thou  art  not  seeing  the  Fishes  plain — after  all,  thine  ear
hath  heard  their  glorification  (of  God).

3145  To  practise  patience  is  the  soul  of  thy  glorifications:  have
patience,  for  that  is  the  true  glorification.

No  glorification  hath  such  a (high)  degree  (as  patience  hath) ;
have  patience:  patience  is  the  key  to  relief  (from  pain).

Patience  is  like  the  bridge  Sirat,  (with)  Paradise  on  the  other
side:  with  every  fair  (boy)  there  is  an  ugly  pedagogue.

So  long  as  you  flee  from  the  pedagogue,  there  is  no  meeting

• Literally,  “openness  of  space.”

^ I.e.  “digested  and  assimilated”;  cf.  v.  3141.

“ Literally,  “ no  means  of  escape  from.”  * See  p.  375  note  6.

J J 0 J

® Read  ; <£>  = This  anomalous jform  occurs  again  in  Book  III,

verse  333-

* Literally,  “throwing  themselves  upon,”  “bringing  themselves  into
contact  with.”


JTJHI  AND  THE  CHILD  385

(with  the  boy),  because  there  is  no  parting  of  the  handsome
boy  from  the  pedagogue.

What  should  you  know  of  the  (sweet)  savour  of  patience,

O you  of  brittle  heart — especially,  of  patience  for  the  sake  of
that  Beauty  of  Chigil?

A man’s  delight  is  in  campaigns  (for  Islam)  and  in  the  glory  jijo
and  pomp  (of  war) ; pathico  voluptas  e pene  est.

Nihil  est  religio  et  precatio  ejus  nisi  penis;  his  thought  has
borne  him  down  to  the  lowest  depth.

Though  he  rise  to  the  sky,  be  not  afraid  of  him,  for  (it  is
only)  in  love  of  lowness  (degradation)  he  has  studied  (and
gained  eminence).

He  gallops  his  horse  towards  lowness,  albeit  he  rings  the  bell
(proclaims  that  he  is  going)  aloft.

What  is  there  to  fear  from  the  flags  of  beggars.? — for  those
flags  are  (but)  a means  for  (getting)  a mouthful  of  bread.

Timet  puer  quidam  hominem  corpulentum.  “Ne  timueris,”
inquit,  “O  puer;  ego  enim  vir  non  sum.”

Juvenis  robustus  puerum  deprehendit  solum.  Palluit  timore  3155
puer  ne  forte  homo  impetum  faceret.

“Securus  esto,”  inquit,  “mi  pulcher;  tu  enim  super  me  eris.

Etiamsi  terribilis  (aspectu)  sum,  scito  me  impotentem  esse
ad  coitum;  me  sicut  camelum  conscende,  propelle.”

(With)  the  appearance  of  men  and  the  reality  like  this —
Adam  without,  the  accursed  Devil  within —

O you  that  are  big  as  the  people  of  ‘Ad,  you  resemble  the
drum  against  which  a branch  was  beaten  b\'  the  wind.

A fox  abandoned^  his  prey  for  the  sake  of  a drum  like  a wind-  snio
filled  leathern  bag,

(But)  when  he  found  no  (real)  fatness  in  the  drum,  he  said,

“A  hog  is  better  than  this  empty  bag.”

Foxes  are  afraid  of  the  noise  of  the  drum;  (but)  the  wise  man
beats  it  ever  so  much,  saying,  “Speak  not!”

The  story  of  an  archer  and  his  fear  of  a horseman  who  was
riding  in  a forest.

A horseman,  armed  and  very  terrible  (in  appearance),  was
riding  in  the  forest  on  a high-bred  horse.

An  expert  archer  espied  him,  and  then  from  fear  of  him  drew
his  bow,

To  shoot  an  arrow.  The  horseman  shouted  to  him,  “I  am  3165
a weakling,  though  my  body  is  big.

Take  heed!  Take  heed!  Do  not  regard  my  bigness,  for  in
the  hour  of  battle  I am  less  than  an  old  woman.”

* Literally,  “gave  to  the  wind.”


386  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

“Pass  on,”  said  he;  “thou  hast  spoken  well,  else  by  reason
of  my  fear  I should  have  shot  a barb  at  thee.”

Many  are  they  whom  implements  of  war  have  slain,  (since  they
held)  such  a sword  in  their  hands,  without  the  manhood  (to
use  it).

If  you  don  the  armour  of  Rustams,  your  soul  goes  (your  life
is  lost)  when  you  are  not  the  man  for  it^.

3170  Make  your  soul  a shield  and  drop  the  sword^,  O son : whoever
is  headless  (selfless)  saves  his  head  from  this  King.

Those  weapons  of  yours  are  your  (selfish)  contriving  and
plotting ; they  have  sprung  from  you  and  at  the  same  time  have
wounded  your  soul.

Since  you  have  gained  nothing  by  these  contrivings,  abandon
contrivance,  that  happy  fortunes  may  meet  (you).

Since  you  have  not  for  one  moment  enjoyed  (any)  fruit  from
the  arts  (of  the  schools),  bid  farewell  to  the  arts,  and  seek  always
the  Lord  of  bounties.

Since  these  sciences  bring  you  no  blessing,  make  yourself  a
dunce  and  leave  ill-luck  behind.

3175  Like  the  angels,  say,  “ We  have  no  knowledge,  O God,  except
what  Thou  hast  taught  us^.”

Story  of  the  desert  Arab  and  his  putting  sand  in  the  sack
and  the  philosopher’s  rebuking  him.

A certain  Arab  of  the  desert  loaded  a camel  with  two  big
sacks — (there  was)  one  full  of  grain.

He  was  seated  on  the  top  of  both  sacks.  A glib  philosopher^
questioned  him.

He  asked  him  about  his  native  land  and  led  him  to  talk  and
said  many  fine  things®  in  the  course  of  (his)  enquiry.

Afterwards  he  said  to  him,  “What  are  those  two  sacks  filled
with?  Tell  (me)  the  truth  of  the  matter.”

3180  He  replied,  “In  one  sack  I have  wheat;  in  the  other  is  some
sand — not  food  for  men.”

“Why,”  he  asked,  “did  you  load  this  sand?”  “In  order  that
the  other  sack  might  not  remain  alone,”  he  replied.

“For  wisdom’s  sake,”  said  he,  “pour  half  the  wheat  of  that
pannier  into  the  other.

So  that  the  sacks  may  be  lightened,  and  the  camel  too.”  He
(the  Arab)  cried,  “Bravo!  O clever  and  noble  sage!

Such  subtle  thought  and  excellent  judgement ! And  you  so
naked,  (journeying)  on  foot  and  in  fatigue ! ”

^ I.e.  “not  able  to  defend  yourself  with  it.”

^ I.e.  “ bear  what  God  sends  and  do  not  resist.’*

® Qur’an,  ii,  30,  slightly  altered.

* Literally,  “a  slinger  of  discourse.”

® Literally,  “bored  many  pearls.”


THE  BEDOUIN  AND  THE  PHILOSOPHER  387


The  good  man  took  pity  on  the  philosopher  and  resolved  to  31S5
mount  him  on  the  camel.

He  said  to  him  again,  “O  fair-spoken  sage,  explain  a little
about  your  own  circumstances  as  well.

(With)  such  intelligence  and  talent  as  you  have,  are  you  a
vizier  or  a king?  Tell  the  truth.”

He  answered,  “I  am  not  (either  of)  these  two:  I am  of  the
common  folk.  Look  at  my  appearance  and  dress.”

He  asked,  “How  many  camels  have  you?  How  many  oxen?  ”

“I  have  neither  these  nor  those,”  he  replied;  “do  not  dig  at
meh”


He  said,  “At  any  rate,  what  goods  have  you  in  your  shop  ? ”
He  answered,  “Where  have  I a shop,  and  where  a dwelling-
place?  ”

“Then,”  said  he,  “I  wilt  ask  about  money.  How  much
money  (have  you)? — for  you  are  a solitary  wanderer  and  one
whose  counsel  is  prized.


With  you  is  the  elixir  which  changes  the  copper  of  the  world
(into)  gold : your  understanding  and  knowledge  are  inlaid  with
pearls^.”


“By  God,”  he  replied,  “O  chief  of  the  Arabs,  in  my  whole
property  there  is  not  the  means  of  (buying)  food  for  the  night.
I run  about  with  bare  feet  and  naked  body.  If  any  one  will


3190


give  me  a loaf  of  bread — thither  I go.

From  this  wisdom  and  learning  and  excellence  (of  mind)  I 3105
have  got  nothing  but  phantasy  and  headache.”

Then  the  Arab  said  to  him,  “Begone  far  from  my  side,  so


that  your  ill-luck  may  not  rain  upon  me.

Take  far  away  from  me  that  unlucky  wisdom  of  yours:  your


speech  is  unlucky  for  (all)  the  people  of  the  time.

Either  go  you  in  that  direction,  and  I will  run  in  this  direction;
or  if  your  way  be  fonvards,  I will  go  back.

One  sack  of  wheat  and  the  other  of  sand  is  better  for  me  than


these  vain  contrivings.

My  foolishness  is  a very  blessed  foolishness,  for  my  heart  is  3200
well-furnished  (with  spiritual  graces)  and  my  soul  is  devout.”

If  thou  desire  that  misery  should  vanish  (from  thee),  endea-
vour that  wisdom  may  vanish  from  thee —

The  wisdom  which  is  bom  of  (human)  nature  and  phantasy,
the  wisdom  which  lacks  the  overflowing  grace  of  the  Light  of
the  Glorious  (God).

The  wisdom  of  this  world  brings  increase  of  supposition  and
doubt;  the  wdsdom  of  the  Religion  soars  above  the  sky.

The  ingenious  rascals  of  (this)  latter  time  have  aggrandised
themselves  over  the  ancients ;


* I.e.  “do  not  worry  me  with  your  questions.”

^ Literally,  “have  pearls,  layer  on  layer,”  i.e.  “are  very  precious.”


388  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

3205  The  (apt)  learners  of  cunning  have  burnt  (consumed)  their
hearts  (in  study)  and  have  learned  feints  and  tricks ;

They  have  thrown  to  the  winds  patience  and  altruism  and
self-sacrifice  and  generosity — (qualities)  which  are  the  elixir  of
(spiritual)  profit.

The  (right)  thought  is  that  which  opens  a way:  the  (right)
way  is  that  on  which  a (spiritual)  king  advances.

The  (true)  king  is  he  that  is  king  in  himself,  and  is  not  made
king  by  treasuries  and  armies ;

So  that  his  kingship  remains  unto  everlasting,  like  the  glory
of  the  empire  of  the  Mohammedan  Religion.


The  miracles  of  Ibrahim  son  of  Adham — may  God  sanctify
his  holy  spirit! — on  the  sea-shore.

2,210  Thus,  it  is  related  of  Ibrahim  son  of  Adham  that  after  a
journey  he  sat  down  (to  rest)  by  the  edge  of  the  sea.

(Whilst)  he  was  stitching  his  Siifi  mantle,  an  Amir,  walking
on  the  shore,  suddenly  came  to  that  spot.

That  Amir  had  been  one  of  the  Shaykh’s  servants;  he
recognized  the  Shaykh  and  at  once  bowed  low.

He  was  astounded  at  the  Shaykh  and  at  his  dervish  garb —
(for)  his  nature  and  outward  guise  had  become  transformed —

(Marvelling)  that  he  gave  up  such  a grand  kingdom,  and  chose
that  very  pettifogging  (spiritual)  poverty^ ;

.3215  (And  why)  he  lets  the  sovereignty  of  the  Seven  Climes  be
lost  (by  him),  and  plies  the  needle  on  his  dervish-cloak,  like  a
beggar.

The  Shaykh  became  aware  of  his  thought : a Shaykh  is  as  the
lion,  and  (people’s)  hearts  are  his  jungle.

He  is  entering,  like  hope  and  fear,  into  (their)  hearts : not  hid
from  him  are  the  secrets  of  the  world.

Keep  watch  over  your  hearts,  O fruitless  ones,  in  the  presence
of  the  majesty  of  the  men  of  heart  (saints).

Before  the  men  of  body  (worldlings),  respect  is  (shown)
outwardly,  for  God  is  veiling  the  occult  from  them.

32^0  Before  the  men  of  heart  (saints),  respect  is  (shown)  inwardly,
because  their  hearts  have  insight  into  the  secret  thoughts.

Thou  art  contrariwise : for  the  sake  of  (worldly)  position  thou
comest  with  reverence  before  them  that  are  blind  (to  spiritual
things),  and  sittest  in  the  vestibule;

(But)  before  the  seers  thou  behavest  disrespectfully:  hence
thou  hast  become  fuel  for  the  fire  of  lust.

^ I think  '^jW  is  best  taken  as  a compound  adjective.  The  alter-

native rendering  would  be : “ (spiritual)  poverty — a very  subde  (slender  and

unsubstantial)  affair.”  In  any  case  there  is  an  antithesis  between  wj>Xi  and


IBRAHIM  SON  OF  ADHAM  389

Since  thou  hast  not  (spiritual)  perception  and  the  light  of
(Divine)  guidance,  continue  to  polish  (cleanse  and  brighten)
thy  face  for  the  sake  of  the  blind !

Before  the  seers,  daub  thy  face  with  dirt!  Act  haughtily  (to-
wards them)  notwithstanding  such  a stinking  state  (as  thou  art  in) !

The  Shaykh  quickly  threw  his  needle  into  the  sea,  and  with  3--5
a loud  voice  called  for  the  needle.

Myriads  of  Divine  fishes — in  the  lips  of  each  fish  a needle  of
gold—

Lifted  their  heads  from  God’s  sea,  saying,  “Take,  O Shaykh,
God’s  needles.”

He  turned  his  face  towards  him  (the  Ami'r)  and  said  to  him,

“O  Amir,  is  the  kingdom  of  the  heart  (spirit)  better,  or  such
a despicable  kingdom  (as  I once  possessed)?”

This  (miracle)  is  the  outward  sign,  this  is  nothing:  wait  till
you  enter  the  inward  (shrine  and)  see  (what  is  there) !

From  the  garden  they  bring  to  town  (only)  a branch : how  3:130
should  they  carry  thither  the  (whole)  garden  and  orchard  ? —

Especially,  a Garden  w'hereof  this  heaven  is  (but)  one  leaf ;
nay,  that  is  the  kernel,  and  this  other  (world)  is  as  the  husk.

(If)  you  are  not  stepping  on  (briskly)  towards  that  Garden,
seek  more  scent,  and  get  rid  of  (your)  rheum.

In  order  that  that  scent  may  draw  your  soul  (thither) ; in  order
that  that  scent  may  become  the  light  of  your  eyes.

For  the  scent’s  sake  Joseph,  son  of  Jacob  the  prophet,  said:
'‘Cast  {my  shirt)  upon  my  father's  face.”

For  this  scent’s  sake  Ahmad  (Mohammed)  constantly  said  in  3:235
(his)  exhortations:  “In  the  ritual  prayer  is  the  delight  of  mine
eye.”

The  five  (spiritual)  senses  are  linked  with  one  another,
because  all  these  five  have  growm  from  one  root.

The  strength  of  one  becomes  the  strength  of  the  rest:  each
one  becomes  a cup-bearer  to  the  rest.

Seeing  with  the  eye  increases  speech ; speech  increases  pene-
tration in  the  eye.

Penetration  (of  sight)  becomes  the  (means  of)  awakening
(stimulating)  every  sense,  (so  that)  perception  (of  the  spiritual)
becomes  familiar  to  (all)  the  senses.

The  beginning  of  the  gnostic's  illumination  by  the  Light
•which  sees  the  invisible  world.

When  one  sense  in  (the  course  of  its)  progress  has  loosed  (its)  3340
bonds,  all  the  rest  of  the  senses  become  changed.

When  one  sense  has  perceived  things  that  are  not  objects  of
sense-perception,  that  which  is  of  the  invisible  world  becomes
apparent  to  all  the  senses.


I


390  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

When  one  sheep  of  the  flock  has  jumped  over  a stream,  then
they  all  jump  across  on  each  other’s  heels.

Drive  the  sheep,  thy  senses,  to  pasture:  let  them  browse  on
(the  pasture  indicated  in  the  text) — He  who  hath  brought  forth
the  herbage.

That  there  they  may  browse  on  hyacinth  and  wild-rose ; that
they  may  make  their  way  to  the  verdant  meadows  of  the
Realities ;

3-45  (That)  every  sense  of  thine  may  become  an  apostle  to  the
senses  (of  others),  and  lead  all  senses  into  that  Paradise;

(And  then  those)  senses  will  tell  their  secret  to  thy  senses,
without  tongue  and  without  (conveying  either)  the  proper  or
the  metaphorical  meaning;

For  this  proper  meaning  admits  of  (different)  interpretations,
and  this  guess-work  is  the  source  of  (vain)  imaginings ;

(But  in  the  case  of)  that  truth  which  is  immediate  and  intui-
tive, there  is  no  room  for  any  interpretation.

When  (all)  senses  have  become  subject  to  thy  sense,  the
heavenly  spheres  cannot  avoid  (obedience  to)  thee.

3450  When  a dispute  takes  place  as  to  the  ownership  of  the  husk,
the  husk  belongs  to  him  who  possesses  the  kernel.

When  there  happens  to  be  a quarrel  about  a load  of  straw,
observe  who  is  the  owner  of  the  grain.

The  heavenly  sphere,  then,  is  the  husk,  and  the  light  of  the
spirit  is  the  kernel.  This  (sky)  is  visible,  that  (spirit)  is  concealed ;
(but)  do  not  stumble  on  this  account.

The  body  is  manifest,  the  (vital)  spirit  is  concealed : the  body
is  as  the  sleeve,  the  spirit  as  the  hand.

Again,  the  intellect  is  more  concealed  than  the  (vital)  spirit:
(your  mental)  perception  makes  its  way  to  (apprehends)  the
(vital)  spirit  sooner  (than  it  apprehends  the  intellect).

3255  (If)  you  see  a movement,  you  know  that  he  (who  moves)  is
alive ; (but)  this  you  do  not  know,  that  he  is  full  of  intellect.

Until  regulated  movements  appear,  and  he  by  means  of
knowledge  turns  the  motion  of  copper  into  gold.

From  manual  actions  being  conformable  (to  reason)  you
may  perceive  that  there  is  intellect  (behind  them).

The  spirit  (that  partakes)  of  Divine  inspiration  is  more  con-
cealed than  the  intellect,  because  it  is  (of)  the  Unseen ; it  belongs
to  that  side.

The  intellect  of  Ahmad  (Mohammed)  was  not  hidden  from
any  one;  (but)  his  spirit  of  (prophetic)  inspiration  was  not
apprehended  by  every  soul.

3260  The  spirit  of  prophecy  also  has  actions  conformable  (to
reason),  (but)  the  intellect  does  not  apprehend  (them),  for  that
(spirit)  is  exalted  (above  intellectual  apprehension).

Sometimes  he  (the  man  of  intellect)  regards  (the  actions  of


MYSTICAL  ILLUMINATION


391

one  endowed  with  the  spirit)  as  madness,  sometimes  he  is  be-
wildered, since  it  (all)  depends  on  his  becoming  that  (other  one)^ ;

As  (for  example)  the  intellect  of  Aloses  was  troubled  by
seeing  the  reasonable  actions  of  Khadir.

His  actions  seemed  unreasonable  to  JMoses,  since  he  (Moses)
had  not  his  (Khadir ’s)  state  (of  Divine  inspiration).

Inasmuch  as  the  intellect  of  Moses  becomes  tied  up  (per-
plexed and  helpless)  in  (the  matter  of)  the  mysterious  (inspira-
tion), who  (what)  is  the  intellect  of  a (mere)  mouse,  O excellent
(reader) }

Conventional  knowledge  is  (only)  for  sale  (self-advertise-  3265
ment) : when  it  finds  a purchaser,  it  glows  with  delight.

The  purchaser  of  real  knowledge^  is  God:  its  market  is
always  splendid.

He  (the  owner  of  real  knowledge)  has  closed  his  lips  (and  is)
enraptured  in  (his)  trading:  the  purchasers  are  without  end,
for  God  hath  purchased.

The  angels  purchase  Adam’s®  teaching;  the  devils  and  Jinn
are  not  privileged  to  receive  it.

Adam,  inform  them  of  the  Names,  give  (them)  teaching,
explain  the  mysteries  of  God,  hair  by  hair.

Such  a person  as  is  short-sighted,  plunged  in  variability  and  327°
without  steadfastness,

I called  a “mouse,”  because  his  place  is  in  the  earth  (of  the
body) : earth  is  the  place  of  living  for  the  mouse.

He  knows  (many)  ways,  but  (only)  underground:  he  has
pierced  the  earth  in  every  direction.

The  mouse-soul  is  naught  but  a nibbler:  to  the  mouse  is
given  a mind  proportionate  to  its  need.

Because  without  need  the  Almighty  God  does  not  give  any-
thing to  any  one.

If  the  earth  had  not  been  needed  by  the  (inhabitants  of  the)  3275
world,  the  Lord  of  all  beings  would  not  have  created  any  (earth) ;

And  if  this  quaking  earth  had  not  needed  mountains.  He
would  not  have  created  them  sublime  (as  they  are) ;

And  if  there  had  not  been  need  of  the  heavenly  spheres  also.

He  would  not  have  created  from  non-existence  the  Seven  Skies.

The  sun  and  moon  and  these  stars — how  did  they  come  plain
into  view  except  through  need?

Need,  then,  is  the  noose  for  (all)  things  that  exist:  Man  has
instruments  in  proportion  to  his  need.

Therefore  quickly  augment  thy  need,  O needy  one,  in  order  3280
that  the  Sea  of  Bounty  may  surge  up  in  lovingkindness.

^ I.e.  the  intellectual  man  can  never  understand  the  spiritual  man  until
he  himself  becomes  spiritualised.

- Literally,  “the  knowledge  that  is  verified  (by  mystical  experience).

^ “Adam”  in  this  and  the  following  verse  is  the  saint,  regarded  as  the
perfect  type  of  humanity.


I


392  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

These  beggars  (are)  on  the  (public)  road,  and  every  sufferer
(among  them)  is  displaying  his  need  to  the  people —

Blindness  and  palsy  and  sickness  and  pain — that  men’s  pity
may  be  aroused  by  this  need.

Does  he  (any  one)  ever  say,  “ Give  bread,  O people,  for  I
have  riches  and  granaries  and  trays  (of  viands)?”

God  has  not  put  eyes  in  the  mole,  because  it  does  not  need
eyes  for  (getting)  food.

3285  It  is  able  to  live  without  eyes  and  sight : in  the  dank  earth  it
is  independent  of  eyes.

It  never  comes  out  from  the  earth  but  for  theft,  to  the  end
that  the  Creator  may  purge  it  of  that  thievishness.

After  that  (purification),  it  will  get  wings  and  become  a bird,
flying  (aloft)  and  glorifying  the*  Creator.

Every  moment,  in  the  rose-garden  of  thanksgiving  to
God,  it  will  produce  a hundred  (sweet)  notes,  like  the
nightingale.

Singing,  “O  Thou  that  deliverest  me  from  evil  qualities!  O
Thou  that  makest  a hell  Paradise  1

32QO  Thou  puttest  light  in  a piece  of  fat;  Thou,  O Self-sufficing
One,  givest  (the  sense  of)  hearing  to  a bone.”

What  connexion  have  those  concepts  (e.g.  sight  and  hearing)
with  the  body  ? What  connexion  has  the  apprehension  of  things
with  (their)  names?

The  word  is  like  the  nest,  and  the  meaning  is  the  bird : the
body  is  the  river-bed,  and  the  spirit  is  the  rolling  water.

It  is  moving,  and  you  say  it  is  standing : it  is  running,  and  you
say  it  is  keeping  still.

If  you  see  not  the  movement  of  the  water  through  the  clods
of  earth— (yet  it  is  moving) : what  are  the  sticks  and  straws  (ever
appearing)  anew  on  it?

3295  Your  sticks  and  straws  are  the  forms  (ideas)  of  thought:
(these)  virgin  forms  are  always  coming  on  anew.

The  surface  of  the  water  of  the  stream  of  thought,  as  it  rolls,
is  not  without  sticks  and  straws,  (some)  pleasing  and  (some)
unsightly.

The  husks  on  the  surface  of  this  rolling  water  have  sped  along
from  the  fruits  of  the  Invisible  Garden.

Seek  the  kernels  of  the  husks  (not  on  the  water,  but)  in  the
Garden,  because  the  water  comes  from  the  Garden  into  the
river-bed.

If  you  see  not  the  flow  of  the  Water  of  Life,  look  at  this  move-
ment of  weeds  in  the  stream.

3300  When  the  water  begins  to  pass  by  in  fuller  volume,  the  husks,
(which  are)  the  ideas,  pass  along  it  more  quickly.

When  this  stream  has  become  extremely  rapid  in  its  flow,  no
care  lingers  in  the  minds  of  the  gnostics.


MYSTICAL  ILLUMINATION  393

Since  it  is  (then)  exceedingly  full  and  swift,  on  that  account
there  is  no  room  in  it  for  anything  but  the  water.

How  a stranger  reviled  the  Shaykh  and  how  the  Shaykh’s
disciple  answered  him.

A certain  man  brought  charges  against  a Shaykh,  saying,
“He  is  wicked  and  not  on  the  path  of  righteousness;

He  is  a wine-drinker  and  a hypocrite  and  a scoundrel:  how
should  he  be  one  to  succour  his  disciples?”

One  (of  the  disciples)  said  to  him,  “Observe  respect:  ’tis  no  ^305
light  matter  to  think  so  ill  of  the  great.

Far  is  it  from  him  and  far  from  those  (saintly)  qualities  of  his
that  his  clear  (spirit)  should  be  darkened  by  a flood  (of  sin).

Do  not  put  such  slander  on  the  people  of  God ! This  is  (mere)
fancy  on  your  part.  Turn  over  (a  new)  leaf.

This  (which  you  say)  is  not  (true);  and  (even)  if  it  should  be,

O land-fowl,  what  harm  (comes)  to  the  Red  Sea  from  a carcase?

He  (the  Shaykh)  is  not  less  than  the  (statutory)  two  jugfuls
or  the  small  tank,  so  that  a single  drop  (of  impurity)  should  be
able  to  disqualify  him  (for  religious  purposes).

The  fire  is  no  damage  to  Abraham,  (but)  let  any  one  who  is  a 5310
Nimrod  beware  of  it ! ”

The  fleshly  soul  is  Nimrod,  and  the  intellect  and  spirit  are
the  Friend  of  God  (Abraham):  the  spirit  is  concerned  with
reality  itself,  and  the  fleshly  soul  with  the  proofs.

These  indications  of  the  way  are  for  the  traveller  who  at
every  moment  becomes  lost  in  the  desert.

For  them  that  have  attained  (to  union  with  God)  there  is
nothing  (necessary)  except  the  eye  (of  the  spirit)  and  the  lamp
(of  intuitive  faith):  they  have  no  concern  with  indications  (to
guide  them)  or  with  a road  (to  travel  by).

If  the  man  that  is  united  (with  God)  has  mentioned  some
indication,  he  has  mentioned  (it)  in  order  that  the  dialecticians
may  understand  (his  meaning).

For  a new-born  child  the  father  makes  babbling  sounds,  ,315
though  his  intellect  may  make  a survey  of  the  (whole)  world.

The  dignity  of  the  master’s  learning  is  not  diminished  if  he
say  that  (the  letter)  a/z/has  nothing  (has  no  diacritical  mark).

For  the  sake  of  teaching  that  tongue-tied  (child),  one  must
go  outside  of  one’s  own  language  (customary  manner  of  speech).

You  must  come  into  (adopt)  his  language,  in  order  that  he
may  learn  knowledge  and  science  from  you.

All  the  people,  then,  are  as  his  (the  spiritual  Teacher’s)
children : this  (fact)  is  necessary  for  the  Pir  (to  bear  in  mind)
when  he  gives  (them)  instruction.

Infidelity  hath  a fixed  limit  and  range — know  (this  for  sure) ; 33 ’o
(but)  the  Shaykh  and  the  light  of  the  Shaykh  have  no  bound.


394  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

Before  the  infinite  all  that  is  finite  is  naught : everything  except
the  Face  of  God  is  passing  away.

Infidelity  and  faith  do  not  exist  in  the  place  where  he  (the
Shaykh)  is,  because  he  is  the  kernel,  while  these  twain  are  (only)
colour  and  husk.

These  fleeting  things  have  become  a veil  over  that  Face,  like
a lantern  concealed  beneath  a bowl.

So  then,  this  bodily  head  is  a screen  to  that  (spiritual)  head
(source  of  mystic  consciousness):  before  that  head  this  bodily
head  is  an  infidel.

3325  Who  is  the  infidel?  One  forgetful  of  the  faith  of  the  Shaykh.
What  is  the  dead?  One  ignorant  of  the  (spiritual)  life  of  the
Shaykh.

(Spiritual)  life  is  naught  but  knowledge  in  (the  time  of)  trial :
the  more  knowledge  one  has,  the  more  (spiritual)  life  one  has.

Our  spirit  is  more  than  the  spirit  of  animals.  Wherefore?
In  respect  that  it  has  more  knowledge.

Hence  the  spirit  of  the  angels  is  more  than  our  spirit,  for  it
is  exempt  from  (transcends)  the  common  sense;

And  the  spirit  of  mystical  adepts  is  more  than  (that  of)  the
angels.  Cease  from  bewilderment  (on  this  subject)!

3330  For  that  reason  Adam  is  their  object  of  worship : his  spirit
(spiritual  life)  is  greater  than  their  being.

Else,  (why  were  they  commanded  to  worship  him?) : it  would
not  be  at  all  a suitable  thing  to  command  the  superior  to  worship
an  inferior.

How  can  the  justice  and  kindness  of  the  Maker  approve  that
a rose  should  fall  down  in  worship  before  a thorn?

Since  the  spirit  (of  the  perfect  saint)  has  become  superior  and
has  passed  beyond  the  utmost  limit  (reached  by  men  and  angels),
the  soul  of  all  things  has  become  obedient  to  it—

Birds  and  fishes  and  Jinn  and  men — because  it  exceeds  (them),
and  they  are  deficient  (in  comparison  with  it).

3335  The  fish  make  needles  for  his  (the  saint’s)  mantle:  (they
follow  him  as)  threads  follow  needles.


The  rest  of  the  story  of  Ibrahim  son  of  Adham — may  God
sanctify  his  spirit! — on  the  sea-shore.

When  that  Amir  saw  the  Shaykh ’s  command  take  effect  in
the  coming  of  the  fish,  he  fell  into  an  ecstasy.

He  said,  “Ah,  the  fish  know  the  Firs.  Fie  on  a person  who
is  an  outcast  of  the  (holy)  Court  I

The  fish  have  knowledge  of  the  Pir,  and  we  afar  (from  him) !
We  (are)  damned  to  lack  this  fortune,  and  they  blest  (with
enjoyment  of  it)  I ”

He  bowed  low,  and  departed  weeping  and  desolate:  he


THE  SHAYKH  AND  HIS  REVILER  395

became  mad  for  love  of  the  opening  of  the  door  (to  union  with

Then,  O you  with  unwashed  face,  what  are  you  about?  3340
Whom  are  you  combating  and  envying?

You  are  playing  with  a lion’s  tail:  you  are  making  a foray
against  the  angels.

Why  are  you  speaking  evil  of  pure  good?  Beware,  deem  not
that  lowness  (vilifying  the  saints)  to  be  eminence !

What  is  evil?  The  needy,  despicable  copper.  Who  is  the
Shaykh?  The  infinite  elixir.

If  the  copper  was  incapable  (of  being  transmuted)  by  the
elixir,  (yet)  the  elixir  was  never  turned  into  copper  by  the  copper.

What  is  evil?  A rebel  that  works  like  fire.  Who  is  the  Shaykh?  3345
The  very  Sea^  of  Eternity.

Fire  is  always  terrified  by  water.  When  was  w'ater  ever  afraid
of  being  set  aflame?

You  are  observing  defects  on  the  face  of  the  moon;  you  are
picking  thorns  in  a Paradise.

Picker  of  thorns,  if  you  go  into  Paradise,  you  will  find  there
no  thorn  but  yourself.

You  are  covering  a sun  with  a sod:  you  are  seeking  flaws  in  a
perfect  full-moon.

A sun  w'hich  shines  throughout  the  world — how  shall  it  be  3350
hidden  for  the  sake  of  a bat?

Sins  are  made  sinful  by  the  disapproval  of  Pirs;  mysteries
are  made  mysterious  by  the  jealousy  of  Pirs.

If  you  are  far  (aloof  in  spirit  from  the  saints),  at  any  rate  be
joined  (with  them)  through  (paying)  respect  (to  them) : be  alert
and  active  in  (showing)  penitence,

(In  the  hope)  that  a breeze  may  be  coming  to  you  from  that
w'ay  (quarter).  Why  do  you  shut  off  the  water  of  mercy  by
(your)  enviousness?

Though  you  are  far  aloof,  at  (that)  distance  wag  your  tail
(ingratiate  yourself  with  them) ; wherever  ye  be,  turn  your  faces
{thither).

When  an  ass  falls  in  mire  through  (going  at)  a rapid  pace,  he  3355
moves  incessantly  for  the  purpose  of  rising.

He  does  not  make  the  place  smooth  (and  comfortable)  to  stay
in:  he  knows  that  it  is  not  the  place  where  he  should  live.

Your  sense  has  been  less  than  the  sense  of  the  ass,  for  your
heart  has  not  recoiled  from  these  clods  of  mud.

You  interpret  (some  canonical  text)  as  an  indulgence  (authoris-
ing you  to  stay)  in  the  mud,  since  you  are  not  willing  to  tear
your  heart  from  it.

(You  say),  “ This  is  allowable  for  me:  I am  under  compulsion.

God  in  His  kindness  will  not  chastise  a helpless  one  (like  me).”

' Or  “the  objective  manifestation  of  the  Sea.”


I


396  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

3360  Indeed  He  has  (already)  chastised  you,  (but)  like  the  blind
hyena  from  self-deception  you  do  not  see  this  chastisement.

They  (the  hunters)  are  saying,  “The  hyena  is  not  in  this
place;  look  for  him  outside,  for  he  is  not  in  the  cave.”

This  they  say  and  (at  the  same  time)  put  bonds  on  him,
(whilst)  he  is  saying,  “They  do  not  know  of  me  (where  I am).

If  this  enemy  had  known  of  me,  howshouldhe  have  exclaimed,
‘Where  is  this  hyena’?”

The  statement  of  a certain  individual  that  God  most  High  would
not  punish  him  for  sin,  and  Shu‘ayb’s  answer  to  him.

In  the  time  of  Shu'ayb  a certain  man  was  saying,  “ God  hath
seen  many  a fault  from  me.

3365  How  many  sins  and  trespasses  hath  He  seen  me  commit!
And  (still),  God  in  His  kindness  does  not  punish  me.”

In  answer  to  him  God  most  High  by  the  mysterious  way
spoke  clearly  into  the  ear  of  Shu‘ayb,

Saying,  “(Tell  him).  Thou  hast  said,  ‘How  many  sins  have
I committed ! And  (still)  God  in  His  kindness  hath  not  punished
me  for  my  trespasses.’

Thou  art  saying  the  opposite  and  reverse  (of  the  truth),  O fool,
O thou  that  hast  abandoned  the  road  and  taken  to  the  wilderness  I

How  oft,  how  oft  do  I chastise  thee,  and  thou  unaware!
Thou  art  lying  (bound)  in  chains  from  head  to  foot.

3370  Thy  rust,  coat  on  coat,  O black  pot,  hath  marred  the  visage
of  thy  heart.

Layers  of  rust  have  collected  upon  thy  heart,  so  that  it  hath
become  blind  to  (the  spiritual)  mysteries.”

If  that  smoke  should  beat  upon  a new  pot,  the  traces  of  it
would  show,  though  it  were  (only  as  much  as)  a barley-corn.

Because  everj^thing  is  made  manifest  by  (its)  contrary : upon  a
white  object  the  black  becomes  conspicuous ;

(But)  when  the  pot  has  been  blackened,  then  after  this  who
will  at  once  perceive  the  effect  of  the  smoke  upon  it?

3375  The  ironsmith  who  is  an  Ethiopian — the  smoke  is  of  the
same  colour  as  his  face;

The  Greek  who  does  the  work  of  an  ironsmith — his  face,
from  gathering  smokeL  becomes  piebald  (spotted  with  black).

Therefore  he  will  quickly  recognise  the  effect  of  sin,  so  that
he  will  soon  lament  (and)  say,  “O  God!”

(But)  when  he  persists  (in  sin)  and  makes  a practice  of  evil,
and  puts  dust  in  the  eye  of  meditation.

He  thinks  of  penitence  no  more:  that  sin  becomes  so  sweet
to  his  heart  that  (in  the  end)  he  comes  to  be  without  the  Faith
(he  turns  infidel).

' Literally,  “from  smokiness.”  Cf.


THE  CALLOUS  SINNER  397

That  repenting  and  (crying)  “O  Lord!”  are  gone  from  him:  33^^°
fivefold  rust  has  settled  on  the  mirror  (of  his  heart).

The  coats  of  rust  have  began  to  eat  his  iron  (mirror) : the  rust
has  begun  to  lessen  its  sheen.

When  you  write  upon  white  paper,  that  writing  may  be  read
at  sight.

When  you  write  script  over  that  which  has  been  (already)
written,  it  is  not  understood : the  reading  of  it  will  be  erroneous ;

For  that  (second)  blackness  has  fallen  (been  made)  upon
blackness ; (hence)  both  scripts  have  become  obscure  and  have
given  no  meaning.

And  if  you  write  a third  time  on  the  top  of  it,  then  you  make  33S5
it  black  as  the  infidel’s  soul.

What  help  is  there,  then,  but  (to  take)  refuge  with  (God)  the
Helper?  Despair  is  copper,  and  the  elixir  for  it  is  (God’s)
regard.

Lay  your  despairs  before  Him,  that  ye  may  escape  from
irremediable  pain.

When  Shu'ayb  had  told  him  these  deep  sayings,  at  that
breath  of  the  spirit  roses  blossomed  in  his  heart.

His  soul  hearkened  to  the  inspiration  from  Heaven ; he  said,
(however),  “ If  He  hath  punished  me,  w'here  is  the  sign?  ”

He  (Shu'ayb)  cried,  “ O Lord,  he  rebuts  me,  he  seeks  the  sign  339°
of  that  punishment.”

He  (God)  said,  “ I am  the  Coverer  (of  sins) : I will  not  tell  his
secrets , (I  will  give)  but  one  indication  for  the  sake  of  trying  him .

One  sign  of  My  punishing  him  is  this,  that  he  has  (^to  his
credit)  pious  acts  of  fasting  and  orison

And  ritual  prayer  and  almsgiving  et  cetera,  but  he  has  not  one
atom  of  spiritual  savour.

He  performs  high  acts  and  deeds  of  devotion,  but  he  has  not
one  atom  of  (spiritual)  relish.

His  devotions  are  good  (in  form),  but  the  spirit  is  not  good:  339.‘i
the  walnuts  are  many,  but  there  is  no  kernel  therein.”

Spiritual  savour  is  required,  in  order  that  devotions  may
yield  fruit:  a kernel  is  required,  in  order  that  the  berry  may
produce  a tree.

How  shall  a berry  without  kernel  become  a sapling?  The
soulless  form  is  naught  but  phantasy.

Remainder  of  the  story  of  the  stranger's  reviling  the  Shaykh.

That  malign  wretch  was  gabbling  silly  nonsense  about  the
Shaykh:  the  squinting  (envious)  man  is  always  of  distorted
understanding.

(He  said),  ‘‘I  saw  him  amidst  a company  (of  revellers):  he  is
one  denuded  and  destitute  of  piety.


)


398  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

3400  And  if  you  do  not  believe  it,  arise  (and  go)  to-night,  that  you
may  see  plainly  your  Shaykh’s  depravity.”

At  night  he  took  him  to  a window  and  said,  “ Behold  a (fine)
debauch  and  merry-making !

Behold  such  hypocrisy  by  day  and  profligacy  by  night! — in
the  daytime  (he  is)  like  Mustafa  (Mohammed),  at  night  (like)
Bu  Lahab.

By  day  his  name  has  become  ‘Abdullah  (the  servant  of  God) ;
by  night — God  save  us!  And  (see),  the  wine-cup  in  his
hand!”

He  (the  disciple)  saw  a full  glass  in  the  Shaykh’s  hand.
“O  Shaykh,”  said  he,  “is  there  a tumour  even  in  thee?

3405  Nonne  dicebas? — ‘In  vini  poculo  mingit  Diabolus  festinans
lente’.”

He  (the  Shaykh)  replied,  “They  have  made  my  cup  so  full
that  there  is  not  room  in  it  for  a single  rue-seed.

Look,  is  there  any  room  here  for  a single  mote?  A deluded
man  has  wrongly  apprehended  this  matter.”

This  is  not  the  apparent  cup  (or)  the  apparent  wine:  deem
this  (allegation)  far  from  (far  below  the  dignity  of)  the  Shaykh
who  sees  the  Unseen.

The  wine-cup,  O fool,  is  the  being  of  the  Shaykh,  in  qua
(essentia)  urina  Diaboli  non  continetur.

3410  He  is  full  and  brimming  with  the  Light  of  God:  he  has
shattered  the  bodily  cup,  he  is  the  Absolute  Light.

If  sunlight  fall  upon  filth,  it  is  the  same  light  (still) : it  suffers
no  defilement.

The  Shaykh  said,  “ Indeed  this  is  not  a cup,  nor  (is  this)  wine.
Hey,  unbeliever,  come  down  and  look  at  it!  ”

He  came,  and  saw  it  was  fine  honey.  That  miserable  enemy
(of  God)  became  blind  (with  shame  and  confusion).

Thereupon  the  Pir  said  to  his  disciple,  “Go,  seek  wine  for
me,  O noble  sir;

3415  For  I have  a pain;  I am  reduced  to  necessity:  because  of  the
pain,  I have  passed  beyond  starvation  1.

In  sore  need  any  carcase  is  clean  (lawful  to  eat) — may  curses
fall  like  dust^  on  the  head  of  him  that  denies  it!”

The  disciple  went  round  the  wine-cellar,  tasting  of  every  jar
on  the  Shaykh’s  behalf.

In  all  the  wine-cellars  (that  he  visited)  he  found  no  wine:
the  jars  of  wine  had  become  full  of  honey.

He  said,  “O  topers,  what  state  of  things  is  this?  What  is  the
matter?  I find  no  wine  in  any  jar.”

3420  All  the  topers  came  to  that  Shaykh,  weeping  and  beating
their  heads  with  their  hands.

^ Literally,  “the  condition  of  one  whose  stomach  is  empty.”

^ Literally,  “may  the  dust  of  execration  be.”


THE  SHAYKH  AND  HIS  REVILER  399

(They  said),  “Thou  earnest  into  the  tavern,  O most  exalted
Shaykh,  and  in  consequence  of  thy  coming  all  the  wines  have
turned  to  honey.

Thou  hast  changed  the  wine  (and  purified  it)  from  filth:
change  our  souls  also  (and  purify  them)  from  defilement!”

If  the  (whole)  world  be  filled"  to  the  brim  with  blood,  how
should  the  servant  of  God  drink  aught  but  what  is  hallowed?

How  ‘A’isha — may  God  be  well-pleased  with  her! — said  to

Mustafa  {Mohammed),  on  whom  be  peace,  “ Thou  performest

the  prayer  anywhere,  without  a prayer-carpet.”

One  day  ‘A’isha  said  to  the  Prophet,  “ O Messenger  of  Allah,
openly  and  secretly

Thou  performest  a prayer  in  whatever  place  thou  mayst  find,  -.+^5
(even  whilst)  unclean  and  low  (people)  are  running  about  in  the
house ;

(Quanquam)  femina  cui  fluit  sanguis  post  menstruorum  dies
vel  infans  vel  (quivis)  inquinatus  et  sordidus  facit  usu  tritum
(pollutum)  quemeunque  locum  advenerit.”

The  Prophet  said,  “Know  that  God  makes  impure  (things)
pure  for  the  (spiritually)  great.

On  that  account  the  grace  of  God  has  made  my  place  of
worship  to  be  pure  (everywhere,  even)  up  to  the  seventh  tier
(of  Heaven).”

Beware  and  beware!  Cease  from  envying  the  (spiritual)
kings,  else  you  will  become  a devil  in  the  world.

For  if  he  drink  poison,  it  turns  to  honey;  (but)  if  you  eat
honey,  it  is  poison  (to  you) ;

For  he  has  been  changed,  and  his  action  has  been  changed:
he  has  become  the  Grace  (of  God),  and  every  fire  in  him  has
been  turned  into  Light.

The  abdbil  (swifts)  had  the  power  of  God  (in  them);  else,
how  should  a bird  kill  an  elephant?

A number  of  little  birds  broke  an  (entire)  army — so  that  you
may  know  that  that  strength  is  from  God.

If  temptation  of  this  kind^  come  to  you,  go,  read  the  Sura
concerning  the  Possessors  of  the  Elephant.

And  if  you  contend  and  engage  in  rivalrv'  with  him  (the  saint),  3435
d.eem  me  an  infidel  if  you  save  your  head  from  them-.

* I.e.  env>-.  Cf.  v.  3429.

- I.e.  the  saints  will  punish  you.


400


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II


How  the  mouse  pulled  {the  rope  attached  to)  the  camel’s
nose-ring  and  became  self -conceited.

A little  mouse  caught  in  his  forelegs  a camel’s  leading-rope
and  from  emulation  went  off  (with  it).

By  reason  of  the  readiness  with  which  the  camel  set  out  along
with  him,  the  mouse  was  duped  into  thinking  himself  a hero.

The  ray  of  his  thought  struck  the  camel.  He  (the  camel)  said
(aside),  “I  will  show  thee  (presently)!  Enjoy  thyself!”

(All  went  well)  till  he  (the  mouse)  came  to  the  bank  of  a great
river,  at  which  any  lion  or  wolf  would  have  lost  heart^.

3440  There  the  mouse  stopped  and  became  paralysed^.  The  camel
said,  “O  my  companion  o’er  hill  and  plain,

What  is  this  standing  still  (for)?  Why  art  thou  dismayed?
Step  (forward)  like  a man ! Go  into  the  river !

Thou  art  my  guide  and  leader:  don’t  halt  midway  and  be
dumbfounded ! ”

He  (the  mouse)  said,  “This  is  a huge  and  deep  river:  I am
afraid  of  being  drowned,  O comrade.”

Said  the  camel,  “Let  me  see  the  limit  (depth)  of  the  water,”
and  he  quickly  set  foot  in  it.

3445  “The  water,”  he  said,  “is  (only)  up  to  the  knee.  O blind
mouse,  wherefore  didst  thou  become  dismayed  and  lose  thy
wits?  ”

He  (the  mouse)  replied,  “It  is  (as)  an  ant  to  you,  but  to  me  it
is  a dragon,  for  there  are  differences  between  one  knee  and
another.

If  it  is  (only)  up  to  your  knee,  O excellent  one,  it  is  a hundred
ells  higher  than  the  crown  of  my  head.”

He  (the  camel)  said,  “Another  time,  do  not  behave  (so)
boldly,  lest  thy  body  and  soul  be  consumed  by  these  sparks.

Contend  with  mice  like  thyself:  a mouse  has  nothing  to  say
to  a camel.”

3450  He  (the  mouse)  said,  “I  repent.  For  God’s  sake,  get  me
across  this  deadly  water ! ”

The  camel  took  pity.  “Hark,”  said  he,  “jump  up  and  sit
on  my  hump.

This  passage  has  been  vouchsafed  to  me : I would  take  across
hundreds  of  thousands  like  thee.”

Since  you  are  not  a prophet,  go  on  the  road  (after  the  prophets),
that  one  day  you  may  come  from  the  pit  (of  fleshliness)  to
(spiritual)  place  and  power.

Be  a vassal  since  you  are  not  a lord:  do  not  steer  (the  boat)
yourself,  since  you  are  not  the  boatman.

3455  Since  you  are  not  (spiritually)  perfect,  do  not  take  a shop  (by

* Literally,  “would  have  become  helpless.”

2 Literally,  “dry.”


THE  MOUSE  AND  THE  CAMEL  401

yourself)  alone.  Be  pliant  to  the  hand,  in  order  that  you  may
become  leavened  (like  dough).

Give  ear  to  (the  Divine  command),  “Keep  silence,”  be  mute;
since  you  have  not  become  the  tongue  (mouthpiece)  of  God,
be  an  ear.

And  if  you  speak,  speak  in  the  form  of  a request  for  explana-
tion: speak  to  the  (spiritual)  emperors  as  a lowly  beggar.

The  beginning  of  pride  and  hatred  is  in  (worldly)  lust,  and
the  rootedness  of  your  lust  is  from  habit.

When  an  evil  disposition  becomes  confirmed  by  habit,  you
are  enraged  with  any  one  who  restrains  you.

After  you  have  become  an  eater  of  clay,  any  one  who  restrains
you  from  (eating)  clay  is  your  enemy.

Since  idolaters  are  accustomed  to  the  idol,  they  are  foes  to
them  that  stop  the  way  to  the  idol.

Since  Iblis  had  become  accustomed  to  being  leader,  he  looked
on  Adam  with  disbelief  (and  denial).

Saying,  “Is  there  another  leader  superior  to  me,  so  that  he
should  be  worshipped  by  one  like  me?”

Leadership  is  poison,  except  to  the  spirit  that  from  the
beginning  hath  (in  himself)  abundance  of  the  antidote^.

If  the  mountain  is  full  of  snakes,  have  no  fear,  for  it  is  a mine  3ir>5
of  antidote  within.

When  leadership  has  become  a bosom-friend  to  your  brain^,
any  one  who  breaks  (thwarts)  you  becomes  (as)  an  ancient
adversary.

When  any  one  contradicts  your  disposition  (habit  of  mind),
many  feelings  of  hatred  against  him  arise  in  you.

“ He  is  tearing  me  (you  say)  from  my  (engrained)  disposition,
he  is  making  me  a pupil  and  follower  (of  himself).”

Unless  the  evil  disposition  has  become  strongly  implanted,
how  should  the  fire-temple  (of  passion)  blaze  up  through  being
opposed?

He  may  show  some  feigned  courtesy  to  the  opponent,  he  may
make  a place  for  himself  in  his  heart®,

(But  he  really  hates  him),  because  the  evil  disposition  has
waxed  strong:  the  ant  of  (worldly)  lust  has  through  habit
become  as  a snake.

Kill  the  snake  of  lust  at  the  beginning;  else,  look  you,  your
snake  is  become  a dragon.

But  every  one  deems  his  own  snake  an  ant:  do  you  (then)
seek  the  explanation  of  yourself  (your  real  state)  from  him  that
is  lord  of  the  heart.

Until  copper  becomes  gold,  it  does  not  know  itself  to  be

‘ Literally,  “is  a place  abounding  in  the  antidote.”

- I.e.  haunts  your  brain.

■'  I.e.  “he  may  seek  to  win  his  favour  by  flattering  him.”


N M


402  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

copper:  until  the  heart  becomes  a king,  it  does  not  know  itself
to  be  an  insolvent.

3475  Do  service  to  the  elixir,  like  copper:  endure  oppression,  O
heart,  from  him  that  holds  the  heart  in  fee.

Who  is  it  that  holds  the  heart  in  fee?  Know  well,  it  is  the  lords
of  the  heart  who,  like  day  and  night,  are  recoiling  from  the
world.

Do  not  find  fault  with  the  Servant  of  God:  do  not  suspect
the  King  of  being  a thief.


The  miracles  of  the  dervish  who  was  suspected  of  theft
in  a ship.

A dervish  was  in  a ship : he  had  made  a bolster  (for  himself)
from  the  goods  of  saintly  fortitude^.

A purse  of  gold  was  lost.  He  was  asleep  (at  the  time).  They
searched  all  (in  the  ship)  and  brought  him  also  to  view^,

3480  Saying,  “Let  us  search  this  sleeping  mendicant  as  well.”
(So)  the  owner  of  the  money,  (excited)  by  grief,  awakened  him.

“A  bag  of  valuables,”  said  he,  “has  been  lost  in  this  ship.
We  have  searched  the  whole  company:  you  cannot  escape
(suspicion).

Put  off  your  dervish-cloak,  strip  yourself  of  it,  in  order  that
the  people’s  suspicions  may  be  cleared  away  from  you®.”

He  cried,  “O  Lord,  these  vile  wretches  have  made  an  accusa-
tion against  Thy  slave : bring  Thy  command  to  pass ! ”

When  the  heart  of  the  dervish  was  pained  by  that  (suspicion),
at  once  there  put  forth  their  heads  on  every  side
3485  From  the  deep  sea  myriads  of  fishes,  and  in  the  mouth  of
' each  (was)  a superb  pearl :

Myriads  of  fishes  out  of  the  full  sea,  each  with  a pearl  in  its
mouth — and  what  (marvellous)  pearls ! —

Every  pearl  the  revenue  of  a kingdom.  “ These,”  they  said  (to
him),  “are  from  God,  thev  have  no  association  (with  any  one
but  God).”

He  dropped  a quantity  of  pearls  on  the  ship  and  sprang
(aloft):  he  made  the  air  his  high-seat  and  sate  (thereon),

(Resting)  at  ease,  cross-legged,  as  kings  upon  their  thrones —
he  above  the  zenith,  and  the  ship  before  him.

3490  He  said,  “Begone!  The  ship  for  you,  God  for  me,  so  that  a
beggarly  thief  may  not  be  with  you !

Let  us  see  who  will  be  the  loser^  by  this  separation!  I am

^ Literally,  “manliness”  or  “the  quality  of  a (holy)  man.”

“ I take  namiid  as  equivalent  to  namudand.  This  archaic  construction  occurs
elsewhere  in  the  Mathnaud.  Cf.  p.  249,  note  i.

^ Literally,  “freed  from  concern  with  you.”

* Literally,  “to  whom  will  be  the  loss.”


f


THE  DERVISH  ACCUSED  OF  THEFT  403

pleased,  (being)  paired  (united)  with  God  and  singled  (isolated)
from  (His)  creatures.

He  does  not  accuse  me  of  theft,  He  does  not  hand  me  over
to  (the  mercy  of)  an  informer^.”

The  people  in  the  ship  cried  out,  “O  noble  chief,  wherefore
has  such  a high  estate  been  given  to  thee?”

He  answered,  “For  throwing  suspicion  on  dervishes  and
offending  God  on  account  of  a despicable  thing  (as  ye  have  done) !

God  forbid ! Nay,  (it  was)  for  showing  reverence  to  (the  3495
spiritual)  kings,  inasmuch  as  I did  not  conceive  ill  thoughts
against  dervishes —

Those  gracious  dervishes  of  sweet  breath  (pure  spirit),  for
whose  magnification  (the  chapter  of  the  Qur’an  entitled)  ‘Abasa
was  revealed.”

That  dervishhood  is  not  for  the  sake  of  (avoiding)  entangle-
ment (with  the  world) ; no,  (it  is)  because  nothing  exists  but  God.

How  should  I hold  in  suspicion  those  whom  God  hath
entrusted  with  the  treasury  of  the  Seventh  Heaven?

The  fleshly  soul  is  suspect,  not  the  sublime  Reason:  the
senses  are  suspect,  not  the  subtle  Light.

The  fleshly  soul  is  a sophist : beat  it  constantly,  for  beating  5500
does  it  good,  not  arguing  with  it.

It  sees  a miracle  (wrought  by  a prophet),  and  at  the  moment
it  glows  (with  belief);  (but)  afterwards  it  says,  “ ’Twas  (only)  a
phantasy ;

For  if  that  wondrous  sight  had  been  real,  then  it  would  have
been  abiding,  day  and  night,  in  the  eye.”

It  is  abiding  in  the  eyes  of  the  pure,  (but)  it  does  not  haunt-
the  eyes  of  animals  (sensual  men) ;

For  the  miracle  is  ashamed  and  scornful  of  these  (bodily)
senses:  how  should  a peacock  be  (confined)  in  a narrow  pit?

Take  heed  not  to  call  me  garrulous:  I say  (only)  one  in  a :505
hundred,  and  that  (one)  like  a hair.


How  some  Sufis  abused  a certain  Sufi,  saying  that  he  talked
too  much  in  the  presence  of  the  Shaykh.

Some  Sufis  abused  a certain  Siifi,  and  came  to  the  Shaykh  of
the  convent,

And  said  to  the  Shaykh,  “ Demand  justice  for  our  souls  from
this  Sufi,  O Guide!”

He  said,  “Why,  what  is  the  complaint,  O Siifis?”  He  (their
spokesman)  replied,  “This  Siifi  has  three  annoying  habits:

In  speech  he  is  garrulous  as  a bell ; in  eating  he  eats  more  than
twenty  persons;

* Literally,  “does  not  give  my  leading-rope  to  an  informer.’’

- Literally,  “become  attached  to.”


404  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

3510  And  if  he  sleep,  he  is  like  the  Men  of  the  Cave.”  (Thus)  did
the  Siifis  march  to  war^  (against  him)  before  the  Shaykh.

The  Shaykh  turned  his  face  towards  that  dervish,  saying,  ‘‘In
every  case  that  exists,  take  the  middle  (course).

(It  is  stated)  in  Tradition  that  the  best  things  are  the  mean
(those  between  the  two  extremes):  the  (four)  humours  are
beneficial  through  being  in  equipoise.

If  by  accident  (any)  one  humour  become  excessive,  disease
appears  in  the  human  body.

Do  not  exceed  in  (any)  quality  him  that  is  thy  yoke-fellow,
for  that  will  assuredly  bring  about  separation  (between  you)  in
the  end.

3515  The  speech  of  Moses  was  in  measure,  but  even  so  it  exceeded
the  words  of  his  good  friend.

That  excess  resulted  in  (his)  opposing  Khadir;  and  he
(Khadir)  said,  ‘Go,  thou  art  one  that  talks  too  much;  this  is  a
{cause  of)  separation  {between  us).'

O (thou  who  resemblest)  Moses,  thou  art  garrulous.  Go  far
off,  or  else  be  dumb  with  me  and  blind !

And  if  thou  goest  not,  but  remainest  sitting  (here)  in  despite
(of  me) , thou  art  gone  in  reality  and  severed  (from  my  company) . ’ ’

When  suddenly  you  commit  an  act  of  (legal)  impurity  in
the  ritual  prayer,  it  (the  prayer)  says  to  you,  ‘‘Go  speedily
to  purify  yourself”;

3520  And  if  you  go  not,  you  will  be  moving  (exerting  yourself)  in
vain ; verily  your  prayer  is  gone  (is  void) : sit  down,  O misguided
man!

Go  to  them  that  are  your  mates,  (them)  that  are  enamoured
of  your  discourse  and  thirsting  for  it.

One  who  keeps  watch  is  superior  to  those  who  slumber:  the
(spiritual)  fish  have  no  need  of  one  who  keeps  watch.

Those  who  wear  clothes  look  to  the  launderer,  (but)  the  soul
of  the  naked  hath  (Divine)  illumination  as  its  adornment.

Either  withdraw  (and  turn)  aside  from  the  naked,  or  like
them  become  free  from  body-garments.

3?25  And  if  you  cannot  become  wholly  naked,  make  your  garments
less,  so  that  you  may  tread  the  middle  path.

How  the  dervish  excused  himself  to  the  Shaykh.

Then  the  dervish  told  the  Shaykh  how  the  case  stood,  and
coupled  excuses  with  the  discharge  of  that  obligation.

To  the  Shaykh’s  questions  he  gave  answer  good  and  right,
like  the  answers  of  Kha^r —

(Namely)  those  answers  to  the  questions  of  Moses  which
Khadir,  (inspired)  by  the  all-knowing  Lord,  set  forth  to  him,

^ I.e.  “made  a disturbance  and  uproar.”


THE  GARRULOUS  AND  GREEDY  SUFI  405

(So  that)  his  difficulties  became  solved,  and  he  (Khadir)  gave
to  him  (Moses)  the  key  to  every  question  (in  a way)  beyond
telling.

The  dervish  also  had  (a  spiritual)  inheritance  from  Khadir;  1530
(hence)  he  bent  his  will  to  answering  the  Shaykh.

He  said,  “Although  the  middle  path  is  (the  way  of)  wisdom,
yet  the  middle  path  too  is  relative.

Relatively  to  a camel,  the  water  in  the  stream  is  little,  but  to
a mouse  it  is  like  the  ocean.

If  any  one  has  an  appetite  for  four  loaves  and  eats  two  or
three,  that  is  the  mean;

But  if  he  eat  all  the  four,  it  is  far  from  the  mean:  he  is  in
bondage  to  greed,  like  a duck.

If  one  has  appetite  for  ten  loaves  and  eats  six,  know  that  that  3.3  >5
is  the  mean.

When  I have  appetite  for  fifty  loaves,  and  you  for  (no  more
than)  six  scones,  we  are  not  equivalent.

You  may  be  tired  by  ten  rak‘as  (of  prayer),  I may  not  be  worn
thin  by  five  hundred.

One  goes  bare-foot  (all  the  way)  to  the  Ka'ba,  and  one
becomes  beside  himself  (with  exhaustion  in  going)  as  far  as  the
mosque.

One  in  utter  self-devotion  gives  his  life,  one  is  agonised  at
giving  a single  loaf.

This  mean  belongs  to  (the  realm  of)  the  finite,  for  that  (finite)  3540
has  a beginning  and  end.

A beginning  and  end  are  necessary  in  order  that  the  mean  or
middle  (point)  between  them  may  be  conceived  in  imagination.

Inasmuch  as  the  infinite  has  not  (these)  two  limits,  how
should  the  mean  be  applicable  to  it^?

No  one  has  shown  it  to  have  beginning  or  end.  He  (God)
said,  ^ If  the  sea  were  to  become  ink  for  it  {the  Word  of  God)...'

If  the  Seven  Seas  should  become  entirely  ink,  (still)  there  is
no  hope  of  coming  to  an  end.

If  orchards  and  forests  should  become  pens  altogether,  there  3545
would  never  be  any  decrease  in  this  Word^.

All  that  ink  and  (all  those)  pens  pass  away,  and  this  number-
less Word  is  everlasting.

At  times  my  state  resembles  sleep:  a misguided  person  may
think  it  is  sleep.

Know  that  my  eyes  are  asleep,  (but)  my  heart  is  awake:  know
that  my  (seemingly)  inactive  form  is  (really)  in  action.

The  Prophet  said,  ‘My  eyes  sleep,  (but)  my  heart  is  not
asleep  to  the  Lord  of  created  beings.’

^ Literally,  “how  should  the  mean  be  that  to  which  it  (the  infinite)  is
referred?  ”

^ I.e.  “no  progress  would  be  made  in  defining  it.”


4o6  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

3550  Your  eyes  are  awake,  and  your  heart  is  sunk  in  slumber;  my
eyes  are  asleep,  (but)  my  heart  is  in  (contemplation  of)  the
opening  of  the  door  (of  Divine  grace).

My  heart  hath  five  senses  other  (than  the  physical) : both  the
worlds  (external  and  spiritual)  are  the  stage  (theatre)  for  the
senses  of  the  heart.

Do  not  regard  me  from  (the  standpoint  of)  your  infirmity : to
you  ’tis  night,  to  me  that  same  night  is  morningtide.

To  you  ’tis  prison,  to  me  that  prison  is  like  a garden:  to  me
the  most  absolute  state  of  occupation  (with  the  world)  has
become  (a  state  of  spiritual)  freedom.

Your  feet  are  in  the  mud;  to  me  the  mud  has  become  roses.
You  have  mourning;  I have  feasting  and  drums.

3555  (Whilst)  I am  dwelling  with  you  in  some  place  on  the  earth,
I am  coursing  over  the  seventh  sphere  (of  Heaven),  like  Saturn.

’Tis  not  I that  am  seated  beside  you,  ’tis  my  shadow : my  rank
is  higher  than  (the  reach  of)  thoughts.

Because  I have  passed  beyond  (all)  thoughts,  and  have
become  a swift  traveller  outside  (the  region  of)  thought.

I am  the  ruler  of  thought,  not  ruled  (by  it),  because  the  builder
is  ruler  over  the  building.

All  creatures  are  subjugated  to  thought ; for  that  reason  they
are  sore  in  heart  and  practised  in  sorrow.

3560  I yield  myself  to  thought  purposely,  (but)  when  I will  I spring
up  from  the  midst  of  them  (that  are  under  its  sway).

I am  as  a bird  of  the  zenith,  thought  is  a gnat:  how  should  a
gnat  have  power  over  me?

Purposely  I come  down  from  the  lofty  zenith,  that  those  of
base  degree  may  attain  to  me.

When  disgust  at  the  qualities  of  the  low  (world)  seizes  me,  I
soar  up  like  the  birds  which  spread  their  pinions.

My  wings  have  grown  out  of  my  very  essence : I do  not  stick
two  wings  on  with  glue.

3565  The  wings  of  Ja‘far-i  Ta5ryar  are  permanent;  the  wings  of
Ja‘far-i  ‘Ayyar  are  borrowed  (unreal  and  transitory).

In  the  view  of  him  that  has  not  experienced  (it),  this  is  (mere)
pretension;  in  the  view  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  (spiritual)
horizon,  this  is  the  reality.

This  is  brag  and  pretension  in  the  eyes  of  the  crow : an  empty
or  full  pot  is  all  one  to  the  fly.

When  morsels  of  food  become  (changed  to)  pearls  within  you,
do  not  forbear:  eat  as  much  as  you  can.”

One  day  the  Shaykh,  in  order  to  rebut  (these)  ill  thoughts,
vomited  in  a basin,  and  the  basin  became  full  of  pearls.

3570  On  account  of  the  (abusive)  man’s  little  understanding,  the
clairvoyant  Pi'r  made  the  intelligible  pearls  objects  of  sense-
perception.


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  RELATIVITY  407

When  pure  (lawful  food)  turns  to  impurity  in  your  stomach,
put  a lock  upon  your  gullet  and  hide  the  key;

(But)  any  one  in  whom  morsels  of  food  become  the  light  of
(spiritual)  glory,  let  him  eat  whatever  he  will,  it  is  lawful  to  him.


Explaining  {that  there  are)  some  assertions  the  truth  of  which
is  attested  by  their  very  nature.

If  you  are  my  soul’s  familiar  friend,  my  words  full  of  (real)
meaning  are  not  (mere)  assertion.

If  at  midnight  I say,  “I  am  near  you:  come  now,  be  not
afraid  of  the  night,  for  I am  your  kinsman,”

These  two  assertions  are  to  vou  reality,  since  you  recognise  3575
the  voice  of  your  own  relative.

Nearness  and  kinship  were  (only)  two  assertions,  but  both
(of  them)  were  reality  to  the  good  understanding.

The  proximity  of  the  voice  gives  him  (the  hearer)  testimony
that  these  words  spring  from  a friend^ ;

Moreover,  (his)  delight  at  (hearing)  the  voice  of  his  kinsman
has  borne  witness  to  the  truthfulness  of  that  dear  relative.

Again,  the  uninspired  fool  who  in  his  ignorance  does  not
know  a stranger’s  voice  from  a kinsman’s —

To  him  his  (the  speaker’s)  words  are  (mere)  assertion:  his  353o
ignorance  has  become  the  source  of  his  disbelief ;

(But)  to  him  of  keen  insight,  within  whom  are  the  (spiritual)
lights,  the  very  nature  of  this  voice  was  just  the  (immediate
evidence  of  its)  reality.

Or  (for  example)  one  whose  mother- tongue  is  Arabic  says  in
Arabic,  “I  know  the  language  of  the  Arabs.”

The  very  fact  of  his  speaking  in  Arabic  is  (evidence  of)  the
reality  (of  his  assertion),  although  his  saying  (that  he  knows)
Arabic  is  (only)  an  assertion.

Or  a writer  may  write  on  a piece  of  paper,  “ I am  a writer  and
a reader,  and  I am  a most  accomplished  person.”

Although  this  written  (statement)  itself  is  a (mere)  assertion,  3585
still  the  script  is  evidence  of  the  reality  (of  the  assertion).

Or  a Sufi  may  say,  “Last  night,  wLile  asleep,  you  saw  some
one  with  a prayer-carpet  on  his  shoulder.

That  was  I ; and  what  I said  to  vou  in  the  dream,  whilst  you
slumbered,  in  explanation  of  clairvoyance —

Give  ear  (to  it),  put  it  in  your  ear  like  an  ear-ring : make  those
words  (of  mine)  your  mind’s  guide.”


* with  izdfat.  The  point  is,  not  that  the  friend  is  near  at  hand

(which  is  obvious),  but  that  the  nearness  of  his  voice  enables  the  listener  to
recognise  him  as  a friend  and  verify  his  statement.


4o8  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

When  you  recollect  the  dream,  these  words  (of  his)  are  (as
real  to  you  as)  a new  miracle  or  old  gold.

3590  Although  this  seems  to  be  (mere)  assertion  (on  his  part),  yet
the  soul  of  the  dreamer  says,  “Yes,  (it  is  true).”

Therefore,  since  Wisdom  is  the  faithful  believer’s  stray
camel,  he  knows  it  with  certainty,  from  whomsoever  he  has
heard  it;

And  when  he  finds  himself  absolutely  in  front  of  it,  how
should  there  be  doubt?  How  should  he  mistake  himself?

When  you  say  to  a thirsty  man,  “Make  haste!  there  is  water
in  the  cup ; take  the  water  at  once,”

Will  the  thirsty  man  say  in  any  event? — “This  is  (mere)
assertion : go  from  my  side,  O pretender  1 Get  thee  far  away !
3595  Or  (else)  produce  some  testimony  and  proof  that  this  is  of
aqueous  kind  and  consists  of  the  water  that  runs  from  a
spring.

Or  (suppose  that)  a mother  cries  to  her  suckling  babe,  “ Come,
I am  mother;  hark,  my  child!” —

Will  the  babe  sayi*^ — “O  mother,  bring  the  proof  (of  it),  so
that  I may  take  comfort  in  thy  milk.”

When  in  the  heart  of  any  community  there  is  savour  (spiritual
perception)  from  God,  the  face  and  voice  of  the  prophet  are  (as)
an  evidentiary  miracle.

When  the  prophet  utters  a cry  from  without,  the  soul  of  the
community  falls  to  worship  within,

3600  Because  never  in  the  world  will  the  soul’s  ear  have  heard
from  any  one  a cry  of  the  same  kind  as  his.

That  stranger  (the  soul),  by  immediate  perception  of  the
strange  (wondrous)  voice,  has  heard  from  God’s  tongue  (the
words),  “ Verily  I am  near.”


How  Yahyd^,  on  whom  be  peace,  in  his  mother's  womb  bowed
in  worship  to  the  Messiah  (Jesus),  on  whom  be  peace.

The  mother  of  Yahya,  before  disburdening  herself  (of  him),
said  in  secret  to  Mary,

“ I see  (it)  wdth  certainty,  within  thee  is  a King  who  is  possessed
of  firm  purpose  and  is  an  Apostle  endowed  with  knowledge
(of  God).

When  I happened  to  meet  thee,  my  burden  (the  unborn
child)  at  once  bowed  in  worship.

3605  This  embryo  bowed  in  worship  to  that  embryo,  so  that  pain
arose  in  my  body  from  its  bowing.”

Mary  said,  “I  also  felt  within  me  a bowing  performed  by
this  babe  in  the  womb.”


i


* John  the  Baptist.


JOHN  THE  BAPTIST  AND  JESUS  409

On  raising  a difficulty  as  to  this  story.

The  foolish  say,  “Cancel  this  tale,  because  it  is  false  and
erroneous.

Mary  in  (her)  pregnancy  was  not  joined  (met)  by  any  one :
she  did  not  return  from  without  the  town.

Until  that  woman  of  sweet  address  was  delivered  outside  of
the  town,  she  indeed  came  not  into  it.

When  she  had  given  birth  to  him,  she  then  took  him  up  in  5610
her  lap  and  carried  him  to  her  kinsfolk.

Where  did  the  mother  of  Yahya  see  her  to  speak  these  words
to  her  about  what  had  happened?”

The  answer  to  the  difficulty.

Let  him  (the  objector)  know'  that  to  one  who  receives  ideas
(from  God)  all  that  is  absent  in  the  world  is  present.

To  Mary,  the  mother  of  Yahya  would  appear  present,  though
she  was  far  from  her  (bodily)  sight.

One  may  see  a friend  (even)  with  eyes  shut,  when  one  has
made  the  skin  (the  bodily  envelope)  a lattice  (to  let  in  spiritual
ideas).

And  if  she  saw'  her  neither  from  without  nor  from  within,  3615
take  the  (essential)  meaning  of  the  story,  O imbecile !

Not  like  him  who  had  heard  (some)  fables,  and  like  sh  stuck
to  the  (literal)  5/!ape  of  them^.

So  that  he  would  say,  “How  should  Kalila,  having  no
language,  hear  w’ords  from  Dimna  who  had  no  power  of  expres-
sion?

And  (even)  if  they  knew  each  other’s  accents,  how'  should
man  understand  it  (their  talk),  (since  it  was)  w'ithout  any
articulation  ?

How  did  Dimna  become  a messenger  between  the  lion  and
the  ox,  and  cajole  them  both  with  his  palaver^?

How  did  the  noble  ox  become  the  vizier  of  the  lion?  How  was  36^0
the  elephant  terrified  by  the  reflection  of  the  moon?

This  Kalila  and  Dimna  is  entirely  fiction,  or  else  how  has
the  stork  a quarrel  with  the  crow?”

O brother,  the  story  is  like  a measure : the  real  meaning  in  it
resembles  grain  (in  the  measure).

The  man  of  intelligence  w'ill  take  the  grain  of  meaning:  he
will  not  pay  any  regard  to  the  measure,  (even)  if  it  is  removed
(altogether).

Listen  to  what  passes  between  the  rose  and  the  nightingale,
though  in  that  case  there  is  no  overt  speech.

^ The  simile  in  the  Persian  is  “like  stun  stuck  to  the  naqsh  of  them,”  shin
being  the  final  letter  of  the  word  naqsh.

- Literally,  “pronounce  spells  over  them  both?”


410


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II


On  mute  eloquence^  and  the  understanding  of  it.

3625  Listen  also  to  what  passes  between  the  moth  and  the  candle,
and  pick  out  the  meaning,  O worshipful  one^.

Albeit  there  is  no  speech,  there  is  the  inmost  soul  of  speech.
Come,  fly  aloft,  do  not  fly  low,  hke  the  owl.

He  (the  player)  at  chess  said,  “ This  is  the  house  of  the  rook.”
“By  what  way,”  said  he  (the  literalist),  “did  the  house  come
into  its  hands.?

Did  it  buy  the  house,  or  inherit  it?  ” — Happy  is  he  that  sped
towards  the  (real)  meaning!

A grammarian  said,  “ Zayd  has  struck  ‘Amr.”  Said  (the  fool),
“How  did  he  chastise  him  without  any  offence  (on  his  part)?

3630  What  was  ‘Amr’s  offence,  that  that  rude  Zayd  struck  him,
innocent  (though  he  was),  as  (if  he  were)  a slave?  ”

He  (the  grammarian)  replied,  “ This  (form  of  words)  is  (only)
the  measure  (container)  of  the  meaning  signified:  take  some
wheat,  for  the  measure  is  (to  be)  rejected.

Zayd  and  ‘Amr  are  a device  for  (showing)  the  declension : if
that  (statement  that  Zayd  struck  ‘Amr)  is  untrue,  make  up  with
the  declension®.”

“Nay,”  said  he,  “I  don’t  know  about  that.  How  did  Zayd
strike  ‘Amr  without  (his  committing  any)  crime  or  fault?  ”

He  (the  grammarian)  in  desperation  started  a joke  and  said,
“‘Amr  had  stolen  a superfluous  wdw*.

3635  Zayd  became  aware,  and  struck  the  stealer  of  it:  since  he
(‘Amr)  carried  it  beyond  bounds  (transgressed  the  law),  the
punishment  serves  him  right.”

How  worthless  sayings  find  acceptance  in  the  minds  of
worthless  folk.

He  (the  fool)  said,  “Here  you  are,  this  is  the  truth!  I accept
(it)  with  (all)  my  soul.”  Wrong  seems  right  to  the  wrong-minded.

If  you  say  to  a squinting  man,  “The  moon  is  one,”  he  will
say  to  you,  “These  are  two  (moons);  and  there  is  a (great)
doubt  as  to  (the  moon’s)  being  one”;

And  if  somebody  laughs  at  him  and  says,  “There  are  tw'o,”
he  deems  it  the  truth.  This  (mockery)  is  what  the  ill-natured
(ignorant  and  contumacious)  fellow  deserves.


* Literally,  “on  speaking  with  the  tongue  of  the  (inward)  state.”

" Literally,  “O  idol.”

® l.e.  “let  the  instruction  conveyed  by  means  of  the  statement  reconcile
and  satisfy  you.”

^ In  Arabic  the  name  ‘Amr  is  written  ‘Amrw,  in  order  to  distinguish  it
from  the  name  ‘Umar,  with  which  it  would  otherwise  be  identical  as  far  as
the  consonants  are  concerned.


f


MUTE  ELOQUENCE


41 1

Lies  muster  round  (those  who  are  living)  lies:  (the  text)
the  wicked  women  for  the  wicked  men  has  thrown  light  (upon  this
point).

They  whose  hearts  are  (opened)  wide  (to  receive  spiritual  ,040
truths)  have  wide  (far-reaching)  hands  they  whose  (spiritual)
eyes  are  blind  have  to  stumble  on  stony  ground.


On  seeking  the  tree  whereof  none  that  eats  the  fruit  shall  die.

A learned  man  (once)  said,  for  the  sake  of  (telling)  a story,

“ In  India  there  is  a certain  tree:

Whoso  takes  and  eats^  of  its  fruit,  he  grows  not  old  nor  ever
dies.”

A king  heard  this  (tale)  from  a veracious  person : he  became
a lover  of  the  tree  and  its  fruit.

From  the  Divan  of  culture  he  sent  an  intelligent  envov  to
India  in  search  (of  it).

For  (many)  years  his  envoy  w'andered  about  India  in  quest  5645
(of  the  tree).

He  roamed  from  town  to  town  for  this  object:  neither  island
nor  mountain  nor  plain  was  left  (unvisited).

Every  one  whom  he  asked  made  a mock  of  him,  saying,
“Who  would  search  after  this,  unless  perhaps  a madman  in
confinement?  ”

Many  slapped  him  jocosely;  many  said,  “O  fortunate  man.

How  should  the  enquiry  of  a clever  and  clear-minded  person
like  you  be  devoid  (of  result)?  How  should  it  be  vain?”

And  this  (ironical)  respect  was  to  him  another  slap,  and  it  ,'350
W'as  harder  (to  bear)  than  the  visible  slap.

They  extolled  him  sarcastically,  saying,  “ O great  sir,  in  such
and  such  a place  there  is  a very  huge  tree.

In  such  and  such  a forest  there  is  a green  tree,  very  tall  and
broad,  and  ever}'  branch  of  it  is  big.”

The  king’s  envoy,  who  had  braced  his  belt  for  the  quest,  was
hearing  a different  kind  of  report  from  every  one ;

So  he  travelled  there  for  years,  (whilst)  the  king  kept  sending
money  to  him.

After  he  had  suffered  much  fatigue  in  that  foreign  land,  at  '<•55
last  he  became  too  exhausted  to  seek  (any  longer).

No  trace  of  the  object  of  pursuit  was  discovered:  of  what  he
wanted  nothing  appeared  but  the  report.

The  thread  of  his  hope  snapped,  the  thing  he  had  sought
became  unsought  in  the  end.

He  resolved  to  return  to  the  king,  (and  set  out)  shedding
tears  and  traversing  the  way.

I.e.  they  enjoy  spiritual  power  and  freedom.

- Literally,  " eats  and  takes.”


412


MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II


How  the  Shaykh  explained  the  hidden  meaning  of  the  tree  to
the  seeker  who  was  in  the  bondage  of  formalism.

There  was  a wise  Shaykh,  a noble  Qutb,  at  the  halting-place
where  the  king’s  intimate  fell  into  despair.

3660  He  (the  envoy)  said,  “Being  without  hope,  I will  go  to  him,
and  set  out  on  the  road  (again)  from  his  threshold.

In  order  that  his  prayer  (blessing)  may  accompany  me,  since
I have  no  hope  of  (winning)  my  heart’s  desire.’’

With  tearful  eyes  he  went  to  the  Shaykh:  he  was  raining
tears,  like  a cloud.

“O  Shaykh,”  he  cried,  “it  is  the  time  for  mercy  and  pity;

I am  in  despair;  now  is  the  time  for  kindness.”

He  (the  Shaykh)  said,  “Say  plainly  what  is  the  cause  of  thy
despair:  what  is  thy  object?  what  hast  thou  in  view^?”

3663  He  answered,  “The  Emperor  chose  me  out  to  seek  a certain
branching  tree,

For  there  is  a tree,  unique  in  (all)  the  quarters  (of  the  world) :
its  fruit  is  (of)  the  substance  of  the  Water  of  Life.

I have  sought  (it)  for  years  and  seen  no  sign  (of  it)  except  the
gibes  and  ridicule  of  these  merry  men.”

The  Shaykh  laughed  and  said  to  him,  “O  simpleton,  this
is  the  tree  of  knowledge  in  the  sage —

Very  high  and  very  grand  and  very  far-spreading:  (it  is)  a
Water  of  Life  from  the  all-encompassing  Sea  (of  God).

36-0  Thou  hast  gone  after  the  form,  thou  hast  gone  astray;  thou
canst  not  find  (it)  because  thou  hast  abandoned  the  reality.

Sometimes  it  is  named  ‘tree,’  sometimes  ‘sun’;  sometimes  it
is  named  ‘sea,’  sometimes  ‘cloud.’

(It  is)  that  one  (thing)  from  which  a hundred  thousand  effects
arise:  its  least  effects  are  everlasting  life.

Although  (in  essence)  it  is  single,  it  hath  a thousand  effects:
innumerable  names  befit  (may  be  properly  applied  to)  that  one
(thing).

One  person  may  be  father  in  relation  to  thee;  in  regard  to
another  individual  he  may  be  son.

3675  In  regard  to  another  he  may  be  wrath  and  a foe ; in  regard  to
another  he  may  be  graciousness  and  a friend.

(He  hath)  hundreds  of  thousands  of  names,  (but)  he  is  one
man:  the  owner  of  every  quality  belonging  to  him  is  blind  to
(incapable  of)  giving  any  (true)  description  (of  him).

Whoever  seeks  the  (mere)  name,  if  he  is  entrusted  (with  a
confidential  mission)  he  is  hopeless  and  in  distraction,  even  as
thou  art.  i

Why  dost  thou  stick  to  the  name  ‘tree,’  so  that  thou  art  left
bitterly  disappointed  and  ill-fortuned?

' Literally,  “towards  what  is  thy  face  (turned)?”


THE  TREE  OF  LIFE  413

Pass  on  from  the  name  and  look  at  the  attributes,  in  order
that  the  attributes  may  show  thee  the  way  to  the  essence.”

The  disagreement  of  mankind  is  caused  by  names : peace  36S0
ensues  when  they  advance  to  the  reality  (denoted  by  the  name).

How  four  persons  quarrelled  about  grapes,  which  were  known
to  each  of  them  by  a different  name.

A certain  man  gave  a dirhem  to  four  persons:  one  of  them
(a  Persian)  said,  “I  will  spend  this  on  angur.”

The  second  one  was  an  Arab:  he  said,  “No,  I want  ‘inab,  not
angur,  O rascal ! ”

The  third  was  a Turk;  and  he  said,  “This  (money)  is  mine:

I don’t  want  ‘inab,  I want  uzum.”

The  fourth,  a Greek,  said,  “Stop  this  talk:  I want  istdfil.”

These  people  began  fighting  in  contention  with  one  another,  3685
because  they  were  unaware  of  the  hidden  meaning  of  the  names.

In  their  folly  they  smote  each  other  with  their  fists : they  were
full  of  ignorance  and  empty  of  knowledge.

If  a master  of  the  esoteric  had  been  there,  a revered  and  many-
languaged  man,  he  would  have  pacified  them;

.^d  then  he  would  have  said,  “ With  this  one  dirhem  I will
give  all  of  you  what  ye  wish.

When  without  deceit  ye  surrender  your  hearts  (to  me),  this
dirhem  will  do  all  this  for  you.

Your  one  dirhem  will  become  four^ — the  result  desired:  3690
four  enemies  will  become  one  through  unanimity  2.

What  each  one  of  you  says  produces  strife  and  separation;
what  I say  brings  you  agreement.

Therefore  be  ye  mute,  keep  silence,  that  I may  be  your  tongue
in  speech  and  talk.”

(Even)  if  in  their  agreement  with  each  other  your  words  are
(as)  a strong  rope,  in  effect  they  are  a source  of  contention  and
distraction.

Borrowed  (accidental)  heat  produces  no  (essential)  effect;
natural  heat  hath  (its  own)  virtue.

If  you  have  made  vinegar  hot  by  means  of  fire,  (still)  when  3695
you  drink  it,  it  will  undoubtedly  increase  the  coldness  (of  your
constitution),

Because  that  (artificially  produced)  heat  of  it  is  exotic^:  its
fundamental  nature  is  coldness  and  tartness.

And  (on  the  other  hand),  though  grape-syrup  be  frozen,  my
son,  it  will  add  heat  to  the  liver  when  you  drink  it.

Hence  the  Shaykh’s  hypocrisy  is  better  than  our  sincerity,

* I.e.  “will  serve  to  gratify  the  wishes  of  all  the  four.”

~ Literally,  “ Einswerden.”

® Literally,  “belonging  to  the  outer  hall.”


414  MATHNAWI,  BOOK  II

for  the  former  arises  from  (spiritual)  insight,  while  the  latter
arises  from  (spiritual)  blindness.

From  the  Shaykh’s  discourse  comes  union  (concord);  the
words  of  the  envious  bring  separation  (discord).

3700  As  (for  example)  Solomon,  who  sped  (on  his  prophetic
mission)  from  God,  and  who  knew  the  language  of  all  birds —

In  the  time  of  his  just  sway  the  deer  made  friends  with  the
leopard  and  ceased  from  war.

The  dove  became  secure  from  the  talons  of  the  hawk,  the
sheep  took  no  precaution  against  the  wolf.

He  (Solomon)  became  an  arbitrator  between  enemies:  he
became  a (means  of  establishing)  oneness  between  the  creatures
that  fly  with  wings.

Thou  art  running  after  grain,  like  an  ant.  Hark!  seek  for
Solomon!  Why  art  thou  still  astray?

3703  To  the  seeker  of  grain  his  grain  becomes  a snare,  but  the
seeker  of  Solomon  may  have  both  (Solomon  and  the  grain).

In  these  latter  days  the  soul-birds  have  no  security  from  each
other  for  a moment ;

(Yet)  even  in  our  epoch  there  is  a Solomon  who  would  give
(us)  peace  and  not  suffer  our  injustice  to  continue.

Call  to  mind  (the  text),  There  is  no  people  down  to  (the  words)
but  in  the  past  a warner  dwelt  among  them.

God  said  that  verily  there  has  never  been  a people  devoid
of  a vicar  of  God  and  a man  of  spiritual  power ;

3710  And  he  makes  the  soul-birds  so  unanimous  that,  in  respect
of  sincerity,  he  purges  them  of  (all)  guile  and  rancour.

They  become  (as)  kind  as  a mother:  he  (Mohammed)  said
of  the  Moslems,  “(They  are  as)  one  soul.”

(’Twas)  through  the  Messenger  of  Allah  they  became  one
soul;  else,  they  were  absolute  enemies,  every  one  (to  the  other).

How  dissension  and  enmity  amongst  the  Ansar  were  removed  by  the
blessings  of  the  Prophet — may  God  bless  and  save  him  !

The  two  tribes  which  were  named  Aws  and  Khazraj  had  a
blood-thirsty  spirit  towards  each  other.

Through  (the  preaching  of)  Mustafa  (Mohammed)  their
ancient  feuds  vanished  in  the  light  of  Islam  and  of  pureness
(of  heart).

3713  First,  those  enemies  became  brethren  like  the  units  of  (a
bunch  of)  grapes  in  the  garden;

And  (then)  at  the  admonition  given  in  the  words^,  The  true
believers  are  brethren,  they  dissolved  (and  mingled)  and  became
one  body.

^ Or,  if  the  reading  •XUj  be  adopted,  “in  consequence  of  the  binding
obligation  involved  in  the  words.”


I


MANY  NAMES  AND  ONE  REALITY  41 5

The  appearance  of  the  (clustered)  grapes  is  (that  of)  brethren :
when  you  squeeze  them  they  become  one  juice.

The  immature  and  the  full-grown  grape  are  opponents,  but
when  the  immature  grape  has  ripened,  it  becomes  a good  friend.

The  immature  grape  that  has  remained  stone-hard  and  crude
— God  in  eternity  has  called  it  an  original  unbeliever.

He  (such  a one)  is  neither  a brother  nor  one  (in)  soul  (with  5-20
the  faithful  Aloslems):  he  is  an  ill-starred  heretic  in  (the  state
of)  damnation.

If  I should  tell  that  vv'hich  he  keeps  hidden  (in  his  heart),
there  would  arise  in  the  world  a sore  temptation  of  (men’s)
minds.

’Tis  better  that  the  secret  of  the  blind  infidel  should  be
untold:  ’tis  better  that  the  smoke  of  Hell  should  be  banished
from  Iram.

The  good  immature  grapes,  which  are  capable  (of  ripening),
are  at  last  (made)  one  in  heart  by  the  breath  of  the  masters  of
heart  (the  saints).

They  push  on  rapidly  to  grapehood  (maturity),  so  that
duality  and  hatred  and  strife  depart  (from  them).

Then  in  grapehood  they  rend  their  skins  till  they  become  one : 3725
unity  is  the  (proper)  attribute  of  him  (who  is  one  with  others).

A friend  becomes  a foe  because  he  is  still  two:  is  any  one
(engaged)  in  a quarrel  with  himself?

Blessings  on  the  universal  love  of  the  Master,  (which)  gave
oneness  to  hundreds  of  thousands  of  motes !

(They  were)  as  dust  scattered  on  the  thoroughfare : the  hand
of  the  Potter  made  them  one  jug.

(But  the  simile  fails  as  applied  to  souls),  for  the  oneness  of
bodies  (formed)  of  water  and  clay  is  imperfect : the  (oneness  of)
soul  is  not  like  this.

If  I should  here  utter  similitudes  in  comparison  (illustration),  37.30
I fear  it  might  disorder  (perplex)  the  understanding.

Even  now  there  exists  (a)  Solomon,  but  we  are  blinded  by
exulting  in  (our)  far-sightedness.

Far-sightedness  keeps  a man  blind,  just  as  one  sleeping  in  a
house  is  blind  to  the  house.

We  are  much  addicted  to  subtle  discussions,  we  are  exceed-
ingly fond  of  solving  problems ;

And  to  the  end  that  we  may  tie  knots  and  (then)  undo  them,

(we  are)  making  many  rules  for  (posing  and  stating)  the  difficulty
and  for  answering  (the  questions  raised  by  it),

Like  a bird  which  should  undo  the  fastenings  of  a snare,  and  3735
tie  (them  together)  at  times,  in  order  that  it  might  become  perfect
in  skill:

It  is  deprived  of  the  open  country  and  meadowland,  its  life
is  spent  in  dealing  with  knots ;


4i6  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

And  even  (then)  the  snare  is  nowise  subdued  by  it,  but  its
wings  are  always  getting  broken.

Do  not  struggle  with  knots,  lest  thy  wings  and  feathers  be
snapped  asunder  one  by  one  through  this  vain  display  (of  effort)
on  thy  part.

Myriads  of  birds  have  had  their  wings  broken,  and  have  not
stopped  that  calamitous  ambuscade^  (from  doing  its  work).

3740.  Read  in  the  Qur’an  (concerning)  their  state,  O covetous  one:
— -They  explored  {and  wandered)  in  them  {the  lands  of  the  earth) ;
mark  (the  words).  Was  there  any  refuge?

The  difficulty  over  angur  and  ‘inab  was  not  solved  by  the
contest  between  the  Turk,  the  Greek,  and  the  Arab.

Until  the  spiritual  Solomon,  skilled  in  tongues,  shall  inter-
vene, this  duality  will  not  disappear.

O all  ye  wrangling  birds,  hearken,  like  the  falcon,  to  this
falcon-drum  of  the  King.

Hark,  from  every  quarter  set  out  with  joy,  (flying  away)  from
your  diversity  towards  oneness.

3745  Wheresoever  ye  be,  turn  your  faces  towards  it  ^ : this  is  the  thing
which  He  hath  not  forbidden  unto  you  (at  any  time).

Blind  birds  are  we  and  very  inept,  in  that  we  have  not  once
recognised  that  Solomon.

Like  the  owls,  we  have  become  hostile  to  the  falcons:  con-
sequently we  are  left  behind  (to  dwell)  in  the  place  of  ruin.

Because  of  (our)  extreme  ignorance  and  blindness  we  are
seeking  to  hurt  those  honoured  of  God.

How  should  the  flock  of  birds  which  are  enlightened  by
Solomon  tear  out  the  wings  and  plumes  of  the  innocent?

3750  Nay,  they  would  bring  grain  to  the  helpless  ones : gentle  are
those  birds  and  without  pugnacity  or  hatred.

Their  hoopoe,  for  the  sake  of  glorifying  (Solomon),  unfolds
the  way  (towards  Him)  to  a hundred  like  Bilqis.

Their  crow,  (even)  if  it  was  a crow  in  outward  aspect,  was
(really)  a falcon  in  aspiration  and  (one  whose  gaze)  turned  not
aside.

Their  stork,  which  cries  lak  lak^,  casts  upon  doubt  (and
disbelief)  the  fire  of  the  profession  of  Unity;

And  their  dove  is  not  scared  by  hawks:  the  hawk  lays  his
head  (in  homage)  before  their  dove.

3755  Their  nightingale,  which  throws  thee  into  ecstasy,  hath  the
rose-garden  in  its  heart.

Their  parrot  was  (always)  independent  of  sugar,  for  the
sugar  of  everlastingness  showed  its  face  (was  revealed)  to  it
from  within.

^ Literally,  “that  place  where  the  (predestined)  events  lie  in  ambush.”

^ Qur’an,  ll,  139  and  145,  slightly  altered.

^ Cf.  Book  II,  verse  1662.


SOLOMON  AND  THE  BIRDS  417

The  feet  of  their  peacocks  are  fairer  to  see  than  (all)  others  in
peacock’s  plumage.

The  speeches  of  princely  birds ^ are  (meaningless  as)  an  echo:
where  is  the  speech  of  the  birds  of  Solomon?

How  wilt  thou  know  the  cries  of  the  birds,  when  thou  hast
never  seen  Solomon  for  a single  moment?

The  wings  of  that  bird  whose  note  thrills  (them  that  can  hear  ;
it)  are  beyond  East  and  West.

Its  every  course  is  from  the  Footstool  of  God  to  the  earth,
and  from  the  earth  to  the  Throne  of  God  it  moves  in  glorj’  and
majesty.

The  bird  that  goes  without  this  Solomon  is  in  love  with
'darkness,  like  a bat.

Make  thyself  familiar  with  Solomon,  O reprobate  bat,  in
order  that  thou  mayst  not  remain  in  darkness  for  ever.

When  thou  goest  one  ell’s  length  in  that  direction,  like  the
ell  thou  wilt  become  the  standard  of  measurement;

And  (even  by)  thy  hopping  lamely  and  limply  in  that  direc-  3
tion,  thou  wilt  be  freed  from  all  lameness  and  limpness.


The  story  of  the  ducklings  which  were  fostered  by  a domestic  fowl.

Thou  art  the  offspring  of  a duck,  though  a domestic  fowl  has
nursed  thee  beneath  her  wing.

Thy  mother  was  the  duck  of  that  Sea;  thy  nurse  was  of  the
earth  and  devoted  to  the  dry  land.

The  desire  which  is  in  thy  heart  for  the  Sea — thy  soul  hath
that  nature  (instinct)  from  thy  mother.

The  desire  thou  hast  for  the  dry  land  is  from  this  nurse.
Leave  the  nurse,  for  she  is  an  evil  counsellor.

Leave  the  nurse  on  the  dry  land,  and  press  on : come  into  the  3
Sea  of  spiritual  reality,  like  the  ducks.

(Even)  if  thy  mother  should  bid  thee  be  afraid  of  the  water,
fear  not  thou,  but  push  speedily  into  the  Sea.

Thou  art  a duck:  thou  art  one  that  lives  (both)  on  dry  and
wet;  thou  art  not  one  like  the  domestic  fowl,  whose  house  is
dug  (in  the  ground).

Thou  art  a king  in  virtue  of  (the  te.xt).  We  have  ennobled  the
sons  of  Adam : thou  settest  foot  both  on  the  dr}'  land  and  on  the
Sea.

For  in  spirit  thou  art  (what  is  signified  by  the  text).  We  have
conveyed  them  on  the  Sea:  push  forward  (then)  from  (the  state
implied  in  the  words).  We  have  conveyed  them  on  the  land.

The  angels  have  no  access  to  the  land ; the  animal  kind,  again,  3
are  ignorant  of  the  Sea.

^ l.e.  the  great  ones  of  this  world.


t

(


4i8  MATHNAWf,  BOOK  II

Thou  in  (thy)  body  art  an  animal,  and  in  (thy)  spirit  thou
art  of  the  angels,  so  that  thou  mayst  walk  on  the  earth  and  also
in  the  sky ;

So  that  the  seer  with  heart  divinely  inspired  may  be,  in
appearance,  a man  like  yourselves.

His  body  of  dust  (is  here),  fallen  upon  the  earth;  (but)  his
spirit  (is)  circling  in  yonder  highest  sphere  (of  Heaven).

We  all  are  water-birds,  O lad : the  Sea  fully  knows  our  language.

37S0  Therefore  the  Sea  is  (our)  Solomon,  and  we  are  as  the  birds
(familiar  with  Solomon) : in  Solomon  we  move  unto  everlasting.

With  Solomon  set  thy  foot  in  the  Sea,  that  the  water,  David-
like,  may  make  a hundred  rings  of  mail  (ripples).

That  Solomon  is  present  to  all,  but  (His)  jealousy  binds
(our)  eyes  (with  spells)  and  enchants  (us).

So  that  from  folly  and  drowsiness  (forgetfulness)  and  vanity —
He  is  beside  us,  and  (yet)  we  are  sick  of  Him.

The  noise  of  thunder  gives  the  thirsty  man  headache,  when
he  does  not  know  that  it  (the  thunder)  brings  on  the  rain-clouds
of  felicity.

37.  His  eye  remains  (fixed)  upon  the  running  stream,  unaware  of
the  delicious  taste  of  the  Water  of  Heaven.

He  has  urged  the  steed  of  (his)  attention  towards  (secondary)
causes ; consequently  he  remains  debarred  from  the  Causer.

(But)  one  that  sees  the  Causer  plainly — how  should  he  set
his  mind  upon  the  (secondary)  causes  in  the  world?

How  the  pilgrims  were  amazed  at  the  miracles  of  the  ascetic
whom  they  found  {living)  alone  in  the  desert.

Amidst  the  desert  lived  an  ascetic,  absorbed  in  devotion  like
the  people  of  ‘Abbadan^.

The  pilgrims  from  (different)  countries  arrived  there:  their
eyes  fell  upon  the  parched  ascetic.

3790  The  dwelling-place  of  the  ascetic  was  dry,  (but)  he  was  moist
in  temperament : in  the  simoom  of  the  desert  he  had  a remedy
(for  his  moistness).

The  pilgrims  were  amazed  at  his  solitude  and  his  welfare  in
the  midst  of  bane.

He  stood  on  the  sand,  (engaged)  in  the  ritual  prayer — sand
from  the  heat  whereof  the  water  in  a pot  would  boil.

You  would  have  said  he  was  (standing)  enraptured  amongst
herbs  and  flowers,  or  mounted  on  Buraq  or  DulduH;


* The  use  of  ‘Abbadiya  for  ‘Abbadaniyya  is  justified  by  the  fact  that
‘Abb^dan  was  originally  named  ‘Abbad.  Cf.  Yaqiit,  Majam  al-Bulddn,

ed.  Wiistenfeld,  in,  598, 2 foil., and  Dozy,  Supplement,  11,91  (under  ^ t .

The  town  had  a great  reputation  for  asceticism  (Yaqut,  in,  598,  6 and  17).

“ See  p.  187,  notes  i and  2.


THE  ASCETIC  AND  THE  PILGRIMS  419

Or  that  his  feet  were  on  silk  and  broidered  cloths ; or  that  to
him  the  simoom  w^as  more  pleasant  than  the  zephyr.

They  (the  pilgrims)  stood  waiting,  (whilst)  he  remained  3795
standing  in  prayer,  (sunk)  in  long  meditation.

When  the  dervish  came  back  (to  himself)  from  (his  state  of)
absorption  (in  God),  one  of  that  company,  a man  (spiritually)
alive  and  of  enlightened  mind.

Observed  that  water  was  trickling  from  his  hands  and  face,

(and  that)  his  garment  was  wet  with  the  traces  of  ablution ;

So  he  asked  him,  “Whence  hast  thou  water?”  He  lifted  his
hand,  (indicating)  that  it  came  from  heaven.

He  (the  pilgrim)  said,  “Does  it  come  whenever  thou  wilt,
without  (any)  well  and  without  (any)  rope  of  palm- fibre}

Solve  our  difficulty,  O Sultan  of  the  Religion,  in  order  that
thy  (spiritual)  experience  may  give  us  certain  faith.

Reveal  to  us  one  of  thy  mysteries,  that  we  may  cut  from  our
waists  the  cords  (of  infidelity).”

He  (the  ascetic)  turned  his  eyes  to  heaven,  saying,  “ (O  God),
answer  the  prayer  of  the  pilgrims !

I am  accustomed  to  seeking  daily  bread  from  above:  Thou
hast  opened  to  me  the  door  from  above,

O Thou  who  from  non-spatiality  hast  brought  space  into
view,  and  hast  made  manifest  (the  fact  that)  in  heaven  is  your
daily  bread.  ”

In  the  midst  of  this  orison  a fair  cloud  suddenly  appeared,  3S05
like  a water-bearing  elephant.

And  began  to  pour  down  rain,  like  water  from  a water-skin :
the  rain-water  settled  in  the  ditch  and  in  the  hollows.

The  cloud  kept  raining  tears,  like  a water-skin,  and  the
pilgrims  all  opened  their  water-skins.

One  party  (among  them),  in  consequence  of  those  marvellous
happenings,  were  cutting  the  cords  (of  unbelief)  from  their
waists.

The  certainty  (faith)  of  another  group  was  on  the  increase
because  of  this  miracle — and  God  knows  best  how  to  guide
aright.

Another  group  (were)  unreceptive,  sour  and  unripe,  eternally  3810
imperfect  ones.  (Here)  ends  the  discourse.


CAMBRIDGE

Printed  by  w.  lewis,  m,a.
At  the  University  Press


I

V


i
