Sh uy!
aah

SAAS : ; See Se
RR > Sas oS

e ONO at

ent

hr)
nas
fepiiets

es
<=

LS Ae ed eS

aaa

cadthees

it

aare itl)

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2025

https://archive.org/details/owb_W9-CWL-618

PEL AAA Ar KLer—a
y 4

RIG-VEDA-SANHITA,

VOL. L. a

OXFORD:
BY T. COMBE, M.A., EB, B. GARDNER, E, P, HALL, AND H. LATHAM, M.A..

PRINTERS TO THE UNIVERSITY.

—

RIG-VEDA-SANHITA.

THE SACRED HYMNS OF THE BRAHMANS

TRANSLATED AND EXPLAINED

BY

F. MAX MULLER, M.A., LL.D.

FELLOW OF ALL SOULS COLLEGE ;
PROFESSOR OF COMPARATIVE PHILOLOGY AT OXFORD;

FOREIGN MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTE OF FRANCE, ETC., ETC,

VOL. I.

HYMNS TO THE MARUTS OR THE STORM-GODS.

LONDON:
TRUBNER AND CO., 60, PATERNOSTER ROW.

1869.

[All rights reserved.}

INTERNATIONAL CHRISTIAN
GRADUATE UNIVERSITY

To the Memory

COLEBROOKE, ROSEN, BURNOUF,

THE THREE FOUNDERS

OF VEDIC SCHOLARSHIP IN EUROPE.

/83 04

PREFACE.

VEN some twenty years ago I decided on

undertaking the first edition of the two texts
and the commentary of the Rig-veda, I little ex-
pected that it would fall to my lot to publish also
what may, without presumption, be called the first
translation of the ancient sacred hymns of the
Brahmans. Such is the charm of deciphering step
by step the dark and helpless utterances of the
early poets of India, and discovering from time to
time behind words that for years seemed unintelli-
gible, the simple though strange expressions of
primitive thought and primitive faith, that it re-
quired no small amount of self-denial to decide
in favour of devoting a life to the publishing of
the materials rather than to the drawing of the
results which those materials supply to the student
of ancient language and ancient religion. Even
five and twenty years ago, and without waiting
for the publication of S&yana’s commentary, much
might have been achieved in the interpretation of

the hymns of the Rig-veda. With the MSS. then

Vill PREFACE.

accessible in the principal libraries of Europe, a
tolerably correct text of the Sanhitaé might have
been published, and these ancient relics of a primitive
religion might have been at least partially deciphered
and translated in the same way in which ancient
inscriptions are deciphered and translated, viz. by
a careful collection of all grammatical forms, and
by a complete intercomparison of all passages in
which the same words and the same phrases occur.
When I resolved to devote my leisure to a critical
edition of the text and commentary of the Rig-
veda rather than to an independent study of that
text, it was chiefly from a conviction that the
traditional interpretation of the Rig-veda, as em-
bodied in the commentary of Sayana and other
works of a similar character, could not be neglected
with impunity, and that sooner or later a complete
edition of these works would be recognized as a
necessity. It was better therefore to begin with the
beginning, though it seemed hard sometimes to spend
forty years in the wilderness instead of rushing
straight into the promised land.

It is well known to those who have followed
my literary publications that I never entertained
any exaggerated opinion as to the value of the
traditional interpretation of the Veda, handed down
in the theological schools of India, and preserved
to us in the great commentary of Sd&yana. More
than twenty years ago, when it required more
courage to speak out than now, I expressed my

PREFACE. 1x

opinion on that subject in no ambiguous language,
and was blamed for it by some of those who now
speak of Sayana as a mere drag in the progress
of Vedic scholarship. A drag, however, is some-
times more conducive to the safe advancement of
learning than a whip; and those who recollect the
history of Vedic scholarship during the last five
and twenty years, know best that, with all its
faults and weaknesses, Sdyana’s commentary was a
sine qud non for a scholarlike study of the Rig-
veda. I do not wonder that others who have more
recently entered on that study are inclined to speak
disparagingly of the scholastic interpretations of
Sayana. They hardly know how much we all owe
to his guidance in effecting our first entrance into
this fortress of Vedic language and Vedic religion,
and how much even they, without being aware of
it, are indebted to that Indian Eustathius. I do
not withdraw an opinion which I expressed many
years ago, and for which I was much blamed at
the time, that Sdyana in many cases teaches us
how the Veda ought not to be, rather than how it
ought to be understood. But for all that, who
does not know how much assistance may be derived
from a first translation, even though it is imperfect,
nay, how often the very mistakes of our predeces-
sors help us in finding the right track? If we
can now walk without Sdyana, we ought to bear
in mind that five and twenty years ago we could
not have made even our first steps, we could never,

x PREFACE.

at least, have gained a firm footing, without his
leading strings. If therefore we can now see
further than he could, let us not forget that we
are standing on his shoulders.

I do not regret in the least the time which I
have devoted to the somewhat tedious work of
editing the commentary of Sayana, and editing it
according to the strictest rules of critical scholar-
ship. The Veda, I feel convinced, will occupy.
scholars for centuries to come, and will take and
maintain for ever its position as the most ancient
of books in the library of mankind. Such a book,
and the commentary of such a book, should be
edited once for all; and unless some unexpected
discovery is made of more ancient MSS., I do not
anticipate that any future Bekker or Dindorf will
find much to glean for a new edition of Sayana,
or that the text, as restored by me from a col-
lation of the best MSS. accessible in Europe,
will ever be materially shaken*. It has taken

* Since the publication of the first volume of the Rig-veda,
many new MSS. have come before me, partly copied for me,
partly lent to me for a time by scholars in India, but every
one of them belonged clearly to one of the three families which
I have described in my introduction to the first volume of the
Rig-veda. In the beginning of the first Ashfaka, and occasionally
at the beginning of other Ashéakas, likewise in the commentary
on hymns which were studied by native scholars with particular
interest, various readings occur in some MSS., which seem at
first to betoken an independent source, but which are in reality
mere marginal notes, due to more or less learned students of

PREFACE. X1

a long time, I know; but those who find fault
with me for the delay, should remember that few
scholars, if any, have worked for others more than
I have done in copying and editing Sanskrit texts,

these MSS. Thus after verse 3 of the introduction one MS.
reads: sa praha nripatim ragan, sayandaryo mamanugah, sarvam
vetty esha vedanam vyakhyatritvena yugyatém. The same MS.,
after verse 4, adds: ityukto madhavaryena virabukkamahipatih,
anvasat sayanakaryam vedarthasya prakasane.

I had for a time some hope that MSS. written in Grantha
or other South-Indian alphabets might have preserved an in-
dependent text of Sayana, but from some specimens of a
Grantha MS. collated for me by Mr. Eggeling, I do not think
that even this hope is meant to be realised. The MS. in
question contains a few independent various readings, such as
are found in all MSS., and owe their origin clearly to the
jottings of individual students. When at the end of verse 6,
I found the independent reading, vyutpannas tavata sarva riko
vyakhyatum arhati, I expected that other various readings of
the same character might follow. But after a few additions
in the beginning, and those clearly taken from other parts of
Sayana’s commentary, nothing of real importance could be
gleaned from that MS. I may mention as more important
specimens of marginal notes that, before the first puna kidrisam,
on page 44, line 24, this MS. reads: athava yagiiasya devam
iti sambandhah, yagiiasya prakasakam ityarthah, purohitam iti
prithagviseshanam. And again, page 44, line 26, before punah
kidrisam, this MS. adds: athava ritvigam ritvigvid (vad) yagiia-
nirvahakam hotaram devandm 4ahvataram; tathd ratnadhatamam.
In the same line, after ratnandm, we read ramaniyadhananam va,
taken from page 46, line 2. Various readings like these, however,
occur on the first sheets only, soon after the MS. follows the usual
and recognized text. For the later Ashtakas, where all the MSS.
are very deficient, and where an independent authority would be
of real use, no Grantha MS. has as yet been discovered.

xu PREFACE.

and that after all one cannot give up the whole
of one’s life to the collation of Oriental MSS. and
the correction of proof-sheets. The two concluding
volumes have long been ready for Press, and as
soon as I can find leisure, they too shall be printed
and published.

In now venturing to publish the first volume
of my translation of the Rig-veda, I am fully
aware that the fate which awaits it will be very
different from that of my edition of the text and
commentary. It is a mere contribution towards
a better understanding of the Vedic hymns, and
though I hope it may give in the main a right
rendering of the sense of the Vedic poets, I feel con-
vinced that on many points my translation is liable
to correction, and will sooner or later be replaced by
a more satisfactory one. It is difficult to explain to
those who have not themselves worked at the Veda,
how it is that, though we may understand almost
every word, yet we find it so difficult to lay hold
of a whole chain of connected thought, and to dis-
cover expressions that will not throw a wrong
shade on the original features of the ancient words
of the Veda. We have, on the one hand, to avoid
giving to our translations too modern a character,
or paraphrasing instead of translating; while, on
the other, we cannot retain expressions which, if
literally rendered in English or any modern tongue,
would have an air of quaintness or absurdity totally
foreign to the intention of the ancient poets. There

PREFACE. xiil

are, as all Vedic scholars know, whole verses which,
as yet, yield no sense whatever. There are words
the meaning of which we can only guess. Here,
no doubt, a continued study will remove some of
our difficulties, and many a passage that is now
dark, will receive light hereafter from a happy
combination. Much has already been achieved by
the efforts of European scholars, but much more
remains to be done; and our only chance of seeing
any rapid progress made lies, I believe, in com-
municating freely what every one has found out
by himself, and not minding if others point out
to us that we have overlooked the very passage
that would at once have solved our diticulties,
that our conjectures were unnecessary, and our
-emendations wrong. ‘True and _ honest scholars
whose conscience tells them that they have done
their best, and who care for the subject on which
they are engaged more than for the praise of
benevolent or the blame of malignant critics, ought
not to take any notice of merely frivolous censure.
There are mistakes, no doubt, of which we ought
to be ashamed, and for which the only amende
honorable we can make is to openly confess and
retract them. But there are others, particularly
in a subject like Vedic interpretation, which we
should forgive, as we wish to be forgiven. This
can be done without lowering the standard of true
scholarship or vitiating the healthy tone of scien-
tific morality. Kindness and gentleness are not

X1V PREFACE.

incompatible with earnestness,—far from it !—and
where these elements are wanting, not only is
the joy embittered which is the inherent reward
of all bond fide work, but selfishness, malignity,
aye, even untruthfulness, gain the upper hand, and
the healthy growth of science is stunted. While
in my translation of the Veda and in the remarks
that I have to make in the course of my commen-
tary, I shall frequently differ from other scholars,
I hope I shall never say an unkind word of men
who have done their best, and who have done
what they have done in a truly scholarlike, that
is, in a humble spirit. It would be unpleasant,
even were it possible within the limits assigned, to
criticise every opinion that has been put forward
on the meaning of certain words or on the con-.
struction of certain verses of the Veda. I prefer,
as much as possible, to vindicate my own transla-
tion, instead of examining the translations of other
scholars, whether Indian or European. Sadyana’s
translation, as rendered into English by Professor
Wilson, is before the world. Let those who take
an interest in these matters compare it with the
translation here proposed. In order to give readers
who do not possess that translation, an opportunity
of comparing it with my own, I have for a few
hymns printed that as well as the translations of
Langlois and Benfey on the same page with my
own. Everybody will thus be enabled to judge
of the peculiar character of. each of these transla-

PREFACE. XV

tions. That of Sdyana represents the tradition of
India; that of Langlois is the ingenious, but
thoroughly uncritical, guess-work of a man of taste;
that of Benfey is the rendering of a scholar, who
has carefully worked out the history of some
words, but who assigns to other words either the
traditional meaning recarded by Sdyana, or a con-
jectural meaning which, however, would not always
stand the test of an intercomparison of all passages
in which these words occur. I may say, in general,
that Sdyana’s translation was of great use to me
in the beginning, though it seldom afforded help
for the really difficult passages. Langlois’ trans-
lation has hardly ever yielded real assistance, while
I sincerely regret that Benfey’s rendering does not
extend beyond the first Mandala.

It may sound self-contradictory, if, after confessing
the help which I derived from these translations,
I venture to call my own the first translation of
the Rig-veda. The word translation, however, has
many meanings. I mean by translation, not a mere
rendering of the hymns of the Rig-veda into
English, French, or German, but a full account of
the reasons which justify the translator in assign-
ing such a power to such a word, and such a
meaning to such a sentence. I mean by translation
a real deciphering, a work like that which Burnout
performed in his first attempts at a translation
of the Avesta,—a traduction raisonnée, if such an

expression may be used. Without such a process,

XV PREFACE.

without a running commentary, a mere translation
of the ancient hymns of the Brahmans will never
lead to any solid results. Even if the translator
has discovered the right meaning of a word or
of a whole sentence, his mere translation does not
help us much, unless he shows us the process by
which he has arrived at it, unless he places before
us the piéces justificatives of his final judgment.
The Veda teems with words that require a justi-
fication; not so much the words which occur but
once or twice, though many of these are difficult
enough, but rather the common words and particles,
which occur again and again, which we understand
to a certain point, and can render in a vague way,
but which must be defined before they can be trans-
lated, and before they can convey to us any real
and tangible meaning. It was out of the question
in a translation of this character to attempt either
an imitation of the original rhythm or metre, or to
introduce the totally foreign element of rhyming.
Such translations may follow by and by: at present
a metrical translation would only be an excuse for
an inaccurate translation.

While engaged in collecting the evidence on
which the meaning of every word and every sen-
tence must be founded, I have derived the most
important assistance from the Sanskrit Dictionary
of Professors Boehtlingk and Roth, which has been
in course of publication during the last sixteen
years. The Vedic portion of that Dictionary may,

PREFACE. XVil

I believe, be taken as the almost exclusive work of
Professor Roth, and as such, for the sake of brevity,
I shall treat it in my notes. It would be ungrate-
ful were I not to acknowledge most fully the real
benefit which this publication has conferred on
every student of Sanskrit, and my only regret is
that its publication has not proceeded more rapidly,
so that even now years will elapse before we can
hope to see it finished. But my sincere admiration
for the work performed by the compilers of that
Dictionary does not prevent me from differing, in
many cases, from the explanations of Vedic words
given by Professor Roth. If I do not always criti-
cise Professor Roth’s explanations when I differ from
him, the reason is obvious. A dictionary without a
full translation of each passage, or without a justifica-
tion of the meanings assigned to each word, is only
a preliminary step to a translation. It represents
a first classification of the meanings of the same
word in different passages, but it gives us no
means of judging how, according to the opinion
of the compiler, the meaning of each single word
should be made to fit the general sense of a whole
sentence. I do not say this in disparagement,
for, in a dictionary, it can hardly be otherwise ;
I only refer to it in order to explain the difficulty
I felt whenever I differed from Professor Roth, and
was yet unable to tell how the meaning assigned
by him to certain words would be justified by the
author of the Dictionary himself. On this ground
VOL, I. b

XVill PREFACE.

I have throughout preferred to explain every step
by which I arrived at my own renderings, rather
than to write a running criticism of Professor Roth’s
Dictionary. My obligations to him I like to express
thus once for all, by stating that whenever I found
that I agreed with him, I felt greatly assured as
to the soundness of my own rendering, while when-
ever I differed from him, I never did so without
careful consideration.

The works, however, which I have hitherto men-
tioned, though the most important, are by no means
the only ones that have been of use to me in
preparing my translation of the Rig-veda. The
numerous articles on certain hymns, verses, or single
words occurring in the Rig-veda, published by Vedic
scholars in Europe and India during the last thirty
years, were read by me at the time of their publica-
tion, and have helped me to overcome difficulties,
the very existence of which is now forgotten. If I
go back still further, I feel that in grappling with
the first and the greatest of difficulties in the study
of the Veda, I and many others are more deeply
indebted than it is possible to say, to one whose
early loss has been one of the greatest misfortunes
to Sanskrit scholarship. It was in Burnouf’s lectures
that we first learnt what the Veda was, and how
it should form the foundation of all our studies.
Not only did he most liberally communicate to
his pupils his valuable MSS., and teach us how
to use these ‘tools, but the results of his own

PREFACE. xix

experience were freely placed at our service, we were
warned against researches which he knew to be
useless, we were encouraged in undertakings which
he knew to be full of promise. His minute ana-
lysis of long passages of Sayana, his independent
interpretations of the text of the hymns, his com-
parisons between the words and grammatical forms,
the thoughts and legends of the Veda and Avesta,
his brilliant divination checked by an inexorable
sense of truth, and his dry logical method enlivened
by sallies of humour and sparks of imaginative
genius, though not easily forgotten and always
remembered with gratitude, are now beyond the
reach of praise or blame. Were I to criticise what
he or other scholars have said and written many
years ago, they might justly complain of such
criticism. It is no longer necessary to prove that
Nabh4anedishtha cannot mean ‘new relatives, or that
there never was a race of Etendhras, or that the
angels of the Bible are in no way connected with
the Angiras of the Vedic hymns; and it would,
on the other hand, be a mere waste of time, were
I to attempt to find out who first discovered that
in the Veda deva does not always mean divine,
but sometimes means brilliant. In fact, it could
not be done. In a new subject like that of the
interpretation of the Veda, there are certain things
which everybody discovers who has eyes to see.
Their discovery requires so little research that it

seems almost an insult to say that they were dis-
b 2

XX PREFACE.

covered by this or that scholar. Take, for instance,
the peculiar pronunciation of certain words, rendered
necessary by the requirements of Vedic metres. I
believe that my learned friend Professor Kuhn was
one of the first to call general attention to the fact
that semivowels must frequently be changed ito
their corresponding vowels, and that long vowels
must sometimes be pronounced as two syllables. It
is clear, however, from Rosen’s notes to the first
Ashtaka (i. 1, 8), that he, too, was perfectly aware
of this fact, and that he recognized the prevalence
of this rule, not only with regard to semivowels
(see his note to Ry. i. 2, 9) and long vowels which
are the result of Sandhi, but likewise with regard
to others that occur in the body of a word. ‘ Ani-
madverte, he writes, ‘tres syllabas postremas vocis
adhvaranam dipodiz iambicee munus_sustinentes,
penultima syllaba preeter iambi prioris arsin, thesin
quoque sequentis pedis ferente. Satis frequentia
sunt, in hac presertim dipodie iambice sede,
exempla syllabee natura longee in tres moras pro-
duct. De-squa re nihil quidem memoratum
invenio apud Pingalam aliosque qui de arte
metrica scripserunt: sed numeros ita, ut modo
dictum est, computandos esse, taciti agnoscere
videntur, quum versus una syllaba mancus non
eos offendat.’

Now this is exactly the case. The ancient oram-
marians, as we shall see, teach distinctly that where
two vowels have coalesced into one according to

PREFACE. XXI

the rules of Sandhi, they may be pronounced as
two syllables; and though they do not teach the
same with regard to semivowels and long vowels
occurring in the body of the word, yet they tacitly
recognize that rule, by frequently taking its effects
for granted. Thus in Stitra 950 of the PratisAkhya,
verse ix. 111, 1, is called an Atyashti, and the first
pada is said to consist of twelve syllables. In order
to get this number, the author must have read,

ayd ruki harinyA pundnah.
Immediately after, verse iv. 1, 3, is called a Dhriti,
and the first pada must again have twelve syllables.

Here therefore the author takes it for granted that
we should read,
sakhe sakhayam abhy 4 vavritsva *.

No one, in fact, with any ear for rhythm, whether
Saunaka and Pingala, or Rosen and Kuhn, could
have helped observing these rules when reading the
Veda. But it is quite a different case when we
come to the question as to which words admit of
such protracted pronunciation, and which do not.
Here one scholar may differ from another according
to the view he takes of the character of Vedic

* See also Stitra 937 seq. I cannot find any authority for the
statement of Professor Kuhn (Beitrige, vol. iii. p. 114) that accord-
ing to the Rik-pratisikhya it is the first semivowel that must be
dissolved, unless he referred to the remarks of the commentator

to Stitra 973.

Xxil PREFACE.

metres, and here one has to take careful account
of the minute and ingenious observations contained
in numerous articles by Professors Kuhn, Bollensen,
Grassmann, and others. With regard to the inter-
pretation of certain words and sentences, too, it may
happen that explanations which have taxed the
ingenuity of some scholars to the utmost, seem to
others so self-evident that they would hardly think
of quoting anybody’s name in support of them, to
say nothing of the endless and useless work it would
entail, were we obliged always to find out who was
the first to propose this or that interpretation. It
_is impossible here to lay down general rules :—each
scholar must be guided by his own sense of justice to
others and by self-respect. Let us take one instance.
From the first time that I read the fourth hymn
of the Rig-veda, I translated the fifth and sixth
verses :

utd bruvantu nah nidah nih anydtah kit arata,

dddhanah indre {t dtivah,
uta nah su-bhégan arih vokéyuh dasma krishtayah,
syama it indrasya sérmani.

1. Whether our enemies say, ‘Move away else-
where, you who offer worship to Indra only,—

2. Or whether, O mighty one, all people call us
blessed: may we always remain in the keeping of
Indra.

About the general sense of this passage I imagined
there could be no doubt, although one word in it,

viz. arth, required an explanation. Yet the variety

PREFACE. XXill

of interpretations proposed by different scholars is
extraordinary. First, if we look to Sdyana, he
translates :

t. May our priests praise Indra! O enemies,
go away from this place, and also from another
place! Our priests (may praise Indra), they who
are always performing worship for Indra.

2. O destroyer of enemies! may the enemy call
us possessed of wealth; how much more, friendly
people! May we be in the happiness of Indra!

Professor Wilson did not follow Sayana closely,
but translated :

1. Let our ministers, earnestly performing his
worship, exclaim: Depart, ye revilers, from hence
and every other place (where he is adored).

2. Destroyer of foes, let our enemies say we are
prosperous: let men (congratulate us). May we
ever abide in the felicity (derived from the favour)
of Indra.

Langlois translated :

r. Que (ces amis), en fétant Indra, puissent dire :
Vous, qui étes nos adversaires, retirez-vous loin Wici.

2. Que nos ennemis nous appellent des hommes
fortunés, placés que nous sommes sous la protection
d’'Indra.

Stevenson translated :

1. Let all men again join in praising Indra.
Avaunt ye profane scoffers, remove from hence, and
from every other place, while we perform the rites

of Indra.

XX1V PREFACE.

2. O foe-destroyer, (through thy favour) even our
enemies speak peaceably to us, the possessors of
wealth ; what wonder then if other men do s0.
Let us ever enjoy the happiness which springs
from Indra’s blessing.

Professor Benfey translated :

1. And let the scoffers say, They are rejected by
every one else, therefore they celebrate Indra alone.

2. And may the enemy and the country proclaim
us as happy, O destroyer, if we are only in Indra’s
keeping.

Professor Roth, s.v. anydtah, took this word
rightly in the sense of ‘to a different place, and
must therefore have taken that sentence ‘move
away elsewhere’ in the same sense in which I take
it. Later, however, s. v. ar, he corrected himself,
and proposed to translate the same words by ‘you
neglect something else.’

Professor Bollensen (Orient und Occident, vol. ii.
p- 462), adopting to a certain extent the second
rendering of Professor Roth in preference to that
of Professor Benfey, endeavoured to show that the
‘something else which is neglected, is not some-
thing indefinite, but the worship of all the other
gods, except Indra.

It might, no doubt, be said that every one of
these translations contains something that is right,
though mixed up with a great deal that is wrong ;
but to attempt for every verse of the Veda to quote
and to criticise every previous translation, would

PREFACE. XXV

be an invidious and useless task. In the case just
quoted, it might seem right to state that Professor
Bollensen was the first to see that arfh should be
joined with krishtdyah, and that he therefore pro-
posed to alter it to ari, as a nom. plur. But on
referring to Rosen, I find that, to a certain extent,
he had anticipated Professor Bollensen’s remark, for
though, in his cautious way, he abstained from alter-
ing the text, yet he remarked: Possitne ari/ pluralis
esse, contracta terminatione, pro arayah ?

After these preliminary remarks I have to say a
few words on the general plan of my translation.

I do not attempt as yet a translation of the
whole of the Rig-veda, and I therefore considered
myself at liberty to group the hymns according
to the deities to which they are addressed. By
this process, I believe, a great advantage is gained.
We see at one glance all that has been said of a
certain god, and we gain a more complete insight
into his nature and character. Something of the
same kind had been attempted by the original
collectors of the ten books, for it can hardly be
by accident that each of them begins with hymns
addressed to Agni, and that these are followed
by hymns addressed to Indra. The only exception
to this rule is the eighth Mandala, for the ninth
being devoted to one deity, to Soma, can hardly be
accounted an exception. But if we take the Rig-
veda as a whole, we find hymns, addressed to the

XXV1 PREFACE.

same deities, not only scattered about in different
books, but not even grouped together when they
occur in one and the same book. Here, as we
lose nothing by giving up the old arrangement,
we are surely at liberty, for our own purposes,
to put together such hymns as have a common
object, and to place before the reader as much
material as possible for an exhaustive study of each
individual deity.

I give for each hymn the Sanskrit original in
what is known as the Pada text, i.e. the text in
which all words (pada) stand by themselves, as
they do in Greek or Latin, without being joined
together according to the rules of Sandhi. The
text in which the words are thus joined, as they
are in all other Sanskrit texts, is called the Sanhité
text. Whether the Pada or the Sanhité text be
the more ancient, may seem difficult to settle. Ag
far as I can judge, they seem to me, in their pre-
sent form, the product of the same period of
Vedic scholarship. The Pratisdkhyas, it is true;
start from the Pada text, take it, as it were, for
granted, and devote their rules to the explanation of
those changes which that text undergoes in being
changed into the Sanhita text. But, on the other
hand, the Pada text in some cases clearly pre-
supposes the Sanhita text. It leaves out passages
which are repeated more than once, while the
Sanhita text always repeats these passages; it
abstains from dividing the termination of the loca-

PREFACE. XXV11

tive plural su, whenever in the Sanhitd text, i.e.
according to the rules of Sandhi, it becomes shu ;
hence nadishu, agishu, but ap-su; and it gives
short vowels instead of the long ones of the San-
hita, even in cases where the long vowels are
justified by the rules of the Vedic language. It
is certain, in fact, that neither the Pada nor the
Sanhitaé text, as we now possess them, represent
the original text of the Veda. Both show clear
traces of scholastic influences. But if we try to
restore the original form of the Vedic hymns, we
shall certainly arrive at some kind of Pada text
rather than at a Sanhité text; nay, even in their
present form, the original metre and rhythm of
the ancient hymns of the Aishis are far more
perceptible when the words are divided, than when
we join them together throughout according to the
rules of Sandhi. Lastly, for practical purposes,
the Pada text is far superior to the Sanhita text
in which the final and initial letters, that is, the
most important letters of words, are constantly
disguised, and liable therefore to different inter-
pretations. Although in some passages we may
differ from the interpretation adopted by the
Pada text, and although certain Vedic words have,
no doubt, been wrongly analysed and divided by
Sakalya, yet such cases are comparatively few, and
where they occur, they are interesting as carrying
us back to the earliest attempts of Vedic scholar-
ship. In the vast majority of cases the divided

XXV1il PREFACE.

text, with a few such rules as we have to observe
in reading Latin, nay, even in reading Pali verses,
brings us certainly much nearer to the original
utterance of the ancient FRishis than the amalga-
mated text.

The critical principles by which I have been
guided in editing for the first time the text of
the Rig-veda, require a few words of explanation,
as they have lately been challenged on grounds
which, I think, rest on a complete misapprehension
of my previous statements on this subject.

As far as we are able to judge at present, we
can hardly speak of various readings in the Vedic
hymns, in the usual sense of that word. Various
readings to be gathered from a collation of dif-
ferent MSS., now accessible to us, there are none.
After collating a considerable number of. MSS., I
have succeeded, I believe, in fixing on three repre-
sentative MSS., as described in the preface to the
first volume of my edition of the Rig-veda. Even
these MSS. are not free from blunders,—for what
MS. is?—but these blunders have no claim to the
title of various readings. They are lapsus calami,
and no more ; and, what is important, they have not
become traditional*.

* Thus x. ror, 2, one of the Pada MSS. (P. 2) reads distinctly
yagiiém pra krinuta sakhayah, but all the other MSS. have
nayata, and there can be little doubt that it was the frequent
repetition of the verb kri in this verse which led the writer
to substitute krinuta for nayata. No other MS., as far as I

PREFACE. XX1X

The text, as deduced from the best MSS. of the
Sanhita text, can be controlled by four independent
checks. The first is, of course, a collation of the
best MSS. of the Sanhita text.

The second check to be applied to the Sanhita
text 1s a comparison with the Pada text, of which,
again, I possessed at least one excellent MS., and
several more modern copies.

am aware, repeats this blunder. In ix. 86, 34, the writer of the
same MS. puts ragasi instead of dhavasi, because his eye was caught
by raga in the preceding line. x. 16, 5, the same MS. reads sim
gakkhasva instead of gakkhatam, which is supported by 8. 1, S. 2,
P. 1, while 8. 3. has a peculiar and more important reading, gak-
khatat. x. 67, 6, the same MS. P. 2. has vi Aakartha instead
of vi kakarta.

A number of various readings which have been gleaned from
Pandit Taranatha’s Tuladanadipaddhati (see Triibner’s American
and Oriental Literary Record, July 31, 1868) belong to the same
class. They may be due either to the copyists of the MSS. which
Pandit Taranatha used while compiling his work, or they may
by accident have crept into his own MS. Anyhow, not one of
them is supported either by the best MSS. accessible in Europe,
or by any passage in the Pratisakhya.

Rv. ix. 11, 2, read devayu instead of devayuh t.
ix.11,4, °,, arkata 4: arkate f.
ix.I4,2, ,, yadisabandhavah _,, yaddiptabandhavah }.
ix. 16,3, ,, anaptam af anuptam }.
ix.17,2, ,, suvandsa 6 stuvanasa y.
ix.21,2, , pravrinvanto 7 pravrinvato T.
ix. 48,2, ,, samvrikta ; samyukta ft.
ix. 49,1, ,, no pam “i no yam +.
iX. 54,3, » suaryah 4, siiryam ft.
ix. 605357_,, sida ni As stdati ft.

+ As printed by Pandit Taranatha,

XXX PREFACE.

The third check was a comparison of this text
with Sdyana’s commentary, or rather with the text
which is presupposed by that commentary. In the
few cases where the Pada text seemed to differ
from the Sanhit& text, a note was added to that
effect, in the various readings of my edition; and
the same was done, at least in all important cases,
where Sdyana clearly followed a text at variance
with our own.

The fourth check was a comparison of any doubt-
ful passage with the numerous passages quoted in
the Pratisdkhya.

These were the principles by which I was guided
in the critical restoration of the text of the Rig-
veda, and I believe I may say that the text as
printed by me is more correct than any MS. now
accessible, more trustworthy than the text followed
by Sayana, and in all important points identically
the same with that text which the authors of the
Pratisikhya followed in their critical researches in
the fifth or sixth century before our era. I believe
that starting from that date our text of the Veda is
better authenticated, and supported by a more per-
fect apparatus criticus, than the text of any Greek or
Latin author, and I do not think that diplomatic cri-
ticism can ever go beyond what has been achieved in
the constitution of the text of the Vedic hymns.

Far be it from me to say that the editio princeps
of the text thus constituted was printed without
mistakes. But most of these mistakes are mistakes

PREFACE. XXX1

which no attentive reader could fail to detect. Cases
hike 11. 35, 1, where gégishat instead of géshishat
was printed three times, so as to perplex even
Professor Roth, or ii. 12, 14, where sasam4ndm
occurs three times instead of sasamdndm, are, I
believe, of rare occurrence. Nor do I think that,
unless some quite unexpected discoveries are made,
there ever will be a new critical edition, or, as
we call it in Germany, a new recension of the
hymns of the Rig-veda. If by collating new MSS.,
or by a careful study of the Pratisdkhya, or by
conjectural emendations, a more correct text could
have been produced, we may be certain that a
eritical scholar like Professor Aufrecht would have
given us such a text. But after carefully collating
several MSS. of Professor Wilson’s collection, and
after enjoying the advantage of Professor Weber's
assistance in collating the MSS. of the Royal
Library at Berlin, and after a minute study of the
Pratisikhya, he frankly states that in the text. of
the Rig-veda, transcribed in Roman letters, which he
printed at Berlin, he followed my edition, and that
he had to correct but a small number of misprints.
For the two Mandalas which I had not yet pub-
lished, I lent him the very MSS. on which my
edition is founded; and there will be accordingly
but few passages in these two concluding Mandalas,
which I have still to publish, where the text will
materially differ from that of his Romanised tran-

script.

XXX PREFACE.

No one, I should think, who is at all acquainted
with the rules of diplomatic criticism, would easily
bring himself to touch a text resting on such authori-
ties as the text of the Rig-veda. What would a
Greek scholar give, if he could say of Homer that
his text was in every word, in every syllable, in
every vowel, in every accent, the same as the text
used by Peisistratos in the sixth century B.c.! A
text thus preserved in its integrity for so many
centuries, must remain for ever the authoritative
text of the Veda.

To remove, for instance, the hymns 49-59 in
the eighth Mandala from their proper place, or
count them by themselves as Valakhilya* hymns,
seems to me little short of a critical sacrilege.
Why Sayana does not explain these hymns, I con-

* The earliest interpretation of the name Valakhilya is found
inthe Taittiriya-aranyaka i. 23. We are told that Pragapati
created the world, and in the process of creation the following
interlude occurs :

sa tapo ’tapyata. sa tapas taptva sariram adhdnuta. tasya yan
mimsam dsit tato ’rundh ketavo vatarasand rishaya udatishthan.
ye nakhah, te vaikhanasah. ye balah, te balakhilyah.

He burned with emotion. Having burnt with emotion, he shook
his body. From what was his flesh, the Zishis, called Aruzas,
Ketus, and Vatarasanas, sprang forth. His nails became the Vai-
khanasas, his hairs the Balakhilyas.

The author of this allegory therefore took bala or vala in vala-
khilya, not in the sense of child, but identified it with bala, hair.

The commentator remarks with regard to tapas: natra tapa
upavasadirfipam, kimtu srashtavyam vastu kidrisam iti parya-
lokanartipam.

PREFACE. XXXiil

fess I do not know*; but whatever the reason was,
it was not because they did not exist at his time,
or because he thought them spurious. They are
regularly counted in Katydyana’s Sarvanukrama,
though here the same accident has happened. One
commentator, Shadgurusishya, the one most com-
monly used, does not explain them; but another
commentator, Gagannatha, does explain them, exactly
as they occur in the Sarvaénukrama, only leaving out
hymn 58. That these hymns had something peculiar
in the eyes of native scholars, is clear enough. They
may for a time have formed a separate collection,
they may have been considered of more modern
origin. I shall go even further than those who
remove these hymns from the place which they
have occupied for more than two thousand years.
I admit they disturb the regularity both of the
Mandala and the Ashtaka divisions, and I have
pointed out myself that they are not counted in
the ancient Anukramanis ascribed to MSaunaka ;
(History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 220.)
But, on the other hand, verses taken from these
hymns occur in all the other Vedast+; the hymns

* A similar omission was pointed out by Professor Roth.
Verses 21-24 of the 53rd hymn of the third Mandala, which
contain imprecations against Vasishtha, are left out by the writer
of a Pada MS., and by a copyist of Sayava’s commentary, probably
because they both belonged to the family of Vasishtha. See my
edition of the Rig-veda, vol. ii. p. lvi, Notes.

+ This is a criterion of some importance, and it might have

VOL. I. CG

XXX1V PREFACE.

themselves are never included in the collections of
Parisishtas or Khilas or apocryphal hymns, nor does
KAtyayana ever mention mere Khilas in his Sarva-
nukrama. Eight of them are mentioned in the Bri-
haddevat4, without any allusion to their apocryphal
character :
Pardny ashtau tu sfiktany rishindm tigmategasam,
Aindrany atra tu shadvimsah pragatho bahudaivatah.
Rig-antyagner akety agnih siryam antyapado gagau.
Praskanvas ka prishadhras ka pradid yad vastu
kimkana
Bhdrid iti tu siktébhyam akhilam parikirtitam.
Aindrany ubhayam ity atra shal AgneyAt pardni tu.
‘The next eight hymns belong to Rishis of keen
intellect *; they are addressed to Indra, but the
26th Prag&tha (viii. 54, 3-4, which verses form the
26th couplet, if counting from vill. 49, 1) is ad-
dressed to many gods. The last verse (of these
eight hymns), vill. 56, 5, beginning with the words
akety agnih, is addressed to Agni, and the last

been mentioned, for instance, by Professor Bollensen in his in-
teresting article on the Dvipada Viragy hymns ascribed to
Parasara (i. 65-70) that not a single verse of them occurs in
any of the other Vedas.

* Lest Saunaka be suspected of having applied this epithet,
tigmategas, to the Valakhilyas in order to fill the verse (pAda-
piranartham), I may point out that the same epithet is applied
to the Valakhilyas in the Maitry-upanishad 2, 3. The nom. plur.
which occurs there is tigmategas4h, and the commentator remarks :
tigmategasas tivrategaso *tyfrgitaprabhavah ; tegasd ityevamyidha
etakkhakhasanketapathas khandasah sarvatra.

PREFACE. XXXV

foot celebrates Strya. Whatsoever Praskanva and
Prishadhra gave (or, if we read prishadhraya, what-
ever Praskanva gave to Prishadhra), all that is
celebrated in the two hymns beginning with bhirit.
After the hymn addressed to Agni (viii. 60, t), there
follow six hymns addressed to Indra, beginning with
ubhayam.’

But the most important point of all is this, that
these hymns, which exist both in the Pada and
Sanhité texts, are quoted by the Pratisdkhya, not
only for general purposes, but for special passages
occurring in them, and nowhere else. Thus in
Sitra 154, hetéyah is quoted as one of the few
words which does not require the elision of a fol-
lowing short a. In order to appreciate what is
implied by this special quotation, it is necessary
to have a clear insight into the mechanism of the
Pratisakhya. Its chief object is to bring under
general categories the changes which the separate
words of the Pada text undergo when joined to-
gether in the Arshi Sanhita, and to do this with
the utmost brevity possible. Now the Sandhi rules,
as observed in the Sanhité of the Rig-veda, are by
no means so uniform and regular as they are in
later Sanskrit, and hence it is sometimes extremely
difficult to bring all the exceptional cases under
more or less general rules. In our passage the
author of the Pratisikhya endeavours to compre-
hend all the passages where an initial a in the

Veda is not elided after a final e or o. In ordinary
C2

XXXV1 PREFACE.

Sanskrit it would be always elided, in the Sanhita
it is sometimes elided, and sometimes not. Thus the
Prdtistkhya begins in Sttra 139 by stating that if
the short a stands at the beginning of a pada or
foot, it is always elided. Why it should be always
elided in the very place where the metre most
strongly requires that it should be pronounced,
does not concern the author of the Pratisakhya.
He is a statistician, not a grammarian, and he
therefore simply adds in Satra 153 the only three
exceptional passages where the a, under these very
circumstances, happens to be not elided. He then
proceeds in Sitra 139 to state that a is elided even in
the middle of a pada, provided it be light, followed
by y or v, and these, y or v, again followed by a
_ light vowel. Hence the Sanhité writes te ’vaidan,
so “yim, but not sikshanto ’vratam, for here the a
of avratam is heavy; nor mitramaho ’vadyat, for
here the a following the v is heavy.

Then follows again an extension of this rule, viz.
in the case of words ending in Avo. After these,
a short a, even if followed by other consonants
besides y or v, may be elided, but the other con-
ditions must be fulfilled, i.e. the short a must be
light, and the vowel of the next syllable must
again be light. Thus the Sanhita writes indeed
gavo ’bhitah, but not gdvo ’gman, because here the a
is heavy, being followed by two consonants.

After this, a more general rule, or, more cor-
rectly, a more comprehensive observation is made,

PREFACE. XXXVI1

viz. that under all circumstances initial a is elided,
if the preceding word ends in aye, ayah, ave, or
aval. As might be expected, however, so large a
class must have numerous exceptions, and these
can only be collected by quoting every word ending
in these syllables, or every passage in which the
exceptions occur. Before these exceptions are
enumerated, some other more or less general obser-
vations are made, providing for the elision of
initial a. Initial a, according to Sdtra 142, is to
be elided if the preceding word is vah, and if this
vah is preceded by 4, na, pra, kva, kitrah, savita,
eva, or kah. There is, of course, no intelligible
reason why, if these words precede vah, the next
a should be elided. It is a mere statement of
facts, and, generally speaking, these statements are
minutely accurate. There is probably no verse in
the whole of the Rig-veda where an initial a after
vah is elided, unless these very words precede, or
unless some other observation has been made to
-provide for the elision of the a. For instance, in
v. 25, 1, we find vah preceded by akkha, which is
not among the words just mentioned, and here the
Sanhité does not elide the a of agnim, which follows
after vah. After all these more or less general
observations as to the elision of an initial a are
thus exhausted, the author of the Pratisikhya
descends into particulars, and gives lists, first, of
words the initial a of which is always elided;
secondly, of words which, if preceding, require under

XXXVI PREFACE.

all circumstances the elision of the initial a of the
next word, whatever may have been said to the con-
trary in the preceding Stitras. Afterwards, he gives
a number of passages which defy all rules, and must
be given on their own merits, and as they stand
in the Sanhit&é. Lastly, follow special exceptions to
the more or less general rules given before. And
here, among these special exceptions, we see that
the author of the Pratisikhya finds it necessary to
quote a passage from a Valakhilya hymn in which
hetéyah occurs, i.e. a word ending in ayah, and
where, in defiance of Sitra 149, which required the
elision of a following initial a under all circum-
stances (sarvatha), the initial a of asya is not elided ;
Vill. 50, 2, Sanhita, satdniké hetéyo asya. It might
be objected that the Pratisakhya only quotes hetdyah
as an exceptional word, and does not refer directly
to the verse in the Valakhilya hymn. But for-
tunately hetayah occurs but twice in the whole of
the Rig-veda; and in the other passage where it
occurs, 1. 190, 4, neither the rule nor the exception -
as to the elision of an initial a, could apply. The
author of the Pratisikhya therefore makes no dis-
tinction between the Valakhilya and any other hymns
of the Rig-veda, and he would have considered his
phonetic statistics equally at fault, if it had been
possible to quote one single passage from the hymns
vill. 49 to 59, as contravening his observations, as if
such passages had been alleged from the hymns of
Vasishtha or Visvamitra.

PREFACE. XXX1X

It would lead me too far, were I to enter here
into similar cases in support of the fact that the
Pratiskhya makes no distinction between the
Valakhilya and any other hymns of the Rig-veda-
sanhita*. But I doubt whether the bearing of this
fact has ever been fully realised. Here we see that
the absence of the elision of a short a which follows
after a word ending in ayah, was considered of suf-
ficient importance to be recorded in a special rule,
because in most cases the Sanhité elides an initial
a, if preceded by a word ending in ayah. What
does this prove? It proves, unless all our views
on the chronology of Vedic literature are wrong,
that in the fifth century B.c. at least, or previously
rather to the time when the PratisAkhya was com-
posed, both the Pada and the Sanhitaé texts were
so firmly settled that it was impossible, for the
sake of uniformity or regularity, to omit one single
short a; and it proves @ fortiori, that the hymn
in which that irregular short a occurs, formed at
that time part of the Vedic canon. I confess I feel
sometimes frightened by the stringency of this
argument, and I should like to see a possibility
by which we could explain the addition, not of the
Valakhilya hymns only, but of other much more
modern sounding hymns, at a later time than the
period of the Pratisikhyas. But until that possi-

* The Pratisakhya takes into account both the Sakala and
Bashkala sakh4s, as may be seen from Siitra 1057.

xl PREFACE.

bility is shown, we must abide by our own con-
clusions; and then I ask, who is the critic who
would dare to tamper with a canon of scripture of
which every iota was settled before the time of
Cyrus, and which we possess in exactly that form
in which it is described to us by the authors of
the Pratisikhyas? I say again, that I am not free
from misgivings on the subject, and my critical
conscience would be far better satisfied if we could
ascribe the Pratisikhya and all it presupposes to a
much later date. But until that is done, the fact
remains that the two divergent texts, the Pada
and Sanhité, which we now possess, existed, as we
now possess them, previous to the time of the
Pratisakhya: they have not diverged nor varied
since, and the vertex to which they point, starting
from the distance of the two texts as measured
by the Pratisdkhya, carries us back far beyond the
time of Saunaka, if we wish to determine the date
of the first authorised collection of the hymns, both
in their Pada and in their Sanhita form.

Instances abound, if we compare the Pada and
Sanhita texts, where, if uniformity between the two
texts had been the object of the scholars of the
ancient Parishads, the lengthening or shortening of
a vowel would at once have removed the apparent
discordance between the two traditional texts. Nor
should it be supposed that such minute discord-
ances between the two, as the length or shortness

of a vowel, were always rendered necessary by the

PREFACE. xh

requirements of the metre, and that for that reason
the ancient students or the later copyists of the
Veda abstained from altering the peculiar spelling
of words, which seemed required by the exigencies
of the metre in the Sanhita text, but not in the Pada
text. Though this may be true in some cases, it is
not so in all. There are short vowels in the Sanhita
where, according to grammar, we expect long vowels,
and where, according to metre, there was no necessity
for shortening them. Yet in these very places all the
MSS. of the Sanhité text give the irregular short,
and all the MSS. of the Pada text the regular long
vowel, and the authors of the Pratisakhyas bear
witness that the same minute difference existed at
their own time, nay, previous to their own time. In
vu. 60, 12, the Sanhita text gives:

ty4m deva purohitir yuvébhyam yagiiéshu mitra-
varunav akari.

This primacy, O (two) gods, was made for you
two, O Mitra and Varuna, at the sacrifices!

Here it is quite clear that deva is meant for a
dual, and ought to have been devi or devau. The
metre does not require a short syllable, and yet
all the Sanhité MSS. read devi, and all the Pada
MSS. read dev’; and what is more important, the
authors of the Pratisikhya had to register this small
divergence of the two texts, which existed in their

time as it exists in our own™.

* See Pratisdkhya, Sfitra 309 seq., where several more instances

of the same kind are given.

xhi PREFACE.

Nor let it be supposed, that the writers of our
MSS. were so careful and so conscientious that
they would, when copying MSS., regulate every
consonant or vowel according to the rules of the
Pratisikhya. This is by no means the case. The
writers of Vedic MSS. are on the whole more
accurate than the writers of other MSS., but their
learning does not seem to extend to a knowledge
of the minute rules of the Pratisdkhya, and they
will commit occasionally the very mistakes against
which they are warned by the Pratisikhya. Thus
the Pratisikhya (Sitra 799) warns the students
against a common mistake of changing valyasva
into vayyasva, 1.e. by changing ai to a, and doubling
the semivowel y. But this very mistake occurs in
S. 2, and another MS. gives vaiyyasva. See p. xlvu.

If these arguments are sound, if nothing can be
said against the critical principles by which I have
been guided in editing the text of the Rig-veda,
if the fourfold check, described above, fulfils every
requirement that could be made for restoring
that text which was known to Sdyana, and which
was known, probably 2000 years earlier, to the
authors of the Pradtisikhyas, what can be the
motives, it may fairly be asked, of those who
clamour for a new and more critical edition, and
who imagine that the editio princeps of the Rig-
veda will share the fate of most of the editiones
principes of the Greek and Roman classics, and
be supplanted by new editions founded on the col-

PREFACE. xii

lation of other MSS.? No one could have rejoiced
more sincerely than I did at the publication of the
Romanised transliteration of the Rig-veda, carried
out with so much patience and accuracy by Pro-
fessor Aufrecht. It showed that there was a grow-
ing interest in this, the only true Veda; it showed
that even those who could not read Sanskrit in
the original Devandgari, wished to have access to
the original text of these ancient hymns; it showed
that the study of the Veda had a future before it
hike no other book of Sanskrit literature. My
learned friend Professor Aufrecht has been most
unfairly charged with having printed this Roman-
ised text me msciente vel invito. My edition of the
Rig-veda is publict juris, like any edition of Homer
or Plato, and anybody might have reprinted it
either in Roman or Devanagari letters. But far
from keeping me in: ignorance of his useful enter-
prise, Professor Aufrecht applied to me for the
loan of the MSS. of the two Mandalas which I
had not yet published, and I lent them to him.
most gladly because, by seeing them printed at
once, I felt far less guilty in delaying the pub-
lication of the last volumes of my edition of the
text and commentary. Nor could anything have
been more honourable than the way in which Pro-
fessor Aufrecht speaks of the true relation of his
Romanised text to my edition. That there are
‘misprints, and I, speaking for myself, ought to say
mistakes also, in my edition of the Rig-veda, I

xliv PREFACE.

know but too well; and if Professor Aufrecht, after
carefully transcribing every word, could honestly say
that their number is small, I doubt whether other
scholars will be able to prove that their number
is large. 1 believe I may with the same honesty
return Professor Aufrecht’s compliment, and con-
sidering the great difficulty of avoiding misprints
in Romanised transcripts, I have always thought
and I have always said that his reprint of the
hymns of the Veda is remarkably correct and accu-
rate. What, however, I must protest against, and
what, I feel sure, Professor Aufrecht himself would
equally protest against, is the supposition, and
more than supposition of certain scholars, that
wherever his Latin transcript varies from my own
Devanagari text, Professor Aufrecht is right, and
I am wrong, that his various readings rest on the
authority of new MSS., and constitute in fact a
new recension of the Vedic hymns. Against this
supposition I must protest most strongly, not for
my own sake, but for the sake of the old book,
and, still more, for the sake of the truth. No doubt
it is natural to suppose that where a later edition
differs from a former edition, it does so intentionally ;
and I do not complain of those who, without being
able to have recourse to MSS. in order to test
the authority of various readings, concluded that
wherever the new text differed from the old, it was
because the old text was at fault. In order to satisfy
my own conscience on this point, I have collated a

PREFACE. xlv

number of passages where Professor Aufrecht’s text
differs from my own, and I feel satisfied that in
the vast majority of cases, I am right and he is
wrong, and that his variations do not rest on the
authority of MSS. I must not shrink from the
duty of making good this assertion, and I therefore
proceed to an examination of such passages as have
occurred to me on occasionally referring to his text,
pointing out the readings both where he is right,
and where he is wrong. The differences between
the two texts may appear trifling, but I shall not
avail myself of that plea. On the contrary, I quite
agree with those scholars who hold that in truly
critical scholarship there is nothing trifling. Besides,
it is in the nature of the case that what may, by
a stretch of the word, be called various readings
in the Veda, must be confined to single letters or
accents, and can but seldom extend to whole words,
and never to whole sentences. I must therefore
beg my readers to have patience while I endeavour
to show that the text of the Rig-veda, as first
published by me, though by no means faultless, was
nevertheless not edited in so perfunctory a manner
as some learned critics seem to suppose, and that
it will not be easy to supplant it either by a colla-
tion of new MSS., such as are accessible at present,
or by occasional references to the Pratisakhya.

I begin with some mistakes of my own, mistakes
which I might have avoided, if I had always con-
sulted the PratisAkhya, where single words or whole

xlv1 PREFACE.

passages of the Veda are quoted. Some of these
mistakes have been removed by Professor Aufrecht,
others appear in his transcript as they appear in
my own edition.

I need hardly point out passages where palpable
misprints in my edition have been repeated in
Professor Aufrecht’s text. I mean by palpable
misprints, cases where a glance at the Pada text
or at the Sanhitaé text or a reference to Sayana’s
commentary would show at once what was intended.
Thus, for instance, in vi. 15, 3, vridhé, as I had
printed in the Sanhité, was clearly a misprint for
vridhé, as may be seen from the Pada, which gives
vridhéh, and from Sayana. Here, though Professor
Aufrecht repeats vridhé, I think it hardly necessary
to show that the authority of the best MSS. (S. 2.
alone contains a correction of vridhé to vridhé) is
in favour of vridhéh, whatever we may think of
the relative value of these two readings. One
must be careful, however, in a text like that of
the Vedic hymns, where the presence or absence
of a single letter or accent begins to become the
object of the most learned and painstaking dis-
cussions, not to claim too large an indulgence for
misprints. A misprint in the Sanhitd, if repeated
in the Pada, or if admitted even in the commen-
tary of Sdyana, though it need not be put down
to the editor’s deplorable ignorance, becomes yet a
serious matter, and I willingly take all the blame
which is justly due for occasional accidents of this

PREFACE. xlvii

character. Such are, for instance, ii. 12, 14, sasa-
mandm instead of sasam&ném ; i. 124, 4, sudhytivah,
in the Pada, instead of sundhytivah ; and the substi-
tution in several places of a short u instead of a
long @ in such forms as sisévima, when occurring
in the Pada; cf. i. 166, 14; 167, 9.

It is clear from Sitra 819 and 163, 5, that the
two words ati indra in iy. 29, 1, should not be
joined together, but that in the Sanhitdé the hiatus
should remain. Hence ttindra, as printed in my
edition and repeated in Professor Aufrecht’s, should
be corrected, and the hiatus be preserved, as it is
in the fourth verse of the same hymn, dati itthd.
MSS. 8S. 1, S. 3. are right; in S. 2. the words are
joined.

It follows from Sdtra 799 that to double the y
in vaiyasva is a mistake, but a mistake which had
to be pointed out and guarded against as early as
the time of the Pratisikhya. In viii. 26, 11, there-
fore, vaiyyasvdsya, as printed in my edition and
repeated in Professor Aufrecht’s, should be changed
to vaiyasvdésya. MSS. 8.1, 8. 3. are right, likewise
P.1, P. 2; but S. 2. has the double mistake vay-
yasvasya, as described in the Pratisdkhya ; another
MS. of Wilson’s has vaiyy. The same applies to
viii. 23, 24, and viii. 24, 23. P.1i. admits the mis-
taken spelling vayyasva.

Some corrections that ought to be made in the
Padapatha only, as printed in my edition, are pointed
out in a note to Sitra 738 of the Pratisikhya. Thus,

xlvill PREFACE.

according to Stitra 583, 6, sriyah in the Pada text
of ii. ro, 2, should be changed to sruy&h. MSS. P.1,
P. 2. have the short u.

In v. 7, 8, I had printed stikih shma, leaving the
a of shma short in accordance with the Pratisikhya,
Satra 514, where a string of words is given before
which sma must not be lengthened, and where
under No. IT. we find y4smai. Professor Aufrecht has
altered this, and gives the 4 as long, which is wrong.
The MSS. 8.1, 8. 2, S. 3. have the short a.

Another word before which sma ought not to be
lengthened is mévate. Hence, according to Sitra
514, 14, I ought not to have printed in vi. 65, 4,
shmi mdvate, but shma m4&vate. Here Professor
Aufrecht has retained the long 4, which is wrong.
MSS. 8.1, S. 2, 8. 3. have the short a.

It follows from Satra 499 that in i. 138, 4, we
should not lengthen the vowel of st. Hence, in-
stead of asyd shi na upa sdtdye, as printed in
my edition and repeated by Professor Aufrecht, we
should read asy& 0 shi na pa sitdye. 8.1, S. 2,
S. 3. have short u.

In vu. 31, 4, I had by mistake printed viddhi
instead of viddhi. The same reading is adopted
by Professor Aufrecht (ii. p. 24), but the authority
of the Pratisdkhya, Sitra 445, can hardly be over-
ruled. §.1, 8.2, 8.3. have viddhf.

While in cases like these, the Pratisikhya is an
authority which, as far as I can judge, ought to over-
rule the authority of every MS., however ancient,

SS OEE SN I NE RN RR Ne BE RS EE

GRADUATE UNIVERSITY
PREFACE. xlix

we must in other cases depend either on the testi-
mony of the best MSS. or be guided, in fixing on
the right reading, by Sdyana and the rules of
grammar. I shall therefore, in cases where I
cannot consider Professor Aufrecht’s readings as
authoritative improvements, have to give my rea-
sons why I adhere to the readings which I had
originally adopted.

In vy. 9, 4, I had printed by mistake puri yé
instead of puri y6. I had, however, corrected this
misprint in my edition of the PratisAkhya, 393, 532.
Professor Aufrecht decides in favour of puri with
a short u, but against the authority of the MSS.,
8.1, 8. 2, 8. 3, which have purd.

It was certainly a great mistake of mine, though
it may seem more excusable in a Romanised tran-
script, that I did not follow the writers of the best
MSS. in their use of the Avagraha, or, I should
rather say, of that sign which, as far as the Veda is
concerned, is very wrongly designated by the name
of Avagraha. Avagraha, according to the Prati-
sikhya, never occurs in the Sanhita text, but is the
name given to that halt, stoppage, or pause which
in the Pada text separates the component parts
of compound words. That pause has the length of
one short vowel, i.e. one matra. Of course, nothing
is said by the Pratisdkhya as to how the pause
should be represented graphically, but it is several
times alluded to as of importance in the recitation
and accentuation of the Veda. What we have been

VOL, I. d

] PREFACE.

in the habit of calling Avagraha is by the writers of
certain MSS. of the Sanhité text used as the sign of
the Vivritti or hiatus. This hiatus, however, is very
different from the Avagraha, for while the Avagraha
has the length of one matra, the Vivritti or hiatus
has the length of + matr4, if the two vowels are
short; of 4 matra, if either vowel is long; of 3 matra,
if both vowels are long. Now I have several times
called attention to the fact that though this hiatus
is marked in certain MSS. by the sign s, I have
in my edition omitted it, because I thought that
the hiatus spoke for itself and did not require a
sign to attract the attention of European readers ;
while, on the contrary, I have inserted that sign
where MSS. hardly ever use it, viz. when a short
initial a is elided after a final e or 0; (see my re-
marks on pp. 36, 39, of my edition of the Pratisikhya.)
Although I thought, and still think, that this use
of the sign s is more useful for practical purposes,
yet I regret that, in this one particular, I should have
deviated from the authority of the best MSS., and
caused some misunderstandings on the part of those
who have made use of my edition. If, for instance,
I had placed the sign of the Vivritti, the s, in its
proper place, or if, at least, I had not inserted it
where, as we say, the initial a has been elided after
e or 0, Professor Bollensen would have seen at once
that the authors of the Pratisdkhyas fully agree
with him in looking on this change, not as an
elision, but as a contraction. If, as sometimes

PREFACE. li

happens, final o or e remain unchanged before ini-
tial short a, this is called the Pafikfla and Prakya
padavritti (Sdtra 137). If, on the contrary, final o or
e become one (ekibhavati) with the initial short a, this
is called the Abhinihita sandhi (Sttra 138). While
the former, the hiatus of the Pafikila and Eastern
schools, is marked by the writers of several MSS.
by the sign s, the Abhinihita sandhi, being a sandhi,
is not marked by any sign*.

1. 3,12. ragati (Aufr. p. 2) instead of ragati as M.
vol. i. p. 75) is wrong.

1.7, 9. ya ékah (Aufr. p. 5) should be yd ékah
(M. M. vol. i. p. r10), because the relative pronoun is
never without an accent. The relative particle yath4
may be without an accent, if it stands at the end
of a pada; and though there are exceptions to this
rule, yet in viil. 21, 5, where Professor Aufrecht gives
yatha, the MSS. are unanimous in favour of yatha
(M. M. vol. iv. p. 480). See Phié-sitra, ed. Kielhorn,
Pp. 54+
i, 10, 11. & td (Aufr. p. 7) should be & tii (M. M.
vol. i. p. 139), because 4 is never without the
accent.

i 10, 12. gushtah, which Professor Aufrecht specially
mentions as having no final Visarga in the Pada, has

the Visarga in all the MSS., (Aufr. p. 7, M. M. vol. i.
p. 140.)

* As to the system or want of system, according to which the
Abhinihita sandhi takes place in the Sanhita, see p. Xxxv seq.

d2

li PREFACE.

“ica, 4. kvir (Aufr. p. 7) should be kavir (M. M.
vol. 1. p. 143).

i. 22, 8. read rddhamsi.

i. 40,1 and 6. There is no excuse for the accent
either on tvémahe or on vékema, while s4k4n in 1. 51,
11, ought to have the accent on the first syllable.

i. 49, 3. Rosen was right in not eliding the a in
divé dntebhyah. 8.1, 8. 2, S. 3. preserve the initial
a, nor does the Pratisikhya anywhere provide for
its suppression.

i. 54, 8. kshdtram (Aufr. p. 46) is a mere misprint
for kshatrém.

i. 55, 7. vandanasriid (Aufr. p. 47) instead of van-
danasrud (M. M. vol. i. p. 514) is wrong.

i. 57, 2. samasita instead of samdsita had been cor-
rected in my reprint of the first Mandala, published
at Leipzig. See Bollensen, Zeitschrift der D. M.G.,
vol, xxii. p. 626.

1. 61, 7. read vishnuh; i. 64, 2. read stikayah ;
1. 64, 5. read dhiitayah.

i. 61, 16. Rosen had rightly printed hariyogana
with a long 4 both in the Sanhité and Pada texts,
and I ought not to have given the short a instead.
All*themMSSe 5.1, 5.2; 8.3, P.1<and Bae. give the
long 4. Professor Aufrecht gives the short a in
the Pada, which is wrong.

1. 67, 2 (4). viddntim (M. M. vol. i. p. 594) is per-
fectly right, as far as the authority of the MSS. and
of Sayana is concerned, and should not have been
altered to vindéntim (Aufr. p. 57).

PREFACE. hu

1. 72, 2. read vatsim; i. 72, 6. read pasii; 1. 76, 3.
read dhdkshy ; i. 82, 1. read yada.

1. 83, 3. Rosen was right in giving dsamyattah.
I gave dsamyatah on the authority of P. 1, but all
the other MSS. have tt.

i. 84, 1. indra (Aufr. p. 68) cannot have the accent
on the first syllable, because it does not stand at the
beginning of a pada (M. M. vol. i. p. 677). The same
applies to indra, vi. 41, 4, (Aufr. p. 429) instead of
indra (M.M. vol. iii. p. 734); to dgne, i. 140, 12, (Aufr.
p- 130) instead of agne (M. M. vol. ii. p. 133). In
lll. 36, 3, on the contrary, indra, being at the head
of a pada, ought to have the accent on the first
syllable, indra (M. M. vol. ii. p. 855), not indra (Aufr.
p- 249). The same mistake occurs again, 11. 36, 10,
vite. 256). Iv. 32, 7, (Autr. pagos);.-1v. 32, 12,
Guilt apes05); vill. 3,12) (Aur; 1.-p. 86). ~ In v. 61, 1,
nara should have no accent; whereas in vii. 91, 3,
it should have the accent on the first syllable. In
vill. 8, 19, vipanyi should have-no accent, and
Professor Aufrecht gives it correctly in the notes,
where he has likewise very properly removed the
Avagraha which I had inserted.

i. 88, 1. read ydta (M.M. vol. i. p. 708), not yatha
(Aufr. p. 72).

i. 90, 1. read rigunitt; i. 94, 11. read yavasddo
(M. M. vol. i. p. 766), not yayas#do (Aufr. p. 80).

i. 118, 9. abhibhiitim (Aufr. p. 105) instead of abhi-
bhatim (M. M. vol. i. p. 957) cannot be right, consi-
dering that in all other passages abhibhiti has the

liv PREFACE.

accent on the second syllable. S. 1, 8. 2, 8. 3. have
the accent on the i.

i. 128, 4. ghritasrir (Aufr. p. 117) instead of ghritasrir
(M. M. vol. i. p. 52) is wrong.

i. 144, 2. read pdrivritah (M. M. vol. ii. p.155) in-
stead of parivritah (Aufr. p. 133).

i. 145, 5 Professor Aufrecht (p. 134) gives upama-
syam, both in the Sanhita and Pada texts, as having
the accent on the last syllable. I had placed the
accent on the penultimate, (Pada, upa-mdsyam, vol. 1.
p- 161,) and whatever may be the reading of other
MSS., this is the only possible accentuation. S. 1,
S. 2, S. 3. have the right accent.

i. 148, 4. pdrdni (Aufr. p. 136) instead of purfini
(M. M. vol. ii. p. 170) does not rest, as far as I know,
on the authority of any MSS. 8.1, 8. 2, S. 3. have
purdini.

i. 151, 7. gakkhatho (Aufr. p. 137) should be gdk-
khatho (M. M. vol. ii. p. 181).

1. 161, 12. All the Pada MSS. read prdé dbravit,
separating the two words and accentuating each.
Though the accent is irregular, yet, considering
the peculiar construction of the verse, in which
pr&é and pré are used as adverbs rather than as
prepositions, I should not venture with Professor
Aufrecht (p. 144) to write pr& abravit.

1, 163, 11. dhrégiman (Aufr. p. 147) instead of
dhragiman (M. M. vol. ii. p. 245) is wrong.

i. 163, 13. gamy4& (Aufr. p. 148) instead of gamyé
(M. M. vol. ii, p. 246) is wrong.

PREFACE. lv

1. 164,17. read pdrena (M. M. vol. ii. p- 259) instead
of paréna (Aufr. p. 149).

1.164, 38. The first hkikyth ought to have the
accent, and has it in all the MSS, (Aufr. p. 151,
M. M. vol. ii. p. 278.)

1. 165, 5. A mere change of accent may seem a
small matter, yet it is frequently of the highest
importance in the interpretation of the Veda. Thus
in i. 165, 5, 1 had, in accordance with the MSS. S. 1,
S. 2, 8. 3, printed étan (vol. ii. p. 293) with the accent
on the first syllable. Professor Aufrecht alters this
into etdn (p. 153), which, no doubt, would be the
right form, if it were intended for the accusative
plural of the pronoun, but not if it is meant, as it
ig here, for the accusative plural of éta, the speckled
deer of the Maruts.

i. 165,15. yasishta (Aufr. p. 154) instead of yasishta
(M. M. vol. ii. p. 298) is not supported by any MSS.

i. 169, 7, instead of pataydnta (Aufr. p. 158), read
patdyanta (M. M. vol. ii. p. 322).

i. 174, 7. kiyavakam (Aufr. p. 162) should be ktya-
vakam (M. M. vol. 1. p. 340).

i. 177, 1. yuktd, which I had adopted from MS.
S. 3 (prima manu), is not supported by other MSS.,
though P. 2. reads yuttkd. Professor Aufrecht, who
had retained yukt& in the text, has afterwards cor-
rected it to yuktvd, and in this he was right. In
i. 177, 2, gahi for yahi is wrong.

i. 188, 4. astrinan (Aufr. p. 171) instead of astrinan
(M. M. vol. ii. p. 395) can only be a misprint.

lvi PREFACE.

ii. 29, 6. kartad (Aufr. p. 203) instead of kartad
(M. M. vol. ii. p. 560) is wrong.

ii. 40, 4. kakra (Aufr. p. 214) instead of kakré (M. M.
vol, il. p. 614) 18 wrong.

iii. 7, 7. guh (Aufr. p. 226) instead of gih (M. M.
vol. ii. p. 666) is wrong ; likewise iii. 30, 10. gah (Auf.
p. 241) instead of gah (M. M. vol. 11. p. 792).

ill. 17, 1. igyate (Aufr. p. 232) imstead of agyate
(M. M. vol. ii. p. 722) is impossible.

iii. 47, 1. Professor Aufrecht (p. 256) puts the nomi-
native indro instead of the vocative indra, which I
had given (vol. ii. p. 902). I doubt whether any
MSS. support that change (S. 1, S. 2, S. 3. have
indra), but it is clear that Sayana takes indra as a
vocative, and likewise the Nirukta.

ill. 50, 2. Professor Aufrecht (p. 258) gives asya,
both in the Sanhitéa and Pada, without the accent on
the last syllable. But all the MSS. that I know (S. 1,
S. 2, S. 3, P.1, P. 2), give it with the accent on the
last syllable (M. M. vol. 1. p. 912), and this no doubt
is right. The same mistake occurs again in lil. 51, 10,
(Aufr. p. 259); 1v. 5, 11,,(Autr-p281)* ive36, 2. (Aur,
P- 309); Vv. 12, 3, (Aufr. p. 337); while in viii. 103, 9,
(Aufr. 11. p. 195) the MSS. consistently give asya as
unaccented, whereas Professor Aufrecht, in this very
passage, places the accent on the last syllable. On
the same page (p. 259) amandan, in the Pada, is a
misprint for 4mandan.

i. 53, 18. asi (Aufr. p. 262) instead of dsi (M. M.

vol. i, p. 934) is wrong, because hf requires that the

PREFACE, lvii

accent should remain on 4si. 8.1, 8. 2, S. Seba ieP 2,
have asi.

iv. 4,7. svi dyushe (Aufr. p. 279) instead of sv4
adyushi (M. M. vol. iii. p. 37) is not supported by any
good MSS., nor required by the sense of the passage.
Dre on o.3) EP iePz.have dyushi.

lv. 5, 7. drupitam, in the Pada, (Aufr. p. 280)
instead of drupitam (M. M. vol. iii. p. 45) is right, as
had been shown in the Pratisdkhya, Sitra #79, though
by a misprint the long 4 of the Sanhité had been
put in the place of the short a of the Pada.

iv. 5,9. read gath (M. M. vol. iii. p. 46) instead of
gdh (Aufr. p. 281). .

iv. 15, 2. yati, with the accent on the first syllable,
is supported by all MSS. against yati (Aufr. p. 287).
The same applies to y&ti in iv. 29, 2, and to varante
IN IV. 31, 9.

iv. 18, 11. ami, without any accent (Aufr. p. 293),
instead of ami (M. M. vol. i. p. 105) is wrong, because
amf is never unaccented.

iv. 21, 9. no, without an accent (Aufr. p. 296), in-
stead of né (M. M. vol. iii. p. 120) is wrong.

iv. 26, 3. dtithigvam (Aufr. p. 300) instead of ati-
thigvém (M. M. vol. iii. p. 140) and vi. 47, 22. dtithig-
vasya (Aufr. p. 437) instead of atithigvdsya (M. M.
vol. ili. p. 776) are wrong, for atithigvd4 never occurs
again except with the accent on the last syllable.
The MSS. do not vary. Nor do they vary in the
accentuation of ktitsa: hence kutsdm (Aufr, p. 300)
should be kiitsam (M. M. vol. ii. p. 139).

lviii PREFACE.

iv. 36, 6. Professor Aufrecht (p. 309) has altered the
accent of 4vishuh into 4vishtih, but the MSS. are
unanimous in favour of avishuh (M. M. vol. ii.
p. 181).

Again in iv. 41,9, the MSS. support the accentua-
tion of d4gman (M. M. vol. iii. p. 200), while Professor
Aufrecht (p. 313) has altered it to agman.

iv. 42, 9. ddasat, being preceded by hi, ought to
have the accent ; (Aufrecht, p. 314, has adasat without
the accent.) For the same reason, v. 29, 3, avindat
(M. M. vol. iii. p. 342) ought not to have been altered
to avindat (Auff. p. 344).

iv. 50, 4. vy6man is a misprint for vyOman.

v. 15, 5. Professor Aufrecht (p. 338) writes dirghdédm
instead of dégham (M. M. vol. iu. p. 314). This, no
doubt, was done intentionally, and not by accident,
as we see from the change of accent. But dégham,
though it occurs but once, is supported in this place
by all the best MSS., and has been accepted by
Professor Roth in his Dictionary.

Vv. 34, 4. prdyato (Aufr. p. 351) instead of prdyata
(M. M. vol. iii. p. 371) is wrong.

Vv. 42,9. visarmanam (Aufr. p. 358) instead of visar-
ménam (M. M. vol. iii. p. 402) is wrong.

v. 44, 4. parvané (Aufr. p. 360) instead of pravané
(M. M. vol. ii. p. 415) is wrong.

v. 83, 4. vanti (Aufr. p. 389) instead of vanti (M. M.
vol. ill. p. 554) 1s supported by no MSS.

v. 85, 6. Asifikantih (Aufr. p. 391) instead of
asifikantih (M. M. vol. iii. p. 560) is not supported

PREFACE. lix

either by MSS. or by grammar, as sifik belongs to
the Tud-class. On the same grounds ishdyantah,
vi. 16, 27 (M. M. vol. iii. p. 638), ought not to have
been changed to ishaydntah (Aufr. p. 408), nor vi. 24, 7,
avakarsdyanti (M. M. vol. ii. p. 687) into avakdrsa-
yanti (Aufr. p. 418).

vi. 46, 10. read girvanas (M. M. vol. iii. p. 763)
instead of girvanas (Aufr. p. 435).

vi. 60, 10. krinoti (Aufr. p. 450) instead of krinéti
(M. M. vol. 111. p. 839) is wrong.

vu. 40, 4. aryama& apah (Aufr. ii. p. 35), in the
Pada, instead of aryama dpah (M. M. vol. iv. p. 81)
is wrong.

Vil. 51, 1. Adityandm (Aufr. u. p. 40) instead of
Aditydnadm (M. M. vol. iv. p. 103) is wrong.

vii. 64, 2. U&m (Aufr. 1. p. 50) instead of fl4m (M. M.
vol. iv. p.146) is wrong. In the same verse gop4h in
the Pada should be changed in my edition to gopé.

vii. 66, 5. y6 (Aufr. ii. p. 51) instead of yé (M. M.
vol. iv. p. 151) is indeed supported by S. 3, but
evidently untenable on account of atipfprati.

vil. 72, 3. In abudhran Professor Aufrecht has
properly altered the wrong spelling abudhnan ; and,
as far as the authority of the best MSS. is concerned
(S. 1, 8. 2, 8. 3), he is also right in putting a final i,
although Professor Bollensen prefers the dental n;
(Zeitschrift der D. M.G., vol. xxii. p. 599.) The fact
is that Vedic MSS. use the Anusvara dot for final
nasals before all class-letters, and leave it to us
to interpret that dot according to the letter which

lx PREFACE.

follows. Before I felt quite certain on this point,
I have in several cases retained the dot, as given
by the MSS., instead of changing it, as I ought
to have done according to my system of writing
Devanagari, into the corresponding nasal, provided
it represents an original n. In i. 71, 1, 8. 2, 8. 3.
have the dot in agushran, but 8.1. has dental n. In
ix. 87, 5, asrigran has the dot; ie. S. 1. has the dot,
and nkh, dental n joined to kh; S. 2. has nkh without
the dot before the n; S. 3. has the dot, and then kh.
In iv. 24, 6, the spelling of the Sanhité 4vivenam tim
would leave it doubtful whether we ought to read
dvivenan tém or 4vivenam tém; S. 1. and S. 3. read
Avivenam tam, but S. 2. has 4vivenan tdm; P. 2. has
dvi-venan tim, and P. 1. had the same originally,
though a later hand changed it to dvi-venam tdm.
In iv. 25, 3, on the contrary, 8.1. and S. 3. write
dvivenam; S. 2. dvivenam; P.1. and P. 2. dvi-venam.
What is intended is clear enough, viz. 4vi-venan in
lv. 24,63; dvi-venam in iv. 25, 3.

vil. 73, 1. asvina (Aufr. ii, p. 56) instead of asvind
(M. M. vol. iv. p.176) is wrong, On the same page,
dhishnye, vil. 72, 3, should have the accent on the
first syllable.

vu. 77,1. In this verse, which has been so often
discussed (see Kuhn, Beitriige, vol. ili. p. 472 ; Boeht-
lingk and Roth, Dictionary, vol. ii. p. 968; Bollensen,
Orient und Occident, vol. ii. p. 463), all the MSS.
which I know, read hkarayai, and not either karathai
nor garayai.

PREFACE. lxi

vil. 2,29. kirfnam (Aufr. ii. p. 84) instead of karinam
(M. M. vol. iv. p. 308) does not rest on the authority
of any MSS., nor is it supported by Sayana.

Vill. 9, 9. Professor Aufrecht has altered the very
important form akukyuviméhi (M. M. vol. iv. p. 389)
to Akukyaviméhi (ii. p. 98). The question is whether
this was done intentionally and on the authority of
any MSS. My own MSS. support the form akukyu-
vimdhi, and I see that Professor Roth accepts this
form.

vill. 32, 14. dydntaéram (Aufr. 1. p. 129) instead of
ayantaram (M. M. vol. iv. p. 567) is wrong.

vill. 47, 15. dushvdépnyam (Auff. i. p. 150) 1s not
so correct as duishvaépnyam (M. M. vol. iv. p. 660),
or, better, dushshvépnyam (Pratisikhya, Sdtras 255
and 364), though it is perfectly true that the MSS.
write dushvapnyam.

In the ninth and tenth Mandalas I have not to
defend myself, and I need not therefore give a
list of the passages where I think that Professor
Aufrecht’s text is not supported by the best MSS.
My own edition of these Mandalas will soon be
published, and I need hardly say that where it dif
fers from Professor Aufrecht’s text, I am prepared to
show that I had the best authorities on my side.

Having said so much in vindication of the text
of the Rig-veda as published by me, and in defence
of my principles of criticism which seem to me so
self-evident as hardly to deserve the name of cano-
nes critici, I feel bound at the same time both to

}xii PREFACE.

acknowledge some inaccuracies that have occurred. in
the index at the end of each volume, and to defend
some entries in that index which have been chal-
lenged without sufficient cause.

It has been supposed that in the index at the
end of my fourth volume, the seventeenth verse of
the 34th hymn in the seventh Mandala has been
wrongly assigned to Ahi Budhnya, and that one
half only of that verse should have been reserved
for that deity. I do not deny that we should be
justified in deriving that sense from the words of
the Anukramaniké, but I cannot admit that my
own interpretation is untenable. As Sdyana does
not speak authoritatively on the subject, I followed
the authority of Shadgurusishya. This commentator
of the Anukramanika says: atra ka abgim ukthair
ahim grinisha ity ardharko “bganémno devasya
stutid ; ma no ’hir budhnya ity ardharko *hirbudh-
nyandmno devasya*. Another commentator says:
abgim ukthair ardharko “hih; uttaro m& no “hir
ity ahir budhnyah. From this we learn that both
commentators looked upon the Dvipadas as ardharkas
or half-verses, and ascribed the whole of verse 16 to
Ahir abgah, the whole of verse 17 to Ahir budhnyah.
It will be seen from an accurate examination of
Sayana’s commentary on verse 17, that in the second
interpretation of the second half of verse 17, he

* MS. Wilson 379 has, ardharko némano daivatasya, and in the
margin "hi, Ahirbudhnya seems to have been taken as one word.

PREFACE. lx

labours to show that in this portion, too, Ahir
budhnyah may be considered as the deity.

Tt is perfectly right to say that the words of the
Anukramaniké, abgim aheh, signify that the verse
beginning with abgdm, belongs to Ahi. But there
was no misprint in my index. It will be seen that
Shadgurusishya goes even beyond me, and calls
that deity simply Abga, leaving out Ahi altogether,
as understood. I was anxious to show the distinc-
tion between Abga Ahi and Ahir Budhnyah, as the
deities of the two successive verses, and I did not
expect that any reader could possibly misinterpret
my entry. é

With regard to hymns 91 and g2 of the seventh
Mandala, it is true, that in the index I did not
mention that certain verses in which two deities are
mentioned (91, 2; 4-7; 92, 2), must be considered as
addressed not to Vayu alone, but to Vayu and Indra.
It will be seen from Sdyana’s introduction to hymn
go, that he, too, wrongly limits the sentence of the
Anukramanikaé, aindryas ka ya dvivaduktah, to the
fifth and following verses of hymn go, and that he
never alludes to this proviso again in his introductory
remarks to hymns 91 and 92, though, of course, he
explains the verses, in which a dual occurs, as
addressed to two deities, viz. Indra and Vayu. The
game omission, whether intentional or unintentional,
occurs in Shadgurusishya’s commentary. The other
commentary, however, assigns the verses of the three
hymns rightly. The subject has evidently been one

lxiv PREFACE.

that excited attention in very early days, for in the
Aitareya-brihmana, v. 20, we actually find that the
word vam which occurs in hymn go, 1, and which
might be taken as a dual, though S&yana explains
it as a singular, is changed into te*.

In hymn vii. 104, rakshohanau might certainly
be added as an epithet of Indra-Somau, and Shad-
gurusishya clearly takes it in that sense. The
Anukramaniké says: indrésoma pafikadhikaindra-
somam rakshoghnam sipabhisapaprayam.

In hymn viii. 67, it has been supposed that the
readings Samada and Samada instead of Sammada
and SAmmada were due toa misprint. This is not
the case. That I was aware of the other spelling of
this name, viz. Sammada and SAammada, I had shown
in my History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature (2nd
ed.), p. 39, where I had translated the passage of the
Sankhdyana-sitras in which Matsya Simmada occurs,
and had also called attention to the AsvalAyana-
sitras x. 7, and the Satapatha-brahmana xiii. 3, 1, 1,
where the same passage is found. I there spelt the

* The interpunction of Dr. Haug’s edition (p. 128) should be
after te. Shadgurusishya says: ata eva brdhmanastitrayoh pratige
vayavatvaya pra viraya sukayo dadrire vam iti dvivakanasthane ta
ity ekavakanapathah kritah, vam ity uktam ked aindratvam kha
sydd iti. Possibly the same change should be made in Asyalayana’s
Sitras, viii, 11, and it has been made by the Rama Narayana
Vidyaratna. The remark of the commentator, however, dadrire
ta iti prayogapathah, looks as if vam might have been retained in
the text. The MSS. I have collated are in favour of te,

PREFACE. lxv

name Sdammada, because the majority of the MSS.
were in favour of that spelling. In the edition of
the Asyalayana-sitras, which hag since been published
by Rama Narayana Vidydranya, the name is spelt
Saimada. My own opinion is that SAmmada is the
right spelling, but that does not prove that Sdyana
thought so; and unless I deviated from the prin-
ciples which I had adopted for a critical restoration
of Sayana’s text, I could not but write SAmada in
our passage. Bur. and B 4. omit simada, but both
give samadakhyasya; Ca. gives likewise samadé-
khyasya, and A. semadikhyasya. This, I believe,
was meant by the writer for sammadakhyasya, for
in the passage from the Anukramani both A. and
Ca. give simmado. I then consulted the commentary
of Shadgurusishya, and there again the same MS.
gave twice simmada, once sdmada, which is explained
by samadikhyamahaminaragaputrah. A better MS.
of Shadgurusishya, MS. Wilson 379, gives the read-
ings sAmmado, sammada, and sammadakhyasya. The
other commentary gives distinctly simanda.

It will be seen from these remarks that many
things have to be considered before one can form
an independent judgment as to the exact view
adopted by Sayana in places where he differs from
other authorities, or as to the exact words in
which he clothed his meaning. Such cases occur
again and again. Thus in ix. 86, I find that
Professor Aufrecht ascribes the first ten verses to
the Akrishtas, whereas Sdyana calls them Akrishtas.

VOL, I. e

lxvi PREFACE.

It is perfectly true that the best MSS. of the
Anukramanik& have Akrishta, it is equally true that
the name of these Akrishtas is spelt with a short a
in the Harivamsa, 11,533, but an editor of Sdyana’s
work ig not to alter the occasional mistakes of that
learned commentator, and he certainly called these
poets Akrishtas.

Verses 21-30 of the same hymn are ascribed by
Professor Aufrecht to the Prisniyah. Here, again,
several MSS. support that reading; and in Shad-
gurusishya’s commentary, the correction of prisniyah
into prisnayah is made by a later hand. But Sayana
clearly took prisnayah for a nominative plural of
prisni, and in this case he certainly was right. The
Dictionary of Boehtlingk and Roth quotes the Maha-
bharata, vil. 8728, in support of the peculiar reading
of prisniyah, but the published text gives prisnayah.
Professor Benfey, in his list of poets (Ind. Stud.
vol. i. p. 223), gives prisniyoga as one word, not
prisniyoga, as stated in the Dictionary of Boehtlingk
and Roth, but this is evidently meant for two words,
viz. prisnayo ‘gah. However, whether prisniyah or
prisnayah be the real name of these poets, an editor
of Sayana is bound to give that reading of the
name which Sayana believed to be the right one,
1. e. prisnayah.

Again, in the same hymn, Professor Aufrecht
ascribes verses 31-40 to the Atris. He evidently
read tritiye ‘trayah. But Sdyana read trittye
trayah, and ascribes verses 31-40 to the three com-

PREFACE. xvii

panies together of the Rishis mentioned before. On
this point the MSS. admit of no doubt, for we read:
katurthasya ka dasarkasya Akrisht& mAsha ityAdi-
dvindmanas trayo gan4 drashtérah. I do not say
that the other explanation is wrong; I only say
that, whether right or wrong, Sdyana certainly read
trayah, not atrayah, and that an editor has no more
right to correct the text, supported by the best MSS.,
in the first and second, than in the third of these
passages, all taken from one and the same hymn.
But though I insist so strongly on a strict
observance of the rules of diplomatic criticism
with regard to the text of the Rig-veda, nay, even
of Sayana, I insist equally strongly on the right
of independent criticism, which ought to begin
where diplomatic criticism ends. Considering the
startling antiquity which we can claim for every
letter and accent of our MSS. so far as they are
authenticated by the Pratisdkhya, to say nothing
of the passages of the hymns which are quoted
verbatim in the Braéhmanas, the Kalpa-sitras, the
Nirukta, the Brihaddevaté, and the Anukramanis,
I should deem it reckless to alter one single letter
or one single accent in an edition of the hymns
of the Rig-veda. As the text has been handed
down to us, so it should remain; and whatever
alterations and corrections we, the critical Mlekkhas
of the nineteenth century, have to propose, should
be kept distinct from that time-hallowed inherit-

ance. Unlikely as it may sound, it is true never-
e 2

lxviil PREFACE.

theless that we, the scholars of the nineteenth
century, are able to point out mistakes in the
text of the Rig-veda which escaped the attention
of the most learned among the native scholars of
the sixth century B.c. No doubt, these scholars,
even if they had perceived such mistakes, would
hardly have ventured to correct the text of their
sacred writings. The authors of the Pratisakhya
had before their eyes a text ready made, of which
they registered every peculiarity, nay, in which
they would note and preserve every single irregu-
larity, even though it stood alone amidst hundreds
of analogous cases. With us the case is different.
Where we see a rule observed in 99 cases, we feel
strongly tempted and sometimes justified in altering
the 1ooth case in accordance with what we con-
sider to be a general rule. Yet even then I feel
convinced we ought not to do more than place
our conjectural readings below the textus receptus
of the Veda,—a text so ancient and venerable that
no scholar of any historical tact or critical taste
would venture to foist into it a conjectural reading,
however plausible, nay, however undeniable.

There can be no clearer case of corruption in the
traditional text of the Rig-veda than if in i. 70, 4, the
Pada text reads :

vardhin yém pirvih kshapdéh vi-ripah sthatih ka
ratham ritd-pravitam.

All scholars who have touched on this verse,
Professors Benfey, Bollensen, Roth, and others, have

PREFACE. lxix

pointed out that instead of ka rétham, the. original
poet must have said Aarétham. The phrase sthatuh
karétham, what stands and moves, occurs several
times. It is evidently an ancient phrase, and hence
we can account for the preservation in it of the
old termination of the nom. sing. of neuters in 711,
which here, as in the Greek pdp-tup or pap-res,
mas¢., appears as ur or us, while in the ordinary
Sanskrit we find ri only. This nom. sing. neut. in
us, explains also the common genitives and ablatives,
pituh, matuh, &c., which stand for pitur-s, matur-s.
This phrase sthattih karétham occurs :

1. 58, 5. sthatuh karétham bhayate patatrinah.

What stands and what moves is afraid of Agni.

1. 68,1. sthatih kardtham akttin vi drnot.

He lighted up what stands and what moves during
every night.

i. 72, 6. pastin ka sthatrin kardtham ka pahi.

Protect the cattle, and what stands and moves!

Here it has been proposed to read sthati/ instead
of sthatrin, and I confess that this emendation is very
plausible. One does not see how past, cattle, could
be called ¢mmobilia or fixtures, unless the poet wished
to make a distinction between cattle that are kept
fastened in stables, and cattle that are allowed to roam
about freely in the homestead. This distinction 1s
alluded to, for instance, in the Satapatha-bridhmana,
xi. 8, 3,.2. saurya evaisha pasuh sydd iti, tasmad
etasminn astamite pasavo badhyante ; badhnanty
ekAn yathdgoshtham, eka upasamayanti.

Ixx PREFACE.

i. yo, 2. gdrbhah ka sthatdm gdrbhah kardéthaim,
(read sthAtrdém, and see Bollensen, Orient und Occi-
dent, vol. 11. p. 462.)

He who is within all that stands and all that
moves.

The word kardtha, if it occurs by itself, means
flock, movable property :

iii. 31, 15. At ft sdkhi-bhyah kardétham sdm airat.

He brought together, for his friends, the flocks.

vill. 33, 8. puru-traé kardtham dadhe.

He bestowed flocks on many people.

X. 92, 13. pré nah pish& kardtham—avatu.

May Ptishan protect our flock !

Another idiomatic phrase in which sthatuh occurs
is sthatuh gdeatah, and here sthatud is really a
genitive :

iv. 53, 6. gagatah sthatuh ubhayasya yah vast.

He who is lord of both, of what is movable and
what is immovable.

V1. 50, 7. visvasya sthatth gagatah gaénitrih.

They who created all that stands and moves.

Vi. 60, 2. visvasya sthatuh gigatah ka gopah.

The guardians of all that stands and moves. Cf.
K-09, 00:

1.159, 3. sthatih ka satydm gdgatah ka dhérmani
putrasya pathah padéim ddvaydvinah.

Truly while you uphold all that stands and moves,
you protect the home of the guileless son. Cf. ii.
31, 5.

But although I have no doubt that in i. 70, 4,

PREFACE. lxxi

the original poet said sthatwh kardtham, I should be
loath to suppress the evidence of the mistake and
alter the Pada text from ka rétham to hardtham.
The very mistake is instructive, as showing us the
kind of misapprehension to which the collectors of
the Vedic text were liable, and enabling us to judge
how far the limits of conjectural criticism may safely
be extended.

A still more extraordinary case of misunder-
standmg on the part of the original compilers of
the Vedic texts, and likewise of the authors of the
Pratisikhyas, the Niruktas, and other Vedic trea-
tises, has been pointed out by Professor Kuhn. In
an article of his, ‘Zur iltesten Geschichté der Indo-
germanischen Volker’ (Indische Studien, vol. i. p. 351),
he made the following observation : ‘The Lithuanian
laukas, Lett. lauks, Pruss. laukas, all meaning field,
agree exactly with the, Sk. lokas, world, Lat. locus,
Low Germ. (in East-Frisia and Oldenburg) louch,
léch, village. All these words are to be traced
back to the Sk. uru, Gr. eps, broad, wide. The
initial u is lost, as in Goth. rdms, O. H.G. rédmi,
ramin (Low Germ. rime, an open uncultivated field
in a forest), and the r changed into . In support
of this derivation it should be observed that in
the Veda loka is frequently preceded by the par-
ticle u, which probably was only separated from
it by the Diaskeuastee, and that the meaning is
that of open space.” Although this derivation has
met with little favour, I confess that I look upon

lxxil PREFACE.

this remark, excepting only the Latin locus, 1. e.
stlocus, as one of the most ingenious of this emi-
nent scholar. The fact is that this particle u
before loka is one of the most puzzling occur-
rences in the Veda. Professor Bollensen says that
loka never occurs without a preceding u in the
first eight Mandalas, and this is perfectly true
with the exception of one passage which he has
overlooked, viii. roo, 12. dyatth dehi lokém vagraya
vi-skébhe, Dyu! give room for the lightning to
step forth! Professor Bollensen (1. c. p. 603) reads
vritrdya instead of vaégraya, without authority. He
is right in objecting to dyatis as a vocative, but
dyatih may be a genitive belonging to vdgraya, in
which case we should translate, Make room for the
lightning of Dyu to step forth !

But what is even more important, is the fact
that the occurrence of this. unaccented u at the
beginning of a pada is against the very rules, or,
at least, runs counter to the very observations
which the authors of the PratisAkhya have made
on the imadmissibility of an unaccented word in
such a place, so that they had to insert a special
provision exempting the unaccented u from this
general observation: ‘anudattam tu padadau na-
uvargam vidyate padam,’ ‘no unaccented word is
found at the beginning of a pada except u!’
Although I have frequently insisted on the fact
that such statements “of the Pratisdkhya are not
to be considered as rules, but simply as more or

PREFACE. lxxiil

less general statistical accumulations of facts actually
occurring in the Veda, I have also pointed out that
we are at liberty to found on these collected facts
inductive observations which may assume the cha-
racter of real rules. Thus, in our case, we can well
understand why there should be none, or, at least,
very few instances, where an unaccented word begins
a pada. We should not begin a verse with an
enclitic particle in any other language either; and
as in Sanskrit a verb at the beginning of a pada
receives ipso facto the accent, and as the same
applies to vocatives, no chance is left for an un-
accented word in that place except it be a particle.
But the one particle that offends against this general
observation is u, and the very word before which
this u causes this metrical offence is loka. Can
any argument be more tempting in favour of ad-
mitting an old form uloka instead of u_ loka?
Lokam is preceded by u in i. 93,6; i. 30,6; (asmin
bhayd-sthe krinutam u lokém, make room for us,
grant an escape to us, in this danger!) iv. 17,17; Vi.
23, 3; 7 (with urtim); 47, 8 (urim nah lokdém, or
ulokém %); 73, 2; Vil. 20, 2; 33, 5 (with urtim); 60, 9
(with urim); 84, 2 (with urtim); 99, 4 (with urtm) ;
IX. 92, 5; X.13, 2; 16, 4 (sukritam u lokd4m); 30, 7;
104, 10; 180, 3 (with urim). Loké is preceded by u
in lil, 29, 8; v. 1,6; loka-krit, ix. 86, 21; x.133,1. In
all remaining passages u lokd is found at the be-
ginning of a pada: lokdah, il. 37, 113 lokdm, 111. 2, 9
(u lokém u dvé ({ti) tipa gémim iyatuh); v. 4, 11;

lxxiv PREFACE.

loka-kritntim, vill. 15, 4; 1x. 2, 8. The only pas-
sages in which loka occurs without being preceded
by u, are lokdm, vi. 47, 8 (see above); vill. 100, 12;
X. 14,9; 85, 20 (amritasya); lokah, ix. 113, 9; lokan,
x90, £45 loké<1x: 413, (775x085, 24,

Considering all this, I feel as convinced as it is
possible to be in such matters, that in all the
passages where u loké occurs and where it means
space, carriére ouverte, freedom, we ought to read
uroké; but in spite of this I could never bring
myself to insert this word, of which neither the
authors of the Brahmanas nor the writers of the
Pratisikhyas or even later grammarians had any
idea, into the text. On the contrary, I should
here, too, consider it most useful to leave the tra-
ditional reading, and to add the corrections in the
margin, in order that, if these conjectural emenda-
tions are in time considered as beyond the reach
of doubt, they may be used as evidence in support
of conjectures which, without such evidence, might
seem intolerable in the eyes of timid critics.

There remains one difficulty about this hypothe-
tical word uloké, which it is but fair to mention.
If it is derived from uru, or, as Professor Bollensen
suggests, from urvak or urvak, the change of va
into o would require further support. Neither
maghon for maghavan, nor durona for dura-vana
are strictly analogous cases, because in each we
have an a preceding the va or u. Strictly speak-
ing, uroka presupposes uravaka, as sléka presupposes

PREFACE. Ixxv

sravaka, or 6ka, house, avaka (from av, not from
uk). That, on the other hand, the u of uru is liable
to disappear, is shown by passages such as i. 138, 3;
Vil. 39, 3, Where the metre requires uru to be treated
as one syllable; and possibly by ix. 96, 15, if the
original reading was urur iva instead of urviva.
The most powerful instrument that has hitherto
been applied to the emendation of Vedic texts, is
the metre. Metre means measure, and uniform
measure, and hence its importance for critical pur-
poses, as second only to that of grammar. If our
knowledge of the metrical system of the Vedic
poets rests on a sound basis, any deviations from
the general rule are rightly objected to; and if by
a slight alteration they can be removed, and the
metre be restored, we naturally feel inclined to
adopt such emendations. Two safeguards, how-
ever, are needed in this kind of conjectural criticism.
We ought to be quite certain that the anomaly is
impossible, and we ought to be able to explain to a
certain extent how the deviation from the original
correct text could have occurred. As this subject
has of late years received considerable attention,
and as emendations of the Vedic texts, supported
by metrical arguments, have been carried on on a
very large scale, it becomes absolutely necessary to
re-examine the grounds on which these emendations
are supposed to rest. There are, in fact, but few
hymns in which some verses or some words have
not been challenged for metrical reasons, and I feel

lxxvi PREFACE.

bound, therefore, at the very beginning of my
translation of the Rig-veda, to express my own
opinion on this subject, and to give my reasons
why in so many cases I allow metrical anomalies
to remain which by some of the most learned and
ingenious among Vedic scholars would be pro-
nounced intolerable.

Even if the theory of the ancient metres had not
been so carefully worked out by the authors of the
PratisAkhyas and the Anukramanis, an independent
study of the Veda would have enabled us to dis-
cover the general rules by which the Vedic poets
were guided in the composition of their works. Nor
would it have been difficult to show how constantly
these general principles are violated by the intro-
duction of phonetic changes which in the later
Sanskrit are called the euphonic changes of Sandhi,
and according to which final vowels must be joined
with initial vowels, and final consonants adapted
to initial consonants, until at last each sentence be-
comes a continuous chain of closely linked syllables.
It is far easier, as I remarked before, to discover
the original and natural rhythm of the Vedic hymns
by reading them in the Pada than in the Sanhité
text, and after some practice our ear becomes suffi-
ciently schooled to tell us at once how each line
ought to be pronounced. We find, on the one hand,
that the rules of Sandhi, instead of being generally
binding, were treated by the Vedic poets as poetical
licences only ; and, on the other, that a greater

PREFACE. Ixxvii

freedom of pronunciation was allowed even in the
body of words than would be tolerated in the later
Sanskrit. If a syllable was wanted to complete the
metre, a semivowel might be pronounced as a vowel,
many a long vowel might be protracted so as to
count for two syllables, and short vowels might be
inserted between certain consonants, of which no
trace exists in the ordinary Sanskrit. If, on the
contrary, there were too many syllables, then the
rules of Sandhi were observed, or two short syllables
contracted by rapid pronunciation into one; nay,
in a few cases, a final m or s, it seems, might be
omitted. It would be a mistake to suppose that
the authors of the Pratisakhyas were not aware of
this freedom allowed or required in the pronunciation
of the Vedic hymns. Though they abstained from
introducing into the text changes of pronunciation
which even we ourselves would never tolerate, if
inserted in the texts of Homer and Plautus, in the
Pali verses of Buddha, or even in modern English
poetry, the authors of the Pratisikhya were clearly
aware that in many places one syllable had to be
pronounced as two, or two as one. They were
clearly aware that certain vowels, generally con-
sidered as long, had to be pronounced as short, but
they did not change the text. They were clearly
‘aware that in order to satisfy the demands of the
metre, certain changes of pronunciation were indis-
pensable. They knew it, but they did not change
the text. And this shows that the text, as they

Ixxvlll PREFACE.

describe it, enjoyed even in their time a high
authority, that they did not make it, but that,
such as it is, with all its incongruities, it had been
made before their time. In many cases, no doubt,
certain syllables in the hymns of the Veda had been
actually lengthened or shortened in the Sanhita text
in accordance with the metre in which they are
composed. But this was done by the poets them-
selves, or, at all events, it was not done by the
authors of the Pratisikhya. They simply register
such changes, but they do not enjoin them, and in
this we, too, should follow their example. It is,
therefore, a point of some importance in the critical
restoration and proper pronunciation of Vedic texts,
that in the rules which we have to follow in order
to satisfy the demands of the metre, we should
carefully distinguish between what is sanctioned by
ancient authority, and what is the result of our own
observations. This I shall now proceed to do.

First, then, the authors of the Pratisakhya distinctly
admit that, in order to uphold the rules they have
themselves laid down, certain syllables are to be
pronounced as two syllables. We read in Sitra 527:
‘In a deficient pada the right number is to be
provided for by protraction of semivowels (which
were originally vowels), and of contracted vowels
(which were originally two independent vowels)”
It is only by this process that the short syllable
which has been lengthened in the Sanhita, viz. the
sixth, or the eighth, or the tenth, can be shown

PREFACE. Ixxix

to have occupied and to occupy that place where
alone, according to a former rule, a short syllable is
liable to be lengthened. Thus we read:
EeLOT Ur ad vata) akrinotand trinam.

This would seem to be a verse of eleven syllables,
in which the ninth syllable na has been lengthened.
This, however, is against the system of the Prati-
sikhya. But if we protract the semivowel v in
udvatsv, and change it back into u, which it was
originally, then we gain one syllable, the whole
verse has twelve syllables, na occupies the tenth
place, and it now belongs to that class of cases
which is included in a former Satra, 523.

The same applies to x. 103, 13, where we read :

pret gayata. narah.

This is a verse of seven syllables, in which the fifth
syllable is lengthened, without any authority. Let
us protract preta by bringing it back to its original
component elements pra ita, and we get a verse of
eight syllables, the sixth syllable now falls under
the general observation, and is lengthened in the
Sanhita accordingly.

The same rules are repeated in a later portion
of the Pratistkhya. Here rules had been given as
to the number of syllables of which certain metres
consist, and it is added (Stitras 972, 973) that where
that number is deficient, it should be completed
by protracting contracted vowels, and by sepa-
rating consonantal groups in which semivowels

Ixxx PREFACE.

(originally vowels) occur, by means of their cor-
responding vowel.

The rules in both places are given in almost
identically the same words, and the only difference
between the two passages is this, that, according
to the former, semivowels are simply changed back
into their vowels, while, according to the latter, the
semivowel remains, but is separated from the pre-
ceding consonant by its corresponding vowel.

These rules therefore show clearly that the authors
of the PratisAkhya, though they would have shrunk
from altering oné single letter of the authorised
Sanhita, recognized the fact that where two vowels
had been contracted into one, they might yet be pro-
_ nounced as two; and where a vowel before another
vowel had been changed into a semivowel, it might
either be pronounced as a vowel, or as a semivowel
preceded by its corresponding vowel. More than these
two modifications, however, the Pratisikhya does not
allow, or, at least, does not distinctly sanction. The
commentator indeed tries to show that by the word-
ing of the Sdtras in both places, a third modification
is sanctioned, viz. the vocalisation, in the body of a
word, of semivowels which do not owe their origin
to an original vowel. But in both places this in-
terpretation is purely artificial. Some such rule
ought to have been given, but it was not given by
the authors of the Pratistkhya. It ought to have
been given, for it is only by observing such a rule

that in 1. 61, 12, gor na parva vi rada tiraskA, we get

PREFACE. lxxxi

a verse of eleven syllables, and thus secure for dA
in radi the eighth place, where alone the short
a could be lengthened. Yet we look in vain for a
rule sanctioning the change of semivowels into
vowels, except where the semivowels can rightly
be called kshaipra-varna (Sttra 974), i.e. semivowels
that were originally vowels. The independent (sv4-
bhavika) semivowels, as e.g. the v in parva, are
not included; and to suppose that in Sitra 527
these semivowels were indicated by varna is impos-
sible, particularly if we compare the similar wording
of Sdtra 973 *.

We look in vain, too, in the Pratisikhya for another
rule according to which long vowels, even if they do
not owe their origin to the coalescence of two vowels,
are liable to be protracted. However, this rule, too,
though never distinctly sanctioned, is observed in
the Pratisikhya, for unless its author observed it, he
could not have obtained in the. verses quoted by
the Pratisikhya the number of syllables which he
ascribes to them. According to Sitra 937, the verse,
Rv. x. 134, 1, 1s a Mahapankti, and consists of six

* It will be seen from my edition of the Pratisakhya, par-
ticularly from the extracts from Uvata, given after Sitra 973,
that the idea of making two syllables out of goh, never entered
Uvata’s mind. M. Regnier was right, Professor Kuhn (Beitrige,
vol. iv. p. 187) was wrong. Uvata, no doubt, wishes to show that
original (svabhavika) semivowels are liable to vyttha, or at least
to vyavaya; but though this is true in fact, Uvata does not suc-
ceed in his attempt to prove that the rules of the Pratisakhya
sanction it.

VOL. I. f

Ixxxil PREFACE.

pidas, of eight syllables each. In order to obtain
that number, we must read: :
samragam harshanindm.

We may therefore say that, without allowing any
actual change in the received text of the Sanhita,
the Pratisikhya distinctly allows a lengthened pro-
nunciation of certain syllables, which in the Pada
text form two syllables; and we may add that, by
implication, it allows the same even in cases where
the Pada text also gives but one instead of two
syllables. Having this authority in our favour, I
do not think that we use too much liberty if we
extend this modified pronunciation, recognized in so
many cases by the ancient scholars of India them-
selves, to other cases where it seems to us required
as well, in order to satisfy the metrical rules of the
Veda.

Secondly, I believe it can be proved that, if not
the authors of the Pratisikhya, those at least who
constituted the Vedic text which was current in the
ancient schools and which we now have before us,
were fully aware that certain long vowels and diph-
thongs could be used as short. The authors of the
Pratisikhya remark that certain changes which can
take place before a short syllable only, take place
likewise before the word no, although the vowel of
this ‘no’ is by them supposed to be long. After
having stated in Sfitra 523 that the eighth syllable
of hendecasyllabics and dodecasyllabics, if short, is
lengthened, provided a short syllable follows, they

PREFACE. lxxxili

remark that for this purpose nah or no is treated
as a short syllable:

X. 59, 4. dyu-bhih, hitah garima, su nah astu, (Sanh.
si no astu.)

Again, in stating that the tenth syllable of hendeca-
syllabics and dodecasyllabics, if short, is lengthened,
provided a short syllable follows, the same exception
is understood to be made in favour of nah or no,
as a short syllable :

vii. 48, 4. nu devdsah varivah kartana nah, (Sanh.
kartand no, bhiita nah, &c.)

With regard to e being shortened before a short
a, where, according to rule, the a should be elided,
we actually find that the Sanhit& gives a instead
of e in Rv. vin. 72, 5. véti stdtave ambydim, Sanh.
véti stétava ambyaim. (Pratis. 177, 5.)

I do not ascribe very much weight to the authority
which we may derive from these observations with
regard to our own treatment of the diphthongs e
and o as either long or short in the Veda, yet in
answer to those who are incredulous as to the
fact that the vowels e and o could ever be short
in Sanskrit, an appeal to the authority of those
who constituted our text, and in constituting it
clearly treated o as a short vowel, may not be
without weight. We may also appeal to the fact
that in Pali and Prakrit every final o and e can
be treated as either long or short *. Starting from

* See Lassen, Inst. Lingus Pracritice, pp. 145,147,151; Cowell,

Vararuki, Introduction, p. xvii.

f 2

lxxxiv PREFACE.

this we may certainly extend this observation, as
it has been extended by Professor Kuhn, but we
must not extend it too far. It is quite clear that
in the same verse e and o can be used both as long
and short. I give the Sanhita text:

i. 84,17. ka ishate tugyate ko bibhaya

ko mamsate santam indram ko anti,
kas tokAya ka ibhdyota rdye
adhi bravat tanve ko gandya.

But although there can be no doubt that e and
o, when final, or at the end of the first member of
a compound, may be treated in the Veda as anceps,
there is no evidence, I believe, to show that the
same licence applies to a medial or initial e or o.
In iv. 45, 5, we must scan

usrah garante prati vastoh asvind,
ending the verse with an epitritus tertius instead of
the usual dijambus *.

* See Professor Weber’s pertinent remarks in Kuhn’s Beitrige,
vol. ili. p. 394. I do not think that in the verses adduced by
Professor Kuhn, in which final 0 is considered by him as an iambus
or trochee, this scanning is inevitable. Thus we may scan the
Sanhita text :

i. 88, 2. rukmo na kitrah svadhitiyan.

i, 141, 8 ratho na yAtah sikvabhih krito.

i. 174, 3. simho na dame apamsi vastoh.

vi. 24, 3. aksho na kakryoh sGra brihan.

xX. 3, I. ino rdgann aratih samiddho.

This leaves but one of Professor Kuhn’s examples (Beitrige,

vol. iv. p. 192) unexplained: i. r91, 1. kankato na kankato, where
iva for na would remove the difficulty.

PREFACE. lxxxy

Thirdly, the fact that the initial short a, if fol-
lowing upon a word ending in o or e, is frequently
not to be elided, is clearly recognized by the authors
of the Pratisdkhya (see p. xxxv). Nay, that they
wished it to be pronounced even in passages where,
in accordance with the requirements of the Prati-
sikhya, it had to disappear in the Sanhita text, we
may conclude from Stitra 978. It is there stated
that no pada should ever begin with a word that
has no accent. The exceptions to this rule are few,
and they are discussed in Sitras 978-987. But if
the initial a were not pronounced in i.1, 9, s&h nah
pita-iva sindve dene su-up&yandh bhava, the second
pada would begin with ’gne, a word which, after the
elision of the initial a, would be a word without an
accent,

Fourthly, the fact that other long vowels, besides
e and o, may under certain circumstances be used as
short in the Veda, is not merely a modern theory, but
rests on no less an authority than Panini.

Panini says, vi. 1, 127, that i, u, 7i (see Rv. Bh. iv.
1, 12) at the end of a pada (but not in a compound”)

* There are certain compounds in which, according to Professor
Kuhn, two vowels have been contracted into one short vowel.
This is certainly the opinion of Hindu grammarians, also of the
compiler of the Pada text. But most of them would admit of
another explanation. Thus dhanvarnasah, which is divided into
dhanva-arnasah, may be dhénu-arnasah (Rv. v. 45, 2)- Dhianarkam,
divided into dhéna-arkam, may have been dhana-rikam (Ry. x.
46, 5). Satarkasam (Rv. vii. 100, 3) may be taken as sata-
rikasam instead of saté-arkasam.

lxxxvi PREFACE.

may remain unchanged, if a different vowel follows,
and that, if long, they may be shortened. He
ascribes this rule, or, more correctly, the first por-
tion of it only, to Sakalya, Pratisikhya 155 seq.*
Thus kakri atra may become kakri atra or kakry
atra. Madhtii atra may become madhti atra or
madhv atra. In vi. 1, 128, Panini adds that a,
i, u, ri may remain unchanged before ri, and, if
long, may be shortened, and this again according
to the teaching of Sakalya, i.e. Pratisakhya 136.
Hence brahm4 rishih becomes brahm% rishih or
brahmarshih ; kumari risyah becomes kumAri risyah
or kumary risyah. This rule enables us to explain
a number of passages in which the Sanhita text
either changes the final long vowel into a semi-
vowel, or leaves it unchanged, when the vowel
is a pragrihya vowel. To the first class belong
such passages as 1. 163, 12; iv. 38, 10. vagi drva,
Sanh. vagydrva ; vi. 7, 3. vagl agne, Sanh. vagyigne;
vi. 20, 13. pakthi arkaih, Sanh. pakthyarkath ; iv. 22, 4.
sushmi 4 gdh, Sanh. sushmy& gdh. In these pas-
sages 1 is the termination of a nom. masc. of a
stem ending in in. Secondly, iv. 24, 8. pdétnt dkkha,
Sanh. patnydkkha ; iv. 34, 1. devi dhndm, Sanh. devy-
dhnam; v. 75, 4. vaniki &-hita, Sanh. vanikydhita ;
vi. 61, 4. avitri avatu, Sanh. avitryivatu. In these

* In the Pratisikhya the rule which allows vowel before vowel
to remain unchanged, is restricted to special passages, and in some
of them the two vowels are savarna; cf. Sfitra 163.

PREFACE. Ixxxvil

passages the i is the termination of feminines. In
x. 15, 4, Utt arvdk, Sanh. tityarvdk, the final 1 of
the instrumental titi ought not to have been changed
into a semivowel, for, though not followed by ft,
it is to be treated as pragrihya; (Pratis. 163, 5.)
It is, however, mentioned as an exception in Siitra
174, 9. The same applies to ii. 3, 4. védi {ti asyam,
Sanh. védyasy4m. The pragrihya i ought not to
have been changed into a semivowel, but the fact
that it had been changed irregularly, was again duly
registered in Stitra 174, 5. These two pragrihya
i therefore, which have really to be pronounced
short, were irregularly changed in the Sanhitd into
the semivowel ; and as this semivowel, like all semi-
vowels, may take vyavdya, the same object was
attained as if it had been written by a short vowel.
With regard to pragrihya 4, no such indication is
given by the Sanhité text; but in such passages
as i. 46, 13. sambhd {ti sam-bhi 4 gatam, Sanh.
sambhi 4 gatam; v. 43, 4. bahd iti ddrim, Sanh.
bahti ddrim, the pragrihya ti of the dual can be
used as short, like the 4 of madht atra, given as
an example by the commentators of Panini.

To Professor Kuhn, I believe, belongs the merit
of having extended this rule to final 4. That the
4 of the dual may become short, was mentioned
in the Pratisikhya, Sfitra 309, though in none of
the passages there mentioned is there any metrical
necessity for this shortening (see p. xh). This being
the case, it is impossible to deny that where this 4

Ixxxvill PREFACE.

is followed by a vowel, and where Sandhi between
the two vowels is impossible, the final 4 may be
treated as short. Whether it must be so treated,
depends on the view which we take of the Vedic
metres, and will have to be discussed hereafter.
I agree with Professor Kuhn when he scans:

vi. 63, 1. kva tyd valgd puru-hitd adya, (Sanh.
puruhtitadya); and not kva ty& valgd puruhtitadya,
although we might quote other verses as ending
with an epitritus primus.

iv. 3, 13. ma vesasya pra-minatah mA dpeh, (Sanh.
mapeh,) although the dispondeus is possible.

i. 77, 1. kathd ddsema agnaye ki asmai, (Sanh.
kasmai.)

vi. 24, 5. aryah vasasya pari-etd asti.

Even in a compound like tva-dta, I should shorten
the first vowel, e. g.

x. 148, 1. tmand tana sanuydma tva-tanh,
although the passage is not mentioned by the Prati-
sikhya among those where a short final vowel in the
eighth place is not lengthened when a short syllable
follows *.

But when we come to the second pada of a
Gayatri, and find there a long 4, and that long
& not followed by a vowel, I cannot agree with
Professor Kuhn, that the long 4, even under such

* I see that Professor Kuhn, vol. iv. p. 186, has anticipated this

observation in eshéau, to be read 4-ishfau.

PREFACE. lxxxix

circumstances, ought to be shortened. We may
scan :

Vv. 5,7. vatasya patman iité daivyd hot&raé manu-
shah.

The same choriambic ending occurs even in the
last pada of a Gayatri, and is perfectly free from
objection at the end of the other padas.

So, again, we may admit the shortening of au
to o in sdno avye and sano avyaye, as quoted in
the Pratistkhya, 174 and 177, but this would not
justify the shortening of au to av in Anushfubh
verses, such as .

Wa 50, 5. martaya devau adabha,

amsa-iva devdu arvate,
while, with regard to the Trishtubh and Gagati
verses, our views on these metres must naturally
depend on the difficulties we meet with in carry-
ing them out. On this more by and by.

There is no reason for shortening 4 in

v. 5,10. devandm guhy& n&méni.

It is the second pada of a Gayatri here; and we
shall see that, even in the third pada, four long
syllables occur again and again.

For the same reason I cannot follow Dr. Kuhn
in a number of other passages where, for the sake
of the metre, he proposes to change a long 4 into
a short one. Such passages are in the Pada text:

vi. 46, 11. didyavah tigma-mtirdhdnah, not miir-

dhanah.

XC PREFACE.

i 15, 6. ritund yagiiam Asdthe, not Asithe.

Wi OO 028 samyak asuryam AsAte, not AsAte.

v. 67, 1. varshishtham kshatram dsdithe, not 4sdthe.
See Beitriige, vol. iil. p. 122.

i. 46, 6. tim asme rdsithim isham, not rAsitham
isham.

iv. 32, 23. babhra yameshu sobhete, not sobhete.

iv. 45, 3. uta priyam madhune yufigathim ratham,
“not yufigathdm ratham.

v.74, 3. kam akkha yuiigdthe ratham, not yufigithe
ratham.

iv. 55,1. dyAvabhimi ({ti) adite trasithim nah, not
trasithdm nah.

v. 41,1. ritasya va sadasi trisithdm nah, not tra-
sithim nah.

IT must enter the same protest against shortening

other long vowels in the following verses which
Professor Kuhn proposes to make metrically correct
by this remedy :

ewig, (0 hiranyavasimat-tama, not vasimat-tama.

Here the short syllable of ganasri-bhih in v. 60, 8,
cannot be quoted as a precedent, for the i in ganasri,
walking in companies, was never long, and could
therefore not be shortened. Still less can we quote
nari-bhyah as an instance of a long i being short-
ened, for nari-bhyah is derived from ndrih, not from
nari, and occurs with a short i even when the metre

requires a long syllable; i. 43, 6. nri-bhyah n&ri-

PREFACE. XCl

bhyah gave. The fact is, that in the Rig-veda the
forms narishu and nari-bhyah never occur, but always
narishu, nari-bhyah; while from vasi we never find any
forms with short i, but always vasishu, vasi-bhih.

Nor is there any justification for change in i. 25, 16.
gavah na gavyttih anu, the second pada of a Gayatri,
Nor in v. 56, 3. rikshah na vah marutah simi-vin
amah. In most of the passages mentioned by Profes-
sor Kuhn on p. 122, this peculiarity may be observed,
that the eighth syllable is short, or, at all events,
may be short, when the ninth is long:

vi. 44, 21. vrishne te induh vrishabha ‘pipdya.

i. 73, 1. syona-sih atithih na prindnah.

vii. 13, 1. bhare havih na barhishi prindnah.

ii. 28, 7. ena krinvantam asura, bhrinanti.

Before, however, we can settle the question
whether in these and other places certain vowels
should be pronounced as either long or short, we
must settle the more general question, what authority
we have for requiring a long or a short syllable in
certain places of the Vedic metres. Now it has
generally been supposed that the Pratisikhya
teaches that there must be a long syllable in
the eighth or tenth place of Traishtubha and (a-
gata, and in the sixth place of Anushtubha padas.
This is not the case. The Pratisikhya, no doubt,
says, that a short final vowel, but not any short
syllable, occupying the eighth or tenth place in
a Traishtubha and Gagata pada, or the sixth

x¢ll PREFACE.

place in a Gayatra pada, is lengthened, but it
never says that it must be lengthened; on the
contrary, it gives itself a number of cases where
it is not so lengthened. But, what is even more
important, the Pratisdkhya distinctly adds a proviso
which shows that the ancient critics of the Veda
did not consider the trochee as the only possible
foot for the sixth and seventh syllables of Gayatyra,
or for the eighth and ninth, or tenth and eleventh
syllables of Traishtubha and Gagata padas. They
distinctly admit that the seventh and the ninth
and the eleventh syllables in such padas may be
long, and that in that case the preceding short
vowel is not lengthened. We thus get the iambus
in the very place which is generally occupied by the
trochee. According to the Pratisikhya, the general
scheme for the Gayatra would be, not only

6 7
++et+] +--+,

but also B
7

t++++ ]+u0-—+4;
and for the Traishtubha and Gagata, not only
8 9
+++4+/[4++4+-] 0+ + (4),
but also
8 9
+ eee + U = eee

And again, for the same pddas, not only
Io Il

hot + eet (2),

but also
Io Il

+ t+ eae pee ye

PREFACE. XC

Before appealing, however, to the Pratisdkhya for
the establishment of such a rule as that the sixth syl-
lable of Anushtubha and the eighth or tenth syllable
of Traishtubha and Gagata pidas must be lengthened,
provided a short syllable follows, it is indispensable
that we should have a clear appreciation of the real
character of the Pratisikhya. If we carefully follow
the thread which runs through these books, we shall
soon perceive that, even with the proviso that a
short syllable follows, the PratisAkhya never teaches
that certain final vowels must be lengthened. The
object of the Pratisakhya is, as I pointed out on
a former occasion, to register all the facts which
possess a phonetic interest. In doing this, all
kinds of plans are adopted in order to bring as
large a number of cases as possible under general
categories. These categories are purely technical
and external, and they never assume, with the
authors of the Pratisikhya, the character of general
rules. Let us now, after these preliminary remarks,
return to the Sitras 523 to 535, which we discussed
before. The Pratisikhya simply says that certain
syllables which are short in the Pada, if occupying
a certain place in a verse, are lengthened in the
Sanhité, provided a short syllable follows, This
looks, no doubt, like a general rule which should
be carried out under all circumstances. But this
idea never entered the minds of the authors of the
PratisAkhya. They only give this rule as the most
convenient way of registering the lengthening of

xcCiV PREFACE.

certain syllables which have actually been lengthened
in the text of the Sanhitd, while they remain short
in the Pada; and after having done this, they pro-
ceed to give a number of verses where the same
rule might be supposed to apply, but where in the
text of the Sanhit&é the short syllable has not been
lengthened. After having given a long string of
words which are short in the Pada and long in
the Sanhit4é, and where no intelligible reason of
their lengthening can be given, at least not by the
authors of the Pratisikhya, the Pratisikhya adds in
Sdtra 523, ‘The final vowel of the eighth syllable
is lengthened in padas of eleven and twelve syl-
lables, provided a syllable follows which is short in
the Sanhita.’ As instances the commentator gives
(Sanhita text) :

i. 32, 4. tHditnd, sitram n& Kila vivitse.

i. 94,1. dgne sakhyé md rishima vaya tava.

Then follows another rule (Sfitra 525) that ‘The
final vowel of the tenth syllable in pddas of eleven
and twelve syllables is lengthened, provided a syl-

lable follows which is short in the Sanhitd” As
instances the commentator olives :

Fan OR el ee ie ello he =
il. 54, 22. dha visva sumdnd didihi nah.
nA 7] v - Rm w F; - =_ 1 v & v =
ll. 34, 9. dva rudra asdso hantana vddhah.

Lastly, a rule is given (Sitra 526) that ‘The final
vowel of the sixth syllable is lengthened in a pada

PREFACE. XCV

of eight syllables, provided a syllable follows which
is short:’

i. 5, 10. YsAno yavaya vadhim.

If the seventh syllable is long no change takes
place :

ix. 67, 30. 4 pavasva deva soma.

While we ourselves should look upon these rules
as founded in the nature of the metre, which, no
doubt, to a certain extent they are, the authors
of the Pratistkhya use them simply as convenient
nets for catching as many cases as possible of
lengthened syllables actually occurring in the text
of the Sanhité. For this purpose, and in order
to avoid giving a number of special rules, they
add in this place an observation, very important
to us as throwing light on the real pronuncia-
tion of the Vedic hymns at the time when our
Sanhité text was finally settled, but with them
again a mere expedient for enlarging the preceding
rules, and thus catching more cases of lengthening
at one haul. They say in Sitra 527, that in order
to get the right number of syllables in such verses,
we must pronounce sometimes one syllable as two.
Thus only can the lengthened syllable be got into
one of the places required by the preceding Sittra,
viz. the sixth, the eighth, or the tenth place, and
thus only can a large number of lengthened syllables
be comprehended under the same general rule of
the PratisAkhya. In all this we ourselves can easily

xevi PREFACE.

recognize a principle which guided the compilers of
the Sanhité text, or the very authors of the hymns,
in lengthening syllables which in the Pada text
are short, and which were liable to be lengthened
because they occupied certain places on which the
stress of the metre would naturally fall. We also see
quite clearly that these compilers, or those whose
pronunciation they tried to perpetuate, must have
pronounced certain syllables as two syllables, and
we naturally consider that we have a right to try
the same expedient in other cases where to us,
though not to them, the metre seems deficient, and
where it could be rendered perfect by pronouncing
one syllable as two. Such thoughts, however, never
entered the minds of the authors of the Pratisakhyas,
who are satisfied with explaining what is, according
to the authority of the Sanhité, and who never
attempt to say what ought to be, even against the
authority of the Sanhitaé. While in some cases they
have ears to hear and to appreciate the natural flow
of the poetical language of the Rishis, they seem
at other times as deaf as the adder to the voice of
the charmer.

A general rule, therefore, in our sense of the word,
that the eighth syllable in hendecasyllabics and do-
decasyllabics, the tenth syllable in hendecasyllabics
and dodecasyllabics, and the sixth syllable in octo-
syllabics should be lengthened, rests in no sense on
the authority of ancient grammarians. Even as a
mere observation, they restrict it by the condition

PREFACE, xevil

that the next syllable must be short, in order to
provoke the lengthening of the preceding syllable,
thereby sanctioning, of course, many exceptions ; and
they then proceed to quote a number of cases where,
in spite of all, the short syllable remains short *.
In some of these quotations they are no doubt wrong,
but in most of them their statement cannot be
disputed.

As to the eighth syllable being short in hen-
decasyllabics and dodecasyllabics, they quote such
verses as,

Vi. 66, 4. antar ({ti) santah avady4ni pundndh.

Thus we see that in vi. 44, 9, varshiyah vayah
krinuhi sakibhih, hi remains short ; while in vi. 25, 3,
gahi vrishnyani krinuhi pardkah, it is lengthened in
the Sanhita, the only difference being that in the
second passage the accent is on hf.

As to the tenth syllable being short in a dodeca-
syllabic, they quote

ii. 27, 14. adite mitra varuna uta mrila.

* «Wo die achtsilbigen Reihen mit herbeigezogen sind, ist es
in der Regel bei solchen Liedern geschehen, die im Ganzen von
der regelmissigen Form weniger abweichen, und fiir solche Fille,
wo auch das Pratisdkhya die Liingung der sechsten Silbe in
achtsilbigen Reihen vorschreibt, niimlich wo die siebente von
Natur kurz ist. Die achtsilbigen Reihen bediirfen einer erneu-
ten Durchforschung, da es mehrfach schwer fallt, den Sanhita-
text mit der Vorschrift der Pratisikhya in Ubereinstimmung zu
bringen.’ Kuhn, Beitrage, vol. iii. p. 450; and still more strongly,
p- 458.

VOL. I. g

xevul PREFACE.

As to the tenth syllable being short in a hendeca-
syllabic, they quote

tt 20, 1 vayam te vayah indra viddhi su nah.

As to the sixth syllable being short in an octo-
syllabic, they quote

Vili. 23, 26. mahah visvan abhi satah.

A large number of similar exceptions are collected
from 528, 3 to 534, 94, and this does not include any
cases where the ninth, the eleventh, or the seventh
syllable is long, instead of being short, while it
does include cases where the eighth syllable is
long, though the ninth is not short, or, at least, is
not short according to the views of the collectors of
these passages. See Siitra 522, 6.

Besides the cases mentioned by the Pratisikhya
itself, where a short syllable, though occupying a
place which would seem to require lengthening,
remains short, there are many others which the
Pratisikhya does not mention, because, from its
point of view, there was no necessity for doing so.
The Pratisikhya has been blamed* for omitting
such cases aS 1. 93, 6. urum yagfidya kakrathtr u
lokam; or i. 96, 1. devé agnim dharayan driivinodim.
But though occupying the eighth place, and though
followed by a short syllable, these syllables could

eu ' 4 Cpa
Dazu kommt, dass der uns vorliegende Sanhitatext vielfiltig
gar nicht mit Saunaka’s allgemeinen Regel tibereinstimmt, in dem
die Verlangerung kurzer Silben nicht unter den Bedingungen ein-
getreten ist, die er vorschreibt.’ Kuhn, Beitrage, vol. iii. p. 459.

PREFACE, xcix

never fall under the general observation of the
Pratisikhya, because that general observation refers
to final vowels only, but not to short syllables in
general. Similar cases are i. 107, 12; 122, 9; 130, 10;
B20 154, 1; 150, 5"; 163, 2; 167, 10%; 171, 4; 173, 6;
179, 12; 182, 84; 186, 6, &c.

If, therefore, we say that, happen what may, these
metrical rules must be observed, and the text of
the Veda altered in order to satisfy the requirements
of these rules, we ought to know at all events that
we do this on our own responsibility, and that we
cannot shield ourselves behind the authority of
Saunaka or Katydyana. Now it is well known that
Professor _Kuhn* has laid down the rule that the
Traishtubha padas must end in a bacchius or amphi-
brachys U—¥, and the Gagata padas in a dijambus
or peeon secundus u-vuY. With regard to Anush-
tubha paddas, he requires the dijambus or pzon
secundus u—u¥ at the end of a whole verse only,
allowing greater freedom in the formation of the
preceding pddas. In a later article, however, the
final pida, too, in Anushtubha metre is allowed
greater freedom, and the rule, as above given, is
strictly maintained with regard to the Traishtubha
and Gagata padas only.

This subject is so important, and affects so large
a number of passages in the Veda, that it requires
the most careful examination. The Vedic metres,

* Beitriige zur Vergleichenden Sprachforschung, vol. iii. p. 118.

g2

c PREFACE.

though at first sight very perplexing, are very
simple, if reduced to their primary elements. The
authors of the Pratisikhyas have elaborated a most
complicated system. Counting the syllables in the
most mechanical manner, they have assigned nearly
a hundred names to every variety which they disco-
vered in the hymns of the Rig-veda*. But they also
observed that the constituent elements of all these
metres were really but four, (Sitras 988, 989):

1. The Gayatra pada, of eight syllables, ending in v -.
2. The Vairaga pada, of ten syllables, ending in —-.
3. The Traishtubha pada, of eleven syllables, ending

tk A

4. The Gagata pada, of twelve syllables, ending in v-.

Then follows an important rule, Sitra g90: ‘The
penultimate syllable, he says, ‘in a Gayatra and
Gagata pida is light (laghu), in a Vairaga and
Traishtubha pada heavy (guru). This is called
their vritta.

This word vritta, which is generally translated
by metre, had evidently originally a more special
meaning. It meant the final rhythm, or if we
take it literally, the turn of a line, for it is derived
from vrit, to turn. Hence vritta is the same word
as the Latin versus, verse; but I do not wish to
decide whether the connection between the two
words is historical, or simply etymological. In
Latin, versus is always supposed to have meant

* See Appendix to my edition of the PratisAkhya, p. ecelvi.

PREFACE. cl

originally a furrow, then a line, then a verse. In
Sanskrit the metaphor that led to the formation
of vritta, in the sense of final rhythm, has nothing
to do with ploughing. If, as I have tried to prove
(Chips from a German Workshop, vol. i. p. 84), the
names assigned to metres and metrical language
were derived from words originally referring to
choregic movements, vritta must have meant the
turn, i.e. the last step of any given movement ;
and this turn, as determining the general character
of the whole movement, would naturally be regulated
by more severe rules, while greater freedom would
be allowed for the rest.

Having touched on this subject, I may add another
fact in support of my view. The words Trishtubh
and Anushtubh, names for the most common metres,
are generally derived from a root stubh, to praise.
I believe they should be derived from a root
stubh, which is preserved in Greek, not only in
atupedds, hard, stupedcGw, to strike hard, but in
the root sreud, from which oréuvdov, stamped or
pressed olives or grapes, and aoreupys, untrodden
(grapes), then unshaken; and in oréu@w, to shake,
otoGéw, to scold, &. In Sanskrit this root exists
in a parallel form as stambh, lit. to stamp down,
then to fix, to make firm, with which Bopp has
compared the German stampfen, to stamp ; (Glossa-
rium, s.v. stambh.) I therefore look upon Trishtubh
as meaning originally tripudiwm, (supposing this
word to be derived from tr? and pes, according to

cll PREFACE.

the expression in Horace, pepulisse ter pede terram,
Hor. Od. iii. 18,) and I explain its name ‘ Three-
step,’ by the fact that the three last syllables u — vu,
which form the characteristic feature of that metre,
and may be called its real vritta or turn, were
audibly stamped at the end of each turn or strophe.
I explain Anushtubh, which consists of four equal
padas, each of eight syllables, as the ‘ After-step,’
because each line was stamped regularly after the
other, possibly by two choruses, each side taking
its turn. There is one passage in the Veda where
Anushtubh seems to have preserved this meaning :

X. 124, 9. anu-stibham 4nu karktiryd4manam indram
ni kikyuh kavdéyah manishdé.

Poets by their wisdom discovered Indra dancing
to an Anushtubh.

Other names of metres which point to a similar
origin, 1.e. to their original connection with dances,
are Padapankti, ‘Step-row ; .Nyanku-sarini, ‘ Roe-
step ; Abhisarini, ‘Contre-danse,’ &c.

If now we return to the statement of the Prati-
sikhya in reference to the vrittas, we should observe
how careful its author is in his language. He does
not say that the penultimate is long or short, but
he simply states, that, from a metrical point of
view, it must be considered as light or heavy,
which need not mean more than that it must be
pronounced with or without stress. The fact that
the author of the Pratisskhya uses these terms, laghu
and guru, instead of hrasva, short, and dirgha, long,

PREFACE. cill

shows in fact that he was aware that the penul-
timate in these pddas is not invariably long or
short, though, from a metrical point of view, it is
always heavy or light.

it is perfectly true that if we keep to these
four padas, (to which one more pada, viz. the half
Vairaga, consisting of five syllables, might be added,)
we can reduce nearly all the hymns of the Rig-veda
to their simple elements which the ancient poets com-
bined together, in general in a very simple way, but
occasionally with greater freedom. The most im-
portant strophes, formed out of these padas, are,

1. Three Gayatra padas = the Gayatri, (24 syllables.)

2. Four Gayatra padas = the Anushtubh, (32 syllables.)

3. Four Vairaga padas=the Virag, (40 syllables.)

4. Four Traishtubha padas=the Trishtubh, (44 syl-
lables.)

5. Four Gagata padas =the Gagati, (48 syllables.)

Between the Gayatri and Anushfubh strophes,
another strophe may be formed, by mixture of
Gayatra and Gagata padas, consisting of 28 syl-
lables, and commonly called Ushnih; likewise
between the Anushtubh and the Virag, a strophe
may be formed, consisting of 36 syllables, and com-
monly called Brihati.

In a collection of hymns, however, like that of
the Rig-veda, where poems of different ages, dif-
ferent places, and different families have been put
together, we must be prepared for exceptions to
many rules. Thus, although the final turn of the

clv PREFACE.

hendecasyllabic Traishtubha is, as a rule, the bacchius,
u--, yet if we take, for instance, the 77th hymn
of the tenth Mandala, we clearly perceive another
hendecasyllabic pada of a totally different structure,
and worked up into one of the most beautiful
strophes by an aacient poet. Each line is divided
into two halves, the first consisting of seven syl-
lables, being an exact counterpart of the first
member of a Saturnian verse (fato Romze Metelli) ;
the second a dijambus, answering boldly to the
broken rhythm of the first member*. We have, in
fact, a Trishtubh where the turn or the three-step,
v--—, instead of being at the end, stands in the
middle of the line.

x. 77, 1-5, in the Pada text:
ox = oo Ss ¥ ree A) eta oe RS
t. abhra-prushah na vaki prusha vasu,

2 a et Mae ed Soo
havishmantah na yagiiah vi-ganushah \

* Professor Kuhn (vol. iii. p. 450) is inclined to admit the same
metre as varying in certain hymns with ordinary Traishtubha
padas, but the evidence he brings forward is hardly sufficient.
Even if we object to the endings .—-v— and —-v-, v. 33, 4,
may be a Gagata, with vytiha of dasa, the remark quoted from
the Pratisakhya being of no consequence on such points; and
the same remedy would apply to v. 41, 5, with vyttha of eshe.
In vi. 47, 31, vyha of asvaparnaih ; in i. 33, 9, vydha of indra
and rodasi; in ii. 24, 5, vyfha of madbhik would produce the
same effect ; while in i. 121, 8, we must either admit the Traish-
tubha vritta — vo — or scan dhukshan. In iii. 58, 6, I should
admit vytiha for nara; in iv. 26, 6, for mandram 5; Isin TOOS.
oO gyotih, always supposing that we consider the ending —— v —
incompatible with a Trishtubh verse.

PREFACE. cv
su-mirutam na brahmAnam arhase,
ganam astoshi eshim na sobhase
2. sriye maryasah afigin akrinvata,
su-marutam na pirvih ati kshapah \
divah putrasah ath na* yetire,
Aditydsah te akrih na vavridhuh w
3. pra ye divah prithivyah na barhanA,
tmand ririkré abhrit na siryah
pagasvantah na virdh 'panasyavah,
risidasah na maryih abhi-dyavah u
4. yushmikam budhne apm. na yamani,
vithuryati na mahi sratharyati
visva-psuh yagtiah arvak ayam su vah,
prayasvantah na satrakah 4 gata i
. yayam dhih-su pra-yugah: na rasmi-bhih,
gyotishmantah na, bhisd vi-ushfishu
syendsah na sva-yasasah risddasah,
pravdsah na pra-sitdsah pari-prushah w
Another strophe, the nature of which has been
totally misapprehended by native metricians, occurs
in iv. 10. It is there called Padapankti and Maha-
padapankti; nay, attempts have been made to
treat it even as an Ushnih, or as a kind of Gayatri.
The real character of that strophe is so palpable

that it is difficult to understand how it could have
been mistaken. It consists of two lines, the first

Gvl PREFACE.

embracing three or four feet of five syllables each,
having the ictus on the first and the fourth syl-
lables, and resembling the last line of a Sapphic
verse. The second line is simply a Trishtubh. It
is what we should call an asynartete strophe, and
the contrast of the rhythm in the first and second
lines is very effective. I am not certain whether
Professor Bollensen, who has touched on this metre
in an article just published (Zeitschrift der D. M. G.,
vol. xxii. p. 572), Shares this opinion. He has clearly
seen that the division of the lines, as given in the
MSS. of the Sanhité text, is wrong; but he seems
inclined to admit the same rhythm throughout, and
to treat the strophe as consisting of four lines of
five syllables each, and one of six syllables, which
last line is to submit to the prevailing rhythm
of the preceding lines. If we differ, however, as
to the internal architecture of this strophe, we
agree in condemning the interpretation proposed
by the Pratisikhya; and I should, in connection
with this, like to call attention to two important
facts: first, that the Sanhita text, in not changing,
for instance, the final t of martdt, betrays itself as
clearly later than the elaboration of the ancient
theory of metres, later than the invention of such
a metre as the Padapankti; and secondly, that
the accentuation, too, of the Sanhita is thus
proved to be posterior to the establishment of
these fanciful metrical divisions, and hence cannot
throughout claim so irrefragable an authority. as

~

joe)

. Agne tam adyaiasvam na stomaih i kratum na bhadram

PREFACE. evil

certainly belongs to it in many cases. I give the
Sanhité text :

hridisprisam ridhy4m& ta ohaih.

Adhd hy agne\ krator bhadrasya 1 dakshasya sidhoh,
rathir ritasya brihato babhatha.

Ebhir no arkair 1 bhava, no arvdn i svar na gyotih,
agne visvebhii suman anikaih.

Abhish te adya. girbhir grinanto 1 agne dasema,

pra te divo na stanayanti sushmah.

. Tava svAdishthd 1 agne samdrishtir,

idA kid ahnai ida kid aktoh,

PO a ae

. Ghritam na ptitam 1 tantr arepii 1 suki hiranyam,

tat te rukmo na rokata svadhdvah.

. Kritam kid dhi shma i sanemi dvesho agna inoshi,

martad ittha yagamdnad ritavah.

. Siva nah sakhy4 1 santu bhratragne 1 deveshu yushme,

si no nabhi sadane sasmin didhan.
Now it is perfectly true that, as a general rule,
the syllables composing the vritta or turn of the

different metres, and described by the Pratisdkhya
as heavy or light, are in reality long or short.

‘The question, however, is this, have we a right,

or are we obliged, in cases where that syllable is
not either long or short, as it ought to be, so to
alter the text, or so to change the rules of pro-

evlll PREFACE.

nunciation, that the penultimate may again be what
we wish it to be?

If we begin with the Gayatra pada, we have
not to read long before we find that it would be
hopeless to try to crush the Gayatri verses of the
Vedic Rishis on this Procrustean bed. Even Pro-
fessor Kuhn very soon perceived that this was
impossible. He had to admit that in the Gayatri
the two first padas, at all events, were free from
this rule, and though he tried to retain it for the
third or final pida, he was obliged after a time to
give it up even there. Again, it is perfectly true,
that in the third pada of the Gayatri, and in the
second and fourth p&das of the Anushtubh strophe,
greater care is taken by the poets to secure a short
syllable for the penultimate, but here, too, excep-
tions cannot be entirely removed. We have only
to take such a single hymn as 1. 27, and we shall
see that it would be impossible to reduce it to
the uniform standard of Gayatri padas, all ending
in a dyambus. But what confirms me even more
in my view that such strict uniformity must not
be looked for in the ancient hymns of the Rishis,
is the fact that in many cases it would be so very
easy to replace the irregular by a regular dipodia.
Supposing that the original poets had_ restricted
themselves to the dijambus, who could have put
in the place of that regular dijambus an irregular
dipodia? Certainly not the authors of the Prati-
sikhya, for their ears had clearly discovered the

PREFACE. cLx

general. rhythm of the ancient metres; nor their
predecessors, for they had in many instances pre-
served the tradition of syllables lengthened in
accordance with the requirements of the metre.
I do not mean to insist too strongly on this argu-
ment, or to represent those who handed down the
tradition of the Veda as endowed with anything like
apaurusheyatva. Strange accidents have happened
in the text of the Veda, but they have generally
happened when the sense of the hymns had ceased
to be understood; and if anything helped to pre-
serve the Veda from greater accidents, it was due,
I believe, to the very fact that the metre continued
to be understood, and that oral tradition, however
much it might fail in other respects, had at all
events to satisfy the ears of the hearers. I should
have been much less surprised if all irregularities
in the metre had been smoothed down by the flux
and reflux of oral tradition, a fact which is so
apparent in the text of Homer, where the gaps
occasioned by the loss of the digamma, were made
good by the insertion of unmeaning particles; but
I find it difficult to imagine by what class of men,
who must have lived between the original poets
and the age of the Pratisikhyas, the simple rhythm
of the Vedic metres should have been disregarded,
and the sense of rhythm, which ancient people
possess in a far higher degree than we ourselves,
been violated through crude and purposeless altera-
tions. I shall give a few specimens only. What

cx PREFACE.

but a regard for real antiquity could have induced
people in viii. 2, 8, to preserve the defective foot
of a Gayatri verse, samine adhi bharman? Any
one acquainted with Sanskrit would naturally read
samine adhi bhirmani. But who would have
changed bharmami, if that had been there originally,
to bhdrman? I believe we must scan samane adhi
bharman, or samane adhi bharman, the peon ter-
tius being a perfectly legitimate foot at the end
of a Gayatri verse. In x. 158, 1, we can under-
stand how an accident happened. The original
poet may have said: Sfryo no divas p4tu patu
vato antarikshAt, agnir nah parthivebhyah. Here
one of the two patu was lost. But if in the same
hymn we find in the second verse two feet of nine
instead of eight syllables each, I should not venture
to alter this except in pronunciation, because no
reason can be imagined why any one should have
put these irregular lines in the place of regular
ones.

In v. 41, 10, grinite agnir etari na sfishaih, soki-
~shkeso ni rindti vand, every modern Pandit would
naturally read vandni instead of vand4, in order to
get the regular Trishtubh metre. But this being
the case, how can we imagine that even the most
ignorant member of an ancient Parishad should
wilfully have altered vandni into vand? What
surprises one is, that vand should have been spared,
in spite of every temptation to change it into
vandni: for I cannot doubt for one moment: that

PREFACE. cX1

vand is the right reading, only that the ancient
poets pronounced it vand. Wherever we alter the
text of the Rig-veda by conjecture, we ought to
be able, if possible, to give some explanation how
the mistake which we wish to remove came to be
committed. If a passage is obscure, difficult to
construe, if it contains words which occur in no
other place, then we can understand how, during
a long process of oral tradition, accidents may have
happened. But when everything is smooth and
easy, when the intention of the poet is not to be
mistaken, when the same phrase has occurred many
times before, then to suppose that a simple and
perspicuous sentence was changed into a compli-
cated and obscure string of words is more difficult
to understand. J know there are passages where
we cannot as yet account for the manner in which
an evidently faulty reading found its way into
both the Pada and Sanhit&é texts, but in those very
passages we cannot be too circumspect. If we read
Vill. 40, 9, parvish ta indropamatayah parvir uta
prasastayah, nothing seems more tempting than to
omit indra, and to read pdarvish ta upamatayah.
Nor would it be difficult to account for the inser-
tion of indra; for though one would hardly venture
to call it a marginal gloss that crept into the text—
a case which, as far as I can see, has never hap-
pened in the hymns of the Rig-veda—it might be
- taken for an explanation given by an Akarya to his
pupils, in order to inform them that the ninth verse,

exil PREFACE.

different from the eighth, was addressed to Indra.
But however plausible this may sound, the question
remains whether the traditional reading could not
be maintained, by admitting synizesis of opa, and
reading ptirvish ta indropamAtayah. For a similar
synizesis of — vu, see iii. 6, 10. praki adhvareva ta-
sthatuh, unless we read priky adhvareva.

Another and more difficult case of synizesis
occurs in

vii. 86, 4. ava tvdnend namas& tira(h) iydm.
It would be easy to conjecture tvarey4m instead
of tura iyam, but tvareyam, in the sense of ‘let
me hasten,’ is not Vedic. The choriambic ending,
however, of Trishtubha can be proved to be legi-
timate, and i that is the case, then even the
synizesis of tura, though hard, ought not to be
regarded as impossible.

In ii. 18, 5, 4 vimsatyd trimsata yahy arvan,

A katvArimsatd haribhir yuginah,

A

4, pafikdsat& surathebhir indra,
4 shashty4 saptatyA somapeyam,

Professor Kuhn proposes to omit the 4 at the
beginning of the second line, in order to have
eleven instead of twelve syllables. By doing so
he loses the uniformity of the four pddas, which
all begin with 4, while by admitting synizesis of
haribhih all necessity for conjectural emendation
disappears.

If the poets of the Veda had objected to a paon

PREFACE. CXill

quartus (J vv) at the end of a Gayatri, what could
have been easier than to change iv. 52, 1, divo adarsi
duhita, into adarsi duhit& divah? or x. 118, 6, add-
bhyam grihapatim, into grihapatim adabhyam ?

If an epitritus secundus (-u—-—) had been objec-
tionable in the same place, why not say vi. 61, ro,
stomyd bhiit sarasvati, instead of sarasvati stomya
bhat? Why not viii. 2, 11, revantam hi srinomi
tv4, instead of revantam hi tvd srinomi?

If an ionicus a minore (u u—-) had been excluded
from that place, why not say i. 30, 10, garitribhyah
sakhe vaso, instead of sakhe vaso garitribhyah? or
i 41, 7, varunasya mahi ‘psarah, instead of mahi
psaro varunasya ?

If a dispondeus (-——-—) was to be avoided, then
HOS. 3: mahi vam kshatram deveshu, might easily
have been replaced by deveshu vam kshatram mahi,
and viii. 2, 10, sukraé Asiram yakante, by sukra ya-
kanta Asiram.

If no epitritus primus (.——-) was allowed, why
not say vi. 61, 11, nidas patu sarasvati, instead of
sarasvati nidas pdtu, or viii. 79, 4, dvesho yavir
aghasya kit, instead of yAvir aghasya hid dveshah ?

Even the epitritus tertius (-_U—) might easily
have been avoided by dropping the augment of apam
in x. 119, 1-13, kuvit somasyApam iti. It is, in fact,
a variety of less frequent occurrence than the rest,
and might possibly be eliminated with some chance
of success.

Lastly, the choriambus (-uv—) could have been

VOL. I. h

CXiv PREFACE.

removed in ili. 24, 5, sisthi nah stinumatah, by reading
sdnumatah sisihi nah, and in viii. 2, 31, sanad amrikto
dayate, by reading amrikto dayate sandt.

But I am afraid the idea that regularity is better
than irregularity, and that in the Veda, where there
is a possibility, the regular metre is to be restored by
means of conjectural emendations, has been so ably
advocated by some of the most eminent scholars,
that a merely general argument would now be of
no avail. I must therefore give as much evidence
as I can bring together in support of the contrary
opinion; and though the process is a tedious one,
the importance of the consequences with regard to
Vedic criticism leaves me no alternative. With
regard, then, to the final dipodia of Gayatri verses,
IT still hold and maintain, that, although the dijam-
bus is by far the most general metre, the following
seven varieties have to be recognized in the poetry

of the Veda:

TP, Vr U—, 2.490=; 3. -V—-, 4. VY —=, 5. ———-,

6. u---, 7. --u-, 8. -Uuu-.

I do not pretend to give every passage in which
these varieties occur, but I hope I shall give a
sufficient number in support of every one of them.
I have confined myself almost entirely to the final
dipodia of Gayatri verses, as the Anushtubha verses
would have swelled the lists too much; and in
order to avoid every possible objection, I have
given the verses, not in their Pada, but in their
Sanhit& form.

PREFACE. CXV

§ 2% vuu-.,
i. 12, 9. tasmai pdvaka mrilaya. (Instead of
myrilaya, it has been proposed to read mardaya.)
i. 18, 9. divo na sadmamakhasam.
i. 42, 4. paddbhi tishtha tapushim.
i. 46, 2. dhiyé deva vasuvidd. (It would have
been easy to read vasivida.)
i. 97, 1-8. apa nah sosukat agham.
iii. 11, 3. artham hy asya tarani.
iii. 27,10. agne suditim usigam.
iv. 15, 7. akkhA na hata ud aram.
iv. 32, 4. asmafi-asmatt id ud ava.
iv. 52,1. divo adarsi duhita.
Vv. 5, 9. yagiie-yagiie na ud ava.
v. 7, 4. pra sma minaty agarah.
7, 5. bhima prishtheva raruhuh.
7,7. anibhrishtatavishih.
9, 4. agne pasur na yavase.
53, 12. end yAmena marutah.
. 61, 3. putrakrithe na ganayah.
_ 61, 11. atra sravamsi dadhire.

. 64, 5. sakhindm ha vridhase.

svi esbnee beck Rh 2h SI

. 65, 4. sumatir asti vidhatah.
v. 82, 9. pra ka suvati savita.
vi. 16, 17. tatr’ sadah krinavase.

vi. 16,18. ath4 duvo vanavase.
h2

CXV1 PREFACE.,

vi. 16, 45. sok’ vi bhAhy agara.

vi. 45,17. sa tvam na indra mrilaya.
vi. 61, 4. dhinim avitry avatu.

vii. 15,14. por bhavA satabhugih.

vii. 66, 2. asury&ya pramahasi.

viii. 6, 35. anuttamanyum agaram.
viii. 6, 42. satam vahantu harayah.
vill. 32, 10. sAdhu krinvantam avase.
viii. 44, 28. tasmai pdvaka mrilaya.
viii. 45, 31. m4 tat kar indra mrilaya.
viii. 72, 6. dima rathasya dadrise.

viii. 72, 13. ras, dadhita vrishabham.
vill. 80, 1 and 2. tvam na indra mrilaya.
viii. 83, 3. ydyam ritasya rathyah.
viii. 93, 27. stotribhya indra mrilaya.
ix. 61, 5. tebhir nak soma mrilaya.
ix. 64,1. vrish4 dharmani dadhishe.

x, 118, 6. adAbhyam grihapatim.

§3-ute.
i, 22,11. akkhinnapatrah sakantdm.
i. 30, 13. kshumanto ydbhir madema.
i. 41, 8. sumnair id va 4 vivase.
i. go, 1. aryam4 devaih sagoshah.
i. 90, 4. ptishd bhago vandydsah.
i, 120,1. kath& vidhdty apraketah,

Vv. 19, 1. upasthe mAtur vi kashte.

PREFACE. CXVll

v. 70, 3. turyama dasytin tantibhih.

V1. 61, 10.
Vill. 2, 2.
Vlll. 2, 4.
Vill. 2, 5.
Vill. 2, IT.

Vill. 2, 12.

Vill. 2, 16.
Vill. 2, 17.
Vill. 2, 29.
Vill. 2, 30.
Vill. 2, 32.

Vill. 2, 33.

Vill. 2, 36.

Vill. 2, 37.
VIL. 7, 30.
Vill. 7, 33.
Vise ET 2:
illogt 138
Villy L1504-
Vill, 16, 3.
Vill. 16, 4.
Vii LOMens

Vill. 16, 7.

sarasvati stomy& bhit.
asvo na nikto nadishu.
antar devan martydms ha.
apasprinvate suhdrdam.
revantam hi tvA srinomi.

adhar na nagn4 garante.

. pred u harivah srutasya.

na gdyatram giyamdnam.

. sikshd sakivah sakibhih.

kanvé ukthebhir garante.
taved u stomam kiketa.
indra kArinam vridhantah.
satré dadhire savAmst.
mah4n mahibhih sakibhih.
anu ghen mandi maghonah.
satyo ‘vita vidhantam.

yo bhiit somaih satyamadva.
mardikebhir nidham4nam.
vavrityam kitravagan.

agne rathir adhvarandm.
adevir agne ardtih (or § 4).
nopa veshi gitavedah. +
maho vaginam sanibhyah.
harshumantah sdrasAtau.
yeshim indras te gayanti.
mahan mahibhih sakibhih. Cf. viii. 2, 32.

Cxvili PREFACE.

viii. 46, 2. vidma datdram rayindm.

viii. 71, 2. tvam id asi kshapdvdn (or § 4).
viii. 81,1. mahAhasti dakshinena.

viii. 81, 3. bhimam na gam varayante.
vill, 81, 4. na radhasa mardhishan nah.
viii. 81, 7. adAstishtarasya vedah.

viii. 81, 9. vasais ka makshti garante.

viii. 94, 2. sdrydmasd drise kam.

ix. 62, 5. svadanti gavah payobhih.

x. 20, 4. kavir abhram didyAnah.

x. 20, 7. adred sinum dyum dhuh.

Ne ea
i. 3, 8. usr& iva svasardni.
1. 27, 4. agne deveshu pra vokah.
i. 30, t0. sakhe vaso garitribhyah.
i. 30, 15. rinor aksham na sakibhih.
1. 38, 7. miham krinvanty avatam.
i. 38, 8. yad eshdm vrishtir asargi.
1. 41, 7. mahi psaro varunasya.
i. 43, 7. mahi sravas tuvinrimnam.
ii. 6, 2. end shktena sugita.
iil. 27, 3. ati dveshAmsi tarema.
v. 82, 7. satyasavam savitdram.
Vi. 16, 25. tirgo napAd amritasya.
vi. 16, 26. marta Andsa suvriktim.

Vi. 61,12. vage-vage havyd bhit.

PREFACE. CX1xX

vill. 2,1. andbhayin rarimé te.

Vill. 2, 3. indra tvdsmint sadhamAde.

vill. 2, 8. sam&ne adhi bhdrman (gee page cx).

vill. 2,18. yanti pramddam atandrih.

vill. 2,19. mahan iva yuvag&nih.

Vill. 2, 21. trishu gdtasya mandmsi.

Vill. 2, 22. yasastaram satamiiteh.

vill. 2, 23. bharé piban narydya.

Vill. 2, 26. ni yamate satamitih.

vill. 2, 35. ino vasu sa hi volhd.

Vill. 16, 2. apam avo na samudre.

vili. 16, 6. esha indro varivaskvit.
8.

Vlil. 16,

ekas kit sann abhibhitih.

Vili. 71, 9. sakhe vaso garitribhyah. Cf. i. 30, 10.

viii. 79, 3. uru yantdsi varitham.

ix. 21, 5. yo asmabhyam arava (or ardva).

v

ix. 62, 6. madhvo rasam sadhaméade.

ix. 66, 21. dadhad rayim mayi posham.

xX.

x.
X.
x

mie

mie
.

20, 5. minvant sadma pura eti.

. 185, 1. duradharsham varunasya.

185, 2. ise ripur aghasamsah.

. 185, 3. gyotir yakkhanty agasram.

S15 ea =*
2,7. dhiyam ghritékim sddhanta.
3, 4. anvibhis tand pitdsah.

27, 3. pahi sadam id visvayuh.

CxXxX PREFACE.

i. go, 2. vrata, rakshante visvdha (or 9 6).

il. 6, 4. yuyodhy asmad dvesh4msi.

iii. 41, 8. indra svadhdvo matsveha (or § 6).

v. 68, 3. mahi vam kshatram deveshu.

v. 68, 4. adruhd devau vardhete.

viii. 2, 10. sukré Asiram yakante.

vill. 2, 24. vagam stotribhyo gomantam (or § 6).
viii. 16,1. naram nrish4ham mambhishtham.
Vili. 16,12. akkh& ka nah sumnam neshi.

vill. 79, 2. prem andhah khyan mi srono bhit.
ix. 66,17. bhdridabhyas kin mambiydn.

X. 20, 6. agnim deva vasimantam.

x. 20, 8. agnim havisha vardhantah.

§6..---.
1.15, 6. rituna, yagfiam AsAthe.
i. 38, 2. kva vo gAvo na ranyanti (see page 70).
i. 38, 9. yat prithivim vyundanti.
i. 86, 9. vidhyat& vidyutd rakshah.
iii. 27, 2. srushtivanam dhitavanam.
iii. 41, 3. vihi stra purolasam.
iv. 32, 23. babhri yAmeshu sobhete.
v. 68, 5. brihantam gartam Asite.
v. 70, 2. vayam te rudr& sydma.
vi. 61, 11. sarasvati nidas pAtu.
Vill. 2, 20. asrira iva gdmata.

Vill. 2, 25. somam virdya sirdya.

PREFACE. CXX1

vill. 7, 32. stushe hiranyavasibhih.

Vili. 26, 19. vahethe subhrayAvand.

Vill. 79, 4. yavir aghasya kid dveshah.

Vili. 79, 5. vavrigyus trishyatah kimam.

Vili. 81, 6. indra m4 no wasor nir bhak.

x. 158, 4. sam kedam vi ka pasyema.

ON

i. 10, 8. sam gd asmabhyam dhanuhi.

i. 12, 5. agne tvam rakshasvinah.

i. 37, 15. visvam kid Ayur givase.

i. 43, 8. & na indo vage bhaga.

i. 46, 6. tim asme rdsithim isham.

ili. 62, 7. asmAbhis tubhyam sasyate.

Iv. 30, 21. dasinaém indro mayaya.

v. 86, 5. amseva deviv arvate.

viii. 5, 32. puruskandra ndsaty& (or ndsatyd, § 8).

vill. 5, 35. dhigavand ndsatya.

x. 119, 1-13. kuvit’ somasyAp4m iti.

Lag ed Ratakakran yo hyo vartanih.
Soeeatoue As

2, 9. daksham dadhate apasam (or § 2).

te

i. 6,10. indram maho vA ragasah.
i. 27, 6. sadyo dasushe ksharasi.
i. 30, 21. asve na kitre arushi (or § 2).

. 41, 9. na duruktdya sprihayet (or § 2).

de

HOORS: kart4 nah svastimatah.

me

exXll PREFACE.

iii. 24, 5. sisthi nah sinumatah.

vy. 19, 2. & drilhAm puram vivisuh.

Vv. 70, 1. mitra vamsi vam sumatim.

v. 70, 4. m4 seshas’ m4 tanasi.

v. 82, 8. svAdhir devah savita.

viii. 2, 27. girbhih srutam girvanasam.
viii. 2, 31. sandd amrikto dayate (or § 2).
viii. 16, 9. indram vardhanti kshitayah (or § 2).
viii. 55, 4. asvaso na kankramata.

viii. 67, 19. yhyam asmabhyam mrilata.
viii. 81, 5. abhi rddhas& gugurat.

viii. 81, 8. asmAbhif su tam sanuhi.

ix. 47, 2. rind ka dhrishnus kayate.

But although with regard to the Gayatra, and
I may add, the Anushtubha padas, the evidence
as to the variety of their vrittas is such that it
can hardly be resisted, a much more determined
stand has been made in defence of the vritta of
the Traishtubha and Gagata pidas. Here Professor
Kuhn and those who follow him maintain that the
rule is absolute, that the former must end in U—u,
the latter in u-U~-, and that the eighth syllable,
immediately preceding these syllables, ought, if pos-
sible, to be long. Nor can I deny that Professor
Kuhn has brought forward powerful arguments in
support of his theory, and that his emendations of
the Vedic text recommend themselves by their great
ingenuity and simplicity. If his theory could be

PREFACE. CXXi

carried out, I should readily admit that we should
gain something. We should have throughout the
Veda a perfectly uniform metre, and wherever we
found any violation of it, we should be justified in
resorting to conjectural criticism.

The only question is at what price this strict
uniformity can be obtained. If, for instance, in
order to have the regular vrittas at the end of
Traishtubha and Gagata lines, we were obliged to
repeal all rules of prosody, to allow almost every
short vowel to be used as long, and every long vowel
to be used as short, whether long by nature or by
position, we should have gained very little, we should
have robbed Peter to pay Paul, we should have re-
moved no difficulty, but only ignored the causes which
created it. Now, if we examine the process by which
Professor Kuhn establishes the regularity of the
vrittas or final syllables of Traishtubha and Gagata
padas, we find, in addition to the rules laid down
before, and in which he is supported, as we saw, to a
great extent by the Pratisikhya and Panini, viz. the
anceps nature of e and o, and of a long final vowel
before a vowel, the following exceptions or metrical
licences, without which that metrical uniformity at
which he- aims, could not be obtained :

1. The vowel o in the body of a word is to be
treated as optionally short:

ii. 39, 3. prati vastor usrd (see Trisht. § 5).

Here the o of vastoh is supposed to be short,
although it is the Guna of u, and therefore very

CXX1V PREFACE.

different from the final e of sarve or Aste, or the
final o of sarvo for sarvas or mano for manas*.
It should be remarked that in Greek, too, the final
diphthongs corresponding to the e of sarve and
Aste are treated as short, as far as the accent is
concerned. Hence drool, tixrerat, and even yveuat,
nom. plur. In Latin, too, the old terminations of
the nom. sing. o and u, instead of the later us, are
short. (Neue, Formenlehre, § 23 seq.)

vi. 51, 15. gop ama.

Here the o of gopa is treated as short, in order
to get U—vu-— instead of ——v-, which is perfectly
legitimate at the end of an Ushaih.

2. The long i and & are treated as short, not
only before vowels, which is legitimate, but also
before consonants :

vii. 62, 4. dyivabhimi adite trisithim nah (see
Trisht. § 5).

The forms isiya and rdsiya in vii. 32, 18, occur
at the end of octosyllabic or Gayatra pddas, and are
therefore perfectly legitimate, yet Professor Kuhn
would change them too, into isiya and rasiya. In
vii. 28, 4,even mayt is treated as mAyi (see Trisht. § 5);
and in vii. 68, 1, vitam as vitam. If, in explanation

* A very strong divergence of opinion is expressed on this point
by Professor Bollensen, He says: ‘O und E erst spiiter in die
Schrifttafel aufgenommen, bewahren ihre Liinge durch das ganze
indische Schriftenthum bis ins Apabhramsa hinab. Selbstver-
stindlich kann kurz o und e im Veda erst recht nicht zugelassen
werden.’ Zeitschrift der D. M. G., vol. xxii. p. 574.

PREFACE. CXXV

of this shortening of vitam, vihi is quoted, which
is identified with vihi, this can hardly be considered
as an argument, for vihi occurs where no short
syllable is required, iv. 48, 1; ii. 26, 2; and where,
therefore, the shortening of the vowel cannot be
attributed to metrical reasons.

3. Final m followed by an initial consonant is
allowed to make no position, and even in the
middle of a word a nasal followed by a liquid is
supposed to make positio debilis. Several of the in-
stances, however, given in support, are from Gayatra
pddas, where Professor Kuhn, in some of his later
articles, has himself allowed greater latitude; others
admit of different scanning, as for instance,

i. 117, 8. mahah kshonasya asvind kanvaya.

Here, even if we considered the dispondeus as ille-
gitimate, we might scan kanvdya, for this scanning
occurs in other places, while to treat the first a as
short before no seems tantamount to surrendering
all rules of prosody.

4. Final n before semivowels, mutes, and double
n before vowels make no position*. Ex. iii. 49, 1.
yasmin visva (Trisht. § 5); i. 174, 5. yasmifi kikan ;
i. 186, 4. sasmin(n) ddhan t.

* Professor Kuhn has afterwards (Beitriige, vol. iv. p. 207)
modified this view, and instead of allowing a final nasal followed
by a mute to make positio debilis, he thinks that the nasal should
in most cases be omitted altogether.

+ Here a distinction should be made, I think, between an n
before a consonant, and a final n following a short vowel, which,

CXXV1 PREFACE.

5. Final Visarga before sibilants makes no posi-
tion*, Ex. iv. 21, 10. satyah samrat (Trisht. § 5).
Even in i. 63, 4. kodih sakb (probably a Gagata),
and v. 82, 4. savih saubhagam (a Gay. § 7), the long
1 is treated as short, and the short a of sakha is
lengthened, because an aspirate follows.

6. S before mutes makes no position. Ex. vi. 66, 11.
ugra aspridhran (Trish¢. § 3). r
7. 8 before k makes no position. Ex. visva-
skandrah, &e. iy

8. Mutes before s make no position. Ex. rakshas,
according to Professor Kuhn, in the seventh Man-
dala only, but see i. 12, 5; kutsa, &e.

- Mutes before r or v make no position. Ex.
Soe dirghasrat.

10, Sibilants before y make no position. Ex.
dasyiin.

11. R followed. by mutes or sibilants makes no
position, Ex. dyur givase, khardih, varshishtham.

12. Words like smaddishéim &c. retain their vowel
short before two following consonants.

We now proceed to consider a number of pro-

according to the rules of Sandhi, is doubled, if a vowel follows.
In the latter case, the vowel before the n remains, no doubt, short
in many cases, or, more correctly, the doubling of the n does
not take place, e. g. i. 63, 4; 186, 4. In other places, the doubling
seems preferable, e. g. i. 33, 11, though Professor Kuhn would
remove it altogether. Kuhn, Beitriige, vol. iii. p. 125.

* Here, too, according to later researches, Professor Kuhn would
rather omit the final sibilant altogether, loc. cit. vol. iv. p. 207.

PREFACE. CxXVil

sodial rules which Professor Kuhn proposes to repeal
in order to have a long syllable where the MSS.
supply a short:

1, The vowel ri is to be pronounced as long, or
rather as ar. Ex. i. 12, 9. tasmai pAvaka mrilaya is to
be read mardaya; v. 33, 10. samvaranasya risheh is to
be read arsheh. But why not samvaranasyé visheh
(i. e. siarsheh) 4

z. The a privativum may be lengthened. Ex.
agarah, amritah.

_3. Short vowels before liquids may be long. Ex.
narah, taruta, tarati, marutam, harivah, arushi, dadhur
iha, suvita (p. 471).

4. Short vowels before nasals may be lengthened.
Ex. gandn, sanitar, tanth, upa nah.

5. Short vowels before the ma of the superlative
may be lengthened. Ex. nritama.

6. The short a in the roots sam and yam, and in am
(the termination of the accusative) may be lengthened.

7. The group ava is to be pronounced aua. Ex.
avase becomes auase; savitd. becomes sauitd; nava
becomes naua.

8. The group aya is to be changed into aia or
ea. Ex. nayasi becomes naiasi.

9. The group va is to be changed into ua, and
this ua to be treated as a kind of diphthong and
therefore long. Ex. kanvatamah becomes kantata-
mah; varunah becomes tarunah.

ro. The short vowel in the reduplicated syllable of
perfects is to be lengthened. Ex. tatanah, dadhire.

CXXViil PREFACE.

11. Short vowels before all aspirates may be
lengthened. Ex. rathah becomes rathih; sakha be-
comes sakhd,

12. Short vowels before h and all sibilants
may be lengthened. Ex. mahini becomes mahini;
usigam becomes usigdm ; rishate becomes rishate ;
dasat becomes dasat.

13. The short vowel before t may be lengthened.
Ex. vagavatah becomes vagavatah; atithid becomes
atithih.

14. The short vowel before d may be lengthened.
Ex. udaram becomes udaram ‘ ud ava becomes ud ava.

15. The short vowel before p may be lengthened.
Ex. ap’m becomes apim; tapushim becomes tapu-
shim; grihapatim becomes grihapatim.

16. The short vowel before g and g may be length-
ened. Ex. sAnushag asat becomes sdnushag asat ;
yunagan becomes yunagan.

Let us now turn back for one moment to look
at the slaughter which has been committed! Is
there one single rule that has been spared? Is there
one single short syllable that must always remain
short, or a long syllable that must always remain
long? If all restrictions of prosody are thus re-
moved, our metres, no doubt, become perfectly
regular. But it should be remembered that these
metrical rules, for which all this carnage has been
committed, are not founded upon any @ prior
principles, but deduced by ancient or modern
metricians from those very hymns which seem

PREFACE. CXX1X

so constantly to violate them. Neither ancient nor
modern metricians had, as far as we know, any evi-
dence to go upon besides the hymns of the Rig-veda ;
and the philosophical speculations as to the origin
of metres in which some of them indulge, and from
which they would fain derive some of their un-
bending rules, are, as need hardly be said, of no
consequence whatever. I cannot understand what
definite idea even modern writers connect with such
statements as that, for instance, the Trishtubh metre
sprang from the Gagati metre, that the eleven syl-
lables of the former are an abbreviation of the twelve
syllables of the latter. Surely, metres are not made
artificially, and by addition or subtraction. Metres
have a natural origin in the rhythmic sentiment
of different people, and they become artificial and
arithmetical in the same way as language with its
innate principles of law and analogy becomes in
course of time grammatical and artificial. To derive
one metre from another is like deriving a genitive
from a nominative, which we may do indeed for
grammatical purposes, but which no one would ven-
ture to do who is at all acquainted with the natural
and independent production of grammatical forms.
Were we to arrange the Trishtubh and Gagati metres
in chronological order, I should decidedly place the
Trishtubh first, for we see, as it were before our eyes,
how sometimes one foot, sometimes two and three feet ;
in a Trishtubh verse admit an additional syllable at
the end, particularly in set phrases which would not
VOL, I. i

CXXxX PREFACE.

submit to a Trishtubh ending. The phrase sam no
bhava dvipade sam katushpade is evidently a solemn
phrase, and we see it brought in without hesitation,
even though every other line of the same strophe or
hymn is Trishtubh, i.e. hendecasyllabic, not dodeca-
syllabic. See, for instance, vi. 74, 1; Vil. 54, 1; X.
85, 44; 165, 1. However, I maintain by no means
that this was the actual origin of Gagati metres ;
I only refer to it in order to show the groundlessness
of metrical theories which represent the component ele-
ments, a foot of one or two or four syllables as given
first, and as afterwards compounded into systems of
two, three or four such feet, and who therefore would
wish us to look upon the hendecasyllabic Trishtubh
as originally a dodecasyllabic Gagati, only deprived
of its tail. If my explanation of the name of Trish-
tubh, i.e. Three-step, is right, its origin must be
ascribed to a far more natural process than that
of artificial amputation. It was to accompany a
choros, i.e. a dance, which after advancing freely
for eight steps in one direction, turned back (vritta)
with three steps, the second of which was strongly
marked, and would therefore, whether in song or
recitation, be naturally accompanied by a long syl-
lable. It certainly is so in the vast majority of
Trishtubhs which have been handed down to us.
But if among these verses we find a small number
in which this simple and palpable rhythm igs violated,
and which nevertheless were preserved from the
first in that imperfect form, although the temptation

PREFACE, exxxi

to set them right must have been as great to the
ancient as it has proved to be to the modern students
of the Veda, are we to say that nearly all, if not all,
the rules that determine the length and shortness
of syllables, and which alone give character to every
verse, are to be suspended? Or, ought we not
rather to consider, whether the ancient choregic
poets may not have indulged occasionally in an
irregular movement? We see that this was so with
regard to Gayatri verses. We see the greater free-
dom of the first and second padas occasionally extend
to the third; and it will be impossible, without
intolerable .violence, to remove all the varieties of
the last pada of a Gayatri of which I have given
examples above, pages cxv seq.

It is, of course, impossible to give here all the
evidence that might be brought forward in support
of similar freedom in Trishtubh verses, and I admit
that the number of. real varieties with them is
smaller than with the Gayatris. In order to make
the evidence which I have to bring forward in sup-
port of these varieties as unassailable as possible,
I have excluded nearly every pida that occurs only
in the first, second, or third line of a strophe, and have
restricted myself, with few exceptions, and those
chiefly referring to padas that had been quoted by
other scholars in support of their own theories, to
the final pAdas of Trishtubh verses. Yet even with
this limited evidence, I think I shall be able to

establish at least three varieties of Trishtubh.
12

CXXXi PREFACE.

Preserving the same classification which I adopted
before for the Gdyatris, so as to include the im-
portant eighth syllable of the Trishtubh, which
does not properly belong to the vritta, I maintain
tHat clasa 4, ull ——, class 5..- — — =, and class
8. —Uv— must be recognized as legitimate endings
in the hymns of the Veda, and that by recognizing
them we are relieved from nearly all, if not all, the
most violent prosodial licences which Professor Kuhn
felt himself obliged to admit in his theory of Vedic
metres.
§4.uu-—-—.

The verses which fall under § 4 are so numerous
that after those of the first Mandala, mentioned
above, they need not be given here in full. They
are simply cases where the eighth syllable is not
lengthened, and they cannot be supposed to run
counter to any rule of the Pratisikhya, for the
simple reason that the Pratisdkhya never gave such
a rule as that the eighth syllable must be lengthened
if the ninth is short. Examples will be found in the
final pada of Trishtubhs: ii. 30, 6; ill. 36, 4; 53, 15;
5A tose Vea 16 32,89 370% Ted, (roe OA no cua Nee
11, 55 17,33 23,63 24,23 27,13 28,5; 55,53 57, 23
VEU 2S VM TO) 218 5 23,07 5 one Oe eee ane
O62) 5203797 2ovil. 21, 956929, °3 5 142.46, ger noomron
84, 27 (Ol Neq mmvallived 693,100, 95 14 92, 6A. x alGnmeroe
13 3°74) 3 pee

In support of § 5. -——-, the number of cases is
smaller, but it should be remembered that it might

PREFACE. CXXXill

be considerably increased if I had not restricted
myself to the final pdda of each Trishtubh, while
the first, second, and third pddas would have yielded
a much larger harvest :

Se ee
1. 89, 9. m& no madhyA ririshatayur gantoh.

1. 92, 6. supratiké saumanasiyagigah.

me

.114, 5. sarma varma khardir asmabhyam yamsat.

band

117, 2. tena nara vartir asmabhyam ydtam.

me

, 122, 1. ishudhyeva maruto rodasyoh (or rodasyoh).
i. 122, 8. asvAvato rathino mahyam strih.

i. 186, 3. ishas ka parshad arigirtah sirih.

ii. 4, 2. devandm agnir aratir girdsvah.

ii. 49, 2. prithugrayAé amindd 4yur dasyoh.

iv. 3,9. gamaryena payasd pipdya.

iv. 26, 6. divo amushmad uttardd Adaya.

v. 41,14. ud& vardhantém abhishata(h) arnah.

vi. 25, 2. Arydya viso (a)va tarir dasih.

vi. 66,11. girayo ndpa ugrd aspridhran.

vii. 8, 6. dyumad amivakdtanam rakshoha.

vii. 28, 4. ava dvité varuno mayi nah sat.

vii. 68, 1. havydni ka pratibhrité vitam nah.

vii. 71, 2. diva naktam mAdhvi trdsithdm nah.
vii. 78, r. gyotishmat&é vamam asmabhyam vakshi.
vii. 93, 7%. akkh&. mitram varunam indram vokeh,
ix. go, 4. sam hikrado maho asmabhyam vagan.

x. 11, 8. bhdgam no atra vasumantam vitat.

CXXX1V PREFACE.

I do not wish to deny that in several of these
lines it would be possible to remove the long
syllable from the ninth place by conjectural emen-
dation. Instead of 4yur in i. 89, 9, we might read.
4yu; in i. 92, 6, we might drop the augment of
agigar; in ii. 4, 2, we might admit synizesis in
aratir, and then read gira-asvah, as im i. 141, 12.
In vi. 25, 2, after eliding the a of ava, we might
read dasih. But even if, in addition to all this,
we were to admit the possible suppression of final
m in asmabhyam, mahyam, and in the accusative
singular, or the suppression of s in the nominative
singular, both of which would be extreme measures,
we should still have a number of cases which could
not be righted without even more violent remedies.
Why then should we not rather admit the occa-
sional appearance of a metrical variation which
certainly has a powerful precedent in the dispon-
deus of Gayatris? I am not now acquainted with
the last results of metrical criticism in Virgil, but,
unless some new theories now prevail, I well recol-
lect that spondaic hexameters, though small in
number, much smaller than in the Veda, were
recognized by the best scholars, and no emendations
attempted to remove them. If then in Virgil we
read, ‘Cum patribus populoque, penatibusque et
magnis dis, why not follow the authority of the
best MSS. and the tradition of the Pratisdkhyas
and admit a dispondeus at the end of a Trishtubh
rather than suspend, in order to meet this single

PREFACE, CXXXV

difficulty, some of the most fundamental rules of
prosody ?

I now proceed to give a more numerous list of
Traishtubha pddas ending in a choriambus, — oT a=
again confining myself, with few exceptions, to final
padas :

shy eye ce aa

be

. 62, 3. sam usriyAbhir vavasanta narah.

i. 103, 4. yad dha stnuh sravase ndma dadhe.

i. 121, 9. sushnam anantail pariydsi vadhaih.

i, 122, 10°, sardhastaro nardm gfirtasravah.
1.173, 8. strims kid yadi dhisha veghi ganan.

i. 186, 2. karant sushdhd vithuram na savah.

ii. 4,3. dakshAyyo yo dAsvate dama 4 (not dame 4).
ii. 19, t. oko dadhe brahmanyantas ka narah.

ii. 33, 14. midhvas tokAya tanaydya mrila.

iv. 1, 19°. suky tidho atrinan na gavam*.

iv. 25, 4. nare naryaya nritamaya nrindm.

iv. 39, 2. dadathur mitravarun’ taturim.

weeoO, 12: praty agrabhishma nritamasya nrindm.
vy. 41, 4. Agim na gagmur Asvasvatamah.

v. 41,15. smat stribhir riguhastd riguvanih.

vi. 4, 7. vayum prinanti ridhasd nritamah.

vi. 10, 5. suviryebhis “Abhi santi gandn.

* ‘Nur eine Stelle habe ich mir angemerkt, wo das Metrum 4am
verlangt.’ Kuhn, Beitrage, vol. iv. p. 180; Bollensen, Zeitschrift
der D. M. G., vol. xxii. p. 587.

CXXXVI PREFACE.

vi. 11, 4. afiganti suprayasam patika ganah.

vi. 13,1, agne vi yanti vanino na vayah.

vi. 13, 14. divo vrishtir idyo ritir ap&m.

vi. 20, 1, tasthati rayih savasé pritsu ganan.

vi. 20, 14, daddhi sino sahaso vritraturam.

vi. 29, 4. ukth4 samsanto devavatatamah.

vi. 33, 3. A pritsu darshi nrindm nritama.

vi. 33, 5. divi shyima parye goshatamah.

Vin4A, Ee gahy asushvin pra vrihaprinatah.

vi. 49, 12. stribhir na ndkam vakanasya vipah.

vi. 68, 5. vamsad rayim rayivatas ka gandn.

vi. 68, 7. pra sadyo dyumné tirate taturih.

vii. 19, 10. sakhd ka sdro ’vité ka nrindm.

vil. 62, 4. m4 mitrasya priyatamasya nrindm.

ix. 97, 26. hotdro na diviyago mandratamah (?).

x. 55, 8. siro nir yudhadhamad dasytin (2).

X. 99, 9. atkam yo asya sanitota nrindm.

x, 108, 6. brihaspatir va ubhay4 na mrilAt.

X. 169, 1. avasdya padvate rudra mrila.

It is perfectly true that this sudden change in
the rhythm of Trishtubh verses, making their ending
iambic instead of trochaic, grates on our ears. But,
I believe, that if we admit a short stop after the
seventh syllable, the intended rhythm of these verses
will become intelligible. We remarked a similar

break in the verses of hymn x. 77, where the sudden
transition to an iambic metre was used with great

PREF ACE. CXXXV11

effect, and the choriambic ending, though less
effective, is by no means offensive. It should be
remarked also, that in many, though not in all cases,
a ceesura takes place after the seventh syllable, and
this is, no doubt, a great help towards a better
delivery of these choriambic Trishtubhs.

While, however, I contend for the recognition of
these three varieties of the normal Trishtubh metre,
IT am quite willing to admit that other variations
besides these, which occur from time to time in
the Veda, form a legitimate subject of critical
discussion.

§%uYUU-.

Trishtubh verses the final pada of which ends in
uuvu-, I should generally prefer to treat as ending
in a Gagata pada, in which this ending is more
legitimate. Thus I should propose to scan :

pee em eo (eo puke he

i. 122, 11. prasastaye mahina rathavate.

ill. 20, 5. vasin rudran Adityén iha huve.

v= SS SS ae I Se

Vv. 2,1. pura pasyanti nihitam (tam) aratau.

— y ~ - ~ w
c: ~ _ ¥. ~
vi. 13, 5. vayo vrikayaraye gasuraye.

§I.u-un-.

I should propose the same medela for some final
padas of Trishtubhs apparently ending in v-v-.
We might indeed, as has been suggested, treat
these verses as single instances of that peculiar

CXXXVill PREFACE.

metre which we saw carried out in the whole of
hymn x. 77, but at the end of a verse the admis-
sion of an occasional GAgata pada is more in accord-
ance with the habit of the Vedic poets. Thus I
should scan :

v. 33, 4. vrishd samatsu dAsasya nima kit *.

v. 41, 5. raya eshe “vase dadhita dhih.

After what I have said before on the real cha-
racter of the teaching of the Pratisdkhya, I need
not show again that the fact of Uvata’s counting
ta of dadhita as the tenth syllable is of no import-
ance in determining the real nature of these hymns,
though it is of importance, as Professor Kuhn re-
marks (Beitrige, vol. i. p. 451), in showing that
Uvata considered himself at perfect liberty in
counting or not counting, for his own purposes,
the elided syllable of avase.

* oe ois egg) Soho lO oe
vi. 4,6. mapsavah pari shadima maduvah.

§6.4u--—-.
Final padas of Trishtubhs ending in u — — — are
very scarce. In vi. 1, 4,
bhadriy4m te ranayanta samdrishtau,
it would be very easy to read bhadrayém te sam-
drishtau ranayanta; and in x. 74, 2,

* Professor Kuhn has finally adopted the same scanning,
Beitrage, vol. iv. p. 184.

PREFACE. CXXX1X
dyaur na varebhih krinavanta svaih,
we may either recognize a GAgata pada, or read
vy — ~ _— — aa yl AS - ww =
dyaur na varebhih krinavanta svaih,

which would agree with the metre of hymn x. 77.

§7.--u-.

Padas ending in ——u- do not occur as final in
any Traishtubha hymn, but as many Gagata pidas
occur in the body of Traishtubha hymns, we have
to scan them as dodecasyllabic :

i. 63, 4%. tvam ha tyad indra kodih sakha.

1v. 26, 6, pardvatah sakuno mandram madam.

The adjective pavaka which frequently occurs at
the end of final and internal pddas of Trishtubh
hymns has always to be scanned pivaka. Of. iv.
51, 23 Vi 5, 23 10, 45 51, 33 Vil 3,13 93 9,13 56,125
Da Medal M's

I must reserve what I have to say about other
metres of the Veda for another opportunity, but
I cannot leave this subject without referring once
more to a metrical licence which has been strongly
advocated by Professor Kuhn and others, and by
the admission of which there is no doubt that
many difficulties might be removed, I mean the
occasional omission of a final m and s, and the
subsequent contraction of the final and initial
vowels. The arguments that have been brought
forward in support of this are very powerful.
There is the general argument that final s and m

exl PREFACE.

are liable to be dropt in other Aryan languages,
and particularly for metrical purposes. There is
the stronger argument that in some cases final s
and m in Sanskrit may or may not be omitted,
even apart from any metrical stress. In Sanskrit
we find that the demonstrative pronoun sas appears
most frequently as sa (sa dadati), and if followed
by liquid vowels, it may coalesce with them even
in later Sanskrit. Thus we see saisha for sa esha,
sendrah for sa indrah sanctioned for metrical pur-
poses even by Panini, vi. 1, 134. We might refer
also to feminines which have s in the nominative
singular after bases in 0, but drop it after bases
in i. We find in the Sanhita text, v. 7, 8, svddhitiva,
instead of svddhitih-iva in the Pada text, sanctioned
by the Pratisikhya 259; likewise ix. 61, 10, Sanhita,
bhtimy 4 dade, instead of Pada, bhtimih & dade. But
before we draw any general conclusions from such
imstances, we should consider whether they do not
admit of a grammatical instead of a metrical ex-
planation. The nominative singular of the demon-
strative pronoun was sa before it was sas; by the
side of bhimih we have a secondary form bhitimi ;
and we may conclude from svddhiti-van, i. 88, 2,
that the Vedic poets knew of a form svddhitt,
by the side of svddhitih.

As to the suppression of final m, however, we
see it admitted by the best authorities, or we see
at least alternate forms with or without m, in
tibhya, which occurs frequently instead of tt-

PREFACE. exli

bhyam*, and twice, at least, without apparently
any metrical reasont. We find asmdka instead of
asmakam (i. 173, 10), yushmd&ka instead of yushmé-
kam (vil. 59, 9-10), yagadhva instead of ydégadhvam
(vill. 2, 37) sanctioned both by the Sanhita and Pada
texts f.

If then we have such precedents, it may well
be asked why we should hesitate to adopt the
same expedient, the omission of final m and sg,
whenever the Vedic metres seem to require it.
Professor Bollensen’s remark, that Vedic verses can-
not be treated to all the licences of Latin scanning §,
is hardly a sufficient answer ; and he himself, though
under a slightly different form, would admit as
much, if not more, than has been admitted on
this point by Professors Kuhn and Roth. On @
priori grounds I should by no means feel opposed
to the admission of a possible elision of final s or
m, or even n; and my only doubt is whether it is
really necessary for the proper scanning of Vedic
metres. My own opinion has always been, that
if we admit on a larger scale what in single
words can hardly be doubted by anybody, viz. the
pronunciation of two syllables as one, we need

Seiad Opal sae e lL 42,95 Vv. k1,5; Vil. 22, 75 Yul. 51, 9;
“Ono EO ey 5 ix, 02,275 60,30; X_167, I.

fT iiesiee ouny 30, 0:

+ See Bollensen, Orient und Occident, vol. iii. p. 4593; Kuhn,
Beitriige, vol. iv. p. 199.

§ Orient und Occident, vol. iv. p. 449.

exlii PREFACE.

not fall back on the elision of final consonants in
order to arrive at a proper scanning of Vedic
metres. On this point I shall have to say a few
words in conclusion, because I shall frequently avail
myself of this licence, for the purpose of righting
apparently corrupt verses in the hymns of the
Rig-veda; and I feel bound to explain, once for
all, why I avail myself of it in preference to other
emendations which have been proposed by scholars
such as Professors Benfey, Kuhn, Roth, Bollensen,
and. others.

The merit of having first pointed out some cases
where two syllables must be treated as one, be-
longs, I believe, to Professor Bollensen in his article,
‘Zur Herstellung des Veda, published in Benfey’s
Orient und Occident, vol. ii. p. 461. He proposed,
for instance, to write hyén& instead of hiyénd,
ix. 13, 6; dhyandé instead of dhiyand, vill. 49, 5;
sdhyase instead of sdhiyase, i. 71, 4; y4né instead of
lyand, vill. 50, 5, &e. The actual alteration of these
words seems to me unnecessary; nor should we
think of resorting to such violent measures in Greek
where, as far as metrical purposes are concerned,
two vowels have not unfrequently to be treated
as one.

That iva counts in many passages as one syllable
is admitted by everybody. The only point on which
I differ is that I do not see why iva, when mono-
syllabic, should be changed to va, instead of being
pronounced quickly, or, to adopt the terminology

PREFACE. exlin

of Greek grammarians, by synizesis*, Synizesis is
well explained by Greek scholars as a quick pro-
nunciation of two vowels so that neither should be
lost, and as different thereby from synalcephe, which
means the contraction of two vowels into onef.
This synizesis is by no means restricted to iva
and a few other words, but seems to me a very
frequent expedient resorted to by the ancient
fishis.

Originally it may have arisen from the fact that
language allows in many cases alternate forms of
one or two syllables. As in Greek we have double
forms like anreyewvos and’ adyewvds, yanaxtopayos and
yraxropayos, meTnvos and wrnvos, tuKwds and Tu«Kvos ft,
and as in Latin we have the shortening or sup-
pression of vowels carried out on the largest scale §,

* Synizesis in Greek applies only to the quick pronunciation
of two vowels, if in immediate contact ; and not, if separated by
consonants. Samprasdérana might seem a more appropriate term,
but though the grammatical process designated in Sanskrit by
Samprasdrana offers some analogies, it could only by a new defi-
nition be applied to the metrical process here intended.

+ A. B. p. 835, 30. éori S€ ev rots Kowois pérpos Kal 7» Kadovpervn
cuverpdvynots i) Kal cvvitnois éyerar. “Orav yap povnévtwy émdddAndos
yerntat ) mpoopa, tére yiverat ) ouvitnors eis play ovAdaBHy, Atadéeper
dé cuvaoupijs’ 9 wev yap ypaypdrev earl Kron, 7 S€ xpdvev' Kal 7 pev
auvaroiph, ds déyerar, gaiverar, 4 d€ ov. Mehlhorn, Griechische
Grammatik, § tor. Thus in Neoprohejos we have synizesis, in
Novmrddewos syneeresis.

t Cf. Mehlhorn, Griechische Grammatik, § 57.

§ See the important chapters on ‘ Kiirzung der Vokale’ and

exliv PREFACE.

we find in Sanskrit, too, such double forms as
prithvi or prithivi, adhi and dhi, api and pi, ava
and va. The occurrence of such forms which have
nothing to do with metrical considerations, but
are perfectly legitimate from a grammatical point
of view, would encourage a tendency to treat two
syllables—and particularly two short syllables—as
one, whenever an occasion arose. There are, besides,
in the Vedic Sanskrit a number of forms where, as
we saw, long syllables have to be pronounced as
two. In some of these cases this pronunciation 1s
legitimate, i.e. it preserves an original dissyllabic
form which in course of time had become mono-
syllabic. In other cases the same process takes
place through a mistaken sense of analogy, where
we cannot prove that an original dissyllabic form
had any existence even in a prehistoric state of
language. The occurrence of a number of such
alternate forms would naturally leave a general
impression in the mind of poets that two short
syllables and one long syllable were under cer-
tain circumstances interchangeable. So consider-
able a number of words in which a long syllable
has to be pronounced as two syllables has been
collected by Professors Kuhn, Bollensen, and

‘Tilgung der Vokale’ in Corssen’s ‘Aussprache des Lateinischen ;’
and more especially his remarks on the so-called irrational vowels
in Plautus, ibid. vol. ii. p. 70.

PREFACE. exlv

others, that no doubt can remain on this subject.
Vedic poets, being allowed to change a semivowel
into a vowel, were free to say nasatya and ndsatyA,
Vill. 5, 323 pr ithivyas and prithivyah ; pitroh and
pitroh, i. 31, 4. They could separate compound
words, and pronounce ghritannah or ghrita-annah,
vu. 3, 1. They could insert a kind of shewa or
svarabhakti in words like sAmne or simne, viii. 6, 47;
dhamne or dhimne, viii. 92, 25; ardvnah and ardvnah,
ix. 63, 5. They might vary between panti and
panti, Rr tier g yAthana, and yathana, i. 39, 3; nie
dhatoh and nidhatoh, i. 41, 9; tredhd and tredha,
i. 34, 8; devah and devah (besides devdsah), i. 23, 243
rodasi and rodasi, i. 33, 9; 59, 4; 64) 9; and rodasyoh,
e399 50, 25 117, 10; Vi. 24, 33 Vilw6, & iuxXe-%4, 1

Need we wonder then if we find that, on the other
hand, they allowed themselves to pronounce prithivi
as prithivi, i 1TU1, 0 7 Vil. 34, 73 99 33 dhrishnava
as dhvishnava, V. 52,14; suvana as suvina? There
is no reason why we should change the spelling of
suvana into svdna. The metre itself tells us at
once where suvdna is to be pronounced as two or
as three syllables. Nor is it possible to believe
that those who first handed down and afterwards
wrote down the text of the Vedic hymns, should

* Professor Bollensen in some of these passages proposes to read
rodasios. In i. 96, 4, no change is necessary if we read visam.
Zeitschrift der D, M. G., vol. xxii. p. 587.

VOL. I. k

exlvi PREFACE.

have been ignorant of that freedom of pronuncia-
tion. Why, there is not one single passage in the
whole of the ninth Mandala, where, as far as I know,
suvana should not be pronounced as dissyllabie,
ie, as suvana and to suppose that the scholars
of India did not know how that superfluous syllable
should be removed, is really taking too low an
estimate of men like Vyali or Saunaka.

But if we once admit that in these cases two
syllables separated by a single consonant were pro-
nounced as one and were metrically counted as
one, we can hardly resist the evidence in favour
of a similar pronunciation. in a large number of
other words, and we shall find that by the ad-
mission of this rapid pronunciation, or of what in
Plautus we should call irrational vowels, many
verses assume at once their regular form without
the necessity of admitting the suppression of final
s, m, n, or the introduction of other prosodial
licences. To my mind the most convincing pas-
sages are those where, as in the Atyashti and
similar hymns, a poet repeats the same phrase
twice, altering only one or two words, but without
endeavouring to avoid an excess of syllables which,
to our mind, unless we resort to synizesis, would
completely destroy the uniformity of the metre.
Thus we read:

Okc 5 eat
i. 133, 6. apirushaghno ’pratita stra satvabhih,
trisaptaih stra satvabhih.
Here no ’pra must be pronounced with one ictus

PREFACE. exlvii

only, in order to get a complete agreement between
the two iambic diameters.

i. 134, 5. ugra aera 3 bhurvani,
apdm ishanta bhurvani.
As ishanta never occurs again, I suspect that the
original reading was ishananta in both lines, and
that in the second line ishananta, pronounced rapidly,
was mistaken for ishanta. Is not bhurvdni a locative,
corresponding to the datives in vane which are so
frequently used in the sense of infinitives? See note
to 1. 6, 8, page 34. Ini. 138, 3, we must read: .
shelamana urusamaa sari bhava,
vige-vage sari bhava.

In 1. 139, 11,

adhd hi tva ganitd giganad vaso,

rakshohanam tvi giganad vaso,
we might try to remove the difficulty by omitting
vaso at the end of the refrain, but this would
be against the general character of these hymns.
We want the last word vaso, if possible, at’ the
end of both lines. But, if so, we must admit two
cases of synizesis, or, if this seems too clumsy, we
must omit tva.

I shall now proceed to give a number of other
examples in which the same consonantal synizesis
seems necessary in order to make the rhythm of
the verses perceptible to our ears as it was to the

ears of the ancient /ishis.

k 2

exlvill PREFACE.

The preposition anu takes synizesis in

i. 127, 1. ghritasya vibhrashtim anu vashti sokisha.
CE xa

The preposition abhi: er

i. 91, 23. rayo bhdgam sahasivann abhi yudhya.
Here Professor Kuhn changes sahas4van into saha-
svah, which, no doubt, is a very simple and very
plausible emendation. But in altering the text of
the Veda many things have to be considered, and
in our case it might be objected that sahasvah
never occurs again as an epithet of Soma. As an
invocation sahasvah refers to no deity but Agni,
and even in its other cases it is applied to Agni
and Indra only.. However, I do not by any means
maintain that sahasvah could not be applied to
Soma, for nearly the same arguments could be
used against sahasdvan, if conjecturally put in the
place of sahasvah; I only wish to point out how
everything ought to be tried first, before we resort —
in the Veda to conjectural emendations. Therefore,
if in our passage there should be any objection
to admitting the synizesis in abhi, I should much
rather propose synizesis of sahasdvan, than change
it into sahasvah. There is synizesis in maha, e. g.
i. 133, 6. avar maha indra dAdrihi srudhi nah.
Although this verse is quoted by the Pratisikhya,
Sdtra 522, as one in which the lengthened syllable
dhi of srudhi does not occupy the tenth place, and
which therefore required special mention, the original
poet evidently thought otherwise, and lengthened

PREFACE. exlix

the syllable, being a syllable liable to be lengthened,
because it occupied the tenth place, and therefore
received a peculiar stress.

The preposition pari :

vi. 52,14. m& vo vakimsi parikakshyani vokam,

sumneshy id vo antam’, madema.
Here Professor Kuhn (Beitriige, vol. iv. p. 197) begins
the last pada with vokam, but this is impossible
unless we change the accent of vokam, though even
then the separation of the verb from m4 and the
accumulation of two verbs in the last line would
be objectionable.

Hari is pronounced as hart:

vii. 32,12. ya indro harivin na dabhanti tam ripah.

ii. 18, 5. 4 katvarimsata haribhir yuganah,

Hence I propose to scan the difficult verse 1. 167, 1,
as follows:

sahasram ta indra-ttayo nah,
sahasram isho harivo girtatamah *,
sahasram rayo mAdayadhyai,
sahasrina upa no yantu vagah.

That the final o instead of as is treated as a
short syllable we saw before, and in 1. 133, 6, we
observed that it was liable to synizesis. We see
the same in

ww vos

v. 61,16. & yagiilyaso vavrittana.

* As to the scanning of the second line see page cxxxy.

cl PREFACE.

The pragrihya i of the dual is known in the
Veda to be liable in certain cases to Sandhi. If
we extend this licence beyond the limits recognized
by the Pratisikhya, we might scan

vi. 52,14. ubhe rodasy ap&m’ napik ka manma, or
we might shorten the i before the a, and admitting

synizesis, scan:

men NY ON Ne

Tn iii. 6, 10, we must either admit Sandhi between
pra and adhvaréva, or contract the first two syl-
lables of adhvaréva.

The o and e of vocatives before vowels, when
changed into av or a(y), are liable to synizesis:

iv. 48,1. vayav 4 kandrena rathena (Anushtubh, c.)

iv.1, 2. sa bhrataram varunam agna 4, vavritsva.

The termination avah also, before vowels, seems
to count as one syllable in v. 52, 14, divo vA
dhrishnava ogasd, which would render Professor
Bollensen’s correction (Orient und Occident, vol. ii.
p- 480), dhrishntiogas’, unnecessary.

Like ava and iva, we find aya and iya, too, in
several words liable to be contracted in pronuncia-
tion; e.g. vayam, Vi. 23, 5; ayam, 1. 177, 4; lyam,
vil. 66, 87; i. 186, 11 (unless we read vo sme);
x. 129, 6. Professor Bollensen’s proposal to change
tyam to im, and ayam to 4m (Orient und Occident,
vol. il. p. 461), would only cause obscurity, without any
adequate gain, while other words would by a similar

suppression of vowels or consonants become simply

PREFACE. ch

irrecognizable. In i. 169, 6, for instance, ddha has
to_be pronounced with one ictus; in vi. 26, 7,
sadhavira is trisyllabic. In vi. 10, 1, we must
admit synizesis in adhvaré; in i. 161, 8, either in

2

udakém or in abravitana; i. 110, 9, in ribhumén:
vill. 79, 4, in divdéh; v. 4, 6, in nritama (unless we
Tead- soe one) + 1..164, 17,91n sparéh; vi. 15, 14, In
pavaka; i. 191, 6; Vil. 34, 7; 99, -3, in prithivi;
hy 20,738,101 pura; Vis-10, 1,1n prayatt; vi. 17; 7,in
brihét ; ix. 19, 6, in bhiydsam ; i. 133, 6, in mahdh;
fee 20 Oe tv Le, Vi. 75, 16,110 FVaruna > 111. 30, 21,
in vrishabha; vii. 41, 6, in vaginah; ii. 43, 2, in
sisumatih ; vi. 51, 2, in sanutér; vi. 18, 12, in sthd-
virasya, &c.

These remarks will, I hope, suffice in order to
justify the principles by which I have been guided
in my treatment of the text and in my translation
of the Rig-veda. I know I shall seem to some to
have. been too timid in retaining whatever can pos-
sibly be retained in the traditional text of these
ancient hymns, while others will look upon the
emendations which I have suggested as unpardon-
able temerity. Let everything be weighed in the
just scales of argument. Those who argue for
victory, and not for truth, can have no hearing
in our court. There is too much serious work to
be done to allow time for wrangling or abuse.
Any dictionary will supply strong words to those
who condescend to such warfare, but strong argu-

cli PREFACE.

ments require honest labour, sound judgment, and,
above all, a genuine love of truth.

The second volume, which I am now preparing for
Press, will contain the remaining hymns addressed
to the Maruts. The notes will necessarily have to
be reduced to smaller dimensions, but they must
always constitute the more important part in a
translation or, more truly, in a deciphering of
Vedic hymns.

F. MAX MULLER.

Parks Enp, Oxronrp :
March, 1869.

FIRST BOOK.

HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

VOL. I. B

2 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Manpata I, SUKTA 6.
Asu7raka I, ApuyAya 1, Varca 11-12.

1. Yufigénti bradhnam arushim /arantam pari
tasthtishah, rokante rokand divi.

2. Vuiigénti asya kAamyé hari (iti) vi-pakshasa rathe,
s6n& dhrishnti ({ti) nri-vahasa.

3. Kettim krinvén aketéve pésah maryah apesase,
sim ushat-bhih agdyathah.

w ne A
4. At 4ha svadh&m 4nu ptinah garbha-tvam 4-iriré,
dadhanah nama yagiiiyam.

1. Witson: The circumstationed (inhabitants of the three
worlds) associate with (Indra), the mighty (Sun), the inde-
structive (fire), the moving (wind), and the lights that shine
in the sky.

Benrey: Die rothe Sonne schirr’n sie an, die wandelt um
die stehenden, Strahlen strahlen am Himmel auf.

Lanetois: Placés autour du (foyer, les hommes) préparent
le char (du dieu) brillant, pur et rapide; (cependant) brillent
dans le ciel les feux (du matin).

2. Witson: They (the charioteers) harness to his car his
two desirable coursers, placed on either hand, bay-coloured,
high-spirited, chief-bearing.

Benrey: Die lieben Falben schirren sie zu beiden Seiten
des Wagens an, braune, kiihne, held-tragende.

Lanexors: A ce char sont attelés ses deux coursiers, beaux,
brillants, impétueux, rougedtres, et dignes de porter un
héros.

3. Witson: Mortals, you owe your (daily) birth (to such

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6, 3

Hymn to InpRA AND THE Marurs (THE
STORM-GODS).

1, Those who stand around him while he moves on,
harness the bright red steed ;! the lights in heaven
shine forth.?

2. They harness to the chariot on each side his
(Indra’s)' two favourite bays, the brown, the bold,
who can carry the hero.

3. Thou who createst light where there was no
light, and form, O men!! where there was no form,
hast been born together with the dawns.”

4, Thereafter’ they (the Maruts), according to their
wont,’ assumed again the form of new-born babes,’
taking their sacred name.

an Indra), who with the rays of the morning, gives sense to
the senseless, and to the formless, form.

Benrey: Licht machend—Maéanner!—das Dunkele und
kenntlich das Unkenntliche, entsprangst du mit dem Mor-
genroth.

Laneuois: O mortels, (voyez-le) mettant Vordre dans la
confusion, donnant la forme au chaos. O Indra, avec les
rayons du jour tu viens de naitre.

4, Witson: Thereafter, verily, those who bear names
invoked in holy rites, (the Maruts,) having seen the rain
about to be engendered, instigated him to resume his embryo
condition (in the clouds).

Benrey: Sodann von freien Stiicken gleich erregen wieder
Schwangerschaft die heilgen Namen tragenden.

Lanetors: A peine la formule de Voffrande a-t-elle été
prononcée, que les (Marouts), dont le nom mérite d’étre
invoqué dans les sacrifices, viennent exciter (de leur souffle)
le feu 4 peine sorti du sein (de Parani).

B2

4 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.
5, Vilt kit arugatni-bhih giha Ait indra vélhni-bhih,

Avindah usriyah anu.

6. Deva-yéntah y4th’ matim 4kkha vidit-vasum
gfrah, mahdm andshata srutam.

7. Indrena sim hi drikshase sam-gagminéh abi-
bhyusha, mandi (iti) sam4n4-varkasa.

8. Anavadyath abhidyu-bhid makhah sahasvat ar-
kati, ganath indrasya kaémyaih.

9. Atah pari-gman 4 gahi divah va rokan&t 4dhi,
sim asmin rifigate girah.

5. Witson: Associated with the conveying Maruts, the
traversers of places difficult of access, thou, Indra, hast dis-
covered the cows hidden in the cave.

Brnrey: Mit den die Festen brechenden, den Stiirmenden
fandst, Indra, du die Kiihe in der Grotte gar.

Lanetois: Avec ces (Marouts), qui brisent tout rempart et
supportent (la nue) Indra, tu vas, du sein de la caverne,
délivrer les vaches (célestes).

6. Witson: The reciters of praises praise the mighty
(troop of Maruts), who are celebrated, and conscious of the
power of bestowing wealth in like manner as they (glorify)
the counsellor (Indra).

Brnrey: Nach ihrer Einsicht verherrlichend besingen
Sanger den Schatzeherrn, den berthmten, gewaltigen.

Lanexors: Voila pourquoi ?hymne qui chante les dieux
célébre aussi le grand (dieu des vents), qui assiste (Indra) de
ses conseils, et découvre les heureux trésors.

7. Witson : May you be seen, Maruts, accompanied by the
undaunted (Indra); both rejoicing, and of equal splendour.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 5

5. Thou, O Indra, with the swift Maruts! who break
even through the stronghold,” hast found even in their
hiding-place the bright cows? (the days).

6. The pious singers! (the Maruts) have, after their
own mind,’ shouted towards the giver of wealth, the
great, the glorious (Indra).

7. Mayest thou’ (host of the Maruts) be verily seen?
coming together with Indra, the fearless: you are
both happy-making, and of equal splendour.

8. With the beloved hosts of Indra, with the blame-
less, heavenward-tending (Maruts), the sacrificer! cries
aloud.

9. From yonder, O traveller (Indra), come hither,
or down from the light of heaven;! the singers all
yearn for it;—

Berney: So lass mit Indra denn vereint, dem furchtlosen,
erblicken dich, beide erfrew’nd und glanzesgleich.

Lanetors: Avec Vintrépide Indra, (6 dieu,) on te voit ac-
courir; tous deux pleins de bonheur, tous deux également
resplendissants.

8. Wison: This rite is performed in adoration of the
powerful Indra, along with the irreproachable, heavenward-
tending, and amiable bands (of the Maruts).

Benrey: Durch Indra’s liebe Schaaren, die untadligen,
himmelstiirmenden, strahlet das Opfer machtiglich.

Lanerors: Notre sacrifice confond, dans un homage aussi
empressé, Indra et la troupe (des Marouts) bienfaisante, irré-
prochable, et brillante des feux (du matin).

9. Witson: Therefore circumambient (troop of Maruts),
come hither, whether from the region of the sky, or from the
solar sphere; for, in this rite, (the priest) fully recites your
praises.

Benrey: Von hier, oder vom Himmel komm ob dem
Atther, Umkreisender! zu dir streben die Lieder all.

6 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

10. [tah va sitim Ymahe div4h va parthivat 4dhi,

fndram mahah va ragasah.

8 SS SS ee

Lanexors: (Dieu des vents), qui parcours le monde, ‘viens
vers nous, ou de ton séjour habituel, ou de la demeure céleste
de la lumiére ; notre voix aujourd’hui t’appelle.

10. Witson: We invoke Indra,—whether he come from
this earthly region, or from the heaven above, or from the
vast firmament,—that he may give (us) wealth.

COMMENTARY.

This hymn is ascribed to Kanva, the son of Ghora. The
metre is Gayatri throughout.

Verse 1, note’. The poet begins with a somewhat abrupt
description of a sunrise. Indra is taken as the god of the
bright day, whose steed is the sun, and whose companions
the Maruts, or the storm-gods. Arusha, meaning originally
red, is used as a proper name of the horse or of the rising
sun, though it occurs more frequently as the name of the
red horses or flames of Agni, the god of fire, and also of
the morning light. In our passage, Arushé, a substantive,
meaning the red of the morning, has taken bradhna as an
adjective,—bradhna meaning, as far as can be made out,
bright in general, though, as it is especially applied to the
Soma-juice, perhaps bright-brown or yellow. Names of
colour are difficult to translate from one language into
another, for their shades vary, and withdraw themselves
from sharp definition. We shall meet with this difficulty
again and again in the Veda.

The following passages will illustrate the principal mean-
ing of arusha, and justify the translation here adopted.

Arushé as an Adjective.

Arusha is used as an adjective in the sense of red:
oe 4 nN f ! va 7 ae
vil. 97, 6. tam sagmasah arushasah Asvah brihaspatim
N ° 3 , 4
saha-vahah vahanti,—nabhah na ripdm arushém vasandh.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 7

10. Or we ask Indra for help from here, or from
heaven, above the earth, or from the great sky.
eee ee ee

Benrey: Von hier, oder vom Himmel ob der Erde begehren
Spende wir, oder, Indra! aus weiter Luft.

Lanetors: Nous invoquons aussi la libéralité d’Indra;
(qu'il nous entende), soit d’ici-bas, soit de Vair qui enveloppe
la terre, soit du vaste séjour de la lumiére.

Powerful red horses, drawing together draw him, Brihas-
pati: horses clothed in red colour like the sky.

lil. I, 4. svetém gaghandm arushém mahi-tva.

Agni, the white, when born; the red, by growth.

ili. 15, 3. krishn@su agne arushah vi bhahi.

Shine, O Agni, red among the dark ones.

iii. 31, 21. antar (iti) krishnan arushaih dhama-bhih gat.

He (Indra) went among the dark ones with his red com-
panions.

vi. 27, 7. yasya gavau arusha.

He (Indra) whose two cows are red.

vil. 75, 6. prati dyutanam arushasah dsvah kitrah adrisran
ushasam vahantah.

The red horses, the beautiful, were seen bringing to us
the bright dawn.

v. 43, 12. hiranya-varnam arusham sapema.

Let us worship the gold-coloured, the red, i. e. Brihaspati
(the fire).

i. 118, 5. pari vam asvah vapushah patangah vayah va-
hantu arushah abhike.

May the winged beautiful horses, may the red birds
bring you (the Asvins) back near to us.

iv. 43, 6. ghrina véyah arushasah pari gman.

The red birds (of the Asvins) came back by day.

v. 73, 5. pari vam arushah véyah ghrina varante 4-tapah.

The red birds shield you (the Asvins) around by day
from the heat.

8 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

i. 36, 9. vi dhtimdm agne arush4ém miyedhya sriga.

Send off, O Agni, the red smoke, thou who art worthy of
sacrificial food.

vii. 3, 3. akkha dydm arushéh dhtimah et.

The red smoke goes up to the sky.

vii. 16, 3. tt dhtiimasah arushasah divi-sprisah.

The clouds of red smoke went up touching the sky.

X. 45, 7. tyarti dhimam arusham.

He (Agni) rouses the red smoke.

i. 141, 8, dyam 4ngebhih arushébhih tyate.

He (Agni) goes to the sky with his red limbs.

ii. 2, 8. s4h idhdnéh ushdsah rdmyah anu svah na didet
arushéna bhanina.

He (Agni), lit after the lovely dawns, shone like the sky
with his red splendour.

iil. 29, 6. dsvah nd vagi arushah vdneshu 4.

Like a stallion, the red one (Agni) appears in the
wood.

iv. 58, 7. arushaéh na vagi kaéshthah bhindan.

Like a red stallion, breaking the bounds.

1, 114, 5. diva# varahdm arushém.

Him (Rudra), the boar of the sky, the red.

V. 59, 5. asvah-iva it arushdsah.

Like red horses, (O Maruts.)

v. 12, 2. ritam sapami arushdsya vrishnah.

I follow the rite of the red hero (Agni). The meaning
here assigned to vrishan will be explained hereafter, see
note toi, 85, 12.

v. 12, 6. ritaém sah pati arushdsya vrishnah.

He observes the rite of the red hero (Agni).

vi. 8, 1. prikshasya vrishnah arushdsya nt shah pra ni
vokam,

I celebrate the power of the quick red hero (Agni Vaisva-
nara),

vi. 48, 6. syavasu arushah vrisha.

In the dark (nights) the red hero (Agni).

il. 7, 5. gananti vrishnah arushdsya sévam.

They know the treasure of the red hero (of Agni).

In one passage vrishan arusha is intended for fire in the
shape of lightning.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 9

x. 89, 9. ni amitreshu vadhém indra timram vrishan
vrishanam arushdém sisthi.

Whet, O strong Indra, the heavy strong red weapon,
against the enemies.

X. 43, 9. Ut gayatdam parastih gydtishA sah4d—vi rokatdm
arushah bhantina stkih.

May the axe (the thunderbolt) appear with the light—
may the red one blaze forth, bright with splendour.

x. 1, 6. arushah gatah padé ilayah.

Agni, born red in the place of the altar.

vi. 3, 6. naktam yah im arushdéh yah diva.

He (Agni) being red by night and by day.

x. 20, 9. krishnah svetah arushdh yaémah asya bradhnah
rigrah uta sdnah.

His (Agni’s) path is black, white, red, bright, reddish,
and yellow. .

Here it is extremely difficult to keep all the colours
distinct.

Arushé is frequently applied to Soma, particularly in the
gth Mandala. There we read:

ix. 8, 6. arushah harih.

ix. 71, 7. arushah divah kavih vrisha.

ix. 74, 1. vagi arushah, .

ix. 82, 1. arush4/ vrisha harih.

ix. 89, 3. hérim arushém.

Perit, t. arushah harih. See also ix) 25, 5; 61, 21.
In ix. 72, 1, arushé seems used as a substantive in the sense
of red-horse.

Arushé as an Appellative.

Arusha is used as an appellative, and in the following
senses :

1. The one red-horse of the Sun, the two or more red-
horses of Agni.

i. 6, 1. yuhganti bradhnam arusham.

They yoke the bright red-horse (the Sun).

i. 94, 10. yat dyukthah arushé rohita rathe.

When thou (Agni) hast yoked the two red-horses and the
two ruddy horses to the chariot.

10 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

i. 146, 2. rihdnti Gdhaf arushasah asya.

His (Agni’s) red-horses lick the udder.

ii. 10, 2. sruyah agnih—hdvam me—syava ratham vaha-
tah rohita va uta arusha.

Mayest thou, Agni, hear my call, whether the two black,
or the two ruddy, or the two red-horses carry you.

Here three kinds of colours are clearly distinguished,
and an intentional difference is made ‘between réhita and
arusha,

iv. 2, 3. arusha yuganah.

Agni having yoked the two red-horses,

iv. 6, 9. tava tyé agne haritakh—rdohitasah—arushasah
vrishanah,

To thee (Agni) belong these bays, these ruddy, these red-
horses, the stallions.

Here, again, three kinds of horses are distinguished—
Harits, Réhitas, and Arushas.

vill. 34, 17. yé rigrah vata-ramhasah arushasah raghu-
syadah.

Here arushé may be the subject and the rest adjectives ;
but it is also possible to take all the words as adjectives,
referring them to ast in the next verse. The fact that rigra
likewise expresses a peculiar red colour is no objection, as
may be seen from i. 6,1; 94, 10.

vil. 16, 2. sah yogate arusha visva-bhogasa.

May he (Agni) yoke the two all-nourishing red-horses.

vil. 42, 2. yunkshva—haritah rohitah ka yé va sddman
arushah,

Yoke (O Agni) the bays, and the ruddy horses, or the
red-horses which are in thy stable.

2. The cloud, represented as the enemy of Indra, as re-
taining, like Vritra, the waters which Indra and the Maruts
wish to liberate.

i, 85, 5. utd arushdsya vi syanti dhardn,

(When you go to the battle, O Maruts), the streams of
the red enemy flow off.

v. 56, 7. uta syah vagi arushah.

This strong red-horse,—meant for the cloud, as it would
seem; but possibly, too, for one of the horses of the
Maruts.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 11

Arusha as the Proper Name of a Solar Deity.

Besides the passages in which arusha is used either as an
adjective, in the sense of red, or as an appellative, meaning
some kind of horse, there are others in which, as I pointed
out in my Essay on Comparative Mythology*, Arush4
occurs as a proper name, as the name of a solar deity, as
the bright deity of the morning (Morgenroth). My inter-
pretation of some of these passages has been contested, nor
shall I deny that in some of them a different interpretation
is possible, and that in looking for traces of Arusha, as a
Vedic deity, representing the morning or the rising sun, and
containing, as I endeavoured to show, the first germs of the
Greek name of Eros, I may have seen more indications of
the presence of that deity in the Veda than others would
feel inclined to acknowledge. Yet in going over the same
evidence again, I think that’ even verses which for a time I
felt inclined to surrender, yield a better sense if we take the
word arusha which occurs in them as a substantive, as the
name of a matutinal deity, than if we look upon it as an
adjective or a mere appellative. Jt might be said that
wherever this arusha occurs, apparently as the name of a
deity, we ought to supply Agni or Indra or Strya. This is
true to a certain extent, for the sun, or the light of the
morning, or the bright sky are no doubt the substance and
subject-matter of this deity. But the same applies to many
other names originally intended for these conceptions, but
which, nevertheless, in the course of time, became inde-
pendent names of independent deities. In our passage
i. 6, 1, yufiganti bradhném arusham, we may retain for
arusha the appellative power of steed or red-steed, but if we
could ask the poet what he meant by this red-steed, or if
we ask ourselves what we can possibly understand by it,
the answer would be, the morning sun, or the light of the
morning. In other passages, however, this meaning of red-
steed is no longer applicable, and we can only translate
Arusha by the Red, understanding by this name the deity
of the morning or of the morning sun.

* Chips from a German Workshop, 2nd ed., vol. ii. p. 137 seq.

12 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

vii. 71, 1. dpa svdsuh ushdsah ndk gihite rindkti krishnih
arushdya pantham.

The Night retires from her sister, the Dawn; the Dark one
yields the path to the Red one, i.e. the red morning.

Here Arusha shares the same half-mythological character
as Ushas, and where we should speak of dawn and morning
as mere periods of time, the Vedic poet speaks of them as
living and intelligent beings, half human, half divine, as
powers of nature capable of understanding his prayers, and
powerful enough to reward his praises. I do not think
therefore that we need hesitate to take Arusha in this
passage as a proper name of the morning, or of the morning
sun, to whom the dark goddess, the Night, yields the path
when he rises in the East.

vi. 49, 2. diva sisum séhasah sinim agnim yaghasya
ketim arushém yagadhyai.

To worship the child of Dyu, the son of strength, Agni,
the light of the sacrifice, the Red one (Arusha).

In this verse, where the name of Agni actually occurs, it
would be easier than in the preceding verse to translate
arushaé as an adjective, referring it either to Agni, the god
of fire, or to yaghdsya ketim, the light of the sacrifice.
I had myself yielded* so far to these considerations that I
gave up my former translation, and rendered this verse by
‘to worship Agni, the child of the sky, the son of strength,
the red light of the sacrificet.’ But I return to my original
translation, and I see in Arusha an independent name, in-
tended, no doubt, for Agni, as the representative of the rising
sun and, at the same time, of the sacrificial fire of the
morning, but nevertheless as having in the mind of the poet.
a personality of its own. He is the child of Dyu, originally
the offspring of heaven. He is the son of strength, origin-
ally generated by the strong rubbing of the aranis, i. e. the
wood for kindling fire. He is the light of the sacrifice,
whether as reminding man that the time for the morning
sacrifice has come, or as himself lighting the sacrifice on the
Eastern altar of the sky. He is Arusha, originally as

* Chips from a German Workshop, vol. ii. p. 139.
+ Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1867, p..204.

«

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 13

clothed in bright red colour, but gradually changed into the
representative of the morning. We see at once, if examin-
ing these various expressions, how some of them, like the
child of Dyu, are easily carried away into mythology, while
others, such as the son of strength, or the light of the
sacrifice, resist that unconscious metamorphosis. That
Arusha was infected by mythology, that it had approached
at least that point where nomina become changed into
numina, we see by the verse immediately following:

vi. 49, 3. arushdsya duhitara virdpe (iti vi-rdpe) stri-bhih
anya pipisé stirah anya.

There are two different daughters of Arusha; the one is clad
in stars, the other belongs to the sun, or is the wife of Svar.

Here Arusha is clearly a mythological being, like Agni
or Savitar or Vaisvanara; and if Day and Night are called
his daughters, he, too, can hardly have been conceived
otherwise than as endowed ‘with human attributes, as the
child of Dyu, as the father of Day and Night, and not as a
mere period of time, not as a mere cause or effect.

iv. 15, 6. tam arvantam né sdnasim arushém na divah
sisum marmrigyante divé-dive.

They trim the fire day by day, like a strong horse, like
Arusha, the child of Dyu.

Here, too, Arusha, the child of Dyu, has to be taken as
a personal character, and, if the na after arusham is right, a
distinction is clearly made between Agni, the sacrificial fire,
to whom the hymn is addressed, and Arusha, the child of
heaven, the pure and bright morning, here used as a simile
for the cleaning or trimming of the fire on the altar.

v. 47, 3. arushah su-parnah.

Arusha, the morning sun, with beautiful wings.

The feminine Arushi as an Adjective.

Arushi, like arusha, is used as an adjective, in the same
sense as arusha, i.e. red:

Un AIA 7 2 A pte beg a i

lil. 55, 11. syavi ka yat arushi ka svasarau.

As the dark and the red are sisters.

° 0 - A AN

i. 92, 1 and 2. gavah drushih and arushih gah,

The red cows of the dawn.

14 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

i. 92, 2. risantam bhanim drushih asisrayuh.

The red dawns obtained bright splendour.

Here ushasah, the dawns, occur in the same line, so that we
may take drushih either as an adjective, referring to the dawns,
or as a substantive, as a name of the dawn or of her cows.

i. 30, 21. Asve na kitre arushi.

Thou bright, red dawn, thou, like a mare.

Here, too, the vocative arushi is probably to be taken as
an adjective, particularly if we consider the next following
verse :

iv. 52, 2. dsva-iva kitra drushi mata gavam ritd-vart sakha
abhit asvinoh ushah.

The dawn, bright and red, like a mare, the mother of the
cows (days), the never-failing, she became the friend of the
Asvins.

X. 5, 5. saptd svdsrih arushih.

The seven red sisters.

The feminine Arushi as a Substantive.

If used as a substantive, drushi seems to mean the dawn.
It is likewise used as a name of the horses of Agni, Indra,
and Soma; also as a name for mare in general.

It means dawn in x. 8, 3, though the text points here so
clearly to the dawn, and the very name of dawn is mentioned
so immediately after, that this one passage seems hardly
sufficient to establish the use of drushi as a recognized
name of the dawn. Other passages, however, would like-
wise gain in perspicuity, if we took drushi by itself as a
name of the dawn, just as we had to admit in several
passages arusha by itself as a name of the morning. Cf.
WRG

Arushit means the horses of Agni, in i. 14, 12:

yukshva hi drushif rathe harita deva rohitah.

Yoke, O god (Agni), the red-horses to the chariot, the
bays, the ruddy.

i. 72, 10. pra nikih agne arushih aganan.

They knew the red-horses, Agni, coming down.

In viii. 69, 5, arushi refers to the horses of Indra, whether
as a noun or an adjective, is somewhat doubtful :

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 15

a harayah sasrigrire drushih.

The bay horses were let loose, the red-horses ; or, possibly,
thy bright red-horses were let loose.

Soma, as we saw, was frequently spoken of as arushah
harih.

In ix. 111, 2, tridhatu-bhih arushibhih seems to refer to the
same red-horses of Soma, though this is not quite clear.

The passages where d4rushi means simply a mare, without
any reference to colour, are vili. 68, 18, and vill. 55, 3.

It is curious that Arusha, which in the Veda means red,
should in its Zendic form aurusha, mean white. That in
the Veda it means red and not white is shown, for instance,
by x. 20, 9, where svetd, the name for white, is mentioned by
the side of arusha. Most likely arusha meant originally bril-
liant, and became fixed with different shades of brilliancy in
Sanskrit and Persian. Arusha presupposes a form ar-vas, and
is derived from a root ar in the sense of running or rushing:
See Chips from a German Workshop, vol. ii. pp. 135, 137+

Having thus explained the different meanings of arusha
and 4rushi in the Rig-veda, I feel it incumbent, at least for
once, to explain the reasons why I differ from the classifi-
cation of Vedic passages as given in the Dictionary pub-
lished by Messrs. Boehtlingk and Roth. Here, too, the
passages in which arusha is used as an adjective are very
properly separated from those in which it appears as a
substantive. To begin with the first, it is said that ‘arusha
means ruddy, the colour of Agni and his horses; he (Agni)
himself appears as a red-horse” In support of this, the
following passages are quoted:

ili. 1, 4. dvardhayan su-bhégam sapté yahvih svetam
gaghaném arushém mahi-tva, sisum né4 gatam abhi aruh
asvah. Here, however, it is only said that Agni was born
brilliant-white*, and grew red, that the horses came to him
as they come to a new-born foal. Agni himself is not called
a red-horse.

iii. 7, 5. Here, again, vrishnah arushasya is no doubt

* See v.1, 4. svetdh vag! gayate dgre Shnim. x. I, 6. arushah géitdh
padé {/ayah.

16 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

meant for Agni. But vwrishan by itself does not mean
horse, though it is added to different names of horses to
qualify them as male horses; cf. vii. 69, 1. 4 vam rathah
vrisha-bhih yatu dsvaik, may your chariot come near with
powerful horses, i.e. with stallions. See note to i. 85, 12.
We are therefore not justified in translating arusha vrishan
by red-horse, but only by, the red male, or the red hero.

In iii. 31, 3, agnih gage guhva régamanah mahah putran
arushasya pra-yaékshe, I do not venture to say who is
meant by the mahdf putran arushasya, whether Adityas or
Maruts, but hardly the sons of Agni, as Agni himself is
mentioned as only born. But, even if it were so, the father
of these sons (putra) could hardly be intended here for
a horse.

iv. 6,9. tava tyé agne haritah ghrita-snah rohitasah rigu-
afikah su-dfikah, arushasah vrishanah rigu-mushkah. Here,
so far from Agni being represented as a red-horse, his
different horses, the Harits or bays, the Rohitas or ruddy,
and the arushasaf vrishanah, the red stallions, are distinctly
mentioned. Here vrishan may be translated by stallion,
instead of simply by male, because arushaé is here a sub-
stantive, the name of a horse.

v. I, 5. ganishta hi gényah agre ahnam hitah hitéshu
arushah vaneshu. Here arushah is simply an adjective, red,
referring to Agni who is understood throughout the hymn
to be the object of praise. He is said to be kind to those
who are kind to him, and to be red in the woods, i.e.
brilliant in the wood which he consumes; cf. iii. 29, 6
Nothing is said about his equine nature.

In v. 12, 2 and 6, vi. 48, 6, we have again simply
arusha vrishan, which does not mean the red-horse, but
the red male, the red hero, i.e. Agni.

In vi. 49, 2, divah sisum sdhasah sintim agnim yaghdsya
kettém arushém ydgadhyai, there is no trace of Agni being
conceived as a horse. He is called the child of the sky or
of Dyu, the son of strength (who is produced by strong
rubbing of wood), the light or the beacon of the sacrifice,
and lastly Arusha, which, for reasons stated above, I take to
be used here as a name.

Next follow the passages in which, according to Professor

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 17

Roth, arusha is an adjective, is said to be applied to the
horses, cows, and other teams of the gods, particularly of
the dawn, the Asvins, and Brihaspati.

i, 118, 5. pari vam dsyah vépushah patangah, vdyah
vahantu arushaf abhike. Here we find the vayah arushah
of the Asvins, which it is better to translate by red birds, as
immediately before the winged horses are mentioned, In
fact, whenever arusha is applied to the vehicle of the Asvins,
it is to be understood of these red birds, iv. 43,.0.

In i. 92, 1 and 2 (not 20), drusht occurs three times,
referring twice to the cows of the dawn, once to the dawn
herself. )

In iv. 15, 6, tam arvantam na sanasim arushdm na divah
sisum marmrigydnte divé-dive, arushé does not refer to
the horse or any other animal of Agni. The verse speaks
of a horse by way of comparison only, and says that the
sacrificers clean or trim Agni, the fire, as people clean a
horse. We cannot join arusham in the next pada with
arvantam in the preceding pada, for the second na would
then be without any construction. The construction is
certainly not easy, but I think it is safer to translate:
they trim him (Agni), day by day, as they clean a strong
horse, as they clean Arusha, the child of Dyu. In fact, as
far as I know, arushaé is never used as the name of the
one single horse belonging to Agni, but always of two or
more.

In iii. 31, 21, antdr (iti) krishnan arushaih dhama-bhih
gat, dhama-bhif is said to mean flames of lightning. But
dhaman in the Rig-veda does not mean flames, and it seems
better to translate, with thy red companions, scil. the
Maruts.

That arusha in one or two passages means the red cloud,
is true. But in x. 43, 9, arushé refers to the thunderbolt
mentioned in the same verse; and in i. 114, 5, everything
refers to Rudra, and not to a red cloud, in the proper
sense of the word.

Further on, where the meanings attributable to arush? in
the Veda are collected, it is said that 4rushi means a red
mare, also the teams of Agni and Ushas. Now, here,
surely, a distinction should have been made between those

VOL. I. C

18 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

passages in which drushi means a real horse, and those
where it expresses the imaginary steeds of Agni. The
former, it should be observed, occur in one Mandala only,
and in places of somewhat doubtful authority, in vii.
55, 3, a Walakhilya hymn, and in viii. 68, 18, a dana-
stuti or panegyric. Besides, no passage is given where
drusht means the horses of the dawn, and I doubt whether
such a passage exists, while the verse where drushi is really
used for the horses of Indra, is not mentioned at all.
Lastly, two passages are set apart where drushi is supposed
to mean flames. Now, it may be perfectly true that the
red-horses of Agni are meant for flames, just as the red-
horses of Indra may be the rays of the sun. But, in that
case, the red-horses of Agni should always have been thus
translated, or rather interpreted, and not in one passage
only. In ix. 111, 2, drushi is said to mean flames, but no
further light is thrown upon that very difficult passage.

Verse 1, note”. A similar expression occurs iii. 61, 5,
where it is said of Ushas, the dawn, that she lighted the
lights in the sky, pra rokana ruruke ranvé-sandrik.

Verse 2, note’. Although no name is given, the pronoun
asya clearly refers to Indra, for it is he to whom the two
bays belong. The next verse, therefore, must likewise be
taken as addressed to Indra, and not to the sun or the
morning-red, spoken of as a horse m the first verse.

Verse 3, note’. The vocative maryah, which I have trans-
lated by O men, had evidently become a mere exclamation
at a very early time. Even in our passage it is clear that
the poet does not address any men in particular, for he
addresses Indra, nor is marya used in the general sense of
men. It means males, or male offspring. It sounds more
like some kind of asseveration or oath, like the Latin
mehercle, or like the English O ye powers, and it is there-
fore quoted as a nipata or particle in the Vagasan. Pratis.
ii. 16. It certainly cannot be taken as addressed to the

Maruts, though the Maruts are the subject of the next
verse.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 19

Verse 3, note *. Ushadbhif, an instrumental plural which
attracted the attention of the author of the Varttika to Pan.
vil. 4, 48. It occurs but once, but the regular form,
ushobhih, does not occur at all in the Rig-veda. The same
grammarian mentions mas, month, as changing the final s
of its base into d before bhis. This, too, is confirmed by
Ry. il. 24, 5, where madbhif occurs. Two other words,
svavas, offering good protection, and svatavas, of independent
strength, mentioned together as liable to the same change,
do not occur with bhi# in the Rig-veda, but the forms
svavadbhik and svatavadbhiz probably occurred in some
other Vedic writings. Svatavadbhyah has been pointed out
by Professor Aufrecht in the Vagasan. Sanhita xxiv. 16,
and svatavobhyad in Satap. Br. ii. 5,1,14. That the nom.
svavan, which is always trisyllabic, is not to be divided into
sva-van, as proposed by Sakalya, but into su-avan, is implied
by Varttika to Pan. viii. 4, 48, and distinctly stated in the
Siddhanta-Kaumudi. That the final n of the nom. su-avan
disappeared before semi-vowels is confirmed by the Sakala-
pratisdkhya, Sdtra 287; see also Vagasan. Pratis. iii. Sitra 135
(Weber, Ind. Stud. vol. iv. p. 206). On the proper division
of su-avas, see Aufrecht, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgen-
landischen Gesellschaft, vol. xiii. p. 499.

Verse 4, note *. At must here take vytha and be pro-
nounced as an iambus. This is exceptional with at, but
there are at least two other passages where the same
pronunciation is necessary. i. 148, 4. At rokate vane a
vi-bha-va, though in the line immediately following it is
monosyllabic. Also in v. 7, 10. at agne aprinatah.

Verse 4, note *. Svadha, literally one’s own place, after-
wards, one’s own nature. It was a great triumph for the
science of Comparative Philology that, long before the
existence of such a word as svadha in Sanskrit was known,
it should have been postulated by Professor Benfey in his
Griechische Wurzel-lexicon, published in 1839, and in the
appendix of 1842. Svadha was known, it is true, in the
ordinary Sanskrit, but there it only occurred as an excla-
mation used on presenting an oblation to the manes. It

@e2

20 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

was also explained to mean food offered to deceased ances-
tors, or to be the name of a personification of Maya or
worldly illusion, or of a nymph. But Professor Benfey,
with great ingenuity, postulated for Sanskrit a noun svadha,
as corresponding to the Greek é@os and the German site,
O. H.G. sit-u, Gothic sid-u. The noun svadha has since
been discovered in the Veda, where it occurs very fre-
quently; and its true meaning in many passages where
native tradition had entirely misunderstood it, has really
been restored by means of its etymological identification
with the Greek €@o0¢ or 700s. See Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. i.
p- 134, vol. xii. p. 158.

The expressions 4nu svadhém and svadham anu are of
frequent occurrence. They mean, according to the nature
or character of the persons spoken of, and may be translated
by as usual, or according to a person’s wont. Thus in our
passage we may translate, The Maruts are born again, i. e.
as soon as Indra appeared with the dawn, according to their
wont; they are always born as soon as Indra appears, for
such is their nature.

i, 165, 5- indra svadham dnu hi nah babhttha.

For, Indra, according to thy wont, thou art ours.

vill. 20, 7. svadham d4nu sriyam nérah—vahante.

According to their wont, the men (the Maruts) carry
splendour.

vill. 88, 5. anu svadhdm vavakshitha.

Thou hast grown (Indra) according to thy nature.

iv. 33, 6. anu svadham ribhavah gagmuh etam.

According to their nature, the Ribhus went to her, scil.
the cow; or, according to this their nature, they came.

iv. 52, 6. Usha anu svadham ava.

Dawn, help! as thou art wont.

i. 33, 11. anu svadham aksharan dpah asya.

As usual, or according to his nature, i.e. his strength, the
waters flowed.

i. 88, 6. Asam Anu svadham.

According to the nature of these libations.

vii, 56, 13. énu svadhém ayudhaih yakkhamandh.

According to their nature, stretching forth with their
weapons.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 21

ill, 51, 11. yah te anu svadh4m dsat suté ni yakkha
tanvam.

Direct thy body to that libation which is according to thy
nature, or better, according to thy taste.

In all these passages svadhé may be rendered by manner,
habit, usage, and 4nu svadham would seem to correspond to
the Greek é& @ovs. Yet the history of these words in
Sanskrit and Greek has not been exactly the same. First
of all we observe in Greek a division between @os and
700s, and whereas the former comes very near in meaning
to the Sanskrit svadha, the latter shows in Homer a much
more primitive and material sense. It means in Homer,
not a person’s own nature, but the own place, for instance,
of animals, the haunts of horses, lions, fish ; in Hesiod, also
of men. Svadha in the Veda does not occur in that sense,
although etymologically it might take the meaning of one’s
own place: cf. dha-man, familia, etc. Whether in Greek
700s, from meaning lair, haunt, home, came, like vouds and
vomos, to mean habit, manner, character, which would be
quite possible, or whether 7@o0s in that meaning represents
a second start from the same point, which in Sanskrit was
fixed in svadha, is impossible to determine. In Sanskrit
svadha clearly shows the meaning of one’s own nature,
power, disposition. It does not mean power or nature in
general, but always the power of some one, the peculiarity,
the individuality of a person. This will appear from the
following passages :

ii. 3, 8. tisrah devih svadhaya barhih a idam akkhidram
pantu.

May the three goddesses protect by their power the
sacred pile unbroken.

iv. 13, 5. kaya yati svadhaya.

By what inherent power does he (the Sun) move on?

iv. 26, 4. akakraya svadhaya.

By a power which requires no chariot, i.e. by himself
without a chariot.

The same expression occurs again x. 27, 19:

In some places ‘mad,’ to delight, joined with svadhaya,
seems to mean to revel in his strength, proud of his

might,

22 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

v. 32, 4. svadhaya madantam.

Vritra who delights in his strength.

vii. 47, 3. svadhaya médantih.

The waters who delight in their strength. See x. 124, 8.

In other passages, however, as we shall see, the same
phrase (and this is rather unusual) requires to be taken in
a different sense, so as to mean to rejoice in food.

i. 164, 38. svadhaya gribhitan.

Held or grasped by his own strength.

ili. 17, 5. svadhdya ka sambhuh.

He who blesses by his own strength.

iii. 35, 10. indra piba svadhaya hit sutasya agnéh va pahi
gihvaya yagatra.

Indra drink of the libation by thyself (by thy own power),
or with the tongue of Agni, O worshipful.

To drink with the tongue of Agni is a bold but not
unusual expression. v. 51, 2. agnéh pibata gihvaya.

X. 15, 3. yé svadhaya sutasya bhaganta pitvah.

Those who by themselves share in the offered draught.

i. 165, 6. kva sya vah marutah svadha asit yt mam ékam
sam-adhatta ahi-hatye.

Where was that custom of yours, O Maruts, that ye should
have joined me who stand alone in the fight with Ahi?

vii. 8, 3. kaya nah agne vi vasah su-vriktim kam tm (iti)
svadham rinavah sasyémanah,

In what character dost thou light up our altar, and what
character dost thou assume when thou art praised ?

iv. 58, 4. vendt ékam svadhaya nih tatakshuh.

They (the gods) made one out of the sun, by their own
power.

iv. 45, 6. visvan anu svadhaya ketathah pathah.

You (Asvins) look after all the paths by your own
strength.

i. 64, 4. sdkam gaghire svadhaya.

They (the Maruts) were born together according to their
nature; very much like anu svadham, i. 6, 4. One can
hardly render it here by ‘they were born by their own
strength,’ or ‘by spontaneous generation,’

In other passages, however,svadhaya, meaning originally by
its own power, or nature, comes to mean, by itself, sponte sud.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 23

vil. 78, 4. @ asthat rdtham svadhdya yugyamanam.

She, the dawn, mounted the chariot which was harnessed
by itself, by its own power, without requiring the assistance
of people to put the horses to.

X. 129, 2. anit avatdm svadhaya tat ékam.

That only One breathed breathlessly, by its own strength,
i.e. by itself.

In the same sense svadhabhih is used in several passages :

1, 113, 13. amrita karati svadhabhih.

The immortal Dawn moves along by her own strength,
i.e. by herself.

vill. 10, 6. yat va svadhabhif adhi-tishthathah ratham.

Or whether ye mount your chariot by your own strength,
ye Asvins.

1, 164, 30. givah mritdésya karati svadhabhih emery ale
martyena sa-yonih.

The living moves by the powers of the dead, the immortal
is the eeouiee of the mortal.

ill. 26, 8. vdrshishtham rétnam akrita svadhabhih.

He (Agni) made the best jewel by his own powers, i.e.
by himself.

v. 60, 4. varah-iva it raivatasah hiranyaih abhi svadhabhih
tanvah pipisre.

Like rich suitors, they (the Maruts) by their own strength,
i.e. themselves, adorn their bodies with gold ornaments.

There are doubtful passages in which the meaning of
svadhabhih, too, is doubtful. Thus, i. 180, 6. In vi. 2, 8,
svadha looks like an adverb, instead of svadhaya, and would
then refer to périgm4. The same applies to vii. 32, 6.

But svadha means also food, lit. one’s own portion, the
sacrificial offering due to each god, and lastly, food in
general,

i. 108, 12. yat indragni (fti) vit-ita siryasya madhye divah
svadhaya madayethe (iti).

Whether you, Indra and Agni, delight in your food at
the rising of the sun or at midday.

X. 15, 12. tvam agne itah gata-vedah avat havyani su-
rabhini kritvi, pra adah pitri-bhyah svadhaya té akshan addhi
tvam deva pra-yata havimshi. 13. yé ka tha pitarah yé ka na
iha yan ka vidma yan tun (iti) ka na pra-vidma, tvam vettha

24 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

yati té gita-vedah svadhabhih yagiidm su-kritam gushasva.
14. yé agni-dagdhah yé dnagni-dagdhah madhye divah sva-
dhaya mAaddyante, tébhif sva-ra¢ dsu-nitim etdm yatha-va-
sim tanvam kalpayasva.

12. Thou, O Agni Gatavedas, hast carried, when implored,
the offerings which thou hast rendered sweet: thou hast given
them to the fathers, they fed on their share. Eat thou, O
god, the proffered oblations. 13. Our fathers who are here,
and those who are not here, our fathers whom we know and
those whom we do not know, thou knowest how many they
are, O Gatavedas, accept the well-made sacrifice with the
sacrificial portions. 14. They who, whether burnt by fire
or not burnt by fire, rejoice in their offering in the midst
of heaven, give to them, O king, that life, and thy (their)
own body, according to thy will.

ili. 4, 7. sapta prikshasah svadhaya madanti.

The seven horses delight in their food.

x. 14, 7. ubha ragana svadhaya madanta.

The two kings delighting in their food.

ix. 113, 10. yatra kama ni-kamah ka, yétra bradhnadsya
vishtapam, svadha ka yatra triptiz ka taétra mam amritam
kridhi.

Where wishes and desires are, where the cup of the bright
Soma is, where there is food and rejoicing, there make me
immortal.

i, 154, 4. yasya tri pirna mddhuna padani dkshiyamand
svadhaya madanti.

He (Vishnu) whose three places, full of sweet, imperish-
able, delight or abound in food.

Vv. 34, 1. svadha dmita.

His unlimited portion or offering.

iil. 35, 7. dhenth svadhdm pipaya.

The cow yields her food, her portion, her milk.

1. 168, 9. at it svadham ishirdm péri apasyan.

Thereafter (the Maruts) saw the vigorous food.

i. 176, 2. anu svadha yém upyate.

After whom, or for whom, his food is scattered.

In the tenth book svadha is used very much as it oceurs

in the later Sanskrit, as the name of a peculiar sacrificial
rite.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 25

X. 14, 3. yan ka devah vavridhth yé ka devan svaha anyé
svadhaya anyé madanti.

Those whom the gods cherish, and those who cherish the
gods, the one delight in Svaha, the others in Svadha; or, in
praise and food.

Verse 4, note *. The expression garbha-tvém 4-triré is
matched by that of iil. 60, 3. saudhanvandsah amrita-tvam
4 frire, the Saudhanvanas (the Ribhus) obtained immor-
tality. The idea that the Maruts assumed the form of a
garbha, lit. of an embryo or a new-born child, is only
meant to express that the storms burst forth from the womb
of the sky as soon as Indra arises to do battle against the
demon of darkness. As assisting Indra in this battle, the
Maruts, whose name retained for a long time its purely ap-
pellative meaning of storms, attained their rank as deities by
the side of Indra, or, as the poet expresses it, they assumed
their sacred name. This seems to be the whole meaning of
the later legend that the Maruts, like the Ribhus, were not
originally gods, but became deified for their works.

Vahni.

Verse 5, note’. Sdyana explains vahnibhih in the sense of
MartidbhiA, and he tells the oft-repeated story how the cows
were carried off by the Panis from the world of the gods,
and thrown into darkness, and how Indra with the Maruts
conquered them_and brought them back. Everybody seems
to have accepted this explanation of Sayana, and I myself
do not venture to depart from it. Yet it should be stated
that the use of vaéhni as a name of the Maruts is by no
means well established. Vahni is in fact a most difficult
word in the Veda. In later Sanskrit it means fire, and 1s
quoted also as a name of Agni, the god of fire, but we do
not learn why a word which etymologically means carrier,
from vah, to carry, should have assumed the meaning of fire.
It may be that vah, which in Sanskrit, Greek, and Latin
means chiefly to carry, expressed originally the idea of
moving about (the German be-wegen), in which case vah-ni,
fire, would have been formed with the same purpose as

26 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

ag-ni, ig-nis, fire, from Sk. ay, dy-@, ag-o. But in Sanskrit
Agni is so constantly represented as the carrier of the
sacrificial oblation, that something may be said in favour
of the Indian scholastic interpreters who take vahni, as
applied to Agni, in the sense of carrier. However that
may be, it admits of no doubt that vdhni, in the Veda also,
is distinctly applied to the bright fire or light. In some.
passages it looks very much like a proper name of Agni,
in his various characters of terrestrial and celestial light.
It is used for the sacrificial fire :

v. 50, 4. yatra vahnih abhi-hitah.

Where the sacrificial fire is placed.

It is applied to Agni:

Vil. 7, 5. asadi vritéh vahnih a-gaganvan agnih brahma.

The chosen light came nigh, and sat down, Agni, the priest.

Here Agni is, as usual, represented as a priest, chosen
like a priest, for the performance of the sacrifice. But, for
that very reason, vaéhni may here have the meaning of priest,
which, as we shall see, it has in many places, and the trans-
lation would then be more natural: He, the chosen minister,
came near and sat down, Agni, the priest.

Vill. 23, 3. vahnif vindate vasu.

Agni finds wealth (for those who offer sacrifices @).

More frequently vahni is applied to the celestial Agni, or
other solar deities, where it is difficult to translate it in
English except by an adjective :

lil, 5, 1. dpa dvara tamasah véhnih avar (fty avah).

Agni opened the two doors of darkness.,

i, 160, 3. saa vahnih putrah pitrdhk pavitra-van punati
dhirah bhtivanani maydya.

That light, the son of the two parents, full of brightness,
the wise, brightens the world by his power.

Agni is even called vahni-tama (iv. 1, 4), which hardly
means more than the brightest.

ii. 17, 4. At rddasi (iti) gyétishd vahnih a atanot.

Then the luminous (Indra) stretched out or filled heaven
and earth with his light.

ii. 38, 1. vit dm (iti) syak devah savita—vahnih asthat.

The bright Savitar, the luminous, arose.

Besides this meaning of light or fire, however, there are

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 27

clearly two other meanings of véhni which must be admitted
in the Veda, first that of a carrier, vehicle, and, it may be,
horse; secondly that of minister or priest.

Vi. 57, 3- agah anydsya vahnayah hart (iti) anydsya s4m-
bhrita.

The bearers of the one (Pishan) are goats, the bays are
yoked for the other (Indra).

1.14, 6. ghrita-prishthah manah-ytigah yé tva vahanti
vahnayah.

The horses with shining backs, obedient to thy will, which
carry thee (Agni).

vill. 3, 23. yasmai anyé dasa prati dhiram vahanti vahnayah,

A horse against whom other ten horses carry a weight ;
i.e. it requires ten horses to carry the weight which this
one horse carries. (See x. 11, 7. vahamanah Asvaih.)

ii. 37, 3. médyantu te vahnayah yébhih tyase.

May thy horses be fat on which thou goest.

ii. 24, 13. utd asishthah anu srinvanti vahnayah.

The very quick horses (of Brahmamaspati) listen. These
may be the flames, but they are conceived as carriers or
horses.

i. 44, 13. srudhi srut-karna vahni-bhih.

Agni, who hast ears to hear, hear, on thy horses. Unless
véhni-bhif is joined with the: words that follow, devath
sayava-bhih.

ili. 6, 2. vakyantam te vahnayah sapta-gihvah*.

May thy seven-tongued horses be called. Here vahnayah
is clearly meant for the flames of Agni, yet I doubt whether
we should be justified in dropping the simile, as the plural
of vaéhni is nowhere used in the bald sense of flames.

In one passage véhni is used as a feminine, or at all
events applied to a feminine subject:

vill. 94, 1. yukta vahnif rathanam.

She is yoked as the drawer of the chariots.

The passages in which véhni is applied to Soma in the
gth and roth Mandalas throw little light on the subject.
fixie 0 m2 01 05830, 2 504, 195 89, 15 X. 101; 16.)

Instead of visdm vispatih, lord of men (vil. 7, 4), we find

* Cf. i. 58, 7. saptd guhvan.

28 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

ix. 108, 10. visim vahnih na vispatid. One feels inclined to
translate here véhnih by leader, but it is more likely that
vabni is here again the common name of Soma, and that it
is inserted between visam na vispatiz, which is meant to
form one phrase.

In ix. 97, 34, tisréh vakah irayati pra vahnih, we may take
vahni as the common appellation of Soma. But it may also
mean minister or priest, as in the passages which we have
now to examine. Cf. x. 11, 6.

For besides these passages in which vahni clearly means
vector, carrier, drawer, horse, there is a large class of verses
in which it can only be translated by minister, i.e. officiating
minister, and,‘as it would seem, chiefly singer or reciter.

The verb vah was used in Sanskrit in the sense of carry-
ing out (ud-vah, ausfiihren), or performing a rite, particularly
as applied to the reciting of hymns. Hence such compounds
as ukthd-vahas or stéma-vahas, offermg hymns of praise.
Thus we read;

v. 79, 4. abhi yé tva vibha-vari stémaih grindnti
vahnayah.

The ministers who praise thee, splendid Dawn, with
hymns.

i. 48, 11. yé tva grinanti vahnayah.

The ministers who praise thee.

vii. 75, 5. ushah ukkhati vahni-bhih grinana.

The dawn lights up, praised by the ministers.

vi. 39, I. mandrasya kavéh divydsya vadhneh.

Of the sweet poet, of the heavenly priest... .

vii, 82, 4. yuvam it yut-si pritandsu vahnayak yuvam
kshémasya pra-savé mitéa-ghavah isind vasvah ubhayasya
karavah indravaruna su-hava havamahe.

We, as ministers, invoke you only in fights and battles ;
we, as supplicants, (invoke) you for the granting of treasure ;
we, as poets, (invoke) you, the lords of twofold wealth, you,
Indra and Varuna, who listen to our call.

Vi. 32, 3. Sah vahni-bhih rikva-bhih géshu sdsvat mitaghu-
bhif puru-kritva gigaya.

He (Indra) was victorious often among the cows, always
with celebrating and suppliant ministers.

I have placed these two passages together because they

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 29

seem to me to illustrate each other, and to show that
although in the second passage the celebrating and sup-
pliant ministers may be intended for the Maruts, yet no
argument could be drawn from this verse in favour of vahni
by itself meaning the Maruts. See also viii. 6, 2; 12, 153
een qa 2s

iv. 21, 6. héta yak nak mahan sam-varaneshu vahnih.

The Hotar who is our great priest in the sanctuaries.

1,128, 4. vahnih vedhah dgayata.

Because the wise priest (Agni) was born.

The same name which in these passages is applied to
Agni, is in others, and, as it will be seen, in the same
sense, applied to Indra.

ll. 21, 2. tuvi-graye vahnaye.

To the strong-voiced priest or leader.

The fact that vahni is followed in several passages by
ukthaiz would seem to show that the office of the vahni
was chiefly that of recitation or of addressing prayers to
the gods.

lil, 20, I. agnim ushdsam asvina dadhi-krém vi-ushéishu
havate vahnif ukthath.

The priest at the break of day calls with his hymns Agni,
Ushas, the Asvins, and Dadhikra.

i, 184, 1. ta vam adyé tai aparém huvema ukkhantydm
ushasi vahniz ukthaih.

Let us invoke the two Asvins to-day and to-morrow, the
priest with his hymns is there when the dawn appears.

In a similar sense, it would seem, as véhnif ukthaih, the
Vedic poets frequently use the words vahnih asd. This asa is
the instrumental singular of 4s, mouth, and it is used in other
phrases also of the mouth as the instrument of praise.

vi. 32, I. vagrine sém-tamdni vakdmsi 4sa sthavirdya
taksham.

I have shaped with my mouth blessed words to the
wielder of the thunderbolt, the strong Indra.

X. 115, 3. asa véhnim na sokisha vi-rapsinam.

He who sings with his flame as the poet with his
mouth. See also i. 38, 14. mimihi slékam asyé, make a
song in thy mouth.

Thus we find vahnihf 4s4 in the same place in the sixth

30 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

and seventh Mandalas (vi. 16, 93 vii. 16, 9), in the phrase
vahnih 4s4 viddh-tarah, applied to Agni in the sense of the
priest wise with his mouth, or taking vaéhnih asa as it were
one word, the wise poet.

i. 129, 5. vahnih asa, vahnih nah akkha,

Indra, as a priest by his lips, as a priest coming towards us.

From the parallelism of this passage it would seem that
Professor Roth concluded the meaning of asd* to be near,
or coram.

i. 76, 4. praga-vata vakasd vahnih asa a ka huvé ni ka
satsi iha devaih.

With words in which my people join, I, the poet, invoke,
and thou (Agni) sittest down with the gods.

vi. 11, 2. pavakéya guhva vahnih 4s.

Thou, a poet with a bright tongue, O Agni!

The question now arises in what sense vahni is used when
applied without further definition to certain deities. Most
deities in the Veda are represented as driving or driven, and
many as poets or priests. When the Asvins are called vahni,
vill. 8, 123 Vil. 73, 4, it may mean riders. But when the
Visve Devas are so called, i. 3, 9, or the Ribhus, the exact

* As, mouth, the Latin os, ors, has been derived from a root as, to breathe,
preserved in the Sanskrit as-u, spirit, asu-ra, endowed with spirit, living, the
living god. Though I agree with Curtius in admitting a primitive root as, to
breathe, from which as-u, breath, must have sprung, I have always hesitated
about the derivation of 4s and Asya, mouth, from the same root. I do not
think, however, that the lengthening of the vowel in 4s is so great a difficulty
as has been supposed (Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. xvii. p.145). Several roots lengthen
their vowel a, when used as substantives without derivative suffixes. In some
cases this lengthening is restricted to the Anga base, as in anadvah; in others
to the Anga and Pada base, as in visvavat, visvavadbhih, &c.; in others again
it pervades the whole declension, as in turdsha¢: (see Sanskrit Grammar,
§§ 210, 208, 175.) Among ordinary words vak offers a clear instance of a
lengthened vowel. In the Veda we find ritishtham, vi. 14, 4, and ritishtham
(Samhita), i. 64,15. We find vah in apsu-vah (Sam. Ved.), indra-vab, havya-vah.
Sah at the end of compounds, such as nvi-sah, pritana-sah, bhtri-sah, satra-sah,
vibha-sah, sad4-sah, varies between a long and short 4: (see Regnier, Etude
sur lidiome du Védas, p. 111.) At all events no instance has yet been pointed
out in Sanskrit, showing the same contraction which we should have to admit
if, as has been proposed, we derived 4s from ay-as, or from an-as. From an
we have in the Veda and, mouth or face, i. 52, 15. From as, to breathe, the
Latin omen, originally os-men, a whisper, might likewise be derived.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 31

meaning is more doubtful. The Maruts are certainly riders,
and we can even prove that they were supposed to sit on
horseback and to have the bridle through.the horse’s nostrils
(v. 61,2). But if in our verse i. 6, 5, we translate vahni as
an epithet, rider, and not only as an epithet, but as a name of
the Maruts, we cannot support our translation by independent
evidence, but must rely partly on the authority of Sayana,
partly on the general tenour of the text before us, where the
Maruts are mentioned in the preceding verse, and, if I am
right, in the verse following also. On the other hand, if
vahni can thus be used as a name of the Maruts, there is at
least one other passage which would gain in clearness by
the admission of that meaning, viz.

x. 138, 1. tava tyé indra sakhyéshu véhnayah—vi adar-
diruh valam.

In thy friendship, Indra, these Maruts tore asunder the
cloud.

Verse 5, note *. I have translated vili by stronghold,
though it is only an adjective meaning firm. Dr. Oscar Meyer,
in his very able essay Questiones Homeric, specimen
prius, Bonnz, 1867, has tried to show that this vili is the
original form of ”"IA:os, and he has brought some further
evidence to show that the siege and conquest of Troy, as I
pointed out in my Lectures on the Science of Language,
vol. ii. p. 470, was originally described in language borrowed
from the siege and conquest of the dark night by the powers
of light, or from the destruction of the cloud by the weapons
of Indra. It ought to be considered, however, that vi/i in
the Veda has not dwindled down as yet to a mere name,
and that therefore it may have originally retained its purely
appellative power in Greek as well as in Sanskrit, and from
meaning a stronghold in general, have come to mean the
stronghold of Troy.

Verse 5, note *. The bright cows are here the cows of
the morning, the dawns, or the days themselves, which are
represented as rescued at the end of each night by the
power of Indra, or similar solar gods. Indra’s companions
in that daily rescue are the Maruts, the storms, or the

32 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

breezes of the morning, the same companions who act even
a more prominent part in the battle of Indra against the
dark clouds; two battles often mixed up together.

Verse 6, note 1. The reasons why I take girah as a mas-
culine in the sense of singer or praiser, may be seen in a
note to i, 37, 10.

Verse 6, note *. yatha matim, lit. according to their mind,
according to their heart’s desire. Cf. ii. 24, 13.

Verse 7, note’. The sudden transition from the plural
to the singular is strange, but the host of the Maruts is
frequently spoken of in the singular, and nothing else can
here be intended. It may be true, as Professor Benfey
suggests, that the verses here put together stood originally
in a different order, or that they were taken from different
sources. Yet though the Sama-veda would seem to sanction
a small alteration in the order of the verses, the alteration
of verses 7, 4, 5, a8 following each other, would not help us
much. The Atharva-veda sanctions no change in the order
of these verses.

The transition to the dual at the end of the verse is
likewise abrupt, not more so, however, than we are prepared
for in the Veda. The suggestion of the Nirukta (iv. 12)
that these duals might be taken as instrumentals of the
singular, is of no real value.

Verse 7, note *. Drikshase, a very valuable form, a second
person singular conjunctive of the First Aorist Atmanepada,
the termination ‘sase’ corresponding to Greek oy, as the
conjunctive takes the personal terminations of the present
in both languages. Similar forms, viz. prikshase, x. 22, a
mamsase, x. 27, 10; Ath, Veda vii. 20, 2—6, and possibly
vivakshase, x. 21, 1-8, 24, I-3, 25, I-11, will have to be
considered hereafter. (Nirukta, ed. Roth, p. 30, Notes.)

Verse 8, note +. Arkati, which I have here translated by
he cries aloud, means literally, he celebrates. I do not
know of any passage where arkati, when used, as here,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 33

without an object, means to shine, as Professor Benfey
translates it. The real difficulty, however, lies in makhd,
which Sayana explains by sacrifice, and which I have
ventured to translate by priest or sacrificer. Makha, as an
adjective, means, as far as we can judge, strong or vigorous,
and is applied to various deities, such as ‘Pishan i. 1 Bone
Savitar vi. 71, 1, Soma xi. 20, 7, Indra iii. oA ezeathe
Maruts i. 64, 11; vi. 66, 9. By itself, makhé is never
used as the name of any deity, and it cannot therefore, as
Professor Roth proposes, be used in our passage as a name
of Indra, or be referred to Indra as a significant adjective.
In i. 119, 3, makha is applied to men or warriors, but it
does not follow that makhé by itself means warrior, though
it may be connected with the Greek mayos in ciupmayos.
See Curtius, Grundziige, p. 293; Grassmann, in Kuhn’s
Zeitschrift, vol. xvi. p. 164.

There are two passages where makha refers to an enemy
Ointhes rods jix. 101,13 5.x. 17-1, 2.

Among the remaining passages there is one where makha
is used in parallelism with vahni, x. 11, 6. vivakti vaéhnih,
su-apasyate makhah. Here I propose to translate, The poet
speaks out, the priest works well. The same meaning seems
to me applicable likewise to the phrase makhasya davane,
to the offering of the priest.

i. 134, 1. 4 yahi davdne, vayo (iti), makhdsya davane.

Come, Vayu, to the offering, to the offering of the priest.

vill. 7, 27. 4 nah makhasya davane—dévasah tipa gantana.

Come, gods, to the offering of our priest.

Professor Roth proposes to render makha in these passages
by ‘attestation of joy, celebration, praise,’ and he takes
davane, as I have done, as a dative of davan, a nomen
actionis, meaning, the giving. There are some passages
where one feels inclined to admit a noun davana, and to
take davane as a locative sing.

vi. 71, 2. devdsya vaydm savitih savimani

sréshthe syama vasunah ka davane.

May we be in the favour of the god Savitar, and in the
best award of his treasure.

In ii. 11, 1, and ii. 11, 12, the locative would likewise
be preferable; but there is a decided majority of passages

VO Lisette D

34 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

in which davdne occurs and where it is to be taken as a
dative *, nor is there any other instance in the Veda of a
nomen actionis being formed by vana. It is better, there-
fore, in vi. 71, 2, to refer sréshthe to savimani, and to make
allowance in the other passages for the idiomatic use of such
phrases as davane véstindm or rayah davane.

The termination vane explains, as has been shown by
Professor Benfey, Greek infinitives such as Oobvat, i.e.
Soevat or dofeva: = Sanskrit da-véne. The termination mane
in d4-mane, for the purpose of giving, explains, as the same
scholar has proved, the ancient infinitives in Greek, such
as dd-mevat. It may be added that the regular infinitives
in Greek, ending in evat, as AeAoww-évar, are likewise
matched by Vedic forms such as ix. 61, 30. dhirv-ane, or
vi. 61, 13. vibhv-ane. In the termination ev, which stands
for ev, like es for ect, we have, on the contrary, not a
dative, but a locative of an abstract noun in an, both cases,
as we see from their juxta-position in vi. 71, 2, being equally
applicable to express the relation which we are accustomed
to call infinitive.

Verses 9 and 10, note’. Although the names for earth,
sky, and heaven vary in different parts of the Veda, yet the
expression diva rokanam occurs so frequently that we can
hardly take it in this place in a sense different from its
ordinary meaning. Professor Benfey thinks that rokana
may here mean ether, and he translates ‘come from heaven
above the ether ;” and in the next verse, ‘come from heaven
above the earth.” At first, every. reader would feel inclined
to take the two phrases, divah va rokanat ddhi, and divah
va parthivat adhi, as parallel; yet I believe they are not
quite so.

The following passages will show that the two words
rokanam divéh belong together, and that they signify the
light of heaven, or the bright place of heaven.

vill. 98, 3. agakkhah rokanam divah.

* Rv. i. 61, 10; 122, 55 134, 2; 139, 6; ii. 1, 10; iv. 29, 8; 32, 93 V. 59,
1; 43 05, 35 vill. 25, 20; 45, 10; (92, 26); 46, 25; 27; 63, 5; 69, 173 70,
12; 1X. 93,45 X. 32,53 44,73 50, 7.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 35

Thou (Indra) wentest to the light of heaven.

1,155, 3. adhi rokané divah,

In the light of heaven.

iii. 6, 8. urati va yé antérikshe—divah va yé rokané,

In the wide sky, or in the light of heaven.

vill. 82, 4. upamé rokané divah.

In the highest light of heaven.

ix. 86, 27. tritlye prishthé adhi rokané divah.

On the third ridge, in the light of heaven. See also i.
105, 53 Vill. 69, 3.

The very phrase which we find in our verse, only with it
instead of va, occurs again, i. 49, 13 vill. 8, 7; and the
same sense must probably be assigned to viii. 1, 18, adha
gmah adha va divah brihatéh rokanat adhi.

Either from the earth, or from the light of the great
heaven, increase, O: Indra!

Rokana also occurs in the plural :

1, 146, I. visva divah rokana.

All the bright regions of heaven.

Sayana: ‘All the bright palaces of the gods.’ See ni. 12, 9.

The same word rokana, and in the same sense, is also
joined with strya and naka.

Thus, i. 14, 9. stiryasya rokanat visvan devan—hota iha
vakshati.

May the Hotar bring the Visve Devas hither from the
light of the sun, or from the bright realm of the sun.

ili. 22, 3. yah rokané parastat stiryasya.

The waters which are above, in the bright realm of the
sun, and those which are below.

i. 19, 6. yé nakasya ddhi rokané, divi devasah asate.

They who in the light of the firmament, in heaven, are
enthroned as gods.

Here divi, in heaven, seems to be the same as the light
of the firmament, nakasya rokané.

Thus rokané occurs also frequently by itself, when it
clearly has the meaning of heaven.

It is said of the dawn, i. 49, 4; of the sun, 1. 50, 43 and
of Indra, i. 44, 4.

visvam 4 bhati rokaném, they light up the whole sky.

We also read of three rokanas, where, though it is difficult

D 2

36 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

to say what is really meant, we must translate, the three
skies. The cosmography of the Veda is, as I said before,
somewhat vague and varying. There is, of course, the
natural division of the world into heaven and earth (dyu and
bhimi), and the threefold division into earth, sky, and heaven,
where sky is meant for the region intermediate between
heaven and earth (prithivi, antdriksha, dyti). There is also
a fourfold division, for instance,
vill. 97, 5. yat va 4si rokané divah

samudraésya ddhi vishéapi,

yat parthive sadane vritrahan-tama,

yat antarikshe 4 gahi.

Whether thou, O greatest killer of Vritra, art in the light
of heaven, or in the basin of the sea, or in the place of the
earth, or in the sky, come hither!

v. 52, 7. yé vavridhanta parthivah yé urati antarikshe 4,
vrigane va nadinam sadha-sthe va maha divah.

The Maruts who grew, being on the earth, those who are
in the wide sky, or in the compass of the rivers, or in the
abode of the great heaven.

But very soon these three or more regions are each
spoken of as threefold. Thus,

i. 102, 8. tisrahk bhimih trini rokana.

The three earths, the three skies.

ii. 27, 9. tri rokana divyé dharayanta.

The Adityas support the three heavenly skies.

v. 69, 1. tr? rokan& varuna trin uté dydn trini mitra
dharayathah ragamsi.

Mitra and Varuna, you support the three lights, and the
three heavens, and the three skies.

Here there seems some confusion, which Sayana’s com-
mentary makes even worse confounded. What can rokand
mean as distinct from dy and ragas? The fourth verse of
the same hymn throws no light on the subject, and I should
feel inclined to take divya-parthivasya as one word, though
even then the cosmic division here adopted is by no means
clear. However, there is a still more complicated division
alluded to in iv. 53, 5:

trif antariksham savita mahi-tvand tri régamsi pari-bhtih
trini rokana, tisraéh divah prithivth tisrah invati,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 6. 37

Tere we have the sky thrice, three welkins, three lights,
three heavens, three earths,

A careful consideration of all these passages will show, I
think, that in our passage we must take divah vA rokanat
adhi in its usual sense, and that we cannot separate the
two words.

In the next verse, on the contrary, it seems equally clear
that diva and parthivat must be separated. At all events
there is no passage in the Rig-veda where parthiva is joined
as an adjective with dyi. Parthiva as an adjective is fre-
quently joined with ragas, never with dyti. See i. 81, 5; 90,
73 vil. 88, 5; ix. 72, 8: in the plural, i. 154, 1; v. 81, 33
Vi. 31, 23 49, 3.

Parthivani also occurs -by itself, when it means the earth,
as opposed to the sky and heaven.

X. 32, 2. viindra ydsi divyani rokana vi parthivani raégasa.

Indra thou goest in the sky between the heavenly lights
and the earthly.

vill. 94, 9. a yé visva parthivani paprathan rokana divah.

The Maruts who stretched out all the earthly hghts, and
the lights of heaven.

vi. 61, 11. 4-paprushi parthivani urd ragah antariksham.

Sarasvati filling the earthly places, the wide welkin, the
sky. This is a doubtful passage.

Lastly, parthivani by itself seems to signify earth, sky,
and heaven, if those are the three regions which Vishnu
measured with his three steps; or east, the zenith, and
west, if these were intended as the three steps of that
deity. For we read:

i. 155, 4. yah parthivani tri-bhif it vigama-bhih urt kra-
mish/éa.

He (Vishnu) who strode wide with his three strides across
the regions of the earth.

These two concluding verses might also be taken as
containing the actual invocation of the sacrificer, which is
mentioned in verse 8. In that case the full stop at the
end of verse 8 should be removed.

38 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawnpata I, Stxta 19.

AsHraka I, ApuyAya 1, VARGA 36-387.

1. Pr&ti tym kéram adhvarém go-pithaya pra
hiyase, martt-bhih agne 4 gahi.

2. Nahi devéh nd. martyah mahah tava kratum
paréh, martit-bhii agne 4 gahi.

3. Yé mahah ragasah vidtth visve devdsah adrihah,
martit-bhih agne & gahi.

4. Yé uerdh arkém anrikih anddhrishtasah dgasa,
martt-bhid agne 4 gahi.

1. Witson: Earnestly art thou invoked to this perfect rite,
to drink the Soma juice: come, Agni, with the Maruts.

Brnrry: Zu diesem schénen Opfer wirst du gerufen, zum
Trank der Milch !—Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni! komm!

Lanetots: Le sacrifice est préparé avec soin; nous t’appe-
lons & venir gotter des nos libations: Agni, viens avec les
Marouts.

2. Witson: No god nor man has power over a rite (dedi-
cated) to thee, who art mighty: come, Agni, with the
Maruts.

Brenrey: Denn nicht ein Gott, kein Sterblicher ragt uber
dein, des Grossen, Macht — Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni!
komm !

Lanexois: Aucun dieu, aucun mortel n’est assez fort pour

lutter contre un étre aussi grand que toi: Agni, viens avec
les Marouts.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 19. 39

Hymn to Aenr (THE Gop or Fire) AND THE
Maruts (tHE STorM-cops).

1. Thou art called forth to this fair sacrifice for a
draught of milk ;' with the Maruts come hither, O
Agni!

2. No god indeed, no mortal, is beyond the might!
of thee, the mighty one; with the Maruts come
hither, O Agni!

3. They who know of the great sky, the Visve
Devas’ without guile;* with those Maruts’ come
hither, O Agni!

4, The wild ones who sing their song,’ unconquer-
able by force; with the Maruts come hither, O
Agni!

3. Witson: Who all are divine, and devoid of malignity,
and who know (how to cause the descent) of great waters:
come, Agni, with the Maruts.

Benrry: Die guten Gétter, welche all bestehen in dem
weiten Raum—Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni! komm!

Lanenois: Tous ces dieux bienfaiteurs (des hommes) con-
naissent ce vaste monde (ot régne la lumiére): Agni, viens
avec les Marouts.

4. Wutson: Who are fierce, and send down rain, and
are unsurpassed in strength: come, Agni, with the Ma-
ruts.

Benrey: Die schrecklich-unbesiegbaren, die miachtiglich
Licht angefacht—Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni! komm!

Lanetors: Menacants, doués d’une force invincible, ils
peuvent obscurcir la lumiére du soleil: Agni, viens avec les

Marouts.

40 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

5. Yé subhrah ghord-varpasah su-kshatrasah risa-
dasah, martit-bhih agne 4 gahi.

6. Yé ndkasya ddhi rokané divi devadsah adsate,
martit-bhih agne 4 gahi.

7. Yé inkhdyanti pérvatan tirdh samudrdm aria-
vam, martit-bhid agne & gahi.

8. A yé tanvanti rasmi-bhih tiréh samudrdm égasa,
martit-bhih agne & gahi.

9. Abhi tvé pirvd-pitaye srig4mi somyém mddhu,
martt-bhih agne 4 gahi.

5. Witson: Who are brilliant, of terrific forms, who are
possessors of great wealth, and are devourers of the malevo-
lent: come, Agni, with the Maruts.

Benrry: Die glanzend-grau’ngestaltigen, hochherrschend-
feindvernichtenden —Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni! komm!

Lane.ois: Resplendissants, revétus d’une forme terrible, ils
peuvent donner les richesses, comme ils peuvent aussi détruire
leurs ennemis: Agni, viens avec les Marouts.

6. Witson: Who are divinities abiding in the radiant
heaven above the sun: come, Agni, with the Maruts.

Benrey : Die Gétter die im Himmel sind ob dem Lichtkreis
des Gottersitz’s—Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni! komm!

Lanexors: Sous la voute brillante du ciel, ces dieux s’élévent
et vont s’asseoir: Agni, viens avec les Marouts.

7. Witson: Who scatter the clouds, and agitate the sea
(with waves): come, Agni, with the Maruts.

Bunrey: Welche uber das wogende Meer hinjagen die Wol-
kenschaar—Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni! komm!

MANDALA I, SUKTA 19. 41

5. They who are brilliant, of awful shape, powerful,
and devourers of foes ; with the Maruts come hither,
O Agni!

6. They who in heaven are enthroned as gods, in
the light of the firmament ;! with the Maruts come
hither, O Agni!

7. They who toss the clouds! across the surging
sea ;* with the Maruts come hither, O Agni!

8. They who shoot with their darts across the
sea with might; with the Maruts come hither, O
Agni !

9. I pour out to thee for the early draught the
sweet (juice) of Soma; with the Maruts come hither,

O Agni!

Lanewois: Ils soulévent et poussent les montagnes (de
nuages) au-dessus de labime des mers: Agni, viens avec
les Marouts.

8. Witson: Who spread (through the firmament), along
with the rays (of the sun), and, with their strength, agitate
the ocean: come, Agni, with the Maruts.

Benrey: Die mit Blitzen schleuderen machtig tiber das
Meer hinaus—Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni! komm!

Lanetors: Ils étendent avec force les rayons @ travers
VOcéan (céleste): Agni, viens avec les Marouts.

9. Witson: I pour out the sweet Soma juice for thy
drinking, (as) of old: come, Agni, with the Maruts.

Benrey: Ich giesse zu dem ersten Trank fir dich des
Soma Honig aus—Mit diesen Marut’s, Agni! komm!

Lanators: A toi cette premiére libation ; je t’offre la douce
boisson du soma: Agni, viens avec les Marouts.

42 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

COMMENTARY.

This hymn is ascribed to Medhatithi, of the family of
Kanva. ‘The metre is Gayatri throughout.

Verse 1, note’. Gopitha is explained by Yaska and
Sayana as drinking of Soma. I have kept to the literal
signification of the word, a draught of milk. In the last
verse of our hymn the libation offered to Agni and the
Maruts is said to consist of Soma, but Soma was commonly
mixed with milk. The other meaning assigned to gopitha,
protection, would give the sense: ‘Thou art called for the
sake of protection.” But pitha has clearly the sense of
drinking in soma-pitha, Rv. i. 51, 7, and must therefore be
taken in the same sense in gopitha.

Verse 2, note’. The Sanskrit krétu expresses power both
of body and mind.

Verse 3, note . The sky or welkin (ragas) is the proper

abode of the Maruts, and ‘ they who know of’ means simply
‘they who dwell’ in the great sky. The Vedic poets dis-
tinguish commonly between the three worlds, the earth,
prithivi, f£, or parthiva, n.; the sky, régas;. and the
heaven, dy: see i. 6,9, note’. The phrase mahah raga-
sah occurs i. 6, 10; 168, 6, &c. Sayana takes rdgas for
water or rain: see on this my article in Kuhn’s Zeitschrift,
vol. xi. p. 28. The identification of régas with «Bos
(Leo Meyer, in Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. vi. p. 19) must remain
doubtful until stronger evidence has been brought forward
in support of a Greek @ representing a Sanskrit g, even
in the middle of a word. See my article in Kuhn’s Zeit-
schrift, vol. xv. p. 215; Curtius, Grundaziige, p. 421.

Verse 3, note *. The appellation Visve dev4h, all gods
together, or, more properly, host-gods, is often applied to
the Maruts; cf. i. 23, 8; 10. Benfey connects this line with
the preceding verse, considering Visve devah, it seems, in-
appropriate as an epithet of the Maruts.

Verse 3, note *. On adrih, without guile or deceit,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 19. 43

without hatred, see Kuhn’s excellent article, Zeitschrift
fur die Vergleichende Sprachforschung, vol. i. pp. 179, 193.
Adrth is applied to the Maruts again in vill. 46, 4, though
in connection with other gods. It is applied to the Visve
Devas, Rv. i. 3, 93 ix. 102, 5: the Adityas, Rv. viii. 19, 34;
67, 13: the Rudras, Ry. ix. 73, 7: to Heaven and Earth,
Myvi 4t, 20-2 50,115 iv. 56,9; vi. 66, 18: to Mitra
and Varuna, Rv. v. 68, 4: to Agni, Rv. vi. 15, 73 viii. 44,
10, The form adhruk occurs in the sixth Mandala only.

Verse 4, note’. Sdayana explains arké by water. Hence
Wilson: ‘Who are fierce and send down rain.’ But arké
has only received this meaning of water in the artificial
system of interpretation first started by the authors of the
Brahmazas, who had lost all knowledge of the natural sense
of the ancient hymns. The passages in which arka is
explained as water in the Brahmanas are quoted by Sayana,
but they require no refutation. On the singing of the
Maruts see note to i. 38, 15. The perfect in the Veda,
like the perfect in Homer, has frequently to be rendered in
English by the present.

Verse 6, note '. Naka must be translated by firmament,
as there is no other word in English besides heaven, and
this is wanted to render dyi. Like the Jewish firmament,
the Indian naka, too, is adorned with stars; cf. i. 68, Io.
pipésa ndkam stribhid. Dyu, heaven, is supposed to be
above the ragas, sky or welkin. Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xii.
pe 728.

Sayana : ‘ In the radiant heaven above the sun.’ See note *

Font) 6.0.05 )2134.

Verse 7, note’. That parvata (mountain) is used in the
sense of cloud, without any further explanation, is clear
from many passages :

i. 57, 6. tvém tém indra pérvatam mahdm urtim vagrena
vagrin parva-sah kakartitha.

Thou, Indra, hast cut this great broad cloud to pieces
with thy lightning. Cf. i. 85, Io.

We actually find two similes mixed up together, such

44 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

as v. 32, 2. tidhah pérvatasya, the udder of the cloud. In
the Edda, too, the rocks, said to have been fashioned out
of Ymir’s bones, are supposed to be intended for clouds.
In Old Norse klakkr means both cloud and rock; nay, the
English word cloud itself has been identified with the
Anglo-Saxon clid, rock. See Justi, Orient und Occident,
VOL mb p 102.

Verse 7, note. Whether the surging sea is to be taken for
the sea or for the air, depends on the view which we take of
the earliest cosmography of theVedic Rishis. Sayana explains:
‘They who make the clouds go, and stir the watery sea.’
Wilson remarks that the influence of the winds upon the sea,
alluded to in this and the following verse, indicates more
familiarity with the ocean than we should have expected from
the traditional inland position of the early Hindus, and it has
therefore been supposed that, even in passages like our own,
samudra was meant for the sky, the waters above the firma-
ment. But although there are passages in the Rig-veda where
samudra may be taken to mean the welkin, this word shows
in by far the larger number of passages the clear meaning
of ocean. There is one famous passage, vil. 95, 2, which
proves that the Vedic poets, who were supposed to have
known the upper courses only of the rivers of the Penjab,
had followed the greatest and most sacred of their rivers,
the Sarasvati, as far as the Indian ocean. It is well known
that, as early as the composition of the laws of the Manavas,
and possibly as early as the composition of the Stitras on
which these metrical laws are based, the river Sarasvatt had
changed its course, and that the place where that river
disappeared under ground was called Vinasana, the loss.
This Vinasana forms, according to the laws of the Manavas,
the western frontier of Madhyadesa, the eastern frontier
being formed by the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna.
Madhyadesa is a section of Arydvarta, the abode of the
Aryas in the widest sense. AryAvarta shares with Madhya-
desa the same frontiers in the north and the south, viz. the
Himalaya and Vindhya mountains, but it extends beyond
Madhyadesa to the west and east as far as the western
and eastern seas. A section of Madhyadesa, again, is the

MANDALA I, SUKTA 19. 45

country described as that of the Brahmarshis, which com-
prises only Kurukshetra, the countries of the Matsyas,
Pankalas (Kanyakubga, according to Kullika), and Sérasenas
(Mathura, according to Kulltika). The most sacred spot
of all, however, is that section of the Brahmarshi country
which les between the rivers Drishadvatt and Sarasvati,
and which in the laws of the Manavas is called Brahmavarta.
I have not found any mention of the Vinasana of the Sara-
svati in any of those works which the author of the laws of
the Manavas may be supposed to have consulted. Madhya-
desa is indeed mentioned in one of the Parisishtas (MS. 510,
Wilson) as a kind of model country, but it is there described
as lying east of Dasdrna*, west of Kampilyat, north of
Pariyatra t, and south of the Himavat, or again, in a more
general way, as the Duab of the Ganga and Yamuna §.

It is very curious that while in the later Sanskrit lite-
rature the disappearance of the Sarasvati in the desert is a
fact familiar to every writer, no mention of it should occur
during the whole of the Vedic period, and it is still more
curious that in one of the hymns of the Rig-veda we should
have a distinct statement that the Sarasvati fell into the sea:

Vii. 95, I-2. pra kshdédasa dhayasa sasre esha sarasvatt
dhartinam 4yasi ptih, pra-babadhana rathya-iva yati visvah
apéh mahina sindhuf anya. éka aketat sdrasvati nadinam
sikih yati giri-bhyah & samudrat, rayéh kétanti bhivanasya
bhireA ghritém péyah duduhe nahushaya.

1. With her fertilizing stream this Sarasvati comes forth—
(she is to us) a stronghold, an iron gate. Moving along as
on a chariot, this river surpasses in greatness all other waters.
2. Alone among all rivers Sarasvati listened, she who goes

* See Wilson’s Vishnu-purana, ed. Hall, pp. 154, 155, 159, 160.

+ See Wilson’s Vishnu-purana, ed. Hall, p. 161.

alsesppat23 sah 7

§ Prag dasarnat pratyak kampilyad udak pariyatrad, dakshinena himavatah.
Gangayamunayor antaram eke madhyadesam ity akakshate. Medhatithi says
that Madhyadesa, the middle country, was not called so because it was in the
middle of the earth, but because it was neither too high nor too low, Albiruny,
too, remarks that Madhyadesa was between the sea and the northern mountains,
between the hot and the cold countries, equally distant from the eastern and
western frontiers. See Reinaud, Mémoire sur l’Inde, p. 46.

46 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

pure from the mountains as far as the sea, She who knows
of the manifold wealth of the world, has poured out to man
her fat milk.

Here we see samudra used clearly in the sense of sea, the
Indian sea, and we have at the same time a new indication
of the distance which separates the Vedic age from that of
the later Sanskrit literature. Though it may not be possible
to determine by geological evidence the time of the changes
which modified the southern area of the Penjab and caused
the Sarasvati to disappear in the desert, still the fact remains
that the loss of the Sarasvati is later than the Vedic age, and
that at that time the waters of the Sarasvati reached the
sea. Professor Wilson had observed long ago in reference
to the rivers of that part of India, that there have been, no
doubt, considerable changes here, both in the nomenclature
and in the courses of the rivers, and this remark has been
fully confirmed by later observations. I believe it can be
proved that in the Vedic age the Sarasvati was a river as
large as the Sutlej, that it was the last of the rivers of the
Penjab, and therefore the iron gate, or the real frontier
against the rest of India. At present the Sarasvati is so
small a river that the epithets applied to the Sarasvati in
the Veda have become quite inapplicable to it. The Vedic
Rishis, though acquainted with numerous rivers, including
the Indus and Ganges, call the Sarasvati the mother of
rivers (vil. 36, 6. sdrasvati saptdthi sindhu-mata), the
strongest of rivers (vi. 61, 13. apdsdm apdh-tama), and in our
passage, Vil. 95, 2, we have, as far as I can judge, conclusive
evidence that the old Sarasvatt reached in its course the
Indian sea, either by itself, or united with the Indus.

But this passage, though important as showing the appli-
cation of samudra, i.e. confluvies, to the Indian sea, and
proving the acquaintance of the Vedic Rishis with the
southern coast of India, is by no means the only one in
which samudré must be translated by sea. Thus we read,
VIL 40.2%

yah apah divyah utd va srévanti khanitrimah utd va yah
svayam-gah, samudré-arthah yah stikayah pavakah tah Spah
devih ihé mam avantu.

The waters which are from heaven, or those which flow

MANDALA I, SUKTA 19. 47

after being dug, or those which spring up by themselves,
the bright, pure waters that tend to the sea, may those
divine waters protect me here !

1. 71, 7. agnim visvah abhi prikshah sakante samudrém
na sravatah sapta yahvih.

All kinds of food go to Agni, as the seven rivers go to
the sea.

Cf. i. 190, 7. samudrém né sravatah rédha-kakrah.

v. 78, 8. yatha vatah yétha vanam yaétha samudrah égati.

As the wind moves, as the forest moves, as the sea moves
(or the sky).

In hymn x. 58, the same expression occurs which we have
in our hymn, and samudrém arnavém there as here admits
but of one explanation, the surging sea.

Samudra in many passages of the Rig-veda has to be
taken as an adjective, in the sense of watery or flowing:

vi. 58, 3. yas te ptishan navah antah samudré hiranyéyih
antarikshe xaranti.

Thy golden ships, O Pishan, which move within the
watery sky.

vil. 70, 2. yah vam samudran saritah piparti.

He who carries you across the watery rivers.

i. 161, 14. at-bhif yati varunah samudraih,

Moms moves in the flowing waters.

In both these passages samudra, as an adjective, does
not conform to the gender of the noun. See Bollensen,
Orient und Occident, vol. ii. p. 467.

ii. 16, 3. n& samudraih parvataid indra te rathah (na
pari-bhvé).

Thy chariot, O Indra, is not to be overcome by the
watery clouds.

48 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawpata I, SOxtTa 37.
AsHraKka I, ApHyAya 8, VARGA 12-14.

1. Krilim val sérdhah m&rutam anarvanam rathe-
stbham, kénvah abhi pra gayata.

2. Yé prishatibhih rishti-bhih sikdém vasibhih afigi-
bhih, d4gayanta svd-bhanavah.

3. Ihd-iva srinve ésham kash hasteshu yat vadan,
ni yaman hitrém rifigate.

4. Prd vah sdrdhiya ghrishvaye tveshé-dyumnaya
sushmine, devdéttam bradhma gayata.

1. Witson: Celebrate, Kafiwas, the aggregate strength of
the Maruts, sportive, without horses, but shining in their
car.

Benrry: Kanviden, auf! begriisst mit Sang, die muntre
Heerschaar der Marut’s, die rasch’ste, wagenglanzende.

Lanetois: Enfants de Canwa, célébrez la puissance des
Marouts que transporte un char brillant, (puissance) rapide
et inattaquable dont vous ressentez les effets.

2. Witson: Who, borne by spotted deer, were born self-
radiant, with weapons, war-cries, and decorations.

Brenrry: Die mit Hirschen und Speeren gleich mit
Donnern und mit Blitzen auch—selbststrahlende—geboren
sind.

Lanetois: Ils viennent de naitre, brillants de leur propre
éclat. (Voyez-vous) leurs armes, leurs parures, leur char tratné
par les daims? (entendez-vous) leurs clameurs ?

eT Ng lpm Nip — WN Fa) ae Me ape! ee ee) Oe ne ee) ae ee, Nae,

GRADUATE UNIVERSITY

MANDALA I, SUKTA 37. 49

Hymn to THE Marvuts (THE SrorMm-cops).

1. Sing forth, O Kanvas, to the sportive host of
your Maruts, brilliant on their chariots, and un-
scathed,'—

2. They who were born together, self-luminous,
with the spotted deer (the clouds),! the spears, the
daggers, the glittering ornaments.’

3. I hear their’ whips, almost close by, as they
crack them in their hands; they gain splendour? on
their way.’

4. Sing forth your god-given prayer to the eXx-
ultant’? host of your Maruts, the furiously vigorous,”
the powerful.

3. Witson: I hear the cracking of the whips in their
hands, wonderfully inspiring (courage) in-the fight.

Benrey: Schier hier erschallt der Peitsche Knall, wenn
sie in ihrer Hand erklingt; leuchtend fahr’n sie im Sturm
herab.

Lanators: Ecoutez, c’est le bruit du fouet qu ils tiennent
dans leurs mains; c’est le bruit qui, dans le combat, anime
le courage.

4. Witson: Address the god-given prayer to those who
are your strength, the destroyers of foes, the powerful, pos-
sessed of brilliant reputation.

Benrey: Singt eurer Schaar, der wihlenden, der strahlen-
reichen, kraftigen ein gotterfilletes Gebet'!

Lanetots: A cette troupe (divine), qui détruit vos ennemis,
noble, forte et glorieuse, offrez la part d’hymnes et de sacrifices
que lui donnent les Dévas.

VOR: , E

50 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

5. Prd samsa géshu éghnyam kril4m yat sdrdhah
marutam, gambhe résasya vavridhe.

6. Kah vah varshishthah & narah divah ka gmah
ka dhitayah, yat sim dntam na dhtinuthda.

7. Ni vah yamaya manushah dadhré ugraya man-
ydve, gihita parvatah girth.

8. Yésh4m dgmeshu prithivi gugurvan-iva vispatih,
bhiy& yameshu régate.

9, Sthirdm hi ginam esham vayah matuh nih-etave,
yat sim dnu dvitd sdévah.

5. Witson: Praise the sportive and resistless might of the
Maruts, who were born amongst kine, and whose strength
has been nourished by (the enjoyment of) the milk.

Benrey: Preist hoch die muntre Marutschaar die unbe-
siegbar in den Kuh’n, im Schlund des Safts wuchs sie heran.

Lanetois: Loue done cette puissance des Marouts, invul-
nérable et rapide, qui régne au milieu des vaches (célestes),
et ouvre avec force (leurs mamelles pour en faire couler) le
lait.

6. Witson: Which is chief leader among you, agitators of
heaven and earth, who shake all around, like the top (of a
tree) ?

Bunrey: Wer, Helden! ist der erste euch—ihr Erd- und
Himmel-schutterer !—wenn ihr sie schiittelt Wipfeln gleich ?

Lanexois: Parmi vous qui remuez si puissamment le ciel et
la terre, qui agitez celle-ci comme la cime (d’un arbre), quel
est le plus vigoureux ?

ae Witson: The householder, in dread of your fierce and
violent approach, has planted a firm (buttress) ; for the many-
ridged mountain is shattered (before you).

MANDALA I, SUKTA 37. 51

5. Celebrate the bull among the cows (the storm
among the clouds),' for it is the sportive host of the
Maruts; he grew as he tasted the rain.

6. Who, O ye men, is the oldest among you here,
ye shakers of heaven and earth, when you shake
them like the hem of a garment ?!

7. At your approach the son of man holds himself
down; the gnarled cloud! fled at your fierce anger.

8. They at whose racings' the earth, like a hoary
king, trembles for fear on their ways,

9. Their birth is strong indeed: there is strength
to come forth from their mother, nay, there is pe
twice enough for it.!

Benrry: Vor eurem Gange beuget sich, vor eurem wilden
Zorn der Mann; der Hiigel weichet und der Berg ;

Lanetois: Contre votre marche impétueuse et terrible,
Phomme ne peut résister; les collines et les montagnes
s’abaissent devant vous.

8. Wirson: At whose impetuous approach earth trembles ;
like an enfeebled monarch, through dread (of his enemies).

Benrey: Bei deren Lauf hei deren Sturm die Erde zittert
voller Furcht, wie ein altergebeugter Mann.

Lanetors: Sous vos pas redoutables, la terre tremble de
erainte, telle qu’un roi accablé par lage.

9. Wuson: Stable is their birthplace, (the sky); yet the
birds (are able) to issue from (the sphere of) their parent: for
your strength is everywhere (divided) between two (regions,
—or, heaven and earth).

Benrey: Kaum geboren sind sie so stark, dass ihrer Mutter
sie entfliehn: ist ja doch zwiefach ihre Kraft.

Lanetors: Le lieu de votre naissance est ferme et stable ;
vous pouvez, du sein de votre mére, vous élancer, tels que des
oiseaux ; car, des deux cdtés, est un élément solide,

EK 2

52 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

10. Ut tm (iti) tyé stindvah girah kdshthah dgme-
shu atnata, vasréh abhi-gii' yatave.

11. Tydm kit gha dirghém prithtim mihdah ndépatam
4mridhram, pré kyavayanti yaéma-bhih.

12. Mérutah y4t ha vah bélam gdénan akukyavitana,
girtn akukyavitana.

13. Yat ha y4nti martitah sém ha bruvate 4dhvan
4, srinéti kah kit eshdm.

14. Prd yata sibham Ast-bhih sdénti kénveshu vah
duvah, tdétro ({ti) si madayadhvai.

10. Witson: They are the generators of speech: they
spread out the waters in their courses: they urge the lowing
(cattle) to enter (the water), up to their knees, (to drink.)

Brnrrey: In ihrem Lauf erheben dann diese Sohne Getés
und Fluth, die bis zum Knie den Kiihen geht.

Lanetots: Ces (dieux) répandent le son comme on répand
la libation. Leur souffle étend les voies du ciel; (l’eau tombe)
et la vache (en s’y désaltérant), y entre jusqu’aux genoux.

11. Wirson: They drive before them, in their course, the
long, vast, uninjurable, rain-retaining cloud.

Brnrey: Dann treiben sie im Sturm heran jenen langen
und breiten Spross der Wolke unerschépflichen.

Lanetois: (Voyez-vous) ce long et large (nuage), fils de
onde (qui s’y amoncelle)? (Il semble) invulnérable. (Les
Marouts) savent le chemin par lequel on arrive jusqu’a lui
pour l’ébranler.

12. Witson: Maruts, as you have vigour, invigorate man-
kind: give animation to the clouds.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 37. 53

10. And these sons, the singers,’ enlarged the
fences in their coursings ;? the cows had to walk
knee-deep.

11. They cause this long and broad unceasing
rain’ to fall on their ways.

12. O Maruts, with such strength as yours, you
have caused men to fall)! you have caused the moun-
tains to fall.

13. As the Maruts pass’ along, they talk together
on the way: does any one hear them 4

14. Come fast on your quick steeds! there are
worshippers’ for you among the Kanvas: may you

well rejoice among them.

Benrey: O Marut’s! mit der Kraft, die ihr besitzt, werft
ihr Geschépfe um, die Berge werft ihr um sogar.

Lanetors: O Marouts, puisque vous avez la force, faites-la _
sentir aux hommes, faites-la sentir aux collines.

18. Witson: Wherever the Maruts pass, they fill the way
with clamour: every one hears their (noise).

Benrey: Wenn die Marut’s des Weges ziehn, dann sprechen
mit einander sie und mancher mag sie horen.

Lanetors: Quand les Marouts sont en marche, le chemin
retentit de leur voix: chacun les entend.

14. Witson: Come quickly, with your swift (vehicles).
The offerings of the Kafiwas are prepared. Be pleased with
them.

Benrey: Auf schnellen kommet schnell herbei, bei Kanva’s
Spross sind Feste euch: da wollt euch schon ergotzen.

Lanetors: Accourez, portez ici vos pas rapides. Les enfants
de Canwa vous attendent avec leurs offrandes; ici vous serez

satisfaits.

‘54 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

15. Asti hf sma méddya vah smdsi sma vaydm
eshim, visvam hit &yuh givase.

15. Wison: The offering is prepared for your gratification :
we are your (worshippers), that we may live all our life.
Benrey: Geriistet ist fiir euren Rausch und wir gehoren,

COMMENTARY.

This hymn is ascribed to Kanva, the son of Ghora. The
metre is Gayatri.

Verse 1, note '. Wilson translates anarvanam by without
horses, though the commentator distinctly explains the
word by without an enemy. Wilson considers it doubtful
whether 4rvan can ever mean enemy. The fact is, that in
the Rig-veda an-arvén never means without horses, but
always without hurt or free from enemies; and the com-
mentator is perfectly right, as far as the sense is concerned,
in rendering the word by without an enemy, or unopposed
(apraty-rita). An-arvén is not formed from 4rvat, horse,
racer, but from drvan; and this is derived from the same
root which yields 4rus, n.a wound. The accusative of anar-
vat, without a horse, would be anarvantam, not anarvanam.

The root ar, in the sense of hurting, is distantly connected
with the root mar: see Lectures on the Science of Lan-
guage, Second Series, p. 323. It exists in the Greek
ONAvmt, Corresponding to Sanskrit rinomi, i.e. arnomi, I
hurt, likewise in ovAy7, wound, which cannot be derived
from 6A7 ; in ovdAos, ovAcos, hurtful, and 6d06de, destructive :
see Curtius, Grundziige der Griechischen Etymologie (zweite
Ausgabe), pp. 59, 505. In the Veda ar has the sense of
offending or injuring, particularly if preceded by upa.

X. 164, 3. yat a-sdsd nih-sdsd abhi-sés4 upa-drima gé-
gratah yat svapaéntah, agnih visvani &pa duh-kritani 4gushtani
aré asmét dadhatu.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 37. 55

15. Truly there is enough for your rejoicing. We
always are their servants, that we may live even the

whole of life.

traun! euch an fiir unser ganzes Lebelang.
Lanewois: Agréez notre sacrifice, car nous vous sommes
dévoués. Daignez nous assurer une longue existence,

If we have offended, or whatever fault we have committed,
by bidding, blaming, or forbidding, while waking or while
sleeping, may Agni remove all wicked misdeeds far from us.

Hence upara, injury, vil. 86, 6. asti gyayan kéniyasah
upa-aré, the older man is there to injure, to offend, to mis-
lead, the young: (History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature,
second edition, p. 541.) Roth translates uparé by Verfeh-
lung, missing. Ari, enemy, too, is best derived from this
root, and not from ra, to give, with the negative particle,
as if meaning originally, as Sayana supposes, a man who
does not give. In 4rarivan, gen. ararushah, hostile, Rosen
recognized many years ago a participle of a really redupli-
cated perfect of ar, and he likewise traced araru, enemy,
back to the same root: see his note to 1, 18, 3.

From this root ar, to hurt, arvan, hurting, as well as
arus, wound, are derived in the same manner as both
dhanvan and dhanus, bow, are formed from dhan; yagvan
and yagus from yag, parvan and parus from par. See
Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. i. p. 233.

-Anarvan, then, is the same as énarus, Sat. P. Brahmana
ili, 1, 3, 7; and from meaning originally without a wound
or without one who can wound, it takes the more general
sense of uninjured, invulnerable, perfect, strong, (cf. inte-
ger, intact, and entire.) This meaning is applicable to i.
94,25 136, 53 il. 6, 53 Vv. 49, 43 VU. 20,33 97, 53 X- Or
13; 65, 3. Ini. 116, 16, anarvén seems to be used as an
adverb; in i. 51, 12, as applied to sléka, it may have the
more general meaning of irresistible, powerful.

56 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

There are two passages in which the nom. sing. arvan,
and one in which the acc. sing. arvanam, occur, apparently
meaning horse. But in i. 163, 13, and ix. 97, 25, arvan
stands in the Pada text only, the Sanhita has arvi akkha
and érva iva. In x. 46, 5, the text hiri-smasrum na 4rvanam
dhéna-arkam is too doubtful to allow of any safe induction,
particularly as the Sama-veda gives a totally different read-
ing. Ido not think therefore that arvat, horse, admits in
the nom. and acc. sing. of any forms but arva and 4rvan-
tam. Panini (vi. 4, 127) allows the forms arvan and arva- ~
mam, but in anarvan only, which, as we saw, has nothing
in common with 4rvat, horse. Benfey: ‘die rascheste
(keinen Renner habend, uneinholbar),’ the quickest (having
no racer, hence not to be reached).

The masculine anarvanam after the neuter sardhas is
curious; sdrdhas means might, but it is here used to
express a might or an aggregate of strong men or gods,
and the nom. plur. yé, who, in the next verse, shows the
same transition of thought, not only from the singular to
the plural, but also from the neuter to the masculine, which
must be admitted in anarvanam. It would be possible, if
necessary, to explain away the irregularity of anarvanam by
admitting a rapid transition from the Maruts to Indra, the
eldest among the Maruts (cf. 1. 23, 8. indra-gyeshthah marut-
ganah), and it would be easier still to alter sérdhas into
sardham, as an accusative singular of the masculine noun
sardha, which has the same meaning as the neuter sardhas.
There is one passage, v. 56, 9, which would seem to give
ample countenance to such a conjecture :

tam vah sérdham rathe-sibham—a huve.

I call hither this your host, brilliant on chariots.

Again, li. 30, 11, we read:

tém vah sardham marutam— gira tipa bruve.

I call with my voice on this your host of Maruts.

vill. 93, 16. srutaém vah vritrahdn-tamam pra sardham
karshaninam, & sushe.

I pant for the glorious, victorious, host of the quick
Maruts.

From this sardha we have also the genitive sardhasya,
vil. 56, 8 (4):

MANDALA I, SUKTA 37. 57

subhrah vah sishmah kridhmi mandmsi dhiinih mtinih-
iva sardhasya dhrishnéh.

Your strength is brilliant, your minds furious ; the shout
of the daring host is like one possessed.

We have likewise the dative sérdhaya, the instrumental
sardhena, and the acc. plur. sdérdhan; and in most cases,
except in two or three where sérdha seems to be used as
an adjective, meaning strong, these words are applied to the
host of the Maruts.

But the other word sardhas is equally well authenti-
cated, and we find of it, not only the nominative, accu-
sative, and vocative sing. sardhas, but likewise the nom.
plur. sardhamsi.

The nominative singular occurs in our very hymn:

i. 37, 5. krilém yat sdrdhah marutam.

Which is the sportive host of the Maruts.

i. 127, 6. sah hi sardhah na marutam tuvi-svanih.

For he (Agni) is strong-voiced like the host of the Maruts.

iv. 6, 10. tuvi-svandésah marutam na sdrdhah.

Thy flames (Agni) are strong-voiced like the host of the
Maruts. :

v. 46, 5. utd tyat nah marutam sérdhah 4 gamat.

May also that host of the Maruts come to us.

ii. 1, 5. tvém naram sardhah asi puru-vasuh.

Thou (Agni), full of riches, art the host of the men.

This host of men seems to me intended again for the
Maruts, although it is true that in thus identifying Agni
with different gods, the poet repeats himself in the next
verse :

i. 1, 6. tvam sérdhaf marutam.

Thou art the host of the Maruts.

If this repetition seems offensive, the first naram sardhas
might be taken for some other company of gods, Thus
we find:

vil. 44, 5. srindtu nah daivyam sérdhah agnih srinvantu
visve mahishah a4mtrah,

May the divine host, may Agni, hear us, may the Visve
hear us, the strong, the wise.

Or iii. 19, 4. sah & vaha devé-tatim yavishtha sardhah
yat adya divyaém yagasi.

58 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Bring thou hither, O Agni, the gods, that you may
sacrifice to-day to the divine host.

Or i. 139, 1. 4 nt tat sérdhah divyaém vrinimahe.

We chose for us now that divine host.

As in these last, so in many other passages, sardhas is
used as a neuter in the accusative. For instance,

i. 106, 13 li, T1, 14. marutam sardhah.

ii. 3, 33 vi. 3, 8. sardhah martitam.

‘The vocative occurs,

v. 46, 2. 4gne indra véruna mitra dévah sardhah pra
yanta maruta uta vishno (iti).

Agni, Indra, Varuna, Mitra, gods, host of the Maruts,
come forth, and Vishau !

We see how throughout all these passages those in which
sérdha and sardhas are applied to the Maruts, or to some
other company of gods, preponderate most decidedly. Yet
passages occur in the Rig-veda where both sardha and sar-
dhas are applied to other hosts or companies. Thus v. 53,
10, sardha refers to chariots, while in 1. 133, 3, sardhas
is applied to evil spirits.

If the passages hitherto examined were all that occur in
the Rig-veda, we might still feel startled at the construction
of our verse, where sardhas is not only followed by mascu-
line adjectives in the singular, but, in the next verse, by a
pronoun in the plural. But if we take the last irregularity
first, we find the same construction, viz. sérdhas followed
bysyé; in i. 92,04:

indrasya saérdhah martitah yé san.

The host of Indra, that was the Maruts.

As to the change of genders, we find adjectives in the
masculine after sdérdhas, in

v. 52, 8. sardhah marutam ut samsa satyd-savasam 7ibh-
vasam.

Celebrate the host of the Maruts, the truly vigorous, the
brilliant.

Here, too, the poet afterwards continues in the plural,
though as he uses the demonstrative, and not, as in our
passage, the relative pronoun, we cannot quote this in sup-
port of the irregularity which has here to be explained.
Anyhow the construction of our verse, though bold and

MANDALA I, SUKTA 37. 59

unusual, is not so unusual as to force us to adopt conjectural
remedies, and in v. 58, 2, we find yé after gan4h. On the
Umbrian Cerfo Martio, as possibly the same as sardha-s
maruta-s, see Grassman, Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xvi: p. 190.

Verse 2, note *. The spotted deer (prishati) are the
recognized animals of the Maruts, and were originally, as it
would seem, intended for the rain-clouds. Sayana is per-
fectly aware of the original meaning of prishati, as clouds.
The legendary school, he says, takes them for deer
with white spots, the etymological school for the many-
coloured lines of clouds: (Rv. Bh. i. 64, 8.) This passage
shows that although prishati, as Roth observes, may mean
a spotted cow or a spotted horse,—the Maruts, in fact,
are called sometimes prishat-asvah, having piebald horses,
vil. 40, 3,—yet the later tradition in India had distinctly
declared in favour of spotted deer. The Vedic poets, how-
ever, admitted “both ideas, and they speak in the same
hymn, nay, in the same verse, of the fallow deer and of the
horses of the Maruts. Thus v. 58, 1, the Maruts are
called asti-asvah, possessed of quick horses ; and in v. 58, 6,
we read yat pra dyasishfa prishatibhiA Asvaih—rathebhih,
where the gender of prishatibhi# would hardly allow us to
join it with dsvaiz, but where we must translate: When
you come with the deer, the horses, the chariots.

Verse 2, note *. The spears and daggers of the Maruts
are meant for the thunderbolts, and the glittering ornaments
for the lightning. Sayana takes vasi in this passage for
war-cries on the authority of the Nirukta, where vasi is
given among the names of the voice. From other pas-
sages, however, it becomes clear that vasi is a weapon of
the Maruts; and Sayana, too, explains it sometimes in
that sense: cf. v.53, 4; 57, 2. Thus i. 88, 3, the vasis
are spoken of as being on the bodies of the Maruts. In
v. 53, 4, the Maruts are said to shine in their ornaments
and their vasis. Here Sayana, too, translates vasi rightly
by weapon; and in his remarks on i. 88, 3, he says that
vasi was a weapon commonly called ara, which is a shoe-
maker’s awl. This reminds one of framea which at one time

60 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

was supposed to be connected with the German pfrieme.
See, however, Grimm (Deutsche Grammatik, vol. i. p. 128)
and Leo Meyer (Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. vi. p. 424). In
viii. 29, 3, the god Tvash/ar is said to carry an iron vasi in
his hand. Grassman (Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xvi. p. 163)
translates vast by axe. That afigi is to be taken in the
sense of ornament, and not in the sense of ointment, is
shown by passages like viii. 29, 1, where a golden ornament
is mentioned, afigi ankte hirany4yam. Sakam, together, is
used with reference to the birth of the Maruts, i. 64, 4. It
should not be connected with vasibhih.

Verse 3, note’. Esham should be pronounced as a creti-
cus; also in verses 9, 13, 15. This is a very common vytha.

Verse 3, note *. I should have taken sitraém as an adverb,
like Benfey, if ni ving were not usually construed with an
accusative. Rifig in the 3rd pers. plur. pres. Atm. is
treated like a verb of the Ad-class.

Verse 3, note *. The locative yaman is frequently used
of the path on which the gods move and approach the
sacrifice ; hence it sometimes means, as in our passage, In
the sky. Yamam in B.R., s. v. arg, is wrong.

Verse 4, note *. Benfey translates ghrishvi by burrowing,
and refers it to the thunderbolt that uproots the earth.
He points out that ghrishvi means also, for the same
reason, the boar, as proved by Kuhn (Die Herabkunft des
Feuers, S. 202). I prefer, however, the general sense
assigned to the adjective ghrishu and ghrishvi, exuberant,
brisk, wild. See Kuhn in Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xi.
p- 385. Wilson, after Sayana, translates destroyers of foes.
On the representation of the clouds as boars, see Nir. v. 4.

Verse 4, note ®. Tveshé-dyumna is difficult to render.
Both tvesha and dyumna are derived from roots that mean
to shine, to be bright, to glow. Derivatives from tvish
express the idea of fiermess, fierceness, and fury. In iv.
17, 2, tvish is used correlatively with manyt, wrath.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 37. 61

Derivatives from dyu convey the idea of brightness and

briskness. Both qualities are frequently applied to the
Maruts.

Verse 5, note *. This translation is merely conjectural.

I suppose that the wind driving the clouds before him, is
here compared to a bull among cows, cf. v. 52, 3:

té syandrasah na ukshaénah ati skandanti sarvarih.

They, the Maruts, like rushing oxen, mount on the dark
cows.

The last sentence states that the wind grows even stronger
after it has tasted the rain (i. 85, 2. té ukshitasah mahiméa-
nam Asata).

Verse 5, note ®, I take gémbhe in the sense of gambhane.
(On the root gabh and its derivatives, see Kuhn, Zeitschrift
fiir vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft, vol. i. p. 123 seq.) It
would be better to read mukhe, instead of sukhe, in the
commentary. The Maruts were not born of milk for
Prisni, as Wilson says in a note, but from the milk of
Prisni. Prisni is called their mother, Rudra their father :
(v. 52, 163 60, 5.)

Benfey takes the cows for clouds in which the lightnings °
dwell; and the abyss of the sap is by him supposed to be
again the clouds.

Verse 6, note. Antam né, literally, like an end, is

explained by Sayana as the top of a tree. Wilson, Langlois,
and Benfey accept that interpretation. Roth proposes, like
the hem of a garment, which I prefer; for vastranta, the
end of a garment, is a common expression in later Sanskrit,
while anta is never applied to a tree in the sense of the top
of a tree. Here agra would be more appropriate.

Verse 7, note '. Sdyana translates: ‘ Man has planted a
firm buttress to give stability to his dwelling.’ Nidadhré
is the perfect Atmanepada, and expresses the holding down
of the head or the cowering attitude of man. I have
taken ugraya manydve over to gihita, because these words
could hardly form an apposition to yamaya. As the Vedic
poets speak of the very mountains as shaken by the

62 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

storms, we might translate parvato girid by the gnarled or
rocky mount; but there is no authority for translating
gihita by it is shattered, and we should have to translate, the
mountain yielded or bent before your anger. Cf. v. 57, 3:

ni vah vana gihate yamanah bhiya.

The forests get out of your way from fear.

v. 60, 2. vand kit ugrah gihate ni vah bhiyd prithivi At
regate parvatah kit.

Even the forests, ye fearful Maruts, yield from fear of
you; even the earth trembles, even the mountains.

Verse 8, note}, Agma seems to express the act of
racing or running (like 4gi, race, battle), while yama is the
road itself where the racing takes place. A very similar
passage occurs in i. 87, 3. The comparison of the earth
(fem.) to a king (masc.) would be considered a grave offence
in the later Sanskrit literature. In i. 87, 3, vithura takes
the place of vispati. ,

Verse 9, note '. A very difficult verse. The birth of
the Maruts is frequently alluded to, as well as their sur-
passing strength, as soon as born. Hence the first sentence
admits of little doubt. But what follows is very abrupt.
Vayas may be the plural of vi, bird, or it may be vayas, the
neuter, meaning vital strength: see Kuhn’s Zeitschrift,
vol. xv. p. 217. The Maruts are frequently compared to
birds (cf. i. 87, 2; 88, 1), but it is usual to indicate the
comparison by na or iva. I therefore take vayas as a nom.
sing. neut., in the sense of vigour, life. Nir-i is used with
particular reference to the birth of a child (cf. v. 78, 7; 9).

Verse 10, note’. If we take stinavo gfrah in the sense of
the sons of voice, i. e. of thunder, the accent of girah will
have to be changed. Girah, however, occurs, at least once
more, in the sense of singers or poets, ix. 63, 10, where
girah can only be a vocative, O ye singers! In i. 6, 6, the
translation of girah by singers, i.e. the Maruts, may be
contested, but if we consider that girah, in the sense of
hymns, is feminine, and is followed by the very word which
is here used, viz. devayantah, as a feminine, viz. devayantih,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 37. 63

vu. 18, 3, we can hardly doubt that in i. 6, 6, girah is a mascu-
lme and means singers. The same applies to vi. 63, 10. In
Vi. 52, 9, the construction is, of course, quite different.

Verse 10, note *. The expression that the Maruts en-
larged or extended the fences of their race-course, can only
mean that they swept over the whole sky, and drove the
clouds away from all the corners. Kashtha may mean the
wooden enclosures (carceres) or the wooden poles that served
as turning and winning-posts (mete). The last sentence
expresses the result of this race, viz. the falling of so much
rain that the cows had to walk up to their knees in water.
This becomes still clearer from the next verse.

Sayana : “These, the producers of speech, have spread
water in their courses, they cause the cows to walk up to
their knees in order to drink the water.’

Verse 11, note '. Rain is called the offspring of the cloud,
miho napat, and is then treated as a masculine.

Verse 12, note’. In viii. 72, 8, akukyavit is explained by
yyadarayat, he tore open. Akukyavitana is the Vedic form
of the 2nd pers. plur. of the reduplicated aorist.

Verse 13, note’. YAanti has to be pronounced as an
amphibrachys.

Verse 14, note '. Benfey supposes that dtivah stands in
the singular instead of the plural. But why should the
plural have been used, as the singular (asti) would have
created no kind of difficulty? It is better to take dtivah as
a nominative plural of a noun dt, worshipper, derived from
the same root which yielded divah, worship. We certainly
find 4-duvah in the sense of not-worshipping :

vii. 4, 6. ma tva vayém sahasd-van avirah ma apsavah pari
sadama ma dduvah.

May we not, O hero, sit round thee like men without
strength, without beauty (cf. viii. 7, 7), without worship.

Here Sayana explains aduvah very well by parikarana-
hinah, which seems better than Roth’s explanation ‘ z6gernd,
obne Eifer.’

64 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawopata I, Stxta 38.
Asuraka I, ApHyAyA 8, VARGA 15-17.

1. Kat ha nfim4m kadha-priyah* pita putrdm na
hdstayoh, dadhidhvé vrikta-barhishah.

2. Kva ehiaehin kat vah drtham gdnta divaéh na
prithivyah, kv& vah gévah nd > ranyanti.

3. Kva vah sumnd névyamsi mdrutah kva suvita,
kv6 (iti) visvani satibhaga.

4. Yat ydydm prisni-matarah martasah syatana,
stoté vah amritah syat.

5. Ma vah mrigdh n& ydvase garitaé bhit dgoshyah,
patha yamdsya gat tipa.

6. M6 (iti) si nah péra-para nih-ritih duh-héna
vadhit, padishté trishnaya sahd.

7. Satydm tveshéh dma-vantah dhdnvan kit &
rudriyasah, miham krinvanti avdtém f.

8. Vasrd-iva vi-dyit mimati vatsim nd matdé si-
sakti, ydt eshdm vrishtih dsargi.

9. Diva kit témah krinvanti pargdnyena uda-
vahéna, ydét prithivim vi-unddnti.

10. Adha svanat mardtém visvam & s4dma parthi-
vam, dreganta pré m&nushah.

* kadha priyah + Omit n& t dvatam

MANDALA I, SUKTA 38. 65

Hymn 10 THE Maruts (THE STorM-Gops).

1. What then now? When! will you take (us) as
a dear father takes his son by both hands, O ye gods,
for whom the sacred grass has been trimmed ??

2. Whither now? On what errand of yours are
you going, in heaven, not on earth ?1 Where are your
cows sporting ??

3. Where are your newest favours, O Maruts 2
Where the blessings? Where all delights?

4. If you, sons of Prisni, were mortals, and your
worshipper an immortal,’—

5. Then never' should your praiser be unwelcome,
like a deer in pasture grass,’ nor should he go on the
path of Yama.’

6. Let not one sin! after another, difficult to be
conquered, overcome us; may it depart® together
with lust. )

7. Truly they are furious and powerful ; even to
the desert the Rudriyas bring rain that is never
dried up."

8. The lightning lows like a cow, it follows as a
mother follows after her young, that the shower (of
the Maruts) may be let loose.’

9. Even by day the Maruts create darkness with
the water-bearing cloud, when they drench the
earth.

10. From the shout of the Maruts over the whole
space of the earth,’ men reeled forward.

VOL. I. is

66 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

11. Mérutah vilupéni-bhih* hitréh rédhasvatih
dnu, yaté im a&khidrayama-bhih.

12. Sthirdh vah santu nemdyah rathah Asvasal,
eshdm, su-samskritah abhisavah.

13, Akkha vada tana gird gardyai brébmanah patim,
agnim mitrém nd darsatdm.

14. Mimihi sl6kam Asyé pargdnyah-iva tatanah,
edya gdyatrém ukthyam.

15. Vandasva marutam gandm tvesham panasyum
arkinam, asmé ({ti) vriddhah asan iha.

COMMENTARY.

This hymn is ascribed to Kanva, the son of Ghora. The
metre is Gayatri throughout. Several verses, however, end
in a spondee instead of the usual iambus. No attempt
should be made to improve such verses by conjecture,
for they are clearly meant to end in spondees. Thus in
verses 2, 7, 8, and g, all the three padas alike have their
final spondee. In verse 7, the ionicus a minore is with an
evident intention repeated thrice.

Verse 1, note *. Kadha-priyah is taken in the Padapatha
as one word, and Sayana explains it by delighted by or
delighting in praise, a nominative plural. A similar com-
pound, kadha-priya, occurs in i. 30, 20, and there too the
vocative sing. fem., kadhapriye, is explained by Sayana as
fond of praise. In order to obtain this meaning, kadha has
to be identified with katha, story, which is simply impos-

sible. There is another compound, adha-priy4, nom, dual,

* vilupAni-bhih ?

MANDALA I, SUKTA 38. 67

11. Maruts on your strong-hoofed steeds! go on
easy roads* after those bright ones (the clouds), which
are still locked up.

12. May your felloes be strong, the chariots, and
their horses, may your reins! be well-fashioned.

13. Speak out for ever with thy voice to praise
the Lord of prayer,’ Agni, who is like a friend,? the
bright one.

14, Fashion a hymn in thy mouth! Expand like
a cloud!! Sing a song of praise.

15. Worship the host of the Maruts, the brisk, the
praiseworthy, the singers.’ May the strong ones stay
here among us.”

which occurs vill. 8, 4, and which Sayana explains either as
delighted here below, or as a corruption of kadha-priya.

In Boehtlngk and Roth’s Dictionary, kadha-priya and
kadha-pri are both explained as compounds of kadha, an
interrogative adverb, and priya or pri, to love or delight,
and they are explained as meaning kind or loving to whom ?
In the same manner adha-priya is explained as kind then
and there.

It must be confessed, however, that a compound like
kadha-pri, kind to whom ?, is somewhat strange, and it seems
preferable to separate the words, and to write kédha priya
and ddha priya.

It should be observed that the compounds kadha-pri and
kadha-priya-occur always in sentences where there is another
interrogative pronoun. The two interrogatives kat—kadha,
what—where, and kas—kadha, who—where, occurring in
the same sentence, an idiom so common in Greek, may
have puzzled the author of the Pada text, and the com-
pound once sanctioned by the authority of Sakalya, Sayana
would explain it as best he could. But if we admit the
double use of the interrogative in Sanskrit, as in Greek,

2

68 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

then, in our passage, priyé# would be an adjective belong-
ing to pita, and we might translate: ‘ What then now ?
When will you take (us), as a dear father takes his son by
both hands, O ye Maruts?? In the same manner we ought
to translate i. 30, 20:

kah te ushah kddha priye bhugé martah amartye.

Who and where was there a mortal to be loved by thee,
O beloved, immortal Dawn ?

In viii. 7, 31, where the same words are repeated as in
our passage, it is likewise better to write:

kat ha nfindm kadha priya yat indram dgahatana, kah
vah sakhi-tvé ohate.

What then now? Where is there a friend, now that you
have forsaken Indra? Who cares for your friendship ?

Why in vii. 8, 4, adha priya should have been joined
into one word is more difficult to say, yet here, too, the
compound might easily be separated.

Kadha does not occur again, but would be formed in
analogy with adha, It occurs in Zend as kadha.

The words két ha ntiném commonly introduce an inter-
rogative sentence, literally, What then now ? cf. x. Io, 4.

Verse 1, note ®. Vrikta-barhis is generally a name of the
priest, so called because he has to trim the sacrificial grass.
‘The sacred Kusa grass (Poa cynosuroides), after having had
the roots cut off, is spread on the Vedi or altar, and upon
it the libation of Soma-juice, or oblation of clarified butter,
is poured out, In other places, a tuft of it in a similar
position is supposed to form a fitting seat for the deity or
deities invoked to the sacrifice. According to Mr. Stevenson,
it is also strewn over the floor of the chamber in which the
worship is performed,’

Cf. vi. 11, 5. vrihgé ha yat ndmasa barhth agnat, 4yami
srik ghrité-vati su-vriktih.

When I reverentially trim the truss for Agni, when the
well-trimmed ladle, full of butter, is stretched forth.

In our passage, unless we change the accent, it must
be taken as an epithet of the Maruts, they for whom the

grass-altar has been prepared. They are again invoked by
the same name, vill. 7, 20:

MANDALA TI, SUKTA 38. 69

kva ninam su-dénavah madatha vrikta-barhishah.

Where do ye rejoice now, you gods for whom the altar
is trimmed ?

Otherwise, vrikta-barhishah might, with a change of
accent, supply an accusative to dadhidhve: ‘ Will you take
the worshippers in your arms?’ This, however, is not
necessary, as to take by the hand may be used as a
neuter verb.

Benfey : ‘ Wo weilt ihr gern? was habt ihr jetzt—gleichwie
ein Vater seinen Sohn—in Hinden, da das Opfer harrt ?’

Wilson: ‘ Maruts, who are fond of praise, and for whom
the sacred grass is trimmed, when will you take us by both
hands as a father does his son ?’

Verse 2, note’. The idea of the first verse, that the
Maruts should not be detained by other pursuits, is carried
on in the second. The poet asks, what they have to do in
the sky, instead of coming down to the earth. The last
sentence seems to mean ‘ where tarry your herds?’ viz. the
clouds. Sayana translates: ‘Where do worshippers, like
lowing cows, praise you?’ Wilson: ‘Where do they who
worship you cry to you like cattle’ Benfey: ‘ Wo jauchzt
man euch, gleich wie Stiere? (Ihre Verehrer briillen vor
Freude tiber ihre Gegenwart, wie Stiere.)’ The verb
ranyati, however, when followed by an accusative, means
to love, to accept with pleasure. The gods accept the
offermgs and the prayers :

v. 18, 1. visvani yah démartyah havyad marteshu ranyati.

The immortal who deigns to accept all offermgs among
mortals.

v. 74, 3. kasya brahmani ranyathah.

Whose prayers do ye accept ?

Followed by a locative ranyati means to delight in.
Both the gods are said to delight in prayers (vill. 12, 18; 33,
16), and prayers are said to delight in the gods (vill. 16, 2).
I therefore take ranyanti in the sense of tarrying, disporting,
and na, if it is to be retained, in the sense of not; where
do they not sport? meaning that they are to be found every-
where, except where the poet desires them to be. We thus
get rid of the simile of singing poets and lowing cows, which,

70 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

though not too bold for Vedic bards, would here come in
too abruptly. It would be much better, however, if the
negative particle could be omitted altogether. If we retain
it, we must read: kva vah gavah na ran yanti ie
But the fact is that through the whole of the Rig-veda
kva has always to be pronounced as two syllables, kuva.
There is only one passage, v. 61, 2, where, before a vowel,
we have to read kva: kuva yo ’svah, kvabhisavah. In
other passages, even before vowels, we always have to
read kuva, e.g. i. 161, 4. kuvet=kva it; 1. 105, 4.
kuvartam=kva ritam. In i. 35, 7, we must read either
kuvedanim siryah, making stiryah trisyllabic, or kuva idanim,
leaving a hiatus. In i. 168, 6, kvavaram is kuvavaram :
Sakalya, forgetting this, and wishing to improve the metre,
added na, thereby, in reality, destroying both the metre and
the sense. Kva occurs as dissyllabic in the Rig-veda at
least forty-one times.

Verse 3, note ’. The meanings of sumna in the first five
Mandalas are well explained by Professor Aufrecht in Kuhn’s
Zeitschrift, vol. iv. p. 274. As to suvita in the plural, see
x. 86, 21, and viil. 93, 29, where Indra is said to bring all
suvita’s. It frequently occurs in the singular:

x. 148, 1. a nah bhara suvitam yasya kdkadn.

Verse 4, note +. One might translate: ‘If you, sons of
Prisni, were mortals, the immortal would be your wor-
shipper.” But this seems almost too deep and elaborate
a compliment for a primitive age. Langlois translates:
“Quand vous ne seriez pas immortels, (faites toutefois) que
votre panégyriste jouisse d’une longue vie.? Wilson’s trans-
lation is obscure: ‘That you, sons of Prisni, may become
mortals, and your panegyrist become immortal.’ Sayana
translates: ‘Though you, sons of Prisni, were mortal, yet
your worshipper would be immortal.’ I think it best to
connect the fourth and fifth verses, and I feel justified in
so doing by other passages where the same or a similar
idea is expressed, viz. that if the god were the poet and the
poet the god, then the poet would be more liberal to the
god than the god is to him. Thus I translated a passage,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 38. 71

Vil. 32, 18, in my History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature,
p- 545: ‘Tf I were lord of as much as thou, I should support
the sacred bard, thou scatterer of wealth, I should not
abandon him to misery. I should award wealth day by day
to him who magnifies, I should award it to whosoever it be.’
Another parallel passage is pointed out by Mr. J. Muir.
(On the Interpretation of the Veda, p. 79.) viii. 19, 25:
“Tf, Agni, thou wert a mortal, and I were an immortal, I
should not abandon thee to malediction or to wretchedness ;
my worshipper should not be miserable or distressed.’ Still
more to the point is another passage, viii. 44, 23: ‘ If I were
thou, and thou wert I, then thy wishes should be fulfilled.’
See also vill. 14, I, 2.

As to the metre it is clear that we ought to read

—<—vu — .e]

gee
martasah syatana.

Verse 5, note '. Ma, though it seems to stand for na,
retains its prohibitive sense.

Verse 5, note *. Yavasa is explained by Sayana as grass,
and Wilson’s Dictionary, too, gives to it the meaning of
meadow or pasture grass, whereas yava is barley. The
Greek Cea or Cea is likewise explained as barley or rye,
fodder for horses. See i. 91, 13. gavah na ydvaseshu, like
cows in meadows.

Verse 5, note *. The path of Yama can only be the path
that leads to Yama, as the ruler of the departed.

x: 14, 8. sm gakkhasva pitri-bhif sam yaména.

Meet with the fathers, meet with Yama, (x. 14, 10; 15, 8.)

x.14, 7. yamaém pasyasi varunam ka devam,

Thou wilt see (there) Yama and the divine Varuna.

x. 165, 4. tésmai yamaya namah astu mrityave.

Adoration to that Yama, to Death!

Wilson: ‘ Never may your worshipper be indifferent to
you, as a deer (is never indifferent) to pasture, so that he may
not tread the path of Yama.’ Benfey: ‘ Wer euch besingt,
der sei euch nicht gleichgiiltig, wie das Wild im Gras, nicht
wandl er auf des Yama Pfad’ Agoshya is translated insa-
tiable by Professor Goldstiicker.

72 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Verse 6, note }. One of the meanings of nirviti is sin.
It is derived from the same root which yielded rita, in the
sense of right. Nirriti was conceived, it would seem, as
going away from the path of right, the German Vergehen.
Nirriti was personified as a power of evil and destruc-
tion.

vii. 104, 9. dhaye vA tan pra-dddatu sémah 4 va dadhatu
nih-riteh upa-sthe.

May Soma hand them over to Ahi, or place them in the
lap of Nirriti.

i. 117, 5. susupvamsam na nih-riteh upa-sthe.

Like one who sleeps in the lap of Nirriti.

Here Sayana explains Nirriti as earth, and he attaches
the same meaning to the word in other places which will
have to be considered hereafter. Cf. Lectures on the
Science of Language, Second Series, pp. 515, 516.

Wilson treats Nirriti as a male deity, and translates the
last words, ‘let him perish with our evil desires.’

Verse 6, note ®, Padish¢é is formed as an optative of the
Atmanepada, but with the additional s before the t, which,
in the ordinary Sanskrit, is restricted to the so-called bene-
dictive (Grammar, § 385; Bopp, Kritische Grammatik, ed.
1834, § 329, note). Pad means originally to go, but in certain
constructions it gradually assumed the meaning of to perish,
and native commentators are inclined to explain it by pat,
to fall. One can watch the transition of meaning from
going into perishing in such phrases as V.S. xi. 46. ma
pady ayushah pura, literally, ‘may he not go before the
time,’ but really intended for ‘may he not die before the time.’
In the Rig-veda padish/a is generally qualified by some words
to show that it is to be taken in malam partem. Thus
in our passage, and in ill. 53, 21; vii. 104,16; 17. Ini, 79;
11, however, padishta sah is by itself used in a maledictory
sense, pereat, may he perish! In another, vi. 20, 5, padi by
itself conveys the idea of perishing. This may have some
weight in determining the origin of the Latin pestis (Corssen,
Kritische Beitrage, p. 396), for it shows that, even without
prepositions, such as @ or vi, pad may have an ill-omened
meaning. In the Aitareya-brdhmana vii. 14 (History of

MANDALA I, SUKTA 38. 73

Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 471), pad, as applied to a
child’s teeth, means to go, to fall out. With sam, however,
pad has always a good meaning, and this shows that origin-
ally its meaning was neutral.

Verse 7, note *. The only difficult word is avatém. Sayana
explains it, ‘without wind.’ But it is hardly possible to
understand how the Maruts, themselves the gods of the
storm, the sons of Rudra, could be said to bring clouds
without wind. Langlois, it is true, translates without any
misgivings : ‘Ces dieux peuvent sur un sol desséché faire
tomber la pluie sans ’accompagner de vent.?, Wilson: ‘ They
send down rain without wind upon the desert. Benfey saw
the incongruous character of the epithet, and explained it
away by saying that the winds bring rain, and after they
have brought it, they moderate their violence in order not to
drive it away again; hence rain without wind. Yet even
this explanation, though ingenious, and, as I am told, particu-
larly truthful in an Eastern climate, is somewhat too artificial.
If we changed the accent, dvataém, unchecked, unconquered,
would be better than avatam, windless. But dvata, uncon-
quered, does not occur in the Rig-veda, except “as applied
to persons. It occurs most frequently in the phrase vanvan
avatah, which Sayana explains well by himsan ahimsitah,
Harms, ebutenotmburts” -(vi. 16,120; 18, 1; 1x.) 39, 7.)
In ix. 96, 8, we read prit-si vanvan Avatah, in battles
attacking, but not attacked, which renders the meaning of
avata perfectly clear. In vi. 64, 5, where it is applied to
Ushas, it may be translated by unconquerable, intact.

There are several passages, however, where avata occurs
with the accent on the last syllable, and where it is accord-
ingly explained as a Bahuvrihi, meaning either windless or
motionless, from vata, wind, or from vata, going, (i. 62, 10.)
In some of these passages we can hardly doubt that the
accent ought to be changed, and that we ought to read
dvata. Thus in vi. 64, 4, avate is clearly a vocative applied
to Ushas, who is called av4ta, unconquerable, in the verse
immediately following. In i. 52, 4, the Maruts are called
avatah, which can only*be avatah, unconquerable ; nor can
we hesitate in viii. 79, 7, to change avatah into avatah, as an

74 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

epithet applied to Soma, and preceded by adriptakratuh, of
unimpaired strength, unconquerable.

But even then we find no evidence that dvata, uncon-
quered, could be applied to rain or to a cloud, and I there-
fore propose another explanation, though equally founded
on the supposition that the accent of avatam in our passage
should be on the first syllable.

I take vAta as a Vedic form instead of the later vana, the
past participle of vai, to wither. Similarly we find in the
Veda gita, instead of gina, the latter form being sanctioned
by Panini. Va means to get dry, to flag, to get exhausted ;
vata therefore, as applied to a cloud, would mean not dry,
not withered, as applied to rain, not dried up, but remain-
ing on the ground. It is important to remark that in one
passage, vi. 67, 7, Sdyana, too, explains avata, as applied to
rivers, by asushka, not dry; and the same meaning would
be applicable to avatad in i. 62,10. In this sense of not
withered, not dry, avatém in our passage would form a per-
fectly appropriate epithet of the rain, while neither windless
nor unconquered would yield an appropriate sense. In the
famous passage x. 129, 2, anit avatam svadhaya tat ékam,
that only One breathed breathless by itself, avatém might be
‘taken, in accordance with its accent, as windless or breath-
less, and the poet may have wished to give this antithetical
point to his verse. But dAvatam, as an adverb, would here
be equally appropriate, and we should then have to translate,
‘that only One breathed freely by itself.’

Verse 8, note’. The peculiar structure of the metre in
the seventh and eighth verses should be noted. Though
we may scan

mam Ube —— Vv -- 6 -- ---
—-v—-U-- --v--0-- u--- ub
by throwing the accent on the short antepenultimate, yet
the movement of the metre becomes far more natural by
throwing the accent on the long penultimate, thus reading

i2 i / / , /
at EG Ce ee 2 e

/ / / Pe /
—tut-v+— -4u4-"-2 v4-4uut-

Sayana: ‘Like a cow the lightning roars, (the lightning)

*

MANDALA I, SUKTA 38. 75

attends (on the Maruts) as the mother cow on her calf, because
their rain is let loose at the time of lightning and thunder.’

Wilson: ‘The lightning roars like a parent cow that
bellows for its calf, and hence the rain is set free by the
Maruts.’

Benfey : ‘ Es blitzt—wie eine Kuh briillt es—die Mutter
folgt dem Kalb gleichsam—wenn ihr Regen losgelassen.
(Der Donner folgt dem Blitz, wie eine Kuh ihrem Kalbe.)’

Vasra as a masculine means a bull, and it is used as a
name of the Maruts in some passages, vill. 7,3; 7. As
a feminine it means a cow, particularly a cow with a calf,
a milch cow. Hence also a mother, x. 119, 4. The lowing
of the lightning must be intended for the distant thunder,
and the idea that the lightning goes near or looks for
the rain is not foreign to the Vedic poets. See i. 39, 9:
“Come to us, Maruts, with your entire help, as lightnings
(come to, i.e. seek for) the rain !’

Verse 9, note 1, That parganya here and in other places
means cloud has been well illustrated by Dr. Biihler, Orient
und Occident, vol. i. p. 221. It is interesting to watch the
personifying process which is very palpable in this word,
and by which Parganya becomes at last a friend and com-
panion of Indra.

Verse 10, note’. Sdédma, as a neuter, means originally
a seat, and is frequently used in the sense of altar : iv. 9, 3.
_ sah sédma pari niyate hota; vii. 18, 22. héta-iva sadma pari
emi rébhan. It soon, however, assumed the more general
meaning of place, as

X.1,1. agnih bhandna risata visva sidmani aprah.

Agni with brilliant light thou filledst all places.

It is lastly used with special reference to heaven and
earth, the two s4dmani, i. 185, 6; iil. 55, 2. In our passage
sadma parthivam is the same as parthive sddane in vill. 97, 5.
Here the earth is mentioned together with heaven, the sea,
and the sky. Sayana takes sédma as ‘ dwelling,’ so do Wilson
and Langlois. Benfey translates ‘der Erde Sitz,’ and makes
it the subject of the sentence: ‘ From the roaring of the Maruts
the seat of the earth trembles, and all men tremble.” Sadman,

76 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

with the accent on the last syllable, is also used as a masculine
in the Rig-veda, i. 173, 13 vi. 51, 12. sadmanam divydém.

Verse 11, note !. I have translated vilu-panibhih, as if it
were vilipanibhiA, for this is the right accent of a Bahuvrihi
compound. Thus the first member retains its own accent in
pritht-pani, bhtiri-pani, vrisha-pani, &c. It is possible that
the accent may have been changed in our passage, because
the compound is used, not as an adjective, but as a kind of
substantive, as the name of a horse. Pani, hand, means, as
applied to horses, hoof:

ii. 31, 2. prithivyah sdnau ganghananta pani-bhih.

When they strike with their hoofs on the summit of the
earth,

This meaning appears still more clearly in such com-
pounds as dravat-pani :

vill. 5, 35. hiranydyena rathena dravatpani-bhih asvaih.

On a golden chariot, on quick-hoofed horses.

The horses of the Maruts, which in our verse are called
vilu-pani, strong-hoofed, are called viii. 7, 27. hiranya-pani,
golden-hoofed :

asvaih hiranyapani-bhih dévasah vipa gantana.

On your golden-hoofed horses come hither, O gods.

Those who retain the accent of the MSS. ought to trans-
late, ‘ Maruts, with your strong hands go after the clouds.’

Verse 11, note *. Rédhasvatt is explained by Sayana as
river. It does not occur again in the Rig-veda. Rédhas
is enclosure or fence, the bank of a river; but it does not
follow that rédhasvat, having enclosures or banks, is appli-
cable to rivers only. i. 15, 8, it is said that he emptied or
opened the artificial enclosures of Bala, these being the
clouds conquered by Indra. Hence J take rédhasvati in
the sense of a cloud yet unopened, which is followed or
driven on by the Maruts.

Kitra, bright or many-coloured, is applied to the clouds,
v. 63, 3. kitrébhih abhraih.

Verse 11, note *. Roth takes ékhidray4man for a name of
horse. The word does not occur again in the Rig-veda,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 38. aed

but the idea that the roads of the gods are easy (sugah
adhva) is of frequent occurrence.
Wilson: ‘ Maruts, with strong hands, come along the
beautifully-embanked rivers with unobstructed progress.’
Benfey: ‘Mit euren starken Hianden folet den hehren
eingeschlossnen nach in unermiid’tem Gang, Maruts.’

Verse 12, note *. Abhisu does not mean finger in the
Rig-veda, though Sayana frequently explains it so, misled
by Yaska who gives abhisu among the names of finger.
Wilson: ‘ May your fingers be well skilled (to hold the reins).’

Verse 13, note’. Agni is frequently invoked together
with the Maruts, and is even called martt-sakha, the friend
of the Maruts, viii. g2, 14. It seems better, therefore, to
refer brahmanas patim to Agni, than, with Sayana, to the
host of the Maruts (martidganam). Brahmanaspati and
Brihaspati are both varieties of Agni, the priest and purohita
of gods and men, and as such he is invoked together with
the Maruts in other passages, i. 40,1. Tana is an adverb,
meaning constantly, always, for ever. Cf. il. 2, 1; vill. 40, 7.

Wilson: ‘Declare in our presence (priests), with voice
attuned to praise Brahmanaspati, Agni, and the beautiful
Mitra.’

Benfey: ‘Lass schallen immerfort das Lied zu griissen
Brahmanaspati, Agni, Mitra, den herrlichen.’

Verse 13, note 7. Mitra is never, as far as I know, in-
voked together with the Maruts, and it is better to take
mitram as friend. Besides na cannot be left here untrans-
lated.

Verse 14, note’. The second sentence is obscure. Sayana
translates: ‘Let the choir of priests make a hymn of
praise, let them utter or expand it, like as a cloud sends
forth rain.’ Wilson similarly: ‘Utter the verse that is in
your mouth, spread it out like a cloud spreading rain.’
Benfey: ‘ Ein Preislied schaffe in dem Mund, ertone dem
Parganya gleich.’ He takes Parganya for the god of thunder,
and supposes the hymn of praise to be compared to it on

78 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

account of its loudness. Tatanah can only be the second
person singular of the conjunctive of the reduplicated
perfect, of which we have also taténat, tatanama, tatanan,
and taténanta. Tatanah can be addressed either to the host
of the Maruts, or to the poet. I take it in the latter sense,
for a similar verse occurs viii. 21,18. It is said there of a
patron that he alone is a king, that all others about the river
Sarasvati are only small kings, and the poet adds: ‘ May he
spread like a cloud with the rain,’ giving hundreds and
thousands, (pargényah-iva taténat hi vrishtya.)

Verse 15, note}. It is difficult to find an appropriate
rendering for arkin. It means praising, celebrating, singing,
and it is in the last sense only that it is applicable to the
Maruts. Wilson translates, ‘ entitled to adoration ;’ Benfey,
‘flaming.’ Boehtlingk and Roth admit the sense of flaming
in one passage, but give to arkin in this place the meaning
of praising. If it simply meant, possessed of arka, i. e. songs
of praise, it would be a very lame epithet after panasyu.
But other passages, like 1. 19, 43 52, 15, show that the
conception of the Maruts as singers was most familiar to
the Vedic Rishis (i. 64,10; Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. i. p. 521,
note); and arka is the very name applied to their songs
(1. 19,4). In the Edda, too, ‘storm and thunder are repre-
sented as a lay, as the wondrous music of the wild hunt.
The dwarfs and Elbs sing the so-called Alb-leich which
carries off everything, trees and mountains.’ See Justi in
Orient und Occident, vol. ii. p. 62. There is no doubt
therefore that arkin here means musician, and that the arka
of the Maruts is the music of the winds.

Verse 15, note ®. Vriddha, literally grown, is used in the
Veda as an honorific epithet, with the meaning of mighty
or great:

ill. 32, 7- yagamah it ndmasa vriddham indram

brihantam rishvam agéram ytivanam.

We worship with praise the mighty Indra, the great, the
exalted, the immortal, the vigorous.

Here neither is vriddha intended to express old age, nor
ytivan young age, but both are meant as laudatory epithets.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 38. 79

Asan is the so-called Let of as, to be. This Lef is
properly an imperative, which gradually sinks down to a
mere subjunctive. Of as, we find the following Le? forms :
belonging to the present, we have dsasi, ii. 26, 2; Asati, vi.
23,9; asathah, vi. 63, 1; and 4satha, v. 61, 4: belonging
to the imperfect, asah, viii. 100, 2; dsat, i. 9, 5; dsdma, i.
173, 93 asan, i. 89,1. Asam, a form quoted by Roth from
Rig-veda x. 27, 4, is really dsam.

We find, for instance, 4sah, with an imperative or opta-
tive meaning, in

vill. 100, 2. asah ka tvém dakshinatah sdkha me

adha vritrani ganghanava bhitri.

And be thou my friend on my right hand, and we shall
kill many enemies.

Here we see the transition of meaning from an imperative
to the conditional. In English, too, we may say, ‘ Do this
and you shall live,’ which means nearly the same as, ‘If you
do this, you will live” Thus we may translate this passage :
‘And if thou be my friend on my right side, then we shall
kill many enemies.’

X. 124, 1. imém nah agne upa yagfhdain 4 ihi—

asah havya-vat uta nah purah-gah.

Here we have the imperative ihi and the Le? asah used
in the same sense.

Far more frequently, however, 4sah is used in relative
sentences, such as,

vi. 36, 5. dsah yatha nah sdvasa kakanah,

That thou mayest be ours, delighting in strength.

Vii. 24, 1. dsah yatha nah avita vridhé ka.

That thou mayest be our helper and for our increase.

See also x. 44, 4; 85, 26; 36.

Wilson: ‘May they be exalted by this our worship.’
Benfey : ‘ Mégen die Hohen hier bei uns sein.’

80 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawpata I, StUxta 39.
Asu7TaAka I, ApHyAvA 8, VARGA 18-19.

1. Prd ydt ithd para-vatah sokth n&é ménam asyatha,
kdsya krétva marutah kdésya varpasd kim yatha kém
ha dhitayah.

2. Sthird vah santu A&yudha pard-nide vili utd
prati-skébhe, yushm&kam astu tdvishi pdniyasi ma
martyasya mayinah.

3. Péra ha ydt sthirém hathd nérah vartdyatha
guru, vi yAthana vaninah prithivydh vi asih parva-
tandm.

4, Nahi vah sdtruh vividé ddhi dydvi né bhimyam
risidasah, yushmdkam astu tavishi tana yugad ridra-
sah nu kit 4-dhrishe.

5. Pr& vepayanti parvatan vi vifikanti vanaspatin,
pré (iti) arata marutah durmddah-iva dévasah sdrvaya
visa.

6. Upo ({ti) rétheshu prishatih ayugdhvam prdsh-
tih vahati réhitah, & vah ydmaya prithivi kit asrot
dbibhayanta ma&nushah.

7. A vah maksht téndya kim ridrAh dvah vrini-
mahe, génta nindm nah dvasi ydthd pura itthd kdn-
vaya bibhytshe.

8. Yushmé-ishitah marutah martya-ishitah & yah
nah dbhvah ishate, vi tim yuyota sdévasd vi égasd vi
yushmakabhih dti-bhih.

9. AsAmi hf pra-yagyavah kénvam dada pra-ketasah,
dsdmi-bhih marutah & nah dti-bhih génta vrishtim nd
vi-dyutah.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 39. 81

Hymn to THE Maruts (tHE SrorM-cops).

1. When you thus from afar cast forwards your
measure? like a blast of fire, through whose wisdom
is it, through whose design ?? To whom do you go, to
whom, ye shakers (of the earth) ?

2. May your weapons be firm to attack, strong
also to withstand. May yours be the more glorious
strength, not that of the deceitful mortal.

3. When you overthrow what is firm, O ye men,
and whirl about what is heavy, you pass! through the
trees of the earth, through the clefts of the rocks’

4. No real foe of yours is known in heaven, nor
on earth, ye devourers of enemies! May strength be
yours, together with your race,! O Rudras, to defy
even now.”

5. They make the rocks to tremble, they tear
asunder the kings of the forest... Come on, Maruts,
like madmen, ye gods with your whole tribe.

6. You have harnessed the spotted deer to your
chariots, a red one draws as leader ;' even the earth
listened at your coming, and men were frightened.

7. O Rudras, we quickly desire your help for our
race. Come now to us with help, as of yore; thus
now also, for the sake of the frightened Kanva.*

8. Whatever fiend, roused by you or roused by
men, attacks us, tear him (from us) by your power,
by your strength, by your aid.’

9. For you, worshipful and wise, have wholly pro-
tected! Kanva. Come to us, Maruts, with your entire
help, as lightnings? (go in quest of).the rain.

VOL. I. G

82 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

10. Asimi égah bibhritha su-dinavah d4s&mi dhi-
tayah sdvah, rishi-dvishe marutah pari-manyave

ishum né srigata dvisham.

COMMENTARY.

This hymn is ascribed to Kanva, the son of Ghora. The
metre varies between Brihatt and Satobrihati, the odd verses
being composed in the former, the even verses in the latter
metre. Each couple of such verses is called a Barhata
Pragatha, The Brihati consists of 8+8+412+8, the
Satobrihati of 12+8+12+8 syllables.

Verse 1, note’. Mana, which I translate by measure, is
explained by Sayana as meaning strength. Wilson: ‘ When
you direct your awful vigour downwards from afar, as light
(descends from heaven).? Benfey: ‘Wenn ihr aus weiter
Ferne so wie Strahlen schleudert euren Stolz (das worauf
ihr stolz seid: euren Blitz). Langlois: ‘ Lorsque vous
lancez votre souffle puissant.? I doubt whether mana is
ever used in the Rig-veda in the sense of pride, which no
doubt it has, as a masculine, in later Sanskrit: cf. Hald-
yudha, ed. Aufrecht, iv. 37. Mana, as a masculine,
means frequently a poet in the Rig-veda, viz. a measurer, a
thinker or maker ; as a neuter it means a measure, or what
is measured or made. Thus y. 85, 5, we read:

_ manena-iva tasthi-van antarikshe vi yéh mamé prithivim
stiryena.

He (Varuna) who standing in the welkin has measured
the earth with the sun, as with a measure.

In this passage, as well as in ours, we must take measure,
not in the abstract sense, but as a measuring line, which is
cast forward to measure the distance of an object, an image,
perfectly applicable to the Maruts, who seem with their
weapons to strike the trees and mountains when they them-
selves are still far off. Another explanation might be given,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 39. 83

10. Bounteous givers, you possess whole strength,
whole power, ye shakers (of the world). Send, O
Maruts, against the wrathful enemy of the poets
an enemy, like an arrow.!

if mana could be taken in the sense of measure, i.e. shape
or form, but this is doubtful.

Verse 1, note *. Varpas, which generally means body or
form, is here explained by praise. Benfey puts Werk (i.e.
Gesang, Gebet) ; Langlois, maison. Varpas, which, without
much reason, has been compared to Latin corpus, must here
be taken in a more general sense. Thus vi. 44, 14, asyd
madé puri vérpamsi vidvan, is applied to Indra as knowing
many schemes, many thoughts, many things, when he is
inspired by the Soma-juice.

Verse 3, note ’. Benfey takes vi yathana in a causative
sense, you destroy, you cause the trees to go asunder. But
even without assigning to ya a causative meaning, to go
through, to pierce, would convey the idea of destruction.
In some passages vi-ya is certainly used in the simple sense
of passing through, without involving the idea of destruction:

viii. 73, 13. rathah viyati rédasi (iti).

Your chariot which passes through or between heaven
and earth.

In other passages the mere passing across implies con-
quest and destruction :

i. 116, 20. vi-bhindtna....réthena vi parvatan....ayatam.

On your dissevering chariot you went across the moun-
tains (the clouds).

In other passages, however, a causative meaning seems
equally, and even more applicable :

vill. 7, 23. vi vritrém parva-sdh yayuh vi parvatan.

They passed through Vritra piecemeal, they passed through
the mountains (the clouds) ; or, they destroyed Vritra, cutting
him to pieces, they destroyed the clouds.

Ge2

84 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Likewise i. 86, 10. vi yata visvam atrinam.
Walk athwart every evil spirit, or destroy every evil spirit !

v-v

We must scan vi yathana vaninah prithivyah.

Verse 8, note 2, It might seem preferable to translate
Asih parvatandm by the spaces of the clouds, for parvata
means cloud in many places. Yet here, and still more
clearly in verse 5, Where parvata occurs again, the object of
the poet is to show the strength of the Maruts. In that
case the mere shaking or bursting of the clouds would sound
very tame by the side of the shaking and breaking of the
forest trees. Vedic poets do not shrink from the conception
that the Maruts shake even mountains, and Indra is even said
to have cut off the mountain tops: iv. 19, 4. dva abhinat kaka-
bhah parvatanam. In the later literature, too, the same idea
occurs: Mahabh. Vana-parva, v. 10974, dyauA svit patati
kim bhtimir diryate parvato nu kim, does the sky fall? is
the earth torn asunder, or the mountain ?

Verse 4, note’. Sayana was evidently without an autho-
ritative explanation of tana yuga. He tries to explain it by
. ‘through the union of you may strength to resist be quickly
extended.? Wilson: ‘May your collective strength be
quickly exerted.” Benfey takes taéné as adverb and leaves
out yuga: ‘ Zu allen Zeiten, O Furchtbarn !—sei im Nu zu
uberwalt’gen euch die Macht.’ Yuga, an instrumental, if
used together with another instrumental, becomes in the
Veda a mere preposition: cf. vii. 43, 5; 95, 4. raya yug4;
x. 83, 3. tapasd yuga ; x. 102, 12. vadhrina yuga ; vii. 32, 20.
puram-dhya yuga; vi. 56, 2. sdkhya yuga; vill. 68, 9. tv
yuga. As to the meaning of tan, see B.R. s.v., where
tan in our passage is explained as continuation. The off-
spring or race of the Maruts is mentioned again in the
next verse.

Verse 4, note *. Nu kit a-dhrishe might possibly be taken
as an abrupt interrogative sentence, viz. Can it be defied 2
Can it be resisted? See v. 87, 2:

tat vah marutah na A-dhrishe savah.

Your strength, O Maruts, is not to be defied.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 39. 85

Verse 5, note '. Large trees of the forest are called the
kings or lords of the forest,

Verse 6, note’. Prash¢i is explained by Sdyana as a
sort of yoke in the middle of three horses or other animals,
harnessed in a car; rohita as a kind of red deer. Hence
Wilson remarks that the sense may be, ‘The red deer
yoked between them aids to drag the car.’ But he adds
that the construction of the original is obscure, and ap-
parently rude and ungrammatical. Benfey translates, ‘ Sie
fiihrt ein flammenrothes Joch,’ and remarks against Wilson
that Sayana’s definition of prashfi as yoke is right, but that
of rohita as deer, wrong. If Sayana’s authority is to be
invoked at all, one might appeal from Sayana in this place
to Sayana viii. 7, 28, where prashfi is explained by him
either by quick or by pramukhe yugyamanah, harnessed in
front. The verse is

yat ésham prishatih rathe prashtih vahati réhitah.

When the red leader draws or leads their spotted deer in
the chariot.

vi. 47, 24. prashtih is explained as tripada adharah ; tad-
vad vahantiti prashfayo *svah. In i. 100, 17, prashfibhih, as
applied to men, means friends or supporters, or, as Sayana
explains, parsvasthair anyair rishibhih,

Verse 7, note’. Kanva, the author of the hymn.
Verse 8, note '. A very weak verse, particularly the
second line, which Wilson renders by, ‘ Withhold from him
food and strength and your assistance.” Benfey translates
abhva very happily by Ungethiim.

Verse 9, note 1. The verb dada is the second pers. plur. of
the perfect of da, and is used here in the sense of to keep, to
protect, as is well shown by B. and R. s.v. da 4, base dad.
Sayana did not understand the word, and took it for an
irregular imperative ; yet he assigned to the verb the proper
sense of to keep, instead of to give. Hence Wilson:
‘Uphold the sacrificer Kafiva. Benfey, less correctly,
‘Den Kanva gabt ihr, as if Kanva had been the highest
gift of the Maruts.

86 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Verse 9, note *. The simile, as lightnings go to the
rain, is not very telling. It may have been suggested by
the idea that the lightnings run about to find the rain,
or the tertium comparationis may simply be the quickness
of lightning. Wilson: ‘As the lightnings bring the rain.
Benfey: ‘(So schnell) gleichwie der Blitz zum Regen
kémmt. Lightning precedes the rain, and may therefore
be represented as looking about for the rain.

Verse 10, note !. Wilson: ‘Let loose your anger.’
Sayana: ‘Let loose a murderer who hates.’

Pari-manyt, which occurs but once in the Rig-veda, cor-
responds as nearly as possible to the Greek meptOui.os.
Manyti, like Oyu0os, means courage, spirit, anger; and in
the compound parimanyd, as in rep/Oumos, the preposition
pari seems to strengthen the simple notion of the word.
That pari is used in that sense in later Sanskrit is well
known; for instance, in parilaghu, perlevis, parikshama,
withered away: see Pott, Etymologische Forschungen,
second edition, vol. i. p. 487. How pari, originally meaning
round about, came to mean excessive, is difficult to explain
with certainty. It may have been, because what surrounds
exceeds, but it may also have been because what is done all

‘around a thing is done thoroughly. Thus we find in the
Veda, vill. 75, 9, pari-dvéshas, lit. one who hates all around,
then a great hater : ;

ma nah pari-dveshasah amhatih, irmih na ndvam & vadhit.

May the grasp of the violent hater strike us not, as the
wave strikes a ship.

Again, pari-spridh means literally one who strives round
about, then an eager enemy, a rival (fem.)
ix. 53, 1. nudasva yah pari-spridhah.

Drive away those who are rivals.

Pari-kros4 means originally one who shouts at one from
every side, who abuses one roundly, then an angry reviler.
This word, though not mentioned in B. R.’s Dictionary,
occurs in

i. 29, 7. Sdrvam pari-krosém gahi.

Kill every reviler !

The same idea which is here expressed by pari-krosa, is

.
.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 39. 87

in other places expressed by pari-rap, lit. one who shouts
round about, who defies on every side, a calumniator, an
enemy.

UH OX aa ame) vi-badhya pari-rapah.

Having struck down the enemies.

il. 23, 14. vi pari-raépah ardaya.

Destroy the enemies.

In the same way as words meaning to hate, to oppose,
to attack, are strengthened by this preposition, which con-
veys the idea of round about, we also find words expressive
of love strengthened by the same preposition. Thus from
pritah, loved, we have pari-pritah, lit. loved all round, then
loved very much: i. 190, 6. pari-pritah né mitrah; cf. x.
27, 12. We also find ix. 72, 1. pari-priyah, those who
love fully or all around, which may mean great lovers, or
surrounding friends.

In all these cases the intensifying power of pari arises
from representing the action of the verb as taking place
on every side, thoroughly, excessively ; but in other cases,
mentioned by Professor Pott, particularly where this prepo-
sition is jomed to a noun which implies some definite limit,
its magnifying power is no doubt due to the fact that what
is around, is outside, and therefore beyond. Thus in Greek
mepiweTpos expresses the same idea as umépuerpos (loc. cit.
p- 488), but I doubt whether pari ever occurs in that sense
in Sanskrit compounds.

88 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawpata I, SOxnta 64.
Asuraka I, ApHyAya 5, VARGA 6-8.

1. Vrishne sardhaya st-makhaya vedhase ndédhah
su-vriktim pré bhara martt-bhyah, apah* n& dhi-
rah ménasi su-hdstyah girah sim afige vidétheshu
a-bhtivah.

2. Té gagiiire divah rishvasah ukshanah ee.
marydh dsurah arepdsah, pavakasah sikayah stiryah-
iva sitvanah n4& drapsinah ghoré-varpasah.

3. Yuvanah rudraéh agérah abhok-haénah vavakshuh
Adhri-gavah parvatah-iva, drilhd kit visva bhivanani
parthiva pra kyavayanti divydni magmana.

4. Kitrath afigi-bhih vapushe vi afigate vakshah-su
rukman ddhi yetire subhé, 4mseshu eshim ni mi-
mrikshuh rishtayah sikdm gagfiire svadhdyé divah
narah.

5. fsina-kritah dhinayah ristdasah vatan vi-dytitah
tévishibhih akrata, duhdénti fidhah divy&ni dhiitayah
bhimim pinvanti pdyasa pdri-grayah.

6. Pinvanti apah martitah su-ddnavah payah ghrité-
vat viddtheshu a-bhiivah, &tyam nd mihé vi nayanti
vaginam utsam duhanti standyantam dkshitam.

7. Mahishdsah mayinah kitré-bhanavah girdyah nd,

* apih ?

MANDALA I, SUKTA 64. 89

Hymn To THE Maruts (tHE StorM-cops).

1. For the manly host, the majestic, the wise, for
the Maruts bring thou, O Nodhas,! a pure offering,
Like a workman,* wise in his mind and handy, I join
together words which are useful at sacrifices.

2. They are born, the tall bulls of Dyu' (heaven),
the boys? of Rudra, the divine, the blameless, pure,
and bright like suns; scattering rain-drops, of awful
shape, like giants.’

3. The youthful Rudras, they who never grow old,
the slayers of the demon,’ have grown irresistible
like mountains. They shake with their strength all
beings, even the strongest, on earth and in heaven.

4, They deck themselves with glittering ornaments’
for show ; on their chests they fix gold (chajns) for
beauty ;” the spears on their shoulders pound to
pieces ;* they were born together by themselves,‘ the
men of Dyu.

5. They who confer power,’ the roarers,’ the de-
vourers of foes, they made winds and lightnings by
their powers. The shakers milk the heavenly udders
(clouds), roaming around they fill the earth with
milk (rain).

6. The bounteous' Maruts fill? (with) the fat milk
(of the clouds) the waters, which are useful at
sacrifices. They seem to lead* about the powerful
horse, the cloud, to make it rain; they milk the
thundering, unceasing spring.’

7. Mighty you are, powerful, of wonderful splen-
dour, firmly rooted! like mountains, (yet) lightly

90 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

svd-tavasa raghu-sy4dah, mrig&h-iva hastinah kha-
datha v4na y4t arunishu tdévishih 4yugdhvam.

8. Simhdh-iva nanadati pré-ketasah pisdh-iva su-
pisah visvé-vedasah, kshépah ginvantah prishati-
bhih rishti-bhid s4m it sa-b4dhah s&vasi éhi-ma-

nyaval.

9. Rédasi ({ti) 4 vadata gana-sriyah nri-sikah stirah
sivasé 4hi-manyavah, 4 vandhtreshu amatih nd dar-
satd vi-dytit né& tasthau marutah rétheshu vah.

10, Visvé-vedasah rayi-bhih sdém-okasah sdém-mi-
slasah tavishibhih vi-rapsinah, dastarah fshum dadhire
gdbhastyoh anantd-sushmah vrisha-khadayah ndrah.

11. Hiranydéyebhih pavi-bhih payah-vridhah ut
gighnante a-pathyah nda pdérvataén, makhah aydsah
sva-sritah dhruva-kyutah dudhra-kritah marttah
bhragat-rishtayah.

12. Ghrishum pavakém vaninam vi-karshanim ru-
drdésya simtim havds4 grinimasi, ragah-tiram tavé-
sam marutam gandm rigishinam vrishanam saskata
sriyé.

13. Pré ni séh martah sdvasi gdndn sti tasthau
vah titi marutah ydm avata, drvat-bhih végam_ bha-
rate dhéna nri-bhih a-prikkhyam krétum 4 ksheti
pushyati.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 64. 91

gliding along ;—you chew up forests, like elephants,”
when you have assumed vigour among the red flames.

8. Like lions they roar, the far-sighted Maruts,
they are handsome like gazelles,! the all-knowing.
By night” with their spotted deer (rain-clouds) and
with their spears (lightnings) they rouse the com-
panions together, they whose ire through strength
is like the ire of serpents.

9. You who march in companies, the friends of
man, heroes, whose ire through strength is like the
ire of serpents, salute heaven and earth!! On the
seats on your chariots, O Maruts, the lightning stands,
visible like light.’

10. All-knowing, surrounded with wealth, endowed
with vigour, singers,’ men of endless prowess, armed
with strong rings,” they, the archers, have placed the
arrow on their arms.

11. The Maruts, who with their golden fellies,
increase the rain, stir up the clouds like wanderers
on the road. They are brisk, indefatigable,’ they
move by themselves ; they throw down what is firm,
the Maruts with their brilliant spears ‘make (every-
thing) to reel.”

12. We invoke with prayer' the offspring of Ru-
dra, the brisk, the bright, the worshipful,” the active.
Cling? for happiness-sake to the strong host of the
Maruts, the chasers of the sky,* the vigorous, the
impetuous.’

13. The mortal whom ye, Maruts, protected with
your protection, he indeed surpasses people in strength.
He carries off food with his horses, treasures with his
men ; he acquires honourable’ strength,and he prospers.”

92 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

14. Karkrityam marutah prit-si dustéram dyu-
méntam stishmam maghdvat-su dhattana, dhana-
spritam ukthyim visvé-karshanim tokém pushyema
ténayam satdim himah.

15. Nu sthirém marutah virdé-vantam riti-stham
rayim asma&su dhatta, sahasrinam satinam stisu-vam-
sam pratéh makshi dhiy&-vasuh gagamyat.

COMMENTARY.

This hymn is ascribed to Nodhas, of the family of Go-
tama. The metre from verse 1-14 is Gagati, verse 15 is
Trish¢éubh.

Verse 1, note *. The first line is addressed by the poet
to himself.

Verse 1, note *. Suvrikti is generally explained by a
hymn of praise, and it cannot be denied that in this place,
as in most others, that meaning would be quite satisfactory.
Etymologically, however, suvrikti means the cleaning and
trimming of the grass on which, as on a small altar, the
oblation is offered: cf. vriktabarhis, i. 38, 1, note ?, page 68.
Hence, although the same word might be metaphorically
applied to a carefully composed, pure and holy hymn of
praise, yet wherever the primary meaning is applicable it
seems safer to retain it: cf. lil. 61, 53 vi. E1, 5.

Verse 1, note *. Apas, with the accent on the last syllable,
is the accusative plural of ap, water, and it is so explained
by Sayana. He translates: ‘I show forth these hymns of
praise, like water, i.e. everywhere, as Parganya sends down
rain at once in every place.’ Benfey explains: ‘I make
these hymns smooth like water, i. e. so that they run smooth

MANDALA I, SUKTA 64. 93

14. Give, O Maruts, to the worshippers strength
glorious, invincible in battle, brilliant, wealth-confer-
ring, praiseworthy, known to all men.! Let us foster
our kith and kin during a hundred winters.

15. Will’ you then, O Maruts, grant unto us wealth,
durable, rich in men, defying all onslaughts ??—wealth
a hundred and a thousand-fold, always increasing 4—
May he who is rich in prayers® (the host of the
Maruts) come early and soon!

like water.” He compares pv@u0s, as derived from péw.
Another explanation might be, that the hymns are powerful
like water, when it has been banked up. Yet all these
similes seem very lame, and I feel convinced that we ought
either to change the accent, and read apa, or the last vowel,
and read apa. In the former case the meaning would be,
‘ As one wise in mind and clever performs his work, so do I
compose these hymns.’ In the second case, which seems
to me preferable, we should translate: ‘Like a workman,
wise in mind and handy, I put together these hymns.’

Verse 2, note *. It is difficult to say in passages like this,
whether Dyu should be taken as heaven or as a personified
deity. When the Maruts are called Rudrasya maryah, the
boys of Rudra (vii. 56, 1), the personification is always pre-
served. Hence if the same beings are called Divah maryah,
this too, I think, should be translated the boys of Dyu (iti.
54, 13; V- 59, 6), not the sons of heaven. The bulls of
Dyu is a more primitive and more vigorous expression for
what we should call the fertilising winds of heaven.

Verse 2, note *. Marya is a male, particularly a young
male, a boy, a young man (i. 115, 23 ill. 33, 10; Iv. 20, 5;
v. 61, 4, with vira) :

Vv. 59, 5. maryah-iva su-vridhah vavridhuh narah.

Like boys that grow well they have grown men,

94 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

When joined with nadrah (v. 53, 3), marah maryah are-
pasah, it may be taken as an adjective, manly, strong. At
last marya assumes the general meaning of man:

i. QI, 13. maryah-iva své okyé.

Like a man in his own house.

Verse 2, note *. The simile, like giants, is not quite clear.
Sdtvan means a strong man, but it seems intended here to
convey the idea of supernatural strength. Benfey translates,
‘like brave warriors ; Wilson, ‘like evil spirits” Ghora-
varpas is an adjective belonging to the Maruts rather than
to the giants, and may mean of awful aspect, i. 19, 5, or of
cruel mind ; cf. i. 39, 1, note *.

Verse 3, note’. Abhog-ghanaf, the slayers of the demon,
are the slayers of the clouds, viz. of such clouds as do not
yield rain. Abhog, not nurturing, is a name of the rainless
cloud, like Namuki (na-muf, not delivering rain), the name
of another demon killed by Indra; see Benfey, Glossar, s.v.
The cloud which sends rain is called bhugman :

Vill. 50, 2. girth na bhugma. maghavat-su pinvate.

Like a feeding cloud he showers his gifts on the wor-
shippers.

Verse 4, note 1. The ornaments of the Maruts are best
described v. 54, I1:

amseshu vah rishtayah pat-si khadayah vaékshah-su ruk-
mah,

On your shoulders are the spears, on your feet rings, on
your chests gold ornaments.

Rukma as a masc. plur. is frequently used for ornaments
which are worn on the breast by the Maruts, but no hint is
given as to the exact nature of the ornaments. The Maruts
are actually called rukmavakshasah, gold-breasted, (ii. 34, 2;

V.055, Loe iese

Verse 4, note *. Vapushe and subhé, as parallel expres-
sions, occur also vi. 63, 6.

Verse 4, note *. Ni mimrikshur does not occur again in
the Rig-veda, and Roth has suggested to read ni mimikshur
instead; see ni+marg. He does not, however, give our

MANDALA I, SUKTA 64. 95

passage under mya, but under mraksh, and this seems
indeed preferable. No doubt, there is ample analogy for
mimikshuh, and the meaning would be, their spears stick
firm to their shoulders. But as the MSS. give mimrikshuh,
and as it is possible to find a meaning for this, I do not
propose to alter the text. The question is only, what does
mimrikshuh mean? Mraksh means to grind, to rub, and
Roth proposes to render our passage by ‘the spears rub
together on their shoulders.’ The objections to this trans-
lation are the preposition ni, and the active voice of the verb.
I take mraksh in the sense of grinding, pounding, destroying,
which is likewise appropriate to mraksha-kritvan (vill. 61, Io),
and tuvi-mraksha (vi. 18, 2), and I translate, ‘the spears on
their shoulders pound to pieces.’

Verse 4, note *. The idea that the Maruts owe every-
thing, if not their birth, at least their strength (sv4-tavasah,
sva-bhanavah, sva-sritah), to themselves is of frequent occur-
rence in these hymns.

Verse 5, note ’. They are themselves compared to kings

(i. 85, 8), and called isana, lords (i. 87, 4).

Verse 5, note ”. Dhitni is connected with root dhvan, to
dun or to din.’ Sayana explains it by bending or shaking,
and Benfey, too, translates it by Hrschiitterer. Roth gives
the right meaning.

Verse 6, note '. I translate sudanavah by bounteous, or
good givers, for, if we have to choose between the two
meanings of bounteous or endowed with liquid drops or
dew, the former is the more appropriate in most passages.
We might, of course, admit two words, one meaning, pos-
sessed of good water, the other, bounteous; the former
derived from danu, neuter, water, or rain, the other from
dant, giving. It cannot be denied, for instance, that when-
ever the Maruts are called suddnavah, the meaning, pos-
sessed of good rain, would be applicable: i. 40, 1; 44, 143
64.16 3095, TOrmiae4, 65 il. 26; 53 V- 52. 53 53.93 575 55
ill, Our Seme Oars Ts) 2° 23,9339, 10. BYetr even
in these passages, while sudanavah in the sense of possessed

96 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

of good rain is possible throughout, that of good giver would
sometimes be preferable, for instance, i. 15, 2, as compared
Withy tel Sante

When the same word is applied to Indra, vu. 31, 2;
X. 23, 6; to Vishnu, viii. 25, 12; to the Asvins, i, 112, 11;
to Mitra and Varuna, v. 62, 9; to Indra and Varuaa, iv. 41,
8, the meaning of giver of good rain might still seem
more natural. But with Agni, vi. 2, 4; the Adityas, v. 67, 4;
viii, 18, 123 19, 343 67, 163 the Vasus, i. 106, 1; x. 66,
12; the Visve, x. 65, 11, such an epithet would not be
appropriate, while sudanavah, in the sense of bounteous
givers, is applicable to all. The objection that danu, giver,
does not occur in the Veda, is of no force, for many words
occur at the end of compounds only, and we shall see
passages where suddnu must be translated by good giver.
Nor would the accent of dand, giver, be an obstacle, con-
sidering that the author of the Unadi-sttras had no Vedic
authority to guide him in the determination of the accent of
dant. Several words in nu have the accent on the first
syllable. But one might go even a step further, and find
a more appropriate meaning for sudanu by identifying it
with the Zend hudanu, which means, not a good giver,
but a good knower, wise. True, this root da, to know, does
not occur in the ordinary Sanskrit, but as it exists both in
Zend and in Greek (Jayu:, daecs), it may have left this one
trace in the Vedic word sudanu. This, however, is only a
conjecture; what is certain is this, that apart from the
passages where sudanu is thus applied to various deities, in
the sense of bounteous or wise, it also occurs as applied to
the sacrificer, where it can only mean giver. This is clear
from the following passages :

i. 47, 8. isham prifkanta su-krite su-danave.

Bringing food to him who acts well and gives well.

Vil. 96, 4. gani-yantah nu agravah putri-yéntah su-ddna-
vah, sérasvantam havamahe.

We, being unmarried, and wishing for wives and wishing
for sons, offering sacrifices, call now upon Sarasvat.

Vill. 103, 7. su-danavah deva-ydvah.

Offering sacrifices, and longing for the gods. Cf. x. 172,
2. ac vE TO moe

MANDALA I, SUKTA 64. 97

iv. 4, 7. sah it agne astu su-bhégah su-ddnuh yah tv
nityena havisha yah ukthaih piprishati.

O Agni, let the liberal sacrificer be happy, who wishes
to please thee by perpetual offerings and hymns. See also
rele, One 00, 15) X5172, 2, 9.

It must be confessed that even the meaning of dénu is
by no means quite clear. It is clear enough where it means
demon, ii. 11, 18; 12, 11; iv. 30, 7; x. 120, 6, the seven
demons. In i. 32, g; iii. 30, 8, ddnu, demon, is applied to the
mother of Vritra. From this danu we have the derivative
danavaé, meaning again demon. Why the demons, con-
quered by Indra, were called danu, is not clear. It may
be in the sense of wise, or in the sense of powerful, for this
meaning is ascribed to danu by the author of the Undadi-
sitras. If the latter meaning is authentic, and not. only
deduced ex post from the name of Danu and Danava, it
might throw light on the Celtic dana, fortis, from which
Zeuss derives the name of the Danube.

But the sense of the neuter danu is by no means settled.
Sometimes it means Soma:

xX. 43,7. A4pah na sindhum abhi yat sam-aksharan s6masah
indram kulydh-iva hradém, vardhanti viprah méhah asya
sddane yévam né vrishtih divyéna danuna.

When the Somas run together to Indra, like water to
the river, like channels to the lake, then the priests
increase his greatness in the sanctuary, as rain the corn,
by the heavenly Soma-juice.

In the next verse girddanu means the sacrificer whose
Soma is always alive, always ready.

In vi. 50, 13, however, danu paprif is doubtful. As an
epithet to Apam népat, it may mean he who wishes for
Soma, or he who grants Soma; but in neither case is
there any tangible sense. Again, viii. 25, 5, Mitra and
Varuna are called sripré-dant, which may mean possessed
of flowing rain. And in the next verse, sim ya dantni
yemathuk may be rendered by Mitra and Varuna, who
brought together rain.

The fact that Mitra-Varuzau and the Asvins are called
danunaspati does not throw much more ‘ight on the sub-
ject, and the one passage where danu occurs as a feminine,

VOL, I. H

98 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

i. 54, 7, danuh asmai upara pinvate divah, may be trans-
lated by rain pours forth for him, below the sky, but the
translation is by no means certain.

Danukitra, applied to the dawn, the water of the clouds,
and the three worlds (v. 59, 8; 31, 63 i. 174, 7), means
most likely bright with dew or rain; and danumat vasu,
the treasure conquered by Indra from the clouds, can be
translated by the treasure of rain. Taking all the evidence
together, we can hardly doubt that danu existed in the
sense of liquid, rain, or Soma; yet it is equally certain that
danu existed in the sense of giver, if not of gift, and that
from this, in certain passages, at all events, sudanu must be
derived, as a synonym of sudavan, suddman, &c.

Verse 6, note *. Cf. vii. 50, 4, (nady&ah) payasa pinva-
manah, the rivers swelling with milk. Pinvati is here
construed with two accusatives, the conception being that
they fill or feed the waters, and that the waters take the
food, viz. the rain. The construction is not to be com-
pared with the Greek tpépewv Tpopay Twa Tomvee (Herod.
ii. 2), but rather with didacxew Twa TL.

Cf. vi. 63, 8. dhentim nai isham pinvatam dsakram.

You filled our cow (with) constant food.

Similarly duh, to milk, to extract, is construed with two
accusatives: Pan. 1. 4, 51. gam dogdhi payah, he milks the
cow milk.

Rv. ix. 107, 5. duhana’ tidhah divy4m madhu priyém.

Milking the heavenly udder (and extracting from it) the
precious sweet, i.e. the rain.

Verse 6, note *. The leading about of the clouds is
intended, like the leading about of horses, to tame them,
and make them eiedicnt, to the wishes of their riders, the
Maruts. Atyah vagi is a strong horse, possibly a stallion ;
but this horse is here meant to signify the cloud. Thus
we read :

v. 83, 6. diva nah vrishtim marutah rartdhvam pra
pinvata vrishnah dsvasya dharah.

Give us, O Maruts, the rain of heaven, pour forth the
streams of the stallion (the cloud).

MANDALA I, SUKTA 64. 99

In the original the simile is quite clear, and no one re-
quired to be told that the atyah vagi was meant for the cloud.
Vagin by itself means a horse, as i. 66, 2; 69, 3. vagi na
pritah, like a favourite horse: i. 116, 6. paidvah vagi, the
horse of Pedu. But being derived om vaga, strength,
vagin retained always something of its etymological meaning,
and was therefore easily and naturally transferred to the
cloud, the giver of strength, the source of food. Even with-
out the na, i.e. as if, the simile would have been understood
in Sanskrit, while in English it is hardly intelligible without
a commentary. Benfey discovers some additional idea in
support of the poet’s comparison: ‘Ich bin kein Pferde-
kenner,’ he says, ‘aber ich glaube bemerkt zu haben, dass
man Pferde, welche rasch gelaufen sind, zum Uriniren zu
bewegen sucht. So lassen hier die Maruts die durch
ihren Sturm rasch fortgetriebenen Wolken Wasser herab
stromen.’

Verse 6, note *. U'tsa, well, is meant again for cloud,
though we should hardly be justified in classing it as a name
of cloud, because the original meaning of ttsa, spring, is
really retained, as much as that of avata, well, in i. 85, 10-11.
The adjectives standyantam and akshitam seem more appli-
cable to cloud, yet they may be applied also to a spring.
Yaska derives utsa from ut-sar, to go forth; ut-sad, to go
out ; ut-syand, to well out; or from ud, to wet. In v. 32, 2,
the wells shut up by the seasons are identified with the
udder of the cloud.

Verse 7, note’. Svdtavas means really having their own
independent strength, a strength not derived from the
support of others. The yet which I have added in brackets
seems to have been in the poet’s mind, though it is not
expressed. In i. 87, 4, the Maruts are called sva-srit, going
by themselves, i. e. moving freely independently, wherever

they list. See i. 64, 4, note *

Verse 7, note, Mrigah hastinah, wild animals with a
hand or a trunk, must be meant for elephants, although it
has been doubted whether the poets of the Veda were

Eee

100 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

acquainted with that animal. Hastin is the received name
for elephant in the later Sanskrit, and it is hardly appli-
cable to any other animal. If they are said to eat the
forests, this may be understood in the sense of crushing or
chewing, as well as of eating.

Verse 7, note *. The chief difficulty of the last sentence
has been pointed out in B. and R.’s Dictionary, s. v. aruni.
Arunt does not oecur again in the whole of the Rig-veda.
If we take it with Sayama as a various reading of aruni, then
the Arunis could only be the ruddy cows of the dawn or of
Indra, with whom the Maruts, in this passage, can have no
concern. Nor would it be intelligible why they should be
called arunt in this one place only. If, as suggested by
B. and R., the original text had been yada arumishu, it
would be difficult to understand how so simple a reading.
could have been corrupted.

Another difficulty is the verb dyugdhvam, which is not
found again in the Rig-veda together with tavishi. Tavishi,
vigour, is construed with dha, to take strength, v. 32, 2.
adhatthah; v. 55, 2. dadhidhve; x. 102, 8. adhatta; also with
vas, iv. 16, 14; with pat, x. 113, 5, &c. But it is not
likely that to put vigour into the cows could be expressed
in Sanskrit by ‘you gain vigour in the cows.’ If tavishi
must be taken in the sense which it seems always to possess,
viz. vigour, it would be least objectionable to translate,
‘when you joined vigour, i.e. when you assumed vigour,
while being among the Arunts.’ The Arunis being the cows
of the dawn, aruzishu might simply mean in the morning.
Considering, however, that the Maruts are said to eat up
forests, aruni, in this place, is best taken in the sense of
red flames, viz. of fire or forest-fire (davagni), so that the
sense would be, ‘When you, Storms, assume vigour among
the flames, you eat up forests, like elephants.” Benfey :
‘Wenn mit den rothen eure Kraft ihr angeschirrt. Die
rothen sind die Antilopen, das Vehikel der Maruts, wegen
der Schnelligkeit derselben.’

Verse 8, note *. As pisd does not occur again in the Rig-
veda, and as Sayana, without attempting any etymological

MANDALA I, SUKTA 64. 101

arguments, simply gives it as a name of deer, it seems best
to adopt that sense till something better can be discovered.
Supis, too, does not occur again, In vii, 18, 2, pis is ex-
plained by gold, &c.; vii. 57, 3, the Maruts are called
visvapis.

Verse 8, note *. Kshépah can only be the accusative
plural, used in a temporal sense. It is so used in the
expression kshapah usrah ka, by night and by day, lit. nights
and days (vil. 15, 8). In vi. 52, 15, we find. kshépah usrah
in the same sense. iv. 53, 7. kshapabhih aha-bhih, by night
and by day. 1. 44, 8, the loc. plur. vytishfishu, in the
mornings, is followed by kshapah, the acc. plur., by night,
and here the genitive kshapah would certainly be preferable,
in the sense of at the brightening up of the night. The
acc. plur. occurs again in i, 116, 4, where tisra/’ is used as
an accusative (ii. 2, 23 vill. 41, 3). Kshapah, with the
accent on the last, must be taken as a genitivus temporalis,
like the German Nachts (i. 79, 6). In vill. 19, 31, kshapah
vastushu means at the brightening up of the night, i.¢. in
the morning. Thus, in ili. 50, 4, Indra is called kshapdm
vasta ganita stiryasya, the lighter up of nights, the parent
of the sun. In viii. 26, 3, ati kshapah, the genitive may
be governed by ati. In iv. 16, 19, however, the accusative
kshaépah would be more natural, nor do I see how a genitive
could here be accounted for :

dyavah na dyumnaih abhi santah aryah kshapah madema
saradah ka ptirvih.

May we rejoice many years, overcoming our enemies as
the days overcome the nights by splendour.

The same applies to i. 70, 4, where kshapa occurs with
the accent on the last syllable, whereas we expect kshapah
as nom. or acc. plural. Here B. and R. in the Sanskrit
Dictionary, s. v. kshap, rightly, I believe, suppose it to be a
nom. plur. in spite of the accent.

Verse 9, note 1. Rédasi, a dual, though frequently fol-
lowed by ubhé (i. 10, 8; 33, 9; 54, 2), means heaven and
earth, excluding the antariksha or the air between the
two. Hence, if this is to be included, it has to be added :

102 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Te oero: dpapri-van rédasi antdriksham. Cf. v. 85, 3. We
must scan rodasi. See Kuhn, Beitrage, vol. iv. p. 193.

Verse 9, note 7. The comparison is not quite distinct.
Amati means originally impetus, then power, e. g. v. 69, 1

vavridhanau amatim kshatriyasya.

Increasing the might of the warrior.

But it is most frequently used of the effulgence of the
sun, (i. 38, 85 -v. 45, 25.62,55 Vile 38, 15) 2°45, 3.) ee
alee v. 56, 8, ere the same companion of ae Maruts is
called Rodas’, The comparative particle na is used twice.

Verse 10, note’. See i. 38, 14, p. 78.

Verse 10, note *, In vrisha-khadi the meaning of khadi
is by no means clear. Sayana evidently guesses, and pro-
poses two meanings, weapon or food. In several passages
where khadi occurs, it seems to be an ornament rather than
a weapon, yet if derived from khad, to bite, it may origin-
ally have signified some kind of weapon. Roth translates
it by ring, and it is certain that these khadis were to be
seen not only on the arms and shoulders, but likewise on
the feet of the Maruts. There is a famous weapon in India,
the kakra or quoit, a ring with sharp edges, which is thrown
from a great distance with fatal effect. Bollensen (Orient
und Occident, vol. ii. p. 46) suggests for vrishan the meaning
of hole in the ear, and then translates the compound as
having earrings in the hole of the ear. But vrishan does
not mean the hole in the lap of the ear, nor has vrishabha
that meaning either in the Veda or elsewhere. Wilson gives
for vrishabha, not for vrishan, the meaning of orifice of the
ear, but this is very different from the hole in the lap of
the ear. Benfey suggests that the khadis were made of the
teeth of wild animals, and hence their name of biters. V7i-
shan conveys the meaning of strong, though possibly with
the implied idea of rain-producing, fertilisng. See p. 121.

Verse 11, note *. Formerly explained as ‘zum Kampfe
wandelnd.” See Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. iv. p. 19.

Verse 11, note *, Wilson: ‘Augmenters of rain, they

MANDALA I, SUKTA 64. 103

drive, with golden wheels, the clouds asunder ; as elephants
(in a herd, break down the trees in their way). They are
honoured with sacrifices, visitants of the hall of offering,
spontaneous assailers (of their foes), subverters of what
are stable, immovable themselves, and wearers of shining
weapons.’

Benfey : ‘ Weghemmnissen gleich schleudern die Fluth-
mehrer mit den goldnen Felgen das Gewélk empor, die nie
miiden Kampfer, frei schreitend-festesstiirzenden, die schweres
thuw’nden, lanzenstrahlenden Maruts.’

Verse 12, note *. Havasd, instead of what one should
expect, havasa, occurs but once more in another Marut
hymn, vi. 66, II.

Verse 12, note *. Vanin does not occur again as an
epithet of the Maruts. It is explained by Sayana as a
possessive adjective derived from vana, water, and Benfey
accordingly translates it by fluthversehn. This, however, is
not confirmed by any authoritative paSsages. Vanin, unless it
means connected with the forest, a tree, in which sense it oc-
curs frequently, is only applied to the worshippers or priests in
the sense of venerating or adoring (cf. venero, venustus, &c.):

iii. 40, 7. abhi dyumnani vaninad indram sakante akshita.

The inexhaustible treasures of the worshipper go towards
Indra.

vill. 3, 5. indram vaninah havamahe.

We, the worshippers, call Indra.

Unless it can be proved by independent evidence that
vanin means possessed of water, we must restrict vanin to
its two meanings, of which the only one here applicable,
though weak, is adoring. The Maruts are frequently repre-
sented as singers and priests, yet the epithets here applied to
them stand much in need of some definite explanation, as
the poet could hardly have meant to string a number of
vague and ill-connected epithets together. If one might
conjecture, svaninam instead of vaninam would be an im-
provement. It is a scarce word, and occurs but once more
in the Veda, iii. 26, 5, where it is used of the Maruts, in
the sense of noisy, turbulent.

104 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Verse 12, note *, Saskata, which I have here translated
literally by to cling, is often used in the sense of following
or revering (colere) :

ii. 1, 13. tvam rati-sakah adhvaréshu sashire.

The gods who are fond of offerings cling to thee, follow
thee, at the sacrifices.

The Soma libation is said to reach the god :

ii. 22, 1. saz enam saskat devah devam. The gods too are
said to cling to their worshippers, i.e. to love and protect
them: iii. 16, 2; vii. 18, 25. The horses are said to follow
their drivers: vi. 36, 3; Vil. go, 3, &c. It is used very much
like the Greek d7aCw.

Verse 12, note *. Ragasttih may mean rousing the dust
of the earth, a very appropriate epithet of the Maruts.
Sayana explains it thus, and most translators have adopted
his explanation. But as the epithets here are not simply
descriptive, but laudatory, it seems preferable, in this place,
to retain the usual meaning of ragas, sky. When Soma is
called ragastitth, ix. 10% 7, Sayana too explains it by tegasam
prerakam, and ix..48, 4, by udakasya prerakam.

Verse 12, note °. Rigishin, derived from rigisha. Rigisha
is what remains of the Soma-plant after it has once been
squeezed, and what is used again for the third libation.
Now as the Maruts are invoked at the third libation, they
were called rigishin, as drinking at their later libation the
juice made of the rigisha. This, at least, is the opinion
of the Indian commentators. But it is much more likely
that the Maruts were invoked at the third libation, because
originally they had been called rigishin by the Vedic poets,
this rigishin being derived from rigisha, and rigisha from rig,
to strive, to yearn, like purisha from pri, manishaé from
man; (see Undadi-stitras, p. 273.) This rig is the same
root which we have in opéyew, to reach, dpy7, emotion, and
dpyta, furious transports of worshippers. Thus the Maruts
from being called vigishin, impetuous, came to be taken for
drinkers of rigisha, the fermenting and overflowing Soma, and
were assigned accordingly to the third libation at sacrifices.
Rigishin, as an epithet, is not confined to the Maruts; it

MANDALA I, SUKTA 64. 105

is given to Indra, with whom it could not have had a purely
ceremonial meaning (viii. 76, 5).

_ Verse 138, note !. Aprikkhya, literally to be asked for, to
be inquired for, to be greeted and honoured. A word of an
apparently modern character, but occurring again in the
Rig-veda as applied to a prince, and to the vessel containing
the Soma.

Verse 13, note *. Ptishyati might be joined with kratu
and taken in a transitive sense, he increases his strength.
But pushyati is also used as an intransitive, and means he
prospers :

1, 83, 3. asam-yatah vraté te ksheti ptishyati.

Without let he dwells in thy service and prospers.

Roth reads asamyattah, against the authority of the MSS.

Verse 14, note '. The difficulty of this verse arises from
the uncertainty whether the epithets dhanaspritam, ukthyam,
and visvakarshanim belong to stishma, strength, or to toka,
kith and kin. Roth and Benfey connect them with toka,
Now dhanasprit is applicable to toka, yet it never occurs
joined with toka again, while it is used with sushma,
vi. 19, 8. Ukthya, literally to be praised with hymns, is
not used again as an epithet of toka, though it is quite
appropriate to any gift of the gods. Lastly, visvakarshani
is never applied to toka, while it is an epithet used, if not
exactly of the strength, sishma, given by the gods, yet of
the fame given by them :

X. 93, 10. dhatam viréshu visva-karshani sravah.

Give to these men world-wide glory. Cf. ili. 2, 15.

The next difficulty is the exact meaning of visva-karshani,
and such cognate words as visva-krishti, visva-manusha.
The only intelligible meaning I can suggest for these words
is, known to all men; originally, belonging to, reaching to
all men; as we say, world-wide or European fame, meaning
by it fame extending over the whole of Europe, or over the
whole world. If Indra, Agni, and the Maruts are called by
these names, they mean, as far as I can judge, known, wor-
shipped by all men. Benfey translates allverstandig.

106 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Verse 15, note '. Riti, the first element of riti-saham,
never occurs by itself in the Rig-veda. It comes from the
root ar, to hurt, which was mentioned before (p. 54) in
connection with ér-van, hurting, drus, wound, and 4ri,
enemy. Sém-riti occurs i. 32,6. iti therefore means hurt-
ing, and riti-séh means one who can stand an attack. In our
passage rayim viré-vantam riti-sham means really wealth
consisting in men who are able to withstand all onslaughts.

The word is used in a similar sense, vi. 14, 4:

agnih apsdm riti-s4ham viraém dadati sat-patim, yasya
trésanti sévasah sam-kakshi sdtravah bhiya.

Agni gives a strong son who is able to withstand all
onslaughts, from fear of whose strength the enemies tremble
when they see him.

In other passages riti-sah is applied to Indra:

vill, 45, 35. bibhaya hi tva-vatah ugrat abhi-prabhanginah
dasmat ahém riti-séhah.

For I stand in fear of a powerful man like thee, of one
who crushes his enemies, who is strong and withstands all
onslaughts.

vill. 68, 1. tuvi-kdrmim vriti-sA4ham indra_ savishtha
sat-pate.

Thee, O most powerful Indra, of mighty strength, able
to withstand all onslaughts.

viii. 88, 1. tam vah dasmam riti-saham—indram gih-bhih
navamahe.

We call Indra the strong, the resisting, with our songs.

Verse 15, note 7. The last sentence finishes six of the
hymns ascribed to Nodhas. It is more appropriate in a
hymn addressed to single deities, such as Agni or Indra,
than in a hymn to the Maruts. We must supply sardha,
in order to get a collective word in the masculine singular.

Nu, as usual, should be scanned nu,

Verse 15, note *. Dhiya-vasu, as an epithet of the gods,
means rich in prayers, i.e. invoked by many worshippers.
It does not occur frequently. Besides the hymns.of Nodhas,
it only occurs independently in i. 3, ro (Sarasvatt), iii. ae
iii, 28, 1 (Agni), these hymns being all ascribed to the

MANDALA I, SUKTA 64. 107

family of Visvamitra. In the last verse, which forms the
burden of the hymns of Nodhas, it may have been intended
to mean, he who is rich through the hymn just recited, he who
rejoices in the hymn, the god to whom it is addressed.

Nodhas, the poet, belongs, according to the Anukramazi,
to the family of Gotama, and in the hymns which are
ascribed to him, i. 58-64, the Gotamas are mentioned
several times :

i. 60, 5. tam tva vayaém patim agne rayinam pra samsa-
mah mati-bhih gétamasah.

We, the Gotamas, praise thee with hymns, Agni, the
lord of treasures.

1. 61, 16. eva te hari-yogana su-vrikti fndra bréhmani
goétamasah akran.

Truly the Gotamas made holy prayers for thee, O Indra
with brilliant horses! See also i. 63, 9.

In one passage Nodhas himself is called Gotama :

1. 62, 13. sand-yaté gétamah indra névyam

atakshat brahma hari-yéganaya,
su-nithaya nah savasana nodhah—
pratah maksht dhiya-vasuh gagamyat.

Gotama made a new song for the old (god) with brilliant
horses, O Indra! May Nodhas be a good leader to us, O
powerful Indra! May he who is rich in prayers (Indra)
come early and soon!

I feel justified therefore in following the Anukramani and
taking Nodhas as a proper name. It occurs so again in

i. 61, 14. sadyéh bhuvat viryaya nodhah,

May Nodhas quickly attain to power!

In i. 124, 4, nodhah-iva may mean like Nodhas, but more
likely it may have the more general meaning of poet.

108 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawopata I, SOxKraA 85.
AsHTAKA I, ADHYAYA 6, VARGA 9-10.

1. Pré yé simbhante gdnayah nd séptayah yaman
rudrasya stindvah su-damsasah, rédasi (iti) hi maru-
tah kakriré vridhé médanti virah vidétheshu ghri-
shvayah.

2. Té ukshit&4sah mahimdnam Asata divi rudrasah
ddhi kakrire sddah, drkantah arkém gandyantah
indriy4m ddhi sriyah dadhire prisni-matarah.

3. G6-matarah ydt subhdyante afigi-bhih tantishu
subhrah dadhire virikmatah, vadhante visvam abhi-
matinam Apa vartmani esham anu riyate ghritdm.

4. Vi yé bhr&égante st-makhasah rishti-bhih pra-
kyavayantah akyuta kit dégasd, manah-givah yat

marutah rdtheshu 4 vrisha-vratasah prishatih dyug-
dhvam.

5. Pré yaét ratheshu prishatih dyugdhvam vage
ddrim marutah ramhdyantah uté arushdsya vi syanti
dharah kérma-iva udé-bhih vi undanti bhtima.

6. A vah vahantu sdptayah raghu-syddah raghu-
patvanah pra gigata bahu-bhih, sidata & barhth uri
vah sddah kritém madéyadhvam marutah mddhvah
Andhasah.

7. Té avardhanta svd4-tavasah mahi-tvang & n&kam

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 109

Hymn To THE Marurs (THE SrorM-cops).

1. Those who glance forth like wives and yoke-
fellows,’ they are the powerful sons of Rudra on
their way. The Maruts have made heaven and
earth to grow,’ they, the strong and wild, delight
in the sacrifices.

2. When grown up,’ they attained to greatness ;
the Rudras have established their abode in the sky.
While singing their song and increasing their vigour,
the sons of Prisni have clothed themselves in beauty.”

3. When these sons of the cow (Prisni)! adorn
themselves with glittering ornaments, the brilliant’
ones put bright weapons on their bodies. They
hurl away every adversary;* fatness (rain) runs
along their paths ;—

4. When you,' the powerful, who glitter with
your spears, shaking even what is unshakable by
strength ; when you, O Maruts, the manly hosts,’
had yoked the spotted deer, swift as thought, to
your chariots ;—

5. When you had yoked the spotted deer before
your chariots, stirring’ the cloud to the battle, then
the streams of the red enemy’ rush forth: like a skin’®
with water they water the earth.

6. May the swift-gliding, swift-winged horses carry
you hither! Come forth with your arms!' Sit down
on the grass-pile; a wide place has been made for you.
Rejoice, O Maruts, in the sweet food.’

7. They who have their own strength, grew ' with

110 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

tasthth uri kakrire sd4dah, vishnuh yt ha avat
vrishanam mada-kytitam vdyah n& sidan ddhi bar-
hishi priyé.

8. Stirah-iva ft ytyudhayah n& gdgmayah srava-
sydvah nd pritandsu yetire, bhdyante visva bhuvana
martit-bhyah régdnah-iva tveshd-sandrisah ndrah.

9. Tvashté ydt vdgram st-kritam hiranydyam
sahdsra-bhrishtim su-dpah dvartayat, dhatté indrah
ndri d4pamsi kdrtave dhan vritrém nih apdm aubgat
arnavam.

10. Urdhvém nunudre avatém té dgasi dadri-
handm kit bibhiduh vi pdrvatam, dhémantah va-
ném martitah su-ddnavah mdde sémasya rdényani
kakrire.

11. Gihmdém nunudre avatéim tdyd dis& dsifikan
ttsam gdtamaya trishnd-ge, 4 gakkhanti im dvasd
kitra-bhinavah kémam viprasya tarpayanta dhdma-
bhih.

12, Y& vah sdérma sasamandya sdnti tri-dhatini
dastishe yakkhata ddhi, asmébhyam tani marutah vi
yanta rayim nah dhatta vrishanah su-viram.

COMMENTARY.

_ This hymn is ascribed to Gotama. The metre is Gagati,
except in verses 5 and 12, which are Trishtubh.

Verse 1, note’. The phrase ginayah nd sdptayah is
obscure. As gani has always the meaning of wife, and
sapti in the singular, dual, and plural means horse, it might

MANDALA I, SOKTA 85. 111

might ; they stepped to the firmament, they made
their place wide. When Vishnu? descried the
enrapturing Soma, the Maruts sat down like birds
on their beloved altar.

8. Like heroes indeed thirsting for fight they rush
about; like combatants eager for glory they have
struggled in battles. All beings are afraid of the
Maruts ; they are men awful to behold, like kings.

9. When the clever Tvashtar' had turned the
well-made, golden, thousand-edged thunderbolt, Indra
took it to perform his manly deeds;? he slew Vritra,
he forced out the stream of water.

10. By their power they pushed the well? aloft,
they clove asunder the cloud, however strong. Send-
ing forth their voice’ the beneficent Maruts performed,
while drunk of Soma, their glorious deeds.

11. They drove the cloud athwart this way, they
poured out the well to the thirsty Gotama, The
bright-shining Maruts approach him with help, they
with their clans fulfilled the desire of the sage.

12. The shelters which you have for him who
praises you, grant them threefold to the man who
gives! Extend the same to us, O Maruts! Give
us, ye heroes,’ wealth with excellent offspring !

be supposed that ganayah could be connected with siptayah,
so as to signify mares. But although gani is coupled with
patni, i. 62, 10, in the sense of mother-wife, ‘and though
sépti is most commonly joined with some other name for
horse, yet ganayah sdptayah never occurs, for the simple
reason that it would be too elaborate and almost absurd an
expression for vadavah. We find sapti joined with vagin,

112 HYMNS TO THE -MARUTS.

i. 162, 13 with rathya, i. 31, 73 dtyam na saptim, iit.
22, 13 sdapti hart, ili, 35, 2; dsva sapti-iva, vi. 59, 3

We might then suppose the thought of the poet to have
been this: What appears before us like race-horses, viz. the
storms coursing through the sky, that is really the host of
the Maruts. But then ganayad remains unexplained, and
it is impossible to take gdénayah na saptayah as two similes,
like unto horses, like unto wives.

I believe, therefore, that we must here take sdpti in its
original etymological sense, which would be ju-mentum, a
yoked animal, a beast of fee. or rather a follower, a
horse that will follow. Sapti, therefore, could never be
a wild horse, but always a tamed horse, a horse that will
go in harness. Cf. ix. 21, 4. hitah na saptayah rathe, like
horses put to the chariot; or in the singular, ix. 70, Io.
hitaéh nd sdptih, like a harnessed horse. The root is sap,
which in the Veda means to follow, to attend on, to
worship. But if sapti means originally animals that will
go together, it may in our passage have retained the sense
of yoke-fellow («vGuyos), and be intended as an adjective
to ganayah, wives. There is at least one other passage
where this meaning would seem to be more appropriate,
viz.

Vill, 20, 23. yaiyadm sakhayah saptayah.

You (Maruts), friends and followers! or you, friends and -
comrades !

Here it is hardly possible to assign to sdpti the sense of
horse, for the Maruts, though likened to horses, are never
thus barely invoked as saptayah /

If then we translate, ‘Those who glance forth like wives
and yoke-fellows,’ i.e. like wives of the same husband, the
question still recurs how the simile holds good, and how
the Maruts rushing forth together in all their beauty can be
compared to wives. In answer to this we have to bear in
mind that the idea of many wives belonging to one husband
(sapatni) is* familiar to the Vedic poet, and that their
impetuously rushing into the arms of their husbands, and
appearing before them in all their beauty, are frequent
images in their poetry. Whether in the phrase patim na
ginayah or ganayah nd gérbham, the ganis, the wives or

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 113

mothers, are represented as running together after their
husbands or children. This impetuous approach the poet
may have wished to allude to in our passage also, but
though it might have been understood at once by his
hearers, it is almost impossible to convey this implied idea
in any other language.

Wilson translates: ‘The Maruts, who are going forth,
decorate themselves like females: they are gliders (through
the air), the sons of Rudra, and the doers of good works,
by which they promote the welfare of earth and heaven.
Heroes, who grind (the solid rocks), they delight in
sacrifices,’

Verse 1, note »» The meaning of this phrase, which
occurs very frequently, was originally that the storms by
driving away the dark clouds, made the earth and the sky
to appear larger and wider, It afterwards takes a more
general sense of increasing, strengthening, blessing.

Verse 2, note '. Ukshita is here a participle of vaksh or
uksh, to grow, to wax; not from uksh, to sprinkle, to
anoint, to inaugurate, as explained by Sayana. Thus it is
said of the Maruts, v. 55, 3. sakdém gatah—sakam ukshitah,
born together, and grown up together.

Verse 2, note *. The same expression occurs vill. 28, 5.
sapté (iti) Adhi sriyah dhire. See also i. 116,175 ix. 68, 1.
1

Verse 3, note '. G6-matri, like gé-gita, a name of the

Maruts.
Verse 3, note *. Subhra applied to the Maruts, i. 19, 5.

Verse 3, note *, Virtékmatah must be an accusative
plural. It occurs i. 127, 3, as an epithet of 6gas; Vi. 49, 5,
as an epithet of the chariot of the Asvins. In our place,
however, it must be taken as a substantive, signifying
something which the Maruts wear, probably armour or
weapons. This follows chiefly from x. 138, 4. satran asrinat
virikmata, Indra tore his enemies with the bright weapon.

VOL, I. I

114 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

In viii. 20, 11, where rukmé occurs as a masculine plural, vi
bhragante rukmasah ddhi bahtishu, their bright things shine
on their arms, it seems likewise to be meant for weapons ;
according to Sayana, for chains. In v. 55, 3; x- 78, 3, the
Maruts are called vi-rokinah, bright like the rays of the sun
or the tongues of fire.

Verse 3, note *. Observe the short syllable in the tenth
syllable of this Pada.

Verse 4, note '. The sudden transition from the third to
the second person is not unusual in the Vedic hymns, the
fact being that where we in a relative sentence should use
the same person as that of the principal verb, the Vedic
poets frequently use the third.

Verse 4, note *. Vrisha-vrata is untranslatable for reasons
stated p. 121 seq.; it. means consisting of companies of vri-
shan’s in whatever sense that word be taken. Wilson in his
translation mistakes akyuta for akyutah, and vrata for vrata.
He translates the former by ‘ incapable of being overthrown,’
the latter by ‘entrusted with the duty of sending rain,
both against the authority of Sayana. Vrisha-vrata occurs
twice in the Rig-veda as an epithet of Soma only, ix. 62,
Dc Odea.

Verse 5, note *. Ramh, to stir up, to urge, to make go:

Vv. 32, 2. tvam utsan ritd-bhiz badbadhandn aramhah.

Thou madest the springs to run that had been shut up
by the seasons.

Vili. 19, 6. tasya it arvantah ramhayante asdvah.

His horses only run quick.

Adri, which I here preferred to translate by cloud, means
originally stone, and it is used in adrivah, wielder of the
thunderbolt, a common vocative addressed to Indra, in the
sense of a stone-weapon, or the thunderbolt. If we could
ascribe to it the same meaning here, we might translate,
“hurling the stone in battle.? This is the meaning adopted
by Benfey.

Verse 5, note *. The red enemy is the dark red cloud,
but arushé has almost become a proper name, and its

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 115

original meaning of redness is forgotten. Nay, it is possible
that arusha, as applied to the same power of darkness
which is best known by the names of Vritra, Dasyu, etc.,
may never have had the sense of redness, but been formed
straight from ar, to hurt, from which arvan, arus, etc.,
(see p. 54.) It would then mean simply the hurter, the
enemy, (see p. 17.)

Verse 5, note *. Sayana explains: ‘They moisten the
whole earth like a hide, a hide representing a small surface
which is watered without great effort. Wilson: ‘They
moisten the earth, like a hide, with water. Langlois:
“Alors les gouttes d’eau, pergant comme la peau de ce
(nuage) bienfaisant viennent inonder la terre.” Benfey :
“Dann stiirzen reichlich aus der rothen (Gewitterwolke)
Tropfen, mit Fluth wie eine Haut die Erde netzend. (Dass
die Erde so durchnasst wird, wie durchregnetes Leder.)’
If the poet had intended to compare the earth, before it
is moistened by rain, to a hide, he might have had in his
mind the dryness of a tanned skin, or, as Professor Benfey
says, of leather. If, on the contrary, the simile refers to
the streams of water, then sarma-iva, like a skin, might either
be taken in the technical acceptation of the skin through
which, at the preparation of the Soma, the streams (dharah)
of that beverage are squeezed and distilled, or we may take
the word in the more general sense of water-skin. In that
case the comparison, though not very pointedly expressed,
as it would have been by later Sanskrit poets, would still
be complete. The streams of the red enemy, i.e. of
the cloud, rush forth, and they, whether the streams
liberated by the Maruts, or the Maruts themselves, moisten
the earth with water, like a skin, i.e. like a skin in which
water is kept and from which it is poured out. The cloud
itself being called a skin by Vedic poets (i. 129, 3) makes
the comparison still more natural.

One other explanation might suggest itself, if the sin-
gular of karma should be considered objectionable on
account of the plural of the verb. Vedic poets speak
of the skin of the earth. Thus:

x. 68, 4. bhimyaf udna-iva vi tvakam bibheda.

ik

116 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

He (Brihaspati) having driven the cows from the cave,
cut the skin of the earth, as it were, with water, i.e.
saturated it with rain.

The construction, however, if we took karma in the sense
of surface, would be very irregular, and we should have
to translate: They moisten the earth with water like a skin,
i.e. skin-deep. . i 3 ae

We ought to scan karmevodabhih vi undanti bhdma,
for karmeva udabhih vyundanti bhima would give an
unusual czsura.

Verse 6, note ’. With your arms, i. e. according to
Sayana, with armfuls of gifts. Though this expression
does not occur again so baldly, we read i. 166, 10, of the
Maruts, that there are many gifts in their strong arms,
bhirini bhadra néryeshu bahtishu; nor does bahu, as used
in the plural, as far as I am able to judge, ever convey
any meaning but that of arms. The idea that the Maruts
are carried along by their arms as by wings, does not rest
on Vedic authority, otherwise we might join raghupatvanah
with bahubhiz, come forth swiftly flymg on your arms!
As it is, and with the accent on the antepenultimate, we
must refer raghupatvanah to saptayah, horses.

Verse 6, note ?. The sweet food is Soma.

Verse 7, note’. The initial ‘a’ of avardhanta must be

elided, or ‘té a’ be pronounced as two short syllables equal
to one long.

Verse 7, note®. Vishnu, whose character in the hymns
of the Veda is very different from that assumed by him in
later periods of Hindu religion, must here be taken as the
friend and companion of Indra. Like the Maruts, he
assisted Indra in his battle against Vritra and the conquest
of the clouds. When Indra was forsaken by all the gods,
Vishnu came to his help.

iv. 18, 11. uté mat& mahishém Anu avenat amy (iti) tva
gahati putra devah,

atha abravit vritram indrah hanishyén sékhe vishno (iti)
vi-taram vi kramasva.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 117

The mother also called after the bull, these gods forsake
thee, O son; then, when going to kill Vritra, Indra said,
Friend, Vishnu, step forward !

This stepping of Vishnu is emblematic of the rising, the
culminating, and setting of the sun; and in viii. 12, 27,
Vishnu is said to perform it through the power of Indra.
In vi. 20, 2, Indra is said to have killed Vritra, assisted by
Vishzu (vishnuna sakanéh). Vishnu is therefore invoked
together with Indra, vi. 69, 8; vii. 99; with the Maruts,
v. 87; vii. 36, 9. In vii. 93, 8, Indra, Vishnu, and the
Maruts are called upon together. Nay, maruta, belonging
to the Maruts, becomes actually an epithet of Vishnu,
v. 46, 2. maruta uta vishno (iti); and in i. 156, 4, marutasya
vedhasah has been pointed out by Roth as an appellation of
Vishnu. The mention of Vishnu in our hymn is therefore
by no means exceptional, but the whole purport of this
verse is nevertheless very doubtful, chiefly owing to the fact
that several of the words occurring in it lend themselves to
different interpretations.

The translations of Wilson, Benfey, and others have not
rendered the sense which the poet intends to describe at all
clear. Wilson says: ‘ May they for whom Vishnu defends
(the sacrifice), that bestows all desires and confers delight,
come (quickly) like birds, and sit down upon the pleasant
and sacred grass.’ Benfey: ‘Wenn Vishnu schitzt den
rauschtriefenden tropfenden (Soma), sitzen wie Vogel sie
auf der geliebten Streu.? Langlois: ‘Quand Vichnou
vient prendre sa part de nos enivrantes libations, eux,
comme des oiseaux, arrivent aussi sur le cousa qui leur
est cher,’

Whence all these varieties? First, because dvat may
mean, he defended or protected, but likewise he descried,
became aware. Secondly, because vrishan is one of the
most vague and hence most difficult words in the Veda,
and may mean Indra, Soma, or the cloud: (see the note on
Vrishan, p. 121.) Thirdly, because the adjective belonging
to vrishan, which generally helps us to determine which
vrishan is meant, is here itself of doubtful import, and
certainly applicable to Indra as well as to Soma and the
Asvins, possibly even to the cloud. Mada-kyuit is readily

118 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

explained by the commentators as bringing down pride,
a meaning which the word might well have in modern
Sanskrit, but which it clearly has not in the Veda. Even
where the thunderbolt of Indra is called madakyit, and
where the meaning of ‘bringing down pride’ would seem
most appropriate, we ought to translate ‘wildly rushing
down.’

viii. 96, 5. & yat vagram bahv6h indra dhatse mada-
kyttam éhaye hantavai dm (iti).

When thou tookest the wildly rushing thunderbolt in
thy arms in order to slay Ahi.

When applied to the gods, the meaning of madakyutt
is by no means certain. It might mean rushing about
fiercely, reeling with delight, this delight bemg produced
by the Soma, but it may also mean sending down delight,
i.e. rain or Soma. The root kyu is particularly applicable
to the sending down of rain; cf. Taitt. Sanh. 11. 4, 9, 25
10, 33 il. 3, 4, 13 and Indra and his horses, to whom this
epithet is chiefly applied, are frequently asked to send
down rain. However, madakytit is also applied to real
horses (i. 126, 4) where givers of rain would be an inappro-
priate epithet. I should therefore translate madasydt,
when applied to Indra, to his horses, to the Asvins, or
to horses in general by furiously or wildly moving about,
as if “made kyavate,’ he moves in a state of delight, or in a
state of intoxication such as was not incompatible with
the character of the ancient gods. Here again the difficulty
of rendering Vedic thought in English, or any other modern
language, becomes apparent, for we have no poetical word
to express a high state of mental excitement produced by
drinking the intoxicating juice of the Soma or other plants,
which has not something opprobrious mixed up with it, while
in ancient times that state of excitement was celebrated as
a blessing of the gods, as not unworthy of the gods them-
selves, nay, as a state in which both the warrior and the
poet would perform their highest achievements. The German
Rausch is the nearest approach to the Sanskrit mada.

vill. I, 21. visveshdm tarutaram mada-kytitam made hi
sma dadati nah.

Indra, the conqueror of all, who rushes about in

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 119

rapture, for in rapture he bestows gifts upon us. Cf.
Legs 2:

The horses of Indra are called madakyit, i. 81, Be Villa ss
18; 34,9. Ordinary horses, i. 126, 4.

It is more surprising to see this epithet applied to the
Asvins, who are generally represented as moving about with
exemplary steadiness. However we read: '

Vill. 22, 16. manah-gavasa vrishand mada-hyuta,

Ye two Asvins, quick as thought, powerful, wildly

moving; or, as Sayana proposes, liberal givers, humblers
of your enemies. See also viii. 35, 109.
Most frequently madakyit is applied to Soma, x. 30, 9;
IX. 32, 13 53,43 79, 23 108, 11; where particularly the last
passage deserves attention, in which Soma is called mada-
kyatam sahasra-dharam vrishabhém.

Lastly, even the wealth itself which the Maruts are asked
to send down from heaven,’ most likely rain, is called, viii.
7, 13, rayim mada-kytitam puru-kshim visva-dhayasam.

In all these passages we must translate mada-kytit by
bringing delight, showering down delight.

We have thus arrived at the conclusion that vrishanam
mada-kyuitam, as used in our passage 1. 85, 7, might be
meant either for Indra or for Soma. If the Asvins can be
called vrishanau mada-Aytita, the same expression would
-be even more applicable to Indra. On the other hand,
if Soma is called vrishabhéh mada-kytt, the same Soma
may legitimately be called vrisha mada-kyat. In deciding
whether Indra or Soma be meant, we must now have
recourse to other hymns, in which the relations of the
Maruts with Vishnu, Soma, and Indra are alluded to.

If Indra were intended, and if the first words meant
‘When Vishnu perceived the approach of Indra,’ we should
expect, not that the Maruts sat down on the sacrificial
pile, but that they rushed to the battle. The idea that
the Maruts come to the sacrifice, like birds, is common
enough :

viii. 20, 10. vrishanasvéna marutah vrisha-psuna rathena
vrisha-nabhina, 4 syendsah nd pakshinah vritha narah havya
nah vitaye gata.

Come ye Maruts together, to eat our offerings, on your

120 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

strong-horsed, strong-shaped, strong-naved chariot, like
winged hawks!

But when the Maruts thus come to a sacrifice it is to
participate in it, and particularly in the Soma that is
offered by the sacrificer, This Soma, it is said in other
hymns, was prepared by Vishnu for Indra (ii. 22, 1), and
Vishnu is said to have brought the Soma for Indra (x.
113, 2). If we keep these and similar passages in mind,
and consider that in the preceding verse the Maruts have
been invited to sit down on the sacrificial pile and to rejoice
in the sweet food, we shall see that the same train of
thought is carried on in our verse, the only new idea being

that the keeping or descrying of the Soma is ascribed to
Vishnu.

Verse 9, note *. Tvdshtfar, the workman of the gods,

frequently also the fashioner and creator.

Verse 9, note *. Nari, the loc. sing. of nvi, but, if so,
with a wrong accent, occurs only in this phrase as used
here, and as repeated in viii. 96, 19. nari 4pamsi karta sah
vritra-ha. Its meaning is not clear, It can hardly mean
‘on man,’ without some more definite application. If nri
could be used as a name of Vritra or any other enemy,
it would mean, to do his deeds against the man, on the
enemy. Nri, however, is ordinarily an honorific term,
chiefly applied to Indra, iv. 25, 4. nare naryaya nri-tamaya
nrinam, and hence its application to Vritra would be
objectionable. Sayana explains it in the sense of battle. I
believe that nari stands for narya, the acc. plur. neut. of narya,
manly, and the frequent epithet of aépas, and I have trans-
lated accordingly. Indra is called narya-apas, viii. 93, 1.

Verse 10, note ’. Avaté, a well, here meant for cloud,
like ttsa, i. 64, 6.

Verse 10, note *. Dhamantah vaném is translated by
Sayana as playing on the lyre, by Benfey as blowing the
flute. Such a rendering, particularly the latter, would
be very appropriate, but there is no authority for vAnd
meaning either lyre or flute in the Veda, Vana occurs

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 121

five times only. In one passage, viii. 20, 8, gdbhih vandh
agyate, it means arrow; the arrow is sent forth from the
bow-strings. The same meaning seems applicable 101K.
50, I. vandsya, kodaya pavim, In another passage, 1XsO 7g 3,
pra vadanti vanam, they send forth their voice, is applied
to the Maruts, as in our passage; in iv. 24, g, the sense
is doubtful, Bat here too vana clearly does not mean a
musical instrument. See iii, 30, To.

Vrishan.

Verse 12, note’. In vrishan we have one of those words
which it is almost impossible to translate accurately. It
occurs over and over again in the Vedic hymns, and if we
once know the various ideas which it either expresses or
implies, we have little difficulty in understanding its import
in a vague and general way, though we look in vain for
corresponding terms in any modern language. In the
Veda, and in ancient languages generally, one and the
same word is frequently made to do service for many.
Words retain their general meaning, though at the same
time they are evidently used with a definite purpose. This
is not only a peculiar phase of language, but a peculiar
phase of thought, and as to us this phase has become
strange and unreal, it is very difficult to transport ourselves
back into it, still more to translate the pregnant terms of
the Vedic poets into the definite languages which we have
to use. Let us imagine a state of thought and speech in
which virtus still meant manliness, though it might also be
applied to the virtue of a woman; or let us try to speak
and think a language which expressed the bright and the
divine, the brilliant and the beautiful, the straight and the
right, the bull and the hero, the areca and the king by
the same terms, and we shall see how difficult it would be to
translate such terms without losing either the key-note that
was still sounding, or the harmonics which were set vibrating
by it in the minds of the poets and their listeners.

Vrishan, being derived from a root vrish, spargere,
meant no doubt originally the male, whether applied to
animals or men, In this sense vrishan. occurs frequently

122 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

in the Veda, either as determining the sex of the animal
which is mentioned, or as standing by itself and meaning
the male. In either case, however, it implies the idea of
strength and eminence, which we lose whether we translate
it by man or male,

Thus 4sva is horse, but vil. 69, 1, we read:

A vam rathah—vrisha-bhih yatu asvaih.

May your chariot come near with powerful horses, 1. e.
with stallions.

The Haris, the horses of Indra, are frequently called
vrishana :

i. 177, 1. yuktva hari (iti) vrishana.

Having yoked the bay stallions.

Vrishabhaé, though itself originally meaning the male
animal, had become fixed as the name of the bull, and in
this process it had lost so much of its etymological import
that the Vedic poet did not hesitate to define vrishabha itself
by the addition of vrishan. Thus we find:

vill. 93, 7. sa/ vrisha vrishabhah bhuvat.

May he (Indra) be a strong bull.

i. 54, 2. vrishd vrisha-tva vrishabhah.

Indra by his strength a strong bull; but, literally, Indra
by his manliness a male bull.

Even vrishabha loses again its definite meaning ; and as
bull in bull-calf means simply male, or in bull-trout, large,
so vrishabha is added to atya, horse, to convey the mean-
ing of large or powerful :

1.177, 2. yé te vrishanah vrishabhasah indra—atyah.

Thy strong and powerful horses; literally, thy male bull-
horses.

When vrishan and vrishabha are used as adjectives,
for instance with sishma, strength, they hardly differ in
meaning :

vi. 19, 8. & nak bhara vrishanam stishmam indra.

Bring us thy manly strength, O Indra.

And in the next verse :

vi. 19, g. & te sishmah vrishabhah etu.

May thy manly strength come near.

Vamsaga, too, which is clearly the name for bull, is
defined by vrishan, i. 7, 8:

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 123

vrisha yitha-iva vamsagah,

As the strong bull scares the herds.

The same applies to varaha, which, though by itself
meaning boar, is determined again by vrishan :

x. 67, 7. vrisha-bhif varahaih.

With strong boars.

In il. 2, 11, we read :

vrisha—nanadat na simhah.

Like a roaring lion.

If used by itself, vrishan, at least in the Rig-veda, can
hardly be said to be the name of any special animal, though
in later Sanskrit it may mean bull or horse. Thus if we
read, x. 43, 8, vrisha na kruddhah, we can only translate
like an angry male, though, no doubt, like a wild bull,
would seem more appropriate.

i, 186, 5. yéna népatam apam gundma manah-givah
vrishanah yam vahanti.

That we may excite the son of the water (Agni), whom
the males, quick as thought, carry along.

Here the males are no doubt the horses or stallions of
Agni. But, though this follows from the context, it would
be wrong to say that vrishan by itself means horse.

If used by itself, vrishan most frequently means man, and
chiefly in his sexual character. Thus:

i. 140, 6. vrisha-iva patnih abhi eti roruvat.

Agni comes roaring like a husband to his wives.

i. 179, I. Api tm (iti) nu patnih vrishanah gagamyuh.

Will the husbands now come to their wives ?

ii. 16, 8. sakrit si te sumati-bhis—sém patnibhih na
vrishanah nasimahi.

May we for once cling firmly to thy blessings, as hus-
bands cling to their wives.

v. 47, 6. upa-prakshé vrishanah médamanah divah patha
vadhvah yanti akkha,

The exulting men come for the embrace on the path of
heaven towards their wives.

In one or two passages vrishan would seem to have a
still more definite meaning, particularly in the formula
strah drisike vrishanah ka patimsye, which occurs iv. 41, 6;

X02, 7. weer also-1.170, I

124 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

In all the passages which we have hitherto examined
vrishan clearly retained its etymological meaning, though
even then it was not always possible to translate it by
male.

The same meaning has been retained in other languages
in which this word can be traced. Thus, in Zend, arshan
is used to express the sex of animals in such expressions
as aspahé arshné, gen. a male horse; varazahe arshn6, gen.
a male boar; géus arshnd, gen. a male ox; but likewise in
the sense of man or hero, as arsha husrava, the hero
Husrava. In Greek we find adpony and appnv used in the
same way to distinguish the sex of animals, as aoceves i701,
Boov apreva, In Latin the same word may be recognized
in the proper name Varro, and in vdro and bdro.

We now come to another class of passages in which
vrishan is clearly intended to express more than merely the
masculine gender. In. some of them the etymological
meaning of spargere, to pour forth, seems to come out
again, and it is well known that Indian commentators are
very fond of explaining wrishan by giver of rain, giver of
good gifts, bounteous, The first of these meanings may
indeed be admitted in certain passages, but in others it is
more than doubtful.

i, 181, 8. vrishd vam meghah may be translated, your
raining cloud.

i. 129, 3. dasmah hi sma vrishanam pinvasi tvékam.

Thou art strong, thou fillest the rainy skin, i.e. the
cloud.

See also iv. 22, 6; and possibly v. 83, 6

It may be that, when applied to Soma too, vrishan
retamed something. of its etymological meaning, that it
meant gushing forth, poured out, though in many places
it is impossible to render vrishan, as applied to Soma, by
anything but strong. All we can admit is that vrishan,
if translated by strong, means also strengthening and invi-
gorating, an idea not entirely absent even in our expression,
a strong drink.

i, 80, 2. sah tva amadat vrishé madah, s6mah—sutdh.

This strong draught inspirited thee, the peared out
Soma-juice.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 125

1. 91, 2. tvam vrisha vrisha-tvébhih.

Thou, Soma, art strong by strength.

1, 175, I. vrisha te vrishne induh vagi sahasra-stamah.

For thee, the strong one, there is strong drink, powerful,
omnipofent.

In the ninth Mandala, specially dedicated to the praises
of Soma, the inspiriting beverage of gods and men, the
repetition of vrishan, as applied to the juice and to the god
who drinks it, is constant. Indo vrisha or vrisha indo
are incessant invocations, and become at last perfectly
meaningless.

There can be no doubt, in fact, that. already in the
hymns of the Veda, vrishan had dwindled away to a mere
epitheton ornans, and that in order to understand it cor-
rectly, we must, as much as possible, forget its etymological
colouring, and render it by hero or strong. Indra, Agni,
the Asvins, Vishnu, the Ribhus (iv. 35, 6), all are vrishan,
which means no longer male, but manly, strong.

In the following passages vrishan is thus applied to
Indra :

i. 54, 2. yah dhrishniina savasa rodast (iti) ubhé (fti) wri-
sha vrisha-tva vrishabhah ni-rifgate.

(Praise Indra) who by his daring strength conquers both
heaven and earth, a bull, strong in strength.

i, 100, I. s&h yah vrisha vrishnyebhih sam-okah mahah
divéh prithivyéh ka sam-rat satind-satva havyah bhareshu
martitvan nah bhavatu indrah iti.

He who is strong, wedded to strength, who is the king
of the great sky and the earth, of mighty might, to be
invoked in battles,—may Indra with the Maruts come to
our help!

i. 16, 1. 4 tva vahantu hérayah vrishanam s6ma-pitaye,
fndra tva stira-kakshasah.

May the bays bring thee hither, the strong one, to the
Soma-draught, may the sunny-eyed horses (bring) thee, O
Indra !

iv. 16, 20. eva it indraya vrishabhaya vrishve brahma
akarma bhrigavah na ratham.

Thus we have made a hymn for Indra, the strong bull,
as the Bhrigus make a chariot.

126 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

X. 153, 2. tvam vrishan vrisha it asi.

Thou, O hero, art indeed a hero; and not, Thou, O
male, art indeed a male; still less, Thou, O bull, art indeed
a bull.

i, 101, I. avasy4vah vrishanam végra-dakshinam® marut-
vantam sakhyaya havamahe.

Longing for help we call as our friend the hero who
wields the thunderbolt, who is accompanied by the
Maruts.

vill. 6, 14. ni sishne indra dharnasim vagram gaghantha
dasyavi, vrisha hi ugra srinvishé.

Thou, © Indra, hast struck the strong thunderbolt
against Sushna, the fiend ; for, terrible one, thou art called
hero !

vill. 6, 40. vavridhandh vipa dydvi vrisha vagri aroravit,
vritra-ha soma-patamah.

Growing up by day, the hero with the thunderbolt has
roared, the Vritra-killer, the great Soma-drinker.

Vv. 35, 4. vrishé hi 4si radhase gaghishé vrishni te savah.

Thou (Indra) art a hero, thou wast born to be bounteous ;
in thee, the hero, there is might.

It is curious to watch the last stage of the meaning of
vrishan in the comparative and superlative varshiyas and
varshishtha. In the Veda, varshishfha still means excellent,
but in later Sanskrit it is considered as the superlative of
vriddha, old, so that we see vrishan, from meaning origin-
ally manly, vigorous, young, assuming in the end the
meaning of old. (M. M., Sanskrit Grammar, § 252.)

Yet even thus, when vrishan means simply strong or
hero, its sexual sense is not always forgotten, and it breaks
out, for instance, in such passages as,

1. 32, 7. vrishnah vadhrih prati-maénam bibhdshan puru-
tra vritrah asayat vi-astah.

Vritra, the eunuch, trying to be like unto a man (like
unto Indra), was lying, broken to many pieces,

The next passages show vrishan as applied to Agni:

i. 27, 15. vrishanam tva vaydém vrishan vrishanah sdm
idhimahi. ;,

O, strong one, let us the strong ones kindle thee, the
strong !

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 127

v. I, 12. avokéama kavaye médhydya vékah vandaru vri-
shabhaya vrishne.

. We have spoken an adoring speech for the worshipful
poet, for the strong bull (Agni).

Vishnu is called vrishan, i. 154, 3:

pra vishnave sishém etu ménma giri-kshite uru-gaydya
vrishne.

May this hymn go forth to Vishnu, he who dwells in
the mountain (cloud), who strides wide, the hero!

Rudra is called vrishan :

li. 34, 2. rudrah yat vah marutah rukma-vakshasah vrisha
agani prisnyah sukré fdhani.

When Rudra, the strong man, begat you, O Maruts with
brilliant chests, in the bright bosom of Prisni.

That the Maruts, the sons of Rudra, are called vrishan,
we have seen before, and shall see frequently again,
(n165,.1; il. 33, 135) vile 50, 203, 21;..58, 6.) The whole
company of the Maruts is called vrisha ganah, the strong
or manly host, i.e. the host of the Maruts, without any
further qualification.

Here lies, indeed, the chief difficulty which is raised
by the common use of vrishan in the Veda, that when it
occurs by itself, it often remains doubtful who is meant
by it, Indra, or Soma, or the Maruts, or some other deity,
We shall examine a few of these passages, and first some
where vrishan refers to Indra:

iv. 30, 10. dpa ushah dnasah sarat sam-pishtat dha
bibhytshi, ni yaét sim sisnathat vrisha.

Ushas went away from her broken chariot, fearing lest
the hero should do her violence.

Here vrishan is clearly meant for Indra, who, as we
learn from the preceding verse, was trying to conquer
Ushas, as Apollo did Daphne; and it should be observed
that the word itself, by which Indra is here designated, is
particularly appropriate to the circumstances.

i. 103, 6. bhtri-karmane vrishabhaya vrishne saty4-sush-
maya sunavama sémam, ydh 4-dritya paripanthi-iva stirah
dyagvanah vi-bhagan éti védah.

Let us pour out the Soma for the strong bull, the per-
former of many exploits, whose strength is true, the hero

128 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

who, watching like a footpad, comes to us dividing the
wealth of the infidel.

Here it is clear again from the context that Indra only
can be meant.

But in other passages this is more doubtful:

iii, 61, 7. ritésya budhné ushdsdm ishamyén vrisha mahi
(iti) rédasi (iti) @ vivesa.

The hero in the depth of the heaven, yearning for the
dawns, has entered the great sky and the earth.

The hero who yearns for the dawns, is generally Indra;
here, however, considering that Agni is mentioned in the
preceding verse, it is more likely that this god, as the light
of the morning, may have been meant by the poet. That
Agni, too, may be called vrishan, without any other epithet
to show that he is meant rather than any other god, is clear
from such passages as,

vi. 3, 7. vrisha rukshéh d6shadhishu ninot.

He the wild hero shouted among the plants.

In vii. 60, 9, vrishanau, the dual, is meant for Mitra and
Varuna; in the next verse, vwrishanah, the plural, must
mean the same gods and their companions.

That Soma is called simply vrishan, not only in the
ninth Mandala, but elsewhere, too, we see from such
passages as,

il. 43, 7. indra piba vrisha-dhittasya vrishnah (4 ydém te
syenah usaté gabhara), yasya made kyavéyasi pra krishtth
yasya made apa gotraé vavartha.

Indra drink of the male (the strong Soma), bruised by
the males (the heavy stones), inspirited by whom thou
makest the people fall down, inspirited by whom thou hast
opened the stables.

Here Sayana, too, sees rightly that ‘the male bruised by
the males’ is the Soma-plant, which, in order to yield the
intoxicating juice, has to be bruised by stones, which stones
are again likened to two males. But unless the words,
enclosed in brackets, had stood in the text, words which
clearly point to Soma, I doubt whether Sayana would
have so readily admitted the definite meaning of vrishan
as Soma.

i. 109, 3. ma khedma yasmin iti nadhamanah pitrindm

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 129

saktih anu-ydkkhamanah, indragni-bhyam kam vrishanah
madanti ta hi adri (iti) dhishdénay4h upé-sthe.

We pray, let us not break the cords (which, by means of
the sacrifices offered by each generation of our forefathers,
unite us with the gods); we strive after the powers of our
fathers. The Somas rejoice for Indra and Agni; here are
the two stones in the lap of the vessel.

First, as to the construction, the fact that participles are
thus used as finite verbs, and particularly when the subject
changes in the next sentence, is proved by other passages,
such as ii. 11, 4. The sense is that the new generation
does not break the sacrificial succession, but offers Soma,
like their fathers. The Soma-plants are ready, and, when
pressed by two stones, their juice flows into the Soma-
vessel. ‘There may be a double entendre in dhishénayah
upa-sthe, which Sanskrit scholars will easily perceive.

When vrishan is thus used by itself, we must be chiefly
guided by the adjectives or other indications before we deter-
mine on the most plausible translation. Thus we read:

1. 55, 4. Sah it vane namasyt-bhih vakasyate kiéru géneshu
pra-bruvanah indriyém, vrisha khanduh bhavati haryatah
vrisha kshémena dhéndm magha-va yat invati.

In the first verse the subject is clearly Indra: ‘ He alone
is praised by worshippers in the forest, he who shows forth
among men his fair power.’ But who is meant to be the
subject of the next verse? Even Sadyana is doubtful. He
translates first: ‘The bounteous excites the man who
wishes to sacrifice; when the sacrificer, the rich, by the
protection of Indra, stirs up his voice. But he allows
an optional translation for the last sentences: ‘when the
powerful male, Indra, by his enduring mind reaches the
praise offered by the sacrificer.’

According to these suggestions, Wilson translated: ‘ He
(Indra) is the granter of their wishes (to those who solicit
him); he is the encourager of those who desire to worship
(him), when the wealthy offerer of oblations, enjoying his
protection, recites his praise.’

Benfey: ‘The bull becomes friendly, the bull becomes
desirable, when the sacrificer kindly advances praise.’

Langlois: ‘When the noble Maghavan receives the

VOLE. K

130 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

homage of our hymns, his heart is flattered, and he
responds to the wishes of his servant by his gifts.’

As far as I know, the adjective khaéndu does not occur
again, and can therefore give us no hint. But haryata,
which is applied to vrishan in our verse, is the standing
epithet of Soma. It means delicious, and occurs very
frequently in the ninth Mandala. It is likewise applied
to Agni, Pishan, the Haris, the thunderbolt, but wherever
it occurs our first thought is of Soma. Thus, without
quoting from the Soma-Mamndala, we read, x. 96, 1, harya-
tam madam, the delicious draught, 1. e. Soma.

x. 96, 9. pitva mddasya haryatésya andhasah, means
having drunk of the draught of the delicious Soma.

viii. 72, 18. padiém haryatdsya ni-dhanyim, means the
place where the delicious Soma resides.

ill. 44, I. haryatéh sdmah.

Delicious Soma.

ii, 21, 1. bhara fndréya s6mam yagataya haryatam.

Bring delicious Soma for the holy Indra.

i. 130, 2. madaya haryataya te tuvih-tamaya dhayase.

That thou mayest drink the delicious and most powerful
draught, i.e. the Soma. .

If, then, we know that vrishan by itself is used in the
sense of Soma, haryata vrishan can hardly be anything
else, and we may therefore translate the second line of
i. 55, 4, ‘the strong Soma is pleasing, the strong Soma is
delicious, when the sacrificer safely brings the cow.’

That Indra was thirsting for Soma had been said in the
second verse, and he is again called the Soma-drinker in the
seventh verse. The bringing of the cow alludes to the often
mentioned mixture with milk, which the Soma undergoes
before it is offered.

That the Maruts are called vrishan, without further ex-
planations, will appear from the following passages :

i, 85, 12. rayim nah dhatta vrishanah su-viram.

Give us wealth, ye heroes, consisting of good offspring.

vill, 96, 14. ishyami vah vrishanah ytidhyata Agau.

I wish for you, heroes (Maruts), fight in the race!

In all the passages which we have hitherto examined,
vrishan was always applied to living beings, whether

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 131

animals, men, or gods. But as, in Greek, appny means
at last simply strong, and is applied, for instance, to
the crash of the sea, «tUios dponv wdvrov, so in the
Veda vrishan is applied to the roaring of the storms and
similar objects.

v. 87, 5. svanah vrisha.

Your powerful sound (O Maruts).

X. 47, 1. gagribhma te daékshinam indra hastam vasu-
yavah vasu-pate vasinam, vidma hf tv4 g6-patim stra géndém
asmabhyam fitrém vrishanam rayim dah.

We have taken thy right hand, O Indra, wishing for trea-
sures, treasurer of treasures, for we know thee, O hero, to be
the lord of cattle; give us bright and strong wealth.

Should fitré here refer to treasures, and vrishan to
cattle ?

x. 89, 9. ni amitreshu vadham indra timram vrishan
vrishanam arushém sisihi.

Whet, O hero, the heavy strong red weapon, against the
enemies.

The long 4 in vrishanam is certainly startling, but it
occurs once more, ix. 34, 3, where there can be no doubt
that it is the accusative of vrishan. Professor Roth takes
vrishan here in the sense of bull (s. v. tumra), but he does
not translate the whole passage.

ili. 29, 9. krindta dhimam vrishanam sakhayah.

Make a mighty smoke, O friends!

Strength itself is called vrishan, if I am right im trans-
lating the phrase vrishanam stishmam by manly strength.
It occurs,

iv. 24, 7. tésmin dadhat vrishanam stishmam indrah.

May Indra give to him manly strength.

vi. 19, 8. 4 nah bhara vrishanam sishmam indra.

Bring to us, O Indra, manly strength.

vil. 24, 4. asmé (iti) dédhat vrishanam sishmam indra.

Giving to us, O Indra, manly strength.

See also vi. 19, 9, stishmah vrishabhah, used in the same
sense.

This constant play on the word vrishan, which we have
observed in the passages hitherto examined, and which
give by no means a full idea of the real frequency of its

ik, &

132 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

occurrence in the Veda, has evidently had its influence on
the Vedic Rishis, who occasionally seem to delight in the
most silly and unmeaning repetitions of this word, and
its compounds and derivatives. Here no language can
supply any adequate translation; for though we may
translate words which express thoughts, it is useless to
attempt to render mere idle play with words. I shall
give a few instances :

i. 177, 3. 4 tishtha rétham vrishanam vrisha te sutah
sémah pari-sikté médhtni, yuktva vrisha-bhyam vrishabha
kshitindm héri-bhydm yahi pra-véta ipa madrik.

Mount the strong car, the strong Soma is poured out for
thee, sweets are sprinkled round; come down towards us, thou
bull of men, with the strong bays, having yoked them.

But this is nothing yet compared to other passages, when
the poet cannot get enough of vrishan and vrishabha.

ii. 16, 6. vrisha te vagrah uta te vrisha rathah vrishana
hari (iti) vrishabhani ayudha, vrishnah madasya vrishabha
tvém isishe indra s6masya vrishabhasya tripnuhi.

Thy thunderbolt is strong, and thy car is strong, strong
are the bays, the weapons are powerful, thou, bull, art lord of
the strong draught, Indra rejoice in the powerful Soma!

v. 36, 5. vrisha tva vrishanam vardhatu dyath vrisha vri-
sha-bhyam vahase hari-bhyam, sé nah vrisha vrisha-rathah
su-sipra vrisha-krato (iti) vrisha vagrin bhare dhah.

May the strong sky increase thee, the strong; a strong
one thou art, carried by two strong bays; do thou who art
strong, with a strong car, O thou of strong might, strong
holder of the thunderbolt, keep us in battle!

v. 40, 2-3. vrisha grdva vrisha madah vrisha s6mah ayém
sutéh, vrishan indra vrisha-bhif vritrahan-tama, vrisha tv
vrishanam huve.

The stone is strong, the draught is strong, this Soma
that has been poured out is strong, O thou strong Indra,
who killest Vritra with the strong ones (the Maruts), I,
the strong, call thee, the strong.

Vill. 13, 31-33. vrishd aydm indra te rdthah utd (iti) te
vrishana héri (iti), vrisha tvém sata-krato (iti) vrishd havah.
vrisha grava vrishd madah vrisha sémah aydém sutah, vrisha
yaghah yam invasi vrishaé havah. vrishd tv vrishanam

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 133

huve vagrin kitrabhih tti-bhih, vavaéntha hi prati-stutim
vrisha havah.

This thy car is strong, O Indra, and thy bays are strong;
thou art strong, O omnipotent, our call is strong.~ The
stone is strong, the draught is strong, the Soma is strong,
which is here poured out ; the sacrifice which thou orderest,
is strong, our call is strong. I, the strong, call thee, the
strong, thou holder of the thunderbolt, with manifold
blessmgs; for thou hast desired our praise; our call is
strong.

There are other passages of the same kind, but they are
too tedious to be here repeated. The commentator, through-
out, gives to each vrishan its full meaning either of
showering down or bounteous, or male or bull; but a word
which can thus be used at random has clearly lost its
definite power, and cannot call forth any definite ideas in
the mind of the listener. It cannot be denied that here
and there the original:meaning of vrishan would be appro-
priate even where the poet is only pouring out a stream of
majestic sound, but we are not called upon to impart sense
to what are verba et preterquam niiil. When we read,
i, 122, 3, vatah apam vrishan-van, we are justified, no
doubt, in translating, ‘the wind who pours forth water ;’
and x. 93, 5, apam vrishan-vasti (iti) stiryamasa, means ‘ Sun
and Moon, givers of water. But even in passages where
vrishan is followed by the verb vrish, it is curious to observe
that vrish is not necessarily used in the sense of rainmg or
pouring forth, but rather in the sense of drinking.

vi. 68, 11. indravarun4 maédhumat-tamasya vrishnah s6-
masya vrishana* 4 vrishetham.

* The dual vrishanau occurs only when the next word begins with a vowel.
Before an initial a, 4, i, the au is always changed into Ay in the Sanhita
(i. 108, 7-12; 116, 21; 117, 19; 153, 2; 157, 53 158; 15 180, 7; vii. 61, 5).
Before u the preceding au becomes 4 in the Sanhita, but the Pada gives au,
in order to show that no Sandhi can take place between the two vowels
(vii. 60, 9; x. 66, 7). Before consonants the dual always ends in 4, both in
the Sanhita and Pada. But there are a few passages where the final & occurs
before initial vowels, and where the two vowels are allowed to form one
syllable. In four passages this happens before an initial 4 (i. 108, 3; vi. 68,
I1; i. 177, 1; ii. 16, 5). Once, and once only, it happens before u, in viii.

at ae

134 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Indra and Varuna, you strong ones, may you drink of
the sweetest strong Soma.

That 4-vrish means to drink or to eat, was known to
Sayama and to the author of the Satapatha-brahmaza, who
paraphrases 4 vrishayadhvam by asnita, eat.

The same phrase occurs i. 108, 3.

i. 104, 9. uru-vydkah gathare 4 vrishasva.

Thou of vast extent, drink (the Soma) in thy stomach.

The same phrase occurs x. 96, 13.

. vili. 61, 3. & vrishasva—sutasya indra andhasah.

Drink, Indra, of the Soma that is poured out.

In conclusion, a few passages may be pointed out in
which vrishan seems to be the proper name of a pious
worshipper :

i. 36, 10. yam tva devasah manave dadhih iha yagish¢ham
havya-vahana, y4m kanvah médhya-atithid dhana-spritam
yam vrisha yam upa-stutah.

Thee, O Agni, whom the gods placed here for man, the
most worthy of worship, O carrier of oblations, thee whom
Kanva, thee whom Medhyatithi placed, as the giver of
wealth, thee whom Vrishan placed and Upastuta.

Here the commentator takes Vrishan as Indra, but this
would break the symmetry of the sentence. That Upa-
stutah is here to be taken as a proper name, as Upastuta,
the son of Vrish¢ihavya, is clear from verse 17:

agnih pra avat mitra uté médhya-atithim agnih sata upa-
stutam.

Agni protected also the two friends, Medhyatithi and
Upastuta, in battle.

The fact is that whenever upastutd has the accent on the
last syllable, it is intended as a proper name, while, if used
as a participle, in the sense of praised, it has the accent on
the first.

Vill. 5, 25- yatha Ait kénvam avatam priyd-medham upa-
stutam.

As you have protected Kanva, Priyamedha, Upastuta.
Chi Tia,

_ vill. 103, 8. pra mamhishthaya gdyata—vpastutasah ag-
naye,

Sing, O Upastutas, to the worthiest, to Agni!

MANDALA I, SUKTA 85. 135

X. I15, 9. iti tva agne vrishti-havyasya putraéh upa-
stutdsah rishayah avokan.

By these names, O Agni, did the sons of Vrishtihavya,
the Upastutas, the Rishis, speak to you.

Vrishan occurs once more as a proper name in vi. 16,
14 and 15:

tém tm (iti) tva dadhydn rishi# putréh idhe atharvanah,
vritra-hanam puram-darém.

tam wm (iti) tva pathy4 vrishé s4m itdhe dasyuhdn-
tamam, dhanam-gayém rdne-rane.

Thee, O Agni, did Dadhyak kindle, the Rishi, the son of
Atharvan, thee the killer of Vritra, the destroyer of towns.

Thee, O Agni, did Vrishan Pathya kindle, thee the best
killer of enemies, the conqueror of wealth in every battle.

Here the context can leave no doubt that Dadhyak as
well as Vrishan were both intended as proper names, Yet as
early as the composition of the Satapatha-brahmana, this
was entirely misunderstood. Dadhyak, the son of Atharvan,
is explained as speech, Vrishan Pathya as mind (Sat. Br.
vi. 3, 3, 4). On this Mahidhara, in his remarks on Vag.
Sanh. xi. 34, improves still further. For though he allows
his personality to Dadhyak, the son of Atharvan, he says
that Pathya comes from pathin, path, and means he who
moves on the right path; or it comes from pathas, which
means sky, and is here used in the sense of the sky of the
heart. He then takes vrishan as mind, and translates the
mind of the heart. Such is the history of the rise and fall
of the Indian mind!

136 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawpata I, S6xta 86.
Asu7aka I, ApuyAya 6, VarGA 11-12.

1. Mérutah ydsya hi kshdye pathd divéh vi-maha-
sah, sih su-gopdtamah ganah.

2. Yagfiath va yagfia-vahasah viprasya va matindm,
méarutah srinuté haévam.

3. Uta va ydsya vaginah dnu vipram dtakshata,
sth ganta od-mati vragé.

4. Asyé virdsya barhishi sutaéh sémah divishtishu,
ukthém mddah ka sasyate.

5. Asydé sroshantu & bhivah* visvah yah karshanih
abhi, stiram kit sasrtishih ishah.

6. Purvibhih hi dadasimé sardt-bhih marutah
vaydm, dvah-bhih karshaninam.

7. Su-bhagah sdh pra-yagyavah mdrutah astu
martyah, yasya prdéydmsi pdrshatha.

8. Sasamandsya va narah svédasya satya-savasah,
vidé kémasya vénatah.

9. Yiydm tat satya-savasah Avih karta mahi-tvang,
vidhyata vi-dytita rékshah.

10. Gthata gihyam tdémah vi yata visvam atrinam,
gyotih karta ydét usmési.

* 4-bhtivah

MANDALA I, SUKTA 86. 137

Hymn To THE Marurs (tHE STORM-GODs).

1. O Maruts, that man in whose dwelling you drink
(the Soma), ye mighty (sons) of heaven, he indeed has
the best guardians.’

2. You who are propitiated! either by sacrifices
or from the prayers of the sage, hear the call, O
Maruts!

3. Aye, the strong man to whom you have granted
a sage, he will live in a stable rich in cattle.

4, On the altar of that strong man Soma is poured
out in daily sacrifices; praise and joy are sung.

5. To him let the strong’ Maruts listen, to him
who surpasses all men, as the flowing rain-clouds?
pass over the sun.

6. For we, O Maruts, have sacrificed in many a
harvest, through the mercies! of the swift gods (the
storm-gods).

7. May that mortal be blessed, O worshipful
Maruts, whose offerings you carry off"

8. You take notice either of the sweat of him who
praises you, ye men of true strength, or of the desire
of the suppliant.'

9. O ye of true strength, make this manifest by
your greatness! strike the fiend’ with your thunder-
bolt!

10. Hide the hideous darkness, destroy’ every
tusky? spirit. Create the light which we long
for!

138 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

COMMENTARY.

This hymn is ascribed to Gotama. The metre is Gayatri
throughout.

Verse 1, note '. Vimahas occurs only once more as an
epithet of the Maruts, v. 87, 4. Being an adjective derived
from mahas, strength, it means very strong. ‘The strong
ones of heaven is an expression analogous to i. 64, 2. divah
rishvasah ukshénah ; i. 64, 4. divah narah.

Verse 2, note '. The construction of this verse is not
clear, Yagfid-vahas has two meanings in the Veda. It is
applied to the priest who carries or performs the sacrifice :

i. 8, 3, and 24, 1. varkah dhah yagia-vahase.

Grant splendour to the sacrificer !

But it is also used of the gods who accept the sacrifice,
and in that case it means hardly more than worshipped or
propitiated; i. 15, 11 (Asvinau); iv. 47, 4 (Indra and
Vayu); vili. 12, 20 (Indra). In our verse it is used in
the latter sense, and it is properly construed with the in-
strumental yaghaih. The difficulty is the gen. plur. mati-
nam, instead of matibhid. The sense, however, seems to
allow of but one construction, and we may suppose that the
genitive depends on the yagfha in yagfdvahas, ‘ accepting
the worship of the prayers of the priest.’ Benfey refers
yagiaih to the preceding verse, and joins havam to viprasya
matinam : ‘ Durch Opfer—Opferfordrer ihr !—oder ihr hort
—Maruts—den Ruf der Lieder die der Priester schuf.’

The Sanhita text lengthens the last syllable of srinutd, as
suggested by the metre.

Verse 3, note *. The genitive yasya vayinah depends on
vipra, Anu-taksh, like anu-grah, anu-gfa, seems to convey
the meaning of doing in behalf or for the benefit of a person.
Ganta might also be translated in a hostile sense, he will
go into, he will conquer many a stable full of cows.

Verse 5, note . I have altered & bhiivah into Abhiivah,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 86. . 139

for I do not think that bhivah, the second pers. sing.,
even if it were bhuvat, the third pers., could be joined with
the relative pronoun yah in the second pada. The phrase
visvahk yah karshanth abhi occurs more than once, and is
never preceded by the verb bhuvah or bhuvat. AbhtivaA,
on the contrary, is applied to the Maruts, i. 64, 6, vida-
theshu abhtiva#; and as there can be no doubt who are
the deities invoked, abhtvah, the strong ones, is as appro-
priate an epithet as vimahas in the first verse.

Verse 5, note *. Sasrdéshih ishah, as connected with stira,
the sun, can only be meant for the flowing waters, the
rain-clouds, the givers of ish or vigour. They are called
divyah ishah :

Vill. 5, 21. uta nah divyah ishah utd sindhin varshathad,

You rain down on us the heavenly waters and the rivers.

Wilson translates: ‘ May the Maruts, victorious over all
men, hear (the praises) of this (their worshipper) ; and may
(abundant) food be obtained by him who praises them.’

Benfey: ‘Thn, der ob alle Menschen ragt, sollen horen
die Labungen, und nahn, die irgend Weisen nahn.’

Langlois: ‘Que les Marouts écoutent favorablement la
priére ; qwils acceptent aussi les offrandes de ce (mortel) que
sa position éléve au-dessus de tous les autres, et méme
jusqu’au soleil.’

Sroshantu does not occur again; but we find sréshan,
i. 68, 5; sréshamaaa, ili. 8, 10; vil. 51, 13 vil. 7, 6.

Verse 6, note ’. The expression avobhih, with the help,
the blessings, the mercies, is generally used with reference
40° divine assistance+—(. 117, 193. 167, 23 185,103. 115
W290 75 Aly O67 0V. 745104 Vin 47, 125 Vi. 20, 13 35, akc.)
It seems best therefore to take Aarshani as a name or
epithet of the Maruts, although, after the invocation of the
Maruts by name, this repetition is somewhat unusual. One
might translate, ‘with the help of our men, of our active
and busy companions,’ for Aarshani is used in that sense
also. Only avobhif would not be in its right place then,

Verse 7, note’. Par, with ati, means to carry over,

140 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

(i. 97, 83 99, I$ 174, 93 lil. 15, 33 20, 43 IV- 39,15 V. 25s
93 73, 83 Vile 40, 45 97, 45 Vill. 26, 55 67, 2, &c.); with
apa, to remove, (i. 129, 5); with nih, to throw down. Hence,
if used by itself, unless it means to overrun, as frequently,
it can only have the general sense of carrying, taking,
accepting, or accomplishing.

Verse 8, note. Vidé as second pers. plur. perf. is

frequent, generally with the final ‘a’ long in the Sanhita,
eWhOse 95s Ve 4h, 1350 5 53p a

Verse 9, note’. Observe the long penultimate in rakshah,
instead of the usual short syllable. Cf. i. 12, 5, and see
Kuhn, Beitrage, vol. ii. p. 456.

Verse 10, note '. See note to i. 39, 3, note *.

Verse 10, note * Atrin, which stands for attrin, is one
of the many names assigned to the powers of darkness and
mischief, It is derived from atré, which means tooth or jaw,
and therefore meant originally an ogre with large teeth or
jaws, a devourer. Besides atra, we also find in the Veda
atra, with the accent on the first syllable, and meaning what
serves for eating, or food:

X. 79, 2. atrami asmai pat-bhih sém bharanti.

They bring together food for him (Agni) with their feet.

With the accent on the last syllable, atré in one passage
means an eater or an ogre, like atrin:

v. 32, 8. apadam atram—mridhra-vakam.

Indra killed the footless ogre, the babbler.

It means tooth or jaw:

i, 129, 8. svayam sa rishayddhyai ya nah upa-ishé atrath.

May she herself go to destruction who attacks us with
her teeth.

It is probably from atra in the sense of tooth (cf. ddovres =
éddvres) that atrin is derived, meaning ogre or a devouring
devil. In the later Sanskrit, too, the Asuras are represented
as having large tusks, Mahabh. v. 3572, damshtrino bhi-
mavegas ka.

Thus we read i, 21, 5, that Indra and Agni destroy the
Rakshas, and the poet continues :

MANDALA I, SUKTA 86. 141

Apragah santu atrinah.

May the ogres be without offspring !

ix. 86, 48. gahi visvan rakshésah indo (iti) atrinah.

Kill, O Soma, all the tusky Rakshas. Cf. ix. 104, 6;
105, 6.-

vi. 51, 14. gahi ni atrinam panim.

Kill, O Soma, the tusky Pani.

i. 94, 9. vadhaih duh-samsan apa duh-dhyah gahi

diré va yé anti va ké Ait atrinah.

Strike with thy blows, O Agni, the evil-spoken, evil-
minded (spirits), the ogres, those who are far or who are
near.

See also 1. 36, 14; 20; vi. 16, 28; vil. 104, 1; 5; viii.
Pee a tQ eh < 690, 45.110, 01.

142 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawpata I, S6xta 87.
AsuTraKa I, ApHyAya 6, VARGA 13.

1. Pr4-tvakshasah pra-tavasah vi-rapsinah 4nana-
tah 4vithurih rigishinah, gushta-tamasah nri-ta-
masah afigi-bhih vi A4nagre ké kit usrah-iva stri-
bhih.

2. Upa-hvaréshu yat akidhvam yayim vayah-iva
marutah kéna kit patha, skdétanti késih pa vah
ratheshu 4 ghritém ukshata mddhu-varnam 4r-
kate.

3. Pré eshdm 4gmeshu vithurd-iva regate bhtimih
yameshu ydt ha yufigdte subhé, té kriléyah dhuna-
yah bhragat-rishtayah svaydém mahi-tvém panayanta
dhiitayah.

4. Sih hi sva-srit prishat-asvah ytiva gandh
aya isandh tadvishibhih 4-vritah, asi saty4h rina-
yava dnedyah asyah dhiyah pra-avité dtha vrishd
gandh.

5. Pitth pratndsya génmand vaddmasi sémasya
gihvé pré gigati kikshasd, yét im fndram sdmi
rikvanah asata at ft naémani yagfifyéni dadhire.

6. Sriydése kim bhanu-bhih s4m mimikshire té
rasm{-bhih té rikva-bhih su-khadéyah,.té vasi-
mantah ishminah dbhiravah vidré priydsya méruta-
sya dh&mnah.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 87. 143

Hymn To THE Marvts (THE SrorM-cops).

1. The active, the strong, the singers, the never
flinching, the immovable, the wild, the most beloved
and most manly, they have shown themselves with
their glittering ornaments, a few only,! like the
heavens with the stars.

2. When you see your way through the clefts, you
are like birds, O Maruts, on whatever road it be.!
The clouds drop (rain) on your chariots everywhere ;
pour out the honey-like fat (the rain) for him who
praises you.

3. At their ravings the earth shakes, as if broken,}
when on the (heavenly) paths they harness (their
deer) for victory. They the sportive, the roaring,
with bright spears, the shakers (of the clouds) have
themselves praised their greatness.

4. That youthful company (of the Maruts), with
their spotted horses,' moves by itself; hence? it
exercises lordship, and is invested with powers.
Thou art true, thou searchest out sin,? thou art
without blemish. Therefore thou, the strong host,
thou wilt cherish this prayer.

5. We speak after the kind of our old father, our
tongue goes forth at the sight! of the Soma: when
the shouting Maruts had joined Indra in the work,’
then only they received sacrificial honours ;—

6. For their glory! these well-equipped Maruts
obtained splendours, they obtained? rays, and men to
praise them; nay, these well-armed, nimble, and fear-
less beings found the beloved home of the Maruts.’

144 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

COMMENTARY.

This hymn is ascribed to Gotama. The metre is Gagati
throughout.

Verse 1, note '. Ké kit refers to the Maruts, who are
represented as gradually rising or just showing themselves,
as yet only few in number, like the first stars in the sky.
Ké kit, some, is opposed to sarve, all. The same expres-
sion occurs again, v. 52, 12, where the Maruts are compared
to a few thieves. B. and R. translate usrah iva stri-bhih
by ‘like cows marked with stars on their foreheads.” Such
cows no doubt exist, but they can hardly be said to become
visible by these frontal stars, as the Maruts by their orna-
ments. We must take usréh here in the same sense as
dyavah ; ii. 34, 2, it is said that the Maruts were perceived
dyavah na stri-bhih, like the heavens with the stars.

i. 166, 11. dtre-drisah yé divyah-iva stri-bhih.

Who are visible far away, like the heavens (or heavenly
beings) by the stars.

And the same is said of Agni, ii, 2, 5. dyath na stri-bhih

kitayat rédasi (iti) anu. Stribhih occurs i. 68, 53 iv. 7, 33
vi. 49, 3; 12. It always means stars, and the meaning
of rays (strahl) rests, as yet, on etymological authority
only. The evening sky would, no doubt, be more appro-
priate than usrah, which applies chiefly to the dawn. But
in the Indian mind, the two dawns, i. e. the dawn and the
gloaming, are so closely united and identified, that their
names, too, are frequently interchangeable.
Verse 2, note *. I translate yayi not by a goer, a
traveller, i.e. the cloud, (this is the explanation proposed
by Sayana, and adopted by Professor Benfey,) but by path.
Etymologically yayi may mean either. But in parallel pas-
sages yayi is clearly replaced by yama. Thus:

vill. 7, 2. yét—yamam subhrah dkidhvam.

When you, bright Maruts, have seen your way.

See also viii. 7, 4. yat yamam yanti vayi-bhih.

When they (the Maruts) go on their path with the winds.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 87. 145

vill. 7, 14. Adhi-iva ydt girindm yamam subhrah dkidhvam.

When you, bright Maruts, had seen your way, as it were,
along the mountains.

The same phrase occurs, even without yaéma or yayi, in

Vv. 55, 7. na parvatah na nady&h varanta vah yatra
akidhvam marutah gaékkhata it u tat.

Not mountains, not rivers, keep you back; where you
have seen (your way), there you go.

Though yayi does not occur frequently in the Rig-veda,
the meaning of path seems throughout more applicable than
that of traveller.

v. 87, 5. tveshah yayih.

Your path, O Maruts, is brilliant.

v. 73, 7- ugrah vam kakuhah yayih.

Fearful is your pass on high.

i, 51, 11. ugrah yayim nih apah srétasa asrigat.

The fearful Indra sent the waters forth on their way
streaming.

X. 92, 5. pra—yayina yanti sindhavah.

The waters go forth on their path.

Verse 3, note’. Cf. i. 37, 8, page 51. There is no
authority for Sadyana’s explanation of vithura-iva, the earth
trembles like a widow. Vithurd occurs several times in
the Rig-veda, but never in the sense of widow. Thus:

i. 168, 6. yat kyavayatha vithura-iva sam-hitam.

When you, Maruts, shake what is compact, like brittle
things.

Par S0s 2-10 25, 93° 40,)Gsm vill. 00, 2; x..77; 4 (Vvi-
thuryati). The Maruts themselves are called avithura in
verse r. As to 4gma and ydma, see i. 37, 8, page 62.

Verse 3, note 2. Stibh is one of those words to which it
is very difficult always to assign a definite special meaning.
Being derived from stibh, to shine, the commentator has
no difficulty in explaining it by splendour, beauty ; some-
times by water. But although sibh means originally
splendour, and is used in that sense in many passages,
yet there are others where so vague a meaning seems very
inappropriate. In our verse Sayana proposes two trans-

VOL. I. L

146 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

lations, either, ‘When the Maruts harness the clouds,’ or,
‘When the Maruts harness their chariots, for the bright
rain-water” Now the idea that the Maruts harness their
chariots in order to make the clouds yield their rain, can
hardly be expressed by the simple word subhé, 1.e. for
brightness’ sake. As the Maruts are frequently praised for
their glittering ornaments, their splendour might be intended
in this passage as it certainly is in others. Thus:

i. 85, 3. yat subhdyante afigi-bhi# tantishu subhrah
dadhire virtkmatah.

When the Maruts adorn themselves with glittering
ornaments, the brilliant ones put bright weapons on their
bodies.

vii. 56, 6. subha sdbhishthah, sriya sam-mislah, 6gah-bhih
ugrah.

The most brilliant by their brilliancy, united with
splendour, terrible by strength.

In i. 64, 4, I have translated vaékshaf-su rukman 4dhi
yetire subhé by ‘ they fix gold (chains) on their chests for
beauty.’ And the same meaning is applicable to 1. 117, 5,
subhé rukmaém na darsatém ni-khatam, and other passages :
by; 51, Ovi. 627-6;

But in our verse and others which we shall examine, beauty
and brilliancy would be very weak renderings for subhé.
‘When they harnessed their chariots or their deer for the sake
of beauty,’ means nothing, or, at least, very little. I take,
therefore, subhé in this and similar phrases in the sense of
triumph or glory or victory. ‘When they harness their chariots
for to conquer, implies brilliancy, glory, victory, but it con-
veys at the same time a tangible meaning. Let us now see
whether the same meaning is appropriate in other passages :

i, 23, 11. gayatam-iva tanyatié mardtam eti dhrishnu-ya
yat sibham yathana narah.

The thundering voice of the Maruts comes fiercely, like
that of conquerors, when you go to conquer, O men!

Sayana: ‘When you go to the brilliant place of sacrifice.’
Wilson: ‘When you accept the auspicious (offering).’
Benfey: ‘Wenn ihr euren Schmuck nehmt.’

V. 57, 2. yathana stibham, you go to conquer. Cf. v. 55, 1.

Sayana: ‘ For the sake of water, or, in a chariot.’

MANDALA I, SUKTA 87. 147
v. 52, 8. sardhah marutam tit samsa—uta sma té subhé
narak pra syandrah yugata tmana.

Praise the host of the Maruts, and they, the men, the
quickly moving, will harness by themselves (the chariots)
for conquest.

Sayana: ‘ For the sake of water.’ Cf. x. 105, 3.

V. 57, 3. subhé yat ugrah prishatih 4yugdhvam.

When you have harnessed the deer for conquest.

Sayana: ‘For the sake of water.’

v. 63, 5. ratham yuhgate marttah subhé su-khém strah
na—gé-ishfishu.

The Maruts harness the chariot meet for conquest, like
a hero in battles.

Sayana: ‘ For the sake of water.’

i, 88, 2. subhé kam yanti— 4svaih.,

The Maruts go on their horses towards conquest.

Sayana: ‘In order to brighten the worshipper, or, for
the sake of water.’

i. 119, 3. sAm yat mithdhd paspridhanasah agmata subhé
makhah Amitah gayavah rane.

When striving with each other they came together, for
the sake of glory, the brisk (Maruts), immeasurable (in
strength), panting for victory in the fight.

Sayana: ‘ For the sake of brilliant wealth.’

vil. 82, 5. martt-bhif ugraéh sibham anydah tyate.

The other, the fearful (Indra), goes with the Maruts to glory.

Sayana: ‘ He takes brilliant decoration,’

iii. 26, 4. subhé— prishatif# ayukshata.

They had harnessed the deer for victory.

Sayama: ‘They had harnessed in the water the deer
together (with the fires).’

i. 167, 6. @ asthapayanta yuvatim ytivanah subhé ni-

mislim.

The Maruts, the youths, placed the maid (lightning
on their chariot), their companion for victory, (subhé
nimislam).

Sdyana: ‘For the sake of water, or, on the brilliant
chariot.’ Cf. 1.197, 63 165, 1.

vi. 62, 4. sdbham priksham isham tirgam vahanta.

The Asvins bringing glory, wealth, drink, and food.

L 2

148 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

viii, 26, 13. subhé kakrate, you bring him to glory.

Subham-yavan is an epithet of the Maruts, 1, SO 75
v. 61, 13. Cf. subhra-yavand, viii. 26, 19 (Asvinau).

Subham-ya, of the wind, iv. 3, 6.

Subham-yi, of the rays of the dawn, x. 78, 7.

Verse 4, note 1. Sdyana: ‘With spotted deer for their
horses,’ See i. 37, 2, note’, page 59.

Verse 4, note ®. Aya is a word of very rare occurrence
in the Rig-veda. It is the instrum. sing. of the feminine
pronominal base 4 or i, and as a pronoun followed by a
noun it is frequently to be met with; v. 45, 11. aya dhiya,
&e. But in our verse it is irregular in form as not entering
into Sandhi with tsana/. This irregularity, however, which
might have led us to suppose an original ayah, indefatigable,
corresponding with the following 4si, is vouched for by the
Pada text, in such matters a better authority than the San-
hité text, and certainly in this case fully borne out by the
Pratisikhya, i. 163, 10. We must therefore take aya as
an adverb, in the sense of thus or hence. In some passages
where aya seems thus to be used as an adverb, it would be
better to supply a noun from the preceding verse. Thus in
ii. 6, 2, aya refers to samidham in ii. 6,1. In vi. 17,15, a
similar noun, samidha or gira, should be supplied. But
there are other passages where, unless we suppose that the
verse was meant to illustrate a ceremonial act, such as the
placing of a samidh, and that aya pointed to it, we must
take it as a simple adverb, like the Greek to: Rv. iii.
12, 23 1X. 53, 23 106,14. In x. 116, 9, the Pada reads
ayah-iva, not aya, as given by Roth; in vi. 66, 4, dyd nd,
the accent is likewise on the first.

Verse 4, note *. Rina-yavan is well explained by B. and
R. as going after debt, searching out sin. Sayana, though
he explains rina-yavan by removing sin, derives it neverthe-
less correctly from rina and ya, and not from yu. The
same formation is found in subham-yavan, &c.; and as
there is rina-ya besides rina-yavan, so we find subham-ya
besides subham-yavan,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 87. 149

Verse 5, note ", The Soma-juice inspires the poet with
eloquence. ;

Verse 5, note *. S4mi occurs again in ii. Capes ale aly
Emilie 5, 27 5X we 1. In our passage it must be taken
as a locative of sim, meaning work, but with special refer-
ence to the toil of the battle-field. It is used in the same
sense in

Vill. 45, 27. vi dnat turvdne sami.

He (Indra) was able to overcome in battle, lit. he reached
to, or he arrived at the overcoming or the victory in battle.

But, like other words which have the general meaning of
working or toiling, sém is likewise used in the sense of
sacrifice. This meaning seems more applicable in

X. 40, I. vastoh-vastoh vahamanam dhiya sami.

Your chariot, O Asvins, which through prayer comes
every morning to the sacrifice.

il, 31, 6. apam napat dsu-héma dhiya sami.

Apam napat (Agni) who through prayer comes quickly
to the sacrifice.

In these two passages one feels inclined, with a slight
alteration of the accent, to read dhiya-sémi as one word.
Dhiya-sém would mean the sacrificer who is engaged in
prayer; cf. dhiya-gur, v. 43,15. Thus we read:

vi. 2, 4. yah te su-danave dhiya martah sasamate.

The mortal who toils for thee, the liberal god, with
prayer.

There is no necessity, however, for such a change, and
the authority of the MSS. is certainly against it.

In ili. 55, 3, sami is an acc. plur. neut. :

simi akkha didye pirvyani.

I glance back at the former sacrifices. See B. R. s.v. di.

From the same root we have the feminine sémi, meaning
work, sacrificial work, but, as far as we can see, not simply
sacrifice. Thus the Ribhus and others are said to have
acquired immortality by their work or works, simi or
samibhih, i. 20, 2; 110, 43 ili. 60, 33 iv. 33, 4. Cf iv.
29, 85097) 1G5) Vo 42,103 77, 43 Vie 52, 13 Vill, 67.5,)£4(s
ix. 74, 7; x. 28, 12. In vi. 3, 2, we read:

igé yaghébhih sasamé sémibhih,

150 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

I have sacrificed with sacrifices, I have worked with
pious works.

Here the verb sam must be taken in the sense of
working, or performing ceremonial worship, while in other
places (iii. 29, 16; v. 2, 7) it takes the more special sense
of singing songs of praise. The Greek kapu-yw, to work, to
labour, to tire (Sanskrit samyati), the Greek Kom.on and
xouiC@, to labour for or take care of a person, and possibly
even the Greek k@muos, a song or a festival (not a village
song), may all find their explanation in the Sanskrit root
sam.
The idea that the Maruts did not originally enjoy divine
honours will occur again and again: cf. 1.6, 43 72, 3.
A similar expression is used of the Ribhus, i. 20, 8, &c.
Yagfitya, properly ‘worthy of sacrifice,’ has the meaning
of divine or sacred. The Greek dyios has been compared
with yagya, sacrificio colendus, not a Vedic word.

Verse 6, note +, Sriydse kém seems to be the same as the
more frequent sriyé kam. Sriyase only occurs twice more,
v. 59, 3- The chief irregularity consists in the absence of
Guna, which is provided for by Panini’s kasen (ili. 4, 9).
Similar infinitives, if they may so be called, are bhiydse,
v. 29, 4; vridhase, v. 64, 5; dhruvase, vii. 70,1; tugase,
iv. 23, 73 rihgase, vili. 4, 17; vrihgase, vill. 76, 1; rikase,
vu. 61, 6. In vi. 39, 5, rikése may be a dat. sing. of the
masculine, to the praiser.

Verse 6, note 7. Mimikshire from myaksh, to be united
with, Rasmi, rays, after bhani, splendour, may seem
weak, but it is impossible to assign to rasmi any other
meaning, such as reins, or strings of a musical instru-

ment. In v. 79, 8, rasmi is used in juxta-position with
arki.

Verse 6, note °. The bearing of this concluding verse is
not quite clear, unless we take it as a continuation of the
preceding verse. It was there said that the Maruts (the
rikvanah) obtained their sacrificial honours, after having
Joined Indra in his work. Having thus obtained a place

MANDALA I, SUKTA 87. 151

in the sacrifice, they may be said to have won at the same
time splendour and worshippers to sing their praises, and
to have established themselves in what became afterwards
known as their own abode, their own place among the gods
who are invoked at the sacrifice.

The metre requires that we should read dhémanah.

Benfey translates: ‘Gedeih’n zu spenden woll’n die schén-
geschmiicketen mit Lichtern, Strahlen mit Lobsingern
regenen ; die brillenden, furchtlosen stiirmischen, sie sind
bekannt als Glieder des geliebten Marutstamms.’

Wilson: ‘Combining with the solar rays, they have
willingly poured down (rain) for the welfare (of mankind),
and, hymned by the priests, have been pleased partakers
of the (sacrificial food). Addressed with praises, moving
swiftly, and exempt from fear, they have become possessed
of a station agreeable and suitable to the Maruts.’

152 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawpata I, SUKTA 88.
Asu7aka I, ApHyAYA 6, VARGA 14.

1. A vidytinmat-bbi? marutah su-arkath rathebhih
yAta rishtimét-bhih * dsva-parnaih, & varshishthaya
nah ishé va4yah n& paptata su-mayah.

2. Té arunébhih vdéram 4 pisdngaih subhé kim
yanti rathattth-bhih asvaih, rukmah n& kitréh + sva-
dhiti-van pavy4 rathasya ganghananta bhtima.

8. Sriyé kdém vah ddhi tantishu vasih medha ft
vénaé n& krinavante trdhvaé, yushmébhyam kém
marutah su-gitéh tuvi-dyumndsah dhanayante
ddrim.

4, Ahani gridhrah pdri & vah & aguh imam dhiyam
varkarydm ka devim, bréhma krinvdntah gdtamAsah
arkaih trdhvém nunudre utsa-dhim ptbadhyai.

5. Etat tydt n& ydganam aketi sasvéh ha yat
marutah gétamah vah, pdsyan hiranya-kakran dyah-
damshtran vi-dhaévatah varahin.

6. Esh& sy& vah marutah anu-bhartri prdti sto-
bhati vaghdtah né vant, dstobhayat vrithA 4s4m dnu
svadham gdbhastyoh.

* rishti-mantah? + kitréh esham? + medh&h

MANDALA I, SUKTA 88. 153

Hymn to THE Maruts (tHE StorM-cops).

1. Come hither, Maruts, on your chariots charged
with lightning, resounding with beautiful songs,!
stored with spears, and winged with horses! Fly®
to us like birds, with your best food,’ you mighty
ones!

2. They come gloriously on their red, or, it may
be, on their tawny horses which hasten their chariots.
He who holds the axe?’ is brilliant like gold ;—
with the felly* of the chariot they have struck the
earth.

3. On your bodies there are daggers for beauty ;
may they stir up our minds' as they stir up the forests.
For your sake, O well-born Maruts, you who are
full of vigour, they (the priests) have shaken’? the
stone (for distilling Soma).

4. Days went round you and came back,' O hawks,
back to this prayer, and to this sacred nte; the
Gotamas making prayer with songs, have pushed up
the lid of the well (the cloud) for to drink.

5. No such hymn? was ever known as this which
Gotama sounded for you, O Maruts, when he saw you
on golden wheels, wild boars? rushing about with
iron tusks.

6. This refreshing draught of Soma rushes towards
you, like the voice of a suppliant: it rushes freely
from our hands as these libations are wont to do.

154 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

COMMENTARY.

This hymn is ascribed to Gotama, the son of Rahtigana.
The metre varies. Verses 1 and 6 are put down as
Prastara-pankti, i.e. as 12 +12+8+48. By merely count-
ing the syllables, and dissolving semivowels, it is just
possible to get twenty-four syllables in the first line of
verses 1 and 6, The old metricians must have scanned
verse I: P

A vidyunmat-bhih marutah su-arkaih

rathebhih yata~rishfimat-bhih asva-parnaih.
Again verse 6: esha syA vah marutah anu-bhartri

prati stobhati vaghatah na vani.
But the general character of these lines shows that they
were intended for hendecasyllabics, each ending in a
bacchius, though even then they are not free from irregu-
larities. The first verse would scan :

A vidyunmat-bhih marutah su-arkaih

rathebhih yata~rishfimat-(bhih) asva-parnaih.
And verse 6: esha sya vah marutah~anu-bhartri

prati stobhati vaghatah na vari.
Our only difficulty would be the termination bhif of rishéi-
mat-bhiz. I cannot adopt Professor Kuhn’s suggestion to
drop the Visarga of bhi and change i into y (Beitrage,
vol. iv. p. 198), for this would be a license without any
parallel. It is different with sah, originally sa, or with
feminines in ih, where parallel forms in 7 are _intelli-
gible. The simplest correction would be to read rathebhih
yata~rishfi-mantah~asva-parnaih. One might urge in sup-
port of this reading that in all other passages where rish¢imat
occurs, it refers to the Maruts themselves, and never to their
chariots. Yet the difficulty remains, how could so simple
a reading have been replaced by a more difficult one ?

In the two Gayatri padas which follow I feel equally
reluctant to alter. I therefore scan
a varshishthaya nah isha vayah na paptata su-mayah,

taking the dactyl of paptata as representing a spondee, and

MANDALA I, SUKTA 88. 155
admitting the exceptional bacchius instead of the amphimacer
at the end of the line.

The last line of verse 6 should be scanned :

astobhayat vritha~asam anu svadhdm gabhastyoh.

There are two other verses in this hymn where the metre
- is difficult. In the last pada of verse 5 we have seven
syllables instead of eleven. Again, I say, it would be most
easy to insert one of the many tetrasyllabic epithets of the
Maruts. But this would have been equally easy for the
collectors of the Veda. Now the authors of the Anukra-
manis distinctly state that this fifth verse is viraddripa, i.e.
that one of its padas consists of eight syllables. How
they would have made eight syllables out of vi-dhavatah
varahin does not appear, but at all events they knew that
last pada to be imperfect. The rhythm does not suffer by
this omission, as long as we scan vi-dhavatah varahin,

Lastly, there is the third pada of the second verse,
rukmaf na kitrah svadhiti-van. It would not be possible
to get eleven syllables out of this, unless we admitted vytha
not only in svadhitivan or svadhiti-vin, but also in kitrah.
Nothing would be easier than to insert eshdm after kitrah,
but the question occurs again, how could esham be lost,
or why, if by some accident it had been lost, was not so
obvious a correction made by Saunaka and Katyayana ?

Verse 1, note ', Alluding to the music of the Maruts,
and not to the splendour of the lightning which is men-
tioned before. See Wolf, Beitrage zur Deutschen Mytho-
logie, vol. ii. p. 137. ‘Das Ross und den Wagen des
Gottes begleitet munterer Hornerschall, entweder stdsst er
selbst ins Horn, oder sein Gefolge. Oft vernimmt man auch
eine liebliche Musik, der keine auf Erden gleich kommt
(Miillenhof, 582). Das wird das Pfeifen und Heulen des
Sturmes sein, nur in idealisirter Art.’ Ibid. p. 158.

Verse 1, note *, Varshishtha, which is generally ex-
plained as the superlative of vriddha, old, (Paz. vi. 4, 157.)
has in most passages of the Rig-veda the more general
meaning of strong or excellent: vi. 47, 9. isham 4 vakshi
isham varshishéham; iii. 13, 7 (vdsu); iil, 26, 8 (ratna);

156 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

iii, 16, 3 (rai); iv. 31, 153 Vili. 46, 24 (sravah); iv. 22, 9
(nrimna4); v. 67, 1 (kshatra); vi. 45, 31 (mtirdhén). In
some passages, however, it may be taken in the sense of
oldest (i. 37, 6; v. 7, 1), though by no means necessarily.
Varshishtha is derived in reality from vrishan, in the sense
of strong, excellent. See note to i. 85,12, page 126.

Verse 1, note *. Paptata, the second person plural of the
Let of the reduplicated base of pat. It is curiously lke
the Greek wimtere, but it has the meaning of flying rather
than falling: see Curtius, Grundztige, p. 190. Two other
forms formed on the same principle occur in the Rig-veda,
paptaf and paptan :

ii. 31, 1. pra yat vayah na paptan.

That they may fly to us like birds.

vi. 63, 6. pra vam vayah— anu paptan.

May your birds fly after you.

X. 95, 15. purtravah ma mrithah ma pra paptah.

Puriravas, do not die, do not fly away !

Verse 2, note '. Though svadhiti-van does not occur
again, it can only mean he who holds the axe, or, it may
be the sword or the thunderbolt, the latter particularly, if
Indra is here intended. Svadhiti signifies axe :

lil. 2, 10, sva-dhitim na tégase.

They adorned Agni like an axe to shine or to cut.

The svadhiti is used by the butcher, i. 162, 9; 18; 20;
and by the wood-cutter or carpenter, iii. 8,6; 11; x. 89,
7, &c. In v. 32, ro, a devi svddhiti# is mentioned, possibly
the lightning, the companion of Indra and the Maruts.

Verse 2, note *. The felly of the chariot of the Maruts
is frequently mentioned. It was considered not only as
an essential part of their chariot, but likewise as useful for
crushing the enemy : ;

Vv. 52, 9. uta pavya rathanam 4drim bhindanti dgasé.

They cut the mountain (cloud) with the felly of their
chariot.

i. 166, 10. pavishu kshurah Adhi.

On their fellies are sharp edges.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 88. 157

In y. 31, 5, fellies are mentioned without horses and
chariot, which were turned by Indra against the Dasyus,
(i. 64, 11.) I doubt, however, whether in India or else-
where the fellies or the niece of chariots were ever used
as weapons of attack, as detached from the chariot; (see
M. M., On Pavirava, in Beitrage zur vergleichenden Sprach-
forschung, vol. iii. p. 447.) If we translate the figurative
language of the Vedic poets into matter-of-fact terms, the
fellies of the chariots of the Maruts may be rendered by
thunderbolts ; yet by the poets of the Veda, as by the ancient
people of Germany, thunder was really supposed to be
the noise of the chariot of a god, and it was but a con-
tinuation of the same belief that the sharp wheels of that
chariot were supposed to cut and crush the clouds ; (see
M. M., loc. cit. p. 444.)

Verse 3, note *. That the vasis are small weapons, knives
or daggers, we saw before, p. 59. Sayana here explains vasi
by a weapon commonly called ara, or an awl. Inx. 101, Io,
vasis are mentioned, made of stone, asman-méayi.

The difficulty begins with the second half. Medha, as
here written in the Pada text, could only be a plural of a
neuter medhaém, but such a neuter does nowhere exist in
the Veda. We only find the masculine médha, sacrifice,
which is out of the question here, on account of its accent.
Hence the passage iii. 58, 2, tirdhvah bhavanti pitara-iva
médhah, is of no assistance, unless we alter the accent.
The feminine medhé means will, thought, prayer: i. 18, 6;
jim 4ee7 stv. 93,10; Vo 27.945) 42, 13; Vil. 104, 6; Vill.
eeL OG e520 58 1X79, 0 52095 92, 05° 65, 163 107,'255
x. 91, 8. The construction does not allow us to take
medha as a Vedic instrumental instead of medhaya, nor
does such a form occur anywhere else in the Rig-veda.
Nothing remains, I believe, than to have recourse to con-
jecture, and the addition of a single Visarga in the Pada
would remove all difficulty. In the next line, if tuvi-dyum-
ndsah be the subject, it would signify the priests. This,
however, is again without any warrant from the Rig-veda,
where tuvi-dyumna is always used as an epithet of gods.
I therefore take it as referring to the Maruts, as an

158 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

adjective in the nominative, following the vocatives marutah
su-gatah. The conception that the Maruts stir up the
forests is not of unfrequent occurrence in the Rig-veda:
ef. i. 171, 3: v. 59, 6. That urdhva is used of the mind,
in the sense of roused, may be seen in i, 119, 2; 134, 15
144,13; vii. 64, 4. The idea in the poet’s mind seems to
have been that the thunderbolts of the Maruts rouse up
men to prayer as they stir the tops of the forest trees.

Verse 8, note . On dhan in the sense of to agitate,
see B. and R. s. v.

Verse 4, note}, The first question is, which is the
subject, 4hani or gridhrak? If gridhrah were the subject,
then we should have to translate it by the eager poets,
and take 4hani in the sense of visva ahani. The sense
then might be: ‘Day by day did the eager poets sing
around you this prayer. There would be several objec-
tions, however, to this rendering. First, gvidhraz never
occurs again as signifying poets or priests. One pas-
sage only could be quoted in support, ix. 97, 57, kavayah
na gridhrah (not gridhrah), like greedy poets. But even
here, if this translation is right, the adjective is explained
by kavi, and does not stand by itself. Secondly, ahani
by itself is never used adverbially in the sense of day after
day. The only similar passage that might be quoted is
ill, 34, 10, and that is very doubtful. To take ahani as a
totally different word, viz. as 4+hani, without ceasing,
without wearying, would be too bold in the present state
of Vedic interpretation. If then we take dhani as the
subject, gridhrah would have to be taken as a vocative,
and intended for the Maruts. Now, it is perfectly true,
that by itself gridhra, hawk, does not occur again as a
name of the Maruts, but syend, hawk, and particularly a
strong hawk (ix. 96, 6), is not only a common simile applied
to the Maruts, but is actually used as one of their names:

vii. 56, 3. abhi sva-ptibhid mithéh vapanta vata-svanasah
syenah aspridhran.

They plucked each other with their beaks (?), the hawks,
rushing like the wind, strove together.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 88. 159

Aguh might be the aorist of gai, to sing, or of ga,
to go:

i, 174, 8. sana ta te indra névyah 4 aguh.

New poets, O Indra, sang these thy old deeds.

lll, 56, 2. gavah 4 aguh,

The cows approached.

If then the sense of the first line is, ‘Days went and
came back to you,’ the next question is whether we are
to extend the construction to the next words, imam dhiyam
varkaryam ka devim, or whether these words are to be
joined to kvrinvantah, like bréhma. The meaning of
varkarya is, of course, unknown. Sayana’s interpretation
as ‘what is to be made by means of water’ is merely
etymological, and does not help us much. It is true that
the object of the hymn, which is addressed to the Maruts,
is rain, and that literally varkérya might be explained as
‘that the effect of which is rain.’ But this is far too
artificial a word for Vedic poets. Possibly there was some
other word that had become unintelligible and which, by
a slight change, was turned into varkarya, in order to
give the meaning of rain-producing. It might have been
karkarya, glorious, or the song of a poet. called Varkara.
The most likely supposition is that varkaryd was the name
given to some famous hymn, some pzan or song of triumph
belonging to the Gotamas, possibly to some verses of the
very hymn before us. In this case the epithet devi would
be quite appropriate, for it is frequently used for a sacred
or sacrificial song: iv. 43, 1. devim su-stutim; iii. 18, 3.
imam dhtyam sata-séyaya devim. See, however, the note
to verse 6,

The purport of the whole line would then be that many
days have gone for the Maruts as well as for the famous
hymn once addressed to them by Gotama, or, in other
words, that the Gotamas have long been devoted to the
Maruts, an idea frequently recurring in the hymns of the
Veda, and, in our case, carried on in the next verse, where
it is said that the present hymn is like one that Gotama
composed when he saw the Maruts or spoke of them as
wild boars with iron tusks. The pushing up the lid of the
well for to drink, means that they obtained rain from the

160 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

cloud, which is here, as before, represented as a covered
well. a

See another explanation in Haug, Uber die urspriingliche
Bedeutung des Wortes Brahma, 1868, p. 5.

Verse 5, note 1. Y6gana commonly means a chariot:

vi. 62, 6. arenti-bhih yéganebhih bhuganta.

You who possess dustless chariots.

vill. 72, 6. dsva-vat yéganam brihat.

The great chariot with horses.

It then became the name for a distance to be accom-
plished without unharnessing the horses, just as the Latin
jugum, a yoke, then a juger of land, ‘quod uno jugo boum
uno die exarari posset,’ Pliny xvill. 3, 3, 9.

In our passage, however, y6gana means a hymn, lit. a
composition, which is clearly its meaning in

viii. 90, 3. brahma te indra girvanah kriyante dnatid-
bhuta, ima& gushasva hari-asva ydéganad indra ya te
amanmahi.

Unequalled prayers are made for thee, praiseworthy
Indra; accept these hymns which we have devised for
thee, O Indra with bright horses!

Verse 5, note >. Varahu has here the same meaning as
varaha, wild boar, (viii. 77, 10; x. 28, 4.) It occurs once
more, i. 121, 11, aS applied to Vritra, who is also called
varaha, i. 61,7; x. 99,6. In x. 67, 7, vrisha-bhih vardhaih
(with the accent on the penultimate) is intended for the
Maruts*. Except in this passage, varaha has the accent on
the last syllable: ix. 97, 7, varaha is applied to Soma.

Verse 6. This last verse is almost unintelligible to me.
I give, however, the various attempts that have been made
to explain it.

Wilson: ‘This is that praise, Maruts, which, suited (to
your merits), glorifies every one of you. The speech of the

* See Genthe, Die Windgottheiten, 1861, p. 14; Grimm, Deutsche Mytho-

logie, p. 689. Grimm mentions eburSrung (boar-throng) as a name of Orion,
the star that betokens storm.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 88. 161

priest has now glorified you, without difficulty, with sacred
verses, since (you have placed) food in our hands.’

Benfey : ‘ Dies Lied — Maruts !—das hinter euch empor-
strebt, es klingt zuriick gleich eines Beters Stimme Miihlos
schuf solche Lieder er, entsprechend eurer Arme Kraft.
(Note: Der zum Himmel schallende Lobgesang findet
seinen Widerhall (wirklich, “‘ bebt zuriick”) in dem Sturm-
geheul der Maruts, welches mit dem Geheul des Betenden
verglichen wird.)’

Langlois: ‘O Marouts, la voix qui s’éléve aujourd’hui
vers vous, vous chante avec non moins de raison que celle
qui vous célébra (jadis). Oui, c’est avec justice que nous
yous exaltons dans ces (vers), tenant en nos mains les mets
sacrés.’

My own translation is to a great extent conjectural.
It seems to me from verse 3, that the poet offers both a
hymn of praise and a libation of Soma. Possibly varkarya
in verse 4 might be taken in the sense of Soma-juice, and
be derived from valkala, which in later Sanskrit means the
bark of trees. In that case verse 5 would again refer to
the hymn of Gotama, and verse 6 to the libation which is
to accompany it. Anu-bhartri does not occur again, but
it can only mean what supports or refreshes, and therefore
would be applicable to a libation of Soma which supports
the gods. The verb stobhati would well express the rushing
sound of the Soma, as in i. 168, 8, it expresses the rushing
noise of the waters against the fellies of the chariots. The
next line adds little beyond stating that this libation of
Soma rushes forth freely from the hands, the gabhastis
being specially mentioned in other passages where the
crushing of the Soma-plant is described :

ix. 71, 3. Adri-bhih sutah pavate gabhastyoh.

The Soma squeezed by the stones runs from the hands.

On svadha see p. 19.

VOL. I. M

162 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawonata I, Stxra 165.
AsHTaka II, ApuyAva 3, VaRGA 24-26.

Indrah. .

1. Kéyd subhé sé-vayasah sé-nildd samanyd maru-
tah s4m mimikshuh, kéy& mati kutah a-itasah eté
drkanti sishmam vrishanah vasu-ya.

Indrah.

2. Kasya bréhmani gugushuh yivanah kéh adhvaré
martitah & vavarta, syendn-iva dhrdgatah antérikshe
kéna mah& ménasd riramama.

Marutah.

3. Kiitah tvdm indra ma&hinah sin ékah yasi sat-
pate kim te ittha, sim prikkhase sam-arandéh subha-
nath vokéh tdét nah hari-vah yat te asmé ({ti).

1. Witson: (Indra speaks): With what auspicious fortune
have the Maruts, who are of one age, one residence, one
dignity, watered (the earth) together: with what intention:
whence have they come: Showerers of rain, they venerate,
through desire of wealth, the energy (that is generated in the
world by rain)?

Lanexors: Quel éclat ces Marouts qui parcourent, qui
habitent ensemble (les espaces de air) répandent par tout (le
monde)! Que veulent-ils? d’ot viennent-ils, généreux et
riches, chercher les offrandes ?

2. Witson: Of whose oblations do the youthful (Maruts)
approve: who attracts them to his (own) sacrifice (from the

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 163

HyMn To THE Maruts AND INDRA.

The Prologue.

The sacrificer speaks :

1. With what splendour are the Maruts all equally?
endowed,’ they who are of the same age, and dwell
in the same house? With what thoughts? From
whence are they come ?* Do these heroes sing forth
their (own) strength* because they wish for wealth ?

2. Whose prayers have the youths accepted ?, Who
has turned the Maruts to his own sacrifice? By
what strong devotion! may we delight them, they
who float through the air like hawks #

The Dialogue.
The Maruts speak :

3. From whence,! O Indra, dost thou come alone,
thou who art mighty? O lord of men,’ what has
thus happened to thee? Thou greetest (us)* when
thou comest together with (us), the bright (Maruts).*
Tell us then, thou with thy bay horses, what thou
hast against us !

rites of others): with what powerful praise may we propitiate
(them), wandering like kites in the mid-air ?

LanGtots: Quel est celui qui, par ses hommages, plait a ces
jeunes (divinités)? qui, par son sacrifice, attire les Marouts?
Par quelle priére parviendrons-nous a retenir ces (dieux qui)
comme des €perviers, parcourent les airs ?

3. Witson: (The Maruts): Indra, lord of the good, whither
dost thou, who art entitled to honour, proceed alone: what
means this (absence of attendance): when followed (by us),
thou requirest (what is right). Lord of fleet horses, say to us,
with pleasant words, that which thou (hast to say) to us.

Lanetors: (Les Marouts parlent): Indra, maitre des

M 2

164 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Indrah.
4. Brdhmfni me matdyah sam sut&sah stishmah

iyarti pré-bhritah me ddrih, 4 sdsate prdati haryanti
ukth& im& hari (iti) vahatah t& nah akkha.

Marutah.

5. Atah vayém antamébhih yuganah svd-kshatre-
bhif tanvaih simbhaménah méhah-bhih étan ipa yug-
mahe nu indra svadh&m d4nu hi nah babhttha.

Indrah.

6. Kva sy& vah marutah svadhd asit yét mam
ékam sam-ddhatta ahi-hdtye, ahdm hi ugrah tavi-
sh4h tuvishman visvasya sdtroh dnamam vadha-
snath.

hommes pieux, d’ot viens-tu, grand et unique? Que veux-
tu? Toi qui est notre compagnon, tu peux nous répondre
avee bonté. O dieu, trainé par des coursiers azurés, dis-nous
ce que tu nous veux.

4, Witson: (Indra): Sacred rites are mine: (holy) praises
give me pleasure: libations are for me: my vigorous thunder-
bolt, hurled (against my foes), goes (to its mark): me, do (pious
worshippers) propitiate: hymns are addressed to me; these
horses bear us to the presence (of those worshippers, and
worship).

Lanexois: (Indra parle): Les cérémonies, les priéres, les
hymues, les libations, les offrandes, tout est A moi. Je porte
la foudre. Des invocations, des chants se sont fait entendre.
Mes chevaux m’aménent. Voila ce que jé veux ici.

5. Witson: (The Maruts): Therefore we also, decorating
our persons, are ready, with our docile and nigh-standing

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 165

Indra speaks:

4. The sacred songs are mine, (mine are) the
prayers ;* sweet* are the libations! My strength
rises,’ my thunderbolt is hurled forth. They call for
me, the prayers yearn for me. Here are my horses,
they carry me towards them.

The Maruts speak :

5. Therefore, in company with our strong friends,’
having adorned our bodies, we now harness our fallow
deer? with all our might ;*—for, Indra, according to
thy custom, thou hast been with us.

Indra speaks:

6. Where, O Maruts, was that custom of yours,
that you should join me who am alone in the killing
of Ahi? I indeed am terrible, strong, powerful,—I
escaped from the blows of every enemy.’

steeds, (to attend thee) with all our splendour, to those rites ;
verily, Indra, thou appropriatest our (sacrificial) food.

Lanetors: (Les Marouts parlent): Et nous, sur les puis-
sants coursiers que voici, plagant nos corps légers et brillants,
nous joignons nos splendeurs aux tiennes. Et tu veux, Indra,
t’approprier notre offrande ?

6. Witson: (Indra): Where, Maruts, has that (sacrificial)
food been assigned to you, which, for the destruction of Ahi,
was appropriated to me alone; for I indeed am fierce and
strong and mighty, and have bowed down all mine enemies
with death-dealing shafts.

Lanetots: (Indra parle): Et comment cette offrande serait-
elle pour vous, 6 Marouts, quand vous reconnaissez ma supé-
riorité en réclamant mon secours pour la mort d’Ahi? Je suis
grand, fort et redoutable, et de mes traits, funestes & tous mes

ennemis, j’ai tué Ahi.

166 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Marutah.

7. Bhtiri kakartha ytgyebhih asmé ({ti) samané-
bhih vrishabha patmsyebhih, bhdrini hi krinévama
savishtha fndra krétvA marutah yat vasama.

Indrah.
8. Vaddhim vritrém marutah indriyéna svéna
bh4mena tavish4h babhivdn, ahdm etéh mdnave vi-

své-kandrah su-gih apéh kakara vagra-bahuh.

Marutah.

9. Anuttam & te magha-van ndékii ni n& tva-van
asti devdta vidinah, nd gdyamanah ndsate nd gatah
yni karishya& * krinuhi pra-vriddha.

Indrah.
10. Ekasya kit me vi-bhi astu dgah y& ni

7. Witson: (Maruts): Showerer (of benefits) thou hast
done much; but it has been with our united equal energies ;
for we, too, most powerful Indra, have done many things, and
by our deeds (we are, as) we desire to be, Maruts.

Lanexois: (Les Marouts parlent): Tu as beaucoup fait,
(dieu) généreux en venant nous seconder de ta force héroique.
Mais, 6 puissant Indra, nous pouvons aussi beaucoup, quand,
nous autres Marouts, nous voulons prouver notre vaillance.

8. Witson: (Indra): By my own prowess (Maruts) I,
mighty in my wrath, slew Vritra; armed with my thunder-
bolt, I created all these pellucid, gently-flowing waters for
(the good of) man.

* karishyah?

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 167

The Maruts speak :

7. Thou hast achieved much with us as com-
panions.t. With the same valour, O hero! let us
achieve then many things, O thou most powerful, O
Indra! whatever we, O Maruts, wish with our heart

Indra speaks:

8. I slew Vritra, O Maruts, with (Indra’s) might,
having grown strong through my own vigour; I, who
hold the thunderbolt in my arms, I have made these
all-brilliant waters to flow freely for man.!

The Maruts speak :

9. Nothing, O powerful lord, is strong before thee:
no one is known among the gods? like unto thee. No
one who is now born? will come near, no one who
has been born. Do what has to be done,’ thou who
art grown so strong.

Indra speaks:

10. Almighty power be mine alone, whatever I

Lanexors: (Indra parle): Marouts, j'ai tué Vritra, et je
n’ai eu besoin que de ma colére et de ma force d’Indra. C’est
moi, qui, la foudre 4 la main, ai ouvert un chemin 4 ces ondes
qui font le bonheur de Manou.

9. Witson: (Maruts): Verily, Maghavat, nothing (done)
by thee is unavailing, there is no divinity as wise as thou ; no
one being born, or that has been born, ever surpasses the
glorious deeds which thou, mighty (Indra), hast achieved.

Lanetors: (Les Marouts parlent): O Maghavan, nous
n’attaquons pas ta gloire. Personne, 6 dieu, quand on connait
tes exploits, ne peut se croire ton égal. Aucun étre, présent
ou passé ne saurait te valoir. Tu es grand, fais ce que tu
dois faire.

10. Witson: (Indra): May the prowess of me alone be

168 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

dadhrishvan krinévai manish4, ahdm hi ugré maru-
tah vidinah yani kydvam indrah ft ise eshdm.

Indrah.

11. Amandat m4 marutah stémah dtra ydt me
narah sriityam bréhma kakrdé, indraya vrishne st-
makhiya méhyam sékhye sdkhayah tanvé tand-
bhih.

Indrah.

12. Eva it eté prdti m& rékamanah dnedyah*
srévah & ishah dddhandh, sam-kdkshya marutah
kandré-varnih akkhinta me khaddyatha ka nt-

nam.

Agastyah.
13. Kah nu dtra marutah mamahe vah pra yatana

irresistible, may I quickly accomplish whatever I contemplate
in my mind, for verily, Maruts, I am fierce and sagacious,
and to whatever (objects) I direct (my thoughts), of them I
am the lord, and rule (over them).

Laneuors: (Indra parle): Ma force est assez grande, pour
que, seul, je puisse exécuter ce que je veux tenter. Je suis
redoutable, 6 Marouts, je sais ce que j’ai a faire, moi, Indra,
maitre de vous tous.

11. Witson: Maruts, on this occasion praise delights me ;
that praise which is to be heard (by all), which men have
offered me. To Indra, the showerer (of benefits), the object
of pious sacrifice; to me, (endowed) with many forms, (do

you) my friends (offer sacrifices) for (the nourishment of my)
person.

EEE cane ens SL
* d4nedyam?

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 169

may do, daring in my heart;! for I indeed, O Maruts,
am known as terrible: of all that I threw down, I,
Indra, am the lord.

Indra speaks :

11. O Maruts, now your praise has pleased me,
the glorious hymn which you have made for me, ye
men !—for me, for Indra, for the powerful hero, as
friends for a friend, for your own sake and by your
own efforts.

Indra speaks:

12. Truly, there they are, shining towards me,
assuming blameless glory, assuming vigour. O
Maruts, wherever I have looked for you, you have
appeared to me in bright splendour: appear to me

also now!
The Epilogue.

The sacrificer speaks:
13. Who has magnified you here, O Maruts? Come

Lanetors: O Marouts, l’éloge que vous avez fait de moi
m/’a flatté et surtout votre attention a me laisser votre part du
sacrifice. Indra est généreux, et fété par de nombreux hom-
mages. Soyez mes amis, et développez vos corps (légers).

12. Witson: Maruts, verily, glorifying me, and enjoying
boundless fame and food (through my favour), do you, of
golden colour, and invested with glory, cover me in requital,
verily, (with renown.)

Lanetors: Ainsi brillant a mes cétés, prenez dans les
offrandes et dans les hymnes la part conforme a votre rang,
O Marouts, vos couleurs sont merveilleuses. Resplendissons
ensemble, et couvrez-moi (de vos corps) comme vous l’avez
fait jusqu’a présent.

13. Wiuson: (Agastya): What mortal, Maruts, worships
you in this world: hasten, friends, to the presence of your

170 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

sikhin dkkha sakhdyah, mdnmani kitrah api-vata-
yantah esham bhita névedih me riténam.

Agastyah.

14. A ydt duvasy&t duvdse né kArt asmdn kakré
manydsya medhé, 6 (iti) si varta marutah vipram
akkha im& bréhmaéni garité vah arkat.

Agastyah.

15. Eshdéh vah st6mah marutah iyém gih mandar-
ydsya manydsya kardh, & ishd ydsishfa tanvé vayam
vidydma ishém vrigdnam gir4-danum.

friends; wonderful (divinities), be to them the means of ac-
quiring riches; and be not uncognisant of my merits.

Lanewois: (Le poéte parle): Quel est celui qui vous chante
en ce moment, 6 Marouts? Soyez-nous agréables, et venez
vers des amis. D’un souffle propice favorisez nos vceux. Pos-
sesseurs de biens variés, daignez visiter notre sacrifice.

14. Witson : Since the experienced intellect of a venerable
(sage), competent to bestow praise upon (you), who deserve
praise, has been exerted for us: do you, Maruts, come to the
presence of the devout (worshipper) who, glorifying (you),
worships you with these holy rites.

Lanewois: Si la science d’un sage nous a, comme un

COMMENTARY.

According to the Anukramanika this hymn is a dialogue
between Agastya, the Maruts, and Indra. A careful consi-
deration of the hymn would probably have led us to a similar
conclusion, but I doubt whether it would have led us to
adopt the same distribution of the verses among the poet,
the Maruts, and Indra, as that adopted by the author of the

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 171

hither, O friends, towards your friends. Ye brilliant
Maruts, cherish’ these prayers, and be mindful of
these my rites.

14. The wisdom of Manya has brought us to this,
that he should help as the poet helps the performer
of a sacrifice: bring (them) hither quickly! Maruts,
on to the sage! these prayers the singer has recited
for you.!

15. This your praise, O Maruts, this your song
comes from Mandarya, the son of Mana,' the poet.
Come hither with rain! May we find for ourselves
offspring,’ food, and a camp* with running water.

artiste habile, faconnés au culte pompeux que nous vous
rendons, 6 Marouts, traitez avec bonté homme qui, par ses
priéres et ses chants, vous a honorés.

15. Wuson: This praise, Maruts, is for you: this hymn
is for you, (the work) of a venerable author, capable of con-
ferring delight (by his laudations). May the praise reach you,
for (the good of your) persons, so that we may (thence) obtain
food, strength, and long life.

Lanatois: O Marouts, cet éloge et cet hymne d’un respec-
table poéte s’addressent 4 vous. I] a voulu vous plaire. Venez
avec V’abondance, en étendant vos réseaux. Que nous con-
naissions la prospérité, la force et Vheureuse vieillesse !

Anukramanikaé. He assigns the first two verses to Indra,
the third, fifth, seventh, and ninth to the Maruts, the
fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth to Indra,
and the three concluding verses to Agastya. I think that
the two verses in the beginning, as well as the three con-
cluding verses, belong certainly to Agastya or to whoever
else the real performer of the sacrifice may have been. The
two verses in the beginning cannot be ascribed to Indra,

172 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

who, to judge from his language, would never say: ‘ By
what strong devotion may we delight the Maruts? It
might seem, in fact, as if the three following verses, too,
should be ascribed to the sacrificer, so that the dialogue
between Indra and the Maruts would begin only with the
sixth verse. The third verse might well be addressed to
Indra by the sacrificer, and in the fourth verse we might
see a description of all that he had done for Indra. What
is against this view, however, is the phrase prabhritah me
ny If used by the sacrificer, it might seem to mean,
‘my stone, i.e. the stone used for squeezing the Soma, has
been brought forth.” But though Professor Roth assigns
this meaning to prdbhrita in our passage, I doubt whether,
in connection with Adri, or with vagra, prabhrita can mean
anything but hurled. Thus we read:

i. 61, 12. asmat it dm (fti) pra bhara—vritraya vagram.

Hurl thou, Indra, the thunderbolt against this Vritra.

Vv. 32, 7. yat im vagrasya pré-bhritau dadabha.

When Indra conquered him in the hurling of the
thunderbolt.

I therefore suppose the dialogue to begin with verse 3,
and I find that Langlois, though it may be from different
reasons, arrived at the same conclusion.

There can be little doubt that the other verses, to verse
12, are rightly apportioned between Indra and the Maruts.
Verse 12 might perhaps be attributed again to the wor-
shipper of the Maruts, but as there is no absolute necessity
for assigning it to him, it is better to follow the tradition
and to take it as the last verse of Indra’s speech. It would
seem, in fact, as if these ten verses, from 3 to 12, formed
an independent poem, which was intended to show the
divine power of the Maruts. That their divine power was
sometimes denied, and that Indra’s occasional contempt of
them was well known to the Vedic poets, will become
evident from other hymns. This dialogue seems therefore
to have been distinctly intended to show that, in spite of
occasional misunderstandings between the Maruts and the
all-powerful Indra, Indra himself had fully recognized their
power and accepted their friendship. If we suppose that
this dialogue was repeated at sacrifices in honour of the

MANDALA I, SOKTA 165. 173

Maruts, or that possibly it was acted by two parties, one
representing Indra, the other the Maruts and their followers,
then the two verses in the beginning and the three at the
end ought to be placed in the mouth of the actual sacrificer,
whoever he was. He begins by asking, who has attracted
the Maruts to his sacrifice, and by what act of praise and
worship they can be asian Then follows the dialogue
in honour of the Maruts, and after it the sacrificer asks
again, ‘Who has magnified the Maruts, i.e. have not we
magnified them?’ and he implores them to graht him their
friendship in recognition of his acts of worship. If then
we suppose that the dialogue was the work of Mandarya
Manya, the fourteenth verse, too, would lose something of
its obscurity. Coming from the mouth of the actual sacri-
ficer, it would mean, ‘the wisdom, or the poetical genius, of
Manya has brought us to this, has induced us to do
this, i.e. to perform this dialogue of Manya, so that he,
Manya, should assist, as a poet assists the priest at a
sacrifice.’ If Manya himself was present, the words 6 st
varta, ‘bring hither quickly, would have to be taken as
addressed to him by the sacrificer; the next, ‘ Maruts, on
to the sage!’ would be addressed to the Maruts, the sage
(vipra) being meant for Manya; and in the last words, too,
‘these prayers the singer has recited for you, the singer
(garita) might again be Manya, the powerful poet whose
services the sacrificer had engaged, and whose famous
dialogue between Indra and the Maruts was considered a
safe means of winning their favour. It would be in keeping
with all this, if in the last verse the sacrificer once more
informed the Maruts that this hymn of praise was the work
of the famous poet Mandarya, the son of Mana, and if he
then concluded with the usual prayer for safety, food, and

progeny.

Verse 1, note +, As samani occurs in the Veda as the
feminine of samana (cf. iv. 51, 9; xX. 191, 3; 4), Samanya
might, no doubt, be taken as an instrumental, belonging to
subh4. We should then have to translate: ‘With what
equal splendour are the Maruts endowed?’ Sayana adopts
the same explanation, while Wilson, who seems to have

174 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

read samanyah, translates ‘of one dignity.’ Professor Roth,
s. v. myaksh, would seem to take samanya as some kind of
substantive, and he refers to another passage, i. 167, 4,
sidharanya-iva marttah mimikshud, without, however,
detailing his interpretation of these passages.

It cannot be said that Sayana’s explanation is objection-
able, yet there is something awkward in qualifying by an
adjective, however indefinite, what forms the subject of an
interrogative sentence, and it would be possible to avoid
this, by taking samanyad as an adverb. It is clearly used
as an adverb in iii. 54, 7; vii. 83, 8.

Verse 1, note ®. Mimikshuf is the perfect of myaksh, in
the sense of to be firmly joined with something. It has
therefore a more definite meaning than the Latin miscere
and the Greek picryes, which come from the same source,
i.e. from a root mik or mig, in Sanskrit also mis in mis-ra ;
(see Curtius, Grundziige, p. 300.) There may be indeed one
or two passages in the Veda where myaksh seems to have
the simple meaning of mixing, but it will be seen that they
constitute a small minority compared with those where
myaksh has the meaning of holding to, sticking to; I
mean

X, 104, 2, mimikshuh yam ddrayah indra tibhyam.

The Soma which the stones have mixed for thee.

This form cannot be derived from mimiksh, but is the
grd pers. plur. perf. Parasm. of myaksh. It may, however,
be translated, ‘This Soma which the stones have grasped or
squeezed for thee, as may be seen from passages quoted here-
after, in which myaksh is construed with an accusative.

ii, 3, 11. ghritam mimikshe.

The butter has been mixed,

This form cannot be derived from mimiksh, but is the
3rd pers. sing. perf. Atm. of myaksh. If the meaning of
mixing should be considered inadmissible, we might in this
verse translate, ‘The butter has become fixed, solid, or
coagulated.”

Leaving out of consideration for the present the forms
which are derived from mimiksh, we find the following
passages in which myaksh occurs. Its original meaning

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 175

must have been to be mixed with, to be joined to, and in many
passages that original sense is still to be recognized, only with
the additional idea of being firmly joined, of sticking to, or,
in an active sense, laying hold of, grasping firmly.

1. Without any case:

i. 169, 3. amyak sa te indra rish¢ih asmé (iti).

This thy spear, O Indra, sits firm for us.

This would mean that Indra held his weapon well, as a
soldier ought to hold his spear. Amyak is the 3rd pers.
sing. of a second aor. Parasm., 4myaksham, 4myak(sht);
(Say. prapnoti.) Cf. viii. 61, 18.

2. With locative:

X. 44, 2. mimyaksha vagrah nri-pate gabhastau.

In thy fist, O king, the thunderbolt rests firmly.

1, 167, 3. mimyaksha yéshu st-dhité—vishtih:

With whom the spear (lightning) rests well placed (gut
eingelegt), i.e. the Maruts who hold the spear firmly, so
that it seems to stick fast to them. (Say. samgatabhit.)

vi. 50, 5. mimydksha yéshu rodasi nd devi.

To whom the goddess Rodasi clings. (Say. samgakkhate.)

vi. I1, 5. A4amyakshi sédma saddane prithivyah.

The seat was firmly set on the seat of the earth. (Say.
gamyate, parigrihyate). It is the 3rd pers. sing. aor. pass.

vi. 29, 2. & yasmin haste néryaéh mimikshtih 4 rathe
hiranyéye rathe-sthah, 4 rasmayah gabhastyoh sthurayoh 4
Adhvan dsvasah vrishanah yuganah.

To whose hand men cling, in whose golden chariot the
drivers stand firm, in whose strong fists the reins are well
held, on whose path the harnessed stallions hold together.
(Say. asityante, Apfiryante ; or dsifixanti, ptrayanti.)

x. 96, 3. indre ni rapa harité mimikshire.

Bright colours stuck or clung or settled on Indra. (Say,
nishiktani babhtivuh ; mihefd sanantat karmani riipam.)

3. With instrumental:
i. 165, 1. kéya subha martitah s4m mimikshuh.
To what splendour do the Maruts cling; or, what
splendour clings to them?
v. 58, 5 svayA matya mardtah sim mimikshuh. (See
also i. 165, I.)

176 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

The Maruts cling to their own thought or will. (Say.
vrishtya samyak sifikanti.)

i. 167, 4. yavya (i.e. yaviyd) sadharanya-iva marttah
mimikshuh.

A difficult passage which receives little light from i. 173,
12 s+ Villy 90, °6 j4. 08 V1e727,) 0

i. 87, 6. bhand-bhik s4m mimikshire.

The Maruts were joined with splendour. (Say. medhum
ikkanti.)

4, With accusative :

vili. 61, 18. ni ya vagram mimikshatuh,

Thy two arms which have firmly grasped the thunder-
bolt. (Say. parigrihnitah.)

Here I should also prefer to place vii. 20, 4, if we might
explain mimikshan as a participle present of myaksh in the
Hu-class :

ni vagram indrah mimikshan.

Grasping firmly the thunderbolt. (Say. satrushu pra-
payan.)

vi. 29, 3. sriyé te pada duivah 4 mimikshuh.

Thy servants embrace thy feet for their happiness. (Say.
Asifkanti, samarpayanti.)

Like other verbs which mean to join, myaksh, if accom-
panied by prepositions expressive of separation, means to
Separate. (Cf. vi-yukta, se-junctus.)

ii, 28, 6. Apo (iti) si myaksha varuna bhiyésam mat.

Remove well from me, O Varuna, terror. (Say. apa-
gamaya.)

Quite distinct from this is the desiderative or inchoative
verb mimiksh, from mih, in the sense of to sprinkle, or to
shower, chiefly used with reference to the gods who are
asked to sprinkle the sacrifice with rain. Thus we read:

i. 142, 3, madhva yagham mimikshati.

(Narasamsa) sprinkles the sacrifice with rain,

ix. 107, 6. madhva yagiém mimiksha nah,

Sprinkle (O Soma) our sacrifice with rain,

i. 34, 3. trih adya yagham madhuna mimikshatam.

O Asvins, sprinkle the sacrifice with rain thrice to-day !

i. 47, 4. madhva yaghdm mimikshatam.

O Asvins, sprinkle the sacrifice with rain !

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 177

5. Without madhu:
i. 22, 13. mahi dyatth prithivi ka nah imém yagnam
mimikshatam.
May the great heaven and earth sprinkle this our sacrifice.

6. With madhu in thé accusative :

vi. 70, 5. madhu nah dyavaprithivi (iti) mimikshatdm.

May heaven and earth shower down rain for us.

Very frequently the Asvins are asked to sprinkle the
sacrifice with their whip. This whip seems originally, like
the whip of the Maruts, to have been intended for the
cracking noise of the storm, preceding the rain. Then as
whips had probably some similarity to the instruments used
for sprinkling butter on the sacrificial viands, the Asvins
are asked to sprinkle the sacrifice with their whip, i.e. to
give rain:

1. 157, 4. madhu-matya nah kasaya mimikshatam.

O Asvins, sprinkle us with your rain-giving whip.

1. 22, 3. taya yagham mimikshatam.

O Asvins, sprinkle the sacrifice with it (your whip).

7. Lastly, we find such phrases as,

i. 48, 16. sdm nah raya—mimikshva,

Sprinkle us with wealth, i.e. shower wealth down upon
us. Here mih is really treated as a Hu-verb in the
Atmanepada.

As an adjective, mimikshti is applied to Indra (iii. 50, 3),
and mimiksha to Soma (vi. 34, 4).

Verse 1, note ®. I do not see how étasah can here be
taken in any sense but that suggested by the Pada, a-itasah,
come near. Professor Roth thinks it not impossible that it
may be meant for étah, the fallow deer, the usual team of
the Maruts. These Etas are mentioned in verse 5, but
there the Pada gives quite correctly étan, not 4-itan, and
Sayana explains it accordingly by ganttin.

Verse 1, note 4. The idea that the Maruts proclaim their
own strength occurred before, i. 87, 3. It is a perfectly
natural conception, for the louder the voice of the wind, the
greater its strength,

VAD DE Me N

178 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Verse 2, note 1. Manas here, as elsewhere, is used in the
sense of thought preceding speech, devotion not yet ex-
pressed in prayer. See Taitt. Sanh. v. 1, 3, 3. yat purusho
manasdbhigakkhati tad vaka vadati, what a man grasps in
his mind that he expresses by speech. Professor Roth
suggests an emendation which is ingenious, but not neces-
sary, viz. mah4 ndmasa, with great adoration, an expression
which occurs, if not in vi. 52, 17, at least in vil. 12,1. We
find, however, the phrase maha manasa in

vi. 40, 4. 4 y4hi sdsvat usataé yayatha indra maha manasa
soma-péyam,

Gpa bréhmani srinavah ima nah atha te yaghah tanvé
vayah dhat.

Come hither, thou hast always come, Indra, to our
libation through our yearning great devotion. Mayest
thou hear these our prayers, and may then the sacrifice
place vigour in thy body.

It is curious to observe that throughout the Rig-
veda the instrumental singular maha is always used
as an adjective belonging to some term or other for
praise and prayer. Besides the passages mentioned, we
find :

ii. 24, 1. aya vidhema naévaya maha gira,

Let us sacrifice with this new great song.

vi. 52, 17. su-ukténa maha namasa 4 vivase.

I worship with a hymn with great adoration, or I worship
with a great hymn in adoration.

vill. 46, 14. gaya gird maha vi-ketasam.

Celebrate the wise Indra with a great song.

Verse 3, note ". We ought to scan kutak tvam indra
mahinaf san, because yasi, being anudatta, could not begin
a new pada. It would be more natural to translate kitah
by why? for the Maruts evidently wish to express their
surprise at Indra’s going to do battle alone and without
their assistance. I do not think, however, that in the
Rig-veda, even in the latest hymns, ktitah has ever a causal
meaning, and I have therefore translated it*in the same
sense in which it occurs before in the poet’s address to
the Maruts.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 179

Verse 3, note *. Sat-pati, lord of men, means lord of
real men, of heroes, and should not be translated by good
lord. Sat by itself is frequently used in the sense of
heroes, of men physically rather than morally good:

ii. I, 3. tvaém agne indrah vrishabhah satdm asi.

Thou, Agni, art Indra, the hero among heroes.

i. 173, 7. saméat-su tva stra satém urdndm.

Thee, O hero, in battles the protector of (good and
true) men.

Verse 3, note °. The meaning of sém prikkhase is very
much the same as that of sim vadasva in i. 170, 5.

Verse 3, note *. Subhand evidently is meant as a name
for the Maruts, who thus speak of themselves in the third
person. This is by no means unusual in the Rig-veda;
see, for instance,

1.170, 2. tébhi# kalpasva sdadhu-ya ma nah sam-drane
vadhih.

Be thou good with these (with us, the Maruts), do not
kill us in battle !

Verse 4, Indra certainly addresses his old friends, the
Maruts, very unceremoniously, but this, though at first
startling, was evidently the intention of the poet. He
wished to represent a squabble between Indra and the
Maruts, such as they were familiar with in their own
village life, and this was to be followed by a reconciliation.
The boorish rudeness, selfishness, and boastfulness here
ascribed to Indra may seem offensive to those who cannot
divest themselves of the modern meaning of deities, but
looked upon from the right point of view, it is really full
of interest.

Verse 4, note 1. Braéhmani and matayah are here men-
tioned separately in the same way as a distinction is made
between bréhman, stéma, and uktha, iv. 22,1; vi. 23,1;
between bréhmani and girah, iii. 51, 6; between brahma,
girah, and stémah, vi. 38, 3; between brahma, girah, uktha,
and manma, vi. 38, 4, &c.

N 2

180 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Verse 4, note *, Saém, which I have here translated by
sweet, is a difficult word to render. It is used as a sub-
stantive, as an adjective, and as an adverb; and in several
instances it must remain doubtful whether it was meant
for one or the other. The adverbial character is almost
always, if not always, applicable, though in English there
is no adverb of such general import as sam, and we must
therefore render it differently, although we are able to
perceive that in the mind of the poet it might still have
been conceived as an adverb, in the sense of ‘well. I shall
arrange the principal passages in which s4m occurs accord-
ing to the verbs with which it is construed.

1. With bhi:

vill. 79, 7. bhava nah soma sam hridé.

Be thou, Soma, well (pleasant) to our heart. Cf. viii. 82, 3.

vill. 48, 4. sam nah bhava hridé 4 pitah indo (iti).

Be thou well (sweet) to our heart, when drunk, O Soma!
Chex. O14

i. go, 9. sam nah bhavatu aryama.

May Aryaman be well (kind) to us!

vi. 74, 1. sém nah bhitam dvi-pdde sém katuh-pade.

May Soma and Rudra be well (kind) to owr men and cattle.

Here sam might be rendered as an adverb, or as an
adjective, or even as a substantive, in the sense of health
or blessing.

Cf. vu. 54, 1; ix. 69, 7. The expression dvip4d and
kétuh-pad is curiously like what occurs in the prayers of
the Eugubian tables, Fisovie Sansie, ditu ocre Fisi, tote
Jovine, ocrer Fisie, totar Jovinar dupursus, peturpursus fato
fito, (Umbrische Sprachdenkmiler, von Aufrecht, p. 198.)

ii, 38, 11. sém yat stotri-bhyah apaye bhavati.

What may be well (a pleasure) for the praisers, for
the friend.

X. 37, 10. sam nah bhava kaékshasa.

Be kind to us with thy light!

2. With as.

Vill. 17, 6. sdmah sim astu te hridé.

May the Soma be well (agreeable) to thy heart!

1. 5, 7. sam te santu pra-ketase.

May the Somas be well (pleasing) to thee, the wise !

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. i181

v. 11, 5. tibhyam manisha iyém astu sdm hridé,

May this prayer be well (acceptable) to thy heart !

1, 114, 1. yatha sém dsat dvi-pdde katuh-pade.

That it may be well for our men and cattle. Cf. x.
LO; s+ 9.

vii. 86, 8. sim nah kshéme sém tun (iti) yoge nah astu.

May it be well with us in keeping and acquiring !

Vv. 7, 9. a yah te—agne sdm Asti dhayase.

He who is lief to thee to support, i.e. he whom thou
likest to support.

v. 74, 9. sam dm (iti) sti vam—asmakam astu karkritih.

Let there be happiness to you—glory to us!

3. With as or bha understood :

Vi. 45, 2%. sam yat gave na sakine.

A song which is pleasant to the mighty Indra, as food
to an ox. :

Vill. 13, 11. sam it hi te.

For it is well for thee.

x. 86, 15. manthah te indra sém hridé.

The mixture is pleasant to thy heart, O Indra!

x. 97, 18. dram kamaya, sam hridé,

Enough for love, pleasant to the heart.

Vi. 34, 3. sam tat asmai.

That is pleasant to him.

vi. 21, 4. kéh te yagfidh manase sam varaya.

What sacrifice seems to thy mind pleasant to select ?

4, With kar:

i. 43, 6. sdm nah karati arvate.

May he do well to our horse, i.e. may he benefit our horses,

iv. I, 3. tokdya tugé—sam kridhi.

Do good to our children and progeny, or bless us for
the procreation of children.

vill. 18, 8. sam nah karatah asvina.

May the two Asvins do us good!

5. With vah:
i. 157, 3. sam nah & vakshat dvi-pade katuh-pade.
May he bring blessing to us for man and cattle.
vill. 5, 20. téna nah—pésve tokaya sim gave, vahatam
pivarih ishah,

182 HYMNS. TO THE MARUTS.

Bring to us rich food, a blessing to cattle, to children,
and to the ox.

6. With other verbs, such as pd, va, and others, where
it is clearly used as an adverb :

ix. 11, 3. séh nah pavasva sim gave sim ganaya sim
arvate, sim ragan 6shadhibhyah.

Do thou, king Soma, stream upon us, a blessing for the
ox, a blessing for man, a blessing for the horse, a blessing
for the plants. Cf. ix. 11, 7; 60, 4; 61,15; 109, 5.

vii. 35, 4. sdm nah ishiréh abhi vatu vatah.

May the brisk wind blow kindly upon us, or blow a
blessing upon us.

Vil. 35, 6. sAm nah tvash¢a gnabhih iha srinotu.

May Tvashéar with the goddesses hear us here well, i. e.
auspiciously !

vii. 35, 8. sim nah stryah—ut etu.

May the sun rise auspiciously for us !

vill. 18, 9. sém nah tapatu stryah.

May the sun warm us well!

ili. 13, 6. sam nah soka—4gne.

Shine well for us, O Agni!

Sam also occurs in a phrase that has puzzled the inter-
preters of the Veda very much, viz. sim ydh. These are
two words, and must both be taken as substantives, though
originally they may have been adverbs. Their meaning
seems to have been much the same, and in English they
may safely be rendered by health and wealth, in the old
acceptation of these words :

1. 93, 7. dhattam yagamanaya sém yéh.

Give, Agni and Soma, to the sacrificer health and
wealth.

i, 106, 5. sam yoh yat te manuh-hitam tat tmahe.

Brihaspati, we ask for health and wealth which thou
gavest to Manu.

1, 114, 2. yat sam ka yoh ka ménuh 4-yegé pita tat
asyama tava rudra pré-nitishu.

Rudra, the health and wealth which Manu, the father,
obtained, may we reach it under thy guidance.

ll, 33, 13. yani mdnuh Avrinita pitd nah td sim ka yoh ka
rudrasya vasmi.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 183

The medicines which our father Manu chose, those I
desire, the health and wealth of Rudra.

i, 189, 2. bhava tokaya tdnayaya sim yoh.

Be to our offspring health and wealth !

iv. 12, 5. yakkha tokaya ténayaya sim yon.

Give to our offspring health and wealth !

v. 69, 3. ile tokaya ténaydya sim yoh.

I ask for our offspring health and wealth.

vi. 50, 7. dhata tokaya tanayaya sim yon.

Give to our offspring health and wealth!

x. 182, 1. atha karat yagamanaya s4m yoh.

May he then produce for the sacrificer health and
wealth.

vil. 69, 5. téna nah sim y6h—ni asvind vahatam.

On that chariot bring to us, Asvins, health and wealth.

ii. 17, 3. atha bhava yagamanaya sdm yon.

Then, Agni, be health and wealth to the sacrificer.

ii. 18, 4. brihat vayah sasamanéshu dhehi, revét agne
visvamitreshu sim yon.

Give, Agni, much food to those who praise thee, give to
the Visvamitras richly health and wealth.

X.15, 4. atha nah sam yoh arapah dadhata.

And give us health and weaith without a flaw! Cf. x. 59, 8.

X. 37,11. tat asmé sim yo arapah dadhatana.

And give to us health and wealth without a flaw!

v. 47, 7. tat astu mitra-varuna tat agne sém yd asma-
bhyam idém astu sastam.

Let this, O Mitra-Varuna, let this, O Agni, be health
and wealth to us; may this be auspicious !

Vv. 53,14. vrishtvi sim y6h apah usri bheshagém syama
maruta/ saha.

Let us be together, O Maruts, after health, wealth, water,
and medicine have been showered down in the morning.

viii. 39, 4. sam ka yoh ka mayah dadhe.

He gave health, wealth, and happiness.

viii, 71,15. agnim sim yoh ka datave.

We ask Agni to give us health and wealth.

X. 9, 4. sam yoh abhi sravantu nah.

May the waters bring to us health and wealth, or may
they run towards us auspiciously.

184 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Verse 4, note *. If we retain the reading of the MSS.
sishmah iyarti, we must take it as an independent phrase,
and translate it by ‘my strength rises.’ For stishma, though
in this and other places it is frequently explained as an
adjective, meaning powerful, is, as far as I can see, always
a substantive, and means power, strength. There may be
a few passages in which, as there occur several words for
strength, it might be possible to translate sishma by strong.
But even there it is better to keep to the general meaning
of sishma, and translate it as a substantive.

Iyarti means to rise and to raise. It is particularly
applied to prayers raised by the poet in honour of the gods,
and the similes used in connection with this, show clearly
what the action implied by iyarti really is. For instance,

i. 116, 1. st6man iyarmi abhriya-iva vatah.

I stir up hymns as the wind stirs the clouds.

X. I16, g. su-vakasyam iyarmi sindhau-iva pra trayam
nayam.

I stir up sweet praise, as if rowing a ship on the river.

In the sense of rising it occurs,

X. 140, 2. pavakd-varkah sukra-varkah dndna-varkah ut
iyarshi bhanina.

Thou risest up with splendour, Agni, thou of bright,
resplendent, undiminished majesty.

We might therefore safely translate in our verse ‘my
strength rises,’ although it is true that such a phrase does
not occur again, and that in other passages where iyarti and
sishma occur together, the former governs the latter in the
accusative. Cfiy.17,12 5 x. 753.

Verse 5, note *. If, as we can hardly avoid, we ascribe
this verse to the Maruts, we must recognize in it the usual
offer of help to Indra on the part of the Maruts. The
question then only is, who are the strong friends in whose
company they appear? It would be well if one could
render antamébhih by horses, as Sdyana does, but there is
no authority for it. Sva-kshatra is an adjective, meaning
endowed with independent strength, synonymous with
sva-tavas, 1. 166, 2. It is applied to the mind of Indra,
1. 54, 33 V. 35. 43 to the Maruts, v. 48,1, but never to

MANDALA I, SOKTA 165. 185

horses. As it stands, we can only suppose that a distinc-
tion is made between the Maruts and their followers, and that
after calling together their followers, and adorning themselves
for battle, they proceed to harness their chariots. Cf. i. 107, 2.

Verse 5, note *, tan, in all MSS. which I consulted, has
here the accent on the first syllable, and Professor Aufrecht
ought not to have altered the word into etan. If the accent
had not been preserved by the tradition of the schools, the
later interpreters would certainly have taken etén for the
demonstrative pronoun. As it is, in spite of accent and
termination, Sayana in i. 166, Io, seems to take étah for
eté. In other passages, however, Sayana, too, has perceived
the difference, and in i. 169, 6, he explains the word very
fully as prishadvarna gantaro va asva va. In this passage
the Etas are clearly the deer of the Maruts, the Prishatis:

i. 169, 6. ddha yat esham prithu-budhnasah étah.

In the next verse, however, éta seems applied to the
Maruts themselves :

i. 169, 7. prati ghoranam étandm ayaésim martitdm srinve
a-yatam upabdih,

The shout of the terrible, speckled, indefatigable Maruts
is heard, as they approach; unless we translate :

The noise of the terrible deer of the indefatigable Maruts
is heard, as they approach.

In i. 166, 10, amseshu étah, I adopt Professor Roth’s
conjecture, that été# means the skins of the fallow deer,
so that we should have to translate: On their shoulders
are the -deer-skins.

In the other passages where éta occurs, it is used as a
simile only, and therefore throws no light on the relation
of the Etas to the Maruts. In both passages, however
(v. 545 53 X. 77, 2), the simile refers to the Maruts, though
to their speed only, and not to their colour.

Verse 5, note >. Mahah-bhif, which I have translated
‘with all our might,’ seems to be used almost as an adverb,
mightily or quickly (makshu), although the original meaning,
with our powers, through our might, is likewise applicable.
The original meaning is quite perceptible in passages like

186 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

v. 62, 3. 4dh4rayatam prithivim utd dyém mitra-ragana
varuna mahah-bhih.

Kings Mitra and Varuna, you have supported heaven
and earth by your powers.

vii. 3, 7. tébhik nah agne dmitaih méhah-bhih satam pur-
bhih ayasibhif ni pahi.

With those immeasurable powers, O Agni, protect us, with
a hundred iron strongholds.

i. 90, 2. té—miéahah-bhih, vrata rakshante visvaha.

They always protect the laws by their powers.

vil. 71, 1. tvam nah agne mahah-bhih pahi.

Protect us, Agni, with thy power.

In other passages, however, we see mdhah-bhih used of
the light or of the flames of Agni and of the dawn:

iv. 14,1. devah rékamanah mahah-bhih.

Agni, the god, brilliant with his powers.

vi. 64, 2. devi rédkamana mahah-bhih.

O goddess, brilliant with thy powers.

The powers of the Maruts are referred to by the same
name in the following passages :

v. 58, 5. pra-pra gayante —mahah-bhih.

The Maruts are born with their powers.

vil. 58, 2. pra yé mahah-bhih dgasa uta santi.

The Maruts who excel in power and strength. Cf. iii.
4; 6.

Verse 6, note *. Indra in this dialogue is evidently repre-
sented as claiming everything for himself alone. He affects
contempt for the help proffered by the Maruts, and seems
to deny that he was at any time beholden to their assistance.
By asking, Where was that custom of yours that you should
join me in battle? he implies that it never was their custom
before, and that he can dispense with their succour now.
He wants to be alone in his battle with Ahi, and does not
wish that they should joi him: (cf. i. 33, 4.) Professor
Roth takes sam-adhatta in the sense of implicating, but it can
hardly be said that the Maruts ever implicated Indra in his
fight against Ahi. Certainly this is not in keeping with
the general tenor of this dialogue, where, on the contrary,
Indra shuns the company of the Maruts. But while on

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 187

this point I differ from Professor Roth, I think he has
rightly interpreted the meaning of 4namam. Out of the
four passages in which badha-snaih occurs, it is three times
joined with nam, and every time has the sense of to bend
away from, to escape from. See also Sonne, in Kuhn’s
Zeitschrift, vol. xii. p. 348.

Verse 7, note’. See vii. 39, 6. sakshimahi ytigyebhih nu
devaih.

Verse 7, note 7. The last words leave no doubt as to
their meaning, for the phrase is one of frequent occurrence. -
The only difficulty is the vocative marutah, where we should
expect the nominative. It is quite possible, however, that
the Maruts should here. address themselves, though, no
doubt, it would be easy to alter the accent. As to the
phrase itself, see

viii. 61, 4. tathd it asat indra kratva yatha vasah.

May it be so, O Indra, as thou desirest by thy mind.

vill. 66, 4. vagri—it karat indrah kratva yatha vasat.

May Indra with the thunderbolt act as he desires in his
mind.» Cfo vii. 20). 975998, 4, &c.

Verse 8, note 1. Here again Indra claims everything for
himself, denying that the Maruts in any way assisted him
while performing his great deeds. These deeds are the
killing of Vritra, who withholds the waters, i.e. the rain
from the earth, and the consequent liberation of the waters
so that they flow down freely for the benefit of Manu, that
is, of man.

When Indra says that he slew Vritra indriyéna, he
evidently chooses that word with a purpose, and we must
therefore translate it, not only by might, but by Indra’s
peculiar might. Indriyé, as derived from indra, means
originally Indra-hood, then power in general, just as vere-
thraghna in Zend means victory in general, though origin-
ally it meant the slaying of Vritra.

Verse 9, note 1. Devaté in the ordinary sense of a deity
never occurs in the Rig-veda. The word, in fact, as a

188 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

feminine substantive occurs but twice, and in the tenth
Mandala only. But even there it does not mean deity.
In x. 24, 6, devah devétaya means, O gods, by your god-
head, i.e. by your divine power. In x. 98, 1, brihaspate
prati me devétam ihi, I take devataé in the same sense ag
devatati, and translate, O Brihaspati, come to my sacrifice.

In all other places where devéta occurs in the Rig-veda
it is a local adverb, and means among the gods. I shall
only quote those passages in which Professor Roth assigns
to devata a different meaning :

i. 55) 3- pra viryéna devata ati kekite.

He is pre-eminent among the gods by his strength.

i. 22, 5. sah kétta devata padam.

He knows the place among the gods.

i. 100, 15. nd yésya devah devata n& martah dpah kana
sdvasah antam apth.

He, the end of whose power neither the gods among the
gods, nor mortals, nor even the waters have reached.

Here the translation of devata in the sense of ‘by their
godhead,’ would be equally applicable, yet nothing would
be gained as, in either case, devata is a weak repetition.

vi. 4, 7. indram na tva sdvasa devaté vayim prinanti
radhasa nri-tamah. .

The best among men celebrate thee, O Agni, as like
unto Indra in strength among the gods, as like unto Vayu
in liberality.

Verse 9, note *. The juxta-position of gayamanah and
gatéh would seem to show that, if the latter had a past,
the former had a future meaning. To us, ‘No one who
will be born and no one who has been born,’ would cer-
tamly sound more natural. The Hindu, however, is
familiar with the idea as here expressed, and in order to
comprehend all begs, he speaks of those who are born
and those who are being born. Thus in a Padasishta of
the Pavamanis (ix. 67) we read:

yan me garbhe vasatah papam ugram,
yag gayamanasya ka kimkid anyat,
gatasya ka yak kapi vardhato me,

tat pavamanibhir aham punami.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 189

Verse 9, note *. Karishy4 is written in all the MSS.
without a Visarga, and unless we add the Visarga on our
own authority, we should have to take it as an accusative
plur. neut, of a passive participle of the future, karishy4m
standing for karyam, faciendum. _It would be much easier,
however, to explain this form if we added the Visarga, and
read karishyah, which would then be a second person
singular of a Vedic conjunctive of the future. This form
occurs at least once more in the Veda:

Iv. 30, 23. uta nimdm ydt indriyém karishydh indra
paumsyam, adyd naékih tat a minat.

O Indra, let no man destroy to-day whatever manly feat
thou art now going to achieve.

Verse 10, note’. As I have translated these words, they
sound rather abrupt. The meaning, however, would be
clear enough, viz. almighty power belongs to me, therefore
I can dare anddo. If this abrupt expression should offend,
it may be avoided, by taking the participle dadhrishvan as
a finite verb, and translating, Whatever I have been daring,
I shall do according to my will.

Verse 11, note '. In this verse Indra, after having
declined with no uncertain sound the friendship of the
Maruts, repents himself of his unkindness towards his
old friends. The words of praise which they addressed to
him in verse g, in spite of the rebuff they had received
from Indra, have touched his heart, and we may suppose
that after this, their reconciliation was complete. The
words of Indra are clear enough, the only difficulty occurs
in the last words, which are so idiomatic that it is impos-
sible to render them in English. In tanvé tanibhih,
literally for the body by the bodies, tani is used like the
pronoun self. Both must therefore refer to the same
subject. We cannot translate ‘for myself made by your-
selves,’ but must take the two words together, so that they
should mean, ‘the hymn which you have made for your
own sake, freely, and by your own exertions, honestly,’

Verse 18, note 1, I translate api-vatayantah by cherish-
ing, a meaning equally applicable to i. 128, 2, and x. 25, 1.

190 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

I suppose the original meaning was really to blow upon a
person, to cool or refresh a person by a draught of air,
which, in countries like India, was and is the office of the
attendants of a prince. It would then take the meaning of
honouring, worshipping or cherishing, though I confess the
hymns of the Veda seem almost too early for such a courtly
metaphor.

Verse 14, note 1. This is a verse which, without some
conjectural alterations, it seems impossible to translate.
Sayana, of course, has a translation ready for it, so has
M. Langlois, but both of them offend against the simplest
rules of grammar and logic. The first question is, who is
meant by asman (which is here used as an amphimacer),
the sacrificers or the Maruts? The verb & kakré would well
apply to the medha manydsya, the hymn of Manya, which is
intended to bring the Maruts to the sacrifice, this bringing
to the sacrifice being the very meaning of 4 kar. But then
we have the vocative marutad in the next line, and even if
we changed the vocative into the accusative, we should not
gain much, as the Maruts could hardly call upon anybody
to turn them towards the sage.

If, on the contrary, we admit that asman refers to those
who offer the sacrifice, then we must make a distinction,
which, it is true, is not an unusual one, between those who
here speak of themselves in the first person, and who pro-
vide the sacrifice, and the poet Mandarya Manya, who was
employed by them to compose or to recite this hymn.

But even if we adopt this alternative, many difficulties
still remain. _ First of all, we have to change the accent of
kakré into kakre, which may seem a slight change, but is
not the less objectionable when we consider that in our
emendations of the Vedic hymns we must think rather of
accidents that might happen in oral traditions than of the
lapsus calami of later scribes. Secondly, we must suppose
that the hymn of Mandarya Manya ends with verse 13, and
that the last verses were supplied by the sacrificers them-
selves. Possibly the dialogue only, from verse 3 to verse 12,
was the work of Manya, and the rest added at some solemn
occasion.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 191

Other difficulties, however, remain. Duvasyat is taken
by Sayana as an ablative of duvasyd, worthy of dtivas,
i.e. of worship, of sacrifice. Unfortunately this duvasy4
does not occur again, though it would be formed quite
regularly, like namasya, worthy of worship, from ndmas,
worship.

If we take duvasyat as the 3rd pers. sing. of the present
in the Vedic conjunctive, we must also confess that this
conjunctive does not occur again. But the verb duvasyati
occurs frequently. It seems to have two meanings. It is
derived from divas, which in the Vedic language means
worship or sacrifice, just as karma, work, has assumed the
special sense of sacrifice. Derived from dtivas in this sense,
duvasyati means to worship. But dtivas meant originally
any opus operatum. The root from which divas is derived,
is lost in Sanskrit, but it exists in other languages. It
must have been du or dé in the sense of acting, or
sedulously working. It exists in Zend as du, to do, in
Gothic as tdujan, gatayan, Old High German zawyjan,
Modern German zauen (Grimm, Gram. i*. p. 1041). The
Gothic ¢tavi, opus, Old High German zouwwi, Middle High
German gezéuwe (Grimm, Gram. ii. p. 499), come from
the same source; and it is possible, too, that the Old Norse
téfrar, incantamenta, the Old High German zoupar, Middle
High German zouder, both neuter, and the modern Zauler,
may find their explanation in the Sanskrit divas. Derived
from dtivas, in the sense of work, we have duvasyati in
the sense of helping, providing, the German schaffen and
verschaffen.

In the sense of worshipping, duvasyati occurs,

iii. 2, 8. duvasyata—gata-vedasam.

Worship Giatavedas.

v. 28, 6, a guhota duvasydta agnim.

Invoke, worship Agni, Cf. iii. 13, 3; I, 13.

iil. 3, 1. agnih hi devan— duvasyati.

Agni performs the worship of the gods. Cf. vil. 82, 5.

1. 167, 6. suta-somah duvasyan.

He who has poured out Soma and worships.

In many passages duvasyati is joined with an in-
strumental :

192 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

vy. 42, 11. naémah-bhih devam—duvasya.

Worship the god with praises.

i. 78, 2. tam u tv gotamah gira—duvasyati.

Gotama worships thee with a song.

v. 49, 2. su-uktaiz devam—duvasya.

Worship the god with hymns.

vi. 16, 46. vitt yah devam—duvasyét.

He who worships the god with food.

xX. 14, I. yamém—havisha duvasya.

Worship Yama with an oblation.

Vi. 15, 6. agnim-agnim vah samidha duvasyata.

Worship Agni with your log of wood. Cf. vill. 44, I

ili. 1, 2. samit-bhif agnim némasa duvasyan.

They worshipped Agni with logs of wood, with praise.

In the more general and, I suppose, more original sense
of caring for, attending, we find duvasyati :

lil, 51, 3. anehasah stibhah indrah duvasyati.

Indra provides for the matchless worshippers.

i, 112,15. kalim yabhih—duvasyathah.

By the succours with which you help Kali. Cf.i. 112, 21.

i, 62,10. duvasyanti svasdrah dhrayanam.

The sisters attend the proud (Agni).

i, 119, 10. yuvam pedévesyethen “deena yar tea

You provide for Pedu the white horse.

If, then, we take duvasyati in the sense of working for,
assisting, it may be with the special sense of assisting at a
sacred act, like dvaxovetv; and if we take duvas, as it has
the accent on the last syllable, as the performer of sacrifice,
we may venture to translate, ‘that he should help, as the
singer helps the performer of the sacrifice *.? The singer
or the poet may be called, the assistant at a sacrifice, for
his presence was not necessary at all sacrifices, the songs
constituting an ornament rather than an essential in most
sacred acts. But though I think it right to offer this
conjectural imterpretation, I am far from supposing that it
gives us the real sense of this difficult verse. Duvasyat
may be, as Sayana suggests, an ablative of duvasy4; and

* Kar in the sense of officiating at a sacrifice is equally construed with a
dative, x. 97, 22. ydsmai krindéti brahmanéh, he for whom a Brahmana
performs a sacrifice.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 193

duvasya, like namasy4, if we change the accent, may mean
he who is to be worshipped, or worshipping. In this way
a different interpretation might suggest itself, in which the
words duvasyat duvase could be taken to mean ‘from one
worshipper to another.’ Some happy thought may some
day or other clear up this difficulty, when those who have
toiled, but toiled in a wrong direction, will receive scant
thanks for the trouble they have taken.

In the second line, the words 6 sti varta remind one of
similar phrases in the Veda, but we want an accusative,
governed by varta; whereas marutah, to judge from its
accent, can only be a vocative. Thus we read:

1.138, 4. 6 (iti) sti tva vavritimahi st6mebhih.

May we turn thee quickly hither by our praises!

Vill. 7, 33. 6 (iti) si vrishnah—vavrityam.

May I turn the heroes quickly hither!

Compare also passages like iii. 33, 8:

6 (iti) sti svasdrah kardve srinota.

Listen quickly, O sisters, to the poet.

i. 139, 7. 6 (iti) si nah agne srinuhi.

Hear us quickly, O Agni.

Gi 182) 1 Pi. 34, F5 3eV0. 50,55) Vill) 25-0 jx. 179; 2.

Unless we change the accent, we must translate, ‘ Bring
hither quickly !’ and we must take these words as addressed
to the karu, the poet, whose hymn is supposed to attract the
gods to the sacrifice. By a quick transition, the next words,
marutak vipram akkha, would then have to be taken as
addressed to the gods, ‘ Maruts, on to the sage!’ and the
last words would become intelligible by laying stress on
the vah, ‘ for you, and not for Indra or any other god, has
the singer recited these hymns.’

Verse 15, note '. I translate Manya, the son of Mana,
because the poet, so called in i. 189, 8, is in all probability
the same as our Mandarya Manya.

Verse 15, note *. The second line is difficult, owing to
the uncertain meaning of vayaém. First of all, it might
seem as if the two hemistichs must be kept distinct, because
the second is so often used independently of the first.

WViORent. O

194 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

There are passages, however, where this very hemistich
carries on the sentence of a preceding hemistich, as, for
instance, i. 177, 5; 182, 8. We may therefore join tanvé
vayim with the following words, and it certainly seems
more difficult to elicit any sense if we join them with
the preceding words.

A isha’ * ydstshta might be rendered, ‘Come hither with
water or drink or rain,’ yasishta being the aorist without
the augment and with the intermediate vowel lengthened.
The indicative occurs in

v. 58, 6. yat pra ayasishfa prishatibhih asvaih.

When you Maruts come forth with your fallow deer and
your horses.

But what is the meaning of vayam? Vaya means a
germ, a sprout, an offshoot, a branch, as may be seen from
the following passages :

li, 5, 4. vidvan asya vrata dhruva vayah-iva dnu rohate.

He who knows his eternal laws, springs up like young
sprouts.

vi. 7, 6. tdsya it tum (iti) visva bhtivana d4dhi mirdhani
vayah-iva ruruhuh, :

From above the head of Vaisvanara all worlds have
grown, like young sprouts.

vill. 13, 6, stotad—vayah-iva anu rohate.

The worshipper grows up like young sprouts.

vill. 13, 17. indram kshonth avardhayan vayah-iva.

The people made Indra to grow like young sprouts.

Vill. 19,33. yasya te agne anyé agnaéyah upa-kshitah vay ah-iva.

Agni, of whom the other fires are like parasitical shoots.

1. 59,1. vayah it agne agndyah te anyé.

O Agni, the other fires are indeed offshoots of thee.

i. 35, 8. vaya it anya bhivanani asya.

The other worlds are indeed his (the rising sun’s) offshoots.

vi, 13, 1.“tvat visva— satbhagani dene vi yanti vaninah
na vayah.

From thee, O Agni, spring all happinesses, as the sprouts
of a tree.

SSS SS ee eee

* There was a misprint in the Sanhita text, esh¥ instead of ésh&, which was
afterwards repeated whenever the same verse occurred again,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 165. 195

vi. 24, 3. vrikshasya nui (nd?) te—vay4h vi itaéyah ruruhuh.

Succours sprang from thee, like the branches of a tree.

V.1,1. yahvah-iva pra vaydm ut-gihandh pra bhAndvah
sisrate ndkam dkkha.

Like birds (?) flying up to a branch, the flames of Agni
went up to heaven.

Vi. 57, 5. tam ptshvdh su-matim vaydém vrikshdsya pra
vayam-iva indrasya ka 4 rabhamahe.

Let us reach this favour of Pishan and of Indra, as one
reaches forth to the branch of a tree.

There remain some doubtful passages in which vaya
occurs, Vil. 40, 5, and x. 92, 3; 134, 6. In the first pas-
sage, as in our own, vayah is trisyllabic.

If vaya can be used in the sense of offshoot or sprout,
we may conclude that the same word, used in the
singular, might mean offspring, particularly when joined
with tanvé. ‘ Give a branch to our body,’ would be under-
stood even in languages less metaphorical than that of the
Vedas ; and as the prayer for ‘ olive branches’ is a constant
theme of the Vedic poets, the very absence of that prayer
here, might justify us in assigning this sense to vaydm.
In vi. 2, 5, the expression vayavantam kshayam, a house
with branches, means the same as nrivantam, a house with
children and men. See M. M., On Bios and vayas, in
Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. xv. p. 215.

If the third pada is to be kept as an independent sentence,
we must take yAsish¢a as the third pers. sing. of the benedic-
tive, and refer it to st6mah or gif. Grammatically this may
seem preferable, and I have given this alternative translation
in the next hymn, where the same verse occurs again.

Verse 15, note *. Vrigana means an enclosure, a vojos,
whether it be derived from vrig, to ward off, like arw from
arcere, or from vrig, in the sense of clearing, as in vrikta-
barhis, barhih pra vrifige, i.116,1. In either case the mean-
ing remains much the same, viz. a field, cleared for pasture
or agriculture,—a clearing, as it is called in America, or a
camp,—enclosed with hurdles or walls, so as to be capable
of defence against wild animals or against enemies. Other
meanings of vrigéna will be discussed in other places.

O 2

196 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Mawpata I, Stxta 166.
Asu7raka II, ApuyAyva 4, VARGA 1-3.

1. Tét ni vokAma rabhasfya génmane plirvam
mahi-tvém vrishabhdsya ketéve, aidhd-iva yaman
marutah tuvi-svanah yudhd-iva sakréh tavishdni
kartana.

2. Nityam nd& sintm médhu bibhratah wpa
krilanti krildi viddétheshu ghrishvayah, ndkshanti
rudr4h dvasi namasvinam nd mardhanti sv4-tavasah
havih-kritam:

8. Ydsmai fmadsah amritah drasata raydh pdésham
ka havisht dadastishe, ukshdnti asmai marttah
hitdh-iva puri régamsi padyasi mayah-bhivah.

4, K yé ragamsi tavishibhih dvyata prd vah
évasah svd-yatasah adhragan, bhdyante visva bhit-
vandni harmy& hitréh vah ydmah prd-yatisu
rishtishu.

5. Ydt tveshd-yamah naddyanta pdrvatain divah
va prishtham nadrya* dkukyavuh, visvah vah dgman
bhayate vdnaspétih rathiydnti-iva pré gihite dsha-
dhih.

6. Yaydm nah ugrah marutah su-kettind drishta-
gramah su-matim pipartana, ydtra vah didytit
radati krivih-dati rinati pasvdh stdhitd-iva bar-
hana.

* ndryah

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 197

Hymn To THE Maruts (THE StorM-cops).

1. Let us now proclaim for the robust! host, for
the herald? of the powerful (Indra), their ancient
greatness! O ye strong-voiced Maruts, you heroes,
show your powers on your way as with a torch, as
with a sword !°

2. Like parents bringing sweet to! their own?
son, the wild (Maruts) play playfully at the sacri-
fices. The Rudras reach the worshipper with their
protection, powerful by themselves, they do not hurt
the sacrificer.

3. For the giver of oblations, for him to whom
the immortal guardians, too, have given plenty of
riches, the Maruts, who gladden men with the milk
(of rain), pour out, like friends, many clouds.

4, You who have stirred’ up the clouds with
might, your horses rushed? forth, self-guided. All
beings who dwell in houses’ are afraid of you, your
coming is brilliant with your spears thrust forth.

5. When they whose path is fiery have caused the
rocks to tremble,’ or when the manly Maruts have
shaken the back of the sky, then every lord of the
forest fears at your racing, the shrubs get out of
your way,’ quick like chariots.’

6. You, O terrible Maruts, whose ranks are never
broken, favourably! fulfil our prayer!? Wherever
your gory-toothed® lightning bites,* it crunches? all
living beings, like a well-aimed bolt.*

198 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

7. Pré skambhd-deshnAh anavabhrd-radhasah ala-
trinksah viddtheshu st-stutah, arkanti arkém madi-
rasya pitaye viduh virdsya prathamdni patimsya.

8. Satdébhugi-bhiz tém abhi-hruteh aghdt pih-
bhi rakshata marutah ydm avata, giénam ydém
ugrih tavasah vi-rapsinah pathdna sdmsit tdna-
yasya pushtishu.

9. Visvani bhadrd marutah rdtheshu vai mitha-
spridhy4-iva tavishdni 4-hité, dmseshu 4 vah pra-
patheshu khaddyah dkshah vah kakré samdya vi

vavrite.

10. Bhiirini bhadr& ndryeshu babushu vékshah-su
rukma&h rabhasdsah afigdyah, dmseshu étah pavishu

kshurah ddhi vayah nd pakshdn vi dnu_ sriyah
dhire.

11. Mahdntah mahn& vi-bhvah vi-bhitayah
diire-drisah yé divy&h-iva stri-bhih, mandra&h su-
gihvah svaritarah asd-bhih sdm-mislah indre mart-
tah pari-stibhah.

12. Tét vah su-gatéh marutah mahi-tvandm
dirghtm vah datrdm dditeh-iva vratém, i{ndrah
kand tydgasi vi hrundti tdét gdéndya ydsmai su-
krite éradhvam.

13. Tét vah gami-tvim marutah pdre yugé
puri ydt sdmsam amritdsah advata, ay& dhiyd

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 199

7. The Maruts whose gifts are firm, whose bounties
are never ceasing, who do not revile,! and who are
highly praised at the sacrifices, they sing forth their
song” for to drink the sweet juice: they know the
first manly deeds of the hero (Indra).

8. The man whom you guarded, O Maruts, shield
him with hundredfold strongholds from injury! and
mischief,—the man whom you, O fearful, powerful
singers, protect from reproach in the prosperity of
his children.

9. On your chariots, O Maruts, there are all good
things, strong weapons? are piled up clashing against
each other. When you are on your journeys, you
carry the rings* on your shoulders, and your axle
turns the two wheels at once.’

10. In your manly arms there are many good
things, on your chests golden chains,’ flaring?
ornaments, on your shoulders speckled deer-skins,’
on your fellies sharp edges ;* as birds spread their
wings, you spread out your splendour behind you.

11. They, mighty by might, all pervading, power-
ful,! visible from afar like the heavens* with the
stars, sweet-toned, soft-tongued singers with their
mouths,’ the Maruts, united with Indra, shout all
around.

12. This is your greatness,’ O well-born Maruts!—
your bounty” extends as far as the sway’ of Aditi.’
Not even® Indra in his scorn® can injure that
bounty, on whatever man you have bestowed it for
his good deeds.

13. This is your kinship (with us), O Maruts, that
you, immortals, in former years have often regarded

200 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

ménave srushtim Avya sikém ndrah damsdnaih &
kikitrire.

14. Yéna dirghtm marutah susdvama yush-
m&kena pdrinasi turdsah, 4 ydt taténan vrigdne
gandsah ebhih yagfi¢bhih tét abhi ishtim asyam.

15. Eshéh vah stémah marutah iyém gih mandar-
yasya manydsya kardh, & ish& yasishta tanvé vayém
vidydma ishdm vrigénam gir4-danum.

COMMENTARY.

This hymn is ascribed to Agastya, the reputed son of
Mitravarunau, and brother of Vasishtha. The metre in
verses I-13 is Gagati, in 14, 15 Trish¢ubh.

Verse 1, note’. Rabhasd, an adjective of rabhas, and
this again from the root rabh, to rush upon a thing, a-rabh,
to begin a thing. From this root rabh we have the Latin
robur, in the general sense of strength, while in rabies the
original meaning of impetuous motion has been more clearly
preserved. In the Vedic Sanskrit, derivatives from the
root rabh convey the meaning both of quickness and of
strength. Quickness in ancient language frequently implies
strength, and strength implies quickness, as we see, for
instance, from the German snél, which, from meaning
originally strong, comes to mean in modern German quick,
and quick only, Thus we read:

1,145, 3. sisuh 4 adatta sam rabhah.

The child (Agni) acquired vigour.

Indra is called rabhah-dah, giver of strength; and
rabhasa, vigorous, is applied not only to the Maruts, who

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 201

our call! Having through this prayer granted a
hearing to man, these heroes become well known by
their valiant deeds.

14. That we may long flourish, O Maruts, with
your wealth, O ye racers, that our men may spread
in the camp, therefore let me achieve the rite with
these offerings.

15. May this praise, O Maruts, may this song of
Manhdarya, the son of Mana, the poet, approach you
(asking) for offspring to our body together with food!
May we find food, and a camp with running water!

in v. 58, 5, are called rabhishthah, the most vigorous, but
also to Agni, li. 10, 4, and to Indra, iii. 31, 12.

In the sense of rabid, furious, it occurs in

X. 95,14. 4dha enam vrik4h rabhasdsah adytih.

May rabid wolves eat him!

In the next verse rabhasa, the epithet of the wolves, is
replaced by asiva, which means unlucky, uncanny.

In our hymn rabhasa occurs once more, and is applied
there, in verse 10, to the angi or glittering ornaments of
the Maruts. Here Sadyana translates it by lovely, and it
was most likely intended to convey the idea of lively or
brilliant splendour. See also ix. 96, 1.

Verse 1, note *. Ketti, derived from an old root ki,
in Sanskrit /i, to perceive, means originally that by which
a thing is perceived or known, whether a sign, or a flag, or
a herald. It then takes the more general sense of light
and splendour. In our passage, herald seems to me the
most appropriate rendering, though B. and R. prefer the
sense of banner. The Maruts come before Indra, they
announce the arrival of Indra, they are the first of his
army.

202 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Verse 1, note *. The real difficulty of our verse lies in
the two comparisons aidha-iva and yudha-iva. Neither of
them occurs again in the Rig-veda. B. and R. explain
aidhd as an instrumental of aidh, flaming, or flame, and
derive it from the root idh, to kindle, with the preposition a.
Professor Bollensen in his excellent article Zur Herstellung
des Veda (Orient und Occident, vol. iii. p. 473) says:
‘The analysis of the text given in the Pada, viz. aidha-
iva and yudhé-iva, is contrary to all sense. The common
predicate is tavishani kartana, exercise your power, you
roarers, i.e. blow as if you meant to kindle the fire on*the
altar, show your power as if you went to battle. We ought
therefore to read aidhé va and yudhé va. Both are
infinitives, aidh is nothing but the root idh + 4, to kindle,
to light.? Now this is certainly a very ingenious explana-
tion, but it rests on a supposition which I cannot consider
as proved, viz. that in the Veda, as in Pali, the comparative
particle iva may be abbreviated to va. It must be admitted,
I believe, that the two short syllables of iva are occasionally
counted in the Veda as one, but yudhé-iva, though it
might become yudha iva, would never in the Veda become
yudhéva.

As yudha occurs frequently in the Veda, we may begin
by admitting that the parallel form aidha must be explained
in analogy to yudha. Now ytdh is a verbal noun and
means fighting. We have the accusative yidham, i. 53, 7;
the genitive yudhas, vill. 27,17; the dative yudhé, i. 61, 13;
the locative yudhi, i. 8, 3; the instrumental yudha, 1. 53, 7,
&c.; loc. plur, yut-su, i. gt, 21. As long as ytidh retains
the general predicative meaning of fighting, some of these
cases may be called infinitives. But ytidh soon assumes
not only the meaning of battle, battle-ground, but also of
instrument of fighting, weapon. In another passage,
xX. 103, 2, yudhah may be taken as a vocative plural,
meaning fighters. Passages im which ytidh means clearly
weapon, are, for instance,

v. 52, 6. & rukmaih a yudhd ndrah rishvah rishtth
asrikshata.

With your gold chains, with your weapon, you have
stretched forth the uplifted spears.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 203

x. 55, 8. pitvi sémasya divéh 4 vridhandh stlrah nih
yudha adhamat dasyin.

The hero, growing, after drinking the Soma, blew away
from the sky the enemies with his weapon. See also
Xe O94:

I therefore take yidh in our passage also in the sense of
weapon or sword, and, in accordance with this, I assign
to aidh the meaning of torch. Whether aidh comes from
idh with the preposition 4, which after all, would only give
edh, or whether we have in the Sanskrit aidh the same
peculiar strengthening which this very root shows in Greek
and Latin*, would be difficult to decide. The torch of the
Maruts is the lightning, the weapon the thunderbolt, and
by both they manifest their strength.

Wilson: ‘We proclaim eagerly, Maruts, your .ancient
greatness, for (the sake of inducing) your prompt: appear-
ance, as the indication of (the approach of) the showerer
(of benefits). Loud-roaring and mighty Maruts, you exert
your vigorous energies for the advance (to the sacrifice),
as if it was to battle’

Langlois: ‘Le généreux (Agni) a donné le signal;
chantons ’hymne du matin en Vhonneur d’une race im-
pétueuse. O puissants et rapides Marouts, que la marche
accroisse votre éclat; que l’élan du combat augmente vos
forces !?

Verse 2, note ', That tpa can be construed with the
accusative is clear from many passages :

il. 35, 2. Upa imam yagfiam 4 vahatah indram.

Bring Indra to this sacrifice!

i, 25, 4. vayah na vasatih upa.

As birds (fly) to their nests.

Verse 2, note *. Nitya, from ni+tya, means originally
what is inside, in¢ternus, then what is one’s own; and is
opposed to nishtya, from nis + tya, what is outside, strange,
or hostile. Nitya has been well compared with nia, literally

* Schleicher, Compendium, § 36, ai@w, ai@np, alfovoa; and § 49, aides,

atdilis, cestas.

204 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

eingeboren, then, like nitya, one’s own. What is inside, or
in a thing or place, is its own, is peculiar to it, does not
move or change, and hence the secondary meanings of
nitya, one’s own, unchanging, eternal. Thus we find nitya
used in the sense of internal or domestic:

i. 73, 4. tam tva ndrah déme 4 nityam iddhém agne
sakanta kshitishu dhruvasu.

Our men worshipped thee, O Agni, lighted within the
house in safe places.

This I believe to be a more appropriate rendering than
if we take nitya in the sense of always, continuously lighted,
or, as some propose, in the sense of eternal, everlasting.

vii. 1, 2. dakshayyah yah dame 4sa nityah.

Agni who is to be pleased within the house, i.e. as belong-
ing to the house, and, in that sense, who is to be pleased
always! Cfoi. 140, 73 141, 23 X12, 2, and, Tee jae
where nityah, however, may have been intended as an
adjective belonging to the vocative sino.

Most frequently nitya occurs with sind, i. 66, 1; 185, 2;
tanaya, iii. 15, 23 X. 39, 143 toka, ii. 2, 115 api, vil. 88, 6;
pati, i. 71, 1, and has always the meaning of one’s own,
very much like .the later Sanskrit niga, which never occurs
in the Rig-veda, though it makes its appearance in the
Atharvana,

Nishtya, extraneus, occurs three times in the Rig-veda:

vi. 75, 19. yah nah svah dranah yéh ka nishtyah
gighamsati.

Whoever wishes to hurt us, our own friend or a stranger
from without.

X. 133, 5. yah nah indra abhi-dasati s4-nabhih yah ka
nishtyah.

He who infests us, O Indra, whether a relative or a
stranger,

viii, 1, 13. ma bhima nishty4ah-iva indra tvdd drandh-iva.

Let us not be like outsiders, O Indra, not like strangers
to thee.

Wilson: ‘ Ever accepting the sweet (libation), as (they
would) a son, they sport playfully at sacrifices, demolishing
(all intruders),’

Langlois: ‘ Acceptant la douce libation sans cesse renou-

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 205

Z > .
velée, comme (un pére adopte) un nouveau-né, ils se livrent
a one jeux au milieu des sacrifices, terribles (pour leurs
ennemis),’

Verse 4, note’. Avyata, a Vedic second aorist of vi (ag),
to stir up, to excite. From it pravayana, ‘a goad, pra-vetar,
a driver, The Greek of-c-rpos, gad-fly, has been referred
to the same root. See Fick, Wérterbuch, p. 170.

Verse 4, note *. Adhragan, from dhrag, a root which,
by metathesis of aspiration, would assume the form of
dragh or dragh. In Greek, the final medial aspirate being
hardened, reacts on the initial media, and changes it to t,
as bahu becomes zjyxvs, budh wv, bandh zevO. This
would give us tpex, the Greek root for running, Goth.
thrag-jan.

Verse 4, note °, Harmyé is used here as an adjective to
bhtivana, and can only mean living in houses. It does not,
however, occur again in the same sense, though it occurs
several times as a substantive, meaning house. Its original
meaning is fire-pit, then hearth, then house, a transition of
meaning analogous to that of e@des. Most of the ancient
nations begin their kitchen with a fire-pit. ‘They dig a
hole in the ground, take a piece of the animal’s raw hide,
and press it down with their hands close to the sides of the
hole, which thus becomes a sort of pot or basin. This
they fill with water, and they make a number of stones
red-hot in a fire close by. The meat is put into the water,
and the stones dropped in till the meat is boiled, Catlin
describes the process as awkward and tedious, and says
that since the Assinaboins had learnt from the Mandans
to make pottery, and had been supplied with vessels by
the traders, they had entirely done away the custom,
“excepting at public festivals; where they seem, like all
others of the human family, to take pleasure in cherishing
and perpetuating their ancient customs*.”’ This pit was

* Tylor, Early History of Mankind, p. 262.

206 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

called harmya, which is the Zend zairimya*, or gharma,
which is the Latin formus. Thus we read:

vii. 56, 16. té harmye-sthah sisavah né subhrah.

The Maruts bright like boys standing by the hearth.

From meaning fire-pit, or hearth, harmya afterwards
takes the more general sense of house:

vii. 55, 6. téshdm sdém hanmaf akshani yatha idam
harmyam tatha.

We shut their eyes as we shut this house, (possibly,
this oven.)

vii. 76, 2. pratiki & agat adhi harmyébhyah.

The dawn comes near, over the house-tops.

x. 46, 3. gatah a harmyéshu.

- Agni, born in the houses.

X. 73, 10. manyoh iyaya harmyéshu tasthau.

He came from Manyu, he remained in the houses.

In some of these passages harmya might be taken in
the sense of householder; but as harmya in vil. 55, 6, has
clearly the meaning of a building, it seems better not to
assign to it unnecessarily any new significations.

But there is one other meaning which harmya has clearly
assumed in the Veda, and that is pit, or the region of
darkness, the abode of evil spirits, lastly the abode of the
departed. The transition of meaning is intelligible enough,
the fiery oven becoming naturally the symbol of any other
place of torment :

Vv. 32, 5. yayutsantam tamasi harmyé dha.

When thou, Indra, hadst placed Sushva, who was
anxious to fight, in the darkness of the pit.

In the next verse we find

astiryé tamasi, in the ghastly darkness.

Vill. 5, 23. yuvaém kanvadya nasatyd dpi-riptaya harmyé
sdsvat itih dasasyathah.

You, Nasatyas, always grant your aid to Kanva when
thrown into the pit.

* Justi, Handbuch, p. 119, zairimyanura, adj. in der Tiefe essend, Name
eines Daéva oder, da er dem Hund gegeniiber genannt wird, eines ahri-
manischen 'Thieres, Spiegel (Av. tibers. vol. i. p. 190) vermuthet des
Hamsters.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 207

This fiery pit into which Atri is thrown, and where he,
too, was saved by the Asvins, is likewise called gharmé,
Pete e751 09, 63 Vills 73353.3°x: 80, 3.

Lastly we find:

X. 114, 10. yada yamaf bhavati harmyé hitah.

When Yama is seated in his house, or in the nether
world.

The Pitars, too, the spirits of the departed, the Manes,
are called gharma-sdd, dwelling in the abode of Yama,
Rerp5aO, andsios~

Wilson: ‘Those, your coursers, which traverse the
regions in their speed, proceed, self-guided: all worlds, all
dwellings are alarmed, for marvellous is your coming:
(such fear as is felt) when spears are thrust forth (in
battle).’

Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. ii. p. 234: ‘Die ihr die Luft

erfullt mit eurer Kraft, hervorstiirmt ihr selbst-gelenkten
Laufes,’
Verse 5, note '. Nad certainly means to sound, and the
causative might be translated by ‘to make cry or shriek.’
If we took parvata in the sense of cloud, we might trans-
late, ‘ When you make the clouds roar ;” if we took parvata
for mountain, we might, with Professor Wilson, render the
passage by ‘When your brilliant coursers make the
mountains echo.’ But nad, like other roots which after-
wards take the meaning of sounding, means originally to
vibrate, to shake; and if we compare analogous passages
where nad occurs, we shall see that in our verse, too, the
Vedic poet undoubtedly meant nad to be taken in that
sense :

viii. 20, 5. akyuta kit vah dgman 4 nanadati parvatasah
vanaspatih, bhtimi yameshu regate.

At your racing even things that are immovable shake, the
rocks, the lord of the forest; the earth trembles on your
ways. (See i. 37, 7, note ', page 62.)

Verse 5, note ?, See i. 37, 7, note ', page 62.

Verse 5, note *, Rathiydnti-iva does not occur again.

208 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

SAyana explains it, like a woman who wishes for a chariot,
or who rides in a chariot. JI join it with dshadhi, and take
it in the sense of upamanad Akare (Pan. ili. 1, 10), i.e. to
behave like or to be like a chariot, whether the comparison
is meant to express simply the quickness of chariots or the
whirling of their wheels. The Pada has rathiydnti, whereas
the more regular form is that of the Sanhita, rathiyanti.
Cf. Pratisakhya, 587.
Verse 6, note '. Su-kettina, the instrumental of su-ketu,
kindness, good-mindedness, favour. This word occurs in
the instrumental only, and always refers to the kindness of
the gods; not, like sumati, to the kindness of the worshipper
also :

i. 79, 9. & nah agne su-kettina rayim visvayu-poshasam,
mardikém dhehi givase.

Give us, O Agni, through thy favour wealth which sup-
ports our whole life, give us grace to live.

1.127, 11. sah nah nédishtham dadrisinah 4 bhara Agne
devébhih sé-kanah su-kettina mahah rayah su-ketina.

Thou, O Agni, seen close to us, bring to us, in company
with the gods, by thy favour, great riches, by thy favour!

i. 159, 5. asmabhyam dyavaprithivi (iti) su-kettind rayim
dhattam vasu-mantam sata-gvinam.

Give to us, O Dyavaprithivi, by your favour, wealth, .
consisting of treasures and many flocks.

Vv. 51,11. svasti dyavaprithivi (iti) su-/ettina.

Give us, O Dyavaprithivi, happiness through your favour!

v. 64, 2. ta bahava su-kettina pré yantam asmai drkate.

Stretch out your arms with kindness to this worshipper !

In one passage of the ninth Mandala (ix. 65, 30) we
meet with su-kettinam, as an accusative, referring to Soma,
the gracious, and this would pre-suppose a substantive
ketana, which, however, does not exist.

Verse 6, note 7, Sumati has, no doubt, in most passages
in the Rig-veda, the meaning of favour, the favour of the
gods. ‘Let us obtain your favour, let us be in your
favour,’ are familiar expressions of the Vedic poets. But
there are also numerous passages where that meaning is

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 209

inapplicable, and where, as in our passage, we must trans-
late sumati by prayer or desire.

In the following passages sumati is abies used in its
original sense of favour, blessing, or even eift :

i. 73, 6 (7). su-matim bhikshaména4h.

Begging for thy favour.

1,171, 1. su-ukténa bhikshe su-matim turdnim.

With a hymn I beg for the favour of the quick Maruts.

1, 114, 3. asyama te su-matim.

May we obtain thy favour! Cf. i. 114, 9.

1.114, 4. su-matim it vayém asya 4 vrinimahe.

We choose his favour. Cf. iii. 33, 11.

1,117, 23. sada kavi (iti) su-matim & sake vam.

I always desire your favour, O ye wise Asvins.

i. 156, 3. mahéh te vishno (iti) su-matim bhagdmahe.

May we, O Vishnu, enjoy the favour of thee, the mighty!

Bhiksh, to beg, used above, is an old desiderative form
of bhagy, and means to wish to enjoy.

lil. 4, 1. su-matim rasi vasvah.

Thou grantest the favour of wealth.

Vil. 39, 1. tirdhvah agnih su-matim vasvah asret.

The lighted fire went up for the favour of wealth.
CEAy ROOM U-nixe 675.20,

ill. 57, 6. vaso (iti) résva su-matim visva-ganyam.

Grant us, O Vasu, thy favour, which is glorious among
men !

vii. 100, 2. tvém vishno (iti) su-matim visva-ganyam—
dah.

Mayest thou, Vishnu, give thy favour, which is glorious
among men !

X. II, 7. yah te agne su-matim martah akshat.

The mortal who obtained thy favour, O Agni.

ii. 34,15. arvaki sd marutah y& vah itih 6 (iti) st vasra-
iva su-matih gigatu.

Your help, O Maruts, which is to usward, your favour
may it come near, like a cow!

viii. 22, 4. asman dkkha su-matih vam subhah pati (iti)
4 dhenth-iva dhavatu.

May your favour, O Asvins, hasten towards us, like a
cow !

VOL. I. Ie

210 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS,

But this meaning is by no means the invariable meaning
of sumati, and it will easily be seen that, in the following
passages, the word must be translated by prayer. Thus
when Sarasvatt is called (i. 3, 11) étant? su-matindm, this
can only mean she who knows of the prayers, as before
she is called kodayitri sinritandm, she who excites songs
of praise :

i. 151, 7. akkha girah su-matim gantam asma-yti (iti).

Come towards the songs, towards the prayer, you who are
longing for us. Cf. x. 20, Io.

ii. 43, 3. tashvim dsinahk su-matim Aikiddhi nah.

Sitting quiet, listen, O Sakuni (bird), to our prayer !

v.1, 10. 4 bhandishthasya su-matim Aikiddhi.

Take notice of the prayer of thy best praiser! Cf. v. 33, I.

vii. 18, 4. & nah indraf su-matim gantu akkha.

May Indra come to our prayer !

vii. 31, 10. pra-ketase pra su-matim krinudhvam.

Make a prayer for the wise god!

ix. 96, 2. su-matim yati akkha.

He (Soma) goes near to the prayer.

x. 148, 3. rishinam viprahk su-matim kakanah.

Thou, the wise, desiring the prayer of the Rishis.

Vill. 22, 6. ta vam ady& sumati-bhih subhah patt (iti)
asvina pra stuvimahi.

Let us praise to-day the glorious Asvins with our prayers.

ix. 74, I. tém tmahe su-mati.

We implore him with prayer.

In our passage the verb pipartana, fill or fulfil, indicates
in what sense sumati ought to be taken. Su-matim pipar-
tana is no more than kamam pipartana, fulfil our desire !
See vii. 62, 3. 4 nak kamam pipurantu; i. 158, 2. kAma-
préna-iva manasa. On sumné, see Aufrecht, in Kuhn’s
Zeitschrift, vol. iv. p. 274.

Verse 6, note *. Krivih-dati has been a crux to ancient
and modern interpreters. It is mentioned as a difficult
word in the Nighantu, and all that Yaska has to say is
that it means possessed of cutting teeth; (Nir. vi. 30.
krivirdati vikartanadantt.) Professor Roth, in his note to
this passage, says that krivi can never have the meaning

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 211

of well, which is ascribed to it in the Nighantu iii. 23, but
seems rather to mean an animal, perhaps the wild boar,
Ka pos, with metathesis of vy and r. He translates our
passage: ‘Where your lightning with boar-teeth tears.’ In
his Dictionary, however, he only says, ‘ krivis, perhaps the
name of an animal, and dant, tooth.’ Sdyana contents
himself with explaining krivirdatt by vikshepazasiladantt,
having teeth that scatter about.

My own translation is founded on the supposition that
krivis, the first portion of krivirdati, has nothing to do
with krivi, but is a dialectic variety of kravis, raw flesh,
the Greek xpéas, Latin caro, cruor. It means what is raw,
bloody, or gory. From it the adjective krira, horrible,
cruentus ; (Curtius, Grundziige, p. 142; Kuhn, Zeitschrift,
vol. ii. p. 235.) A name of the goddess Durga in later San-
skrit is kriradanti, and with a similar conception the lightning,
I believe, is here called krivirdati, with gory teeth.

Verse 6, note *. It should be observed that in radati the
simile of the teeth of the lightning is carried on. For
radati may be supposed to have had in the Veda, too, the
original meaning of radere and rédere, to scratch, to gnaw.
Rada and radana in the later Sanskrit mean tooth. It is
curious, however, that there is no other passage in the Rig-
veda where rad clearly means to bite. It means to cut, in

i. 61,12. gdh na parva vi rada tiraska.

Cut his joint through, as the joint of an ox.

But in most passages where rad occurs in the Veda, it
has the meaning of giving, and is in fact a different root, but
hardly the same which we have in the Zend rad, to give,
and which Justi rightly identifies with the root radh.

This meaning is evident in the following passages :

vii. 79, 4. tavat ushak radhah asmébhyam rasva yavat
stotri-bhyah dradah grinana.

Grant us, Ushas, so much wealth as thou hast given to
the singers.

i. 116, 7. kakshivate aradatam ptram-dhim.

You gave wisdom to Kakshivat.

i. 169, 8. rada martit-bhih surddhah gd-agrah.

Give to the Maruts gifts, rich in cattle.

IPB

212 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

vii. 62, 3. vi nah sahdsram surtdhah radantu.

May they (the gods) give to us a, thousand gifts.

i. 117,11. vagam vipraya—radanta.

Giving sustenance to the sage!

vi. 61, 6. rada pisha-iva nah sanim.

Give us, Sarasvati, wealth, like Pashan !

ix. 93, 4. rada indo (iti) rayim.

Give us, O Indra, wealth !

vii. 32, 18. rada-vaso (iti).

Indra, thou who givest wealth !

In many passages, however, this verb rad is connected
with words meaning way or path, and it then becomes a
question whether it simply means to grant a way, or to cut
a way open for some one. In Zend, too, the same idiom
occurs, and Professor Justi explains it by ‘ prepare a way.’
I subjoin the principal passages :

Vi. 30, 3. yat abhyah dradah gatam indra.

That thou hast cut a way for them (the rivers).

iv. 19, 2. pra vartanih aradah visva-dhenah.

Thou (Indra) hast cut open the paths for all the cows,

vil. 47, 4. yabhyah indrah dradat gatim.

The rivers for which Indra cut a way.

X. 75, 2. pra te aradat varunah yatave pathah.

Varuna cut the paths for thee to go.

vii. 87,1. radat pathah varunah stiryaya.

Varuna cut paths for Sirya.

v. 80, 3. pathah radanti suvitaya devi.

She, the dawn, cutting open the paths for wealth.

vil. 60, 4. yasmai Aditya ddhvanah radanti.

For whom the Adityas cut roads.

il. 30, 2. pathah radantih—dhiinayah yanti 4rtham.

Cutting their paths, the rivers go to their goal.

This last verse seems to show that the cutting open of
a road is really the idea expressed by rad in all these
passages. And thus we find the rivers themselves saying
that Indra cut them out or delivered them;

lil. 33, 6. indrah asman aradat vagra-bahuh. Cf. x. $9; 7;

Verse 6, note °. Rinati, like the preceding expressions
krivirdati and rddati, is not chosen at random, for though

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 213

it has the general meaning of crushing or destroying, it is
used by the Vedic poets with special reference to the
chewing or crunching by means of the teeth. For
instance,

i. 148, 4. purtini dasmah ni rinati gambhaih.

Agni crunches many things with his jaws.

1.127, 4. sthira kit dona ni rinati dgasa.

Even tough morsels he (Agni) crunches fiercely.

In a more general sense we find it used,

Vv. 41, 10. sokih-kesah ni rinati vana.

Agni with flaming hair swallows or destroys the forests.

Iv. 19, 3. ahim vagrena vi rinah.

Thou destroyedst Ahi with the thunderbolt.

X.120,1. sadyah gaghanah ni rinati sdtrin.

As soon as born he destroys his enemies.

Verse 6, note °. Stidhita-iva barhéna. I think the expla-
nation of this phrase given by Sayana may be retained.
He explains stidhita by suhita, i.e. sushthu prerita, well
thrown, well levelled, and barhana by hatis, tatsddhana hetir
va, a blow or its instrument, a weapon. Professor Roth
takes barhanma as an instrumental, used abverbially, in the
sense of powerfully, but he does not explain in what sense
stidhita-iva ought then to be taken. We cannot well refer
it to didytt, lightning, on acgount of the iva, which requires
something that can form a simile of the lightning. Nor is
su-dhita ever used as a substantive so as to take the place
of svadhitiva. St-dhita has apparently many meanings, but
they all centre in one common conception. Su-dhita means
well placed, of a thing which is at rest, well arranged, well
ordered, secure ; or it means well sent, well thrown, of a
thing which has been in motion. Applied to human beings,
it means well disposed or kind.

iii. 23, 1. nih-mathitah si-dhitah 4 sadha-sthe.

Agni produced by rubbing, and well placed in his
abode.

vii. 42, 4. st-pritah agnih sti-dhitah dame 4,

Agni, who is cherished and well placed in the house.

iil. 29, 2. aranyoh ni-hitah gatd-vedah garbhah-iva su-
dhitah garbhinishu.

214 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Agni placed in the two fire-sticks, well placed like an
embryo in the mothers. Cf. x. 27, 16.

viii. 60, 4. abhi prayamsi sti-dhita 4 vaso (iti) gahi.

Come, O Vasu, to these well-placed offerings. Cf. i. 135,
Ay Vit, 1 yer 5 55 ee

x. 70, 8. sti-dhita havimshi.

The well-placed offerings.

iv. 2,10 (adhvarém). vii. 7, 3 (barhih).

As applied to dyus, life, stidhita may be translated by
well established, safe :

ii. 27, 10. asyama Aydmshi si-dhitani parva.

May we obtain the happy long lives of our forefathers.

iv. 50, 8. sah it ksheti su-dhitah dkasi své.

That man dwells secure in his own house.

Applied to a missile weapon, stidhita may mean well
placed, as it were, well shouldered, well held, before it is
thrown ; or well levelled, well aimed, when it is thrown:

i. 167, 3. mimydksha yéshu st-dhita—rishtih.

To whom the well held spear sticks fast.

vi. 33, 3. tvam tan indra ubhayan amitran dasa vritrani
arya ka stra, vadhif véna-iva si-dhitebhih atkaih.

Thou, Indra, O hero, strikest both enemies, the barbarous
and the Aryan fiends, like forests with well-aimed weapons.

Applied to a poem, stdhita means well arranged or
perfect : .

i. 140, 11. idém agne sti-dhitam duh-dhitat ddhi priyat
dum (iti) kit ménmanah préyah astu te.

May this perfect prayer be more agreeable to thee than
an imperfect one, though thou likest it.

Vil. 32,13. mantram dékharvam sti-dhitam.

A poem, not mean, well contrived.

As applied to men, stidhita means very much the same
as hita, well disposed, kind :

iv. 6, 7. adha mitrah na sti-dhitah pavakah agnih didaya
manushishu viksht.

Then, like a kind friend, Agni shone among the children
of man.

v. 3, 2. mitram su-dhitam.

Vi. 15, 2. mitraém né yém st-dhitam.

vill. 23, 8, mitrém né gane st-dhitam rit4-vani.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 215

X. 115, 7. mitrasah na yé sti-dhitah.

At last sti-dhita, without reference to human beings,
takes the general sense of kind, good :

ii. 11, 8. pari visvani sti-dhita agnéh asyAma ménma-bhih.

May we obtain through our prayers all the goods of
Agni.

Here, however, préyamsi may have to be supplied, and
in that case this passage, too, should be classed with those
mentioned above, vill. 60, 4, &c.

If then we consider that stidhita, as applied to weapons,
means well held or well aimed, we can hardly doubt that
barhana is here, as Sayana says, some kind of weapon. I
should derive it from barhayati, to crush, which we have,
for instance,

i. 133, 5. pisanga-bhrishtim ambhriném pisakim indra
sam mrina, sarvam rékshah ni barhaya.

Pound together the fearful Pisaki with his fiery weapons,
strike down every Rakshas.

ul. 23, 8. brihaspate deva-nidaf ni barhaya.

Brihaspati strike down the scoffers of the gods. Cf. vi.
TALE

Barhaéna would therefore mean a weapon intended to
crush an enemy, a block of stone, it may be, or some other
missile, and in that sense barhdna occurs at least once
more :

Vill. 63, 7. yat pafika-ganyaya visa indre ghéshah asri-
kshata, Astrinat barhana vipah.

When shouts have been sent up to Indra by the people
of the five clans, then the weapon scattered the enemies ;
or, then he scattered the enemies with his weapon.

In other passages Professor Roth is no doubt right when
he assigns. to barhén4 an adverbial meaning, but I do not
think that this meaning would be appropriate in our verse.

Verse 7, note '. Alatrinasah, a word which occurs but
once more, and which had evidently become unintelligible
even at the time of Yaska. He (Nir. vi. 2) explains it by
alamatardano meghah, the cloud which opens easily. This,
at least, is the translation given by Professor Roth, though
not without hesitation. Alamatardanah, as a compound, is

216 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

explained by the commentator as 4tardanaparyaptah, alam
Atardayitum udakam, i.e. capable of letting off the water.
But Devardgayagvan explains it differently. He says:
alam parydptam Atardanam himsd yasya, bahtdakatvat
sabalo megho viseshyate, i.e. whose injuring is great; the
dark cloud is so called because it contains much water.
Sayana, too, attempts several explanations. In iil... gO ato;
he seems to derive it from trih, to kill, not, like Yaska,
from trid, and he explains its meaning as the cloud which
is exceedingly hurt by reason of its holdmg so much water.
In our passage he explains it either as anatrina, free from
injury, or good hurters of enemies, or good givers of
rewards.

From all this I am afraid we gain nothing. Let us now
see what modern commentators have proposed in order to
discover an appropriate meaning in this word. Professor
Roth suggests that the word may be derived from ra, to
give, and the suffix trina, and the negative particle, thus
meaning, one who does not give or yield anything. But,
if so, how is this adjective applicable to the Maruts, who in
this very verse are praised for their generosity ? Langlois in
our passage translates, ‘heureux de nos louanges;’ in iil. 30,10,
‘qui laissait flétrir les plantes.? Wilson in our passage trans-
lates, ‘devoid of malevolence ;? but in iil. 30, to, ‘ heavy.”

I do not pretend to solve all these difficulties, but I may
say this in defence of my own explanation that it fulfils the
condition of being applicable both to the Maruts and to
the demon Bala. ‘The suffix trina is certainly irregular,
and I should much prefer to write alatrina, for in that case
we might derive latrin from latra, and to this latra, i.e.
ratra, should ascribe the sense of barking. The root rai
or ra means to bark, and has been connected by Professor
Aufrecht with Latin rire, inrire, and possibly inritare *,
thus showing a transition of meaning from barking, to
provoking or attacking. The same root ra explains also
the Latin ldtrare, to bark, allatrare, to assail; and, what-
ever ancient etymologists may say to the contrary, the
Latin Jatro, an assailer. The old derivation ‘latrones eos

* Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. ix. p. 233.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 217

antiqui dicebant, qui conducti militabant, dao tis NaTpeias,’
seems to me one of those etymologies in which the scholars
of Rome, who had learnt a little Greek, delighted as much
as scholars who know a little Sanskrit delight in finding
some plausible derivation for any Greek or Latin word in
Sanskrit. I know that Curtius (Grundziige, p. 326) and
Corssen (Kritische Nachtrige, p. 239) take a different view ;
but a foreign word, derived from AaTpor, pay, hire, would
never have proved so fertile as /atro has been in Latin.

If then we could write alatrindsah, we should have an
appropriate epithet of the Maruts, in the sense of not
assailing or not reviling, in fact, free from malevolence, as
Wilson translated the word, or rather Sayana’s explanation
of it, dtardanarahita. What gives me some confidence in
this explanation is this, that it is equally applicable to the
other passage where alatrina occurs, ili. 30, Io:

alatrinah valah indra vragah g6h pura héntoh bhéyamanah
vi ara.

Without barking did Vala, the keeper of the cow, full of
fear, open, before thou struckest him.

If it should be objected that vrag4 means always stable,
and is not used again in the sense of keeper, one might
reply that vragah, in the nom. sing., occurs in this one
single passage only, and that bhayamanah, fearing, clearly
implies a personification. Otherwise, one might translate :
‘Vala was quiet, O Indra, and the stable of the cow came
open, full of fear, before thou struckest.? The meaning of
alatrina would remain the same, the not-barking being here
used as a sign that Indra’s enemy was cowed, and no longer
inclined to revile or defy the power of Indra. Hom, hymn.
in Mere. 145, ovdé xuves NeAaKovTo.

Verse 7, note *. See i. 38,15, note ', page 78.

Verse 8, note 1. Abhi-hruti seems to have the meaning
of assault, injury, insult. It occurs but once, but abhi-
hrut, a feminine substantive with the same meaning, occurs
several times. The verb hru, which is not mentioned in
the Dhatupatha, but has been identified with hvar, occurs
in our hymn, verse 12:

218 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

i. 128, 5. sah nah trasate duh-itdt abhi-hritah samsat
aghat abhi-hrutah.

He protects us from evil, from assaults, from evil speak-
ing, from assaults.

x. 63,11. trayadhvam nah duh-évayah abhi-hrutah.

Protect us from mischievous injury !

i. 189, 6. abhi-hrtitém asi hi deva vishpat.

For thou, god, art the deliverer from all assaults. Vishpat,
deliverer, from vi and spas, to bind.

Vi-hruta, which occurs twice, means evidently what has
been injured or spoiled :

vill, 1, 12. ishkarta vi-hrutam punar (iti).

He who sets right what has been injured. Cf. viii. 20, 26.

Avi-hruta again clearly means uninjured, intact, entire:

v. 66, 2. ta hi kshatraém 4vi-hrutam — asate.

For they both have obtained uninjured power.

X.170,1. ayuh dadhat yagnha-patau avi-hrutam.

Giving uninjured life to the lord of the sacrifice.

Verse 9, note’, Tavishé certainly means strength, and
that it is used in the plural in the sense of acts of strength,
we can see from the first verse of our hymn and other
passages. But when we read that tavishani are placed on
the chariots of the Maruts, just as before bhadra, good
things, food, &c., are mentioned, it is clear that so abstract
a meaning as strength or powers would not be applicable
here. We might take it in the modern sense of forces,
i.e@. your armies, your companions are on your chariots,
striving with each other; but as the word is a neuter,
weapons, as the means of strength, seemed a_ preferable
rendering.

Verse 9, note *. The rendering of this passage must
depend on the question whether the khadis, whatever they
are, can be carried on the shoulders or not. We saw before
(p. 102) that khadis were used both as ornaments and as
weapons, and that, when used as weapons, they were most
likely rings or quoits with sharp edges. There is at least
one other passage where these khadis are said to be worn
on the shoulders:

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 219

vil. 56, 13. dmseshu 4 marutah khadayah vah vakshah-su
rukmah upa-sisriyanah.

On your shoulders are the quoits, on your chests the
golden chains are fastened.

In other places the khadis are said to be in the hands,
hasteshu, but this would only show that they are there
when actually used for fighting. Thus we read:

1.168, 3. a eshdm 4mseshu rambhini-iva rarabhe, haste-
shu khadih ka kritih ka sim dadhe.

To their shoulders (the spear) clings like a creeper, in
their hands the quoit is held and the dagger.

In v. 58, 2, the Maruts are called khadi-hasta, holding
the quoits in their hands. There is one passage which
was mentioned before (p. 94), where the khadis are said to
be on the feet of the Maruts, and on the strength of this
passage Professor Roth proposes to alter pra-patheshu to
pra-padeshu, and to translate, ‘The khadis are on your
forefeet. I do not think this emendation necessary.
Though we do not know the exact shape and character
of the khadi, we know that it was a weapon, most likely a
ring, occasionally used for ornament, and carried along
either on the feet or on the shoulders, but in actual battle
held in the hand. The weapon which Vishnu holds in one
of his right hands, the so-called kakra, may be the modern
representation of the ancient khadi. What, however, is
quite certain is this, that khadi in the Veda never means
food, as Sayana optionally interprets it. This interpretation
is accepted by Wilson, who translates, ‘At your resting-
places on the road refreshments (are ready).’ Nay, he
goes on in a note to use this passage as a proof of the
advanced civilisation of India at the time of the Vedic
Rishis. ‘The expression,’ he says, ‘is worthy of note, as
indicating the existence of accommodations for the use of
travellers: the Prapatha is the choltri of the south of India,
the saréi of the Mohammedans, a place by the road-side
where the travellers may find shelter and provisions.’

Verse 9, note *. This last passage shows that the poet
is really representing to himself the Maruts as on their
journey, and he therefore adds, ‘ your axle turns the two

220 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

(iv. 30, 2) wheels together,’ which probably means no more
than, ‘ your chariot is going smoothly or quickly.” Though
the expression seems to us hardly correct, yet one can well
imagine how the axle was supposed to turn the wheels as
the horses were drawing the axle, and the axle acted on the
wheels. Anyhow, no other translation seems possible.
Samaya in the Veda means together, at once, and is the
Greek dun, generally 6uo¥ or ous, the Latin simul. Cf. 1.
56, 63 73,63 113,10; 163, 33 vil. 66,153 ix. 75, 43 85,
53.97; 56.

Vrit means to turn, and is frequently used with reference
to the wheels :

vill. 46, 23. dasa syavah—nemim ni vavrituh.

The ten black horses turn the felly or the wheel.

iv. 30, 2. satrd te Anu krishtdyah visvah kakra-iva
vavrituh.

All men turn always round thee, like wheels.

That the Atmanepada of vrit may be used in an active
sense we see from

i. 191, 15. tatah visham pra vavrite.

I turn the poison out from here.

All the words used in this sentence are very old words,
and we can with few exceptions turn them into Greek or
Latin. In Latin we should have axis vos(ter) circos simul
divertit. In Greek d&wy U(uev) Kikrw GUNES oars

Verse 10, note *. See i. 64, 4, note’, page 94. I ought
to have mentioned there that in the Asvalayana Srauta-
sitras ix. 4, rukma occurs as the fee to be given to the
Hotar, and is explained by abharanavisesho vrittakarah,
a round ornament.

Verse 10, note *. See i. 166, 1, note ', page 200.

Verse 10, note *. On éta in the sense of fallow deer, or,
it may be, antelope, see i. 165, 5, note”, page 185.

Kita originally means variegated, and thus becomes a
name of any speckled deer, it being difficult to say what
exact species is meant. Sayama in our passage explains
étah by suklavarna malah, many-coloured wreaths or chains,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 221

which may be right. Yet the suggestion of Professor
Roth that étah, deer, stands here for the skins of
fallow deer, is certainly more poetical, and quite in
accordance with the Vedic idiom, which uses, for instance,
go, cow, not only in the sense of milk,—that is done even
in more homely English,—but also for leather, and thong.
It is likewise in accordance with what we know of the
earliest dress of the Vedic Indians, that deer-skins should
here be mentioned. We learn from Asvalayana’s Grihya-
sttras, of which we now possess an excellent edition by
Professor Stenzler, and a reprint of the text and com-
mentary by Rama Narayana Vidydaratna, in the Bibliotheca
Indica, that a boy when he was brought to his tutor, i.e.
from the eighth to possibly the twenty-fourth year, had to
be well combed, and attired in a new dress. A Brahmana
should wear the skin of an antelope (aineya), the Kshatriya
the skin of a deer (raurava), the Vaisya the skin of a goat
(aga). If they wore dresses, that of the Brahmana should
be dark red (kdshdya), that of the Kshatriya bright red
(mafigishtha), that of the Vaisya yellow (haridra), The
girdle of the Brahmana should be of Mufga grass, that
of the Kshatriya’ a bow-string, that of the Vaisya made of
sheep’s wool, The same regulations occur in other Sitras,
as, for instance, the Dharma-stitras of the Apastambiyas
and Gautamas, though there are certain characteristic
differences in each, which may be due either to local or
to chronological causes. Thus according to the Apa-
stambiya-sitras, which have just been published by Pro-
fessor Buhler, the Brahmana may wear the skin of the
harina deer, or that of the antelope (aineyam), but the latter
must be from the black antelope (krishvam), and, a proviso
is added, that if a man wears the black antelope skin, he
must never spread it out to sit or sleep on it. As materials
for the dress, Apastamba allows sana, hemp*, or kshuma,

: ,

* Sana is an old Aryan word, though its meanings differ. Hesychius and
Eustathius mention xdyva as being synonymous with ypiados, reed. Pollux
gives two forms, «dvva and xdva, (Pollux x. 166. mravaxa 5€ éore Ylabos 1) ev
rois axartos Av Kad ndvay nadodow. vii. 176. Kdvvar 5e 7d &x KavdBow mréypA.)
This is important, because the same difference of spelling occurs also in

222 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

flax, and he adds that woollen dresses are allowed to all
castes, as well as the kambala (masc.), which seems to be
any cloth made of vegetable substances (darbhadinirmitam
kiram kambalam). He then adds a curious remark, which
would seem to show that the Brahmanas preferred skins,
and the Kshatriyas clothes, for he says that those who wish
well to the Brahmanas should wear agina, skins, and those
who wish well to the Kshatriyas should wear vastra, clothes,
and those who wish well to both should wear both, but, in
that case, the skin should always form the outer garment.
The Dharma-stitras of the Gautamas, which were published
in India, prescribe likewise for the Brahmana the black
antelope skin, and allow clothes of hemp or linen (saza-
kshaumakira) as well as kutapas (woollen cloth) for all.
What is new among the Gautamas is, that they add the
karpasa, the cotton dress, which is important as showing

kdvvaBis and KdvaBos or xavvaBos, a model, a lay figure, which Lobeck derives
from «avy. In Old Norse we have hanp-r, in A.S. henep, hemp, Old High
Germ. hanaf.

The occurrence of the word sana is of importance as showing at how early a
time the Aryans of India were acquainted with the uses and the name of
hemp. Our word hemp, the A.S. henep, the Old Norse hanp-r, are all bor-
rowed from Latin cannabis, which, like other borrowed words, has undergone
the reguiar changes required by Grimm’s law in Low German, and also in
High German, hanaf. The Slavonic nations seem to have borrowed their
word for hemp (Lith. kanapé) from the Goths, the Celtic nations (Ir. canatb)
from the Romans ; (cf. Kuhn, Beitriige, vol. ii. p. 382.) The Latin cannabis
is borrowed from Greek, and the Greeks, to judge from the account of
Herodotus, most likely adopted the word from the Aryan Thracians and
Scythians ; (Her. iv. 74; Pictet, Les Aryens, vol. i. p. 314.) KdvvaBis being
a foreign word, it would be useless to attempt an explanation of the final
element bés, which is added to sana, the Sanskrit word for hemp. It may be
visa, fibre, or it may be anything else. Certain it is that the main element in
the name of hemp was the same among the settlers in Northern India, and
among the Thracians and Scythians through whom the Greeks first beéiime
acquainted with hemp.

The history of the word xdavvafis must be kept distinct from that of the
Greek xdvva or xdva, reed. Both spellings occur, for Pollux, X,166, writes
mravdna d5€ éo7t Yiabos % év Tots dxarios i Kal Kdvav Kadrodow, but vii. 176,
kavvar 5& 7d é&& KavdBov mréypa. This word xdvva may be the same as the
Sanskrit sana, only with this difference, that it was retained as common
property by Greeks and Indians before they separated, and was applied
differently in later times by the one and the other.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 223

an early knowledge of this manufacture. The karpasa dress
occurs once more as a present to be given to the Potar
priest (Asv, Srauta-stitras ix. 4), and evidently considered as
a valuable present, taking precedence of the kshaumi or
lmen dress. It is provided that the cotton dress should
not be dyed, for this, I suppose, is the meaning of avikrita.
Immediately after, however, it is said, that some authorities
say the dress should be dyed red (kashayam apy eke), the
very expression which occurred in Apastamba, and that, in
that case, the red for the Brahmana’s dress should be taken
from the bark of trees (varksha). Manu, who here, as
elsewhere, simply paraphrases the ancient Sitras, says,
Vig ae

karshnarauravavastani karmani brahmakarinah

vasirann a4nuptirvyena sdnakshaumavikani ka.

‘Let Brahmafarins wear (as outer garments) the skins
of the black antelope, the deer, the goat, (as under gar-
ments) dresses of hemp, flax, and sheep’s wool, in the order
of the three castes.’

The Sanskrit name for a dressed skin is agina, a word
which does not occur in the Rig-veda, but which, if Bopp
is right in deriving it from aga, goat, as alyis from até,
would have meant originally, not skin in general, but a goat-
skin. The skins of the éta, here ascribed to the Maruts,
would be identical with the aineya, which Asvaldyana
ascribes to the Brahmana, not, as we should expect, to
the Kshatriya, if, as has been supposed, aineya is derived
from ena, which is a secondary form, particularly in the
feminine eni, of eta. There is, however, another word,
eda, a kind of sheep, which, but for Vestus, might be
hedus, and by its side ena, a kind of antelope. These
two forms pre-suppose an earlier erna, and point therefore
in a different direction.

Verse 10, note *. I translate kshuré by sharp edges, but
it might have been translated literally by razors, for, strange
as it may sound, razors were known, not only during the
Vedic period, but even previous to the Aryan separation.
The Sanskrit kshuré is the Greek Evpds or Evpdy. In the
Veda we have clear allusions to shaving:

224 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

x.142, 4. yada te vatah anu-vati sokih, vapta-iva smasru
vapasi pra bhima.

When the wind blows after thy blast, then thou shavest
the earth as a barber shaves the beard. Cf. i. 65, 4.

If, as B. and R. suggest, vaptar, barber, is connected
with the more modern name for barber in Sanskrit, viz.
napita, we should have to admit a root svap, in the sense
of tearing or pulling, vellere, from which we might derive
the Vedic svapt (vii. 56, 3), beak. Corresponding to this
we find in Old High German snabul, beak, (schnepfe, snipe,)
and in Old Norse nef. The Anglo-Saxon neb means mouth
and nose, while in modern English ned or nib is used for
the bill or beak of a bird*. Another derivation of napita,
proposed by Professor Weber (Kuhn’s Beitrage, vol. i.
P- 505), who takes napita as a dialectic form of snapitar,
balneator, or lavator, might be admitted if it could be
proved that in India also the barber was at the same time
a balneator,

Verse 11, note *. Vi-bhitayah is properly a substantive,
meaning power, but, like other substantives+, and par-
ticularly substantives with prepositions, it can be used as
an adjective, and is, in fact, more frequently used as an
adjective than as a substantive. It is a substantive,

i. 8, 9. eva hi te vi-bhitayah titayah indra ma-vate sadyéh
kit santi dastshe.

For indeed thy powers, O Indra, are at once shelters for
a sacrificer, like me.

But it is an adjective,

i, 30, 5. vi-bhttiA astu sinrita.

May the prayer be powerful.

vi. 17, 4. mahdm andinam tavdsam vi-bhitim matsardsah
garhrishanta pra-sdham, :

* Grimm, Deutsche Grammatik, vol. ili. pp. 400, 409. There is not yet
sufficient evidence to show that Sanskrit sy, German sn, and Sanskrit n are
interchangeable, but there is at least one case that may be analogous. San-
skrit svafig, to embrace, to twist round a person, German slango, Schlange,
snake, and Sanskrit naga, snake. Grimm, Deutsche Grammatik, vol. iii.
p. 364.

+ See Benfey, Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. ii. p- 216,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 225

The sweet draughts of Soma delighted the great, the
perfect, the strong, the powerful, the unyielding Indra.
Cf. vill. 49, 6; 50, 6.

Vibhvah, with the Svarita on the last syllable, has to be
pronounced vibhuah. In iii. 6, 9, we find vi-bhavah.

Verse 11, note *. See i, 87,1, note 1, page 144.
Verse 11, note *. See i. 6, 5, note 1, page 29.

Verse 12, note *. Mahi-tvaném, greatness, is formed by
the suffix tvanaé, which Professor Aufrecht has identified
with the Greek cvvy (cuvov); see Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, vol. i.
p- 482. The origin of this suffix has been explained by
Professor Benfey, ibid. vol. vii. p. 120, who traces it back to
the suffix tvan, for instance, i-tvan, goer, in pratah-itva =
pratah-yava.

Verse 12, notes? and*. Vrata is one of those words which,
though we may perceive their one central idea, and their
original purport, we have to translate by various terms in
order to make them intelligible in every passage where they
occur. Vrata, I believe, meant originally what is enclosed,
protected, set apart, the Greek vouds :

v. 46, 7. yah parthivasah yah apdm 4pi vraté tah nah
devih su-havah sarma yakkhata.

O ye gracious goddesses, who are on the earth or in the
realm of the waters, grant us your protection !

Here vrata is used like vrigdna, see i. 165, 15, note °,
page 195.

X. 114, 2. tasim ni dikyud kavéyah ni-danam pareshu yah
guihyeshu vratéshu.

The poets discovered their (the Nirritis’) origin, who are
in the far hidden chambers, ;

i. 163, 3. asi tritah guhyena vraténa.

Thou art Trita within the hidden place, or with the
secret work.

Secondly, vraté means what is fenced off, what is deter-
mined, what is settled, and hence, like dharman, law,
ordinance. In this sense vrata occurs very frequently :

i. 25,1. yat kit hi te visah yatha pra deva varuna vratam,
minimasi dydvi-dyavi.

VOL. I. Q

226 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Whatever law of thine we break, O Varuna, day by day,
men as we are.

ii. 8, 3. ydsya vratam na miyate.

Whose law is not broken.

iil. 32, 8. indrasya karma sti-kritd purtini vratani devah
n& minanti visve.

The deeds of Indra are well done and many, all the gods
do not break his laws, or do not injure his ordinances.

ii. 24, 12. visvam satym maghavand yuvoh it apah kana
pré minanti vratam vam.

All that is yours, O powerful gods, is true; even the
waters do not break your law.

ii. 38, 7. ndkih asya tani vrata devadsya savitih minanti.

No one breaks these laws of this god Savitar. Cf. i.
38; 9.

i. 92,12. A4minati daivyani vratani.

Not injuring the divine ordinances. Cf. 1. 124, 2.

X. 12, 5. kat asya ati vratam kakrima.

Which of his laws have we overstepped ?

Vili. 25, 16. tasya vratani 4nu vah karamasi.

His ordinances we follow.

X. 33, 9. nd devandm ati vratém satd-atma kana givati.

No one lives beyond the statute of the gods, even if he
had a hundred lives.

vii. 5, 4. tava tri-dhatu prithivi uta dyath vaisvanara
vratam agne sakanta.

The earth and the sky followed thy threefold law, O
Agni Vaisvanara.

vii. 87, 7. yah mrilayati kakrashe kit agah vayém syéma
varune anagah, anu vratani Aditeh ridhantah.

Let us be sinless before Varuna, who is gracious even to
him who has committed sin, let us perform the laws of
Aditi !

ii, 28, 8. ndémah pura te varuna uté nindém utd aparém
tuvi-gata bravama, tvé hi kam péarvate na sritdni apra-
kyutani duh-dabha vratani.

Formerly, and now, and also in future let us give praise
to thee, O Varuna; for in thee, O unconquerable, all laws
are grounded, immovable as on a rock.

A very frequent expression is 4nu vratdm, according to

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 227

the command of a god, ii. 38, 3; 6; viii. 40, 8; or simply
anu vratam, peering to law and ice

1, 136, 5. tém aryama abhi rakshati rigu-yantam anu
vratam, *

Aryaman protects him who acts uprightly aoe to law.

re wIG Pets .iV. 13,82 sy. 60, 1

The laws or ordinances or institutions of the gods are
sometimes taken for the sacrifices which are supposed to
be enjoined by the gods, and the performance of which is,
in a certain sense, the performance of the divine will.

i. 93, 8. yah agnishéma havishd saparyat devadrisa
manasa yah ghriténa, tasya vratém rakshatam patém 4m-
hasah,

He who worships Agni and Soma with oblations, with a
godly mind, or with an offering, protect his sacrifice, shield
him from evil !

i. 31, 2. tva4m agne prathamah dngirah-tamah kavih
devanam pari bhishasi vratém.

Agni, the first and wisest of poets, thou performest the
sacrifice of the gods.

iii. 3, 9. tésya vratani bhtri-poshinah vayém tpa bht-
shema dame 4 suvrikti-bhih.

Let us, who possess much wealth, perform with prayers
the sacrifices of Agni within our house.

In another acceptation the vratas of the gods are what
they perform and establish themselves, their own deeds :

ili. 6, 5. vraté te agne mahatéh mahani tava kratva
rédasi (iti) 4 tatantha.

The deeds of thee, the great Agni, are great, by thy
power thou hast stretched out heaven and earth.

Vili. 42, 1. Astabhnat yam asurah visvé-vedah amimita
variménam prithivyah, 4 asidat visva bhtvanani sam-rat
visva it tani varunasya vratani.

The wise spirit established the sky, and made the width
of the earth, as king he approached all beings,—all these
are the works of Varuna.

vi. 14, 3. tirvantah désyum dydvah vrataih sikshantah
avratam.

Men fight the fiend, trying to overcome by their deeds
him who performs no sacrifices ; or, the lawless enemy.

Q 2

228 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Lastly, vraté comes to mean sway or power, and the
expression vraté tava signifies, at thy command, under thy
auspices :

i. 24,15. atha vayém Aditya vraté tava anagasa/ Aditaye
syama.

Then, O Aditya, under thy auspices may we be guiltless
before Aditi.

vi. 54, 9. ptishan tava vraté vayaém na rishyema kada
kana.

O Piishan, may we never fail under thy protection.

X. 36,13. yé savittih satyd-savasya visve mitrasya vraté
varunasya devah.

All the gods who are in the power of Savitar, Mitra, and
Varuna.

v. 83, 5. ydsya vraté prithivi nadmnamiti yasya vraté
sapha-vat garbhuriti, y4sya vraté dshadhif visva-riipah sah
nah parganya mahi sarma yakkha.

At whose command the earth bows down, at whose com-
mand the earth is as lively as a hoof (?), at whose command
the plants assume all shapes, mayest thou, O Parganya, yield
us great protection !

In our passage I take vrata in this last sense.

Datra, if derived from da, would mean gift, and that
meaning is certainly the most applicable in some passages
where it occurs :

ix. 97, 55. Asi bhagah asi datrasya data.

Thou art Bhaga, thou art the giver of the gift.

In other passages, too, particularly in those where the
verb da or some similar verb occurs in the same verse,
it can hardly be doubted that the poet took datra, like
datra or dattra, in the sense of gift, bounty, largess :

i. 116, 6, yam asvina dadéthuh svetam dAsvam—tadt vam
datram méhi kirtényam bhit.

The white horse, O Asvins, which you gave, that your
gift was great and to be praised.

1.185, 3. anehah datrém aditeh anarvam huvé.

I call for the unrivalled, the uninjured bounty of
Aditi.

vil. 56, 21. ma vah datrat marutah nih ardma.

May we not fall away from your bounty, O Maruts!

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 229

il. 54, 16. yuvam hi sthah rayi-dati nah rayinam datraém
rakshethe.

For you, Nasatyas, are our givers of riches, you protect
the gift.

vi. 20, 7. rigisvane datrém dastishe dah.

To Rigisvan, the giver, thou givest the gift.

Vill. 43, 33. tat te sahasva tmahe datrém yat nd upa-
dasyati, tvat agne varyam vasu.

We ask thee, strong hero, for the gift which does not
perish ; we ask from thee the precious wealth.

x. 69, 4. datram rakshasva yat idém te asmé (iti).

Protect this gift of thine which thou hast given to us.

vill, 44, 18. isishe varyasya hi datrasya agne svah-patih.

For thou, O Agni, lord of heaven, art the master of the
precious gift. Cf. iv. 38, 1.

Professor Roth considers that datré is derived rather
from da, to divide, and that it means share, lot, possession.
But there is not a single passage where the meaning of
gift or bounty does not answer all purposes. In vii. 56, 21,
ma vah datrat marutah nih arama, is surely best translated
by, ‘let us not fall away from your bounty,’ and in our own
passage the same meaning should be assigned to datra,
The idea of datra, bounty, is by no means incompatible
with vrata, realm, dominion, sway, if we consider that the
sphere within which the bounty of a king or a god is
exercised and accepted, is in one sense his realm. What
the poet therefore says in our passage is simply this, that
the bounty of the Maruts extends as far as the realm of
Aditi, i.e. is endless, or extends everywhere, Aditi being in
its original conception the deity of the unbounded world
beyond, the earliest attempt at expressing the Infinite.

As to datra occurring once with the accent on the first
syllable in the sense of sickle, see M. M., ‘ Uber eine Stelle
in Yaska’s Commentar zum Naighantuka,’ Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, 1853, vol. vil.
Pp: 375:

viii. 78, 10. tdva it indra ahém 4-sds4 haste datram kana
& dade.

Trusting in thee alone, O Indra, I take the sickle in my hand.

This datra, sickle, is derived from do, to cut.

230 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Aditi, the Infinite.

Verse 12, note *. Aditi, an ancient god or goddess, is in
reality the earliest name invented to express the Infinite ;
not the Infinite as the result of a long process of abstract
reasoning, but the visible Infinite, visible by the naked eye,
the endless expanse beyond the earth, beyond the clouds,
beyond the sky. That was called A-diti, the un-bound,
the un-bounded; one might almost say, but for fear of
misunderstandings, the Absolute, for it is derived from
diti, bond, and the negative particle, and meant therefore
originally what is free from bonds of any kind, whether of
space or time, free from physical weakness, free from moral
guilt. Such a conception became of necessity a being, a
person, a god. To us such a name and such a conception
seem decidedly modern, and to find in the Veda Aditi, the
Infinite, as the mother of the principal gods, is certainly, at
first sight, startling. But the fact is that the thoughts of
primitive humanity were not only different from our thoughts,
but different also from what we think their thoughts ought
to have been. The poets of the Veda indulged freely in
theogonic speculations without being frightened by any con-
tradictions. They knew of Indra as the greatest of gods,
they knew of Agni as the god of gods, they knew of Varuna
as the ruler of all, but they were by no means startled at
the idea that their Indra had a mother, or that their Agni
was born like a babe from the friction of two fire-sticks, or
that Varuza and his brother Mitra were nursed in the lap of
Aditi. Some poet would take hold of the idea of an unbounded
power, of Aditi, originally without any reference to other gods,
Very soon these ideas met, and, without any misgivings,
either the gods were made subordinate to, and represented
as the sons of Aditi, or where Indra was to be praised as
supreme, Aditi was represented as doing him homage.

vill, 12, 14. utd sva-rage Aditih st6mam indraya giganat.

And Aditi produced a hymn for Indra, the king. Here
Professor Roth takes Aditi as an epithet of Agni, not as
the name of the goddess Aditi, while Dr. Muir rightly
takes it in the latter sense, and retains st6mam instead of
sdmam, as printed by Professor Aufrecht. Cf. vii, 98,4;

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 231

The idea of the Infinite, as I have tried to show else-
where, was revealed, was most powerfully impressed on the
awakening mind, by the East*. ‘It is impossible to enter
fully into all the thoughts and feelings that passed through
the minds of the early poets when they formed names for
that far, far East from whence even the early dawn, the
sun, the day, their own life, seemed to spring. A new life
flashed up every morning before their eyes, and the fresh
breezes of the dawn reached them like greetings from the
distant lands beyond the mountains, beyond the clouds,
beyond the dawn, beyond “ the immortal sea which brought
us hither.” The dawn seemed to them to open golden
gates for the sun to pass in triumph, and while those gates
were open, their eyes and their mind strove in their childish
way to pierce beyond the limits of this finite world. That
silent aspect awakened in the human mind the conception
of the Infinite, the Immortal, the Divine.’ Aditi is a name
for that distant East, but Aditi is more than the dawn.
Aditi is beyond the dawn, and in one place (i. 113, 19)
the dawn is called ‘ the face of Aditi,’ Aditer 4nikam. Thus
we read :

v. 62, 8. hiranya-ripam ushdsah vi-ushfau dyah-sthinam
Vit-ita stryasya, 4 rohathah varuva mitra gartam atah
kakshathe (iti) aditim ditim ka.

Mitra and Varuza, you mount your chariot, which is
golden, when the dawn bursts forth, and has iron poles
at the setting of the sun: from thence you see Aditi and
Diti, what is yonder and what is here.

If we keep this original conception of Aditi clearly before
us, the various forms which Aditi assumes, even in the
hymns of the Veda, will not seem incoherent. Aditi is not
a prominent deity in the Veda, she is celebrated rather in
her sons, the Adityas, than in her own person., While
there are so many hymns addressed to Ushas, the dawn,
or Indra, or Agni, or Savitar, there is but one hymn, x. 72,
which from our point of view, though not from that of
Indian theologians, might be called a hymn to Aditi.
Nevertheless Aditi is a familiar name; a name of the past,

* Lectures on the Science of Language, Second Series, p. 499.

232 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

whether in time or in thought only, and a name that lives
on in the name of the Adityas, the sons of Aditi, including
the principal deities of the Veda.

Aditi and the Adityas.

Thus we read :

i. 107, 2. tipa nah devahk avasé & gamantu 4ngirasam
sdma-bhih stiyémanah, indrad indriyaih martitah martt-
bhih adityath nah aditih sarma yamsat.

May the gods come to us with their help, praised by
the songs of the Angiras,—Indra with his forces, the
Maruts with the storms, may Aditi with the Adityas give
us protection !

x. 66, 3. indrah vdsu-bhih pari patu nah gayam adityaih
nah Aditih sarma yakkhatu, rudréh rudrébhih devah mrilay ati
nah tvashta nah gnabhif suvitaya ginvatu.

May Indra with the Vasus watch our house, may Aditi
with the Adityas give us protection, may the divine Rudra
with the Rudras have mercy upon us, may Tvashéar with
the mothers bring us to happiness !

Ill; 54, 20; Adityath nah aditih srinotu yakkhantu nah
marttah sarma bhadram.

May Aditi with the Adityas hear us, may the Maruts
give us good protection !

In another passage Varuna takes the place of Aditi as
the leader of the Adityas:

vii. 35, 6. sam nak indrah vadsu-bhih devéh astu sim
adityébhih varunah su-sémsah, sim nak rudrah rudrébhih
galashah sam nah tvashta gnabhih iha srinotu.

May Indra bless us, the god with the Vasus! May
Varuna, the glorious, bless us with the Adityas! May the
relieving Rudra with the Rudras bless us! May Tvashéar
with the mothers kindly hear us here !

Even in passages where the poet seems to profess an
exclusive worship of Aditi, as in

v. OS 3. pratah devim aditim gohavimi madhydndine
Ut-ita stiryasya,

I invoke the divine Aditi early in the morning, at noon,
and at the setting of the sun,

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 233

Mitra and Varuna, her principal sons, are mentioned
immediately after, and implored, like her, to bestow bless-
ings on their worshipper.

Her exclusive worship appears once, in viii. 19, 14.

A very frequent expression is that of Adityah Aditih
without any copula, to signify the Adityas and Aditi:

iv. 25, 3. kah devdndm avah adyé vrinite kah Aditydn
aditim gy6tih tee.

Who does choose now the protection of the gods? Who
asks the Adityas, Aditi, for their light ?

Vi. 51, 5. visve adityah adite sa-géshah asmabhyam sérma
bahulam vi yanta.

All ye Adityas, Aditi together, grant to us your manifold
protection !

X. 39, II. na tam raganau adite ktitah kana na Amhah
asnoti duf-itam nakid bhaydm.

O ye two kings (the Asyins), Aditi, no evil reaches him
from anywhere, no misfortune, no fear (whom you protect).
Ciivu. 66,6.

x. 63, 5. tan @ vivdsa namasd suvrikti-bhi# mahah
adityan dditim svastaye.

I cherish them with worship and with hymns, the great
Adityas, Aditi, for happiness’ sake.

X. 63, 17. eva platéh simi avivridhat vah visve adityah
adite manishi.

The wise son of Plati magnified you, all ye Adityas,
Aditi!

x. 65, 9. parganyavata vrishabha purishina indravaya
(iti) varunah mitréh aryama, devan Adityan Aditim hava-
mahe yé parthivasah divydsah ap-si yé.

There are Parganya and Vata, the powerful, the givers
of rain, Indra and Vayu, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, we call
the divine Adityas, Aditi, those who dwell on the earth, in
heaven, in the waters.

We are not justified in saying that there ever was a
period in the history of the religious thought of India,
a period preceding the worship of the Adityas, when Aditi,
the Infinite, was worshipped, though to the sage who first
coined this name, it expressed, no doubt, for a time the
principal, if not the only object of his faith and worship.

234 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Aditi and Daksha.

Soon, however, the same mental process which led on
later speculators from the earth to the elephant, and from
the elephant to the tortoise, led the Vedic poets beyond
Aditi, the Infinite. There was something beyond that
Infinite which for a time they had grasped by the name
of Aditi, and this, whether intentionally or by a mere
accident of language, they called daksha, literally power
or the powerful. All this, no doubt, sounds strikingly
modern, yet, though the passages in which this daksha
is mentioned are few in number, I should not venture to
say that they are necessarily modern, even if by modern
we mean only later than 1000 B.c. Nothing can bring
the perplexity of the ancient mind, if once drawn into this
vortex of speculation, more clearly before us than if we
read :

X. 72, 4-5. aditeh dakshah agayata dékshat tm (iti) aditih
pari,— aditih hi aganishta déksha ya duhita tava, tam devah
anu agayanta bhadraf amrita-bandhavah.

Daksha was born of Aditi, and Aditi from Daksha. For
Aditi was born, O Daksha, she who is thy daughter ; after
her the gods were born, the blessed, who share in im-
mortality.

Or, in more mythological language :

x. 64, 5. dakshasya va adite ganmani vraté ragand mitra-
varuna a vivasasi.

Or thou, O Aditi, nursest in the birthplace of Daksha
the two kings, Mitra and Varuna.

Nay, even this does not suffice. There is something
again beyond Aditi and Daksha, and one poet says:

X. 5, 7. asat ka sat ka paramé vi-oman dékshasya ganman
aditeh upa-sthe.

Not-being and Being are in the highest heaven, in the
birthplace of Daksha, in the lap of Aditi.

At last something like a theogony, though full of con-
tradictions, was imagined, and in the same hymn from
which we have already quoted, the poet says:

x. 72,1—4. devanam nu vayém gana pré vokdma vipanyay4,
ukthéshu sasyamaneshu yah (yat?) pasyat vit-tare yugé. 1.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 235

brahmanah patih eta sim karmarah-iva adhamat, devandm
purvyé yugé dsatah sdt agayata. 2.

devanaim yugé prathamé dsatah st agdyata, tat Asdh dnu
agayanta tat uttdné-padah pari. 3.

bhth gage uttdnd-padak bhuvaéh asdh agdyanta, dditeh
dakshah agayata, dakshat tm (iti) aditih pari. 4.

1. Let us now with praise proclaim the births of the
gods, that a man may see them in a future age, whenever
these hymns are sung.

2. Brahmanaspati* blew them together like a smith
(with his bellows); in a former age of the gods, Being
was born from Not-being.

3. In the first age of the gods, Being was born from
Not-being, after it were born the Regions, from them
Uttanapada ;

4. From Uttanapad the Earth was born, the Regions
were born from the Earth." Daksha was born of Aditi, and
Aditi from Daksha.

The ideas of Being and Not-being (70 év and 70 pi ov)
are familiar to the Hindus from a very early time in their
intellectual growth, and they can only have been the result
of abstract speculation. Therefore daksha, too, in the
sense of power or potentia, may have been a metaphysical
conception. But it may also have been suggested by a
mere accident of language, a never-failing source of ancient
thoughts. The name daksha-pitarah, an epithet of the
gods, has generally been translated by ‘those who have
Daksha for their father. But it may have been used
originally in a very different sense. Professor Roth has,
I think, convincingly proved that this epithet daksha-pitar,
as given to certain gods, does not mean, the gods who
have Daksha for their father, but that it had originally
the simpler meaning of fathers of strength, or, as he

* Brdhmanaspdti, literally the lord of prayer, or the lord of the sacrifice,
sometimes a representative of Agni (i. 38, 13, note), but by no means identical
with him (see vii. 41, 1); sometimes performing the deeds of Indra, but again
by no means identical with him (see ii. 23, 18. indrena yugé—nih apém
aubgah arnavém ; cf. viii. 96,15). In ii. 26, 3, he is called father of the gods
(dev&n4m pitéram) ; in ii, 23, 2, the creator of all beings (visvesham ganitd).

236 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

translates it, ‘preserving, possessing, granting faculties *.’
This is particularly clear in one passage:

iii. 27, 9. bhitdndm garbham 4 dadhe, dakshasya pitaram.

I place Agni, the source of all beings, the father of
strengthisyn ssa.

After this we can hardly hesitate how to translate the
next verse :

vi. 50, 2. SUu-gy6tishah—daksha-pitrin — devan.

The resplendent gods, the fathers of strength.

It may seem more doubtful when we come to gods like
Mitra and Varuna, whom we are so much accustomed to
regard as Adityas, or sons of Aditi, and who therefore,
according to the theogony mentioned before, would have
the best claim to the name of sons of Daksha; yet here,
too, the original and simple meaning is preferable; nay, it
is-most likely that from passages like this, the later ex-
planation, which makes Mitra and Varuna the sons of
Daksha, may have sprung.

vil. 66, 2. ya—su-daksha daksha-pitara,

Mitra and Varuna, who are of good strength, the fathers
of strength.

Lastly, even men may claim this name; for, unless we
change the accent, we must translate :

vill. 63, 10. avasyadvah yushmabhih daksha-pitarah.

We suppliants, being, through your aid, fathers of
strength.

But whatever view we take, whether we take daksha in
the sense of power, as a personification of a philosophical
conception, or as the result of a mythological misunder-
standing occasioned by the name of déksha-pitar, the fact
remains that in certain hymns of the Rig-veda (viii. 25, 5)
Daksha, like Aditi, has become a divine person, and has
retained his place as one of the Adityas to the very latest
time of Puranic tradition.

* The accent in this case cannot help us in determining whether déksha-
pitar means having Daksha for their father (Aoxporarwp), or father of
strength. In the first case déksha would rightly retain its accent (déksha-
pitar) as a Bahuvrthi; in the second, the analogy of such Tatpurusha com-

pounds as grihd-pati (Pm. vi. 2, 18) would be sufficient to justify the pfiirva-
padaprakritisvaratvam.

MANDALA I, SOKTA 166. 237

Aditi in her Cosmic Character.

But to return to Aditi. Let us look upon her as the
Infinite personified, and most passages, even those where
she is presented as a subordinate deity, will become
intelligible.

Aditi, in her cosmic character, is the beyond, the un-
bounded realm beyond earth, sky, and heaven, and originally
she was distinct from the sky, the earth, and the ocean.
Aditi is mentioned by the side of heaven and earth, which
shows that, though in more general language she may be
identified with heaven and earth in their unlimited character,
her original conception was different. This we see in pas-
sages where different deities or powers are invoked together,
particularly if they are invoked together in the same verse,
and where Aditi holds a separate place by the side of heaven
and earth :

i. 94, 16 (final). tat nah mitréh vdrunah mamahantam
aditiz sindhuh prithivi uta dyath.

May Mitra and Varuna grant us this, may Aditi, Sindhu
(sea), the Earth, and the Sky!

In other passages, too, where Aditi has assumed a more
personal character, she still holds her own by the side of
heaven and earth; cf. ix. 97, 58 (final) :

i, 191, 6. dyath vah pita prithiv’ mata sédmah bhrata
aditih svasa.

The Sky is your father, the Earth your mother, Soma
your brother, Aditi your sister.

viii. 101, 15. matd rudrandm duhita vasinam svasa aditya-
nam amritasya nabhih, pré ni vokam kikitishe ganaya ma
gam éndgam aditim vadhish/a.

The mother of the Rudras, the daughter of the Vasus,
the sister of the Adityas, the source of immortality, I tell
it forth to the man of understanding, may he not offend the
cow, the guiltless Aditi! Cf. i. 153, 3; ix. 96,153 Vagasan.
Sanhita gil. 49.

vi. 51, 5. dyatih pitar (iti) prithivi matah adhruk agne
bhratah vasavah mriléta nah, visve Adityah adite sa-goshah
asmabhyam saérma bahulém vi yanta.

Sky, father, Earth, kind mother, Fire, brother, bright

238 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

gods, have mercy upon us! All Adityas (and) Aditi
together, grant us your manifold protection !

x. 63, 10, su-tramadnmam prithivim dydm anehaésam su-
sirmanam 4ditim su-prénitim, daivim navam su-aritram
anagasam dsravantim 4 ruhema svastaye.

We invoke the well-protecting Earth, the unrivalled Sky,
the well-shielding Aditi, the good guide. Let us enter for
safety into the divine boat, with good oars, faultless and
leakless !

x. 66, 4. aditih dyavaprithivi (iti).

Aditi, and Heaven and Earth.

Where two or more verses come together, the fact that
Aditi is mentioned by the side of Heaven and Earth may
seem less convincing, because in these Nivids or long strings
of invocations different names or representatives of one and
the same power are not unfrequently put together. For
instance,

xX. 36, 1-3. ushdsdnékta brihati (iti) su-pésasd dydava-
kshéma vaérunah mitréh aryama, indram huve marttah
parvatén apdh Aadityan dydvaprithivi (iti) apah svar (iti
svah). 1.

dyath ka nah prithivi ka pra-ketasd ritavari (ity ritd-
vari) rakshataém dmhasah rishah, ma duh-vidatra nih-ritih
nah isata tat devindm avah adya vrinimahe. 2.

visvasmat nah aditih patu amhasah mata mitrdsya vdru-
nasya revatah svah-vat gy6tih avrikam nasimahi. 3.

1. There are the grand and beautiful Morning and
Night, Heaven and Earth, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, I
call Indra, the Maruts, the Waters, the Adityas, Heaven
and Earth, the Waters, the Heaven.

2. May Heaven and Earth, the provident, the righteous,
preserve us from sin and mischief! May the malevolent
Nirriti not rule over us! This blessing of the gods we
ask for to-day. ”

3. May Aditi protect us from all sin, the mother of
Mitra and of the rich Varuna! May we obtain heavenly
light without enemies! This blessing of the gods we ask
for to-day.

Here we cannot but admit that Dyavaékshima, heaven
and earth, is meant for the same divine couple as

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 239°

Dyavaprithivi, heaven and earth, although under slightly
differing names they are invoked separately. The waters
are invoked twice in the same verse and under the same
name; nor is there any indication that, as in other pas-
sages, the waters of the sky are meant as distinct from the
waters of the sea. Nevertheless even here, Aditi, who in the
third verse is called distinctly the mother of Mitra and
Varuna, cannot well have been meant for the same deity as
Heaven and Earth, mentioned in the second verse; and
the author of these two verses, while asking the same
blessing from both, must have been aware of the original
independent character of Aditi.

Aditi as Mother.

In this character of a deity of the far East, of an Orient
in the true sense of the word, Aditi was naturally thought
of as the mother of certain gods, particularly of those that
were connected with the daily rising and setting of the sun.
If it was asked whence comes the dawn, or the sun, or
whence come day and night, or Mitra and Varuna, or any of
the bright, solar, eastern deities, the natural answer was that
they come from the Orient, that they are the sons of Aditi.
Thus we read in

ix. 74, 3. urvi gavyttih aditeh ritam yaté.

Wide is the space for him who goes on the right path
of Aditi.

In viii. 25, 3, we are told that Aditi bore Mitra and
Varuna, and these in verse 5 are called the sons of Daksha
(power), and the grandsons of Savas, which again means
might: napata sdvasah mahah sind (iti) dékshasya su-kratt
(iti). In x. 36, 3, Aditi is called the mother of Mitra and
Varuna ; likewise in x. 132, 6; see also vi. 67, 4. In viii,
47, 9, Aditi is called the mother of Mitra, Aryaman, Varuna,
who in vii. 60, 5, are called her sons. In x. 11, 1, Varuna
is called yahvéh Aditeh, the son of Aditi (cf. vill. 19, 12) ; in
vii. 41, 2, Bhaga is mentioned as her son. In x. 72, 8, we
hear of eight sons of Aditi, but it is added that she
approached the gods with seyen sons only, and that the
eighth (martandé, addled egg) was thrown away: ashéat

240 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

putrisah aditeh yé gatah tanvah pdri, devan tpa pra ait
sapta-bhih para martandam asyat.

In x. 63, 2, the gods in general are represented as
born from Aditi, the waters, and the earth: yé stha gatah
Aditeh at-bhyéh pari yé prithivyah té me iha sruta
havam.

You who are born of Aditi, from the water, you who are
born of the earth, hear ye all my call !

The number seven, with regard to the Adityas, occurs
also in

ix. 114, 3. sapta disah nana-stiryah sapta hotarah ritvigah,
devah Adityah yé sapta tébhif soma abhi raksha nah.

There are seven regions with their different suns, there
are seven Hotars as priests, those who are the seven gods,
the Adityas, with them, O Soma, protect us!

The Seven A dityas.

This number of seven Adityas requires an explanation
which, however, it is difficult to give. To say that seven
is a solemn or sacred number is to say very little, for
however solemn or sacred that number may be elsewhere,
it is not more sacred than any other number in the Veda.
The often-mentioned seven rivers have a real geographical
foundation, like the seven hills of Rome. The seven flames
or treasures of Agni (v. 1, 5) and of Soma and Rudra
(vi. 74, 1), the seven paridhis or logs at certain sacrifices
(x. 90, 15), the seven Harits or horses of the sun, the seven
Hotar priests (iii. 7, 7; 10, 4), the seven cities of the enemy
destroyed by Indra (j. 63, 7), and even the seven Rishis
(x. 82, 2; 109, 4), all these do not prove that the number
of seven was more sacred than the number of one or three
or five or ten used in the Veda in a very similar way.
With regard to the seven Adityas, how ever, we are still able
to see that their number of seven or eight had something
to do with solar movements. If their number had always
been eight, we should feel inclined to trace the number of
the Adityas back to the eight regions, or the eight cardinal
points of the heaven. Thus we read:

1. 35, 8. ash¢ai vi akhyat kakibhah prithivya.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 241

The god Savitar lighted up the eight points of the earth
(not the eight hills).

But we have seen already that though the number of
Adityas was originally supposed to have been eight, it was
reduced to seven, and this could hardly be said in any sense
of the eight points of the compass. Cf. Taitt. Ar. i. 7, 6

As we cannot think in ancient India of the seven pines
T can only suggest the seven days or tithis of the four
parvans of the lunar month as a possible prototype of the
Adityas. This might even explain the destruction of the
eighth Aditya, cnetietien that the eighth day of each
parvan, owing to its uncertainty, might be represented as
exposed to decay and destruction. This would explain
such passages as,

iv. 7, 5. yagishtham sapta dhama-bhih.

Agni, most worthy of sacrifice in the seven stations.

ix. 102, 2. yaghdsya sapté dhaéma-bhih.

In the seven stations of the sacrifice.

The seven threads of the sacrifice may have the same
origin :

il. 5, 2. & yasmin sapta rasmayah tatah yagihdsya netari,
manushyat daivyam ashfamém.,

In whom, as the leader of the sacrifice, the seven
threads are stretched out,—the eighth divine being is
manlike (2).

The sacrifice itself is called, x. 124, 1, sapta-tantu, having
seven threads.

X. 122, 3. sapta dhamani pari-yan amartyah.

Agni, the immortal, who goes round the seven stations.

x. 8, 4. ushdh-ushah hi vaso (iti) 4gram éshi tvam yama-
yoh abhavah vi-bhava, ritdya sapta dadhishe padani ganayan
mitrém tanvé svayai.

For thou, Vasu (Agni), comest first every morning, thou
art the divider of the twins (day and night). Thou takest
for the rite the seven names, creating Mitra (the sun) for thy
own. body.

X. 5, 6. sapté maryadah kavdyah tatakshuh tasim ékiém
it abhi amhurah gat.

The sages established the seven divisions, but mischief
befel one of them.

VOL. I. R

242 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

i. 22,16. atah devah avantu nah ydtah vishnuh vi-kakramé
prithivyah sapta dhama-bhih.

May the gods protect us from whence Vishnu strode
forth, by the seven stations of the earth! ;,

Even the names of the seven or eight Adityas are not
definitely known, at least not from the hymns of the Rig-
veda. In ii. 27, 1, we have a list of six names: Mitré,
Aryamén, Bhaga, Varuna, Déksha, Amsah. These with
Aditi would give us seven. In vi. 50, 1, we have Aditi,
Varuna, Mitra, Agni, Aryamdn, Savitér, and Bhaga. In
i. 89, 3, Bhaga, Mitra, Aditi, Daksha, Aryaman, Varuna,
Soma, Asvind, and Sdrasvati are invoked together with an
old invocation, ptrvayé ni-vida. In the Taittiriya-aranyaka,
i. 13, 3, we find the following list: 1. Mitra, 2. Varuna,
3. Dhatar, 4. Aryaman, 5. Amsa, 6. Bhaga, 7. Indra,
8. Vivasvan, but there, too, the eighth son is said to be
Martanda, or, according to the commentator, Aditya.

The character of Aditi as the mother of certain gods is
also indicated by some of her epithets, such as raga-putra,
having kings for her sons; su-putra, having good sons;
ugra-putra, having terrible sons :

ii. 27, 7. pipartu nah aditih raga-putra ati dvéshamsi
aryama su-gébhih, brihat mitrésya varunasya sdrma tipa
sydma puru-virah drish?¢ah.

May Aditi with her royal sons, may Aryaman carry us
on easy roads across the hatreds; may we with many sons
and without hurt obtain the great protection of Mitra and
Varuna !

iii, 4, 11. barhih nah stam Aditid su-putra.

May Aditi with her excellent sons sit on our sacred pile !

vil. 67, 11. parshi diné gabhiré 4 tgra-putre gighdmsatah,
makih tokasya nah rishat.

Protect us, O goddess with terrible sons, from the enemy
in shallow or deep water, and no one will hurt our offspring !

Aditi identified with other Deities.

Aditi, however, for the very reason that she was originally
intended for the Infinite, for something beyond the visible
world, was liable to be identified with a number of finite

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 243

deities which might all be represented as resting on Aditi,
as participating in Aditi, as being Aditi. Thus we read:

i. 89, 10 (final). Aditih dyath Aditih antdriksham Aditih
mata sah pita sah putrah, visve devah Aditih pdfika gandh
aditih gatém aditih géni-tvam.

Aditi is the heaven, Aditi the sky, Aditi the mother, the
father, the son, All the gods are Aditi, the five clans, the
past is Aditi, Aditi is the future.

But although Aditi may thus be said to be everything,
heaven, sky, and all the gods, no passage occurs, in the
Rig-veda at least, where the special meaning of heaven or
earth is expressed by Aditi. In x. 63, 3, where Aditi
seems to mean sky, we shall see that it ought to be taken
as a masculine, either in the sense of Aditya, or as an
epithet, unbounded, immortal. In i. 72, 9, we ought pro-
bably to read prithvi and pronounce prithuvi, and translate
‘the wide Aditi, the mother with her sons; and not, as
Benfey does, ‘the Earth, the eternal mother.’

It is more difficult to determine whether in one passage
Aditi has not been used in the sense of life after life, or as
the name of the place whither people went after death, or of
the deity presiding over that place. In a well-known hymn,
supposed to have been uttered by Sunahsepa when on the
point of being sacrificed by his own father, the following
verse occurs :

i. 24, 1. kak nah mahyai aditaye ptinah dat, pitaram ka
driséyam mataram ka.

Who will give us back to the great Aditi, that I may see
father and mother?

As the supposed utterer of this hymn is still among the
living, Aditi can hardly be taken in the sense of earth, nor
would the wish to see father and mother be intelligible in
the mouth of one who is going to be sacrificed by his own
father. If we discard the story of Sunahsepa, and take the
hymn as uttered by any poet who craves for the protection of
the gods in the presence of danger and death, then we may
choose between the two meanings of earth or liberty, and
translate, either, Who will give us back to the great earth ?
or, Who will restore us to the great Aditi, the goddess of
freedom ?

R 2

244 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Aditi and Diti.

There is one other passage which might receive light if
we could take Aditi in the sense of Hades, but I give this
translation as a mere guess:

iv. 2,11. rayé ka nah su-apatyaya deva ditim ka rasva
aditim urushya.

That we may enjoy our wealth and healthy offspring, give.
us this life on earth, keep off the life to come! Cf. i. 152, 6.

It should be borne in mind that Diti occurs in the Rig-
veda thrice only, and in one passage it should, I believe, be
changed into Aditi. This passage occurs in vil. 15, 12.
tvam agne vird-vat ydsah devih ka savita bhagah, ditih ka
dati varyam. Here the name of Diti is so unusual, and
that of Aditi, on the contrary, so natural, that I have little
doubt that the poet had put the name of Aditi; and that
later reciters, not aware of the occasional license of putting
two short syllables instead of one, changed it into Aditi.
If we remove this passage, then Diti, m the Rig-veda at
least, occurs twice only, and each time together or in con-
trast with Aditi; cf. v. 62, 8, page 231. I have no doubt,
therefore, that Professor Roth is right when he says that
Diti is a being without any definite conception, a mere
reflex of Aditi. We can clearly watch her first emergence
into existence through what is hardly more than a play of
words, whereas in the epic and pauranic literature this Diti
has grown into a definite person, one of the daughters
of Daksha, the wife of Kasyapa, the mother of the enemies
of the gods, the Daityas. Such is the growth of legend,
mythology, and religion !

Aditi in her Moral Character.

Besides the cosmical character of Aditi, which we have
hitherto examined, this goddess has also assumed a very pro-
minent moral character. Aditi, like Varuna, delivers from
sm. Why this should be so, we can still understand if we
watch the transition which led from a purely cosmical
to a moral conception of Aditi. Sin in the Veda is
frequently conceived as a bond or a chain from which
the repentant sinner wishes to be freed:

MANDALA I, SOKTA 166. 245

vii. 86, 5. ava drugdhani pitrya sriga nah ava yd vaydém
kakrima tantbhih, ava ragan pasu-tripam na tdytm srigd
vatsam na damnah vasishtham.

Absolve us from the sins of our fathers, and from those
which we have committed with our own bodies. Release
Vasishtha, O king, like a thief who has -feasted on stolen
cattle ; release him like a calf from the rope*.

vill. 67,14. té nah asndh vrikanam Aditydsah mumodkata
stenam baddhém-iva adite.

O Adityas, deliver us from the mouth of the wolves, like
a bound thief, O Aditi! Cf. viii. 67, 18.

Sunahsepa, who, as we saw before, wishes to be restored
to the great Aditi, is represented as bound by ropes, and in
Vv. 2, 7, we read :

sinah-sépam fit ni-ditam sahdsrat ytpat amufkah asa-
mishZa hi sah, eva asmat agne vi mumugdhi pasan hotar (iti)
kikitvah iha tu ni-sddya. ~

O Agni, thou hast released the bound Sunahsepa from
the pale, for he had prayed ; thus take from us, too, these
ropes, O sagacious Hotar, after thou hast settled here.

Expressions like these, words like daman, bond, ni-dita,
bound, naturally suggested 4-diti, the un-bound or un-
bounded, as one of those deities who could best remove
the bonds of sin or misery. If we once realise this con-
catenation of thought and language, many passages of the
Veda that seemed obscure, will become intelligible.

Vil. 51, 1. Adityanam dvasa ntitanena sakshimahi sarmana
sam-tamena, andgdh-tvé aditi-tvé turasah imam yagham
dadhatu sréshamanah.

May we obtain the new favour of the Adityas, their best
protection; may the quick Maruts listen and place this
sacrifice in guiltlessness and Aditi-hood.

I have translated the last words literally, in order to
make their meaning quite clear. Agas has the same
meaning as the Greek dyos, guilt, abomination; an-dgis-
tv, therefore, as applied to a sacrifice or to the man who
makes it, means guiltlessness, purity. Aditi-tva, Aditi-hood,
has a similar meaning, it means freedom from bonds, from

* See M.M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 2nd ed., p. 541.

246 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

anything that hinders the proper performance of a religious
act ; it may come to mean perfection or holiness.

Aditi having once been conceived as granting this
adititvé, soon assumed a very definite moral character, and
hence the following invocations :

i. 24, 15. Vit ut-tamdm varuna pasam asmat ava adhamam
vi madhyamam srathaya, atha vayam Aditya vraté tava
Andgasah aditaye syama.

O Varuna, lift the highest rope, draw off the lowest,
remove the- middle; then, O Aditya, let us be in thy
service free of guilt before Aditi.

v. 82, 6. dAndgasah Aditaye devdsya savittih savé, visva
vamani dhimahi.

May we, guiltless before Aditi, and in the keeping of the
god Savitar, obtain all goods! Professor Roth here trans-
lates Aditi by freedom or security.

i, 162, 22. andgdh-tvam nah aditih krinotu.

May Aditi give us sinlessness! Cf. vii. 51, I.

iv. 12, 4. yat kit hi te purusha-tra yavishtha akitti-bhih
kakrimé kat kit dgah, kridhi si asman aditeh anagan vi
énamsi sisrathah vishvak agne.

Whatever, O youthful god, we have committed against thee,
men as we are, whatever sin through thoughtlessness, make us
guiltless of Aditi, loosen the sins on all sides, O Agni!

Vil. 93, 7. sah agne ena namasa sém-iddhah akkha mitraém
varunam indram vokeh, yat sim agah kakrimé tat sti mrila
tat aryama Aditih sisrathantu.

O Agni, thou who hast been kindled with this adoration,
greet Mitra, Varuna, and Indra. Whatever sin we have com-
mitted, do thou pardon it! May Aryaman, Aditi loose it!

Here the plural sisrathantu should be observed, instead
of the dual.

vil. 18, 6—7. aditid nah diva pastim Aditi ndktam ddva-
yah, aditih patu dmhasah sada-vridha.

uta sya nah diva matih aditid dtya & gamat, sd sém-tati
mayah karat dpa sridhah.

May Aditi by day protect our cattle, may she, who never
deceives, protect by night; may she, with steady increase,
protect us from evil !

And may she, the thoughtful Aditi, come with help to

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 247

us by day; may she kindly bring happiness to us, and
earry away all enemies! Cf. x. 36, 3, page 239.

x. 87, 18. a4 vriskyantam Aaditaye duh-évah.

May the evil-doers be cut off from Aditi! or literally,
may they be rooted out before Aditi!

il. 27,14. adite mitra véruna uté mrila yét vah vaydm
kakrima kat kit agah, urd asydm abhayam gyétih indra ma
na dirghah abhi nasan tdmisrah.

Aditi, Mitra, and also Varuna forgive, if we have com-
mitted any sin against you. May I obtain the wide and fear-
less light, O Indra! May not the long darkness reach us !

vil. 87, 7. yah mriléyati kakrishe kit agah vayém syama
varune anagah, anu vratani aditeh ridhéntah yuyém pata
svasti-bhiz sada nah.

May we be sinless before Varuna, who is gracious even
to him who has committed sin, and may we follow the laws
of Aditi! Protect us always with your blessings!

Lastly, Aditi, like all other gods, is represented as a
giver of worldly goods, and implored to bestow them on her
worshippers, or to protect them by her power:

i. 43, 2. yathd nah aditih karat pasve nri-bhyah yatha
gave, yaétha tokaya rudriyam.

That Aditi may bring Rudra’s favour to our cattle, our
men, our cow, our offspring.

i. 153, 3. pipaya dhentA aditid ritaya ganaya mitravaruna
havih-dé, .

Aditi, the cow, gives food to the righteous man, O Mitra
and Varuna, who makes offerings to the gods. Cf. viii.
LOT; 15.

i. 185, 3. anehah datrém aditeh anarvam huvé.

I call for the unrivalled, uninjured gift of Aditi. Here
Professor Roth again assigns to Aditi the meaning of free-
dom or security.

vil. 40, 2. dideshtu devi aditih réknah.

May the divine Aditi assign wealth !

x. 100, I. 4 sarva-tatim Aditim vrinimahe.

We implore Aditi for health and wealth.

i. 94, 15. yasmai tvém su-dravinah dadasah andgah-tvam
adite sarvé-tata, yam bhadréna sdvasa hkodayasi praga-vata
radhasa té syama.

248 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

To whom thou, possessor of good treasures, grantest
guiltlessness, O Aditi, in health and wealth*, whom thou
quickenest with precious strength and with riches in
progeny, may we be they! Cf. ii, 40, 6; iv. 25, 53
Sean es be

The principal epithets of Aditi have been mentioned in
the passages quoted above, and they throw no further light
on the nature of the goddess. She was called devi, goddess,
again and again; another frequent epithet is anarvan, un-
injured, unscathed. Being invoked to grant light (vil. 82,
10), she is herself called luminous, gy6tishmati, 1. 136, 3 ;
and svarvati, heavenly. Being the goddess of the infinite
expanse, she, even with greater right than the dawn, is
called tridi, viii. 67, 12; uruvydkas, v. 46,6; uruvraga,
vill. 67,12; and possibly prithvi in i. 72,9. As supporting
everything, she is called dharayatkshiti, supporting the
earth, i. 136, 3; and visvaganya, vii. 10, 4. To her sons
she owes the names of ragaputra, il. 27, 7; suputra, iil. 4,
11; and ugraputra, vill. 67, 11: to her wealth that of
sudravinas, 1. 94, 15, though others refer this epithet to
Agni. There remains one name pastya, iv. 55, 3; Vill. 27, 5,
meaning housewife, which again indicates her character as
mother of the gods.

I have thus given all the evidence that can be collected
from the Rig-veda as throwing light on the character of the
goddess Aditi, and I have carefully excluded everything that
rests only on the authority of the Yagur- or Atharva-vedas,
or of the Brahmanas and Aranyakas, because in all they give
beyond the repetitions from the Rig-veda, they seem to me
to represent a later phase of thought that ought not to be
mixed up with the more primitive conceptions of the Rig-
veda. Much valuable material for an analytical study of
Aditi may be found in B. and R.’s Dictionary, and in
several of Dr. Muir’s excellent contributions to a knowledge
of Vedic theogony and mythology.

* On sarvdtati, salus, see Benfey’s excellent remarks in Orient und

Occident, vol. ii, p. 519. Professor Roth takes aditi here as an epithet
of Agni.

MANDALA I, SOKTA 166. 249

Aditi as an Adjective.

But although the foregoing remarks give as complete a
description of Aditi as can be gathered from the hymns
of the Rig-veda, a few words have to be added on certain
passages where the word Aditi occurs, and where it clearly
cannot mean the goddess Aditi, as a feminine, but must be
taken either as the name of a corresponding masculine
deity, or as an adjective in the sense of unrestrained,
independent, free.

v. 59, 8. mimatu dyatih aditih vitdye nah.

May the boundless Dyt (sky) help us to our repast !

Here Aditi must either be taken in the sense of Aditya,
or better in its original sense of unbounded, as an adjective
belonging to Dyt, the masculine deity of the sky..

Dy@ or the sky is called dditi or unbounded in another
passage, x. 63, 3:

yébhyah mata madhu-mat pinvate payah piytsham dyath
aditid adri-barhah,

The gods to whom their mother yields the sweet milk,
and the unbounded sky, as firm as a rock, their food.

iv. 3, 8. katha sardhaya marttam ritdya katha sidré
brihaté prikkhyémanah, prati bravah dditaye turaya.

How wilt thou tell it to the host of the Maruts, how to
the bright heaven, when thou art asked? How to the quick
Aditi?

Here Aditi cannot be the goddess, partly on account of
the masculine gender of turaya, partly because she is never
called quick. Aditi must here be the name of one of the
Adityas, or it may refer back to stiré brihaté. It can hardly
be joined, as Professor Roth proposes, with sardhaya ma-
ruitam, owing to the intervening stré brihaté.

In several passages Aditi, as an epithet, refers to
Agni:

iv. 1, 20 (final). visveshdm Aditi yagfiydndm visvesham
Atithid manushanam.

He, Agni, the Aditi, or the freest, among all the gods;
he the guest among all men.

The same play on the words Aditi and 4tithi occurs
again :

250 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

vii. 9, 3. amtirah kavih Aditih vivdsvan su-samsat mitrah
atithih sivah nah, kitraé-bhanuh ushdsam bhati agre.

The wise poet, Aditi, Vivasvat, Mitra with his good
company, our welcome guest, he (Agni) with brilliant
light came at the head of the dawns.

Here, though I admit that several renderings are pos-
sible, Aditi is meant as a name of Agni, to whom the whole
hymn is addressed; and who, as usual, is identified with other
gods, or, at all events, invoked by their names. We may
translate Aditih vivésvan by ‘the brilliant Aditi,’ or ‘the
unchecked, the brilliant,’ or by ‘the boundless Vivasvat,’
but on no account can we take dditi here as the female
goddess. The same applies to viii. 19, 14, where Aditi,
unless we suppose the goddess brought in in the most
abrupt way, must be taken as a name of Agni; while in
X. 92, 14, 4ditim anarvénmam, to judge from other epithets
given in the same verse, has most likely to be taken again
as an appellative of Agni. In some passages it would, no
doubt, be possible to take Aditi as the name of a female
deity, if it were certain that no other meaning could be
assigned to this word. But if we once know that Aditi
was the name of a male deity also, the structure of these
passages becomes far more perfect if we take Aditi in that
sense :

iv. 39, 3. andgasam tam Aditih krinotu séh mitréna
varunena sa-gdshah,

May Aditi make him free from sin, he who is allied
with Mitra and Varuna.

We have had several passages in which Aditi, the female
deity, is represented as sagdshad or allied with other
Adityas, but if sé is the right reading here, Aditi in this
verse can only be the male deity. The pronoun sé cannot
refer to tam.

With regard to other passages, such as ix. 81, 53 vi. 51, 3,
and even some of those translated above in which Aditi has
been taken as a female goddess, the question must be left
open till further evidence can be obtained. There is only
one more passage which has been often discussed, and
where dditi was supposed to have the meaning of
earth :

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 251

vil. 18, 8. duh-ddhyah Aditim srevaéyantah aketdsah vi
gagribhre parushzim.

Professor Roth in one of his earliest essays translated
this line, ‘The evil-disposed wished to dry the earth, the
fools split the Parushzi” and he supposed its meaning to
have been that the enemies of Sudas swam across the
Parushni in order to attack Suds. We might accept this
translation, if it could be explained how by throwing them-
selves into the river, the enemies made the earth dry,
though even then there would remain this difficulty that,
with the exception of one other doubtful passage, discussed
before, Aditi never means earth. I should therefore propose
to translate: ‘The evil-disposed, the fools, laid dry and
divided the resistless river Parushzi.? This would be a
description of a strategem very common in ancient warfare,
viz. diverting the course of a river and laying its original
bed dry by digging a new’channel, and thus dividing the
old river. This is also the sense accepted by Sdyana, who
does not say that vigraha means dividing the waves of a
river, as Professor Roth renders kilabheda, but that it
means dividing or cutting through its banks. In the
Dictionary Professor Roth assigns to aditi in this passage
the meaning of endless, inexhaustible.

Verse 12, note °. Nothing is more difficult in the inter-
pretation of the Veda than to gain an accurate knowledge
of the power of particles and conjunctions. The particle
kana, we are told, is used both affirmatively and negatively,
a statement which shows better than anything else the
uncertainty to which every translation is as yet exposed.
It is perfectly true that in the text of the Rig-veda, as we
now read it, kand means both indeed and no. But this
very fact shows that we ought to distinguish where the first
collectors of the Vedic hymns have not distinguished, and
that while in the former case we read kana, we ought in the
latter to read ka na,

I begin with those passages in which kana is used
emphatically and as one word.

La. In negative sentences :
i. 18, 7. yasmat rité n4 stdhyati yaghah vipah-Aitah kana.

252 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

Without whom the sacrifice does not succeed, not even
that of the sage.

Vv. 34, 5. n& d4sunvata sakate pushyata kana.

He does not cling to a man who offers no libations, even
though he be thriving.

i. 24, 6. nahi te kshatrém nd sdhah né manytim vayah
kané ami (iti) patayantah apuh.

For thy power, thy strength, thy anger even these birds
which fly up, do not reach. Cf. i. 100, 15.

i. 155, 5. tritiyam asya nékif 4 dadharshati vayah kana
patayantah patatrinah.

This third step no one approaches, not even the winged
birds which fly up.

i. 55,1. divah kit asya varima vi papratha, indram na
mahna prithivi kana prati.

The width of the heavens is stretched out, even the earth
in her greatness is no match for Indra.

I b. In positive sentences :

vii. 32, 13. ptrvih kand pra-sitayah taranti tam yah indre
karmana bhivat.

Even many snares pass him who is with Indra in his
work,

viii. 2, 14. ukthém hand sasy4manam 4goh arith 4 kiketa,
na gdyatrém giy4manam.

A poor man may learn indeed a prayer that is recited,
but not a hymn that is sung.

vill. 78, 10. tava it indra ahém 4-sds4 haste datram kana
a dade.

Trusting in thee alone, O Indra, I take even this sickle in
my hand.

1. 55, 5+ adha kana srat dadhati tvishi-mate fndraya
vagram ni-ghanighnate vadham.

Then indeed they believe in Indra, the majestic, when
he hurls the bolt to strike.

1.152, 2. etat kana tvah vi kiketat eshdm.

Does one of them understand even this ?

iv. 18, g. mamat kan& used in the same sense as
mamat kit.

1, 139, 2. dhibhih kané manasa svébhih aksha-bhih.

Vv. 41, 13. vayah kana su-bhvah & ava yanti.

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 253

vii. 18, 9. astih kana it abhi-pitvim gagdma.

Vill. 91, 3. @ kana tva kikitsAmah édhi kandé tv na
imasi.

We wish to know thee, indeed, but we cannot under-
stand thee.

x. 49, 5. ahaém randhayam mrigayam srutaérvane yat ma
agihita vaytina kané anu-shak.

vi. 26, 7. aham kana tat sdri-bhih dnasydm.

May I also obtain this with my wise friends.

Ic. Frequently kana occurs after interrogative pro-
nouns, to which it imparts an indefinite meaning, and
principally in negative sentences :

i. 74, 7. n& yok upabdih asvyah srinvé rathasya kat
kana, yat agne yasi ditydim.

No sound of horses is heard, and no sound of thé chariot,
when thou, O Agni, goest on thy message.

1, 81, 5. na tva-van indra kah kand na gatdh na gani-
shyaté.

No one is like thee, O Indra, no one has been born, no
one will be!

i. 84, 20. ma te rddhamsi ma te titayah vaso (iti) asman
kada kana dabhan.

May thy gifts, may thy help, O Vasu, never fail us!

Many more passages might be given to illustrate the use of
kana or kas kana and its derivatives in negative sentences.

OPtistOs Orso teeta, lla, 9 3229, 65028. 0:3
Mie Ow. aivne is O (Vit 2.40 2002,.2 5 V1.3, 25 20,43 47,
1; 35 48,173; 54,93 59,43 69,8; 75,16; vil. 32, 1; 19;
59, 33 82, 73 104, 33 Vili. 19,6; 23,15; 24,15; 28, 4;
me OA 2) OO 81S os OO LGmmIse O1, 27; 00, Os. 114, 43
X. 33,93 39,115 48, 55 49,10; 59,8; 62,9; 85, 3; 86,
II; 95,13 112, 9; 119,63; 7; 128, 45 129, 23 152, 13
168,33 -3185, 2.

I d. In a few passages, however, we find the inde-
finite profioun kas kana used in sentences which are not
negative :

i. 113, 8. ushah mritam kim kana bodhayanti.
Ushas, who wakes even the dead, (or one who is as if
dead.)

254 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

i. 191, 7. Adrish¢ah kim hand ihé vah sarve sakém ni
gasyata.
Invisible ones, whatever you are, vanish all together !

Il. We now come to passages in which kana stands
for ka nd, and therefore renders the sentence negative with-
out any further negative particle :

ii. 16, 2. yasmat indrat brihataéh kim kana im rité.

Beside whom, (beside) the great Indra, there is not
anything.

ii, 24,12. visvam saty4m magha-vané yuvoh it apah kana
pra minanti vratém vam.

Everything, you mighty ones, belongs mdeed to you;
even the waters do not transgress your law.

iii. 30, 1. titikshante abhi-sastim génanam indra tvat 4
kah kana hi pra-ketah.

They bear the scoffing of men; for Indra, away from thee
there is no wisdom.

iv. 30, 3. visve kana it ana tva devasah indra yuyu-
dhuh.

Even all the gods together do not fight thee, O Indra.

v. 34, 7. duh-gé kana dhriyate visvah & puri ganah yah
asya tavishim akukrudhat.

Even in a stronghold many a man is not often preserved
who has excited his anger.

vii. 83, 2. yasmin aga bhavati kim kana priydém.

In which struggle there is nothing good whatsoever.

vi. 86, 6. svapnah kana it anritasya pra-yota.

Even sleep does not remove all evil.

In this passage I formerly took kana as affirmative, not
as negative, and therefore assigned to prayotaé the same
meaning which Sayana assigns to it, one who brings or
mixes, whereas it ought to be, as rightly seen by Roth,
one who removes.

viii. I, 5. mahé kana tvam adri-vah para sulkaéya deyam,
na sahdsraya na aytitaya vagri-vah na sataya sata-magha.

I should not give thee up, wielder of the thunderbolt,
even for a great price, not for a thousand, not for ten
thousand (?), not for a hundred, O Indra, thou who art
possessed of a hundred powers !

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 255

vill. 51, 7. kada kana starth asi.

Thou art never sterile.

Vill. 52, 7. kada kana pra yukkhasi.

Thou art never weary.

vill. 55, 5. Adkshushaé kand sam-nase.

Even with my eye I cannot reach them.

x. 56, 4. mahimnaf esham pitarah kana isire.

Verse 12, note ® Considering the particular circum-
stances mentioned in this and the preceding hymn, of
Indra’s forsaking his companions, the Maruts, or even
scorning their help, one feels strongly tempted to take
tyagas in its etymological sense of leaving or forsaking,
and to translate, by his forsaking you, or if he should
forsake you. The poet may have meant the word to convey
that idea, which no doubt would be most appropriate here ;
but then it must be confessed, at the same time, that in
other passages where tyégas occurs, that meaning could
hardly be ascribed to it. Strange as it may seem, no one
who is acquainted with the general train of thought in the
Vedic hymns can fail to see that tyaégas in most passages
means attack, onslaught; it may be even the instrument of
an attack, a weapon. How it should come to take this
meaning is indeed difficult to explain, and I do not wonder
that Professor Roth in his Dictionary simply renders the
word by forlornness, need, danger, or by estrangement,
unkindness, malignity. But let us look at the passages,
and we shall see that these abstract conceptions are quite
out of place :

viii. 47, 7. na tam tigmém kand tydgah né& drasad abhi
tam guru.

No sharp blow, no heavy one, shall come near him whom
you protect.

Here the two adjectives tigma, sharp, and gurt, heavy,
point to something tangible, and I feel much inclined to
take tydgas in this passage as a weapon, as something that
is let off with violence, rather than in the more abstract
sense of onslaught.

i. 169, 1. mahah kit asi tyagasah varita.

Thou art the shielder from a great attack.

256 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

iv. 43, 4. kdh vim mahah kit tydgasah abhike urushyatam
madhvi dasra nah itt. .

Who is against your great attack? Protect us with your
help, ye givers of sweet drink, ye strong ones.

Here Professor Roth seems to join mahaéh hit tyagasah
abhike urushydtam, but in that case it would be impossible
to construe the first words, kéh vam.

i. 119, 8. dgakkhatam kripamanam para-vati pitdh svasya
tydgasa ni-badhitam.

You went from afar to the suppliant, who had been
struck down by the violence of his own father.

According to Professor Roth tyagas would here mean
forlornness, need, or danger. But nibadhita is a strong
verb, as we may see in

viii. 64, 2. pada panin aradhdsah ni badhasva mahan asi.

Strike the useless Panis down with thy foot, for thou art
great.

x. 18, 11. Ut svafikasva prithivi ma ni badhathah.

Open, O earth, do not press on him (i.e. the dead, who
is to be buried; cf. M.M., Uber Todtenbestattung, Zeit-
schrift der D, M. G., vol. ix. p. xv).

vii. 83, 6. ydtra raga-bhih dasd-bhif ni-badhitam pra
su-dasam dvatam tritsu-bhih saha.

When you protected Sudas with the Tritsus, when he
was pressed or set upon by the ten kings.

Another passage in which tydgas occurs is,

vi. 62, 10. sanutyena tyégasd mértyasya vanushyatam
api sirsha vavriktam.

By your covert attack turn back the heads of those even
who harass the mortal.

Though this passage may seem less decisive, yet it is
difficult to see how tydgasi could here, according to
Professor Roth, be rendered by forlornness or danger.
Something is required by which enemies can be turned
back. Nor can it be doubtful that sirsha is governed
by vavriktam, meaning turn back their heads, for the
same expression occurs again in i, 33, 5. para kit sirsha
vavriguh té indra ayagvanah ydgva-bhih spdrdhamandh.

Professor Benfey translates this verse by, ‘ Kopfiiber
flohn sie alle vor dir;? but it may be rendered more

MANDALA I, SUKTA 166. 257

literally, ‘These lawless people fighting with the pious
turned back their heads,

X. 144, 6. eva tat indraf indund devéshu Ait dharayate
mahi tyagah.

Indeed through this draught Indra can hold out against
that great attack even among the gods.

x. 79, 6. kim devéshu tydgah énah kakartha.

What insult, what sin hast thou committed among the gods?

In these two passages the meaning of tydgas as attack or
assault is at least as appropriate as that proposed by Pro-
fessor Roth, estrangement, malignity.

There remains one passage, vi. 3, 1. yém tvém mitréna
varunah sa-goshah déva pasi tyégasd martam 4mhah.

I confess that the construction of this verse is not clear
to me, and I doubt whether it is possible to use tydégas4 as
a verbal noun governing an accusative. If this were pos-
sible, one might translate, ‘The mortal whom thou, O God
(Agni), Varuna, together with Mitra, protectest by pushing
back evil” Anyhow, we gain nothing here, if we take tydgas
in the sense of estrangement or malignity.

If it be asked how tyagas can possibly have the meaning
which has been assigned to it in all the passages in which
it occurs, viz. that of forcibly attacking or pushing away,
we can only account for it by supposing that tyag, before
it came to mean to leave, meant to push off, to drive away
with violence, (verstossen instead of verlassen.) This mean-
ing may still be perceived occasionally in the use of tyag; €. g.
devas tyagantu mam, may the gods forsake me! i.e, may
the gods drive me away! LEven in the latest Sanskrit tyag
is used with regard to an arrow that is let off. ‘To expel’
is expressed by nis-tyay. Those who believe in the pro-
duction of new roots by the addition of prepositional pre-
fixes might possibly see in tyag an original ati-ay, to drive
off; but, however that may be, there is evidence enough to
show that tyag expressed originally a more violent act of
separation than it does in ordinary Sanskrit.

Verse 13, note '. Samsa, masc., means a spell whether
for good or for evil, a blessing as well as a curse. It
means a curse, or, at all events, a calumny :

VOU. I. Ss

258 HYMNS TO THE MARUTS.

i. 18, 3. md nah sdmsah drarushah dhirtih pranak
martyasya.

Let not the curse of the enemy, the onslaught of a
mortal hurt us.

i. 94, 8. asmdkam sémsah abhi astu duh-dhyah.

May our curse fall on the wicked !

ii. 26, 1. rigéh ft simsah vanavat vanushyatah.

May the straight curse strike the enemies! Cf. vil. 56, 19.

iii. 18, 2. tépa sémsam ararushah. —

Burn the curse of the enemy !

Vil. 25, 2. aré tim s&émsam krinuhi ninits6h.

Take far away the curse of the reviler! Cf. vii. 34, 12.

It means blessing :

il. 31, 6. utd vah sémsam usigam-iva smasi.

We desire your blessing as a blessing for suppliants.

X. 31, 1. 4 nah devanam tpa vetu samsah.

May the blessing of the gods come to us!

x. 7, 1. urushyd nah urti-bhihk deva sdmsaih.

Protect us, god, with thy broad blessings !

ii, 23, Io. ma nah duh-sdmsah abhi-dipsth isata pra su-
samsah mati-bhih tarishtmahi.

Let not an evil-speaking enemy conquer us; may we,
enjoying good report, increase by our prayers !

Lastly, saémga means praise, the spell addressed by men
to the gods, or’ prayer :

i. 33, 7. pra sunvatah stuvatah sfmsam avah.

Thou hast regarded the prayer of him who offers libation
and praise.

Xx. 42, 6. yasmin vayém dadhimé sAémsam indre.

Indra in whom we place our hope. Cf. dsams, Wester-
gaard, Radices Lingue Sanscrita, s. v. sams.

TABLE

Hymn I. 6

Commentary .

Arusha . a:

Arusha as an adjective .

Arusha as an appellative

1. Of the horse of the sun, or
of the horses of Agni

2, Of Vritra ;

Arusha as the proper name
of a solar deity

The feminine Arushtf as an
adjective a

The feminine Arushi as a
substantive é

Remarks on the Kea
tion of the different
meanings of arusha
and dérushi in the Dic-
tionary of Boehtlingk
and Roth . 2

The vocative maryah

Ushadbhiz and similar
forms :

At as two elon ;

Svadha, its origin and dif-
ferent meanings . :

Garbhatvam of the Maruts

Vahni and its different
meanings .

OF CONTENTS.

PAGE
aie bineme
6 2, Agni.
6 3. Luminous . :
6 4. Vehicle, carrier, horse
OM Peeebriest ; é
Meaning of vahnih asa .
9 Is véhni a name of the
10 Maruts ?
Derivation of 4s and Asya .
11 Vila and ’IA0os
Drikshase and similar cee
PS WvATEati,
Makha .
14 Makhasya davane
The terminations mane,
vane, ane.
Rokaném
Rokanim divéh
Stiryasya, ndkasya
15 Heaven, earth, and sky.
18 Rokanani tri.
Parthivani .
19
19 Hymw I. 19
Commentary .
19 Gopitha
25 Ragas, ¢peBos .
Adriéh .
25 Arka

ee

PAGE
26
26
26
27
28
29

30
30
31
32
32
33
33

34
34
34
35
36
36
37

38
42
42
42
42
43

260 TABLE OF
PAGE
INSK ac Soe a eee ets
Parvata, cloud). eee
Samudré, the sea or the
SEY ess ete ns eee
Saérasvati as reaching the
SCAme sea) OE ow be ot aa.
Samudra as an adjective . 47
‘Hyan LS7 ee 848
Commentary’. . . . . 54
INTEVRRIN 6 5 g 5 6 o =O

Ar, arvan, drus, upara, ari. 54

Sardhas and sardha. . . 56

Masculine gender of the
adjective after sirdhas. 58

Prishation ae ye eee Oo

Vas (pylo7\, week ae ne Oo
JU Nek thee ok ee OO
Maman, oe, SMe OO
Gago 5 5 + 5s » a GC
Tveshé-dyumna . . . . 60
Ganbha yea; 4. oo. Boe 161
TItAR PH glist a: Seeger te L
Gililten .. ele a oe Oe
Agma and ydma. . . . 62
Nayalis 1; % at Soe #62
Girah ee 2G. 0, 2 eee EPO?
ashthatas, oi oe ma wees
Divaiee ee es 8h. 46.63
HxuNne Sooner mem, % (64
Commentary . . . . . 66
Kadhapriyah . . . . . 66
Vriktabarhis . . : . . 68
Réanyatl = eee 9
Kya and kuva. . 2 een
Sumné4, suvité. . . . . 70
Xévaga. 4. 2 Poona
Yamisya pathd . . . . 71
Nirriti 7)... Sa ee

CONTENTS.

Padisht4, pad .
Avata and avata .
Vasra

Parganya ;
Saédman and Kn
Vilupani and vilépani .
Rédhasvati
Akhidrayaman
Abhisu .
Bréhmanaspati
Tana

Tatanah :
Arkin, Alb-leich .
Vriddha

As, its Let forms.

Hymn I. 39

Commentary .

Mana

Varpas .

Ya with vi.

Parvatandm asah .

Tana yuga .

Prashéi .

Dada

Parimanyé .

Pari, like Lat. per, an vader
tival prefix

Hymn I. 64
Commentary .
Suvrikti

Apas and apas

 Dyu or Rudra, father of ie

Maruts
Marya .
Satvan .
Abhogghénah .
Rukmé (p. 220) ..
Vapushe and subhé .

PAGE

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

Mraksh, mimrikshuh .

Dhini.

Sudanu

Da, dant.

Danu .

Pinyati

Atya vagin

Utsa

Hastin, bit phiant

Arunt .

Tavish?

Pisa

Kshapah and lapel

Rédast

Amati .

Khadi (p. 218) .

Vanin .

Sask

Ragasttih .

Rigishin .

Aprikkhya

Pashyati .

Dhanasprit, nits. yore.
karshani .

Riti

Dhiyayasu

Nodhas Gotama

Hymn I. 85.
Commentary .
Génayah saptayah .
Ukshita
Virtkmat.
Vrishayrata .
Ramh .

Adri k
Arusha 9) eee
Kaérma-iva .
Vishnu.
Madakyut

PAGE
94
95
95
96
97
98
98
99
99

100
100
100
101
101
102

102

103
104
104
104
105
105

105
106
106
107

108
110
110
113
113
114
114
114
115
115
116
118

Nari, ni .
Vana .
Vrishan, its eeynolory
Its various meanings, Male
MAngay er Pauses. oe rs
Fertilising, strengthening .
Eiitheton ornans .
Varshishtha (p. 155)
Vrishan, applied to certain
deities :
Vrishan, an eppeltative of
certain deities .
Vrishan haryata :
Vrishan, applied to in-
animate things.
Vrishan, an empty word .
A-vrish
Vrishan, a proper name
Upastuta and Upastuta
Vrishan and Dadhyah,
their latest phase .

Hymn I. 86.
Commentary .
Vimahas .
Yagiiavahas . :
A bhiivah or Abhivah .
Ishah sasréshih .
Srosh .

Ayobhih . ;
Par, with ti, apa, nih
Atrin .

Hymn I. 87.
Commentary
Usrah, stribhih .
Yayi

Vithurd

Stbh

Aya

261

PAGH
120
120
121
122
123
124
125
126

126

127
130

131
132
133
134
134

135

136
138
138
138
138
139
139
139
139
140

142
144
144
144
145
145
148

262 TABLE OF CONTENTS.

PAGE
Rinayavan 7 = =. see sss
Sémi, sim, simf . . . 149

Sriyaése kim, datives in 4se 150
Myaksh, mimikshire(p.174) 150

Hivine 1288) eu oy) ee lo?
Commentary... . 154
Metre of the hymn . . 154
Sheds 4 Bese a a 3) lite
Viarshish?/aye eee meLoS
Paptate: {7 on0.6) 6. (ee 8 aOO
Syaclmimnegm 5 5 » « o RC
Pavls oo ee Arent eee elo
VEER al tov om gre een LY
Medhastarui. Marge omer ene cO: 74
Tuyidyumné 9, 9. . . 4&7
Crdhvigc. eo. = eels
Gridhran tus) oS
(nani ss ant acre eel oS
ADU ta ea. ee ea* tags OO
Warkarya. tat wicgn eee ADO
Deyiteea es (ees eee mL Do
Voganae.: 0. 1 Ta ae vOO
Wert, 5 6 5 6 o « WG
Anubhartri. . © . = 3 46L
uo g 6 o no - o Gil
ELVatN e165 een Go
Commentary . . . . 170
Adrih prébhritah . . . 172
Samanyae tee ges cee 8 LTS
Mrvyaksho* > Ss au cemn, La
Wiring 5 o 5 o « AWG
Asitdsah Sp Se eee Ly
Manas: = 2.— 5 se eS
Kutah- 3-2 a elas
Sat-pati . .. fee eal atte
Braéhmani and iabevan : 79
Cer teeta oo LOO

pam: VOR = GA = a eee

Stishma

Tyarti .

Eta ;
Méhah-bhih .
Vaso.

Indriyé

Devata
Karishya(h) .
Tanvé tanfbhih .
Api-vatayati .
Duvasyat, divas, duveeree
Vaya .
Yastshia .
Vrigana

Hymn I. 166
Commentary

Rabhasé .

Ket ; ;
Aidha-iva, udhiv -lva .
Ni-tya, nish-tya, apa- Be :
Vi, dvyata

Dhrag . ae
Harmya, zairimya, formus
Nad ..

Rathiyati .

Sukett

Sumati

Krivih-dati

Rad .

Rinati .

Sidhita

Barhana .

Alatrina .

Abhfhruti

Tavishaé

Khadi .

Samaya, ouy .

Eta :

Ancient dresses .

PAGE
184
184
185
185
187
187
187
189
189
189
191
194
195
195

196
200
200
201
202
203
205
205
206
207
207
208
208
210
211
212
213
215
215
217
218
218
220
220
221

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

Kshura ae

Vap-tar, napita, svap, snap

Naga, svaiig, snake

Vibhtti

Vibhvah .

Mahi-tvaném

Vrata .

Datra .

Datra . tare

Aditi, the Infinite .

Aditi and the Adityés

Aditi and Déksha .

Aditi in her
character

cosmic

PAGE
223
224
224
224
225
225
225
228
229
230
232
234

237

Aditi as mother

The seven Adityas .

Aditi identified with other
deities

Aditi and Diti .

Aditi in her
character

Aditi as an adjective .

The particles ana and
ka na.

Tyagas

Nibadh

Vrig (sirsha)

Shinsa .

moral

263

PAGE
239
240

242
244

244
249

251
255
256
256
257

CONTENTS.

Triibner’s Oriental Series Coeacae bce assoutesot kes eiuage

eee

Serials and Periodicals... ee eee cee
Archeology ,Ethnography, Geography, History, Law, Literature, Numismatics,
and) Lravels: 0) sells. Meee mee C50 wek Gael eoduayesei eee
The Religions of the East... A ho ede bo co, a
Comparative Philology (Polyglots)... Se arm omc, sca SE
Grammars, Dictionaries, Texts, and Translations :—
PAGE PAGE
Accad—». palin .. ss. 56 Icelandic eae oo a
African Languages... ... .. 51 Japanese... s2. cee cee cee cee 89
Albanian ... ree 53 Lrish—vs Keltic: ss. es. vecemmee=
American Languages See GI Bea EN ee coos OE
Anglo-Saxon ... 0 so» so 54 Kamarese... 2. ss ase oo fe
Arabic SE a6 ns ere EG) EI cas) ce 87
Assamese Bas eet ees) es cOOmmeineltic(Vornish, Gaelic, Welsh, Trish) 87
Assyrian... ... Are) ee OOM HRonkantns. eects 88
Australian Languages wee eee) 00 Aap AY ON ee + soe MOSS
Aztek—v. American Lang. .. Mabratta (Marathi) Poe os SE
Babylonian—v. Assyrian... Malagasy.:cc) jn. eset ees eco cesmans
IERIE: co eo dco ko 58 li Malays 9 cos coe (cost eee Mtescumcor mano
Bengali (2. 3... “2 ~<:-) ... 68 9 Malayalim Sees «-. Bool pe es
Bibart ==. we FAF*.... 1584 4 Maori . con cc meee 89
Brahoe (Brakui) Sey ces ete OO POLIva——z: Uriya 2 eh oh os
Braj Bhakaé—v. Hindi... ... IMMie ho ono co Oo. ee SE
Burmese ter) bene) coe) soe) geese OOM oz a00 Gece eens eer aoa
Celtic—v. Keltic IAT UIENY “255 Goo faO Sd Ape coo i!
Chaldaic—v. Assyrian ... .. Pehilvigee.comscs code coo es
Chinese (for books on and in Pennsylvania Dutch. see!) cosa
Pidgin-English see under Persian eo ee con, es OF
this heading) ... ... ... 59 Pidgin- English EAS Ae bea 1O8
Choctaw—v. American Lang. Polish : bes 94
Coptic—v. perpen ao. ts Prakrit ... ap oH!
Corean ... sales 26a. U64ITI5 Paukshto (Pakkhto, “Pashto) /. nso
Cornish—z, Keltic .. Punjabi—v. Gurmukhi ... nee
Cree —v. American Lan- Quichua—v. American Languages
Creole guages > Fo We. Roumamian ty. ..0 see SD
Cuneiform—v. Assyrian... ... Russian ie coy od co oo 8
Danish .. coe cee 164 Samaritan’) 2.5. (..<) Gacsumecomeeemmnoe
Dutch (Pennsylvania) we om 92) Samoans ce deen ceo ascent nComeO
Egyptian .. G4e }) Sanskrit, -cc0 cclil.c 0 aces ace meee
English— Early 4a Modern Serbian Seer dec Goal sesseeeeLOO
English and Dialects... ... 65 Shan tt eth eo roo eas io LDS
Frisian... aha Oe (EDA ASITCING Sha es BS ee ls
Gaelic—v. Keltio’ cour a Sinhalesecje i...) (cco! cccluiesommeaaelcg
Gaudian ... eee ee ccs 9). Saal Pema. sos ike
German (Old) eS sce Cceey” CO Swedish exre= ca iy piemyes. LOG
Gipsy" Se... eco c.. re 19-4. Sywiace Rade: sceamces caeee LOG
Gothic ... 80 Tamil Seer ee << ees sereeel Ol
Greek (Modern and 1 Classic) . 80). ‘Delugupest ca) Gan) (cece ce umn On
Gujarati ... “ Rese o lel elubctanume. cum ; con. cau
Gurmukhi Be eet Ease Oa Unk ee a ay, 10)
lawaliaien. sect aiseames 81 } Turkish ... es caals = ise cisco um teweemme Ox
Hebrew 81 Umbrian ... 56 aval werelos
Hidatsa—»v. American, ‘Lang, Urdu—v. Hindustani 1 ee
ELiwdigne ccs) ners ceo C OM ELTLY a Ty POEMS, ost UK
Hindustaniy <2) .0 sec) ss Oo cise. Keltic .cjucaateeee
Hungarian 60. oe om «ws 84

TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES.

‘*A knowledge of the commonplace, at least, of Oriental literature, philosophy,
and religion is as necessary to the general reader of the present day as an acquaint-
ance with the Latin and Greek classics was a generation or so ago. \ Immense strides
have been made within the present century in these branches of learning ; Sanscrit
has been brought within the range of accurate philology, and its invaluable ancient
literature thoroughly investigated; the language and sacred books of the Zoroastrians
have been laid bare; Egyptian, Assyrian, and other records of the remote past have
been deciphered, and a group of scholars speak of still more recondite Accadian and
Hittite monuments; but the results of all the scholarship that has been devoted to
these subjects have been almost inaccessible to the public because they were contained
for the most part in learned or expensive works, or scattered throughout the numbers
of scientific periodicals. Messrs. TrisNer & Co., in a spirit of enterprise which
does them infinite credit, have determined to supply the constantly-increasing want,
and to give in a popular, or, at least, a comprehensive form, all this mass of know-
ledge to the world.” — Times.

THE FOLLOWING WORKS ARE NOW READY.

Post 8yo. cloth, uniformly bound.

Essays on THE Sacrep Laneuace, Werirrnes, anp Retiaron of
THE Parsts. By Martin Have, Ph.D. late Professor of Sanskrit and Com-
parative Philology at the University of Munich. Edited and enlarged by Dr
E. W. West. ‘To which is also added a Biographical Memoir of the late Dr.
Haug, by Prof. Eyans. Third Edition, pp. xlviil. and 428. 1884. 16s.

Texts From THE Buppuist Canon, known as Dhammapada. With
accompanying Narratives. Translated from the Chinese by 8, Beat, B.A.,
Prof, of Chinese, University College, London. pp. viii.-176. 1878. 7s. 6d.

Tue Hisrory or Inpran Lirerarvre. By Atsrecur WEBER.
Translated from the German by J. Mann, M.A., and T. Zacnartan, Ph.D., ae
with the sanction of the Author. Second Edition, pp. xxiv.-360. 1882. 10s, 6d.

Tue Mopxern Lanevaces or tHe Kasr Inpies. By Rozerr Cusr.
Accompanied by Two Language Maps. pp. xii.-198. 1878. 7s. 6d.

Tue Birera or tox War Gop. A Poem by KAryp4sa. Translated
from the Sanskrit into English Verse. By Rauepn T. H. Grirriru, M.A.,
Principal of Benares College. Second Edition. pp. xii.-116. 1879. 4s.

A Crasstcat Dicrionary or Hrinnv Myrnotoey anv History,
GrocrapHy AND LireratuRE. By Joun Dowson, M.R.A.S., late Professor
in the Staff College. pp. xix. and 412. 1879, 16s.

Serxcrions From tHE Koray. With a Commentary. ‘Translated by
the late E.W. Lanz, Author of an ‘‘Arabic-English Lexicon,” ete. New Edition,
Revised, with Introduction on the History and Development of Islam, especially
with reference to India. By Srantuy L. Poote. pp. exii.-176. 1879. 9s.

Merricat Transtatrons From Sanskrit Werirers. With an Intro-
duction, many Prose Versions, and Parallel Passages from Classical Authors.
By J. Murr, C.1.E., D.C.L. pp. xliv. and 376. 1879. 14s.

Mopern Inpia anp THE INprans. Being a Series of Impressions, Notes,
and Essays. By Sir Monrer Monter-Wixuas, K.C.1.E., D.C,L., ete., ete,
Fourth Edition, pp. 866, with an Index and Map, 1887, 14s.

4 Linguistic Publications of Trubner & Co.,

Miscernanzous Essays reLatine to Inpran Supsxcts. By B. H
Hoveson, F.R.S., late of the Be.C.S., etc. 2 vols. pp. viii.-408, and viii. 348
1880. 28s.

Tue Lire or Lecenp or Gaupama, the Buddha of the Burmese. Witt
Annotations, The Ways to Neibban, and Notice on the Phongyies or Burmest
Monks. By the Right Rev. P. Bieanpzr, Bishop of Ramatha. Third Edition
2 vols. pp. xx. and 268, and viii. and 326. 1880. 21s.

Tue Gurrstan; or, Rose Garden of Shekh Mushliu’d-din Sadi o:
Shiraz. Translated for the first time into Prose and Verse, with a Preface
and a Life of the Author, from the Atish Kadah, by E. B. Eastwick, F.R.S.
M.R.A.S., ete. Second Edition, pp. xxvi. and 244. 1880. 10s. 6d.

Cuinest Buppuism. A Volume of Sketches, Historical and Critical
By J. Epxins, D.D., pp. xxvi. and 454. 1880. 18s,

Tae History or Esaruappon (Son oF SenNAcHERIB) Kine oF As:
SYRIA, B.C 681-668. Translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions in the British
Museum. The Original Texts, a Grammatical Analysis of each Word, Explana-
tions of the Ideographs, and list of Eponyms, etc. By E. A. Bupas, B.A., etc
pp. xii. and 164. 1880. 10s. 6d.

A Tatmupic Miscertany; or, One Thousand and One Extracts from
the Talmud, the Midrashim, and the Kabbalah. Compiled and Translated by
P. J. Hershon. With a Preface by the Rev. F. W. Farrar, D.D., Canon o:
Westminster. With Notes and Copious Indexes. pp. xxvill. and 362. 1880. 14s

Bupvpuist Brern Stories; or, Jataka Tales. The oldest collection of
4 Folk-lore extant: being the Jatakatthavannana, for the first time edited in the
original Pali, by V. Fauspout, and translated by T. W. Rhys Davids. Trans-

lation. Vol. I. pp. exvi. and 348. 1880. 18s.

Tue Crasstcat Porrry or THE Japanese. By Bast CHAMBERLAIN,
Author of ‘ Yeigio Henkaku, Ichiran.’’ pp. xii. and 228. 1880. 7s. 6d,

Livnevistic and Ortentat Essays. Written from 1846 to 1887. By
R. Cust. pp. 496. 1880. 10s. 6d. Second Series, pp. 562, with 6 Maps. 1887. 21s.

Tue Mxsyevi. (Usually known as the Mesneviyi Sherif, or Holy
Mesneyi) of Mevlana (our Lord) Jelalu’d-Din Muhammed er-Rtmi. Book I.
With a Life ofthe Author, Illustrated by a Selection of Characteristic Anecdotes,
by Mevlana Shemsu’d-Din Ahmed el Eflaki, el’Arifi. Translated and the Poetry
Versified in English, by J. W. Repuousr, M.R.A.S. pp. xv. and 135, v. and
290....1881. 21's.

Eastern Proverss AND Emsrems, Illustrating Old Truths. By the
Rev. J. Lone, M.B.A.S., F.R.G.S. pp. xvi. and 280. 1881. 6s.

Inpian Porrry. Containing ‘‘ The Indian Song of Songs,” from the
Sanskrit of the ‘Gita Govinda”’ of Jayadeva; Two Books from ‘‘ the Iliad of
India’’ (Mahabharata) ; and other Oriental Poems. Fourth Edition. By Sir
Epwin Arnoxp, M.A., K.C.1.E., ete. pp. viii. and 270. 1886. 7s. 6d.

Hinpv Putrosopny. The Sankhya Karika of Iswara Krishna. An
i Exposition of the System of Kapila. With an Appendix on the Nyaya and

Vaiseshika Systems. By J.Davizs,M.A. pp. vill. and 152. 1881. 6s.

Tue Rewicrons or Inpra. By A. Barre. Authorised Transla-
tion by Rey. J. Woop. pp. 386. 1881. 16s.

A Manvat or Hivyov Panruzism. The Vedantasara. Translated
with Copious Annotations, by Major G. A. Jacon, B.S.C. With Preface by
KE. B. Cowrrt, M.A., Prof. of Sanskrit in Cambridge University, pp. x. and
129. 1881. 6s.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 5

Tae Quatrams or Omar Kuayyiu. Translated by E. H. Wuinriep,
M.A., late of H.M. Bengal Civil Service. pp. 96. 1881. s.

Tue Quarrarns or Omar Knayydu. Persian Text, and English Verse
Translation oy E. H. Wutyrierp, M.A., late Be.C.S. pp. 368. 1883.
10s. 6d.

Tue Mryp or Mencrus; or, Political Economy founded upon Moral
Philosophy. A Systematic Digest of the Doctrine of the Chinese Philosopher
Mencius. Translated from the Original Text, and Classified with Comments
and Explanations by the Rev. Ermst Faner, Rhenish Mission Society.
Translated from the German with Additional Notes, by the Rev. A. B.
Hurcutnson, C.M.S., Hong-Kong. pp. xvi. and 294. 1881. 10s. 6d.

Tsunt- Goam, THe. Supreme Berne or THE Kuor-Kuor. By Taxo-
puitus Haun, Ph.D., Custodian of the Grey Collection, Cape Town, etc. pp.
xii. and 154. 1881. 7s. 6d.

Yousrr anp Zorarkua. A Poem by J4mi. Translated from the Persian
into English Verse. By R. TF. H. Grirrirx. pp. xiv. and 304. 1882. 8s. 6d.

Tue Inpran Empire: its History, People, and Products. By Sir W. W.
Hunter, K.C.1.E., LL.D. Second Edition. pp. 780. With Map. 1886. 21s.

A ComPREHENSIVE CoMMENTARY TO THE QURAN: comprising Sale’s
Translation and Preliminary Discourse, with Additional Notes and Emendations.
With a complete Index to the Text, Preliminary Discourse, and Notes. By Rev.
E. M. Wuerry, M.A., Lodiana. Vol. I. pp. xii. and 392. 1882. 12s. 6d.
Vol. II. pp. xii.-408. 1884. 12s. 6d. Vol. Ill. pp. viiii-416. 1886.
12s. 6d. Vol. IV. pp. xiii.-340. 1886. 10s. 6d.

Comparative History or tHe Eeyprran AND Mesoporamtan ReEriaions.
By OC. P. Tiele. Egypt, Babel-Assur, Yemen, Harran, Pheenicia, Israel.
Vol. I. History of the Egyptian Religion. Translated from the Dutch, with the
co-operation of the Author, by James BALLINGAL. pp. Xxiv.-230, 1882. 7s. 6d.

Tre Sarva-Darsana-Samerana; or Review of the different Systems of

Hindu Philosophy. By Madhava Acharya. Translated by E. B. Cowztt,
M.A., Cambridge; and A. E. Goven, M.A., Calcutta. pp. xil.-282. 1882. 10s. 6d. ay Se

Tisetan Tares, Derived from Indian Sources. Translated from -the
Tibetan of the Kah-Gyur. By F. Anton von ScuiEFNER. Done into English
from the German, with an Introduction, by W. R. 8. Rauston, M.A. pp.
lxvi.-368. 1882. 14s.

Tinevistic Essays. By Cart Aset, Ph.Dr. pp. viii.-266. 1882. 9s.

ConTENnTs,—Language as the Expression of National Modes of Thought—The Conception of
Love in some Ancient and Modern Languages—The English Verbs of Command—The discrimi-
nation of Synonyms —Philological Methods—The Connection between Dictionary and Grammar
—The Possibility of a Common Literary Language for the Slave Nations—Coptic Intensification
—The Origin of Language—The Order and Position of Words in the Latin Sentence,

Hinpi Parosopny. The Bhagavad Gita or the Sacred Lay. A
Sanskrit Philosophical Poem. ‘Translated, with Notes, by Joun Davizs, M.A. PL
(Cantab.), M.R.A.S. pp. vi.-208. 1882. 8s. 6d. ;

Tur Pattosopny or THe Upanisnaps and Ancient Indian Metaphysics.

By A. E. Goven, M.A. Calcutta. Pp. xxiv.-268. 1882. 9s.

Upanavarea: A Collection of Verses from the Buddhist Canon. Com-
piled by Duarmarrata. The Northern Buddhist Version of Dhammapada.
Translated from the Tibetan of Bkah hgyur, Notes and Extracts from the Com-
mentary of Pradjnavarman, by W. W. Rockuiny. Pp. xvi.-224, 1883. 9s. Poe

6 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

A Hisrory or Burwa. Including Burma Proper, Pegu, Taungu
Tenasserim, and Arakan. From: the Earliest Time to the End of the Firs
War with British India. By Lieut.-General Sir A. P. Puayez, G.C.M.G.
K.0.8.1., &c. pp. xii. and 312, with Maps and Plan. 1883. 14s.

A Sxercu or tHE Mopern Lanevaces or Arrica. By R. N. Cusr
Accompanied by a Language Map. By E. G. Ravenstem. Two Vols
pp. xvi.-288, viil.-278, with Thirty-one Autotype Portraits. 1883. 18s.

Se he oF THE Hisrory oF ReLieron To THE SPREAD OF THE UNIVERSAI

Rexicrions. By Prof C.P. Tietz. Translated from the Dutch by J. E. CarpEnrTEr
‘M.A., with the Author's assistance. Third Edition, pp. xx. and 250. 1884. 7s. 6d

Retieron in Cura; containing a brief Account of the Three Religion
of the Chinese; with Observations on the Prospects of Christian Conversiot
amongst that People. By Josrrn Epxins, D.D., Peking. Third Edition
pp. xvi. and 260. 1884. 7s. 6d.

Tue Lire or tHE Buppwa aND THE Earty History oF HIS ORDER
From Tibetan Works in the Bkah-hgyur and Bstan-hgyur. With notices o1
the Early History of Tibet and Khoten. Translated by W. W. RocxuiLy
Second Secretary U.S. Legation in China. pp. 284. 1884. 9s.

Bouppuist Recorps or THE WesterN Wortp. ‘Translated from the
Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang (a.p. 629) by S. Brau. Dedicated by permissio.
to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales. 2 vols. pp. 250 and 378. 1884. 24s.

Tur Sanxuya Apnorrsms or Karma. With Illustrative Extracts fron
the Commentaries. Translated by J. R. Barzanryne, LL.D., late Principa
of Benares College. Edited by F. Hatz. Third Edition. pp. 472. 1884. 16s

THE Orprnances oF Manu. Translated from the Sanskrit, with Intro
duction by the late A. C. Burnett, Ph.D., C.I1.E. Completed and Edited by E
W. Horxins, Ph.D., Columbia College, New York. pp. 446. 1884. 12s.

Lire anp Works oF ALEXANDER Csoma DE Koros between 1819 anc
1842. With a Short Notice of all his Published and Unpublished Works an
Essays. From Original and for the most part Unpublished Documents. By T
Duxa, M.D., F.R.C.S. (Eng.), Surgeon- Major H.M.’s Bengal Medical Service
Retired, ete. pp. xii.-234, 1885. 9s.

Leaves rrom My Curnese Scrap-Boox. By F. H. Batrour, Author o
‘‘ Waifs and Strays from the Far Kast,” etc. pp. 216. 1887. 7s. 6d.

Ayctent Proverss anp Maxims rrom Buruuse Sources; or, the Nit
Literature of Burma. By J. Gray, Author of “ Elements of Pali Grammar,
etc. pp. 192. 1886. 6s.

Masnavi t Ma’navr: the Spiritual Couplets of Maulana Jaldlu-’d-Di.
Muhammad i Ramf. Translated and abridged by E. H. Wurnriexp, M.A
pp- xxxil. and 330. 1887. 7s. 6d. ,

~ Tue Sarakas oF Buarrrinart. Translated from the Sanskrit by th
Rev. B. Hatz Wortuam, B.A., M.R.A.S. pp. xii.-72. 1886. 6s.

with Critical Notes. By J. Jouuy, Ph.D., Professor of Sanskrit in the Universit

Neat Nie By the Code of Manu. Original Sanskrit Tex

of Wurzburg ; late Tagore Professor of Law in the University of Calcutta. Pp
viil. and 846. 1887. 10s. 6d. :

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C: 7

MiscELLantovus PaPERS RELATING TO Inpo-CrrNA. Reprinted for the
Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, from Dalrymple’s “ Oriental Reper-
tory,” and the *‘ Asiatic Researches’? and “ Journal’? of the Asiatic Society of
Bengal. pp. xii.-318, vi-112, 1887. 21s.

MiscertanEous PAPERS RELATING To Iypo-CurNna anp THE Inp1AN ARcHI-
PELAGO. Reprinted for the Straits Branch of the R. Asiatic Society, from the
“* Journals”’ of the R. Asiatic, Bengal Asiatic, and R. Geographical Societies ;
the “ Transactions ” and ‘‘Journal”’ of the Asiatic Society of Batavia, and the
** Malayan Miscellanies.’’ Second series. 2 vols. pp. viii. and 307, and 313.
With Five Plates and a Map. 1887. £1 5s.

Forx Taxes or Kasuure. By the Rev. J. Huyton Knowzzs, F.R.G.S.,
M.R.A.S., ete. (C.M.8.) Missionary to the Kashmiris. Pp. xii.-510. 1888. 16s.

SERIALS AND PERIODICALS.

Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland—Jovrwat or THE
Royat Astaric Socrety or Great Britain anD IreLanp, from the Com-
mencement to 1863. First Series, complete in 20 Vols. 8vo., with many Plates,
Price £10; or, in Single Numbers, as Pee 1 to 14, 6s, each; No, 15,
2 Parts, 4s. each ; No. 16, 2 Parts, 4s, each; No. 17, 2 Parts, 4s. each; No.
18, 6s. These 18 Numbers form Vols. I. to IX.—Vol. X., Part 1, 0.p.;
Part 2, 5s.; Part 3, 5s—Vol. XI., Part 1, 6s.; Part 2 not published.—Vol.
XII., 2 Parts, 6s. each.—Vol. XIII., 2 Parts, 6s. each. Vol. XIV., Part 1.
5s.; Part 2 not published.—Vol. XV., Part 1, 6s.; Part 2, with 3 Maps, £2 2s.
—Vol. XVI., 2 Parts, 6s. each.—Vol. XVII., 2 Parts, 6s, each.—Vol. XVIIL.,
2 Parts, 6s. each.—Vol. XIX., Parts 1 to 4, 16s,—Vol. XX., Parts 1 and 2, 4s.
each. Part 3, 7s. 6d.

Asiatic Society.—Journat or tHE Royar Astaric Soctety or Great
BRITAIN AND IRELAND. New Series. Vol. I. In ‘Two Parts. pp. iv. and
490, sewed. 1864-5. 16s.

Contents —I. Vajra-chhedika, the ‘‘Kin Kong King,’? or Diamond Stra. Translated from
the Chinese by the Rey. S. Beal.—II. The Péramité-hridaya SGtra, or, in Chinese, ‘‘ Mo ho-pé-
ye-po-lo-mih-to-sin-king,” i.e. ‘‘The Great Pdéramité Heart Sttra.’’ Translated from the
Chinese by the Rey. S, Beal.—III. On the Preservation of National Literature in the East.
By Col. F. J. Goldsmid.—IV. On the Agricultural, Commercial, Financial, and Military Statistics
of Ceylon. By E, R. Power.—V. Contributions to a Knowledge of the Vedie Theogony and
Mythology. By J. Muir, D.C.L.—VI. A Tabular List of Original Works and ‘I'ranslations, pub-
lished by the late Dutch Government of Ceylon at their Printing Press at Colombo. Compiled
by Mr. M. P. J. Ondaatje.—VII. Assyrian and Hebrew Chronology compared, with a view of
showing the extent to which the Hebrew Chronology of Ussher must be modified, in conformity
with the Assyrian Canon. By J. W. Bosanquet.—VIII. On the existing Dictionaries of the
Malay Language. By Dr. H. N. van der Tuuk.—IX. Bilingual Readings: Cuneiform and
Pheenician. Notes on some Tablets in the British Museum, containing Bilingual Legends
(Assyrian and Pheenician). By Major-Gen. Sir H. Rawlinson, K.C.B.—X. Translations of Three
Copper-plate Inscriptions of the Fourth Century a.p., and Notices of the Chalukya and Gurjjara
Dynasties. By Prof. J. Dowson, Staff College, Sandhurst.—XI. Yama and the Doctrine of a
Future Life, according to the Rig-, Yajur-, and Atharva-Vedas. By J. Muir, D.C.L.—XI11. On
the Jyotisha Observation of the Place of the Colures, and the Date derivable from it. By W.
D. Whitney, Prof, of Sanskrit, Yale College, U.S.A.—Note on the preceding Article. By Sir E.
Colebrooke, Bart., M.P.—XIII. Progress of the Vedie Religion towards Abstract Conceptions
of the Deity. By J. Muir, D.C.L.—XIV. Brief Notes on the Age and Authenticity of the Work
of Aryabhata, Varfhamihira, Brahmagupta, Bhattotpala, and Bhaskaraicharya. By Dr. Bhau
Daji.—XV. Outlines of a Grammar of the Malagasy Language. By H. N. Van der Tuuk.—
XVI. On the Identity of Xandrames and Krananda. By E. Thomas, Esq.

Vol. II. In Two Parts. pp. 522, sewed. 1866-7. 16s.

Conren7s.—I. Contributions to a Knowledge of Vedic Theogony and Mythology. No. 2.
By J. Muir. II. Miscellaneous Hymns from the Rig- and Atharva-Vedas. By J. Muir.—IIl.
Five hundred questions on the Social Condition of the Natives of Bengal. By the Rev. J. Long.
—IV. short account of the Malay Manuscripts belonging to the Royal Asiatic Society. By

8 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,

Dr. H. N. van der Tuuk.—V. Translation of the Amitébha Siitra from the Chinese. By the Rev.
S. Beal.—VI. The initial coinage of Bengal. By E. Thomas.—VII. Specimens of an Assyrian
Dictionary. By E. Norris.—VIII. On the Relations of the Priests to the other classes of Indian
Society in the Vedic age By J. Muir.--1X. On the Interpretation of the Veda. By the same.—
X. An attempt to Translate from the Chinese a work known as the Confessional Services of the
great compassionate Kwan Yin, possessing 1000 hands and 1000 eyes. By the Rev. S. Beal.—
—XI. The Hymns of the Gaupayanas and the Legend of King Asamati. By Prof. Max Miller.
—XII. Specimen Chapters of an Assyrian Grammar. By the Rey. E. Hincks, D.D.

Vol. III. In Two Parts. pp. 516, sewed. With Photograph. 1868. 22s.

Conrrenrs.—I. Contributions towards a Glossary of the Assyrian Language. By H. F. Talbot.
—II. Remarks on the Indo-Chinese Alphabets. By Dr. A. Bastian.—III. The poetry of
Mohamed Rabadan, Arragonese. By the Hon. H. E. J. Stanley.—IV. Catalogue of the Oriental
Manuscripts in the Library of King’s College, Cambridge. By E. H. Palmer, B.A.—V. De-
scription of the Amravati ‘ope in Guntur. By J. Fergusson, F.R.S.—VI. Remarks on Prof.
Brockhaus’ edition of the Kathdsarit-sagara, Lambaka IX. XVIIl._ By Dr. H. Kern, Prof. of
Sanskrit, University of Leyden.—VII. The source of Colebrooke’s Essay ‘‘On the Duties of a
Faithful Hindu Widow.” By Fitzedward Hall, D.C.L. Supplement: Further detail of proofs
that Colebrooke’s Essay, ‘‘On the Duties of a Faithful Hindu Widow,” was not indebted to
the Vivadabhangarnava. By F. Hall.—VIII. The Sixth Hymn of the First Book of the Rig
Veda. By Prof. Max Miiller.—IX. Sassanian Inscriptions. By E. Thomas.—X. Account of an
Embassy from Morocco to Spain in 1690 and 1691. By the Hon. H. E. J. Stanley.—XI. The
Poetry of Mohamed Rabadan, of Arragon. By the same.—XII. Materials for the History of
India for the Six Hundred Years of Mohammadan rule, previous to the Foundation of the British
Indian Empire. By Major W. Nassau Lees, LL.D.--XIII. A Few Words concerning the Hill
people inhabiting the Forests of the Cochin State. By Capt. G. E. Fryer, M.S.C.—XIV. Notes
on the Bhojpuri Dialect of Hindi, spoken in Western Behar. By J. Beames, B.C.S.

Vol. 1V. In Two Parts. pp. 521, sewed. 1869-70. 16s.

Conrents.—I. Contribution towards a Glossary of the Assyrian Language, By H. F. Talbot.
Part II.—II. On Indian Chronology. By J. Fergusson, F.R.S.—III. The Poetry of Mohamed
Rabadan of Arragon. By the Hon. H. E. J. Stanley.—IV. On the Magar Language of Nepal.
By J. Beames, B.C.S.—V. Contributions to the Knowledge of Parsee Literature. By E. Sachau,
Ph.D.—VI. Illustrations of the Lamaist System in Tibet, drawn from Chinese Sources. By
W. F. Mayers, of H.B.M. Consular Service, China.—VII. Khuddaka Patha,a Pali Text, with a
Translation and Notes. By R. C. Childers, late Ceylon C.S.—VIIL. An Endeavour to elucidate
Rashiduddin’s Geographical Notices of India. By Col. H. Yule, C.B.— IX. Sassanian Inscriptions
explained by the Pahlaviof the Parsis. By E, W. West.—X. Some Account of the Senby&
Pagoda at Mengan, near the Burmese Capital, in a Memorandum by Capt. E. H. Sladen, Politi-
cal Agent at Mandalé; with Remarks on the Subject by Col. H. Yule, C.B.—XI. The Brhat-
Sanhita; or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of Varaha-Mihira. Translated from Sanskrit
into English by Dr. H. Kern.— XII. The Mohammedan Law of Evidence, and its influence on
the Administration of Justice in India. By N. B. E. Baillie.—XIIL. The Mohammedan Law of
Evidence in connection with the Administration of Justice to Foreigners. By the same.—XIV.
A Translation of a Bactrian P4li Inscription. By Prof. J. Dowson.—XYV. Indo-Parthian Coins,
By E. Thomas.

Vol. V. In Two Parts. pp. 463, sewed. With 10 full-page and folding Plates.
1871-2. 18s. 6d.

Contents.—I. Two Jatakas. The original Pali Text, with an English Translation. By V.
Fausbdll.—1I. On an Ancient Buddhist Inscription at Keu-yung kwan, in North China. By A.
Wylie.—III. The Brhat Sanhita; or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of Varaha-Mihira
Translated from Sanskrit into English by Dr. H. Kern.—IV. The Pongol Festival in Southern
India. By C. E. Gover.—V. The Poetry of Mohamed Rabadan, of Arragon. By the Right Hon.
Lord Stanley of Alderley.—VI. Essay on the Creed and Customs of the Jangams. By C. P.
Brown.—VII. On Malabar, Coromandel, Quilon, etc. By C. P. Brown.—VIII. On the Treatment
of the Nexus in the Neo-Aryan Languages of India. By J. Beames, B.C.S.—IX. Some Remarks
on the Great Tope at Sanchi, By the Rev. S. Beal.—X. Ancient Inscriptions from Mathura.
Translated by Prof. J. Dowson.—Note to the Mathura Inscriptions. By Major-Gen. A. Cun-
ningham.—XI. Specimen of a Translation of the Adi Granth. By Dr. E. Trumpp.—XII. Notes
on Dhammapada, with Special Reference to the Question of Nirvana. By R. C. Childers, late
Ceylon C.S—XIII. The Brhat-Sanhita; or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of Varaha-
mihira, Translated from Sanskrit into English by Dr. H. Kern.—XIV. On the Origin of the
Buddhist Arthakathds. By the Mudliar L. Comrilla Vijasinha, Government Interpreter to the
Ratnapura Court, Ceylon. With Introduction by R. C. Childers, late Ceylon C.Si—XV. The
Poetry of Mohamed Rabadan, of Arragon. By the Right Hon. Lord Stanley of Alderley —
XVI. Proverbia Communia Syriaca. By Capt. R. F. Burton. XVII. Notes on an Ancient
Indian Vase, with an Account of the Engraving thereupon. By C. Horne, late B.C.S.—X VIII
Tbe Bhar Tribe. By the Rev. M. A. Sherring, LL.D., Benares. Communicated by C. Horne,
late B.C.S.—XIX. Of Jihad in Mohammedan Law, and its application to British India By
N. B. E. Baillie.—XX. Comments on Recent Pehlvi Decipherments. With an Incidental Sketch
of the Derivation of Aryan Alphabets. And Contributions to the Early History and Geograph
of Tabaristén. Illustrated by Coins. By E. Thomas, F.R.S. spe

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 9

Vol. VI., Part I, pp. 212, sewed, with two plates and a map. 1872. 83.

Conrents.—The Ishmaelites, and the Arabic Tribes who Conquered their Country. By A.
Sprenger.—A Brief Account of Four Arabic Works on the History and Geography of Arabia.
By Captain S. B. Miles.—On the Methods of Disposing of the Dead at Llassa, Thibet, etc. By
Charles Horne, late B.C.S. The Brhat-Sanhita; or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of
Varaha-mihira, Translated from Sanskrit into English by Dr. H. Kern.— Notes on Hwen
Thsang’s Account of the Principalities of Tokhdristan, in which some Previous Geographical
Identifications are Reconsidered. By Colonel Yule, C.B.—The Campaign of #lius Gallus in
Arabia. By A. Sprenger.—An Account of Jerusalem, Translated for the late Sir H. M. Elliot
from the Persian Text of Nasir ibn Khusrii’s Safandamah by the late Major A. R. Fuller.—The
Poetry of Mohamed Rabadan, of Arragon. By the Right Hon. Lord Stanley of Alderley.

Vol. VI., Part IL., pp. 213 to 400 and Ixxxiv., sewed. Illustrated with a Map,
Plates, and Woodcuts. 1873. 8s. 2

Conrents.— On Hiouen-Thsang’s Journey from Patna to Ballabhi. By James Fergusson,
D.C.L., F.R.S.—Northern Buddhism. [Note from Colonel H. Yule, addressed to the Secretary.
—Hwen Thsang’s Account of the Principalities of l'okh4ristan, ete. By Colonel H. Yule, C.B.—
The Brhat-Sanhita; or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of Vardha-mihira. Translated
from Sanskrit into English by Dr. H. Kern.—The Initial Coinage of Bengal, under the Early
Muhammadan Conquerors. Part II. Embracing the preliminary period between a.H. 614-634
(ace 1217-1236-7). By Edward Thomas, F.R.S.—The Legend of Dipafikara Buddha. Translated
rom the Chinesé (and intended to illustrate Plates xx1x. and L., ‘free and Serpent Worship ’).
By S. Beal.—Note on Art, IX., anté pp. 213-274, on Hiouen-Thsang’s Journey from Patna to
Ballabhi. By James Fergusson. D.C.L., F.R.S.—Contributions towards a Glossary of the
Assyrian Language. By H. F. Talbot. é

Vol. VII., Part I., pp. 170 and 24, sewed. With a plate. 1874. 8s.

Contents.—The Upasampada-Kammavéaecad, being the Buddhist Manual of the Form and
Manner of Ordering of Priests and Deacons. The PAli Text, with a Translation and Notes.
By J. F. Dickson, B.A.—Notes on the Megalithic Monuments of the Coimbatore District,
Madras. By M. J. Walhouse, late M.C.S,—Notes on the Sinhalese Language. No. 1. On the For-
mation of the Plural of Neuter Nouns. By R. C, Childers, late Ceylon C.S.—The Pali Text
of the Mahdparinibbana Sutta and Commentary, with a Translation. By R. C. Childers, late
Ceylon C.S —The Brihat-Sanhita; or, Complete System of Natural Astrology of Varaha-mihira.
Translated from Sanskrit into English by Dr. H. Kern.—Note on the Valley of Choombi.
By Dr. A. Campbell, late Superintendent of Darjeeling.—Tbe Name of the Twelfth Im4m on the
Coinage of Egypt. By H. Sauvaire and Stanley Lane Poole.—Three Inscriptions of Para-
krama Babu the Great from Pulastipura, Ceylon (date circa 11804.p.). By IT. W. Rhys Davids,
—Of the Kharéj or Muhammadan Land Tax; its Application to British India, and Effect on
the Tenure of Land. By N. B. E. Baillie.—Appendix: A Specimen of a Syriac Version of the
Kalilah wa-Dimnah, with an English I'ranslation. By W. Wright.

Vol. VII., Part IT., pp. 191 to 394, sewed. Withseven platesand a map. 1875. 8s.

ConrTents.—Sigiri, the Lion Rock, near Pulastipura, Ceylon; and the Thirty-nintb Chapter
of the Mahavamsa. By T. W. Khys Davids.—The Northern Frontagers of China. Part I,
The Origines of the Mongols, By H. H. Howorth.—Inedited Arabic Coins. By Stanley Lane
Poole.—Notice on the Dinars of the Abbasside Dynasty. By Edward Thomas Rogers.—The
Northern Frontagers of China. Part II. The Origines of the Manchus. By H. H. Howorth.
—Notes on the Old Mongolian Capital of Shangtu. By S, W. Bushell, B.Sc,, M.D.—Oriental
Proverbs in their Relations to Folklore, History, Sociology; with Suggestions for their Collec-
tion, Interpretation, Publication. By the Rev. J. Long.— Two Old Simhalese Inscriptions. The
Sahasa Malla Inscription, date 1200 a p., and the Ruwanweeli Dagaba Inscription, date 1191 a.p.
Text, Translation, and Notes, By T. W. Rhys Davids.—Notes on a Bactrian Pali Inscription
and the Samvat Era. By Prof. J. Dowson.—Note on a Jade Drinking Vessel of the Emperor
Jahangir. By Edward homas, F.R.S.

Vol. VIII., Part I., pp. 156, sewed, with three plates and a plan. 1876. 8s.

ConrEenTs.—Catalogue of Buddhist Sanskrit MSS, in the Possession of the R.A.S. (Hodgson
Collection), By Prof. E. B. Cowell and J, Eggeling.—On the Ruins of Sigiriin Ceylon, By
T. H. Blakesley, Ceylon.—The Patimokkha, being the Buddhist Office of the Confession of Priests,
The Pali Text, with a Translation, and Notes, By J. F. Dickson, M.A., Ceylon C.S.—Notes
on the Sinhalese Language. No.2. Proofs of the Sanskritic Origin of Sinhalese, By R. C.
Childers, late of the Ceylon Civil Service.

Vol. VIII., Part II., pp. 157-308, sewed. 1876. 8s.

ContentTs.—An Account of the Island of Bali. By R. Friederich.—The Pali Text of the Maha-
parinibbana Sutta and Commentary, with a Translation. By R. C. Childers, late Ceylon C.S.—
The Northern Frontagers of China, Part III. The Kara Khitai. By H. H. Howorth.—In-
edited Arabie Coins. II. By S. L. Poole.—On the Form of Government under the Native
Sovereigns of Ceylon. By A. de Silva Ekanayaka, Mudaliyar, Ceylon.

10 Linguistic Publications of Tribner f Co.,

Vol. IX., Part I., pp. 156, sewed, with a plate. 1877. 8s. r

Conrents.—Bactrian Coins and Indian Dates. By E. Thomas, F.R.S.—The Tenses of th
Assyrian Verb. By the Rev. A. H Sayce, M.A.—An Account of the Island of Bali. By R.
Friederich (continued from Vol. VIII. n.s. p. 218).—On Ruins in Makran. By Major Mockler.
—Inedited Arabic Coins. III. By Stanley Lane Poole,—Further Note on a Bactrian Pali Inscrip-
tion and the Samvat Era. By Prof. J. Dowson.—Notes on Persian Beldchistan. From the
Persian of Mirza Mehdy Khan. By A. H. Schindler.

Vol IX., Part II., pp. 292, sewed, with three plates. 1877. 10s. 6d.

Conrents.—The Early Faith of Asoka. By E. Thomas, F.R.S.—The Northern Frontagers
of China, Part II. The Manchus (Supplementary Notice). Part 1V. The Kin or Golden Tatars.
By H. H. Howorth.—On a Treatise on Weights and Measures by Eliya, Archbishop of Nisibin.
By M. H. Sauvaire.—On Imperial and other Titles. By Sir T. E. Colebrooke, Bart., M.P.—Affi-
nities of the Dialects of the Chepang and Kusundah Tribes of Nip4l with those of the Hill Tribes
of Arracan. By Capt. C. J. F. Forbes F.R.G.S, M.A.S. Bengal, etc.—Notes on Some Anti-
quities found ina Mound near Damghan. By A. H, Schindler.

Vol. X., Part I., pp. 156, sewed, with two platesanda map. 1878. 8s.

Conrents,—On the Non-Aryan Languages of India. By E. L. Brandreth.—A Dialogue on
the Vedantic Conception of Brahma. By Pramadaé Dasa Mittra, late Offi. Prof. of Anglo-Sanskrit,
Gov. College, Benares.—An Account of the Island of Bali. By R. Friederich (continued from
Vol. 1X. N.S. p. 120).—Unpublished Glass Weights and Measures, By E, T. Rogers.—China
vid Tibet. By S. C, Boulger.—Notes and Recollections on Tea Cultivation in Kumaon and
Garhwil. By J. H. Batten, late B.C.S.

Vol. X., Part II., pp. 146, sewed. 1878. 6s.

Conrrnts.—Note on Pliny’s Geography of the East Coast of Arabia. By Major-Gen. S. B. Miles,
B.S.C, The Maldive Islands; with a Vocabulary taken from Francois Pyrard de Laval, 1602—
1607. By A. Gray, late Ceylon C.S.—On Tibeto-Burman Languages. By Capt. C. J.. F. 8.
Forbes, Burmese C.S. Commission.— Burmese Transliteration. By H. L. St. Barbe, Resident at
Mandelay.—On the Connexion of the Méns of Pegu with the Koles of Central India. By
Capt. C. J. F. S. Forbes, Burmese C.C.—Studies on the Comparative Grammar of the Semitic
Languages, with Special Reference to Assyrian. By P. Haupt. The Oldest Semitic Verb-Form,
—Arab Metrology. II. El-Djabarty. By M. H. Sauvaire.—The Migrations and Early History
of the White Huns; principally from Chinese Sources. By T. W. Kingsmill.

Vol. X., Part III., pp. 204, sewed. 1878. 8s.

Contents —On the Hill Canton of Salér,—the most Easterly Settlement of the Turk Race.
By Robert B, Shaw. -- Geological Notes on the River Indus By Griffin W. Vyse, Executive
Engineer P.W.D, Panjab.—Educational Literature for Japanese Women. By B. H. Chamber-
lain.—On the Natural Phenomenon Known in the East by the Names Sub-hi-Kazib, etc., ete.
By J. W. Redhouse.— On a Chinese Version of the Sankhya K4rikdé, eic., found among the
Buddhist Books comprising the Tripitaka and two other works. By the Rey. 8. Beal.—The
Rock-cut Phrygian Inscriptions at Doganlu. By E. Thomas, F.R.S.—Index.

Vo}. XI., Part. I., pp. 128, sewed, with seven illustrations. 1879. 5s.

ConrEnts.—On the Position of Women in the East in the Olden Time. By E. Thomas, F,.R.S.
—Notice of Scholars who have Contributed to our Knowledge of the Languages of British India
during the last Thirty Years. By R. N. Cust.—Ancient Arabic Poetry: its Genuineness and
Authenticity. By Sir W. Muir, K.C.S.I1.—Note on Manrique’s Mission and the Catholics in the
time of Shah Jahan. By H. G. Keene.—On Sandhi in Pali. By the late R. C. Childers.—On
Arabic Amulets and Mottoes. By E. T. Rogers.

Vol. X1., Part II., pp. 256, sewed, with map and plate. 1879. 7s. 6d.

ConrEnts.—On the Identification of Places on the Makran Coast mentioned by Arrian, Ptolemy
and Marcian, By Major E. Mockler.—On the Proper Names of the Mohammadans, By Sir T.
EK. Colebrooke, Bart., M.P.—Principles of Composition in Chinese, as deduced from the Written
Characters, By the Rev. Dr. Legge. On the Identification of the Portrait of Chosroes II, among
the Paintings in the Caves at Ajanta. By James Fergusson, Vice-President.—A Specimen of
the Zoongee (or Zurngee) Dialect of a Tribe of Nagas, bordering on the Valley of Assam
between the Dikho and Desoi Rivers, embracing over Forty Villages, By the Rev. Mr. Clark.

Vol. XI. Part III. pp. 104, cxxiv. 16, sewed. 1879. 8s.

Contents,—'lhe Gaurian compared with the Romance Languages. Part I. By E. L.

Brandreth,—Dialects of Colloquial Arabic. By E. T. Rogers.—a Comparati
Japanese and Korean Languages. By W. G. Aston.—Index, Pereive, Biudyries

Vol. XII. Part I. pp. 152, sewed, with Table. 1880. 5s.

Conrrents.—On ‘The Most Comely Names,” i.e. the Laudatory Epithets, or i i
bestowed on God in the Qur’an or by Muslim Writers. By J. W. Reuton een pane
discovered Clay Cylinder of Cyrus the Great. By Major-Gen. Sir H. C. Rawlinson, K.C.B ie
Note on Hiouen-Thsang’s Dhanakacheka, By Robert Sewell, M.C.S8.— Remarks by Mr
Fergusson on Mr. Sewell’s Paper.—A Treatise on Weights and Measures. By Eliya Archbishop
of Nisibin. By H. Sauvaire. (Supplement to Vol. 1X., pp. 291-313)—On the Age of the
Ajanta Caves, By Rajendralila Mitra, C.I.E.—Notes on Babu Rajendralé Mitra’s Paper on
the Age of the Caves at Ajanté, By J. Fergusson, F.R.S.

d7 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 11

Vol. XII. Part II. pp. 182, sewed, with map and plate. 1880. 6s.

ConrEnrs,—On Sanskrit Texts Discovered in Japan, By Prof. Max Miiller.—Extracts from
“Report on the Islands and Antiquities of Bahrein. By Capt. Durand. Followed by Notes by
Major-Gen. Sir H. C. Rawlinson, K.C.B.—Notes on the Locality and Population of the Tribes
dwelling between the Brahmaputra and Ningthi Rivers. By the late G. H. Damant, Political
Officer Naga Hills.—On the Saka, Samvat, and Gupta Eras, A Supplement to his Paper on Indian
‘Chronology. By J. Fergusson, D.C.L.—The Megba-Sitra. By C. Bendall.—Historical and
Archeological Notes on a Journey in South-Western. Persia, 1877-1878. By A. Houtum-
Schindler.—Identification of the ‘‘ False Dawn” of the Muslims with the ‘Zodiacal Light” of
Europeans, By J. W. Redhouse.

Vol. XII. Part III. pp. 100, sewed. 1880. 4s.

ConTENnts,—The Gaurian compared with the Romance Languages. Part II. By E. L.
Brandreth.—-The Uzbeg Epos. By Arminius Vambéry.— On the Separate Edicts at Dhauli and
Jaugada. By Prof. Kern.—Grammatical Sketch of the Kakhyen Language. By Rev. J. N.
a oe on the Libyan Languages, in a Letter addressed to R. N. Cust, Esq., by Prof.

. W. Newman,

Vol. XII. Part IV. pp. 152, with 3 plates. 1880. 8s.

Contrents.—The Early History of Tibet, from Chinese Sources. By 8. W. Bushell, M.D.—
Notes on some Inedited Coims from a Collection made in Persia during the Years 1877-79. By
Guy Le Strange, M.R.A.S.—Buddhist Nirvana and the Noble Eightfold Path. By Oscar
Frankfurter, Pk.D.—Index.—Annual Report, 1880.

Vol. XIII. Part I. pp. 120, sewed. 188i. 5s.

Conrents.-~Indian Theistic Reformers. By Prof, Monier Williams, C.I.E.—Notes on the Kawi
Language and Literature. By Dr. H. N. Van der Tuuk.—The Invention of the Indian Alphabet.
By John Dowson, The Nirvana of the Northern Buddhists. By the Rev. J. Edkins, D,D.—
An Account of the Malay ‘ Chiri,” a Sanskrit Formula. By W. E. Maxwell.

Vol. XIII. Part II. pp..170, with Map and 2 Plates. 1881. 8s.

Convrrents.— The Northern Frontagers of China, Part V. The Khitai or Khitans. By H. H.
Howorth.—On the Identification of Nagarahara, with reference to the Travels of Hiouen-Thsang.
By W. Simpson.—Hindu Law at Madras. By J. H. Nelson, M.C.S.—On the Proper Names of
the Mohammedans. By Sir T. E. Colebrooke, Bart., M.P.—Supplement to the Paper on Indian
Theistic Reformers, published in the January Number ef this Journal. By Prof. Monier
Williams, C.1I.E.

Vol. XIII. Part III. pp. 178, with plate. 1881. 7s. 6d.

Contents.—The Avar Language. By C. Graham.—Caucasian Nationalities. By M. A.
Morrison.—Translation of the Markandeya Purana, Books VII., VIII. By the Rev. B.
H. Wortham.—Lettre 4 M. Stanley Lane Poole sur quelques monnaies orientales rares ou inédites
de la Collection de M. Ch. del’Ecluse. Par H. Sauvaire.—Aryan Mythology in Malay Traditions.
By W. E. Maxwell, Colonial Civil Service.—The Koi, a Southern Tribe of the Gond. By the
Rey. J. Cain, Missionary.—On the Duty which Mohammedans in British India owe, on the
Principles of their own Law, to the Government of the Country. By N. B. E. Baillie.—The
L-Poem of the Arabs, by Shanfara, Re-arranged and translated by J. W. Redhouse, M.R.A.S.

Vol. XIII. Part IV. pp. 130, cxxxvi. 16, with 3 plates. 1881. 10s. 6d.

Conrrents.—The Andaman Islands and the Andamanese. By M, V. Portman.—Notes on Marco
Polo’s Itinerary in Southern Persia, By A. Houtum-Schindler.—T wo MalayMyths : The Princess
of the Foam, and the Raja of Bamboo. By W. E. Maxwell.—'The Epoch of the Guptas. By
E. Thomas, F.R.S.—T'wo Chinese-Buddhist Inscriptions found at Buddha Gaya, By the Rev. 8.
Beal, With 2 Plates.—A Sanskrit Ode addressed to the Congress of Orientalists at Berlin. By
Rama Dasa Sena, the Zemindar of Berhampore: with a Translation by 8, Krishnavarma.—
Supplement to a paper, “‘ On the Duty which Mahommedans in British India owe, on the Principles
of their own Law, to the Government of the Country.” By N. B.E,. Baillie.—Index,

Vol. XIY. Part I. pp. 124, with 4 plates. 1882. 4s.

Conrents.—The Apology of Al Kindy: An Essay on its Age and Authorship. By Sir W
Muir, K.C 8.I.—The Poet Pampa. By L. Rice.—On a Coin of Shams ud Dunya wa ud Din
Mahmitid Shah. By C. J. Rodgers, Amritsar.—Note on Pl xxviii. fig, 1, of Mr. Fergusson’s
‘¢Tree and Serpent Worship,” 2nd Edition. By S, Beal, Prof. of Chinese, London University.—
On the present state of Mongolian Researches. By Prof. B. Julg, in a Letter to R. N Cust.—
A Sculptured Tope on an Old Stone at Dras, Ladak. By W. Simpson, F.R.G 8.—Sanskrit Ode
addressed to the Fifth International Congress of Orientalists assembled at Berlin, September,
1881. By the Lady Pandit Rama-bai, of Silchar, Kachar, Assam; with a Translation by Prof.
Monier Williams, C.I.E.—The Intercourse of China with Eastern Turkestan and the Adjacent
Countries in the Second Century B.c. By T. W. Kingsmill.—Suggestions on the Formation of
tbe Semitic Tenses. A Comparative and Critical Study. By G. Bertin,—On a Lolo MS. written
on Satin, By M. T. de La Couperie,

12 Linguistic Publications of Triibner ¢ Co.,

Vol. XIV. Part II. pp. 164, with three plates. 1882. 7s. 6d.

Conven7rs.—On Tartar and Turk. By S. W. Koriiz, Ph.D.—Notice of Scholars who have Con-
tributed to our Knowledge of the Languages of Africa. By R.N. Cust.— Grammatical Sketch
of the Hausa Language. By the Rev. J. F. Schon, F.R.G.S,,—Buddhist Saint Worship. By
A. Lillie.—Gleanings from the Arabic. By H. W. Freeland, M.A.— Al Kahirah and its Gates.
By H. C. Kay, M.A.—How the Mah4bhérata begins, By Edwin Arnold, C,S.I.—Arab Metrology.
IV. Ed-Dahaby. By M. H. Sauvaire.

Vol. XIV. Part III. pp. 208, with 8 plates. 1882. 8s.

Conrenrs.—The Vaishnava Religion, with special reference to the Siksha-patri of the
Modern Sect called Svami-Narayana, By Monier Williams, C.I.E., D.C.L —Further Notes on
the Apology of Al-Kindy. By Sir W. Muir, K.C.S.I., D.C.L., LL.D.—The Buddhist Caves of
Afghanistan. By W. Simpson.—The Identification of the Sculptured Tope at Sanchi. By Ww.
Simpson.—On the Genealogy of Modern Numerals. By Sir K. C, Bayley, K.C.S.I., C.1.E.
—The Cuneiform Inseriptions of Van, deciphered and translated, by A. H, Sayce.

Vol. XIV. Part IV. pp. 330, clii. 1882. 14s.

Conrrn1's.—The Cuneiform Inscriptions of Van, deciphered and translated, by A. H. Sayce.
—Sanskrit Text of the Siksha-Patri of the Svami-Narayana Sect. Edited and Translated by
Prof. M. Williams, C.1.E.—The Successors of the Siljaks in Asia Minor, By S. L. Poole.—The
Oldest Book of the Chinese (The Yh-King) and its Authors. By T. de la Couperie.

Vol. XV. Part I. pp. 134, with 2 plates. 1883. 6s.

Conrrrenrs.—The Genealogy of Modern Numerals. Part II. Simplification of the Ancient Indian
Numeration. By Sir E C. Bayley, C.I.E.—Parthian and Indo-Sassanian Coins, By E. Thomas,
F.R.S.—Early Historical Relations between Phrygia and Cappadocia. By W. M. Ramsay.

Vol. XV. Part II. pp. 158, with 6 tables. 1883. 5s.

Contents.—The Tattva-muktavali of Gauda-pdrnanandacbakravyartin. Edited and Trans-
Jated by Professor E. B. Cowell.—Two Modern Sanskrit slokas. Communicated by Prof. E. B.
Cowell.—Malagasy Place-Names, By the Rev. James Sibree, jun.—The Namakkara, with
Translation and Commentary. By H. L, St, Barbe.—Chinese Laws and Customs. By
Christopher Gardner.—The Oldest Book of the Chinese (the Fh-King) and its Authors
(continued), By Terrien de LaCouperie.—Gleanings from the Arabic. By H. W. Freeland.

Vol. XV. Part III. pp. 62-cxl. 1883. 6s.

Conrents.—Early Kannada Authors. By Lewis Rice——On Two Questions of Japanese
Archeology. By B. H. Chamberlain, M.R.A.S.—Two Sites named by Hiouen-Thsang in the
10th Book of the Si-yu-ki. By the Rev. 8. Beal.—Two Eatly Sources of Mongol History. B
H. H. Howorth, F.S.A.—Proceedings of Sixtieth Anniversary of the Society, held May 21, 1883,

Vol. XV. Part IV. pp. 140-iv.-20, with plate. 1883. 5s.

Co»rents.—The Rivers of the Vedas, and How the Aryans Entered India. By Edward
Thomas, F.R.S.—Suggestions on the Voice-Formation of the Semitic Verb. By G. Bertin, M.R.A.S,
—The Buddhism of Ceylon. _By Arthur Lillie, M.R.A.S.—The Northern Frontagers of China.
Part VI, Hia or Tangut. By H. H. Howorth, F.S.A.—Index.—List of Members.

Vol. XVI. Part I. pp. 138, with 2 plates. 1884. 7s.

Conrents.—The Story of Devasmitaé. Translated from the Katha Sarit Sagara, Taranga 13,
Sloka 54, by the Rev. B. Hale Wortham.—Pujahs in the Sutlej Valley, Himalayas. By William
Simpson, F.R.G.S.—On some New Discoveries in Southern India. By R. Sewell, Madras C.S.—
On the Importanee to Great Britain of the study of Arabic. By Habib A. Salmoné.—
Grammatical Note on the Gwamba Language in South Africa. By P. Berthoud, Missionary
of the Canton de Vaud, Switzerland, stationed at Valdézia, Spelonken, Transvaal. (Prepared
at the request of R. N. Cust. )—Dialect of Tribes of the Hindu Khush, from Colonel Biddulph’s
Work on the subject (corrected).— Grammatical Note on the Simndni Dialect of the Persian
Language. By the Rev, J. Bassett, American Missionary, Tabriz. (Communicated by R. N. Cust.)

Vol. XVI. Part Il. pp. 184, with 1 plate. 9s.

Conrents.—Etymology of the ‘Turkish Numerals. By S. W. Koelle, Ph.D., late Missionary
of the Church Missionary Soc., Constantinople-—Grammatical Note and Vocabulary of the
Kor-ku, a Kolarian Tribe in Central India. (Communicated by R. N. Cust.) The Pariah Caste
in Travancore. By 8. Mateer.—Some Bihari Folk-Songs. By G. A. Grierson, BC.S.. Offi
Magistrate, Patna.—Some further Gleanings from the Si-yu-ki. © By the Rev. S. Beal, —On the
Sites of Brahmandbad and Manstrah in Sindh; with notices of others of less note in their
Vicinity. By Major-Gen, M. R, Haig.—Antar and the Slave Daji. A Bedoueen Legend. By
St. C. Baddeley.—The Languages of the Early Inhabitants of Mesopotamia, By G. Pinches.

07 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 13

Vol. XVI. Part III. pp. 74.—clx. 10s. 6d.

Conrents.—On the Origin of the Indian Alphabet. By R, N. Cust.—The Yi king of the
Chinese as a Book of Divination and Philosophy. By Rev. Dr. Edkins.—On the Arrangement of
the Hymns of the Rig-veda. By F. Pincott.—Proceedings of the Sixty-first Anniversary Meeting
of the Society, May 19, 1884,

Vol. XVI. Part IV. pp. 134. 8s.

Conrents,—S’uka-sandesah. A Sanskrit Poem, by Lakshmi-dasa. With Preface and Notes in
English by H. H. Rama Varma, the Maharaja of Travancore, G.C.9.I.—The Chinese Book of the

Odes, for English Readers. By C. F. R. Allen.—Note sur les Mots Sanscrits composés avec ufa.

Par J. van den Gheyn, 8.J.—Some Remarks on the Life and Labours of Csoma de Koros,
delivered on the occasion when his Tibetan Books and MSS. were exhibited before the R.A.8.,
June 16, 1884. By Surgeon-Major T. Duka, M.D , late of the Bengal Army.—Arab Metrology.
V. Ez-Zahrawy. Translated and Annotated by M. H. Sauvaire, de l’Académie de Marseille.

Vol. XVII., Part I., pp. 144, with 5 plates. 1885. 10s, 6d.

Conrenrs.—Story of Shiuten Déji. From a Japanese ‘‘Makimono” in Six “Ken,” or
Rolls. By F. V. Dickins.—The Bearing of the Study of the Bantu Languages of South
Africa on the Aryan Family of Languages. By the Rev. F. W. Kolbe.—Notes on Assyrian
and Akkadian Pronouns. By G. Bertin.—Buddhist Remains near Sambhur, in Western
Kajputana, India. By Surgeon-Major I. H. Hendley.—Gleanings from the Arabic. By
H, W. Freeland.—Dialects of Tribes of Hindu Khush, from Colonel Biddulph’s Work on
the Subject. II. Shina (Giljit Dialect). III. Khowar (Chitral Valley). ;

Vol. XVII., Part II., pp. 194, with 1 map. 1885. 9s.

Contents.—Languages of the Caucasus. By R. N. Cust.—The Study of the South Indian
Vernaculars. By G. U. Pope, D.D.—The Pallavas. By the Rev. T. Foulkes.—Translation
of Books 81-93 of the Markandeya Purana. By the Kev. B. H. Wortham.—Notes on Prof,
E. B. Tylor’s ‘‘ Arabian Matriarchate,” propounded by him as President of the Anthropo-
logicai Section, British Association, Montreal, 1884. By J. W. Kedhouse, LL.D.—I'he
Northern Frontagers of China, Part VII. The Shato Turks. By H. H. Howorth.

Vol. XVII., Part III., pp. 344, with 2 plates. 1885. 10s. 6d.

Conrents.—Age of the Avesta. By Prof. de Harlez.—Chinese Game of Chess. By H. F.
W. Holt.—Customs and Superstitions connected with the Cultivation of Rice in the
Southern Province of Ceylon. By C. Kk. J, le Mesurier.—Vernacular Literature and Folk-
Lore of the Panjab. By IT. H. Thornton, C 8.1.—Beginnings of Writing in and around
Tibet. By I’. de Lacouperie.—Index. Proceedings of the Sixty-second Anniversary Meeting
of the Society held on the 18th of May, 1885. List of Members.

Vol. XVIII., Part I., pp. 128, with 2 plates. 1886. 6s.

Conrents.—Ancient Navigation in the Indian Ocean. By the Rev, J. Edkins, D.D.,
Peking.—La Calle and the Country of Khomair, with a Note on North African Marbles;
being the Report of a recent Tour addressed to H.M. Secretary of State. By Consul-
General R. L. Playfair.—Bushmen and their Language, By G. Bertin.—Inscriptions at
Cairo and the Burju-z Zafar. By Henry C, Kay.— Gleanings from the Arabic: Lament of
Maisun, the Bedouin wife of Muawiya. By H. W, Freeland, M.A.— Discovery of Caves on
the Murghab. By Gapt. De Laessoé and the Hon, M.G. Talbot, R,K. With Notes by W.
Simpson.—The Alchemist: A Persian Play. Translated by Guy Le Strange.

Vol. XVIII., Part Il., pp. 196. 1886. 10s. 6d.

Conrrnrs.—On Buddhism in its Relation to Brahmanism. By Sir M. Monier-Williams,
K.C.I.E.—The Stories of Jimutavahana, and of Harisarman. ‘lranslated by Rey. B.
Hale Wortham. —Geographical Distribution of the Modern Turki Languages. By
M. A. Morrison. With a Note, Table of Authorities, and a Language Map,—A Modern
Contributor to Persian Literature. Riza Kuli Khan and his Works. _By Sidney Churchill,
—Some Bhoj’puri Folk-Songs. kdited and ‘Translated by G. A. Grierson,—Observations
on the various 'exts and Translations of the so-called ‘‘Song of Meysun”’; an Inquiry into
Meysun’s Claim to its Authorship; and an Appendix on Arabic Jransliteration and Pro-
nunciation. By J. W. Redhouse.

Vol. XVIIL., Part II1., pp. 314, with 10 plates. 1886. 10s. 6d.
2nts.—Rock-Cut Caves and Statues of Bamian. By Capt. the Hon. M. G. Talbot
rh eaerT Notes hereon, and on Sketches of Capt. P. J, Maitland, by W. Simpson.—
Sumerian Language and its Affinities. By Prof. Dr. Fritz Hommel, Munich.—Early
Buddhist Symbolism. By R. Sewell —Pre-Akkadian Semites. By G. Bertin.—Arrange-
ment of the Hymns of the Adi Granth. By F. Pincott. Annual Report,

14 Linguistic Publications of Triubner ¢ Co.,

Vol. XVIII., Part IV., pp. 112, with 11 plates. 1886. 7s. 6d.

Conrenrs.— Ancient Sculptures in China. By R. K. Douglas.—Mosque of Sultan Nasir
Mohammed Ebn Kalaoun, in the Citadel of Cairo, By Major C. M. Watson, R.E.—l.an-
guages of Melanesia. By Prof. G. von der Gabelentz.—Notes on the History of the Banu
‘Okayl. By H. C. Kay.—Foreign Words in the Hebrew Text of the Old Testament. By
the Rev. S. Leathes, D.D.

Vol. XIX., Part I., pp. 192, with 3 plates. 1887. 10s.

Conrrnts.—Story of the Old Bamboo Hewer: A Japanese Romance of the Tenth Century,
Translated with Notes, etc., by F. V. Dickins. - Brahui Grammar, after the German of the
Jate Dr. Trumpp. By Dr. T, Duka.—Some useful Hindi Books. By G. A. Grierson.—
Original Vocabularies of Five West Caucasian Languages, compiled by Mr. Peacock.—
Art. A Version in Chinese, by the Marquis ‘I'seng, of a Poem written in English and
Italian by H. W. Freeland.

Vol. XIX., Part II., pp. 160, with 3 plates. 1887. 10s.

Conrents.—Narrative of F4-hien. By the Rev. S. Beal.—Priority of Labial Letters
jllustrated in Chinese Phonetics. By the Rev. J. Edkins.—Education in Egypt. By H.
Cunynghame.—The Tri-Ratna. By F. Pincott.—Description of the Noble Sanctuary at
Jerusalem in 1470 a.p. By Kamal (or Shams) ad Din as Suyuti. Extracts re-translated
by Guy le Strange.

Vol. XIX., Part III., pp. 218, with 5 plates. 1887. 10s.

Conrrnts —Life and Labours of A. Wylie, Agent of B. and F. Bible Society in China.
By H. Cordier.—Modern Languages of Oceania. With Language Map. By Dr. R. N.
Cust.—Ibnu Batuta in Sindh. By Major-General Haig.—Formosa Notes on MSS., Races
and Languages. By Prof. ’. de Lacouperie, Including a Note on Nine Formosan MSS.
by E. Baber.—Revenues of the Moghul Empire. By H G. Keene.—Annual Report for 1886.

Vol. X{X., Part IV., pp. 202, with 1 plate. 1887. 10s.

Conrents.—The Miryeks or Stone-men of Corea. By Prof. T. de Lacouperie (Plate).—
Pre-Sanskrit Element in Ancient Tamil Literature. By E. 8. W. Senathi Raja.—Were
Zenobia and Zebba’u Identical? By J. W. Redhouse.—First Mandala of the Kig-Veda,
By F. Pincott.—Origin and Development of the Cuneiform Syllabary. By G. Bertin,—
Babylonian Chronicle. By T. G. Pinches.—Index—List of Members.

Vol. XX., Part I., pp. 164, with 3 plates. 1888. 10s.

Contents.—Cuneiform Inscriptions of Van. By the Rev. Prof. A. H. Sayce, M.A.—
Some Suggestions of Origin in Indian Architecture. By W. Simp on.—The Chaghatai
ee By E. E. Oliver.—Sachau’s Alberuni. By Major-Gen. Sir F. J. Goldsmid, C.B.,

.CS.1,

Asiatic Society Transactions or THE Royat Asratic Socrety oF
Great Brirain AnD IRELAND. Complete in 8 vols. 4to., 80 Plates of Fac-
similes, etc., cloth. London, 1827 to 1835. Published at £9 5s.; reduced to
£5 5s.

The above contains contributions by Professor Wilson, G. C. Haughton, Davis, Morrison
Colebrooke, Humboldt, Dorn, Grotefend, and other eminent Oriental scholars. :
Asiatic Society of Bengal—Journat. 8vo. 8 numbers per annum.

4s. each number, Pxocrrpines. Published Monthly. 1s. each number,

Asiatic Society of Bengal.—Journat. A Complete Set from the
beginning in 1832 to the end of 1878, being Vols. 1 to 47. Proceedings, from

the commencement in 1865 to 1878. A set quite complete. Calcutta, 1832 to
1878. Extremely scarce. £100.

Asiatic Society of Bengal.—Crnrmnary Review of the, from 1784
to 1883. Part I. History of the Society, By RasenprataLa Mirra, LL.D
C.1L.E. Part II. Archeology, History, Literature, ete. By Dr. AG F R.
Horrniz. Part III. Natural Science, ete. By Banoo P. N. Bosp. Part I.
contains an Alphabetical Index to the Papers and Contributions to the
“Asiatick Researches,” and the “Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic
Soviety of Bengal,’”’ from the commencement up to 1883. Part II. contains a
Classified Subject Index of the Society’s Publications during the same period
under the heads of (1) Antiquities; (2) Coins, Weights, Measures, etc. ; (3)
History ; (4) Language and Literature; (5) Religion, Manners and Customs;

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 15

Part ITT. contains a similar Index, classified under the heads of (1) Mathematical

and Physical Science ; (2) Geology; (3) Zoology ; (4) Botany ; (5) Geography ;

ecpeanreati (7) Chemistry. Royal 8vo. pp. 216—ciii. ; 109, xcvi. 20, cloth.
é. Ss.

Asiatic Society, Royal—Bombay Branch.—Journat. Nos. 1 to 35
in 8vo. with many plates. A complete set. Extremely scarce. Bombay,
1844-78. £13 10s.

Asiatic Society Royal—Bombay Branch.—Journar. Nos. 1 to 45.

ds. to 10s. 6d. each number. Several Numbers are out of print.

Asiatic Society, Royal.—Ceylon Branch (Colombo.)—Journat. Part
for 1845. 8vo. pp. 120, sewed. Price 7s. 6d.

Conrents:—On Buddhism, No. 1, By the Rev. D. J. Gogerly.—Translated Ceylonese
Literature. By W. Knighton.—The Elements of the Voice in reference to the Roman and
Singalese Alphabets, By the Rev. J. C. Macvicar.—Crime in Ceylon. By the Hon. J. Stark.—
Ancient Coins. By S. C, Chitty,—Collection of Statistical Information in Ceylon. By John
Capper.—On Buddhism. No 2, By the Rey. D. J. Gogerly.

1846, 8vo- pp. 176, sewed. Price 7s. 6d.

Contents :—On Buddhism. By Rey. D. J. Gogerly.—Sixth Chapter of the Tiruvathavur
Purana, translated with Notes. By 8. C. Chitty.—The Discourse on the Minor Results of Con-
duct, or the Discourse Addressed to Subba, By Rev. D. J. Gogerly.—On the State of Crime in
Ceylon. By Hon J. Stark.—Language and Literature of the Singalese. By Rev.S. Hardy.—
Education Establishment of the Dutch in Ceylon. By Rey. J. D. Palm.—Account of the Dutch
Chureh in Ceylon. By Rev. J. D. Palm.—Some Experiments in Electro-Agriculture. By J.
Capper.—Singalo Wada, translated by Rev. D. J. Gogerly.—Colouring Matter Discovered in the
husk of the Cocoa Nut. By Dr. R. Gygax.

1847-48. 8vo. pp. 221, sewed. Price 7s. 6d.

ContEents:—The Mineralogy of Ceylon. By Dr. R. Gygax.—The Dutch Church in Ceylon.
By Rey. J. D. Palm.—On the History of Jaffna, from the Earliest Period to the Dutch Conquest.
By 8. C. Chitty.—The Rise and Fall of the Calany Ganga, from 1843 to 1846. By J. Capper,
—The Discourse respecting Ratapala. Translated by Rev. D. J. Gogerly.—The Manufacture
of Salt in the Chilaw and Putlam Districts. By A. O. Brodie.—A Royal Grant engraved on a
Copper Plate. Translated, with Notes. By Rev. D. J. Gogerly.—Ancient and Modern Coins
of Ceylon. By Hon, Mr, J. Stark.—Notes on the Climate and Salubrity of Putlam, By A, O.
Brodie.— Revenue and Expenditure of the Dutch Government in Ceylon, during the last years
of their Administration. By J. Capper.—On Buddhism, By Rev. D. J. Gogerly.

1853-55. Part I. 8vo. pp. 56, sewed. Price 7s. 6d. (or the 3 parts £1).
Contents :—Buddhism: Chariya Pitaka. By Rev. D. J. Gogerly.—Laws of the Buddhist
Priesthood. By Kev. D. J. Gogerly.—Statistical Account of the Districts of Chilaw
Korle, Seven Korles. By A. O. Brodie.—Catalogue of Ceylon Birds. By E. F, Kelaart, and
and Putlam, N.W.P. By A. O. Brodie.— Rock Inscription at Gooroo Godde Wihare, in the Magool.
By E. L. Layard.
1853-55. Part II. 8vo. pp. 102, with extra plates, sewed. Price 7s. 6d.

Conrents:—Catalogue of Ceylon Birds. By E. F. Kelaart and E. L. Layard.—Forms
of Salutations and Address known among the Singalese, By Hon. J. Stark.— Rock In-
scriptions. By A. O. Brodie.—On the Veddhas of Bintenne. By Rev. J. Gillings. — Rock
Inscription at Piramanenkandel. ByS C,Chitty.—Analysis of the Great Historical Poem of the
Moors, entitled Surah, By S. C. Chitty.

1853-55. Part III. 8vo. pp. 150, sewed. Price 7s. 6d.
Contents :—Analysis of the Great Historical Poem of the Moors, entitled Surah. By
S. C. Chitty.—Description of New or little known Species of Reptiles found in Ceylon, By
E. F. Kelaart.—Laws of the Buddhist Priesthood. By the Rev. D. Sie Gogerly.—Ceylon Ornitho-
logy. By E F. Kelaart.—Account of the Rodiyas, with a Specimen of their Language, By
§. C. Chitty.—Rock Inscriptions in the North-Western Province. By A. O. Brodie.

1865-6. 8vo. pp. xi. and 184. Price 7s. 6d.

Contents :—On Demonology and Witchcraft in Ceylon. By D. de Silva Gooneratne Modliar,
—First Discourse Delivered by Buddha, By Rey. D. J. Gogerly. Pootoor Well.—The Air
Breathing Fish of Ceylon. By Bareroft Boake, B.A.—On the Origin of the Sinhalese Language.
By J. D’Alwis.—Reumrks on the Poisonous Properties of the Calotropis Gigantea, ete. By
W. C, Ondaatjie.—On the Crocodiles of Ceylon. By Barcroit Boake.—Native Medicinal Oils.

16 Linguistic Publications of Triibner ¢ Co.,

1867-70. Part I. 8vo. pp. 150. Price 10s.

Conrents:—On the Origin of the Sinhalese Language. By James De Alwis.—A Lecture on
Buddhism, By the Rey. D, J. Gogerly.—Description of two Birds new to the recorded Fauna
of Ceylon, By H. Nevil.—Description of a New Genus and Five New Species of Marine Uni-
valves from the Southern Province, Ceylon. By G. Nevill.—A Brief Notice of Robert Knox and
his Companions in Captivity in Kandy for the space of Twenty Years, discovered among the
Dutch Records preserved in the Colonial Secretary’s Office, Colombo. By J. R. Blake.

1867-70. Part II. 8vo. pp. xl.and 45. Price 7s. 6d.
Conrenrs:—Summary of the Contents of the First Book in the Buddhist Canon, called the
Parajika Book.—By the Rev. 8. Coles.—Parajika Book—No, 1.— Parajika Book—No. 2,

1871-72. 8vo. pp. 66 and xxxiv. Price 7s. 6d.

Contents :—Extracts from a Memoir left by the Dutch Governor, Thomas Van Rhee, to his
successor, Governor Gerris de Heer, 1697, Translated from the Dutch Records preserved in the
Colonial Secretariat at Colombo. By R. A. van Cuylenberg, Government Record Keeper.—The
Food Statistics of Ceylon. By J. Capper.—Specimens of Sinhalese Proverbs. By L. de Zoysa,
Mudaliyar, Chief Translator of Government.—Ceylon Reptiles: being a preliminary Catalogue
of the Reptiles found in, or supposed to be in Ceylon, compiled from various authorities. By
W. Ferguson.—On an Inscription at Dondra. No.2. By T. W. Rhys Davids, Esq.

1873. Part I. 8vo. pp. 79. Price 7s. 6d.

Contents:—On Qath and Ordeal. By Bertram Fulke Hartshorne.—Notes on Prinochilus
Vincens. By W. V. Legge.—The Sports and Games of the Singhalese. By Leopold Ludovici.—
On Miracles. By J. De Alwis.—On the Occurrence of Scolopax Rusticola and Gallinago Scolo-
pacina in Ceylon. By W. V. Legge.—Transcript and Translation of an Ancient Copper-plate
Sannas, By Mudliyar Louis de Zoysa, Chief Translator to Government.

1874. Part I. 8vo. pp. 94. Price 7s. 6d.

ConrEents :—Description of a supposed New Genus of Ceylon, Batrachians. By W. Ferguson,
—Notes on the Identity of Piyadasi and Asoka. By Mudaliyar Louis de Zoysa.—The Island
Distribution of the Birds in the Society’s Museum. By W. V.Legge.— Brand Marks on Cattle.
By J. De Alwis.—Notes on the Occurrence of a rare Eagle new to Ceylon; and other interesting
or rare birds. By S. Bligh —Extracts from the Records of the Dutch Government in Ceylon,
By R, van Cuylenberg.—Stature of Gotama Buddha, By J. De Alwis.

1879. Svo. pp. 58. Price 5s.

Conrrnts.—Notes on Ancient Sinhalese Inscriptions.—On the Preparation and Mounting of
Insects for the Binocular Microscope.—Notes on Neophron Puenopterus (Savigny) from
Nuwara Eliya,—On the Climate of Dimbula.—Note on the supposed cause of the existence of
Patanas or Grass Lands of the Mountain Zone of Ceylon,

1880. Part I. 8vo. pp. 90. Price 5s.

Conrents.—Text and Translation of the Inscription of Mahinde III. at Mihintale.—Glossary.—
A Paper on the Vedic and Buddhistic Polities.—Customs and Ceremonies connected with the
Paddi Cultivation.—Gramineae, or Grasses Indigenous to or Growing in Ceylon.

1880. Part II. 8vo. pp. 48. Price 5s.

Contents.—Gramineae, or Grasses Indigenous to or Growing in Ceylon.—Translation of two
Jatakas.—On the supposed Origin of Tamana, Nuwara, Tambapanni and Taprobane,—The Rocks
and Minerals of Ceylon.

1881. Vol. VII. Part I. (No. 23.) 8vo. pp. 56. Price 5s.

Conrrnts.—Hindu Astronomy: as compared with the European Science, By 8S. Mervin,—
Sculptures at Horana. By J. G. Smither.—Gold. By A. C. Dixon,—Specimens of Sinhalese
Proverbs. By L. De Zoysa.—Ceylon Bee Culture By S. Jayatilaka.—A Short Account of the
Principal Religious Ceremonies observed by the Kandyans of Ceylon. By C. J. R, Le
Mesurier.—Valentyn’s Account of Adam’s Peak, By A. Spense Moss. hoch rg

oe Vol. ve Part II. (No. 24.) 8vo. pp. 162. Price ds.

Conrents,—The Ancient Hmporium of Kalab, etc., with Notes on Fa-Hian’

Ceylon. By H. Nevill.—The Sinhalese Observance of the Kalawa. By L Nelle Nee eae
Origin of the Veddas, with Specimens of their Songs and Charms. By L. de Zoysa.—A Htiniyam
Image. By L. Nell.—Note on the Mira Kantiri Festival of the Muhammadans. By x ZN
Sham-ud-did,—Tericulture in Ceylon. By J. L. Vanderstraaten.—Sinhalese Omens. By SS

Jayatilaka,
. 1882. Extra Number. 8yvo. pp. 60. Price 5s.
Conrents.—Ibu Batuta in the Maldi d Ceylon, §

Dee ainda ae sal and Ceylon, Translated from the French of M. M.

Asiatic Society (Royal).—North China Branch of,— Journal.—Old
Series, 4 numbers, and New Series, Parts 1 to 12. The following numbers
are sold separately: Op Serims—No. II. May, 1859, pp. 145 to 256.
No. III]. December, 1859, pp. 112. 7s. 6a. each. Vol. Il. No. I. Sept., 1860
pp. 128. 7s. 6d, New Srrrs—No. I. Dec., 1864, pp. 174. 7s. 6d. No. IL.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 17

Dec., 1865, pp. 187, with maps. 7s. 6d. No. III. Dec., 1866, pp: 121. Qs.
No. IV. Dec., 1867, pp 266. 10s. 6d. No. VI. for 1869 and 1870, pp- 216.
7s. 6d. No. VII. (1871-2) pp. 270. 10s. No. VIII. pp. 200. 10s. 6d. No.
IX. pp. 254. 10s. 6d. No. X. pp. 336 and 279. £1 1s. No. XI. (1877) pp.
200. 10s. 6d. No. XII. (1878) pp. 337, with maps. £1 1s. No. XIII.
(1879) pp. 138, with plates, 10s. 6d. No. XIV. (1879) pp. 80, with plates, 4s.
No. XV. (1880) pp. 390, with plates, 15s. Vol. XVI. (1881) pp. 248. 12s. 6d.
Vol. XVII. (1882) pp. 246 with plates, 12s. 6d. Vol. XVIII. (1883) pp-
228, with 2 plates.

Asiatic Society (Royal).—China Branch of the,—Journal. — 8vo.
sewed. Vol. XIX. Part I. (1884) pp. 125. Vol. XX. (1885) pp. 322,
with plate. Vol. XXI. (1886) pp. 370, with plate.

Asiatic Society of Japan.—'ransacrions. Vol. I. From 30th October,
1872, to 9th October, 1873. 8vo. pp. 110, with plates. 1874. Vol. II. 1873.
Svo. pp. 249. 1874. Vol. III. Part I. 1874. Vol. III. Part Il. 1875;
Vol. IV. 1875. Vol. V. Part I. 1876. Vol. V. Part II. (A Summary of the
Japanese Penal Codes. By J. H. Longford.) Vol. VI. Part I. pp. 190. Vol.
VI. Part II. 1878. Vol. VI. Part III. 1878. 7s. 6d. each Part.—Vol.
VII. Part I. (Milne’s Journey across Europe and Asia.) 5s.—Vol. VII. Part
II. March, 1879. 5s.—Vol. VII. Part III. June, 1879. 7s. 6d. ’ Vol. VII.
Part IV. Nov., 1879. 10s. 6d. Vol. VIII. Part I. Feb., 1880. ‘7s 64d.
Vol. VIIT. Part Il. May, 1880. “7s. 6d. Vol. VIII. Part, TIT, Oc'.,
1880. 10s. 6d. Vol. VIII. Part IV. Dec., 1880. 5s. Vol. IX. Part I.
Feb., 1881. 7s. 6d: Vol. IX. Part II. Aug., 1881. 7s. 6d. Vol. IX. Part
III. Dec., 1881. 53. Vol. X. Part I. May, 1882. 10s. Vol. X. Part IU.
Oct., 1882. 7s. 6d. Vol. X. Supplement, 1883. £1. Vol. XI. Part. April,
1883.* 7s. 6d. Vol. XI. Part If. Sep., 1888. 7s. 6d. Vol. XII. Part I.
Nov, 1883. 5s. Vol. XII. Part II. May, 1884. 5s.

Asiatic Society, Royal.—Straits Branch.—Journat. No. 1. 8vo. pp.
pp- 130, sewed, 3 Maps and Plate. July, 1878. Price 9s.

Conrents.—Inaugural Address of the President. By the Ven. Archdeacon Hose, M.4A,—
Distribution of Minerals in Sarawak. By A. Hart Everett.—Breeding Pearls. By N. B.
Dennys, Ph.D.—Dialects of the Melanesian Tribes of the Malay Peninsula, By M. de Mikluho-
Maclay.—Malay Spelling in English. Report of Government Committee (reprinted).—Geography
of the Malay Peninsula. Part I. By A. M. Skinner.—Chinese Secret Societies. PartI. By
W. A. Pickering.—Malay Proverbs. Part. I. By W. E. Maxwell.—The Snake-eating
Hamadryad. By N.B. Dennys, Ph.D.—Gutta Percha, By H. I. Murton,—Miscellaneous Notices.

No. 2. 8vo. pp. 130, 2 Plates, sewed. December, 1878. Price 9s.

ConrEvTs : — The Song of the Dyak Head-feast. By Rev. J. Perham.—Malay Proverbs. Part II.
By £. W. Maxwell.—A Malay Nautch. By F. A. Swettenham, -— Pidgin English. By N. B.
Dennys, Ph.D.—The Founding of Singapore. By Sir T. S. Raffles.—Notes on Two Perak
Manuscripts. By W.E. Maxwell.—The Metalliferous Formation of the Peninsula. By D. D.
Daly.— Suggestions regarding a new Malay Dictionary. By the Hon. C. J. Irving. —Ethnological
Excursions in the Malay Peninsula. By N. von Mikluho-Maclay.—Miscellaneous Notices.

No. 3. 8vo. pp. iv. and 146, sewed. July, 1879. Price 9s.

ConrenTs :—Chinese Secret Societies, by W. A. Pickering.—-Malay Proverbs, Part III, by W.
£. Maxwell.—Notes on Gutta Percha, by F, W. Burbidge, W. H. Treacher, H. J. Murton.—The
Maritime Code of the Malays, reprinted from a translation by Sir S. Raffles.—A Trip to Gunong
Bumut, by D, F. A, Hervey.—Caves at Sungei Batu in Selangor, by D. D. Daly.—Geography
of Aching, translated trom the German by Dr. Beiber.—Account of a Naturalist’s Visit to Selan-
gor, by A. J. Hornady. —Miscellaneous Notices: Geographical Notes, Routes from Selangor to
Pahang, Mr. Deane’s Survey Report, A Tiger’s Wake, Breeding Pearls, The Maritime Code, and
Sir F. Raffles’ Meteorological Returns.

No. 4. 8vo. pp. xxv. and 65, sewed. December, 1879. Price 9s.

Conrents. —List of Members,—Proceedings, General Meeting.—Annual Meeting.—Council’s
Annual Report for 1879, —‘lreasurer’s Report for 1879.—President’s Address,—Keception of
Professor Nordenskjold.—The Marine Code. By Sir S, Raftles.—About Kinta. By? De We,
Leech.—About Shin and Bernam. By H. W. Leech,—The Aboriginal Tribes of Perak, By
W. E. Maxwell. — The Vernacular Press in the Straits, By E. W. Birch.—On the Guliga of
Borneo, By A. H. Everett.—On the name ‘‘Sumatra,”—A Correction,

2

18 Linguistic Publications of Triibner ¢ Co.,

No. 5, 8vo. pp. 160, sewed. July, 1879. Price 9s.

Conrrnrs,—Selesilah (Book of the Descent) of the Rajas of Bruni. By H. Low.—Notes to
Ditto. — History of the Sultins of Bruni.—List of the Mahomedan Sovereigns of Bruni. — Historic
Tablet.—Acheh. By G. P. Talson.—From Perak to Shin and down the Shin and Bernam Rivers.
By F. A. Swettenham.—A Contribution to Malayan Bibliography, By N. B. Dennys.—Compa~-
rative Vocabulary of some of the Wild Tribes inhabiting the Malayan Peninsula, Borneo, etc.—
The Tiger in Borneo. By A. H, Everett. ;

No. 6. 8vo. pp. 133, with 7 Photographic Plates, sewed. December, 1880. Price 9s.

Conrenrs.— Some Account of the Independent Native States of the Malay Peninsula, Part I.
By F. A. Swettenham,—The Ruins of Boro Burdur in Java. By the Ven. Archdeacon G, F. Hose.
A Contribution to Malayan Bibliography. By N. B. Dennys.—Report on the Exploration of the
Caves of Borneo. By A. H. Everett.—Introductory Remarks, By J. Evans.—Notes on the
Report:—Notes on the Collection of Bones. By G. Bush.—A_ Sea-Dyak ‘Tradition of the
Deluge and Subsequent Events. By the Rev. J. Perham.—The Comparative Vocabulary.

No. 7. 8vo. pp. xvi. and 92. With a Map, sewed. June, 1881. Price 9s.

ConrEents.—Some account of the Mining Districts of Lower Perak. By J. Errington de la
Croix.— Folklore of the Malays. By W. E. Maxwell —Notes on the Rainfall of Singapore. By
J. J. L Wheatley.—Journal of a Voyage through the Straits of Malacca on an Expedition to
the Molucca Islands. By Captain W. C. Lennon.

No. 8. 8vo. pp. 56. With a Map, sewed. December, 1881. Price 9s.

Conrtents.—The Endau and its Tributaries. By D. F A. Hervey.—lItinerary from Singapore
to the Source of the Sembrong and up the Madek.—Petara, or Sea Dyak Gods. By the Rey. J.
Perham.—Klouwang and its Caves, West Coast of Atchin. Translated by D. F. A. Hervey.—
Miscellaneous Notes: Varieties of “ Getah”’ and ‘‘ Rotan.”—The ‘‘Ipoh”’ Tree, Perak.—Com-
parative Vocabulary.

No. 9. 8vo. pp. xxii. and 172. With three Col. Plates, sd. June, 1882. Price 12s.

Conrents.— Journey on Foot to the Patani Frontier in 1876. By W. E. Maxwell.—Probable
Origin of the Hill Tribes of Formosa, By John Dodd.—History of Perak from Native Sources.
by W. E. Maxwell.—Malayan Ornithology. By Captain H. R. Kelham.—On the Transliteration
of Malay in the Roman Character. By W. E. Maxwell.—Kota Glanggi, Pahang. By W.
Cameron.- Natural History Notes. By N. B. Dennys.—Statement of Haji of the Madek Ali,.—
Pantang Kapur of the Madek Jakun,—Stone from Batu Pahat.— Rainfall at Lankat, Sumatra,

No. 10. 8yo. pp. xv. and 117, sewed. December, 1882. Price 9s.

Contents,—Journal of a Trip from Sarawak to Meri. By N. Denison.—The Mentra Tradi-
tions. By the Hon. D. F. A, Hervey.—Probable Origin of the Hill Tribes of Formosa. By J.
Dodd.—Sea Dyak Religion. By the Rev. J. Perham,—The Dutch in Perak. By W. E. Max-
well.—Outline History of the Kritish Connection with Malaya. By the Hon, A. M Skinner.—
Extracts from Journals of the Société de Geographie of Paris —Memorandum on Malay Trans-
literation.—The Chiri.—Register of Rainfall.

No. 11. 8vo. pp. 170. With a Map, sewed. June, 1883. Price 9s.

Contents.—Malayan Ornithology. By Captain H. R. Kelham.—Malay Proverbs. By the
Hon. W. E. Maxwel]l.—The Pigmies. Translated by J. Errington dela Croix.—On the Patani
By W. Cameron.—Latah. By H. A. O’Brien.—The Java System. By the Hon. A. M. Skinner,
—Batu Kédok. ~ Prigi Acheh.—Dutch Occupation of the Dindings, etc.

No. 12. 8vo. pp. xx. and 288, sewed. December, 1883. Price 9s.

ConrEnts.—Malayan Ornithology. By Captain H. R. Kelham.—Gutta-producing Trees. By
L, Wray.—Shamanism in Perak. By the Hon. W. E. Maxwell.—Changes in Malayan Dialects.
~ By A. M. Ferguson.—Straits Meteorology. By the Hon. A. M. Skinner.—Occasional Notes
By the Hon, W. E. Maxwell. :

No. 18. S8vyo. pp. xx. and 116, sewed. June, 1884. Price 9s,

Conrents.—The Pigmies. Translated by J. Errington de la Croix.—Valentyn’s Descripti
of Malacca.—By Hon, D. F. A. Hervey.—The Stream Tin Deposit of Perak. By the Rese
Tenison- Woods.—Rembau. By the Hon. D. F. A. Hervey.—'’he Tawaran and Putatan Rivers.
By S. Elphinstone Dalrymple.—Miscellaneous Notes. .

No. 14. 8vo. pp. 176, sewed. December, 1884. Price 9s.

Conrenrs.—Journey to the Summit of Gunong Bubu. By the Rey. J. E. Tension-W
F.G.8., F.L.S., ete.—Sea Dyak Religion. By the Rev. J. Perham.—The History of Perak ad
Native Sources. By the Hon. W. E. Maxwell.—British North Borneo. By E. P. Gueritz.—
Jelebu.—By H. A. O’Brien. :

.57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 19

No. 15. 8vo. 172, sewed. June, 1885. Price 9s.

ContEnts.—Journal kept during a Journey across the Malay Peninsula (with Maps). By F.
A. Swettenham.—The Object and Results of a Dutch Expedition into the Interior of Sumatra
in the years 1877, 1878, and 1879. Translated from the French, by R. N. Bland.—Further Notes
on the Rainfall of Singapore. By J.J.L. Wheatley. -A Glimpse at the Manners and Customs
of the Hill Tribes of North Formosa. By J. Dodd.—Genealogy of the Royal Family of Brunei,
Translated from the Malay by W. H. Treacher.—French Land Decree in Cambodia, Translated
from the French by the Hon. W. E. Maxwell, C.M G.—Malay Language and Literature. By
Dr. Reinhold Rost.—A Missionary’s Journey through Laos from Bangkok to Ubon. By the Rey,
N. J. Couvreur, Singapore.—Valentyn’s Account of Malacca. Translated from the Dutch.

No. 16. 8yo, pp. 220, sewed. December, 1885. Price 9s.

Contents.— Plan for a Volunteer Force in the Muda Districts, Province Wellesley. By the late
J. R. Logan.—A Description of the Chinese Lottery known as ‘‘Hua-Hoey.” By ©. W. S.
Kynnersley.—On the Roots in the Malay Language. From the Dutch of J. Pijnappel.—Klieng’s
War Raid to the Skies; a Dyak Myth. By the Rev. J. Perham.—Valentyn’s Account of Ma-
lacca. Translated from the Dutch (continued from Journal, No. 15).—On Mines and Miners in
Kinta, Perak. By A. Hole, Inspector of Mines, Kinta.

No. 17. 8vo. pp. 160-84, sewed. June, 1886. Price 9s.

Contents.—Biography of Siam. By E. M. Satow,—Sri Rama; a Fairy Tale told by a Malay
Rhapsodist. By W. E. Maxwell.—History of Malacca from Portuguese Sources, Contributed

by E. Koch.—Occasional Notes.
No. 18. 8vo. pp. xx. and 376, sewed. December, 1886. Price 9s.

Contents.—Biography of Siam. By E. M. Satow.—English, Sulu, and Malay Vocabulary.
By T. H. Haynes.—Raja Donan, a Malay Fairy Tale told bya Malay Rhapsodist. By W. EK.
Maxwell.—The Survey Question in Cochin China. By M. Camouilly.—Notes on Economic
Plants, Straits Settlements, by N. Cautley.—Index to Journal of the Indian Archipelago. By N.

B. Dennys.

American Oriental Society.—Journat or THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL
Society. Vols. I. to X. and Vol. XII. (all published). S8vo. Boston and
New Haven, 1849 to 1881. A complete set. Veryrare. £14.

Volumes 2 to 5 and 8 to 10 and 12 may be had separately at £1 1s. each.

Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine.—A Record of
Information on the Topography and Natural Productions of Madagascar, ani
the Customs, Traditions, Language and Religious Bel'efs of its People. Edited
by the Rey. J. Stprzs, F.R.G.S., and Rey. R. Baron, F.L.8. Demy 8vo. pp.

iv. and 132, with plate, paper. 2s, 6d.

Anthropological Society of London, Mrmorrs READ BEFORE THE, 1863-
1866, 8vo. pp. 542, cloth. 21s. Vol. II. 8vo., pp. x. 464, cloth. 21s,

Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland (The Journal
of the). Published Quarterly. 8yo. sewed.

Biblical Archeology, Society of.—Transactions or rue. 8vo. Vol. I.
Part. I., 12s. 6d. Vol. I., Part II., 12s. 6d. (this part cannot be sold
separately, or otherwise than with the complete sets). Vols. II. and III.,
2 parts, 10s. 6d. each. Vol. 1V., 2 parts, 12s. 6d. each, Vol. V., Part. I., 15s. ;
Part. II., 12s. 6d. Vol. VI, 2 parts, 12s. 6d. each. Vol. VII. Part I. 10s, 61.
Parts II, and III. 12s. 6d. each. Vol. VIII., 3 parts, 12s. 6d. each.
Vol. IX. Part I. 12s. 6d.

Procespinas. Vol. I. Session 1878-79. 2s. 6d. Vol. II. 2s. 6d. Vols.
Ill., IV., and V. 5s. each. Vols. VI., VII., and VIII. (1885-6). 6s. each.

Bibliotheca Indica. A Collection of Oriental Works published by
the Asiatic Society of Bengal. Old Series. Fasc. 1 to 261. New Series.
Fase. 1 to 607. (Special List of Contents and prices to be had on application.)

Browning Society's Papers.—Demy 8vo. wrappers. 1881-84, Part
I., pp. 116. 10s. Bibliography of Robert Browning from 1833-81, Part IT.
p. 142. 10s. Part III., pp. 168. 10s. Part [V., pp. 148. 10s. Part V.,
pp. 104. 10s. 1885-86. Part VII., pp. 168. 10s. Part VILL pple we kOg.

20 Linguistie Publications of Triibner & Co.,

Browning.—Bibliography of Robert Browning from 1833-81. Com-
piled by F. J. Furnivaty. Demy 8vo. pp. 170, wrapper. Third Edition.
Enlarged. 1883. 12s.

Browning’s Poem’s (Illustrations to).—4to. boards. Parts I. and Il.
10s. each.

Calcutta Review (Tur).—Fublished Quarterly. Price 6s. per annum.

Calcutta Review.—A Compiere Ser rrom THE COMMENCEMENT IN
1844 to 1882. Vols 1. to 75, or Numbers 1 to 140. A fine clean copy.
Calcutta, 1844-82. Index to the first fifty volumes of the Calcutta Review,
2 parts. (Ualeutta, 1873). Nos. 39 and 40 have never been published. £66.
Complete sets are of great rarity.

Calcutta Review (Selections from the).—Crown 8vo.sewed. Nos. 1.
to 45. 5s. each.

Cambridge Philological Society (Transactions of the).—Vol. I. From
1872 to 1880. 8vo. pp. xvi. and 420, wrapper. 1881. lds.

Con1ents —Preface.—The Work of a Philological Society. J. P. Postgate.—Transactions of

the Cambridge Philological Society from 1872 to 1879.—Transactions for 1879-1880.— Reviews.
—Appendix,

Vol. II. for 1881 and 1882. 8vo. pp. vill.-286, wrapper, 1883. 12s.
Vol. III. Part I. 1886. 3s. 6d.

Cambridge Philological Society (Proceedings of the).—PartsI and II.
1882.5 1s. 62.3 TIT. Ns.3 IV.-VIL. 23.26d_; Vit cand Wilh 23. eX
Xand XI. I's..6¢4; XII.) ls. 6¢y; XTX Ve, 28. 6d.

China Review; or, Notes and Queries on the Far East. Published
bi-monthly. 4to, Subscription £1 10s. per volume.

Chinese Recorder and Missionary Journal.— Shanghai.
per volume (of 6 parts) 15s.

A complete set from the beginning. Vols. 1 to 10. 8vo. Foochow and
Shanghai, 1861-1879. £9.

Containing important tributi Chi Philology, Mythology, ;
Rdising, Giles, Bretechnelder, Scarborough, eto, ‘The earlier volumes are out-of prin, 7
Chrysanthemum (The).—A Monthly Magazine for Japan and the Far

East. Vol. I. and II, complete. Bound £1 1s. Subscription £1 per volume.

Geographical Society of Bombay.—Journat anp Transactions. A
complete set. 19 vols. 8vo. Numerous Plates and Maps, some coloured.
Bombay, 1844-70. £10 10s.

An important Periodical, containing grammatical sketches of several languages and dialects,
as well as the most valuable contributions on the Natural Sciences of India Since 1871 the
above is amalgamated with the ‘ Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society.”

Indian Antiquary (The).—A Journal of Oriental Research in Archseo-
logy, History, Literature, Languages, Philosophy, Religion, Folklore, etc.
Edited by J. F. Finer, C.I.E, M.R.A.S., ete., and Carr. R. C. Temes
F.R.G.S., M.R.A.S., ete. 4to. Published 12 numbers per annum. Sub-

scription £1 16s. A complete set. Vols. 1 to 11, £28 10s. (The earlier
volumes are out of print.)

Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia, Journal of the—LEdited by
J. R. Locan, of Pinang. 9 vols. Singapore, 1847-55,
I. to IV. Part 1, (all published), 1856 -59,
with many plates. £30.

Vol. I. of the New Series consists of 2 parts; Vol. II. of 4 parts; Vol. III. of
No. 1 (never completed), and of Vol. LV. also only one number was published
A few copies remain of several volumes that may be had separately. :

Ls5

Subscription

New Series. Vols.
A complete set in 13 vols. 8vo.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 21

Indian Notes and Queries. A Monthly Periodical devoted to the
Systematic Collection of Authentic Notes and Scraps of Information regarding
the Country and the People. Edited by Captain R. C. TEMPLE, etc. 4to.
Subscription per annum. 16s.

Japan, Transactions of the Seismological Society of, Vol. I. Parts i.
and ii. April-June, 1880, 10s. 6d. Vol. If. July-December, 1880. 5s.
Vol. III, January~December, 1881. 10s. 6d, Vol. LV. January-June. 1882. 9s.

Literature, Royal Society of—See under “ Royal.”

Madras Journal of Literature and Science.—Published by the
Committee of the Madras Literary Society and Auxiliary Royal Asiatic Society,
and edited by Morris, Cote, and Bruwn. A complete set of the Three Series
(being Vols. I. to XVI., First Series; Vols. XVII. to XXII. Second Series;
Vol. XXIII. Third Series, 2 Numbers, no more published). A fine copy,
uniformly bound in 23 vols, With numerous plates, half calf. Madras,
1834-66. £42.

Equally scarce and important. On all South-Indian topics, especially those relating to
Natural History and Science, Public Works and Industry, this Periodical is an unrivalled
authority.

Madras Journal of Literature and Science. 1878. (I. Volume of
the Fourth Series.) Edited by Gustav Oppert, Ph.D. 8vo. pp. vi. and 284,
and xlvii. with 2 plates. 1879. 10s. 6d. Contents.—I. On the Classification
of Languages. By Dr. G. Orrert.—II. On the Ganga Kings. By Lewis
Ricz. 1879. pp. 318. 10s. 6d. 1880. pp. vi. and 232. 10s. 1881. pp.
vi. and 338. 10s.

Orientalist (The).—A Monthly Journal of Oriental Literature, Arts,
Folk-lore, ete. Edited by W. Goonrrgenirxr. Annual Subscription, 12s.

Pandit (The).—A Monthly Journal of the Benares College, devoted to
Sanskrit Literature. Old Series. 10 vols. 1866-1876. New Series, vols. 1 to 9.
1876-1887. £1 4s. per volume.

Panjab Notes and Queries, now Indian Notes and Queries, which
see above.

Peking Gazette.—Translations of the Peking Gazette for 1872 to 1885.
8vo. cloth. 10s. 6d. each.

Philological Society (Transactions of The). A Complete Set, in-
cluding the Proceedings of the Philological Society for the years 1842-1853.
6 vols. The Philological Society’s Transactions, 1854 to 1876. 15 vols, The
Philological Society’s Extra Volumes. 9 vols. In all 30 vols, 8vo. £19 18s. 6d.

Proceedings (The) of the Philological Society 1842-1853. 6 vols. 8vo. £3.

Transactions of the Philological Society, 1854-1876. 15 vols. 8vo. £10 16s.

*,* The Volumes for 1867, 1868-9, 1870-2, and 1873-4, are only to be had in

complete sets, as above.

Separate Volumes.

For 1854: containing papers by Rev. J. W. Blakesley, Rev. T. 0. Cockayne,
Rey. J. Davies, Dr. J. W. Donaldson, Dr. Theod. Goldstiicker, Prof. T. Hewitt
Key, J. M. Kemble, Dr. R. G. Latham, J. M. Ludlow, Hensleigh Wedgwood,
etc, 8yo.cl. £1 ls.

For 1855: with papers by Dr. Carl Abel, Dr. W. Bleek, Rev. Jno. Davies, Miss
A. Gurney, Jas. Kennedy, Prof. T. H. Key, Dr. R. G, Latham, Henry Malden,
W. Ridley, Thos. Watts, Hensleigh Wedgwood, etc. In 4 parts. 8vo. £1 1s.

*,* Kamilaroi Language of Australia, by W. Ridley; and False Etymologies, by

H. Wedgwood, separately. 1s.

22 Linguistic Publications of Triibner f Co.,

For 1856-7: with papers by Prof. Aufrecht, Herbert Coleridge, Lewis Kr. Daa,
M. de Haan, W.U- Jourdain, James Kennedy, Prof. Key, Dr. G. Latham, J. M.
Ludlow, Rev. J. J. S. Perowne, Hensleigh Wedgwood, R. F. Weymouth, Jos.
Yates, etc. 7 parts. 8vo. (The Papers relating to the Society's Dictionary
are omitted.) £1 1s, each volume. ; ;

For 1858: including the volume of Early English Poems, Lives of the Saints,
edited from MSS. by F. J. Furnivall; and papers by Ern. Adams, Prof.
Aufrecht, Herbert Coleridge, Rev. Francis Crawford, M. de Haan Hettema,
Dr. R. G. Latham, Dr. Lottner, ete. 8vo. cl. 12s.

For 1859; with papers by Dr. E. Adams, Prof. Aufrecht, Herb. Coleridge, F. J.
Furnivall, Prof. T. H. Key, Dr. C. Lottner, Prof. De Morgan, F. Pulszky,
Hensleigh Wedgwood, ete. 8yvo.cl. 12s.

For 1860-1: including The Play of the Sacrament; and Pascon agau Arluth, the
Passion of our Lord, in Cornish and English, both from MSS., edited by Dr.
W. Stokes; and papers by Dr. E. Adams, T. F. Barham, Rev. D. Coleridge,
H. Coleridge, Sir J. F. Davis, D. P. Fry, Prof. T. H. Key, Dr. C. Lottner,
Bishop Thirlwall, H. Wedgwood, R. F. Weymouth, ete. 8vo.cl. 12s.

For 1862-3: with papers by C. B. Cayley, D. P. Fry, Prof, Key, H. Malden,
Rich. Morris, F. W. Newman, Robert Peacock, Hensleigh Wedgwood, R. F.
Weymouth, etc. 8vo.cl. 12s. BD

For 1864 : containing 1. Manning’s (Jas.) Inquiry into the Character and Origin

~ of the Possessive Augment in English, ete. ; 2. Newman's (Francis W.) Text of
the Iguvine Inscriptions, with Interlinear Latin Translation; 3. Barnes’s (Dr.
W.) Grammar and Glossary of the Dorset Dialect; 4. Gwreans An Bys—The
Creation: a Cornish Mystery, Cornish and English, with Notes by Whitley
Stokes, etc. 8vo.cl. 12s.

*,* Separately : Manning’s Inquiry, 3s.—Newman’s Iguvine Inscription, 3s.—

Stokes’s Gwreans An Bys, 8s. ; ;

For 1865: including Wheatley’s (H. B.) Dictionary of Reduplicated Words in the
English Language; and papers by Prof. Aufrecht, Ed. Brock, C. B. Cayley,
Rev. A. J. Church, Prof. T. H. Key, Rev. E. H. Knowles, Prof. H. Malden,
Hon. G. P. Marsh, John Rhys, Guthbrand Vigfusson, Hensleigh Wedgwood, H.
B. Wheatley, etc. 8vo.cl. 12s.

For 1866: including 1. Gregor’s (Rev. Walter) Banffshire Dialect, with Glossary
of Words omitted by Jamieson; 2. Edmondston’s (‘I’.) Glossary of the Shetland
Dialect; and papers by Prof. Cassal, C. B. Cayley, Danby P. Fry, Prof. T. H
Key, Guthbrand Vigfusson, Hensleigh Wedgwood, etc. S8vo. cl. 12s.

*.* The Volumes for 1867, 1868-9, 1870-2, and 1873-4, are out of print.
Besides contributions in the shape of valuable and interesting papers, the volume for
1867 also includes: 1. Peacock’s (Rob. B.) Glossary of the Hundred of Lonsdale ;
and 2, Ellis (A. J.) On Paleeotype representing Spoken Sounds; and on the
Diphthong “Oy.” The volume for 1868-9—1. Ellis’s (A. J.) Only English
Proclamation of Henry IIT. in Oct. 1258; to which are added “ The Cuckoo’s Song”
and “The Prisoner’s Prayer,” Lyrics of the XIII. Century, with Glossary; and 2.
Stokes’s (Whitley) Cornish Glossary. ‘hat for 1870-2—1. Murray’s (Jas. A. H.)
Dialect of the Southern Counties of Scotland, with a linguistical map. That for
1873-4—Sweet’s (H.) History of English Sounds.

For 1875-6: containing Annual Addresses (Rev. R. Morris President), Fourth
and Fifth. Sources of Aryan Mythology by E. L. Brandreth; C. B. Cayley on
Italian Diminutives; Changes made by four young Children in Pronouncing
English Words, by Jas. M. Menzies; Manx Language, by H. Jenner; Dialect
of West Somerset, by F. T. Elworthy; English Metre, by Prof. J. B. Mayor;
Words, Logic, and Grammar, by H. Sweet; The Russian Language and its
Dialects, by W. R. Morfill; Relies of the Cornish Language in Mount’s Bay,
by H. Jenner. Dialects and Prehistoric Forms of Old English. By Henry

O7 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 23

Sweet; The Dialects of Monmouthshire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire,
Gloucestershire, Berkshire, Oxfordshire, South Warwickshire, South North-
amptonshire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, Middlesex, and Surrey, with a
New Classification of the English Dialects. By Prince L. L. Bonaparte (‘Two
Maps), Index, ete. Part I., 6s.; Part II., 6s.; Part III., 2s.

For 1877-8-9: containing the President’s (H. Sweet) Sixth, Seventh, and (Dr. J. A.
H. Murray) Eighth Annual Addresses. Accadian Phonology, by Prof. A. H.
Sayce; Here and There in Chaucer, by Dr. R. Weymouth; Grammar of the
Dialect of West Somerset, by F. T. Elworthy; English Metre, by Prof. J. B.
Mayor; Malagasy Language, by the Rev. W. E. Cousins; Anglo-Cymric Score,
by A, J. Ellis, F.R.S; Sounds and Forms of Spoken Swedish, by Henry Sweet ;
Russian Pronunciation, by Henry Sweet. Index, ete. Part I., 3s.; Part IL.,
7s. Part III. 8s.

For 1880-81: containing Some Phonetic Laws in Persian, by Prof. Charles Rieu,
Ph.D. ; Portuguese Simple Sounds, compared with those of Spanish, French,
English, ete., by H.I.H. Prince L. L. Bonaparte; The Middle Voice in
Virgil’s Aineid, Book VI., by B. Dawson, B.A. ; Difficulty in Russian Grammar,
by C. B. Cayley; The Polabes, by W. R. Morfill, M.A.; The Makua Language,
by Rey. C. Maples, M.A.; Distribution of English Place Names, ‘by W. R.
Browne, M.A.; Dare, ‘To Give”’; and t-Dere “To Put,’ by Prof. Postgate,
M.A.; Differences between the Speech ov Edinboro’ and London, by T. B.
Sprague, M.A.; Ninth Annual Address of President (Dr. J. A. H. Murray)
and Reports; Sound-Notation, by H. Sweet, M.A.; On Gender, by E. L.
Brandreth ; Tenth Annual Address of President (A. J. Ellis, B.A.) and Re-
ports; Distribution of Place-Names in the Scottish Lowlands, by W. R.
Browne, M.A.; Some Latin and Greek Etymologies, and the change of Z to D
in Latin, by J. P. Postgate, M.A.; Proceedings, etc.; The n of an, etc., in
the Authorized and Revised Versions of the Bible. By B. Dawson, B.A. ;
Notes on Translations of the New Testament. By B. Dawson, B.A.; Simple
Sounds of all the Living Slavonic Languages compared with those of the
Principal Neo-Latin and Germano Scandinavian Tongues. By H.1I.H. Prince
L-L. Bonaparte; The Romonsch or Rheetian Languages in the Grisons and
Tirol. By R. Martineau, M.A.—A Rough List of English Words found in
Anglo-French, especially during the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries; with
numerous References. By Rev. W. W. Skeat, M.A. ; The Oxford MS. of the
only English Proclamation of Henry III., 18 October, 1258. By Rev. W. W.
Skeat, MA.; and Errata in A. J. Ellis’s copy of the only English Proclamation
of Henry II1., in Phil. Trans. 1869. Index; List of Members, Part I. 12s.
PartII. 8s. PartIll. 7s.

For 1882-3-4: 1. Eleventh Annual Address (A. J. Ellis, B.A.); Obituary of Dr.
J. Muir and Mr. H. Nicol. Work of the Society. Reports. Some Latin Ety-
mologies. By Prof. Postgate, M.A. Initial Mutations in the Living Celtic,
Basque, Sardinian, and Italian Dialects, By H. I. H. Prince L.-L. Bonaparte.
Spoken Portuguese. By H. Sweet, M.A. The Bosworth-Toller Anglo-Saxon
Dictionary. By J. Platt, jun. The Etymology of “ Surround.’ By Rev.
Prof. Skeat. Old English Verbs in -egan and their Subsequent History By Dr.
J. A. H. Murray. Words connected with the Vine in Latin and the Neo-Latin
Dialects. By H. I. H. Prince L.-L. Bonaparte. Names of European Reptiles
in the Living Neo-Latin Languages. By H. I. H. Prince L.-L. Bonaparte,
Monthly Abstracts. English Borrowed Words in Colloquial Welsh. By T.
Powell. Oscan Inscription Discovered at Capuain 1876. By G, A. Schrumpf.
On wérwp, réAwpos, weAdSpios. By R. F. Weymouth. Portuguese Vowels,
according to Mr. R. G. Vianna, Mr. H. Sweet and Myself. By H.1.H. Prince
L.-L. Bonaparte. Spoken North Welsh. By Henry Sweet. Italian and Uralic
Possessive Suffixes Compared. By H.1.H. Prince L.-L. Bonaparte. Albanian in

24 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,

Terra d’Otranto. By H.1.H. Prince L.-L-Bonaparte. Thirteenth Annual Address
of President (J. A. H. Murray). Simple ‘Tenses in Modern Basque and Old
Basque, ete. By H.I.H. Prince L.-L. Bonaparte. Index. Monthly Abstracts.
List of Members. Part I. 10s. Part II. 10s. Part III. 15s.

For 1885-7: English Etymology. By Rev. Prof. Skeat. Critical Etymologies.
By H. Wedgwood. Pali Miscellanies: Notes and Queries on Pali. By Dr.
R. Morris, On the Revised Version of the New Testament. By B. Dawson.
Titin: A Study of Child Language. By Sr. D. A. Machado-y-Alvarez, of
Seville. Notes on English Etymology, and on Words of Brazilian and Peruvian
Origin. By Rev. Prof. Skeat. Celtic Declension. By W. Stokes. Neo-
Celtic Verb Substantive. By. W. Stokes. Influence of Analogy as explaining
certain Examples of Unoriginal L and R. By Dr. F. Stock. Sound-Changes
in Melanesian Languages. By Rev. R. H. Codrington. Notes on English
Etymology. By Rev. Prof. Skeat. Notes on the Revised Version of the Old
Testament. By B. Dawson. Monthly Abstracts. List of Members. Fourteenth
Annual Address of President (Rev. Prof. Skeat). Obituary: Mr. Bradshaw,
Mr. Walter Raleigh Browne, Prof. Cassal, Archbishop Trench, Dr. Stock.
Report by the President on the Work of the Philological Society. The Presi-
dent on Ghost Words. W.R. Morfill on Slavonic Philology (April 1884 to
1886). J. Boxwell on Sontali. Prof. Thurneysen on Celtic Philology. Prof.
de Lacouperie on the Languages of China before the Chinese. The Breton
Glosses at Orleans. By W. Stokes. Remarks on the Oxford Edition of the
Battle of Ventry. By S. H. O’Grady. On the Derivations of * Cad, Luther,
Ted.’ By. H. Wedgwood, M.A. The Origin of the Augment. By Rey.
A, H. Sayce, M.A. On the Place of Sanskrit in the Development of Aryan
Speech in India. By J. Boxwell, B.C.S. The Primitive Home of the Aryans.
By Rev. Prof. Sayce, M.A. Notes on English Etymology. By Rev. Prof.
Beeahy Lia. Index. Monthly Abstracts. List of Members. PartI. 10s.

art II. 16s.

The Society’s Extra Volumes.

Early English Volume, 1862-64, containing: 1. Liber Cure Cocorum, A.D. ¢.
1440. ~2. Hampole’s (Richard Rolle) Pricke of Conscience, a.p. ¢. 13840.—
8. The Castell off Love, a.p. ¢. 1820. 8vo. cloth. 1865. £1.

Or separately: Liber Cure Cocorum, Edited by Rich. Morris, 3s.; Hampole’s
(Rolle) Pricke of Conscience, edited by Rich. Morris, 12s, ; and The Castell off
Love, edited by Dr. R. F. Weymouth, 6s.

Dan Michel’s Ayenbite of Inwyt, or Remorse of Conscience, in the Kentish
Dialect, a.p. 1340. From the Autograph MS. in Brit. Mus. Edited with
Introduction, Marginal Interpretations, and Glossarial Index, by Richard
Morris. 8vo. cloth. 1866. 12s.

Levins’s (Peter, a.p. 1570) Manipulus Vocabulorum: a Rhyming Dictionary of

the English Language. With an Alphabetical Index by H. B. Wheatley. 8vo.
cloth. 1867. 16s.

Skeat’s (Rev. W. W.) Moeso-Gothic Glossary, with an Introduction, an Outline of
Meeso-Gothic Grammar, and a List of Anglo-Saxon and old and modern Eng-
lish Words etymologically connected with Mceso-Gothic. 1868. 8vo.cl. 9s.

Ellis (A. J.) on Early English Pronunciation, with especial Reference to
Shakspere and Chaucer: containing an Investigation of the Correspondence of
Writing with Speech in England from the Anglo-Saxon Period to the Present
Day, etc. 4 parts. 8vo. 1869-75. £2.

Medieval Greek Texts: A Collection of the Earliest Compositions in Vulgar
Greek, prior to a.p. 1500. With Prolegomena and Critical Notes by W.

Wagner. Part I. Seven Poems, three of which appear for the first ti
1870. 8vo. 10s. 6d. "He a

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 25

Poona Sarvajanik Sabha, Journal of the. Edited by S. H. Curr-

LonKAR. Published quarterly. 3s. each number.

Royal Society of Literature of the United Kingdom (Transactions
of ‘the). First Series, 6 Parts in 3 Vols., 4to., Plates; 1827-39. Second
Series, 13 Vols. or 38 Parts. 8vo., Plates; 1843-86. A complete set, as far
as published, £11 10s. Very scarce. The first series of this important
series of contributions of many of the most eminent men of the day has long
been out of print and is very scarce. Of the Second Series, Vol. I.-IV.,
each containing three parts, are quite out of print, and can only be had in
the complete series, noticed above. Three Numbers, price 4s. 6d. each, form
avolume. The price of the volume complete, bound in cloth, is 13s. 6d.

Separate Publications.

I. Fastr Monastict AEvi SAxonicr: or an Alphabetical List of the Heads of
Religious Houses in England previous to the Norman Conquest, to which is
prefixed a Chronological Catalogue of Contemporary Foundations. By WaLTER
DE Gray Bircu. Royal 8vo. cloth. 1872. 7s. 64.

II. Lt Caantart pt Lancentorro; a Troubadour’s Poem of the XIV. Cent.
Edited from a MS. in the possession of the Royal Society of Literature, by
Watrer DE Gray Bircu. Royal 8vo. cloth. 1874. 7s.

III. Ineursir1o Comrrarus CaNTABRIGIENSIS, nunc primum, e Manuscripto
unico in Bibliotheca Cottoniensi asservato, typis mandata: subjicitur Inquisitio
Eliensis: cura N. E. S. A. Hamilton, Royal 4to. With map and 3 facsimiles.
1876. £2 2s.

IV. A CommonertacE-Book or JouHn Mitton. Reproduced by the autotype
process from the original MS. in the possession of Sir Fred. U. Graham, Bart.,
of Netherby Hall. With an Introduction by A. J. Horwood. Sq. folio.
Only one hundred copies printed. 1876. £2 2s.

V. CuHronicon AD# DE UskK, A.D. 1377-1404. Edited, with a Translation and
Notes, by Ep. Maunpz THompson. Royal 8vo. 1876. 10s. 6d.

Syro-Egyptian Society.—Original Papers read before the Syro-
Egyptian Society of London. Volume I. Part 1. 8vo. sewed, 2 plates and a
map, pp. 144. 3s. 6d.

Temple.—Tuer Lxuexnps or tHE Pangan. By Captain R. C. Temrre,
Bengal Staff Corps, F.G.S., etc. Crown 8vo, Vol. I. (Nos. 1 to 12), cloth.
£1 10s. Vol, Il. (No. 13 to 24), cloth, £1 10s. Vol. ILI. in course of pub-
lication, Subscription in Nos, 24s.

Triibner’s American, European and Oriental Literary Record.—
A Register of the most important works published in North and South
America, in India, China, Europe, and the British Colonies ; with occasional
Notes on German, Dutch, Danish, French, etc., books. 4to. In Monthly
Numbers. Subscription 5s. per annum, or 6d. per number. A complete set,
Nos. 1 to 142. London, 1865 to 1879. £12 12s.

Yorkshire Notes and Queries.—With the Yorkshire Genealogist,
Yorkshire Bibliographer, and Yorkshire Folk-lore Journal. Edited by J.
Horsrart Turner, Idel, Bradford. Eighty pages, with Illustrations, Distinct
pagination of each subject, Published Quarterly, demy 8vo. Price 1s. 6d. each
or 5s. per annum, if paid in advance.

26 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Archeology, Ethnography, Geography, History, Law, }
Literature, Numismatics, and Travels.

Abel.—Stavic ann Latry. Ilchester Lectures on Comparative Lexico-
graphy. Delivered at the Taylor Institution, Oxford. By Cart ABEL, Ph.D.
Post 8vo. pp. viii.-124, cloth. 1883. 6s. , .

Abel.—Linguistic Essays. See Triibner’s Oriental Series, p. 5.

Alberuni’s Inpra. See ‘‘Sachau,” page 38.

Ali.—Vuer Proposep Porrrican, Lucan anp Socran Rerorms IN THE
Ottoman Empire and other Mohammedan States. By Mounavi CurrAcu ALt,
H.H. the Nizam’s Civil Service. Demy 8vyo. cloth, pp. liv.-184. 1883. 8s.

Arnold.—Inp1an Ipyxts. From the Sanskrit of the Mahabharata. By Sir
Epwin Arnoxp, M.A., K.C.1.E., &c. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. xii.-282. 1883. 7s. 6d.

Arnold.—Inp1an Porrry. See ‘‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,”’ page 4.

Arnold.—Pearls of the Faith. See page 41.

Arnold.—Inpra Revistrep. By Sir Epwiy Arvyotp, M.A., K.C.LE.,
etc., Author of the “ Light of Asia,” etc. With Thirty-two Full-page Illus-
trations from Photographs selected by the Author. Crown 8yo. pp. 324, cloth.
1886. 7s. 6d.

Arnold.—Tux Sone Crtestrat. See page 96.

Arnold.—Tue Srcrer or Duarte. See page 96.

Arnold.—Lorus anp Jewrn. Containing ‘In an Indian Temple,”
“A Casket of Gems,’’ “ A Queen’s Revenge.’? With other Poems. By Sir E.
ArnoLp, M.A., K.C.I.E, etc. Crown 8vo. pp. vi. and 264. 1887. 7s. 6d.

Baddeley. —Lorus Leaves. By Sv. Ctarr Bappetry. Feap, folio,
pp- xu. and 118, half-vellum. 1887. 8s. 6d.

Baden-Powell.—A Manvat or JurispRuDENCE FoR Forest OFFIcErs.
By B. H. Bapen-Powez 1, B.C.S. 8vo. half-bound, pp. xxii-554. 1882. 12s,

Baden-Powell.—A Manvat or THe Lanp Revenve Systems anp Lanp
Tenures of British India. By B. H. Bapren-Powerxz, B.C.S. Crown 8vyo.
half-bound, pp. xii.-788. 1882. 12s.

Badley.—Inpv1an Misstonary Record anp Mrmortat Vorumr. By
the Rev. B. H. Baptey, of the American Methodist Mission. New Edition.
8vo. cloth. [Jn Preparation. ]

Balfour.—Watrs and Strays From THE Far Easr. See p. 59.

Balfour.—The Divine Classic of Nan-Hua. See page 59.

Balfour.—Taoisr Texts. See page 41.

Ballantyne.—Sanxuya Apnorisms or Kapiua. See p. 6.

Beal.—See pages 6, 41 and 42.

Bellew.—F rom ruz Invus to tHE Trerts: Journey through Balochistan
Afghanistan, Khorassan, and Iran, in 1872; with a Synoptical Gritinier
and Vocabulary of the Brahoe Language, and a Record of Meteorological
Observations and Altitudes on the March. By H. W. Bettew, C.S.1., Surgeon
B.S.0. Demy 8vo. pp. viii.-496, cloth. 1874. 10s. 6d,

Bellew.—Kasumir ann Kasuear. A Narrative of the Journey of the
Embassy to Kashgar in 1873-74. By H. W. Butuew, C.S.1: Demy 8vo. cloth
pp. xxxii, and 420. 1875. 10s. 6d. :

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.0. 27

Bellew —Tue Races or Arcwanistan. Being a Brief Account of
the Principal Nations inhabiting that Country. By Surgeon-Major H. W.
Brtiew, C.S.1., late on Special Political Duty at Kabul. Crown 8vo. pp. 124,
cloth. 1880. 7s. 6d.

Beveridge.—Tux Disrricr or Baxareans; its History and Statistics.
By H. Brverinaes, B.C.S. 8vo. cloth, pp. xx. and 460. 1876. 21s.

Bhandarkar.—Earty History or tun Dexxan, Down to tHE Ma-
HOMEDAN Conaurst. By R. G. Buanparwkar, M.A., Prof. of Oriental
Languages, Dekkan College. 8vo. pp. vi.-122, wrappers. 1885. ds.

Bibliotheca Orientalis: or, a Complete List of Books published
in France, Germany, England, and the Colonies, on the History, Religions,
Literature, etc., of the East. Edited by C. Frieprrici. Part I., 1876,
sewed, pp. 86, 2s. 6d. Part II., 1877, pp. 100, 3s. 6d. Part III., 1878,
3s. 6d. Part 1V., 1879, 3s. 6d. Part V., 1880. 38s.

Biddulph.—Trrses or tHe Hinpoo Koosu. By Major J. Brppuren,
B.8.C., Political Officer at Gilgit. 8vo. pp. 340, cloth. 1880. 15s,

Blades.—An Account oF THE GERMAN Moraxiry Pray, Enririep
Depositio Cornutr Typocraruici, as Performed in the 17th and 18th
Centuries. With a Rhythmical Translation of the German Version of 1648.
By W. Buapes, Typographer. ‘lo which is added a Literal Reprint of the
Unique Original Version, written in Plaet Deutsch, by Pau pz Wiss, and
printed in 1621. Small 4to. pp. xii.-144, with facsimile Illustrations, in an
appropriate binding. 1885. 7s. 6d.

Bleek.—Keryyarp tHE Fox rin Sourn Arrica; or, Hottentot Fables
and Tales. See page 51.

Blochmann.—Scuoor Grocrapuy or Inpra and Britise Burman. By
H. BLrocumann, M.A. 12mo. wrapper, pp. vi. and 100. 2s. 6a.

Bombay Code, The.—The Unrepealed Bombay Regulations, Acts of the
Supreme Council, relating to Bombay, and Acts of the Governor of Bombay in
Council. With Chronological Table. Royal 8vo. pp.xxiv.-774, cloth. 1880. £1 1s.

Bombay Presidency.—Gazurreer or tHE. Demy 8yo. half-bound.
Wolebin alts Ole eLiaVille Saneach a VOle Vill. Gsiccks, Nl eA Ie,
XIV., XVI., 8s. each; Vols. XXI., XXII., XXIII., 9s. each.

Bretschneider.—Norres on Curnesk Mepimvat TRAVELLERS TO THE
West. By E. BrerscHneipER, M.D. Demy 8yo.sd., pp. 130. ds.

Bretschneider.— On tHe Knyowxeper Possessep BY THE ANCIENT
CHINESE OF THE ARABS AND ARABIAN COLONIES, and other Western Coun-
tries mentioned in Chinese Books. By E. BrutscunempEr, M.D., Physician
to the Russian Legation at Peking. 8vo. pp. 28, sewed. 1871. Is.

Bretschneider.—Norices or THE MuprmvaL GrograpHy AND History
or Cenrrat AND WestTERN Asta. Drawn from Chinese and Mongol Writings,
and Compared with the Observations of Western Authors in the Middle Ages.
By E. Brerscunerer, M.D. 8vo. sewed, pp. 233, with two Maps. 1876. 12s. 6d.

Bretschneider. — ArcHmotoeicaL anp Husrorican NEsEaRCHES ON
PEKING AND 17s Environs. By E. Brerscunerper, M.D., Physician to the
Russian Legation at Peking. Imp. 8yo. sewed, pp. 64, with 4 Maps. 1876. 5s.

Bretschneider.—Boranrcon Sitntcum. Notes on Chinese Botany, from
Native and Western Sources. By E. Brerscunrrprr, M.D. Crown 8vo. pp.
228, wrapper. 1882. 10s. 6d.

Bretschneider. — Iyrercourse oF THE CntneseE wita WESTERN
CouNTRIES IN THE MippLE AGES, AND ON KinpxEep Sussects. By K.
BretscuneipEr, M.D. (In the Press.)

28 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,

Brown.—Tue Icr~anpic Discoverers oF AMERICA; oR, Honour TO
Wom Honour 1s Dug. By Marre A. Brown. Crown 8vo. pp. viii. and
214, cloth. With Hight Plates. 1887. 7s. 6d.

Budge.—Assyrian Texts. See p. 56.

Budge.—History or Esargappon. See Triibner’s Oriental Series, p. 4.

Biihler.—Eteven Lanp-Granrs of THE CHAULUKYAS OF ANHILVAD.
A Contribution to the History of Gujarat. By G. BUster. 16mo. sewed,
pp. 126, with Facsimile. 3s. 6d.

Burgess.—ArcumotocicaL Survey or Western Inp1a. By James
Burgess, LL.D., etc., ete. Royal 4to. half bound. Vol. 1. Report of the
First Season’s Operations in the Belgim and Kaladgi Districts. 1874. With
56 photographs and lith. plates, pp. viii. and 45. 1875. £2 2s. Vol. 2.
Report of the Second Season’s Operations. The Antiquities of Kathiawad and
Kachh. 1874-5. With Map, Inscriptions, Photographs, ete., pp. x. and 242.
1876. £3 38s. Vol. 8. Report of the Third Season’s Operations. 1875-76.
The Antiquities in the Bidar and Aurangabad District. pp. viii. and 188.
With 66 photographic and lithographic plates. 1878. £2 2s. Vols. 4.
and 5. Reports on the Buddhist Cave Temples, the Elura Cave Temples, the
Brahmanical and Jaina Caves in Western India: containing Views, Plans,
Sections, and Elevations of Facades of Cave Temples; Drawings of Architectural
and Mythological Sculptures ; Facsimiles of Inscriptions, etc.; Translation of
Inscriptions, ete., pp. x.-140 and viii.-90, half morocco, gilt tops with 165
Plates and Woodcuts. 1883. £6 6s.

Burgess.—Arcu Z0LocicaL Survey or SourHern Inpra. Vol. I. The
Buddhist Stupas of Amaravati and Jaggayyapeta in the Krishna District,
Madras Presidency, Surveyed in 1882. By James Burcess, LL.D., C.1.E.,
ete., Director-General of the Survey. With Translations of the Asoka Inscrip-
tions at Jaugada and Dhauli by Grorcr Bunter, LL.D., C.1.E., etc., Prof.
of Sanskrit in the University of Vienna. Containing Sixty-nine Collotype and
other Plates of Buddhist Seulpture and Architecture, etc., in South-Eastern
India; Facsimiles of Inscriptions, etc.; and Thirty-two Woodcuts. Super-
royal 4to. pp. x. and 131, half-moroceo, 1887. £4 4s.

Burgess.—Tue Rock Temprus or Exvra or Verut. A Handbook for
Visitors. By J. Bureuss. 8vo. 3s. 6d., or with Twelve Photographs, 9s. 6d.

Burgess.—Tnx Rock Tempres or ErepHanta Described and Illustrated
with Plans and Drawings. By J. Bureess. 8vo. cloth, pp. 80, with drawings,
price 6s.; or with Thirteen Photographs, price £1.

Burne.—Surorsurre Forx-Lorr. A Sheaf of Gleanings. Edited by
C. 8. Burnz, from the Collections of G. F. Jackson. With Map of Cheshire.
Demy 8vo. pp. xvi.-664, cloth. 1886. 25s,

Burnell.—Ezements or Sourn Inpran Patmocrapny. From the
Fourth to the Seventeenth Century a.p. By A. C. BurNELL. Second Enlarged
Edition, 35 Plates and Map. 4to. pp. xiv. and 148.- 1878. £2 12s. 6d.

Byrne.—GerneraL PrincreLes or THE Structure oF Lanauacr. B
James Byrnz, M.A., Dean of Clonfert; Ex-Fellow of Trinity College,
Dublin. 2 vols. demy 8vo. pp. xxx. and 504, xviii. and 394, cloth. 1885. 36s.

Bryne.—Oricin oF THE GREEK, Latin anp Goruic Roots. By Jamus
Byrne, M.A., Dean of Clonfert, ete. Demy &vo. pp. viii. and 360, cl. 1888. 18s.

Carletti—History or THe Conquest or Tunis. Translated by J.T.
CaRLerri. Crown 8yo. cloth, pp. 40. 1883. 2s. 6d. ;

Cesnola.—Tux History, Treasures, anp ANTIQUITIES oF SALAMIS,
IN THE IsLAND oF Cyprus. By A. P. Dr Cxsnona, F.S.A. With an
Introduction by 8. Breen, D C.L. With over 700 Illustrations and Map of
Ancient Cyprus. Royal 8yvo. pp. xlviii.-325, cloth, 1882, £1 lls, 6d,

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.0. 29

Chamberlain.—Japanusz Porrry. See page 4.

Chattopadhyaya.—T'ne Yarras; or the Popular Dramas of Bengal.
Post 8vo. pp. 50, wrapper. 1882. Qs.

Clarke.— Tue Enetisx Srarions 1n tHE Hiri Reerons or Inpra: their
Value and Importance, with some Statistics of their Produce and Trade. By
Hype Cuarxe, V.P.S.S8. Post 8vo. paper, pp. 48. 1881. 1s.

Colebrooke.—Tux Lire anp Miscertanerous Essays or Henry THomas
Cotrsrooke. In 3 vols. Demy 8vo. cloth. 1873. Vol. 1. The Biography by
his Son, Sir T. E. Covesrooxr, Bart., M.P. With Portrait and Map. pp. xii.
and492. 14s. Vols. II. and Ill. The Essays. A New Edition, with Notes
by E. B. Cowrtx, Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Cambridge.
pp. xvi.—544, and x.-520, 28s.

Conway.—Verner’s Law in Iraty. An Essay in the History of
the Indo-European Sibilants. By R. 8. Conway, Gonville and Caius College,
Cambridge; Classical Scholar in the University of Cambridge; Exhibitioner in
Latin in the University of London. With a Dialect Map of Italy by
E. Heawoop, B.A., F.R.G.S. Demy 8vo. pp. vi. and 120, cloth. 1887. 5s.

Crawford.—Recottectrions oF Travets In New ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA.
By J. C. Crawrorp, F.G.S., Resident Magistrate, Wellington, etc., ete. With
Maps and Illustrations, 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 468. 1880. 18s.

Cunningham.—Corrvs Inscriprionum Inprcarum. Vol. I. Inscrip-
tions of Asoka. Prepared by ALEXANDER CunnincHAM, C.S.I., etc. 4to.
cloth, pp. xiv. 142 and vi., with 31 plates. 1879. 42s.

Cunningham.—Tue Srupa or Buaruvr. A Buddhist Monument,
ornamented with numerous Sculptures illustrative of Buddhist Legend and
History in the third century B.c. By ALEXANDER CunNINGHAM, C.S.1., C.I.E.,
Director-General Archeological Survey of India, ete. Royal 4to. cloth, gilt,
pp- viii. and 144, with 51 Photographs and Lithographic Plates. 1879. £3 3s.

Cunningham.—Tue Ancient Grocraruy or Inpra. I. The Buddhist
Period, including the Campaigns of Alexander, and the Travels of Hwen-Thsang.
By ALEXANDER CUNNINGHAM, Major-General, Royal Engineers (Bengal Re-
tired). With thirteen Maps. 8vo. pp. xx. 590, cloth. 1870, 28s,

Cunningham.—ArcuzoLoaicat Survey or Inpra. Reports, made
during the years 1862-1882. By A. Cunnincuam, ©.S.I., Major-General,
etc. With Maps and Plates. Vols. 1 to 18. 8vo. cloth. 10s. and 12s. each,

Cust.—Pictrures or Inpran Lire. Sketched with the Pen from 1852
to 1881. By R. N. Cust, late of H.M. Indian Civil Service, and Hon, See.
to the Royal Asiatic Society. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. x. and 346. 1881. 7s. 6d.

Cust.—Inpran Lanevaces. See ‘‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 3.

Cust.—Arnican Lanevacrs. See ‘‘Triibner’s Oriental Series,”’ page 6.

Cust.—Linevrstic anp OrrentaL Essays. See ‘‘ Tribner’s Oriental
Series,’’ page 4.

Cust.—Lanevace: as Intusrratep By Bisrr Transtation. By R. N.
Cust, LL.D. Demy 8vo. pp. 86, wrapper. 1886. ls.

Dahl.—Narrowar Sones, Barnaps anp Sxercues by the most Celebrated
Scandinavian Authors. Translated by J. A. Dant, Professor of the English
Language. Square crown 8vo. pp. 128, cloth. 1887. 2s. 6d,

Dalton.—Descriprrve Ernnoroey or Brneat. By Col. E. T. Darron,
C.S.I., B.S.C., etc. Illustrated by Lithograph Portraits copied from Photo-
graphs. 38 Lithograph Plates. 4to. half-calf, pp. 340. £6 6s.

30 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Da Cunha.—Nores on tHe Hisrory anp ANTIQUITIES OF CHAUL AND
Bassrin. By J Gerson pA Cunna, M.R.C.S. and L.M, Eng., etc. 8vo.
cloth, pp. xvi. and 262. With 17 photographs, 9 plates anda map. £1 5s.

Da Cunha.—Conrrreurions to THE Stupy or Inpo-Porruevese Numis-
matics. By J. G. Da Cunna, M.R.C.S., ec, Crown 8yo. stitched in wrapper.
Fasc. I. to LV., each 2s. 6d.

Das.—Tue Invran Ryor, Lanp Tax, PERMANENT SETTLEMENT, AND THE
Famine. Chiefly compiled by Apuay Cuanan Das, Post 8vo. cloth, pp.
iv.-662. 1881. 12s.

Davids.—Corns, Erc., or Cryton. See ‘‘ Numismata Orientala,” Vol.
eeParbuyile

Dennys.—Curna anp Japan. A Guide to the Open Ports, together
with Pekin, Yeddo, Hong Kong, and Macao; a Guide Book and Vade Mecum
or Travellers, etc. By W. F. Mayers, H.M.’s Consular Service; N. B.
Drnwys, late H.M.’s Consular Service; and C. Kine, Lieut. R.M.A. Edited
by N. B. Dennys. 8vo. pp. 600, 56 Maps and Plans, cloth. £2 2s.

Dowson.—Dricrronary of Hindu Mythology, etc. See ‘‘ Triibner’s
Oriental Series,’’ page 3.

Edmundson —Mirton anp Vonpzz. A Curiosity of Literature. By
G. Epmunpson, M.A. Crown 8vo. pp. vi.-224, cloth. 1885. 6s.

Egerton.— Aw Iziustrrarep Hanpsoox or InpiAn Arms; being a
Classified and Descriptive Catalogue of the Arms exhibited at the India
Museum; with an Introductory Sketch of the Military History of India. By
the Hon. W. Ecrrron, M.A.,M.P. 4to. sewed, pp. vill. and 162. 1880. 2s. 6d.

Elliot.—Mermorrs on tHE History, Fotktorb, AnD DisTRIBUTION OF
THE RACES oF THE Nortu WESTERN PROviINCES OF INDIA. By the late Sir
H. M. Exttor, K.C.B. Edited, ete., by Joun Beames, B.C.S., etc. In
2 vols. demy 8vo., pp. xx., 8370, and 396, cloth. With two Plates, and four
coloured Maps. 1869. 36s.

Elliot.—Corns or Sournern Inpia. See ‘‘ Numismata Orientalia.”
Vol. ILJ. Part II. page 36.

Elliot.—Tue History or Inpra, as told by its own Historians. The
Muhammadan Period. Edited from the Posthumous Papers of the late Sir
H. M. Extior, K.C.B., by Prof. J. Dowson. 8 vols. 8vo. cloth. 1867-1877.
Sets, £8 8s. ; or separately, Vol.I.pp xxxii.and 542. £22s.—Vol. Il. pp. x.
and 580. 18s.—Vol. III. pp. xii. and 627. 24s.—Vol. IV pp. x. and 563. 21s.
—Vol. V. pp. xiil.and 576. 21s.-—Vol. VI. pp. viii.and 574. 21s.—Vol. VII.
pp. vill. and 674. 21s.—Vol. VIII. pp. xxxii., 444, and Ixviii. 24s,

Farley.—Ecypr, Cyprus, anp Asiatic Turkey.” By J. L. Farry,

Author of “The Resources of Turkey,’ etc. Demy 8Vvo. cl., pp. xvi.-270. 1878.
10s. 6d.

Featherman.—Tue Soctat History or tHe Races or Manxryp. By
A, Frarnerman. Demy 8vo. cloth. The Aramaeans. pp. xvii.and 664. 1881.
£1 1s. The Nigritians. pp. 826. 1885. 381s. 6d. Papuo and Malayo-
peg pp- 526. 1880. 25s. Oceano-Melanesians. pp. 452. 1887.

Be

Ferguson.—Summary or Inrormation Rrearpine Cryron: Its Natural
Features, Climate, Population, Religion, Industries, Agriculture, Government
Laws, Objects of Interest, etc., in 1887, the Queen’s “ Jubilee Year.” Come
piled by A. M. and J. Frreuson, Editors of the Ceylon Observer, Tropical
Agriculturist, etc., etc. Post 8vo. iv.-26. wrapper. 1887. 2s.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 31

Fergusson and Burgess.—Tue Cave Temprxs or Inpra. By Janus
Fereusson, D.C.L., F.R.S., and James Burcuss, F.R.G.S. Imp. 8vo. half
bound, pp. xx. and 536, with 98 Plates. £2 2s.

Fergusson.—Axrcumonoey in Inpra. With especial reference to the
Works of Babu Rajendralala Mitra. By J. Frrcusson, C.1.E. 8vo. pp. 116,
with Illustrations, sewed. 1884. 5s.

Forchhammer. — An Essay on tHE Sources AND DEVELOPMENT OF
Burmese Law. From the Era of the First Introduction of the Indian Law to
the Time of the British Occupation of Pegu. By Dr. E. Forcuuammer, Ph.D.,
Professor of Pali at the Government High School, Rangoon. Imperial 8vo. pp.
vi.-110, cloth. 1885. 10s. 6d.

Fornander.—Awn Account or tHE Potynestan Race: Its Origin and
Migration, and the Ancient History of the Hawaiian People to the Times of
Kamehameha I. By A. Fornanper, Circuit Judge of the Island of Maui,
H.I. Post 8vo. cloth. Vol. I., pp. xvi. and 248. 1877. 7s. 6d. Vol. II.,
pp. viii. and 400. 1880. 10s. 6d. Vol. I1I., pp. xii-292. 1885. Qs.

Forsyth.—Reporr or A Misston to Yarkunp In 1878, under Command
of Str T. D. Forsytn, K.C.S.1., C.B., Beagal Civil Service, with Historical
and Geographical Information regarding the Possessions of the Ameer of
Yarkund. With 45 Photographs, 4 Lithographic Plates, and a large Folding
Map of Eastern Turkestan, 4to. cloth, pp. iv. and 573. £5 5s.

Gardner.—Parrutan Cornace. See ‘‘ Numismata Orientalia.’”’? Vol. I.
Part V.

Garrett.—A Crasstcat Dictionary oF Inp1a, illustrative of the My-
thology, Philosophy, Literature, Antiquities, Arts, Manners, Customs, etc., of
the Hindus. By Joun Garrett. 8vo. pp. x. and 798. cloth. 28s.

Garrett.—SuprLEMENT TO THE ABOVE CxasstcAL Dicrronary oF Inpra.
By J. Garrett, Dir. of Public Instruction, Mysore. 8vo. cloth, pp. 160. 7s. 6d.

Garrett.—Mornine Hours 1n Inpra. Practical Hints on Household
Management, the Care and Training of Children, ete. By Exizaneru Garrerr.
Crown 8vo. pp. x.-124, cloth. 1887. 3s. 6d.

Gazetteer of the Central Provinces of India. Edited by CHartzs
Grant, Secretary to the Chief Commissioner of the Central Provinces. Second
Edition. With a very large folding Map of the Central Provinces of” India.
Demy 8vo. pp. clvii. and 582, cloth. 1870, £1 4s.

Geiger.—Conrrrsurions to THE History oF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
Human Race. Lectures and Dissertations by L.Gricer. Translated from
the German by D. Asher, Ph.D. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. x. and 156. 1880. 6s.

Goldstiicker —On THE Dericipncius IN THE PRESENT ADMINISTRATION
or Hinpu Law; being a paper read at the Meeting of the East India As-
sociation on the 8th June, 1870. By Turopor GoupstiickeRr, Professor of
Sanskrit in University College, London, &c. Demy 8vo. pp. 56, sewed. Is. 6d,

Gover.—J'nx Foix-Sones or Sournern Inpia. By Cuartes HK. Gover,
Svo. pp. xxiii. and 299, cloth. 1872. 10s, 6d.

Grierson.—Bruar Peasant Lire; being a Discursive Catalogue of the
Surroundings of the People of that Province, with many Illustrations from
Photographs taken by the Author. . Prepared under Orders of the Government
of Bengal. By Goran A. Grierson, B.C.S. Royal 8vo. pp. xxviii.—586,
half-bound. 16s.

32 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Griffin.—Tue Rasas or tHE Punsas. History of the Principal States
in the Panjab, and their Political Relations with the British Government. By
Lepret H. Grirrry, B.C.S.; Under Sec. to Gov. of the Punjab, Author of
“The Punjab Chiefs,’’ ete. Second edition. Royal 8vo., pp. xiv. and 630.
1878. 2ls.

Griffis.—Corra; Wrrnour anp Wiratn, Chapters on Corean History,
Manners and Religion. With Hendrick Hamel’s Narrative of Captivity and
Travels in Corea, Annotated. By W. E. Grirris. Crown 8vo. pp. 316, with Map
and Illustrations, cloth. 1885. 6s.

Griffis. Tue Mixapo’s Emprre. Book I. History of Japan from
660 z.c. to 1872 a.p. Book II. Personal Experiences, Observations, and
Studies in Japan, 1870-74. By W. E. Grirris. Illustrated. Second Edition.
8yo. pp. 626, cloth. 1883. £1.

Growse.—Marnvura: A District Memoir. By F. 8. Growsz, B.C.S.,
C.I.E. Second Revised Edition. Illustrated. 4to. boards, pp. xxiv. and 520.
1880, 42s.

Hahn.—Tsuni Goam. See Triibner’s Oriental Series, page 5.

Head.—Cornace oF Lypra anp Persta. See ‘‘ Numismata Orientalia.”’
Vol. I. Part III.

Heaton.—Avsrratian Dicrronary or Dates anp Men oF THE TIME.
Containing the History of Australasia, from 1542 to May, 1879. By I. H. Hxaron.
Royal 8yo. cloth pp. 1v.—554. 1879. 1ds.

Hebrew Literature Society. See page 82.

Hilmy.—Tue Lirerature or Eeypr anp tHE Sovpan. From the
Earliest Times to the Year 1885, inclusive. A Bibliography. Comprising
Printed Books ; Periodical Writings and Papers of Learned Societies; Maps and
Charts; Ancient Papyri; Manuscripts, Drawings, ete. By H.H. Prince
Izranim-Hitmy. Dedicated to H.H. the Khedive Ismail. Vol. I. (A-L)
demy 4to. pp. vili.-398, cloth. 1886. £1 1ls. 6d. ;

Hindoo Mythology Popularly Treated.—An Epitomised Description
of the various Heathen Deities illustrated on the Silver Swami Tea Service
presented, as a Memento of his visit to India, to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales
fee Ds Hp Habis the Gaekwar of Baroda, Small 4to. pp. 42, limp cloth.

. 8. .

Hodgson.—Essays on tHE Lanevacss, Lirrraturr, anp Retreion
or Nepat And Tipet; with Papers on their Geography, Ethnology, and

Commerce. By B. H. Honason, late British Minister at Nepal. R
8vo. cloth, pp. 288. 1874. 14s. Wels oyal

Hodgson.—Essays on Inpran Svupsects. See ‘Triibner’s Oriental
Series,’’ p. 4.

Hunter.—Tue Lwrrrtat Gazerrerr or Inpra. By Sir WruaMm
Winson Huntsr, K.O.8.1., C.I.E., LL.D., late Director-General of Statistics
to the Government of India. Published by Command of the Secretary of
State for India. 14 vols. 8vo. half morocco. 1887, £3 8s.

‘A great work has been unostentatiously carried on for the las i i
importance of which it is impossible to pe cats, This is a relay ened ie
statistical survey of the entire British Empire in Hindostan. ... We have said enough to sho ‘
that the ‘Imperial Gazetteer’ is no mere dry collection of statistics ; it is a treasury from Which
the politician and economist may draw countless stores of yaluable information, ath into hich

the general reader can dip with the certainty of always finding somethi inter
instruct him,” —Zimes. q : 5 Somer De Ott haart aa

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 33

Hunter.—A Srarisrican Account or Benaat. By Sir W. W. Hunter,
K.C.8.1., LL.D., ete, Director-Gen. of Statistics to the Government of India.

VOL. you,
I. 24 Pargands and Sundarbans, X. Darjfling, Jalpdigurf and Kuch Behar
Il. Nadiya and Jessor. XI. Patna and Saran. [State.
Ill. Midnapur, Higli and Hourah, XIL. Gaya aud Shahabad.
IV. Bardwan, Birbhim and Bankura, XIU. Tirhut and Champaran.
VY. Dacca, Bakarganj, Farfdpur and Mai- XIV. Bhagalpur and Santél Parganas.
mansinh. XV. Monghyr and Purniah.
VI. Chittagong Hill Tracts, Chittagong, XVI. Hazaribagh and Lohardaga,
Noakhali, Tipperah, and Hill Tipperah XVII. Singbham, Chutid NagpurTributary
State. States and Manbhim,
VII. Meldah, Rangpur and Din4jpur. XVIII. Cuttack and Balasor,
VII. Rajshabf and Bogra. XIX. Puri, and Orissa Tributary States.
1X. Murshidaébad and Pabna, XX. Fisheries, Botany, and General Index

Published by command of the Government of India. In 20 Vols. 8vo. half-
morocco. £5.

Hunter.—A Srarisricat Account or Assam. By Sir W. W. Hunter,
K.0.8.I., LL.D., ete. 2 vols. 8vo. half-morocco, pp. 420 and 490, with Two
Maps. 1879. 10s.

Hunter.—Famrve Aspects or Beneat Disrricrs. A System of Famine
Warnings. By Sir W. W. Hunrsr, K.C-S.I., LL.D., etc. Crown 8vo. cloth,
pp. 216. 1874. 7s. 6d.

Hunter.—Tue Inpran Musatmans. By Sir W. W. Hunter, K.C.S.I.
LL.D., ete. Third Edition, 8vo. cloth, pp. 219. 1876. 10s. 6d.

Hunter.—A srier History or THE Inpran Peorprte. By Sir W. W.
Hunter, K.C.S8.I., LL.D., ete. Crown 8vo. pp. 222 with map, cloth. 1884.
3s. 6d.

Hunter.—Indian Empire. See Triibner’s Oriental Series, page 5.

Hunter.—An Account oF tHE British Serrrement or ADEN
in Arabia. Compiled by Captain fF. M. Hunter, Assistant Political Resident,
Aden. Demy 8vo. half-morocco, pp. xii.-232. 1877. 7s. 6d.

India.—Finance anp Revenve ACcouNTS OF THE GOVERNMENT oF, for
1882-83. Fep. 8vo. pp. viii.-220, boards, 1884. 2s. 6d.

Jacobs.—Tue Jewish Question. 1875-1884. A Bibliographical
Hand-list. Compiled by Josepa Jacons, B.A., late Scholar of St. John’s
College, Cambridge. Fvcap. 8vo. pp. xil.-96, wrapper. 2s.

Japan.—Mapr or Nippon (Japan): Compiled from Native Maps, and
the Notes of recent Travellers. By R. H. Brunton, F.R.G.S., 1880. In
4 sheets, 2ls.; roller, varnished, £1 lls, 6d.; Folded, in case, £1 5s. 6d.

Juvenalis Satire.—With a Literal English Prose Translation and
Notes. By J. D. Lewis, M.A. Second, Revised, and considerably
Enlarged Edition. 2 Vols. post 8vo. pp. xii.-230, and 400,cloth. 1882. 12s.

Kaegi.—Tue Ria Vena: the Oldest Literature of the Indians. By
Apoteu Kaxer, Professor in the University of Ziirich. 8vo, pp. viil.-198,
cloth. 1886. 7s. 6d.

Kerrison —A Common-prace Book or tHE Firrrenta Century. Con-
taining a Religious Play and Poetry, Legal Forms, and Lucal Accounts.
Printed from the Original MS. at Brome Hall, Suffolk. By Lady Carouine
Kerrison. Edited, with Notes, by Lucy Toupmin Smrra. Demy 8vo. with
Two Facsimiles, pp. viii.-176, parchment. 1886. 7s. 6d.

Kitts.— A Compenpium or tae Castes and Trrees Fouyp ry Inora.
Compiled from the (1881) Census Reports for the Various Provinces (excluding
Burmah) and Native States of the Empire. By K. J. Krrrs, B.C.8. Feup.
folio, pp. xii. 90, boards. 1886. 5s. :

34 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.

Knowles.—A Dicrionary or Kasumret Proverss ano Sayines. Ex-
plained and Illustrated from the Rich and Interesting Folk-lore of the Valley.
By the Rev, J. Hinton Knowtes, F.R.G.S., ete. (C.M.S.), Missionary to the
Kashmiris. Crown 8vo. pp. viil.-263, cloth. 1885. 8s.

Leitner.—Sin1v-I-Istam. Being a Sketch of the History and
Literature of Muhammadanism and their place in Universal History. or the
use of Maulvis. By G. W. Leitner. Part I, The Karly History of Arabia
to the fall of the Abassides. S8vo. sewed. Lahore. 6s.

Leitner.—Hisrory or InpicEnNous EpucaTioN IN THE PANJAB SINCE
Annexation, and in 1882. By G. W. Lurrner, LL.D., late on special duty
with the Education Commission appointed by the Government of India. Fecap.
folio, pp. 588, paper boards, 1883. £5.

Leland.—Fusane; or, the Discovery of America by Chinese Buddhist
Priests in the Fifth Century. By Cuarues G. Levanp. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp.
xix. and 212, 1875. 7s. 6d.

Leland.—The Gypsies. See page 69.

Leonowens.—Lire anp Travet rn Inpra. Being Recollections of a
Journey before the Days of Railroads. By Anna H. Leonowens. 8vo. pp. 326,
Illustrated, cloth. 1885. 10s. 6d.

Linde.—Tra 1 Invra. A Sketch, Index, and Register of the Tea
Industry in India, with a Map of all the Tea Districts, etc. By F. Linps,
Surveyor. Folio, wrapper, pp. xxii._30, map mounted and in cloth boards.
1879. 638s.

Long.—Eastern Proverbs and Emblems. See page 4.

Lowell.—Cuosén: tar Lanp or tHE Mornine Catm. A Sketch of
Korea. By Percryan Lowey. Super-royal 8vo. pp. x.-412, cloth. 1886. 24s.

McCrindle.—The Commerce and Navigation of the Erythrean Sea.
Being a Translation of the Periplus Maris Erythraei, by an Anonymous Writer,
and of Arrian’s Account of the Voyage of Nearkhos, from the Mouth of the
Indus to the Head of the Persian Gulf. With Introduction, Commentary,
Notes, and Index. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. iv. and 238. 1879. 7s. 6d.

McCrindle-—Ancrent Inp1a as Descrrpep BY MurcGAsTHENES AND
Arrian. A Translation of Fragments of the Indika of Megasthenés collected
by Dr. ScuwansERk, and of the First Part of the Indika of Arrian. By J.
W. McCrinotz, M.A., Principal of Gov. College, Patna. With Introduction,
Notes, and Map of Ancient India. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. xii—224. 1877. 7s. 6d.

McCrindle.—Ancrenr Inpia as described by Ktésias, the Knidian,
a translation of the abridgment of his “Indica,’’ by Photios, and fragments
of that work preserved in other writers. By J. W. McCrinpun, M.A. With
Introduction, Notes, and Index. 8vo. cloth, pp. viii—104. 1882. 6s,

McCrindle —Ancrent Inpra as Descrrpep By Prozemy. A Transla-
tion of the Chapters which describe India and Central and Eastern Asia in the
Treatise on Geography written by Ktaupros Prozemaros, the Celebrated
Astronomer; with Introduction, Commentary, Map of India according to
Ptolemy, and a very Copious Index. By J. W. McCrinpuz, M.A. Demy
8vo. pp. xii.-373, cloth. 1885. 7s. 6d.

MacKenzie.—The History of the Relations of the Government with
the Hill Tribes of the North-East Frontier of Bengal. By A. MacKenziz,

Wes Sec. to the Gov. Bengal. Royal. 8vo. pp. xviii.-586, cloth, with Map.
1884. 16s.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 35

Madden.—Corys or tur Jews. See ‘‘ Numismata Orientalia,” Vol. II.

Man.—Own rae Axoriatnat Inwasrrants or THE ANDAMAN ISLANDS.
By E. H. Man, Assistant Superintendent Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
F.R.G.S., M.R.A.S., ete. With Report of Researches into the Language of
the South Andaman Islands, by A. J. Exurs, F.R.S., F.S.A. Reprinted from
‘The Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland.”
Demy 8vo. pp. xxviii.-298, with Map and Eight Plates, cloth. 1885. 10s. 6d.

Mariette ——Monnments of Upper Egypt. See page 65.

Markham.—Tur Narratives or tHe Mission or Goren Boater,
B.C.S., to the Teshu Lama, and of the Journey of T. Manning to Lhasa, Edited,
with Notes, Introduction, and lives of Bogle and Manning, by C. R. Marxnam,
C.B. Second Edition. 8yvo. Maps and Illus., pp. clxi. 314, cl. 1879. 21s.

Marsden’s Numismata Orientalia. New International Edition.
See under NumisMara ORIENTALIA.

Marsden.—NoumismMaTa Orrentatia Ittusrrata. The Plates of the
Oriental Coins, Ancient and Modern, of the Collection of the late W. Marsden.
Engraved from Drawings made under his Directions. 4to. 57 Plates, cl..31s. 6d.

Martin.—Tue Caress: THerr Epucation, Parnosopry, anp Lerrers.
By W. A. P. Martin, D.D., LL.D., President of the Tungwen College, Pekin.
8vo. pp. 320, cloth. 1881. 7s. 6d.

Mason.— Burma: Its People and Productions; or, Notes on the Fauna,
Flora, and Minerals of Tenasserim, Pegu and Burma. By the Rey. F. Mason,
D.D. Vol. I. Geology, Mineralogy, and Zoology. Vol. II. Botany. Re-
written by W. Tuxzopap, late Deputy-Sup. Geological Survey of India. 2
vols. Royal 8yo. pp. xxvi. and 560; xvi. and 781 and xxxvi. cloth. 1864. #3.

Matthews.—Erxnonoey anp Purtotoay or tHe Hrpatsa Inpians,
By Wasuineton Marruews, Assistant Surgeon, U.S. Army. Contents :—
Ethnography, Philology, Grammar, Dictionary, and English-Hidatsa Voca-
bulary. 8vo. cloth. £1 11s. 6d.

Mayers.—China and Japan. See Dennys.

Mayers.—Txe Curnese Government. A Manual of Chinese Titles,
categorically arranged and explained, with an Appendix. By W. F. Mayers,
Second Edition, with Additions by G. M. H. Puayrarr, Roy. 8vo. cloth, pp.
Ixx.-158. 1886. lds.

Metcalfe.—Tue EncLisHMAN AND THE SCANDINAVIAN ; or, a Comparison
of Anglo-Saxon and Old Norse Literature. By Freperick Mercaurs, M.A.,
Author of ‘‘ The Oxonian in Iceland, etc. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. 512. 1880. 18s.

Milton and Vondel.—See Epmunnson.

Mitra.—Tue Anrigurtres or Orissa. By Rasyenpratata Mirra.
Published under Orders of the Government of India. Folio, cloth. Vol. I.
pp- 180. With a Map and 36 Plates. 1875. £6 6s, Vol. II. pp. vi. and 178.
1880. £4 4s.

Mitra.—Buppua Gaya; the Hermitage of Sdkya Muni. By Rasen-
pratata Mitra, LL.D., C.1.E. 4to. cloth, pp. xvi. aad 258, with 51 plates.
1878. £3.

Mitra.—Tue Sanskrit Bopputst Literature or Nepat. By Rasenpra-
para Mrrra, LL.D., C.1.E. 8vo. cloth, pp. xlviii.-340. 1882. 12s. 6d.
Moor.—Tue Hinvv Pantrnzon. By Epwarp Moor, F.R.S. A new
edition, with additional Plates, Condensed and Annotated by the Rev. W. O.

Smpson. 8vo. cloth, pp. xiii. and 401, with 62 Plates, 1864. £3,

36 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Oo.,

Morris.—A Descriptive aNd Historrcat Account oF THE GODAVERY
Disrricr in the Presidency of Madras. By H. Morris, formerly M.C.S. 8vo.
cloth, with map, pp. xil. and 390. 1878. 12s.

Miiller.— Ancient Inscriptions In Ceyton. By Dr. Epvwarp Murrer.
2 Vols. Text, crown 8vo., pp. 220, cloth and plates, oblong folio, cloth.
1883. 21s.

Munro.—Masor-Gunerat Sir T. Munro, Bart., K.C.B., Governor of
Madras. Selections from his Minutes and other Official Writings, Edited, with
an Introductory Memoir and Notes, by Sir A. J. ARBUTHNOT, K.C.S8.1., C.L.E.
New Kdition. Demy 8vo. pp. cxliv.-625, with Map, cloth. 1887. 41 1s.

North.—Norrn’s Prurarcu, Four Cuaprers oF ; Containing the Lives
of Caius Marcius, Coriolanus, Julius Caesar, Marcus Antonius, and Marcus
Brutus, as Sources to Shakespeare’s Tragedies; Coriolanus, Julius Cesar, and
Antony and Cleopatra; and partly to Hamlet and Timon of Athens. Photo-
lithographed in the size of the Kdition of 1595. With Preface, Notes com-
paring the Text of the Editions of 1579, 1595, 1608, and 1612; and Reference
Notes to the Text of the Tragedies of Shakespeare. Edited by Prof. F. A.
Lxo, Ph.D., Member of the Directory of the German Shakespeare Society; and
Lecturer at the Academy of Modern Philology at Berlin. Folio, pp. 22, 130
of facsimiles, half-morocco, Library Edition (limited to 250 copies), £1 11s. 6d. ;
Amateur Edition (50 copies on a superior large hand-made paper), £3 3s.

Notes, Rovcu, or Journeys made in the years 1868-1873, in Syria,
India, Kashmir, Japan, Mongolia, Siberia, United States, Sandwich Islands,
Australasia, etc. Demy 8vo. pp. 624, cloth. 1875, 14s.

Numismata Orientalia.—Tue Iyrernartonat Numismata ORIENTALIA.
Edited by Epwarp Tuomas, F.R.S., ete. Vol. I. Illustrated with 20 Plates
anda Map. Royal 4to. cloth. 1878. £3 13s. 6d.

Also in 6 Parts sold separately, royal 4to., wrappers, viz.:—

Part I.—Ancient Indian Weights. By E. Tuomas, F.R.S., etc. Pp. 84, with
Plate and Map of the India of Manu. 9s. 6d. II.—Coins of the Urtuki
Tarkumans. By S. L. Poorz. Pp. 44, with 6 Plates. 9s. II1l. The
Coinage of Lydia and Persia, from the Earliest Times to the Fall of the
Dynasty of the Achemenide, By B. V. Hzap, Assistant-Keeper of Coins,
British Museum. Pp. viii. and 56, with three Autotype Plates. 10s. 6d.
IV. The Coins of the Tuluni Dynasty. By E. T. Rocers. Pp. iv. and 22,
and 1 Plate. 5s. V. The Parthian Coinage. By P. Garpner, M.A. Pp.
iv. and 65, with 8 Autotype Plates. 18s. VI. The Ancient Coins and Measures
of Ceylon. With a Discussion of the Ceylon Date of the Buddha’s Death.
By T. W. Ruys Davins, late Ceylon ©. 8. Pp. 60, with Plate. 10s.

Numismata Orientalia.—Vou. II. Corns orran Jews. History of the
Jewish Coinage in the Old and New Testaments. By F. W. Mapprn, M.R.A.S.,
Member of the Numismatic Society of London, ete. With 279 woodcuts and a
plate of alphabets. Royal 4to. sewed, pp. xii. and 330. 1881. £2.

Or as a separate volume, cloth. £2 2s.

Numismata Orientalia—Vol III. Part I. Tue Cors or ARAKAN. oF
Prev, AND oF Burma. By Lieut.-General Sir Arrnur Puayrz, C.B.
K.C.S.1., G.C.M.G., late Commissioner of British Burma. Royal 4to. pp.
vii. and 48, with 5 Autotype Illustrations, sewed. 1882. 8s. 6d. Also cone
tains the Indian Balhara and the Arabian Intercourse with India in the Ninth
and following centuries. By Epwarp Tuomas, F.R.S. Vol. III. Part II.
The Coins of Southern India. By Sir W. Exxior. Royal 4to. pp. vili.-168
with Map and 4 Plates. 1886. 25s, ;

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 37

Nutt.—A Sxeron or Samarrran History, Doema, and Lrrprature.
An Introduction to “ Fragments of a Samaritan Targum,” By J. W. Nort,
M.A., &., &e. Demy 8vo. pp. 180, cloth. 1874. 5s.

Olcott.—A Buddhist Catechism, according to the Canon of the Southern
Church. By Col. H. 8. Olcott, 24mo. pp. 32, wrapper. 1881. 1s.

Oppert.—On tHe Ancrent Commerce or Inp1a: A Lecture. By Dr.
G. Oprerr. 8yo. paper, 50 pp. 1879. 1s.

Oppert.—Conrrisurions To rue History or Sournern Inpra. Part I.
Inscriptions. By Dr. G. Oprerr. 8vo. paper, pp. vi. and 74, with a Plate.
1882. 4s.

Orientalia Antiqua; or Documents anp ResEARCHES RELATING TO
THE History oF THE Writines, LANGUAGES, AND ARTS OF THE East.
Edited by Terrren pz La Coupsrre, M.R.A.S., etc., etc. Feap. 4to. pp. 96,
with 14 Plates, wrapper. Part I. ds.

Oxley.—Eeyrr: and the Wonders of the Land of the Pharaohs. By
W. Oxuey. Illustrated by a New Version of the Bhagavat-Gita, an Episode
of the Mahabharat, one of the Epie Poems of Aneient India. Crown 8vo. pp.
Vili -328, cloth. 1884. 7s. 6d.

Palmer.—Ecypt1an CHronictes, with a harmony of Sacred and
Egyptian Chronology, and an Appendix on Babylonian and Assyrian Antiquities.
By Witttam Paumer, M.A., late Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford.
2 vols. 8vo. cloth, pp. xxiv. and 428, and viii. and 636. 1861. 12s,

Patell—Cowasser Parert’s CHronoLocy, containing corresponding
Dates of the different Eras used by Christians, Jews, Greeks, Hindts,
Mohamedans, Parsees, Chinese, Japanese, ete. By Cowasszz SoraBJEE
PaTeLL. 4to. pp. viii. and 184, cloth. 50s.

Pathya-Vakya, or Niti-Sastra. Moral Maxims from the Writings
of Oriental Philosophers. Paraphrased, and Translated into English by
A.D. A. Wisayastnua. Foolscap. 8vo, sewed, pp. vill. and 54. 1881. 8s,

Paton.—A History or tae Eeyprian Revorvrion, from the Period of

' the Mamelukes to the Death of Mohammed Ali; from Arab and European
Memoirs, Oral Tradition, and Local Research. By A. A. Paton. Second
Edition. 2 vols. demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 395, viii. and 446. 1870. 7s. 6d.

Phillips —Korat-Kunpata, A Tale of Bengali Life. Translated
from the Bengali of Bunkim Chandra Chatterjee by H. A, D. Puruies,
Bengal C.S. Crown 8vo. pp. 240, cloth. 1885. 6s,

Pfoundes.—Fu So Mimi Bukuro.—A Bouncer or Japanese Notes.
By Carr. Prounpss, of Yokobama. 8vo. sewed, pp.184. 7s. 6d.

Phayre.—Cors or Arakan, Etc. See “‘Numismata Orientalia,”
Vol. III. Part I.

Piry.—Lz Sarr Eprr. Lirrerarvre Curnorsn. See page 63.

Playfair.—Tue Cries anp Towns or Cutna. A Geographical Diction-
ary by G. M. H. Prayrarr, of Her Majesty’s Consular Service in China. 8vo.
cloth, pp. 506. 1879. 26s.

Poole.—Corns oF tHe Urnruxf TurxumAns. See ‘‘Numismata Ori-
entalia,’ Vol. I. Part II.

Poole.—A Scueme or MonammapAn Dynasties Durine THE KHALIFATE.
By S. L. Poouz, B.A. Oxon., M.R.A.8., Author of “ Selections from the Koran,’’
etc. 8yo. sewed, pp. 8, with a plate. 1880. 2s.

38 Linguistic Publications of Triibner § Co.,

Poole —Awn Inprx ro Perroprcan Lrrerature. By W. F. Poole,
LL.D., Librarian of the Chicago Public Library. Third Edition, brought
down to January, 1882. Royal/8vo. pp. xxviil. and 1442, cloth. 1883.
£3 18s. 6d.

Ralston.—Tibetan Tales. See Triibner’s Oriental Series, page 5.

Ram Raz.—Essay on the Arcurrecrure of the Hinpus. By Ram Raz,
Native Judge and Magistrate of Bangalore. With 48 plates. 4to. pp. xiv. and
64, sewed. London, 1834, £2 2s.

Rapson.—Tne Srruceie BETWEEN ENGLAND AND FRANCE FOR SUPREMACY
in Inpra. (The “Le Bas”? Prize Essay for 1886.) By E. J. Rapson, B.A.
Crown 8vo., pp. viii. and 120, cloth. 1887. 4s. 6d.

Ravenstein.— Tue Russians on tHE Amur; its Discovery, Conquest,
and Colonization, with a Description of the Country, its Inhabitants, Produc-
tions, and Commercial Capabilities, and Personal Accounts of Russian ‘Travel-
lers. By E. G. Ravensrern, F.R.G.S. With 4 tinted Lithographs and 3
Maps. 8vo. cloth, pp. 500. 1861. 15.

Raverty.—Nores on AFGHANISTAN AND Parr or Batucutstan, Geo-
graphical, Ethnographical, and Historical. By Major H. G. Raverry, Bombay
N. I. (Retired). Feap. folio, wrapper. Sections I. and IT. pp. 98. 1880. 2s.
Section III. pp. vi. and 218. 1881. 5s. Section LV. pp. x-136. 1883. 3s.

Rice.—Mysorre Inscrierions. Translated for the Government by
Lewis Rice. 8vo. pp. vii. 336, and xxx. With a Frontispiece and Map.
Bangalore, 1879. £1 10s.

Rockhill.—Lirs or roe Buppwa. See page 6.

Roe and Fryer.—Travets ry Inpra in THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.
By Sir Tuomas Rok and Dr. Joun Fryer. 8vo. cloth, pp. 474. 1873. 7s. 6d.

Rogers.—Corns or tae Tutunt Dynasty. See ‘‘ Numismata Ori-
entalia,’’ Vol. I. Part. IV.

Routledge.—Enerish Route anp Native Oprnion in Inpia. From
Notes taken in the years 1870-74. By James Rourtepecr. Post 8vo.
cloth, pp. 344. 1878. 10s. 6d.

Rowbotham.—A History or Music. By Jonn Freprericx Rowxzoruam,
late Scholar of Balliol College, Oxford. 3 vols. demy Svo. pp. xx. and 342,
cloth. Vol. I. 1885. Vol. II. 1886. Vol. III. 1887. Each Volume, 18s.

Roy.—Tue Lyrics or Inp.—By Drsenpra Lata Roy, M.A. &c., Author
of ‘Ihe Aryan Melodies.’’ Crown 8yo. pp. viii.—79, cloth. 1887. 2s. 6d.

Sachau.—Atsirtni’s Invra. An Account of the Religion, Philosophy,
Literature, Chronology, Astronomy, Customs, Laws, and Astrology of India,
about A.D. 1030. Edited in the Arabic Original by Dr. Edward Sachau, Pro-
fessor in the Royal University of Berlin. With an Index of the Sanskrit
Words. 4to. pp. xli. and 371, cloth. 1887. £3 3s.

Sangermano.—A Descriprion or tHE Burmese Emprre. Compiled
chiefly from Native Documents, by the Rev. Father SangurMAno, and translated
from his MS. by W. Tanpy, D.D., Member of the Roman Sub-Committee of
the Oriental Translation Fund, Royal 8vo. pp. x.—228, cloth. 1885. 8s,

Sastri —Forxiorr in Sournern Inpra. By Pandit S. M. Narfsa

SAstri, Government Archevlogical Survey. In Two Parts, crown 8yvo. pp. 1386
wrapper, 1886. 3s.

Schiefner.—Tibetan Tales. See Triibner’s Oriental Series, page 5.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 39

Schlagintweit.—Grossary or Grocrapuican Trrus From INDIA AND
Tibet, with Native Transcription and Transliteration. By HerMANN DE
ScuLacintwerr. With an Atlas in imperial folio, of Maps, Panoramas,
and Views. Royal 4to., pp. xxiv. and 293. 1863. £4.

Sewell.—Reporr on roe Amaravatt Tops, and Excavations on its Site
in 1877. By R. Sewstx, M.C.S. Royal 4to. 4 plates, pp. 70, boards. 1880. 3s.

Sewell.—Arcumonocican Survey or Sournern Inpra. Lists of the
Antiquarian Remains in the Presidency of Madras. Compiled under the Orders
of Government, by R. Sewer, M.C.S. Vol. I. 4to. pp. 400, cloth. 1882. 20s.

Sherring.—Hindu Tribes and Castes as represented in Benares. By
the Rev. M. A. Suerrine. With Illustrations. 4to. Cloth. Vol. I. pp. xxiv.
and 408. 1872. Now £6 6s. Vol. II. pp. Ixviii. and 376. 1879. £2 8s.
Vol. ILI. pp. xii. and 336. 1881. £1 12s.

Sherring —Tue Sacrep Crry or tar Hriyovs. An Account of
Benares in Ancient and Modern Times. By the Rev. M. A. Suernine, M.A.,
LL.D.; and Prefaced with an Introduction by Firzepwaxrp Hatt, Esq., D.C.L.
8yo. cloth, pp. xxxvi. and 388, with numerous full-page illustrations. 1868. 21s.

Sibree. — Tue Great Arrican Istanp. Chapters on Madagascar.
Researches in the Physical Geography, Geology, Natural History and Botany,
and in the Customs, Language, Superstitions, Folk-Lore and Religious Belief,
and Practices of the Different Tribes, Illustrations of Scripture and Early
Church History, from Native Statists and Missionary Experience. By the Rev.
Jas. SipReEg, jun., F.R.G.S., of the London Missionary Society, ete. Demy
8vo. cloth, with Maps and Illustrations, pp. xii. and 372. 1880. 10s. 6d.

Steel and Temple. — Wipz-Awake Srorres. A Collection of Tales

' told by Little Children between Sunset and Sunrise in the Punjab and Kashmir.
By F. A. Srezn and R, C. Tempzte. Crown 8vo. pp. xil.—446, cloth.
1884. 9s.

Strangford.—OnxiermaL Lerrers and Papers oF THE LATE VISCOUNT
SrRANGFORD, upon Philological and Kindred Subjects. Edited by ViscounTESS
STRANGFORD. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. xxii. and 284. 1878. 12s, 6d.

Thomas.—Ancrent Inpisan Weteuts. See Numismata Orientalia,”’
Vol. I. Part I.

Thomas.—UommeEnts on Recent Peutvi DectpHerments. See page 92.

Thomas.—Sassantan Cotys. Communicated to the Numismatic Society
of London. By E. Tuomas, F.R.S. Two parts. With 3 Plates and a Wood-
cut. 12mo. sewed, pp. 43. 4s.

Thomas.—The Indian Balhar4, and the Arabian Intercourse with
India in the ninth and following centuries. By Enwarp Tuomas. See
Numismata Orientalia, Vol. III. Part I. page 30.

Thomas.—Recorps or tHE Gupta Dynasty. Illustrated by Inscrip-
tions, Written History, Local Tradition and Coins. ‘To which is added a
Chapter on the Arabs in Sind. By Epwarp Tuomas, F.R.S. Folio, with a
Plate, handsomely bound in cloth, pp. iv. and64. 1876. Price 14s.

Thomas.—Tne Curonictes or THE Parudy Kies or Dent. Ilus-
trated by Coins, Inscriptions, and other Antiquarian Remains. By Epwarp
Tuomas, F.R.S. With numerous Copperplates and Woodcuts. Demy 8vo.
cloth, pp. xxiv. and 467 1871. £1 8s.

Thomas.—Tne Revenve Resources or THE Muewat Emprre in Inpra,
from a.D. 15983 to a.p. 1707. A Supplement to “‘ The Chronicles of the Pathan
Kings of Delhi.” By E. Tuomas, F,R.S. 8vo. pp. 60, cloth. 3s. 6d.

40 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,

Thorburn.—Bannt; or, Our Afghén Frontier. By S. 8. Tuorsury,
Settlement Officer, Bann District. 8vo. cloth, pp. x. and 480. 1876. 18s.

Vaughan. — Tur Manners anp Cusroms oF THE CHINESE OF THE
Srraits Serruements. By J. D. Vaueuan, Advocate and Solicitor, Supreme
Court, Straits Settlements. 8vo. pp. iv.-120, boards. 1879. 7s. 6d.

Watson.—Inprx ro roe Native anv Screntiric Names or INDIAN AND
oruer Eastern Economic Puiants anp Propucts, By J. F. Warson,
M.A., M.D., etc. Imperial 8vo., cloth, pp.65@. 1868. £1 11s. 6d.

Wedgwood.—Conresrep Erymoxocizs in the Dictionary of the Rev.
W. W. Skeat. By HenstercH Wepewoop. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. viil.-194.
1882, 5s.

West and Buhler.—A Dicesr or tHe Hinpv Law of Inheritance,
Partition, Adoption; Embodying the Replies of the Sastris in the Courts of the
Bombay Presidency. With Introductions and Notes by the Hon. Justice Ray-
monp West and J. G. Binzer, C.1.E. Third Edition. 8vo. pp. xc.-1450,
wrapper. 1884. 36s.

Wheeler.—Txe History or Inpia From THE Earttest Acus. By J.
TaLBoys WHEELER, Assistant Secretary to the Government of India in the
Foreign Department, etc.etc. Demy 8vo.cl. 1867-1881.

Vol. 1. The Vedic Periodandthe Maha Bharata. pp.Ixxv.and 576. Out of Print.
Vol. 1II., The Ramayana and the Brahmanic Period. pp. lxxxviii. and 680, with
two Maps. 21s. Vol. III. Hindu, Buddhist, Brahmanical Revival. pp. 484,
with two maps. 18s. Vol. IV. Part I. Mussulman Rale. pp. xxxi. and 320.
14s. Vol. LV. Part Il. Moghul Empire—Aurangzeb. pp. xxviii. and 280. 12s.

Wheeler.—Farty Recorps or British Inpra. A History of the
English Settlement in India, as told in the Government Records, the works of
old travellers and other contemporary Documents, from the earliest period
down to the rise of British Power in India. By J. Tatpoys WHEELER.
Royal 8vo. cloth, pp. xxxii. and 392. 1878. 16s.

Williams.—Mopern Iypra anp THE Inprans. See Triibner’s Oriental
Series, p. 3.

Wilson.—Pansas Customary Law. Vol. IV. Gernerat Copr or
TrrpaL Custom IN THE Sirsa District oF THE Pungas. Drawn up by J.
Wixson, Settlement Officer. Imperial 8vo. pp. viii. and 194, cloth. 1886. 7s.

Wirgman.—A Sxerrcn Boox or Japan. By C. Wireman. Contain-
ing 89 Humorous Sketches on the Manners and Customs of the Japanese, with

accompanying Explanations. Royal 8vo. oblong, bound in Japanese gilt cloth.
1885. lds.

Wise.—Commentary on THE Hrypv System or Meprorne. By T. A.
Wise, M.D., Bengal Medical Service, 8vo., pp. xx. and 432, cloth. 7s. 6d.

Wise.—Rerview or tae Hisrory or Meniciner. By Tuomas A.
Wise, M.D. 2 vols. 8vo. cloth. Vol. I., pp. xeviii. and 397; Vol. Ils
pp. 574. 10s.

Worsaae.—Tur Pre-Hisrory or tHe Norru, BASED oN ConTEMPORARY
Memoriats. By the late CHamBeRLaIN J. J. A. Worsaan, Dr. Phil., Hon.
F.S.A., F.S.A. Scot., M.R.LA., &., &. Translated, with a brief Memoir of
the Author, by H. F, Mortanp Simpson, M.A. Crown 8yo. pp. xxx. and
206, cloth, with Map and Illustrations. 1886. 6s,

_ 57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 4]

Wright.—Tux Crrr, rue Roman, ann THE Saxon; a History of the
Early Inhabitants of Britain down to the Conversion of the Anglo-Saxons to
Christianity. Illustrated by the Ancient Remains brought to light by Recent
Research, By Tomas Wricut, M.A., F.S.A., &., &. Corrected and En-
hee Edition. Crown 8vo. pp. xiv. and 562, with nearly 300 Engravings, cloth.
1885, 9s,

THE RELIGIONS OF THE EAST.

Adi Granth (The); or, THe Hoty Scurprures or tHE Sixus, trans-
lated from the original Gurmukhi, with Introductory Essays, by Dr. Ernest
Trumpep, Prof. Oriental Languages, Munich. Roy. 8vo. cl. pp. 866. £2 12s. 6d,

Alabaster.—Tue Wueer or tur Law: Buddhism illustrated from
Siamese Sources by the Modern Buddhist, a Life of Buddha, and an account of
the Phrabat. By Henry ALaAsasTER, Interpreter of H.M. Consulate-General
in Siam. Demy 8vo. pp. lviii. and 324, cloth. 1871. 14s.

Amberley.—An Awnatysis or Reticious Betrer. By Viscount
AMBERLEY. 2 vols. 8vo. cl., pp. xvi. 496 and 512. 1876. 30s..

Apastambiya Dharma Sutram.—Aruorisms or THE Sacrep Laws oF
THE Htinpvus, by Apastamba. Edited, witha Translation and Notes, by G. Biibler.
2 parts. 8vo. cloth, 1868-71. £1 4s. 6d.

Arnold.—Tue Lieur or Asta; or, The Great Renunciation (Maha-
bhinishkramana). Being the Life and Teaching of Gautama, Prince of India,
and Founder of Buddhism (as told by an Indian Buddhist). By Sir Enwiy
Arnotp, M.A., K.C.L.E., ete. Cheap Edition. Crown 8vo. parchment, pp.
xvi. and 238. 1887. 3s. 6d. Library Edition, post 8vo. cloth. 7s. 6d.
Illustrated Edition. 4to. pp. xx.-196, cloth. 1884. 21s.

Arnold.—Inoran Porrry. See “‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 4.

Arnold.—Perarts or tHe Farrn; or, Islam’s Rosary. Being the
Ninety-nine Beautiful Names of Allah (Asma-el-’ Husna), with Comments in
Verse from various Oriental sources as made by an Indian Mussulman. By
Sir E. Arnoip, M.A,, K.C.I.E., ete. Fourth Ed. Cr. 8vo. cl., pp. xvi.-320.
1887. 7s. 6d.

Balfour.—Taoist Texts; Ethical, Political, and Speculative. By
F. H. Batrour. Imp. 8vo. pp. vi. 118, cloth. [1884.] 10s. 6d.

Ballantyne.—The Sankhya Aphorisms of Kapila. See p. 6.

Banerjea.—Tue Artan Wityess, or the Testimony of Arian Scriptures
in corroboration of Biblical History and the Rudiments of Christian Doctrine,
Including Dissertations on the Original Home and Early Adventures of Indo-
Arians. By the Rev. K. M. Banrersea. 8vo. sewed, pp. xviii. and 236. 8s. 6d.

Barth.—Reticrons or Inpra. See ‘Triibner’s Oriental Series,”
page 4.

Beal.—A Catena or Buppuisr Scriprures From THE Cuinuse. By S.
Beat, B.A. 8vo. cloth, pp. xiv. and 436. 1871. los.

Beal.—Tue Romantic Lucenp or SAxuya Buppua. From the
Chinese-Sanscrit by the Rev. S. Brat. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 400. 1875. 12s.

Beal. —Tur Duammaprava. See ‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 3.

42 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.

Beal.—Axsrract or Four Lectures on Buppuisr LireraTurE IN CHINA,
Delivered at University College, London. By Samurn Brau. Demy 8vo.
cloth, pp. 208. 1882. 10s. 6d.

Beal.—Buddhist Records of the Western World. See “ Triibner’s
Oriental Series,’ p. 6.

Bigandet.—Gavpama, the Buddha of the Burmese. See ‘‘ Triibner’s
Oriental Series,” page 4.

Brockie.—Inp1an Purttosopuy. Introductory Paper. By Wiut11aM
Brockrz. 8vo, pp. 26, sewed. 1872. 6d.

Brown.—Tue Dervisurs; or, OrtenTat Spreiruarism. By Joun P.
Brown, Sec. and Dragoman of Legation of U.S.A. Constantinople. With
twenty-four Illustrations. 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 415. 14s.

Burnell.—T ux Orpinances or Manu. See ‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series.”
page 6.

Callaway.—Tue Rericious System or THE AmazuLu. See page 51.

Chalmers.—Tue Oricrn or THE CuInEsE; an Attempt to.Trace the
connection of the Chinese with Western Nations in their Religion, Superstitions
Arts, Language, and Traditions. By JoHn Cuaumers, A.M. Foolscap 8vo,
cloth, pp. 78. 4s.

ChatterjiTue Buacavap GirdA; or Tor Lorv’s Lay.—With Com-
mentary and Notes, as well as references to the Christian Scriptures. Translated
from the Sanskrit for the benefit of those in search of Spiritual Light. By
Mouini M. Cuarrers1, M.A. Royal 8vo. pp. ix. and 283, cloth. 1887. 10s. 6d.

Clarke.—Tew Great Retiaions: an Essay in Comparative Theology.
Ry James FREEMAN CLARKE. 8vo. cloth, pp.x. and 528. 1871. 10s. 6d.

Clarke.—Trn Great Rewictons. Part II. A Comparison of All
Religions. By J. F. Crarxe. Demy 8vo., pp. xxviil.-414, cloth. 1883. 10s. 6d.

Clarke.—Srrrent anv Srva Worsarp, and Mythology in Central
America, Africa and Asia. By Hyor Ciarke, Esq. 8vo. sewed. 1s.

Conway.—Tuer Sacrep Antruotocy. A Book of Ethnical Scriptures.
Collected and edited by M. D. Conway. Sth edition. Demy 8vo. cloth,
pp. xvi. and 480. 1876. 12s.

Coomara Swamy.—Tne Darndvansa; or, the History of the Tooth-
Relic of Gotama Buddha. Pali Text, and English Translation, with Notes.
By Sir M. CoomAra SwAmy, Mudeliar. Demy 8vo. pp. 174, cloth. 1874. 10s. 6d.
Translation only, with Notes. pp. 100. 6s.

Coomara Swamy.—Svurra Nipdra; or, the Dialogues and Discourses
of Gotama Buddha. Translated from the Pali, with Introduction and Notes.
By Sir M. CoomAra Swamy. Cr. 8vo. cloth, pp. xxxvi. and 160. 1874. 6s.

Coran.—Exrracts From THE CorRAN IN THE ORIGINAL, WITH ENGLISH
Renverine. Compiled by Sir Wrir1am Murr, K.C.S.1., LL.D., Author of
the ‘Life of Mahomet.” Second Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. 72, cloth. 1885,

2s. 6d.
Cowell.—Tuer Sarva Darsana Samerana: See ‘Triibner’s Oriental
Series,” p. 5.

Cunningham.—Tuer Buirsa Torres; or, Buddhist Monuments of Central
India: comprising a brief Historical Sketch of the Rise, Progress, and Decline
of Buddhism ; with an Account of the Opening and Examination of the various
Groups of Topes around Bhilsa. By Brev.-Major A. Cunningham. Illustrated.
8vo. cloth, 33 Plates, pp. xxxvi. 870. 1854, £2 2s.

57 and 59 Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 43

Da Cunha.—Memorr oN THE History oF THE Toorn-Retic or Cryton ;
with an Essay on the Life and System of Gautama Buddha. By J. Gerson
pA CunHA. 8vo. cloth, pp.xiv.and 70 With 4 photographs and cuts. 7s. 6d.

Davids.—Buppuisr Birru Srortss. See “ Triibner’s Oriental Series,”
page 4,

Davies.—Hrxpu Puttosopny. See “ Triibner’s Oriental Series,”’ page 5.

Dowson.—Drcrionary or Hinpu Myruotoey, ere. See ‘Triibner’s
Oriental Series,”’ page 3.

Dickson.—Tue Parrwoxxna, being the Buddhist Office of the Con-
fession of Priests. The Pali Text, with a Translation, and Notes, by J. F.
Dickson, M.A, 8vo. sd., pp. 69. 2s.

Edkins.—Cutvese Buppuism. See ‘Triibner’s Oriental Series,’’
page 4.

Edkins.—Retteton ry Curna. See “ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” p. 6.

Eitel—Hanpsook For tue Srupent or Curnese Bupputsm. By the
Rev. E. J. Errer, L. M.S. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 224. 1870. 18s.

Eitel.—Buppuism: its Historical, Theoretical, and Popular Aspects.
In Three Lectures. By Rev. E. J. Errer, M.A. Ph.D. Third Revised
Edition. Demy Svo. pp. x —146, limp cloth. 1885. 6s.

Examination (Candid) of Theism.—By Physicus. Post 8vo. cloth, pp.
xviii. and 198. 1878. 7s. 6d.

Faber.—A Sysremarican Dierst oF THE Docrrines oF ConFuctus,
according to the ANaLEcTs, Great Learntina, and Doctrine of the Man.
with an Introduction on the Authorities upon Conrucius and Confucianism.
By Ernst Faser, Rhenish Missionary. Translated from the German by P.
G. von Mollendorff. 8vo. sewed, pp. vill. andi3l. 1875. 12s, 6d.

Faber.—Inrropuction ro THE Sctencr or CurnusE Rezieton. <A Critique
of Max Miiller and other Authors. By the Rev. E, Fanrr, Rhenish Mission-
ary in Canton. Crown 8yo. stitched in wrapper, pp. xii. and 164. 1880. 7s. 6d.

Faber.—Tur Mrinp or Menctus. See ‘‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” p. 5.

Giles.—Recorp or tHE Bupputst Kinevoms. Translated from the
Chinese by H. A. Gites, of H.M. Consular Service. 8vo. sewed, pp.
x.-129. 5s.

Gough.—Tur PuitosopuHy or tHE Upanisuaps. See ‘ Triibner’s
Oriental Series,” p. 5.

Gubernatis.—Zootocica, Myruotoey; or, the Legends of Animals.
By ANGELO DE GuBERNatis, Professor of Sanskrit and Vomparative Literature
in the Instituto di Studii Superiori e di Perfezionamento at Florence, etc. In
2 vols. 8vo. pp. xxvi. and 432, vii. and 442. 28s.

Gulshan I Raz: Tue Mystic Rose Garpen or Sa’p vp pin Manmup
SuapisTari. The Persian Text, with an English Translation and Notes, chiefly
from the Commentary of Muhammed Bin Yahya Lahiji. By E. H. Wurnrietp,
M.A., late of H.M.B.C.S. 4to. cloth, pp. xvi. 94 and 60. 1880. 10s. 6d.

Gulshan I Raz: Tue Distocur or rue. Crown 8vo. pp. iv.-64,
cloth. 1887. 3s.

Hardy.—Currstianity anp Buppuism Comparep. By the late Rry.
R. Spence Harpy, Hon. Member Royal Asiatic Society. 8vo. sd. pp. 138. 6s.

Haug.—Tux Parsts. See ‘“ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” p. 3.

44 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.

Haug.—Tue Arrarvya BraumanamM or THE Rie Vepa: containing the
Earliest Speculations of the Brahmans on the meaning of the Sacrificial Prayers
and on the Origin, Performance, and Sense of the Rites of the Vedic Religion.
Sanskrit Text Edited, Translated, and Explained by Martin Hauce, Ph.D;
Superintendent of Sanskrit Studies in the Poona College, ete. 2 Vols. Crown
8vo. pp. 312, and 544, cloth. 1863. £2 2s.

Hawken.—Ura-Sasrra: Comments, Linguistic and Doctrinal, on
Sacred and Mythic Literature. By J.D. Hawxen. 8vo. cloth, pp.viii. —288.
7s. 6d.

Hershon.—Tatmupic Miscernany. See ‘‘Triibner’s Oriental Series,”
page 4.

Hodgson.—Essays reLatine to Inpran Svunszcrs. See “‘ Triibner’s
Oriental Series,” p. 4.

Inman.—Ancrent Pagan AnD Moprern Caristran SymBorism ExposeD
AND Expiarnep. By Tuomas Inman, M.D. Second Edition, With Ulustra-
tions. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xl. and 148. -1874. 7s. 6d.

Johnson.—Orrentat Retieions and thei Relation to Universal Reli-
gion. By Samury Jounson. I. India. 2 Volumes, post 8vo. pp. 408 and
402, cloth. 21s. II. Persia. Demy 8vo. pp. xliv.-784, cloth. 1885. 18s.

Journal of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society.—For
Papers on Buddhism contained in it, see page 15.

Kistner.—Buppua anv nts Docrrinrs. A Bibliographical Essay. By
O1ro KistNER. Imperial 8vo., pp. iv. and 32, sewed. 2s. 6d.

Koran.—Arabic text. Lithographed in Oudh. Foolscap 8vo. pp.
502, sewed. Lucknow, a.H. 1295 (1877). 9s.

Koran.—See also under ‘‘ Coran.”’

Lane.—Tuet Koran. See ‘“ Triibner’s Oriental Series,’’ p. 3.

Legge.—Conrucranism mv Retatron to Curistraniry.. See page 62.

Legge.—Tue Lire anp Tracurines or Conrucius. With Explanatory
Notes. By James Luccr, D.D. Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. vi-
and 338. 1887. 10s. 6d.

Legge.—Tue Lire anp Works or Mencius. With Essays and Notes.
By James Lecce. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 402. 1875, 12s.

Legge.—Tue Sue-Kine; or, The Book of Ancient Poetry. Trans-
lated in English Verse, with Essays and Notes. By James Luaer, D.D.,
LL.D., etc., ete. Pp. vi. and 482, cloth. 1876. 12s.

Legge.—Curnesr Crasstcs. See page 62.

Leigh.—Tur Reticion or rau Wortp. By H. Sronz Lerten. 12mo.
pp- Xli. 66, cloth. 1869. 2s. 6d.

M‘Clatchie.—Conructan Cosmocony. A Translation (with the
Chinese Text opposite) of Section 49 (Treatise on Cosmogony) of the “ Com-
plete Works’? of the Philosopher Choo-Foo-'l'ze. With Explanatory Notes by
the Rev. Tu. M‘Ciarcure, M.A. Small 4to. pp. xviii. and 162. 1874. 12s. 6d.

Mitra.— Buppna Gaya, the Hermitage of Sdkya Muni. By Raszn-
eee a lane LL.D., C.I.E. 4to. cloth, pp. xvi. and 258, with 51 Plates,
( * ie

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 45

Muhammed.—Tue Lire or Munamuep. Based on Muhammed Ibn
Ishak By Abd El MalikIbn Hisham. Edited by Dr, Ferpinanp WiisTEN-
FeLD. ‘The Arabic Text. 8vo. pp. 1026, sewed, 21s. Introduction, Notes,
and Index in German. 8vo. pp. Ixxii. and 266, sewed. 7s. 6d.

The text based on the Manuscripts of the Berlin, Leipsic, Gotha and Leyden Libraries, has
been carefully revised by the learned editor, and printed with the utmost exactness.

eee TONS FROM THE Sanskrit. See ‘ Tribner’s Oriental

eries,’”’ p. 3.

Muir.—Onicivat Sansxrrr Trexrs.—See page 102.
Muir.—Exrracrs rrom tHe Coran. See Coran, page 42.

Miiller—Tue Sacrep Hymns or tur Branmrins, as preserved to us

’ in the oldest collection of religious poetry, the Rig-Veda-Sanhita, translated and
explained. By F. Max Miitzter, M.A., Oxford. Volume I. Hymns to the
Maruts or the Storm Gods. 8vo. pp clii. and 264, 1869. 12s, 6d.

Muller.—Tur Hymns or toe Rie Vepa mn tHE Samuira AnD Papa
Texts. Reprinted from the Editio Princeps by F. Max MUuuzr, M.A.
Second Edition. With the two texts on parallel pages. 2 vols., 8yo. pp.
800-828, stitched in wrapper. 1877. Sl 12s,

Miiller.—Lecrure on Buppuisr Ninuism. By F. Max Miirrrr,

M.A. Delivered before the Association of German Philologists at Kiel, 28th
September, 1869. (Translated from the German.) Sewed. 1869. ls.

Newman.—Hesrew Tuersm. By F. W. Newman. Royal 8vo. stiff
wrappers, pp. viii, and 172. 1874. 4s. 6d.

Piry.—Lz Samr Eprr, Exupe pe Lirrerarvre CHrnotise. Préparée
par A. TuHioputte Prry, du Service des Douanes Maritimes de Chine. 4to.
pp. xx. and 320, cloth. 1879. 21s.

Priaulx—Quzstionres Mosatcm; or, the first part of the Book of

Genesis compared with the remains of ancient religions. By Osmonp bE
Beauvoir PriavLx. 8vo. pp. vill. and 548, cloth. 12s.

Redhouse.—Tue Musyevi. See ‘“ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” p. 4.

Rig-Veda Sanhita.—A Correction or Ancrent Hinpu Hymns. Con-
stituting the First tothe Eighth Ashtaka, or Books of the Rig-veda; the oldest
authority for the religious and social institutions of the Hindus. Translated
from the Original Sanskrit by the late H. H. Wiuson, M.A. 2nd Ed., with
a Postscript by Dr. F. Haxu. 8vo. cloth, Vol. I. pp. li. and 348. 21s.
Vol. II. pp. xxx. and 346. 1854, 21s. Vol. III. pp. xxiv. and 625. 1857.
21s. Vol. 1V. Edited by E. B. Cowxzit, M.A. pp. 214. 1866. 14s.

A few copies of Vols. II. and ILI. stili left, [ Vols. V. and VI. in the Press,

Rig-Veda Sanhita.—See Miirrer.
Rockhill.—Lirs or rue Buppaa. See “ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” p. 6,

Sacred Books (The) or rum East. ‘Translated by various Oriental
Scholars, and Edited by F. Max Miiller. All 8yo. cloth. 1879-1888.

First Series.

Vol. I. The Upanishads. Translated by F. Max Miller. Part I. The Khan-
dogya-Upanishad; the Talavakara-Upanishad; the Aitareya-Aranyaka ; the
Kaushitaki-Brahmana-Upanishad and the Vagasansyi-Samhitd-Upanishad,
10s. 6d,

46 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.

Vol. II. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, as taught in the Schools of Apastamba,
Gautama, VAsishtha, and Baudhdyana. Translated by Georg Bihler. Part J.
Apastamba and Gautama. 10s. 6d. ; :

Vol. III. The Sacred Books of China. The Texts of Confucianism. Translated
by James Legge. Part I. The Shi King. The Religious Portions of the Shih
King The Hsiao King. 12s. 6d.

Vol. IV. The Zend-Avesta. Part I. The Vendidad. ‘Translated by James
Darmesteter. 10s. 6d.

Vol. V. Pahlavi Texts. Part I. The Bundahis, Bahman Yast, and Shayast-la
Shayast. Translated by E. W. West. 12s. 6d.

Vol. VI. The Qur'an. Part I. Translated by E. H. Palmer. 10s. 6d.

Vol. VII. The Institutes of Vishnu. Translated by Julius Jolly. 10s. 6d.

Vol. VIII. The Bhagavadgité with other extracts from the Mahabharata.
Translated by Kashinath Trunbak Telang. 10s. 6d.

Vol. IX. The Qur’an. Part II. Translated by E. H. Palmer. 10s. 6d. ~

Vol. X. The Suttanipata, ete. Translated by V. Fausbéll. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XI. The Mah4parinibbana Sutta; the Tevigga Sutta; the Mahasudassana
Sutta; the Dhamma-Kakkappavattana Sutta. Translated by T. W. Rhys
Davids. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XII. The Satapatha-Brahmana. Translated by Prof. Eggeling. Vol. I.
12s. 6d.

Vol. XIII. The Patimokkha. Translated by T. W. Rhys Davids. The Maha-
vagea, Part I. Translated by Dr. H. Oldenberg. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XIV. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, as taught in the Schools of Vasishtha
and Baudhayana. Translated by Prof. Georg Buhler. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XV. The Upanishads. Part II. Translated by F. Max Miiller. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XVI. The Yi King. Translated by James Legge. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XVII. The Mahavagga. Part II. Translated by T. W. Rhys Davids, and
Dr, H. Oldenberg. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XVIII. The Dadistan-i? Dintk and Mainy6-i Khard. Pahlavi Texts. Part
II. Translated by E. W. West. 12s. 6d.

Vol. XIX. The Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king. Translated by Samuel Beal. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XX. The Yayu-Purana. Translated by Prof. Bhandarkar, of Elphinstone
College, Bombay. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XXI. The Saddharma-pundarika. Translated by Prof. Kern. 12s. 6d.

Vol. XXII. The Akaranga-Sitra. Translated by Prof. Jacobi. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XXIII. The Zend-Avesta. Part. 1]. The Sirdzahs, Yasts, and Nyayis.
Translated by J. Darmesteter. 10s. 6d.

Vol. XXIV. Pahlavi Texts. Part HII. Dina-? Mainég-i Khirad, Sikaud-
gtimanik, and Sad Dar. Translated by E. W. West. 10s, 6d.

Second Series,

Vol. XXV. Manu. Translated by G. Buhler. 21s.

Vol. XXVI. The Satapatha-Brahmava. Part II. Translated by J. Eggeling.
12s. 6d.

Vols. XXVII. and XXVIII. The Sacred Books of China. The Texts of Con-
fucianism. ‘I'ranslated by J. Legge. Parts III. and IV. ‘The Liki, or Col-
lection of Treatises on the Rule of Propriety, or Ceremonial Usages. 12s. 6d. each.

Vols. XXIX. and XXX. ‘The Grihya-sitras. Rules of Vedic Domestic Cere-

monies. Translated by Hermann Oldenberg. Part I. (Vol. XX1X.) 19s.
Part IL. (Vol. XXX.) [In the Press.] . ( dla Re

_ 57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 47

Vol. XXXI. The Zend-Avesta. Part III. The Yasna, Visparad, Afrinagan,
Gabs, and Miscellaneous Fragments. Translated by L. H. Mills, 12s, 6d.
In the Press,
Vol. XXXII. Vedic Hymns. Translated by F. Max Miiller.
Vol. XXXIII, Narada, and some Minor Law-books. ‘Iranslated by Julius Jolly.
Vol. XXXIV. The Vedanta-Siitras, with Sankara’s Commentary. Translated
by G. Thibaut.
The Second Series will consist of Twenty-four Velumes in all.

Schlagintweit.—Buppuism 1n Tiser. Illustrated by Literary Docu-
ments and Objects of Religious Worship. With an Account of the Buddhist
Systems preceding it in India. By Emit Scauacintweit, LL.D. Witha
Folio Atlas of 20 Plates, and 20 Tables of Native Prints in the Text. Royal
8vo., pp. xxiv. and 404. £2 2s.

Sell.—Tue Farrn or Istam. By the Rev. E. Srtt, Fellow of the
University of Madras. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xiv. and 270. 1880. 6s. 6d.
Sell.—Iuy-1-Taswip ; or, Art of Reading the Quran. By the Rey.

E. Sez, B.D. 8vo., pp. 48, wrappers. 1882. 2s. 6d.

Sherring.—Tue Hiypoo Pirertmms. By the Rev. M. A. Suerrrne,
Feap. 8vo. cloth, pp. vi. and 125. ds.

Singh —Saxuee Boor; or, the Description of Gooroo Gobind Singh’s
Religion and Doctrines, translated from Gooroo Mukhi into Hindi, and after-
wards into English. By Sirdar Attar Singh, Chief of Bhadour. With the
Author’s photograph. 8vo. pp. xviii. and 205. Benares, 1873. 15s.

Sinnett.—THE Occurt Wortp. By A. P. Sinnert, President of the
Simla Eclectic Theosophical Society. Fourth Edition, Feap. 8vo., pp. xiv. and
140, cloth. 1884. 3s, 6d.

Syed Ahmad.—A Szrzzs or Essays on tHE Lire or Monammuep, and
Subjects subsidiary thereto. By Syep Anmap Kuan Banapor, C.8.1. 8vo.
pp. 532, with 4 Genealogical Tables, 2 Maps, and Coloured Plate. £1 10s.

Tiele —Ovurtminrs or THE History oF Retieron. See ‘‘ Triibner’s
Oriental Series,’’ page 6.

Tiele.—History of Egyptian Religion. See “Triibner’s Oriental Series,”
page 5. ;

Vishnu-Purana (The) ; a System of Hindu Mythology and Tradition
Translated from the Sanskrit, with Notes derived chiefly from other Puranas.
By the lateH. H. Wruson, M.A., Boden Prof. of Sanskrit in the University
of Oxford, etc. Edited by Firzepwarp Hatt. 6 vols. 8vo. cloth. Vol. I. pp.
exl. and 200; Vol. II. pp. 343; Vol. ILI., pp. 348; Vol 1V. pp. 846; Vol.
V. Part I. pp. 392. 10s. 6d. each. Vol. V., Part 2, Index, compiled by F. Hall.
pp. 268. 12s.

Wake.—Tue Evorurton or Moratiry. A History of the Develop-
ment of Moral Culture. By C. S. Waxz. Two vols. 8vo. pp. 622 and
486, cloth. 1878. © 21s.

Wherry.—Commentary on the Quran. See page 5.

Wilson.—Essays anpD LeEcrurES CHIEFLY ON THE RELIGION OF THE
Hinpus. By the late H. H. Wison, M.A., F.R.S., etc. Collected and
edited by Dr. REINHOLD Rost, 2 vols. pp. 414 and 422, cloth. 21s.

48 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.

COMPARATIVE PHILOLOGY.

POLYGLOTS.

Beames.—Ovruines or Inpran Purtotogy. With a Map, showing the
Distribution of the Indian Languages. By Joun Beames. Second enlarged and
revised edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. vili. and 96. 1868. 5s.

Beames.—A Comparative Grammar or tHE Mopern Aryan LancuacEs
or Inpvia (to wit), Hindi, Panjabi, Sindhi, Gujarati, Marathi, Uriya, and
Bengali. By JoHN Brames, Bengal C.S., M.R.A.S., &c. 8vo. cloth. Vol.
1. On Sounds. pp. xvi. and 860. 1872. 16s. Vol. 1I. The Noun and the
Pronoun. pp. xii. and 348. 1875. 16s. Vol III. The Verb. pp, xii. and
316. 1879. 16s.

Bellows.—Enexisn Ovriine VocaButary, for the use of Students of the
Chinese, Japanese, and other Languages. Arranged by JouN BELLows. With
Notes on the writing of Chinese with Roman Letters, by Professor SuMMERs,
King’s College, London. Crown 8vo., pp. 6 and 368, cloth. 1867. 6s.

Bellows.—Ovriiyer Dictionary, FoR THE USE oF MissronaRIEs, Explorers,
and Students of Language. By F. Max Miitter, M.A., Oxford. With Introduc-
tion on the proper use of the English Alphabet in transcribing Foreign
Languages. Vocabulary compiled by J. BetLows. Crown 8vo. pp. 400,
limp morocco. 1867. 7s. 6d.

Caldwell.—A Comparative GRAMMAR OF THE DRAvVIDIAN, oR SouTH-
InpiAN Famity oF Lanouaces. By the Rev. R. CatpweLt, LL.D.
Second, enlarged, Edition. Demy 8vo. pp. 806, cloth. 1875, 28s.

Calligaris—Lr Compacnon pr Tous, ov Dicrionnarre PoryeLorre.
Par le Colonel Louis CaLiiGa kis, Grand Officier, etc. (French —Latin—Italian—
Spanish—Portuguese—German—English— Modern Greek—Arabic—Turkish.)
2 vols. 4to., pp. 1157 and 746. Turin. £4 4s.

Campbell.—Srecimens or THE Lanevaces or Inpra, including Tribes
of Bengal, the Central Provinces, and the Eastern Frontier. By Sir G.
CampBELL, M.P. Folio, paper, pp. 808. 1874. £1 11s. 6d.

Clarke.—lrsrarcHEs IN PRE-HISTORIC AND PRoro-HIsToRIC ComPARA-
tTIvE PuitoLocy, MytHouocy, anp ArcHmoLocy. See page 56.

Cust.—Lanevaces or tHe East Inprms. See page 8,
Cust.—Lanevaces or Arrica. See page 6.

Edkins.—Curna’s Prace in Putnonogy, An Attempt to show that the
Languages of Europe and Asia have a Common Origin. By the Rev. Josery
Evxins. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. xxiii. and 403. 0s. 6d.

Ellis.—Errvuscan Numerats. By R. Exxis, B.D. 8vo. pp. 52. 2s. 6d.

Ellis.—Tue Asiatic AFFINITIES OF THE Oxp Itatrans. By Roserr
Evuis, B.D., Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge, and author of “ Ancient
Routes between Italy and Gaul.”’ Crown 8vo. pp. iv. 156, cloth. 1870, 5s.

Ellis—On Nomwrats, as Signs of Primeval Unity among Mankind.
By Rosert Extis, B.D., Late Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge.
Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 94. 3s. 6d.

Ellis.—Sovrces or rue Erruscan anp Basque Lancvacrs. By Rosert
Exxis, B.D., late Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge. Demy 8vo. pp.
vilili.-166, 1886. 7s, 6d.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 49

Ellis—Prruvra Scyruica. The Quichua Language of Peru: its
derivation from Central Asia with the American languages in general, and with
the Turanian and Iberian languages of the Old World, including the Basque,
the Lycian, and the Pre-Aryan language of Etruria. By Ropert Ex.is, B.D.
8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 219. 1875. 6s.

Geiger.—Conrrrsvtions To THE History oF THE DRVELOPMENT OF THE
Human Race. Lectures and Dissertations. By LazarusGezicrer. ‘Translated
from the Second German Edition by Davip Asuer, Ph.D. Post 8vo. cloth,
pp. x. and 156. 1880. 6s.

Grey.—Hanproox oF Arrican, AUSTRALIAN, AND Potynustan Pur-
LOLOGY, as represented in the Library of His Excellency Sir George Grey,
K.C.B., Her Majesty’s High Commissioner of the Cape Colony. Classed,
Annotated, and Edited by Sir Georcz Grey and Dr. H. I. Burr.

Vol. I. Part 1.—South Africa. 8vo. pp. 186. 20s.

Vol.I. Part 2.—Africa (North of the Tropic of Capricorn). 8vo.pp.70. 4s.

Vol.I. Part 3.—Madagascar. 8vo. pp. 24. 2s.

Vol. II. Part 1.—Australia. 8vo. pp.iv. and 44. 3s.

Vol. II. Part 2.—Papuan Languages of the Loyalty Islands and New Hebrides, compris-
ing those of the Islands of Nengone, Lifu, Aneitum, Tana, and
others. 8vo. p.12. ls. 6

Vol. II. Part 3.—Fiji Islands and Rotuma (with Supplement to Part II., Papuan Lan-
guages, and Part I., Australia). 8vo. pp. 34. 2s.

Vol. II. Part 4.—New Zealand, the Chatham Islands, and Auckland Islands. 8vo. pp.
76. 78.

Vol. II. Part 4 (continuation).—Polynesia and Borneo, 8vo. pp. 77-154. 7s.

Vol. III. Part 1.—Manuscripts and Incunables. 8vo. pp. viii. and 24. 2s.

Vol. IV. Part 1.—Early Printed Books. England. 8vo. pp. vi. and 266. 12s,

Gubernatis.—Zootocicat Myruotoey; or, the Legends of Animals.
By ANGELO DE GuBERNATIS, Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Literature
in the Instituto di Studii Superiori e di Perfezionamento at Florence, etc. In
2 vols. 8vo. pp. xxxvi. and 432, vil. and 442, 28s,

Hoernle.—A Comparative GRAMMAR OF THE Gaupran Lanevacer, with
Special Reference to the Hastern Hindi. With Language Map and Table of
Alphabets, By A. F. R. Hozrniz. Demy 8vo. pp. 474. 1880. 18s.

Kilgour.—Tur Hesrew or Isertan Race, including the Pelasgians,
the Phenicians, the Jews, the British, and others. By Hunry Kizgour. 8vo.
sewed, pp. 76. 1872. 2s. 6d.

March.—A Comparative GRAMMAR OF THE ANnGLo-Saxon LaneuaceE ;
in which its forms are illustrated by those of the Sanskrit, Greek, Latin,
Gothic, Old Saxon, Old Friesic, Old Norse, and Old High-German. By
Francis A. Marcu, LL.D. Demy 8vo, cloth, pp. xi. and 253. 1877. 10s.

Notley.—A Comparative GRaMMak oF THE Frencu, Iratran, SpanisH,
AND Portuaursr Lancuaces. By Epwin A. Norrey. Crown oblong 8vo.
cloth, pp. xv. and 396. 7s. 6d.

Oppert.—On the Classification of Languages. A Contribution to Com-
parative Philology. By Dr.G.Opprrr. 8yo. paper, pp. Vi. and 146. 1879. 7s.6d,

Oriental Congress.—Report of the Proceedings of the Second Interna-
tional Congress of Orientalists held in London, 1874. Roy. 8vo, paper, pp. 76. 5s.

Oriental Congress —Transactions oF THE Second Sesston oF THE
JNTERNATIONAL ConcrEss or OrrenrTaists, held in London in September,
1874. Edited by Roperr K. Dovexas, Honorary Secretary. Demy 8vo.
cloth, pp. viii. and 456. 21s. :

50 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Pezzi.—Aryan Puitotocy, according to the most recent Researches
(Glottologia Aria Recentissima), Remarks Historical and Critical. By
Domenico Przz1, Membro della Facolta de Filosofia e lettere della R.
Universit. di Torino. Translated by E. S. Ropers, M.A., Fellow and Tutor
of Gonville and Caius College. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 199. 6s.

Sayce.—An Assyrian Grammar for Comparative Purposes. By A. H.
Saycr, M.A. 12mo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 188. 1872. 7s. 6d.

Sayce.— Tue Privciptes or Comparative Puitotosy. By A. HH,
Saycr, Fellow and Tutor of Queen’s College, Oxford. Second Edition. Cr.
8vo. cl., pp. xxxii. and 416. 10s. 6d.

Schleicher.—Comprenpium oF THE ComparaTIVE GRAMMAR OF THE InDO-
European, SANSKRIT, GREEK, AND Latin Lancuaces. By Avucust
ScHLEICHER. Translated from the German by H. Benpatt, B.A., Chr.
Coll. Camb. : 8vo. cloth, Part I. Grammar. pp. 184. 1874. 7s. 6d.
Part II. Morphology. pp. viii. and 104. 1877. 6s.

Triibner’s Collection of Simplified Grammars of the principal Asraric
and Evropran Lanevuacss. Edited by Rernnorp Rost, LL.D., Ph.D.
Crown 8yo. cloth, uniformly bound.

I,—Hindustani, Persian, and Arabic. By the late E. H. Palmer, M.A.
Pp. 112. 5s.
‘TI.—Hungarian. ByI.Singer, of Buda-Pesth. Pp.vi.and 88. 4s. 6d.
TII.—Basque. By W. Van Eys. Pp. xii. and 52. 3s. 6d.
IV.—Malagasy. By G. W. Parker. Pp. 66. 5s.
V.—Modern Greek. By E. M.Geldart, M.A. Pp. 68. 2s. 6d.
VI.—Roumanian. By M. Torceanu. Pp. viii. and 72. 5s.
VII.—Tibetan. By H. A. Jaschke. Pp. vii. and 104. ds.
VIII.—Danish. By E. C. Otté. Pp. viii. and 66. 2s. 6d.
IX.—Turkish. By J. W. Redhouse. Pp. xii. and 204. 10s. 6d.
‘X.—Swedish. By E. C. Otté. Pp. xii. and 70. 2s. 6d.
XI.—Polish. By W. R. Morfill, M.A. Pp. viii. and 64. 3s. 6d.
XII.—Pali. By E. Miller, Ph.D. Pp. xvi. and 144. 7s. 6d.
XI1I.—Sanskrit. By H. Edgren. Pp. xii.-178. 10s. 6d.
XIV.—Grammaire Albanaise. Par P. W. Pp. x.and170. 7s. 6d.
XV.—Japanese. By B. H. Chamberlain. Pp. viii. and 108. 5s.
XVI.—Serbian. By W.R. Morfill, M.A. Pp. viii. and 72. 4s. 6d.
XVII.—Cuneiform. By G. Bertin. Pp. viii-118. 5s,

(Others in Preparation.)

Tribner’s Catalogue of Dictionaries and Grammars of the Principal
Languages and Dialects of the World. Considerably enlarged and revised, with
an Alphabetical Index. A Guide for Students and Booksellers. Second Edition
8vo. pp. vill. and 170, cloth. 1882. 5s. ‘

*,* The first edition, consisting of 64 pp., contained 1,100 titles; iti i
* : ’ : itles ; th
170 pp., and contains 3,000 titles. ; i emiamricapoimisathpe es

mh Ce OF Bete dete a Langage el the Afghans, com-
pared wi e Iranian an orth-Indian Idioms. Dr. E ak
Svo. sewed, pp. xvi. and 412. 21s. i pied tg

Weber.—Inv1an Lirerarurn. See “Triibner’s Oriental Series,” p. 3.

Wedgwood.—On rur Ontern or Language. By Hensteren Wepewoop
late Fellow of Christ’s College, Cambridge. Fcap. 8yvo. pp. 172, cloth. 3s. 6d.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 51

Whitney.—Lanevace anv rts Srupy, with especial reference to the
Indo-European Family of Languages. Seven Lectures by W. D. Wurrney,
Professor of Sanskrit, Yale College. Edited with Introduction, N otes, Grimm’s
Law with Illustration, Index, ete., by the Rev. R. Morris, M.A., LL.D.
Second Edition. Or, 8vo.cl., pp. xxii. and 818. 1881. ds.

Whitney.—Lanevace anp tHE Srupy or Lanevace: Twelve Lectures
on the Principles of Linguistic Science. By W. D. Wurrney. Fourth Edition,
augmented by an Analysis. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 504. 1884. 10s. 6d.

Whitney.—Onrentat anp Linevistic Srupmes. By W. D. Wurrney,
Cr. 8vo. cl. 1874. Pp. x. and 418. 12s.

First Series. The Veda; the Avesta; the Science of Language.
Second Series.—The East and West—Religion and Mythology—Orthography and
Phonology—Hindt Astronomy. Pp. 446. 12s.

GRAMMARS, DICTIONARIES, TEXTS,

AND TRANSLATIONS.
AFRICAN LANGUAGES.

Bentley.—Drcrionary anp GramMar or tHe Koneo Lanevage, as
Spoken at San Salvador, the Ancient Capital of the Old Kongo Empire, West
Africa. Compiled by the Rev. W. Horman Benruey, Missionary of the
Baptist Missionary Society on the Kongo. With an Introduction by R. N.
Cust, Hon. Secretary of the Royal Asiatic Society. Demy 8vo. pp. xxiv. and
718, with Table of Concords, cloth. 1888. £1 1s.

Bleek.— A Comparative Grammar or Sourn Arrican Lanevacns. By
W. H. I. Buzex, Ph.D. Volume I. I. Phonology. 11. The Concord.
Section 1. The Noun. 8vyo. pp. xxxvi. and 322, cloth. 1869. £4 4s.

Bleek.—A Brizr Account or Busuman Fork Lore anp otHER TExts.
By W. H. I. Breszx, Ph.D., etc., ete. Foliosd., pp. 21. 1876. 2s. 6d.

Bleek.— Reynarp THE Fox 1n Soutrn Arrica; or, Hottentot Fables.
Translated from the Original Manuscript in Sir George Grey’s Library.
By Dr. W. H. I. Burex, Librarian to the Grey Library, Cape Town, Cape
of Good Hope. Post. 8vo., pp. xxxi. and 94, cloth, 1864. 38, 6d.

Callaway.—Izineanexwane, NensumansuMAnE, Nezrnpasa, ZABaNntu
(Nursery Tales, Traditions, and Histories of the Zulus). In their own words,
with a Translationinto English,and Notes. By the Rev. H. Carzaway, M.D.

Callaway.— Tue Reticious System or THE AMAZULU,

Part I.—Unkulunkulu; or, the Tradition of Creation as existing among the
Amazulu and other Tribes of South Africa,in their own words, with a translation
into English, and Notes. By the Rev. Canon Catnaway,M.D. 8vo. pp. 128
sewed. 1868. 4s.

Part [1.—Amatongo; or, Ancestor Worship, as existing among the Amazulu, in
their own words, with a translation into English, and Notes, By the Rev.
Canon Cattaway, M.D. 1869. 8vo. pp.127, sewed. 1869. 4s. :

Part I11.—Izinyanga Zokubula; or, Divination, as existing among the Amazulu, in
their own words. Witha Translation into English, and Notes. By the Rev.
Canon Cartaway, M.D. 8vo. pp. 150, sewed. 1870. 4s.

Part [V.—Abatakati, or Medical Magic and Witchcraft. 8vo. pp. 40, sewed. 1s. 6d.

52 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.

Christaller.—A Dricrionary, Enerrsn, Tsut, (Asants), Agra; Tshi
(Chwee), comprising as dialects Akan (Asanté, Akém, Akuapém, etc.) and
Fanté; Akra (Accra), connected with Adangme; Gold Coast, West Africa.

Enyiresi, Twi né Nkran Enlisi, Ot8ti ke Ga
nsem - asekyere - nhoma. wiemoi - asisit8Omv- wolo.
By the Rev. J. G. Curisratuer, Rev. C. W. Locuzr, Rev. J. ZIMMERMANN.
16mo. 7s. 6d.

Christaller.—A Grammar or THE AsANTE AND FantE Lanevaes, called
Tshi (Chwee, Twi): based on the Akuapem Dialect, with reference to the
other (Akan and Fante) Dialects. By Rev. J. G. CurisTaLLeR. 8vo. pp.
xxiv. and 203. 1875. 10s. 6d.

Christaller—Drcrionary or THE AsANTE AND Fantr Lanevaee, called
Tshi (Chwee, Twi). With a Grammatical Introduction and Appendices on the
Geography of the Gold Coast, and other Subjects. By Rev. J.G. CHRISTALLER,
Demy 8yo. pp. xxviii. and 672, cloth. 1882. £1 ds.

Cust.—Sxeron or THE Mopern Lanevaces or Arnica. See ‘ Triibner’s
Oriental Series,” page 6.

Dohne.—Tue Four Gospets in Zutu. By the Rev. J. L. Douneg,
Missionary to the American Board C.F.M. 8vo. pp. 208,cloth. 1866. 5s.

Dohne.—A Zutv-Karir Dicrionary, etymologically explained, with
copious Illustrations and examples, preceded by an introduction on the Zulu-
Kafir Language. By the Rev. J. L. Donne. Royal 8vo. pp. xlii. and 418,
sewed. Cape Town, 1857. 21s.

Grey.—Hanppoox or Arrican, AUSTRALIAN, AND Porynestan Put-
LOLOGY. See page 49.

Grout.—T ux Istzvtv: a Grammar of the Zulu Language ; accompanied
with an Historical Introduction, also with an Appendix. By Rev. Lewis Grout.
8vo. pp. lii. and 432, cloth. 21s.

Hahn.—Tsvnr- Goam. See ‘‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 5.

Kolbe.—A Lanevacr Srupy Basrp on Bantu; or, An Inquiry into
the Laws of Root-Formation, the Original Plural, the Sexual Dual, and the
Principles of Word-Comparison; with Tables Illustrating the Primitive Pro-
nominal System restored in the African Bantu Family of Speech. By the Rev.
F. W. Koxss, of the London Missionary Society, formerly of the Rhenish
Herero Mission, Author of “ An English-Herero Dictionary.” Post 8yo. pp.
viii. and 97, with Four Tables, cloth. 1888. 6s.

Krapf.—Drcrionary or THe Svan Lanevaer. Compiled by the
Rey. Dr. L. Krapr, Missionary C.M.S. in East Africa. With an Outline of
Suahili Grammar. Royal 8vo. pp. x1.-434, cloth. 1882. 30s.

Steere—Suorr Specimens oF THE VOCABULARIES OF THREE Un;
PUBLISHED African Languages (Gindo, Zaramo, and Angazidja). oll
by Epwarp Srrrrz, LL.D, 12mo. pp. 20. 6d. ieee panes

Steere.—Cotiecrions For A Hanpsoox or tHe Nyamwezt LANGUAGE
as spoken at Unyanyembe. By E. Stzzrn, LL.D. Fcap. pp. 100, cloth. 1s. 6d.

Tindall—A Grammar anv VocasuLary or tHE Namaqua-Horrentot
Lanevace. By Henry Trnpat1, Wesleyan Missionary. 8vo. pp. 124, sewed. 6s.

Zulu Izaga; That is, Proverbs, or Out-of-the-Way Sayings of the

Zulus. Collected, Translated, and interpreted by a Zul issi
8vo. pp. ly. and 32, sewed. 2s. 6d. “ manpreiest ete

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 53

ALBANIAN,

Grammaire Albanaise.—Par P. W. Crown 8vo. pp. viii. 170, cloth.
1887. 7s. 6d,

AMERICAN LANGUAGES.

Aboriginal American Literature, Library of. Edited by D. G.
Brinton, M.D. 8vo. cloth. 1. The Chronicles of the Mayas. pp. 280.
£1 1s. (Or if with Set, 12s.) 2. The Iroquois Book of Rites. Edited by
H. Haze. pp. 222. 12s. 3. The Comedy-Ballet of Gueguence. pp. 146. 10s,
4. A Migration Legend of the Creek Indians. By A. S. Garscuer. pp. 262.
12s, 5. The Lenape and their Legends. By D. G. Brinton, M.D. 8vo. pp.
262. 12s. 6. The Annals of the Cakchiquels. The Text, with a Translation,
Notes and Introduction, by D. G. Brinton, M.D. pp. 240. 12s. 7. Ancient
Nahuatl Poetry. Text and Translation by D.G. Brinton, M.D. pp.182. 12s.

Byington.—GramMar oF THE CHoctaw Laneuacs. By the Rev. Cyrus
Byineton. Edited from the Original MSS. in Library of the American
Philosophical Society, by D. G. Brinton, M.D. Cr. 8vo. sewed, pp. 56. 7s. 6d.

Ellis.—Prrvuvia Scyruica. See-page 49.

Howse.—A Grammar or THE Cree Lanavace. With which is com-
bined an analysis of the Chippeway Dialect. By JoszrpH Howse, Esq.,
F.R.G.S. 8vo. pp. xx. and 324,cloth. 7s. 6d.

Markham.—Otranta: A Drama In THE Quicuua Lanevacr. Text,
Translation, and Introduction, By Cuuments R. Marxuam, F.R.G.S. Crown
8vo., pp. 128, cloth. 1871. 7s. 6d.

Markham.—A Mewmore or tHE Lapy Ana pre Osorto, Countess of
Chinchon, and Vice-Queen of Peru, a.p. 1629-39. With a Plea for the correct
spelling of the Chinchona Genus, By C. R. Marxuam, C.B., Member of the
Imperial Academy Nature Curiosorum, with the Cognomen of Chinchon.
Small 4to. pp. xii. and 100. With two Coloured Plates, Map and Illustrations.
Handsomely bound. 1874. 28s,

Matthews.—Erunotoey anp Puitonogy or tHE Huipatsa Iyprans.
By Wasxineton Marruews, Assistant Surgeon, U.S. Army. 8vo. cloth.
£1 11s. 6d.

Contents :— Ethnography, Philology, Grammar, Dictionary, and English-Hidatsa Vocabulary.

Nodal.—Los Vrincutos pr Oxranta y Cusi-Kcuyrtor. Drama EN
Quicaua. Obra Compilada y Espurgada con la Version Castellana al Frente
de su Testo por el Dr. José FernanprEz Nona, Abogado de los Tribunales
de Justicia de la Reptblica del PerG. Bajo los Auspicios de la Redentora
Sociedad de Filantropos para Mejoror la Suerte de los Aborijenes Peruanos.
Roy. 8vo. bds. pp. 70. 1874. 7s. 6d.

Nodal.—Ezemenros pE GramAtica Quicuua 6 IpromA DE Los Yeas.
Bajo los Auspicios de la Redentora, Sociedad de Filantropos para mejorar la
suerte de los Aborijenes Peruanos. Por el Dr. Jose FERNANDEZ NoDAL,
Abogado de los Tribunales de Justicia de la Reptiblica del Pera. Royal 8yo.
cloth, pp. xvi. and 441, Appendix, pp. 9. £1 ls.

Ollanta: A Drama in THe Qurcuva Lanevace. See under Marxnam
and under Nopat.

54 Linguistic Publications of Tribner § Co.,

Pimentel. —Cuapro DESCRIPTIVO Y COMPARATIVO DE LAS Lenevas
Invicenas DE Mxico, o Tratado de Filologia Mexicana. Par FRanorsco
PimentseL. 2 Edicion unica completa. 3 Volumes 8vo. Mexico, 1879.
£2 2s. :

Thomas.—Tur Turory anv Practice or Crrore Grammar. By J. J-
Tuomas, Port of Spain (Trinidad), 1869. 1 vol. 8vo. bds. pp. viii. and 135. 12s.

ANGLO-SAXON.

Harrison and Baskervill. — A Hanpy Dicrronary or Aneio-Saxon
Porrry. Based on Groschopp’s Grein. Edited, Revised, and Corrected, with
Grammatical Appendix, List of Irregular Verbs, and Brief Etymological
Features. By J. A. Harrison, Prof. of English and Modern Languages in
Washington and Lee University, Virginia; and W. Baskervitt, Ph.D. Lips.,
Prof. of English Language and Literature in Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Ten. Square 8vo, pp. 318, cloth. 1886. 12s. ;

March.—A Comparative Grammar or THE ANnGLo-Saxon LANGUAGE ;
in which its forms are illustrated by those of the Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, Gothic,
Old Saxon, Old Friesic, Old Norse, and Old High-German. By Francis A.
Marcu, LL.D. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xi. and 253. 1877. 10s.

March.—Iyrropucrion to Anezo-Saxon. An Anglo-Saxon Reader.
With Philological Notes, a Brief Grammar, and a Vocabulary. By F. A.
Marcu, LL.D. 8vo. pp. viii. and 166, cloth. 1870. 7s. 6d.

Rask.— A Grammar or THE AN@to-Saxon Tonevr. From the Danish
of Erasmus Rask, Professor of Literary History in, and Librarian to, the
University of Copenhagen, etc. By B. Tuorps. Third edition, corrected
and improved, with Plate. Post 8vo. pp. vi. and 192, cloth. 1879. 5s. 6d.

Wright.—Awnezo-Saxon anp Otp-EnetisH Vocasurarizs, See page 79.

ARABIC.

Ahlwardt.—Tux Drv‘ns or run Six Ancient Arasic Ports, Enndbiga,
*Antara, Tarafa, Zuhair, ’Algama, and Imruolgais; chiefly according to the
MSS. of Paris, Gotha, and Leyden, and the collection of their Fragments: with
a complete list of the various readings of the Text. Edited by W. AuLwarpr,
8vo. pp. xxx. 340, sewed. 1870. 12s,

Alif Lailat wa Lailat—Tur Arasian Nicurs. 4 vols. 4to. pp. 495,
493, 442, 434. Cairo, A.H. 1279 (1862). £3 3s.
This celebrated Edition of the Arabian Nights is now, for the first time, offered at a price
which makes it accessible to Scholars of limited means.
Athar-ul-Adhir—Traczs or Centurins; or, Geographical and Historical
Arabic Dictionary, by Settw Kauri and Seni Su-nape. Geographical

Parts I. to V., Historical Parts I. and II. 4to. pp. 980 and 384.

Pri
7s. 6d. each part. rice

[In course of publication.
Badger.— An EnettsH-Arastc Lexicon, in which the equivalents for
English words and Idiomatic Sentences are rendered into literary and colloquial
Arabic, By G. P. Bapcrr, D.C.L, 4to. cloth, pp. xii. and 1248. 1880. £4.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 55

Butrus-al-Bustany.—c3 jlea)\ Silo Gl:S An Arabic Encylopedia
of Universal Knowledge, by Burrus-at-BustAny, the celebrated compiler
of Mohit ul Mohit (laeh lie), and Katr el Mohit (l.<4} jk).

This work will be completed in from 12 to 15 Vols., of which Vols. I. to VII.
are ready, Vol. I. contains letter \ to (ae >, Yol. LI, a) to 3 Vol. III.

yi to ¢\ Vol. IV. eltocsl Vol. V. b to Vol. VI to >. Vol-

VII. ;> to @O. Vol. VII. @9 to). IX. 4) to ke. small folio, cloth,
pp. 800 each. £1 11s. 6d. per Vol.

Carletti.—Mfruopr Tufortco-Pratiavr pe Langue Arasr. Par P.
Y. Carterti. 4to. pp. 318, wrapper. 10s.

Cotton.—Arasic Prruer. Consisting of 180 Short Sentences contain-
ing 30 Primary Words prepared according to the Vocal System of Studying
Language. By General Sim A. Corron, K.C.S.I. Cr. 8vo. cloth, pp. 38. 2s.

Hassoun.—Tue Drwan or Harrm Tar, an Old Arabic Poet of the
Sixth Century of the Christian Era, Edited by R. Hassoun. With Illustra-
tions. 4to. pp. 43. 3s. 6d. ;

Jami, Mulla.—Sataman U Azsat. An Allegorical Romance; being
one of the Seven Poems entitled the Haft Aurang of Mulla Jami, now first
edited from the Collation of Eight Manuscripts in the Library of the India
House, and in private collections, with various readings, by Forsxs
Fauconer, M.A., M.R.A.S. 4to. cloth, pp. 92. 1850. 7s. 6d.

Koran (The). Arabic text, lithographed in Oudh, a.H. 1284 (1867).
16mo. pp. 942. 6s.

Koran.—Exrracts From THE CoRAN IN THE ORIGINAL, wiTtH ENGLISH
RENDERING. Compiled by Sir Witxt1am Moir, K.C.S.1., LL.D., Author of
the ‘ Life of Mahomet.’’ Second Edition. Crown 8vo. pp. 72, cloth. 1885.
2s. 6d.

Koran.—See Wherry, page 5.
Ko-ran (Selections from the).—See ‘‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” p. 3.

Leitner.—Inrropuction to A Purnosopnican GRAMMAR or ARABIC.
Being an Attempt to Discover a Few Simple Principles in Arabic Grammar.
By G. W. Lerner. 8vo. sewed, pp. 52. Lahore, 4s.

Morley.—A Descriptive Caratocur of the Hisrortca, Manuscripts
in the ARABICand Prerstan LAneuaGss preserved in the Library of. the Royal
Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. By Witrtam H. Mor.ey,
M.R.A.S. 8vo. pp. viii. and 160, sewed. London, 1854. 2s. 6d.

Muhammed.—Tue Lire or Munammep. Based on Muhammed Ibn
Ishak. By Abd El Malik Ibn Hisham. Edited by Dr. Ferprvanp WiistTxn~
FELD. The Arabic Text. 8vo. pp. 1026, sewed. Price 21s. Introduction,
Notes, and Index in German. 8vo. pp. lxxii. and 266, sewed. 7s. 6d, Hach

part sold separately.
The text based on the Manuscripts of the Berlin, Leipsic, Gotha and Leyden Libraries, has
been carefully revised by the learned editor, and printed with the utmost exactness,

Newman.—A Hanpxnoox or Mopern Arasic, consisting of a Practical
Grammar, with numerous Examples, Dialogues, and Newspaper Extracts, in a
European Type. By F. W. Newman, Emeritus Professor of University
College, London. Post 8vo. pp. xx. and 192, cloth. 1866. 6s.

‘

56 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,

Newman.—A Dicrionary or Moprrn Arasrc —1. Anglo-Arabic
Dictionary. 2. Anglo-Arabic Vocabulary. 8. Arabo-English Dictionary. By
F. W. Newman, Emeritus Professor of University College, London. In 2
vols. crown 8vo., pp. xvi. and 376—464, cloth. £1 1s.

Palmer.—Tur Sone or tHe Reep; and other Pieces. By E. H.
Patmer, M.A., Cambridge. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 208. 1876. 5s.

Among the Contents will be found translations from Hafiz, from Omer el Kheiyém, and
from other Persian as well as Arabic poets.

Palmer.—Hinpvustant, Prrsran, and Arabic GramMMAR SIMPLIFIED.
By E. H. Patmer. M.A., Cambridge. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. pp.
yili.-104, cloth. 1885. 5s,

Rogers.—Norice on toe Drvars or tHE Axpassipe Dynasty. By
Epwarp Tuomas Rocsrs, late H.M. Consul, Cairo. 8vo. pp. 44, with a
Map and four Autotype Plates. 5s.

Schemeil.—Ex Mvsraxer; or, First Born. (In Arabic, printed at
Beyrout). Containing Five Comedies, called Comedies of Fiction, on Hopes
and Judgments, in Twenty-six Poems of 1092 Verses, showing the Seven Stages
of Life, from man’s conception unto his death and burial. By Emin Ipranim
ScuemeEIL. In one volume, 4to. pp. 166, sewed. 1870. 4s.

Syed Ahmad.—Lirs or Monammep. See Muhammed.

Wherry.—Commentary on the Quran. See page 5.

ASSAMESE.

Bronson.—A Dictionary In AssaAMESE AND Ewneziso. Compiled by
M Bronson, American Baptist Missionary. 8vo. calf, pp. viii. and 609. £2 2s.

*.® Catalogue of Assamese Books to be had of Messrs. Triibner § Co., Post free for
one penny stamp.

ASSYRIAN (Cunstrorm, Accap, BaByLonian).

Bertin.—AsripceD GRAMMARS OF THE LANGUAGES OF THE CUNEIFORM
Inscriptions. By G. Bertin, M.R.A.S. I. A Sumero-Akkadian Grammar.
II. An Assyro-Babylonian Grammar. III. A Vannie Grammar. lV. A Medic
pears V. An Old Persian Grammar. Crown 8vo. pp. viii.-118, cloth.

snubs.

Budge.—Assyrtan Texts, Selected and Arranged, with Philological
Notes. By E. A. Bupex, B.A., Assyrian Exhibitioner, Christ’s College,
Cambridge. Crown 4to. cloth, pp. viii. and 44. 1880. 7s. 6d.

Budge.— Tue Hisrory or Esarnappon. See “ Triibner’s Oriental
Series,” p. 4.

Catalogue (A) of leading Books on Egypt and Egyptology, and on
Assyria and Assyriology, to be had at the affixed prices, of Triibner and Co.
pp. 40. 1880. 1s.

Clarke.—Rusrarcuzs in Pre-nrstor1c AND Proto-nistortc ComPARA-
tive Puitorocy, MytHotoey, anp ARcHmOLOGY, in connexion with the
Origin of Culture in America and the Accad or Sumerian Families. By Hype
Cranxe. Demy 8yo. sewed, pp. xi. and 74. 1875. 2s. 6d,

07 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London E.C., 57

Cooper.—An Archaic Dictionary, Biographical, Historical and Mytho-
logical; from the Egyptian and Etruscan Monuments, and Papyri. By W. R.
Coorer. London, 1876. 8vo. cloth. 15s.

Hincks.—Spromen Cuarrers or an Assyrran Grammar. By the
late Rev. E. Hincxs, D.D., Hon. M.R.A.S. 8vo., sewed, pp. 44. 1s.

Lenormant (F.)—Cuatpran Maerc; its Origin and Development.
Translated from the French. With considerable Additions by the Author,
London, 1877. 8vo. pp. 440. 12s.

Luzzatto.— Grammar or THe Bretican Cuatparc LANeuaGE AND THE
Tatmup Bapytonicat Iproms. By S. D. Luzzarro. Translated from the
Italian by J. S. Gonpammer. Cr. 8vo. cl., pp. 122. 7s. 6d.

Rawlinson.— Norns on rue Earry Hisrory or Banyztonta. By
Colonel Rawuinson, C.B. 8yo. sd., pp. 48. 1s.

Rawlinson.—A Commentary on THE Ovnerrorm Inscriptions oF
BasBYLONIA AND AssyRIA, including Readings of the Inscription on the Nimrud
Obelisk, and Brief Notice of the Ancient Kings of Nineveh and Babylon,
by Major H. C. Rawuinson. 8vo. pp. 84, sewed. London,1850. 2s. 6d.

Rawlinson.—Inscrietion or Tretarn Prreser J., Kine or Assyrra,
B.c. 1160, as translated by Sir H. Rawttnson, Fox Taxsor, Esq., Dr. Hincxs.
and Dr. Oprrrr. Published by the Royal Asiatic Society. 8vo.sd., pp. 74. 2s.

Rawlinson.—Ovrrives or Assyr1dn Hisrory, from the Inscriptions of
Nineveh. By Lieut. Col. Rawctnson, C.B., followed by some Remarks by
A. H. Layaxp, Esq., D.C.L, 8vo., pp. xliv., sewed. London, 1852. Is.

Records of the Past: being English Translations of the Assyrian and
the Egyptian Monuments. Published under the sanction of the Society of
Biblical Archeology. Edited by S. Brrcu. Vols. 1 to12. 1874 to 1879.
£1 11s. 6d. or 3s. 6d. each vol.

Renan.—Awn Essay on tHE AcE anp ANTIQUITY oF THE Boox oF
NaBaTH#@AN AcricutTurRE. To which is added an Inaugural Lecture on the
Position of the Shemitic Nations in the History of Civilization. By M. Ernest
Renan, Membre del’ Institut. Crown 8vo., pp. xvi. and 148, cloth. 3s. 6d.

Sayce.—An Assyrray GramMAR FOR ComparstTIVE Purposes. By
A. H. Saycz, M.A, 12mo. cloth, pp. xvi.and 188. 1872. 7s. 6d.

Sayce.—An Erementary Grammar and Reading Book of the Assyrian
Language, in the Cuneiform Character: containing the most complete Syllabary
yet extant, and which will serve also as a Vocabulary of both Accadian and
Assyrian. London, 1875. 4to. cloth. 9s,

Sayce.—Lucrvres upon the Assyrian Language and Syllabary.
London, 1877. Large 8vo. 9s. 6d.

Sayce.—Baxytonran Lirerature. Lectures. London, 1877. 8vo. 4s.

Smith.—Tue Assyrian Evonym Canon; containing Translations of the
Documents of the Comparative Chronology of the Assyrian and Jewish King-
doms, from the Death of Solomon to Nebuchadnezzar. By E. Smrru. London,
1876. 8vo. 9s.

AUSTRALIAN LANGUAGES.

Grey.—Hanpzook or Arrican, AUSTRALIAN, AND Porynestan Put-
LOLoGY. See page 49.

58 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

BASQUE,

Ellis. —Sourcrs or THE Basque anp Erruscan Lanevaces. See p. 48.

Van Eys.—Ovrrres or Basqur Grammar. By W. J. Van Eys.
Crown 8vo. pp. xii. and 52, cloth. 1883. 3s. 6d.

BENGALI.
Catalogue of Bengali Books, sold by Messrs. Triibner § Co., post free for penny stamp.

Browne.—A BAneArt Primer, in Roman Character. By J. F. Browne,
B.C.S. Crown 8vo. pp. 32, cloth. 1881. 2s,

Charitabali (The); or, Insrrucrive Broerapny By IsvARACHANDRA
Vipyasacara. With a Vocabulary of all the Words occurring in the Text, by
J. F. Buumuarpt, Bengali Lecturer University College, London; and Teacher
of Bengali Cambridge University. 12mo. pp. 120-iv.—48, cloth. 1884. ds.

Mitter.—Brneatr anp Enerisa Dicrronary for the Use of Schools:
Revised and improved. 8vo. cloth. Calcutta, 1860. 7s. 6d.

Sykes.—Enerish anp Brneart Dicrionary for the Use of Schools.
Revised by Gorpzrn Kissnn Mirrer. 8vo. cloth. Calcutta, 1874. 7s. 6d.

Yates—A Bernedrf Grammar. By the late Rev. W. Yarns, DD.
Reprinted, with improvements, from his Introduction to the Bengali Language.
Edited by I. Wencrr. Fcap. 8yo. bds, pp. iv.and 160. Calcutta, 1864. 4s,

BIHARI.
Catalogue of Bihari Books, sold by Messrs. Tribner § Co., post free for penny stamp.

Grierson.—Srven Grammars or THE Diatects AND Sus-Drarects oF
the Biharf Language Spoken in the Province of Bihar, in the Eastern Portion
of the N. W. Provinces, and in the Northern Portion of the Central Provinces.
Compiled under orders of the Government of Bengal. By Grorex E. Grierson,
B.C.S., Joint Magistrate of Patna. Part 1. Introduetory; 2. Bhojpari;
3. Magadhi; 4. Maithil-Bhojpuri; 5. South Maithili; 6, South Maithil-
Magadhi; 7. Not yet Published. TFcap. 4to. cloth. Price 2s. 6d. each.

Hoernle and Grierson.—Comparative Drcrronary or THE BIBARI
Laneuacr. Compiled by A. F. R. Horrn xe, of the Bengal Educational Service,
and G. A. Grrprson, of Her Majesty’s Bengal Civil Service. (Published
under the Patronage of the Government of Bengal.) Part I. From A to
Ag’mani. 4to. pp. 106, wrapper. 1885. 5s.

BRAHOE (Brauvt).

Bellew.—From tux Inpus to rnE Texts. A Narrative; together with
Synoptical Grammar and Vocabulary of the Brahoe language. See p. ‘19.

Duka.—Awn Essay on THE Branti Grammar. By Dr. T. Doxa.
Demy 8vo. pp. 78, paper. 1887. 38. 6d.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E. C. 59

BURMESE.

Hough’s Genrrat Ovriovns or Guocrarny (in Burmese). Re-written

oar enlarged by Rev. Jas. A. Haswetx. Large 8vo. pp. 368. Rangoon,
chy Sth

Judson.—A Dicrroyary, English and Burmese, Burmese and English.
By A. Jupson. 2 vols. 8vo. pp. iv. and 968, and viii. and 786. 25s. each.
Judson.—A Grammar or THE Burmese Lanavace. 8vo. pp. 52,

boards. Rangoon, 1883. 3s.
Sloan.—A Pracricatn Mernop with the Burmese Language. By W.
H.Stoan. Second Edition. Large 8vo. pp. 232. Rangoon, 1887. 12s. 6d.
We-than-da-ya, Tnx Srory or, 4 Bupputst Leczenp. Sketched from
the Burmese Version of the Pali Text. By L. Aran Goss, Inspector of

Schools, Burma. With five Illustrations by a native artist. 4to. pp. x.—80,
paper. 1886. ds.

CHINESE.

Acheson.—Awn Inpvex to Dr. Writrams’s “‘Syriasro Drorronary oF THE
Cuinesz Laneuace.” Arranged according to Sir Tuomas Wapr’s System of
Orthography. Royal 8yvo. pp. viii. and 124. Half bound. Hongkong. 1879. 18s.

Baldwin.—A Manvat or tae Foocnow Dratecr. By Rev. C. C.
BaLpwin, of the American Board Mission. 8vo. pp. viii.—256. 18s.

Balfour.—Taorsr Texts. See page 41.

Balfour.—Tue Divine Crasstc or Nan-ovua. Being the Works of
Chuang-Tsze, Taoist Philosopher. With an Excursus, and copious Annotations
in English and Chinese. By H. Batrour, F.R.G.S. Demy 8vo. pp. xxxviil.
and 426, cloth. 1881. 14s.

Balfour.—Watrs anp Strays From THE Far East; being a Series of
Disconnected Essays on Matters relating to China. By F. H. Balfour. 8vo.
pp- 224, cloth, 1876. 10s. 6d.

Balfour.—Lzaves rrom my Curnese Scrap Boor. See page 6.

Ball.—Tue Cantonrsr-MADE-FAsy Vocasutary. A small Dictionary
in English and Cantonese, containing only Words and Phrases used in the
Spoken Language, with the Classifiers Indicated for each Noun, and Definitions
of the Different Shades of Meaning; as well as Notes on the Different Uses of
some of the Words where Ambiguity might Otherwise Arise. By J. Dyzr
Baut, M.R.A.S., etc., of H.M.C.S., Hong Kong. Royal 8vo. pp. 6—27,
Wrappers. 5s.

Ball.—Easy Sentences 1n THE Cantonese Dratect, with A Vo-
CABULARY. Being the Lessons in ‘‘ Cantonese-made-easy’’ and ‘‘ The Cantonese-
made-easy Vocabulary.” By J. Dyur Baxt, M.R.A.S., etc., of H.M.C.S.,
Hong Kong. Royal 8vo. pp. 74, paper. 7s. 6d.

Ball._—Awn Enenisu-Canronese Pocxer Vocasutary. Containing
Common Words and Phrases, Printed without the Chinese Characters, or Tonic
Marks, the Sounds of the Chinese Words being Represented by an English
Spelling as far as Practicable. By J. Dyzr Barz, M.R.A.S., etc., Author of
‘« Cantonese-made-easy.”’ Crown 8vo. pp. 8—24, cloth. 4s.

Beal.—Tue Bupputsr TriprraKa, as it is known in China and Japan.
A Catalogue and Compendious Report. By Samuxrt Brat, B.A. Folio, sewed,
pp- 117. 7s. 6d.

60 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.

Beal.—Tur Duammarapa. See “ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 3.
Beal.—Buddhist Literature. See pages 6, 41 and 42.
Bretschneider.—Sce page 27.

Chalmers.—Tur Orrein or THE Curnese; an Attempt to Trace the
connection of the Chinese with Western Nations, in their Religion, Superstitions,
Arts, Language, and Traditions. By Joun Cuatmers, A.M. Foolscap 8vo.
cloth, pp. 78. 4s.

Chalmers.—A Conctsr Knane-nst Curtnesr Dictionary. By the Rev.
J. Caters, LL.D., Canton. Three Vols. Royal 8vo. bound in Chinese
style, pp. 1000. £1 10s.

Chalmers. — Tur SrructurE or CHINESE CHARACTERS, UNDER’ 300
Primary Forms; after the Shwoh-wan, 100 a.p., and the Phonetic Shwoh-wan
1833. By Joun Cuaumers, M.A., LL.D. 8vo. pp. x-199, with a plate, cloth,
1882. 12s. 6d.

China Review; or, Nores anp Quertes on THE Far East. Pub-
lished bi-monthly. Edited by E. J. Errez, 4to. Subscription, £1 10s,
per volume.

Dennys.—A Hanpzoox or THE Canton VERNACULAR OF THE CHINESE
Lanecuace. Being a Series of Introductory Lessons, for Domestic and
Business Purposes. By N. B. Dennys, M.R.A.S., Ph.D. 8vo. cloth, pp. 4,
195, and 31. £1 10s.

Dennys.—Tue Forx-Lorr or Cura, and its Affinities with that of
the Aryan and Semitic Races. By N. B. Dennys, Ph.D., author of ‘‘ A Hand-
book of the Canton Vernacular,” etc. 8vo. cloth, pp. 168. 10s. 6d.

Douglas.—Curnxsz-Enerise Dicrronary oF THE VERNACULAR OR SPOKEN
LanGuaGE oF Amoy, with the principal variations of the Chang-Chew and
Chin-Chew Dialects. By the Rev. Carstairs Doucuas, M.A., LL.D., Glasg.
High quarto, cloth, double columns, pp. 632. 1873, £3 3s.

Douglas.—Cuinesr Lanevaer and Literature. Two Lectures de-
livered at the Royal Institution, by R. K. Douevas, of the British Museum,
and Prof. of Chinese at King’s College. Cr. 8vo. pp. 118, cl. 1875. 5s.

Douglas.—Tux Lire or Jeyentz Kuan. Translated from the Chinese,
with an Introduction, by R. K. Doucuas, of the British Museum. Crown 8vo.
pp- xxxvi.-106, cloth. 1877. 5s.

Edkins.—A Grammar or Cottoaurat Curinesg, as exhibited in the
Shanghai Dialect. By J. Epxins, B.A. Second edition, corrected. 8vo.
half-calf, pp. viii. and 225. Shanghai, 1868. 21s.

Edkins.—A Vocasutary or THE Suanewart Diatecr. By J. Epurs.
8vo. half-calf, pp. vi. and 151. Shanghai, 1869. 21s,

Edkins. —Rotictoy 1v Cina. A Brief Account of the Three Religions
of the Chinese. By Jospru Epxins, D.D. Post 8vo. cloth. 7s. 6d.

Edkins.—A Grammar or THE Carnese Cornoautan Lanevaer, com-
monly called the Mandarin Dialect. By Josrpu Epxrns. Second edition;
8vo. half-calf, pp. viii. and 279. Shanghai, 1864. £1 10s.

Edkins.—Inrropuction ro toe Srupy or THE Cuinesr CHARACTERS.
By J. Evxuys, D.D., Peking, China, Roy. 8vo. pp. 340, paper boards. 18s,

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 61

Edkins.—Cutna’s Pracr in Puitotogy. An attempt to show that the
Languages of Europe and Asia have a common origin. By the Rey. JosErH
Evxins. Crown 8vo, pp. xxiii—403, cloth. 10s. 6d.

Edkins.—Curvesz Buppursu. See ‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” p. 4.

Edkins.—Pxoerxsstve Lessons in tar Curnese Spoxen Lanevace,

with Lists of Common Words and Phrases, and an Appendix containing the Laws
of Tones in the Pekin Dialect. Fourth Kdition, 8vo. Shanghai, 1881. 12s,

Edkins.—Tuer Evorvrion or raz Curnese Lanevace, as exemplifying
the origin and growth of Human Speech. By Josupu Epxiys, D.D. Author
of “ Religion in China;’’ ‘‘Chinese Buddhism;’’ etc. Reprinted from the
Journal of the Peking Oriental Society. 1887. 8vo. pp. xvi.—96. 3s. 6d.

Eitel—Curvusr Dicrionary in tHe Cantonese Dratecr. By Ernest
JoHN Erren, Ph.D. Tubing. I. to IV. 8vo. sewed, 12s. 6d. each.

Eitel.—Hanpzoox For THE Stupent or Curvesz Buppuism. By the Rev.
E. J. E1ret, of the London Missionary Society. Cr. 8vo. pp. viii., 224, cl. 18s.

Eitel.—Fxrne-Suur: or, The Rudiments of Natural Science in China.
By Rev. E. J. Errer, M.A., Ph.D, Demy 8vo. sewed, pp. vi. and 84. 6s.

Faber.—A sysrematican DicEesr or THE Docrrines or Conrucrvs,
according to the Analects, Great Learning, and Doctrine of the Mean, with an
Introduction on the Authorities upon Confucius and Confucianism. By Ernst
Faser, Rhenish Missionary. ‘I'ranslated from the German by P. G. von
Méllendorff. 8vo. sewed, pp. viii. and 131. 1875. 12s. 6d.

Faber.—Inrropucrion To THE ScrencE oF CurnEsE Retreron. A Critique
of Max Miiller and other Authors. By E. Fazer. 8vo. paper, pp. xii. and 154.
Hong Kong, 1880. 7s. 6d.

Faber.—Minp or Mencius. See ‘‘Triibner’s Oriental Series,” p. 5.

Ferguson.—Cuinrse Resrarcues. First Part: Chinese Chronology
and Cycles. By f. Frereuson. Cr. 8vo. pp. vil. and 274,sd. 1880. 10s. 6d.

Giles. —A Dicrionary or Cottogurat Iptoms 1n THE Manparin Dratect.
By Herpert A. Gites. 4to. pp. 65. £1 8s.

Giles —Tuxr San Tzv Curie; or, Three Character Classic; and the
Ch’Jen Tsu Wen; or, Thousand Character Essay. Metrically Translated by
Herpert A. Gites. 12mo. pp. 28. 2s. 6d.

Giles.—Synopricat Srupies iy Curyese Cuaracrer. By Herzert A.
Gites. 8vo. pp. 118. 16s.

Giles.—Curnesr Sxercues. By Herserrt A. Gites, of H.B.M.’s
China Consular Service. 8vo.cl., pp. 204. 10s. 6d.

Giles —A Gtossary oF REFERENCE ON SUBJECTS CONNECTED WITH THE
Far Fast. By H A. Gites, of H.M. China Consular Service. 8vo, sewed,
pp. v.-183. 7s. 6d.

Giles.—Cuinesr witnout a Tracner. Being a Collection of Easy and
Useful Sentences in the Mandarin Dialect. With a Vocabulary. By Hurperr
A. Gites. 12mo. pp. 60. 6s.

Hernisz.—A Guipr to Conversation IN THE Ene ish AND CHINESE
Laneuaaes, for the use of Americans and Chinese in California and elsewhere,
By Sranistas Hernisz. Square 8vo. pp. 274, sewed. 10s. 6d.

The Chinese characters contained in this work are from the collections of Chinese groups
engraved on steel, and cast into moveable types, by Mr. Marcellin Legrand, engraver of the
Imperial Printing Office at Paris. They are used by most of the missions to China.

62 Linguistic Publications of Tribner ¢ Co.,

Kidd.—Caratoevr or THE Curinese Liprary or THE Royat AsrIatIc
Socrery. Bythe Rev. S. Kipp. 8vo. pp. 58, sewed. Is.

Kwong.—Kwone’s Epucarronat Serres. By Kwone Kr Cuzv, late
Member of the Chinese Educational Commission in the United States, &c. In
English and Chinese. All Post 8vo. cloth. First Reading Book. Illustrated
with Cuts. pp. 162. 1885. 4s, First Conversation Book. pp. xxxii. and
248. 10s. Second Conversation Book. pp. xvi. and 406. 12s. Manual of
Correspondence and Social Usages, pp. xxvi. and 276. 12s. .

Legge—Tue Cutnesr Crasstcs. With a Translation, Critical and
Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena, and Copious Indexes. By James Lecce,
D.D., of the London Missionary Society. 7 vols. Royal 8vo. cloth.

Vol. I. Confucian Analects, the Great Learning, and the Doctrine of the Mean.
pp. 526. £22s. Vol. II. Works of Mencius. pp. 634. £2 2s. Vol. III.
Part I. First Part of the Shoo-King, or the Books of Tang, the Books of
Yu, the Books of Hea, the Books of Shang, and the Prolegomena. pp. viii.
and 280. £22s. Vol. III. Part Il. Fifth Part of the Shoo-King, or the Books
of Chow, andthe Indexes. pp.281—736, £22s. Vol. LV. Part I. First Part
of the She-King, or the Lessons from the States; and the Prolegomena. pp.
182-244. £2 2s. Vol. LY. Part IJ. The 2nd, 3rd and 4th Parts of the She-
King, or the Minor Odes of the Kingdom, the Greater Odes of the Kingdom,
the Sacrificial Odes and Praise-Songs, and the Indexes. pp. 540. £2 2s.
Vol. V. Part I. Dukes Yin, Hwan, Chwang, Min, He, Wan, Seuen, and
Ch‘ing; and the Prolegomena. pp. xil., 148 and 410. £22s. Vol. V. Part
IJ. Dukes Seang, Ch'aon, Ting, and Gal, with Tso’s Appendix, and the
Indexes. pp. 526. £2 2s.

Legge—Tue Cuinese Crasstcs. Translated into English. With
Preliminary Essays and Explanatory Notes. By Jamus Lrees, D.D., LL.D.
Crown 8vo. cloth. Vol. I. The Life and Teachings of Confucius. pp. vi. and
338. 10s. 6d. Vol. II]. The Life and Works of Mencius. pp. 412. 12s,
Vol. III. The She King, or The Book of Poetry. pp. viil. and 432. 12s,

Legge.—Inaveurat Lecrure on rae Consrirutine oF 4 Cuinese CHAIR
in the University of Oxford, 1876, by Rev. James Lucex, M.A., LL.D.,
Professor of Chinese at Oxford. 8vo. pp. 28, sewed. 6d.

Legge.—Conructanism IN Rexatton to Curisrraniry. A Paper
Read before the Missionary Conference in Shanghai, on May 11,1877. By
Rev. James Leces, D.D., LL.D. 8vo. sewed, pp. 12. 1877. 1s. 6d.

Legge.—A Lerrer to Proressorn Max MUrrer, chiefly on the Trans-
lation into English of the Chinese Terms 7% and Shang 7%. By J. Lucor
Professor of Chinese, Oxford. Crown 8yvo. sewed, pp. 30. 1880. 1s. ;

Leland.—F sane; or, the Discovery of America by Chinese Buddhist
Priests in the Fifth Century. By Cuartus G. Lenanp. Cr. 8vo. cloth
pp. xix. and 212, 1875. 7s. 6d. .

Leland.—Pinern-Enerisn Sine-Sone; or Songs and Stories in the
China-English Dialect. With a Vocabulary. By Charles G. Leland. Crown
8vo. pp. vill. and 140, cloth. 1876. ds.

Lobscheid.—-Enetish anp Cuinese Dictionary, with the Punti and

Mandarin Pronunciation. By the Rev. W. Lozscunip, Knight of Francis
Joseph, ete. Folio, pp. viii. and 2016. In Four Parts. £8 8s.

Lobscheid.—Cuinesr anp Enerisu Dicrronary, Arranged according to
the Radicals. By the Rev. W. Losscurrp, Knight of Francis Joseph
etc. Imp. 8yo. double columns, pp. 600, bound. £2 8s, af

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 63

M‘Clatchie—Conrucran Cosmocony. A Translation (with the Chinese
Text opposite) of section 49 (Treatise on Cosmogony) of the “ Complete Works”
of the Philosopher Choo-Foo-Tze, with Explanatory Notes. . By the Rev.
Tuomas M‘Cxarcure, M.A. Small 4to. pp. xviii. and 162. 1874. £1 Is.

Macgowan.—A Manuva or tHe Amoy Coxnoaurat. By Rey. J.
Maceowan, of the London Missionary Society. Second Edition. 8vo. half-
bound, pp. 206. Amoy, 1880. £1 10s.

Macgowan.—Enetisu anp Curyesr Dicrronary or THE Amoy Draecr.
By Rev. J. Maccowan, London Missionary Society. Small 4to. half-bound,
pp. 620. Amoy, 1883. £3 3s.

Maclay and Baldwin.—An Arpnasetic Dicrronary or THE CHINESE
LANGUAGE IN THE Foocuow Diatecr. By Rev. R. 8. Macnay, D.D., of the
Methodist Episcopal Mission, and Rey. C. C. Barpwiy, A.M., of the American
Board of Mission. 8vo. half-bound, pp. 11382. Foochow, 1871. £4 4s.

Mayers.—Tue Aneto-Cuinese Catenpar Manvat. A Handbook of
Reference for the Determination of Chinese Dates during the period from
1860 to 1879. With Comparative Tables of Annual and Mensual Designations,
ete. Compiled by W. F. Mayers, Chinese Secretary, H.B.M.’s Legation,
Peking. 2nd Edition. Sewed, pp. 28. 7s. 6d.

Mayers.—Tue Curyesr Government. A Manual of Chinese Titles,
Categorically arranged, and Explained with an Appendix. By W. F. Mayrrs,
Chinese Secretary to H.B.M.’s Legation at Peking. Second Kdition,
with additions by G. M. H. Playfair, H.B.M. Vice-Consul, Shanghai. 8vo.
cloth, pp. lxiv-168. 1886. 15s.

Medhurst.—Cutyese Dratocues, Quustions, and Farrar SEnTENcEs,
literally translated into English, with a view to promote commercial intercourse
and assist beginners in the Language. By the late W. H. Mepuurst, D.D.
A new and enlarged Edition. 8vo.pp. 226. 18s.

Mollendorff—Manvat or Curnese Brpriocravuy, being a List of
Works and Essays relating to China. By P. G. and O. F. von M6LLENDORFF,
Interpreters to H.I.G.M.’s Consulates at Shanghai and Tientsin. 8vo. pp. viii.
and 378. £1 10s.

Morrison.—A Drcrronary or THE Curnese Lanevace. By the Rey.
R. Morrison, D.D. Two vols. Vol. I. pp. x. and 762; Vol. II. pp. 828,
cloth. Shanghae, 1865. £6 6s.

Peking Gazette.—Translation of the Peking Gazette for 1872 to 1885,
8vo. cloth. 10s. 6d. each.

Piry.—Lz Sarr Epir, Etude de Littérature Chinoise. Préparée par
A. THEOPHILE Piry, du Service des Douanes Maritimes de Chine. Chinese
Text with French Translation. 4to. cloth, pp. xx. and 320. 21s.

Playfair.—Crrtus anp Towns or Cutna. 25s. See page 87,

Ross.—A Manparin Prover. Being Easy Lessons for Beginners,
Transliterated according to the European mode of using Roman Letters. By
Rey. Joun Ross, Newchang. 8vo, wrapper, pp. 122. 7s. 6d.

Rudy.—Tue Curyese Manpartn Lanevacs, after Ollendorfi’s New
Method of Learning Languages. By Cuarues Rupy. In 3 Volumes,
Vol. J. Grammar. 8vo. pp. 248. 41 ls.

Scarborough.—A Cotzecrion or Curnese Proverss. Translated and
Arranged by Wittram Scarzoroven, Wesleyan Missionary, Hankow. With
an Introduction, Notes, and Copious Index, Cr. 8vo. pp, xliv. and 278. 10s.6d,

64 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.

Stent.—A Curnesr AND Enetish VocaBULARY IN THE PEKINESE
Diatgct. By G. E. Srenr, Second Edition, 8vo. pp. xii.-720, half bound.
1877. £2.

Stent.—A Curnusr anp Enorrsa Pocxer Dictionary. By G. E.
Stent. 16mo. pp. 250. 1874. 14s.

Vaughan.—The Manners and Customs of the Chinese of the Straits
Settlements. By J.D.Vaucuan. Royal 8vo. boards. Singapore, 1879. 7s. 6d.

Vissering.—On Curvesr Currency. Coin and Paper Money. With
a Facsimile of a Bank Note. By W. Vissering. Royal 8vo, cloth, pp. xv. and
219. Leiden, 1877. 18s.

Williams.—A Syziiapic Dicrionary or THE CHINESE LANGUAGE,
arranged according to the Wu-Fang Yuen Yin, with the pronunciation of the
Characters as heard in Peking, Canton, Amoy, and Shanghai. By 8S. Wes
Wittrams. 4to. cloth, pp. Ixxxiv. and 1252. 1874. £5 ds.

Wylie.—Nores on Curnese Lirrrature; with introductory Remarks
on the Progressive Advancement of the Art; and a list of translations from the
Chinese, into various European Languages. By A. Wy.in, Agent of the
British and Foreign Bible Society in China. 4to. pp. 296, cloth. Price, £1 16s.

COREAN,

Ross.—A Corran Primer. Being Lessons in Corean on all Ordinary
Subjects. Transliterated on the principles of the Mandarin Primer by the
same author. By the Rev. Joun Ross, Newchang. Demy 8vo. stitched.
pp: 90. 10s.

DANISH.

Otte.—How to rearn Dano-Norweeran. A Manual for Students of
Dano-Norwegian, and especially for Travellers in Scandinavia. Based upon
the Ollendorffian System of teaching languages, and adapted for Self-Instruction.
By HE. C. Orrs, Second Edition. Crown 8vo. pp. xx.-338, cloth. 1884.
7s. 6d. (Key to the Exercises, pp. 84, cloth, price 3s,)

Otté.—Smeririep Grammar or THE Danish Laneauace. By E, OC.
Orrz. Crown 8vo. pp. vili.-66, cloth. 1884. 2s. 6d.

EGYPTIAN (Copric, Hizroctypuics).

Birch.—Eeyprian Tuxts: I. Text, Transliteration and Translation
—II. Text and Transliteration.—III. Text dissected for analysis.—1V. Deter-
minatives, etc. By 8. Birch. London, 1877. Large 8yo. 12s.

Catalogue (C) of leading Books on Egypt and Egyptology on Assyria
and Assyriology. To be had at the aflixed prices of Triibner and Co. 8vo. pp-
40, 1880. 13. ;

Chabas.—Lus Pasrrurs rn Ecyprr.—Mémoire Publié par’ l’Academie

Royale des Sciences 4 Amsterdam. By F, Casas. 4t
Amsterdam, 1868. 6s. di 0. sewed, pp. 56.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, B.C. 65

Clarke.—Meworr on tHe Comparattve Grammar or Eeverran, Corre,
anp Upr. By Hypz Crarke, Cor. Member American Oriental Society ; Mem.
German Oriental Society, etc., ete. Demy 8vo. sd., pp. 82. 2s.

Egyptologie.— (Forms also the Second Volume of the First Bulletin of
the Congrés Provincial des Orientalistes Francais.) 8vo. sewed, pp. 604, with
Eight Plates. Saint-Etiene, 1880. 8s. 6d.

Lieblein.—Recuercues sur tA CHronotoete Eeyprrenne d’aprés les
listes Généalogiques. By J. Lrzpiery. Roy. 8vo. sewed, pp. 147, with Nine
Plates. Christiana, 1873. 7s. 6d.

Mariette-Bey.—Tue Monuments or Upper Eeyrr; a translation of
the “ Itinéraire de la Haute Egypte’”’ of August Marierrr-Bry. Translated
by AtpHonsE Mariette. Crown 8vo. pp. xvi. and 262, cloth. 1877. 7s. 6d.

Records of the Past, Bermnc Enciish TRANSLATIONS OF THE ASSYRIAN
AND THE E@yptr1an Monuments. Published under the Sanction of the Society of
Biblieal Archeology. Epttep By Dr. S. Brrcu.

Vous. I. ro XII., 1874-79. 3s, 6d. each, (Vols. I., III., V., VII., IX., XI., contain
Assyrian Texts.)

Renouf.—Exementary Grammar of the Ancient Egyptian Language,

in the Hieroglyphic Type. By Lz Pace Renovr. 4to., cloth. 1875. 12s.

ENGLISH (Karty anp Mopern EnciisH anp DiAtects).

Ballad Society (The).—Subscription—Small paper, one guinea, and
large paper, three guineas, per annum. List of publications
on application.

Barnes.—Guossary or THE Dorset Dratect, with a Grammar of its
Word Shapening and Wording. By W. Barnes, B.D. Demy 8vo. pp. viii
126, sewed. 1886. 6s.

Boke of Nurture (The). By Joun Russert, about 1460-1470 Anno
Domini. The Boke of Keruynge. By WyNnkyN pE Worpe, Anno Domini
1513. The Boke of Nurture. By Hugu Ruopes, Anno Dominil577, Edited
from the Originals in the British Museum Library, by Freperick J. Furni-
vatL, M.A., Trinity Hall, Cambridge, Member of Council of the Philological
and Early English Vext Societies. 4to. half-morocco, gilt top, pp. xix. and 146,
28, xxviii.and 56. 1867. 142. Ils. 6d.

Burne.—Surorsuire Forx-Lore; A Sheaf of Gleanings. Edited by
C. 8. Burne from the Collections of G. F. Jackson. Demy 8vo. pp xvi.—664,
cloth. 1886. 26s.

Charnock.—Versa Nomrnaria; or Words derived from Proper Names.
By Ricuarp StepHEN CHARNOCK, Ph.Dr., F.S.A., etc. 8vo. pp. 826, cloth. 14s,

Charnock.—Lupvs Parroyymicus; or, the Etymology of Curious Sur-
names. By RicHarD StepHEN CHARNock, Ph.D., F.S.A., F.R.G.S. -Crown
8vo., pp. 182, cloth. 7s. 6d.

Charnock.—A Gtossary or tHe Essex Diarecr. By R. 8. Cuarnocg,
8vo. cloth, pp. x. and 64. 1880. 3s. 6d.

Chaucer Society (The).— Subscription, two guineas per annum.

List of Publications on application.
5

66 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Eger and Grime; an Early English Romance. Edited from Bishop
Percy’s Folio Manuscript, about 1650 a.p. By J. W. Hass, M.A., and
F. J. Furntvaut, M.A., of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. 4to., pp. 64 (only
100 copies printed), bound in the Roxburghe style. 10s. 6d.

Early English Text Society’s Publications. Subscription, one guinea

per annum, All demy 8yvo. in wrappers.

1. Earty Enetisa Axurrerative Porms. In the West-Midland
Dialect of the Fourteenth Century. Edited by R. Morris, Esq., from an
unique Cottonian MS. 16s.

2. Arruur (about 1440 a.p.). Edited by F. J. Furntvarz, Esq.,
from the Marquis of Bath’s unique MS. 4s.

3. Anz Compenpious AND Breur TRACTATE CONCERNYNG YE OFFICE
AND Dewr1z or Kyneis, ete. By Winz1aAm Lauper. (1556 a.p.) Edited
by F. Haut, Esq., D.C.L. 4s.

4. Srr Gawayne anp THE Green Kyicnr (about 1320-30 a.p.).
Edited by R. Morris, Esq., from an unique Cottonian MS. 10s.

5. Or THE ORTHOGRAPHIE AND CoNGRUITIE oF THE Britan TonevE;
a treates, noe shorter than necessarie, for the Schooles, be ALEXANDER HumzE.
Edited for the first time from the unique MS. in the British Museum (about
1617 a.v.), by Henry B. WHEATLEY, Esq. 4s.

6. Lancetor or THE Larx. Edited from the unique MS. in the Cam-
bridge University Library (ab. 1500), by the Rev. Waiter W. SxKeat;
M.A. 8s.

7. Tue Story or Genesis AnD Exopvus, an Early English Song, of
about 1250 a.p. Edited for the first time from the unique MS. in the Library
of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, by 2. Morris, Esq. 8s.

8 Morte ArtHureE; the Alliterative Version. Edited from Rosrert
THoRNTON’s unique MS, (about 1440 a.p.) at Lincoln, by the Rev. GEorGE
Perry, M.A., Prebendary of Lincoln. 7s.

9. ANIMADVERSIONS UPPON THE ANNOTACIONS AND CORRECTIONS OF
somE ImprRrecTions oF IMprEssIoNES oF Cuaucer’s Wokrkus, reprinted
in 1598; by Francis Tuynne. Edited from the unique MS. in the
Bridgewater Library. By G. H. Kinestey, Esq., M.D., and F. J. Furnivat1,
Hsq., M.A. 10s.

10. Meririn, or tHE Karty History or Kine Artuur. Edited for the
first time from the unique MS. in the Cambridge University Library (about
1450 a.p.), by HENRY B. Wuerarupy, Esq. Part I. 2s. 6d.

11. Tur Monarcue, and other Poems of Sir David Lyndesay. Edited
from the first edition by Joune Sxorv, in 1552, by Firzepwarp Hatt,
Esq., D.C.L.- Part I. 3s.

12. Tue Wrrent’s Cuasre Wire, a Merry Tale, by Adam of Cobsam
(about 1462 a.p.), from the unique Lambeth MS. 306. Edited for the first
time by F. J. Furnitvau, Esq., M.A. Is.

13. Sernte Marwerere, pE Memen ant Marryr. Three Texts of ab.
1200, 1310, 1330 a.p. First edited in 1862, by the Rev. Oswautp Cockayne,
M.A., and now re-issued. 2s.

14. Kyne Hory, with fragments of Floriz and Blauncheflur, and the
Assumption of the Blessed Virgin. Edited from the MSS. in the Library of

the University of Cambridge and the British Museum, by the Rev. J. Rawson
Lumby. 3s. fd.

15.

16.

nh

18.

ie

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26

27.

28.

29.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 67

Pouirrcat, Retietous, anp Love Porms, from the Lambeth MS.

2 dapat and other sources. Edited by F. J. Furntvaut, Esq., M.A.
Ss. .

A Trericz In Enexisn breuely drawe out of p book of Quintis
essencijs in Latyn, ) Hermys } prophete and king of Egipt after p flood
of Noe, fader of Philosophris, hadde by reuelacioun of an aungil of God to him
sente. Edited from the Sloane MS. 73, by F. J. Furnivatt, Esq., M.A. 1s.

Paratret Extracts from 29 Manuscripts of Prers Prowmay, with
Comments, and a Proposal for the Society’s Three-text edition of this Poem.
By the Rev. W. Sxeat, M.A. 1s.

Hatt Merpenneap, about 1200 a.p. Edited for the first time from
the MS. (with a translation) by the Rev. OswaLp Cockayne, M.A. Is.

Tuer Monarcus, and other Poems of Sir David Lyndesay. Part II.,
the Complaynt of the King’s Papingo, and other minor Poems. Edited from
the First Edition by F. Haut, Esq., D.C.L. 3s. 64.

Some Treatises py Ricwarp Rotts pe Hamporz. Edited from
Robert of Thornton’s MS. (ab. 1440 a.p.), by Rev. Grorer G. Perry,
M.A. 1s. ,

Merry, or THE Earty History or Kine Arruvr. Part II. Edited
by Henry B. Wuzattey, Esq. 4s.

THe Romans of Parrenay, on Lustanen. Edited for the first time
from the unique MS. in the Library of Trinity College, Cambridge, by the
Rev. W. W. Sxeat. M.A. 6s.

Dan Micuer’s AYENBITE oF Inwyt, or Remorse of Conscience, in
the Kentish dialect, 1340 a.p. Edited from the unique MS. in the British
Museum, by Ricuarp Morris, Esq. 10s. 6d.

Hymns or tHe Viren anp Curist; Tue Parrtrament or Dervits,
and Other Religious Poems. Edited from the Lambeth MS. 853, by F. J.
Furnivatt, M.A. 3s.

Tue Sractons or Roms, and the Pilgrim’s Sea-Voyage and Sea-
Sickness, with Clene Maydenhod. Edited from the Vernon and Porkington
MSS., etc., by F. J. Furnivau, Esq., M.A. 1s.

Retierous Preces in Prost anp Verss. Containing Dan Jon
Gaytrigg’s Sermon; The Abbaye of S. Spirit; Sayne Jon, and other pieces
in the Northern Dialect. Edited from Robert of Thorntone’s MS. (ab. 1460
A.D.), by the Rev. G. Perry, M.A. 2s.

Manrevtus Vocasutorum : a Rhyming Dictionary of the English
Language, by Prrrr Levins (1570). Edited, with an Alphabetical Index
by Henry B. Wunatiey. 12s.

Tur Viston oF WILLIAM CONCERNING Prers Plowman, together with
Vita de Dowel, Dobet et Dobest, 1362 a.p., by Witt1am LAncuanp. The
earliest or Vernon Text; Text A. Edited from the Vernon MS., with full
Collations, by Rev. W. W. Skat, M.A. 7s.

Op Encettsa Homies anp Homreric Treatises. (Sawles Warde
and the Wohunge of Ure Lauerd : Ureisuns of Ure Louerd and of Ure Lefdi,
etc.) of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. Edited from MSS. in the Brit-
ish Museum, Lambeth, and Bodleian Libraries ; with Introduction, Transla-
tion, and Notes, by Ricuarp Morris, First Serves. Part I. 7s,

68

30.
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,

Piers, THE Proveuman’s Crepe (about 1394). Edited from the
MSS. by the Rev. W. W. Sxuat, M.A. 2s.

Insrructions For Parts Priests. By Jonn Myrc. Edited from
Cotton MS. Claudius A. II., by Epwarp Peacock, Esq., F.S.A., etc., etc. 4s.

Earty Eneriseh Mzars anp Manners; John Russell’s Boke of
Nuture, Wynkyn de Worde’s Boke of Keruynge, The Boke of Curtasye, R.
Weste’s Booke of Demeanor, Seager’s Schoole of Vertue, The Babees Book,
Aristotle’s A BC, Urbanitatis, Stans Puer ad Mensam, The Lytille Childrenes
Lytil Boke, For to serve a Lord, Old Symon, The Birched School-Boy, ete.
With some Forewords on Education in Early England. Edited by F. J.
Furnivati, M.A., Trin. Hall, Cambridge. 15s.

Tur Book or THE KnicuT DE LA Tour Lanpry, 1372. A Father’s
Book for his Daughters, Edited from the Harleian MS. 1764, by THomas
Wricat Esq., M.A., and Mr. WittiAM Rossiter. 8s.

Oxp Enerisn Homirres anp Homireric Treatises. (Sawles Warde,
andthe Wohunge of Ure Lauerd: Ureisuns of Ure Louerd and of Ure Lefdi,
etc.) of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. Edited from MSS. in the
British Museum, Lambeth, and Bodleian Libraries; with Introduction, Trans-
lation, and Notes, by Rrcwarp Morris. First Serves. Part 2. 8s.

Sm Daviv Lynprsay’s Works. Parr 3. The Historie of ane
Nobil and Wailzeand Sqvyer, Witr1am Mrtprum, umqvhyle Laird of
Cleische and Bynnis, compylit be Sir Davin Lynpersay of the Mont alias
Lyoun King of Armes. With the Testament of the said Williame Mel-
drum, Squyer, compylit alswa be Sir Dauid Lyndesay, etc. Edited by F.
BN OK OID Ee

Merry, on tHE Earty History or Kine Arruur. A Prose
Romance (about 1450-1460 a.p.), edited from the unique MS. in the
University Library, Cambridge, by Henry B. Wueatiry. With an Essay
on Arthurian Localities, by J. 8S. SruarT Gienniz, Esq. Part III. 1869. 12s,

Sir Davin Lyypzsay’s Worxs. Part IV. Ane Satyre of the
thrie estaits, in commendation of vertew and vitvperation of vyce. Maid
be Sir Davip Linprsay, of the Mont, alias Lyon King of Armes. At
Edinbvrgh. Printed be Robert Charteris, 1602. Cvm privilegio regis.
Edited by F. Hatt, Esq., D.C.L. 4s.

Tue Viston or WitttaAm concerninc Piers THE Prowmay,
together with Vita de Dowel, Dobet, et Dobest, Secundum Wit et Resoun,
by Witt1am Laneuannd (1377 a.p.). The “ Crowley” Text; or Text B.
Edited from MS. Laud Misc. 581, collated with MS. Rawl. Poet. 38, MS.
B. 15. 17. in the Library of Trinity College, Cambridge, MS. Dd. 1. 17. in
the Cambridge University Library, the MS. in Oriel College, Oxford, MS.
Bodley 814, etc. By the Rev. Wanrer W. Sxeat, M.A., late Fellow of
Christ’s College, Cambridge. 10s. 6d.

Tue ‘“‘Grsr Hysrorrare”? or tHe Destruction or Troy. An
Alliterative Romance, translated from Guido De Colonna’s “« Hystoria
Troiana.” Now first edited from the unique MS. in the Hunterian Museum,
University of Glasgow, by the Rev. Gro. A. Panton and Davip DonaLpson.
Part I. 10s. 6d.

Enews Ginps. The Original Ordinances of more than One
Hundred Early English Gilds : Together with the olde usages of the cite of
Wynchestre; The Ordinances of Worcester; The Office of the Mayor of
Bristol; and the Customary of the Manor of Tettenhall-Regis. From

41.

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51. p

52.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, F.C. 69

Original MSS. of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries. Edited with
Notes by the late Tourmin Smiru, Esq., F.R.S. of Northern Antiquaries
(Copenhagen). With an Introduction and Glossary, etc., by his daughter,
Lucy Tovtmin Smiru. And a Preliminary Essay, in Five Parts, ON THE
History and DsveLorpment or Gixps, by Luso Brenrano, Doctor Juris
Utriusque et Philosophie. 21s.

Tue Miyor Poems or Writ1am Lauper, Playwright, Poet, and
Minister of the Word of God (mainly on the State of Scotland in and about
1568 A.p., that year of Famine and Plague). Edited from the Unique
Originals belonging to S. Curistre-MinuEr, Esq., of Britwell, by F. J.
Furnivat, M.A., Trin. Hall, Camb. 38s.

Bernarpus pe Cura REI Famutiarts, with some Early Scotch
Prophecies, ete. From a MS., KK 1. 5, in the Cambridge University
Library. Edited by J. Rawson Lumsy, M.A., late Fellow of Magdalen
College, Cambridge. 2s.

Ratis Ravrye, and other Moral and Religious Pieces, in Prose and
Verse. Edited from the Cambridge University Library MS. KK 1. 5, by J.
Rawson Lumsy, M.4A., late Fellow of Magdalen College, Cambridge. 3s.

JosppH or AnrrmaTuix: otherwise called the Romance of the
Seint Graal, or Holy Grail: an alliterative poem, written about a.p. 1350,
and now first printed from the uhique copy in the Vernon MS. at Oxford.
With an appendix, containing ‘‘ The Lyfe of Joseph of Armathy,’’ reprinted
from the black-letter copy of Wynkyn de Worde; ‘“ De sancto Joseph ab
Arimathia,” first printed by Pynson, a.p. 1516; and ‘‘ The Lyfe of Joseph of
Arimathia,’’ first printed by Pynson, a.p. 1520. Edited, with Notes and
Glossarial Indices, by the Rev. Waiter W. Sxeat, M.A. 5s.

Kine Atrrep’s West-Saxon Version or Grucory’s Pasrorat Care.
With an English translation, the Latin Text, Notes, and an Introduction
Edited by Henry Sweet, Esgq., of Balliol College, Oxford. Part I. 10s.

Lecenps oF THE Hoty Roop; Symzors or THE Passron anp Cross-
Poems. In Old English of the Eleventh, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Cen-
turies. Edited from MSS. in the British Museum and Bodleian Libraries;
with Introduction, Translations, and Glossarial Index. By RicuarpD
Morris, LL.D. 10s.

Srr Davin Lynpesay’s Works. Parr V. The Minor Poems of
Lyndesay. Edited by J. A. H. Murray, Esq, 3s.

Tue Times’ Wuistte: or, A Newe Daunce of Seven Satires, and
other Poems: Compiled by R. C., Gent. Now first Edited from MS. Y. 8. 3.
in the Library of Canterbury Cathedral; with Introduction, Notes, and
Glossary, by J. M. Cowper. 6s.

Aw Oxp Enerisn MiscrLtany, containing a Bestiary, Kentish
Sermons, Proverbs of Alfred, Religious Poems of the 13th century. Hdited
from the MSS. by the Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. 10s.

Kine Atrrep’s West-Saxon Version or Grecory’s Pastorat Care.

Edited from 2 MSS., with an English translation. By Hunry Sweet, Esq.;

Balliol College, Oxford. Part II. 10s.

ge Lretape or Sr. Junrana, from two old English Manuscripts of

1234 a.p.. With renderings into Modern English, by the Rey. O. CockAYNE

and Epmunp Brook. Edited by the Rev. O. Cockaynz, M.A, Price 2s,

Pattapius on Huszonpriz, from the unique MS., ab. 1420 a.p.,
ed. Rev. B. Lopcze. Partl. 10s.

70

53.

54.

50.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,

Oxp Enerisx Homies, Series II., from the unique 13th-century
MS. in Trinity Coll. Cambridge, with a photolithograph ; three Hymns to
the Virgin and God, from a unique 13th-century MS. at Oxford, a photo-
lithograph of the music to two of them, and transcriptions of it in modern
notation by Dr. Rimpautrt, and A. J. Exxis, Esq., F.R.S.; the whole
edited by the Rev. Ricuarp Morris, LL.D. 8s,

Tur Viston or Prers Prowman, Text © (completing the three
versions of this great poem), with an Autotype; and two unique alliterative
Poems: Richard the Redeles (by Wi1uxtam, the author of the Vision) ; and
The Crowned King; edited by the Rev. W. W. Sxeat, M.A. 18s.

GxENERYDES, a Romance, edited from the unique MS., ab. 1440 a.p.,
in Trin. Coll. Cambridge, by W. Atpis Wricurt, Esq., M.A., Trin. Coll.
Cambr. Part lI. 3s.

Tue Gest HysrorraLe oF THE Destruction or Troy, translated
from Guido de Colonna, in alliterative verse; edited from the unique MS, in
the Hunterian Museum, Glasgow, by D. Donaxpson, Esq., and the late Rev.
G. A. Panton, PartII. 10s. 6d.

Tue Earty Enerish Version or THE ‘‘ Cursor Monopt,”’ in four
Texts, from MS. Cotton, Vesp. A. iii. in the British Museum; Fairfax MS.
14. in the Bodleian; the Gottingen MS. Theol. 107; MS. R. 38, 8, in Trinity
College, Cambridge. Edited by the Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. Part I. with
two photo-lithographic facsimiles by Cooke and Fotheringham. 10s. 6d.

Tue Bricxrine Homies, edited from the Marquis of Lothian’s
Anglo-Saxon MS. of 971 a.v., by the Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. (Witha
Photolithograph). Partl. 8s.

)

Tue Karty Enerisn Version oF THE ‘‘Cursor Munvr;”’ in four

Texts, from MS. Cotton Vesp. A. iii. in the British Museum; Fairfax MS.
14, in the Bodleian; the Gottingen MS. Theol. 107; MS. R. 3, 8, in Trinity
College, Cambridge. Edited by the Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. Part II. 15s.

Mepiracyuns on THE Soper oF ouR LorpDE (perhaps by Roserr
or Brunne), Edited from the MSS. by J. M. Cowpsr, Esq. 2s. 6d.

THE Romance anp Propuecies or THomas or Ercetpouns, printed
from Five MSS, Edited by Dr. James A. H. Murray. 10s. 6d.

Tue Karty Enerish Version or THE ‘‘ Cursor Muno1,” in Four
Texts. Edited by the Rev. R. Morris, M.A., LL.D. Part III. 15s.

63, Tue Buicktrne Homies. Edited from the Marquis of Lothian’s

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

Anglo-Saxon MS. of 971 a.p., by the Rev. R. Morris, LL.D. Part II. 4s.

Francis Toynne’s Empiemes anv Eprerams, a.d. 1600, from the
Earl of Ellesmere’s unique MS. Edited by F. J. Furnivann, MA. 4s.

Br Domes Dae (Bede’s De Die Judicii) and other short Anglo-
Saxon Pieces, Ed. from the unique MS. by the Rev. J. Rawson Lumpy, B.D. 2s

Tur Karty Enerish Version or rue ‘Cursor Munoz,” in Four
Texts. Edited by Rev. R. Morris, M.A., LL.D. Part IV. 10s.

Norrs on Pirrs Prowman. By the Rev. W. W. Sxerat, M.A.
Part 1.52118: :

The Early English Version of the ‘Cursor: Munpr,” in Four
Texts. Edited by Rev. R. Morrrs, M.A., LL.D. Part V. 25s.

69.

70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.

76.
77.
78.
79.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 71

Avamw Davy’s Five Dreams azour Epwarp II. Tue Lire or
Satnt Axextus. Solomon's Book of Wisdom. St. Jerome’s 15 Tokens
before Doomsday. The Lamentation of Souls. Edited from the Laud MS.
622, in the Bodleian Library, by F. J. Furnivaiy, M.A. 5s.

GENERYDES, a Romance. Edited by W. Atpis Wrient, M.A.
Part II. 4s.

Tue Lay Forx’s Mass-Boox, 4 Texts. Edited by Rey. Canon
Smumons. 25s.

Pazraptus on Huszonprig, englisht (ab. 1420 a.p.). Part II. Edited
by S. J. Herrtacs, B.A. 5s.

Tue Bricxrrye Homirms, 971 4.p. Edited by Rev. Dr. R. Mornis.
Part III. 8s.

Enetish Works or Wrctir, hitherto unprinted. Edited by F. D.
Marruzw. 20s.

Carnoricoy Anexicum, an early English Dictionary, from Lord
Monson’s MS., ap. 1483. Edited with Introduction and Notes by S. J.
Herrrace, B.A.; and with a Preface by H. B. WuEatiey. 20s.

Artrric’s Merricat Lives or Saints, in MS. Cott. Jul. E. 7.
Edited by Rey. Prof. Skzar, M.A. Part I. 10s,

Browvutr. The unique MS. Autotyped and Transliterated.
Edited by Professor Zuprtza, Ph.D. 25s.

Tue Firry Eartrest Enetish Wits in the Court of Probate,
1387-1439. Edited by F. J. Furnivaty, M.A. 7s.

Kiye Atrrep’s Orostus From Lorp Tottemacnn’s 9rH CENTURY
MS. PartI. Edited by H. Sweet, M.A. 13s,

Extra Volume. Facsimile of the Epinal Glossary, 8th Century, edited by H.

80.

81.

82.

83.
84.

85.

86.

Sweet. 16s,

Tue Aneto-Saxon Lire or St. Karaurrne anv its Latin ORIGINAL.
Edited by Dr. ErnzenxeL, 12s.

Pizrs Prowman. Notes, Glossary, etc., Part IV., Section II.,
completing the Work. Edited by Rev. Prof. Skzar, M.A. 18s.

Axtrric’s MrrricaL Lrves or Saints, MS. Cott. Jul. E, 7. ed.
Rey. Prof. Skzat, M.A., LL.D. Part II. 12s.

Tur Oxpest Enerisu Texts. Charters, etc., ed. H. Swenr, M.A. 20s.
Apprrionat Anatogs To “THe Waricut’s Cuaste Wire.” No. 12.
By W. A. Crouston. 1s.

Tur Turer Kines or Conogne. 2 English Texts and 1 Latin.
ed. Dr. C. Horstmann. 178.

ProsE Lives or Women Sarnts, ab, 1610 a.p., from the unique
MS., by Dr. C. Horsrmann. 12s.

Extra Series. Subscriptions—Small paper, one guinea; large paper

1.

two guineas, per annum.

Tur Romance or WrttiamM oF Parerne (otherwise known as the
Romance of William and the Werwolf). Translated from the French at the
command of Sir Humphrey de Bohun, about a.p. 1350, to which is added a
fragment of the Alliterative Romance of Alisaunder, translated from the

72

Linguistie Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Latin by the same author, about a.p. 1340; the former re-edited from the
unique MS. in the Library of King’s College, Cambridge, the latter now
first edited from the unique MS. in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. By the
Rev. Watter W. Sxeat, M.A. 8vo. sewed, pp. xliv. and 328. 13s.

2. On Earty Eneutsn Pronunciation, with especial reference to

Shakspere and Chaucer; containing an investigation of the Correspondence
of Writing with Speech in England, from the Anglo-Saxon period to the
present day, preceded by a systematic Notation of all Spoken Sounds by
means of the ordinary Printing Types; including a re-arrangement of Prof.
F. J. Child’s Memoirs on the Language of Chaucer and Gower, and reprints
of the rare Tracts by Salesbury on English, 1547, and Welsh, 1567, and by
Barcley on French, 152). By ALexanver J. Evtis, F.R.S. Part I, On
the Pronunciation of the x1vth, xvith, xviith, and xvii1th centuries. 8vo.
sewed, pp. viii. and 416. 10s.

3. Caxton’s Boox or Curresy®, printed at Westminster about 1477-8,

A.D., and now reprinted, with two MS. copies of the same treatise, from the
Oriel MS. 79, and the Balliol MS. 354. Edited by Freprricx J. Furni-
vaLL, M.A, 8vo. sewed, pp. xii. and 58. 5s.

4, Tue Lay or Havetox roe Dane; composed in the reign of

Edward I., about a.p. 1280. Formerly edited by Sir F. Mapopen for the
Roxburghe Club, and now re-edited from the unique MS. Laud Misc. 108, in
the Bodleian Library, Oxford, by the Rev. WattER W. Sxear, M.A. 8vo.
sewed, pp. lv. and 160. 10s.

5. Cuavcer’s TRANsLATION oF Boxrruius’s ‘‘ DE ConsoLaTIONE

Puivosopuiz.’’ Edited from the Additional MS. 10,340 in the British
Museum. Collated with the Cambridge Univ. Libr. MS. Ii. 3. 21. By
Ricuarp Morris. 8vo. 12s.

6. Tur Romance or tHe CuEvELERE Asstcng. Re-edited from the

unique manuscript in the British Museum, with a Preface, Notes, and
Glossarial Index, by Henry H. Gipss, Esq., M.A. 8vo. sewed, pp.
xvili. and 88, 3s,

7. On Earty Enerrsa Pronuncration, with especial reference to

Shakspere and Chaucer. By AxexanDer J. Evuis, F.R.S., ete., ete.
Part II. On the Pronunciation of the x11 th and previous centuries, of
Anglo-Saxon, Icelandic, Old Norse and Gothic, with Chronological Tables of
the Value of Letters and Expression of Sounds in English Writing. 10s.

8. Qurrne Enizanerues Acuapemy, by Sir Humpnrey Griperr.

A Booke of Precedence, The Ordering of a Funerall, etc. Varying Versions
of the Good Wife, The Wise Man, etc., Maxims, Lydgate’s Order of Fools,
A Poem on Heraldry, Occleve on Lords’ Men, etc., Edited by, di:
Furnivaui, M.A., Trin. Hall, Camb. With Essays on Early Italian and

German Books of Courtesy, by W. M. Rossrerri, Esq., and E. Oswaup
Esg. 8vo, 138s.

9. Tue Frarernitye or Vacazonprs, by Joun Awopetry (licensed

in 1560-1, imprinted then, and in 1565), from the edition of 1575 in the
Bodleian Library. A Caueat or Warening for Commen Cursetors vulgarely
called Vagabones, by THomas HaRMAN, Esquiere. From the 3rd edition of
1567, belonging to Henry Huth, Esq., collated with the 2nd edition of 1567,
in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, and with the reprint of the 4th edition of
1573. A Sermon in Praise of Thieves and Thievery, by Parson HaBen or
Hysrrpynge, from the Lansdowne MS. 98, and Cotton Vesp. A. 25. Those

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 73

parts of the Groundworke of Conny-catching (ed. 1592), that differ from
Harman's Oaueat. Edited by Epwarpv Vites & F. J. Furnivay., 8vo.
7s. 6d.

10. Toe Fyrst Boxe or raz Inrropucrion or Knowxrpen, made by
Andrew Borde, of Physycke Doctor. A Comprnpyous REGYMENT OF A
Dyzrary or Hetru made in Mountpyllier, compiled by Andrewe Boorde,
of Physycke Doctor. Baxnes In THE Durence or THE BrerpE: a treatyse
made, answerynge the treatyse of Doctor Borde upon Berdes. Edited, with
a life of Andrew Boorde, and large extracts from his Breuyary, by F. J
Purnrvatu, M.A., Trinity Hall, Camb. 8vo. 18s.

11. Tue Bruce; or, the Book of the most excellent and noble Prince,
Robert de Broyss, King of Scots: compiled by Master John Barbour, Arch-
deacon of Aberdeen, a.p. 1375. Edited from MS. G 23 in the Library of St.
John’s College, Cambridge, written a.p. 1487; collated with the MS. in the
Advocates’ Library at Edinburgh, written a.p. 1489, and with Hart's
Edition, printed a.p. 1616; with a Preface, Notes, and Glossarial Index, by
the Rev. Water W. Sxeat, M.A. Part I 8yvo. 12s.

12. Enetanp In tHE Retan or Kina Henry roe Erentn. A
Dialogue between Cardinal Pole and Thomas Lupset, Lecturer in Rhetoric
at Oxford. By Tuomas Srarkry, Chaplain to the King. Edited, with
Preface, Notes, and Glossary, by J. M. Cowrrr. And with an Introduction,
containing the Life and Letters of Thomas Starkey, by the Rev. J. S. Brewer,
M.A. PartII. 12s.

13. A Suppricacyon For THE Becears. Written about the year 1529,
by Srtmon Fisu. Now re-edited by Freperick J. FurNtvaLt. With a
Supplycacion to our moste Soueraigne Lorde Kynge Henry the Eyght
(1544 a.p.), A Supplication of the Poore Commons (1546 a.p.), The Decaye
of England by the great multitude of Shepe (1550-3 a.p.). Edited by J.
Meapows Coweer. 6s.

14. On Earty Enetish Pronuncration, with especial reference to
Shakspere and Chaucer. By A. J. tunis, F.RS., F.S.A. Part III.
Illustrations of the Pronunciation of the x1vth and xvith Centuries. Chaucer,
Gower, Wycliffe, Spenser, Shakspere, Salesbury, Barcley, Hart, Bullokar,
Gill. Pronouncing Vocabulary. 10s.

15. Ropert Crowtery’s THirty-ons Epiarams, Voyce of the Last
Trumpet, Way to Wealth, etc., 1550-1 a.p. Edited by J. M. Cowpzr, Esq.
12s.

16. A Treatise on THE AstrroLaBE; addressed to his son Lowys, by
Geoffrey Chaucer, A.D. 1391. Edited from the earliest MSS. by the Rev.
Water W. Sxeat, M.A., late Fellow of Christ’s College, Cambridge. 10s.

17. Tur Compraynt or ScornanpE, 1549, a.p., with an Appendix of
four Contemporary English Tracts. Kdited by J. A. H. Murray, Esq.
Part I. _ 1s.

18. THs Compiaynt oF ScoTtanpE, etc. Part II. 8s.

19. Ourr Lapyzs Myrovre, a.p. 1580, edited by the Rev. J. H.
Bunt, M.A., with four full-page photolithographic facsimiles by Cooke and
Fotheringham. 24s.

20. Loneticn’s History or rae Hoty Gratt (ab. 1450 a.p.), translated
from the French Prose of Stres Rosiprs pe Borron. Ke-edited fron the
Unique MS. in Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, by F. J, Furnivall, Esq.
MPAs) Partsl.. 28s:

23.

24.

39.

40.

Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

. Barzour’s Bruce. Edited from the MSS. and the earliest

printed edition by the Rev. W. W. Sxrat, M.A. Part Il. 4s.

. Henry Brinxiow’s Compraynt oF Roprrycx Mors, somtyme

a gray Fryre, unto the Parliament Howse of Ingland his naturall Country,
for the Redresse of certen wicked Lawes, euel Customs, and cruel Decreys
(ab. 1542); and THe LamEnTacton or a CuristiaAN AGAINST THE CITIE
or Lonpon, made by Roderigo Mors, a.p. 1545. Edited by J. M. CowPEr,
Esq. 9s.

On Earty Enerisn Pronunciation, with especial reference to
Shakspere and Chaucer. By A. J. Eris, Esq., F.R.S. Part TV e= 055

Lonetrcx’s History or tHE Hoty Gratz (ab. 1450 a.p.), translated
from the French Prose of Sirrs RopiERs nE Borron. Re-edited from the
Unique MS. in Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, by F. J. Furntvau.,
Esq., M.A. Part II. 10s.

. Tue Romance or Guy or Warwick. Edited from the Cambridge

University MS. by Prof. J. Zupirza, Ph.D. Part I. 20s.

. Tue Romance or Guy or Warwick. Edited from the Cambridge

University MS. by Prof J. Zuprrza, Ph.D, (The 2nd or 15th century version).
Part LT. 14s.

. Tue Enexish Works or Joun Fisuer, Bishop of Rochester (died

1535). Edited by Professor J. E, B. Mayor, M.A. Part I., the Text. 16s.

. Lonrericu’s History or tHE Hoty Gram. Kdited by F. J.

Furnivaut, M.A. Part III. 10s.

. Barzsour’s Bruce Edited from the MSS. and the earliest Printed

Edition, by the Rev. W. W. Sxreat, M.A. PartIII. 21s.

. Lonrticu’s History or tae Hory Grait. LEdited by F. J.

FurnivatL, Esa., M.A. Part IV. 15s.

. ALEXANDER AND Dinpimus. Translated from the Latin about

A.D. 1340-50. Re-edited by the Rev. W. W. Skxat, M.A. 6s.

. Starxey’s ‘‘ Enecanp mv Henry VIII.’s True.” Part I. Starkey’s

Life and Letters. Edited by 8. J. Hurrracr, B.A. 8s.

. Gesta Romanorum: the Early English Versions. Edited from

the MSS. and Black-letter Editions, by 8. J. Hurrracr, B.A. 1és.

CHARLEMAGNE Romances: No. I. Sir Ferumbras. Edited from
the unique Ashmole MS. by S. J. Hurrracs, B.A. 15s.

. CHARLEMAGNE Romancns: II. The Sege off Malayne, Sir Otuell,

etc. Edited by S. J. Hurrracn, B.A. 12s.

. CHartemAGNE Romances: III. Lyf of Charles the Grete, Pt. 1.

Edited by 8. J. Herrracn, B.A. 16s.

. CoartemacnE Romances: IV. Lyf of Charles the Grete, Pt. 2.

Edited by 8. J. Herrracz, B.A. lds.

. CHartemacNE Romances: V. The Sowdone of Babylone. Edited

by Dr. Havsxnucur. 15s.
CuartemaGne Romances: VI. The Taill of Rauf Colyear, Roland,
Otuel, etc. Edited by Sypnny J. Herrracn, B.A. 15s.

CuartemaGne Romances: VII. Houn of Burdeux. By Lord
Berners, Edited by 8. L. Lez, B.A. Part I. 15s.

42.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 75

- Cuartemacne Romancus: VITI. Huon of Burdeux. By Lord
Berners. Edited by 8S. L. Lex, B.A. Part II. 16s.

Guy or Warwick. Two Texts (Auchinleck MS. and Cain’s
MS.). Edited by Prof. Zuprrza. PartI. 16s.

43. Cuartemacne Romances: IX. Huon of Burdeux, by Lord Bernens.
Edited by 8S. L. Lez, B.A. Part III. 1és.

44, CoartemacNne Romances: X. The Four Sonsof Aymon. Edited
Miss O. RicHarpson. Part I. 14s.

5. Cuartemacne Romances: XI. The Four Sons of Aymon. Edited
by O. RicHarpson. Part II. 20s.

46. Str Bevis or Hampton, from the Auchinleck and other MSS.
Edited by Prof. E. Kotpine. PartI. 10s.

47. THe Wars or AxExanpER. LEdited by Prof. Sxear, Litt.D.,
BLEEDS 20s:

48. Str Bryis or Hamron, ed. Prof. E. Kotsine. Part II. 10s.

49. Guy or Warwick, 2 texts (Auchinleck and Caius MSS.). Part 2.
Edited by Prof. J. Zupirza. 15s.

50. Cuartemacne Romances: Huon of Burdeux. By Lord Berners.
Edited by S. L. Lez, B.A. Part IV. 5s.

English Dialect Society’s Publications. Subscription, 1873 to 1876,
10s. 6d. per annum; 1877 and following years, 20s. per annum. Alli demy Svo.
in wrappers.

1, Series B. Part 1. Reprinted Glossaries, I.-VII. Containing a
Glossary of North of England Words, by J. H.; Glossaries, by Mr.
MarsHALL; and a West-Riding Glossary, by Dr. Wituan. 7s. 6d.

2. Series A. Bibliographical. A List of Books illustrating English
Dialects. Part J. Containing a General List of Dictionaries, etc.; and a
List of Books relating to some of the Counties of England. 4s, 6d.

8. Series C. Original Glossaries. Part I. Containing a Glossary
of Swaledale Words. By Captain Haruanpn. 4s.

4, Series D. The History of English Sounds. By H. Sweet, Esq.
4s. 6d. ;

5. Series B. Part II. Reprinted Glossaries. VIIIT.-XIV. Con-
taining seven Provincial English Glossaries, from various sources. 7s.

6. Series B. Part III. Reprinted Glossaries. XV.—XVII. Ray’s
Collection of English Words not generally used, from the edition of 1691,
together with Thoresby’s Letter to Ray, 1703. Re-arranged and newly edited
by Rev. Water W. Sxear, 8s,

6*. Subscribers to the English Dialect Society for 1874 also receive
a copy of ‘A Dictionary of the Sussex Dialect.’ By the Rev. W. D.
ParisH.

7, Series D. Part II. The Dialect of West Somerset. By F. T.
Etwortnuy, Esq. 3s. 6d.

8. Series A. Part II. A List of Books Relating to some of the
Counties of England, Part II. 6s.

9. Series ©. A Glossary of Words used in the Neighbourhood of
Whitby. By F.K. Rosinson. Part]. A—P. 7s. 69,

76

10.
11.
12.
13.
as
15.
16.

Wee

18.

18),

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Series C. A Glossary of the Dialect of Lancashire. By J. H.
Nopaz and G. Mizner. PartI. A—E. 3s. 6d.

On the Survival of Early English Words in our Present Dialects.
By Dr. R. Morris. 64d.

Series C. Original Glossaries. Part III. Containing Five
Original Provincial English Glossaries. 7s.

Series ©. A Glossary of Words used in the Neighbourhood of
Whitby. By F. K. Robinson. Part II. P—Z. 68 6d.

A Glossary of Mid-Yorkshire Words, with a Grammar. By C.

CroueH Rosinson. 9s.

A Gtossary oF Worps used in the Wapentakes of Manley and
Corringham, Lincolnshire. By Epwarp Pracock, F.S.A. 9s. 6d.

A Glossary of Holderness Words. By F. Ross, R. Sreap, and
T. Hotperness. With a Map of the District. 7s. 6d.

On the Dialects of Eleven Southern and South-Western Counties,
with a new Classification of the English Dialects, By Prince Louis Lucien
Bonaparte. With Two Maps. 1s.

Bibliographical List. Part III. completing the Work, and

containing a List of Books on Scottish Dialects, Anglo-Irish Dialect, Cant
and Slang, and Americanisms, with additions to the English List and Index.

- Edited by J. H. Nova. 4s. 6d.

An Outline of the Grammar of West Somerset. By F. T
Exiworruy, Ese. 5s.

A Glossary of Cumberland Words and Phrases. By Wut1tam

Dickinson, F.L.S. 6s.

Tusser’s Five Hundred Pointes of Good Husbandrie. Edited

with Introduction, Notes and Glossary, by W. Partnz and Sipnzey J.
HerxtaGe, B.A. 12s. 6d.

A Dictionary of English Plant Names. By Jamus Barrren,
F.L.S., and Ropert Hotuanp. Part I. (Ato F). 8s. 6d.

Five Reprinted Glossaries, including Wiltshire, East Anglian,
Suffolk, and East Yorkshire Words, and Words from Bishop Kennett’s
Parochial Antiquities. Edited by the Rev. Professor Sknat, M.A. 7s.

Supplement to the Cumberland Glossary (No. 20). By W.

Dickinson, F.L.S. 1s.

Specimens of English Dialects. First Volume. I. Devonshire ;
Exmoor Scolding and Courtship. Edited, with Notes and Glossary, by F. T.
Exworrny. Il. Westmoreland: Wm. de Worfat’s Bran New Wark.
Edited by Rev. Prof. Skuar. 8s. 6d.

A Dictionary of English Plant Names. By J. Brrrren and R.
Houtranp. Part II. (G to 0). 1880. 8s. 6d.

Glossary of Words in use in Cornwall. I. West Cornwall. By

it M. A. Courtney. II. Kast Cornwall. By Tuomas Q. Coucy. With
ap. 6s.

Glossary of Words and Phrasesin use in Antrim and Down. By

Wiiuiam Huex Parrerson, M.R.I.A. 7s.

29.
30.
81.
32.

33.
34.
35.

36.
37

°

38.
39.

40.

41.

7 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 77

An Early English Hymn to the Virgin. By F. J. Forwrvatz,
M.A., and A. J. Exits, F.R.S. 6d.

Old Country and Farming Words. Gleaned from Agricultural
Books. By Jamus Brirren, F.L.S. 10s. 6d.

The Dialect of Leicestershire. By the Rey. A. B. Evans, D.D.,
and Szpastian Evans, LL.D. 10s. 6d.

Five Original Glossaries. Isle of Wight, Oxfordshire, Cumber-
land, North Lincolnshire and Radnorshire. By various Authors. 7s. 6d.

George Eliot’s Use of Dialect. By W.E. A. Axon. (Forming
No. 4 of ‘* Miscellanies.’’) 6d.

Turner’s Names of Herbes, a.p. 1548. Edited (with Index and
Indentification of Names) by Jamzs Brirren, F.L.S. 6s. 6d.

Glossary of the Lancashire Dialect. By J. H. Nopat and Gro.

Mitner. Part II. (F to Z). 6s.

West Worcester Words. By Mrs. Cuampertain. 4s. 6d.

Fitzherbert’s Book of Husbandry, a.p. 1534. Edited with Intro-

duction, Notes, and Glossarial Index. By the Ruv. Prorzssor Sxzar. 8s. 6d.

Devonshire Plant Names. By the Rev. Hitprrtc Frrenp. 5s.

A Glossary of the Dialect of Aldmondbury and Huddersfield. By

the Rev. A. Easurr, M.A., andthe Rev. Tuos. Luzs, M.A. 8s. 6d.

Hampsuire Worps anp Purases. Compiled and Edited by the
Rev. Sir Witi1am H. Cops, Bart. 6s.

NarHaniet Barrey’s Enerisu Dratect Worps oF tHE 18TH CENTURY.
Edited by W. E. A. Axon. « 9s.

41.* Tuer Trearyse of FyssHiner witH AN ANeLE. By Juriana Barnes.

42.
43.

44.
45.
46.

47.
48.

49.

50.
51.

52.

An earlier form (circa 1450) edited with Glossary by Tuomas SarcHeE.y, and
by him presented to the subscribers for 1883.

Upron-on-Severn Worps AnD Puraszs. By the Rev. Canon
Lawson. 2s. 6d.

Aneto-Frexncu Vowet Sounps. A Word List Illustrating their
Correspondence with Modern English, By Miss B. M. Sxrar. 4s.
Guossary or Coesutre Worps. By R. Hortanp. Part I. (A-F.) 7s.
Enerisn Prant Names. Part III. completing the work. 10s.
GrossaRy oF CursHtrE Worps. By Roperr Hortanp. Part 2.
(G-Z), completing the vocabulary. 9s.

Brrp Names. By the Key. Coartus Swainson. 12s,

Four Dratecr Worps—Clem, Lake, Oss, Nesh. By TxHomas
Hatiam. 4s.

Report on Drarecran Work. From May ’85 to May ’86. By
A. J. Exuis, F.R.S. (Miscellanies, No. 5). 2s.

Gtossary oF West Somerset Worps. By F. T. Exworruy. 20s.
Cursutre Grossary. By. R. Horrann. Part III. completing
the work. 6s.

S.W. Lincornsutre Grossary (Wapentake of Graffoe). By the
Rey. R. EK. Cone. 7s. 6d.

78 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.,

53. Tun Forx Sreecu or Sourn Cursuire. By Tuomas Dartineton. 15s.

54, A Dicrionary or THE Keyriso Diatect. By the Rev. W. D.
Panisy and the Rev. W. Frank Suaw. 10s.

55. Sxconp Report on Dratecrat Work. From May ’86 to May ’87.
By A. J. Exuis, F.R.S. (Miscellanies, No. 6). 2s.

Freeman.—On Sprrcn Formation as THE Basts ror True SPELLING.
By H. Frezman. Crown 8vo. pp. viii--88, cloth. 3s. 6d.

Furnivall.—Epvoatron in Earry Eneranp. Some Notes used as
Forewords to a Collection of Treatises on ‘‘Mannersand Meals in the Olden
Time,’’? for the Early English Text Society. By F. J. Furntvart, M.A.
8vo. sewed, pp. 74. 1s.

Garlanda.—Tue Fortunes or Worps. Letters to a Lady. By
Frperico GAkLANDA, Ph.D. Crown 8vo. pp. vi.—-226, cloth. 1888. 5s.

Garlanda.—Tue Puinosopny or Worps. A Popular Introduction to
the Science of Language. By Frprrico GarzanpA, Ph.D. Crown 8yvo. pp.
vi.-294, cloth. 1888. 5s.

Gould.—Goop Enexisx; or, Popular Errors in Language. By E. S$.
Goutp. Revised Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. xil. and 214. 1850. 6s.

Hall.—On Enerisa Apsectives In -ABLE, with Special Reference to
REvraBLE. By Frrzepwarp Hatt, C.E., M.A., Hon. D.C.L. Oxon. Crown
8vo. cloth, pp. vili. and 238. 1877. 7s. 6d.

Hall.—Moprrn Enerisu. By Frrzepwarp Hatt, M.A., Hon. D.C.L.,
Oxon. Cr. 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 394. 1873, 10s. 6d.

Jackson.—SurorsuirE Worp-Boox; A Glossary of Archaic and Pro-

vincial Words, etc., used in the County. By Georgina F. Jackson. 8vo. pp.
xevi. and 524, 1881. 31s. 6d.

Manipulus Vocabulorum.—A Rhyming Dictionary of the English
Language. By Peter Levins(1570) Edited, with an Alphabetical Index, by
Henry B, WHEATLEY. 8vo. pp. Xvi. and 370, cloth. 14s.

Manning.—Awn Ineurry INTO THE CHARACTER AND ORIGIN OF THE
Possesstve AuGMENT in English and in Cognate Dialects. By the late
James Mannine, Q.A.S., Recorder of Oxford. 8vo.pp.iv.and 90. Qs.

Percy.—Bisnor Prrcy’s Forro Manuscripts—Battaps anp Romances.
Edited by John W. Hales, M.A.,, Fellow and late Assistant Tutor of Christ’s
College, Cambridge; and Frederick J. Furnivall, M.A., of Trinity Hall, Cam-
bridge; assisted by Professor Child, of Harvard University, Cambridge, U.S.A.,
W. Chappell, Esq., etc. In 3 volumes. Vol. I., pp. 610; Vol. 2, pp. 681. ;
Vol. 3, pp. 640. Demy 8vo. half-bound, £4 4s. Extra demy 8vo. half-bound
on he ret 05" paper, £6 6s, Extra royal 8vo., paper covers, on What
man’s best ribbed paper, £10 10s. Large 4to., paper cover :
best ribbed paper, £12. : j eee ae

Philological Society. Transactions of the, contains several valuable
Papers on Early English. For contents see page 21.

Shakespeare-Notes.—By F. A. Leo. Demy 8vo. pp. viii. and 120
cloth. 1885. 6s. ;

Stratmann.—A Dicrionary or THE Otp Enerisnh LANGUAGE. Compiled
from the writings of the xiith, xivth, and xvth centuries. By Francis
Henry Srrarmann. 38rd Edition. 4to. with Supplement. In wrapper. £1 16s.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. is)

Stratmann.—An Oxp Enetrsu Porm or THE Own AND tHE NIGHTINGALE
Edited by Francts Henry Stratmann. 8vo. cloth, pp. 60. 3s.

Turner.—Tue Enerisn Lanevacr. A Concise History of the English
Language, with a Glossary showing the Derivation and Pronunciation of the
English Words. By R. Turner. In German and English on opposite pages.
18mo. sewed, pp. vili. and 80. 1884. 1s. 6d.

Wedgwood.—A Dictionary or Enetish Erymotoey. By Henstricu
Wepewoop. Third revised Edition. With an Introduction on the Formation
of Language. Imperial 8vo., double column, pp. Ixxii. and 746. 21s.

Wright.—Ferupat Manvats or Enerise History. A Series of
Popular Sketches of our National History, compiled at different periods, from
the Thirteenth Century to the Fifteenth, for the use of the Feudal Gentry and
Nobility. (In Old French). Now first edited from the Original Manuscripts. By
THomas Wricut, Esq., M.A. Small 4to. cloth, pp. xxiv. and 184. 1872. 15s:

Wright.—Ane1o-Saxon anp Oxp-Enenise Vocasutaries, Illustrating
the Condition and Manners of our Forefathers, as well as the History of the
Forms of Elementary Education, and of the Languages Spoken in this Island
from the Tenth Century to the Fifteenth. Edited by Toomas Wricut, Esq.,
M.A., F.S.A., ete. Second Edition, edited and collated, by Ricuarp WuLCKER.
2 vols. 8vo. pp. xx.-408, and iv.-486, cloth. 1884. 28s.

Wright.— Crtr, Roman, anp Saxon. See page 41.

FRISIAN.

Cummins.—A Grammar or THE Otp Frinstc Lanevace. By A. H.
Cummins, A.M. Second Edition, with Reading Book, Glossary, ete. Crown
8yo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 130. 1887. 6s.

Oera Linda Book, from a Manuscript of the Thirteenth Century,
with the permission of the Proprietor, C. Over de Linden, of the Helder
The Original Frisian Text, as verified by Dr. J. O. Orrema; accompanied
by an English Version of Dr. Ottema’s Dutch Translation, by Winuram R.,
SanpBacu. 8yo. cl. pp. xxvil. and 223. 6s.

GAUDIAN (See under ‘‘ Horrntz,”’ page 42.)

OLD GERMAN.

Kroeger.—Tne Mrynestnerr or Germany. By A. E. Krozaer. 12mo.
cloth, pp. vi. and 284. 7s.

Conrents.—Chapter I. The Minnesinger and the Minnesong.—IT. The Minnelay.—III. The
Divine Minnesong.—l1V. Walther von der Vogelweide.—V. Ulrich von Lichtenstein.—VI, The
Metrical Romances of the Minnesinger and Gottfried von Strassburg’s *’ Tristan and Isolde.”

GLPSY;
Leland.—Tar Encrisa Girstes anp THEIR Lanevacr. By Cares
G. Letanp. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 276. 7s. 6d.

Leland.—Tne Gyprsrus.—By 0. G. Lenanp, Crown 8yo. pp. 872,
cloth. 1882. 10s. 6d.

80 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.

Paspati.—Erupes suk Les TourncHranés (GypstEs) ov BoHEMIENS DE
L’Empree Orroman. Par ALEXANDRE G. Paspatr, M.D. Large 8vo. sewed,
pp- xii. and 652. Constantinople, 1871. 28s.

GOTHIC.

Skeat.—A Morso-Gorntc Grossary, with an Introduction, an Outline
pf Moeso-Gothic Grammar, and a List of Anglo-Saxon and Modern English
Words etymologically connected with Moeso-Gothic. By the Rev. W. W.
Sxnat. Small 4to. cloth, pp. xxiv.and 342. 1868. 9s.

GREEK (Mopern anv Crassic).

Bizyenos—ATOIAES AYPAI Porms. By M. Bizyenos. With Frontis-
piece Etched by Prof. A. Legros. Royal Svo. pp. viii.-312. Printed on
hand-made paper, and richly bound. 1884. £1 11s. 6d.

Buttmann.—A Grammar or tHE New Testament Greex. By A.
Burrmann. Authorized translation by Prof J. H. Thayer, with numerous
additions and corrections by the author. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xx. and 474,
187 . 14s.

Byrne.—Oxicin or THE Greex, Latin anp Goruic Roots. By James
Byrne, M.A. Demy 8vo. pp. viii. and 360, cloth. 1887. 18s.

Contopoulos.—A Lexicon or Moprrn Grerx-Enetish anp EncLisn
Moprern Greek. By N. Conroprovutos. In 2 vols. 8vo. cloth. Part I.
a Greek-English, pp. 460. Part II. English-Modern Greek, pp. 582.
21 7s,

Contopoulos.—Hawnpsoox or Greek and Encrisa Dratoeurs anp Cor-
RESPONDENCE. F cap. 8vo. cloth, pp. 288. 1879, 2s. 6d.

Edmonds.—Grrex Lays, Ipyrtrs, Lreernps, ete. <A Selection from
Recent and Contemporary Poets. Translated by E. M. Edmonds. With
Introduction and Notes. Crown 8yo. pp. xiv. and 264, cloth. 1885. 6s. 6d.

Gaster.—Izcurster Lectures on Grepxo-Srtavonic Lirrrarure, and
its Relation to the Folk-lore of Europe during the Middle Ages. With two
Appendices and Plates. By M. Gastrzr, Ph.D. Crown 8vo. pp. x. and 230,
cloth. 1887. 7s. 6d.

Geldart.—A Gvipr to Moprrn Gremx. By E. M. Gerparr. Post
8vo. cloth, pp. xl. and 274. 1883. 7s. 6d. Key, cloth, pp. 28. 2s. 6d.
Geldart.—Sivpririzp Grammar or Moprrn Grerx. By E. M.

Grtpart, M.A. Crown 8vo. pp. 68, cloth. 1883. 2s. 6d.

Lascarides.—A Comprenensive PurasnonogicaL EncortsH-ANCIENT AND
Moprrn Greek Lexicon. Founded upon a manuscript of G. P. Lascaripzs,
Ksq., and Compiled by L. Myrranruzus, Ph. D. In 2 vols. foolscap 8vo. pp.
Xii. and 1,338, cloth. 1882. £1 10s.

Murdoch.—A Nor on Inpo-Evropran Puonorogy. With Especial
Reference to the True Pronunciation of Ancient Greek. By D. B. Murpocu
L.R.C.P., ete. Demy 8vo. pp. 40, wrapper. 1887. ls. 6d. :

Newman.—Comments on top Trxr or Aiscuytus. By F. W. Newman.
Demy 8vo. pp. xii. and 144, cloth. 1884. 5s.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 81

Sophocles. —Romarc on Moprrn Greex Grammar. By E. A. Sopnoctrns.
8vo. pp. xxviii. and 196. 10s. 6d.
Sophocles.—Greex Lexicon or tHe Roman anp Byzantine Pertops

(From x.c. 146 to a.p. 1100), By E. A. Sopnocuzs. Super-royal 8vo. pp.
Xvi.-1188, half-bound, cloth sides. 652s. 6d.

GUJARATI.
Catalogue of Gujarati Books sold by Messrs. Trtibner and Oo, post free for penny stamp.

Minocheherji.—Pantavi, Gusardrr anp Enetise Dicorronary. By
Jamasps1 Dastur Minocuenerst Jamase Asana. 8vo. Vol. I., pp. clxii.
and 1 to 168. Vol. Il., pp. xxxii and pp. 169 to 440. 1877 and 1879. Cloth.
14s. each. (To be completed in 5 vols.)

Shapurji Edaljii—A Grammar or tue Gusardrf Lanevacr. By
SuApursi Eparsf. Cloth, pp.127. 10s. 6d.

Shapurji EdaljiA Dicrionary, Gusaratt anp Enerisn. By Sudpursi
Epatsi. Second Edition. Crown 8yo. cloth, pp. xxiv. and 874. 2ls,

GURMUKHI (Punsast).

Adi Granth (The); or, Tue Hoty Scriprures or tHe Srxus, trans-
lated from the original Gurmuki, with Introductory Essays, by Dr. Ernest
Trumpp, Munich. Roy. 8yo. pp. 866, cloth. £2 12s. 6d.

Singh.—_Saxuee Boor; or, The Description of Gooroo Gobind Singh’s
Religion and Doctrines, translated from Gooroo Mukhi into Hindi, and after-
wards into English. By Srrpar Arrar Sincu, Chief of Bhadour. With the
author’s photograph. 8vo. pp. xviii. and 205. 145s.

HAWAIIAN.

Andrews.—A Drcrronary or THE HawartAn Lanevacr, to which is
appended an English-Hawaiian Vocabulary, and a Chronological Table of
Remarkable Events. By Lorrin ANprews. 8vo. pp. 560, cloth. £1 11s. 6d.

HEBREW.

Bickell.—Ovurrines oF Hesrew Grammar. By Gusravus BicKert,
D.D. Revised by the Author; Annotated by the Translator, Samunn Ivus
Curtiss, junior, Ph.D. With a Lithographic Table of Semitic Characters by
Dr. J. Eurine. Cr. 8yo.sd., pp. xiv. and 140. 1877. 3s. 6d.

Collins.-- A Grammar anv Lexicon or tHe Hesrew Lanevaes, entitled
Sefer Hassoham. Bv Raspr Moseu Ben Yrrsuax, of England. Edited from
a MS. in the Bodleian Library of Oxford, and collated with a MS. in the
Imperial Library of St. Petersburg, with Additions and Corrections. By G,
W. Coxuns, M.A., Corpus Christi College, Camb., Hon. Hebrew Lecturer,
Keble College, Oxford. Part I. 4to. pp. 112, wrapper. 1884. 7s. 6d.

Gesenius.—Hersrew anv Eneriseh Lexicon or THE OLp Testament,
including the Biblical Chaldee, from the Latin. By Epwarp Rostnson.

Fifth Edition. 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 1160. £1 16s.
6

82 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Oo.

Gesenius.—Husrew Grammar. Translated from the Seventeenth
Edition. By Dr. T. J. Conant. With Grammatical Exercises, and a
Chrestomathy by the Translator. 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi—364. £1.

Hebrew Literature Society (Publications of the).

First Serves.

Vol. I. Miscellany of Hebrew Literature. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and
228. 10s.

Vol. Il. The Commentary of Ibn Ezra on Isaiah. Edited from MSS., and
Translated with Notes, Introductions, and Indexes, by M. FRiEpLaNDER,
Ph.D. Vol. I. Translation of the Commentary. Demy 8vo. cloth,
pp. xxviii. and 3382. 10s. 6d.

Vol. IIL. The Commentary of Ibn Ezra. Vol. II. The Anglican Version of
the Book of the Prophet Isaiah amended according to the Commentary of
Ibn Ezra. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. 112. 4s. 6d.

Second Series.

Vol. I. Miscellany of Hebrew Literature. Vol. II. Edited by the Rev. A.
Lowy. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. vi. and 276. 10s. 6d.
Vol. Il. The Commentary of Ibn Ezra. Vol. III. Demy 8vo. cloth,
pp. 172. 7s.
Vol. III. Ibn Ezra Literature. Vol. IV. Essays on the Writings of Abraham
Ibn Ezra. By M. FrrepuanpEer, Ph.D. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. x.—252

and78. 12s. 6d.
Third Series.

Vols. I.-III. The Guide of the Perplexed of Maimonides. Translated from the
original text and annotated by M. Friedlander, Ph.D. Demy 8vo. pp. Ixxx.
—270, and x.— 226, and xxvill.— 328, cloth. £1 Ils. 6d.

Hershon.—Tatmvupic Miscertany. See ‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,”’
page 4.

Jastrow.—A Dicrionary or THE Tarcumim, THE Tatmup Basii AND
Yerushalmi, and the Midrashic Literature. Compiled by M. Jastrow, Ph.D.
Demy 4to. boards. Part I. pp.100. 5s. Part II. pp. 96. 4s.

Land.—Tue Principres or Hesrew Grammar. By J. P. N. Lanp,
Professor of Logic and Metaphysic in the University of Leyden. Translated
from the Dutch by Rueryatp Lanz Poors, Balliol College, Oxford. Part I.
Sounds. Part Il. Words. Crown 8vo. pp. xx. and 220, cloth. 7s. 6d.

Mathews.—AsBrauAm BEN Ezra’s Unepitep ComMEeNnTARY oN THE CAN-
tictrs, the Hebrew Text after two MS., with English Translation by H. J.
Marnews, B.A., Exeter College, Oxford. 8vo. cl. limp, pp. x., 34, 24. 2s. 6d.

Nutt.—T'wo Treatisrs on VERBS contarnrne Frerste anp DovetE
Lerrers by R. Jehuda Hayug of Fez, translated into Hebrew from the original
Arabic by R. Moses Gikatilia, of Cordova; with the Treatise on Punctuation
by ue gee econ ae Aben Ezra. Edited from Bodleian MSS.
with an English Translation by J. W. Nurr, M.A. Demy 8vo. 32
Re. ee ; y 8vo. sewed, pp. 312.

Semitic (Songs of the). In English Verse. By G. E. W. Cr. 8vo.
cloth, pp. 140. ds.

Weber.—System der altsynagogalen Palastinischen Theologie. By
Dr. Frrp. WEBER. 8vo. sewed. Leipzig, 1880. 7s, :

——

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 83

HINDI.
Catalogue of Hindi Books sold by Messrs. Triibner and Co. post Sree for penny stamp.

Ballantyne.—Etements or Hinpfanp Bras Buixi Grammar. By the
late James R. Bantantyne, LL.D. Second edition, revised and corrected.
Crown 8vo., pp. 38, cloth. 1868. 5s.

Bate—A Drcrronary or rue Hinprr Lanevaer. Compiled by ‘i
D. Bate. 8vo. cloth, pp. 806. £2 12s. 6d.

Beames.—Norres on tHe Buosruri Drarecr or Hinpi, spoken in
Western Behar. By Joun Bzames, Esq., B.C.S., Magistrate of Chumparun,
8vo. pp. 26, sewed. 1868. Is. 6d.

Browne.— A Hriypr Prrer. In Roman Character. By J. F.
Brownz, B.C.S. Crown 8vo. pp. 36, cloth. 1882. 2s. 6d.

Hoernle.—Hindi Grammar. See page 49.

Kellogg.—A Grammar oF THE Hrypr Lanevaae, in which are treated
the Standard Hindi, Braj, and the Eastern’ Hindi of the Ramayan of Tulsi
Das ; also the Colloquial Dialects of Marwar, Kumaon, Avadh, Baghelkhand,
Bhojpur, ete., with Copious Philological Notes. By the Rev. 8S. H. Kznioce,
M.A. Royal 8vo. cloth, pp. 400. 21s.

Mahabharata. Translated into Hindi for Mapan Monun Buart, by
KRISHNACHANDRADHARMADHIKARIN of Benares. (Containing all but the
Harivansé.) 3 vols. 8vo. cloth, pp. 574, 810, and 1106. £2 2s.

Mathuraprasada Misra.—A Tritrnevat Dictionary, being a Compre-
hensive Lexicon in English, Urdu, and Hindi, exhibiting the Syllabication, Pro-
nunciation, and Etymology of English Words, with their Explanation in English,
and in Urdtiand Hindi in the Roman Character. By MarHuraprasapA Misra,
Second Master, Queen’s College, Benares. 8vo. cloth, pp. xv. and 1380.
Benares, 1865. £1 10s.

HINDUSTANI.

Catalogue of Hindustani Books sold by Messrs. Triibner and Co. post free for penny
stamp.

Ballantyne.—Hrvvsranr Serections in the Naskhi and Devanagari
Character. With a Vocabulary of the Words. Prepared for the use of the
Scottish Naval and Military Academy, by James R. BALLANTYNE. Royal 8vo.
cloth, pp. 74. 3s. 6d.

Craven.—The Popular Dictionary in English and Hindustani and
Hindustani and English, with a Number of Useful Tables. By the Rev. T.
Craven, M.A. Feap. 8vo. pp. 214, cloth. 1882. 3s. 6d.

Dowson.—A Grammar of the Urdu or Hindustani Language. By
J. Dowson. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, pp. xvi. and 264, cloth, 1887. 10s. 6d.

Dowson.—A Hryvustant Exercise Boox. Containing a Series of
Passages and Extracts adapted for Translation into Hindustani. By Jonn
Dowson, M.R.A.S. Crown 8vo. pp. 100, limp cloth. 2s. 6d.

Eastwick.—Kurrap Arroz (The Illuminator of the Understanding).
By Maulavi Hafizu’d-din. A New Edition of Hinddstani Text, carefully revised,
with Notes, Critical and Explanatory. By Epwarp B. Hasrwick, F.R.8.,
Imperial 8vo. cloth, pp. xiv. and 319. Re-issue, 1867. 18s,

84 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.

Fallon.—A New Huiyovsrant-Enetisn Dicrionary. With Ilustra-
tions from Hindustani Literature and Folk-lore. By 8. W. Fatton, Ph.D.
Halle. Roy. 8vo. cloth, pp. xxviii. and 1216 and x. Benares, 1879. £3 10s.

Fallon.— Enerisu-Hinpustanr Dictionary. With Illustrations from
English Literature and Colloquial English Translated into Hindustani. By S.
W. Fatton. Roy. 8vo. pp. iv.-674, sewed. £1 10s.

Fallon.—A Huinpustant-Enetish Law anp CommerrctaL Dictionary.
By S. W. Fatton. 8vo. cloth, pp. ii. and 284, Benares, 1879. 12s. 6d.
Ikhwanu-s Safi; or, Brorners or Puriry. Describing the Contention
between Men and Bea-ts as to the Superiority of the Human Race. Translated
from the Hindustani by Professor J. Dowson, Staff College, Sandhurst.

Crown 8vo. pp. viii. and 156, cloth. 7s. ;

Khirad-Afroz (The Illuminator of the Understanding). By Maulavi
Hafizu’d din. A new edition of the Hindastani Text, carefully revised, with
Notes, Critical and Explanatory. By E. B. Eastwick, M.P.,F.R.S. 8vo.
cloth, pp. xiv. and 321. 18s.

Lutaifi Hindee (The); or, Hiypoosranze Just-Boox, containing a
Choice Collection of Humorous Stories in the Arabic and Roman Characters ;
to which is added a Hindoostanee Poem by MrzER MoonumMMuD TuQUvEE.
2nd edition, revised by W. C. Smyth. 8vo. pp. xvi. and 160. 1840. 10s. 6d. ;
reduced to ds.

Mathuraprasida Misra.—A Tririnevat Dricrronary, being a compre-
hensive Lexicon in English, UrdG, and Hindi. See under Hindi, page 83.

Palmer.—Hinpusrani Grammar. See page 56.

HUNGARIAN.

Singer.—Srueiirmap Grammar or THE Huneartan Lanevace. B
I. Singer, of Buda-Pesth. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. vi. and 88. 1884. 4s. 6d.

ICELANDIC.

Anderson.—Norsz Myruotoey, or the Religion of our Forefathers.
Containing all the Myths of the Eddas carefully systematized and interpreted,
with an Introduction, Vocabulary and Index. By R. B. Anpprson, Prof. of
Scandinavian Languages in the University of Wisconsin. Crown 8yo. cloth.
Chicago, 1879. 12s. 6d.

Anderson and Bjarnason.—Vixtve Tates or rox Norra. The Sagas
of Thorstein, Viking’s Son, and Fridthjof the Bold. Translated from the
Icelandic by R. B. Anderson, M.A., and J. Bjarnason. Also, Tegner’s Frid-
thjof’s Saga. Translated into English by G. Stephens. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp.
xviii. and 370. Chicago, 1877. 10s.

Cleasby.—Aw Icrtanpic-Ene1ise Drcrionary. Based on the MS.
Collections of the late Richard Cleasby. Enlarged and completed by. G.

Vicrtsson. With an Introduction, and Life of Richard Cleasby, by G. WEBBE
Daszent, D.C... 4to. £3 7s.

Cleathycn AueenTs TO AN Icrtanpic-Enertsn Dicrionary. See
Skeat.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, F.C. 85

Edda Saemundar Hinns Froda—The Edda of Saemund the Learned.
From the Old Norse or Icelandic. By Bensamin Tuorpe. Part II. with Index
of Persons and Places. 12mo. pp. viii. and 172, cloth. 1866. 4s.

Publications of the Icelandic Literary Society of Copenhagen. For
Numbers 1 to 54, see “ Record,’ No. 111, p. 14.

55. Skinner Tiprnpr. Hins Islenzka Békmentafélags, 1878. 8vo.
pp. 176. Kaupmannahdéfn, 1878. Price 5s,

56. Um Srpsorrna 4 Istanvr eptir Porkel Bjarnason, prest 4 Reyni-
vollum. Utgefid af Hinu Islenzka Bokmentafélagi, 8vo. pp. 177. Reyk-
jJavik, 1878. Price 7s. 6d.

57. Biskupa Sdeur, gefnar tt af Hinu [slenzka Békmentafélagi.
Annat Bindi III, 1878, 8vo. pp. 509 to 804. Kaupmannahéfn. Price 10s.

58. Sxyrstur o¢ Rercninear Hins Islenzka Békmentafélags, 1877 to
1878. 8vo. pp. 28. Kaupmannahéfn, 1878. Price 2s.

59. Frsertrr Fra Istanpr, 1877, eptir V. Briem. 8vo. pp. 50.
Reykjavik, 1878. Price 2s. 6d. r

60. AxpinerssrapuR Hryn Forni Vin Oxara, med Uppdrattum eptir
Sigurd Gudmundsson. 8vo. pp. 66, with Map. Kaupmannahéfn, 1878. Price
6s.

Skeat.—A List or Enerish Worps, the Etymology of which is illus-
trated by Comparison with Icelandic. Prepared in the form of an Appendix to
Cleasby and Vigfusson’s Icelandic-English Dictionary. By the Rev. WaLTER
W. Sxeat, M.A., English Lecturer and late Fellow of Christ’s College, Cam-
bridge; and M.A. of Exeter College, Oxford; one of the Vice-Presidents of
the Cambridge Philological Society ; and Member of the Council of the Philo-
logical Society of London. 1876. Demy 4to. sewed. 2s.

Tegner.—Friptusor’s Saga, A Norse Romance. By Esatas Tren,
Bishop of Wexid. Translated from the Swedish by Tuomas A. E. Hotcoms
and Marra A. Lyon Hoxtcoms. Crown 8yo. pp. viil.-214, cloth. 1883.
6s. 6d.

Thorhelson, Pall.—Dricrionnatre Istanpats-Francats. Vol. 1. Part
I. 8vo. pp. 32. To be completed in about 50 parts. Price 1s. each.

JAPANESE.

Aston.—A Grammar or THE Japanese Warrren Lanevacu. By W. G.
Aston, M.A., Assistant Japanese Secretary, H.B.M.’s Legation, Yedo, Japan.
Second edition, Enlarged and Improved. Royal 8vo. pp. 3806. 28s.

Aston.—A Snort Grammar oF THE JAPANESE Spoken Lanevace. By
W. G. Aston, M.A., H. B. M.’s Legation, Yedo, Japan. Third edition.
12mo. cloth, pp. 96. 12s.

Black.—Youne Japan, Yoxouama anp Yepo. A Narrative of the
Settlement and the City, from the Signing of the Treaties in 1858 to the close
of the Year 1879. With a Glance at the Progress of Japan during a period of
Twenty-one Years. By J. R. Buacx. Two Vols., demy 8vo. pp. xviii. and 418 ;
xiv. and 522, cloth. 1881. £2 2s.

Chamberlain. — A Romantsen Japanese Reaper. Consisting of
Japanese Anecdotes, Maxims, etc., in Easy Written Style; with English
Translation and Notes. By B. H. Cuamperuarn, Professor of Japanese and
Philology in the Imperial University of Tokyo. 12mo. pp. xlii—346, cloth.
1886. 6s.

86 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.

Chamberlain.—Srvprirrep Japanese Grammar. See page 50.
Chamberlain.—-CiasstcaL Porrry oF THE Japanese. See page 4.

Dickins—Tue Oxp Bamsoo-Huwzr’s Srory (Taketori no Okina
no Monogatari). The Earliest of the Japanese Romances, written in the
Tenth Century. Translated, with Observations and Notes, by F. Vicror
Dickxins. With Three Chromo-Lithographic Illustrations taken from
Japanese Makimonos, to which is added the Original Text in Roman, with
Grammar, Analytical Notes and Vocabulary. 8vo. cl., pp. 118. 1888. 7s. 6d.

Hepburn.—A Japanese anv Eyerisn Dicrionary. With an English
and Japanese Index. By J. C. Hepsurn, M.D., LL.D. Second edition.
Imperial 8vo. cloth, pp. xxxii., 632 and 201. 18s.

Hepburn.—A Japanese-Enerish anp Enetisu-Japanese Dictionary.
By J. C. Hupsurn, M.D., LL.D. Third Edition, demy 8vo. pp. xxxiv.—964,
half-morocco. 1887. £1 10s.

Hepburn.—A Japanuse-Eneiish and EnerisH-JapanesE DIcTionaRY.
By J. C. Hepsurn, M.D., LL.D. Abridged by the Author. Second Edition,
Revised and Enlarged. 16mo. cloth, pp. vili. and 1083. 1887. 14s.

Hoffmann, J. J.—A Japanese Grammar. Second Edition. Large
8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 368, with two plates. £1 1s.

Hoffmann.—Suorrine Driatocuxs, in Japanese, Dutch, and English.
By Professor J. Horrmann. Oblong 8vo. pp. xiii. and 44, sewed. s.

Hoffmann (Prof. Dr. J. J.)\—Japanusn-Enetise Dicrionary.—Pub-
lished by order of the Dutch Government. Elaborated and Edited by Dr. L.
Serrurier. Vols. 1 and 2. Royal 8vo. Brill, 1881. 12s. 6d.

Imbrie.— Hanproox or Enetisu-Japanese Erymotogy. By W.
Impriz. 8yo. pp. xxiv. and 208, cloth. Tokiyd, 1880. £1 ls.

Metchnikoff.—L’ Empire Japonais, texte et dessins, par L. Merrcu-
NIkorr. 4to. pp. villi. and 694. Illustrated with maps, coloured plates and
woodcuts. cloth. 1881. £1 10s.

Pfoundes.—Fvu So Mimz Buxvro. See page 37.

Satow.—Awn Enexisu Japanzse Dictionary oF THE Spoxen Lanevace.
By Ernest Mason Sarow, Japanese Secretary to H.M. Legation at Yedo, and
Isuipasu1 Masaxara, of the Imperial Japanese Foreign Office. Second
edition. Imp. 32mo., pp. xvi. and 416, cloth. 12s. 6d.

Suyematz.—Gurnsr Monocarart. The most celebrated of the Classical

Japanese Romances. Translated by K. Suyzmarz. Crown 8yo. pp. xvi. and
254, cloth. 1882. 7s. 6d.

KABAIL,

Newman.—Kasar Vocanvnary. Supplemented by Aid of a New

Source. By F. W. Nuwman, Emeritus Professor of University College
London. Crown 8vo., pp. 124, cloth. 1888. 5s. :

KANARESE.

Garrett.—A Manvat Enouisn anp Kanarzsr Dicrronary, containing

about Twenty-three Thousand Words. By J. Garrerr, 8
Bangalore, 1872. 18s. : “rich RB

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 87
KAYATHI.

Grierson——A Hanpsoox ro tHe Kayarur Cuaracrer. By G. A.
Grierson, B.C.S., late Subdivisional Officer, Madhubani, Darbhanga. With

Thirty Plates in Facsimile, with Translations. 4to. cloth, pp. vi. and 4.
Calcutta, 1881. 18s.

KELTIC (Cornisu, Gazric, Wetsu, Irisu).

Bottrell—Trapirions anp Heartustpe Stortes or West CornwalLt.
By Witttam Borrrety. With IJllustrations by Mr. Josep Butcur. Crown

8vo. cloth. Second Series, pp. iv. and 300. 6s. Third Series, pp. viii. and
200, cloth. 1880. 6s.

Evans.—Dicrionary oF THE WetsH Lanevacr. By the Rev. D.
Sitvan Evans, B.D., Rector of Llanwrin, N. Wales. Part 1, A—AWYS.
Royal 8yo. pp. 420, paper. 1887. 10s. 6d.

Rhys.—Lectures on WetsH Putrotocy. By Joun Ruys, M.A.,
Professor of Celtic at Oxford. Second revised and enlarged edition. Crown
8vo. cloth, pp. xiv. and 468. 1879.'. 15s.

Spurrell—A Grammar oF THE WetsH Lanevace. By Witt
SPURRELL. 8rd Edition. Feap. cloth, pp. viii.-206. 1870. 3s.

Spurrell—A Wetsu Dicrionary. English-Welsh and Welsh-English.
With Preliminary Observations on the Elementary Sounds of the English
Language, a copious Vocabulary of the Roots of English Words, a list of
Scripture Proper Names and English Synonyms and Explanations. By
‘Wixn.iaM SpuRRELL. Third Edition. Fecap. cloth, pp. xxv. and 732. 8s. 6d.

Stokes.—Gorprerica—Old and Early-Middle Irish Glosses: Prose and
Verse. Edited by Wuittny Stokes. Second edition. Medium 8vo. cloth,
pp. 192. 1872. 18s.

Stokes.—Tocart Trot; The Destruction of Troy. Transcribed from
the fascimile of the Book of Leinster, and Translated, with a Glossarial Index of
the Rare Words, by W. Stoxus. 8vo. pp. xv.-188, boards. 1882. 18s. A
limited edition only, privately printed, Calcutta.

Stokes.—Tue Breron Guossus at Ortrans. By W. Sroxes. 8vo.
pp. x.-78, boards. 1880. 10s. 6d. A limited edition only, privately printed,
Calcutta.

Stokes.—Turep Mippre-Jrisu Homrrtes on the Lives of Saints Patrick,
Brigit, and Columba. By W. Sroxus. 8vo. pp. xii.-140, boards. 1877.
10s. 6d. A limited edition only privately printed, Calcutta.

Stokes.—Brunans Merissux. The Life of Saint Meriasek, Bishop
and Confessor. A Cornish Drama, Edited, with a Translation and Notes, by
Wuittery Sroxes. Medium 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi.-280, and Facsimile. 1872. 15s.

Stokes.—Tue Otp-Inish Gtosszes at Wwtrzpur¢ AND CARLSRUHE.
Edited, with a Translation and Glossarial Index, by Wuittzy Sroxss, D.C.L.,
Part I. The Glosses and Translation. Demy 8vo. pp. viii. and 342, paper.
10s. 6d.

Wright’s Celt, Roman, and Saxon. See page 41.

a TD

88 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

KONKANTI.
MaffeiitA Konxant Grammar. By Aneztus F. X. Marrer. 8vo.
pp- xiv. and 488, cloth. Mangalore, 1882. 18s.

Maffei—An Enexisa-Konxant anp Konxant-EnctisH DIcrionaRy.
8yo. pp. xii. and 546; xii. and 158, Two parts in one. ‘ Half bound. £1 10s.

LIBYAN.

Newman.—Lisyan Vocanutary. An Essay towards Reproducing the
Ancient Numidian Language, out of Four Modern Languages. By F. W.
Newman, Emeritus Professor of University College, London. Crown 8vo. pp.
vi. and 204, cloth. 1882, 10s. 6d.

MAHRATTA (Mararnt).
Catalogue of Marathi Books sold by Messrs. Triibner & Co. post free for penny stamp.

ZEsop’s Fables.—Originally Translated into Marathi by Sadashiva
Kashinath Chhatre. Revised from the Ist ed. 8vo. cloth. Bombay, 1877. 5s. 6d.

Ballantyne.—A Grammar or THE Manrarra Lanevace. For the
use of the East India College at Haileybury. By James R. Batuantyne, of
the Scottish Naval and Military Academy. 4to. cloth, pp. 56. 5s.

Bellairs—A Grammar or THE Mararut Lancuace. By H. S. K.
Beruairs, M.A., and Laxman Y. ASHKEDKAR, B.A. 12mo. cloth, pp.90. 5s.

Molesworth.—A Drcrionary, MAxarurt and Enerise. Compiled by
J.T. Motesworru, assisted by GeorGer and THomas Canpy. Second Edition,
revised and enlarged. By J.T. MoLteswortuH. Royal 4to. pp. xxx and 922,
boards. Bombay, 1857. £2 2s.

Molesworth.—A Comprnpium or MotrswortH’s Maratut and Ene isn
Dictionary. By Basa Papmansr. Second Edition. Revised and Enlarged.
Demy 8vo. pp. xx. and 624, cloth. 14s.

Navalkar.—Tur Sruprnv’s MarAtut Grammar. By G. R. Navarxar.
New Edition. 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 342. Bombay, 1879. 18s.

Tukarama.—A Comptere Correction of the Poems of Tukaérdma
(the Poet of the Maharashtra). In Marathi. Edited by Visunu Parasuv-
ram Suasrri Panprr, under the supervision of Sankar Pandurang Pandit,M.A.
With a complete Index to the Poems and a Glossary of difficult Words. To
which is prefixed a Life of the Poet in English, by Janardan Sakharam GAdgil.

2 vols. in large 8vo. cloth, pp. xxxii. and 742, and pp. 728, 18 and 72. Bombay
1878. £1 1s. each vol.

MALAGASY.
Catalogue of Malagasy Books sold by Messrs. Triibner § Co. post free for penny stamp.

Parker. —A Concisz Grammar or THE Mazacasy Lanevacn. By G.
W. Parker. Crown 8vo. pp. 66, with an Appendix, cloth. 1883. 6s.

Van der Tuuk.—Ovrtives or 4 GRAMMAR oF THE MataGasy LAanguacE
By H. N. van DER TuvK. 8vo., pp. 28, sewed. 1s.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 89

MALAY.
Catalogue of Malay Books sold by Messrs. Triibner § Co. post Sree for penny stamp.

Dennys.—A Hanpsoox or Maray Cortogurat, as spoken in Singapore,
Being a Series of Introductory Lessons for Domestic and Business Purposes.
By N. B. Dennys, Ph.D., F.R.G.S., M.R.A.S., ete., Author of ‘The
Folklore of China,” etc. 8vo. pp. 204, cloth. 1878. £1 1s.

Maxwell.—A Manvat or raz Maray Lanevace. With an Intro-
ductory Sketch of the Sanskrit Element in Malay. By W. E. Maxwett,
Assistant Resident, Perak, Malay Peninsula, Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. viii.-
184e -L882o. 18..6d.

Miscellaneous Papers relating to Indo-China and the Indian
Archipelago. See page 7.

Swettenham.—Vocasutary or tHE Enerish anp Matay Lanevaens.
With Notes. By F.A. Swerrenuam. 2 Vols. Vol. I. English-Malay Vo-
cabulary and Dialogues. Vol. II. Malay-English Vocabulary. Small 8vo.
boards. Singapore, 1881. £1.

The Traveller’s Malay Pronouncing Handbook, for the Use of
es and New-comers to Singapore. 382mo. pp. 251, boards. Singapore,

. s.

Van der Tuuk.—Suort Account or THE MaLay MANUSCRIPTS BELONGING

To THE Royat Asiatic Society. By H.N. vAN pERTuUK. 8vo. pp.52. 2s. 6d.

MALAYALIM.

Gundert.—A Matayatam anp Enertise Dricrronary. By Rev. H.
Gunpvert, D. Ph. Royal 8vo. pp. viii. and 1116. £2 10s.

MAORI.

Grey.—Maorr Mementos: being a Series of Addresses presented by
the Native People to His Excellency Sir George Grey, K.C.B., F.R.S. With
Introductory Remarks and Explanatory Notes; to which is added asmall Collec-
tion of Laments, ete. By Cu. OLiver B. Davis. 8vo. pp.iv.and 228, cloth, 12s.

Williams.—Firsr Lessons in tHe Maort Lanevace. With a Short
Vocabulary. By W. L. Witu1ams, B.A. Feap. 8vo. pp. 98, cloth. 5s.

PALI.

D’Alwis.—A Descriptive Catatocue of Sanskrit, Pali, and Sinhalese
Literary Works of Ceylon. By Jamzs D’Anwis, M.R.A.S., etc., Vol. I. (all
published), pp. xxxil. and 244, 1870. 8s. 6d.

Beal. —Duammapapa. See ‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 3.

Bigandet.—Gavpama. See ‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 4.

Buddhist Birth Stories. See ‘‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 4.

Biihler.—T rere New Epicrs or Agoxa. By G. Biinter. 16mo.
sewed, with Two Facsimiles. 2s. 6d.

Childers.—A Pati-Enetisn Dicrionary, with Sanskrit Equivalents,
and numerous Quotations, Extracts, and References. Compiled by the late Prof.

R. C. Curzpers, late of the Ceylon C. S. Imperial 8vo., double columns, pp.
xxii. and 622, cloth. 1875. £3 8s. The first Pali Dictionary ever published.

90 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Childers.—Tur ManAparrnippAnasurta oF THE Surra-Piraka. The
Pali Text. Edited by the late Professor R. C. CHILDERS. 8vo. cloth, pp.
ieee Ose

Childers —On Sanpur rn Patt. By the late Prof. R. C. CHILDERS.
8vo. sewed, pp. 22. Is.

Coomara Swamy.—Sourra Nirdra; or, the Dialogues and Discourses
of Gotama Buddha, Translated from the Pali, with Introduction and Notes.
By Sir M. Coomara Swamy. Cr. 8yo. cloth, pp. xxxvi. and 160. 1874. 6s.

Cooméra Swamy.—Tur Darudvansa; or, the History of the Tooth-
Relic of Gotama Buddha. The Pali Text and its Translation into English,
with Notes. By Sir M. Coomara Swamy, Mudeliar. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp.
174. 1874. 10s. 6d. English Translation only, with Notes. Pp. 100, cloth. 6s.

Davids.—See Buppuisr Birra Storms, “ Triibner’s Oriental Series,”
page 4. .

Davids.—Sicrr1, tHe Lron Rock, neEAR PULASTIPURA, AND THE 39TH
Cuaprer or THE ManAvamsa. By T. W. Ruys Davins. 8vo. pp. 30. 1s. 6d.

Dickson.— Tur PArrmmoxxna, being the Buddhist Office of the Con-
fession of Priests. The Pali Text, with a Translation, and Notes, by J. F.
Dickson. 8vo.sd., pp. 69. 2s.

Fausboll.—JAraxa. See under JAraxa.
Fausboll.—Tur Dasararna-J MtaKa, being the Buddhist Story of King

Rama. The original Pali lext, with a Translation and Notes by V. FausBo.u.
8vo. sewed, pp. iv. and 48. 2s. 6d.

Fausboll.—Frvz JArakas, containing a Fairy Tale, a Comical Story,
and Three Fables. In the original Pali Text, accompanied with a Translation
and Notes. By V. FausBoLy. 8vo. sewed, pp. viii. and 72. 6s.

Fausboll.——Trw JAraxas, The Original Pali Text, with a Translation
and Notes. By V. FaussoLu. 8vo. sewed, pp. xiii. and 128. 7s. 6d.

Fryer.—Vorropaya. (Exposition of Metre.) By SanewaRaAKKHITA

Tupra. A Pali Text, Edited, with Translation and Notes, by Major G. E.
Fryer. 8vo. pp. 44. 2s. 6d.

Haas.—CatatocuE oF Sanskrit anp Patt Booxs In THE LIBRARY OF

tHe Brirish Muszum. By Dr. Ernst Haas. Printed by Permission of the
Trustees of the British Museum. 4to. cloth, pp. 200. £1 1s.

Jataka (The); together with its Commentary. Being Tales of the
Anterior Birth of Gotama Buddha. For the first time Edited in the original
Pali by V. Fauspot1. Demy 8vo. cloth. Vol. I. pp. 512. 1877. 28s.
Vol. II., pp. 452. -1879. 28s. Vol. III. pp. viii.-544. 1883. 28s. Vol.

IV. pp. x.-450. 1887. 28s. For Translation see under ‘‘ Buddhist Birth
Stories,” page 4.

The ‘‘Jataka” is a collection of legends in Pali, relating the history of Buddha’s trans-
migration before he was born as Gotama. The great antiquity of this work is authenticated
by its forming part of the sacred canon of the Southern Buddbists, which was finally settled at
the last Council in 246 B.c. ‘he coliection has long been known as a storehouse of ancient
fables, and as the most original attainable source to which almost the whole of this kind of
literature, from the Panchatantra and Pilpay’s fables down to the nursery stories of the present
day, is traceable; and it has been considered desirable, in the interest of Buddhistie studies as
well as for more general literary purposes, that an edition and translation of the complete
work should be prepared, The present publication is intended to supply this want.—Atheneum.

, 57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 91

Mahawansa (The)—Tue Manawaysa. From the Thirty-Seventh
Chapter. Revised and edited, under orders of the Ceylon Government, by
H. Sumaneata, and Don Anpris pE Sinva Baruwantupawa. Vol. I. Pali
Text in Sinhalese character, pp. xxxii. and 436. Vol. II. Sinhalese Transla-
tion, pp. lii. and 378 half-bound. Colombo, 1877. £2 2s.

Mason.—Tue Pari Texr or Kacucnayano’s Grammar, wit ENGLISH
Anwnorations. By Francots Mason, D.D. I. The Text Aphorisms, 1 to 673.
Il. The English Annotations, including the various Readings of six independent
Burmese Manuscripts, the Singalese Text on Verbs, and the Cambodian Text
on Syntax. To which is added a Concordance of the Aphorisms. In Two
Parts. 8vo. sewed, pp. 208, 75, and 28. Toongoo, 1871. #£1 lls. 6d.

Minayeff.—Grammarre Parie. Esquisse d’une Phonétique et d’une
Morphologie de la Langue Palie. Traduite du Russe par St. Guyard. By
J. Minaverr. 8yo. pp. 128. Paris, 1874. 8s.

Miller.—Sivetiriep Grawmar or tHE Part Lanevacr. By E. Miitrer,
Crown 8yo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 144. 1884. 7s. 6d.

Senart.— KaccAyana Er ta Lirrérarure Grammaricate pv PAtt.
Ire Partie. Grammaire Palie de Kaccayana, Sutras et Commentaire, publiés
avec une traduction et des notes par KE. Senart. 8yo. pp. 338. Paris, 1871.
12s.

PAZAND.
Maino-i-Khard (The Book of the).—The Pazand and Sanskrit

Texts (in Roman characters) as arranged by Neriosengh Dhaval, in the
fifteenth century. With an English translation, a Glossary of the Pazand
texts, containing the Sanskrit, Rosian, and Pahlavi equivalents, a sketch of
Pazand Grammar, and an Introduction. By E. W. Wezsr. 8vo. sewed, pp.
484. 1871. 16s.

PEGUAN.

Haswell.—Grammatican Nores anp VocaBULARY OF THE Pravan
Laneuacs. To which are added a few pages of Phrases, ete. By Rev. J. M.
HASWELL. 8vo. pp. xvi. and 160. 15s. Z

PEHLEWI.
Dinkard (The).—The Original Pehlwi Text, the same transliterated

in Zend Characters. Translations of the Text in the Gujrati and English
Languages; a Commentary and Glossary of Select Terms. By Prsnorun
Dustoor BEHRAMJEE SUNJANA. Vols. I. andII. 8vo.cloth. £2 2s.

Haug.—Awn Oxp Pantavi-Pazanp Grossary. Ed., with Alphabetical
Index, by Destur Hoswanasi Jamaspsi Asa, High Priest of the Parsis in
Malwa. Rev. and Enl., with Intro. Essay on the Pahlavi Language, by M. Have,
Ph.D. Pub. by order of Gov. of Bombay. 8vo. pp. Xvi. 152, 268,sd. 1870. 28s.

Haug.—A Lecrure on an Orretnat Sperce or Zoroaster (Yasna 45),
with remarks on his age. By Martin Have, Ph.D. 8vo. pp. 28, sewed.
Bombay, 1865. 2s. :

Haug.—Tuez Parsis. See ‘‘Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 3.

92 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Haug.—Aw Orp Zanp-Pantavi Grossary. Edited in the Original
Characters, with a Transliteration in Roman Letters, an English Translation,
and an Alphabetical Index. By Dustur Hosuencst Jamaspsi, High-priest of
the Parsis in Malwa, India. Rev. with Notes and Intro. by Martin Have,
Ph.D. Publ. by order of Gov. of Bombay. 8vo.sewed, pp. lvi.and 132. lds.

Haug.—Tue Boox or Arpa Virar. The Pahlavi text prepared by
Destur Hoshangji Jamaspji Asa. Revised and collated with further MSS., with
an English translation and Introduction, and an Appendix containing the Texts
and Translations of the Gosht-i Fryano and Hadokht Nask. By Martin
Have, Ph.D., Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Philology at the Uni-
versity of Munich. Assisted by E. W. Wxst, Ph.D. Published by order of
the Bombay Government. 8vo. sewed, pp. Ixxx., v., and 316. £1 ds.

Minocheherji—Pantavr, Gusardtt anp Eneutsn Dicrronary. By
Jamaspst Dastur Mrnocurrs1, Jamasp Asana, 8vo. Vol. I. pp. clxii.
and 1 to 168, and Vol. II. pp. xxxii. and pp. 169 to 440. 1877 and 1879.
Cloth. 14s. each. (To be completed in 6 vols.)

Sunjana.—A Grammar or THE Pautyr Lanevaer, with Quotations
and Examples from Original Works and a Glossary of Words bearing affinity
with the Semitic Languages. By Prsnotun Dusroor BEHRAMJEE SUNJANA,
Principal of Sir Jamsetjee Jejeeboy Zurthosi Madressa. 8vo.cl., pp. 18-457.
258.

Thomas.—Earty Sassanran Inscrretions, Szats AND Corns, illustrating
the Early History of the Sassanian Dynasty, containing Proclamations of Arde-
shir Babek, Sapor I., and his Successors. With a Critical Examination and
Explanation of the Celebrated Inscription in the Hajiabad Cave, demonstrating
that Sapor, the Conqueror of Valerian, was a Professing Christian. By Epwarp
Tuomas, F.R.S. Illustrated. 8vo. cloth, pp. 148. 7s. 6d.

Thomas.—Comments on Recent Pestyr DecipHerments. With an
Incidental Sketch of the Derivation of Aryan Alphabets, and Contributions to
the Early History and Geography of Tabaristan. Illustrated by Coins. By
Epwarp Tuomas, F.R.S. 8vo. pp. 56, and 2 plates, cloth, sewed. 3s. 6d.

West.—Grossary anp Inpex or ton Pantavr Texts or.THE Boox oF
Arda Viraf, The Tale of Gosht-I Fryano, The Hadokht Nask, and to some
extracts from the Din-Kard and Nirangistan ; prepared from Destur Hoshangji
Asa’s Glossary to the Arda Viraf Namak, and from the Original Texts, with
Notes on Pahlavi Grammar. By E. W. West, Ph.D. Revised by Martin
Have, Ph.D. Published by order of the Government of Bombay. 8vo. sewed,
pp. vili, and 352. 25s.

PENNSYLVANIA DUTCH.
Haldeman. — Prnnsytvania Dutcu: a Dialect of South Germany
with an Infusion of English, By S. 8S. Hatpeman, A.M., Professor of Com—

parative Philology in the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. 8vo. pp:
viii. and 70, cloth. 1872. 3s. 6d.

PERSIAN.

Ballantyne.—Privcrrtes oF Purrstan Carieraruy, illustrated by
Lithographic Plates of the TA” LIK characters, the one usually employed in
writing the Persian and the Hindiistani. Second edition. Prepared for the
use of the Scottish Naval and Military Academy, by Jamns R. BALLANTYNE
4to. cloth, pp. 14, 6 plates. 2s. 6d. :

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 98

Blochmann.—Tur Prosopy or THe Persrans, according to Saifi, Jami,
and other Writers. By H. Brocumann, M.A., Assistant Professor, Calcutta
Madrasah. 8vo. sewed, pp. 166. 10s. 6d.

Blochmann.—A Treatisr oN THE Rvupa’s entitled Risalah i Taranah.
By Acua AumaD ’AxrI. With an Introduction and Explanatory Notes, by H.
Brocumann, M.A. 8vo. sewed, pp. ll and 17. 2s. 6d.

Blochmann.—Tue Perstan Merres sy Sart, and a Treatise on Persian
Rhyme by Jami. Edited in Persian, by H. BLocumann, M.A. 8vo. scarce,
pp. 62. 3s. 6d.

Eastwick.—Tuer Guuisran. See ‘‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 4.

Finn.—Perrstan ror Travetters. By A. Fryy, H.B.M. Consul at
Resur. Part I. Rudiments of Grammar. Part II. English-Persian Vocabulary.
Oblong 32mo, pp. xxii.— 232, cloth. 1884. 5s.

Griffith Yusur anp Zutarkma. See ‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” p. 5.

Gulshan-i-Raz.—Tue Dratouvr or THE GuisHAn-I-Raz; or, Mystical
Garden of Roses of Mahmoud Shabistari. With Selections from the
Rubiayat of Omar Khayam. Crown 8vo. pp. vi.-64, cloth. 1888. 38s.

Hafiz of Shiraz.—Setxcrions From nuts Porms. Translated from the
Persian by Herman Bicknetu. With Preface by A. S. Bicknriy. Demy
4to., pp. xx. and 384, printed on’ fine stout plate-paper, with appropriate
Oriental Bordering in gold and colour, and Illustrations by J. R. HErBERt,
eAL ere 2. 2s,

Haggard and Le Strange.—Tur Vazrr or Lanxuran. A Persian
Play. A Text-Book of Modern Colloquial Persian, for the use of European
Travellers, Residents in Persia, and Students in India. Edited, with a Gram-
matical Introduction, a Translation, copious Notes, and a Vocabulary giving the
Pronunciation of all the words. By W. H. Hacearp and Guy Lz Srranas.
Crown 8vo. pp.-xl.-176 and 56 (Persian Text), cloth. 1882. 10s. 6d.

Mirkhond.—Tue History or tHe ArAsexs oF Syrra AND PerstA,
By Munammep Brn KuAwENDSHAH Ben Manmun, commonly called
Mirxuonp. Now first Edited from the Collation of Sixteen MSS., by
W. H. Mortey, Barrister-at-law, M.R.A.S. To which is added a Series
of Facsimiles of the Coins struck by the Atabeks, arranged and described
by W. S. W. Vaux, M.A., M.R.A.S. Roy. 8vo. cloth, 7 Plates, pp. 118.
1848. 7s. 6d.

Morley.—A Descriptive Catalogue of the Historical Manuscripts in
the Arabic and Persian Languages preserved in the Library of the Royal Asiatic
Society of Great Britain and Ireland, By Witntam H. Moruny, M.R.A.S.
8vo. pp. Vili. and 160, sewed. London, 1854. 2s. 6d.

Palmer.—Tue Sone or tHE Reep. See page 56.

Palmer. — A Conctsr Prrsran-Enetish Dictionary By E. H.
Parmer, M.A., Professor of Arabic in the University of Cambridge. Second
Edition. Royal 16mo. pp. vili. and 364, cloth. 1883. 10s. 6d.

Palmer.—A Concisr Enerisa-Perstan Dictionary. ‘Together with
a Simplified Grammar of the Persian Language. By the late BE. H.
Patmer, M.A., Lord Almoner’s Reader and Professor of Arabic, Cambridge.
Completed and Edited from the MS. left imperfect at his death. By G. Lx
Srrance. Royal 16mo. pp. xii. and 546, cloth. 1883. 10s. 6d.

Palmer.—Snvetirrep Perstan Grammar. See page 56.

Redhouse.—Tue Musnevi. See ‘“ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 4.

94 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Rieu.—Cartatocve or THE Prrstan Manuscripts in THE BritIsH
Museum. By Cuanrzs Rrev, Ph.D., Keeper of the Oriental MSS. 4to. cloth.
Vol. I. pp. 432. 1879. 25s. Vol. II. 1881. 25s. Vol. III. 1883. 25s.

Whinfield —Gu1suan-1-Raz; The Mystic Rose Garden of Sa’d ud
din Mahmud Shabistani. ‘Phe Persian Text, with an English Translation and
Notes, chiefly from the Commentary of Muhammed Bin Yahya Lahiji. By
i. H. Wurnrietp, M.A., late of H.M.B.C.S. 4to. pp. xvi., 94, 60, cloth.
1880. 10s. 64

Whinfield.—Quarrams or Omar KuayyAm. See page 5.

PIDGIN-ENGLISH.

Leland.—Pincin-Enerisn Srye-Sone; or Songs and Stories in the
China-English Dialect. With a Vocabulary. By Cuartes G. Lezanp. Fcap.
Svo. cl., pp. vill. and 140. 1876. 5s.

POLISH.

Baranowski. — Anero-Porish Lexicon. By J. J. Baranowskxr,
formerly Under-Secretary to the Bank of Poland, in Warsaw. Feap. 8yo. pp.
vili. and 492, cloth. 1883. 12s.

Baranowski.—Stownixk Potsxo-AneretsKr. (Polish-English Lexicon.)
By J. J. Baranowski. Feap. Svo. pp. iv.-402, cloth. 1884. 12s.

Morfill.—A Srvetrrimp Grammar or THE PotisH Lanevaer. By
W. R. Morritt, M.A. Crown 8vo. pp. viii.—64, cloth. 1884. 3s. 6d.

PRAKRIT.

Cowell.—A_ sHort Iytropuction to THE OrpINARY PRAKRIT OF THE
Sanskrit Dramas. With a List of Common Irregular Prakrit Words. By
Prof. E. B. Cowrerz. Cr. 8vo. limp cloth, pp. 40. 1875. 3s. 6d.

Cowell.—Praxnita-Praxasa ; or, ‘The Prakrit Grammar of Vararuchi,
with the Commentary (Manorama) of Bhamaha; the first complete Edition of the
Original Text, with various Readings from a cvllation of Six MSS. in the Bod-
leian Library, etc., with Notes, English Translation, and Index of Prakrit Words
an Kasy Introduction to Prakrit Grammar. By E. B. Cowsxt, Professor of
Sanskrit at Cambridge. New Edition, with New Preface, ete. Second Issue
8vo. cloth, pp. xxxi. and 204. 1868. 14s, ; :

PUKSHTO (Paxxuro, Pasuto).

Bellew.—A Grammar or THE Puxxuto or Puxsato Lanevage, on a
Nes and nepreres System. Combining Brevity with Utility, and Illustrated by
ixercises and Dialogues. By H. W. Brxtinw, Assistant Surgeon, Beng:
Super-royal 8vo., pp. xii. and 156, cloth. 21s, aaa)

Bellew.—A Dicrionary oF THE PuKKHTO, on PuxsHTo LANGUAGE, on a
New and Improved System. With a reversed Part, or English and Pukkhto,

By H. W. Ber.turw, Assistant Surgeon, Bengal A
pp. xii. and 356, cloth. 42s, ease BE Ee eee ae:

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 95

Plowden.—Transtation or tae Katrp-1-Aranant, the Text Book for
the Pakkhto Examination, with Notes, Historical, Geographical, Grammatical,
and Explanatory. By Trevor Cuicnetz PLowpen, Captain H.M. Bengal
Infantry, and Assistant Commissioner, Panjab. Small 4to, cloth, pp. xx. and
395 andix. With Map. Lahore, 1875. £2 10s.

Thorburn.—BannG ; or, Our Afghan Frontier. By S. 8. Txorsurn,
1.C.S., Settlement Officer of the Banna District. 8vo. cloth, pp. x. and 480,
1876. 18s.

pp- 171 to 230: Popular Stories, Ballads and Riddles, and pp. 231 to 413:
Pashto Proverbs Translated into English. pp. 414 to 473: Pashto Proverbs
in Pashto.

Trumpp.—Pasro Grammar. See page 50.

ROUMANIAN.

Torceanu.—Srveririep Grammar oF THE Roumantan Lanevace. By-
R. Torceanv. Crown 8yo. pp. vili.-72, cloth. 1883. 5s.

RUSSIAN.

Freeth.—A Conprensep Russtan Grammar for the Use of Staff Officers
and others, By F. Freeru, B.A.. late Classical Scholar of Emmanuel College,
Cambridge. Crown 8vo. pp. iv.-76, cloth. 1886. 3s. 6d.

Lermontoff.—Tue Demon. By Micuart Lerwonrorr, ‘Translated
from the Russian by A. Conpiz STEPHEN. Crown 8vo. pp. 88, cloth. 1881. 2s. 6d.

Riola.—A Grapvarep Russtan Reaper, with a Vocabulary of all the
Russian Words contained init. By H. Rrota, Crown 8vo. pp. viil. and 314.
1879. 10s. 6d.

Riola.—How 10 Learn Russtan. A Manual for Students of Russian,
based upon the Ollendorfian system of teaching languages, and adapted for
self instruction. By Henry Riowa, Teacher of the Russian Language. With
a Preface by W. R. S. Ratsron, M.A. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth,
pp. 576. 1884. 12s.

Key to the above. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. 126. 1878. 5s.

Thompson.—Diatocurs, Russtan anp Enerisa. Compiled by A. R.
Tuompson. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. iv.-1382. 1882. 5s.

Wilson.—Rvsstan Lyrics 1x Enerish Verse. By the Rev. C. T.

Witson, M.A., late Chaplain, Bombay. Crown 8vo. pp. xvi. and 244, cloth.
1887. 6s.

SAMARITAN.

Nutt.—A Sxerce or Samaritan History, Doema, ann Literature.
Published as an Introduction to ‘Fragments of a Samaritan Targum.” By
J.W. Nurt,M.A. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. viii. and 172. 1874. 4s.

Nutt.—Fracments or A Samaritan Targum. LEdited from a Bodleian
MS. With an Introduction, containing a Sketch of Samaritan History,
Dogma, and Literature. By J. W. Nurr, M.A. Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. viit
172, and 84. With Plate. 1874. lds.

96 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.

SAMOAN.

Pratt.—A Grammar anp Dicrronary of the Samoan Language. By
Rey. Grorcr Prarr, Forty Years a Missionary of the London Missionary
Society in Samoa. Second Edition. Edited by Rev. S.J. Whitmee, F.R.G.S.
Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. viii, and 880, 1878. 18s.

SANSKRIT.
Aitareya Brahmanam of the Rig Veda. 2 vols. See under Have.

D’Alwis—A Descriptive CaTaLoaur or Sansknit, Part, AND SINHALESE
Lirerary Works or Cryton. By James D’Auwis, M.R.A.S., Advocate of
the Supreme Court, &c., &c. In Three Volumes. Vol. I., pp. xxxii. and 244,
sewed. 1870. 8s. 6d.

Apastambfya Dharma Sutram.—Apuorisms or THE SacreD Laws oF
tue Hrnpus, by ApasraAmBA. Edited, with a Translation and Notes, by G.
Biihler. By order of the Government of Bombay. 2 parts. 8vo. cloth,
1868-71. £1 4s. 6d.

Arnold.—Tur Sone Crrzsriazt; or, Bhagavad-Gitaé (from the Maha-
bharata). Beinga Discourse between Arjuna, Prince of India, and the Supreme
Being under the form of Krishna. Translated from the Sanskrit Text by Sir E.
Arnotp, M.A., K.C.I.E., etc. Second edition. Crown 8vo. pp. 192, cloth.
1885. ds.

Arnold.—Tur Srcrer or Drare: being a Version, in a Popular and
Novel Form, of the Katha Upanishad, from the Sanskrit, with some Collected
Poems. By Sir E. Arnold, M.A., K.C.I.E. Third Edition. Crown 8vo. pp.
430, cloth. 1885. 7s. 6d,

Arnold.—Liecnr or Asta. See page 41.
Arnold.—Inpran Poxrrry. See ‘‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,’”’ page 4.

Arnold.—Tur Itrap anp Opyssry or Inpra. By Sir Epwr Arnoxp,
M.A., K.C.1.E., ete. Fcap. 8vo. sd., pp. 24. le.

Apte.—Tuz Sruprynr’s Guipr to Sansxrrr Compostrion. Being a
Treatise on Sanskrit Syntax for the use of School and Colleges. 8vo. boards.
Poona, 1881. 6s.

Apte.—Tux Srupent’s Enerisn-Sansxrit Dicrionary. Roy. 8vo. pp.
xii. and 526, cloth. Poona, 1884. 16s.

Atharva Veda Praticakhya.—See under Wurrney.
Auctores Sanscriti. Vol. I. The Jaiminiya-Nydya-M4lA-Vistara.

Edited for the Sanskrit Text Society under the supervision of TuEopor
Gotpsrickrr. Parts I. to VIJ., pp. 582, large 4to. sewed. 10s. each part.
Complete in one vol., cloth, £3 13s. 6d. Vol. II. The Institutes of Gautama.
Edited with an Index of Words, by A. F. Srpnzurr, Ph.D., Professor of
Oriental Languages in the University of Breslau. 8vo. cloth, pp. iv. 78.
1876. 4s. 6d. Vol. III. Vaitana Sitra. The Ritual of the Atharva Veda.
Edited with Critical Notes and Indices, by Dr. Ricnarp Gaxsr. 8vo.
sewed, pp. 119. 1878. 5s. Vols. IV. and V. Vardhamana’s Ganaratnama-
Pee as Author’s Commentary, Edited, with Critical Notes and
ndices, by J. Eceuine, Ph.D. 8vo. wrapper. Part I., pp. xii. 240. :
6s. Part II., pp. 240. 1881. 6s. oF bes eater

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 97

Avery.—Conrripurionsto THE History or Verb-[Nrincrion In SANSKRIT.
By J. Avery. 8vo. paper, pp. 106. 4s.

Ballantyne.—Sanxuya Apuorisms or Karma. See page 6.

Ballantyne.—Firsr Lessons ry Sansxrir Grammar; together with an
Introduction to the Hitopadésa. Fourthedition. By Jamns R. BALLANTYNE, ——
LL.D., Librarian of the India Office. 8vo. pp. viii.and 110, cloth, 1884. 3s. 6d.

Benfey.—A Practicat Grammar or THE Sanskrit Lanevace, for the
use of Early Students. By THropor Brnrey, Professor of Sanskrit in the
University of Gottingen. Second, revised and enlarged, edition. Royal 8vo.
pp. viii. and 296, cloth. 10s. 6d.

Benfey.—Vevica unp Verwanpres. By Tuerop. Benrey. Crown 8yo.
paper, pp. 178. Strassburg, 1877. 7s. 6d.

Benfey.—Venica unp Linevistica.—By Tu. Benrey. Crown 8vo.
pp. 254. 10s. 6d.

Bibliotheca Indica.—A Collection of Oriental Works published by
the Asiatic Society of Bengal. Old Series. Fasc. 1 to 235. New Series.
Fasc. 1 to 408. (Special List of Contents to be had on application.) Each
Fase. in 8vo., 2s.; in 4to., 4s.

Bibliotheca Sanskrita.—See Trisyer.

Bombay Sanskrit Series. Edited under the superintendence of @G.
Buuxer, Ph. D., Professor of Orrental Languages, Elphinstone College, and
F, Krecuorn, Ph. D., Superintendent of Sanskrit Studies, Deccan College.

1868-84. —

—+- 1. Pancwaranrra Iv. anp v. Edited, with Notes, by G. Biinrer, ——~

Ph. D.. Pp. 84,16. 3s.

2. Nigosfpwarra’s ParrpudsHenDusexHara. Edited and explained

by F. Kietnorn, Ph. D. Part I., the Sanskrit Text and Various Readings,

pp- 116. 4s.

8. PANCHATANTRAII. AND 111. Edited, with Notes, by G. Biinter, Ph. D.——~"

. Pp. 86, 14,2. 3s.

4. PancwaTantra I. Edited, with Notes, by F. Kirernory, Ph.D.-——~
Pp. 114, 53, 3s. 6d.

5. KAtip4sa’s Racuuvamsa. With the Commentary of Mallinatha,
Edited, with Notes, by SHANKAR P. Panpnit, M.A. Part I. Cantos I-VI. 4s.

6. KAtrpdsa’s MAtavieAenrmirra. Edited, with Notes, by SHaNKAR ——~
P. Panpit, M.A. 4s. 6d.

7. N&cosfsnarta’s ParrpHisHenpusekHara Edited and explained
by F. Kreruorn, Ph.D. Part II. Translation and Notes. (Paribhashas,
i.—xxxvii.) pp. 184. 4s.

8. KAdripdsa’s Raecuuvamsa. With the Commentary of Mallinatha.
Edited, with Notes, by SHanxar P. Paypir, M.A. Part II. Cantos VII.—
XIII. * 4s.

9. Ndcosfsuarra’s PartpHisuenpuseKuara. Edited and explained
by F. Kreuuorn. Part II. Translation and Notes. (Paribhdshis xxxviii-’
lxix.) 4s.

10. Danprn’s Dasaxumaracuarira. Edited with critical and explana-
tory Notes by G. Bihler, Part I. 3s.

11. Boarrriuarr’s NirisaTakaA AND VAIRAGYASATAKA, with Extracts
from Two Sanskrit Commentaries. Edited, with Notes, by Kasinaru T.
TeLane. 4s. 6d. ,

12. Nagosrpnarta’s ParrpHdsHENDUSEKHARA. Edited and explained
by F. Krecuorn. Part II, Translation and Notes, (Paribhashas Ixx.—
exxii.) 4s, . :

98 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

13. Kazrpasa’s Racuvuvatisa, with the Commentary of Mallinatha.
Edited, with Notes, by SHankar P. Paypir. Part III. Cantos XIV.-
XIX. 4s. :

14. VixramAnxapevacuarira. Edited, with an Introduction, by G.
Biiuter. 3s.

15. Buavasutrr’s MAtari-MApnava. With the Commentary of
Jagaddhara, edited by RAMKRISHNA GopAL BHANDARKAR. 14s. . ‘

16. Tux Vixramorvastyam. A Dramain Five Acts. By KAnrpasa.
Edited with English Notes by Shankar P. Pandit, M.A. pp. xii. and 129
(Sanskrit Text) and 148 (Notes). 1879. 6s.

17. Hemacnpra’s DustnamAnd, with a Glossary by Dr. Piscuen
and Dr. Biiuter. Part I. 10s.

18—22 and 26. Paransatr’s VyaKaRANAmanABHisHya. By Dr.
Kietyorn. Part I—IV. Vol. I. II. Part 11. Each part 5s.

23. Tue VAsisHTHaADHARMASASTRAM. Aphorisms on the Sacred Law
of the Aryas, as taught in School of Vasishtha, Edited by Rey. A. A. Funrer.
8vo. sewed. 1883. 2s. 6d.

24, Kapamsart. Edited by Prrzr Prrerson. 8vo. sewed. 1883. 15s.

25. Kirrrxaumupr. Sri Somesvaraprva, and edited by Asasr VisHnu
Karuavati, 8vo. sewed. 1883. 35s. 6d.

27. MupraraxsHasa. By Visakaaparra. With the Commentary of
Dhundhiraj. Edited with critical and explanatory notes by K. T. Telang. 8vo.
sewed.. 1884. 6s,

28, 29, and 30. Parangati’s VYAKARANAMAHABHASHYA. By Dr.
Krevnorn. Vol III., Parts I., II., and III. Each Part ds.

31. Vatrasnapeva’s SuspwasuirAvarr. Edited by Dr. P. Prrerson
and Panpir Durcar Prasap. 12s. 6d.

32. LaveAxsart Buasxar’s Sarxa-Kaumupi. Edited by Prof. M. N.

Dyrvepi. 1s. 6d.
33. Hrropaprsa By Narayana. Edited by Prof. P. Peterson. 4s. 6d.

Borooah.—A Companton To THE SansKrit-READING UNDERGRADUATES
of the Calcutta University, being a few notes on the Sanskrit Texts selected

for examination, and their Commentaries. By ANUNDORAM BorooAn. 8vo.
pp. 64. 3s. 6d.

Borooah.—A Pracrican Enerisa-Sanskrtr Dictionary. By Anun-
porAM Borooan, B.A., B.C.S., of the Middle Temple, Barrister-at-Law.
Vol. I. A to Falseness. pp. xx.—580-10. Vol. IL. Falsification to Oyster, pp.
581 to 1060. With a Supplementary Treatise on Higher Sanskrit Grammar or
Gender and Syntax, with copious illustrations from standard Sanskrit Authors
and References to Latin and Greek Grammars, pp. vi. and 296. 1879. Vol. III.
£1 11s. 6d. each.

Borooah.—Buavasnvri AnD His Prace in Sanskrit Lirerature. By
ANUNDORAM BorooaH. Svo. sewed, pp. 70. 5s.

Brhat-Sanhita (The).—See under Kern.

Brown.—Sanskrir Prosopy anp Numertcan Sympors Expratnep. By
Cuartes Partie Brown, Author of the Telugu Dictionary, Grammar, etc., Pro-
fessor of Telugu in the University of London. Demy 8vo. pp. 64, cloth. 3s. 6d.

Burnell.—RrxtantravyaKarana. <A Praticikhya of the Samaveda.
Edited, with an Introduction, Translation of the Sutras, and Indexes, by
A. C. Burnett, Ph.D. Vol. I. Post 8vo. boards, pp. lviii, and 84. 10s. 6d,

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 99

Burnell.—A Ozasstriep Inpex to the Sanskrit MSS. in the Palace at
Tanjore. Prepared for the Madras Government. By A.C. Burney, Ph.D.
In 4to. Part I. pp. iv. and 80, stitched, stiff wrapper. Vedic and Technical
Literature. Part II. pp. iv. and 80. Philosophy and Law. 1879. Part III.
Drama, Epics, Puranas and Tantras, Indices, 1880. 10s. each part.

Burnell.—Caratocun or a Conzuction or Sanskrit Manuscripts. By
A. C. Burnett, M.R.A.S,, Madras Civil Service. Parr 1. Vedie Manuscripts.
Feap. 8vo. pp. 64, sewed. 1870. 2s.

Burnell.—Dayapacactoxt. Ten Stoxas 1x Sansxrit, with English
Translation. By A. C. BuRNELL. 8vo. pp. 11. 2s.

Burnell.—On ruxz Arypra Scuoor or Sanskrit GramMartans. Their
Place in the Sanskrit and Subordinate Literatures. By A.C. BuRNELL. 8vo.
pp. 120. 10s. 6a.

Burnell.—Tue SAmavipninasriumana (being the Third Brahmana)
of the Sama Veda. Edited, together with the Commentary of Sdyana, an
English Translation, Introduction, and Index of Words, by A. C. BurNELL.
Volume I.—Text and Commentary, with Introduction. 8vo. pp. xxxviii. and
104. 12s. 6d.

Burnell.—Tue AxrsHeyapranMAna (being the fourth Brahmana) oF
THE Sama VepA. The Sanskrit Text. Edited, together with Extracts from the
Commentary of Sayana, etc. An Introduction and Index of Words. By A. C.
BurRnewt, PhD. 8vo, pp. 51 and 109. 10s. 6d.

Burnell.—Tuz Devarapuyayapranmana (being the Fifth Brahmana)
of the Sama Veda. The Sanskrit Text edited, with the Commentary of Sayana,
an Index of Words, etc., by A. C. Burnett, M.R.A.S. 8vo. and ‘rans.,
pp. 34. 5s.

Burnell—Tue Jammyiya Text oF THE ARSHEYABRAHMANA OF THE
Sama Veda. Edited in Sanskrit by A. C. Burnett, Ph. D. 8vo. sewed, pp.
56, 7s. 6d.

Burnell. — Tue SaumrropantsnapprauMana (Being the Seventh
Brahmana) of the Sama Veda. The Sanskrit Text. With a Commentary, an
Index of Words, etc. Edited by A. C, BurnELL, Ph.D. 8vo, stiff boards,
pp. 86. 7s. 6d

Burnell.—Tue Vamcasriumana (being the Eighth Brahmana) of the
Sama Veda. Edited, together with the Commentary of Sayana, a Preface and
Index of Words, by A. C. Burnett, M.R.A.S., etc. 8vo. sewed, pp. xliii.,
12, and xii., with 2 coloured plates. 10s. 6d.

Burnell.—The Ordinances of Manu. See page 6.

Catalogue or Sanskrir Worxs Prinrep in Inpra, offered for
Sale at the affixed nett prices by Triisner & Co. 16mo. pp. 52. Is.

Chintamon.—A Commentary on THE Text or THE Buacavan-Giri ;
or, the Discourse between Krishna and Arjuna of Divine Matters. A Sanscrit
Philosophical Poem. With a few Introductory Papers. By Hurrycuunp
CHINTAMON, Political Agent to H. H. the Guicowar Mulhar Rao Maharajah
of Baroda. Post 8vo. cloth, pp. 118. 6s.

Clark.—Mrcuaputa, tHe Croup Merssencer. Poem of Kalidasa,
Translated by the late Ruy. Tuomas Crarx, M.A. Feap, 8vo. pp. 64,

; wrapper. 1882. Ils.

Colebrooke.—The Life and Miscellaneous Essays of Henry Thomas
Colebrooke. See page 29.

100 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,

Cowell and Eggeling.—Caratocus or Buppaist Sanskrit ManvscriPrs _
in the Possession of the Royal Asiatic Society (Hodgson Collection). By Pro-
fessors E. B. Cowett and J. Eecrtine. 8vo.sd., pp. 56. 2s. 6d.

Cowell.—Sarva DarsanA Samorana. See page 5.

Da Cunha.—Tue Sanyaprr Kuaypa or tHe SxanpdA Purana; a
Mythological, Historical and Geographical Account of Western India. First
edition of the Sanskrit Text, with various readings. By J. Gerson pa Cunna,
M.R.C.S. and L.M. Eng., L.R.C.P. Edinb., ete. 8vo. bds. pp. 580. £1 As.

Davies.—Hinpu Purttosopuy. See page 4.

Davies.—Buacavap Gira. See ‘Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 5.

Dutt.—Kuinas or Kisumina: being a Translation of the Sanskrita Work
Rajataranggini of Kablana Pandita. By J. Cx. Durr. 12mo. paper, pp. v. 302,
and xxill. 4s.

Edgren.— A Comprnprous Sanskrit Grammar. With a brief Sketch
of Scenic Prakrit. By H. Eperen, Ph.D., Professor of Sanskrit in the
University of Nebraska, U.S.A, Crown 8vo. pp. xil.—178, cloth. 1885. 10s. 6d.

Gautama.—Tue Instrrutres or Gautama. See Auctores Sanscriti.

Goldstiicker—A Dictionary, Sanskrit anpd Ene isu, extended and
improved from the Second Edition of the Dictionary of Professor H. H. Wirson,
with his sanction and concurrence. Together with a Supplement, Grammatical]
Appendices, and an Index, serving as a Sanskrit-English Vocabulary. By
TuEopor GotpstickEr. Parts I.to VI. dto. pp. 400. 1856-1863. 6s. each

Goldstiicker.—Panin1: His Place in Sanskrit Literature. An Inves-
tigation of some Literary and Chronological Questions which may be settled by
a study of his Work. A separate impression of the Preface to the Facsimile of
MS. No. 17 in the Library of Her Majesty’s Home Government for India,
which contains a portion of the Manava-Katpa-Sutra, with the Commentary
of Kumarita-Swamin. By Tnropror GoxpsticKer. Imperial 8vo. pp.
268, cloth. £2 2s.

Gough.—Puitosopny or THE UpantsHaps. See page 6.

Griffith Scrnrs rrom tHE Ramayana, Mecuapura, nrc. Translated

i by Raten T. H. Guirrrtn, M.A., Principal of the Benares College. Second
Edition. Crown 8yo. pp. xviii., 244, cloth. 6s. Or rs

Conrents.—Preface—A yodhya--Ravan Doomed—The Birth of Rama—The Heir apparent—

Manthara’s Guile—Dasaratha’s Oath—The Step-mother—Mother and Son—The Triumph of

Love—Farewell?—The Hermit’s Son—The Trial of Truth—The Forest—The Rape of Sita—

Rama’s Despair—The Messenger Cloud—Khumbakarna—The Suppliant Dove—True Glory —

Feed the Poor—The Wise Scholar.

Griffith Tur RAwAyan or VAtmixt. Translated into English verse.
By Raten T. H. Grirriru, M.A., Principal of the Benares College. 5 vols.
Demy 8vo. cloth. Vol. I., pp. xxxii. 440. 1870. Out of print. II., pp.
504. Out of print, IIL, pp. v. and 871. 1872. I1V., pp. viii, and 432.
1873, V., pp. 368. 1875. Complete Sets £7 7s.

Griffith —KArrp4sa’s Birto or tox War Gop. See page 3.

Haas.—Catalogue of Sanskrit and Pali Books in the Library of the
British Museum. By Dr. Ernst Haas. 4to. pp. 200, cloth. 1876. £1 Is.

Haug.—Tue Arrarrya Branmanam or THE Rie Vepa: containing the
Earliest Speculations of the Brahmans on the meaning of the Sacrificial Prayers,
and on the Origin, Performance, and Sense of the Rites of the Vedic Religion.
Edited, Translated, and Explained by Martin Have, Ph.D.. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo.
Map of the Sacrificial Compound at the Soma Sacrifice, pp. 312 and 544. £2 2s.

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 101

Hunter.—Cararocur or Sansxrrr Manvscrrprs (Buddhist) Collected
in Nepal by B. H. Hopason, late Resident at the Court of Nepal. Compiled
from Lists in Caleutta, France, and England. By Sir W. W. Hounrer,
K.S.8.F., LL.D., &. 8vo. pp. 28, wrapper. 1880. 2s.

Jacob.—Hinvvu Panrnzrsm. See “ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 4.

Jaiminiya-Nydya-Mala-Vistara—See under Aucrores SANscrITI.

Kasika.—A Commentary on PAnryr’s Grammaricat Apnortsus. By
Panpir JAyApirya. Edited by Panpir Baza SAsrrt, Prof. Sansk. Coll.,
Benares. First part, 8vo. pp. 490. Part II. pp. 474. 16s. each part.

Kern.—Tue Aryapnatiya, with the Commentary Bhatadipika of
Paramadigvara, edited by Dr. H. Kurn. 4to. pp. xii. and 107. 9s.

Kern.— Tue Bruat-Sanurr{; or, Complete System of Natural
Astrology of Varaba-Mihira, Translated from Sanskrit into English by Dr. H.
Kern, Professor of Sanskrit at the University of Leyden. Part I. 8vo. pp. 50,
stitched. Parts 2 and 3pp.51-154. Part 4 pp. 155-210. Part 5 pp. 211-266.
Part 6 pp. 267-330. Price 2s. each part. [ Will be completed in Nine Parts.

Kielhorn.—A Grammar or THE Sanskrit Laneuace. By F. Krernorn,
Ph.D., Superintendent of Sanskrit Studies in Deccan College. Registered
under Act xxv. of 1867. Demy 8vo. pp. xvi. 260. cloth. 1870. 10s. 6d.

Kielhorn.—KAryAyana anp Parangatrt. Their Relation to each other
and to Panini. By F. Kiznuorn, Ph. D., Prof. of Orient. Lang. Poona. 8vo.
pp. 64. 1876. 3s. 6d. ‘

Laghu Kaumudi. A Sanskrit Grammar. By Varadaraja. With an English
Version, Commentary, and References. By James R. Batuantyne, LL.D.
Third Edition. S8vo. pp. xxxiv. and 424, cloth. 1881. £1 ds.

Lanman.—On Noun-Inflection in the Veda. By R. Layman, Asso-
ciate Prof. of Sanskrit in Johns Hopkins University. 8vo. pp. 276, wrapper.
1880, 10s.

Lanman.—A Sanskrit Reaver, with Vocabulary and Notes. By C.
R. Lanman, Prof. of Sanskrit in Harvard College. Part I. and Il.—Text and}
Vocabulary. Imp. 8yvo. pp. xx.—294, cloth. 1884. 10s. 6d.

Mahabharata.—Transtatep ryro Hiypr for Madan Mohun Bhatt, by
KrisHNACHANDRADHARMADHIKARIN, of Benares. Containing all but the
Harivansa. 3 yols, 8yo. cloth. pp. 574, 810, and 1106. £3 3s.

Mahdbhérata (in Sanskrit), with the Commentary of Nilakantha. In
Eighteen Books: Book I. Adi Parvan, fol. 248. II. Sabha do, fol. 82. III. Vana
do. fol. 312. IV. Virata do. fol. 62. V. Udyoga do. fol. 180. VI. Bhfshma do.
fol. 189. VII. Drona do. fol. 215. VIII. Karna do fol. 115. IX. Salya do.
fol. 42. X. Sauptika do. fol. 19. XI. Strf do. fol. 19. XII. Santi do.:—
a. Rajadharma, fol. 128; 6. Apadharma, fol. 41; ec. _Mokshadharma, fol. 290,
XIII. Anusfsana Parvan, fol. 207. XIV. Aswamedhika do. fol. 78. XV. Asra-
mayvasika do. fol. 26. XVI. Mausala do. fol. 7. XVII. Mahaprasthanika do.
fol. 3. XVIII. Swargarokana do. fol. 8. Printed with movable types. Oblong
folio. Bombay, 1863. £12 12s.

Maha-Vira-Charita; or, the Adventures of the Great Hero Rama.
An Indian Drama in Seven Acts. Translated into English Prose from the
Sanskrit of Bhavabhiiti. By J. Pickrorp, M.A. Crown 8vo. pp 192, cloth,
1871. 5s. 4

Maino-i-Khard (The Book of the).—The Pazand and Sanskrit Texts
(in Roman characters) as arranged by Neriosengh Dhavyal, in the fifteenth
century. With an English translation, a Glossary of the Pazand texts, con-
taining the Sanskrit, Rosian, and Pahlavi equivalents, a sketch of Pazand Gram-
mar, and an Introduction. By E. W. Wzsr. 8vo. sewed, pp. 484. 1871. 16s,

102 Linguistic Pubhcations of Tribner & Co.,

Manava-Kalpa-Sutra; being a portion of this ancient Work on Vaidik
Rites, together with the Commentary of Kumarita-Swamin. A Facsimile of
the MS. No. 17, in the Library of Her Majesty’s Home Government for India.
With a Preface by Turopor Goupsriicker. Oblong folio, pp. 268 of letter-
press and 121 leaves of facsimiles. Cloth. £4 4s.

Mandlik.—Tun YAsNavatkya Smurirr, Complete in Original, with an
English Translation and Notes. With an Introduction on the Sources of, and
Appendices containing Notes on various Topics of Hindu Law. By V. N.
Mannix. 2 vols. in one. Roy. 8vo. pp. Text 177, and Transl. pp. lxxxvii. and
532. Bombay, 1880. £3.

Megha-Duta (The). (Cloud-Messenger.) By Kalidasa. Translated
from the Sanskrit into English verse, with Notes and Illustrations, By the
late H. H. Witson, M.A., F.R.S.,etc. Vocabulary by F. Jounson, some-
time Professor of Oriental Languages at the College of the Hon. the East India
Company, Haileybury. New Edition. 4to. cloth,pp. xi. and 180. 10s. 6d.

Muir.—Transtations from Sanskrit Writers. See page 3.

Muir.—Orremat Sanskrit Texts, on the History of the People of
India, their Religion and Institutions. Collected, Translated, and Illustrated
by Joun Murr, D.C.L., LL.D. Demy 8vo. cloth. Vol. I. Mythical Accounts
of the Origin of Caste. Second Edition, pp. xx. 532. 1868. 21s. II. Trans-
Himalayan Origin of the Hindus, and their Affinity with the Western Branches
of the Aryan Race. Second Edition, pp. xxxii. and 512. 1871. 21s. III.
The Vedas: Opinions of their Authors, and of later Indian Writers, on their
Origin, Inspiration, and Authority. Second Edition, pp. xxxii. 312. 1868.
16s. IV. Comparison of the Vedic with the later representations of the
principal Indian Deities. Second Edition. pp. xvi. and 524. 1873. 21s.
V. The Cosmogony, Mythology, Religious Ideas, Life and Manners of the
Indians in the Vedic Age. Third Edition. pp. xvi. 492. 1884. 21s.

Nagananda; or THE Joy or raz Snaxe-Wortp. A Buddhist Drama
in Five Acts. Translated into English Prose, with Explanatory Notes, from the
Sanskrit of Sri-Harsha-Deva. By Patmer Boyp, B.A., Sanskrit Scholar of
Trinity College, Cambridge. With an Jntroduction by Professor Cows.
Crown 8vo., pp. xvi. and 100, cloth. 4s. 6d.

Nalopakhyanam.—Srory or Nata; an Episode of the Maha-Bharata.
The Sanskrit Text, with Vocabulary, Analysis, and Introduction. By Sir
M. Monrer-Wititams, K.C.I.E., M.A. The Metrical Translation by the Very
Rev. H. H. Mrzuman, D.D. 8vo. cloth. 1és.

Naradiya Dharma Sastram; or, rae Insriturrs or Narapa. Trans-
lated for the First Time from the unpublished Sanskrit original. By Dr. Junius
Jouny, University, Wurzburg, With a Preface, Notes chiefly critical, an Index
of Quotations from Narada in the principal Indian Digests, and a general Index.
Crown 8vo., pp. xxxv. 144, cloth. 10s. 6d.

Oppert.—List of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Private Libraries of
Southern India. Compiled, Arranged, and Indexed, by Gusray Ovrert,
Ph.D. Vol. I. Royal 8vo. cloth, pp. 620. 1880. 21s.

Oppert.—Ow tHe Weapons, Army Organization, AND Porrricat Maxims
of the Ancient Hindus. With Special Reference to Gunpowder and Fire Arms.
By G. Opprrr. 8vo. sewed, pp. vi. and 162. Madras, 1880. 7s. 6d. :

Patanjali—Tur VyAxarana-ManApnAsnya or Paransatr. Edited

by F. Kretnorn, Ph.D., Professor of Oriental Languages, Deccan College.
Vol. I., Part I. pp. 200. 8s. 6d,

57 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, F.C. 103

Perry.—A Sanskrit Priwer. Based on the “ Leitfaden fir den
Elementar-Cursus des Sanskrit’? of Prof. Georg Biihler, of Vienna. By E.
D. Prrry, of Columbia Coll., New York. 8vo. pp. xii. and 230,cl. 1886. 7s. 6d. za

Peterson.—Tun AvcuiryaramKara oF Ksuemenpra; with a Note
on the Date of Patanjali, and an Inscription from Kotah. By P. Prrerson,
Elphinstone Professor of Sanskrit, Bombay. Demy 8vo. pp. 54, sewed. 1885. 2s.

Ramayan of Vélmiki.—5 vols. See under Grirrire.

Ram Jasan.— A Sanskerr anp Enerisn Drcrronary. Being an
Abridgment of Professor Wilson’s Dictionary. With an Appendix explaining
the use of Affixes in Sanskrit. By Pandit Ram Jasan, Queen’s College,
Benares. Published under the Patronage of the Government, N.W.P. Royal
8vo. cloth, pp. ii. and 707. 28s.

Rig-Veda Sanhita.—A Coruection or Ancient Hinpv Hymns.
See page 45.

Rig-Veda-Sanhita: Tur Sacrep Hymns or roe Braumans. Trans-
lated and explained by F. Max Mixuer, M.A., LL.D. See page 45.

Rig-Veda.—T xe Hymysortue Ric-Vepa in the Samhitaand Pada Texts.

By F. Max Mixtsr, M.A., etc. See page 45.

Sabdakalpadruma, the well-known Sanskrit Dictionary of Rassu
Rapuaxanta Deva. In Bengali characters. 4to. Parts 1 to 40. (In
course of publication.) 3s. 6d. each part.

Sama-Vidhina-Brahmana. With the Commentary of Sayana. Edited,
with Notes, Translation, and Index, by A. C. Burnett, M.R.A.S. Vol. I.
Text and Commentary. With Introduction. 8vo. cloth, pp. xxxviii. and 104,
12s. 6d.

Sakuntala.—A Sansrrir Drama in Seven Acts. Edited by Sir M.
Monter-WitiiaMs, K.C.I.E., M.A. Second Edition. 8vo.cl. £1 Is.
Sakuntala.—KAxipAsa’s QaxunratA. The Bengalf Recension. With

Critical Notes, Edited by Ricuarp PiscuEn. 8vo. cloth, pp. xi. and 210. 14s.

Sarva-Sabda-Sambodhini; ox, Tue Comptere Sanskrit Dicrionary.
In Telugu characters. 4to. cloth, pp. 1078. £2 15s.

Surya-Siddhanta (Translation of the).—See Whitney.

Taittiriya-Praticakhya.—See Wuitney.

Tarkavachaspatii—Vacuaspatya, a Comprehensive Dictionary, in Ten
Parts. Compiled by TaranatHaA TarKavacuaspati, Professor of Grammar
and Philosophy in the Government Sanskrit College of Calcutta. An Alpha-
betically Arranged Dictionary, with a Grammatical Introduction and Copious
Citations from the Grammarians and Scholiasts, from the Vedas, etc. Parts I.
to XIII: 4to. paper. 1873-6. 18s. each Part.

Thibaut.—Tue Strvastrras. English Translation, with an Intro-
duction. By G. Tu1sauT, Ph.D., Anglo-Sanskrit Professor Benares College.
8yvo. cloth, pp. 47, with 4 Plates. 5s.

Thibaut.—ContTRIBuTIONS To THE ExpLANATION oF JyoTIsHA-VEDANGA
By G. Turpavur, Ph.D. 8vo. pp. 27. 1s. 6d.

Triibner’s Bibliotheca Sanscrita. A Catalogue of Sanskrit Litera-
ture, chiefly printed in Europe. To which is added a Catalogue of Sanskrit
Works printed in India; and a Catalogue of Pali Books. Constantly for sale
by Triibner & Co. Cr. 8vo. sd,, pp. 84. 28, 6d.

104 Linguistic Publications of Triibner § Co.,

Vardhamana.—See Auctores Sanscriti, page 96.

Vedarthayatna (The); or, an Attempt to Interpret the Vedas. A
Marathi and English Translation of the Rig Veda, with the Original Samhita
and Pada Texts in Sanskrit. Parts I. to XXVIII. 8vo. pp. 1—896. Price
38s. 6d. each.

Vishnu-Purana (The).—See page 45, and also ‘‘ Wilson,” page 105.

Weber.—On rue RAmivana. By Dr. Axsrecur Weser, Berlin.
Translated from the German by the Rev. D. C. Boyd, M.A. Reprinted from
“The Indian Antiquary.” Feap. 8vo. sewed, pp. 130. 5s.

Weber.—Inoran Lirerature. See page 3.

Whitney.—Arnarva Vepa Priricdxuya; or, Céunakfya Caturadhya-
yika (The). Text, Translation, and Notes. By WiitiaM WV. WuitTney, Pro-
fessor of Sanskrit in Yale College. 8vo. pp. 286, boards. £1 11s. 6d.

Whitney.—Svurya-Sippnanta (Translation of the): A Text-book of
Hindu Astronomy, with Notes and an Appendix, containing additional Notes
and Tables, Calcuiations of Eclipses, a Stellar Map, and Indexes. By the
Rev. E. Burcuss. Edited by W. D. Wuirnry. 8vo. pp. iv. and 354,
boards. £1 11s. 6d.

Whitney.—Trrrreiya-Pritichxuya, with its Commentary, the
Tribhashyaratna: Text, Translation, and Notes. By W. D. Wurrnzy, Prof.
of Sanskrit in Yale College, New Haven. 8vo. pp. 469. 1871. £1 ds.

Whitney.—Index Verborum to the Published Text of the Atharva-
Veda. By William Dwight Whitney, Professor in Yale College. (Vol. XII. of
the American Oriental Society). Imp. 8yo. pp. 384, wide margin, wrapper.
1881. £1 ds.

Whitney.—A Sanskrit Grammar, including both the Classical Lan-
guage, and the Older Language, and the Older Dialects, of Veda and Brahmana.
8vo. cloth, pp. [New Edition, in the Press.

Whitney.— Tux Roots, Vers-Forms, anp Prmtary DertvaTIvEs oF THE
Sanskrit Lancuacs. A Supplement to his Sanskrit Grammar. By Witu1am
Dwient Wuitney. Demy 8vo. pp. xiv.—250, cloth. 1885. 7s. 6d.

Williams.—A Dictionary, Enerish anp Sanscrit. By Sm
Monier Monrer-WiLLiAms, K.C.I.E., M.A. Published under the Patronage
of the Hon East India Company. 4to. pp. xii. 862, cloth. 1851. £3 3s.

Williams.—A Sansxrir-Enexise Dicrionary, Etymologically and
Philologically arranged, with special reference to Greek, Latin, German, Anglo-
Saxon, English, and other cognate Indo-European Languages. By Sir Monrer
Monrer-Wriitrams, K.C.1.E., M.A., Boden Professor of Sanskrit. 4to. cloth,
pp. xxv. and 1186. £4 14s. 6d.

_-— Williams.—A Practicar Grammar or tHe Sanskrit Lanevacs, ar-
al ranged with reference to the Classical Languages of Europe, for the use of
English Students, by Sir Monrer Monrer-Wiuiams, K.C.1.E., M.A. 1877.
Fourth Edition, Revised. 8vo. cloth. 15s, ~
Wilson.—Works of the late Horace Hayman Wurson, M.A., F.R.S.
etc., and Boden Prof. of Sanskrit in the University of Oxford. 12 vols, Demy
Vols. I. and II. Essays anp Lectures, chiefly on the Religion of the
Hindus. Collected and Edited by Dr. R. Rost, 2 vols. pp. xiii. and 399
vi. and 416, 21s. Vols. III, 1V.and V. Essays ANALYTICAL, Criricar,

o7 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, E.C. 105

AND PuinoLogicaL, on Sunsects CONNECTED wiTH SANskRiIt LitTERATURE.
Collected and Edited by Dr. R. Rost. 3 vols. pp. 408, 406, and 390. 36s.
Vols. Vi., VII., VIII, IX. and X., Part I. Visunu PurAnd, a Sysrem or:
Hinpu Mytuonocy anp Trapition. Vols. I. to V. Translated from the
original Sanskrit, and Illustrated by Notes derived chiefly from other Puranas.
Edited by F. Hani, M.A., D.C.L., Oxon. pp. exl. and 200; 344; 344;
346. 2/.12s.6d. Vol. X., Part 2, containing the Index to, and completing
the Vishnu Purana, compiled by F. Hall. pp. 268. 12s. Vols. XI. and XII.
SriLect SpeciMENS OF THE THEATRE OF THE Hrinpvus. Translated from the
Original Sanskrit. 8rd corrected Ed. 2 vols. pp. Ixi. and 384; and iv. and
418 2ls.

Wilson.—Sztecr Specrmens or tHE THEATRE or THE Hrnpvs. Trans-
lated from the Original Sanskrit. By the late H. H. Witson, M.A., F.R.S,
Third corrected edition. 2 vols. 8vo., pp. lxxi. and 384; iv. and 418, cloth. 2Is.

ContTEnTs.—Vol. I.—Preface—Treatise on the Dramatic System of the Hindus—Dramas trans-

lated from the Original Sanskrit—The Mrichchakati, or the Toy Cart—Vikrama and
Urvasi, or the Hero and the Nymph—Uttara Rama Charitra, or continuation of
the History of Rama, Vol. II.—Dramas translated from the Original Sanskrit—
Malati and Madhava, or the Stolen Marriage—Mudra Rakshasa, or the Signet of
the Minister—Ratnavali, or the Necklace—Appendix, containing short accounts of
different Dramas.

Wilson.—A Dicrionary in Sansxrir anp Ewncutsa. Translated,
amended, and enlarged from an original compilation prepared by learned Natives
for the College of Fort William by H. H. Witson. The Third Edition edited
by Jagunmohana Tarkalankara and Khettramohana Mookerjee. Published by
Gyanendrachandra Rayachoudhuri and Brothers, 4to. pp. 1008. Calcutta,

1874. £3 3s.
Wilson (H. H_).—See also Megha Duta, Rig-Veda, and Vishnu-
Purana.

Yajurveda.—Tue Ware Yasurvepa in THE Mapnyanpina Recen-
sion. With the Commentary of Mahidhara. Complete in 36 parts. Large
square 8vo. pp. 571. £4 10s.

SERBIAN.

Morfill—Smrriiriep Sersran Grammar. By W. R. Moritz, M.A.,
Crown 8yo. pp. viii. and 72, cloth. 1887. 4s. 6d.

SHAN.
Cushing.—Gramuar or THE Suan Lanavace. By the Rev. J. N.
Cusnine. Large 8yo. pp. xii. and 60, boards. Rangoon, 1871. 9s.

Cushing.—Elementary Handbook of the Shan Language. By the
Rey. J. N. Cusuine, M.A. — Small 4to. boards, pp. x.and122. 1880. 12s. 6d.

Cushing.—A Shan and English Dictionary. By J. N. Cusuine, M.A.
Demy 8vo. cloth, pp. xvi. and 600. 1881. £1 Is. 6d.

SINDHI.

Trumpp.—Gramuar or tHe Sinput Lanevace. Compared with the
Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the Cognate Indian Vernaculars. By Dr. Ernest
Trumpp. Printed by order of Her Majesty’s Government for India. Demy
8vo, sewed, pp. xvi, and 590. 1s.

106 Linguistic Publications of Tribner & Co.,
SINHALESE.

‘Aratchy.—Arnrerna Waxya Derpanya, or a Collection of Sinhalese
Proverbs, Maxims, Fables, etc. Translated into English. By A. M. S.
ArRatouy. 8vo. pp. iv. and 84, sewel. Colombo, 1881. 2s. 6d.

D’Alwis.—A Duscrrprive Caratocur of Sanskrit, Pali, and Sinhalese
Literary Works of Ceylon. By James D’Atwis,M.R.A.S. Vol. I. (all pub-
lished) pp. xxxii. and 244, sewed. 1877. 8s. 6d.

Childers.—Norrs on tHE SinwaLese Jiancuacre. No. 1. On the
Formation of the Plural of Neuter Nouns. By the late Prof. R. C. CaiDERs.
Demy 8vo. sd., pp. 16. 1873. Is.

Mahawansa (The)—Tue Manawansa. From the Thirty-Seventh
Chapter. Revised and edited, under orders of the Ceylon Government, by
H. Sumangala, and Don Andris de Silva Batuwantudawa. Vol. I. Pali Text
in Sinhalese Character, pp. xxxii. and 436.—Vol. II. Sinhalese Translation,
pp. lii. and 878, half-bound. Colombo, 1877. £2 2s.

Steele.—An Eastern Love-Story. Kusa Jatakaya, a Buddhistiec
Legend. Rendered, for the first time, into English Verse (with notes) from the
Sinhalese Poem of Alagiyavanna Mohottala, by Tuomas Srreezx, Ceylon
Civil Service. Crown 8vo. cloth, pp. xii. and 260. London, 1871. 6s.

SUAHILI.

Krapf.—Dicrionary or Tar Svani~r Lanevacr. By the Rey. Dr. L.
Krarr. With Introduction, containing an outline of a Suahili Grammar.
The Preface contains a most interesting account of Dr. Krapf’s philological
researches respecting the large family of African Languages extending from the
Equator to the Cape of Good Hope, from the year 1848, up to the present time.
Royal 8vo. pp. xl.-434, cloth. 1882. 30s.

SWEDISH.

Otte.—SiveLtirizep GRAMMAR OF THE SwEDISH LANGUAGE. By E. C.
Orré. Crown 8vo. pp. xii.—70, cloth. 1884. 2s. 6d.

SYRIAC.

Gottheil.— A Treatise on Syrtac Grammar. By MAnr(1) Exra or SéB¥A,
Edited and Translated from the Manuscripts in the Berlin Royal Library by
R. J. H. Gottheil. Royal 8vo. pp. 174, cloth. 1887. 12s. 6d.

Kalilah and Dimnah (The Book of). Translated from Arabic into
Syriac. Edited by W. Wricut, LL.D., Professor of Arabic in the University
of Cambridge. 8vo. pp. lxxxii.-408, cloth. 1884. 21s.

Phillips.—Tur Docrrryz or Appar tHE Aposttr. Now first Edited
in a Complete Form in the Original Syriac, with an English Translation and
Notes. By Grorcx Purtuirs, D.D., President of Queen’s College, Cambridge.
8vo. pp. 122, cloth. 7s. 6d.

Stoddard.—Grammar or THE Moprrn Syrrac Lanovaer, as spoken in
Oroomiah, Persia, and in Koordistan. By Rev. D. T. Sropparp, Missionary of
the American Board in Persia, Demy 8vo. bds., pp. 190. 10s. 6d.

d7 and 59, Ludgate Hill, London, B.C. 107

TAMIL.
Catalogue of Tamil Books sold by Messrs. Triibner § Co. post Sree for penny stamp,

Beschi.—Cravis Humantorum Lrrrerarum Susriutorrs Tamvtrer Ipro-
maATrs. Auctore R. P. Constantio Josppuo Buscuro, Soc. Jesu, in Madurensi
Regno Missionario. Edited by the Rev. K. Iatzrenp, and printed for A.
Burnell, Esq., Tranquebar. 8vo. sewed, pp. 171. 10s. 6d.

Lazarus.—A Tamm Grammar, Designed for use in Colleges and Schools.
By J. Lazarus. 12mo. cloth, pp. viii. and 230. London, 1879. 5s. 6d.

TELUGU.
Catalogue of Telugu Books sold by Messrs. Triibner & Co. post free for penny stamp.

Arden.—A ProcgrusstvE GRAMMAR OF THE TELUGU LanevacE, with
Copious Examples and Exercises. In Three Parts. Part I. Introduction.—
On the Alphabet and Orthography.—Outline Grammar, and Model Sentences.
Part II. A Complete Grammar of the Colloquial Dialect. Part I1I. On the
Grammatical Dialect used in Books. By A. H. Arpry, M.A., Missionary of
the C. M. 8. Masulipatam. 8vo. sewed, pp. xiv. and 380. 18s.

Arden.—A Companton Telugu Reader to Arden’s Progressive Telugu
Grammar. 8vo. cloth, pp. 130. Madras, 1879. 7s. 6d.

Carr.— 0/0 S$ 80/88. A Corrxcrion or Trrucv Proverss,

Translated, Illustrated, and Explained; together with some Sanscrit Proverbs
printed in the Devanagari and Telugu Characters. By Captain M. W. Carr,
Madras Staff Corps. One Vol. and Supplement, roy. 8vo. pp. 488 & 148. 31s. 6d.

TIBETAN.

Csoma de Korés.—A Drcrronary Tibetan and English (only). By
A. Csoma bE Kérés. — 4to. cloth, pp. xxii. and 352. Calcutta, 1834. £2 2s,

Csoma de Korés.—A Grammar of the Tibetan Language. By A.
Csoma DE Kéris. 4to. sewed, pp. xil. and 204, and 40. 1834. 25s.

Jaschke.— A Trsetan-Enetisu Dictionary. With special reference to
the prevailing dialects ; to which is added an English-Tibetan Vocabulary. By
H. A. Jascuxe, late Moravian Missionary at Kijelang, British Lahoul. Com-
piled and published under the orders of the Secretary of State for India in
Council. Royal 8vo. pp. xxii.-672, cloth. 30s.

Jaschke.—Tiseran Grammar, By H. A. Jascuxn. Crown 8vo. pp.
viii. and 104, cloth. 1883. 4s.

Lewin.—A Manvat of Tibetan, being a Guide to the Colloquial Speech
of Tibet, in a Series of Progressive Exercises, prepared with the assistance of
Yapa Ugyen Gyatsho, by Major Tuomas Herzerr Lewin. Oblong 4to. cloth,
pp- x1. and 176. 1879. Al Is.

Schiefner.—Tibetan Tales. See “‘ Triibner’s Oriental Series,” page 5.

TURKI.

Shaw.—A Sxercn or tHe Turxrt Lanevacr. As Spoken in Eastern
Turkistan (Kashghar and Yarkand). By Ropert Barxuay Suaw, F.R.G.S.,
Political Agent. In Two Parts. With Lists of Names of Birds and Plants
by J. Scutty, Surgeon, H.M. Bengal Army. 8vo. sewed, Part I., pp. 130.

1875, 7s. 6d.

108 Linguistic Publications of Triibner & Co.

TURKISH.

Arnold.—A Simprz Transrrrerat Grammar or THE TurKIsH LANGUAGE.
Compiled from various sources. With Dialogues and Vocabulary. By Sir
Epwin Agnoxp, M.A., K.C.LE., etc. Pott 8vo. cloth, pp. 80. 1877. 2s. 6d.

Gibb.—Orroman Porms. Translated into English Verse in their
Original Forms, with Introduction, Biographical Notices, and Notes. F cap. 4to.
pp. lvi. and 272. With a plate and 4 portraits. Cloth. By E. J. W. Giss.
1882. £1 1s.

Gibb.—Tur Srory or Jnwap, a Romance, by Ali Aziz Efendi, the
Cretan. Translated from the Turkish, by E. J. W. Grex. 8vo. pp. xii. and
238, cloth, 1884. 7s.

Hopkins.—Etemenrary Grammar or THE TurxisH Lanevace. With
a few Easy Exercises. By F. L. Hopxrys, M.A., Fellow and Tutor of Trinity
Hall, Cambridge. Cr. 8vo. cloth, pp. 48. 1877. 3s. 6d

Redhouse.—On the History, System, and Varieties of Turkish Poetry,
Illustrated by Selections in the Original, and in English Paraphrase. With a
notice of the Islamic Doctrine of the Immortality of Woman’s Soul. By J. W.
Repuovuss. Demy 8yo. pp. 64, sewed. 1879. 1s. 6d.; cloth, 2s. 6d.

Redhouse.—Tue Turkish Campatener’s Vapr-Mxrcum or Orroman
CottoauraL LANGUAGE; containing a concise Ottoman Grammar; a carefully
selected Vocabulary, alphabetically arranged, in two parts, English and Turkish,
and Turkish and English; also a few Familiar Dialogues; the whole in English
characters. By J. W. Repuovusz, F.R.A.S. Third Edition. Oblong 32mo.
pp: vuli.-872, limp cloth. 1882. 6s.

Redhouse.—Orroman-TurxisH Grammar. See page 50.

Redhouse.—Tourxish anp Enctisa Lextcon, showing in English the
Significations of the Turkish Terms. By J. W. Repuovuss, M.R.A.S., ete.
Parts I. to III. Imperial 8vo. pp. 960, paper covers. 1885. 27s.

UMBRIAN.

Newman.—Tue Text or tut Icuvrne Inscrirrions, with interlinear
Latin Translation and Notes. By Francis W. Newmav, late Professor of
Latin at University College, London. 8vo. pp. xvi. and 54, sewed. 1868. Qs.

URIYA:

Browne.—Aw Urry Primeri Roman Cuaracter. By J. F. Brownz,
B.C.S. Crown 8vo. pp. 32, cloth. 1882. 2s. 6d.

Maltby.—A Pracrican Hanpzoox or THe Urtya or Oprya Lanevace.
By Tuomas J. Maursy, Madras C.8. 8vo. pp. xiii. and 201. 1874. 10s. 6d.

~S
500
~ 9,4,88.

} MOTI

ee
Nea ‘

jie

cee
SNS

=

mae

ONS :
WARES AS
AS a) ONG
It : A
AES SY

ENS
<

RANE
RAGAN
SEA
AN cc “
~ TN ay
SO
SAC

Aa

CRN
aN

”)
AY SoS
A w

‘ 3
ENO “ Bo SANSA a
Den haan ASA Ni ‘
ww wT NaN Ny x wi \ STAN aN
ACR
