Philo of Alexandria: On the Special Laws (C. D. Yonge translation, 1855)
========================================================================
C. D. Yonge’s 1855 public-domain translation of Philo’s De Specialibus Legibus, all four books. Philo’s exposition of Mosaic law; source: Internet Archive.

THREE  ARTICLES  OF  THE 
DECALOGUE,  NAMELY.  THE  THIRD,  FOURTH,  AND 
FIFTH  ;  ABOUT  OATHS,  AND  THE  REVERENCE  DUE 
TO  THEM;  ABOUT  THE  HOLY  SABBATH;   ABOUT    ' 
THE  HONOUR  TO  BE  PAID  TO  PARENTS. 

I.  In  the  treatise  preceding  this  one  we  have  discussed  with 
accuracy  two  articles  of  the  ten  commandments,  that  which 
relates  to  not  thinking  that  any  other  beings  are  absolute  gods, 
except  God  himself ;  and  the  other  which  enjoins  us  not  to 
worship  as  God  any  object  made  with  hands.  And  we  also 
spoke  of  the  laws  which  relate  specially  to  each  of  these  points. 
But  we  will  now  proceed  to  discuss  the  three  which  come  next 
in  the  regular  order,  again  adapting  suitable  special  laws  to 

each. 

And  the  first  of  these  other  commandments  is  not  to  take  the 
name  of  God  in  vain ;  for  the  word  of  the  virtuous  man,  says 
the  law,  shall  be  his  oath,  firm,  unchangeable,  which  cannot 
lie,  founded  steadfastly  on  truth.  And  even  if  particular  ne- 
cessities shall  compel  him  to  swear,  then  he  should  make  the 
witness  to  his  oath  the  health  or  happy  old  ago  of  his  father  or 
mother,  if  they  are  alive ;   or  their  memory,  if  thev  are  dead. 


bfMi«'!;ii'tors  an-i  rf^DccLinu^  them  as  ruivrs  aT'i-oimcn  u>  m 

I  A         L  w 

and  niuht  tlu.'^t'^>^^•  iint  iM^iiiv  iiivukt^  lii*.'  iKiiiie  ul'  GuJ. 
iiicTn}  iiicn  aiio  dt;^tjr\c   to   Ixj  [)r;ii.>c'i  wiiu,  wiitii  tht-v  aru 
pelled  to  swear,  by  their  slowness,  and  delay,  and  evasion, 
fear  not  only  to  those  who  see  them,  but  to  those  also  who  i 
them  to  take  an  oath ;  for  when  they  do  pronounce  the 
they  are  accustomed  to  say  only  thus  much,  **  By  the — 
*•  No,bythe — ;'*  without  any  furtheraddition,  giving  an  em| 
to  these  words  bv  the  mutilation  of  the  usual  form,  but  wi 
utteiing  the  express  oatli.     However,  if  a  man  must  swe^ 
is  so  inclined,  let  him  add,  if  he  pleases,  not  indeed  the  hi 
name  of  all,  and  the  most  important  cause  of  all  thing 
the  earth,  the  sun,  the  stars,  the  heaven,  the  universal  v 
for  these  things  are  all  most  worthy  of  being  named,  ai 
more  ancient  than  our  own  birth,  and,  moreover,  thev 
grow  old,  lasting  for  ever  and  ever,  in  accordance  with  tl] 
of  their  Creator. 

II.  And  some  men  display  such  easiness  and  indifiV 
on  the  subject,  that,  passing  over  all  created  things,  the; 
in  tiieir  ordinary  conversation  to  rise  up  to  the  Create 
Father  of  the  universe,  without  stopping  to  consider  the 
in  which  they  are,  whether  it  be  profane  or  sacred ;  < 
time,  whetlier  it  be  suitable :  or  themselves,  whether  th 
pure  in  body  and  soul ;  or  the  business,  whether  it  be  ic 
ant ;  or  the  occasion,  whether  it  is  necessary ;   but  (i 


-•-1- 1 1    4 


ON  THE  SPECIAL  LAWS.  d5T 

are  made  distinct  and  articulate,  in  a  manner  to  contribute  to 
the  honour,  and  dignity,  and  blessing  of  the  great  Cause  of  all 
things.  But  now,  out  of  their  excessive  impietj,  thej  use  the 
most  awful  names  in  speaking  of  the  most  unimportant  matters, 
and  heaping  one  appellation  upon  another  in  a  perfect  crowd 
they  feel  no  shame,  thinking  that  by  the  frequency  and  number 
of  Uieir  uninterrupted  oaths  they  will  attain  to  the  object  which 
they  desire,  being  very  foolish  to  think  so ;  for  a  great  number 
of  oaths  is  no  proof  of  credibility,  but  rather  of  a  man*s  not 
deserving  to  be  believed  in  the  opinion  of  men  of  sense  and 
wisdom. 

III.  But  if  any  one  being  compelled  to  swear,  sweazB  by 
anything  whatever  in  a  manner  which  the  law  does  not  forbid, 
let  him  exert  himself  with  all  his  strength  and  by  every  means 
in  his  power  to  give  effect  to  his  oath,  interposing  no  hindrance 
to  prevent  the  accomplishment  of  the  matter  thus  ratified, 
especially  if  neither  implacable  anger  or  frenzied  love,  or 
unrestrained  appetites  agitate  the  mind,  so  that  it  does  not 
know  what  is  said  or  done,  but  if  the  oath  has  been  taken 
with  sober  reason  and  deliberate  purpose.  For  what  is  better 
than  to  speak  with  perfect  truth  throughout  one*s  whole  life, 
and  to  prove  this  by  the  evidence  of  God  himself?  For  an 
oath  is  nothing  else  but  the  testimony  of  God  invoked  in  a 
matter  which  is  a  subject  of  doubt,  and  to  invoke  God  to 
witness  a  statement  which  is  not  true  ,is  the  most  impious  of 
all  things. 

For  a  man  who  does  this,  is  all  but  saying  in  plain  words 
(even  though  he  hold  his  peace),  **  I  am  using  tliee  as  a  veil 
for  my  iniquity ;  do  thou  co-operate  with  me,  who  am  ashamed 
to  appear  openly  to  be  behaving  uigustly.  Do  thou  incur  the 
blame  instead  of  me,  who  am  acting  unjustly.  For  though  I  am 
doing  wrong,  I  am  anxious  not  to  be  accounted  wicked,  but 
thou  canst  be  indifferent  to  thy  reputation  with  the  multitude, 
having  no  regard  to  being  well  spoken  of.**  But  to  say  or 
imagine  such  things  as  these  is  most  impious,  for  not  only 
would  God,  who  is  free  from  all  participation  in  wickedness, 
but  even  any  father  or  any  stranger,  provided  he  were  not 
utterly  devoid  of  all  virtue,  would  be  indignant  if  he  were 
addressed  in  such  a  way  as  this. 

A  man,  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  must  be  sure  and  give 
effect  to  all  oaths  which  are  taken  for  honourable  and  desirable 

VOL.  HL  s 


258  PHTLO  JUDiEUS. 

olgects,  for  the  dae  establishment  of  private  or  public  objects 
of  importance,'  under  the  guidance  of  wisdom,  and  justice,  and 
holiness. 

lY.  And  in  this  description  of  oaths  those  most  lawful  tows 
are  included  which  are  offered  up  in  consequence  of  an 
abundance  of  blessings,  either  present  or  expected ;  but  if  any 
▼ows  kre  made  for  controiy  objects,  it  is  not  holy  to  ratify 
them,  for  there  are  some  men  who  swear,  if  chance  so  prompts 
them,  to  commit  theft,  or  sacrilege,  or  adultery,  or  rape,  or  to 
inflict  wounds  or  slaughter,  or  any  similar  acts  of  wickedness, 
and  who  perform  them  without  any  delay,  making  an  excuse 
that  they  must  keep  their  oaths,  as  if  it  were  not  better  and 
more  acceptable  to  God  to  do  no  iniquity,  than  to  perform 
such  a  TOW  and  oath  as  that.  The  nationd  laws  and  ancient 
ordinances  of  CTery  people  are  established  for  the  sake  of 
justice  and  of  every  rirtue,  and  what  else  are  laws  and 
ordinances  but  the  sacred  words  of  nature  having  an  authority 
and  power  in  themselves,  so  that  they  differ  in  no  respect  from 
oaths? 

And  let  every  man  who  commits  wicked  actions  because  he 
is  so  bound  by  an  oath,  beware  that  he  is  not  keeping  his 
oath,  but  that  he  is  rather  violating  one  which  is  worthy  oi 
great  care  and  attention  to  preserve  it,  which  sets  a  seal  as  it 
were  to  what  is  honourable  and  just,  for  he  is  adding  wicked- 
ness to  wickedness,  adding  lawless  actions  to  oaths  taken  on 
improper  occasions,  which  had  better  have  been  buried  in 
silence.  Let  such  a  man,  therefore,  abstain  from  committing 
iniquity,  and  seek  to  propitiate  God,  that  he  may  grant  to  him 
the  mercy  of  that  humane  power  which  is  innate  in  him.  so  as 
to  pardon  him  for  the  oaths  which  he  took  in  his  folly.  For  it 
is  incurable  madness  and  insanity  to  take  upon  himself  two- 
fold evils,  when  he  might  put  off  one  half  of  the  burden  of 
them. 

But  there  are  some  men  who,  out  of  the  excess  of  their 
wicked  hatred  of  their  species,  being  naturally  unsociable  and 
inhuman,  or  else  being  constrained  by  anger  as  by  a  hard 
mistress,  think  to  confirm  the  savageness  of  their  natural 
disposition  by  an  oath,  swearing  that  they  will  not  admit  this 
man  or  that  man  to  sit  at  the  same  table  with  them,  or  to 
come  under  the  same  roof ;  or,  again,  that  they  will  not  give 
any  assistance  to  such  an  one,  or  that  they  will  not  receive 


ON   THE  SPECIAL  LAWS.  259 

any  from  him  as  long  as  he  liyes.  And  sometimes  eren  after 
the  death  of  their  enemy,  they  keep  up  theif  irrecoucileahle 
enmity,  not  allowing  their  friends  to  give  the  cnstomaiy 
honours  even  to  thoir  dead  bodies  when  in  the  grave.  I 
would  recommend  to  such  men,  as  to  those  I  have  mentioned 
before,  to  seek  to  propitiate  the  mercy  of  God  by  prayers  and 
sacrifices,  that  so  they  may  find  some  cure  for  the  diseases  of 
their  souls  which  no  man  is  competent  to  heal. 

V.  But  tbere  are  other  persons,  also,  boastful,  puffed  up 
with  pride  and  arrogance,  who,  being  insatiably  greedy  of  gloir, 
are  determined  to  obey  none  of  the  precepts  which  point  to 
that  most  beneficial  virtue,  frugality:  but  even  if  any  one 
exhorts  them  to  it,  in  order  to  induce  them  to  shake  off  the 
obstinate  impetuosity  of  the  appetites,  they  look  upon  all 
their  admonitions  as  insults,  and  drive  their  course  on  head- 
long to  every  kind  of  effeminate  luxury,  despising  those  who 
seek  to  correct  tbero,  and  making  a  joke  of  and  turning  into 
ridicule  all  the  honourable  and  advantageous  recommendations 
of  wisdom.  And  if  such  men  happen  to  be  in  such  circum- 
stances as  to  have  any  abundance  and  superfluity  of  the  means 
of  living,  they  declare  with  positive  oaths  that  they  will  indulge 
in  all  imaginable  expense  for  the  use  and  enjoyment  of  costly 
luxury.  For  instance,  a  man  who  has  lately  come  into  the 
enjoyment  of  considerable  riches,  embraces  a  prodigal  and 
extravagant  course  of  life;  and  when  some  old  man,  some 
relation  perhnps,  or  some  friend  of  his  father,  comes  and 
admonishes  him,  exhorting  him  to  alter  his  ways  and  to  come 
over  to  a  more  honourable  and  strict  behaviour,  he  is  indignant 
beyond  all  measure  at  the  advice,  and  being  obstinate  in  his 
contentious  disposition,  swears  that  as  long  as  he  has  the 
means  and  resources  necessary  for  supplying  his  wants  he  will 
not  practise  any  single  way  which  leads  to  economy  or  moder- 
ation, neither  in  the  city  nor  in  the  country,  neither  when 
travelling  by  sea  nor  by  land,  but  tbat  he  will  at  all  times  and 
in  all  places  show  how  rich  and  liberal  he  is ;  but  as  it  seems 
to  me  such  conduct  as  this  is  not  so  much  a  display  of  riches 
as  of  insolence  and  intemperance. 

And  yet  many  men  who  have  before  now  been  placed  in 
situations  of  great  authority,  and  even  many  who  now  are  so, 
though  they  have  most  abundant  resources  of  all  kinds,  and 
enormous  riches,  wealth  continually  and  uninterruptedly  flow- 

s  i5 


260  PHILO  JUD-EUS. 

iu  upon  them.  OS  if  from  some  miceasing  spring,  do  nevertheless 
at  times  tarn  to  the  same  things  which  we  poor  men  use,  to 
earthenware  cups,  and  small  cheap  loaves,  and  olives,  or 
cheese,  or  vegetables,  for  a  seasoning  to  their  dinners ;  and  in 
the  summer  put  on  a  girdle  and  a  Hnen  garment,  and  in 
winter  any  whole  and  stout  cloak,  and  for  sleep  use  a  bed 
made  on  the  ground,  discarding  gladly  couches  made  of  ivorj 
or  wrought  in  tortoisesbell  and  gold,  and  coverlets  of  various 
embroidery,  and  rich  clothes  and  purple  dyes,  and  the  luxury 
of  sweet  and  elaborate  confectionery,  and  costly  viands ;  and 
the  reason  of  this  conduct  is  not  merely  that  they  have  a 
virtuous  and  abstemious  disposition  by  nature,  but  also  that 
they  have  enjoyed  a  good  education  from  their  earliest  youth, 
which  has  taught  them  to  honour  what  belongs  to  man  rather 
than  what  belongs  to  authority,  which  also  taking  up  its  settled 
abode  in  the  soul,  I  may  almost  say  reminds  it  every  day  of  its 
humanity,  drawing  it  down  from  lofty  and  arrogant  thoughts, 
and  reducing  it  within  due  bounds,  and  correcting  whatever  is 
unequal  by  the  introduction  of  equality. 

Therefore  such  men  fill  their  cities  with  vigour  and  abund- 
ance, and  with  good  laws  and  peace,  depriving  them  of  no 
good  thing  whatever,  but  providing  them  with  all  requisite 
blessings  in  the  most  unlimited  and  unsparing  manner;  for 
this  conduct  and  actions  of  this  sort  are  the  achievements  of 
men  of  real  nobility,  and  of  men  who  may  truly  be  called 
governors.  But  the  aciions  of  men  newly  become  rich,  of 
men  who  by  some  blunder  of  fortune  have  arrived  at  great 
wealth,  who  have  no  notion,  not  even  in  their  dreams,  of 
wealth  which  is  genuine  and  truly  endowed  with  sight,  which 
consists  of  the  perfect  virtues,  and  of  actions  in  accordance 
with  such  virtues,  but  who  stumble  against  that  wealth  which 
is  blind,  leaning  upon  which,  and  therefore  of  necessity  missing 
the  right  road,  they  turn  into  one  which  is  no  road  at  all, 
admiring  objects  which  deserve  no  honour  at  all,  and  ridiculing 
things  that  are  honourable  by  nature ;  men  whom  the  word  of 
Qod  reproves  and  reproaches  in  no  moderate  degree  for  intro- 
ducing oaths  on  unfitting  occasions  ;  for  such  men  are  difiBcult 
to  punfy  and  difficult  to  cure,  so  as  not  to  be  thought  deserving 
pardon  even  by  God,  who  is  all-mercifui  by  nature. 

VI.  But  the  law  takes  away  from  virgins  and  from  married 
women  the  power  of  making  vows  independently,  pronouncing 


ON  THE  SPECIAL  LAWa  201 

the  parents  cf  the  one  class,  and  the  husbanf}s  of  the  other, 
their  lords;  and  with  reference  to  any  confirmation  or  dis- 
avowal of  their  oaths,  declaring  that  that  power  belongs  in  the 
one  case  to  the  father,  and  in  the  other  to  the  husband.  And 
▼eiy  reasonably,  for  the  one  class  by  reason  of  their  youth  are 
not  aware  of  the  importance  of  oaths,  so  that  they  stand  in 
need  of  the  advice  of  others  to  judge  for  them ;  while  the  other 
class  do  often  out  of  easiness  of  disposition  take  oaths  which 
are  not  for  the  interest  of  their  husbands,  on  which  account 
the  law  invests  the  husbands  and  fathers  with  authori^  either 
to  ratify  their  oaths  or  to  declare  them  void. 

And  let  not  widows  swear  inconsiderately,  for  they  have  no 
one  who  can  beg  them  off  from  the  effect  of  their  oaths; 
neither  husbands,  from  whom  they  are  now  separated,  nor 
fathers,  whose  houses  they  have  quitted  when  they  departed 
from  home  on  the  occasion  of  their  marriage,  since  it  is 
unavoidable  that  their  oaths  must  stand  as  being  confirmed 
through  the  absence  of  any  one  to  take  care  of  the  interests  of 
the  swearers. 

But  if  any  one  knows  that  any  one  else  is  violating  his 
oath,  and  does  not  inform  against  him,  or  convict  him,  being 
influenced  by  friendship,  or  respect,  or  fear,  rather  than  by 
piety,  he  shall  be  liable  to  the  same  punishment  as  the 
perjured  person  ;*  for  assenting  to  one  who  does  wrong  differs 
in  no  respect  from  doing  wrong  one's  self.  And  punishment  is 
inflicted  on  perjured  persons  in  some  cases  by  God  and  in 
others  by  men;  but  those  punishments  which  proceed  from 
Grod  are  the  most  fearful  and  the  most  severe,  for  God  shows 
no  mercy  to  men  who  commit  such  impiety  as  that,  but  allows 
them  to  remain  for  ever  unpurifled,  and  in  my  opinion  with 
great  justice  and  propriety,  for  the  man  who  despises  such 
important  matters  cannot  complain  if  he  is  despised  in  his 
turn,  receiving  a  fate  equal  to  hb  actions.  But  the  punish- 
ments which  are  inflicted  by  men  are  of  various  characters, 
being  death,  or  scourging  ;t  those  men  who  are  more  excellent 
and  more  strict  in  their  piety  inflicting  death  on  such  offenders, 
but  those  who  are  of  milder  dispositions  scourging  them  with 
rods  publicly  in  the  sight  pf  all  men ;  and  to  men  who  are  not 
of  abject  and  slavish  dispositions  scourging  is  a  punishment 
not  inferior  in  terror  to  death 

•  Levitictui  v.  21,  +  Deuter^-^nfl^n.'^ 's5a^  "VA^ 


262  PHILO  JUD^US. 

.  VII.  These  then  are  the  ordiuances  contained  in  the  ex- 
press language  of  these  commandments ;  but  there  is  also  an 
allegorical  meaning  concealed  beneath,  which  we  must  extract 
by  a  careful  consideration  of  the  figurative  expressions  used. 
We  must  be  aware,  therefore,  that  the  correct  principles  of  na- 
ture recognbe  the  power  both  of  the  father  and  of  the  husband 
as  equal,  but  still  in  different  respects.  The  power  of  the 
husband  exists  because  of  his  sowing  the  seed  of  the  virtues  in 
the  soul,  as  in  a  fertile  field ;  that  of  the  father  arises  from  its 
being  his  natural  office  to  implant  good  counsels  in  the  minds 
of  his  children,  and  to  stimulate  diem  to  honourable  and  vir- 
tuous actions ;  and  because,  when  he  has  done  so,  he  cherishes 
them  with  salutary  doctrines,  which  education  and  wisdom 
supply ;  and  the  mind  is  compared  at  one  time  to  a  virgin,  and 
at  another  to  a  woman  who  is  a  widow,  and  again  to  one  who 
is  still  united  to  a  husband. 

It  is  compared  to  a  virgin,  when  it  presen-es  itself  pure,  and 
undefiled,  free  from  the  infiuence  of  pleasures  and  appetites, 
and  likewise  of  pains  and  fears,  treacherous  passions,  and  then 
the  father  who  begot  it  retains  the  regulation  of  it ;  and  her 
principle,  as  in  the  case  of  a  virtuous  woman,  she  now  being 
united  to  pure  reason,  in  accordance  with  virtue,  will  exert  a 
proper  care  to  defend  her,  implanting  in  her,  like  a  husband. 
the  most  excellent  conceptions.  But  the  soul  which  is  de- 
prived of  the  wisdom  and  guardianship  of  a  parent,  and  of  the 
union  of  right  reason,  being  widowed  of  her  most  excellent 
defences,  and  abandoned  by  wisdom,  if  it  has  chosen  a  life 
open  to  reproach,  must  be  bound  by  its  own  conduct,  not 
having  reason  in  accordance  with  wisdom  to  act  as  intercessor, 
to  relieve  her  of  the  consequences  of  her  sins,  neither  has  a 
husband  living  with  her,  nor  as  a  father  who  has  begotten  her. 

YIII.  But  in  the  case  of  those  persons  who  have  vowed  not 
merely  their  own  property  or  some  part  of  it,  but  also  their 
own  selves,  the  law  has  affixed  a  price  to  their  vows,  not 
having  a  regard  to  their  beauty,  or  their  importance,  or  to  any 
thing  of  that  kind,  but  with  reference  to  the  number  of  the  indi- 
viduals separating  the  men  from  the  women,  and  the  infants 
from  those  who  are  full  grown.  For  the  law  ordains*  that 
from  twenty  years  of  age  to  sixty  the  price  of  a  man  shall  be  two 
hundred  drucUmos  of  solid  silver  money,  and  of  a  woman  a 

*  LcriticuM  xxvli.  3. 


ON  THE  SPXOliL  LAWS.  363   - 

hundred  and  twenty  drachmas.  And  from  five  years  of  age  to 
twenty,  the  price  of  a  m^e  child  is  eighty;  and  of  a  femalo 
child  forty  drachmas.  And  from  infancy  to  five  years  oldt  the 
price  of  a  male  is  twenty ;  of  a  female  child,  twelve  drachmas.f 
And  in  the  case  of  men  who  have  lived  heyond  sixty  years 
of  age,  the  ransom  of  the  old  men  is  sixty,  and  of  the  old  women 
forty  drachmas.  And  the  law  has  regulated  this  ransom  with 
reference  to  the  same  age  hoth  in  men  and  women  on  account 
of  three  most  important  considerations.  First  of  all,  because 
the  importance  of  their  vow  is  equal  and  similar,  whether  it 
be  made  by  a  person  of  great  or  of  little  importance.  Secondly, 
because  it  is  fitting  that  those  who  have  made  a  vow  shocdd 
not  be  exposed  to  the  treatment  of  slaves ;  for  they  are  valued 
at  a  high  or  at  a  low  price,  according  to  the  good  condition  and 
beauty  of  their  bodies,  or  the  contrary.  Thirdly,  which, 
indeed,  is  the  most  important  consideration  of  all,  because 
inequality  is  valued  among  men,  but  equality  is  honoured  by 
God. 

IX.  These  are  the  ordinances  establi^bed  in  respect  of  men, 
but  about  animals  the  following  commands  are  given.  If  any 
one  shall  set  apart  any  beast ;  if  it  be  a  clean  beast  of  any 
one  of  the  three  classes  which  are  appropriated  to  sacrifice, 
such  as  an  ox,  or  a  sheep,  or  a  goat,  he  shall  surely  sacrif:ce 
it,  not  substituting  either  a  worse  animal  for  a  better,  or  a 
better  for  a  worse.  For  God  does  not  take  delight  in  tliu 
fleshiness  or  fatness  of  animals,  but  in  the  blameless  disposi- 
tion of  the  man  who  has  vowed  it.  But  if  he  should  make  a 
substitution,  theu  he  must  sacrifice  two  instead  of  one ;  both 
the  one  which  he  had  originally  vowed,  and  the  one  which  he 
wished  to  substitute  for  it. 

But  if  any  one  vows  one  of  the  unclean  animals,  let  him 
bring  it  to  the  most  venerable  of  the  priests ;  and  let  him 
value  it,  not  exaggerating  its  price,  but  adding  to  its  exact 
value  one-fifth,  in  order  that  if  it  should  be  necessary  to  saori* 
fice  an  animal  that  is  clean  instead  of  it,  the  sacrifice  may  not 
Mi  short  of  its  proper  value.  And  this  is  ordained  also  for 
the  sake  of  causing  the  man  who  has  vowed  it  to  feel  grieved 
at  having  made  an  inconsiderate  vow,  having  vowed  an  animal 
which  is  not  dean,  looking  upon  it,  in  my  opmion,  for  the 

*  Leriticus  x.  X 


MA 


€w4ii,  \0S!Oi^  wn  vnpf  \ff  criin  oc  ibhw  ttivi^s 


ii  the  iMtkf  wiuth  he  hm  Towed  he  Im 
hvre  the  fheat  fat  s  valoer.  But  tfacae  wiw  but 
t^taf  it  fbiU  noc  fM^aaeqnaimisQfiilbr  it;  bat  if  the' 
fcii  V9«ed  it  dtmes  to  nuuom  it,  be  siitn  per  its  price  and  s 
fftb  btftidee,  ppnttbipg  bis  9«n  nsfaness  and  impetuoos  desire 
6r  1m  t«9  iaoJts*  bis  ntboeu  for  makiiig  the  ttv,  and  bis 
imftaMis  desire  for  wisfaiog  for  things  badi  sgsin  wbidi  be 
hid  be^MV  stttndcoed.  But  if  sot  one  eke  brings  it  be  shall 
weimj  iBore  thso  itt  falne*  And  let  not  the  nail  vfao  has 
wmie  the  row  make  aoj  long  delaj  either  in  the  acoomplidH 
flMSt  of  bis  TOW  or  in  proeoring  a  proper  valuation  to  be  made 
of  iL  For  it  is  absoH  to  attempt  to  make  strict  corenants 
wUl  men,  hot  to  look  upon  asreements  made  with  God  who 
has  no  need  of  any  thibg.  and  who  bss  no  deficiencj  of  snr 
tMng  as  onneccstarj  to  be  obserred,  while  those  who  do  so 
SfO  vy  their  d/Jajs  and  Blowness  conTicting  themselves  of  the 
|ritte«t  of  ofienres ,  namelr.  of  a  neglect  of  him  whose  serrice 
tbsj  oagbt  to  look  upon  as  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  happi- 


Tbis  is  enough  to  saj  of  oaths  and  rows. 


A  TBEATISE 

OxN   THE   NUMBER  SEVEN. 

L  TffC  next  commandment  is  that  concerning  the  sacred 
serenth  day,  in  which  are  comprehended  an  infinite  number 
ot  most  important  festivals.  For  instance,  there  is  the 
rslsase  of  those  men  who  by  nature  were  free,  but  who,  through 
some  unforeseen  necessity  of  the  times,  have  become  slayes, 
mhUh  release  takes  place  every  seventh  year.  Again,  there  is 
tb#  humanity  of  creditors  towards  their  debtors,  as  they  fo^ 
gife  their  countrymen  their  debts  every  seventh  year.  Also 
tnero  is  the  rest  given  to  the  fertile  ground,  whether  it  be  in 
the  champaign  or  in  the  mountainous  country,  which  also  takes 
place  every  seventh  year.  Moreover,  there  are  those  ordi- 
nances which  arc  established  respecting  the  fiftieth  year. 

And  of  all  these  things  the  bare  narration  (without  looking 


ON  THE  TEN  FESTIVALS.  205 

to  any  inner  and  figurative  signification)  is  sufficient  to  lead 
those  who  are  well  disposed  to  perfect  virtue,  and* to  make  even 
those  who  are  obstinate  and  stubborn  in  their  dispositions 
more  docile  and  tractable. 

Now  we  have  alreadj  spoken  at  some  length  about  the 
virtue  of  the  number  seven,  explaining  what  a  nature  it  has  in 
reference  to  the  number  ten ;  and  also  what  a  connection  it 
has  to  the  decade  itself,  and  also  to  the  number  four,  which  is 
the  foundation  and  the  source  of  the  decade.  And  now, 
having  been  compounded  in  regular  order  from  the  unit,  it  in 
regular  order  produces  the  perfect  number  twenty-eight ;  being 
multiplied  according  to  a  regular  proportion  equal  in  all  its 
parts,  it  makes  at  last  both  a  cube  and  a  square.  I  also  showed 
how  there  is  an  infinite  number  of  beauties  which  may  be 
extracted  from  a  careful  contemplation  of  it,  on  which  we  have 
not  at  present  time  to  dilate.  But  we  roust  examine  every 
one  of  the  special  matters  which  are  before  us  as  comprehended 
in  this  one,  beginning  with  the  first. 

The  first  matter  to  be  considered  is  that  of  the  festivals 


A  TEEATISE 
TO  SHOW  THAT  THE  FESTIVALS  ARE  TEN  IN  NUMBER. 

I.  Now  there  are  ten  festivals  in  number,  as  the  law  sets 
them  down.  The  first  is  that  which  any  one  will  perhaps  be 
astonished  to  hear  called  a  festival.    This  festival  is  every  day. 

The  second  festival  is  the  seventh  day,  which  the  Hebrews 
in  their  native  language  call  the  sabbath. 

The  third  is  that  which  comes  after  the  conjunction,  which 
happens  on  the  day  of  the  new  moon  in  each  month. 

The  fourth  is  that  of  the  passover  which  is  called  the  pass- 
over. 

The  fifth  is  the  first  fruits  of  the  com— the  sacred  sheaf. 

The  sixth  is  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  after  which  that 
festival  is  celebrated,  which  is  really  the  seventh  day  of  seventh 
days. 

The  eighth  is  the  festival  of  the  sacred  moon,  or  the  feast 
of  trumpets. 

The  ninth  is  the  fa&t. 


M6  PHILO  JXn>JEUS. 

The  tenth  is  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  which  is  the  last  of  all 
the  annual  festivals,  ending  so  as  to  make  the  perfect  number 
of  ten.     We  must  now  begin  with  the  first  fiestiTaL 

THE   FIRST  FESTIVAL. 

I.  The  law  sets  down  eyery  day  as  a  festival,  adapting  itself 
to  an  irreproachable  life,  as  if  men  continually  obeyed  nature 
and  her  injunctions.  And  if  wickedness  did  not  prosper,  sub- 
duing by  their  predominant  influence  all  those  reasonings 
about  what  things  might  be  expedient,  which  they  have  driven 
out  of  the  soul  of  each  individual,  but  if  all  the  powers  of  the 
virtues  remained  in  all  respects  unsubdued,  then  the  whole 
time  from  a  man's  birth  to  his  death  would  be  one  uninterrupted 
festival,  and  all  houses  and  every  city  would  pass  their  time  in 
continual  fearlessness  aud  peace,  being  full  of  every  imaginable 
blessing,  enjoying  perfect  tranquillity.  But  as  it  is  at  present, 
covetousness  and  the  system  of  mutual  hostility  and  retaliation 
with  which  both  men  and  women  are  continually  forming  de- 
signs against  one  another,  aud  even  against  themselves,  have 
destroyed  the  continuity  of  cheerfulness  and  happiness. 

And  the  proof  of  what  I  have  just  asserted  is  visible  to  all 
men ;  for  all  those  men,  whether  among  the  Greeks  or  among 
the  barbarians,  who  are  practisers  of  wisdom,  living  in  a  blame- 
less aud  irreproachable  manner,  determining  not  to  do  any  in- 
justice, nor  even  to  retaliate  it  when  done  to  them,  shunning 
all  association  with  busy-bodies,  in  all  the  cities  which  they  in- 
habit, avoid  all  courts  of  justice,  and  council  halls,  and  market- 
places, and  places  of  assembly,  and,  in  short,  every  spot  where 
any  band  or  company  of  precipitate  headstrong  men  is  collected, 
admiring,  as  it  were,  a  life  of  peace  and  tranquillity,  being  the 
most  devoted  contemplators  of  nature  and  of  all  the  things  in 
it.  Investigating  earth  and  sea,  and  the  air,  and  the  heaven, 
and  all  the  different  natiu^es  in  each  of  them ;  dwelling,  if  one 
may  so  say,  in  their  minds,  at  least,  with  the  moon,  and  the 
sun,  and  the  whole  company  of  the  rest  of  the  stars,  both 
planets  and  fixed  stars.  Having  their  bodies,  indeed,  firmly 
planted  on  the  earth,  but  having  their  souls  furnished  with 
wings,  in  order  that  thus  hovering  in  the  air  they  may  closely 
survey  all  the  powers  above,  looking  upon  them  as  in  reality 
the  most  excellent  of  cosmopolites,  who  consider  the  whole 
world  as  their  native  city,  and  all  the  devotees  of  wisdom  as 


ON  THE  TEN   FESTIVALS.  367 

their  fellow  citizens,  virtue  herself  haying  enrolled  them  as 
such,  to  whom  it  has  been  entrusted  to  frame* a  constitution 
for  their  common  city. 

XL  Being,  therefore,  full  of  all  kinds  of  excellence,  and 
being  accustomed  to  disregard  all  those  good  things  which 
affect  the  body  and  external  circumstances,  and  being  inured 
to  look  upon  things  indifferent  as  really  indifferent,  and  being 
armed  by  study  against  the  pleasures  and  appetites,  and,  in 
short,  being  always  labouring  to  raise  themselyes  above  the 
passions,  and  being  instructed  to  exert  all.  their  power  to  pull 
down  the  fortification  which  those  appetites  have  built  up,  and 
being  insensible  to  any  impression  which  the  attacks  of  fortune 
might  make  upon  them,  because  they  have  previously  estimated 
the  power  of  its  attacks  in  their  anticipations  (for  anticipation 
makes  even  those  things  light  which  would  be  most  terrible 
if  unexpected),  their  minds  in  this  manner  calculating 
that  nothing  that  happens  is  wholly  strange,  but  having 
a  kind  of  faint  perception  of  everything  as  old  and  in  some 
degree  blunted.  These  men,  being  very  naturally  rendered 
cheerful  by  their  virtues,  pass  the  whole  of  their  lives  as  a 
festival. 

These  men,  however,  are  therefore  but  a  small  number, 
kindling  in  their  different  cities  a  sort  of  spark  of  wisdom,  in 
order  that  virtue  may  not  become  utterly  extinguished,  and  so 
he  entirely  extirpated  from  our  race.  But  if  men  everywhere 
agreed  with  this  small  number,  and  became,  as  nature  origi- 
nally designed  that  they  should,  all  blameless  and  irreproach- 
able, lovers  of  wisdom,  delighting  in  all  that  is  virtuous  and 
honourable,  and  thinking  that  and  that  alone  good,  and  look- 
ing on  everything  else  as  subordinate  and  slaves,  as  if  they 
themselves  were  the  masters  of  them,  then  all  the  cities  would 
be  full  of  happiness,  being  wholly  free  from  all  the  things 
which  are  the  causes  of  pain  or  fear,  and  full  of  all  those  which 
produce  joy  and  cheerfulness.  So  that  no  time  would  ever 
cease  to  be  the  time  of  a  happy  life,  but  that  the  whole  circle 
of  the  year  would  be  one  festival. 

III.  Wherefore,  if  truth  were  to  be  the  judge,  no  wicked  or 
worthless  man  can  pass  a  time  of  festival,  no  not  even  for  the 
briefest  period,  inasmuch  as  he  must  be  continually  pained  by 
the  consciousness  of  his  own  iniquities,  even  though,  with  his 
boul,  and  his  voice,  and  his  countenance,  he  may  i^retend  to 


268  TSnO  JUDiBUSL 

smfle ;  for  how  can  a  man  who  is  foil  of  the  most  eiil  coon- 
tela,  and  who  lives  with  fbllj,  hare  an j  period  of  genuine  joj  ? 
A  man  who  is  in  ererr  respect  unfortunate  and  miserable,  in 
his  tongue,  and  his  bellj,  and  all  his  other  members,  since  he 
uses  the  first  fur  the  utterance  of  things  which  ought  to  be 
secret  and  buried  in  silence,  and  the  second  he  fills  full  of 
abandince  of  strong  wine  and  immoderate  quantities  of  food 
oat  of  gluttonj,  and  the  rest  of  his  members  he  uses  for  the  in- 
dulgence of  unlawful  desires  and  illicit  connections,  not  onlj 
seeking  to  Tiolate  the  marriage  bed  of  others,  but  lusting  un- 
natondlj,  and  seeking  to  dehce  the  manly  character  of  the 
nature  of  man,  and  to  change  it  into  a  womanUke  appearance,  for 
the  sake  of  the  gratification  of  his  own  polluted  and  accursed 
passions. 

On  which  account  the  all-great  Moses,  seeing  the  pre- 
eminence of  the  beautj  of  that  which  is  the  real  festival,  looked 
upon  it  as  too  perfect  for  human  nature  and  dedicated  it  to 
God  himself,  speaking  thus,  in  these  very  words :  *'  The  feast 
of  the  Lord.***  In  considering  the  m«^lancboly  and  fearful 
condition  of  the  human  race,  and  how  full  it  is  of  innumerable 
evils,  which  the  covetousness  of  the  soul  begets,  which  the 
defects  of  the  body  produce,  and  which  all  the  inequalities  of 
the  soul  inflict  upon  us,  and  which  the  retaliations  of  those 
among  iihom  we  live,  both  doing  and  sufiering  innumerable 
evils,  are  continually  causing  us,  he  then  wondered  whether 
any  one  being  tossed  about  in  such  a  sea  of  troubles,  some 
brought  on  deliberately  and  others  unintentionally,  and  never 
beinff  able  to  rest  in  peace  nor  to  cast  anchor  in  the  safe  haven 
of  a  life  free  from  danger,  could  by  any  possibility  really  keep 
a  feast,  not  one  in  name,  but  one  which  should  really  be  so, 
enjoying  himself  and  being  happy  in  the  contemplation  of  the 
world  and  all  the  things  in  it,  and  in  obedience  to  nature,  and 
in  a  perfect  harmony  between  his  words  and  his  actions,  between 
his  actions  and  his  words. 

On  which  account  he  necessarily  said  that  the  feasts  belonged 
to  God  alone ;  for  he  alone  is  happy  and  blessed,  having  no 
participation  in  any  evil  whatever,  but  being  fiili  of  all  perfect 
blessinffs.  Or  rather,  if  one  is  to  say  the  exact  truth,  being 
himself  the  good,  who  has  showered  all  particular  good  things 
over  the  heaven  and  earth.     In  reference  to  which  fact,  a  cer- 

*  Leviticui  xziii.  2. 


ON  THE  TEN  FESnVALS.  260 

tain  pre-eminently  yirtoous  mind  among  the  people  of  old,* 
when  all  its  passions  were  tranquil,  smiled,  being  full  of  and 
completely  penetrated  with  joy,  and  reasoning  vrith  itself 
whether  perhaps  to  rejoice  was  not  a  peculiar  attribute  of  God, 
and  whether  it  might  not  itself  miss  this  joy  by  pursuing  what 
are  thought  delights  by  men,  was  timorous,  and  denied  ^he 
laughter  of  her  soul  until  she  was  comforted. 

For  the  merciful  Grod  lightened  her  fear,  bidding  her  by  IiIa 
holy  word  confess  that  she  did  laugh,  in  order  to  teach  us  that 
the  creature  is  not  wholly  and  entirely  deprived  of  joy ;  but 
that  joy  is  unmingled  and  the  purest  of  ail  which  can  receive 
nothing  of  an  opposite  nature,  the  chosen  peculiar  joy  of  God. 
But  the  joy  which  flows  from  that  is  a  mingled  one,  being 
alloyed,  being  thaf  of  a  man  who  is  already  wise,  and  who  has 
received  as  the  most  valuable  gift  possible  such  a  mixture  as  that 
in  which  the  pleasant  are  far  more  numerous  than  the  unpleasant 
ingredients.     And  this  is  enough  to  say  on  this  subject. 

THE  SECOND  FESTIVAL. 

I.  But  after  this  continued  and  uninterrupted  festival  which 
thus  lasts  through  all  time,  there  is  another  celebrated, 
namely,  that  of  the  sacred  seventh  day  after  each  recurring 
inter>'al  of  six  days,  which  some  have  denominated  the  virgin, 
looking  at  its  exceeding  sanctity  and  purity.  And  others  have 
called  the  motherless,  as  being  produced  by  the  Father  of  the 
universe  alone,  as  a  specimen  of  the  male  kind  unconnected 
with  the  sex  of  women  ;  for  the  number  seven  is  a  most  brave 
and  valiant  number,  well  adapted  by  nature  for  government 
and  authoiity.  Some,  again,  have  called  it  the  occasion,  form- 
ing their  conjectures  of  that  part  of  its  essence  which  is  ap- 
preciable only  by  the  intellect,  from  the  oi)jects  intelligible  to 
their  outward  senses.  For  whatever  is  best  among  the  objects 
of  the  external  senses,  the  things  by  means  of  which  the 
seasons  of  the  year  and  the  revolutions  of  time  are  brought  to 
perfection  in  their  appointed  order,  partake  of  the  number 
seven.  I  mean  that  there  are  seven  planets ;  that  the  stars  of 
the  Bear  are  seven,  that  the  Pleiads  are  seven,  and  the  revolu- 
tions of  the  moon  when  increasing  and  waning,  and  the  orderly 
well-regiilated  circuits  of  the  other  bodies,  the  beauty  of  which 
exceeds  all  description. 

*  Gtoneda  xviii.  10. 


d70  PHILO  JTTDJBUS. 

Bat  Moses,  from  a  most  honourable  cause,  called  it  consum- 
mation  and  perfection;  attributing  to  the  number  six  the 
origination  of  all  the  parts  of  the  world,  and  to  the  number 
seven  their  perfection;  for  the  number  six  is  an  odd-eyen 
number,  being  composed  of  twice  three,  having  the  odd  num- 
b^  for  the  miBLle  and  the  even  number  for  the  female,  from 
the  union  of  which,  production  takes  place  in  accordance  with 
the  unalterable  laws  of  nature.  But  the  number  seven  is  free 
from  <all  such  commixture,  and  is,  if  one  must  speak  plainly, 
the  light  of  the  number  six;  for  what  the  number  six 
engendered,  that  the  number  seven  displayed  when  brought  to 
perfection.  In  reference  to  which  fact  it  may  properly  be 
called  the  birthday  of  the  world,  as  the  day  in  which  the  work 
of  the  Father,  being  exhibited  as  perfect  with  all  its  parts 
perfect,  was  commanded  to  rest  and  abstain  from  all  works. 

Not  that  the  law  is  the  adviser  of  idleness,  for  it  is  always 
accustoming  its  followers  to  submit  to  hardships,  and  training 
them  to  labour,  and  it  hates  tliose  who  desire  to  be  indolent 
and  idle ;  at  all  events,  it  expressly  commands  us  to  labour 
diligently  for  six  days,*  but  in  order  to  give  some  remission 
from  uninterrupted  and  incessant  toil,  it  refreshes  the  body 
¥rith  seasons  of  moderate  relaxation  exactly  measured  out,  so 
as  to  renew  it  again  for  fresh  works.  For  those  who  take 
breath  in  this  way,  I  am  speaking  not  merely  about  private 
individuals  but  even  about  athletes,  collect  fresh  strength,  and 
with  more  vigorous  power,  without  any  shrinking  and  with 
great  endurance,  encounter  everything  that  must  be  done. 
And  the  works  meant  are  those  enjoined  by  precepts  and 
doctrines  in  accordance  with  virtue. 

And  in  the  day  he  exhorts  us  to  apply  ourselves  to  philo- 
sophy, improving  our  souls  and  the  dominant  part  of  us,  our 
mind.  Accordingly,  on  the  seventh  day  there  are  spread  before 
the  people  in  every  city  innumerable  lessons  of  prudence,  and 
temperance,  and  courage,  and  justice,  and  all  other  virtues : 
during  the  giving  of  which  the  common  people  sit  down,  keep- 
ing silence  and  pricking  up  their  ears,  with  all  possible  atten- 
tion, from  their  thirst  for  wholesome  instruction  ;  but  some  of 
those  who  are  very  learned  explain  to  them  what  is  of  great 
importance  and  use,  lessons  by  which  the  whole  of  their  lives 
may  be  improved. 


ON  THB  TEN  FBSnYALS.  371 

And  there  are,  as  \re  may  saj,  two  moat  especiall j  important 
heads  of  all  the  innumerable  particular  lessons  and  doctrines ; 
the  regulating  of  one*s  conduct  towards  God  bj  the  rules  of 
piety  and  holiness,  and  of  one*s  conduct  towards  men  oj  the 
rules  of  humanity  and  justice ;  each  of  which  is  subdivided 
into  a  great  number  of  subordinato  ideas,  all  praiseworthy. 
From  which  considerations  it  is  plain  that  Moses  does  not 
leave  those  persons  at  any  time  idle  who  submit  to  be  guided 
by  his  sacred  admonitions ;  but  since  we  are  composed  of  both 
soul  and  body,  he  has  allotted  to  the  body  such  work  as  is 
suited  to  it,  and  to  the  soul  also  such  tasks  as  are  good  for 
that.  And  he  has  taken  care  that  the  one  shall  succeed  the 
other,  so  that  while  the  body  is  labouring  the  soul  may  be  at 
rest,  and  when  the  body  is  enjoying  relaxation  the  soul  may  be 
labouring ;  and  so  the  best  lives  with  the  contemplative  and 
the  active  life,  succeed  to  one  another  in  regular  alternations. 
The  active  life  having  received  the  number  six,  according  to 
the  service  appointed  for  the  body ;  and  the  contemplative  life 
the  number  seven,  as  tending  to  knowledge  and  to  the  perfect- 
ing of  the  intellect. 

II.  It  is  forbidden  also  on  this  day  to  kindle  a  fire,  as  being 
the  beginning  and  seed  of  all  the  business  of  life ;  since  with- 
out fire  it  is  not  possible  to  make  any  of  tbe  things  which  are 
indispensably  necessary  for  life,  so  that  men  in  the  absence  of 
one  single  element,  the  highest  and  most  ancient  of  alt,  are  cut 
off  from  all  works  and  employments  of  art,  especially  from  all 
handicraft  trades,  and  also  from  all  particular  services.  But 
it  seems  likelv  that  it  was  on  account  of  tliose  who  were  less 
obedient,  and  who  were  the  least  inclined  to  attend  to  what 
was  done,  that  Moses  gave  additional  laws,  besides,  thinking  ii 
right,  not  only  that  those  who  were  free  should  abstain  from 
all  works  on  the  seventh  day,  but  also  that  their  ser\'ants  and 
handmaids  should  have  a  respito  from  their  tasks,  proclaiming 
a  day  of  freedom  to  them  also  after  every  space  of  six  days, 
in  order  to  teach  both  classes  this  most  admirable  lesson ;  so 
that  the  masters  should  be  accustomed  to  do  some  things  with 
their  own  hands,  not  waiting  for  the  services  and  ministrations 
of  their  servants,  in  order  that  if  any  unforeseen  necessities 
came  upon  them,  according  to  the  changes  which  take  place  in 
human  affairs,  they  might  not,  from  being  wholly  unaccustomed 

*  Exodus  ixsT.  3. 


272  '     PUILO  JUD^US. 

to  do  anything  for  themselves,  faint  at  what  they  had  to  do ; 
but,  fiudirtg  the  different  parts  of  the  body  actiye  and  handy, 
might  work  with  ease  and  cheerfulness;  and  teaching  the 
servants  not  to  despair  of  better  prospects,  but  having  a 
relaxation  every  six  days  as  a  kind  of  spark  and  kindling  04 
freedom,  to  look  forward  to  a  complete  relaxation  hereafter,  if 
they  continued  faitliful  and  attached  to  their  masters. 

And  from  the  occurrence  of  the  free  men  at  times  submitting 
to  the  tasks  of  servants,  and  of  the  servants  enjoying  a  respite 
and  holiday,  it  will  arise  that  the  life  of  mankind  advances  in 
improvement  towards  perfect  virtue,  from  their  being  thus 
reminded  of  the  principles  of  equality,  and  repaying  each  other 
with  necessary  services,  both  those  of  high  and  those  of 
obscure  rank. 

But  the  law  has  given  a  relaxation,  not  to  servants  only  on 
the  seventh  day,  but  also  to  tlie  cattle.  And  yet  by  nature 
the  servants  are  bom  free ;  for  no  man  is  by  nature  a  slave. 
But  other  animals  are  expressly  made  for  the  use  and  service 
of  man,  and  are  therefore  i-ankcd  as  slaves ;  but,  nevertheless, 
those  that  ought  to  bear  burdens,  and  to  endure  toil  and 
labour  on  behalf  of  their  owners,  do  all  find  a  respite  on  the 
seventh  day.  And  why  need  I  mention  other  particulars? 
The  ox,  the  animal  who  is  bom  for  the  most  important  and 
most  useful  of  all  the  purposes  of  life,  namely,  for  the  plough, 
when  the  earth  is  already  prepared  for  seed ;  and  again,  when 
the  sheaves  are  brought  into  the  bam,  for  threshing  in  order 
to  the  purification  of  the  crop,  is  on  this  day  unhamessed, 
keeping  as  a  festival  that  day  which  is  the  birtliday  of  the 
year.  And  thus  its  holiness  pervades  every  thing  and  affects 
every  creature. 

III.  And  Moses  thinks  the  number  seven  worthy  of  such 
reverence  that  even  all  other  things  which  at  all  partake  of  it 
are  honoured  by  him ;  at  all  events,  on  eveiy  seventh  year  he 
ordains  a  remission  of  debts,  assisting  the  poor,  and  inviting 
the  rich  to  humanity ;  *  that  so  they,  from  their  abundance, 
giving  to  those  that  are  in  want,  may  also  look  forward  to 
receiving  ser\'ices  from  them  in  the  case  of  any  disaster  hap- 
pening to  them.  For  the  accidents  of  human  life  are  nume- 
rous, and  life  is  not  always  anchored  on  the  same  bottom,  but 
is  apt  to  change  like  the  fickle  wind  which  blows  in  different 

*  Deuteronomy  xv.  1. 


ON  THE  TEN   FESTIVALS.         '  273 

directions  at  different  times.  It  is  well,  therefore,  that  the 
kindness  shown  bj  the  creditors  should  ejLttod  to  all  the 
debtors.  But  sipce  all  men  are  not  naturallj  inclined  to  mag- 
nanimity, but  some  men  are  the  slaves  of  monej,  or  per- 
haps not  yerj  rich,  the  law  has  appointed  that  thej  should 
contribute  what  will  not  inconvenience  them  when  parted  with. 

For  while  it  does  not  permit  them  to  lend  on  usury  to  their 
fellow  countrymen,  it  has  allowed  them  to  receive  interest 
from  foreigners;  calling  the  former,  with  great  felici^  of 
expression,  their  brothers,  in  order  to  prevent  any  one*8 
grudging  to  give  of  his  possessions  to  those  who  are  as  if  by 
nature  joint  inheritors  with  themselves ;  but  those  who  are  not 
their  fellow  countrymen  are  called  strangers,  as  is  very  naturaL 
For  the  being  a  stranger  shows  that  a  person  has  no  right  to  a 
participation  in  any  Uiing,  unless,  indeed,  any  one  out  of  an 
excess  of  virtue  should  treat  even  those  in  the  conditions  of 
strangers  as  kindred  and  related,  from  having  been  bred  up 
under  a  virtuous  state  of  things,  and  under  virtuous  laws  which 
look  upon  what  is  virtuous  alone  as  good. 

But  the  action  of  lending  on  usury  is  blameable ;  for  a 
man  who  lends  on  usury  has  not  abundant  means  of  living,  but 
is  clearly  in  some  want ;  and  he  does  so  as  being  compelled  to 
add  the  interest  to  his  principal  in  order  to  subsist,  and  so  he 
at  last  becomes  of  necessity  very  poor ;  and  while  he  tlunks 
that  he  is  deriving  advantage  he  is  in  reality  injured,  just  as 
foolish  animals  are  when  they  are  deceived  by  a  present  bait  But 
I  should  say  to  such  persons,  "  0  you  who  lend  on  usury,  why 
do  you  seek  to  disguise  your  unsociable  disposition  by  an  appa- 
rent pretence  of  good  fellowship  ?  And  why  do  you  in  words, 
indeed,  pretend  to  be  a  humane  and  considerate  person,  while 
in  your  actions  you  exhibit  a  wont  of  humanity  and  a  terrible 
hardness  of  heart,  exacting  more  than  you  g^ve,  and  some- 
times even  doubling  your  original  loan,  so  as  to  make  the 
poor  man  an  absolute  beggar?  Therefore  no  one  sympathises 
with  you  in  your  distress,  when,  having  endeavoured  to  obtain 
more,  you  fail  to  do  so,  and  besides  lose  even  what  you  had 
before.  But,  on  the  contrary,  all  men  are  glad  of  your  misfor- 
tunes, calling  you  a  usurer,  and  a  skinflint,  and  all  kinds  of 
names  like  £ose,  looking  on  you  as  one  who  lies  in  wait  for 
human  misfortunes,  and  who  esteems  the  misfortunes  of  otben 
his  own  prosperity." 

VOL.  m.  't 


274  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

ft 

Bat,  as  some  have  said,  wickedness  is  a  most  laborious 
thing ;  and  he  who  lends  on  usury  is  blind,  not  seeing  the 
time  of  repayment,  in  which  he  will  scarcely,  or  perhaps  not 
at  all,  receive  the  things  which  in  his  covetousness  he  had 
hoped  to  gain.  Let  such  a  man  pay  the  penalty  of  his  avari- 
cious disposition,  not  recovering  back  what  he  has  expended, 
so  as  to  make  a  gain  of  the  misfortunes  of  men,  deriving  a 
rovenuo  from  unbecoming  sources.  But  let  the  debtors  be 
thought  worthy  of  a  humanity  enjoined  by  the  law,  not  paying 
back  their  loans  and  usurious  interest  upon  them,  but  paying 
back  merely  the  original  sum  lent.  For  again,  at  a  proper 
season,  they  will  give  the  same  assistance  to  those  who  have 
aided  them,  requiting  those  who  set  the  example  of  kindness 
with  equal  services. 

TV.  After  having  given  these  commandments,  Moses  pro- 
ceeds in  regular  order  to  establish  a  law  full  of  all  gentleness 
and  humanity.  "  If,"  says'this  law,  **  one  of  thy  brethren  be  sold 
to  thee,  let  him  sen-e  thee  for  six  years ;  and  in  the  seventh 
year  let  him  be  set  free  without  any  pajment,"*  Here  again 
Moses  calls  their  fellow  countrymen  their  brothers,  implanting 
in  the  soul  of  the  owner  by  this  appellation  an  idea  of  relation- 
ship to  his  servant,  that  he  may  not  neglect  him  as  a  stranger, 
towards  whom  he  has  no  bond  of  goodwill.  But  that,  yielding 
to  a  feeling  of  affection  for  him  as  a  relation,  in  consequence 
of  the  lesson  which  the  holy  scripture  thus  suggests,  he  may 
not  feel  indignant  when  his  servant  is  about  to  recover  his 
freedom.  For  it  has  come  to  pass  that  such  men  are  called 
slaves  (dovXoi),  but  they  are  in  reality  only  servants  (^?rf^), 
serving  their  masters  for  the  sake  of  their  necessities.  And 
even  though  they  had  a  thousand  times  over  given  their  masters 
absolute  power  and  authority  over  them,  still  their  masters 
ought  to  be  gentle  to  them,  considering  these  beautiful  injunc- 
tions of  the  law.  O  man,  he  is  a  hireling  who  is  called  a  slave, 
and  he  also  is  a  man,  having  a  most  subHme  relationship  to 
you,  inasmuch  as  he  is  of  the  same  nation  as  yourself ;  and 
perhaps  he'  is  even  of  the  same  tribe  and  the  same  borough  as 
yourself,  and  is  now  reduced  to  this  condition  through  want. 
.  Do  you,  therefore,  casting  out  of  your  soul  that  treacherous 
evil,  insolence,  behave  to  him  as  if  he  were  a  hireling,  giving 
some  things  and  receiving  others.    And  so  he  will,  with  all 

•  Deuteronomy  xv.  12. 


ON  THE  TEN  FESTIYALS.  S75 

energy  and  cheerfnlness  perform  the  services  dne  to  you,  at  all 
times  and  in  all  places,  never  delaying,  but  by  his  speed  and 
willingness  anticipating  your  commands.  And  do  you,  in 
return,  provide  him  widi  food  and  raiment,  and  talce  all  other 
necessary  care  of  him ;.  not  yoking  him  to  the  plough  like  a 
brute  beast,  and  not  oppressing  him  with  heavy  burdens 
beyond  his  power  to  bear,  nor  treating  him  with  insolence,  nor 
reducing  him  to  painful  despondency  by  threats  and  infliction 
of  punishment;  but  giving  him  proper  relaxation  and  well- 
regulated  periods  of  rest ;  for  the  precept,  '*  Let  nothing  be  too 
much,"  applies  to  every  case,  and  especially  to  the  conduct  of 
masters  to  their  servants. 

Therefore,  when  he  has  served  you  for  a  very  sufficient 
time,  for  six  years,  then,  when  the  most  sacred  number,  the 
seventh  year  is  about  to  arrive,  let  him  who  is  free  by  nature 
depart  in  freedom ;  and  grant  him  this  kindness  without  hesi- 
tating as  to  your  part,  my  good  man,  but  joyfully,  because  you 
have  now  an  opportunity  of  doing  a  service  to  that  most  excel- 
lent of  all  animals,  man,  in  the  most  important  of  all  matters ; 
for  there  is  no  blessing  to  a  slave  greater  than  freedom.  Do 
you,  therefore,  set  him  free  joyfully ;  and,  moreover,  make  him  a 
present  from  your  own  property,  from  each  portion  of  your 
possessions,  giving  to  him  who  has  served  you  faithfully  means 
to  support  himself  on  his  journey.  For  it  will  tend  to  your 
credit  if  he  does  not  leave  your  house  in  poverty  but  having  a 
plentiful  supply  for  all  his  necessities,  so  that  he  may  not 
again,  through  want,  fall  into  his  previous  calamity,  namely, 
slavery,  being  compelled  through  want  of  his  daily  food  to  sdl 
himself,  and  so  your  kindness  will  be  lost.  This,  then,  in 
enough  to  say  about  the  poor. 

v.  In  the  next  place  Moses  commands  the  people  to  leave 
the  land  fallow  and  untilled  every  seventh  year,  for  many  rea- 
sons ;*  first  of  all,  that  they  may  honour  the  number  seven,  or 
each  period  of  days,  and  months,  and  years ;  for  every  seventh 
day  is  sacred,  which  is  called  by  the  Hebrews  the  sabbath ;  and 
the  seventh  month  in  every  year  has  the  greatest  of  the  festi- 
vals allotted  to  it,  so  that  very  naturally  the  seventh  year  also 
has  a  share  of  the  veneration  paid  to  this  number,  and  receives 
especial  honour. 

And  the  second  reason  is  this,  "  Be  not,**  says  the  lawgiver, 

*  LoviticuB  sxv.  4. 


S76  PfllLO  JUDJBUS. 

"  wholly  devoted  to  gain,  but  oven  willingly  snbmit  to  some 
loss,"  that  80  yon  may  hear  with  the  more  indifference  invo- 
luntary calamity  if  it  should  ever  fall  upon  you,  and  not  grieve 
and  despond,  as  if  at  some  new  and  strange  occurrence ;  for 
there  are  some  rich  men  so  unfortunate  in  their  dispositions, 
as,  when  want  comes  upon  them,  to  groan  and  despond  no  less 
than  they  might  do,  if  they  were  deprived  of  all  their  sub- 
stance. But  of  the  followers  of  Moses,  all  who  are  true  dis- 
ciples, being  practised  in  good  laws,  are  accustomed,  from  their 
earliest  age,  to  bear  want  with  patience,  by  the  custom  of 
leaving  their  fertile  land  fallow ;  and  being  also  taught  mag- 
nanimity, and  one  may  almost  say,  to  let  slip  out  of  their 
hands,  from  deliberate  intention,  revenues  of  admitted  cer- 
tainty. 

The  third  reason  appears  to  me  to  be  thus,  which  is  inti- 
mated in  a  somewhat  figurative  manner,  namely,  to  show  that 
it  does  not  become  any  one  whatever  to  weigh  down  and  op- 
press men  with  burdens ;  for  if  one  is  to  allow  a  period  of  rest 
to  the  portions  of  the  earth  which  cannot  by  nature  have  any 
share  in  the  feelings  of  pleasure  or  of  pain,  how  much  the  more 
must  men  be  entitled  to  a  similar  relaxation,  who  have  not 
only  these  outward  senses,  which  are  common  to  the  brute 
beasts,  but  also  the  especial  gift  of  reason,  by  which  the  painful 
feelings  which  arise  from  toil  and  fatigue,  are  more  vividly 
imprinted  on  their  imaginations  ? 

Cease,  therefore,  ye  who  are  called  masters,  from  imposing 
harsh  and  intolerable  commands  on  your  slaves,  which  break 
the  strength  of  the  body  by  their  compulsion,  and  compel  the 
souls  to  faint  even  before  the  bodies ;  for  there  is  no  objection 
to  your  exerting  a  moderate  degree  of  authority,  giving  orders 
by  which  you  will  receive  the  services  to  which  you  are  en- 
titled, and  in  consequence  of  which  your  servants  will  cheer- 
fully do  what  they  are  desired ;  and  then  they  will  discharge 
their  duties  but  for  a  short  period,  as  if  early  exhausted,  and, 
if  one  must  say  the  truth,  brought  by  their  labours  to  old  age 
before  their  time ;  but  like  athletes,  preserving  their  youthful 
vigour  for  a  long  time,  who  do  not  become  fat  and  corpulent, 
but  who  are  accustomed,  by  exertion  and  sweat,  to  train  them- 
selves, so  as  to  be  able  to  acquire  the  things  which  ere 
nc  cessary  and  useful  for  life. 

Moreover  let  the  governors  of  cities  cease  to  oppress  them 


ON  THE  TEK  FESTIVALS.  S77 

ynth  continual  and  excessive  taxes  and  tributes,  filling  their 
own  stores  with  money,  and  in  preserving  as*  a  treasure  the 
illiberal  vices  which  defile  their  whole  lives ;  for  tbey  do,  on 
purpose,  select  as  collectors  of  their  revenues  the  most  pitiless 
of  men,  persons  full  of  all  kinds  of  inhumanity,  giving  them 
abundant  opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  their  covetouaness ; 
and  they,  in  addition  to  their  own  innate  severity  of  temper, 
receiving  free  license  from  the  commands  of  their  masters, 
and  having  determined  to  do  everything  so  as  to  please  them, 
practise  ail  the  harshest  measures  which  they  can  imagine, 
having  no  notion  of  gentleness  or  humanity,  not  even  in  their 
dreams;  therefore  they  throw  everything  into  disorder  and 
confusion,  levying  their  exactions,  not  only  on  the  possessions 
of  the  citizens,  but  also  on  their  persons,  with  insults  and  vio- 
lence, and  the  invention  of  new  and  unprecedented  torture. 

And  before  now  I  have  heard  of  some  persons  who,  in  their 
ferocity  and  unequalled  fury,  have  not  spared  even  the  dead ; 
but  have  been  so  brutal  as  even  to  venture  to  beat  the  dead 
corpses  with  goads ;  and  when  some  one  blamed  their  brutality, 
in  that  not  even  death,  that  relief  and  real  end  of  all  miseries, 
could  prevent  their  victims  from  being  insulted  by  them,  but 
that,  instead  of  a  grave  and  the  customary  funeral  rites,  they 
were  exposed  to  continued  insult,  they  made  a  defence  worse 
even  than  the  accusation  brought  against  them,  saying  that 
they  were  insulting  the  dead,  not  for  the  salve  of  abusing  the 
dumb  and  senseless  dust,  for  there  was  no  iidvantage  in  tliat, 
but  for  the  sake  of  making  those  who  through  ties  of  blood  or 
of  friendship  were  nearly  connected  with  tliem  feel  compassion 
for  them,  and  so  inducing  them  to  pay  a  ransom  for  their 
bodies,  thus  doing  them  the  last  service  in  their  power. 

VI,  Then,  0  you  most  worthless  of  all  men !  I  would  say 
to  them,  have  you  not  first  learnt  what  you  are  now  teaching  ? 
or  do  you  know  how  to  innte  other  people  to  compassion  even 
by  the  most  inhuman  actions,  and  yet  have  you  eradicated  all 
merciful  and  humane  feelings  from  your  own  souls  ?  And  do 
you  act  in  this  way  in  spite  of  not  being  in  want  of  good  ad- 
visers, and  especially  of  our  laws,  which  have  released  even 
the  earth  from  its  yearly  burdens,  giving  it  a  relaxation  and  a 
respite  ?  and  it,  aldiough  it  seems  to  be  inanimate,  is  never- 
theless fully  prepared  to  make  a  requital  and  to  recompence 
favours,  hastening  to  pay  back  any  gift  which  it  has  received ; 


278  PHUiO  JXTDMUS. 

for  as  it  receiyes  an  exemption  every  seventh  year,  and  is  not 
forced  to  exert  itself  that  year,  but  is  set  wholly  free  for  the 
whole  circle  of  the  year,  in  the  subsequent  year  produces  double, 
or  sometimes,  many  times,  larger  crops  than  usual  from  its 
great  productiveness. 

And  in  like  manner  you  may  see  the  trainers  acting  in  the 
same  way  towards  tbe  athletes ;  for  when  they  are  exercising 
them  with  continual  and  uninterrupted  practice,  before  they 
are  wholly  knocked  up,  they  refresh  them,  giving  a  respite  not 
only  from  their  exertions  in  training,  but  also  from  their  strict 
regimen  of  eating  and  drinking,  relaxing  the  severity  of  their 
diet  so  as  to  produce  a  cheerfulness  of  soul  and  good  condition 
of  body.  And  yet  they  are  not  to  be  looked  upon  as  teachers 
of  indolence  and  luxury,  inasmuch  as  their  professed  business 
IS  to  train  men  to  the  endurance  of  labours,  but  by  a  certain 
method  and  artificial  system  they  add  to  their  natural  strength 
a  strength  more  powerful  still,  and  to  their  innate  vigour  a 
more  energetic  vigour  still,  increasing  their  previous  powers 
by  reciprocal  remission  and  exertion,  as^by  a  well-regulated 
harmony. 

And  I  liave  learnt  all  this  from  all-wise  nature,  which, 
knowing  the  industrious  and  laborious  condition  of  our  race, 
has  distributed  them  into  day  and  night,  giving  to  us  the  one 
for  wakefulness,  and  the  other  for  sleep  ;  for  she  felt  a  natural 
anxiety,  like  a  careful  mother,  that  her  offspring  should  not  be 
worn  out  with  toil ;  for  by  day  she  excites  our  bodies,  and 
rouses  them  up  to  all  the  necessities  and  duties  belonging  to 
life,  compelling  those  to  work  who  would  gladly  be  accustomed 
to  cultivate  the  leisure  of  idleness,  and  an  effeminate  and  luxu- 
rious life.  But  by  night,  as  if  she  were  sounding  a  retreat  iu 
time  of  war,  she  invites  us  to  rest,  and  to  take  care  of  our 
bodies.  And  those  men  who  have  laid  aside  a  heavy  weight  of 
business,  which  has  lasted  from  morning  till  evening,  do  now 
lay  their  burdens  aside  and  return  home  and  devote  them- 
selves to  ease,  and  indulging  in  profound  sleep,  refresh  them- 
selves after  the  labours  of  the  day.  This  long  interval  between 
sleeping  and  waking  nature  has  allotted  to  men,  that  they  may 
by  turns  labour  diligently  and  by  turns  rest,  so  as  to  have  all 
the  parts  of  their  bodies  more  ready  for  action,  and  more  active 
and  powerful. 

VIL  And  the  lawgiver,  who  is  a  prophetic  spirit,  gave  us  our 


ON  THE  TEN  FESTIVALS.  279 

laws,  haTing  a  regard  to  these  things,  and  proclaimed  a  holiday 
to  the  whole  country,  restraining  Uie  fanners  ffom  cultivating 
the  land  after  each  six  years*  incessant  industry.  But  it  was 
not  only  on  account  of  the  motives  which  I  have  mentioned 
that  he  gave  these  injunctions,  but  also  because  of  his  innate 
humanity,  which  he  thinks  fit  to  weave  in  with  every  part  of 
his  legislation,  stamping  on  all  who  study  the  holy  scriptures 
a  sociable  and  humane  disposition. 

For  he  commands  his  people  every  seventh  year  to  forbear 
to  enclose  any  piece  of  land,  but  to  let  all  the  olive  gardens 
and  vineyards  remain  open,  and  all  their  other  possessions, 
whether  they  be  seed-land  or  trees,  that  so  the  poor  may  be 
able  to  enjoy  the  spontaneously  growing  crops  without  fear,  in 
a  greater,  or  at  all  events  not  in  a  less  degree  than  the  owners 
themselves.  On  which  account  he  does  not  allow  the  masters 
to  cultivate  the  land,  having  in  view  the  object  of  not  causing 
them  any  annoyance  from  the  feeling  that  they  are  at  all  the 
expense,  but  that  they  do  not  receive  any  revenue  from  their 
lands  to  make  up  for  the  expense,  wliile  the  poor  enjoy  all  the 
crops  as  their  own ;  and  he  permits  those  who  appear  to  be 
strangers  to  enjoy  all  these  things,  raising  them  from  their  ap- 
parent lowly  condition,  and  from  the  reproach  of  beingbeggars. 

Is  it  not  then  fit  to  love  these  laws  which  are  full  of  such 
abundant  humanity?  by  which  the  rich  men  are  taught  to 
share  the  blessings  which  they  have  with  and  to  communicate 
them  to  others  :  and  the  poor  are  comforted,  not  being  for  ever 
compelled  to  frequent  the  houses  of  the  indigent  to  supply  the 
deficiencies  by  which  they  themselves  are  oppressed ;  but 
there  are  times  when  the  widows  and  orphan  children,  as  if 
they  had  been  deriving  a  revenue  from  their  own  properties, 
namely  the  spontaneously  growing  crops,  as  I  have  said  before, 
and  all  other  classes  of  persons  who  are  disregarded  from  not 
being  wealthy,  do  at  last  find  themselves  in  the  possession  of 
plenty,  being  on  a  sudden  enriched  by  the  gift  of  God,*  who  has 
called  them  to  share  with  the  possessors  themselves  in  the 
number  of  the  sacred  seven. 

And  all  those  who  breed  flocks  and  herds  lend  their  own 
cattle  with  fearlessness  and  impunity  to  graze  on  the  land  of 
others,  choosing  the  most  fertile  plains,  and  the  lands  most 
suitable  for  the  feeding  of  their  cattle,  availing  themselves  of 
the  license  of  the  jubilee ;  and  they  are  not  met  by  any  ill-will 


280  PHILO  JUBJBUS. 

or  illibdrality  on  the  part  of  the  masters,  as  having  the 
property  in  these  lands  by  old  custom,  ^iiich  having  prevailed 
for  a  very  long  time,  so  as  to  become  iJEuniliar,  has  now  pre- 
vailed even  over  nature. 

VIIL  Having  laid  down  these  principles  as  a  kind  of 
foundation  of  gentleness  and  humanity,  he  then  puts  together 
seven  sevens  of  years,  and  so  makes  the  fiftieth  year  an 
entirely  sacred  year,  enacting  with  reference  to  it  some  ordi- 
nances of  especial  honour  beyond  those  which  relate  to  the 
ordinary  years  of  communication  of  property. 

In  the  first  place  he  gives  this  commandment  He  thinks 
it  fitting  that  all  property  that  has  been  alienated  should  now 
be  restored  to  its  original  master^  in  order  that  the  inheri^ 
ances  originally  apportioned  to  the  different  tribes  may  be 
preserved,  and  that  no  one  who  originally  received  an  allot- 
ment may  be  whoUy  deprived  of  his  possessions.  Since  it 
often  happens  that  unforeseen  circumstances  come  upon  men 
by  which  they  are  compelled  to  sell  what  belongs  to  them. 
And  so  ho  provided  in  a  suitable  manner  for  their  necessities, 
and  prevented  those  who  purchased  the  lands  from  being 
deceived,  allowing  the  one  to  sell  their  lands,  and  teaching  the 
others  very  plainly  the  conditions  on  which  they  ore  going  to 
purchase.  For  the  law  says  Do  not  give  a  price  as  if  for 
an  everlasting  possession,  but  only  for  a  definite  number  of 
years,  which  must  be  less  than  fifty;  for  the  sale  effected 
ought  not  to  be  a  sale  of  the  lands  owned,  but  a  sale  of  the 
crops,  for  two  most  weighty  reasons;  one,  that  the  whole 
country  is  called  the  possession  of  God,  and  it  is  impious  for 
any  one  else  to  be  recorded  as  the  masters  of  the  possessions 
of  God ;  and  secondly,  because  a  separate  aUotment  has  been 
assigned  to  each  land-owner,  of  which  the  law  does  not  choose 
the  man  who  originally  received  the  allotment  to  be  deprived. 
Therefore,  the  law  invites  the  man  who  is  able  to  recover  his 
original  property  within  the  period  of  fifty  years,  or  any  one  of 
his  nearest  relations,  to  use  every  exertion  to  repay  the  price 
which  he  received,  and  not  to  be  the  cause  of  loss  to  the  man 
who  purchased  it,  and  who  served  him  at  a  time  when  he  was  in 
need  of  assistance.  And  at  the  same  time  it  sympathises  with 
the  man  who  is  in  too  great  a  state  of  indigence  to  do  so,  and 
bestows  its  compassion  on  him,  giving  him  back  his  former 
property  with  the  exception  of  any  fields  which  have  been 


OK  THE  TEN  TESTZVALS.  281 

consecrated  by  a  tow,  and  are  so  placed  in  the  ^dass  of  offer- 
ings to  God.  And  it  is  contraiy  to  divine  law  that  any  thing 
which  has  been  offered  to  God  shoold  ever  by  lapse  of  time 
become  profane.  On  which  account  it  is  commanded  that  the 
accorato  value  of  those  fields  shall  be  fully  exacted,  without 
showing  any  favour  to  the  man  who  dedicated  the  offering. 

IX.  These  are  the  commandments  which  are  given  with 
respect  to  the  divisions  of  the  land  and  the  inheritances  so 
portioned  out.  There  are  others  also  enacted  with  respect  to 
houses.  And  since  of  houses  some  are  in  cities,  being  within 
walla ;  while  others  are  open  abodes  in  the  country,  and  not 
within  any  walls;  the  law  has  directed  that  those  in  the 
country  shall  always  be  redeemed  with  money,  and  that  those 
which  are  not  redeemed  before  the  fiftieth  year  shall  be 
restored  without  any  payment  to  their  original  owners,  just  as 
their  other  possessions ;  *  for  the  houses  are  a  portion  of  the 
man*s  possessions.  But  those  which  are  within  walls  shall  be 
liable  to  be  redeemed  by  those  who  have  sold  them  for  a  full 
year;t  but  if  they  be  not  redeemed  within  that  year,  then 
after  that  year  they  shall  be  confirmed  to  those  who  had  bought 
them,  the  jubilee  of  the  fiftieth  year  not  injuring  the  claim  of 
the  purchasers. 

And  the  reason  of  these  enactments  is  that  God  wills  to 
give  even  to  strangers  an  opportunity  of  becoming  firmly 
established  in  the  land.  For  since  they  have  no  participation 
in  the  land,  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  numbered  amona  those 
to  whom  the  inheritances  have  been  apportioned,  the  law  has 
allotted  to  them  a  property  in  houses,  being  desirous  that  they 
who  have  come  as  suppliants  to  the  laws,  and  who  have  taken 
refuge  under  their  protection,  should  not  be  homeless  wander- 
ers in  the  land.  For  the  cities,  when  the  land  was  originally 
portioned  out  in  inheritances,  were  not  divided  among  the 
tribes,  nor  indeed  were  they  originally  built  together  in  streets, 
but  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  preferred  to  make  their  abode 
in  their  open  houses  in  the  fields.  But  afterwards  they  quitted 
these  houses  and  came  together,  the  feeling  of  a  love  of  fellow- 
ship and  communication,  as  was  natural,  becoming  stronger 
after  a  lapse  of  time,  and  so  they  build  houses  in  the  same 
place,  and  cities,  of  which  they  allowed  a  sharo  also  to  the 

•  Leviticujs  xxT.  31.  +  Leviticiiaxxs.lA. 


2S-2  PEILO   JUD-EUS. 

strangers,  that  they  might  not  be  destitute  of  every  thing  both 
in  the  ooontiy  and  in  the  cities. 

X.  And  concerning  the  tribe  which  was  set  apart  as  conse- 
cxmted  for  the  priesthood,  the  following  laws  are  established. 
The  law  did  not  bestow  upon  the  keepers  of  the  temple  any 
portion  of  the  land,  bonsidering  the  first  fruits  of  it  a  sufficient 
leTenue  for  them.  But  it  allotted  them  eight  and  forty  cities 
to  dwell  in,  and  a  suburb  of  two  thousand  cubits  around  each 
city.*  Therefore,  it  did  not  confirm  the  houses  in  these  cities 
in  the  same  manner  that  it  did  those  in  the  other  cities  which 
are  built  within  walls,  to  the  purchasers,  if  those  who  had  sold 
them  were  not  able  to  redeem  them  within  the  year,  but  it 
permitted  them  to  be  redeemed  at  any  time,  like  the  open 
nouses  in  the  country  taken  from  the  gentiles,  to  which  -they 
corresponded.  Since  the  Levites  had  received  only  houses  in 
this  district,  of  which  the  lawgiver  did  not  think  it  fit  that 
those  who  received  them  should  be  deprived  any  more  than 
those  to  whom  the  allotments  of  the  open  houses  in  the  coun* 
try  had  fallen.     And  this  is  enough  to  say  about  the  houses. 

XL  But  the  laws  established  with  respect  to  those  who 
owed  money  to  usurers,  and  to  those  who  had  become  servants 
to  masters,  resemble  those  already  mentioned;  that  the 
usurers  shall  not  exact  usurers*  interest  from  their  fellow 
countrymen,  but  shall  be  contented  to  receive  back  only  what 
they  lent ;  and  that  the  masters  shall  behave  to  those  whom 
they  have  bought  with  their  money  not  as  if  they  ^vere  by 
nature  slaves,  but  only  hirelings,  giving  them  immunity  and 
liberty,  at  once,  indeed,  to  those  who  can  pay  down  a  ransom 
for  themselves,  and  at  a  subsequent  period  to  the  indigent, 
either  when  the  seventh  year  from  the  beginning  of  their 
slavery  arrives,  or  when  the  fiftieth  year  comes,  even  if  a  man 
happen  to  have  fallen  into  slavery  only  the  day  before.  For 
thu  year  both  is  and  is  looked  upon  as  a  year  of  remission  ; 
every  one  retracing  his  steps  and  turning  back  again  to  his 
previous  state  of  prosperity. 

But  the  law  permits  the  people  to  acquire  a  property  in 
slaves  who  are  not  of  their  own  countrymen,  but  who  are  of 
different  nations ;  intending  in  the  first  place  that  there  should 
be  a  difference  between  one's  own  countrymen  and  strangers, 
and  secondly,  not  desiring  completely  to  exclude  from  the 

*  LeritictiB  xxzv.  5. 


OK  THE  TEN  FESTXYALS.  283 

constitution  that  most  entirelj  indispensable  property  of  slayes ; 
for  there  are  an  innumerable  host  of  circumstsmces  in  life 
which  reqiiire  the  ministrations  of  servants. 

THE  THIRD  FESTIYAL. 

Following  the  order  which  we  have  adopted,  we  proceed  to 
speak  of  the  third  festiTal,  that  of  the  new  moon.  First  of  all, 
because  it  is  the  beginning  of  the  month,  and  the  beginning, 
whether  of  number  or  of  time,  is  honourable.  Secondly,  be- 
cause at  this  time  there  is  nothing  in  the  whole  of  heaven 
destitute  of  light  Thirdly,  because  at  that  period  the  more 
powerful  and  important  body  gives  a  portion  of  necessary 
assistance  to  the  less  important  and  weo^er  body ;  for,  at  the 
time  of  the  new  moon,  the  sun  begins  to  illuminate  the  moon 
with  a  light  which  is  visible  to  the  outward  senses,  and  then 
she  displays  her  own  beauty  to  the  beholders.  And  this  is,  as 
it  seems,  an  evident  lesson  of  kindness  and  humanity  to  men, 
to  teach  them  that  they  should  never  grudge  to  impart  their 
own  good  things  to  others,  but,  imitating  the  heavenly  bodies, 
should  drive  envy  away  and  banish  it  from  the  soul. 

THE  FOURTH  FESTIVAL. 

And  after  the  feast  of  the  new  moon  comes  the  fourth 
festival,  that  of  the  passover,  which  the  Hebrews  call  pascha,  on 
which  the  whole  people  offer  sacri6ce,  beginning  at  noon-day 
and  continuing  till  evening.  And  this  festival  is  instituted  in 
remembrance  of,  and  as  giving  thanks  for,  their  great  migra- 
tion which  they  made  from  Egypt,  with  many  myriads  of 
people,  in  accordance  with  the  commands  of  God  given  to 
them ;  leading  then,  as  it  seems,  a  country  full  of  all  inhu* 
manity  and  practising  every  kind  of  inhospitality,  and  (what 
was  worst  of  all)  giving  the  honour  due  to  God  to  brute  beasts ; 
and,  therefore,  they  sacrificed  at  that  time  themselves  out  of 
their  exceeding  joy,  without  waiting  for  priests.  And  what  was 
then  done  the  law  enjoined  to  be  repeated  once  every  year,  as 
a  memorial  of  the  gratitude  due  for  their  deliverance. 
'  These  things  are  thus  related  in  accordance  with  the  ancient 
historic  accounts.  But  those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  turning 
plain  stories  into  allegory,  argue  that  the  passover  figuratively 
represents  the  purification  of  the  soul;  for  they  say  that  the 
lover  of  wisdom  is  never  practising  anything  else  except  a  pass- 


284  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

ing  over  from  the  body  and  the  passions.  And  each  house  is 
at  that  time  invested  with  the  character  and  dignity  of  a 
temple,  the  victim  being  sacrificed  so  as  to  make  a  suitable 
feast  for  the  man  who  has  provided  it  and  of  those  who  are 
collected  to  share  in  the  feast,  being  all  duly  purified  with  holy 
ablutions. 

And  those  who  are  to  share  in  the  feast  come  together  not 
08  they  do  to  other  entertainments,  to  gratify  their  bellies  with 
wine  and  meat, -but  to  fulfil  their  hereditary  custom  with  prayer 
and  songs  of  praise.  And  this  universal  sacrifice  of  the  whole 
people  is  celebrated  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month,  which 
consists  of  two  periods  of  seven,  in  order  that  nothing  which  is 
accounted  worthy  of  honour  may  be  separated  from  the  number 
seven.  But  this  number  is  ihe  beginning  of  brilliancy  and 
dignity  to  everything 

THE  FIFTH   FESTIVAL. 

And  there  is  another  festival  combined  with  the  feast  of  the 
passover,  having  a  use  of  food  difierent  from  the  usual  one, 
and  not  customary ;  the  use,  namely,  of  unleavened  bread,  from 
which  it  derives  its  name.  And  there  are  two  accounts  given 
of  this  festival,  the  one  peculiar  to  the  nation,  on  account  of 
the  migration  already  described ;  the  other  a  common  one,  in 
accordance  with  conformity  to  nature  and  with  the  harmony  of 
the  whole  world.  And  we  must  consider  how  accurate  the 
hypothesis  is. 

This  month,  being  the  seventh  both  in  number  and  order, 
according  to  the  revolutions  of  the  sun,  is  the  first  in  power  ; 
on  which  account  it  is  also  called  the  first  in  the  sacred  scrip- 
tures. And  the  reason,  as  I  imagine,  is  as  follows.  The  vernal 
equinox  is  an  imitation  and  representation  of  that  beginning 
in  accordance  with  which  this  world  was  created.  Accordingly, 
every  year,  God  reminds  men  of  the  creation  of  the  world,  and 
with  this  view  puts  forward  the  spring,  in  which  season  all 
plants  Sourish  and  bloom ;  for  which  reason  this  is  very  cor- 
rectly set  down  in  the  law  as  the  first  month,  since,  in  a 
manner,  it  may  be  said  to  be  an  impression  of  the  first  begin- 
ning of  all,  being  •stamped  by  it  as  by  an  archetypal  seal.  And 
this  feast  is  begun  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  month,  in  the 
middle  of  the  month,  on  the  day  on  which  the  moon  is  full  of 

*  Exodus  xlL  1. 


ON  THE  TEN  FESnVALB.  285 

light,  in  consequence  of  the  proyidence  of  God  taking  care  that 
there  shall  be  no  darkness  on  that  day. 

And,  again,  the  feast  is  celebrated  for  seven  days,  on  acoount 
of  the  honour  due  to  that  number,  in  order  that  nothing  which 
tends  to  cheerfulness  and  to  the  giving  of  thanks  to  God  may 
be  separated  from  the  holy  number  seven.  And  of  the  seven 
days,  Moses  pronounces  two,  the  first  and  the  last,  holy; 
giving,  as  is  natural,  a  pre-eminence  to  the  beginning  and  to 
Uie  end ;  and  wishing,  as  if  in  the  case  of  a  musical  instru* 
ment,  to  unite  the  two  exiremities  in  harmony. 

And  the  unleavened  bread  is  ordained  because  their  ancee. 
tors  took  unleavened  bread  with  them  when  they  went  forth 
out  of  Egypt,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Deity ;  or  else,  because 
at  that  time  (I  mean  at  the  spring  season,  during  which  this 
festival  is  celebrated)  the  crop  of  wheat  is  not  yet  ripe,  the 
plains  being  still  loaded  with  the  com,  and  it  not  being  as  yet 
the  harvest  time,  and  therefore  the  lawgiver  has  ordained  the 
use  of  unleavened  food  with  a  view  to  assimilating  it  to  the 
state  of  the  crops.  For  unleavened  food  is  also  imperfect  or 
unripe,  as  a  memorial  of  the  good  hope  which  is  entertained ; 
since  nature  is  by  this  time  preparing  her  annual  gifts  for  the 
race  of  mankind,  with  an  abundance  and  plenteous  pouring 
forth  of  necessaries. 

The  interpreters  of  the  holy  scriptures  do  also  say  that  the 
unleavened  food  is  a  gift  of  nature,  but.  that  banned  bread  is  a 
work  of  art.  Since,  therefore,  the  vernal  festival  is  a  com- 
memoration of  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  since  that  it  was 
inevitable  that  the  most  ancient  persons,  those  formed  out  of 
the  earth,  must  have  used  tlie  gifts  of  the  world  without  altera- 
tion, pleasure  not  having  as  yet  obtained  the  dominion,  the 
lawgiver  ordained  that  food  which  was  the  most  suitable  to  the 
occasion,  wishing  to  kindle  every  year  a  desire  to  walk  in  the 
paths  of  a  holy  and  rigid  way  of  life. 

THE  SIXTH  FESTIVAL. 

There  is  also  a  festival  on  the  day  of  the  paschal  feast, 
which  succeeds  the  first  day,  and  this  is ,  named  the  aheaf^ 
from  what  takes  place  on  it ;  for  the  sheaf  is  brought  to  the 
altar  as  a  first  fruit  both  of  the  country  which  the  nation  has 
received  for  its  own,  and  also  of  the  whole  land ;  so  as  to  be 
an  offering  both  for  the  nation  separately,  and  also  8.cacQs&£fi^ 


286  PHn<o  JXTBiEua. 

one  for  tbe  whole  race  of  mankind ;  and  so  that  the  people  hj 
it  worship  the  living  God,  hoth  for  themselves  and  for  all  the 
rest  of  nutnkind,  hecause  they  have  received  the  fertile  earth 
for  their  inheritance ;  for  in  the  country  there  is  no  barren  soil 
but  even  all  those  parts  which  appear  to  be  stony  and  rugged 
are  snnounded  with  soft  veins  of  great  depth,  which,  by  reason 
of  their  richness,  are  very  well  suited  for  the  production  of 
living  things. 

And  there  are  many  meanings  intended  by  this  offering  of 
the  first  fruits.  In  the  first  place  they  are  a  memorial  of  God ; 
secondly,  they  are  a  most  just  requital  to  be  offered  to  him 
who  is  the  real  cause  of  all  fertiliQr ;  and  the  sheaf  of  the  first 
fhuts  is  barley,  calculated  for  the  innocent  and  blameless  use 
of  the  inferior  animals ;  for  since  it  is  not  consistent  with 
holiness  to  offer  first  fruits  of  evexything,  since  most  things 
are  made  rather  for  pleasure  than  for  any  actually  indispens- 
able use,  it  is  also  not  consistent  with  holiness  to  enjoy  and 
partake  of  any  thing  which  is  given  for  food,  without  first  giving 
thanks  to  that  being  to  whom  it  is  becoming  and  pious  to 
offer  them. 

That  portion  of  the  food  which  was  honoured  with  the 

second  place,  namely,  barley,  was  ordered  by  the  law  to  be 

offered  as  first  fruits ;  for  the  first  honours  were  assigned  to 

'  wheat,  of  which  it  has  deferred  the  offering  of  the  first  fruits, 

as  being  more  honourable,  to  a  more  suitable  seiison. 

THE   SEVENTH  FESTIVAL. 

The  solemn  assembly  on  the  occasion  of  the  festival  of  the 
sheaf  having  such  great  privileges,  is  the  prelude  to  another 
festival  of  still  greater  importance;  for  from  this  day  the 
fiftieth  day  is  reckoned,  making  up  the  sacred  number  of 
seven  sevens,  with  the  addition  of  a  unit  as  a  seal  to  the  whole : 
and  this  festival,  being  that  of  the  first  fruits  oif  the  com,  has 
derived  its  name  of  pentecost  from  the  number  of  fifty,. 
(nnYTrflLOcrhi),  And'  on  it  it  is  the  custom  to  offor  up  two 
leavened  loaves  made  of  wheat,  as  a  first  fruit  of  the  best  kind 
of  food  made  of  com ;  either  because,  before  the  fruit  of  the 
year  is  converted  to  the  use  of  man,  the  first  produce  of  the 
new  crop,  the  first  gathered  com  that  appears  is  offered  as  a 
first  fruit,  in  order  that  by  an  insignificant  emblem  the  people 
mnjr  djsplaf  their  grateful  disposition;  or  else  because  the 


ON  THE  TEN  FESTIVALS.  287 

fruit  of  wheat  is  most  espedallj  the  first  and  most  excellent 
of  all  productions. 

And  the  hread  is  leavened  hecause  the  law  forhids  anj  one 
to  offer  unleavened  hread  upon  the  altar;  not  in  order  that 
there  should  he  any  contradiction  in  the  injunctions  giveD, 
hut  that  in  a  manner  the  giving  and  receiving  maj  he  of  one 
sort ;  the  receiving  being  gratitude  from  those  who  offer  it, 
and  the  giving  an  unhesitating  hestowal  of  the  customary 
blessings  on  those  who  offer.*    Not  indeed  to  that    ... 

For  those  to  whom  such  an  action  is  permitted  will  use 
the  offerings  when  they  have  once  been  consecrated :  and  it  is 
permitted  to  the  priests ;  and  the  leaven  is  also  an  emblem  of 
two  other  things;  first  of  all  of  that  most  perfect  and  entire* 
food,  than  which  one  cannot,  among  all  the  things  of  daily 
use,  find  any  which  is  better  and  more  advantageous ;  and 
the  fruit  of  wheat  is  the  best  of  all  the  things  that  are  sown ; 
so  that  it  is  fitting,  that  that  should  be  offered  as  the  most 
excellent  of  first  fi*uits,  for  the  most  excellent  gift.  The  second 
is  a  more  figurative  meaning,  implying  that  every  thing  which 
is  leavened  is  apt  to  infiate  and  elate  ;  and  joy  is  an  irrational 
elation  of  the  soul. 

Now  man  is  not  by  nature  disposed  to  rejoice  at  anything 
that  exists  more  than  at  an  abundant  and  sufficient  supply  of 
necessaries ;  for  which  it  is  very  proper  to  give  thanks  joy- 
fully, maicing  a  display  of  gratitude,  for  the  invisible  happiness 
affecting  the  mind,  which  shall  be  perceptible  to  the  outward 
senses  dirough  the  medium  of  the  leavened  loaves ;  and  these 
first  fruits  are  loaves,  not  com,  because  when  there  is  com 
there  is  no  longer  anything  wanting  for  the  enjoyment  of  food, 
for  it  is  said  that  the  wheat  is  the  last  of  all  the  grains  which 
are  sown  to  ripen  and  to  come  to  harvest.  And  there  are  thus 
two  most  excellent  acts  of  thanksgiving  having  a  reference  to 
two  distinct  times ;  to  the  past  in  which  we  have  been  saved 
from  experiencing  the  evils  of  scarcity  and  hunger  while 
living  in  happiness  and  plenty ;  and  to  the  fiiture,  because  we 
have  provided  ourselves  with  supplies  and  abundant  prepara- 
tions for  it. 

*  The  whole  of  this  puiage  appears  cormpt  and  unintelligible. 
Mangey  especmlly  points  out  that  what  was  forbidden  was  not  to  offer 
unleavened  bread,  but  leavened  bread  upon  the  altar.  See  Exodus 
xziiL  18. 


288  PHILO  JTJDJEUS, 


THE  EIGHTH  FESTIVAL. 


Immediately  after  comes  the  festiyal  of  the  sacred  moon ; 
in  which  it  is  the  custom  to  plaj  the  trampet  in  the  temple  at 
the  same  moment  that  the  sacrifices  are  offered.  From  which 
practice  this  is  called  the  true  feast  of  trumpets,  and  there  are 
two  reasons  for  it,  one  peculiar  to  the  nation,  and  the  other 
oommpn  to  all  mankind.  Peculiar  to  the  nation,  as  being  a 
commemoration  of  that  most  marvellous,  wonderful,  and 
miraculous  eyent  that  took  place  when  the  holy  oracles  of 
the  law  were  given ;  for  then  the  voice  of  a  trumpet  sounded 
from  heaven,  which  it  is  natural  to  suppose  reached  to  the 
Teiy  e.xtremities  of  the  universe,  so  that  so  wondrous  a  sound 
attracted  all  who  were  present,  making  them  consider,  as  it  is 
probable,  that  such  mightj  events  were  signs  betokening  some 
great  things  to  be  accomplished.  And  what  jnore  great  or 
more  beneficial  thing  could  come  to  men  than  laws  affecting 
the  whole  race  ? 

And  what  was  common  to  all  mankind  was  this:  the  trumpet 
is  the  instrument  of  war,  sounding  both  when  commanding 
the  charge  and  the  retreat 

There  is  also  another  kind  of  war,  ordained  of  God,  when 
nature  is  at  variance  with  itself,  its  different  parts  attacking 
one  another.  And  bj  both  these  kinds  of  war  the  things  on 
earth  are  injured.  Thej  are  injured  hj  the  enemies,  bj  the 
cutting  down  of  trees,  and  by  conflagrations;  and  also  by 
natural  injuries,  such  as  droughts,  heavy  rains,  lightning  from 
heaven,  snow  and  cold ;  the  usual  harmony  of  the  seasons  of 
the  year  being  transformed  into  a  want  of  all  concord. 

On  this  account  it  is  that  the  law  has  given  this  festival  the 
name  of  a  warlike  instrument,  in  order  to  show  the  proper 
gratitude  to  God  as  the  giver  of  peace,  who  has  abolished  all 
seditions  in  cities,  and  in  all  parts  of  the  universe,  and  has 
produced  plenty  and  prosperity,  not  allowing  a  single  spark 
that  could  tend  to  the  destruction  of  the  crops  to  be  kindled 
into  flame. 

THE  NINTH  FESTIVAL. 

• 

And  after  the  feast  of  trumpets  the  solemnity  of  the  fast  is 
celebrated,  and  this  Moses  has  called  the  greatest  of  the 
festivals,  denominating  it  in  his  national  language  the  sabbath 


ON  THE  JES  FESHVALS.  S80. 

of  sabbaths,  or,  as  the  Greeks  would  style,  it  the  week  of  weeks, 
the  most  holy  of  all  holy  times.  And  it  has  this  title  for  many 
reasons. 

The  first  reason  is  the  temperance  which  the  lawgiver  is 
continually  exhorting  men  to  display  at  all  times,  both  in  their 
language  and  in  their  appetites,  both  in  and  below  the  belly. 
And  he  most  especially  enjoins  them  to  display  it  now,  when 
he  devotes  a  day  to  the  pardcnlar  observances  of  it  For  when 
a  person  has  once  learnt  to  be  indifferent  to  meat  and  drink, 
those  very  necessary  things,  what  can  there  be  of  things  which 
are  superfluous  that  he  would  find  any  difficulty  in  disregarding? 

The  second  reason  is,  that  every  one  is  at  this  time  occupieid 
in  prayers  and  supplications,  and  since  they  all  devote  Uieir 
entire  leisure  to  nodung  else  from  morning  till  evening,  except 
to  most  acceptable  prayers  by  which  they  endeavour  to  gain 
the  favour  of  God,  entreating  pardon  for  their  sins  and  hoping 
for  his  mercy,  not  for  their  own  merits  but  through  the  com- 
passionate nature  of  that  Being  who  will  have  forgiveness 
rather  than  punishment 

The  third  is  an  account  of  the  time  at  which  this  fast  is 
fixed  to  take  place;  for  by  this  season  all  the  fruits  which 
the  earth  has  produced  during  the  whole  year  are  gathered  in. 
And  therefore  to  proceed  at  once  to  devour  what  has  been  pro- 
duced Moses  looked  upon  as  an  act  of  greediness ;  but  to  mst 
and  to  abstain  from  touching  food,  he  considered  a  mark  of 
perf&ct  piety  which  teaches  the  mind  not  to  trust  to  the  food 
which  it  may  have  prepared  as  the  cause  of  health  or  life. 
Therefore  those  who,  i^ter  the  gathering  in  of  the  harvest, 
abstain  from  the  food,  do  almost  declare  in  express  words, 
"  We  have  with  joy  received*  and  we  shall  cheerfully  store  up 
the  bounteous  gifts  of  nature ;  but  we  do  not  ascribe  to  any 
corruptible  thing  the  cause  of  our  own  durable  existence,  but 
we  attribute  that  to  the  Saviour,  to  the  God  who  rules  in  the 
world,  and  who  is  able,  either  by  means  of  these  things  or 
without  them,  to  nourish  and  to  preserve  us.  At  all  events, 
behold,  he  nourished  our  forefathers  even  in  the  desert  for 
forty  years."* 

And  this  day  of  the  fast  is  celebrated  in  the  tenth  month, 
because  the  number  ten  is  a  perfect  number.  Therefore  Ood 
has  ordained  that  abstinence  from  food  should  take  place  in. 

VOL,  ttL  XX 


800  PHiLO  Jin>.£U& 

accordance  ^th  the  perfect  namber,  for  the  sake  of  affording 
the  best  noorishment  to  the  best  thing  which  is  in  us ;  that 
no  one  may  suppose  that  the  interpreter  of  God*s  word  is 
eigoining  hunger,  the  most  intolerable  of  all  evils,  but  only  a 
brief  cutting  off  of  the  stream  which  flows  into  the  channels  of 
the  body.  For  thus  the  clear  stream  which  proceeds  from  the 
fountain  of  reason  was  likely  to  be  borne  smoothly  and  evenly 
to  the  soul,  since  the  uninterrupted  use  of  food  inundating  the 
body  contributes  also  to  confuse  the  reason.  But  if  the  supply 
of  food  be  checked,  then  the  reason  getting  a  firm  footing  as  it 
in  a  dry  road,  will  be  able  to  proceed,  in  safety  without 
stumbling ;  and  besides  it  was  fitting  that  when  the  supply  of 
all  things  had  turned  out  according  to  the  wishes  of  the  people 
and  become  completed,  they  should,  amid  the  abundance  of 
their  hanrest,  preserve  a  commemoration  of  their  previous 
want  by  abstinence  from  food,  and  should  offer  up  prayers,  in 
order  that  they  might  never  come  to  a  real  experience  of  a 
want  of  necessary  food. 

THB  TENTH  FESTIVAL. 

The  last  of  all  the  annual  festivals  is  that  which  is  called 
the  feast  of  tabernacles,  which  is  fixed  for  the  season  of  the 
autumnal  equinox.  And  by  this  festival  the  lawgiver  teaches 
two  lessons,  both  that  it  is  necessary  to  honour  equality,  the 
first  principle  and  beginning  of  justice,  the  principle  akin  to 
unshadowed  light ;  and  that  it  is  becoming  also,  after  witnessing 
the  perfectbn  of  all  the  fruits  of  the  year,  to  give  thanks  to 
that  Being  who  has  made  them  perfect  For  the  autunm 
{/Mr^ufov),  as  its  very  name  shows  is  the  season  which  comes 
after  (jMra)  the  fruits  of  the  year  (n)v  icrtijpat)  are  now 
gathered  into  the  granaries,  on  account  of  the  providence  of 
nature  which  loves  the  living  creatures  upon  the  earth. 

And»  indeed,  the  people  are  commanded  to  pass  the  whole 
period  of  the  feast  under  tents,  either  because  there  is  no 
longer  any  necessity  for  remaining  in  the  open  air  labouring 
at  Uie  cultivation  of  the  land,  since  there  is  nothing  left  in  the 
{and,  but  all  ....  is  stored  up  in  the  bams,  on  account  of 
the  injuries  which  otherwise  might  be  likely  to  visit  it  from 
the  burning  of  the  sun  or  the  violence  of  the  rains. 

It  is  also  intended  as  a  conmiemoration  of  the  long  joumey- 
Jn^  of  their  ancestors,  while  making  which  through  the  desert 


ON  THE  FESTIVAL  OF  THE  BASKET  OF  FIRST  FBUITS.*    291 


they  lodged  in  numeroos  tents  for  many  years,  ^hile  stopping 
at  each  halting  place.  And  it  is  proper  in  the  time  of  riches 
to  remember  one's  poverty,  and  in  an  hour  of  glory  to  recollect 
the  days  of  one's  disgrace,  and  at  a  season  of  peace  to  think 
upon  ^e  dangers  that  are  past 

Again,  the  beginning  of  this  festival  is  appointed  for  the 
fifteenth  day  of  die  month,  on  account  of  the  reason  which  has 
already  been  mentioned  respecting  the  spring  season,  also  that 
the  world  may  be  full,  not  by  day  only  but  also  by  night,  of 
the  most  beautiful  light,  the  sun  and  moon  on  their  rising 
opposite  to  one  another  with  uninterrupted  light,  without  any 
darkness  interposing  itself  between  so  as  to  divide  them.  And 
after  the  festival  has  lasted  seven  days,  he  adds  an  eighth  as 
a  seal,  calling  it  a  kind  of  crowning  feast,  not  only  as  it  would 
seem  to  this  festival,  but  also  to  all  the  feasts  of  the  year  which 
we  have  enumerated ;  for  it  is  the  last  feast  of  the  year,  and  is 
a  very  stable  and  holy  sort  of  conclusion,  befitting  men  who 
have  now  received  all  the  produce  from  the  land,  and  who  are 
no  longer  in  perplexity  and  apprehension  respecting  any 
barrenness  or  scarcity. 

I  have  spoken  in  this  way  about  the  sacred  week  and  the 
sacred  number  seven  at  more  than  usual  length,  wishing  to 
show  that  all  the  feasts  of  the  year  are,  as  it  were,  the  offspring 
of  the  number  seven,  which  stands  in  the  relation  of  a  mother.* 
....  Follies  and  joys ;  and  because  in  such  assemblies  and 
in  a  cheerful  course  of  life  there  are  thus  established  seasons  of 
delight  unconnected  with  any  sorrow  or  depression  supporting 
both  the  body  and  the  soul ;  the  one  by  the  pleasure  and  the 
other  by  the  opportunities  for  philosophical  study  which  they 
afford. 

A  TEEATISE 


OM 

FESTIVAL  OF  THE  BASKET  OF  FIRST-FRUITS.t 

I.  Teeee  is,  besides  all  these,  another  festival  i  sacred  to 
God,  and  a  solemn  assembly  on  the  day  of  the  festival  which 

*  I  hAve  translnted  this  as  it  is  printed  in  Schwicheif  •  edition. 
Mangey  makes  the  treatise  end  at  "  mother." 
t  This  treatise  is  not  given  in  Mangey's  edition. 
^  Deuteronomy  xxvi.  1. 


20'2  PIHLO   JUD^US. 

they  call  castallos,*  from  the  -event  that  takes  place  in  it,  as 
w8  shall  show  presently.  Now  that  this  festiYiu  is  not  in  the 
same  rank,  nor  of  the  same  importance  with  the  other  fesdvals, 
is  plain  from  many  considerations.  For,  first  of  all,  it  is  not 
one  to  he  obscrred  by  the  whole  population  of  the  nation  as 
each  of  the  others  is.  Secondly,  none  of  the  things  that  are 
brought  or  offered  are  laid  upon  the  altar  as  holy,  or  commit- 
ted to  the  unextinguisbable  and  holy  fire.  Thirdly,  the  very 
nnmber  of  days  which  aiB  to  be  observed  in  the  festival  are  not 
expressly  stated. 

II.  Nevertheless,  any  one  may  easily  see  that  it  has  about 
it  somo  of  the  characteristics  of  a  sacred  festival,  and  that  it 
comes  very  near  to  having  the  privileges  of  a  solemn  assembly. 
For  eveiy  one  of  those  men  who  had  lands  and  possessions, 
having  filled  vessels  with  every  difilerent  species  of  fruit  borne 
by  fruit-beariiig  trees ;  which  vessels,  as  I  have  said  before,  are 
called  castalli,  brings  with  great  joy  tbe  first  fruits  of  his 
abondant  crop  into  the  temple,  and  standing  in  frout  of  the 
altar  gives  the  basket  to  the  priest,  uttering  at  the  same  time 
the  very  beautiful  and  admirable  hymn  prescribed  for  the  oc- 
casion ;  and  if  he  does  not  happen  to  remember  it,  he  listens 
to  it  with  all  attention  while  the  priest  recites  it.  And  the 
hymn  is  as  follows : — *'  The  leaders  of  our  nation  renounced 
Syria,  and  migrated  to  Egypt.  Being  but  few  in  number, 
they  increased  till  they  became  a  populous  nation.  Their 
descendants  being  oppressed  in  innumerable  ways  by  the 
natives  of  the  land,  when  no  assistance  did  any  longer  appear 
to  be  expected  from  men,  became  the  suppliants  of  God, 
having  fled  for  refuge  to  entreat  his  assistance.  Therefore  he. 
who  is  merciful  to  all  who  are  unjustly  treated,  having  received 
their  supplication,  smote  those  who  oppressed  them  with  signs 
and  woniders,  and  prodigies,  and  with  all  the  marvellous  works 
which  he  wrought  at  that  time.  And  he  delivered  those  who 
were  being  insidted  and  enduring  every  kind  of  perfidious  op- 
pression, not  only  leading  them  forth  to  freedom,  but  even 
giving  them  in  addition  a  most  fertile  land ;  for  it  is  from  the 
fruits  of  this  land,  0  bounteous  God !  that  we  now  bring  you 
the  first  fruits ;  if  indeed  it  is  a  proper  expression  to  say  that 
he  who  receives  them  from  you  brings  them  to  you.  For,  O 
Master !  they  ai*e  all  your  favoura  and  your  gifts,  of  which  you 
'  CastMlIuM  i»  interpreted  "i  basket  with  a  pointed  bottom.'' 


ON  THE  HONOUK  DUE  TO  PARENTS.  M9 

have  thought  us  vrorthv,  and  so  enabled  us  to  live  comfortablj 
and  to  rejoice  in  unexpected  blessings  which  £hou  hast  given 
to  us,  who  did  not  expect  them/* 

III.  This  hymn  is  sung  from  the  beginning  of  summer  to 
to  the  end  of  autumn,  by  two  choruses  replying  to  one  another 
uninterruptedly,  on  two  separate  occasions,  each  at  the  end  of 
one  complete  half  of  ten  years ;  because  men  cannot  all  at 
onoe  bring  the  fruits  of  the  seasons  to  God  in  accordance  with 
his  express  command,  but  different  men  bring  them  at  dif- 
ferent seasons ;  and  sometimes  even  the  same  persons  bring 
first  fruits  from  the  same  lands  at  different  times ;  for  since 
some  fruits  become  ripe  more  speedily,  and  others  more  slowly, 
either  on  account  of  the  diffenmces  of  the  situations  in  yrlnch 
they  are  grown,  as  being  hotter  or  colder,  or  from  innumerable 
other  reasons,  it  follows  that  the  time  for  offering  the  first 
fruits  of  such  productions  is  undefined  and  uncertain,  being  ex 
tended  over  a  great  space.  And  the  use  of  these  first  firoits  is 
permitted  to  the  priests,  since  they  had  no  portion  of  the  land 
themselves,  and  had  no  possessions  from  which  they  covdd  de- 
rive  revenue ;  but  their  inheritance  is  the  first  fruits  from  all 
the  nation  as  the  wages  of  their  holy  ministrations,  which  they 
2)erform  day  and  night 

IV.  I  have  now  said  thus  much  respecting  the  number 
seven,  and  the  things  referring  to  it  among  the  days,  and  the 
months,  and  the  years ;  and  about  the  festivals  which  are  con- 
nected with  this  number  seven,  following  the  regular  connection 
of  the  heads  of  the  subject,  which  I  proj>osed  to  myself  accord- 
ing to  the  order  in  which  they  are  mentioned  in  the  sacred 
history.  And  I  shall  now  proceed  in  regular  order  to  consider 
the  commandment  which  comes  next,  which  is  entitled  the  one 
about  the  honour  due  to  parents. 


A  TEEATISE 

•«  ms 
HONOUR  COMMANDED  TO  BE  PAID  TO  PARENTS.* 

I.  Havin'o  already  spoken  of  four  commandments  which, 
both  as  to  the  order  in  which  they  are  placed  and  as  to  their 
*  This  treatif  e  is  alao  omitted  in  Mcn^jB^A  «ds&ics^ 


I 

I 


d04  PHILO  JUDMVS. 

importance,  4Lre  tnilj  the  first ;  namely,  the  commandment 
about  the  lenity  of  that  sovereign  authority  by  which  the  world 
is  governed,  and  Uiat  which  commands  that  man  should  not 
look  upon  any  representation  or  figure  of  anything  as  God,  and 
that  which  forbids  the  swearing  fidsely,  or  indeed  the  swearing 
carelessly  and  vainly  at  all,  and  that  concerning  the  sacred 
seyenth  day — all  which  commandments  tend  to  piety  and 
holiness.  I  now  proceed  to  the  fifth  commandment,  relating 
to  the  honour  due  to  parents ;  which  is,  as  I  showed  in  the 
mention  I  made  of  it  separately  before,  on  the  borders  between 
those  which  relate  to  the  afiairs  of  men  and  those  which  relate 
to  God. 

*  For  parents  themselves  are  something  between  divine  and 
human  nature,  partaking  of  both  ;  of  human  nature,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  plain  that  they  have  been  bom  and  that  they  will  die ; 
and  of  divine  nature,  because  they,  have  engendered  other 
beings,  and  have  brought  what  did  not  exist  into  existence : 
for,  in  my  opinion,  wliat  God  is  to  the  world,  that  parents  are 
to  their  children ;  since,  just  as  God  gave  existence  to  that 
which  had  no  existence,  they  also,  in  imitation  of  his  power,  as 
£BLr  at  least  as  they  were  able,  make  the  race  of  mankind  ever- 
lasting. 

II.  And  this  is  not  the  only  reason  why  a  man*s  father  and 
mother  are  deserving  of  honour,  but  here  are  also  several  other 
reasons.  For  among  all  those  nations  who  have  any  regard  for 
virtue,  the  older  men  are  esteemed  above  the  younger,  and 
teachers  ubove  their  pupils,  and  benefactors  above  those  who 
have  received  kindnesses  from  them,  and  rulers  above  their 
subjects,  and  masjbers  above  their  slaves.  Accordingly,  parents 
are  placed  in  the  higher  and  superior  class  ;  for  mey  are  the 
elders,  and  the  teachers,  and  the  benefactors,  and  the  rulers, 
and  the  masters.  And  sons  and  daughters  are  placed  in  the  in- 
ferior class  ;  for  they  are  the  younger,  and  the  pupils,  ai^d  the 
persons  who  have  received  Idndnesses,  and  subjects,  and  slaves. 
And  that  every  one  of  these  assertions  is  correct  is  plain  from 
the  circumstances  that  take  place,  and  proofs  derived  from 
reason  will  establish  the  truth  of  them  yet  more  undeniably. 

III.  I  affirm,  therefore,  that  that  which  produces  is  always 
older  than  that  which  is  produced,  and  that  that  which  causes 
anything  is  older  than  that  of  which  it  is  the  cause ;  but  those 
/rj^a  beget  or  bring  lortb  a  child  are  in  some  sense  the  causes 


ON  TEE  HONOUB  DUB  TO  PABENTS.        205 

and  producers  of  the  child  vhich  is  hegotten  pr  brought  forth, 
and  they  stand  in  the  light  of  teachers,  inasmuch  as  all  that 
thej  know  themselves  thej  teach  to  their  children  from  their 
earliest  infancy,  and  they  not  only  exercise  and  train  them  in 
the  supemumeiaiy  accomplishments,  impressing  reasonings  on 
the  minds  of  their  children  when  they  come  to  their  prime, 
but  they  also  teach  them  those  most  necessary  lessons  which 
refer  to  choice  and  avoidance,  the  choice,  that  is  to  say,  of 
virtues,  and  the  avoidance  of  vices,  and  of  all  the  energies  in 
accordance  with  them.  For  who  can  be  more  completely  the 
benefactors  of  their  children  than  parents,  who  have  not  only 
caused  them  to  exist,  but  have  afterwards  thought  them  worthy 
of  food,  and  after  that  again  of  education  both  in  body  and 
soul,  and  have  enabled  them  not  only  to  live,  but  also  to  live 
well ;  trainiog  their  body  by  gymnastic  and  athletic  rules  so  as 
to  bring  it  into  a  vigorous  and  healthy  state,  and  giving  it  an 
easy  way  of  standing  and  moving  not  without  elegance  and 
becoming  grace,  and  educating  the  soul  by  letters,  and  num- 
bers, and  geometry,  and  music,  and  every  kind  of  philosophy 
which  may  elevate  the  mind  which  is  lodged  in  the  mortal 
body  and  conduct  it  up  to  heaven,  and  can  display  to  advantage 
the  blessed  and  happy  qualities  that  are  in  it,  producing  an 
admiration  of  and  a  desire  for  an  unchangeable  and  harmonious 
system,  which  they  will  afterwards  never  leave  if  they  preserve 
their  obedience  to  their  captain. 

And  in  addition  to  the  benefits  which  they  heap  upon  them, 
they  have  likewise  authority  over  the  children  of  whom  they 
are  the  parents,  not  as  is  the  case  in  cities,  in  consequence  of 
some  drawing  of  lots  or  election,  so  that  any  one  can  find  fault 
with  his  governor  as  having  become  so  either  by  some  blunder 
of  fortune  and  not  by  reason,  or  it  may  be  by  the  impetuosi^r 
of  the  multitude,  the  most  inconsiderate  and  foolish  of  all 
Ihiogs,  but  being  established  in  this  post  by  the  most  excellent 
and  perfect  wisdom  of  the  sublime  nature,  which  regulates  all 
divine  and  human  a£Gdrs  in  accordance  with  justice. 

lY.  For  these  reasons  it  is  allowable  for  parents  even  to 
accuse  their  children,  and  to  reprove  them  with  considerable 
severity,  and  even,  if  they  do  not  submit  to  the  threats  which 
are  uttered  to  them  by  word  of  mouth,  to  beat  them,  and  inflict 
personal  punishment  on  them,  and  to  imprison  them ;  and  if 
they  behave  with  obstinacy  and  resist  thia  ^^-aJacBKs^wxVAssjss^sssss^ 


•I 


d06  phuiO  JUDJSU& 

adff-necked  tlirough  the  greatness  of  their  incorahle  wicked- 
ness, the  law  permits  them  to  chastise  them  even  to  the  extent 
of  putting  them  to  death.*  Bat  still  this  permission  is  not 
given  to  either  the  fieither  by  himself,  or  to  the  mother  bj 
nerself,  bj  reason  of  the  greatness  of  the  pmiishment,  which  it 
is  not  fitting  should  be  determined  by  one,  but  by  both 
together,  for  it  is  not  probable  that  both  the  parents  will  agree 
about  patting  their  child  to  death  unless  his  iniquities  are 
very  grievous,  and  weigh  down  by  a  certain  undoubted  prepon- 
derance that  firm  affection  which  is  firmly  implanted  in  the 
parents  by  nature. 

Bat  parents  have  received  not  only  the  power  of  a  ruler  and 
governor  over  their  children,  but  also  that  of  a  master,  accord- 
ing to  both  the  veiy  highest  characteristics  of  the  possession 
of  servants,  namely,  possessing  them  as  bom  in  the  house,  and 
also  as  purchased  with  money,  for  they  expend  a  price  many 
times  greater  than  their  real  value  on  their  children  and  for 
the  sake  of  their  children,  in  wages  to  nurses,  and  instructors, 
and  teachers,  besides  all  the  expenses  which  they  incur  for 
their  dress  and  their  food,  and  their  other  care  of  them  when 
well  and  when  sick,  from  their  earliest  infancy  till  the  time 
that  they  are  full  grown.  And  not  only  are  those  looked  upon 
as  servants  bom  in  the  house  who  have  actually  been  brought 
forth  within  the  walls,  but  those  also  are  so  regarded  who  by 
the  laws  of  nature  receive  from  the  masters  of  the  house  a 
sufficient  support  to  maintain  them  in  life  after  they  are  bom. 

y.  Since  this,  then,  is  the  case,  those  who  do  honour  their 
parents  are  not  doing  anything  worthy  of  praise,  since  even 
any  single  one  of  the  commandments  already  mentioned  is 
sufficient  to  invite  them  to  regard  their  parents  with  reverence. 
But  are  not  those  men  worthy  of  blame,  and  accusation,  and 
the  very  extremity  of  punishment,  who  neither  respect  them  as 
older  than  themselves,  nor  listen  to  them  as  their  teachers,  nor 
think  them  worthy  of  any  requital  as  their  benefactors,  nor 
obey  them  as  their  rulers,  nor  fear  them  as  their  masters  ? 
Therefore  the  law  says,  **  Honour  thy  fieither  and  thy  mother 
next  after  God;"t  assigning  to  them  the  second  place  in 
honour,  on  the  same  principle  as  nature  herself  has  ranked 
them  in  her  decision  of  their  proper  place  and  duties. 

And  jou  will  not  honour  them  more  by  any  line  of  conduct 
*  Deateronomj  xxi.  18.  t  Deuteronomy  v.  1«- 


ON  THE  HONOUB  DUE  TO  PABENTS.        207 

than  by  endeaTooring  and  appearing  to  be  Tirtuous  persons. 
As  the  being  such  is  a  seeking  of  virtue  without  pnde  and 
without  guile,  and  appearing  such  aims  at  virtue  in  connection 
with  a  good  reputation  and  praise  from  one  s  associates ;  for 
parents,  thinking  but  little  of  their  own  advantage,  think  the 
virtue  and  exceUence  of  their  children  the  perfection  of  their 
own  happiness,  for  which  reason  it  is  that  they  are  anxious  that 
they  should  obey  the  injunctions  which  are  laid  upon  them, 
and  that  they  should  be  obedient  to  all  just  and  beneficial 
commands ;  for  a  fieither  will  never  teach  his  child  anything 
which  is  inconsistent  with  virtue  or  with  truth. 

YI.  And  any  one  may  coi\jecture  that  pious  respect  is  due 
to  parents,  not  only  from  what  has  been  said  above,  but  also 
from  the  manner  in  which  persons  behave  to  those  who  are  of 
the  same  age  with  their  parents;  for  the  man  who  shows 
respect  to  an  old  man,  or  to  an  old  woman,  who  is  no  relation 
to  him,  must  appear  in  some  degree  to  be  remembering  his  own 
father  and  mother,  and,  out  of  this  consideration,  to  be  lookinff 
upon  them  as  the  images  of  his  parents,  who  are  the  real 
models.  On  which  account,  in  the  sacred  scriptures,  it  is  not 
only  commanded  that  young  men  should  rise  up  and  give  the 
best  seats  to  their  elders,  but  also  that  they  should  rise  up 
before  them  when  they  pass  by  ;'*'  showing  honour  to  the  grey 
hairs  of  old  age,  to  which  there  is  a  hope  that  they  may  come 
themselves  if  they  now  yiel'd  precedence  to  them. 

And  this  commandment  also  seems  to  me  to  have  been 
enacted  with  exceeding  beauty  and  propriety ;  for  the  law  says, 
'*  Let  each  man  fear  his  father  and  his  mother, "f  enjoining  fear 
rather  than  affection,  not  as  being  better  in  every  respect  or 
for  every  purpose,  but  as  being  more  advantageous  and  profit- 
able with  reference  to  the  present  occasion,  for  the  Sist  of 
these  feelings  affects  foolish  persons  when  they  are  being  in- 
structed or  reproved,  and  folly  cannot  be  cured  by  any  other 
means  than  fear.  But  the  second  feeling,  namely,  affection 
towards  their  parents,  it  is  not  fitting  should  be  inculcated  on 
children  by  the  injunctions  of  a  lawgiver,  for  naturo  requires 
that  that  ^ould  be  spontaneous.  For  it  has  implanted  it  so 
deeply  from  very  infancy  in  the  souls  of  those  who  are  so 
completely  imited  by  blood,  and  by  the  services  done  by  the 
parents  to  the  children,  that  it  is  aJways  self-taught  and  spon- 
taneous, and  has  no  need  of  commandments  to  enforce  it. 
•  Leviticu*  lix.  Vl%  \  'SjtsrJwso^'iss-.'^- 


J 


208 


PHILO  JUDiEUS. 


Bat  the  law  has  enjoined  fear,  because  children  are  accus- 
tomed to  feel  an  easy  indifference.  For  though  parents  attend 
to  their  children  \ndi  an  exceeding  violence  of  affection,  pro- 
viding them  with  necessary  things  from  all  q^oarters,  and 
bestowing  all  good  things  upon  them,  and  shrinking  from  no 
labour  and  firom  no  dimger,  being  bound  to  them  by  love 
stronger  than  any  oaths,  still  some  persons  do  not  receive 
their  affection  as  if  it  aimed  solely  at  their  good,  being  full  of 
loxuiy  and  arrogance;  and  coveting  a  luxurious  life,  and 
becoming  effeminate  both  in  body  and  soul,  permitting  them 
in  no  respect  to  entertain  proper  dispositions  as  through  the 
native  powers  of  their  minds,  which  they  are  not  ashamed  to 
overthrow,  and  to  enervate,  and  to  deprive  of  each  separate 
energy,  and  so  they  come  not  to  fear  their  natural  correctors, 
their  fathers  and  mothers  yielding  to  and  indulging  their  owa. 
private  passions  and  desires.  But  we  must  also  urge  on  the 
parents  of  such  persons  that  they  employ  more  weighty  and 
severe  admonitions  in  order  to  cure  this  impetuous  obstinacy 
of  their  children,  and  we  must  warn  the  children  to  reverence 
their  parents,  fearing  them  as  their  rulers  and  natural 
masters ;  for  it  is  with  difficulty  even  by  these  considerations 
that  they  will  be  brought  to  hesitate  to  act  unjustly. 

YII.  I  have  now  then  gone  through  all  the  £ve  heads  of 
laws  in  the  first  table,  and  have  noticed  also  all  the  particular 
points  which  had  any  reference  to  any  individual.  I  must 
also  now  point  out  the  punishments  affixed  to  the  transgression 
of  these  laws. 

Now  there  is  one  common  penalty  affixed  to  them  all, 
namely,  death,  through  which  all  such  offences  have  a  kind  of 
relationship  to  one  another.  But  the  causes  of  this  sentence 
being  pronounced  in  such  cases  are  different,  and  we  must 
begin  with  the  last,  the  one  that  relates  to  parents,  since  it  is 
in  reference  to  this  one  that  the  words  are  still  ringing  in  our 
ears,  **  If  any  one  shall  beat  his  father  or  his  mother,  let  him 
be  stoned.'** 

And  very  justly,  for  it  is  not  fit  that  that  man  should  live 
who  insults  those  who  are  the  causes  of  his  living ;  but  some 
of  the  men  of  high  rank,  and  some  of  the  lawgivers,  looking 
rather  at  the  vain  opinions  of  men  than  at  the  truth,  have 
softened  this  commandment,  and  instituted  as  a  penalty,  for 

*  Exodus  xxi,  15. 


ON  THE  HONOUB  DUB  TO  PJlBEKTS.  290 

• 

those  who  beat  their  iktherB,  that  their  hands  should  be  cut 
off;  and  for  the  sake  of  bearing  a  good  reputation  ^I  the  ey^ 
of  hasty  and  inconsiderate  persons,  they  profess  to  them  that  it 
is  becoming,  that  the  parts  with  which  such  men  have  struck 
their  parents  should  be  cut  off;  but  it  is  a  piece  of  folly  to  be 
angry  with  the  serrants  rather  than  with  those  who  are  the 
causes  of  such  folly ;  for  it  is  not  the  hands  that  behave  with 
such  insolence,  but  insolent  men  perform  their  actions  with 
their  hands,  and  it  is  the  men  who  must  be  punished,  unless 
indeed  it  can  be  called  fitting  to  let  men  go  who  have  com- 
mitted murder  with  the  sword,  and  to  content  on^s  self  with 
throwing  away  the  sword;  and  unless,  on  the  contrary,  one 
ought  not  to  give  honour  to  those  who  have  shown  pre-eminent 
valour  in  war,  but  to  the  inanimate  coats  of  armour,  by  means 
of  which  they  have  behaved  themselves  valiantly ;  and  unless 
again  it  is  reasonable,  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  oained  the 
victoiy  in  the  gymnastic  games,  in  the  stadium,  or  the  double 
race,  or  the  long  straight  course,  or  in  the  contest  of  boxing, 
or  in  the  pancratium,  to  attempt  to  crown  only  the  legs  and 
arms  of  Uie  conquerors,  and  to  let  the  whole  of  their  bodies 
remain  unhonoured. 

Surely  it  would  be  a  ridiculous  thing  to  lay  down  such 
principles  as  these,  and  to  abstain  in  consequence  from 
punishing  or  honouring  those  who  were  the  real  causes  of  the 
results  in  question ;  for  we  do  not  pass  over  a  man  who  has 
given  a  splendid  exhibition  of  musical  skill,  playing  exquisitely 
on  the  flute  or  the  lyre,  and  think  the  instruments  themselves 
worthy  of  proclamations  and  honours.  Why,  then,  should  we 
deprive  of  their  hands  men  who  beat  their  fathers,  0  you  most 
noble  lawgivers  ?  Is  it  that  they  may  for  the  future  be  wholly 
useless  for  any  purpose  whatever,  and  that  they  may  exact  as 
a  tribute,  not  once  a  year  but  every  day,  from  those  whom  they 
have  treated  with  iniquity,  compelling  them  to  supply  them 
with  necessary  food,  as  being  unable^to  provide  for  themselves? 
For  their  faUier  is  not  so  wholly  hard-hearted  as  to  endure  to 
see  even  a  son  who  has  so  grievously  offended  against  him 
dying  of  hunger,  after  his  anger  has  been  blunted  by  time. 
And  even  if  he  has  not  laid  hands  upon  his  parents,  but  has 
only  spoken  ill  of  those  whom  he  was  bound  to  praise  and 
bless,  or  if  he  has  in  any  other  manner  done  anything  which 
can  tend  to  bring  his  parents  into  disrepute,  still  let  him  die.* 


M#  ffllLO  SVDMVMk. 


For  fniee.lK  k  a  commoii  eDeor,  and  if  ooe  nsr  tdl  the 
pfatto  tradi^beif  ApoUieeaeiBf  ofall  men,  to  whom  die  en 
De  be  kind  tad  firroofmUe  vben  he  u  not  so  to  the  aothon  cf 
Ui  beisg,  hj  wboee  maaam  he  came  into  this  Modd^aod  of 
whom  he  if  ^eortof  eupplemeiit? 

VIIL  AgiiiB*  let  the  men  who  hee  profrned  the  secred 
iereoth  day  ee  fir  ee  it  maj  here  kin  in  fak  power,  be  fiable 
to  die  pontfhment  of  death.  For,  on  the  eontzszj,  it  k  proper 
father  to  provide  wfaaterer  k  profime,  be  it  a  tlniig  or  be  it  a 
MsoD,  with  mea&f  of  porification,  in  order  to  indooe  a  change 
inr  the  better,  since  ^^enrj  *  as  some  <me  has  said,  **  goes  fixth 
out  of  the  diiine  company:"  But  to  darejto  adoltente  or  to 
defiiee  the  htAj  coinage  k  an  ae^  which  dis^^js  an  extiaoidi- 
iiaiT  degree  muBpietj, 

In  tlMit  ancient  migratum  which  took  pkce  when  the  people 
of  Israel  left  'E^fSfpU  «id  when  the  whole  multitude  was  trsTel- 
Isog  throogh  the  pathless  wilderness,  when  the  serenth  daj 
came  all  those  mjr\aA%  of  men  whkh  I  have  described  before 
rested  in  their  tents  in  perfect  tnmquillitT ;  bat  one  man,  and 
he  not  one  of  the  most  despised  or  lowest  class  of  the  people, 
dkregarding  the  commands  which  were  laid  opon  the  nation, 
and  ndscnling  those  who  attended  to  them,  went  fbrth  to  pick 
tip  sticks,  bat  in  realitj  to  show  hk  contempt  for  and  violation 
of  the  law.  And  he  indeed  came  back  bearing  with  him  a 
fkggot  in  hk  arm,  bat  the  men  who  remained  in  their  tents 
althoodb  inflamed  with  anger  and  exasperated  by  hk  condact, 
oerertbeless  did  not  at  once  proceed  to  very  harsh  measores 

r'nst  him  that  day  by  reason  of  the  holy  reverence  due  to 
dar,  but  they  led  hun  before  the  raler  of  the  people,  and 
made  known  hk  impious  action,  and  he  having  committed  him 
to  prison,  after  a  command  had  been  given  to  put  him  to 
death,  gave  the  man  up  to  those  who  had  originally  seen  him 
to  execute.  As  therefore,  in  my  opinion,  it  was  not  permitted 
to  kindle  a  fire  on  the  seventh  day  for  the  reason  which  I 
have  already  mentioned,  so  likewke  it  was  not  kwful  to  collect 
any  fuel  for  a  fire. 

IX.  Against  those  who  call  God  as  a  witness  in  favouir  of 
assertions  which  are  not  true,  the  pumshment  of  death  k 
ordained  in  the  kw  ;t  and  very  properly,  for  even  a  man  of 

*  Exodui  xxL  10.  t  Deuteronomy  six.  19. 


ON  THE  HONOUB  DUE  TO  PABENTS.  801 

moderate  respectability  thU  never  endure  to  be  dted  as  a  wit- 
ness, and  to  nave  his  name  registered  in  support  of  a  lie.  But 
it  seems  to  me  that  he  would  look  upon  any  one  who  proposed 
such  a  thing  to  him  as  a  thoroughly  faithless  enemy;  on  which 
account  we  must  say  this,  that  him,  who  swears  rashly  and 
falsely,  calling  God  to  witness  an  unjust  oath,  God,  although 
he  is  merciful  by  nature,  will  yet  never  release,  inasmuch  as 
he  is  thoroughly  defiled  and  iciaroous  from  guilt,  even  though 
he  may  escape  punishment  at^the  hands  of  men.  And  such  a 
man  will  never  entirely  escape,  for  there  are  innumerable 
beings  looking  on,  zealots  for  and  keepers  of  the  national  laws, 
of  rigid  justice,  prompt  to  stone  such  a  criminal,  and  visiting 
without  pity  all  such  as  work  wickedness,  unless,  indeed,  we 
are  prepared  to  say  that  a  man  who  acts  in  such  a  way  as  to 
dishonour  his  father  or  his  mother  is  worthy  of  death,  but  that 
he  who  behaves  with  impiety  towards  a  name  more  glorious 
than  even  the  respect  due  to  one's  parents,  is  to  be  borne  with 
as  but  a  moderate  offender. 

But  the  lawgiver  of  our  nation  is  not  so  foolish  as,  after 
putting  to  death  men  who  are  guilty  of  minor  offences,  then  to 
treat  Uiose  who  are  guilty  of  heavier  crimes  with  mildness, 
since  surely  it  is  a  greater  iniquity  than  even  to  speak  dispa- 
ragingly or  to  insult  one  s  parents,  to  show  a  contempt  for  the 
sacred  name  of  God  by  means  of  pexjury.  And  if  even  he 
who  swears  in  an  unbecoming  manner  is  guilty  and  blameable, 
of  what  punishment  is  that  man  worthy  who  denies  the  one 
only  true  and  living  God  and  who  honours  the  creature  above 
the  Creator,  and  chooses  to  honour  not  only  the  earth  and  the 
water,  or  the  air,  or  the  fire,  the  elements  of  the  universe, 
or  again  the  sun  and  moon,  and  the  planets  and  fixed  stars, 
and  the  whole  of  heaven,  and  the  universal  world,  but  even 
stocks  and  stones,  which  mortal  workmen  have  fashioned,  and 
which  by  them  have  been  shaped  into  human  figures  ? 

Therefore,  let  such  a  man  be  himself  likened  to  images 
carved  by  the  hand;  for  it  ought  not  to  be  that  that  man 
should  have  any  soul  himself  who  honours  things  destitute  of 
soul  or  life,  and  especially  after  he  has  been  a  disciple  of 
Moses,  whom  he  has  often  heard  announcing  to  him  and 
under  the  influence  of  divine  inspiration  declaring  those  most 
sacred  and  holy  admonitions,  '*  Take  not  the  name  of  any  other 
gods  into  thy  soul  for  a  remembrance  of  them,  and  utter  not 


dOd  PHILO  JUDJEUB. 

their  name«r  with  thy  yoice,  but  keep  both  thy  mind  and  thy 
•peeoh  far  from  all  other  interpositions,  and  turn  them  wholly 
to  the  Father  and  Creator  of  the  uniyerse,  that  thus  thou 
mayest  cherish  the  most  yirtuous  and  godly  thoughts  about  his 
■ii^Rlo  gOYemment,  and  mayest  speak  words  that  are  becoming 
and  most  profitable  both  to  thyself  and  to  those  that  hear 
thee."^ 

X.  We  have  now  then  mentioned  the  punishments  which 
are  ordained  against  those  who  neglect  the  five  commandments. 
But  the  rewards  which  are  offered  to  those  who  keep  them, 
6TeQ  though  the  law  has  not  set  them  forth  in  express  words 
of  ii\j unction,  are  nevertheless  figuratively  intimated.  There- 
fore the  &ct  of  not  thinking  that  there  are  any  other  gods  but 
the  true  Qod,  nor  imagining  that  things  made  by  the  hand  of 
man  are  gods,  and  the  fact  of  not  committing  perjuiy,  are 
things  which  have  no  need  of  any  other  reward,  for  the  mere 
fact«  in  my  opinion,  of  practising  these  virtues  is  itself  a  most 
exct»U«nt  and  most  perfect  reward.  For  at  what  circumstance 
can  a  lov<^r  of  truth  feel  more  really  delighted  than  at  the  devo- 
tion of  himself  to  one  God.  and  attending  in  a  guileless  and 
rLr«  mann<»r  to  his  service  ?  And  when  I  speak  of  witnesses, 
meniu  not  such  persons  as  are  slaves  to  pride,  but  such  as 
lure  dev\>teii  to  an  admiration  of  goodness  free  from  all  error, 
by  wKv^m  the  truth  is  honoxired. 

F<»r  wi«\iom  itself  is  the  reward  of  wisdom :  and  justice,  and 
e«oh  \xf  the  other  vinues,  is  its  own  reward.  And  truth,  as 
bein^  the  niv>9t  beautiful  in  the  whole  compdusy.  and  as  being 
the  chwf  vxf  all  the  hv>lv  Tinues,  is  in  much  creater  decree  io 
o«u  rec\>tt\pen$e  and  reward,  affording  as  it  aoes  happiness  to 
all  wh\^  practb^  it,  and  ble^sin^  ci'  wbkh  they  cacz»c  be 
deivrive\i  u>  their  children  and  desoenianSw 

aI,  A^w.  thN>»  why"*  wrvrhr  kwr  the  sahff«^i  sabbath  are 
beuetl:i\i  ui  rwvk  wo*t  ircporaint  ruracdUrs.  Ksrt  K>iy  axad 
5fcvH»l  J  a»  to  the»,r  Kxiy.  by  a  r«t  frvvn  their  cccdn:al  and  races- 
«aut  Ubs^ur* :  *:v»l  **  tc  tht-xr  5ouI>  Vt  f.>r=in^  r:c«  er.>fllect 
svive^^tu^w  re5^i>ev";:r,^  i^wi  as  :be  v'rwivc  .^z*  tie  ^iriT*r»  ici 
<be  N>*)Yt\il  \Nrv*;ecKNr  of  *U  the  thirds  and  S?in^  w^:i  gyj 
^bsvtt^  he  b«»  r.'^ie.  A?!si  Se  nriie  u^e  wtj,\e  m:'r»r»  -n  ? 
>he^K      h  w  vNUitt.  tSr?>f^*^.  r^*^r.  tSw«»  ^^yr?  :bi:  :i* 


OK  SPECIAL  ULWB.  808 

m 

In  the  same  way  let  not  him  who  honoon  his  parents 
dotifiilly  seek  for  any  farther  adyantage,  for  if  lie  considexa 
the  matter  he  will  find  his  reward  in  Ha  own  conduct.  Not 
hot  what,  since  this  commandment  is  inferior  in  importance 
to  the  first  fiye  commandments,  which  have  a  more  divine 
character,  inasmuch  as  this  is  concerned  with  mortal  subjects, 
God  has  ffiyen  an  inducement  to  obey  this  one,  sayinff, 
"  Honour  ttxj  father  and  thy  mother/ that  it  may  be  well  wim 
thee,  and  that  thy  days  may  be  long  in  the  land;"^  a£Bxing 
thus  two  rewards  to  this  injunction,  one  being  in  fact  the 
participation  in  yirtue,  for  "  weU  "  means  yirtue,  or  at  least 
cannot  subsist  without  yirtue ;  while  the  other  is,  if  one  is  to 
say  the  truth,  immortality  by  length  of  days,  and  a  life  of  long 
dofadon,  which  thou  wilt  presenre  eyen  in  the  body  Hying 
with  thy  soul,  purified  with  a  perfect  purification. 

These  things  haye  now  been  discussed  at  sufficient  length. 
Let  us  after  this,  since  the  opportunity  offers,  consider  the 
commandments  in  the  second  table. 


A.  TREATISE 

oir 

THOSE  SPECIAL  LAWS 

WHICH  ARE  BEFERRIBLE  TO  TWO  C02Of  ANDMEKTS  IN 
THE  DECALOGUE,  THE  SIXTH  A^^)  SEVENTH,  AOAINST 
ADULTERERS  AND  ALL  LEWD  PERSONS,  AND  AGAINST 
MURDERERS  AND  ALL  YIOLENCK 

I.  There  was  once  a  time  when,  deyoting  my  leisure  to 
philosophy  and  to  the  contemplation  of  the  world  and  the 
things  m  it,  I  reaped  the  fruit  of  excellent,  and  desirable,  and 
blessed  intellectual  feelings,  being  always  liying  among  the 
diyiue  oracles  and  doctrines,  on  which  I  fed  incessantly  and 
insatiably,  to  my  great  deliglit,  never  entertaining  any  low  or 
groyelling  thoughts,  nor  eyer  wallowing  in  the  pursuit  of  glory 
or  wealth,  or  the  delights  of  the  body,  but  I  appeared  to  be 
raised  on  high  and  borne  aloft  by  a  certain  inspiration  of  the 

•  Exodoi  xz.  12. 


804  FHILO  JTrD^U& 

soul,  and  to  dwell  in  the  regions  of  the  sun  and  moon,  and  to 
associate  with  the  whole  neayenf  and  the  whole  nniversal 
worid. 

At  that  time,  therefore,  looking  down  from  aboye,  from  the 
air,  and  straining  the  eje  of  mj  mind  as  from  a  watch-tower, 
I  snrrejed  the  unspeakable  contemplation  of  all  the  things  on 
the  earth,  and  looked  upon  mjself  as  happj  as  haying  forcibly 
escaped  from  all  the  eyil  fates  that  can  attack  human  life. 
Neyertheless,  the  most  grieyous  of  all  eyils  was  lying  in  wait 
for  me,  namely,  enyy,  that  hates  eyery  thing  that  is  good,  and 
which,  suddenly  attacking  me,  did  not  cease  from  dragging  me 
after  it  by  force  till  it  had  taken  me  and  thrown  me  into  the 
Tast  sea  of  the  cares  of  public  politics,  in  which  I  was  and  still 
am  tossed  about  without  being  able  to  keep  myself  swimming  '' 
at  the  top.     But  though  I  groan  at  my  fate,  I  still  hold  out 
and  resist,  retaining  in  my  soul  that  desire  of  instruction  which 
has  been  implanted  in  it  from  my  earliest  youth,  and  this 
desire  taking  pity  and  compassion  on  me  continually  raises 
me  up  and  alienates  my  sorrow.     And  it  is  through  this 
^  fondness  for  learning  that  I  at  times  lift  up  my  head,  and  with 
the  eyes  of  my  soul,  which  are  indeed  dim  (for  the  mist  of 
afiEairs,  wholly  inconsistent  with  their  proper  objects,  has  oyer- 
shadowed  their  acute  clear-sightedness),  still,  as  well  as  I  may, 
I  sunrey  all  the  things  around  me,  being  eager  to  imbibe 
something  of  a  life  which  shall  be  pure  and  unalloyed  by  eyils. 
And  if  at  any  time  unexpectedly  there  shall  arise  a  brief 
period  of  tranquillity,  and  a  short  calm  and  respite  from  the 
troubles  which  arise  from  state  afikirs,  I  then  rise  aloft  and 
float  aboye  the  troubled  wayes,  soaring  as  it  were  in  the  air, 
and  being,  I  may  almost  say,  blown  forward  by  the  breezes  of 
knowledge,  which  often  persuades  me  to  flee  away,  and  to  pass 
all  my  days  with  her,  escaping  as  it  were  from  my  pitDess 
masters,  not  men  only,  but  also  afliEurs  which  pour  upon  me 
from  all  quarters  and  at  all  times  like  a  torrent.     But  even  in 
these  circumstances  I  ought  to  give  thanks  to  God,  that  though 
I  am  so  oyerwhelmed  by  this  flood,  I  am  not  wholly  sunk  and 
swallowed  up  in  the  depths.    But  I  open  the  eyes  of  my  soul, 
which  from  an  utter  despair  of  any  good  hope  had  been  belieyed 
to  haye  been  before  now  wholly  darkened,  and  I  am  irradiated 
with  the  light  of  wisdom,  since  I  am  not  giyen  up  for  the 
fr^a/cf  ofwf  life  to  darkness. 


Oir  SPECIAL  IJLW8.  805 

Behold,  therefore,  I  yentare  not  only  to  study  the  sacred 
commands  of  Moses,  but  also  with  an  ardent  lore  of  knowledge 
to  inyestigate  each  separate  one  of  them,  and  to  endeayour  to 
reyeal  and  to  explain  to  those  who  wish  to  understand  them« 
things  concerning  them  which  are  not  known  to  the  multitude. 

II.  And  since  of  the  ten  commandments  which  God  himself 
gaye  to  his  people  without  employing  the  agency  of  any  prophet 
or  interpreter,  five  which  are  engrayed  in  the  first  tablet  have 
been  already  discussed  and  explained,  as  haye  also  all  the 
particular  ii^unctions  which  were  comprehended  under  them ; 
and  since  it  is  now  proper  to  examine  and  expound  to  the  best 
of  our  power  and  ability  the  rest  of  the  commandments  which 
are  found  in  the  second  table,  I  will  attempt  as  be&re  to  adapt 
the  particular  ordiuances  which  are  implied  in  them  to  each  of 
the  general  laws. 

Now  on  the  second  table  this  is  the  first  commandment, 
"Thou  shalt  not  commit  adulteiy,**  because,  I  imagine,  in 
eyexy  part  of  the  world  pleasure  is  of  great  power,  and  no 
portion  of  the  world  has  escaped  its  dominion,  neither  of  the 
things  on  earth,  nor  of  the  things  in  the  sea,  nor  even  of  those 
in  ^e  air,  for  all  animals,  whether  walking  on  the  earth,  or 
flying  in  the  air,  or  swimming  in  the  water,  do  at  all  times 
rejoice  in  pleasure,  and  cultivate  it,  and  obey  its  behests,  and 
look  to  its  eye  and  to  its  nod,  obeying  it  with  cheerfulness, 
however  arrogant  and  proud  they  may  be,  and  all  but  antici- 
pating its  commands,  by  the  promptness  and  unhesitating 
rapidity  of  their  service. 

Tlierefore,  even  that  pleasure  which  is  in  accordance  with 
nature  is  often  open  to  blame,  when  any  one  indulges  in  it 
immoderately  and  insatiably,  as  men  who  are  unappeasably 
voracious  in  respect  of  eating,  even  if  they  take  no  kind  of 
forbidden  or  unwholesome  food ;  and  as  men  who  are  madly 
devoted  to  association  with  women,  and  who  commit  themselves 
to  an  immoderate  degree  not  with  other  men's  wives,  but  with 
their  own.  Still  this  sort  of  reproach,  as  affecting  most  men, 
is  one  rather  of  the  body  than  of  the  soul,  since  the  body  has 
a  vehement  flame  within,  which  consumes  the  food  which  is 
offered  to  it,  and  seeks  other  food  at  no  great  distance,  by 
reason  of  the  abundant  moisture,  the  stream  of  which  is  con- 
veyed into  the  most  secret  parts  of  the  body,  creating  an 
itching,  and  stinging,  and  incessant  tickling.    But  those  men 


806  FHILO  JUDiSUB. 

who  are  frantic  in  their  deaires  for  the  vnves  of  others,  and  at 
times  eyen  for  those  of  their  nearest  relations  or  dearest  firiends, 
and  who  lire  to  the  injury  of  their  neighhoors*  attempting  to 
Titiate  whole  fiunilies,  however  numeroos,  and  Tiolating  all 
kinds  of  marriage  tows,  and  making  vain  the  hopes  which  men 
conceive  of  having  legitimate  children,  being  afflicted  with  an 
incorable  disease  of  me  soul,  must  be  punished  with  death  as 
common  enemies  to  the  whole  race  of  mankind,  in  order  that 
they  may  no  longer  Uve  in  perfect  fearlessness,  so  as  to  be  at 
leisure  to  oorrapt  other  houses,  nor  become  teachers  of  others, 
who  may  learn  by  their  example  to  practise  evil  habits.    « 

III.  Moreover  the  law  has  laid  down  other  admirable  regu- 
lations with  regard  to  carnal  conversation ;  for  it  commands 
men  not  only  to  abstain  from  the  wives  of  others,  but  also 
from  certain  relations,  with  whom  it  is  not  lawful  to  cohabit ; 
therefore  Moses,  detesting  and  loathing  the  customs  of  the 
Persians,  repudiates  them  as  the  greatest  possible  impiety,  for 
the  magistrates  of  the  Persians  many  even  their  own  mothers, 
and  consider  the  ofifspring  of  such  marriages  the  most  noble  of 
all  men,  and  as  it  is  said,  they  think  them  worthy  of  the 
highest  sovereign  authority.  And  yet  what  can  be  a  more 
flagitious  act  of  impiety  than  to  defile  the  bed  of  one*s  father 
after  he  is  dead,  which  it  would  be  right  rather  to  preserve 
untouched,  as  sacred ;  and  to  feel  no  respect  either  for  old  age 
or  for  one's  mother,  and  for  the  same  man  to  be  both  the  son 
and  the  husband  of  the  same  woman ;  and  again  for  the  same 
woman  to  be  both  the  mother  and  wife  of  the  same  man,  and 
for  the  children  of  the  two  to  be  the  brothers  of  their  father  and 
the  grandsons  of  their  mother,  and  for  that  same  woman  to  be 
both  the  mother  and  grandmother  of  those  children  whom  she 
has  brought  forth,  and  for  the  man  to  be  at  the  same  time 
both  the  father  and  the  uterine  brother  of  those  whom  he  has 
begotten? 

These  enormities  formerly  took  place  among  the  Greeks  in 
the  case  of  (Edipus,  the  son  of  Laius,*  and  the  actions  were 

*  Thii  IB  the  labjeet,  in  face,  of  the  (Edipos  Tyrmnnus  aC  Sophodet, 
and  in  dilated  upon  by  (Edipua,  where  he  aaya — 

w  ydfMoi  ydiMi 
IfvaaO*  ^ftSc  Kai  Avrtvoavrtc  iraXiv 
dvtXrt  ravrbv  trirfpfia,  c*  dmculart 
waripac,  diik^ov^  iraliaQ,  aJfi  ifipiXioVf 


on  SPECIAL  ULWB.  807 

committed  oat  of  ignorance  and  not  yoluntarilj,  and  yet  that 
marriage  brought  on  such  a  host  of  evils  that  nothing  ms 
^wanting  to  make  op  the  amount  of  the  most  complete  wretch- 
edness and  miseiy,  for  there  ensued  from  it  a  continual 
succession  of  wars,  both  domestic  and  foreign,  which  were 
bequeathed  like  an  inheritance  from  their  fittihers  and  ances- 
tors to  their  children  and  descendants;  and  there  were 
destructions  of  cities  which  were  the  greatest  in  Greece,  and 
destructions  of  embattled  armies,  and  slaughter  of  nations 
and  of  allies  which  had  come  to  the  assistance  of  either  side, 
and  mutual  slaughter  of  the  most  gallant  leaders  in  each  army, 
and  nnrecondleable  enmities  about  soyereigntj  and  aothori^, 
and  fratricides,  by  which  not  only  the  families  and  countries  of 
the  persons  immediately  concerned  were  utterly  extinguished 
and  destroyed,  but  the  greater  portion  of  the  whole  Greek 
nation  also,  for  cities  which  were  previously  populous  now 
became  desolate  and  yoid  of  their  inhabitants,  and  were  left  as 
a  memorial  of  the  calamities  of  Greece,  and  a  miserable  sight 
for  all  beholders. 

Nor,  indeed,  do  the  Persians,  among  whom  such  practices 
are  frequent,  avoid  similar  evils,  for  they  are  continually 
involved  in  military  expeditions  and  battles,  killing  and  being 
killed,  and  at  one  time  invading  their  neighbours  and  at 
others  repelling  those  who  rise  up  against  them.  And  many 
enemies  rise  up  against  them  from  many  quarters,  since  it  is 
not  the  nature  of  Uie  barbarians  to  rest  in  tranquillity ;  there- 
fore, before  the  existing  sedition  is  appeased,  another  springs 
up,  so  that  no  season  of  the  year  is  ever  indulged  in  peace  and 
quietness,  but  they  are  compelled  to  live  under  arms  niffht  and 
day,  bearing  for  the  greater  portion  of  their  lives  hardsnips  in 
the  open  air  while  serving  in  the  camps,  or  else  living  in  cities 
from  the  complete  absence  of  all  peace.  I  forbear  to  mention 
the  great  and  intolerable  violence  and  pride  of  success  exhibited 

v^ft^Q,  ywaixac  ftiyripac  rr,  x*  ^^oa 
tAvxier*  iv  dtfOptlnroinv  Spya  yiyvtrai,    1408. 

And  wi^aki  he  m7»» 

rfjv  rfcovffoy  ^potfiv 
h$tv  mo  oh-bQ  ivwdprip  kJu:  r&y  in0V 
icrnffad*  {ffidc  ivrtp  avrbt  ili^v.    1409. 

Fhilo  allades  afterwards  to  the  wan  which  are  the  subject  of  the  *£irr' 
iwi  Onpac  of  JSschylus. 


SOS  PHILO  JJJDMUS, 

ij  the  IdngBy  whose  first  contests  be^  st  the  Tery  Bni 
assmn^tioii  of  their  sorereign  power  with  the  greatest  of  all 
imqnities,  fraticide,  as  thus  alone  do  they  imagine  that  they 
win  be  safe  from  all  attacks  and  treachery  on  the  part  of 
their  brothers  if  thej  appear  to  have  put  them  to  doiui  with 
reaaon  and  justice. 

: «.  And  it  seems  to  me  that  all  these  things  arise  from  the  un- 
hallowed connections  of  sons  with  their  own  mothers,  because 
justioe,  who  smTe3rs  all  human  affairs,  revenges  herself  thus 
on  those  who  act  improperij  for  their  wickedness ;  for  not 
only  do  those  who  act  tlius  commit  impiety,  but  those  also 
who  Toluntarilv  sig^nify  their  assent  to  the  arbitrary  conduct 
of  those  who  dEo  such  actiona. 

But  our  law  guards  so  carefully  against  such  actions  as 
these  that  it  does  not  permit  even  a  step-son,  when  his 
fiither  is  dead,  to  many  nia  step-mother,  on  account  of  the 
respect  which  he  owes  to  his  father,  and  because  the  titles 
mother  and  step-mother  are  kindred  names,  even  though  the 
affections  of  the  souls  may  not  be  identical ;  for  the  man 
who  is  thought  to  abstain  fit>m  her  who  has  been  the  wife  of 
another  man,  because  she  is  called  hid  step-mother,  will 
much  more  abstain  from  his  own  natural  mother.  And  if 
any  one,  on  account  of  his  recollection  of  his  father,  shows  a 
respectful  awe  of  her  who  has  formerly  been  his  wife,  it  Ia 
quite  erident  that  he,  because  of  the  respect  which  he  feels 
towards  both  his  parents,  is  not  likely  to  meditate  any  im- 
proper conduct  to  his  mother ;  since  it  would  be  downright 
folly  for  a  man  who  studies  to  please  one  half  of  his  fitmily, 
to  appear  to  neglect  it  in  its  wholenesd  and  integrity. 

IV.  There  follows  after  this  a  command  not  to' espouse 
one's  sister :  which  is  an  injunction  of  great  excellence,  and 
one  which  contributes  verv  greatly  to  temperance  and  good 
order.  Therefore  the  Athenian  lawgiver,  Solon,  when  he 
permitted  men  to  marry  their  sisters  by  the  same  father, 
lorbade  them  to  marry  those  by  the  .same  mother.  But  the 
lawgiver  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  on  the  other  hand,  allowed 
of  marriages  between  brothers  and  sisters  by  the  same 
mothers,  but  forbade  those  between  brothers  and  sisters  br 
the  same  father.  'V\Tiile  the  lawgiver  of  the  I^yptians,  ridi- 
culing the  cautious  timidity  of  the  others  as  u  they  had 
established  impeifect  ordinances,  gave  the  reins  to  lascxYious- 


ON  8PBCUL  LAWS.  809 

ness,  sappljing  in  great  abundance  that  most  incorable  eril 
of  intemperance  both  to  body  and  bovIj  and'permittin^  men 
fearlessly  and  with  impunity  to  marry  all  their  sisters, 
whether'bj  both  parents  or  by  one,  or  by  either,  whether 
&fcher  or  mother,  and  that  too  not  oidy  if  younger  than,  but 
eyen  when  older  than,  or  of  the  same  age  as  themselycs ; 
for  twins  are  yery  often  bom,  which  nature,  indeed,  at  their 
yery  birth  has  disseyered  and  separated,  but  which  inconti- 
nence and  loye  of  pleasure  has  inyited  to  an  association 
which  ought  neyer  to  be  entered  into,  and  to  a  most  inhar> 
monious  agreement. 

But  the  most  sacred  Moses,  rejecting  all  those  ordinances 
with  detestation,  as  being  quite  inconsistent  with  and  at 
yariance  with  any  praisewortny  kind  of  constitution,  and  as 
laws  which  encouraged  and  trained  people  to  the  most  dis- 
graceful of  all  habits,  most  peremptorily  prohibited  any  con- 
nection with  a  man's  sister,  whether  by  both  parents,  or 
whether  only  by  one  of  the  two ;  for  why  should  any  one 
seek  to  demce  the  beauty  of  modesty  ?  And  why  make 
yirgins  destitute  of  all  modesty,  to  w&om  it  is  becoming  to 
blush  ?  And,  moreover,  why  should  one  be  willing  to  limit 
the  associations  and  connections  with  other  men,  and  to 
confine  a  most  honourable  thing  within  the  narrow  space  of 
the  walls  of  a  single  house,  which  ought  rather  to  be  extended 
and  difPiised  oyer  all  continents,  and  islands,  and  the  whole 
inhabited  world?  Por  the  intermarriages  with  strangers 
produce  new  relationships,  which  are  in  no  respect  inferior 
to  those  which  proceed  from  ties  of  blood. 

y.  On  which  account  our  lawgiyer  has  also  forbidden 
other  matrimonial  connections,  commanding  that  no  man 
shall  marry  his  granddaughter,  whether  she  be  his  son's  or 
his  daughter's  cmld ;  nor  his  niece ;  nor  his  aunt ;  nor  his 
grandmother,  by  either  father  or  mother ;  nor  any  woman 
who  has  been  the  wife  of  his  uncle,  or  of  his  son,  or  of  his 
brother;  nor,  again,  any  step-daughter,  whether  yirgin  or 
widow,  whether  his  own  wite  be  aliye  or  eyen  aft^  her 
death.  For,  in  principle,  a  step-father  is  the  same  as  a 
&ther,  and  therefore  ne  ouffht  to  look  upon  his  wife's 
daughter  in  the  same  light  as  nis  own. 

Again.  He  does  not  permit  the  same  man  to  mazry  two 
aisters,  neither  at  the  same  time  nor  at  different  periods, 


SIO  FHILO  JUD2BU3. 

efen  if  he  bare  put  awaj  the  one  whom  he  previousl j  married ; 
for  while  she  is  living,  whether  she  be  cohabiting  with  him 
or  whether  she  be  put  away,  or  if  she  be  living  as  a  widow, 
or  if  she  be  married  to  another  man,  still  he  did  not  consider 
it  holy  for  her  sister  to  enter  npon  the  portion  of  her  who 
had  been  unfortunate ;  by  this  injunction  teaching  sisters 
not  to  violate  the  requirements  of  justice  towards  their  rela-- 
tions,  nor  to  make  a  stepping  stone  of  the  disasters  of  one 
so  united  to  themselves  oy  bS>od,  nor  to  acquiesce  in  or  to 
pride  themselves  in  receiving  attentions  from  those  who  haye 
shown  themselves  enemies  to  their  relations,  or  to  redpro- 
eate  anv  kind  offices  received  from  them. 

For  from  such  things  as  these  arise  bitter  jealousies  and 
quarrels,  and  enmities  which  scarcely  admit  of  reconciliation, 
but  which  brin^  on  indescribable  nosts  of  misfortunes ;  for 
that  would  be  just  as  if  the  different  members  of  the  body 
were  to  abandon  the  harmony  and  fellowship  in  which  they 
are  put  together  by  nature,  and  to  quarrel  with  one  another, 
which  circumstance  must  necessarily  cause  incurable  diseases 
and  mischiefs.  And  sisters  are  like  limbs,  which,  although 
they  are  separated  from  one  another,  are  neyertheless  all 
adapted  to  one  another  by  nature  and  natural  relationship. 
Ana  jealousy,  which  is  the  most  grievous  of  all  passions,  is 
continually  producing  new,  and  terrible,  and  incurable 
mischiefs. 

Again.  Moses  commands,  do  not  either  form  a  connec- 
tion of  marriage  with  one  of  another  nation,  and  do  not  be 
seduced  into  complying  with  customs  inconsistent  with  your 
own,  and  do  not  stray'  from  the  ri^ht  way  and  forget  the 
path  which  leads  to  piety,  turning  mto  a  road  which  is  no 
road.  And,  perhaps,  you  will  yourself  resist,  if  you  have 
been  from  your  earliest  youth  trained  in  the  best  possible 
instruction,  which  your  parents  have  instilled  into  you,  con- 
tinually filling  your  mind  with  the  sacred  laws.  And  the 
anxiety  and  fear  which  parents  feel  for  their  sons  and 
daughters  is  not  slight ;  for,  perchance,  they  may  be  allured 
by  mischievous  customs  instead  of  genuine  good  ones,  and 
so  they  may  be  in  danger  of  learning  to  forget  the  honour 
belonging  to  the  one  God,  which  is  the  beginning  and  end 
of  extreme  unhappiness. 

But  if^  proceeds  the  lawgiver,  a  woman  having  been  di- 


OK  SPBCIAL  ULWS.  311 

vorced  from  ber  Imflband  under  any  pretence  wliaterery  and 
liaving  married  another,  has  again  become  a  widow,  whether 
her  second  husband  is  aliye  or  dead,  still  she  must  not 
return  to  her  former  husband,  but  may  be  united  to  anj 
man  in  the  world  rather  than  to  him,  naying  yiolated  her 
former  ties  which  she  forgot,  and  haying  chosen  new  allure- 
ments  in  the  place  of  the  old  ones.  But  if  any  man  should 
choose  to  form  an  alliance  with  such  a  woman,  he  must  be 
content  to  bear  the  reputation  of  effeminacy  and  a  complete 
want  of  manly  courage  and  yigour,  as  if  he  had  oeen 
castrated  and  depriyed  of  the  most  useful  portion  of  the 
soul,  namely,  that  disposition  which  hates  iniquity,  by  which 
the  afiairs  both  of 'houses  and  cities  are  placed  on  a  good 
footing,  and  as  haying  stamped  deeply  on  his  character  two 
of  the  greatest  of  aU  iniquities,  adultery  and  the  employ- 
ment of  a  pander ;  for  the  reconciliations  which  take  place 
subsequently  are  indications  of  the  death  of  each.  Let  him, 
therefore,  suffer  the  punishment  appointed,  together  with 
his  wife. 

YI.  And  there  are  particular  periods  affecting  the  health 
of  the  woman  when  a  man  may  not  touch  her,  but  during 
that  time  he  must  abstain  from  all  connection  with  her, 
respecting  the  laws  of  nature.  And,  at  the  same  time,  he 
must  learn  not  to  waste  his  yigour  in  the  pursuit  of  an  un- 
seemly and  barbarous  pleasure ;  for  such  conduct  would  be 
like  that  of  a  husbandman  who,  out  of  drunkenness  or 
sudden  insanity,  should  sow  wheat  or  barley  in  lakes  or 
flooded  torrents,  instead  of  oyer  the  fertile  plains ;  for  it  is 
proper  to  cast  seed  upon  fields  when  they  are  dry,  in  order 
that  it  may  bear  abundant  fruit.  But  nature  each  month 
cleanses  the  womb,  as  if  it  were  some  field  of  maryellous 
fertility,  the  proper  season  for  fertilising  which  must  be 
watched  for  by  the  husband  as  if  he  were  a  skilful  husband- 
man, in  order  to  withhold  his  seed  and  abstain  from  sowing 
it  at  a  time  when  it  is  inundated ;  for,  if  he  do  not  do  so,  the 
seed,  without  his  perceiying  it,  will  be  swept  away  by  the 
moisture,  not  only  haying  sul  its  spiritual  energies  relaxed, 
but  haying  them,  in  fact,  utterly  dissolyed. 

These  are  the  persons  who  form  animals  in  that  workshop 
of  nature,  the  womb,  and  who  perfect  with  the  most  con- 
summate skill  each  separate  one  of  the  paru  of  the  body 


313  PBILO  JUD^fiUS. 

and  souL    Bnt  when  the  periods  of  illness  which  I  hare 

rken  of  are  intermpted,  then  he  may  with  confidence 
wer  his  seed  into  the  ground  readj  to  receive  it,  no  longer 
fearing  that  there  will  be  any  loss  of  the  seed  thns  sown. 
But  those  people  deserve  to  be  reproached  who  are  plough- 
ing a  hitfd  and  stonj  soil.  And  who  can  these  be  but  they 
who  have  connected  themselyes  with  barren  women  ?  For 
such  men  are  only  hunters  after  intemperate  pleasure,  and 
in  the  excess  of  their  licentious  passions  they  waste  their 
seed  of  their  own  deliberate  purpose.  Since 'for  what  other 
reason  can  they  espouse  sucn  women  P  It  cannot  be  for  a 
hope  of  children,  which  they  are  aware  must,  of  necessity, 
be  disappointed,  but  rather  to  gratify  their  excess  in  lust 
and  incurable  incontinence. 

As  many  men,  therefore,  as  marry  virrins  in  ig:norance  of 
how  will  they  will  turn  out  as  regards  tneir  prolificness,  or 
the  contrary,,  when  after  a  long  time  they  perceive,  by  their 
never  having  any  children,  that  they  are  barren,  and  do  not 
then  put  them  away,  are  still  worthy  of  pardon,  being  influ- 
enced by  habit  and  familiarity,  which  are  motives  of  great 
weight,  and  being  also  unable  to  break  through  the  power  of 
those  ancient  charms  which  by  long  habituation  are  stamped 
upon  their  souls.  But  those  who  many  women  who  have 
been  previously  tested  by  other  men  and  ascertained  to  be 
barren,  do  merely  covet  the  carnal  enjoyment  like  so  many 
boars  or  goats,  and  deserve  to  be  inscribed  among  the  lists 
of  impious  men  as  enemies  to  Grod ;  for  Grod,  as  being 
finendly  to  all  the  animals  that  exist,  and  especiallv  to  man, 
takes  all  imaginable  care  to  secure  preservation  ana  duration 
to  every  kind  of  creature.  But  those  who  seek  to  waste  all 
their  power  at  the  very  moment  of  putting  it  forth  are  con- 
fessedly enemies  of  nature. 

VII.  Moreover,  another  evil,  much  greater  than  that  which 
we*have  already  mentioned,  has  made  its  way  among  and 
been  let  loose  upon  cities,  namely,  the  love  of  boys,  which 
formerly  was  accounted  a  great  infamy  even  to  be  spoken  of^ 
but  which  sin  is  a  subject  of  boasting  not  only  to  those  who 
practise  it,  but  even  to  those  who  suffer  it,  and  who,  being 
accustomed  .to  bearing  the  affliction  of  being  treated  like 
women,  waste  away  as  to  both  their  souls  and  bodies,  not 
bearing  about  them  a  single  spark  of  a  manly  character  to  be 


OK  SPECIAL  IJLW&  818 

kindled  into  a  flame,  but  having  even  the  hair  of  their  heads 
conspicnouslj  curled  and  adorned,  and  having  their  &ces 
smeared  with  vermilion,  and  paint,  and  things  of  that  kind, 
and  having  their  eves  pendUed  beneath,  and  having  their 
skins  anointed  witli  fragrant  perfumes  (for  in  such  persons 
as  these  a  sweet  smell  is  a  most  seductive  quality),  and  being 
well  appointed  in  everything  that  tends  to  beauty  or 
el^fOQce,  are  not  ashamed  to  devote  their  constant  study 
and  endeavours  to  the  task  of  chan^g  their  manly  character 
into  an  effeminate  one.  And  it  is  natural  for  those  who 
obey  the  law  to  consider  such  persons  worthy  of  death,  since 
the  law  commands  that  the  man-woman  who  adulterates  the 
precious  coinage  of  his  nature  shall  die  without  redemption, 
not  allowing  hun  to  live  a  single  day,  or  even  a  single  nour, 
as  he  is  a  disgrace  to  himself^  and  to  his  family,  and  to  his 
country,  and  to  the  whole  race  of  mankind. 

And  let  the  man  who  is  devoted  to  the  love  of  boys  sub- 
mit to  the  same  punishment,  since  he  pursues  that  pleasure 
which  is  contrary  to  nature,  and  since,  as  far  as  depends 
upon  him,  he  would  make  the  cities  desolate,  and  void,  and 
empty  of  all  inhabitants,  wasting  his  power  of  propagating 
his  species,  and  moreover,  being  a  guide  and  teacner  of  those 
greatest  of  all  evils,  unmanliness  and  effeminate  lust,  strip- 
ping young  men  of  the  flower  of  their  beauty,  and  wasting 
their  prime  of  life  in  effeminacy,  which  he  ought  rather  on 
the  otner  hand  to  train  to  vigour  and  acts  of  courage ;  and 
last  of  all,  because,  like  a  worthless  husbandman,  he  allows 
fertile  and  productive  lands  to  lie  fallow,  contriving  that 
they  shall  continue  barren,  and  labours  night  and  day  at 
cultivating  that  soil  from  which  he  never  expects  any  pro- 
duce at  aU. 

And  I  imagine  that  the  cause  of  this  is  that  among  many 
nations  there  are  actually  rewards  given  for  intemperance 
and  effeminacy.  At  all  events  one  may  see  men-women 
continually  strutting  through  the  market  place  at  midday, 
and  leading  the  processions  in  festivals ;  and,  impious  men 
as  they  are,  having  received  by  lot  the  charge  of  tne  temple, 
and  beginning  the  sacred  and  initiating  rites,  and  concerned 
even  in  the  holy  mysteries  of  Ceres. 

And  some  of  these  persons  have  even  carried  their  admi- 
I'ation  of  these  delicate  pleasures  of  youth  so  far  that  they 


814  pmLO  JUSTUS. 

baiB  desired  wholly  to  change  their  condition  for  that  of 
women,  and  hare  castrated  themselyes  and  haye  clothed 
themselTea  in  purple  robes,  like  those  who,  haying  been  the 
eaioae  of  sreat  blessings  to  their  natiye  land,  walk  aboat 
attended  uj  body-guards,  pushing  down  eyerj  one  whom 
they  meet. 

£ut  if  there  was  a  general  indignation  asainst  those  who 
▼enture  to  do  such  thmgs-,  such  as  was  felt  by  our  lawgiyer, 
and  if  such  men  were  destroyed  without  any  chance  of 
escape  as  the  common  curse  an^  pollution  of  their  country, 
then  many  other  persons  would  be  warned  and  corrected  by 
their  example,  l^or  the  punishments  of  those  persons  who 
hsre  been  already  condemned  cannot  be  ayertedby  entreaty, 
and  therefore  cause  no  sH^ht  check  to  those  persons  who 
are  ambitious  of  distinguishing  themselyes  by  the  same 
pursuits. 

Yin.  But  some  persons,  imitating  the  sensual  indul- 
gences of  the  Sybarites  and  of  other  nations  more  licentious 
still,  haye  in  the  first  place  deyoted  themselyes  to  gluttony 
md  wine-bibbine,  and  other  pleasures  affecting  the  belly 
and  the  parts  adjacent  to  the  belly,  and  then  when  fully 
sated  haye  behayed  with  such  extraordinary  insolence  (and 
it  is  natural  for  satiety  to  produce  insolence)  that  in  their 
insanity  of  passion  they  haye  gone  frantic  and  been  so  mad- 
dened as  to  desire  no  loneer  numan  beings,  whether  male 
or  female,  but  eyen  brute  beasts,  as  they  say  that  in  ancient 
times  in  Crete,  the  wife  of  Minos  the  Kmg,  by  name  Pasi- 
phae,  fell  in  loye  with  a  bull,  and  became  yery  yiolent  in  her 
passion  from  her  despair  of  being  able  to  gratify  it  (for  loye 
which  fails  in  its  object  is  usually  increased  in  no  ordinary 
degree),  so  that  at  last  she  reported  to  Daedalus  the  afflic- 
tion by  which  she  was  oyerwnelmed,  and  he  was  the  most 
skilful  of  all  workmen  of  his  time.* 

*  Thli  fftoiy  is  alladod  to  bj  tdmhj  poet«»  and  e^ecudlj-  by  Virgil, 
iEneidfi.  24. 

Hio  omdelia  amor  taori,  suppottaque  farto 
Paaiphae  mistomque  genus  prolesque  blforxnis 
Minotaoms  inest.  Veneris  monnmenta  ne&nda. 

Or,  m  H  Is  translated  by  Diyden — 

"There  too,  in  living  scnlptore,  might  be  seen 
The  mad  affection  of  the  Cretan  qneen : 


OK  8PSCIAL  IJLW8.  315 

And  he,  being  yezy  ingenionB,  so  as  by  Iub  contrivances 
to  discoyer  thines  undi8a>yerable  to  anj  one  "else,  made  a 
cow  of  woody  and  put  Pasiphae  into  it  at  one  of  the  sides, 
and  tiie  bull  rushed  at  the  wooden  cow  as  if  it  had  been  an 
animal  of  its  own  kind.  And  Pasiphae,  becoming  pregnant 
at  a  certain  period,  brought  forth  an  animal  hall  man  and 
half  beast,  called  the  minotaur.f 

And  it  is  yerj  likely  that  there  maj  be  other  Pasiphaes 
also,  with  passions  equally  unbridled,  and  that  not  women 
only,  but  men  likewise  may  fall  madly  in  love  with  animals, 
firom  whom,  perhaps,  indescribable  monsters  may  be  bom^ 
beinff  memorials  or  the  excessiye  pollution  of  men ;  owing  to 
whicm,  perhaps,  those  unnatural  creations  of  unprecedented 
and  fabulous  monsters  will  exist,  such  as  hippocentaurs  and 
chinuDras,  and  other  similar  animals.  But  so  mat  are  the 
precautions  which  are  taken  against  them  in  the  holy  laws 
of  Grod,  that  in  order  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  men  ever 
desiring  any  unlawful  connection,  it  is  expressly  commanded 
that  even  animals  of  different  kinds  shall  not  be  put  toge* 
ther.  And  no  Jewish  shepherd  will  endeavour  to  cross  a 
sheep  with  a  he-eoat,  or  a  ram  with  a  she-goat,  or  a  cow 
with  a  horse  ;  and  if  he  does,  he  must  pay  the  penalty  as 
breaking  a  solemn  law  of  nature  who  is  desirous  to  keep  the 
original  kinds  of  animals  free  irom  all  spurious  admixture. 
And  some  persons  prefer  mules  to  every  other  kind  of 
animal  for  the  yoke,  since  their  bodies  are  very  compact, 
and  are  veiT  strong  and  powerful ;  and  accordingly,  in  the 
pastures  and  stalls  where  they  keep  their  hoi*8e8,  they  slso 
Keep  asses  of  an  extraordinary  size,  which  they  call  celones, 
in  order  that  they  may  breed  with  the  mares ;  and  then  the 
mares  produce  a  mixed  animal,  half  horse  and  half  ass, 

Then  how  she  cheats  her  bellowing  lorer's  eye : 
The  rushing  leap  ;  the  doubtful  progenj : 
The  lower  part  a  beast,  a  man  above ; 
The  monument  of  their  polluted  lore." 

*  Ovid  describes  this  animal  more  than  once— 

Dedalus  ut  dausit,  conceptum  crimine  matria 
SemiboTemque  viraniy  semiTirumque  boreuL     A.  A.  IL  84. 

And  again — 

Nee  tua  maeti^sset  nodoso  stipite  Theseu, 

Ardua  parte  virum  deztera»  parte  borem.    Her.  z.  101. 


816  reiLo  judjeus.  -^ 

which,  Binee  Moses  knew  that  its  production  was  wholly 
contrary  to  nature,  he  forbade  the  existence  of  with  all  his 
might  by  a  general  injunction,  that  that  no  union  or  combi- 
nanon  oetween  different  kinds  of  animals  should  on  any 
account  be  permitted. 

.  Therefore  he  provided  thus  against  those  evils  in  a  manner 
suited  to  and  consistent  with  nature ;  and  from  a  long  dis- 
tance off,  as  from  a  watchtower,  he  admonished  men  and 
kept  them  in  the  straight  path,  in  order  that  both  men  and 
women,  learning  from  uiese  preceptsof  his,might  abstainfirom 
unlawfol  connections.  If^  theretore,  a  man  seek  to  indulge 
himself  with  a  quadruped,  or  if  a  woman  surrender  herself  to 
a  quadruped,  thej  shall  all  die,  both  the  man  or  woman  and 
the  quadruped.  The  human  beings,  because  they  have  gone 
beyond  even  the  bounds  of  intemperance  itself  becoming 
discoverers  of  unprecedented  appetites,  and  because  with 
their  new  inventions  they  have  mtroduced  most  detestable 
pleasures,  the  very  mention  of  which  is  infamous ;  and  the 
beasts  shall  die,  because  they  have  been  subservient  to  such 
iniquities,  and  also  to  prevent  their  bringing  forth  or  beget- 
ting any  thin^  intolerable,  as  would  naturaUy  be  the  result 
of  such  pollutions. 

Moreover,  those  who  have  even  a  slight  care  for  what  is 
becoming  would  never  use  such  animds  as  those  for  any 
purpose  of  life,  but  would  reject  and  abominate  them, 
loatninff  their  very  sight,  and  thinking  that  whatever  they 
touched  would  at  once  become  impure  and  polluted.  An^ 
it  is  not  well  that  those  things  which  are  or  no  use  for  life 
should  live  at  all,  since  they  are  only  a  superfluous  burden 
on  the  earth,  as  some  one  has  called  them. 

IX.  Again,  according  to  the  injunctions  of  the  sacred 
scriptnres  the  constitution  of  the  law  does  not  recognise  a 
harlot;  as  being  a  person  alienated  from  good  order,  and 
modesty,  and  chastity,  and  all  other  virtues,  who  has  filled 
the  soms  both  of  men  and  women  with  intemperance,  pol- 
luting the  immortal  beauty  of  the  mind,  and  honouring 
above  it  the  short-lived  perishable  beauty  of  the  body  prosti- 
tuting herself  to  eveij  chance  comer,  and  selling  her  beauty  as 
if  it  were  some  vendible  thing  in  the  market,  doing  and  say- 
ing every  thing  with  a  view  to  catch  the  young  men.  And  she 
excites  ner  lovers  to  contests  with  one  another,  proposing 


OK  SPECIAL  LAWS.  '  817 

herself  as  the  most  disgraceful  prize  for  those  who  gain  the 
victory.  Let  her,  therefore,  be  stoned  as  \ai  injury  and 
mischief  to,  and  a  common  pollution  of^  the  whole  state, 
having  corrupted  the  graces  of  nature,  which,  she  ought  to 
have  aidomea  further  hj  her  own  excellence. 

X.  The  law  has  pronounced  all  acts  of  adultery,  if  de- 
tected in  the  fact,  or  if  Droved  by  undeniable  evidence, 
liable  to  the  punishment  or  death ;  but  cases  in  which  guilt 
is  only  suspected,  it  does  not  choose  should  be  investigated 
by  men,  but  it  brings  them  before  the  tribunal  of  nature ; 
since  men  are  able  to  judge  of  what  is  visible,  but  Qod  can 
judge  also  of  what  is  unseen,  since  he  alone  is  able  to  behold 
the  soul  distinctly,  therefore  he  sajs  to  the  man  who  sus- 
pects such  a  thing,  ^  Write  an  accusation,  and  go  up  to  the 
noly  city  with  thy  wife,  and  standing  before  the  judges,  lay 
bare  the  passion  of  suspicion  which  affects  jou,  not  like  a 
fidse  accuser  or  treacherous  enemy,  seeking  to  gain  the  vio- 
tory  by  any  means  whatever,  but  as  a  man  may  do  who 
wisnes  accurately  to  ascertain  the  truth  without  any  sophis- 
try. And  the  woman,  having  incurred  two  dangers,  one  of 
her  life,  and  the  other  of  her  reputation,  the  loss  of  which 
last  is  more  grievous  than  any  kind  of  death,  shall  judffe 
the  matter  with  herself;  and  if  she  be  pure,  let  her  make 
her  defence  with  confidence ;  but  if  she  be  convicted  by  her 
own  conscience,  let  her  cover  her  fiice,  making  her  modesty 
the  veU  for  her  iniquities,  for  to  persist  in  her  impudence 
is  the  very  extravagance  of  wickecmesa.  But  if  the  charge 
which  is  made  against  her  be  contested,  and  if  the  evidence 
be  doubtful,  so  as  not  to  incline  to  either  side,  then  let  the 
two  parties  go  up  to  the  temple,  and  let  the  man  stand  in 
front  of  the  altar,  in  the  presence  of  the  priest  for  the  day, 
and  then  let  him  state  his  suspicions  ana  his  grounds  for 
them,  and  let  him  produce  ana  offer  some  barley  flour,  as 
a  species  of  oblation  on  behalf  of  his  wife,  to  prove  that  he 
accuses  her,  not  out  of  insult,  but  with  an  honest  intention, 
because  he  has  a  reasonable  doubt.  And  the  priest  shall 
take  the  barley  and  offer  it  to  the  woman,  and  shall  take 
away  from  her  the  head-dress  on  her  head,  that  she  may  be 
jud^d  with  her  head  bare,  and  deprived  of  the  symbol  of 
modesty,  which  all  those  women  are  accustomed  to  wear 
who  are  completely  blameless ;  and  there  shall  not  be  any 


818  PHILO  JXn>MUB. 

oil  used,  nor  any  frankincense,  as  in  the  case  of  other 
sacrifices,  because  the  sacrifice  now  offered  is  to  be  accom- 
plished on  no  joyful  occasion,  but  on  one  which  is  yeiy 
gnerous. 

And  the  reason  why  the  fionr  is  to  be  made  of  barley  is, 
perhaps,  because  the  food  which  is  made  of  barley  ia  of  a 
somewhat  ambiguous  character,  and  is  suited  for  the  use 
both  of  irrationiu  animals  and  of  needy  men ;  and  is  there- 
fore a  sign  that  a  woman  who  has  committed  adultery 
differs  in  no  respect  from  the  beasts,  whose  connections 
with  one  another  are  promiscuous  and  incessant ;  but  she 
who  is  pure  from  all  such  accusations  is  devoted  to  that 
manner  of  life  which  befits  human  bein^ 

Then  the  law  proceeds  to  say,  the  pnest,  having  taken  an 
earthen  vessel,  shall  pour  forth  pure  water,  having  drawn  it 
from  a  fountain,  ana  shall  also  oring  a  lump  of  clay  from 
the  ground  of  the  temple,  which  also  I  think  has  m  it  a 
sym^lical  reference  to  the  search  after  truth;  for  the 
earthenware  vessel  is  appropriate  to  the  commission  of  adul- 
tery because  it  is  easily  broken,  and  death  is  the  punish- 
ment appointed  for  adulterers ;  but  the  earth  and  the  water 
are  appropriate  to  the  purging  of  the  accusation,  since  the 
origin,  and  increase,  and  perfection  of  all  things,  take  place 
by  them :  on  which  account  it  was  very  proper  for  the  law- 
giver to  set  them  both  off  by  epithets,  saying,  that  the 
water  which  the  priest  was  to  take  must  be  pure  and  livine 
water,  since  a  blameless  woman  is  pure  as  to  her  life,  and 
deserves  to  live ;  and  the  earth  too  is  to  be  taken,  not  from 
any  chance  spot,  but  from  the  soil  of  the  ground  of  the 
temple,  which  must,  of  necessity,  be  most  excellent,  just  as 
a  modest  woman  is. 

And  when  all  these  things  are  previously  prepared,  the 
woman  'vtith  her  head  uncovered,  bearing  the  barley  flour  in 
her  hand,  as  has  been  already  specified,  shall  come  forward ; 
and  the  priest  standing  opposite  to  her  and  holding  the 
earthenware  vessel  in  whicn  are  the  water  and  the  earth, 
shall  speak  thus :  **  If  you  have  not  transgressed  the  laws  of 
your  marriage,  and  if  no  other  man  has  been  associated  with 
you,  so  that  you  have  not  violated  the  rights  of  him  who  is 
joined  to  you  by  the  law,  you  are  blameless  and  innocent ; 
but  if  you  have  neglected  your  husband  and  have  followed 


»•' 


05  SPECIAL  LAWS.  810 

empty  appetites,  either  loving  some  one  yourself  or  yielding 
to  some  lorer,  betraying  your  nearest  and*  dearest  con- 
nections, and  adultenSting  them  by  a  spurious  mixture,  then 
learn  that  you  are  deserredly  liable  to  every  kind  of  curse, 
the  proofs  of  which  you  will  exhibit  on  your  body.  Come 
then  and  drink  the  draught  of  conviction,  which  shall  un- 
cover and  hkj  bare  all  thy  hidden  and  secret  actions." 

Then  the  priest  shall  write  these  words  on  a  paper  and 
dip  it  in  the  water  which  is  in  the  earthenware  vessel,  and 
giro  it  to  the  woman.  And  she  shall  drink  it  and  depart, 
awaiting  the  reward  of  her  modesty  or  the  extreme  penalty 
of  her  mcontinence ;  for  if  she  has  been  falsely  accused  she 
may  hope  for  seed  and  children,  disregarding  all  apprehen- 
sions and  anxieties  on  the  subject  of  barrenness  and  child- 
lessness. But  if  she  is  guilty  then  a  great  weight  and  bulk, 
form  her  belly  swelling  and  becoming  full,  wiU  come  upon 
her,  and  a  terribly  evil  condition  of  her  womb  will  afflict  her, 
since  she  did  not  choose  to  keep  it  pure  for  her  husband, 
who  had  married  her  according  to  the  laws  of  her  nation. 
And  the  law  takes  such  exceeding  pains  to  prevent  any 
irregularity  taking  place  with  respect  to  marriages,  that 
even  in  the  case  of  husbands  and  wives  who  have  come  to- 

g^ther  for  le^timate  embraces,  in  strict  accordance  with  the 
ws  of  marriage,  after  they  have  arisen  from  their  beds  it 
does  not  allow  them  to  touch  anything  before  they  have  had 
recourse  to  washinss  and  ablutions ;  xeepin^  them  very  &r 
from  adultery  and  nrom  all  accusations  reiemng  to  adultery. 
XI.  But  u  any  one  should  offer  violence  to  a  widow  after 
her  husband  is  dead,  or  after  she  has  been  otherwise  divorced 
from  him,  and  defQe  her,  committing  a  lighter  offence  than 
adulterv,  and  one  that  maj  perhaps  be  about  half  as  serious, 
he  sha&  not  indeed  be  liable  to  the  punishment  of  death, 
but  he  shall  be  impeached  for  violence,  and  insolence,  and 
intemperance,  having  thus  adopted  the  most  infamous  con- 
duct as  if  it  bad  been  the  most  creditable ;  and  the  tribunal 
of  the  judge  shall  decide  and  condemn  him  to  the  penalty 
that  he  deserves  to  suffer. 

Again,  seduction  is  an  offence  which  is  similar  and  nearly 
related  to  adultery,  as  they  are  both  sprung  from  one 
common  mother,  incontinence.  But  some  of  those  persons 
who  are  accustomed  to  dignify  shameful  actions  by  specious 


820  FHUiO  JUDiBUS. 

luunea,  call  thia  loTe,  blushing  to  confess  the  real  truth  con- 
cerning its  character.  But,  nevertheless,  though  it  may  be 
akin  to  it,  it  is  not  in  every  respect  simSar  to  it,  because  it 
is  an  offence  that  does  not  spread  so  as  to  affect  manr 
fiunilies,  as  is  the  case  with  adultery,  but  it  is  limited  to  one 
house  alone,  that  of  the  virgin  who  has  been  seduced. 

Therefore  we  must  say  to  a  man  who  desires  to  enjoy  a 
virgin  who  is  a  free-bom  citizen,  ^My  good  man,  rejecting 
your  shameless  rashness  and  audaci^,  the  sources  ..of 
treachery  and  fiiithlessness,  and  all  such  feelinn,  do  not 
iJlow  yourself  to  be  discovered  to  be  wicked,  either  openly 
or  secretlv,  but  if,  indeed,  you  have  any  legitimate  feelinff  of 
love  for  the  maiden  in  your  soul,  go  to  her  parents,  if  they 
are  alive,  and  if  they  are  not,  then  go  to  her  brother  or  to 
her  guanlians,  or  to  any  other  persons  who  chance  to  be  her 
protectors,  and  having  discovered  to  them  your  feeling 
towards  her,  as  a  free-bom  man  should  do,  ask  her  m 
marriage,  and  implore  them  not  to  account  you  unworthy. 

**  For  no  one  of  those  who  have  the  guardianship  of  the 
maiden  entrusted  them  could  be  so  base  as  to  oppose  an 
earnest  and  persevering  entreatv,  and  especially  as  to  refuse 
you  since  you,  would  be  found,  oy  strict  examination,  not  to 
have  falsely  pretended  a  passion  which  you  do  not  feel,  or  to 
have  conceived  only  a  superficial  love  for  her,  but  one  which 
is  genuine  and  thoroughly'  established."  * 
.  £ut  if  any  one,  being  msane  and  frantic,  repudiating  and 
discarding  all  the  suggestions  of  reason,  were  to  submit 
himself  -wholly  to  passion  and  desire  as  his  masters,  and 
looking,  as  people  say,  on  might  as  stronger  than  right,  were 
to  ravish  and  seduce  women,  treating  free-bom  women  as 
slaves,  and  doing  acts  of  war  in  time  of  peace,  let  such  a 
man  be  led  before  the  judges.  And  if  the  damsel  who  has 
been  forced  has  a  father,  let  him  take  counsel  and  deal  with 
the  ravisher  about  espousing  her ;  then  if  he  refuse  to  do  so, 
he  shall  give  the  damsel  a  dowry  for  another  husband,  being 
fined  in  a  sum  of  money  sufficient  for  this  purpose.  But  it' 
he  consents  and  registers  her  as  his  wife,  let  him  marry  her 
at  once  without  any  delay,  confessing  a  second  time  that  be 
owes  her  the  same  dowry,  and  let  him  have  no  permission  to 
delay  or  evade  the  fulfilment  of  this  marringe ;  J>oth  because 

*  Deuteronomy  zzii  13. 


ON  SPECIAL  LA.WS.  SSI 

of  hia  own  conduct,  in  order  thafc  the  muhap  which  took 
pkce  respecting  her  first  connection  with  a*  man  may  ho 
comfortea  hj  a  firm  marriage,  which  nothing  shall  erer 
separate  hut  death.  But  if  the  damsel  be  an  orphan  and 
have  no  father,  then  let  her  be  asked  br  the  judges  whether 
she  is  willing  to  take  this  man  for  her  husband  or  not ;  and 
whether  she  agrees  to  do  so  or  whether  she  refuses,  still  let 
her  have  the  same  dowry  that  the  man  would  have  agreed  to 
give  her  while  her  father  was  jet  alive. 

XIF.  Some  people  think  that  a  licensed  concubinage  is  an 
offence  something  between  seduction  and  adultery,  when 
the  two  parties  come  together,  and  agree  to  live  as  man  and 
wife  by  a  certain  agreement,  but  before  the  marriage  cere- 
mony is  completed,  some  other  man  meeting  with  the 
woman,  or  forcing  her  has  connection  with  her ;  but  in  my 
opinion  this  also  is  a  kind  of  of  adultery ;  for  such  an  agroo- 
ment  as  is  here  mentioned  is  equivalent  to  a  marriage,  mr  in 
it  the  names  of  the  woman  and  of  the  man  are  both  regis- 
tered, and  all  other  things  which  were  to  lead  to  their 
union ;  on  which  account,  the  law  orders  both  the  parties  to 
be  rtoned  if  with  one  and  the  same  mind  they  agree  together 
to  commit  adultery ;  for  it  is  impossible  that,  unless  they 
both  set  out  with  the  same  intention,  they  should  be  looked 
upon  as  equal  in  iniquity,  if  they  had  not  both  sinned  in  an 
equal  degree ;  at  all  events  it  often  happens  that  the  offence 
is  enhanced  or  diminished,  with  reference  to  the  difference 
of  place  in  which  it  is  committed. 

For,  as  it  seems,  such  an  offence  is  greater  if  it  be  com- 
mitted in  a  city,  and  less  if  it  be  committed  outside  the 
walls  of  any  city,  in  a  wilderness ;  for  in  such  a  place  there 
is  no  one  to  assist  the  maiden,  even  though  she  may  have 
said  and  done  everything,  which  could  conduce  to  the  pre- 
servation of  her  virginity,  unattacked  and  undefiled ;  but  in 
a  city  there  are  halls  of  council,  and  courts  of  justice,  and  mat 
assemblies  of  generals,  and  »diles,  and  rulers  of  the  mancets, 
and  other  magistrates ;  and  besides  all  these  there  is  the 
people ;  for  there  is  in  the  soul  of  evexy  man,  even  though 
he  may  be  a  private  individual,  a  feeling  which  is  hostile  to 
iniquity,  which,  when  it  is  excited,  makes  the  man  who 
cherishea  it  a  champion  for  the  time  being,  and  a  sponta- 


832  VHILO  JJWMUS, 

neoos  and  yolnntary  defender  of  the  penou  who  appears  to 
be  unjiuthr  treated* 

XIIL  Therefore  justice  in  enreij  case  pursues  the  man 
who  has  committed  Tioience,  nor  is  his  iniqtdtj  excused  by 
the  difference  of  the  place,  so  that  cannot  be  any  plea  to  defend 
him  from  the  consequence  of  his  violence  and^  lawlessness ; 
but  as  I  haire  said  before,  there  will  be  compassion  and 
*  pardon  for  the  damsel  in  the  one  case,  and  m  the  other 
mezecrable  punishment  will  visit  her. 
'  And  concerning  her  the  judge  must  examine  the  matter 
Tsry  carefullr,  not  referring  everytlung  to  or  making  eveiy- 
thing  depend  upon  the  place ;  for  it  is  possible  that  a  woman 
may  be  rayished  aeainst  her  will  even  in  the  middle  of  the 
city ;  and  on  the  other  hand  eren  if  outside  the  dty,  she  may 
hare  voluntarily  given  herself  up  to  an  illicit  connection. 
Wherefore  the  law,  making  a  very  careful  and  very  admir- 
ably conceived  defence,  on  behalf  of  a  damsel  ravished  in 
the  wilderness,  says,  "  for  the  damsel  cried  out,  and  there 
was  no  one  to  help  her  ;"*  so  that  if  she  neither  cried  out 
nor  resisted,  but  willingly  consented  to  her  ravisher,  she 
must  be  looked  upon  as  g^ty,  having  only  put  forward  the 
fact  of  the  place,  as  a  sophistical  excuse  to  make  it  appear 
that  she  had  been  ravished. 

And  yet  in  the  city  what  advantage  can  her  efforts  be  to 
a  damsel,  who  is  willmg  to  do  everything  for  the  ^ake  of 
preserving  her  own  reputation,  but  who  is  unable  to  succeed 
Dy  reason  of  the  strength  of  the  man  who  is  assaulting  her  P 
fon  what  advantage  could  she  derive  from  those  who  live  in 
the  same  house  ii  he  were  to  bind  her  with  ropes,  or  to  gag 
her  mouth,  so  that  she  could  not  utter  even  a  word ;  for  in 
some  sense  she  then,  although  dwelling  in  a  city,  is  in 
reality  in  a  wilderness,  inasmuch  as  she  is  destitute  of  all 
protection ;  but  if  she  be  in  a  wilderness,  and  yet  willingly 
gives  herself  up  to  her  ravisher,  she  is  in  no  different  condi- 
tion from  a  woman  in  a  city. 

XIV.  There  are  also  some  persons  easily  sated  with 
their  connection  with  the  same  woman,  being  at  once  both 
mad  for  women  and  women  haters,  full  of  promiscuous  and 
irregular  dispositions,  who  at  once  give  themselves  up  to 

*  Deuteronomy  ixii.  27. 


ON  8PECLLL  LAWS.  83S 

their  first  impdaet  whaterer  they  may  be ;  letting  thoM 
passions  proceed  without  restraint  which  they  ought  to 
curb,  and  like  blind  men,  without  any  consideration,  wifch<i 
out  an^  prudence,  stumbling  upon  any  bodies  or  any  thing^ 
upsetting,  and  overturning,  and  confusing  ererythixif  in 
their  violent  impetuosity  and  haste,  and  suffering  evils  as 
great  as  those  which  they  inflict ;  and  concerning  these  men 
we  have  this  law  enacted. 

When  those  men  who  marry  virgins  in  accordance  with 
the  law,*  and  who  have  saoificed  on  the  occasion  and  cele* 
brated  their  marriage  feast,  and  who  yet  aft^wards  preserve 
no  natural  affection  for  their  wives  but  treat  tb^  with 
insolence,  and  behave  to  freebom  dtiaens  as  if  they  were 
courtesans,  if  they  seek  to  procure  a  divorce,  and  not  bdng 
able  to  find  any  pretext  for  such  a  separation,  then  betake 
themselves  to  bringing  forward  false  accusations,  and  firom 
an  absence  of  any  clear  grounds  of  impeachment  direct  all' 
their  charges  at  things  which  cannot  be  made  certain, 
and  come  forward  and  accuse  them,  saying  that  though  they 
fancied  that  they  had  been  marrying  virgins,  they  found  on 
the  first  occasion  of  their  having  intercourse  together,  that 
they  were  not  so.  When,  I  say,  these  men  make  such  charset 
let  all  the  elders  be  assembled  to  decide  on  the  case,  and  let 
the  parents  of  the  woman  who  is  accused  also  appear,  to 
make  their  defence  in  this  their  common  danger. 

For  in  such  a  case,  not  only  are  their  daughters  them- 
selves in  danger,  as  to  their  reputation  as  having  preserved 
the  chastity  of  their  bodies,  but  their  guardians  are  likewise 
imperilled,  not  only  because  they  have  not  kept  them  safe 
till  the  important'  period  of  their  marriageaole  age,  but 
because  they  have  given  in  marriage  as  virgins  those  who 
have  been  defiled  by  others,  deceiving  and  imposing  upon 
those  who  have  tiiken  them  to  wife. 

Then  if  they  appear  to  have  justice  on  their  side,  let  the 
judges  impose  a  pecuniary  fine  on  those  who  have  invented 
these  false  accusations,  and  let  them  also  sentence  those  who 
have  assaulted  them  to  corporal  punishment^  and  let  them  also 
pronounce,  what  to  those  men  will  be  the  most  unpleasant  of 
all  things,  a  confirmation  of  their  marriage,  if  their  wives  will 
still  endure  to  cohabit  with  them ;  for  the  law  permits  them 

*  Deuteronomy  xziL  IS. 


324  PHILO  JUDiBUS. 

ftt  their  owh  choice  to  remain  with  them  or  to  abandon  them, 
and  will  not  allow  the  hosbands  any  option  either  war,  on 
account  of  the  false  accusations  which  thej  have  brought. 

THi  xJLw  coircxBzniro  icxhldsbebs. 

I.  The  name  of  homicide  is  that  affixed  to  him  who  has 
dain  a  man ;  but  in  real  truth  it  is  a  sacrilege,  and  the  very 
greatest  of  all  sacrileges,  because,  of  all  th&jpossessions  and 
sacred  treasures  in  the  whole  world,  there  is  nothing  more 
holj  in  appearance,  nor  more  godlike  than  man,  the  all- 
beautiful  copy  of  an  all*beautiful  model,  a  representation 
admirably  made  after  an  archetypal  rational  idea. 

We  must  therefore,  without  hesitation,  pronounce  the 
homicide  or  murderer  an  impious  and  atrociously  wicked 
person,  committing  as  he  does  the  greatest  of  all  atrocities 
and  impieties,  and]  he  ought  to  be  put  to  death  as  haying 
done  toings  which  can  never  be  pardoned,  since,  being 
worthy  of  ten  thousand  deaths,  he  escapes  by  one  only, 
because  the  way  to  death  being  easy,  does  not  permit  hUs 
existence  to  be  protracted,  so  as  to  endure  a  multitude  of 
punishments ;  but  there  can  be  nothing  wrong  in  his  suffer* 
me  the  same  treatment  as  that  which  he  has  inflicted'  on 
others,  and  yet  how  can  it  be  the  same,  if  it  be  different 
as  to  its  time,  ss  to  its  mode  of  infliction,  as  to  the  inten- 
tion, and  as  to  the  persons  ?  Does  not  the  beginning  of 
acts  of  yiolence  come  first,  and  the  repelling  or  retaliating 
them  come  subsequently?  And  is  not  murder  the  most 
htwless  of  all  things,  but  the  punishment  of  murderers  the 
most  lawful  action  possible  ? 

Aeain,  he  who  hiss  slain  a  man  has  satisfied  his  desire 
which  he  entertained  when  he  slew  him;  but  he  who  has 
been  slain,  inasmuch  as  he  is  now  put  out  of  the  way, 
can  neither  attack  him  in  retaliation,  nor  can  he  mtify 
himself  by  taking  revenge.  Moreover,  the  one  was  able  by 
his  own  hands  to  carry  out  the  designs  which  he  conceived 
bv  himself;  but  the  other  can  never  succeed  in  procuring 
his  punishment,  unless  his  relations  and  friends  become  his 
champions,  taking  compassion  on  him  for  the  calamity  which 
has  befallen  him.  If  now  any  one  aims  a  blow  with  a  sword 
at  any  one,  with  the  intention  of  killing  him,  and  does  not 
kill  him,  he  will  still  be  guilty  of  murder,  since  he  was  a 


OK  SFSCIAL  LAW&  S^} 

murderer  in  hia  intentiozi,  eren  though  the  end  did  not  keep 
pace  with  hia  wiah. 

Again,  let  that  man  be  liable  to  the  same  punishment 
vfhOf  hy  previous  contrivance  and  nuu^hinatious  (not  dar- 
ing to  benave  bravely,  and  to  stand  face  to  face  with  his 
enemy  and  attack  him  openly),  treacherously  plots  and. 
compasses  his  slaughter ;  for  such  a  man  is  equally  liable  to 
the  curse  denoum^ed  against  murderers,  and  even  though 
he  may  not  be  one  with  his  hands  he  la  so  in  his  soul ;  for 
aSy  in  my  opinion,  one  must  not  only  look  upon  those  people 
as  enemies  who  fight  against  us  by  sea  or  by  land,  but  also 
those  who  are  prepared  for  either  Jdnd  of  warfare,  and  who 
are  erecting  battering  rams  and  engines  against  our  har- 
bours and  our  walls ;  and  as  we  do  in  fact  jud^  thus  of 
them,  even  though  they  come  to  no  actual  conflict^  so  also 
we  must  consider  murderers,  not  only  those  who  perform 
the  mere  act  of  killing,  but  those  who  do  anything  which 
tends  to  slaving,  whether  openly  or  secretly,  even  if  they  do 
not  eventually  perpetrate  the  action. 

And  if  out  of  tear  or  out  of  audacity,  two  very  contrary 
feedings,  but  both  blameable,  they  venture  to  flee  to  the 
temple  as  if  they  would  there  find  an  asylum,  we  must 
prevent  their  doing  so,  if  we  con :  but  if  they  are  before* 
band  with  us,  and  do  effect  their  entrance,  then  we  must 
take  them  out  and  give  them  up  for  execution,  affirming  the 
principle  that  the  temple  does  not  give  an  asylum  to 
impious  men ;  for  every  one  who  commits  actions  of  incur- 
able guilt  is  an  enemy  to  God ;  and  murderers  do  commit 
such  actions,  since  those  who  are  murdered  have  suffered 
disasters  which  are  incurable.  Or  shall  we  say  that  to  those 
who  have  done  no  wrong  the  temple  is  still  inaccessible 
until  they  have  washed  themselves,  and  sprinkled  them- 
selves, and  purified  themselves  with  the  accustomed  purifi- 
cations ;  but  that  those  who  are  guilty  of  indelible  crimes, 
the  pollution  of  which  no  length  of  time  will  ever  efiace, 
may  approach  and  dwell  among  those  holy  seats ;  though  no 
decent  person,  who  has  any  regard  for  holy  things  would 
even  receive  them  in  his  house  P 

IL  Therefore,  since  they  have  heaped  iniquity  upon 
iniquity,  adding  lawlessness  and  impiety  to  murder,  they 
must  be  dragged  out  of  the  temple  to  undergo  their  punish- 


tM  PHILO  JTTDiSnS. 

nent,  since^  aa  I  hare  said  before,  they  haye  oommitted 
actions  worthy  of  ten  thousand  deaths  instead  of  one ;  aa 
othemise,  the  temple  would  be  shut  against  the  relations 
and  friends  of  the  man  who  has  been  so  treacherously  mur- 
dered, if  the  murderer  were  to  be  dwelling  in  it,  since  they 
could  never  endure  to  come  into  the  same  place  with  him. 
But  it  wotdd  be  absurd  that,  for  the  sake  of  one  man,  and 
him  the  most  lawless  of  men,  a  great  number  of  persons, 
and  those  too  the  very  persons  who  have  been  injured  by 
him,  should  be  excluded  from  the  temple — men  who,  besides- 
that  they  have  done  no  wrong  themselves,  have  even  bos- 
tained  an  unseasonable  affliction  through  his  actions. 

And  perhaps,  indeed,  the  lawgiver  seeing  far  into  futurity 
by  the  acuteness  of  his  reasoning  powers,  was,  by  such  com- 
mandments, providing  against  any  bloodshed  ever  taking 
place  in  the  temple  by  the  entrance  of  anv  of  the  friends  of 
the  murdered  man  into  it,  whom  natural  affection,  a  very 
un^vemable  feeling,  would  urge,  full  of  enthusiasm  and 
violent  rage  as  they  would  be,  almost  to  day  the  murderer 
with  their  own  hands,  while  if  such  an  event  were  to  take 
place  it  would  be  most  impious  sacrilege;  for  then  the 
blood  of  the  sacrifices  would  be  mingled  with  the  blood  of 
murderers ;  that  which  has  been  consecrated  to  Grod  with 
that  which  is  wholly  impure. 

It  is  on  this  account  that  Moses  commands  that  the 
murderer  shall  be  given  up,  even  from  the  altar  itself.    . 

in.  But  some  persons  who  have  slain  others  with  swords, 
or  spears,  or  darts,  or  clubs,  or  stones,  or  something  of  that 
kind,  may  possibly  have  done  so  without  any  previous 
design,  and  without  having  for  some  time  before  planned 
this  deed  in  their  hearts,  but  may  have  been  excited  at  the 
moment,  yielding  to  passion  more  powerful  than  their 
reason,  to  commit  the  homicide ;  so  that  it  is  but  half  a 
crime,  inasmuch  as  the  mind  was  not  for  some  long  time 
before  occupied  by  the  pollution. 

But  there  are  others  also  of  the  greatest  wickedness,  men 
polluted  both  in  hands  and  mind,  who,  bein^  sorcerers  and 
poisoners,  devoting  all  their  leisure  and  all  their  solitude  to 
planning  seasonable  attacks  upon  others,  who  invent  all 
kinds  oi  contrivances  and  devices  to  bring  about  calamities 
on  their  neighbours.     On  which  account,  Moses  commands 


OK  SPECIAL  LAW&  2517 

that  poifldnen  and  sorceresses  shall  not  be  allowed  to  live 
one  day  or  even  one  hour,  but  that  they  shall  be  put  to 
death  the  moment  that  thej  are  taken,  no  pretext  bemg  for 
a  moment  allowed  them  for  putting  off  or  delaying  their 
punishment.  Por  those  who  attack  one  openly  and  to  one's 
lace,  any  body  mar  guard  against ;  but  of  those  who  plot 
against  one  secretly,  and  who  disguise  their  attacks  by  the 
concealed  approaches  of  ^ison,  it  is  not  easy  to  see  the 
cunning  beforehand.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  antici- 
pate them,  inflicting  upon  them  that  death  which  other 
persons  would  eJse  haye  suffered  by  their  means.    , 

And  again,  besides  this,  he  who  openly  slays  a  man  with' 
a  sword,  or  with  any  similar  weapon,  can  only  kill  a  few 
persons  at  one  time ;  but  one  who  mixes  and  compounds 
poisonous  drugs  with  food,  may  destroy  innumerable  com- 
panies at  once  who  have  no  suspicion  of  his  treachery. 
Accordingly,  it  has  happened  before  now  that  rerv  nume- 
rous parties  of  men  who  nave  come  together  in  gooA  fellow- 
ship to  eat  of  the  some  salt  and  to  sit  at  the  same  table, 
have  suffered  at  such  a  time  of  harmony  thinc^ .  wholly 
incompatible  with  it,  beine  suddenly  killed,  and  have  thus 
met  with  death  instead  of  ieastinjz.  On  which  account  it  is 
fitting  that  e?en  the  most  merciiul,  and  gentle,  and  mode- 
rate of  men  should  approve  of  such  persons  beins;  put  to 
death,  who  are  all  but  the  same  as  murderers  who  uay  with 
their  own  hand ;  and  that  they  should  think  it  consistent 
with  holiness,  not  to  commit  their  punishment  to  others, 
but  to  execute  it  themselves.  Por  how  can  it  be  anything 
but  a  most  terrible  evil  for  any  one  to  contrive  the  death  of 
another  by  that  food  which  is  given  as  the  cause  of  life,  and 
to  work  such  a  change  in  that  which  is  nutritious  by  nature 
as  to  render  it  destructive  ;  so  that  those  who,  in  obedience 
to  the  necessities  of  nature,  have  recourse  to  eating  and 
drinking,  having  no  previous  idea  of  any  treachery,  take  de- 
structive food  as  though  it  were  salutary  ? 

Again,  let  those  persons  meet  with  the  same  punishment 
who,  though  they  do  not  compound  dnu^s  widen  are  actu- 
ally deadly,  nevertheless  administer  such  as  long  diseases 
are  causedi  bv ;  for  death  is  often  a  lesser  evil  than  diseases : 
and  especially  than  such  as  extend  over  a  lon^  time  and 
have  no  fortunate  or  favourable  end.    Por  the  illnesses 


838  PHILO  JUDJBUS. 

wbicli  flrifle  tram  jpoisons  are  difficult  to  be  cored,  and  are 
often  completely  incurable.  Moreorer,  in  tbe  case  of  men 
wbo  bare  oeen  exposed  to  macbinations  of  tbis  kind,  it  often 
bappens  tbat  diseases  of  the  mind  ensue  wbicb  are  worse 
eren  tban  tbe  afflictions  of  tbe  body;  for  they  are  often 
attacked  by  delirium  and  insanity,  and  intolerable  ^nzy,  by 
means  of  wbich  tbe  mind,  ibe  greatest  blessing  which 
Gk>d  baa  bestowed  upon  mankind,  is  impaired  m  erery 
possible  manner,  despairing  of  any  safety  or  cure,  and  so 
18  utterly  remoyed  firom  its  seat,  and  expelled,  as  it  were, 
leaving  in  tbe  body  only  tbe  inferior  portion  of  tbe  soul, 
namely,  its  irrational  part,  of  which  even  beasts  partake, 
since  every  person  wbo  is  deprived  of  reason,  which  is  the 
better  part  of  the  soul,  is  changed  into  tbe  nature  of  a  beast, 
even  though  the  characteristics  of  the  human  form  remain. 

lY.  Now  the  true  magical  art,  being  a  science  of  discern- 
ment, wbicb  contemplates  and  beholds  the  books  of  nature 
with  a  more  acute  and  distinct  perception  than  usual,  and 
appearing  as  such  to  be  a  dignified  and  desirable  branch  of 
knowledge,  is  studied,  not  merely  by  private  individuals, 
but  even  by  kingn,  and  the  very  greatest  of  kings,  and 
especially  by  the  rersian  monarcLs,  to  such  a  degree,  that 
they  say  that  among  that  people  no  one  can  possibly  suc- 
ceed to  the  kingdom  if  he  has  not  previously  been  initiated 
into  the  mysteries  of  the  magi.  But  there  is  a  certain  adul- 
terated species  of  this  science,  which  may  more  properly  be 
called  wicked  imposture,  which  quacks,  and  cheats,  and 
buffoons  pursue,  and  the  vilest  of  women  and  slaves,  pro- 
fessing to  understand  all  kinds  of  incantations  and  purifi- 
cations, and  promising  to  change  the  dispositions  of  those 
on  whom  they  operate  so  as  to  turn  those  who  love  to 
unalterable  enmity,  and  those  who  hate  to  the  most  excessive 
affection  by  certain  charms  and  incantations ;  and  thus  they 
deceive  and  gain  influence  over  men  of  unsuspicious  md 
innocent  dispositions,  until  they  fall  into  the  greatest 
calamities,  by  means  of  which  great  numbers  of  friends  and 
relations  have  wasted  away  by  degrees,  and  so  have  been 
rapidly  destroyed  without  any  noise  being  made.  And  I 
imagine  that  the  lawgiver,  having  a  regard  to  all  these 
circumstances,  would  on  that  account  not  permit  the  punish- 
ments due  to  poisoners  to  be  postponed  to  any  subsequent 


05  8PBCUL  LAWS.  826. 

occasion,  but  ordained  that  the  executioners  should  at  once 
proceed  to  inflict  the  due  penaltj  on  them ;  for^delaj  rather 
excites  the  guilty  to  make  use  of  the  time  that  is  allowed 
them  to  cany  out  their  iniquities,  inasmuch  as  thej  are 
already  condemned  to  death,  while  it  fills  those  who  are 
already  suspicious  and  apprehensiye  of  misfortune  with  a 
more  urgent  fear,  as  they  took  upon  the  life  of  their  enemies 
to  be  their  own  death. 

Therefore,  as  if  we  only  see  snakes,  and  serpents,  and  any 
other  venomous  animals,  we  at  once,  without  a  moment's 
delay,  kill  them  before  they  can  bite,  or  wound,  or  attack  us 
at  all,  taking  care*  not  to  expose  ourselres  to  any  injunr 
from  them  by  reason  of  our  knowledge  of  the  mischief  whicli 
is  inherent  in  them ;  in  the  same  manner  it  is  right  promptly 
to  punish  those  men  who,  though  they  have  had  a  gentle 
nature  assigned  to  them  by  means  of  that  fountain  of  reason 
which  is  the  cause  and  source  of  all  society,  do  nevertheless 
of  deliberate  purpose  change  it  themselves  to  the  ferocity  of 
untameable  beasts,  looking  upon  the  doing  injurY  to  as  many 
people  as  they  can  to  be  their  greatest  pleasure  and 
advantage. 

y.  This  may  be  sufficient  to  say  on  the  present  occasion 
concerning  poisoners  and  magicians.  Moreover,  we  ought 
also  not  to  be  ignorant  of  this,  that  very  often  unexpected 
occasions  arise,  in  which  a  person  slays  a  man  without  naving 
ever  prepared  himself  for  this  action,  but  because  he  has 
been  suddenly  transported  with  anger,  which  is  an  intolera- 
ble and  terrible  feeling,  and  which  injures  beyond  all  other 
feelings  both  the  man  who  entertains  and  the  man  who  has 
excited  it;  for  sometimes  a  man  having  come  into  the 
market-place  on  some  important  business,  meeting  with 
some  one  who  is  inclined  precipitately  to  accuse  him,  or 
who  attempts  to  assault  him,  or  who  begins  to  pick  a  quarrel 
with  him,  and  engages  him  in  a  conflict,  for  the  sake  of 
separating  from  him  and  more  speedily  escaping  him,  either 
strikes  his  opponent  with  his  nst  or  takes  up  a  stone  and 
throws  it  at  mm  and  knocks  him  down. 

And  if  the  wound  which  the  man  has  received  is  mortal, 
BO  that  he  at  once  dies,  then  let  the  man  who  has  struck  him 
also  die,  suffering  the  same  fate  himself  which  he  inflicted 

•  Esodaa  xzL  18. 


330  FHILO  JUDjEVS. 

on  the  other.  But  if  the  man  does  not  die  immediately 
after  reoeinng  the  blow,  but  ia  afflicted  by  illneaa  in  conae* 
qnence  and  takea  to  hia  bed,  and  baring  been  properiy 
attended  to  riaea  up  again,  eren  though  he  may  not  be  able 
to  walk  well  without  aupport,  but  may  require  aome  one  to 
aupport  him  or  a  stick  to  leui  upon,  in  that  caae  the  man 
who  struck  him  shall  pay  a  double  penalty,  one  aa  an  atone- 
ment  for  the  injury  done,  and  one  for  the  expenses  of  the 
cnre.  And  when  lie  has  paid  this  he  shall  be  acquitted  aa  to 
the  punishment  of  death,  eren  if  the  man  who  haa  reoeired 
the  olow  should  subsequently  die ;  for  perhaps  he  did  not 
die  of  the  blow,  since  he  got  better  after  that  and  recorer^ 
so  far  aa  to  walk,  but  perhapa  he  died  from  some  other 
causes,  such  as  often  suadenly  attack  thoae  who  are  of  the 
most  vifforous  bodily  health,  and  kill  them. 

But  u  any  one  has  a  contest  with  a  woman  who  is  preg- 
nant, and  strike  her  a  blow  on  her  belly,  and  she  miscarry,  if 
the  child  which  was  conceived  within  her  is  still  unfashioned 
and  unformed,  he  shall  be  punished  by  a  fine,  both  for  the 
assault  which  he  committea  and  also  "because  he  has  pre* 
rented  nature,  who  was  flBLshioning  and  preparing  that  most 
excellent  of  all  creatures,  a  human  being,  m)m  brineinff  >»ini 
into  existence.  But  if  the  child  which  was  conceired  had 
assumed  a  distinct  shape*  in  all  its  parts,  harin^  receired  all 
its  proper  connective  and  distinctive  qualities,  he  shall  die ; 
for  such  a  creature  as  that  is  a  man,  whom  he  has  slain  while 
still  in  the  workshop  of  nature,  who  had  not  thought  it  aa 
ret  a  proper  time  to  produce  him  to  the  light,  but  had  kept 
Iiim  lile  a  statue  lying  in  a  sculptor's  workshop,  requiring 
nothing  more  than  to  be  released  and  sent  out  into  the 
world. 

YI.  On  account  of  this  commandment  he  also  adds 
another  proposition  of  greater  importance,  in  which  the  ex- 
posure of  infants  is  forbidden,  which  haa  become  a  rery  ordi- 
nary piece  of  wickedness  amon^  other  nations  by  reason  of 
their  natural  inhumanity ;  for  if  it  is  proper  to  provide  for 
that  which  is  not  yet  brought  forth  by  reason  of  the  definite 
periods  of  time  requisite  lor  such  a  process,  so  that  eren 
that  may  not  suffer  any  injury  by  being  plotted  against,  how 
can  it  be  otherwise  than  more  necessary  to  take  similar  care 

•  Exodua  xxi  22. 


iOMU 


Off  SPXCIAL  LAWS.  881 

of  tbe  cbild  when  brought  to  perfection  and  bom,  and  sent 
forth,  as  it  were,  into  that  colony  which  has  been  assigned 
to  the  human  race,  for  the  purpose  of  having  a  share  oi  the 
bounties  of  nature  which  she  sends  forth  from  the  land,  and 
fiom  the  water,  and  from  tbe  air,  and  from  tbe  heayen? 
bestowing  on  men  the  sight  of  the  hearenlj  bodies,  and  the 
power  and  supreme  authority  over  all  tbe  things  on  earth, 
and  supplying  all  the  extemiA  senses  with  abundant  supplies 
of  all  thmgs,  and  presenting  to  the  mind  as  the  great  king, 
br  means  of  those  outward  senses  as  its  body-gusrds,  all  the 
things  which  are  yisible  to  them,  and,  without  employing 
their  agency,  all  those  things  which  are  appreciable  only  by 
i^ason. 

Accordingly,  let  those  parents  who  deprire  their  children 
of  all  these  blessings,  giving  them  no  share  of  any  one  of 
them  from  the  moment  of  their  birth,  know  that  they  are 
violating  the  laws  of  nature,  and  accusing  themselves  of  the 
very  greatest  enormities,  of  a  devotion  to  pleasure,  and  a 
hatred  of  their  species,  and  miirder,  and  tbe  very  worst  kind 
of  murder,  infanticide ;  for  those  men  are  devoted  to  pleasure 
who  are  not  influenced  by  the  wish  of  propagating  children, 
and  of  perpetuating  their  race,  when  they  have  connection 
with  women,  but  who  are  only  like  boars  or  he-goats  seeking 
the  enjoyment  that  arises  from  such  a  connection.  Again, 
who  can  be  greater  haters  of  their  species  than  those  who 
are  the  implacable  and  ferocious  enemies  of  their  own  chil- 
dren ?  Unless,  indeed,  any  one  is  so  foolish  as  to  imagine 
that  these  men  can  be  humane  to  strangers  who  act  in  a 
barbarous  manner  to  those  who  are  united  to  them  by  ties 
of  blood.  And  as  for  their  murders  and  infanticides  they 
are  established  by  the  most  undeniable  proofs,  siuce  some  of 
them  slay  them  with  their  own  hands,  and  stifle  the  first 
breath  of  their  children,  and  smother  it  altogether,  out  of  a 
terribly  cruel  and  unfeeling  disposition ;  others  throw  them 
into  the  depths  of  a  river,  or  of  a  sea,  after  they  have  attached 
a  weight  to  them,  in  order  that  they  may  sink  to  the  bottom 
more  speedily  because  of  it. 

Others,  again,  carry  them  out  into  a  desert  place  to 
expose  them  there,  as  they  themselves  say,  in  the  hope  that 
they  may  be  saved  by  some  one,  but  in  real  truth  to  load 
them  with  still  more  painful  sufiering;  for  there  all  the 


8S3  PHILO  JXJDMVS. 

beasts  whicli  deTour  human  flesh,  since  there  is  no  one  to 
keep  them  off,  attack  them  and  feast  on  the  delicate  banquet 
of  the  children,  while  those  who  were  their  onlj-  guardians, 
and  who  were  bound  aboTe  all  other  people  to  protest  and 
saye  them,  their  own  father  and  mother,  have  exposed  them. 
And  camiTorous  birds  fLj  down  and  lick  up  the  remainder 
of  their  bodies,  when  they  are  not  tliemselves  the  first  to  dia- 
coTer  them ;  for  when  they  discoyer  them  themselyes  thej  do 
battle  with  the  beasts  of  the  earth  for  the  whole  carcass. 

And  eyen  suppose  that  some  one  passing  by  on  his  road  is 
moyed  bj  a  feeling  of  gentle  compassion  to  take  pity  on  and 
show  mercy  to  the  exposed  infants,  so  as  to  take  them  up  and 
g*ye  them  food,  and  to  show  them  other  portions  of  the  atten- 
tion that  is  requisite,  what  do  we  think  of  such  a  humane 
action  ?  Do  we  not  look  upon  it  as  an  express  condemnation  of 
the  real  parents,  when  those  who  are  in  nowise  related  to  them 
show  the  tender  foresight  of  parents,  but  the  parents  do  not 
display  eyen  the  kindness  or  strangers?  Therefore,  Moses 
has  utterly  prohibited  the  exposure  of  children,  by  a  tacit 
prohibition,  when  he  condemns  to  death,  as  I  haye  said 
before,  those  who  are  the  causes  of  a  miscarriiige  to  a 
woman  whose  child  conceiyed  within  her  is  already  formed. 

And  yet  those  persons  who  haye  inyestigated  the  secrets 
of  natural  philosophy  say  that  those  children  which  are  still 
within  the  belly,  and  while  they  are  still  contained  in  the 
womb,  are  a  part  of  their  mothers ;  and  the  most  highly 
esteemed  of  the  physicians  who  haye  examined  into  the 
formation  of  man,  scrutinising  both  what  is  easily  seen  and 
what  is  kept  concealed  with  ereat  care,  by  means  of  anatomy, 
in  order  that,  if  there  should  be  any  need  of  their  attention 
to  any  case,  nothing  may  be  disregarded  through  ignorance 
and  so  become  the  cause  of  serious  mischief,  agree  with  them 
and  say  the  same  thing.  But  when  the  children  are  brought 
ferth  and  are  separated  from  that  which  is  produced  with 
them,  and  are  set  free  and  placed  by  themselyes,  they  then 
become  real  liying  creatures,  deficient  in  nothing  which  can 
contribute  to  the  perfection  of  human  nature,  so  that  then, 
beyond  all  question,  he  who  slays  an  infant  is  a  homicide, 
and  the  law  shows  its  indignation  at  such  an  action ;  not 
beinff  guided  by  the  age  but  by  the  species  of  the  creature 
in  whom  its  ordinances  are  yiolated. 


ON  SPECIAL  LAWS.  333 

« 

If,  indeed,  it  seemed  reasonable  to  be  at  all  influenced  by 
tbe  age,  then  I  think  that  a  person  might  very  reasonably  be 
even  more  indignant  at  those  who  slaj  infants.  For  when 
fbll-grown  people  are  killed,  there  maj  be  ten  thousand 
plausible  excuses  for  assaults  upon  or  quarrels  with  them ; 
out  in  the  case  of  mere  infants  only  just  launched  into 
human  life  and  shown  to  the  light  of  day,  it  is  impossible  for 
the  greatest  liar  to  invent  an  accusation  against  them,  as 
thej  are  wholly  yoid  of  offence.  On  which  account  those 
ought  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  most  inhuman  and  pitiless 
of  all  men  who  entertain  plots  for  the  destructiou  of  those 
infants,  and  justly  does  the  sacred  law  detest  such  criminals 
and  pronounce  them  worthy  of  death. 

Vli.  The  sacred  law  says  that  the  man,  who  has  been 
killed  without  any  intention  that  he  should  be  so  on  the  part 
of  him  who  kiUed  him,  has  been  given  up  by  GKmI  into  the 
hands  of  his  slayers;*  in  this  way  designing  to  make  an 
excuse  for  the  man  who  appears  to  have  slain  him  as  if  he 
had  slain  a  guilty  person.  jPor  the  merciful  and  forgiying 
God  can  never  be  supposed  to  have  given  up  any  innocent 
person  to  be  put  to  death ;  but  whoever  ingeniously  escapes 
the  judgment  of  a  human  tribunal  by  means  of  his  own 
cunning  and  wariness,  he  is  convicted  when  broueht  before 
the  invisible  tribunal  of  nature,  by  which  aloue  the  uncor- 
rupted  truth  is  discerned  without  being  kept  in  the  dark  by 
the  artifices  of  sophistical  arguments. 

Por  such  an  investigation  does  not  admit  of  arguments  at 
all,  laying  bare  all  devices  and  intentions,  and  brinnng  the 
most  secret  counsels  to  light ;  and,  in  one  sense,  it  does  not 
look  upon  a  man  who  has  slain  another  as  liable  to  justice, 
inasmuch  as  he  has  only  sinned  to  be  the  minister  of  a  divine 
jud^ent,  but  still  he  will  have  incurred  an  obscure  and 
sb'gnt  kind  of  defilement,  which,  however,  may  obtain  allow- 
ance and  pardon.  For  Grod  employs  those  who  commit 
slight  and  remedial  errors  against  tnose  who  have  perpe- 
trated enormous  and  unpardonable  crimes  as  ministers  of 
punishment ;  not,  indeeo,  that  he  approves  of  them,  but 
that  he  avails  himself  of  them  as  smtable  instruments  of 
punishment,  so  that  no  one  who  is  himself  pure  in  his  whole 
me  and  descended  from  virtuous  parents  may  have  homicide 

•  Exodui  zzL  18. 


S^  PHILO  JUD^Ua. 

imputed  to  him,  eyen  if  he  be  the  greatest  man  in  the 
world. 

Therefore,  the  law  has  pronounced  the  sentence  of  baniah- 
ment  upon  him  who  haa  slain  a  man,  yet  not  of  VniahmAi^t 
anj  where,  nor  for  erer ;  for  it  has  assigned  six  cities^*  jone 
fourth  portion  of  what  the  whole  sacred  tribe  rec^yed  as  its 
inheritance,  for  those  who  were  conyicted  of  homicide; 
which,  from  the  circumstances  connected  with  them,  it  has 
naoied  cities  of  refuge.  And  it  fixed  the  time  of  this 
^ffnifhmftnt  as  the  length  of  the  life  of  the  hi^h  priest, 
permitting  the  exiles  to  return  home  after  his  deauL 

Ylli.  And  the  cause  of  the  first  of  these  iijyunctions  waa 
this.  The  tribe  which  has  been  mentioned  receiyed  these 
cities  aa  a  reward  for  a  iustifiable  and  holj  slaughter,  which 
we  must  look  upon  as  the  most  illustrious  and  miportant  of 
all  the  gallant  actions  that  were  eyer  performed.  Tor  when 
the  prophet,  after  haying  been  called  up  to  the  loftiest  and 
most  sacred  of  all  the  mountains  in  that  district,  was 
diyinelj  instructed  in  the  generic  outlines  of  all  the  special 
lawsyt  and  was  out  of  sight  of  his  people  for  many  aays ; 
those  of  the  people  who  were  not  of  a  peaceable  dis- 
position filled  eyerj  place  with  the  eyils  which  arise 
mm.  anarchy,  and  crowned  all  their  iniquitj  with  open 
impiety,  tumm^  into  ridicule  all  those  excellent  and  beautiful 
lessons  concemmg  the  honour  due  to  the  one  true  and  living 
God,  and  haying  made  a  golden  bull,  an  imitation  of  the 
Egyptian  Typhos,  and  brought  to  it  unholy  sacrifices,  and 
festiyals  unhallowed,  and  instituted  profane  and  impious 
dances,  with  BongB  and  hymns  instead  of  lamentations; 
tuen  the  tribe  aforesaid,  being  very  terribly  indignant  at 
their  sudden  departure  from  their  prerious  customs,  and 
being  enfiamed  with  zeal  by  reason  of  their  natural  disposi- 
tion  which  hated  iniauity,  all  became  full  of  rage  and  of 
diyine  enthusiasm,  and  arming  themselves,  as  at  one  signal, 
and  with  great  contempt  and  one  unanimous  attack,  came 
upon  the  people,  drunk  thus  with  a  twofold  intoxication  of 
impiety  and  oi  wine,  be&^inning  with  their  nearest  and  dearest 
friends  and  relations,  thinking  those  who  loved  God  to  be 
their  only  relations  and  friends.  And  in  a  very  small  por- 
tion of  tLe  day,  four-and-twenty  thousand  men  were  slain; 
*  Kumben  xxxv.  1.  t  Exodus  xxziL  1. 


QV  SPBCUI*  luiWS.  835 

the  calamities  of  wliom  were  a  warning  to  tiiose  who  would 
otherwise  hare  joined  themsdyes  to  their  iniquity,  but  who 
xiow  were  alarmed  lest  they  should  suffer  a  similar  fate. 

Since  then  these  men  had  undertaken  this  expedition  of 
their  own  accord  and  spontaneouslj,  in  the  cause  of  piety 
and  holy  rererence  for  the  one  true  and  living  Gk>d,  not 
without  mat  danger  to  those  who  had  entered  in  the  con- 
test, the  JB*ather  of  the  universe  received  them  with  appro- 
bation, and  at  once  pronounced  those  who  had  slain  those 
men  to  be  pure  from  all  curse  and  pollution,  and  in  requital 
for  their  courage  he  bestowed  the  priesthood  on  them. 

IX.  Therefore  the  lawgiver  enjoms  that  the  man  who  haa 
committed  an  unintentional  murder  should  flee  to  some  one  of 
the  cities  which  this  tribe  has  received  as  its  inheritance,  in 
order  to  comfort  him  and  to  teach  him  not  to  despair  of  anj 
sort  of  safe^;  but  to  make  him,  while  safe  through  the 
privilege  of  the  place,  remember  and  consider  that  not  onlj 
on  certain  occasions  is  forgiveness  allowed  to  those  who 
have  designedly  slain  any  person,  but  that  even  great  and 
pre-eminent  honours  and  excessive  happiness  is  bestowed  on 
them. 

And  if  such  honours  can  ever  be  allowed  to  those  who 
have  slain  a  man  voluntarily,  how  much  more  must  there 
be  allowance  made  for  those  who  have  done  so  not  with  any 
design,  so  that,  even  if  no  honour  be  bestowed  on  them, 
they  may  at  least  not  be  condemned  to  be  put  to  death  in 
retaliation. 

By  which  injunctions  the  lawgiver  intimates  that  eveir 
kind  of  homicide  is  not  blameable,  but  only  that  which  is 
combined  with  injustice ;  and  that  of  other  kinds  some  are 
even  praiseworthy  which  are  committed  out  of  a  desire  and 
zeal  for  virtue ;  and  that  which  is  imintentional  is  not  greatly 
to  be  blamed. 

This,  then,  may  be  enough  to  say  about  tbe  first  cause ; 
and  we  must  now  explain  the  second. 

The  law  thinks  fit  to  preserve  the  man  who,  without  intend- 
ing it,  has  slain  another,  knowing  that  in  his  intention  he  was 
not  guilty,  but  that  with  his  hands  he  has  been  ministering 
to  tmit  justice  which  presides  over  aU  human  affairs.  For 
the  nearest  relations  of  the  dead  man  are  lying  in  wait  for 
him  in  a  hostile  manner  seeking  his  death,  while  others,  out 


880  •    PHILO  JUDJnTB. 

of  tbeir  ezcessiye  compassion  and  inconsolable  grief  for  the 
dead,  are  eager  for  (their  revenge ; ,  in  their  unreasoning 
impetuosity  not  regarding  either  the  truth  or  the  justice  en 
nature.  l!herefore,  the  law  directs  a  man  who  has  commit- 
ted a  homicide  under  these  circumstances  not  to  flee  to  the 
temple,  inasmuch  as  he  is  not  jet  purified,  nor  jet  into  any 
place  which  is  neglected  and  obscure,  lest,  being  despiseo, 
he  should  be  without  resistance  Sfiyen  up  to  his  enemies ; 
but  to  flee  to  the  sacred  city,  mAch  lies  on  the  borders 
between  the  holj  and  profane  ground,  being  in  a  manner  a 
second  temple ;  for  the  cities  of  those  who  are  consecrated 
to  the  priesthood  are  more  entitled  to  respect  than  the 
others,  in  the  same  proportion,  I  think,  as  tne  inhabitants 
are  more  venerable  than  the  inhabitants  of  other  cities ;  for 
the  lawgiver's  intention  is  by  means  of  the  privilege  belong- 
ing to  the  city  which  has  received  them  to  give  more 
complete  security  to  the  fugitives.  Moreover,  I  said  before, 
he  has  appointed  a  time  for  their  return,  the  death  of  the 
high  priest,  for  the  following  reason.* 

As  the  relations  of  each  individual  who  has  been  slain 
treacherouslj  lie  in  wait  to  secure  themselves  revenge  and 
justice  upon  those  who  treacherously  slew  him;  in  like 
manner  the  hi^h  priest  is  the  relation  and  nearest  of  kin  to 
the. whole  nation;  inasmuch  as  he  presides  over  and  dia- 

Eenses  justice  to  all  who  dispute  in  accordance  with  the 
iws,  and  offers  up  prayers  and  sacrifices  every  day  on 
behalf  of  the  whole  nation,  and  prays  for  blessings  for  the 
people  as  for  his  own  brethren,  and  parents,  and  children, 
that  every  age  and  every  portion  of  the  nation,  as  if  it  were 
one  body,  may  be  united  mto  one  and  the  same  society  and 
union,  devoted  to  peace  and  obedience  to  the  law. 

Therefore,  let  every  one  who  has  slain  a  man  uninten- 
tionally fear  him,  as  the  champion  and  espouser  of  the  cause 
of  those  who  have  been  slain,  and  let  him  keep  himself  dose 
within  the  city  to  which  he  has  fled  for  refuse,  no  longer 
venturing  to  advance  outside  of  the  walls,  if  he  has  any 
regard  for  his  own  safety,  and  for  keeping  his  life  out  of  the 
reach  of  danger. 

When,  therefore,  the  law  says,  let  not  the  fugitive  return 
tin  the  high  priest  is  dead,  it  says  something  equivalent  to 

*  Kamben  zzzt.  25. 


ON  SPECIAL  LAWS.  337 

this :  Until  the  liigh  priest  is  dead,  who  is  the  common  rela-' 
tion  of  all  the  people,  to  whom  alone  it  is* committed  to 
decide  the  a£Eair8  of  those  who  are  living  and  those  who  are 
dead. 

X.  Such,  then,  is  the  reason  which  it  is  fitting  should  be 
communicated  to  the  ears  of  the  younger  men.  But  there* 
is  another  which  maj  be  well  set  before  those  who  are  elder 
and  settled  in  their  characters,  which  is  this. 

It  is  granted  to  private  individuals  alone  to  be  pure  from 
voluntary  offences,  or  if  anj  one  chooses,  he  mav  add  the 
other  priests  abo  to  this  list ;  but  it  can  onlj  be  given  as  an 
especial  honour  to  the  hiffh  priest  to  be  pure  frop  both 
kinds,  that  is  from  both  voluntary  and  involuntary  offences ; 
for  it  is  altogether  unlawful  for  him  to  touch  any  pollution 
whatever,  whether  intentionally  or  out  of  some  unforeseen 
perversion  of  soul,  in  order  that  he,  as  being  the  declarer  of 
the  will  of  God  may  be  adorned  in  both  respects,  having  a 
disposition  free  from  reproach,  and  prosperity  of  life,  and 
beinff  a  man  to  whom  no  disgrace  ever  attaches.  Now  it 
will  be  consistent  with  the  chuacter  of  such  a  man  to  look 
with  suspicion  on  those  who  have  even  unintentionally  slain 
a  man,  not  indeed  re^ardine  them  as  under  a  curse,  but 
also  not  as  pure  and  wholly  &ee  &om  offence,  even  though 
they  may  have  appeared  most  completely  to  obey  the  inten- 
tion of  nature,  who  used  them  as  her  instruments  to  avenge 
herself  on  those  whom  they  have  slain,  whom  she  had 
privately  judged  by  herself  and  condemned  to  death. 

XI.  This  is  enough  to  say  concerning  free  men  and  citi- 
zens. 

The  lawgiver  proceeds  in  due  order  to  establish  laws  con- 
cerning slaves  who  are  killed  by  violence. 

Now  servants  are,  indeed,  in  an  inferior  condition  of  life, 
but  still  the  same  nature  belones  to  them  and  to  their 
masters.  And  it  is  not  the  condition  of  fortune,  but  the 
harmony  of  nature,  which,  in  accordance  with  the  divine 
law  is  the  rule  of  justice.  On  which  account  it  is  proper 
for  masters  not  to  use  their  power  over  their  slaves  in  an 
insolent  manner,  displaying  by  such  conduct  their  insolence 
and  overbearing  disposition  and  terrible  cruelty;  for  such 
conduct  is  not  a  proof  of  a  peaceful  soul,  but  oi  one  which, 
out  of  an  inability  to  regulate  itself^  covets  the  irresponsi- 

TOL.  m.  z 


338  *  raiLO  fUDiEUS. 

bflitj  of  a  tynuinlcal  vower.  Por  the  man  wlio  fortifies  his 
own  hoaae  like  a  citaoel,  and  does  not  allow  a  single  person 
within  it  to  speak  fireelj,  but  who  behayes  savagely  to  eveij 
one,  bj  reason  of  his  innate  misanthropy  and  barbarity, 
which  has  perhaps  even  been  increased  by  exercise,  is  a 
tyrant  in  mmiatiire ;  and  by  his  conduct  now  it  is  plainly 
shown  that  he  will  not  stop  eyen  there  if  he  should  acquire 
greater  power. 

Por  then  he  will  at  once  go  forth  to  attack  other  cities 
and  countries,  and  nations,  after  haying  preyiousl^  enskyed 
his  own  native  land,  so  as  to  prove  that  he  is  not  inclined  to 
behave  mercifully  to  any  one  who  shall  ever  become  mibject 
to  him.  Let,  then,  such  a  man  be  well  assured  that  he  wiU 
not  always  esci^  punishment  for  hia  continual  ill-treatment 
of  many  persons ;  for  justice,  which  hates  iniquity,  will  be 
his  enemy,  she  who  is  the  assistant  and  champion  of  those* 
who  are  treated  with  injustice,  and  she  will  exact  of  him  a 
strict  account  of^  and  reckoning  for,  those  who  have  fallen 
into  calamity  through  his  means,  even  if  he  should  say  that 
he  had  only  inflict^  blows  on  them  to  correct  them,  not 
designing  to  kill  them.  For  he  wiU  not  at  once  get  off  with 
a  cheerful  countenance,  but  he  will  be  brought  before  the 
tribunal  and  examined  by  accurate  investigators  of  the  truth, 
who  will  inquire  whether  he  slew  him  intentionally  or  unin- 
tentionally. And  if  he  be  found  to  have  plotted  against  him 
with  a  wicked  disposition,  let  him  die;  not  having  any 
excuse  made  for  him  on  the  ground  of  his  being  the  servants' 
master,  so  as  to  procure  his  deliverance. 

But  if  the  servants  who  have  been  beaten  do  not  die  at 
once  after  receiving  the  blows,  but  live  one  day  or  two,  then 
the  master  shall  no  longer  be  liable  to  be  accused  of  murder, 
having  this  strong  fi;round  of  defence  that  he  did  not  kill 
them  on  the  spot  by  beating,  nor  afterwards  when  he  had 
them  in  his  house,  but  that  he  suffered  them  to  live  as  long 
as  they  could,  even  though  that  may  not  have  been  very 
long.  Besides  that,  no  one  is  so  silly  as  to  attempt  to  dis- 
tress another  by  conduct  by  which  he  himself  also  will  be  a 
loser.  But  any  one  who  kills  his  servant  injures  himself 
much  more,  since  he  deprives  himself  of  the  services  which 
he  received  from  him  while  alive,  and,  moreover,  loses  the 
price  which  he  paid  for  him  which,  perhaps,  was  large.    If, 


•■sw-" 


ON  SPECIAL  ULWS.  330 

howerer,  the  servant  turn  out  to  haye  done  any  thing  worthr 
of  deathy  let  him  brin^  him  before  the  judges*  and  proTe  his 
offence,  making  the  laws  the  arbiters  of  his  ponishment 
and  not  himself. 

COKCXBNDro  THOSE  BEUTE  BEASTS  WHICH  ABE   THE 

CAUSES  07  A  HAN's  DEATH. 

s 

If  a  bull  gore  a  man  and  kill  him,  let  him  be  stoned.* 
For  his  flesh  may  not  be  either  offered  in  sacnfice  bj  the 
priests,  nor  eaten  bj  men.  Whj  not  ?  Because  it  is  not 
consistent  with  the  law  of  God  that  man  should  take  for 
food  or  for  a  seasoning  to  his  food  the  flesh  of  an  animal 
which  has  slain  a  man.  But  if  the  owner  of  the  beaat  knew 
that  he  was  a  sayase  and  ferocious  animal,  and  did  not  con- 
fine him,  nor  shut  him  up  and  take  care  of  him,  or  if  he  had 
heard  from  others  that  he  was  not  ouiet,  and  still  allowed 
him  to  feed  at  liberty,  he  shall  be  liable  to  a  prosecution  as 
guilty  of  the  man's'  death.  And  then  the  animal  which 
gored  the  man  shall  die,  and  his  master  shall  be  put  to  death 
also,  or  else  shall  pay  a  ransom  and  a  price  for  his  safety, 
and  the  court  of  justice  shall  deyise  what  punishment  he 
ought  to  suffer,  wliat  penalty  he  ought  to  pay. 

And  if  it  be  a  slaye  who  has  been  killed  then  he  shall  pay 
his  full  yalue  to  his  master ;  but  if  the  bull  haye  gored  not 
a  man  but  another  animal,  then  the  owner  of  the  beast 
which  killed  him  shall  take  the  dead  animal  and  giye  his 
master  another  like  him  instead  of  him,  because  he  was 
aware  beforehand  of  the  fierceness  of  his  own  beast,  and  did 
not  fl:uard  against  it.  And  if  the  bull  has  killed  a  sheep 
which  belonged  to  some  one  else,  he  shall  aeain  restore  this 
man  one  like  it  instead  of  it,  and  be  thankfiu  to  him  for  not 
exacting  a  ereater  penalty  of  him,  since  it  was  he  who  was 
the  first  to  do  any  injury. 

C05CEB5IKO  PITS. 

I.  Some  persons  are  accustomed  to  dig  yery  deep  pits,  either 
in  order  to  open  springs  which  may  bubble  up,  or  else  to 
receive  rain  water,  and  then  they  widen  drains  under  ground ; 
in  which  case  they  ought  either  to  build  round  the  mouths  of 
them,  or  else  to  put  a  cover  on  them ;  but  still  they  often,  out 

*  Exodui  zzL  28. 
z  2 


840  PHILO  JUD^EUS. 

of  shameful  carelessness  or  foUj,  hare  left  such  places  open,  by 
which  means  some  persons  have  met  with  destruction.  If, 
therefore,  any  trayeller  passing  along  the  road,  not  knowing 
beforehand  that  there  is  any  such  pit,  shall  step  on  the  hole, 
and  fall  in,  and  be  lulled,  any  one  of  the  relations  of  the 
dead  man  who  chooses  may  bring  an  accusation  against 
those  who  made  the  pit,  and  the  tribunal  shall  decide  what 
punishment  they  ougnt  to  suffer,  or  what  penalty  they  ought 
to  pay.* 

But  if  a  beast  fall  in  and  perish,  then  they  who  dug  the 
pit  shall  pay  its  value  to  its  owner  as  if  it  were  still  alive, 
and  they  shall  have  the  dead  body  for  themselves. 

Again,  those  men  also  are  committing  an  injury  akin  to 
and  resembling  that  which  has  just  been  mentioned,  who 
when  building  houses  leave  the  roof  level  with  the  ground 
though  they  ought  to  protect  them  with  a  parapet,  in  order 
that  no  one  may  fall  down  into  the  hole  made  without  per- 
ceiving it.  For  such  men,  if  one  is  to  tell  the  plain  truth, 
are  committing  murder,  as  far  as  they  themselves  are  con- 
cerned, even  though  no  one  fall  in  and  perish ;  accordingly 
let  them  be  punished  equally  with  those  who  have  the 
mouths  of  pits  open. 

II.  The  law  expressly  enjoins  that  it  shall  not  be  lawful 
to  take  any  ransom  from  murderers  who  ought  to  be  put  to 
death,  for  the  purpose  of  lessening  their  punishment,  or 
substituting  banishment  for  death.  Por  olood  must  be 
atoned  for  by  blood,  the  blood  of  him  who  has  been 
treacherously  slain  by  that  of  him  who  has  slain  him.  Since 
men  of  wicked  dispositions  are  never  wearied  of  offending, 
but  are  always  committing  atrocious  actions  in  the  excess 
of  their  wickedness,  and  increasing  their  iniquities,  and 
extending  them  beyond  all  bounds  or  limits. 

Por  the  lawgiver  would,  if  it  had  been  in  his  power,  have 
condenmed  those  men  to  ten  thousand  deaths.  But  since 
this  was  not  possible,  his  prescribed  another  punishment  for 
them,  commanding  those  who  had  slain  a  man  to  be  hanged 
upon  a  tree.  And  after  having  established  this  ordinance 
he  returned  again  to  his  natural  humanity,  treating  with 
mercy  even  those  who  had  behaved  immercifully  towards 
others,  and  he  pronounced,  "Let  not  the  sun  set  upon 

*  Ezodos  xzi.  83. 


Olf  SPECIAL  LAWS.  841 

persona  bangine  on  a  tree ;"  *  but  let  them  be  buried  under 
the  earth  and  be  concealed  fiom  ai^ht  before  aunaet.  For 
it  waa  neceaaary  to  raise  up  on  his^h  all  those  who  were 
enemiea  to  every  part  of  the  woiid^  ao  aa  to  show  most 
evidently  to  the  sun,  and  to  the  heaven,  and  to  the  air,  and 
to  the  water,  and  to  the  earth,  that  they  had  been  chaatised ; 
and  after  that  it  waa  proper  to  remove  them  into  the  resion 
of  the  dead,  and  to  bury  them,  in  order  to  prevent  their 
polluting  the  things  upon  the  earth. 

m.  Sloreover,  there  is  this  further  commandment  given 
with  great  propriety,  that  the  fathers  are  not  to  die  in  behalf 
of  their  sons,  nor  the  sons  in  behalf  of  their  parents,  but 
that  every  one  who  has  done  things  worthy  of  death  is  to  be 
put  to  death  by  himself  alone.  And  this  commandment  is 
established  because  of  those  persons  who  set  might  above 
right,  and  also  for  the  sake  of  those  who  are  too  affectionate ; 
for  these  last,  out  of  their  extraordinary  and  extravagant 
good  will,  will  be  often  willing  cheerfully  to  die  for  others, 
the  innocent  thus  giving  themselves  up  for  the  guilty,  and 
thinking  it  a  great  gain  not  to  see  them  punished ;  or  else 
sons  givinfi^  themselves  up  for  their  fathers  in  the  idea  that, 
if  deprived  of  them  they  would  for  the  future  live  a  miserable 
life,  more  grievous  than  any  ];ind  of  death. 

But  to  such  persons  one  must  say,  ''This  your  good- will 
is  out  of  season.'*  And  all  things  which  are  out  of  season 
are  very  properly  blamed,  just  aa  things  that  are  done 
seasonably  are  praised  on  that  account.  Moreover,  it  ia 
right  to  love  those  who  do  actions  worthy  to  attract  love. 
But  no  wicked  man  can  be  really  a  friend  to  any  one.  And 
wickedness  alienates  relations,  and  even  those  who  are  the 
most  attached  of  relations,  when  men  violate  all  the  prin- 
ciples of  justice.  Por  the  agreement  as  to  principles  of 
iiistice  and  as  to  the  other  virtues,  ia  a  closer  tie  than 
relationship  by  blood ;  and  if  any  one  violates  such  an  agree- 
ment, he  is  set  down  not  only  as  a  stranger  and  a  foreigner, 
but  even  as  an  irreconcilable  enemy. 

"  Why  then  do  you  pervert  and  misapply  the  name  of  good- 
will which  is  a  most  excellent  and  humane  one,  and  conceal 
the  truth,  exhibiting  as  a  veil  an  effeminate  and  womanly 
disposition  ?    For  are  not  those  persons  womanly  in  whose 

*  Deaieronomy  xxL  23. 


849  PHILO  JUDJnTB. 

mindB  reason  is  OTeroome  bj  compassion  ?  And  you  do  this 
in  order  to  effect  a  double  iniquity,  deliyering  the  guilty  from 
punishment,  and  thinking  it  fair  to  punish  yourselves,  who 
are  blameable  in  no  respect  whaterer,  instead  of  them.'* 

lY.  But  these  men  have  this  to  say  in  excuse  of  them- 
selreSy  that  they  are  not  pursuing  any  priyate  advantage  for 
themselYes,  and  also  that  they  are  influenced  by  ezcessire 
,  affection  for  their  nearest  relations,  for  the  sake  of  the  pre- 
servation of  whom  they  will  cheerfully  submit  to  die.  But 
who,  I  will  not  say  of  moderate  men,  Sut  even  of  those  who 
are  very  inhuman  indeed  in  their  dispositions,  would  not 
reject  such  barbarous  and  actually  brutally  disposed  persons 
as  those  who,  either  by  secret  contrivance  or  by  open 
audacity,  inflict  the  matest  calamities  on  one  person  as  a 
punishment  for  the  niults  of  another^  putting  forward  as  a 
pretext  the  plea  of  friendship,  or  of  relationship,  or  of  fellow- 
ship, or  something  of  that  Kind,  as  a  justification  for  the 
destruction  of  those  who  have  done  no  wrong  ?  And  at  times 
they  even  do  these  things  without  having  steered  any  injury 
at  all  out  of  mere  covetousness  and  a  love  of  rapine. 

Not  lonff  ago  a  certain  man  who  had  been  appointed  a 
collector  ot  taxes  in  our  countir,  when  some  of  those  who 
appeared  to  owe  such  tribute  fled  out  of  poverty,  from  a 
fear  of  intolerable  punishment  if  they  remained  without  pay- 
ing, carried  off  their  wives,  and  their  children,  and  their 
parents,  and  their  whole  families  by  force,  beating  and 
insulting  them,  and  heaping  every  land  of  contumely  and 
ill  treatment  upon  them,  to  make  them  either  fl^ve  informa- 
tion  as  to  where  the  fugitives  had  concealed  themselves,  or 
pay  the  money  instead  of  them,  thoueh  they  could  not  do 
either  the  one  thing  or  the  other ;  in  the  first  place,  because 
they  did  not  know  where  they  were,  and,  secondly,  because 
they  were  in  still  greater  poverty  than  the  men  who  had 
fled.  But  this  tax-collector  did  not  let  them  go  till  he  had 
tortured  their  bodies  with  racks  and  wheels,  so  as  to  kill 
them  with  newly  invented  kinds  of  death,  fastening  a  basket 
full  of  sand  to  their  necks  with  cords,  and  suspending  it 
there  as  a  veiy  heavy  weight,  and  then  placing  tnem  in  the 
open  air  in  the  middle  of  the  market  place,  that  some  of 
tnem,  being  tortured  and  beine  overwhelmed  by  all  these 
aflELictions  at  once,  the  wind,  and  the  sun,  and  the  mockery 


^\    ■■'in      m^m0^^^a^mmmtmi^m0m^m,JBamgagi 

ox  SPECIAL  LAWS.  848 

of  the  passera  bj,  and  tlie  shame,  and  the  heavy  burden 
attached  to  them,  misht  £unt  miserably ;  and  that  the  rest, 
being  spectators,  might  be  grieved  and  take  warning  by  their 
punishment,  some  of  whom,  having  a  more  acute  sense  of 
such  miseries  in  their  minds  than  that  which  they  could 
receive  through  their  eyes,  since  they  sympathised  with  these 
unfortunates  as  if  they  were  themselves  suffering  in  the 
persons  of  others,  put  an  end  to  their  own  lives  by  swords, 
or  poison,  or  halters,  thinking  it  a  great  piece  of  good  luck 
for  persons,  liable  to  such  misery,  to  be  able  to  meet  with 
deatn  without  torture. 

But  those  who  did  not  make  haste  to  kill  themselves,  but 
who  were  seized  before  they  could  do  so,  were  led  away  in  a 
row,  as  in  the  case  of  actions  for  inheritance,  according  to 
their  nearness  of  kindred,  the  nearest  relations  first,  then 
those  next  to  them  in  succession,  in  the  second  or  third 
place,  till  they  came  to  the  last ;  and  then,  when  there  were 
no  relations  left,  the  cruelty  proceeded  on  to  the  friends 
and  neighbours  of  the  fugitives ;  and  sometimes  it  was  ex- 
tended even  into  the  cities  and  villa^^  which  soon  became 
desolate,  beino;  emptied  of  all  their  inhabitants,  who  all 
quitted  their  homes,  and  dispersed  to  places  where  they 
hoped  that  they  mi^ht  escape  detection. 

But  perhaps  it  is  not  wonderful  if  men,  barbarians  by 
nature,  utterly  ignorant  of  all  gentleness,  and  under  the 
command  of  despotic  authority,  which  compelled  them  to 
give  an  account  of  the  yearly  revenue,  should,  in  order  to 
enforce  the  payment  of  the  taxes,  extend  their  severities, 
not  merely  to  properties  but  also  to  the  persons,  and  even 
to  the  lives,  of  those  from  whom  they  thought  they  could 
exact  a  vicarious  payment.  But  now,  even  those  persons 
who  are  the  very  standard  and  rule  of  justice,  the  lawgivers 
themselves,  having  a  regard  to  appearance  rather  than  to 
truth,  have  endured  to  become,  instead,  standards  of  injus- 
tice, commanding  the  children  of  a  traitor  to  be  put  to  death 
with  the  traitor  himself,  and  in  the  case  of  tyrants  the  five 
families  most  nearly  related  to  them. 

Why  is  this  I  should  say  ?  Por  if  indeed  they  have 
shared  in  their  wickedness,  then  let  them  likewise  share  in 
their  punishment ;  but  if  thej  have  not  participated  in  that, 
and  it  they  have  not  been  imitators  of  such  actions,  and  if 


Hi  VHJLO  JUDiEUS. 

&BJ  ha,Ye  not  been  elated  bj  the  prosperitj  ot  their  kins- 
xnen,  so  as  to  exult  in  it,  whj  should  thej  be  put  to  death  ? 
Is  it  for  this  reason  alone,  that  thej  are  their  relations? 
Are  the  punishments  then  inflicted  for  the  relationship,  or 
for  the  lawless  conduct?  Perhaps  you  yourselves,  0  you 
renerable  lawgivers,  have  had  virtuous  relations ;  but  sup- 
pose they  had  been  wicked,  then  it  seems  to  me  that  you 
not  only  would  never  yourselves  have  devised  any  such  com- 
mandments as  this,  but  would  have  been  furious  with  any 

one  else  who  proposed  such  a  law,  because* taking 

tare  to  avoid  all  liability  to  terrible  calamity,  and  desiring 
to  live  in  security,  is  now  in  great  danger,  and  is  exposed  to 
an  equal  degree  of  misfortune.  v- 

Por  the  one  condition  is  liable  to  fear,  which,  though  a 

Serson  may  guard  against  for  himself,  he  will  still  not 
espise  the  safety  of  another,  but  the  other  state  is  free 
from  all  apprehension,  and  by  it  men  have  often  been  per- 
suaded to  neglect  the  safety  of  innocent  men. 

Therefore  our  lawgiver,  considering  these  things  and  per- 
ceiving the  errors  of  others,  rejects  them  and  hates  them  as 
destructive  of  the  most  excellent  constitution,  and  consigns 
to  punishment  all  those  who  give  way  to  such,  whether  it  be 
out  of  indifference,  or  out  of  inhumanity  and  wickedness, 
and  never  permits  any  of  their  countrymen  or  Mends  to  be 
substituted  for  them,  making  themselves  an  addition  to  the 
crimes  which  the  others  have  alreadv  committed ;  on  which 
account  he  has  expressly  forbidden  sons  to  be  put  to  death 
instead  of  their  parents,  or  parents  instead  of  their  sons, 
thinking  it  right  that  they  who  have  committed  the  crimes 
should  also  bear  the  punishment,  whether  it  be  a  pecuniary 
fine,  or  stripes,  and  more  severe  personal  chastisement,  oV 
even  wounds  and  mutilation,  and  dishonour,  and  exile,  or 
any  other  judicial  sentence ;  for  though  he  only  names  one 
kind  of  punishment,  forbidding  one  person  to  be  put  to 
death  for  another,  he  also  comprises  other  kinds,  which  he 
does  not  expressly  mention. 

*  There  ^peen  to  be  an  hiattu  in  the  text  here.  There  i«  clearly  a 
want  of  connection  and  coherence  in  the  rest  of  the  sentence  as  it 
stands  now. 


laammma^^m 


"  -  — —  —  - 


OK  SPECIAL  LAWS  *  tUS 


ABOUT  TTOHXK  KOT  BXHATIKO  noCODXSTLT. 

I.  Market  places,  and  council  chambers,  and  courts  of 
justice,  and  large  companies  and  assemblies  of  numerous 
crowds,  and  a  life  in  the  open  air  full  of  arguments  and 
actions  relating  to  war  and  peace,  are  suited  to  men ;  but 
taking  care  of  the  house  and  remaining  at  home  are  the 
proper  duties  of  women ;  the  virgins  having  their  apartments 
in  toe  centre  of  the  house  within  the  innermost  doors,  and 
the  full-grown  women  not  going  beyond  the  vestibule  and 
outer  courts ;  for  there  are  two  kinds  of  states,  the  greater  and 
the  smaller.  And  the  lar^r  ones  are  called  reallj  cities ; 
but  the  smaller  ones  are  ciuled  houses. 

And  the  superintendence  and  management  of  these  is 
allotted  to  the  two  sexes  separately;  the  men  having  the 
government  of  the  greater,  which  government  is  called  a 
polity ;  and  the  women  that  of  the  smaller,  which  is  called 
o&conomv.  Therefore  let  no  woman  busv  herself  about  those 
things  which  are  beyond  the  province  of  ceconomy,  but  let 
her  cultivate  solitude,  and  not  be  seen  to  be  going  about  like 
a  woman  who  walks  the  streets  in  the  sight  of  other  men, 
except  when  it  is  necessary  for  her  to  go  to  the  temple,  if 
she  has  any  proper  resard  for  herself;  and  even  then  let  her 
not  go  at  noon  when  tne  market  is  full,  but  after  the  greater 
part  of  the  people  have  returned  home;  like  a  wdl-bom 
woman,  a  real  and  true  citizen,  performing  her  vows  and  her 
sacrifices  in  tranquillity,  so  as  to  avert  evils  and  to  receive 
blessings. 

But  when  men  are  abusing  one  another  or  fighting,  for 
women  to  venture  to  run  out  under  pretence  of  assisting  or 
defending  them,  is  a  blameable  action  and  one  of  no  slight 
shamelessness,  since  even,  in  the  times  of  war  and  of  mUitary 
expeditions,  and  of  dangers  to  their  whole  native  land,  the 
law  does  not  choose  that  they  should  be  enrolled  as  its  de- 
fenders ;  looking  at  what  is  becoming,  which  it  thinks  desira- 
ble to  preserve  unchangeable  at  all  times  and  in  all  places, 
thinking  that  this  very  thing  is  of  itself  better  than  victory, 
or  than  freedom,  or  than  any  kind  of  success  and  prosperity. 
Moreover,  if  any  woman,  hearinj^  that  her  husband  is  being 
assaulted,  heios  out  of  her  affection  for  him  carried  away  by 
love  for  her  husband,  should  yield  to  the  feelings  which  over- 


tit  PHILO  JUDJSU8 

power  hex  ftnd  rosli  fortli  to  aid  him,  still  let  her  not  be  so 
audacioos  as  to  behave  like  a  man,  outrunning  the  nature 
of  a  woman  ;*  but  eren  while  aiding  him  let  her  continue  a 
woman. 

For  it  would  be  a  very  terrible  thing  if  a  woman,  bein^ 
desirous  to  deliver  her  husband  from  an  insult,  should 
expose  herself  to  insult,  bj  exhibiting  human  life  as  full  of 
shamelessness  and  liable  to  great  reproaches  for  her  incura- 
ble boldness ;  for  shall  a  woman  utter  abuse  in  the  market- 
place and  give  vent  to  unlawful  language  ?  and  if  another 
man  uses  foul  language,  will  not  she  stop  her  ears 
and  run  away?  But  as  it  is  now,  some  women  are  ad- 
vanced to  such  a  pitch  of  shamelessness  as  not  onlj,  though 
thej  are  women,  to  give  vent  to  intemperate  language  and 
abuse  among  a  crowd  of  men,  but  even  to  strike  men 
and  insult  them,  with  hands  practised  rather  in  works  of  the 
loom  aad  spinning  than  in  blows  and  assaults,  like  competi- 
tors in  the  pancratium  or  wrestlers.  And  other  thmgs, 
indeed,  may  oe  tolerable,  and  what  any  one  might  easily 
bear,  but  that  is  a  shocking  thing  if  a  woman  were  to  proceed 
to  such  a  degree  of  boldness  as  to  seize  hold  of  the  genitals 
of  one  of  the  men  quarrelling. 

For  let  not  such  a  woman  be  let  go  on  the  ground  that 
she  appears  to  have  done  this  action  in  order  to  assist  her 
own  husband ;  but  let  her  be  impeached  and  suffer  the  punish- 
ment due  to  her  excessive  audacity,  so  that  if  she  should 
ever  be  inclined  to  commit  the  same  offence  again  she  may 
not  have  an  opportunity  of  doing  so ;  and  other  women, 
also,  who  might  be  inclined  to  be  precipitate,  may  be  taught 
by  fear  to  be  moderate  and  to  restrain  themselves. 

And  let  the  punishment  be  the  cutting  off  of  the  hand 
which  has  touched  what  it  ought  not  to  have  touched. 

And  it  is  fitting  to  praise  those  who  have  been  the  judges 
and  managers  of  the  gymnastic  games,  who  have  kept  women 
from  the  spectacle,  in  order  that  they  might  not  be  thrown 
among  naked  men  and  so  mar  the  approved  coinage  of  their 
modesty,  neglecting  the  ordinances  oi  nature,  which  she  has 
appointed  for  each  section  of  our  race ;  for  neither  is  it  right 
for  men  to  mix  with  women  when  they  have  laid  aside  their 
garments,  but  each  of  the  sexes  ought  to  avoid  the  sight  of 

*  Deuteronomy  xxr.  11. 


ON  SPECIAL  LAWS.  347 

the  other  when  thej  are  naked,  in  accordance  with  the 
promptings  of  nature.  Well,  then,  of  those  things  of  which 
we  are  to  abstain  from  the  sight,  are  not  the  hands  much 
more  to  be  blamed  for  the  touch?  Por  the  eyes,  being 
whollj  at  freedom,  are  nevertheless  often  constrained  so  as 
to  see  things  which  they  do  not  wish  to  see ;  but  the  hands  are 
ranked  among  those  parts  which  are  completely  under  sub 
jection,  and  obey  our  commands,  and  are  subservient  to  us. 

II.  And  this  is  the  cause  which  is  often  mentioned  by 
many  people.  But  I  have  heard  another  also,  alleged  by- 
persons  ot  high  character,  who  look  upon  the  ^ater  part  of 
the  injunctions  contained  in  the  law  as  plain  symbols  of 
obscure  meanings,  and  expressed  intimations  of  what  may 
not  be  expressed.  And  this  other  reason  alleged  is  as 
follows. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  soul,  just  as  there  are  two  sexes 
among  human  relations ;  the  one  a  masculine  soul,  belon^ng 
to  men ;  the  other  a  female  soul,  as  found  in  women.  The 
masculine  soul  is  that  which  devotes  itself  to  GK>d  alone,  as 
the  Father  and  Creator  of  the  universe  and  the  cause  of  all 
things  that  exist ;  but  the  female  soul  is  that  which  depends 
upon  all  the  things  which  are  created,  and  as  such  are  liable 
to  destruction,  and  which  puts  forth,  as  it  were,  the  hand  of 
its  power  in  order  that  in  a  blind  sort  of  way  it  may  lay  hold 
of  whatever  comes  across  it,  clinging  to  a  generation  which 
admits  of  an  innumerable  quantity  of  changes  and  variations, 
when  it  ought  rather  to  cleave  to  the  unchangeable,  blessed, 
and  thrice  happy  divine  nature. 

Very  naturally,  therefore,  the  law  commands*  that  the 
executioner  should  cut  off  the  hand  of  the  woman  which  has 
laid  hold  of  what  it  should  not,  speaking  figuratively,  and  in- 
timating not  that  the  body  shsdl  be  mutilated,  being  deprived 
of  its  most  important  part,  but  rather  that  it  is  proper  to 
extirpate  all  the  ungodly  reasonings  of  the  soul,  usm^  all 
thin^  which  are  created  as  a  stepping-stone ;  for  the  things 
which  the  woman  is  forbidden  to  take  hold  of  are  the 
symbols  of  procreation  and  generation.  And,  moreover, 
keeping  up  a  consistent  regard  to  nature,  I  will  also  say 
this,  that  the  unit  is  the  image  of  the  first  cause,  and  the 
number  two  of  the  divisible  matter  that  is  worked  upon. 

*  Deuteronomy  zxv.  12. 


848  FHILO  JVDMVS, 

WHoeyer^  therefore,  receives  the  Dumber  two,  hononring  ifc 
above  the  unit,  must  be  taught  to  know  that  he  is,  in  so 
doine^,  approving  of  the  matter  more  than  of  God.  On 
which  account  the  law  has  thought  fit  to  cut  off  this  appre- 
hension of  the  soul  as  if  it  were  a  hand ;  for  there  can  be  no 
greater  impiety  than  to  ascribe  the  power  of  the  agent  to 
that  which  is  passive. 

m.  And  any  one  may  here  fitly  blame  those  who  appoint 
that  punishments,  in  nowise  corresponding  to  the  offences,  are 
to  be  inflicted  on  the  offenders,  imposing  pecuniary  penalties 
for  assaults,  or  stigma  and  infamy  for  wounds  and  mutila- 
tions, or  a  banishment  beyond  the  borders  of  the  land  for  in- 
tentional murders,  and  everlasting  exile  or  imprisonment  for 
thefts ;  for  irregularity  and  inequality  are  enemies  to  a  con- 
stitution which  is  eager  for  the  truth.  And  our  law,  being 
the  interpreter  and  teacher  of  equality,  commands  that 
offenders  should  undergo  a  punishment  similar  to  the  offence 
which  they  have  committed ;  that,  for  instance,  they  should 
suffer  punishment  in  their  property  if  they  have  injured  their 
neighbour  in  his  property ;  in  their  persons,  if  they  have  in- 
jured him  in  his  body,  or  in  his  limos,  or  the  organs  of  his 
outward  senses ;  and,  if  their  evil  designs  have  extended  to 
his  life,  then  the  law  commands  that  the  punishment  should 
affect  the  life  of  the  malefactor. 

For  to  exact  a  different  and  wholly  unequal  punishment 
which  has  no  connection  with  or  resemblance  to  the  offence, 
but  which  is  wholly  at  variance  with  it  in  all  its  characteris- 
tics, is  the  conduct  of  those  who  violate  the  laws  rather  than 
of  those  who  would  establish  them.  And  when  we  say  this. 
we  mean  provided  no  circumstances  occur  to  give  a  different 
complexion  to  the  affair;  for  it  is  not  the  same  thing  to 
inflict  blows  on  one*s  father  and  on  a  stranger,  nor  to  speak 
ill  of  a  ruler  and  of  a  private  person,  nor  to  do  anything 
which  is  forbidden  on  common  ground  or  in  holy  places,  or 
at  the  time  of  a  festival,  or  of  a  solemn  assemblv,  or  of  a 

Eublic  sacrifice ;  or,  again,  on  the  days  on  which  tnere  is  no 
oliday  or  sacred  observance,  or  on  those  which  are  com- 
pletely common  and  profane.     And  all  other  things  of  this 
tdnd  one  must  examine  with  a  view  to  iudge  of  the  propriety 
of  increasing  or  diminishing  the  punishment. 
A^ain,     "  I^"  says  the  law,  •*  any  one  strike  out  the  eye 


Ill-  ■  mi  ■■  .t-m. 


ON  SPECIAL  LAWS.  849 

of  a  servant  or  of  a  handmaiden,  he  shall  let  them  depart 
free."*  Because,  as  nature  has  assigned  the  ghief  position 
in  the  body  to  the  head,  having  bestowed  upon  it  a  situation 
the  most  suitable  to  that  pre-eminence,  as  it  might  give  a 
citadel  to  a  king  (for  having  sent  it  forth  to  govern  the  body 
it  has  established  it  on  a  height,  putting  the  vrhole  composi- 
tion of  the  body  from  the  neck  to  the  feet  under  it,  as  a 
pedestal  might  be  placed  under  a  statue),  so  also  it  has 
given  the  pre-eminence  among  the  organs  of  the  external 
senses  to  toe  eyes.  At  all  events,  it  has  assigned  them  a 
position  above  all  the  others,  as  if  they  were  the  chiefs,  wish- 
ing to  honour  them  not  only  by  other  things,  but  tiao  by 
this  most  evident  and  conspicuous  of  all  signs. 

lY.  Now  it  would  take  a  lone;  time  to  enumerate  all  the 
necessities  which  the  eyes' supply  to,  and  all  the  services 
which  they  perform  for,  the  human  race.  But  one,  the  most 
excellent  of  all,  we  may  mention.  It  is  the  heaven  which 
has  showered  philosophy  upon  us,  it  is  the  human  mind 
which  has  received  and  which  contains  it,  but  it  is  sight 
which  has  entertained  and  been  its  host ;  for  that  is  the 
faculty  which  was  the  first  to  see  the  level  roads  through 
the  air. 

And  philosophy  is  the  fountain  of  all  blessings,  of  all 
things  which  are  really  good.  And  he  who  draws  fiom  this 
fountain,  so  as  thus  f^  acquire  and  make  use  of  virtue  is 
praiseworthy ;  but  he  who  does  it  with  the  object  of  accom- 
plishin^wicked  purposes  and  of  condemning  others  is  blame* 
able.  Por  the  one  is  like  a  man  at  an  entertainment,  who 
is  delighting  both  himself  and  all  who  are  feasting  in  his 
company ;  but  the  other  is  like  one  who  is  swallowing  down 
strong  wine,  in  order  to  make  himself  and  his  neighbour 
drunk. 

Now  in  what  way  it  is  that  the  sight  may  be  said  to  have 
entertained  philosophy  as  its  host  we  must  now  proceed  to 
explain.  Having  looked  up  to  heaven  it  beheld  the  sun,  and 
the  moon,  and  the  planets,  and  the  fixed  stars,  the  most 
beautiful  host  of  heaven,  the  ornament  of  the  world.  After 
that  it  arrived  at  a  perception  of  the  rising  and  setting  of 
these  bodies,  and  their  harmonious  motions,  and  the  fixed 
seasons  of  their  periodical  revolutions,  and  their  meetingS| 

*  Exodus  zzi.  26. 


850  PH1L0  JTJBJEUS. 

and  eclip,8e8,  and  itsappearances.  After  that  it  proceeded 
onwards  to  a  comprehension  of  the  increase  and  decrease  of 
the  moon ;  of  the  motions  of  the  sun  along  the  breadth  of 
beaven,  as  he  comes  from  the  south  towards  the  north,  and 
again  recedes  from  the  north  towards  the  south,  in  order  to 
the  generation  of  the  fruits  of  the  year,  so  that  they  maj  all 
be  brought  to  perfection,  and  ten  thousand  other  wonderful 
things  besides  these.  And  having  looked  round  and  sur* 
Yej^  the  things  in  the  earth,  and  in  the  sea,  and  in  the  air, 
with  great  diligence  displayed  all  the  things  in  each  of  these 
elements  to  the  mind. 

But  as  the  mind  was  unable  by  itself  to  comprehend  all 
these  thin^  from  merely  beholdmg  them  by  the  faculty  of 
sight,  it  did  not  stop  merely  at  what  was  seen  by  it,  but 
being  devoted  to  learning,  and  fond  of  what  is  honourable 
and  excellent,  as  it  admired  what  it  did  see,  it  adopted  this 
probable  opinion,  that  these  things  are  not  moved  spon- 
taneously and  at  random  by  any  irrational  impulse  of  their 
own,  but  that  they  are  set  in  motion  and  guided  by  the  will 
of  God,  whom  it  is  proper  to  look  upon  as  the  Father  and 
Creator  of  the  world.  Moreover,  that  these  things  are  not 
unrestrained  by  any  bounds,  but  that  they  are  limited  by 
the  circumference  of  one  world,  as  they  might  be  by  the 
the  walls  of  a  city,  the  world  itself  being  circumscribed 
within  the  outermost  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 

Moreover  it  considered  also  that  the  Pather  who  created 
the  world  does  by  the  law  of  nature  take  care  of  that  which 
he  has  created,  exerting  his  providence  in  behalf  of  the 
whole  universe  and  of  its  parts.  In  the  next  place  it  also 
considered  what  was  the  essence  of  the  visible  world,  and 
whether  all  the  things  in  the  world  had  the  same  essence, 
or  whether  different  things  had  different  essences,  and  also 
of  what  substances  everything  was  made,  and  for  what 
reasons  it  was  made,  and  by  what  powers  the  world  was 
held  together,  and  whether  these  powers  were  corporeal  or 
incorporeal.  For  what  can  the  investigation  into  these  and 
similar  subjects  be  called  but  philosophy  ?  And  what*  more 
fitting  name  could  one  give  to  the  man  who  devoted  himself 
to  the  investigation  of  these  topics  than  that  of  a  philoso- 
pher ?  For  by  his  examination  of  the  nature  of  God,  and  oi 
the  world,  and  of  all  the  things  in  it,  whether  plants  or 


O^r  SPECIAL  LAWS.  351 

animals,  and  of  those  models  which  are  only  appreciable  bj 
the  intellect,  and  again  of  the  perfected  representations  of 
those  models  which  are  risible  to  the  outward  senses,  and  of 
the  yirtues  and  rices  which  exist  in  all  created  things,  he 
shows  that  his  disposition  is  one  truly  devoted  to  learning,  and 
contemplation,  and  philosophy ;  and  this  greatest  of  blessings 
to  mortal  man  is  bestowed  upon  him  by  the  faculty  of  sight. 

And  this  faculty  seems  to  me  to  deserre  this  pre-eminence, 
since  it  is  more  nearly  related  to  the  soul  than  any  one  of 
the  other  outward  senses,  for  they  all  of  them  have  some 
kind  of  connection  with  the  intellect ;  but  this  one  obtains 
the  first  and  principal  rank  as  the  nearest  relation  does  in  a 
private  house.  Ana  any  one  may  conjecture  this  from  many 
circumstances,  for  who  is  there  who  does  not  know  that 
when  persons  are  delighted  their  eyes  betray  their  pleasure, 
and  sparkle,  but  that  when  they  are  mevea  their  eyes  are 
full  01  depression  and  heaviness ;  and  if  any  heavv  burden 
of  grief  oppresses,  and  crushes,  and  overwhelms  tLe  mind, 
they  weep ;  and  if  anger  obtains  the  preponderance,  the 
eves  swell,  and  become  bloodshot  and  fiery;  and  again 
change  so  as  to  be  gentle  and  soft  when  the  anger  is  relaxed. 
Again,  when  the  man  is  immersed  in  deep  thought  and  con- 
templation, the  eyes  seem  fixed  as  if  they  in  a  manner  joined 
in  his  gravity ;  but  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  of  no  great 
wisdom  the  sight  wanders,  because  of  their  vacancy  of  intel- 
lect, and  is  restless,  and  in  short  the  eyes  sympathise  with 
the  affections  of  the  soul,  and  are  wont  to  change  along  with 
it  in  inniunerable  alternations,  on  account  of  the  closeness 
of  their  connection  with  it ;  for  it  seems  to  me  that  there  is 
no  one  visible  thing  which  G-od  has  made  so  complete  a 
representation  of  that  which  is  invisible  as  the  sight  is  of 
the  mind. 

Y.  If  therefore  any  one  has  ever  plotted  against  this 
most  excellent  and  most  dominant  of  all  the  outward  senses, 
namely  sight,  so  as  ever  to  have  struck  out  the  eye  of  a  free 
man,  let  nim  suffer  the  same  infliction  himself,  but  not  so  if 
he  have  only  struck  out  the  eye  of  a  slave ;  not  because  he 
is  entitled  to  pardon,  or  because  the  injury  which  he  has 
done  is  less,  but  because  the  man  who  has  been  injured  will 
have  a  still  worse  master  if  he  has  been  mutilated  in  retali- 
ation, since  he  will  for  ever  bear  a  grudge  against  him  for 


85i)  PHILO  JUDJSUS. 

the  calamity  whicli  has  fallen  upon  him,  and  will  rerenge 
himself  on  him  eyery  day  as  an  irreconcileable  enemy  by 
harsh  commands  beyond  his  power  to  perform,  by  which  the 
slave  will  be  so  oppressed  that  he  will  oe  ready  to  die. 

Therefore  the  law  has  provided  that  the  man  who  has 
thus  done  injury  to  his  slave  shall  not  be  allowed  to  escape 
firee,  and  yet  has  not  commanded  that  the  man  who  nas 
flJready  sunered  the  loss  of  his  eye  shall  be  ill-treated  still 
further,  enjoining  that  if  any  one  strikes  out  the  eye  of  his 
servant  he  shall  without  hesitation  grant  him  his  freedom  | 
for  thus  he  will  sufibr  a  double  punishment  for  the  actions 
which  he  has  committed,  in  bein^  deprived  of  the  Value  of 
his  servant  and  also  of  his  services,  and  thirdly,  which  is 
worse  than  either  of' the  things  already  mentioned,  in  being 
compelled  to  do  good  to  his  enemy  in  the  most  important 
matters,  whom  very  likely  he  wished  to  be  able  to  ill-treat  for 
ever.  And  the  slave  has  a  double  consolation  for  the  evils 
which  he  has  been  subjected  to  in  bein^  not  only  emancipated, 
but  also  in  having  escaped  a  cruel  and  inhuman  master. 

YI.  The  law  ^o  commands  that  if  any  one  strike  out 
the  tooth  of  a  slave  he  shall  bestow  his  freedom  on  the 
slave ;  why  is  this  ?  because  life  is  a  thing  of  great  value, 
and  because  nature  has  made  the  teeth  the  instruments  of 
life,  as  being  those  by  which  the  food  is  eaten.  And  of 
the  teeth  some  are  fitted  for  eating  meat  and  all  other 
eatable  food,  and  on  that  account  are  called  incisors,  or 
cutting  teeth ;  others  are  called  molar  teeth  frt)m  their  still 
further  grinding  and  smoothing  what  has  been  cut  by  the 
incisors ;  on  which  accounb  the  Creator  and  Father  of  the 
universe,  who  is  not  accustomed  to  make  anythins;  which  ia 
not  appointed  for  some  particular  use,  did  not  do  with  the 
teeth  as  he  did  with  every  other  part  of  the  body,  and  make 
them  at  once,  at  the  first  creation  of  the  man,  considering 
that  as  while  an  infant  he  was  only  intended  to  be  fed  upon 
milk  they  would  be  a  superfluous  burden  in  his  way,  and 
would  be  a  severe  injury  to  the  breasts,  filled  as  they  are  at 
that  time  with  springs  of  milk,  from  which  moist  food  is 
derived,  as  they  would  in  that  case  be  bitten  by  the  child 
while  sucking  the  milk.  Therefore,  having  waited  for  a 
suitable  season  (and  that  is  when  the  child  is  weaned),  he 
then  causes  the  infant  to  put  forth  the  teeth  which  he  had 


ON  SPECIAL  ULWS.  353 

prepared  for  it  before,  as  the  most  perfect  food  now  supplied 
to  it  requires  the  organs  aboTe-mentioned  now  that  the 
child  rejects  the  food  of  milk. 

If  therefore  any  one,  yielding  to  an  insolent  disposition, 
strikes  out  the  tooth  of  nis  servant,  that  organ  which,  is  the 
minister  and  provider  of  those  most  necessary  thines,  food 
and  life,  he  shall  emancipate  him  whom  he  has  injured, 
because  hj  the  evil  which  he  inflicted  on  him  he  has  depriyed 
him  of  the  service  and  use  of  his  tooth. 

''  Is  then,"  some  one  will  say, ''  a  tooth  of  equal  yalne 
with  an  eye  ?"  "Each,"  I  would  reply,  "is  of  equal  value 
for  the  purposes  for  which  they  were  given,  the  eye  with 
reference  to  the  objects  of  sight,  the  teeth  with  reference  to 
those  which  are  eatable."  But  if  any  one  were  to  desire  to 
institute  a  comparison,  he  would  find  that  the  eye  is  entitled 
to  the  highest  respect  amon^  all  the  parts  of  the  body, 
inasmuch  as  beiug  occupied  in  the  contemplation  of  the 
most  glorious  thing  in  the  whole  world,  namely  the  heaven ; 
and  that  the  tooth  is  useful  as  being  the  masticator  of  food, 
which  is  the  most  useful  thing  as  contributing  to  life.  And 
he  who  strikes  out  a  man's  eye  does  not  hinder  him  irom 
living,  but  a  most  miserable  death  awaits  the  man  who  has 
all  his  teetli  knocked  out. 

And  if  any  one  meditates  inflicting  injury  in  these  parts 
on  his  servants,  let  him  know  that  he  is  causing  them  an 
artificial  famine  in  the  midst  of  plenty  and  abundance ;  for 
what  advantage  is  it  to  a  man  that  there  should  be  an 
abundance  of  food,  if  the  instruments  by  which  he  may  be 
enabled  to  make  use  of  it  are  taken  ^om  him  and  lost, 
through  the  agency  of  his  cruel,  and  pitiless,  and  inhuman 
master  ?  It  is  for  this  reason  that  in  another  passage  the 
lawgiver  forbids  creditors  to  exact  firom  their  debtors  a 
molar  tooth  or  a  grinder  as  a  pledge,  giving  as  a  reason 
that  the  person  who  does  so  is  taking  a  man's  life  in  pledge; 
for  he  who  deprives  a  man  of  the  instruments  of  living  is 
proceeding  towards  murder,  entertaining  the  idea  of  plotting 
even  against  life. 

And  the  law  has  taken  such  exceeding  care  that  no  one 
shall  ever  be  the  cause  of  death  to  another,  that  it  does  not 
look  upon  those  who  have  even  touched  a  dead  body,  which 
has  met  with  a  natural  death,  as  pure  and  clean,  until  they 

yoL.  III.  A  iL 


854 


PHILO  JUD.£US. 


hare  washed  and  purified  themselTes  with  sprinkling  and 
ablutions ;  and  even  after  thej  are  perfectly  dean  it  does 
not  permit  them  to  go  into  the  temple  witlun '  seyen  dajs, 
enjoininf  them  to  use  purifying  ceremonies  on  the  third  and 
serenth  day.  And  again,  in  the  case  of  persons  who  have 
gone  into  the  house  in  which  any  one  has  died,  the  law 
enjoins  that  no  one  shall  touch  them  until  they  have  both 
washed  their  bodies  and  also  the  garments  in  which  they 
were  clothed,  and,  in  a  word,  it  looks  upon  all  the  furniture 
and  aU  the  vessels,  and  everrthing  whicn  is  in  the  house,  as 
unclean  and  polluted ;  for  the  soul  of  a  man  is  a  valuable 
thing,  and  when  that  has  quitted  its  habitation,  and  paMed 
to  another  place,  everything  that  is  left  behind  by  it  is 

EoUuted  as  being  deprived  of  the  divine  image,  since  the 
uman  mind  is  made  as  a  copy  of  the  mind  of  Gknl,  having 
been  created  after  the  archetypal  model,  the  most  sublime 
reasoninfi^. 

And  the  law  says,  **  Let  everything  which  a  man  that  is 
unclean  has  touched  be  also  unclean  as  being  polluted  by  a 
participation  in  that  which  is  unclean."  iUia  this  sacred 
injunction  appears  to  have  a  wide  operation,  not  beine 
limited  to  the  body  alone,  but  proceeding  as  it  would 
seem  also  to  investigate  the  dispositions  of  the  86ul,  for  the 
unjust  and  impious  man  is  peculiarly  unclean,  being  one 
who  has  no  respect  for  either  human  or  divine  things,  but 
who  throws  everything  into  disorder  and  confusion  oy  the 
immoderate  vehemence  of  his  passions,  and  by  the  extrava- 
gance of  his  wickedness,  so  that  everything  which  he 
touches  becomes  faulty,  having  its  nature  changed  by  the 
wickedness  of  him  who  has  taken  them  in  hand.  !For  in 
like  manner  the  actions  of  the  good  are,  on  the  contrary,  all 
praiseworthy,  being  made  better  by  the  energies  of  (hose 
who  apply  themselves  to  them,  since  in  some  decree  what  is 
done  resembles  in  its  character  the  person  who  does  it. 


ON  SPECIAL  LAWS.  365 


A  TREATISE 

THOSE  SPECIAL  LAWS 

WHICH  ARE  CONTAINED  UNDER  AND  HAVE  REFERENCE 
TO  THE  EIGHTH,  NINTH,  AND  TENTH  COMMANDMENTa 

Oy  THEFT. 

I  HATE  in  my  previous  treatises  spoken  of  the  laws 
relating  to  adultery  and  murder,  and  to  all  the  subordinate 
offences  which  come  under  those  heads,  with,  as  I  persuade 
myseli^  all  the  accuracy  which  the  case  admits  of^  and  now, 
proceeding  in  the  regular  order,  I  must  consider  what  is  the 
third  commandment  in  the  second  table,  but  the  eighth  in 
all,  if  the  two  tables  are  taken  together,  namely,  the  com- 
mandment, "Thou  shalt  not  steal."* 

Whoever  carries  off  or  leads  away  the  property  of  another 
when  he  has  no  right  to  do  so,  if  he  does  it  openly  and  bv 
main  force,  shall  be  set  down  as  a  common  enemy,  and  shall 
be  prosecuted  as  having  with  lawless  wickedness  contrived 
a  shameless  act  of  audacity.  But  if  he  has  done  it  secretly, 
endeavouring  to  escape  notice  like  a  thief,  exhibiting  some 
modesty,  and  making  the  darkness  the  veQ  of  his  iniquity, 
let  him  then  be  punished  privately  as  only  liable  to  con- 
demnation in  respect  of  the  one  inoividual  whom  he  endea- 
voured to  injure ;  and  let  him  restore  double  the  value 
of  the  thing  stolen,  making  amends  by  his  own  most 
righteous  suffering  for  the  unrighteous  advantage  he  has 
endeavoured  to  gam. 

But  if  he  is  a  poor  man,  and  consequently  unable  to  pay 
the  penalty,  let  him  be  sold  (for  it  is  fitting  that  that  man 
should  be  deprived  of  his  freedom  who  for  the  sake  of  his 
most  iniquitous  gain  has  endured  to  become  a  slave  to 
guilt),  that  he  who  has  been  ill-treated  may  not  be  allowed 
to  depart  without  consolation,  as  if  he  appeared  to  have  his 
claims  disregarded  by  reason  of  the  poverty  of  the  man  who 
has  robbed  him.  And  let  no  one  accuse  this  ordinance  of 
inhumanity ;  for  the  man  who  is  sold  is  not  left  as  a  slave 

•  Exodus  XX.  13. 


356  PHILO  JX7D.£X7S. 

for  ever  and  eyer,  but  within  the  space  of  seven  years  he  is 
released  by  a  common  proclamation  as  I  have  shown  in  mj 
treatise  on  the  number  seven. 

And  let  him  be  content  to  pay  the  double  penalty,  or 
even  to  be  sold,  since  he  has  committed  no  slight  offence ; 
sinnine  in  the  first  place  in  that,  not  being  content  with  what 
he  ha{  he  has  desu:*ed  more,  encouraging  a  feeling  of  covet- 
ousness,  a  treacherous  and  incurable  wickedness.  Secondly, 
because  he  has  cast  his  eyes  on  the  property  of  others  and 
longed  for  it,  and  has  lain  plots  to  deprive  his  neighbour  of 
bis  own,  depriving  the  owner  of  what  belongs  to  him. 
Thirdly,  because  tnrough  his  desire  to  escape  detection,  he 
very  oiiten  keeps  to  himself  all  the  advantage  that  can  be 
derived  from  the  thing  he  appropriates,  and  diverts  the 
accusation  so  as  to  cause  it  to  fall  upon  the  innocent,  thus 
making  the  investigation  of  the  truth  blind.  And  such  a 
man  appears  in  some  degree  to  be  himself  his  own  accuser, 
being  convicted  by  his  own  conscience  of  the  theft  of  those 
things  which  he  has  secretly  stolen,  being  filled  either  with 
shame  or  fear,  one  of  which  feelings  is  a  proof  of  his 
considering  his  action  a  disgraceful  one,  for  it  is  only  dis- 
graceful actions  which  cause  shame,  and  the  other  is  a  sign 
of  his  thinking  it  deserving  of  punishment,  for  punishment 
causes  fear. 

COITCEBNINO   HOUSEBBEASXBS. 

If  any  one  being  insanely  carried  away  by  a  desire  for 
the  property  of  others  attempts  to  steal  it,  and  not  being 
able  easily  to  carry  it  ofi"  breaks  into  a  house  at  night, 
using  the  darkness  as  a  veil  to  conceal  his  wicked  action,  if 
he  be  caught  in  the  fact  before  the  sun  has  risen,  he  may  be 
slain  by  the  master  of  the  house  in  the  breaches,  having 
accomplished  the  lesser  object  which  he  had  proposed  to 
himself,  namely,  thefl,  but  having  been  hindered  oy  some 
one  from  accomplishing  the  greater  crime  which  might  have 
followed  it,  namely,  murder;  since  he  was  prepared  with 
iron  house-breaking  tools  which  he  bore,  and  other  arms,  to 
defend  himself  from  any  attack. 

But  if  the  sun  has  risen,  then  let  him  no  longer  be  slain 
by  the  hand  of  the  master  of  the  house,  but  let  him  be  led 
away  and  brought  before  the  magistrates  and  judges,  to 


05  SPECIAL  LAWS.  357 

suffer  whatever  punishment  they  condemn  him  to.  Fop 
while  men  are  remaining  in  their  houses  at  night,  and  when 
they  have  betaken  themselves  to  rest,  whether  they  be 
rulers  or  private  individuals,  in  either  case  there  is  no  refuge 
or  assistance  for  the  offender ;  on  which  account  the  inmate 
of  the  house  has  the  power  of  punishment  in  his  own  hands, 
being  appointed  magistrate  and  judge  by  the  very  time  itself. 

But  in  the  day  time  the  courts  of  justice  and  the  council 
chambers  are  open,  and  the  city  is  full  of  persons  who  will 
help  to  arrest  the  criminal ;  some  of  whom  have  been  for- 
mally appointed  guardians  of  the  laws ;  and  others,  without 
any  such  appointment,  by  their  natural  disposition  which 
hates  iniquity,  take  up  the  cause  of  those  who  are  injured ; 
and  before  tnese  men  the  thief  must  be  brought ;  for  thus 
the  man  who  seeks  revenge  will  escape  the  charge  of  arro- 
gance or  rashness,  and  appear  to  be  acting  in  the  spirit  of 
the  democracy. 

But  if,  when  the  sun  has  risen  and  is  shining  upon  the 
earth,  any  one  slays  a  robber  with  his  own  hand  before 
bringing  him  to  trial,  he  shall  be  held  guilty,  as  having  been 
guided  by  passion  rather  than  by  reason,  and  as  having  made 
the  laws  second  to  his  own  impulses.  I  should  say  to  such 
a  man,  "  !My,  friend,  do  not,  because  you  have  been  injured 
by  night  by  a  thief,  on  this  account  in  the  daylight  yourself 
commit  a  worse  theft,  not  indeed  affecting  money,  but 
affecting  the  principles  of  justice,  in  accordance  with  which 
the  constitution  of  the  state  is  established. 

ABOUT  THE  THEFT  OF  A  SHEEP  OR  AK  OX. 

Now  other  thefts  are  to  be  atoned  for  bv  a  pav-ment  of 
double  the  value  of  the  thing  stolen ;  but  it  any  one  steals 
an  ox  or  a  sheep,  the  law  uiinks  such  a  man  worthy  of  a 
greater  punishment,  giving  a  particular  honour  and  prece- 
dence to  those  ftnimalg  which  are  the  most  excellent  among 
all  tame  £ocks  and  herds,  not  only  by  reason  of  the  beauty 
of  their  bodies,  but  also  because  of  the  service  the^  are  of 
to  the  life  of  man.  And  on  this  account  the  lawgiver  has 
not  afiSxed  a  fine  of  equal  amount  to  the  theft  of  each  ani- 
mal, but  having  calculated  the  use  of  both  and  the  purposes 
for  which  both  are  available,  he  has  appraised  their  value  in 
this  way. 


858  PHILO  JUDjEUS. 

For  he  caixiinands  that  the  thief  shall  restore  four  sheep 
and  fiye  oxen  in  the  place  of  the  one  which  he  has  stolen  ; 
since  a  sheep  gives  four  kinds  of  trihute,  milk,  and  cheese, 
and  its  fleece,  and  a  lamb,  every  year :  but  an  ox  furnishes 
five ;  three  o£  which  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  sheep — 
the  milk,  the  cheese,  and  the  offspring ;  but  two  are  pecu- 
liar to  itself,  the  ploughing  of  the  earth,  and  the  threshing 
of  the  com ;  the  first  of  which  actions  is  the  first  step 
towards  the  sowing  of  the  crops,  and  the  other  is  the  eno, 
being  for  the  purification  of  the  crop  after  it  is  gathered  in, 
in  oraer  to  the  more  easy  use  of  it  for  food. 

coircxBimfo  kii>5appxbs. 

A  kidnapper  also  is  a  thief;  but  he  is,  moreover,  a  thief 
who  steals  the  very  most  excellent  thing  that  exists  upon 
the  earth.  Now,  in  the  case  of  inanimate  things,  ana  of 
those  animals  which  are  of  no  very  great*  use  indeed  in  life, 
he  has  conmianded  twice  the  value  of  them  to  be  paid  to 
their  owners  by  those  who  steal  them,  as  has  been  said 
before.  And  a^ain,  in  the  case  of  those  tame  and  very 
useful  flocks  ana  herds  of  sheep  and  oxen,  he  has  ordereii 
the  payment  to  be  fourfold  or  fivefold;  but  man,  as  it 
seems,  has  been  assigned  the  most  preeminent  position 
amone  the  animals,  being,  as  it  were,  a  near  relation  of  God 
himself,  and  akin  to  him  in  respect  of  his  participation  in 
reason ;  which  makes  him  immortal,  although  he  is  liable  to 
death.  On  which  account  every  one  who  feels  any  admira- 
tion of  virtue  is  full  of  exceeding  anger,  and  is  utterly 
implacable  against  kidnappers,  who  for  the  sake  of  most 
iniauitous  gam  dare  to  inflict  slavery  on  those  who  are  free 
by  oirth,  and  who  partake  of  the  same  nature  as  themselves. 

Por  if  masters  perform  a  praiseworthy  action  when  they 
emancipate  servants  bom  in  their  house  or  purchased  with 
money,  even  though  they  have  often  not  done  them  any 
great  service,  from  the  slavery  in  which  they  are  held, 
because  of  their  own  humanity  by  which  they  are  influenced, 
how  heavy  ought  to  be  the  accusation  which  is  brought 
against  those  who  deprive  of  that  most  excellent  of  all  pos- 
sessions, freedom,  those  who  are  at  present  in  possession  of 
it ;  when  it  is  an  object  for  which  man,  who  has  been  well 
ham  and  properly  brought  up,  would  think  it  glorious  to 


ON  SPECIAL  LAWS.  350 

die?  And  before  now,  some  men,  increasing  their  own 
innate  wickedness,  and  directing  the  natural  treachery  oi 
their  characters  to  a  violation  of  all  rights,  have  studied  to 
bring  slavery  not  only  upon  stran^rs  and  foreigners,  but 
even  upon  those  of  the  same  nation  as  themselves ;  and 
sometimes,  even  upon  men  of  the  same  borough  and  of  the 
same  tribe,  disregarding  the  community  of  laws  and  customs, 
in  which  they  have  l^n  bred  up  with  them  from  their 
earliest  infancy,  which  nature  stamps  upon  their  soula  as 
the  firmest  bond  of  good  will  in  the  case  of  all  those  who  are 
not  veiy  intractable  and  greatly  addicted  to  cruelty ;  who, 
for  the  sake  of  lawless  gain  sell  slaves  to  slave-dealers,  and 
enslave  them  to  any  chance  persons,  transporting  them  to  a 
foreign  land,  so  that  they  shall  never  any  more  salute  their 
native  land,  not  even  in  a  dream,  nor  taste  of  any  hope  of 
happiness. 

jPor  these  kidnappers  would  be  committing  a  lighter 
iniquity  if  they  themselves  retained  the  services  of  those 
whom  they  have  enslaved,  but  as  the  case  stands  at  present 
they  commit  a  double  wrong,  in  selling  them  again,  and 
thus  making  them  two  masters  instead  of  one,  and  raising 
up  two  slaveries  as  enemies  to  their  condition.  For  they, 
being  aware  of  the  former  prosperous  condition  of  those 
whom  they  have  carried  off,  might  perhaps  repent,  feeling  a 
tardy  and  late  compassion  for  those  who  are  thus  fallen, 
having  a  proper  awe  of  the  uncertainty  of  fortune  eluding 
all  conjectures.  But  those  who  buy  persons  in  this  condi- 
tion, out  of  ignorance  of  their  families,  will  neglect  them  as 
if  they  were  sprung  &om  successive  generations  of  slaves, 
having  no  inducement  in  their  souls  to  display  that  gentle- 
ness and  humanity  towards  them  which  it  would  be  natural 
for  them  to  preserve  in  the  case  of  slaves  who  had  become 
so  after  having  been  originally  and  naturally  free-bom. 
,  And  let  whatever  punishment  the  court  of  justice  shall 
sentence  them  to  be  inflicted  upon  those  who  kidnap  and 
enslave  those  of  another  nation ;  but  upon  those  who  kid- 
nap those  of  their  own  coimtry  and  of  their  own  blood,  and 
who  sell  them  for  slaves,  shall  be  passed  the  unalterable 
sentence  of  death.  For,  in  fact,  one^  own  countrymen  are 
not  far  from  blood  relations,  and  they  must  very  nearly 
come  under  the  same  definition  with  them. 


860  PfllLO  JUDJETJS 


CONCEBNIXO  DA.\rA6£. 


**  In  the  field  also,"  as  some  one  of  the  old  writers  has 
said,  '*  lawsuits  arise  ; "  since  covetousness  and  a  desire  for 
the  possessions  of  others  does  not  exist  onlj  in  the  city,  hut 
is  found  also  outside  the  walls,  inasmuch  as  it  has  its  ahode 
not  only  in  yarious  places,  hut  also  in  the  minds  of  insatia- 
ble and  contentious  men.  On  which  account  those  cities 
which  enjoy  the  best  codes  of  laws  elect  double  superintend- 
ents, and  rulers,  and  providers  of  a  common  regularity  and 
safe^;  one  class  to  manage  within  the  walls,  whom  they 
call  curators  of  the  city ;  the  others  without  the  walls,  to 
whom  also  they  give  an  appropriate  name,  for  they  call 
them  agrarian  magistrates. 

But  what  need  could  there  be  of  aCTarian  magistrates  it 
there  were  not  some  persons  in  the  fields  living  only  for  the 
injury  of  their  neighbours  ?  If,  therefore,  any  shepherd  or 
goatherd,  or  oxherd,  or  in  short  any  manager  of  any  kind 
of  cattle,  drives  his  herds  to  feed  and  pasture  upon  another 
man's  land,  sparing  neither  crops  nor  trees,  he  shall  pay  a 
fine  equal  to  the  value  of  those  crops  and  trees.  And  be 
may  be  very  well  content  to  escape  with  this  punishment, 
having  met  with  a  verv  merciful  and  exceedingly  indulgent 
law,  woich,  though  he  tas  adopted  the  conduct  of  implacable 
foreign  enemies,  who  are  accustomed  to  lay  waste  the  lands 
and  to  destroy  the  cultivated  trees  of  the  inhabitants,  has. 
nevertheless,  not  chastised  him  as  a  common  enemy,  inflict- 
ing upon  him  death,  or  exile,  or  of,  lastly,  a  confiscation  of 
all  his  property;  but  has  merely  sentenced  him  to  make 
good  the  damage  done  to  the  owner. 

For  as  the  lawgiver  was  always  seeking  pretexts  by  which 
to  lighten  whatever  misfortunes  have  been  suffered  by  reason 
of  the  excessive  gentleness  and  humanity  which  he  derived 
from  nature  and  from  habit,  he  found  an  excuse  for  the 
shepherd  on  the  ground  that  the  nature  of  cattle  was  incon- 
siderate and  disobedient,  and  especially  so  when  in  pursuit 
of  food. 

Let  the  shepherd,  then,  be  guilty,  as  having  originally 
driven  his  herd  into  an  iinsuitaole  place,  but  still  let  him 
not  bear  the  blame  of  every  thing  that  has  ensued  from  his 
doing  so.    For  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that,  as  soon  as  he 


ON  SPECIAL  LAJ78.  861 

perceived  the  mischief  that  had  taken  place  he  endeaTOured 
to  drive  them  out  again,  but  that  his  beasts*  resisted  him, 
luxuriating  in  the  green  pasture,  and  the  tender  crops,  and 
shoots  which  they  were  devouring. 

CONCEB^ONO  NOT   BETTING  FIKE   TO  BBAMBLXS 

INCONSIDEBATELY. 

And  not  onlj  do  those  men  do  damage  who  devour  the  pro- 
perty of  others  with  their  flocks  and  herds,  but  so  also  do 
those  who  inconsiderately  and  carelessly  kindle  a  flre ;  for 
if  the  power  of  fire  catches  hold  of  any  appropriate  Inel,  it 
spreads  in  every  direction,  and  extends  and  devours  all 
around.  And  when  it  has  once  got  ahead  it  defies  all 
the  means  of  ertin^shing  it  which  any  one  seeks  to  apply, 
taking  the  very  thino^  employed  for  that  purpose  as  food 
for  ito  increase,  until  having  consumed  every  thing  it  is  at 
last  exhausted  by  itself.  It  is  right,  therefore,  never  to 
leave  any  fire  either  in  a  house  or  in  any  stables  in  the  fields 
unguarded,  since  we  well  know  that  a  single  spark  has  often 
smouldered  long,  and  at  lost  has  been  fannea  into  a  flame, 
and  so  has  consumed  mat  cities,  especially  when  the  flame 
has  been  borne  onwards  by  a  favourable  wind. 

Accordingly,  in  savage  wars  the  first,  the  middle,  and  the 
last  power  which  is  excited  is  that  of  fire,  to  which  the 
enemies  trust  more  than  they  do  to  their  squadrons  of 
infantry,  or  cavalry,  or  to  their  fleets,  or  to  their  unlimited 
supplies  of  arms  and  naval  stores.  For  if  any  one  with 
good  aim  shoots  a  fiery  arrow  among  a  numerous  squadron 
of  ships  he  may  bum  it  with  all  the  crews,  or  he  may  thus 
destroy  vast  camps  with  all  their  baggage,  and  furniture, 
and  equipments,  on  which  the  army  rested  its  hopes  -of 
victory. 

If,  then,  any  one  scatters  fire  among  a  heap  of  brambles 
or  thorns,  and  the  fire  kindles  and  bums  a  tnreshing  floor 
full  of  wheat,  or  barley,  or  vetches,  or  sheaves  of  corn  which 
have  been  gathered  together,  or  any  fertile  plain  full  of  pas- 
ture, then  the  man  who  scattered  the  flre  shall  pay  the 
amount  of  the  damage  done,  in  order  that  by  his  suffering 
he  may  learn  to  take  good  care  and  to  guard  against  the 


803  PHILO  JUDJSUS. 

beginninga*  of  things,  and  may  not  awaken  and  atir  up 
an  inTmcible  power  which  might  otherwise  ha^e  remained 
quiet. 

CONCXRKIKG  DXPOSITB. 

A  deposit  is  the  most  sacred  of  all  those  things  which 
relate  to  the  associations  of  men  with  refi;ard  to  property, 
inasmuch  as  it  depends  upon  the  good  uiith  alone  of  the 
man  who  has  receired  it.  f'or  loans  are  proved  bj  contracts 
and  writines,  and  things  which,  independent  of  loans,  are 
openly  useo,  hare  all  the  persons  who  see  them  for  witnesses. 
But  this  is  not  the  case  with  deposits,  but  the  owner  hj 
himself  gives  them  priyily  to  the  man  who  receives  them  by 
himself,  looking  carefully  round  the  place,  and  not  even 
taking  a  slave  with  him  for  the  nurpose  of  carrying  the 
thinff  to  be  deposited,  even  though  ne  oe  ever  so  affectionate 
to  his  master ;  for  each  of  the  two  parties  appears  to  be 
anxious  to  avoid  discovery ;  the  one  depositing  the  thing  in 
order  to  receive  it  again,  and  the  other  being  desirous  not 
to  be  known  to  have  received  it. 

But  we  ought  bv  all  means  to  look  upon  the  invisible  Qt>d 
as  an  unseen  third  party  to  every  concealed  action,  whom  it 
is  natural  to  make  as  a  witness  for  both  parties;  the 
receiver  calling  him  to  vdtness  that  he  will  restore  the 
deposit  when  it  is  demanded  back  from  him,  and  the  other 
Tn^lnng  him  to  see  that  he  receives  it  back  at  the  proper 
time. 

Let,  then,  the  man  who  commits  this  great  wickedness 
and  denies  his  deposit  not  be  ignorant  that  he  has  deceived 
liiTn  who  committed  it  to  him  of  his  hope,  and  that  he  is 
concealing  a  wicked  disposition  under  specious  language, 
and  that  he  is  h3rpocritically  pretending  a  bastard  sort  of 
faith  while  in  reality  faithless,  showing  that  all  his  pledges 
are  worthless  and  all  his  oaths  disregarded,  so  that  he 

*  This  raembles  Ovid— 

Principiifl  obiia,  aero  medidaa  pantur, 
Cum  mala  per  longas  invaluere  moras. 

Which  may  be  translated — 

Check  the  first  rise  :  all  remedy's  too  late 
When  long  delay  has  made  the  mischief  great 


ON  SPECIAL  LAWS.  363 

neglects  all  human  and  all  diyine  obligations ;  and  that  he  is 
denying  two  deposits  at  once;  firstly,  the  deposit  of  him 
who  entrusted  his  property  to  his  care ;  and  secondly,  that 
of  that  most  unerring  and  mfallible  witness  who  sees  all  the 
actions  of  all  men,  and  hears  all  the  words  of  all  men, 
whether  they  are  willing  that  he  should  do  so  or  not. 

But  if  the  man  who  has  received  a  deposit  as  a  sacred 
thing  thinks  that  he  ought  to  keep  it  without  fraud,  duly 
honouring  truth  and  good  faith,  but  yet  others  who  are 
always  plotting  against  their  neighbour'  property,  such  as 
cutpurses  or  housebreakers,  break  in  treacherously  and  steal 
the  deposit  so  entrusted,  then  he  shall  pay  as .  a  penalty 
double  the  value  of  what  has  been  stolen  By  the  thieves. 
And  if  they  are  not  taken,  then  the  man  who  received  the 
deposit  shall  go  of  his  own  accord  before  the  divine  tribunal, 
and  stretchinc^  out  his  hands  to  heaven  shall  swear  by  his 
own  life  that  he  himself  had  no  hand  in  the  theft  from  any 
desire  to  appropriate  what  had  been  deposited  with  him, 
and  that  he  did  not  volimtarily  give  it  up  to  any  one  else ; 
and  that,  moreover,  he  is  not  making  a  false  statement  of  a 
robbery  which  has  never  taken  place.* 

Por  it  would  be  absurd  to  piinish  a  man  who  has  done 
no  wrong,  or  for  a  man  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  assist- 
ance of  a  friend  when  he  was  being  injured  by  others,  now 
to  become  the  cause  of  irjuiy  to  that  mend. 

And  deposits  consist  not  only  of  inanimate  things  but 
also  of  anmials :  the  danger  of  which  last  is  twofold ;  first, 
that  while  they  share  in  common  with  inanimate  things  in 
beinff  liable  to  be  stolen,  and  also  one  which  is  distinct  and 
pecimar  to  themselves,  that  the^  are  liable  to  die.  We  have 
hitherto  been  speaking  only  of  the  first  kind  of  deposit,  but 
we  must  now  also  expLain  the  law  about  the  secona. 

If  now  any  cattle  which  have  been  entrusted  as  a  deposit 
die,  then  he  who  has  received  the  deposit  shall  send  for  him 
who  committed  it  to  him,  and  show  him  the  matter,  protect- 
ing himself  from  any  evil  suspicion ;  but  if  the  depositor  be 
absent,  then  it  is  not  proper  to  send  for  any  one  else,  whose 
notice  perhaps  the  depositor  might  have  been  desirous  to 
escape;  but  when  the  depositor  returns  home,  his  friend 
shall  swear  to  him  that  he  has  not  been  concealing  any 

*  Exodus  xxiL  7 


864  FHILO  JUDiEUS. 

unjust  appropriation  of  the  animals  by  a  false  statement  of 
their  death.  And  if  any  one  receives  anything  not  as  a 
deposit,  but  because  lie  has  borrowed  it  to  use,  whether  it  is 
a  yessel  or  an  animal ;  then  if  he  be  robbed  of  it,  whichcTer 
it  may  be,  or  if  the  animal  die,  while  the  man  who  lent  it  is 
living  with  the  borrower,  the  borrower  shall  not  be  liable,  as 
the  owner  himself  can  be  brought  as  u  witness  that  there  is 
no  false  pretence  in  the  business ;  but  if  the  lender  be  not 
with  him  at  the  time,  he  shall  pay  the  value.  Why  so  ? 
because  it  is  possible  that  the  man  who  used  the  animal 
when  the  owner  was  not  present  may  have  either  worn  him 
out  by  continual  labour  so  as  to  kill  nim,  or  may  have  worn 
out  the  vessel,  from  not  taking  any  care  of  the  property  of 
another  of  wluch  he  ought  to  have  been  careful,  and  to  have 
put  it  away,  and  not  to  have  given  thieves  an  easy  oppor- 
tunity of  stealing  it. 

But  as  our  lawgiver  was  acute  beyond  all  other  men  at 
discerning  the  consequences  of  actions,  he  proceeds  to  enact 
a  series  of  prohibitions,  one  after  another,  preserving  a  due 
connection  between  them,  and  taking  care  that  his  later 
commandments  shall  be  consistent  with  his  earlier  ones. 
And  with  this  harmonious  connection  of  what  was  to  be  said 
by  him,  he  tells  us  that  he  was  divinely  inspired  by  the 
person  of  God  speaking  to  him  in  this  manner : — 

"  Ye  shall  not  steal. 

''Ye  shall  not  speak  falsely,  and  bring  false  accusations 
against  your  neighbour. 

"And  ye  shaU  not  swear  by  my  name  to  compass  an 
unjust  end,  and  ye  shall  not  profane  my  name."* 

These  injunctions  are  given  with  great  beauty  and  very 
instructively ;  for  the  thief  being  convicted  by  his  own  con- 
science denies  and  speaks  falsely,  fearing  the  punishment 
which  would  ensue  upon  his  confession.  And  he  who  denies 
an  action  seeks  to  attach  the  imputation  to  some  one  else, 
bringing  a  false  accusation  against  him,  and  imagines  devices 
to  make  his  false  accusation  appear  probable ;  and  every 
false  accuser  is  at  once  a  perjured  man,  thinking  but  little  of 
piety,  since  he  has  no  iust  proofs  ;  on  which  account  he  has 
recourse  to  what  is  called  the  inartificial  mode  of  proof,  that 

♦  Leviticus  xix.  11. 


ON  SPECIAL  LAWS.  865 

hj  oaths,  thinking  that  bj  the  inyocation  of  Grod  he  shall 
produce  belief  among  those  who  hear  him. 

But  let  such  an  one  know  that  he  is  ungodly  and  impious, 
inasmuch  as  he  is  defiling  that  which  by  nature  is  undefiled, 
the  good  and  holy  name  of  God. 

THOU  SHALT  KOT  BEAB  TALSE  WITNESS.* 

This  is  the  ninth  of  the  ten  commandments,  being  the  fourth 
in  number  of  those  in  the  second  table ;  but  one  which  is 
calculated  to  bestow  ten  thousand  benefits  on  human  life  if 
it  be  kept,  as,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  injure  men  in 
innumerable  ways  if  it  is  neglected ;  for  the  false  accuser  is 
to  be  blamed,  but  he  who  bears  witness  to  what  is  false  is 
more  euilty  still ;  for  the  one  acts  only  from  a  desire  to  pro- 
tect himself,  but  the  other  is  wicked  from  his  wish  to  co- 
operate with  another  in  iniquity.  And  in  the  comparison  of 
wicked  men  he  who  does  wrong  for  his  own  ssike  is  less 
luirighteous  than  he  who  does  so  for  another.  And  every 
judge  looks  vrith  suspicion  on  an  accuser,  as  likely  to  pay 
but  little  attention  to  truth  for  the  sake  of  coming  on  in 
safety  himself^  on  which  account  tlie  accuser  stands  in  need 
of  a  preface  to  beg  the  attention  of  the  hearer  while  he  is 
speaking ;  but  if  the  judge  has  no  prejudice  against  a  witness 
on  any  personal  grounds  he  receives  his  evidence;  with  a 
willing  mind  and  open  ears,  while  he  is  covering;  over  those 
most  excellent  things,  truth  and  good  faith,  with  specious 
language.  And  the  false  witnesses  use  seductive  words  as 
a  sportsman  uses  bait  for  the  purpose  of  attaining  the  objects 
which  he  desires  and  aims  at. 

For  which  reasons,  In  many  parts  of  his  enactment  of  the 
law,  he  commands  that  we  should  not  approve  of  any  wicked 
man  or  action,  f  For  any  approbation  of  what  is  not 
virtuous  is  likely  to  lead  to  giving  false  evidence;  since 
every  one  to  whom  iniauity  is  a  disagreeable  and  hateful 
thing  is  a  friend  of  truth.  Now  there  is  no  great  wonder 
in  a  man's  having  connected  himself  with  one  wicked  person, 
who  has  incited  him  to  an  action  resembling  his  own 
character ;  but  it  is  a  sign  of  a  noble  soul,  and  of  a  dispo- 
sition practised  in  manly  resolutions  not  to  follow  a  multitude 
to  do  evil,  like  a  man  borne  down  over  a  precipice  by  the 
*  Exodoa  XI.  16.  t  Exodiu  xxiiL  1. 


8G6  PHILO  JUDiBUS. 

coUectiTe  force  of  a  torrent.  Eor  some  people,  among  the 
multitude,  think  some  things  lawful  and  just,  even  though 
they  be  most  flagitious,  not  judging  correctly ;  for  it  is  well 
to  follow  nature,  but  this  impulse  of  the  multitude  is  wholly 
at  Tariance  with  the  following  of  nature. 

If,  then,  some  persons,  being  assembled  together  in  com- 
panies and  numerous  multitudes,  attempt  to  make  any 
mnoyations,  one  must  not  consent  to  them,  since  they  are 
adulterating  the  ancient  and  approved  coinage  of  the  state ; 
for  one  wise  counsel  is  superior  to  many  attempts,  but 
ignorance,  in  conjunction  witn  numbers,  is  a  ^reat  evil ;  but 
some  persons  practise  such  an  excess  of  wickedness  that 
they  not  only  accuse  mortal  men,  but  adhere  and  cling  to 
their  unrighteousness,  so  as  eyen  to  raise  their  lies  as  high 
as  heayen,  and  to  bear  their  testimony  against  the  blessed 
and  happy  nature  of  Gh>d. 

And  by  these  men  I  mean  soothsayers,  and  diviners,  and 
augurs,  and  all  other  persons  who  practise  what  they  call 
divination  studying,  an  art  without  any  art,  if  one  must  tell 
the  plain  truth,  a  mere  bare  imitation  of  the  real  inspiration 
and  prophetic  gift ;  for  a  prophet  does  not  utter  anything 
whatever  of  his  own,  but  is  only  an  interpreter,  another 
Being  suggesting  to  him  all  that  he  utters,  while  he  is 
speaking  under  inspiration,  being  in  ignorance  that  his  own 
reasoning  powers  are  departed,  and  have  quitted  the  citadel 
of  his  soul ;  while  the  divine  spirit  has  entered  in  and  taken 
up  its  abode  there,  and  is  operating  upon  all  the  organization 
of  his  voice!  and  making  it  sound  to  the  distinct  manifesta- 
tion of  all  the  prophecies  which  he  is  delivering. 

But  all  those  persons  who  pursue  the  spurious  and  pre- 
tended kind  of  prophecy  are  inverting  the  order  of  truth  by 
conjectures  ana  guesses,  perverting  sincerity,  and  easily 
influencing  those  who  are  of  unstable  dispositions,  as  a 
violent  wind,  when  blowing  in  a  contrary  direction,  tosses 
about  and  overturns  vessels  without  ballast,  preventing  them 
from  anchoring  in  the  safe  havens  of  truth.  For  such 
persons  think  proper  to  say  whatever  they  conjecture,  not 
as  if  they  were  things  which  they  themselves  had  found  out, 
but  as  if  they  were  divine  oracles  revealed  to  themselves 
alone,  for  the  more  complete  inducement  of  great  and 
Dumerous  crowds  to  believe  a  deceit. 


ON  SPECIAL  LAWS.  367 

Such  persons  our  lawgiver  verj  appropriately  calls  false 
prophets,  who  adulterate  the  true  prophecj,  and  OTcrshadow 
what  is  genuine  by  their  spurious  oevices;  but  in  a  very 
short  time  all  their  manceuvres  are  detected,  since  nature 
does  not  choose  to  be  always  hidden,  but,  when  a  suitable 
opportunity  offers,  displays  her  own  power  with  irresistible 
strength.  For  as  in  tne  case  of  eclipses  of  the  sun  the  rays 
which  have,  for  a  brief  moment,  been  obscured,  a  short  time 
afterwards  shine  forth  again,  exhibiting  an  unclouded  and 
far-seen  brilliancy  without  anything  whatever  comins  over 
the  sun  at  all,  but  one  unalloyed  blaze  beaming  forth  from 
him  in  a  serene  sky ;  so  also,  even  though  some  persons  may 
deliver  predictions,  practising  a  lying  art  of  prophecy,  and 
disguising  themselves  under  the  specious  name  of  prophetic 
inspiration,  falsely  taking  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  they  will 
be  easily  convicted.  For,  again,  the  truth  will  come  forth  and 
will  beam  forth,  shedding  around  a  most  conspicuous  lisht^ 
so  that  the  falsehood  which  has  previously  overshadowed  it 
will  disappear. 

Moreover  there  also  was  an  excellent*  commandment 
that  Moses  gave  when  he  ordained  that  the  judge  should 
'*  not  receive  the  testimony  of  one  witness."  t  First  of  all, 
because  it  is  possible  that  one  person  may  without  design- 
ing  it  have  a  false  impression  of  a  thing,  or  may  be  careless 
about  it  and  therefore  be  deceived.  For  there  are  innu- 
merable false  opinions,  which  freauently  arise  from  an 
innumerable  variety  of  grounds  ;  and  secondly,  because  it  is 
most  unjust  to  trust  to  one  witness  as;ainst  many  persons, 
or  indeed  against  only  one  individual ;  in  the  first  place, 
because  many  are  more  entitled  to  belief  than  one,  since 
the  one  is  not  superior  in  number  to  many,  and  equality  of 
number  is  inconsistent  with  any  preponaerance ;  for  why 
should  the  judge  trust  a  single  witness,  bearing  testimony 
against  another,  rather  than  the  defendant  pleading  in  his 
own  behalf?  But,  as  it  should  seem,  it  is  best  to  suspend 
one's  opinion,  where  there  is  no  deficiency  and  no  excess  to 
guide  the  judgment. 

•  Numners  xsxv.  SO.  *  Dent^ronomy  xvil  6 :  xix.  15. 


868  PHILO  JT7D£T7S. 


OK  THS   OFFICE   AJSTD   CHASACTXIl  OF  A  JUPOE. 

L  Thz  law  thinks  that  all  those  who  adhere  to  the  sacred 
constitution,  estahlished  hj  Moses,  ought  to  be  free  from 
all  unreasonable  passions,  and  from  all  wickedness;  and 
most  especiaUj  ought  all  men  to  be  so,  who  are  either 
appointed  hj  lot  or  elected  to  judge  between  others ;  for  it 
is  an  absurdilr  for  these  men  to  be  themselves  liable  to  the 
imputation  oi  error,  who  undertake  to  dispense  justice  to 
others,  whom  it  becomes  to  give  a  faithl'ul  copj  of  the 
works  ot  nature,  presenting  an  accurate  representation  of  a 
model  picture ;  for  as  the  power  of  fire  which  disperses 
warmth  to  all  other  things  which  it  reaches,  was,  long  before 
doing  so,  warm  as  far  as  it  was  itself  concerned,  and  as,  on  the 
contrary,  the  power  of  snow  cools  other  things,  by  the 
fact  of  its  being  itself  cooled  previously,  so  also  ought  the 
judge  to  be  full  of  pure  unalloyed  justice,  if  he  is  to  irrigate 
all  who  come  before  him  with  justice,  in  order  that  from  him, 
as  from  a  sweet  fountain,  a  wholesome  spring  may  be 
afforded  to  all  who  thirst  for  a  dispensation  or  good  law. 

And  this  will  be  the  case  if  any  one  who  undertakes  the 
office  of  a  judge  looks  upon  it  as  if  he  were  at  the  same 
time  judging  and  bein^  judged  himself,  and  when  he  takes 
up  the  pebble  with  which  he  is  to  give  his  vote,  were  at  the 
same  tiine  to  take  up  wisdom  so  as  not  to  be  deceived, 
and  justice  so  as  to  dispense  to  each  party  what  they 
deserve,  and  courage  so  as  never  to  peld  to  supplications 
or  to  feelings  of  compassion,  so  as  to  diminish  tne  punish- 
ment due  to  convicted  offenders ;  for  the  man  who  studies 
these  virtues  may  reasonably  be  looked  upon  as  a  common 
benefactor,  like  a  good  pilot  tranquillising  the  storms  of 
affairs  in  such  a  manner  as  to  secure  the  preservation  and 
safety  of  those  who  have  committed  their  interests  to  him. 

II.  In  the  first  place  the  law  enjoins  the  judge  not  to 
listen  to  vain  reports.*  Why  is  this  ?  The  law  says,  "  My 
good  man,  let  thy  ears  be  purified."  And  they  will  be 
purified  if  they  are  continually  washed  out  with  a  stream  of 

*  Exodus  xxiii.  L 


OK  SPECIAL  LAWS.  369 

▼irtuouB  language,  never  admitting  the  long,  and  false,  and 
Tain,  and  hackneyed  protestations,  so  deserving  to  be  ridi« 
culed,  of  fabulists  or  yain  babblers,  or  hyperboucal  exagge- 
rations, who  make  a  great  deal  of  things  of  no  importance ; 
and  this  is  what  is  meant  bj  the  injunction  not  to  listen 
to  yain  reports,  and  also  by  another  precept  in  some  degree 
consistent  with  the  former. 

For,  says  the  lawgiver,  he  who  attends  to  those  who  give 
evidence  on  hearsay  is  attending  to  vanity  and  not  to  sound 
reason ;  because  the  eyes  do  mdeed  dwell  with  the  very 
things  which  are  done,  taking  hold  of  them  as  one^  may  say, 
and  comprehending  and  seizinc^  upon  them  in  all  their 
parts,  the  light  co-operating  with  them,  by  means  of  which 
all  things  are  illuminated  and  clearly  proved ;  but  the  ears, 
as  one  of  the  philosophers  of  old  has  very  truly  said,  are 
less  trustworthy  than  the  eyes,  inasmuch  as  they  are  not 
themselves  present  at  the  transactions,  but  are  attracted  by 
words  as  tne  interpreter  of  facts,  which  ore  not  alwavs 
disposed  to  tell  the  truth ;  for  which  reasons  some  of  tde 
lawgivers  among  the  Greeks,  having  transcribed  some  of  the 
laws  from  the  two  tables  of  Moses,  appear  to  have  estab- 
lished very  wise  regulations,  forbidding  any  one  to  mention 
in  his  testimony  anything  that  he  has  neard,  on  the  ground 
that  it  is  right  to  look  upon  what  a  man  has  seen  as  trust- 
worthy, but  on  what  he  has  heard  as  not  in  all  respects 
certain. 

ni.  The  second  commandment  given  to  a  judge  is  not 
to  receive  gifts ;  *  for  gifts,  says  the  law,  blind  the  eves 
that  see,  and  pervert  justice,  and  do  not  permit  the  mind 
to  travel  along  the  level  road  which  leads  to  righteousness ; 
and  to  receive  bribes  to  aid  in  unjust  actions  is  the  action 
of  very  wicked  men  indeed ;  and  even  to  do  so  for  the 
purpose  of  furthering  ffood  objects  is  the  conduct  of 
persons  who  are  half  wicked ;  for  there  are  some  judges 
speciously  disguised,  half  wicked,  something  between  just 
and  unjust,  armed  indeed  in  the  eause  of  those  who  are 
injured,  as  their  champions  against  those  who  injure  them, 
but  still  not  desirous  to  cause  them  to  prevail,  without 
deriving  any  advantage  to  Idiemselves  firom  their  victory, 

*  Exodus  XTJii.  8. 
VOL.  III.  B  B 


370  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

• 

though  thej  ought  to  preyail;  but  making  their  decision 
corrupt  and  mercenarj. 

Then,  when  any  one  blames  them,  they  ti&rm  that  they 
haye  not  perveited  justice;  for  that  those  have  been 
defeated  who  ought  to  have  been  defeated,  and  that  those 
have  gained  their  cause  who  ought  to  have  got  the  better ; 
alleging  a  most  unworthy  and  false  defence ;  for  a  righteous 
judge  ought  to  exhibit  two  things,  a  judgment  in  strict 
accordance  with  the  law,  and  incorruptibility ;  but  he  who  is 
a  judge  for  bribes,  even  though  he  decides  justly,  does  with- 
out perceivinfi"  it  defile  a  thing  which  is  beautiful  by  nature. 

Moreover,  ne  also  offends  in  two  other  points ;  in  the 
first  place,  because  he  is  accustoming  himself  to  be  covetous 
of  money ;  which  is  the  beginning  of  the  very  greatest  ini- 

Suities  ;  and  secondly,  because  he  is  injuring  the  man  whom 
e  ou^ht  to  benefit ;  by  making  him  pay  a  price  for  justice ; 
on  which  account  Moses  has  very  instructively  commanded, 
that  the  judge  shall  pursue  what  is  righteous  in  a  righteous 
manner ;  *  intimating  under  this  figurative  expression,  that 
it  is  possible  to  do  so  in  an  unrighteous  manner,  because  of 
those  men  who  sell  just  and  legal  decisions  for  money,  not 
only  in  the  courts  ot  justice,  but  everywhere  in  every  part 
of  land  and  sea,  and  I  had  almost  said  in  all  the  transactions 
of  life. 

Eor  instance,  it  has  happened  before  now,  that  a  man 
who  has  received  a  deposit  of  small  value,  has  given  it  back 
ae;ain  when  demandeo,  more  by  way  of  laying  a  snare  for 
him  who  receives  it  back,  than  with  any  idea  of  serving  him, 
in  order  that  by  showing  good  faith  in  things  of  small  value 
as  a  bait  he  may  cover  over  the  look  of  his  faithlessness  in 
CTeater  things,  and  such  conduct  is  nothing  else  than  pursu- 
ing justice  in  an  unrighteous  manner ;  for  the  restitution  of 
what  did  not  belong  to  him  was  just,  but  it  was  done  in  an 
onrighteous  manner,  inasmuch  as  it  was  only  done  as  a  bait 
to  attract  more. 

And  the  cause  of  all  such  offences  is  principally  the  incli- 
nation to  and  the  familiar  habit  of  falsebooa,  which,  from 
their  very  birth  and  swaddling  clothes,  their  nurses  and 
mothers,  and  all  the  whole  multitude  in  the  house,  whether 
free-bom  persons  or  slaves,  habituate  them  to  and  familia- 

•  Deuteronomy  xri.  19. 


ON  SPECIAL  ULWS.  371 

rise  them  with  both  b^**  words  and  actions,  adapting  it  to 
and  uniting  it  with  their  souls,  as  a  necessaixpart  of  them 
bj  nature,  though,  if  it  had  in  truth  been  implanted  in  them 
bj  nature,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  eradicate  it  by 
instilling  good  habits  into  them  instead. 

And  what  in  life  is  there  equally  beautiful  with  truth, 
which  the  all-wise  Iefi;islator  erected  in  the  most  sacred 
place,  in  that  part  of  the  dress  of  the  chief  priest,  where  the 
dominant  part  of  the  soul  lies,  wishing  to  adorn  it  with  the 
most  beautiful  and  glorious  of  aU  ornaments  ?  And  next  to 
truth  he  has  placed  power  as  akin  to  it,  which  he  has  in  this 
case  called  manifestation,  being  the  two  images  of  the  two 
kinds  of  speech  which  exist  in  us,  the  secret  speech  and  the 
lettered  speech,  for  the  lettered  speech  reqmres  manifest- 
ation, by  which  the  secret  thoughts  in  aU  our  hearts  are 
made  known  to  our  neighbour,  but  the  secret  speech  has 
need  of  truth  for  the  perfection  of  life  and  actions,  by 
means  of  which  the  road  to  happiness  is  found  out. 

lY.  The  third  commandment  given  to  a  judge  is  to  inves- 
tigate the  transactions  themselves,  in  preference  to  showing 
any  regard  to  the  parties  to  the  suit ;  and  to  attempt,  in 
every  imaginable  manner,  to  separate  himself  from  all 
respect  of  persons;  constraining  himself  to  an  ignorance 
and  forgetndness  of  all  those  things  of  which  he  has  any 
knowledge  or  recollection ;  such  as  relations,  friends,  coun- 
trymen or  foreigners,  enemies  or  hereditary  connections,  so 
that  neither  afifection  nor  hatred  may  overshadow  his  know- 
ledge of  justice ;  for  he  must  stumble  like  a  blind  man,  who 
is  advancing  without  a  stafi^  and  who  has  no  one  to  guide 
him  in  whom  he  can  rely  firmly. 

For  which  reason  it  is  fitting  that  a  righteous  judge 
should  have  it  even  concealed  from  him  who  the  parties  to 
the  suit  are,  and  that  he  should  look  at  the  undisguised, 
simple  nature  of  the  transactions  themselves ;  so  as  not  to 
be  liable  to  judge  in  accordance  with  random  opinion,  but 
according  to  real  truth,  and  to  be  guided  by  such  an  opinion 
as  this,  that  judgment  is  of  God  ;*  and  that  the  judge  is  the 
minister  ^nd  steward  of  his  judgment ;  and  a  steward  is  not 
allowed  to  give  away  the  things  of  his  master,  as  he  has 
received  as  a  pledge  the  most  excellent  of  all  the  things 

*  Deuteronomy  i.  ]  7. 
B  B  2 


873  PHILO  JUDiEUSL 

which  exist  in  human  life,  from  the  most  excellent  of  all 
beings. 

Y.  And  in  addition  to  what  has  abeadj  been  said,  there 
is  another  most  admirable  precept  giren  which  enjoins  the 
judge  **  not  to  show  pity  npon  the  poor  man  in  his  judg- 
ment."* 

While  in  other  precepts  the  lasrgirer  has  filled  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  law  with  precepts  of  mercj  and  hnmanitr,  and 
has  nttered  great  threats  against  arn^iant  and  insolent  men, 
and  has  proposed  great  rewards  for  those  who  endearour  to 
make  amenos  for  the  misfortunes  of  their  neighbours,  and 
who  look  npon  their  superfluities  not  as  their  own  exclusire 
possessions,  but  as  the  common  property  of  ererj  one  in 
want ;  for  it  was  a  felicitous  and  true  saymg  of  one  of  the 
wise  men  of  old,  that  men  never  act  m  a  manner  more 
resembling  the  ^ods  than  when  thej  are  bestowing  benefits  ; 
and  what  can  be  a  greater  good  than  for  mor^  men  to 
imitate  the  ererlasting  God  ? 

Let  not  then  the  rich  man  collect  in  his  house  vast 
quantities  of  silver  and  ^old,  and  store  them  up,  but  let  him 
bring  them  forward  fireely  in  order  by  his  cheerful  bounty 
to  soften  the  hard  condition  of  the  poor ;  nor  let  any  man 
be  pufied  up  with  vain  glory,  and  raise  himself  and' boast 
himself  in  pride  and  arrogance,  but  let  a  man  rather  honour 
equality,  and  allow  freedom  of  speech  to  those  of  low  estate. 
Ajid  let  the  man  who  enjovs  vigour  of  body  be  the  prop  of 
those  who  are  weaker,  andf  let  him  not  like  the  men  at  the 
gymnastic  contests  strive  by  every  means  to  overthrow  those 
who  are  inferior  in  strength,  but  let  him  be  willing  and 
eager  to  assist  with  his  own  power  those  who,  a?  far  as  thev 
themselves  are  concerned,  are  ready  to  faint.  For  all  those 
who  have  drunk  deep  of  the  fountains  of  wisdom,  having 
banished  envy  entirely  out  of  their  minds,  are  of  their  own 
accord,  and  without  any  prompting,  ready  to  undertake  the 
assistance  of  their  neighoours,  pouring  the  streams  of  their 
words  into  their  souls  through  their  ears,  so  as  to  impart  to 
them  a  participation  in  similar  knowledge  with  themselves. 
And  when  they  see  young  men  of  good  dispositions  spring- 
ing up  like  flourishing  and  vigorous  shoots  of  a  vine,  they 
rejoice,  thinking  that  they  have  found  proper  inheritors  for 

*  Exodtu  zziii.  3. 


OK  SPEaAL  ULWS.  873 

tliis  wealth  of  their  souls,  wliich  is  the  only  real  riches,  and 
having  taken  them  thej  cultivate  their  souls  with  doctrines 
and  good  meditations,  until  they  arrive  at  full  strength  and 
matiuitj,  so  as  to  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  excellence. 

Manj  such  ornaments  as  these  are  woven  into  and  in- 
serted among  the  laws,  in  order  to  enrich  the  poor  on  whom 
it  is  always  proper  to  have  compassion  except  at  the  time  of 
fi;iyinfi;  judgment,  for  compassion  is  due  to  misfortunes ;  but 
he  who  behaves  wickedly  with  deliberate  purpose  is  not 
unfortunate  but  unrighteous,'  and  punishment  is  due  to  the 
unrighteous  just  as  honours  should  oe  confirmed  to  the  just, 
so  tnat  no  wicked  man  who  is  in  difficulties,  and  who 
conceals  the  truth,  ought  to  escape  punishment  through  the 
pity  excited  by  his  poverty,  since  he  has  done  what  deservesi 
not  pity  (how  should  it  ?)  but  great  anger. 

Aiid  let  the  man  who  undertakes  the  duty  of  a  judge, 
like  a  skilM  money-changer,  divide  and  distinguish  between 
the  natures  of  things,  in  order  that  confusion  may  not  be 
caused  by  the  mixing  together  of  what  is  good  witj^  what  is 
spurious.  And  there  are  many  other  things  which  may  be 
said  with  respect  to  false  witnesses  and  judges ;  but  for  the 
sake  of  avoiding  prolixity  we  must  proceed  now  to  the  last 
of  the  ten  commandments,  which  is  delivered  also  in  a 
concise  and  summary  form  as  each  of  the  others  is :  and 
this  commandment  is,  '*  Thou  shalt  not  covet." 

OK  covETiyo. 

I.  Every  passion  is  open  to  and  deserving  of  blame,  inas- 
much as  every  immoderate  and  violent  impulse,  and  every 
irrational  and  unnatural  emotion  of  the  soul  is  also  faulty 
and  blomeable,  for  what  is  either  of  these  things  but  an 
ancient  passion  spread  over  a  wider  extent  ?  If  any  one, 
therefore,  does  not  set  limits  to  these  feelings,  nor  put  a 
bridle  on  them  as  on  restive  horses,  he  will  be  afflicted  oy  an 
evil  difficult  to  remedy,  and  then,  without  being  aware  of  it, 
he  will,  because  of  their  unrestrainable  character,  be  carried 
away  by  them,  as  a  charioteer  sometimes  is  by  a  chariot, 
and' hurried  into  ravines  and  pits  irom  which  it  is  difficult 
to  rise  up,  and  very  hard  to  escape  with  safety. 

But  of  all  the  passions  there  is  not  one  so  grievous  as  a 
covetous  desire  of  what  one  has  not  ^^^  ^^  >icssij^  -^^^^.^5=^ 


874  PfllLO  JXTDJEUS. 

are  in  appearance  good,  bat  not  in  reality ;  a  desire  wliich 
produces  grieyous  anxieties  which  are  hard  to  satisfy ;  for 
such  a  passion  puts  the  reason  to  flight,  and  banishes  it  to  a 
great  distance,  involying  the  soul  in  great  difficulties,  while 
the  object  which  is  desired  flies  away  contemptuously, 
retreating  not  with  its  back  but  with  its  face  to  one; 
for  when  a  person  perceives  this  passion  of  covetousness 
after  having  started  up  rapidly,  then  resting  for  a  short 
time,  either  with  a  view  to  spread  out  its  alluring  toils,  or 
because  it  has  learnt  to  entertain  a  hope  of  succeeding  in 
its  object,  he  then  retires  to  a  loneer  distance  uttering 
reproaches  against  it ;  but  the  passion  itself,  being  lelt 
benind  and  coming  too  late  to  succeed,  struggles,  bearing 
a  Tantalus-like  punishment  iiv  its  miserable  futiire ;  for  it  is 
said  that  Tantalus,  when  he  desired  to  obtain  any  liquor  to 
drink,  was  not  able  to  do  so,  as  the  water  retreated  from  his 
lips,*  and  if  he  wished  to  gather  any  fruit,  it  all  disap- 

*  The  Btoiy  of  Tantalus  is  told  in  Homer,  Od.  zi.  581. 

Kai  lA^v  TdvraXoy  iitrtXiov  x^'^'  ^^7*  iX^*^' 
ivradr  iv  Xifivy  ;  r/  ci  irpotrivrXaZt  ycvftM 
arivTo  ik  ^tv^diuv,  irutiv  S'otfK  fixe*'  OdirOai 
6<r<rdn  ydp  Kinj/fi  6  yipc^v  irUtiv  fitvtaiviaty 
Tooodx  id^p  diro\i<yKtr  dvaffpoxiv*  dii^  ck  irooffi 
rata  fiiXaiva  ^vton  KaTaKrjvafTKt  ik  oaifiuv 
iivopia  6*  vrj/iirirTiXa  KaraKorj9iv  x**  Kapirdv 
Syxvat  Kai  poiai  KaifirjXiai  ayXadKapiroi 
ffVKai  rtyXoKtpai  xai  kXaiai  rrjXtOSitKTat 
r«2v  ofTor'  iQvtrii  6  yipwv  irri  x^P^*  fid(ya<r9ai 
tAq  S'  dvtfioc  ffiirraffKt  ttoti  vifta  fyKidtvra. 

Or,  as  it  is  translatediby  Pope, 

"  There  Tantalus  along  the  Stygian  bonnds, 
Pours  out  deep  groans  (with  groans  all  bell  resounds); 
Er'n  in  the  circling  floods  refreshment  craTes, 
And  pines  with  thirst  among  a  sea  of  waves ; 
When  to  the  water  he  his  lip  applies, 
Back  from  his  lip  the  treacherous  water  flies. 
Above,  beneath,  around  his  hapless  head, 
Trees  of  all  kinds  delicious  fruitage  spread ; 
There  figs,  sky-dyed,  a  purple  hue  disclose, 
Green  looks  the  clive,  the  pomegranate  glows ; 
There  dangling  pears  exalting  scents  unfold. 
And  yellow  apples  ripen  into  gold. 
The  first  he  striyes  to  seize ;  but  blasts  arise, 
Toss  it  on  high,  and  whirl  it  to  the  skies.** 


ON  SPEaAL  LAWS.  875 

peared,  the  productiveness  of  the  trees  becoming  suddenly 
barren ;  for  as  those  implacable  and  inexorable  mistresses  of 
the  bodjy  thirst  and  hunger,  do  Terr  often  strain  it  more,  or 
at  all  erents  not  less,  than  those  unhappy  persons  are 
strained  who  are  racked  hj  the  torture  eyen  to  d^ath,  unless 
when  they  have  become  violent  some  one  appeases  them 
with  meat  and  drink ;  in  like  manner,  covetous  desire,  hav- 
ing first  rendered  the  soul  empty  through  its  forgetfrilness 
of  what  is  present  and  its  recollection  of  what  is  removed 
to  a  great  aistacce,  fills  it  with  impetuosity  and  madness, 
and  introduces  into  it  masters  worse  than  even  its  former 
tyrants,  but  having  the  same  names  with  them,  namely, 
huneer  and  thirst,  not,  however,  now  of  those  things  which 
conduce  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  belly,  but  of  money,  and 
glory,  and  authority,  and  beauty,  and  of  innumerable  other 
things  which  appear  to  be  objects  of  desire  and  contention 
in  human  life. 

And  as  the  disease  which  the  physicians  call  the  herpes,* 
does  not  stop  in  one  part  of  the  oody,  but  moves  about  and 
overruns  the  skin,  and,  as  its  name  shows,  creeps  about 
(3ifp^i),  and  becomes  diffused  in  every  direction,  and 
spreading  widely  seizes  hold  of  and  infects  with  its  contact 
the  whole  combination  of  the  different  parts  of  the  body 
from  the  head  to  the  feet,  so  in  the  same  manner  does 
covetous  desire  spread  over  the  whole  soul,  and  leave  not 
even  the  smallest  portion  of  it  free  from  its  inroads,  imi- 
tating the  power  of  fire  when  supplied  with  abimdant  fuel, 
for  that  spreads  and  bums  away  till  it  has  devoured  and 
destroyed  everything  with  which  it  meets. 

n.  So  great  and  so  excessive  an  evil  is  covetous  desire ; 
or  rather,  if  I  am  to  speak  the  plain  truth  concerning  it,  it  is 
the  source  of  all  evils.  Por  from  what  other  source  ao  all  the 
thefts,  and  acts  of  rapine,  and  repudiation  of  debt,  and  all 
fialse  accusations,  and  acts  of.  insolence,  and,  moreover,  all 
ravishments,  and  adulteries,  and  murders,  and,  in  short,  all 
mischiefs,  whether  private  or  public,  or  sacred  or  profane, 
take  their  rise  ?  For  most  truly  may  covetous  desire  be  said 
to  be  the  original  passion  which  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  these 
mischiefs,  of  which  love  is  one  and  the  most  significant  off- 
spring, which  has  not  once  but  many  times  filled  the  whole 

♦  So  called  from  i pxw,  *'  to  creep." 


876  PHIIiO  JCJDiEUS. 

world  with  indescribable  evils ;  which  even  the  whole  cir- 
cumference of  the  world  has  not  been  large  enough  to  coli- 
tain,  but  out  of  their  vast  number  thej,  as  if  carried  on  by 
the  impetuosity  of  a  torrent,  have  fallen  into  the  sea,  and  all 
seas  in  every  region  have  been  filled  with  hostile  fleets.  It 
is  owino;  to  this  passion  that  all  the  terrible  evils  which  are 
caused  dj  naval  wars  have  happened ;  and,  coming  upon  all 
continents  and  all  islands  together,  have  thrown  them  into 
confusion,  spreading  everywhere  and  returning  in  their  own 
steps  like  the  wamors  in  the  diaulos,*  or  like  the  ebb  and 
flow  of  the  tides  of  the  sea,  returning  to  the  point  from 
which  they  originally  set  out. 

And  by  looking  at  it  in  this  manner  we  shall  more  clearlr 
perceive  the  power  of  this,  passion.  Everything  which, 
covetous  desire  lays  hold  of  is  oy  it  changed  for  the  worse, 
like  poisonous  serpents  or  deadly  poisons.  Now  what  is  it 
that  I  mean  when  I  say  this  ? 

If  this  passion  is  directed  towards  money,  it  makes  thieves, 
and  cut-purses,  and  clothes-stealers,  and  house-breakers,  and 
taints  men  with  the  guilt  of  the  repudiation  of  debts,  of  the 
denial  of  deposits,  of  bribery  and  sacrilege,  and  all  such  iniqui- 
ties as  those.  K  it  is  directed  towards  glory,  it  makes  men 
insolent,  overbearing,  fickle,  and  unstable  in  their  dispositions, 
depending  wholly  on  what  is  said  to  them  and  on  what  they 
hear,  at  the  same  time  humbled  and  elated  by  reason  of  the 
variety  and  inconstancy  of  the  multitudes  who  praise  and 
blame  them  with  inconsiderate  impetuosity,  inconsiderate  in 
their  enmity  and  in  their  frieDdship,  so  as  easily  to  change 
from  one  to  the  other,  and  fills  them  with  all  sorts  of  humours 
akin  to  and  resembling  these. 

Again,  if  the  desire  takes  the  direction  of  wishing  for 
authority  and  power,  it  renders  men's  natures  seditious, 
unequal,  and  tvrannical,  it  makes  them  cruel  and  inhuman 
enemies  of  their  native  countries,  implacable  masters  unable 
to  restrain  themselves,  irreconcileable  foes  to  all  who  are 
equal  to  themselves  in  might,  flatterers  of  those  who  are 
more  powerful  than  themselves,  in  order  to  be  able  to  attack 
them  treacherously. 

If  what  is  desired  is  beauty  of  person,  it  makes  men 

*  The  diaulos  was  the  race  in  tvhich  the  raxmers  ran  to  the  goal  and 
kick  to  the  starting  post 


OK  SPECUL  ULWS.  877 

seducers,  ravishers,  adulterers,  paederasts,  practisers  of  licen- 
tiousness and  incontinence,  it  teaches  them  to  regard  the 
greatest  evils  as  the  most  fortunate  of  blessings.  This 
passion,  also,  when  it  extends  to  the  tongue,  often  caused 
innumerable  evils ;  for  some  persons  desire  either  to  be  silent 
about  what  ought  to  be  mentioned,  or  to  mention  what  ought 
to  be  buried  in  silence,  and  avenging  justice  pursues  them  if 
they  reveal  thinss  improperly,  or,  on  tne  contrary,  if  they  are 
unseasonably  silent. 

When  it  affects  the  parts  about  the  belly  it  makes  men 
gluttonous,  insatiable,  intemperate,  debauched,  admirers  of  a 
profligate  life,  delighting  in  drunkenness  and  epicurism, 
slaves  to  strong  wine,  and  fish,  and  meat,  pursuers  of  feasts 
and  tables,  waUowing  like  greedy  dogs ;  owing  to  all  which 
things  their  lives  are  rendered  miserable  and  accursed,  and 
they  are  reduced  to  an  existence  more  grievous  than  any 
death.  Por  this  reason  those  who  have  tasted  deeply  of 
philosophy,  not  merely  with  their  lips,  but  feasting  thoroughly 
on  its  profound  doctrines,  investigating  the  nature  of  the 
soul,  and  comprehending  its  threefold  character,  and  how 
it  is  divided  mto  reason,  and  anger,  and  appetite,  have 
attributed  the  chief  post  to  reason  as  the  principal  authority, 
assigning  to  it  the  head  as  its  most  appropriate  abode,  where 
also  the  company  of  the  outward  senses,  who  are  always 
present  as  the  bod^-guards  of  the  mind  as  their  king,  axe 
stationed ;  and  assigning  the  breast  as  the  abode  of  hunger^ 
partly  in  order  that  the  man,  being,  like  a  soldier,  armed  with 
this  as  with  a  breastplate,  so  that,  even  if  it  be  not  utterly  free 
from  all  injury,  it  may,  at  least,  be  difficult  to  subdue,  and 
partly  in  order  that,  dwelling  near  the  mind,  it  may  be  bene- 
fited by  its  neighbour,  who  charms  it  by  its  wisdom,  and 
who  renders  the  passions  gentle  and  manageable;  and  to 
appetite  they  assign  the  place  around  the  navel,  and  to  that 
part  which  is  called  the  diaphragm.  Por  it  was  proper  that 
that,  as  having  the  smallest  participation  in  reason,  should 
be  removed  as  fiur  as  possible  from  the  palace  of  the  mind  and 
located  almost  at  the  very  extremities ;  and  that  which  is 
the  most  insatiable  and  the  most  intemperate  of  all^  the 
passions,  should  be  confined  to  the  pastures  of  cattle,  where 
they  can  find  food  and  opportunities  for  the  propagation  of 
their  species. 


378  PHILO  JUDJ5U& 

m.  And  the  inost  holy  Moses  appears  to  me  to  have  had 
a  regard  to  all  these  circumstances,  and  on  that  account  to 
haye  commanded  that  men  should  discard  this  passion,  de- 
testine:  it  as  the  most  disgraceful  thing  and  tne  cause  of 
most  disgraceful  actions ;  and,  therefore,  to  have  prohibited 
it  above  all  other  feeling  as  an  engine  for  the  destruction  of 
the  soul ;  but  if  that  engme  is  destroyed  and  the  soul  brought 
back  to  its  obedience,  to  the  guidance  of  reason,  the  man 
will  become  entirely  filled  with  peace  and  obedience  to  law 
and  all  sorts  of  perfect  good  thmgs,  so  as  to  produce  com- 
plete happiness. 

But  as  be  was  fond  of  brevity  and  accustomed  to  cut  short 
thinfi;8  which  were  inclined  to  be  countless  in  point  of  niun- 
ber,  by  a  mode  of  teaching  which  was  confined  to  general 
instances,  he  begins  to<admonish  and  to  correct  one  appetite, 
that  which  is  concerned  about  the  beUy ;  conceiving  that  the 
other  appetites  will  not  be  equally  restive,  but  will  be  brought 
to  order  Dy  learning  that  the  most  important  and  authorita- 
tive of  the  whole  has  become  obedient  to  the  laws  of 
moderation. 

What,  then,  is  the  lesson  which  he  ^ves  us  about  this 
origin  of  all  vices  ?  There  are  two  thmgs  of  a  most  com- 
prehensive nature,  meat  and  drink.  He,  then,  has  not  left 
either  of  them  unrestrained,  but  has  bridled  them  with  espe- 
cial commands  most  calculated  to  lead  them  to  temperance 
and  to  humanity,  and  to  the  greatest  of  all  virtues,  piety ; 
for  he  commanded  men  to  offer  first  fruits  of  com,  and  wine, 
and  oil,  and  cattle,  and  other  things  ;*  and  to  distribute 
the  first  firuits  among  the  sacrificers  and  the  priests ;  among 
the  sacrificers  because  of  the  gratitude  due  to  God  for 
the  abundance  and  fertility  of  all  things,  and  to  the  priests 
because  of  their  sacred  mmistrations  about  the  temple,  and 
tlierefore  they  were  worthy  to  receive  wages  for  their  services 
in  respect  of  the  sacred  ceremonies.t  And  he  utterly  for- 
bids any  one  to  taste  of  anything,  or  to  take  any  portion  of 
anything,  before  separating  off  the  first  firuits,  wishing  also 
by  this  injunction  to  inculcate  the  practice  of  most  useful 
temperance;  for  he  who  has  learnt  not  to  throw  himself 
greedily  on  all  the  abundance  which  the  seasons  of  the  year 
have  brought,  but  to  wait  till  tlie  first  fruits  are  consecrated, 
•  Numbers  zriii.  12.  f  Numbers  xviiu  31. 


y 


ox  SPECIAL  LAWS.  879 

18  likel  J  to  be  able  to  restrain  the  restive  obstinacy  of  the 
passions,  making  them  gentle  and  manageablei 

'Moreover,  Moses  has  not  granted  an  unlimited  possession 
and  use  of  all  other  animals  to  those  who  partake  in  his 
sacred  constitution,  but  he  has  forbidden  with  all  his  might 
all  animals,  whether  of  the  land,  or  of  the  water,  or  that  flj 
through  the  air,  which  are  most  fleshv  and  fat,  and  calculated 
to  excite  treacherous  pleasure,  well  knowing  that  such, 
attracting  as  with  a  bait  that  most  slavish  of  all  the  outward 
senses,  namely,  taste,  produce  insatiability,  an  incurable  evil 
to  both  soids  and  bodies,  for  insatiability  produces  indiges- 
tion, which  is  the  origin  and  source  of  all  diseases  and 
weaknesses. 

Now  of  land  animals,  the  swine  is  confessed  to  be  the 
nicest  of  all  meats  by  those  who  eat  it,  and  of  all  aquatic 
animals  the  most  delicate  are  the  fish  which  have  no  scales ; 
and  Moses  is  above  all  other  men  skilful  in  training  and 
inuring  persons  of  a  good  natural  disposition  to  the  practice 
of  virtue  by  firugauty  and  abstinence,  endeavouring  to 
remove  costly  luxury  from  their  characters,  at  the  same 
time  not  approving  of  unnecessary  rigour,  like  the  lawgiver 
of  Lacedsemon,  nor  undue  effeminacy,  like  the  man  who 
taught  the  lonians  and  the  Sybarites  lessons  of  luxury  and 
license,  but  keeping  a  middle  path  between  the  two  courses, 
so  that  he  has  relaxed  what  was  over  strict,  and  tightened 
what  was  too  loose,  mingling  the  excesses  which  are  found 
at  each  extremity  with  moderation,  which  lies  between  the 
two,  so  as  to  produce  an  irreproachable  harmony  and  con- 
sistency of  life,  on  which  account  he  has  laid  down  not  care- 
lessly, but  with  minute  particularity,  what  we  are  to  use  and 
what  to  avoid. 

One  might  very  likely  suppose  it  to  be  just  that  those 
beasts  which  feed  upon  human  flesh  should  receive  at  the 
hands  of  men  similar  treatment  to  that  which  they  inflict  on 
men,  but  Moses  has  ordained  that  we  should  abstain  from 
the  enjoyment  of  all  such  things,  and  with  a  due  considera- 
tion of  what  is  becoming  to  the  gentle  soul,  he  proposes  a 
most  gentle  and  most  pleasant  banquet;  for  though  it  is 

•  Leviticus  xi.  7. 


880  PHILO  JDD^US. 

proper  tbat  those  who  inflict  evils  should  suffer  simiLir 
calamities  themselves,  yet  it  may  not  be  becoming;  to  those 
whom  they  ill  treated  to  retaliate,  lest  without  bemg  aware 
of  it  they  become  brutalized  by  anger,  which  is  a  savage 
passion ;  and  he  takes  such  care  to  guard  against  this,  that 
being  desirous  to  banish  as  far  as  possible  all  desire  for 
those  animals  abovementioned,  he  forbids  with  all  his  energy 
the  eating  of  any  carnivorous  animal  at  all,  selecting  the 
herbivorous  animals  out  of  those  kinds  which  are  domes- 
ticated, since  they  are  tame  by  nature,  feeding  on  that 
sentle  food  which  is  supplied  by  the  earth,  and  having  no 
disposition  to  plot  evil  against  anything. 

WHAT  QtrADBTIPEnS  ASS   CLEAIT. 

The  animals  which  are  clean  and  lawful  to  be  used  as  food 
are  ten  in  number ;  the  heifer,  the  lamb,  the  goat,  the  stoc;, 
the  antelope,  the  buffalo,  the  roebuck,  the  pygarg,  the  wild- 
ox,  and  the  chamois,*  for  he  always  adheres  to  that  arith- 
metical subtilty  which,  as  he  originally  devised  it  with  the 
minutest  accuracy  possible,  he  extends  to  all  existing  things, 
so  that  he  establishes  no  ordinances,  whether  important  or 
unimportant,  without  taking  and  as  it  were  adapting  this 
number  to  it  as  closely  connected  with  the  regulations  which 
he  is  ordaining. 

Now  of  all  the  numbers  beginning  from  the  unit,  the 
most  perfect  is  the  number  ten,  and  as  Moses  says,  it  is  the 
most  sacred  of  all  and  a  holy  number,  and  by  it  he  now 
limits  the  races  of  animals  that  are  clean,  wishing  to,  assign 
the  use  of  them  to  all  those  who  partake  of  the  constitution 
which  he  is  establishing.  And  he  gives  two  tests  and 
criteria  of  the  ten  anima]^  thus  enumeratedf  by  two  signs, 
first,  that  they  must  part  the  hoof,  secondly,  that  they  must 
chew  the  cud ;  for  those  which  do  neither,  or  only  one  of 
these  things,  are  unclean. 

And  these  signs  are  both  of  them  symbols  of  instruction 
and  of  the  most  scientific  learning,  bv  which  the  better  is 
separated  from  the  worse,  so  that  all  confusion  between 
them  is  prevented ;  for  as  the  animal  which  chews  the  cud, 
while  it  IS  masticating  its  food  draws  it  down  its  throat,  and 
then  by  slow  degrees  kneads  and  soflens  it,  and  then  after 
*  Deuteronomy  xiv.  4.  t  Leviticoa  xi.  3. 


OK  SPECIAL  LAWS.  881 

this  process  again  sends  it  down  into  the  bellj,  in  the  same 
manner  the  man  who  is  being  instructed,  having  received 
the  doctrines  and  speculations  of  wisdom  in  at  his  ears  from 
his  instructor,  derives  a  considerable  amount  of  learning 
firom  him,  but  still  is  not  able  to  hold  it  firmlj  and  to 
embrace  it  all  at  once,  until  he  has  resolved  over  in  his 
mind  everything  which  he  has  heard  bj  the  continued 
exercise  of  his  memory  (and  this  exercise  of  memory  is  the 
cement  which  connects  ideas),  and  then  he  impresses  the 
image  of  it  all  firmly  on  his  souL  But  as  it  seems  the  firm 
conception  of  s\ich  ideas  is  of  no  advantage  to  him  unless  he 
is  able  to  discriminate  between  and  to  distinguish  which  of 
contrary  things  it  is  right  to  choose  and  which  to  avoid,  of 
which  the  parting  of  the  hoof  is  the  symbol;  since  the 
course  of  life  is  twofold,  the  one  road  leading  to  wickedness 
and  the  other  to  virtue,  and  since  we  ought  to  renounce  the 
one  and  never  to  forsake  the  other. 

WHAT  BEASTS   ABE  KOT   CLEAK. 

For  this  reason  all  animals  with  solid  hoofs,  and  all  with 
many  toes  are  spoken  of  by  implication  as  unclean ;  the  one 
because,  beinc;  so,  they  imply  that  the  nature  of  good  and 
evil  is  one  ana  the  same ;  which  is  just  as  if  one  were  to  say 
that  the  nature  of  a.  concave  and  a  convex  surface,  or  of  a 
road  up  hill  and  down  hill,  was  the  same.  And  the  other, 
because  it  shows  that  there  are  many  roads,  though,  indeed, 
they  have  no  right  to  be  called  roacis  at  all,  which  lead  the 
life  of  man  to  deceit ;  for  it  is  not  easy  among  a  variety  of 
paths  to  choose  that  which  is  the  most  desirable  and  the 
most  excellent. 

WHAT  AQUATIC   AJTHTALS   ABE    CLEAK. 

Having  laid  down  these  definitions  with  respect  to  land 
animals,  ne  proceeds  to  describe  what  aquatic  creatures  are 
clean  and  lawful  to  be  used  for  food ;  distinguishing  them 
also  by  two  characteristics  as  having  fins  or  scales.*  Por 
those  which  have  neither  one  nor  the  other,  and  those  which 
have  only  one  of  the  two,  he  rejects  and  prohibits.f  And 
he  must  state  the  cause,  which  is  not  destitute  of  sense  and 
propriety;  for  all  those  creatures  which  are  destitute  of 
*  Leyiticiis  xi  9.  f  Deuteronomy  ziv.  10. 


383  PHILO  JUDJBUS. 

both,  or  eyen  of  one  of  the  two,  are  sucked  down  by  the 
current,  not  being  able  to  resist  the  force  of  the  stream ; 
but  those  which  haye  both  these  characteristics  can  stem 
the  water,  and  oppose  it  in  front,  and  striye  against  it  as 
against  an  adyersarj,  and  struggle  with  inyindble  good  will 
and  courage,  so  that  if  they  are  pushed  thej  push  in  their 
turn ;  and  if  thej  are  pursued  the j  turn  upon  their  foe  and 
pursue  it  in  their  turn,  making  themselyes  broad  roads  in  a 
pathless  district,  so  as  to  have  an  easy  passage  to  and  fro. 

Now  both  these  things  are  STmbols;  the  former  of  a 
soul  deyoted  to  pleasure,  and  the  latter  of  one  which  loves 
perseverance  and  temperance.  For  the  road  which  leads  to 
pleasure  is  a  down-hill  one  and  very  easy,  being  rather  an 
absorbing  gulf  than  a  path.  But  the  path  whic^  leads  to 
temperance  is  up  hill  and  laborious,  but  above  all  other 
roads  advantageous.  And  the  one  leads  men  downwards, 
and  prevents  those  who  travel  bv  it  &om  retracing  their 
steps  until  they  have  arrived  at  the  very  lowest  bottom, 
but  the  other  leads  to  heaven ;  making  those  who  do  not 
weary  before  they  reach  it  immortal,  if  they  are  only  able  to 
endure  its  rugged  and  difficult  ascent. 

ABOUT   BEPTILES.* 

And  adhering  to  the  same  general  idea  the  lawgiver 
asserts  that  those  reptQes  which  have  no  feet,  and  which 
crawl  onwards,  dragging  themselves  along  the  ground  on 
their  bellies,  or  tho^e  which  have  four  legs,  or  many  feet, 
are  all  unclean  as  far  as  regards  their  being  eaten. 

And  here,  again,  when  he  mentions  reptiles  he  intimates 
under  a  figurative  form  of  expression  those  who  are  devoted 
to  their  bellies,  gorging  themselves  like  cormorants,  and  who 
are  continually  offering  up  tribute  to  their  miserable  belly, 
tribute,  that  is,  of  strong  wine,  and  confections,  and  fish,  and, 
in  short,  all  the  supernuous  delicacies  which  the  skill  and 
labour  of  bakers  and  confectioners  are  able  to  devise,  invent- 
ing all  sorts  of  rare  viands,  to  stimulate  and  set  on  fire  the 
insatiable  and  unappeasable  appetites  of  man. 

And  when  he  speaks  of  animals  with  four  legs  and  many 
feet,  he  intends  to  designate  the  miserable  slaves  not  of  one 
single  passion,  appetite,  but  of  all  the  passions ;  the  genera 

•  Leviticus  xL  20. 


ON  bpeculL  laws.  883 

.of  wluch  are  four  in  number;  but  in  their  subordinate 
species  tliej  are  innumerable.  Therefore,  the  despotism  of 
one  is  reiy  grieyous,  but  that  of  manj  is  most  terrible,  and 
as  it  seems  intolerable. 

Again,  in  the  case  of  those  reptiles  who  hare  lej?s  abore 
their  feet,  so  that  they  are  able  to  take  leaps  from  the 
eround,  those  Moses  speaks  of  as  clean ;  as,  for  instance,  the 
different  kinds  of  locusts,  and  that  animal  called  the  serpent- 
fighter,  here  again  intimating  by  figurative  expressions  the 
manners  and  habits  of  the  rational  soul.  Por  the  weight  of 
the  body  bein^  naturally  heavy,  drags  down  with  it  those 
who  are  but  oi  small  wisdom,  strangUng  it  and  pressing  it 
down  by  the  weight  of  the  fiesh. 

But  olessed  are  they  to  whose  lot  it  has  fallen,  inasmuch  • 
as  they  have  been  well  and  solidly  instructed  in  the  rules  of 
sound  education,  to  resist  successfully  the  power  of  mere 
strength,  so  as  to  be  able,  by  reason  of  what  they  have 
leamt,  to  spring  up  from  the  earth  and  all  low  things,  to 
the  air  and  the  periodical  revolutions  of  the  heaven,  the 
very  sight  of  which  is  to  be  admired  and  earnestly  striven 
for  by  those  who  come  to  it  of  their  own  accord  with  no 
indolence  or  indifference. 

Having,  therefore,  in  his  ordinances  already  sone  through 
all  the  dmerent  kinds  of  land  animals  and  oi  those  who  live 
in  the  water,  and  having  distinguished  them  in  his  code  of 
laws  as  accurately  as  it  was  possible,  Moses  begins  to 
investigate  the  remaining  class  of  animals  in  the  air;  the 
innumerable  kinds  of  flying  creatures,  rejecting  all  those 
which  prey  upon  one  another  or  upon  man,  all  carnivorous 
birds,  in  short,  all  animals  which  are  venomous,  and  all 
which  have  any  power  of  plotting  against  others.  But 
doves,  and  pigeons,  and  turtle-doves,  and  all  the  flocks 
of  cranes,  and  geese,  and  birds  of  that  kind,  he  numbers 
in  the  class  of  domestic,  and  tame,  and  eatable  creatures, 
allowing  every  one  who  chooses  to  partake  of  them  with 
impunity. 

Thus,  in  each  of  the  parts  of  the  universe,  earth,  water, 
and  air,  he  refuses  some  kinds  of  each  description  of  animal, 

*  Le\iticiis  xi  10. 


084  ^HILO  JVT)JEVB, 

"whether  t^rrestrialy  or  aquatic,  or  aerial^  to  our  use ;  and 
thus,  taking  as  it  were  fuel  from  the  fire,  he  causes  the 
extinction  of  appetite. 

COXCEBlOyO  CABCASSES  AITD  BODIES  WHICH  HATE  BEEN 

TOBS"  BT  WILD  BEASTS. 

Moreover,  Moses  commands  *  that  no  man  shall  take  of 
any  dead  carcass,  or  of  any  hodj  which  has  been  torn  by 
wild  beasts ;  partly  because  it  is  not  fitting  that  man  should 
share  a  feast  with  untameable  beasts,  so  as  to  become  almost 
a  fellow  reveller  in  their  carnivorous  festivals ;  and  partly 
because  perhaps  it  is  injurious  and  likely  to  cause  disease  if 
the  juice  of  the  dead  body  becomes  mingled  with  the  blood, 
and  perhaps,  also,  because  it  is  proper  to  preserve  that 
which  has  been  pre-occupied  and  seized  beforehand  by 
death  untouched,  naving  a  respect  to  the  necessities  of 
nature  by  which  it  has  been  seized. 

Now  many  of  the  lawgivers  both  amon^  the  Greeks  and 
barbarians,  praise  those  who  are  skilful  in  hunting,  and  who 
seldom  fail  in  their  pursuit  or  miss  their  aim,  and  who  pride 
themselves  on  their  successful  hunts,  especially  when  they 
divide  the  limbs  of  the  animals  which  they  have  caught  with 
the  huntsmen  and  the  hounds,  as  being  not  onlv  brave 
hunters  but  men  of  very  sociable  dispositions,  fiut  any 
one  who  was  a  sound  interpreter  of  the  sacred  constitution 
and  code  of  laws  would  very  naturally  blame  them,  since  the 
lawgiver  of  that  code  has  expressly  forbidden  any  enjoyment 
of  carcasses  or  of  bodies  torn  by  beasts  for  the  reasons 
before  mentioned. 

But  if  any  one  of  those  persons  who  devote  themselves 
wholly  to  meditations  on  and  to  the  practice  of  virtue  were 
suddenly  to  become  fond  of  gymnastic  exercises  and  of 
hunting,  looking  upon  hunting  as  a  sort  of  prelude  to  and 
representation  of  the  wars  and  dangers  that  have  to  be 
encountered  against  the  enemy,  then,  whenever  such  a  man 
is  successful  in  his  sport,  he  ought  to  give  the  beasts  which 
he  has  slain  to  his  dogs  as  a  feast  for  them,  and  as  a  reward 
or  wages  for  their  successful  boldness  and  their  irreproach- 
able alliance.  But  he  ought  not  himself  to  touch  them, 
inasmuch  as  he  has  been  previously  taught  in  the  case  of 

*  LeviticuB  t.  2. 


V 

\ 


ON  SPECIAL  LAWS.  385 

irrational  animals,  'what  sentiments  he  ought  to  entertain, 
respecting  his  enemies. 

±^or  he  ought  to  cany  on  war  against  them,  not  for  the 
sake  of  unrighteous  gain  like  those  who  make  a  dishonest 
traffic  of  all  their  actions,  but  either  in  revenge  for  some 
calamities  which  he  has  preyiouslj  suffered  at  their  hands, 
or  with  a  view  toward  some  which  he  expects  to  suffer. 

But  some  men,  with  open  mouths,  carry  even  the 
excessive  luxmy  and  boundless  intemperance  of  Sarda- 
napalus  to  such  an  indefinite  and  unlimited  extent,  being 
wholly  absorbed  in  the  invention  of  senseless  pleasures, 
that  thej  prepare  sacrifices  which  ought  never  be  offered, 
strangling  their  victims,  and  stifling  the  essence  of  life,* 
which  thej  ou^ht  to  let  depart  free  and  unrestrained,  burying 
the  blood,  as  it  were,  in  the  body.  Por  it  ought  to  nave 
been  sufficient  for  them  to  enjoy  the  flesh  hj  itself,  without 
touching  any  of  those  parts  which  have  a  connection  with 
the  soul  or  Me. 

On  which  account  jMoses,  in  another  passage,  establishes 
a  law  concerning  blood,  that  one  may  not  eat  the  blood  nor 
the  fat.t  The  blood,  for  the  reason  which  I  have  already 
mentioned,  that  it  is  the  essence  of  the  life ;  not  of  the 
mental  and  rational  life,  but  of  that  which  exists  in  accord- 
ance with  the  outward  senses,  to  which  it  is  owiag  that 
both  we  and  irrational  animals  also  have  a  common  exist- 
ence. 

COXCEBNrSG  THE   SOITL   OR  LITE   OP   MAN 

I.  Por  the  essence  of  the  soul  of  man  is  the  breath  of 
God,  especially  if  we  follow  the  account  of  Moses,  who, 
in  his  history  of  the  creation  of  the  world,  says  that  Gk)d 
breathed  into  the  first  man,  the  founder  of  our  race,  the 
breath  of  life ;  breathing  it  into  the  principal  part  of  his 
body,  namely  the  face,  where  the  outward  senses  are  esta- 
blished, the  body-guards  of  the  mind,  as  if  it  were  the  great 
king.  And  that  which  was  thus  breathed  into  his  face  was 
manifestly  the  breath  of  the  air,  or  whatever  else  there  may 
be  which  is  even  more  excellent  than  the  breath  of  the  air, 
as  being  a  ray  emitted  from  the  blessed  and  thrice-happy 
nature  of  Gcd. 

•  Leviticna  xvii  11.  f  Lerlticua  ill.  17. 

TOL.  in.  C  C 


886  PHILO  JUDJBUS. 

Bat  Moses  commanded  men  to  abstain  firom  eating  fat, 
because  it  is  gross. 

And  again,  he  gave  ns  this  injunction,  in  order  to  incul- 
cate temperance  and  a  zeal  for  an  austere  life:  for  some 
things  we  easily  abandon,  and  without  any  hesitation; 
though  we  do  not  willingly  encounter  any  anxieties  or  labours 
for  the  sake  of  the  acquisition  of  rirtue.  For  which  reason 
these  two  parts  are  to  be  taken  out  of  every  victim  and  burnt 
with  fire,  as  a  kmd  of  first  fruits,  namely,  the  fat  and  the 
blood ;  the  one  being  poured  upon  the  altar  as  a  libation ; 
and  the  other  as  a  fuel  to  the  flame,  being  applied  instead 
of  oil,  by  reason  of  its  fatness,  to  the  consecrated  and  holy 
flame. 

The  lawgiver  blames  some  persons  of  his  time  as  gluttons, 
and  as  believing  that  the  mere  indulgence  of  luxury  is  the 
happiest  of  all  possible  conditions,  not  being  content  to  live 
in  this  manner  only  in  cities  in  which  there  are  abundant 
supplies  and  stores  of  all  kinds  of  necessary  things,  but 
carrying  their  efleminacy  even  into  pathless  and  untrodden 
deserts,  and  choosing  in  them  also  to  have  markets  for  fish 
and  meat,  and  all  things  which  can  contribute  to  an  easy 
life:  then,  when  a  scarcity  arose,  they  assembled  toother 
and  raised  an  outcry,  and  looked  miserable,  and  with  shame- 
less audacity  impeached  their  ruler,  and  did  not  desist  from 
creating  disturbances  till  they  obtained  what  they  desired ; 
and  they  obtained  it  to  their  destruction,  for  two  reasons : 
first  of  all,  that  it  might  be  shown  that  all  things  are  possible 
to  God,  who  can  find  a  way  in  the  most  difficult  and  appa- 
rently hopeless  circumstances;  and  secondly,  that  punish- 
ment might  fall  on  those  who  were  intemperate  in  their 
gluttonous  appetites,  and  obstinate  resisters  of  holiness. 

For  a  vast  cloud  bein^  raised*  out  of  the  sea  showered 
down  quails  about  the  tmie  cf  simrise,  and  the  camp  and 
all  the  district  around  it  for  a  day's  journey  for  a  well-girt 
active  man  was  overshadowed  all  about  with  the  birdB.t 
And  the  height  of  the  flight  of  the  birds  was  distant  from 
the  ground  a  height  of  aoout  two  cubits,  in  order  that  they 
might  be  easily  caught.  It  would  have  been  natural  there- 
fore for  them,  being  amazed  at  the  marvellous  nature  of  the 
prodigy  which  they  beheld,  to  be  satisfied  with  the  sight, 
•  ExodoB  XTi.  18.       -  t  Numbers  xi  31. 


OK  SPECIAL  LAWS.  S87 

and  being  filled  with  piety  to  nourish  their  souls  on  that, 
and  to  abstain  from  eating  flesh;  but  these  men,  on  the 
contrary,  stirred  up  their  desires  even  more  than  before,  and 
pursuea  these  birds  as  the  greatest  good  imaginable,  and 
catching  hold  of  them  with  both  their  hands  filled  their 
bosoms ;  then,  having  stored  them  up  in  their  tents,  they 
sallied  forth  to  catch  others,  for  immoderate  covetousness 
has  no  limit.  And  when  they  had  collected  every  descrip- 
tion of  food  they  devoured  it  insatiably,  being  about,  vain- 
minded  generation  that  they  were,  to  perish  by  their  own 
fulness ;  and  indeed  at  no  distant  time  they  dia  perish  by 
the  purging  of  their  bile,*  so  that  the  place  itself  derived  its 
name  from  the  calamity  which  fell  upon  them,  for  it  was 
called  the  graves  of  their  lust,t  than  which  there  is  not  in 
the  soul,  as  the  scripture  teaches  us,  any  greater  evil. 

For  which  reason  Moses  says  with  mat  beauty  in  his 
recommendations,  "  Let  not  every  man  do  that  which  seem- 
eth  good  to  his  own  eyes,"  J  which  is  equivalent  to  saying, 
let  not  any  one  gratify  his  own  desire,  but  let  each  person 
seek  to  please  &od,  and  the  world,  and  nature,  and  wise 
men,  repudiating  self-love,  if  he  would  become  a  good  and 
virtuous  man.  , 

II.  This  may  be  sufficient  to  say,  being  in  fact  all  that  I 
am  able  to  advance,  about  the  laws  whicn  bear  on  appetite 
and  desire  by  way  of  filling  up  the  whole  body  of  toe  ten 
commandments,  and  of  the  subordinate  injunctions  con- 
tained in  them  ;  for  if  we  are  to  look  upon  the  brief  heads 
which  were  oracularly  delivered  by  the  voice  of  God,  as  the 
generic  laws,  and  all  the  particular  ordinances  which  Moses 
subsequently  interpreted  and  added  as  the  special  laws ; 
then  there  is  need  of  great  care  and  skill  in  order  to 
preserve  the  arrangement  unconfused  in  order  to  an  accurate 
comprehension  of  it,  and  I  therefore  have  taken  great  care, 
and  nave  assi^ed  and  apportioned  to  each  of  these  ^^eneric 
laws  of  the  whole  code  idi  that  properlv  belonged  to  it. 

But  enough  of  this.  "We  must  however  not  remain 
ignorant  that  as  separately  there  are  some  particular  in- 

*  Numben  zi.  20 

f  See  Noznbera  xi  34  :  ''  And  he  called  the  name  of  that  place 
Eibroth-hattaaTah,  because  there  they  boried  the  people  that  lu/tted.* 
$  Deuteronomy  zi  8. 

C  C  2 


888  PHILO  JUDiEUa 

junctions  related  to  each  one  of  the  ten  generic  command- 
ments, which  have  nothing  in  common  with  any  one  of  the 
others ;  so  also  there  are  some  things  to  be  observed  which 
are  common  to  the  whole,  being  adapted  not  to  one  or  two, 
as  people  saj,  but  to  the  whole  ten  commandments. 

And  I  mean  bj  this  those  virtues  which  are  of  common 
utility,  for  each  one  of  these  ten  laws  separately,  and  all  of 
them  tofi;ether,  train  men  and  encourage  them  to  prudence, 
and  justice,  and  piety,  towards  God  and  all  the  rest  of  the 
company  of  virtues,  connecting  sound  words  with  good 
intentions,  and  virtuous  actions  with  wise  language,  that  so 
the  organ  of  the  soul  may  be  wholly  and  entirely  held 
together  in  a  good  and  harmonious  manner  so  as  to  produce 
a  well-regulated  and  faultless  innocence  and  consistency  of 
life. 

We  have  spoken  before  of  that  queen  of  all  the  virtues, 
piety  and  holiness,  and  also  of  prudence  and  moderation; 
we  must  now  proceed  to  speak  of  justice  which  is  con- 
versant about  subjects  which  are  akin  and  nearly  related  to 
them. 


A  TEEATISE 

ON  JUSTICE. 

I.  One  portion  of  justice,  and  that  not  an  unimportant 
one,  relates  to  courts  of  justice  and  to  the  judge,  which 
indeed  I  have  mentioned  before,  when  I  was  going  through 
the  subject  of  testimony,  and  dwellinfi;  on  it  at  some  length, 
in  order  that  nothing  which  belonged  to  the  subject  should 
be  omitted ;  and  as  I  am  not  fond  of  repetitions,  unless  indeed 
gome  necessity  arising  from  the  imperious  character  of  the 
occasion  compels  me  to  it,  I  will  pass  that  part  of  the 
subject  over  now,  and  will  turn  my  attention  to  the  other 
portions,  having  just  said  thus  much  as  a  preface. 

The  law  says,  it  is  proper  to  lay  up  justice  in  one's  heart, 
and  to  fasten  it  as  a  sign  upon  one's  head,  and  as  frontlets 
before  one's  eyes,  figuratively  intimating  by  the  former 
expression  that  one  ought  to  commit  the  precepts  of  justice, 
Dot  to  one's  ears,  v»hich  are  not  trustworthy,  for  there  is 


ON  JUSTICE.  389 

no  credit  due  to  the  ears,  but  to  that  most  important  and 
dominant  port,  stamping  and  impressing  them  on  the  most 
excellent  of  all  offerings,  a  well  approved  seal ;  and  hj  the 
second  expression,  that  it  is  necessary  not  onlj  to  fonn 
proper  conceptions  of  what  is  right,  but  also  to  do  what  one 
has  decided  upon  as  proper  without  delaj.  For  the  hand  is 
the  symbol  or  actions,  to  which  Moses  here  commands  the 
people  to  attach  and  fasten  justice,  saying,  that  it  shall  be  a 
sign,  of  what  indeed  he  has  not  expressly  stated,  because  it 
is  not  a  sign  as  I  conceive  of  one  particular  thing,  but  of 
many,  and,  I  maj  almost  say,  of  everything  with  which  the 
life  of  man  is  concerned.  And  by  the  third  expression,  he 
implies  that  justice  is  discerned  everywhere  as  being  close 
to  the  eyes. 

Moreover  he  says  that,  these  things  must  have  a  certain 
motion ;  not  one  that  shall  be  light  and  unsteady,  but  such 
as  by  its  agitation  may  rouse  the  sight  to  the  spectacle 
manifest  before  it ;  for  motion  is  calculated  to  attract  the 
sight,  inasmuch  as  it  excites  and  rouses  it ;  or,  I  might 
rather  say,  inasmuch  as  it  renders  the  eyes  awake  and 
sleepless. 

But  the  man  to  whom  it  happens  to  represent  to  the  eyes 
of  his  mind  things  which  are  not  quiet  but  which  are  in 
motion,  and  exerting  energies  in  accordance  with  nature,  is 
entitled  to  be  set  down  as  a  perfect  man,  and  no  longer  to 
be  reckoned  among  learners  and  pupils,  but  among  teachers 
and  instructors ;  and  he  ought  to  allow  all  the  young  men 
who  are  desirous  to  do  so,  to  drink  of  his  wisdom  as  of  an 
abundant  stream  flowing  from  a  living  fountain  of  lessons 
and  doctrines.t 

And  if  there  is  any  one  who,  out  of  modesty,  is  wanting: 
of  courage,  and  therefore  delays,  and  is  slow  to  approach 
him  for  the  purpose  of  learning,  let  him  go  to  him  of  his 
own  accord,  and  pour  into,  his  ears  a  coUection  of  admo- 
nitions, until  the  channels  of  his  soul  are  filled  with  them. 
And  let  him  instruct  in  the  principles  of  justice  all  his 
relatives  and  friends,  and  all  young  men,  at  home  and  on  the 
road,  and  when  they  are  going  to  bed,  and  when  they  rise 
up  ;  that  in  all  their  positions,  and  in  all  their  motions,  and 
in  all  places  whether  privtte  or  public,  not  only  waking,  but 
♦  Deuteronomy  vi.  6.  f  Deuteronomy  vi  7. 


890  PHILO  JUDiETTS. 

also  while  asleep,  they  may  be  delighted  with  the  image  and 
conception  of  justice. 

For  there  is  no  delight  more  exquisite  than  that  which 
proceeds  from  the  whole  soul  being  entirely  filled  with 
justice,  while  devoted  to  the  study  of  its  eyerlasting  doc- 
trines and  meditations,  so  that  it  has  no  vacant  place  at 
which  injustice  can  effect  an  entrance. 

Moreover,  he  ordains  that  those  who  have  written  out 
these  things  should  afterwards  affix  them  to  every  house 
belonging  to  a  friend,  and  to  the  gates  which  are  in  their 
walla;  that  all  people,  whether  coming  in  or  going  out, 
whether  citizens  or  strangers,  reading  the  writing  thus  fixed 
on  pillars  before  the  gates,  may  have  an  unceasing  recollec- 
tion of  all  that  ought  to  be  said  or  that  ou^ht  to  be  done ; 
and  that  every  one  may  take  care  neither  to  do  nor  to  suffer 
injury ;  and  that  all  persons,  whether  going  into  their  houses 
or  going  out  of  them,  men  and  women,  children  and  servants, 
may  do  all  that  is  proper  and  becoming  to  one  another  and 
to  themselves. 

THAT   IT   IS   irOT   LAWFUL   TO   ADD   ANTTHIXG   TO   OB   TO 
TAKE   AirrTHI>'0   FROM   THE   LAW. 

The  lawgiver  also  gives  this  most  admirable  injunction,  that 
one  must  not  add  anything  to,  or  take  anything  away  from 
the  law,  but  that  it  is  a  duty  to  keep  all  the  ordinances  as 
originally  established  in  an  ecjual  and  similar  state  to  that 
in  which  they  were  at  first  delivered  without  alteration ;  for, 
as  it  seems,  there  might  otherwise  be  an  addition  of  what  is 
unjust ;  for  there  is  nothing  which  has  been  omitted  by  the 
Mrise  lawgiver  which  can  enable  a  man  to  partake  of  entire 
and  perfect  justice. 

Moreover,  by  this  command  Moses  intimates  the  per- 
fection of  all  other  virtue ;  for  each  separate  virtue  is  free 
from  all  deficiency,  and  is  complete,  deriving  its  perfection 
from  itself;  so  that  if  there  were  any  addition  thereto,  or 
anything  taken  away  therefrom,  it  would  be  utterly  and 
entirely  changed  and  altered,  so  as  to  assume  a  contrary 
character.  TV  hat  I  meant  to  say  is  this,  all  who  are  pro- 
foundly ignorant  and  uninstructed,  all  who  have  the  very 
slightest  smattering  of  education,  know  that  courage  is  a 
virtue  which  is  conversant   about  terrible  objects;    is  a 


OK  JUSTICE.  391 

science  teacliing  one  wbai'he  ought  to  endure  and  dare. 
But  if  any  one,  under  the  influence  of  that  ignorance  which 
proceeds  from  insolence,  should  be  so  superfluous  as  to  fancj 
nimself  capable  of  correcting  that  which  requires  no  cor- 
rection, and  should  consequently  Tcnture  to  add  anything  or 
take  away  anything,  he,  bj  so  doing,  is  altering  the  whole 
appearance  of  the  thing,  changing  that  which  had  a  good 
cnaracter  into  unseemliness ;  for  by  any  addition  to  courage 

.  he  will  produce  audacity,  but  if  he  takes  anythinc^  a^  ay  from 
it  he  will  produce  cowardice,  not  leaying  eyen  tne  name  of 
courage,  that  most  useful  of  all  yirtues  to  life. 

In  the  same  manner,  if  any  one  makes  an  addition,  be  it 
eyer  so  small,  or  eyer  so  great,  to  that  queen  of  the  yirtues, 
piety,  or  if  he  takes  anything  away  from  it,  he  will  chaoge 
and  metamorphose  its  whole  appearance,  and  make  it  some- 

'  thing  quite  diflerent ;  for  any  addition  will  engender  super- 
stition, and  any  diminution  will  produce  impiety,  real  piety 
itself  wholly  disappearing  under  the  operation,  which  every 
one  should  pray  for,  that  it  may  be  continually  conspicuous 
and  brilliant,  since  it  is  the  cause  of  the  greatest  of  all 
blessings,  inasmuch  as  it  produces  a  knowledge  of  the  seryice 
of  Ood,^  which  one  ought  to  look  upon  as  more  important 
and  more  precious  th^  any  dominion  or  authoril^.  And 
we  may  giye  instances  of  eyery  other  yirtue  resemblmg  what 
we  haye  said  about  these  just  mentioned;  but  since  I  am  in 
the  habit  of  avoidins;  prolixity,  I  will  be  satisfied  with  what 
has  been  stated,  which  may  \)e  a  sufficient  guide  to  what 
might  be  said  respecting  these  virtues  which  we  omit  to 
mention. 

ABOUT  yOT   '^OVTSGt  LAXD-MABKS. 

There  is  also  this  commandment  ordained  which  is  of 
great  common  utility,  that, ''  Thou  shalt  not  move  thy  neigh- 
bours' land-marks  which  the  former  men  have  set  up.'^  And 
this  injunction  is  &;iyen,'  as  it  seems,  not  only  with  respect 
to  inheritances,  and  to  the  boundaries  of  the  land,  in  order 
to  prohibit  coyetousness  respecting  them,  but  also  as  a  e:uard 
to  ancient  customs ;  for  customs  are  unwritten  laws,  being 
the  doctrines  of  men  of  old,  not  engraved  on  pillars  or 
written  on    paper  which   may  be  eaten  by  moths,  but 

*  Deuteronomy  xiz.  14. 


802  FHILO  JUD^US. 


impressed  in  tLe  souls  of  those  liTisg  under  tbe  same  con- 
stitution. 

For  the  children  ought  to  inherit  from  the  fatlier  of  their 
being  the  national  customs  in  which  thev  have  been  brought 
npy  and  in  which  they  have  lived  from  their  cradle,  and  not 
to  despise  them  merely  because  they  are  handed  down  with- 
out being  written.  For  the  man  who  obeys  the  written 
laws  is  not  justly  entitled  to  any  praise,  inasmuch  as  he  is 
influenced  by  compulsion  and  the  fear  of  punishment. 
But  he  who  abides  by  the  unwritten  laws  is  worthy  of  praise, 
as  exhibiting  a  spontaneous  and  unconstrained  virtue. 


A  TEEATISE 

ox  THS 

CREATION  OF  MAGISTRATES. 

I.  Some  persons  have  contended  that  all  magistracies 
ought  to  have  the  officers  appointed  to  them  by  lot ;  which 
however  is  a  mode  of  proceeding  not  advantageous  for  the 
multitude,  for  the  casting  of  lots  shows  good  fortune,  but 
not  virtue ;  at  all  events  many  unworthy  persons  have  often 
obtained  office  by  such  means,  men  w{iom,  if  a  good  man 
had  the  supreme  authority,  he  would  not  permit  to  be 
reckoned  even  among  his  subjects  :  for  even  those  who  are 
called  lesser  rulers  by  some  persons,  those  whom  men 
entitled  masters,  do  not  admit  every  one  whom  they  can 
possibly  find  to  be  their  servants,  whether  bom  in  the  house 
or  bought  with  money ;  but  they  will  only  take  those  who 
are  obedient,  and  at  times  they  sell  all  those  of  incurably 
bad  dispositions  in  a  lot,  as  not  being  worthy  to  be  the 
slaves  ot  good  men. 

Therefore  it  is  not  right  to  make  men  masters  and  rulers 
of  entire  cities  and  nations,  who  obtain  those  places  by  lot, 
which  is  a  sort  of  blunder  on  the  part  of  fortune,  which  is 
an  unstable  and  fickle  thing.  Beyond  all  question,  casting 
of  lots  can  have  no  connection  with  ability  to  attend  upon 
the  sick ;  for  physicians  do  not  obtain  their  employments  by 
lot,  but  because  their  experience  is  approved  of;  again,  witt 


ON  THE  CREATION  OF  ICAGISTIUTES.  898 

reference  to  the  successful  Toyage  and  safety  of  men  at  sea^ 
it  is  not  any  man  who  may  obtain  the  office  of  pilot  by  lot, 
who  is  sent  at  once  to  the  stem  to  steer  the  yessel,  and  who 
then  by  his  ignorance  may  cause  a  needless  wreck  in  calm 
and  tranquil  weather,  but  that  person  has  that  charge  giyen 
to  him  who,  from  his  earliest  youth,  appears  to  have  learnt 
and  carefully  studied  the  business  of  a  pilot ;  this  is  a  man 
who  has  made  many  voyages,  and  who  has  traversed  every 
sea,  or  at  all  events  most  seas,  and  who  has  carefully  ascer- 
tained the  character  of  all  the  marts,  and  harbours,  and 
anchorages,  and  places  of  refuge  in  the  different  islands  and 
continents,  and  who  is  still  better,  or  at  all  events  not  worse 
acquainted  with  the  tracks  over  the  sea,  than  he  is  with  the 
roads  on  land,  through  his  accurate  observation  of  the  hea- 
venly bodies ;  for  having  remarked  the  various  motions  of 
the  stars,  and  having  followed  and  being  guided  by  their 
regular  revolutions,  he  has  learnt  'to  be  able  to  make  out  for 
himself  an  unerring  and  easy  path  through  the  pathless 
waste  of  waters,  so  that  (what  seems  the  most  incredible  of 
all  things),  beings  whose  nature  it  is  to  live  on  the  land  are 
able  to  traverse  the  sea  which  can  only  be  crossed  by  sailing. 

And  if  any  one  should  be  about  to  undertake  the  govern- 
ment or  regulation  of  large  and  popiilous  cities,  full  of  inha- 
bitants, and  should  attempt  to  settle  the  constitution  of 
such,  and  should  undertake  the  superintendence  of  private, 
and  public,  and  sacred  afairs,  a  task  which  any  one  may 
right^r  call  the  art  of  arts,  and  the  science  of  sciences,  he 
woula  not  trust  to  the  uncertain  chances  of  time,  passing 
over  the  accurate  and  trustworthy  test  of  truth ;  and  the 
test  of  truth  is  proof  combined  witli  reason. 

n.  The  all-wise  Moses  seeing  this  by  the  power  of  his 
own  soul,  makes  no  mention  of  any  authority  being 
assigned  by  lot,  but  he  has  chosen  to  direct  that  all  offices 
shaU  be  elected  to ;  therefore  he  says,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
appoint  a  stranger  to  be  a  ruler  over  thee,  but  one  of  thine 
own  brethren," •  implying  that  the  appointment  is  to  be  a 
voluntary  choice,  and  an  irreproachable  selection  of  a  ruler, 
whom  t^e  whole  multitude  with  one  accord  shall  choose ; 
and  God  himself  will  add  his  vote  in  favour  of,  and  set  his 
seal  to  ratify  such  an  election,  that  being  who  is  the  con- 

•  Deuteronomy  xviL  IS* 


394  PHILO  JUD^tJS. 

finner  of.  all  adyantageous  things^  lookiiig  upon  the  man 
80  chosen  as  the  flower  of  his  race,  just  as  the  sight  is  the 
best  thing  in  the  body. 

III.  And  Moses  gives  also  two  reasons,  on  account  of 
.  which  it  is  not  proper  for  strangers  to  be  elected  to  situa- 
tions of  authority ;  in  the  first  place,  that  they  may  not  amass 
a  quantity  of  silver,  and  gold,  and  flocks^  and  raise  great  and 
imquitously  earned  riches  for  themselves,  out  of  the  poverty 
of  those  who  are  subjected  to  them;  and  secondly,  that 
they  may  not  make  tne  nation  quit  their  ancient  abodes 
to  gratify  their  own  covetous  desires,  and  so  compel  them 
to  emigrate,  and  to  wander  about  to  and  fro  in  interminable 
wanderings,  suggesting  to  them  hopes  of  the  acquisition 
of  greater  blessings,  which  shall  never  be  fulfilled,  by  which 
they  come  to  lose  those  advantages  of  which  they  were  in 
the  secure  enjoyment.  For  our  lawgiver  was  aware  before- 
hand, as  was  natural  that  -one  who  was  a  countryman  and  a 
relation,  and  who  had  also  an  especial  share  in  the  sublimest 
relationship  of  all,  (and  that  sublimest  of  relationships  is 
one  constitution  and  the  same  law,  and  one  Gtod  whose 
chosen  nation  is  a  peculiar  people)  ;  so  that  he  would  never 
offend  in  any  manner  similar  to  those  which  I  have  been 
mentioning,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  instead  of  causing  the 
inhabitants  to  quit  their  abodes,  he  would  be  likely  even  to 
afford  a  safe  return  to  such  of  his  countrymen  as  were  dis- 
persed in  a  foreign  land ;  and  instead  of  taking  away  the 
property  of  others,  he  would  even  give  his  ovm  property  to 
those  who  were  in  need  of  it,  making  his  own  wealth  common. 
rV.  And  from  the  first  day  on  which  any  one  enters  upon 
his  office,  he  orders  that  he  shall  write  out  a  copy  of  the 
book  of  the  law*  with  his  own  hand,  which  shall  supply  him 
with  a  summary  and  concise  image  of  all  the  laws,  because 
he  wishes  that  all  the  ordinances  which  are  laid  down  in  it 
shall  be  firmly  fixed  in  his  soul ;  for  while  a  man  is  reading 
the  notions  of  what  he  is  reading  fleet  away,  being  carried 
off  by  the  rapidity  of  his  utterance ;  but  if  he  is  writing 
they  are  stamped  upon  his  heart  at  leisure,  and  they  take 
up  their  abode  in  the  heart  of  each  individual  as  his  mind 
dwells  upon  each  particular,  and  settles  itself  to  the  con- 
templation of  it,  and  does  not  depart  to  any  other  object, 
till  It  has  taken  a  firm  hold  of  that  which  was  previously 

•  Peuterooomy  xvii.  IS. 


ON  THE  CREATION  OF  aCAGISTRATES.  305 

submitted  to  it.  When  therefore  he  is  writing,  let  him 
take  care,  every  day,  to  read  and  study  what  lie  has  written, 
both  in  order  that  he  may  thus  attain  to  a  continual  and 
unchangeable  recollection  of  these  commands  which  are 
virtuous  and  expedient  for  all  men  to  observe,  and  also  that 
a  firm  love  of  and  desire  for  them  may  be  implanted  in  him, 
by  reason  of  his  soul  being  continually  taught  and  accus- 
tomed to  apply  itself  to  the  study  and  observance  of  the 
sacred  laws. 

For  familiarity,  which  has  been  engendered  by  long 
acQuaintance,  engenders  a  sincere  and  pure  friendship^  not 
only  towards  men,  but  even  also  towards  such  brancnes  of 
learning  as  are  worthy  to  be  loved ;  and  this  will  take  place 
if  the  ruler  studies  not  the  writincfs  and  memorials  of  some 
one  else  but  those  which  he  himself  has  written  out ;  for  his 
own  works  are,  in  a  certain  degree,  more  easily  to  be  under- 
stood by  each  individual,  and  they  are  also  more  easily  to 
be  comprehended ;  and  besides  that  a  man,  while  he  is  read- 
ing them,  will  have  such  considerations  in  his  mind  as 
these :  "  I  wrote  all  this ;  I  who  am  a  ruler  of  such  cpreat  power, 
without  employing  any  one  else  as  my  scribe,  though  I  had 
innumerable  servants.  Did  I  do  all  this,  in  order  to  fill  up 
a  volume,  like  those  who  copy  out  books  for  hire,  or  like 
men  who  practise  their  eyes  and  their  hands,  training  the 
one  to  acuteness  of  sight,  and  the  others  to  rapidity  ot 
writing  ?  Why  should  I  have  done  this  ?  That  was  not 
the  case ;  I  did  it  in  order  that  after  I  had  recorded  these 
things  in  a  book,  I  might  at  once  proceed  to  impress  them 
on  my  heart,  and  that  I  might  stamp  upon  my  intellect 
their  divine  and  indelible  characters :  other  kings  bear  scep- 
tres in  their  hands,  and  sit  upon  thrones  in  royal  state,  but 
my  sceptre  shall  be  the  book  of  the  copy  of  the  law ;  that 
shall  be  my  boast  and  my  incontestible  glory,  the  signal  of 
my  irreproachable  sovereignty,  created  after  the  image  and 
model  of  the  archetypal  royal  power  of  God. 

"  And  by  always  relying  upon  and  supporting  myself  in 
the  sacred  laws,  I  shall  acquire  the  most  excellent  things. 
In  the  first  place  equality,  than  which  it  is  not  possible  to 
discern  any  greater  blessing,  for  insolence  and  excessive 
haughtiness  are  the  signs  of  a  narrow-minded  soul,  which 
does  not  foresee  the  future. 


396  PHILO  JUD-EUS. 

"  Equality,  therefore,  will  \nii  me  good  will  from  all  who 
are  subject  to  mj  power,  and  safety  inasmuch  as  thej  will 
bestow  on  me  a  just  requital  for  mj  Idndness ;  but  inequality 
will  bring  upon  me  terrible  dangers,  and  these  I  shall  escape 
by  hating  inequality,  the  purveyor  of  darkness  and  wars ; 
and  my  hfe  wul  be  in  no  danger  of  being  plotted  against, 
because  I  honour  equality,  which  has  no  connection  with 
seditions,  but  which  is  the  pareut  of  light  and  stability. 
Moreover,  I  shall  gain  another  advantage,  namely,  that  I 
shall  not  sway  this  way  and  that  way,  like  the  dishes  in  a 
acale,  in  consequence  of  perverting  and  distorting  the  com- 
mandments laid  down  for  my  gmdance.  But  I  shall  en- 
deavour to  keep  them,  going  through  the  middle  of  the  plain 
road,  keeping  my  own  steps  straight  and  upright,  in  order 
that  I  may  attain  to  a  life  free  from  error  or  misfortune." 

And  Moses  was  accustomed  to  call  the  middle  road  the 
royal  one,  inasmuch  as  it  lay  between  excess  and  deficiency ; 
and  besides,  more  especially,  because  in  the  number  three 
t)ie  centre  occupies  the  most  important  place,  uniting  the 
extremities  on  either  side  by  an  indissoluble  chain,  it  being 
attended  by  these  extremities  as  its  body-guards  as  though 
it  were,  a  king. 

Moreover,  Moses  says  that  a  long-enduring  sovereignty  is 
the  reward  of  a  lawful  magistrate  or  ruler  who  honours 
equality,  and  who  without  any  corruption  gives  just  deci- 
sions in  a  just  manner,  always  studying  to  observe  the  laws ; 
not  for  the  sake  of  granting  him  a  life  extending  over  many 
years,  combined  with  the  administration  of  the  common- 
wealth, but  in  order  to  teach  those  who  do  not  understand 
that  a  governor  who  rules  in  accordance  with  the  laws,  even 
though  he  die,  does  nevertheless  live  a  long  life  by  means  of 
his  actions  which  he  leaves  behind  him  as  immortal,  the 
indestructible  monuments  of  his  piety  and  virtue. 

V.  And  it  becomes  a  man  who  has  been  thought  worthy 
of  the  supreme  and  greatest  authority  to  appoint  successors 
who  may  govern  with  him  and  judge  with  him,  and,  in  con- 
cert with  him,  may  ordain  everything  which  is  for  the  com- 
mon advantage  ;  tor  one  person  would  not  be  sufficient,  even 
if  he  were  ever  so  willing,  and  if  he  were  the  most  powerful 
man  in  the  world,  both  in  body  and  soul,  to  support  the 
weight  and  number  of  affairs  which  would  come  upon  him, 


ON  THE  CBEATION  OF  MAGISTRATES.  897 

as  he  would  faint  under  the  presstire  and  rapidity  of  all 
kinds  of  business  cominc;  in  upon  liim  continually  every  day 
from  all  quarters,  unless  ne  had  a  number  of  persons  selected 
with  reference  to  their  excellence  who  might  co-operate  with 
him  by  their  prudence,  and  power,  and  justice,  and  godly 
piety,  men  who  not  only  avoia  arrogance,  but  even  detest  it 
:i8  an  enemy  and  as  the  very  greatest  of  evils. 

Por  these  men  would  st^d  by,  and  assist,  and  co-operate 
with  a  virtuous  and  holy  man,  one  who  hated  evils  equally 
with  themselves,  and  would  be  the  most  suitable  persons  to 
lighten  and  relieve  his  labours.  And,  besides,  since  of  the 
mattersw  hich  would  force  themselves  upon  his  attention, 
some  are  of  greater  importance  and  others  of  less,  the  chief 
will  very  reasonably  commit  those  which  are  more  unim- 
portant to  his  lieutenants,  while  he  himself  would  of  neces- 
sity become  the  most  accurate  judge  of  the  weightier  matters. 
But  the  affairs  which  we  ought  to  look  upon  as  the  most 
weighty  are  not,  as  some  persons  think,  those  in  which  per- 
sons of  reputation  are  at  variance  with  other  persons  of 
reputation,  or  rich  men  with  rich  men,  or  princes  with 
princes ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  are  rather  where  there  are 
powerful  men  on  one  side,  and  private  individuals,  men  of  no 
wealth,  or  dignity,  or  reputation,  on  the  other,  men  whose 
sole  hope  of  escaping  intolerable  evils  lies  in  the  judge 
himself. 

And  we  can  find  clear  instances  of  both  kinds  in  the 
sacred  laws,  which  it  is  well  for  us  to  imitate  ;  for  there  was 
once  a  time  in  which  Moses,  alone  by  himself,  decided  all  causes 
and  all  matters  of  legal  controversy,  labouring  from  morning 
till  night.  But  afler  a  time  his  father-in-law  came  to  him, 
and  seeing  with  what  a  weight  of  business  he  was  over- 
whelmed, as  all  those  who  had  any  disputes  were  everlast- 
ingly coming  upon  him,  he  c;ave  him  most  excellent  advice, 
counselling  him  to  choose  subordinate  magistrates,  that  they 
might  decide  the  less  important  affairs,  and  that  he  might 
have  only  the  more  serious  causes  to  occupy  him,  and  by 
this  means  provide  himself  with  time  for  rest.*  And  Moses, 
being  convinced  by  the  arguments  of  Jethro  (for,  indeed, 
thev  were  for  his  good),  having  chosen  the  men  of  the 
highest  reputation  in  the  ^hole  nation,  he  appointed  them 

*  Exodus  xvilL  14. 


898  PHILO  JVDJEDB. 

bis  lieutenvits  and  judges,  bidding  them  refer  the  more  im- 
portant cases  to  him. 

And  the  history  of  the  sacred  laws  contains  this  arrange- 
ment duly  recorded,  for  the  instruction  of  the  rulers  in  all 
succeeding  generations,  that,  in  the  first  place,  thej  maj  not 
despise  the  assistance  of  fellow  counsellors,  as  if  thej  were 
able  of  themselves  to  superintend  everything,  since  that  all- 
wise  and  godly  man,  Moses,  did  not  reject  them;  and, 
secondly,  that  they  may  learn  to  choose  subordinates  of  the 
second  class  and  of  the  third  class,  so  as  to  provide  for  them- 
selves not  being  driven  to  neglect  matters  of  greater  import- 
ance, through  being  wholly  occupied  by  affairs  of  a  more 
triflinc;  nature;  for  it  is  mipossible  for  human  nature  to 
attend  to  everything  at  once. 

YI.  We  have  here  mentioned  one  example  of  what  we 
before  alluded  to.  We  must  now  add  an  instance  of  the 
second  kind.  I  said  that  the  causes  of  men  of  humble  con- 
dition were  important ;  for  the  widow,  and  the  orphan,  and 
the  ptranger  are  powerless  and  humble.  And  it  is  right 
that  he  supreme  King  should  be  the  judge  in  their  case,  the 
Buler  who  has  the  supreme  authority  over  the  whole  nation ; 
since,  according  to  Moses,  even  God,  the  Ruler  of  the  uni- 
verse, did  not  exclude  them  from  the  provisions  of  his  laws ; 
for  when  Moses,  that  holy  interpreter  of  the  will  of  GK)d,  is 
raising  a  hymn  in  praise  of  the  virtues  of  the  living  God  in 
these  terms,  "  God  is  great  and  mighty,  one  who  is  no 
respecter  of  persons,  and  who  does  not  take  gifts  to  guide 
him  in  his  judgment,"*  he  adds,  in  whose  case  it  is  that  he 
gives  judgment,  not  in  the  case  of  satraps,  and  tyrants,  and 
men  who  have  the  power  by  land  and  sea,  but  he  gives 
judgment  respecting  the  stranger,  and  the  orphan,  and  the 
widow. 

In  the  case  of  the  first,  because  he  has  made  his  own 
kinsmen,  whom  alone  it  was  natural  for  him  to  have  as  allies 
and  champions,  his  irreconcileable  enemies,  by  quitting  their 
camp  and  taking  up  his  abode  with  the  truth,  and  with  the 
honour  of  the  one  Being  who  is  entitled  to  honour,  abandon- 
ing all  the  fabulous  inventions  and  polytheistic  notions 
wmch  his  fathers,  and  grandfathers,  and  ancestors,  and  all 

*  Deuteronomy  z.  17. 


ON  THE  CREATION  OF  MAGISTRATES.       809 

his  kindred,  who  deaye  to  tbe  beautifal  settiement  which  he 
has  forsaken,  were  wont  to  honour. 

In  the  case  of  the  second,  because  he  is  depriyed  of  his 
father  and  mother,  his  natural  defenders  and  protectors,  and 
bj  consequence  of  the  onlj  power  which  was  bound  to  show 
itself  as  his  ally. 

And  lastly,  in  the  case  of  the  woman  who  is  a  widow 
because  she  has  been  depriyed  of  her  husband,  who  suc- 
ceeded her  parents  as  her  guardian  and  protector;  for  a 
husband  is  to  his  wife  in  point  of  relationship  what  her 
parents  are  to  a  yirgin.  And  one  maj  almost  saj  that  the 
whole  nation  of  the  Jews  may  be  looKed  upon  in  the  Hght 
of  orphans,  if  they  are  compared  with  a]l  other  nations  in 
other  lands ;  for  other  nations,  as  often  as  they  are  afflicted 
by  any  calamities  which  are  not  of  diyine  inmction,  are  in 
no  want  of  assistance  by  reason  of  their  frequent  intercourse 
with  other  nations,  from  their  habitual  dealings  in  common. 
But  this  nation  of  the  Jews  has  no  such  allies  by  reason  of 
the  peculiarity  of  its  laws  and  customs.  And  their  laws  are 
of  necessity  strict  and  rigorous,  as  they  are  intended  to  train 
them  to  the  ^eatest  height  of  yirtue ;  and  what  is  strict 
and  rigorous  is  austere.  And  such  laws  and  customs  the 
generality  of  men  ayoid,  because  of  their  inclination  for  and 
their  adoption  of  pleasure. 

But,  neyertheless,  Moses  says  that  the  great  Buler  of  the 
uniyerse,  whose  inheritance  they  are,  does  always  feel  com- 
passion and  pity  for  the  orphan  and  desolate  of  this  his 
people,  because  they  have  been  dedicated  to  him,  the  Creator 
and  Father  of  all,  as  a  sort  of  first-fruits  of  the  whole  human 
race.  And  the  cause  of  this  dedication  to  God  was  the 
excessive  and  admirable  righteousness  and  virtue  of  the 
founders  of  the  nation,  which  remain  like  undying  plants, 
bearing  a  fruit  which  shall  ever  flourish  to  the  salvation  of 
their  descendants,  and  to  the  benefit  of  all  persons  and  all 
things,  provided  only  that  the  sins  which  they  commit  are 
such  as  are  remediable  and  not  wholly  unpardonable. 

Let  not  any  one  then  think  that  nobility  of  birth  is  a 
perfect  good,  and  therefore  neglect  virtuous  actions,  con- 
sidering that  that  man  deserves  greater  anger  who,  after  he 
has  been  bom  of  virtuous  parents,  brines  disgrace  on  his 
parents  by  reason  of  the  wicKedness  of  his  disposition  and 


400  PHILO  JXTD^US. 

conduct ;  for  if  he  bas  domestic  examples  of  goodness  which    : 
he  may  iihitate,  and  jet  never  copies  them,  so  as  to  correct 
his  own  life,  and  to  render  it  healthy  and  virtnous,  he 
deserves  reproach. 

VII.  The  law  also  forbids,  by  a  most  just  and  reasonabl'^ 
prohibition,  the  man  who  has  undertaken  the  care  and 
government  of  the  common  interests  of  the  state,  to  behave 
with  treachery  among  the  people  ;*  for  a  treacherous  dis- 
position is  the  mark  of  an  illiberal  and  very  slavish  soul, 
which  seeks  to  overshadow  its  real  nature  by  hypocrisy ;  for, 
in  reality,  a  ruler  ought  to  stand  up  in  defence  of  his  sub- 
jects as  a  father  would  in  defence  of  his  children,  that  he 
may  be  honoured  by  them  as  if  they  were  his  own  real  chil- 
dren ;  on  which  account  good  rulers  are  the  common  parents 
of  their  cities  and  nations,  if  one  may  say  the  plain  truth, 
displaying  equal,  and  sometimes  even  superior,  good  will  to 
them ;  but  those  men  who  acquire  great  power  and  authority 
to  the  iojury  and  damage  of  their  subjects,  ought  to  be 
entitled,  not  rulers,  but  enemies,  inasmuch  as  they  are 
acting  the  part  of  implacable  foes. 

Not  but  what  those  who  injure  one  treacherously  are 
even  more  wicked  than  those  who  oppose  one  openly,  since 
it  is  possible  to  repel  the  one  without  difficulty,  as  ther 
display  their  hostility  without  disguise ;  but  the  evil-mincC- 
edness  of  the  others  is  difficult  to  detect  and  hard  to  unveil, 
being  like  the  conduct  of  men  on  the  stage,  who  are  clothed 
in  a  dress  which  does  not  belong  to  them,  in  order  to  conceal 
their  real  appearance. 

But  there  is  a  kind  of  pre-eminence  and  superior  authority, 
which  I  had  almost  said  pervades  every  part  of  life,  varying 
only  in  respect  of  magnitude  and  quantity;  for  what  the 
king  of  a  city  is,  that  also  is  the  first  man  in  a  village,  and 
the  master  of  a  house,  and  a  physician  amoDg  the  sick,  and 
a  general  in  his  camp,  and  an  admiral  with  respect  to  his 
crew  and  to  his  passengers,  and  a  captain  of  a  ship  in  regard 
to  merchant  vessels  and  transports,  and  a  pilot  among 
common  sailors,  every  one  of  whom  has  power  to  moke 
tbii  gs  either  better  cr  worse.  But  they  ought  to  wish  to 
concuct  themselves  in  everything  for  the  best,  and  the  best 
is  to  use  all  their  energies  to  assist  people  and  not  to  injure 

*   LeviticuB  xix.  16. 


ON  THE  CBSAnON  OF  SCAGISTR^TBS.  401 

them ;  for  this  is  to  act  in  imitation  of  GK>d,  since  be  also 
baa  the  power  to  do  either  good  or  eyil,  but  his  inclination 
cansea  bun  only  to  do  good.  And  the  creation  and  arrange- 
ment of  the  world  shows  this,  for  be  has  summoned 
what  had  preyiously  no  being  into  existence,  creating  order 
out  of  disorder,  and  distinctiye  qualities  out  of  things  which 
had  no  such  qualities,  and  similarities  out  of  thmgs  dis- 
similar, and  identity  out  of  things  which  were  different,  and 
intercommunion  and  harmony  out  of  things  which  had 
previously  no  communication  nor  agreement,  and  equality 
out  of  inequality,  and  Ught  out  of  darkness ;  for  he  is  always 
anxious  to  exert  his  beneficent  powers  in  order  to  change 
whateyer  is  disorderly  from  its  present  eyil  condition,  and 
to  temsform  it  so  as  to  bring  it  into  a  better  state. 

VJULL.  Therefore  it  is  right  for  good  rulers  of  a  nation  to 
imitate  him  in  these  points,  if  they  haye  any  anxiety  to 
attain  to  a  similitude  to  Gk>d;  but  since  innumerable  cir- 
cumstances are  continually  escaping  from  and  eluding  the 
human  mind,  inasmuch  as  it  is  entongled  among  and  em- 
barrassed by  so  great  a  multitude  of  the  external  senses,  as 
is  yery  well  calculated  to  seduce  and  deceiye  it  by  false 
opinions,  since  in  fact  it  is,  as  I  may  say,  buried  in  the 
mortal  body,  which  may  yery  properly  be  called  its  tomb,  let 
no  one  wlio  is  a  judge  be  ashamed  to  confess  that  he  is 
ignorant  of  that  of  which  he  is  ignorant,  for  in  the  first 
mace  the  man  who  is  deceived  becomes  worse  than  he  was 
oefore,  because  he  has  expelled  truth  from  the  confines  of 
his  soul ;  in  the  second  place,  he  will  do  exceedinc^  mischief 
to  those  on  whose  causes  he  is  deciding  by  delivering  a 
blind  decision  in  consequence  of  his  not  seeing  what  is  just. 

When,  therefore,  he  does  not  clearly  comprehend  a  case 
by  reason  of  the  perplexed  and  unintelligible  character  of - 
the  circumstances  wnich  throw  uncertainty  and  darkness 
aroimd  it,  he  ought  to  decline  giving  a  decision,  and  to  send 
the  matter  before  judges  who  mH  understand  it  more 
accurately.  And  who  can  these  judges  be  but  the  priests, 
and  the  ruler  and  governor  of  the  priests  ?  For  the  genuine, 
sincere  worshippers  of  God  are  by  care  and  diligence 
rendered  acute  in  their  intellects,  inasmuch  as  they  are  not 
indifferent  even  to  slight  errors,  because  of  the  exceeding 
excellence  of  the  Monarch  whom  they  serve  in  every  point. 

yoL.  III.  D  n 


402  PH7L0  JUDMUS. 

On  wbich  aocoant  it  is  oommanded  that  the  priests  shall  go 
soberly*  to  offer  sacrifice,  in  order  that  no  medicine  such  as 
causes  men  to  err,  or  to  speak  and  act  foolishly  may  enter  into 
the  mind  and  obscnre  its  vision,  and  perhaps  because  the  real 
genuine  priest  is  at  once  also  a  prophet,  having  attained  to  the 
honour  of  being  allowed  to  see  the  only  true  and  living  God, 
not  more  by  reason  of  his  birth  than  by  reason  of  his  virtue. 
And  to  a  prophet  there  is  nothing  unknown,  since  he  has 
within  himself  the  sim  of  intelligence,  and  rays  which  are  never 
overshadowed,  in  order  to  a  most  accurate  comprehension  of 
those  things  which  are  invisible  to  the  outward  senses,  but 
intelligible  to  the  intellect. 

IX.  Again,  merchants  and  pedlars,  and  people  in  the  market, 
and  all  those  who  deal  in  things  necessary  for  life,t  and  who  in 
consequence  are  conversant  with  measures,  and  weights,  and 
balances,  since  they  sell  things  both  dry  and  wet,  are  put  in 
subjection  to  the  superintendants  of  the  market,  and  these 
superintendants  are  bound  to  govern  them  if  they  act  with 
moderation,  doing  what  is  right,  not  out  of  fear,  but  volun- 
tarily, for  spontaneous  good  conduct  is  in  every  case  more 
honourable  than  that  which  proceeds  from  compulsion. 

On  which  account  the  law  orders  these  merchants  and 
dealers,  and  all  other  persons  who  have  adopted  this  way  of 
life,  to  take  care  to  provide  themselves  with  just  balances,  and 
measures,  and  weights,  not  practising  any  wicked  manoeuvres 
to  the  injury  of  those  who  purchase  of  them,  but  to  do  and  say 
everything  with  a  free  and  guileless  soul,  consideriug  this,  that 
ux\just  gains  are  injurious,  but  that  that  weahh  which  is 
acquired  in  accordance  with  justice  a  man  cannot  be  deprived 
of;  and  since  wages  are  offered  to  artisans  as  a  reward  for 
their  work,  and  since  it  is  people  in  want  who  are  artisans, 
and  not  men  who  have  an  abundance  of  wealth,  the  law  com- 
mands that  the  payment  of  their  wages  shall  not  be  delayed, 
but  that  their  employers  shall  pay  them  the  wages  agreed  upon 
the  same  day  that  they  are  earned  4  for  it  is  absurd  for  the 
rich  to  avail  themselves  of  the  services  of  the  poor,  and  yet  for 
those  who  live  in  plenty  and  affluence  not  at  once  to  give  the 
poor  the  proper  remuneration  for  those  services.  Are  not 
these  things  very  conspicuous  instances  to  teach  us  to  guard 
against  greater  offences  ?  For  he  who  will  not  allow  a  pay- 
*  Leyiticui  x.  9.  "^  Leviticoa  xix.  36.  t  Deut.  zzit.  15. 


ON  THE  CREATION  OF  ICAGIST&ATES.  403 

ment  which  is  sure  to  he  eTentually  repaid  to  he  delayed 
hejond  the  proper  time,  fixing  the  eveniDg  of  Ihe  day  for  the 
time  on  which  the  artisan,  at  his  return  home,  is  to  carry  his 
wages  home  with  him,  does  not  he  much  more  by  such  a 
commandment  prohibit  rapine  and  theft,  and  the  repudiation 
of  debts,  and  aU  things  of  that  sort,  fashioning  and  moulding 
the  soul  according  to  the  approved  characteristics  of  virtue  and 
piety? 

X.  Also  this  commandment  is  given  with  exceeding  pro- 
priety,* which  forbids  anyone  from  blaspheming  and  speaking 
ill,  especially  of  a  deaf  man,  and  of  one  who  is  unable  to 
perceive  by  the  aid  of  his  outward  senses  the  injuries  which 
are  done  to  him,  nor  to  retaliate  in  an  equal  manner  under 
similar  circumstances ;  for  that  is  the  most  iniquitous  conflict 
of  all,  in  which  the  one  side  is  considered  only  in  acting,  and 
the  other  only  in  suffering ;  and  those  who  speak  ill  of  the 
dumb,  or  of  people  whose  sense  of  hearing  is  defective,  are 
committing  the  same  offences  as  those  who  put  stumbling 
blocks  in  the  way  of  the  blind,  or  who  offer  other  obstacles  to 
their  progress ;  for  in  this  case  also  it  is  impossible  for  the  blind 
to  step  over  the  obstacles,  as  they  are  not  aware  of  their 
existence,  so  they  stumble  over  them,  and  both  are  hindered 
in  their  progress  and  hurt  their  feet  Accordingly,  with  great 
propriety  and  fitness,  does  the  law  threaten  those  who  devise 
and  execute  wickedness  of  this  kind  with  punishment  at  the 
hand  of  God ;  since  he  alone  holds  his  protecting  hand  over 
and  defends  those  who  are  unable  to  protect  themselves,  and 
all  but  says  in  plain  words  to  those  who  injure  the  innocent, 
**  0  foolish  minded  men,  do  you  expect  to  escape  detection 
while  turning  the  misfortunes  of  those  men  into  ridicule,  and 
committing  offences  against  those  very  parts  in  respect  of 
which  they  are  unfortunate,  attacking  their  ears  by  false  accu- 
sations, and  their  eyes  by  putting  stumbling  blocks  in  their 
-  path  ?  But  you  will  never  escape  the  notice  of  God,  who  sees 
everything  and  governs  everything,  while  you  insult  in  this 
manner  the  calamities  of  miserable  men,  so  as  to  avoid  meet- 
ing with  similar  distresses  yourselves,  inasmuch  as  your  bodies 
are  also  liable  to  all  kinds  of  diseases,  and  your  outward  senses 
are  susceptible  of  injury  and  mutilation,  being  such  as,  by  a  very 

*  Leviticus  xiz.  li. 


404  '  PHILO  JTJDMUS. 

slight  and  ordinary  cause,  thej  are  often  not  only  impaired,  but 
crippled  by  incurable  mutilations. 

Why  then  should  those  who  foi^get  themselves,  and  who  in 
their  arrogance  fancy  that  they  themselves  are  superior  to  the 
ordinary  natural  weakness  of  mankind,  and  that  they  are  out 
of  the  reach  of  the  invisible  and  unexpected  attacks  of  fortune, 
which  often  aims  sudden  blows  at  all  people,  and  which  has 
often  wrecked  men,  who  up  to  that  moment  had  enjoyed  a 
prosperous  voyage  through  life,  when  they  had  almost  arrived 
in  the  very  harbour  of  intimate  happiness^  why,  I  say,  should 
such  men  triumph  in  and  insult  the  misfortunes  of  others, 
having  no  respect  for  justice,  the  ruler  of  human  life,  who  sits 
by  the  side  of  the  great  Ruler  of  the  imiverse,  who  surveys  all 
things  with  sleepless  and  most  piercing  eyes,  and  sees  what  is 
in  recesses  as  clearly  as  if  it  was  in  the  pure  sunlight  ? 

It  seems  to  me  that  these  men  would  not  spare  even  the 
dead,  in  the  extravagance  of  their  cruelty,  but,  according  to 
the  proverb  so  commonly  quoted,  would  even  slay  the  slain 
over  again,  since  they  in  a  manner  think  fit  to  insult  and 
ill  treat  those  members  of  them  which  are  already  dead ;  for 
eyes  which  do  not  see  are  dead,  and  ears  which  are  devoid  of 
the  power  of  hearing  are  devoid  of  life ;  so  that  if  the  man  him- 
self to  whom  these  members  belong,  were  to  be  extinct,  they 
would  then  show  their  merciless  and  implacable  nature,  doing 
no  humane  or  compassionate  action,  such  as  is  shown  to  the 
dead,  even  by  their  enemies  in  irreconcileable  wars.  And  this 
may  be  enough  to  say  on  this  subject. 

XI.  After  this  the  lawgiver  proceeds  to  connect  with  these 
commandments  a  somewhat  similar  harmony  or  series  of 
injunctions ;  commanding  breeders  not  to  breed  from  animals 
of  different  species;  not  to  sow  a  vineyard  so  as  to  make 
it  bear  two  crops  at  once ;  and  not  to  wear  garments  woven  of 
two  different  substances,  which  are  a  mixed  and  base  work. 
Now  the  first  of  these  injunctions  we  have  already  mentioned 
in  our  treatise  on  adulterers,  in  order  to  make  it  more  evident, 
that  our  people  ought  not  to  be  anxious  for  marriages  with 
foreigners,  corrupting  the  dispositions  of  the  women,  and  de- 
stroving  also  the  good  hopes  which  might  be  conceived  of  the 
propagation  of  legitimate  children.  For  the  lawgiver,  who  has 
forbidden  all  copulation  between  irrational  animals  of  different 
species,  appears  to  have  utterly  driven  away  all  adulterers  to  a 


OK  THE  CBBATIOK  OF  MAGISTRiLTES.  405 

great  distance.   And  we  must  now  speak  again  of  this  rule  in 
thb  our  treatise  on  justice. 

For  we  must  take  care  not  to  pass  over  the  opportunity  of 
adapting  it  to  as  many  particulars  as  possible.    It  is  just  then 
to  bring  together  those  things  which  are  capable  of  union ; 
now  animals  of  the  same  species  are  by  nature  capable  of 
onion,  as,  on  the  other  hand,  all  animals  of  different  species 
are  incapable  of  any  admixture  or  union,  and  the  man  who 
brings  unlawful  connections  to  pass  between  such  animftla  is 
an  oi^ust  man,  transgressing  the  ordinances  of  nature ;  but 
that  which  is  the  really  sacred  law  takes  such  exceeding  care 
to  proyide  for  the  maintenance  of  justice,  that  it  will  not 
permit  eren  the  ploughing  of  the  land  to  be  carried  on  by 
animals  of  unequid  strength,  and  forbids  a  husbandman  to 
plough  with  an  ass  and  a  heifer  yoked  to  the  same  plough, 
lest  the  weaker  animal,  being  compelled  to  exert  itself  to  keep 
up  with  the  superior  power  of  the  stronger  animal,  should 
become  exhausted,  and  sink  under  the  effort ;  and  the  bull  is 
looked  upon  as  the  stronger  animal,  and  is  enrolled  in  the 
class  of  clean  beasts  and  animals,  while  the  ass  is  a  weaker 
animal  and  of  the  class  of  unclean  beasts ;  but  nevertheless  he 
has  not  grudged  those  animals  which  appear  to  be  weaker,  the 
assistance  which  they  can  derive  from  justice,  in  order,  as  I 
imagine,  to  teach  the  judges  most  forcibly,  that  they  are  never 
in  ^eir  decisions  to  give  the  worse  fate  to  the  humbly  bom, 
in  matters  the  investigation  of  which  depends  not  on  birth 
but  on  virtue  and  vice. 

And  resembling  these  injunctions  is  the  last  commandment 
concerning  things  yoked  in  pairs,  namely,  that  it  is  unlawful 
to  wear  together  substances  of  a  different  character,  such  as 
wool  and  linen  ;  for  in  the  case  of  these  substances,  not  only 
does  the  difference  prevent  any  union,  but  also  the  superior 
strength  of  the  one  substance  is  calculated  rather  to  tear  the 
other  than  to  unite  with  it,  when  it  is  wanted  to  be  used. 

XII.  The  commandment  which  came  in  the  middle  of  the 
three  injunctions  about  pairs,  was  that  one  was  not  to  sow  a 
vineyard  so  as  to  make  it  bear  two  crops  at  the  same  time ; 
the  object  of  this  law  being,  in  the  first  place,  that  those  things 
which  are  of  different  species  might  not  be  confused  by  being 
mixed  together ;  for  crops  grown  from  seed  have  no  connection 
with  trees,  nor  trees  with  crops  grown  from  seed  ;  on  which 


406  PHILO  JTJDiEUS. 

accomit  nature  has  not  appointed  to  tbem  both  the  same  time 
for  the  production  of  their  fruits,  but  has  assigned  to  the  one  the 
spring  as  the  season  of  their  harrest,  while  to  the  others  it  has 
appointed  the  end  of  summer,  as  the  season  for  the  gathering 
of  their  fruits ;  accordingly,  it  happens  that  at  the  same  period 
of  the  year  the  one  are  becoming  withered  having  been  in 
bloom  at  an  earlier  time,  while  the  others  are  just  budding 
having  been  dried  up  before ;  for  the  crops  which  are  produced 
from  seed  begin  to  flourish  in  the  winter,  when  the  trees  are 
losing  their  leaves ;  and  in  the  spring,  on  the  contrary,  when 
all  the  crops  which  are  produced  from  seed  are  drying  up,  the 
wood  of  all  trees,  whether  wild  or  improved  by  cultivation,  are 
shooting ;  and  one  may  almost  say,  that  the  period  in  which 
the  crops  which  are  produced  from  seed  come  to  perfection 
is  the  same  as  that  in  which  those  of  the  trees  derive  the 
beginning  of  their  productiveness. 

Very  naturally  therefore,  has  God  separated  things  so 
wholly  different  from  one  another,  both  in  their  natures  and 
in  the  period  of  their  flowering,  and  in  the  seasons  of  their 
producing  their  appropriate  fruits,  and  has  appointed  different 
situations  for  them,  producing  order  out  of  disorder ;  for  order  is 
closely  connected  with  arrangement,  and  disorder  with  a  want 
of  arrangement. 

And  in  the  second  place,  in  order  that  the  two  different 
species  may  not  go  through  a  reciprocal  system  of  inflicting 
and  suffering  injuzy,  because  of  one  kind  drawing  away  the 
nourishment  from  die  other  kind,  while  if  that  nourishment  is 
divided  into  small  portions,  as  happens  in  times  of  famine  and 
of  scarcity  of  necessaries,  all  plants  of  every  kind  will  in  every 
place  become  weak,  and  will  be  either  afflicted  with  barren- 
ness, becoming  utterly  unproductive,  or  at  all  events  will 
never  bear  tolerably  flne  fruit,  inasmuch  as  they  have  been 
previously  weakened  by  want  of  nourishment 

And  in  the  third  place,  in  order  that  the  naturally  fertile  land 
may  not  be  oppressed  with  burdens  beyond  its  strength,  partly 
by  the  continued  and  uninterrupted  thickness  of  the  crops 
which  are  sown,  and  of  the  trees  which  are  planted  in  the 
same  place,  and  partly  by  the  doubling  of  the  crops,  which  are 
exacted  from  the  ground ;  for  it  ought  to  be  quite  sufficient 
for  the  owner  to  draw  one  yearly  tribute  from  one  spot,  just  as 
it  is  sufficient  for  a  king  to  receive  his  tribute  from  a  dty  onoe 


OK  THE  CREATION  OF  MA6ISTaATE&  407 

a  year ;  and  to  endeavour  to  extract  larger  revenues  is  the  act 
of  exceeding  covetousness,  bj  which  all  the  lawd  of  nature  are 
attempted  to  be  overturned. 

For  which  reason  the  law  might  well  saj  to  those  who 
have  determined  to  sow  tbeir  vineyards  with  seed  out  of  pure 
covetousness ;  **  Do  not  you  be  worse  than  those  kings  who 
have  subdued  cities  with  arms  and  warlike  expeditions,  for 
even  they,  from  a  prudent  regard  for  the  future  and  from  a 
proper  wish  to  spare  their  subjects,  are  content  to  receive  one 
payment  of  tribute  each  year,  as  they  are  desirous  not  to 
reduce  them  utterly  to  the  yery  extremity  of  want  and 
distress  in  a  short  time ;  but  if  you  in  the  spring  exact  from 
the  same  piece  of  ground  crops  of  barley  and  of  wheat,  and 
in  the  summer  the  crops  from  the  fruit-bearing  trees,  you 
will  be  exhausting  it  by  a  double  contribution ;  for  then  it  will 
very  naturally  grow  fiEunt  and  fEul,  like  an  athlete,  who  is  never 
abroad  any  time  to  take  breath  and  to  collect  his  strength 
for  the  begiiming  of  another  contest. 

'*  But  you  seem  rashly  to  forget  those  precepts  of  general 
advantage  which  I  enjoined  you  to  observe.  For,  at  all  events, 
if  you  had  recollected  the  commandment  concerning  the 
seventh  year,  in  which  I  commanded  you  to  allow  the  limd  to 
remain  fallow  and  sacred,  without  being  exhausted  by  any 
agricultural  operation  of  any  kind,  by  reason  of  the  labours 
which  it  has  been  going  through  for  the  six  preceding  years, 
and  which  it  has  undergone,  producing  its  crops  at  the  ap« 
pointed  seasons  of  the  year  in  accordance  with  the  ordinances 
of  nature ;  you  would  not  now  be  introducing  innovations,  and 
giving  vent  to  all  your  covetous  desires,  be  seeking  for  unpre- 
cedented crops,  sowing  a  land  fit  for  the  growth  of  trees,  and 
especially  one  planted  with  vines,  in  order  by  two  crops  every 
year,  both  being  founded  in  iniquity,  to  increase  your  sub- 
stance out  of  undue  avarice,  amassing  money  by  lawless 
desires." 

For  the  same  man  would  never  endure  to  let  his  land  lie 
fallow  every  seventh  year  without  exacting  any  revenue  from 
it,  for  the  sake  of  not  having  his  land  exhausted  by  over- 
production, but  of  allowing  it  to  recover  itself  by  rest,  and  yet 
at  the  same  time  to  oppress  and  overwhelm  it  by  double  bur- 
dens ;  therefore  I  have  judged  it  necessary  to  pronounce  all 
acquisition  or  exaction  of  wealth  in  this  way  unholy  and  im- 


408  PHILO  JXJT>/EUB. 

pious ;  I  mean  the  prodaction  of  the  fruit  of  trees,  and  of  such 
crops  as  are  derivea  from  seed,  because  such  fertility  does  in  a 
manner  exhaust  and  destroj^the  viTifying  principle  in  the  good 
soil,  and,  because  too,  by  requiring  so  much,,  the  owner  of  the 
land  is  insulting  and  abusing  the  bounty  and  liberality  of  God, 
giving  full  reins  to  his  unrighteous  desires,  and  not  restraining 
them  by  any  limits. . 

Ought  we  not,  then,  to  feel  an  attachment  to  such  com- 
mandments as  these,  which  tend  to  restrain  us  from  and  to 
remoTO  us  to  a  great  distance  from  the  acts  of  coTctousness, 
which  are  common  among  men,  blunting  the  edge  of  the  pas- 
sion itself?  .  For  if  the  priTSto  indiyidual,  who,  in  the  matter 
of  his  plants,  has  learnt  to  renounce  all  unrighteous  gain,  if  he 
should  acquire  power  in  weightier  matters  and  become  a  king, 
would  adopt  the  same  practice  towards  men  and  women,  not 
exacting  twofold  tributes  frt>m  them,  not  exhausting  his  sub- 
jects with  taxes  and  contributions  ;  for  the  habits  in  which  he 
has  been  brought  up  would  be  sufficient  for  him,  and  would 
be  able  to  soften  the  harshness  of  his  disposition,  and  in  a 
manner  to  educate  him,  and  to  re-mould  him  to  a  better 
character.  And  that  is  a  better  character  which  justice  im- 
presses upon  the  souL 

XIII.  These,  then,  are  the  laws  which  he  appoints  to  be 
obsenred  by  each  individual.  But  there  are  other  command- 
ments of  a  more  general  nature  of  which  he  enjoins  the 
obsenrance  to  the  whole  nation  in  common,  recommending 
them  to  attend  to  them,  not  only  with  regard  to  their  own 
friends  and  allies,  but  also  to  those  who  are  uuconnected  with 
their  alliance,  For  if,  says  Moses,*  they  shut  themselves  up 
within  their  walls  and  make  their  necks  stiff,  then  let  your 
youog  men  arm  themselves  well,  and  being  provided  with  all 
the  preparations  necessary  for  war,  go  forth  and  fortify  their 
camp  all  around,  and  watch  in  expectancy,  not  indulging  their 
anger  so  as  to  neglect  reason,  but  taking  care  to  apply  them- 
selres  to  what  must  be  done  firmly  and  strenuously.  Let 
them,  therefore,  at  once  send  out  heralds  to  invite  the  enemy 
to  an  agreement,  and  at  the  same  time  let  them  display  the 
power  and  considerable  character  of  the  force  whi(£  is  en 
camped ;  and  if  the  enemy,  repenting  of  the  evil  designs  which 
they  had  conceived,  submit  and  turn  to  peace  in  any  manner, 

*  Deuteronomy  xz.  1. 


OK  THE  CBSATION  OF  1UGISTBATE8.  400 

then  let  the  people  gladly  receire  them  and  make  a  truce  with 
them ;  for  peace,  even  though  it  be  very  unfavourable,  is  more 
adyantageouB  than  war. 

But  if  thej  persevere  in  their  folly,  and  push  it  further, 
acting  with  audacity,  then  let  our  people,  'display  vigorous 
confidence,  reljdug  also  on  the  invincible  alliance  of  justice, 
and  so  let  them  advance,  placing  their  destructive  engines 
against  the  walls,  and  when  they  have  made  a  breach  in  some 
part  of  them  let  them  all  enter  in  together;  and  shooting 
with  their  spears  with  correct  aim,  and  brandishing  their 
swords,  and  slaying  the  enemies  all  around,  let  them  repel  them 
unshrinkingly,  inflicting  upon  them  what  they  were  intended 
to  suffer  themselves,  until  they  have  overthrown  the  whole 
army  arrayed  against  them,  eveiy  man  of  them,  and  taken 
their  silver,  and  their  gold,  and  aU  the  booty.  And  let  them 
bring  fire  against  their  city,  and  bum  it  so  that  it  may  never, 
after  an  interval  of  rest,  again  raise  its  head  and  excite  wars  and 
tumults,  with  the  view  also  of  terrifying  and  warning  the 
neighbouring  states,  since  it  is  by  the  calamities  of  others  that 
men  are  taught  to  act  with  moderation. 

But  let  them  suffer  the  maidens  and  the  women  to  go  free, 
inasmuch  as  they  did  not  expect  to  suffer  any  of  the  evils 
which  war  brings  upon  men  at  their  hands,  as  they  are  exempt 
{torn  all  military  service  through  their  natural  w^dmess. 

From  all  which  it  is  plain  that  the  nation  of  the  Jews  is 
allied  with  and  friendly  to  all  those  who  ore  of  the  same  senti- 
ments, and  all  who  are  peaceful  in  their  intentions ;  and  that 
it  is  not  to  be  despised  as  one  that  submits  to  those  who  begin 
to  treat  it  with  iiijustice  out  of  cowardice ;  but  when  it  goes  forth 
to  defend  itself,  it  distinguishes  between  those  who  are  habitu- 
ally plotting  against  it  and  those  who  are  not ;  for  to  be  eager 
to  slay  all  men,  and  even  those  who  have  committed  but  slight 
offences,  or  no  offences  at  aU  against  one,  I  should  call  the 
conduct  of  an  inhnman  and  pitiless  soul,  as  it  would  be  also  to 
treat  women  as  if  they  were  an  addition  to  the  men  who  carry 
on  war,  when  their  way  of  life  is  naturally  peaceful  and  do- 
mestic. 

But  our  lawgiver  implants  such  a  love  of  justice  in  all  men 
who  live  under  the  institution  which  he  has  established,  that 
he  does  not  permit  them  to  injure  the  fertile  land  of  even  an 
hostile  city  by  ravaging  it,  or  by  cutting  down  the  trees^  so  as 


410  FHILO  JTJD-fiUS. 

to  destroy  -the  crops.  "  For  why,"  says  he,  "  do  you  hear  a 
grudge  against  inanimate  things,  'which  are  in  their  nature 
quiet,  and  which  produce  wholesome  fruits  ?  Does  the  tree, 
my  friend,  display  the  hostile  spirit  of  a  man  that  is  an 
enemy,  so  that  you  are  to  tear  it  up  by  the  roots  in  retaliation 
for  the  evils  which  it  has  inflicted,  or  which  it  has  designed  to 
inflict  upon  you  ?  On  the  contrary,  it  assists  you,  bestowing 
on  you,  when  you  are  victorious,  an  abundance  of  necessary 
food,  and  of  supplies  which  conduce  to  rendering  life  happy 
and  luxurious ;  for  it  is  not  men  alone  who  contribute  reve- 
nues to  their  lords,  but  plants  offer  even  more  useful  tribute 
at  the  fixed  seasons  of  the  year,  a  tribute  without  which  man 
cannot  live."  But  there  is  no  prohibition  against  their  cutting 
down  those  trees  which  are  barren  and  unproductive,  and 
which  are  not  cultivated  for  food,  for  the  purpose  of  making 
staves,  or  poles,  or  posts,  or  fences;  and,  when  occasion 
requires,  ladders,  and  engines,  and  wooden  towers;  for  the 
chief  use  of  these  kinds  of  trees  is  for  such  and  other  similar 
purposes. 

XIV.  We  have  now  enumerated  the  matters  which  belong 
to  justice ;  but  as  for  justice  itself,  what  poet  or  orator  could 
celebrate  it,  in  worthy  terms,  since  it  is  beyond  all  panegyric 
and  ail  praise  ?  At  all  events,  there  is  one  most  important 
good  thing  belonging  to  it,**  which,  even  if  one  were  to  pass 
ovej  and  be  silent  about  all  its  other  parts,  would  be  an  all- 
sufficient  panegyric  on  it ;  for  this  is  the  principle  of  equality, 
which  is,  as  those  who  have  accurately  investigated  the  secrets 
of  nature  have  handed  down  to  us.  the  mother  of  justice ;  and 
equality  is  a  light  which  is  never  shaded;  the  sun  (if  one 
must  speak  the  plain  truth)  appreciable  by  the  intellect  alone, 
since  inequality,  on  the  contraiy,  in  which  that  which  is 
superior  and  that  which  is  inferior  are  both  found,  is  the  be- 
ginning and  source  of  darkness ;  it  is  equality  which,  by  its 
unchangeable  laws  and  ordinances,  has  arranged,  in  their  pre- 
sent beautiful  order,  all  the  things  in  heaven  and  earth ;  for 
who  is  there  who  does  nof  know  this  fiEu:t,  that  the  days  are 
measured  in  due  proportion  to  the  nights,  and  the  nights  in 
due  proportion  to  the  days,  by  the  sun,  according  to  the 
equality  of  proportionate  distances  ? 

Nature,  therefore,  has  marked  out  those  periods  in  every 
*  The  text  has  ivfiivtia,  which  Maogey  pronounces  cormpt. 


OK  THE  CREATION  OF  IfAGISTRATES.  411 

year,  which  are  called  the  equinoxes,  from  the  state  of  things 
which  exists  at  that  time,  namely,  the  spring  atid  the  autum« 
nal  equinox,  with  such  distinctness,  that  even  the  most 
illiterate  persons  are  aware  of  the  equality  which  then  exists 
between  the  extent  of  the  days  and  of  the  nights.  Again,  are 
not  the  periods  of  the  moon,  as  she  advances  and  retraces  her 
course,  from  a  crescent  to  a  full  circle,  and  again,  from  a  com- 
plete orb  to  a  crescent,  also  measured  by  an  equality  of  dis- 
tances ?  For  as  great  and  as  long  as  the  period  and  amount 
of  her  increase  is,  so  also  is  her  diminution,  in  both  respects, 
as  to  magnitude  and  duration,  as  to  the  number  of  days  and 
the  size  of  her  orb. 

And  as,  in  that  purest  of  all  essences,  heaven,  equality  is 
honoured  with  especial  honours,  so  also  is  she  in  the  neighbour 
of  heaven,  the  air.  For  as  the  year  is  portioned  out  into  four 
divisions,  the  air  is  formed  by  nature  to  endure  changes  and 
alterations  at  what  are  called  the  seasons  of  the  year,  and  it 
displays  an  indescribable  regularity  in  its  irregularity ;  for  as 
the  atmosphere  is  divided  by  an  equal  number  of  months  into 
winter,  and  spring,  and  summer,  and  autumn,  it  completes  the 
whole  year  by  allotting  three  months  to  each  season ;  as,  in 
fact,  the  very  name  of  the  year  (hiaurhi)  intimates.  For  it  in 
itself  {aitrhi  h  aurf)  contains  everything,  being  complete  in 
itself,  though  otherwise  it  would  not  be  able  to  effect  Uu's,  if  it 
were  not  aided  by  the  regular  revolutions  of  the  seasons  of  the 
year. 

Again,  this  same  equality  extends  firom  the  heavenly  bodies, 
and  from  those  which  are  raised  on  high,  to  the  things  upon 
earth,  raising  on  high  its  own  pure  nature,  which  is  akin  to 
the  air,  and  sending  downwards  its  beams  like  the  sun,  as  a 
sort  of  secondary  Hght,  for  all  the  things  which  are  inhar- 
monious or  irregular  among  us  are  caused  by  inequality,  and 
all  those  which  have  in  them  that  regulari^  which  becomes 
them  are  the  work  of  equality,  which,  in  the  universal  essence 
of  the  universe,  one  may  fairly  call  the  world,  and  in  cities  one 
may  entitle  it  that  best  regulated  and  most  excellent  of  all 
constitutions,  democracy,  and  in  bodies  health,  and  in  souls 
virtue. 

For,  on  the  contrary,  inequality  is  the  cause  of  diseases 
and  wickednesses ;  and  the  existence  of  the  longest  lived  man 
of  the  human  race  would  fail,  if  he  were  to  attempt  to 


J 

4  Id  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

enumerate  all  the  praiseworthy  qualities  of  equality,  and  of  its 
ofipring,  justice.  la  consequence  of  which  it  seems  to  me  to 
be  best  to  be  satisfied  with  what  has  already  been  said,  which 
may  be  sufficient  to  rouse  up  the  recollection  of  those  persons 
who  are  fond  of  learning,  and  to  leave  the  remaining  circum- 
stances unwritten  in  their  souls,  as  divine  images  in  a  most 
sacred  place.