e S) 5

i "Vedi ane

rhet EEE hs ji E PARE I ARTI hr, 7]

i

cmc Amp oem Io (SR HE UM M Aa cj oo tpi iati TIT tr 
REES inn taeda dd nn. A ED tQ T 
3 N 
PAIS ee IHE Fem pO toren EEE 
TEE AT en T

H

FREE

132 J95co v.9 pt.2

^, Jung, C. G. (Cari 
Gustav), 1875-1961. cn | 
Collectad works, |

The Mithraic god Aion 
Roman, and-3rd century

RESEARCHES INTO THE

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE SELF

C. G. JU.NG

TRANSLATED BY R. F. C. HULL

BOLLINGEN SERIES XX

PANTHEON BOOKS

COPYRIGHT ©) 1959 BY BOLLINGEN FOUNDATION INC., NEW YORK, N. Y. 
PUBLISHED FOR BOLLINGEN FOUNDATION INC. 
BY PANTHEON BOOKS INC., NEW YORK, N. Y.

THIS EDITION IS BEING PUBLISHED IN THE 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA FOR THE BOL- 
LINGEN FOUNDATION BY PANTHEON BOOKS 
INC., AND IN ENGLAND BY ROUTLEDGE AND 
KEGAN PAUL, LTD. IN THE AMERICAN EDI- 
TION, ALL THE VOLUMES COMPRISING THE 
COLLECTED WORKS CONSTITUTE NUMBER 
XX IN BOLLINGEN SERIES. THE PRESENT 
VOLUME IS NUMBER 9 OF THE COLLECTED 
WORKS, AND IS THE EIGHTH TO APPEAR. 
IT IS IN TWO PARTS, PUBLISHED SEPA- 
RATELY, THIS BEING PART II.

Translated from the first part of Aion: Untersuchungen zur Symbolgeschichte 
(Psychologische Abhandlungen, VIII), published by Rascher Verlag, Zurich, 1951.

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 52-8757 
MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA BY H. WOLFF 
NEW YORK, N. Y.

EDITORIAL NOTELIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 52-8757 
MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA BY H. WOLFF 
NEW YORK, N. Y.

EDITORIAL NOTE

Volume 9 of the Collected Works is devoted to studies of the 
specihc archetypes of the collective unconscious. Part I, entitled 
The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious, is composed of 
shorter essays; Part II, Aton, is a long monograph on the arche- 
type of the self. The author has agreed to a modification of the 
sub-title of Aion, which in the Swiss edition appeared in two 
forms, “Researches into the History of Symbols" and “‘Contribu- 
tions to the Symbolism of the Self.” The first five chapters were 
previously published, with small differences, in Psyche and Sym- 
bol: A Selection from the Writings of C. G. Jung, edited by 
Violet S. de Laszlo (Anchor Books, Garden City, New York,

1958).

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE

Grateful acknowledgment is made to the following persons, 
whose translations have been consulted during the preparation 
of the present work: Mr. William H. Kennedy, for reference to 
his translation of portions of Aion, chapters 2 and 3, issued as 
"Shadow, Animus, and Anima" by the Analytical Psychology 
Club of New York, 1950; Dr. Hildegarde Nagel, for reference 
to her translation of the original Eranos-Jahrbuch version (1949) 
of "Concerning the Self,” in Spring, 1951, which original ver- 
sion the author later expanded into Aion, chapters 4 and 5; and 
Miss Barbara Hannah and Dr. Marie-Louise von Franz, for 
helpful advice with the remaining chapters. Especial thanks are 
due to Mr. A. S. B. Glover, who (unless otherwise noted) trans- 
lated the Latin and Greek texts throughout. References to pub- 
lished sources are given for the sake of completeness.

4 AAS 
“ b 
3

i 3 Gilt unv CUDLIU

j Aad u 5 ( I“ 4 2 fu hag og baud

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EDITORIAL NOTE

LIST OF PLATES

FOREWORD

Ihe Ego

. The Shadow

. Ihe Syzygy: Anima and Animus 
. The Self

. Christ, a Symbol of the Selfj Aad u 5 ( I“ 4 2 fu hag og baud

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EDITORIAL NOTE

LIST OF PLATES

FOREWORD

Ihe Ego

. The Shadow

. Ihe Syzygy: Anima and Animus 
. The Self

. Christ, a Symbol of the Self

VI. The Sign of the Fishes 
VII. The Prophecies of Nostradamus 
VIII. The Historical Significance of the Fish 
IX. The Ambivalence of the Fish Symbol 
X. The Fish in Alchemy 
1. T he Medusa, 126 — 2. The Fish, 137 — 3. The Fish 
Symbol of the Catharists, 145 
XI. The Alchemical Interpretation of the Fish 
XII. Background to the Psychology of Christian 
Alchemical Symbolism 
XIII. Gnostic Symbols of the Self 
XIV. The Structure and Dynamics of the Self 
XV. Conclusion 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
INDEX

Vil

viii

LIST OF PLATES

The Mithraic god Aion

Roman, 2nd-8rd century. Museo Profano, Vatican. Pp: Alinari. 
frontisbiece

I. The Four Elements 
Michael Maier, Scrutinium chymicum (1687), Emblema XVII, p. 49. 
i following page 250

II. The Trinity 
From a manuscript by Joachim of Flora. Graphics Collection, Zurich 
Central Library, B x 606. following bage | 254

viii

FOREWORDII. The Trinity 
From a manuscript by Joachim of Flora. Graphics Collection, Zurich 
Central Library, B x 606. following bage | 254

viii

FOREWORD

The theme of this work ! is the idea of the Aeon (Greek, Aton). 
My investigation seeks, with the help of Christian, Gnostic, and 
alchemical symbols of the self, to throw light on the change of 
psychic situation within the “Christian aeon." Christian tradi- 
tion from the outset 1s not only saturated with Persian and 
Jewish ideas about the beginning and end of time, but is filled ` 
with intimations of a kind of enantiodromian reversal of domi- 
nants. I mean by this the dilemma of Christ and Antichrist. 
Probably most of the historical speculations about time and the 
limitation of time were influenced, as the Apocalypse shows, by 
astrological ideas. It is therefore only natural that my reflections 
should gravitate mainly round the symbol of the Fzshes, for the 
Pisces aeon is the synchronistic concomitant of two thousand 
years of Christian development. In this time-period not only 
was the figure of the Anthropos (the "Son of Man") progres- 
sively amplified symbolically, and thus assimilated psychologi- 
cally, but 1t brought with it changes in man's attitude that had 
already been anticipated by the expectation of the Antichrist 
in the ancient texts. Because these texts relegate the appearance 
of Antichrist to the end of time, we are justified in speaking of 
a "Christian aeon," which, it was presupposed, would find its 
end with the Second Comung. It seems as if this expectation 
coincides with the astrological conception of the “Platonic 
month" of the Fishes.1[In the Swiss edition, this foreword begins as follows: “In this volume (VIII of 
the Psychologische Abhandlungen) I am bringing out two woxks which, despite 
their inner and outer differences, belong together in so far as they both treat 
of the great theme of this book, namely the idea of the Aeon (Greek, Aion). 
While the contribution of my co-worker, Dx. Marie-Louise von Franz, describes 
the psychological transition from antiquity to Christianity by analysing the Pas- 
sion of St. Perpetua, my own investigation seeks, with the help of" etc., as above. 
Dr. von Franz's "Die Passio Perpetuae" is omitted from the present volume. 
—EDITORS.] 
1X

FOREWORD 
NEED PMFOREWORD 
NEED PM

The immediate occasion for my proposing to discuss these 
historical questions is the fact that the archetypal image of 
wholeness, which appears so frequently in the products of the 
unconscious, has its forerunners in history. T'hese were identi- 
fied very early with the figure of Christ, as I have shown in my 
book Psychology and Alchemy (chapter 5). I have been re- 
quested so often by my readers to discuss the relations between 
the traditional Christ-figure and the natural symbols of whole- 
ness that I finally decided to take this task in hand. Considering 
the unusual difficulties of such an undertaking, my decision did 
not come easily to me, for, in order to surmount all the ob- 
stacles and possibilities of error, a knowledge and caution would 
be needed which, unfortunately, are vouchsafed me only in 
limited degree. I am moderately certain of my observations on 
the empirical material, but I am fully aware of the risk I am 
taking in drawing the testimonies of history into the scope of 
my reflections. I think I also know the responsibility I am tak- 
ing upon myself when, as though continuing the historical 
process of assimilation, I add to the many symbolical amplifica- 
tions of the Christ-figure yet another, the psychological one, or 
even, so it might seem, reduce the Christ-symbol to a psycho- 
logical image of wholeness. My reader should never forget, how- 
ever, that I am not making a confession of faith or writing a 
tendentious tract, but am simply considering how certain 
things could be understood from the standpoint of our modern 
consciousness—things which I deem it valuable to understand, 
and which are obviously in danger of being swallowed up in the 
abyss of incomprehension and oblivion; things, finally, whose 
understanding would do much to remedy our philosophic dis- 
orientation by shedding light on the psychic background and 
the secret chambers of the soul. 'The essence of this book was 
built up gradually, in the course of many years, in countless 
conversations with people of all ages and all walks of life; with 
people who in the confusion and uprootedness of our society 
were likely to lose all contact with the meaning of European 
culture and to fall into that state of suggestibility which 1s the 
occasion and cause of the Utopian mass-psychoses of our time.I write as a physician, with a physician's sense of xespon- 
sibility, and not as a proselyte. Nor do I write as a scholar, 
otherwise I would wisely barricade myself behind the safe walls

X

FOREWORD

of my specialism and not, on account of my inadequate knowl- 
edge of history, expose myself to critical attack and damage my 
scientific reputation. So far as my capacities allow, restricted as 
they are by old age and ilIness, I have made every effort to docu- 
ment my materialas reliably as possible and to assist the veri- 
fication of my conclusions by citing the sources. 
C. G. JUNG

May 1950

AION

RESEARCHES INTO THE PHENOMENOLOGY 
OF THE SELF

These things came to pass, they say, that Jesus 
might be made the first sacrifice in the discrim- 
ination of composite natures.

Hırrporyrus, Elenchos, VII, 27, 8

L

THE EGO

Investigation of the psychology of the unconscious con- 
fronted me with facts which required the formulation of new 
concepts. One of these concepts is the self. The entity so denoted 
is not meant to take the place of the one that has always been 
known as the ego, but includes it in a supraordinate concept. 
We understand the ego as the complex factor to which all con- 
scious contents are related. It forms, as it were, the centre of the 
field of consciousness; and, in so far as this comprises the em- 
pirical personality, the ego is the subject of all personal acts of 
consciousness. The relation of a psychic content to the ego forms 
the criterion of its consciousness, for no content can be con- 
scious unless it is represented to a subject.With this definition we have described and delimited the 
scope of the subject. Theoretically, no limits can be set to the 
field of consciousness, since it is capable of indefinite extension, 
Empirically, however, it always finds its limit when it comes up 
against the unknown. This consists of everything we do not 
know, which, therefore, is not related to the ego as the centre 
of the field of consciousness. The unknown falls into two groups 
of objects: those which are outside and can be experienced by 
the senses, and those which are inside and are experienced im- 
mediately. The first group comprises the unknown in the outer 
world; the second the unknown in the inner world. We call this 
latter territory the unconscious.

‘The ego, as a specific content of consciousness, is not a sim- 
ple or elementary factor but a complex one which, as such, 
cannot be described exhaustively. Experience shows that it rests 
on two seemingly different bases: the somatic and the psychic. 
The somatic basis is inferred from the totality of endosomatic 
perceptions, which for their part are already of a psychic nature 
and are associated with the ego, and are therefore conscious. 
They are produced by endosomatic stimuli, only some of which

3

AION 
pH3

AION 
pH

cross the threshold of consciousness. A considerable proportion 
of these stimuli occur unconsciously, that is, subliminally. The 
fact that they are subliminal does not necessarily mean that their 
status is merely physiological, any more than this would be true 
of a psychic content. Sometimes they are capable of crossing the 
threshold, that is, of becoming perceptions. But there is no 
doubt that a large proportion of these endosomatic stimuli are 
simply incapable of consciousness and are so elementary that 
there is no reason to assign them a psychic nature—unless of 
course one favours the philosophical view that all life-processes 
are psychic anyway. The chief objection to this hardly demon- 
strable hypothesis is that it enlarges the concept of the psyche 
beyond all bounds and interprets the life-process in a way not 
absolutely warranted by the facts. Concepts that are too broad 
usually prove to be unsuitable instruments because they are too 
vague and nebulous. I have therefore suggested that the term 
"psychic" be used only where there is evidence of a will capable 
of modifying reflex or instinctual processes. Here I must refer 
the reader to my paper "On the Nature of the Psyche," * where 
I have discussed this definition of the "psychic" at somewhat 
greater length.4 The somatic basis of the ego consists, then, of conscious and 
unconscious factors. The same is true of the psychic basis: on 
the one hand the ego rests on the total field of consctousness, 
and on the other, on the sum total of unconscious contents. 
These fall into three groups: first, temporarily subliminal con- 
tents that can be reproduced voluntarily (memory); second, 
unconscious contents that cannot be reproduced voluntarily; 
third, contents that are not capable of becoming conscious at all. 
Group two can be inferred from the spontaneous irruption of 
subliminal contents into consciousness. Group three is hypo- 
thetical; it is a logical inference from the facts underlying group 
two. This contains contents which have not yet ixrupted into 
consciousness, or which never will.

5 When I said that the ego "rests" on the total field of con- 
sciousness I do not mean that it consists of this. Were that so, it 
would be indistinguishable from the field of consciousness as a 
whole. ‘The ego is only the latter's point of reference, grounded 
on and limited by the somatic factor described above.

11954/55 version: “The Spirit of Psychology."

4

6

THE EGO

Although its bases are in themselves relatively unknown and 
unconscious, the ego is a conscious factor par excellence. It is 
even acquired, empirically speaking, during the individual's 
lifetime. It seems to arise in the first place from the collision 
between the somatic factor and the environment, and, once 
established as a subject, it goes on developing from further col- 
lisions with the outer world and the inner.Despite the unlimited extent of its bases, the ego is never 
more and never less than consciousness as a whole. As a con- 
scious factor the ego could, theoretically at least, be described 
completely. But this would never amount to more than a pic- 
ture of the conscious personality; all those features which are 
unknown or unconscious to the subject would be missing. A 
total picture would have to include these. But a total descrip- 
tion of the personality is, even in theory, absolutely impossible, 
because the unconscious portion of it cannot be grasped cogni- 
tively. ‘This unconscious portion, as experience has abundantly 
shown, 1s by no means unimportant. On the contrary, the most 
decisive qualities in a person are often unconscious and can be 
perceived only by others, or have to be laboriously discovered 
with outside help.

Clearly, then, the personality as a total phenomenon does 
not coincide with the ego, that is, with the conscious personality, 
but forms an entity that has to be distinguished from the ego. 
Naturally the need to do this is incumbent only on a psychology 
that reckons with the fact of the unconscious, but for such a 
psychology the distinction is of paramount importance. Even for 
jurisprudence it should be of some importance whether certain 
psychic facts are conscious or not—for instance, in adjudging the 
question of responsibility.I have suggested calling the total personality which, though 
present, cannot be fully known, the self. The ego is, by defini- 
tion, subordinate to the self and is related to it like a part to the 
whole. Inside the field of consciousness it has, as we say, free 
wil. By this I do not mean anything philosophical, only the 
well-known psychological fact of “free choice," or rather the sub- 
jective feeling of freedom. But, just as our free will clashes with 
necessity in the outside world, so also it finds its limits outside 
the field of consciousness in the subjective inner world, where 
it comes into conflict with the facts of the self. And just as

5

10

11

AION

circumstances or outside events "happen" to us and limit our 
freedom, so the self acts upon the ego like an objective occur- 
rence which free will can do very little to alter. It is, 1ndeed, well 
known that the ego not only can do nothing against the self, but 
is sometimes actually assimilated by unconscious components 
of the personality that are in the process of development and 
is greatly altered by them.

It is, in the nature of the case, impossible to give any general 
description of the ego except a formal one. Any other mode of 
observation would have to take account of the individuality 
which attaches to the ego as one of its main characteristics. Al- 
though the numerous elements composing this complex factor 
are, in themselves, everywhere the same, they are infinitely 
varied as regards clarity, emotional colouring, and scope. The 
result of their combination—the ego—is therefore, so far as one 
can judge, individual and unique, and retains its identity up 
to a certain point. Its stability is relative, because far-reaching

---
*[continued text truncated]*